The Divining Rod: An Experimental and Psychological Investigation (William F. Barrett and Theodore Besterman, 1926)
==========================================================
Barrett and Besterman's 1926 investigation of dowsing; the SPR physicist's last great inquiry. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/diviningrodexper0000will).

See
ne


st


Ms
i


ig


ane
ha


5
Pia


j\!
(ca it


PURCHASE ie


essa) youn Dew


ee


pu0-H-Pemy Sc. (ieeees|


WORKING MEN’S COLLEGE.
LIBRARY REGULATIONS.


The Library is open every week-day evening, from-6.30 to
10 o'clock, except on Saturdays, when it closes at 9;

This book may be kept for three weeks. If’not returned
within that period, the borrower will be liable to a fine of one
penny per week.

If lost or damaged, the borrower will be required to make
good such loss or damage.

Only one book may be borrowed at a time.


Pee. 6


a ahs


THE DIVINING-ROD


OTHER WORKS BY
SIR WILLIAM BARRETT
SWEDENBORG: the Savant and the Seer.
CREATIVE THOUGHT AND THE PROBLEM OF EVIL.


THE RELIGION OF HEALTH: an Examination of Christian
Science.


ON THE THRESHOLD OF THE UNSEEN: an Examination
of the Phenomena of Spiritualism and of the Evi-
dence for Survival after Death.


PsYCHICAL RESEARCH.


DEATH-BED VISIONS.


OTHER WORKS BY
THEODORE BESTERMAN


CRYSTAL-GAZING: a Study in the History, Distribution,
Theory and Practice of Scrying.


THE Mystic Rose: a Study of Primitive Marriage and
of Primitive Thought in its bearing on Marriage.
By Ernest Crawley. Second Edition, greatly en-
larged by Theodore Besterman. 2 vols. (shortly).


In THE Way oF HEaveNn: Being the Teaching of many
Saered Scriptures.


WORKING MEN'S
_ COLLEGE
{| LIBRARY


a eee eee


Ss
“TN \ 5


BEE MW |


Fic. 1. Tuer Eartrest Picturz oF A DowSER
S. Minster, Cosmographia universalis (1550), p. 9


19792 ;
THE DIVINING-ROD


AN EXPERIMENTAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION


BY


SIR WILLIAM BARRETT, F.R:s.


AND


THEODORE BESTERMAN


WITH I2 PLATES AND 62 OTHER
ILLUSTRATIONS


METHUEN & CO. LTD.
36 ESSEX STREET. W.C.
LONDON


First Published in 1926


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


. . . these toyes, which howsoever in some mens too severe
censures, they may be helde absurde and ridiculous, I am
the bolder to insert; as not borrowed from circumforanean
roagues and Gipsies, but out of the writings of worthy
philosophers and Phisitians, yet living some of them, &
Regious Professors in famous Vniversities, who are able to
patronize that which they have said, and vindicate them-
selues from all cavillers and ignorant persons.

ROBERT BuRTON


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Fic. 2. A Mintnc Token


PREFACE


HE object of this book is to investigate, by means of
historical researches, by the collection and collation


of large numbers of contemporary cases, by the carry-
ing out of experiments, and by a discussion of the results
thus obtained, the claims made on behalf of ‘‘ water-divining.”’
This investigation has involved a great deal of work, including
a correspondence conducted by Sir William Barrett during
the course of which he wrote some six to seven thousand
letters, and including the examination of an almost equally
large number of volumes of all kinds. Whether the results |
justify this labour it is for the reader to decide; but should
it be agreed that the ability to find hidden objects by other
than normal means has been established, the question can
hardly be answered otherwise than in the affirmative. For
what scientific discovery could be of greater importance than
that of a hitherto unknown human faculty ?

Every one must greatly regret that Sir William Barrett did
not live to see this book published, and I must naturally
regret it more than most. But I have at least the satisfaction
of recollecting the numerous and lengthy discussions on all
aspects of the subject that I had with Sir William during the
months that intervened between the time when he honoured
me with an invitation to collaborate with him and his sudden
death. For the actual arrangement and writing of nearly
the whole of the book I must take full responsibility, but its
most important part, that comprising the experimental and
other contemporary cases, is almost entirely based on Sir
William’s lifelong work.

It would be impossible to mention by name the very many
persons who have assisted in this investigation by the conduct

1X


ie THE DIVINING-ROD


of experiments, the description of experiences, the submission
to cross-examination, the permission to use printed matter,
and in very many other ways. The work could not have been
done without this ready co-operation, and it is hoped that all
will accept this general expression of grateful thanks.
Acknowledgments must particularly be made to the Council
of the Society for Psychical Research for permission to use
observations and illustrations already published in their


Journal and Proceedings.
Tu. B.


LER HERE
Li COPS,
f, org & ‘
(= { i 3
4 / aa


TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAP.
List oF ILLUSTRATIONS
INTRODUCTION


PARTE TE
HISTORICAL AND GEOLOGICAL


I. A Brier HistoricAL SKETCH OF DOWSING
§ 1. Origins.


§ 2. Dowsing among Savage Peoples and in Folklore.


§ 3. The Rod in Classical and Medieval Times.
§ 4. Earliest Evidence of Dowsing.
§ 5. Earliest Systematic Study of Dowsing.
§ 6. Dowsing in England.
§ 7. The Early Scientists on Dowsing.
§ 8. Dowsing for Water.
§9. The Distribution of Dowsing in Europe.
§ ro. Dowsing in Modern Times.
§ 11. The Modern Literature of Dowsing.


II. THREE Famous FRENCH DOWSERS


I. JACQUES AYMAR
§1. Early Days.
§ 2. Aymar’s Great Exploit.
§ 3. Later Days.
§ 4. Aymar’s Account of his Dowsing.


11. BARTHELMY BLETON .
§ 1. Bleton’s Procedure and Semarang.
§2. Early Experiments.
§ 3. The Experiment of the Luxembourg.


§ 4. Contemporary Opinion adverse to Bleton.


ui. THE ABBE PARAMELLE


§1. Water Supply in the Deparpent of Loe


§ 2. Paramelle’s Solution of the Problem.
§ 3. Paramelle’s Theories.


Ili. Dowsinc AND GEOLOGY
§1. The Geology of Water Supply.


§ 2. The Geology of Somerset in Relation to Dowsing.


xi


PAGE


xV


xix


27
27


31


48


55


Xi


CHAP.


IV.


VI.


VII.


VII.


THE DIVINING-ROD


§ 3. The Experiment of Dr W. J. Sollas.

§ 4. Dowsing in Geological Works.

§ 5. Geological Criticism of Dowsing.

§ 6. Geological Opinion in favour of Dowsing.


PART II
EXPERIMENTAL


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING
§1. The Horsham Experiment.
§2. The Waterford Experiment.
§ 3. The Carrigoona Experiment.


Two Famous BriTIsH DOWSERS OF THE NINETEENTH
CENTURY


§1. William Scott ieptenee
§2. John Mullins.


NOTABLE CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DoWSERS: PRO-
FESSIONAL :
§ 1. William Stone.
§2. Benjamin Tompkins.
§ 3. Leicester Gataker.


NoTABLE CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DowsERS : AMATEUR


§1. Miss Clarissa Miles.
§2. Mr Fergus Carstairs Rogers.


OTHER CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DOWSERS : PROFESSIONAL


§ x. Thomas Willis, of Gloucester.

§ 2. Charles Sims, of Pilton.

. Thomas Hares and John Blake.

. Richard Anthony, of Yelling.

. John Stears, of Hessle.

. Henry Smart, of Evercreech.

. H. W. Golding, of Braintree.

. H. W. Mullins, of Bath.

. Thomas Heighway, of Llandrindod Wells.

§ Io. S. T. Child, of Ipswich, Suffolk.


Or OP OA HO? COCO? CO?
© OI AnH W


IX. OTHER CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DowsERS: AMATEUR .


§ 1. Walter Wyburn.

§2. Mr Kemp, of Taunton.

§3. An Official of the Government of Northern
Ireland.

§ 4. The Boy Lockyer.

§ 5. Colonel Hugh Rose.

§6. The Boy Guy Fenley, of Texas,


X. EXPERIMENTS WITH Two OR MorE INDEPENDENT DOWSERS


PG I


EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER


PAGE


65


103


133


160


174


189


199


222


CHAP.


XII.


XII.


CONTENTS


PART Tit


THEORETICAL


THE MECHANISM OF DowsING
§ 1. The Dowsing-Rod.


§ 2. How the Rod is Held.


§ 3. The Motion of the Rod.


§ 4. Transmission of the Motion of the Rod.
§5. The Sensations Occurring in Dowsing.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING
§ 1. Obsolete Theories.


§ 2. Criticism of the Obsolete Theories.
. Dowsing for Miscellaneous Objects.


. Dowsing for Hidden and Lost Objects.


. Cryptesthesia in Dowsing.


. Criticisms of the Cryptesthetic Theory.


§3
§ 4
§ 5
§ 6. The Cryptesthetic Theory of Dowsing.
i
§8


. Unconscious Muscular Action.


§ 9. Conclusion.


APPENDIX A. THE ZAHORIS


APPENDIX B. DowsING FoR MINERAL WATER IN THB
UNITED STATES


APPENDIX C, Two AMERICAN DOWSERS
§1z. A Dowsing Questionnaire.


§ 2. The Negro Bob Wellington.
§3. The Boy James Ellard.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


INDEX


Xiii


PAGE


233


248


277


283
288


293
313


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


FIGURE
1, THE EaRLiEsT PICTURE OF A DowsER..___.. Frontispiece
Sebastian Miinster, Cosmographia umiversalis (1550), p. 9.
2. A MINING TOKEN . facing


Ww


This token has the inscriptions d "Ruthe’ Weise. Gliicklich An,” and
“Dass ich Aus Beiit Miintzen Kan.” It was struck in gold and
silver by Friedrich August I in 1719. From C. Ernst, “ Von
Bergwerksmiinzen,”  Oéesterreichische Zeitschrift fiir Berg- und
Hiittenwesen (1885), xxxiii. 105, Plate III. 9; cp. A. Riechmann
and Co.’s Catalogue XXXV (Sammlung Karl Vogelsange,
Halle (Saale), 1925), Plate VII. 823.


. A SIXTEENTH-CENTURY DOWSER F - 2 =


G. Agricola, De Re Metallica (1556), facing p. 28.


DowsING FOR MINERALS, *
G. E. von Lohneyss, Bericht vom ” Berewerck (1617), Plate 16.


. INDICATING MINERAL LODES WITH THE RopD .
Balthasar Roessler, Speculum metallurgie politissimum (1700), p. 14.


. DowsING FoR METALS . : A é :


G. Schott, Magia universalis (1657-1659), Plate XI.


. A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DOWSER . s facing


M. A. de La Frata et Montalbano, Pratica Minerale (1678), facing
p. 11 ; the engraved titlepage of ‘this book has another figure of a
dowser.

THE ORIGIN AND LATTER END oF DowSING . :

J. G. Zeidler, Pantomysterium (1700), frontispiece.


THE DowsER UNMASKED ‘ ,
Theophilus Albinus, Das entlarvete Tdolum ( 1704), frontispiece.


. CHARLES ADAMS, OF ROWBERROW . é


F. Phippen, A Narrative of Practical Experiments (185 3), frontispiece.


. JAcguES AYMAR (?)


P. de Le ‘Lorrain de Vallemont, La physique occulte (1693), p. 139.


. La VERGE DE JACOB ; 5 . _ A facing
La verge de Jacob (1693). Title-page and frontispiece.
. SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY Rops . : . : facing
[P. Lebrun], Lettres (1696), p. 125.
. THE DowsER PENNET . -
C. Amoretti, ‘‘ Lettera,” Opusculi Scélti. (1793), xvi. ‘Plate Il.
. WARNHAM LODGE PARK . A ; . é
After the 25-in. Ordnance Survey Map: ” Sussex, II. 15.
THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT: PLAN. 3 “
THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT: SECOND PLAN ° ,
. THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT: GEOLOGICAL MaP , >


THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT: DIAGRAMMATIC SECTION .
XV


PAGE


vili


84


Xvi THE DIVINING-ROD


FIGURE PAGE
20. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: GEOLOGICAL MaP . Be esis)
21. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: PLAN . A : . 89
22. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: VIEW LOOKING NORTH
facing 90
23. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: SECTION OF No. 1 BoRE-
HoLe 4 “ - é : : 5 3 or
24. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: SECTION OF No, 2 BorE-
HoLe = : ° ° ° 5 - ae Oe
25. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT : : SEcTION OF No. 3 BoreE-
HOLE ; é : A ° . . S ee
26. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: SECTION OF No. 4 BoRE-
HOLE 3 : 3 S ¢ i fs ‘ ‘ 93
27. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: SECTION OF No. 5 BoRE-
HOLE 4 é 5 5 P : P 2 2 OF
28. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: SECTION OF THE FIELD
East AND WEST é ‘ 5 A : 2 95
29. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: SECTION OF THE FIELD
NorTH AND SOUTH . ; : “ 2 = 90
30. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: VIEW LOOKING East facing 98
31. JoHN MULLINS , : : facing 110
The Implement and Machines Revie’ feet: Xviii. 15598.
32. Muiins’s DowsING-ROD BEFORE USE . ; : (Rane
33. Mutitns’s Dowsinc-RopD AFTER USE * 5Be - w' Liz
34. WILLIAM STONE. : : . : - facing 134
35. PLAN OF WELLS ON THE HAREBY ESTATE : 5 ) £40
36. BENJAMIN TOMPKINS DoWSING IN SOUTH AFRICA facing 142
37. Map oF Toy Farm . . . - 145


From the 25-in. Ordnance Sone Map : Sesser. LXVII. TZ.
38. GENERAL VIEW OF Toy FARM AND THE VALLEY facing 146


39. Map To ILLUSTRATE THE Rev. W. H. SEDDON’s CaSE . 150
40. LEICESTER GATAKER DOWSING WITH HIS BARE HANDs facing 152
41. THE Four WELLS IN LocKING PARISH . : = ee i /
42. PLAN OF BUILDINGS AT RILLINGTON - : : 7p EOE
43. PLAN oF HEIGHWAY’s THREE WELLS : : ; By ha Rel
44. SECTION OF THE SAME , ‘ : : : : ere
45. PLAN OF A SITE IN CHRISTCHURCH RoapD, NEWportT, Mon-
MOUTHSHIRE ., . ‘ . ; ‘ . - 193


46. PLAN OF THE GARDEN BEHIND COLONEL TaAyYLor’s HousE 200
47. WATER FOUND BY THREE INDEPENDENT DowserRs : PLAN 201


48. THE SHANKLIN EXPERIMENT: Map. “ 210


After the 25-in, Ordnance Survey Map: Hampshire, “XCIX. 9, ile
Geological Survey Map and local surveys.


49. THE SHANKLIN EXPERIMENT: SECTION
50. PLAN oF ELLIOTTS, NUTHURST


° ° . . 21ir


‘* : . . + 220


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


FIGURE


51.


Ep
53:


54.


55-


56.
57:


58.


59.
60.


61.


62.


63.


64.


65.


66.


67.


68.


69.


70.
Gia


72.


73°


74.


FRED RODWELL DoWSING WITH A ROD AND WITHOUT
The Graphic (1889), xl. 547.


PLAN OF EXPERIMENTS WITH JOHN STEARS


WILLIAM STOKEs’s Rop . :
After M. R. Cox, in Papers and Transactions [of] The International
Folk-lore Congress, r8gr (1892), p. 440.
WILLIAM CookWoRTHY’s Rop . : i é
From his “Observations on .. . the Virgula Divina,” Gentleman's
Magazine (1751), xxi. 507.
A Rop HELD AS DIRECTED BY COOKWORTHY
W. Pryce, Mineralogia Cornubiensis (1778), p. 118.


THE Rop sas HELD BY JOHN MULLINS. A ‘ 5


THE ROD AS HELD IN THE UNITED STATES a
“The Divining Rod,” The American Journal of Science ‘(1826),
HH. 202.
AN ALUMINIUM POCKET-ROD AS USED By Messrs J. F.
YouNG AND R. ROBERTSON -


ANOTHER KIND oF METAL Rop -


THE SAME ROD AS ITIS ALLEGED TO TWIST WHEN OVER WATER .
G. H. Stokes, ‘‘ A Water Wizard [S. T. Child],” The Ibis Magazine
(September 1910).
THE RopD AS USED BY AN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY GERMAN
DOWSER . 5
J. G. Kriiger, Geschichte der Erde (1746), Plate LEO


THE MovEMENT OF THE Rop . ~


Luigi Sementini, Pensieri e Sperimenti sulla Bacchetta Divinatoria
(1810), p. 21.


Rops AS USED BY FRENCH SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DOWSERS
facing


: . . .


. . °


[P. Lebrun], Lettres (1696), p. 133.


“ CURRENTS ’’ PASSING THROUGH A Rop , 5 :


Count J. de Tristan, Recherches sur quelques effluves terrestres (1826),
Figure 7.


THE RoD AS HELD BY A GERMAN MINER ns é :
C. Sterne, Die Wahrsagung (1862), p. 88.


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY FRENCH Rop . , z é
P. Garnier, Dissertation (1692), p. 32.


THE Rop AS HELD BY GABRIEL DE MOoRTILLET: FIRST
POSITION . Z - - 3 és 3
TuE Rop AS HELD BY GABRIEL DE MoRTILLET: SECOND
POSITION . = F F - ; x : :


TuE Rop AS HELD BY GABRIEL DE MorTILLET: THIRD


POSITION . ; A A : :
From his Histoire dé Phydroscopie " (1849), frontispiece.


First EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PLACED IN THE ENVELOPE
First EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PRODUCED By Mr YOUNG
SECOND EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PLACED IN THE ENVELOPE


SECOND EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PRODUCED BY Mr YOUNG
AT THE First ATTEMPT . a : -
SECOND EXPERIMENT : LETTERS PRODUCED BY Mr YOUNG AT
THE SECOND ATTEMPT ; ; 3 i ‘ :


b


XVil


PAGE
223


228
234


235


236


237
237


250


254


255


259
259


259


265
265
205


265


265


INTRODUCTION


who profess to be able to discover, without the aid

of any known means of investigation, the exact
location of underground water. For this purpose they usually
employ a Y-shaped twig of hazel or some other wood ; this
so-called divining-rod is held in the hand and the diviner
then traverses the ground. When supposed to be approach-
ing the hidden water the rod is seen to move, sometimes with
such vigour as to forcibly strike the holder’s body, although
he claims to make considerable efforts to restrain it—a fact
which seems to be proved by one limb of the twig being often
snapped across under the strain of the opposing forces. The
holder of the rod generally appears exhausted by the effort ;
in some cases he complains of sickness or giddiness, occasion-
ally the pulse rises, he breaks out into a violent perspiration,
and trembles allover. Asarule he asserts that he experiences
singular sensations, resembling muscular cramp, when he is
over an underground water-course. These sensations are so
well marked that in some cases he discards the use of the
twig and trusts to his sensations alone. If now the place be
carefully noted beneath which the hidden water-course is
asserted to exist, the probability is that, however often the
spot be crossed by the holder of the rod, the same phenomena
will recur, even when his attention is distracted, or another
and independent dowser is employed. Further, if a well be
dug at the spot so indicated, water will usually be found.
This alleged power of finding underground water, when to
an ordinary observer there appears nothing to betray its
presence, is not confined to a professional and paid class of
men, but is found among amateurs, young and old, male and
female, and in all classes of society. Nor is the dowser only
met with in England ; he is found today to our knowledge in
France, Italy, Spain and Portugal, Switzerland, Germany,
Austria, Scandinavia, the Baltic countries, in short, in all
parts of Europe, and in the United States, Canada, Australia,


X1X


[Doe are in many parts of the world certain persons


x THE DIVINING-ROD


India, and doubtless in other places of which we have no
direct evidence.

There exists a large mass of indisputable evidence (a portion
of which will be given in due course) proving that it is possible
to find water, oil, metallic ores, coal, hidden objects, and so
forth, by means of the rod. It is impossible to read this
voluminous evidence without coming to the same conclusion
as that of a modern investigator, who wrote after painstaking
investigation : ‘‘ The evidence for the success of ‘ dowsing ’ as
a practical art is very strong—and there seems to be an unex-
plainedresiduum whenall possible deductions have been made.”’?

In like manner, it is impossible to study this subject his-
torically without being impressed. by the number of those
who have accepted as indisputable the practical value of the
rod. And these believers in its efficacy were not a set of
silly, superstitious men, easily duped by cunning rogues,
credulous fools, capable of believing any nonsense; on the
contrary, among them are some of the most learned writers
and the most painstaking investigators, Cabinet Ministers
and judges, shrewd business men and large landowners, rail-
way companies and architects, together with an array of
practical miners and well-sinkers ; men who ought to have
known what they were talking about, and not likely to waste
their money on a silly superstition. The popular off-hand
view about the rod—that it is merely another instance of the
perennial superstition and roguery of mankind—seems there-
fore somewhat inadequate. For the curious problem that
meets one in the examination of the subject is not only the
long survival and wide extent of the belief in the rod, but the
singular and unselfish enthusiasm of its advocates, together
with the general probity and intelligence of the diviners them-
selves. Quakers, farmers, ladies, children, poor-law guardians,
clergymen, magistrates, etc., are among the English diviners
of today, and these are not the class of people one would expect
to find hoodwinking a gullible public. They may, of course, be
the victims of self-deception ; if so, does this also apply to the
professional dowsers (in England alone there are scores who
make a living by their practice), whom numerous agents of
estates and owners of land find it in their interest repeatedly to
employ ? 2

As a silly superstition, nevertheless, the subject remains in
the minds of most people who have not had an opportunity of

1 E, R. Pease, in Proc. S.P.R., ii, 89.


* We are glad to be able to bear testimony to the fact that several
of these professional dowsers, notably those who have been most suc-


INTRODUCTION Xxi


themselves witnessing its phenomena or of reading accounts
of other people’s experiences. To this practice is also opposed
the whole weight of official science. This sufficiently curious
phenomenon must be accounted for, for such a widespread
attitude cannot be altogether unreasonable. It is true that
the subject at first dispirits and repels the investigator because
of the quantity of rubbish that overlays it and the credulity
and ignorance that surround it, and which characterize so many
of its enthusiastic votaries and of the writers on the divining-
rod, both in ancient and in modern times. Indeed, at first
sight few subjects appear to be so unworthy of serious notice
and so utterly beneath scientific investigation as that of the
divining-rod. .

But this was once true of many matters now of the greatest
scientific importance, and it is our business to try and discover
with the divining-rod of science the treasure that is hidden
beneath any soil. As Sir John Herschel has truly said: “‘ He
that has seen obscurities, which appeared impenetrable, sud-
denly dispelled, and the most barren and unpromising fields of
inquiry converted into rich and inexhaustible springs of know-
ledge ona simple change of our point of view, or by bringing to
bear on them some principle which it never occurred before to
try, will be the last to acquiesce in any dispiriting prospects.’’!

Unhappily this truly scientific spirit is only too often re-
placed in academic circles by a reckless misoneism.2, Many


cessful, are simple unassuming men, who do not disguise their ignorance,
nor occasional failures, and are ready to impart all they know. On
the other hand, as might naturally be expected, the possession of any
peculiar ‘‘ faculty ”’ tends to inordinate self-conceit and vanity, especi-
ally among the illiterate class from whom the professional dowser is
usually drawn. This is traceable from the 17th century dowser down
to the present day. Among such men a great mystery is made of their
“art’’; an apprenticeship must be served, and initiation to its mys-
teries could, in former times, only be gained by a knowledge of the
magic rites and ceremonies with which the practice was surrounded.
At the present day these magic rites are swallowed up by the more magic
dollar. For example, the son of an English rector having accidentally
found he had the faculty of dowsing, the father applied for information
to a young professional dowser, and received the reply that “‘ Mr
declines to take less than one hundred guineas for giving the youth
three months training’?! We hope this warning may make such
premiums a little more difficult to catch.

1 A Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy (1831),

Mey

2 Here is an amusing instance of apriorism in a letter from a well-
known geologist : ‘‘ It is sad to find you troubling about that wretched
divining-rod! ... Why is it that of late years this ‘ pestilent heresy’
has cropped up so? And why are educated people bitten by it?
Squires, M.P.’s, doctors, and alas, parsons!”


Xx THE DIVINING-ROD


men who have imperfectly assimilated and related the findings
of the various sciences have too easily recourse to a convenient
and superficial scheme of things, from which they then vigor-
ously exclude any new facts which appear destructive of their
preconceived notions. To discuss this psychological truth
would be to go beyond our present scope, and we have merely
to consider whether there is any immediate explanation of
this very general scientific prejudice against serious con-
sideration of the dowsing-rod. Its name is no doubt largely
responsible for the opprobrium under which the subject rests ;
naturally enough the “ divining-rod ” is confused with such
ancient divinatory practices as Belomancy, Xylomancy, and
especially with Rhabdomancy. But there is of course no
connexion between these things and the use of the divining-
rod. It will therefore be convenient to replace that term with
the old and locally well-established words dowsing-rod and
dowser.!

The historical evidence adduced in the next chapter renders
it practically certain that the birthplace of the modern use
of the dowsing-rod is in the mining districts of Germany,
probably the Harz Mountains. It was probably introduced
into England in the latter part of the 16th century by the Ger-
man miners brought into this country to work the Cornish
mines.2. The beginning of the use of the rod for the purpose
of finding underground water is uncertain, but this probably
originated at least a century after the use of the rod in mining.
Towards the end of the 17th century the rod was also used,
in France, for the tracing of criminals, but this practice soon
died out. At the present time, in this country, the rod is
almost exclusively used as a water-finder. It fell into disuse
as a help in mining through the exhaustion of the mines in
Cornwall. If it is tending to become disused for water-finding
also (which is very doubtful) the fact is no doubt due to the
spread of elementary scientific knowledge among farmers and
the like. Such elementary knowledge is sufficient to make
a poorly educated person distrustful of unorthodox methods of
research but not sufficient to enable him to distinguish
between the charlatan and the dowser producing practical
results. This conclusion explains why the rod is more widely


+ According to the best authorities the origin and derivation of the
words are unknown.

* Though of course foreign miners are known to have been in the
country much earlier; see e.g., T. Rymer, Foedova (1704-1732), xi.
318 ; W. Campbell, Materials for a History of the Reign of Henry VII
(1873-1877), i. 310.


INTRODUCTION XXill


used by cultured persons than by illiterate ones. It is always
ignorance, and not knowledge, that blindly denies what is
unfamiliar. ‘‘ Ignorance is the parent both of blind credulity
and of scoffing scepticism, and leads not only to implicit
belief in untruths, but to a rash denial of what is true.” 1
Our present object is to endeavour to dispel such ignorance
in regard to the dowsing-rod by carefully examining in the
clearer light of the present day the evidence that exists on
behalf of phenomena rejected as trivial and valueless by
orthodox science.

Here then we find a widespread belief existing at the present
day and extending backwards for centuries ; though it seems
contemptible, how are we to account for the origin and sur-
vival of this belief, and for its appearance and persistence
in regions remote from each other? The answer is simple:
the belief can only be explained by proving it to be founded
on true and ascertainable facts, facts which are now to be
put before the reader.

Before doing so it seems proper to refer to a matter of
some importance. From time to time reports come to hand
of local authorities who refuse to employ a dowser, or who
refuse to pay his fees after having employed him, on the
ground that such employment and payment are contrary to
law. These authorities have some justification for their
view in that several such authorities have in fact been sur-
charged by their auditor of the fee paid by them to a dowser.
But in fact an auditor has no right to do so, nor is there any-
thing to prevent a local authority employing a dowser if they
think fit. In this connexion we may quote a letter from the
now defunct Local Government Board in answer to a specific
inquiry on this point (31st of August Igor): “.... it
appears to them [the Board] to be competent to the District
Council to consult Mr Tompkins if they think fit to do so,
and to pay him a reasonable fee for his advice.’’ This state-
ment was confirmed by the Board in a later letter (23rd of
November 1903) to Sir William Barrett.?


1 Sir Lauder Brunton, ‘“‘ Truth and Delusion,’”? The Universal Re-
view (1889), iii. 54. :

2 News has come to hand (June 1926) of the appointment of an
official dowser by the Municipality of Bombay.


NT yg
ye i ap ey Se

JOSS BANS ns

Aas he Gp
ha
[©
\ Py A
%


THE DIVINING-ROD


PART 1
HISTORICAL AND GEOLOGICAL


CHAPTER I
A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING


§ I. ORIGINS


N eminent authority, after discussing the oracular
powers of the whispering leaves of the oaks of Dodona,


of the Appolonic laurel at Delphi, and of the fabulous
ash Ygdrasill, proceeds to say that “the divining-rod has
inherited its qualities from the divining tree.’’1 Other
writers have found similar theories tempting, and indeed
there is some slight ground on which to rest such opinions.
The wand of Hermes is sometimes figured as a forked rod ; ?
figures of Mediterranean idols have been found bearing forked
rods as symbols of their power ; * and so far afield as on the
carved rocks of Peru similar figures are to be discovered.*
The various ideas regarding the origin of the dowsing-rod
to which students were led by these discoveries were summed
up in a completely scholarly way by Adalbert Kuhn, a mytho-
logist of the old school. Postulating the forked shape of
the rod, which he imagined to be its universal and_ distin-
guishing characteristic, he suggested that the rod was, in
brief, the symbol of divine fire or light. Perhaps the most
extraordinary medley ever put together on this basis is an

1C. F. Keary, Outlines of Primitive Belief (1882), p. 62.

2 L. Preller, Ausgewdahlie Aufsdtze (1864), p. 154.

3’ F, Creuzer—J. D. Guigniaut, Religions de P Antiquité (1841), iv.
plate LVI bis; cp. J. W. Tyndale, The Island of Sardinia (1849), iii.
221-222.

4 T. J. Hutchinson, Two Years in Peru (1873), ii. 174, plate.

® Die Hevabkunft des Feuers (1851), pp. 204 et seqg.; cp. Sir J. G.
Frazer, The Golden Bough (1911-1915), xi. 67, 281-2, 291-2.

1 1


2 THE DIVINING-ROD


article by John Fiske, of Harvard, the historian and philo-
sophico-scientific writer. Having once met a dowser, whom
he promptly proved to be a rogue by showing that the rod
would not move when he (Professor Fiske) held it, and having
read that ‘learned author”? Mr Baring-Gould, Fiske felt
himself qualified to clear up the subject. Accordingly he tells
us that the dowsing-rod as “ throughout Europe it has been
used from time immemorial,” and as “ the one thing essential
about it is that it should be forked,” it is obvious that its
origin, ‘‘ hopeless as the problem may at first sight seem,”’
is “ nevertheless solved.’’ It is, we learn, unquestionably the
wooden incarnation of forked lightning !4_ So much for myths
and myth-makers.

All such theories fail because it is attempted to trace the
origin of dowsing through the forked shape of the rod. This
shape, however, is neither its original nor its universal form.
In the oldest references even more than in contemporary
practice the instrument used in dowsing varies in all ways.
The substance of which the rod is made may be of any kind
of wood and metal, they may be manufactured articles such
as tongs, snuffers, or even (be it whispered) a German sausage.
It is clear, therefore, that if the origin of dowsing is to be
found it must be sought through the practice and not through
its instrument. On these grounds we cannot connect dowsing
with any of the numerous ancient divinatory practices such
as rhabdomancy, belomancy, xylomancy, hydromancy and
the like. Nor does there appear to be any reason for ascrib-
ing to dowsing the feat of Moses in the wilderness (Numbers xx.
11), though the commentators have not reined their imagina-
tions in discussing this passage and others of a similar nature,
which may be found in any biblical concordance under “ rod.”
In short, the origin of dowsing for underground minerals and
water is wrapped in obscurity too deep for present penetration.
But we may well say with the learned William Pryce that
“it is impossible to ascertain the date or personality of the
discovery, which appears to me of very little consequence
to posterity ; but perhaps we may not be far off from the
truth, if we incline to the opinion of Georgius Agricola, in his
excellent latin treatise De Re Metallica, that ‘ the application
of the inchanted or divining rod to metallick matters took
its rise from magicians and the impure fountains of inchant-
ment, * *


* Myths and Myth-Makers (1873), pp. 37 et seq.
* Mineralogia Cornubiensis (1778), p. 113. The passage from
Agricola will be found at p. 27 of the work cited.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 3
§2. DowsING AMONG SAVAGE PEOPLES AND IN FOLKLORE


It is no part of our purpose to make any extended investiga-
tion into the practice of dowsing among savage peoples. Nor,
indeed, does this custom appear to be very widespread among
such peoples. But a few instances that we may adduce will
serve to demonstrate the world-wide extent of the use of
the rod for finding hidden things. These hidden things are
in fact generally stolen things in the remoter regions of the
world. An Indian case will lead to more characteristically
uncivilised evidence, though it is not recorded by an impec-
cable authority. It appears that having had some property
stolen from his home near Calcutta the writer had secured a
native who was famous for these detections. This native,
after the proper incantations, caused two other natives from
the Madras coast to hold together two bamboo rods. After
a while, says the writer, “we confess to our great surprise,
we beheld the bamboos crossing each other horizontally, and
afterwards alternately rise up and descend.”” In this manner
the direction in which they were to proceed was indicated,
and at length a certain person was shown as the culprit.t

We have here in all probability a mingling of two elements :
one being dowsing proper, and the other the very widespread
worship of sticks and their use in divination, such sticks being
held to be possessed by, or to contain, a spirit or deity.2, With
such cases we are not here concerned. Very similar to the
practice just described is that of the Maganja of Central
Africa. Some corn had been stolen and the medicine-man
appointed four men to hold the sticks, two men to a stick.
On the spectator enquiring what this meant, he was answered :
“Wait and you will see. The sticks will drag and drag the
men, until they drag them to the person who stole the corn ! ”’
And so it was. ‘‘ The men seemed scarcely able to hold the
sticks, which took a rotatory motion at first, and whirled
the holders round and round like mad things.” The sticks
led to the hut of one of the wives of the robbed person, who
duly was made to pass through the appropriate ordeal, which,
by the way, proved her innocent ! *

A very similar custom is found among the Yaos of Lake


1 “ The Detective in India,” Chambers’s Journal (1856), pp. 49-52 ;
cp. S. R. Maitland, False Worship (1856), p. 330.

2 E.g., Richard Taylor, Te Ika A Maui (1855), p. 92; cp. Sir E. B.
Tylor, Primitive Culture (1920), i. 125 et seq.

$ Henry Rowley, The Story of the Universities’ Mission (1866),
pp. 218-9.


4 THE DIVINING-ROD


Nyanza,! and seemingly also among the Zulus.* The natives
of the Banks and Torres Islands in Melanesia use bamboo rods
for the purpose of spiritualistic sittings. When they feel the
bamboos moving in their hands they know it to be a sign of
the presence of a ghost.? It is interesting to observe that
in a journal supposed to have been written about 1675 in
connexion with a search for treasure up the river Gambia,
occurs the following entry: “‘ February the 24th, I tried the
Use of Virga Divina upon a high, barren and rocky Moun-
tain: But, whether it afforded no Metal, or whether my Rod,
being cut in England, and being dried and carried far by
Sea, had lost its Virtue ; or whether it hath no such Quality
(which I rather believe) I/am not certain. However my
Companions laugh’d me out of the Conceit.’’* In discussing
gold-mining in Borneo, Posewitz says, without giving a refer-
ence: ‘‘ Professor Veth states that they [the natives] use a
kind of Wiinschelruthe (divining-rod) in order to find the
spots rich in gold.” 5 James Gilmour tells us that the Mongols
among whom he lived expected him to be able to say “ where
they should dig a well so as to get plenty of good water near
the surface»... .” §

Sir Frank Swettenham, discussing the methods of divination
used by the Malays, writes: ‘‘ Yet another plan is to place
in the hand of the pawang, magician, or medium, a divining-
rod formed of three lengths of rattan, tied together at one end,
and when he gets close to the person ‘ wanted’, or to the
place where anything stolen is concealed, the rod vibrates in
a remarkable manner.”? This is confirmed by Dr Skeat in
the following interesting passage, describing the rod. spoken
of by Swettenham: “ This is a rod or birch of rotan sega (the
best marketable variety of cane), which may consist either
of a single stem, or of any odd number of stems up to nine.
The handle of the rod or rods is bound witha hank of ‘ Javanese ’
yarn, which may or may not be stained yellow. The sorcerer


1 Duff Macdonald, Africana (1882), i. 161.

* Bishop H. Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu (1870),
PP. 330-2; cp. td., “ Divination and Analogous Phenomena,” The
Journal of the (Royal) Anthropological Institute (1872), i. 178.

*> R. H. Codrington, The Melanesians (1891), pp. 223-225.

“ Francis Moore, Travels into the Inland Paris of Africa (1738),
Appendix III, p. 16.

* T. Posewitz, Borneo (1892), p. 343; P. J. Veth, Borneo’s Wester-
A fdeeling (1854-1856). Cp. N. Adriani and A. C. Kruijt, De Baye’e-
sprekende Tovadja’s van Midden-Celebes (1912-1914), i. 25.

* Among the Mongols (1883), p. 188.

* Malay Sketches (1895), p. 207.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 5


who wishes to use it grasps the butt-end of the rod in his right
fist, and after burning incense and scattering sacrificial rice,
repeats the appropriate charm, which commences with a
summons to the spirit to descend from the mountains and enter
into hisembodiment. Ifthe invocation is properly performed,
the spirit descends, and entering the sorcerer’s head by way
of the fontanel, proceeds down his arm and into the rod itself.
The result is that the tip of the rod commences to rotate with
rapidly increasing velocity, until the sorcerer loses conscious-
ness, in which case the rod will point in the direction of any
sort of lost or hidden treasure, which it may be the object
of the operation to discover. Even underground water could,
I was assured, be thus discovered.’ 1

To deal adequately with the subject of dowsing and the
dowsing-rod, in custom, tradition and association, in European
folklore, would require a small treatise. To do so would be
to throw our study hopelessly out of proportion. It can only
be said that dowsing folklore is to be found in every European
race, that some of it is of considerable age and that a know-
ledge of it is essential for a proper appreciation of the origin
and development of the practice.?


§3. THE RopD IN CLASSICAL AND MEDIEVAL TIMES


Apart from the reasons put forward above, it is pretty clear
that dowsing was unknown in classical times, from the absence
of references to that practice. Pliny, who had a sharp eye for
this sort of thing, has a good deal to say about water and its
discovery, but nothing of dowsing. We may be sure that
Varro’s lost Virgula divina dealt merely with divination. Still
better reason for our opinion that dowsing was unknown at this
time is the fact that so lateas the 4thcentury A.D., Cassiodorus
praises water-finders without allusion to our subject ;* and


1“ Malay Spiritualism,” Folk-Lore (1902), xiii. 145.

2 The reader who wishes to follow this up should consult the Biblio-
graphy under the names of Afzelius, Arnot, Bartsch, Birlinger, Bosquet,
Brand, Broberg, Buckland, Busch, Caila, Dybeck, Dyer, Elworthy,
Feilberg, Folkard, Friend, Grimm, Hausky, Hedenstjerna, Herrlein,
Hoffman-Krayer, Robert Hunt, Hunziker, Ipolyi, Jens, Kamp, Kelly,
Kinahan, Krause, Krauss, Kiichler, Kuhn, Lang, Lehmann, Lemke,
Leoprechting, Lippert, Lloyd, Luetolf, Lyncker, Mahlschedl, Mann-
hardt, Meier, Menzel, Meyer, Miillenhoff, Miiller, Musdus, Nerucci,
Napier, Panzer, Peretti, Perger, Philpot, Preller, Pritz, Prohle, Quitz-
mann, Raaf, Sanders, Schindler, Sch6nwerth, Schulenburg, Schwartz,
Seiler, Simrock, Sloet, Strackerjan, Thorpe, Vernalaken, Vonbun,
Waldbrucht, Waldfreund, Wigstr6m, Wlislocki, Wolf, Wuttke, Zingerle.

8 Variarum, III. liii.


6 -THE DIVINING-ROD


the same applies even to such specialist works as the 6th cent.
De Re Rustica (IX. viii) of Palladius and the (probably)
earlier De Architectura of Vitruvius (VIII. i).

The next allusion to anything approaching our subject dates
from the 11th century, at the beginning of which we find
Notker, monk in St Gallen, writing of the volatile and mercurial
rods.1 In the next two centuries are to be found a number
of Germanic allusions to the rod; it is necessary to refer to
these since these allusions are likely to lend themselves to too
facile generalisations. The ancient Germanic word for the
divining-rod (in its rhabdomantic sense) was wtinschelruote
or wiinschelrisz, that is, wishing-rod. This word was unfor-
tunately adopted for the dowsing-rod, which is now called
in German the wiinschelrute. It must therefore be made
quite clear that no allusion to dowsing must be feund in the
golden rod of the Nibelungslied (c. 1170),? or in the paradisial
wishing-rod of Gottfried of Strassburg’s Lobgesang auf Mania
und Christus (c. 1210),* or in the magical rod or taming-wand
of the Edda (c. 1240). References to this wishing-rod are
curiously frequent in certain writers of this period, such as
Albrecht of Scharffenberg,® Conrad of Wiirzburg,® the anony-
mous Histovi7 von hertzog Reynfrid von Braunschweijg.? A
number of similar allusions to a wishing-rod may be found in
other of the typical compositions of this time, to the end
of the fifteenth century, but we need not linger with these.

One interesting allusion may however be discussed: in
Conrad of Megenberg’s Buch der Natur (written 1349-50), the
first work on natural history in the German language, there
are several references to a wishing-rod.§ One of these refer-
ences (p. 376) says that when split hazel rods are used as spits
they turn by the heat of the fire without any magic ; this seems
to imply a knowledge of turning rods, but whether it may be
regarded as an allusion to dowsing is doubtful.


§ 4. EARLIEST EVIDENCE OF DOWSING


Towards the end of the period just described, in which the
rod was known only as a mythological, semi-fabulous instru-


1 Schriften Notkers, i. 701, 720.

* Das Nibelungenlied nach der Hohenems-Miinchener Handschrift,
D433. Waa 8 Gottfried’s Werke, ii. 104.

‘ Edda, etc., pp. 2, ll. 14, 29-30; 22, ll. 28-29; 23, 1.10; 25, 1. 7.

° Der jtingere Titurel, ll. 624, 701, 1242, 1247-8, 1728, 25009, etc.

° Engelhard, 1. 3000; Goldene Schmiede, 1. 664, 1312; Lieder und
Spriiche, no. 11, 1. 43; Der Trajanische Krieg, ll. 2217, 20,006.

” Il. 1575, 4150, 4414, 6352, 10,944, 12,950, 13,106.

8 Das puch dey natur, pp. 42, 455.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 7


ment, on a par with magical wishing-rings and cups, it be-
comes apparent that it began to be used for the discovery of
underground minerals. As early as about 1430 there is an
allusion, in a manuscript left by a mine surveyor, to a mining-
rod, its striking being attributed to metallic exhalations.1
After this earliest unmistakable reference to dowsing there is
a long silence until 1518, when Martin Luther included the
use of the rod in his list of acts that break the first command-
ment.? But twelve years later the subject was definitely
established as a practical help in mining, for there is a refer-
ence to the rod in the Latin-German glossary in Agricola’s little
essay published in 1530.8 This reference was supplemented a
quarter of a century later (1556) by a long and acute dis-
cussion in Agricola’s great treatise. He points out very
cogently that as the rod does not move in the hands of all
men there cannot be any specific affinity between the object
of the search and the rod: the phenomena (which Agricola
himself observed) must be due to some quality of the dowser
himself.4 An interesting woodcut (Fig. 3) shows the successive
scenes of a dowse for minerals. We see the dowser cutting a
branch from a tree, traversing the ground with the rod thus
obtained, the rod dipping, an excavation begun and the
bringing up of sample pieces of rock. On another woodcut
the operations are shown proceeding below the ground,
while on the surface the dowser goes on with his work. The
serious, business-like air of the dowser is apparent on both
these cuts, and the same can be seen in an illustration to a
book which had appeared in the meanwhile: the geographer
and mathematician Sebastian Miinster’s greatest work, his
Cosmographia universalis (1550, p. 9). This woodcut (Fig. 1,
Frontispiece), showing the dowser, forked rod in hand,
striding over low hills, is the earliest picture of the dowser at
work. Init the rod is labelled, ‘“‘ Virgula divina—Gliick rit,”
but there is no reference to it in the text.

In the interval between the publication of Agricola’s two
works on mining there had appeared, in addition to the cut in
Miinster’s folio, a number of interesting accounts of dowsing
which show that by the middle of the sixteenth century dowsing
for metals had become quite general. In 1531 Paracelsus


1 Andreas de Solea, Evéffnite und blosgestellte Natur, in C. Kiese-
wetter, Geschichte des Neueven Occultismus (1891-1895), i. 512, ll. 382.

2 Decem Praecepta (1518), praeceptum primum ; cp., id., Tischreden
odey Colloquia (1566), f. 4810.

3 P, Plateanus, in G. Agricola, Bermannus (1530), p. 135.

4 De Re Metallica (1556), pp. 25-28,


MEN'S


COLLEGE
LIBRARY


WORKING


SS SN SIE


Fic. 3. A SIxTEENTH-CENTURY DoWSER


G. Agricola,


De Re Metallica (1556), facing p. 28


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 9


touched on the matter of the rod,! and next year was published
“‘a true though brief description of the mercurial rod,” in
which we find described the discovery of buried treasure by the
Reverend Father P. Bernhardus, the first dowser of whom
we have such specific record.2. Ten years later Caspar Brusch
celebrated in heroic verse the use of the rod for finding veins
and treasures on the Bohemian side of the Erzgebirge § (just
as Michael Barth was to celebrate later the village of Annaburg
in the Saxon Erzgebirge) ; * and a little later (1549) there is
an allusion in the Zimmerische Chronik.® In 1553 Pierre Belon
observes that the rod is not used by the Macedonian miners
as it is by the German,® and in the same year Caspar Peucer
speaks of the forked rod used in the search for metals.’

After Agricola’s discussion of the subject (1556) more or
less original considerations of dowsing are to be found in many
of the works of the learned inquirers of the sixteenth cen-
tury.® In works dealing with mining there are also frequent
allusions,® and, in short, knowledge of dowsing for minerals
seems to have been very widespread by the beginning of the
seventeenth century. We cannot attempt to mention even a
few of the writers who discuss the subject.


§ 5. EARLIEST SYSTEMATIC STUDY OF DOWSING


Systematic experiments in dowsing may be said to begin
with the Baroness of Beau-Soleil. This lady was anxious that
France should hold the first place among the nations of Europe
(about which she need have had little concern at that time).
Looking round France, says she in a dedicatory epistle to
Richelieu, she came to the conclusion that her country could


1 De Causa et Origione Morborum (1565), f. 2b; cp. td., Von heym-
ligkeyten der Natur (1584), p. 4 of “‘ Die Wtmschelrhut”’ ; id., Astron-
omia Magna (1571), p. 64; td., Dictionarium obscuriorum vocabulorum,
p. 91; id., De natura rerum (1583), 1x. 94b.

2 Vera atque brevis descriptio Virgulae Mercurialis (1532).

2 Encomia Hubae Slaccenwaldensis (1542), p. 8.

4 Annaeberga (1557), PP. 37-38.

5 Literarischer Verein (1869), xciv. 136.

6 Les Observations de plusieurs singularitez (1553), i. 45.

7 Commentarius de praecipuis divinationum generibus (1553), P- 276.

8 E.g., J. Bodin, De la Démonomancie des Sorciers (1580), f. 36a;
M. Pabst, Wunderbarliches Leib und Artzneybuch (1590), i. 350; G. B.
della Porta, Magia naturalis (1589), p. 300; M. A. del Rio, Disguisi-
tionum magicarum (1593), I. ili. 4, etc.; id., Syntagma Tvragoediae
Latinae (1594), Comment. in Medeam, 1. 231.

® Some of these can be found in N. Gobet, Les anciens minéralogistes


(1779).


91 ‘Id ‘(4191) youamssag mon qyI4ag ‘sskauyoT UOA “gy “Dy
SIVUANIJ. YOL ONISMOGE *b ‘DIT


10


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 11


best achieve this end by means of her mineral wealth. This,
however, was largely undeveloped and she accordingly applied
herself to remedy this defect by careful study. From a mar-
ginal note (p. 12) in her first pamphlet she intended to apply
her methods to the discovery of underground water as well as
minerals and she thus becomes the first to have applied
dowsing to water. After much study the Baroness laid down
five methods of finding underground water and minerals:
by means of opening the ground, by means of plants that grow
on the surface, by means of tasting the water that can be
found on the surface, by means of the vapours that ascend
from the soil, and finally by means of sixteen instruments,
chief among which she places that rod which, she says, is in
Italy called indifferently Verga lucenta, Verga cadente or foco-
sa, Verga salente or saltente, Verga batente or forcilla, Verga
candente or tnfertore, Verga obuia or superiore. What is more
to the point, the writer gives a list of the mines she has dis-
covered by means of this rod: these include numerous gold,
silver, copper, lead, iron and many other kinds of mines.
Details are given and there seems to be no reason to doubt
that some of these claims are sound.


§ 6. DowsING IN ENGLAND


The first discussion of dowsing in an English work occurs
in Robert Fludd’s Philosophia Moysaica (1638, p. 117), though
this can only be called an English work by courtesy, since it is
in Latin and was published in the Netherlands. Fludd has
nothing original to say, for he simply revives the use of the
rod as an illustration of the innate affinity between things
vegetable and things mineral. He states that the rod is used
by Germans in the Welsh silver-mines. hee

Next year Gabriel Plattes, animated by reasons similar to
those of the Baroness of Beau-Soleil and perhaps inspired by
them, sets cut in brief various matters relating to mining.
Among other things he describes how on a calm midsummer
morning he cut a rod of hasell, almost a yard long, and carried
it up and down a mountain. ‘‘ Before Noone it guided mee
to the Orifice of alead mine.’’ The reason of the motion of the
rod Plattes conceives to be ‘‘ of Kin to the Load-stone, drawing
Iron to it by a secret vertue, inbred by nature, and not by any
coniuration as some have fondly imagined.” By 1646 Sir


1 Véritable déclaration de la découverte des mines (1632); La restitv-
tion de Plvton (1640).
2 A Discovery of Subterraneall Treasure (1639), pp. 11-13.


12 THE DIVINING-ROD


Thomas Browne was able to include the rod among the vulgar
and common errors,! and a few years later (1651) we find
the satirical Samuel Sheppard writing :


Some Sorcerers do boast they have a Rod,
Gather’d with Vowes and Sacrifice,

And (borne about) will strangely nod

To hidden treasure, where it lies:
Mankind is (sure) that Rod Divine,

For to the wealthiest (ever) they encline.?


And Abraham Cowley, some years later, thus :


To walk in Ruines, like vain Ghosts, we love,
And with fond Divining Wands
We search among the Dead
For Treasures Buried,
Whilst still the Liberal Earth does hold
So many Virgin Mines of undiscover'd Gold.®


And half a century later still (1710), thus Jonathan Swift,
in a satirical political broadsheet :


Tuey tell us something strange and odd,
About a certain Magick Rod, -

That, bending down it’s Top, divines
When e’er the Soil has Golden Mines:
Where there are none, it stands erect,
Scorning to show the least Respect.‘


§7. THE EARLY SCIENTISTS ON DOWSING


In the meanwhile had appeared some interesting comments
by the learned Jesuit Athanasius Kircher (1641). Discussing
the virgula divinatoria, which, on very proper grounds: the
desire to dissociate a purely scientific speculation from the
divinatory practices, he prefers to call the virgula aurifera or
metalloscopia, he states that he has witnessed and made innum-
erable experiments and is convinced of its truth. But experi-
ment has shown that the motion of the rod is due to some
movement communicated to the rod by the dowser ; he des-
cribes (with cut) a test to prove this contention: a rod is bal-
anced horizontally on a vertical support and it is found that
no movement in the rod ever follows. In a later work he
repeats these observations and gives additional experiments,
which go to assimilate the principle underlying the rod to


1 Pseudodoxia Epidemica (1646), V. xxi. 20.

2 Epigvams (1651), VI. i.

8 “To Mr. Hobs,” Pindarique Odes (1656), p. 27.

* Virtues of Sid Hamet the Magician’s Rod (1710), ll. 21-26.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 13


that governing the pendule explorateur, a ring attached to a
thread held in the hand.! If Agricola first discovered this
absence of specific affinity between the rod and the mineral
or water, it was Kircher who first hit upon unconscious mus-
cular action as being the mechanism of the rod’s movements.


Fic. 5. INDICATING MINERAL LODES WITH THE Rob
B. Roessler, Speculum metallurgiae politissimum (1700), p. 14


Some years later (1658) Pierre Gassend unfortunately returned

to the theory of affinity.?
Robert Boyle, in placing dowsing among the “ Un-succeeding

Experiments,’’ says that he is unable to come to an opinion


1 Magnes (1641), pp. 25-28; Mundus Subterraeneus (1665), il.
181-182. Bs
2 Opera Omnia (1658), il. 167.


LLEGE
RARY ||


ne


col
LIB


I4 THE DIVINING-ROD


in the matter: he is not convinced but dare not peremptorily
reject it. Indeed, a few years later, he inserted a query
regarding this very matter in the Royal Society’s Philoso-
phical Transactions The replies to this query are inter-
esting; “the learned and worthy’ Joseph Glanvil writes
twice: first on the information of a friend whose knowledge
is thirty years old and who declares that the rod is not used
in the Mendips, and then from contemporary information
to the effect that in the Mendips ‘‘ some have made use of the
Virgula divinatoria ; but the Experienced Work-men have no
value for it ; yet they say, when the Mine is open, they may
guess by it, how farr the Vein leades.”2 This passage sub-
stantiates a similar statement made a few years before by
Joshua Childrey.* According to a later anonymous reply to
the same question the rod was used for a similar purpose in
the mines of Cornwall and of Devon as well as in those of the
Somerset Mendips,* but in Lancashire, Cheshire and Derby-
shire it was not found in use. This broad geographical dis-
tribution holds good to this day, and for very good reasons
that will be discussed in their due place. John Webster, who
later wrote The Displaying of supposed Witchcraft, gives a
lengthy historical account of the rod, ‘‘as by many judged
to be a sure way to discover where the ores of metals lie.”’ ®
It may here be conveniently observed that there is some
account of dowsing in many works dealing with trees, plants,
and the like, because of the general notions regarding the
material of which the rod is made. Of early works of this
nature need only be mentioned Evelyn’s Sylva (1664, p. 35)
and John Ray’s Catalogus Plantarum Angliae (1670, pp. 83-84).


§ 8. DowsING FOR WATER


It will have been observed that so far, except for a marginal
reference by the Baroness of Beau-Soleil, nothing has been
written of dowsing for water. The earliest discussion of this


_ 1 Certain Physiological Essays (1661), pp. 83-85 ; ‘‘ Article of Inquir-
ies ee Mines,” Philosophical Transactions (1665-1666), i. 333,
no, 18.

* Philosophical Transactions (1667), ii. 526; (1668), iii. 767, 768.
Cp. John Billingsley, General View of the agriculture of the County of
Somerset (1795), Pp. 22-23.

® Britannia Baconica (1660), pp. 44-45.

“ Philosophical Transactions (1671), vi. 2101; cp. Sir John Pettus,
Fodinae Regales (1670), sig. B2b.

® Charles Leigh, The Natural History of Lancashive, Cheshire, and
the Peak in Derbyshire (1700), i, 89.

* Metallographia (1671), pp. 104-110.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 15


matter appears to be in the rather fantastic observations of
Jean Francois in his comprehensive treatise on hydrology
(1655). Basing his theories on Kircher’s experiment described
above, which he completely misunderstood, Francois manu-
factured an instrument (which he illustrates, though the cut
conveys little) by means of which underground water ought
to be discoverable: but we are not told whether it was
successful. Indeed a score of years later, after witnessing a


Fic. 6. DowsinGc For METALS
G. Schott, Magia universalis (1657-1659), pl. XI


normal dowsing performance, Francois fell back on a simple
rod.2_ About this time too John Aubrey, writing of the
“springs medicinall’’ of Wiltshire, reports that Mr Nich.
‘Mercator “told me that water may be found by a divining


1 La Science des Eaux (1655), li. 5-6; id., L’ Avi des Fontaines (1665),


. 38-39, 120.
ot — Le Royer, Traité du baston universel (1674), p. 27.


TWORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY _


16 THE DIVINING-ROD


rod made of willowe .. .”’ And he adds the note “ Quaere
Sir John Hoskins de hoc.’’?

In 1658 took place a happy event : the elevation of dowsing
to the dignity of discussion in an academic thesis at Wit-
tenberg. The question to be settled was whether the move-
ments of the Virgula mercurialis are due to an occult force.
Duly considered under twenty-three heads, the conclusions
are that it is unquestionable that the rod does move, that
the movements are not due to an occult force, but in the larger
number of cases to fraud and deception, and in the smaller
number of cases in which the indications are genuine, to an
implicit pact with the devil.2 This thesis was reprinted in
the same year with sets of congratulatory Latin verses from
twelve persons, and went into yet another edition a few years
later. This dissertation was followed by many similar ones,
mainly from Wittenberg.®

In 1692, it is interesting to observe, was published John
Locke’s letter on the lowering of interest,* in which occurs
the first recorded use of the word dowsing, though in an archaic
form: “.., . the Deusing-rod or Virgila [sic] Divina able to
discover Mines of Gold and Silver.”


§9. THE DISTRIBUTION OF DOWSING IN EUROPE


Works of all kinds in which more or less lengthy and interest-
ing references to dowsing may be found became very numerous
from the end of the seventeenth century, and we cannot
attempt, nor would it be in any way useful, to mention more
than the most important, or those wholly devoted to our sub-
ject. Before doing this it may be useful, in order to emphasize
the widespread nature ofthis practice, to allude to a few works
in languages not yet referred to. In Spanish works there are
many discussions of dowsing owing to the activities of the
Zahoris, or clairvoyants; this is a peculiarly interesting
subject and deserves separate consideration. Of French and
German works we have already quotedanumber. The earliest
Dutch reference is in the Collectanea medico-physica (written


1 The Natuval History of Wilishive (c. 1660-70), p. 24; cp. id.,
Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme (1686-1687), p. 115.

* Jacobus Klein, An Virgula Mercurialis agat ex Occulta Qualitate ;
cp. Sylvester Rattray, Aditus novus (1658), pp. 37, 44.

® See the Bibliography under Ahlbom, Beern, Cleeman, Dethar-
ding, Fischer, Kauderbach, Martius, Praetorius, Rivinus, Salchlin,
Thilemann, Wille.

“ Some Considerations of the consequences of the lowering of Interest,
Deke 7


It,


ing p.


mM

Re

Aas

bie

aS

Dies

mS an

f? ‘|e

24 co

HS Wise

iy

a a

Bs of

zs tc

gS =n

Se =

a § <O-

ne coo

a3 $
iovg

| g

Se

iS)

q&


M. A. de La


a - 0 ~ 4 a = | ) ,
a a eae
F i ee ie is ( 7 |


=i) @an


q' AG =


’


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 17


in Dutch, 1680-83, IV. xlix, V. lxxii). The first Danish refer-
ence is by Baron Ludwig of Holberg in 1729 ;1 the first Italian,
apart from translations, is in Frata et Montalbano’s mining
treatise (1678) ; ? the first Swedish is in 1751 by Linnaeus,?
andsoon. In quite modern times works, big or small, devoted
to dowsing are to be found in practically all languages.

In 1681 appeared a German tractate devoted to the showing-
up of the devil’s pernicious influence in dowsing,* and so
characteristic is this of the general attitude at this time that
dowsing, like so many other misunderstood practices, seemed
about to wilt and disappear beneath the priest’s frown. About
this time, however, the intellectual world of Europe was
aroused by the advent of the first outstanding dowser of whom
we have knowledge, Jacques Aymar. His activities are of
the greatest importance and will be separately considered in
the next chapter. Here it will suffice to say that his work
produced a flood of literature and filled the French press for
about ten years from 1689. He was the direct cause of the
first substantial work devoted to the study of our subject ; 5
and he inspired, among many other things, a valuable corre-
spondence between the learned priest Pierre Lebrun and
Malebranche and a most learned and comprehensive work
by the former. ®

In the midst of the turmoil evoked by Aymar appeared a very
interesting little book called La Verge de Jacob in which Aymar
is not so much as named. The author indicates chiefly how
the rod should be held and discusses the rationale of its move-
ments, basing himself on the corpuscular theory, which was
then in the height of its fashion.” In discussing the problem of
finding water-sources Jacques Ozanam gives an account, with
illustrations, of dowsing.* This account has an interesting
history, for Ozanam’s book, after going through several editions,
was rewritten by J. E. Montucla (1790), and translated into
English in 1708, 1790 and finally by Charles Hutton, the
learned editor of the Royal Society’s Tvansactions, in 1803.


1 Danmark og Norges Staats-Beskrivelse (1729), P. 47.

2 Pyatica Minerale (1678), pp. 8-9.

8 Skanska Resa (1751), pp. 160-161.

4 A. Lebwald von Lebenwald, Von den Teuffels List und Betrug
in dey Berg-Ruethen (1681).

*' P. de Le Lorrain de Vallemont, La Physique occulte (1693).

® Lettres qui découvrent Villusion des philosophes (1693) ; [P. Lebrun],
Histoive critique des pratiques superstitiewses (1702).

7 J.N., La Verge de Jacob (1693) ; trans. as Jacob’s Rod by Thomas
Welton [1875].

8 Récréations Mathématiques (1694), li. 223-231.


2


—————————— rn 7
saethants


Sue
\


Fic. 8. THE OrIGIN AND LATTER END oF DOWSING
J. G. Zeidler, Pantomysterium (1700), Frontispiece


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 19


In this edition Hutton thought dowsing beneath contempt,
but by the publication of a second edition in 1814 he had con-
vinced himself of the contrary and had the courage to say so.
He quotes a letter to him from Lady Milbanke (at whose death
her son-in-law Byron made the unkind jest that she was gone
to a place where she could no longer dowse) in which she des-
cribes how she first came to dowse. Hutton carried out some
experiments with this lady at the Royal Military Academy,
Woolwich, in which she was successful, though not beyond the
powers of a geologist.?

In 1700 appeared a long condemnatory German work on
dowsing, the most valuable part of which consists of a series
of plates showing the different kinds of dowsing-rods in use.
The articles shown for this purpose include, in addition to the
usual wooden and metal rods, candle-snuffers, a pair of scissors,
a knife and fork crossed, two pipes held at an angle with the
mouthpiece of one in the bowl of the other, an open book, a
bucket handle, an ordinary forked rod fixed to the ends of
two magnets, the bare hands, and the kind of long, hard,
smoked sausage known as Knackwurst. Each of these articles
is not only illustrated in a plate, but they are shown all
together in the frontispiece (Fig. 8). This entertaining picture
shows Leviathan belching up a crowd of dowsing-rods, not-
withstanding the efforts of a priest, who not only fails in this
but gets his nose tweaked by the dowser himself when he
begins to use the rods so thoughtfully provided for him. In
the foreground the dowser is shown in all his glory; ina tray
he carries the various implements of his craft, which overflow
on to the table beneath. By these arts he again tweaks a
nose, but this time that of ‘‘ God’s city’ Halle, which is
symbolically represented as a globe with three eyes and “‘ the
wisest nose,” as we are told in an explanatory stanza. From
the heavens, however, we get a delicate hint of retribution
in the shape of a whip and a plague of locusts. _In Figure 9 we
see the dowser already unmasked and shown in his true shape ;
this is the frontispiece to a work published a few years later :
one of equal length, but less merit,’ for Zeidler at least goes very
thoroughly into the philosophic basis of dowsing and makes
many sensible observations. These two books together total
nearly thirteen hundred pages.


1 Recreations in Mathematics, ed. by C. Hutton (1st ed. 1803), iv.
259-266 ; (2nd ed., 1814), iv. 216-231.

2 J. G. Zeidler, Pantomysterium (1700) ; cp. Unterricht vom rechten
Gebrauch der Wiindschel-Ruthe, ed. by J. G. Zeidler (1705).

® Theophilus Albinus, Das entlarvete Idolum (1704).


20 THE DIVINING-ROD


From the beginning of the eighteenth century to about its
middle the theological movement against dowsing, which had |
been interrupted by the advent of Aymar, resumed its ascen-
dancy. Even as late as 1778 the engraved frontispiece of a


a


/


Anat


Fic. 9. THE DowsER UNMASKED
T. Albinus, Das entlarvete Idolum (1704), Frontispiece


mineralogical work shows the good genius of a new dispen-
sation breaking the dowsing-rod of a blindfolded evil genius.
But from the fifties of that century there appear numerous
favourable allusions to dowsing in works on mines and mining,


2 J. F. W. Charpentier, Mineralogische Geographie (1778).


WORKING MEN'S.
| LIBRARY


NOT a at PO rN SLES.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING ar


as in the works of William Hooson,! William Borlase 2 and Wil-
liam Pryce, to mention only a few English ones. Pryce’s well-
known folio on Cornish mining contains some interesting
pages on dowsing for minerals. The author derived his know-
ledge from personal observation and from the dowser William
Cookworthy, of Plymouth, a very intelligent Quaker, who had
written an excellent article on this subject some years before, *
and of whom we possess also other information.‘ Pryce gives
some useful cases of the discovery of mineral veins by means
of dowsing, but the larger part of his space is devoted to some
absurd theories on a corpuscular basis.’ Pryce lived at Red-
ruth and it is therefore interesting to notice that in 1802 a
Mr William Phillips published an account of his discovery by
dowsing of a mineral lode in that Cornish village.¢


§ 10. DowsInc IN MODERN TIMES


In the last quarter of this century there appeared in France
another remarkable dowser, named Bleton, whose career we
shall consider in the next chapter. He was fortunate in that
he was studied and experimented with by, among others, a
Dr Thouvenel, who has left very full accounts of his obser-
vations.? Bleton had been preceded by a dowser called
Parangue and was succeeded by another named Pennet, so
that the attention both of the public and of academic circles
in France was focussed on dowsing almost continuously for
a quarter of a century. This public attention was continued
into the first half of the nineteenth centuryin connexion with the
inexplicable achievements of the Abbé Paramelle, which we also
discuss in the next chapter. Paramelle was not a self-avowed
dowser, but his success in finding water was quite remarkable
and not based on any accepted scientific postulates. Thus
dowsing has been before the public in France to a far greater
extent than it has ever been in England, though the achieve-
ments of W. S. Lawrence and John Mullins were at least as
remarkable as those of any of the continental dowsers and


1 The Miners’ Dictionary (1747), s.v. Virgula Divinatoria; cp.
D. W. Linden, A Letter to Wm. Hooson (1747), pp. 13-22; id., Three
Letters on Mining (1750), pp. 24-31.

2 The Natural History of Cornwall (1758), p. 165 ; cp. Rural Elegance
Display’d (1768), p. 41.

3 Gentleman’s Magazine (1751), Xxi. 507-508.

« T. Bond, Topographical and Historical Sketches (1823), p. 141.

5 Mineralogia Cornubiensis (1778), Ppp. 113-124.

8 Tilloch’s Philosophical Magazine (1802), xiii. 309-328; cp. id.,
Transactions of the Geological Society (1814), ii. 123-124. _

7 Mémoire physique et médicinale (1781); Seconde mémoive (1784).


22 THE DIVINING-ROD


much more scientifically recorded. Indeed, really accurate
study of dowsing is only about a century old. In 1821 the
Rey. Ralph Emerson (not Ralph Waldo) published an excellent
paper in which he suggested that there should be collected “a
sufficient number of well authenticated facts’ on the use of
the dowsing-rod. He himself carried out some experiments
with a Rev. Mr Steele and records some interesting cases.
In the same year a German physician reports the conversation
he had with a Walloon dowser named Johann Philipp Brayer.
By means of skilful questions this dowser was led to give a very
interesting account of the development of his faculty and an
account of some of his successes.?

In England De Quincey appears to have been familiar with
the phenomena of dowsing (he uses the word in a slightly
different form), for he refers to the subject more than once.
Thus, in his essay on Modern Superstitions (1840) he writes
that there “are in England a class of men who practise the
pagan rhabdomancy in a limited sense. They carry a rod or
rhabdos (e&Bdo¢) of willow: this they hold horizontally, and
by the bending of the rod towards the ground, they discover
the favourable places for sinking wells,—a matter of consider-
able importance in a province so ill-watered as the northern
district of Somersetshire. These people are called jowsers ;
. . . the experimental evidence of a real practical skill in
these men, and the enlarged compass of speculation in these
days, have led many enlightened people to a stoic éxoyn,
or suspension of judgment, on the reality of this somewhat
mysterious art.’”’ In a footnote De Quincey adds that for
twenty miles round Wrington in Somersetshire ‘‘ nobody sinks
wells without their advice,’’ and he adduces an instance of a
dowser’s success.®

In 1844 a journalist named Francis Phippen being on a visit
to Somersetshire heard and saw so much of the practical use
of dowsing that he wrote a full report of his inquiries in the
newspapers and later published a pamphlet on the subject.


__.? “On the Divining Rod,” The American Journal of Science (1821),
lll, 102-104; cp. (1826), xi. 201-222.

2 — qd’Outreport, ‘‘ Ein Beytrag zur Geschichte der Wiinschel-
ruthe,” Zeitschrift fiir psychische Aerzte (1871), i. 94-109; abridged
trans. by E. T. Bennett in Journ. S.P.R. (1899-1900), ix. 83-86.

® The Collected Writings (1889-1890), viii. 434; cp. Confessions of
an English Opium-Eater, iii, 220-221 n.

“ The Morning Chronicle, 15th November 1844, and The Morning
Advertiser of the same date; A Narrative of practical experiments,
proving to demonstration the discovery of water (1853). Cp. John Phillips,
Memories of William Smith (1844), pp. 131-132.


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 23


He gives many facts that came under his own observation,
chiefly concerning the doings of the dowser Charles Adams of
Rowberrow, and quotes some cases that seem to be valuable.
An excellent frontispiece (Fig. Io), by A. Crowquill, shows a


Fic. 10. CHARLES ADAMS, OF ROWBERROW
F. Phippen, A Narrative of practical experiments (1853), Frontispiece


dowser at work, the flexed arms being held tightly to the sides
of the body, and the prongs of the fork (which are longer
than those now generally used) passing between the index
and the next finger of each hand. A few years later Her-
bert Mayo published an article showing a very nice under-
standing of the subject and its difficulties ; he describes some


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY _ _


Caen es
aaa


24 THE DIVINING-ROD


experiments carried out by himself and by his friends and
concludes by assimilating the subject to the theories of von
Reichenbach.?


§ 11. THE MoDERN LITERATURE OF DOWSING


In 1849 the distinguished French anthropologist Gabriel de
Mortillet, who was at one time a professional dowser, published
a little treatise on dowsing. This book is of considerable inter-
est as being a description by an educated dowser of his own
sensations and experiences. But, as so often happens, the
author is no better able than the most ignorant yokel to give
an accurate analysis of his own psychological and nervous
re-actions.2. The standard treatise on dowsing was long con-
sidered to be Michel Eugéne Chevreul’s De la baguette divin-
atoive (1854). Chevreul was a distinguished chemist, the author
of numerous books (some of which have gone into several
editions in English translations) and scientific papers on
colour and the artistic and industrial application of chemistry,
and on other scientific subjects. He died in 1889 at the age
of 103, retaining his faculties and industry almost to the last.
The immediate cause of Chevreul’s essay was a paper presented
to the Academy of Sciences in March 1853 by a M. Riondet,
entitled Sur la baguette divinatoire employée a la recherche des
eaux souterraines. As is usual in such cases, the Academy
ordered a report on the paper to be made, and nominated
for the purpose three eminent members of its body, MM.
Chevreul, Boussingault and Babinet. Chevreul was requested
by his colleagues to draw up the report, which led to the
publication of his book. The author relates that he found it
impossible to dissociate the movement of the rod from that
of the pendule explorateur and from table-turning, and these
subjects accordingly occupy a considerable part of his work.
(Meanwhile Riondet’s paper seems to have been forgotten,
for it is not discussed by Chevreul and no report or summary
of it—nor of a subsequent paper sent in by M. Riondet—was
made in the Comptes Rendus of the Academy.) Chevreul’s
book was certainly useful in drawing attention to a widespread
belief which had hitherto not been seriously discussed in


* Under the pseudonym of ‘‘ Mac Davus,” “ The Divining Rod,”
Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (1847), lxi. 368-374. This was
reprinted with alterations and the addition of an account of experi-
ments carried out by the author with Edward Seebold at Weilbach
in Nassau in On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions (3rd ed.,
1851), pp. I-21.

* Histoire de ’ Hydroscopie (1849).


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF DOWSING 25


contemporary times by any writer of recognised scientific
position. But its importance has been largely over-stated :
it was believed to be the first attempt to give a rational explan-
ation of the movement of the rod. This belief is erroneous,
for Chevreul’s theories were anticipated three centuries before
by Agricola and later by Kircher. Chevreul is content to
accept the popular view that the indications afforded by the
rod are always fallacious; hence he gives no contemporary
evidence of its success or failure and made no experimental
examination for himself. The historical portion of his book is
principally derived from the works of Le Lorrain and of
Lebrun. In this part of his book, at least, he was far out-
stripped by Louis Figuier, whose works maintain a surprising
level of excellence when their number and scope is considered ;
their great popularity is well merited. His essay on dowsing,
though he relied on Le Lorrain for most of his historical
data and on Chevreul for his theory, is by far the best popular
memoir on our subject that had appeared to his time. He
made no attempt, however, to collect or discuss contemporary
evidence. We may note here that Mr Baring-Gould’s
article, probably the best-known to English readers, is largely
historical and is entirely indebted to Figuier, though the
debt is not acknowledged.2, Andrew Lang has a capital
though brief essay on the rod, written in his inimitable style
of contemporary comment on historical narrative.®

In 1876 Mr Charles Latimer, an American civil engineer,
published an essay on dowsing which contains an interesting
record of his own experience. Having accidentally discovered
that the rod moved in his hands, he was led to try whether
its indications were of any practical use, and the experiments
which he narrates convinced him that they were. The move-
ment of the twig enabled him to discover underground water-
supplies in places where his experience and judgment would
not have led him to locate them.4 A few years later (1883)
Professor Rossiter Raymond, the secretary of the American
Institute of Mining Engineers, read a paper on dowsing before
that Institute. This is a serious and thoughtful attempt
to investigate the subject ; contemporary evidence, though
not adduced, was considered by the writer, and he concluded
that in dowsing “‘ there is a residuum of scientific value, after
making all necessary deductions for exaggeration, self-decep-


1 Histoive du merveilleux dans les temps modernes (1860), ii. 3-175.
2 Curious Myths of the Middle Ages (1866), pp. 52 et seq.

'8 Custom and Myth (new ed. 1904), pp. 180 ef seq.

4 The Divining Rod (1876).


26 THE DIVINING-ROD


tion and fraud.’”’! In 1884 MrE. R. Pease, the secretary of the
Fabian Society, published a study and abstract of a number of
contemporary well-attested cases collected by E. Vaughan-
Jenkins,? to whom we shall have occasion to refer more than
once, and finally in 1897-1900 Professor (later Sir William)
Barrett published the reports of his researches and remarkable
assembly of cases that he had collected and investigated,®
dowsing thus being definitely established as a subject worthy
of the most careful scientific attention.

This century the flood of dowsing literature shows every sign
of becoming more voluminous than ever. The multitude of
dowsers’ pamphlets continues to increase throughout Europe,
America and Australia, few of them containing anything of
value. In France and Germany much intensive study has
been devoted to the subject. In the latter country there
was formed in IgII, as a result of a congress of dowsers, the
Verband zur Klarung der Wiinschelrutenfrage, which issues
regular publications. A similar body was formed in Vienna,
the Osterreichisches Verband, the first issue of whose Mitteilun-
gen appeared in June 1914. The attempt in 1913 to form a
similar international organisation did not succeed. A small
newspaper, Die Wiinschelrute, was founded in Leipsic in Octo-
ber 1920. During March 1913 was held in Paris a Congress of
students and practitioners of dowsing; as a result of this
the Academy of Sciences appointed a Commission de la baguette
divinatoire, which heard evidence during 1913-1914, but failed
to come to a definite conclusion. In the meanwhile the
Ministry of Agriculture had appointed in 1910 a sub-committee
to investigate the matter; this committee was unable to
make any formal recommendations. In December 1912 the
Société d’agriculture, sciences et industrie de Lyons appointed
a Commission d’études hydroscopiques, which published
two interesting preliminary reports (see Bibliography under
Birot) and a subsequent brief report. In England no such
official inquiries have been held, but the present volume
should make it clear that the dowsers’ activities have not
been less, though applied to the practice rather than to the
organisation and discussion of their craft.

+“ The Divining Rod,” Tvansactions of the Amevican Institute of
Mining Engineers (1883), xi. 411-446.

* “The Divining Rod,” Proc. S.P.R. (1884), ii. 79-107.


8 “On the so-called Divining Rod,” Proc. S.P.R. (1897-1898), xiii.
2-282 ; (1900-1901), xv. 130-383.


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE


~


- LIBRARY


CHAPTER II
THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS
I, JACQUES AYMAR


§ i. Earty Days


YMAR did not become a public figure for more than
A a year Or two, under very special circumstances, and

little is known of his early movements. He was
born on the 8th of September 1662 at Saint-Marcellin, some
distance from Lyons. It is not known how he found himself
possessed of the dowsing faculty, but Dauphiny was a famous
spot for dowsers and no doubt he learned by imitation. While
searching for water Aymar one day felt his rod turn so strongly
that he felt sure he was standing over an underground supply.
On the spot being dug there was found, instead of water,
the head of a murdered woman. Aymar went to the house
in which this woman had lived and directing the rod, in turn,
upon each person there; he found that it moved for only
one person, the widower. This man immediately fled, and his
guilt being thus apparently established, Aymar’s ability to
trace murderers and other criminals became equally estab-
lished. Later, at Grenoble in 1688, Aymar performed a
similar exploit into the details of which we need not enter.


§ 2. AYMAR’S GREAT EXPLOIT


Accordingly when on the 5th of July 1692 a wine-merchant
of Lyons and his wife were murdered, and no trace of the
murderer could be found, recourse was had to Jacques Aymar.
Thus began the almost incredible feat which filled France with
astonishment. Before entering upon its details the reader
should understand that these details were not reported upon
hearsay, but were recorded in legal documents and testified
by the magistrates, doctors and others concerned in the actual
case. These documents may be found in the reports and
books cited at the end of this section.

27


28 THE DIVINING-ROD


On being applied to Aymar agreed to do what he could
and visited the house in which the murders had been com-
mitted. He left the house and, following a circuitous route,
arrived at the door of the city, which was closed for the night.
The following morning he resumed his way, following the


Fic. 11. JAcQuES AYMAR (?)
P. de Le Lorrain, La physique occulte (1693), p. 139


right bank of the Rhéne; he soon announced that his sensa-
tions and the rod which indicated them informed him that
the murderers were three in number. They reached the *
house of a gardener and Aymar stated that the fugitives had
entered this house and had eaten. The gardener denied this,
but his two children confessed that they had allowed three men
to enter and drink a bottle of wine. Aymar’s assertion being


WORKING MEN’S
COLLEG®
| LIBRARY «|


necro


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 29


so far verified, the magistrates decided to apply some tests to
him. These were carried out in the presence of the legal
authorities and others. The fugitives had left some article
behind them; three similar articles were obtained, and the
whole buried in the garden. Aymar passed over the place
with his rod, which gave indications only over the article
which had been found. Aymar was then blindfolded, the
experiment repeated, and with equal success.

Thus encouraged the magistrates gave Aymar legal powers
and a number of archers to accompany him, and sent him on
his way. He continued to skirt the Rhéne until half a league
beyond the last bridge in Lyons; here the footsteps of three
men were found in the sand, where they had embarked. Ay-
mar and his escort did likewise and by water and by land
Aymar continued this fantastic journey to a military camp at
Sablon. Aymar feared to continue his researches here and
returned to Lyons to obtain the requisite authority. This
done he and his escort returned to the camp from which,
Aymar declared, the murderers had recently departed. Pur-
suing his way Aymar indicated not merely the houses that
the fugitives had entered, but the beds in which they had
slept, the chairs on which they had sat and the glasses from
which they had drunk. The party eventually arrived at
Beaucaire and found themselves led to the prison. This they
entered and Aymar indicated a man who had just been arrested
for a petty larceny. This man denied all knowledge of the
murders ; he was accordingly led back to Lyons by the route
that Aymar had indicated. So overcome was he by the
accurate manner in which his movements were indicated that,
arrived at Lyons, he confessed to the crime and gave a des-
cription of his accomplices.

Aymar and his archers went back to Beaucaire, picked up
the trail, and continued on their way, which led them to
Nimes, back to Beaucaire, to Toulon and finally to the frontier
of the kingdom, where they were obliged to give up their
search. In the meanwhile the man already arrested had
made a detailed confession, which corresponded with all that
Aymar had said, and accordingly on the 30th of August 1692
the murderer was condemned to be broken on the wheel.


§ 3. LATER Days


It need hardly be said that this series of incidents attracted
very extensive attention. It was impossible to question the
facts, for these were to be found recorded in proper legal


30 THE DIVINING-ROD


form in the judiciary records of Lyons. Aymar was invited to
Paris by the Prince of Condé and a number of experiments
were carried out. Of these experiments we unfortunately
lack details; it seems that they were of the absurd nature
that is always to be expected when such delicate experiments
are carried out by persons who approach them not only in
complete ignorance of the subject but in a fashionably satirical
spirit. Thus, on one occasion Condé caused a number of
holes to be dug which were filled with various metals. Aymar
was then required to discriminate, by means of his rod,
between the metals !

Aymar, however, did attract a certain amount of attention
from those better fitted to investigate his curious gift. The
Jesuit Lebrun carried on a correspondence with Malebranche
on this subject, but without coming to any very notable
conclusions. The learned Abbé of Vallemont, on the other
hand, writes that Aymar came to Paris on the 21st of January
1698, and that for two hours daily for a month after this date,
he carried out experiments with him. ‘‘ During the whole of
this time,’’ he writes, ‘“‘ I investigated him this way and that
as well as I could. It is certain that the rod turns in his
hands on the trail of fugitive thieves and murderers.”’

At the beginning of the eighteenth century Aymar, back in
the country, involved himself in the bloody disputes then
taking place in the Cevennes between protestants and catholics.
The latter employed him, as a pretext it must be feared, to
trace some protestants who had killed some of the other party.
Aymar did so, whether honestly or not we have no means of
judging, and at his word twelve protestants were taken and
executed. A lamentable end, certainly, to a career begun
with such possibilities for good.


§ 4. AYMAR’s ACCOUNT OF HIS DOWSING


In the records of Aymar’s feat in Lyons, we find a number
of passages in which are reported his own statements con-
cerning his procedure and sensations while dowsing. We
learn that when he was on the trail of the murderers and when
his rod began to act, his temperature increased till he was in a
feverish state, that his pulse increased in rapidity, that he
felt faint, and even that he spat blood. From all accounts it
seems certain that the sensations he felt were unusually violent.
The manner in which he discovered whether any article had
been touched by the fugitives was by placing his foot on the
article and then taking his rod in his hands. On being asked


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 31


what sensations he felt, he stated that he felt none when
searching for thieves, water or money, but that when he was
tracing criminally displaced boundaries, and murderers, he
felt “violent agitations.” He stated that the rod gave
indications just as well on water as on land, and this was be-
cause his rod did not act for any water but only for under-
ground water. In reply to a question he agreed that if, while
looking for water, he came across buried money, his rod might
move and give wrong indications. But he could not make a
similar mistake as between a murderer and an underground
spring or buried treasure, because of the difference in his sensa-
tions. Nor could he confuse the trail of the different murderers
because what he followed was not a generally murderous trail
but that of a specific person. This is an important distinction
and disposes of the theory which was given currency at
the time, namely, that Aymar was able to detect a special
““matiére meurtriére,’’ “‘ murderous matter,” given off by a
murderer. He also said that he was able to find coins, and
at once proved it in an experiment in which a coin was hidden
in some of a number of hats, his indications being always correct.

In conclusion, there can be no doubt but that Aymar was a
genuine dowser, and that his faculty took a peculiar and most
unusual direction, to which we can find few parallels outside
of ethnographical records, though such an incident has been
recorded in recent years.


II. BARTHELMY BLETON
§ 1. BLETON’s PROCEDURE AND SENSATIONS


Barthélmy Bleton was born at Bouvantes in Dauphiny
somewhere between the years 1740 and 1750. He was the


1 The chief sources for Aymar’s activities are: Mercure Galant
(1692), August: pp. 113-128, September: pp. 226-237, October:
Ppp. 12-64, 212-216; (1693), January: pp. 16-64, 223-284, February :
Pp. 235-280, 311-313, March: pp. 104-210, April: pp. 171-187, 261—
294, May : pp. 75-106, 140-200, June: pp. 66-119, 201-249, August :
PP. 52-146; Journal des Sgavans (1693), pp. 26-27, 51-54, 142-143,
189, 215-216, 221-225 ; Lettres Historiques (1692), ii. 393, 637; (1693),
iii. 312, 658; Mercure Historique et Politique (1693), xiv. 558-565;
(1694), xvi. 176; Monatliche Unterrichtungen (1693), pp. 604-607 ;
(1694), pp. 399-403 ; and the books and pamphlets described in the
Bibliography under the names of Boileau-Despréaux, Buissiére, Chauvin,
Forest de Bélidor, Garnier, Lebrun, Le Conte, Leibnitz, Le Lorrain de Val-
lemont, Louvreleuil, Ménestrier, Renaud, Saint-André, Vaginay, Viollet.

2 The exact date of his birth is uncertain ; the above date is deduced
from an incidental observation in the evidence about to be cited. By
1773, aS appears from another witness, Bleton’s faculty was so well
known that he was then in request as a water-finder or sowrcier.


32 THE DIVINING-ROD


son of a poor peasant, was brought up by charity in a Charter-
house of Dauphiny, and became a herdsman. An accidental
circumstance seems to have led to the discovery of Bleton’s
peculiar faculty. Here is the account which is given by one
of Dr Thouvenel’s correspondents, who writes from Dijon
on the 14th of April 1781, and who adds that he has certain
proofs of all that he has stated: Bleton, when seven years
of age, had carried dinner to some workmen; he sat down
on a stone, when a fever or faintness seized him ; the workmen
having brought him to their side, the faintness ceased, but
each time he returned to the stone, he suffered again. This
was told to the Prior of the Chartreuse, who wished to see
it for himself. Being thus convinced of the fact, he had the
ground under the stone dug up; there they found a spring,
which at the time of writing was still in use to turn a
mill,

A similar account is given by another contemporary and by
the writer in the Monthly Review, who quotes from a French
pamphlet, the writer of which states that the circumstance
was ‘‘ confirmed by many local witnesses.’ Some confirmation
of the foregoing story is gained from a remark made by the
Prior of the Charterhouse of Lyons, in a document testifying
to Bleton’s extraordinary faculty, that Bleton “was quite
as well able to detect underground water when he was seven
years old as he is now.” }

In any other part of the world but Dauphiny the coincidence
of the boy’s illness and the presence of an underground spring
would probably soon have been forgotten. But a century
before Jacques Aymar and his rod had made this province
famous for its dowsers, and Aymar had been followed by
many who claimed a similar gift. As, however, the Inquisition
had forbidden the use of the rod in the ‘‘ moral world,’’ that
is, for tracing criminals, or determining boundaries, or settling
lawsuits and the like (its use for these purposes having become
a most mischievous superstition and scandal), these diviners
or tourneurs were chiefly water-finders or sourciers. Bleton
was therefore at once considered to be a new and sensitive
sourcier. Some tests followed which confirmed this view.
Doubtless custom demanded that he should have a rod, and
the subsequent use by Bleton of a nearly straight rod, resting
on the forefingers of each hand, satisfied the sense of sourcier
propriety. The rod was very slightly curved, and rotated


* See P. Thouvenel’s Mémoive physique et médecinal (1781), p. 251 ;
Monthly Review (1782), Ixvii, 554.


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


LART DE TROUVER
LES I RESO RS,
Les Sources , les Limives, ica M1--
taux, les Mines, es Alinerze + &


anttes choles cachées y pat ‘+c
:
du Baton Fourche,


PAR IN:
a a

$i d 4s
“ag


: 4 LYO yy.
my te CGMILAIRE NaARIT EL,


The Merciere 4 | iCuu


Banco,


M.D Coxe
: Arce Approkations & Pr


chiffon,


Fic. 12. “‘La VERGE DE JacoB”’ (1693)


Title-page and Frontispiece


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 33


more or less rapidly on its axis when Bleton came over an
underground spring. Dr Thouvenel states that he counted
from 30 to 80 revolutions per minute, and upwards. The
rotation of the rod was doubtless caused by involuntary
muscular action on Bleton’s part. There is no reason to
suppose that he moved it intentionally ; in fact, it is a very
difficult, if not impossible, feat to accomplish by volition,
except to one long practised in sleight of hand, as any one
can prove who supports a short slightly-curved stick on his
forefingers, and attempts to cause it to rotate from “ 30 to
80 times a minute.’”’ On the other hand, there is no reason
to assume any other motive power than muscular action, as
the astronomer Lalande showed that Bleton’s rod could be made
to rotate by this means.

How Bleton came by this novel form of rod is not told us.?
A straight rod, supported horizontally between the forefinger
and thumb of each hand, is depicted on the title page of that
interesting old book on the divining-rod, La Verge de Jacob
(see Fig. 12, D) which was published at Lyons in 1693. In the
third chapter of this book the writer says that in order to ascer-
tain if a person really has the faculty of finding a hidden spring
he must let a straight stick rest across his hands, in the manner
shown in the lowest figure of the woodcut (Fig. 13) ; if he has
the faculty the stick will begin to rotate. Bleton was probably
tested in this way, and subsequently used this rotating rod
as the outward and visible sign of the inward commotion he
experienced.

The singular physiological effect produced upon Bleton by
underground springs seems to have been retained more or less
throughout his life. A sort of convulsive spasm seized him,
affecting the diaphragm and pulse. Abundant evidence of
the genuineness of this “commotion ”’ is given by a number
of unimpeachable witnesses. Bleton’s sensibility appeared to
vary, being greater in dry weather and before meals ; it entirely
ceased during an illness he had, and did not return until three
months subsequent to his recovery. The rate of rotation of
the baguette was observed closely to correspond with the physio-
logical effect produced. When Bleton moved away from an


1 The only notice of the peculiarity of Bleton’s rod is in a letter
‘from a distinguished physician’ cited by Thouvenel in support of
Bleton’s faculty. The writer says (Mémoire, p. 277) that although
nearly all the fourneurs he has known use a forked rod, yet some in
Germany use a simple rod, very slightly curved, placed across the back
of the hand, ‘‘ ou comme Bleton, sur l’extrémité des deux doigts indica-
teurs.”


3


34 THE DIVINING-ROD


underground spring the symptoms disappeared as rapidly as
they arose, and the pulse resumed its normal rate. Stagnant
water appeared to make no impression on him, nor the water
of exposed rivers, lakes, etc. This latter is indeed a singular,
and at first sight appears a suspicious circumstance. But
equally singular is the fact that it is affirmed by all dowsers
from the time of Jacques Aymar in 1693 down to the present
day, and not in one country but wherever the dowsing-rod is
in use, a singular illustration of the manner in which tradition
spreads, for diviners, as a rule, are illiterate men, ignorant of
any language but their own.


§ 2. EARLY EXPERIMENTS


Let us now examine what experimental evidence history has
preserved on behalf of Bleton’s alleged powers. The principal
sources of information are Dr Pierre Thouvenel’s Mémoire
physique et médicinal (1781) and his Seconde mémoire (1784).
Both these works are almost entirely devoted to a record of
observations of the phenomena occurring in connexion with
Bleton and to an exposition of Thouvenel’s electrical theory.
This Dr Thouvenel was a very interesting man. Born in 1747
he established himself in Paris and soon became identified with
questions relating to water-supply. He was appointed inspec-
tor of the mineral waters of France and in the succeeding years
many honours, both French and foreign, were bestowed upon
him : as the Biographie universelle has it, he seemed destined for
a happy and peaceful career, enjoying a considerable personal
prestige. At this time, however, appeared Bleton, whom
Thouvenel brought to Paris, and the phenomena produced
by whom he begantostudy. At once the learned and fashion-
able worlds turned against him, and at last, disappointed and
tired, he retired to Italy, where he pursued his researches into
dowsing. He was a sincere and courageous investigator, and
if his theories were haseless it was rather because of the limi-
tation in the knowledge of the age than because of any intel-
lectual shortcoming in their propagator. Thouvenel died in
1815.

Here is a complicated test to which Thouvenel submitted
Bleton. Over a stone bridge, of one arch, pass four small
wooden aqueducts, carrying water to Nancy. Only the engi-
neer, who had never seen Bleton, knew the exact position of
these four rows of pipes, their distance apart and depth under-
ground, the whole being well covered by earth and vegetation.
He gave Thouvenel secretly information on this, of which Bleton


Fic. 13. SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY Robs
[P. Lebrun] Lettres (1696), p. 125


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 35


was entirely ignorant. The latter was then taken across this
bridge as though to return to the town, after various experi-
ments had been made in the neighbourhood, and without being
told that fresh experiments were to be made. Just before
reaching the bridge he asserted water was flowing beneath him,
and the sensation continued with slight gaps, while crossing
and in front of the bridge to a distance of five or six feet. He
retraced his steps several times before finding distinctly the four
channels, and was much astonished to find them so near. He
was then told that they were simply four hollow tree trunks
made to serve as aqueducts.

Thouvenel then describes other tests as to the distance apart
of these pipes, and remarks that as a small stream about 3 feet
wide was flowing some ro feet beneath the bridge, he endeav-
oured to ascertain what effect it had on Bleton ; a careful experi-
ment showed that the agitation of the diviner and the rotation
of the baguette sensibly increased on crossing the stream. There
is nothing, however, in this experiment to exclude the effect of
unconscious indications given to Bleton by the experimenter.
Suggestion also, without doubt, played a great part in such
experiments. For example Thouvenel found that when his
sourciey waS over a spring and the baguette turning strongly,
the convulsive movements of the body and the rotation of
the rod were almost arrested the moment he touched Bleton
with various ‘‘ magnetic compositions recently electrified ”’ !
Experiments were also made when Bleton was insulated, the
belief that insulation stops the movement of the rod being
almost as widespread as that concerning the different effects
of running and of stagnant water.

On pp. 77-80 of his first memoir Thouvenel gives a summary
of the tests he made with Bleton in Lorraine. He writes:
‘“‘T took the precaution to repeat several times all the experi-
ments just described in detail, after having carefully blindfolded
Bleton ; in addition his arms were sometimes fastened behind
his back leaving his forearms only just sufficiently free to hold
the baguetie at the extremity of his fingers, sometimes even
confining these in order to hinder if possible all mechanical
movement. These precautions were not taken for my own
satisfaction, as I was already entirely convinced.

I conducted Bleton to places which he had never seen; I
took him towards springs of which I knew, but which he could
not know of, at other times over ground where neither of us
knew what might be found. Whenever he experienced his
peculiar sensations—and whenever the baguette repeatedly
turned at the same spot—I led him far away, bringing him


36 THE DIVINING-ROD


back by quite different roads, still with his eyes bandaged.

When he had followed the course of an underground
spring—sometimes for more than a quarter of a mile, across
mountains, rock, or forests, and indicated on the way numerous
sub-divisions of the same spring—I made him return. He
then re-conducted me himself, though still blindfolded, only
supported by one arm, to the point from which we set out,
without straying a single step from the line previously traced
and marked by pegs, which were often hidden beneath the
surface. He re-found all the subterranean rivulets already
pointed out, and followed exactly the sinuosities of the under-
ground stream. It frequently happened that we came across
springs whose course was interrupted by walls, terraces, or wide
ditches, so that in order to enable Bleton to overcome these
obstacles, I had to procure ladders, or take long detours, or in
some way get him conveyed across; nevertheless although
blindfolded, he soon regained the course without the aid of
his eyes. Sometimes in order to try and deceive him, if his
senses were concerned, I placed false marks as if to indicate a
spring ; sometimes after he had followed a spring across several
fields, I moved the pegs some feet away without his know-
ledge. Nevertheless, he was never led astray and always recti-
fied such errors. In fine I tried all sorts of ways to deceive
him, and I can testify that in more than six hundred trials,
I did not succeed in doing so one single time.”

M. Jadelot, the Professor of Medicine in Nancy, Thouvenel
states, was a witness of, and co-operated in, all his experiments,
which extended over a space of two months, and was no less
struck than he was with the strength and importance of the
evidence obtained. Another distinguished savant who was
converted to a belief in the baguette was M. Sigaud de La Fond,
whose published testimony Thouvenel quotes (Mémoire, pp.
289 et seq.). But the most important evidence on behalf of
Bleton is contained in the numerous letters and affidavits
Thouvenel appends to his work. These are the replies he
received from various well-known persons who had employed
Bleton, and whose opinion he had asked. In addition to the
foregoing, Bleton found one or more valuable springs (as
testified by letters or procés verbaux) for the Marquis de Torcy
in Poiton, for the President of Lamoignon in Basville, for the
Bishop of Laon in Annisy, for the Count d’Adhemar in Thun,
for the Duke d’Uzés, the Count of La Blanche, the Count of
Bourg, President d’Ornacieux, M. de La Borde, and many other
French personages of distinction. There are also brief state-
ments from 20 other persons for whom Bleton found plusieurs


‘THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 37


belles sources, in addition to the 17 letters or affidavits quoted
at length by Thouvenel. In these piéces justificatives Thouvenel
as a rule gives only the initials of his correspondents; the
_ documents, he tells us, are all signed and some legally attested,
but some of the writers might object to their names being
published ; moreover, he adds that in physics names add
nothing to the facts themselves.1

In one statement, however, this rule is departed from, and
Thouvenel humorously prefixes the heading: ‘ Procés verbal
sur Bleton . . . papier timbré, paraphé, collationné, etc., etc.
(Bon pour ceux qui aiment ces petites formalités),” and the
testimony is certified by, and attested before, a list of signa-
tories whose names and official titles are appended. In this
case the evidence of the various municipal officers of the
Commune of St Jean-en-Royant in Dauphinyis given. Bleton
was a native of, and resided in, this commune (Bouvantes
being a parish therein), and the procés-verbal states that Bleton
had possessed the gift of finding springs for about 30 years,
and had practised it much to the advantage of the inhabitants
ofthe commune. Specific instances are then cited of the more
important springs Bleton had found in arid ground—springs
which were still running, the witnesses affirm, and had largely
increased the value of the property in the commune: owing
to these discoveries fertile and productive land had, in several
places, now replaced the previously barren soil. The Chief
Clerk of the neighbouring commune states that Bleton found
for him an ample spring in a district where no water was
previously known to exist, the result of which was that the
ground which formerly was of little or no value now was a
valuable property. The signatories of the procés-verbal further
testify that Bleton had discovered during the preceding 20
years a quantity of springs in other neighbouring communes,
some of these being of so great a volume that machinery was
worked by them.

Another document, also signed by an inhabitant of St Jean
de Royant, states that the value of his property had been
increased tenfold by the springs discovered on it by Bleton.
The Prior of the Charterhouse of Lyons testifies that Bleton
had found several springs for him and had not once been mis-
taken, though his estimate of the depth and volume of the
water he acknowledged to be conjectural, Bleton’s discovery
of his liability to err on this point being, he adds, the only


1 This may account for the omission of his own name (initials only
being given) as the author of these Mémoires, though of course his
authorship was an open secret.


38 THE DIVINING-ROD


progress he had made since he was seven years old, when
i] etoit aussi savant qu’il l’est .actuellement.’’ The Prior
states that when he held Bleton’s wrist, the change in Bleton’s
pulse was so perceptible upon arriving over an underground
spring that the fact was as obvious to him as to the sowrcter,
a baguette being perfectly needless. The Chevalier de M.,
formerly Captain of the Piedmont regiment, testifies that
he had been convinced of Bleton’s powers in spite of the
prejudices he previously entertained. Having put Bleton
to all the tests he could think of, he never once found him
mistaken. ‘‘ Whatever the power is,’’ he remarks, “‘it is not
the mere movement of the baguette that astonishes me—that
might be a matter of skill—but the effect on Bleton’s pulse
and nervous system were unmistakable, and these cannot
be simulated. Moreover,’ he continues, “I have made all
the tricky tests that my doubts suggested to me,”’ until doubt
became impossible. The Chevalier describes in detail one of
several tests he made; he brought Bleton to his own house,
arriving after dark; in passing through the village, which
Bleton had not visited before, Bleton suddenly stopped and
said water was there; he followed it in the darkness and
arrived at a spot where he declared the spring existed; he
was right; it was in fact the source of the fountain of the
castle. Other tests are also given: altogether a remarkable
and weighty testimony. M. de F., the receiver of taxes for
Autun, states that a strong spring was discovered on his place
by Bleton. In order to test the sourcier, M. de F. afterwards
blindfolded him, and took him over the same ground ; Bleton
marked precisely the same spots he did previously when not
blindfolded ; this experiment he repeated several times. Dr
de C. (a neighbour of M. de F.) took Bleton to his house, where
Bleton accurately traced the course of the water pipes, a fact
confirmed by the workmen who had laid them. M. le Comte
de M., of Chagny, describes several careful tests he made of
Bleton. In one, after Bleton had accurately indicated an
underground spring (the existence of which was known to the
Count but unknown to Bleton) and traced its direction, which
was noted, the Count carefully bandaged Bleton’s eyes with
a thick handkerchief, and, in order to mislead him, turned
him round several times ; nevertheless Bleton correctly indi-
cated the same course of the spring in spite of frequent attempts
made to divert him. Holding his wrist the Count noticed
that the change in the rate of Bleton’s pulse was very marked
when he came over the spring. The Bishop of M. describes
how his Archbishop tested Bleton’s ability to discover running


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 39


water: (1) Bleton correctly traced the buried water pipes
in the Archbishop’s grounds when water was flowing through
them ; (2) unknown to Bleton the water was then turned off
and he was asked to repeat the trial, and he completely failed
to find the pipes ; (3) again the water was secretly turned on,
and Bleton once more correctly indicated the direction taken
by the pipes.

The Chevalier de S., commandeur de Malte, states that many
years previously his grandfather had made several attempts
to find water at his chateau prés de la Céte de Saint-André,
having even sunk a well to the depth of seventy feet, which
had to be abandoned. The Chevalier de S., and his brother,
the President d’O., in 1735 sent for a sourcier they knew of
who traversed the estate, using an iron rod they had picked
up as a baguette. Upon their expressing surprise at his ability
to use so novel a dowsing-rod, the sourcier replied, ‘“‘ The rod
is of no consequence, it is the peculiar feeling I have when
over an underground spring that guides me.” In 1773 (thirty-
eight years later) the Chevalier heard of Bleton and sent for
him. On his arrival he was taken to the terrace, where the rod
began to rotate, and the site of the well was correctly indicated.
To estimate its depth Bleton went to a certain distance on
each side, the rod rotating in an opposite direction as he moved
away from the spring. By observing the distance and decreas-
ing force of the rotation, Bleton estimated the depth of the
well to be 64 feet : its actual depth was 66 feet. Bleton was
then taken to a hill behind the chateau, where he pointed out
the existence of several springs in the spots marked; the
following winter a well was sunk at one of these spots and
water found at a depth of 18 feet, a narrow layer of sand being
struck after piercing through the upper very hard rock. This
spring had never run dry even in times of great drought.
Two years later (in 1775) Bleton was again tested on the same
estate and he indicated another spring, the depth of which
he estimated at 33 feet; a well was sunk at this spot and
the prediction was verified. Some time after, the two springs
were joined by underground conduits ; these conduits Bleton
accurately traced when he was again summoned to the chateau
in 1779.

tate a fourth visit to this estate was made by Bleton.
This time he discovered another spring which he estimated at
25 feet deep; a well was sunk and at 35 feet an abundant
supply of water was obtained ; this also issued from a layer of
sand beneath the hard superincumbent rock. Some experi-
ments were then made by the President d’O. and his brother


40 THE DIVINING-ROD


as to the movement of the baguette when Bleton was placed
in various positions. The rod turned when he lay on his
back, but not on his stomach, nor did it turn when it was
placed on his loins when he was lying down. Bleton was
then suspended upside down and the baguette placed on the
soles of his feet ; it did not rotate. Bleton, however, showed
them that when the rod was placed nearly perpendicular with
one end resting on the palm of the left hand, and the other
in the air, encircled by a ring formed of the finger and thumb
of the right hand placed a little below the point, the baguette
“‘pirouetted slowly ’’ when over a spring. This interesting
document ends by suggesting the desirability of placing le
tourneur de baguette on a sheet of resin or a glass-legged stool and
noticing whether his peculiar sensations are still experienced,
or whether they resemble the sensations one has when thus
insulated and connected with an electric machine. If, remarks
the Chevalier, running water gives off subtle emanations, they
must be comparable to those of light, and possibly suffer refrac-
tion and reflection in their course. The document is signed
by Le President d’O., who states that he did not write it, but
he approves ; and that the facts narrated were all witnessed
by him, his son, the Chevalier de S. and other persons, and he
adds his conviction that Bleton employed no charlatanerie
in any of his proceedings.

On the lands of the Abbé of Vervains there were certain
springs, all trace of which had long been lost; they were,
however, known to exist from the ancient title-deeds of the
estate. A lawsuit hinged upon the question of their existence
being actually proved. When search for the springs had been
made in vain, Bleton was sent for. He came and indicated
the location of these springs. Their actual existence was
then discovered and the lawsuit terminated. Surgeon-Major
N., of St Geny Laval, near Lyons, testifies that Bleton came
to a part of his estate which was rocky and arid, and found one
spot where the baguette indicated a considerable spring, which
he estimated to be at a depth of some 55 feet. A well was
sunk, but no water found at this depth. Bleton was, therefore,
sent for again. He tested the ground once more, asserted
confidently that a good spring would be found at a few feet
lower, remarking that he was often mistaken as to the depth
when it was over 30 feet. The well was, therefore, deepened,
and at 7 or 8 feet lower so powerful a spring gushed forth that
it was impossible to sink deeper, as the water rapidly rose in
the well, which was 5 feet in diameter. The witness adds,
“A useless land has thus been converted into a meadow.”


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 41


P.I.G., and Seigneur D., Conseiller du Parlement de B.,
affirm that they brought Bleton to Tanyot, in Burgogne, where
he was subjected to various tests, three of which are cited:
(1) He was asked to find the course of some water pipes that
had been laid some time previously and which were completely
covered by earth and grass, so that no difference was apparent
on the surface of the ground. Bleton immediately discovered
the position, and accurately traced the course, of these pipes.
(2) He was asked to find the spring which supplied a neigh-
bouring well, and to estimate its depth. This he did quite
accurately, and stated it was a very feeble spring, which the
owner of the well certified was also correct. (3) He was asked
to find a supply of water for their chateau. For some time he
searched in vain, but eventually in another direction he found
six small springs: their position was marked by pegs. Upon
digging at these spots springs were found in each place at about
the depth and volume he indicated. These springs were then
connected by a deep trench, and furnished an abundant supply
of water for both house and garden.


§ 3. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE LUXEMBOURG


It is needless to translate or summarize the other documents,
which contain similar evidence. Thouvenel’s treatises, how-
ever, are not the only sources of our information about Bleton.
Accounts of this sourciey are to be found in many of the French
journals of that period.

In the Journal de Paris for the 13th of May 1782 an account
was published of some careful experiments, made to test
Bleton’s powers, in the garden of the Luxembourg, under the
direction of M. Guillaumot, ‘‘ intendant général des batiments
du roi,’ who was accompanied by inspectors and officials of the
gardens. The report states that on leaving the Chateau d’Eau
Bleton traced the aqueduct of Arceuil with such precision that if
M. Guillaumot’s plan were to be lost they would use the trail of
Bleton. These indications were verified from this plan and
Bleton’s angles and sinuosities were found to be “almost
mathematically ’ correct. Two days later the experiments
were repeated in the presence of the municipal authorities
and a crowd of spectators. Here the events were such that
with the exception of two persons (who had publicly stated
that they would not believe, whatever they saw), the five hun-
dred spectators were convinced of Bleton’s ability to trace
underground water with the most rigorous precision. On
this occasion Bleton was blindfolded. Other trials followed


42 THE DIVINING-ROD


in the presence of ministers of state, ambassadors, magistrates,
scientific men and clergy, and the writer in the Journal de
Paris, in summing up his report says: “ To the present time,
and to our knowledge, Bleton has followed more than fifteen
thousand forses [sic] of the conduits, without his having commit-
ted a single error and without having found, among more
than six thousand persons, a single responsible witness who
has made a well-founded objection. He has been submitted
to the most rigorous tests that incredulity, even prejudice,
could suggest, and they have only resulted in more light, more
conviction and more astonishment.”

Some rigorous experiments were made by a committee of
six savants, who drew up a report dated “ Paris, 25th of May
1782.” This report, which was signed by all the members,
states that Bleton, having been blindfolded with extreme
care by a succession of black and then white linen bandages,
with cotton wool stuffed up the sides of his nostrils, was
taken to the garden of one of the, members of the committee,
wherein a water pipe ran underground to a distant fountain.
The jets of this fountain had been removed, so that the water
ran into the basin, and off through an overflow pipe, quite
noiselessly. Here Bleton indicated running water at certain
spots which were marked ; he was then made to retrace his
steps Io or 12 times, and it was found that the baguette turned
nearly, but not quite, invariably when he crossed the same
spots: at the places where the water entered the basin and
where the overflow pipe discharged he was always right. This
they verified at least a dozen times. The experiments lasted
two hours, with a short interval for rest ; during the whole
time Bleton was blindfolded, and during part of that time
Thouvenel was not present. According to the writer of the
article in the Monthly Review for 1782: ‘‘ These successes
led the Queen of France to employ Bleton and the springs
that have been found in consequence of his indications have
fertilised and embellished several arid districts, among which
Trianon is a striking example, as that delightful seat has
acquired new charms by Bleton’s discoveries.”” According to
another account, however, Bleton had some failures at Trianon,
mistaking caverns and dry conduits for underground water.

The Editor of the Journal des Spectacles, in a figure of
speech, we must assume, states that Bleton, by his discovery
of numerous springs, had changed Dauphiny from an arid
soil, which produced nothing, to one of the richest in France.
Dr Ginetz, writing in the Journal de Paris for November 1807,
states that ‘‘ the efficacy of the baguette is nowhere contested


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 43


in Dauphiny. I have myself frequently observed the effects
of the baguette, and can state from personal experience its
success in seeking for springs and metallic veins.’”’ 1

In Thouvenel’s second Mémoire further accounts are given of
his experiments with Bleton. He had been commissioned
in 1783 by Louis XVI to examine and report on the mineral
and medicinal waters of France, and to aid him in the discovery
of any fresh mineral springs he obtained permission to engage
the services of the dowser. Most of this second Mémoire is
therefore occupied with the tracing of hot springs and mineral
waters, with conjectures as to the source of the former, and
attempts to verify the electrical hypothesis which Thouvenel
had formed of the influence of subterranean springs on the
diviner. We need not concern ourselves with the latter, as
the experiments cited are certainly open to criticism, and would
only excite a smile in the wider scientific knowledge of the
present day. It is, however, now known, as Thouvenel con-
jectured, that there are subterraneous electric currents, the
strength of which fluctuates in various places and from time
to time. It is certainly a curious coincidence, if it be no more,
that upwards of one hundred years ago this French physician,
on the strength of Bleton’s sensations, maintained that these
electrical manifestations appeared in general to run east and
west. Current electricity itself was not discovered till ten
years later, the existence of earth currents was not known
till Barlow’s experiments in 1849, and the general trend of
these currents east and west is a still more recent observation.


§ 4. CONTEMPORARY OPINION ADVERSE TO BLETON


Among those who, after experimenting with Bleton, formed
an unfavourable opinion of his reported powers was the Abbé
Mongez, one of the principal contributors to the articles on
natural philosophy in the Paris Encyclopédie; but, according
to Dr Thouvenel, these experiments were intended to be
unfavourable, and the experimenters, by designing a number
of ingenious tricks to deceive Bleton, in reality deceived them-
selves. Certainly the partis pris of most of the scientific
investigators of Bleton was very evident, and to a large extent

1 It was in Provence (the adjoining province to Dauphiny) that
Lady Milbanke, in 1772, first saw the use of the divining-rod. Ina
dry, mountainous region north of the Durance, the Marquis d’ Ansonis
had found water by the aid of a sourcier, and the Marquis, whose faith
in the divining-rod was unbounded, converted Lady Milbanke to his
views after she had witnessed experiments on his estate. She herself
afterwards became a dowser, as we have already seen.


44 THE DIVINING-ROD


vitiated both the experiments made and the conclusions drawn
from them.1 These experiments were made for the most
part in the church and garden of Ste Genevieve in the presence
of several savants. An account is given of them in the Journal
de Paris for the 16th of June 1782, and procés-verbaux of the
experiments are to be found in the Journal de Physique of that
year. It is needless to enter into the details ; suffice it to say
that the report concludes by stating that Bleton found water
pipes, springs, etc., on all sides, whereas there were no water
pipes and no springs beneath him. The attempt to explain
away this failure, which Thouvenel made, shows that believers
in dowsing can be no less blind and prejudiced than their
opponents. Doubtless the experiments were wholly incon-
clusive in face of the abundant testimony in Bleton’s favour,
some of which we have cited. The writer in the Monthly Review
seems to have given the true explanation of these experiments.
Admitting that Bleton did fail, he remarks “ this will not appear
surprising when we consider this poor timorous man led about
blindfold, harassed, fatigued, and perplexed with cross ques-
tions,’’ and he adds, “‘ even the Abbé Mongez admits that Bleton
was sometimes quite correct.’’ In fact “the public have no
curiosity to know how far tricks and ingenious means of decep-
tion can go in disconcerting or suspending the exercise of
Bleton’s natural talent ; they only desire to know whether he
in reality possesses this talent, when left to himself and allowed
the free use of his faculties.” But like all other dowsers,
Bleton unquestionably failed at times. Figuier names four
places, and also ‘“‘dans quelques autre lieux,’’ where wells
were dug at the spots indicated by Bleton and no water found,
even when the wells were sunk to a depth greater than had
been estimated by the sourcier. In his able paper read before
the American Institute of Mining Engineers in 1883, Dr Rossiter
Raymond quotes—without, however, naming his authority—
several instances where Bleton failed to find the same spot,
after being blindfolded, that he had indicated previously.
After the lapse of a century it is instructive to notice how


? As the able contemporary reviewer remarks (Monthly Review,
Ixvii. 554), ‘‘ It is certainly possible that even an honest zeal for the
discovery of imposture or enthusiasm may be exerted in a manner not
perfectly adapted to the discovery of truth. ... It is observed by
all that Bleton is uncommonly timorous and easily disconcerted, even
so far as to suspend his impressions. This we can well conceive, be his
talent ever so real. The very talent seems to announce a sensibility
of nerves that may render him peculiarly susceptible of perturbation.
Who has not seen schoolboys of the most retentive memories lose the
remembrance of the best learned lesson by being intimidated ? ”


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 45


frequently the adverse criticism of Bleton arose from his critics
assuming a particular explanation of the lad’s sensitiveness
or of the motion of his rod, and having demolished that theory
they roundly asserted the boy was a charlatan, a mode of
argument not unknown to certain critics of psychical research
of the present day. Thus, Bleton’s sensitiveness being sup-
posed to be due to some electric influence, he was mounted
on an insulating stool and his rod at once ceased to move,
but resumed its motion when he was on the ground. A famous
physicist, Charles, who conducted this experiment a century
ago, when Bleton was on the insulating stool, secretly connected
the lad with a wire to the earth ; still the rod remained passive
although the insulation was destroyed. Whereupon Bleton
was openly denounced as a charlatan by his scientific critic.
All that this experiment proves is the influence of suggestion
on the motion of the rod. As the lad knew nothing of elec-
tricity he must have been told that the insulating stool would
intercept the power, and so the rod ceased to move when he
was mounted on the glass-legged stool, and it remained motion-
less when the insulation was destroyed, as care had been taken
to avoid any suggestion of this reaching Bleton. Even on his
own hypothesis, the French experimenter with Bleton was
mistaken ; for the theory that some electrical influence from
underground water affects the dowser, and so starts the motion
of the rod, is not touched by insulating the dowser ; as every
tyro knows, standing on a glass-legged stool merely prevents
electric conduction from the earth and does not impair electric
induction.

Again, the eminent astronomer Lalande believed he had
conclusively demonstrated Bleton was a rogue because he
established the fact that the peculiar rod Bleton employed could
be rotated by sleight of hand. The fallacy of this line of
argument, though persisted in at the present day, is obvious
enough. As, however, Lalande is often quoted as having
“exposed” Bleton, it is worth giving im extenso the com-
munication which this famous savant made to the Journal
des Scavans for August 1782, p. 558:

‘‘Unnommé Bleton, né dans un village, prés de Grenoble, a
prétendu avoir un propriété extraordinaire de sentir les eaux
souterainnes par un tremblement convulsif. Ce sourcier, ou
hydropyréte, placoit sur ses doits une baguette ou une verge
de métal, courbée en arc, et on la voyoit tourner rapidement.
Ce stratagéme était plus adroit que celui des sourciers qui cour-
ent les villages, et qui marquent des sources aux paysans,
moyennant la plus mince rétribution. Ceux-ci serrent leur


46 THE DIVINING-ROD


baguette dans leurs mains, et pour peu qu’on ait envie des
regarder, on s’appercoit facilement qu’il suffit de ferrer la bagu-
ette inégalement ; sa courbure détermine nécessairement un
mouvement de rotation . . . il [Thouvenel] n’etait plus assez
calme pour se rendre aux raisons de ses adversaires, ni méme
pour appercevoir la petite charlatannerie dont il avait été la
dupe... [il] a été parfaitement séduit par l’addresse de
Bleton, a faire tourner sur ses doigts une verge courbe de
métal ; iln’a pas appercu que cela tenoit a une cause mécanique.

En effet, si l’on place sur deux doigts une baguette de métal
courbée en arc, de maniére que le sommet de l’arc soit plus
bas que les deux extrémités, mais que le tout soit presqu’en
equilibre, le plus petit rapprochement des doigts, ne fdat-il
que d’une ligne, suffira pour que les extrémités l’emportent a
leur tour, et que le sommet de l’arc vienne en haut. Si on
les écarte, a l’instant le sommet de l’arc descendra, et avec
une pareille alternative, le mouvement peut continuer aussi
longtemps qu’on le jugera a propos. Un homme trés-exercé
n’a besoin pour cela que d’un léger tremblement qui est a
peine sensible, quand on n’est pas prévenu.

Faute d’avoir appergu ce petit mécanisme, M. Thouvenel
a fait un livre sur la baguette, mais M. Demours, fils de l’Acadé-
micien trés-connu, a fait tourner une baguette pareille dans
une assemblée de |’Académie des sciences, de maniére a lever
toute espéce de doute a cet égarde.... M. Needham...
cite méme quelques faits contre les prétentions de la baguette,
qui sont renovellées de tems a autres par des fripons, ou par
des dupes.’ Enfin, M. Paulet, dans la Gazette de Santé du
10 Juin, 1781, s’est moqué de la nouvelle physique, ainsi qu’on
Vavait fait dans le dernier siécle.’’

But whilst M. de Lalande clearly demonstrates that slight
muscular action can move the rod, somewhat as Bleton moved
it, he does not trouble to make any enquiry on the only point
of real value: whether Bleton was more successful in finding
underground water than chance or shrewd observation would
account for. Nevertheless, the weight of Lalande’s authority
crushed Thouvenel and his protégé Bleton. It was taken as
a matter of course that the latter was a clever trickster, who
had duped the public. Conjuring books showed how to work
the rod a la Bleton. A book by H. Decremps, called La magie
blanche dévoilée, published in Paris in 1784, devotes a lengthy
chapter to this, showing not only how to rotate a slightly
curved rod by the quivering of the index fingers, but also how


“4 [L. Spallanzani, Nouvelles recherches sur les découveries microsco-
piques, ed. by J. T. Needham (1769), i. 245-248).


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 47


a manikin can be made to imitate the search for water in this
fashion. This chapter was copied into the Encyclopédie
Méthodique for 1792, and an English translation of Decremps’s
book was published in 1785 under the title of The Conjurer
unmasked . . . with directions for the tricks of the Divining
Rod. But the whirligig of time brings its revenge ; Decremps,
whose book was all the vogue a century ago, is today forgotten
and Bleton is now the subject of scientific study.


Fic. 14. Tue Dowsrer PENNET
C. Amoretti, ‘‘ Lettera,’”? Opuscolt Scelti (1793), xvi. Plate II


The rotation of Bleton’s nearly straight rod was no doubt
due to the same cause as the twisting of the forked twig of the
dowser at the present day: an involuntary muscular move-
ment arising from some subconscious suggestion; how he,
in common with other dowsers, derived this usually correct
suggestion of underground water, when no one else knew of
its presence, is the problem that we have to consider.


48 THE DIVINING-ROD


Thouvenel gives no picture of Bleton nor of his manner of
holding the rod. After search through many works in the
hope of finding a picture given by some contemporary writer
of the use of this curved rod, the accompanying drawing (Fig.
14) was at last discovered. The picture shows the lad Pennet
holding the rod as Bleton did, but the rod appears rather
larger and more curved than Bleton’s. Thouvenel, and after-
wards Amoretti, experimented with Pennet.?


III. THE ABBE PARAMELLE


§1. WATER SUPPLY IN THE DEPARTMENT OF LOT


The story of the Abbé Paramelle and his extraordinary suc-
cess as a water-finder (or hydroscope, as he was called) is so
little known in England that it is worthy of more than a
passing notice. Paramelle was born in 1790, and in 1818 was
appointed curé and afterwards abbé of St Jean L’Espinasse,
moving from there to St Céré in the Department of Lot in
the south-west of France. A man of keen observation and
scientific spirit, he was struck with the remarkable difference
between the numerous springs, streams and well watered
areas of the eastern half of the Department and the difficulty
with which water was obtained in the twenty-four arid can-
tons of the western half. Here the population were impover-
ished by having to expend a large part of their time in labor-
iously carrying water from distant wells to supply the wants
of their families and their cattle. Prompted, he tells us, by
charitable feelings, he spent two years in the fruitless search
for springs, in the hope that he might be able to supply the
poor folk of the arid region with the benediction of a bountiful
water supply. In this he failed, and got the reputation of
searching for the quantities of buried treasure which the
English were supposed to have left behind when long ago
they evacuated that district. He then set to work to compare
the geological characteristics and rainfall in the two regions ;
the arid part was calcareous but had the same rainfall ; where,


1 The main sources for the above account, in addition to those
cited, are: Journal des Sgavans (1781), pp. 623-628 ; (1782), pp. 558—
564; Journal de Paris (1781), x. 329-330; (1782), x. 659-660 ; (1783),
xii. 431-438; (1784), xiv. 242-243, 831-833, 1072; (1785), xvi. nos.
167-173 ; (1786), xvi. no. 185, Supplement ; (1787), xviii. no. 190, Supple=
ment ; Journal de Physique (1782), xx. 58-72 ; Journal Encyclopédique
(1782), vi. 491-501 ; The Monthly Review (1781), xv. 497-504 ; (1782),
Ixvil. 553-556, (1784), lxxi. 571-577; and most of Thouvenel’s works
have some discussion of the subject.


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 49


then, did the rainfall go to in the arid region? It must
penetrate the soil and accumulate ultimately, making its way
underground to the river valleys. Guided by his own obser-
vations, Paramelle was gradually led to put his theories to the
test, and found them verified. He then travelled further
afield, and at last he tells us that after nine years of explor-
ation and observation he felt sufficient confidence to go to
what we should call the County Council of the Department
of Lot and to ask them to place a certain sum at his dispo-
sal to test his theories by sinking wells in certain places where
he predicted water would be found in the arid communes.
The Council agreed, and in 1827 granted him a sum of 600
francs to make experiments, the communes that were benefited
to contribute an equal sum. Eight places were selected by
Paramelle in as many communes, but it was considered at that
time so impossible to find water in these calcareous plateaux
that three communes refused to incur the expense, though
five who did make the venture were in each case rewarded by
an abundant supply.


§ 2. PARAMELLE’S SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM


In the procés-verbal of the Council General of the Department
for 1829 these remarkable successes are recorded. Paramelle
—now the learned savant, M. l’Abbé Paramelle—is called in
to explain his theories, and a further sum of two thousand
francs placed at his disposal and a generous recognition paid
to his learning and self-sacrificing devotion. Two years later
the Council record that in sixteen out of seventeen localities
the predictions of Paramelle had been verified, a perennial
water supply being found at the place, depth and of the volume
he hadindicated. His fame becoming widespread, applications
to find water in waterless districts poured in to such an extent
that with his Bishop’s permission he relinquished his ecclesiastic
duties and became what we should now call a hydro-geolo-
gist, what he called a geognostic, and the public of that day an
hydroscope. Disclaiming the infallibility which was thrust
upon him, the local newspaper accounts of the period speak
of his modesty and marvellous success. Many explain his
secret as a gift of God, others as the work of the devil. The
poor people, however, answered very much in the words of
the blind man cured: ‘‘ Whether he be a sorcerer or a mes-
senger of God we know not; this we know, that whereas
we were perishing for want of water, now by his help we have
an abundance.”” By permission of the authorities, Paramelle


4


50 THE DIVINING-ROD


hereafter made a fixed and modest charge of ten to forty-five
francs for his services in each case, except to the poor, to
whom no charge was made (this would not satisfy our English
water-finders, whether geologists or dowsers !), and for twenty-
one years he spent from sunrise to sunset every day, except
Sundays, for nine months in every year at the work of water-
finding.

In 1843 the frocés-verbal of the Council General of Lot
records that in their department alone 338 wells had been dug
at places indicated by Paramelle, and of these 305, or 90 per
cent., yielded an abundant supply of potable water, in every
case found at the depth he had predicted. In other parts he
had also found 683 sources of water supply ; and when in
1854, at the age of 64, he practically gave up his active work,
the Abbé asserts that in 25 years he had located over 10,000
sources of underground water, and he estimated that between
8,000 and 9,000 wells had been dug at the sites he had selected.
He endeavoured to find out the percentage of failures he
had had, but in spite of the circulars he sent out, he got very
few replies ; he believed, however, that his failures were under
5 per cent. of his total trials. Whether 5 per cent. or Io per
cent., as the above official records indicate from his entire
results, his astonishing success is, we venture to think, beyond
anything modern expert geologists claim. A remarkable
testimony to the value of his work is found in a number of the
Journal @ Agriculture Pratique for April 1845. The Journal
quotes a letter the Prefect of Lot wrote to the Prefect of
Versailles, stating that up to that time about 6,000 new sources
of water supply in 30 departments had been discovered by the
Abbé Paramelle, and the actual money value of the springs
thus found was, he says, estimated at not less than four to five
million francs.

In 1846 the Académie of Reims published a report in their
Comptes Rendus from a committee of six of their members
appointed to enquire into Paramelle’s theory and work. In
this lengthy and careful report the committee express their
high opinion of Paramelle’s character and the results of his
work, and quote a number of letters and certificates from
various officials in different parts of France testifying to his
success. His proportion of failures is estimated as rather
less than 5 per cent. In almost every instance quoted, the
depth at which water was found was under 50 feet. As to
his theory, the committee report that, though true in a sense,
it is imperfect and not always applicable, nor do they
consider that a knowledge of it would enable another, not


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 51


possessed of Paramelle’s special talents, quick recognition of
all surface indications and long practice, to be equally success-
ful. Paramelle himself declared, however, that in a few
months of study and three of field practice, he could teach
anyone of ordinary intelligence all that he knew. That
might be, but he could not communicate his almost unerring
instinct.

Paramelle, however, unlike most prophets, seems to have
had more honour in his own country than elsewhere. His
success was declared by outsiders to be impossible; doubt
was thrown on the reality or permanence of the springs he
had found ; one savant asserts that his procedure was unscien-
tific and valueless ; whilst a writer in one of the French journals
for 1842 says whatever success he had was due to impressions,
sensations and convulsions, and, doubtless, diabolic visions
that he experienced. This writer adds: ‘‘ The only differ-
ence between Paramelle and other sorcerers is that he con-
ceals the diabolic signs he receives, glossing over his magical
proceedings with a lot of scientific jargon.’’ 1

To meet his critics Paramelle determined to publish the
methods which had guided him. He states that in 1827 he
had written a work “on the art of discovering springs.’’ This
he revised and published in 1856; three editions were quickly
sold, a German translation was made by the Professor of
Geology in Freiberg, a Spanish translation followed, and so
highly was the work esteemed that the Spanish Ministry
ordered every municipality to purchase a copy. A fourth
enlarged French edition was published in 1896, after Para-
melle’s death. We have read this book and we do not hesitate
to express our amazement at the oversight of this work in
England. The wealth of geological and useful practical
knowledge gained, through field observation, by this French
Abbé two’generations ago is astonishing. He must have been
an odd mixture, for he includes in his work a number of lauda-
tory Press notices. From these, however, we gain a descrip-
tion by eye-witnesses of his method of procedure ; and these
merit some attention. First, there is the unimpeachable
evidence of one of the most distinguished French savants,
Geoffroy St Hilaire, who, in a memoir read before the
Paris Academy of Sciences, in 1836, said as follows: ‘‘ The
Abbé Paramelle’s skill in discovering springs rests on the
science of observation, and not on the instinctive movement
of the divining rod. He has acquired by practice such acute;
ness of observation that, after a single and rapid inspection


1 TL’ Eclaireuy du Midi, July 1842.


52 THE DIVINING-ROD


of the surface of the ground, he can indicate the place and the
depth of any underground sources that may exist. His suc-
cess has been so remarkable as to convince the most incredu-
lous.” Nearly every eye-witness says the same thing. A
journal at Aix says that, ‘“‘ Without any hesitation, and after
_a rapid glance, Paramelle at once indicates not only the very
spot where to sink a well, but the depth it will have to be
sunk and the volume of water that will be obtained. All
this in so laconic and precise a fashion that scepticism van-
ishes.” Another journal, Le Rhutenois, writes on the 15th of
February 1837: ‘‘ The Abbé Paramelle simply looks round,
says, ‘ Here you will find the spring at such a depth and of
such quantity ; it comes in this direction, and the water will
be of such and such a quality’’’; and so on, in upwards
of a score of other Press notices which are included in the
chapters XXX. and XXXI. of Paramelle’s work. Similar
testimony is borne in the Report of the Commission appointed
by the Academy of Reims already referred to, and in a paper
published in 1835 by the French Société Centrale d’Agriculture
(LVIIe Cahier, p. 326).


§ 3. PARAMELLE’S THEORIES


What then was the secret of Paramelle’s method? This
he has disclosed, or professed to disclose, in his book, L’Avt de
découvrir les sources. He did not use any form of dowsing-
rod ; he tells us the rod would never turn in his hands, though
he had often tried it, and he regarded the users of the baguette
with undisguised contempt. The hypothesis upon which he
worked, to state it in the most general form, was that under-
ground water behaves precisely like water that is visible on
the surface of the earth. Just as in the latter case waters
that are precipitated upon the surface of the earth and fail
to penetrate the superficial soil, gather into rivulets and join
streams and rivers, following in their course certain suitable
channels, so must underground waters behave. Thus the
waters which percolate through the upper earth, on reaching
a bed of impermeable rock, will form into little filaments of
water, these will unite into rivulets, which again will join
larger subterranean water courses, and so on until they finally
reach the surface or possibly emerge in the bed of a river or
lake. Throughout their course they will follow hollows,
depressions or folds in the impermeable stratum analogous to
those in which surface waters flow. The position of these
underground channels, our author asserts, can be determined


THREE FAMOUS FRENCH DOWSERS 53


by observation of the surface. This branch of his subject
Paramelle explains with much detail, but it will be sufficient
here to give a bare outline of his views.

Subject to certain exceptions, it may be said that he held
the conformation of the surface to correspond in some impor-
tant features with that of an impermeable stratum beneath it.
A valley or longitudinal depression, whether large or small,
marks, he says, the position of an underground stream. In
broad valley bottoms the principal water course will usually
be found on the line of intersection of the sides. Subsidiary
gullies or hollows indicate the affluents. In a fairly level
country, where the depressions can be only slightly marked, he
describes how it is still possible with minute precautions and
by closer observation to detect them. The existence of such
outward signs of hidden streams of water Paramelle attributes
to the natural tendency of the surface to conform to its sup-
porting bed, and also to subsidence due to the constant carry-
ing away of matter by the underground current. The quantity
of water likely to be found at a selected point he estimated
from the area drained. The quality of the water he inferred
from the nature of the soil through which it had filtered, and
the depth at which it ran mainly from ordinary geologic data.
Paramelle did not claim that his method was applicable to
the discovery of sheets of underground water or water-logged
strata of wide area, or, one may suppose, to water at a great
depth. The former case, however, he believed to be of very
rare occurrence, and to others, for which his general plan would
be unsuitable, he refers candidly, and suggests several ingenious
considerations.

Paramelle’s theories may excite a smile among geologists of
the present day or they may awaken interest or arouse criti-
cism. In any case, his phenomenal success in the location of
underground water needs explanation, even assuming that he
did not discover the more abundant sources found in deep
wells. We believe that the experience he had gained by long
observation in the field, and the instinct he had thus acquired,
accounted for a good deal more than he could rationally
explain. Hence, like the successful dowser of past and present
times, it was his subconscious far more than his conscious
faculties that were concerned in the process of water-finding.
That no mere knowledge of the theories he sets forth in his
book will enable any one to become a second Paramelle is
obvious from the fact that, although his book has been widely
read on the Continent during the last seventy years, no such
renown has been subsequently gained by any Continental


54 THE DIVINING-ROD


water-finder, nor by hydro-geologists anywhere. In short, the
success of Paramelle, in our opinion, was due, as a general
rule, not to a new geological theory but to his possession of
_ the very same gift as that owned by the avowed dowser.?


1 Reference to most of the contemporary literature regarding Para-
melle is cited in jhis book L’Art de découvrir les sources (4th edition,
1856).


CHAPTER III
DOWSING AND GEOLOGY


N* study of dowsing would be complete which did not


consider, however briefly, the general geological laws

of water supply and distribution, and which did not
consider the opinions of geologists concerning the claims of
dowsers. Nor would much that follows be readily understood
without such a discussion.


§1. THE GEOLOGY OF WATER SUPPLY


The supply of potable water depends almost entirely on rain-
fall; this source of supply, though it may seem insufficient
and inconstant, suffers from neither of these defects. The
average annual rainfall in Great Britain is about 39 inches,
and has never fallen below about 15 inches. But a rainfall of
only I inch per annum, if it could all be utilised, would yield
over 100 gallons per head per day for the population of the
country.1. The rain sinking into the soil has to encounter
water-bearing and non-water-bearing rocks. Among the for-
mer are porous and permeable rocks such as sand, soft sand-
stone, marlstone and chalk; rocks which are impervious but
which have joints, fissures, and the like, which hold water,
may be included in this class. Among the non-water-bearing
rocks may be noted clay, loam, marl, granite and green-
stone.

The former class of rocks become saturated to their full
extent and then throw off any surplus water in the form of
springs. The rain that falls on the latter class of rocks runs
off their surface into surface streams, collects in pools, or
runs off the edges of the impermeable surface. It should
also be observed that there are definite underground water
courses which are followed, for instance, by rivers in times of
drought. Cases are also known of holes which take water and


1H. R. Mill, in The Journal of the Statistical Society (1909), lxxii.
294.
55


56 THE DIVINING-ROD


discharge them elsewhere ; thus the water disappearing into
the Malham Tarn Water Sinks comes up through the Aire
Head Springs. There are still further exceptions to the
rule stated, but these we need not consider.

It is apparent therefore that it would be unnecessary to
employ a dowser in districts the geological formation of which
is known to fall under either of two heads. On the one hand if
the district is over porous or permeable rocks, watermay readily
be found almost anywhere. On the other hand if the locality
is over non-water-bearing rocks, water can, as a general rule,
be found only where the impermeable or impervious rocks have
been pierced. In the former case the experienced local well-
sinker can do the work and in the latter recourse must be had
to a geologist, or by preference to an hydro-geologist.

It will be observed that a large field is left for the dowser :
the numerous regions in which the non-water-bearing rocks
have faults, fissures, joints and the like, or are in a decomposed
or shattered condition. In such regions both the well-sinker
and the geologist are often helpless, and can only proceed by a
process of guess-work. We can now understand the reason
why so many dowsers originate from Somersetshire; it is
because this region is among the most typical examples of
the geological condition just described. It is here that the
dowser should be employed and it is under such conditions
that he has scored some of his most striking successes.

It must not be supposed that the dowser can never be
usefully employed in other circumstances than those we have
discussed. This is not the case, for geologists often make
mistakes. Thus a well on Southampton Common was sunk
to a depth of 1,317 feet at a cost to the ratepayers of £19,600,
getting a supply which could only be used for road watering.
The well of the Caledonian Road Prison in London only yielded
a supply of goo gallons per hour at a depth of 370 feet. The
artesian well at Chichester is 1,054 feet deep and yields only
100 gallons per hour of bad water. These are only a few
examples, and in fact, as Mr Westlake pointed out, ‘‘ Even
where deep wells are necessary, experience has shown it is
sometimes advantageous to supplement geological advice by
calling in a dowser, for, though a definite water level may
exist, the guantity found at a given spot is often a matter of
chance: such a case I saw recently near Newbury, where the
dowser, Tompkins, had found, at a depth of over roo ft. in the
chalk, so large a supply that steam pumping-gear had to be ~
used, whereas in two or three other wells in the neighbour-
hood, with water at about the same hydrostatic level, the


DOWSING AND GEOLOGY 57


quantity was much less.’ Throughout this book examples of
cases have been quoted in which a dowser has succeeded after
a geologist or engineer has failed. Indeed, Mr C. E. De Rance,
a geologist who made hydro-geology his own subject, says in a
letter that he would not be surprised to learn that the best
geologists, other than hydro-geologists, were in their success or
non-success on all fours with the dowser! But as a general
rule it is true to say that it is in a region like Somerset that the
dowser is likely to be most useful and successful.


§ 2. THE GEOLOGY OF SOMERSET IN RELATION TO
DowsinG }


The mineralised ridge of the Mendip Hills just above the
middle of the county has been the seat of mineral dowsing
since the time of Queen Elizabeth. The practice was prob-
ably introduced into Cornwall simultaneously, but has become
practically extinct for this purpose in both localities. In
Somersetshire, however, local conditions, favouring the later
application of the rod to water-finding, have preserved its use
to the present day. The Mendip itself consists of permeable
Palaeozoic rocks—Mountain Limestone on a core of Old Red
Sandstone—in which the water for the most part sinks to too
great a depth to be reached by wells. It is the Secondary rocks
lying to the north and south—the Trias, Lias, and Oolite—
forming what De Rance calls a “‘ super-pervious ”’ series and
yielding underground water, which have determined that
Somersetshire and not Cornwall shall be the centre of water-
dowsing.

The two last (Jurassic), which occupy about half the area
of the county, may be described as alternations of clays and
limestones, the sand beds being few and subordinate. The
Oolites, especially in the upper part, consist of clays often
of great thickness, alternating with massive limestones form-
ing reservoirs in which it is comparatively easy for a geologist
to predict water; although even here, the limestones being
well consolidated, success where quantity is required may
depend upon the accidental striking of a water-bearing fissure.

In the Lower Lias, which forms most of the low-lying arable
land of the county, clays and limestones alternate every few
feet or inches, and are alike impermeable, as De Rance indeed
terms the whole formation. When uncovered in the quarries
they are seen, however, to be traversed by cracks and occa-
sional faults, like much-skated-upon ice, which allow of a slow

1 This section is by the late E. Westlake, F.G.S.


58 THE DIVINING-ROD


percolation and the storage of small bodies of water.1 There
is no record of any copious supply, and the finding even of a
domestic supply depends on a chance meeting with these
water-bearing joints of which there is no sign at the surface.
This, which is the geologist’s extremity, is the dowser’s oppor-
tunity ; or, in other words, it is not surprising that where
common-sense ends, the uncommon-sense attributed to the
dowser should be in demand. The water, it is true, is some-
times impure, the fissured character of the formation being
more favourable to pollution near farms or villages than to
purification. Thus at the town of Somerton the well water
was analysed by the Rivers Pollution Commission and found
to be nearly all dangerously polluted.

We may note, moreover, that dowsing is not carried on on the
Somersetshire moorlands, which comprise the high-lying imper-
meable Devonian areas of Exmoor and the Quantocks drained
by surface streams, and the low-lying alluvial levels debouch-
ing on the Bristol Channel where water lies near the surface.
Cornwall also consists of Palaeozoic clay-slate (“ killas ’’)
with granite and other igneous rocks, all of which throw off
the water, except the little that percolates in fissures.

There are two main types of underground water—what
may be termed bed-water, or seepage, filtering through the
pores of beds ; and fissure-water, or drainage, flowing through
their joints. The first type characterises permeable beds, the
second the impermeable. To the latter condition the consoli-
dation due to ages tends to bring all the aqueous rocks; all
the igneous are so from the time of cooling: such rocks are
seen in the Palaeozoic of Cornwall, Wales, the Lake district,
etc:?

Bed-water is the more usual form, in the sense of being the
one most met with in the populated lowlands. But as we
pass from the looser rocks in the south-eastern counties to the
more consolidated in the west, the proportion of fissure-water
increases, till in the mountains there is nothing else. Tending


1 Water not only sinks through the Lias but rises through it as in
the springs of Bath and Cheltenham.

* An illustration from Llanelly is furnished by Mr J. F. Young, who
says in a letter: ‘‘ In the Coal Measures exposed in a new dock near
here numerous springs have been intersected, issuing with considerable
force through fissures in the rock, some of which were horizontal
whilst others were vertical. In a new coal pit they are sinking near
my residence’ I noticed the same thing, showing beyond dispute that
underground water in this and similar districts does circulate through
fissures, or follows the dip of the strata, and that intervening portions
at some distance below the surface may be quite dry.”


DOWSING AND GEOLOGY 59


to keep in compartments, it is difficult for a geologist to predict
its level, and still more its exact place or quantity. In these
Palaeozoic districts, however, surface water is usually abun-
dant and good, and the dowser is superfluous ; and so also in
the Tertiary where the rocks hold only bed-water. His happy
hunting ground lies therefore, as we have seen, in the inter-
mediate conditions of the Secondary rocks, such as exist in
Somersetshire.


§ 3. THE EXPERIMENT OF DR W. J. SoLLas


In view of these facts and in view of the numerous suc-
cesses recorded of dowsers it is surely extraordinary that no
British geologist or geological body (beyond those experiments
instigated by students of dowsing) has thought it worth while
to make a serious investigation into the subject. This being
the case the Society for Psychical Research requested Pro-
fessor Sollas, one of the most eminent geologists living, to under-
take, at its own expense, a simple experiment. This was done
and the results described by Professor Sollas.1_ The experiment,
in brief, was this: On a field at Locking the dowser Thomas
Young was asked to, and did, indicate two spots, one at which
water would be found and one at which no water would be
found. Professor Sollas, on the other hand, stated that
water would or would not be found in both wells alike. The
wells were duly sunk, Professor Sollas reported, to a depth of
29 feet, and, he said, equal quantities were found in each.
On the strength of this Professor Sollas triumphantly declared
the dowser’s pretentions to have been exploded. Unfortun-
ately, however, for this claim, when Mr E. R. Pease examined
the wells he found that the well in which the dowser declared
water would be found was ‘‘a mere hole some Io ft. deep,
whilst the—well was a carefully-timbered shaft 24 ft. in depth.”
Thus Professor Sollas’s conclusion is quite unjustified, since
the conditions under which the wells were sunk were unequal.
Mr Pease writes that he ‘‘ cannot feel his [Professor Sollas’s]
complete confidence in the conclusive nature of the experi-
ment ;’’ an opinion from which, we imagine, few would be
disposed to dissent. We are, of course, far from claiming
that the experiment was completely successful from the point
of view of the dowser, but simply that it was inconclusive.


1 “ Report on Wells Sunk at Locking, Somerset, to Test the alleged
Power of the Divining Rod,” Proceedings of the Bristol Naturalists’
Society (1882-5), n.s., iv. LI6-125.


60 THE DIVINING-ROD


§ 4. DOWSING IN GEOLOGICAL WORKS


This is a subject very easily disposed of. There are many
works of a geological and of a jointly geological and engineering
nature devoted to water supply. The very great majority of
these works do not so much as mention dowsing.t Those
writers who do refer to the matter do so generally only to
condemn,? or to damn with faint praise. Among substantial
works published in recent years there is only one in which
dowsing is discussed at any length and with knowledge: the
admirable treatise by E. A. Martel.4 Ina smaller book occurs
this passage: ‘‘ When doubt exists as to whether sinking will
yield water, or when great depths may have to be sunk, the
services of a water diviner are very useful. Water divining is a
gift ; and very few practise this art and some of these are not
reliable. On the whole however much reliance can be placed
on a first-class man.”’®


§ 5. GEOLOGICAL CRITICISM OF DOWSINGe


It might be supposed, when viewing this strong body of opinion
on the part of geologists against dowsing, that there is a clear
geological case against dowsing. It is true that a geologist
might be disposed to dismiss the whole matter at a glance
because of the absurd opinions held with great determination
by the dowsers themselves regarding the underground dis-
tribution of water. The dowser with the utmost assurance
locates a spring on a particular spot, and gives its exact depth
to a foot and its yield of water, and then probably will tell
you there is another spring a few feet further off, perhaps at a
very different depth, but that between no water will be found.
Or, basing his interpretations on the indications of the rod,
he will confidently assert that under his feet an underground
river exists, yielding so many gallons per hour. By the same
means he will profess to ascertain the direction in which the


1 See for instance among modern works those in the Bibliography
under Engels, Flinn, Hodson, Isler, Jeffery, Parker, Prinz, Uren,
Water Supply Manual.

* E.g., E. S. Auscher, L’Art de découvrir les sources (2nd ed., 1905),
pp. 149-154 ; E. Bailey-Denton, The Watery Supply and Sewerage (1901),
pp. 37-38; M. L. Fuller, Domestic Water Supplies (1912), pp. 48-50;
Gordon Harris, Water Supply (1899), p. 8; A. B. Thompson, Emergency
Water Supplies (1924), pp. 3-4.

* £.g., P. F. Chalon, Les Eaux soutervraines (3rd ed., 1813), pp. 2-5 ;
H. B. Woodward, The Geology of Water-Supply (1910), pp. 239-242.

* Nouveau traité des eaux souterraines (1921), pp. 743-754.

° F. N. Taylor, Small Water Supplies [1912], p. 23.


DOWSING AND GEOLOGY 61


imaginary river is running, and give you its depth below the
surface. Hard by he will trace other invisible streams, and
follow them to their source, maintaining that a perfectly dry
rock or sub-soil separates the underground water. A lot of
this is ridiculous to the geologist. Thus the Rev. Osmond
Fisher, an authority on this subject, writes in a letter: “‘ It
appears to me that the assumption which underlies the belief
in the divining rod is erroneous. It is only under exceptional
circumstances, as among crystalline rocks, or where the strata
are much disturbed, that underground water runs in channels
like water in a pipe so that a person can say, ‘I am now
standing over a spring,’ whereas a few paces off he was not over
one. What is called a spring, such as is reached in a well, is
usually a widely extended water-saturated stratum. Ordin-
arily where water can be reached by a well, there are few
spots in the neighbourhood where a well would not find it.”

We have seen that this is true; but it is unfortunate, from
the point of view of the geologist, that these absurd statements
of the dowser are often verified, that when the dowser has
stated that there is an underground flow, there has in fact
been often found a fissure in the hard rock, and so on. As
another geological writer has well said: “ A priori conclusions
seem to me absurd and unscientific, whether put forward by
the President of the Royal Society, or by a village cobbler.”
These are the words of Mr T. V. Holmes, a past president of
the Geologists’ Association of London, and one of the few
geologists well-informed as regards dowsing. This gentleman
studied a number of successes of dowsers and concluded that
there were a few undoubtedly genuine cases of this nature.
He was not willing, however, to admit that the dowser pos-
sessed any supernormal faculty, ascribing his successes to a
marvellously developed instinct and eye for the country.
This criticism is not a geological one, but ample evidence
will be put forward to show that an eye for the country is
far from being the portmanteau theory Mr Holmes supposes
at to che:

Thus the interesting fact is revealed that there is no geolo-
gical case whatever to be set against the claims of the dowser.
In other words, there is no a priovt reason why, assuming that
his record of successes is as great as that of the geologist, a
dowser should not be employed for the finding of water as
readily as a geological expert. It must not be supposed that
a geologist is never able to correct the dowser. On the con-
trary, when the dowser has found the water, the geologist
is always ready to explain how it was done and how he him-


62 THE DIVINING-ROD


self could have done it. But apart from such wisdom after
the event, the geologist is in fact often able to show that
there was nothing supernormal in the dowser’s discovery of
water. He is able to show, for instance, that water would
have been found anywhere in the neighbourhood of the spot
indicated by the dowser, since the locality rests on a water-
bearing rock. For this reason a great many of the cases
collected by Sir William Barrett were submitted to a com-
petent geologist: G. A. J. Cole, T. V. Holmes, J. R. Kilroe,
G. H. Kinahan or E. Westlake. No case rejected by one of
these gentlemen on the grounds stated has been included in
this volume.

When a number of geologists were requested to state their
opinion of dowsing and to describe any case of failure which
they had come across, many general criticisms of the nature
described were received. Othersstated that they knew of many
failures, but failed to reply when asked for particulars. One
geologist, however, did give some details. Mr J. H. Blake,
F.G.S., replied that so far as he knew the dowser was never
successful and that in his opinion “‘ those who profess to find
water by means of the divining rod, and receive money for
their erroneous information, ought to be prosecuted for
fraud...” This temperate expression of opinion could be
ignored, but Mr. Blake went on to quote two specific instances
of failure on the part of a dowser. These cases were investi-
gated, with the following result.

Mr Blake states that “the owner of The Hollies, Burghfield,
near Reading, called upon me, and stated that her tenant—a
General, who believed in the divining rod—had employed a
well-known divining rod man, who went over the ground, and
told him water would be found at about 40 feet beneath the
surface. After making some calculations, I informed the
owner that no water would be met with until the basement
bed of the London clay was reached, which at the site of the
house would be about 183 feet beneath the surface. This
information was communicated to the General, who shortly
afterwards called upon me, when I explained to him how I
arrived at my conclusions, and that the divining rod business
was absolute nonsense! I advised a boring to be made, which
was completed a few days ago, and no water was met with
until the water-bearing basement bed of the London clay was
reached at a depth of 190 feet from the surface.” On inquiry
it was found that the General in question was General L. Buck,
of “ The Hollies,’ Mortimer, Berks. This gentleman replied
that the dowser employed was one of the young Mullins ;


DOWSING AND GEOLOGY 63


that the depth he had estimated was not 40 ft. but 70-80 ft. ;
that the depth estimated by Mr Blake was 186 feet ; and that
water was actually found at 210 feet. This therefore was un-
doubtedly a failure of the dowser, even though the geologist
had been out about 12% in his calculation, and, as General
Buck adds, “‘ No doubt I should have found water at that
depth at the place pointed out by the diviner, as I was aware
that if I went deep enough I should get water.”

The other case of failure mentioned by Mr Blake, he de-
scribed thus: “ The late W. J. Palmer, of the Biscuit Factory,
Reading, wanting a water supply at Kingwood House, Lam-
bourn, Berkshire, employed a divining rod man, who walked
over the ground and stated water would be found at a few
feet beneath the surface over a certain area which he pointed
out. I was afterwards consulted, and having inspected the
site, and made some calculations, informed Mr Palmer that
no water would be met with until the plane of saturation in the
chalk was reached, which at the locality mentioned would be
about 300 feet from the surface of the ground. Mr Palmer
then decided to have a well dug, six feet in diameter, which
was carried out by a man I know very well, and who supplied
me with all particulars; and no water was found until the plane
of saturation in the chalk was reached at about the depth I
stated. This well was sunk in 1892.” In another letter of
Mr Blake’s he adds that: ‘“‘ The Palmers are no longer be-
lievers in the divining rod, but strong believers in Geology
and Hydro-geology.”’

Owing to the death of Mr W. J. Palmer it was unfortun-
ately impossible to obtain direct confirmation or denial of
Mr Blake’s‘statements. It is interesting to note, however,
with regard to Mr Blake’s last-quoted observation, that the
following reply was received to an inquiry addressed to Mr
G. W. Palmer: ‘In reply to your letter, I write to say you
have been entirely misinformed; my experience with the
divining rod has, Iam glad to say, been eminently satisfactory.”
It will be seen that the facts upon which Mr Blake based
his position hardly justify so decided a parti-pris.


§ 6. GEOLOGICAL OPINION IN FAvouR OF DOWSING


It is not to be supposed that no geologist approves of dow-
sing. That is far from being the case. Sir Archibald Geikie,
the greatest geologist of modern times, wrote that while he
was not yet convigiced ofthe truth of dowsing, the evidence
was so Lee ae he was keeping his mind open. Mr


64 THE DIVINING-ROD


Whitaker, who succeeded Geikie as President of the Geological
Society, took up a similar attitude. J. R. Kilroe,G. H. Kina-
han (both of the Irish Geological Survey), Ernest Westlake
and the Rev M. H. Close (President of the Irish Geological
Society), all helped Sir William Barrett’s researches very
materially by criticising the cases collected by him; they
were all firm believers in dowsing. T. V. Holmes (President
of the Geological Society), while not accepting all the claims
of the dowser, granted the possibility of. finding water by
dowsing. Finally, and most interesting of all, Mr J. D.
Enys (President of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall)
was himself a dowser, and has described his experiences.
It will thus be seen that while most geologists are as opposed
to dowsing as they are ignorant of its facts, there are some,
and these among the most eminent, whose greater knowledge
of the phenomena has necessarily converted them to a belief
in them.


Pat To
“~ s gt
re ane SS Et Le C35 %


fat: s SS oy

fs KS

be Nigga!
i :


PART II
EXPERIMENTAL


CHAPTER IV
THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING


§1. THE HoRSHAM EXPERIMENT


IR HENRY HARBEN, the owner of Warnham Lodge,
an estate near Horsham in Sussex, found there was a
scarcity of water on his property. To remedy this
serious defect he called in the aid of an experienced local
well-sinker and, at his advice, had a well sunk some go feet
deep (well A on Fig. 15). From this well he got little water,
indeed, in his own words, it was “‘ absolutely useless.’? Accord-
ingly the services of another well-sinker were secured and
another well (well C) was sunk, in an adjoining field some
200 yards off. This was at the lowest part of the estate and
at 55 feet down a small spring was met running into the well ;
the quantity was so small that the supply was quite insufficient.
Having spent a considerable sum uselessly in sinking these
two wells, Sir Henry Harben was advised to employ the famous
dowser John Mullins, whose achievements at Waterford will
be recorded below. This he distinctly refused to do as he
utterly disbelieved in him. On the contrary he determined
to obtain from London the highest engineering and geological
advice. His position as one of the directors of the New River
Company and his ample means rendered this comparatively
easy. Acting under such advice another well (well B) was
sunk not far from well A, the first one. This well was of large
dimensions and sunk to nearly roo feet, with, however, little
result as regards water; tunnels were then driven in various
directions, and finally, after {1000 had been spent on this last
attempt—made under the best scientific advice and with the
most modern and approved engineering methods—the well
B was abandoned.
Now, as a last resort, Sir Henry agreed to call in Mullins,


5 65


WORKING MEN’S
COLLEGE
IBRARY


FOOTPATH


Se


BES A
ey,


Fic, 15. WARNHAM LODGE PARK
After the 25-in. Ordnance Survey Map: Sussex (lies)


66


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 67


who came shortly before his death. To prevent his gaining
any local information Sir Henry met him at the railway station
and drove him to Warnham Lodge, four miles distant. Mul-
lins said it was his first visit to that part of Sussex, and there
is no reason to think otherwise. Arrived at Warnham Lodge,
Mullins traversed the estate accompanied by the bailiff and the
head gardener, who superintended the work of the well sink-
ing. He said that there was no water where wells A and C
were situated, unless an immense depth were bored. As he
came near well C, into which it will be remembered a small
spring was running, Mullins was narrowly observed. Only
Sir Henry Harben and the well-sinker knew the exact direc-
tion of the streamlet, and no hint of any kind was given,
or could have been given, to Mullins. Suddenly the rod
turned :

“ There is a small stream here,” he said, “ flowing in this
direction.”’ The direction he indicated was absolutely cor-
rect.

Mullins then said that the depth of the well was between
50 feet and 60 feet, the actual depth being 55 feet. Dis-
satisfied with the small supply in this well, Mullins proposed
to try the higher ground. From this it was attempted to
dissuade him, as that part had been examined and rejected
by the scientific experts.

“Never mind,” said Mullins, “ I am going to try it.”

Towards the top of the hill the rod turned vigorously, and
the spot was marked ; 30 feet further on, absolutely on the
crest of the hill and the highest point on the estate, it turned


again.

“Call this No. 1,” said Mullins. Twenty feet further it
turned again. ‘Call this No. 2,’’ Mullins went on, ‘“‘ and the
first: No. 33’


One of the men then remarked that water doubtless existed
everywhere at a certain depth beneath the hill. Mullins
tried carefully and said: “No. Nos. I and 2 are independent
springs, there is no water between them, but you will find
plenty of water at either of these places at 12 feet or 15 feet
deep.”’

Mullins was then taken across the road to find a well for
the supply of some cottages on the estate, about 250 feet dis-
tant from the last spots; he found a place where he said
water would be obtained at a depth of about 4o feet. Here
a well was subsequently dug, and at 35 feet deep a good spring
was found. The water, however, was found to be chalybeate
and the well was accordingly filled up. Mullins had indicated


68 THE DIVINING-ROD


at the same time another place for a well, 75 feet distant from
No. 2 spot and some little distance from the cottages. Upon
sinking here, water was found in sufficient quantity for the
requirement of the cottages (well C).

The spots Mullins had marked as springs Nos. 1 and 2 on the
crest of the hill were then dry ; soon a compact sandstone was
encountered and after sinking at each spot to a depth of 12 feet
from the surface, a copious supply of excellent water was
suddenly met (wells E and F). At No. 3 a good spring was
also found at 19 feet down (well D). To the surprise of Sir
Henry, Mullins had proved right in each case.

Sir Henry Harben, fortunately for our inquiry, then decided
to go to the expense of testing Mullins’s assertions, contrary
to all geological probability, that no water would be found
between wells E and F. By means of a powerful pump he
had one of the wells pumped nearly dry; the water level in
the other was unaffected. However, to leave no room for
doubt, Sir Henry went to the further expense of tunnelling the
intermediate 20 feet from the bottom of well E to the bottom
of well F. No water was found between the two wells, the
intermediate formation being dry. Still further verification of
Mullins’s statement was obtained later when, in order to
run the water from the wells to the pumping house, which
is on lower ground (near well A) a trench was sunk to within a
foot of the bottom of the wells E and F. It was then carried
85 yards to the north of well E; 24 yards from E an offset,
8 yards long, connects the 2 inch water pipe, which was laid
in the trench, to the well D. These various trenches were all
dry to the bottom and no springs were intersected, except the
one supplying well D.1

Writing on the 8th of April 1897 Sir Henry adds another
illustration of Mullins’s ability. ‘“‘ He was walking with me
towards my Farm Buildings [marked Home Farm on the map]
trying his rod occasionally ; when he came to the spot marked
with an asterisk [see right-hand side of map], he stopped and
said that here was another spring. I told him there was a well
in the neighbourhood. Mullins then 'said, ‘I shall be able to
tell you whereabouts it is.” He walked to and fro with his
rod and said, ‘ The spring runs that way, and the well is prob-
ably behind that chimney ’ [well H]. This was perfectly cor-
rect ; a well with pump attached was in an outhouse behind
the Farm building. There was no possibility of Mullins seeing

1 The foregoing account was compiled from information supplied


by Sir Henry Harben and verified on the spot by Sir William Barrett,
Ernest Westlake, F.G.S., and T. V. Holmes, F.G.S.


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 69


the well or pump, as it was entirely out of sight and in a closed
building ; nor had he left my side to make any inquiries.
We had not yet verified his other predictions and this incident,
together with his discovery of the direction of the spring
running into the well C, and the depth of that well, impressed
me much.”

To make this case one of the most valuable in our records
it only remained to secure gological opinion in order to discover
whether the dowser’s success could be attributed to some
simple geological feature. For this purpose Mr E. Westlake,
F.G.S., a very able geologist and anthropologist, visited the
spot. He confirmed the facts put before him, even added a
few details, and his report was wholly to the effect that Mul-
lins’s achievement was of a supernormal nature. Further
application was then made to Mr T. V. Holmes, F.G.S., the
President of the Geologists’ Association for 1889-90, who had
read a paper on the dowsing-rod before the Anthropological
Institute in 1897.1 This gentleman went to a great deal of
trouble to investigate geologically a number of successes in
dowsing, the present case amongst them ; on this he reported
as follows.

“ The position of Warnham Lodge is not shown on the old
Ordnance map on which the geological surveyors worked, but
it evidently stands where the words ‘ Lit. Mays ’ appear on that
map, about a mile N.W. of the village of Warnham, which is
about 24 miles N.W. of Horsham. Horsham stands on the
Tunbridge Wells Sand of the Hastings Beds, while Warnham
and Warnham Lodge are both on the overlying formation
known as the Weald Clay, as the great bulk of it consists of clay.
Topley, in the ‘Geological Survey Memoir on the Weald
District ’ 2 (p. Ior), gives a section of a ‘ well at Warnham, near
Horsham.’


ft. in.
Bluish clay ; ‘ ‘ : haat 7ie5O
Red sandstone A : : : 9
Bluish clay ‘ ; ‘ : oh eno
Red sandstone 2 ‘ : : 8
Blue clay . ‘ : ; SPER HG,
Hardened blue clay 5 ; ; ciao
Blue clay . : ; é ee ht)
Water-bearing bed : : : PPh fk aS)


2“ On the Evidence for the Efficacy of the Diviner and his Rod
in the Search for Water,” Journal of the (Royal) Anthropological Insti-
tute (1897), Xxvil. 233-259.

2 [William Topley, The Geology of the Weald (1875)].


70 THE DIVINING-ROD


fim

Blue clay . ; : é Pgs Ae

Hard sandy clay , 3 0
Blue clay, with fragments of other [for-

mation (?)] 29"
Red clay, with fragments 0 of red sand-

stone (?). ; fone ae

T5276


Topley notes (p. 396) that of 97 towns and villages on the
Hastings Beds (which consist of alternations: of sands and
clays, neither decidedly predominating as regards the area they
cover), 79 are on sandy sites. To obtain a water supply by
means of shallow wells and pumps has been the chief cause
of this selection, clay yielding no water. In the Weald Clay
district, the most important of the subordinate beds of stone
is the Horsham Stone, on which the village of Warnham and
Warnham Court stand. The presence of one of these beds of
stone, where it attains a thickness of a few feet, will be marked
by the existence of a ridge, which will make higher ground than
that where the surface beds are almost wholly clay. As water
supply in such a district depends so largely on the presence
of these beds of stone, the dowser naturally has a keen eye
for the elevated ground, and will go there, to the horror of his
backers at first, and to the enormous increase of their wonder
at his powers, when a well is successfully sunk at the top of a
hill, after failures down below.

There are signs of the presence of a bed of stone on the
high ground where Warnham Lodge and farm buildings
stand, and Topley mentions (p. 104) a bed of sand and sand-
stone ranging by Hurst Hill, Gearing’s, Little May’s, Charman’s,
and other spots to Rudgwick, which is evidently the stone in
question. Whether in Yorkshire, Sussex, or anywhere else,
where beds of stone alternate with others of clay or shale, the
high ground is composed of the beds of stone, and the lower
of the shales, and the former are waterbearing, the latter not.

I do not wonder that the non-dowsing advisers ignored the
surface stone bed, and thought of (I suppose) going down to
the Horsham Stone, or even the Tunbridge Wells Sand; or,
perhaps, of tapping a sufficient number of waterbearing
beds, which individually insignificant might collectively prove
sufficient, and be free from possible dangers arising from sur-
face pollution—dangers by no means uncommon in similar
cases. The dowser’s triumph is to find water, and to find it as


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 41


near the surface as possible ; he has no further responsibility.
But the geologist who should recommend water from a source
easily polluted, and which gave rise to disease in persons using
it, would be deemed to have shown a most culpable reckless-
ness—at the very least.

However, the dowser in this case, after ‘ blasting and sink-
ing’ in hard limestone for, rather, sandstone], obtained a
supply of water at a depth of 12 feet, at spots known as E and
F, and at 19 feet at D (p. 119), all these wells being only a few
yards apart. The dowser, however, insisted that no water
would be found between wells E and F, as ‘ both were inde-
pendent springs.’ One of the wells was pumped nearly dry,
and the water-level in the other was unaffected. But this
merely showed that there were no lines of bedding or jointing
giving an easy passage to the water between the two wells.
And the water from the stone for some distance around having
been collected into the two wells, the space between them was
likely to be a spot comparatively free from water. Of course,
ultimately, a well midway between E and F would have become
as full of water as they were. But the days necessary for this
to take place, in the absence of a good system of jointing, were
not allowed, but a tunnel was at once made connecting the wells
E and F, and ensuring a better supply than could otherwise be
obtained.

This stone was evidently an extremely hard and compact
rock, very much more so than the chalk, but the best illus-
tration I can think of to show the difference between the
restricted circulation of water in jointed rocks, and its free
percolation in gravel and sand is from the chalk.

In the Essex Naturalist, Vol. I., p. 254 (1887) there is a
brief account of some ‘ chalk wells’ in Buckinghamshire. These
chalk wells were situated at a tile works, and consisted of
some five or six shafts, about 70 ft. deep, which after piercing
through the surface beds, entered the chalk to a depth of about
6 ft., and then widened out into bell-shaped chambers. The
object of their makers was to obtain chalk for lime from the
ground beneath the limited area of the tile works. The chalk
being locally full of water almost to the top, these chambers -
were hollowed out as near the top of the chalk as possible.
After a considerable amount of chalk had been removed from
one of these chambers, it would become unpleasantly wet,
and would ultimately be abandoned and another shaft sunk,
and so on. The important point is that these chambers
became unpleasantly wet only after some time had elapsed,
though for their size, as compared with that of a mere well,


72 THE DIVINING-ROD


they must have been comparatively far more likely to be
speedily flooded. I have no doubt that the Warnham well
between E and F would eventually have had water in it, had
sufficient time been allowed, just as in the case of the chalk
chambers at the tile works. That Mullins fixed upon the spot
midway between two wells as a dry place, seems to me simply
caused by his experience of the behaviour of water in jointed
rocks, not as showing the veracity of his sensations.”

This criticism is less helpful than that sometimes put for-
ward by geologists. It should be noted, in the first place,
that the “ explanation ’’ suggested by Mr Holmes presupposes
that Mullins had not only local knowledge, but also a geological
knowledge of the locality. Thisisin the highest degree improb-
able, since so far as local persons knew (and, incidentally,
according to his own statement) he had never been in that
neighbourhood. Mullins, moreover, was well known to have
never troubled himself in the least about gaining the advantage
to be derived from even an elementary acquaintance with
geological facts. However, granting even this point, as not
being positively incontrovertible, there remains the fact that
at Warnham Park there was absolutely nothing in the surface
of the ground to indicate which was stone and which was
Weald clay. The hill and its slopes, as well as the rest of the
ground, were covered with vegetation, under which was a
thick layer of alluvial soil. Moreover the water found, though
from a shallow well, is an excellent, abundant and perennial
supply. If its discovery was so very obvious as Mr Holmes
pretends, why did not the experienced local well-sinkers and the
eminent authorities who were consulted—aided as they were
by geological maps and geological advice—indicate the fact to
Sir Henry Harben and save him the fruitless expenditure of
over {1000 ?

In a later communication Mr Holmes admits this point,
writing: ‘“‘ As you say, there is no evidence of stone on the
surface, but that would not matter to the dowser. He would
see, as I saw, that there was a ridge capped by stone of some
sort there, 7.¢., by something harder than clay, which would
be enough for his purpose. And the information which he
would inevitably gather from Mr Harben [as he then was]
and others would suffice without asking many questions.”’

Now, it is surely an affectation for an eminent geologist
to say that an illiterate dowser would be able to discern any
kind of geological trace as well as he. Moreover, how could
Mullins know that the ridge was ‘‘ capped by stone of some
sort,’’ when Mr Holmes himself states that ‘there was no


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 73


evidence of stone on the surface”’? As for the other point :
Sir Henry and the men who followed Mullins round! cate-
gorically deny that they gave any hints of any kind.

To return to the matter with which Mr Holmes makes most
play, the absence of water between wells E and F. It need
only be said that Mr Holmes wrote his report before he knew
of the various trenches dug from point to point as described
above; the fact that these trenches were dug completely
answers his objections—though this is in any case only a
subsidiary point. .

Here, then, we have a case in which, after costly failures
on the part of orthodox authorities, the dowser, without a
single error, indicated several spots at which water was to
be found; indicated, moreover, places in which no water
would be found; all his assertions being elaborately tested
and triumphantly vindicated.?


§ 2. THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT


This case is one of the strongest we possess. Attention was
first drawn to it in 1891 by a letter from Mr W. Christie-Miller,
the proprietor of Messrs Richardson’s bacon-curing works at
’ Waterford in Ireland, the scene of the events to berelated. The
details provided were, however, somewhat scanty and the
remarkable aspects of the matter escaped attention. Some
time later Mr J. R. Kilroe, of the Geological Survey of Ireland,
whose report on the Carrigoona experiment will be quoted
in the next section, came across a case the details of which
were found on examination to correspond with the incidents
related by Mr Christie-Miller, who was then found to be the
proprietor of Messrs Richardson’s factory. Interest was now
aroused and it was decided to investigate the matter.

It is common ground that in all investigations depending
on evidence human testimony has been found to be a very
unreliable quantity. We are fortunate therefore in possessing
in this case not only the accounts given by the principals, and
also independent reports based on answers to inquiries, but
contemporary documents. The report of Mr Kilroe has been
already mentioned ; it is as follows and dated the 23rd of


1 It is an important point to be noted that nearly always the dowser
takes the lead and is followed by the assistants, thus obviating the
possibility of their giving any indications.

2 In a letter dated the 30th of January 1905, Sir Henry Harben
states that since the above experiments he had occasion to employ
one of John Mullins’s sons, who was successful in finding water both
for Sir Henry and at Sachel Court, nine miles from Horsham.


74, THE DIVINING-ROD


January 1897: ‘In or about the year 1888, Messrs Richard-
son, bacon curers, of Waterford, required a considerable
water supply and got professional advice, based upon geological
grounds, as to where to obtain it by sinking. The amount
procured on sinking proved entirely insufficient. This was
surface water, and when the rock was reached it proved
quite dry, giving a worse rather than a better prospect as the
sinking progressed. The strata at the place are nearly vertical
and the bedding much folded.

An English ‘ diviner’ was engaged, and to hinder collu-
sion, the chief clerk of the firm met him at the boat on
arrival at Waterford; who also brought him to the works.
There the diviner was accompanied by the head of the firm
and his staff of clerks, as he went around the premises. He
carried in his two hands a forked hazel twig, holding a branch
of the fork in each hand, the stem extending from him in front
horizontally. He almost immediately came to a spot over
which the rod bent slightly and quite spontaneously, as well
as could be observed. This spot was marked and the search
continued. Similar indications appeared at two or three other
places. At one, the effect was so manifest that the rod twisted
completely round and bvoke /—also of its own accord. (The
man had several of these rods with him.) The firm sank at
one of the places indicated and obtained a copious supply of
water. -

Mr Budd, a local amateur geologist, ascertained the above
particulars and communicated all to Mr Clark, of the Irish
Survey, who gave them to me.”

This account being only at third-hand it was natural to sup-
pose that at the least many details must have disappeared on
the way. Application was accordingly made direct to Messrs
Richardson, who replied very courteously and, after some
preliminary correspondence, sent the following memorandum on
the 2nd of February 1897: ‘‘ In the year 1887, we received an
estimate for boring a 24-inch artesian bore from John Hender-
derson and Son, Glasgow. He started to bore on the 18th May,
1887, with jumper steel drills. The first 15 feet was clay,
the following 17 feet was slaty sandstone, after which the
rock became harder with the result that the rate of boring
slowed, varying from 2 to 5 feet perday. When going through
extremely hard rock, they bored (on Monday, the 18th June,
1887) only 4inches. We continued boring until we had reached
a depth of 292 feet, after which we widened the bore for roo
feet to allow a pump to be lowered, but the yield was not
sufficient to justify our going deeper, so relinquished this bore.


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 75


We next started to bore, in 1888, a 7-inch bore hole at the
bottom of a well 62 feet deep. This bore was executed by the
Diamond Rock Boring Co., of London, and was bored by a
revolving tube 7 inches in diameter having black diamonds
set in a nose piece fastened to bottom of tube. We bored 612
feet with this size tube and then reduced to 6 inches and with
the 6-inch tube bored 337 feet 7 inches, making a total depth
bored of 949 feet 7 inches from the bottom of well, and from
the ground level of 1,011 feet 7 inches. We had, during the
process of boring, tested at intervals for yield of water but
with no satisfactory result. We again tested at 1,011 feet 7
inches, and again failure, so relinquished this bore.

We then asked Mr Kinahan to come down—which he did,
and suggested a spot to bore. This bore we started with a
4-inch tube diamond drill, and bored 40 feet through yellow
sandstone when we came on blue slate for 8 inches; we then
stopped and wired Mr Kinahan what we ought to do. In the
interval we tested for water ;—result, 230 gallons per hour,
not one-tenth part of what we required. Mr Kinahan advised
going on again. Went on 11 feet more, tested again, with
the yield 180 gallons per hour, a loss of 50 gallons; wired Mr
Kinahan again ;—reply, give up boring—which we did ;—
another failure.

We then sent for John Mullins, the water diviner. He
suggested that we put down a bore on a marked out line,
which we did, with the result that we have an ample supply.
See below (Fig. 16) for rough plan of wells.”

These particulars are obviously of great interest and eviden-
tial value and it therefore became important to secure con-
cordant testimony and geological opinion. This was fortun-
ately available ; the gentleman referred to in Messrs Richard-
son’s memorandum was Mr G. H. Kinahan, at that time senior
geologist to the Irish Geological Survey.1_ Now, the Mr Clark
mentioned in Mr Kilroe’s report, at the same time as he passed
on his information to Mr Kilroe, mentioned the fact that he
was doing so to Mr Kinahan. This gentleman accordingly
wrote direct to Sir William Barrett while Messrs Richardson’s
reply was being awaited. Mr Kinahan, it appears, had made
contemporary notes and preserved the correspondence relating
to the case, which is of the greatest importance. His letter,
of the 25th of January 1897, is as follows: “I am glad to
learn through Mr Clark that you are taking up the Divining


1 Author of A Handy-Book of Rock Names (1873); Manual of the
Geology of Iveland (1878) ; Valleys and theiy Relation to Fissures, Fvac-
tuves and Faulis (1875); etc.


76 THE DIVINING-ROD


Rod question. I, therefore, through him, send you a rather
interesting case. These letters [which follow] I give solely
up to you, and you are at liberty to use them as you like.
I should, however, let you know how I was connected with
them. A bacon firm in Waterford (Messrs Denny and Co.)
were looking for water, and their trials were unsatisfactory.
My friend, the late Mr James Budd, advised them to apply
to me. This they did, and as their case was a simple one,
I easily put them right. Then another firm, Messrs Richard-
son’s, was in a similar predicament ;—they had a water supply,
but not sufficient. They employed a borer who bored, I


Fic. 16. THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT: PLAN


No. 1. First Bore Hole, sunk to a depth of 292 feet: a failure.

No. 2. Second Bore Hole, sunk to a depth of 949 feet 7 inches from bottom of a well
63 feet deep; from ground level 1r,orr feet 7 inches: another failure.

No. 3. Bore Hole suggested by Mr Kinahan: third failure.

No. 4. Bore Hole suggested by John Mullins, around which bore hole was sunk a
eae dul, 82 feet deep. Yield from 3,000 to 5,000 gallons per hour depending
on rainfall.


Line from No. 4 shows course of spring as suggested by Mullins, anywhere along
which line, he said, water would be found. The line runs N.N.E.


think, 1,000 feet, without finding water. They were then
advised by Budd to employ me ; when I visited their premises
I found it was probably crossed by three water lines, one south,
another at their well, and the third to the northward—as the
strata was hard, impervious ordovician shale. It was evident
that unless the bore hole was exactly on one of the water lines
a bore was useless. I, therefore, advised sinking and driving.


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 77


While they were considering my report, young Richardson
heard of the water-man, and what happened afterwards you
will know from the letters.”

Enclosed was, first, a letter to him from Mr Richardson of
the 24th October 1889: “In reply to your favour, re John
Mullins, Colerne, Chippenham, Wiltshire, I will give you a short
account of his doings here. The morning he came I had him
met at the Milford steamer, in order to prevent his having
communication with any one in Waterford, and making inquiries
about our premises. I myself went with him when he began
his searches for water. He had in his hands a hazel fork of
this shape — >>> holding an end between his fingers of
each hand. He then walked about until the hazel fork twisted
suddenly in his hands. He did this over and over again to
test it, and marked several places for us to bore where he
said he was certain we should find water, and gave the depths.
One place in particular he pointed out to us and advised our
boring, saying we should find about 1,500 gallons per hour
at a depth of 80 to go feet. We procured the boring people,
and the result of it was we obtained water at the depth of 79
feet from the surface. We tested to 1,672 gallons per hour,
but we are sure there is more, only our pump could not test
a greater supply. He [told us he] has six sons, and not one
of them has this power.

It is a most curious thing, but must be genuine without
doubt. I know several people in the north who had Mullins
there, and found water where pointed out by him. It was
from them IJ heard of Mullins in the first instance.

The rod often breaks with the force it turns in his hands.
The greater the movement the more water is there, and by this
he tells the depth... .

He holds the twig straight out in front of him, with the
ends passing between his finger and thumb and coming out
between his second and third fingers ; backs of hands down-
wards.”

The next letter is from Mr Budd, addressed to Mr Kinahan,
and is interesting on account of its having been written whilst
the boring experiments were in progress; it is dated from
Tivoli, Tramore, Waterford, on the 3rd of September 1889:
‘Your being interested in Messrs Richardson’s case here will
be my apology for my inflicting on you the following authentic
account of the late proceedings there.

Well, they pierced where you pointed out to a depth of about
40 feet, got a little water, and then came on blue metamorphic
rock. Then the boring machine was, I believe, out of order,


78 THE DIVINING-ROD


and while waiting for some new parts from London the borers
got some jobs in Clonmel ; this delayed work here. Meantime
young Mr R. heard in the North of a man named Mullins,
I think from Chippenham, who had been most successful in
finding water with his hazel twigs. He is one of a few who
possesses this ‘faculty’. He cannot communicate it, for none
of his own sons possess it. They sent for him, and to prevent
any collusion or prefatory inquiries, one of their clerks met
him at the Milford boat, and walked up with him to the con-
cern. He carried with him about a dozen fresh forked twigs
as thick as a quill, each side of the fork 12 or 15 inches long.

He traversed the whole of the premises, marking out four
places where water might be got. The premises are about
700 feet long [see Fig. 17].

No. 1 he said was the best place. No. 2 was not 20 feet
from the place that you marked out (marked G.H.K.)


cnx. O


JM2)O


SCALE OF YARDS


Fic. 17. THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT: SECOND PLAN


Mullins’s two wells, Mr Kinahan’s well and X, the abortive 1,000 feet bore hole


He held the twigs near their ends, between his second and
third fingers, as if you were going to write, the point of the
fork pointing downwards. At No. 1 the point lifted itself up
till it turned over backward and twisted itself till it broke!
‘Water here not more than 80 feet deep,’ said he. He used
another and another twig. The clerks then held them with
him, and held his hands, always the same effect. I saw to-day
two of the broken twisted twigs.

Now for the result [at J.M.(1), which corresponds to No. 4
in Messrs Richardson’s drawing].

The diamond borers pierced through 41 feet of boulder clay,
then through 39 feet of our ordinary clay slate. Then on the
and [yesterday,] touched our old friend, the blue metamorphic
rock, and stopped, sounded, and found 36 feet of water in their
four-inch tube. They were told to pump, a steam one, which
they did all night, 3 o’clock on 2nd to 9 o’clock on 3rd—18


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 79


hours—without any diminution of the supply, their estimate
being 800 to goo gallons per hour.

Arrangements were then made while I was there to pump
into a cistern containing 270 gallons. After repeated trials
the average was found to be 1,560 gallons per hour without
the slightest sign of abatement. Today it is reported to me
to be 2,000 gallons per hour. Good water, temperature 52°,
an important item to Messrs Richardson’s.

I would like to know what you think of this thing. To me
it is wholly unaccountable. All I know is, they are singing
* Jubilate’ at Richardson’s. What would Professor Huxley
say?”

Mr Budd gives additional particulars in the next letter, also
‘ addressed to Mr Kinahan and dated the 11th of September
1889: “I have been not only considering the bearings of the
case, and it is an extraordinary one, but I have been making
myself up on all the facts of it.

Mullins was never in the South of Ireland before, and cer-
tainly had no idea of Messrs Richardson’s locality. As to
reading faces: they had no expectation of success; indeed,
the failure of your boring made them give up all hope, and one
of their principal persons utterly scoffed at the idea of the
twigs ; their faces, they tell me, must have expressed only
incredulity and curiosity. I can quite believe that some ner-
vous or muscular force, voluntary or involuntary, affected the
twigs, for certainly they could not move of themselves. But
was this force derived from some innate faculty ? Mullins
made no pretence of magic ; there was nothing about him of
‘See now vot you vill see.’ Quite in a business-like way he
walked through the premises as each door was opened for him,
most of the clerks following him, and stopping every now and
then. Up to the present there has been no effect on other
wells with them or elsewhere. As to his knowledge, he did
not know whether there was any well in the concern, but he
had the general idea, which every one in Waterford has, that
they had bored and wéterly fatled.

The clerk who accompanied him from the steamer, and whom
I cross-examined to-day, is a reliable man. He was warned
to answer no questions as to wells, water, or strata. Mullins
did not ask him a single question.

When M. was asked before he left about his successes else-
where, he said he had often gone to places where there was
no water, but when he had indicated water in any place, as
far as he knew, it had always been found, but he made no
boast of this, said only he could not account for it.


80 THE DIVINING-ROD


As to 80 feet, o one said this to him, nor did any one know
the depth of the strata there. Your boring was only 41 feet
deep. The well through which the 1,000 feet was bored was
originally 60 feet deep, and it was only today that I learned
for the first time, with some difficulty, that the steam pump
wellis 72 feet deep. This I learned from the clerk who manages
the machinery ; none of the others knew it, nor had ever asked.

As to the sailors 1 ;—as I said before, every one [here] knew
of their boring, and failing, but no one outside the office but
myself knows the particulars. They keep their business to
themselves. I believe it was quite impossible that any sailor
could know anything about their [Messrs Richardson’s] con-
cern, or indeed would care to know.

Well, he [Mullins] was written to, to come over and try his
hand, as they were very anxious to get water.

He came, drove up to the concern, and they first brought
him to the field you indicated. He walked about and said
there was water in a spot about 20 feet east of yours. ‘ Oh,’
said they, ‘we tried near this and failed.’ ‘No matter,’
said he, ‘ therezs waterhere.’ They then brought him through
each of their yards and stores. In most of them he paused,
and said, ‘ There is xo water here,’ but in two of them he said,
‘There 7s water here,’ and they marked them in red.

The last place they came to, to their surprise, he said, ‘ This
is by far the best place I hdve come to. Markit No.1. Now
mark the first place I went to No. 2, the others 3 and 4. I
am sure you will get at least half the quantity you require at
Noses

He has the look of an honest John Bull master mason, has
picked up a good deal of information going about, and is of
quiet manner, but answers any question he is asked promptly
and in the most straightforward manner. He said he could
not tell the depth at No. 1, but probably it would be within
80 feet. Their since finding it, at exactly 80 feet, was a mere [!]
coincidence. He left by the boat that evening. He asked
no questions as he walked about, nor did they volunteer any
information.”

Having thus secured these different accounts, making the
accuracy of the facts related unquestionable, it only remained
to obtain a few further details. Messrs Richardson were
again approached and kindly sent the following additional
particulars, writing from Waterford on the 22nd of February

[In reply to inquiry Messrs Richardson state that this probably


refers to the sailors on board the steamer in which Mullins crossed over
from England to Waterford].


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 81


1897: ‘The Mullins line runs N.N.E. and almost in the
_ direction of the bedding of the rocks.

This was merely [!] a coincidence as Mullins had no local
knowledge whatsoever of the locality, it being his first visit
to this part of the country, and we gave him no knowledge
in any way, as to position of wells, or that we had bored. In
ee we kept him in entire ignorance, until he had located his
ine.

The line as marked on our map, and position of well, is the
correct position, and all the borings and old wells are to the
east of Mullins’s line except the final well, which of course is
on the line.

Mullins’s line was not theoretically straight, but was com-
paratively so. Mullins started with his twig (a light hazel
fork) at the top of Hodges field, and worked down through the
concern, and when finished the marking and pegs were almost
a straight line running N.N.E.

No. r Bore Hole,—sunk to a depth of 292 feet, cost £267
13s. 4d.; widening same down to a depth of 100 feet, cost
extra £100, total £367 13s. 4d. [These numbers refer to Fig.
16.]

No. 2 Bore Hole,—sunk to a depth of 949 feet 7 inches from
bottom of well, cost {916 16s. 6d.

No. 3 Bore Hole,—cost about £40, with pumping tests and
delay, awaiting Mr Kinahan’s advice.

The cost of a bore hole depends on the size of the bore, and
depth, as the contractors will not bore a 100-foot bore at the
same rate as the first 100 feet of a 5 or 600 foot bore. Carriage
of engine and gear, and pumping test have to be paid for, and
add also to the comparative cost of the shorter bore hole.

The No. 4 Bore Hole—bored on Mullins’s line—was composed
as follows :

First 38 feet clay, loose shingle 3 feet, yellow shaley sand-
stone 39 feet, last few feet slate and yellow shaley sandstone.

Mullins works his rod with the back of hands down, and
holds each rod of fork between the second and third finger of
each hand with the apex of the fork pointing to the ground,
and each rod of fork passing over the second and first finger,
and under the thumb, and held firm by thumb.

When the rod passes over any flowing water, the apex rises
from the downward position, to a position with the apex of
the fork in an almost vertical position and pointing upwards


1 (The ground iscovered with buildings and sheds, and Mullins had
to go in and out of these in the course of tracing out the water line].


6


82 THE DIVINING-ROD


with a very perceptible jerk, although the diviner’s hands are
apparently inactive and without any movement whatever.”

From this it will be seen that the cost of the unsuccessful
borings and well sinking prior to Mullins’s visit was some
£1,324, an expensive experiment. One further difficulty
remained which was settled by a note from Mr Richardson
of the 11th of March 1897, in which he states that the surface
of the well is 95 feet above low water level in the adjoining
tidal river, while the bottom is 13 to 14 feet above it. Thus,
as the level of the water in the well when not being pumped was
44 feet from the surface, it will be seen that the water level
in Mullins’s well is some 50 feet above the low water level
of the river ; the well is therefore not supplied by percolation
from the river.

The whole of this evidence was then submitted to Mr J.
R. Kilroe and to Mr G. H. Kinahan. The former made a
full report, which follows :


“H.M. Geological Survey of Ireland, Dublin.


Notes on the Borings at Waterford.


The rocks of the neighbourhood are of Silurian age (Ordo-
vician), and are in great part concealed by glacial drift.
The drift area is indicated by stippling on the accompanying
map (Fig. 18); the portions enclosed by chain (boundary)
lines are those where the rock is devoid of drift, and appears
at or comes very near the surface.

The strata consist of slates and grits in alternating bands ;
the former are comparatively impervious to water while the
latter are more or less porous, and some may be sufficiently
so to constitute reservoirs for underground water.

The beds of rock are set at a uniformly high angle—about
60° to the horizontal near Waterford,—technically called the
dip: they are also much folded and contorted and dislocated
by faults, as may well be observed along the sea coast not far
distant, though no faulting, and but little contortion of the
strata, seems to have been noticed at, ornear, Waterford city.

The strata at Waterford, moreover, are cleaved in a direction
which accords with that of the stratification ; but stratification
and faulting, in general, affect the location of underground
waters, rather than cleavage, so that the latter is not of apparent
import in our case.

The futility of the first three attempts to find water proves
the absence from the rocks pierced of water-bearing strata, in
other words, of porous sandstone or grit bands of any import-


Hatching: Beds of rock when seen at surface. rr l@
Arrows: Direction of dip. 5

Figures: Height of surface above datum, low water,
Stippling: Drift Area.


83


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


84 THE DIVINING-ROD


ance. A particular case in which a thick sandstone band
might be supposed to exist, concealed, notwithstanding the
unsuccessful sampling afforded by the first experiences, is
discussed below; about this, however, one cannot speak
confidently without a more intimate knowledge of the ground.

The lack of water in those borings does not seem to me to
be accounted for by concealed faults or breaks in the strata ;
for if the rocks were thereby sufficiently shattered to admit
of leakage, and descent of the water from the ground tried, it
would not descend lower than the level of the Suir, and the
same conditions would with equal facility and greater proba-
bility admit of percolation from the river to the point reached
by the borings.

The water in Mullins’s well, however, stands at 44 feet from


Fic. 19. THE WATERFORD EXPERIMENT


DIAGRAMMATIC SECTION along a vertical plane supposed to cut through the strata
at Waterford, at right angles to Mullins’s water line. The wells are numbered
as in Fig. 16.


the surface, and is dependent on the rainfall. It cannot
therefore be due to percolation from the river; and must
collect beneath the more or less porous drift which covers the
rock at Richardson’s works (see section [Fig. 19]).

Assuming that water would be found at the other points
indicated by Mullins, equally with that at which the successful
boring was put down, we should have a wet zone stretching
N.N.E.-ward, in which a copious supply would be, in fact
was, tapped at some 80 feet below the surface.

This zone might be coincident with a line of fault in which
water falling upon the sloping surface northwestward would
collect ; and such a supposition is favoured by the circumstance
that it is not coincident with the direction taken by the outcrop
of the bedding.

On the other hand, a break of sufficient dimensions to supply


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 85


over 1,500 gallons of water per hour would in all probability
extend to and beyond the river, and admit of very great if not
entire leakage of the water entering it, to a much lower level
than 44 feet from the surface at all events; and no fault is
represented here, on the published maps of the Geological
Survey.

An alternative supposition is that of a porous stratum con-
cealed beneath the drift, in the slight hollow at Richardson’s
premises. The only manner in which such a stratum could
occur, consistently with the direction and amount of dip
recorded for the beds in the vicinity, is such as that represented
in the above section, drawn at right angles to Mullins’s wet zone,
and showing the relative distances from the latter of Kinahan’s
boring B, the 1,000 feet boring C, and the first one D. In
this section the porous stratum and the thin grit beds are repre-
sented by dots, Mullins’s boring by A, and the glacial drift by
larger dots immediately beneath the surface line.

The stratum mentioned cannot be regarded as continuous
(see line X—Y) according to the dzp of the beds, as seen at
the surface, for in this case it would have been tapped by the
1,000-feet boring. It therefore should assume a synclinal curve,
and form a trough-shaped reservoir receiving the rainfall
between the point marked gg, Gallows Hill (241A) and the
water-shed south-westward. Such folding of the strata is
common in Silurian rocks throughout the country.”

The conclusion of Mr Kinahan is this: ‘‘ The Waterford
rocks are Ordovician with protrudes or intrudes of basic igneous
rocks. From the wells above and below the premises there
seemed to be two water lines crossing it, both of which our
friend Mullins found by instinct, due either to his being able
to smell water, or that water has such an influence on his
nervous system that he can tell the distance and quantity when
he is near it ; unless he was a Sherlock Holmes who could draw
conclusions from trifles that no one else could detect.’ In
another communication Mr Kinahan put these facts more
graphically : “ As far as actual results went I failed, and the
diviner ‘wiped my eye.’ ’”’}


1 It ought perhaps to be added that in 1915 a gentleman named
Edwin Fayle, of Kylemore, Orwell Park, Rathgar, Co. Dublin, wrote
to the Society for Psychical Research to say that at the time of the
incidents related he was living in the neighbourhood and heard a very
different story ; he implied clearly that the whole thing had been a
failure. After correspondence it was discovered that he knew nothing
of the facts, and that the case he had in mind was one at Clonmel ;
about this case, in which Mullins was alleged to have failed, no details
could be obtained, but see p. 132, which may refer to the same incidents.


86 THE DIVINING-ROD


To sum up, we have here a case in which, under unexcep-
tionable conditions, a dowser succeeded in locating the exact
spot at which a water supply could be obtained in a rocky
formation ; he also succeeded in precisely stating the depth
at which a sufficient supply would be found; and this was
done after two independent attempts by engineers, and an
attempt by the best geologist in the country, had uniformly
and completely failed.


§ 3. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT


After prolonged study of all the available evidence on behalf
of dowsing it became apparent that a thorough and personally
supervised experiment was necessary. Owing to the expense
involved and other considerations such a test is always a very
difficult one. It was nevertheless determined that it should
take place.

Certain precautions are necessary in such an experiment
if any satisfactory evidence is to be obtained. The place
chosen must be one entirely unfamiliar to the dowser, so that
no previously acquired information may help him. The per-
sons who accompany the dowser should be ignorant of the
geology of the district in order that they should be unable
even subconsciously to convey their knowledge to him. The
dowser must not know beforehand where the experiment is
to be conducted, so that he should not have any opportunity
to make inquiries or to study geological maps. These conditions
fulfilled, the dowser must be taken to the selected spot imme-
diately on his arrival in the neighbourhood to avoid the
possibility of his questioning the local inhabitants. So much
for the dowser, but an equally important consideration is
the geological nature of the selected site: this must not be
uniformly water-bearing or waterless, the character of which
might be discerned at a glance, and where he could not go
wrong anywhere in predicting water or no water.

For the purpose of the experiment about to be undertaken,
these conditions were all successfully met, the place selected
—a mountainous region in the Co. Wicklow, Ireland, four
miles from Bray—admirably fulfilling the geological conditions
required, and a region it is believed no dowser had ever visited.
The services of the well-known dowser, William Stone, were
secured. On his arrival he had no idea where the experi-
ment was to be made, nor was he told but taken straight-
way to the place.

The whole proceedings were personally directed and super-


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 87


intended by Sir William Barrett, who was then Professor of
Experimental Physics at the Royal College of Science, Dublin.
He had taken a farmhouse in the neighbourhood and was thus
enabled to be present throughout the proceedings. His friend,
Mr C. St G. Lefroy, a geologist and an independent careful
observer, took notes, and the facts were subsequently verified
by other competent geologists. We may now proceed in Sir
William’s words :

It was Easter week, 1899, and the day was fine. Mr Stone
told me he had never been in Co. Wicklow before, and I have
no doubt that is quite true. Leaving our car in the Rocky
Valley, we ascended the mountain road leading round a hill
called Carrigoona, on the lower slopes of which there are
patches of cultivated ground, but the quartzite rock of which
the hill is composed juts out here and there, though the hillside
is generally covered with two or three feet of alluvial soil,
on which gorse and heather and bracken grow, clothing the
mountain with a garment of beauty. The panorama from the
mountain-side is also one of unsurpassed beauty, and stirred
the emotions of my geological friends who afterwards visited
the spot with me.

For the accompanying geological map of the district I am
indebted to the kindness of H.M. Geological Survey. The field
we first went to is on the eastern side of Carrigoona and is
marked Eonthemap. The upper part of the map is due north.
Having secured the necessary permission, I took Mr Stone
_ first to the field, E, Fig. 20, rather over an acre in extent,
and asked him to begin operations. He pulled out a slender
forked twig from his pocket, and immediately walked round
the field ; at one spot the twig forcibly revolved and he said
we should find plenty of water there, less than 15 ft. deep. The
spot was marked, and after traversing the field two or three
times he asserted that water was flowing from north to south
along a line or region he traced out, but that at the side of
‘ the field very little, if any, water would be found.! “ Bore
anywhere along this line,” he said (see dotted line in Fig. 20),
“and you will get plenty of water, but very little or none over
there,” 7.¢., on the east side of the field. The places were
marked and subsequently fixed by measurement, so that the
marks could be removed. All round the field was a rough
stone wall, overtopped to a height of 8 ft. or g ft. by a thick
gorse hedge, so that it was impossible to see a plateau of rock
that flanked the east and west sides of the field beyond the

1 The three dots on the field E, Fig. 20, indicate these places, and
where the bore holes were subsequently made.


88 THE DIVINING-ROD


boundary wall; I mention this for a reason that will appear
presently. The field was on the mountain side, it sloped
downwards from north to south, was uniformly covered with
grass, and had no trace of water anywhere on the surface.
From this field we crossed the mountain and went to an en-
closed piece of the commons on the western side of Carrigoona,
marked W on the map, Fig 20. Here, again, I asked Mr
Stone to select two test places. He walked round the field,


way ; -
go. ROCKY VALLEY % Pe aie { >’
xx LERMAN ASS S betes mS4


weer F

~xGREATXASUGARLOAF 22% * «*
Sethe ASS IN ee a a a a > Peed “, «Kx <
~"™e MOUNTAIN **%"% * Xx

Fic. 20. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: GEOLOGICAL MAP


Scale: Six inches to the mile.
Xxx indicate quartzite.


but there was no motion of his forked twig. It so happened
a friend had purchased this field in order to erect a summer
cottage, and particularly wanted to find a spring. Noticing
a patch of rank and very green grass I asked him to try that
spot. “No good,” he said, “it’s no good boring anywhere
in this field, there is little or no water.’’ Pressed to try once
more, he fixed on one spot as best to bore, but said only a
little water, “of no use,” would be found: this place was
marked. It is the more northerly of the two dots marked in
W, Fig. 20.


WORKING MEN'S
COLLE


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 89


Three weeks later a country gentleman, Mr J. H. Jones, of
Mullinabro House, Waterford—who some years ago accidentally
discovered that the rod moved in his hands, and had had some
success in his own neighbourhood as an amateur dowser—
kindly agreed, at my request, to try the same fields. Mr
Jones had never been in that district before, and knew nothing
of the places marked by Mr Stone. These marks had been
carefully removed prior to Mr Jones’s visit.


ee


Fic. 21. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT
Plan of the field E in Fig. 20


As before, Mr Lefroy accompanied us, and we agreed to let
Mr Jones go round the fields alone, so that no hint could be
derived from any involuntary indications on our part. Mr
Jones used a small, slender forked twig, which he held in the
same way as the elder Mullins. We went, first, to the larger
field on the east of Carrigoona. On completing his perambula-
tion of the field we examined the places marked by Mr Jones.


WORKING MEN'S.
COLLEGE
BB PUA AY ou


enon ema’


go THE DIVINING-ROD


The spot where the twig moved most vigorously with him,
and where he was confident we should find water, was not a
foot distant from the place selected by Mr Stone, as we found
subsequently by measurement with the tape. This was at
No. I, in Fig. 21. Mr Jones also asserted the water course
ran from north to south in the field, in the same direction
as marked out by Mr Stone; but from the movement of the
twig he asserted we should also find water a few feet on the
east side of the place marked No. 1, but flowing towards
Stone’s line. We then crossed the mountain to the smaller
field on the western side; after Mr Jones had traversed it
with his “rod” he said much as Mr Stone did, that very
little, if any, water would be found there.

It was not until July 1899 that the boring apparatus
arrived. Mr Stone had kindly placed it at my disposal, so
that the only expense incurred was for labour and the services
of his brother, Mr E. Stone, who was a skilful working engineer.
A four-inch bore hole was made in each case ; a hardened steel
‘‘jumper ” and the usual boring tools being employed. Fig.
22 shows the boring apparatus at work. Mr E. Stone is standing
on the left of the picture, and the men are boring with the
jumper. The thick gorse hedge isseen round the field. From
conversation with the farmer who had tilled the eastern field
for many years, we expected to reach the bed rock some 6 ft.
below the surface, and I anticipated a laborious and costly
boring if we were to get anything better than surface water.
As I had taken a farmhouse for the summer on the northern
slope of Carrigoona, I was able daily to inspect the result of
the boring operations. We commenced at the spot marked
No. rin Fig. 21, and a foot below the surface struck a very hard
dry clay ; this went on for a depth of 8 ft., with slow progress,
until suddenly, after two days’ work, a bed of sand was encoun-
tered, through which the ‘“‘ jumper ”’ sank, and water rushed
up the bore hole to within 4 ft. of the surface. After 4 ft. of
sand a bed of gravel was reached, but the quantity of water
was so great that the sides of the lower part of the bore hole
were constantly washed in, and we could not sink deeper until
a lining tube was obtained. As this could only be procured
in London, we proceeded to test the east side of the field,
where Mr Stone said little or no water would be got. Here
No. 2 bore hole was sunk, and nothing but a hard clay, with
stones intermixed in one part, was met with till the rock was
reached at a depth of 12 ft., when a little water was found
between the rock and the impermeable stratum above it. I
made them continue boring to a depth of 1 ft. 6 in. into the


YY
z
uJ
=
o
e
<
oc
Oo
3


>
ox
wt
5
oa
O—
d


Rus
oe


: VIEW LOOKING NorRTH


ARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT


THE C


TGs 22),


(Air oa et) IE pe nlewela Ss od a
Pattie See Preis ATION feo :


Meee he pias’

- pt 3 2s if
ae Food ttn

EE ee

; won.


b


CS SI od tt


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING or


solid quartzite rock, but no more water was obtained. We
then began No. 3 bore hole, on what Mr Stone called the
“water-line.”’ The boring was similar in its results to No. 1,
the water-bearing permeable stratum being struck 6 ft. below
the surface, and abundant water rose in the bore hole. The
boring was continued when a bed of soft plastic clay was reached,


Baron a dayet Sa : 4


Rok
ad tne A
Fic. 23. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERI- Fic. 24. THE CARRIGOONA
MENT EXPERIMENT
Section of No. 1 bore hole, 20 ft. deep; Section of No. 2 bore hole, 15 ft.
abundant supply zone to 4 ft. from the deep; very little water, 12 ft.
surface. from the surface.


and after this a hard clay mixed with pebbles. I was aston-
ished at not reaching the rocky bed, and determined to con-
tinue the boring ; after we had gone to a depth of 22 ft. we
were still in the clay, and were so impeded by the constant
washing in of the sandy stratum that we had to abandon
the boring, the lining tubes not having arrived. —

Figs. 23-25 show sections of the different borings. The
surface of bore No. 1 is 6 in. above the level of bore No. 2,


WORKING MEN’S |
COLLEGE
JEL BR AR YS


ahs EN REN carer |


92 THE DIVINING-ROD


and 3 ft. above the surface of bore No. 3, as will be seen subse-
quently in the cross-section of the field (Figs. 28 and 29).
So far, then, Mr Stone’s prognostication had proved perfectly
correct, and we now moved the boring apparatus to the field
on the western side. Here I made them sink a bore hole at
a spot that seemed to me most likely to yield water, where
the ground appeared moister, and was covered by a patch of
rank grass. The boring No. 4, Fig. 26, proved difficult and


_ Fic. 25. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT


Section of No. 3 bore hole, 22 ft. deep . abundant supply zone to 5 ft. from the
surface.


very tedious. Instead of clay a rocky débris mixed with clay
was encountered below the surface-soil ; at 9 ft. deep the bed-
rock was reached, and, thinking we might strike a fissure it
was bored to a depth of nearly 3 ft., but not a drop of water
was obtained. Then I had a bore hole sunk at the spot fixed
on by Mr Stone as likely to yield a little water, but ‘‘ no use ”’,
as he remarked (this is No. 5 bore hole); here, after the |
shingle, we reached a hard dry clay, and continued boring
through this until the rocky bed was encountered at a depth


WORKING MEN'S
Col , tor Cahey


LIBRARY


aS Cam:


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 93


of 14 ft. from the surface, but no trace of water was found (Fig.
27). This field slopes sharply down from east to west, and
No. 5 bore hole is at some Io ft. lower level than No. 4, which
is on the upper eastern side of the field. Finally, I had a
small trial bore made at the lowest point in the field adjoining
the mountain road, but only dry shingle, and no sign of water,
was met with. Here, again, Stone’s predictions were verified ;
there might have been a little water between the impermeable
clay and the rocky bed when he made his trial at Easter, as
it was then in the early spring, after rains.1 The borings were
all made in the long drought we had during the summer of
the present year ; it was, therefore, all the more astonishing


Fic. 26. THE CAaRRIGOONA EXPERIMENT


Section of No. 4 bore hole, 11 ft. 6 in. deep; no water.


to find such a good supply of water in the No. 1 and No. 3
borings in the eastern field.

After the perforated lining tube had arrived we were able
to go on boring in No. 1 hole, but found a second bed of clay
below the gravel, and reached no rock, though we went down
20 ft. All the water was therefore supplied by the permeable
layer between the two impermeable clays. In order to test
the quantity, I procured a pump and 15 ft. of iron tubing, and
found that No. 1 bore hole yielded five gallons a minute, which,
if the supply held, would be equivalent to over 7,000 gallons
in the 24 hours. After pumping 10 minutes, however, the
pump choked, and the water was then found to stand 8 ft.
from the surface ; it had been lowered about 4 ft. in the four-


1 Subsequently, after the summer drought, Mr Lefroy noticed a
little water at the bottom of this bore hole; see P.S. to his memoran-


dum, p. 97.


WORKING MEN'S.
COLLEGE
BRA Y


gg es THE DIVINING-ROD


inch bore hole. The water was flowing in all the time through
the perforations in the lining tube, but not sufficiently rapidly
to maintain a constant level, as the pump was a powerful one.
The temperature of the water was some 20 deg. F. below that
of the air. No. 2 bore hole contained so little water that we
were able, in a few minutes, almost to empty the bore hole
by ladling out the water with a small tin can.

It was desirable, in order to decide the question as to the
exact levels of the respective bore holes, that a careful survey
of the field should be made. For this purpose my friend and
former student, Mr J. A. Cunningham, B.A., kindly assisted


ae, ‘
Fic. 27. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT


Section of No. 5 bore hole, 16 ft. deep; no water.


me in taking the levels shown in Figs. 28 and 29. In these
diagrams the vertical scale is exaggerated five times the
horizontal, the surface depression shown in Fig. 28 not being
perceptible in the field. These diagrams illustrate the prob-
able geological sections of the field from bore hole No. 1 to
No. 2, nearly west and east, and also the section from north
to south. It will be observed in Fig. 28 that the nearly dry
bore hole No. 2 is actually a little lower than the water-bearing
hole No. 1. Possibly water might be found between Nos. 1
and 2; in fact, Mr Jones predicted it would be a few feet to
the east of No. 1. But this can only be settled by boring at
intervals across from west to east ; I hope to be able to do
this eventually. As the bed-rock was not reached in bore


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
_ LIBRARY


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 95


holes Nos. 1 and 3, its representation in both sections is in part
imaginary, as is the lateral extent of the layer of sand in
Fig. 29.

Such is Sir William Barrett’s account of this remarkable
experiment, and to it should be added, to enable the reader to
form an opinion based on all the available facts, the following
independent account given by the Mr Lefroy already referred
to. This gentleman wrote :

“On the 2nd of April 1899, Professor Barrett invited me to
accompany him and Mr Stone, an English ‘ dowser’, toa field in
the Rocky Valley, Co. Wicklow. We drove directly from Bray


Fic. 28. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT


Section of the field, east and west. Horizontal scale: 1in. = 60 ft. Vertical
scale, exaggerated five times: I in. = 12


station to the field, which is enclosed by a high stone fence,
partly covered by a gorse hedge. The configuration of the
immediately adjacent land cannot be seen from the field, owing
to its situation and the height of this fence and hedge. The
area is between one and two acres in extent. Mr Stone had
no opportunity afforded him of examining the surroundings
of the field except upon the side of approach, nor did he, I
fully believe, receive any information on that subject, to which
he made no reference in my hearing, and was apparently
indifferent. I watched him closely, but saw no sign of attention
on his part to surface indications, if any existed.

He traversed the field in various directions, holding a fork
of the divining rod between the forefinger and thumb of


‘WORKING MEN'S:
COLLEGE
LB RAR


96 THE DIVINING-ROD


each hand. His manner was that of easy confidence, and
he readily maintained a conversation at the same time. At
certain points the rod in his hands was violently twisted. One
of these points, marked ‘ No. 1’ on the plan, Fig. 21, he stated
to be that most suitable for boring purposes and he declared
that a sufficient supply of water for domestic use would be
found there at a very moderate depth. To the best of my
recollection he said not more than 15 ft., but of this I am
not now certain. The other points at which the rod was
notably contorted were in a line south from this, which he
attributed to the existence of an underground watercourse.


Yyy


G Yj Y Yj
Li MME Wy


Fic. 29.


Section of the field, north and south. Scales as in Fig. 28.


The direction of this is shown on the plan by the dotted line.

The positions of these points Professor Barrett and I measured
at once and noted on a rough plan. The line of the asserted
watercourse was marked by taking the distances from the
side of the field. Except on that line, only very slight move-
ments of the rod were anywhere observable, and an area in
the eastern portion of the field was designated by Mr Stone
as practically waterless. The test boring subsequently made
in this area is marked ‘No. 2’ on the plan.

On the 22nd of April, I again visited the place with Professor
Barrett and Mr Jones, of Waterford, an amateur ‘ dowser’. The
same conditions were repeated. He saw no more of the sur-


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 97


rounding land than was strictly unavoidable and appeared to
pay no attention to that, or to any indications other than those
furnished by the ‘rod’. No marks had been left by which
the places selected by Mr Stone as yielding water could have
been identified or guessed at. Mr Jones walked over the field
as Mr Stone had done, the ‘rod’ behaved similarly in his
hands, and his results were practically the same. The differ-
ence of a foot or so in the ‘ best ’ point selected may be reason-
ably attributed to his crossing the line of the watercourse
referred to at a different point.

From this field, which is on the eastern side of Carrigoona
Hill, we went, on the day first mentioned, to the western side,
and Mr Stone was asked to find a spring in a small field on
that side. He walked over this field in the same manner with
the rod, and said that no water, or so little as to be useless,
would be found in it,—that there were traces of water at a
certain spot, but that it would be ‘no good boring’. Mr Jones
also went with us to this other field and he confirmed what
Mr Stone had said of there being little water to be found there.

Since the borings have been made, I have measured and
verified their positions with Professor Barrett, and on the 5th
of November 1899 I again visited Carrigoona, and made a
careful examination of the borings. In the field on the eastern
side, the one first tried by Mr Stone, I found the water in
boring marked No. 1 in the plan [see Fig. 21] standing 6 ft.
from the ground level. The water in boring No. 3, on the line
of the watercourse alleged by Mr Stone to exist, stood 6 ft.
3 in. from the surface of the ground. The boring No. 2 was
dry. In the field on the western slope of the hill I found the
upper boring [No. 4] quite dry and the lower boring [No. 5]
had four or five inches of water in it [Figs. 26 and 27]. These
results agree with the predictions made by Mr Stone, and
also by Mr Jones, before the borings were made.”

The experimenter did not remain satisfied with the conclu-
sive result of the experiment and with the concordant testi-
. mony of the witness ; he proceeded to ask for the opinions of
geologists on the facts put before them. It would, of course,
have been fairer to the dowser to have asked for the geologists’
opinion before the former’s visit, since the results of the borings
revealed to the competent observer the fact, hitherto unknown
to these gentlemen, who were intimately acquainted with
the geology of the district, that the field was on the site of
an ancient and deep V-shaped depression or narrow valley
between the rocks, probably an ancient river bed now filled
with drift.


7


98 THE DIVINING-ROD


The first opinion invited was that of Professor Barrett’s
colleague Grenville Cole, F.G.S., the Professor of Geology at
the Royal College of Science. He reported as follows :

“The Rocky Valley is cut by denudation through the
ancient series of shales and sandstones, altered to slates and
quartzites, which occur in the Sugar Loaf area, at Bray Head,
and at Howth. Unless a fissure were fortunately struck, it
would be very difficult to find water in this series. It is not
a water-bearing series in itself, as is well known to residents
at Howth, who are in the habit of collecting rain and surface
water.

But in the Rocky Valley area, considerable deposits of glacial
drift occur, varying from clays to permeable sands, filling all
the ancient hollows carved in the slates and quartzites. A
trained eye readily picks out, by contour and the green or
cultivated patches, the position of the sands and gravels where
they abut on the older series.

The heights are formed of slate and quartzite, on which
heather and some thin bogs accumulate. The rainfall on these
is considerable, and soaks off down into the old waterways,
carved before glacial times, in the rocky bed. As these hollows
are full of drift, the drift, where sand and gravel prevail, ab-
sorbs the water. Thesupply at any point, by tapping the drift,
must depend greatly on the extent of the impervious gathering-
ground round about, and would, in any case, probably diminish
in autumn after a dry summer.

The field selected for boring in the Rocky Valley shows a
marked green surface, with the hard quartzite sloping steeply
down close at hand on either side. It falls towards the valley,
and so, evidently, does the old rocky bed under the infilling
of drift. Water would accumulate in the infilling, and would
probably flow slowly down along the middle line of the old
hollow. Its constancy may be doubted, but can be tested
satisfactorily after the present dry season (August 1899). A
trained eye would certainly select the central line of the
field, along the ancient stream-hollow, for boring.

I think a professional engineer would undoubtedly bore
two or three holes along the line under which the two rock
slopes at either side meet; this line might or might not be
along the lowest line of the hummocky surface of the field
above, where the borings were made. Iam clearly of opinion
that a casual visitor who knew anything about general condi-
tions of water supply would proceed a good distance from the
obvious rock on either side before he predicted a fair water


[This refers to the Sugarloaf, as there are no bogs on Carrigoona.]


ay UE


Fic. 30. THE CARRIGOONA EXPERIMENT: VIEW LOOKING EAST ACROSS
THE FIELD


G MEN’S
LEGE
LIBRARY


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING 99


supply. But I also feel with you that the rapid survey and
determination in two minutes or so [by the dowser] show
either exceptional powers of observation or confidence in some
power not possessed by ordinary engineers.”’

Sir William observes on this report that the rocky contour
immediately on each side of the field was not observed by Mr
Stone, nor could it be seen from the side they approached.
Wisdom after the event is too often the prerogative of the
geologist in such cases. It would have required, adds Sir
William, a trained geological eye, even after traversing the
ground round about, to arrive at the conclusions stated by
Professor Cole, who, moreover, had at his disposal the facts
brought to light by the different borings. Sir William had
been over the place dozens of times, having spent two summers
in the neighbourhood, but before the borings were made, there
appeared no evidence to him that the “ hard quartzite sloped
steeply down close at hand on either side,’ leaving a deep
ravine filled in with glacial drift. As can be seen to some
extent from the photograph reproduced in Fig. 30, to all
appearance the local opinion seemed probable enough: that
the field was simply a layer of a few feet of clay over a rocky

bed which was nearly level from east to west.

Finally the opinion of Mr J. R. Kilroe? of the Geological
Survey was obtained. This gentleman was not only a recog-
nised authority on Irish geology, but one who had made some
study of dowsing and was familiar with its phenomena, having
previously investigated the famous Waterford case, which is
given in an earlier section. Mr Kilroe came specially from
a distance to inspect the field and reported as follows :

“Carrigoona Hill, rising to the moderate height of 802 ft.
above the sea, commands one of the most attractive and varied
panoramas in Wicklow. From its foot, eastward, spreads the
park-like country containing and adjoining Kilruddery, the
Earl of Meath’s demesne, to the town of Bray and the sea
beyond. North-westward the hill overlooks the Dargle Valley
which separates it from the Dublin and Wicklow Mountains.
Southward the eye is attracted by the valley of Killough,
from which, on its east side, rises almost precipitously the
Great Sugarloaf Mountain to a height of 1,659 ft.—this beauti-
ful conical hill being separated from Carrigoona by the narrow,
weird gorge known as the Rocky Valley. Further eastward
the Little Sugarloaf Mountain bounds the landscape beyond
the vale of Kilmacanoge.

The hills named above—Carrigoona, with the Great and

2 Author of A Description of the Soil and Geology of Ireland (1907).


Too THE DIVINING-ROD


Little Sugarloaf—constitute a group standing above the general
level of the surrounding country, a circumstance attributable
to the greater resistance offered to disintegration by quartzite,
which forms the hills, than by the slate rock which prevails
inthe lower ground. Bands of slate also occur with the quartz-
ite; and the results of unequal denudation are apparent in
the uneven—in some places, rugged—aspect presented by the
higher ground.

The rocky bed is largely covered with a mantle of glacial
drift, which, though chiefly occurring in the low ground, is of
fairly general distribution, resting in various places on the
hillsides, and partially filling hollows between crags. In these
latter cases, the drift consists of local rock detritus, chiefly
a mixture of sand, clay, and pebbles of slate and quartzite.
Limestone pebbles also are interspersed in the drift which
skirts the hill slopes ; but few, if any, are to be found at higher
elevations. The drift in the latter positions usually contains
lenticular layers of sand and gravel, which form favourable
reservoirs for underground water.

Alluding to the immediate topography of the ground experi-
mented upon (E, Fig. 20), it is situated on the south-eastern
slope of Carrigoona Hill, adjoining the Commons, that is,
the heathery and rocky portion of the hill near its summit.
Descending the slope, one observes crags of quartzite jutting
upon either side of a hollow, which is partially filled with drift
of the character described above. The south-eastern drainage
of the hill would naturally in part flow along this hollow,
and would rapidly disappear, were there no drift. The drift,
however, intercepts the drainage, and would merely retard its
flow were it quite porous in texture ; but it is comparatively
impervious with the exception of the sand and gravel layers ;
and whatever drainage-water percolates through, reaches
and is retained by the layers, which consequently are ready
sources of supply when tapped. These are almost horizontal,
probably dipping more or less from the sides towards the
centre, and somewhat basin-shaped when spreading to any
extent over the area occupied by the field. Hence, when
such a stratum is pierced, the water rises to a height in the
boring corresponding to its head in the basin-shaped layer—
higher than the layer at its centre; and practically to the
same height in borings which tap the same source—as in the
pa of the two successful borings with which we are concerned

ere.

Judging, then, from geological data, the nature of the ground
would suggest as the most proinising site for a water-boring,


THREE NOTABLE EXPERIMENTS IN DOWSING ror


a point, say, midway between the quartzite crags—perhaps a
little nearer to the western crag than the eastern, say 40 yds.
from the former and 60 from the latter. The successful borings
[Nos. 1 and 3] have, on the dowser’s advice, been put down
some 22 yds. from the west side of the field (lying immediately
between the crags) and some 70 yds. from the east side.

It is very improbable—at least, very difficult to understand
—that a merely casual visitor to the place, however shrewd,
if not versed in geological facts, could divine the existence
of water in the field by a cursory inspection, much less indicate
with any accuracy the spot and depth at which it would be
found. The success attending the experiment here is rendered
the more striking by the dowser’s additional prediction that
water would not be found in the other field at the west side
of Carrigoona (W, Fig. 20) ; though, to the ordinary observer,
there would appear to be at least as much probability of
finding a supply in this place as in the one above de-
scribed.”

Thus we see that both these geological authorities agree,
when all possible qualifications have been made, the one that
the facts show “ either exceptional powers of observation or
confidence in some power not possessed by ordinary engineers,”’
and the other that it is ‘“‘ very difficult to understand that a
merely casual visitor to the place, however shrewd, if not
versed in geological facts, could divine the existence of water
in the field by a cursory inspection, much less indicate with
any accuracy the spot and depth at which it would be
found.”

The possibility of the dowsers’ success being explicable
by geological observation being thus disposed of, as mere
common-sense could equally well have done, there remains
one possibility to be considered. If a plausible explanation
is to be found, it is much more likely to be in the impression
made upon the dowsers by some surface indication of water.
Now it appears that although there were absolutely no indica-
tions of water in the experimental field, E, Fig. 20, yet on the
way up to it there is a small spring (marked S in the map,
Fig. 20) emerging from the rock, and flowing over the grass
beside the road. This spring is not derived from the field,
but comes from quite another direction, though a casual
observer could not tell this.1 A little beyond there is also


1 There is a famous spring known as Silverwell, that gushes out of
the quartzite rock at the foot of the Great Sugarloaf Mountain, about
a quarter of a mile further up the Rocky Valley ; it is marked S’ in
Fig. 20.


102 THE DIVINING-ROD


evidence of some feeble springs.1 It is just possible that the
dowsers may have subconsciously rapidly perceived all this ;
but any conclusions drawn from the presence of these springs
could only have an accidental relation to the spots eventually
indicated.

As regards the second and smaller field, in which no water
was found, there is in one corner of the field a hole some
6 ft. deep, with the débris from it lying about. This hole is
quite dry and the nature of the surface-soil can be seen from
the sides of the hole and from the débris, which consists of
shingle and rocky débris. Mr Stone passed sufficiently near
the hole to have examined it if he wished to, but he seemed
not to pay the least attention. Here again, however, had
he subconsciously observed it and drawn deductions from what
he saw, he would have been on very unsafe ground, for the
boring No. 5 revealed quite a different material beneath the
surface than that in the hole and in No. 4 boring, only the
latter boring being on the same level as the hole.

Moreover, which is most important of all, it must be remem-
bered that the movement of the rod and the dowsers’ conclu-
sions from them were identical as between Mr Stone and Mr
Jones. This places the possibility of ascribing the result to
subconscious observation of the points mentioned, even had
these been useful, beyond reason.

To sum up, we have seen two dowsers led independently to
two fields in a locality unknown to both of them, and inde-
pendently coming to identical conclusions, indicating where
water would, and where it would not, be found ; we have seen
these conclusions entirely upheld by practical demonstration
in the form of borings ; and we have seen that there was no
manner, geological or other, in which the information could
have been normally obtained. We have thus an experiment
which conclusively proves the reality of dowsing. ,


1 Which probably have their origin in the outcrop of the layer of
sand shown in Fig. 29; but this is not obvious as the turf at the spot
is simply swampy, and a stretch of dry ground intervenes between this
spot and the field.


CHAPTER V


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS OF THE
NINETEENTH CENTURY


§ 1. WILLIAM ScoTT LAWRENCE


MONG the English dowsers whose activities are well
known there were two who stand out because of the
large number of their successes and because of the

almost infallible nature of their dowsing. W.S. Lawrence was
one of these, and the other was John Mullins. The former was
born in Bristol on the 25th of July 1810 ; in 1893, at the age
of 83, he wrote the following account of his discovery that
he possessed the dowsing faculty.

“My father was the contractor for building a new Rectory
house at Winterbourne, Gloucestershire. In the contract he
was to find a supply of spring water, and had to sink a well for
such ; he had done this to about 40 ft. deep without success,
when an old working man, a gardener, who passed the spot every
day, stated it was quite useless to go on sinking, it being in
the wrong spot. On being asked to mark the right spot, he
went to the hedge ofa field and cut a hazel forked stick, and on
arriving at the well marked a spot about 15 ft. away from the
well, and desired us to sink there, which we accordingly did,
and at about 15 ft. deep obtained a valuable spring of water.
I then was about 20 years of age, and asked him to allow me to
try and see if the forked twig would act same with me, but
he said it would [probably] be quite useless; but if I would
call on him next day at his cottage he would test me.

I did so, and he placed in my hands a small steel watch
spring, and desired me to walk about the kitchen with such,
and to his great surprise it acted-with me similar to what it did
in his own hands. This was to prove and ascertain if I had
the power, as he knew there was a capital spring of water
under the floor of the cottage; he then stated his great sur-


1 This account is from a letter dated the 5th of October 1893, and
addressed to Mr C. E. De Rance.


103


104 THE DIVINING-ROD


prise, he said as many as Ioo persons had been there previously,
and never one [had the rod] acted with previous. From which
time I have made use both of steel spring and hazel rod. I
do not believe I have any power without the rod or spring to
discover such.

You may make any use whatever of these remarks... .
I am now in my 84th year, and write this without the aid of
glasses.”’

This dowser died in June 1896, having made use of his
faculty for nearly seventy years. Apart from his dowsing,
Lawrence was an interesting character, independent and
scrupulously honest. For many years he was in business as a
stone mason; his two marriages, extending over a period
of sixty years, made him the father of twenty-six children,
seventeen of whom survived him. One of his sons was an
able doctor, consulting physician at the Bristol General Hos-
pital ; another son, who also had the faculty, was a clergyman
in the Church of England; and other sons held honourable
positions in the business world.

That Lawrence himself was generally respected is obvious
from the fact that for sixty-three years he lived at Bishopston,
Bristol, and at Stapleton, close by ; he was a Poor-law Guar-
dian, Chairman of the Highway Board, and for twenty-one
successive years he was elected Vicar’s churchwarden, and
he held other parochial appointments. His character is well
shown by the following anecdote related by himself: ‘ In
our Parish church, with a capacity for holding only 250 people,
there was a pew that would seat a dozen persons which was
monopolized by a single old lady, while six other parishioners
claimed the hereditary right to pews that could furnish no
less than IIo sittings. This old corruption of the hereditary
system I strenuously disputed, and fought the battle in London
single-handed, and upset the whole of them at a cost to myself
of £75, a large sum for me then to lose; but as it happily
turned out, the circumstances which were revealed at my law-
suit caused the Bishop to build us a new church at his own
expense, which, of course, remedied the evil.”

W. S. Lawrence has the historic credit of having been the
first to rate a workhouse. He writes: ‘‘ When the Clifton
Union migrated into my parish, and built a large workhouse
on seventeen acres of land (already rated) for the benefit of
thirty-five parishes, I as warden assessed the rate at {250—
this caused a great stir. All the other guardians representing
the other parishes were dead against me, and at a final stormy
meeting the Chairman reproachfully exclaimed, ‘The man


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 105


who would do such an outrageous act as to rate a workhouse
would not mind rating his own mother ;’ to which I replied,
‘Certainly I would not, in my official capacity as warden, if
it was my duty to do so.’ This reply had its natural effect :
the rate was passed, and so obtains to this day, each parish
virtually contributing its equitable quota.” 4

No apology is required for quoting these stories, for they
illustrate the character of this remarkable dowser; the col-
umns of the British press for many years bear witness to his
* vigour in defending his reputation when his dowsing achieve-
ments wereridiculed. We must now pass on to a consideration
of a few of his successes ; it may be noted that among those
for whom he found water and who gave him testimonials were
such individuals as the Duke of Grafton, Lord Spencer, Sir
Joseph Weston, Lord Heytesbury, Lord Justice Fry, Sir H. W.
Peak, Sir Greville Smythe, Sir Henry Selwyn Ibbetson, Lord
Arthur Cecil, and very many others, and such companies as the
Bristol Wagon Works, the Eagle Card Company, Devizes,
the Tiverton Town Council, the Gloucestershire Dairy Com-
pany, the Great Western Railway, the Ely Paper Works, and
many other breweries, tanneries, electrical and water works,
farms, dairies, and so forth.?

First may be quoted a letter which gives a graphic account
by an eye-witness of the muscular spasm which seems to lay
hold of some dowsers (especially W. S. Lawrence) when they
are over, or have reason to believe they are over, an under-
ground spring. The letter is from Mr H. W. Whitaker, the
well-known geologist. Mr Whitaker was not a great believer
in the dowsing-rod, or in any practical good resulting from
its use.

“We went yesterday and saw the divining rod used, and a
stranger performance I never saw. The diviner, named Law-
rence, an old white-haired, benevolent-faced man, walked
about the place for some time, it appeared fruitlessly, holding
between each finger and thumb a piece of flat steel wire bent
round into a sort of horseshoe shape. This, he told us, would
detect minerals as well as water, so that when it presently began
to agitate as it did, scriggling, and wriggling, and twisting,
and turning in his fingers, he could not say definitely that it
was water he had come upon, until he took in his hand a


1 These two stories are quoted by E. Vaughan Jenkins, in J. F.
Young and R. Robertson, The Divining Rod (1894), pp. 135-136.

2 A long list will be found in J. F. Young and R. Robertson, of. cit.,
pp. 51-52; see also a list, with particulars, in E. R. Pease, ‘‘ The
Divining Rod,” Proc. S.P.R. (1884), ii. 92.


106 THE DIVINING-ROD


strong forked hazel twig, holding an end of each fork in each
hand, and keeping his elbows tightly down to his side. I
can only describe the antics of that twig as a pitched battle
between itself and him! It twisted,it knocked about, it con-
tracted and contorted the muscles of his hands and arms, it
wriggled, and fought, and kicked, until it snapped in two—
and then—what made it painful to watch until you got used
to it, the old man reeled, and clutched hold of any one nearest
to him for a few moments. It evidently exhausts him very
much, though afterwards I asked him what effect it had on
him, and he said it only made his heart beat most violently for
a short time. Certainly it has not shortened his life! Hav-
ing found that spring (I must tell you the wire and twig will not
act over stagnant water), the farmer asked him to try if there
was a spring nearer home. He did not find one until, having
gone into the garden, he suddenly came upon one close to the
hall door. After that, he went further afield, and found two
some distance from the house. He can also tell the direction
the water takes underground and the probable depth they will
have to bore for it. Mr C.’s lawyer was there ‘ to watch the
case’; he was most sceptical, but was obliged to own that if
they find the spring he must believe! He went behind Law-
rence, and held his wrists with all his strength, to try and
keep him quiet while the twig moved, but he could not.

I asked Lawrence how he found out he possessed the power,
and he told us that 60 years ago he saw a cottager do it, so he
tried himself, and found he possessed the same property. We
tried, Lady D. and I, but needless to say, we could do noth-
ing. Lawrence makes no mystery of it, though he cannot
explain it; he says it is a gift. He was asked if he could
mesmerise, and he said, no. He held the wire over Lady
D.’s watch, and it wriggled just as it had done over the water.”

In a later letter, dated May 180, the lady referred to
relates that, the farmer having expressed doubts as to the
genuineness of the proceedings, Lawrence was taken again to
the farm and blindfolded. The rod performed in exactly the
same manner on reaching the spot where it had indicated the
setae: er on They then dug, and found the spring at a depth
of 15 it.

Next we have a case obtained through the indefatigable
ardour of Mr Vaughan Jenkins. Rumours having reached
him of this case Mr Jenkins applied to Messrs Stephens and
Barstow, Bristol Steam Joinery Works, who replied thus:
“In the year 1879 we were building a house at Horsham, in
Sussex, for Mr J. Renton of Guildford.


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 107


There were two wells on the property, but little or no water
could be obtained from either (in fact water was very scarce
in the neighbourhood generally), and it was thought desirable
to sink another well.

As we had known Mr Lawrence for many years, and knew
that he professed to be able to discover water, we communi-
cated with and arranged with him to go to Horsham, hoping
that if he should point out a place where we might sink, that
the well would be a greater success than those already there.

Mr Lawrence proceeded to the place, but we cannot, from
personal observation, give you an account of what took place,
as no member of the firm was able to accompany him (we may
here state that neither of us have ever seen him use the ‘ rod’),
but we enclose you a letter from the man who was foreman
upon the works at the time of Mr Lawrence’s visit (he is still
in our employ, and we wrote to him upon receiving your
letter), in which he fully describes how Mr Lawrence pro-
ceeded.

You will see by Mr Martell’s letter that he was in every way
successful.”

This was the enclosed letter from the foreman, Mr S. Martell :
“He selected one, a hazel twig, and walked about with it.
On coming to a certain place, he said, ‘ Here is the spring of
water,’ and the twig was violently jumping up and down, and
he marked the place which was to be the centre of the well.
He then tried the steel spring with the same result. On
commencing to dig the well I was obliged to move a little on
one side, as one of the new drains was in the way, and the
centre of the well, as marked by him, became the side. On
sinking down about 40 ft. the spring burst out as large as a
hammer handle in the very spot that he marked for the centre.”’

Mr Vaughan Jenkins then applied to the architect who built
the house, Mr Henry How, 52 New Broad Street, London, who
replied: ‘‘ With regard to the ‘ Divining Rod’, in 1878 I
erected a house at Rudgwick! for J. T. Renton, Esq; the
site was on high ground, and the subsoil of stiff clay. During
the progress of the works the contractor proceeded to form a
well close to the new building, and had bored a very considerable
depth without coming to water. Messrs Stephens and Barstow,
of Bristol, were the contractors, and they advised that Mr
Lawrence should be employed to detect a shying. I had heard


1 [The house, first called Hedgecocks, then Oakwood House and
finally (?) Oak Grange, and at the time of the latest inquiries in the
possession of the Duchess of Santo Teodora, is four miles from Hors-
ham and two miles from Rudgwick].


108 THE DIVINING-ROD


of him before, and was greatly interested as to his mode of
procedure. He was shown where we had already bored.
[Then follows a description of the process]. He said we should
find water, the position being only some few yards from the original
boring. We proceeded to sink at the place indicated by Mr
Lawrence, and within some 14 yards from the surface we came
upon a good spring of water, and which has, I believe, con-
tinued to supply the house from that time to this. I may
state that there was an old well some 100 yards from the
new building, but Mr Lawrence was not informed of this to
my knowledge.” +

It will thus be seen that the two independent accounts agree
in all details. About twenty years later Mr E. Westlake made
a geological investigation of the locality; but in the mean-
while the house had undergone several changes of name and
ownership ; other wells had been sunk ; and the report was in
consequence indefinite.”

The next case is an illustration of the implicit faith in his
dowsing power which Lawrence appears to have inspired in
those who had employed him. The letter, which is too long
to quote in full, is from the well-known well-sinker and
contractor, Mr Mereweather, who subsequently found he also
could use the rod, and had some success as a dowser.® The
following summary gives the chief facts :

The late Dr Fox, of Brislington, directed Mr Mereweather
to sink a well to supply the Lunatic Asylum at that place.
Instead of sinking at the spot suggested by the contractor,
Dr Fox took him to the Park and after searching found an
iron peg driven in the ground, where he told the contractor
to sink the well. Dr Fox gave as his reason that Mr Law-
rence had been over the ground with his divining-rod and
fixed on that place. The well was sunk go feet through Pen-
nant stone and no water found. Dr Fox insisted that the
work should go on, as he had absolute confidence that water
would be found, but as the contractor’s experience was dead
against finding water there, he (Dr Fox) at last consented to
a four-inch bore hole being driven; this was done and after
35 feet had been bored (125 feet from the surface) a large body
of water was struck, which has supplied the Asylum ever
since, has never failed, and could not be pumped dry.

Enough evidence has now been quoted to put Lawrence’s


1E. R. Pease, op. cit., ii. 103-104.

© Proc: SPR XV. 325-826;

* He also founded the well-known firm of water-engineers, Messrs.
Mereweather, of Long Acre, London.


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 10g


claims as a dowser beyond question. But it will be inter-
esting to conclude by quoting two or three of the many testi-
monials addressed to Lawrence that we have seen. The first
is from Mr Samuel Lang of Bristol: “ After vain endeavours
to obtain a supply of water for my kennels, and sinking 130
feet deep, I was advised to send for you, who, by aid of your
divining rod, in my presence, indicated the spot within 20
feet of the spot where I had sunk, and directed me to drive
there, which I did, and obtained at 30 feet deep most plentiful
supply. I have the greatest belief in your powers with the
divining rod.”

The next (from Messrs Evans and Owen, Ely Paper Works,
Cardiff) is quoted in answer to an objection sometimes made
that no large supply of underground water is ever found by a
dowser. “‘ At your request we have much pleasure in stating
the result of your visit to our works. We sunk two wells in
spots marked by you; in the first one we have a supply of
over 20,000 gallons per hour at a depth of 31 feet; and in
the other, about 300 yards away from the first, a supply
of 12,000 to 14,000 gallons per hour of spring water.”’

Finally we have the following addressed to Mr Lawrence by
Mr F. W. Newton, secretary of the Bristol Municipal Charity
Trustees : ‘‘ In reply to yours of yesterday’s date, Iam directed
by the Trustees of the Bristol Municipal Charities to state that
they have much pleasure in recording the fact that you were
most successful with your divining rod in discovering water
at the spot on their estate at Burnett, on which they after-
wards bored, though the surface certainly afforded no evidence
of the presence of water there.”


§2. JoHN MULLINS


John Mullins was without doubt the most remarkably suc-
cessful dowser of whom we possess records. Two of his most
striking achievements, at Waterford and at Horsham, have
already been described, and further examples are now to be
quoted.

One warning must here be given: when John Mullins found
that he was able to make a living with his dowsing-rod and
when he found that two of his sons had inherited his gift, he
formed a company under the style of John Mullins and Sons.
This was about 1882. After that date when application for
a dowser was made to the firm it was not always old Mullins
himself who did the work. The two sons, further, were rather
apt to take themselves the credit for the exploits of their


IIo THE DIVINING-ROD


father. Consequently for many years after John Mullins’s
death triumphant reports of his failures were made by a
number of well-intentioned persons ignorant of these facts.
In practically every case such reports were found to refer to
one of the young Mullins’s.

John Mullins was born at Colerne, eight miles from Chip-
penham, in Wilts, on the 12th of November 1838. His father
was a mason and John, the second son of eleven children,
followed the same trade. In 1859 he was employed in the
building of his house by Sir John Ould on the Ashwick Estate
in Gloucestershire. A large supply of water was needed and
Sir John was informed by a friend that there was a dowser
named Adams living in Cornwall.1 Adams was sent for and
indicated a line along which he declared water would be found.
There were a number of persons present, all of whom tried
the rod. When a daughter of Sir John Ould took the rod
into her hand and she came to the line marked by the dowser,
it turned so violently that she threw it down in a fright. A
well was afterwards sunk at the place and an abundant supply
was found at 60 feet from the surface.

A few days afterwards, Sir John, much struck by the cir-
cumstances, decided to try all the men working on the build-
ing, numbering about a hundred and fifty. When it came
to John Mullins’s turn to hold the twig it turned so violently
that it snapped in two. Mullins was accordingly dubbed a
dowser, but he continued his work asa mason. One day Sir
John came to him with a request for him to go to a farm
where water was required. He marked a spot at which a well
was later sunk and a spring yielding 200 gallons per hour was
tapped at eighty-five feet. This was John Mullins’s first use
of the divining-rod, and after that time he was much in
demand.?

John Mullins married in 1859 and continued in his occupation
as a mason until 1882; from then to his death in May 1894
he devoted himself exclusively to dowsing and well-sinking.
When he was the contractor for sinking a well at a spot indi-
cated by himself by dowsing, he was willing as a rule to re-


1 This was probably Charles Adams, of Rowberrow in Somersetshire.

* Cp. a little book by [Joseph and W. H. Mullins], the title-page of
which runs: “ The Divining Rod : its History, Truthfulness and Prac-
tical Utility, by John Mullins and Sons, Colerne, Box, Wiltshire.
Under the Patronage of Her Majesty’s Government. ... Colerne
1894.” See also a pamphlet with title-page as follows: ‘‘ The Divin-
ing Rod and its results in Discovery of Springs. By J. Mullins, Water
Finder. Under the Patronage of Her Majesty’s Government. Printed
at the ‘ Bath Chronicle’ Office [c. 1880].”


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Fic. 31. JoHN MULLINS


The Implement and Machinery Review (1892), xviii. 15598


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS E1y


ceive. no payment for sinking the well if a good supply of water
were not obtained. When one remembers the heavy outlay
involved in making a well, often through solid rock to a depth
of 70 to 100 feet or more, this agreement is a forcible illus-
tration of the faith Mullins had in his powers; a faith that
appears justified by its works, for Mullins is declared to have
located over 5,000 water sources and to have himself carried
out work in connexion with 700 water supplies. After the
death of old Mullins, his sons who carried on the business,
and one of whom was himself a dowser,! but not nearly so
successful, did not maintain the principle of ‘“‘no water, no
pay.” They state, it is true, in a letter that they “do not
generally make any extra charge for giving a guarantee of
finding water; on three occasions only we charged 15 per
cent extra on the contract for making a well.”” They enclose
copies of some of their contracts for large amounts ; several
of these contain the clause “in the event of not obtaining a
supply of 1,000 gallons per day of twenty-four hours, we will
make no charge for the work done.’”’ But a thousand gallons
a day is not a large supply, and judicious observation can
generally find that quantity of contaminated surface water.

The manner in which Mullins invariably held and used his
rod is thus clearly described by Colonel Thomas Waring,
M.P., in a letter dated the 11th of November 1891: ‘‘ I send
you herewith two of the ‘ Dowsing’ or divining rods, for
discovering water or minerals ; a fresh cut one (Fig. 32) and
one after being used by Mullins (Fig. 33). The portion nearly
twisted off the end of it (C, Fig. 33) will show the action ; it
was done while I was looking on, and no movement of the
hand was made to occasion the twisting. In fact, if you hold
the rod, or rather fork, as directed, such action, whether
voluntary or the reverse, on the part of the operator is impos-
sible. You pass the ends of the fork between the second and
third fingers of the hand, palm upwards, and close the thumb
and first and second fingers tightly on the points of the fork
(A and B, Fig. 32) and hold it, apex downwards, out before
you; when you come on the spring the apex of the fork
bends forward and upward, and if one end be held tight and
the other allowed to revolve it will twist itself nearly (or quite)
off, as in the specimen (Fig. 33). The violence of the action,
Mullins says, depends on the volume and proximity of the
running water.”

1 This was H. W. Mullins; Joseph was also stated to be a dowser
and himself records one or two cases in which he was successful, but
no other instances have come to our notice.


II2 THE DIVINING-ROD


The twigs sent by Colonel Waring are illustrated in the accom-
panying cuts; in Fig. 33 (the one actually used by Mullins),
the end was nearly twisted off, only a shred of bark remaining
at C. The twigs are of pliable green wood, about 15 inches in
extreme length, three-sixteenths of an inch diameter at A
and B, and a quarter of an inch diameter (not quite as thick
as a cedar pencil) at the junction. Fig. 56 shows the rod
actually held in the manner described.

A selection of specimens of Mullins’s successes must now
be given. One of the earliest of these we have on very good
authority, that of General Sir Mildmay Willson, K.C.B., who
writes as follows in a letter dated from Rauceby Hall, Grant-


B


Fic. 32. Mutiins’s DowsInc- Fic. 33. Muttrins’s Dowsinc-
ROD BEFORE USE ROD AFTER USE


ham, the 30th of January 1905: ‘‘ When I succeeded to my
father’s estate at Rauceby, Lincolnshire, in the year 1866, |
the parish was very badly off for water, and in dry seasons
almost every drop had to be led from the brook about a mile
away, so the first thing I took in hand was to try and get a good
supply. There were one or two shallow wells in a spinney
adjoining the east side of the village, so I started sinking a
well on rather lower ground within about 30 yards of one of
these wells, and perhaps 40 of the other. I almost immediately
came on solid limestone rock, and after sinking 100 feet with-
out finding a drop of water, I got a boring machine and went
sok another 250 ft. without success, when I stopped the
work.


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 113


The following year Messrs Kirk and Parry, Railway Con-
tractors and Builders, Sleaford, asked leave to sink a shaft
through a deep bed of clay in the next parish, Kelby, hoping
to find the same bed of soft stone as they quarry at Ancaster,
and two men from this village were set to work on the shaft.
After working for some days one of these men went sick, and
Kirk and Parry sent Mullins senior to take his place. It was
reported to me a day or two afterwards that Mullins had
stated as soon as he arrived that it was most unfortunate
that they had commenced where they did, as they had hit on
the only spring on the hill side and that they would be drowned
out before they went much further. However they were told
to go on, and a few mornings afterwards on returning to their
work they found the shaft 3 parts full of water; and after
trying in vain to get the water out, they had to give it up,
leaving their tools at the bottom.

This struck me as so extraordinary that I sent for Mullins ;
he was working then as an ordinary labourer at 2/6a day. I
employed him several days searching for springs on the estate.
I first took him to my abandoned well of the year before. He
told me if I went down 1,000 ft. I should not find a drop;
he then pointed out two or three places in the afore-mentioned
spinney where a limited amount of water would be found
within a very few feet of the surface. Towards the west
end of the village he pointed out several places where a good
supply could be obtained all within 10 or 12 feet of the sur-
face. I put three in hand at once, and in each case found
water as predicted, and the supply has continued to the
present day. One of these wells was near what are known as
the Hollow Cottages. Mullins in putting his twig over the well
pronounced there was no spring, but found one quite close
to the side, and in his opinion only a foot or two deeper down.
In sinking the new well, the ‘ circle ’’ to carry the well bricks
‘actually cut the edge of the old well. The bottom of the old
well was on a hard bed of rock, on going through this in
the new one a copious supply was found which has never
failed.

Mullins at once jumped into notoriety and was much em-
ployed all round this district, by the late Lord Winchelsea
[sic] and others. Amongst these the late Col. John Reeve
had him over to Leadenham and tested his power of finding
water in the following way. There is a reservoir on the hill
connected with a pipe to the gardens ; the water was purposely
turned off when Col. Reeve first took Mullins across the park,
but in accordance with his orders, was turned on as they came


8


II4 THE DIVINING-ROD


back; the Twig at once gave a violent jerk, and Mullins
followed the pipe right down to the garden fence. ;

In those days we were much interested in the Divining rod,
and as Mullins showed that there were two or three strong
springs that ran across the path leading from this house to
the bottom of the garden, a good many people tried for them-
selves to see if they had the power, and certainly five or six
found they possessed it, my sister being one of them, Miss
Wordsworth, daughter of the late Bishop of Lincoln, another,
the Hon. Mrs E. Pelham a third, as also my second horseman,
Sumner by name. The stick acted so strongly in the hands
of the latter that it was with the greatest difficulty we could
get him to show its working, as he looked on it as something
“most uncanny ’.

Since those days I have sunk some three or four more wells
on spots originally pointed out by Mullins, but the marks
having been lost, I have had to get somebody who could work
the Twig to point out the exact spots. At the present moment
one of my farm bailiffs at Kelby, Tebb by name, his wife, and
I believe all his children have this same power.

I might add that my experience in this district is that all our
springs are fissure springs, and unless you hit these off exactly
you will not get a drop, except perhaps some surface water,
even if you sink within a very few feet. These fissures run
pretty nearly from W. to E., and generally parallel to one
another, as I have been shown on several occasions by the man
following the water for considerable distances.

Personally I cannot call to mind a single instance where
Mullins proved himself wrong, but he refused to make trials
except in dry times, as he told me that every under-drain
that had water going down it would affect the divining rod.
The last time I employed him was on the Hill-house farm
on the late Lord Abinger’s estate at Redford in Surrey, of
which I was a Trustee. A good deal of money had been spent
by the late Lord in trying to get water, and the tenant had
given notice that unless he got a water supply he must give
up his tenancy. Mullins came down and found an excellent
supply, almost in the middle of the other costly failures.

During the seventies, Mullins was largely employed by most
of the large landowners in this district with great success,
and a large number of wells were sunk under his advice. All
round here the limestone rock comes very near the surface
and all the springs apparently are fissure ones, and quite near
the surface, 7.e. from 6 to 25 feet.”

In a later letter, giving permission to reproduce his account,


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS II5


Sir Mildmay Willson adds that on a subsequent occasion he
employed Mullins on the Hill House Farm near Yewhurst in
Surrey, where he succeeded in finding a plentiful supply after
several other wells had been sunk without result. Sir Mild-
may goes on: “I have employed my bailiff, Tebb, on three or
four occasions ; he has infallibly pointed out where there is
water, but I suppose owing to want of practice is unable to
estimate the depth.”

Though a number of early cases of dowsing by Mullins are
available, it has been possible to confirm only a few of them.
We may pass on therefore to an example of somewhat later
date, 1879. Details of this case are contained in a letter
from Mr F. Bastable, 14 Foskelt Road, Fulham, and appeared
in the Carpenter and Builder of the 30th of September 18q2.
The contractor of the Somerset and Dorset Railway, Mr T. A.
Walker, here employed Mullins under the following circum-
stances: ‘“‘ At the Shepton Mallet Station, on that line, it was
decided to sink a well close to the rails to supply water for the
locomotives. Wehadsunka depth of 250 feet entirely through
blue lias rock as dense and hard as possible, and as dry as a
bone, and began to look upon it as a forlorn hope, when Mr
Mullins was mentioned as a man likely to help us in the matter.
After much hesitation and fear lest it should turn out to be a
hoax—we were very incredulous—it was decided to ask the
advice of Mr Mullins, who came at once, and with very little
trouble discovered for us close at hand that for which we had
sought so long... . The most favourable spot was found to
be about 50 feet from our well. Mr Mullins, from his obser-
vations of the action of the forked twig, advised us to com-
mence and drive a heading about 50 feet down the well, and
under [where the twig turned] we should have abundance.
This was done, and when at that spot our miners had to rush
out and up for their lives, leaving behind them their steel drills,
hammers, clothes, etc. The well soon filled up, and when
we left in 1879 the water was within 12 feet of the surface.

We procured two pairs of smith’s tongs to see if the twigs
did actually twist, and held them in a tight grip, with one pair
securing the tips and the other the fork, but the contractions
still went on between the points held. What the power con-
sists of Iam still at a loss to conceive ; but this I know, not one
of us present at the operation had any doubts afterwards
as to his ability in discovering water in the earth.”’

In a letter to the Daily Graphic for the 30th of March 1892,
Mr T. J. Hickes, of Truro, describes the same case. Both he
and Mr Bastable wrote from personal knowledge of the facts,


116 THE DIVINING-ROD


but from memory, and it is not surprising that their figures
differ. They agree, however, in all essential details, as the
account is further confirmed by Mr F. J. Clark, F.L.S., who
wrote to say that he was well acquainted with the case, which
came to his knowledge at the time of its occurrence, his father
being then a director of the line. Mr Clark added, ‘“‘ I went to
see my father on receipt of your letter, and he tells me the
account you have printed [as above] is correct, though his
impression is that the well was not quite so deep.” Mr Clark
thought the depth was Ioo feet.

No apology is needed for the length of the next relation,
for it is not only one of the best general accounts of dowsing,
but also a good instance of Mullins’s successes, and still further
illustrates the concordant discoveries of two independent dow-
sers. The account is by Sir W. E. Welby-Gregory, M.P.,
Denton Manor, Grantham, and is dated the 28th of January
1883. This letter was originally addressed to Mr Vaughan
Jenkins.

“In the spring of 1877 I was preparing to build a large
country house on a new site, which I had selected on account,
among other reasons, of its dryness. This site was on a large
plateau of red loamy soil, resting on a bed of solid rock ! several
feet thick, in which there was no indication of water; and it
was a problem where the water supply was tocome from, as
there was none apparent which could be brought to the house
without great expense. While puzzling over this I heard that
John Mullins, of Colerne, had been employed to find water at
various places in the neighbourhood with very remarkable
success ; that he had been tested in almost every conceivable
way, and that not only country gentlemen and farmers, but
plumbers in the neighbouring towns had frequently called in
his aid, purely as a matter of business, and I was at last in-
duced to send for him. When he came, I asked him whether
he required a twig of any particular wood, and he replied
that almost any wood would do, except lance-wood and box-
wood, which were too stiff. He then cut for himself from the
nearest convenient tree, which I think was a sycamore, a forked
twig in the shape of a Y of a foot or 18 inches long. I set
him to work for a few minutes at first on my lawn, sending
him over parts where I knew there was a current of water at a
depth of a few feet, though none was visible or audible on the
surface. He slowly quartered his ground like a pointer, bend-
ing forward and holding the twig about the level of his knees,


1 The rock I believe is marlstone, and the thickness of the upper
bed has been since ascertained to be between 7 and 8 feet.


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 117


point downwards, and tightly grasped an inch or two from
the extremities of the prongs of the fork, with, if I recollect
rightly, the thumb and fourth and little fingers of each hand
below, and the fore and middle fingers above the twig. When-
ever he crossed the water, of which I have spoken (a drain),
the twig turned upwards in his hands, though he apparently
resisted its doing so to the utmost ; and the same thing hap-
pened at other parts of the lawn, where, though we did not
know of any runlet, it was very likely that one existed.

I then took him to the kitchen garden, where we had always
been much in want of water ; and presently the twig stopped
him at a spot apparently as dry as the rest, and with nothing
distinctive about it. I asked him what amount he supposed
there was, whether running or stagnant, and at what depth.
He answered that he was certain there was water, and that it
was running, for no amount of stagnant water had the slightest
effect upon him ; but that he could only guess at the amount
and the depth from the force with which the twig turned up.
From his experience he should say that it was a stream not
thicker than a walking stick, and at a depth of from 20 to 30
feet. He traversed the rest of the kitchen garden without
finding any more, and I next took him to the site of the new
house. Here he soon indicated two lines, about 30 yards apart,
along which he said water was flowing in somewhat greater
volume than the rill he had found in the kitchen garden, and
at a depth, he thought, of from 30 to 40 feet. This was all he
could find there, and as this seemed hardly likely to be sufficient
for my requirements, I felt that it must be looked for at a
greater distance. To save time, I took him to a spot from
which he could see the contour of the hills (about a mile dis-
tant from the house) from which most of our water comes,
showed him what spring we knew of, and told him to choose
for himself the best part to try for more. He unhesitatingly
selected the upper part of a certain hill (which was afterwards
pronounced by an eminent civil engineer to be unquestionably
the most likely spot within sight to contain water), and thither
we went. He tried the whole of that hillside over, without
finding a drop, and we afterwards took another hillside with
no better success.

It was now late, and Mullins was evidently becoming ex-
hausted. I felt that I had seen enough to convince me that
he was no impostor, and that whatever discoveries he made
were due to some force over which he had no control, not to
any power he had acquired by experience or observation of
making good guesses at where water was likely to be; but I


118 THE DIVINING-ROD


was not satisfied that he had found anything for me which
promised to be of any practical use ; so I dismissed him to
tea in the housekeeper’s room. After tea several of the ser-
vants whose curiosity was excited got him to exhibit his art
to them, and tried whether they themselves had any power
with the twig. My gardener, Joseph Towers, found that it
worked in his hands nearly as strongly as in those of Mullins
himself. I took no further action then in the matter; but
described what I had seen to the civil engineer before referred
to, who, though by no means altogether pooh-poohing it,
assured me that from his knowledge of the geological formation
of the country, he could say confidently there was no chance
of finding a water supply under my new house at a depth of
less than 120 or 130 feet ; and his opinion was confirmed by
another geological authority who was then in the neighbour-
hood. So I virtually gave up all hope of deriving any benefit
from Mullins’s assertions. Some weeks later, however, my
gardener came to me and said that he was in great want of
water in the kitchen garden; that he had tried repeatedly
with the twig over the place where Mullins indicated a rivulet ;
that it invariably turned up at the spot, and that he was quite
convinced there was water there. If I would allow him, he
could sink a well with the garden labourers, so as not to involve
any additional expense. I consented to this; the well was
sunk to a depth of nearly 20 ft., when water poured into it
freely, and it has supplied a long range of hot-houses ever
since.

I had previously decided upon bringing down the main
supply of water to the new house in pipes, by gravitation,
from a considerable distance ; but as this was a heavy work,
necessarily taking much time, the question of a supply during
building had become urgent, and on the strength of what had
occurred in the kitchen garden, I set Towers to traverse the
new site, where the lines of water indicated by Mullins had
been marked by pegs 60 yards or 70 yards apart, and just
visible above the grass. These lines Towers and his twig
emphatically confirmed, and I proceeded to test him. I had
the projecting extremities of the prongs of the twig held tight
by pincers, so that there could be no voluntary action on
Towers’s part when crossing the marked lines. Despite of this,
the point of the twig twisted itself upwards, till the bark was
wrinkled and almost split, while the strain and pressure upon
the muscles of the man’s hands were most apparent. I then
blindfolded him, and turned him loose. The result was pre-
cisely the same. Whenever he crossed Mullins’s lines, up went


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 119g


the twig. The presumption now appeared to be so strong in
favour of the twig that I determined to disregard the geolo-
gists, and havea well sunk on one of the lines. This was done ;
at the depth of about 28 ft. the water rushed in, and rose
till it stood about 8 ft. deep, at which it now remains, having,
in the meantime, fully supplied all the requirements during
building the house, which were probably not less than 1,000
gallons a day for three years or more, and since that having
acted as an ample reserve to the house for all purposes when-
ever the distant supply for any reason has had to be shut
off. J may add that I have since had occasion to sink a shaft
for a lift between the two lines indicated by Mullins, some
12 yards or 15 yards from either, and to a depth considerably
greater (10 ft. or 12 ft.) than the well. As no water came
into this, though the formation was precisely similar, and the
well has not been affected by it, I am satisfied that, had I
not employed Mullins, I might have sunk wells in any number
to no purpose under my house, unless I had happened to hit
upon the rills indicated by him with such perfect precision.”’

One part of this valuable case being the successful tracing
of underground pipes, it will be interesting to quote a similar
experimental case. It is taken from The Garden of the 11th of
April 1885. The writer is Mr W. Crump, head gardener of
Earl Beauchamp’s estate, Madresfield Court, Malvern: ‘‘ Many
successes in finding water on Earl Beauchamp’s estates could
be named ; in fact, not a single failure is known. Amongst
the most recent consultations with Mullins was one concerning
a well that had been sunk 116 feet without finding water.
Mullins selected a spot a few yards distant, where, at a depth
of 50 feet, an inexhaustible supply was found by him. He
again selected a spot, naming water at 30 feet deep, and it
was found at 27 feet. Many other instances could be men-
tioned, and so certain is he of his power that he offers to dig
the wells without charge if proved wrong in his judgment.

Mullins was engaged to find some water on an estate at
Madresfield last week, and on the day before his visit we
prepared for him a series of severe tests. No. 1 was to send
him into a field which he had never seen before, in which a
six-inch socket glazed pipe drain conveyed a stream of water
to supply the moat. On the surface there was not the slightest
trace of this drain, the depth of which was about three feet.
All being in readiness, Mullins commenced to cast about with
his twig, when, to every one’s astonishment, the moment he
came upon, or over the water, up went the twig to the per-
pendicular. He further proved the exact subterranean posi-


120 THE DIVINING-ROD


tion of the drain again and again. No. 2 test was similar to
the last, but the pipes in this case were of iron rather deeper.
Nevertheless the result was equally satisfactory ; of course
every member of the party tried to use the rod, but amongst
them only one young lady had any influence over it.”

These facts are confirmed in several letters from Mr Crump
and, as regards the tracing of the underground pipes, by the
Rev. G. S. Munn, who conducted the experiments, in the
following letter, dated the 24th of February 1897 from Madres-
field Rectory, Malvern: “‘ In reply to queries respecting Mul-
lins and water-finding, I may say that I was told off to test
Mullins on his first visit to Madresfield. Snow was on the
ground two or three inches deep, entirely obliterating all
external indications of water. Knowing the locality well,
I took him alone in a line across two places beneath which
water ran. One of these had been laid down so many years
before that I believe it was known only to myself. In both
cases the rod turned up exactly on the spot. I won’t trouble
with other instances where, as in the above, all collusion and
deception was quite impossible, except to say that on one of
Lord Beauchamp’s farms, which had been very short of water
for many years, after much searching, he indicated a spot
where water would be found at, so far as I remember, from
20 to 30 feet below the surface. A well was sunk through the
rock; the water was found, and I believe there has been an
ample supply since.

On the last occasion Mullins was here, a considerable num-
ber of persons came to see his performances ; many tried to
see if they had the power. When all had failed, I persuaded
one of my daughters to take the rod, and to my great surprise,
it acted in her hands as well as in Mullins’s. She has used
her power on some few occasions to find water for friends, and
also to convince those who have doubted the possibility—
as I did, entirely, before I was convinced.

If you saw the rod act when in the hands of those who have
the power, you would see at once that no possible action of the
hands could produce the results.”

Yet another case of this nature is the following one, which
is additionally interesting because Mullins also succeeded in
finding hidden gold. Mr W. R. Bruce (one of the Masters in
the King’s Bench Division of the High Court of Justice in
Ireland), wrote as follows from Rockford, Blackrock, Co. Dub-
lin on the 6th of May 1897: ‘‘I engaged Mullins to come here
for a day on his way back from my brother’s, where I had
seen him try for water. To test his powers I took him into


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 121


my yard, across which a small pipe ran underground, supply-
ing the house with water from the main. Before doing this
I turned the cock and stopped the flow of water. Mullins
passed the pipe and the rod gave no sign. While he and the
persons about him were engaged in this, I went into the house
unobserved, and having turned on the cock suggested his
again making a circuit of the yard. He did so, and when he
crossed the pipe, the rod turned up, the water then not being
stagnant, but flowing through the pipe. There were certainly
no signs in the yard to show that a pipe had been laid under
the ground, and I am convinced there was no audible sound of
running water, and nothing in my action to give Mullins any
hint on the subject.

I put him to another test ; he said that gold had the same
effect as water. While he was in the house getting his dinner,
I went out and hid half-a-sovereign in the ground on the
marked line of a tennis ground. I am certain no one saw me
do this. I then took him out and told him to try and find
the coin, which was some place under the line. He did find
the coin. I am certain that nothing in my face or manner
gave him any indication of where it was, and it was absolutely
impossible for any one to have discovered it by eyesight. In
fact, I had some difficulty in finding the exact spot myself.
I should add that in going round the tennis ground the divining
rod turned up two or three times before Mullins arrived at the
spot over the coin. This he accounted for by saying there
was water there, which is quite comprehensible.”

At the beginning of the above case it is stated that Mullins
was on his way back from Mr Bruce’s brother. There also
Mullins had had a success, and also in finding coins as well as
water. MrS. Bruce, of Norton Hall, 3 miles north of Campden,
in Gloucestershire, records this series of successes on the part of
Mullins. They are notable for the detailed manner in which
his predictions were fulfilled and also because Mr Westlake
investigated the circumstances on the spot and confirmed
the facts as stated by Mr Bruce in his letter dated the 23rd of
April 1897: ‘‘ With reference to Mullins, it is about 12 years
since he came here. I believe he had never been here or in
the neighbourhood before. We sunk at three places pointed
out by him, and got water at each of them. The sub-soil here
is blue lias clay, and goes down a great depth. A friend of
mine, who bored near here 5 or 6 years ago, got down over
1,200 feet before he got through the clay; this clay is quite
impervious to water, the neighbouring hills are oolite brash.

This house is built on a levelled or terraced slope. When


122 THE DIVINING-ROD


Mullins first got to work at the hall door, before he had gone
ro yards he stopped and said there was water there, but it was
not a convenient place to sink, so we went on. It was some
time before he got to another place, which was in the stable
yard ; there he said we would find water at about 30 feet.
When we came to sink, we got to water at about the depth he
said, which rose at the rate of about 6 feet a day (that is, 24
hours) till we had about 20 feet in the well of about 3 feet
diameter. We then tried another place he pointed out, with
a similar result. Then the men who were sinking for me,
local men, said that any one would know how to find water
there, that there was water anywhere along the bank, mean-
ing the slope on which the house stands. I told them to go
and pick a place and try. After some discussion, they sank
close to my lodge ; when they had got 30 feet down they had
not got water, and they said there was no use going further, as
they were then down into the blue clay; at the end of a week
there were not 6 inches of water in that well.

We then tried another place that Mullins had marked close
to the house, and about 20 yards from the place where he first
stopped by the hall door. Mullins had told us we would find a
very strong spring here, about 20 feet down. When we got
about 12 feet down, we got signs of water, and when we got 17
feet the water came so fast the men could not sink any fur-
ther ; it was a case of getting out three buckets of water to
one of clay.

The men that were sinking had up to now rather scoffed at
Mullins’s theories, but now the head man said, ‘ This man must
know something more than we do after all, for the water is
coming through a vein of gravel not bigger than my hat, and
if we had been 3 feet one side or other of it we would not
have got a drop ; ’ these men were well sinkers by trade. This
well did not hold out when we got a long spell of dry weather,
and I always think that there is an underground connection
between it and the well in the stable yard, and also with
another one in the house yard, and this well being the shallow-
est of the three gives out ; probably the vein of gravel runs
on and connects with the others. Once, in a very dry time,
—1887, I think,—it was the well in the stable yard failed, and
we had a lot of water from a pond filled into it; we found
that the well in the house yard rose as we filled into the one in
the stable yard, and the water was dirty like pond water. I
don’t think I can give you any more information on the
matter.

Mullins also found a half-sovereign that I had buried in a


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 123


walk we were then making. I would have lost the half-
sovereign if it had not been for him, as I was so careful not to
put any mark lest he might notice that I was not able to find
the place myself, and when he stopped and said-it was under
his foot, I thought he was wrong, but there it was! ”

These successes are the more remarkable when it is remem-
bered that this part of Gloucestershire is very badly watered,
with springs fewand far between. Next we have an example
in which Mullins not only found water in the usual way by
dowsing, but located an underground pipe and also succeeded
in re-finding the spot he had marked, after he was blind-
folded. This case, from the collection of Mr Vaughan Jenkins,
is the following, which is not only recorded at first-hand by a
responsible personage but which contains some interesting
experiments. The account is by the Hon. M. E. G. Finch
Hatton, M.P., later the Earl of Winchilsea, writing from
23 Ennismore Gardens, S.W., on the 29th of February 1884:
“ Hearing that J. Mullins possessed the power of finding springs
of water, by means of a forked twig held between his hands, I
desired him to come over to Haverholme Priory, near Sleaford,
where I live.

This is what happened. First he cut a forked twig from a
living tree, and held it between his hands, the centre point
downwards and the two ends protruding between the fingers
of each hand.

He then stooped forward and walked over the ground to be
tried. Suddenly he would stop and the central point would
revolve in a half circle until it pointed the reverse way. This
he stated to be owing to the presence of a subterranean spring,
and further that by the strength of the movement he could
gauge the approximate depth.

My brother, Hon. Harold Finch Hatton, and I each took
hold of one of the ends, protruding as stated above, and held

‘them fast while the phenomenon took place, to make sure
that it was not caused by a movement, voluntary or otherwise,
of the man’s own hand or fingers. The tendency to twist
itself, on the twig’s part, was so great that, on our holding
firmly on to the ends, the twig split and finally broke off.

The same thing occurred when standing on a bridge over a
running stream.

Stagnant water, he states, has no effect on the twig.

Though now convinced ourselves of the man’s good faith,
and of the automatic—or rather independent—action of the
twig, we resolved to test Mullins in various ways, of which
the following is an account.


124 THE DIVINING-ROD


First we established it on good authority that Mullins had
no previous acquaintance with Haverholme.

1. I took him on to the grass in front of the house, across
which the water-supply pipe passed. There was no indication
of its presence on the surface, nor did I previously mention its
existence to Mullins; on crossing it, the twig moved in the
manner described, and he could trace the water to right and
left by its means, along the path actually taken by the pipe.

2. On our way to the kitchen garden Mullins discovered a
spring on the open lawn, whose existence was unknown to me,
it had been closed in so long, but was subsequently attested by
an old labourer on the place who remembered it as a well,
and had seen it bricked in many years before.

3. On reaching the kitchen garden I knew that a lead pipe,
leading water to a tap outside the wall, crossed the gravel
path at a certain spot. On crossing it the twig made no sign.
I was astonished at first, till I remembered what Mullins had
said about stagnant water, and that the tap was not running.

I sent to have it turned on, re-conducted Mullins over the
ground, when the twig immediately indicated the spot.

When Mullins had passed on, I carefully marked the exact
spot indicated by the twig. When he had left the garden, I
said, ‘ Now, Mullins, may we blindfold you and let you try ? ’
He said, ‘ Oh yes, if you don’t lead me into a pond or anything
of that sort.’ We promised.

Several sceptical persons were present who took care the
blindfolding was thoroughly done.

I then re-conducted him, blindfold, to the marked spot by
a different route, leaving the tap running, with the result that
the stick indicated with mathematic exactness the same spot.
At first he slightly overran it a foot or so, and then felt round,
as it were, and seemed to be led back into the exact centre of
influence by the twig.

All present considered the trial entirely conclusive of two
things.

First, of the man’s perfect good faith.

Secondly, that the effect produced on the twig emanated
from an agency outside of himself, and appeared due to the
presence of running water.

My brother, Mr Harold Finch Hatton, is present as I write,
and confirms what I say.

It is true that one of the Misses Wordsworth tried the twig,
and was surprised to find that an influence of a similar nature,
though not so strong, was imparted to it.

I merely give facts, without attempting to explain them.


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 125


No doubt it will be long before they are generally admitted
—probably not until scientific (?) men cease to gratify their
vanity by denying the existence of everything they cannot
explain or account for fully.

It appears to me to be due to some occult form of magnetism,
requiring a high conductive power in the operator. Mullins
says he feels something akin to an electric shock each time,
and that his arms ache all night after many experiments.”

Mr G. Troyte-Chapyn-Grove, F.S.A., is the owner of 7,000
—8,000 acres in the West of England ; in his property are some,
valuable dairy farms in Wilts and Dorset. They were so badly
supplied with water, that his tenants were in great difficulties.
Mullins was then called in, and, in Mr Grove’s words, ‘“‘ He
was most successful in doing so [“‘ in discovering some sources
of water with his.Divining Rod ’”’], with hardly one failure,
and having bored at the spots indicated, and within a few feet
of the depths he stated, I was fortunately able to supply the
Dairy Farms with excellent water to the great content of
the Dairymen and the complete satisfaction of my tenants.”’
Mr Grove goes on to say that since that time he has had no
occasion to employ a dowser, as his bailiff at the Home Farms
was found to be an excellent dowser, and successfully found
water for farms and cottages. This fact is verified by a quite
independent communication from Mr John E. Holland, of
Wanham, Bampton, Devonshire, who states that the bailiff’s
name was Rhoades.

The reader will remember the striking manner in which
Mullins found water at Waterford. Encouraged by this success
Mr Christie-Miller, the proprietor of the works supplied at
Waterford, employed Mullins on several subsequent occasions,
detailed by Mr and Mrs Christie-Miller in a number of letters
from 1891 to 1897.

In June 1891 Mullins went by invitation to Broomfield, near
Chelmsford. Here he indicated a number of places where he
declared water would be found. At one place he stated that
water would be found at 40 feet and he also indicated the
direction of the flow. A well was sunk and a supply reached
at 404 feet ; the direction was found to be as predicted. In
another place Mullins indicated water at between 50 feet and
60 feet; a strong spring was met at 4o feet.

Mullins’s next visit was at Kircassock, Lurgan, in Ireland.
He marked seventeen springs. Of these two were tested. In
the one Mullins had predicted a given supply (not specified
in the record) at 15 feet ; the stated supply was encountered
at exactly that depth, and was used to supply cottages. In


126 THE DIVINING-ROD


the other case Mullins foretold water at 60 feet; a small
supply was met at 40 feet and the well was satisfactorily deep-
ened to 60 feet.

In one of her last letters Mrs Christie-Miller writes: ‘“ We
are unable to quote an instance of failure with the divining rod,
and can therefore speak most confidently in favour of water
finding by the twig. We have seven wells sunk after marking
by Mullins with his rod.”

A case from the same neighbourhood as the Waterford
triumph is the following. Mr J. H. Jones, a gentleman living
at Mullinabro, near Waterford, who afterwards found that he
was himself a dowser, writes in a letter dated the 3rd of January
goo: ‘‘ Some few years ago, a friend and neighbour of mine,
after trying in vain to obtain an unpolluted water supply
for his house, decided to enlist the services of Mr Mullins, the
dowser. I was asked to witness the experiments and was
glad to do so.

Mr Mullins, on his arrival at Waterford, per steamer, drove
rapidly to his client’s house and in a few minutes indicated
an underground water supply near the house quite uncon-
nected, as he alleged, with the flow to a polluted pump-well
in the stable yard; he pointed out a favourable spot for
sinking, where subsequently a splendid supply of pure water
was found at about 30 feet deep.”’

It will be seen that the success in this incident was the
finding of a pure water supply ; the same applies to the next
two cases to be quoted. The former of these may be thus
summarised: Mr Charles William Nasmith, the head of a well-
known firm of chartered accountants in Manchester, needed
a new supply of water at his house, Mereleigh, Chelford, Cheshire,
owing to the fact that the only well he had was only 18 feet
deep and had been condemned. He accordingly employed
Messrs Timmins, a local firm of well-borers; working from
the geological chart of the neighbourhood, they recommended
a certain spot not far from the condemned well. At consider-
able expense a boring to a depth of 480 feet was made, but
without success so far as water was concerned.

Mr Nasmith then applied to John Mullins, who was a stranger
to the locality. Mullins found water under the lawn and
traced the underground flow to the kitchen garden; here he
indicated a spot only ro feet from the 480 feet bore. He declared
that good water would be found at not more than 40 feet from
the surface. Heasked to be allowed to undertake the necessary
work, agreeing not to charge for the work if his predictions
were not substantiated. As a result the well was made and


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 127


at 36 feet a good supply of water of excellent quality was
found. This success was all the more remarkable since it
was so near the deep boring and not far from the disused well.

The well-borers disputed these facts, declaring that the
water in Mullins’s well was only surface water and not fit for
use. Mr T. V. Holmes was asked to make a geological report,
but was unable to offer any conclusive opinion. Mr Nasmith
re-affirmed his statement that there was a good supply of
water and that it was of perfectly good quality ; and he, having
to use the water, may be allowed the last word. Moreover,
if the supply was merely surface water, the same quantity
should have been obtained in the deep boring on reaching
the depth of Mullins’s well, which had not been the case.

The last of the cases to be quoted in connexion with the
finding of a specially required supply of pure water is the
following. In the Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries for
June 1897, the Editor, the Rev. C. H. Mayo, M.A., published
a letter from Mr H. W. Hoskyns, dated the 2nd of January
1889, concerning an experience in dowsing. Application for
further information was made to Mr Hoskyns, which he readily
gave and allowed Mr Westlake to make a geological examination
on the spot.

Having an impure supply of water on his estate, North
Perrott Manor, Crewkerne, Somersetshire, he sent for John
Mullins, who, by means of the rod, fixed upon the best site
for sinking a well, estimating the water to be about 25 ft.
below the surface. The well was sunk, solid rock was soon
encountered, and after 25 ft. below the surface had been
reached, and a considerable thickness of rock pierced, still
no water was found. Suddenly, however, when 254 ft. had
been reached, an inrush of water took place, so rapid that
the men had to be hurriedly withdrawn from the well; the
water rose 234 ft. and has thus stood, 2 ft. from the surface,
ever since, even in the driest summers. An old well some
20 ft.-30 ft. deep and about 18 yards distant, contained water
that was so polluted that it could not be used, though the well
had been cleaned out several times. The spring found by Mul-
lins at a less depth has given a constant supply of pure water.
In another part of the estate, about 50 yards further west,
Mullins indicated another well, which, sunk to a depth of 18
ft., gives a fair supply.

The first well was sunk in the Inferior Oolite, and the water
rushes rapidly at 254 ft. through a joint in the rock. The
well gives a supply of pure water so constant that it is full
even when the river is nearly dry; the water is probably


128 THE DIVINING-ROD


dammed up by a downthrow of Fuller’s earth, which passes
close to the farm.

Among Edmund Gurney’s papers were found several com-
munications on dowsing. Here is one which relates to Mullins
written by Miss C, I. Burton from Longner Hall, Shrewsbury,
on the 31st of January 1888: ‘‘ Onthe 22nd of December 1887,
we sent for Mr Mullins, the water-finder. He was driven from
the railway station to the Weir Hill farm, where water has
been scarce (and sometimes altogether absent) from time im-
memorial; and the consulting engineer thought it useless to
make any further search.

Mr Mullins having cut a number of twigs from nut trees,
held one by the two prongs and proceeded to walk over a field
—it sprung up suddenly and broke ; he said, ‘ There is water
at a depth of 60 feet.’ He then followed the spring up a
ploughed field and marked the spot where we were to dig.
He said we should find a strong spring from 35 to 45 feet down,
but if we failed at that depth we were to go on; he then took
his fee and departed. Wesunk toa depth of 45 feet and began
to despair and doubt Mr Mullins’s powersextremely. However,
we went on through a seam of coal, when suddenly, at 48 feet,
the water rushed in and is now 29 feet in depth.”

Mr Gurney thereupon wrote to Mrs Burton the following
letter, which is quoted as an illustration of the vast amount
of letter writing that he undertook and the admirable way in
which he seized the main issue of an investigation.


“26, Montpelier Square, S.W. February 5th, 1888.


Dear Madam,—Very many thanks for your account of the
water-finding. But one would need to know one thing. Had
there been ever digging to as great a depth as 48 feet before ?
If not, we cannot be sure that water might not have been found
at numbers of other places, had the digging been continued
to that depth ; and so the evidential value of the case is left
doubtful. Would you kindly let me know this? and believe
me, yours very truly,

EDMUND GURNEY.”


Mrs Burton replied: ‘‘ Yes, we had dug before deeper than
48 feet, about 200 yards nearer the farmhouse 50 years ago,
and some water unfit for use was found. Last year we sank
a very deep well also near the house; blasting through the
rock we came to what is called a ‘ pocket’ of water and all
the water disappeared and the well remained dry, the foul
gas being too strong to continue the work.”’


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 129


It was learned from Mr R. T. Glasebrook, F.R.S., the Bursar
of Trinity College, Cambridge, that Mullins had been success-
fully employed on one of the estates of the College. Inquiries
were addressed to Mr Reginald Woolley, the College agent,
who replied as follows: ‘‘ We determined to try the dowser,
—who had been successful for my firm elsewhere,—before under-
taking experimental boring.

I met John Mullins at the Farm (Walkeringham) along with
the tenant, on the 16th of May 1893. I took him to the place
which would be convenient as the site of a windmill pump
to supply the farmstead. He soon passed a point at which
the twig turned up strongly. He estimated the spring as fairly
good, and from 60 to 70 feet deep. He marked other points,
but we bored only at the first. A spring was found at 45 feet
g inches, and others at about 80 feet, the depth to which we
went. These springs yield an ample supply.

A point of interest is that the contractor for the boring,
who was a local man quite unconnected with Mullins, stated
that if the boring had been driven a few inches from the
point fixed, the first spring would have been missed.’’ 2

In reply to a query with regard to the other successes men-
tioned by Mr Woolley, his brother (Mr T. C. S. Woolley) replied
on the 24th of June from South Collingham, Newark: ‘‘ We
have employed the late J. Mullins for other clients than Trinity
College, Cambridge, with satisfactory results.

I made use of his services in Gloucestershire on Lord Leigh’s
estate, where he found us an excellent and invaluable spring
of water.

It may interest you to know that in one spot where he
indicated water, I took the twig in my own hands and went
over the same spot with no result.

He then took hold of my wrists without touching the twig
himself and when we together walked over the same place,
the twig turned up in my hands. This was, I suppose, caused
by muscular action on my part, but if so, it was certainly,
as far as I was concerned, perfectly unconscious action. My
mental attitude was one of neutrality!”

Finally may be quoted the following testimonial, which shows
the scale on which Mullins was successful, having been instru-
mental in the discovery of 25 wells for one client. This letter
from Mr W. D. Little, estate agent to the Earl of Jersey, is
addressed to Mr J. Mullins from the Estate Office, Middleton
Park, Bicester, Oxon., and dated the zoth of August 1890:
‘In reply to your letter of inquiry, I have much pleasure in

1 [How the contractor knew this is not stated].


9


130 THE DIVINING-ROD


informing you that since August 1884 I have had upwards
of 25 wells dug on sites where you had found springs by means
of the dowsing rod, and in every instance an abundant and
unfailing supply of water has been obtained. These wells have
been sunk on the estates of the Earl of Jersey in the counties
of Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, and Middlesex, and on the
Charterhouse Estate in Wiltshire. I send you a copy of a
letter which appeared in Farm and Home in 1885.”

The following is the letter Mr Little addressed to the journal
he names: “ As it may, perhaps, interest some of the readers
of Farm and Home, I venture to send a statement of the
practical results of seven wells sunk during the autumn of 1884
on the Earl of Jersey’s estate at Middleton Park, near Bicester,
Oxon., on sites located by John Mullins, of Colerne, Chippenham,
Wilts, by means of the dowsing rod. I may preface the follow-
ing statement by saying that the unprecedented drought of
last year was most severely felt in Oxfordshire, and water had
to be carted a considerable distance at great expense for several
months, for all descriptions of stock. Mullins’s search for
water was made during the last week in August 1884, and the
sinking of the wells was proceeded with as soon after as possible.

No. I was sunk 22 yards from a well sunk in 1879, which
had proved to be useless even for supplying two cottages only.
At a depth of 18 feet an abundant supply of water was obtained
on the spot selected by Mullins. No. 2 was also sunk to
substitute a well made in 1879, which, although in a position
likely to yield plenty of water, had turned out useless. At
a distance of 60 yards from the old well, the new well, sunk on
a site selected by Mullins at a depth of 12 feet 6 inches, yielded
more water than two ordinary portable pumps would keep
down, the continued drought not seeming to affect it in any
way. No. 3 was a well that had gone dry, and was deepened
on the strength of Mullins’s recommendation with a satisfactory
result. No. 4, a well sunk to supply the mansion with drinking
water; it is 49 feet deep, and has an excellent spring with
the water standing about 25 feet deep in the well, the diameter
of which is of large size. It is proposed to further increase
the inflow of water by boring at some later period. No. 5
was sunk to supply two cottages. Although situate in a district
proverbially dry and badly off for water, a good supply was
found at a depth of 30 feet. No. 6—this is perhaps the most
remarkable well of the seven alluded to in this notice. At
a depth of 13 feet 6 inches a spring (whose existence was
not even suspected) was found that has been proved, after
being tested by steam pumps for several days, to yield between


|


TWO FAMOUS BRITISH DOWSERS 131


20,000 and 30,000 gallons of water per diem; and this after
an abnormally low rainfall during the year. No. 7—at a depth
of 18 feet an abundant supply has been found, and, like the
wells Nos. r and 2, has been sunk to substitute a well that
cannot be relied upon.”’

An instructive incident arose out of these successes; Lord
Jersey was so impressed by Mullins’s performance that he
determined to arrange an experiment. Mullins consented
and the experiments were duly made at Osterley Park under
the guidance of Sir James Crichton-Browne and in the presence
of the Earl of Jersey, Sir Herbert Maxwell and others. These
gentlemen, learned in their own departments, knew nothing
of dowsing and accordingly the tests they devised were of little
use. At one point Mullins was asked to allow himself to
be blindfolded ; he consented, but Sir James Crichton-Browne,
in a heavy-handed way, insisted on stuffing the bandage with
cotton-wool (a necessary precaution, certainly, when tactfully
done). Mullins became irritated, tore off the bandage and
“vowed that he had practised his profession for thirty years
without once having had his honesty called in question, and
would not submit to have it doubted now.”’ ‘ Don’t you be-
lieve my word ? ” said he, not scientifically it is true. But
Sir James’s answer was not more scientific : ‘‘ I believe nothing
but what I see’’!

This curious attitude of mind is reflected by the Right
Hon. Sir Herbert Maxwell himself; for, having recorded the
incident, he concludes with these strange words, almost incredi-
ble as coming from so learned and able an observer : ‘ I don’t
believe in the divining rod, but I don’t deny that its virtues
are genuine [ ! ]; and were I in straits to find water, I should
employ a professional water-finder—rod and all—if there
remains one so successful as Mullins was.’’}

The mass of evidence thus far presented on behalf of John
Mullins should enable everyone to come to a conclusion with
regard to his possession of the dowsing faculty.? It will be
asked whether there is any information regarding any possible


1 Sir H. Maxwell, Memoirs of the Months, i. 103-106 ; cp. vi. 171-174.

2 Among persons of position, in addition to those already cited, for
whom Mullins successfully dowsed, may be mentioned Lord Salisbury,
Sir Robert Roper, Lord Exeter, Lord Stanhope, the Dukes of Rutland,
Grafton, and Beaufort, Lord Knutsford, Lord Leigh, Lord Yarborough,
Lord Brownlow, Lord Heytesbury, Sir J. O. Poynder, M.P., and very
many others, in addition to innumerable commercial concerns, homes,
asylums, and the like. Mullins also discovered the spring at Catley
Abbey which is described as “‘ the only British natural seltzer water
spring,’ while dowsing for Mr H. Chaplin, M.P.


132 THE DIVINING-ROD


failures of Mullins’s, If such cases had been at all numerous
they would have undoubtedly reached Sir William Barrett,
who made numerous inquiries in all the districts visited by
Mullins in England and Ireland. A number of reports of failures
were certainly received, but very few bore investigation.
They were found to be due to other dowsers, or to one of
the young Mullins’s, or not to be failures at all, or only to
be partial failures, or even to be striking successes. One case
of ‘complete failure’? was advertised; it was stated that
the Hastings Board of Guardians had employed Mullins with
the result of a complete failure. Inquiries showed that the
failure was far from complete, the facts having been that
whereas Mullins had predicted water at 80 feet it was not
found until 200 feet had been sunk. Of such failures there
are certainly a few, perhaps ten or a dozen, not more, known
tous. The astonishing fact remains that even if all his known
failures were to be multiplied fivefold they probably would
hardly amount to five per cent. of the successes he had, for
the reader is again asked to remember that only a small propor-
tion of the successes known to us are reproduced in these
pages.

As an illustration of the caution that must be exercised in
accepting failures as well as successes may be quoted this case.
A great failure on the part of Mullins was reported from Carlow ;
the details seemed complete, and various critics made play
with it. Here is the result of an investigation on the spot
which Mr J. R. Kilroe was asked to make ; writing on the 16th
of July 1900 from the office of the Geological Survey of Ireland,
he says: ‘‘I have made inquiries about Mullins at Clonmel,
as promised, and found, to my disgust, that the people there
made the poor man drunk and turned his performances into
a laugh!”


CHAPTER VI


NOTABLE CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DOWSERS:
PROFESSIONAL


§z. WILLIAM STONE


ILLIAM STONE is a native of Burbage in Wilt-
shire, and has had a wide and successful experience
as a dowser, describing himself in his characteristic-

ally modest way as “‘ the most successful water finder living,’’ and
stating himself, fairly accurately, to be ‘‘ under the distinguished
patronage of Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, and their
Graces the Dukes of Northumberland, Grafton and Buccleuch,
and all the leading nobility.’’1 His business is that of a well-
sinker and water-engineer. Stone is a very shrewd business
man, not marred by any undue sense of modesty, and has a
very inflated notion of his own importance. He is, however,
very generally respected, having been Rector’s churchwarden
and a District Councillor of his parish, besides Chairman of
the Technical Education Committee for his district. In his
advertisements he does not forget to mention that he is a
Freemason and an Oddfellow, and makes casual references to
his kindness of heart and charitable nature.

But these are trifles; his solid achievements as a dowser
cannot be questioned, as the Carrigoona experiment, described
in detail above, shows well enough. It is only fair to say that
Stone submitted himself to this long and wearisome experi-
ment, not only without fee but at considerable inconvenience
to himself. What is worse is that he is often guilty of wild
exaggeration and even occasionally of direct misrepresenta-
tion. An example of this must be quoted as a warning. On
being requested to quote some examples of his dowsing successes,
Stone described, amongst others, a case at Arreton in the Isle
of Wight, writing: ‘‘ My visit to the Isle of Wight was to a
village called Arreton. Several attempts had been made, at


1 The quotations are from the title-page of his catalogue: Water /
Water ! Water ! (Spilsby [1899 ?] ).
133


134 THE DIVINING-ROD


great expense, to obtain a water supply to this village without
success, and upon my arrival I was told by the old men that
I should never find a spring of water in their neighbourhood.
I said, ‘ Well, you must wait and see,’ and I started to work
with my rod in hand, and in a few minutes I discovered a spot,
beneath which a good supply of water was flowing, and all
the company who were with me were astonished, and said that
was a spot they thought water would never be found at; I,
however, guaranteed a spring at 10 feet, and the work was
entrusted to me to carry out, which I did, and my men tapped
water at 9 feet, which quickly rose to the top, and I laid
it on to the Rectory and village by gravitation. A well had
been sunk within 20 yards of this spot, to a depth of about
50 feet, and not a drop of water was found.”

These details were substantiated by reports in several news-
papers, including The Morning Post for the 20th of September
1892. In The Daily Graphic for the 18th of April 1892 appeared
a photograph of Stone standing by a powerful jet of water,?
under the heading ‘‘ A Water Wizard in the Isle of Wight,”
together with the statement that the spring had proved more
than sufficient to supply the wants of the village. Mr Ernest
Westlake investigated this case on the spot and found that
Stone had been so sure of getting water that he had built a
large reservoir and laid pipes to the cottages before he had got
any. At that time there were four inches of snow on the
ground, and with this and other temporary supplies, when the
tap was turned on at the cottage, a powerful jet was got. By
this Stone had himself photographed. Unfortunately, however,
after a few minutes the supply ran out, and not a drop had been
obtained since !

Such cases, however, are exceptional, not more than a very
few having come to light after the most exhaustive investigation.
Before quoting instances in which Stone has been successful
it will be interesting to reproduce his own account of the
manner in which he discovered that he had the faculty of dows-
ing: ‘I was invited by a friend who had some suspicion that
I possessed the power of a ‘ diviner ’ to try the rod ; I did so,
and when walking with the rod in hand I felt a peculiar twitching
in the rod, and hearing that the rod would turn with any one
who had this feeling, I was determined to stop it, if possible ;
but, to my astonishment, the rod twisted itself over until it
broke in my grasp; a good spring of water was found to be
running beneath. I was, of course, some time before I would


ek photograph is reproduced ; it shows Stone’s manner of holding
the rod.


27


pi
RO


SZ OK
Go


Ta


Y yl %
Wf Cyyllliopy,


7


>
i or
o)

wt
=e
oa
O=
=I


yl
U/


St a


i)
z
LJ
=
4
fc
fe)
=


Ly ,


Ve,


‘-


ae a


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 135


take hold of the rod and try it, as I was an unbeliever, and
after I found I possessed the power, I was a long time before
I would practise it, though I had numerous invitations.

Since then I have discovered thousands of springs of water
with my divining rod, and can openly say that I have never
failed to find water at the spots I have indicated. In numerous
cases [have been called in after great expense had been incurred
without success; also in many instances I have discovered
water within a very few yards of the unsuccessful operations.
I may say that I have discovered over a hundred springs within
a radius of about 30 miles of where I am now living. I still
feel a peculiar tingling sensation passing through my body,
when standing immediately over springs of water.

The power to use the rod is not, I think, hereditary. My
father did not possess the power, but I have a little daughter
who possesses the power to a slight degree.”’

It should be noted that Stone does not work on the principle
of no water, no pay. He states that he is willing to undertake
work on the terms of only charging out-of-pocket expenses, in
addition to his fee, if water is not found. This is an unsatis-
factory system, for there is nothing to stop the borer going down
to prodigious depths until he does find water; complaints
against Stone in this respect have, in fact, been received.

On Stone’s statement that he never had a failure being ques-
tioned, he replied, ‘‘ I would frankly tell you, if I could recall
a single failure, but I do not know of even one that I have
had.” This, however, is not quite correct ; Stone, like other
dowsers, has had occasional failures. It is certainly true that
the number of these is very small compared to that of his
successes. In his catalogue and book of testimonials are very
many tributes to him, of which only one need be quoted (it
is from the Arthur’s Hill Brewery Company, Newcastle-on-
Tyne) : “ The success which has attended the sinking and com-
pletion of our well affords another striking proof of Mr Stone’s
marvellous power in the use of the divining rod. He visited
us in May 1894, and with his divining rod directed us to a spot
where he said we would find water about 4o feet from the
surface. His prediction was correct, for after sinking 41 feet,
we came upon a spring of beautiful water, large enough to
supply our wants at this brewery. We need scarcely say
that our confidence in Mr Stone’s ability is beyond doubt, and
he fully merits the fame which he has achieved in this district.

In reply to inquiries Mr Higginbottom, the writer of the above
letter, answered: “ Before engaging Mr Stone no attempts
had been made to find water by boring. I cannot believe Mr


136 THE DIVINING-ROD


Stone’s success in our case was a mere chance. His prediction
as to the depth at which we should find water was about
accurate.

These replies answer your questions. I may now add that
the experiments were made inside and outside the brewery ;
the strongest indication of the presence of water exhibited by
the twig in the hands of Mr Stone was in a cellar, the floor of
which was covered with cement about three inches thick.
Having in my own mind perfect confidence in the power of Mr
Stone I did not even bore, but at once proceeded with the
sinking of the well with the result that at a depth of 20 feet
we came across good feeders ; but at 40 feet, predicted by Mr
Stone as the depth at which we should find a good supply, we
found all the water we wanted and now can draw 3,000 gallons
per day. In order to put Mr Stone to a further test I took
him to a back street about 25 yards from the brewery where
very many years ago there was a pump (but of which Mr Stone
knew nothing) and on the very spot where it stood the twig
denoted the presence of water, but not of sufficient quantity
for our requirements.”’ This last fact was quite independently
substantiated by a correspondent writing in connection with
another case, that of the American Steam Laundry Co., of
Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Stone was asked to furnish particulars of any case in which,
as he stated in the communication quoted above, he had been
called in to find water with the rod “‘ after great expense had
been incurred without success.” He replied that he had not
kept a list of all these cases, but quoted a few that he remem-
bered. Here is one, in his own words: ‘“‘ Colonel Grantham,
West Keal Hall, Spilsby, dug to the depth of 50 feet for a water
supply for a house, without success, and sent for me to come
and test with my divining rod. I did so, and tested, and about
ten yards off where his deep sinking had been carried out, I
discovered a beautiful spring of pure water at a depth of 30
feet. The water came in so strong when tapped, that the men
had great difficulty in bricking the well.”

Inquiries were made and Captain Grantham, Colonel Gran-
tham’s son, who had taken great interest in the experiments,
substantiated the details. It appeared, however, that Stone’s
30 feet was really 42 feet, and his “about ten yards ” should
have been 15 yards. And this is characteristic of Stone’s
accuracy as to facts and tendency to exaggerate in details.
Captain Grantham added: “ There is an under-drain running
a small run of water across the drain in front of my house,
with nothing to indicate the place; I got him to walk along


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 137


the drive with his rod ; as soon as he stood over the drain the
twig turned over.”’

A striking case occurred at Sherburn-in-Elmet, Yorkshire.
Mr Walter Colley, of Leeds, the owner of the property, had
a well 70 feet deep from which he had obtained a good supply
of water for fifteen years. Then an artesian well was sunk
near by and Mr Colley lost his water, though he bored a further
go—I00 feet from the bottom of the well. Stone was then
called in and, 15 yards from the useless well, indicated a spot
where water would be found, he stated, at 60 feet. A well
was sunk and a good supply was in fact encountered at 62
feet. These facts are vouched for by Mr Colley himself and
it remains remarkable that an entirely distinct supply of
water should have been tapped at a lesser depth and at only
15 yards distance from the first supply. The water was
met in a layer of gravel and clay after sinking for the stated
depth through the magnesian limestone.

Among the testimonials addressed to Stone is one from a
firm of landagents, Messrs Bolan and Co., of Palace Chambers,
Westminster. They write: “‘ Having employed William Stone
on several estates of which we have the management, in various
parts of the country, with great success, we have pleasure in
recommending him to the notice of noblemen and gentlemen
desirous of finding water on their estates, and we can testify
to his efficiency in carrying out any works entrusted to him
in connection therewith.’”’ The value ofa dowser to land agents
and the like is well illustrated by the following case, in which
the assistance of Stone induced the purchase of an estate.
Stone’s account is as follows: “A large hall called Preston
Hall, Uppingham, Rutlandshire, had been standing empty
for several years through not having a water supply. Major
Codrington, of 110 Eaton Square, London, went to look at
it with the view of purchasing, and when he found there was
no water on the place he refused to purchase, but agreed he
would wait and see if I could find water. I was, therefore,
sent for, and upon my arrival I met Major Codrington and
the agents of the estate. They had also a gentleman from
London to meet me who is a leading geologist.

I at once tested with my rod, and said a spring of water
would be found flowing at about the depth of 60 feet. The
geologist said water would be found at 20 feet anywhere about
the place, and he said to the Major, ‘If you don’t find water
at 20 feet, don’t sink deeper whatever you do, for you won’t
find water until you get to 150 feet.’ It was decided to have
a trial for the water, and the well is now sunk ; not a drop of


138 THE DIVINING-ROD


water was found at 20 feet, so the well was carried deeper
until it reached 60 feet. Just at this depth, to the inch, a
beautiful spring'of water was tapped, which yields an abundant
supply for all purposes, and through this result Major Codring-
ton has purchased the estate.

Nine wells had been sunk on this estate before I visited
it, without success, and useless wells are on each side of the
well I have just sunk. My sinking plant is still on the
spot and the well is just completed and open for inspec-
tion.”

The geologist referred to refused to allow his name to be
mentioned, but Major Codrington kindly confirmed Stone’s
statement as follows: ‘‘ Stone’s account is substantially accur-
ate. There are a few details which are not quite accurate,
however. There was water on the place, but the supply was
insufficient. The geologist did not imply that water was to
be found at 150 feet, but he merely said, ‘ The clay is 150 feet
thick at least, and there is no water in it.’

At about 60 feet the clay was noticed to be very wet, and
the actual supply of water comes from a point 66 feet below
the surface of the ground, where there is a band of rock about
7 or 8 inches thick.

I sent a piece of this rock to the geologist, and he pro-
nounced it to be a band of limestone, such as frequently occurs
in the upper lias clay.

I may say that the soil which lies above this clay, and which
is from 20 to 25 feet thick, is known as ‘ Northampton sand.’
All the old wells are merely dug in this, but they have appar-
ently been neglected for years. They nearly all contained
some water, but, as I have said, the supply has not been
sufficient for the place.”” Major Codrington goes on to say that,
the analysis of the water being satisfactory, he purchased the
property. -

Here is an example of the money that can be saved on
occasion by the use of a dowser. Mr Stevenitt, for many
years Superintendent of Police in the Lincolnshire Constabu-
lary, requiring water at his house, Minting, Horncastle, spent
£200 in boring 290 feet, to no purpose, beyond getting some
salt water at 135 feet. He then applied to Stone who indicated
a spot in a field, about 20 yards from the stock yard and
45 yards from the useless boring. At 42 feet a supply ample
enough for Mr Stevenitt and his neighbours was encountered.
Mr T. V. Holmes comments: ‘ In Lincolnshire the gratitude
for good water at 42 feet on the part of Mr Stevenitt is most
intelligible,”’


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 139


Another of the cases brought forward by Stone is the follow-
ing : “‘ I discovered a spring in an estate in the North of Ireland
for a gentleman who lives at Newcastle-on-Tyne, after he had
spent an enormous amount of money without success. Upon
my arrival on the scene, I pointed out a spot where a spring
of water would be found, after walking about five minutes.
Water was found at this spot, less than 20 feet deep, and the
previous sinking and boring had been abandoned after being
put down to the depth of about 50 feet with no results. This
had been done in the same field I discovered the spring in at
20 feet deep.”

The name and address of this gentleman (Mr J, McKay,
6 Brandling Park) were obtained and application for details
was made to him; he replied as follows: “ In reply to your
letter of the 13th, with reference to Mr Stone and his ‘ divining
rod ’ (whom I employed on my place in county Down, in 1895),
before employing him I had quarried through 17 feet of granite
for water without success. I then sent a man from Northum-
berland with proper appliances to bore through the granite,
still hoping to find water. He worked for several months.
In December 1894 he reported to me that he had found a
good spring. In June 1895 we had no water; after a great
deal of expense it had turned out a complete failure. In
December 1895 I sent for Mr Stone, and I must confess my
faith in him was not very great at first, but I was soon convinced
he could point out where there was water. He did so on
several places on my land, and on one spot where he said there
was a good spring, we started and quarried down some 20 feet
in hard granite; we found a splendid spring and we have
a great supply of water. Through all the long drought last
spring and summer, when most of the springs in the neighbour-
hood were dry, ours showed no signs of diminishing. Where
Mr Stone found the spring was not near where we thought we
had a spring ; in fact, I would never have looked for one in
the place he pointed out.

I have great confidence in Mr Stone and his divining’ rod,
and Iam very pleased to recommend him. He has been success-
ful in finding water in several places in Northumberland and
Durham to my knowledge.”

In a later letter Mr McKay supplies further particulars, as
follows: ‘‘ (1) The depth of the old well quarried was 17 feet
deep. We then bored through hard granite 2g feet, in all 44
feet. There is a lake a little distance from where the well
was sunk. We were 6 feet 6 inches below the level of this
lake. We expected to have a good supply of water on account


140 THE DIVINING-ROD


of this. The depth we quarried where Mr Stone pointed out
was 23 feet, and we got a good spring.

(2) The locality where the land is situated is in South Down,
between Rathfriland and Castlewellan (about midway). Cabra
Towers, Cabra by Newry, is the postal address, and the nearest
railway station is Ballyroney via Scarva.”

We may now conclude this selection of examples of Stone’s
successes with the following interesting case. The Hareby
Estate at Spilsby in Lincolnshire consists of about I,000 acres


Fic. 35. PLAN oF WELLS ON THE HAREBY ESTATE


Wells marked W are those sunk before Stone came and are practically useless, though
considerably deeper than S! and S?, the wells sunk by Stone. S! is 7 feet deep
and supplies the house and other buildings; S* is the well 15 feet deep and
is 3 yards from an old well which is 28 feet deep and which has no water.


of land, on which are built a small village, a large mansion,
farm premises and a church. To procure the necessary water
supply, always a difficulty in this county, eight wells had been
sunk with no success. Accordingly the owner of the property
was put to great expense, two water-carts having been in con-
stant use for bringing water from a distance. Stone was then
called in and indicated two places where he declared water
would be found. One place was close to an old and useless well
80 feet deep ; here an ample supply of water was found at 7
feet deep. The other spot indicated by Stone was 3 yards


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 141


from a useless well 28 feet in depth ; here a supply of about
20,000 gallons per day was found at 15 feet. All the other
old wells were considerably deeper than this. These facts are
substantiated by independent statements made by Stone and
by the gentlemen who successively owned the property. This
was one of Stone’s most striking successes.


§ 2. BENJAMIN TOMPKINS


The career of Benjamin Tompkins, now of Ivy Lodge, Thet-
ford, dates from 1891, and he is, with William Stone, the most
successful professional English dowser living. Prior to the
date mentioned Tompkins was a tenant farmer; on his farm
he had been to some expense in trying to obtain a good supply
of water for his cattle and at last was advised to send for
Mullins and get the aid of the dowsing rod. This he did;
Mullins came and found a spot where he said a plentiful supply
of water existed at a depth of less than 30 feet. A well was
sunk and at 15 feet deep a strong spring was tapped, which
has yielded an unfailing supply ever since. After Mullins
left, Tompkins tried his own skill, and found the forked twig
also moved in his hand. He traversed another part of his
land, and found three spots where the twig turned vigorously.
Mullins was asked subsequently to try the same ground; he
came during Tompkins’s absence from home, tried over the
place, and fixed on the same spots that Tompkins had found,
and privately marked, unknown to Mullins. This led the
former to test his own powers in other ways, and, having
gained confidence, he was asked by Messrs Smith and Marshall,
of Chippenham, to try if he could find a spring on Lord Methuen’s
estate, as a well already sunk had proved useless. Tompkins
tried, and after a long search the rod moved at a certain spot
on a hillside, where he predicted a good supply of water would
be found. A well was sunk, by blasting through 9 feet of solid
rock, and at 18 feet a spring was struck, which rose some 9
or 10 feet in the well. Messrs Smith and Marshall afterwards
wrote as follows to Mr Tompkins: ‘“‘ The decision you arrived
at was perfectly correct, and it is our opinion that if we had
made the well 6 feet either way to the right or left of the
spot you marked, we should have missed the water, which is
now abundant.’”’ Messrs Smith and Marshall subsequently
vouched for these facts as ‘‘ perfectly correct.”

Arising out of this success Tompkins was next engaged by
Mr Charles Maggs, a Wiltshire county magistrate, and proprietor
of the Melksham Dairy Company, who required a large supply


142 THE DIVINING-ROD


of pure water for his butter factory ; in a field close to the
buildings he had had a well sunk to 21 feet and bored a further
18 feet, but no water was found. Tompkins was then asked
to dowse and indicated a spot at the other side of the field,
exclaiming, ‘‘ Here it is ; and a good head of water too! Not
running away, but just ready for tapping, and as soon as you
strike it, it will come surging up.”” He further stated that
the water would be found at 25 feet. A well was accordingly
sunk and at 22 feet a spring was encountered which rose to
within 12 or 15 feet of the surface. These details, which
are contained in letters from Mr Maggs, show therefore that
in the same field as a useless digging 39 feet deep, Tompkins
found an ample supply at 22 feet.

Encouraged by these initial successes Tompkins now adver-
tised in the press and received many engagements in most
parts of the country, and as far afield as South Africa. We
have seen a considerable number of testimonials tendered to
him voluntarily ; these show that he has been employed by
such individuals of responsible position as the Dukes of Beau-
fort, Grafton, and Marlborough, Lords Bathurst, Brassey,
Camoy, Chesterfield, Cowley, Dunraven, Lansdowne, Londes-
borough and Long, and a large number of other private persons,
these in addition to a number of Parish, Rural District, Town
and County Councils, and many Architects, Estate Agents,
Waterworks, Land and Railway Companies, Engineers and
Factories, as well as several Colleges. Among those for whom
Tompkins has successfully dowsed within the last year or two
are the Dearne Valley Water Board, Bolton; the Norfolk
Dairy Farmers’ Association, Norwich ; and Lord Yarborough,
Conisborough Castle, Yorkshire. Of this last case Mr W. L.
Cole, Lord Yarborough’s agent, states (Ist of December 1924)
that this was the fifteenth occasion on which he had employed
Tompkins, who had never failed. It is not claimed that in
all, or even in most, of these cases Tompkins obtained results
which could not have been equally well obtained by a geologist
or an experienced well-sinker. But these names do show
the trust reposed in a man avowedly practising an art unrecog-
nised by science, a trust that could only have been obtained
by repeated and constant success.

A few examples of such successes have now to be quoted.
The following letter is from the Rev. G. Booker, M.A., and
gives particulars of Tompkins’s dowsing for water at Woolhope,
Herefordshire: ‘‘ In reply to your queries, my brother in his
lifetime tried to deepen a small well at his lodge gate; and
he lost the very insignificant quantity of water which he had. -


Fic. 36. BENJAMIN Tompkins Dowsinc 1n SourH AFRICA


WORKING MEN’S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 143


There was on a high level, not far from the stable yard, a
small well; but there was no quantity of water in it; quite
insufficient for the supply of the house, and much more of the
stables and gardens. The principal supply of the house and
stables, etc., was drawn from two ponds used as reservoirs
to collect the surface water from the rain, and a so-called land
spring on a neighbouring estate. There was trouble about
the water supply almost every summer. Under these circum-
stances, I, being a trustee of the estate, had Mr Tompkins’s
work as a water-finder brought under my notice. I communi-
cated with him at once, and he came, and without any trouble
or delay found two springs, one of which, more convenient in
position, we adopted, and found water, sinking through the
hardest blue-stone, at 514 feet. Mr Tompkins in reply to an
enquiry of mine when he found the spring, named 50 to 55
feet as the probable depth we should have to sink; you will
see that the actual distance was between his two limits.

As to your third question [whether any prior attempts to
find water in the neighbourhood had been made without the
aid of a dowser] I have heard of attempts being made to sink
wells and get water in the immediate neighbourhood of my
son’s property ; but without success.

The Jaiter part of the sinking in our well had to be done with
dynamite. The water came in too quickly for the use of
gunpowder. When last I enquired, there were 25 feet in the
well, and the workmen are now fixing a wind-pump to lift the
water from the well and force it to the house and stables.
There may be charlatans amongst the so-called water-finders :
but Tompkins is a genuine man and may be trusted.”’

Mr Booker, on request, kindly sent the following further
details : ‘‘ The spring was found on the 19th of September 1893:
but the well was not sunk for some months after that date, as
Tompkins was very busy ; and when he got to work he had
to proceed by blasting with large charges all the way down.
It was past midsummer in 1894, I think, before he finished
the well, and had a head of water of 30 feet. I said 25 in my
last, but it is recorded as last mentioned. The parish where
the well was sunk is that of Woolhope, which is in County
Hereford, and distant (speaking roughly) equally from Here-
ford, Ledbury and Ross. It is, you may be aware, well known
to geologists from its presenting a sample of the silurian forma-
tion ; and is, I believe, mentioned by Sir Roderick Murchison
in one of his works.1 Tompkins’s success on my son’s estate
got him employment on the Earl of Chesterfield’s, which is


1 (Sir R. I. Murchison, Sijuria (1867), pp. 107 et seq.)


144 THE DIVINING-ROD


close at hand. If you were to see him at work you would not
doubt him. It is most interesting to see him following the
run of the spring.”

The following case is an extremely valuable one, not only on
its own account but because of the notes with which Mr West-
lake enriched it. This case was recorded by MrT. W. Pickard,
the steward of the estate in question, which comprises Toy
Farm. He wrote in 1899: ‘‘ About 30 years ago a well was
sunk at the Farm for some distance, and then abandoned on
account of bad air. After this another well was dug, 167 ft.
deep, but no water was found. Some short time before 1893
I personally took the depth; it was then quite dry, and the
old men living at the place never remembered water there.

In 1893 Mr Tompkins, of Chippenham, was engaged. I
purposely met him at the station and drove him to the place.
He had no idea to what part of the estate he had to go until
he got there, and he had no private conversation with any
of the men there. He went over the ground tracing all the
springs to one point, 450 ft. from the old well and from 8
to ro ft. above it, and said that water would be found at a depth
of 70 ft. I have marked on the enclosed tracing [Fig. 37] from
the 25-in. map, as near as I can recollect, the lines he traced
(they form a star of six sinuous lines over 100 yds. long).

After he had found the place for the new well I took him to
the old well, which had been covered up with strong timber ;
to mark the site there was a small heap of mould on which
cucumbers were growing. I sent him over this with his twig,
which made no movement. I then told him he had been
over an old well several times: I told him the depth, and
asked him how he thought it possible to find water nearer
the surface such a short distance away. He replied that the
old well was out of the run of the springs.

We dug at the spot selected, and the first 20 ft. of chalk
was rubbly [probably decomposed]. Nearly 70 ft. down we
came on a level bed of solid flint about 6 to g in. thick; and
at 70 ft. on open fissures mostly vertical, which were wet as
though water had recently passed through ; there was a very
slight dribble at the time.1. At about 118 ft. we struck two
springs on opposite sides of the well giving a strong supply, and
sunk an additional 6 ft. before the water gained the upper
hand. The well is 124 ft. deep, in ordinary white chalk with


1 Through one of these, according to Mr Sherlock, a young man at
the Farm, a draught of air came with such force as to be heard at the
surface, showing an open fissure of great extent. He said the well takes
an hour to pump out, and refills in twelve or less,


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 145


flints, which continued to the bottom. The well holds 12 ft.
of water, the same as when first dug. The water at the bottom
came through vertical fissures and horizontal veins, and princi-
pally from the west side from the directions Tompkins had
named from either end of the plantation (an enclosure on the
hillside to the W. and S.W.). We have since bored some 20 ft.
to obtain a better supply, but I do not think it has improved
it. The old well has been filled in with the chalk, etc., from
the new one.”

These are Ernest Westlake’s comments: ‘This I regard


Q

8

%S

oS

S pe = Pe \s

oo. £4) \ Loy Larm


ao ee Old Well! Go g


Fic. 37. Map oF Toy Farm


From the 25-in. Ordnance Survey Map: Sussex (LXVII. 12)


—


as the best case I have yet met with in favour of the dowser.
The farm is situated in a remote hollow of the Sussex downs,
midway between Glynde and Newhaven. The valley of which
it is a ramification falls into the sea at Bishopstone, three
miles to the south: half-way down the Newhaven Water Com-
pany are pumping a considerable supply from wells. The old
well was close to the farm, and the level of the ground at
the well is about 260 ft. above the sea.

The new well is 150 yds. further up the valley, and about
22 ft. above the old well. Hence the water standing 12 ft.


10


146 _ THE DIVINING-ROD


deep in the new well has a level of no less than 77 ft. above
the bottom of the old well. The new well is in chalk with
flints. On the heap from it, shown in the photograph [Fig.
38], I found a spine of Cidaris sceptrifera, which is common
in the zone of Micraster cor-anguinum, so that the thick flint-
bed 7o ft. down is probably the strong and constant M. cor-
anguinum-tabular described by Dr Rowe as occurring between
Beachy and Seaford Heads about 62 ft. above the zone of
M. cor-testudinarium.| According to this reading the new
well is sunk entirely in the M. cor-anguinum chalk and to
within 8 ft. of its base; which last may account for finding
some other fossils, as two or three specimens of Holaster
placenta, which are commoner in the lower zone. The bottom
of the old well is similarly 57 ft. deep in the zone of M. cor-
testudinarium and 52 ft. above its base—it being 1093 ft. thick
on the coast.

Water in the chalk usually lies at a gentle gradient which
is, however, modified by the density of particular beds, and
by the presence of fissures. In the lithology of the beds as
seen on the coast there is nothing to explain the absence of
water in the old well, or its preferential occurrence in the new
well, which is doubtless due to fissures. Water in chalk usually
flows in fissures, i.e., in the main planes of jointing, which in
this district, as shown by the direction of the valleys, run N.
and’ S,, and EH. and W:

The narrow valley, approximately N. and S., in which the
farm lies, is slightly sickle-shaped. The house with the old
well is about the middle of the handle, so to speak, and the
new well at the ferrule end, the valley at this point being
contracted by a slight bulge from the east, which may, and
probably does, indicate the position of an underground fissure.
With this may be taken the fact, noted by the steward, Mr
Pickard, that the water flowed into the well from the sides
of the valley rather than from its upper end.

Whether Mr Tompkins noticed a slight surface feature of
this kind—I did not myself till I was leaving and saw it fore-
shortened—and, if he did, whether he drew the right inference
from it, may be doubtful. Ithinka geologist at any rate would
have taken no account of it, but would have advised deepening
or tunnelling the old well.”

The next case, from Mr Codrington H. Crawshay, D.L.,
J.P., of Llanvair Grange, Abergavenny, is instructive because
of the precautions taken to prevent any local knowledge being


1 A. W. Rowe, “ The Zones of the White Chalk,” Proceedings of the
Geologists’ Association (1899-1900), xvi. 322-323.


Fic. 38.


GENERAL VIEW OF Toy FarRM AND THE VALLEY


a NS ARE
A} «a


WORKING MEN’S
COLLEGE


LIBRARY


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 147


gained by the dowser. Mr Crawshay writes: ‘‘ For the last
four months I have been almost without water (and in conse-
quence could not have my family home), and I now find that
my predecessors were short everysummer. Having ascertained
from Mr Tompkins his fees, I wired for him to come, and met
him at the station myself, so as to prevent him speaking to
anybody who knew my place. He at once started work,
cutting a V-shaped twig from a white thorn in the garden.
He soon came on a stratum of water, and, following it up
through my smoking-room, eventually came on the spring at
a distance of 86 yards from the house. As my readers may
imagine, I did not believe him, and told him I wanted to see
the water. He immediately offered to sink the well on the
condition of no water, no pay, which offer I closed with. After
arranging terms, which were the ordinary well-sinking charges,
plus the fee for finding the water, he started sinking the well,
and at a depth of 14 feet struck a very strong spring—so
strong that it was impossible to sink deeper than 18 feet, as
no pump was able to keep the water down so that the men
could work. Since then I have connected my engine, etc.,
to the well, and I am glad to say that I now have an abundance
of water, and I find it impossible to lower the well more than
2 feet 6 inches. The water never rises more than 5 feet at
the most.”

In reply to inquiries Mr Crawshay states that this excellent
supply, reached at 14 feet, was indicated by Tompkins within
80-90 yards of a useless well over 60 feet deep. Mr Crawshay
adds that during this visit he also indicated water under the
kitchen: “‘ This afterwards proved to be true, as the following
November the spring burst through the floor, and nearly
flooded us out, and I had to cut a drain to run the water
off.”” This fact was quite independently recorded by Sir
Henry Harben. Mr Crawshay concludes one of his letters
(28th of May 1899): ‘‘ I am sure there are many people who,
like myself, would greatly benefit if they only believed in water-
finding by the so-called divining-rod ; in fact, I can never
repay Tompkins for the service he did me at Llanvair.”’

In view of this success it is interesting to note that Tomp-
kins revisited the locality some time after. The Rev. W. J.C.
Lindsay writes from Llanvair Rectory: ‘‘ The snow was on
the ground when the ‘ diviner’ came here the first week in
February 1895. There was the usual walking over the grounds
round the house, with the forked hazel rod in his hands,
which occasionally gave an upward movement that, he said,
indicated the presence of water. Atlast the evolutions of the


148 THE DIVINING-ROD


rod became so marked and vigorous, that it almost skinned
the fingers of the holder, and he said a strong spring would
be found here. This was at a distance of some 250 yards from
the house, and at an elevation rather above the level of the top
of the house. A well was sunk and water found at a depth of
34 feet, the water rising to as high as 29 feet inthe well. During
all the dry weather we have had an abundant supply, and
little pumping, as the cisterns are mostly filled by gravitation.”

Nothing is known of the local conditions of this case and it
is therefore of little evidential value, but it should be noted
that the fact of snow being on the ground disposes of the possi-
bility of the success being due to the observation of natural
or geological phenomena.

The following letter appeared in The Farmer and Chamber of
Agriculture Journal for the 18th of October 1897. The case
is interesting as the artesian well-borers were attempting to
bore through the Oxford clay, whilst the dowser, as in many
other cases, evidently found a permeable surface stratum, of
sand or gravel, above the clay. The letter is from Mr G. W.
Bennett, of Tidddington House, Oxford. ‘“‘ Being without
water for my garden and stable, except what was fetched by
water-cart some distance day by day and caught from rainfall,
and this altogether unsatisfactory, I experienced a great diffi-
culty in getting a proper water supply, and eventually decided
to employ a firm of artesian well-borers to bore for water for
my use in 1883. A spot was decided upon, and a boring put
down to a depth of 312 ft., which cost me over £300, and no
water was obtained; all I have for my money is the piece
of parchment containing the sections of the boring and a few
samples of the formation. . .

I engaged Mr Tompkins to search my property for a water
supply . . . and instructed him to carefully test my stable
yard, as this was the site I was most anxious to find water
on. After carefully searching this property he reported that
no water existed there, and that it would be simply useless to
attempt to obtain water here. I then informed him of what
I had previously done, and the amount of money I had uselessly
spent. Thus the water-finder proved correct in his first test.

A move was then made into the gardens, and, after going
over them, the water-finder reported a stratum of water
was running across the corner of the garden, and was an
overflow from a spring above. He traced up this stratum of
water. The twig he was using was a white thorn cut in the
shape of a V, which he held by the two prongs apex downwards.
As he walked over this stratum of water, the twig kept rising


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 149


in front of him until he came to the head of the spring 1 in the
upper part of the paddock above, when it turned completely
over and over, and so strong was the upward movement of
the rod that it bent considerably in its frantic endeavour to
turn over, and on being held firmly by the water-finder, it
broke off in his hand. Naturally, we were all surprised and
astonished at such a remarkable occurrence.

I instructed Mr Tompkins to prepare me an estimate to sink
a well four feet diameter in the clear, and to supply and erect
a wind engine and storage tank. The well was put in hand,
and at a depth of 30 ft. water was struck. The well was
steined up before sinking deeper, and a strong pump put down
to keep the water under, and before sinking many feet it
became necessary to put on seven men to keep the water
going. From the inrush of water the bottom men were working
up to their knees in water, and the moment the pump and
buckets stopped they were in danger of being drowned out.
The work proceeded under these circumstances for a week or
so, until it became useless to continue the work owing to the
abundance of water; 10,000 gallons per day being the yield
of the spring at a depth of 37 ft., and this site is at a higher
elevation than my stable yard. I cannot speak too highly of
Mr Tompkins’s practical success, both as regards his finding
water and the satisfactory way in which he has carried out the
work.”’

Inquiries elicited from Mr Bennett the information that the
well had never gone dry and that it had been sunk through 3-4
ft. of surface mould and 25-30 ft. of gravel. This proves that
the dowser had in fact tapped a spot on the Oxford clay which
was covered by a stratum of water-bearing gravel. Mr T. V.
Holmes tries to explain away the dowser’s success by attribu-
ting it to his usual “ practised eye.’ It is curious, however,
if the gravel-capping was visible to the eye, that Mr Bennett’s
gardener and the well-sinker should both have failed to per-
ceive it.

Finally may be quoted an interesting account of a very
good case by the Rev. W. H. Seddon, which we owe to the
kindness of Mr C. M. Gere. Mr Seddon writes (21st of Decem-
ber 1904): “I have made a tracing [Fig. 39] of the ordnance
maps of the district which will show the lie of the land and
the position of the various springs and wells ; and also enable


1 [This is an absurd but favourite expression of Tompkins, who is
under the delusion that underground water originates in a reservoir,
and that the higher up you trace the “‘ spring” the more copious will
be the supply.]


150 THE DIVINING-ROD |


you to follow the course taken by the ‘ dowser ’ in his opera-
tions. He [Tompkins] started from A on the right of the map,
followed the road round to B and returned on this track to C.
As he returned he indicated three channels along which water
would be found, shown by the three dotted lines on the
map, and these channels he followed down to their common
meeting-place where the well is now dug. He gave the prob-
able depth as 35 ft. (but said he might be out as much as Io
ft. if there was black clay about, as there is), and the probable
volume as between 500 and 700 gallons per diem. Water was


SPRING OC /7/®.


Y


Fic. 39. Map To ILLUSTRATE THE Rev. W. H. SEppon’s CaAsE


found at 26 ft. and the well continued down to 35 ft. and the
amount of water as gauged at bottom 500 and 600 gallons
per diem. Two wells had been previously dug on this property
at points indicated on the map to a depth of 28 ft. and 18 ft.
respectively, but abandoned as useless in stiff black clay. At
the point indicated by the dowser very little black clay was
found, and the water runs in a stratum of grey ‘claybats ’
which I have not seen elsewhere in this locality.

The dowser used a forked white thorn twig, holding the
forked ends loosely in his closed and upturned hands, and the
twig appeared to bow to right and left as he went along when
he believed water to be flowing, and when he got to the point


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 151


where the streams met it turned rapidly in his hands and
twisted itself almost to pieces when we—the bystanders—took
hold of the looseends. Several of us, myself among the num-
ber, took the twig and held it as the dowser held it without
obtaining any result. You will note that the position in which
the twig is held, with fingers closed and hands upturned, has
the effect of tightening the sinews so that the slightest further
stretch upon them is acutely felt. I took note of this fact and
afterwards went over the same (and other) ground as the dowser,
with my hands in this position but without a twig, with the
result that I find that a very distinct aching sensation is set
up as one (presumably) passes over underground currents.
In this way I have picked up without difficulty the streams
indicated by the dowser, and have indicated water in other
places when I was afterwards told that wells or springs existed.
On the map you will see a [spot marked ‘dowser’s spring,’]
indicating a spot where the dowser tells us there is water and
that a well might be successfully dug. This spot he marked
by cutting out a turf. The other day, starting from the
corner of the meadows immediately opposite the point marked
C on the map, I followed the line indicated by faint and infre-
quent dots and landed on the spot where the turf had been
cut, though I certainly had no remembrance of its where-
abouts, or indeed was thinking at all about it before I found
it. ...’ These last observations are interesting but, of
course, of no value, as Mr Seddon was present when Tompkins
gave his indications.

Though Tompkins states in print that he never fails, he agrees
in correspondence that he has had a few failures and readily
gives the names and addresses of those who employed him on
those occasions. If Tompkins had restricted himself to the
practice of his art nothing but praise could be given to him,
and he could be allowed to rest contentedly on the laurels
he has well earned in many years of successful dowsing, not to
speak of the silver medal accorded to him in 1906 by the Wirral
and Birkenhead Agricultural Society. Unfortunately Tomp-
kins has fallen into that trap for dowsers, the attempt to
explain what he does. He writes: “I feela tingling sensation,
and the twig begins to quiver when I get on toarunning stratum
of water, and when over it the twig rises immediately. It
does not move for surface water nor water in pipesor drains,
only natural live water, as I term it. The moment I cross
a stratum of water I feel a sort of bracing sensation, which
passes up my legs, back, and shoulders, and down the arms
to the twig; when I get off the water course I feel the loss


152... THE DIVINING-ROD


of this power, till I cross the water again. When I get over
the exact spot the twig revolves over and over, and I am
powerless to keep it still.”

Basing himself on these sensations Tompkins has evolved
a theory of water-finding, into the details of which we need
not enter.1 As will have been observed from the last-quoted
case, he believes that underground water always flows in
streams; that these streams, if traced far enough, converge
to a “head”; and that this head is the proper place for
sinking a well. His own perception of the water he ascribes
to the magical ‘electricity.’’ These theories Tompkins
defends with vigour; thus, he writes in a letter: “I much
regret you think my expression of the ‘ Head of the Spring ’
absurd, but I can give you proof I am correct also that I am
under no delusion; that water underground originates in a
reservoir. ... My theory was the result of many years of
careful study and practice... .”

It must be agreed, none the less, that these notions are
absurd. But this does not affect Tompkins’s great success—
in which he has such confidence, and rightly, that he is willing
to work on the no water, no pay principle, subject only to a
higher fee.


§ 3. LEICESTER GATAKER


Gataker began dowsing about 1890 and has had a very
successful career. The son of a Captain in the Bengal Staff
Corps, he was educated at the Bath College. Soon after leaving
he discovered to his surprise that a forked twig revolved in
his hands in the same way as it did with a local “ diviner.”’
Gataker stated that whenever he was over a spring of water
a sensation not unlike a slight shiver came over him, chiefly
in his arms; the forked twig or wire that he sometimes held,
then revolved and continued to do so—independently of his
volition—so long as he remained over the water. In conversa-
tion Gataker added that this sensation was very marked,
usually beginning in the pit of the stomach, so much so as often
to produce a feeling of sickness. This agrees with what other
dowsers have declared.

Judging from his sensations, or from the movement of a rod,
Gataker asserted that by practice he became able to estimate
not only the whereabouts of underground water, but also its


* See his The Theory of Water-Finding (1892), now in its third edition,
as Springs of Water [1925].


40.


LEICESTER GATAKER DOWSING WITH HIS BARE HANDS


WORKING MEN’S


COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Be
:
7
®


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 153


depth and volume. Repeated trials having satisfied him
that his success was not due toa mere “ fluke ’’’ Gataker deter-
mined to make water-finding his business, his health not
permitting him to continue the sedentary life of a London
office. In addition to finding water he madea business of well-
sinking and the like; he was willing to work on the terms of
no water, no pay, but in that case added 25% to his charges.
Gataker was first established at Weston-super-Mare and later
removed to Bath. He describes as his “‘ sole agent in Ireland—
C. Eyre Townsend, J.P., F.S.I., Mount Coote, Killmallock.”’

The most interesting aspect of Gataker’s dowsing is the
fact that he does not ordinarily use any kind of rod, but his
hands only, in the manner shown in Fig. 40. His procedure
is thus described by an eye-witness: ‘‘ His procedure appears
to be a rapid survey of the ground. He walks along with a
quick step, with his hands hanging by his side, until (according
to his statement) he strikes a stream of water, when he at once
becomes visibly agitated. With outstretched hands he appears
carefully to feel his whereabouts, until he ascertains the direc-
tion the stream is flowing and follows it up. Then he marks
the spot of greatest supply and estimates the depth and quantity
likely to be obtained.”

Another account, which supplements the one just quoted,
is furnished by Mr G. F. Tregelles of Barnstaple, who writes :
“On the 28th of October 1896, I went down to Ilfracombe
to join a party of members of the I/fracombe Local Board,
who had engaged Leicester Gataker, of Weston-super-Mare
and Bath, to look for additional supplies of water for their
reservoir... .

Gataker, who is a young man, did not use the forked twig,
but walked about with long strides, holding out his hand, or
hands, palm down, and every now and then making a dash
or lurch to one side, diverging right or left, sometimes walking
straight, and sometimes in a circle, and at last, if satisfied,
digging his heel into the turf at the chosen spot. He seemed
to be following a sensation, which is what he professes to do,
and he looked very like a dog following the traces of a rabbit
over the grass.

On questioning him he said that when over a hidden spring,
even with arms folded, he felt a tingling all through his body,
and still more so when one or both hands were extended.
The depth and quantity of water he estimated by the intensity
of this feeling, coupled with experience.”

Gataker frankly confesses that he had experienced failures,
estimating them at 10% of all his cases. It will be seen, for


\


154 THE DIVINING-ROD


there is no reason to doubt his statement, that he was far
from being as successful as, say, Mullins. It should be noted,
however, that Gataker employed an assistant named A. W.
Wills, who often did the dowsing when Gataker was asked
for. It seems probable that some of the failures were due to
this less able assistant. Though Gataker is so frank regarding
his failures, he is a very shrewd business man and not averse
to enshrouding himself in a little helpful mystery. Thus,
when engaged in some work at Richmond, during the course
of which he was obliged to dowse in an adit, he made statements
which are thus reported: “ Mr Gataker was closely questioned
as to whether the stream of running water in the channel
of the adit might not affect his judgment. To this he replied
most positively in the negative, saying that it might affect
the twig, but that by ‘a new dodge ’ which he had discovered
about ten months ago, in working with his hands, he could
absolutely eliminate that disturbing influence. He could also
discriminate between natural and artificial currents, and
could even tell if there were two springs, one immediately
beneath the other, and could divine the depth and quantity
of each.’’1 This is the sort of thing that can only provoke
well-deserved contempt.

We must now pass on to a consideration of some of Gataker’s
successes ; he was himself asked to furnish examples of these
and replied by giving brief particulars—drawn up in a com-
petent and business-like manner—of some two dozen cases.?
In each case the full name and address of the client was given,
and all the cases were followed by direct inquiries, with the
result of substantiating practically all Gataker’s claims.

Mr Arkwright of Hampton Court, near Leominster, requiring
a supply of water, had sunk by advice a well to the depth of
72 feet; this well had given out by the summer of 1894.
Gataker was then called in and declared that a supply of
water would be reached at a depth of about 40 feet at a spot
only eight yards from the useless well. A well was accordingly
sunk at the place indicated by Gataker and after going down
53 feet through hard marl (with the exception of a six-inch
bed of stone 6 feet from the surface), water was reached, which
stood from three to three and a half feet in the well. These
facts are vouched for by Mr Arkwright’s agent, Mr H. A. Ash-
worth.

On his estate Millways, Launceston, in Cornwall, Mr John


1 Richmond Times, 11th of January 1896.


* See also a pamphlet: ‘‘ Leicester Gataker, Expert Water Dis-
coverer ’’ [Bath 1896 ?].


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 155


Geake had sunk a well to 25 feet for the purpose of supplying
20 acres of grazing lands. This well was found insufficient
and was deepened from time to time until it reached a depth
of 55-56 feet and had been bored to 86 feet ; even then it often
dried up for three or four months in the year. Gataker was
asked to come, and after going over the place declared that
if the well was of the depth it was stated to be there ought
to be water in it. On examination it was then found that
the well had not been sunk vertically and that its apparent
depth of 55-56 feet was not its real depth. Gataker gave
instructions for the well to be sunk ro feet lower and for a
heading to be driven for 15 feet in a given direction. When
this was done a supply of water was reached which two previous
bores to 80 feet and 86 feet had failed to tap, and a sheet of
water 10 feet deep was created at the bottom of the well and
in the heading. Mr Geake, in describing the facts, concludes :
“‘ The water is of excellent quality, and we have raised the rent
accordingly.” [!]

Gataker was several times employed by Sir James de Hoghton,
of Hoghton Tower, near Preston in Lancashire, the facts being
attested in several letters by Mr Walter de H. Birch, the agent.
In a field close to Hoghton Station Gataker marked a spot
where he declared water would be found at from Io to 15
feet ; a boring was made and water reached at 10 feet. At
Hardshaw Hillock, Walton-le-Dale, Gataker indicated a place
where water might be found at from 20 to 25 feet. Here, in
March 1895, a bed of sand was reached after sinking through
22 feet of stiff marl, and a large supply of water obtained in
it. At a neighbouring farm, Leigh House, Walton-le-Dale,
Gataker indicated a spot where he estimated water at 30 to
35 feet deep. Mr Birch writes that “ after getting down 30 feet
of exceptionally hard clay and marl, the well-sinkers were
beginning to lose heart, and the tenant suggested that a rain-
water tank would answer his purpose, but continuing to sink,
they struck a vein of sand at about 31 feet, with a good supply
of water.”

Gataker had five other similar successes on these estates ;
in addition occurred the following incident. He marked a
spot where he declared water would be found at 12 to 18 feet ;
after sinking through quite dry sand to beyond that depth,
Gataker was again consulted and stated that there must be a
quicksand, which had thrown him out. This quicksand he
declared to be at a depth of from 60 to 70 feet, and when a
boring was undertaken from curiosity a quicksand stratum
was in fact met at a depth of 72 feet.


156 THE DIVINING-ROD


The Brewery, Belfast, requiring a supply of water, Mr Thomas
R. Caffrey, its proprietor, employed a dowser, whose name
we have been unable to discover ; at the advice of this dowser
four wells were sunk, in only one of which water was found.
Recourse was then had to Gataker, who marked two places.
In one, where he stated that water would be reached at 150
feet, his assertion was verified. Ona second visit he said that
if the well were to be sunk a further nine feet a still greater
supply would be reached. This was done and found to be the
case, the quantity obtained being increased by 2,000 gallons
aday. Inthe meanwhile the second place marked by Gataker
was also sunk and 9,000 gallons a day was obtained. Both
wells were eventually sunk to 197 feet in order to maintain
a maximum supply of water, and Mr Caffrey stated that “it
would have been a saving of many hundreds of pounds had
I known Mr Gataker when I first started looking for water.”

A large supply of water appears to be necessary in the manu-
facture of beer, for here is another brewery case. The facts
are described by Mr H. D. Yorath, the manager of Messrs
Lloyd and Yorath, Ltd., of 23 High Street, Newport, Mon-
mouth. It appears that in this case it was Gataker’s assistant,
A. W. Wills, who dowsed. He located several supplies of
water, and recommended that a well should be sunk at one
of these. Here, he declared, a supply of 800 gallons per hour
would be found at a depth not exceeding 300 feet. At 120
feet 720 gallons per hour was reached and at 285 feet, when
boring was stopped, the supply had reached 1,200 to 1,500
gallons per hour. This supply did not give out under continuous
pumping.?

It will be convenient to add here one or two more examples
of the success of this assistant of Gataker. The following
account from General R. H. Jelf, of Offcote Hurst, Ashbourne
in Derbyshire, shows how closely Wills imitated his teacher.
General Jelf writes that “ being 700 feet above the sea, it was
most important to me to find water, and if possible in one of
the very few fields that stand above the house.

I tried to get Mr Gataker, but he was ill and could not come,
and instead sent an Assistant (name unknown) who had never
been in the country before.

I showed him the field where I should like to find the water,
and he strolled about with eyes closed, and fingers extended
(no rod) until at last he seemed to strike a line like a hound.
He said, ‘ Yes, there is a good stream within 100 feet below
the surface here, running in such and such a direction ’ (point-

* Cp. “ The Champion Dowser,” Land and Water (27th of May 1899).


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 157


ing down towards the bottom of the [word illegible] which you

know). The ground, as you know, falls away in that direction,

and I remembered instantly that that corner of the field was

on always wet. (But the dowser had never been near
ere.

I sunk a well at the point indicated, and though it is nearly
the highest point in the country round, at about 50 feet such
a splendid supply of water was found that the well fell in!

I sunk another in the same line that he had indicated, but
with more care, and after putting in a bottom at 60 feet, I
got a head of 14 feet permanently in the well, sufficient to supply
our house, and to give considerable aid to two farms.

(Unfortunately after three years or so an earthquake dis-
placed the strata, in my opinion, and water now only stands
at 84 feet.)

I should mention that after finding the line without a rod,
he plucked one out of the hedge and showed that it did work
as they claim. But he found the water without the rod, by
some kind of sensation apparently.”

The next example is also interesting as showing the dowser’s
success in distinguishing free water from water in pipes. It
is described by Mr J. W. Pichard of Oatlands, Lancaster,
and has reached us through the kindness of Professor J. W.
Graham. “ Water Divining is quite a trade now. There are
several firms in England, I believe, who undertake to find
water by thismeans. The man who I had over was the Assist-
ant of a man called Gatacre [sic], a relative of Gatacre of the
Boer War, and they make quite a business of Water finding,
undertaking to make wells anywhere where they say water
is, on the principle of No water at or just before the depth
they say, no pay,—so that you see they are pretty certain
that they are correct in their statements.

In my instance, there were several places pointed out to me,
and I chose one and sank a bore hole, and struck water at,
I think it was, 39 feet, where I was told I should find it at 40 to
50 feet deep, and it rose to within 68 inches of the surface.
I had a pump put down, and found their estimate of 60 gallons
an hour was rather under the real quantity. Unfortunately
the water was unfit for domestic use, as on having it analysed
it was found to contain too much free ammonia... .

I think the most interesting part of my experience with the
diviner was when I took him to a place where I knew there
was water, and also knew its source. When we got there he
said, ‘What’s the use of getting me to find water for you
when you have a spring there sufficient to supply several


158 _ THE DIVINING-ROD


houses?’ The water was bubbling up out of the ground,
so I said I thought he might tell me at what depth it was,
or how deepI should go. After about 20 mins. or half an hour
he gave it up and admitted he was beaten; he said he could
see the water, but there was no spring. So I sent him over
the hedge and he soon found a place where he said there were
thousands of gallons but no spring. I then told him he was
on the track of the Manchester Thirlmere Waterworks, and
the water he saw was a leakage from that.

I can give more and fuller particulars if you still think it
worth while, but as it is such a common occurrence now to
employ these Water Diviners, I hardly see where the interest
would come in... .”

To return to Gataker himself, Mr Gilson Martin had sunk
a well in a favourable spot toa depth of about 45 feet in order
to find water at Chatsworth, Chesterfield, the Duke of Devon-
shire’s estate, of which he was the agent. This attempt was
unsuccessful and Gataker was invited to dowse. The latter
marked a spot 300 yards from the useless well and on much
higher ground ; here he estimated that water would be found
at 60 to 70 feet. At 69 feet a supply was encountered, contrary
to Mr Martin’s expectations ; so gratified was he that he volun-
tarily increased Gataker’s fee !

We may now conclude with an account of a striking success
on the part of Gataker in yet another brewery, Messrs Mont-
gomerie and Co., Bermaline Maltings, Haddington. Mr John
Montgomerie, the managing director, writes that they had
decided to make an artesian bore in a certain part of their
property. Before doing so they called in Gataker, who marked
two spots 70 yards apart. He guaranteed that from either
of these two places they would get a supply of 20,000 gallons
per day at a depth of 100 feet to 150 feet. ‘‘ We put downa
4-inch bore at the first spring, and are pleased to say that at
a depth of 102 feet we are getting a supply of about 100,000
gallons per day, and the water is coming up with great force.”
Mr Montgomerie enclosed a ‘‘ journal of bore”’ as follows:


CONTEMPORARY PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 159
Er


lame
=)


NOW ADAARONN DADOCUW OH OW


Forced material
Sand :
Bound gravel . :
Hard bound gravel .
Sand gravel :
Gravel
Boulder clay
Gray faikes
Faikes
Fireclay .
Faikes
Sandstones

Gs hard
Faikes
Sandstone
Faikes
Sandstone
Marl
Sandstone


HW


H H
HN NHB DOAW OHUNDNHUAWA H


Eta 102 er


Mr Montgomerie is of the opinion that no water would be
found between the two places marked by Gataker and instances
the fact “during the excavations for the new bridge here,
there was dug out a hole 40 ft. square by 13 ft. deep alongside
our mill dam, with only about 3 ft. of an embankment between
the water and the hole. We naturally expected that this
hole would be filled up with water rising through the gravel
bed ; but to our surprise not a drop of water came up. Any
water that found its way into the working came in at the north-
east corner—that is furthest, from the river.’’+


1 In addition to those mentioned above, Gataker has dowsed for such
individuals as the Dukes of Westminster and Bedford, the Marquises of
Ailsa, Anglesey, and Londonderry, Lords Strathmore, Home, Windsor,
Llangattock, Archdeacon Chapman, and many justices of the peace
and other persons of position ; such responsible bodies as the Winch-
combe, Menai Bridge, and Burnley District Councils, the Colne Cor-
poration, the Charmouth and Whittle-le-Woods Parish Councils; and
many architects, land agents and commercial firms.


CHAPTER VII


NOTABLE CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DOWSERS :
AMATEUR


§1. Miss CLARISSA MILES


N amateur dowser whose achievements are of excep-
A tional interest is Miss Clarissa Miles. This lady has
made extensive and successful experiments in thought-
transference in conjunction with Miss Ramsden, and has also
had some experiences in what is called clairvoyance. The
following letter written by her fully explains her procedure and
her ideas in the matter. She writes from Lissadell, Sligo:
“|. . I daresay that on occasions the rod may move or not
according to a preconceived idea. That I do not know any-
thing about. But that the spring has power to force that
rod up in your face, absolutely against your will, is clearly
demonstrated by the following simple experiment which was
tried on me the other day by a man in Suffolk, who wanted to
prove to a sceptical brother, in a practical way, the power of
water over the rod. He pared away the wood from the rod,
about 2 inches or so from the forked part, to make them equally
thin on both pieces of wood. Then he told me to hold both
ends as firmly down as I could, and walk over the spring.
Nothing that I could do would prevent both ends of the rod
turning upwards at the thin parts and looking me in the face.
You could see where they nearly cracked in half afterwards.
This I could show you any time, only the wood must be fresh.
Never since I began finding water in 1891 have I ever mis-
taken surface water for spring water. Lord Monteagle’s letter
saying that, Owing to so much surface water about, it would
be better to try no more divining, clearly proves to me how
ignorant he is of the power of the diviner to discriminate
between the two, I have found it on occasions most necessary
to warn people about surface water. Witness enclosed letter.
I asked Captain Greer to write out all particulars about sink-
ing for the water for the hospital, as I had never heard exactly
what took place until now; only I knew they had had some
160


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 161


bother, although I had warned them most particularly about
surface water, so I send it for your perusal, but do return it
to me. Personally I am most pleased at not going to look
for water at Lord Monteagle’s, as it is only to verify what
has been found by other people. I like trying new ground,
although it would have been very interesting in some ways,
because I wanted to show you more clearly my special way of
seeking for hidden springs. ... It has been dawning on me
how I find water. It is entirely by looking on the surface of the
ground. I get violently attracted to certain spots . .. the
rest of the ground seems to disappear and I see only the spots
where the water is. Like when I hold a letter in my hand
the room all fades away and I see nothing but the vision.
When in a seeing state I can’t judge distances, so I made
Captain Greer tell me how far off it was I spotted the new
place where he is going to sink a well for his new house ; he
said 400 yards. Here there were several heads of springs
close together. In another place Mrs Greer stood on the exact
spot I described to her ona hill 150 yards away. WhenIam
very clairvoyant, houses and hedges are no barriers; I see,
I know, I feel a spring is in that direction. In an open field
one glance is sufficient to shew me the exact spot. It saves
so much trouble training your second-sight to find the springs
like this. I have not the faintest idea if anyone else finds the
springs in this way because I have never spoken or described
it to anyone except you, and Captain and Mrs Greer. I have
on occasions pointed out, like in Suffolk the other day, exactly
where the springs were, but unless I followed it up with the
divining rod, I know not a single soul would believeme. Shak-
ing convinces them more. You may not believe a word of all
this. I daresay not. But I have proved it over and over
again that this is the way I find water and by none other.
I only go by results. Here is always a large supply of water,
and I have never found any of the wells go dry, not even in
those dry summers.

I send you an account of another well (that I got by mere
accident) I found for Lady Guendolen Ramsden’s son. She is
my great friend. I spotted that one in the same way like
all the rest, only by looking. But I can’t see springs when
they have been tapped. I tried at the hospital, I would not
let Mrs Greer tell me where it was; there was nothing to
mark the spot outside, but I walked straight to a head of
spring about four yards off. This Captain Greer quite well
remembers my marking some years ago. For me all this is
intensely interesting, because every time I am discovering


11


162 THE DIVINING-ROD


new things. Also the depths, I find I arrive at that also, I"
sort of see and feel, as well as by the measure you despise.
On an average I am pretty correct. But that is the difficulty.
I told the Ramsdens about 50, that was 60 feet deep. .. .”

The account by Captain J. H. Greer alluded to in this letter
is as follows, dated the 6th of September 1903 from Crotans-
town, The Curragh, Co. Kildare: ‘‘ The Woods and Forests
Department offered a site on The Curragh for the building
of the hospital for a small rent. Before accepting this offer
the committee responsible for the building had to assure
themselves that a water supply to the hospital could be secured.

Miss Miles, hearing of these circumstances, kindly consented
to endeavour to find by ‘ divining ’ whether a spring existed,
underground, in the portion of land embraced in the proposed
site for the hospital. (This occurred in the winter of 1896-97 :
I think January 1897.) She came here and visited the pro-
posed site with Mrs Greer and me. She went backwards and
forwards over the site with the divining rod, and for some time
could not find a spring, though she informed us that there
was a large deposit of surface water (she thought about 15 ft.
under the surface). After considerable search she came on
a genuine spring, which, after measuring, she said was about
45 to 50 ft. underground, and quite separate from the deposit
of surface drainage. By my orders a well was sunk on the
spot over which Miss Miles declared the spring existed. At
17 ft. we came on an apparently plentiful supply of water,
which resisted an endeavour to pump it dry, lasting for eight
hours, and we were convinced, in spite of Miss Miles’s caution
about the surface water, that this was the spring, and we
actually built in the well and connected the water supply
to the hospital. This supply, however, turned out to be
surface water. On analysis it was declared to be of moderate
quality, and was used only for washing, drinking water being
obtained from a house close to the hospital, which was then a
small institution.

In the following spring the well, which had contained 4 to
5 ft. of water, went dry, and then for the first time we realised
that Miss Miles must have been correct in her diagnosis, and
that we had made a well to contain what was merely surface
drainage.

I sunk through the bottom of the well with an Artesian
borer, and found at 43 ft. a strong spring of perfectly pure
water, which has provided the hospital with a perfect water
supply ever since.”

The finding of water for Mr J. F. Ramsden, Lady Guendolen


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 163


Ramsden’s son, is contained in two independent letters. This,
from Lady Guendolen, is as follows, written to Miss Miles from
Byram, Ferrybridge, Yorkshire (19th of January 1904):
“You wish me to write what I remember of the day you went
to find water for my son near Brackley. You were anxious
to find water above the house and farm yard, so we walked
in that direction. I think you were holding the rod in your
hand but I was following you. (It was the first time, I think,
I had seen that field ; it was all new to me, as it was to you.)
After crossing the farm yard and one small field we came to
a gate and the moment we passed on you said ‘ Up there to
the right —you found a spring in a few minutes—but not
being satisfied with its strength you said ‘I will try still fur-
ther up, up near the hedge still on the right,’ the instant you
reached it you exclaimed ‘ This is strong enough for the whole
house and village too, I should think ! ’—you then said the
depth to reach the water would be from 50 to 60 feet. I
think this is all. Myson can tell you the rest.”’

The other and independent statement is from Mr Ramsden,
dated the 12th of June 1904 from Turweston Manor, Brackley,
Northants: “ Inthe summer of 1902 Miss Miles, at my request,
tried for water in the fields near the house here, which was
at that time very insufficiently supplied with water. Two
places were marked, and I was told water would probably
be found at 60 ft. or less. A well was dug and at a depth
of 54 ft. water was found. In order to get a masonry founda-
tion for the well lining an attempt was made to lower the level
of the water which had risen 5 to 6 ft.—at first with two
handpumps, subsequently with a powerful pulsometer which
in a week’s continuous working never at any time lowered
the level of the water more than 1 ft. Eventually the well
lining was built upon steel rails laid under water.

I may say that there are wells within a hundred yards which
ordinarily give a very poor supply of water, and are some-
times almost dry—though they are of almost exactly the same
depth.”’

ioe other cases of Miss Miles’s success could be quoted,
but two or three further instances must suffice. Thus Colonel
H. le P. Trench writes from St Huberts, Gerrards Cross,
Buckinghamshire: ‘‘ Some five years ago there was a very
(otherwise) desirable residence which I was anxious to relet,
but it possessed one drawback. The well, which had sufficed
for the requirements of its successive occupants since it was
built (towards the end of the 18th century) had of recent
years been found insufficient to meet the requirements of modern


164 | THE DIVINING-ROD


sanitation, and, during the two or three dry summers which
had just passed, it had become necessary to supplement the
supply by water carts.

The lady, whose tenure of the premises was just about to
expire, was the widow of the late Colonel Miles of Burton Hill.
Their daughter Miss Clarissa Miles, hearing of my difficulty,
told me that in her native country ‘ water finding ’ was suc-
cessfully practised by people possessed of the gift, who were
called ‘ Dowsers,’ and that she herself had tried and found that
she was possessed of the gift, which she kindly offered to put
in practice, with a view to solve my difficulty. We accordingly,
at her request, cut for her a young hazel fork in the form of a
‘merry thought ’, and with this in her hand, she searched the
land adjoining, with the result that at a distance of about
thirty yards from the site of and on higher ground than the
old well, she indicated a spot under which she told me I would
find a plentiful supply of water. I accordingly employed men,
and have obtained a good supply of water without fail ever
since.”

After describing the experiment with Miss Miles which he
had carried out, Colonel Trench proceeds: ‘‘On a distant
part of my property I was anxious to erect a couple of labourers’
cottages, and I asked Miss Miles to ascertain for me if I should
find water near them. She examined the place, and showed
where I should find water, and told me the spring was 42 ft.
below the surface. I proceeded to build my cottages, the
builders obtaining water for their purposes from a surface
drain, the weather having been wet. When I had finished the
cottages, I proceeded to have the well sunk. Neighbours were
somewhat severe in their animadversions on my having built
without first having found the water. I, however, told them
that my previous experiences of the power of Miss Miles to
locate water, were such, that I had not the slightest doubt on
the subject.

I had to go abroad, but left directions with my steward to
employ the local well-sinkers. They protested against the idea
that water would be found, saying that my steward would
only be wasting his master’s money. At 20 ft., at 30 ft.,
at 35 ft., and at 4o ft., they renewed their protests, but were
told it was no business of theirs whether my money was
wasted or not, that they would be paid for their work. They
worked on, still under protest, and when one day they had
reached 41 ft. 6 in., having passed through about 30 ft. of
chalk, and time to adjourn for dinner having arrived, they
made use of an uncomplimentary expression regarding the


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 165


persistence of my steward, the man handling the pick sticking
it in the bottom of the shaft with a big big D!! When they
returned after dinner, there was 5 ft. of water in the well, and
it steadily rose to a height of 16 ft., at which it has remained
ever since.”

In the following case Miss Miles, while locating the site for
a well, also discovered a buried and long lost cistern for Mrs
Batson of Hoe Benham, Newbury, who writes thus: ‘I was
anxious this summer, 1905, to lay on a small supply of water
to a part of our flower garden which suffered much from
drought, and Miss Miles very kindly consented to seek for a
source that would suffice for our wants. I wished also to
locate the site of the spring from which pipes were laid on
for the supply of our house some fourteen years since. All
record of this site had been lost, even the plumber who had
laid on the water being uncertain about its exact position
and unable to indicate it. Miss Miles very quickly assured
us of the whereabouts of this supply cistern, and a post was
driven into the earth at the place suggested by her. She also
indicated another spot at which, as she asserted, water suffi-
cient for our [flower] borders would be discovered within a
few feet of the surface. Here also the place was carefully
marked. The following morning the ground was dug out, and
a spring of water was found within about six feet from the sur-
face at the spot where Miss Miles had advised us to dig for our
supply. The crown of the lost cistern also appeared to sight
at the expected place. I must confess to some previous scepti-
cism, but in both these instances we have had undoubted
evidence as to Miss Miles’s gift in divining the existence of water,
and I am now as completely convinced as before I was incredu-
lous about it.”

Among Miss Miles’s other successes may be mentioned one
at Rosses Point, Sligo, which earned her a public testimonial ;
but this account may be concluded with the following letter
from Mr Richard Myddleton of Chirk Castle, North Wales:
“Miss Miles, while on a visit here in October 1896, was kind
enough to shew me her power of finding water with a hazel
wand—underground—which she did with very marked suc-
cess. The wands were common forked ‘hazels’ selected at
hazard by the gardener. I first asked her if she could find the
position of an old well in the courtyard of the Castle here,
which had certainly not been used for 150 years, and which
no one now living had ever seen opened—the position of which
I was approximately aware of, and which, as well as the whole
courtyard, was uniformly covered over with gravel surface,


166 THE DIVINING-ROD


there being nothing in any way to indicate the existence of a
well or of water.

The courtyard is about 175 feet long, by 130 wide. Miss
Miles walking slowly across the courtyard, and holding the
wand in front of her, very soon indicated an underground
current of water, and shortly afterwards, following this, very
unmistakably and strongly indicated the old covered up well
—which is probably 60 or 70 feet deep, and situated rather
(though not quite) in a corner of the courtyard, not a likely
place for its position.

I then asked Miss Miles if she could find two underground
currents of water in the Deer Park, of which I suspected the
existence, as the springs break out below a steep hillside
nearly 150 feet (or more) below where we were walking, and
quite out of sight—the surface being very dry and solid,
there being no rushes or any indications of springs on that
surface. Miss Miles after walking about 200 yards came
across one, and after an interval of about 150 yards or more,
another underground flow of water, both of which break out
in springs below the hill. Miss Miles was a stranger to the
locality, and I gave her no hint as to where she might expect
to find indications of water. I may add that one of these
springs has lately been utilized and turned into a fish hatchery,
and I am told is producing a flow of 300 gals. of water per
minute.

On another occasion I asked Miss Miles if she could find
some additional springs in a meadow of mine which supplies
water for the reservoir of the Chirk Water Company supply.
This she did, and found two springs which we did not know
of, and which have been turned to good account, and now
supply a constant extra quantity of water to the above men-
tioned reservoir.”’


§ 2. Mr FerGcus CARSTAIRS ROGERS


In August 1920 Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, M.B.E., M.S.A.,
an architect of Gordon Chambers, Stockdale Street, Kimber-
ley, South Africa, addressed us an interesting communication
the relevant parts of which follow: ‘“ The writer has had
considerable experience and success in divining for water, but
instead of using the hazel twig, which is unprocurable in
Griqualand West, he had recourse to twigs obtained from
Pepper, Apple, Peach and other local trees, as well as twisted
grass and even fencing wire. Using the medium of the pepper
twig, he successfully located water on virgin ground at the


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 167


Homestead, Kimberley, for MreE. W. Mowbray, who, when
sinking a well on the spot located by means of the forked
twig, found the stream to supply the quantity of water and
to be at the depth indicated by the diviner.

Some three years later the writer, after inspecting a bore-
hole with water divined by him at Leukop in the Orange
Free State, proceeded to a distant farm, accompanied by two
other diviners, and, when walking over the veldt, with his
thoughts concentrated on water finding, repeatedly felt a
curious trembling sensation in the nape of the neck. The sen-

-sation reminded him of a similar feeling he experienced some
years before when travelling at night on the Kaap Plateau in
a post cart. He remembered complaining to the driver of the
post cart of this feeling and was assured that such a feeling
was usual with the driver when passing over a vlei or under-
ground water. Hoping to find a new method of divining, he
invited his companions to follow him at about Io yards dis-
tance, and when he held up his hand, on experiencing the sen-
sation described above, he asked them to use their rods at the
spots indicated by him. A couple of hours was spent in
experimenting in this line, and whenever the trembling sen-
sation was felt by the writer the other diviners corroborated
by means of their rods.

Since then the writer has discarded the rod for locating
water, and only uses it when determining the depth. The
depth is gauged by approaching the underground stream, after
its direction is found, at right angles, and when the rod begins
to rise or deflect, according to the quantity of the water. a
mark is made and the distance to the stream measured in feet.
Double this measurement gives the depth of the stream under
the surface of the ground. The quantity of water is deter-
mined by the rod which, if it deflects, means a quantity less
than 5,000 gallons per 24 hours, and if it rises, a greater quan-
tity according to the intensity of the sensation. Incidentally
it might be remarked that the writer has never accepted any
remuneration whatever for divining, but only insists that, when
divining at a distance, he must be taken, free of charge, to
and from the spot where his services are required.

Mr J. J. T. King, secretary of the Griqualand West Board of
Executors, invited the writer to divine for water in the grounds
adjoining his residence in Egerton Road, Kimberley. The
writer agreed to divine but, as he had recently undergone a
serious operation, told Mr King although he was confident of
locating a stream, if one existed, he could not rely on the
accuracy of the depth, as, when using the rod to ascertain the


168 THE DIVINING-ROD


depth, pain disturbed the sensation. Two streams were traced
and the point of intersection noted. Mr King happening to
meet Mr W. Nicol of Farm Napier, Orange Free State, re-
ferred to the divining already done and asked him also to
divine but without giving him any information. Mr Nicol by
means of the twig, located the streams pointed out by the first
diviner and the point of intersection of the two streams tallied.
In boring, the first stream was struck but the lower and stronger
stream indicated by the writer was not encountered at the
depth he gave, at any rate no increase in the supply of water
was noticeable. Mr Hetzel was then called in and, when shown
the bore-hole, assured Mr King that the streams were there,
and asserted that the lower stream would be struck about 40
feet below the depth indicated by the writer. In due course
the second stream was also struck and yielded a copious supply
of water.

The writer was motored out by the Chairman of the Central
Salt Pan Company, Limited, to the Salt Pan on the farm
Zevenfontein in the Orange Free State, about 28 miles N.E.
of Kimberley, to divine for water. In the Pan workings, the
writer was shown a well 52 feet deep, but absolutely dry, and
was asked if there was any water in the vicinity. Strolling
about near the dry well he felt a sensation in the neck and
eventually discovered two streams at approximately 52 and
78 feet deep. The intersection of these streams was pegged
and found to be 24.6 from the edge of the well in an easterly
direction. A drive was made from the bottom of the well
in the direction of the peg and, on tapping the top stream, a
flow of water of about ? of a million gallons per 24 hours was
the result. Nothing further was done in regard to the lower
stream. Mr Nicol checked this divining with his twig.

The writer was also successful in distinguishing between
fresh and brine streams on the same pan. The sensation
experienced when locating brine is in the temples instead
of the neck as in the case of water. Mr Hetzel reported
that he had divined six streams of brine in the Salt Pan at
varying depths to 26 feet within a distance of 71 feet and,
after corroboration by Mr Nicol and the writer, a cutting
was made and the six brine streams found.

In South Africa, where there are vast extents of land suffer-
ing at times from severe droughts, farmers and others have
had resource to the divining rod with excellent results, and
no doubt, in other continents similarly situated, the services
of the diviner are requisitioned.”

With this very interesting communication, with many of


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 169


the theoretical statements in which we, however, disagree,
Mr Rogers enclosed declarations attesting to the truth of his
_ relations. These declarations were all duly signed and sworn
before a Commissioner of Oaths or a Justice of the Peace and
date from July 1920. They are from Mr J. J. T. King, J.P.,
Secretary of the Griqualand West Board of Executors Trust
and Agency Company, Limited, Mr K. C. Elliott, Vice-President
of the Kimberley Chamber of Commerce and Chairman of the
Central Salt Pan Company, Limited, Mr A. J. Thomson, J.P.,
Manager of the Kimberley Branch of the National Bank of
South Africa, Limited, and Mr E. W. Mowbray, the owner
of the Steam Laundry at the Homestead, Kimberley.

After further correspondence Mr Rogers sent a number of
other cases in which he had successfully dowsed for water ;
he enclosed the following certificates, which speak for them-


selves.
\


“T, Wietsche Marthinus Snyman of Klipdam, make oath
and say :—

(1) That I am the owner of the farm ‘ Karrepan’ in the
district of Barkly West in the Union of South Africa.

(2) That I had to abandon the Homestead on the said farm
through my well, approximately 56’ 0” deep, giving out.

(3) That Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, M.B.E., of Kimberley, at
my request and free of charge, divined for water on portion of
the said farm ‘ Karrepan’ and located three converging
streams of water meeting at a point 21’ 6” from the edge of
the well and at a depth of 50’ 0” below the surface of the
ground. He recommended a drive being made from the well
at the 56’ 0” level.

(4) I drove a tunnel accordingly from the bottom of the well,
namely 56 feet, and tapped a strong water as located by
Mr Rogers. I am using a 3” pump, driven by a 6 H.P. petrol
engine, as well as two windmills, and when all these pump
continuously they only reduce the water by two feet.’”’ [Dated
the 21st of July rg2r].


“T, John Jeffrey of Kimberley, make oath and say :—

(1) That I am the Chief Caretaker at the Head Offices of
the De Beers Consolidated Mines, Limited, Kimberley, and that
I own the property known as Hope Farm at the corner of
Ennor and Howie Roads, Kimberley, and in extent about 4}
morgen. '

(2) That, at my invitation, Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, about
three years ago, visited the above mentioned property and


170 THE DIVINING-ROD


pointed out two spots where he assured me I should obtain
good supplies of water. The first spot was about 20 or 30
feet from a well that had practically given out, and the second
spot towards the northern end of the property and over I00
yards from the first spot. At the second spot Mr Rogers said
two streams intersected at different levels and would yield
over 5,000 gallons of water per diem. I bored as directed and
found the supplies of water as promised by Mr Rogers, and
approximately at the depths he gave.

During boring operations at the second spot and when
approaching the lower stream, the driller reported that, when
lighting his pipe near the borehole, some gas from the bore-
hole ignited with a loud explosion, accompanied by a rumbling
under the surface of the ground. When I visited the property
about a week later, I saw the gas ignited and also heard a
loud rumbling below the ground near the bottom of the bore-
hole. I drew a sample of the water from the borehole, which,
on settling, shewed a film of oil onthe surface, but I took no
further notice of the occurrence as I was given to understand
that it was caused by marsh gas.’”’ [Dated the 22nd of April
1g2r]. ;


“T, Gustave Hauff of Kimberley, make oath and say : —

(x1) That I am Chief Draughtsman to the De Beers Consoli-
dated Mines, Limited, in the Kimberley Office, and am owner
of the farm ‘ Excelsior’ in the District of Jacobsdal, Orange
Free State.

(2) That, at my invitation, Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, M.B.E.,
of Kimberley, accompanied me to the above farm during the
month of February 1921, for the purpose of divining for
brine.

(3) That Mr Rogers pointed out a spot in the northern
portion of my farm on the edge of a vlei where he assured
me a strong stream of weak brine would be found at a depth
of fifty feet.

(4) That I bored as directed and struck a strong stream of


weak brine at the depth indicated.”’ [Dated the 21st of April
rg21].


“I, William Bumford of Kimberley, make oath and say :—


(1) That Iam Revenue Clerk to the Kimberley City Council
and that I own a property on Stand No. 35 R in Schmidt’s
Drift Road, Kimberley.

(2) That, at my invitation, Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, in
September 1919, visited my property and pointed out a spot


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 171


in my garden where he assured me I should obtain a good
supply of water. I thereupon put down a 6’ diameter bore-
hole and at a depth of 135 feet, and obtained a good supply of
good water. I have not tested the supply, but my 10 feet
windmill, having a tower of 25 feet with 22” cylinder, has failed
to empty the bore-hole, although it has been kept constantly
going, only being stopped when the weather was too boister-
ous.”’ [Dated the 9th of February 1921].


“T, Johannes Jacobus van Rensburg of the Farm Leeuwkop,
Orange Free State, make oath and say :—

(r) That I am the owner of the Farm Leeuwkop, situated in
the Orange Free State some 12 miles east of Kimberley, Cape
Province, and that I entered into possession of the Farm in
the month of November 1920.

(2) That I formed a new outspan, and requiring water to
supply to draught animals, asked Mr W. Nicol of the adjoining
farm, Napier, to divine for water. Mr Nicol called in Mr F.
Carstairs Rogers, M.B.E., to assist him and between them
they pointed out some spots where they asserted water would
be found with a minimum of 15,000 gallons per diem at a
depth of 50 feet. Boring operations were immediately started
and one borehole made with the result that at 50 feet a copious
supply of water was found estimated at 30,000 gallons per day.”’
[Dated the 2nd of February 1g2r].


““T, Peter Dewar of Middel Plaats North, make oath and
say :—

(rt) That I am a Builder and Contractor, and the owner
of the Farm Middel Plaats North in the Division of Kimberley,
Griqualand West.

(2) That owing to a scarcity of water on my farm, I invited
Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, M.B.E., of Kimberley to divine for
water. He visited my farm in the winter of 1918 and indicated
a spot within 25 feet of a dry well, 20 feet deep, and about
40 feet from a large dam which held my sole supply of water.
He assured me I should get a minimum of 5,000 gallons of
water per diem at a depth of 35 feet. In spite of the ridicule
of the neighbouring farmers, who said I would only get soak-
age from the dam, I sunk a well in accordance with Mr Rogers’s
directions, and obtained a copious supply of water which
enabled me during the severe drought of 1919 and the early
part of 1920, when the dam was absolutely dry, to keep my
Homestead and garden going and to water over 1500 head of
large and small stock, without diminishing the supply. When


172 THE DIVINING-ROD


the drought was broken in February 1920, the heavy flood
broke the dam wall, which has been rebuilt and completed
only last week.” [Dated in December 1920].


Further information being requested about the last quoted
striking case, Mr Rogers kindly sent the following additional
particulars in a statement from Mr Dewar: “ Distance
from the large Earth Dam to well 64 feet. Distance from the
Dry Well to new Well 14 feet 3”. Depth of new well from
ground level to bottom of well 38 feet. Water rises in well
to 20 feet in 24 hours. Diameter of well 5 ft. 6’. Formation,
limestone conglomerate. Water comes up through the bottom
of well, sides being dry. Had no rain on Farm since 30th of
April 1921, until today 25th of January 1922, today soft rains.
Large Earth Dam dry since end of July, 1921, and no water
in same at present time. Have erected a 30 feet Mill with ro
feet wheel 3” Cylinder and 14” delivery pipe pumping into a
stone reservoir 35 feet long x 20 feet wide x 5 feet deep.
This waters at present 100 head of cattle, 70 head of donkeys,
20 head of horses, 50 sheep, also irrigates my garden, orchard,
and lucerne beds. Ihave 1,200 feet of piping laid on from the
reservoir to water troughs in camps and kraals and to taps for
watering trees. I have planted 150 trees this season (gums
and poplars) and these are also irrigated from the reservoir.”

Finally may be quoted two more successful cases of Mr
Rogers’s, the latter of which he considers his greatest achieve-
ment.


“JT, Ronald Percy Love of Kimberley, make oath and
say :-—

“That I am the Secretary of the Divisional Council of
Kimberley.

That in October last I approached Mr F. Carstairs Rogers,
M.B.E., of Kimberley, and asked him if he would divine for
water on a certain plot of ground, 44 acres in extent, on the
farm Bultfontein in the Division of Kimberley, and which I
desired to lease from De Beers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., if
sufficient underground water was available.

Mr Rogers willingly acceded to my request and pointed
out a certain spot where he assured me I should get 5,000
gallons of water per diem at a depth of 66 feet.

I accordingly sank a well at the spot indicated and struck
water at a depth of 15 feet. I discontinued sinking operations
at 25 ft., at which depth I secured a supply of about 2,000
gallons per 24 hours, and quite sufficient for my requirements
for some time to come.


CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 173


The spring from which the water rises can be clearly seen,
and is in the form of a pothole almost in the centre of the
well.

Mr Rogers declined to accept any consideration for his
services.’’ [Dated the 12th of January 1922].


“T, John William de Kock, [J.P.], owner of the farm, Spring
Valley, District of Mafeking, Cape Province, do hereby certify
that on the 29th of July 1921, Mr F. Carstairs Rogers, M.B.E.,
of Kimberley, whilst on a visit to this farm for the purpose of
divining for water, located a spot 33 yards in length, which he
said carried a large water supply at about 12 feet from the
surface.

During the month of August 1921, I had a trench cut 33
feet long and sunk on the same to about 6 feet from the sur-
face, when water was found coming from the bottom of this
trench. This work was continued during September and
October to about 9g feet down, the water supply increasing all
the time. During December 1921 and January 1922 the
trench was sunk down to 13 feet and the work had to cease
last Saturday, 14th inst., owing to the water being too strong
to cope with it fully. Since ceasing this work, the water has
risen up to 6 feet from the surface.

I do not consider the real supply has yet been found, as
the water still comes from the bottom of the trench. To test
it fully a power pump will have to be erected before any
further sinking can be done.’”’ [Dated the 16th of January
1922].


. CHAPTER VIII


OTHER CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DOWSERS :
PROFESSIONAL


to consider, however briefly, the achievements of con-

temporary dowsers abroad. Even restricting the field to
Great Britain and Ireland, it is impossible to quote examples
of the dowsing of all the practitioners of whom we have
records. But in addition to the foregoing detailed account of
some of the outstanding dowsers, it seems desirable to add a
case or two from each of a few other notable dowsers. To
make a selection from such dowsers is an invidious task, and
the cases that follow have been chosen principally on account
of the interest of each case as illustrating one aspect or other
of dowsing and they are by no means a series of the best cases
known to us, nor do they represent the most successful dow-
sers only. Among the many other dowsers who could well
have claimed a place in this chapter may be named Thomas
Hawker of Somerton, Charles Milham of Assa, in Canada,
Tom Heard of Taunton, F. H. Buckingham of Norwich, John
Pattmore of Chard, W. Robertson of Claydon, Bucks.,
C. B. M. Chambré of Dungannon, W. N. Pogson of Kilpauk,
in India, F. Webb of Yeovil, Allan Butcher of Hythe, W.
Cubbage of Botolph Claydon, William Edwards of Marsh-
field, Roberts of Henfield, Rodney Kitcher of Brockenhurst,
Hants., R. A’Barrow of Stalbridge, Charles Adams of Row-
berrow, H. Bacon of Newport, Essex, H. Chesterman of
Bath, Stokes of Newbury, Berks., W. Mereweather of Bed-
minster, R. W. Robertson of Llanelly, R. Rothwell of Cardiff,
G. Elson of Crewkerne, R. Pavey of Cheddar, and many others.


| T would have been impossible in a volume of reasonable size


§1. THOMAS WILLIS, OF GLOUCESTER


The water supply at Meredith, near Gloucester, depended
until 1887 on a well 54 feet deep near the house of Sir W.
Wedderburn, M.P. In the year mentioned, as a result of


174


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 175


several dry summers, the supply in the well gave out. Under
these circumstances Sir W. Wedderburn decided to sink a
new well. He had heard that a local dowser had been suc-
cessful in finding water in a farm at Rudford, and he accor-
dingly asked the dowser to come over. This was Thomas
Willis, a cabinet maker in Gloucester, who used a straight rod
about eighteen inches long or a steel wire. He was not a
regular professional dowser but accepted a small fee if he was
successful. He went over the ground and marked two places
near the dry well. Sir W. Wedderburn writes that when
Willis was dowsing “the muscles of his arms appeared to
work and twitch as if he was holding the handles of a mild
galvanic battery, and the wand or wire, from being straight
between his hands bent into a sort of bow and worked round
like a crank, rotating upwards when passing the holder’s body.”’

At the second place marked by the dowser, about 50 yards
from the old well, a well was sunk. He had estimated that
water would be found at 25 to 30 feet, and after sinking for
30 feet through red marl water began to trickle in, and at
47 feet a big supply was obtained. By levelling it was ascer-
tained that the bottom of the new well was two feet above
the surface of the water in the old well; there was therefore
no connexion between the old deficient supply, which provided
a gallon in ten minutes, and the new supply which gave a gallon
a minute.


§ 2. CHARLES SIMS, OF PILTON


The following is an important case from an evidential
point of view. The Bristol Times and Murror for the 16th
of June 1891 states: ‘‘ The Anglo-Bavarian Brewery at Shep-
ton Mallet needed a large water supply ; accordingly excava-
tions had been made to find water, but without success.
About two years since, during an exceptionally dry season,
it became absolutely necessary to obtain a further supply
of brewing water; hence several boring experiments were
made on the property. At the suggestion of a gentleman in
the locality, the services of a ‘ diviner’ were obtained, and
although the principal members of the firm professed to have
no faith in his ‘art’, yet he was allowed to try the fields
on the company’s property, and those on the neighbouring
estate, and discovered the well now used by the brewery.


1 These facts are related by Sir W. Wedderburn in a report dated the
1st of January 1888, and confirmed in a letter of the 19th of February


1897.


176 THE DIVINING-ROD


. . . The soothsayer, who carried the divining rod, a hazel
branch, was Mr Charles Sims, a local farmer, and a notable
discoverer of wells in the district. Operations were imme-
diately commenced, and, after excavating and dynamiting
through the rock, to the depth of 50 feet, a magnificent spring
was discovered in a fault of the rock, which proved to be of
exceptionally fine water, and of even a finer quality than the
town’s supply.”

Inquiries were addressed to the Brewery, and Mr J. Clifford,
its manager, answered: “‘ Replying to your letter in regard
to a local diviner, we had one of the name of Sims, from Pilton,
who successfully denoted a spot on our ground where we
have had an abundant supply of water since. .. .

The writer of this letter also has had some considerable
experience with Mr Lawrence of Bristol, who was one of
the most noted divining rod men in the West of England. He
also was successful in denoting a supply for a Bristol brewery
with which the writer was connected ; and in numerous other
instances in the neighbourhood. Mr Lawrence bore a very
high reputation. We believe he died a few months ago at a
ripe old age.”

Having written to ask if a previous boring had been made,
and if so, to what depth, and with what result, the following
account was received: ‘ Replying to yours of the 14th, a
boring was carried out to the extent of some 140 feet without
success on another portion of our premises, before it was
successfully done at the spot indicated by the water-finder ;
here a well was sunk and abundant water obtained at a depth
of 40 feet.”


§ 3. THomMAS HARES AND JOHN BLAKE


Mr George H. Pope, Treasurer of the Merchant Venturers
of Bristol, asked Mr W. G. Hellier, of Wick St Lawrence,
near Weston-super-Mare, the bailiff of that body, to give some
account of his experience in dowsing. Mr Hellier did so and
sent the following statement: ‘I should as soon think of
planting a tree with its root upwards, as I should of digging a
well for water without employing a ‘ dowser.’ I never knew
the rod to fail in the hands of Thomas Hares or John Blake,
but I have heard of many failures in the hands of supposed
dowsers. Thomas Hares used to find both water and minerals
by the rod, but he told me that a watch spring would not


do in his hands for finding water, though it was all right for
minerals.


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS ir]


The following facts are within my own knowledge.

Within 200 yards or so of Rectory Farm house, at Locking,
near Weston-super-Mare, four wells have been sunk, the
position of which is marked on the enclosed rough tracing
from the parish map. For No. 1 well, the spring was found
by Thomas Hares. After walking over the field in different
directions, with the rod in his hand, he crossed the fence, and,
whilst on the top of it, the rod kept turning. He marked the |
spot of the spring, and on that spot I removed the fence and
sank the well where the fence had stood. There has been a
constant supply of water in it, even all through last summer,
when there was a general drought.

For No. 2 well, the spring was found by John Blake, on the


CHURCH


SCALE OF CHAINS


Fic. 41. THE Four WELts 1Nn LockineG PariIsH


lawn of the Vicarage, opposite the drawing-room window, a
most unsuitable position. I sank the well and there is a plenti-
ful supply of water, with no lack last summer.

No. 3 well was sunk without a dowser. It is 10 feet deeper
than No. 1. There was no water in it all last summer, and
I should not think it has 6 feet of water in it now.

No. 4 well was also sunk without a dowser, because the place
was thought likely for water. It is nearly as deep as No. I.
There is water in it for about 9 months of the year, but last
summer it was quite dry.

Water was wanted at Edbrook Cottage, in Fiddington, near
Bridgwater. There wasa good spring in a field 200 yards away,
and the dowser traced it over field, fence and roadway, and
marked the spot for a well just opposite the door of the cot-


12


178 THE DIVINING-ROD


tage. I sank the well there, and the tenants have never had to
go elsewhere for water since.

Whilst the dowser was tracing this spring, walking backwards
and forwards across the line of its course, I hid my pocket
compass in the long grass in his track, and, when he came to
it, the rod turned over, and he said ‘ There is summat here.’
I am certain that he did not see the compass until after-
wards, when I showed it to him hidden.

The most striking case I know of is on Sandford Green, in
the parish of Winscombe, Somerset, where Thomas Hares
offered to sink his well for nothing, if he did not come to the
spring. There was already a well on the green, but it had
scarcely any water during the summer months. The well sunk
by the dowser was so near it that the sinkers threw the dirt
as they dug tt out from the new well into the old one. The water
rose to within 6 feet of the top of the new well. This was some
30 years ago. The spring was the talk of the neighbourhood
at the time, and it is still a noted one.

I could go on telling yarns about dowsers, but all that
I have written has come under my own observation, and I can
vouch for the truth of it.”

From inquiries the depths of the wells were ascertained
to be as follows in February 1897:

No. zr well, Church Farm, 20 feet.

No. 2 well, Vicarage lawn, 31 feet.

No. 3 well, dry, 33 feet.

No. 4 well, Garden, about 12 feet.

It was not possible to gather further information about
the case at Edbrook Cottage ; regarding the wells at Sand-
ford Green: the one sunk at the spot indicated by the dowser
was, in 1897, 33 feet deep and had then rg feet of water—the
old well had been filled up in the manner described, and its
depth was not ascertainable.


§ 4. RICHARD ANTHONY, OF YELLING


Mr Montague Price had sunk a well to a depth of 150 feet
at The Node, Welwyn, Hertfordshire, and obtained a quite
insufficient supply of water. He then called in Richard
Anthony, of Yelling, Huntingdonshire, a farmer who had
accidentally discovered that he had the dowsing faculty.
Anthony advised Mr Price to drive a heading from the bottom
of the well in a given direction that he marked. The well-
sinkers found, before they had carried this heading 6 ft., the
inrush of water so great that they had to stop, in spite of a


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 179


steam engine which kept going night and day with powerful
pumps. Mr T. V. Holmes, being asked to report on this case,
declared that the driving of a head would have been what
any engineer or geologist would have recommended. But if
so, why did not the engineer in charge of the works recommend
it? And how could an engineer or geologist have indicated
the exact direction in which so large a supply was reached
before six feet had been driven? In other experiments, in
similar chalk formations, headings were driven great dis-
tances under the advice of the best geologists and engineers,
and yet to a large extent failed to accomplish their purpose.

On the same occasion Anthony found water in another place
and for an opposite purpose. Mr Price writes in one of the
letters in which he describes the above case: ‘‘ After trying
every device for keeping water out of an accumulator house,
which always seemed to be rising, in spite of a concrete floor
6 inches thick, the same diviner told me exactly where a spring
caused the trouble. We tapped it from the outside, and now
the place is perfectly dry.

I held one side of the forked rod myself and the ‘ diviner ’
the other, and when we came to water [alleged underground
water] the strain was so great on my fingers I was obliged to
ask him tostop. From the position of the rod it was absolutely
impossible for him to produce the pressure, which increased
with the strength of the stream.”’


§5. JOHN STEARS, OF HESSLE


Stears was for many years in business in Hull as an engineer,
and had done other work of a semi-scientific nature. For
some time he was honorary secretary of the Hull Field Natura-
ists’ Society and is much respected by all who knew him. He
described his own sensations as follows: ‘‘ My experience has
been most satisfactory (extending over 20 years), and I have
always found water where the rod indicated it, also iron pipes.
In some towns I have mapped out their position for the pur-
pose of repairs, and the pipes have been found exactly where
I stated, some even left deep where a road had been raised.

I may say that I notice a different sensation with waters
and metals; there is a chilly feeling creeps up my legs when
the rod shows water.

My powers vary with health ; if tired I lose the power ; pro-
vide the animal system with a fresh supply of food, and back
the power comes. I do not like blindfolding. It seems to
interfere with that calmness which is desirable, but I have tried


180 THE DIVINING-ROD


it on roads where I denoted water ; having been taken back-
wards and forward I have been started in the middle of the
road and stopped at the part previously marked. Darkness
does not interfere with the power in the least.”

Stears found himself so successful that he became a pro-
fessional dowser and removed to Westholme, Hessle, Yorkshire.
The following is a typical example of his success. Mr John
Letts, of Rillington, near Molten, in Yorkshire, had made a
boring to a depth of 120 feet without finding water; 5 feet
away was an old boring about 20 feet deep, contaminated
with manure. At 30 yards from these places Stears selected
a spot at which a bore was made and a good supply of pure
water encountered at 84 feet. On the accompanying plan
(Fig. 42) the dotted lines show the underground courses traced
by Stears, C being the old contaminated well, B the waterless
well and A Stears’s successful pure well. Stears declared that
D was the underground course supplying C and A, the useless
B thus being off the course. We need not concern ourselves
with the value of such theorising : it remains true that Stears
scored a striking success.


§6. HENRY SMART, OF EVERCREECH


The following case from Somersetshire is given in The Western
Gazette for the 10th of February 1893. Evercreech is at the
foot of the Mendips: “ A well has recently been sunk on the
premises of Messrs W. Roles and Son, of Evercreech Junction,
on the site of the proposed milk factory. Mr Henry Smart,
head gardener at Pennard House, was successful with the
divining twig (or rod), and a well was sunk to a depth of 60
feet, when a spring was found which yielded no less than
15,000 gallons of water in ten hours. Water came at such a
rate that a powerful pump had to be erected temporarily
by Messrs Hill and Son, of Bruton, and was kept working day
and night in order to keep the water down for the purpose of
walling [the well]. At the present time there is 50 feet of water
in the well, the supply increasing daily.”’

Messrs Roles were written to to know if a well had been
sunk previously, and if the above statement was correct. They
replied that the account is quite correct, and added, ‘“‘ We had
previously sunk a well without the use of the rod, to nearly
the same depth, but it was unsuccessful. Six yards from this
useless well the diviner found the spring which now yields
enough to supply a small village if required.”


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 181


To Malton —— RIVER DERWENT <<


Fic. 42. PLAN oF Buitpincs at RILLINGTON


WORKING MEN'S |


ae ll


COLLEGS :


182 THE DIVINING-ROD


§7. H. W. GOLDING, OF BRAINTREE


The following is from The Daily News for the 22nd of May
1894 (the case having also been reported in The Daily Telegraph
of the same date, and in The Essex Herald and other news-
papers): “ The divining rod has again been used in Essex with
success, this time on the estate of General Thompson of Wethers-
field Place, near Braintree. Some years ago General Thomp-
son had a field surveyed by an eminent engineer who, after
testing the ground with boring apparatus, expressed an opinion
that no water was obtainable there. Hearing, however, of the
success of the divining rod in the immediate neighbourhood,
the General invited Mr H. W. Golding, of Bocking, to walk
over the field, with the result that at two places which Mr
Golding marked water was found at less than 10 feet from the
surface.”

On inquiry it was found that General Thompson had died
since the above experiments were made. His widow stated
that the report was correct, emphasizing the fact that Mr
Golding accepted no payment. Sir William Barrett then had
an interview with General Thompson’s son, Mr J. Wycliffe
Thompson, who had been present during the dowsing. Mr
Thompson stated that his father made the experiment on
purpose to test in a systematic manner the value or otherwise
of the indications afforded by the divining rod. Accordingly,
in the first instance a boring was made to find water by advice
without the use of the rod. Mr Thompson stated that the
boring was made to a considerable depth, but he did not know
the exact depth. No signs of water were found. Then Mr
Golding was invited over, and, cutting a forked twig, traversed
the ground. Presently the twig turned vigorously and, follow-
ing its indications, he professed to trace an underground spring
running not far from the experimental boring to a point some
50 yards away. The course indicated was staked out, and,
after Mr Golding left, a well was sunk in two places, chosen
at random on the course so marked. The result was that
water was found in both places at a depth of some 10 fect.
Mr Thompson was certain the first boring was “ far deeper
than this ”, and said that no doubt whatever was left in the
mind of General Thompson and others present of the reality
and practical value of some peculiar faculty for discovering
underground water afforded by the movement of the rod.

Golding has worked almost exclusively in Essex, and we
have a number of reports of his successes in that county.
Among the most interesting of these was one at Shalford for


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 183


the Council Schools ; here the County Council took exception
to the employment of a dowser and sunk a bore-hole to a
depth of 40 feet on other advice. No water was found and
ire was then called in, finding a good supply at a depth of
ap reet*


§8. H. W. Mutuins, oF BATH


Although no conclusive evidence exists to show that the
faculty of dowsing is hereditary, yet in several instances one
or more of the children of notable dowsers do possess the “ gift.”
H. W. Mullins, a son of John Mullins, isa case in point. Many
cases of his success have been investigated, but the following
recent instance must suffice. During 1921 the water supply
of Bath was found to be quite inadequate ; various attempts
to increase the supply having failed, the position in 1922 had
become serious. Two plans were considered, either of which
would have cost {100,000 and have taken three years to carry
out. Before one of the schemes was adopted it was decided
‘to call in Messrs J. Mullins and Sons, of Railway Place, Bath.
H. W. Mullins, one of the famous John Mullins’s sons, acted
on this occasion ; he went in great detail over the whole ground
and made a full report, which was submitted to the Bath
Corporation on the 7th of March 1922. In this report Mullins
recommended that sinkings should be made, especially at two
places which he indicated. These recommendations were acted
upon, and Messrs Mullins commenced work at these two

laces.
i At the first site Mullins had estimated a yield of about 40,000
gallons per day at a depth of 12-15 feet below the surface ;
water was actually found to the extent of 144,000 gallons per
day at 10 feet deep. At the second site the dowser had esti-
mated a daily yield of 50,000 gallons at a depth of 15 feet ;
at 7 feet a supply of 52,000 gallons was obtained. These
quantities were measured early in 1922 after rains. In each
case the water was found at the base of the Midford Sands.

Later other spots were tried and in the words of Mr J. Basil
Ogden, the Town Clerk of Bath, who has kindly supplied this
information, with a copy of the report, “ In every case he has
found water at the spot where his twig caused him to expect
it to be located.”” Inthe same letter, dated the 3rd of Novem-
ber 1923, Mr Ogden says that the Corporation “have every
reason to be satisfied with the work of Mr Mullins which he


1 See also Golding’s pamphlet Water Finding in Essex and District
[1907].


184 THE DIVINING-ROD


has undertaken for us.” Mr Jules Dent Young, the Bath
Waterworks Engineer, reports on the 22nd of November 1923 :
“T have at different times of the year gauged the springs
collected by Mr Mullins. I find that Mr Mullins has under-
estimated the maximum yield in many cases; he has been
fairly accurate with the average yield, but has in most cases
considerably overestimated the minimum yield. The total
yield when gauged in the middle of October was 319,536
gallons a day; this is the lowest they went to this year, in
June they were yielding 681,840. At the present time the
yield is over 900,000 gallons.’

The following report appeared in The Bath Herald for the
14th of March 1922. It will be seen that the cost of the finding
of water by the dowser was £5,463 as against £100,000, and the
time a few months as against three years: “‘ Moving the
minutes of the Waterworks Committee at the City Council
today, Councillor A. G. F. Spurr (the chairman) asked per-
mission to amend the charge by meter to consumers to read—
‘from 1/6 to 1/8 per 1,000 gallons, as from the March quarter
readings.’ He also moved that the tender of Messrs Mullins
and Sons for executing the work at Weston at £5,463 be
accepted, and that a contract be entered into under the Common
Seal. He said he felt that there was no need for him to take
up a lot of the Council’s time in advancing arguments of the
need for increasing their water supply after their experience
of the past few months, but he would like to make a few remarks.
The committee were blamed at the end of last season because
they did not take steps earlier to remedy the situation. They
were in an exceedingly difficult position. They could have
adopted either of two schemes that would have each cost at
least £100,000, and would have taken at least three years to
carry out. The committee were anxious not to do the wrong
thing ; they did not wish to rush the Council into spending
a large sum of money like that without they were quite certain
that they were adopting the right scheme. When the Council
gave them permission to call in an expert, they called in Mr
Mullins, whose name was suggested to him by Mr Councillor
Stone, and he was very grateful to him that he suggested
that name. He could not speak too highly of the way in
which Mr Mullins went to work. He threw his whole energy
into the question, and the result was that when the Council
asked them to bring a report up at the beginning of this month
they did so, but at the same time a great part of it was already
carried out—the first part—and today he thought there was
running into Monkswood reservoir at least 400,000 gallons


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 185


from the springs that Mr Mullins had discovered. It had
always seemed an extraordinary thing to him that in past
years the Bath City Council had engaged the services of eminent
geologists and engineers, who had surveyed the country all
round for miles. In one of the reports they picked out five
places at varying distances from Bath, and yet they seemed to
have missed the water which was just under their noses. Mr
Mullins came along with his twig, and he said: ‘There are
50,000 gallons here, and 70,000 gallons there,’ and so on.
He thought when that waterworks work was finished they
poset to erect a statue to Mr Mullins, holding his twig in his
and.”


§9. THomas HEIGHWAY, OF LLANDRINDOD WELLS ©


Thomas Heighway, the proprietor of the Park Pump Room,
Llandrindod Wells, is another example of heredity in dowsing,
for his father, John Heighway, was also in his day a successful
dowser. Thomas Heighway said that when he dowsed and
got over an underground spring his nervous system was so
much affected that he did not recover from it for some hours ;
accordingly he did not dowse much. It is interesting to note
that his father did not suffer in the same way. The example
of Heighway’s success to be quoted is particularly interesting,
the discovery having been of mineral water, and the details
of it, and of the dowser’s forecast, having been communicated
during the course of the actual diggings.

Captain Penny Lloyd, of Glasbury, R.S.O., had been looking
for sulphur mineral water, but without success. He then called
in Heighway, who went over the ground and traced three
underground water-courses, on each of which he indicated the
spot most suitable for sinking. In No. 1 (Fig. 43), when the
well had been sunk 35 feet he went down it and declared that
the water would come in from the south side. This was correct,
for the vein of rock holding the water was encountered at
475, feet and was found to run from west to east, so that if the
well had been sunk 3 feet more to the north, the supply would
not have been obtained. This was a sulphur spring, as was
No. 3, in which the supply was encountered at 52 feet below the
surface and 6 feet into the solid rock. No. 2 well was a still
more striking success ; Heighway had foretold a strong spring
of chalybeate water, and in fact at 32 feet so strong a supply
was encountered that it overflowed the well. On the accom-
panying map the dotted lines show the courses indicated by
Heighway, and the section is of the course A—B.


186 THE DIVINING-ROD
§ 10. S. T. Cui_tp, oF IpswicH, SUFFOLK


Child, who has recently died, was one of the most successful
of the dowsers of this century. He practised all over the
country and visited Portugal during the famine of 1907, achiev-
ing a striking success at Evora. Another of his more notable


VICTORIA WELLS D '
LLANWRTYO L&NW RL *f
<


We
BRECONSHIRE ask aA
SSS”


i


CHALYBEATE 3


ABOVE SEA


Fic. 43. PLAN or HEIGHWAY’s THREE WELLS


successes was the discovery of the springs at Woodhall Spa,
Lincolnshire. The following account of experiences has been
kindly supplied by Mr S. L. Bensusan, who is well known as
an authority in rural matters and who has had other experi-
ences with dowsers. He writes: ‘I heard of Mr Child in
1906 as a man who could find water and I sent for him to see


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


OTHER PROFESSIONAL DOWSERS 187


if he could discover some for me on my country home at Duton
Hill near Dunmow. I remember driving down to the station
to meet him on a hot summer day and wondering at the long
frock coat and silk hat which seemed a little out of place.
He used wands of willow or hazel and the clock spring and so
far as I remember he examined the land walking North to
South because, he said, rivers would be running from West to
East. He traced several subterranean streams and marked
two places where I would be likely to find water. The first
one failed, or perhaps we did not go down deep enough. At
the second attempt we discovered a good spring which did
not cease to supply the house until I sold the property in 1920.
A friend of mine, the late Mr A. P. Humphrey of Cambridg


SECTION ON LINE A-B
.— = EE eee


NOT TO SCALE


Fic. 44. SECTION OF THE SAME

University, came to see the test and suggested that he and
I should each hold one wrist of Mr Child while he held the wand
and passed again over a field under which he said water was
flowing. Mr Child agreed and we each held a wrist so tightly
that there was no play forthe wand. To our surprise just before
we passed over the marked ground the wand broke in his hands,
entirely without his control.

Later Mr Child told me that he learned of his gift when he
was a boy. The landlord of the Suffolk village in which he
lived sent for a dowser to find water and this man invited all
the village children to see if they had the gift. Mr Child was
the only one in whose hands the wand responded. Later in
life, by reason of this gift, he was able to buy a cottage on a
piece of land supposed to be far from water and consequently


188 THE DIVINING-ROD


very cheap. He had found out first that water was present.
One of his recent journeys had been to Portugal, where he had
discovered water in certain vineyards. He told me he had
been tested by various scientists and that if he stood on a
sheet of plate glass over running water his wands and springs
refused to act. He appeared both to Mr Humphrey and to
me to be an honest, straightforward and simple minded man.” 1


* See also Child’s pamphlet Water Finding [1910].


CHAPTER IX


OTHER CONTEMPORARY BRITISH DOWSERS :
AMATEUR


HE comments at the head of the previous chapter
apply also to the present one. For convenience the


interesting case of the American boy Guy Fenley
has been included under this heading. Among the amateur
dowsers who may be named here in the same way are Dr
Foxley Norris, the new Dean of Westminster, Capt. J. P.
Dixon of Tiverton, Mr Batten of Ilminster, Mr H. G. Flanagan,
F.L.S., of Komgha, Cape Colony, Mr Geo. Gillingham, J.P.,
of Reading, Mr J. H. White of Shepton Mallet, Captain
Chapman of Caistor, Mrs Greig of Okehampton, Dean Ovenden,
Andrew Lang, the late Duke of Argyll, Lord Farrer, Sir Richard
Harington, Bart., Mr J. H. Jones of Mullinabro, Mr J. Stenson
Hooker, Mrs Henry Pim, Major J. H. Wedderburn Maxwell,
Colonel R. W. Aldworth, Rev. J. R. Blunt, Rev. J. G. Jenkins,
Mr R. Robertson, Mr F. J. Young, Archdeacon Earle, Mr
E. M. Hippisley, Colonel King-Harman, Judge Spink, Mr R.G.
D. Tosswill, Mr G. H. Ward-Humphreys, and many more.


§1. WALTER WYBURN


MrF. J. Clark, F.L.S., writes from Netherleigh, Street, Somer-
set: “A few years ago I was appointed along with Walter
Wyburn and the late A. R. Grace, of Bristol, a sub-committee
of a Charitable Trust Committee belonging to our religious
body [the Society of Friends]. One object of this committee
was to get water for a farmhouse belonging to the Trust at
Chelbro’, in Dorset, about 25 miles south-west of Yeovil. We
spent several days in a fruitless search for water, or for any
likely place to sink a well. However, we made an attempt in
the most likely spot, according to our local geological knowledge,
and sunk a well 20 feet. Alas! no water was reached. At
length Walter Wyburn suggested trying the divining rod, as
he found to his surprise he could use it with some success.

189


Igo THE DIVINING-ROD


We agreed ; he had cut a forked twig and tried over all the
ground. After a good deal of perambulation the rod indicated
a strong spring in a neighbouring wood. Accordingly we had
a well dug at this spot, and to our delight found a capital spring ;
pipes were put down, and a constant supply for the house has
been given ever since.”


§2. Mr Kemp, oF TAUNTON


An able dowser is Mr Kemp, of Woodcroft House, Norton
Fitzwarren, near Taunton. This gentleman was for many years
stationmaster of the Norton Fitzwarren Station on the Great
Western Railway. When he retired he built a small house
there ; there was no water, but he succeeded in finding a supply
by dowsing. Mr Kemp has possessed the gift since his boyhood
in Barnstaple, and has often used it. He is a straightforward
man and willingly answers all inquiries. Appended is an
example of his achievements.

In the autumn of 1913 Mr F. S. Arnold, of Northway House,
Taunton, the owner of some property near Taunton, required
a water supply. Mr Kemp was called in and indicated two
flows of water, 14 feet apart, which he stated to cease sharply
at a given spot. On one of the courses a well was sunk and
water was found at 43 feet, after 10 feet of Sandy Red Loam,
6 feet of Red Clay and 27 feet of Red and Grey streaked Marl
had been pierced ; the water rose about 26 feet. On two sides
of the water courses marked by the dowser are visible streams,
but in each case the ground slopes sharply down from the well
to the stream, the spot being part of a ridge extending for several
miles in a southerly direction from the foot of the Quantock
Hills. The most striking part of the dowser’s success in this
case is the fact that it was found later that there are two geo-
logical faults 30 ft. to 4o ft. down, corresponding to the two
lines indicated by the dowser.


§ 3. AN OFFICIAL OF THE GOVERNMENT OF NORTHERN
IRELAND


Towards the end of 1923 the Greenmount Agricultural
College in County Antrim, Ireland, required a very much in-
creased supply of water, Several attempts were made in the
usual way but with no success. Accordingly Mr Herbert E.
Broderick, the assistant engineer of the Office of Works in
the Ministry of Finance of the Government of Northern Ireland,
whose duty it was to provide the water, applied to Sir William


OTHER CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS ror


Barrett. Sir William advised that William Stone, the dowser,
should be employed. There was some objection to this course,
especially as Stone’s charges seemed heavy; it was found,
however, that an official of the Government had some ability
in dowsing. Accordingly, after a conference at the Ministry,
instructions were given for the experiment to be tried with
this official.

The dowsing took place in the presence of Captain B., M.C.,
B.Sc., A.M.I.C.E., of the Office of Works and of Mr Marshbanks,
the principal of the College. The dowser indicated several
places, and when wells were sunk at these spots, a supply of
1,500 gallons a day, a sufficient supply, was obtained at once.
“ The engineering staff,”’ writes Mr Broderick, “ is very gratified
ae their excursion into the ‘ occult ’ has proved so success-
i) Rad

The principal of the College, who had expressed his complete
scepticism, was induced to try his hand with the rod, and was
found to be himself a good dowser !


§ 4. THE Boy LOCKYER


In an early volume of the Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research,t Mr E. Vaughan Jenkins published an
interesting case of dowsing. The date of this case was 1853,
but contemporary notes were kept, from which Mr Jenkins
later extracted voluminous additional particulars ; the inci-
dents may be summarised as follows :

Mr Jenkins having purchased some land for building pur-
poses in Christchurch Road, Newport, Monmouth, the absence
of a water supply necessitated his sinking a well. Guided by
the best advice, a site was carefully chosen and a well com-
menced. When the well-sinkers had reached 51 feet, and no
water found, it was decided from the nature of the ground,
a hard, compact marl, it would be useless to proceed further.
A consultation of local experts was held, and the conclusion
arrived at that there was no chance of obtaining water in that
neighbourhood. Thereupon the foreman of the masons (a
Cornishman) suggested using the divining-rod. He said it was
in common and successful use for the purpose of finding water
in his county, and his own son, eleven years old, had the power
of using ‘the rod in a remarkable degree. Mr Jenkins, though
at that time very incredulous, consented. The lad was sent
for, and with a hazel rod he crossed and re-crossed the ground
several times. At one spot the rod began to revolve, and


1 E.R. Pease, ‘‘ The Divining Rod,” Proc. S.P.R. (1884), ii. 106-107.


192 THE DIVINING-ROD


continued to do so with such force that the lad was obliged
to let it go, when the rod flew to some distance. Whereupon
the father of the lad, George Lockyer, said, “‘ I will stake my
life we shall find a good spring of water under this spot. I
will undertake to sink the shaft myself, and no water, no pay.”’
Accordingly, a well was begun the next day on the spot indicated
by the “rod.” At the depth of 48 feet, so strong a spring was
struck that the men employed had to beat a hasty retreat, the
water rising to a depth of Io feet in the well, and subsequently
to 15 feet, and remains at that depth at the present time,
constantly yielding an abundant supply. The lad neither
asked nor expected any payment. The father stated that he
himself also had the power of using the ‘‘ rod ’’ when he was
a boy, but he lost it when about 16 years old.

The discovery of this water supply led to the old site for
the house being abandoned, and a new site fixed on close
to the abundant supply of pure spring water that was obtained.
The relative position of the two wells, marked O O, is shown
in the annexed plan, Fig. 45, drawn to scale. The old site is
marked S’, and the abandoned well shaft W’, the new site is
S”, and the new well W” adjoins it. The plot A belongs to
Mr V. Jenkins. The owner of the adjacent plot B, which slopes
somewhat steeply to the S.W., shortly after began to build two
villas at B, and to sink the well W adjoining. He declined,
indeed ridiculed, the use of the divining rod, and informed
Mr Jenkins that he was confident of getting water at 20 feet
depth, but feared, as the land was so much lower, it would drain
off the supply from Mr Jenkins’s new well. Upon getting this
information Mr Jenkins asked the youthful dowser to go over
the ground again and see if he could trace the direction of the
underground water. This the lad did, and asserted, on the
evidence of the rod, that water would be found on the West
side of the new well W’”, but that little would be found on the
South or East side of it ; the North side had already been tried
and abandoned. The father of the lad thereupon assured Mr
ago gs he had no cause for anxiety from the proposed well
at B.

Accordingly at B a shaft was sunk, but no water was met
with at 25 nor even 50 feet. Eventually the well sinkers went
down to roo feet, and still no water was found. A boring was
then made 25 feet deeper, and at 125 feet water was struck, but
though the boring was continued still deeper, the water never
rose beyond 18 to 24 inches in the well; a fair supply was,
however, obtained. The water at Mr Jenkins’s well at S” was,
and still is, entirely unaffected by the well at B. The soil


OTHER CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 1093


at B was the same as that in the abandoned well shaft at S’
in the plot A, viz., a “ hard, compact marl.’”’ Three pairs of
villas were subsequently erected on the plot C, and three wells
sunk as shown at W, W, W. Water was obtained at 50 feet


PLAN OF A SITE IN CHRISTCHURCH Roap, NEWPporT, MONMOUTHSHIRE


VIH = wVvO WIVd


Fic. 45.


depth, but the supply “ was poor, and is not sufficient to keep
the wells from running dry in a very dry summer.” These
wells were therefore a comparative failure.t


1 It was the success of this experiment that led Mr Vaughan Jenkins
to devote much of his time for over 40 years to collecting evidence on
the use of the dowsing-rod.


13


104 THE DIVINING-ROD


§ 5. COLONEL HuGH ROSE


During the Great War Colonel Rose on several occasions ren-
dered great service by meansof dowsing. Acoupleofexamples
are appended, each followed by comments by Colonel Rose.
The first one is recorded by Captain J. C. Dufresne, R.E., late
Officer-in-charge of Water Supply for the Corps, who
writes to Colonel Rose (2nd of November 1916) as follows :
“It is with sincere pleasure that I recall the circumstances
under which you helped us out of a difficult situation by showing
me where I could obtain a good supply of water in Long Valley
—to the N.W. of Albert. I may say that it was the first time
I had seen the gift of Water Divining put into actual practice.

Long Valley is merely a depression, running from N. to S.
in the chalk plateau about a mile to N.W. of Albert. As it
offered good cover from enemy observation, it was decided to
concentrate a large number of horses at the spot, but as it is


most important that horses should not interfere with traffic


by crossing the main roads to water, the necessity of a local
supply of about 1,000 gallons per hour became apparent, and
to be of any use it had to be found within a week.

That water existed we knew, for, where the valley crossed
the Albert-Amiens Road, it was found within 20 feet of the
surface,—yet at the northern end of the valley near Bouzin-
court, a well had been sunk to a depth of 65 feet without results,
and a bore-hole 100 feet deeper still gave insufficient results,
after weeks of hard work.

Hearing of your mystic powers I begged your assistance
and you very kindly accompanied me to Long Valley. I think
this was about June zoth. With your magic spring you went
over the ground, getting various indications from time to time
by the uncanny movements of the little clock spring you carried.
At last coming to a place where the spring seemed to turn over
and over, you told me to dig there.

It was also curious that you were able to trace the direction
from whence the water was coming, the flow being from the N.W.
and not down the centre of the valley. I put three shifts of
well diggers to work next day; the result being that on the
fifth day at a depth of 41 feet water began to come in from
the N.W. side of the well (not a drop of water had come in
before this), and on taking out another foot of chalk—or at
a depth of 42 ft.—we struck all the water we needed ; the water
level rising to 4 ft. in the well. With continual pumping
of 800 to 1,000 gallons per hour we could only lower the water
level 7 inches.


a


OTHER CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 105


I have recently heard that the well you located at ‘ Rose
Water Point ’ (near Mametz) is going strong and giving 4,500 1
gallons per hour, and has saved the situation in that district.

‘More power to your arm.’ ”

Colonel Rose comments: ‘ The weather on the morning of
June zoth was the very reverse of favourable for the task,
as a cold wind was blowing, with rain showers at frequent
intervals.

Captain Dufresne showed me, roughly, whereabouts he would
like to have a well, and after about half an hour’s search around
I struck into an ‘ indication ’ on some ground above the nullah
and to the W. of it.

This streak I traced back in a N.Wly. direction for some
200 to 250 yards, then turned and worked back on the ‘ run-
down ’ (or hidden fissure in the chalk) to a spot in the valley
where I mapped out a pretty large ‘spread ’ of some 20 to 24
feet in diameter. Exchanging the delicate clock spring for a
stoutish hazel twig, I tried hard to keep the latter from turning,
but it fairly beat me in the centre of the ‘spread ’.

So I carefully marked the middle of this area, and told
Captain Dufresne that with that as the centre of his well he
could go ahead with his digging, which he did.”

The second case to be quoted is recorded by Captain J. W.
Blow, R.E., Field Engineer in charge of Advanced Water
Supply for the Corps; in a letter to Colonel Rose dated
the r5thof January 1917: “‘ During the month of August, 1916,
I received orders from the Chief Engineer of the Corps,
to provide a large water supply for horses and troops to be
camped in the vicinity of Botton Wood. On the map I fixed
the approximate desirable position of the necessary well from
a military and geological point of view, and was making
arrangements for a careful reconnaissance of the ground when
my friend, Capt. Dufresne, R.E., informed me of the valuable
aid you had given him in determining the position of a well
in Long Valley. This decided me to consult you on this
important matter. You very kindly consented to accompany
me to the spot, and, to cut a long story short, after searching
for several hours under difficult and trying circumstances,
as stated below, you located a series of fissures in the chalk,
indicating me an entirely new position. A well was sunk at
this point to a total depth of 59’ 6” giving a yield of over 10,000
gallons per hour—a quite exceptional yield for a comparatively
shallow well in chalk formation. The above is, I think, of


1 [Over 10,000 gallons per hour. The pump is only capable of lifting
that amount.]


196 THE DIVINING-ROD


scientific interest showing the valid assistance Water Divining
can give to the geologist. The valley at the time was full of
Batteries in action, and was receiving considerable enemy
attention. Your difficulties were further increased by the large
amount of metal about in the shape of buried unexploded
shell.”

Colonel Rose observes: ‘‘ At the request of Captain Blow
I commenced to search considerably higher up the valley than
the spot where the present well, known as ‘ Rosewater Point,’
was located. Four or five small patches of water were come
upon, but none showing a sufficient quantity to warrant the
sinking of a well.

I may mention that in my hands the clock spring, or forked
rod turns for metals if held level, with the U, or tail, pointing
towards one’s body, upwards and forwards. With water just
the contrary.

All the time I was working (over 4 hours) the spring kept
flicking over for metal. What with the din of howitzers firing
projectiles at very close range right over one’s head, while
the Boche replied by Crump ‘overs’ to my right and left,
and with the heat caused by a steel helmet on a still sunny
day, the task was a somewhat tough one.

While working along the line of a brae I struck across a
small ‘run-down.’ Some officers were lying on the slope out-
side a small tent. I traced the ‘run-down’ up to the brae
from S. to N. and found that, by a strange coincidence, the
fissure passed right under the tent. This fact I verified by
a second trial from N. to S.

About 40 yards further E. I struck a satisfactory parallel
‘run-down ’, and found that the other fissure merged into this
one at a certain point. Where they joined a stake was put in,
and with that as centre the well was dug, with the results
mentioned by the water expert, Captain Blow, R.E.”


§6. THE Boy Guy FENLEY, oF TEXAS


In 1901, Guy Fenley, the 14-year-old son of a highly respected
citizen of Uvalde, Texas, accidently discovered his ability to
find underground water while walking with his father over
the pasture of a ranch near Uvalde. This boy appeared to
be able to state the approximate depth of the water as well as
the direction of its flow, and to describe the strata between
the water and the surface. In order to test his powers, Mr
Fenley took his son to a field at night: the boy indicated a
spot where he stated water would be found at a depth of 200


OTHER CONTEMPORARY AMATEUR DOWSERS 1097


feet. It is alleged that water was in fact found at 187 feet.

This being a very dry country, where the lack of water is
one of the most serious difficulties to be encountered, the
news of this boy’s faculty soon spread. Mr Thomas Devine
took him to his ranch in the northern part of Uvalde county,
where thousands of dollars had been spent in vain efforts to
find water. Guy was taken to a large pasture and after two
hours indicated an underground stream. This he followed
for over a mile, marking a number of spots. It is stated that
in each instance a fine flow of water was found. The boy was
also alleged to have found water in the ranch of F. K. Moore,
in Edwards County, and to have refused 500 dollars for his
trouble.

Young Fenley was soon overwhelmed with requests from all
parts of Texas to find not only water but oil. Only one more
case need be quoted ; the details appeared in American news-
papersasfollows. Judge W. Van Sickle of the State Legislature
had asked the boy to come to his ranch in Brewster county.
This gentleman, on being interviewed, made the following
statement: ‘‘That Guy Fenley, this 14-year-old boy, is
possessed of an X-ray sight cannot be questioned. He has
demonstrated his ability to see underground streams of water,
no matter what their depth may be, on a number of occasions,
and the stockmen of West Texas have ample proof of his
power in this line. I engaged him to go to Brewster County
and locate two wells on the ranch which is owned by D. J.
Combs and myself. This ranch is situated in a very dry
country, known as the Glass Mountains. We had made a
vain search for water on this ranch, having sunk a well to a
depth of 607 feet, at a cost of $1,500, without striking water.
This boy has already located two wells on the ranch, one
at a depth of 250 feet and the other at a depth of 400 feet, both
containing an abundant supply of pure water, and well-drilling
outfits are now at work sinking other wells on the ranch, with
no doubt about securing water.

There can be no longer any doubt about this boy’s wonderful
power of sight, for the reason that instances are numerous
and notoriously known where his X-ray gift or whatever it
may be called has been proven beyond a doubt. He comes of
a splendid family and has fine connections. He is a modest,
handsome, blue-eyed boy, and to all outward appearances there
is nothing about him to distinguish him from other boys of
the same age. While locating the wells in Brewster County
he romped and played with other boys whose acquaintance
he made.


198 THE DIVINING-ROD


Without citing the numerous cases and giving the names of
parties for whom he has been successful in locating wells, I
will say that if there is any doubting Thomas, such person can
verify the truth of all my statements concerning the wonderful
power of this boy by writing to anyone in Uvalde, Sanderson
or Alpine, Texas. He cannot tell the exact depth of the water
below the surface, but he approximates its depth as any other
person would guess at distances above the ground.

I am unable to explain this wonderful power—this extra
sense—possessed by this boy, but that he has it there can be
no question. He is bright and intelligent and when in school
at Uvalde he stood at the head of his class in mathematics.”’ }

These facts were confirmed by the Hon. John N. Garner, of
Uvalde, and its representative in the State Legislature. Direct
application was also made to Judge van Sickle, who vouches
for his statement to the press, in a letter dated the 6th of
February, 1gol.


1 Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 7th of February tgo1 ; Illustrated Buffalo
Express, 2nd of February 1901; etc.


CHAPTER X


EXPERIMENTS WITH TWO OR MORE
INDEPENDENT DOWSERS


SB HE best justification of the dowser’s claims is naturally


his success. If it can be shown, as we believe the fore-

going pages amply show, that the dowser not only
has a very large percentage of successes in the investigations
he undertakes, but that many of these successes take place
subsequent to the failures of geologists and engineers, the best
possible case on his behalf ismadeout. But beyond this direct
pragmatical test, interesting experiments may be designed
in order to ascertain whether the indications given by the dow-
ser are in fact founded on something outside of himself. Of
such experiments there are two of especial importance, to
which the ensuing chapters are to be devoted. The former
of these is one in which two or more dowsers are taken over
the same ground, but quite independently of each other, and .
their indications compared. Under such a test even the most
accurately scientific opinions might be expected to fail not
infrequently, but, on the contrary, in dowsing under such
conditions we have a number of striking successes and hardly
any failures. Professor Gabriel de Mortillet, the distinguished
anthropologist, himself a dowser, says emphatically: ‘ This
much, however, is certain, which J can affirm as the result of
experience: that the point chosen by one diviner will also be
chosen by others brought from a distance, and completely ignor-
ant of the preceding experiment.’ ?

These statements have now to be substantiated by quoting
illustrative cases. Accepting the reality of a dowsing faculty,
whatever its nature, we must agree that if two dowsers quite
independently of each other fix upon the same spot as likely
to yield water, a good prima facie case is made out for the
probability of actually finding water in that spot. Such an
experiment, however, loses much of its point if a well is not

1 L’Intermédiaive de ? Association Frangaise pour ?Avancement des
Sciences (1896).

199


200 THE DIVINING-ROD


sunk at the indicated place. A case of this kind nevertheless
retains some value and such an incident may therefore be
quoted. This experiment was carried out by Lieut.-Colonel
G. L. le M. Taylor, 6 College Lawn, Cheltenham. This gentle-
man, while Tompkins was in the neighbourhood, asked him
to try and find water in his garden. Colonel Taylor describes
how Tompkins “traced the line of an underground stream
and I marked it with pegs (about four inches long) driven in
quite to their head; one spot g, Fig. 46, he specially noted.

I told Mr Chesterman about my experiments with Mr Tomp-
kins and asked him if he would go into my garden and try


avouw


[=]
o
o
re]


INNER CARDEN


' Y '
(0 5 9 10 20YDS.
Fic. 46. PLAN OF THE GARDEN BEHIND COLONEL TayLor’s HousE


The continuous line indicates the stream found by Tompkins. The dotted lines
mark Chesterman’s indications.


to locate a stream found by the latter. He kindly consented.
It was quite dark when we went out, but it made no difference ;
in a short time he found water at f, Fig. 46, and said the stream
ran parallel to the road. He then, passing up by the hedge,
found the rod turn at the point g, when he said he was crossing
a stream. I put down my hand to mark the place with a
peg when it came into contact with the end of the peg I had
previously put in to mark the spot Tompkins had selected.
It was much too dark for either of us to see the pegs even if
we had searched for them. Chesterman then walked down
the centre and afterwards the inner edge of the tennis ground
and crossed the stream at ” and 7 respectively. The dotted


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 2or


line on the plan of my garden will fairly represent the flow
of water underground as indicated by Mr Chesterman.

How far, from these experiments, it may be considered
that the subterranean streams influenced these two men
I cannot say ; I think, however, something more than chance
must have dictated their choice of ground.”

Our agreement with this opinion must be greatly strengthened
by the next case, admirably described by Mr F. J. Clark, F.L.S.,
in which three dowsers independently fixed upon three different
spots all obviously on the line of a fissure in the strata of the
Blue Lias. Writing from Netherleigh, Street, in Somerset,
in September 1896, Mr Clark says: ‘Some twenty years ago
an opportunity presented itself to me of testing the value of
the indications given by the divining rod.


N
Ow4
£ Q
, Ae W
fe ‘i ;
Se, VW H
Af vy ‘
\
Oo tR iC aww iim ‘Omi
STABLES a My i
Hi pe | FACTORY
HM AA /
ae 1)
10 20.3040 © 0 70 40 zo 280


SCALE OF FEET


Fic. 47. WATER FOUND BY THREE INDEPENDENT DowsERS: PLAN


The then manager of our local gasworks, Mr Stears, found he
had the power of using the rod ; + others in our neighbourhood
also tried, and an old workman I knew well, Simon Seymour
by name, was equally successful. I got Mr Stears to go over
my ground, and the rod indicated water at the spot A on the
rough plan (Fig. 47). Some little time after I tried Seymour,
who knew nothing of Mr Stears’s experiment. Seymour found
the rod indicated water at B. Curiously enough a neighbour
and member of our body (Society of Friends), Walter Wyburn,
a Poor-Law guardian, found he also could use the rod. I
invited Wyburn to my place, and asked him to try where he
could find water. He did so, and the rod indicated water at
C; he had no knowledge of what the others had done. Now


1 J. Stears later removed to Yorkshire and, as we have seen, be-
came a professional dowser.


202 THE DIVINING-ROD


it happens that a well had been sunk for our factory at W?,
and a good supply of water obtained at about 40 feet depth.
Another well, in the cellar of my house, at W?, gave us a supply
of water at about 35 feet, and a third well at W%, on higher
ground, and about 280 feet distance, supplied the stable yard ;
this well was only about 27 feet deep. We had also since sunk
a well at W4, some 60 feet North of W?, but had got little
or no water from it even at a depth of 50 feet. We tunnelled
about 20 feet in the direction of W?, and found rather more
water coming in. It seems, therefore, that a fault or fissure
running East and West existed in the strata of the Blue Lias,
and along the fissure water could be obtained. This conclu-
sion is rendered very probable from the fact that, if we pump
a large supply of water from the factory well, W1, it completely
drains W?, and perceptibly affects W°. Now it was just when
the three dowsers crossed this line the rods indicated water
beneath. Their trials, as I have said, were made independently,
and they had no knowledge of the position, or (so far as I
know) the existence of the wells on my place. I may also
mention that the late rector of the parish found he too was
an expert with the ‘rod,’ and on trying my grounds with it
he also hit upon the same line of underground water, but I
am not sure whether he knew of the other trials I have related.”

We must now pass on to cases in which a well was actually
sunk at the spot marked by the dowsers. First we may con-
sider one in which W. S. Lawrence was one of the dowsers,
the other being the late R. Rothwell, a gardener of Cathays,
Cardiff. Mr A. A. James (who describes the events in several
letters) of the Cardiff Malting Company, Limited, East Moors,
Cardiff, requiring a supply of water, called in Lawrence, who
pointed out a spot at which he declared water would be found
at 20 to 25 feet. Sometime after Mr James made the acquaint-
ance of Rothwell, who had then recently discovered the dowsing
faculty in himself. Rothwell knew that Lawrence had indicated
a place for sinking, but had no idea of its whereabouts. Being
left entirely to himself, Rothwell soon marked a site, the
precise spot found by Lawrence, and estimated that water
would be found at 28-30 feet. The dowser then traced the
“spring ” into an adjoining property, where, in fact, two years
previously water had been accidently found at 26 feet. In
the upshot a well was sunk at the place marked by the dowsers,
and water was found at 18 feet below the surface, the well
being deepened, in order to obtain a larger supply, to 24 feet.

In another case in which Lawrence was one of the dowsers,
the identity of the other dowser employed remains unknown,


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 203


Lady Dorothy Nevill sent to the Pall Mall Gazette for the
13th of February 1897 an account of the successful dowsing
for water at the Convent of the Holy Child at Mayfield, in
Sussex, a place which was once the palace of Sir Thomas
Gresham and has other historical associations. This account
has been supplemented with letters from the Superioress of
the Convent, from Lady Dorothy, and from other independent
persons. There being a need of water, the aid of an amateur
dowser was sought. He traversed the grounds, and fixed
on a certain spot where he said water would be found. Before
digging a well W. S. Lawrence was called in some time after
and selected the same spot. Accordingly a well was dug, and
at 30 feet deep water was found. Subsequently they wanted
a well nearer the house and sunk at another spot which both
the amateur and professional dowsers had fixed upon. Again
water was found, and on boring to 270 feet a big supply was
obtained.

As might have been expected from his remarkable record,
John Mullins played a part in several of these independent
dowsing experiments. One such case is of particular interest
in that the second dowser was his son, H. W. Mullins, and in
that the spring here discovered is described as “the only
British natural seltzer water.’’ Here, while dowsing for the
Right Hon. H. Chaplin, M.P., John Mullins, after indicating a
spot at which a well was afterwards sunk and the supply of
seltzer water obtained, professed to trace the underground
path of the water. He declared that the water flowed to the
further side of a certain hedge at a depth of 120 to 130 feet.
Eight years later H. W. Mullins was called in, as his father had
died in the interval. He was told “that his father asserted
the seltzer spring flowed under a hedge on the other side of
the field in which we were then standing, and he was asked
to indicate the place. Starting at one end of the field he
walked close by the hedge side. He had gone about 100 yards
when the twig began to ply, and digging his heel into the
ground, he thus marked the spot.’”’ On digging being begun
at this spot a stake was dug up with which Mr E. G. Allen,
who superintended the experiment, had eight years before
marked the place indicated by John Mullins. Water was
found here at a depth about five feet less than that stated by
the dowsers.?

In this case both the dowsers were professionals, and we
may now consider a couple of cases in which the dowsers were

1 The Lincolnshive Chronicle, 8th of June and 23rd of August 1895,
and vouched for by Mr E. G. Allen.


204 THE DIVINING-ROD


Mullins on the one hand and an amateur on the other. In
the first of these cases the amateur was the Archdeacon of
Totnes.

Mr H. D. Shrine, J.P., D.L., the Deputy-Lieutenant of
Gloucestershire, of Claverton Manor, near Bath, having given
some account! of his experience with the rod, was asked to
give a fuller relation. This he did in the following letter:
“In reply to your questions relating to my experience of
the use of the divining rod for the discovery of water, the
facts are these :—About twenty years ago, intending to build
a cottage residence on the top of Warleigh Hill, adjoining the
hamlet of Conkwell, I employed a man named John Mullins, a
reputed spring-finder and well-sinker living at Colerne, Wilts.,
to find water, which he did by means of a forked twig of hazel
or thorn. He was, so far as I know, an entire stranger to the
place, and could not have known anything about the springs.
I took him to the top of the wood in a flat field, the subsoil
of which for a great depth was known to be oolite rock. He
pointed out by means of his forked twig where water was, in
his opinion, to be found under the surface, but at what depth
he did not pretend to say. In every instance where he said
he found water, there was tomy knowledge a spring low down
in the wood in a line with the spot indicated.

He afterwards made some attempts to find water on the
lawn in the front of the house, and traced a spring upward
to a spot on the grass plot in front of the greenhouse where,
some years before, in moving a large arbutus tree we had found
a spring of water. To test the man’s water-finding powers
more closely, before I allowed him to sink the well, I invited
my friend: and neighbour Mr Earle—late Rector of Monkton
Farleigh, and now Archdeacon of Totnes, who had the gift
himself, and who had found several wells by this process—
to meet Mullins in the field near Conkwell. He did so, and
though unaware of what places Mullins had selected, they both
agreed in a very remarkable manner in the spots where the
hidden springs were ; the forked twig turned with him at the
same places as with Mullins. On this conjunction of their
discoveries I decided to sink a well, and at a little over 8o ft.
deep we came to a bed of yellow clay and found water. The
bed was however too thin, and the men sank the well to over
too ft. deep, when they came to a blue marl or lias, and we
have a fair supply of water about 4 ft deep.”

This concludes the present case, but it will be interesting


1 Proceedings of the Bath Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club
(1889), vi. 424.


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 205


to quote the rest of Dr Shrine’s letter, which proceeds as follows :
“Since then and quite recently Mullins has found for me
several springs in Claverton and sunk two wells, in one of
which the water was found not more than 6 ft. below the
surface where we had no idea there was any. In each instance
of his finding by the twig a spring on the hill he traced it
down to an existing spring unknown previously to myself.
He also found for us the course of several drains, the lines of
which had been forgotten by the workpeople, and in every
case was right and saved us much trouble in digging.

It certainly appears to me that Mullins is himself a believer
in the divining rod, and if it is a mere trick or deception it
is strange that he could not communicate it to his own son who
works with him! The twig on the approach to a spring curved
upwards in his hands without the least appearance of action
on his part.” |

We have a still more interesting case in this class, ably
recorded by Mr Vaughan Jenkins. Here the amateur whose
findings corresponded with those of John Mullins was a young
girl. Mr Jenkins’s record was made in a letter addressed to the
Abingdon Herald, as follows:


“* Some time ago there appeared in a contemporary a short
paragraph, which only recently came under my notice, giving
the information that ‘Miss Wood, a daughter of Mr George
Wood, of the Vallets, and agent for the Whitfield estates, near
Hereford, had again been successful in finding water at Lug-
wardine by means of the (so-called) divining rod.’ Being
desirous of obtaining full and authentic particulars of this
young lady’s experimental operations, I addressed several
specific enquiries, with special reference as to how and when
Miss Wood discovered that she possessed the dowsing, or ‘ so-
called divining ’ faculty, to her father, who very kindly sent
me the following interesting details :


‘ Whitfield Estate Office. February 4th, 18go.
In reply to your letter of the 15th ult., I beg to say that
in January last (1889) Mrs Greathed of Whitfield, who is sister
of the late owner of the estate—C. M. B. Clive, Esq.,—wrote
to Mullins, the well-known water-finder by the use of the
divining rod, asking him to come to Whitfield for the purpose
’ of making some trials there. Mrs Greathed requested me to
conduct Mullins to various elevated places on the estate,
1 This was probably Joseph Mullins; another son did inherit the


faculty. Mr Shrine states in the earlier account referred to that his
own two sons have the dowsing faculty.


206 THE DIVINING-ROD


which I did in company with several persons, including Mrs
Greathed herself, Mr Percy Clive, the future owner of the
estate, etc. I took Mullins to several places where I knew
there was water running through the earth, but not the slightest
trace of it on the surface. I did not tell him that I knew there
was water anywhere. I merely took him to the gates of the
different fields and asked him to try in each case. He quickly
spotted each place to a great nicety, without the slightest
hesitation.

The next thing was for each of the company to try with
the rod, but not one of us had the “‘ faculty ’’ excepting my
little daughter May. Subsequently the rod indicated water in
several places, both in the hands of May and Mullins—May
finding it first sometimes and at other times Mullins.

I suggested that we should not make a trial by sinking
wells until the autumn, when springs here are generally very
low. Well, we made a trial in November last at a spot where
Mullins said the water would possibly be found at a depth of
40 or 50 feet. We came on water at 40 feet. I may mention
that previous to sinking this well the rod in my daughter’s
hand indicated the presence of an underground spring there.
May is now thirteen years of age. She has proved successful
in numerous cases ; four wells have been sunk where she said
there was water, and each one was a success, viz., one at Led-
bury, one at Lugwardine, and two at Whitfield. Hitherto, all
her predictions have proved invariably true. Two wells
had been unsuccessfully sunk at Lugwardine previous to my
daughter’s visit there, the deepest of which was 16 feet. The
place where May indicated water is distant 42 feet from this
abandoned well, and at 11 feet deep a superabundance of water
was found, and pipes are now laid to convey the water to
the Vicarage, which is, I believe, several hundred yards away.
As regards her modus operandi, she holds the forked hazel twig
downwards when in search of water, and when she comes
on a spring the twig quivers and rises upwards, sometimes
from her body and sometimes towards it, until it comes to a
perpendicular position. She practises the rod as you suppose,
viz., aS an amateur only, being only too happy to use her
powers for the benefit of friends and neighbours.

G. Woop.’


In confirmation of the foregoing statements, the following
letters may be quoted: The Rev. Francis Curtis, rector of
Coddington, near Ledbury, writes : ‘ The spring has been found
at the Stone-house 57 ft. below the surface, exactly at the


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 207


spot indicated by Miss Wood. She said she thought the depth
would be as much as 50 feet. So the event proves her judg-
ment to have been very correct. We are very glad that we
availed ourselves of her gifts.’ The Rev. A. C. Lee, of Lugwar-
dine Vicarage, Hereford, writes: ‘The well sinker came
to me an hour ago with the welcome intelligence that he had
come upon a strong spring of water, at the depth of 11 feet,
on the spot Miss Wood “ found ” on Monday, and which, you
will remember, I marked with two sticks, and which was
thought to have the strongest indications. Previous to
a Wood’s visit two wells had been sunk, but no water
ound.’ ”’


This report by Mr Vaughan Jenkins was sent to Mr G. Wood
who replied on the oth of May 1896:

“The report enclosed is quite accurate. My daughter May
has been requested to go to very many places to find water
since the report you send was written, and has always been
successful. I have often been glad of her services my-
self.”

This statement was subsequently endorsed by Mr Percy
A. Clive :

“ Tower of London, April 24th, 1897.

I can vouch for the accuracy of the statement made above
by Mr G. Wood, who is my estate agent at Whitfield. I saw
Mullins ‘ find ’ water in several places, where his findings were
afterwards proved to be correct.. I, as well as others, tried
to find water in the same way, but had not the power. But
when Mullins held my wrist, and I held the twig over running
water, it turned round in my hands with such force that
when I held it tight it broke. Miss May Wood has been very
successful in finding water; and seems also able to make
a pretty accurate guess at the depth at which it will be
found.”


The next case is one in which the dowser who agreed with
Mullins is unknown. The facts are recorded by Mr C. Leeson
Prince, F.R.A.S., of The Observatory, Crowborough Hill,
Sussex: “I must confess that I have been converted to belief
in the power of the divining rod, and for the following reasons.
Some eight or nine years since a stranger called upon me
respecting a contemplated local improvement, and upon leav-
ing me he said that he was a person who made use of the
divining rod to find water. I took him into my garden and
asked him to point out where water would be found. After


208 THE DIVINING-ROD


wandering about over nearly an acre of ground, he came to a
spot which he said would be successful. He then left me, and
I thought no more of it. About three years since, a lady
bought this property of me, and, having a large establish-
ment, she was rather apprehensive of not finding a sufficient
water supply. I pointed out to her the spot where it had been
stated to me that water would be found. She did not, how-
ever, pay much attention to this, and dug for water in another
part of the property ; but she was not successful. Without
having any further conversation with me, she sent for a
‘ diviner,’ who, after walking about in various directions (and
without her having mentioned to him what the other person
had said), told her that she would find abundance of water
if she dug down at a certain place which was within a yard of
the same spot which the former person had pointed out. She
accordingly acted upon his information, and at a depth of rather
less than twenty feet she found an ample supply. When the
lady saw the twig point downwards in the man’s hand, she
expressed a wish to try if it would act in the same way in her
hand; which, of course, it did not. He then told her that if
he put his hand upon hers it would, which it accordingly did.
I may say that I report this case from personal information of
the facts. Only a few weeks since I heard of another suc-
cessful case, in an adjoining parish, precisely similar to the
above in every particular.”’ +

On application Mr Prince added the particulars that the
lady mentioned was a Mrs Gresson, the property being between
Mr Prince’s observatory and that of Dr Roberts, F.R.S. The
first dowser was John Mullins.

We may now conclude our relation of cases in which John
Mullins was one of the dowsers concerned by quoting one of the
best on record. Here the agreement was not merely between
two dowsers, but between several. It is fortunate that this
most interesting case has been recorded by that able geologist,
the late Mr E. Westlake, F.G.S., after very careful investigation.
The pains that he took are amply shown by the following
account. While he was in the Isle of Wight in 1897 for other
purposes he took the opportunity of investigating a case that
had been reported in the local press. He described his re-
searches as follows: ‘‘I found that, though three or four
eminent geologists had been previously called in, they had
altogether failed to find water, while the three dowsers had been
as uniformly successful. As the strata at the point in ques-
tion are as well known to geologists as any in England, this

1 Notes and Queries (1896), 8 S. x. 345.


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 209


result was rather unexpected, and I have therefore taken
some pains to get at the circumstances. After visiting the
place on four occasions, and through the kindness of Mr
Milman Brown, the Chairman of the District Council (who has
revised this account), and others concerned, I am now able to
give the main particulars, which to make intelligible I will
preface by a few words on the geological situation.

The Shanklin reservoirs are in the Gault Clay a mile south
of the town, at the sources of the small stream which issues in
the Chine. The collecting ground is the southern mass of the
Chalk and Upper Greensand, the water issuing at the base of
the latter where it rests upon the Gault. The valley is a right-
angle facing the north and east, due to the main joints in
the Greensand, which runs E. and W. and N.andS. The dip
of the strata is I in 45 (14°) south. Along the sides of the
valley the Greensand has a local inward dip of from 2° to 8°,
due to the slipping out of its base upon the Gault, forming
fissures which increase in size as they descend. On account,
however, of the tendency of the water to run southwards, the
valley is unfavourably situated for springs, and on its sides
one only has been utilised, viz., on the south side just below
the top cottage, The Retreat ; the remainder are in the copse
at the head of the valley.

Greatwood Copse, the scene of the water-finding, occupies
a semi-circular hollow a quarter of a mile wide at the angle of
the valley (Fig. 48). The effect of this hollowing is that the
Greensand, which extends for a quarter of a mile to the north,
obtains in the copse a slight southern face traversing the fis-
sures aforesaid, and it is here that the springs take their rise.
The well (to be described presently) which was sunk at a spot
indicated by J. Mullins, the late famous dowser, is placed in
this southern face—the very best place, geologically speaking
i.e., on the above theory that the main supply comes from
the north-east corner of Shanklin Down. As the consumption
of water in the town has been continually increasing (in 1898
it was about 50,000 gallons a day), while the supply has never
been large (about 40,000 gallons in September, 1898), there
have been continual efforts to augment it, which, as far as
they relate to our inquiry, are as follows:

The first wells in the copse, Mr Brown informed me, were
sunk in 1875 by the London engineers, Messrs Quick. The
east well, 150 yards west of the road, is 55 feet deep, and held
(September 1898) 9 feet of water; its cover is 411 feet above
Ordnance Datum (i.e., above sea-level). The west well, 20
yards further in, is 4204 feet O.D., and 65} feet deep, with


14


210


PTeS NM EPL ree pen,
SOOT eee * *
seen enters


han


at secs renees


THE DIVINING-ROD


|Avereee


Lin


SCALE oF Feer


100 200


Fic. 48.


300 400 L in suatsaieranecete,


a


\\ Shamk lin


. .
.
0 ee A SN ee enna ad


= J
a, UL =o wert 10,7 |
ares .


a ga ee Nica >
Come


PARSONS’ WELL
& :BORING


THE SHANKLIN EXPERIMENT: Map


After the 25” Ordnance Survey Map, Hampshire (XCIX. 9), the Geological Survey


Map and local surveys.


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 211


ro feet of water. There is thus a difference of only x foot
in the bottoms of the wells. They are connected by a sub-
water heading so as to form virtually one well, and by a middle
heading for syphoning purposes, the floor of which averages
383 feet O.D. They supply, Iam informed by Mr E. C. Cooper,
the town surveyor, about 4,000 gallons a day. The water,
when syphoned, stood (September 1898) at 365 feet O.D.
When not syphoned it stood (December 1899) at 382 feet O.D. ;
in winter it rises till it overflows the outer sill of the middle
heading at 388 feet O.D.

The upper heading, which is close by, was driven without
expert advice above a wet place in the copse, and followed the
water in a westerly direction for a distance of from 400 to 500
feet. This heading starts at a level of 401} feet O.D., at a


Middle Heading


Fic. 49. THE SHANKLIN EXPERIMENT: SECTION


point 15 yards west of the middle heading and 18 feet above it.
(See Fig. 49.)

About 1878 Mr H. Bristow, F.R.S., F.G.S., of the Geological
Survey, was consulted by the Board, and visited the spot.
On his advice the upper heading was extended to a point
about goo feet west of the entrance directly under the old
chalk pit on Shanklin Down, but without getting any appre-
ciable addition to the flow of water. When I measured it in
December 1899, the quantity was 9,000 gallons a day, which,
however, is below the average ; the turncock, Mr Whittington,
said when the flow was good it was double this. That hardly
any water was found in Bristow’s extension is probably due,
as pointed out by Mr Topley, F.R.S., in a subsequent report,
to its having been driven ‘at too high a level’; ‘ water,’ he


212 THE DIVINING-ROD


adds, ‘might be found by a well or boring at the far end,
but would probably not rise into the heading.’

In 1885 the Board consulted two other geologists, Mr W.
Topley, F.R.S., of the Geological Survey, whose report in
May of that year I have just cited, and Mr Mark Norman,
author of a geological guide to the Isle of Wight, but their
schemes of sinking to the Lower Greensand were not only
costly but problematical.

In 1893, as a last resort, the Board called in Mr John Mul-
lins, the well-known Wiltshire dowser, who marked several
spots in the field to the south of the reservoirs, but the condi-
tions were too onerous for them to sink there. On their own
land, however, by the S.W. corner of the upper reservoir, which
was from 50 to Ioo yards to the north of Mullins’s marks, they
sank a well 30 feet deep, but without getting water. Then
they got Mr Parsons, the Brading harbour-master, to bore at
the bottom of the well for 97 feet—i.e., to 127 feet from the
surface—but he got no water, only bad air, which suffocated
him, his son, and his men, who were all found dead in the
well one morning in July. Mr Thom, of Manchester, continued
the boring from 200 to 300 feet deeper into the Lower Green-
sand but after diminishing the bore from 8 to 4 inches the Board
refused to sanction a further reduction and the boring was
abandoned. The borehole is now disconnected. The well
has a supply from surface soakage of from 400 to 800 gallons
a day, which is not used. I may remark on the foregoing that
Mullins’s marks, being on the outcrop of the Upper Greensand,
offered a reasonable prospect for finding water, whereas the
site chosen for the well at a level of 373 feet O.D., being on
solid Gault clay, could have only a little from surface perco-
lation.

In 1895 the Board consulted Mr A. Strahan, F.G.S., of the
Geological Survey (who had re-surveyed the district), on the
prospect of obtaining a supply by a deep boring on the same
site. In his report of September of that year he says, ‘I do
not think there is a more favourable site, from a geological
point of view, in the immediate neighbourhood.’ His plan,
like that of Messrs Topley and Norman, was to sink some
400 to 700 feet, and pump from the Ferruginous Sands below
the sea-level; ‘ but this,’ said Mr Brown, ‘ would have cost
us a great deal, and he could not promise us anything certain
when we got there.’

Returning to Mullins’s operations, it appears that after he
came, early in 1893, two members of the Board, Messrs Brown
and Bailey, who had found the twig turn in their hands,


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 213


started dowsing in the copse on their own account. They
each found the twig turn at certain places nearly coincident ;
one of these places they found to be the same spot previously
fixed upon by Mullins. At this spot (No. 1, see map, Fig. 48)
they sunk a well 26 feet deep, and at two points of their own
(Nos. 2 and 7) they sank wells 28 feet and 64 feet deep. Though
No. I is only 100 yards to the north of the headings and No. 2
only 40 yards south, a good supply of water was found in the
three wells. No. 1 supplied, at first, 7,000 gallons a day;
No. 2, about 10,000 gallons. No. 7 required, at first, nine
days to pump it out; at the present time, however, it only
supplies about 2,000 gallons a day. In 1895, again following
the twig’s indications, they sank four more wells (Nos. 3,
4, 5 and 6), in all of which water was found. Nos. 3 and 4
have supplied from 1,500 to 2,000 gallons a day. No. 5, when
dug, had 2 feet of water which ran freely, but has since failed.
No. 6 (72 feet deep) has not been connected to the reservoir.
These additional supplies, though quite inadequate for a grow-
ing town, had, said Mr Brown, kept them going for the time
being. The height of the ground at these wells (Nos. I to 7)
I found, by levelling from St John’s Church, to be 415, 415,
413, 419%, 4474, 465 and 466 feet O.D. All the wells are now
covered over, except No. 7, but I have ascertained their
respective depths to be, approximately, 26, 28, 28, 30, 33, 72
and 64 feet; their bottoms are, therefore, approximately,
389, 387, 385, 3893, 4144, 393 and 4oz2 feet O.D. Hence,
except in No. 5, the water lies at levels between the middle
and upper headings, showing the dowsed water to come
from the same stratum as that in the other wells and headings.
In No. 7 the water stands at 4164 feet O.D., so that the ex-
haustion of No. 5 is probably due to its not having been sunk
deep enough.

The geological position of Parsons’s well is in the Gault clay,
which is penetrated after the first 100 feet, the remainder of the
boring being in the sandstones of the Lower Greensand (Neoco-
mian). Quick’s wells and the middle heading are in the
passage-beds between the Gault and Upper Greensand, which
pass into one another insensibly. The upper heading is mostly
in the Upper Greensand, the base of which, according to the
Geological Survey, is a little below the path in the copse, and
coincides nearly with the 400 feet contour. The dowsed wells
start in the Upper Greensand, and, except No. 5, penetrate to
the passage-beds.

Tabulating the results obtained by the professionals and
dowsers respectively, we have :


214 THE DIVINING-ROD


ENGINEERS’ AND GEOLOGISTS’ RESULTS
Supply when good. Supply at worst.
Quick’s east well 55 ft.
Quick’s west well 65 ft.


Submerged head- syphon. 4,000 gals. per day. _—


iNOa. eat He ore POOVTE.
Middle heading ._ 120 ft.

Upper heading how. 20,000 ,, RNs 9,000 gals.
about goo ft.


Parsons’s well and
boring, not con- (300 ft.
nected, about.


Total 1,500 ft. 24,000 gals. ,, 3, g,000 ,,
DowseErs’ RESULTS
No. 1 well Supply when good. Supply at worst.
(Mullins’s) 26 ft. flow 7,000 gals. per day. 1,250 gals.
ae and
1 3S) meen tans 10,000
”? 3 a”? »” 28 it: a? 2,000 | a” ” a”? Le] ”
a9 2 a” a” Ss) ft. ” I,000
a Al a ae 30 ft. syphon 2-GGO\ 4s “Mek ?
WO us Ss GPa peed ? >
nected 22 gee ;
2”? Uf ”? ”? 64 ft. pump 2,000 a” ” ” ?
otal) .28r ft: 24,000 gals. TE2RO\ee


The dowsers’ first total includes the first flows (always excep-
tionally large) for Nos. r and 2; in the second total, which I
took in December 1899, after a very dry season, most of the
wells had gone dry. Thus, for comparison with the engineers’
total, the dowsers’ first total is too large, and the second
too small. To compare the water found by them respect-
ively, we ought properly to have figures either for all the first
flows, or for some time when the springs were high enough
to get flows from all the wells. Mr Cooper writes (July r1th,
r1goo): ‘I think if you put the value of the [dowsers’] wells
at their best as a third the value of the headings, you will
then be stating their [relative] value very fairly.’ According
to this estimate, and taking the amount of excavation into
account, the dowsers obtained nearly twice as much water
per foot as the other water finders. Of the success of the latter,
five-sixths was due to empirical means, one-sixth to the engin-
eers, and none to the geologists who went either above or

1 This estimate agrees, Mr Brown tells me, with a measurement of


25,000 gals. made by the surveyor, Mr Colenutt. Parsons’s well is
surface water and not used.


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 215


below the proved water-bearing bed. The dowsers on the
other hand went straight to the point by putting their wells into
the water-bearing bed itself.

The relative professional failure, however, does not entitle
the dowsers’ results to pose as mysterious. The top of the
Gault is typically water-bearing: the well-known landslip
at East End, a mile or two distant, is due to the water in this
very bed, the level of which in the copse was known from
Quick’s two wells. The probability, therefore, of some water
at this horizon no geologist would doubt. What they did
doubt was whether a useful quantity would be found in the
copse by driving or sinking at haphazard: thus in his report
Mr Topley says, alluding to Mr Bristow’s attempt, ‘ Galleries
have been driven into the Upper Greensand for the purpose
of intercepting springs .. . and I cannot recommend any
further experiments in this direction.’ The subsequent experi-
ments of the dowsers, introducing ex hypothesi a new method
of discovery, do not throw light on the problem of haphazard
sinking, except in so far as the doubtful utility of wells Nos. 5
and 6 tends to show that a useful quantity of water is not
to be met with everywhere. The results of the experiments
may be considered under their (1) qualitative and (2) quanti-
tative aspects :

(x) The finding of some water in all the dowsers’ wells if
claimed as evidence for dowsing involves the assumption that
water could not be found everywhere by sinking into the pas-
sage beds. Between this and the geological deduction that it
probably could, there is no direct evidence to decide. Quick’s
wells, though supporting the geological view as far as they go,
are close together, and inadequate for comparison with the
dowsers’ seven distributed over the copse.

(2) The 50 per cent. superiority of the seven dowsed wells
assumes that Quick’s wells represent the average of as many
trials by. ordinary methods; granting this, the superiority
seems too slight to exclude accident. In support of the
dowsers’ opinion that they had a faculty for pitching on the
right places, Mr Brown mentioned that in one or more wells
they came on loose rubble like that filling the fissures in the
adjoining quarries, which made him think they had hit on a
‘vent’ (water-bearing fissure): this was confirmed by Mr
Young, the sinker of wells Nos. 2 and 7. Failing an examin-
ation of the wells at the time, we can now only judge of the
extent of this feature from its probable consequences in an
increased supply, so that it does not add to the evidence.
Hence the dowsers’ success cannot I think be pressed in


216 THE DIVINING-ROD


either aspect, for want of proper terms of comparison. There
remains the broad result that for equal amounts of work the
dowsers got twice as much water as the engineers, while the geolo-
gists got hardly any. As regards surface signs of water in the
copse I did not notice any in relation to the dowsed wells, and
have given the dowsers the benefit of assuming there were none.
But the absence of a reason for digging somewhere in particular
may lead to digging nowhere, and in such cases the rod may
succeed by supplying a motive for digging. The sceptic may
urge, ‘the dowser turns the twig and fortune does the rest.’
We see, however, that geological explanations of dowsers’
successes do not necessarily show that the geologists would
have found the water themselves.”

It will be agreed that this report could hardly have been
couched in more conservative and moderate language; it
thus leaves an all the stronger impression of the dowsers’
triumph. We may next consider a case which is thus recorded
in a letter dated the 18th of January 1905:

“The soil of which I write is boulder clay over Oxford
clay, notably a non-bearing water strata. A few years ago
a water finder ‘divined’ water in a village where it was
much needed and had never been found before, as wells dug in
the district never fill. Two wells were dug at the spots indi-
cated by the water finder, and abundant springs were found.

Amongst the village crowd that followed the water finder
and tried their luck with the rod, the only persons who were
found to possess the same power were a farmer and his young
son.

Some time afterwards the original water finder was asked
to ‘ divine’ water for a village a few miles distant, and in a
large field, after following what he described as the circuitous
course of an underground stream for some distance, he came
to what he said was known by water finders as a ‘ knot’ in
the currents.

A few weeks later some of the village residents being anxious
to examine into the bona fides of the neighbouring farmer,
got him to come to the field, where they blindfolded him
and turned him round several times, and then giving him a
rod asked him to find water. After moving about for a little
time he got on to the same track as the water finder, and
followed it about in the same manner, coming at last to the
‘knot’ which sorely puzzled him, and pulling off the hand-
kerchief from his eyes he exclaimed that he did not know
what it meant. This farmer had not been present when the
water finder came, and had never been in the field before


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 217


or heard about the ‘knot,’ and he was only blindfolded
to ensure that he did not receive any hints from the counten-
ances of the bystanders. The course followed by the original
water finder had not been marked out, but in the opinion of
those present and most competent to judge, it was exactly the
same as that taken by the farmer.

On one or both occasions the water finder and the farmer
were accompanied by neighbouring gentry, clergyman, ladies,
land agents, etc.

I may add that the water finder of whom I write is con-
vinced that his power has to do with electricity, as if he stands
on glass placed over a spring his rod refuses to act. Also he
experienced the very greatest discomfort when travelling by
the tube railway, so much so that he could only bear it by
putting his feet up on to the opposite seat, and getting out at the
first stop.”

The writer of this letter, Miss C. Cochrane, Hon. Secretary
of the Cambridgeshire Committee of the Rural Housing and
Sanitation Association, adds that the dowser in question was
Benjamin Tompkins, the place at which the two successful
wells were sunk being Yelling, Hunts., the farmer mentioned
being Richard Anthony of the same place, a dowser of whose
later achievements we also possess records.

The following is an interesting first-hand account of the
discovery of a supply of water by the noted dowsers Thomas
Young and Thomas Day. The relation is by Colonel Young
of Woodlands, Congresbury, in Somerset. ‘‘ For many years
I have been dependent on rain for my water-supply, and those
who do the same will know how unreliable this is. Plenty of
rain may fall each year, but (with the exception of thunder-
storms) it is seldom enough to run off the surface of roofs in
sufficient quantity to fill tanks.

In 1885 I moved to Clevedon expecting to let this place
easily, but the want of spring water prevented my getting a
tenant.

In 1888 I returned and determined to get water if possible.

Higher up the hill, about a mile East of this house on a
property named Woolmers belonging to the Trustees of the
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Bristol, is a well that has never
been known to be dry, and I hoped that possibly the spring
might run this way. I sent for Thomas Young who lived at
Rowberrow, and was noted as a successful dowser.

Mr T. J. Scoones, civil engineer, and Captain Rathmay, late
62nd Regiment, were present, and we started for the well at
Woolmers. With T. Young the fork twists on crossing a


218 THE DIVINING-ROD


stream, and commencing at the well we soon had a row of
pegs at about 50 paces interval marking the course of the
spring down hill, due West, in a line with my house. Pro-
ceeding about 800 yards we suddenly lost it, and carefully
dowsing over the last peg marked, we found the stream turned
due South under a limestone hill off my property.

I was of course greatly disappointed, and quite hopeless
of any result, asked Young to dowse over a field called Taylor
Hill. Almost immediately he struck on a stream and on the
rise of the Hill (exactly 300 yards from my house and several
feet above it), the stick twisted considerably.

Here a well was sunk 22 feet deep. This filled in the winter,
but soon became dry in the summer, and in September, 1889,
(Thomas Young had died), Thomas Day, another noted dow-
ser who also lived at Rowberrow, descended the well with
me. The twigs were much agitated, and, one after the other,
if not allowed to twist, snapped off.

Day said, ‘ There is a lot of water under here.’ He under-
took the sinking and sunk 30 feet more, when the water came
in so fast he had to leave, and ever since, even during this dry
summer (1893) I have had plenty.

Of dowsing itself I can offer no explanation. I am con-
tented with the result.”

To this account the Rev. H. H. Winwood, M.A., F.G.S.,
adds the following note: ‘‘ The well in question was sunk
through the New Red Marl which here rests on the carbon-
iferous limestone, and apparently the water was found before
the limestone had been reached. It seemed an unlikely place
to meet with a spring.”

Water was required for a new convent at Thomastown, co.
Kilkenny. As the finishing touches were being put to the
buildings a spot was selected and sinking operations were
begun. The men had worked for some time without success
and, beginning to fear that they might fail, the Administrator
of the parish,'the Rev. John Roe, consulted the architect, Mr
Hynes, of Cork. This gentleman advised him to bring over
Gataker or his assistant. ‘‘ At first,’ writes Mr Roe, “I
laughed at the idea, and though I had heard and read a little
about the divining rod, I was most sceptical as to its results.
After some persuasion I communicated with Mr Gataker and
he sent over his partner, Mr Wills, at a cost of £10. When
he arrived he looked at the site already selected, and after
some evolutions of his rod said he should abandon it, as there


* Proceedings of the Bath Natural History and Antiquarian Field
Club (1897), viii. 61.


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 219


was only a very, very small ripple, and at great depth. He
then went through the whole field with his rod and marked out
two or three places where an abundant supply of water could
be obtained, but selected a rather elevated spot in preference
to the others. He said we would most certainly get water at
about 80 feet and so many gallons per hour. By a most
singular coincidence Mr Jones came on the scene accompanied
by a mutual friend, Mr O’Connell (engineer), Kilkenny . . .”

This Mr J. H. Jones, of Mullinabro, near Waterford, was a
gentleman who, having seen Mullins locate the site for a well
in his neighbourhood, which turned out remarkably successful,
was astonished to find the rod also moved in his own hands.
He writes as follows: “I began experimenting with the rod
as a sceptic—and thoroughly prejudiced against it, and think-
ing that its action in a diviner’s hands was a mere trick or
sleight of hand—but I am now convinced that the thing is
genuine, and that the rod is moved in consequence of some
action or influence produced in persons susceptible when near
or over subterranean water.”

It will be remembered that Mr Jones, in the Carrigoona
experiments, independently pointed out the same places that
Mr Stone indicated as water-bearing or waterless. Mr Jones
has had several experiences of this kind of which the present
one is a casein point. A Mr Roe invited Mr Jones to have a
try with his rod, and he pointed out the same spot, and traced
out the water in the same line as Wills had done. A 6 ft.
well was accordingly sunk at that spot and a good supply of
water was encountered at 75 feet.

In 1899 Colonel E. A. Ollivant settled at Elliotts, Nuthurst,
Horsham, in Sussex. He had the water supply analysed and
found that it was of bad quality. He called in Mr Roberts, a
builder of Henfield in Sussex, who was known as a dowser.
Mr Roberts indicated several spots, particularly one where
water would be found, he declared, at from 28 ft. to 30 ft., and
a bigger supply at about 60 feet.

It so happened that that year the Nuthurst Rectory was
let to a Mr Altree of Brighton, who was an amateur dowser.
This gentleman was asked to come to Elliotts. He was not
taken to any particular spot (this had also been the case with
Mr Roberts) but allowed to walk over various fields. He
indicated several places that had previously been noted by Mr
Roberts, and also pointed out the spot which had been strongly
recommended by the first dowser, though Mr Altree could not
be sure about the depth.

Col. Ollivant, encouraged by this striking concordance,


220 THE DIVINING-ROD


sunk a well; at 28 ft. a fair supply was struck. The well was
then lowered and between 59 ft. and 60 ft. a fresh supply was
tapped, which stood 28 ft. in the well. From the accompany-
ing sketch it will be seen that there were several useless wells
close by and also a couple of ponds, the unanimity and success
of the dowsers thus being the more striking.

These accounts may now suitably be brought to a close
with one in which both the dowsers concerned were amateurs.
The Rev. J. R. Blunt, of Bugbrooke, Weedon, in Northampton-
shire, thought that he possessed the dowsing faculty, as he
found that the rod moved in his hands when over water. He


SCALE OF YAROS


AFTER THE 25 /NC/T ORONANCE
SURVEY MAP SUSSEX XXIV. 8


Fic. 50. PLAN oF ELLiotts, NuTHURST


A, B, D and E are old wells 26 feet, 40 feet, 35 feet, and 30 feet deep respectivel
all giving a small supply of bad water. C is the dowsers’ well, So-60 teak


deep and containing 23 feet of pure water. Fisal
drainage pond. P a large pond and Ga small


had, however, not had any opportunity of putting this faculty
to the test by experiment until he was asked one day to try
and find water for Sir W. Grantham, who wanted to dig a
well on one of his farms at Barcombe in Sussex. Mr Blunt
began, writes Miss Grantham, “ by cutting a twig out of the
hedge, of hazel or blackthorn, V-shaped, each side about 8
inches long, then taking hold of one end in each hand be-


EXPERIMENTS WITH INDEPENDENT DOWSERS 221


tween the thumb and first finger, and pointing the angle to
the ground, he walked about the field in which my father
proposed digging a well, and at two spots the point of the twig
turned right up exactly reversing its previous position; in
fact so strong was its impulse to point upwards, that we found
that unless Mr Blunt relaxed his hold the twig broke off near
his fingers.”’

The places indicated by Mr Blunt were marked and a boy of
about 12 years old, who was believed to have the faculty, was
taken over the ground. He had not witnessed the previous
performance nor was he told anything, but his twig moved at
the same places. At one of these spots a well was accordingly
dug by Judge Grantham and a good supply of water was
encountered at a depth of 15 feet.


1 The facts are contained in independent letters from Mr Blunt,
dated the 8th of July 1893, and from Miss E. L. Grantham, dated from
roo Eaton Square, S.W., the 1st of February 1893.


CHAPTER XI
EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER


that two good tests could be applied to the pretensions

of the dowser. One of these, the comparison of two
or more independent dowsers’ indications was studied in that
chapter. The other of these two tests consists in blindfolding
the dowser after he has located underground water, and then
causing him to again search the same ground. The indications
given under these conditions should then agree with those first
given. For if there be, as all dowsers and most of their sup-
porters believe, a subtle influence exerted by underground
water upon the dowser, then blindfolding should make no
difference. The same remark applies if the dowser be endowed
with some supernormal sensibility or clairvoyance, provided
always, not merely under blindfolding but throughout all such
experiments, that the dowser is at his ease and joins heartily
in the experiment.

In all experimental work it is essential for success that the
instruments you employ are suitable for the purpose in view
and also in good order. Having selected the proper instru-
ments, the mental atmosphere in physical experiments does
not affect the results, as we are dealing with non-living matter,
but the physical conditions are allimportant. In experiments
with living beings the physical surroundings (except in so far
as they produce discomfort) are unimportant, but, as we are
now dealing with living instruments, our experiments are sure
to fail or be inconclusive if the instrumental appliances we have
to employ are out of order; and they are very apt to be de-
ranged by a sudden change in the psychical conditions. Modern
physical and chemical research has taught us the profound
influence exerted by an imperceptible difference in the materials
we are dealing with; the tendency of all psychical research
is to reveal that an influence quite as profound is exerted
by an imperceptible difference in the mental apparatus we
employ. Though this may seem quite reasonable and obvious


222


A T the beginning of the previous chapter it was stated


EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER 223


to most of us, it has taken physicists 200 years to learn the
former truth, and we should not therefore be surprised if
those to whom psychical research is new overlook, or even
ridicule the latter.

Some years ago Sir Ray Lankester published an account of
some experiments he had made in blindfolding a dowser, a
lad named Fred Rodwell, and a good deal of public interest
was excited by what Sir Ray and many others considered to
be his complete exposure of the trickery of dowsers in general
and of this lad in particular.1 Now, while we have no wish
to be apologists for this dowser, as similar experiments which
Sir William Barrett made with him were only partially success-
ful, yet it must be remembered that Sir Ray Lankester, though


Fic. 51. FRED RODWELL DOWSING WITH A ROD AND WITHOUT
The Graphic (1889), xl. 547.


a distinguished naturalist, is not an equally distinguished
experimentalist. His scepticism regarding phenomena that
do not lie within the range of his experience might almost be
termed ferocious and, on the occasion referred to, it can
hardly be said he dealt with the living instrument as gently
as he would have dealt with his microscope. Upon this point
we may quote from a letter written by Mr T. V. Holmes, quite
as keen a critic as Sir Ray Lankester, but somewhat better
informed in all that relates to the subject of the present research.
Mr Holmes writes: ‘‘ With regard to the experiments of Pro-

1 Cp. Diversions of a Naturalist (1919), Ppp. 392-394. |

2 Taking his statements for what they are worth, the elder Rod-
well refers in a letter to Professor Lankester’s (as he then was) harsh


treatment, the boy having almost been “ frightened to death,” “I
charged,” he goes on, ‘‘ my son never to submit to anything of the kind


again.”


224 THE DIVINING-ROD


fessor Ray Lankester on the alleged power of Rodwell, I am
very decidedly of opinion that no result of any value could
be obtained unless the boy was quite at his ease, and that
he would require much more tact and geniality to put him at
his ease than a man would. Now the impostor, or semi-
impostor, shows his hand to the genial man, and is rigidly on
his guard in the presence of the ungenial, as though ‘ sweetness
and light ’ never co-existed in the same person.”’

With this sagacious observation we may pass on to the
consideration of some experiments in blindfolding the dowser.
It will be necessary to say at once that records of such experi-
ments are comparatively few. The use of two independent
dowsers is an ordinary commercial precaution readily under-
taken by many persons ; but to blindfold a dowser is a set
experiment and requires a good deal of tact and other qualities
which few possess. It is natural therefore that such cases
should be fewer than others. But there are at any rate enough
to make out a very good case. Forinstance, Mr W. J. Brown,
of Middlehill House, Box, in Wiltshire, who had a good deal
of experience in employing dowsers, writes: “ After Mullins
has indicated water I have blindfolded him and turned him
round and round, but wherever after this he crossed the spring
up went the rod directly. I conclude by saying I believe in
him thoroughly.’

Of Lawrence also there is similar evidence, but unfortunately
of no evidential value as the ladies concerned do not wish
their names and addresses to be given. These ladies, A and
Lady B, describe Lawrence’s motions in searching for water
and how he eventually indicated a place for sinking. Later
doubts having been developed as to the genuineness of the
proceedings, Lawrence was again taken to the farm and blind-
folded. The rod performed in exactly the same manner on
reaching the spot where it had indicated water before. They
then dug and found water at 15 feet below the surface.

In a letter addressed to Mr F. W. H. Myers, Judge William
Ward Spink, of Vernon, Okanagan, British Columbia, wrote
(27th of February 1893): ‘‘ I see that your Society take some
interest in the divining rod. We made some careful tests on
this matter last year. The rod works in my hands. I was
rather sceptical, and thought that my own mind might work
in some unknown manner on the rod and cause it to turn


2 In T. Forder Plowman, ‘‘ The Divining Rod,” Proceedings of the
Bath Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club (1889), vi. 415. Cp.
the accounts by Sir W. E. Welby-Gregory and by the Earl of Winchilsea
in the section on Mullins.


EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER 225


down where I fancied there ought to be water. I was blind-
folded and led about with the wand, for about an hour at
least, until I could not hold the wand upright without great
pain. Each time the wand dipped, a peg was driven into the
ground to mark the spot. I was walked in all directions, and
passed over the same ground again and again, but in no instance
did the rod fail to dip when it came to a peg. I have sunk
two wells on the credit of the wand, and in both instances
have found water, in both these instances contrary to the advice
of the well-sinking experts. The power appears to increase
rapidly with use. When experimenting with the rod over a
water hose, I had the water turned on and off several times,
and could distinctly feel the jar that one hears in such cases.”

On being requested to give particulars of the two discoveries
he mentions, Judge Spink states in a subsequent letter (dated
the 4th of November 1893) that he had since succeeded in
locating a third supply. He was having a house built and as”
his rod did not move over the proposed foundations, he decided
that there was no fear of water being encountered. But a
hundred feet in one direction from these foundations Judge
Spink located a water supply at a depth of 25 feet, and a hundred
feet in the other direction, on the summit of a slope a hundred
feet high, he found another supply at a depth of 85 feet The
other well was some distance away, and 20 feet deep. Water
having thus been found on either side of the foundations by
means of the rod, it was feared that water would also be found
when the foundations came to be dug. But here also the rod
was justified, for the soil was perfectly dry.

This case has been quoted first as an illustration of the
curiously elementary error which has obliged us to reject fully
two-thirds of the experiments in blindfolding. It will have
been observed that Judge Spink describes himself as being
“‘ blindfolded and led about.’’ Now it is obvious that if the
blindfolded dowser is in contact with a person who knows the
whereabouts of the spot previously indicated, that person must
almost inevitably give, unconsciously of course, some indication
to the dowser. Whether this takes place by some involuntary
contraction of the muscles or otherwise is, for our present
purpose, immaterial. A general rule must be laid down that
an experiment of this kind in which a spectator of the whole.
proceedings is in contact with the blindfolded dowser is vitiated
and useless.

Experiments of a better type, including one in blindfolding,
were carried out by Mr F. Napier Denison, of the Toronto
Meteorological Observatory, and are thus described by himself :

15


226 THE DIVINING-ROD


‘With regard to the experiments with the ‘ divining rod,’ I
made a full note of them at the time and copy the following
from my note-book : June 19th, 1898. Rode over to Mr Harris’s
residence at Clarkson, 18 miles west of Toronto. At dinner
Mr H.{told the following story: ‘Last year my well near the
house became dry ; I sent for a well-digger to increase depth.
Before doing so he asked permission to explore with a hazel
wand to ascertain if another spring would be found deeper
before going to the expense of digging. He said he had dis-
covered a stream which would flow into the well from west
to east, a few feet below present level. The well was then
deepened, and, when down 3 ft., water did flow in from the
west, so rapidly it was difficult to pump fast enough to enable
men to lay the bricks. Ever since there has been a good
supply of fine water. It was at this time I found the hazel
wand would turn in my hands also. The stick was Y-shaped,
and held firmly by both hands with thumbs turned outwards.’

After dinner I got Mr Harris to cut a forked plum stick about
20 in. long—he had used a hazel before and felt sure plum
would not work ; however he grasped the plum switch firmly,
as explained, holding it vertically before him. As he approached
the well, the stick began to turn down in jerks until when
over the stream to west of the well the rod turned so much
that the bark was twisted near his hands. Mr Harris is a
powerful man and endeavoured to hold the rod in its original
position. I then got him to explore other parts of the lawn
and at roo ft. from latter the rod again turned down. I then
blindfolded him and allowed a sceptic in the party to turn him
round about several times and then lead him in different
directions ; but when he came over the first and second spots,
where the rod turned before, it again twisted down. He was
once more turned about and asked to walk as requested not
in contact with anyone, but the same results occurred. He
then tried an ordinary willow, and also a lilac twig, with good
results. .When a dvy stick was used he obtained no action.


Finally, I bent a galvanised wire thus: . When Mr


Harris held this like the twig, it not only moved downwards
but twisted round to such an extent as to form a loop thus:


which assumed its natural shape as he moved away


from stream.


EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER 227


T also got him to follow a stream for several hundred feet.
Mrs Harris tried without any result, but when Mr H. grasped
her wrists as she approached the spring, the rod turned forcibly.
One daughter, aged 15, had also the power. When Mr H.
held the rod and Miss H. grasped his wrists, there would be a
momentary increase in the vigour of the rod twisting, and when
the daughter held the rod and her father grasped her wrists,
a similar action occurred.

Out of the twelve persons who tried the above experiments,
two had the power well developed, two slightly, while the
remaining eight almost nil. When the weaker members used
a rod over 4 ft. long, their slight muscular action was clearly
shown by the far end of rod turning down. When Mr H.
held the rod exactly perpendicularly, it sometimes turned
inwards until it pressed heavily against his chest. At the end
of the experiments Mr Harris’s hands were considerably blis-
tered.”

It is to be hoped that these experiments were continued, as
this letter shows Mr Denison to be a careful observer. It will
be noticed that Mr Denison distinctly states that in his second
experiment the blindfolded dowser was not in contact with any
one, and yet was equally successful. This is therefore an
important and excellent experiment, and more evidence is
much to be desired. It will also be observed that Mr Denison
says a dry stick would not work, but any forked twig would
do and also wire. This is the experience of many others who
can use the rod and who usually attribute this phenomenon
to the dry stick being a non-conductor of electricity. But the
reason for the frequent refusal of a dry stick to act is in all
probability to be found in the fact that such a stick, not being
so supple and elastic as a green twig, cannot respond to the
slight muscular movements which produce the motion of the
rod.

The dowser J. Stears happening to be on a visit to Ireland
in July 1892 Sir William Barrett requested him to submit to
some tests of his powers, to which he readily consented. Sir
William describes these tests thus: The experiments were
made in the private pleasure grounds opposite my house, at
Kingstown, a place entirely new to Mr Stears, who had never
been in this neighbourhood before. Cutting a forked twig,
Mr Stears started from the point marked A in the accompany-
ing plan, and walked to and fro until he reached the point
marked with an asterisk, when from the sudden and vigorous
movement of the twig he asserted that a considerable spring
of water was underneath this spot. There was nothing what-


228 THE DIVINING-ROD


ever to indicate that such was the case, but on inquiry from
the gardener (who was not present during the experiment)
I learnt for the first time that the very spot upon which Mr
Stears had fixed was the site of an old well, now completely
hidden beneath the level greensward.

I now begged Mr Stears to walk slowly over the ground,
and if the rod indicated any other springs, to allow me then
to blindfold him and so retrace the ground. Mr Stears con-
sented, and with this object he moved in the direction of the
dotted line. The rod moved at the points marked X? on the
plan (Fig. 52). At the point B, Mr Stears, notwithstanding


Fic. 52. PLAN oF EXPERIMENTS WITH JOHN STEARS


the very reasonable objection he had made in his letter to me


18 months before,! was carefully blindfolded, and endeavoured |


to retrace his steps: the rod moved at the points marked X2.
He now asked me to let him try the same course with his eyes
closed and the bandage removed. This I did, and the rod
moved at the points marked X%, Finally, at C, he consented


1 [This is the relevant passage in the letter referred to: ‘‘ I do not
like blindfolding. It seems to interfere with that calmness which is
desirable, but I have tried it on roads where I denoted water; having
been taken backwards and forwards I have been started in the middle
of the road and stopped at the part previously marked. Darkness does
not interfere with the power in the least.’’]


EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER 229


to be again carefully blindfolded, and once more he retraced
his steps, the rod moving at the points marked X‘4. It will
be seen that these points do not coincide, but in two or three
places they are nearly in the same straight line,—approximately
N. and S. It is possible that there may be underground
water in this direction, as Mr Stears subsequently declared
there was from the movement of the rod, and tracked out the
supposed course of two or three imaginary streams.”

Of course this experiment loses much of its value in that
no sinking was undertaken, but its importance can be judged
from a careful examination of the plan, which shows a sub-
stantial agreement in the dowser’s different sets of indications.

An experiment in blindfolding a dowser, in this case Stone,
is recorded in Morton’s Lincolnshire Almanac for 1899 ; supple-
mented by several letters from the writer of the account, Mr
- F. C. Withnell, the facts were as follows. In 1897 the late
Mr Beavis Dunham commissioned Stone to find a supply of
water at his farm, High Toynton, near Horncastle, Lincoln-
shire. Mr Dunham determined to submit Stone to a severe
test ; when Stone arrived he soon indicated a spot where
he asserted a plentiful supply of water would be found at 25
feet. The spectators, carefully observing Stone, ‘“ candidly
informed the diviner that they believed the turning of the
twig was due to some sharp movement on the part of the
holder.”” Stone then allowed himself to be completely blind-
folded, and Mr Withnell writes: “‘ After Mr Stone was blind-
folded, I and the late Mr Beavis Dunham simply led him away
from some paraphernalia that was on the ground and against
which he might have stumbled, and then, releasing our hold,
we allowed him to take whatever course he chose to take, assur-
ing him, on his own request, that we, would carefully watch
him and give him a warning shout if in his peregrinations he
appeared likely to blunder against the hedge. As he walked
about free from obstructions, we neither touched him nor called
out to him.”’ Under these unexceptionable conditions Stone
happened to pass two or three times over the spot he had
previously indicated, and each time “‘ the twig curled as before.”
To make the experiment quite conclusive a well was then sunk
on the site and an excellent supply of water was found at a
depth of 34 feet, a supply which had not given out after several

ears.
4 Finally may be quoted an experiment with an otherwise
unknown dowser. The reader will remember the description
in an earlier chapter of Mullins’s success at Crewkerne, Somer-
setshire, in finding a good supply of pure water. This case


230 THE DIVINING-ROD


had an interesting sequel, which is thus described by Mr H.
W. Hoskyns in a letter to Andrew Lang: “ Mullins having
on his visit here, in 1888, given several (half-a-dozen or so)
indications of water in the lane by the two cottages, I had
pegs put in on the strip of grass land opposite these indications,
and thrust in very low, so as only just to be seen when looked
for, and not showing above the grass, so that the cottage chil-
dren should not pull them up or displace them. Some rather
long time after, when I had made up my mind to go to the
further expense of making a draw-well (not a deep one) for
the cottages, having meanwhile heard that a labourer on my
estate, one George Elson, had the dowsing power, I went with
him myself, had him bandaged tightly and deeply, well over the
nose, and in addition made a steady man keep his hands over
the bandage, whilst Elson walked down the lane in question,
holding the twig. At each halt that he made, the twig turned
downwards for water, I looked for Mullins’s peg, but the grass
had grown over them and they were all quite undiscernible.
So I made Elson and his guide (for being completely blinded,
he stumbled occasionally) scrape a mark on the road surface
with their boots. When we had come to the end of the lane,
I returned with these men and one or two others (Elson being
then unblinded) and we all made close search for the Mullins
pegs, every one of which, without exception, proved to be imme-
diately opposite one of Elson’s boot-marks on the road. This
uneducated labourer could have had no geological, or even
rule-of-thumb, knowledge of water-bearing strata, for the
place was quite strange to him.”

It will be seen that this case satisfies two of the best tests,
in that we have here the concordant findings of two independent
dowsers and in that one of them was blindfolded. The only
objection that can be raised to this extremely interesting test
is that the guide, who kept his hand on the bandage over the
labourer’s eyes, might have known where the pegs were placed,
and unconsciously tended to arrest the dowser at the right spots.
This is likely enough if the pegs were discernible, but Mr
Hoskyns distinctly says they were not, and as some time had
elapsed since Mullins visited the place, no one seems to have
remembered the exact spots where the pegs had been put.
Mr Hoskyns states that Elson’s guide knew nothing whatever
about Mullins’s pegs; involuntary guidance is therefore
excluded.

A test of this kind is of such importance that it was thought
well to spare no effort to repeat it. Accordingly Mr Westlake,
who was living near Crewkerne, was asked to repeat, with


EXPERIMENTS IN BLINDFOLDING THE DOWSER 231.


Mr Hoskyns’s permission, the blindfolding experiment with
Elson. Mr Westlake reports: ‘On the 24th of April rgoo,
I went with Mr Hoskyns and his agent, Mr Slade, to Pipplepen
farm. I walked down the same lane with Elson to a little
stream at the bottom, a distance of 1,050 ft., in the course of
which his twig turned seven times. I then carefully blindfolded
him, and on retracing our steps, the twig turned ten times,
five ne which corresponded nearly or quite with his first marks,
as under :


Elson’s first marks when not His second series when
blindfolded. blindfolded. Difference,
206 feet 2 inches. (1) 206 feet 8 inches + 6 inches
(2) 326 feet 7 inches
406 feet 6 inches
(3) 429 feet 5 inches
(4) 564 feet 3 inches
GHOMICCL ARG 8!e.r p) je pais (5) 651 feet + 3 feet
(6) 680 feet 6 inches
(7) 742 feet 9 inches
762 feet
Bij. IEG cL ee eeaee C (8) 877 feet + 5 feet
QaterCet mn fa) as! 4 ie vss (9) 934 feet + 3 feet
Gosmicctmme | 6 =~ | (£0) 985 feet none


Elson was not held, and was only told (to prevent accidents)
to keep to the right or the left. The results may have been
somewhat impaired, first, by the steward, Mr Slade, who accom-
panied us, having touched Elson with a stick (with a view to
guiding him straight) at the points I and 5, immediately after
which the twig turned, and, second, there was more or less
conversation, at Nos. 8, 9, and 10, Slade informing Elson that
he had passed the cottages (a landmark between 7 and 8),
that the point 8 he had just indicated was the well (by the road-
side), and so on.

In view of such sources of error, I think Mr Hoskyns’s experi-
ment much better than mine, but, as I understand that some
of those who took part in it had seen Mullins’s pegs when they
were put in, one cannot feel certain that the experiment was
an absolutely conclusive one.

In the afternoon, I made a further trial with Elson in an
orchard at North Perrott, where he had previously indicated
two springs. Slade remained at a distance. Elson having
found the points, I blindfolded him and, starting him from
a little distance and directing him by voice, I got him to cross


232 THE DIVINING-ROD


his marks. He thereupon re-found the spots three times, his
marks at one of them being only a yard apart. It is possible
he may have been able to reckon the distance ; and I noticed
also towards the end of the experiment that the bandage had
slipped a little, and I could see the upper corner of his left
eye, so that he may have been guided by the trees. Thus
the result was probably inconclusive.

Elson’s hands and arms are very muscular; he uses stout
hazel forks and grips them very hard, and they turn downwards
with corresponding strength, usually breaking, sometimes at
the fork, but generally on one side ; he then takes a fresh grip
nearer the fork, and so on, till the stick may be used up to
within an inch of the fork. When it turned over the stream
his forearm muscles were strongly contracted. He says it
usually makes his left thumb numb, and that he feels the effects
in his biceps the day after. Mr Slade said Elson had found
water for many of the neighbours, and had never had a failure.
The farmer also told me Elson had predicted water at another
point half a mile to the east at 30 ft., and that it was found
at 27 ft., and rose to within 5 or 6 ft. of the surface.”


PART II
THEORETICAL


CHAPTER XII
THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING


§1x. THE Dowsinc-Rop


HE reader has now had ample opportunity for verify-
ing our statement that there is an endless variety


in the instruments used for dowsing. Under this
head we might reasonably have considered what may be called
mechanical water- and mineral-finders. There are numerous
articles of this kind patented in Europe andin America. Thus
T. Fiddick, a professional English dowser has invented what
he calls a “‘ dowsing cone,”’ but which is nothing more than a
pendule explorateur. M. Henri Mager, in France, has an
elaborate instrument to which he has devoted much trouble.
Then there are Schmidt’s “‘ Apparatus,’’ W. J. Bodenhamer’s
“‘ Vibrator,’’ Fred. H. Brown’s “ Electro-Terreohmeter’’ and
** Electro-Geodetic Mineral Finder,’’ Mansfield’s ‘‘ Patent
Automatic Water Finder,’ and many others.’ In the U.S.A.
particularly there is a large number of such mechanical oil and
petroleum finders, and many advertisements such as this can
be found in the press of that country: ‘ Rods for locating gold
and silver, lost treasures, etc. Guaranteed.’”? W. Edwards, of
Draycott, near Cheddar, in Somerset, has even invented a ring
which, when worn, prevents the dowser from feeling any
untoward sensations! With these we do not propose to deal ;
the inventors of these instruments usually treat them as being
of quite supreme importance and refuse to impart details
of their principles. Messrs Mansfield (formerly of Liverpool,
and later of New Brighton) even returned an exceedingly
impertinent letter to such a request. It is, in short, difficult
to take such instruments, and the claims made on their behalf,
quite seriously.
1 See ¢.g., Lilian Whiting, Canada the Spelibinder (1917), pp. 138-140
233


234 THE DIVINING-ROD


To go to the other extreme we find that some dowsers such
as Leicester Gataker, A. W. Wills, the lad Fred Rodwell (shown
in Fig. 51), and others, dispense with all instruments, and use
only their bare hands, either stretched out horizontally to
the earth or clasped together! This, however, is unusual for
several reasons: because dowsing without an instrument is
not very attractive to the popular mind and the dowser,
naturally enough, is averse to losing any measure of atten-
tion. Another reason is a better one: whatever be the
causative influence that enables the dowser to find the hidden
water and the like, it undoubtedly operates through the
dowser’s subconsciousness. Consequently some autoscope is
necessary to enable the dowser to become aware of the indica-
tions of his subconsciousness. The rod serves this purpose,
precisely as does, in similar cases, the planchette and the
many other articles used for such pur-
poses. é

The rod itself can be of many shapes,
examples of all of which can be found
in the illustrations in this chapter and
throughout the book. We have straight
rods which are simply laid across the
hands and across the extended fingers.

Buss There is the slightly curved rod as used
Wituam Stoxes’s Rov. Py Bleton and Pennet, which can be

After M. R. Cox, Papers laid across the hands or held by them.
and Transactions [of] Ihe ‘There is the more unusual kind used by
gress, r89r (1892), p. 440. Mr R. Robertson, a successful amateur

dowser; this gentleman simply held a
three or four foot stick outstretched in one hand. Then there
are various steel or other metallic articles used, such as watch-
springs, and such eccentric articles as candle-snuffers, or a Ger-
man sausage, andsoon. But what is most often used, though
not so often as to form a majority of cases, is some kind of
forked rod. Such a rod may be simply a natural one formed
of a twig branching into two, or it may be a more solid manu-
factured article resembling a spur, such as is shown in Fig. 53.
But the distinguishing characteristic of these forked rods is
that such a rod has three extremities, which correspond to -
the angles of an imaginary triangle, of which two are held
one in either hand, the third one pointing away from the
body. Into the question of the manner in which the rod is
held we must now enter.


* See also W. Leaf, “‘ Vis-Knut,” Proc. S.P.R. (1908-1909), xxi.
142, 146; Journ, S.P.R. (1897-1898), viii. 264.


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 235


§2. How THE Rop 1s HELpD


William Cookworthy, a dowser of two centuries ago, gives a
description of the method he had found best for holding the
rod, and says that ‘“‘ after numerous experiments he has good
reason to believe the effects of the divining rod to be more
than imagination,’’ remarking that he believes all persons
could use the rod, though ‘‘some have the virtue intermit-
tently.”” He used either a forked hazel twig or two straight
twigs tied together in the shape of an X, and continues:
“The most convenient and handy method of holding the rod
is with the palms of the hands turned upwards, and the two
ends of the rod coming outwards ; the palms should be held
horizontally as nearly as possible, the part of the rod in the
hand ought to be straight, and not bent backwards or for-
ward. The upper part of the arm should be
kept pretty close to the sides, and the elbows
resting on them ; the lower part of the arm
making nearly a right angle with the upper,
though rather a little more acute. The
rod ought to be so held, that in its working
the sides may move clear of the little fingers.

The position of the rod when properly held

is much like the figure annexed [Fig. 54] ,.. ener
where the distance between the four down- Chee Pan
ward lines is the part that is supposed to be a 2

held in the hands. ee gations etna

The best manner of carrying the rod jee Diving, Co
is with the end prolaided [sic] in an angle (1751), xxi. 507.
of about 80 degrees from the horizon, as
by this method of carrying it the repulsion is more plainly
perceived than if it was held perpendicularly. But after all
the directions that can be given, the adroit use of it can only
be attained by practice and attention. It is necessary that the
grasp should be steady, for if, when the rod is going, there be
the least succussion or counter-action in the hands, though
ever so small, it will greatly impair and generally totally
prevent its activity, which is not to be done by the mere
strength of the grasp, for, provided this be steady, no strength
can stop it.”

It is interesting to note that the foregoing description of the
way of holding the rod closely resembles that given by Agricola
in De Re Metallica. Agricola’s work is the earliest detailed
account we have of the use of the Virgula divina, and refers,
of course, only to its use in finding mineral lodes. In like


236 THE DIVINING-ROD


manner the learned Jesuit de Chales, in his great work Mundus
Mathematicus (1674, ii. 190) gives a similar description of the
way the rod is held. The following is a translation of the pas-
sage, which is of great interest, as it is one of the earliest
references to the successful use of the rod in finding under-
ground water: “They hold it [a forked branch of hazel]
with both fists, in such a way that the outer part of the fists
turns downwards, i.e., the two little fingers face each other.
Thus each branch being grasped firmly in each fist, they walk
to and fro. . . . When they come perpendicularly over under-
ground water, the branch, however strongly it is held, turns
upside down ; that is, the vertex points downwards, so that the
forked sides are twisted; but it does not succeed with all
persons. .. . Once on a certain occasion I purposely hid
some money in the earth, which was
found by a certain noble person by the
hazel twig in my presence. The same
person used to find springs so surely
that he would trace the whole course of
underground water.”’

A detailed account of the manner of
holding the dowsing-rod is also given by
Pryce in his Mineralogia Cornubiensis
(1778, p. 118). Pryce says: “tas wery
difficult to describe the manner of hold-
o ing and using the rod: it ought to be
ee ae IS. 55° scrap Held in the hands, in the position shown

ayiCooka conta, [in Fig. 55], the smaller ends lying flat

W. Pryce, Mineralogia Cor- OT parallel to the horizon, and the upper

nubiensis (1778), p. 118. part in an elevation not perpendicular
to it, but 70 degrees, as shown.

Alonso Barba directs the rod to be fixed across the head
of a walking stick in the form of a T, and the end which is
nearest the root will dip or incline to the Mineral Ore. . .
The rod should be firmly and steadily grasped ; for if, when
it hath begun to be attracted, there be the least imaginable
jerk, or opposition to its attraction, it will not move any more,
till the hands are opened and a fresh grasp taken. The
stronger the grasp the livelier the rod moves, provided the
grasp be steady, and of an equal strength... .

A little practice by a person in earnest about it, will soon
give him the necessary adroitness in the use of this instrument :
but it must be particularly observed, that as our animal spirits


1 [There is no mention of this in Alonso Barba, Arte de los metales
(1640).]


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 237


are necessary to this process, so a man ought to hold the rod,
with the same indifference and inattention to, or reasoning
about it or its effects, as he holds a fishing rod or a walking
stick ; for if the mind be occupied by doubts, reasoning, or any
other operation that engages
the animal spirits, it will
divert their powers from
being exerted in this pro-
cess, in which their instru-
mentality is absolutely
necessary ; from hence it is
that the rod constantly an-
swers in the hands of peas-
ants, women and children, Fic. 56.

who hold it simply without TsE Rop as HELD By Joun Muztins
puzzling their minds with

doubts or reasonings. Whatever may be thought of this
observation, it is a very just one, and of great consequence
in the practice of the rod.”

The remark in the last paragraph is interesting, and Pryce’s
observation is confirmed by the quite independent testimony
of many others. If the dowsing
faculty be some subconscious
perception of which the rod is
the outward: and visible sign,
we should expect to find “ doubts
or reasonings ”’ fatal to the suc-
cessful use of the rod.

We have already referred to
the excellent picture (Fig. 10)
by A. Crowquill of a dowser at
work given in Phippen’s pam-
phlet on the rod (1853). Here
also the arms are held tightly
to the sides of the body, but
the prongs of the fork pass


between the index and next Fic. 57.
: THE RopD AS HELD IN THE UNITED
finger of each hand. Miss Cox, erie


in her notes on the rod, shows «The pivining Rod,” The American
(Fig. 53) Stokes holding the  Jowrnal of Science (1826), ii. 202.
rod pointing downwards with

the prongs grasped by the fists. Mullins, however, whose
success as a dowser was the most remarkable in modern
times, always held the rod as shown in Fig. 56. This is much
the same way as Tompkins is shown holding the rod in


238 THE DIVINING-ROD


Fig. 36; this might indeed be expected since he learnt his art
from Mullins. On the other hand, Stone is seen in Fig. 34 to
be holding the rod in quite another manner. Again, in the
American Journal of Science,in the course of a lengthy article
on the rod, a picture is given showing how the rod must be


Fic. 58. AN ALUMINIUM POCKET-ROD AS USED BY Messrs J. F. Younce
AND R. ROBERTSON


held, and here the prongs of the fork pass between the thumb
and forefinger of each hand (Fig.57). Messrs Young and Robert-
son, both amateur dowsers, in their little book on the rod
give illustrations showing their way of holding the rod: they
have sent a little waistcoat-pocket forked rod made of alumin-
ium, which they recommend to be held in the way shown in


Fic. 59. Fic. 60.
ANOTHER KIND OF METAL Rop ‘THE SAME ROD As IT IS ALLEGED TO


TWIST WHEN OVER WATER.
G. H. Stokes, “A Water Wizard [S. T. Child],” The Ibis Magazine (September, 1910)


Fig. 58. They also use a straight rod or wand some three or
four feet long, as already mentioned, which they hold inclined
in the right hand, the thinner end being held in the hand and
“the eye resting on the top of the thick end.” This, they
assert, dips down over an underground spring.


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 239


Many pages could be filled with descriptions of the manner
in which various dowsers hold their various rods. But no
descriptions could give so clear an idea of the diversity that
exists in this respect as the accompanying illustrations. The
manner of holding the rod varies with the dowser, and obviously,
in itself, is of no importance. Both in the nature of the rod
and in the manner in which it is held, the determining factor
is the degree in which the rod is a sensitive indication of
the muscular tremor which determines its motion. For this
purpose it is of course important that it should be held in a
position of tension or poised equilibrium. We shall revert to
this subject in the next chapter.


§ 3. THE MoTION OF THE RopD


To an onlooker who sees a dowser at work for the first time
one of the most startling things is the sudden and apparently
spontaneous motion of the forked twig, a motion so vigorous
that one of the limbs of the twig is frequently broken, though
the dowser is apparently doing his utmost to restrain its motion.
The common explanation of an incredulous public is that this is
merely a trick on the dowser’s part to mystify his dupes, but
the evidence adduced in this volume shows that this view
is quite untenable. (We refer to honest dowsers : impostors
exist here as elsewhere.) The only alternative recognised by
scientific men is that the motion of the rod is due to an involun-
tary muscular action. Few will be disposed to dispute this
proposition. When the rod is held in most of the ways des-
cribed above or shown in the illustrations, it is in a sensitive
state, and an almost imperceptible movement of the hand or
hands will cause it to move.

But it is true that this is not always the case ; when the rod
is held as it is by Tompkins, for instance, we have found from
personal experiments that it is most difficult to produce any
motion of the twig without a very visible movement of the
hands.- Moreover this is not all. Both with practised pro-
fessional dowsers like Lawrence and Mullins and with amateurs
like Lady Milbanke and the Rev. J. Blunt, the rod not only
rotates, but one limb is frequently twisted off completely.
Thus the Rev. Martin R. Knapp, writing of a dowser whom
he does not name, says: ‘‘. . . the twig showed vigorous signs
of animation. When his hand was being twisted in his efforts
to keep the twig steady, I cried to him to hold fast, with the
result that the twig twisted itself into two pieces.”’ Mr Enys,
F.G.S., who is an amateur dowser, states “ the rod broke short


240 THE DIVINING-ROD


off in front of my hands, and did so a second time in the same
place,” 7.e., where underground water existed. Miss Grantham
(daughter of Judge Grantham), describing what occurred with
the Rev. J. Blunt, states ‘‘so strong was the impulse, that we
found unless Mr B. relaxed his hold, the twig broke off near his
fingers.”” Lady Milbanke had the same experience. Mr Budd,
a geologist, describes what occurred with Mullins when he came
over underground water at Waterford. He writes: “ Mullins
held the forked twig between his second and third fingers as if
you were going to write, the point of the fork downwards.
At No. 1 [the spot where a large supply of underground water
was found] the point lifted itself up, until it turned over back-
wards and twisted itself until it broke . . . The clerks then
held [another forked twig] with him, and held his hands,
always the same effect.” In another place, seeing the fran-
tic motion of the twig when Mullins came over underground
water, a gentleman tried to stop its motion by gripping the
twig in two places with smiths’ tongs, “‘ one pair securing the
tips and the other the fork, but the contortions still went on
between the points held.”

Numerous independent witnesses of unimpeachable integrity
and some with high scientific attainments testify to this
automatic and apparently irresistible motion of the twig in the
hands often of a complete novice. We have already quoted
Mr Enys, the President of the Royal Geological Society of
Cornwall, who also states that the clerk of his Parish Council,
on finding the rod suddenly twist in his hands, called out,
‘* It is alive, sir, it is alive!’’ Mr Enys adds: ‘ This exactly
describes the sensation when the rod moves.’’ Mr Dixon, a
large fruit-grower in California, states: ‘‘I held the stick as
tight as I could to prevent its moving, but it twisted right
round.”’ Mr Denison, of the Toronto Meterorological Observa-
tory, gives a careful record of the violent twisting of a forked
plum stick or bent wire used as a dowsing-rod by an amateur
dowser. Mr G. W. Bennett, of Oxford, refers to the frantic
motion and ultimate breaking of the twig ‘held firmly ”’ in
the dowser’s hands. Mr Montague Price states: ‘‘ I held one
side of the forked rod myself and the ‘ diviner ’ the other, and
when we came to water [alleged underground water] the strain
was so great on my fingers I was obliged to ask him to stop.
From the position of the rod it was absolutely impossible for
him to produce the pressure, which increased with the strength
of the stream.”’

The usual practice, after watching a dowser at work, is for
some of the onlookers to try if the forked twig will move in their


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 241


hands. Generally speaking, one or more, out of perhaps ten
or twelve persons, discover to their astonishment that the twig
curls up in their hands at the same places at which it did with
the dowser. Here is such an experience. Mrs Minnie Hol-
lands writes as follows from Dene Park, Tonbridge: ‘In
answer to your note of inquiry about the divining rod, the
whole thing is rather a long story, but the practical result of
the water dowser’s visit was to find water which now supplies
the house. One of my daughters found she had the strange
power which moves the divining rod, and it works for her now
quickly over any spring. It is most interesting, as you can feel
the rod if you take one side of it and take one of her hands,
she holding the other end of the rod—it struggles up, and would
break off altogether if you did not allow it to move. My
daughter has since found several springs on the estate, where
we have sunk wells. They have stood us in very good stead
these last dry seasons.”

A similar experience is given by Miss M. Craigie Halkett, who
published some excellent photographs of a dowser at work in
The Sketch for August 23rd, 1899. Miss Halkett writes from
Lauriston, New Eltham, Kent: ‘‘ The man depicted in the
photographs is not a water-finder by profession. He is a
tenant farmer residing at Catcott, a village near Bridgwater,
and merely exercises the art to oblige his neighbours. Several
of the country people in this neighbourhood (Somerset) have
the gift. It has never been known to fail.

Personally, I was rather sceptical on the subject, but was
converted by the stick turning in my hands when standing
over a spring. There were about six persons present at the
time ; all tried it, but it would turn for no one excepting the
man in the picture and myself. I experienced a sort of ting-
ling sensation in my arms and wrists, but otherwise was
quite unaware when the forked stick began to turn, it seemed
to go over so quickly.”’ Miss Halkett does not say how
she knew she was “‘‘ standing over a spring’ when the twig
turned in her hands: this is very characteristic of the state-
ments of dowsers.

These facts are so curious that they have been adduced at
some length, and the reader will have observed other instances
in the foregoing pages. We do not propose to discuss them at
this point, but only seek to establish the fact that the rod
does often move, sometimes violently, without the volition of
the dowser. Whether all the cases can be attributed to uncon-
scious muscular action, as we claim, must be considered in the
next chapter.


16


242 THE DIVINING-ROD


§ 4. TRANSMISSION OF THE MOTION OF THE RopD


We have now briefly to consider what may appear at first
sight a group of still stranger phenomena. That is, the fact
occasionally noticed that when the dowser lays hold of the
wrist or hand of a person with whom the rod will not turn,
the twig instantly moves. This apparent transmission of
involuntary muscular action was noticed by Thouvenel to
occur with Bleton a century ago. Thouvenel states that
when Bleton placed his finger on the hand of a person with
whom the baguette would not ordinarily turn, the rod instantly
rotated when they approached underground water. The


Ay Gn ¢


Fic. 61. THE Rop AS USED BY AN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY GERMAN DOWSER
J. G. Kriiger, Geschichte der Erde (1746), pl. I. 2


Count of M. confirms this from his own experience.1 A few
years later Amoretti, the Italian scientist, discovered the same
thing when Pennet touched his hands. He writes that the
rod then turned against his (Amoretti’s) will whenever he stood
over veins of metal.

We do not lack modern confirmation of this observation.
Thus Mr Duncan A. Morton writes: “I took the V-shaped
wand in my hand, and passed it over running water without
any result. Mullins laid his hands on my wrists, and grasped
them firmly, when the twig instantly began to turn, and
continued turning while it was in my hands.” Mr Percy Clive
states that when he held the rod and Mullins put his hands


1 Mémoire (1781), p. 59.


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 243


on his wrists, the rod “ twisted round in my hands with such
force that when I held it tight it broke.” Mr Cecil Woolley,
of Lincoln, agent to Trinity College, Cambridge, writes, again
of Mullins, that the latter having gone over the ground and
indicated water in one spot, “I took the twig in my own
hands and went over the same spot with no result. He
[Mullins] then took hold of my wrists without touching the
twig himself and when we together walked over the same
place, the twig turned up in my hands. This was, I suppose,
caused by muscular action on my part, but if so, it was cer-
tainly, as far as I was concerned, perfectly unconscious action.”
Lord Burton makes a very similar statement in a letter to the
Pall Mall Gazette, for the 20th of February 1897. There can
thus be no doubt of the reality of this curious fact, which
seems to occur most conspicuously only with notable dowsers
such as Bleton and Mullins, and it forms another item in the
complete group of phenomena relating to dowsing which must
be covered by any theory put forward.


§5. THE SENSATIONS OCCURRING IN DOWSING


Nearly all dowsers assert that when the rod moves in their
hands, or when they believe that underground water is be-
neath them, they experience a peculiar sensation, which some
describe as felt in the limbs like the tingling of an electric
shock, others as a shivering or trembling, and others as an
unpleasant sensation in the epigastric region. With all there
is more or less of a convulsive spasm, sometimes of a violent
character. This malaise is very marked in some cases, but not
experienced in others. That these physiological disturbances
have a purely psychological origin is obvious from the facts
that they are not experienced when the dowser is off duty,
that is, when he has no suspicion that he is in the neighbourhood
of underground water, and that like effects are not produced
by the much greater masses of visible water in rivers, lakes
and the sea. The interesting point is that these psycho-
physiological phenomena have a real existence; they exist
among dowsers in all countries, and can be traced back, as
historical investigation shows, for upwards of two centuries.

Let us briefly note the principal facts. In the first place
it is not, as some imagine, only when the “‘ diviner ’’ is in the
presence of underground water that this physiological disturb-
ance occurs. We have seen that when Jacques Aymar was
sent for to trace, by means of his rod, the murderer of the
Lyons wine merchant, Aymar was taken into the cellar where


244. THE DIVINING-ROD


the murder was committed; suddenly his baguette moved
violently, he was seized with convulsive spasms, and his pulse
rose as if feverish.

A century later another distinguished French physician, Dr
Thouvenel, independently noticed much the same thing with
Bleton. Thouvenel gives a detailed medical report of his own
long-continued observations, and states that when Bleton
believed he was over a subterranean spring he was seized with
an extraordinary malaise, which affected his diaphragm and
produced a sense of oppression in the chest; at the same
time a shivering set in and the pulse fell, his body trembled
and, in a word, he exhibited ‘all the characteristics of an
attack of convulsive spasm.”’1_ Similar symptoms manifested

themselves in the Prior of a convent

at Autun, who was an amateur

dowser and contemporary of Bleton.

A few years later the Italian savant,

Amoretti, noticed the same symp-

toms occur whenever the lad Pennet

See came over a vein of mineral ore or

Tue Movement or THe Rop Of coal. Amoretti states that a

From Luigi Sementini, Pensieri SUTgeOn, Sanzio, an amateur
Cele OBtG ge ola Dim dowser, found his pulse accelerated

twelve to fifteen beats per minute
when the rod moved in his hands.

Dr Mayo, F.R.S., Professor of Anatomy and Physiology in
King’s College and in the College of Surgeons in London,
describes corresponding symptoms which he observed in 1847
in a youth with whom he experimented. The lad had never
seen a “ divining rod” before, but when Dr Mayo instructed
him how to use it, and made him walk over a spot where
he had reason to believe an underground spring existed, the
forked twig twisted round, much to the lad’s astonishment, and
at the same time Dr Mayo states the lad declared that ‘‘ he
felt an uneasy sensation which quickly increased to pain at the
pit of the stomach, and he became alarmed, so that I bade
him quit hold of the rod, when the pain ceased. Ten minutes
later I induced him to make another trial; the results were
the same.” * As Mayo was apparently unaware of Thouvenel’s
writings, he could hardly have anticipated or suggested the
malaise experienced by his subject, and the effect observed
was doubtless due to the same psychological cause as in the
previous cases. :

1 Mémoire (1781), p. 53.
* On the Truths contained in Popular Superstition (1851), p. 18.


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 245


Abundant modern instances of a similar physiological dis-
turbance and convulsive spasm occurring with various dowsers
in different countries have reached us. Thus Mr J. F. Young
says: “‘ I have noticed, when divining, unpleasant and peculiar
symptoms always occur when I am over an underground
spring; often a convulsive feeling and staggering comes
on.”’ ‘ The sensation in this case, however, may have been
due to suggestion or unconscious imitation, for this dowser’s
father, Mr Robert Young, had also been an amateur dowser,.
He wrote that whenever he came over an underground spring,
so violent a trembling seized him that he had to be supported
or he would fall. His daughter supplemented this statement
by writing: ‘‘ One day I asked father to point out to me the
spring in Gough’s close ; he walked to and fro, and when he
came to a certain spot he reeled and staggered and said the
spring was below. To test the reality of his indication I
privately marked the spot where he said the spring was. I
then took him to the far end and blindfolded him carefully,
then led him about the field by a circuitous route. Directly
he came on the spot I had marked, he reeled as before and
would have fallen if I had not held him up. Directly he came
off the place he was all right.” Of course, this interesting
experiment was to an extent vitiated by the fact that Mr Young
was led.

John Stears writes: ‘‘ My feeling when I am on a stream is
not pleasant, I can only describe it as being the same as pro-
duced by reading of a railway accident.”” Thomas Heighway
says that he does not dowse much because his nervous system
is so much affected that he does not recover for some hours.
Still more interesting is the following letter from Leicester
Gataker: ‘“‘. . . when I am near the spring I get a distinct
feeling or shock, which is greater when I am over the spring
proper, thus I judge the depth at once, but the volume by the


duration of that shock... .’’ The sensations felt by other
dowsers, especially Lawrence, have been described on previous
pages.


There are some sceptical persons who would explain these
phenomena by asserting that these different dowsers conspire
to exhibit similar symptoms as a bit of stage business in order

-to impress the onlookers. It is, we think, unnecessary to
waste time in disputing such a belief if any one cares to hold
it.

How, then, are we to explain these curious pathological
phenomena? The facts are certainly incontestable and, we
venture to think, deserve more attention from physiologists


246 THE DIVINING-ROD


than they have yet received. They are not, however, peculiar
to the use of the so-called divining rod, but are found to exist
more or less conspicuously in other cases of motor automatism.
Pierre Janet, for instance, has drawn attention to very similar
convulsive phenomena and physiological disturbances as
associated with other phases of automatism.!_ Prior to this,
however, Sir William Barrett pointed out that in trials with
the ‘“ willing game,’”’ which is one phase of these varied auto-
matic phenomena, curious physiological disturbances were
often produced, such as dizziness, hysteria, and incipient
trance. In fact, a malaise, manifesting itself in different
ways, and with different degrees of intensity in different sub-
jects, is a usual concomitant of motor automatism and its
allied phenomena.

The singular connection of visceral sensation, a visceral con-
sciousness as it were, with a particular psychical state is
familiar to us all in emotion, and forms the basis of the James-
Lange theory. Emotion, in fact, is a feeling excited by an
idea or train of ideas, and therefore the sensations experienced
by the dowser are strictly emotional disturbances. Whether
emotion is primarily a cerebral process, as some physiologists
maintain, the visceral or vascular disturbance being secondary ;
or whether, as other eminent physiologists hold, the psychical
process of emotion is secondary to the excitation of the visceral
organs, through certain stimuli causing the discharge of a
nervous impulse into those organs is a matter that does not
concern us here, albeit physiologists may find in the facts
cited some fresh light thrown on this controversy. The points
of interest to us are that the malaise or other sensation felt by
the dowser is probably an emotional effect, and the fresh
evidence afforded of the nexus existing between emotion and
muscular action, whether this latter be conscious or, as with
the dowser and his rod, unconscious.

Furthermore, in many cases where subconscious acts are
performed, as M. Janet points out,a state of partial catalepsy
supervenes. Catalepsy, as Dr Ochorowicz has shown, is a
state of mono-ideism,® that is, a ‘‘mental condition which
concentrates every action upon one single and dominant idea
and is not counterbalanced by any other.’’ Now this is pre-
cisely the condition of the dowser when he sets himself to
dowse, and in some few cases he passes into a state of com-
plete catalepsy when the idea culminates. It is not, therefore,


1 L’Automatisme psychologique (1889), pp. 208 et seq.
9 Proc. SPR. (1062) ea
° “ La suggestion mentale,” Revue Philosophique (1887), xviii. 122.


THE MECHANISM OF DOWSING 247


a question of underground water or mineral ore, but merely
the result of a suggestion producing a state of mono-ideism.

The malaise felt by the dowser is therefore in all probability
an emotional disturbance, the mind being dominated by a
single idea and the subject being a person on whom suggestion
is operative: using the word suggestion in the sense of an
impression or influence exercised without the knowledge or
consent of the subject concerned.

We have now narrowed the issue down to this problem:
how does this subconscious suggestion arise in the case of the
successful dowser ? Here we enter upon the final stage of our


inquiry.


3 ev —s
rid red & ro,
fod SAS,
fer? Was
3 , —*
i. ro |
f a
2 fo


CHAPTER XIII
THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING


§ 1. OBSOLETE THEORIES


NTIL that attitude of mind which produces what is
| | called scientific method had become established as

the only proper manner in which to approach any
problem, there arose from time to time, according to the
fashion of the moment, a variety of explanations of the varied
and numerous mysteries of nature. One of these, and one
the mystery of which increased in men’s minds in proportion
to its value and wide application, was the dowsing-rod.

The earliest theory put forward in explanation of the pheno-
mena of dowsing was that of sympathy. It was alleged that
when the heavy-laden branches of some tree bent to the earth,
they did so not in obedience to the laws of gravitation but
to those of sympathy. It was alleged that there exists some
innate affinity between certain objects, as between the heavenly
bodies and the processes of nature, the moon and the fluctua-
tions of the waters, and the like. Thus this theory was not
altogether based on empty speculation; it was when they
began to apply this hypothesis to matters for which they
had no evidence, that these early investigators went astray.
One example of their error, the idea that there existed a special
sympathy between the wooden bough of the tree and sub-
terranean metals, led to a further error in interpreting the
facts of dowsing. It led to the obviously absurd error that
the dowsing-rod moved towards the earth in the hands of the
dowser when he passed over metals (for this was the only use
of the rod in the sixteenth century and before) because of the
attraction exercised by the hidden metal on the sympathetic
wooden rod.

The next theory saw the light in France towards the end
of the seventeenth century. Variously known as the atomic
or the corpuscular theory, it is, if anything, even more fan-
tastic than the one just described, though it is obviously
based on it. This theory is graphically shown in the accom-


248


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Fic. 63. RODS AS USED BY FRENCH
SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DOWSERS


{P. Lebrun] Lettres (1696), p. 133


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 249


panying illustration, but to make the matter quite clear we
cannot do better than quote the worthy and learned William
Pryce on this subject: ‘The corpuscles . . . that rise from
the Minerals, entering the rod, determine it to bow down, in
order to render it parallel to the vertical lines which the effluvia
describe in their rise. In effect the Mineral particles seem to
be emitted from the earth ; now the Virgula, being of a light
porous wood, gives an easy passage to these particles, which
are also very fine and subtle ; the effluvia then driven forwards
by those that follow them, and pressed at the same time by
the atmosphere incumbent on them, are forced to enter the
little interstices between the fibres of the wood, and by that
effort they oblige it to incline, or dip down perpendicularly,
to become parallel with the little columns which those vapours
form in their rise.’”’?_ We have already seen how this theory
was enlarged in order to encompass the activities of Jacques
Aymar in tracing murderers, it being decided that the body
of a murderer gave off a special kind of corpuscular emanation
which was named matiére meurtriére. Nor have these.ideas
failed to find contemporary adherents.

Before the corpuscular theory had arisen and for long after
its popularity had failed, the official religious dogma in regard
to dowsing was the usual simple and comprehensive one: if
the rod did good it was due either to divine inspiration or to
the action of angels, if no result was achieved then the move-
ments of the rod were due to the direct interference of evil
spirits or even of the devil himself, as we can see in figure
g. This plain alternative was supplemented sometimes by
the introduction of merely playful demons, who regarded the
moving of the rod as a pleasant pastime.

The theory of sympathetic affinity and attraction outlived
the name which it originally bore and we find the principle
behind this theory transmogrified into Reichenbach’s Od- ©
force, or radio-active force, or dynamic force and the like.
These new names were principally due to the fact that, as we
have seen, the divining-rod was a familiar object long before
the dowsing-rod became an object worthy of serious considera-
tion. Naturally, therefore, the first explanations that were
forthcoming smacked very strongly of this occult ancestry.
Later, however, the occultists were in rather.a.difficulty ; for,
having claimed the rod as an occult phenomenon, they could
not reconcile that claim with the disappearance of the theory
of sympathetic affinity. How these writers then transferred
the onus of the responsibility to science can be judged from

1 Mineralogia Cornubiensis (1778), p. 114.


250 THE DIVINING-ROD


the following passage from Mr A. E. Waite: ‘“‘. . . the ordinary
divining-rod . . . is an instrument of natural magic and not
of pneumatic art. This is substantially equivalent to saying
that if its curious properties are really established facts, they
are unappreciated phenomena of ordinary science and belong,
like the loadstone, to the domain of magnetism.’’? This
comparison of the rod to the loadstone is, of course, meaning-
less, but the magnetic theory itself has received very wide
support.

Still later, with the general use of electricity, this further
phenomenon was used and at the present day a majority of
dowsers affirm with the most dogmatic emphasis that the
phenomena they produce are due to electricity. In Germany


Fic. 64. ‘‘ CURRENTS’ PASSING THROUGH A Rop.


Count J. de Tristan, Recherches sur quelques effluves terrestres (1826), Fig. 7


most students of this subject are making heroic attempts to
prove this assertion ; they combine as a rule the theories of
magnetism and electricity, and their ideas amount to this:
that underground water exerts magnetic attraction on the
dowsing-rod on the same principle as the magnet on steel.
De Tristan ? spoke of these magnetic currents as effluves terres-
ives, and held that water gave off, in addition to the magnetic
currents, certain electrical currents which, passing through the
hands of the dowser, formed a circuit with the earth whenever
the dowser and his rod pass over water, the two currents
passing through the rod as shown in Fig. 64. On this basis a

1 The Occult Sciences (1891), pp. 151-162.

* Count J. de Tristan, Recherches sur quelques effiuves terrestres (1826).


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 251


considerable number of mechanical appliances have been
invented and are used by their inventors.

A novel theory has been put forward by Sir W. H. Preece,
who writes : “‘ The proper use of electric currents can show the
existence of water and of metallic veins, but the so-called
‘ divining-rod ’ has nothing whatever to do with electrical or
magnetic phenomena as far as I can conceive. I have come
to the conclusion that it is mechanical vibration, set up by
the friction of moving water, acting upon the sensitive vertical
diaphragm of certain exceptionally delicately framed persons
[which causes the phenomena of dowsing].”’?

These theories, whatever their intrinsic value may be, do at
any rate attempt to explain the matter rationally, but there are
many theories which are hopelessly eccentric or which entirely
evadethe mainissue. Such, forinstance, is that of an American
writer who declares that the forked branch dips because of
the physical impossibility of maintaining it in a horizontal
position.?. And that of Count von Klinckowstroem who writes
in a letter that “ the sun, and the moon which reflects its rays,
can be considered as an essential source of energy for the
motion of the rod.’”’ And that of Dr Aigner, the leader
of the German dowsers’ association, who looks upon dowsing
as the “rudiment of an atavistic sense of smell.’’ These
opinions we need not discuss, though the last theory has the
support of Bishop W. Boyd Carpenter,* and of Lord Farrer,
himself a dowser, who writes that dowsing seems to him to
be “ analogous to those disused powers which savages possess,
but which civilized men generally lose. Is it just possible that
at an earlier geological period the earth was drier and hotter,
and for the preservation of the species it was necessary to track
water ? ”’


§ 2. CRITICISM OF THE OBSOLETE THEORIES


Nearly all these theories are still held by many persons, and
not only by those who know little of the subject but by not
a few students who are well acquainted with it. Therefore
it is necessary to indicate briefly why these theories are unten-
able. This can be done very easily along several lines. The
reader will have observed that those theories which postulate
attraction between the underground metal or water and the


1 The Times (16th of January 1905), p. 12d.

2 P. Robinson, ‘‘ Saunterings in Utah,” Harper's Magazine (1883),
Ixvil. 705-714.

3 ‘ Presidential Address,”’ Proc. S.P.R. (1913), Xxvi. 19.


252 THE DIVINING-ROD


wooden rod at once fall to the ground because of the fact,
amply demonstrated in the previous chapter, that the rod is
far from being always a wooden one, that it can be of any
substance which responds to muscular movements, and that
it can be entirely dispensed with. In short, any theory which
seeks to explain the origin or rationale of dowsing on the
basis of the material or shape of the rod is 7pso facto valueless.

The theory of electricity can be disposed of in a very simple
manner by any reader who cares to go to the trouble. Those
dowsers who allege that the phenomena they produce are due
to electricity, further allege that if they stand on a sheet of
insulating material the rod will not move. It has already
been pointed out that this fact, if it is a fact, would not demon-
strate the falseness of the theory, for if the dowser stands on
a sheet of insulating material or on a glass-legged stool, he
is merely preventing electrical conduction from the earth and
does not impair electrical induction. But this simple experi-
ment can be adapted in this way: place the dowser over a
spot beneath which he declares water to run and cause him
to stand on a stool or the like which is capable of being caused
to alternately insulate and uninsulate him. Now when the
dowser knows that he is completely insulated, his rod will not
budge an inch ; then go through some elaborate, but meaning-
less, actions and inform the dowser that he is uninsulated :
immediately the rod will dip. Nevertheless throughout the
experiment the dowser was uniformly insulated. This simple
test has been repeatedly carried out and proves in an incontro-
vertible manner that what causes the rod to move under these
circumstances is not electricity but the dowser’s own ideas,
whether conscious or subconscious. This opinion gains strong
support from an equally simple experiment described by Sir
E. B. Tylor, whose clear intellect and power of discrimination
led him to this view as far back as 1883. He said in a lecture
given at the University Museum, Oxford: ‘ That the spring
or other object sought has really no effect on the instrument,
but that its dipping has to do with the seeker, is sufficiently
shown by its being considered to act with the most dissimilar
objects—a spring of water, a vein of ore, a piece of metal, a
dead body—which have, however, this in common, that they
are what the dowser is in search of. It does not appear that
he fraudulently moves the rod, but my sensations led me to
agree with Chevreul that the slight movements of the hands
are unconsciously guided to accumulate into impulses sufficient
to cause the twig to dip or rise. I noticed that when I could
allow my attention to stray, the rod would from time to time


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 253


move in my hands in a way so lifelike that an uneducated person
might well suppose the movements to be spontaneous. It
is hardly necessary to say that the rod always moves where
the bearer’s mind suggests an object. In the present’case the
special business of the dowser was to find springs of water,
and his difficulty was to distinguish between the mere top
springs, which though acting on the rod were of course practic-
ally worthless, and the valuable main springs which would
repay the sinking of a well. In the trial an incident occurred
which threw light on the whole operation. The rod when
brought over my watch, dipped strongly, and the dowser
looking up at me with innocent archness said: ‘ You see, sir,
it’s just over the mainspring of your watch.’ The remark
showed how his mind was so simply controlled by association
of ideas, that he expected the same action from a main spring
of water and of a watch, their likeness of name quite overriding
their unlikeness of nature. Nothing could have better shown
at once the man’s sincerity and the purely ideal character of
his craft, nor does one often meet with a more perfect illustra-
tion of the state of mind where magic has its origin in delusive
analogy, whether of things or of their names.’’?

Those theories which posit a magnetic, radio-active or other
emanation from water, and the vibratory theory of Sir W. H.
Preece, cannot be so easily disposed of. The case against them
is based on the fact that the dowser is not only able to find
underground water, but can also find mineral veins, coal, oil
and petroleum, hidden coins and any object or substance what-
ever on which the dowser’s intention is fixed.


§ 3. DowsING FOR MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS


We are obliged to relegate for brief mention many now
subsidiary uses of dowsing. We have seen that at one time
the rod was exclusively used for the finding of minerals. This
use has now almost entirely died out, probably because of the
very exact knowledge we now possess of the location of such
mineral deposits. Nevertheless occasional use of the rod for
this purpose still occurs. One of the most successful practi-
tioners of dowsing for metals in contemporary days was a
dowser named Hazel who lived near Bristol until his death in
zg00. A record of general observations and experiments with
Hazel has been kindly made by Mr W. Pole Routh, of Reading.
Again, a report has reached us of a recent discovery of gold by
means of dowsing in the Curone Valley in Piedmont, some

1“ Anthropology,’’ Nature (1883), xxviii. 58.


254 THE DIVINING-ROD


miles from Alessandria. Mrs Greig, of Mill, South Zeal, Oke-
hampton, Devonshire, has had some interesting successes in
the discovery of underground coal, and has proved equally
successful in some experiments carried out with her by Colonel
W. G. Lowther, J.P., for the discovery of metals. In this
connexion it may be interesting to observe that early in 1917
Sir William Barrett had the idea that submarines and mines
might be discovered from the surface of the water by means
of dowsing ; after consultation with Sir Oliver Lodge the idea
was put before the Admiralty Board of Invention and Research,
who authorized experiments to be made, which, however,
owing to the expense involved,
did not take place.

Dowsing has also been ap-
plied in the American conti-
nents to the finding of mineral
waters (a case of which will be
found in Appendix B), oil and
petroleum. Several accounts
of these last applications have
reached us which describe suc-
cesses, more particularly in
Peru; and Mr Frank N. Hales
of Armstrong, British Colum-
bia, has kindly sent an account
of the achievement of an oil-
dowser in California, who
states that he learnt his art in

Fic. 65. China. But with all these

THE ROD ASHELDBYAGERMANMiInER forms we cannot deal. We
C. Sterne, Die Wahrsagung (1862), p. 88 may conclude this brief survey
of the varied uses of dowsing

by quoting an extremely interesting and valuable relation of
Sir Herbert Maxwell (also independently described in a letter by
Andrew Lang), from which it will be seen that Aymar’s tracing
of human beings by means of his rod is not a solitary case.
It may be mentioned that the Mr Howson referred to has sub-
sequently carried out a number of experiments in dowsing
which show that his achievements in the following case are
far from unique. Sir Herbert’s story opens with an account
of cases of water-dowsing, which are worth reproducing, though
we have not obtained independent testimony: ‘‘ Our County
Council having condemned open springs for the domestic
supply of water and called upon landowners to provide covered
wells, I found myself under the necessity of sinking no fewer


THE RATIONALE OF .DOWSING 255


than ninety-five wells. In ninety-three cases water was found
without difficulty ; wells were sunk and equipped at an average
cost of {25, or £2,375 in all. But on two farms we were
defeated, we failed utterly to hit upon a supply.

Hearing of our dilemma, Mr Howson, a gentleman of Lanca-
shire, most kindly offered his assistance as an amateur dowser.
He had never been on the ground before,} but he came, he
saw, he conquered. He walked at high speed over the fields
quartering the ground as a well-trained pointer might do,
and carrying before him, not the traditional forked hazel rod,
but a piece of stout twisted wire, bent to form an acute angle,
with an end held in either hand. On both farms he indicated
a spot where we should sink a well; we did so and found
an ample supply in each place, which has never failed in the
ten years that have gone
by since.

Some years previously,
desiring to sink a well in
the garden, I had availed
myself of the power of a
lady friend who had the
gift of ‘dowsing’. She
went all over the ground,
and her rod (an orthodox
hazel this time) indicated
one spot, and one only,
where water would be found.
The well was never sunk,
and I bethought me of trying whether Mr Howson’s wire
would correspond in its action with that of the lady’s hazel.
I took him over the whole ground, and, sure enough, at the
very same spot his index turned smartly up... .

We were sitting at luncheon one day, eight or ten of us, when
Mr Howson asked whether we would care to see some further
experiments with the divining rod. Of course we agreed. He
then said that if he might take the ‘ power ’ of any one present
by touching him or her with the point of the wire that served
him as a rod, that person might go out into the park or woods
or anywhere and that he would follow his or her footsteps at
any time within, I think he said, 36 hours. So we sent out a
young lady, whose ‘ power ’ he took in the manner prescribed,
pressing the point of the wire on her arm. We gave her a ten


Fic. 66.
A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY FRENCH Rop


P. Garnier, Dissertation (1692), p. 32


1 The geological foundation is lower Silurian rock, overlaid with
glacial drift, the surface soil or tilth being rather light gravelly loam.
The land lies in a series of low ridges, and is under arable rotation.


256 THE DIVINING-ROD


minutes start, and then set forth in pursuit, guided by the
diviner. It was impossible that there should be any collusion
between pursuer and pursued, for it was I who asked the lady
to submit to the experiment, and Mr Howson had never met
her till just before we sat down to luncheon. It was equally
impossible that he should have seen from his seat at the table
the direction she took in her flight ; yet he hit the trail at
once, followed it step by step, the index pointing upward when
he was right and rising to horizontal when he was astray.
Our operator followed that young woman across a wide lawn,
into a wood on the far side, where she had described a consider-


able circuit, returning to the flower-garden near the house. -


Here Mr Howson got confused. ‘There are several tracks
here,’ said he ; ‘I amafraid Iam beaten this time.’ It turned
out that the young lady had been in the garden before luncheon
gathering flowers !

The next chase ended more satisfactorily. A male member
of the party was sent forth, his ‘ power’ having been duly
taken, and, after prolonged pursuit, was run to ground... .

Even more perplexing was Mr Howson’s next demonstration
of his power. He bade us arrange round a table a number
of pieces of crockery—porcelain, delft, stoneware, etc., three or
four ofeach manufacture. We didso, and allowed the operator
to ‘take the power’ of one piece of a set. He was then
brought into the room blindfold, was led round the table, and
with his rod picked out the pieces of the set of which he had
taken the ‘ power.’’’ Sir Herbert Maxwell proceeds to describe
further and equally interesting experiments of the same nature.!


§ 4. DowsING FoR HIDDEN AND Lost OBJECTS


There is a large body of evidence showing that the dowser
succeeds equally well in finding hidden or lost objects as in
finding underground water, but one need do no more than
quote a few typical instances. Thus Mr T. Forder Plowman
writes : “‘Some time ago I met a personal friend, Mr William
Brown, of Middlehill House, Box, at the Board Room of the
G.W.R. Company, at Bristol, whither we had both come to
attend a meeting, quite unconnected with either water or
divining. While we were waiting, some one called to see Mr
Brown, and before this person left my friend asked me if I had
ever seen a water diviner, as he could show me one. I replied
that I had heard of such persons, but had never dropped across
them. He then introduced me to John Mullins, who, he


1 Memoirs of the Months (1897-1922), vi. 171-174.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 257


said, had been most successful in finding water on his property.
After I had had some conversation with Mullins, my friend
asked him to leave the room for a few moments. When he
had done so Mr Brown informed me that, although Mullins
would not bind himself to find anything but water, he had
had proof of his capacity to discover hidden metal, and he
would test it in my presence. He then took three sovereigns
from his purse and placed them in a line, and several feet apart,
underneath the Turkey carpet. I may say that the door of
the room was closed, and that no one could observe our pro-
ceedings through the keyhole, as it did not command the end
of the room we were in. We then called Mullins in, and asked
him to use his rod along the left-hand side of the room. He
took a forked twig from his pocket and proceeded up the room
with it, holding it in front of him as I have described. It
showed no agitation at first, but soon did so, and we marked
the spot witha piece of paper. Twice afterwards this occurred,
and Mullins said he had no doubt but that he had come across
some water conveyed under the flooring, probably the supply
to a cistern. We then turned up the carpet and found the
sovereigns on the spots indicated by the rod.’’!

Mr Brown carried out another interesting experiment of this
nature, which he describes in a letter. In Mullins’s absence he
and some others who were present placed ten stones on the
road, putting a sovereign under each of three of these stones.
When Mullins came he was asked to pass his rod over these
stones, the experiment having been explained to him, and
without hesitation gave correct indications. When he came
to a stone under which there was no sovereign he at once said,
‘* Nothing here master,’’ but when he came to the others he
remarked, “‘ All right, master, thankee,”’ turned the stone over
and put the sovereign in his pocket.

A number of similar incidents in finding coins, drain-pipes and
the like, have been described incidentally in previous chapters.
The following one is typical ; Mr Bruce of Norton Hall, Glou-
cester, writes: ‘‘ Mullins also found a half-sovereign I had
buried in a walk we were then making. I would have lost
the half-sovereign if it had not been for Mullins, as I was so
careful not to put any mark [on the place where it has been
hidden] that I was not able to find the place myself, and when
Mullins stopped and said it was under his foot, I thought he
was wrong, but there it was!”

In May 1909 a number of scientists and the three dowsers,

1“ The Divining Rod,”’ Proceedings of the Bath Natural History and
Antiquarian Field Club (1889), vi. 414-415.

17


258 ~ JHE DIVINING-ROD


Mr J. F. Young, of Llanelly, Mr Ede, of Arundel, and Mr ae
Farndell, of Littlehampton, gathered in the Caxton Hall,
Westminster, for the purpose of carrying out set experiments
such as those described above. One of the experiments was
as follows: A coin was to be hidden in some part of the room
in the absence of the dowsers and while all those present in
the room looked out of the window, the person hiding the coin
was then to leave the room, and one of the dowsers called in
to try and find the coin. This was done five times: first the
coin was hidden by Sir William Barrett beneath an article
lying on a chair in the large Council Room, 45 other chairs
being similarly covered. The odds against finding the coin
at the first venture were thus 45 to 1, but when Mr Young
was called in he immediately indicated the correct chair. Mr
Young again left the room, accompanied by a guardian, and
the coin was hidden under another chair, which was again
correctly indicated by Mr Young. The odds against two such
consecutive successes being due to chance coincidence are 2,025
to 1. A third experiment was made with Mr Young, and this
time a sceptical gentleman, Mr A. E. Best, hid the sovereign,
the dowsers being absent and all those present looking out
of the window. Mr Best then left the room and the dowser
came in and fixed on a certain chair. This was wrong, but
when Mr Best came in he said he had first put it there and
then removed it to another chair. Without any information
being given to the dowser he was asked to try again to find
the coin, which he did correctly. There would be good reason
to consider this as two distinct, and even specially instructive,
successes, but reckoning it merely as a success at the second
attempt and reckoning the odds against such a success as being
20 to 1, the odds against the results at the end of the third
experiment being due to hazard are 40,500 to 1. The fourth
time the coin was hidden by Mr H. May and again found at
the first trial by Mr Young. On the fifth and last trial the
sovereign was secreted by Mr R. F. Duke, F.G.S., and found
at the first attempt by Mr Ede. At the end of the experiment
the odds against the results being purely fortuitous were
over 80,000,000 to I, presenting on absolute moral certitude
that the dowser is able to find hidden objects. M. Charles
Richet has carried out very similar experiments,! and among
dowsers who have kindly submitted to such tests may be men-
tioned Mr R. G. D. Tosswill, of Budleigh Salterton, Mr Jermans,
F.R.I.B.A. of Exeter, and Mr Young, some of whose successes


* “La Suggestion mentale,” Revue Philosophique (1884), xviii. 639
et seq.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 259


have just been recorded and who conducted, with himself as
subject, many other similar experiments.

The Rev. H. J. T. Tringham, of Long Cross Vicarage, Chertsey,
is an amateur dowser, and has carried out some interesting
experiments, some of which he describes in the following letter
(dated the 21st of January 1922): “‘ Last night I was making


Fic. 67. THE Rop AS HELD BY GABRIEL DE MORTILLET: First
POSITION


Fic. 68. Tur Rop as HELD BY GABRIEL DE MoRTILLET: SECOND
PosITION


Fic. 69. THE Rop aS HELD BY GABRIEL DE MoRTILLET: THIRD
PosiTIon


From his Histoire de l’hydroscopie (1849), Frontispiece


the test [by dowsing] over a lot of coins—silver and copper,
and the rod moved in a lively fashion, but I found . . . that
it would only work if the thought of metal was in my mind.
If I thought of water it would not work for metal, and vice
versa. Well, that is weird enough, but it occurred to me
that I might be deceiving myself as to the movement of the
rod over the coins, more especially when I found that to get


260 THE DIVINING-ROD


it to operate I had to think of the particular metal of which
the coins were made! So I devised a test. I made parcels’
of silver coins and parcels of copper coins, and ‘ jumbled ’
them up together so that I had not the least idea which metal
any one of them contained. Then I selected one at hazard,
put it on the floor and tried the rod over it, thinking of silver.
‘Nothing doing,’ as the boys say. Changed my thought to
copper, and the rod moved. Copper it was. I tried each
packet in turn and the rod never made a mistake! This is
rather uncanny, but fascinating. I tried with pewter, and with
an ordinary tin, and got no result.”

Finally, under this head, may be quoted the following case
of finding a lost jewel by dowsing. Miss F. M. Turner, of
Hampton Court, near Worcester, writes on the 11th of April
tg1r1: “A little while ago a valuable turquoise and diamond
ring was lost, on a hockey ground, by the daughter of the
Vicar of Pershore, in Worcestershire. The ring had been given
to her to take care of while her friend was playing hockey,
and the loser was naturally greatly distressed. Long and
repeated search was immediately made for the missing ring,
but it was without result, and all hope of ever seeing the ring
again was abandoned. The loser one day chanced to hear
of my ‘divining’ powers, and at once wrote to me, and I
consented to go and see if I could help in such a minute search.
The day was a very stormy one, and I had only time to carefully
walk backward and forward by the pavilion and mark one
place where my rod turned in my hand, when a very heavy
storm of hail and rain came on, and when it was over the
ground was so wet and muddy we could not properly examine
the spot I had marked—also, I had to catch my train. Next
day the lady and her sister went back to the place with a
garden fork, and the very first sod they moved contained the
ring ; it had been trodden into the ground half an inch, and
was only three inches away from the spot marked by me the
day before . . . I must confess that I was as surprised as
everyone else that such a small thing as a ring could be found
by the rod in such a large tract of ground as the hockey field.”
These facts were duly confirmed by a letter from the lady in
question, Miss Mary Lawson.


§ 5. CRYPTESTHESIA IN DOWSING


The facts put forward in §§ 3 and 4 seem to us to prove in no
uncertain manner that the phenomena of dowsing cannot be
due to any kind of emanation or radiation. Sir W. H. Preece’s


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 261


theory that the success of the dowser is due to an hyperesthetic
perception of the vibrations produced by underground water
is readily traversed by the dowser’s success in finding a hidden
object or underground mineral vein, which produce no vibra-
tions. Similarly, granting what is in itself a quite unfounded
supposition, that underground water in some way throws out
some kind of emanation which is hyperesthetically cognized
by the dowser, how would this cover the finding of other things
than water? There can be no form of emanation known to
science produced equally by all forms of matter and affecting
equally all forms of matter. To say, therefore, that dowsing
is due to an aqueous emanation or radiation is a mere termino-
logical perversity. |

Before proceeding to discuss our own theory a further
series of facts has to be put forward. The reader will have
noticed in the case of the boy Guy Fenley and in a few others
that the dowser speaks of, or is spoken of, as “seeing ”’ or
“ perceiving ’’ the underground water or other objective. In
the case of Miss Miles’s discovery of a lost cistern for Mrs Bat-
son, Miss Miles wrote that when she came near the spot she
“‘ saw the tank unmistakeably, it appeared large with a rounded
top and something branching away from it.’’ This was, in
fact, the appearance ofthecistern. Arising from this statement
an experiment was made with Miss Miles, in which a coin was
hidden under a carpet in Miss Miles’s absence. When she came
in, without any possibility of unconscious guidance being given,
she correctly described the spot where the coin was hidden,
saying as she closed her eyes fora moment: ‘I see it under
the corner of that rug.’”’ This test was twice repeated with
equal success, and when the very large number of places suitable
for hiding a coin in an ordinary living room is remembered,
this becomes a very valuable piece of evidence.

The following case of a boy in South Africa may be compared :
Professor R. F. A. Hoernlé, of Armstrong College, Newcastle-
on-Tyne, writes (22nd of December 1912) : “‘ In October, IgI1,
about 24 months before I left S. Africa (Cape Town) for good,
I received a letter (in Dutch) from a resident at Paarl, a small
country town about 60 miles from Cape Town [actually 30
miles E.N.E.], in which he told me of a boy, aged about 11
(I think) who could find water by ‘seeing’ it. On my taking
the letter to Mr J. Du Toit, Professor of Dutch at the South
African College, Cape Town, I learnt that the case was well
known to the Professor, because the boy in question lives in
the Orange Free State on a farm close to one belonging to Prof.
Du Toit’s brother.


262 THE DIVINING-ROD


I summarise the facts as told me by Prof. Du Toit. When
the boy was about 5 years of age, his father, finding the three
wells on his farm inadequate, started digging for another
without success. The boy came running to his mother : ‘ Why
does father dig there? There is no water there. He ought
to dig here. There is water here,’ and he pointed to a spot some
yards away from where the father was digging. At first no
one paid any attention, taking it for childish prattle. But the
boy insisted, and his curiously positive conviction finally
impressed the parents so much that they dug at the spot
indicated, where, in due course, they struck a plentiful supply.
At first they were upset, believing it—as ‘ backveld’ Boers
are quite likely to do—a case of diabolical possession, but the
minister of the Dutch Reformed Church had the good sense
to reassure them. The story presently came to be hinted
about the countryside ; other farmers, either from curiosity
or because themselves in need of fresh wells, asked the boy
to visit their farms and indicate water. As a result, the
parents soon lost their superstitious terror, and in fact ended
by making a business of their son’s ‘ gift ’,—by now, no doubt,
regarded as ‘divine.’ At any rate, I was told that the fee—
payable to the father—is £5 for three indications ; money
returned in case of failure. Many farmers, according to my in-
formant, and also villages have successfully availed themselves
of the boy’s services. Of failures I could hear nothing—only
of an alleged failure. When that was reported to the boy he
insisted that they must have dug at the wrong spot, and revisit-
ing the locality, he is said to have indicated as the original spot
a spot about one yard away from the one where the people
had dug, and at this original spot water was duly found.

The boy employs no rod or any other instrument or device.
He is said to ‘see’ the water simply as if there were no solid
soil between him and it at all. He will point to the slope of
a ‘kopje’ and trace the line of a subterranean water-course,
as if it wereon the surface. And he speaks of seeing the water
‘gleam ’and sparkle as if it were in the sunlight. He estimates
the volume at least sufficiently to advise his employers whether
it is worth their while to dig or not. I could not get certain
evidence as to whether he can tell accurately how deep down
they have to dig before they strike water. Also, I could not
ascertain whether he is in a trance or in any other way in
an abnormal condition when ‘seeing’ water. But he was de-
scribed as, apart from the gift, a perfectly normal and healthy
ey Needless to say, he has no geological knowledge of any

Gi"


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 263


There is no lack of historical evidence for this method of
dowsing by “‘ seeing ” the water and the like. In Appendix
A are discussed the Spanish dowsers known as Zahoris, or clear-
seers. In the eighteenth century there was Jean Jacques
Parangue in France and the woman Pedegacha ? in Portugal ;
and in Switzerland in the first half of the nineteenth century
occurred the striking case of Katharina Beutler and Anna Maria
Briegger,* both of Thurgovia. In none of these cases, however,
is the evidence sufficiently ample to justify its being discussed
here. By a curious chance that is not the case in an incident
recorded by Dr Ashburner. This writer, in considering the
facts of dowsing, gives a remarkable instance of a girl who,
when mesmerised (the word was still fashionable when he wrote),
appeared to be an excellent dowser ; in the hypnotic trance,
when the rod moved in her hands, she exclaimed that she saw
the water a few feet beneath the surface, and gave a vivid
description of it. Dr Ashburner quotes in full the letter he
had received from a lady, a friend of his, giving a minute
account of this experiment, which was made in a field adjoining
the lady’s house in Hertfordshire. At the spot where the rod
turned and the girl declared that she saw the water, a well
was dug, and an abundant supply of good water was found
a few feet below the surface, though previously the lady states
that they had “ very bad water and had long been unable to
find a good spring.” 4

This took place in the middle of the last century and it seemed
hopeless to obtain any confirmation of the case, especially as
Dr Ashburner gives no names. But by a fortunate chance
a letter was sent to Sir William Barrett from a lady living at
Waterford, who writing to a friend 4 propos of his first report
on dowsing, gave an account of a visit she paid in 1847 to her
aunt in Hertfordshire, Miss B., and narrates the very circum-
stance described by Ashburner. The writer confirms several


1 See Gazette de France (12th of June 1772); Mercure de France
(1772), i. 137, ii. 169-173 ; — Saurey, L’Hydroscope et le ventriloque
(1772) ; Histoire @une jeune anglaise (1773).

2 Mercure de France (1725), li. 2120-2125; (1728), i. 1175-1177;
Mémoire instructif pour un voyageur (1738), i. 114, 120; Rozier, Intro-
duction aux observations sur la physique (1772), ii. 255-260.

8 Morgenblatt (1810), iv. 1237-1244; L. Oken, ‘“‘ Die Rhabdomantin
Beutler,’ Isis (1818), II. i. 140-146; J. H. D. Zschokke, Ueberliefer-
ungen zuv Geschichte unsere Zeit (1818), pp. 331-335 ; 1d., Eine Selbst-
schau (1842), i. 226-227, ii. 172; J. F. Weisse, Evfahrungen wiber
arzneiverstandige Somnambulen (1819), pp. 75-84.

4 C. von Reichenbach, Physico-physiological Researches, ed. by J.
Ashburner (1850-1851), pp. 90-106,


264 THE DIVINING-ROD


of his statements, and it was found that she was unaware that
Ashburner had written anything on the subject.

In view of these facts it seemed desirable to arrange a set
experiment along these lines; but it is almost impossible to
induce a professional dowser to submit to such a test, because
it requires a good deal of time, patience and intelligence: the
patience and the intelligence he very often does not possess
and the time he can more profitably dispose of in dowsing for
water. It was decided therefore to have recourse toan amateur ;
about this time was received the following letter from Mr F.
J. Young: ‘‘ In the year 1893 I had a remarkable experience
when out water-finding with the rod.... I found that
after ‘setting’ myself to use the rod, 7.e., getting into an
abstracted mental condition, lost to all around, when, or just
before, the rod turned, I could—as it were clairvoyantly—see
the underground springs and actually appeared able to trace
them out as I walked along. My friend Mr Robertson, who,
as you are aware, also uses the rod with success as an amateur
water-finder, tells me he also had a similar experience, and
we have since read that a ‘ diviner ’ named Adams,a Somerset
man, frequently asserted the same thing.”

It was therefore decided to ask Mr Young to submit to some
experiments, to which he readily consented. The method was
this: he was asked to try whether a pencil held in his hand
would write automatically certain words or numbers that would
be enclosed in a sealed envelope. Some words of three letters
were therefore written in capital letters, the paper placed
between the folds of a piece of thick paper and then enclosed
in an opaque envelope which was securely fastened and sealed
with a private seal. Three such envelopes were posted to Mr
Young. He replied: “On receiving your letter I gave the
envelopes to my sister-in-law, who took charge of them till I
was ready to make the experiment. When at leisure in the
evening she gave me one of the envelopes marked (3), which
I placed inside my cap, and put cap and envelope on the top
of my bald head. I sat at a table, as usual, with a pencil in
my hand, and made my mind as blank as possible, patiently
waiting till my hand appeared controlled to write without
any volition on my part. After waiting for a little while my
hand suddenly scribbled out, on an old postcard which was
lying near, the enclosed, which looks like ONW, or else the
last letter is E, ONE. I send the postcard to you with the
scribble on it. Will you please say what the word is? I
return the envelope.

I found the experiment very tiring, as if some vital force


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 265


were exhausted, and will try the other envelopes another time.

P.S. Before posting this letter, I made a second experiment
with another of your envelopes, the one marked (2). First
I tried with the rod in my hands, my sister slowly repeated
the alphabet aloud; this she did three or four times. After
the first repetition the rod moved at the letters A, B and C
and no others. I then tried automatic writing with my eyes
shut ; the enclosed came, starting from the x—it looks like A.


giv &


Fic. 70. First EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PLACED IN THE ENVELOPE


On,


Fic. 71. First EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PRODUCED BY Mr YOUNG


Bae’


Fic. 72. SECOND EXPERIMENT: LETTERS PLACED IN THE ENVELOPE


ee AG


iGa 73: Fic. 74.
SECOND EXPERIMENT: LETTERS SECOND EXPERIMENT: LETTERS
PRODUCED BY MR YOUNG AT THE PRODUCED BY MR YOUNG AT THE
First ATTEMPT SECOND ATTEMPT


B. On a second attempt the same letters came somewhat
clearer.”

On receiving the envelopes they were carefully examined and
found not to have been tampered with in any way. They were
then opened and in No. 3 was found the word ONE, and in
No. 2 the word CAB. Figs. 70-74 are facsimiles of the original
and of the writing sent by Mr Young. Sir William Barrett,
who conducted this experiment, had no idea which of numerous
words he had written was in the envelopes he had sent. The


266 THE DIVINING-ROD


experiment, therefore, was a strikingly successful one. Unfor-
tunately, before Mr Young could proceed to the third envelope,
illness and death invaded his house, and the experiments were
laid aside and forgotten. Before this experiment Mr Young
had made others of a similar nature, which are, however,
recorded on his sole authority. Mr Young was a man of
unquestionable integrity, who devoted many years to this
problem, not only without any kind of gain but also without
gaining, or seeking, notoriety. Nevertheless, the results must
be taken for what they are worth. He wrote on the 5th of
January 1900: “ I madea few trials this evening. I cut some
squares of paper all alike, put a number of one figure on each,
then turned the squares upside down, shuffled them about in
every way, and then picked up one of the squares with my eyes
closed, put it on the top of my head and placed my cap on,
it fitting close to the crown of my head. Then I made myself
as passive as possible, and either slowly repeated the figures
till a certain one seemed to be right, or the impression of a
particular figure came as soon as I put the cap on my head ;
when it came thus quickly, it was invariably right. This is the
result, and the order in which I took up the figures, of course
one at a time. x denotes a wrong guess:
olz[6|:
Ox Ocean


4 | 7 | 5 | 3
4171/5 |x
The experiment was very exhausting, so that I could not go
on any longer.”

Finally under this head may be quoted the following passage
from a statement kindly sent by Professor E. Garnett, Principal
of the Pretoria Normal College and Professor of Education
at the Transvaal University College. We have not obtained
independent verification of his statement, but the facts are
carefully recorded. Professor Garnett (writing from Alandale,
Grahamstown, on the 3rd of February 1924), after describing
various discoveries of note made by his eighteen-year-old son
Edward Oscar Garnett, the manner in which he discovered
his ability to dowse, and his procedure and sensations, proceeds :
“During the past few months, my son has discovered (again
trying simple tests by way of amusement) that in reply to
definite questions the rod behaves as planchette.

The method he adopts is as follows :


Figure on square . 2
Figure guessed . : Bie


2
2


The rod is held at forehead level, almost vertical.
Questions are asked in usual tone and pitch of voice.
For ‘ Yes’ the rod moves forward and downward.
For ‘No’ the rod moves backward and downward.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 267


The first trials were of a very simple and easily verified nature.
During the last five weeks the following examination results
were predicted, and the fulfilment realized within the past
fortnight, viz.,

(1) His sister Kathleen Erica’s passing the Cape University

Junior Matriculation, Class I.
(2) His friend Barbara Bell-John’s passing the Transvaal
Matriculation.

Occasionally the answers were given by the Morse Code
which my son knows, a tremor representing the dot, a sharp
downward stroke the dash.”


§6. THE CRYPTESTHETIC THEORY OF DoWSING


The several categories of phenomena surveyed above appear
to us to lead inevitably to the conclusion that no physical
theory can cover the facts. In our view the phenomena of
dowsing are due to the following causative chain of psycho-
logical and physiological happenings : a suggestion is received by
the dowser’s subconsciousness by means of a sensibility as yet
unknown to us and therefore admirably named by M. Richet
cryptesthesia (xevatdc, hidden + aioOyotc, perception); the
knowledge thus supernormally obtained can become conscious
in several ways: (1) if the person is one whose access to, and
ability to become conscious of, knowledge in his subconscious-
ness is more continuous and complete than those of the normal
person, the cryptesthetic suggestion received by his subcon-
sciousness can almost simultaneously become conscious either
by a purely abstract cognition or by means of a visualisation
or even by means ofan hallucination of one or more of the senses.
Under this head would come many of those phenomena which
we have considered in which the dowser simply “‘ knows ’’ when
he has discovered the object of his search or “sees ’’ it.

Such cases, however, are exceptional, and the dowser gener-
ally becomes conscious of the subconscious suggestion, (2) by
means of unconscious, automatic movements such as those
which provide the phenomena of automatic writing, of the
planchette, of the pendule explorateur, and of all those things
which Sir William Barrett has named autoscopes, including,
of course, the dowsing-rod. Intermediately between these
alternatives may be placed (3) those reactions of the subcon-
scious suggestion which cause the phenomena which may be
comprehensively described as the malaise of the dowser.

In short, we claim that dowsing is a purely psychological
problem, that all its phenomena find their origin in the dowser’s


268 THE DIVINING-ROD


mind, that no physical theory can bear close consideration,
and that the movements of the rod and of the dowser have no
more direct relation to the discovery of, say, water than as
giving physical and visible expression to a mental and abstract
cognition.

Much evidence put forward in this chapter and the previous
one obviously can bear no other interpretation. How else can
the simple experiment of insulating and uninsulating the dowser
be explained? Nevertheless this theory has been strongly
criticised, but before turning to these criticisms we may briefly
review some of the support this view has received. Over two
centuries ago Zeidler pointed out that the rod should not be
asked questions transcending human intelligence, ‘for it is
your own spirit that answers; you collect your mind, and it
answers the rod according to the nature of the spirit.’’+ Sir
Lauder Brunton has well expressed this theory in writing:
“T am inclined to think that the success of the divining rod,
in some hands, for finding water or even for tracing criminals,
is due to its causing involuntary muscular action, and thus
enabling the person using it to consciously recognise that
impressions have been made upon him which would otherwise
never have arisen above the state of sub-consciousness.”’ ?
This is the view endorsed by M. Charles Richet,® and finally
may be quoted a passage by a German writer. In Germany
nearly all students of this subject are still hankering after
electrical and magnetic theories, a circumstance which gives
the following passage (with the terminology of which we dis-
agree) all the more value: ‘The dowsing-rod is only an
auxiliary meant to intensify the almost unnoticeable change
in the physiological condition of the body, and to visualise
more strongly the unconscious action of the muscles, the indica-
tion of a nervous stimulation of the body, as Heim very rightly
remarks. The fact that the rod generally turns upwards in
France and downwards in Germany is another clear proof
that in dowsing it is only an unconscious physiological change,
and that the whole act is of a subjective nature, and the mystic
rod is but a means to fix the attention and to magnify by lever-
age the feeble motions of the muscles—an instrument which
can be dispensed with after adequate practice.” 4

1 Pantomysterium (1700), c. 6.

* “ Truth and Delusion,”’ The Universal Review (18809), iii. 54.

43 See e.g., Tvaité de métapsychique (1923), pp. 291 et seg.; see also
Pierre Janet, L’auiomatisme psychologique (1889), pp. 367 et seg.; J.
Grasset, L’occultisme hier et aujourd’hui (1908), pp. 112 et seq.; id.,
Le spivitisme devant la science (1904), pp. 226 ef seq.


“ R. Hennig, Wunder und Wissenschaft (1904), pp. 135-136. The
translation is not ours.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 269


§ 7. CRITICISMS OF THE CRYPTESTHETIC THEORY


The central criticism directed at the theory we have just
outlined is a fundamental one, which, if it could be sustained,
would nullify all that we have so far said. The critics who
follow this line (the earliest of them was Mr E. T. Bennet) }
state in effect that unconscious muscular action is not capable
of producing some of the movements of the rod that have been
observed, and that have been described above, and particularly
that such unconscious muscular action does not account for
the phenomena of the transmission of the movements of the
rod, that is, the movements of the rod in the hands of a non-
dowser when touched by a dowser (see §§ 3 and 4 in the
previous chapter).

Before meeting this criticism directly, let us consider this
important point: if the movements of the rod are not caused
by muscular action on the part of the dowser, to what cause
are they due? Mr A. P. Sinnett, the theosophist, wrote in
a letter, “. . . when you get the hazel rods twisted with a
force that seems disposed to break them it looks as if there
were some elemental agency at work and I should be inclined
to regard some of your ‘ dowsers’ as mediums rather than
clairvoyants.’’ In our opinion the phenomena known as tele-
kinesis, the movement of objects without physical contact,
rests on a sufficiently broad basis of experimental evidence to
be regarded as proved ; we therefore are not disposed to reject
a priori the suggestion that the movements of the rod are due
to a force or ectoplasm emitted by the dowser. But there is
no evidence whatever that this is the case, and an economy of
hypothesis leads us to reject this view so far as the average
case of dowsing is concerned. It must also be remembered
that the use of a rod on which such a force could exercise its
influence is not indispensable.

A view held by some persons was put forward in a letter by
A. R. Wallace to the effect that the rod is used by discarnate
intelligences. This opinion cannot be better criticised than
by quoting from a letter from Sir Oliver Lodge, whose belief
in human survival is well known : “‘ lam interested in Wallace’s
view ; suppose the dowser weve a medium, how does that explain
the movement of the stick? Does he suppose a deceased
person comes and bobs the stick about? If so how does the
deceased person know of the water? Byclairvoyance? Then
why not the dowser by clairvoyance?” In fact, we are again
at the law of economy of hypothesis.

1 Journ. S.P.R. (1897), viii. 151-155.


4


270 THE DIVINING-ROD


The theory occasionally is put forward that thought-transfer-
ence can account for the phenomena of dowsing; this idea
can be easily disposed of. Granting the possibility of thought-
transference, and granting that this may be the explanation
when some person living or dead knows the whereabouts of
the object looked for, thought-transference cannot account
for the finding of underground water, metals and the like,
and of lost objects.


§ 8. Unconscious Muscular ACTION


We must now return to the contention of many critics and
nearly all dowsers that muscular action is incapable of pro-
ducing the observed movements of the rod. The dowsers
themselves express this opinion in no hesitating manner ;
thus Major Wedderburn Maxwell writes: “I have taken
hold of people by one hand and made them hold the wire
or twig in their léft hand and held the other end in my right
hand, and the wire or twig will work and twist despite what
any one does or wishes to do to prevent it.””. Dean Ovenden,
after describing some experiments which he carried out,
continues: ‘I felt a downward drag which I was unable to
resist, although employing all my muscular force in the oppo-
site direction. . . . There was, lam convinced, a force external
to myself pulling against me.”” Dr D. W. Eshelby, of Stock-
ton House, near Worcester, writing in a letter about a young
farmer named Skyrne in his neighbourhood, who is a success-
ful dowser, writes: “‘ He [Skyrne] endeavours to resist the
downward jerk of the branch. To assure myself of this I
clasped his hands in mine and then walked slowly over the
pipe of running water at night. The moment we came over
the water the sensation was as though someone had seized the
apex of the triangular branch and forcibly borne it down;
our hands resisted this downward movement, and the two
sticks gave way at the spot where they left his hands, and
showed a ‘ green-stick fracture.’ He did not move his hands
or wrists as I had hold of them and should have detected
any muscular movement sufficient to break the sticks.” The
late Sir Richard Harington, after describing his experience as a
dowser, concludes that in his opinion his experiments (which
seem quite inconclusive to us), “‘ are conclusive that in my case
at least there must be the operation of some force exterior to
my own body. ...’’ The reader will remember the Aymar-
rivalling exploits of Mr R. Howson, who subsequently agreed
to carry out some experiments ; writing of these he states that


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 271


“no muscular action can account for the turning of the rod ;
that it is due to some independent and external force, the
origin of which has yet to be discovered.”’ And he concludes
in unmistakeable and courageous terms: ‘It is not the
muscle that moves the rod but the rod that moves the muscle.”
We could quote many other letters from dowsers to the same
effect.

_ We will now pass on to evidence which shows that the
motion of the rod is really due to the muscular action of the
dowser, notwithstanding the fact that there are certain posi-
tions in which the rod is held where it seems at first sight to
be impossible for the dowser to move it. Such, for example,
as that shown in figure 34, where Stone is shown holding a thick
forked rod depending from the forefinger, second finger and
thumb of each hand. Stone himself asserts that there is no
movement of his fingers and that he holds the rod in this way
because it cannot be moved by the dowser ; but a careful eye-
witness, Mr R. J. Charleton, writes as follows: ‘‘I must
contradict the assertion that no movement of Mr Stone’s
fingers could be detected whilst he is using the divining rod.
I watched him most closely, and distinctly noticed that his
forefingers, second fingers and thumbs, between which he held
the ends of the forked stick, were strongly compressed upon
the pliant wood. At the same time there was an inward
twisting action of the fingers which had the effect of raising the
apex of the rod. Tremendous muscular force was apparently
being used, to such an extent, in-fact, that the operator’s hands
became quite swollen and tremulous when he had completed
his experiments. I have myself been able to verify this
explanation in my own person repeatedly, though I could not
move such thick twigs as Mr Stone employs, but his muscular
development is greater than mine and he is in constant
practice.’’ ;

Further testimony is afforded by Mr J. F. Young. Mr
Young was at first inclined to think that the movement of the
rod was entirely spontaneous and quite independent of the
dowser, but after his attention had been drawn to the matter,
he writes as follows: ‘I see that the motion of the rod,
which is always held in tension by the water-finder, is really
due to unconscious muscular action ; this is specially notice-
able with a watch-spring which I generally employ. In fact, I
am so convinced in this matter, after endless experiments,
that I defy any one to prove the contrary.” A Somersetshire
incumbent gives corroborative testimony, and states that,
when holding the rod in the same way as the professional


272 THE DIVINING-ROD


dowser he employed, “ the harder I grasped the stick to prevent
it turning, the more it turned, till at last it broke in two, and
hurt the hand that held it.’

But this is no new explanation of the motion of the rod,
for the fullest and best account of its motion, based upon
experimental evidence, is given by the American writer to
whom we have already referred, Mr Emerson, in the pages of
the American Journal of Science. The writer shows how
startling and apparently miraculous is the sudden motion
of the rod, in the hands of a good water-finder, and remarks
that if there be a fraud, the dowsers are themselves the dupes.
It is true, he goes on to say, that nearly every one can urge it to
_ turn in a fashion, but only in the hands of a very few does it
move, not only without urging, but contrary to their best
efforts. He himself tried again and again, but failed. At
last, one day, watching a young and successful diviner, he
noticed the peculiar spirit and air of determination with which
he handled the rod. ‘“‘ Hoping to catch his lively manner
[Mr Emerson says] I took the rod and tried my hand again.
When I got to the bank of the rivulet the rod began to move,
and I could not restrain it. He who for the first time in his life
has received an electric shock will recognise the sensation which
I experienced when I felt the limbs of the rod crawling round,
and saw the point turning down in spite of every effort my
clenched hands could make to restrain it. In this contest
between myself and the rod the bark was stripped off the twig.
The secret appeared to be to hold the rod in a spirited manner
[by this he apparently means a determined and confident,
not a weak and hesitating, manner], for since then the rod
has never failed to move in my hands, nor in the hands of
those I have instructed.’’ ?

These opinions may be supplemented by those of two
trained observers who undertook experiments for the purpose
of observing this specific point. Dr F. Purser, Professor of
Physiology at Trinity College, Dublin, conducted such an
experiment with Mr J. H. Jones, of whom we have already
several times spoken. Dr Purser reported as follows: ‘‘ The
interview with Mr Jones was held under rather unfavourable
circumstances, owing to the storm, but I think I was able to see
the movement by which the turning of the stick is effected.

The movements by which the stick is turned are: (1) A


1 Notes and Queries (1854), 1 S. x. 155.

* Cp. C, Richet, ‘‘La suggestion mentale,” Revue Philosophique
(1884), xviii. 639-640 ; M. Culpin, Spiritualism and the New Psychology
(1920), pp. 37-38.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 273


rotation of the forearms, or one of them ; (2) a flexion of the
inner fingers, by which the stick is made a lever of the first
order with very short distance between the fulcrum and the
power, or perhaps a lever of the third order. It was impossible
to follow the movements when the stick was rapidly twirled,
or when Mr Jones walked rapidly and the rod suddenly turned
and he said: ‘There is. water here.’ But when he stood
over the place where he said underground water existed, and
professed to struggle against the motion of the stick, the
movement was evident, and I had no difficulty in imitating the
movements myself, although, of course, not so dexterously as
Mr Jones did. As to whether the movements are conscious
or unconscious I cannot express any opinion,—but that the
stick 7s moved by the muscles of the arm and not by any
occult influence cannot be doubted, I think, by any reasonable
being.”’

The second opinion referred to is contained in the following
extract from the report of a small committee who, in 1894,
critically examined a dowser at work. The committee of
investigation consisted of the pathologist and the assistant
physician of one of the Bristol hospitals, Mr Mole, F.R.C.S.,
and Dr F. H. Edgeworth, the latter having made neurology
a special study, and the Rev. R. A. Chudleigh, of West Parley
Rectory, Wimborne, Dorset. They were fortunate in securing
the co-operation of a skilful amateur dowser, who placed
himself, as well as his estate’ (on the border of the Mendips),
entirely at their service. In the course of a lengthy report
Mr Chudleigh says: ‘If there be one thing which is per-
fectly clear, it is that the movement of the wand is due to an
unconscious muscular contraction, just like other muscular
contractions, except that it is unconscious.”” He goes on to
say: ‘“‘ The violent tremor which convulsed the over-strained
arm is itself enough to suggest witchcraft to an ordinary spec-
tator, and yet I am sure that it is nothing more than what is
known as muscle-clonus.’”’ Anatomical reasons are then given
to account for the sudden violent motion of the rod, and the
report continues: “A precisely analogous phenomenon is
seen in those cases where a spinal wound or a spinal poison
throws the whole body into universal spasm ; but the flexors
master the extensors and the back muscles overpower the front
ones, the result being the frightful and well-known pose called
opisthotonus.”” The writer then points out that the sudden
spontaneous tension of the muscles of the arms which occur
when the dowser believes himself to be over a spring is probably
due to auto-suggestion ; ‘‘ this auto-suggestion makes a diviner


18


274 THE. DIVINING-ROD


positively tetanic when he knows or thinks that water is
present.”’

It will be seen therefore that the assertions of the dowsers are
over-balanced by those of competent observers. And we must
therefore find the reason why so many persons feel unable to
accept the obvious and reasonable theory of unconscious
muscular action. This reason is not far to seek: the lay
person cannot believe an unconscious muscular action to be
perfectly compatible with a conscious resistance to that action.
Nevertheless the evidence that this is not only possible but
constantly done every day by everyone is overwhelming. To
take a familiar case : many persons suffer from a tic, or twitch-
ing of a muscle, as that of the eyelid, for instance. This is an
unconscious muscular action, and no amount of conscious
muscular effort will restrain that muscle from twitching.
Further, to conclude this argument, there is a simple experi-
ment that everyone can try, and which not only covers the
present point but also the apparent difficulty of the trans-
mission of unconscious muscular action.

Most people will find if they hold in their fingers a thread
which is weighted at the other end with a ring or something
of the kind, that this thread or pendule explorateur will begin
to move in a rhythmical manner. This motion is not due to
anything but unconscious muscular action, for (and this applies
equally well to the dowsing-rod) if the thread be suspended
from a fixed support, it will not move.t Thus the possibility
of unconscious muscular action is proved. Now, ifa bystander
suggests to the holder of the thread that it will move from
north to south, it will generally do so. This proves the pos-
sibility of suggestion controlling unconscious muscular action.
Further, if the holder of the thread tries by muscular effort or
passivity to stay the motion of the thread, he will invariably
fail. This proves the impossibility of conscious functions, as a
rule, controlling unconscious ones. If now a suggestion con-
cerning, say, the direction of the movement of the pendule,
be given to somebody in another room and out of hearing,
and this person returns to the room and holds the hand of
the person who is holding the thread, the thread will obey
the suggestion. This will occur if one or more persons are
interposed between the holder of the thread and the person
to whom the suggestion is given. In this way is proved the
possibility of transmitting unconscious muscular movements.
We need only add that concerning all these points there is an


» An experiment on these lines was made by Kircher three centuries
ago; see pp, 12-13 above.


THE RATIONALE OF DOWSING 275


enormous mass of evidence which can be found in the writings
of psychologists, hypnotists, psychical researchers, and others.
It would be idle to pretend that we understand the rationale
of such phenomena, but their existence no serious person can
doubt unless he be of the disposition of that observer of Bleton
who declared that he would not believe even if he saw. But
it would be equally idle to pretend that unconscious muscular
- action in itself is a complete explanation ; that is far from
being the case. To mention only one point yet to be resolved,
why does the unconscious muscular action take the form that
produces a movement ina rod? This psychological difficulty
has been very well put by Sir Charles Sherington in a letter :
““... An emotional stimulus is often directly connected
with an unwilled movement; but the movement is as a rule
such a one as without straining interpretation bears some ob-
vious significance as appropriate for circumstances likely to
be concurrent with the stimulus. It is curious to find a move-
ment connected with emotion which seems comparatively mean-
ingless. In the dowser the muscular contractions actuating
the rod do not convey any feature of particular appropriateness
to the event, e.g., discovery of water. If they—to instance
crudely—could signify the scraping of earth away to reach
water, or the cupping of the hands to drink, etc., etc., it might
be different... .” It is very difficult to say whether the
striking of the rod has more relation to its original purpose, the
indication of mineral ores, but such considerations drive to the
foundations of all our psychological knowledge, and it would
be hopeless to attempt to consider such things from the angle of
dowsing alone.


§ 9. CONCLUSION

We may now state the conclusion to which we believe an
impartial student of the facts set out in this book must come.
The dowser, in our opinion, is a person endowed with a sub-
conscious supernormal cognitive faculty, which, its nature
being unknown, we call, after Professor Richet, cryptesthesia.
By means of this cryptesthesia knowledge of whatever object
is searched for enters the dowser’s subconsciousness and is
revealed by means of an unconscious muscular reaction, or less
often by an obscure nervous sensation or emotion which
produces physiological disturbances, or very rarely by means
of direct supernormal cognition made conscious by a visualisa-
tion or hallucination.

We do not believe that the accumulation of further masses of


276 THE DIVINING-ROD


evidence, though of course this is not undesirable, will make the
argument for these contentions any stronger. All that is
required is the discovery of some fruitful generalisation which
_will permit the orthodox scientist to incorporate cryptesthesia
into the canon of accepted and indisputable scientific know-
ledge. We believe that the first movement of thought in this
direction will occur from the impossibility of finding any normal
explanation of the phenomena of dowsing.


APPENDIX A


THE ZAHORIS


A writer in the Quarterly Review for 1822 (p.373) states that ‘‘ the
faculty of using the divining rod is evidently the same as that pos-
sessed by the Spanish Zahoris, though the latter do not employ a
hazel twig.’’ The Sfectatoy, in an article on the rod (the 14th of
October 1882), also refers to the Zahoris in the same casual way, as if
every one knewall about them. On inquiry no one could give any
information beyond a reference to the meaning of the word as given
in Spanish dictionaries. Thus, in Lopes’s Spanish Dictionary the
word “ Zahori” is explained as follows: “A vulgar impostor
pretending to see things, although hidden in the bowels of the earth,
if not covered with blue cloth.”” Again, “‘ Zahoria”’ is said to be
“ The art of seeing as above. The performer must be born on Good
Friday.”’ Neuman and Baretti, in their Spanish dictionary, use
similar words, and the Dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy
has a similar description, ending, “Lynceus homo subterranea
videns.” The word “ Zahori.”’ is really from the Arabic, meaning
“clear,” “enlightened”; it was, in fact, equivalent to the term
“clairvoyant,” as that word is now used. The same root occurs in
Hebrew, and is the origin of the title Zohar, the most famous book
of the Kabbalists.

It seemed, therefore, to be a matter of historical interest to
ascertain what was known concerning these Zahoris. The earliest
account of them comes to us from Mexico in the year 1557. It is
contained in a folio volume entitled Phisica Speculatio, published
at Mexico in .1557 and written by one Alphonsus (Gutierrez) of Vera
Cruz. This work was reprinted at Salamanca in 1559. In his dis-
course on the Sou! (De Anima, lib. ii, speculatio ii, pp. 300-301
or pp. 376-377 of the Salamanca edition), Alphonsus writes as
follows :


‘“SpECULATION II OF ENCHANTERS, SALUTATORS,! AND OF THE
PEOPLE VULGARLY CALLED ZAHORIS.


There is no one who denies that there may be such an arrange-
ment in a man’s eyes, that he may be enabled to see at a great


.


1 The word salutatoy means in low Latin a “‘ pointer out.” The
index finger was called digitus salutatorius, not only from its being
used for familiar salutation, but also for pointing out.


277


278 THE DIVINING-ROD ©


distance, to which another man’s eyes cannot reach. In the same
way there may be such an arrangement as to enable a man to see an
object through some diaphanous medium, whilst other eyes are
incapable of discerning the shape of the object through the same
medium. But I cannot conceive that any one’s sight can be so
constructed that he can see an object behind a wall or any opaque
substance ; for sight is the effect either of outward transmission,
[i.e., from the eyes] as some maintain, or of inward reception, as the
majority declare. It is not clear how the shape of anything can
reach the eye, when it is hidden in the earth, and behind something
opaque and not diaphanous ; for how would it pierce through the
earth or penetrate the stone? For such shape would necessarily
be absorbed on coming in contact with an opaque body, and could
not transmit, because it is not a diaphanous body. Wherefore such
shape could not reach the eye, neither could the object itself be
seen. And I do not see how they [the Zahoris] can perceive (as
they say) abscesses or humours in the internal organs of a man,
(their sight not being impeded by the body or clothes) ; nevertheless
they themselves assert that they can, and in the same way, on
entering a temple where dead bodies lie, that they can clearly
perceive the internal organs of the corpses, if they cast their eyes
down. Nevertheless I do not give full credence to their assertions.
For these things may be illusions wrought of the devil. Neverthe-
less I do not condemn them; for I have known men otherwise
upright, who have declared they see these things. I confess I do
not know what cause can produce such natural power; for it is
not the same as that alleged by enchanters and salutators; but
is quite different, for the Zahoris say the object is made visible
by natural means, by radiating its shape to the eye; if so, it is
necessary that the medium through which it passes should be
diaphanous ; otherwise the shape does not become visible. All
philosophers say that air and water are diaphanous mediums, and
all things partake of their nature ; but the earth and opaque bodies
are not of that kind.”

Some years later a famous Jesuit of Louvain, Martin del Rio,
published his great work Disquisitionum Magicarum in three folio
volumes. In the first volume (pp. 11-12) of this work, del Rio
refers to the Zahoris (he calls them Zahuris), and the following
translation gives the principal statements he makes:

“A race of men in Spain are known who are called Zahuris ; we
may name then Lynxes ; when I was staying at Madrid in the year
1575, such a boy was to beseen there. They relate that these people
see things that are hidden in the inward bowels of the earth, veins of
water and treasures of metals, and corpses placed within sarcophagi.
This thing is most fully received and well known. Not only Pindar,
Tzetzes, and other poets have thought this possible, but philosophers
also, some of whom ascribe this power to a melancholy humour.


* [Melancholy here means madness ; as Milton says, ‘‘ Moonstruck
melancholy, moping madness,’’]


APPENDIX A 279


. . . I think they know veins of water by the vapours exhaled from
those places morning and evening. They know veins of metal
from the grass, of whatever kind, that usually grows there. Trea-
sures and corpses I would consider to be indicated by demons. . . .
They are accustomed to restrict this faculty of seeing to certain
days, the third and sixth day of the week, which is a token of a
secret pact. Besides, the redness of the eyes, which is particularly
to be observed in Zahuris, would rather injure than assist clearness
of sight.’

It is interesting to note the prevalent idea of that period, and
long afterwards, that demons have the principal hand in the dis-
covery of hidden treasure, otherwise del Rio’s conjectures indicate
shrewd observation on his part. The “redness of the eyes” is a
curious trait.

Another early reference to the Zahoris is to be found in a work
by Juan Eusebio Nieremberg, entitled Curiosa y Oculta Filosofia
(3rd edition, Madrid 1643). Chapter LX XVI of this work is de-
voted to the power of the Zahoris, and the following is a translation
of the chief portion (pp. 284-285) :

“Less is heard of the sight of the modern Zahoris, though it can-
not be taken as certain. Celio Rodiginio favours their cause,
judging that there may be a natural means of seeing through large
opaque bodies. Another attributes what they say they see to the
effect of a melancholy humour. This would be a good explanation
if facts did not follow their imagination or sight; but springs
are found where they point them out, metal where they say they see
it, and the dead with all their marks which they perceive, so that
it must be attributed to some other cause than melancholy.

But knowledge of where water is to be found underground may
be acquired without much difficulty, without its being necessary
for the sight to pierce the earth. It was the ancient office of the
Aquilegus,! whose art was the knowledge of where water was to
be found, at what depth, and of what quality it was. Marcellus
wrote of these things among the Romans, and is quoted by Cassio-
dorus. In the time of the king Theodoric a very celebrated Aquile-
gus came from Africa, whom Theodoric affectionately recommended
to Apronianus that he might give him a suitable salary. The
mode of discovering the water was by the presence of certain
herbs, briars, reeds and other green trees, by certain species of
mosquitoes, and light vapours which arose from the spot, and by
other means which they took, such as placing dry wool in certain
parts at night, well covered, to see if it would be found damp.
Sweet and salutary waters are qualified by the south and east wind,
and the heavy and less salutary fall with the north and west wind.
The same thing may be urged concerning the knowledge of mines
of metal, for there may be in the same way natural signs of them,
and certain herbs which signify their presence.

As to the assertion that the Zahoris can see the buried dead


1 [Aquilegus in Latin was one skilled in seeking out water.]


280 THE DIVINING-ROD


and certain particular marks upon them, Alphonso of Vera Cruz, in
the second book of his Anima, and Father Delrio, on the Medea of
Seneca and in the first book of his Magia, attribute this to evil
arts ; and I can see no grounds for opposing them, the more so that
the power of the Zahoris is limited to certain days, such as Tues-
days and Fridays, which to me is a suspicious circumstance ; also
the redness and inflammation of the eyes usually found among these
people seems to prove that they rather blind their sight than
sharpen it.’’

The most interesting part in this quotation is Nieremberg’s
reference to an ancient cult of water-finders, or aquilegt, as he calls
them. The famous Jesuit, Father Kircher, also refers to the
method employed by the aquilex (as he terms him) in water-
finding.

Another Spanish writer, Feyjoo y Montenegro, published a
paper entitled Vara Divinatoria, y Zahories.1 This paper is prin-
cipally concerned with the discussion of the well-known case of
Jacques Aymar, whose story was then attracting universal atten-
tion. In section VII the Zahoris are referred to, and the author
treats them with scepticism, remarking that the multitude is gener-
ally credulous, and among all people men of critical faculty and
sound judgment are few. He continues:

“‘The name Zahoris is applied to a class of men of whom it is
said that their vision penetrates opaque bodies, thus causing to
appear whatsoever may be hidden away fathoms deep below the
surface of the earth.? Perhaps we have inherited them from the
Moors, since the word Zahort seems Arabic.

It cannot be advanced that this virtue is either natural or super-
natural; consequently it must be condemned as either feigned


1 Theatro Critico Universal (1728), ix. 85-86.

2 [‘ In the past century,” one writer says, ‘‘ it is declared that there
were in Spain certain men who saw what was underground to a depth
of 20 pike handles (picas). Many philosophers failed not to discover
(as they thought) reasons for persuading people that this might happen
quite naturally.” He then states that the Mercure frangais [sic] of
the year 1728, published an account of a Portuguese lady (named
Pedegacha). ‘‘ She declared she saw what was in the earth to a
depth of thirty to forty fathoms, but as regards the human body,
she could not see into it if clothed, the clothing preventing her vision.
But the body being uncovered, she was able to observe all the interior
parts, even the abscesses or any other defect there might be, as well
in the humours or soft parts as in the solid. It may be that this fable
had its origin, not in Portugal, but in France. But this author does
not give credence to the existence of the Zahoris, justifying himself
mainly for’ his refusal of assent to my testimony, since having cited
my work, he terminates thus: ‘ The testimony of this Benedictine,
being that of a Spaniard, is of great weight to give assurance of the


falsity of this opinion.’ ’’ See Mercure de France (September 1725),
pp. 2121-2125; (June 1728), pp. 1175-1177; Mémoire instructif
pour un voyageuy (1738), i. 114, 120; — Romier, Introduction aux


observations sur la physique (1772), ii. 225-7.]


APPENDIX A . 28%


or as superstitious. It is not natural, since light does not penetrate
into the depth of opaque bodies. . . . As little can it be alleged
that the talent or power of the Zahoris is supernatural. In the first
place, it is not credible that it has God as its special author, since
it is a virtue whose only use is to serve greed. It is not announced
that the Zahoris disinter treasures to furnish assistance to the
poor, or to make war on infidels. In the second place, because,
neither in the sacred writings nor in ecclesiastical history do we read
that God has granted this virtue as a permanent habit to any of His
many illustrious servants. How then can it be believed that, while
refusing it to all these His most intimate friends, He has reserved
it for men in no way remarkable by their merits? In the third
place, supernatural graces are not limited to any particular nation,
and of Zahoris, they are said to exist only in Spain.

Among the vulgar there is the belief that God dispenses this
grace only to those who are born on a Good Friday, without con-
sidering that there should be an infinity of Zahoris, since many
there are who are born on that day. Others limit the power to the
circumstances of being born at the particular moment at which the
Passion is being chanted. Even with this restriction it would
follow that there should be in the whole extent of Spain from 700
to 800 Zahoris, since this total, more or less, results from the sup-
position that about the same number of men are born every day
and hour of the year, and that Spain (including Majorca and ex-
cluding Portugal) possesses seven and a half millions of persons,
which is the population determined by Senor Don Geronymo de
Urtariz in his excellent work, Theory and Practice of Commerce and
of Sailing. Consequently, on this computation there would not be a
province of Spain which had not four or five dozens of Zahoris.
Where are they, that we may see them? Nor can it be said that
those who pretend to this grace hide it, since God does not concede
virtues that they may be of no use.

There remains then but to say that this virtue is superstitious,
and that those who exercise it have a compact, either expressed or
implied, with the devil. In truth, the work of extracting gold from
the depths of the earth is more of a nature to be attributed to
diabolical influence than to the Divine assistance, since an abun-
dance of that precious metal rather promotes vice than favours
virtue. Such, indeed, appears to have been the thought of the
ancients when they pretended that Pluto, the infernal divinity,
was the first discoverer of mines of gold and silver.”

The author then goes on to say that if the Zahoris really do
exist, they are either wizards or rogues, and he prefers to think the
latter, as the former would involve a diabolical compact, a far
greater crime than being a mere rogue.

This extract has been quoted at some length, as it gives an
interesting picture of the habits of thought of a learned Spaniard
120 years ago. It is evident that the writer had no personal know-
ledge of the Zahoris, his information about them appearing to be
derived from traditional stories coming from a preceding century.


282 THE DIVINING-ROD


During the present century there are only casual references to the
Zahoris, and this race of pretended seers, some of whom possibly
may have had supernormal faculties, has long died out, even
the voy meaning of the word being known to comparatively
few.


1 In addition to the literature cited see Baltasar Gracian, El Criticon
(1653), Ppp. 124-43; G. C. Le Gendre, Tvaité de Opinion (1735), i.
491, 500-501 ; E. D. Hauber, Bibliotheca Acta et Scripta Magica (1739-
45), xi. 747-68, xii. 816-821, xxii. 659.


APPENDIX B


DOWSING FOR MINERAL WATER IN THE
UNITED STATES


We have had a lengthy correspondence with Mr J. C. Minor,
Vice-President of the General Carbonic Company, of 542 Fifth
Avenue, New York, with Mr Frank Whalen, of Ballston Spa, New
York, and with other gentlemen, in connexion with some remark-
able dowsing exploits that are alleged to be of daily occurrence at
Saratoga Springs and elsewhere. At this time we have not been
able to obtain all the details necessary for a reasoned statement on
the matter; but it appears to be of such great importance, that
we print certain of the letters in full.

The first letter is from Mr Minor, dated the 7th of July 1922:
“ Regarding the particular well you speak of, this was known as the
Adams Well, because we originally bought a small piece of several
acres at a sheriff sale formerly owned by one Adams. We got it
for a song, and never thought it had the slightest value. One
afternoon Mr Titus dropped in and said that somewhere on our
property he knew of a wonderful location, and evidently was desir-
ous of having us employ him to spot it, but as we then had plenty
of gas I did not care to do that, and I could not get from him any
information, except that he said no line drawn connecting any
of our present springs would come anywhere near that location.
After he went I took down our map, and the only piece of property
that in any way corresponded to his conditions was the Adams lot,
which because it was located about 30 ft. higher than any other
land we owned had never seemed worth while to me.

In 1897 my sister observed the divining rod operate, and when
she tried it it operated with her. That was the first and only
time she ever had one in her hands until the following incident.
After Mr Titus left my office I studied our maps and came to the
conclusion that the Adams lot was the only one that in any way
seemed to approach the location which he had in mind. I, there-
fore, took our engineer, with whom the rod has always operated,
but who has always scoffed at it nevertheless, and told him to
cut a rod and go over the Adams property with me. We did this
and found several places where the rod acted just like it so often
does, but presently came to a place where within a circle of perhaps
12 ft. radius he claimed the rod stayed down all the time, and
acted differently from anything he had ever seen before.

283


284 THE DIVINING-ROD


The thought came to me to check this up with my sister, because
I had always had grave doubts of the value of the rod, and thought
this would be a fine chance to check it up and see whether she also
could note that one spot was very different from the others. Now
my sister is a very calm-minded, strong-minded woman, a graduate
of the New York University Law School, and not at all a person of
an unusual temperament, and at my request she came down, and
we cut and gave her a stick, and blindfolded her before she went
to this four-acre piece. I walked beside her just simply to keep her
from stumbling, and as she proceeded she also noticed several
places where the rod went down in the ordinary way. When she
came to the place above referred to, she immediately remarked
that it felt very differently and wherever she stood in that vicinity
the rod stayed down.

I was enormously impressed by this, which I felt was the most
thorough test that could possibly be made on this matter of the
divining rod, and furthermore in my opinion it somewhat checked
up Mr Titus. Within a few days we put our drilling-machine over
there and started a well, and we got what is now known as the
Adams Well, and it was, so far as I know, the greatest gas and
mineral water well ever found in Saratoga Springs, considering
both the amount of gas and the flow of strong saline water, and
furthermore this well flowed naturally, after every other natural
flowing well in the vicinity had stopped.

A one-page article was sent out some time after that by the
Department of Agriculture showing the absurdity of divining rods,
and I then wrote them a full description of this incident, thinking
that perhaps they might allow it was not entirely absurd, but I
never got a reply.

‘I would say, of course, that in leading my sister around the
property I took especial care (I cannot say to confuse her) but to
keep her from any suggestion that there was anything out of the
ordinary going on, and I never told her anything about what was
back of it all until the test was done.

I considered that it was an absolute impossibility for her to
have duplicated the results of Fred Rabe, our engineer, by any
other means but some virtue possessed by the divining rod. Of
the nature of that virtue I am wholly ignorant, but I stand to-day
convinced that unless I had some good. reason for knowing that a
certain place would be good to drill in for water, I would first have
it checked off with a divining rod—ridiculous as it may sound. I
have other good reasons for believing in it based on the results
obtained, but this test with my sister was the thing which made
me a believer.”’

Next we have the following extracts from the letters of Mr
Whalen, dated respectively the 13th of October and the 5th of
November 1922.

“The Director of the U.S. Geoflogical] Survey writes me that
“the best minds seem to agree that’ the twig is caused to dip by
the unconscious muscular action of the dowser.


APPENDIX B 285


I wrote him that many curious facts had come to my notice,
while they were drilling for carbonic acid gas wells hereabouts :
that the procedure was about like this, 7.e., Wanting more gas,
they would send out a dowser with his stick to locate a proper
place in which to drill; before starting the drill, however, and
on the same day—or perhaps several days after—they would
send out another dowser to verify the location of the first man ;
sometimes they even sent out a third, but both 2nd and 3rd were
ignorant of the location of the predecessor. If they agreed in
the ‘location,’ the drill would be started. Generally too, the
dowsers could approximate the depth very closely at which the
drill would strike product... .

The Carbonic Acid Gas Trade (Natural) came about in this
Wway—as a business project. The mineral waters in and about
Saratoga Springs (6 m. North of here) are highly charged with
carbonic acid gas; someone discovered that discharged into an
air-tight tank something like 85% of the gas would separate from
the water in a short time. The gas was then pumped from the
‘separators ’ into ‘ gasometers’ and then condensed under pressure
into 20 Ib. tubes, and sold to soda water and soft drinks mfrs with
which they ‘charged’ their products. This soon developed into
a regular and profitable business as the demand for gas was large,
and the ‘natural’ product was so much cleaner to use, etc., etc.
These mineral waters here run in veins—not a vast lake under-
neath—so the business of ‘locating’ these veins, on which to
drill for a ‘ mineral spring’ soon drew the best ‘ dowsers’ to this
point. The next step—caused by the demand for gas—was to
start pumping, and it soon developed that many, if not all, of these
veins that were already producing, were connected, as the producer
with the largest pump soon cut off or stopped the flow from some
other producer who had no pump or one not large enough to main-
tain the status quo. This led to litigation galore, and soon the
producers were all by the ears with suits and counter suits, and
the ‘springs’ which had given Saratoga its great reputation as
a ‘ health resort ’ seemed to be in a fair way toward total ruination.
Finally the State of New York condemned the properties of all the
producers and formed them into a ‘ Reservation.’ As soon as
this was done, and the ‘ pumping’ stopped, springs that had been
dry for several years began to flow again with their own gas pres-
sure, same as in years gone by. It was in searching for the veins
on which to drill for more wells and to produce more gas that I or 2,
or even 3, ‘Dowsers’ were employed—one to search out a new
‘location ’ and the others to ‘ check him up’ and verify the result.
As these wells went from 300 to 600 or 800 feet in depth, and cost
often $1000 or so, it was simply good business to know where to drill.
There was and is a widespread popular delusion that ‘ You can put
down a well anywhere here and get mineral water.’ Those who
worked on that theory went broke. The business brought many
‘fake’ dowsers into the field too; some of them ‘ went broke’
learning that they were ‘fakes’. The best of these dowsers, the


286 THE DIVINING-ROD


reliable ones, don’t seem to want to have their business investi-
gated. They seem to fear that it will take away their means for
earning a living.

One of the latest ‘ manifestations’ that has come to my know-
ledge is this: A man in Charlton (John S. De Ridder) had a well
some hundreds of feet away from his barns, and the well did not
give him water sufficient. He called in Walter McQueen, a dowser
and a well driller who worked the stick, and he told De Ridder
there was more water to be had in that well if he went deep enough,
—it was then about 37 feet deep. The drill was started and run to
177 ft. and no more water! De Ridder began to get weary, and
sent for 50 Ibs. of dynamite, and touched off 35 lbs. at the bottom of
the hole—still no water ; then came up about half way and fired off
the 15 lbs.—no water! The next step was to come to Ballston
Spa and get Ed. Garvan, a well digger with some reputation as a
dowser, and commonly known as ‘Old Ed.’ De Ridder took
Old Ed. on to his farm—about 6 m. West of here—and turned him
loose with a switch from a peach tree (as I remember it). After
wandering around a spell Old Ed. struck a vein, and finally landed |
at a point only a few feet from De Ridder’s barn (De R. says it is
right where he would like to have one). De Ridder was sharp and
with his recent experience with McQueen in mind, said to Old Ed.,
‘Now I want to be sure about this; I’ve just been stuck for a lot
of good money and I don’t want another deal like that. Circulate
around again and see what else you can find that is better or more
certain if anything.’ So Old Ed. ‘ circulated ’ and finally came back
to that same spot as being the best to be had according to his lights.
De Ridder still cautious, said, ‘ Now I want to know the exact spot
where you would advise starting for a well. I don’t want any
mistakes’; and stooping down De Ridder kept moving his finger
along on the ground till Old Ed. indicated the ‘exact spot’, and
there De Ridder drove down a nail or peg, and covered it over with
dirt. Old Ed. said, too, that about 30 ft. would get the water.

Within a few days De Ridder got one of his neighbours to come
(name Smith, who has some reputation as a dowser), and without
letting Smith know what had been done with Old Ed., turned
Smith loose with his stick. Smith soon struck the same trail, and
landed at about the same point as Old Ed. De Ridder gave Smith
about the same line of talk as he had to Old Ed., and asked him
to ‘circulate again to make sure’, which he did, coming back
to the same spot. De Ridder got down with his finger to ‘locate
the exact spot’, same as he did with Old Ed., and when Smith
indicated that ‘exact spot’ De Ridder drove another peg. On
uncovering Old Ed’s peg, they proved to be within 3 inches of each
other. Old Ed. then put down the well on that spot, and got
plenty of water at 28 feet. Apparently there is no connection
between this well and the one that was dynamited, else the water
from the 28 feet well would run down into the 177 feet well.”

Finally we may quote from a letter from Mr Whalen of the
24th of December 1923: ‘‘ Mr Titus is (or was) a man who made his


APPENDIX B 287


living by ‘locating’ water supplies for cities and corporations.
He came into Saratoga to try and help Mr Minor as against some
other spring owners who were pumping Mr Minor’s springs away
from his (Minor’s) plant. Some years ago Titus took a contract to
supply the City of Brooklyn with water. The contract was sub-
stantially like this: ‘I will supply your city daily with so many
million gallons of water, put in a plant, operate it so many years
—so you can know you have the supply ; and then turn over to you
the R. Estate, pumps and supply plant entire for . . . millions
of dollars.’ He did the job, and then the City politicians tried to
beat him out of it, and it cost him (so he told me) $68,000 to collect
his bill.

Titus some years ago took a contract to put down a mineral
water spring—for carbonic gas supply for Saratoga parties—on
my farm, about 14 m. East of here. He got the water and gas at
864 ft. He would not start the drill, however, until the ‘ location ’
was verified by another ‘ diviner’—known as ‘ The Ferret’, and
who lived then in Syracuse. The Ferret has died since that. The
last I knew of Titus he had had a stroke, and was living in Brook-
lyn, 528 3rd Street. Silas W. Titus is his full name. . .

I think I told you that the Baptist Minister here, Rev. W. E.
Sprague, is a ‘sensitive.’ He does not consider himself as sensitive
as some others, however, so far as I can judge there is a great
difference in them. Few there are that can tell how far down they
will have to go to get the water—that is if it is any great distance.
Only about one person in 25 around here seems to have the ‘ gift ’
or ‘faculty’ of having the stick turn in their hands when they
go over a ‘vein.’ This mineral water, from which carbonic gas
is obtained, runs in veins; it is not obtained from a large under-
ground ‘ pool’ or ‘lake’ as most people imagine.

Titus was one of those ‘ diviners’ who did not take kindly
to the idea of having his ‘gift’ investigated. J. H. Hyslop
tried him out on that before his (Hyslop’s) death.”

It will be agreed that we have here a series of facts of great
importance which promise to repay the closest investigation.


APPENDIX C
TWO AMERICAN DOWSERS


§ 1. A DowWSING QUESTIONNAIRE


In 1905 a case of dowsing occurred in Alabama which attracted
some attention. Mr Frederick G. Bromberg, a lawyer of Mobile,
Alabama, had the happy idea of drawing up a questionnaire, which
he submitted to the two dowsers concerned inthe case. One of the
men was Bob Wellington, an uneducated negro, and the other was
James Ellard, a schoolboy. The questions were therefore put to
these dowsers orally and their replies taken down. This explains
the occasionally facetious nature of Wellington’s replies. These
replies are of the greatest interest and deserve careful study. The
questionnaire was as follows :


“, Explain fully how you go about to find the spot under the
surface of the ground where water can be found.

2. Do you hold any stick, twig or other thing in your hands
whilst searching for water ?

3. If you do, in what manner do you hold the stick, twig or
other thing ?

4. How do you know when you have reached the spot under which
is the water ?

5. How do you tell how deep beneath the surface of the earth
the water is ?

6. Do you have a feeling in your head or in your fingers or in
any other part of your body when you reach the spot under which
the water is ?

7. Describe the kind of feeling you have when you reach the
spot you recognise as that under which the water lies.

8. When did you first find out you had the powers of a water
witch ?

9g. How did you find it out ?

10. How did you learn to become a water witch ?


11. Who taught you, if you had a teacher, and where does he or
she live?”


Here follow the statements of the two dowsers. It should be
noted that water-witching is the current popular American term for
dowsing.


288


APPENDIX C 289


§2. THE NEGRO BoB WELLINGTON


“My name is Bob Wellington. I am a carpenter. I live in
Avondale, Alabama. Iam also what is known as a water witch—a
person who can locate water under the surface of the ground by
means of a twig or other instrument. I charge from $2.50 to $5.00
for locating water. I have engaged in this business at frequent
intervals during the past twenty years. I have been successful in
a great many instances in directing well diggers to the very spot
where the water can be struck. I will guarantee that if I tell you
there is a vein of water under the ground, it will be there. If it is
not found where I say it is, I will not ask for any pay for my work.

I do not know the name of any person who taught me to do this.
I believe I just took it up by myself when I was quite a young man.
I doubt the ability of one person to teach another this thing. Un-
less I am mistaken, witches, like poets, are born and not made. I
do not think it is given to many men to have this power. I have
heard of some white folks in Kentucky who are remarkably accurate
in discovering certain fluids, but they do not employ my methods,
and I have never heard that they are good at finding water.

When I am called on to say whether or not there is water in
the ground at or near any given place, the first thing I do is to
go and get me a switch from a persimmon tree. Some people use
peach or maple, but the persimmon is my switch always. It does
not matter with me whether a ’possum has been in the tree or not.
I will say, however, that while I prefer this kind of a switch, the
virtue is not so much in the switch as in the man. Indeed one
possessing the requisite power could discover water without a
switch, by a certain twitching or thumping of the muscles in the
arms when they are held out in front of the body with the hand
closed or fist doubled up.

It is better, though, to have the switch. It is better to have
one in each hand, as the switch points with more certainty to the
spot where the water can be found. :

So then, I would get a persimmon switch for each hand. Let the
switches be from two to three feet long. About six inches from the
hand the switch should fork or have prongs, and these should be
—well, two feet would be long enough. I grip or hold them tightly,
I hold the arms out in front of me, with the arms bent at the elbows,
so that my hands will be in front of my waist. The switches are
held so they will point directly upward, or nearly so.

Now, if you tell me you want to drill a well on a certain lot,
I will take my switches, in the way I have described, and walk
around over the ground to see if the switches behave all right. If
I feel anything the matter with my muscles—the biceps of my arms
—I know the switches will soon go to cutting up. It will turn right
over from its upright position and point toward the ground when
my hands get over the spot where there is water to be found. I
should have stated before this that it has been my custom to tie the
branches of the switches together with some sort of a string—I do


19


290 THE DIVINING-ROD


not know that it matters what kind of a string is used. Cases
have been known where strong men were unable to keep the switches
from turning downward when over the right spot. I am unable to
explain to you fully how this happens, or what the cause of it is.
Even if I were able to describe fully my feelings when engaged in
pointing to the water, I would not be willing to do so. I may not
get anything for my talk in this case, and ought not to reveal any
secret about the trick any way.

As to the way I tell how far under the surface the water is, I
might say that it is by the intensity or power with which the twig
is attracted toward the earth. There is a difference in the way my
arm feels, too. If the vibrations in the arm are rapid or the turn-
ing of the switch violent, the water is not far away, or if it is there
is a good deal of it there. I have told the exact number of feet
from the surface down to the stream of water, and I believe I could
do it over and over again. I can do this; but I know I cannot
explain it to you in a satisfactory way. The whole thing rests
largely on faith any way. If you go into anything without faith,
or feeling that you will not succeed, I believe you will meet with
failure. I am confirmed in my belief that such is true in this
business. I always believe that if water is under the ground I can
locate it, and I have been successful. I do not know whether there
is anything scientific about this or not. I have had people to tell
me they had read all the books, but could not find the water as I had
done ; and a man not long ago said that if I had lived a great many
years ago I would have been put to death or put in jail without
bail. All because I could do something that I could not satisfac-
torily explain to other people, or convince them about.

I might add one thing more, which is that it is possible for a
water witch to tell which way the water is flowing under the ground.
The switch will turn over in the direction of the flow.”


§ 3. THE Boy JAMES ELLARD


“My name is James Ellard. I live in Avondale, Ala. I am 16
years old. I am what is sometimes called a water witch. I can
locate water in the ground. JI am aschoolboy and have not devoted
a great deal of time to locating water, though I have been suc-
cessful each time that I have been called on to undertake the job.

I take a forked switch from a peach tree, and hold one end of
the switch in one hand and the other end in the other hand. I grip
it hard. I mean I hold it tightly. I hold it so firmly that the
bark comes off in my hand. It seems to do better when I hold it
tightly. I hold the switch out in front of me, with my arms bent
at the elbows and the switch being principally between my two
hands, in a horizontal position. If I walk over the ground in this
position and there happens to be a stream of water under the surface
the switch will bend down in the centre. If the stream is large or
strong, the switch will bend with some force toward the ground and
force my hands toward each other and nearer together. If the


APPENDIX C 291


stream is small or scattered or remote the bending of the switch
is not so pronounced. Some people use two switches, but I have
done very well with one. Some people can tell the direction in
which the water is flowing. My experience does not show me that
I can do that, and I would not know how to tell you to do it. I
cannot even tell with accuracy how deep one must dig to get to the
water. As I have already said, the force with which the switch is
drawn toward the earth will tell me something as to that, but I
cannot measure the distance in feet or inches as some are said to do
with a fair degree of skill.

I am inclined to think that one person cannot teach another to
perform this sort of work. I have given the switch to my father and
tried to instruct him, but the switch will not bend in his hands at
all. I would have to laugh at his motions and his failure.

I do not know how to describe any peculiar feeling that some
people profess to experience when doing this trick. I have had the
muscles of my arms to be a little sore from holding my hands so
closely shut for a long time; but I have never been in any sort of
trance or fit or anything of that kind. While it is true that some
people can do this thing, and others cannot, my belief is that the
switch is the thing that is affected most. I mean that if there be
any spell or magnetism or other thing of the kind, it is evidenced
or manifested in the peculiar performances of the switch, rather
than in the individual through whose powers the switch works.

I hardly know when I first found out that I could discover water.
It was not a great while ago. No one taught me, so far as I know.
I tried it a year or so ago, or may be a little farther back than that,
and I have located wells, or good places to get water for several
parties right here in Avondale. A coloured man named Ellington
or Wellington came along where I was at work and said the water
was right where my switch told me it was, and it was there when
they bored for it. Sometimes one man’s switch will indicate water
at one point, and another will come and say that it will be found a
few inches or possibly a foot from there. I do not know how to
account for that difference. Being accurate may possibly be a
matter of being expert or skilled or experienced in the trick.

I do not know of anything else to be said about the business,
except that I can be found here in Avondale when I am wanted,
and I think I can do what I have claimed.”


BIBLIOGRAPHY.!


Abingdon Herald, The: Abingdon.

** Accompt of some Mineral Observations touching the Mines of Corn-
wall and Devon, An,” Philosophical Transactions: London 1671,
vi. 2101.

Adriani, N., and Kruijt, A.C., De Bave’e-sprekende Tovadja’s van
Midden Celebes: Batavia 1912-1914, 3 vols.

Afzelius, A. A., Swenska Folkets Sago-Hdafder: Stockholm 1839, 2
vols., i. 18-19.

Agricola, Georgius, De Re Metallica: Basle 1556.

*AhIbom, T. A., De Virgula Divinatoria : Stockholm 1764.

*Aigner, E., “‘ Der gegenwartige Stand der Wiinschelruten-Forsch-
ung,” im C. von Klinckowstroem, Bibliogvaphie der Waiinschel-
yuthe: Munich rogIt.

*Albinus, Theophilus, Das entlarvete Idolum dev Wunschel-Ruthe :

Dresden 1704.

Kurtze Fortsetzung des entlarvien Idoli der Wuischel-Ruthe:

Dresden 1706.

Albrecht of Scharffenberg, Dev jungere Titurel, ed. by K. A. Hahn,
Bibliothek der gesammten deutschen National-Literatur: Qued-
linburg 1842, xxiv.

All the Year Round: London.

Alphonsus Gutierrez, Phisica Speculatio: Mexico 1557, and Sala-
manca 1559.

*Alrutz, S., Die Wumschelrute: Stuttgart [1912].

American Journal of Science, The: New Haven.

*Amoretti, Carlo, Della Rabdomanzia, ossia Eletivometria animale:
Milan 1808.

* “TLettera ...al P. Prof. D. Francesco Soave Su alcune speri-
ense elettriche,’’ Opuscoli Scelti (1793), xvi. 351-5.

Amsterdammer, De: Amsterdam.

*Amy, F., Voyage d'un Hydroscope: Paris 1861.

Annales des Sciences Psychiques: Paris.

Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradizione Popolari: Palmero.

*Aretin, J. C. F. von, Beytrage zur literarischen Geschichte der Wunschel-
vuthe: Munich 1807.

Nachtrag zuy Literatur der Wiunschelruthe, Munich 1807.


x


*


1 This bibliography comprises only the best and the most interesting
works on dowsing (these are indicated by an asterisk), and such works
on mining, geology, folklore, etc., as are actually quoted or cited in
this book. It makes no pretensions to completeness, comprising no
more than a quarter of the works which discuss dowsing known to us.
Writers who are quoted from letters or other private communications
are not included.

293


294 THE DIVINING-ROD


Arndt, E. M., ‘“‘ Winke aus germanischen Sprachen, Gebrauchen und
Gegetzen,” Rheinisches Museum (1828), ii. 247-252, 353-

Aubrey, John, The Natural History of Wiltshire (1656-1691), ed. by
John Britton: The Wiltshire Topographical Society, London
1847.

—. nae of Gentilisme and Judaisme, ed. by James Britton:
Folk-lore Society, London 1881.

Auscher, E. S., L’Art de découvrir les sources et de les captey: Paris 1905,
2nd ed.

*Baggally, W. W., ‘“‘ Dowsing Experiments with Mr J. E.,” Journal of
the Society for Psychical Research (1912), XV. 243-249.

Barba, A. A., Arte de los metales: Madrid 1640.

*Barrett, Siv W. F., ‘‘ The Dowsing Rod,” Journ. S.P.R. (1909),
xiv. 50-60.


NS in The Freeman’s Journal, 23rd and 26th of May 1906.

* The History and Mystery of the so-called Divining or Dowsing Rod:
London [1910].

* “On the Detection of Hidden Objects by Dowsers,’’ Journ.
S.P.R. (1910), xiv. 183-193.

* “On the so-called Divining Rod, or Virgula Divina,’’ Proceedings
of the Society for Psychical Research (1897-9, 1900-01), xiii.
2-282, XV. 130-383.

* “On Water Finding by the so-called Divining or Dowsing Rod,”’
Water: 15th of May i902.

*


‘“ The Psychical versus the Physical Theory of Dowsing,’’ Journ.
S.P.R. (1913), xvi. 43-48.
*—. “ The So-called Divining (or Dowsing) Rod,” The Psychic Re-
search Quarterly (1920), i. 17-27.
““Water-Finding,’”’ The Times: 21st and 28th of January and
4th of February 1905.
Barth, Michael, Annaeberga: Basle 1557.
Bartsch, K., Sagen, Mdrchen und Gebrduche aus Meklemburg : Vienna
1879-80, 2 vols., i. 241, il. 258, 285, 288, 351.
*Bates, William, ‘‘ The Divining Rod,” Notes and Queries (1854), 1 S.,
X. 449-451, 467-8.
*Beaucorps, A. and F. de, Etude empirique, au moyen de la baguette, sur
les ovigines souterraines de la viviéve du Loivet: Orleans 1900.
*Beaven, E, W., Tales of the Divining Rod: London 1899.
*Beern, P. C., De Magia Baculorum, dissertationam physio-philo-
logicam: Wittenberg, 1661.
*Behme, Friedrich, Die Wtinschelrute: Hanover 1914-1916, 3 vols.
*Behrendt, P., Die Versuche mit Rutengangern im Kalibergwerk Riedel
bet Hanigsen (Hannover), am 29 September 1911: Stuttgart 1912.
Belon, Pierre, Les observations de plusieurs singularttez et choses memor-
ables: Paris 1553, 3 vols.
*Benedikt, M., Leztfaden der Rutenlehve: Berlin and Vienna 1916.
*—— Ruten- und Pendel-lehre; Vienna and Leipzic 1917.
Bertereau, Martine de, Baroness of Beau-Soleil and of Auffenbach,
La Restitution de Pluion: Paris 1640.
—— Veritable declaration de la descouverte des mines et miniéves de
France: Paris 1632.
*Besterman, Theodore, ‘‘ The Divining-Rod,”’ The Occult Review (1923),
XXXVili. 155-161.
Beyer, August, Griindlicher Unterricht von Berg-Bau : Schneeberg 1749.
*Bianco, F., in Le Corriere della sera: goth of April 1907.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 298


Bibby’s Quarterly: Liverpool.

Bibliothek dey gesammten deutschen National-Literatur: Quedlinburg.

Bibliothek des literarischen Verein: Stuttgart.

Billingsley, John, General View of the agriculture of the County of
Somerset: Bath 1797.

Biographie universelle: Paris.

Birlinger, Anton, Volksthtimliches aus Schwaben: Freiberg im
Breisgau, 1861, i. 87-89, 338.

Birmingham Daily Gazette, The: Birmingham.

*Birot, E., and Roux, C., ‘‘ Expériences de Rabdomancie,” Annales de
la Société d’Agriculiure, Sciences et Industrie de Lyons: 1912,
Pp. 179-192.

““Hydroscopie et Rabdomancie,

129-178.

Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine: Edinburgh.

Blankaart, Stephanus, Collectanea medica-physica, af Hollands Jaar-
register dey Genees- en Naturkundige Aanmerkingen van gantsch |
Europa: Amsterdam 1680-1683, 3 vols.

Bodin, Jean, De la Démonomanie des Sorcievs: Paris 1580.

Boehmer, J. B., De Matricibus Metallorum: Leipzic 1738.

Boekzaal von Europe, De: Rotterdam.

Boileau-Despréaux, N., and Brossette, C., Lettves familiéves (1706-8),
ed. by F. L. Cizeron-Rival: Lyons 1770, ii. 140-149, 223-224.

Bombast von Hohenheim, P. A. T., De Causa et Ovigione Morborum :
Cologne 1565.

— Astronomia Magna: Frankfort 1571.

— De natura rerum: Strassburg 1584.

Dictionavium obscuriorum vocabulorum: Frankfort 1583.

Bond, T., Topographical and Historical Sketches of the Bovoughs of
East and West Looe, in the County of Cornwall: London 1823.

*Bonnemére, —, “‘ La baguette des sorciers vendéens,’’ Bulletins de la
Société d’ Anthropologie de Paris: Paris 1887, 3rd ser., x. 780.

*[Boonacker, —], “‘ Over de wichelroede,’’ Weten schappelijke bladen
(1914), pp. 461-466.

Borlase, William, The Natural History of Cornwall: Oxford 1758.

Bosquet, Amélie, La Normandie vomanesque et mervetlleuse : Paris and
Amiens 1845, pp. 304-305.

*Boyer, H. C., Mit der Wimschelrute: Stuttgart 1909.

Boyle, Hon. Robert, Certain Physiological Essays: London 1661.

“ Articles of Inquiries touching Mines,” Philosophical Trans-
actions (1665-6), i. 333.
*Boys, C. V., ‘‘ Water, Water, Everywhere,’’ Nature (1899-1900),
lxi, 1-4.

*Braickowich, F., ‘‘ Ueber die Wiinschelrutenfrage,”’ Zeztschrift des Oes-
terreichisches Ingenieur- und Architehtenvereins (1917), lxix. iv—v.

Brand, John, Observations on Populay Antiquities: Newcastle-upon-
Tyne 1775, and later editions.

*Brief geschreeven van de Heer P,. Rabus, wegens de Proeven gedaan met
de Wichchelroede: Amsterdam, 1697.

Bristol Times and Mirror, The: Bristol.

Broberg, J. W., Bedrog fram var Folkmedecins Vidskepelser : Stock-
holm 1878, 2 vols., i. 22.

Brough, B. H., Cantor Lectures on Mine Surveying: London 1892.

*Bruckbran, F, W., Die goldene Wunschelruthe fiir all Stande : Augsburg

1830,


”»


*


Annales, etc.: 1912, pp.


296 THE DIVINING-ROD


Brunton, Siv Lauder, ‘“‘ Truth and Delusion,” The Universal Review
(1889), iii. 53-66.

Brusch, Caspar, Encomia Hubae Slaccenwaldensis ac Thermarum
Carolinarum apud Boemos: Wittenberg 1542.

*Bruyn, F. de, ‘‘ Die wichelroede,”” Studién (1915), xlvii. 517-551.

Buckland, A. W., Anthropological Studies: London 1891, pp. 140-159.

*Buissiére, P., Lettre a M. l’abbé D.L., sur les véritables effets de la
baguette de Jacques Aymary: Paris 1694.

Bulletins de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris: Paris.

Bulletins de la Société dauphinoise d’ethnologie et d’anthropologie :
Grenoble.

*Burgess, Rowland, ‘“‘ The Divining Rod,” The Cornhill Magazine (1925),
lviii. 726-731.

Busch, Moritz, Deutscher Volksglaube: Leipzic 1877, pp. 134-137.

Caila, Bayon Pierre Martin de, “‘ Usages et Traditions antiques du
départment de la Gironde,” Mémoires de l’ Académie Celtique (1808),
iv. 267:

Callaway, Bishop H., The Religious System of the Amazulu: Natal
1870.

a + Divination and Analogous Phenomena among the Natives of
Natal SjeAi. (2872) 1. 278:

Campbell, William, Materials for a history of the veign of Henry VII
from original documents preserved in the Public Record Office:
London 1873-1877, 2 vols.

Carpenter, Bishop W. Boyd, “ Presidential Address,’ Proc. S.P.R.
(1913), Xxvi. I9.

Carpenter and Builder, The: London.

*Carrié, Abbé —, L’Hydroscopographie et métalloscopographie: Saintes
1863.

Casopis Ceského Musea: Prague.

Cassiodorus, Magnus Aurelius, Variarum.

*Chabraud, E., ‘“‘ La baguette divinatoire et les sourciers,’’ Bulletin de
la Société dauphinoise d’ethnologie et d’anthropologie (1904), XI. ii.

Chalon, P. F., Les Eaux Souterraines: Paris and Liége 1913, 3rd ed.

Chambers’s Edinburgh Journal, afterwards Chambers’s Journal:
London and Edinburgh.

* “ The Champion Dowser,” Land and Watery, 27th of May 1899.

Charpentier, J. F. W., Minevalogische Geographie dey Chursdchsischen
Lande: Leipzic 1778.

*Chauvin, Pierre, Lettre a Mme la Marquise de Senozan sur les moyens
dont on s’est servy pour découvrir les Complices d'un assassinat
commis a Lyon, le 5me juillet, 1692: Lyons 1692.

*Chevalier, Casimir, La baguette divinatoive justifiée scientifiquement :
Tours 1853, 2nd ed.

*Chevreul, Michel Eugéne, De la baguette divinatoire, du pendule dit

explovateur et des tables tournantes, au point de vue de Vhistoire,

de la critique et de la méthode expérimentale: Paris 1854.

* in Journal des Savants; October 1853-July 1854, passim.

*Child, S. T., Water Finding: Ipswich [1910].

Childrey, Joshua, Britannia Baconica: or, The Natural Raritties of
England, Scotland and Wales: London 1660.

*Church, A. H., “‘ Water Divining up to Date,” Municipal Engineering
and The Sanitary Record : April-May 1922.

*Cleeman, Christian, De Virtute Vivgulae saliaris: Wittenberg 1689.

Codrington, R. H., The Melanesians: Oxford 1891.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 297


*(Coldstream, W.], Water Finding on the Field of War: [London] 1917.

*Cove, E. F., “ The Divining Rod made Reputable,” Scientific American
(1921), Cxxv. 219.

Conrad of Wiirzburg, Engelhard, ed. by M. Haupt: Leipzic 1844.

Goldene Schmiede, ed. by W. Grimm: Berlin 1840.

Leider and Spriiche, ed. by K. Bartsch: Vienna 1871.

Der Trojanische King, ed. by A. von Keller, Litevarischer Verein,

(1858), xliv.

*(Cookworthy, William], ‘‘ Observations on the properties and use of the
Virgula Divina,”’ Gentleman’s Magazine (1751), xxi. 507-508.

Cornhill Magazine, The: London.

Corriere della sera, Le: (Rome).

*Cotton, E. P., “The Divining Rod,” The Sydney Stock and Station
Journal: 3rd of August 1920.

*Cotton, Louise, Palmistry and... the use of the Divining Rod:
London r8go.

Cowley, Abraham, Pindarique Odes: London 1656.

*Cox, Marian Roalfe, in Papers and Transactions [of] The Inteynational
Folk-lore Congress, 1891: London 1892, pp. 439-442.

Creuzer, F., and Guigniaut, J. D., Religions de l’antiquité: Paris
1825-1841, 4 vols., iv. plate LVI bis.

Culpin, Millais, Spiritualism and the New Psychology: London 1920.

*Cushman, A. S., “‘ The Divining Rod and Mineral Finding,” Light:
26th of November 1921.

Daily Graphic, The: London.

Daily News, The: London.

Daily Telegraph, The: London. :

*Darapsky, L., Alies und Neues von der Wiinschelrute: Leipzic 1903.

*Day, George, Notes on Essex Dialect and Folk-love, with some account
of the Divining-Rod. Reprinted from The Essex Naturalist (1894).


VIII. i-v.

*Decremps, Henri, La Magie blanche dévoilée . . . avec des reflexions sur
la baguette divinatoive: Paris 1784.

* The Conjuror unmasked . . . with directions for the trick of the


Divining Rod: London 1785.

Denton, E. Bailey-, The Water Supply and Sewerage of Couniry
Mansions and Estates.: London 1Igot.

De Quincey, Thomas, Confessions of an English Opium-Eater, and
Modern Superstitions, in The Writings of Thomas De Quincey, ed.
by David Mason: Edinburgh 1819-1820, 14 vols.

*Detharding, G., Novam scrutationem negotit physico-magici per virgulam
vacillantem detegendt occulta: 1740.

Dictionario de la Lengua Castellana por la Real Academia Espafiola :
Madrid 1914, 14th ed.

* “ The Divining Rod,” The American Journal of Science: New Haven
1826, xi. 201-212.

*“ The Divining Rod at Work,” The Birmingham Daily Gazetie :
24th of March 1894.

*Dixon, H.N., ‘‘ The Divining Rod,” Journal of the Northampton Natural
History and Field Club: (1878), x. 85-104.

Du Moulin, Pierre, Opera Philosophica: Amsterdam 1645, 3 vols.

Dybeck, Richard, in Runa (1844), p. 22; (1845), pp. 63, 80.

Dyer, T. F. T., English Folk-lore: London 1878, pp. 31-34.

Folk-love of Plants: London 1889, pp. 266-70, 287.
Eau, L’: Paris.


298 THE DIVINING-ROD


Ecclesiastical Review, The: Philadelphia.
Eclaiveuy du Midi, L’.


Edda: Handskviftet Nr. 2365 4to. gl. kgl. Samling pa det stove kgl.
bibliothek 1 Kobenhavn, etc., ed. by L. F. A. Wimmer and F.
Jonsson: Copenhagen 1891. bart

*Ellis, A. J., The Divining Rod: a History of Water Witching: US.
Geological Survey, Water Supply Paper 416, Washington 1917.

Elworthy, F. T., The Evil Eye: London 1895, p. 46.

The West Somerset Worvd-Book: London 1886, pp. 206-207.

*Emerson, Ralph, ‘‘ On the Divining Rod, with reference to the use
made of it in exploring for Springs of water,” The American Journal
of Science (1821), ili. 102-104.

Encyclopédie méthodique: Paris.

*Endriss, K., Wiimschelrute und Wasserfachmanner: 1910.

Engels, Hubert, Handbuch des Wasserbaues: Leipzic and Berlin 1914,
2 vols.

Ernst, C., “Vom Bergwerkmiinzen,’’ Oesterreichische Zeitschrift fir
Berg- und Hiittenwesen (1885), Xxxiii. 105, and Plate III. 9.

Essex Hevald, The: Chelmsford.

Essex Natuvalist, The: Buckhurst Hill.

Evelyn, John, Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Tvees, and the Propa-
gation of Timber: London 1664.

Farm and Home: London.

Farmer and Stock-Breedey and Chamber of Agriculture Journal, The:
London.

Feilberg, H. F., Dansk Bondelivi Westjylland : Copenhagen 1889, p. 364.

Fettus, Sir John, Fodinae Regales: or the History, Laws and Places
of the Chief Mines and Minerval Works in England, Wales, and the
English Pale in Iveland: London 1670.

Feudivirus [pseudonym, see Lehmann, J. G.]

Feyjoo y Montenegro, B. G., Theatvo Critico Universal: Madrid 1728.

*Fiddick, Thomas, Dowsing: Camborne [1913].

Figurien, Louis, Histotve du Mervetlleux dans les temps modernes :
Paris 1860, 4 vols.

* “ Finding Water by the Divining Rod,” Chambers’s Journal (1887),
5th ser., v. 463-464.

*Fischer, J. A., Facultatis medicae in pevantiqua electovali ad hievam
academia decanus et senior, D. Joh. Andveas Fischer . . . lectori
benevolo S.P.D. tpsique de complemento votorum suorum solictto
virgulam divinatovriam porvigit: Erfurt [1719].

Fiske, John, Myths and Myth-Workers: Boston 1873.

Flinn, A. D., Weston, R. S., and Bogert, C. L., Waterworks Handbook :
New York 1916.

Fludd, Robert, Philosophia Moysaica: Gouda 1638.

Folkard, Richard, Plant Love: London 1884, pp. 113-115.

Folk-lore : Folk-lore Society, London.

Forest de Bélidor, B., Architecture Hydvaulique: Paris 1739, ii.
342-345.

*Fortis, A., Letteva . . . al Signor Abate Lazzeyo Spallanzani [su gli
Sperimenti di Pennet]. [1791].

Francois, Jean, L’Arvt des Fontaines: Rennes 1665.

*Franzius, G., Meine Beobachtungen mit der Wiinschelrute : Berlin 1907.
Frata et Montalbano, M.A. de la, Pratica Minerale: Bologne 1678.
agentes J. G., The Golden Bough: London 1911-1915, 3rd ed., 12

Vols,


BIBLIOGRAPHY 299


Freeman’s Journal, The: Dublin.

Friend, Hilderic, Flowers and Flowery Lore: London 1884, 2 vols.,
i. 285-7, ii. 536, 646-7.

Fuller, M. L., Domestic Water Supplies for the Farm: New York 1912.

*G., S. F., “A Cornish Water-Finder [G. A. Williams],” Bibby’s
Quarterly (1896), i. 125.

Garden, The: London.

*Garnier, Pierre, Dissertation Physique en forme de lettve a M. de Séve
. . . dans laquelle il est prouvé que les talens extraordinaires qu’a
Jacques Aymar, de suivre avec une Baguetie les Meurtriers et les

Voleurs a la piste, de trouver de l’eau, l’argent caché, les bornes

tvansplantées, &c. dependant d’une cause trés-naturelle et trés ordin-

aive: Lyons 1692.

Histotve de la baguetie de Jacques Aymar, pour faire toutes sortes de

découvertes: Paris 1693.

Gassend, Pierre, Opera Omnia: 1658, 6 vols.
Gazette de France: Paris.
Gazette de Santé: Paris.

*Gazola, G: B., Fortis, A., and Thouvenel, P., Esperienze eseguite da
Pennet in Verona: Verona 1793.

*Gedanken tiber das Schlagen dev Wiinschelruthe: Eisenach 1757.

Gentleman’s Magazine: London.
Gids, De: Amsterdam.
*Gilbert, L. W., Kvitische Aufsdtze tiber die in Munchen wieder eyvneuerten
Versuche mit Schwelfelkiespendel und Wiinschelruten : Halle 1808.

Gilmour, James, Among the Mongols: London [1883].

Gobet, N., Les Anciens Minévalogistes du Royaume de France: Paris
1779, 2 vols.

Goetzschmann, M. F., Die Auf- und Untersuchung Legerstatten
nutzhaben Minevalien: Freiberg 18506.

*Golding, H. W., Water Finding in Essex and District by the Divining
Rod: Braintree [1907].

Gottfried of Strassburg, Werke, ed. by F. H. von der Hagen: Breslau
1823, 2 vols.

Gould, C. Baring-, Curious Myths of the Middle Ages: London 1866.

Gracian, Baltasar, El Criticon: Madrid 1653.

*Graeve, O. E. von, Die Wiinschelrute und ihre Auswerdung in der

Praxis: Osterode 19ft.

Meine Wiinschelrutentatigheitt: Gernrode-Harz [1913].
Graphic, The: London.

*Grassberger, R., Die Wiinschelrute: Vienna 1917.

* Die Winschelrute: Aberglaube oder Wissenschaft ? Vienna 1918.
Grasset, J., L’occultisme hier et aujourd’hui: Montpellier 1908.

Le Spivitisme devant la Science: Montpellier 1904.

Grimm, J. L. C., Deutsche Mythologie: Berlin 1875-8, 4th ed., 3 vols.,
i-ii. 15, 119, 347, 725-6, 813-6; ili. 102, 188, 289-90.

*Gulik, D. von, De wichelroede: The Hague 1917.

*Giirich, G., Wiinschelrute in Hamburg: Hamburg 1920.

*Harder, Johann, Warhafte die Experimenta mit der Wiinschel-Rute ein
mera actio physica und operatio animae rationalis sey: 1725.

Harper's Magazine: New York.

Harris, Gordon, Water Supply to Country Mansions and Estates:
London 1899.

Hauber, E. D., Bibliotheca Acta et Scripta Magica: Lemgo 1739-1745,
36 vols.


*.


*


300 THE DIVINING-ROD


Hauky, J. V., “ Druha slirka povér narodnich v Cechach,” Casopis
Ceského Musea (1854), xxviii. 533.

Hedenstjerna, A., I Svenska Bondehem : Stockholm 1885.

*Heimans, E., ‘“‘ Het geheim van de hazelroe,’’ De Amsterdammer (1906),
no. 1499.

Hennig, R, Wundey und Wissenschaft: Hamburg 1904.

*Henning, Hans, “ Priifung eines Wiinschelrutengangers durch eine
wissenschaftliche Kommission,” Zeitschrift fiir Psychologie (1919),
Ixxxii. 314-333.

Herrlein, A. von, Die Sagen des Spessovts: Frankfort 1851, pp. 65-66.

Herschel, Siv J. F. W., A Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural
Philosophy : London 1831.

*(Herzog, E.], Die Fund- und Doppelrute: Kénigsberg 1918.

Hibbert Journal, The: London.

*Histoive véritable et merveilleuse d’une jeune anglaise, précédée de
quelques circonstances concernant l'enfant hydroscope [Parangue] :
Parisi 773%

History von hertzog Reynfrid von Braunschweyg, ed. by K. Bartsch,
Bibliothek des litevarischen Vereins (1871), cix.

Hodson, George, A Consideration of some of the conditions requisite for

obtaining Underground Water Supplies: Loughborough 1893.
Hoffman, J. G., [De Matricibus Metallorum]: [Leipzic 1738].

*Hoffman-Krayer, E., “‘ Baguette divinatoire,” Schweizerisches Archiv
fiiv Volkskunde (1899), iii. 173-175.

‘‘Brunnensucher und Zauberrute,’’ Schweizevisches Archiv, etc.

(1900), iv. 241-4.

*Hohenfels, H. von, Die Wiinschelrute: Munich t1g1t.

Holberg, Baron Ludvig of, Danmark og Norges Staats-Beskrivelse :
Copenhagen 1729.

*Holmes, T. V., ‘‘ On the Evidence for the efficacy of the diviner and his
rod in the search for water,’’ Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute (1897), xxvii. 233-259.

Hooson, William, The Miners’ Dictionary: Wrexham 1747.

Hunt, Robert, Populay Romances of the West of England: London
TOOs eek:

Hunziker, A., Aargaver Worterbuch: Aarau 1877, pp. 40, 212.

*Hiising, G., Um die Wiinschelrute: Diissen 1907.

Hutchinson, T. J., Two Years in Peru: London 1873, 2 vols., ii. 174,
plate.
Illustrated Buffalo Express: Buffalo.
Implement and Machinery Review, The: London.
Li cc la de lV Association Frangaise pour l’Avancement des Sciences,
4: Pars,

Ipolyi, Arnold, Magyar Mythologia: Pest 1854, p. 402.

Isis: Jena.

Isler, C., Well-Boring for Water, Brine and Oil: London 1902.

* “Ts the Divining Rod a Fallacy?” Chambers’s Edinburgh Journal
(1853), xix. 298-300.

* Jacquet, —, Solution du probléme concernant l’origine et la découverte des
sources: Lyons 1851.

J ahrbtcher des Vereins fiir meklenburghische Geschichte und Alterthums-
kunde: Schweine.

Janet, Pierre, L’automatisme psychologique: Paris 1889.

*[Jansé], Les Radiations des Corps Minéraux: [Mexico 1909].

Jeffery, W. H., Deep Well Drilling: Toledo, Ohio, 1921.


*


BIBLIOGRAPHY 301


* Jenkins, E. Vaughan, “‘ Are the Claims and Pretensions of the Divining
Rod Valid and True? ” in J. F. Young and R. Robertson, The
Divining Rod: Clifton 1894.

Jens, William, Credulities Past and Present: London 1880, PP. 145-9.

*Jewitt, L., ‘““ A Few Words on the ‘ Divining’ or ‘ Dowsing Rod,’ ”
The Reliquary: (1882-3), xxiii. 81-88.

*Jones, C. E., Water Finding : the Mystery of the Divining Rod: London
1907.

Jones, William, The Treasures of the Earth: London 1868,

Journal @’Agriculiure Pratique: Paris.

Journal de Pavis: Paris.

Journal de Physique: Paris.

Journal des Débats: Paris.

Journal des Sgavans: Paris.

Journal des Spectacles: Paris.

Journal Encyclopédique: Paris.

Journal of American Folk-lore, The: The American Folk-lore Society,
Boston and New York.

Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research: New
York.

Journal of the Northampton Natural History Society and Field Club:
Northampton. \

Journal of the (Royal) Anthropological Institute, The: London.

Journal of the Royal Society of Arts: London.

Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, The: London.

Journal of the Statistical Society: London.

Kamp, Jens, Danske Folkeminder: Odenze 1877, p. 169.
*Kauderbach, S. H., De Rabdomanteia h.e. Divinatione ex Baculo:
Leipzic 1700.

Keary, C. F., Outlines of Primitive Belief: London 1882.

Kelly, W. K., Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and Folk-lore :
London 1863, pp. 168-173, 190-191.

Kiesewether, C., Geschichte des neueren Occultismus: Leipzic 1891-
1895, 2 vols.


*Kiessling, J. G., Gegriindete Nachricht von dem Bergbau . . . benebst
einer Evzahlung von . . . dey Wrinschel-Ruthe: Leipzic 1747.

Kilroe, J. R., A Description of the Soil and Geology of Ireland: Dublin
1907


Kinahan, G. H., A Handy-Book of Rock Names: London 1873.

Manual of the Geology of Ireland: London 1878.

— “‘ Notes on Irish Folk-lore,’’ Folk-Love Record (1881), iv. 106.

—— Valleys and their Relation to Fissures, Fractures and Faults:
London 1875.

Kircher, Athanasius, Magnes, sive De Arte Magnetica: Rome 1641.

Mundus Subterrvaneus: Amsterdam 1665, 2 vols.

*Klein, Jacobus, An Virgula Mercurialis agat ex Occulid Qualitate :
Wittenberg 1658.

*Kleiner, H., Wtinschelrutentechnik, der neue Beruf: Oldisleben 1915.

*Klinckowstroem, Count Carl von, Bibliographie der Wunschelruthe.
With an Introd. by E. Aigner, Der gegenwartige Stand der Wiinschel-
yuten-Forschung: Munich 1911

* Neues von dey Wiinschelrvute: Stuttgart 1919, 2nd ed.

*___. ‘“ The Present Position of the Divining Rod Question in Ger-

many,” Journ, S.P.R. (1925), xxii. 54-60.

Der Quellenfinder Josef Benaz: Leipzic 1914.


*


302 THE DIVINING-ROD


*Klinckowstroem, Count Carl von, Die Wiinschelrute als wissenschaft-

liches Problem mit Anhang : Geophysikalische Aufschlussmethoden :

Stuttgart 1922. : :

And many papers in Das Wasser: Leipzic, and in the Zeitschrift

der Gas und Wasserfachmdanner in Ostereich-Ungarn: Vienna.

*Kénig, Friedrich, Evnstes und Heiteres aus dem Zauberveiche der
Winschelrute: Leipzic 1907.

* Die Wiinschelyvute: Berlin 1911. :

*Korsukewitz, Olga: Die Léswng des Wiinschelruten problems: Leipzic
1919.

Krause, E., ‘‘ Aberglaubliche Kuren und samtigen Aberglaube in
Berlin,” Zeztschrift fiir Ethnologie (1883), xv. 89.

[ ] Die Wahrsagung aus den Bewegungen lebloser Korper : Weimar
1862.

Krauss, F. S., Sitte und Brauch dev Stidslaven: Vienna 1885, p. 54.

Kriiger, J. G., Geschichte der Evde in den allerdltesten Zeiten: Halle
1746.

*Kiichler, A., ‘‘ Brunnensucher und Zauberrute,’
Archiv fiir Volkskunde (1900), iv. 241-4.
Kuhn, F. F. A., Die Hevabkunft des Feuers und des Gottertranks:

Berlin 1859.
— Mérkische Sagen und Mérchen: Berlin 1843, p. 330.
Kuhn, F. F. A., and Schwartz, W., Norddeutsche Sagen: Leipzic 1848,


*.


?


Schwetzerisches


Pp. 393.

*La Garde, — de, Dissertation physique, dans laquelle il est démontré que
les talens qu’on attribue a Vhomme a baguetie . . . sons tous talens
supposez: Grenoble 1693.

Land and Water: London.

*Landesque, P., Hydrologie et hydroscopie: Paris 1920.

Lang, Andrew, Custom and Myth: London 1904, new ed.

The Making of Religion: London 1898, pp. 32-3, 164-7.

“ Presidential Address,” Proc. S.P.R. (I9II), xxv. 365.
Lankester, Sir E. R., Diversions of a Naturalist: London 1919, 3rd ed.

*Latimer, Charles, The Divining Rod: Virgula divina—Baculus
divinatorius, Water-witching : Cleveland, Ohio 1876.

Leaf, Walter, ‘‘ Vis—Knut.”’ Proc. S.P.R. (1908-9), xxi. 142-146.

(Lebrun, Pierre], Histoive critique des pratiques superstitieuses: Vol. 1
Rouen, Vol. 2 Paris 1702, 2 vols.

*- | Letives qui découvrent Villusion des philosophes sur la baguette, et

qui détruisent leurs systémes: Paris 1693.


*Lebwald von Lebenwald, Adam, Funfftes Tractatl von des Teuffels List
und Betrug in der Berg-Ruethen und Berg-Spiegl: Salzburg 1681.

*Le Conte, J. G. Ex legibus Ebraeorum forensibus contra magicam, de
divinationibus Magicis : eaque occasione de Virgula divina et
Divinatione nupera Jacobi Aymari: Strassburg 1694.

Le Gendre, G. C., Traité de l’opinion: Paris 1735.

Lehmann, Alfred, Overtvo og Troldom fra de oeldste Tider til vore Dage :
Copenhagen 1894-6, 4 vols., ii. 174-7, iv. 105, 109, 280.

Sinerwaege J. G.], Gebrauch der Berg- und Wiinschel-Ruthe : Leipzic
1763.

*Leibnitz, G. W. von, “‘ Epistola de Aimari ad Teuzelum,”’ Monatliche
Unterrichtungen : 1694, iv. 401-403.

‘Leicester Gataker, Expert Water Discoverer: [Bath 1896 ?]

Leigh, Charles, The natural History of Lancashire, Cheshive, and the Peak
in Derbyshive: Oxford 1700, 3 vols.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 303


*Le Lorrain de Vallemont, Pierre de, La Physique Occulte, ov Traité de la
baguette divinatoive: Paris 1693.
Lemke, C., Volksthtimliches in Ostpreussen : Mohungen 1884-7, ii. 283.
Leoprechting, C. von, Aus dem Lechrain: Munich 1855, pp. 98,
172.
*Le Royer, Jacques, Tvaité du baston universel: Rouen 1674.
Letives Historiques: Paris.
Light: London.
Lincolnshive Chronicle, The: Stamford.
Linden, Diederich Wessel, A Letter to Wm. Hooson : Chester and Holy-
well 1747.
Three Letters on Mining and Smelting: London 1750.


Linnaeus, Carl, Skanska Resa pa hoga Ofwervetens Befallning Sovattad dr
1749: Stockholm 1751.

Lippert, Julius, Christenthum, Volksglaube und Volksbrauch: Berlin

_ 1882, pp. 478-479, 649.

Literary Digest, The: New York.

Lloyd, L., Peasant life in Sweden: London 1870, pp. 266-67.

Locke, John, Some Considerations of the consequences of the Lowering
of Interest. London 1692.

Loéhneyss, G. E. von, Bericht von Bergwerck: Zellerfeldt [1617].

Lopes, J. M., and Bensley, E. R., Nuevo dicionario inglés-espanol y
espanol-inglés: Paris 1891.

*Lorthe, G. A. de, L’Avt de faive tourney la baguette divinatoive: Paris
1782.

Louvreleuil, J. B., Le Fanatisme Renouvelé: Avignon 1704, 2nd ed.,
i273

*Luce, J. W. L. v., Bemerkungen und Muthmassungen uber die Winschel-
vuthe: Neuwied and Leipsic 1790.

Leutolf, Alois, Sagen, Bratiche, und Legenden aus den fiinf Orten:
Lucerne 1865, p. 371.

Luther, Martin, Decem Praecepta: Wittenberg 1518.

Tischveder odey Colloquia: Eisleben 1566.

Lyncker, C., Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Ganen : Cassel
1854, Pp. 102-105.

MacDonald, Duff, Africana ; or, The Heart of Heathen Africa: London
1882, 2 vols.

*Mager, Henri, Les baguettes des sourciers et les forces de la nature:
Paris 1920.


"g Pour découvrir les sources, les mines et les trésors au moyen de la
baguette divinatoive: Paris 1910, 2nd ed.
* Les Sourciers et leurs procédés: Paris 1913.


Mahlschedl, J. N., Ritter von Alpenburg: Mythen und Sagen Tirols ;:
Zurich 1857, pp. 392-393.

Maitland, S. R., False Worship.: London 1856.

Mannhardt, Wilhelm, Die Géttenwelt der deutschen und nordischen

Volker: Berlin 1860, 2 vols., i. 206-207.

Zauberglaube und Geheimwissen: Leipzic 1896, 2nd ed.

Mansergh, James, Address of James Mansergh, President of the Institu-
tion of Civil Engineers, 6th of November 1900: London Igo.

*Marage, —, ‘‘ Ce qu’il faut penser de la baguette des sourciers,” Revue
Scientifique (1920), lviii. 72-80.

Martel, E. A., Nowveau Traité des eaux souterraines: Paris 1921.

*Martin, J. H., Dissertatio physica de Virgula Divinatrice : Wittenberg
1669.


304 THE DIVINING-ROD


*Matuschka, Graf Bernhard, Die Wuinschelrute : Koloniale Abhand-
lungen, Heft 70; Berlin [1914].

Maxwell, Siv Herbert, Memoirs of the Months: London 1897-1922,

vols.

Maral! J., “ L’étude de Chevreul sur la baguette divinatoire et les
tables tournantes,”’ Annales des Sciences Psychiques (1904), xiv.
276-290, 337-358. se

*Maxwell, J. Wedderburn, ‘‘ The Divining Rod,” Journ. S.P.R. (1903),
xi. 8 ‘

*Mayo, iesbare ‘The Divining Rod,’’ Blackwood’s Edinburgh Maga-
zine (1847), lxi. 368-374.

—— On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions : Edinburgh and
London 1851, 3rd ed.

Meier, Ernst, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebratiche aus Schwaben:
Stuttgart 1852, pp. 244-246.

Mémoire instructif pour un voyageur:; Paris 1738.

Mémoires de lV’ Académie Celtique: Paris.

Mémoires de la Société belge de geologie, paléontologie et hydrologie :
Brussels.

*Ménestrier, C. F., Reflexions sur les usages et les Indications de la
Baguette pour découvrir les sources d’Eau, les Métaux cachez, les
Vols, les Bornes déplacés, les Assassinats, etc.: Lyons 1694.

Menzel, Wolfgang, Zur Deutschen Mythologie: Stuttgart 1855, 2 vols.,
i. 153-156.

Mercure de France: Paris.

Mercure Galante, La: Paris.

Mercure Historique et Politique, La: Paris.

Meyer, Carl, Der Aberglaube des Mittelaliers: Basel 1884, pp. 66-69.

Meyer, E. H., Germanische Mythologie: Berlin 1891, 2 vols., i. 84-86,
O2; 120, 528;


Mill, H. R., in Journal of the Statistical Society (1907), xxii.


294.
Milliet de Chales, C. F., Cursus seu Mundus mathematicus : Lyons 1674,
3 vols.


Monatliche Unterrichtungen: Leipzic.

Moore, Francis, Tvavels into the Inland Parts of Africa: London 1738.
Morgenblatt: Tibingen.

Morning Advertiser, The: London.

Morning Chronicle, The: London.

Morning Post, The: London.

*Moroques, Baron — de, Observations sur le fluide'organo-électrique et
sur les mouvements électrometriques des baguettes et des pendules :
Bourges 1854.

*Mortillet, Gabriel de, Histoire de l’Hydroscopie et de la baguette divina-
toive: Chambéry 1849.

ak Edgar, ‘‘ The Water Diviner,” The Cornhill Magazine (1925),
ix. 543-6.

Morton’s Lincolnshive Almanac.


* Mouvements de la baguette divinatoire, Les,” L’Eau: 1 5th April

1914,

Millenhoff, C. V., Sagen, Mdrchen und Lieder dey Herzogthiimer
Schleswig Holstein und Lauenburg: Kiel 1845, p. 204.

Miiller, W., Bedivdge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mahren: Vienna
1823, p. 265.


*(Mullins, H. W.], Reports submitted to the [Bath] Council: [1922].


BIBLIOGRAPHY | 308


*Mullins, John, The Divining Rod and its Results in Discovery of Springs :
Bath 1891 ?
*[Mullins, Joseph and H. W.], The Divining Rod: its History, Truth-
fulness and Practical Utility: Colerne, Wilts 1894.
Municipal Engineering and The Sanitary Record: London.
Miinster, Sebastian, Cosmographia universalis: Basle 1550.
Murchison, Siy R. I., Stluria: London 1867, 4th ed.
Musaus, J., ‘“‘ Meklenburgische Volksmahrchen,” Jahrbiichey des
Vereins fiir meklenburgische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde (1840);


v. 84, 109-117.
*Musil, Friedrich, Die Drehungen dey ‘‘ Wiinschelrute”’: eine Folge
von Induktionswirckungen . . . Rutentechnische Aufnahmen in der


Umgehung Wien’s: Vienna 1922, 2nd ed.

N., I. [see Nicolas, Jean].

Napier, J., Folk-lore, or Superstitious Belief in the West of Scotland:
Paisley 1879, p. 125.

Nature: London.

*Nerucci, Gherardo, ‘‘ La Bacchetta Divinatoria,” Archivio per lo Studio
delle Tradizione Popolari (1884), iii. 79-82.

Neumann, H., and Baretti, G., Dictionary of the Spanish and English
Languages: London 1854, 2 vols.

Nibelungenhied nach der Hohenems-Muinchener Handschrift (A) in
phototypischer Nachbildung, Das: Munich 1886.

Nicolas, Jean, La Verge de Jacob, ou L’Art de trouver les trésors :
Lyons 1693.

Jacob’s Rod, trans. by Thomas Welton: London 1875.

Nieremberg, J. E., Cuviosa y Oculta Filosofio: Madrid 1643, 3rd ed.

“ Nodige Verantwoordinge voor de Heer Pieter Rabus en Juffr. sijn

Huysvrouw, tegens de Amsterdammers en Haarlemmers, niet
gelovende de werking der Wichchelroede,’’ De Boekzaal van Europe
(1697), x. Supplement.

Notker Labeo, Die Schriften Notkers und seiner Schule, ed. by Paul

Piper: Freiburg i. B, 1882, 3 vols.

Numbers.

Occult Review, The: London.

Oesterveichische Zeitschrift fiir Berg- und Hiittenwesen: Vienna.

Opuscoli Scelti suble Scienze e suble Arti: Milan.

*Outrepont, — d’, ‘“‘ Eyn Beytrag zur Geschichte der Wiinschelruthe,”
Zeitschrift fiir psychische Aerzte (1821), 1. 94-109.

‘‘ A Contribution to the History of the Divining Rod,”’ trans.
by FE. T. Bennett, Journ. S.P.R. (1889-1900), ix. 83-86.
*Ovenden, C. T., Dean of Clogher, ‘‘ Water-Finding and Faith-Healing,”’

The Hibbert Journal (1911), ix. 560-570.
Ozanam, Jacques, Recréations Mathématiques et Physiques : Paris 1694.
Ozanam, J., and Montuclo, J. E., Recveations in Mathematics and
Natural Philosophy, trans. and ed. by Charles Hutton: London
1803; znd ed. London 1814, 4 vols.

Pabst, Michael, Wunderbarliches Leib und Wund Artzneybuch: Mul-

hausen 1590, 2 vols.

Palladius Rutilius Taurus Aemilianus: De Re Rustica.

*Panthot, J. B., Traitié de la baguette: Lyons 1693.

Panzer, Friedrich, Beitrag zur Deutschen Mythologie: Munich 1855, 2
vols., ii. 296-7.

*Paramelle, Abbé —, L’Art de découvriy les sources: Paris 1856.

Parker, P. 4 M., The Control of Water: London 1913.


20


*


306 THE DIVINING-ROD


*Pavey, Rowland, Water-Finding and the sublimated Faculty . . . with
a full veply to Professor Wertheimer’s Report: Cheddar 1909.

Pearson’s Magazine: London.

*Pease, E. R., “‘ The Divining Rod,” Proc. S.P.R. (1884), ii. 79-107.

Peretti, A., Delle Sevate del Villagio: Ivrea 1863, iv.

Perger, Anton von, Deutsche Pflanzensagen: Stuttgart 1864, pp.
241-253.

Paneer! Caspar, Commentarius de praecipuis divinationum generibus :
Wittenberg 1553.

Philpot, Mrs. J. H., The Sacred Tyee: London 1897.

Phillips, John, Memoirvs of William Smith: London 1844.

‘“On the Veins of Cornwall,” Tvansactions of the Geological

Society (1814), il, 123-124.

*Phillips, William, ‘‘ On the Virgula Divinatoria,”’ Tilloch’s Philosophical
Magazine (802), xciii. 309-328.

Philosophical Transactions: London.

*Phippen, Francis, in The Morning Chronicle, 15th of November 1844.

- in The Morning Advertiser, 15th of November 1844.

*_— A Narrative of practical experiments, proving to demonstration the
discovery of water, coal and minerals in the earth by means of the
“ Dowsing Fork ”’ or “ Divining Rod” as successfully practised in
Somersetshive: London 1853.

Plateanus, Petrus, ‘‘ Rerum Metallicarvm appellationes iuxta uernacula
Germanorum linguam,” in G. Agricola, Bermannus, sive de re
metallica: Basle 1530.

Plattes, Gabriel, A Discovery of Subtervaneall Treasure : London 1639.

*Platts, J. B., ‘‘ Unconscious Muscular Action,”’ Journal of the American
Society for Psychical Research (1910), iv. 551-554.

*Plowman, T. Forder, ‘‘ The Divining Rod,” Proceedings of the Bath
Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club (1889), vi. 411-432.

*Pogson, W. N., ‘‘ The Higher Science of Rhabdomancy,”’ The Occult
Review (1920-1921), XXXII. iv—vi, XXXII. i.

Porta, G. B. della, Magia naturalis: Naples 1589.

Posewitz, Theodore, Borneo : its Geology and Mineral Resources, trans.
by F. W. Hatch: London 1892.

*Poskin, A., ‘“‘ La rabdomancie ou l’art de découvrir les mines et les
sources au moyen de la baguette divinatoire,’’ Mémoires de la
Société belge de géologie, paléontologie et hydrologie (1909), xxiii.
28-57.

*Praetorius, Johann, Gasophylaci Gaudium, das ist ein Ausbund von
Wiindschel-Ruthen: Leipzic 1667.

Preller, Ludwig, Ausgewahite Aufsdtze aus dem Gebiete dey classischen

Alterthumswissenschaft, ed. by R. Kohler: Berlin 1864, p. 154.

Griechische Mythologie: Berlin 1894, 4th ed., 2 vols., i. 404, 412.

Prinz, E., Handbuch dey Hydrologie: Berlin 1919.

Pritz, F. X., Ueberbleibsel aus dem hohen Alterthume im Leben und
Glauben der Bewohner des Landes ob dey Enns: Linz 1853, p. 43.

Proceedings of the Bath Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club:
Bath.

Proceedings of the Bristol Naturalists’ Society: Bristol.

Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association: London.

Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research: London.

Prohle, Heinrich, Harzbilder: Leipzic 1855, p. 79.

Psychiatrische en neurologische bladen.

Psychic Research Quarterly, The: London.


BIBLIOG RAPHY 307


Quarterly Review, The: London.

Quitzmann, E. A., Die Heidnische Religion dey Baiwaren: Leipzic and
Heidelberg 1860, pp. 27-28.

Raaf, L. F., Ydre hévad i Ostergathland : Linképing 1856, 2 vols., i.
133-135.

*Rabus, P., ‘‘ Vertoog wegens de Wichchelroede,”’ De Boekzaal van
Europe: (1697), x. Supplement.

Rattray, Sylvester, Aditus Novus ad occultas Sympathiae et Antpathiae
Causas inveniendas: Glasgow 1658.

Ray, John, Catalogus Plantarum Angliae et Insularum Adjacentium :
London 1670.

*Raymond, Rossiter, ‘‘ The Divining Rod,”’ Tyvansactions of the American
Institute of Mining Engineers (1883), xi. 411-446.

Reichenbach, Baron C. von, Physico-physiological researches, ed. by J.
Ashburner: London 1850-1851, 2 vols.

Reliquary, The: London.

*Renaud, André, Critique sincére de plusieurs écrits sur la fameuse
Baguette: Lyons 1695.

Revue Scientifique: Paris.

Rheinisches Museum: Bonn.

Rhutenois, Le.

Richet, Charles, ‘‘ La suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilités,”’

Revue Philosophique (1884), xvili. 609-674.

Traité de métapsychique: Paris 1923, 2nd ed,

Richmond Times: Richmond.

Rio, M. A. del, Disquisitionum magicarum: Mainz 1593, 3 vols.

—— Syntagma Tvragoediae Latinae: Antwerp 1594.

*Rivinus, F. F., Dissertatio inauguralis de finibus per virgulam mer-
curialem non investigandis: Wittenberg 1734.

Robinson, Phil, “‘ Saunterings in Utah,’’ Harper’s Magazine (1883),
Ixvii. 705-714.

*Rocal, G., ‘“‘La Baguette des Baguettisants,’’ Mercure de France
(1924), clxx. 59-89.

Roessler, Balthasar, Speculum metallurgiae politissimum: Dresden


1700.
*Rolliére, B. de, La baguette des sourciers: 1913.
Rozier, —, Introduction aux observations de la physique: Paris 1772.


Rossler, B., Speculum metallurgiae politissimum: Dresden 1700.
*Rothe, Georg, Die Wauinschelrute: Historisch-theovetische Studie:
Jena 1910.

Rowe, A. W., ‘‘ The Zones of the White Chalk of the English Coast,”
Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association (1899-1900), xvi. 289-368.

Rowley, Henry, The Story of the Universities’ Mission to Central
Africa: London 1866.

Runa: Stockholm.

Rural elegance display’d, in the description of four Western Counties,
Cornwall, Devonshive, Dorsetshire and Somersetshire: London
1768.

etier Thomas, Foedova: London 1704-1732, 20 vols. :

*Rzehak, A., Der gegenwartige Stand der Wiinschelrutenfrage : Berlin 1918.

*S., J., The Shepherds’ Kalender, or, The Citizen’s and Country Man’s
Daily Companion : treating of ... the Mosaick Wand to find
out hidden treasuve: London [1705 ?], 5th ed.

Saint-André, — de, Lettres au sujet de la magie; Paris 1725, pp. 51-58.

*Salchlin, R., [dolomantia et Rabdomantia: Bern 1715.


308 THE DIVINING-ROD


Sanders, Daniel, Wérterbuch der deutschen Sprache, s.v., Wiinschel-


Rute.
*Sauri, —, L’hydroscope et le ventriloque ; Ouvrage dans lequel on
explique ... Comment il se peut faive qu’un jeune Provengal


[Pavangue] voit a travers la terre . . .: Amsterdam and Paris 1772.

*Schaub, J. D., Dissertatio physica de virgula mercuriali : Marpurgi 1674.

Schindler, H. B., Dery Aberglaube des Mittelalters: Breslau 1858, pp.
215-220,

Schénwerth, F. X. von, Aus dey Obenpfalz : Sitten und Sagen: Augs-
burg 1859, 3 vols., iii. 216-217.

*Schooling, J. Holt, ‘“‘ The! Divining Rod,” Pearson’s Magazine (1897),
iii. 304-312.

Schott, Gasper, Magia Universalis Natuvae et Artis: Wurtzburg
1657-9, 4 vols.

*Schreiber, J., Altes und Neues von der Wunschelrute: Erfurt 1917.

*Schriften des Verbundes zur Klavung der Wiinschelrutenfrage: Stutt-
gart.

Schulenburg, W. von, Wendische Volkssagen und Gebrauche aus dem
Spreewald: Leipzic 1880, pp. 204-5, 301.

*Schwartz, Wilhelm, ‘“‘ Die Wiinschelruthe als Quellen- und Schatz-
sucher,” Zettschrift des Verein fiir Volkskunde (1892), ii. 67-78.

Schweizerisches Archivs fiir Volkskunde: Zurich.

Scientific American: New York.

* “ Scientific Divining Rod, A,’’ The Literary Digest (1912), xliv. 17.

Seatile Port-Intelligencer ; Seattle.

Seiler, G. A., Die Basler Mundart: Basel 1879, pp. 43, 163-164,

*Sementini, Luigi, Pensieri e Sperimenti sulla Bacchetta Divinatoria :
Naples 1810.

Sheppard, Samuel, Epigvams: London, 1651.

Simrock, Karl, Handbuch der Deutschen Mythologie: Bonn 1887, 6th
ed., pp. 88, 182, 498.

Skeat, W. W., ‘‘ Malay Spiritualism,” Folk-lorve (1902), xiii. 145.

Sloet van de Beele, Bayon L. A. J. W., “ Het Volksgeloof aan het
bovennatuurlijke in het rijk der planten,’’ De Gids (1881), XLV.


li, 231-5.
De planten in het Germaansche volksleven: The Hague 1890,
pp. 80 e# seq.
*(Smith, G, W. Finch], ‘ The Divining Rod,” The Star: 20th of August
1905.


*Sollas, W. J., ““ Report on Wells sunk at Locking, Somerset, to test the
alleged Power of the Divining Rod,” Proceedings of the Bristol
Naturalists’ Society (1882-5), n.s., iv. 116-125.

Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries.

*Spadoni, Paolo, Letteva idvoelettrica sull’ esperienze di un secondo
Pennet: Ancona 1793.

*Spallanzani, L., Letterva . . . al Signor Abate Fortis sugli Sperimenti
di Pennet in Pavia: [1791].

—— Nowvelles recherches suy les découvertes microscopiques, ed. by J.T.
Needham: Paris 1769.
Spectator, The: London,

*Sperlings, M., Slagrutan, Forsok till losning of dess mysterium: Stock-
holm 1912.

Star, The: Johannesburg.

*Steenhuis, J. F., Het Wichelroede-Vraagstuk : Centrale Commissie voor
Dinkwatervoorziening: 1918.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 309


*Stein, M. T., “‘ De wichelroede,” Tijdschrift Nederlandsche Heiden-
maaischappi) (1914), xxvi. 52-54, I15—I20.

Sterne, Carus [pseudonym, see Krause, Ernst].

*“Stick- (not Table-) Turning,” Al the Year Round (1867), xvii.
391-394.

*Stokes, G. H., ‘‘A Water Wizard,” The Ibis Magazine: September
IgIo.

*Stone, W., Water! Water! Water !: Spilsby [1899 ?]

Strackerjan, L., Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg :
Oldenburg 1867, 2 vols., i. 98.

Student and Intellectual Observer, The: London.

Studién:

*“ Study of the Divining-Rod, The,” The Literary Digest (1913), xlvi.
341.

*Suckling, A. J., The Divining Rod no Delusion: St. Helier 1855.

*Surbled, G., Le Secret des sourciers: Paris 1908, 2nd ed.

Swettenham, Siv F. A., Malay Sketches: London 1895.

*(Swift, Jonathan], Virtues of Sid Hamet the Magician’s Rod: London
1710.

Sydney Stock and Station Journal, The: Sydney.

T***, D.M.M., M., [see Thouvenel, Pierre].

Taylor, F. N., Small Water Supplies: London to1z2.

Taylor, Richard, TeIka A Mau, ov New Zealand andits Inhabitants :
London 1855.

* “ Telepathy and the Divining Rod,” The Ecclesiastical Review (1920),
lxii. 306-307.

*Thilemann, J. H., Vindiciae Dissertationes de Finibus per Virgulam
Mercurialem non tnvestigandis: Wittenberg 1734.

Thompson, A. B., Emergency Water Supplies: London 1924.

Thorpe, Benjamin, Northern Mythology : London 1851, 3 vols., ii. 238.

*Thouvenel, Pierre, Mémoire Physique et Médicinal, montrant des
vapports évidens entre les phénomenes de la Baguette Divinatoire,
du Magnétisme et de lV Electricité: Paris 1781.


* Nuovi Ragguagh dell’ espertenze d’Elettrometria Organica:
Venice 1794,
* Seconde Mémoire, Physique et Médicinal: Paris 1784.


Tijdshrift Nederlandsche Heidenmaatschappty.
Tilloch’s Philosophical Magazine: London.
Times, The : London.
*Tompkins, Benjamin, The Theory of Water-Finding, with advice there-
on: Farnmouth 1892.
Springs of Water and how to discover them by the Divining-Rod :
London 1925, 3rd ed. of the above.
Topley, William, The Geology of the Weald: London 1875.
Transactions of the American Institute of Mining Engineers: Boston.
Transactions of the Geological Society: London.
*Tristan, Count J. de, Recherches sur quelques effluves terrestves : Paris
1826.
Tylor, Sir E. B., “‘ Anthropology,”’ Nature (1883), xxviii. 8-11, 55-59.
-——— Primitive Cultuve: London 1920, 6th ed., 2 vols.
Tyndale, J. W., The Island of Sardinia: London 1849, 3 vols.
Universal Review, The: London.
*Untervicht vom rechten Gebrauch der Wunschel-Ruthe in Bergwercken, ed.
by J. G. Zeidler: Frankfort and Leipzic 1705.
Uren, F. C., Waterworks Engineering: Bristol 1914.


*


310 THE DIVINING-ROD


*Vaginay, Jean, Histoive merveilleuse d’un magon qui, condmt par la
baguette divinatoive a suivie un meurtriey pendant 45 heures sur la
terve, et plus de 30 heures sur l'eau: Grenoble 1692.

Valentini, M. B., Museum Museorum: Frankfort 1704, 2 vols.

*Valentinus, Basilius [pseud.], Bergwerckschatz, das ist aussfuhrlicher . . .
Bericht von Bergwercken, nach der Ruten und Witterung kumstlich
zubauen: Frankfort 1618.

* B. V., His last Will and Testament: London 1657.

*Vance, L. J., ‘‘ Three Lessons in Rhabdomancy,” The J ournal of
American Folk-love (1891), iv. 241-246.

*Varigny, H. de, ‘‘ La baguette divinatoire,” Journal des Débats, 28th
of October 1897.

*Veva atque brevis descriptio Virgulae Mercurialis, eamque modo pre-
parandi, pro ut eam invernit, atque ejus ministerio multos thesauros
detergit R.P.P. Bernhardus: Prague 1532.

Vernalaken, F. T., Alpensagen: Vienna 1858, pp. 291, 415-416.

Mythen und Braviche des Volkes in Oestereich: Vienna 1859, p.


144.
Veth, P. J., Borneo’s Westerv-Afdeeling: Zalt-Bommel 1854-1856, 2


vols.

*Vigen, Ch., L’Abbé Richard . . . Vhydroscopie et la baguette: La
Rochelle 1906.

*Vilbussiére, — de, Discours du boiteux sur la baguette divinatoive qui


pavoit depuis quelque tems en France, et de ses consequences envers
la philosophe: Amsterdam 1712.

*Viollet, Pierre, Tvacté en forme de lettre contre la nouvelle Rhabdomance,
en la maniéve nouvelle de deviney avec une Baguetie fourchue par
Jacques Aymay Vernin: Lyons 1694.

Vitruvius Pollio, M., De Architectura.

*Voll, Adam, Die Wiinschelrute und dey siderische pendulum : Leipzic
IgI0o.

Vonbrun, F. J., Bettrdge zur deutschen Mythologie : Chur 1862, p. 127.
Die Sagen Vorarlbergs : Innsbruck 1858, pp. 61-62.

— Volkssagen aus Vovariberg: Vienna 1847, pp. 7-8.

—— “ Volkssagen aus Vorarlberg,” in G. C, Frammann, Die Deut-
schen Mundarten: Nuremberg 1856, 3 vols., iii. 210.

*Waijenburg, G. von, ‘‘ Proeven met de orakelroede of wichelroede,”’
Psychiatrische en neurologische bladen (1913), xvii. 719-721.

Waite, A. E., The Occult Sciences: London 18o1.

[Waldbrucht, W. von], Die deutscher Volksfeste: Iserlohn 1854, pp.
118-119, 152.

Waldfreund, T. E., ‘‘ Volksbrauche und Aberglaube im Tirol und dem
Zalzburger Gebirge,”’ Zeitschrift fiir Deutsche Mythologie (1856)
Wl. 335, 339.

Warcollier, R., ‘‘ Expériences avec la baguette divinatoire,’’ Annales
des Sciences Psychiques (1906), xvi. 745-747.

Wasser, Das: Leipzic.

Water: London.

Water Divining: London [1902].

* “ Water Supply Appliances and the Divining Rod,” The Implement
and Machinery Review (1892-3), xviii. 15598, 16207.

Water Supply Manual, War Office 40-790: [London] 1909.

*Weber, L., Aus den Ingarten des Wiinschelrutenglaubens: Hanover
1912.

Die Wiinschelrute: Kiel and Leipzic 1905.


*


BIBLIOGRAPHY 311


Webster, John, Metatlographia ; or, An History of Metals: London,
1671.
*Weisse, J. F. Evfahrungen tiber arzneivertindige Somnambulen, nebst
einigen Versuchen mit einer Wasserfiilerin: Berlin 18109.
*Wertheimer, J., ‘‘ Experiments with ‘ Waterfinders,’ ’’ Water: Supple-
ment to 15th November 1906; reprinted with criticism by Sir
William Barrett in Journal of the Royal Society of Arts (1911), lix.
384 et seq.

Western Gazetie, The: Yeovil.

Wetenschappelijke Bladen: The Hague.

*Weyrauch, R., Der Begriff des Erfolges bet Arbeiten von Waiinschel-
rutengangeyn: Stuttgart 1912.

*White, Henry, ‘‘ The Divining-Rod,” The Student and Intellectual
Observer (1871), v. 20-28.

Whiting, Lilian, Canada the Spellbindey : London and Toronto 1917.


Wigstrém, Eva, Folkdtktning 7 Skane : Copenhagen 1880, 2 vols., i.
105, 200.

*Wille, Matthes, Vera Virgulae Mercurialis Relatio, Das ist: Wahrhaff-
tiger und Grindlicher Bericht von dev Wiinschel-Ruthen, wie solche
Anno 1667, zu Sulzaan der Ihnen bey Anageburg eines Saltz-Quells
ohn alle Superstition ist abgebrochen und zum 6fftern gebraucht
worden: Jena 1872.

Wlislocki, H. von, Volksglaube und religidsey Brauch dey Zigeuner :
Miinster i. W. 1891, 4 vols, iv. 146-147.
Aus dem Volksleben dey Magyaven: Munich 1893 pp. 88-89.
Wolf, —, in Zettschrift fur deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde (1853-5),
19327," 1151339:
* “ Wonderful Wands,” All the Year Round (1886), n.s., xxxvili. 53-59.
Woodward, H. B., The Geology of Water-Supply : London rgto.

*Winschelrute, Die: Leipzic.

Wuttke, C. F. A., Dev deutsche Volksaberglaube dey Gegenwart, ed. by
E. H. Meyer: Berlin 1900, pp. 108-110, 149, 270-271, 385.

"Young, J. F., and Robertson, R., The Divining Rod and tts Uses:
Clifton 1894.

Zeidler, Johann Gottfried, Pantomysterium, oder Das Neue vom Jahre


in dev Wunschelruthe : Halle i. Magdeburg 1700.

Zeitschrift des O¢esterveichisches Ingenteur- und Aychitektenvereins :
Vienna.

Zeitschrift des Vereins dey Gas- und Wasserfachmanns in Ostereich-
Ungarn: Vienna.

Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde.

Zettschrift fiir psychische Aerzte: Leipzic.

Zeitschrift fur Psychologie.

Zimmerische Chronik (1549), in Lttevarischer Verein (1867), xciv.

Zingerle, I. V., Sztten, Gebratiche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes :
Innsbruck 1857, §§ 512, 734, 878, 961.

Zschokke, J, H. D., Ueberlieferungen zur Geschichte unsere Zeit; Aarau
1818.

—— Eine Selbstschau: Aarau 1842,


INDEX


A, on a case of dowsing, 224

A’Barrow, R., a dowser, 174

Abergavenny, dowsing at, 146-148

Abingdon Herald, 205

Abinger, Lord, dowsing for, 114

Academic theses, dowsing the subject
of, 16, 16 nm, 223

Académie of Reims appoint a com-
mittee to investigate dowsing,
50, 52

Academy of Sciences, The, Paris,
order an investigation into dows-
ing in 1853, 34; the same in
1913, 36; demonstration before,
46; Geoffroy St Hilaire reads a
paper on dowsing before, 51

Adams, Charles, a dowser, 23, 110,


174, 264
Adhemar, Count d’, dowsing for, 8
Admiralty Board of Invention and
Research, 254
Affinity between things vegetable
and things mineral as an explana-
tion of dowsing, II, 13
Africa, dowsing in, 3, 4; South, dow-
sing in, 142, 165-173, 261-262,
266-267
Agricola, Georgius, on dowsing, 2, 7,
9, 13, 25, 235-236
Aigner, E., on dowsing, 251
Ailsa, Marquis of, dowsing for, 159 x.
Aire Head Springs, 56
Aix, a journal at, on Paramelle, 52
Alabama, dowsing in, 288-291
Albert, dowsing near, 194-196
Albert-Amiens road, 194
Albinus, Theophilus, on dowsing, 19
Albrecht of Scharffenberg’s allusions
to a wishing-rod, 6
Aldworth, Colonel R. W., a dowser,
189
Alessandria, dowsing near, 253-254
Allandale, Grahamstown, dowsing at,
266
Allen, E. G., on a case of dowsing,
203, 203 ”.
Alphonsus Gutierrez, on the Zahoris,
277-278
Alpine, Texas, dowsing in, 198


Altree, Mr, a dowser, 219

Aluminium dowsing rod, 238, Fig. 58

American Institute of Mining Engin-
eers, a paper on dowsing read
before the, 25-26, 44

American Journal of Science, 238, 272

American Steam Laundry Co., dow-
sing for, 136

Amoretti, Carlo, experimented with
Pennet, 47, 242

Ancaster, soft stone quarrying at, 113

Anglesey, Marquis of, dowsing for,
I59 Nn.

Anglo-Bavarian Brewery,
for, 175-176

Annaburg, dowsing in, 9

Annisy, dowsing at, 36

Ansonis, Marquis d’, dowsing for, 43 7.

Anthony, Richard, a dowser, 178-
179, 216-217

Anthropological Institute, The, paper
on dowsing read before, 69

Antrim, County, dowsing in, 190-191

“ Apparatus,” 233

Apple-tree dowsing-rod, 166

Apronianus, 279

Aqueducts traced by dowsing, 34-35,
41

Aqueous rocks, 58

Aquilegus, water-finder, 279-280

Arceuil, dowsing at, 41

Argyll, Duke of, a dowser, 189

Arkwright, Mr, dowsing for, 154

Arnold, F. S., dowsing for, 190.

Arreton, dowsing at, 133-134

Avt de découvriy les sources,
Paramelle’s book, 52

Arthur’s Hill Brewery Company,
dowsing for, 135-136

Arundel, Ede of, 258

Ashbourne, dowsing at, 156-157

Ashburner, J., on dowsing, 263

Ashwick Estate, the, dowsing on, 110

Ashworth, H. A., on a case of dow-
sing, 154

Assa, C, Milham of, 174

Association of ideas, 253

Atavistic sense of smell, dowsing as
an, 251


dowsing


Gr,


313


314


Atomic theory of dowsing, the, 17, 21,
248-249

Aubrey, John, on dowsing, 15-6

Australia, dowsing in, vii, 26

Austria, dowsing in, vii

Automatism, 246

Autoscopes, 234, 267.

Autun, dowsing at, 38

Avondale, Bob Wellington of, 289 ;
J. Ellard of, 290; dowsing at,
291

Aymar, Jacques, the first important
dowser, I7, 20, 32, 34, 243-
244, 249, 254, 270; early days,
27; his great exploit, 27-29;
later days, 29-30 ; his sensations
when dowsing, 30-31; his por-
trait (?), Fig. 11


B., Captain, 191

B, Lady, on a case of dowsing, 224

B., Miss, dowsing for, 263-264

Babinet, M., with others, requested

to investigate dowsing, 124

Bacon, H., a dowser, 174

Baguette, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 42,
43, 46, 52, 242

Bailey, Mr, a dowser, 212-213

Ballston Spa, dowsing at, 286

Baltic countries, dowsing in, vii

Bamboo dowsing-rods, 3, 4

Banks Islands, use of rods in the, 4

Barba, Alonso, on dowsing, 236

Barcombe, dowsing at, 220-221

Barkly West, dowsing in, 169

Barlow’s experiments on earth cur-
rents, 43

Barnstaple, dowsing at, 190

Barth, Michael, celebrates dowsing, 9

Basic igneous rocks at Waterford, 85

Bastable, F., ona case of dowsing, 115

Basville, dowsing in, 36

Bath, the springs of, 58 ”.; L. Gat-
aker of, 153; H. Chesterman of,
174; H. W. Mullins of, 183-185 ;
dowsing at, 183-185

Bath City Council, 183-185

Bath College, 152

Bath Herald, The, 184

Bathurst, Lord, dowsing for, 142

Batson, Mrs., dowsing for, 165

Batten, Mr., a dowser, 189

Beau-Soleil, Baroness of, initiated
the systematic study of dowsing,
Q-II, 14

Beaucaire, dowsing at, 29

Beauchamp, Earl, dowsing for, 119-
120

Beaufort, Duke of,
131 7.7, 142

Bed-water, 58

Bedford, Duke of, dowsing for, 159 m


dowsing for,


THE DIVINING-ROD


Bedminster, W. Mereweather of, 174

Belfast, dowsing i in, I 56

Belgium, dowsing in, 22

Belomancy, not to be confused with
dowsing, x, 2

Belon, Pierre, on dowsing, 9

Bengal Staff Corps, 152

Bennett, E. T., 269

Bennett, G. W., dowsing for, 148-
149, 240

Bensusan, S. L., on a case of dowsing,
186-188

Berkshire, dowsing in, 62—63

Bermaline Maltings, Haddington,
dowsing at, 158-159

Bernhardus, the Rev. P., the first
recorded dowser, 9

Best, A. E., 258

Beutler, Katharina, a dowser, 263

Bicester, dowsing near, 130-131

Biographie universelle, 34

Birch, W. de H., on cases of dowsing,


155

Bishopston, W. S. Lawrence of, 104

Bishopstone, 145

Black clay, 150

Blackcap Hill, dowsing at, 144-146,
Figs. 37-38

Blackrock, dowsing at, 120-121

Blackthorn dowsing-rod, 220

Blake, J. H., on dowsing, 62; his
examples of ‘‘ fraud ’’ examined,
62-63

Blake, John, a dowser, 176-178, Fig.
41

Bleton, Barthélmy, a dowser, 21,
234, 242, 243, 244 ; his birth, 31 ;
his sensations when dowsing, 32 ;
experiments with, 32-47; opin-
ion adverse to him, 43-47

Blindfolding the dowser, experiments
in, 29, 35-36, 38, 41, 42, 44, 106,
124, 131, 179-180, 216-217, 222—
232, 256

Blood, Aymar spat, when dowsing, 30

Blow, Capt. J. W., on a case of
dowsing, 195-196

Blue clay, at Warnham, 69;
Campden, 122

Blue lias at Shepton Mallet, 115
near Campden, 121; at Street,
201; at Warleigh Hill, 204

Blue marl at Warleigh Hill, 204

Blue metamorphic rock at Waterford,

8


near


7

Blue slate at Waterford, 75

Blunt, Rev. J. R., a dowser, 189, 220,
239, 240

Bocking, 182

Bodenhamer, W. J., his ‘‘ Vibrator,”


233
Bogs. at Carrigoona, 98, 98 7.


INDEX


Bohemian Erzgebirge, dowsing in the,


9
Bolan and Co., dowsing for, 137
Boiton, dowsing at, 142
Bombay, appointment of an official
dowser at, xin.?
Book, an open, as a dowsing-rod,
19, Fig, 8
Booker, Rev. G., on acase of dowsing,
142-144
Borlase, William, on dowsing, 21
Borneo, dowsing in, 4
Botolph Claydon, W. Cubbage of, 174
Botton Wood, dowsing at, 195-196
Boulder clay at Waterford, 78
Boundaries, dowsing for determining,


ies?

Bourg, Count of, dowsing for, 36

Boussingault, M., with others, re-
quested to investigate dowsing,
24

Bouvantes, Bleton of, 31, 37

Bouzincourt, dowsing near, 194

Boxwood too stiff for use as a
dowsing-rod, 116

Boyle, Robert, on dowsing, 13-14

Brackley, dowsing at, 163

Braintree, H. W. Golding of, 182-
183; dowsing near, 182

Brassey, Lord, dowsing for, 142

Bray, dowsing near, 86

Bray Head, geology of, 98

Brayer, Johann Philipp, a dowser,


22

Brewery, The, Belfast, dowsing for,
156

Brewster County, Texas, dowsing in,
197

Bridgewater, dowsing near, 177-178,
241

Briegger, Anna Maria, a dowser, 263

Brighton, Mr Altree of, 219

Brislington, dowsing at, 108


‘Bristol, W. S. Lawrence of, 103, 104 ;


dowsing at, 105, 108, 176; Hazel
of, 253

Bristol Channel, 58

Bristol General Hospital, 104


Bristol Municipal Charity Trustees,


dowsing for, 109

Bristol Steam Joinery Works, dow-
sing for, 106-108

Bristol Times and Mirror, 175

Bristol Wagon Works, dowsing for,
105

Bristow, H., 211

British Columbia, dowsing in, 224-
225

Brockenhurst, Hants., R. Kitcher of,


174
Broderick, H. E., on a case of dow-
sing, 190-191


315

Bromberg, F. G., 288

Brooklyn, dowsing at, 287

Broomfield, dowsing at, 125

Brown, F. H., his ‘“ Electro-Terre-
ohmeter,”’ etc., 233

Brown, Milman, a dowser, 209, 212-
213

Brown, W, J., on Mullins, 224, 257

Browne, Sir J. Crichton, his experi-
ment with Mullins, 131

Browne, Sir Thomas, on dowsing,
II-I2

Brownlow, Lord, 131 7.2

Bruce, S., dowsing for, 121-123, 257

Bruce, W. R., dowsing for, 120-121

Brunton, Sir Lauder, on ignorance,
xi, 268

Brusch, Caspar, celebrates dowsing,


9

Buccleuch, Duke of, dowsing for, 133

Buck, General L., dowsing for, 62-63

Bucket handle as a dowsing-rod,
19, Fig. 8

Buckingham, F. H., a dowser, 174

Buckinghamshire, the geology of, 71

Budd, James, on the Waterford case,
74; 78, 77-79, 240

Budleigh-Salterton, R. G. D. Tosswill
of, 258

Bugbrooke, Rev. J. R. Blunt of, 220

Bultfontein, Kimberley, dowsing at,
172-173

Bumford, W., dowsing for, 170-171

Burbage, W. Stone of, 133

Burghfield, dowsing at, 62-63

Burgogne, dowsing in, 41

Burnett, dowsing at, 109

Burnley District Council, dowsing
for, 159 7.

Burton, Lord, on a case of dowsing,


243
Burton, Miss C. I., dowsing for, 128
Butcher, Allan, a dowser, 174
Byron, Lord, his jest about Lady
Milbanke’s dowsing, 17


C., M. de, dowsing for, 38

C., Mr, 106

Cabra, dowsing at, 139-140

Cabra Towers, dowsing at, 139-140

Caffrey, T. R., dowsing for, 156

Caistor, Capt. Chapman of, 189

Calcutta, dowsing near, 3

Caledonian Road Prison, the well of
the, 56

California, dowsing in, 240, 254

Camoy, Lord, dowsing for, 142

Campden, dowsing near, 121-123

Canada, dowsing in, vii, 227; C.
Milham, of Assa, 174

Candle-snuffers as dowsing-rods, 2,
19, Fig. 8, 234


316


Cape Colony, H. G. Flanagan of
Komgha, 189

Cape Province, dowsing in, 166-173

Carbonic acid gas, dowsing for, 283—


2

Exebontiercus limestone at Congres-
bury, 218

Cardiff, dowsing in, 109, 202; R.
Rothwell of, 174, 202

Cardiff Malting Co., Ltd., dowsing for,


202
Carlow, dowsing at, 132
Carpenter, Bishop W. Boyd, on


dowsing, 251

Carpenter and Builder, 115

Carrigoona, dowsing at, 73, 86-102 ;
the geology of, 87-102

Carrigoona Hill, the geology of,
99-101

Cassiodorus on water-finders, 5, 279

Castlewellan, dowsing near, 139-140

Catalepsy, 246

Catcott, a doswer of, 241

Catley Abbey, seltzer water spring at,
discovered by dowsing, 131 ”.?

Caxton Hall, dowsing in the, 258

Cecil, Lord Arthur, 105

Central Salt Pan Co., Ltd., dowsing
for, 168, 169

Chagny, dowsing at, 38

Chales, de, on dowsing, 236

Chalk, a water-bearing rock, 48,
55» 71; at Lambourn, 63; at
Blackcap Hill, 144; at Welwyn,
179; in Long Valley, 194; at
Shanklin, 209

Chalybeate water
dowsing, 67, 185

Chambré, C. B. M., a dowser, 174

Chaplin, Right Hon. H., dowsing for,
I3I n.?, 203

Chapman, Archdeacon, dowsing for,
159”.

Chapman, Captain, a dowser, 189

Chard, J. Pattmore of, 174

Charles, the experiments with Bleton
of the physicist, 45

Charleton, R. J., on Stone, 271

Charlton, dowsing at, 286

Charman’s, 70

Charmouth Parish Council, dowsing
for, 159 n.

Charterhouse, Bleton, brought up in
a, 32; the observations of the
Prior of this, 32

Charterhouse Estate, dowsing on the,


discovered by


130
Chatsworth, Chesterfield, dowsing at,
8


15
Cheddar, R. Pavey of, 174
Chelbrough, dowsing at, 189-190
Chelford, dowsing at, 126-127


THE DIVINING-ROD


Chelmsford, dowsing near, 125

Cheltenham, the springs of, 587.1;
dowsing at, 200-201

Chertsey, dowsing at, 259-260

Cheshire, dowsing said not to be
found in, 14; dowsing in, 126—
127

Chesterfield, dowsing at, 158

Chesterfield, Lord, dowsing for, 142,
143-144

Chesterman, W., a dowser, 174, 200—


201

Chevreul, Michel Eugéne, on dow-
sing, 24-25, 252; his scientific
work, 24; requested to investi-
gate dowsing, 24; his views,
24-25; their value exaggerated,
25; his debt to others, 25

Chichester, the artesian well at, 56

Child, S. T., a dowser, 186-188 ;
his dowsing-rod, Figs. 59-60

Childrey, Joshua, on dowsing, 14

China, dowsing in, 254

Chippenham, dowsing at, 141 ; Mul-
lins of, 110

Chirk Castle, dowsing at, 165-166

Chirk Water Company, 166

Christchurch Road, Newport, Mon-
mouth, dowsing in, 191-193

Chudleigh, Rev. R. A., on the motion
of the rod, 273-274

Cidaris sceptrifera, 146

Cistern discovered by dowsing, 165

Clairvoyance. See Cryptesthesia.

Clark, F. J., on cases of dowsing,
116, 189-190, 201-202

Clark, Mr, on the Waterford case,
TAs 7D

Clarkson, dowsing at, 226-227

Classical times, dowsing unknown in,


5

Claverton, dowsing at, 205

Clay, a non-water-bearing rock, 55,
150; in Somerset, 57; in
Berks, 62; at Warnham, 69;
at Waterford, 78 ; at Carrigoona,
QI, 92, 93, 98, 100; near Camp-
den, 121, 122; at Sherburn-in-
Elmet, 137; at Uppingham,
138; at Oxford, 148; at Wal-
ton-le-Dale, 155; at Hadding-
ton, 159; near Taunton, 190;
at Warleigh Hill, 204 ; at Shank-
lin, 209; at Yelling, 216

Clay-slate in Cornwall, 58 ; at Water-
ford, 78

Claybats, 150

Claydon, Bucks, W. Robertson of,
174

Clevedon, 217

Clifford, J., on a case of dowsing, 176

Clifton Union, 104


INDEX


Clive, C. M. B., 205

Clive, Percy A., on a case of dowsing,
206, 207, 242-243

Clock-spring. See Watch-spring

Clonmel, 78 ; dowsing at, 132

Coal, measures of Llanelly, 587.2;
at Shrewsbury, 128; dowsing
for, 253, 254

Cochrane, Miss C., on a case of dow-
sing, 216-217

nebo Major, on dowsing, 137-
13

Coins found by dowsing, 31, 120-123,
253, 257-260, 261

Cole, G. A. J., cases of dowsing sub-
mitted to, 62; on the Carri-
goona case, 98-99

Cole, W. L., on Tompkins, 142

Colenutt, Mr, 214 n.

Colerne, Mullins born at, 110

Colley, Walter, dowsing for, 137

Colne Corporation, dowsing for,
159 7.

Combs, D. J., dowsing for, 197

Commission d’études hydroscopiques,
26 ;

Commission de la baguette divina-
toire, 26

Commons, the, 100

Compass found by dowsing, 178

Comptes Rendus of the Académie of
Reims, on dowsing, 50, 52

Condé, Prince of, his experiments
with Aymar, 30

Conduction and induction, electrical,
45, 252

Conduits traced by dowsing, 39, 42

Congresbury, dowsing at, 217-218

Congresses of dowsers, 26

Conisborough Castle, dowsing at, 142

Conjuring trick, dowsing as a, 46-47

Conjuror unmasked, The, 47

Conkwell, dowsing at, 204

Conrad of Megenberg’s allusion to
wishing- and turning-rods, 6

Conrad of Wiirzburg’s allusions to a
wishing-rod, 6

Convent of the Holy Child, Mayfield,
dowsing at, 203

Convulsive spasms produced by
dowsing, 33, 35, 243

Cookworthy, William, a dowser, on
dowsing, 21, 235; his rod, Fig.
54; a rod held as directed by,
Fig. 55

Cooper, E. C., 211

Copper, mines discovered by dowsing,
11; dowsing for, 259

Cornwall, dowsing in, x, 14, 21, 57,
154-155; the geology of, 58

Corpuscular theory of dowsing, the,
17, 21, 248-249


317


Cowley, Abraham, his lines on dow-
sing, 12

Cowley, Lord, dowsing for, 142

Cox, Miss M. R., on dowsing, 237

Cracks in the rock, 57

Crawshay, C. H., dowsing for, 146-
147

Crewkerne, dowsing at, 127-128,
229-332; G. Elson of, 174

Criminals traced by dowsing, x,
3, 4, 27-31, 32

Crockery identified by dowsing, 256

Crotanstown, dowsing at, 162

Crowborough Hill, dowsing at, 207—
208

Crowquill, A., his drawing of a dow-
Sr, 23,7237, Fis. 10

Crump, W., on a case of dowsing,
IIg—120

Cryptesthesia, 160, 161, 222, 260-
270

Crystalline rocks, 61

Cubbage, W., a dowser, 174

Cunningham, J. A., 94

Curone Valley, dowsing in the, 253

Curragh, The, dowsing in, 162

Current electricity, 43

Curtis, Rev. Francis, on a case of,
206-207

Curved dowsing-rods, 32, 33, 45,
234


D., Lady, 106

D., Seigneur, dowsing for, 4; his
experiments with Bleton, 41

Daily Graphic, The, 115, 134

Daily News, The, 182

Daily Telegraph, The, 182

Dairies, dowsing for, 105

Dargle Valley, 99

Darkness, dowsing in, 38, 180, 196

Dauphiny famous for dowsers, 27,


32; Aymar born in, 27; Ble-
ton born in, 31; dowsing in,
37, 42, 43


Day, Thomas, a dowser, 217-218

Dearne Valley Water Board, dow-
sing for, 142

Deception as an explanation of
dowsing, viii, 16, 40, 45, 62,
219

Decomposed rocks, 56

Decremps, H., and dowsing, 46-47

Delft identified by dowsing, 256

Delphi, the oracle of, 1

Demours, M., his experiment with a
dowsing-rod, 46

Dene Park, Tonbridge, dowsing at,
241

Pe atissa: F. Napier, on a case of
dowsing, 225-227, 240

Denmark, dowsing in, 17


318 THE DIVINING-ROD


Denny and Co., 76

Depth, estimating, by means of
dowsing, 39, 40, 41, 49, 52, 60,
07) 77s 7or EDS, DLS, LE 7. LALO;
122.) 123) 125. D2Onei 27 te,
12935 E35 ,213 7 T4ks LAS 245s
150, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157,
158, 162, 163; 167-273;.. 175,
183-184, 196, 198, 206-207, 219,
290

De Quincey, T., on dowsing, 22

De Rance, C. E., on hydrogeology
and dowsing, 57; on ‘“ super-
pervious”’ series, 57; on the
Lower Lias of Somerset, 57

Derbyshire, dowsing said not to be
found in, 14; dowsing in, 156—


157

De Ridder, J. S., dowsing for, 286

Deusing-rod, 16

Devine, Thomas, dowsing for, 197

Devizes, dowsing at, 105

Devonshire, dowsing in, 14; the
geology of, 58

Devonshire, Duke of, dowsing for,
158

Dewar, Peter, dowsing for, 171

Diamond Rock Boring Co., 75

Diaphragm affected by dowsing, 33

Dip, geological, 82, 85

Divination, the use of sticks in, 3

Divinatory practices and dowsing, x

Diviner for water. See Dowser

Divining for water. See Dowsing

Divining-rod. See Dowsing-rod

Divining-tree, 1

Dixon, Capt. J. P., a dowser, 189

Dixon, Mr, a dowser, 240

Dodona, the oracle of, 1

Dorsetshire, dowsing in, 125, 188-189

Down, County, dowsing in, 139

Dowsers : R. A’Barrow, 174 ; Charles
Adams, 23, I10, 174, 264; Col.
R. W. Aldworth, 189; Mr
Altree, 219; Richard Anthony,
178-179, 216-217;

H. Bacon, 174; Mr Bailey, 212-
213; Mr Batten, 189; Rev.
P. Bernhardus, 9; Katharina
Beutler, 263; John Blake, 176-—
178, Fig. 41; Barthélmy Ble-
ton, 21, 31-47, 234, 242-244;
Rev. J. R. Blunt, 189, 220, 239,
240; Anna Maria Briegger, 263 ;
Milman Brown, 209, 212-213;
Allan Butcher, 174;

C. B. M. Chambré, 174; Captain
Chapman, 189; H. Chester-
man, 174, 200-201 ; S. T. Child,
186-188, Figs. 59-60; William
Cookworthy, 21, 235, Figs. 54-
55; W. Cubbage, 174;


Dowsers (contd.)


Capt. J. P. Dixon, 189 ; Mr Dixon,
240 ;

Acueentan Earle, 189, 2043
William Edwards, 174, 233;
James Ellard, 288, 290-291 ;
G. Elson, 174, 229-232; J. D.
Enys, 64, 239-240;

H. Farndell, 258; Lord Farrer,
189, 251; Guy Fenley, 189, 196—
198, 261 ; 2° E. Hiddicki 2335
H. G. Flanagan, 189;

Edward Oscar Garnett, 266-267 ;
Ed. Garran, 286; Leicester
Gataker, 152-159, 218, 234, 245,
Fig. 40; G. Gillingham, 189;
H. W. Golding, 182-183; :Mrs
Greig, 189, 254;

Thomas Hares, 176-178, Fig. 41 ;
Sir Richard MHarington, 189,
270; Col. King-Harman, 189;
Miss Harriss, 227; Thomas
Hawker, 174 ; Tom Heard, 174 ;
John Heighway, 185, 245, Figs.
43, 44; Thomas Heighway,
185; Mr Hetzel, 168; E. M.
Hippisley, 189; J. Stenson
Hooker, 189; R. Howson, 254—
256, 270-271; G. H. Ward-
Humphreys, 189;

Rev. J. G. Jenkins, 189; Mr
Jermans, 258; J. H. <jenes;
89-102, 126, 189, 219, 272, 273;

Mr Kemp, 190; Rodney Kitcher,


1743

Andrew Lang, 189; Charles
Latimer, 25; William Scott
Lawrence, 21, 103-109, 202-203,
224, 239, 245; Lockyer, I91-
193, Fig. 45;

Walter McQueen, 286; Henri
Mager, 233; Mr Marshbanks,
212; Major J. H. Wedderburn
Maxwell, 189, 270; W. Mere-
weather, 108, 174; Lady Mil-
bank, 19, 43%, 239, 2405
Clarissa Miles, 160-166, 261;
Charles Milham, 174; Miss
Minor, 283-284; Gabriel de
Mortillet, 24, 199, Figs. 67-69 ;
H. W. Mullins, 111 ”., 183-185,
203; John Mullins, 21, 65-86,
103, 109-132, I4I, 154, 183,
203-216, 224, 229-232, 237,
239, 242, 243, 256-257, Figs.
15-19, 31; Joseph Mullins,
III ”., 205%”.; the young Mul-
lins’s, 62-63, 73.2, I0g-I10;
Miss Munn, 120;

W. Nicol, 168, 171; Dr Foxley
Norris, 189 ;

Dean Ovenden, 189, 270;


| INDEX 319


Dowsers (contd.)


Abbé Paramelle, 21, 47-54; J. J.
Parangue, 21, 263; John Patt-
more) 174.5 R. Pavey, 1743
Pedegacha, 263, 2807.2; Pen-
nets 25, 47, 234, 242, Fig. 143
Mrs Henry Pim, 189; W. N.
Pogson, 174;

Rhoades, 125; Roberts, 174,
219; R. Robertson, 189, 234,
238, 264, Fig. 58; R. W. Robert-
son, 174; W. Robertson, 174;
Fred Rodwell, 223, 223 7.1, 224,
234, Fig. 51; Fergus Carstairs
Rogers, 166-173; Col. Hugh
Rose, 194-196; R. Rothwell,
EZAS2025

Sanzio, 244; Edward Seebold,
24n”.1; Simon Seymour, 201-—
202; Charles Sims, 175-176;
Skyrne, 220 ; Henry Smart, 180 ;
Smith, 286; Judge William
Ward Spink, 189, 224, 225;
Rev. W. E. Sprague, 287; John
Stears, 179-180, 201-202, 227-—
229, 245, Figs. 42, 47, 52; Rev.
‘Mr Steele, 22; William Stokes,
174, 237, Fig. 53; William
Stone, 86-102, 133-I4I, I9I,
219, 229, 238, 277, Figs. 34-35;
Sumner, 114;

Tebb family, 114, 115; Silas W.
Titus, 286-287; Benjamin
Tompkins, xi, 56, 141-152, 200,
216-217, 237-238, 239, Figs.
36-39; R. G. D. Tosswill, 189,
258; Joseph Towers, 118;
C. E. Townsend, 153; Rev.
H. S. T. Tringham, Miss F. M.
Turner, 260 ;

F. Webb, 174; Bob Wellington,
288, 289-290; J. H. White,
189; Thomas Willis, 174-175;
A. W. Wills, 154, 156-158,
218-219, 234; May Wood,
205-208; Miss Wordsworth,
114, 124; Walter Wyburn,
189-190, 201-202;

pele Young, 58° 2.2; 189,238,
BAS I259, 1264, 6270); KRobert
Young, 245; Thomas Young,
59, 217-218 ;

Zahoris, the, 16, 263, 277-282 ;


Dowsing at (in, amongst the): Aber-


gavenny, 148; Africa, 3, 4, 142,
165-173, 261-262, 266-267 ; Ala-
bama, 288-291; near Albert,
194-196 ; near Alessandria, 253-—
254; Allandale, Grahamstown,
266; Alpine, Texas, 198; An-
naburg, 30; Antrim, I90—-I9QI ;
Arceuil, 41; Arreton, 133-134;


Dowsing at (in, amongst the) (contd.)


Ashbourne, 156-157; Ashwick
Estate, 110; Australia, vii, 26;
Austria, vii; Autun, 38; Avon-
dale, 291;

Ballston Spa, 286; Baltic coun-
tries, vii; Banks Islands, 4;
Barcombe, 220-221; Barkly
West, 169; Basville, 36; Bath,
183-185; Beaucaire, 29; Bel-
fast, 156; Berkshire, 62-63;

_Bermaline Maltings, 158-159 ;
Bicester, 130-131; Blackcap
Hill, 144-146, Figs. 37-38;
Blackrock, 120-121 ; Bohemian
Erzgebirge, 9; Bolton, 142;
Bombay, xizn.?, Borneo, 4;
Botton Wood, 195-196; near
Bouzincourt, 194; Brackley,
163; near Braintree, 182; near
Bray, 86; Brewster County,
Texas, 197; near Bridgwater,
177-178, 241; Brislington, 108 ;
Bristol, 105, 108, 176; British
Columbia, 224-225; Brooklyn,
287;  SBultfontein, 172-173;
Burghfield, 62-63; Burgogne,
41; Burnett, 109;

Cabra, 139-140; near Calcutta,
3; California, 240, 254; near
Campden, 121-123 ; Canada, vii,
227; Cape Province, 166-173 ;
Cardiff, 109, 202; Carlow, 132;
Carrigoona, 73, 86-102; near
Castlewellan, 139-140; Catley
Abbey, 131 ”.2; Caxton Hall,
258; Chagny, 38; Charlton,
286; Charterhouse Estate, 158 ;
Chelbrough, 189-190; Chel-
ford, 126-127; Cheltenham,
200-201 ; Chertsey, 259-260 ;
Cheshire, 14, 126-127 ; Chester-


field, 158; China, 254; Chip-
penham, 141; Chirk Castle,
165-166; Christchurch Road,


Newport, Mon., 191-193 ; Clark-
son, 226-227; Claverton, 205;
Clonmel, 78, 132 ; Colne, 159 %. ;
Congresbury, 217-218; Conis-
borough Castle, 142 ; Conkwell,
204; Convent of the Holy
Child, Mayfield, 203; Cornwall,
X, 14, 21, 57, 154-155; Crew-
kerne, 127-128, 229-232; Cro-
tanstown, 162; Crowborough
Hill, 207-208; Curone Valley,
253; Curragh, The, 162;
Dauphiny, 37, 42, 43; Dearne
Valley, 142; Dene Park, Ton-
bridge, 241; Denmark, 17;
Derbyshire, 14, 156-157; De-
vizes, 105 ; Devonshire, 14 ; Dor-


320


Dowsing at (in, amongst the) (contd.)


setshire, 125, 188-189; Down,
County, 139; Dublin, County,
120-121; near Dunmow, 187;
near the Durance, 43 ”.; Dur-
ham, 139; Duton Hill, 187;

Edbrook Cottage, 177-178; Ed-
wards County, Texas, 197;
Egerton Road, Kimberley, 167—
169; Elliotts, Nuthurst, 219—
220, Fig. 50; England, passim ;
Erzgebirge, 9; Essex, 182;
Europe, vii; Evora, 186; Ex-
celsior farm, 170;

Fiddington, 177-178; France,
Vil, x; 9-11, 17, 21, 24-25; 20,
27-54, 194-196, 263, 268;

Gambia river, 4; Germany, vii,
x, 6-9, 17, 19, 26, 250, 268;
Glasbury, 185; Glass Moun-
tains, 197; mear Gloucester,
174-175; Gloucestershire, 103,
105, I10, I2I-123, 139; near
Glynde, 145; Gough’s close,
245; Grahamstown, 266-267 ;
Grenoble, 27 ; Griqualand West,
166-173;

Haddington, 158-159; Halle, 19;
Hampton Court, Leominster,
154; near Hardshaw Hillock,
155; Hareby Estate, 140-141,
Fig. 35; Harz Mountains, x;
Hastings, 132; Haverholme
Priory, 123-125; Hedgecocks,
106-108; near Hereford, 142-
144; Herefordshire, 206-207 ;
Hertfordshire, 178-179, 263;
High Toynton, 229; Hill-house
farm, 114, 115; Hoe Benham,
165; Hoghton Tower, 155;
Holland, 16-17; Hollies, The,
62-63; Hollow Cottages, 173;
Homestead, The, 166-167, 169 ;
Hope Farm, 169-170 ; near Horn-
castle,229 ; near Horsham, 65-73,
73 n.*, 106-108, 219, 220, Fig.
15; Huntingdonshire, 216-217;

Ilfracombe, 153; India, viii, xi ”.?,
3; Isle of Wight, 133-134, 208-
216; Italy, vil, 7, 34;

Jacobsdaal, 170 ;

Karrepan, 169; Kelby, 113;
Kentucky, 289; Kilkenny, Co.,
218-219; Kimberley, 167-173;
Kingstown, 227-229, Fig. 52;
Kingwood House, 63; Kir-
cassock, 125;

Lambourn, 63; Lancashire, 14,
1553 Lancaster, 157-158 ;
Launceston, 154-155; Leaden-
ham, 113-114; Ledbury, 143,
206; Leuwkop, 167, 171; Leigh


Oatlands,


near Rathfriland,


THE DIVINING-ROD


Dowsing at (in, amongst the) (contd.)


House, 155; near Leominster,
154; Lincolnshire, 112-113, 136—
137, 138, 140-141, 187, 229;
Llanvair, 146-148; Locking,
59, 177, Fig. 41; Long Cross
Vicarage, 259-260 ; Long Valley,
194-196; Lorraine, 35; Lot,
Dept. of, 49-52; Lugwardine,
205; Lurgan, the, 125; Lux-
embourg, the, 41-43; Lyons,
29, 37, 40;


Macedonia, 9; Madresfield, 119—-


120; Mafeking, 173; Maganja,
the, 3; Malays, the, 4; Mal-
vern, 119; Mametz, 195, 195 ”. ;
Mayfield, 203; Melanesia, 4;
Melksham, 141-142; Menai
Bridge, 159”.; Mendips, the,
14, 57, 180, 273; Meredith,
174-175; Mereleigh, 126-127;
Middel Plaats North, 171-172;
Middlesex, 130 ; Middleton Park,
130-131; Millways, 154-155;
Minting, 138; Molten, 180;
Mongols, 4; Monmouthshire,
136, 191-193; Mortimer, 62;
Mullinabro, 126;


Nassau, 24 ”.1; near Nancy, 34;


Netherleigh, 201-202; New-
bury, Berks, 56, 165; New-
castle-on-Tyne, 135-136; near
Newhaven, 145 ; Newport, Mon.,
156, IgI-193; near Newry,
139-140; Nimes, 29; Node,
The, 178-179; Norfolkshire,
142; North Perrott, 127-128,
231-232; Northamptonshire,
163; Northumberland, 139;
Norton Fitzwarren, 190; Nor-
ton Hall, 121-123; Norwich,
142 ; Nuthurst, 219-220, Fig. 50;
157-158 ; Offcote
Hurst, 156-157; Orange Free
State, 167-171, 261-262; Os-
terley Park, 131; Oxford, 148-
149;


Paarl, 261; Paris, 30, 34, 41-42,


44; Pershore, 260; Piedmont,
253; Pipplepen, 231; Poitou,
36; Portugal, vii, 186, 188, 263 ;
near Preston, 155 ; Preston Hall,
137-138 ; Provence, 43 ”.;'

139-140 ;
Rauceby, 112-113; near Read-
ing, 62; Redford, 114; Red-
ruth, 21; Rhdéne, the, 28-29;
Richmond, 154; Rillington,
180, Fig. 42; Rockford, 120-
121; Rocky Valley, 86-102;
Rose Water Point, 195, 196;
near Ross, 143; Rosses Point,


INDEX 321


Dowsing at (in, amongst the) (conid.)


165 ; Rudford, 175 ; near Rudg-
wick, 106-108; Rutlandshire,
137-138;

Sablon, 29; Sachel Court, 73 .?;
near St. André, 39; St. Geny
Laval, 40; St. Jean-en-Royant,
37; Ste Geneviéve church, 44;
Sanderson, 198 ; Sandford Green,
178; Saratoga Springs, 283—
287; Saxon. Erzgebirge, 9;
Scandinavia, vii, 6; Schmidt’s
Drift Road, Kimberley, 170-
171; Shalford, 182-183 ; Shank-
lin, 208-216, Figs. 48-49 ; Shep-
ton Mallet, 115, 175-176; Sher-
burn-in-Elmet, 137; Shrews-
bury, 128; Shropshire, 128;
near Sleaford, 123-125; Sligo,
165; Somersetshire, 14, 22-23,
56-59, 127-128, 177-178, 180,
201-202, 217-218, 229-232, 241,
271-272, 273; South Africa,
142, 166-173, 261-262, 266—
267; South Down, 140; Spain,
vii, 16, 277-282 ; Spilsby, 136—
137, 140-141, Fig. 35; Spring
Valley, 173; Street, 201-202,
Fig. 47; Suffolk, 160, 161, 187;
Surrey, 114; Sussex, 65-73,
106-108, 144-146, 203, 207-208,
219-220, 220-221, Figs. 15,
37-38, 50; Sweden, 17; Swit-
zerland, vii, 263;

Tanyot, 41; Taylor Hill, 218;
Texas, 196-198; Thomastown,
218-219; Thun, 36; Thur-
govia, 263; Tiddington House,
148-149; Tiverton, 105; Ton-
bridge, 241; Torres Straits, 4;
Toulon, 29; Toy Farm, 144-
146, Figs. 37-38; Trianon,
42; Turweston Manor, 163 ;

United States, vii, 22, 25-26, 233,
259,283-291,Fig.51; Uppingham,
137-138 ; near Uvalde, 196, 198;

Vervains, 40;

Wales, North, 165-166; Walker-
ingham, 129; Walton-le-Dale,
155; Warleigh Hill, 204 ; Warn-
ham, 65-73; Warwickshire,
130; Waterford, 65, 73-86, 240,
Figs. 16-19; near Waterford,
126; Weilbach, 24”.1; Weir
Hill, 128; Welwyn, 178-179;
West Keal Hall, 135-137; near
Weston-super-Mare, 177, Fig. 41;
Wethersfield Place, 182; Whit-
field, 205-206 ; Whittle-le-
Woods, 159%.; Wicklow, Co.,
86-102; Wiltshire, 15-16, 125,
130, 141-142; Winchcombe,


21


Dowsing at (in, amongst the) (contd.)


159 ”.; Winscombe, 178 ; Win-
terbourne, 103; Woodhall Spa,
186; Woodlands, 217-218 ;
Woolwich, 19; Worcestershire,
260, 270 ; Wrington, Vale of, 22;

Yaos, the, 3; Yelling, 216-217;
near Yeovil, 189-190; near
Yewhurst, 115; Yorkshire, 137,
142, 180;

Zevenfontain, 168; Zulus 4


Dowsing, things found (etc.) by


means of: aqueducts, 34-35,
41; carbonic acid gas, 283, 287 ;
chalybeate water, 67, 185;
coal, 253-254; coins, 31, 120-
I23, 253, 257-260, 261; com-
pass, 178; conduits, 39, 42;
copper, II, 259; criminals, x,
3, 4, 27-31, 323 crockery, 250;

delft, 256; drains, 117, 118-120,
136-137, 205; gold, 11, 16,
120-123, 257-258; hot springs,
432) AION, eis) jewel;9200);
lawsuits, 32, 40; lead, 11;

medicinal waters, 43; metals,
7-9; 12, 14; 30) 43,, 179, 248,
249, 254, 257, 260; mineral-
waters, 43, 1317.7, 185, 203,
254, 283-287, Figs. 43-44 ; min-
erals, 7-9, II, 14, 2I, 57, 105,
LEG el 70) el 791 233582 Soe eGOp
253, 254; Mines, submarine,
254; murderers, 27-31; oil,
197, 253, 254;

petroleum, 253, 254; pewter,
260; water-pipes, 34-35, 38,
39, 41, 42, 44, 113-114, 117, 119,
120; -121,, “124, ©1136-1375) (052;
157159) 165, 179, 205,270);
porcelain, 256;

seltzer waterspring, 131 7.7, 203 ;
silver, II, 16, 259; stoneware,
256; submarines, 254; sulphur
springs, 185; thieves, 3-4; tin,
260 ; treasure, 31 ; water, passim


“ Dowsing-cone,” 233
Dowsing-rods, articles and _ sub-


stances used for: aluminium,
238, Fig. 58; apple-tree wood,
166; bamboo, 3, 4; blackthorn,
220 ; abook, 109, Fig. 8; bucket-
handle, 19, Fig. 8; candle-
snuffers, 2, 19, 234, Fig. 8;

galvanized wire, 226; grass, 166;
hazel, 6, I1, 74, 77, 81, 103, 104,
106, 107, 147, 164, 165, 166,
187, 191, 195, 204, 206, 220,
226, 232, 235, 236, 255, 277;
Knackwurst, 19; knife and fork,
19, Fig. 8; not lance-wood, 116 ;
lilac-wood, 226;


322


Dowsing-rods (contd.)
metal, 2, 19, 46, 103, 105, 107,
152, 166, 175, 176, 187,194,
226, 234, 238, 255, 271, Figs.
58-60 ; nut-wood, 128; peach-
tree wood, 166, 290 ; pepper-tree
wood, 166 ; persimmon-tree wood,
289; smoking-pipes, 19, Fig. 8;
plum-wood, 226;
sausage, 2, 19, 234; scissors, 19,

Fig. 8; steel, 103, 104, 105,
107, 175, 234; sycamore, I16;
thorn, 147, 148, 150; tongs, 2;
walking-stick, 236-237; watch-
spring, 103, 104, 107, 176, 187,
194, 234, 271; whitethorn, 147,
148, 150; willow, 15-16, 187,
226; wire, 106, 152, 166, 175,
226, 255; wood, passim

Drainage, geological, 58, 100

Drains traced by dowsing, 117, 118-
120, 136-137, 205

Draycott, W. Edwards of, 233

Dublin, County, dowsing in, 120-121

Dublin Mountains, 99

Dufresne, Capt. J. C., on a case of
dowsing, 194, 195

Duke, R. F., 258

Dungannon, C. B. M. Chambré of, 174

Dunham, Beavis, dowsing for, 229

Dunmow, dowsing near, 187

Dunraven, Lord, dowsing for, 142

Durance, dowsing near the, 43 .

Durham, dowsing in, 139

Du Toit, J., on a case of dowsing,
261-262

Duton Hill, dowsing at, 187

Dynamic force as an explanation of
dowsing, 249


Eagle Card Company, dowsing for, 105

Earle, Archdeacon, a dowser, 189, 204

Earth currents, 43

East End, Shanklin, 215

Eau, Chateau d’, 41

Edbrook Cottage, Fiddington, dow-
sing at, 177-178

Edda, the magical rods of the, 6

Ede, a dowser, 258

Edgeworth, F. H., 273

Edwards, William, a dowser, 174;
his invention, 233 ‘

Edwards County, Texas, dowsing in,
197

Effluves terrestres, 250

Egerton Road, Kimberley, dowsing
in, 167-168, 169

Electricity, its alleged connection
with dowsing, 34, 35, 49, 43, 45,
152, 888, 217, 227, 243, 250, 252

“ Electro-Geodetic Mineral Finder,”
233


THE DIVINING-ROD


“‘ Electro-Terreohmeter,”’ 233

Elizabeth, Queen, dowsing in the
Mendips since her time, 57

Ellard, James, a dowser, 288, 290,


291

Elliott, K. C., dowsing for, 168, 169

Elliotts, Nuthurst, dowsing at, 219—
220, Fig. 50

Elson, G., a dowser, 174, 229-232

Ely Paper Works, dowsing for, 105,
109 :

Emanations, influence on dowsing of
alleged, 40

Emerson, Rev. Ralph, on dowsing,
E2272

Encyclopédie, the Paris, 43

Encyclopédie méthodique, on dowsing,


47

Engineers and dowsing, 57, 60, 65,
75, 86, 98, I0I, 117, 118, 128,
179, 182, 183-184, 190, 199, 210

England, dowsing in, passim

Enys, I. D., a geologist and dowser,
on dowsing, 64, 239-240

Erzgebirge, dowsing in the, 9

Eshelby, D. W., on a case of dowsing,
270

Hesex donslie in, 182

Essex Herald, The, 182

Essex Naturalist, 71

Europe, dowsing in, vii

Evans and Owen, Messrs, dowsing
for, 105, 109

Evelyn, John, on dowsing, 14

Evercreech, H. Smart of, 180

Evora, dowsing at, 186

Excelsior Farm, Jacobsdal, dowsing
at the, 130

Exeter, Lord, dowsing for, 131 7.2

Exeter, Mr. Jermans of, 258

Exmoor, the geology of, 58

Experiments in dowsing, 12-13, 15,
19, 22,24, 24 ”.1, 25 and passim ;
precautions to be observed, 86


F., M. de, dowsing for, 38; his
experiments with Bleton, 38

Faikes at Haddington, 159

Failures of Bleton, 44-45; Para-
melle, 50; Mullins, 131-132;
Stone, 133-135; Gataker, 153 ;
Wills, 154

Faintness produced by dowsing, 30

Farm and Home, 130

Farmer and Chamber of Agriculture
Journal, The, 148

Farndell, H., a dowser, 258

Farrer, Lord, a dowser, 189; on
dowsing, 251

Faults in the rock, 56, 190

Fayle, Edwin, on the Waterford
case, 85 n.


a


INDEX


Fenley, Guy, a dowser, 189, 196-
198, 261

Ferruginous sands at Shanklin, 212

F ee y Montenegro on the Zahoris,
280


Fiddick, T., a dowser, his ‘‘ dowsing
cone,’ 233

Fiddington, dowsing at, 177-178

Figuier, Louis, on dowsing, 25; on

Bleton’s alleged failures, 44

Fire, the dowsing-rod as a symbol of

divine, 1

Fireclay at Haddington, 159

Fisher, Rev. Osmond, on geology
and dowsing, 61

Fiske, John, on the origin of the
dowsing-rod, 1-2

Fissure-water, 58, 114

Fissures in rocks, 55, 57, 58, 98,
I14, 144, 195, 201, 215

Flanagan, H. G., a dowser, 189

Flint at Blackcap Hill, 144

Fludd, Robert, on dowsing, 11

Folklore, dowsing in, 5, 5 ».?

Foot, use of the, by Aymar in dow-
sing, 30

Forked shape of the dowsing-rod,
the, I-2, 9, 19, 47, 74, 77, 81, 87,
89, 95, 103, 106, III, I1I5, 116,


118, 123, 128, 141, 147, 148,
I50, 152, 153, 160, 164, 165,
E79, E82, 204; 200, 217, +220,
Z2ZOwmoe (reese, 234,162 35,, 250;
230.6240, 241, 242,251, 255,
271, 290, Figs. 1, 3-13, 31-34,


36, 51, 53-58, 64-67
Fox, Dr., dowsing for, 108
France, dowsing in, vii, x, 9-11, 17,
21, 24-25, 26, 27-54, 194-196,
263, 268
France, Queen of, dowsing for, 42
Francois, Jean, on dowsing, 15
Fraud as an explanation of dowsing,
Vili, 16, 40, 45, 62, 219
Freiberg, translation of Paramelle’s
book by Professor at, 51
Fry, Lord Justice, dowsing for, 105
Fuller’s earth in Somerset, 128


G., P. I., dowsing for, 41 ; his experi-
ments with Bleton, 41

Gallows Hill, 85

Galvanized-wire dowsing-rod, 226

Gambia river, dowsing up the, 4

Garden, The, 119

Garner, Hon. John N., on a case of
dowsing, 198

Garnett, Edward Oscar, a dowser,
266-267

Garnett, Professor E., on a case of
dowsing, 266-267

Garran, Ed., a dowser, 286


323


Gassend, Pierre, on dowsing, 13

Gatacre. See Gataker

Gataker, Leicester, a dowser, 218,
234; his wife, 152; his sensa-
tions, 150, 245 ; his failures, 153 ;
examples of his successes, 153—
159; his portrait, Fig. 40

Gault clay at Shanklin, 209, 213

Gazette de santé on dowsing, 46

Geake, John, dowsing for, 154-155

Gearing’s, 70

Geikie, Sir Archibald, on dowsing, 63

General Carbonic Co., 283

Geognostic, 49

Geological Society, The, 64

Geological Survey, 87, 212

Geological Survey of Ireland, 64,

Geological works, dowsing in, 60

Geologists’ Association of London,
61, 69

Geologists on dowsing, passim;
where they should be employed,


56

Geology of water-supply, the, 48-
59; of Somerset, 56-59; and
passim

Gere, C. M., 149

German translation of Paramelle’s
book, 51

Germanic literature, the divining-rod
in, 6

Germans, dowsing by, x, II

Germany, dowsing in, vii, x, 6-9,
17, 19, 26, 250, 268

Gillingham, G., a dowser, 189

Gilmour, James, on dowsing among
the Mongols, 4

Ginetz, Dr, on dowsing, 42-43

Glacial drift in the Rocky Valley,
98, 100

Glanvil, Joseph, on dowsing, 14

Glasbury, dowsing at, 185

Glasebrook, R. T., on a case of
dowsing, 129

Glass Mountains, Texas, dowsing at,


197

Gloucester, dowsing near, 174-175;
T. Willis of, 174-175

Gloucestershire, dowsing in, 103, 105,
110, I2I-123, 129, 174-1753
geology of, I2I—-123

Gloucestershire Dairy Company, dow-
sing for, 105

Ghickrit, 7

Glynde, dowsing near, 145

Gold discovered by dowsing, 120-
123, 257-258

Gold mines discovered by dowsing,
11; dowsing used in, 16

Golden rod, the, of the Nibelungslied,
6


324


Golding, H. W., a dowser, 182-183

Gottfried of Strassburg’s allusion
to a wishing-rod, 6

Gough’s Close, dowsing in, 245

Gould, G. Baring-, on dowsing, 2, 25

Grace, A. R., 189

Grafton, Duke of, dowsing for, 105,
131 %.7, 133, 142

Graham, Professor J. W., 157

Grahamstown, dowsing at, 266-267

Granite, a non-water-bearing rock,

5; in Cornwall, 58; in County

Down, 139

Grantham, Captain, on a case of
dowsing, 136-137

Grantham, Colonel, dowsing for, 136-
137

Grantham, Judge. Ses Grantham,
Sir W.

Grantham, Miss, on a case of dowsing,
220-221, 240

Grantham, Sir W., dowsing for, 220—
221, 240

Grantham, dowsing at,
near, 112-113

Grass dowsing-rods, 166

Gravel, 71; at Carrigoona, 90, 93,
Ioo; near Campden, 122; at
Sherburn-in-Elmet, 137; at
Oxford, 148 ; at Waddington, 159

Great Britain, rainfall in, 55

Great Sugarloaf Mountain, 99-100,
IOI #,

Great Western Railway,
for, 105

Greathed, Mrs, dowsing for, 205-206

Greatwood Copse, 209

Greenmount Agricultural College,
dowsing for, 190-191

Greensand at Shanklin, 209

Greenstone, a  mnon-water-bearing
rock, 55

Greer, Captain J. H., dowsing for,
160, 161, 162-163

Greer, Mrs., 161, 162

Gregory, Sir W. F. Welby-, on a
case of dowsing, 116-119, 224 n.

Greig, Mrs, a dowser, 189, 254


116-119 ;


dowsing


Grenoble, Aymar’s feat at, 27;
Bleton born near, 45

Gresham, Sir Thomas, 203

Gresson, Mrs, dowsing for, 208

Grey ‘“‘claybats,” 150; marl, near


Taunton, 190
Griqualand West, dowsing in, 166-


173

Grits at Waterford, 82

Grove, G, Troyte-Chapyn-, dowsing
for, 125

Guillaumot, M., his experiments with
Bleton, 41

Gurney, Edmund, on dowsing, 128


THE DIVINING-ROD


Haddington, dowsing at, 158-159

Hales, Frank N., on a case of dow-
sing, 254

Halkett, Miss M. Craigie, on a case
of dowsing, 241

Halle, dowsing in, 19

Hampton Court, Leominster, dow-
sing at, 154

Hampton Court, near Worcester,
Miss Turner of, 260

Handle of a bucket as a dowsing-


rod, 19, Fig. 8
Harben, Sir Henry, dowsing for,
65-73, Fig. 15; om cases of


dowsing, 73 ”.*, 147

Hardshaw Hillock, dowsing at, 155

Hareby Estate, dowsing on the, 140—
141, Fig. 35

Hares, Thomas, a dowser, 176-178,
Fig, 41

Harington, Sir Richard, a dowser,
189, 270

Harmon, Colonel King-, a dowser, 189

Harriss, Mr, dowsing for, 226-227

Harriss, Miss, a dowser, 227

Harriss, Mrs., 227

Harz Mountains, dowsing in the, x

Hastings, dowsing at, 132

Hastings Board of Guardians, dow-
sing for, 132

Hastings Beds at Horsham, 69

Hatton, Hon. Harold Finch, 1123-124

Hatton, Hon. M. E, G. Finch, later
the Earl of Winchilsea, g.v.

Hauff, G., dowsing for, 170

Haverholme Priory, dowsing at, 123-
125

Hawker, Thomas, a dowser, 174

Hazel, a dowser, 253

Hazel dowsing-rods, 6, II, 74, 77,
8I, 103, 104, 106, 107, 147, 164,
165, 166, 187, I9I, 195, 204,
206, 220, '226, 232,235, 236;

255, 277

“Head of the Spring,’’ Tompkins’s
expression, 149, 149 #., 152

Heard, Tom, a dowser, 174

Hedgecocks, near Rudgewick, dow-
sing at, 106-108, 107 ”,

Heighway, John, a dowser, 185

Heighway, Thomas, a dowser, 185,
Figs. 43-44, 245

Hellier, W. G,., dowsing for, 176-
178

Henderson, John, and Co,, 74

Henfield, Roberts of, 174, 219

Hennig, R., on dowsing, 268

Hereditary nature of dowsing, 183,
185

Hereford, dowsing near, 142-144

Herefordshire, dowsing in, 142-144,
206-207


INDEX


Hermes, the wand of, 1


Herschel, Sir John, on scientific
method, ix

Hertfordshire, dowsing in, 178—
179, 263


Hessle, J. Stears of, 179-180

Hetzel, Mr, a dowser, 168

Heytesbury, Lord, dowsing for, 105,
131 #2

Hickes, T. J., on a case of dowsing,
II5-116

Hidden articles found by dowsing,
29, 31, 120-123, 178, 253, 256—
260

Higginbottom, Mr,
135-136

Hightoynton, dowsing at, 229

Hill and Son, 180

Hill-house farm, Yewhurst, dowsing
on the, 114, 115

Hippisley, E. M., a dowser, 189

Histortj von hevrizog Reynfrid von
Braunschweijg, allusions to a
wishing-rod in the, 6

Hodgesfield, Waterford, dowsing in,
81

Hoe Benham, dowsing at, 165

Hoernlé, Prof. R. F. A., on a case
of dowsing, 261-262

Hoghton, Sir James de,
for, 155 -

Hoghton Station, 155

Hoghton Tower, dowsing at, 155

Holastey placenta, 146

Holland, dowsing in, 16-17

Holland, J. E., on a case of dowsing,
I25

Hollands, Mrs Minnie, on a case of
dowsing, 241

Hollands, Miss, a dowser, 241

Hollies, The, Burghfield, dowsing at,
62-63

Hollow Cottages, dowsing at the,


dowsing for,


dowsing


113

Holmes, Sherlock, 85

Holmes, T. V., on a priori conclusions,
61; cases of dowsing submitted
to, 62; on dowsing, 64; on the
Horsham case, 68%., 69-73;
on a case at Chelford, 127; on
a case at Horncastle, 138; on
a case at Oxford, 149; ona case
at Welwyn, 179; on Sir R.
Lankester’s experiment, 223-224

Home, Lord, dowsing for, 159 #.

Home Farms, 125

Homestead, The, Kimberley, dow-
sing at, 166-167, 169

Hooker, J. Stenson, a dowser, 189

Hooson, William, on dowsing, 21

Hope Farm, Kimberley, dowsing at,
169-170


325


Horncastle, dowsing at, 138 ; near, 229

Horseshoe-shaped dowsing-rod, 105

Horsham, dowsing near, 65-73, 73 .?
Fig. 15, 106-108, 219, 220; the
geology of, 69-72

Horsham Stone, 69

Hoskins, Sir John, 16

Hoskyns, H. W., dowsing for, 127—
128, 229-232

Hot springs, dowsing for, 43

How, Henry, dowsing for, 106-108

Howson, R., a dowser, 254-256, 270—


271

Howth, the geology of, 98

Hull Field Naturalists’ Society, 179

Humphrey, A. P., 187, 188

pee G. H. Ward-, a dowser,
169

Huntingdonshire, dowsing in,216-217

Hurst Hill, 70

Hutton, Charles, on dowsing, 17-19

Huxley, T. H.,79

Hydro-geologist, Paramelle becomes


a, 49

Hydro-geologists, 54; where should
be employed, 56; not more
successful than dowsers, 57

Hydromancy not to be confused with
dowsing, 2

Hydropyréte, 45

Hydroscope, 47, 49

Hynes, Mr, 218

Hyperesthesia, 261

Hyslop, J. H., 287

Hythe, A. Butcher of, 174


Ibbetson, Sir W. S., dowsing for, 105

Igneous rocks in Cornwall, 58; at
Waterford, 85

Ilfracombe, dowsing at, 153

Ilfracombe Local Board, dowsing for,


153

Illiteracy of dowsers, 24, 34

Illness, its influence on dowsing, 33

Ilminster, Mr Batten of, 189

Impermeable and permeable rocks, 55

Independent dowsers, experiment
with two or more, 86-102, 117—-
118, I4I, I51I, 167-168, 199-
221, Figs. 46-50, 286

India, dowsing in, viii, xi, #.%, 3;
W. N. Pogson of Kilpauk, 174

Induction and conduction, electrical,
45, 252

Inferior oolite in Somersetshire, 127

Inquisition, dowsing in the “ moral
world ”’ forbidden by the, 32

Instruments used for the finding of
underground water, minerals,
CtCr tt

Insulation, its alleged effect on dow-
sing, 35, 40, 45, 252


326


Intrudes, 85

Involuntary muscular action.
Unconscious muscular action

Ipswich, Suffolk, S. T. Child of, 186—
188

Ireland, Gataker’s agentin, 153

Irish Geological Society, 64

Irish Geological Survey, 64, 73, 74, 75

Iron mines discovered by dowsing, '11

Isle of Wight, dowsing in the, 133-
134, 208, 216

Italy, dowsing in, vii, 7, 34

Ivy Lodge, the home of Ag at
141


See


Jacobsdaal, dowsing in, 170

Jadelot, Prof., on dowsing, 36

James, A. A., dowsing for, 202

James-Lange theory, the, 246

Janet, Pierre, 246

Jeffrey, John, dowsing for, 169-170

Jelf, General R. H., dowsing for,
150-157

Jenkins, E. Vaughan-, on dowsing,
26, 193”.; cases collected by,
107-109, 116-119, 123-125, 191I—
193, 205-208

Jenkins, Rev. J. G., a dowser, 189

Jermans, Mr, a dowser, 258

Jersey, Earl of, dowsing for,
130, 131

Jewel, dowsing for a, 260

Joints in rocks, 55, 71, 146

Jones, J. H., a dowser, 189, 219, 272,
273; at Carrigoona, 89-102; on
a case of dowsing, 126

Journal d’agriculture pyvatique, on
dowsing, 50

Journal de Paris on dowsing, 41-42,


129-


44
Journal de Physique on dowsing, 44
Journal des Sgavans on dowsing, 45-


4
Jouynal des Spectacles on dowsing, 42
Jowsers, 22

Jurassic rocks in Somerset, 57


Kaap Plateau, 167
Kabbalists, 277
ee Barkly West, dowsing at,


de, C. F., on the origin of the
dowsing- -tod, I

Kelby, dowsing at, 113

Kemp, Mr, a dowser, 190

Kentucky, dowsing in, 289

Kilkenny, County, dowsing in, 218-


219
“ Killas,” clay-slate, in Cornwall, 58
Killough, valley of, 99
Kilmacanoge, vale of, 99
Kilpauk, W. N. Pogson of, 174


THE DIVINING-ROD


Kilroe, J. R., cases of dowsing sub-
mitted to, 62, 64; on the Water-
ford case, 73, 74, 75, 82-85; on
the Corrigoona case, 99-IOI ; on
an alleged failure of Mullins, 132

Kilruddery, 99

Kimberley, dowsing at, 167-173

Kinahan, G. H., cases of dowsing sub-
mitted to, 62, 64; on the Water-
ses igs 75, 77, 82, 85, Figs.


16,
King, J. - T., dowsing for, 167-168,
69


I

Kingstown, dowsing at, 227-229,
Fig. 52

Kingwood House, Lambourn, dow-
sing at, 63

Kircassock, dowsing at, 125

Kircher, Athanasius, on dowsing,


I2-13, 15, 25, 280
Kirk and Parry, Messrs., 113
Kitcher, Rodney, a dowser, 174
Klinckowstroem, Count C. von, on
dowsing, 251
Knackwurst, as a dowsing-rod, 19
Knapp, Rev. Martin R., on a case of
dowsing, 239
Knife and fork as a dowsing-rod,
19, Fig. 8
Knutsford, Lord, dowsing for, 131 ».?
Kock, J. W. de, dowsing for, 173
Komgha, H. L. Flanagan of, 189
Kuhn, Adalbert, on the origin of the
dowsing-rod, I


La Blanche, Count of, dowsing for, 36
La Borde, M. de, dowsing for, 36
La Fond, Sigaud de, on dowsing, 36
Lake District, the geology of the, 58
Lalande, the astronomer, on the
rotation of the dowsing-rod, 33 ;
his criticisms of Bleton, 45-46 ;
his criticism discussed, 45
Lambourn, dowsing at, 63
Lamoignon, President of, dowsing for,


3
Lancashire, dowsing said not to be
found in, 14; dowsing in, 155
Lancaster, dowsing at, 157-158
Lance-wood too stiff for use as a
dowsing-rod, 116
Lang, Andrew, on dowsing, 25; a
dowser, 189; letter to, 230, 254
Lang, Samuel, dowsing for, 109


Lankester, Sir Ray, his experiment .


in dowsing criticised, 223-224,
223 n.
Lansdowne, Lord, dowsing for, 142
Laon, Bishop of, dowsing for, 36
Latimer, Charles, a dowser, on dow-
sing, 2
Launceston, dowsing at, 154-155


INDEX


Lawrence, William Scott, a dowser,
21, 103-109, 224, 239, 245; his
life and character, 103-105; ex-
amples of his successes, 106—109,
202, 202-203

Lawson, Miss Mary, dowsing for, 260

Lawsuits, dowsing to settle, 32, 40

Lead mines discovered by dowsing, 11

Leadenham, dowsing at, 113-114

Lebrun, Pierre, on dowsing, 17, 25,
30; his correspondence with
Malebranche, 17, 30

Ledbury, dowsing near, 143, 206

Lee, Rev. A. C., on a case of dowsing,
207

Leeuwkop, ory Leukop, farm, Orange
Free State, dowsing at, 167, 171

Lefroy, C. St G., on the Carrigoona
case, 87, 89, 93 %., 95-97

Leigh House, Walton-le-Dale, dow-
sing at, 155

Leigh, Lord, dowsing for, 129, 131 ”.?

Leipsic, a paper devoted to dowsing
in, 26

Le Lorrain de Vallemont, P. de, on
dowsing, 25, 30; his experi-
ments with Aymar, 30

Leominster, dowsing near, 154

Letts, John, dowsing for, 180, Fig. 42

Leukop, ov Leeuwkop, farm, Orange
Free State, dowsing at, 167, 171

Leviathan belching dowsing-rods, 19,
Fig. 8

Lias in Somerset, 57, 58.1; at
Shepton Mallet, 115; near
Campden, 121; at Uppingham,
138; at Street, 201-202; at
Warleigh Hill, 204

Light, the dowsing-rod as a symbol
of divine, 1; its properties in
connection with dowsing, 40

Lightning, the dowsing-rod sym-
bolical of, 2

Lilac-wood dowsing-rod, 226

Limestone, a permeable rock, 57,
71; at Carrigoona, 100; at
Rauceby, 112, 114; at Sher-
burn-in-Elmet, 137; at Upping-
ham, 138; at Kimberley, 172;
at Congresbury, 218

Lincolnshire, dowsing in, 112-113,
136-137, 138, 140-141, 187, 229

Little, W. D., on a case of dowsing,
129-130

Little Mays, 69

Little Sugarloaf Mountain, 99-100

Littlehampton, H. Farndell of, 258

Llandrindod Wells, T. Heighway of,


185
Llanelly, the geology of, 587.7;
R. W. Robertson of, 174
Llanvair, dowsing at, 146-148


327


Llanvair Grange, dowsing at, 146-147

Llanvair Rectory, dowsing at,147-148

Lloyd, Captain Penny, dowsing for,
185, Figs. 43, 44

Lloyd and Yorath, Ltd., Messrs,
dowsing for, 156

Load-stone, its properties compared
to dowsing, II, 250

Loam, a non-water-bearing rock, 55 ;
near Taunton, 190

Local authorities entitled to employ
dowsers, xi

Local Government Board dowsing, xi

Locke, John, his use of the word
Deusing, 16

Locking, dowsing at, 59, 177, Fig. 41

Lockyer, a dowser, 191-193, Fig. 45

Lockyer, George, 192

Lodge, Sir Oliver, 254, 269

Londesborough, Lord, dowsing for, 142

London clay in Berks, 62

Londonderry, Marquis of, dowsing
for, 159”.

Long, Lord, dowsing for, 142

Long Cross Vicarage, dowsing at,
259-260

Long Valley,
194-196

Lorraine, dowsing in, 35

Lot, the Department of, water-supply
in, 47-49 ; dowsing in, 49-52

Louis XVI, Thouvenel commissioned
by, 43

Love, R. P., dowsing for, 172-173

Lower greensand at Shanklin, 212

Lower lias, the, in Somerset, 57

Lowther, Colonel W. G., dowsing
for, 254

Lugwardine, dowsing at, 205

Lunatic Asylum, the Brislington,
dowsing for, 108

Lurgan, dowsing in the, 125

Luther, Martin, on dowsing, 7

Luxembourg, the experiments with
Bleton at the, 41-43

Lyons, a commission on dowsing
appointed at, 26; Aymar born
near, 27; the murder of a mer-
chant at, 27; Aymar traces the
criminal through, 29; the case
noted in the records of, 29-30 ;
Bleton in the Charterhouse of,
32; the Prior of this on Bleton,
32, 37, 38; a book on dowsing
published at, 33 ; dowsing in, 37 ;
dowsing near, 40


Albert, dowsing in,


M., Bishop of, on experiments with
Bleton, 38-39

M., Chevalier de, dowsing for, 38;
his experiments with Bleton,
38


328


M., Count de, dowsing for, 38; his
experiments with Bleton, 38, 242

Macedonian miners stated not to
dowse, 9

McQueen, Walter, a dowser, 286

Madras coast,dowsing by native from,3

Madresfield, dowsing at, 119-120

Mafeking, District of, dowsing in, 173

Maganja, Central Africa, dowsing
among the, 3

Mager, Henri, a dowser, his mechani-
cal water-finder, 233

Maggs, Charles, dowsing for, 141-142

Magic, ix, 14, 79

Magical rod, the, of the Edda, 6

Magie blanche dévoilée, La, 46-47

Magnesian limestone at Sherburn-in-
Elmet, 137

Magnetism, its alleged connection
with dowsing, 19, 35, 250

Malaise, the, of the dowser, 243-247

Malays, dowsing among the, 4

Malebranche, on dowsing, 17

Malham Tarn water sinks, 56

Malvern, dowsing at, 119

Mametz, dowsing near, 195, 195”.

Manchester ThirlmereWaterworks,158

Manikin, directions for making one
dowse, 46-47

Mansfield’s ‘“‘ Patent Automatic Wa-
ter Finder,” 233

Marcellus, 279

Marl, a non-water-bearing rock, 55;
near Leominster, 154; at Wal-
ton-le-Dale, 155; at Hadding-
ton, 159; at Meredith, 175;
near Taunton, 190 ; at Newport,
Mon., 193; at Warleigh Hill,
204; at Congresbury, 218

Marlborough, Duke of,dowsing for,142

Marlstone, a water-bearing rock, 55 ;
at Grantham, 116 n.

Marshbanks, Mr, a dowser, 212

Marshfield, W. Edwards of, 174

Martel, E. A., on dowsing, 60

Martell, S., on a case of dowsing, 107

Martin, Gilson, dowsing for, 158


“ Matiére meurtriére,”’ 31, 249
Maxwell, Sir Herbert, on dowsing,
I31, 254-256


Maxwell, Major J. H. Wedderburn, a
dowser, 189, 270

May, H., 258

Mayfield, dowsing at, 203

Mayo, Rev. C. H., 12


Mayo, Herbert, on dowsing, 23-24,
24.1, 244
Mechanical water- and wmineral-


finders, 233, 250-251
Mechanism of dowsing, the, 233-247
Medicinal waters, 43
Medieval times, dowsing in, 6


THE DIVINING-ROD


Mediterranean idols, 1

Melanesia, use of rods in, 4

Melksham, dowsing at, 141-142

Melksham Dairy Co., dowsing for,
I4I—-142

Menai Bridge District Council, dow-
sing for, 159 #.

Mendips, dowsing in the, 14, 57,
180, 273; the geology of the, 51

Mercator, N., on dowsing, 15-16

Mercurial rods, 6, 9

Meredith, dowsing at, 174-175

Mereleigh, Chelford, dowsing at, 126—
127

Mereweather, W., a dowser,
on a case of dowsing, 108

Mereweather, Messrs, 108 7.?

“* Merry thought,”’ 164

Metal dowsing-rods, 2,19, 46, 103,105,
'I07, 152, 166, 175, 176, 187, 194,
226, 234, 238, 255, 271, Figs.58—60

Metalloscopia, 12

Metals, dowsing for, 7-9, II, 14, 30,
43, 179, 248, 249, 254, 257-260

Metamorphic rock at Waterford, 78

Methuen, Lord, dowsing for, 141

Micrastey cor-anguinem, 146

Micraster cor-testudinarium, 146

Middel Plaats North, Kimberley,
dowsing at, 171-172

Middlesex, dowsing in, 130

Middleton Park, dowsing at, 130-131

Midford Sands at Bath, 183

Milbanke, Lady, a dowser, 19, 43 %.,
239, 240

Miles, Miss Clarissa, a dowser, 160-—
166, 261

Miles, Colonel, 164

Milham, Charles, a dowser, 174

Miller, W. Christie-, dowsing for,
73-86, 125-126


174;


Millways, Launceston, dowsing at,

_ 154-155
Mineral-waters, 34, 43; dowsing for,
43, 131.7, 185, Figs. 43-44,


203, 254, 283-287

Minerals, dowsing for, 7-9, II, 14,
21, 57, 105, ILE, 176,0879, 2335

_ 235, 236, 253, 254

Mines, submarine, dowsing for, 254

Mining, dowsing in connection with,
X, 7, 9, II, 14, 16, 20-21, 25, 26

Mining-rod, 7

Ministry of Agriculture, France,
appoint a sub-committee to
investigate dowsing, 26

Ministry of Finance, Northern Ire-
land, 190

Minor, J. C., on a case of dowsing,
283-287

Minor, Miss, a dowser, 283-284

Minting, Horncastle, dowsing at, 138


INDEX


Mole, Mr, 273

Molten, dowsing near, 180

Mongez, Abbé, his experiments with
Bleton, 43-44

Mongols, dowsing among the, 4

Monkswood Reservoir, 184

Monmouthshire, dowsing in,
IQI—-193

Mono-ideism, 246, 247

Monteagle, Lord, 160, 161

Montgomerie and Co., dowsing for,
158-159

Monthly Review, The, the views of a
writer in, on dowsing, 32, 42,


156,


44, 44 7.

Montucla, J. E., his edition of Ozan-
am, I7

Moore, F. K., dowsing for, 197

“Moral world,’ dowsing forbidden
in the, 32

Morning Post, The, 134

Morse code, 267

Mortillet, Gabriel de, a dowser, 24;
on experiments with independent
dowsers, 199; the rod as held
by, Figs. 67-69

Mortimer, dowsing at, 62

Morton, Duncan, on a case of dow-
sing, 242

Morton’s Lincolnshive Almanac, 229

Moses, the feat of, in the wilderness
not to be confused with dowsing, 2

Motion of the rod, the, 33, 39, 45-
46, 105-106, I10, III, 114, 115,
120, 123, 129, 134, 147-148, 148-—


149, I5I-I52, 152-153, 160,
E75 079s 2075) £91,) 195, 207;
ZOS 212) 9257, 0210, 224, 226—
227, 229, 239-243, 255, 256,


259, 268, 270-275, 289, 290-2901 ;
transmission of, 129, 227, 242-243

Motor automatism, 246

Mountain limestone, a permeable
tock, 57

Mowbray, E. W., dowsing for, 166—
167, 169

Mullinabro, dowsing at, 126; J. H.
Jones of, 89-102, 126, 189

Mullins, H. W., a dowser, III %.,
183-185, 203

Mullins, John, a dowser, 21, 103,
141, 154, 183, 224, 229-232, 237,
239, 242, 243, 250-257; at
Horsham, 65-73, Fig. 15; at
Waterford, 65, 73-86, Figs. 16—
19; his business and life, 109—
t11; his manner of holding the
tod, 111-112, Figs. 32-33, 56;
examples of his successes, 112—
131, 203-216; his failures, 131—
132; an alleged failure, 132;
his portrait, Fig. 31


329


Mullins, John, and Sons, a firm of
dowsers and well-sinkers, 109

Mullins, Joseph, 111 #., 205 ».

Mullins, the young, dowsers, failure
of one of, in Berks, 62-63 ; suc-
cesses of one of, near Horsham,
73 .2; apt to take credit for
their father’s successes, 109-110

Munn, Miss, a dowser, 120

Munn, Rev. G. S., on a case of dow-
sing, 120

Minster, Sebastian, on dowsing, 7

Murchison, Sir Roderick, 143

Murderers traced by dowsing, 27-31

““ Murderous matter,” 31

Muscular spasms produced by dow-
sing, 105

Myddleton, Richard, dowsing for,
165-166

Myers, F. W. H., 224


N., Surgeon-Major, dowsing for, 40

Nancy, dowsing near, 34

Nasmith, C. W., dowsing for, 126-127

Nassau, dowsing in, 24 7.1

Needham, J. T., on dowsing, 46

Negro dowser, a, 288, 289-290

Neocomian formation at Shanklin,213

Netherleigh, Street, dowsing at, 201-
202 :

Nevill, Lady Dorothy, on a case of
dowsing, 203

New River Company, 65

New red marl at Congresbury, 218

Newbury, Berks., dowsing at, 56,
165; Stokes of, 174

Newcastle-on-Tyne, dowsing at, 135-
136

Newhaven, dowsing near, 145

Newhaven Water Co., 145

Newport, Essex, H. Bacon of, 174

Newport, Monmouth, dowsing at,
156, I9I-193

Newry, dowsing near, 139-140

Newton, F. W., testimonial to W. S.
Lawrence, 109

Nibelungslied, the golden rod of the, 6

Nicol, W., a dowser, 168, 171

Nieremberg, J. E., on the Zahoris,
279-280

Nimes, dowsing at, 39

Node, The, Welwyn, dowsing at, 178-


179

Norfoik Dairy Farmers’ Association,
dowsing for, 142

Norfolkshire, dowsing in, 142

Norman, Mark, 212

Norris, Dr Foxley, Dean of West-
minster, a dowser, 189

North Perrott, dowsing at, 231-232

North Perrott Manor, Crewkerne,
dowsing at, 127-128


330


Northamptonshire, dowsing in, 163

Northern Ireland, an official of the
Government of, a dowser, 190-191

Northumberland, dowsing in, 139

Northumberland, Duke of, dowsing
for, 133

Norton Fitzwarren, Mr Kemp of,
190; dowsing at, 190

Norton Hall, dowsing at, 121-123

Norwich, dowsing at, 142

Norwich, F. H. Buckingham of, 174

Notker on volatileand mercurial rods,6

Nut-wood dowsing-rod, 128

Nuthurst, dowsing at, 219-220, Fig.50

Nuthurst Rectory, 219


O., President d’, dowsing for, 39-40

Oak Grange, near Rudgwick, dow-
sing at, 106-108, 107 .

Oakwood House, near Rudgwick,
dowsing at, 106-108, 107 n.

Oatlands, Lancaster, dowsing at,
157-158

Observatory, The, Crowborough Hill,
dowsing at, 207~208

Ochorowicz, Dr, 246

O’Connell, Mr, 219'

Od-force as an explanation of dow-
sing, 249

Offcote Hurst, Ashbourne, dowsing
at, 156-157

Office of Works, Northern Ireland, 190

Official of the Government of North-
ern Ireland, a dowser, 190-191

Ogden, J. Basil, on a case of dowsing,
183-184

Oil, dowsing for, 197, 253, 254

Okanagan, Judge Spink of, 224

Okehampton, Mrs Greig of, 189

Old Red Sandstone, a permeable
rock, 57

Ollivant, Colonel E. A., dowsing for,
219-220, Fig. 50

Oolite in Somerset, 57, 127;
Campden, 121;
Hill, 204

Orange Free State, dowsing in the,
167-171, 261-262

Ordovician shale at Waterford, 76;
rock at Waterford, 82, 85

Ornacieux, President d’, dowsing for,


near
at Warleigh


36

Osterley Park, experiments in dow-
sing at, 131

Osterreichisches Verband zur Klar-
ung der Wiinschelrutenfrage,
26; its Mittetlungen, 26

Ould, Sir John, dowsing for, 110

Ovenden, Dean, a dowser, 189, 270

Oxford, dowsing at, 148-149

Oxford clay, at Oxford, 148-149; at
Yelling, 216


THE DIVINING-ROD


Oxfordshire, dowsing in,
149 x
Ozanam, Jacques, on dowsing, 17


130, 148-


Paarl, dowsing at, 261

Paleozoic rocks, in the Mendips, 573
in Cornwall, 78; in Cornwall,
Wales, the Lake District, 58;
water abundant i in, 59

Pall Mall Gazette, 203, 243

Palladius on water-finders, 6

Palmer, G. W., on dowsing, 63

Palmer, W. J., dowsing for, 63

Paracelsus on dowsing, 7-9

Paradisial wishing-rod of Gottfried of
Strassburg, 6

Paramelle, Abbé, his achievements
in water-finding, 21, 47-54; his
life, 47-48; studies water-sup-
ply, 47-49; is very successful,
49-51; publishes his theories,
51-52; ascribes his success to
his theories, 52-53 ; his theories
criticised and his success as-
cribed to dowsing, 53-54

Parangue, J. J., a dowser, 21, 263

Paris, congress of dowsers held in,
26; dowsing in, 20: 34, 41-42, 44

Park Pump Room, 185

Parsons, Mr., 212

Pattmore, John, a dowser, 174

Paulet, M., on dowsing, 46

Pavey, R., a dowser, 174

Peach-tree dowsing-rods, 166, 290

Peak, Sir H. W., dowsing for, 105

Pease, E. R., on dowsing, viii; his
paper on dowsing, 26; on Prof.
Sollas’s experiment, 59

Pedegacha, a dowser, 263, 280 ».?

Pelham, Hon. Mrs E., a dowser, 114

Pendule explorateur, its affinity to the
dowsing-rod, 12-13, 24, 233,
207). 2

Pennant stone at Brislington, 108

Pennet, a dowser, 21, 47, 234, 242;
his portrait, Fig. 14

Pepper-tree dowsing-rods, 166

Permeable and impermeable rocks, 55

Pershore, dowsing at, 260

Persimmon-tree dowsing-rod, 289

pu figures on the carved rocks of,

dowsing in, 254

Patroian. dowsing for, 253, 254

Peucer, Caspar, on dowsing, 9

Pewter, dowsing for, 260

Phillips, William, on dowsing, 21

Phippen, Francis, on dowsing, 22, 237

Physiological effect of dowsing, vii,
30-31, 32, 33-34, 243-247. See
Sensations, the dowser’s |

Pichard, J. W., dowsing for, 157-158

Pickard, T. W., dowsing for, 144-146


INDEX


Piedmont, dowsing in, 253

Pilton, C. Sims of, 175-176

Pim, Mrs Henry, a dowser, 189

gen oe as a dowsing-rod, 19,
i


Pipes, water-, traced by dowsing,
34-35, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44, 113-


To4,2 LEP, E29, 120; T2r,- 124;
136-137, I5I, 157-158, 165,
179, 205, 270


Pipplepen farm, dowsing at, 231

Planchette, 234, 266

Plants as indicators of underground
water and minerals, I1

Plateanus, P., his reference to dows-


ing, 7

Plattes, Gabriel, on dowsing, 11

Pliny’s ignorance of dowsing, 5

Plowman, T. Forder, on a case of
dowsing, 256-257

Plum-wood dowsing-rod, 226

““ Pocket ”’ of water, 128

Pogson, W. N., a dowser, 174

Poitou, dowsing in, 36

Pope, G. H., 176

Porcelain identified by dowsing, 256

Portugal, dowsing in, i, vii, 186, 188,
263

Posewitz, T., on dowsing in Borneo, 4

Potable water supply depends on
rainfall, 55

Poynder, Sir J. O., dowsing for, 131 ”.?

Preece, Sir W. H., on dowsing, 251,
260-261

Preston, dowsing near, 155

Preston Hall, Uppingham, dowsing
at, 137-138

Price, Montague, dowsing for, 178-
179, 240

Priestly condemnation of dowsing,
17-20, Figs. 8, 9

Prince, C. Leeson, dowsing for, 207—
208

Proceedings of the Society for Psy-
chical Research, 191

Protrudes, 85 |

Provence, dowsing in, 43 ”.

Pryce, William, on dowsing, 2, 21,
230-237, 249

Pulse affected by dowsing, 30, 33,
34, 38, 244

Pulsometer, 163

Purser, F., on a case of dowsing,


272-273


Quality of water estimated by dow-
sing, 52

Quantocks, the geology of the, 58, 190

Quarterly Review, The, 277

Quartzite rock at Carrigoona, 87,
91, 98, 100, IOI, IOI #.

Queen of England, dowsing for, 133


331


Queen of France, dowsing for, 42
Questionnaire, a dowsing, 288
Quick, Messrs, 209

Quicksand at Walton-le-Dale, 155


Radio-activity as an explanation of
dowsing, 249

Rainfall, its importance in water-
supply, 48-49, 55

Ramsden, Lady Gwendolen,
on a Case of dowsing, 163

Ramsden, J. F., dowsing for, 162-163

Ramsden, Miss, 160

Rathfriland, dowsing near, 139-140

Rathmay, Captain, 217

Rationale of dowsing, the, 17, 248-276

Rattom. See Rotan sega

Rauceby, dowsing at, 112-113

Ray, John, on dowsing, 14

Raymond, Rossiter, on dowsing, 25—
26; on Bleton’s alleged failures, 44

Reading, dowsing near, 62; A
Gillingham of, 189

Rectory, the, Winterbourne, dowsing
at, 103

Red clay, 69 ; near Taunton, 190

Red loam near Taunton, 190

Red marl at Meredith, 175; near
Taunton, 190; at Congresbury,218

Red sandstone, a permeable rock, 57

Redford, dowsing at, 114

Redruth, dowsing at, 21

Reeve, Col. John, dowsing for,113—-114

Reichenbach, von, his theories assimi-
lated to dowsing, 24, 249

Reims, the Académie of, appoint a
committee to investigate dow-
ing, 50, 52

Rensburg, J. J. van, dowsing for, 171


161;


‘Renton, J. T., dowsing for, 106-108


Retreat, The, 209

Rhabdomancy not to be confused
with dowsing, x, 2; in Germanic
literature, 6

Rhoades, a dowser, 125

Rhéne, dowsing along the, 28-29

Rhutenois, Le, on dowsing, 52

Richardson, Messrs., dowsing at their
works, 73-86

Richelieu, Cardinal, a book on dow-
sing dedicated to, 9

Richet, Charles, 258, 267, 268, 275

Richmond, dowsing at, 154

Rillington, dowsing at, 180, Fig. 42

Ring for use in dowsing, 233

Rio, Martin del, on the Zahoris, 278-


279
Riondet, M., his lost papers on dow-
sing, 24
Rivers Pollution Commission, 58
Roberts, a dowser, 174, 219
Roberts, Dr, 208


332


Robertson, R., a dowser, 189, 234,
238, 264 ; his rod, Fig. 58
Robertson, R. W., a dowser, 174
Robertson, W., a dowser, 174
Rockford, dowsing at, 120-121
Rocks, permeable and impermeable,


Ghs}7/

Rovky Valley, the, dowsing in, 86-
102; the geology of, 98, 101 ”.

Rodiginio, Celio, 279

Rodwell, Fred, a dowser, 223-224,
223 n.1, 234; his portrait, Fig. 51

Roe, Rev. John, dowsing for, 218-219

Rogers, Fergus Carstairs, a dowser,
166-173

Roles, W., and Son, dowsing for, 180

Roper, Sir Robert, dowsing for, 131 ”.?

Rose, Colonel Hugh, a dowser,194—196

“Rose Water Point,’”’ dowsing at,
195, 196

Ross, dowsing near, 143

Rosses Point, dowsing at, 165

Rotan sega, a variety of cane, used
for dowsing, 4-5

Rotation of the SEA ctat Sy 6350:
45-46

Rothwell, R., a dowser, 174, 202

Routh, W. Pole, on hazel, 253

Rowberrow, Charles Adams of, 24,
t10o%”.1, 174; Thomas Young
of, 217; Thomas Day of, 218

Royal Anthropological Institute, The,
paper on dowsing read before, 69

Royal Geological Society of Cornwall,
6


4

Royal Military Academy, Wool-
wich, experiments in dowsing at
the, 19

Royal Society’s Philosophical Tyvan-
sactions, discussion of dowsing in
the, 14

Rudford, dowsing at, 175

Rudgwick, dowsing near, 1or—108

Rutland, Duke of, dowsing for, 131 #.?

Rutlandshire, dowsing in, 137-138


S., Chevalier de, dowsing for, 39-40

Sablon, dowsing at, 29

Sachel Court, dowsing at, 73 .?

St André, dowsing near, 39

St Céré, 47

St Geny Laval, dowsing at, 40

St Hilaire, Geoffroy, on Paramelle,
51-52

St Jean-en-Royant, dowsing in, 37

St Jean L’Espinasse, 47

St John’s Church, Shanklin, 213

St Marcellin, the birthplace of Ay-
mar, 27

Ste Geneviéve, dowsing in the church
and garden of, 44

Salisbury, Lord, dowsing for, 131 7.?


THE DIVINING-ROD


Salutators, 277

Sand, a water-bearing rock, 55, 71;
Tunbridge Wells, 69; at Carri-
goona, 98, 100; at Oxford, 148;
at Walton-le-Dale, 155; at
Haddington, 159; at Bath, 183 .

Sanderson, Texas, dowsing in, 198

Sandford Green, Winscombe, dow-
sing at, 178

Sandstone, a water-bearing rock,
55, 57; at Warnham, 69; at
Waterford, 74, 75, 82; at Car-
rigoona, 98 ; at Haddington, 159

Santo Teodora, Duchess of, 107 ”. 7

Sanzio, a dowser, 244

Saratoga Springs, dowsing at, 283-287

Sausage as dowsing-rod, 2, 19, 234

Savages, dowsing among, 3-5

Saxon Erzgebirge, dowsing in the, 9

Scandinavia, dowsing in, vii, 6

Schmidt’s ‘‘ Apparatus,” 233

Schmidt’s Drift Road, Kimberley,
dowsing in, 170-171

Scientists on dowsing, ix,
passim

Scissors as a dowsing-rod, 19, Fig. 8

Scoones, T. J., 217

Secondary rocks in Somerset, 57, 59

Seddon,. Rev. W. a dowser,
dowsing for, 149-150, Fig. 39

Seebold, Edward, a dowser, 24 2.1

Seepage, 58

Seltzer water spring, 131 7.2, 203

Sensations, the dowser’s, vii, 30-31,
33-35, 105, 125, I5I-152, 152-
153, 167, 179, 185, 232, 233,
241, 243-247

Seymour, Simon, a dowser, 201—202

Shale, beds of, 70; at Waterford, 76,
81; at Carrigoona, 98

Shaley sandstone at Waterford, 81

Shalford, dowsing at, 182-183

Shanklin, dowsing at, 208-216, Figs.
48-49

Shanklin Down, 209, 211

Shanklin reservoirs, 209

Shattered rocks, 56

Sheppard, Samuel, his epigram on
dowsing, 12

Shepton Mallet, dowsing at, 115,
175-176; J. H. White of, 189

Sherburn-in-Elmet, dowsing at, 133

Sherington, Sir Charles, on dowsing,


275
Sherlock, Mr., 144
Shingle, at Waterton: Bi
goona, 92, 93
Shrewsbury, dowsing in, 128
Shrine, H. D., on a case of dowsing,
204-205
Shropshire, dowsing in, 128
Sickness produced by dowsing, 152


12-14 and


at Carri-


INDEX


Silurian formation, 255 . ; at Water-
: ford, 82,85; at Woolhope, 143
Silver, mines, discovered by dowsing,
11; dowsing used in, 11, 16;
dowsing for, 259

Silverwell, spring, ror x.

Sims, Charles, a dowser, 175-176

Sinnett, A. P., 269

Skeat, W. W., on dowsing among the
Malays, 4-5

Sketch, The, 241

Skyrne, a dowser, 270

Slate, Mr., 231, 232

Slate, at Carrigoona, 98, 100

Slate, blue, at Waterford, 75, 82

Slate, clay-, in Cornwall, 58

Slaty sandstone at Waterford, 74

Sleaford, dowsing near, 123-125

Sleight of hand in dowsing, 33, 45-

_ 47, 219

Sligo, dowsing at, 165

Smart, Henry, a dowser, 180

Smell, dowsing as an atavistic sense
of, 251

Smith, a dowser, 286

Smith and Marshall, dowsing for, 141

Smythe, Sir Greville, dowsing for, 105

Snuffers as dowsing-rods, 2, 19, Fig. 8

Snyman, W. M., dowsing for, 169

Société d’agriculture, sciences et in-
dustrie de Lyons appoints a
Commission to investigate dow-
sing, 26

Société Centrale d’Agriculture, a
paper on dowsing read before, 52

Society for Psychical Research, The,
arranges an experiment in dow-
sing, 59; letter to, 85 n., 224—
225

Society of Friends, 189, 201

Solea, Andreas de, on a mining-rod, 7

Sollas, W. J., his experiment in dow-
sing, 59; his conclusions criti-
cised, 59

Somerset and Dorset Notes and Quer-
4eS, 127

Somerset and Dorset Railway, dow-
sing for, 115

Somersetshire, dowsing in, 14, 22-23,
56-59, 127-128, 177-178, 180,
201-202, 217-218, 229-232, 241,
271-272, 273; geology of, 56-59

Somerton, polluted water at, 58;
T, Hawker of, 174

Sourcier, 31 n.*, 32, 38, 39, 41, 44

South Africa, dowsing in, 142, 166—
173, 261-262, 206-267

South Down, dowsing in, 140

South-eastern counties of England,
the geology of the, 58

Southampton Common, a well on, 56

Spain, dowsing in, vii, 16, 277-282


Soo


Spanish Ministry order every munici-
pality to purchase a copy of
Paramelle’s book, 51

Spanish translation of Paramelle’s
book, 51

Spasms produced by dowsing, 33, 35,
105, 243

Spectator, The, 277

Spencer, Lord, dowsing for, 105

Spilsby, dowsing at, 136-137, 140-
141, Fig. 35

Spink, Judge William Ward, a dow-
ser, 189, 224-225

Sprague, Rev. W. E., a dowser, 287

Spring, watch-, as a dowsing-rod,
103)" IO4)) 107, 17657187, 194,
234, 271

Spring Valley, Mafeking, dowsing in,


173
Springs found by dowsing, passim
Spur-shaped dowsing-rod, 234, Fig.


53

Spurr, Councillor A. G. F., on a case
of dowsing, 184-185

Stagnant water and dowsing, 34, 106,
Li7, 123

Stalbridge, R. A’Barrow of, 174

Stanhope, Lord, dowsing for, 131 7.?

Stapleton, W. S. Lawrence lived at,104

Stears, John, a dowser, 179-180,
Fig. 42, 201-202, Fig. 47, 227—
229, Fig. 52, 245

Steel dowsing-rod, 103, 104, 105, 107,
175, 234

Steele, the Rev. Mr, a dowser, 22

Stephen and Barstow, Messrs, dow-
sing for, 106-108

Stevenitt, Mr, dowsing for, 138

Stokes, William, a dowser, 174, 237;
his rod, Fig. 53

Stolen articles found by dowsing, 3—4

Stone, beds of, 70

Stone, Councillor, 184

Stone, E., 89

Stone, William, a dowser, I9I, 219,
229, 238, 271; at Carrigoona,
86-102; his life, 133; his
account of himself, 134-135;
examples of his successes, 135—
141, Fig. 35 ; his portrait, Fig. 34

Stoneware identified by dowsing, 256

Strahan, A., 212

Straight dowsing-rods, 32, 33, 47,
175, 238

Strathmore, Lord, dowsing for, 159 7.

Street, dowsing at, 201-202, Fig. 47

Subconscious suggestion as an in-
fluence on dowsing, 47

Submarines, dowsing for, 254

Suffolk, dowsing in, 160, 161, 187

Sugarloaf, the, geology of, 98, 98 ”.

Sugarloaf Mountains, 98 ”., 99-100


334


Suggestion, the influence of, in dow-
sing, 35, 47, 246-247

Suir, river, 84, Fig. 18

Sulphur spring discovered by dow-
sing, 185

Sumner, a dowser, 114

Supernormal faculty of the dowser,
the, 61, 62, 222

‘‘ Super-pervious ”’ series of rocks,


5

Shrtace indications of underground
water, passim

Surrey, dowsing in, I14

Sussex, dowsing in, 65-73, Fig. 15;
dowsing in, 106-108, 144-146,
Figs. 37-38, 203, 207-208, 219—
220, Fig. 50, 220-221; the
geology of, 69-70

Sweden, dowsing in, 17

Swettenham, Sir Frank, on dowsing
among the Malays, 4

Swift, Dean, his lines on dowsing, 12

Switzerland, dowsing in, vii, 263

Sycamore dowsing-rod, 116

Sympathy as an explanation of
dowsing, I1, 13, 248


Table-turning, its affinity to dowsing,
24

Taming-wand, the, of the Edda, 6

Tanyot, dowsing at, 41

Taste of surface water as indicator
of underground water and miner-
als, II

Taunton, T. Heard of, 174; Mr.
Kemp of, 190; dowsing near,190

Taylor, Colonel G. L. le M., dowsing
for, 200-201

Taylor Hill, Congresbury, dowsing on,
218

Tebb, Mrs Tebb and their children,
dowsers, II4, 115

Temperature affected by dowsing, 30

Tertiary rocks, 59

Texas, dowsing in, 196-198;
Fenley of, 189, 196-198

Theodoric, 279

Theories in explanation of dowsing,
248-276

Theses, dowsing the subject of
academic, 16, 16\nxn, *-8

Thetford, the home of Tompkins, 141

Thieves traced by dowsing, 3-4

Thom, Mr, 212

Thomastown, dowsing at, 218-219

Thompson, General, dowsing for,
182

Thompson, J, Wycliffe, on a case of
dowsing, 182

Thomson, A. J., dowsing for, 169

Thorn dowsing-rod, 147, 148, 150

Thought-transference, 160, 270


Guy


THE DIVINING-ROD


Thouvenel, Pierre, his experiments
with Bleton, 21, 32-47, 242,244 ;
his life, 34; his collection of
evidence, 36-41; his views on
anonymity, 37, 37%”.; his theo-
ries, 433; criticism of, 45-46;
his experiments with Pennet, 47

Thun, dowsing at, 36

Thurgovia, dowsing in, 263

Tiddington House, Oxford, dowsing
at, 148-149

Timmins, Messrs, 126

Tin, dowsing for, 260

Titus, Silas W., a dowser, 286-287

Tiverton, dowsing at, 105; Capt.
J. P. Dixon of, 189

Tiverton Town Council, dowsing for,
105

Tompkins, Benjamin, a dowser, xi,
200, 216-217, 237-238, 239; his
life, 141; examples of ‘his
successes, 56, 142-151, Figs.
37-39; his sensations and theo-
Ties, 151-152; his portrait, Fig. 36

Tonbridge, dowsing at, 241

Tongs as dowsing-rods, 2

Topley, William, on the geology of
Warnham, 69-70; on the geo-
logy of Shanklin, 211-212, 215

Torey, Marquis de, dowsing for, 36

Toronto Meteorological Observatory,
F. N. Denison of, 225

Torres Straits, use of rods in, 4

Tosswill, R. G. D., a dowser, 189,
258

Totnes, Archdeacon of.

Toulon, dowsing at, 29

Tourneur, 32, 33 n.

Tourneur de buguette, 40

Towers, Joseph, a dowser, 118

Townsend, C. E., Gataker’s agent in
Treland, 153

Toy Farm, dowsing on,
Figs. 37-38

Transmission of the motion of the
rod, 129, 227, 242-243

Treasure found by dowsing, 31

Tregelles, G. F., on a case of dowsing,


See Earle


144-146,


153

Trench, Col. H. le P., dowsing for,
163-165

Trianon, dowsing at, 42

Trias in Somerset, 57

Tringham, Rev. H. J. T., a dowser,
259-260

Tristan, Count J. de, on dowsing,
250

Tunbridge Wells sand, 69

Turner, Miss F. M., a dowser, 260

Turweston Manor, Brackley, dow-
sing at, 163

Tylor, Sir E. B., on dowsing, 252-253


INDEX


Unconscious indications, 35, 73 n.},
225

Unconscious muscular action in dow-
Sing, 33, 47, 79, 123, 129, 227,
229, 232, 239-243, 252, 270—
275; discovered by Kircher, 13

United States, dowsing in the, vii,
22, 25-26, 233, 254, 283-201; a
rod as held in the, Fig. 57

Upper greensand at Shanklin, 209,
212

Upper lias at Uppingham, 138

Uppingham, dowsing at, 137-138

Urtariz, G. de, 281

Uvalde, Guy Fenley of, 196-198;
dowsing near, 196, 198

Uzés, Duke d’, dowsing for, 36


Vallemont, Abbé of. See Le Lor-
rain de Vallemont, P. de

Van Sickle, Judge W., on Guy Fen-
ley, 197-198 ; dowsing for, 197

Vapours as indicators of under-
ground water and minerals, 11

Varro’s lost Virgula divina, 5

Verband zur Klarung der Wiinschel-
rutenfrage, 26

Verga lucenta and other Italian names
of the dowsing-rod, 11

Verge de Jacob, La, 17, 33

Vernon, Judge Spink of, 224

Versailles, letter to the prefect of, 50

Vervains, Abbé of, dowsing for, 40

Vervains, dowsing at, 40

Veth, P. J., on dowsing in Borneo, 4

“ Vibrator,” 233

Victoria, Queen, dowsing for, 133

Vienna, a dowsers’ organisation in, 26

Virga Divina, 4

Virgila divina, 16

Virgula, 249

Virgula auvifera, 12

Virgula divina, 3, 7, 235

Virgula divinatovia, 12, 14

Virgula mercurialis, 16

Vitruvius on water-finders, 6

Volatile rods, 6

Volume of water, estimating the,
by dowsing, 60, 67, 77, 87, 88, 89,


Wi ea 25, 0 L25,0 120), T4l,~ 42,
D5G40150, 157, 156, 162, 163,
167-173, 183-185, 290
Waite, A. E., on dowsing, 250
Wales, the geology of, 58; North,


dowsing in, 165-166
Walker, T. A., dowsing for, 115
Walkeringham, dowsing at, 129
Walking-stick as a dowsing-rod,
236-237
Wallace, A. R., 269
Walloon dowser, a, 22


goo


Walton-le-Dale, dowsing at, 155

Waring, Col. Thomas, on Mullins’s
manner of holding his dowsing-
rod, 111

Warleigh Hill, dowsing on, 204

Warnham, dowsing at, 65-73; the
geology of, 69-72

Warnham Court, 69

Warnham Lodge, near Horsham,
dowsing at, 65-73, Fig. 15

Warnham Park, 72, Fig. 15

Warwickshire, dowsing in, 130

Watch-spring as a dowsing-rod, 103,
104, 107, 176, 187, 194, 234, 271

Water, dowsing for, 11, 14-16, and
passim

Water-diviner. See Dowser

Water-divining. See Dowsing

Water-man, 77

Water-pipes, traced by dowsing, 34—
35, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44, 113-114,
II7, 119, 120, 121, 124, 136-137,
I5I, 157-158, 165, 179, 205, 270

Water-supply, passim; the geology
of, 48-59

Water-witch, 290

Waterford, dowsing at,'65, 73-86, 240,
Figs. 16-19; near, 126

Weald clay, 69

Weather, its influence on dowsing, 3

Webb, F., a dowser, 174 ;

Webster, John, on dowsing, 14

Wedderburn, Sir W., dowsing for,
174-175

Weedon, Rev. J. R. Blunt of, 220

Weilbach, dowsing at, 24.1

Weir Hill farm, dowsing on the, 128

Well-sinker, where he can be relied
upon, 56; failures of, 65, 122

Wellington, Bob, a dowser, 288, 289,
290

Welsh silver-mines, dowsing in, 11

Welwyn, dowsing at, 178-179

West Keal Hall, Spilsby, dowsing at,
136-137

West of England,the geology of the,58

Western Gazette, The, 180

Westlake, E., on geology and dow-
sing, 56-57; on the geology of
Somerset in relation to dowsing,
57-59; cases of dowsing sub-
mitted to, 62; on dowsing, 64 ;
on the Horsham case, 68 7., 69 ;
on a case near Rudgwick, 108 ;


on a case near Campden, 121 ;
on a case at Crewkerne, 127;
on a case at Arreton, 134; ona


case at Blackcap Hill, 144-146;
on a case at Shanklin, 208-216;
experiment at Crewkerne, 229-
231; experiment at North
Perrott, 231-232


336


Westminster, Dr Foxley Norris,
Dean of, a dowser, 189

Westminster, Duke of, dowsing for,
159”.

Weston, Sir Joseph, dowsing for, 105

Weston-super-Mare, Gataker first es-
tablished at, 153 ; dowsing near,
177, Fig.

Wethersfield Place, near Braintree,
dowsing at, 182

Whalen, Frank, on a case of dowsing,
283-287

Whitaker H. W., on dowsing, 63-—
64; on the dowsing of W. S.
Lawrence, 105-106

White, J. H., a dowser, 189

Whitethorn dowsing-rod, 147, 148,150

Whitfield, dowsing at, 205-206

Whittington, Mr., 211

Whittle-le-Woods Parish Council,
dowsing for, 159 n.

Wicklow, County, dowsing in, 86-102

Wicklow Mountains, 99

Willis, Thomas, a dowser, 174-175

Willow dowsing- -rod, 15-16, 187, 226

Wills, A. W., a dowser, 234;
failures, 154; examples of his
successes, 156-158, 218-219

Willson, Sir Mildmay, on a case of
dowsing, 112-115

Wiltshire, dowsing in,
130, 141-142

Winchcombe District Council, dow-
sing for, 159 n.

Winchilsea, Lord, dowsing for, 113,
123-125, 224 n.

Windsor, Lord, dowsing for, 159 7.

Winscombe, dowsing at, 178

Winterbourne, dowsing at, 103

Winwood, Rev. H. H., on a case of
dowsing, 218

Wire dowsing-rod, 106, 152, 166, 175,
226, 255

Wirral and Birkenhead Agricultural
Society award a medal for dow-
sing, 151

Wishing-rod, the, in Germanic litera-
ture, 6

Withnell, F. C., on a case of dowsing,
229

Wittenberg, dowsing as the subject
of academic theses at, 26, 16 ”.3

Wood dowsing-rods, passim; any
kind of, suitable, 116

Wood, George, on a case of dowsing,
205-208

Wood, May, a dowser, 205-208

Woodhall Spa, dowsing at, 186


15-16, 125,


THE DIVINING-ROD


Woodlands, Congresbury, dowsing at,
217-218

Woods and Forests Department, 162

Woolhope, dowsing at, 142-144

Woolley, Reginald, on a case of
dowsing, 129

Woolley, T. C. S., on cases of dowsing, .
129, 243 ¢

Woolmers, 217

Woolwich, dowsing at, 19

Worcestershire, dowsing in, 260, 270

Wordsworth, Miss, a dowser, 114, 124

Wrington, the Vale of, dowsing in, 22

Wiinschelvisz, 6

Wiunschelruete, 6

Wiinschelrute, Die, 26

Wiinschelruthe, Wiinschelrute, 4, ©

Wyburn, Walter, a dowser, 189-190,
201-202


X-ray sight, 197
Xylomancy not to be confused with
dowsing, x, 2


Yaos, Lake Nyanza, dowsing among


€, 3

Yarborough, Lord, dowsing for,
131 ”.*, 142

Yelling, R. Anthony of,
dowsing at, 216-217

Yellow clay at Warleigh Hill, 204

Yellow sandstone at Waterford, 75, 81

Yellow shaley sandstone at Water-
ford, 81

Yeovil, F. Webb of, 174;
near, 189—190

Yewhurst, dowsing near, 115

Ygdrasill, the fabulous ash, 1

Yorath, H. D., onacase of dowsing,156

Yorkshire, dowsing in, 137, 142, 180 ;
the geology of, 70

Young, Colonel, dowsing for, 217-218

Young, J. D.,on a case of dowsing, 184

Young, J. F., a dowser, 189, 238,
245, 258, 264, 271; his dowsing-
rod, 238; on the geology of
Llanelly, 58 ”.?

Young, Mr, 215

Young, Robert, a dowser, 245

Young, Thomas, a dowser, 59, 217-218


178-179 ;


dowsing


Zahoris, the, 16, 263, 277-282

Zeidler, J. G., on dowsing, 19, 268

Zevenfontein, dowsing at, 168

Zimmerisches Chronik, its allusion to
dowsing, 9

Zohar, the, 277

Zulus, dowsing among the, 3


; F Ci é
Printed in Great Britain by Butler & Tanner Ltd., Frome and London


WORKING MEN’S
COLLEGE


LIBRARY


= tec pe a ee


METHUEN’S
GENERAL LITERATURE


MESSRS.


METHUEN’S
PUBLICATIONS


This Catalogue contains only a selection of the more important
books published by Messrs. Methuen. :
their publications may be obtained on application.


A complete catalogue of


ABRAHAM (G. D.)
MOopDERN MOUNTAINEERING


I}lustrated. 7s. Od. net.
ARMSTRONG (Anthony) (‘A. A.’
of Punch)


WarRIORS AT EASE
Warriors STILL AT EASE
SELECTED WARRIORS
PERCIVAL AND I
PERCIVAL AT PLAY
APPLE AND PERCIVAL
ME AND FRANCES
How To bo It
BRITISHER ON BROADWAY
WHILE You WAIT
Each 3s. 6d. net.
LIVESTOCK IN BARRACKS
Illustrated by E. H. SHEPARD.
6s. net.
Easy WARRIORS
Illustrated by G. L. STAMPA.
5s. net.
YESTERDAILIES. Illustrated.
3s. 6d. net.
BALFOUR (Sir Graham)
THe Lire or Rosert Louis
STEVENSON tos. 6d. net.
Also, 3s. 6d. net.
BARKER (Ernest)
NATIONAL CHARACTER


Ios. 6d. net.
GREEK POLITICAL THEORY
148. net.
CHURCH, STATE AND STUDY
los. 6d. net.
BELLOC (Hilaire)
Paris 8s. 6d. net.
'THE PYRENEES 8s. 6d. net.


BELLOC (Hilaire)—continued
Mari£zé ANTOINETTE
A History OF ENGLAND
In7 Vols. Vols. 1, 11, 11] and 1V
Each 15s. net.
BIRMINGHAM (George A.)
A WAYFARER IN HUNGARY
Illustrated. 8s. 6d. net.
SPILLIKINS: Essays 3s. 6d. net. |
SHIPS AND SEALING-WAX: Essays
3s. 6d. net.
CASTLEROSSE (Viscount)
VALENTINE’S Days
Illustrated. 10s. 6d. net. |
CHALMERS (Patrick R.) |
KENNETH GRAHAME: LIFE, LET-
TERS AND UNPUBLISHED WORK
Illustrated. 10s. 6d. net.


CHARLTON (Moyra)
PaTCH : THE STORY OF A MONGREL
Illustrated by G. D. ARMOUR.
5s. net.
THE MIDNIGHT STEEPLECHASE
Illustrated by GILBERT HOLIDAY.


18s. net.


5s. net.

CHESTERTON (G. K.)
COLLECTED POEMS 7s. 6d. net.
ALL | SURVEY 6s. net.


‘THE BALLAD OF THE WHITE Horss


38. 6d. net.
Also illustrated by Rosert
AUSTIN. 12s. 6d. net.


ALL Is Grist
CHARLES DICKENS
CoME TO THINK OF IT...
GENERALLY SPEAKING
Each 3s. 6d. net


CHESTERTON (G. K.)—continued
ALL THINGS CONSIDERED
‘TREMENDOUS TRIFLES
FANCIES VERSUS FADS
ALARMS AND DISCURSIONS
A MISCELLANY OF MEN
THE Uses oF Diversity
THE OUTLINE OF SANITY
THE FLYING INN Each 3s. 6d.
WINE, WATER AND SONG ts. 6d.

CURLE (J. H.)


net.
net.


THE SHADOW-SHOW 6s. net.
Also, 3s. 6d. net.
THis WORLD OF OurRS 6s. net.


TO-DAY AND TO-MORROW 6s.

THis WorLD First 6s.
DOLLFUSS (Dr. August)

FROM CLERK TO CHANCELLOR

7s. 6d. net.


net.
net.


DUGDALE (E. T. S.)
GERMAN DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTS,
1871-1914
In 4 vols. Vol. I,
Vol. Il, 1891-8.
1g10.


1871-90.
Vol. III, 1898-
Vol. IV, 1911-14.
Each £1 ts. net.
EDWARDES (Tickner)
Tue Lore OF THE HONEY-BEE
Illustrated. 7s. 6d. and 3s. 6d. net.
BEE-KEEPING FOR ALL
Illustrated. 35. 6d. net.
THE BEE-MASTER OF WARRILOW
Illustrated. 7s. 6d. net.
BEE-KEEPING Do’s AND DON’Ts
2s. 6d. net.
Lirt-LuckK ON SOUTHERN RoapDs
55. net.
EINSTEIN (Albert)
RELATIVITY: THE SPECIAL AND
GENERAL THEORY 5s. net.
SIDELIGHTS ON RELATIVITY
3s. 6d. net.
THE MEANING OF RELATIVITY
5S. net.
THE BROWNIAN MOVEMENT
55. net,
EISLER (Robert)
THE MEsstIAH JESUS AND JOHN THE
BAPTIST
Illustrated. £2 2s. net.
EVANS (B. Ifor)
ENGLISH POETRY IN THE LATER
NINETEENTH CENTURY
tos. 6d. net.
EWING (Sir Alfred), President of
the British Association, 1932
AN ENGINEER’S OUTLOOK
8s. 6d. net.


LT


Messrs. Methuen’s Publications 3


FIELD (G. C.)
Mora. THEORY 6s. net.
PLATO AND His CONTEMPORARIES
12s. 6d. net.
PREJUDICE AND IMPARTIALITY
2s. 6d. net.
FINER (H.)
THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF
MODERN GOVERNMENT _ 2’ vols.
£2 2s. net.
ENGLISH LocaL GOVERNMENT
£1 1s. net.


FITZGERALD (Edward)
A FiITzGERALD MEDLEY.
by CHARLES GANZ.


FYLEMAN (Rose)
Happy FamMI Lies
FAIRIES AND CHIMNEYS
THE FAIRY GREEN
THE Fairy FLUTE
THE RAINBOW CAT
EIGHT LITTLE PLAYs FOR CHILDREN
Forty GOOD-NIGHT TALES
FORTY GOOD-MORNING TALES
SEVEN LITTLE PLAYS FOR CHILDREN
TWENTY TEA-TIME TALES

Each 3s. 6d. net.

THE BLUE RHYME BOOK


Edited
15s. net.


Each 2s. net.


Illustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
THE EASTER HARE
Illustrated. 35. 6d. net.


FIFTY-ONE NEw Nursery RHYMES
Illustrated by DororHy Bur-
ROUGHES. 6s. net.

THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF
CAPTAIN MARWHOPPLE

Illustrated. 3s. 6d.


GAVIN (C. I.)
Louis PHILIPPE,
FRENCH


IKING OF
7s. 6d.


GIBBON (Edward)
THE DECLINE AND FALL OF
ROMAN EMPIRE
With Notes, Appendixes and Maps,
by J. B. Bury. Illustrated. 7 vols.
15s. net each volume. Also, un-
illustrated, 7s. 6d. net each volume.


GLOVER (T. R.)
VIRGIL
THE CONFLICT OF RELIGIONS IN
THE EARLY ROMAN EMPIRE

POETS AND PURITANS

Each tos. 6d. net.
FROM PERICLES TO PHILIP

12s. 6d. nety


THE


4 Messrs. Methuen’s Publications


GRAHAME (Kenneth)
THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS
7s. 6d. net and 5s. net.
Also illustrated by ERNEsT H.
SHEPARD. Cloth, 7s. 6d. net.
Green Leather, 12s. 6d. net.
Pocket Edition, unillustrated.
Cloth, 3s. 6d. net.
Green Morocco, 7s. 6d. net.
THE KENNETH GRAHAME BOOK
(The Wind in the Willows’,
‘ Dream Days ’ and ‘ The Golden
Age’ in one volume).
7s. 6d. net.
See also Milne (A. A.)


HALL (H. R.)
Tue ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE
NEAR East £1 1s. net.
THE CIVILIZATION OF GREECE IN
THE BRONZE AGE £1 Ios. net.


HEATON (Rose Henniker)

THE PERFECT HOosrTEss

Decorated by A. E. TAYLOR.
7s. 6d. net. Gift Edition, £1 15. net.
‘THE PERFECT SCHOOLGIRL
3s. 6d. net.

HEIDEN (Konrad)

A History oF THE Nazi Move-


MENT 10s. 6d. net.
HERBERT (A. P.)
HELEN 2s. 6d. net.


TANTIVY TOWERS and DerBy Day
in one volume. Illustrated by
Lady VIOLET BARING. 55. net.
Each, separately, unillustrated

2s. 6d. net.

HONEYBUBBLE & Co. 3s. 6d. net.

MISLEADING CASES IN THE COMMON
Law 5s. net.

More MISLEADING CASES 5s. 7et.

STILL MorE MISLEADING CasEs

5s. net.

THE WHEREFORE AND THE WHY

« "TINKER, CUAILOR: «6, <2
Each, Illustrated by

Morrow. 2s. 6d. net.

THE SECRET BATTLE 3s. 6d. net.

THE House BY THE RIVER

3s. 6d. net.
‘No Boats ON THE RIVER’
Illustrated. 5s. net.
HOLDSWORTH (Sir W. S.)

A HistTory oF ENGLISH Law

Nine Volumes. £1 5s. net each

Index Volume by Epwarb Potron.

£1 Is. net.


GEORGE


HUDSON (W. H.)
A SHEPHERD’sS LIFE


Illustrated. 10s. 6d. net.
Also unillustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
| HUTTON (Edward)
CITIES OF SICILY
Illustrated. 10s. 6d. net.


MILAN AND LOMBARDY
THE CITIES OF ROMAGNA AND THE
MARCHES
SIENA AND SOUTHERN TUSCANY
NAPLES AND SOUTHERN ITALY
Illustrated. Each 8s. 6d. net.
A WAYFARER IN UNKNOWN TUSCANY
THE CITIES OF SPAIN
THE CITIES OF UMBRIA
COUNTRY WALKS ABOUT FLORENCE
ROME
FLORENCE AND NORTHERN TUSCANY
VENICE AND VENETIA
Illustrated. Each 7s. 6d. net.


INGE (W.R.), D.D., Dean of St. Paul's
CHRISTIAN MysTICIsM. Witha New
Preface. 7s. 6d. net.


JOHNS (Rowland)
Docs You’p LIKE TO MEET
Let Docs DELIGHT
ALL Sorts oF Docs
Let’s TALK OF Docs
PUPPIES
Lucky Docs
Each, Mlustrated, 3s. 6d. net.
So You Lixge Docs !


Illustrated. 2s. 6d. net.
THE ROWLAND JOHNS DoG Book
Illustrated. 5s. net


“Our FRIEND THE DoG’ SERIES
Edited by ROWLAND JOHNs,

THE CAIRN

THE COCKER SPANIEL

THE Fox-TERRIER

THE PEKINGESE

THE AIREDALE

THE ALSATIAN

THE SCOTTISH TERRIER

THE CHow-CHOW

THE IRISH SETTER

‘THE DALMATIAN

THE LABRADOR

THE SEALYHAM

THE DACHSHUND

THE BULLDOG

THE BULL-TERRIER

THE GREAT DANE

Each 2s. 6d. net.


a A aR a a a


Messrs. Methuen’s Publications 5


KIPLING (Rudyard)


BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS
THE SEVEN SEAS

THE Five NATIONS
DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES
THE YEARS BETWEEN


Four Editions of these famous
volumes of poems are now pub-
lished, viz. :-—

Buckram, 7s. 6d.° net.

Cloth, 6s. net. Leather, 7s. 6d. net.

Service Edition. Two volumes

each book. 3s. net each vol.
A KipLinc ANTHOLOGY—VERSE

Leather, 7s. 6d. net.

Cloth, 6s. net and 3s. 6d. net.

TWENTY POEMS FROM RUDYARD


KIPLING Is, net.
A CHOICE OF SONGS 2s. net.
SELECTED PoEMS Is. net.


LAMB (Charles and Mary)


‘THE COMPLETE WoRKS
Edited by E. V. Lucas. Six
volumes. 6s. net each.
SELECTED LETTERS
Edited by G. T. CLAPTON.
3s. 6d. net.
THE CHARLES LAMB Day-BooK
Compiled by E. V. Lucas. 6s. net.
THE LETTERS OF CHARLES LAMB
Edited by E. V. Lucas Two
volumes. 6s. net each.


LANKESTER (Sir Ray)


SCIENCE FROM AN EASY CHAIR
First Series
SCIENCE FROM AN EASY CHAIR
Second Series
GREAT AND SMALL THINGS
Each, Illustrated, 7s. 6d. net.
SECRETS OF EARTH AND SEA
Illustrated. 8s. 6d. net.


LINDRUM (Walter)


BILLiarDs. Illustrated. 2s. 6d. net.


LODGE (Sir Oliver)


MAN AND THE UNIVERSE

7s. 6d. net and 3s. 6d. net.
THe SURVIVAL OF MAN 7s. 6d. net.
RAYMOND 10s. 6d. net.
RAYMOND REVISED 6s. net.
MODERN PROBLEMS 38. 6d. net.
REASON AND BELIEF 35. 6d. net,
THE SUBSTANCE OF FAITH 2s. net.
RELATIVITY Is. net.
CONVICTION OF SURVIVAL 2s. net.


LUCAS (£. V.), C.H.


READING, WRITING AND REMEM-


BERING 18s, net.
THE COLVINS AND T'HEIR FRIENDS
£1 1s. net.

Tue LIFE OF CHARLES LAMB
2 Vols. £1 1s. net,
AT THE SHRINE OF ST. CHARLES
5s. net.


PosT-BAG DIVERSIONS 7s. 6d. net.
VERMEER THE MAGICAL 5s. net.
A WANDERER IN ROMB
A WANDERER IN HOLLAND
A WANDERER IN LONDON
LONDON REVISITED (Revised)
A WANDERER IN PARIS
A WANDERER IN FLORENCB
A WANDERER IN VENICE

Each tos. 6d. net.
A WANDERER AMONG PICTURES


8s. 6d, net.
E. V. Lucas’s LONDON’ £1 net.
THE OPEN ROAD 6s. net.


Also, illustrated by CLaupg A.
SHEPPERSON, A.R.W.S.
Ios. 6d. net.
Also, India Paper.
Leather, 7s. 6d. net.
THE Joy oF LIFE 6s. net.
Leather Edition, 7s. 6d. net.
Also, India Paper.
Leather, 7s. 6d. net,
THE GENTLEST ART
THE SECOND Post
FIRESIDE AND SUNSHINE
CHARACTER AND COMEDY
Goop COMPANY
ONE Day AND ANOTHER
OLp Lamps FoR NEw
LOITERER’S HARVEST
LUCK OF THE YEAR
EVENTS AND EMBROIDERIES
A FRONDED ISLE
A Rover I WouLD BE
GIVING AND RECEIVING
HER INFINITE VARIETY
ENCOUNTERS AND DIVERSIONS
TURNING THINGS OVER
'TRAVELLER’S LUCK
AT THE SIGN OF THE DOVB
VISIBILITY GOOD
Each 3s. 6d. net
LEMON VERBENA
SAUNTERER’S REWARDS
Each 6s. net.
FRENCH LEAVES
ENGLISH LEAVES
THE BARBER’S CLOCK Each 55. net.


a


Messrs. Methuen’s Publications


LUCAS (E. V.)—continued


“THE More I See oF MEN...’

OuT OF A CLEAR SKY

lr Docs CouLp WRITE

‘|... AND suCH SMALL DEER’
Each 3s. 6d. net.

See also Lamb (Charles).


LYND (Robert)


THE COCKLESHELL

Rain, RAIN, GO TO SPAIN

It’s A FINE WoRLD

THE GREEN MAN

‘THE PLEASURES OF IGNORANCE

THE GOLDFISH

THE LITTLE ANGEL

THE BLUE LION

THE PEAL OF BELLS

THE ORANGE TREE

Tue Money-Box Each 3. 6d. net.

‘YY. An Anthology of essays by
RosBert Lynp. Edited by EILEEN
SQUIRE. 9s. 6d. net.


5s. net.


McDOUGALL (William)


AN INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL
PsYCHOLOGY tos. 6d. net.
NATIONAL WELFARE AND NATIONAL
DECAY 6s. net.
AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOLOGY


1os. 6d. net.

AN OUTLINE OF ABNORMAL PSYCHO-
LOGY 15s. net.
Bopy AND MIND 12s. 6d. net.


CHARACTER AND THE CONDUCT OF
LIFE tos. 6d. net.
MoperN MATERIALISM AND EMER-
GENT EVOLUTION 7s. Od. net.
ETHICS AND SOME MODERN.WORLD
PROBLEMS 7s. 6d. net.

THE ENERGIES OF MEN
8s. 6d. net.


MAETERLINCK (Maurice)


THE BLUE BIRD 6s. net.
Also, illustrated by F. CAYLEy


ROBINSON, los. 6d. net.
Our ETERNITY 6s. net.
THE UNKNOWN GUEST 6s. net.
POEMS 5s. net.
‘THE WRACK OF THE STORM 6s, net.
THE BETROTHAL 6s. net.
Mary MAGDALENE 25. net.


MARLOWE (Christopher)


THE Works. In 6 volumes.
General Editor, R. H. CaAsE.
THE LIFE OF MARLOWE and DIbDo,
QUEEN OF CARTHAGE 8s. 6d. net.
TTAMBURLAINE, I AND II 105.6d.net.


MARLOWE (Christopher)—cont.


Tue Jew or Matta and THE


MASSACRE AT ParRIs_ 10s. 6d. net.
POEMS 10s. 6d. net.
Doctor FAustTus 8s. 6d. net.
Epwarp II 8s. 6d. net.


MASEFIELD (John)


ON THE SPANISH MAIN 8s. 6d. net.
A SAILor’s GARLAND 35. 6d. net.
SEA LIFE IN NELSON’S TIME

7s. 6d. net.


METHUEN (Sir A.)


AN ANTHOLOGY OF MODERN VERSE
SHAKESPEARE TO HARDY: An
Anthology of English Lyrics.
Each, Cloth, 6s. net.
Leather, 7s. 6d. net.


MILNE (A. A.)


TOAD OF ToAD HALL
A Play founded on Kenneth
Grahame’s ‘The Wind in the
Willows ’. 55. net.
THOSE WERE THE Days: Collected
Stories 7s. 6d. net.
By Way OF INTRODUCTION
Not THAT IT MATTERS
Ir I May
THE SUNNY SIDE
THE RED House MYSTERY
ONCE A WEEK
THE Ho.tipay ROUND
THE Day’s PLAY
Mr. Pim Passes BY
Each 3s. 6d. net.
WHEN WE WERE VERY YOUNG
WINNIE-THE-POOH
Now WE are SIx
THE House aT POOH CORNER
Each illustrated by E. H. SHEPARD.
7s. 6d. net. Leather, 10s. 6d. net.
‘THE CHRISTOPHER ROBIN VERSES
(‘ When We were Very Young’
and ‘ Now We are Six’ com-
plete in one volume). Illustrated
in colour and line by E. H.
SHEPARD. 8s. 6d. net.
‘THE CHRISTOPHER ROBIN STORY
Book
Illustrated by E. H. SHEPARD.
5s. net,
‘THE CHRISTOPHER ROBIN BIRTH-
DAY Book
Illustrated by E. H. SHEPARD.
3s. 6d. net.
FOURTEEN SONGS FROM ‘ WHEN WE
WERE VERY YOUNG’ 77s. 6d. net.


Messrs. Methuen’s Publications 7


MILNE (A. A.) and FRASER-SIM-
SON (H.)—continued

TEDDY BEAR AND OTHER SONGS

FROM ‘WHEN WE WERE VERY

YOUNG’ 7s. 6d. net.

THE KING’S BREAKFAST 3s. 6d. net.

Soncs FROM ‘ Now WE ARE SIX’


7s. 6d. net.
More ‘ Very YOUNG’ SoNcs

7s. 6d. net.
THE HuMs OF PooH 7s. 6d. met.


In each case the words are by
A. A. MILNE, the music by H.
FRASER-SIMSON, and the decora-
tions by E. H. SHEPARD.
MITCHELL (Abe)
DOWN TO ScRATCH
MORTON (H. V.)
A LONDON YEAR
Illustrated, 6s. net.
THE Heart OF LONDON


55. net.


3s. 6d. net.
Also, with Scissor Cuts by L.
HUMMEL. 6s. net.


THE SPELL OF LONDON
THE NIGHTS OF LONDON
BLUE Days AT SEA
Each 3s. 6d. net.
IN SEARCH OF ENGLAND
THE CALL OF ENGLAND
IN SEARCH OF SCOTLAND
IN SCOTLAND AGAIN
IN SEARCH OF IRELAND
IN SEARCH OF WALES
Each, illustrated, 7s. 6d. net.
NEWBOLD (Walton)
DEMOCRACY, DEBTS AND DISARMA-


MENT 8s. 6d. net.
OMAN (Sir Charles)
Tuincs I HAVE SEEN 8s. 6d. net.


A History OF THE ART OF WAR IN
THE MIDDLE AGES, A.D. 378-1485.
2 vols. Illustrated. £1 16s. net.
STUDIES IN THE NAPOLEONIC WARS
8s. 6d. net.
PARTRIDGE (Eric)
Worps, Worps, Worps !
PETRIE (Sir Flinders)
A History OF EGypt
In 6 Volumes.
Vol. I. From THE IST TO THE
XVITH DyNastTy 12s. net.
Vol. 11. THE XVIITH AND XVIIITH


6s. net.


DYNASTIES gs. net.
Vol. Ill XIXTH TO XXXTH

DYNASTIES 12s. net,
Vol. IV. EGYPT UNDER THB

PTOLEMAIC DYNASTY

By EpwyYN BEVAN. 15S. net,


PETRIE (Sir Flinders)—continued
Vol. V. EcypT UNDER ROMAN RULE
By J. G. MILNgE. 12s. net.
Vol. VI. Ecypr IN THE MIDDLE
AGES.
By S. LANE POoLe.
PHILLIPS (Sir Percival)
Far VISTAS 128. 6d. net.
PICCARD (Prof. Auguste)
My First AND SECOND ASCENSIONS
IN THE STRATOSPHERE


10s. net.


Illustrated. ros. 6d. net.
RAGLAN (Lord)
JOCASTA’s CRIME 6s. net.


THE SCIENCE OF PEACE 3s. 6d. net.
SELLAR (W. C.) and YEATMAN
(R. J.)
1066 AND ALL THAT
Illustrated by JOHN REYNOLDS.
5S. net.
AND Now ALL THIS
Illustrated by JOHN REYNOLDS.
5s. net,
Horse NONSENSE
Illustrated by JOHN REYNOLDS.
5S. net.
STEVENSON (R. L.)
THE LETTERS Edited by Sir SIDNEY
COLVIN. 4 Vols. Each 6s. net.
STOCK (Vaughan)
THE Lire OF CHRIST
SURTEES (R. S.)
HANDLEY CROSS
Mr. SPONGE’S SPORTING TOUR
ASK MAMMA
Mr. FAcEY ROMFORD’s HOUNDS
PLAIN OR RINGLETS ?
HILLINGDON HALL
Each, illustrated, 7s. 6d. net.
JORROCKS’S JAUNTS AND JOLLITIES
HawBuckK GRANGE
Each, illustrated, 6s. net.


TAYLOR (A. E.)


6s. net.


PLato: ‘THE Man AND His Work
£1 1s. net.
PLATO: TIMUS AND CRITIAS
6s. net.
ELEMENTS OF METAPHYSICS
12s. 6d. net.


TILDEN (William T.)
THE ART OF LAWN TENNIS
Revised Edition.
SINGLES AND DOUBLES
Each, illustrated, 6s. net.
THE COMMON SENSE OF LAWN
‘TENNIS
MATCH PLAY AND THE SPIN OF THE
BALL. Fach, illustrated, 53. net.


Sl


8 Messrs. Methuen’s Publications


TILESTON (Mary W.)
DaILy STRENGTH FOR DAILY NEEDS
3s. 6d. net.
India Paper. Leather, 6s. net.


UNDERHILL (Evelyn)
Mysticism Revised Edition.
15s. net.
THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT AND THE
LiFe OF TO-DAY 7s. 6d. net.
MAN AND THE SUPERNATURAL
7s. 6d. net.
THE GOLDEN SEQUENCE
Paper boards, 3s.
Cloth, 5s. net.
Mixep PasTuRE: Essays and
Addresses 5S. net.
CONCERNING THE INNER LIFE
2s. net.
2s. net.


6d. met;


THE HOUSE OF THE SOUL.


VIEUCHANGE (Michel)
Smara: THE FORBIDDEN CITY
Illustrated. 8s. 6d. net.


WARD (A. C.)

TWENTIETH CENTURY LITERATURE
5s. net,

Tue NINETEEN-TWENTIES 55. net.
LANDMARKS IN WESTERN LITERA-
TURE 5s. net.
AMERICAN LITERATURE 75. 6d. net
WHAT IS THIS LIFE? 5s. net.
THE FROLIC AND THE GENTLE: A
CENTENARY STUDY OF CHARLES
LAMB 5s. net.


WILDE (Oscar)
Lorp ARTHUR SAVILE’S CRIME AND
THE PorTRAIT OF Mr. W. H.


6s. 6d. net.
THE DUCHESS OF PADUA

3s. 6d. net.
POEMS 6s. 6d. net.
Lapy WINDERMERE’S FAN

6s. 6d. net.
A Woman oF No IMPORTANCE

6s. 6d. net.
AN IDEAL HusBAND 6s. 6d. net.


THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST


6s. 6d. net.
A House OF POMEGRANATES

6s. 6d. net.
INTENTIONS 6s. 6d. net.
DE PROFUNDIS and PRISON LETTERS

6s. 6d. net.


EssAyS AND LECTURES 6s. 6d. net.
SaLomé, A FLORENTINE TRAGEDY,
and LA SAINTE COURTISANE

2s. 6d. net.
SELECTED PROSE OF OscAR WILDE
6s. 6d. net.
ART AND DECORATION
6s. 6d. net.
For LOVE OF THE KING
5s. net.
VERA, OR THE NIHILISTS
6s. 6d. net.


WILLIAMSON (G. C.)


THE BOOK OF FAMILLE ROSE
Richly illustrated. £8 8s. net.


METHUEN’S COMPANIONS TO MODERN STUDIES


SPAIN. E, ALLISON PEERS.
GERMANY. J. BITHELL.
Iraty. E. G. GARDNER.
R. L. G. RItTcHie.


FRANCE.


12s. 6d. net.
15s. net.

12s. 6d. net.
12s. 6d. net.


METHUEN’S HISTORY OF MEDIEVAL AND MODERN EUROPE


In 8 Vols.

I. 476to 911. By
II. 911 to 1198. By
II. 1198 to 1378. By
IV. 1378 to 1494. By
V. 1494 to 1610. By
VI. 1610 to 1715. By
VII. 1715 to 1815. By
VII. 1815 to 1923. By


Each 16s. net.

J. H. Baxter.

Z. N. BROOKE.

C. W. PREVITE-ORTON,
W. T. WauaGuH,

A. J. GRANT.

E, R. Apair,

W. F REDDAWAY.

Sir J. A, R. Marriott,


Methuen &
1133


Co.


Ltd., 36 Essex Street, London, W.C.2


"


se §


o:%
“ir


ee eee ee ee ee


é


ee
cm
i
=
+:
ae


THIS BOOK TO BE RETURNED BY:


je —-Mart-
16 OC] 1931


WORKING MEN'S
COLLEGE
1 LIBRARY


—
Ao °


pikes ae


gy A gn Ls hg Pel
