Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, Vol. 4 (Abbé Augustin Barruel (trans. Robert Clifford), 1797)
==========================================================
Barruel's fourth volume: the Illuminati and the Germanic Union exposed. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/memoirsillustrat04barr).

,£r    " '


*


^     jj


—-*- *;


D'vf«io«      <T  g*  jT

Sci  tioo  /    fi\


nT  — •*" — .    *

E  M  O  (ÇR  S^_   *

ILLUSTRATING  TP^         ',wg    —


HISTORY  OF  JACOBINISM,—


WRITTEN  IN   FRENCH   BY

THE    ABBE   BARRUEL,


AND  TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  BY

THE  HON.  ROBERT  CLIFFORD,  F.  R.  S.  &  A.  S.


Princes  and  Nations   fhail  difappear  from  the  face  of  the  Earth — and
this  revolution  fhall  be  the  work  of  secret  societies.

Weijloaupt's  Difcoutfe  for  the  Myjïeries.


PART  IV VOL.  IV.

ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY,  HISTORICAL  PART,

v»» ■»%■■■        —«4«

Firft  American  Edition,  from  the  Second  London  Edition»
..  ■  — , — . min  man  i     > ■■"■


tZIZABETH-TOfrN:

Printed  by  Shepard  Kollock  for  Cornelius  Davjs,  No.  g&
Water-Street,  Ntiv-Vork%


1799-


OBSERVATIONS

On  feme  articles  publijhed  in  the  Monthly  Review,
relative  to  the  "  Memoirs  on  Jacobinism."


THERE  are  Reviewers  of  vvhofe  approbation  I  ffiall  ever  be
proud,  becaufe  I  know  the  propagation  of  good  princi-
ples to  be  the  objecl  of  their  labors.  There  are  others,  how-
ever, whofe  applauie  would  always  be  hateful  to  me,  becaufe,
under  the  mafk  of  fcience,  they  diffeminate  the  principles  of
Impiety  and  Rebellion.  To  which  of  theie  daffies' the  Monthly
Review  may  belong,  1  mall  not  pretend  to  determine,  as  I  am
not  in  the  habit  of  reading  it  ;  but  fliould  be  forry  to  ground
my  judgment  on  the  account  which  Dr.  Griffiths,  or  his  aiTo-
ciates,  have  given  of  the  Memoirs  ofjacohinifm.  In  the  ap-
pendix to  his  twenty-fifth  Volume,  he  has  loaded  me  with  im-
putations which  I  ihouid  leave  to  the  good  fenfe  of  my  Read-
er, were  I  engaged  in  a  mere  literary  difpute  ;  but  I  have  de-
nounced the  moll:  formidable  confpuacy  that  ever  was  con-
trived againft  Religion  and  Society.  I  owe  it,  therefore,  to  my
caufe,  and  to  myfelf,  to  prove  which  of  us  is  molt  open  to  the
charge  of  unfairnefs,  of  dexterity,  or  of  treacherous  ingenuity.
Fortunately  the  talk  is  not  difficult.

Dr.  Griffiths  is  pleafed  to  pals  a  favorable  fentence  on  my  firft
Volume,  treating  of  the  Con/piracy  of  the  SophiJIers  againft  the
Altar;  but  he  fays,  that  the  Con/piracy  "  or  the  Sophiiters
"  of  Rebellion  againft  the  Throne  is  fb  imperfectly  fupported
"  in  the  fécond  Volume,  that  he  muft  fti!!  afcribe  the  extinction
*'  of  Royalty  in  France  much  more  to  the  comfe  of  local  e-
**  vents  in  Pans,  than  to  the  previous  concert  and  deliberate
*' wifli  of  the  leaders  of  the  Revolution.'' — Certainly  the  Ja-
cobins would  not  be  forrow  to  fee  fuch  an  opinion  become  pie-
valent,  for  they  alfo  claim  the  right  of  faying  to  Kings,  if  we
attack  your  thrones  you  may  thank  yourfelves  ;  it  was  your
perfidy  and  defpotifm,  much  more  than  the  eitorts  of  a  BrifTot
or  a  Syeyes,  that  dethroned  Lewis  XVI  ;  it  was  more  owing
to  vou  than  to  Petion  or  Robefpiene  that  He  was  led  ro  the
fcafFold  ;  and,  above  all,  it  was  the  tyranny  of  Lewis  XVI.  that
engraved  in  our  hearts  that  wifh  to  exterminate  every  King
on  earth.  Dr.  Griffiths  a!fo  finds  it  more  convenient  per»;
torily  to  pronounce  on  the  validity  of  the  proofs  which  I  ad-
duce, than  to  fubmit  any  of  them  to  his  readers,  left  they  mould
draw  a  very  different  conclusion.  Not  a  word  does  he  men-
tion of  the  Letters,  of  the  Syftems,  of  Holbach's  Club,  of  the
Central  Committee,  of  the  EmifTaties  of  the  Grand  Orient,  of
the  Declamations  and  formal  its  Le  Roi,

Condorcet,  Dudin,  and  bis  fellow-re  >f  the  Mercure.

All  this  muft  lead  us  to  helie.ve,  that  Dr.  Griffiths  is  difficult
of  conviclion  when  hepleafes  to  be  fo  ;  ar.d  that  he  can  with-


ÎV  OBSERVATIONS,  &C-

#fiold  proofs  when  he  is  not  in  a  humour  to  refute  therh.  Sd
many  perfons  will  take  the  word  of  their  teachers  for  grant-
ed, that  it  is  unnecefTary  for  him  to  condefcend  to  give  his  rea-
fons.  We  fhall  fee  whether  he  will  deign  to  notice  Sir  Horace
Walpole,  who  fo  long  fince  denounced  the  Confpiracy  of  the
Sophifters  of  Rebellion.  If  Dr.  Griffiths  be  determined  to  be
blind,  I  cannot  pretend  to  make  him  fee.

adly,  Dr.  Griffiths  alfo  declares,  that  my  pofittan  "is  whol-
ly erroneous,"  when  I  fay,  that  Equality  and  Liberty  form  the
effential  and  perpetual  Creed  of  the  Freemafons.  Heue  I  was
tempted  to  recognize  a  brother  dupe,  but  he  had  his  reafonS
for  appearing  to  be  better  informed  than  I  was.  He  then  fpeaks
of  a  communication  opened  between  the  Grand  Lodges  of
London  and  Berlin  1776;  and  Berlin,  he  fays,  was  at  that  ara
the  very  f ecus  of  convergence  for  every  ray  of  modern  Pbilofo-
phy  ;  and  then  he  afks,  were  thefe  embaffies  mere  child* s  play  i
or  ivere  there  Timoleons  concealed  in  the  Latomies  (  Lodges  )  ?
I  candidly  confefs,  that  had  I  known  of  theie  communications
with  the  very  center  of  Sophiftry,  fo  far  ffiould  I  have  been
from  retracing  my  proofs  of  the  Confpiracy  of  the  Freema-
fons, that  I  mould  have  given  them  a  ftronger  turn.  I  can  alfo
affure  him,  that  1  would  not  have  generalized  to  fuch  an  ex-
tent my  exception  in  favor  cf  the  Mafonry  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  London,  had  I  been  informed  that  it  could  poffibly  have
contained  members  fo  inimical  to  Kings  as  that  Timoleon  who
afiaflinated  his  brother  Timophane,  for  that  fame  caufe  of  hat-
red to  Royalty  in  which  the  Elder  Brutus  became  the  execu-
tioner of  his  Children,  and  the  Younger  Brutus  the  murderer
ofCcfar  his  benrfaclor.  Let  Englifh  Mafons  defend  them-
felvts  againft.  the  imputations  of  Dr  Griffiths  ;  but  every  read-
er will  perceive,  that  the  method  he  has  adopted  to  prove  that
my  poftion  <iuas  erroneous  is  rather  extraordinary  ;  for,  accord-
ing to  his  alertions,  iff  am  culpable,  it  is  of  having  general-
ized my  exception  toe  much  in  favOr  of  thofe  to  whom  I  tho't
no  guilt  could  attach*

When  we  proceed  to  the  third  Volume  treating  of  the  Illu-
minées, and  I  fpeak  of  their  Confpiracy  againft  all  fociety,
property,  and  fciences,  then  is  he  far  more  difficult  of  perfua-
fion.  It  is  here  that  I  am  guilty  of  treacherous  ingenuity,  of
partiality-,  and  of  unfair  nefs.  Let  the  reader  judge  to  which
of  us  fuch  imputations  are  the  moft  applicable.

jdly,  The  Reviewerdeduceshisgrandproofsagainftmefrom
the  manner  in  which  I  have  tfanflated  two  of  Weilhaupt's  texts.
I  mult  own,  that  one  of  them  gave  me  a  confiderable  deal  of
trouble,  îlot  on  account  of  the  language*  for  the  words  are  clear
enough;  but  on  account  of  the  arrant  nonfenfe,  and,  to  me,
irreconcileable  contradiction  of  this  text  in  the  phce  where  it
ftands.  To  have  tranflattd  .Weifhatipt  literally,  we  muft  have
made  him  fay,  "few  wants  j  this  is  thefirjl  ftèp  towards  Li-
*'  herty.  it  is  for  this  reafen  that  Savages  and  the  Learned  (or
**■  men  enlightened  in  the  fupreme  degree  J  are  perhaps  the  only
"  free  men>  the  o?i,y  independent  men.'"  I  here  law  a  great  er-
ror in  ftating  our  men  of  learning  as  thofe  who  have  xhçjèfveji


OBSERVATIONS,  &C.

Wants,  or  as  the  freeft,  or  as  the  moft  independent  of  Socie^
ty.  i'o  enable  them  to  attend  folely  to  their  ftudies,  they  Hand,
in  need  of  a  fufficieot  fortune  to  relieve  them  from  attention  to
temporal  concerns.  They  Hand  in  need  of  the  labor  of  others
to  cloath,  lodge,  and  noai  ilh  them.  They  are  above  ail  others
dependent  on  fociety  for  that  ftate  of  peace  and  tranquillity  fo
necelTary  to  the  progrefs  of  fcience.  They  mud,  therefore,  be
monfters  of  ingratitude  if  they  do  not  tecognize  that  public  au-
thority, without  which  fciencesmuftbanilh.  Futthemoitlearned
member  of  the  Royal  Society  into  a  defert  or  a  foreft,  and  in
another  part  put  a  country  clown,  and  fee  which  of  the  two
will  tare  beft,  or  ftand  moftin  need  of  the  help  of  others.

But  this  is  not  all;  Weifhaupt  pofuively  alTerts.that  flavery
is  the  offspring  of  the  fciences  ;  and  can  it  follow  from  fuch
a  pofition,  that  the  moft  fbientific  are  the  freeft  and  moft  in-
dependent of  men  ?  As  from  a  variety  of  other  paffages  I  knew
that,  according  to  the  modern  Spartacus,  no  men  were  really
cnlig^cned,  unlefs  it  were  the  favages,  or  thofe  who  wifhed

to  carry  us  back  to  the  favage  ftate;  I  tranflated  it  thus  :

*'  Hence  few  wants  is  the  firjl  fiep  towards  Liberty. — //  it
"  for  this  reafon,  that  ire  favages  are  the  vwfi  enlightened  of
*'  men,  and  perhaps  they  alone  are  free',"  but  1  took  the  pre-
caution to  add  the  German  text,  ("  Darum  find  wilde,  und
*'  in  hocftken  grad  aufgeklârte,  vielleicht  die  einzige  freye
V  menfchen")  that  each  reader  might  give  the  fenfehe  chofe
to  the  original.  Dr.  Griffiths  has  done  more,  he  has  quoted
tha'  other  text,  in  which  Weifhaupt  literally  declares  flavery
to  be  the  offspring  of  the  fciences  ;  he  neverthelefs  makes
Weifhaupt  fay,  that  favages  and  the  fully  enlightened  are  per •-
baps  the  only  free  men.  '1  his  certainly  approaches  nearer  to  a
literal  tranuation,  and  the  fentence  taken  in-the  abftract  may
be  more  correct  ;  my  tranflation,  however,  is  conformable  to
the  fenfe  of  the  difcourfe  ;  but  I  have  no  objt&ion  to  fubftitute
that  given  by  Dr.  Griffiths,  provided  a  N.B.  be  added,  to  warn
the  reader  of  the  nonfenfe  of  it,  and  the  grofs  contradiction  it
contains.

4th!y,  Dr.  Griffiths,  or  the  writer  he  employs,  next  pro-
ceeds to  the  French. "  The  text  of  Weifhaupt  exprefly

"  fa^s,  out  of  our  pre  fat  imperfeel  for?ns  of  civil  union  nvè
**  jhaU  pafs  into  new  and  better  chofe n  ;  but  the  Abbé,  in
"order  to  attribute  to  hint  the  per  verle  project  of  perpetu-
"  ating  anarchy,  unfairly  renders  the  paflage  as  if  we  were  to
*'  pafs  back  into  the  favage  ftate."  Then, as  if  he  had  it  in  his
power  to  quote  numberlefs  examples  of  my  unfair  tranflations,
he  adds,  "  On  the  topic  of  Property,  fimilar  freedoms  have
*'  been  ufed,  with  a  not  lefs  treacherous  ingenuity."

Upon  my  word  Dr.  Griffiths  here  fathers,  with  great  facili-»
ty,  his  own  failing  upon  others.  Sir,  notwithstanding  the  bafe
and  calumr.icus  accufations  which  you  chofe  to  vent  againft
me,  1  wrote  to  yen  as  to  a  Reviewer  upright  in  his  intentions,
yet  liable  to  miftake,  but  who.  after  fuch  violent  imputations,
would  condtilend  at  le^ft  to  infert  in  a  future  number  of  his
Review  the  explanation  which  I  had  fent  him.  You  denitd  me


V1  OBSERVATIONS,  &C,

this  means  of  defence;  I  then  told  you,  that  I  Ihouîd  not  leave
the  public  in  that  error  into  which  your  Review  might  lead
them,  as  in  the  prefent  citcumilances  the  confequences  might
be  too  dangerous.  I  requefted  a  meeting  in  order  to  lay  before
you  the  Original  Writings,  and  therein  to  point  out  evident
proofs  that  your  imputations  were  unjuft.  You  refufed  thefe
means  of  rectifying  your  miftake.  What,  then,  entitles  you  to
better  treatment  than  you  have  given  to  a  man  who  was  molt
certainly  actuated  by  no  other  fentiment  than  that  of  the  pub-
lic good,  and  whom  you  chooie  to  calumniate  in  defiance  of
conviction  ?

It  pleafes  Dr,  Griffiths  alfo  to  reprefent  my  letter  (in  which
I  informed  him,  that  1  would  not  leave  the  public  in  an  error)
as  a  rifible  threat  of  denouncing  him  as  an  Illuminée  (June
1798).  He  adds,  that  I  am  "  at  full  liberty  to  accufe  or  com-
*'  pHment  him  by  fuch  a  iefcriptUn"  You  may,  Sir,  take  what
I  am  going  to  fay  as  a  reproach  or  as  a  compliment;  but^vith-
out  pretending  to  fay  whether  you  are  initiated  in  the  iRrets
of  Iliuminifm  or  not,  this  much  i  can  affert,  that  no  Illuminée
could  have  mown  lefs  candor  than  has  the  author  of  the  article
to  which  I  am  about  to  reply.

So  far  was  I  from  attributing  any  other  intention  to  Wei-
fhaupt,  than  that  which  he  really  had,  when  he  wrote  thefe
words,  Aus  den  jlaaten  tretten  nvir  in  ?ieue  kl tiger  geivdhltet
which  I  have  tranflated,  de  cesfociêtés  nous  pajfons  a  des  vœux
a  ten  choix  plusfage  (from  thefe focieties  we  proceed  to  further
wi.'hes,  and  to  a  wifer  choice);  and  as  this  fentence,  taken  ab-
ftractly,  has  no  lignification  either  in  German  or  French,  I,
in  a  note,  called  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fentence
that  immediately  followed,  as  explaining  the  nature  of  the

K-.rfcr  choice  (Fr.  Vol.  III.) The  Englifh  tranfiator  has  o>

muted  this  note,  which,  in  reality  was  only  added  through
an  excefs  of  precaution.  But  had  he  inferted  it  what  would  it
have  proved  ?  Nothing  but  an  efpeciai  care  on  my  fide  not  to
attribute  to  Weifhaupt  any  meaning  that  did  not  entirely  co-
incide with  the  text.  Am  I  to  blame,  if  what  precedes  and
what  follows  that  fentence  evidently  demonftrate  that  this  So-
phifter  was  endeavoring  to  lead  us  back  to  thefavage  frate? —
I  fhould  fpare  the  Reviewer  too  much,  or  mould  rather  hold
him  out  as  an  Ignoramus,  were  I  to  fay  that  he  could  have  been
jrjiftaken  as  to  the  meaning  of  that  fentence.  Here  it  is,  with
what  precedes  and  follows  it:  "  Nature  drew  men  from  the
*'  favage  ftate,  and  re-united  them  in  civil  focieties  ;  from
"  thefe  focieties  w<?  preceed  to  further  ivijbes ,  and  îj  a  iuifer
"  choice*  New  aiTociations  prefent  themfeives  to  thefe  wi/hes  ;

*  The  note  in  jmtefton  would  aftfwer  to  the  ward  choice,
Volume  III.  and  is  literal  ows:  li  Ion  tarifer  choice i

6;  this  is  the  literal  tranflation  of  the  text,  aus  den  ftaaten  tret-
*'  ten  wir  in  neue  kiiiger  gewiihlte.  The  fentence  that  follow
'*  èlearly  enough  exprejfes  what  this  choice  is."  I  placed  the
German  text  bettueçn  a pSrentheJis  immediately  after  the  -cord
choice  ;  and  as  the  fentence  alluded  to  immediately  followed,  £


OBSERVATIONS,  &C.  VÏi

* '  and  by  their  means  we  return  to  the  (late  whence  ive  catm^
■    not  again  to  run  the  former  courfe,  but  the  better  to  enjoy
"  our  deftiny."  Since  the  Reviewer  did  not  ccndefcend  to  fa-
vor me  with  the  interview  I  requefted,  that  I  might  mow  him
the  German  text,  1  here  print  it,  that  he  may  get  it  tranflated
by  whom,  and  where  he  pleafes  ;  and  I  defy  him  to  (how  that
I  have  either  altered  or  warped  the  fenfe  of  that  pafTage  :  "  Die
*'  natur  hat  das  menfehen  gefchlecht  ausden  wildheitgeriiTen,
"  und  in  ftaaten  vereinight;  ans  âenflaatentr$ttentwirinneus
*'  Kluger  gemoahtte.     Zu  unferen  wiinfehen  nahen  fich  neue
"  verbindungen,  und  durch  diefe  langen  wir  wieder  dort  an,
"  wo  wir  aufaegangen  find  ;  aber  tiicht  um  dereinft  den  alten
**  zirkul  wieder  zuruck  zu  machen,  fondern  um  unfere  weitere
"  beitimTrlBng  naher  zu  erfahren,"  Nowl  boldly  afk,  whether
natural  ftu^idity  can  be  carried  fo  far,  or  whether  any  man  can
be  fo  totally  dellitute  of  every  idea  of  logic,  as  not  plainly  to
fee,  that  the  ftate  from  which  Weifhaupt  fays  that  Nature  has
drawn  us,  and  to  which  it  is  leading  us  back  by  means  of  his
(fecret)  affociations,  is  not  the  favage  ftate.     Befide,  he  adds,
Let  ».r  explain  this  txjfiar.fi  and  how  does  he  do  this?  why,  by
dedicating  more  than  forty  pages  to  prove,  that  the  object  of
Nature  in  Secret  Societies  is  to  eradicate  even  the  very  name  of
People,  Prince,  Nation,  or  Country  ;  and  this  he  pofitively  tells
us  is  one  sf 'his grand  myjleries.    This  monftrous  Sophifler  alfo
fays,  that  Original  Sin,  the  Fall  of  Man,  was  no  other  than
their  reunion  into  civil  fociety;  and  that  Redemption  is  our  re-
instatement in  that  ftate  which  was  anterior  to  fuciety.     It  is
even  thus  that  he  pretends  to  explain  the  gofpel:  it  is  thus  thatQ
he  explains  the  rough  JIo?>es,  the 'Jlçnejplit  or  broken,  and  the  po-
lifted Jlone  of '  Mafonry. — And  after  this  Dr.  Griffiths  and  his
co-operators  will  come  and  accufe  us  of  unfairnefs,  dexterity,
and  treacherous  ingenuity,  becaufe  we  unfold  the  abfurdity  of
his  favorite  Illuminifm  !  Let  our  readers  aflïgn  thofe  epithets
to  whom  in  their  opinion  they  belong.

5thly.  What  can  the  Reviewer  mean  by  that  great  zeal  which
he  (hows  for  the  characters  of  Weifhaupt  and  Jvnigge,  thofe
two  prototypes  of  Illuminifm  ?  ïn  order  tojuftify  them,  he
comes  and  talks  to  us  of  the  theifm  and  of  the  opinions  which
they  affected  in  their  public  writings,  and  acts  the  brother
dupe,  grounding  his  opinion  on  Weifhaupt's  giving  the  wri-
tings of  the  Socinian  Bajfedottt  to  his  novices.  What  does  all
this  prove  to  a  man  who  is  fpeaking  of  the  fecret  opinions  of
Koigge  and  Weifhaupt,  and  who  lias  demonftrated  the  whole
doctrine  of  their  confpiring  myfteries;  to  a  man  who  proves  to
you,  by  the  very  letters  of  Weifhaupt  and  Knigge,  that  after
the  perufal  of  the  writings  of  the  Socinian  Baffedow,  thefe  two
atheilts  recommend  and  give  to  their  adepts  the  writings  of

looked  upon  the  remainder  of  the  note  as  per  feclly  ufelefs,  and  o-
viitted  it  ;  for  nvho  could  have  dreamt  that  any  perfon  could  have
cavilled  atfo  clear  a  fntence  ?  I  only  tranferihe  the  note  in  this
pi  ace,  that  every  reader  may  judge  of  Dr.  Griffiths' s  candour.—*

Tranflator.


Viii  OBSERVATIONS,  &<?.

the  atheift  Boulanger,  of  the  atheift  Robinet,  of  the  atheifê
Helvetius,  of  the  atheift  Diderot;  and  that  Knigge  even  com-
plains, that  fuch  a  fuperabundance  of  Atheifrn  would  betray
the  tendency  of  the  Seel  too  foon  ?  (Original  Writings,  VoL
J.  Let.  3,  from  S  part  ecu  s  to  Cato. — Vol.  II.  Let.  %.  from  Pki~
lo  to  Cato) — To  what  purpofe,  let  me  afk,  is  all  the  fluff
which  the  Reviewer  has  copied  from  the  German  Illuminées
about  the  Jefuits;  all  thofe  panic  terrors  which  he  afFe&s  about
the  return  of  Catholicifm  in  a  protectant  country;  as  if  protes«
tants  and  perfons  of  every  religion  were  r.otfjound  in  one  in-
tereft  to  counteract  the  plans  of  Uluminifm  ?  If  Dr.  Griffiths
wifhes  to  miflead  the  Englifh  nation,  as  fome  of  the  adepts  did
for  a  time  in  Germany,  let  him  learn  that  the  trick  i3  ftale  ;
that  it  will  be  in  vain  foi  him  to  copy  Mirabeau  or  Bonneville,
and,  like  them,  cry  up  the  alledged  proofs  of  Jefuits  Mafonry
difcovered  by  the  Illuminée  L-acian-ti  icol  ai.  We  are  on  the
fpot,  and  can  verify  thefe  grand  proofs.  We  beg  Dr.  Griffiths
to  favor  us  with  a  fight  cf  that  famous  Pelican  difcovered  at
Oxford;  and  that  he  will  not  forget  to  tell  us  how  it  comes  to
pafs,  that  this  Pelican  is  replaced  by  a  Sparrotu-hamui,  whole
feathers  grow  again,  and  koiu  a  Sparroiv-haivk,  nvho  thus  re-
fledges  itfelf  evidently  demonftrates  that  Jefuits  have  long  fines
teen  bidden  in  the  Evglijh  Ledges  ;  and  that  if  great  care  be
not  taken,  they  are  on  the  eve  of  fallying  forth  to  make  a  moft
terrible  havock.  He  will  alfo  tell  us  how  this  demonftration
becomes  evident,  when  we  obferve,  that  Sir  Chriftopher  Wren
(the  architect  who  built  St.  Paul's )was  profefTor  in  one  college
1fet  Oxford, and  that  the  Pelican  and  Sparroiv-haivk  were  found
in  another  college.  But  I  am  forry  to  conlider,  that,  when  Dr,
Griffiths  /hall  have  ably  developed  all  the  grand  proofs  given
by  Nicoiai,  the  Englifh  reader  will  be  much  tempted  to  rank;
the  inventor  and  his  panegyrift  in  the  fame  clafs.*

Let  not  Dr.  Griffiths  think  that  while  we  fhrug  our  fhoulders
at  this  miferable  fable  of  Catholicifm  and  Jefuitifm  latent  in
Freemafonry,  we  cannot  produce  fubftantial  proofs  that  this:
fable  was  only  invented  to  avert  the  attention  of  the  inhabitants
of  proteftant  countries  from  the  progrefs  made  by  the  Ulumir
nees.  We  can  <how  thofe  leaders  of  Illuminifm  B runner,  the
apoftate  catholic  curate  of  Tiefenbach  ;  the  apoftate  Nimis,  the
Chabot  of  Germany;  the  adepts  Dorfeh,  Blaa,  and  Wreden,
the  famous  Illuminées  of  Spire,  Mentz,  and  Bonne,  meditating
and  combining  among  themfelves  the  means  of  propagating
this  fable  in  Germany,  juft  as  Dr.  Griffiths  had  done  in  Eng-
land. We  can  produce  the  letter  of  the  adept  Brunner  to  A7-
?,Wj,  difcovered  among  the  papers  of  Blau  and  fent  by  the  of-
ficers who  had  feized  them  to  the  Bijhop  of  Spire.  Dr.  Grif-
fiths knows  many  things  concerning  Mafonry  and  Illuminifm  %
but  he  may  probably  be  unacquainted  with  this  letter;  it  would
not  be  right  that  he  lhould  commue  fo,  as  he  will,  by  the  in*

*  See  Monthly  Review,  Augufi,  1798,  pages  460  and 461—
Seealjl  the  miferable  difcoveries  of  Nicetai  appreciated  in  a  Ger->
man  ivork  called  the  Veil  torn  from  Mafonry,  page  318,  &c.


OBSERVATIONS,  &£.  $£

formation  be  better  able  to  judge  of  the  partthat  he  is  a&ing,
and  of  the  fervices  that  he  is  rendering  Illuminifm.

This  difpatch  is  dated  June  9,  1791,  that  is,  juft  about  the
time  when  the  coalition  of  the  crowned  heads  feemed  to  me»
nace  Jacobinifm  with  immediate  deftruclion.  The  adepts  are
much  occupied  with  inventing  a  plan  for  remodelling  Illumin-
ifm,  that  it  might  acquire  new  vigor.  Jn  this  plan  a  cloak  is
fought,  which,  hiding  the  grand  machine, leaves  its  inflruments
at  liberty  to  ad  without  being  feen,  and  10  attain  the  object  of
the  Sect  without  being  fufpected  of  meddling  with  Illuminifm.

The  cloak  that  was  thus  to  favor  the  views  of  the  brethren,
•was  an  Academy  of  Sciences  formed  of  two  clafles  of  men,  the
one  of  men  remarkable  for  their  zeal  in  the  caufe  of  religion,
the  other  of  profound  Illuminées.  Honorary  members  were  to
be  elected  as  protectors;  and  if '(fays  the  author  of  the  plan)
Dalbert  ■once  gets  to  his  government  (that  is,  if  the  Suffragan
becomes  Elector  of  Mentz)  be  of  ail  ether  princes  would  be  the
moji  proper  for  our  objecl.  We  may  perhaps  unfold  the  txthpls
of  our  pian  to  him,  and  make  Mentz  the  central  point  of  our
academy. — To  do  away  every  idea  of  the  hidden  myjleries  of  this
academy y  it  ivou/d  be  right  that  each  member  Jheuld  ivear  on  his
breajl  a  medal  bearing  the  infer  iption  lit:  Li  Gi  ON  1  etScientiis
(to  religion  and  fciences}. — The  better  to  conceal  our  fecret  ob-
jecl, *we  mufi  be  careful  to  engage  ail  the  learned  jcfuits,fucb
as  Sattler,  Sailer,  Mutschelle,  and  other  learned  re-
ligious, that  are  perfeûly  orthodox,  fuel)  as  Gerbert,  and
Schwartzueber. — It  would  even  be  right  if  it  could  be  bro't
about,  that  the  eftablift>me?it  of  this  academy  Jhould  be  announced
to  the  public  by  a  Jefuit,  and  not  by  one  of  us.

Pray,  Dr.  Griffiths,  has  this  plan  come  to  your  knowledge?
Now  liften  to  what  the  adept  author  of  the  plan  fays  :  "  But  if
*'  people  cry  out  againft  hidden  jfefuitifm  and  again  ft  the  pro-
81  grefs  oj ' Catholicifn,  it  will  be  ib  much  the  better.  That
"  would  the  better  do  away  all  fufpicion  oi  a  fecret  aflbciation  ;
*'  one  might  (and  this  is  worthy  of  Dr.  Griffiths  s  obfervation)
**  one's felf  help  to fpread this falfe  alarm."  1  here  add  the
text,  for  the  benefit  of  a  tranllation  from  Dr.  Griffiths,  which
if  he  gives,  I  hope  he  will  alfo  add  the  text,  that  the  public
may  pronounce  on  the  treacherous  ingenuity:  "  Wurde  iiber
*'  heimlichen  Jefuitifm,  oder  iiber  grofei.e  au&reitunjg  des
*'  Katholicifm  gefchrien,  delto  btffiïr;  dadurch  wiirde  aller
**  verdacht  einer  geheimen  verbindung  nur  um  fo  mehr  be-
*'  feitiget.  Man  konte  fogar  diefen  blinden  lïrmTelbftichlagen
*'  belfen."  When,  tvir,  you  ffiail  have  dnly  meditated  on  this
plan  of  the  adepts,  1  mould  like  to  know  what  you  could  have
done  more  to  favor  their  views  than  you  did  in  giving  an  ac-
count of  Mr.  Robilbn's  work,  of  my  work,  and  of  the  mifera-
ble  produi'licn  calling  ni'eif  A  firjl  Letter  of  a  Free  msfon  to
the  Abbe  Barrutl.  You  will,  doubtlefs,  remark,  that  the  date
of  this  plan  is  June,  T792;  fo  you  cannot  refer  your  readers
to  the  ///?w»wwBoéticer  to  make  them  believe,  that  fmcethe
year  1790  there  fus  been  no  farther  queition  of  Illuminifm  itt
Germany.

B


X  OBSERVATIONS,  SiCt

t  flatter  myfelf  that  you  now  coincide  in  opinion  with  méi
fend  that  you  think  it  might  have  been  better — ift,  To  have  ei-
ther fpoken  of  the  above  works  with  more  candor  and  polite-
nefs,  or  not  to  have  mentioned  them  at  all. — zdly,  To  have  ac-
cepted the  invitation  that  I  lent  you.  that  I  might  lay  the  ori-
ginal texts  before  you. — .idly,  To  hare  publifhed  the  letter
that  I  requefted  you  would  infert  in  your  Review. — And  4thly»
Not  to  have  pretended  that  1  had  threatened  to  denounce  you
as  an  Illuminée.  For  reaily,  Sir,  1  never  felt  the  {lighted  in-
ducement to  pronounce  whether  the  Illuminées  had  ever  ini-
tiated yourfelf  or  your  co-operators  in  their  laft  myfteries.— ■
You  begin  with  granting  that  the  conspiracy  of  the  Sophifters
againft  the  altar  really  exifls  ;  and  when  you  come  to  the
Illuminées  you  tell  us,  "  that  however  extravagant  may  bet  hi
"  opinions  offome  leading  men  amongrhe ÎUuminees,the ave?
*'  rage  ivif/of  the  party,  the  collecled  pnrfuit  of  the  confederated
il  Lodges*  appears  rather  to  have  had  socinianism  and  re-
"  publicanism  than  Aikcifm  and  Anarchy  fir  its  objetts''—*
(June,  1798,  p.  240.) — This  is  avowing  at  leaitthat  there  ex-
ills  in  thele  Lodges  a  confpiracy  againft  the  God  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  againfl  the  thrones  of  all  fovereigns.  This  is  alfo
abandoning  the  chiefs  or  foundets  of  the  confederacy  of  the
Illuminées.  When  you  go  lb  far  youilL-lf,  Sir,  as  to  grant  all
this,  am  I  not  entitled  to  afk  what  could  induce  you  to  accufe
me  of  io  much  treacherous  ingenuity,  when  you  confefs  your*
felf  that  I  might  be  in  the  right  ;  for  you  mult  have  l'een  that  £
diftinguifhed  the  degrees;  I  have  fhewn  by  the  very  code  ol  the
illuminées  how  in  their  fir  ft  fchools  they  only  infufed  hatred
for  kings,  and  that  fpecies  of  Socinianilm  which  borders  fo
clofely  on  rank  Deifm.  This,  I  think,  was  fufficientjy  proving
a  confpiracy  whofe  tendency  well  deferved  the  attention  of  the
public.  When  I  accufe  the  Sedt  of  aiming  at  the  wildeft  an-
archy, I  iliow  that  this  myllery  was  reierved  to  the  profound
adepts  and  chiefs,  though  their  iecret  at  prêtent  frequently  es-
capes them  before  a  public  audience.  Generally,  Sir,  they  make
the  fame  avowals  as  you  do.  They  are  pleafed  to  hear  it  faid
that  Voltaire,  and  thofe  men  whom  they  denominates?*?^ />/•;'-
lofophers,  confpired  againft  Chriflianity  5  and  that  other  i'elf-
created  philofophers  of  the  Lodges  confpired  againft  kings.—
This  might  contribute  to  make  nations  believe  that  it  is  notfo
very  criminal  a  thing  to  engage  in  fuch  confpiracies.  But  it
is  a  more  difficult  thing  to  invent  a  plaufible  pretext  for  con-
fpiring  againft  all  property  and  civil  fociety  ;  and  for  that  rea-
fon  more  care  is  taken  to  conceal  the  ultimate  views  of  their
plots.  Meanwhile,  however,  they  cry  down  every  author  that
dares  to  unmafk  thefe  hideous  confpirators.  Was  it  under  an
illufion,  or  wittingly,  that  you  followed  lb  neatly  the  fame
method  in  reviewing  the  works  of  Mr.  Robifon  and  myfelf?
Do  not  expect  a  decidon  from  me.  My  objed  is,  that  the  pub-
lic fhould  not  bemiflead  to  believe  that  1  have  exaggerated  the
myfteries  of  the  Illuminées.  I  leave  to  that  fame  public  to  judge
Whether  any  of  the  Reviewers  are  dupes  or  accomplices.


OBSERVATIONS,  &C,  '\[

N.  B.  In  fupport  of  the  account  given  by  the  Monthly  Re-
view, I  am  threatened  with  an  anfwer  from  Spartacus
WEISHAUP  r.  My  rejoinder  is  ready  for  this  perfonage  alfo.
Let  him  meet  me  at  the  archives  of  Munich,  where  his  letters
are  preferved.  But  as  that  might  expofe  him  to  the  peril  of
the  gallows,  I  confent  that  he  mould  acî  by  attorney.  Let  him
prove  then  that  thefe  letters  are  fpurious  ;  and  that  the  Court
and  Magiftrates  of  Bavaria  impofed  upon  the  world,  when  they
puWilhed  thole  letters,  and  invited  perfons  of  every  country  to
come  and  verify  the  originals  ;  for  all  other  apology  on  his  fide
muil  be  ufelefs,  and  any  anfwer  on  minefuperfluous.  A  com-
plete anfwer  to  all  his  publications,  as  well  as  to  his  firft  apolo-
gy, is  already  publimed  in  the  code  and  hiftory  of  his  Illumin-
ifm ,  and  all  that  I  can  poffibly  fay  with  reference  to  his  vyri?
fings  may  be  reduced  to  three  words,  read  and  verify*


PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE.


Object  and  Plan  of  this  Volume.

(CONCEIVED  but  a  fhort  time  before  the  French
_^  Revolution,  by  a  man  whofe  ambition  feemed  con-
fined within  the  narrow  compafs  of  the  town  oflngol-
ftadt  and  to  the  dully  folios  of  his  fchools,  by  whatftrange
means  did  Illuminifm  in  lefs  than  fifteen  years,  become
that  formidable  Sect  which,  under  the  name  of  "Jacobin*
rides  triumphant  over  ruined  altars,  fhivcred  fceptres,  and
Scattered  crowns;  over  the  wrecks  of  nations  and  their
conftitutions  ;  over  the  bodies  of  potentates  fallen  beneath
their  poifons  or  their  poignards,  while  they  drag  others  in
their  train,  craving  a  (ervitude  termed  peace,  or  branding
themfelves  with  the  infamy  of  what  they  call  an  alliance?
Under  this  name  of  Jacobin  abforbing  all  the  myfte-
ries,  plots,  and  combinations  of  every  feclary  againlt  eve-
ry religion,  government,  and  fociety,  by  what  artifice;
could  Illuminifm  acquire  that  dominion  of  terror  which
forbids  any  foVereign  within  the  aftonifhed  univerfe  to
fay,  To-morrow  I  ihall  continue  leated  on  my  throne  ;
which  forbids  nations  and  citizens  to  fay,  that  their  laws
and  religion,  their  houfes  and  property,  will  not  be  torn
from  them;  which  forbids  the  peaceful  inhabitant  to  lie
down  to  reft  with  any  aflurance  that  he  will  not  rife  in  the
morning  beneath  the  fhade  of  that  fy mbol  of  blood  called
the  Tree  of  Liberty,  and  threatened  by  the  axe  of  the  de-
vouring guillotine  ?  How  is  it  poffible,  that  the  fecret
adepts  of  the  modern  Spartacus  mould  be  the  invifible  and
exclufive  movers  of  that  long  chain  of  crimes  and  calam-
ities, that  difaftrous  torrent  of  ferocity  and  rapine,  which
is  called  the  revolution  ?  How  do  they  continue  to  direct
thofe  machinations  which  are  to  confummate  the  diiTolu-
tion  and  mifery  of  human  fociety  ?

In  dedicating  this  Fourth  Volume  to  the  inveftigation  Object  of
of  thefe  queft  ions,  I  do  not  flatter  myfelf  with  the  hopes  ^is  vo-
of  iiluftrating  them  with  all  that  precifion,  and  of  point-  lutne*
ing  out  thofe  particularities,  which  other  men  might  have
done  who  have  had  it  in  their  power  to  follow  the  Seel
of  Illuminées  into  their  dark  abodes,  without  ever  lofing
iight  of  the  adepts  or  their  teachers,    The  monfter  has


14  PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE.

taken  its  courfe  through  wilderneiTes,  and  darknefs  has
more  than  once  obfcured  its  progrefs.  "Weimaupt  had
adopted  the  bird  of  night  for  his  emblem,  becaufe  he
courted  darknefs;  but  the  fcreechings  of  this  ominous
bird,  rending  the  air  in  fpite  of  him,  difcover  his  fecret  re-
treat. The  venemous  reptile  is  often  uncovered-  by  the
ftench  of  its  poifon;  the  beaten  and  blood-ftained  track
leads  to  the  difcovery  of  the  cavern  inhabited  by  brigands;
and,  riotwithftanding  all  the  efforts  of  the  wicked,  an  all-
powerful  God  will  fometimes  in  his  mercy  permit  a  ray
of  light  to  mine  on  their  tenebrous  recelTes,  which  may
fufficeto  develope  their  plots.  Many  horrid  particulars,
no  doubt,  have  been  loft  under  the  veil  of  darknefs  ;  but
in  claflirig  thofcr  which  have  come  to  my  knowledge,  I
find  abundance  of  proofs  to  trace  the  Seel;  wherever  crime
has  pointed  out  its  fatal  influence.  In  vain  does  the  black-
cloud  hover  round  thefummit  of  the  volcano,  the  bitumin-
ous and  fulphurous  vapors  which  it  exhales,  bear  teitimo-
nyof  the  interior  combullions,  till  at  length  the  eruption
denotes  the  abyfs  where  fo  great  a  convulfion  was  gene-
rated.

Hence,  without  flattering  myfelf  with  the  hopes  of  lei-
zing  every  link  of  that  horrid  chain  of  iniquity  which  mufc
blacken  the  page  of  hiflory  when  treating  of  the  Seel,  or
of  decyphering  the  alTumed  names  of  all  its  adepts,  I
(hall  proceed  to  lay  before  my  readers  what  has  already
come  to  light.  AtTerting  nothing  but  will  bear  the  flriifteir.
fcrutiny,I  {hall  {till  find  matter  Sufficient  to  trace  the  pro-
grefs of  the  Sect  from  its  origin  to  that  congrefs  to  which,
at  the  prefent  moment,  it  calls  the  vanquifhed  fovereigns,
not  fo  much  to  quell  the  horrors  of  the  field  of  battle,  as
to  enjoy  that  dominion  of  terror  which  it  defpotically
{ways  without,  and  to  prepare  within  new  refources  to
extend  its  triumphs;  not  fo  much  to  reltore  to  nations  the
tottering  remnants  of  their  laws  and  religion,  as  to  invent
means  of  obliterating  the  very  traces  of  either  that  may
yet  remain.  I  {hall  here  attempt  to  lead  the  hiftoriati
through  thefe  mazy  windings  left  he  fnould  lofe  himfelf
when  in  purfuit  of  the  Se£t.  The  reader  has  already  leerj
(in  our  remarks  on  the  Code)  its  oaths  and  threats  againi^
every  religion,  all  fociety,  and  property.  Now,  when
reading  of  what  the  Sec"t  has  done,  of  the  plots  and  ma-
chinations it  has  fuccefsfully  undertaken  and  executed,
may  nations  and  their  rulers  acquire  new  ardor,  and  be


TRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE.  t$

Simulated  to  oppofe  the^r.  future  projets  with  all  the
courage  ana  ail  thé  means' they  ate  matters  of.  It  is  to  tri-
umph over  Jacobinilm,  colt  what  it  may,  that  nations  are
to  ftudy  the  records  of  this  Seel,  and  not  to  link  meanly
into  defpair.  I  know  I  am  but  mortal,  and  that  ere  long
I  Iliall  defcend  into  the  grave;  and  I  calmly  wait  mydis-
folution  i  but  fhouid  that  confederation  prevent  iny  weep-
ing over  the  general  diilblution  which  threatens  fociety,
after  I  have  awakened  my  readers  to  the  dangers  which
threaten  them,  only  to  fee  them  finking  once  more  into
that  apathy  which  portends  ruin,  under  pretence  that  it  is
too  !af'.,  that  it  is  ufelefs  to  refill  the  fate  which  the  Se£t
has  decreed  for  all  nations  ?  God  forbid  that  I  mould  hold
fuch  langu  ^ge!  Cannot  the  good  be  fired  with  that  zeal
which  confumes  the  breaft  of  the  mifcreant  heaving  for
wickednefs.  Let  the  rulers  of  nations  will  it,  let  nations
wity  to  fave  their  religion,  their  laws,  their  property,  as
this  infernal  Sect  wills  the  deftruclion  of  them  all,  and
jfuccefs  muff,  infallibly  crown  their  endeavors»  It  is  only
in  hopes  of  contributing  to  their  luccefs,  that  I  once  mors
confent  to  fully  my  pen  with  the  names  of  IVeifiaupt,  of
Illuminée^  and  of  face-bin.  and  to.  wade  through  their  dis-
gull:  ing  annais.

The  order  to  be  obferved  in  treating  of  the  hiilory  of  Plan  of
the  Sect  fhali  be  regulated  according  to  its  moll  remarks-  f!ns  v0'*
ble  epochs.  lume*

The  firfffhal!  fhew  Weifhaupt  laying  the  foundations
of  his  Illuminifm,  preparing  and  initiating  his  firit  adepts,
founding  his  firft  Lodges,  trying  his  firft  apoftles,  and  pre-        >
paring  every  thing  for  great  conqueffs.

The  fécond  fhail  treat  of  that  fatal  intrunon  which  em-
bodied thoufands  and  thoufands  of  adepts  under  Wei-
fhaupt's  banners;  and  this  epoch  will  be  called  the  Illu-
nunvzation  of  Free-mafonry.

Very  few  years  fuifice  to  extend  thefe  tenebrous  and
myfterious  conqueiis^  but  the  thunderbolts  of  heaven
warn  mankind  of  their  danger.  The  5e<5tand  its  confpi-
racies  are  difcovered  in  Bavaria,  and  it  fpeaks  of  this  dis-
covery under  the  appellation  of  its  perfections  i  nations
and  their  rulers  have  been  led  to  believe  that  it  was  the
death-blow  and  extinction  of  the  Seal.

Shrinking  back,  however,  into  its  dark  recelTes,  with
unabating  ardor,  it  crawls  from  den  to  den  until  it  attains
thofe  of  Philip  of  Qrleans,  who,  joining  the  Sect  with  all


î6  PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE.

the  adepts  of  his  occult  Lodgesygives  it  fovcreigti  (way
over  the  whole  of  French  Malonry.  From  this  monftrous
aflbciation  fprungthe  Jacobins»  with  all  the  crimes  and
horrors  of  the  Revolution.  This  conftitutes  the  fourth
epoch  of  Illuminifm;  for  as  the  lion,  feeling  his  ftrength
fufficient,  fallies  from  his  den,  roars  loudly,  and  victims
muft  be  facrificed  to  him  ;  fo  the  Jacobins,  or  Illumini-
zed  Mafom,  quit  their  lurking  places,  and  with  horrid
yell  announce  to  nations  and  their  rulers  that  they  may
tremble,  for  the  day  of  revolution  is  come.  This  is  the
epoch  at  which  the  Seel:  begins  the  execution  of  its  plots.
He  only  knows  how  low  the  earth  is  condemned  to  bend
beneath  their  yoke,  who  in  his  vengeance  permits  the
plague  and  other  fcourges  to  devaftate  empires  until  he
has  been  avenged  of  an  impious  generation.  I  neither
pretend  to  be  a  prophet  nor  defcendant  of  a  prophet;  but
in  treating  of  the  numerous  crimes  already  committed  by
the  Seel:,  it  will  be  but  too  eafy  to  point  out  thole  that  it
has  frill  to  commit,  and  that  it  will  commit,  if  princes  and
their  people  difregard  the  leffons  of  that  fame  God,  teach-
ing them  the  conducl  they  fhould  hold,  in  order  to  avert
the  impending  fcourge.


CONTENTS.


Page.

Pr  EL  IMINA  RT  DIS  COURSE  13

Chap.  I.  Firft  Epoch  of  Illuminifm  l7

Chap.  JI.        Of  the  principal  Adepts  during  the  fis  ft

Epoch  of  Illuminifm  -  -34

Chap.  III.  Second  Epoch  of  Illuminifm. — The  II-
luminizationofFreemafonry. — Wei-
fhaupt's  attempts    on    the    Mafonic

Lodges. Aequifition  of  Knigge,

and  his  firft  Services  -  "63

Chap.  IV.  Gongrefl ;  of  the  Freemafonsat  Willems-
baden. — Of  their  divers  Se&s,  and
particularly  of  that  oftheTheofophi-
cal  Illuminées  -  78

Chap.  V.  Knigge's  Intrigues  and  SucccrTes  at  the
Congrefs. — Ofricial  Reports  of  the
Superiors  of  the  Order. — Multitude
of  Mafons  Iiluminized  at  this  Period    101

ChAp.  VI.  New  means  practifed,  and  new  con-
quers made  by  Knigge  and  Wei-
lhaupt  on  Mafo'.'.ry — Difputes  be-
tween thefe  two  Chiefs  of  Illumin-
ifm— Their  defigns  on  the  German
Muions  confummated  before  Knigge's
retreat  -  -  -  122

Chap.  VII.     Third  Epoch  of  Illuminifm. — Difcove-

ry  of  the  Seel  -  -  141

Chap.  VIII.  Continuation  of  the  Difcoveries  made
in  Bavaria  as  to  the  Illuminées. —
Proceedings  of  the  Court  with  res-
pect to  the  Chiefs  of  the  Seel:. — A
few  Remarks  on,  and  a  Lilt  of  the
principal  Adepts  -  -        163

Chap.  IX.  New  Chiefs  and  New  Means  of  the  Il-
luminées.— Device  of  the  JefuitsMa-
fonry  and  Succefs  of  that  Impofture    17S

Chap.  X.        The  Germanic  Union — Its  principal


CONTENTS.

Page.
Attors,  and  the  Conquefb  it  prepa-
red for  the  Illuminées         -         -       190

Chap.  XI.  Fourth  Epoch  of  Illuminifm. — The
Deputation  from  Weifhaupt's  Illu-
minées to  the  Freemafons  of  Paris.— .
State  of  French  Mafonry  at  that  pe-
riod.— Labors  and  SuccelTes  of  the
Deputies — Coalition  of  the  Confpi-
ring  Sophillers,  Mafons,  and  Illumi-
nées, generating  the  Jacobins       -      209

Chap.  XII.     Application  of  the  three  Confpiracies

to  the  French  Revolution         -  %^i

Chap.  XIII.  Univerfality  of  the  Succefs  of  the  Seel:
explained  by  the  univerfality  of  its
Plots  -  282

Conclusion         -  «  -  -  335


THE

ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

HISTORICAL  PART.


CHAP.  I.

Fir/}  Epoch  of Illuminifm.

FOR  many  years  paft,  and  particularly  fince  Free-
mafonry  had  acquired  fuch  repute  throughout  Eu-
rope, a  multitude  of  petty  fecret  focieties  had  been  form-
ed in  the  Proteftant  univerfities  of  Germany,  each  hav-
ing its  lodge,  its  mailer,  its  myfteries,  all  modelled  on
thole  founded  by  mafons  coming  from  England  and  Scot-
land. Hence  fprung  thofe  various  Orders  of  Hope ■,  of
Harmony^  the  ConjUvitiJis,  the  Black  Brethren^  and  the
like.  The  difputes  and  quarrels,  nay,  the  diforderly  be-
havior of  thefe  young  brethren  attracted,  more  than  once,
the  attention  or  the  mag  ill  rates;  fame  few  attempts  were
made  to  crufh  thefe  meetings,  but  being  made  without  e-
nergv  they  were  of  courfe  uielefs.  Governments  had  not
fufficiently  confidered,  that  the  mo  ft  dangerous  abufe  of
thefe  focieties  was  not  fo  much  the  quarrels  and  the  boy-
ifh  battles  which  enfued,  as  the  tafte  which  they  inculcat-
ed for  focieties  impervious  to  the  eye  of  the  magiftrate,
and  under  the  cover  of  which  their  iecrets  were  fo  eafilv
transformed  into  the  myfteries  of  impiety  and  the  plots  of
rebellion.*

C

*  The  fophifticated  mafons  of  France  were  not  ftrangers  to
thefe  boyilh  Lodges.  A  few  years  before  the  deftrudtion  of  the
Jefuits,  one  of  thefe  lodges  was  fet  on  foot  in  their  college  of
Tulle,  ftiling  its  members  the  Chevaliers  de  la  Pure  Vérité»
(Knights  of  the  Pure  Truth.)  The  Jefuits  foon  perceived,
whither  this  doctrine  of" pure  truth  and  its  fecret  meetings
would  lead.  Before  any  other  method  for  putting  a  ftop  to  this
new  eftablilhment  was  propofed,  they  refolved  to  try  the  pow-
er of  ridicule  which  was  almofl:  infallible  in  France.  Accord-
ingly one  of  the  mailers  undertook  to  compofe  a  mod  f  areas  -
tic  fong  on  our  young  Knights,  and  copies  were  fecretly  dis»


ï8  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY!

ît  would,  however,  be  difEcult  I  believe  to  prove,  that
any  fyftems  or  opinions  militating  againft  religion  or  go-
vernments had  as  yet  been  introduced  into  thefe  puerile
aiîbciations.  Many  were  even  known  to  profefs  princi-
ples conducive  to  good  manners  and  morality.  The  re-
medy may  be  found  in  the  very  (burce  whence  fprung  the
evil,  that  is  to  fay,  from  the  conftitutioaof  thofe  univer-
fities,  which,  on  the  one  fide»  'leaves  the  choice  of  the  dif-
ferent profeftbts  in  each  branch  to  their  fcholar9,  and  on
the  other  does  not  fufficiently  provide  for  an  honeft  teach-
er to  place  him  beyond  the  powers  of  want  or  the  temp-
tations of  avarice  and  vanity.  Hence  it  followed,  that
mailers,  little  delicate  as  to  the  means  of  obtaining  a  no-
minati«n,and  nearly  deftitute  of  talents,  had  onlytofhow
great  zeal  for  one  of  thefe  little  focieties,  or  invent  fome
new  myftery  more  enticing  than  the  reft,  and  his  Lodges
immediately  filled  j  the  fcholars  formed  parties  for  him;
in  a  fhort  time  h;s  fchools  were  as  much  flocked  to
as  his  Lodges,  and  contributions  in  his  favor  kept  pace
with  his  growing  reputation.  The  fear  of  pafling-  for  a
feducer  of  youth  was  a  bar  againft  his  making  ute  of  thefe
focieties  for  inftiUiag  bad  principles  into  his  young  fol-
lowers, however  much  he  might  have  wifhed  itj  and  on
the  other  fide,  the  authority  which  he  had  acquired  in  the
fchools  gave  him  a  fufSicent  power  in  the  Lodges  to
thwart  any  perverfe  intentions  in  the  young  adepts  j  and
thefe  oppofite  reaibr.s  proved  in  general  a  fufEcient  guard
againft  the  introduction  of  great  abufes.*

The  time  was  not  yet  come,  however»  when  proofs
were  to  be  acquired  of  the  ufe  to  which  the  great  con-
fpirators  were  to  turn  thefe  myfterious  nurièries.

When  public  report  fpread  the  news  in  Germany  of  a
new  order  of  Illuminées  having  been  founded  in  the  uni-
verfity  of  Ingolftadt  by  Weifhaupt,  many  people  (impos-
ed it  to  be  one  of  thofe  little  college  Lodges»  which  could
no  longer  intereft  the  adepts,  when  omcc  they  had  fuiim-
ed  their  ftudies.     Many  even  thought  that  Weifhaupt,

tributed  to  all  the  young  men  who  <à\à  not  belong  to  the  lodge.
Scarcely  could  one  of  the  Juvenile  Knights  make  his  appear»
ance  without  hearing  fome  ridiculous  line  of  this  fong  bum-
med in  his  ears;  and  in  a  Ihort  time  fquares,  compaffès,  Lodge
and  all  difappeared,

*  See  the  Memoirs  of  a  Proteitant  Minifter  on  the  Illumi-
nées.


HISTORICAt  PART.  X?

who  was  at  that  time  a  fworn  enemy  to  the  Jefuits,  had
only  founded  this  Lodge  with  a  view  to  form- a  party  for
himfelf  againft  thofe  fathers  who,  after  the  destruction  of
their  order,  had  been  continued  in  their  offices  of  public
teachers  at  theuniveifity  of  Ingolftadt.*  The  Illuminées
fuccefsfully  availed  themfelves  of  this  opinion  on  an  oc-
cafion  which  we  (hall  hereafter  fee  to  have  been  decifive
as  to  their  future  exiftence  in  Germany.  Had  not  the  na-
ture of  their  code  and  of  their  myfteries  demonstrated
views  of  far  other  importance  both  for  nations  and  their
governments,  to  have  been  the  grand  object  of  the  foun-
der, the  Archives  of  the  Sect  would  ihow  beyond  all
doubt  that  from  its  firft  institution  Weifhaupt  had  coh-
ceived  the  hopes,  and  determined  on  means  for  extend-
ing the  plots  of  the  Sect  to  the  utmoft  boundaries  of  Em-
pires.

It  was  on  the  ift  of  May,  1776,  that  Weifhaupt  laid
the  firft  foundations  of  his  Illuminifm.  The  lift  of  adepts
feised  among  their  Archives  fhows  his  name  inferibed
on  that  day  at  the  head  of  the  Regifter;  on  the  fame  day
^'tf.v-Maiienhaufen  and  'Tiber ius-Mexz  were  declared
Areopagites.f  It  is  true  that  he  /'elected  thefe  two  firft
adepts  from  ameng  his  pupils  who  were  ftudying  the  law
under  him  at  the  univerfity  of  Ingolftadt;  thefe  were  ge-
nerally young  men  from  eighteen  to  twenty,  a  moft  dan-
gerous age,  when  the  paflions  eafily  lay  open  the  un-
guarded mind  to  the  feduction  of  Sophiftry.  Weifhaupt
could  not  overlook  fo  fair  an  opportunity  of  forming  a-
poftles,  who,  returning  home  when  they  had  fihifhed  their
ftudies,  might,  under  his  direction,  continue  the  fame  ca-
reer of  feduclion  which  he  himfelf  carried  on  at  Ingol-
ftadt. Atrocioufly  impious,  we  fee  him  in  the  firft  year
of  his  Illuminifm  aping  the  God  oî  Chriftianity,  and  or-
dering ^"flx-Mallenhaufen  in  the  following  terms  to  pro-
pagate the  doctrines  of  his  new  gofpel:  "  Did  no:  ChrifL
*'  fend  his  Apoftles  to  preach  his  Gofpel  to  the  univerfe?
"  You  that  are  my  Peter,  why  fhould  you  remain  idle  ac
K  home,  go  then  and  preach. "|

*  See  the  Memoirs  of  a  Proteftant  Minister  on  the  Illumi-
nées.

f  Original  Writings,  Seel.  IV.

X  Hat  doch  Chriftus  audi  feine  apoitel  in  die  welt  gefchickt,
und  warum  foil  te  ich  meinen  Pen  as  zu  haafe  laflenl  Ifretpre-
Jkate, — Original  Writipgs>  Letters  te  Jjax,  19th  Sept.  177*.


ÎO  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

The  modem  Cephas  had  not  waited  for  the  orders  of
his  mafter  to  give  him  proofs  of  his  zeal.  .In  the  enthu-
fiafm  of  his  fir  ft  fervor,  and  during  the  very  month  of  his
inftallation,  he  had  acted  the  part  of  Infinuator  to  Xave-
rius  Zwack.*  "We  fhall  foon  fee  him  outwitted  by  his
pupil  ;  but  fo  great  a  conqueft  covered  a  multitude  of  fins
of  which  he  was  afterwards  guilty.  By  the  name  of  Cato
we  fee  Zwack  pafs  under  the  direction  of  Weifhaupt  him-
felf,  and  he  foon  became  his  favorite  difciple.  He  may  be
faid  to  have  robbed  his  Infinuator  of  the  honor  of  hav-
ing founded  the  Lodges  at  Munich  5  and  it  was  through
the  means  of  this  new  apoftle  that  the  Sect  made  that  ra-
pid progrefs  which  Weifhaupt  boafts  of  in  his  letter  to
Tiberius-WLerz.,  13th  May,  1778:

<;  It  is  with  great  pleafure  that  I  can  inform  you  of  the
tc  happy  progrefs  my  Order  is  making:  knowing  how
"  anxious  you  are  for  its  welfare,  and  that  you  have  pro-
*'  mifed  to  contribute  to  its  fuccefs  by  all  the  means  in
<c  your  power,  I  muft  inform  you,  that  in  a  few  days  I  fhall
<l  be  able  to  found  two  Lodges  at  Munich.  The  firft  will
<c  be  compoied  of  Cato,  of  Hencl,  to  whom  I  have  given
ct  the  name  of  Marius,  and  of  MafTenhaufen,  whom  we
"  call  Ajax.  Thefe  three  will  receive  their  inftructions
"  in  direct  line  from  me.  You  alfo  fhall  have  a  feat  in
*c  their  council  when  at  Munich.  I  have  been  obliged  to
"  fix  Ajax  there,  though  he  might  have  been  of  great  ufe
ct  to  me;  for  he  was  the  firfr,  to  whom  I  opened  myfelf
<l  on  the  fubjecl,  and  he  alfo  recruited  Cato  for  me.  Had
"  Ï  to  begin  again,  I  certainly  would  not  make  choice  of
"  him;  but  I  have  fo  clipped  his  wings  that  he  can  no
11  longer  play  off  any  of  his  intrigues.  I  don't  leave  him
"  in  poiTeilion  of  a  iingle  halfpenny  of  our  funds;  they
"  are  entrufted  to  Marius.  Cato  is  the  main  fpring
li  at  Munich,  and  the  man  who  conducts  every  thing.  It

*  In  the  Third  Volume  of  thefe  Memoirs,  page  9,  in  the
Note,  it  is  faid,  "  it  is  clear  that  Znvack  was  only  initiated
*'  te?i  months  after  the  two  adepts  Ajax  and  Tiberius."  In
place  of  ten  we  mould  read  tnneuty-ttvo  months,  as  I  meant  to
fpeak  cf  his  inftallation  among  the  Arcopagites,  which  only
took  place  on  the  izd  of  Feb.  1778.  (Original  Writings,  FoL
J.  Seel.  IV.)  ;  but  he  had  been  received  into  the  Order  on  the
■3,9th  May,  1776,  as  may  be  feen  by  the  tablets  of  Ajax.  Be-
flde,  thefe  tablets,  and  the  lift  juil  mentioned,  do  not  perfect-
Jy  coincide.  The  reafon  of  this  difference  will  be  explained
when  treating  of  the  fit  ft  adepts.


HISTORICAL  PART.  »ï

*c  is  for  that  reafon  that  you  mud  in  future  correfpond
'*  with  him.  It  is  in  this  Lodge  that  all  is  regulated  with
"  regard  to  the  general  direction  of  the  order;  but  then
**  every  thing  is  to  be  fubmitted  to  me  for  approbation.

"  The  fécond  college  (or  Lodge)  fhall  conlift  of  the
K  above-named  brethren,  of  Berger,  under  the  name  of
tl  Cornelius  Scipio-,  and  of  a  certain  Troponero,  whom  we
<l  have  furnamed  Coriolanus-,  a  moil  excellent  man  for  us,
**  about  forty  years  of  age,  and  who  has  been  for  a  long
**  time  concerned  in  the  Hamburgh  trade:  He  is  an  able:
"  financier,  and  at  this  very  time  reads  public  lectures  ou
"  finance  at  Munich.

To  thefe  will  foon  be  added  Baader  and  Werftenrie-
"  der,  both  profeffors  in  the  fame  town.  This  Lodge  is
"  to  attend  to  all  local  concerns,  that  is,  to  all  that  may
h  be  of  fervice  or  differvice  to  .us  at  Munich.  Claudius^
<c  one  of  Cato's  cou  fins,  and  the  young  Sauer,  an  appren-
<c  tice  to  a  merchant,  are  in  the  Noviciate.  Beieramer,
"  furnamed  Zoroajler,  who  was  initiated  a  few  days  ago,
"  is  going  to  try  his  luck  at  Landfhut,  whither  we  fend
"  him  to  fee  how  it  will  be  received  there.  Michel,  un~
"  der  the  name  of  Timon,  and  Hohenaicher  fet  off  to  the
"  attack  of  Freifinguen.

"  You  are  but  little  acquainted  with  the  people  of  Aich-
"  ftadt.  It  is  enough  to  fay,  that  (counfellor)  Lang,  fur-
"  named  Tamerlane,  is  Director  there.  His  zeal  has  al-
u  ready  gained  over  to  us  Odin,  Tajfo,  Ofiris,  Lucullus,
"  Sejo/irisj  and  Mofes.  This  is  going  on  pretty  well,  I
"  think.  I  forgot  to  fay,  that  we  have  our  printer  at  Mu-
"  nich.  We  are  now  making  a  new  edition,  and  at  our
w  own  expenfe,  of  Alphonfus  de  Vargas  on  the  Jlrata-
"  gems  zndfophifms  of  the  Jefuits.*     You  fhall  foon  re-

*  This  fuppofed  Alphonfus  de  Vargas,  vvhofe  calumnies  a-
gainft  the  Jeluifts  Weilhaupt  renews  with  fo  much  eagernefs,
is  no  other  than  Gafpar  Sciopius,  far  better  known  for  the  grofs-
neis  and  virulence  of  his  tedious  difconrfes  againft  thofe  who
dared  differ  from  him  in  opinion,  than  by  his  erudition.  He
was  particularly  abufive  apainft  Scalrçer  and  Jamss  I.  King  of
England;  the  latter  had  him  anfwered  in  Spain  by  a  fevere
baftinado.  This  was  alio  the  man  who  revenged  himfelf  in  fo
virulent  a  manner  on  Cafaubon  and  Du  Plejjis  Montai,  his
beft  friends,  but  who  had  contradicted  him  on  a  point  of  lite-
rature; in  (hort,  the  man  who  has  been  alternately  called  the
yittila,  the  Cerberus,  and  even  the  public  executioner  of  litera-
ture. See  Mertri'%  and  Feller's  Diftwiarhs.


I
21  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

w  ceive  a  copy  of  it.  If  you  will  fend  your  contribution
K  in  money  to  Cato,  as  you  promifed,  I  (hall  be  obliged  to
"  you.  He  will  fend  you  a  receipt  foi  it.

"  If,  through  your  zeal,  and  by  your  means,  we^ould
M  obtain  a  footing  in  Suabia,  it  would  be  a  great  ftep
u  gained  for  us.  Let  me  then  befeech  you  to  fet  to  work.
"  — In  five  years  you  ivill  be  ajionijhed  to  fee  what  a
"  Progrif  vue  Jhall  have  made.  Cats  is  really  incompar-
44  able.  The  greateft  difficulties  are  over.  You  will  now
11  fee  us  advancing  with  gigantic  Jlrides.  Do  fet  to  work
K  then.  It  would  be  in  vain  for  you  to  expeel  a  better  ac-
"  cafionfor  acquiring  power.  You  are  endowed  with  all
u  the  neceflary  talents  for  fuch  an  undertaking  ;  and  to  ne-
u  gleet  building  in  the  Elyfian  Fields  when  the  occafion
"  offers  is  to  be  doubly  criminal.  There  are  a  vaft  num-
"  ber  at  Aichftadt;  and  could  not  your  natal  foil  rival  an
e{  Aichftadt.  With  refpect  to  myfelf,  the  fervices  I  can
tc  render  here  can  be  but  of  little  avail.  Anfwer  me  foon  i
c<  make  an  extract  of  this  letter  as  ufual,  and  then  fend  it
"  back  to  me,  &c."

The  grand  object  of  fuch  intimations  on  the  progrefs
of  Illuminifm  was  not  fo  much  to  fàtisfy  the  curiofity  of
the  adept,  as  to  ftimulate  his  zeal  by  the  example  of  Cats
and  Tamerlane^  thofe  active  recruiters  for  the  Sect,  the
former  at  Munich,  the  latter  at  Aichftadt.  Though  he
owned  that  Tiberius  had  not  been  altogether  unfervice-
able  to  him,  neverthelefs  Weifhaupt  did  not  think  that  he
had  made  a  fufficient  return  for  the  honor  conferred  on
him  in  being  nominated  at  once  fécond  Areopagite  and
fécond  Apoftle  of  the  Order:  It  was  with  much  concern
(to  make  ufe  of  Weifhaupt's  expreflion)  that  he  faw  this
apoftle  had  neither  Jon  nor  nephew  in  the  order,  that  is  to
fay,  that  he  had  not  founded  a  Lodge  nor  recruited  a  An-
gle novice.*  Wholly  abforbed  in  his  pleasures,  Wei-
ftiaupt^ad  hitherto  made  but  fruitlefs  attempts  to  ftimu-
late his  zeal,  nor  had  he  fucceeded  better  through  Cato's
means;  but  this  news  had  the  defired  effect.  Thcfe  in-
timations on  the  progrefs  of  Illuminifm  fmifhed  by  re»
quefting  Tiberius  to  leek  out  a  proper  perfon  to  be  lent
to  found  new  colonies  in  Suabia.  This  fired  the  fluggard
apoftle  with  emulation  :  'Tiberius  undertook  the  talk  him-
iclfy  and  in  a  fhort  time  we  find  him  reprefentcd  in  the

*  Letter  3,  to  Cato.


HISTORICAL  PART.  5J

annals  of  the  Sect  as  at  the  head  of  a  new  colony  at  Ra«
venfburg  in  Swabia,  and  as  fulfilling  pcrfe&ly  the  func-»
tions  of  his  apoftlelhip.*

But  this  zeal  of  Tiberius,  as  well  as  that  of  Jjax,  was
but  of  an  intermittent  nature.  The  latter  had  robbed  the
tunds  of  the  Order  i  and  Weifhaupt,  fpeaicing  of  him,
complains  that  he  had  done  him  more  mi/chief  both  in  men
end  money  than  three  years  could  recruit  again.\  As  to
'liberius,  he  had  lb  thoroughly  imbibed  the  iniquitous
doctrines  which  he  was  to  infule  into  the  young  adepts,
and  the  fcandalous  publicity  of  his  character  militated  fa
much  againft  that  hypocrify  which  Weilhaupt  judged  ne-
ceiTary  for  the  propagation  of  his  Uluminifm,  that  we  (hall
fee  him  hereafter  expelled  the  Order.  Notwithstanding
the  feeming  impropriety  of  fuch  a  choice  for  the  two  fe-
nior  apoftles,  it  was  to  them  neverthelefs  that  the  Sedl
was  indebted  for  the  two  colonies  of  Munich  Athens,  and
of  Ravenfburg  Sparta.  As  to  Aichftadt  Erzerumy  Wei-
fhaupt himfelf  was  the  founder.  He  profited  of  the  firfc
vacation  he  had  from  the  fchools  to  make  an  excurfion  to
that  town,  and  there  employed  all  that  time  which  the
generality  of  profefibrs  dedicate  to  the  recruiting  of  their
health,  after  the  labors  of  the  paft  year,  in  the  propagation
of  his  doctrines.  An  affiduous  fcrutator,  he  fought  among
all  ranks  of  citizens  and  of  all  ages  thofe  he  could  hope  to
captivate.  The  firft  perfon  on  whom  he  call  his  eyes,
was  one  of  the  principal  magiftrates,of  the  name  of  Lang.
But  a  few  days  fu&ced  for  this  conqueft,  and  this  is  the
Tamerlane  whofe  fuccefles  are  fo  much  extolled  in  the
above-mentioned  letter  to  Tiberius.  He  next  began  to
exercife  his  talents  as  Infinuator  with  all  the  artifice  and
according  to  the  laws  laid  down  in  the  code,  on  men  who
bearing  a  certain  character,  and  habitually  refiding  among
their  fellow-citizens,  could  the  more  effe&ually  influence
the  public  opinion.  He  made  au  attempt  to  (educe  the
Chapter  of  that  town,  for  it  was  from  thence  that  he  writes,
"  I*  even  think  that  I  mall  be  able  to  recruit  two  others,
"  and  what  is  more  two  Canons.  Can  I  but  execute  my
"  defigns  on  the  Chapter,  then  we  fhall  have  made  a  g;*eat
«  ftep."$

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  Î.  Let.  to  Cafa,  *5th  Aug.  and
3d  Sept.  1778.       f  Original  Writings,  L«,i.  3,  to  Cat&.,
%  Let.  3,  to  Ajax,


Zf.  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

It  does  not  appear  that  he  fucceeded  with  his  two  ca-
nons; but  we  fee  him  on  the  other  hand  making  nume-
rous conqueirs.  He  begins  by  a  certain  Schleich,  with
whom  he  is  much  delighted,  and  who  on  his  firft  admis-
iion  prefented  the  Order  with  whatever  books  Weifliaupt
chofe  to  feiect  from  his  library.  Then  comes  a  man  fur-
named  Lucullus,  who,  while  only  in  his  noviciate,  begins
by  Weiihaupt's  exprefs  command  to  act  the  part  of  Infi-
nuator  to  the  Baron  Eckert,  who  was  fuppofed  to  be  a
great  prize.  In  fliort  there  was  a  number  of  young  men
whom  Weifliaupt  perfuaded  to  come  and  fmifli  their  edu-
cations at  his  univerfity,  that  he  might  be  able  to  com-
plete their  initiation.  Such  was  the  fuccefs  be  met  with
during  the  few  months  he  remained  at  Aichiladt;  and  he
was  fo  overjoyed  with  it,  that  he  writes  to  ^'a^-MafTen-
haufen,  "  I  have  moll  certainly  done  more  during  this
"  vacation  than  all  of  you  have  done  together*."  Though
obliged  to  return  to  his  public  functions  of  teacher  at  the,
univerfity  of  Ingolftadt,  he  left  this  new  Lodge  in  pos-
feffion  of  fuch  a  fund  of  illuminized  inftruction,  that  Aich-
Aadt  was  foon  looked  up  to  as  the  model  of  Lodges;  and
the  predeliction  which  Weifliaupt  ever  after  retained  for
it  is  obfervable.  He  often  propofes  it  as  an  example  to
thofe  adepts  who  became  lukewarm  in  the  fervice  of  the
Sect.  It  was  alio  the  Lodge  which  he  had  the  moil  grofs-
]y  impofed  upon  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Seel-,  and  which
hemoft  ridicules  in  his  confidential  letters  to  Cato-Zwack,
when  he  fays,  "  The  greatelt  of  our  myfteries  mud  be  the
"  novelty  of  the  Order.  The  fewer  perfons  there  are  in
"  the  fecret,  the  better  wefhall  thrive;  atprefentyou, and
"  Merz  are  the  only  two  that  know  the  fecret,  nor  do  I
"  mean  to  tell  it  to  any  one  elfe  for  a  long  time  to  come..
<c  As  to  our  fellows  at  Aiclfladt,  there  is  not  one  of  them
<c  that  knows  ity  nor  is  there  one  who  would  notfwear  on
cc  bis  life  and  death  that  the  Order  is  older  than  Methn-
«Jalem\r

On  his  return  to  Ingolftadt,  Weifliaupt  applied  himfelf
to  the  means  of  combining  his  functions  of  Doctor  of
Laws  with  thofe  of  Founder  of  a  Secret  Society,  whofe
future  purpofe  was  the  total  fubverfion  of  every  law.  He
fulfilled  the  former  part  of  his  duty  with  fuch  afliduity,

*  To  Ajax,  Let.  4.

f  Orig.  Writ.  Let.  z,  to  FhiUp-Strozzi  or  CWo-Zwack.


HISTORICAL  PART.  25

and  with  fuch  an  appearance  of  candor,  that  he  was  cho-
tfen  Superior  of  the  univerfity.  This  new  dignity  only
added  to  his  hypocrify.  The  fame  year,  fo  far  was  he
from  lofing  fight  of  his  tenebrous  plots,  that  he  formed  a
fecret  fchool,  wherein  he  amply  counter-balanced  the  les-
fons  he  was  obliged  to  give  in  public  ;  and  by  means  of
this  new  fpecies  of  fcholars  he  ftored  up  abundant  means
•for  the  propagation  of  his  Illuminifm.  At  once  Superior
and  Profeffor  of  the  univerfity,  he  made  ufe  of  this  dou-
ble title  to  infpire  the  parents  of  his  fcholars  with  new
confidence.  He  converted  his  houfe  into  one  of  thofe
boarding-houfes  where  young  men,  perpetually  under  the
eyes  of  their  mafters,  are  fuppofed  to  be  better  preferved
from  the  dangers  which  threaten  them  at  that  age.  Se-
veral letters  demonftrate  the  intention  of  this  monftrous
pedagogue  to  offer  his  houfe  and  table  to  the  young  ftu-
dents  of  the  univerfity  as  a  means  of  attaining  his  baleful
ends.  He  folicited  fathers  and  mothers  to  entruft  their
children  to  his  care;  and  overjoyed  at  having  obtained  fo
precious  a  depofit,  he  exultingly  writes  to  his  adepts,,
"  that  the  young  Baron  Gf  Schroeckenberg,  and  the  young
<(  Hoheneicher,  are  to  be  boarded  with  him."  He  then
adds,  "  And  the  je  gentlemen  aljo  mujl  jwallow  the  bait
that  is  thrown  to  them."  When  he  had  obferved  the
great  facility  that  this  fecret  fchool  gave  him  of  feducing
his  difciples,  he  writes,  "  Next  year  alio  I  will  take  board-
«  ers  at  my  houfe,  always  with  a  view  to  forward  the
"  grand  objetl"*  Should  it  come  to  pafs  that  he  could
not  perfuade  the  parents  to  intruft  any  of  his  young  audi-
tors to  his  care,  efpecially  when  he  had  caft  his  views  on
them,  he  then  had  houfes  near  him  and  in  his  intereft,  to
which  he  would  entice  the  young  pupils,  left  he  mould  lofe
fight  of  them.  It  is  on  a  fimilar  occafion  that  he  writes
to  Ajax,  "  I  fee  no  other  lodging  for  you  in  our  neigh-
**  borhood  but  at  my  mother's,  I  mould  be  exceffively
"  happy  if  that  would  do  for  you  ;  and  more  particularly
**  fo,  as  fhe  would  make  no  difficulty  in  allowing  you  the
"  key  of  the  houfe-door.  I  do  not  wifh  to  force  you  to
ct  go  there  if  you  can  find  a  better;  but  the  great  advan-
u  tagv  of  this  would  he,  that  I  Jhould  always  have  a  pre"
u  tence  far  going  to  your  chamber*  and  there  we  csul4

D

9  Orig.  Writ,  Vol.  i,  Let,  u  to  Ajax,  Let.  30,  to  Cats»


26  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

<c  more  eafîly  than  at  my  boufe  difcourfe  together  without
"anyone's  knowing  a  word  of  the  matter.  Our  union
li  would  be  more  fecrei."*

Let  not  the  reader  be  furprized  at  feeingme  defcend  to
all  thefe  particulars.  I  am  defcribing  the  infant  ftateof  a
Secf,  and  the  founder  forming  his  firft  difciples.  Such
.means  might  be  defpifed  by  fome;  but  this  was  not  the
cafe  with  our  prototype  of  rebellion;  he  lcarcely  ap-
pears to  venture  beyond  the  porch  of  his  own  habitation.
Let  the  wolf  alone;  in  the  thickets  of  the  foreft  fhe  fuc-
kles  her  young  ;  they  grow  in  ftrength,  and  we  foon  be-
hold them  carrying  the  palpitating  remnants  of  flocks  to
gorge  the  ravenous  maw  of  her  who  taught  them  to  de-
vour. Scarcely  had  Weifhaupt  dedicated  his  fecret  fchool
for  the  fpace  of  two  years  to  his  Hluminifm,  when  his
adepts,  worthy  of  luch  difaftrous  plans,  fallied  forth  to
fpread  the  baneful  poifons.  Let  the  reader  judge  of  the
importance  of  his  means  by  the  fucceiles  attending  on
them  ;  let  him  reflect  on  them  while  Weifluupt  (hall  be
his  own  hiilorian  in  the  following  letter:

"  In  future,"  fays  he  to  his  two  famous  AreopagiteS
Cato  and  Marivs,  u  you  will  aflume  a  different  tone  with
11  'Limon  and  Hoheneicher,  as  I  have  let  them  into  the
tc  whole  fecret;  I  have  even  difclofed  myfelf  to  them  as
"  founder  of  our  Order;  and  I  have  done  it  for  many  rea-
«  fons.

"  Firft,  Becaufe  they  are  to  be  themfelves  founders  of
u  a  new  colony  at  Freyjinguen^  their  native,  country,  and
*'  on  that  account  irano  in  need  of  more  particular  inftruo
*'  tions  as  to  the  whole  tendency  of  the  Order,  which
"  were  much  too  long  to  have  been  given  by  letter.  I
11  pi  oiit  of  every  iuitant  while  they  remain  with  me  to
"  prepare  them  for  every  thing.

a  Secondly,  Becaufe  they  muft  in  the  meantime  inn-
u  nuate  the  Baron  D'E  •  •  •  anâ  fowe  other Jludents.

"  Thirdly,  Becaufe  H "  (this  H is  evident-
ly the  above-mentioned  Hoheneicher,  the  very  perfon  of
whom  Weifhaupt  fays,  when  enticing  him  to  board  with
him,  He  Jhall  [wallow  the  bait)  "  is  too  well  acquaint-
"  ed  with  my  iryle  of  writing  and  of  thinking,  not  to  have
f*  foon  found  out  that  the  whole  was  of  my  own  invc;i»
"  tion.

*  Orig.  Writ.  Let.  5,  to  dja*.


HISTORICAL  PART.  27

"  Fourthly,  Becaufe  of  all  my  boa)  ders  oflaft  year  he
«  was  the  only  one  who  had  not  been  made  acquainted
<*  luith  the  whole  bufmefs.

"  Fifthly,  Becaufe  he  has  offered  to  contribute  to  our
"  fecret  library  at  Munich,  and  will  furnijb  us  withfeve-
**  ral  important  articles  belonging  to  the  chapter  of  Frey-
"  Jinguen.

"  And,  Laftly,  Becaufe  after  three  months  more  in-
<c  ftruction,  which  I  have  to  give  them,  they  will  both  be
41  enabled  to  render  us  the  moil  important  fervices."*

From  this  letter  we  may  evidently  infer,  fir  ft,  that  of
all  the  young  men  who  boarded  with  Weifhaupt  during
the  firft  year  of  his  confpiracy  not  a  tingle  one  efcaped
his  dark  defigns:  Secondly,  that  they  were  not  only  ini-
tiated in  the  myfteries,  but  even  in  the  moft  profound
myfteries,  that,  for  inftance,  in  which  he  reveals  himfelf
to  be  the  founder  of  his  Iliuminifm,  which  is  pointed  out
in  the  Code  as  the  laft  fecret,  and  only  to  be  imparted  to
the  moft  confummate  adepts. f  Thirdly,  that  before  he
had  initiated  his  boarders  into  all  his  fecrets,  he  ufed  them
as  tools  for  the  fedu&ion  of  other  itudents  of  the  universi-
ty, whom  he  had  not  been  able  to  entice  to  his  table. —
Fourthly,  that  at  the  very  period  when  \V  eifhaupt  reftores
his  pupils  to  their  parents,  their  feduclion  is  complete;
and  that  when  thefe  young  men  quit  the  univedity,  as
having  accompliihed  the  ftudy  of  the  laws  of  their  coun-
try, they  depart  for  their  natal  foil  imbued  with  the  prin-
ciples and  initiated  in  all  the  means  by  which  they  are  to
overturn  thofe  very  laws  which  they  are  fuppofed  to  have
been  ftudying,  and  annihilate  all  religion,  fociety,  and  pro-
perty.— Fifthly,  the  reader  is  not  to  forget  the  important
articles  which  the  young  Hohencicher  promifes  to  fteal
from  the  library  of  the  Chapter  of  Freyitnguen,  and  with
which  he  is  to  enrich  the  fecret  library  of  the  Sect.  Such
an  action  could  only  be  a  çonfequence  of  Weifhaupt's
grand  principle  of  morality,  that  a  ufeful  theft  could  not  be
criminal^  or  that  thoie  famé  means  which  the  wicked  em-
ploy for  an  evil  end  are  juftifiable  when,  employed  for  the
attainment  of  a  good  end.  It  is  the  fame  principle  which
begins  by  plundering  the  libraries  of  the  clergy,  as  the  firft

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  r.  Let-  i?,,  to  Cato  and  Mariut.
f  See  the  Code,  Vol.  3.  Chap  a-  00  the  Gra..d  Myfteries,
Page  288.


2$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY  ;

f!ep  towards  the  plundering  of  their  eftates  ;  which  form»
under  the  pretence  of  general  utility  and  necefîity  for  the
fupport  of  the  premeditated  revolution,  will  invade  the
property  of  the  Nobles  and  of  the  Rich,  of  the  Merchant,
the  Hufbandman,  and  the  Mechanic,  pillaging  all,  and
blading  the  molt  diftant  hope  they  may  have  conceived  of
preferving  the  fmalieft  remnant  of  their  fhattered  fortune
from  the  general  wreck.  When  the  hiftorian  (hall  come
to  treat  of  thefe  great  revolutionary  fpoliations,  reverting
to  the  prime  fource,  he  will  find  himfelf  in  the  midft  of  a
Seel:  calling  itfelf  Illuminées,  a  fchool  of  methodized  rob-
bers thieving  by  principle,  whence  Weifliaupt  fends  his
apoitles  of  depredation,  and  brigand  adepts,  Soon  we  (hall
behold  them  boafting  of  other  fpoliations.  The  leflbns  of
the  fecret  cavern  (hall  fpread  around,  and  the  adept,  anni-
hilating all  property  as  well  as  blafpheming  all  govern-
ment and  all  religion,  l'hall  do  homage  to  their  matter  pre-
siding over  his  fecret  fchool.

The  two  new  adepts,  formed  with  fo  much  care  to  the
arts  of  fcduclion,  at  length  received  their  million,  and  the
town  of  Freyfinguen,  under  the  appellation  of  Thebes^  be-
comes the  fourth  colony.  About  the  fame  time  the  adepts
of  the  two  Lodges  at  Âlunich  mowed  fo  much  zeal  for
the  propagation  of  the  myfteries,  that  Weiihaupt  after
having  calculated  on  their  and  his  own  fuccefs,did  nothe-
fitate  at  writing  to  them,  "  If  you  do  but  continue  with
"  the  fame  zeal,  we  (hall  in  a  little  time  be  mailers  of  our
*c  whole  country*  ;"  that  is  to  fay,  of  all  Bavaria.

The  reader  mud  not,  however,  think  that  his  views
were  circumfcribed  to  this  Electorate;  he  foon  writes  to
his  Areopagites,  dehring  them  to  make  choice,  from
among  the  foreigners  who  were  then  at  Munich,  of  per-
fons  who  might  be  inflrucled,  initiated,  andfent  to  found
new  colonies  at  Augfcourg,  Ratifbon^  Saltzbourg,  Land-
Jhut-i  and  in  different  parts  of Francania.f  At  the  time
he  wrote  thefe  inftrudîions  he  had  already  lent  his  million*
aries  to  the  'iyrol  and  into  ltaly.%  The  part,  or  rather
the  multiplicity  of  parts,  which  he  acted  at  Ingolftadt  to
enfure  the  fuccefs  of  his  undertaking  are  as  inconceivable

*  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  t.  Let.  %(■>,  14th  of  November,  1778.
Wennfiefo  fortfabren,  tuitjèit  àniger  zeitfogebort  in  k&rzcF
bat  unjer  vater land  uns.

T  ibid.  Let.  39,  X  Ibid.  Let.  36.


HISTORICAL  PART.  2q

as  they  were  real.  He  gives  us  a  fmall  fketch  of  his  acti-
vity when  he  writes  to  Cato,  propofmg  himiclf  as  a  model  :
"  Do  as  I  do,  avoid  large  companies.  But  do  not  think
lc  of  remaining  idle  if  you  wifh  to  acquire  any  influence
"  in  this  world.  Wait  a  while;  the  hour  is  coming, and
u  it  will  come  foon,  when  you  will  have  a  great  deal  to  do.
•*  Remember  Sejanus,  who  lb  well  aflumed  the  charter
"  of  an  idle  man,  and  who  tranfacted  fo  much  bufmefs
"  without  appearing  to  tranfact  any;  erat  autcm  Sejanus
11  otiofo  fimillïmuî-tnlhil  agendo  mulia  ogens  ;"*  neverhad
a  confpirator  better  laid  down  the  precept  or  given  the  ex-
ample than  Weifhaupt.

Apparently  tranquil  at  Ingolflradt,  Weifhaupt  had  a
far  better  cloak  for  his  confpiracies  than  Sejanus's  idle—
nefs.     A  fecming  affiduity  in  his  duty,  a  great  fhow  of
zeal  and  erudition  in  his  expounding  of  the  laws,  eafily
mifled  people  to  believe  that  his  whole  time  and  talents
were  engrailed  with  the  itudy  of  them;  and,  if  we  are  to
credit  his  own  account,  Ingolltadt  had  never  witnefled  a
profeflor  fo  well  calculated  to  add  new  luftre  to  its  uni-
verfity.    The  public  functions  of  profeflor  of  the  laws,
and  the  fecret  arts  of  feducer  in  private,  had  not  made  him
forget  that  he  was  alfo  the  founder  of  Illuminifrn,  and  that
in  this  latter  quality  he  had  to  form  a  code  of  laws,  which
were  at  once  to  annihilate  every  other  law,  all  religion,
and  all  property,    At  the  time  when  he  initiated  his  fuir;
adepts,  he  was  far  from  having  perfected  that  code  of  ini-
quity; and  perhaps  in  the  ltrict  ienfe  of  the  word  Wei-
fhaupt had  deviated  from  the  common  rules  of  prudence,
in  giving  way  to  fuch  ardor  for  the  propagation  of  the  Or-
der, fending  his  apoitles  and  initiating  his  difciples  before
he  had  completed  the  code  of  laws  which  was  to  regulate
their  conduct.    But  fuch  an  impetuoiity  cannot  be  conli-
dered  in  this  prototype  of  rébellion  as  a  want  of  forefight,
or  as  an  excefs  01  confidence.    He  knew  that  years  and
experience  were  neceiTary  to  perfect:  that  gradual  fyitem
of  initiations  and  of  trials  which  his  Novices  were  to  un-
dergo ;  and  artfully  to  prepare  thole  impious  and  fophifri-
cated  difcouries  to  be  pronounced  by  his  Hierophants;  in
a  word,  to  complete  that  concatenation  of  artifice  which
was  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  his  Regents, Directors, and
Areopagitps,    He  could  not  endure  the  idea  of  Sacrificing

*  Let.  i,  to  Cato.


36  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

fd  many  years  to  mere  theoretic  projets.  He  would,  in
his  firit  efTays,  make  conquefb  that  were  to  enfure  him
ftill  greater  ones  on  a  future  day,  which  he  had  already
calculated.  He  knew  his  own  talents  too  well  to  enter-
tain the  leaft  doubt-of  fuccefs  ;  he  forefaw  how  far  he  could
perfect  thofe  fyftems  which  he  had  as  yet  only  conceived,
and  he  wifhed  to  have  ready  at  hand  a  numerous  clan  of
diiciples  difpofed  to  receive  his  new  gofpel,  and  apoftles
who  mould  need  only  to  be  initiated  in  his  laft  myfteries,
when  his  code,  completed,  was  to  be  fent  to  the  tenebrous
recefles  of  his  different  colonies.

Such  were  his  views,  and  fuch  the  confidence  he  had  in
the  tranfcendency  of  his  own  genius  for  wickednefs,  when
he  wrote  at  different  times  to  his  firft  adepts,  "  Do  not
"  trouble  yourfelf  about  future  degrees.  The  day  will
*'  come  when  you  mall  view  with  aitonifhment  what  I
*'  have  done  on  that  fcore.  In  the  mean  time,  be  it  your
"  care  to  enlijl  men  for  ?ne,  prepare  knights  for  me,  iujtrucl
u  then:-,  difpofe  them,  arnufe  them,  and  leave  the  reji  to  ms.
"  The  whole  of  your  bufinefs  conflits  in  adding  to  the
*'  numbers.  Allow  yourfelves  to  be  directed,  and  obey
"  for  a  year  or  two  longer,  and  give  me  time  to  lay  my
"  foundations,  for  that  is  the  efj'ential  point;  and  nobody
u  under Jlands  that  part  better  than  1  do.  If  thefe  foun-
"  dations  are  once  laid,  you  may  then  do  what  you  pleafej
u  and  though  you  were  to  try,  I  would  defy  you  to  over-
"  tbroiv  ?ny  edifice."*

This  defperate  method  of  proceeding  mult  have  given
rife  to  many  difficulties  ;  but  Weiîhaupt  overcame  them
all.  By  provisional  regulations  and  private  instructions
he  Supplied  the  deficiency  of  this  incomplete  code,  and  he
was  equal  to  the  tafk.  The  greatell  obltacles  he  met  with
came  from  thefe  very  Areopagites  from  whom  he  had  ex-
pected the  greateft  Support.  Villains  will  difagree  even
in  their  viilainy;  and,  impatient  of  the  laws  of  the  State,
they  become  impatient  of  the  laws  of  their  own  leaders'.
Weifhaupt  wifhed  to  take  advantage  of  their  views,  but
had  no  intention  of  imparting  his  to  them;  he  knew  his
own  fuperiority  in  the  black  arts  too  well,  he  wiflied  for
agents  and  not  counfdlors  and  co-icgiilators.  Jealoufies
and  interline  broils  rofe  to  fuch  a  height,  that  any  other

*  Extras  from  Let.  8,  to  Ajax,  from  Letters  to  Cato,  and
to  the  Artopagues  particularly  from  Let.  59,  Vol.  1.


HISTORICAL  PART.  31

but  Weifhaupt  would  have  thought  that  his  infant  aflb-
ciation  muft  have  been  crufhed  in  its  very  cradle  ;  but  he
found  means  of  weathering  the  ftorm;  now  negociating,
then  defpotically  commanding;  fuppliant  like,  he  enters
into  agreements,  and  ends  by  dictating  conditions;  pray-
ers, excufes,  all  are  means  with  him  to  command  fubmis-
fion;  he  even  fhowed  himfelf  difpofed  to  facrince  all  the
fruits  of  his  paft  labors;  he  threatened  to  abandon  bis  re-
bellious brethren  to  themfelves,  and  to  undertake  the  di-
rection of  a  new  fociety  more  powerful  and  ftronger  full,
in  as  much  as  he  would  render  it  more  fubmilîive.*  In
the  midfl  of  all  thefe  broils,  he  alone  «ontinued  and  per-
fected that  code  which  would  have  required  the  talents  of
twenty  Alachiavels.  Storms  indeed  appeared  only  to  fti-
mulate  his  ardor  and  activity;  and  he  fays  himfelf,  when
writing  to  his  dear  Cato,  "  I  am  once  more  at  open  war
"  with  all  our  people  ;  that  does  no  harm,  it  enlivens  the
*'  machine  %  but  if  I  underftand  the  part  I  have  to  a£t,  I
"  can  neither  praife  nor  wink  at  faults  committed.  Mean
"  while  our  affairs  go  on  very  well;  and  provided  they
"  follow  my  directions  the  general  fyftem  will  have  loft
*'  nothing."^  Night  and  day,  in  the  midit  of  thefe  broils,
as  h&  fays,  meditating,  writings  and  co?nbining,  all  that
could  perfect,  ltrengthen,  or  propagate  his  Illuminifm  ei-
ther in  the  whole  or  part,  he  neverthelcfs  held  his  profefs-
orfnip  with  appiaufe,  he  ovei  looked  his  fecret  fchool,  he
formed  new  adepts,  and  from  his  fanctuary  washed  and
overlooked  his  miffionaries  in  their  provinces  and  new  co-
lonies. By  means  of  the  £hdbus  Licet' s  he  would  defcend
into  the  minuteit  particulars  of  their  conduct,  direct  them
in  their  undertakings,  point  out  to  them  what  might  be
done,  and  reprimand  them  for  what  they  had  not  done  to
promote  his  views.  Voltaire's  correfpondence  under  this
head  is  immenfe  ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  compared  to  Wei-
fhaupt's;  not  a  letter  of  all  thofe  feized  by  the  arm  of  the
law  but  bears  the  itamp  of  the  comfummate  confpirator;
not  a  letter  that  does  not  allude  to  the  myfteries  or  to  fome
new  artifice;  that  does  not  point  out  the  candidates  to  be
enticed,  the  adepts  to  be  advanced,  animated,  reprciTed,  or
reprimanded;  in  fhort,  the  enemies  who  are  to  be  guard-
ed againit  and  the  protectors  to  be  courted.    His  apoitlçs

*  Vol.  r,  Let.  a.?,  37,  <te;  Vol.  a,  Let.  u,  19,  ai>  Sec.  Sec.
t  Vol,  2,  Lut.  19.


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

are  on  the  fpot  in  their  different  millions,  while  he,  from
his  head-quarters,  appears  to  be  better  acquainted  with
thofe  who  ilirrounded  thetn  than  they  are  themfelves.  He
goes  fo  far  as  to  inform  them  of  the  rank,  political  or  ci-
vil ftation,  and  even  of  the  private  characters  of  thofe
whom  they  are  to  recruit  j  he  gives  them  the  means,  men-
tions the  peifons  who  are  to  fécond  them,  and  what  com-
panies they  ought  to  frequent,  in  order  to  fucceed  in  their
undertakings  ;  in  fine,  he  animates,  threatens,  and  repri-
mands his  adepts,  juft  as  if  they  wereftill  boarding  with
him,  though  perhaps  at  many  hundred  miles  diftance.—
Scarcely  have  they  made  any  new  conqueft  when  he  di-
rects them  in  the  fame  manner,  and  at  once  governs  the
main  fpring  and  every  fubfervient  power  throughout  the
whole  Order.  His  correfpondence  will  fhow  him  on  the
fame  day  writing  of  the  laws  necefTary  for  the  further
erhblifhment  of  his  Order,  of  treaties  to  be  made,of  plans
of  commerce,  and  of  the  moft  impious  commerce,  to  en-
rich his  Iliuminifm.  At  length,  with  all  the  hypocrify  of
a  man  who  aflumes  the  character  of  an  idler,  or  at  leaft  of
one  only  fulfilling  that  which  his  public  duty  exa&s  from
him,  he  aims  at  the  fupremacy  over  every  confpiring  Sect.
He  gets  himfelf  received  a  Free-mafon,  he  dives  into  the
fecrets  of  the  occult  lodges  of  the  Roficrucians,  and  blends
their  confpiring  arts  with  his  own.*  He  next  forms  an
alliance,  and  from  the  bottom  of  Bavaria  correfponds  with
thofe  federations  which  the  free-mafons  of  Poland  were
preparing;  and  left  any  of  thefe  revolutionary  arts  mould
be  loft,  he  makes  large  collections,  which  might  be  called
the  grand  arfenal  for  the  feduction  of  nations;  and  thefe
are  to  become  the  foundations  of  fecret  libraries  for  the
ufe  of  the  adepts.  He  never  lofes  fight  of  thofe  profits
which  accrue  from  the  fecret  prefles,  which  were  perpe-
tually difgorging  poifon  into  the  minds  of  the  people.—
For  the  further  replenifhment  of  his  coffers,  he  fets  all
the  talents  of  his  adepts  to  work  ;  fome  are  to  contribute
pamphlets,  profe  or  verfe,  or  journals,  while  others  are  to
col i eel  all  the  impious  doctrines  and  calumnies  of  anti-^
quity,  or  to  compofe  libels  on  fubjecls  which  he  gives
them;  and,  for  his  own  part,  he  undertakes  to  burleique
the  Prophets  and  the  Lamentations,  and  to  convert  the
hiftory  of  the  church  into  a  romance  replete  with  calum-

*  Let.  6,  to  JjaXf  and  Let.  $i»  to  Cat«.


HISTORICAL  PART.

ny.*  The  facred  writings  mention  a  Devil  that  was  na-
med Légion^  from  the  innumerable  evils  he  brought  upon
mankind;  were  we  to  confider  the  fatal  activity  of  Wei-
ihaupt  in  every  impious  and  rebellious  art,  we  mould  be
tempted  to  believe  that  he  had  been  polTefled  by  this  evil
fpirit,  and  that  it  was  to  that  devil  he  owed  all  his  fuccefs.
As  yet  the  very  exiftence  of  the  Order  had  not  been
fufpe&ed  at  Ingolftadt,  though  there  were  already  in  Ba-
varia alone,  five  Lodges  at  Munich  ;  other  Lodges  and
Colonies  at  Freynnguen,  at  Lanfberg,  at  Burghaufen,  and
at  Straubing.  Weifhaupt  was  on  the  eve  of  founding
others  at  Ratifbon  and  Vienna;  many  had  been  eftabliih-
ed  in  Suabia,  Franconia,  and  Tyrol.  His  apoftles  were
working  at  the  fame  time  in  Holland  and  at  Milan.  His
Illuminifm  had  not  been  founded  three  years,  when  he
writes  to  Cato  that  he  has  more  than  a  thoufand  adepts,  -p
He  was  much  indebted  to  his  own  zeal  and  activity  for
fuch  a  rapid  progrefs.  I  cannot  flatter  the  hiftorian  with
the  hopes  of  an  accurate  account  of  the  whole  Legion;
but  I  can  falisfy  his  curiofity,  I  think,  with  refpeft  to  thofe
who  the  moft  actively  feconded  Weifhaupt,  and  who  af-
ter their  founder  appear  the  moft  confpicuous  on  the  re-
cords of  the  Seel.


*  Vol.  i,  Let.  6,to  djax,  to  Cato,  36,  &c.  To  Philip-Stroz»
Stf,  Let.  %,  fr  paflim»  Vol.  a,  Let.  %i,  et  paffim.

f  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  1,  fee  Let.  * 5,  to  Cato,  13th  Abenraeh^
x  .148,  that  ia  to  fay,  13th  Nov.  1778.


24  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY!


CHAP,  II.


Of  the  'principal  Adepts  during  the  firfl  Epoch  of  IUu-
minifm.

*

Ci./y-Hà'    f~\F  tms  kg1'011  °f  ConfpiratOrs,  which,  as  early  as  the
verius         V_y  third  year  of  Illuminifm,  Weifhaupt  computes  at
Zwack.      more  than  a  tbcufand,*  Xaverius  Zwack  is  certain-
ly the  moft  confpicuous  among  the  adepts.     He  is  ftiled
the  incomparable  ;  and  the  greater  part  of  the  letters  print-
ed in  the  Original  JVritlngs  are  written  to  him,  particu-
larly thofe  which  comprehend  the  cleareft  account  of  the
myfteries;  in  fliorr,  his  favor  was  fuch,  that  the  founder
cf  the  Sect  apoiîropdiifes  him  faying,  "  Now  you  are  in  a
"  poll  where  nobody  can  be  above  you  butyourfelf;  you
ft  are  exalted  above  all  the   Brethren;  an  irnmenfe  field
"  opens  itfelf  for  you  to  exert  your  power  and  your  influ-
"  ence,  fhould  we  fucceed  m  propagating  our  fyftetns."f
Such  a  diftin&ion  and  fuch  favor  naturally  fuppofe  great
merit.     Happily,  ah   incontrovertible   monument  exifts
which  will  direct  the  Hiftorian  in  his  judgment,  and  ren-
der unneceflary  any  further  refearch.  It  is  to  be  found  at
the  end  of  the  firft  Volume  of  the  Original  Writing?,  under
the  title  of  Tablets  relating  to  Danaus,  written  by  Ajaxy
^iji  December,  IJj6.    Danaus  is  the  flirt  characteriftie
name  that  was  given  to  Zwack  when  only  a  candidate.
The  fadfc  is  evident,  as  in  the  firft  column  of  the  Tablets
we  find  the  brother  Danaus  defcribed  by  his  own  name:
Ajax,  that  is,  Maflenhaufen,  acls  the  part  of  Scrutator.
■ — Should  this  ftate  nient  not  be  very  flattering,  we  may
at  leaft  conclude  that  the  failings  and  vices  of  the  adept
are  not  exaggerated,  fince  the  Scrutator  declares,  that  it
is  by  the  extreme  intimacy  and  friendfhip  in  which  he  liv-
ed with  the  Candidate  that  he  has  been  enabled  to  make
this  conqueft,  and   terminates  the  tablet  by  ftating  the
Candidate  to  be  one  of  thofe  Sages  who  has  all  the  ne-
celfary  qualifications  to  be  admitted  into  the  Order.—

*   Original  Writings,  Let.  25,  to  Cat$x
<[•  Ibid.  Vol.  1,  Let.  37.


HISTORICAL  PART»  $$

Thefe  tablets  are  alfo  a  lafting  monument  of  the  rapid
progrefs  Weifhaupt  had  made,  even  in  thofe  early  days  of
Jlluminiun,  in  the  fcrutinizing  arts;  nor  will  they  prove
an  unfaithful  ftandard  by  which  the  Hiftorian  may  judge
of  the  merits  of  thofe  confpirators,  whom  the  founder  fe-
le£ts  as  worthy  of  his  moft  intimate  correfpondence.  Let
us  begin  by  fuppreffing  that  difguft  which  naturally  drives
the  honeft  heart  from  dwelling  on  fuch  defpicable  en-
gines of  rebellion,  remarkable  only  for  their  vices,  and
proceed  from  thefe  tablets  to  depict  the  features  which
are  in  future  to  ftand  as  the  model  for  all  thpfe  who  are
to  recruit  Candidates  for  the  Seel.  Let  nations  and  the
people  at  large  learn  what  a  miferable  banditti  of  thieves
and  libertines  pretend  to  regenerate  them,  and  how  bafe-
ly  they  are  duped  by  them  who  ftirred  up  the  Revolu-
tion. ,

The  Tablets,  whence  Weifhaupt  is  to  learn  the  me-  ~  ç  .,    ,
rits  and  demerits  of  the  future  Cato  of  his  Order,  are  di-  jn  t!ie  t£^.
vided  into  feventeen  columns,  each  relating  to  a  different  Jets  of  his
head.     The  name,  the  age,  the  civil  dignity,  the  defcrip-  Infinuator.
tion  of  his  perfon,  the  civil  and  moral  character  of  the
candidate,  are  all  treated  of  feparately.     Then  follow  the
ftudies  he  is  addidted  to,  the  fervices  the  Order  may  ex-
pect from  him,  the  progrefs  he  has  made,  the  decrees  con-
ferred on  him,  the  fecret  manuscripts  or  books  left  to  him,
the  contributions  he  has  paid;  his  friends,  his  protectors,
his  enemies,  and  the  perlons  with  whom  he  correippnds,
are  each  feparately  treated  ol".

Under  thefe  columns  is  to  be  found  a  frcond  table  alfo
fubdivided,  and  containing  obfervations  on  the  family,  and
particularly  of  the  father  and  mother  of  the  candidat  \
made  by  the  fame  Scrutator.  Combining  thefe  two  ta-  ,
bles  we  find,  «  That  Francis  Xaverius  Zwack  was  fori  Coluran-
*c  of  Philip  Zwack,  commiflary  of  the  Chamber  des  Cornp~
u  tes,  and  was  born  at  Ratifbon:  That  at  the  time  of  his
"  initiation  (29th  May,  1776)  he  was  twenty  years  of
"  age,  and  had  rinifhed  his  college  education."

"  The  description  of  his  pel  Jon.     He  was  then  about        H.
I£  five  feet  high.   His  perfon  emaciated  by  debauchery;  his    Column.
"  conftitutioa  bordering  on  melancholy;*  his  eyes  of  a
"  dirty  grey,  weak  and  languijhincr\ — his  complexion  pale

*  Der  ganze  bau  feines  durch  débauche  mager  gewordene»
korper  inclioiert  nun  zum  melancoliichen  temperament.


36  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  and  fallow;— Wis  health  weak,  and  much  hurt  by  fre-
"  queiat  diforders; — his  nofe  long,  crooked,  and  hooked,
" — Hair  light  brown; — gait  precipitate; — bis  eyes  al-
<c  ways  cajl  towards  the  gro un d;— under  the  nofe  and  on
<{  each  fide  of  the  mouth  a  mole.
jjj  "  The  moral  characler,  religion,  confcicnce.  His  heart

Column.  "  tender,  and  mod  extraordinarily  philanthropic,  but  ftoic
"  when  in  a  melancholy  mood;  otherwife  a  true  friend^
"  circumipccl>rcferved,ejr/r^;//«,/)'y^cr^/) — often  fpeaking
u  advantageoufly  of  himfelf, — envious  of  other  people's
u  perfections — voluptuous,  endeavoring  to  improve  him-
"  felf — little  calculated  for  numerous  aflèmblies — choleric
tl  and  violent,  but  eafily  appeafed — willingly  giving  his
"  private  opinions,  when  one  has  the  precaution  to  praife
"  him,  though  contradiSling  him — a  lover  of  novelties—-
**  on  religion  and  confcience  widely  differing  from  the  re-
"  ceived  ideas;  and  thinking  precifely  as  he  ought,  to  be-
"  come  a  good  member  of  the  Order*

K  His  favorite  Jludies,  and  the  fervices  he  can  render
1  "  to  the  Order.  Moft  particularly  addicted  to  philofophy

" — having  fome  knowledge  ofthe  laws— fpeaking  French
«  and  Italian  very  correctly — at  prefent  attempting  to  get
"  himfelf  placed  in  the  foreign  department — a  perfeft
"  majler  in  the  arts  of  diffmulaîion;  a  proper  pcrfon  ta
"  be  received  into  the  Order,  as  applying  himfelf  particu-
u  larly  to  the  fludy  ofthe  human  heart."

Friends,  correfpondence,  company. — Here  the  Infinua-

_  ,  tor  names  five  or  fix  perlons,  friends  to  the  candidate. — -

Among  them  we  find  a  certain  Sauer  and  a  Berger,  both
of  whom  loon  after  appear  on  the  registers  of  the  Seel.

vr.  vn.       Thefe  three  columns  contain  the  name  of  Ajax  as  In-
VHI.      fmuator — The  day  when  the  candidate  was  infinuated — -

Columns.  an(j  uJien  received.

TV  "  Ofthe  means  of  gaining  and  leading  the  Candidate,

Column.  "  an^  whether  he  is  acquainted  with  any  other  fee  ret  fo-
"  dettes. — Here  it  appears  that  Zwack  was  already  con-
"  nected  with  other  iecret  focieties,  which  made  the  con-
a  quell  rather  more  difficult.—  The  intimacy  of  our  friend-
"  Jhip,  (fays  the  Infinuator)  and  particularly  the  care  which
u  i  took  to  allume  a  myfterious  tone  and  appearance,  lev  -
"  elled  many  difficulties. — At  prefent  he  exprtffes  a  great
"  ardor  and  zeal  for  the  Order.
X.  "  Predominant  paj/ions — Pride,  love  of  glory,  probity,

Column.  "  eafily  provoked— -an  extraordinary  propenlity  for  mys-


HISTORICAL  PART.  37

**  teries — a  perpetual  cuftom  of  fpeaking  of  himfelf  and
*'  of  his  own  perfections."

In  the  eleventh  column  vie  are  informed,  that  the  can-       XÏ,
didate  had  received  a  penfum  to  fill  up,  or  a  difcourfe  to   Column,
make,  and  that  it  was  to  be  finilhed  on  the  29th  April,
1778.

The  twelfth  mentions  the  fortune  and  revenue  of  the  XII.
candidate;  but  the  Editor  has  left  the  figures  in  blank.        Column.

The  two  next  mow,  that  the  day  on  which  Z  wack  en-     XIII.
gaged  to  pay  his  contribution  for  J  777  was  the  29th  of     X{V.
May,  but  for  1778  was  the  lit  of  April.     That  on  the  Columns.
19th  July  1776,  he  fent  a  Dutch  Ducat,  and  fome  time
after  two  books  on  Chymiftry.

The  column  in  which  the  Infinuator  notes  the  progrefs  XV,
of  his  candidate  (hows,  that  the  fecret  books  which  had  Column,
been  given  him  to  read  were  thole  numbered  1,  2,  4,  and
9 — the  orders  which  he  had  received  are  only  numbered,
as  alfo  the  leave  given  to  recruit  other  Brethren.  As  this
column  is  made  ufe  of  to  note  the  fuccefiive  progrefs  of
the  candidate,  the  Brother  Infinuator  at  length  arrives  at
that  period  when  Zwack  has  received  all  the  information
neceifary  to  his  ad  million  into  the  Order.  He  then  de-
clares, that  it  is  time  to  impart  more  eflêntial  fecrets  to
him  and  to  promote  him  to  higher  degrees.  '

The  fixteenth  column  enumerates  his  enemies,  and  the  XVT.
reafon  of  their  enmities.  In  the  lafl  we  find  the  names  of  XV if.
his  friends  and  proteclors.  Columns.

I  fhould  not  have  infilled  fo  much  on  thefe  Tablets,
had  I  not  thought  it  neceifary  to  give  one  fpecimen  at
iealf.  of  thefe  inquifitorial  inllrumentsj  in  which  Illumi-
nifn  grounds  the  choice  of  its  adepts,  and  the  future  fuc-
cefs  of  its  confpiracies.*

*  Many  readers  may  he  curious  to  know  what  is  contained
in  the  fécond  table,  fubjoined  to  that  which  defcrihes  the  can-
didate, it  is  in  ten  columns,  comprehending  the  names  and
rank  of  Zwack's  relations,  an  account  of  their  children,  their
fortune,  their  alliances,  friends,  and  enemies;  the  company
they  keep,  pariiculariv  the  education  they  have  received,  and
their  moral  character,  which  is  called  their  Jlrong  or  their  ineak
fide.  The  Editor  has  thought  proper  to  omit  fome  articles  in
uns  table— The  two  which  appear  to  be  the  mod  perfect  are
on  the  jlrong  'and nveak  Ji 'de  of  Zwack's  parents,  who,  accord-
ing to  the  Indinuator,  have  received  an  antiquated  education  ndt
•worth  much.  The  father  is  défcribed  as  "  jealous  of  his  honoi ,
44  honeft,  zealous  in  the  dhcharge  of  his  duty — apparently


3$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

When  we  re  fled  on  the  leading  features  of  thefe  ta-
blets, what  idea  are  we  to  form  of  Zwack's  chara&er?
Inordinate  debauchery,  extreme  fatuity,  jealoufy,  diflimu-
lation,  and  a  fullen  melancholy. — Such  features  are  more
than  fufficient  to  banifh  him  from  all  good  company. — <
He  alfo  thinks  on  matters  relating  to  religion  and  confci-.
encc  as  the  adepts  do;  or,  m  other  words,  is  a  downright
Atheift.  With  an  infatiable  thirft  after  novelties,  he  has
all  that  admiration  for  fecrecy  which  the  revolutionift  can
oeifiré.  He,  moreover,  profeffes  univerfal  philanthropy  for
all  mankind,  that  he  may  the  better  fucceed  in  his  plots
againff.  every  focial  law  ;  and  this  could  fufnce  to  oblite-
rate all  other  failings  in  Xavcrius  Zwack,  and  conftitute
him  the  favorite  adept.

Meanwhile  the  leflbns  of  the  Infinuator,  together  with
that  black  melancholy  which  reigned  in  his  heart,  had
nearly  deprived  Illuminifm  of  the  important  amftance  of
this  beloved  adept.  To  defpife  death  was  one  of  the  im-
portant leifons  that  we  have  feen  given  to  the  novices;
and  to  die  by  their  own  hands  rather  than  difclofe  the  fe-
Crets  of  their  teachers,  was  particularly  inftilled  into  them.
Weiflïâupt  had  conceived  this  maxim  in  two  words,  Pa-
tet  Ex'itus  (the  exit  is  free)  or  dejtroy  himfelf  ivbo  willy
particularly  if  he  finds  himfelf  unhappy  in  this  life.  It  is
apart  of  that  convenient  maxim  after wards  decreed  by
the  Jacobins,  That  death  was  only  an  eternal  jleep.  Full
of  this  principle,  and  weary  of  his  exiftence,  our  new
candidate  had  permaded  himfelf,  that  mould  he  die  by  his
own  hand  he  would  die  the  death  of  a  fage.  He  compos-
ed his  work3  entitled,  Thoughts  on  Suicide.  They  are  tire

'■  bar fh  to  his  inferiors,  but  really  loving  them  to  excefs— -
"  fpeaking  to  every  body  with  a  tone  of  authority  and  inape-
"  dântic  ftyle — In  his  habits  and  fpeech  impoliticly  frank — fe-
"  cret,  and  lparing  even  to  the  want  of  necerTanes  when  he  can
"  fe.rve  his  Prince,  zealoufly  ferving  him  without  diftinclion  of
"  pcrfons,  to  the  rifk  even  of  Jofing  all  iiis  employments  —
4<  feeling,  humane,  myfterious,  officious,  and  proud  of  his  ex-
"  pesiencfc — carefully  attentive  to  the  whole  of  his  affairs."
As  to  the  mother,  "  /he  is  a  good  boujekeeper—  abforbed  in  her

"  dear  child  Xaveriiu  Ztvack,  and  fo  forth." Many  other

things  have  been  fuppreffed  in  this  latter  table.  But  there  ifili
remains  h.iore  than  iuiucierit  to  give  all  relations  of  illuminées
an  idea  of  the  methods  ufed  by  the  fcrutinizins  Brethren  to
pry  into  their  moft  fecret  conduclj  and  to  deicrioe  their  moit
private  ioterefts  to  t^e  Order,


HISTORICAL  PART.  39

fentiments  of  an  Atheift  worn  out  with  debauchery,  and
almoft  mad  with  impiety.*  He  made  his  will,  and  Wirote
the  following  letter  to  Brother  Ajax.

"  Munich,  the  30th  Oct.  1777. — Friend,  I  am  on  my
"  departure.  It  is  the  beft  ftep  1  can  take,  Fare  thee  well;
"  doubt  not  of  my  probity,  and  let  it  not  be  doubted  of  by
"others.  Confirm  the  Sages  in  the  judgment  they  are
u  going  to  form  on  my  death,  and  look  on  thole  who  blame
"  it  with  pity.  Be  thou  an  honeit  man;  think  fometimes
"  on  me,  and  do  not  let  me  be  forgotten  by  the  fmall  num-
"  ber  of  our  friends.  Beware  of  pitying  me,

Z\VACK."

In  a  poftfeript  he  bequeaths  a  ring  as  a  kéepfaké  to
Brother  Ajax,  and  begs  him  to  forward  a  fécond  letter  to
the  whole  brotherhood  of  Illuminifm;  it  is  as  follows:

«  And  you  alio,  Brethren,  I  falute  you  for  the  laft  time;
«  I  thank  you  for  your  good  intentions  towards  me.  I  de-
»  clare  to  you,  that  I  was  worthy  of  them — I  declare  it
"  upon  my  honor,  which  is  my  only  worth,  andvihicb
"  alone  I  held/acred.  Let  my  alhes  be  honored  by  your
"  remembrance;  bhjs  tbem,  while  fuperjlition  JJo<all  cm  ft
"  me.  Enlighten  yourfelves  mutually,  labor  to  render
ct  mankind  happy,  efteem  virtue  and  reward  it;  punifh.
"  crime,  and  behold  with  pity  the  failings  of  human  na-
"  ture.  On  the  brink  of  his  grave,  defending  into  it  de-
"  liberately,  and  making  choice  of  death  through  convie-
"  tion,  through  demonjiration,  choofing  it  for  bis  happi-
"  nefs;  it  is  thus  that  he  makes  his  adieu,  who  ever 're-
"  mains  your  friend  and  Brother,!

ZWACK.'*

Illuminifm  mud  have  loft  its  favorite  adept,  had  ife
proved  as  confiant  in  his  refolution  as  he  was  ferions
when  he  took  it.  No  reafon  is  given  why  he  condefcend-r
ed  to  live;  but  in  like  manner  as  Weilhaupt  has  found
a  protector  in  the  perfon  of  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Gotha,  fo
has  he  been  created  a  Privy  Ccunfellor  to  the  Prince  of
Salm-Kirbourg,  and  is  his  ordinary  agent  at  the  Imperial
Chamber  of  Wetzlar.  At  this  prefent  moment  he  is  de*
puty  for  the  Houfe  of  Salm-Kirbourg  at  P,aftadt,  at  the
General  Congrefs  of  the  Germanic  Empire,  treating  of
peace  with  the  triumphant  Illuminées  of  the  French  Re-
public. He  is  accompanied  by  a  Sieur.  Ambmann,  a  citizen

*  Bee  Original  Writings,  Vol.  t.  Seel.  a<j.    f  Ibid.


40  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

of  Darmftadt,  and  an  Illuminée  like  himfeif.  Hiftory,I  fup~
pofe,  will  at  fome  future  time  explain  how  he  contrived  to
combine  the  intercfts  of  the  Seâ:  with  thofe  of  the  Pow-
ers which  he  had  fworn  to  annihilate.  But  let  us  return
to  Zwack  at  a  time  when  he  little  expected  to  be  carried
by  the  Brethren  to  that  exalted  ftation  where  he  was  to
decide  on  the.  fate  of  Sovereigns,

His  Thoughts  on  Suicide^  however,  were  not  loft  on
his  iifter-in-law,  for  (lie  really  fought  death,  and,  throw-
ing herfelf  from  the  top  of  a  tower,  daftied  her  brain*
out.*  Eut  he,  who  had  chofen  to  live,  took  umbrage  at
the  great  length  of  his  noviciate,  and  at  the  many  trials
Ajax  made  him  undergo.  He  writes  directly  to  Wei-
Oiaupt,  who,  taking  him  under  his  direction,  begins  by
telling  him  that  yf/'<?.vhad  impofed  upon  him  by  not  for-
warding the  letter  he  had  written  to  the  brethren;  but
fince  he  has  impofed  upon  you.,  fays  the  inftructor,  trick
him  in  your  turn;  and  the  following  was  the  method  a-
dopted  on  Weimaupt's  propofal.  Zwack  is  eftablifhtd
Inspector  over  his  own  Infinuator;f  and  he  then  gave
the  moiî  evident  proofs  that  his  character  had  been  well
drawn,  when  it  was  faid  that  he  was  a  perfect  majier  of
the  arts  of  diffimulation;  for  although  he  now  became  the
confident  and  bofom  friend  of  Spartacus,  and  was  con-
sequently initiated  in  all  the  myfteries  of  the  Sect,  he  ne-
vertheless continued  to  acTt  the  part  of  a  Novice  with  his
Inflnuaton  He  was  not  only  at  that  time  a  member  of
the  College  of  Areopagites,  but  alfo  the  fuperior  of  it,
and  in  a  perpetual  and  direct  correfpondence  with  Wei-
fhaupt.  He  acted  his  part  fo  well,  that  Ajax,  ftill  coniid-
eiing  him  as  his  fchclar,  thought  to  do  him  a  great  fa-
vor in  fliowing  him  a  few  of  Weifhaupts's  letters;  but
they  had  already  pafled  through  the  fcholars'  hands,  as  did
every  writing  coming  from  Spartacus  to  Ajax.

This  part  which  Zwack  acted,  of  infpeéting  him  who
thought  himfeif  his  infpector,  explains  that  apparent  con-
tradiction between  the  tablets  written  by  Ajax  and  the
lift  of  the  firft  adepts,  which  is  to  be  (sen  in  the  Original
Writings.;}:  In  the  former  Ajax  looks  upon  Xavcrius
Zwack  as  a  mere  candidate  till  the  29th  May,  1778,  and
in  the  latter  he  is  ftyled  an  Areopagite  on  the  22d  Feb.

*  Ibid  in  the  Note.
f  Let.  1,  to  Philip  Strozzi.  %  Vol.  I.  Ssct,  IV.


HISTORICAL  PART.  41

1778,  under  the  characterise  of  Cato-,  and  a  few  months
after  he  appears  to  be  the  next  in  command  after  the  Spar-
tacus  of  the  Order.*  Never  was  an  Infmuator  better  un-
dermined by  his  novice.

The  different  names  under  which  this  adept  appears
in  the  Original  Writings  has  been  a  matter  of  fome  dif-
ficulty to  many  readers;  but  on  paying  attention  to  that
predilection,  always  increafing,  which  Weifhaupt had  con-
ceived for  this  adept,  the  difficulty  vanifhes.  At  fïrft
Zwack  had  received  the  infignificant  name  of  Danaus,
but  no  fooner  was  Spartacus  made  acquainted  with  his
hatred  for  Icings,  than  he  fumâmes  him  philip  Strozziy
after  that  famous  Florentine  Confpirator,  who,  having
murthered  Alexander  de  Medicis,  was  afterwards  taken
in  open  rebellion  againft  his  fovereiçn,  and  plunged  a
dagger  into  his  own  breaft,  reciting  that  verie  dictated  by
all  the  fury  of  vengeance:

Exoriare  aliquis  noflris  ex  offibus  ultor.

The  fuicide,  though  it  did  not  take  place,  was  equally
iperitorious  in  Weifhaupt's  eyesj  and  hence  Zwack  is
created  the  Cato  of  Illuminiiin.  It  is  under  that  name
that  he  becomes  the  principal  agent  and  beloved  difciple
of  the  founder  at  iviunich;  and  their  mutual  fympathyin
■yvickednefs  has  perpetuated  their  intimacy.

Though  he  had  not  all  the  genius  of  Weifhaupt  him-
felf,  he  was  as  much  prone  to  the  commiihon  of  crime. — :
Scarcely  had  he  entered  the  Order  when,  for  his  firft  es-
fay,  he  declares  himfelf  a  downright  Atheiftjf  he,  at  the
fame  time,  makes  known  his  hatred  for  kings,  and  his  ad-
miration of  the  people  in  rebellion  againft  their  pretended
tyrarits.|  We  may  obferve  fome  of  the  firft  adepts  afto-
nifhed  at  the  immenfity  of  the  crimes  and  difafters  which
Weifhaupt  was  preparing  for  the  univerfe;  and  it  re-
quires fome  management  to  prepare  them  for  fuch  horrid
plots.  But  his  Cato  is  always  ready  for  every  thino;.  The
incomparable  Cato  was  arrived  at  the  height  of  his  mys-

F

*  Letter  47,  to  Philip  Strozzi.

f  See  his  Difcourfe  on  Societies,  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I,
SeÛ.  XXÏI.

X  See  his  Thoughts  on  Suicide.


Êfi.  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

terteS)  and  Weifhaupt  hid  but  to  enroll  his  code  of  ini-
quity, for  his  fcholar  could  onl^t-be  furpaffed  by  the  crimi-
nality of  invention.

This  fympathy  for  impiety  and  wickednefe,  however,
could  not  fuflice  for  Weifhaupt's  policy.  His  views  re-
quired a  fenate  of  Confpirators;  buta  fenate  of  agents,
and  not  of  equals.  The  better  to  be  obeyed  by  the  Areo-
pagites,  he  commands  them  to  meet  at  a  diftance  from
him  j  for  he  well  underftood  the  nature  of  fecret  focieties,
and  knew  that  his  orders  would  be  the  better  obeyed  the
more  he  enveloped  hinfelf  in  myftery,  and  hid  himfelf  from
public  view.  If,  in  fpite  of  his  inviiibility,jealoufy  fliould
arife  on  the  part  of  the  Areopagites,  he  will  have  an  a-
gent  at  their  head,  that  Cato,  who  holds  the  exalted  Na-
tion of  president  from  him,  and  is  therefore  moft  intcreft-
ed  to  fupport  the  authority  of  the  founder,  his  protedtor.
And  it  is  to  preferve  this  prefident  in  his  inter.efts  that  we
fee  Weifhaupt  ufing  every  artifice,  and  even  Amplica-
tion; "  flip-port  me  then"  he  fays;  "  do  difpofe  things  fo,
"  and  prepare  their  minds,  that  my  dilpoiitions  may  be
<*  received."--"

Weifhauut  had  no  reafon  to  regret  his  choice;  for  dur-
ing all  thole  inteftine  broils  which  arofe  between  him  and
his  Areopagites  on  account  of  his  defpotifm,  Zwack  al-
ways took  the  part  of  his  benefactor,  was  the  pacificator,
and,  {Simulating  their  zeal  for  his  plots  and  confpiracies,
brought  them  back  to  that  refpedt  due  to  the  Spartacus
of  the  Order.  It  is  to  him  alio  that  Illuminifm  is  indebt-
ed for  the  progrefs  it  made  in  Munich.  Cato  was  fo  zea-
lous a  Recruiter,  that  Weifhaupt  was  obliged  feveral
times  to  reprefs  his  ardor.  He  wanted  his  aiTiftance  for
the  digefting  of  his  code,  and  for  the  government  of  the
Order.  In  (hort,  the  refult  of  their  correfpondence  proves,
that  no  Areopagite  either  entered  fo  completely  into  his
views,  or  fojuftlydeferved  his  confidence  as  Ctfta-Zwack.f
And  it  may  be  faid  with  truth,  that  no  confpirator  ever
acled  the  part  of  a  zealous  fervant  of  his  prince  with  fo
much  fuceefs  as  this  man.  In  the  midft  of  his  plots  of  Il-
luminifm, Xaverius  Zwack  found  means  of  getting  him-
felf named  Cotoifellor  to  the  Court-,  and  Çounfeller  to  the
Regency,  with  a  falary  oj twenty  thoujand  florins.  Wei*

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  particularly  Letter  si-
f  See  the  Original  Writings,  Letters  to  Cat*.


HISTORICAL  PART.  43

Inaupt,  overjoyed  at  his  promotion,  compliments  him,
faying,  "  Accept  my  felicitations  on  the  new  appoint-
K  ment.  I  could  wifti  that  all  my  Arecpagites  were  privy
w  counfellors  with  falaries  of  twenty  thouland  florins;  but
*'  I  could  alfo  more  ardently  wifh,  that  their  employments
w  required  but  little  time  and  labor,  as  they  could  then
•*  apply  more  clolUy  to  the  grand  objedt."*  The  very
letter  in  which  Weifhaupt  compliments  his  prefldent  is
one  of  thofe  to  his  Areopagites  in  which  he  enters  into
the  particulars,  and  boafts  of  the  progrefs  of  his  confpi-
racy.

The  fécond  of  thefe  Areopagites  was  a  prieft  of  the        N.
name  of  Hertel,  furnamed  Marius  by  the  Illuminées.  Marins
ït  is  of  this  perfon  that  Weifhaupt  writes  to  C?/<?-Zwack,  ™  }*]?
<*  Our  Marius  is  fuperlatively  referved.   On  moft  occa-  u'e^tel
"  fions  he  advances  with  the  greateft  cirawifpeation-,  and
"  with  refpedl  to  religious  mat ter s  let  us  flatter  bit  weak-
Cl  fiefs-.     His  jlomach  is  notjlrong  enough  as  yet  to  digejl
c'  the  tougher  morfels.  On  all  other  fubjeéts  you  may  re-
*'  ly  on  him.     Do  not  give  him  too  much  work  until  he
c<  has  acquired   the  habit  of  bufinefs,  and  taken  a  liking
w  to  the  affair.  If  he  be  once  brought  in  properly,  he  can
M  render  the  greatelr.  fervices."f

Notwithftanding  all  his  drcumfpeclinn^  Hertel  foon  fuf-
fered  himfelf  to  be  carried  away  into  all  the  clangers  of  fe-
cret  focieties,  and  fell  a  prey  to  their  machinations.  Since
he  had  lbme  confeience  left,  Weifhaupt  thought  that  he
could  not  turn  it  to  a  better  account  than  by  making  him
treaibrer  to  the  Order,  that  he  might  by  his  economy  and
honefty  repair  the  numerous  breaches  that  had  been  made
in  its  funds  by  the  thefts  of  Jjax.  The  illuminized  Ma-
rius acquitted  himfelf  of  his  oirice  much  to  the  fatisfac-
tion  of  the  founder.  In  recorripence  for  his  fervices,  the
brethren  get  him  nominated  canonicate  at  Munich;  and
he  was  ib  much  amufed  with  this  intrigue,  that  he  wifli-
cs  to  divert  Cato  with  a  recital  of  it,  but  does  not  dare
commit  it  to  paper.J  At  the  period  when  he  came  to
take  poffeflion  of  his  canonicate,  all  thofe  cirtumfpefl:  ideas
of  religion  had  vanilhed.  He  delcribes  himfelf  as  going
from  the  altar  to  the  dens  of  Illumimfm,  as  publicly  in-

*  Ibid.  Vol.  IH.  Letter  ».

f  Ibid.  Vol.  I.  Letter  7,  to  Cato,  17th  March  1778.

%  Ibid.  Letter  from  Marius  to  Cato,  3d  Nov.  i?Sj.


44-  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY^

vetting  himfelf  with  an  ecclefiaftical  benefice,  while  îh
fecret  he  extols  the  great  fervices  he  has  rendered  to  the
brood  confpiring  againff.  the  Jchurch  ;  but  thefe  alfo  art
fervices,  he  fays,  too  important  to  be  committed  to  paper.*
They  are  fervices,  however,  which,  I  arn  lure,  no  reader
can  miftake,  when  he  fees  him  partaking  with  Zwack  of
Weifhaupt's  intimacy.  In  the  correfpondence  of  the  laN
ter  there  are  a  multitude  of  letters  to  be  found  directed
in  common  to  Zwack  and  Hertel;  there  are  alfo  many
inftruclions,  both  abfolute  and  provifional,  directed  to  the
Areopagites;  and  in  thefe,  it  is  no  longer  the  confeienti*»
ous  but  the  apoflate  Hertel,  who,  after  Zwack  is  to  oc-
cupy the  next  place,  and  act  the  principal  part.f  It  is
this  unfortunate  pricft  who  appears  to  have  been  more
particularly  charged  with  the  care  or  ftealing  or  buying
tor  the  ufe  of  the  fecret  libraries  all  thofe  miferable  pro-
ductions which  might  form  an  arfenal  of  impiety  and  re-
bellion for  the  corruption  of  all  morals.  J  In  fhort,  it  is
he  whom  Spartacus  feiecb  from  among  the  brethren  as
the  moft  proper  confidant  when  premeditating  that  horrid
infanticide  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  the  Third  Vo-
lume of  thefe  Memoirs;  and  he  behaves  himfelf  in  fuch
a  manner  as  to  deferve  the  thanks  of  the  inceituous  pa*
rent.§
-  ni  We  find  a  flill  ftronger  proof  of  what  horrid  monfters

aarfer  were  feated  in  this  fenate  of  rebellion  in  the  perfon  of  Cel-
/us-Haader.  Even  before  be  is  admitted  into  this  afto-
ciation,  we  fee  him  offering  the  depraved  fecrets  of  his
art  to  murder  the  innocent  offspring  of  inceft uous  pa-
rents j  for  he  is  that  Celfus  who  had  promifed  Weifhaupt
two  years  before  to  ufe  all  the  powers  of  his  art  to  pre-
ferve  his  honor  for  him  at  the  expenfe  of  the  moft  horrid
of  crimes.  Without  doubt  it  is  in  return  for  thefe  offers
of  his  fervices,  that  Weifhaupt  is  fo  eager  to  number  him
among  the  adepts,  and  to  grant  him  thofe  difpenfations  of
which  he  fpeaks  when  writing  to  Zwack  :  "  If  I  could
"  but  fucceed  in  enrolling  the  Phyiician  Baader,  tell  me
"  beforehand  what  difpenfations  and  privileges  we  could

*  Letter  from  Marim  to  Cafot  3d  Nov.  1783.

f  Ibid.  Vol.  1.  Sed.  IX.  fee  the  Inftruflions  for  Cato,  Ma'
rius,  and  Scipio.

i  Ibid.  Vol.  I.  Letter  46,  and  Vol.  II.  Letter  3,  &c.

§    Ibid.  Vol.  11.  Letter  3  and  4.


B3ader.


HISTORICAL  PART.  45

te  grant  him  among  the  Areopagites;  forunlefs  fomedis*
*c  penfations  were  granted  to  him,  we  could  not  employ
*<  him  i'o  actively  as  I  could  wifh."*  This  letter  was  fooa
followed  by  a  fécond,  in  which  he  expreffes  in  ftill  clear-
er terms  the  high  value  he  places  on  this  conqueft,  and
idelcribes  the  intrigues  played  off  to  enfure  luccefs.—
*«  In  order  (he  writes  to  his  Athenians)  to  carry  my  plan
t{  into  execution  in  Athens  (Munich)  I  ftand  in  need  of
*'  two  men — -The  one  a  Nobleman ,  the  other  a  Phyfician.
*'  Cato's  unremitting  zeal  will  foon  acquire  the  means, and
•*  he  will  loon  make  a  conqueft  of  what  is  wanting  to  us.
"  The  Count  S  .  .  .  .  (Savioli,  whom  Cato  had  juft  in-
c<  fjnuated)  fhail  allume  the  charaéteriftic  of  Brutus,  and
*  he  is  one  of  the  moft  important  conquefts  we  could  have
C£  made  in  Athens.  The  following  fhall  be  your  method
*c  of  proceeding  with  him.  Let  Cato  continue  to  ac^l
fi  with  him  as  ufual,  and  particularly  attend  to  his  fecre-
M  cy.  After  that,  let  him  read  our  reformed  ftatutes  to
"  the  new  candidate,  and  queftion  him  whether  he  thinks
<c  them  ufeful  and  proper.  Should  Brutus  anfwer  in  the
•*  affirmative,  Cato  will  affc  the  Count  whether  he  is  ready
**  to  fécond  us  in  our  labors;  he  will  then  tell  him,  that  in
li  confederation  of  the  important  fervices  he  has  it  in  his
a  power  to  render  to  the  Order,  by  permitting  us  to  make
cc  ufe  of  his  name,  we  (hall  be  much  lefs  fevere  with  re-
cc  gard  to  him,  in  the  ufual  trials,  and  that  he  fhall  be
tc  immediately  initiated  into  the  higher  myfteries.  But
t£  as  a  preliminary  ftep  he  will  be  required  either  to  de-
ct  liver  Baader  over  to  us,  or  fome  other  perfon.  That
u  we  are  very  well  apprized  that  he  is  not  to  be  overloaded
<c  with  work,  and  that  it  is  on  that  account  he  is  difpenfed
"  from  the  ufual  tafks  prefcribed  by  our  ftatutes;  that  he
"  will  comply  with  them  only  as  far  as  he  pleafes  ;  and
K  that  we  have  made  a  particular  choice  of  him  to  help  us
"  in  the  Government  of  the  Order.  Should  he  deliver
"  Baader  over  to  us,  he  Ihould  alio  be  entitled  to  the  fame
"  difpenfations,  which  are  to  be  granted  to  no  other  per-
«*  fon  in  Athens.    You  will  read  the  Degree  of  Minerval  #

"  to  the  Count  with  every  thing  that  precedes  ;  if  he  i'hows
tc  a  liking  and  zeal  for  the  caufe,  you  will  alfo  read  the
"  Degree  of  Illuminée \  and  when  you  fhall  have  acquired
K  evident  proofs  of  his  zeal,  and  that  he  Jhall  have  made

*  Ibid.  Vol.  i.Let-  39,  of  the  36th  Dec.  1778.


46  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

€<  common  caufe  with  us  by  recruiting  for  us,  you  may
"  let  him  into  the  whole  fecret. — Hold  a  fimilar  conduce
"  with  Baader."*

Whether  the  Brethren  at  Munich  had  already  adopted
this  mode  of  ailing,  or  whether  they  had  followed  fomc
other  of  a  fimilar  nature,  is  not  known;  but  in  a  very
(hort  time  after  we  find  Weifhaupt's  views  on  Baader  ac-
complifhed;  for  on  the  13th  of  December  1778,  only
three  days  after  the  foregoing  letter,  we  find  him  infcribed
on  the  lift  of  Areopagites.  Ever  after  we  find  his  name
mentioned  in  the  correfpondence  as  one  of  the  moll  a£tivo
adepts,  and  as  one  of  thofe  who  had  the  raoft  deeply  imbi-
bed the  horrid  myfteries.f

Another  reafon  which  made  Weifliaupt  more  eager
for  this  conqueft,  was>  that  Baader  read  public  le&ures
on  medicine  at  Munich,  and  therefore  had  an  opportuni-
ty of  feducing  his  young  pupils,  after  the  example  of  his
mafter,  who  had  i'o  efficaciouily  and  fatally  made  ufe  of
his  influence  to  feduce  the  young  (ludents  of  the  law  at
the  Univerfity  of  ïngolftadt.
IV#  A  fimilar  reafon  had  made  him  ardently  wifh  to  initi-

Scipio-  ate  Berger  who  alfo  read  public  lectures  at  Munich,
Berger.  though  I  do  not  find  on  what  fcience*  His  characteriitic
is  Scipioy  and  he  was  infcribed  on  the  lift  of  Areopagites
on  the  28th  July  1778.  A  Freemafon  before  he  became
an  Illuminée,  he  was  fome  time  before  he  could  overcome
his  predilection  for  his  former  lodges,  in  fo  much  even
that  he  afked  for  his  difmiflal.  Spartacui  was  furious  at
fuch  a  preference.  Without  mowing  his  defire  of  retain-
ing the  difcontented  Brother,  and  not  having  him  fufH-
ciently  in  his  power  to  make  ufeof  threats,  he  commands
Zwaclc  to  declare  to  the  Candidate  in  the  name  of  the
Order,  that  he  was  at  full  liberty  to  follow  his  predilec-
tion; but  the  fame  letter  contains  all  that  is  to  be  hinted
underhand  to  the  discontented  adept,  all  that  was  to  be
thrown  out  on  the  pre-eminence  and  advantages  of  Illu-
minifm  over  Mafonry.  The  Profcffor  Berger  was  {o  per-
fectly convinced  of  this  pre-eminence,  that  Weifhaupt,  t*
give  him  the  preference  over  all  the  ether  AreopagitiS%
onlv  required  of  him  a  Utile  more  aclivity.%

*  Ibid.  Vol.1.  Let  33,  nth  Dec.  1778.

f  Vol.  II.  Let.  13,  from  Spart acus to  Ce;fiit.

X  Vol.  I.  Let.  46  and  58.


HISTORICAL  PART,  47

The  want  of  activity  was  not  a  fault  with  which  Illu-  V.
fninifm  could  ever  upbraid  its  adept  Corialanus.  He  was  Cortolanut
a  merchant  of  the  name  of  Troponero  retired  from  p
Hamburgh  to  Munich.  At  the  time  of  his  initiation  he
did  not  employ  his  talents  in  that  line  which  Weifhaupt
îudged  to  be  lb  ufeful  for  the  propagation  of  his  hireling
doctrines.  Zwack  bethought  himfeif  of  letting  up  this
Troponero  for  a  public  lecturer  on  finance,  and  made
the  propofition  to  Spartacus->  who  immediately  anfwered,
u  It  is  a  very  good  plan  both  for  him  and  for  us,  to  make
u  Coriolanus  read  lectures  on  finance;  only,  do  you  fpare
*c  no  pains  to  get  him  fcholars.  It  is  a  hue  occafton  for  re-
*c  cruiting  young  men\  nor  would  it  be  a  bad  plan  if  you
**  became  one  of  his  pupils  yourfelf,  in  order  to  entice
il  others."*  It  does  not  appear  whether  Zwack  relifhed
defcending  from  the  bench  of  the  Areopagites  to  attend
the  fchools  of  the  new  lecturer;  but  certain  it  is  that  the
Archives  of  Illuminifm  bear  teftimony  of  the  sreat  fervi-
ces  rendered  by  this  Coriolanus  ;  and  Weifhaupt  frequent-
ly extols  his  merits.  He  was  particularly  ufeful  at  all  the
receptions,  alfuming  that  air  of  ceremonious  gravity  fo  be-
coming in  the  Grand  Matter  of  a  Lodge;  and  fo  well
did  he  impofe  on  the  young  adepts,  that  they  had  not  the
leaft  fufpicion  of  the  Occult  Myfteries  of  the  Roiicrucians,
much  lefs  of  thole  of  Illuminifm.

About  the  fame  time  we  meet  with  the  names  of  the  „     ,    ,
two  firft  Illuminized  Noblemen  whom  Weifhaupt  had  ^  B'arJn
initiated  into  his  laft  mytteries-— the  one  Hanibal,  the  Ba-  BafTus.
ron  Bassus  ;  the  other  Diomedcs,  the  Marquis  of  Con-      VIII.
stanza.    Illuminized  Barons  and  .Vlarquifies,  certainly,  Diaviedes%
are  a  fort  of  phenomena  not  eafily  to  be  conceived.    That      •     ^ r"
men  who  are  never  called  by  their  names  without  being  Conftanza»
reminded  of  the  great  ftake  they  have  to  lofe,  fhould  pro-
perty and  the  focial  order  be  overthrown,  that  fuch  men
Ihould  plunge  themfelves  into  the  moft  horrid  confpiracy
ever  framed  againff.  both,  can  only  be  believed  by  thofe
who  have  attended  to  theamazitig,  cunning  of  Weifhaupt's

Code  and  the  artifice  with  which  it  is  put  in  execution »

In  fhort  the  Archives  of  Illuminifm,  the  letters,  nav  the
apologies  of  thefe  titled  Illuminées,  bear  too  ftrong  proofs
of  the  fact,  and  mutt  quafh  all  objections.  The  Baron
Battus,  in  his  pretended  j  unification,  owns  that  he  was  the

*  Ibid.  Let.  j,  to  Cat»,


4$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY?

perfon  known  under  the  chara&eriftic  of  Hanibal\*  and
the  letters  of  this  Hanlbal  not  only  ihovv  that  he  was  an
Illuminée  himfelf,  but  alfo  an  apoftle  of  Illuminization,
giving  an  account  to  the  Brethren, of  his  fuccefTes  atBoU
zen  in  Tyrol,  and  boaftingof  the  important  conqueftshe
had  made  in  that  town,  having  en1  ited  and  imbued  the
Prejident,  the  Vice-Prefidcnt,  the  principal  Counfellort
of  the  Government,  and  the  Grand  Àlajîer  of  the  Pojh;
with  the  moft  enthuuaftic  admiration  for  Uluminifm.  j— •.
A  little  farther,  the  letters  of  this  fame  Hanlbal  bear  tes-
timony of  his  having  gone  into  Italy,  and  of  his  having
initiateJ  at  Milan  his  Excellency  the  Count  W .  .  Impe-
rial Mini/ier.  Then,  meditating  new  conquefts,  he  pro-
ceeds to  Pavia,  in  hopes  of  eniilting  lèverai  of  the  Pro-
fefiors  of  that  Univeriity,  and  fmifhes  by  requcfting  that
Une  geography  of  the  Order  may  be  enlarged,  that  he  may
have  a  greater  fcope  for  his  illuminizing  talents.;};

With  refpeâ  to  Diomedes,  or  our  illuminized  Mar-?
quis,  his  letters  alfo  bear  testimony  of  his  enthufiaftic  zeal
in  the  fervice  of  Weilhaupt.  He  held  this  Arch-Confpi-
rator  in  fuch  great  veneration,  that,  with  the  exception  of
tome  few  infignifcant  weaknefjes,  he  looked  upon  „Wei-
ihaupt  as  the  mojl  perfeft,  the  mofl  profound,  and  the  mofl
extraordinary  mortal  on  earth.  The  hours  be  had  the
happinefs  of  fpending  in  his  company  were  too  fhort  in
his  opinion,  but  unhappily  long  enough  to  fire  him  with
all  mat  zeal  which  fends  him  frantic  to  Deux  Pouts,  then
to  Nauplis  or  Straubingen,  and  at  laft  to  Munich,  replete
with  all  that  hireling  cunning  with  which  the  young  can-
didates are  to  hj  io  completely  duped,  that  they  are  not
even  tofurmife  that  their  credulity  is  to  le  impofed  upon.
So  deeply  are  the  true  principles  of  the  Se£r.  rooted  in  his
breaft,  that  to  revenge  the  Order  on  fome  Brother  who,
probably  difç^ufted  with  the  abominable  tendency  of  thele
myfteries,  had  made  fome  difcovery  of  them  to  the  Ma-
gistrates, he  writes  to  one  of  the  brethren,  "  Oh  the  ras-
ct  cal  !  might  not  a  perfon,  or  to  be  more  correct:,  would
"  it  be  a  crime  to  fend  fuch  a  Devil  as  this  into  the  other
World?"  %

*  Page  6.  f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Sedt.  XLV.

X  Ibid.  Vol.  II.  Sed.  IV.  Let.  t  and  a.

§  Oder  Schuikl!  Konnte  man  nicht,  oder  urn  befier  zu  fa-
gen,  w'àie  es  nicht  erlaubt,  io  einen  Teufel  in  die  andere  wel  A


HISTORICAL  PART.  49

Neither  do  the  Original  Writings  nor  my  private  cor-       IX.
refpondence  inform  me  of  the  real  tides  of  the  Areopagite  ~î.7
So/on-MiCHT.     He  does  not  appear  to  have  a&ed  any       c  *
very  confpicuous  part  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Order.    He  is
only  flated  to  have  worn  the  ecclefiaftical  habit  at  Freyfin-
guen;  happy  for  him  if  it  is  to  this  drefs  that  he  is  indebt-
ed for  his  apparent  nullity  in  Weifiiaupt's  plots.

Next  appears  Hoheniecher  under  the  title  of  Aki-       X.
Hades,  who,  though  i'eated  in  the  confpirins;  l'enate  of  the  dlcibiader
Illuminées,  does  not  blulli  to  hold  a  feat  in  the  i'enate  of  ™onensi-
Freyfinguen  as  counfellor.

The  Eleventh  of  the  Areopagites  is  Mahomet  the  Ba-  -.?'"

ron  ScRoCKENSTfilN.    We  mail  foon  behold  him  prefi-  „  ab'jV:J
i-  11  •  i  r  \  •    r,        tu       •    -r      -Karon  tie

ding  over  whole  provinces  that  are  iubject  to  illuminum.  Scrocken-

A  few  days  after  his  initiation  we  meet  with  another  Are-  ftein.
opagite  characterized  Gennanicus.    Not  having  been  able       ^jT
to  difcover  his  real  name,  I  will  not  give  way  to  conjee-  Germain   '
ture.*     At  this  fame  period  we  find  a  numerous  lift  of  eus*
perfons  of  confequence  initiated  in  the  lower  degrees. —
Such,   for  example,  were  the  magi  Urate   of  Aichifcadt,
Tamerlane-LAUG,  and  the  private  fecretary  Geiser.—
The  characleriitic  of  this  adept  docs  not  appear  ;   but
Weifiiaupt's  letter  on  the  great  acquisition  he  had  made
in  this  adept  fufficiently  demonilrates  the  importance  he
attached  to  conquefts  of  this  nature,  and  how  far  he  could
turn  them  to  the  advantage  of  his  Order,

This  letter  is  of  the 'iotb  Chardad,  1148  (luth  June,
1778)  ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  it  is  the  firft  let-
ter which  we  find  in  the  Original  Writings  dated  accord-
ing to  the  Perfian  ./Era.  It  is  to  his  dear  Lata  that  Wei?
fhaupt  writes: — «  The  acqwifition  we  have  made  of  the

G

ZB  fchicken— Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Sèff.  XLIV.  Letters  t
and  z.

*  In  order  to  difcover  the  real  name  of  an  adept,  it  will  often
fufrke  to  combine  their  letters,  ami  particularly  thole  in  which
Weilhanpt  declares  the  characleriftics  to  be  given  to  candi-
dates, with  what  is  afterwards  faid  of  them  under  their  new
names.  '1  he  German  Journais,  and  divers  other  writings  in
that  language,  my  own  private  correfponder.ee  with,  and  me-
morials that  J  hnve  received  from  men  who,  living  on  the  fpor,
have  been  enabled  to  procure  more  accurate  documents  with
relbect  to  thefe  different  perfonages,  have  furniihed  me  with
the  means  of  difcovering  many  omers  oa  whom  no  Ihadow  or
doubt  can  beeûtwtainea.


5d  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

«  private  fecretary  (fecretaire  intime)  Geifef  is  an  event
«  of  fuclj  conference  to  us,  that  our  affairs  will  foon  as-
£c  fume  quite  a  different  afpect.  It  obliterates  that  ap-
*  pearance  {much  too  confpieuous)  of  novelty.  It  is  for
*;  this  reafon  that  we  ought  to  mutually  congratulate  each
*'  other  and  the  whole  Order.  We  may  now  expect  to  do
K  fotnething  great.  By  enticing  men  among  us  of  his  itamp
u  and  or"  his  confequence,  we  add  great  weight  to  our  ob-
v  :zti,  and  they  are  ui'eful  in  keeping  our  young  Iters  with-
<c  in  bounds.  Do  not  forget  to  thank  and  maice  my  moi*
"  fmoere  compliments  to  the  private  fecretary.  A4en  of
"  his  importance  mult  have  a  right  to  choofe  their  own
u  charaéxerifl'ics,  their  employments,  and  the  (pedes  of  ia-
"  bor  that  they  would  prefer.  You  will  remember  to  in-
*'  form  me  of  it,  that  Ï  may  take  the  proper  iteps  in  con-
"  îêquence."*

In  this  clafs  of  Brethren  of  confequence»  we  mull  not
forget  Brutus  Count  Saviola,  Sylla  the  Baron  Mag-
genhoff,  and  Alexander  Count  PapP£NHeï,M.  Mean-
while, till  we  come  to  treat  of  minifters  and  princes  drawn
into  this  vortex  of  feditioft,  let  us  hear  Weifhaupt  deve-
lop his  views,  and  obferve  him  marlhalling  his  troops;
particularly  when  he  takes  meafures  to  eufnare  thofe  no-
blemen whom  he  wifhes  to  make  the  prime  agents  and
the  propagators  of  the  very  confpiracies  to  which  they  are
to  fell  the  fiyrft  victims.  On  the  \oth  Pharavardin^  1 1 49
(31H  March,  1779),  he  writes  to  his  Athenians  of  Mu-
nich, "  Have  you  not  in  aîl  your  town  of  Athens  any
<c  ftrangers  who  may  be  immediately  admitted  into  the
«  Order,  advanced  as  foon  as  poflible  to  the  degree  of
*'  Minerval  and  then  amply  inftrucled  in  the  mytteries  of
"  that  degree \  Such  perfons  may,  without  any  further
"  initiation,  be  fent  to  found  the  fyftem  in  other  countries
w  and  make  recruits;  for  example,  at  Augfbourg,  atRa-
«  4ifbonne,  at  Saltzbourg,  at  Landihut,  and  other  towns.
"  To  meet  with  fuch  perfons  it  would  be  proper  for  you
"  to  go  into  company,  and  to  frequent  aflemblies  and  pla-
tc  ces  of  public  refort.  Since  you  have  done  lo  many  other
"  things  you  may  very  well  do  this.  At  Erzerum  (Aich-
u  ftadt)  and  throughout  all  Franconia  I  could ?nake  a  ra-
**  pid  progrefs  if  I  could  hut  initiate  two  gentlemen  of  that
^  country  whom  I  am  well  acquainted  withy  and  who  are
*

*  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Let.  13,  to  Qat:


Historical  fart,  51

*'  men  of  great  wit  and  much  e /heme  d  by  the  nobility  there.
u  This  acquifition  would  foon  procure  us  adepts  from
**  amons;  the  nobility,  men  of  wit  who  would  recruit  for
<v  us  in  their  own  clafs  throughout  all  Franconia. — When
"  we  initiated  any  one  at  Athens  to  a  new  degree,  thefe
"  two  gentlemen  might  be  called  to  affift  at  the  ceremo*
u  ny,  and  would  then  become  candidates  for  the  higher
'•  degiee.  The  rank  they  hold,  and  their  nobility,  would
tc  alio  be  of  ufe  to  curb  the  petulance  of  your  young  Bru-
u  tus  and  other  gentry. — Infhort,  Tamerlane  (or  the  coun-
**  fellur  Lang),  who  thinks  that  there  are  no  other  adepts
**  at  Erzerum  but  thofe  with  whom  he  is  acquainted,
<c  would  be  thunderftruck  at  finding  perfons  in  a  higher
*  degree  than  himfelf,  though  he  had  nut  the  leaif.  idea
*'  they  belonged  to  the  Order,  and  men  alfo  of  whom  he
"  has  the  higheft  opinion.  Do  reflect  and  deliberate  on
«  this."*

In  the  following  letters  it  appears  that  Brutus  no  long-
er needed  any  curb;  for  he  becomes  an  apoflle  of  the  Secf,
znà  fets  off  on  an  expedition  from  which  Weifhaupt  au-
gurs great  fuccefs.  He  is  even  fo  zealous^  that  Sparta-
<us,  on  the  eve  of  difmiffing  feveral  other  adepts,  mentions
him  as  an  ufefnl  member  who  is  to  be  preferved,f  and
defires  that  he  may  as  loon  as  poffible  be  advanced  to  the
degree  of  Maj or  llluminee.%  To  enable  the  reader  to
judge  how  far  he  was  difpoled  to  ferve  the  Cider,  it  will
iuffice  to  record  the  terms  in  which  he  expreiîès  his  gra-
titude for  favors  received,  and  the  promifes  be  makes  in
hopes  of  obtaining  new  ones.  His  letter  to  the  Mojl  Ex-
cellent Superiors  of '  llluminijm  is  couched  in  the  following
terms  :

u  Most  Excellent  Superiors'
K  Receive  my  moft  grateful  acknowledgments  for  the
H  third  degree  with  which  you  have  juft  honored  me. — ■
u  Every  part  of  it  is  noble,  grand,  and  beautiful;  it  has
"  perfectly  anfwered  the  expectations  1  had  formed  of  it
**  from  the  fécond.  I  fha'l  moft  undoubtedly  do  every
K  thing  that  lies  in  my  power  to  deierve  you:  confidence.
"  In  future  rely  on  mine,  and  believe  me  to  be  perfectly
K  devoted  to  your  fervice.     Nothing  in  the  world  (hall

*  Ibid.  Vol.  I.  Let,.  39.
1   Ori«.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Let.  58.      t  Ibid.  Vol.  II.  Let.  ï  3 .


52  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  ever  withdraw  me  from  my  allegiance  to  your  laws,  of
"  make  me  ceafe  to  be  guided  by  you.

"  You  wrote  to  me  fome  time  fmce,  defiring  me  to  fef  Ic
f'  for  no  further  advancement  at  Court,  as  I  could  not
"  expect  any.  I  obeyed  that  order;  but  as  the  minifteis
<c  of  the  regency  have  lately  paid  me  fome  marks  of  atten*
"  tion,  my  affairs  have  aflumed  a  different  afpe£!:.  The
"  ferious  llineis  of  the  Emperor  having  given  rile  to  the
u  idea  of  a  vicarage  of  the  Empire,  Brother  Pericles  and
<c  myfelf  have  been  mentioned* as  counfellors  in  that  court;
"  and  I  have  great  hopes  of  being  made  a  privy  counfel-
"  lor  (ccnfeiller  intime).  S  .  .  .  ,  has  taken  my  caufe  in
"  hand,  and  I  am  indebted  to  the  Brothers  Ce  If  us  and  Al-
ufred  for  it.  If  ever  I  get  into  power,  the  moj.1  excellent
w  Order  will  foon  fee  how  much  I  am  devoted  to  it,  and
V  how  entirely  I  belong  to  it.  In  the  mean  time  \  can  but
tl  exprefs  my  fincereft  wifh.es."*

Though  the  advancement  which  had  infpired  the  Count
'Brutus  with  fo  much  zeal  for  the  Order  left  him  ftill  at  a
great  di  fiance  from  the  higher  myfleries,  he  neverthelefs
had  a  brother  who  could  not  flatter  himfelf  that  he  mould
arrive  at  even  this  third  degree.  7'he  Iniinuator  had  made
a  diflinction  between  them.  The  letter  in  which  he  an-
nounces their  initiation  to  Spartacus  will  fhow  the  reader
what  other  fervices  the  Order  had  to  expect  from  fuch
kinds  of  adepts.

Cato  writes  to  Spartacus  ;  K  Here  are  my  new  hopes
<c  for  the  Order.  After  a  long  perfeverance  I  have  at
a  length  engaged  the  young  S— — —  (Savioli).  He  will
"  deliver  his  brother  over  to  us,  who  may  fet  our  aflairs
"  agoing  at  Augfbourg.  They  are  both  rich.  The  firft
"  I  recruited  as  a  Sta  bene,  that  is  to  fay,  one  who  is  ne-
"  ver  to  pals  the  lower  ranks.  I  alfo  engage  him  becaufe
<l  on  certain  occafions  he  will  lend  us  his  houle  which  is
"  very  convenient  for  our"  meetings  -,  and  more  particular-»
l-  \y  becaufe,  being  rich,  he  can  help  us  with  his  purfc.f

The  fame  letter  mentions  a  fimilar^fl  bene;  "  The
**  Brother  Livius  (Rudorger)  is  in  future  to  be  looked
"  on  as  belonging  to  the  fame  clafs.  He  frankly  owned
tl  to  me,  thai  he  had  neither  the  time  nor  inclination  to
u  give  himfelf  up  to  our  labors.    But  that  he  was  willing

*\  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  II.  Qulbtu  Licet  from  Brutus,
f  Dathit  cr  an  geld  beytraget»


HISTORICAL  PART.  53

c  to  contribute  towards  the  progrefs  of  the  Order  with
*c  his  purfe,  and  that  he  would  even  furnifh  us  with  books
<c  for  our  libraries,  and  inftruments  for  experiments. — I
tc  gave  him  to  underftand,  that  certainly  he  might  remain.
t(  a  member  of  the  Order  j  but  that  he  could  only  be  clafs-
"  ed  in  future  with  thofe  who  feconded  its  views  with
u  their  money/'*  Thus  did  Weifhaupt  turn  the  ftupidity
and  ignorance,  the  impiety  and  money  of  his  MarquilFes,
Barons,  Knights,  and'Magiftrates,  to  the  advantage  and.
propagation  of  his  difaffrous  plots. — He  had  already  made
converts  of  this  nature  in  the  imperial  chamber  of  \Vetz-
lar;  for,  as  early  as  the  29th  of  Auguft,  1778,  we  find
that  Minos,  the  Affeflbr  Dittfurth,  inferibed  on  the
lift  of  Illuminées,  the  fame  perfon  whom  we  have  already
i'een  (o  zealous  for  the  foundation  of  an  illuminijSed  fis-r
tgrhood.f  At  firft  we  find  him  under  a  j  ufpenfion,  as  not
to  be  trufted  by  the  Brethren  jj  but  very  loon  his  zeal
makes  him  at  once  the  admiration  and  laughing-flock  of
Spartacus.  The  reader  mull:  have  already  obferved  the
art  with  which  Weifhaupt  obliges  every  candidate  to  give
the  hiftory  of  his  life,  with  an  exicf.  defcription  of  his  pas-
sons and  prejudices.  The  Affeffor  Minos  complied  with
this  regulation  in-fo  fcrupulous  a  manner,  that  Weifhaupt
could  not  refrain  from  writing  to  the  Areopagites  in  the
following  terms  :  "  Alinos,  that  man  who  bears  (o  high  a
*'  character,  is  at  prefent  writing  the  hiilory  of  his  life.- — -
'*  He  is  as  yet  only  arrived  at  his  Jeveniecnth  year,  and
"  has  rvritten  ninety-three  facets  of  paper.  He  is  now  for-
"  ty-five  years  of  age.  This  will  be  foniething  more  than
<c  a  general  confeflion.  You  fee  what  may  be  done  with
"  men  if  one  does  but  know  how  to  gain  their  confidence^
**  and  to  convince  them  of  the  excellency  of  the  obje".,,i}
So  completely  did  the  imperial  Afleflbr  imbibe  this  prin-
ciple and  learn  to  convince  others  of  it,  that  we  fliall  here-
after fee  him  railed  to  the  dignity  of  Provincial.

However  much  Weifnaupt  may  have  wilhed  to  make
profelytes  among  the  great,  wc  neverthelefs  fee  him  re-
commending to  his  inlinuators  to  recruit  more  particu-

*  Orig.  Writ,  Vol.  I.  Seel,  xxxii.  Letter  from  CatçioSpar*

lacus  .

t  Vol.  III.  of  thefe  Memoirs,  Page  41.
Ï  Orig.  Writ.  Seel.  iv.  See  the  Lift.
§  Orig,  Writ.  Vol.  II.  Let.  7  and  10.


$$  ANfïSOClAL  CONSPIRACY*

ïarly  amon^:  the  profeffirf  and  fcboolmafîers,  as  a  Cure
means  of  gaining  over  to  his  views  the  youth  of  all  clafTes.
Hence  it  is  that  Hermes  Trifmcgiftes,  whofe  real  name
was  Socher,  and  who  was  fuperior  of  the  college  at
Land&erg,  receives  the  foecial  commiilion  to  watch  and
£Urird  againil  the  Jefuits,  as  fwom  enemies  to  the  educa-
tion he  is  to  give  to  his  pupils.*  For  the  fame  reafon
does  Weifhaupt  ftrain  every  ne  t  to  fill  his  univerfityof
Ingolftadt  with  profeffors  and  prefects  belonging  to  his
SecL  He  entreats  the  adepts  at  Munich  to  befet  the  mi-
nifters,  and  obtain  the  expulnon  of  all  Jefuits,  becaufe
thefe  fathers  had  retrieved  the  four  profeifors  ocholli-

KiiRj    S TEINGENBERGER,    WuRlER,  and    ShLEGEL,

from  Illuminiftnj  and  becaufe  he  had  but 'three  profes-
sors left  in  the  univerfity  to  refift  Jefuitifm.f  The  Lift
of  Profeifors  foon  fwells  to  an  alarming  height  in  all  towns
where  Iiluminifm  makes  any  progrefs.  On  this  black  lift
we  find  Jrménius-lLREUNERi  Co  rtuz-L  Ell  mer  ;  Py*-
ihagoras-\N essenreider;  this  latter  foon  abandoned
the  Order  when  his  characleriffcic  was  given  to  the  Pneft
and  Librarian  Drexlj  but  as  profellor  we  find  three  to
replace  him,KuNDLER,LoLLiNG,and  aboveall  Baïer-
AMMJlR,  at  firft  called  Zoroajhr,  but  aftewards  Confu-
cius. It  is  this  adept  that  Weifhaupt  brings  at  length  to
Ingolftadt,  that  he  might  have  for  his  colleague  in  the  fe-
duetion  of  youth,  a  man  that  he  himfelf  had  initiated  in
the  black  arts  of  his  Iltuminifm.i  This  ferves  to  account
for  that  zeal  with  which  he  fends  his  adepts  into  all  hou-
fes  of  education-  and  that  folicitude  with  which  he  entreats
Ccdo  and  Marîus  to  feck  out  fome  brethren  well  drilled
to  the  arts  of  Infinuators,  who  might  be  iènt  to  the  uni-
versities of  Saltzboiirg)  of  b:fpruck,of  Frihourg,  and
of  other  floces.  *§

To  fclect  the  following  will  fufRce  to  fhow  to  what  ex-
tent thefe  miffionary  profeiTors  fucceeded,  according  to
the  views  of  the  Order  ;  Saladtn-EKEL-,  Tkales-lL-\?~
finger;  Timo  n  -  M I  c  H  L  ;  Euclid  -  il  i  e  d  l  ;  all  from
eighteen  to  twenty  years  of  age:  Sauer,  furnamed  At-
tila\  and  the  Lmperor  Claudius,  ox  Simon  Zwack,
coulin  to  the  incomparable  Cato>  v/e-re  of  the  lame  age  ;
an  age  fought  after  by  Weifhaupt,  as  he  could  the  more

*  Vol.  I.  Let.  28.  .      f  Vol.  I.  Let.  3a,  30th  Jan.  1778.
Î  See  particularly  L°t.  24,  Vol.  I.  §  Ibid.  Let.  40.


HISTORICAL  PART»  55

eafiîy  twine  the  young  adept  to  vice.  This  docility  was
far  from  being  the  leading  feature  of  his  other  adepts  j  they
were  not  all  enthunalUcally  wedded  to  his  plots  at  this
dawn  of  Uiuminifm;  nor  could  he  make  them  the  paifive  —
inftruments  of  his  confpiracy.  He  defcribes  the  profelytes
he  had  made  among  the  ariftocracy  u  as  rich,  therefore
u  given  to  all  the  vices  of  their  ftate  ;  ai  ignorant,  proudt
"  cowardly,  arid  lazy  in  the  fuperlative  degree  ;  as  only
K  feeking  their  advancement  in  the  myfteries,  in  order  to
*'  gratify  their  curiolity,  or  even  to  feoff  at  the  ceremonial
*'  of  the  different  degrees  ;"*  and  we  wifhed  to  find  men
who  would  be  ilruck  with  awe,  and  be  fired  with  enthû-
fiafm  at  the  fight  of  thefe  ceremonies.  The  ftyie  of  re-.
proach  in  which  he  writes  to  many  other  of  the  adepts
clearly  depicts  a  let  of  men  deftitute  of  all  morals,  and  hav-
ing  no  other  views  in  the  Order  than  to  gratify  their  pas-
lions  and  their  avarice;  feeking  none  but  their  own  inté-
rêts, and  often,  through  their  diffolute  and  immoral  con-
duct, expofing  the  founder  of the  Order  to  be  looked  up-
on as  a  corrupter  of youth. f  He  was  willing  to  have  none
but  followers  that  could,  like  himfelf,  gratify  the  moft  in-
famous pallions  in  private,  and  who,  under  the  mail:  of
virtue,  moderation,  and  wiidom,  impofing  on  the  public,
would  accredit  his  Uluminifm.  With  reipect  to  the  foun-
der, we  have  feen  him  already  defcribing  the  turpitude  of
his  morals,  and  the  atrocious  means  to  which  he  had  re-
farted  to  preferve  the  mafk  of  his  pretended  virtue  ;  let  us
now  hear  him  upbraiding  his  firft  adepts  with  the  public
depravity  of  their  morals  as  being  prejudicial  to  his  Illu-
miniiin:  w  I  have  received,"  fays  he,  "the  moll  fatal  in»
**  telligence  from  Thebes  (Freylinguen).  They  have  giv-
*  en  a  public  fcandal  to  the  whole  town,  -by  admitting
«(  into  the  Lodges  that  vile  Propertius,  a  libertine  loaded
«*  with i  debts,  and  a  mofi  detejiable  being.     In  that  fame

*'  town  is  to  be  found  the  Brother  D ,  who  is  nothing

tc  more  than  a  wicked  fellow;  our  Socrates,  who  could  be
"  of  the  greateft  ufe  to  us  is  always  drunk  ;  our  Augujlus
il  has  acquired  the  worft  of  reputations  ;  the  Brother  AU
"  cibiades  is  perpetually  lighing  and  pining  away  at  the
*4  feet  of  his  landlady;  Tiberius  attempted  to  lay  violent
41  hands  on  Diomedes's  lifter,  and  Fuffered  himfelf  to  be
li  caught  by  the  hufband  ;  heavens  !  what  men  have  I

*  Vol.  II.  Let,  i.  f  ibid.  Let.  1 1.


56  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

lt  theft  for  Areopagltes!  What  !  we  facrinceour  health,
«  our  fortune,  our  reputation,  to  the  good  of  the  Order;
"  and  tbefe  gently  give  themfelves  up  entirely  to  their
<l  pleafurcs  and  eafe,  proftitute  themfelves,  give  public
«  fcandals,  and  ft  111  with  to  he  acquainted  with  all  our  fe*
«' crets  :  From  this  inftant  I  fhall  look  upon  'Tiberius
u  (Merz)  as  erafed  from  our  lift,  O  Areopagites,  Are-
"  opagites  !  I  would  much  rather  have  none  at  all,  than
ct  not  have  men  more?  à,ftive  and  more fu&mtjjive."*

This  is  not  the  only  letter  in  which  Weifhaupt  plainly
fhows  what  opinion  he  had  himfelf  of  bis  horde  cf  adepts.
The  following  gives  a  clearer  infight  into  the  caufe  of  the
alarm  he  had  taken  from  their  public  fcandals,  and  their
•  evil  tendency  for  the  general  good  aï'  the  Seel.  After  hav~

ing  told  them,  ÏVith  regard  to  politics  and  morals,  yon
are  as  yet  far  behind  indeed,  he  fays,  "  Judge  yourielves
"  what  would  be  the  confequence,  if  a  man  fuch  as  our
«  Marcus  Aurelius  (he  was  a  profefTor  of  Gottinguen,
«  and  his  real  name  was  Feder)  were  once  to  know
"  what  a  [el  of  men  àejïitute  of  morals,  what  a  Jet  of  de~
«  bauchées,  liars,  fpendthrifts,  braggadochios,  and  fools
"  replete  with  vanity  and  pride,  you  have  among  you;
fi  if  fuch  a  man,  I  fay,  were  to  fee  this,  what  opinion  mult
"  he  form  of  us  1  Would  he  not  be  alhamed  to  belong  to
«c  a  fociaty  whofe  chiefs  promife  fuch  great  things,  andex-
«  ecute  fo  ill  the  mojl  beautiful  plan  \  and  all  from  obfti-
*c  nacy,  and  becaufe  they  will  not  fufter  one  tittle  of  their
u  pleafures;  now  frankly  declare,'  am  i  not  in  the  right?
«  Do  you  not  think  that,  in  order  toprefervea  man,  fuch
«  as  Marcus  Aarelius-Ftder,  whofe  name  alone  is  worth
«  the  belt  part  of  Germany,  I  ought  to  facriftce  and  re-
"  (bind  all  your  whole  province  of  Greece  (Bavaria)  the
«  innocent  as  well  as  the  guilty  ?  And  fhould  I  take  fuch.
«  a  ftep,  who  would  be  to  blame?  Is  it  not  better  to  cut
ff  off  the  gangrened  members,  than  to  lofe  the  whole  bo-*
<c  dy  ?  Can  you  be  fo  void  of  all  feeling,  as  to  fee  a  ftlccfc
*c  fociety  of  men  diffolve,  and  abandon  the  reformation  of
«  the  world,  and  that  on  account  of  the  vices  you  have
<c  plunged  yourielves  into,  and  the  fcandal  you  give? — .
f*  That  would  be  ftill  worfe  than  an  Heroftratus,  worfe
^  than  all  the  wicked  men  of  all  times  and  of  all  ages. — .
*  Thoie  of  you,  gentlemen,  therefore,  who  do  not  ap~

*  Ibid.  Vol.  II.  Let,  9,


HISTORICAL  PART.  $7

**  prove  of  this  plan,  who  will  not  facrifice  your  eafe  and
«  miserable  partions;  thofe,  in  fhort,  who  are  indifferent
tl  to  the  praifes  of  the  beft  of  men,  and  who  will  not  la-
^  bor  with  us  at  making  all  mankind  but  one  and  the  fame
"family  ;  thofe,  I  not  only  pray,  but  conj  ure,  at  leaft  not
"  to  impede  our  labors,  and  not  to  entail  on  the  Order
"  the  infamy  and  ihame  of  their  public  fcandals.  Such
"  eonducl  would  be  worfetban  that  of  real  affaffins,worfe
"  than  the  pla'gue."*

However  well-founded  Weifhaupt  may  have  been  in
making  ufe  of  fuch  reproaches,  the  rapid  progrefs  made
by  his  Illuminifm  fhould  have  convinced  him,  that  his  a-
depts,  in  the  midft  of  their  debaucheries,  never  loll  light
of  the  grand  object  of  his  myfteries.  The  reader  may
judge  of  their  progrefs  by  the  following  note;  which,  at
the  fame  time  that  it  denotes  their  fuccefTes,  will  (how  in
what  manner  they  reported  them  to  each  other.  This  do-
cument may  alio  begin  to  explain  various  mylleries  of*
the  revolution.

Note,  on  the  progrefs  of  'Illuminifm,  found  among  the
papers  of  <£à.lo~Zivack,  written  in  his  own  hand,  and
contained  in  the  frfi  volume  of  the  Original  f Writ-
ings.

«  We  havef  at  Athens  (  Munich),  ift,  a  regular  Lodge
**  of  Major  Illuminées;  2dly,  a  leiter  meeting  of  Illumi-
**  nees,  very  well  adapted  to  our  purpolés;  3dlv,  a  very
"  large  and  remarkable  Mafonic  Lodge;  4-thly,  two con-
"  iidcrable  Churches,  or  Muierval  Academies.

"  At  Thebes  (Freyfinguen)  alfo  there  is  a  Minerval
<c  Lodge,  as  well  as  at  Megara  (Landfberg),  at  Brug-
t*  haufen,  at  Straubing,  at  Ephefus  (IngoHfadc),  and  in  a
"  lhort  time  we  fhall  have  one  at  Corinth  (Ratifbonne),

"  We  have  bought  a  houfe  (at  Munich)  for  ourlelves;
"  and  we  have  taken  our  precautions  fo  well,  that  the  in-r
"  habitants  not  only  do  not  cry  out  againft  us,  but  fpeak

H

*  Original  Letters,  Vol.  »,  Let.  10.

f  This  note  begins  with  thefe  words:  The  number  in  Greece
confijts  of- — Whether  Cato  did  mark  the  number  or  not,  J  know
not  ;  but  the  editor  has  left  it  in  blank,  and  the  fentence  is  in-
complete. Mr.  Robifon  has  inferted  the  tiumber  600;  butas
he  does  not  give  his  authority,  I  fhall  content  myfelf  with  trans-
lating, and  fliall  continue  with  Zwack.


58  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

«  of  us  with  efteern,  when  they  fee  us  going  publicly  to
"  that  houfe,  or  to  the  Lodge.  Certainly  that  is  a  great
"  deal  for  this  tovjn.

"  We  have  in  this  houfe  a  Cabinet  of  natural  hiftory,
"  iriftruments  for  experimental  philofophy,  and  a  library;
"  and  all  this  is  daily  augmented  by  the  gifts  of  the  Breth-
"  ren.  The  garden  is  to  be  turned  into  a  botanical  one.

"  All  the  fcientific  journals  are  procured  for  thebreth-
"  ren  at  the  expenfe  of  the  Order.

"  By  means  of  different  pamphlets  we  have  awakened
"  the  attention  of  the  princes  and  citizens  to  certain  re-
"  markable  abufes;  we  oppofe  religious  Orders  with  all
"  our  might;  and  we  have  good  reafon  to  be  plealed  with
"  the  fuccefs  ot  our  endeavors.

"  We  have  entirely  new  modelled  the  Lodge  on  our
"  plan,  and  have  broke  off  all  communication  with  Berlin.

"  We  have  not  only  repreffed  all  the  enrollments  of  the
"  R  C.  (Roficrucians),  but  we  haye  fucceeded  incafting
"  fufpicions  on  them.

"  We  are  in  treaty  for  a  ftri£l  and  effective  alliance
fi  with  the  Lodge  of—,  and  with  the  national
u  Lodge  of  Poland."

Another  Note,  written  by  the  fame  band,  on  the  politi-
cal progrefs  of  the  Order.

l:  Through  the  intrigues  of  the  Brethren  the  Jefuits
"  have  been  dilmiiTed  from  all  the  Profefforfhips;  we  have
"  entirely  cleared  the  univerfity  of  Ingolftadt  of  them.*

u  The  Dowager  Dutchefs  has  modelled  her  Inflitute
"for  the  Cadets  entirely  on  the  plan  prepared  by  the  Or-
"  der.  That  houfe  is  under  our  itifpeftion;  all  its  Profes-
<c  fors  belong  to  our  Order;  fve  of  its  members  have  been
"  ivell provided  for,  and  all  the  pupils  will  be  ours.

"  On  the  recommendation  of  the  Brethren  Pylades  is
u  made  the  ecclcfiajlical  ffcal  counfellor.  By  procuring
"  this  place  for  him,  we  have  put  the  church  monies  at
"  the  difpofal  of  the  Order:  and  by  means  of  thefe  monies
"  we  have  already  repaired  the  mal-adminiftration  of  our

" and  of ,  and  have  delivered  them  from

"  the  hands  of  the  ufurers»

*  Durch  die  verwendung  der  Br.  Br.  (Briidern)  wurden  die
Jefuiten  von  alien  profeflbr  ftellen  entfernt,  die  Univerfitat  In-
golftadt ganz  von  ihnen  gereinigt.


HISTORICAL  PART.  59

lt  With  thefe  monies  alfo  we  fupport  new  Brethren.
"  The  Brethren  who  are  in  orders  have  all  been  pro-
"  vided  with,  livings  and  curacies^  or  with  preceptor's
"  places.

"  Through  our  means  too,  the  Brothers  rfrmenius  and
"  Cortez  have  been  made  Profeffors  in  the  Univerjtty  of
€;  Ingolfladt.  We  have  alfo  got  purfes  for  all  our  young
"  candidates  in  the  fame  univerilty.

"  On  the  recommendation  alfo  of  our  Order,  two  young
"  men  are  travelling  at  the  expenfe  of  the  Court.  They
"  are  at  prefent  at  Rome.

"  The  Germanic  fchools  are  all  under  the  inspection
"  of  the  Order,  and  have  no  other  prefects  than  our
"  Brethren.

"  The  Benevolent  Society  is  alfo  under  our  direction.
"  The  Order  has  obtained  an  augmentation  of  pay  and
"  falaries  for  a  great  number  of  Brethren  who  are  em-
"  ployed  in  the  Dicajleres  (that  is  to  fay,  at  the  boards  of
*'  Adminiftration).

"  JVe  have  obtained  Jour  ecdefiajlical  chairs  for  as
"  many  of  our  Brethren.

"  We  fhall  ihortly  be  majlers  oj  the  Bartholomew  In-
"  jhtution  for  the  education  of  young  ecclejiajlics.  AH
w  our  meafures  arereadyfor  that  purpofe.  The  bufinefs
"  has  taken  a  very  favorable  turn;  by  this  means  vue  may
"  flock  all  Bavaria  with  prie/h  both  clever  and  proper"
(for  our  object).

"  We  have  limilar  hopes  and  views  on  another  houfe
w  of  priefts.

"  Through  incefTant  application,  indefatigable  efforts,

"  and  the  intrigues  of  different by  — -,  we  have  at

"  length  fucceeded  in  not  only  maintaining  the  Eceleft-
"  aftical  Council,  which  the  Jefuits  wifhed  todeitrov;
"  but  alfo  in  adigning  over  to  this  council,  to  the  colleges
"  and  univerfities,  all  thofe  goods  which  had  ftill  remain-
"  ed  under  the  adminiftration  of  the  Jefuits  in  Bavaria;
"  fuch  as  the  inftitution  for  the  minion,  the  golden  aim?,
"  the  houfe  of  retreat,  and  the  funds  for  the  newly  con-
«  verted.  Our  Major  Illuminées,  to  effectual  ,//7v

"  meetings  ;  feiural  of  them  remained  there  whole  nig  J
u  and  —  — ."

This  latter  article  is  alio  mutilated  by  the  editor  of  the
Original  Writings.  The  Court  of  Bavaria  did  not  think
pioper  to  publiih  the  names  oï  thoi


60  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

ftifbrs  and  others)  who  fo  well  feconded  Weifliaupt  and
his  adepts  on  this  occafion.  The  Jefuits  at  leaft  ftronaJy
fufpected  the  Count  of  Senseim  to  be  one  of  the  differ-
ent   ,  and  thole  of  the  Engliih  collège  of  Liege1,

in  particular,  had  reafon  to  believe  that  he  was  one  or
thole  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for  the  lofs  of  a  pen-
fion  often  thoufand  florins,  which  had  always  been  paid
to  them  by  the  Court  of  Bavaria.  How  far  thefe  fufpi-
cions  are  grounded  I  do  not  pretend  to  fay;  but  certain
it  is,  that  this  Count  Senfeim  appears  on  the  lift  of  adepts
under  the  characteristic  of  King  Alfred.  But  without  our
entering  into  any  difcuflion,  the  two  notes  I  have  juft
tranllated  clearly  evince,  that  the  adepts  did  not  defervé
to  be  (o  frequently  reprimanded  for  inactivity  as  Wei-
ihaupt  feems  to  have  thought.

What  a  ftrong  light  is  thrown  on  the  feCret  hiftory  of
the  Revolution  by  thefe  two  notes,  even  in  their  mutilat-
ed ftare!  A  large  portion  of  the  clergy,  it  is  true,  have
been  faithful  to  their  duty;  but  Europe  has  been  afto-
nifhed  at  feeing  fo  many  of  them  plunged  into  the  moll:
horrid  fcencs  of  impiety.  We  here  learn  from  Gatà-
Zwaclc  who  thole  falfe  paftors  were.  Thefe  atrocious
hypocrites  are  felected  by  the  Sect.,  imbued  with  all  the
venom  of  its  principles,  and  then  ufhered  into  the  bofom
of  the  church  under  its  baneful  protection.  It  had  laid  to
them,  affume  the  appearance  of  piety  and  zeal,  and  pre-
tend to  believe  in  the  fymbol  of  the  priefthood,  and  we
ihall  find  means  of  mltalling  you  in  the  livings  of  the
church,  and  of  making  you  the  rectors  and  paftors  of  the
flock.  You  (hall  publicly  preach  the  doctrine  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  your  exterior  fhall  coincide  with  the  duties  of
thole  ftations;  butin  fecret  you  fhall  fécond  our  views,
s:id  prepare  the  way  for  us.  It  would  be  a  futile  objec-
tion to  afk  how  it  was  polîible  to  find  monfters  whole  de-
pravity could  make  them  confent  to  act  fuch  fcenes  of
hypocrifv  even  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  !  We  have  the  au-
thority of  Cato-Zwzckj  who  tells  us  that  they  allumed  the
characters  and  functions  of  rectors  and  curates,  of  canons,
profellors,  and  teachers  in  the  Catholic  Church.  We  fhâil
foon  fee  the  fame  game  playtd  with  refpeci  to  the  Pro-
ttjra?it  Church;  and  thus  were  both  churches  miniltered
to  by  wretches  who  had  fworn  their  deftruction.

A  fimilar  mode  of  proceeding  was  adopted  lor  the  de
ftruction  of  the  ftate,  and  that  at  the  iirli  dawn  of  Illu-


/


historical  Part.  6î

rhinifm.  It  is  Cats  again  who  informs  us  of  the  intrigues,
Views,  and  fuccefles  or  the  Sect,  Insinuating  its  adepts  in-
to the  DicaJlercS)  the  councils,  and  boards  of  adminiftra-
tion,  which  are  paid  by  the  prince  and  ftate;  he  points
them  out  as  having  gained  accefs  into  the  councils  of  the
prince  and  the  irate,  carrying  with  them  all  the  treache-
rous plots  of  the  mort  difallrous  confpiracy  againft  both
prince  and  ftate.

Many  readers  have  been  aftonifhed  at  feeing  whole  ge-
nerations rife  imbued  with  the  principles  of  the  moft  rank
jacobinifm,  and  that  from  fchools  founded  by  princes  for
the  inftrudtion  of  youth;  but  Cato  again  folves  the  diffi-
culty, when  he  fpealcs  of  the  Injiiiuticn  founded  by  the
Dowager  Dutchefs.

In  fhort,  it  will  be  incumbent  on  future  hiftoriaus  to
tell  their  readers  whence  were  obtained  thofe  treafures
fpent  in  the  propagation  of  the  principles  of  the  Sett,  in
the  peregrinations  of  its  apoftles,  and  in  the  fupport  of  its
pennylefs  adepts;  thev  will  find  the  talk  already  complet-
ed by  the  Sect  itfdf,  which  tells  us,  that  its  novices  arc
fupporied  at  the  cxpenje  ff  the  public  foundations',  that
its  miffionaries  are  paid  and  Cent  to  foreign  parts  by  the
prince,  who  has  been  milled  to  believe  that  he  was  lend-
ing men  in  the  purfuit  of  arts  and  fcienccs.  Moreover,
does  not  the  Sect  betray  itfclf,  when  introducing  its  adepts
into  the  admini/lration  of  the  ecdcjlajlical property,  and
with  that  property  paying  the  debts  of  its  Lodges,  fup-
porting  the  apoftles  of  its  conspiracies,  re-eftabhfhing  its
former  clubs,  and  erecting  new  ones.  Let  the  hiitorian
iefieét  on  the  conditions  under  which  fuch  a  multitude  of
adepts  have  been  ufhered  into  livings  and  other  employ-
ments, and  he  will  loon  perceive  the  funds  of  the  Sect
fwelled  to  an  immenie  bulk  by  thoie  (hares  which  it  pre-
i-rves  for  its  own  ufe  out  of  ail  the  emoluments  which  it
has  procured  for  its  adepts  either  in  church  or  ftate.

But  in  this  fame  note  an  enigma  occurs  of  a  quite  dif-  -

forent  nature, The  reader  may  have  obferved  Cato-

Zwack  at  once  exulting  in  having  founded  a  mafonic
Lodge  at  Munich  toi-  the  Illuminées,  and  in  the  victories
gamed  by  the  Illuminées  over  the  Rojicrucian  Mafons.
—  What  can  have  given  rife  to  this  contraaiction,  at  the
lame  time  to  imitate  the  Free-tnafons, and  to  declare  war
againft  the  moft  famous  adepts  or  Mafonry.  Thefe  ques-
tions naturally  lead   us  to  the  investigation  of  the  moft


Uî  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

profound  device  thaï  Weifhaupt  evrer  invented  for  the
propagation  of  his  plots.  They  relate  to  his  firft  attempt,
to  the  diveriity  of  the  means  ufed,  his  fuccefs,  and  finally
to  his  triumphant  intruiion  into  the  mafonic  Lodges.  la
order  to  folve  them,  i  ihall,  in  the  following  Chapters,  lay
before  my  reader  the  mo  ft  remarkable  paflages  of  the  Ar-
chives of  the  Sect,  or  of  the  letters  and  avowals  of  the
moft  celebrated  adepts  relating  to  that  famous  plan,  the
execution  of  which  belongs  to  the  fécond  epoch  of  the
;;  and  unfortunately  it  maybe  too  truly  cailed  the
epoch  of  the-  illuminization  of  Free  Mafonry.


HISTORICAL  PART,


CHAP.    III.


*3


Epoch  of  the  Illuminization  of  Frce-Mafonry. —  Wei*
Jhaupt's  attempts  on  the  Mafonic  Lodges. — Acquifition
of  Knigge-y  and  his  firfl  Services.

LET  us,  for  a  moment,  fuppofe  every  thing  that  has
been  faid  in  thefe  Memoirs  relating  to  the  nature,
object,  origin,  and  fecret  of  Mafonry,  to  be  no  more  than
a  conjectural  fyftem;  let  it  ftill  further  be  fuppofed,  that
the  cloud  which  encompafles  the  origin  and  hiftory  of
Mafonry  is  for  ever  impenetrable;  let  even  the  Brethren
and  their  Matters  exalt  ftill  higher  the  merits  and  glory
of  their  anceftry;  yet,  for  the  misfortune  of  our  cotem-
poraries,  the  day  is  come  when  all  this  glory  is  fullied — .
when  the  Orators  of  their  own  Lodges  with  grief  ex-
claim,— "  Brethren  and  Companions,  give  free  vent  to
"  your  forrow  ;  the  days  of  innocent  Equality  are  gone  by.
"  However  holy  our  myfteries  may  have  been,  the  Lodges
"  are  now  profaned  and  fullied. — Brethren  and  Compan-
ions, let  your  tears  flow; — attired  in  your  mourning
"  robes  attend,  and  let  us  feal  up  the  gates  of  our  temples,
"  for  the  profane  have  found  means  of  penetrating  into
"  them.  They  have  converted  them  into  retreats  for  their
44  impiety,  into  dens  of  confpirators.  Within  the  facred
*'  walls  they  have  planned  their  horrid  deeds,  and  the  ruin
"  of  nations.  Let  us  weep  over  our  logions  which  they
"  have  feduced.  Lodges  that  may  ferve  as  hiding  places
"  for  thefe  confpirators  muft  remain  for  ever  fhut  both  to
"  us  and  to  every  good  citizen."*  Thefe  complaints,3nd
awful  lamentations  are  not  mine;  they  proceed  from  the
mouth  of  the  venerable  M  after  of  a  Lodge  ;  they  are  con-
tained in  the  funeral  oration  pronounced  on  Mafonry  in
prefence  of  the  Brethren  aflembled  for  the  laft  time  in  a
Lodge  in  Germany,  and  fighing  over  the  forrowful  des-
tiny of  their  Confraternity.  Unfortunately  for  the  honor
of  the  Brotherhoodjtheir  forrow  was  but  too  well-ground-

*  See  the  difcourfe  of  the  Orator  on  thç  (hutting  up  of  a
Lodge.


6^  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

ed;  and  it  is  our  duty  to  adduce  proofs  of  it.  Whatever
may  have  been  its  myfteries  heretofore,  Free-masonry
is  novj  become  criminal.  If  it  be  not  fo  in  itfelf,  it  is  be-
come fo  through  Weifhaupt's  means;  it  has  brought  a-
bout,  or  he  has  brought  about  through  its  means,  the
mod  difaftrous  of  all  revolutions.  This  awful  truth  can
nc  longer  remain  hidden.  Hillory  muft  found  its  trunv
pet,  and  let  it  adduce  its  proofs;  for  never  has  it  yet  giv-
en fo  awful  a  lcflbn  to  nations  on  the  fatal  effects  of  fe-
cret  focietics.

From  the  commencement  of  his  Illuminifm  Weifhaupt
had  forefecn  the  great  fupport  he  could  draw  from  the
multitude  of  Free  Mafons  difperfed  throughout  Europe,
fhjui  J  he  ever  be  fortunate  enough  to  form  an  alliance
v/ith  them.  "  Let  me  tell  you  a  piece  of  news,"  he  writes
to  Ajax  as  early  as  the  year  1777  ;  "  Before  the  next  car-
"  nival  I  fhall  go  to  Munich,  and  ihall  get  myfelf  admit-
"  ted  a  Frec-mafon.  Do  not  let  this  alarm  you;  our  buf-'
"  ncfs  will  notfvffer  in  the  lenji;  but  by  thisjhp  we  become
*c  acquainted  with  a  tie  or  new  fecret,  and  by  that  means
11  Jhall  beflronger  than  the  others"'*  Weifhaupt  accord-
ingly received  the  firft  degrees  of  Mafonry  at  Munich,  in
St.  Theodore's  Lodge.  At  firit  he  could  only  obferve
the  bagatelle  of  an  innocent  fraternity,  yet  even  then  he
perceived  that  Equality  and  Liberty  were  the  ground-?
work  of  all  the  amufements  of  the  Brotherhood.  He  fur-
mifed  further  myfteries.  In  vain  they  aflured  him,  that
all  political  or  religious  difcuffions  were  banifhed  from
the  Lodges,  and  that  every  true  Mafon  was  ejTentially  a
iraunch  friend  to  his  prince  and  to  Christianity.  He  had
faid  the  fame  thing  to  his  Novices  and  to  his  AH  nervals;
and  he  knew  too  well  what  became  of  all  thefe  protdra-
tions  in  his  Illuminifm,  He  eahly  conceived  that  a  limi-
lar  fate  awaited  thefe  .declarations  in  the  higher  degrees  of
Mafonry.  Soon  his  faithful  Zwack  furnifhed  him  with
the  means  of  penetrating  into  the  higher  myfteries  of
Mafonry  without  fubjeéting  himjelf  to  all  the  necefiary
trals.  This  latter  adept  had  made  acquaintance  at  Augl-
bourg  with  an  Abbé  of  the  name  of  Marotti.  Alone
pf  thefe  interviews  Marotti  had  initiated  bun  into  the
higher  degrees,  and  even  into  thofe  éJ  the  Scotch  Lodges.
*—He  had  explained  to  him  all  the  myfteries  of  Mafonry  }

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Letter  6,  to  Jjax,


"J

\    wil


HISTORICAL  PART.  f>$

àofàîutely  founded^  as  he  faid,  on  religion  and  the  hifiory
of  the  church.  Cato-'Zwzck  (hews  us,  by  the  eagernefs
with  which  he  announces  his  difcovery  to  Spartacus-
/Vcifhaupt,  how  much  this  explication  coincided  with
the  plots  of  his  impiety.*  No  fooner  has  Weilhaupt
(who  on  his  Tide  was  making  all  pofiible  enquiries)  re-
ceived the  news  cf  this  interview,  though  no  particulars
were  mentioned,  than  he  immediately  anfwers,  "  I  doubc
tc  much  whether  you  are  acquainted  with  the  real  object
tc  of  Mafonry;  but  I  have  acquired  fome  information  on
"  that  fubjedf,  which  I  mean  to  make  ufe  of  in  my  plan,
<c  and  which  I  refetye  for  our  higher  degrees.^  Cat»
foon  fent  a  circurhftantial  account  to  his  mafter  of  the  ex-
planation that  had  been  communicated  to  him,  and  re-
ceived for  anfwer,  "  the  important  difcovery  you  have
*c  made  at  Nicodernia  (Augfbourg),  in  your  interview
*'  with  the  Abbé  Marotti,  gives  me  extreme  pleafure. — «
U  Profit  of  this  occafwnyand  get  ail  you  can  from  bim."%
In  reading  fuch  pafTages  of  their  mod  intimate  corres-
pondence, one  is  naturally  led  to  ail;  what  can  occafion
this  extreme  joy  in  the  two  moft  monftrous  confpirators
that  have  ever  appeared  on  earth,  at  the  mere  difcovery
of  the  myfteries  of  the  occult  Lodges  of  Mafonry,  and  of
thofe  even  of  the  Scotch  Lodges  ! — Has  Weifhaupt  then
been  anticipated  by  the  Mafons  in  the  explanation  he  had
given  of  their  fymbols,  and  which  he  has  actually  infert-
ed  in  his  myfteries  ?§  Could  there  have  pre-exifled  in  thefe
occult  Lodges  of  Mafonry  an  impiety  and  plots  ftrangely
preparatory  for  that  infidelity  and  thofe  plots  of  Cato  and
Spartacus  ?— The  confequence  is  frightful,  but  is  that  a
reaion  why  nations  fhould  be  blind  and  deny  the  tefti-
mony  of  truth;  are  we,  for  the  honor  of  Mafonry,  to  be
filent  on  the  hidden  fnares  laid  for  them,  and  which  will
continue  to  be  laid  not  only  for  them  but  for  all  nations
in  general. |J

Weil  fatisfied  with  the  difcovery  he  had  made,  Weir
I

*  See  Carfs  Journal,  Diarium  des  Cato,  Original  Writ?
jngs,  Vol.  I.

f  Ibid.  Letter  31,  2d  Dec.  1778.  »

%  Original  Writings,  Letter  of  the  6th  Jan.  1779.

§  See  Vol.  HI.  of  thefe  Memoirs,  Degree  ofEpopt.

H  Ibid.  Letter  31,


66  antisocial  conspiracy;

faaupt  begins  to  prefs  the  eftablifhment  of  a  Malêniç
Lodge  for  his  pupils  of  Munich.  He  immediately  order-
ed all  his  Areopagites  to  get  themfelves  made  Mafons;
he  hid  his  plansfor  fimilar  initiations  at  Aichftadt;  and  in
all  the  other  colonies  of  the  Order.*  Notwithftanding
all  his  effort's,  fuccefs  declared  but  ilovvly  in  his  favor. —
He  was  in  poïïefïion  of  the ',  fçcrets  of  the  Mafor.s,  but
they  were  not  initiated  in  his.— -The  Rohcrucians  faw
with  regret  another  fecret  fociety  rifing,  which  drew  it$
members  from  their  Lodges,  which  already  began  to
bring  their  meetings  into  difrepute^by  bragging  that  it  a-
•  was  in  pofTeflion  of  the  reai'fecrets-  of  Maionry.—
Notwithftanding  the  impiety  of  the  fecrets  of  the  Roii-
crucians,  and  though  their  iyftems  all  had  a  fimilar  ten-
dency with  refpecf.  to  the  annihilation  of  Chriffianity,  Hill
the  path  they  had  chofon  was  quite  different  from  that
_  which  Weifoaupt  had  adopted.  He  defpifed  all  the  non-
fenfe  of  their  Alcbymy;  above  all  he  detelted  their  The-
bfophy.  He  taughed  at  the  double  principle,  at  the  good
and  evil  genii,  and  at  all  thofe  daemons  on  which  the  Ro-
Çcmcian  rounds  his  Magic,  Cabal,  and  Myfieries  of  A-
BRACît  ïn  fbort,  notwithftanding  all  the  benefit  Wei-
ihaupt  expected  to  reap  from  thefe  myfteries,  fymbols  and
explanations  of  Mafonry,  he  treated  with  the  mofl  (ove-

*  Let  it  be  always  remembered,  that  we  continue  to  except
the  Mafons  who  only  acknowledge  the  firtl  three  degrees  ;
but  rvLN  these  ought  never  to  forget,  that  it  was  precisely
their  firjl  three  degrees  which  Jèrved  oj  a  cloak  to  toe  grand
init  ujlon  of  lit  uminifm.

■\  The  word  Abrac  is  derived  from  Abraxas,  which  is  only
a  let  of  Gietk  ittttis  pet  together  hy  Basimdk s,  a  famous
tfophifter  of  Alexandria,  and  an  herefiarch  of  the  fécond  cen-
tury, exprefiing  the  number  of  z^"  Intelligences  or  fpirits,
which  conflnuted  his  God.  St.  Jerome  fays,  that  Abraxas  was
the  fîcîitio'us  God  of  J3af tides,  expreifed  in  Greek  numerals,

*j.tiGo.r.66.i.«oo.  Bafijides  grounded  all  his  magic  on  the
number  of  his  genii;  and  hence  the  term  Science  of  Abrac  is
t:itd  lor  the  fcience  of  Magic  (  Vide  Hicronimus  adverfus  Lu-
y.v; — 'Auguftinm  liber  de  harejiis — Tèrtuliian  de  Bafilidc.)
—  Man  Es  adopted  many  of  his  errors  from  this  Bafilides,  and
paiticularly  bis  Eons  vac  his  magic.  Thefe  myf cries  of  Abrac
are  mentioned  in  the  Mafonic  manufcript;  of  Oxford,  which
v  s  teftîmbny  that  (orne  Brethren  were  as  much  addicted  to

thefe  viyjieria  of  Abrac  thiee  hundred  years  ago,  as  many  o*
our;r.c.d,in  ^.oiiciucians.


HISTORICAL  PART.  €y'

vtreign  contempt  every  thing  that  is  purely  cabaliftjc  fol-
ly and  reverie  in  the  Roficruiians.  He  adopted  all  their
means  of  impiety  and  laughed  at  their  fooleries,  It  was
the  contention  of  impiety,  fallen  on  the  one  fide  into  the'
mod:  abfurd  Atheifm,  and  on  the  other  into  the  moil  mi-
finable  fuperitition.  Hence  arofe  thofe  diUèntions  and jea-
îoufîes  mentioned  by  Czrtf-Zwack  when  tracing  the  pro-
gress of  Hiuminifrnj  and  it  was  for  a  long  time  doubtful
which  of  the  two  competitors  was  to  be  crowned  with
fuccefs.  During  the  conflict  we  fee  Weifhaupt  daily  in-
Venting  new  means  of  triumph;  but  he  was  undecided  as
to  the  ufe  he  mould  make  of  his  victory. — "  In  the  firib
**  place,  he  writes  to  Zwack,  "  I  mould  have  wifhed  to
**  lend  to  Lomion  for  a  çonftitution  for  our  Brethren  ;  and
M  I  mould  ittll  be  of  that  opinion  if  we  could  make  our-
"  felves  matters  of  the  Chapter  [the  Mafonic)  of  Munich.
**  You  will  do  well  to  try.  I  can  come  to  no  determination
c<  on  that  fubjec-fc  unr.il  I  have  feert  what  turn  our  affairs
•*  take.  Perhaps  Î  mall  only  adopt  a  reform;  or  if  maybe
"  becter  to  create  a  new  fyftem  of  Mafonry  for  Ourfi  Lves  ;
K  or,  may  it  not  be  tho't  convenient  to  incorporate  Mà-
"  i'onry  into  our  Order,  and  thus  to  make  but  one  body
K  of  them  both.  Time  alone  can  decide  this."*

To  relieve  the  founder  from  this  ftate  of  indecifion,  it
was  necefTary  that  he  fhould  become  acquainted  with  a
man  who  laid  lefs  ftrefs  on  difficulties,  and  who  knew  how  £.~a
to  cut  them  mort.  The  demon  who  wields  the  fiery  fword  Km£8e»
of  revolutions  throws  a  Hanoverian  Baron  in  his  way,  of
the  name  of  Knigge.  At  this  name  every  honeft  Ger-
man Mafon  will  liart  back,  as  at  the  man  who  corrupted
rUentht  fraternal  bagatelles  of  they?  -y?  degrees  of  Mafonry,
and  confummated  the  depravity  of  their  impious  Roflcru-
cians.  The  honeft  Brethren,  in  their  indignation,  would;
al molt  forget  Weifhaupt  to  overpower  Knigge  with  the
whole  weight  of  their  hatred;  and  to  heap  on  him  alone
all  the  opprobrium  of  the  Lodges  now  become  the  great
feminaries  of  Illuminifm.  The  truth  obliges  us  to  fay,
that  PAiVo-Kniggc  was  no  other  than  the  worthy  tool  of
Spartacus- Weifhaupt  in  this  grand  intrufjon.  That  which
was  executed  by  the  one  had  long  fince  been  conceived
by  the  other;  and,  in  all  probability,  had  it  not  |
the  profound  combinations  of  the  one,  the  wicked  aclivi*

*  Original  Wiitings,  Letter  57  to  Cafe,  March  178a.


65  antisocial  conspiracy;

ty  of  the  other  would  have  proved  fruitlefs  in  its  attempt^
-—Unfortunately  in  the  re  union  of  their  baneful  talents
were  to  be  found  all  the  requifites  for  the  moft  confum-
mate  confpirators;  in  the  one,  for  the  directing  of  the
moft  difaftrous  of  all  Se&s;  in  the  other,  for  the  propaga-
tion of  its  myfteries  and  the  recruiting  of  its  confpiring
bands.

Weifliaupt,  like  Satan,  profoundly  meditated  the  de-
ftrudtion  of  mankind,  while  Knigge  may  be  compared  to
thofe  Genii  winged  like  the  plague,  ever  hovering  and  im-
patient to  receive  the  Orders  of  the  King  of  Hell  to  bend
their  courfe  wherever  he  will  point  out  evil  to  be  done.
Weifliaupt  proceeds  flowly  in  his  combinations,  weighs
his  refources,  compares  the  different  effays,  and,  left  he
fhould  miftake,  defers  and  fufpends  his  choice.  Knigge*
in  his  levity,  has  fooner  acted  than  deliberated;  he  fees
where  evil  can  be  done;  he  does  it,  and  is  ready  to  found
a  retreat,  fhould  his  hVft  attempts  fail  of  fuccefs.  The
one  forefees  the  cbftacles  he  may  have  to  encounter,  and
ieeks  to  evade  them;  the  other  proceeds  boldly  in  fpite
of  all,  and  looks  on  the  time  fpent  in  reflection  as  fo  much
loft  from  the  execution.  The  former  is  aware  of  every
fault  that  can  impede  his  progrefs;  the  latter  proceeds
heedlefs  of  the  falfe  fteps  he  may  have  taken.

Enco m paifed  with  darknefs,  how  great  would  have
been  the  happinefs  of  Weifliaupt  could  he  but  have  been
gratified  with  a  fight  of  the  world  in  ruins,  and  that  with-c
out  being  himfelf  ùcn  !    The  confeioufnefs  of  his  crimes
would  have  been  to  him  that  grateful  fenfation  which  vir-
tue raifes  in  the  honeft  heart.    The  power  of  doing  harm
is  more  dear  to  him,  than  a  celebrity  which   might  have
proved  fatal  to  toe  execution  of  his  plots.  Knigge,  on  the
contrary,  Aiows  himfelf  every  where,  meddles  with  every
-    thing;  his  utmoft  ambition  was  to  appear  to  have  been
the  agent  m  whatever  was  done.    Both  are  impious,  and
both  have  iworn  the  overthrow  of  the  laws;  but  Wei-
'.  pt  from  the  very  beginning  had  laid  down  his  prin-
ciples; he  had  followed  them  through  all   their  confe-
rences; his  revolution  is  to  be  the  accompliftiment  of
them  all;  and  he  will  think  his  attempt  fruitlefs,  fhould
a  'ingle  law,  fecial  or  religious,  efcape  the  general  wreck.
With  Knigge,  both  his  impiety  and  his  plans  of  rebel-
lion have  had  their  gradual   progreflion:  he  fucceflively
attended  ail  the  public  and  occult  fchools  of  the  Intideli*


Historical  part.  69

fy  of  the  ?.£c.  He  can  vary  his  means  and  adapt  himfelf
to  the  different  characters  he  has  to  deal  with.  He  alfo
wifhes  for  a  revolution,  but  he  will  not  lofe  the  occafion
of  one  that  offers ,  in  hopes  of  that  particular  one  which
he  wifhes  to  operate.  Where  he  cannot  form  an  Atheift,
he  will  form  a  Deift  or  a  Sceptic;  as  circumftances  may
require,  he  will  aét  the  part  of  any  fpecies  of  Sophifter,  or
engage  in  any  degree  of  rebellion,  Weifhaupt  wifhes  to
involve  in  univerfal  ruin,  religion,  magitrrates,  fociety,
and  property,  that  he  may  inftal  his  nomade  clans,  his
Men  KingS)  and  his  Equality  and  Liberty.  Knigge  is
content  to  deftroy  lefs,  provided  he  defpotically  fways  o-
ver  all  that  has  efcaped  deftrucStion.  In  the  filent  foades
of  his  retreat,  the  one  has  more  accurately  ftudied  the
nature  of  man,  and  has  laid  his  plans  for  new-modelling
human  nature  according  to  his  views,  The  other  is  bet-
ter acquainted  with  them  from  his  habit  of  intrigue,  and
is  eafier  pleafed  with  the  afcendancy  he  can  require  over
them.  In  fhort,  the  former  may  be  faid  to  prepare  his
poifons  with  more  art,  while  the  latter  retails  them  bet-
ter; and  between  them  they  wield  the  mighty  power  ©f
delrruclion.

When  the  common  enemy  of  human  nature  brought
thefe  two  fiends  of  rebellion  in  contact  with  each  others
they  had  already  acquired  ail  thofe  habits  and  means  which
muff,  render  their  union  fatal  to  mankind.  The  Hanove-
rian Baron  had  been  caft  upon  the  earth  nearly  at  the
"fame  time  that  the  Bavarian  monfcer  had  been  engender-
ed. His  whole  life  appears  to  have  been  but  one  continu-
ed preparation  for  the  part  he  was  to  acf  in  fécond  ing
Weifhaupt,  and  particularly  to  open  the  gates  of  the
Lodges  from  the  North  to  the  South,  and  from  the  Eafi
to  the  weft,  to  receive  the  founder  of  Iliuminifm,  and  de-
liver over  to  him  all  thofe  adepts  who,  trained  by  the
higher  myfteries  of  Mafonry,  had  long  fmce  been  pre-
pared to  receive  thofe  of  the  modern  Spartacm,

Knigge  informs  us,  that  from  his  youth  he  had  always
had  an  invincible  propenfity  towards  fecret  focieties  ;  and
that  while  a  boy  he  had  founded  one  of  thofe  little  focie-
ties fo  common  in  the  Proteftant  Univeiûties,  and  of
which  we  have  before  fpoken.  He  had  acquired  this  turn
from  his  father,  whom  he  had  obferved  fpending  his  time
in  the  ftudy  of  the  Mafonic  Myfteries,  and  his  money  in
the  vain  purfuit  of  the  Philofop'her's  Stone.    The  father's


fO  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

gold  had  vaniflied  in  the  crucible,  and  the  fon  reaped
nothing  but  the  drofs.  No  fooner  had  he  attained  the
neceffary  age,  than  he  got  himfelf  made  a  Freemafon  in
one  of  thoïe  Lodges  called  of  the  Striai  Observance.  He
rofe  to  the  degree  of  Terr.plar,  that  is  to  fay,  of  thofeMa-
fon'S  Who,  ftill  flattering  themfelves  with  the  hopes  of  re-
covering the  polTeiuons  of  that  once  celebrated  Order,
diihibute  in  the  mean  time  the  different  titles  formerly
borne  by  thofe  Knights.  Knigge  became  one  of  thefe
Brother  Commanders  under  the  title  of  Eques  a  Cygno
{Knight  of  the  Sivan).  Contrary  to  his  expectations,
lie  found  this  to  be  but  an  empty  title  without  any  emo-
lument. Wiming  to  make  up  for  this  deficiency,  and
ftili  more  actuated  with  the  defire  of  acquiring  that  im-
portance in  the  Lodges  at  leafr,  which  he  could  not  ac-
quire elfewhere,  he  made  himfelf  the  difcrple  of  the  fa-
mous Mountebank  Schroeder  at  Marbourg.  When
in  company  with  this  Schroeder,  or  the  Caglioftro  of  Ger-
many, What  man,  as  he  fays  himfelf.  Would  not  have
b'eeft  fired  with  zeal  for  Theofophy,  Magic,  and  Alchymy  ?
Thefe  were  the  myiteries  of  the  Mafons  of  the  Stricl  Ob-

fervance.  Violent,  faniajlical^  and  rejllefs^  as  he  defcribes
himfelf,  he  at  the  age  of  five  and  twenty  was  a  firm  be-
liever in  all  thefe  myferies  -,  he  even  practifed  all  the
evocations  of  spirits,  and  other  follies  of  ancient  and
modern  Cabal.  Soon  he  began  to  doubt  whether  he  real-
ly bètieved  or  ought  to  believe  in  all  this  fluff.  He  flat-
tered himfelf  with  the  hopes  that,  in  the  midfr.  of  thefe
enchantments  and  magic  fpells,ffo  chaos  of  his  ideas  would

fiibftde.  To  gain  knowledge,  and  put  his  mind  at  eale,
he  would  willingly  have  gained  admiffion  iiito  every  Ma-
fonic  Lodge,  tie  foutnd  means  of  getting  admitted  into
the  higher  degrees,  procured  the  rerejl  and  mofl  fiiyfteri-*
vies manufcripts-y  and  even  ftudied  all  their  different  Se&s.*
Then,  as  if  he  wifhed  to  convert  himfelf  into  a  vaft  em-
porium of  every  error,  he  applied  to  the  doctrines  of  the
modern  Sophifters,  and  thus  plied  hi?  unfortunate  brain
on  the  one  fide  with  all  the  delirious  conceits  of  Cabaliftic
Maforiry,  and  on  the  other  with  the  impious  doctrines  of
the  felf-'creal  fophers.     His  attempts  at  fortune

rfiiar  to  thofe  h  de  for  the  acquiurion  of

nor  was  he  more  fuc'cefsful. — 'A  courtier  without

ee  his  Lafb  Obfenv.'ionSj  P,  24.


HISTORICAL  PART*  "J  I

favor,  he  dcferts  his  Piince  to  take  the  direction  of  a  Play-
houle  ;  thence  he  accepts  a  commiiuion  in  the  fervice  of
the  Prince  of  Hefl'e  Çaflêl  ;  but  is-foon  difmifTed,  in  con-
fequence  of  the  violence  and  refllcfineis  of  his  temper. — ■
He  then  turns  author,  and  writes  violent  declamations
againfr.  the  Roman  Catholics;  then,  in  confequence  of
fame  hope  of  preferment  (I  know  not  what),  he  makes
a  public  profeffion  of  their  faith;  but,  not  fucceeding  as-
he  hoped,  he  deierts  them,  abufes  them  more  icurriloufly
than  ever,  takes  part  with  the  Proteftants,  but  writes  in
favor  of  Deifm.*  Such  had  been  the  reftlefs  education
of  the  man  who  was  to  prove  the  moft  worthy  fupporter
and  the  moil  active  co-operator  that  Weiihaupt  yet  had
found.

By  a  ftrange  coincidence,  juft  at  the  very  time  that
thefe  Cçnfpi  razors  met,  Knigge  had  been  projecting  a
conqueft  of  Mafonry,  and  had  formed  luch  pleins  for  an
yniverial  confpiracy,  that  he  fcarcely  leaves  the  honor  of
invention  to  Weiihaupt,  The  account  given  by  Knigge
will  bell  explain  this  coincidence.

It  was  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1780  ;  and  a  general
aiTembly  of  Mafons  had  been  convoked  at  Willemfbaden
for  the  next  year,  under  the  protection  of  the  Duke  of
Erunfwick  and  of  the  Landgrave  of  Helîe  Caflel.  uOn
"  the  news  of  this,"  fays  -P/^/Zj-Knigge,  "  I  caft  an  eye
«  on  the  iinmenfe  multitude  of  brethren  :  I  obferved  it  to
«.  be  compofed  of  men  of  aii  itations  in  life,  of  noblemen,
ft  of  men  of  great  riches,  of  great  power,  and  ajfoofBre-
"  thren  pouefTuig  great  knowledge  and  activity,  I  faw
u  thefe  men  all  actuated  by  one  common  fer.timent,  tho*
"  I  could  not  very  well  conceive  the  object  of  their  union.
"  I  faw  them  all  bound  by  an  oath  of  the  moft  profound
"  fecrecy,  without  being  able  to  form  any  better  idea  as
tc  to  the  object  of  it.  I  beheld  them  divided  in  their  opi-
"  nions,  nor  could  I  comprehend  on  which  fide  the  error
<c  lay  ;  ftill  lefs  could  1  furmife  what  had  been  the  grand
**  obftacle  that  had  impeded  the  advantages  which  man-
"  kind  had  reafon  to  expect  from  Freemafbnry. — Never-
*c  thelefs  how  great  would  thefe  advantages  have  been,  if
"  diftinguifhing  actions  from  (peculations,  opinions  had
f*  been  left  t©  each  individual,  while  a  regular  fyftem  of
«;  conduct  was  followed,  perpetually  tending  towards  the

*  See  his  Lafl  Obfervations,  P.  z;*


73  antisocial  conspiracy;

**  advantage  of  humanity  in  general,  and  of  the  Brethren
"  in  particular  /  Had  they  agreed  on  a  iyftem  of  laws
<{  for  the  mutual  and  general  fupport  of  each  other;  ta
*'  raife  deprefTed  or  obfcure  merit  ;  to  fécond  with  all  the
«  power  and  influence  of  Mafonry  all  plans  for  general
"  utility;  'to  favor  the  advancement  of  the  Brethren;  to
"  meafure  out  the  different  employments  in  the  State  t9

*  the  B)  ethren,  according  to  their  capacities,  and  in  pro-
11  portion  as  they  foould  have  profited  of  the  advantages
tc  to  be  reaped  from  secret  societies  in  the  arts  of
"  knowing  men  and  of  governing  them   without    con-
Kftraint'/'*

"  Meditating  and  mufing  on  thefe  ideas,"  continues
«  Knigge,  «  I  had  refolved  on  all  my  plans  of  reform,
«  and  had  fent  them  to  Willemfbaden.  I  received  polite
«  anfwers  ;  they  promifed  to  take  my  work  into  confide-
«  ration  at  the  general  meeting,  that  was  about  to  be  held.
«  But  I  foon  had  reafon  to  believe,  that  the  benevolent
«  and  difinterefted  views  of  the  illultrious  chiefs  and  pro-
fs teétors  of  Mafonry  would  be  but  very  ill  feconded  ;  that
«  partial  views  and  difcordant  interelrs  would  play  off
«  every  artifice  to  make  the  fyftems  of  particular  Sects
«  predominate;  and  I  forefaw  how  difficult  it  would  be
«  to  make  one  cap  fit  fo  many  heads.  Meanwhile  I  com-
«  municated  my  plans  to  different  Mafons,  and  repeated-
«  ly  exprefTed  my  fears;  when,  in  July  1780, 1  made  ac-
«  quaintance  with  Diomcdes  (the  Marquis  of  Conftan-
«  za)  in  a  Lodge  at  Frankfort  on  the  Mein,  who  had
«  been  fent  from  Bavaria  by  the  Illuminées  to  eftablifh
«  new  Colonies  in  the  Protefïant  States.  I  informed  him
w  of  my  views  with  refpect  to  a  general  reform  of  Free-
«  mafonry;  and  that,  perfectly  convinced  of  the  inutility
«  of  the  meeting  at  Willemfbaden  I  had  refolved  to  work
«  at  the  eftablilhment  of  my  fyftem  feconded  by  a  few
«  Mafons  my  particular  friends,  and  who  were  fpread

*  throughout  Germany.  After  having  heard  me  explain
"  my  intentions,  why,"  faid  he,  "  fhould  you  give  your-
"  felf  the  trouble  to  found  a  new  fociety,  when  there  al-
«  ready  exifts  one  which  has  undertaken  all  that  you  wifh
«  to  do,  which  can  in  every  way  gratify  your  thirft  for
K  knowledge,  and  open  a  wide  field  for  your  activity  and;
**  defire  of  being  ufeful;  a  fociety,  in  fhort,  which  is  \s\

•  See  his  Laft  Obfervations,  P.  %l.


HISTORICAL  PART.  73

*f  poûeflion  of  all  the  fciences  and  all  the  authority  neces-
*}  farw  for  the  accomplimmetit  of  yourpbjecV*

The  Marquis  was  correct;  for  there  exifled  a  moft
finking  coincidence  between  the  plots  of  his  mafter  an4
thofe  propofed  by  Knigge  to  raife  deprefled  or  obfcure
merit,  and  fuccor  fufFering  virtue;  to  teach  the  adepts
the  art  of  knowing  men;  to  conduce  mankind  to  happi-
nefs,  and  to  govern  t'neni  without  their  perceiving  it.—
Like  Knigge,  Weifhaupt  alfo  had  invented  that  invi-
fible  concatenation  which,  proceeding  from  the  tene-
brous meeting  of  his  lurking  fenate,  was  to  extend  its
ramifications  over  every  clafs  of  citizens,  and,  dictating
Jaws  from  thefe  dark  recefTes,  the  Brotherhood  was  to
leave  no  art  untried  to  caufe  them  to  be  promulgated  by
the  councils  of  the  Prince. -J-  Thus  far  the  two  Arch-
confpirators  follow  the  fame  pian;  but  the  truth  is,  that
Weimaupt  only  leeks  power  to  deftrov,  and  gives  laws
but  to  annihilate  every  law;  while  Pbiio-K>n\gge  will
look  upon  nations  as  fufiiciently  free,  provided  he  can  but
fubject  their  magiftrates  and  rulers  to  the  decrees  of  the
Mafonic  Lodges  ;  though  the  Liberty,  therefore,  fought
by  the  one  be  the  death  of  fociety,  that  of  the  other  will
be  its  eternal  fhame.  Two  fuch  men  could  not  long  re-
main feparate;  pride  may  give  rife  to  temporary  difagree-
ments:  but  they  will  co-operate  fufiiciently  for  the  mife-
ry  of  mankind.

Knigge  could  fcarcely  exprefs  the  joy  and  aftoniih-»
ment  with  which  he  learned  that  the  plans  he  had  con-»
ceived  were  already  executing.  He  threw  himfelf  into
the  arms  of  the  Iliuminizing  Apoitle,  and  immediately
received  the  degrees  of  Candidate,  of  Novice,  and  was
even  admitted  into  the  Adinerval  Academy.  Wei-
fhaupt foon  felt  the  importance  of  fuch  an  acquisition,
though  in  P»evolutionary  Impiety  he  found  Knigge  even
more  advanced  than  he  wifhed.  This  latter  immediately
fet  to  work  for  the  Illuminées  with  as  much  zeal  as  if  he
had  been  prolecuting  his  own  plan,  and  took  upon  him-
Jèlf  the  million  on  which  Diomcdes  had  been  fent.  Ne-
ver had  Illuminifin  beheld  fo  a&ive  and  fo  infinuating  3
K

*  Sea  his  Lafl  Gbfemtiocs,  P.  35.

f  Original  Writings,  firft  Statutes  of  the  lKurr.inee,  ar,4
lolr,ru<5tioii3  for  the  Regent.


74  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Recruiter.  The  lift  of  Novices  and  Brethren  was  fwoî-
len  with  amazing  ^rapidity,  nor  did  he,  like  Weifhaupt,
merely  enlift  youths  coming  from  the  College,  but  men
who  had  attained  the  age  of  maturity,  and  whofe  impiety
was  already  known  to  him. — He  more  particularly  fe-
ii-Cted  thofe  whom  m  the  Lodges  he  hadobferved  to  have
a  greater  propenfity  for  the  Occult  Myfteries.

Weifhaupt  in  his  firft  furprize  couid  not  help  admir-
ing h.s  new  Apoftle;  and  thus  extols  him  to  his  Areopa-
gites:  "  Phils-Knifrge  alone  does  more  than  all  of  you
li  put  together  could  even  hope  to  do.  .  .  .  Pbilo  is  the
"  mafter  from  whom  you  all  fhould  take  leflbns.  .  .  .
"  Give  me  only  fix  fuch  men,  and  I  will  engage  to  change
"  the  whole  ïàcc  of  the  univerfe.'r*  The  grand  point
which  gave  Weifhaupt  fo  much  pleafurewas  the  difcove-
fy  of that  generation  of  men  who  were  already  prepared
for  his  plots,  and  which  in  part  difpenfed  with  the  labo-
rious education  he  had  found  necefiary  for  the  preparation
or  youth  ;  and  indeed  we  foon  after  fee  him  inftru£ting
his  recruiters  to  fbliow  Knipge's  method  of  proceeding. f
Nor  was  he  Ids  pleafed  to  fee  the  Sect,  daily  gaining
ground,  and  that  without  any  violence,  in  thofe  very
Ledges  which  he  wifhed  ih  much  to  reduce  under  hi9
fût  jection.  This  rapid  fuccefs,  however,  gave  rife  to
difficulties  which  mud  have  difgufted  any  other  man;  but
Knigge  was  exaétly  the  perfon  to  remedy  them.

Tricked  by  the  Apoftolic  Marquis,  as  the  latter  had

been  before  by  Weifhaupt,  with  regard  to  the  antiquity,

omnifcience,  and  power  of  Ilkmlnifm,  Knigge  had  only

been  admitted  as  yet  to  the  preparatory  degrees  ;  nor  had

he  the  leaft  fufpicion  that  the  remaining  degrees  had  no

exiftènee  but  in  the  brain  or  portfolio  of  the  modern

Sfiariacus.     He  expected  grand  myiteries;  he  afked  for

them,  both  in  his  own  name  and  in  the  name  of  the  Old

ee.ns  who  were  not  to  be  treated  like  boys  from  the

college  in  their  Minerval  Academy. — Weifhaupt  had

>Urfe  to  all  thofe  fubterfuges  by  which  he  had  hereto-

iucceeded  in  keeping  his  pupils  in  fufpenfe  with  res-

t   to  the  higher  myfteries  ;  and  the  more  he  extolled

them  by  afking  for  new  trials  the  more  preffing  Knigge

i  iginai  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Let.  56,  and  Lafl  Cbfervations>

r.  49-

t  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  7.


HISTORICAL  PART.  M.

became,  who  told  him  that  fuch  trials  might  be  ncceffary
in  the  Catholic  countries,  but  were  by  no  means  jo  in  the
Proteftant  ones,  where  the  fpirit  of  Philofophy  had  made
a  much  greater  progrefs.* — Weifhaupt  continued  to  fnift
his  ground,  and  Knigge  became  more  prelnng  in  his  de-
mands.— The  old  Mafons,  famous  for  deciphering  the
hieroglyphics,  afked  for  fome  which  might  anfwer  to  the
enthufiafm  with  which  he  had  infpired  them.  They
threw  out  hints  of  abandoning  him  as  an  impoftor  who
had  deluded  them  with  idle  promifes,  unlefs  he  kept  his
word  with  them;  and  Illuminifm  mull  have  been  irrepa-
bly  undone  had  fo  many  Brethren  abandoned  him  under
that  perfuafion.  Thefe  perpetual  folicitations  at  length
forced  Weifhaupt's  fecret  from  him:  u  His  letters  (fays
*<  Knigge)  at  length  informed  me,  that  this  Order,  pro-
«  feiTedly  fo  ancient,  had  no  other  exiftence  than  in  his
M  own  head,  and  in  the  preparatory  claj/ès  he  had  efta-
<«  blifhed  in  the  Catholic  countries;  but  that  he  had  a
«  large  quantity  of  excellent  materials  for  the  higher  de-
"  grees.  In  making  this  avowal  he  begged  me  to  pardon
<c  his  little  finefle;  for  (faid  he)  I  have  fought  in  vain  af-
"  ter  worthy  co-operators  ;  no  perfon  has  ever  entered  fo
<c  deeply  into  my  views  as  you  have  ;  nor  has  any  perlon
"  feconded  me  with  fo  much  activity.  He  told  me,  that
"  I  was  a  man  fent  from  Heaven  to  fécond  him  in  his
K  undertaking;  that  he  threw  himfelf  upon  my  honor,
"  and  was  willing  to  give  me  up  all  his  papers;  and  that
"  in  future,  not  looking  upon  himfelf  as  my  fuperior,  he
*c  would  be  content  to  work  under  my  direction  ;  that  the
*c  Brethren  were  expecting  me  in  Bavaria,  where  ail  the
tc  necefiary  fieps  could  be  agreed  upon,  and  that  they  yyere
€i  ready  to  pay  my  expenfes  there."  f

Had  Weifhaupt  thought  Knigge  to  be  a  man  lefs  to
be  depended  upon,  this  would  have  been  the  only  error
we  ihould  have  feen  this  confpiring  genius  fall  into.  He
muft  have  been  the  only  man  on  earth  who  could  have
looked  upon  his  higher  degrees  and  means  of  leduetion  as
incomplete.  The  myfteries  and  the  difcourfe  for  the  de
gree  of  Epopt  were  finifhed  ;  all  that  has  been  laid  before
the  reader  on  this  degree  was  already  compofed  ;  J  Knigge

*  Laft  Obfervations  of  Phih,  from  P.  35  to  15.
T  Lall  Obfervations  of  Philo,  from  P.  35  to  55.
I  See  the  original  of  this  difcourie  in  ih*.  Original  vViiungs,
Vol.  H,  Part  II.


7$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

inay  have  ornamented  the  impiety  and  diforganizing  prin  ï
ciples;  but  neither  Knigge  nor  all  the  powers  of  hell
could  have  added  to  them.  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  the
means  of  feduction.  All  the  cunning  of  the  Infinuatort
and  directing  Illuminées  is  to  be  found  either  in  his  firft
degrees,  or  in  the  inflruclion  for  the  Provincials;  his  ir*
rcfolution  can  only  be  attributed  to  the  immenfity  of  his
powers  for  fedaciion  which  no  other  perfon  but  himfelf
could  conceive.  Hence  he  was  led  to  fuppofe  that  what
he  had  done  was  incomplete,  becaufe  he  thought  he  could
do  it  ft  ill  better.  In  a  word,  had  he  fent  his  code  a.6  it  was,
Knigge  would  have  profited  of  what  had  been  completed,
and  would  never  even  have  furmifed  that  he  could  have
perfected  it.  Elated  to  a  great  degree  at  the  idea  of  ex-
tricating from  a  difficulty  a  man  whofe  plots  and  fyftems
fo  perfectly  coincided  with  his  own,  he  haftened  to  his
fuccor.  He  had  focn  run  over  all  the  papers  that  Wei-
fhaupt en  trufted  him  with}  made  his  appearance  at  thé
Council  of  the  Areopagites  ;  and  in  a  few  days  got  thé
better  of  ail  their  irrelolution  with  refpect  to  the  divifiori
of  clafTes  and  degrees,  and  of  the  higher  and  lower  mys-
teries. The  chief  point,  and  which  in  thefe  circumftan-
ces  required  an  immediate  decifion,  was  to  know  what
rank  fhould  be  given  to  the  Freematbns  in  the  Order,  as
a  mode  of  facilitating  the  general  intrufion  into  the  Lodg-
es. Knigge  had  already  proved  that  they  might  entirely
rely  on  him  as  to  the  number  of  Mafonic  brethren  to  bé
gr.ined  over  to  Illunn'nifm  ;  his  vote  carried  the  point,
pnd  the  Intermediary  Glafs  of  Mafonvy  was  irrevocably
determined.

About  this  time  the  Deputies  of  the  Lodges  flocked
from  ail  parts  to  WilLemfbaden.  It  was  an  object  of  great
importance  for  Weifhaupt  and  his  Council,  that  no  fteps
inimical  to  their  views  on  Mafonry  fhould  be  taken  at
that  afîèrnbiy. — To  obtain  an  acc«unt  of  all  their  pro-
ceedings, Philo  had  taken  care  to  have  Minos  named  a
deputy.  As  to  himfelf,  he  preferred  being  in  the  neigh-
borhood of  the  congrefs,  there  to  watch  its  motions,  and
only  to  aft  by  his  agents.  He  had  received  full  powers
from  Weifhaupt  and  the  Council  of  Areopagites  to  take
fuch  fteps  as  circumftances  might  require.

The  article  which  required  the  greuteft  expedition  waSj
to  complete  the  higher  parts  of  the  code,  and  to  decide  on
*what  degrees  were  to  be  given  to  the  Mafons,  who  were


Historical  part.  77

too  far  advanced  inthemyfteries  to  befubjected  to  the  tri-
als of  the  Minerval  School  ;  and  Knigge  had  fpeedily  exe-
cuted this  firft  part  of  his  miffion.  His  a&ive  pen  had  foon
made  choice  of  its  materials  from  Weifhaupt's  portfolio.
According  to  his  agreement  with  the  Areopagites,  he  left
all  the  preparatory  degrees,  fuch  as  Novice-,  Minerval^
and  Minor  Illuminée,  which  had  already  been  conferred
on  feveral  of  the  adepts,  in  their  primitive  ftate.  It  had
alio  been  agreed,  that  the  firjl  three  degrees  of  Mafonry
( now  become  thje  intermediary  degrees  of  Illuminifm)
ihouid  not  be  touched.  He  united  the  Major  Illuminée
to  the  Scotch  degrees.  In  the  degree  of  Epopi  and  Re-
gent, he  condenfed  every  feditious  and  impious  principle,
as  well  as  every  article  that  he  could  find  in  Weiniaupt's
works  j  and  hence  arofe  that  aftonilhing  code  already
inveitigated  in  the  foregoing  volume.

It  was  not  long  before  Weiihaupt  again  gave  way  to
his  irrefolution;  for  he  was  always  inventing  fame  new
art  of  feduchon  ;  but  while  he  was  deliberating  Knigga
was  acting.  The  fuccefs  of  the  fécond  part  o.f  his  miffion,
or  his  views  on  the  Mafons  of  Wiilemfbaden,  entirely
depending  on  the  final  determination  of  the  myfteries  for
the  degrees  of  Epopt  and  Regent,  Weifbaupt  was  prefs-
èd  once  more,  and,  approving  the  whole,  he  ftgned  and
fealed  them  zvith  the  grand  féal  of  the  Order.

Knigge  now  had  only  to  attend  to  his  miffion  at  Wii-
lemfbaden. We  fhall  foon  follow  him  to  that  Congrcfs  of
Mafonry;  but  we  mud  firit  explain  to  our  readers  of
what  fpecies  of  men  this  grand  aftembly  was  compofed  }
and  what  the  great  agents  were,  that  had  already  prepa-
red the  fuccefs  and  enfured  the  triumph  of  the  new  mys-
teries over  thofe  of  Freemafonry.*

*  For  the  whole  of  this  chapter,  fee  the  Laft  Obfervations
of  Pkib,  from  P.  $$  to  123  ;  alfo  his  firft  Letter  to  Cato,  Ori-
ginal Writicgs,  Vol.  11. and  his  convention  with  the  Areopa-
gites, Ibid.


78  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;


CHAP.  I\T.


Congrefs  of  the  Frcemafons  at  Willemfladcn — Of  their
divers  SeSfs,  and  particularly  sj that  of  the  Theofphi-
phical  Illuminées.

IT  was  by  no  means  the  deputies  of  an  infignifkanC
fociety  that  were  flocking  from  all  parts  of  the  uni-
verfe  to  Willemfbaden.  At  that  period,  many  mafons
conceived  their  numbeis  to  amount  to  three  militons  of
brethren  ;  and  the  Lodge  de  la  Candeur  at  Pans,  in  its
Circular  Letter  oj the  $ifl  May,  1782,  fuppofes  that
France  alone  contained  one  7nillion.  Doclor  Stark  (one
of  the  mort  learned  writers  of  the  Order)  in  his  work  on
the  ancient  and  modern  myfteries,  pofitively  fays,  that  at
the  loweft  computation  the  number  of mafons  at  that  time
7nv.fl  have  amounted  to  one  million.*  Let  the  hiitorian
abide  by  this  eftimate,  let  him  be  ever  fo  partial,  yet  at
the  fight  of  thefe  deputies  fent  by  a  Secret  Society  com-
peted of  at  ieaft  a  million  of  adepts,  all  flocking  to  their
myfterious  congrefs,  what  ferious  reflections  muft  arife,
and  how  important  the  confederation  both  to  nations  and
their  rulers  !

"What  inconceivable  motive  is  it  then  that  draws  forth,
thefe  agents  and  deputies  from  all  parts  of  the  globe,  from
Europe,  Afia,  Africa,  and  America,  agents  of  men  ail
bound  by  the  oath  of"  fecrecy,  both  as  to  the  nature  of  their
aflbciation  and  the  object  of  their  myfteries  ?  What  in-
tentions can  actuate,  what  plans  are  brought  by  thefe  de-
puties of  fo  formidable  an  aflbciation  fecretly  fpreading
its  ramifications  around  us,  throughout  town  and  coun-
try, creeping  into  our  habitations,  and  encompailing  em-
pires? What  do  they  meditate,  what  are  they  going
to  combine  either  for  or  again/t  nations  ?  If  they  thus
convene  for  the  general  good  of  humanity,  and  the  wel-
fare of  nations,  whence  do  they  derive  their  right  of  deli-
berating on  our  religion,  morals,  or  governments  ?  Who
haï  entrufted  them  with  our  interefts  ?  Who  has  fubject-

*  Chap.  re.


HISTORICAL  PART.  ?9

ed  the  world  to  their  decrees  and  their  pretended  wifdom  ?
Who  has  told  them  that  we  wiSh  to  act,  to  think,  or  to  be
governed  according  to  their  decifions  and  fubterraneous
nations;  or  in  their  language  according  to  their
indujhious  and  jeer  et  influence.

Should  their  plans  be  conspiracies,  arifing  in  a  wiSh  to
change  the  nature  of  our  worfhip  and  of  our  laws,  infi-
dious  Brethren,  perfidious  citizens,  by  what  right  do  you
pretend  to  live  among  us  as  children  of  the  fame  fociety,
or  fubject  to  the  fame  magistrates  ?

But  fiiould  it  neither  be  for  nor  againSt  nations,  mould
their  or.ly  object  be  to  draw  more  clofe  the  bonds  of  their
fraternity,  to  propagate  their  benevolence,  and  their  gene-
ral love  of  mankind,  then  will  I  anfwer,  Amufe  the  popu-
lace with  fuch  bubbles,  ad  Pcpnlum  Pbaleras  !  What!
you  that  live  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames  or  of  the  Ta-
gus,  in  the  plains  watered  by  the  Tiber  or  Viftula,  are  you
to  emigrate  to  the  Rhine  or  to  the  Elbe,  there  in  the  dark
abodes  oflVlafonry  to  coalefce  and  deliberate  with  men
whom  you  have  never  before  (cen  nor  will  ever  meet
again  ?  There  is  great  occafion  for  you  to  go  there  to
learn  how  to  love  and  fuccor  thofe  with  whom  you  daily
cohabit  !  The  Englishman,  the  Ruffian,  or  the  Ameri-
canos to  go  and  bury  himfelf  in  a  German  Lodge  to
learn  how  to  be  charitable  at  home  ! — The  voice  of  na-
ture and  of  the  Gofpel  then  is  only  to  be  heard  within
the  Secret  recefles  of  Mafonry?  Or  are  we  to  be  told,
that  men  have  braved  the  dangers  of  the  Ocean  and  crofs-
ed  whole  empires  to  affift  at  a  fraternal  banquet,  there  to
drink  a  toaft  given  in  a  zig-zag  or  afquare;  or  perhaps
to  chant  fome  hymns  facred  to  innocent  Equality;  and
that  for  thefe  harmlefs  amufements  they  Should  have  cho-
f'-n  a  den  only  worthy  of  the  deepeSt  confpirators  !  Let
them  find  other  pretences,  or  not  wonder  of  being  fufpeel-
ed  of  confpiring.  Such  language  every  citizen,  every
magistrate,  every  fovereign,  was  entitled  to  hold  to  thefe
deputies  flocking  to  WillemSbadcn.  Happy  would  it
have  been  for  Mafonry  had  fuch  language  been  held  ;  for
it, might  have  faved  the  Brethren  the  eternal  Shame  of  hav-
ing become  the  vile  instruments  and  accomplices  of  Wei-
ihaupt.

Had  any  religious  body,  had  even  the  BiShops  of  the
church,  held  a  general  meeting,  the  civil  power,  without
doubt,  would  have  ufed  its  right  of  fending  its  commiila--


Bo


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;


General
ftate  of
Freema-
fonry
when  the
Meeting
at  Wil-
lerr,  fta-
êft\  took
place.


rfes  to  fuch  a  meeting, and  they  would  have  been  inftr lift-
ed to  watch,  left  under  pretence  of  debating  on  ecclefias-
tica)  affairs,  the  right  of  the  ftate  fhould  be  infringed.-—
But  all  governments  permitted  the  mafons  peaceably  to
proceed  to  the  congrefs  of  Willemfbaden.  The  brethren
even  had  paffports  from  the  civil  powers.  For  more  than
fix  months  did  thefe  deputies  deliberate  in  their  immenfe
Lodge,  without  any  fovereign  harboring  the  lead  fufpi-
cion  as  to  his  own  fafety,  or  that  of  his  people.  They
all  relied  on  thofe  princes  who  were  themfelves  initiated
in  the  myfteries  of  Mafonry;  they  were  in  all  probability
ignorant  that  Brethren  of  that  rank  are  but  partially  ad-
nutted  to  the  fecrets  of the  Sell;  nor  were  they  aware,
that  great  names  are  only  cloaks  under  which  fccret  foci-*
eties  often  confpire  againft  their  very  protectors.  They
had  not  conceived,  that  the  only  means  of  efcaping  the
vengeance  of  fuch  focieties  was  to  tolerate  none,
not  even  thofe  that  are  known  to  be  innocent;  for  the
Confpirator^  ever  watchful,  can  have  no  more  favorable
opportunity  of  afluming  the  garb  of  innocence,  than  in
thefe  fecret  recefles,  where  fooner  or  later  lie  will  find
means  of  involving  the  undefigning  members  in  his  crimi-
nal plots.

Sovereigns  were  equally  ignorant  of  the  ftate  in  which
Mafonry  was  at  the  time  of  the  too  famous  meeting  of
Willemfbaden;  had  they  but  known  It,  theutmoft  feve-
rity  might  have  become  a  duty  on  them.  To  judge  by
the  writings  of  the  Sect,  it  never  had  been  lefs  difpofed
to  a  reform,  which  fome  it  would  feem  wifhed  to  promote,
and  which  Sir  Andrew  Michael  Ramfay,  a  Scotch  Baro-
net, had  attempted  to  bring  about  forty  years  before;  nor
is  it  clear  that  the  reform  he  had  attempted  was  fa-
vorable to  religion.  In  order  to  unite  the  efforts  of  the
Brethren  towards  fome  ufeful  object,  he  had  conceived
the  plan  of  an  Encyclopaedia,  which  was  to  have  been
executed  by  all  the  learned  Mafons  of  the  world.*  If  the
pofthumous  works  attributed  to  Ramfay  are  really  his
(fuch  as  The  Philofophicai  Principles  of  Natural  Reli-
gion and  of  Revelation,  printed  under  his  rame  in  1749,
fix  years  after  his  death)  I  could  not  venture  to  fay,  that
he  had  not  forgotten  the  greater  part  of  thofe  lefions  which
he  had  received  from  Fenclon,  or  that  the  Malonic  En-


*  See  Dit'  auf  gezogene  vorhang  der  Frey  Maurery,  P.  303.


HISTORICAL  PART,  tl

Cyclopaedia  would  have  been  a  better  work  than  that  ex-
ecuted by  the  Sophifters  D'Alembert  and  Diderot;  nei*
ther  would  I  vouch  that  any  reform  was  intended  at  that
time  in  the  ancient  myfteries  of  the  Lodges,  other  than
the  introduction  of  many  antichriftian  errors,  together
with  thofe  of  the  IVUcempfichofis.  But,  whatever  may
have  been  the  reform  projected  by  Ramfay,  every  thing
denoted  that  that  which  thé  Brethren  were  about  to  accom-
plish at  Wilhemfbaden  would  be  no  other  than  the  con-*
ïûmmation  of  the  myfteries  or  plots  of  the  Roficrucians,
(See  Note  at  the  end  of  the  Chapter).  In  reality,  thefe
myfteries  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  Scocch  Knights  had  on-
ly been  new  modelled,  the  better  to  meet  the  wifh.es  of  the
Sophifters,  and  of  the  Impoftors  of  the  age.  In  France
alone,  under  the  mcceffive  protection  of  the  Princes  of
Clermont,  of  Conti,  and  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  all
Grand  Matters  of  the  Order,  the  Clermontois  Brethren^
the  African  Brethren,  the  Knights  of  the  Eagle,  the  A-
dept,  the  Sublime  Philofopher,  were  fo  many  national  in-
ventions added  to  Mafonry;  and  all  thefe  degrees  were
fteps  towards  our  Revolution.  In  Germany  we  fee  Ro-
fa  combining  all  thefe  French  inventions  with  the  ancient
Scotch  myfteries;  the  Baron  Hund  and  Shtibard  fubdi-
Viding  Mafonry  into  the  Stricl  Qbfervance  and  the  Lax
Obfervance.  Under  the  name  of  'Çemplar  Mafons,  it  dai-
ly beheld  new  degrees  invented,  more  and  more  threaten-
ing to  Kings  and  Pontiffs,  who  had  fuppreffed  the  Tem-
plars. There  alfo  appeared  the  Phyfician  Zinnendorf
and  with  him  were  introduced  the  modern  Roficrucians
from  Sweden,  and  their  new  myfteries  of  the  Cabal^
while  the  impoftor  Jaeger  was  propagating  his  at  Ratis-
bon.

There  was  not  one  of  thefe  new  mafonic  Se&s  that
did  not  revive  fome  ancient  fyftem  of  impiety  or  rebellion.
$ut  the  worft  of  the  whole  clan  was  a  fort  of  Illuminées
calling  themfelves  Theofophs,  whom  I  find  continually
confounded  by  fome  people  with  thofe  of  Weifhaupt. — ?
They  are  certainly  no  better;  but  they  are  a  different
Seel.  The  neceflity  under  which  I  lie  to  diftinguifh  them,
Jeft  the  hiftorian  fhould  be  mifled,  obliges  me  to  trace
them  to  their  origin,  and  to  give  a  fhort  account  of  their
myfteries.

All  the  Theofophical  Illuminées  of  this  age  in  England,  The
France,  Sweden,  or  Germany,  have  drawn  their  princi*  Theçfb?
h


$2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

î  hxal  II-    pies  from  the  Baron  Emmanuel  Swedenborg.  This  name,

or^'we-8'   t0  Dfc  ^ure'  ^'JCS  not  [^em  to  àenole  the  founder  of  a  Seel.
denborgi-    Swedenborg  became  oikj,  perhaps,  without  dreaming  of
anMafons.  an>  /ucil  thing,  and  through  one  of  thofe  extraordinary
.    incidents  which  Providence  in  an  age  of  impiety  permits
|        to  humble  the  pride  of  our  Sophifters.  He  was  fon  of  the
Lutheran   Biiiiop  of  Skara,  and  was  born  at  Upfal  in
1688.     After  having  paiTed  the  greater  part  of  his  life  in
the  moil  incongruous  purfuits,  as  a  Poet,  a  Philofopher,
a  Metaphyfician,  a  Mineralogift,  a  Sailor,  a  Divine,  and
an  Aitionoiner,  he  was  attacked  by  one  of  thofe  violent
fevers  which  leave  the  organs  o^  the  human  frame  in  a
very  deranged  flaie.*     His  meditations  or  rather  reve-
ries, took  the  form  of  thofe  fpeculations  to  which  he  had
forme/ly  been  addicted,  on  the  Infinite,  the  Creation,  the
Spirit,  Matter,  God,  and  Nature.     All  on  a  fudden  he
thought  himleif  infpired,  and  lent  by  God  to  reveal  new
truths.     The  following  is  the  account  he  gives  of  his
apoftlefhip.

"  I  was  one  day  dining  very  late  at  my  hotel  in  Lon-
"  don,  and  I  ate  with  great  appetite,  when  at  the  end  of
<c  my  repair.  I  perceived  a  fort  of  fog  which  obftructed  my
■■'.',  and  my  floor  was  covered  with  hideous  reptiles.
"  They  difappeared,  the  darknefs  v/as  difperfed,  and  I
"plainly  faw,  in  the  midil  of  a  bright  light,  aman  fitting
"  in  the  corner  of  my  room,  who  laid  in  a  terrible  voice,
\  «  Do  not  eat  fo  much.  At  thefc  words  my  fight  was  be-
"  dimmed.;  but  £  regained  it  little  by  lictle,  and  then
«  found  that  I  was  alone.  The  next  night,  the  fame  man,
<c  refplendent  with  light, flood  before  me,  and  laid:  I  am
"  the  Lord,  Creator,  and  Redeemer',  I  have  c  h  of  en  you
"  to  explain  to  men  the  interior  and fpiritual fenfe  of
"  the  Jacred  Scriptures.  I  will  dictate  what  you  fball
"  write.  This  time  I  was  not  affrighted;  and  the  light,
u  though  very  vivid,  did  not  affect  my  fight.  The  Lord
"  was  clothed  in  purple,  and  the  viilon  continued  for  a
M  quarter  of  an  hour.  This  very  night  the  eyes  of  my
"  interior  were  opened  and  enabled  to  fee  into  heaven,
"  into  the  world  of  Ipirits,  into  hell,  in  which  places  I

*  f  do  not  fee  that  any  of  his  adepts  have  mentioned  this
illnefs  ;  but  indeed  I  am  not  furprized  at  it.  I  quote  it  on  the
authority  of  a  PhyficiaD,  who  learned  it  from  feveral  other
Phyiicians  of  Loudon.


HISTORICAL  PART.

w  found  many  of  my  acquaintances,  fome  who  had  been
**  long  fince  dead,  others  only  a  fhort  time."*

This  viiion  would  appear  more  worthy  of  a  man  to
whom  one  might  fay  in  a  lefs  terrible  voice,  Do  not  eatjc
much,  but  rather,  indeed,  Do  not  drink  fo  much.  Swe-
denborg declares  it  to  have  been  in  the  year  1745.  He
lived  till  1772,  perpetually  writing  new  volumes  of  his
revelations,  travelling  every  year  from  England  to  Swe-
den, and  daily  from  earth  to  heaven  or  to  hell.  It  requires
exceeding  great  patience  to  wade  through  all  thefe  works  ;
and  when  one  has  iludied  them,  it  is  difficult  to  form  an
idea  of  their  author.  In  this  Theofophical  Illuminée  fome
will  behold  a  man  in  a  confiant  delirium  ;  others  will  trace
the  Sophifter  and  Infidel  ;  while  others  again  will  take
him  for  an  importer  and  hypocrite,  is  it  the  madman,
the  vifionary  madman  in  the  regions  of  Folly,  that  is
fought?  Let  the  reader  follow  him  in  his  frequent jour-
nies  to  the  world  of  fpirits,  or  let  him  have  the  patience
to  hear  him  tell  what  he  has  feen.  On  one  fide  he  fhews
us  a  paradile  perfectly  corrci'ponding  with  the  earth,  and
the  angels  doing  every  thing  in  the  other  world  that  men
do  in  this.  On  the  other,  he  defcribes  heaven  and  its
plains,  its  forefts,  its  rivers,  its  towns,  and  its  provinces;
he  then  proceeds  to  the  fchools  for  infant  angels  ;  to  the
univerfities  for  the  learned  angels  ;  to  fairs  for  the  com-
mercial angels,  and  particularly  for  the  Engliih  and  Dutch
angels.  The  fpirits  are  male  and  female;  they  marry,
and  Swedenborg  was  prefent  at  a  marriage.  This  mar-
riage is  celeftial  ;  "  but,"  fays  he,  "  we  are  not  to  infer
"  that  the  celcftial  couples  are  unacquainted  with  volup-
"  tuoufnefs.  .  .  .  The  propenfity  to  unite,  imprinted
"  by  the  Creator,  exiils  in  the  fpiritual  bodies^  as  it  docs
u  in  the  material  bodies.  The  angels  of  both  fexes  are
u  always  in  the  moft  peifecl:  flate  of  beauty,  youth,  and
"  vigor.  They  enjoy  therefore  the  utnaoft  voiuptuou
"  of  conjugal  love,  and  that  to  a  much  greater  degree  than
"  it  is  poffible  for  mortals."  {•

From  this  delirium  let  us  proceed  to  the  impoftor

The  whole  lifeand  writings  of  3wedenb0rg  depofe  againft
him.    To  begin  with  his  writings,  it  is  always  Cîod  or

*  See  the  Preface  to  the  Abridgement  of  Swedenborg's  Works.
t  Swedenborg  on  the   celeAiai   Jerufalem— of  the  i'piriui-U
vorld—of  the  Eogiilh— of  the  Dutch,  ccc— Art.  Her/


$4  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

an  angel  that  fpeaks.  Every  thing  that  he  tells  us  he  has
feen  in  heaven  himfelf,  and  he  is  at  liberty  to  go  there  as
often  as  he  pleafes.  He  has  fpirits  at  his  command;  and
they  reveal  to  him  the  moft  fecret  tranfaâions.  The
Princefs  Ulrica,  Queen  of  Sweden,  fends  to  confult  him
why  her  brother  the  Prince  of  Pruffia  had  died  without
anfwering  a  certain  letter  which  (he  had  written  to  him.
Swedenborg  promifes  to  confult  the  deceafed.  The  fol-
lowing day  he  returns,  and  addrefles  himfelf  as  follows  to
the  Queen  :  "  Your  brother  appeared  to  me  lad  night,
"  and  ordered  me  to  inform  you,  that  he  had  not  anfwer-
Cc  ed  your  letter  becaufe  he  difapproved  your  conduce,  be-
ct  cauf'e  your  imprudent  politics  and  your  ambition  were
"  the  caufes  of  the  effufion  of  blood.  I  command  you
"  therefore  in  his  name  to  meddle  no  more  in  ftate  af-
*'  fairs,  and  particularly  not  any  more  to  excite  troubles
tc  to  which  you  would  fooner  or  later  fall  the  vi£f.im."—
The  Queen  was  aftonifhed  ;  Swedenborg  told  her  things
that  fhe  alone  and  the  deceafed  could  know;  and  the  ré-
putation of  the  prophet  was  much  increafed.  For'  my
readers  to  form  their  judgment,  it  will  be  fufHcient  for
them  to  know  that  the  letter  the  Queen  had  written  had
been  intercepted  by  two  fenators,  who  profited  of  this
occafion  to  give  her  the  above  leflbn  through  the  medium
of  Swedenborg.*

Take  another  trait  of  the  Impoftor  : — The  Countefs
of  Mansfield  is  afraid  of  having  to  pay  a  fum  of  money  a
fécond  time,  the  receipt  being  miflaid  at  her  hufband's
death.  She  confults  Swedenborg,  and  in  the  name  of  the
deceafed  he  comes  to  acquaint  her  where  the  receipt  was
to  be  found:    He  could  very  eafily  give  the  information

x

*  See  Mr.  Rollig's  letter  in  the  Mow't  Shrifft  of  Berlin,  Ja-
nuary, 1788.  When  the  difciples  of  Swedenborg  faw  Mr.
Roilig's  letter  appear,  they  gave  a  new  turn  to  the  ftory.  It
was  no  longer  the  Qneen  queftioning  Swedenborg  about  the
letter  ;  fhe  fimply  afked,  Whether  he  kadfeen  her  brother  ?  Swe-
denborg is  faid  at  the  end  of  a  week  to  return  to  the  Queen,
and  tell  her  :hings  that  fhe  believed  herfdt  to  be  alone  conver-
sant with,  after  the  deceafe  of  the  Prince.  1  his  contrivance
gives  a  whole  week  in  place  of  a  day  to  prepare  the  tiick.  I
now  learn  a  third  ;  according  to  De  Mainauduc,  the  letter  was
ic?.rcely  written  when  Swedenborg,  without  even  feeing  it,
divines  the  object  and  dilates  the  anfwer  before  hand.  When
th  s  Çcheroe  is  exploded,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  brethiett
will  invent  another.


HISTORICAL  PART.  8$

to  be  fure,  for  he  had  found  the  receipt  in  a  book  which
had  been  returned  him  by  the  Count.  It  was  the  Queen
Ulrica  who  gave  this  natural  explanation  of  the  faci  ;  yet
(he  is  neverthelèfs  quoted  by  the  difcipks  as  an  authority
to  prove  the  miracle.*  Certainly  we  have  mown  enough
of  the  impcftor;  but  the  important  perfon  for  our  conii-
deration  is  the  Illuminizing  law-giver,  the  Sophifter  of
Impiety;  and  Swedenborg's  character  partakes  much
more  of  this  than  is  generally  fuppofcd.  His  manner
Would  lead  us  to  think  that  his  hypocrify  was  not  inferior
to  his  impiety.  Never  did  any  man  ipeak  more  of  the
love  of  God  and  of  the  love  of  his  neighbor;  neVer  did
any  perfon  more  frequently  quote  the  rrophets  and  the
Scriptures  j  or  affect  more  refpe£l  for  Chrift  and  more
zeal  for  Chriftianity;  never  did  any  one  better  affume
the  character  and  tone  of  a  fincere,  religious,  and  upright
man  :  Neverthelèfs,  I  muft  fay,  never  did  any  man  fhow
more  duplicity  and  impiety;  never  did  any  one  conceal
the  moft  relolute  delign  of  annihilating  Chiiirianity  and
every  Religion,  under  the  mafk  of  zeal,  more  completely  .
than  he  did.  Let  all  his  followers  proteft  againil  this  as-
fertion  ;  to  expofe  the  two  fyjlems  of  their  mailer  will  am*-
ply  fuffice  to  juftify  the  imputation.  I  fay  tzuo  fyjhmsy
becaufe  as  Swedenborg  always  had  tvjofenfes,  the  one  in-
ternal  and  allegorical^  the  other  external  or  literal^  to
explain  and  overthrow  the  Scriptures;  fo  he  has  alio  two
J'yJlemS)  the  one  apparent  for  fools  and  dupes;  the  other
iecret  and  hidden,  and  referved  for  the  adepts;  the  one
tending  only  in  appearance  to  reform  Chrifhanity  on  the
reveries  of  Deifm;  the  other  leading  to  ali  the  Impiety  of
Atheifm,  Spinolifm,Fanaticifm,  and  Materialifm.

I  lament  with  my  readers,  that  fuch  is  the  nature  of
our  revolutions,  that  to  know  and  unfold  their  caufes  it  is
neceffary  to  ftudy  manifold  Se£ts,  and  wade  through  dis.
gufting  fyftems.  Few  people  are  aware  of  the  multitude
of  Antichriitian,  impious,  and  tenebrous  factions  that  had
overrun  the  earth  to  prepare  the  advent  of  our  difafters.
I  myfelf  for  a  long  time  defpifed  thefe  'ïheofophical  Illu-
minées. But  I  found  them  at  Wilhemfbaden;  and  the
part  they  adted  at  firft  in  concurrence  with  Weiihaupr,


*  Preface  to  the  Abridgment  ofSvvedenbnrg's  Works — the
Edition  of  them  by  Pernetti — Eflay  'jn  the  Illuminées  written
by  Mirabeau,  Note  8.


SO


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;


and  afterward  in  union  with  him,  obliged  me  to  invefti-
gate  their  Seâ:  ,  and  my  reader  mull:  have  a  fhort  and  pre-
Sweden-     cife  idea  of  each  of  their  two  fyftems.     The  firft,  which
borg  s        j  caj]  apparent,"\s  compiled  for  men  who  ftill  wifh  to
fvftein.       preferve  the  words  God,  Religion,  Spirit,  Heaven,  and
Hell  ;  but  who,  fwerving  from  Chriftianity,  are  aban-
doned by  the  Almighty  to  all  the  abfurdities  and  follies
of  Anthropomorphifm.    For  fuch  perfons  Swedenborg  has
on  worlds,  invented  two  worlds,  the  one  invifible  and fpiritual,  the
other  vijîbïe  and  natural.     Each  of  thefe  worlds  has  the
form  of  a  man  ;  together  they  compound  the  univerfe,
which  has  alfo  the  form  of  a  man.

The  fpiritual  world  comprehends  Heaven;  the  World
of Spirits,  and  Hell.     This  Heaven,  World  of  Spirits,
and  Hell,  are  formed  to  the  Image  of  Adan,  that  is  to  fay
of  Gcd  himfelf.
on  God.  F°r  God  is  alfo  man\  indeed  it  is  only  the  Lord  or  God,

that  can  be  properly  called  man. — This  God  man  is  un-
created,  ; n finite,  pre fail  every  where  by  his  humanity—
Though  God  and  Man  at  the  fame  time,  he  is  but  of  one
nature,  one  efTence,  and  particularly  but  one  in  perfon, —
It  is  true,  there  is  a  God  the  Father,  a  God  the  Son,  and
a  God  the  Holy  Ghoil,  but  jefus  Chrift  alone  is  the  Fa-
ther, the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  according  as  he  man-
iflils  himfelf  by  the  creation,  redempti  on,or  fanctifica-
tion;  and  the  Trinity  of  perfons  in  God,  according  to
Swedenborg,  is  an  impiety  which  has  produced  many
others.

This  doctrine  againft  the  Trinity  is  one  of  thofe  arti-
cles to  which  the  Sophifter  and  his  difciples  molt  fre-
quently advert,  and  particularly  infill:  upon,  even  in  their
Oatechifms  for  children.
on  Mm.  Though  we  are  to  believe  the  exiftence  of  but  one  na-
ture and  of  one  perfon  in  this  God-Alan,  Father,  Son,
and  Holy  Ghojh,  yet  in  each  man  we  are  to  conceive  two
tuiiinc-t  men;  the:  one  fpiritual  and  inUrior^  the  other
exterior  and  natural.  The  Alan-fpirit  or  interior,  has
a  heart,  lungs,  feet  and  hands,  and  ail  the  different  parts
©f  the  human  frame,  which  belong  to  the  vijible  and  ex-
terior man.**

*  Every  thing  that  is  faid  here  of  this  fyftem  is  extracted

ïr  nom  the   Works  of  Swedenborg»  which  i  have  in  my

fiion;  fuch  asliis  Doftrine  oj  the  New  ffsrufak/h, his  Spi-


HISTORICAL  PART.  87

There  arc  alfo  three  diftindt  things  in  every  man,  the
body,  the  fou/,  and  the  fpirit.  We  are  all  acquainted  with
the  body,  and  Swedenborg  makes  no  change  in  it;  but
his  fpirit  is  that  interior  man,  who  has  a  hearty  lungs\
and  a  fpiritual  body  entirely  modelled  on  the  natural  bo-
dy. But  the  fou  I,  that  is  the  man  himfelf,  children  receive
from  their  father  y  the  body  is  the  envelope  and  is  of the
mother.

Notwithftanding  this  body,  this  fpirit,  and  this  {ou\,eve~
ry  thing  that  man  thinks  or  that  he  wills  is  infufed  into
him  through  the  influent:  e  of  Heaven  or  of  Hell,  "  He  irji*
u  agines  that  his  thoughts  are  actually  his  own,  and  his
u  volition  in  himfelf  and  from  himfelf,  while  ncverthelefs
"  the  whole  is  infufed  into  him.  If  he  believed  the  real
"  facl,  he  would  not  then  appropriate  evil  actions  to  him-
"  felf,  for  he  would  reje£t  them  from  himfelf  to  Hell,
**  whence  they  come.  Neither  would  he  appropriate  to
<£  himfelf  good  actions,  and  for  that  reafon  would  pretend
"  to  no  merit  from  them.  He  would  be  happy;  he  would
"  fee  according  to  the  Lord,  the  Good  and  the  Evil;"*
or,  in  other  words,  he  will  find  that  he  is  mailer  neither
of  his  thoughts  nor  actions;  that  he  is  deprived  of  free-
agency,  and  that  he  can  neither  merit  nor  demerit.

This  poor  being  who  io  grofsly  miilakes  himfelf  when
he  believes  himfelf  to  be  thinking  or  acting  of  himfelf,
has  alfo  fallen  into  a  multitude  of  other  religious  errors,
becaufe  he  does  not  rightly  underfiand  the  facred  fcrip-
tures.  In  the  Books  of  Revelation  every  thing  is  allego-
rical, every  thing  has  two  fenfes,  the  one  celejli&l,  fpirit-
ual, interior;  the  other,  natural,  exterior,,  literal.  It  is
from  not  having  undcrftood  the  fpiritual  and  celeftial
fenfe  that  Chriitians  have  believed  in  the  Son  of  God
made  Man,  and  in  his  death  on  the  Crofs  for  the  Re-
demption of  mankind.  Swedenborg,  one  day  prefent  in
Heaven  at  a  great  council,  heard  and  repeats  thefe  words
of  an  angel,  who  was  a  great  divine:  "  How  is  it  polTible
"  that  the  Chriftian  world  can  abjure  found  reafon,  and
"  rave  to  fuch  a  degree  as  to  eftablifh  the  fundamental

ritual  World,  his  Apocalypfe  Revealed  ;  cr  from  divers  abridg-
ments of  his  Works  io  Ficnch  and  tengliih,  made  by  his  difci-
pies.

*  Extiaft  from  the  New  Jerufalem  and  from  th»  Aicanjt,
drt.  Influence,  No.  «77.


Z3  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  principles  of  their  belief  on  paradoxes  of  fuch  a  nature,
"  which  evidently  militate  againft  the  divine  elTence,  the
"  divine  love,  the  divine  wifdom,  the  omnipotence,  and
"  the  univeral  prefence  of  God  ?  What  he  is  fuppofed
u  to  have  done,  a  good  mafter  would  not  have  done  againft
iC  his  fervants,  nor  even  a  wild  beaft  againft  its  young  !"*
The  fame  angel  told  him  many  other  things,  which  over-
turn all  the  remaining  articles  of  the  Chriftian  belief.—
One  point  in  particular  he  aflerts,  which  muft  give  plea-
fure  to  the  wicked,  when  he  teaches  them  to  fcofFat  Hell,
particularly  when  he  fays,  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  di-
vide effence  to  deprive  a  Jingle  man  of  his  mercy  ;  that  the
whole  of  tbofe  doctrines  are  contrary  to  the  divine  na-
ture^  which  the  Chriftian  world  does  natfeem  to  be  aware

Another  part  of  the  doctrine  which  muft  be  alfo  very
acceptable  to  the  wicked,  is  the  ftate  with  which  Swe-
denborg flatters  them  in  the  other  world,  and  the  time  he
gives  them  after  death  to  gain  Heaven.  According  to
bis  new  Gofpel,  the  inftant  that  man  believes  to  be  that
of  his  death,  is  the  moment  of  his  refurrection  ;  and  no
other  refurrection  is  allowed  of.  At  that  very  inftant  he
appears  in  thejpiritual  world  under  the  human  form,  ex»
actly  as  if  he  was  in  this  world;  under  this  form  he  be*
comes  an  angel,  and  no  other  angels  exift  but  thofe  who
become  fo  at  their  departure  from  this  world.  All  thefe
angels  inhabit  the  world  of  fpirits,  and  are  received  there
by  other  angels,  who  inftrudt  them  in  the  fpiritual fenfe
of  the  Scriptures.  They  are  allowed  till  the  age  of  thirty
to  learn  this  fenfey  and  to  repent  in  the  world  of  fpirits.— -
But  left  we  fhould  revert  to  the  delirious  Illuminée,  let
us  haften  to  that  part  of  his  doctrines  which  conftitutes
the  grand  hopes  of  his  difciples  on  earth.  After  having
expounded  all  the  myfteries  of  Chriftianity  according  to
his  fpiritual  and  allegorical  fenfe,  that  is  to  fay,  after  hav-
ing fubftituted  his  doctrines  to  thofe  of  the  Gofpel,  Swe-
denborg informs  them,  that  the  day  willcome  when  the
whole  of  his  doctrine  fhall  be  received  in  this  world. — »
His  New  This  happy  day  will  be  that  on  which  the  New  Jerufa-*
Terulalem.  l£m  ^ia^  'oe  re-eftabliftied  on  earth,  This  New  Jeru-
falem  will  be  the  reign  of  the  new  church,  of  Jefus  Chrift

*  See  Abridgment  of  Swedenborg,  ifr/.  Redemptiok.
f  Ibid.


HISTORICAL  PART.  §9

feigning  alone  over  the  earth,  as  he  formerly  did  over  our
forefathers  before  the  deluge.  It  will  be  the  golden  age
of  true  Chriftianity;  and  then  the  revolution  foretold  by
Swedenborg  will  be  accomplifhed  with  his  prophecies.

Such  is  that  which  I  have  denominated  the  apparent
fyjlem  of  the  Baron  de  Swedenborg,  My  readers  may
eafily  obferve,  that  fuch  tools  in  the  hands  of  the  adepts
muft  fuffice  to  eradicate  true  Chriftianity  from  the  minds
of  their  dupes,  and  to  make  their  New  Jerufalem  a  plea
for  thofe  revolutions  which,  in  order  to  recall  ancient
times,  are,  in  the  name  of  God  and  of  his  prophet,  to
overthrow  all  the  altars  and  thrones  exifting  under  the  v
prefent  Jerufalem,  that  is  to  fay,  under  the  prefect  church-
es and  governments.

From  the  midft  of  this  chaos  of  delirium,  and  thefe
prophecies  of  rebellion,  let  us  bring  forth  that  other  fys-  His  hid-
tem,  which  appears  to  have  beenreferved  to  the  profound  den  fys»
adepts.  It  is  that  of  Materialifm  and  of  the  pureft  Athe-  tem%
ifm.  This  fyftem  is  occult  in  Swedenborg's  works,  but
it  is  wholly  contained  in  them.  Here  we  ilîould  no  long-
er have  to  deal  with  the  prophet  in  delirium,  but  with  the
moil  artful  Sophifter,  were  I  not  aware  that  fuch  hypo-
Crify  is  not  entirely  incompatible  with  a  dilbrdered  mind.
I  will  explain  :  it  fometimes  happens,  that  the  minds  of
men  will  rave  on  certain  queftions,  though  perfectly  fenr
fible  and  reafonable  on  others.  There  are  alfo  madmen
who  will  conftantly  purfue  their  object  ;  their  principles
may  be  extravagant,  but  they  never  lofe  fight  of  their  con-
fequences.  They  will  even  reafon  on  them,  and  com-
bine them  with  all  the  art  of  the  moft  fubtle  Sophifter. — i
I  think  it  is  in  this  clafs  that  Swedenborg  is  to  be  rank-
ed j  I  believe  it,  becaufe  not  only  his  writings,  but  many
circumftances  in  his  life,  ferve  to  confirm  the  conjecture.
For  example:  at  Stockholm,  after  having  made  a  general
officer  (who  came  to  pay  him  a  vifit  from  Mr.  Euler,  the
Prince  of  Orange's  librarian)  wait  in  his  antichamber  for
a  confiderable  time,  he  at  length  came  to  him  and  made  his
excufes,  by  faying,  Indeed,  General,  juft  at  that  moment
St.  Peter  and  St,  Paul  were  with  me  j  and  you  eafily  ap-
prehend, that  when  one  receives  fuch  vilitors  one  is  in  no
hurry  to  difmifs  them. — -My  readers  muft  as  eafily  con-
ceive the  opinion  the  General  formed  of  the  Baron,  and
the  account  he  gave  of  him  to  Euler,
M


|fi|  ANTISOCIAL  CON3PIRAGY;

At  another  time,  on  a  journey  from  Stockholm  to  Ber-
lin, one  of  his  companions,  awakened  by  a  noife  which
Svvedendorg  was  making,  and  thinking  he  was  ill,  went,
into  his  room.  He  there  found  him  in  bed,  faft  aileep,
very  much  agitated,  and  in  agreatheat,  repeating  in  a  loud
voice  the  queftions  and  anfwers  of  a  converfation  which,
he  dreamt  he  was  holding  with  the  Virgin  Mary.  The
next  day  his  fellow-traveller  afked  the  Raron  how  he  had
flept  the  night  before;  he  anfwered,  "T  had  yefterday
"  afked  a  favor  of  the  Virgin  Mary  in  the  moft  preffing
"  manner;  fhe  paid  me  a  vifit  this  night,  and  I  had  a  long
"  converfation  with  her."

The  firft  of  thefe  facts  will  be  vouched  for  by  Mr.
Euler;  and  with  refpecl  to  the  fécond  1  think  it  is  as  well
founded.

We  will  now  Ihow  how  thefe  anecdotes  are  blended.
with  thehiftory  of  a  Sect  that  has  powerfully  contributed
towards  our  Revolution.

Swedenborg,  anterior  to  the  derangement  of  his  mind,
had  formed  a  fyfïem  leading  to  Materiulifm;  and  this  con-,
tinued  deeply  rooted  in  his  mind  after  his  illnefs.  He
then  added  his  male  and  female  fpirits,  and  fome  extras
Vagances  of  the  fame  nature.  With  refpedf.  to  the  re-
mainder of  his  iyftem,  he  follows  up  his  principles  in  a
confequent  manner,  and  unfortunately  the  whole  tends
to  Materialifm.  Sophifters  and  infidels,  no  doubt,  foon,
perceived  that  they  could  make  a  tool  of  this  unfortunate
man  ;  they  let  him  up  as  a  Prophet,  and  his  reveries  were
oppofed  to  the  truths  of  Chriftianity.  Let  us  for  a  mo-
ment attend  to  his  moft  zealous  and  artful  apoftles.  It
is  thus  that  they  fpeakof  his  firft  works,  in  order  to  cap-
tivate the  reader's  mind  in  favor  of  his  fubfequent  wri-
tings. "  According  to  the  difcoveries  made  by  the  Baron
"  de  Swedenborg,  every  human  body  confifts  of  feveral
"  orders,  of  forms diftinct  among  themfelves,  according  to
"  the  apparent  degree  of  purity  refpedtively  belonging  to
"  each  ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  the  inferior  degree  is  to  be  found
*'  the  bans  or  receptacle  of  the  fécond  degree,  which  is
a  more  pure  and  more  interior  than  the  firft.  In  the
u-  fiine  manner,  the  fécond  ferves  as  the  bafis  or  recepta-
"  cle  for  the  third,  which  is  more  elevated,  and  is  the
**  pu:  tft  and  moft  interior  of  the  three.  It  is  in  the  latter
*£  that  rendes  the  human  fpirits ,  which  is  an  organized
w  form  -Anima,  Carre/ponding  with  the  corporal  fpirit


HISTORICAL  PART.  QI

**  ANIMUS,  and  vivifying  it,  while  it  derives  its  own  life
•  dire&ly  from  the  fpiritual  world."*

After  having  feen  this  famous  difcovery  of  the  mafter,
and  on  Which  the  difciples  lay  fo  much  ftrefs,  let  us  in-
quire what  are  the  true  lignifications  of,  or  real  exprefs-
ions  appropriate  to  this  human  fpirit  or  organized  form,
which  Swedenborg  calls  the  foul;  or  to  this  corporal  fpi-
rit denominated  animus.    This  foul  and  this  fpirit  will
be  found  to  be  no  other  than  organized  matter,  one  of
thofe  bodies  which  is  called  the  germ,  and  which  are  as
much  matter, both  in  the  animal  or  vegetable  reign,  as  the
body,  the  branch,  or  the  fruits  they  produce.     It  is  eafy
then  to  conceive  what  Swedenborg  means  by form  ox  foul,
ot  by  that  fpirit  which  has  lungs,  feet,  and  all  the  différ-
ent parts  of  the  human  body.    The  foul  is  organized  mat-
ter, and  the  fpirit  is  living  matter.  Terms  may  be  chang-
ed, but  in  fact  nothing  is  to  be  found  but  matter,  and  a
monfter  of  hypocrify,  who,  after  the  example  of  the  foul,
will  reduce  his  God  to  matter  alio.    To  prove  this  aiïer-
tion,  let  the  following  propofition  be  noticed — God  is  life,
becaufe  God  is  love — Love  is  his  effence,  wifdom  his  ex-
ijlence — The  heat  of  the  fpiritual  Sun  is  love,  its  light  is
wifdom'\     What  a  deal  of  twilling  and  turning  to  fay,
that  God  is  no  more  than  the  heat  and  light  of  a  Sun  fup-
pofed  to  he  fpiritual',  for  if  God  is  love  and  wifdom,  and
that  this  love  and  wijdom  are  only  the  heat  and  light  of
this  Sun,  is  it  not  evident  that  God  is  nothing  more  than
the  heat  and  light  of  that  Sun.     When,  therefore,  the
reader  fhall,  in  Swedenborg's  works,  meet  with  exprefs-
ions  fuch  as  thefe,  God  is  Ufe,becaufe  God  is  love,  and  lie
alone  is  life,  he  will  naturally  fubitkute  God  is  life  bè-
caufe  he  is  heat  ;  he  alone  is  life  becaufe  life  is  only
ported  by  heat;  and  he  will  have  Swedenborg"^  real  mean-
ing.   This  might  ftill  leave  fome  idea  of  a  fpirituality,  if
this   Sun,  whofe  light  and  heat  are  God,  was  really  fpi-
ritual ;  but  for  the  folution  of  this  queftion  let  us  again
appeal  to  S  wedenborg,  and  we  mall  find  that  the  fpiritua  '
fun  is  nothing  more  than  at?nrfpheres,  receptacles  of
and  of  ùght,  the  extremity  of  which  produces  the  natural

*  Dialogues  on  the  nature*  the  object,  and  evidence  of  Swe-
denborg's theological  writings,  London  1790,  page  34  and  25.
— —Alio  the  Animal  Reign,  and  the  Economy  of  the  Animal
Iteign,  by  Swedenborg.

*  See  the  Abridgment  of  Swedenborg,  Art.  Goi».


92  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

fun.  This  alfo  has  its  atmofpheres,which  have  produce  £
by  three  degrees  material fubjiance s . —  Thefefame  atmos-
pheres of  the.  natural  fun,  decreafng  in  activity  and  in  ex-
panjicn,  ultimately  form  maffes  whofe  parts  an  brought
together  by  the  prejfion  of weighty  fubflances  that  are  fix-
ed and  at  refl^  and  which  we  call  matter.*  In  clearer
and  more  intelligible  language^  here  will  be  the  Deity
and  its  generations  according  to  Swedenborg.  In  the
fir  ft  place,  a  Sun,  fuppofed  fpiritual,  forms  itfelf  in  the
higher  regions  of  the  moft  ardent  and  luminous  fire  :  the
heat  and  light  of  this  fire  is  God.  This  God,  in  this  ftate,
as  well  as  this  Sun,  is  nothing  more  than  matter  in  a  ftate
of  expanfion,  agitation,  fire,  and  incandefcence.  As  long
as  matter  remains  in  thefe  burning  regions,  Swedenborg
does  not  chufe  to  call  it  matter,  but  the  fpiritual  fun. —
Particles  lefs  fubrle,  or  not  (o  much  heated,  are  carried
to  the  extremity  of  thefe  regions.  There  they  clufter  to-
gether, and  the  natural  fun  is  formed.  They  are  not
matter  as  yet  5  but  the  grofler  particles  of  this  fécond  fun
unite  together  at  the  extremity  of  its  atmofpheres  ;  there
they  cl  ump  together, cool,  thicken,  and  form  heavy  mafias,
and  at  length  acquire  the  appellation  of  matter.  Thefe
particles  are  no  longer  God,  or  the  fpiritual  fun,  becaufe
they  are  no  longer  in  a  ftate  of  fire*  What  then  is  this
God  of  Swedenborg,  if  it  is  not  fire,  or  all  matter  in  a  ftate
of  fire,  ceafing  only  to  be  God,  when  it  ceafes  to  be  burn-
ing and  luminous  ?  And  what  abominable  hypocrify  is
this,  where,  under  the  cloak  of  thus  changing  the  termSj
the  moft  downright  materialifm  is  preached  ?

Let  my  reader  form  what  opinion  he  pleafes  as  to  the
man  who  has  broached  fuch  impious  abfurdities  ;  he  muft
never  forget  that  there  exift  men  always  ready  to  adopt
the  moft  extravagant  errors.  Some  becaufe  they  are  un-
able to  diftinguifh  a  fophifm,  others  again  becaufe  their
impiety  leads  them  to  rejoice  at  every  new  blafp hemy. — .
Swedenborg  has  met  with  difciples  of  both  thefe  defcrip*
lions  j  and  hence  arofe  two  diftinct  Seels,  the  one  public,
the  other  occult.  The  firft  comprehends  thofe  men  (o
eafily  impofed  upon  by  hypocrify,  and  by  their  own  cre-
dulity; they  had  called  themfelves  Christians  and  ado-
itd  Jelus  Chrift;  but  when  Swedenborg  had  called  his
God  heat  and  light;  or  his  fpiritual fun  by  the  name  of

*  Ihià.Arî-  Creation.


HISTORICAL  PART.  <£3

jefus  Chrift,  they  ftill  continued  to  think  themfelves  the
followers  of  Chriit,  though  they  were  only  the  Specta-
tors of  Swedenborg's  reveries.  He  evidently  is  the  de-
clared enemy  of  the  principal  myfteries  of  revelation,  par-
ticularly of  the  Trinity,  and  of  the  Redemption  of  man-
kind by  the  Son  of  God  dying  on  a  crofs  for  the  falvation
of  finners  ;  he  uevertheiefs  talks  a  great  deal  about  reve-
lation j  he  allumes  a  devout  tone,  and  with  his  allegorical
znd  fpirit  uc,  I  fenfe  would  appear  rather  to  reform  than  to
deitroy  all;  and  his  followers  do  not  perceive  that  with
his  allegorical  fenfe  he  is  only  repeating  the  arguments  of
the  Sopiiifters  againft  revealed  religion,  in  order  to  re-
new all  the  follies  and  impieties  of  the  Perfians,  Magi,
and  Materiali tts.*  They  tell  thefe  poor  people  of  his
miraculous  vifions,  of  his  prophecies,  and  of  his  difcour-
fing  with  the  angels  and  fpisitsj  they  are  ignorant  of  the
firft  principles  of  ciiticifm,  and  believe  in  all  thefe  mar-
vellous ftories  of  Swedenborg,  jufr.  as  children  do  in  the
hinVjry  of  Raw-head-and-bloody-bones  told  them  by  an
old  nurfe.

The  newferufaUrnm  particular  has  gained  over  ma-
ny profely  tes  to  Swedenborg.  I  oblerve  in  one  of  the
molt  famous  abridgments  of  his  works,  that  fo  early  as
the  year  178S,  the  fmgle  tovjn  of  Manchejitr  contained
SEVEN  THOUSAND  of  thefe  illnminized  Jerufalernites^
andthat  there  were  about  TWENTY  thousand  in  Eng-
land^ Manyof  thefe  beatified  beings  may  be  very  well  in-
tentioned  j  but  with  this  new  Jeruiklem  they  daily  expect
that  great  revolution  which  is  to  fvveep  from  the  earth
every  prince  and  every  king,  that  the  God  of  Sweden-
borg may  reign  uncontroled  over  the  whole  globe.:];  And
that  revolution,  which  they  faw  btarfting  forth  in  France,
was  nothing  more  in  their  eyes  than  the  fire  that  was  to
purify  the  earth  to  prepare  the  way  tor  their  Jerufalem.

*  Some  readers,  I  know,  will  be  furprifed  to  fee  me  charge
with  materialrfm  a  man  who  talks  fo  much  of  the  fpirit,  foul,
God,  and  religion.  But  I  mail  requeft  them  to  weigh  the  proofs
adduced  before  they  decide  againil  me.  Had  I  been  writing  a-
mother  fort  of  work  I  might  have  prolonged  the  difcuilion;  but
Ï  think  I  have  faid  fufficient  to  prove,  that  Swedenborg  never
acknowledged  any  other  fpirit  but  matter,  or  the  elementary
fire.

\  Ibid.  Preface  to  a  note,  Page  Ixviii.

%  See  his  Apocalypfe  Reves!ed,


94  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACV;

Should  they  ftill  remain  in  thé  dark  as  to  the  menacing
tendency  of  fuch  doctrines  for  every  ftate,  let  them  learn
it  from  the  revolutionary  Sophifters.  They  have  public-
ly declared  the  hopes  they  have  conceived  of  thofe  Seels
that  are  ff ringing  up  en  all  fidesi  particularly  in  the
north  of  Europe  (Sweden)  and  in  America.  They  even
in  plain  terms  exprefs  their  expectations  grounded  on
the  great  number  of  ■Sivcdcnborg' s feclators  and  commen~
tat  ors.*

And  indeed  if  we  do  but  caft  our  eyes  on  thofe  that  are
moft  admired  by  the  Set*-,  we  {hall  find  all  the  grand
principles  of  the  revolutionary  Equality  and  Liberty,  and
thofe  Jacobinical  declamations  againft  the  Great,  the  No-
ble, and  the  Rich,  and  againft  all  governments.  We  (hall
find,  for  example,  that  their  Religion,  or  their  new  Jeru-
salem, cannot  be  welcomed  by  the  Great,  becaufe  the  Great
are  born  tranfgreffors  of  'its  firjl  precept.  Neither  can  it
be  approved  by  the  Nobles,  becaufe  ivhcn  mortals  afpi-
red  at  nobility,  they  became  proud  and  tvicked.  Still  lefs
can  it  be  admired  by  thofe  who  do  not  delight  in  the
confufion  of  ranks,  becaufe  the  pride  of  ranks  produced
inhumanity  and  even  ferocity  j  and  even  long  before  the
revolution  we  fhall  fee  the  adepts  inculcating  that  grand
principle  of  anarchy  and  revolution,  that  the  laiv  is  the
exprejjion  of  the  general  %vill,znà  thus  preparing  the  peo-
ple to  difregard  every  law  that  had  been  made  heretofore,
cither  bv  their  fovereigris,  their  parliaments,  or  their  Se-
nates ;  encouraging  them  to  found  the  alarm,  to  over-
throw them  all,  and  to  fubftitute  the  decrees  and  capri-
cious conceits  of  the  populace  in  their  ftead.

But  all  this  revolutionary  concatenation  as  vet  only
characlerifes  the  dupes  of  the  Sect  of  Iliuminizing  Jeru-
falemites.  The  profound  adepts  had  taken  refuge  in  the
dens  of  thé  Rojicrucian  mafonry.  Thofe  were  their  na-
tural afylums,  the  greater  part  of  the  tenets  perfectly  co-
inciding with  thofe  of  the  ancient  Roficrucians.  After
the  example  of  their  Doctors,  Swedenborg  tells  us,  that
his  doélrines  are  all  of  the  higheft  antiquity,  and  fimilar
to  thofe  of  the  Egyptians,  thu  Magi,  and  the  Greeks;  he
even  aflerts  them  to  be  anterior  to  the  d.-lugc.  His  new
Jeruiklem  has  alfo  its  Jehovah,  its  loji  word,  that  has

*'  Preface  to  the  Phjfical 0hfervatt9ttsa  anno  1790,  by  La
Metherie.


HISTORICAL  PART.  95

been  at  length  revealed  to  Swedenborg.  Should  any  per-
fon  be  tempted  to  leek  it  elfewhere,  he  mult  go  in  queft
of  it  among  thofe  clans  where  Chriftianity  and  political
laws  are  not  known.*  Swedenborg  tells  us,  that  it  might
be  found  in  the  north  of  China,  and  in  Great  Tartary,
that  is  to  fay  among  that  fpccies  of  men  who  have  prefer-
ved  the  molt  of  that  Equality,  Liberty,  and  Independence,
which  the  learned  Jacobins  pretend  to  have  been  ante-
rior to  civil  fociety,  and  which  mofl  certainly  is  incom-
patible with  it.  Here  then  it  appears,  that  S  wedcnborg's
views  coincide  with  thofe  of  the  occult  lodges,  aiming  at
the  overthrow  of  every  religious  and  civil  law,  and  at  the
downfall  of  every  throne.  His  God  beat  and  light,  his
God  lire  and  fpiritual  fun,  his  twofold  world  and  two-
fold man,  are  only  modifications  of  the  God  light  and  the
twofold  principle  of  Manes.  The  Roficrucians  mud
then  have  found  in  Swedenborg's  fyftems  what  they  lb
much  admired  in  the  Manichaeans.  Their  Magic,  Evo-
cations, Eons,  Cabal,  &c,  were  to  be  traced  in  the  male
and  female  fpirits.  In  fhort,  what  numberlefs  adepts
mult  not  this  new  Jerufalem,  or  revolution,  carrying  man
back  to  primitive  Equality  and  -Liberty,  have  found  in
the  occult  Lodges  ?  It  was  there  indeed  that  Sweden-
borg's myfteries  become  connected  with  thofe  of  the  an-
cient Brethren.  Thefe  new  or  compound  adepts  ïky\tà
themfelves  Illuminées.  Notwithftanding  the  Atiieifm,
and  Materialifm  of  their  mailer,  they,  after  his  example,
perpetually  talked  of  God  and  of  fpirits  ;  they  even  af-
fected to  fpeak  much  of  God,  and  people  were  perfuaded
that  they  believed  in  a  Deity;  hence  they  received  the
denomination  of  Theofophical  lllmninees.  Like  the  wri-
tings of  their  founder,  their  hiftory  is  a  mere  labyrinth  of
impiety  and  impofture.    It  will  fuffice  for  our  readers,  at

*  Swedenborg's  exprefilons  are,  De  hoc  vrrbovetufto  quod
ante  verbum  Ifraeliticum  in  Alia  fuerat,  referre  meretur  lioa
novum;  quod  ibi  adhuc  refervatum  lit,  apud  populos  qui  in
Magna  Tartaria  habitant.  Locutus  fum  cum  fpiritibus  et  an-
gelis  qui  in  mundo  fpirituali  inde  erant,  qui  dixerunt  quod
poffideant  verbum,  et  quod  id  ab  antiquis  temporibus  poiTede-
rint — Qnasrite  de  eo  in  China  et  forte  invenietis  illud  apud
'.fanaros.  ( '  âpocaUpfu  Revelata,  Chap.  x.No.  ht.J  Is  not  this
a  continuation  of  that  fame  plan,  always  holding  out  oations
piunged  in  the  moftfavage  ignorance,  and  a  perpetual  prey  to
anarchy,  Equality  and  Liberty,  as  the  models  to  which  we
ought  to  look  up?


96  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

this  period,  to  know  that  their  head-quarters  was  at  A-
Vfgfiorf;*  that  they  had  a  famous  lodge  at  Lyons;  that
they  were  fpreading  chiefly  in  Sweden,  and  were  making
progress  in  Germany.  Their  înyfïeries  aC  that  time  had
mingled  with  thofe  of  die  Martinifts  ;  or  it  might  be  more
corredt  to  l'nyy  that  the  Martinifts  were  only  a  reform  of
the  Swedenborgi ans;  and  in  France  the  appellations  of
Illuminée  and  Martfrtift  were  fynonymous.  In  Germany
they  began  to  diftinguifh  thetnjelves  under  the  names  of
Peilalctes  and  Benevolent  Knights.  But  whatever  may
have  been  their  afiumed  names,  they  moi}  certainly  of
all  the  modern  MafoflS  were  the  neareff  of  kin  to  Wei-
fhaupt.  Syftems  and  means  may  have  differed  (ufficiently
to  excite  jeaioufies;  but  on  both  fides  we  find  the  fame
determined  wifh  for  a  revolution  as  antisocial  as  it  was
anti-religious.  They  were  equally  ardent  in  their  defire
of  multiplying  their  adapts,  by  a  general  intrufion  into
the  Mafonic  Lodges.  Both  Seâs  had  their  deputies  at
Willemfbaden,  and  1  will  defcribe  their  mutual  conte  fh
and  fucccfTes  in  the  following  Chapter.

*  In  a  work  under  the  title  of  The  Red  Lodge  difecveredto
Sovereigns,  1  read,  that  "the  Rite  of  the  Theofophical  lilumi-
*'  nees  appears  to  have  taken  its  origin  at  Edinburgh,  where
*'  the  Red  Lodge  was  formed  by  a  fciiaon  from  the  Blue  Lodge;
4;  ihat  this  Red  Lodge  (of  the  Theolbphical  Illuminées  had
"  immediately  eftablimed  a  fubordinate  Lodge  at  Avignon."
{  Page  9  and  jc.J — I  fhould  have  been  very  glad  to  have  found
proof  or  this  origin,  as  at  prefent  it  lefts  on  the  bare  affertion
of  the  author.  Be  that  as  it  may,  however,  the  Illuminées  of
Avignon  are  fufficiently  well  known  in  France.  Ever  lince  the
year  1783,  that  Lodge  has  been  looked  upon  as  the  parent
ft'-'ck  of  all  thofe  that  have  fince  fp'read  over  France  with  their
abominable  myfteries.

And  here  J  think  it  right  to  fay,  that  this  Red  Ledge  difcov-  .
fredto  Sovereigns  is  by  no  means  the  work  that  I  mentioned  in
my  iecond  volume  under  the  title  of  Depojitioin  made  by  Klei-
ner. The  extracts  made  from  this  latter  work,  and  which  are
in  my  pofTeffion,  give  me  reafon  to  think,  that  it  contains  de-
tails of  a  very  different  nature.  The  author  there  fpeaks  as  an
eye-witnefs  ;  and,  among  other  things,  gives  the  tradition  cur-
rent in  his  Lodge,  and  with  reipec"t  to  the  leifons  that  Wei-
firawpt  is  fuppofed  to  have  received  from  a  certain  Kolmer.--
Thefe  depofitio.-is  would  be  a  valuable  document;  and  it  is,
perhaps,  on  that  very  account  that  the  Illuminées  have  deftroy-
ed  it.  At  leaif  I  am  obliged  to  fay,  that,  notwithstanding  the
numerous  inquiries  which  I  have  made,  I  have  not  bee»  able
to  procure  it.


HISTORICAL  PART.  97


Mte  to  Chap.  IV.  vide  Page  81.

Î  think  it  incumbent  on  me  in  this  place  to  mention  the  ob*
fervations  which  I  have  heard,  and  theftrifluresthaU  have  re-
ceived from  divers  Mafons,  on  what  has  been  faid  of  their  de-
grees in  the  fécond  volume  of  thefe  Memoirs.     According  to
f>me  of  the  Brethren,  I  have  fiid  a  great  deal  too  much;  ac»
cording  to  others,  /  have  not  faid  enough .  The  reader  will  eafi-
ly  conceive,  that  the  former  confifts  of  thofe  Brethren  in  whofe
favor  an  exception  has  been  made,  as  too  honeft  and  upright  to
be  admitted  to  the  higher  myfteries;  and  that  the  latter  are
men  who,  after  having  been  admitted  into  the  occult  Lodges,
blulh  to  think  that  they  could  ever  have  deferved  fuch  an  ad-
miflion.    Both  are  entitled  to  my  thanks;  I  alfo  owe  them  an
anfwer;  more  particularly  thofe  German  obfervers,  who  have
been  kind  enough  to  fend  me  fome  very  important  difcuffions
on  Mafonry,  and  whofè  learning  can  only  be  equalled  by  their
politenefs.    They  are  perfons  of  too  accurate  underftandings
not  to  perceive  that  their  negative  teftimony  muft  naturally
vanifh  before  the  pofitive  evidence  of  thofe  who  confefs  the
whole.  A  very  ancient  Mafon,  fpeaking  of  a  particular  Lodge
of  which  he  had  been  a  member,  told  me,  "  He  was  perfectly
*.*  aware,  that  feveral  Mafons,  refpectable  for  the  purity  both
"  of  their  religious  and  political  principles,  and  of  their  gene-
"  ral  conduct,  had  often  attended  a  certain  Lodge  ;  but  that  he
"  alfo  knew  what  precautions  were  taken  when  they  were  pre-
f?  font;  and  further  he  could  aflert,  that  the  generality  of  the
V  Brethren  belonging  to  that  Lodge  had  been  the  moft  ardent
*'  promoters  of  the  Revolution.     Some  of  them  had  held  high
*'  ftations  in  it,  and  one  of  them  had  become  minifter."  Thefe
■precautions  taken  are  more  than  a  fufficient  anfwer  to  thofe  who
have  not  feen  any  thing  improper,  tho*  admitted  to  the  Lodges.
In  the  fécond  place,  my  German  obfervers,  though  they  wifh
to  juftify  the  inftitution  and  views  of  Free-mafonry,  candidlv
confefs,  that  Mafonry  has  been  corrupted  for  more  than  thefe
three  hundred  years  paji  ;  and  this  is  more  than  fufficient  to
prove  the  intrigues  to  which  it  has  been  fubfervient.

The  principal  objection  made  by  thefe  gentlemen  is,  that  I
have  confounded  Free-mafonry,  which  has  but  three  degrees»
with  the  new  and  ancient  Roficrucians,  and  other  degrees  of
modern  creation.  My  anfwer  is,  that  if  all  Mafons  are  not
Rof  crucians,  all  Rojicrucians  are  Mafons;  that  I  have  made
the  proper  exceptions  for  the  firft  three  degrees  ;  but  that  will
not  hinder  thefe  firft  degrees  from  being,  as  they  really  have
been  for  this  long  time,  a  noviciate  for  the  Roficrucian  de-
grees. I  will  not  difpute  upon  terms;  let  any  perfon  give  me
a  name  by  which  I  may  call  this  body  of  apprentices,  Fellow-
era fts,  Maflers,  and  Rojicrucians,  and  I  will  with  pleafure  ad-
mit it;  but  till  that  be  done  I  muft  fpeak  fuch  a  language  as
rny  readers  can  underftand.  In  fhort,  I  know  that  Mafonry
fornurly  exifted  without  Rofkruciar.s  ;  but  I  fhoulci  be  glad  \Q

N


9&  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

fee  it  proved,  that  thofe  occult  myfteries  now  removed  to  ip**
Roficrucian  degrees  did  not  belong  to  the  firft  three  degrees.
1  think  I  could  prove  that  they  did;  ?nd  the  inference  would
be,  that  Mafonry  at  no  time  could  have  been  free  from  thofe
dangerous  myfteries  or  real  plots.  At  prefent  it  fuffices  for  my
object,  to  have  proved  what  the  Mafonry  of  the  prefent  day  is  ;
and  that  is  moft.  certainly  demonstrated  by  the  very  nature  and
the  authentic  documents  of  its  higher  degrees.  To  the  proofs
already  adduced  I  am  now  enabled  to  add  (if  I  chofe  it)  memo-
rials, letters,  and  formal  declarations  of  repenting  Mafons,
certainly  not  men  whofe  teftimony  could  be  queftioned.  One
of  thefe  is  a  worthy  magiftrare,  who,  admitted  a  Free-mafon
«bout  the  year  1761,  had  pafi'ed  a  great  part  of  his  life  in  the
dark  recefTes  of  Mafonry.  The  other  is  a  military  man,  at  pre-
fent as  zealous  for  his  religion  as  he  formerly  was  for  the  mys-
teries of  Mafonry.  Thefirft  declares,  that  what  I  have  faid  of
Mafonry  is  true,  but  that  I  have  not  faid  all.  The  latter  writes
me  word,  that  I  have  rather  foftcned  than  exaggerated  the  oc-
cult degrees.  In  fact,  the  former  gives  me  a  clearer  infight  into
the  three  Rojtcrtecian  degrees;  the  firft  is  entirely  Ckrijlian;
the  fécond  is  denominated  t he  Founder s ,  or  the  Cabal;  the
third  is  that  of  the  Natural  religion.  The  particular  object  of
this  third  degree  was,  ift,  to  avenge  the  Templars  ;  2dly,  to
feizeonthe  ifland  of  Malta,  and  to  make  it  the  firft  feat  of 'na-
tural religion.  He  told  me  indeed  things  fcarcely  to  be  credit-
ed. For  example,  and  thefe  are  his  words,  "  That  about  the
"  end  of  die  year  1773,  or  in  the  courfe  of  1774,  the  Lodge  of
*'  which  he  was  Matter  received  a  letter  from  the  Grand  Orient*
"  purporting  to  be  a  cony  of  a  letter  which  it  had  received
"  from  the  King  of  Pruffia.  It  was  onty  to  be  communicated
"  to  the  Knights  of  Paiejline,  the  Knights  Kadofi},  and  the
"  Scotch  Directory.  This  letter  was  tranfmitied  to  us  by  the
*:  corfefponding  Lodge';  and  though  it  had  already  been  read
"  in  feveral  Lodges,  it  only  contained  three  fignatures.  It  ex-
"  horted  as,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  oath  mjehad  taken,  to  fign  an
*'  obligation  to  march  at  the  fnft  requifirion,  and  to  contribute
"  both  by  our  perfons  and  our  imral and ph-yfica I poivers,  to  the
"  conqueft  of  the  ifland  of  Malta,  and  of  all  the  former  polTes-
*'  fions,  fituated  in  the  two  hemifpheres,  which  had  formerly
■  M  belonged  to  the  erncejiorj  of  the  Mafonic  Order.  The  object
"  of  our  efiablifhment  at  Malta  luar  the  pofiibility  of  converting
"  that  ifland  into  the  fat  of  natural  religion.^  I  objected  to  the
author  of  this  memorial,  that  if  I  wrote  this  account  nobody
would  believe  me.  Let  people  believe  or  not,  as  they  pleafe,  he
anfwered,  I  both  fa<v*  and  received  the  Utter;  my  Lodge,  how-
ever, refufed  to  fignit: — I  alio  fay,  let  it  be  believed  or  not,  I
have  the  memorial  and  can  atteit,  that  the  author  is  a  mart  much
and  defervedly  eiteemed  by  all  who  know  him.

The  fécond  Obferver,  who  is  alfo  a  repenting  Msfon,  in-
forms me,  1  ft,  That  in  the  hypothec's  I  had  advanced  on  the
origin  of  Mafonry,  I  had  only  copied  one  of  the  Mafonic  Tra-
ditions, which  taught  that  Manes  was  the  real  founder  of  Ma-
fonry. adly,  That  "  ia  the  Lodges  of  the  Knights  Kadofi,  af-


HISTORICAL  PART.  99

"  ter  all  the  oaths,  ceremonies,  and  trials,  more  or  lefs  terri-
*'  ble,  wicked  and  impious,  three  Manikins  are  mown  to  the
*'  Candidate,  reprefenting  Clement  V.  Philippe  Le  Bel,  and
*'  the  Grand  Majler  of  Malta,  each  attired  in  the  attributes  of
*l  their  dignities.  The  unhappy  fanatic  is  here  to  fwear  eternal
"  hatred  and  death  to  thefe  three  profcribed  perfons,  entailing
"  that  hatred  and  death  on  their-fitccejfors  in  their  default.  He
*'  there  ftrikes  off  the  three  heads,  which,  as  in  the  degree  of
"  Elecl,  are  real  when  they  can  be  procured,  or  filled  with
l(  blood  if  fictitious.  He  does  this,  crying  out  vengeance,  ven-
*'  geance!  &c."  k  is  evident  that  I  had  foftened  the  barbarity
of  this  decree,  for  I  had  fpoken  but  of  one  head  to  be  {truck  off,
ivhen  in  reality  there  are  three.  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  name
thefe  two  Memorialifts  ;  but  two  other  witnefTes  1  may  name.
— The  firft  is  the  Count  de  Gilliers,  who,  living  on  intimate
terms  with  great  and  profound  Mafons,had  fo  well  laughed
them  out  of  their  fecrets,  that  he  gained  admiilion  into  the
Lodges  without  undergoing  any  trials;  and  he  makes  no  dif-
ficulty in  faying,  that  he  has  been  an  eye-wirnefs  to  three-
fourths  of  what  I  have  faid.  The  other,  the  Count  D'Orfeuilie,
gives  me  leave  to  fay,  that  though  he  was  for  a  long  time  the
Mafter  of  a  Lodge,  he  can  obferve  but  very  flight  differences
between  the  Roficrucian  degrees  which  he  has  given  and  feen
given,  and  thofe  which  I  have  defcribed.

I  am  at  prefent  in  poffeffion  of  twenty  original  Mafonic  de-
grees ;  and  of  four  accounts  of  the  Ro'>crnc:.in  degrees,  two  in
manufcript  and  two  printed.  The  firit  was  fent  me  from  Ger-
many, the  fécond  from  America,  the  third  was  primed  in
France,  and  the  fourth  in  England.  They  differ  confiderably
from  each  other:  but  aH  of  them  coincide  in  about  fifteen  lines,
preciiely  the  moft  impious,  thofe  which  contain  the  Mafonic
explanation  of  INRI.  The  account  which  I  followed  in  inv
fécond  volume  was  that  published  by  the  Abbé  Le  Fran: m  his
Voile  Levé,  and  his  Conjuration  decohverfe.  Several  Mafons
had  informed  me,  that  he  had  accurately  delineated  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  Lodges;  but  I  am  now  able  to  fay  whence  he
had  procured  thofe  Mafonic  decrees  whole  ceremonies  he  had
fo  well  defcribed;  and  I  learned  it  in  the  following  manner: —
One  of  thefe  refbeftabJe  EccJefiafficn  wl'ohave  found  a  rrtrrtr
in  the  generofuy  of  the  Engiifh  nation  from  the  perfecutions
of  his  countrymen,  and  who  to  the  greatcft  fimplicity  of  man-
ners joins  the  knowledge  and  praclice  of  his  duties,  Mi .  De  La
Haye,  Curate  of  Fié  in  the  diocefe  of  Mans,  hearing  that  1  was
writing  on  Free-maionry,  was  kind  en  High,  before  he  had  feen
my  work,  to  lend  mefome  Memoirs  that  he  had  written  on  the
fame  lubjecl.  When  he  came  to  afk  me  mv  opinion  on  them.  ï
toM  him,  "  that,  allowing  for  difference  of  ftyle,  his  work
»'  long  fince  been  printed,  and  the  Jacobins  in  return  had  n
*'  fiicred  the  Author  at  the  Carmes  on  tue  famous  fécond  of
tl  September."  I  then  fhowed  him  the  Abbé  Le  Franc's  work,
who  had  added  but  little  to  his,  and  both  had  fallen  info  the
là  n  error  in  attributing  th^  origin  of  Malbnry  to  Socinus  —
This  worthy  eccleiiafcic  anfwered  me,  "  That  he  had  bee»


100  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  perfectly  unacquainted  with  the  exiftence  of  the  Abbé  Le
"  Franc's  work,  but  that  he  could  eafily  account  for  its  coin*
"  cidcnce  with  his.  I  had,  faid  he,  feveral  Free-mafons  in  my
"  pariih.  In  my  neighborhood  in  particular  was  that  unfortu-
"  nate  Feffier,  a  famous  Brother  of  the  Lodge  at  Alençon,  fince
**  become  luch  a  terrible  Jacobin,  and  the  intruded  Bilhop  of
**  Séez.  Several  of  thefe  Mafons  renounced  their  errors;  and,
"  as  a  proof  of  their  total  renunciation  of  the  Lodges,  they
*'  gave  me  up  all  their  papers  and  Mafonic  degrees.  I  had  made
"  a  digeft  of  thefe  degrees.  Mr.  Le  Franc,  who  was  at  that  pe*
"  riod  in  our  diocefe,  preffed  me  to  publifh  them;  but  1  did
"  not  dare  do  that,  for  fear  of  the  Mafons,  and  I  rather  chofe
.  to  give  a  copy  of  the  whole  to  Mr.  Le  Franc,  requeuing  him*
"'  to  uie  it  as  he  thought  fit.  Mr.  Le  Franc  went  to  Paris;  the
"  Revolution  took  place;  and  he  doubtlefs  thought  it  wou  d
"'  be  ufeful  to  publifh  the  work  I  had  given  him,  having  firft
'*  improved  it  by  the  polifh  of  his  ftyle;  and  he  certainly  has
*'  done  it  better  than  I  could.  If  his  work  has  done  any  good,
"  I  am  happy  that  he  publifhed  it;  but  1  am  very  fori  y  to  re-
"  fleet  that  it  caufed  his  death." — This  latter  fentiment,  and
the  fear  left  I  fhould  fufpeel  the  Abbé  Le  Franc  of  a  breach  of
confidence,  feemed  folely  to  occupy  this  worthy  man's  mind.
I  could  not  help  praifing  Mr.  Le  Franc  for  having  had  more
courage  in  publifhing  the  work  than  he  had  ha.1;  and  he  had
befides  given  it  the  ftyle  of  a  Man  of  Letters.  The  point,  how-
ever, moft  interefting  for  our  object  is,  to  find  in  this  anecdote
a  new  proof  of  the  authenticity  of  the  degrees  publifhed  by  the
Abbé  Le  Franc,  which  I  had  quoted  with  fo  much  confidence.
The  teftimony  of  repenting  Mafons  is  far  more  to  be  relied  on
than  the  afTertions  ofthofe  who  continue  to  be  dupes  or  perfiit
in  their  errors. — I  addrefs  this  note  to  thofe  readers  who  may
flill  entertain  any  doubt  of  the  authenticity  of  the  degrees  as  I
have  publifhed  them.  I  alfo  declare  to  theadepts,  that  nothing
would  give  me  greater  fatisfaction  than  to  fee  an  anfwer  found-
ed, not  on  nonfence  and  fcurrilous  abufe,  but  on  good  reafon-
ing.  I  am  perfectly  aware,  that  a  very  excellent  work  on  Ma*
fonry  might  be  made.  Their  Letters  and  my  Anfwers,  with  o-
ther  materials  that  I  have  by  me,  may,  perhaps,  at  fome  future
tïr.iz,  iurnilh  the  fubject  for  iuch  a  work.


HISTORICAL  PART,  ICI


CHAP.    V.


to


Knigge's  Intrigues  and  Succeffes  at  the  Congrefs. — Offi-
cial Reports  of  the  Superiors  of  the  Order. — Multi-
tude of  Mafons  illuminized  at  this  Period.

OF  all  the  general  afTernblies  that  had  been  held  by  p;rft
the  Mafons  for  thefe  laft  twenty  years,  whether  at  means  em-
Brunfwick,  Wifbaden,  or  in  any  other  towns  in  Germa-  P|c-yed  by
ny,  none  could  be  compared  with  that  of  Wilhemfbaden,  ^kt?'&8e  tr
either  for  the  number  of  the  deputies  or  the  variety  of  [|ie  Qon_
Seels  of  which  it  was  compofed.  One  might  fay,  that  all  grefs.
the  incoherent  elements  of  Mafonry  had  been  thrufr.  into
one  den.  Knigge  informs  us,  that  he  had  had  the  honor
of  being  deputed  by  his  ancient  brethren;  that  he  might
have  taken  his  feat  and  been  prefent  at  the  deliberations  ;
but,  forefeeing  the  ilfue  of  it,  he  thought  he  could  more
ufefully  ferve  thecaufe  of  his  new  Illuminifm  by  direct-
ing the  part  that  Mi  no  s -Dittfurt  was  to  aét  in  the  inte-
rior of  the  Meeting,  while  he  himfelf  would  hover  around
and  obferve  the  exterior.  His  fuit  plan  of  attack  was  to
gain  the  Templar  Mafons  of  the  Strié}  Obfervance,  with
vvhofe  fecrets  he  was  well  acquainted,  and  he  had  fre-
quently attended  their  Lodges,  that  he  might  thro'  their
means  enfure  a  majority  of  votes.  Had  he  fucceeded  in
this  plan,  Weifhaupt's  code  would  have  been  decreed  at
this  general  congrefs,  and  would  have  become  at  once  the
ftandard  law  for  millions  of  Mafons  fcattered  throughout
the  globe,  who  would  thus  have  been  illuminized  and
ready  to  fally  forth  from  their  lurking  places  at  the  com-
mand of  their  Antifocial  Chief-

When  defcribinj  this  plan  of  attack,  Knigge  takes  care

to  inform  his  readers  why  he  abandoned  it: "  I  own

"  (fays  he)  that  I  always  retained  a  certain  predilection
"  tor  my  former  brethren  of  the  Striât  Observance;  I
"  had  already  illuminized  fo  great  a  number,  that  I  was
w  in  hopes  of  uniting  their  fyftem  with  ours.  My  inten-
"  tion  moft  certainly  could  never  be  to  deliver  up  to  the
M  Congrefs  all  our  papers,  and  thus  to  put  ourfelves  at
"  the  mercy  of  the  deputies.  I  had  not  received  fuch  pow-


102  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

«  ers  from  thofe  who  fent  me.  And  be  fide,  we,  who  did
K  not  feek  after  that  power  that  gives  grcatnrfs,  rank,  or
"  riches;  zve,  who  did  not  feek  ta  reign  in  Jplendor  and
"  in  the  eyes  of  the  public;  zve,  in  fort,  whofe  conflit  u-
**  tion  was  to  a£i  in  filcncc  and  with  fecrecy  ;  how  could
u  we  go  and  make  ourfelves  dependent  on  an  Order  fo
li  deftittlte  of  unity  in  its  fyftems.

"  I  made,  however,  an  offer  of  my  fervices;  I  made  it
c:  both  in  writing  and  by  word  of  mouth;  and  all  the  an-
"  fwer  I  received  was,  that  I  might  fend  or  prefent  my
*c  papers  to  the  Congrefs,  and  that  they  would  judge  of
K  thofe  parts  that  were  to  be  approved  or  rejected."*

Stung  to  the  quick  at  fuch  contempt,  Kludge  conceiv-
ed himfelf  abfolved  from  all  his  oaths,  and  from  every  cu-
ty  toward  his  ancient  brethren.  Abandoning  all  hopes  of
conquering  the  whole  body,  he  refohed  to  attack  them
cne  by  one,  and  then  to  gain  over  the  while  body,  Lodge
by  Lodge.  He  agreed  with  the  afTtfTor  Alines  to  direel
their  whole  attention  in  future  toward  two  points;  the
iirft,  to  hinder  the  aflembly  from  pairing  any  refolutions
detrimental  to  the  interefts  of  their  IUuminifm;  the  other,
to  facilitate  its  intrufion  into  the  Lodges,  and  that  with
fo  much  art  that  no  degree,  nor  any  Grand  Mailer,  could
be  an  obstacle  to  the  domination  of  the  Bavarian  Breth-
ren; and  that  means  fhould  be  found  fooner  or  later  to
unite  the  code  of  the  Illuminées  with  that  of  the  Mafons.
— Such  was  the  object  of  the  million  entrufted  by  Knigge
to  his  co-adept  Minos,  whom  he  charged  to  get  the  fol-
lowing refolutions  palled:  "  ill,  A  fort  of  union  of  all
u  the  Mafonic  fyftems  in  the  firft  three  degrees,  fo  that  a
u  Mafon  admitted  to  thefe  three  degrees  ihould  be  ao-
"  knrjwledged  as  a  true  brother  by  every  Lodge  of  what-
«  ever  c]afs  or  fyfrem  it  might  be. — 2dly,  That  in  com-
ct  mon  Mafonry  no  mention  fhould  ever  be  made  of  the

"  higher  degrees  or  of  the  unknown  Superiors. 3  ily,

"    That  all  traiifmitting  of  money  to  the  Mafonic  Supe-

*'  riors  fhould  be  forbidden.— 4-thly,  'J'hat  a  new  code

"jfhould  be  prepared  for  the  brethren. — 5thly,  That  eve-
"  rv  Lodge  fhould  choofe  its  own  Superiors  and  Direc-
"  tory,  that  is  to  fay,  ihould  declare  to  which  Grand
"  Lodge  they  choie  theirs  fhould  be  fubjecV'f

*  I  .ail  Obfcrvations  of  Pb//o,  Page  8  j.
f  Original   Writings,  Vol.  II.  Kludge's  Report  of  Dimeb
tij  j,  or  Jam!?."-  1783.


HISTORICAL  PART.  JO3

While  Minos  was  thus  following  his  inftru&ions  within,
Knigge  was  without,  acting  the  part  of  Infinuator  and
Scrutator.  "  I  fought  to  know,  (fays  he  in  the  fame  re-
*'  port  to  the  Aréopagites)  and  I  knew  what  turn  things
K  were  taking  in  the  afleinbly.  I  knew  all  the  different
"  fyftems  that  different  parties  wifhed  to  make  predomf-
"  natej  I  then  entered  into  a  correfpondence,  which  I  Hill
"  continue,  with  the  Chiefs  of  Zinnendorf's  party.*  I
u  alfo  founded  the  Chiefs  of  other  parties  by  various  means.
41  Several  came  of  themfclves  and  difcloied  themfelves  to
M  me,  entrusting  me  with  all  their  fecrets  becaufe  they
"  knew  that  I  was  folely  actuated  by  a  wifh  for  the  gen-
w  eral  good,  and  not  by  perfonai  confiderations.  Infhort,
"  fome  of  the  deputies  learned  (J  enow  not  how)  that  our
"  Illuminifm  was  in  exigence.  They  ahrtojl  all  came  to
'*  me  to  entreat  me  to  admit  them; — 1  thought  it  proper
"  to  exacl:  the  reverfal  letters  (of  our  candidates)  from
u  them,  commanding  them  to  keep  abfolute  filence  on  the
"  fubjeclj  but  I  took  care  not  to  entruft  them  with  the
«  leaft  part  of  our  fecrets.  I  only  fpoke  to  them  of  our
u  myfteries  in  general  terms,  during  the  whole  time  that
u  the  Congrefs  continued. "f

This  method  of  proceeding,  and  the  art  with  which
he  infinuated  that  Mafonry,  undoubtedly,  was  in  pofTes-
fion  of  myfteries  of  the  higheft  importance  ;  but  that  the
profound  Malbns,  who  were  in  pollcffion  of  fuch  myfte-
ries, were  not  to  be  met  with  at  the  congrefs,  greatly  aug-
mented the  curiofity  and  ftimulated  the  ardor  of  the  de-
puties for  his  Illuminifm.  1  ne  care  with  which  he  took
the  reverfal  letters^  the  character  of  candidate,  the  pro-
mife  he  exadled  at  the  fame  time  of  all  thefe  deputies  not
to  fécond  any  proportion  detrimental  to  the  new  brother-
hood, were  lufficient  toenfure  himagainft  any  refolutions
that  might  be  entered  into  by  the  meeting.  Befide,  the
difpofitions  he  obferved  in  thefe  deputies  were  fufTicient
to  ftrengthen  his  hopes.  "  I  owe  them  thejuftice  to  fay,**
he  continues  in  his  report,  "that  I  found  the  great eji
,**  part  of  them  in  the  bejl  difpofitions;  that  if  their  con-

*  This  fyftem  of  Zinnendorf  was  an  incoherent  medley  of
the  Scotch  and  Swedilh  degrees,  of  the  Knights  Templars,  of
the  Confidants  of  St.  John;  and  at  that  time  was  the  predomi-
aant  fyitern  in  Germany.

f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Knigge 's  Report  cf  Dimeh
jiji,  or  January  178*.


104  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

«  duct  was  not  effective  it  was  for  want  of  having  been

<c  nurtured  in  a  better  fchool.* It  was  with  plea-

"  fure  I  obferved,  that  if  the  excellent  intentions  that  had
"  brought  thefe  men  together  from  œil  corners  of  Mafon-
u  ry,  were  not  more  efficacious,  it  was  becaufc  they  could
"  not  agree  on  principles.  Mojl  of  them  appeared  to  be
*'  ready  to  follow  any  fyilem  that  they  judged  conducive
*  to  give  to  their  Order  that  utiiicy  and  activity  that  was
"  the  object  of  all  their  wifhes/'f

Whatever  may  be  the  partiality  of  the  hiftorian  for  the
Mafonic  Brotherhood,  it  will  be  impofitble  for  him  to
invalidate  this  terrible  evidence  of  Knigge  a^ainft  their
chofen  and  privileged  members  j  againft  thofe  whom  the
Order  judged  moit  worthy  of  reprefenting  it  in  folemn
congrefs.  No  man  can  mifconceive  the  fignification  of
left  difpofitions  or  of  excellent  intentions  in  the  mouth  of
jP/jifVij-Knigge.  They  evidently  demonstrate  men  who
needed  only  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  means  of
working  a  revolution  of  impiety  and  anarchy,  to  under-
take it.  This  vaft  Brotherhood  of  Mafons  muft,  at  this
period  at  leaft,  have  been  forciy  affected  in  its  higher  mys-.
teries.  It  was  prepared  for  confpirators  even  of  Wei-
(haupt's  ftamp.

Certain  of  fuccefs,  Knigge  feems  to  have  left  the  as-
fembly  to  its  diforderly  deliberations  ;  and  notwithftand-»
ing  the  imprudence  with  which  he  taxes  Minos,  the  lat-
ter fucceeded  in  obtaining  the  decree  of  the  principal  par-
ticulars agreed  between  them.  It  was  forbidden  that  any
brethren  fhould  call  each  other  Heretics  (Ferketzern).
It  was  decided  that  the  firft  three  degrees  alone  mould
be  looked  upon  as  effential  to  Mafonry.  CommifTaries
were  named  to  digeft  certain  regulations,  the  plan  of  which
had  been  given  by  the  affembly,  as  well  as  of  a  general
code.  The  choice  of  the  higher  degrees  and  of  fyftems
was  left  to  the  decifions  of  each  Lodge.  The  reft  of  the
deliberations  were  as  boifterous  as  might  be  expected  from
the  variety  of  Sects.  I  have  before  me  a  manufcript  ac-
count of  this  aifembly  written  by  a  very  learned  Mafori,
and  it  contains  nearly  as  much  lamentation  as  it  does  in-
struction. Among  other  things  I  find,  that  the  Duke
Ferdinand  of  Brunfwick  was  proclaimed  Grand  Matter
of  all  Mafonry,  and  that  few  members  recognized  him  as

*  Ibid.  |  Laft  Obfcrvatiom,  Page  85.


HISTORICAL  PART.  10$

fuch.  A?ain  I  fee,  that  it  was  wifhed  to  abrogate  the
fyltem  of  the  Templar  Mafons,  whofe  abominations  and
fecrets  had  been  expofed  by  fome  falfe  brother  in  a  woik,
called  'J  he  Stone  oj  Scandal,  but  that  few  Lodges  would
obey  the  abrogation.  Moreover  an  attempt  was  made  to
quafh  all  Seels  and  Schifrns;  but  they  neither  could  be
overpowered,  and  confufton  continued  to  prevail  with  re-
doubled force.

Let  us  however  obferve,  that  if  any  fyftem  can  be  faid
to  have  gained  a  preponderance  it  was  that  of  the  Phila-
ietes,  a  fort  of  fpurious  offspring  of  Swedenborg.  The
moft  famous  Illuminées  of  thatfet,  Wiihermoz,  St.  Mar-
tin, and  La  Chappe  de  la  Henriere,hzd  made  an  attempt
to  connect  themlelves  with  the  Hero  of  Crçvelt  andMin-
den  ;  it  is  even  afierted,  that  he  was  mific-d  by  their  ap-
puliation  of  Pkilaletes  and  of  Benevolent  Knights.  Strong,
however,  in  his  protection,  neither  they  nor  their  agents
fpared  any  pains  to  carry  the  day  at  Willemfbaden  ;  they
were  well  fupported,  and  victory  muff  have  infallibly  de-
clared in  their  favor,  had  not  Knigge  already  gained  over
fo  many  of  the  deputies.  Hence  the  remit  of  this  too  fa-
mous con°;refs  was  to  have  been  the  delivery  over  of  all
the  Mafonic  Lodges,  and,  with  them,  of  all  the  govern-
ments of  Europe,  to  two  Sects  of  Illuminées,  the  moft
jmpieus  and  the  moft  difaftrous  in  their  views,  and  moft
unrelenting  in  their  zeal  for  the  overthrow  of  every  reli»
gion  and  of  every  government  whatever.

I  know  not  into  which  of  thefe  two  fects  the  Count
de  Virieux  had  been  initiated;  but  either  might  have
fuggefted  the  manner  in  which  he  defcribed  the  refult  of
this  Mafonic  Congrefs.  On  his  return  to  Paris,  being
complimented  by  the  Count  de  Gilliers  on  the  fublime
fecrets  he  had  been  in  queft  of  at  Willemfbaden,  and  prefs-
ed  a  little  by  the  farcafric  ftyle  with  which  the  Count  was
wont  to  jeer  the  Brotherhood,  he  at  length  anfwered,  "  I
*'  will  not  tell  you  the  fecrets  I  bring;  but  what  I  think  I
"  mav  tell  you  is,  that  it  is  all  much  more  ferious  than
K  you  think.  'I  he  fail  is,  that  a  conspiracy  is  now  con-
*'  t  riving,  and  that  xuith  fo  much  art  and  of  fo  profound
"  a  nature,  that  it  will  be  very  difficult  jar  Religion  ar.d
"  Nations  not  to  fink  under  it."  Happily  for  Mr.  de
Virieux,  faid  Mr.  de  Gillieis  when  he  told  me  this  anec-
dote, the  Count  had  a  great  fund  of  probity  and  upright*
nefs.  What  he  had  learned  on  his  miflion  fo  difguiied
O


iû6  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

him-  with  the  myfteries,  that  he  abandoned  them  and1  be-
came^ a  very  religious  man.  It  was  to  this  event  that  his
great  zeal.«igainir.  the  Jacobins  maybe  attributed.

Lîiiui  innately  for  ail  nations,  thefe  plots  did  not  in-
fpire  the  other  Mafonic  Deputies  with  a  fimilar  horror.
The  Congrefs  being  terminated,  Pbiic-¥Liv.g<ye  haitened
to  reap  the  benefit  of  his  intrigues;  and  his  harveft  was
much  more  plentiful  than  he  expected.  On  the  break-
ing up  of -the  ailembly,  the  deputies  flocked  to  him  to  beg
ad  million  to  the  myfteries.  Such  candidates  needed  no
long  noviciate,  or  tedious  trials  in  the  minerval  fchools-j
they  were  to  be  Conducted  quickly  to  the  mylteries  ;  and
Knigge  admitted  them  to  the  degrees  of  Epopt  and  Re-
gent, ichicb  they  all  received  (he  tells  us)  with  cnthufi-
cjtn.*  "  All  of  them  were  enraptured  with  our  degrees
"  of  Epopt  and  of  Regent  ;  all  were  enchanted  with  theie
"  mcjur-picces,  for  lb  they  ftyled  thefe  degrees.  Two
<c  ©nly  made  fume  llight  obfervations  on  certain  expres-
"  (ions,  that  may  be  eahly  changed  according  to  local  cir-
'•  cumuancct,  and  particularly  in  Catholic  countries."!   ,

Were  it  not  that  all  honeit  Mafons  would  link  under
grief  and  aitonifhment,  I  fhould  conjure  them  to  weigh
tor  a  moment  theie  words,  all  vuere  enraptured,  all  re-
errjed  them  with  enlbujiafm  ;  all  Elect,  Roiicrucians,
Templars,  Brethren  of  Zinnendorf,  Brethren  of  St.  John,
Knights  of  the  Sun,  Knights  Kadofh,  Perfect  Phiiofo-
phers;  all  hearken,  and  receive  with  enthuiiafm  thole  or-
acles of  the  Hierophant  which  call:  fuch  light  on  their  an-
tique myfteric.*:,  and,  expounding  the  meaning  of  their,
Hiram,  their  Mac  Benac,  and  their  Polijhed  Stone,  fliow
that  they  contain  nothing  more  than  that  primitive  Equa-
lity and  Liberty,  as  well  as  that  Morality,  which  entirely
conflit  in  the  art  of  annihilating  princes,  governments,
religion,  and  property  !  When  thefe  Deputies  fhall  re-
turn to  their  Orients,  and  fpread  thetnfelves  throughout
the  Mafonic  Directories  and  Provinces,  will  not  thefe
original  plots  be  intruded  on  your  Lodges  under  the  pre-
tence of  mylteiies  I  Ely  then  fuch  dens  of  fedition  ;  and


*  Die  ho'jeren  graden  wurden  mit  enthufiafmus  au  fgenom-
men.

f  Jeder  mann  war  znfrieden — Meine  Leutewaren  eniziickt
uber  cliefe  mei.Uer  ftiicke.  Lujt  Qhftrvatiens,  Pages  us  and
%1%—and  Original  Writings,  Let.  i,  efPhilo  to  Caio.


HISTORICAL  PART.  '  IO7

'learn  once  for  all,  that  thofe  men  in  whom  you  place  fuch
confidence  are  profound  confpirators  abufmg  your  confi-
dence, juft  as  they  will  that  of  princes  at  a  future  day. —
View  then  this  pretended  Brotherhood  as  a  hoard  of  con-
spirators, who  have  long  waited  only  for  the  baleful  ge-
mius  of  a  Weifliaupt  to  launch  out  into  all  the  crimes  of
revolution.

From  the  period  when  thefe  Mafonic  Deputies  were
illuminjzed,  the  Bavarian  Seel:  alTumed  a  menacing  as-
pect; and  its  progrefs  is  fo  rapid,  that  the  univerfe  will
(bon  be  overrun  with  Confpirators.  The  center  of  ac-
tion may  be  faid  to  have  been  at  Frankfort,  where  Knigg'e
'refided;  and  he  computes  the  number  of  perfons  he  had
illuminized,  and  nearly  all  of  whom  were  Mafons,  at  five
hundred.*  There  is  fcarcely  a  town  in  his  neighborhood,
bat  has  its  Epopts  and  Minerval  Schools;  Franconia,
Swabia,  the  Circles  of  the  Higher  and  Lower  Rhine,
Weftphalia,  Sec.  fwarm  with  then.

The  towns  of  Vienna  and  Berlin  almoft  immediately
fhowed  that  Auftria  and  Prulîia  were  falling  a  prey  tu
Illuminifm.  Tyrol  had  been  already  infected,  and  the
fame  apoltle  had  proceeded  to  carry  it  into  Italy.  In  the
north  adepts  were  making  their  attacks  on  the  Lodges  of
Bruxelles  and  of  Holland,  while  others' were  preparing
to  introduce  Weifhaivpt 's  my  ft  cries  into  England.  In  Li-
vonia they  had  gained  footing;  and  treaties  were  making
in  Poland,  to  throw  the  whole  power  of  the  Confedera-
tions into  the  hands  of  the  Illuminées.  Ifthe  day  off  ranee
was  not  yet  come,  it  was  becaufè  they  entertained  deeper
views  on  her;  but  the  day  was  to  come,  and  aii  Europe
ihall  now  know  why  it  has  been  deferred.

It  would  be  of  little  avail  for  me  to  have  produced
Weifliaupt's  code,  were  I  not  alio  to  produce  demonftra-
tive  evidence  of  its  proarefs  and  continuation.  MitW/
will  demand  that  I  prove  the  exiltence  fcfthis  Se6t,
myfteries,  and  confpitacies,  ranging  from  the  noun  to  die
fouth,  and  from  the  eaft  to  the  weir,  enlifting  under  its
banners  that  multitude  of  hands  which  it  needed  to  •
revolutions.  To  effectuate  this,  I  ihall  again  appeal  to
their  own  annals  ;  they  are  mutilated,  it  is  true;  but  v:'>t-
withftanding  that,  they  are  menacing,  and  they  are  de-
monftrative.

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  from  VhJi  to  Cait*


ttU.


I08  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

In  the  very  year  after  the  conrçrefs  of  Willemfbadeft

we  find  five  provinces  completely  organized  according

to  the  Laws  of  the  modern  Spartacus,  under  the  general

direction  or  Philo- Knigge,  and  in  full  correfpondence

with  the  iiluminizing  Areopagites.f     Even  during  the

time  of  the  congrefs  we  find  in  the  Original  Writings

not  only  ample  letters  on  the  progreis  made  by  a  few

candidates,  but  official  reports,  and  ftatements  made  by

the  Provincials  of  their  provinces,  relating  to  the  progrefs

of  their  novices,  of  their  initiated,  and  of  their  emiflaries»

Official       Let  us  call  our  eyes  onthefe  documents,  for  none  can  be

Reports,     better  authenticated.     Perhaps  I  might  have  done  well

to  have  tranfiated  the  whole  of  them  ;  but  tho*  I  abridge

them,  they  will  ftill  retain  the  whole  force  of  evidence.

j4  The  firft  of  thele  reports  is  from  Mahomet. \     This

Of  the        Provincial  of  a  new  fpecies  was  the  Baron  Schroeck*

Province    enstein,  the  fame  whom  Weifhauptfo  early  as  the  firft

°u  aD0"     year  or  ^is  llbaminifm,  enlifted  at  Aichftadt,  and  whom

he  ciaffed  among  thole  fooiifh  Aristocrats  who  were  to

fwallow  the  baii.     The  Baron  fo  completely  fwallowed

the  bait,  that  in  fix  years  we  find  him  one  of  the  Chiefs

of  the  Confpiracy.    The  Province  he  prefided  over  in  the

Illuminized    Geography   was    denominated   Pannoniay

comprehending  t\\c^\ih\€i^,oi Morea  and  Latium,  which

com  p  rife  the  Lodges  of  Olympia,  Damietta,  libur,  His-

palis,  Damajcu^  6iche??i,  Nicomsdia,  and  Surention.     I

find  that  his  reiidence  is  at  Aichitadtj  and  he  informs  the

Areopagites,  that  he  has  given  the  name  of  Surentum  to

the  new  colony  of  Mompelgard,  which  he  looks  upon  as

belonging  to  the  Duchy  of  Wurtemberg,  and  therefore

fhould  be  comprifed  within  the  diftrict  of  Latiiun.    I  al-

fo  find  that  Niccmcdia  is  Augfbourg;  hence  I  conclude,

that  the  Lodges  under  the  infpeCfion  of  this  adept  were

fo  many  conquers  made  by  Illuminifm,  partly  in  Bava»

ria,  and  partly  in  Swabia.

f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  3,  from  Philo  to  Wei»
fhaupt.

t  This  report  is  of  the  month  of  Char  dad  «151,  that  is  to
fay  June  1782,  coniequently  anterior  to  the  breaking  up  of  the
Mafonic  Conpreis.  Mahomet  is  nererthelefs  in  direel  corres-
pondence with  Pw/s- Knigge  ;  for  we  may  obferve  the  latter
pointing  out  to  the  former  novices  to  be  initiated.  Original
Writings,  Pbilo'l  Report.


HISTORICAL  PART.  IO9

The  report  contains  ftrong  proofs  of  this  Provincial's
teal  for  the  propagation  of  the  Order.  We  may  obferve
him  threatening  two  adepts  with  their  immediate  difmis-
fion  unlefs  they  lhow  more  activity,  and  promoting  two
others  becaufe  they  excelled  in  the  arts  of  inlinuation — •
As  a  proof  of  the  care  with  which  he  describes  his  infe-
riors, and  of  the  precautions  he  takes  according  to  their
characters,  let  the  reader  perufe  the  account  he  gives  of
the  Brotherhood  at  Olympia,  which  he  has  juft  been  in-
specting :  "  {have  learned,  (he  writes),  to  know  the  Bro-
"  ther [Zeno.  I  did  not  find  him  to  be  a  thinker,  and  much
K  lefs  afcrutator.  .  .  .  He  does  not  like  to  meddle  with
"  things  that  are  above  the  human  under/landing;  and  he
tt  contents  himfelf  with  the  degree  of  Minerval,  but^>/-<?-
"  mifes  toenlijl  us  feme  good  novices. . . .  Grantor  has  more
11  araor  j  I  initiated  him  mylelfinto  the  Minerval  degree.
«  You  may  eafily  conceive  how  much  he  is  difpleafed
"  with  all  his  fcience,  and  how  much  his  wit  difconcerts
u  him,  when  I  tell  how  that  he  is  furious  at  his  father  for
"  having  had  him  taught  to  write.  .  .  .  Spevfppus.  was

"  ill;  the  others  though  young  are  full  of  ardor

*  The  colony  is  weak  as  yet Be  guarded  in  your

ct  letters  to  Zeno.  He  told  me,  that  he  would  not  lodge  in
"  the  fame  houfe  with  a  ?nan  who  doubted  of  the  immor-
<c  mortality  of  the  Soul.  ....  All  thefe  Brethren  hold
"  their  regular  meetings,  but  don't  dare  enliit  their  novi-
"  ces  under  the  name  of  Maionry.  They  prefer  doing  it
"  under  the  pretence  of  a  Literary  Society,  and  I  made
"  no  difficulty  in  permitting  them  to  continue  their  prac-
«  tice."

In  that  town  of  Latium,  or  of  the  Dutchy  of  Wur-
temberg, which  Mahomet  calls  Damietta,  there  is  an
academy  and  a  college  ;  and  one  of  the  profeflbrs  is  the
adrpt  PhirrOf  whofe  honejly  and  activity  could  not  be
iuflicieritly  praifed  by  the  Provincial.  The  following
inilituttoii  may  ferve  as  a  fpecimen  of  this  man's  hones-
ty :  "  By  means  of  this  Brother,  fays  Mahomet,  the  whole
«  academy  of  this  town  has  become  a  real  nurfery  for  us
"  (eine  pfanxfchule  fur  uns).  Pythagoras-ÛREXL  is
u  the  unknown  fuperior  of  this  affembly,  which  is  entirely
"  compofed  of  young  pupils  of  not  le  birth.  He  has  under
"  him  an  apparent  fuperior  to  conduct  and  form  them,  c ho-  #
" Ie n  from  among  the  young  men.  No  reverfal  letters  are
"  required  of  them  ;  they  are  only  flattered  with  the  hopes


dia.


110  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

u  fhould  they  prove  faithful  to  the  leflbns  inftilled  into
"  them)  of  being  hereafter  admitted  into  an  Order  com-'
u  tbofed  of  the  bej}  of  men"

Left  fuch  lèflbns  fhould  be  loft  to  thofe  who  were  edu-
cated at  Court,  the  adept  Epimenides-Y  ALK-,  auliccoun-
iellor  and  burgo-mafter  of  Hanover,  has  taken  care  to  il-
iuminize  the  f -b-preceptor  of  a  young  Prince  defigned
by  the  initials  T.  H.  .  .  .  After  having  told  all  this  news
to  the  Areopagites,  Mahomet  at  length  informs  them  that
ALu.hiavel,  one  of  his  emiffaries,  has  fent  in  a  lift  of  the
hoiieJi  men  with  whom  he  has  made  an  acquaintance  iti
Switzerland;  and  that  things  would  take  a  good  turn
there,  provided  Phiio+K-nigge  would  ftimulate  a  little  the
steal  of  the  Helvetian  apoftie.
11.  The  next  official  report  is  from  M/nos-DiTTrum

OfDacia  the  Afleflor.  This  man  was  alfo  a  Baron.  As  a  recom-
and  Ly-  penle  for  the  pains  he  had  taken  at  W-dlemfbaden,  Knig-ge
had  made  him  the  Provincial  or  fuperior  of  Veteravia,
probably  of  part  of  Weftphalia.  His  command  compl-
ied two  diftricts,  Dacia  and  Lydia.  Overburthened  with
bufinefs,  and  more  attentive  to  that  of  Illuminifrn  than
to  the  affairs  of  the  Empire,  he  gives  but  a  brief  account
for  the  prefent.  He  names  about  a  dozen  Brethren  a-
mong  whom  are  four  novices.  Hediftinguiih.es  the  Bro-
ther Mentha  rit  h  in  particular,  whom  he  means  to  entruft
with  the  eftablifliment  of  a  Minerval  School  at  Bcnfabe.
Meanwhile,  till  he  can  report  further  progrefs,  he  propo-
fes  his  plan  for  an  illuminized  fflerhood,  which  he  pro-
mifes  to  place  under  the  direction  of  another  Baron,  who,
like  himielf  is  an  Afleflor  at  the  Imperial  Chamber.  A-
bout  the  fame  time  (Merdemeh  1152,  Auguft  1782),
Knigge 's  report  ftates,  that  Minos  was  in  correfpondence
with  Doctor  Stark,  in  hopes  of  making  a  conqueft  of  the
Landgrave  of  Heile  Darmftadt  by  means  of  his  grand
Almoner.  The  Illuminizing  Afleflor  does  not  report
the  progrefs  of  this  négociation;  but  Knigge  appears  to
have  forefeen  the  fuccefs  it  would  have,  when  he  writes
to  the  Areopagites,  "  I  am  much  pleafed  to  fee  that  Bro-
*'  ther  Minos  has  entered  into  a  correfpondence  with
<c  Doctor  Stark;  it  will  teach  him,  that  to  be  able  to
w  treat  with  a  man  of  wit  one  muft  have  fome  one's  felf."
9'  Though  it  feems  that  Knigge  did  not  allow  any  great
fhare  to  this  Provincial,  yet  he  founded  great  hopes  on
his  ferviceSj  efpecially  if  bis  too  great  zeal  could  ie  re
prejjed'


HISTORICAL  PART.  Ill

The  third  report  is  from  the  adept  Epic7etus-Mi.EC.,  HT-
Provincial  of  Albania,  the  fame  Brother  whom  we  (hall  P'  Aiba-
find  mentioned  by  Knigge  as  founding  the  Lodge  at  Man-
hejm  furnamed  Surina/ri,  and  at  Erankenthal  that  called
Parmariho,  within  the  prefecture  of  Paphlagonia,  or  of
the  Palatinate.  It  would- feem,  that  at  that  period  Albania
had  p  ailed  under  the  infpeclion  of  fome  other  Provin-
cial :  This  Epicietus-hheg  was  acounfellor  and  Protes-
tant Miniiter  of  Heidelberg,  his  habitual  réfidence,  and
bad  been  milructed  in  the  arts  of  Infinuator  by  Wei-
fhaupt  himfeif.

The  reader  may  judge  of  this  man's  merits  from  the
following  bulogium  that  Weifhaupt  makes  on  hini  when
writing  to  Ce /fus  :  "Do  not  forget,  when  at  Munich,  to
"  do  every  thing  in  your  power  for  our  EpiEietus.  He
t;  is  nearly  the  bell  of  the  adepts.  He  has  a  little  too
"  much  ardjr,  but  in  all  other  points  he  is  incomparable.
"  He  has  already  made  a  conqueji  for  the  Order  of  nearly
"  the  whole  Palatinate.  Not  a  country  town  but  con-
"  taijis  one  or  two  adepts  at  leaft."*  This  letter  being
of  the  fame  year  as  the  report,  it  would  be  ufelefs  to
particularize.  Some,  however,  of  the  Brethren,  mention-
ed by  Epicletus  deferve  our  attention  :  fuch,  for  example,
as  a  certain  Brother  defcribed  by  the  initials  B.  E.  under
the  direction  of  Diodorus,  who  in  a  Catholic  Univerfity
and  of  the  Catholic  Religion  himfeif  until  that  period,
thought  he  could  not  give  a  better  proof  of  his  zeal  for
Illuminifm,  than  by  attempting  to  defend  a  Proteftant  the-
iis,  and  that  under  a  pretence  that  denotes  neither  a  Ca-
tholic nor  a  Proteftant,  but  a  man  who  views  Religion
only  as  a  political  invention.  He  gives  for  reafon,  that
the  College  of  the  Counts  of  JVeJlphaiia  mufl  be  a  Pro-
tejiant  College.  Next  the  Brother  Erajlus,  of  the  fame
degree,  who  afks  advice  as  to  the  belt  means  to  fucceed
in  Illumiuizing  the  Preceptor  of  the  Pri?icc  of  Dupont's
Jen,  and  by  that  means  to  educate  the  young  Prince  ac-
cording to  the  views  of  the  Order.  And  laftly  the  Bro-
ther Pic  de  la  Mirandole,  or  BRUNNER,a  Prielt  at  Tief-
enback,  in  the  biiliopric  of  Spire.  "  This  man,  (fays  the
Provincial,)  is  as  yet  a  novice,  but  full  of  zeal  for  the


*  Hat  fchjer  die  ganze  pfahz  unter  das  commando  des  O's
(ordens )  g  bracht.  In  jedem  landft'àdtchen  find  einodei  zwie
•^-Original  Writings,  Vol.  IL  Let.  i.3>  «ntta  178a.


112  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  Order.    The  tenth  of  September  he  defended  his  The-

"  lis  in  fpite  of  the  Jefuits.    In  his  Quibus  Licet  be  begs

"  the  Order  to  take  precautions  leji  the  fortrefs  of  Phi-

"  lipfoourgy  which  the  Auftriana  had  abandoned,  fljould

"  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  bigoted  officer  ^  who  was  petition^

u  ing  for  the  government  of  it-,  ?nd  to  have  it  given  to

l<  another  officer  (more  worthy  of  it,  I  fuppofe)  who  as-

"  pired  to  it." — This  lîluminized  Novice,  who  already

pays  fo  much  attention  to  fortreiles,  wiil  appear  on  the

liage  again  with  the  Brethren  of  Mentz,  confpiring  and

delivering  up  that  town  to  the  French  Jacobins.

ÏV.  The  fourth  official  report  is  made  by  the  adept  rfgis-

Report       Krober.     He  docs   not  take  the  title  of  Provincial  ;  he

by     w-     onj^  a(^s  çov  ^/^r/,;z/.|3LrrUBKTRaH)  originally  a  Jew,

and  who  afterward  made  himfelf  a  Chrilfcian  to  become
Aulic  Counfellor  to  the  Prince  of  Neuwied,  and  a  Pro-
vincial of  the  Illuminées.  Agis  was  governor  to  the
Count  S  toi  berg's  children,  and  the  memoirs  I  have  before
me  declare  him  to  have  been  afterwards  charged  with
the  education  of  the  young  Prince  of  Neuwied,  to  have
gained  the  good  graces  of  the  Princefs,  fowing  difcord  in
ti.at  court,  and  deftroying  the  internal  happi nefs  of  that
family;  in  fhort,  he  was  known  to  all  Germany  by  a
name  that  could  not  reflect  honor  on  his  protccttrix.  As
news,  he  informs  tne  Areopagites  that  the  Baron  de  Witte,
at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  is  much  more  zealous  than  was  ex-
pected; that  he  has  undertaken  to  illuminize  his  Mafonic
Lodge  there;  and  that  from  his  letters  they  may  hope  to
fee  that  of  Bruxelles  fhare  a  fimilar  fate.  .  .  .  The  Bro-
ther Jgis  enquires  whether  they  think  it  proper  that  he
ihould  enter  into  a  correfpondence  with  thofe  fools  of  the
Hermetic  CabeL  Before  he  initiates  them  in  the  fecrets
of  the  Order,  he  wifhes  to  preien:  himfelf  at  their  Lodges
as  one  acquainted  with  thcir's.  He  owns  that  he  is  not
fufHciemly  mafter  of  all  their  fyftenris.  He  afjes  for  lome
inftruction,  that  he  may  perfect  himfelf  in  them,  kit  he
fhould  be  uifcovered  by  thofe  Mafons  lor  whom  he  has  a
ibvereign  contempt,  but  wirli  whofe  jargon  it  is  neceflary
that  he  ihould  be  acquainted,  to  make  a  conqucfl  of  them
for  the  Order.  Thefe  inftructions  are  the  more  necell'a-
ry,  as  a  Brother  of  the  diftricl:  has  juit  applied  to  him  for
leave  to  (how  fome  of  his  letters  to  the  Venerable  of  the
Mafonic  Lodge  at  /r/V,  to  enable  him  to  make  but  one
draught  of  the  whole  Lodge,  Venerable  and  all.


HISTORICAL  PART,  "3

In  the  fame  report  the  Brother  Agis  recommends  to
the  Areopagites  the  adept  Jrchelaus-B  arres,  hereto-
fore a  major  in  the  French  fervice,  at  prefent  throwing
himfelf  on  the  protection  of  the  Order  to  obtain  a  place
in  fome  court  of  Germany,  and  the  Crofs  of  Merit  from
that  of  France,  with  a  brevet  of  Major  à  la  fuite  :  "  I  had
"  taken  it  into  my  head  (fays  he)  that  the  Ambaflador
"  Ch.  .  .  .  was  one  of  ours;  that  he  had  great  influence
"  with  ....  (the  court  or  minifters),  therefore  I  did  not
"  refufe  our  protection,  If  we  fucceed  in  this  buhnefs,  the
"fame  of  our  poiver  will  be  greatly  extended.  Scarcely
"  a  week  pafïes  without  fomebody  coming  to  folicit  our
*'  protection  at  the  courts  of  Verfailles,  of  Vienna,  or  of
<c  Berlin.  It  is  enough  to  make  one  die  of  laughing.  We
<c  take  great  care,  however,  not  to  difmifs  thofe  people
<l  without  hopes;  we  only  fay,  that  we  do  not  like  to  im-
*'  portune  thofe  courts  every  day."

A  marginal  note  is  found  oppofite  to  this  article  in
Knigge's  own  hand-writing,  faying,  JVho  the  devil  has
■put  into  their  heads  this  fable  of  our  omnipotence?  The
man  who  wrote  the  queftion  might  alfo  have  written  the
anfwer;  for  we  may  obierve  him  long  before  this  period
(training  every  nerve  to  give  the  Brethren  a  high  opinion
of  the  power  of  the  Order,  and  even  flattering  himfelf,
that  through  the  exertions  of  his  agents  he  had  obtained
for  the  adepts  honorable  fituations,  livings,  and  dignities,
which  he  dijlributcd  in  the  names  of  the  unknown  fupe-
riorSj  who  were  not  even  in  exijlence  at  that  time  ;  and
when  thefe  fuperiors  do  exift,  we  fee  him  acting  preci  fely
as  the  Brother  Agis  had  done,  procuring  from  an  adept
Count  the  place  of  Chancellor  Direclor,  with  a  falary  of
twelve  hundred  florins,  fending  the  nomination  to  his  can-
didate Wundt,  ecclepajlical  counfellor  at  Heidelberg;  and,
to  (how  the  candidate  the  great  power  of  the  Brethren,
informing  him,  that  the  Order  had  got  him  named  to  this
dignity.*

The  very  article  on  which  Knigge  had  made  this  notç
js  followed  by  another,  which  will  fufficiently  demonftrate
the  credit  they  had  acquired  in  certain  courts,  and  the  ufs
•they  could  turn  it  to  for  the  propagation  of  their  myfte-t

P

*'  See  lad  Obferrations  of  Philo,  Page  45.— Original  Wri-
tings, Vol,  II.  Page  *o*.


114  antisocial  conspiracy;

ries.  "  This  week  (continues  Agis)  we  (hall  receive  a
«  Lutheran  minifter,  who  by  flight  of  hand  has  collecled
IC  about  nine  thoufand  florins  for  the  community  (the
"  Lodge)  of  this  place.  As  foon  as  peace  is  made,  he  is
"  TO  stT  OFF  FOR  LONDON,  with  a  multitude  oj letters

cc  of  recommendation.  The  Pr F O.  B.  uncle  to

"  the  reigning  Duke,  has  promifed  to  fécond  him  with  all
"  his  might.*  It  is  our  intention  alfo  to  employ  him  in
"  that  country  for  the  Order.  He  must  slily  illu-
"  MiNizjE  the  English.  ...  A  large  Dutch  wig,  a
"  fallow  and  meagre  complexion,  large  eyes  widely  open-
''•  ed,  a  fertile  imagination,  a  perfect  knowledge  of  men,
••  acquired  by  roving  about  the  world  for  the  fpace  of  two
%-  vears  under  the  difguife  of  a  beggar.  .  .  .  Do  not  you
li  think  that  with  fuch  qualifications  this  man  will  do  won-
rs? — During  this  winter  we  will  drill  him,  as  the
"  Hernuti  ufed  to  do  their  apoftles."

The  adept  fo  well  defcribed  by  ^/V-Krober,  and  on
whom  he  grounds  his  hopes  of  the  Illuminization  of  Eng~>
iland,  is  not  mentioned  even  by  his  characteriftic;  but  a
manufcript  marginal  note  informs  me,  that  his  real  name
Rontgen,  a  Dutch  proteflant  of  Petkam,  in  Eaft
Frielîând.
Y  The  fifth  report  is  mutilated,  and  is  without  the  name

Of  Pici-     of  any 'Provincial.     Such  as  it  is,  however,  it  forcibly
bam.  evinces  the  progrefs  of  the  Sect  during  the  laft  three

months  of  1782  in  the  Electorates  of  Cologn  and  of
Treves,  called  Picinurn.  At  this  epoch  the  Provincial
is  much  elated  at  the  high  repute  Mafbnry  has  acqui-
red in  thofe  parts  fince  it  has  been  ilium  inized.  "  Here
"  (fays  he)  a  Mafon  was  formerly  a  laughing-flock,
"  whereas  now  a  man  who  does  not  belong  to  a  Lodge  is
"pitied.  Everybody  flocks  tous;  and  the  prophane
"  third  after  our  myftcries. — Every  body  comes  to  cravs
"  the  protection  of  an  Order  that  is  fo  powerful."

A  very  unexpected  proof  of  their  power  is  to  be  found
in  their  Archives;  it  is  the  difgrace  and  exile  of  the  Ab-
be Beck,  whom  the  Prince  Clement  of  Saxony  and  Elect  -

*  To  my  copy  of  the  Original  Writings  I  find  a  manufcript
note  in  the  margin,  by  a  man  who  is  very  converiant  on  thefe
matters;  it  irate? ,  that  thefe  initials  ftand  for  the  Prince  Fer-
dinand of  Bruiipwick.    Pr F ~  V.  B kat  ihm

«tie  unterjtutzang  verfprochen.


HISTORICAL  PART.  Ï  1$

©r  of  Treves  had  till  then  favored  with  his  confidence.
I  had  not  the  honor  of  being  acquainted  with  this  vene-
rable eccleliaftic  ;  but  1  remembered  to  have  feen  fome
of  his  friends  at  Paris,  who  augured  ill  from  this  difgrace.
I  little  expected  at  that  time  to  find  his  apology  in  fo  com-
plete a  ftyle  in  the  report  made  by  the  Provincial  to  his
Superiors  :  "  The  famous  executioner  of  the  Electors  con-
"  fcience,  the  Abbé  B.  has  at  length  received  his  dis-
<c  million,  and  an  order  to  leave  the  country.  Ever  fines
"  the  Elector  has  had  this  Jefuit*  in  his  fervice  he  has
tc  been  a  declared  enemy  to  Free-mafonry,  and  generally
{*  fpealcing,  to  every  thing  that  tends  to  enlighten  man-
'■  kind.  Nov/  that  this  Jefuit  is  out  of  the  way,  we  have
"  the  greateft  hopes  of  making  a  glorious  harveft  in  Treves
"  and  the  Electorate."  How  indignant  muft  his  Electo-
ral Plighnefs  haye  been  when  he  discovered  in  his  official
report  the  true  origin  of  all  thofe  infinuations  to  which
one  of  his  moll  faithful  fervants  had  fallen  a  victim;  and
particularly  when  he  obferved  the  advantages  that  his
real  enemies  and  enemies  of  all  governments,  promifed
themfelves  in  confequence  of  an  illulion  originating,  in
all  probability,  entirely  with  themfelves.

We  fhall  here  give  another  proof  of  the  omnipotence
that  the  Order  was  acquiring  in  the  different  courts  of
Germany.  The  Provincial,  under  the  head  of  the  Lodge
of  Pinna,  that  is  to  fay  Hachenburg,  gives  an  account  hi
the  inauguration  of  Doctor  Vogler,  phyfician  to  the
Count  of  Kirchenberg,  and  then  continues,  "  Here  the
"  affairs  of  the  Order  prulper  amazingly  well;  the  Count
(i  is  entirely  furrounded  by  Illuminées.  His  private  je-
il  cretary,  his  pbyfuian,  his  pa/lor,  his  counsellors-,  are
"■all  ours. —  The  Prince's  favorites  are  our  mcii  zee
*c  adepts;  and  we  have  taken  our  precautions  for  the  fu~
."  ture.  Let  the  Order  ejiablijh  itfelfas  v.  t  I  where,
"  and  the  world  is  our's."

This  wifh  of  the  illuminizing  Provincial   wo.
have  been  accomplifhed,  had  the  adepts  been  ev.
as  zealous  as  thofe  whom  he  mentions  of  the  provinces  of
Picinum  and  Dacia.    One  adept  in  particular  had  :


*  The  appellation  Jefuit  is  here  ufed  by  the  Iltamir.'1
a  term  of  fcurrilous  reproach,  as  it  frequently  is  a  gain  ft  am
perfon  inimical  to  their  principles,  for  the  Abb  :  i
was  a  Jefuit.


IIÔ  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

thirteen  novices  in  three  months  ;  and  it  is  not  unworthy
of  remark,  that  eleven  were  already  Free-mafons  and  two
Lutheran  minifters,  who  were  charatlerizcd  in  the  Or-
der by  the  names  of  Avcrvûës  and  Theognis.  The  firft
fhowed  fo  much  zeal,  activity,  and  intelligence,  and  the
principles  of  the  Order  appeared  to  have  taken  iuch  deep
root  in  his  heart,  that  the  fuperiors  haftened  his  initiation
into  the  higher  degrees,  that  they  might  admit  him  to  the
council,*and  eafe  themfelves  of  fome  part  of  their  labors  on
him.  The  other  Tbeognis-FiscHER)  became  curate  of
Wolfbriicff.  in  Auftria,  near  Lintz,  by  means  of  the  in-
trigues of  the  adept  Paufanias.  In  Knigge's  report  to
the  Areopagites,  I  find  the  following  note  on  this  adept  :
"  Theognis,  at  the  time  of  his  promotion  to  his  curacy,

"  received  a  letter  from  the  bifhop  ofK ,  the  princi-

"  pics  of  which  appear  to  have  been  copied  from  our
"  code.  The  prelate  mentions  a  fecret  project,  of  reform,
u  and  begs  Theognis  not  to  (how  his  letter  to  any  body.
"  The  Brethren  of  this  colony  are  firmly  perfuaded  that
tc  the  Bifhop  is  one  of  our  adepts;  and  to  that  circum-
"  flancs  they  attribute  his  having  given  a  benifice  to  The-
"  ognis-y  and  in  confequence  of  it  they  labor  with  redou-
"  bled  zeal."

What  can  have  induced  the  editor  of  the  Original
Writings  to  give  only  the  initial  letter  of  this  Bifhop's
e  ?  Have  not  the  Evangelifts  named  Judas  Ifcariot
at  full  length?  Why  not  then  name  the  prelate  H as-
lein,  vice-prefident  of  the  fpi ritual  council  at  Munich,
afterwards  Lord  Bifhop  of  Kherson  for  the  church,
and  Brother  Philo  of  Byblos  for  Weiihaupt  ?  With  a
little  leis  refpect  for  pcrfons,  miftruft  would  fall  on  thofè
who  deferye  it,  and  who  fo  little  refpeâ  their  own  dignr-
tv  ;  and  the  world  would  know  the  man  who  was  fore-
molt,  in  the  confpiracy  agatnft  God,  though  he  might
wear  a  mitre.
Reports  !0rc  I  undertake  to  prefent  a  lift  to  my  readers,  I

by  will  mention  the  laft  official  reports  recorded  in  the  an-

Knigge.  najs  0f  the  Seer.  They  are  made  by  Knigge  himfelf,  and
are  dated  Thirmeh,  Mcrdcdmeh,  Dim,;h,  u  52,  that  is  to
foy  July  and  Augult  17^2,  and  the  January  following»
We  there  find,  th"a  .non  at  Willcmfbaden  did  not

hinder  him  from  overlooking  the  provincial  fuperiors,
whole  reports  I  have  juft  iiattd.  It  was  to  him  that  their
reports  were  firft  lent;  he  tranfmitted  them  to  the  Areo-


HISTORICAL  PART.  117

pâgïtes,  after  making  fuch  remarks  as  his  zeal  for  the  pro-
pagation of  the  Se£t  might  fuggeft.  What  he  particu-
larly blames  in  his  inferiors  was,  a  want  of  method.  That
want  of  regularity  in  their  proceedings  appeared  to  him
to  impede  their  fuccefs,  and  to  render  it  lefs  certain  than
he  could  wifh.  And  he  writes  to  his  fenate,  "  I  cannot
"  fufficiently  repeat  it;  when  we  mall  have  organized
u  the  whole  body,  when  every  province  (hall  have  its
«  Provincial,  and  every  Infpeâor  ihall  have  three  Provin-
«  cials  under  his  inflection  j  when  our  National  Direcl-
«  ory  (hall  he  eilablifhed  at  Rome  (that  is  to  fay  Vienna)  ;
"  when  our  Areopagites  mall  be  freed  from  all  the  tire-
K  fome  detail,  (and  by  that  means  certain  of  remaining
tv  unknown)  and  mail  only  have  to  infpect  the  whole,  to
«  perfect  the  fyllem,  and  to  direct  the  propagation  of  it  in
K  other  countries;  when  the  Order  can  give  proper  help
"  to  the  directing  Brethren,  then,  and  not  before,  ihall  we
'«  be  able  to  do  fomething."

Soon  after  thefe  leiTons,  and  under  the  head  of  France,
we  read,  "  With  refpect  to  that  country,  I  would  not
cc  advife  you  to  undertake  any  thing  until  I  {hall  have
"  difpofed  of  the  multiplicity  of  bufmefs  that  overpowers
u  mo  at  prefent.  I  have  even  laid  afide  for  the  prelent  my
"  projects  on  Alface  and  Lorraine."  Meanwhile,  till
that  day  comes,  Knigge  takes  a  view  of  the  reports  re-
turned to  him  by  the  Provincials,  and  fubjoins  to  the
number  of  their  Novices  thofe  whom  he  had  made  him-
felf.  But  the  grand  object  that  abforbs  all  his  attention
is  the  means  of  confummating  the  intrufion  into  the  Ma-
fonic  Lodge?,  which  is  at  once  to  en!  ill  millions  of  men
under  the  .  of  his  Aréopage,  and  to  eiFcct  his  Ulu-

minizing  revolution.

the  period  of  this  laft  report,  that  is,  January  1783,
this  intrufion  had  made  great  progrefs;  and  it  was  to  that
circu  m  trance  that  Wcifhaupt  was  indebted  for  the  mul-
titude of  adepts  who  already  had  fpread  his  confpiracy
throughout  Germany.  Let  the  reader  caft  an  eye  on  tiie
map  of  Germany,  and  on  the  Lodges  already  ilium inized.
It  is  true,  that  many  towns  are  at  prefent  unintelligible,
in  confequence  of  the  geographical  nomenclature  adopt-
ed by  the  Sect;  but  every  one  of  thefe  names  denotes  an
Iiluminized  Lodge,  a  town  where  the  copfpiratorS  had
gained  a  hold;  and  hence  we  may  obferve,  that  (carcely
a  canton  is  to  be  found  where  this  baleful  Sect  has  not


IIÏ  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

penetrated.  Let  us  attend  only  to  thofe  towns  that,  in
fpite  of  all  their  precautions.,  have  been  difcovered  either
by  the  writings  or  habitual  refidence  of  the  great  adepts;
i — what  a  formidable  alliance  have  they  already  formed  !
The  fu-ft  of  the  Provincials  immediately  under  the  direc-
tion of  Weiftiaupt  has  under  him  alone  the  Lodges  of
A'iunich,  of  Ratifbon,  of  Landfberg,  of  Burghaufen,  of
Straubingen,  and  of  Freyfingen. — In  the  Circles  of  Fran-
conia  and  Swabia,  the  Baron  Mahomet  prelides,  at  leaft
over  thofe  at  Aichftadt,  his  habitual  refidence,  at  Bamberg,
at  Nuremberg,  at  Augfb'ôurg,  at  Mompelgard,  and  over
tbofe  of  the  Dutchy  of  Wurtemberg. — In  the  Circles  of
the  Upper  Rhine  and  of  the  Palatinate  of  the  Lower
!  bine  thi  .'  £t  has  eftabl i flied  i tfel f,  at  Deuxponts, Man-
heim,  Frankenthal,  Heidelberg,  Spire,  Worms,  Wetz-
lar,  and  Franckfort  on  the  Mein. — The  Electorates  of
Mayencç,  of  Treves  and  Cologne,  have,  with  their  capi-
tals, mated  a  fimilar  fate. — In  Weftphalia,  this  diltemper
rages  at  Aix-La-Chapelle,  at  Neuwied,  and  at  Hachen-
burg. — In  Higher  and  Lower  Saxony,  at  Kiel,  at  Bre-
men, at  Brunfwick,  at  Hanover,  at  Gottinguen,  at  Go-
tha, at  Jena. — The  great  adepts  Nicolai  and  Lechfering,
eftablifh  Illuminifm  at  Berlin,  and  the  adept  Brutus  re-
ports that  the  Minerva!  Schools  are  in  as  full  activity  at
Vienna,  in  Auftria,  as  they  were  at  Lintz.  Hannibal^ot
.Weifhaupt's  grand  commiflioner  the  Baron  Baiius,  had
ellabiifiied  it  at  lnfpruck  and  Botzen,  and  at  many  other
towns  in  the  Tyrol.  From  the  bottom  of  his  den,  at  In-
golciltadt,  Weifhaupt  prefides  over  his  confpiring  crew;
and  through  their  means  he  commands,  as  it  were,  Ger-
many and  its  confines,  and  might  be  called  its  Emperor
of  Darknefs.  He  has  more  town?  in  his  confpiracy  than
the  Chief  of  the  Empire  has  in  his  dominions.

At  this  period  a  great  revolution  took  place  in  the  code
of  the  Illuminées,  which  only  contributed  to  augment  the
ftrength  of  the  Sect,  and  which  I  hope  the  hiltorian  will
not  overlook,  as  it  will  fumiflî  him  with  an  nnfwer
to  thofe  who  may  repeat  an  objection  that  has  often  been
made  to  me.  "  Weifhaupt's  Illuminifm  only  began  in
Bavaria  about  the  middle  of  the  year  1776;  the  Sect  chief-
ly attached  itfelf  to  youth.  It  required  a  long  noviciate,
and  many  years  for  its  Mincrval  fchools  to  form  the
>ts  and  prepare  them  for  the  degrees  where  the  con-
ey is  entered  upon.    It  muft  have  required  therefore


HISTORICAL  TART.

generation  after  generation  to  form  that  multitude  of  con-
spirators whofe  marftialled  cohorts  rife  triumphant  at  a
time  when  Illuminifm  is  ftill  in  its  cradle."

This  objection  may  have  appeared  forcible;  but  at  the
period  where  we  now  fland  it  folveS  itfelf,  Knigge  has
anfwered  it  when  he  enumerates  that  multitude  of  Mafons
who  have  already  attained  the  years  or  diicreticn,  and  did
not  ftand  in  need  of  thofe  long  trials,  and  who,  in  the  pro-
teftant  countries  particularly  difdained  the  Minerval  fchools
only  the  more  to  Jhow  their  ardor  to  be  admitted  to  the
higher  degrees  of  the  conipiracy.*  Weifhaupt  (bon  un-
derftood  the  reafon  of  this  rapid  progrefs  ;  and  it  was  on
that  account  that  he  difpenfed  with  the  feverity  of  the
code  and  the  trials  of  the  Minerval  fchool,  and  that  he
exhorted  his  Infinuators  to  enroll,  after  Knigge's  exam-
ple, men  who  could  be  quickly  advanced  to  the  higher
myiteries:  Such  was  the  new  method  of  recruiting  that
was  adopted  at  this  period.  When  the  Provincials  men-
tion the  ages  of  their  Novices,  we  find  few  that  have  not
attained  the  age  of  manhood,  generally  or  twenty-five,
thirty,  forty,  and  even  fifty  years  of  age,  and  whofe  occu-
pations in  life  denote  years  of  difcretion.  Thus  then  does
the  Seel  enlift  multitudes  of  hands  that  do  not  wait  for


*  Knigge  fays,  that  in  the  Catholic  countries  the  Philofo-
phical  writings,  the  light  of  the  age,  (the  impiety  of  the  day)
had  not  made  near  fo  much  progrefs  as  in  Proteflant  coun-
tries. This  was  true  with  refpect  to  Bavaria;  would  to  God
that  the  fame  thing  could  have  been  faid  of  France  !  Be  that  as
it  may,  "  The  Minerval  fchools,  fays  Knigge,  did  not  take  at
"  all  in  the  Proteftant  countries;  and  in  fair,  fays  he,  fuch  in-
*'  ftitutions  could  only  be  of  ufe  in  Catholic  countries  buried
"  yi  darknefs,  and  for  indifferent  old-fa(hioned  beings.  But
*'  the  greater  the  averfion  fhewn  by  the  Brethren  for  thefe  as-
"  iemblies  of  Novices,  the  more  earneftly  they  folicited  to  be.
44  admitted  to  the  higher  degrees — Mit  der  Minerval  clajfe
*l  nuollte  es  in  protejïantiybben  larder  durçhaus  Hicht  forty  una
"  nvurklich  nvar  aucb  diefe  an]} alt  vorziiglich  nur  inferjînjîerten
**  catholifcben  provinxen,  und  auf  inittetmàJRgealtags  tnenjch  m
"  awviendbar — "Je  iveniger  absr  die  mietglieder  geneigt  tuareH
*'  verfammlungen  der  Pjlanz-fchule  anzukgen,  urn  dejto  eifriger
"  drangenjie  in  micb,  thnen  endlich  die  habere  grade  mitzuthei~
*'  lex/'  Phih  endlicbc  erhjdrungy  P.  52,  53,  et  pajim.  The
reader  will  not  forget  that  Knigge  fpeaks  particularly  of  thofe
jfjphifticated  Mafons  among  whom  he  was  making  recruits,  and
who  were  better  prepared  tor  the  myfteriea  than  the  others,
becaufe  they  were  mure  accuftomed  to  thefecrets  of  the  Lodge,


**9


120  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

age  to  enable  them  to  prepare  for,  or  even  to  a£t  when  the
day  of  revolution  fhall  be  come.

Another  confideration  that  fhould  not  efcape  the  his-
torian is,  the  avowal  (frequently  repeated  by  the  Adepts
in  the  Original  Writings)  "  that  the  great  progrefs  they
made  was  in  confequence  of  the  facility  with  which  they
introduced  themfelves  into  the  Mafonic  Lodges,  and  of
the  preponderance  that  the  myfteries  of  Illuruinifm  da'ly
acquired  in  the  Lodges,"  One  of  the  Illuminées,  Lu/lus,
tells  us,  that  fince  feveral  Mafons  and  fome  even  of  the
rnoft  zealous  Roiicrucians,have  been  initiated  in  our  mys-
teries, one  would  think  that  the  Order  had  acquired  new
life,  and  a  much  increafed force  of  expanfton  or  of  propa-
gation.* The  Areopagite  Hannibal  attributes  the  fuc-
cefs  of  his  miifion  to  the  fame  caufe.  In  the  report  he
makes  of  his  proceedings,  he  begins  by  congratulating
himfelf  on  having  found  Mafonic  Lodges  already  efta-
blifhed  in  the  Tyrol.  It  was  in  them  that  he  made  his
great  conquerls.  that  he  recruited  Counfellors  of  the  Re-
gency, PaofeiTors  of  Colleges,  Counts,  Excellencies,  Mi-<
nifters  of  the  Emperor,  PiefidentP,  Vice-Prefidents,  Mas-
ters of  the  Port-Office,  Counfellors  of  the  Government,
all  enthufiaits  for  the  new  myfteries  of  lHurmnifnv  At
the  fight  of  fuch  unexpected  fuccefs,  he  openly  confeffes
that  they  are  all  due  to  the  new  method  introduced  by
Philo-Kriigge.  He  then  informs  the  Areopagites  "  that
"  the  experienced  Mafons  are  turning  themfelves  on  all
«fides  in  que/1  of  light,  that  fcaicely  had  he  given  the
«  flighted:  indication  of  it,  before  their  hearts  were  infla-
"  med,  and  their  entreaties  to  be  initiated  were  moil
"  preffing.  That  it  was  juft  the  moment  for  making
"  o;ieat  conquefts  at  Vienna,  where  there  mufl  he  more
«  than  four  hundred  Mafons,"  If  at  Milan  he  has  not
{o  good  a  profpedt,  it  is  becaufe  no  Mafonic  Lodges  have
been  eftablifhed  there;  but  he  will  find  fome  at  Cremo-
na, Pavia,  and  other  parts  of  Italy;  and  he  ends  by  re-
queuing that  the  other  towns  he  means  to  vifit  may  ba
comprehended  in  the  new  Geography  of  the  Se&.f

In  fhort,  how  does  Knigge  himfelf  account  for  that
prodigious  multitude  of  adepts  recruited  in  fo  fhort  a  pe-
riod for  Illuminifm?  «  When  I  entered  the  Order  (he

*  R.  Ittlliu*  Journal,  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  II.  Seel.  VI.
.  f  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  and  II.  Hannibal's  four  Letters,


HISTORICAL  PART.  121

«  writes  to  Cato-Zwzck)  you  were  all  in  the  dark  with
«  refpect  to  the  Mafons  of  tbejlrifi  Obfervance.  I  told
"  you  (o,  and  was  pofitive  that  among  them  there  were
"  excellent  men  (for  us).  Spariacus  believed  mê;  and
"  the  event  has  proved  it.  Our  beft  adepts  at  Neuwied,
'*  at  Gottinguen,at  Mayence,at  Hanover,  at  Brunfvvick,
"  and  in  the  Palatinate,  were  all  formerly  Free-mafons  of
«  the  Striai  Obfervance."*

Neverthelefs,  thefe  conquefts  on  Mafonry  made  by  II-
luminifm  do  not  fatisfy  either  Pbilo-Knigge  or  Sparta*
cus-WQifhzupt.  They  will  not  even  let  the  name  of  Ma-
fonry  exift,  but  as  a  cloak  for  their  Illuminifm.  Let  us
then  conhder  of  their  new  means  and  further  fuccefîes  in
the  following  Chapterf

*  Utifere  beften  leute  in  Neuwied,  Gottinguen,  Mainz,
Hannover,  Braunfchweig.PfaltZjfuid  ehemalige  mitgliederder
Striden  Obfcrvantz.

f  For  the  whole  of  this  chapter  let  the  Reader  apply  to  the
Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Part  I.  and  the  Reports  of  the  Pro*
vincials  ( Prtvintial-Beriche)  from  P.  159  to  %%u


;  ..2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

I


CHAP.  VI.


Xew  means  praclifed,  and  new  eonquejîs  made  by  Knigge
and  Weijbaupt  on  Mafonry. — Difputes  between  thefe
two  Chiefs  of  Uluminifm. —  'J  heir  defigns  on  the  Ger-
man Mafons  conjunmiated  before  Knigge's  Retreat.

NOTWITHSTANDING  the  immenfe  number  of
Mafons  that  had  flocked  to  theftandard  of  Ulumi-
nifm,  Weifhaupt  and  Knigge  labored  under  fome  appré-
hendons with  refpecl:  to  a  new  congrefs  that  had  been  ap-
pointed for  the  following  year  at  Willemfbaden.    Knigge
particularly  dreaded  that  new  Code  and  new  form  that
was  in  agitation  for  the  Lodges.     He  knew  that  fome  of
the  Brethren  had  been  named  to  make  a  digeft  of  laws;
nor  could  he  forget,  that  others  bad  received  instructions
from  the  Congrefs  to  gain  admiffion  into,  and  get  them-
Jches  received  members  of  all  the  Jecretfocieties,  in  order
that  they  might  be  initiated  into  their  myjleries^  and  make
their  report  at  the  following  congrefs.  Left  all  the  fruits
of  his  laffc  mifïïon  at  Willemfbaden  fhould  be  blafted  in
the  bud  at  this  new  meeting,  Knigge  (ought  to  make  him-
felf  acquainted  with  the  difpoiitions,  with  regard  to  his
Uluminifm,  of  the  commhTaries  nominated  to  make  the
new  digeft  of  laws,
A melius         rfhe  chief  of  thefe  comminâries  was  a  man  of  the  name
of  Bode,  already  famous  in  the  annals  of  Mafonry,  and
v/ho  was  foon  to  become  more  fo  in  thofe  of  Uluminifm.
—The  fon  of  a  common  foldier  of  Brunfwick,  he  was
brought  up  as  fifer  of  a  regiment,  but  he  foon  thought
himfelf  deftined  to  act  a  higher  part  in  the  world  than  to
accompany  a  drum  with  the  fhrill  founds  of  his  fife.    He
had  learned  to  read,  and  was  fuiRciently  acquainted  with
the  French  and  the  Englifh  languages  to  undertake  fome
tranflations.     Thofe  of  Triftram  Shandy  and  Yorick's
Sentimental  Journey  gained  him  more  credit  than  money;
he  then  fet  up  as  a  bookleller  at  Hamburg;  but  foon  be-
coming the  widower  of  a  rich  heirefs,  he  abandoned  tradei
and  was  decorated  by  the  Duke  of  Weimar  with  the  title
of  Counfellor  of  Embaff'y.     At  length  he  was  declared
Privy  Counfellor  to  the  Landgrave  of  Hefle  Caflei.


Bode.


HISTORICAL  PART,  123

Created  a  Commander  among  the  Templar  Mafons  un-
-der  the  title  of  Knight  of  the  Lillies  of  the  Valley,  Eques
a  Lilio  convallium,  Bode  had  brought  with  him  all  that
genius  neceffary  to  give  importance  to  the  games  of  their
Equality  and  Liberty,  and,  above  all,  that  concern  which
impiety  and  independence  manifeft,  to  difcover  their  mys^
teries  in  the  fymbols  of  that  fame  Equality  and  Liberty.
The  fervices  he  had  rendered  to  the  Brethren  may  be  ap-
preciated by  that  which  Knigge  believed  to  be  lb  mi:  h
to  his  honor,  when  he  fays,  that  nearly  all  the  little  good
that  is  to  be  found  in  the  fyjlem  of  the  Striéf  Observance
is  to  be  attributed  to  Bode;  or,  in  other  words,  every  thing
that  ahunilated  their  fyftem  to  that  of  Weimaupt.  After
having  clofely  fcrutinized  his  man,  Knigge  declares  him
to  be  advanced  in  years,  but  ftill  in  queft  of  truth  which
he  had  not  yet  been  able  to  find,  though  he  had  been  for-
ty years  a  Mafon;  he  depicts  him  as  indiffèrent  to  all  fys-
tems,  though  petulent,  fiery,  and  jealous  of  dominion,  and
as  loving  to  be  flattered  by  Princes.  To  this  cefcription
I  may  add  from  my  German  Memorials,  that  his  exterior
was  unpolifhed  and  almoft  deformed,  which,  however,
did  not  hinder  this  old  Mafon  from  acting  the  part  of  a
wit  and  of  a  man  of  fentiment  with  the  Ladies.  They  al-
fo  defcribe  him  as  a  pedant,  with  an  appearance  of  franlc-
nefs  that  Princes  miflook  for  opennefs  of  character;  but
with  which  they  might  not  have  been  fo  eafily  duped  had
they  known,  that  though  he  fought  their  favor,  he  as  cor-
dially hated  them  as  he  did  what  he  called  the  Mumme-
ries of  Religion^  ofjefuits^  and  of  Priejls.  Such  ienti-
mejits  muft  neceffanly  have  endeared  him  to  the  Illumi-
nées. Knigge  more  particularly  courted  him  on  account
of  the  great  influence  he  enjoyed  over  the  German  Ma-
fonry.  Thefe  two  men  fcrutinized  each  other,  and  Kni
at  length  declares,  that  "  after  many  mutual  explanatin
<l  he  had  admitted  him  to  the  degree  of  Scotch  Kni-
Here  Bode  found  all  thole  promifes  to  forward  the  views
of  the  Order,  to  reveal  all  his  difcoveries  on  Mafonry  to
his  new  Superiors,  to  inftall  the  Illuminées  in  all  the  p'ri.i-
cipal  ports  of  the  Lodges,  and  to  embezzle  their  fui
None  of  thefe  ebligations  appear  to  have  gi'Jc?
uncaftnefs;  but  he  feared,  that  in  the  end  thoie  unie:.-
Superiois  would  turn  out  to  be  jeluits  and  Priefts.  It
was  neceffary,  therefore,  to  remove  fuch  fears,  and  to  gua-,
rantee  to  him  that  thofe  Superiors  detefted  Piieih  and


124  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

Jefuîts  as  much  as  he  did  himfelf.  "  On  this  condition
«  (fays  Knigge)  he  promifed,  i/?,  To  labor  for  us,  and,
"  by  means  of  the  new  Syftem  or  Code  to  be  formed  for
*'  Mafonry,  to  throw  the  empire  over  the  Lodges  into  our
"  hands.  2«//y,  To  put  the  Directories  and  provincial  in-
"  fped-tions,  in  as  much  as  depended  on  him,  into  the  hands
"  of  the  Illuminées,  ylly^  To  prevail  on  the  Brethren  of
"  the  Stria}  Observance  to  fraternize  with  us.  4-tbiy-,  In
"  the  forming  of  the  new  Mafonic  Code,  never  to  lofe
tc  fight  of  the  Illuminized  plan  for  the  choice  of  Matters
"  or  Vénérables  of  Lodges.  $ihly,  To  lay  before  the  Su-
"  periors  all  the  knowledge  he  has  acquired  concerning
"  the  origin  of  Mafonry  and  of  the  Rohcruciansj  and  to
"  caufe  the  Deduofisns  promifed  for  the  Striai  Objervance
"  to  be  printed  at  our  preffes,  and  to  difhibute  them  to
"  our  Brethren  according  to  agreement."*

Such  promifes  from  Bode  were  of  too  much  confe-
quence  to  be  rejected  by  the  Illuminées;  he  was  receiv-
ed with  open  arms,  and,  under  the  characteristic  of  Jme-
lius,  was  ufhered  into  the  higher  degrees.  We  fhall  foon
fee  how  faithfully  he  acquitted  himfelf  of  his  promifes.

While  Knigge  was  making  fuch  important  acquittions

from  Mafonry,  Weifhaupt  was  meditating  another  plan,

that  was  to  inftall  him  matter  of  all  the  Lodges  of  Poland»

The  Areopagite  Cato-Xwack  received  nearly  at  the  fame

time  both  Knigge's  official  note  relative  to  Bode,  and  the

Wei-  following  letter  from  Weifhaupt:  u  i  have  a  mind  to  un-

fhaupt's      «  dertake  the  Polonefe  Confederation,  not  precifely  to  II-

VLews  ?"     "  luminize  them,  but  merely  as   Free-mafonry  to  efta-

Mafbn        "  Wi*h  ik*  Hliem  oj  Confederate  Lodges;  to  fele<St  the  a-

"  biett  perfonsj  to  get  the  ftart  of  the  Striai  Obfervancey

a  and  to  deftroy  it.   Write  immediately  to  Warfaw,  that

"  you  are  acquainted  with  feveral  Lodges  at  Munich  and

pother  towns,  that  are  willing  to  confederate  with  them

"  on  the  following  conditions: 1/?,  That  they  Ihould

*  Original  Writing?,  Vol.11.  Phi  Jo's  bericht  uber  jonien  ;
Di»irh  January,  1783.— tf  îry  DtdnÛîbÉsthé  account  of  the
c/n-iibunons  to  be  dr.iucled for  the  Grand  Ohfirvance,  and  af»
t  rward  to  be  delivered  over  to  the  Jiiumiru-es.  be  not  meant.  I
du  noi  uoderftand  the  meaning  of  them.  But  Bode  referves  to
himfelf  the  difctetionary  power  of  letting  other  perfons  parti-
cipateof  them;  that  is  to  lay,  he  wifhes  to  ferve  the  Illuminées
without  appearing  to  have  abandoned  his  former  Brethren.-—
(Sue  VoL  III.  oj  thefe  Memoirs.)


HISTORICAL  FART.  11$

(i  acknowledge  but  the  firft  three  degrees — idly,  That
"  each  Lodge  fhould  be  at  liberty  to  have  what  Superiors
<(  and  as  many  of  them  as  they  pleafed-y3<//y,  That  ;  II
"  Lodges  ihould  be  independent  of  each  otner,  at  leaft  as
"  much  fo  as  the  Lodges  of  Germany  are  of  thole  of  Po-
"  land — âfthly,  That  all  their  union  ihould  be  carried  on
'*  by  the  correfpondence  and  viiks  of  the  Brethren. — If
"  we  can  but  gain  that  point,  v/e  fhall  have  fucceeded  in
"  all  we  want;  leave  the  rejt  to  me."

"  Philo  has  already  received  inlrrucrjons  toprepareour
"  Lodges  of  the  Rhine  and  of  Lower  Saxony  for  this
"  plan.  Don't  lofe  a  day;  for  both  time  and  danger  prefs.
«  'John  is  corning,  and  the  confederation  will  take  place
*€  at  Vienna  before  that  time.  The  Lodge  %.  %  appears  as
<*  if  it  would  accede.  .  .  Send  to  Warfaw  the  manifeito
«  that  is  to  be  immediately  circulated  in  the  Lodges  on
«  the  occafion.  Without  doubt  the  federation  Will  be
Cî  numerous.  See  hszv  I  eanfeiase  every  occriJioK  açid turn
«  every  circuir;;hrace  to  uft.  As  faon  as  you  iiiaJl  get  an
"  anfwer  fend  it  to  me;  don't  lofe  a  minute.  The  moll
iC  important  bufmefs  for  us  is,  to  eftabliih  an  Ecleâic
"  Mafonry;  if  we  fucceed  in  that,  'tis  all  we  want.  Do
tc  not  mention  our  order  at  Warfaw;  it  is  always  defir-
"  able  to  gain  fo  elTential  a  point.  Send  all  your  docu-
*c  ments  on  Poland  to  Pbiio.  A  multitude  of  Lodges
tc  would  have  joined  us  had  they  not  dreaded  to  be  taken
"  for  blind  Lodges.  This  arrangement  will  raife  the  diffi-
•*  culty.  The  Lngliih  Lodge  of  Edejfa  (Frankfort)  has
"  already  promiled  to  accede  to  thefe  conditions.  Send
¥■  your  di  (patches  off  immediately  for  Warfaw,  without
"  tranfmitting  them  to  me,  that  they  may  get  there  the
"  lboner;  and  defire  an  immediate  anfwer."'*

Though  perlons  who  cannot  gain  adrniilion  to  Wei-
fhaupt's  fecret  councils  may  not  forefee  why  he  fo  earn-
eltly  intereits  hirr.ielf  in  this  plan  for  the  propagation  of
his  confpiracy,  we  may,  however,  remark,  that  Knigge
had  conceived  the  lull  importance  or  the  meafure,  when  a
week  after  he  writes  to  Zwack,  "  7  bat  plan  on  Poland
"  is  a  titojl  majierly  blow.  I  have  already  fent  my  draft  of
°  the  circular  letter  for  the  Lodges  tc  Spartacus."  Ac-
cording to  Weifh'aupt's  plan,  this  circular  letter  was  not
intended  for  the  rol.ih  Mafons  alone,  but  was  to  be  lent

*   nth  January,  1783.


I2Ô  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

to  all  the  Lodges  of  the  Order.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the
fécond  volume  of  the  Original  Writings,  and  is  exactly
that  medley  of  artifice  for  the  feduction  of  Mafons  which
might  be  expected  from  its  author.  Knigge  begins  with
a  fulfome  eulogy  on  their  inflitution.  He  tells  them,  that
their  fociety  tuas  intended  by  God  and  nature  to  reclaim
the  rights  of humanity  opprejj'ed^  of  virtue  perjecuted^  and
offcicnce  degenerated.  In  aftory  artfully  intermixed  with
truth  and  falsehood, he  endeavors  to  demonftrate how  much
the  Order  had  fwerved  from  its  grand  obje£t  for  about
twenty  years  pair.  To  reftore  it,  therefore,  to  its  ancient
fplendor,  he  invites  all  Brethren  fired  with  a  true  zeal  to
unite  with  thofe  Mafons  who  alone  have  remained  in  pos-
fefïion  of  the  real  myfteries,  with  a  fociety  formed  for
their  prcfcrvation  about  the  year  1762,  and  whofe  fpecial
objecl:  was  to  oppofe  the  tyranny  of  the  Brethren  of  the
Strict  Obfervance;  in  fhort,  to  join  a  fociety  which  he
declares  to  be  compofed  of  the  beft  heads  of  the  Order,
and  of  men  whofe  fcience  and  experience  v/ould  command
the  efreem  and  veneration  of  all  that  approached  them.—
At  length,  giving  the  plan  for  his  new  aiibciation,  "  In
"  the  new  regimen  admitted  by  thefe  real  Mafons  (fays
"  he)  we  invariably  hold  to  the  firft  three  degrees. — Se-
"  veral  Lodges  unite  together  in  the  choice  of  one  for
"  their  Scotch  Diretlory,  or  chief  place  of  Lheir  diftric"t,
"  to  which  each  fends  a  Deputy.  This  Directory  decides
"  on  money  matters,  overlooks  objects  of  ceconomy  and
"  the  raiting  of  contributions,  and  grants  powers  for  the
"  erecting  of  new  Lodges.  Above  this  tribunal  we  have
tc  no  Superiors  who  have  a  right  to  raife  contributions;
a  they  are  only  entitled  to  an  exa£t  account  every  three
"  months  of  the  moral  and  political  ft  a  te  of  every  Lodge.
"  A  certain  number  0/  Scotch  Diretlories  join  to  chufe  a
"  Provincial  Directory,  three  of  the  latter  ele£t  an  In-
"  fpeclor,  and  three  infpeclors  chufe  the  National  Di-
"  rector.

cc  This  is  not  the  place  for  expatiating  on  what  we  have
"  already  done  in  the  filent  abodes  of  fecrecy,  or  on  what
"  we  mean  to  do.  It  will  fuffice  to  fay,  that  we  have
"  fchools  to  form  the  young  men  whom  we  afterward  ad-
"  mit  into  our  Order,  and  who  are  deitined  to  labor  to
"  procure  happier  and  more  tranquil  days  for  the  rifing
"  generation.  The  care  we  beftow  on  thefe  pupils  is  in
w  our  eyes  th^  moft  honorable  part  of  our  labors.  Should


HISTORICAL  PART,  127

w  the  Lodges  wifh  for  any  further  particulars,  they  (hall
"  receive  them  from  the  very  perfons  who  have  thought
"  proper  to  propofe  this  plan."*

The  memorials  before  us  are  not  fufficiently  explicit  to
enable  us  to  decide  what  effect.  Zwack's  and  Knigge's
letters  produced  on  the  Polifli  Mafons.  In  Zwack's  note>
however,  on  the  progrefs  of  the  Brethren  we  may  obferve,
that  the  Aréopage  was  in  treaty  for  a Jiritl  alliance  with
the  National  Lodge  of  Poland.  With  refpeir.  to  Germa-
ny, we  are  not  left  in  the  dark  as  to  the  fuccefs  of  thefe
artifices  ;  but  then  it  is  to  Bode  particularly  that  fuch  fuc-
celîcs  are  attributed.  Through  his  means  it  was,  that
Knigge  acquired  powerful  prote&ors  with  the  Mafons  of
high  rank,  and  particularly  with  the  committee  that  was  to
frame  the  new  code.  •  By  the  help  of  fuch  protection  he
fo  amazingly  extended  the  number  of  the  adepts,  that
Weiihaupt  pretended  to  be  alarmed,  or  was  fo  in  real-
ity. The  defpotic  founder  viewed  with  a  jealous  eve
the  afcendant  that  Knigge  was  daily  acquiring,  and  the
great  encomiums  bellowed  on  him  by  the  adepts  in  their
£hiibus  Licets.  Befide,  his  profound  policy  led  him  to
conceive  that  his  power  would  be  too  much  divided  by
that  of  Knigge's,  to  enfure  him  fovereign  fway  over  his
tenebrous  meetings,  and  to  preferve  that  unity  of  objet!:
and  of  action  which  his  projects  required.  This  multi-
tude of  adepts  luddenly  initiated  into  the  higher  myfteries
kept  him  in  a  ftate  of  continual  alarm.  Among  thefe  new
dilciples  fome  might  be  found  who,  not  having  undergone
the  neceffary  trials,  might  expofe  both  himfelf  and  all  the
confpiracies  of  his  Sect  to  be  difcovered.  Though  Knigge  Quarrels
had  faithfully  copied  (as  the  reader  has  feen)  all  the  pro-  betweeo
fligate  myfteries  that  Weiihaupt  had  invented  in  the  de-  We'-
gree  of  Epopt,  yet  this  illuminizing  chief  did  not  fcruple  fta"ptan^
to  accufe  the  Baron  of  having  weakened  them;  the  fact  °  *
was,  that  he  could  not  forgive  him  for  having  participated  in
the  glory  of  founding  the  Order.  He  even  pretended  that
Knigge  v/as  privately  laying  the  foundations  of  another
iêcret  fociety.f  Thefe  reflections  weighed  fo  heavily  on
the  mind  of  the  defpotic  chief,  that  all  on  a  fudden  Knigge
found  himfelf  depofed  at  the  very  inftant  when  he  was

*  Extract  from  the  Circular  Letter,  Original  Writings,  Vol.
U.  Part  II.  Sed.  VI-


*


Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  ao,


128  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

rr.nft  elated  with  his  fuccefles  in  the  frrvice  of  the  Or*
rier.

Weifliaupt  took  from' him  the  direâion  of  his  pro-
vinces, and  made  him  fubjec-t  to  fome  of  his  own  pupils.
~— f  he  manner  in  which  Kniggc  received  this  humbling
news  cannot  be  better  defcribed  than  in  his  own  letters  to
Weifliaupt  and  to  Zwack.  The  latter  had  attempted  to
reconcile  thefe  two  terrible  competitors,  particularly  by
affecting  to  throw  the  whole  blame  of  their  difagreements
on  Mahomet  and  another  brother.  "  It  is  neither  Maho-
«  met  nor  that  other  brother  (fays  Knigge  to  Cato),  but
<c  it  is  that  Jefuitifm  of  Weifliaupt,  that  occafionsall  our
"  broils  and  difputes.  It  is  that  defpotifm  which  he  exer-
*<  cifes  over  men  perhaps  lefs  powerful  in  imagination,
<c  art,  and  cunning  than  himfelf,  but  equal  to  him  at  leaft
"  in  good-will,  prudence,  uprightneis,  and  probit)  ;  over
"  men  who  have  rendered  the  moft  important  fervices,
*c  without  which  his  Order  would  ftill  have  been  a  piti-
*c  ful  medley  of  boys.  Long  fince  have  I  obferved  his  in-
*'  tention  of  deceiving  me;  but  I  am  firmly  refolved
**  to  make  him  feel,  notwithftanding  my  exceffive  pati-
*l  ence  and  obedience,  that  there  are  men  who  are  not  to
K  be  played  upon  with  impunity.  I  therefore  declare,
"  that  nothing  can  ever  put  me  again  on  the  fame  foot-
cc  ing  wirh  Spartacus  on  which  I  was  before;  but  as  long
**  as  I  live  I  will  do  every  thing  in  my  power  for  the
*c  good  of  the  Order  \  and  ye  (the  Areopngites),  my  bejl
*l  of  friends,  ye  fhall  always  find  me  ready  to  obey  ye  in
u  every  thing  conducive  to  the  fame  objecV

After  this  exordium  Knigge  proceeds  to  enumerate  e-
very  thing  that  he  had  done  for  Weifliaupt,  in  the  per-
fecting of  the  Code,  the  founding  of  Lodges,  and  the  re-
cruiting of  Brethren.  "  I  had  actually  recruited  five  hun-
u  dred  (he  continues)  when  he  chofe  to  view  me  in  the
u  light  of  an  indifferent  being,  who  was  ruining  his  af-
"  fans  by  my  want  of  reflection.  Without  giving  me  any
*f  intimation,  he  began  to  correfpond  with  my  inferiors.
"  I  have  i'een  fome  of  his  letters  to  my  pupils,  in  which
<{  he  treats  me  as  a  novice. — At  prefent  I  am  under  the
<c  direction  of  Minos>  and  am  to  fend  him  my  Shiibu:
"  Licet  every  month.  Without  being  an  ambitious  man,
cc  I  fee  no  reafon  why  I  fhould  put  up  with  fuch  affronts,
"  and  allow  myfelf  to  be  led  like  a  fcholar  by  a  profefTor
K  of  Ingolliadt.  And  certainly  with  refpect  to  him  I  look


HISTORICAL  PART.  I29

«  Upon  myfelf  as  difpenfed  from  all  obedience.  With  re-
<{  gard  to  you,  ready  to  obey  the  flighted  intimation  of
<c  your  wifhes,  I  confent  to  continue  to  direct  the  pro-
*c  vinces  of  He  (Je  and  Upper  Saxony,  until  every  thing  is
"  properly  organized  in  thofe  countries.  I  fliall  then  re-
*'  tire,  prompt,  notwithftanding,  to  ferve  you  with  all  my
"  might,  either  by  night  or  by  day,"

This  letter  is  dated  the  20th  of  January,  17 S3,  and  is
immediately  followed  by  another  to  the  fame  adept.  The
latter  fhows  how  painful  it  was  to  Knigge  to  abandon  the
Brethren;  but  at  length  he  writes  to  Zvvack,  "  Were  \
"to  give  way  to  an  imprudent  vengeance  ?  reflect  on  thi^
«'  at  leaft.

"  It  was  by  order  of  Spartacus  (auf  Spartacus  geheifs)
"  that  I  wrote  againft  the  ci-devant  Jtjitijii  and  againft
u  the  Rijtcrucians,  neither  of  whom  had  ever  done  me
"  any  harm.  It  was  by  his  orders  that  I  fpread  diffenfions
"  among  the  Mafons  of  the  Striai  Objervance,  and  fe-
"  duced  their  ableft  brethren.  I  inftilled  into  them  ftrong
"  ideas  of  the  antiquity,  the  excellence  and  power  of  our
"  Order,  of  the  perfection  of  our  Superiors,  of  the  irre-*
"  proachable  manners  of  the  Brethren,  of  the  importance
*c  of  our  myfteries,  and  of  the  fincerity  and  purity  of  our
**  intentions.  Many  of  thofe  who  at  prefent  labor  molt
"  efficacioufly  for  our  Order,  were  under  confiant  appre*.
u  henfions  that  we  were  leading  them  to  Deifm.  Little
<c  by  little,  however,  I  do  what  I pleaje.  Now  were  I  to
**  inform  the  Jefuits  and  the  Roficrucians  of  their  real
"  perfecutor;  were  I  fimply  to  let  fome  certain  perfons
"  into  the  fecret  of  the  inlignificant  novelty  of  the  Order;
*'  were  I  to  inform  them  that  I  compofed  parts  of  the  de-
<c  grees;  were  I  to  tell  them  how  I  am  treated  after  the
*'  many  fervices  I  have  rendered  ;  were  I  to  make  them
«l  acquainted  with  the  Jejuitifm  of  that  man  who  leads  us
*'  all  by  the  nofe,  and  facrifices  us  to  his  ambition  whenever
"  he  pleafesj  were  I  to  inform  the  fecret-hunters  that
"  they  will  "not  find  that  which  they  are  in  queft  of  ;  were
«'  I  to  let  thofe  who  love  religion  into  the  fecret  of  the
"  founder's  religious  principles;  were  I  to  found  the  a*
<c  larm  to  P^ree^ mafons  concerning  an  aiibciation  fet  on
"  foot  by  the  Illuminées;  were  I  myfelf  to  eftablifh  an
"  Order  on  a  more  fol  id,  clear,  difinterefted  plan,  whofe
**  object  lhould  be  honefty  and  liberty;  were  I  to  attract
w  the  many  able  men  whom  I  am  acquainted  with  intcj
R


I30  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

«  this  Order;  were  I  to  place  certain  perfons  in  your '5
"  who  would  inform  me  in  future  of  every  thing  that  was
"  tranfùéting  in  it;  were  I  to  give  a  hint  only  in  Greece
"  (  that  ihould  at  once  difclofe  the  founder  and

"  his  Order;  were  I  to   found  the  alarm  to   Princes  by
"  means  of \Numenius  and  the  Roficrucians  -at  Rome  (Vi-
"  enna): — I  Ihudder  at  the  idea!  No,  I   will  not  carry
;  fuch  lengths;  but  if"  I  do  not  obtain  fatis-
i,  i  will  take  fuch  fteps  as  my  honor  requires.-—
"  Let  me  once  more  enjoy  that  unlimited  confidence  that
"  1  formerly  enjoyed,  and  then  I  fhall  be  ready  to  under-
ji    it  things  for  the  Order  again.     I  am  perfectly
ted  with  our  people  ;  I  know  what  attaches  each
"  one  to  the  Order,  and  what  engines  fhould  be  let  in
tc  motion  either  to  excite  their  enthufiafrn  or  fuddenly  to
"  crufli  it.  Once  more  I  repeat  it;  if  I  am  left  at  liberty
"  to  act,  I  will  anfwer  upon  my  head  to  put  the  Order
"  immediately  in  poueffion,   ift->of  mofi important fecrets ;
tc  2dly,  of  a  ftr$ng  preponderance  over  the  Mafons  of  the
a  Strict  Obiervance,  or,  rather,  of  means  abfolutely  to  de-
** Jiroy  them;  3dly,  of  a  great  influence  over  the  Mafons
*'  of  Zijnnendorf'sfyfbem;  4-thly,  Ipromife  to  put  the  Or~
"  dcr  in  pofjeffion  of  great  richesy  and  of  great  power,  and
tc  that  without  making  any  alterations  in  our  confiitu-
«  tions."

So  far,  from  allowing  himfelf  to  be  foothed  by  thefe
promifes,  or  affrighted  by  thefe  menaces,  which  ZwacJc
was  to  tranfmit  to  It,  Wetuhaupt  appeared  to  be-

come more  inflexible.  He  knew  his  agents  too  well;  he
was  certain  that  Knigge  could  never  bring  himfelf  to  be-
tray him;  and  indeed  he  muft  have  betrayed  himfelf  in
denouncing  his  chief.  That  adept,  without  doubt,  might
.  have  deferred  him  and  carried  many  of  the  brethren  with

him;  and  Weifhaupt  would  have  preferred  fuch  extre-
mities rather  than  have  had  rebel  adepts,  particularly  com-
petitors under  him.  "  What  care  I  (he  writes)  for  all
€t  that  multitude  of  unmanageable  adepts  who  wilh  to  be

41  guided  by  no  other  rule  than  their  fancy?" At

other  times  he  would  write,  "  It  is  by  means  of  thofe  who
"  will  obey  me,  that  I  muft  perform  moji  afionifhing  things.
<:  I  anfwer  for  nothing  when  1  meet  with  reliftance  from
"  my  adepts;  I  have  forefeen  every  thing,  and  1  have  pre-
"  pared  every  thing.  Letfny  whole  Order  go  to  rack  and
"  ruin  j  in  three  years  k  will  anfwer  to  reftore  it,  and  that


HISTORICAL  PART,  j^;

c,:  to  a  more  powerful  ftate  than  it  is  in  at  prefent. — Ob-
"  fiacles  only  ftimulate  my  activity.  I  know  how  to  turn
«  them  to  my  advantage;  and  when  people  lhall  think
«  that  I  am  undone,  even  then  fhall  I  rife  ftronger  than
«  ever.  Let  that  perfon  leave  me  who  thinks  he  can  bet-
"  ter  himielfelfe where;  and  time  will  fhew  whoismis-
«'  taken.  I  know  how  to  find  men  more  docile,  I  can  .-
"  crifice  whole  provinces,  the  defertion  of  a  hw  individ-
"  uals,  therefore,  will  not  alarm  me."*

Thus  firm  and  confiant  in  his  determination  to  enforce
obedience,  Weifhaupt  left  Knigge  under  an  interdict;  he
continued  to  tranfmit  all  orders  to  him  through  the  me-
dium of  his  inferiors;  he  even  fo  far  let  him  at  defiance,
as  to  refufe  to  give  him  the  watchword  and  the  quarter-
ly fign;  fo  that  he  might  almoft  look  upon  himfelf  as  ex-
pelled the  Order.  If  he  deigned  to  write  to  him,  it  was
in  a  tone  only  calculated  to  add  to  his  humiliation;  ^id
Knigge  himfelf  actually  thought  all  his  intercourfe  with
this  overbearing  Defpot  had  been  broken  off  when  he  re-
ceived a  letter  ftill  more  imperious  and  injurious  than
ever.  Pbilo's  anfwer  is  remarkable;  and  I  will  lay  it  be-
fore my  readers;  not  that  I  think  it  important  to  defcribe
ail  the  jealoufies  and  inteftine  broils  that  may  very  well
be  called  the  rogues  quarrel,  but  becaufe  it  fljows  how
well  in  the  midit  of  all  their  difputes  thefe  fellows  knew
each  other,  and  how  they  drew  together  when  the  mis-
fortunes of  nations  were  in  queftion;  it  /hows  aifo  hoy/
they  vied  with  each  other,  am!  placed  all  their  merit  i,n
the  deftruclion  of  the  altar  and  the  throne,  and  in  ha\  ing
abufed  the  confidence  of  Princes;  fuch  were  the  m
deeds  on  which  they  grounded  their  rights  ofpre-i
nence  in  their  dark  dens  of  rebellion.

This  letter  from  Knigge  to  Weifhaupt  was  written  at
fucceflive  periods  during  his  excurfion  from  Frankfort  to
Caffel,  to  Brunfwick,  and  Neuterhaufen.  He  begins  it,
dated  at  CafTel,  25th  February,  1783.

u  An  unfoi'efeen  circumftahce  occaiions  my  writing  to
"  you.  Read  my  letter  without  paffiqn,  wrlh  ialitv,

"  and  as  coolly  as  you  are  able.   I  own  that,  as  late  evçn
"  as  yefterday,  until  I  had  received  yoi
"  ter  1  little  thought  we  were  êv<  >d  togetb-

4<  er  again.     lam  perfectly  refolved  t  it  for  one

*  Original  Writings.  Vol.  II.  Let.  S,  to  tato.


13a  antisocial  conspiracy;

«  more  anfwer;  and  if  it  is  in  the  fame  tone  that  you
«  have  lately  taken  with  me,  nothing  fhall  hinder  me
<l  from  abfolutely  breaking  off  all  connexion  with  you*
"  Do  not  pretend  to  think  that  this  is  an  idle  threat.  I
"  am  aware  that  you  can  do  without  me;  but  I  alfo  know>
a  or  am  at  Ieaff,  willing  to  think,  that  your  confcience  will
"  rife  in  judgment  againft  you,  if  you  continue  without
*'  reafon  to  reject  a  man  who  has  been  your  mod  active
"  co -operator.  What  am  I  to  understand  when  you  fay
"  that  you  can  begin  the  whole  over  again,  and  that  with
41  new  agents?  To  be  fure  you  may  try;  but  were  you
"  really  to  undertake  it,  you  would  ceafe  in  my  eyes  to
"  be  that  man  whom  I  was  willing  to  believe  endowed
ct  with  prudence.  The  points  to  which  I  wifh  to  call
"  your  attention  require  a  general  view  of  our  refpe&ive
"  fituations.  Let  us  addrefs  each  other  freely.

"  You  have  injured  me;  you  know  it;  but  you  will
"'not  own  it,  becaufe  you  are  afraid  of  loiing  your  con-^
ct  fequence  were  you  to  fay,  I  have  really  behaved  fhame-
w  fully  ill  to  that  m?.n.  You  wifh  to  perfuade  both  your-
"  felf  and  others  that  you  are  indifferent  to  my  flaying
"  with  you  or  not,  for  that  I  am  not  fit  for  fo  great  an
"  undertaking;  though  you  well  know,  that  we  both  have
w  our  failings;  that  men  muft  be  taken  as  they  are;  that
*'  no  one  would  proceed  far,  if  he  were  to  change  co-ope-
"  rators  every  fix  months.  To  make  fhort  of  the  matter,,
"  you  would  be  forry  to  fee  me  abandon  you,  and  found
4<  another  fociety;  but  you  are  unwilling  to  appear  to
"  ftand  in  need  of  me.

tc  Now  for  Me  :  I  have  not  the  vanity  to  pretend,  that
"  a  man  of  a  fupcrior  underftanding  to  my  own  fhoul,d
"  fo  debate  himfclf  as  to  afk  me  pardon.  But  I  could  wifh
c<  you  to  reflect  on  the  following  circumftances  : — I  am
"  certain  that  I  have  acled  according  to  my  confcience,
"  and  on  a  (olid,  plan.  I  defy  any  perfon  to  point  out  to
u  me  thofe  indiicretions  by  which  I  am  fuppofed  to  have
"  done  the  Order  irreparable  evil.  So  far  from  it,  I  have
41  engaged  men  of  the  moft  tranfcendant  merit  in  its  fer-
<c  vice.  If  in  many  hundred  recruits  any  are  to  be  found
"  who  are  not  exactly  what  they  ought  to  be,  your  own
w  conduit  will  plead  my  excufe,  iînçe  you  have  entrufted
u  me  with  the  government  of  five  provinces,  a  perfon  that
u  you  at  prefect  upbraid  as  a  heedlefs  giddy  young  fellow..
44  Ln  fhort,  I  have  aîted  as  I  ought  to  have  done.     That


HISTORICAL  PART.  133

*c  you  ihould  acknowledge  this,  I  do  not  defire;  but  I
f<  really  wifh  to  fee  you  convinced  of  it.  Our  union  fhould
**  be  grounded  on  a  reciprocal  and  boundlefs  confidence.
«  — If  you  are  unwilling  to  grant  me  yours,  remember  at
"  leaft  that  I  am  not  to  be  led  like  a  machine.  I  there-
tc  fore  retire,  not  through  an  ill-judged  delicacy,  but  be-
"  caufe  I  can  be  of  no  uie  to  you,  and  that  I  know  perfore
lt  to  whom  I  can  be  of  great  ufe,  and  who  place  unbound-
"  ed  confidence  in  me.

"  Now  to  the  point:  /  can  inform  you,  that  lajl  night
li  I  brought  my  grand  plan  to  ajlate  of  maturity.  Mark  me,
"  therefore:  fince  I  have  quitted  the  government  of  my
ct  provinces,  great  things  have  been  the  objecls  of  my  la-
**  bors,  letters.,'  and  conferences.  For  this  iveek  pafi  I
*c  have  had  here  (at  Cajfel)  feveral  private  interviews
«  with  the  P—  C—  or  H—  C— ,"  (Prince  Charles  of
«*  HefTe  Caflel,  brother  in  law  to  the  King  of  Denmark).
**  All  this  taken  together  has  enabled  me  to  fulfil  the  fol-
"  lowing  promifes,  provided  1  am  treated  a}  I  think  I
*  am  entitled  to  he."

Thefe  promifes  of  Knigge  are  nearly  the  fame  as  thofe
already  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  Cff/a-Zwack.  He  adds,
however,  fome  few  points  that  are  eflential  ;  for  example,
he  does  not  only  promife  to  difcover  to  the  Illuminées
the  real  objetl  of  Alafonry  and  of  the  Roficrucians,  but  to
make  it  a  part  of  the  higher  degrees  oj  Ifeifhaupt  's  mys-
teries. This  addition  is  not  an  indifferent  indication  on
the  occult  myfteries  of  Ivlafonry.  Without  having  been
a  Roficrucian,  Philo-Kniggo  had  long  applied  to  their
myfteries  before  his  admilTion  into  Illurninifm.  He  had
ftudied  them  as  Cojnmander  and  Knight  Templar,  but  had
not  been  able  to  dive  into  their  lait  myfteries.  It  was  re-
ferved  to  Bode,  to  that  man  known  by  all  Germany  to
have  been  one  of  their  moft  zealous  and  learned  Mafons,
to  initiate  Knigge  in  thefe  myfteries;  and  we  muff  hence
conclude,  that  few  of  the  brethren  were  acquainted  with
them;  but  no  fooner  are  they  difcovered  to  Philo,  than  '
he  conceives  them  to  be  worthy  of  being  blended  with
thofe  of  Weifhaupt.  Thefe  occult  myfteries,  therefore,
of  the  Roficrucians  can  fall  little  fhort  of  the  baneful  ma-
chinations of  Illurninifm;  and  all  that  jealoufy  that  ftill
.rages  between  the  Roficrucians  and  Illuminées  may  be
faid  to  be  only  a  rivalfhip  for  hireling  primacy.  No  long-
er do  I  pretend  to  difpute  with  Brother  Dupe  on  the  «x-


E3+  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

iftence  of  thefe  hideous  myfteries  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  wi!!
compliment  him  on  his  {till  having  fufficient  virtue  left
to  be  refufed  admiflion;  but  I  will  infift  on  the  abfolute
neceility  and  duty  of*  abandoning  any  afTociation  that  can
have  nurtured  the  abominable  and  impious  plots,  the  dis-
covery of  which  is  the  caufe  of  fo  much  exultation  in
thcfe  arch-confpirai

On  the  fame  conditions  Knigge  promifes  Weifhaupt
to  dij  cover  to  the  Order  certain  ferrets  vf  Nature^  ;
(fays  he)  at  once  affanifliing,  marvellous,  and  productive*
and  all  this  without  being  miracles.*  He  alfo  fpecifies
the  means  by  which  the  Illuminées  are  to  acquire  power
and  wealth;  it  \slbe  liberty  and  a  lice'.  Den-

mark, Hoi/: an,  and  other  Jlates,  with  fund's

for  the  enterprise.  Infhort,  his]     ,  .    r^Ro-

iicrucians  is  accompanied  with  the  promife  of  a  power-
ful party  againft  the  Jefuits.f

This  letter  remained  in  his  turn

from  Cailel  to  Brunfvvicr:;  he  there  continues  it  on  the
ioth  of  March:  «  The  D—  F—  of  B— ,  (L
"  dinand  of  Brunfwick)  has  call.d  me  to  this  town  to
"  confer  with  me  on  different  fubj eels.  I  will  ky  more
"  of  this  on  a  future  occafion,  let  us  revert  to  the  moft
"  preffing  bufinefs.  I  have  already  faid  it,  and  I  repeat  it
41  again  without  any  difguife,  here  are  my  conditions:  If
c<  you  reftore  me  to  your  confidence,  all  will  be  termi-
"  nated,  and  this  whole  bufinefs  remains  afecret  between
<*  us.  From  this  inftant  I  not  only  engage  to  attach
"  fell  ftronger  than  ever  to  the  order,  but  I  alfo  promife
*'  and  guarantee  to  it  a  power  of  which  it  can  have  no
M  conception.

"  Should  you  rcfufe  to  rely  on  me,  from  that  inftant
"our  union  is  difiblved;  I  erect  another  fociety  on  much
"  ftronger  bonds.  But  no  threats.  Think  of  it,  and  weigh
«  it  coolly."

Knigge  alfo  takes  time  to  reflect;  and  on  the  26th  of
March  he  continues  from  N  fen:  "  I  am  here  a-

"  gain.  .  .  Once  more  I  fay,  if  you  know  your  own  inter-
*'  eji  the  world  is  ours;  if  not,  may  the  confequences  of
"  your  fcandalous  proceedings  fall  upon  you.  But  no;
"  1  it  ill  rely  on  your  prudence,  fate  leads  us  admirably.  I

•  Krftauouch  und  eiotraglicb,  obgleich  keine  wunder.
t  Line  macim'ge  parthey  gegen  jefaiten.


HISTORICAL  PART,  Ï 35

«have  great  things  before  me;  I  have  prodigious  ones
«  in  view. — It  is  in  your  power  to  partake  of  thorn.  1
<*  have  not  as  yet  taken  a  iingle  ftep  againft  you.  1  hope
«  your  conduct  will  give  me  reafon  to  write  to  Jtheusy
"  that  I  had  formed  a  wrong  opinion  of  you."

On  the  27th  of  the  fame  month  another  poftfeript  in

the  following  terms:  "  I  was  juft  going  to  fend  my  let-

"  ter,  when  1  received  this  Order,  which  you  fend  me  by

«■  F.  .  .  Oh  !   you  ought  not  to  have  taken  fuch  a  ftep,

«  You  with  then  to  drive  me  to  all  extremities?  Upon

tt  my  word  you  will  gain  nothing  by  it,     Reflect  on  the

"  importance,  Ï  may  venture  to  fay,  that  1  have  given  to

tl  your  ailociation.     Were  I  now  to  difcover  to  certain

"  perlons  your  whole  hiftory,  and  your  principles  fo  dan-

«  gerous  for  the  yjor/d,  and  declare  that  I  was  obliged

«  to  moderate  them  by  every  means  in  my  power,  who

«  would  not  ihun  you  ?    What  is  your  «'agree  of  Ebopt  in

«  comparifon  with  your  means  of  attaining  a  good  0

«*  (that  is»  to  lay  in  comparifon  to  the  principle, vllmeans

"  are  good  when  the  end  is  good? ) — What  is  it,  I  fay,

tc  when  compared  with  your  icandalous  injuftice  towards

"  Wolter  and  Levelling? — O  !  what  are  men? — Good

"  God!   were  you  a  Jefuit  yourfelf?  I  tremble  to  think

"  of  it;  but  mould  that  be  the  cafe  all  Hell  ihould  not

u  fave  you  from  my  claws."

Lajt  Poftfeript  of  the  31ft:  "  Do  not  hurry  yourfelf
«  to  anfwer  me.  Caio  may  tranfmit  certain  things  to  you
"  that  may  make  you  change  your  mind.  Take  care  of
«  yourfelf  cave  ne  eadas.  V engeance  is  a  thing  that  I
«  mall  with  great  difficulty  refift."*

AU  thefe  letters  depict  Knigge  as  an  adept  determin-
ed to  withdraw  himfelf  at  length  from  the  defpotifm  of
the  modern  Spartacus;  not  indeed  to  abandon  his  plots,
but  in  order  to  lay  the  balis  of  new  aflociations  of  Con-
ipirators:  In  the  midil  of  all  thefe  broils,  it  is  worthy  of
remark,  that  the  injured  competitor  in  his  letters  to  Wei-
fhaupt  and  to  Zwack  intermixes  anfwers  and  advice  on
every  thing  that  can  tend  to  propagate  the  Order,  In  his
poftfeript  of  the  26th  of  March,  forgetting  on  a  fudden
all  his  anger  againft  Weilhaupt,  he  informs  him,  that
Brother  Accatius  folicits  letters  of  recommendation  and
directions  to  the  Brethren  of  Italy  for  another  adept  who

*  Orig,  Writ.  Vol.  II.  Let.  r,  3,  and  3*  from  Pbilo.


I36  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY^

is  going  to  fécond  Brother  Hannibal  in  his  million  to
thole  countries.  *'•  This  affair  (fays  Knigge)  is  of"  the
'*  higheft  importance  to  the  Orders  for  our  man  is  an
<(  excellent  Scrutator;  andldoaffure  you  that  fpecial  good
"  news  is  come  relating  to  the  Monks  of  Italy."  Molt
certainly^  discontented  Monks  of  the  ftamp  of  Dom  Ger-
les  might  be  found  there;  but  before  they  could  be  en-
rolled an  article  of  the  Code  which  excludes  them  from
the  Order  was  to  be  difpenfed  with*  As  I  have  already
obferved,  however,  Knigge  was  always  lefs  fcrupulous
than  Weifhaupt  on  the  article  of  exceptions.  In  thefe
fame  letters  he  warns  the  Arcopagites  to  pay  particular
attention  to  the  affairs  of  the  Order  at  Vienna;  and  in-
forms them,  that  he  has  important  news  from  that  coun-
try; and  with  refpecl  to  Poland,  though  he  may  be  ac-
quainted with  no  perfon  who  could  forward  the  federa-
tion, he  had  people  at  leajt  in  Livonia.  And  in  his  offi-
cial reports  we  find  that  he  had  a  miffionary  in  that  part
of  Ruifia,  vjbofromfo  great  a  dijiance  perhaps  might  not
(end  his  £htibus  Licet  s  exaelly  and  monthly ;  but  who
would  labor  for  the  Order  perhaps  with  more  fuccefs  than-
any  of  its  Apoftles,*

Such  tendernefs  for  the  welfare  of  the  Order,  and  zeal
for  the  propagation  of  its  plots,  evidently  demonftrates
that  Knigge,  fo  far  from  abandoning  it,  expecled  to  re-
alTume  his  former  rank.  It  appears  ftill  clearer  in  the  let-
ter he  wrote  to  Cato  by  the  very  fame  poll:,  by  which  he
had  fent  all  his  menaces  to  Weifhaupt:  cc  I  have  great
"  views  indeed  for  our  Order,  and  that  makes  me  forget
"  all  the  injuries  I  have  received  from  Spartacus.  I  do
<c  not  wifli  him  to  own  that  he  is  in  the  wrong,  but  only
"  that  he  fhould  know  that  the  fault  lies  with  him."  The
letter  ends  by  conitituting  Cato  judge  of  the  conteit.f — »
Weifhaupt  needed  no  more  to  convince  him  that  this
■warfare  would  terminate  to  his  advantage.  He  did  not
wifh  to  lofe  Philo,  but  flill  lefs  could  he  bear  him  as  a
rival.  "  If  Philo  (Weifhaupt  fays  to  Zwack)  will  return
"  to  me,  and  confefs  that  he  is  in  the  wrong,  he  will  find
u  me  fuch  as  I  formerly  was  in  his  regard.  But  for  your
"  part  do  not  fhow  the  lead  eagernefs  to  reclaim  him.  I
"  wifli  to  prove  to  him  that  I  can  do  without  himj  his

*   Aber  er  wild  wiirken  wie  noch  keiner  gewlii'kt  hat.
f  Woruber  fie,  befster  Cato  I  Richter  feyo  n.çgen.


HISTORICAL  PART.  1 3?

<c  vanity  mull  not  be  flattered;  he  wants  to  be  entreated,
11  and  it  is  exactly  for  that  reafon  that  he  fhould  not  be
*'  entreated. — If  he  has  the  good  of  the  caufe  at  heart,  he
"  will  return  of  his  own  accord,  and  I  wû\  receive  him
*c  with  open  arms."*

Thç  good  of  the  caufe,  as  Weilhaupt  calls  it  (that  is,  the
propagation  and  triumph  of  Illuminifm  with  all  its  impi-
ous plots),  was  evidently  as  dear  to  Knigge  as  to  him-
felf.  This  mutual  bias  to  crime  reconciled  them  together
again,  at  leaft,  for  a  fpace  of  time  fumcient  to  acquire  for
Illuminifm  the  greater  part  of  that  authority  which  Knigge
had  promifed  to  the  Areopagites.  It  is  true,  that  he  tells
us  he  had  obtained  his  difmilîion,  and  an  honorable  tefli-
nnony  of  his  fervices.  It  may  be  a  fact  that  he  received
his  difmilîion,  as  he  fays,  on  the  exprefs  conditions,  that
he  would  never  undertake  any  thing  detrimental  to  the
interefts  or  plans  of  the  Illuminées;  that  he  would  keep
a  profound  iilence  with  refpeit  to  the  fecrets  of  the  Breth-
ren; that  he  would  never  do  any  thing  that  could  com-
mit the  fuperiors,  and  not  even  fo  much  as  name  them;f
but  certain  it  is,  that  the  date  coincides  with  the  time  of
the  difcoveries  made  at  Munich,  which  mult  have  induc-
ed him  to  take  fuch  precautions  as  he  judged  necefTary
to  avoid  being  implicated  with  the  other  chiefs  of  the  Il-
luminées. He  declares  that  he  received  his  congé  on  the
firft  of  June,  1784,  and  the  firft  decrees  iiTued  by  the  E-
le£tor  ofBavaru  againft  Secret  Societies  bear  date  of  the
twenty-lecond  of  the  fame  month.  Four  months  after  we
fee  P£/7fl-Knigge  mentioned  by  Weiihaupt  as  an  adept,
without  the  leaf!  allufion  to  his  retreat,  and  this  may  cre-
ate fome  doubt  at  leaft  as  to  the  date.  Whatever  may
have  been  the  cafe,  fourteen  months  elapfed  horn  the  time
of  their  grand  difputes,  till  that  when  Knigge  declares  he
broke  oft"  all  connection  with  the  Illuminées.  Hereafter
we  fhall  fee  what  is  to  be  underltood  by  this  pretended
dereliction  of  his  former  Brethren.  It  is  however  certain,
that  during  thofe  fourteen  months,  he  but  too  well  enti-
tled himfelf  to  the  gratitude  of  the  Sect  by  the  new  fer-
vices he  rendered,  and  more  particularly  by  his  intrigues
with  Bode,  by  means  of  which  he  confummated  Wei-

S

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Letter  24.

T  Seine  obern- w«der  zunennen  noch  zu  compromittiren.


I  3S  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

fhaupt's  plan  of  confederation  or  of  intrufion  in  all  the

or  Germany.

The  fede-       'J  he  grand  obttacle  to  thefe  plans  was  the  jealoufy  of

ration  of     the  Rohcrucians,  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Striai  Obferv-

).     *-a"     a/ue,  and  of  thv.  PI  Halètes,  calling  thenifei  ves  the  Tbeofo-
lons  and        ,  .     ,  ,,,  , ,       .  >  r  r»    1      \r   •        >

I'iuminees  phical  illuminées,   but  the  acquihtion  of  bode;  Knigge  s

«omioued.  frequent  vifits  to  their  Highneffes  the  Duke  Ferdinand
oftJrunfwyck  and  the  Prince  Charles  of  HelTe- Caffdl  ;
the  manner  in  which  he  impoied  on  thefe  two  chiefs  of
German  Mafonryj  the  influence  acquired  by  Philo  thro*
the  means  of  Bode  over  the  Commiflaries  who  were  nam-
ed at  Willemfbaden  to  frame  the  laws,  are  circumltances
inore  than  fufficu-nt  to  account  for  his  fuccefs  in  fpite  of
iuch  numerous  opponents.  When  Bode  was  thoroughly
convinced  that  Hluminifm,  fo  far  from  being  an  invention
of  Jeluits  and  Priefts,  was  no  other  than  a  nioit  determin-
ed conipiracy  againft  Princes  and  the  Priefthood,  which
he  equally  hated;  when  he  beheld  the  means  of  its  deve-
loping themfelyes  in  the  degrees  of  Epopt  and  of  Regcnty
he  then  had  no  other  view  than  to  perform  the  promife
...  he  had  made  to  Knigge,  to  dedicate  bis  life  entirely  to  the
leryice  of  the  Order,  and  particularly  f<?  have  its  intercjls
at  heart  in  the  jraming  of  the  nevj  Code.  Never  was
promife  more  rehgiouAy  kept,  nor  attended  with  greater
fuccefs.  With  refpeâ  to  thofe  Brethren  whole  antique
in,)  fteries  perpetually  recalled  to  their  minds  Equality  and
Libert}',  nothing  could  be  more  (educing  than  Knigge's
circular  letter  on  EcUdiivc  or  Elective  Mafonry.  Many
Lodges  had  of  their  own  accord  acceded  to  his  federation.
iiuJw  introduced  its  laws  into  the  new  Majonic  Ritual.
It  was  oii  feeing  thefe  laws  that  the  Mafon  who  beft,  fore-
fa  w  their  çonfequences  exclaims,  in  the  bitternefs  of  his
heart;  "  Oh,  my  Brethren!  At  what  point  ihail  I  be-
cc  gin,  or  where  (hall  1  end,  when  I  fpeak  to  you  of  that
'-ï  bode  known  among  the  Illuminées  by  the  name  of  A-
"  melius?  Judge,  my  Brethren, of  the  important,  I  would
*'•  lay  difaflrous  let  vices  he  went  to  render  them;  he,  who
"  has  becii  in  habits  of  intimacy  with  fo  many  of  our
u  Brethren;  he  who  had  taken  fo  great  a  lead  in  molt  of
•■•.our  ggneral  meetings;  he,  who,  under  an  affectation  of
"  good  nature  and  of  German  uprightnels,  concealed  a
u  heart  replete  with  the  raoft  heinous  impiety,  and  afran-
M  tic  enthufiafm  for  Naturalifm;  he,  again,  who  had  tak-
41  en  offeree  at  die  Brethren  of  the  Strict  Qbjtrvame  be-


HISTORICAL  PART.  139

l<  caufe  they  had  not  fatiated  his  ambition.  What  an  ac-
"  quifition  in  all  réfpeâs  was  this  man  for  the  Illumi-
«  necs  ! — His  firft  efforts  were  directed  againff.  us.  He
<{  a<5led  where  Knigge  could  not  gain  admittance.  It  ivai
"  through  his  means  that  the  Illuminées- gained  theit  as-
*'  tendency  in  the  ncxv  fyflem  that  zvas  to  have  heen  e/ra-
"  blijhed  at  Wille?njbctden;  that  they  gained  admittance
*c  into  our  Directories;  andtb.it  they  jveceeded  in  frater-
<c  nizing  ivith  the  greater  part  oj  our  Brethren  of  the
"  StriSf  Observance.  His  Iniinuator  Knigge  had  left  him
"  no  alternative  but  to  bring  over  Free-mafonry  to  this
ft  unfortunate  alliance,  or  to  crufh  the  Brotherhood.  To
"  the  aftonifhment  and  grief  of  every  true  ivlafon,  it  was
"  by  the  combined  efforts  of  Bode  and  Knigge,  that  the
"  greater  part  of  the  Lodges  throughout  Germany  were
"  tainted  and  infected  with  this  baneful  Illuminifm."*

I  often  meet  with  fimilar  avowals  and  lamentations  in
the  different  letters  and  memorials  that  I  have  received
from  German  Mafons,  heretofore  zealous  for  the  honor
of  their  Brotherhood,  but  now  lamenting  the  intrufion  of
the  Bavarian  peft  among  them.  Some  few  Lodges,  how-
ever, held  out  againff.  it.  That  of  Berlin,  called  oj  the
Three  Globes,  in  1783,  publifhed  a  circular  letter,  ana-
thematizing all  Brethren  who  mould  pretend  to  degrade
Free-mafonry  fo  as  to  transform  it  into  a  fociety  of  men
confpiring  againit  their  God  and  their  country-  Whe-
ther this  Lodge  had  not  been  initiated  into  the  laft  myfrc-
ries  of  the  Roiicrucians  and  other  conlpi-ring  degrees,  or
whether  this  anathema  was  but  a  (ham,  the  circular  let-
ter had  but  little  effeâ;.  The  intrufion  continued,  and
became  (o  general,  that  the  illuminizing  Sect  in  its  in-
frructions  to  the  Directing  llhoninces  makes  ufe  of  the
following  formidable  exprcfiions:  "  Of  all  the  legitimate  t
"  Lodges  in  Germany,  there  is  ONLY  OKE  ihat  has  not
"  coalejc  :d  with  our  Superiors,  and  this  Lodge  has  been
"  obliged  to  fufpend  its  labors."!

This  declaration  does  not  imply  that  the  greater  num-
ber of  the  Brethren  were  already  illuminized,  but  only  de-
notes that  the  Superiors,  whether  Mafters,  Wardens^  or
Treafurers,  of  almoft  every  Lodge  had  entered  into  the
federation  with  Weifhaupt. — But  what  an  awful  a/pecl

*  Difcouffe  of  a  Mafler  on  the  ultimate  fate  of  Free-mafonry.
f  Degree  of  Dire&ing  Illuminée,  Se<ft.  3,  No,  5.


140  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

does  this  fubterraneous  power  prefrnt! — A  multitude  of
emiiTaries  and  agents  difperfed  throughout  the  tenebrgus
recelicS  of  Mafonry.  The  Superiors  once  gained  over,  the
Lodges  would  make  but  a  feeble  and  fhort  refinance.

The  greater  part  of  thefe  fuccenes  were  to  be  attribut-
ed to  P b i/o -Kniggej  neither  did  he  hide  thofe  pretentions
that  could  indicate  the  rival.  Weiihaupt  cou  id  not  brook
the  mod  diftant  appearance  of  rivality;  new  contefts  a-
rofe  between  the  two  chiefs.  Knigge  at  length  abandoned,
or  pretended  to  abandon,  the  Order.  It  does  not  appear
that  Weifhaupt  mowed  the  leaft  regret.  His  power  feem-
ed  to  be  built  on  foundations  that  could  not  be  ihaken  by
any  ftorm  : — it  was  no  longer  confined  to  a  corner  of  Ger-
many.* The  Danube  and  the  Rhine  could  no  longer
bound  it.  In  the  North  and  the  Eaft  he  had  his  emiila-
ries, in  Holland,  Poland,  and  Livonia. f  His  apoftles  in
the  South  had  already  advanced  from  Milan  to  Venice.^
On  the  Weft  he  was  beginning  his  attacks  on  France  by
the  way  of  Strafbourg.§  But  juft  at  this  period  was  pre-
paring that  ftorm  which  in  the  annals  of  the  Se&  {hall  be
called  the  Third  Epoch.

•

*  That  the  reader  may  form  a  clear  and  precife  idea  of  the
Wanner  in  which  thefe  different  Lodges  and  Illuminées  on  their
fe»era!  millions  correfponded  with  their  chief,  I  think  it  right
to  fubjoin  the  Geographical  and  Political  Chart  of  the  Seel,
fuch  as  it  was  drawn  out  by  Knigge  in  the  Original  Writings.
1  know  this  plate  only  comprehends  Germany,  and  that  with-
out the  /Uiftrian  Provinces,  "  becaufe  (fays  Knigge)  the  Breth-
ren ofthofe  Provinces  have  petitioned  to  have  aj'eparate  Nation-
al Direclor''*  But  every  reader  can  apply  a  iiimilar  one  to
any  other  ftate.  To  complete  it,  I  have  added  Weifhaupt  in
direct  communication  with  the  Areopagites,  and  the  latter  with
the  National  DireflGrs. — A  very  flight  inflection  will  fuffice  to
fliow,  how  inftructions,  communications,  &c.  pafs  to  and  from
the  General,  down  to  the  Scotch  Directories,  and  from  the  lat-
ter to  the  loweft  individual  of  llluminifm.

f  Philo's  Bericht.

X  See  Juridical  Depofitions  made  at  Munich.

§  Original  Writings,  Vol.  11.  Letter  23,  to  Cato,  a8th  Jan-
uary, 1783.


Geographical  and  Political  Chart  of  the  Uluminized  German  Lodges.


Provincial  of  Bavaria

who  fuperintends  the

Firft  Infpeftoi

who  infpecls  tbe{  Provincial  of  Swabia

who  fuperintends  the


SPJR  TAC  US-W  E I S  H  A  U  P  T,

the  General  of  all

I  L  L  U  M  I  N  I  S  M,

torrefponds  ivith,  and  gives  his  orders


The  Areopagites,
who  tranfmit  their  orders


The  National  Director
of  all  Germany,

who  direcls   -   -


the  <


Scotch  Directories  oj


Munich   -  -  -  for  The  Dutchy  of  Bavaria.

Saltzburg The  Archbifhopric  of  Saltzburg,

Ratifbon    -    -    —  Ratiibon,  Pafl'au,  Sternberg,  Ortenburg,  Leuchtenbers,  Sulzbach.

Freyfingucn   -  —  The  Upper  Palatinate,  Freyfingucn,  Neuburg.


'  Augfburg   -   -  for  Augfburg,  Coftanz,  Kcmpten.

Scotch  Directories./.!  ^,tut"ard. Wurtemberg   Zollem,  and  the  Imperial  Towns.

I  Uettinguin Octtinguen,  Furftemberg,  the  Abbeys,  and  Imperial  Towns.

Cliarlfruhe  -  -  —   Baaden,  and  the  Seignorial  and  Imperial  Towns.


Provincial  of  Franconia

,.     who  juperintends  the  —  Scotch  Directories


Aichftadt   -    -  for   Aichftadt,  the  Country  of  B;.reith,  and  the  Imperial  Towiii.

Wunzburg    -    —   Wurtzburg  and  Bamberg.

Bareith   -   -   -   —   Bareith,  the  Counties  and  Lordfhips.

Memmingen The  Towns  of  the  Teutonic  Order  and  Henneberg.


Second  Infpeitor

who  mjpefts  the  <


Third  Infpector

wtu  '"fpeils  tht


Provincial  of  the  Electorates
of  the  Rhine
who  fuperintends  the


Provincial  of  the  Circle

of  the  Upper  Rhine
who  fuperintends  the  •


Provincial  of  Weftpbalia

who  fuperintends  the


'Provincial  of  Upper  Saxony
who  fuperintends  the


^Provincial  of  Lower  Saxony
who  fuperintends  the


H  id  !h      '  C   for  The  Palatinate  of  the  Rhine.

Mentz   -   -   -   —  The  Electorate  and  Beilftein.
Scotch  Directories  o/-(  t


q  m  I    -  —  The  Archbifliopric  of  Treves.

—  Cologn,  Aremberg,  Reineck,  Ifenbur


Bonn  or  )
Cologn  I


ÏCaftèl   -  -  -  -  jor   The  Landgraviate  of  HefTe-CalTel.
Wetzlar  -  -  -  —   Veteravia,  and  the  Seignorial  and  Imperial  Towns.
Frankfort   -    -   —   Frankfort,  Fulda,  Hanover,  Ifenburg.
Darmftadt   -  -  —  Darmftadt,  Homburg,  Ufinguen.
Spire  -   -    -  -  —   Spire,  Worms,  Deux-Ponts.

J"  Neuwied    -    -  for  The  Countries  of  the  Wied,  of  Seyn,  Moeurs,  Thorn,  Ellen.
Munfter  -  -  -  —   Ofnabruck,  Juliers,  Cleves.

Paderborn Paderborn,  Minden,  Corvey,  Naflau,

Oldenburg Ferden,  Hoya,  Schauenburg.


-  Scotch  Directories  of\


-  Scotch  Directories  of<


Scotch  Directories  oj


\Tofaee  page  140.  J


"Drefden  or
Leipfic

Berlin  -  -

Weimar  01
1  Jo  ha
Dcflau  -  -

Hanover for   The  Electorate,  Celle,  Grubenhagen.

nfwick  -  -  —    Wolfenbuttel,  Magdeburg,  Halberftadr,
emeu   -  -  -  —   Bremen,  the  Holltein,  Hamburg,  Hildctheim,
.  .  —  Mecklenburg,  Lubeck,  Ritzeburg.


•r  Hanove
r\  Brunfw
1  Bremen
(_  Streliiz


\      fir  The  Electorate  of  S_axony  and  the  ProyoP.mip  of  .:

Brandenburg  and  Pomerania.

I The  Dutchy  of  Saxony  and  Principality  of  Schwartzburg,

. Anhalt,  Mansfield,  Stolberg,  and  Querfurt.


HISTORICAL  PART.  H1


CHAP.    VII.


Third  Epoch  of  Illumimfnu
Difcovery  of  the  Se£f.

IT  was  not  without  reafon  that  Weifliaupt  had  exprefs-
ed  his  apprehenfions  as  to  the  precipitate  manner  in
which  Knigge  had  admitted  fo  many  candidates  to  the
myfteries  of  the  Sect:  on  the  other  hand,  Knigge  might
with  equal  reafon  upbraid  Weifhaupt  with  want  of  pru-
dence in  recommending  to  the  adepts  fuch  books  as  thofe
publifhed  under  the  name  of  Boulanger;  and  thus  difclo-
img  his  atheifm  previous  to  the  laft  myfteries.*  Butfuc-
fcefs'  had  fo  emboldened  Weifhaupt,  that  he  kept  no  far-  •„     ex"f
ther  referve  on  the  fcore  of  religion,  even  with  his  Mi-  niumin.
nerval  fcholars;  and  fo  early  as  the  year  178 1,  the  court  ifm  furmi-
of  Bavaria  entertained  (orne  lufpicions  of  this  new  Sect,  fed.
It  had  even  ordered  certain  inquiries  to  be  made;  but  the
Illuminées  had  art  enough  to  bafRle  thefe  inquefts.f —
Left,  however,  any  enquiries  mould  at  any  future  time  Wei-
take  place,  Weifhaupt  bethought  himfelf  of  making  the  Aiaupt's

Elector  the  tutelar!  y  adept  of  his  confpuracies.    "  I  am  of  means  for

•  r  *       prevent-

"  opinion  (would  he  write  to  his  Areopagites)  that  in  ;ng  any

"  order  to  ftrengthen  ourfelves,  you  mould  fend  a  depu-  procefs.

ft  tation  to  the  Elector,  to  offer  him  the  Protectorate  of

u  the  Eclectic  Lodges.     The  Brethren  UlyJJes,  Jpello,

"  and  fom'e  others   of  the  moft  diftinguifhed  members,

"  even  Ce  If  us  for  inftance,  might  be  deputed  for  this  pur-

"  pofe.    Should  the  Prince  accept  it,  we  fhall  be  elfectu-

"  ally  fkreened  from  any  future  perfecution,  and  nobody

"  will  then  be  afraid  of  joining  you,  or  of  frequenting

*'  your  Lodges."^

The  reader  may  eafily  judge  how  fuch  a  deputation
would  have  been  received  by  the  Elector,  when  he  is  in-
Formed  of  the  manner  in  which  he  had  formerly  received
a  fimilar  proportion  while  refiding  at  Manheim.  One  or
his  minifters  at  that  time,  under  a  far  more  plaufible  pre-

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  a,  from  Pbilo  to  Caio*

f  Ibid.  Let.  i,  from  Efittetus.

X  Orig.  Writ.  Let.  I,  to  Epiclehu,  ;th  Feb.  1783.


14*  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

tence,  propofed  to  him  to  call  to  his  court  the  moft  famous
Philofophers  of  the  day,  and  to  grant  penfions  to  thefe
pretended  great  men,  after  the  example  of  Lewis  XIV.
who  had  been  the  protestor  of  the  learned  men  of  his  age.
The  glory  of  fuch  an  undertaking  ieemed  at  firft  to  flat-
ter  the  Prince;  but  on  confuting  men  of  real  learning  he
foon  perceived  that  l'uch  a  meafure  would  only  end  in
multiplying  a  Seel  equally  inimical  to  their  God  and
their  country;  and  Charles  Theodore  would  no  longer
hear  of  the  Proteclorfhip  of  Philofophifm.  This  anec-
dote was  lent  to  me  by  a  perfon  who  heard  it  from  the
very  minifter  that  had  made  the  proportion  to  the  Elector.

It  is  not  understood  how  the  court  of  Munich  acquired
its  Rrif.  knowledge  refpccling  Uluminifm  ;  the  informa-
tion, it  received  was  not  fufficiently  explicit  indeed  to  de-
fcrib'e  the  fpirit  of  the  Sect,  but  it  gave  a  general  idea  of
the  danger  of  fecref  fociëtiés.  On  the  22d  of  June  1784,
His  Electoral  Highnefs  publifhed  an  Ediét  abfolutely  for-
bidding aïïfaret  communities,  fouettes^  and  confraterni-
ties, other  than  thofe  by  law  eirablifhed.  The  unconta-
minated  Mafons  ihut  up  their  Lodges;  the  illuminized
Mafons,'who  had  many  of  their  adepts  about  the  court,
thought  themfelves  ftrorig  enough  to  bid  defiance  to  the
Edict:,  and  continued  their  meetings.  A  work  publifhed
by  Air.  Ba'bb,  a  Profeilor  at  Munich,  entitled  The  fir jl
Warning  en  Free.-mojonry,  began  to  difclofe  more  clearly
the  plans  of  the  new  adepts.  Soon  after  the  Count  Jo-
feph  Tôrring  made  a  more  vigorous  attack  on  them.  The
Illuminées  not  only  wrote  apologies  in  anfwer  to  thefe
attacks,  but  fet  many  other  engines  to  work,  the  artifice
of  which  cannot  be  better  defcribed  than  by  Weiihaupt's
own  letters  to  his  adepts.

"  Liften  for  a  moment  to  my  advice,  (he  writes  on  the
c'  iocb  December,  1784).  If  any  inquiry  be  fet  on  foot,
"  1  am  of  opinion  that  none  of  the  Chiefs  lhould  fuffer
"  themfelves  to  be  led  into  the  detail  and  particulars  of
44  the  Order;  and  they  mull  pofitively  declare,  that  no
"  power  on  earth  lhould  force  them  to  make  any  difcove-
"  lies  excepting  to  the-  Elector  perfonally:  the  two  de-
rees  of  the  higher  myfteries  ftiould  then  be-  fubmitted
tc  to  him.  A»-  Î. ■■{{  fueh  ihall  be  the  line  oi  conduct  which
"  Ï  will  hold,  if  ever  I  am  eallcd  upon.  You  will  then
4i  fee  what  a  happy  turn  our  affairs  will  take.  You  have
ad  what  Brother  D  ,.  .  .  thought  of  the  full  degree.


HISTORICAL  PART.  1^3

*l  I  am  certain  the  Elector  will  view  it  in  the  fame  light.
u  I  place  all  my  hopes  in  the  goodnefs  of  my  caufe.  Bold-
"  ly  and  without  the  leal!  apprehenlion,  1  can  declare  be-
u  forehand,  that  if  I  am  to  fall  it  (hall  be  in  an  honorable
"  manner,  though  it  were  to  coft  me  my  head.  Deport
"  youriclves  in  the  fame  manner,  and  inftil  courage  intq
"  the  others.  This  is  an  admirable  opportunity  of  ihew-
"  ins;  your  magnanimity  ;  do  not  let  it  pals  by  without
"  avail.  1  have  mentioned  my  plan  for  the  Eledtor  to  13  ro-
"  ther  CromwelL  and  he  augurs  fortunately  from  it: — but

P,  J

"  he  very  well  knows  that  Such  a  meafure  will  only  be
w  reforted  to  in  the  laft  extremity."

What  an  extraiydinsiy  mode  of  defence  muft  this  ap-
pear to  thofe  who  do  not  know  that  tbefe  two  degrees
which  he  intended  to  (how  to  the  Elector  were  the  cor-
rected ones,  luch  as  he  had  prepared  for  Princes  and  cer-
tain other  candidates  who  would  have  been  difgufted  with
them  in  their  real  flate.  Sometimes  die  whole  of  that
part  relating  to  the  mytTeric^,  and  the  difcourfes  of  the
Hierophants,  were  retrenched,  and  nothing  but,  the  idle
ceremonial  preferved.  A  fécond  letter  oi  Weifhaupt's  to
his  Areopagites  dated  the  2J  February  1785,  will  more
clearly  explain  the  whole  of  this  artifice.  "My  Brethren
"  (he  fays),  the  ftep  you  are  going  to  take  is  proper,  and
"  fuch  as  the  circumftances  require.  The  Memorial  of
*'  our  Alenelaus  (Werner,  Counfellor  at  Munich)  is
11  very  fine  and  very  judicious.  I  only  with  you  to  add,
"  that  you  will  (how  your  degrees  to  nobody  but  to  the
';  Ek:£tor  j  and  thofe  that  may  be  fubmitted  to  his  inlpec-
"  tion  are — iff,  The  Novice;  2d!y,  The  Afinerval}
"  3%>  The  Minor  Illuminée.  [A"ota  bene,that  the  words
"  dumrnjler  m'onch  (frupid  monk)  are  to  be  changed  into
*4  dummjler  menfeh  (ffupid  men].  4thly,  The  Major  II-
11  luminee  entire,  except  thefe  words,  which  you  will  ef-
u  face  :  the  Priejh  and  bad  Princes  are  in  our  zvay.
«  5thly,  The  Direfîing  Illuminée -y  but  in  this  degree
<;  you  will  only  Ihow  the  ceremonial  of  the  reception,  and
«  my  difcourfe;  not  a  word  of  the  reft.  6thly,  The  de-
"  gree  of  Pricjl  ox  Epopt  ;  here  you  will  only  JJioiv  our
"  injlruùlions  that  relate  tofciences  ;  and  you  will  care-
*'  juhy  read  thofe  ovtr^leji  any  allufion  or  reference  to  the
«  reji  /houldfubjifr.

"  As  all  the  packets  for  Ephefus  (Ingolftadt)  are  open.
*<  ed,  I  plainly  fee  that  I  am  the  petfun  at  whom  they  aim.


144"  antisocial  conspiracy;

"  To-morrow  I  will  write  to  Alfred  (the  mintfter  Sein-
"  iheim)  ;  and  that  letter  will  inform  the  court  before -
"  hand  how  I  mean  to  behave  on  this  occafion.    Openly
"  declare  to  the  Elector,  that  the  Order  is  a  produce  of
"  his  own  fiâtes,  and  that  I  am  the  author  of  it.    Then
<c  the  whole  affair  will  turn  upon  me  3    but  I  am  much
"  miftaken  if  they  will  proceed  to  a  perfbnal  inqueft  until
<l  they  have  further  proofs,  which  can  only  be  acquired
"  by  opening  the  lettejs.     Show  yourfelves,  great,  firm,
*  and  undaunted.    My  conduâî  will  prove  to  you  what  I
"  can  be.    In  the  inftruction  for  the  degree  of  Epopt  take
"  great  care  of  that  part  that  relate  s  to  H>fhryy  leave
u  nothing  that  can  lead  to  the  difcovery  of  the  theft  com-
"  înitted  on  the  Archives."
He  is  dis-       All  this  artifice,  however,  proved  ufelefs.     The  court
covered      had  acquired  Sufficient  proofs  to  take  fuch  fleps  againft
an-n-£jS"      tne  hero  of  the  Sect  as  prudence  might  require.    A  few
days  after  he  had  written  thefe  inftructions  to  his  Areo-
pagites,  he  was  difmilild  from  his  chair  of  Profeflbr  of
Laws   in  the  Un  i  ver  ft  ty  of  Ingolftadt;  only,  however,
as  a  famous  Mafhr  of  Lodges,  and  as  difobedient  to  the
Edict  fuppreffing  all  fecret  focieties.     The  myfteries  or*
his  Lodge  had  not  yet  tranfpired  ;   it  was  only  known,
that  feveral  members  of  his  illuminifm,  difgufted   with
his  doctrines  or  his  plans,  had  abandoned  his  Lodges  as
early  as  1783.     Among   others  were  to  be  found  Co-
sandey  a  jh-icft,  and  the  Abbé  R  enner,  both  of  them
Profefïbrs  of  the  Litiera:  hunianiores  at  A'lunich.     But,
great  as  might  be  the  horror  which  they  had  conceived
of  what  they  had  ken  of  the  Seel:  without  having  attain-
ed the  grand  myfteries,  it  does  not  appear  that  they  had
as  yet  taken  any  fteps  againft  it  ,  at  leaft  they  had  not
given  fuch  details  as  might  direct  the  arm  of  the  law.  On
the  30th  March  17B5,  however, they  received  a  fummons
Juridical    from  His  Ele&oral  Highnefs,  and  from  the  Bifhop  of
rj.epo  -        Freyfinguen,to  appear  before  the  Tribunal  of  the  Ordina-
two  lllu-     rv?and  there  to  declare  whatever  they  might  have  obferv-
minees.      ec^  m  tne  Sect  of  Illuminées  contrary  to  religion  and  good
morals.     Nobody,  even  then,  had  the  leaft  idea  that  the
confpiracy  was  pointedly  directed  againft  the  government.
Meilrs.   Cofandey  and  Renner  made  their  depofitions,
the  one  on  the  3d  the  other  on  the  7  th  of  April  follow-
ing.    I  muft  give  extraits  from  both,  though  perfectly
agreeing  with  each  other.    That  made  by  Mr.  Cofandey


HISTORICAL  PART.  ,  I45

\$  more  ample  on  the  principles  of  the  Illuminées,  while
Mi".  Renner  defcends  more  particularly  into  their  confti-
tution  and  the  education  of  their  pupils.  I  (hall  therefore
begin  by  an  extract  from  the  latter  j  and  then  revert  ta
that  made  by  Mr.  Cofandey.

^aridical  Depojïtion  ?nade  by  the  Profcjfor  Renner  on
the  Illuminées.

After  having  ftated  the  orders  he  had  received  to  ap-
pear before  the  Tribunal,  and  the  fubject  on  which  he
was  to  give  evidence,  Mr.  Renner  begins  by  declaring
that

"  The  Order  of  the  Illuminées  muft  be  diftinguifhcd
#  from  that  of  the  Free-mafons.  But  this  diftinction  is  a
tc  fecret  to  mere  Mafons,  as  well  as  to  Illuminées  of  the
?*  Minerval  degree.  I  was  myfelf  in  the  dark  refpecKng
f1  it,  until,  after  a  long  trial,  they  thought  proper  to  ad-
*'  vance  me  to  the  degree  of  Minor  Illuminée,  the  firft
M  degree  in  which  they  take  the  name  of  Illuminée.  I
"  was  even  constituted  Superior  over  a  imall  number  of
M  the  Brethren."  s

Here  the  deponent,  who  thought  he  was  to  become  a
Mafon  on  his  firlt  entrance  into  the  Seel:,  learns  that  he
is  not  yet  one;  and  tells  us,  that  many  of  the  Brethren
bad  complained  heavily  that  they  had  not  been  admit-
ted as  yet  to  the  Intermediary  Degrees.  He  himfelf
is  admitted  to  them,  and  does  not  find  them  fatîsfactp-
ry  :  but  he  adds,  *'  The  advantage  I  reaped  from  them
?*  was,  that  I  discovered  the  benefits  which  the  Order  de-
"  rived  from  Free-mafonry.  The  Illuminées  fear  no-
"  thing  fo  much  as  to  be  known  under  that  name.  They
*'  allume  the  cloak  of  Mafonry,  only  becaufe  they  believe
"  themfelves  more  feeure  when  rttafked  under  the  appear  -
u  ance  of  an  aflbciation  that  is  looked  upon  as  iniigniii-
*c  cant. — -The  Mafonic  Lodges,  according  to  their  ex-
P  preffton,  only  contain  the  drefs  of  the  people  (der  trbfs
M  von  leuten)  or  the  bulk  of  the  army,  among  whom  a
P  few  perfons  may  be  found,  that  may  look  upon  tftem-
"  felves  as  very  happy,  after  long  and  fevere  trials,  to  be
t*  fecretly  admitted  into  the  fanctuary  of  the  Order.  All
^  the  other  Free-mafons,  Apprentices-  Fellow-crafts,  and
*'  Mafons,  are  to  content  themfelves  with  idle  ceremo-
f*  nies,  and  remain  under  the  yoke,  either  becaufe  their
T


14-6  antisocial  conspiracy;

cc  eyes  are  not  firong  enough  to  bear  the  light,  or  becaufe
"  their  love  for  the  Order,  and  their  fecrecy,  two  elTential
4C  requisites  in  every  adept,  cannot  be  fufficiently  depend-
"  ed  on.  When  once  they  are  condemned  to  linger  in
"  obfeurity,  they  can  never  have  hopes  of  rifing  io  the
"  rnyfteries  ;  and  this  is  exprefled  by  the  fuperioi  s  in  the
<c  following  fentence,  Ex  inferno  nulla  ejl  R.edernpt'10.

*'•  Meantime  thefe  Mafons,  without  knowing  it,  are
4i  under  the  direction  of  the  Illuminées,  who  reap  great
"  advantages  from  their  reputation  and  their  riches. —
u  Thefe  men  (fay  the  Superiors)  are  fufficiently  recom-
u  penfed  by  being  admitted  to  converfe  with  the  adepts  of
u  light,  and  to  learn  enough  from  fuch  converfations  to
"  appear  enlighted  to  the  prophane.

tc  The  Illuminées,  who  at  firft  only  fhow  themfelves
"  under  the  appearance  of  a  literary  fociety,  gave  them-
u  (elves  the  following  conftitution:  Their  Order  is  fub-
**  divided  into  different  claffes,  called  degrees,  becaufe  the
"  light  expands  itfelf  according  to  thefe  claifes. — The  firft
"  degree  is  a  fort  of  Noviciate,  though  every  perfon  re-
tv  ported  as  infmuated,  and  recommended  by  fome  mem-
"  ber  of  the  Order  as  worthy  of  being  admitted,  muft
*'  have  been  prepared  and  inftructed  to  a  certain  point  by
"  his  Infinuator  or  Recruiter.  It  is  a  confiant  rule  in  the
"  Order,  that  every  Candidate  Ihould  undergo  a  year's
u  trial,  that  his  infinuator  may  obferve  him  accurately,
u  according  to  the  regulations  of  the  Order,  and  in  a  £%ui-
"  bus  Licet  draw  an  exact  picture  of  his  perfon,  his  cha-
"  racter,  his  talents,  and  his  conduct.  If  the  Candidate
"  is  judged  to  be  worthy,  he  is  admitted  into  the  clafs  of
"  Preparations. — In  my  time  there  were  two  of  this  na-
c'  ture,  called  Churches.  Each  was  directed  by  four  men,
"  forming  what  was  called  the  Mo.gijiracy.  They  were
<£  the  Superior,  the  Cenfsr,  the  Treajurer,  and  the  Secre-
"  tary,  and  all  thefe  were  adepts  of  higher  degrees. —
«  We  held  at  leaft  one  meeting  every  month,  at  which
tc  all  the  members  of  the  fame  Church  were  to  attend,  to
"  wive  their  Superiors  a  fealed  letter  directed  Qiiibus  Li-
"  cety  Soli,  or  Primoy  containing  an  exact  ftatement  of  the
"  conduct, difcourfe,  &c.  of  thoie  whom  they  had  cbjerved
"  during  the  month.

"  No  member  is  difpenfed  from  thefe  £>uibus  Licets,
"  which  afcend  from  Degree  to  Degree,  and  are  only  open-
«  eel  by  thoie  who  have  aright  to  read  them.     The  other


HISTORICAL  PART.  14


ft  J


"  occupations  of  the  meeting  were/after  fome  ceremonies,
*  to  read  the  ftatutes,  a  few  partages  from  the  ancient  Phi-
**  lofophers,  and  a  difcourfe  on  various  fubj eels,  compofed
"  by  the  different  members  in  rotation.  As  the  Brethren
"  in  general  do  not  like  religion,  the  greater  liberty  the
cc  writer  ufes  on  that  fubjeft,  he  is  the  more  applauded,
"  and  acquires  a  higher  reputation  of  being  enlightened.
"  Sometimes,  however,  the  prefence  of  certain  brethren,
"  either  feeble  as  yet,  or  not  to  be  entirely  depended  upon,
"  caufe  the  Superiors  at  fuch  le&ures  to  give  ngns  of  ap-
u  parent  dilTatisfaction.  It  would  be  a  violent  breach  of
**  their  policy  to  give  way  to  intemperate  language,  and"
"  to  exprels  the  principles  of  the  Order  too  openly,  as
u  each  member  might  look  upon  fuch  talk  as  a  part  of
«  their  fyftem.

"  To  avoid  fufpicion,  and  to  attain  their  ends  more  cer-
"  tainly,  they  hold  weekly  meetings,  whence  all  ceremony
"and  conftraint  is  difcarded.  Here  the  pupils  hold  dis—
K  putations  among  themfelves  on  all  forts  of  fubje&S.  It
"  is  on  thefe  occafions  that  the  fuperiors,  and  thofe  who
"  have  imbibed  the  true  principles  of  the  Order,  fneer  at
"  what  they  call  Religious  Préjudices  ;  for  in  their  lan-
K  guage  every  thing  that  can  obftruct  their  views  are  pre-
<c  judices.  It  is  then  that  by  means  of  the  molt  (educing
w  fubterfuges  they  reprefent  their  principles  in  fuch  poign-
u  ant  language,  that  the  molt  timid,  encouraged  by  their
11  example,  and  purified  from  ail  drofs  and  religious  pre-
judice, become  perfectly  like  the  reft.  He  that  can
"  withftand  fuch  artifice  is  a  man  loil  in  the  eyes  of  the
«  Order.

"  That  which  made  the  greateft  imprefiîon  on  me,  ?,-
"  mong  the  Illuminées,  was  certainly  their  method  of
"  binding  down  their  adepts  and  fubctuing  their  minds. —
u  They  extoll  the  greatntis  and  power  of  the  Order;  they
"  fpeakof  its  dignity  with  the  utmoft  refpect;  they  ilun
<c  you  with  the  molt  magnificent  promifes,  and  affure  you
"  of  the  protection  of  great  perf  m  ages  ready  to  do  every
"  thing  for  the  advancement  of  its  members  at  the  re-
"  commendation  of  the  Order  ;  till  at  length  each  pupil
"  reaily  conliders,  or  appears  to  confider,  the  intereft  of
t;  Ulurninifin  as  his  own,  and  views  all  the  propositions
«  and  orders  he  receives  from  his  fuperiors  as  duties  which
«  he  has  to  fulfill.  Should  a  pupil  under  this  idea  have
«  the  misfortune  to  declarej  in  a  $j(it/us  Licet^  a  Pr'uno^


14.S  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

«  or  a  Soli)  fome  mifconducl  of  his  own,  or  fome  feerefc
w  that  he  has  been  entrufted  with  or  that  he  has  extorted
"  from  any  body,  the  unhappy  confident  is  loft  to  him-
"  felf,  for  he  thenceforth  belongs  wholly  to  the  $câ.—~
li  When  once  they  have  thus  tied  him  down,  they  affume
"  a  very  different  tone  with  him.  They  care  very  little
tc  about  him;  *  He  may  abandon  us  (they  fay),  we  ftand  in
"  no  farther  need  of  him.' — I  do  not  think,  that  any  one  has
"  yet  dared  or  will  ever  dare  to  (how  the  leaft  difcontentj
"  much  lefs  a  defire  to  quit  the  Order;  efpecially  if  he
*'  reflects  on  the  dictatorial  threat,  It  jhall  be  in  •vain  for
tc  any  prince  to  pretend  to  fave  him  who  ftiall  dare  to  be-
"  tray  us.*

"  They  felecl  their  pupils  with  great  caution^  and  only
"  entice  into  their  Order  thofe  whom  they  think  can  be
*c  ufeful  to  the  attainment  of  their  ends.  Statefmen,  per-
*'  fons  diftinguifhed  by  rank  or  fortune,  archiving  coun-
kt  fellors,  fecretaries,  clerks,  profelîbrs;  abbés,  preceptors,
u  phyficians,  and  apothecaries,  are  always  welcome  candi-
"  dates  to  the  Order.

"  The  degree  of  Major  Illuminée  is,  if  Ï  may  make  ufe
"  of  fuch  an  txpremon,  a  fchool  in  which  the  candidate  is
lc  trained  like  a  true  Bloodhound."  f

Here  the  deponent  relates  their  method  of  watching
their  adepts,  and  of  defcribing,  both  them  and  the  pro-
phane.  He  alfo  mentions  fome  few  of  the  thoufand  or
fifteen  hundred  queftions  that  are  to  be  anfwered  on  the
character,  the  habits,  &e.  of  any  perfon  whom  an  adept  is
ordered  to  fcrutinize.    He  then  continues;

"  This  method  of  enlightening  the  pupils  always  goes
u  on  increafing  in  every  degree.  A  brother  may  know
(<  thofe  of  his  clafs  and  thofe  of  an  inferior  one;  but,  un*
"  lefs  his  Superiors  have  conferred  on  him  the  commifiion
4<  of  Director^  Vifitor,  or  Spy,  all  other  adepts  are,  in  their
"  language,  invifible  to  him.  This,  v/ithout  doubt,  is  the
"  point  that  conltitutes  the  great  ftrength  of  the  Order.
"  The  chietSjby  this  method,  watch  an  inferior  without  be-
Ci  ing  known;  they  know  how  far  he  is  devoted  to  the  Or-
'■'  der  and  true  to  his  fecrecy;  and  a  point  of  ftill  greater
*c  importance  is,  that  in  cafe  of  any  explofion,  (of  which
li  they  have  been  long  apprehenh»;^),and  on  ail  occafionsj

*  Kein  F'jrft  Kann  den  fchutzen  der  uns  verr'ath.
t  Wie  die  wahren  ipiirhund;  abgeiicluet  werden.


HISTORICAL  PART»  149

K  they  can  fupport  the  brethren  without  any  one  enter-
"  taining  the  leaft  fufpicion  of  their  being  connected  -vith
*'  the  fyitem,  fince  they  are  unknown  even  to  the  Bre-
"  thren,  and  of  courfe  to  the  prophane.

"  There  are  men^  and  they  may  be  eafily  difcemed*,  zvho
u  defend  the  Order  (of  Illuminilm)  with  great  warmth,
K  though  they  do  not  declare  themfehe;  to  belong  to  it. —
"  Such  conduct  certainly  deferves  a  little  animadverfion.
u  Either  thefe  defenders  belong  to  the  Order,  or  they  do
"  not  ;  if  they  do  not,  can  they  pretend  to  defend  that
«  which  they  neither  know  nor  have  any  pofîîbility  of
"  knowing.  W  they  belong  to  the  Order,  that  very  cir-
"  cumftance  renders  them  unworthy  of  belief,  though  they
u  ihould  adduce  as  proofs  fame  few  works  thrown  out  to
'w  baffle  any  attempt  to  inv^ftigate  the  plan  of  the  Order,
"  or  fhould  protêt!  on  their  words  of  honor  when  they
"  fpeak  fo  highly  in  its  praife.  When  a  perfon  comes  fe-
'*<  riouily  to  çonfider  the  impofilbility  of  knowing  any
"  thing  of  Illuminifm  but  by  being  a  member  of  it,  and
"  when  we  compare  the  many  advantages  derived  from
"  their  inijifibility  ;  if  we  fhould  be  tempted  to  draw
u  any  concluions  on  thefe  defenders,  we  might  (and  that
u  without  reafoning  ill)  fuppofe'they  belonged  themfelves
"  to  the  Order,  and  to  that  particular  ipecies  of  adepts
"  which  the  Illuminées  term  invijible."*

After  having  thus  given  as  much  of  the  general  plan
of  the  Illuminées  as  he  could  know  without  having  been
admitted  to  the  higher  degrees,  the  Deponent  comes  to  the
principles  which  the  Superiors  wii.ii  to  inculcate  in  their
pupils;  and  in  the  iirff.  place  he  mentions  the  following,
of  which  they  have  mads  a  fori  of  proverb  :

*  Und  zwar  von  tener  art  dcr  verfchwundenen,  wie  man  fie
in  der  ordens  fptache  nennt. — Were  I  to  requeft  certain  En-
glilh  reviewers, and  particularly  Dr-  Griffiths,  or  his  afliftants
jn  the  Monthly  Review,  to  read  and  weigh  this  obfervation  of
the  German  depooant,  thofe  gentlemen  might  perhaps  vvifllto
retort  it  on  me;  biK  let  them  recollect,  that  when  men  who
have  aflbciated  with  robbers  are  feen  to  depofe  againft  them,
or  when  the  writings  of  conipirators  are  produced  in  evidence,
asperfon  may  eafily  prove  their  criminality  without  being  an
accomplice.  But  you,  Gentlemen,  who  were  not  with  them,
yet  pretend  to  prove  their  innocence,  will  your  a/I'erticn  inva-
lidate the  evidence  of  eye  and  ear  witneiTes? — if  you  are  of
their  party,  all  that  can  be -concluded  from  your  déniais  is,
that  you  are  ftill  very  faithful  and  much  devoted  to  them,  iince
in  their  defence  you  refill  the  demonftraiion  of  evidence.


150  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Tous  les  Rois  et  tous  les  Prêtres
Sont  des  fripons  et  des  traîtres.*

With  regard  to  Suicide, the.  Superiors  preach  it  to  their
brethren  to  prepare  them  for  more  tempejluous  times. —
"  They  have  the  art  of  reprefenting  fuicide  as  fo  eafy,  and
'*  fo  advantageous  in  certain  ci rcumlfanccs,  that  I  fhould
"  not  be  furprized  (lays  Mr.  Renner)  to  fee  fome  adept
*'  carried  away  by  the  lure  ofa  certain  vol uptuoufnefs  which
"  they  pretend  to  be  peculiar  to  fuicide;  and  they  even
"  pretend  to  prove  their  aflerrions  by  examples.

"  But  of  all  their  deteffable  principles  the  mod  danger-
"  ous  in  my  judgment  is  this  :  The  end  jn/iifies  the  means.
u  in  confequence  of  this  morality,  and  according  to
"  their  constant  pkactice,  the  mere  fufpicion  that
"  a  man  will  at  any  future  period  be  in  a  pofition  to  ob-
"  ftruc-t  the  views  of  the  Order  will  be  a  fufficient  reafon
lt  to  calumniate  him,  however  virtuous  he  may  be.  They
"  will  cabal  to  drive  one  man  out  of  his  place;  they  will
"  poifon  another;  a  third  they  will  aflaflinatej  in  fhort,
"  they  will  do  any  thing  to  attain  their  ends.  Suppofe  the
"  crime  of  the  Illuminée  fhould  be  difcovered,  he  always
"  has  the  Patet-exitus  as  a  refource.  //  is  only  a  ball
"  through  the  bead,  and  he  efcapes  the  rigor  and  ignomi-
"  ny  of  the  law."

Mr.  Renner  next  alludes  to  what  the  Sect  calls  its  Mo-
ral Government  or  Com?rJJJion  of  Morals,  or  its  Fifcah
"  This  commiffion  is  a  college  formed  of  the  moft  able
"  and  honed  men,  that  is  in  their  language,  of  men  chiefly
"  belonging  to  the  clafs  of  Invifibles,  and  who,  enjoying
"  the  confidence  of  the  fovereign,  would,  according  to*  the
"  vices  of  their  commiffion,  inform  him  of  the  morals
"  and  honeftv  of  each  of  his  fubjecls;  but  as  probity  is
"  neCeflary  to  fulfil  the  divers  Rations  of  the  ftate,  each
"  peifon  fhould  be  prepared  beforehand  for  the  office  he
11  is  to  occupy.  An  admirable  plan  !  But  fhould  they  ever
"  accomplish  it,  fhould  their  rule  ever  be  adopted,  what
"  would  become  of  ail  thofe  men  who  did  not  belong  to
"  Ulurhinifm  ?  Happily,  the  pian  is  difcovered  in  lime;
"  ofherwife  they  might  have  verified  what  a  Superior  juft
tc  returned  from  vifiting  a  Superior  or'  a  higher  degree
**  had  foretold  ;  All  the  Pojls  once  properly  piled  in  fuc-

*  Ail  kings  and  all  priefls  are  rafcals  and  traitors.


HISTORICAL  PART.  I5I

<l  cejfion  to  each  other,  Jh-mld  the  Order  hecompof/dofhut
*.Jtx  hundred  members,  r.o  potver  on  earth  could  rejijl
«  them."

Mr.  Renner  finiihes  by  declaring,  that  he  is  unacquaint-
ed with  tiie  ultimate  object  of  the  Order;  that  the  Supe-
riors were  perpetually  talking  of  that  obiect,  but  never
mentioned  what  it  was.  He  believes  it  to  be  of  the  ut-
moft  conlequence  ;  but  he  leaves  every  one  free  to  con-
ceive, after  what  he  has  (aid,  how  that  object  can  accord
with  the  civil  and  religious  duties.  He  affirms  on  oath
the  particulars  contained  in  the  above  declaration,  and
which  he  leaves  written  and  figned  by  his  own  hand.

'Juridical  Depojitioiu  of  M  r.  Cos  AN  D  E  y,  3.'/  Jprily  1785.

My  reafon  for  placing  Mr.  Renner's  depoiition  in  ft,
was^becaufe  he  is  more  explicit  on  the  government  of
llluminiim;  while  Mr.  Cofandey  chiefly  dwells  on  the
principles  of  the  Seer.  After  having  ihown  in  a  lew
words  how  Free-mafonry  ferves  as  a  cloak  to  the  Sect,
how  the  candidate  is  gradually  fettered  in  the  bonds  of  the
Superiors,  and  how  dangerous  muff  be  a  fervitude  to  men
who  from  principle  wiih  to  appear  idlers  though  in  the
m  vt  active  purfuits;  he  proceeds  with  the  unfortunate
Minerval  to  the  degrees  of  Minor  and  Major  Illuminée.
11  It  is  here  (fays  he)  that  the  pupil  is  a  little  further  ini-
"  tiated  into  the  fyifems  of  the  Order.  Light,  however,
a  is  imparted  to  him  but  flowly,  and  with  ail  poffiblepre-
"  cautions.  He  is  here  made  acquainted  with  a  greater
"  number  of  Adepts  and  Under-Superiors;  but  the  Chiefs
u  always  remain  invijible.

"  In  order  to  be  advanced  to  the  higher  degrees  the
•*  candidate  mult,  in  the  language  of  the  Se£t,  have  got  rid
M  of  all  religious  prejudices,  or  at  leaft  he  mull  allume
*4  the  appearance  of  one  who  has  fo  done  in  the  prefence
"  of  his  Superiors  ;  as  no  religionijl  (fuch  is  their  expres-
"  lion)  can  be  admitted  to  the  higher  degrees.*

"  The  moft  excellent  Superiors  are  the  perfons  that
a  give  the  ton  in  all  thefe  degrees.  Their  orders,  their
"  maxims,  their  opinions,  their  doctrines,  are  the  foul,  the
w  ftandard,  the  fpirit,  the  main  fpring  of  this  inltitution.


*  Dann  kein  Religionar  (es  ift  ihr  aufdruck)  wird  in  die  ho-
here  grad  aut  genommen.


152  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

*{  The  lower  clafs  of  Superiors  and  Chiefs,  are  cunning
«*  knave's,  and  black  and  ryftematiç  villains,  or  fometimeu
<c  milled  enthufiafts,  fpurred  on  and  abominably  deluded
<c  by  the  others,  As  a  proof,  I  will  relate  fume  of  their
"  principles  in  the  form  of  proverbs,  which  are  never  giv-
"  en  in  writing,  but  are  perpetually  inculcated  in  the  adepts,
"  by  thefè  Superiors.

u  I.  JVhcn  nature  lays  too  heavy  a  burthen  upon  uix
il  it  is  to  fuicide  tfydt  tue  are  to  apply  for  relief.  PatêT
"  Exïtus.  An  Illuminée,  they  would  tell  us,  fhould
*{  make  away  with  hi  mfelf  rather  than  betray  his  Order;
*c  and  they  alfo  represent  a  fecret  yoluptuoufnefs  to  he  in-
"  herent  to  fuicide.

"  II.  Nothing  through  reafon\  every  thing  through
çc  PaJfi°Py  's  their  fécond  maxim.  The  end,  the  propa-
*'  gatioii,  and  the  advantage  of  their  Order,  fupplies  iç  the
<c  minds  of  the  adepts  the  place  of  God,  country,  and  con-
"  ieience.  Every  thing  that  obitrucis  theprogrefs  of  the
"  Order  is  the  blackeft  treafon.

"  III.  The  end  fane  life  s  the  means.  Thus  calumny,
"  poifon,  aifailination,  treafon,  revolt,  wickednefs,  and  any
"  thing  that  can  lead  to  this  end,  is  laudable.

"  IV.  No  Prince  can  five  the  man  who  dares  to  betray
tc  us.  Things  then  are  carried  on  in  this  Order  that  are
"  adverfe  to  the  interefts  of  Princes;  things  that  fronv
u  their  importance  might  be  difcovered  to  Princes;  fuch
<l  a  difcovery  (in  the  language  of  the  Seel:)  would  be  the
"  blacked  treafon  ;  and  the  traitor  is  beforehand  threaten*
**  ed  with  vengeance.  They  mull  alfo  have  means  of  de-
"  ftroying  their  accufers  with  impunity;  and  fuch  means
*'  are  eai:!y  furmifed.

"  V.  All  King:  and  all  Pricfls  are  rafals  and  trai-
"  tors;  and  in  another  place,  Ail  Pricfs  are  Knaves. — ■
"  The  total  annihilation  of  religion,  of  the  love  of  the
"  country,  and  of  princes,  enters  into  the  plans  of  the  II-
"  luminees;  becaufe  ffaythey)  religion  as  well  as  love  of
4t  the  country,  and  of  princes,  restrains  the  affections  of
^  men  to  particular  fiâtes,  and  diverts  them  from  the  more
?  extenfive  views  of  Illuminifm,

"  Among  their  plans  I  obferved  one  which  they  called
"  their  ?noral  Empire  or  Government.  This  government,
"  which  would  throw  the  whole  force  of  every  flate  into
"  the  hands  of  their  college  or  council  oi  Illuminifm,  would,
^  without  any  appeal  to  the  prince^  name  to  all  promo-


HISTORICAL  PART.  153

(r  tiong,  and  grant  or  refufe  all  the  favors  of  the  ftate.—
f*  tJy  thefe  means  they  would  be  entrufted  with  the  abfo-
fl  lute  right  of  definitively  pronouncing  on  the  honeftyor
*4  the  capability  of  each  individual.  By  thefe  means  too
*4  all  the  prophane  would  be  difcarded  from  the  court  and
"  other  employments  ;  and,  to  ufe  their  expreffion,  a  holy
*c  legion  would  furround  the  prince,  mailer  him,  and  die-
"  tate  his  edicts  according  to  their  own  will  and  pleafure.
*<  This  Regimen  or  Moral  College,  alfo  called  the  Com-
IC  mifilon  of  Morals,  or  the  Fifcal  (being  a  fortofexche-
*c  quer  chamber  for  the  government  of  the  people),  would
*'  invefl  the  Sect  with  a  moil  formidable  defpotic  power
f*  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  v/ould  reduce
f*  fovereigns  to  the  defpicable  ftate  of  mere  phantoms,  or
"  of  crowned  ilaves."

This  College,  or  Mora!  Regimen^  will  occur  again  in
another  juridical  depofition;  and  I  will  then  explain  how
it  ferved  to  veil  the  future  projects  of  the  S^cl  for  the
diforganizatiou  and  abfolutedeftruction  of  all  focicty  what-
ever. Mr.  Cofandey  concludes  with  faying  that  he  is  rea-
dy to  affirm  on  oath  the  truth  of  all  that  is  contained  in
the  above  declaration.

Thefe  depositions,  notwithstanding  their  importance,
feemed  to  make  but  little  impreffion.  Whether  the  tri-
bunals were  befet  by,  or  in  great  part  compofed  of  Illu-
minées, or  not,  I  cannot  know;  but  they  affeâed  to  treat
thefe  declarations  as  containing  nothing  either  very  ferj-
pus  or  menacing;  or  whether  the  removal  of  Weilhaupt
|iad  made  them  view  the  Seâ  as  deftroyed,  and  the  con-
spiracy as  counteracted,  I  do  not  pretend  to  fay;  but  cer-
tain it  is,  that  at  length  Heaven  by  its  thunderbolts  warns
nations  and  their  rulers  of  the  plots  contriving  againffc
them,  of  the  extent  of  which  plots  they  were  ignorant^
neither  had  they  furmifed  the  baneful  activity  of  the  con-
spirators. Qifmifled  from  his  public  functions  at  Ingol-
ftadt,  Weifhaupt  had  taken  refuge  at  Ratifbon.  This  Wej-
town  becomes  his  new  Efeu/is,  his  center  of  myfteries  j  "laupt
all  his  plots  had  followed  him  thither;  and  fo  far  was  he  Ç?nt,"ues

.  l"iIS  plots

from  looking  upon  them  as  baffled,  that  he  purfued  them  at  Ratis,
with  redoubled  ardor.   Vengeance  had  rendered  him  more  bon.
terrible  from  the  recefTes  of  his  new  retreat;  and  now  en-
tirely liberated  from  all  public  duties,  he  gives  up  his
whole  time  to  the  preparation  and  drilling  of  emifTaries,
aijd  to  teaching  them  the  means  of  fapping,  when  on  their

U


154  antisocial  conspiracy;

different  millions,  the  foundations  of  the  altar  and  fte
throne,  of  civil  fociety,  and  of  all  governments  whatever,
An  adept        Among  his  adepts  was  one  Lanz,  an  apoftate  prieft.
ftruck        Weifhaupt  defigned  him  as  the  perfon  to  carry  his  mys«
with  ^         teries  and  confpiracies  into  Silefia.    His  miffion  was  aî-
icclten"      rea(^>'  nxed,  and  Weifhaupt  was  giving  him  his  laft  in-
ftructions,  when  a  thunderbolt  from  heaven  ftruck  the
apoftate  dead,  and  that  h  the  fide  of  WeifhaupU*     The
Brethren,  rn  their  firfl  fright  had  not  recourfe  to  their  or-
dinary means  for  diverting  the  papers  of  the  deceafed  adept
from  the  infpeeYion  of  the  magiftrates.     The  perufa!  of
forrie  of  his  papers  furnifbed  new  proofs;  and  being  trans-
mitted to  tat  court  of  Bavaria,  induced  it  to  take  the  de-
termination of  following  up  the  difcovefies  made  in  the
depofitions  of  Meflrs.  Cofandey  and  Renner.

The  enquiries  made,  chieflv  related  to  thofe  who  were
known  to  have  had  connections  with  Weilhaupt  at  Ingol-
itadt.  The  adept  Fischer,  fuft  judge  and  Burgo-mas-
ter  of  that  town,  and  the  Librarian  Drexl,  werebanifh-
ed.  The  Baron  Fr.auf.nb  erg  and  fifteen  other  of  Wei-
(haupt's  pupils  were  expelled  the  univerfity.  But  nei-
ther  their  punjfhment,  nor  the  circumftance  of  the  adept
being  ftruck  by  lightning,  could  raife  any  fymptoms  of
remorfe  in  the  mind  of  their  mafter.  The  following  let-
ter to  Fifcher  may  ferve  as  a  fpecimen-  of  the  manner  in
which  he  wifhed  to  fupport  their  courage,  ftimulate  thei/
enthufiaim,  and  infufe  all  the  rage  and  vengeance  of  his
plots  into  their  minds.

"  I jaiule  you,  my  dear  martyr?'  it  is  thus  he  begins
his  letter.  He  then  reminds  his  pretended  martyr  of  that
paffage  in  Seneca  where  thejuft  man  itruggling  with  ad-
verfity  is  reprefented  as  the  light  mod  worthyot  Heaven:
He  then  continues  :  "  Am  I  to  congratulate  you,  or  am
«  I  to  condole  with  you  on  your  misfortunes?  I  know
"  you  too  well  to  indulge  in  the  Litter  fentiment — Receive
«  then  my  moil  fincere  congratulations  on  feeing  you
"  among  thofe  to  whom  polterity  will  render  juftice,  and
M  whofe  conftancy  in  the  defence  of  truth  it  cannot  fail
"  to  admire — You  arc  triply  and  quadruply  more  dear  to
"  me,  now  that  you  fbare  my  fate  and  that  of  fo  many
w  other  magnanimous  perlons.  I  leave  it  to  your  pru«
°  clence  to  decide  whether  you  will  commence  a  profecu»

*  See  the  Apology  of  the  Illuminées,  P.  6*.


HISTORICAL  PART.  155

**  tion  againfr  thofe  who  have  been  guilty  of  fuch  abomi-
<l  nabie  injuftice  againft  you;  or  whether  Submitting  to
**  your  exile  without  murmur  or  complaint,  you  will  wait
*{  for  better  times.  You  fhall  not  want;  I  and  the  Bre-
<*  thren  will  provide  for  your  expenfes.  'The  public  paper  s
u  alfa  Jhall  reprefent  the  whole  çf  this  bufmefs  in  its  pro-
sper light.  Drexl  in  the  mean  time  will  retire  to  Brunn.
*'  Let  the  laughers  laugh,  and  our  enemies  rejoice,    iheir  9

«joy  ere  long  Jl)all  be  converted  into  tears.  Look  upon
«  your f elf  as  happy  to  fuffer  with  the  better  part  of  the
"  nation.  If  I  have  the  power  of  giving  my  benediction
u  to  any  body,  I  give  you  mine  with  both  my  hands.—
"  O  be  thou  blefjed,  moji  worthy  and  moft  confiant  of  my
11  Heroes.  ...  i  am  forry  that  all  this  has  happened  jufr
tc  at  the  time  when  I  am  fetting  out  for  the  banks  of  the
«  Rhine.  I  depart  next  month  and  fhall  not  return  till  a
*'  few  months  hence.  In  the  mean  time  IJball  not  be  idle\
«  and  it  is  not  without  a  reafon  that  I  go  to  that  country.
«  Acquaint  -the  Brethren  of  it.  Be  always  firm  and  con-
"  (tant.  No  difhonorcan  attach  to  you;  continue  as  yon
"  have  begun,  and  your  very  enemies  will  be  obliged  to
*l  admire  you.  Adieu,  learn  to  appreciate  and  feel  your
"  own  greatnefs.  Your  enemies  ;,re  little  indeed  in  their
«  triumph. — (Ratijbon  this  qth  April  170*5^.

"  P.  S.  If  you  want  money  I  will  have  proper  mea-
K  fures  taken  at  Munich  to  fupply  you."

This  letter  was  either  intercepted  or  fell  into  the  Elec-
tor's hands  by  fome  other  means;*  and  he  there  faw  how
dangerous  a  man  this  muft  be  who  could  thus  infufe  his
enthufiafm  into  the  minds  of  his  Conipirators.  A  fecret
co  nmifSon  was  named  to  receive  further  depofitions.— >
The  aulic  counfellor  Utzschneiber  and  Mr.  Grum
BERGER  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  who  were  known  to
have  abandoned  the  Order  of  the  Illuminées  about  two
years  before,  were  Summoned  to  make  their  depofitions.
The  Prieft  Cofandey  was  called  upon  once  more.  The
declaration  made  in  common  by  thefe  three  Gentlemen
will  recall  to  the  minds  of  the  readers  many  of  the  parti-
culars already  dated  in  the  foregoing  declarations,  and  irt
the  Code  of  the  Illuminées,  with  refpecf.  to  the  means  em-
ployed by  the  Sect,  for  making  themfelves  mailers  of  the
Mafoaic  Lodges;  for  appropriating  to  themfelves  their

*  See  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  lad  Letter  and  Note,


15^  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRAC7;

fund?,  to  provide  for  the  expenfe  of  their  travellers;  aftd
for  multiplying  the  number  of  their  adepts. — The  fame
method  for  the  fctutators  is  obfervable,  the  fame  oaths,  al-
manacks, and  cypher  for  the  firft  degrees.  The  depo-
nents had  abandoned  the  Order  before  they  were  admitted
to  the  higher  degrees.  The  principles  that  had  been  laid
down  to  them  are  on  that  account  the  more  remarkable;»
I  lhaJ],  therefore,  translate  that  part  of  their  evidence  a«
being  of  the  utmoil  confequence.  Some  perfons  may  be
of  opinion,  that  to  have  fimpîy  ftated  the  perfect  coinci-
dence of  this  new  declaration  with  thofe  already  feen
would  have  fufficed;  but  they  fhoUld  confider  that  repe-
titions of  ohjeâ  s  of  inch  importance  may  be  infifted  011
by  many  readers,  becaufe  the  proofs  are  ftrengthened  by
the  number,  the  character,  and  concordance  of  the  wit-
nefTes.

The  ^Juridical  Dcpojltion  made  in  common  hy  the  Aulic
t    Counfcllor  (Jtzschneider,  the  Prieji  Cosandey,

and  the  Academician  Grunberger,  on  the  qth  of

Sept.  1785.

<c  The  object  of  the  ttrft  degrees  of  Illuminifm  is  at
<(  once  to  train  their  young  men,  and  to  be  informed  of
u  every  thing  that  is  going  forward  by  a  fyftem  of  cfpion-
*'  age*  The  Superiors  aim  at  procuring  from  their  in-
"  feriors  diplomatic  aits,  documents,  and  original  wri-
*'  tings.  With  pleafure  they  fee  them  commit  any  trea-
u  fons  or  treacherous  ads,  becaufe  they  not  only  turn  the
**  fecrets  'betrayed  to  their  own  advantage^  but  thereby
"  have  it  in  their  power  to  keep  the  traitors  in  a  perpetual
*'  dread,  left,  if  they  ever  fhowed  any  figns  of  ftubborn-
"  nefs,  their  malefactions  fhould  be  made  known. — Ode-
"  rint  dwn  metuant,  let  them  hate,  provided  they  fear,  is
"  the  principle  of  their  government.

"  The  illuminées  from  thefe  firft  degrees  are  educated
"  in  the  following  principle»:

I.  "  The  Illuminée  who  wifb.es  to  rife  to  the  higheft
"  degrees  muft  be  free  from  all  religion  ;f  for  a  religionifi

*  Und  zu  gliech  zur  aufkundfehaftung  aller  fachen.

t  Der  Illuminât,  der  in  die  hohern  grade  kommen  will,  muft
<rofl  aller  religion  frey  ieyn.


Historical  part»  %$1

lt  (as  they  call  every  man  who  has  any  religion)  will  ne-
"  ver  be  admitted  to  the  higheft  decrees.

II.  The  Patet  Exitus^  or  the  doctrine  on  Suicide,  is
exprelled  in  the  fame  terms  as  in  the  preceding  depofition.

III.  "  The  end  fanfiifies  the  means.  The  welfare  of
"  the  Order  will  be  a  justification  for  calumnies,  poifon-
"  ings,  aflafîînations,  perjuries,  treafons,  rebellions}  in
*c  fhort,  for  all  that  the  prejudices  of  men  lead  them  to
"  call  crimes,

IV.  "  One  muft  be  more  fubmiffive  to  the  Superiors
"  of  Illuminifm,  than  to  the  fovereigns  or  magiftrates  who
cc  govern  the  people  ;  and  he  that  gives  the  preference  to
"  fovereigns  or  governors  of  the  people  is  ufelefs  to  us.*
"  Honor,  life>  and  fortune,  all  are  to  be  facrificed  to  the
u  Superiors.  The  governors  of  nations  are  defpots  when
"  they  are  not  directed  by  USi  They  can  have  no  autho-
*'  rity  over  us,  who  are  free  men,"|

The  Marquis  of  Conftanza  ufed  to  fay,  lc  that  there
<£  ought  to  be  but  two  Princes  in  Germany — Thefe  Prin-
M  ces  fliould  be  illuminées,  and  fo  furrounded  and  led  by
IC  our  adepts,  that  none  of  the  prophane  could  approach
**  their  perfons.  The  greater  and  lefter.'officcs  of  the  ffcate
K  fliould  be  folely  entrufted  to  members  of  our  Order;
"  and  the  advantages  of  the  Order  fhould  be  attended  to,
w  tho'  in  direct  oppofition  to  the  mterefts  of  the  Prince,  t
il  Sovereigns  fhould  alfo  pafs  through  the  lower  degrees
"  of  the  Order,  and  they  fliould  only  be  admitted  to  the
tc  higher  degrees  when  they  properly  apprehend  the  holy
C£  deligns  of  the  Order— which  are  no  other  than  to  deli—
cc  ver  the  people  from  the  bondage  of  their  Princes,  No-
"  bles,  and  Prieits;  to  cftablifh  an  equality  of  ftations  and
4t  of  religion;  and  to  render  men  both  free  and  happy. — -
K  Should  we  ever  have  fix  hundred  Illuminées  in  Bavaria*
*'  nothing  coiïld  refill:  us,"

I  promifed  to  make  a  few  reflections  on  this  article}
and  to  thofe  perfons  [  addrefs  them,  who  would  immedi-
ately lay  hold  of  it  to  prove  that  the  illuminées,  fo  far  from
wifhing  to  annihilate  every  government  and  civil  fociety
itfelf,  had  no  other  view  than  to  re-unite  Germany  under

*  Vollte  jemand  den  Regenten  mehranhangen,  £0  taught  er
nicht  tiir  uns.

f  Sie  haben  kei.n  Recht  iîber  uns  freye  Menfchen.

t  Alies  was  das  befte  des  Ordens  befordert,  mufs  man  thun,
wtnn  es  gleich  dem  beilen  der  Regenten  auwider  baft.


I58  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

pre  and  the  fame  government.*  Molt  undoubtedly  fuch
views  were  held  out  to  the  deponents  in  their  lower  dais-
es ;  but  let  it  be  remembered,  that  none  of  them  had  been
admitted  to  the  higher  myfteries.  It  is  in  the  degree  of
Epopt  that  the  defigns  of  the  Order  for  the  total  dtftruc-
tion  of  Civil  Society  are  manifefted.  There  the  illumi-
nizing  Hierophant  no  longer  fays,  that  Germany  ought
to  be  under  the  government  of  one  Prince;  but  he  fays

THAT  NATIONS  AND  PRINCES  SHALL  DISAPPEAR
TBOM  THE  FACE  OF  THE  EARTH' j  that  every  father
jhall,  like  Abraham^  be  at  once  the  prieji  and  f over  eign
cf  bis  family;  end  reason  Jhall  be  ihefole  Code  of  Man.
The  Hierophant  there  declares,  that  secret  societies
are  the  agents  that  are  to  produce  this  revolution,  and
that  it  is  one  of  the  grand  fecrets  of  Illuminifm.  There,
in  fhort,  is  clearly  to  be  hen  the  plan  of  bringing  men
back  to  the  pretended  Patriarchal  nomade  and  favage
life;  and  it  is  even  exprefsly  aflerted,  that  the  original
caufe  of  the  fall  of  man  was  their  re-union  in  civil fociety  !
The  depositions,  therefore,  of  Mcffrs.  Utzfchneider,  Co-
fandey,  and  Griinberger,  are  perfectly  con  e£f,  fo  far  as
they  relate  to  their  degrees  ;  for  fuch  was  the  doctrine
taught  in  the  degrees  of  Major  and  Minor  Illuminée. — .
Another  remark  may  alio  be  true,  that  as  a  preparatory
itep  the  Illuminées  only  leek  todeftroy  all  the  lefler  pow-
ers in  order  to  form  one  or  two  great  ftates  in  Germany  ;
but  that  will  not  change  the  fate  decreed  in  the  higher
myiteries  for  thefe  greater  Princes  of  the  German  nation,
or  for  all  Princes  and  nations  in  general.  This  iingle  Po-
tentate will  then  fhare  the  fame  fate  as  Religion.  We
have  heard  them  talk  of  reducing  the  world  to  the  unity
of  Religion,  as  well  as  to  the  unity  or  equality  oïjlations*
But  has  not  the  Sect  already  declared,  that  in  order  to  be
admitted  to  the  laft  fecret  one  muft  begin  by  getting  rid
of  all  Religion  ?  This  plan,  therefore,  for  reducing  Ger-

*  This  is  precifely  what  has  been  lately  attempted  to  divert
the  eyes  ofthe  public  from  their  monitions  and  Antifocial  plots  ;
and  even  in  England  this  plea  has  been  let  up.  in  hopes  of  in-
validating the  j. roofs  adduced  in  fuch  Memoirs.  I  know  not
who  writer  of  thefe  paragraphs;  but  though  e-

ven  t!  Sieur  Boettiger  hinifelf,  famous  among  the  German  Il-
luminées, were  the  author  of  them,  I  mould  little  fear  his  ar-
guments. Let  my  readers  compare  his  proofs  with  mine:  I
&£k  no  more.


HISTORICAL  PART.  159

many  under  the  dominion  of  one  Prince,  is  evideQtly  no-
thing more  than  a  preliminary  ftep,  in  like  manner  as
their  plan  of  fubjccling  Princes  to  the  government  of
their  Order.  When  the  proper  time  comes,  all  thele
plans  are  changed,  in  the  leflbns  of  the  adepts,  to  the  to-
tal annihilation  of  every  ftate,  prince,  and  civil  govern-
ment on  earth.

The  Reader  may  eaftly  perceive  how  the  Seel,  even  fa
early  as  the  degrees  in  which  the  three  deponents  had
been  admitted,  prepares  them  for  the  laft  fecrets;  espe-
cially when  he  fees  immediately  following  the  pretended
union  of  Germany,  that  maxim  which  has  already  ap-
peared in  the  firft  depofition.

V.  "The  love  of  one's  prince  and  of  one's  country
■"  are  incompatible  with  views  of  an  immenle  extent,  with.
w  the  ultimate  ends  of  the  Order,  and  one  muft  glow  with
"  ardor  for  the  attainment  of  that  end."*

In  the  Degrees  alfo  to  which  the  deponents  had  been
admitted  we  fee  the  Superiors  incefTantly  declaiming  on
that  end;  but  they  never  mention  what  it  really  was. — -
They  even  confefs  that  they  are  not  in  the  fecret;  they
fay  that  the  knowledge  of  it  is  referved  to  the  higher
degrees;  their  own  declaration,  therefore,  proves  that  it
cannot  be  this  unity  of  Religion  or  of  government  to
be  eftabliihed  in  Germany,  as  they  are  not  Arrangers  to
that  plan.  Beiides,  how  can  it  appear,  that  the  love  of
one's  country,  or  national  love,  is  incompatible  with  the
wifh  of  uniting  a  great  nation  under  the  dominion  of  one
Prince.  On  the  other  hand,  we  fee  thefe  maxims  in  per-
fect accord  with  the  views  of  Illuminifm,  when,  advan-
cing toward  the  higher  degrees,  we  hear  the  Seel  pouring
forth  its  blafphemies  againft  Princes  and  Nations,  and
potitively  declaring,  as  one  of  their  myfleries,  that  Secret
Societies  were  only  contrived  to  fweep  Nations  and
Princes  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Such  are  the  plots  to
be  discovered  to  nations  ;  fuch  have  been  the  tricks  em-
ployed by  the  Illuminées  to  lull  nations  to  fleep  on  their
dangers;  and,  Englifh  Reviewers  having  hearkened  to
fuch  insinuations,  I  am  obliged  to  have  recourfe  to  repe«
titions  in  the  midir,  of  a  nation  whoferuin  is  now  become


*  Furften  and  vaterlands  Hebe  wiederfprechen  den  weitaus-
fehenden  gefichts  pun&en  des  Orders— Man  muis  gluhea  fur
deo  zweck.


ï6»  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY*

one  of  the  chief  objects  of  the  Sett. — But  let  us  return  to
the  depositions  of  our  witneilcs.

"  The  Superiors  of  Illuminifm  are  to  he  looked  upon
"  as  the  moft  perfect  and  the  moft  enlightened  of  men  j
"  no  doubts  are  to  be  entertained  even  of  their  infalli-
*<  bility.*

"  It  is  in  thefe  moral  and  political  principles  that  the
"  Illuminées  ate  educated  in  the  lqwe  ;  and  it  is

u  according  to  the  manner  in  which  they  imbibe  them
"  and  fhow  their  devotion  to  the  Order,  or  are  able  to
w  fécond  its  views,  that  they  are  earlier  or  later  admitted
"  to  the  higher  degrees.

"  They  ufe  every  poffible  artifice  to  get  the  different
"  poft-ofïïces  in  all  countries  entrufted  to  the  care  of  their
*'  adepts  only.  They  alio  boaft  that  they  are  in  pofFes-
*'  fion  of  the  fecret  of  opening  and  reclofing  letters  with-
<£  out  the  circurnftance  being  perceived.

"  They  made  us  give  anfwers  in  writing  to  the  follow-
"  ing  queftions  :  How  would  it  be  poffible  to  devife  one
"  fingle  fyitem  of  morals  and  one  common  government
Î*  for  all  Europe,  and  what  means  fhould  be  employed  to
"  effectuate  it?  Would  the  Chriftian  Religion  be  a  ner
"  ceffary  requifite  ?  Should  revolt  be  employed  to  accom-
«  plifn  it  ?  &c.  &ç.

"  We  were  alfo  afked,  in  which  Brethren  we  fhould
"  place  the  moft  confidence  if  there  were  any  important
"  plan  to  be  undertaken  ;  and  whether  we  were  willing
<c  to  recognize  the  right  of  life  and  death  as  veiled  in  the
"  Order;  and  alfo  the  right  of  the  fword,  Jus  Gladii.

"  in  confequence  of  our  acquaintance  with  this  doc-!
**  trine  of  the  Illuminées,  with  their  conduce,  their  man-
"  ners,  and  their  incitements  to  treafon,  and  being  fully
"  convinced  of  the  dangers  of  the  Seel:,  we  the  Aulic
«  Counfellor  Utfchneider  and  the  Prieft  Dillis  left  the
"  Order.  The  Profeilor  Grijnberger,  the  Prieft  Cofan-
K  dey,  Renner,  and  Zaupfer,  did  the  fame  a  week  after,
*c  though  the  Illuminées  fought  to  impofe  upon  us  fhame-
"  fully,  by  afTuring  us  that  his  Electoral  Highnefs  was  a
<c  member  of  their  Order.  We  clearly  fiw  that  a  Prince
"  knowing  his  own  interefts,  and  wholly  attending  to  the
4<  paternal  care  of  his  fubjecls,  would  never  countenance
cc  a  Seel,  fpreading  through  almoft  every  province  under

*  An  deren  untriiglichkeit  «pan  nie  zweifeln  diirfe.


HISTORICAL  PART.  ?6l

f*  the  cloak  of  Free-mafonry  5  becaufe  it  fows  divifion
*'  and  difcord  between  parents  and  their  children,  between
*c  Princes  and  their  lubjeds,  and  among  the  mod:  fincere
**  friends  ;  becaufe  on  all  important  occailons  it  would
*'  inftall  partiality  on  the  feats  of  juftice  and  in  the  coun-
"  cils,  as  it  always  prefers  the  welfare  of  the  Order  to  that
"  of  the  ft.ite,  and  the  interefts  of  its  adepts  to  thofeofthe
"  prophane,  Experience  had  convinced  us,  that  they  would
"  foon  fucceed  in  perverting  all  the  Bavarian  youth.  The
^  leading  feature  in  the  generality  of  their  adepts  were  irre-
"  li<2;ion,  depravity  of  mqrals,  difobedience  to  their  prince
cc  and  tu  their  parents, -and  the  neglect  of  all  ufeful  ftudie%
*'  We  law  that  the  fatal  confequence  ofliiurninifm  would
*'  be,  to  create  a  general  diftruft  between  the  prince  and  his
*c  fubjeccs,  the  fithei  and  his  children,  the  minifter  and  his
f  fecretaries,  and  between  thedifferenttribunals  and  coun-
tc  cils.  We  were  not  to  be  deterred  by  that  threat  fo  often
W  repeated,  That  no  Prince  canfave  him  thai  betrays  us.
"  We  have  abandoned,  one  after  the  other,  this  Se£t,  which,
"  under  different  names,  as  we  have  been  informed  by  fe-
I*  veral  of  our  former  Brethren,  has  already  fpread  itfelf
£  in  Italy,  and  particularly  at  Venice,  in  Aujlria,  in  Hal-
^  land,  in  Saxony  on  the  Rhine,  particularly  at  Frank*
*'  fort,  and  even  as  jar  as  America. — The  Illuminées
<v  meddle  as  much  as  pofîibîe  in  ftate  affairs,  and  excite
I*  troubles  wherever  their  Order  can  be  benefitted  by
fc  them."

■  Here  followed  a  lift  of  a  great  many  invifibles,  of  feve-
ral  fuperiors,  and  of  fome  of  the  mod  active  members.  A
fécond  lift  contained  perfons  who,  though  as  yet  unac-
quainted with  the  ultimate  views  of  the  Order,  were  zea-
lous and  active  Recruiters,  but  the  government  thought
fit  to  keep  thefe  two  lifts  fecret.  The  deponents  then  pro-
ceed :

"  We  are  not  unacquainted  with  the  other  invifibles^
*  who  in  all  probability  are  chiefs  of  a  higher  degree,

"  After  we  had  retired  from  the  Order,  the  Illuminées
"  calumniated  us  on  all  fides  in  the  moil  infamous  man-
*c  ner.  Their  cabal  made  us  fail  in  every  requeft  we  prc-
*c  fented;  fucceeding  in  rendering  us  hateful  and  odious
t*  to  our  fuperiors,  they  even  carried  their  calumnies  fo
<c  far  as  to  pretend  that  one  of  us  had  committed  murder*
*c  After  a  year's  perfecution,  an  Illumir.ee  came  to  repre-
t$  fent  to  the  Aulic  Counfellor  Utzfchneider, that  from  ex-?


î6l  antisocial  conspiracy;

«  perience  he  muft  have  learned  that  he  was  everywhere
"  perfecutéd  by  the  Order;  that  unlefs  he  could  contrive
"  to  regain  its  protection,  he  would  never  fucceed  in  any
"  of  his  demands;  and  that  he  could  ftill  regain  admis-
&  iion."

Here  ends  the  depofition  figned  by  the  three  deponents.
After  their  fignature  follows  the  atteftation,  that  each  of
the  deponents  had  been  called  in  feparâtely  in  prefenceof
the  Côrrïmiffary,  and  their  refpective  declarations  read  to
them;  and  that  each  hadaiErmed  the  truth  of  the  contents
on  oath,  as  witneil'es,  the  10th  of  September,  1785.  I
leave  the  reader  to  make  his  reflections  on  the  llrength
and  nature  of  thefe  firfl  proofs  acquired  againff.  Illuminifm;
and  protëç'd  immediately  to  the  circumftances  which  dis-
«iofed  the  ulterior  projects  of  the  Sect.


HISTORICAL  PART,  J$3


CHAP.  VIII.


Continuation  of  the  Difcoveries  made  in  Bavaria  as  to
the  Illuminées. — Proceedings  of  the  Court  with  refpecl
to  the  Chiefs  of  the  Seat. — A  few  Remarks  on  and  a
Lift  of  the  principal  Adepts.

NOTWITHSTANDING  the  important  difcove-
ries  made  by  the  court  of"  Bavaria,  proofs  were  ftill
wanting  of*  the  plans  and  of  the  ultimate  views  of  illu-
minifm,  which  the  Sect  concealed  with  fo  much  care,  and
of  which  none  of  the  witneiTes  could  give  any  fatisfactory
account.  The  court  had  neglected  to  feize  Weilhaupt's
papers  at  the  time;  and  it  was  clear  that  the  adepts  had
taken  every  precaution  to  put  theirs  beyond  the  power  of
the  moft  diligent  fearch.  The  court  even  appeared  to
pay  little  or  no  attention  to  the  proper  fteps  that  fhould
be  taken,  and  only  watched  the  motions  of  thofe  adepts
who  frill  kept  up  a  correipondence  with  their  chiefs.  If
we  are  to  credit  the  apology  publifhed  by  the  Illuminées,  Puni1"^
it  was  for  no  other  reafon  that  Delling,  municipal  of-  çomç  ,',>
ficer  of  Munich,  and  Krenner,  profefl'or  at  Ingolftadt,  theadeptsi
were  difmifTed  from  their  employments.  On  the  fame  ac-
count, they  tell  us,  were  the  Count  Savioli  and  the  ?v1ar-
quis  Confranza  exiled  from  Bavaria,  and  the  Baron  Mag-
genhoff  condemned  to  a  month's  imprifoment  in  a  mo-
naftery.

This  apologifr.  alfo  pretends,  that  the  Canon  Hertel
was  deprived  of  his  benefice,  becaufe  he  would  not  give
in  an  account  of  the  funds  belonging  to  the  Illuminées. —
But  after  the  different  parts  that  we  have  feen  thele  adepts
perform,  it  appears  that  the  court  was  pretty  well  inform-
ed; and  it  certainly  gave  a  great  proof  of"  its  clemency
when  it  allowed  Brutus-Szvïolï  and  Diomedes-Confttin-
za  a  penfion  which  they  were  at  liberty  to  expend  where*-
ver  they  chofe,  excepting  in  Bavaria.  Light,  however,
as  thefe  punifhments  were  for  confpirators  of  their  ftamp,
the  Illuminées  filled  all  Germany  with  their  reclamations,
crying  out  againft  a  perfecution  which  they  reprefented
as  the  height  of  deipotiim,  oppreflion,  and  injuftice.  The


164  ANTISOCIAL  CONsri'îlÀCV;

depofitions  that  had  been  made  were  published,  and  thé
authors  of  them  were  immediately  aiTailed  with  a  torrent
of  abufe,  lophiftry,  and  calumny  ;  nor  was  the  court  fpa-
red.  The.  whole  bufinefs  appeared  to  be  changed  into  a
literary  war,in  which  the  impudence  of  the  apologifts  had
very  nigh  fucceeded  in  calling  doubts  on  the  wifdom  and
juftice  of  his  Electoral  Highnefs;*  and  it  was  high  time
to  have  recourfe  to  fuch  meafures  as  could  inconteitibly
prove  the  guilt  of  the  Seel.
This  àr-  -At  length,  on  the  I  ith  of  Oftober,  17  86,  the  magis-

chives  of  trates,  by  order  of  the  Elector,  made  a  vifit  at  Cato-
the  Seel:  Zwack's  houfe,  at  a  time  when  he  leaft  expected  it.  O-
oiicover-  ^ers  wenr.  on  the  fame  cornmiffion  to  the  caftle  of  San-
derdorf,  belonging  to  Hannibal  Baron  Baflus;  The  re-
fult  of  thefe  vifitations  was,  the  difcovery  of  a  multitude
or  letters^  difcourfes,  rules,  plans,  and  fratutes,  which  may
be  looked  upon  as  the  archives  of  the  confpirators,  and
have  been  publifhcd  under  the  title  of  Original  Writings
of  the  Order  and  of  the  Seel  of  the  Illuminées.  The  con-
spiracy of  which  Weifhaupt  was  the  chief,  now  appeared
in  fuch  horrid  colors,  that  one  could  fcarcely  believe  hu-i
man  wickednefs  to  have  been  able  to  devife  it.  But  at
the  head  of  each  of  thefe  two  volumes  is  an  advertifementj
informing  all  readers-,  that  orders  have  been  given  by  the
Elector  to  the  keeper  of  his  archives  to  (how  the  origin-
als to  whoever  might  wifh  to  verify  them.  The  only  re-
source now  left  to  the  confpifators  was  to  complain  of
.  the  violation  of domeftic  fccreey.  Pretendedjuftifications
jfwarmed  again  from  the  adepts;  and  they  had  the  impu-
dence to  afl'ert,  that  thefe  letters,  fo  far  from  containing
anything  militating  againft  fociety  or  religion,  only  con-
tained views  for  the  happinefs  and  amelioration  of  man-
kind. They  made  every  attempt  pofîïbïe  to  give  plauli-
Me  interpretations  to  their  letters;  but  they  never  dared
aller t  that  any  of  thefe  writings  had  been  forged.  Their
own  avowals  are  to  be  found  in  their  apologies;  and  the
proofs  of  their  antireligious  and  antifoci-al  confpiracy  reft


s  For  the  whole  of  this  literary  war,  fee  the  Apologie  dsr  R-
luvdnaten,  and  the  addition  Nachtrackt  zu  der  Apologie,  Sec.
a!ib  the  anfwer  of  the  deponents  Grojfs  sbfechten  des  Orders  d&
'liluminutienj  the  addition  to  thefe  anlwers  Njcbtracb,  &c.  No.
J»  2>  i'


MicToRicAL  Part,  16^

topon  fuch  inconteftible  grounds,  that  their  fophiftns  can
never  invalidate  them.*

The  court  of  Bavaria,  when  it  gave  \o  great  a  publi-  Why  this
tity  to  the  proofs  it  had  thus  acquired,  was  not  actuated  difcovery
folely  by  a  view  of  juftifying  its  own  conduct  ;  but  it  was  ™*kzs  la
defirous  aiib  to  warn  every  llate  of  the  dangers  with  which  '"  £  ™"
it  was  threatened.    The  Elector,  therefore,  fent  a  copy  on  0|her
of  thefe  Original  "Writings  to  all  the  powers  of  Europe;  courts»
and  theanfwers  of  the  different  miniftcrs  proved,  that  they
had  all  received  thefe  documents  of  a  molt  monftrous  con-
fpiracy  againft  every  church  and  ftate.    The  hiftorian  will
naturally  afb,  how  it  came  to  pafs  that  the  knowledge  of
thefe  proofs  of  a  confpiracy,  at  once  fo  evident  and  fo
threatening  to  every  ftate  in  the  world,  ihould  have  been
Co  long  confined  to  Germany.     And  how  it  happened,
that  thefe  Original  Writings  did  not  become  the  daily
lectures  of  every  family.     Should  not  every  father  have
read  it  to  his  children,  and  explained  to  them  the  horrid
machinations   that  were  contriving  againft  their  God,
their  country,  and  their  property  ?   Univerfal  indignation
muft  have  feized  every  mind,  and  cruflied  thefe  illumini-
zing  monfters  in  their  cradle.    Such  at  leaft  were  the  fears
which  the  confpirators  themfelves  had  conceived  on  feeing
their  plans  and  means  difcovered.    Unable  to  deftroy  the
proofs,  they  did  every  thing  in  their  power  to  hinder  their
circulation.  On  the  other  hand',  few  minifters  were  aware
of  the  itnmenfe  influence  and  power  of  fecret  focieties  ;
and  the  Bavarian  alFociation  appeared  to  them  more  des-
picable than  dangerous;  the  very  excefs  of  their  confpi-
racy gave  it  a  more  chimerical  appearance;  and  the  policy
of  fome  ftatefmen  might  have  made  them  believe  that  the
publication  of  the  archives  of  thefe  confpirators  would  on-
ly ferve  to  accredit  their  iophilinf,  and  add  to  the  danger
by  divulging  their  principles.

Lallly-,  the  language  in  which  they  were  written  was
little  known  in  tne  other  parts  of  Europe;  and  it  was
thought  bell  to  leave  them  in  a  profound  oblivion.  Such

*  For  thefe  avowals  fee  the  Apology  of  Ctffo-.Zwack  ;  the
Preface  of  Werfhaupt's  Illuminifmcorrefled}  the  Baron  BafTus's
Defence;  and  particularly  the  Laji  Qbfervatioru  byKnigge. —

Philo,  in  this  latter  work,  very  frankly  acknowledges  all  the  let-
ters that  are  attributed  to  him  in  the  Original  Writings, arid  he
frequently  quotes  Weifhaupt's  letters  as  being  tqu?.iiy  authen-
tic with  his  own.


i66  antisocial  conspiracy;

may  be  the  explanation  of  this  fpecies  of  phenomenon,  or
of  this  total  ignorance  in  which  the  reft  of  the  world  were,
with  refpect  to  the  nature  and  views  of  the  Illuminées,
when  I  announced  to  the  public  the  ufe  I  intended  to
make  of  them  in  thefe  Memoirs.
Even  in  A  myftery  ftil!  more  aftonifhing,  and  which  could  not

Germany.  ^ave  ^een  Deijevec|}  haj  not  the  progrefs  of  the  Illuminées
proved  it,  is  that  inactivity  or  fomnolency  in  which  all
the  German  courts  appeared  to  be  buried  in  the  midft  of
the  dangers  that  had  been  fo  clearly  pointed  out  to  them
by  the  court  of  Bavaria.  Unfortunately  for  the  Empire,
Frederic  II.  of  Pruflia  died  a  little  before  thefe  laft  proofs
were  acquired  againft  the  Illuminées.  No  fooner  did  this
Prince  hear  of  the  conspiracy,  than  he  immediately  traced
all  thofe  principles  of  fedition  and  anarchy  which  he  had
already  been  obliged  to  divulge  as  the  tenets  of  the  So-
phifterSj  the  Illuminées  even  pretend  it  to  have  been  at
his  inftigation  that  the  court  of  Munich  profecuted  their
chief  and  the  firft  adepts  who  were  difcovered.*  What
would  he  not  have  done  himfelf  againft  this  Sect,  if  he
he  had  but  feen  in  the  Original  Writings  the  progrefs
that  it  was  making  in  his  own  dates  !  Minifters,  under  a
Prince  fo  tenacious  as  he  was  of  the  authority  necefïàry
to  fupport  his  Government,  and  fo  juftly  offended  as  he
was  againft  the  Sophifters  of  Rebellion,  would  not  have
fneered  or  replied  farcaftically  to  thofe  letters  which  the
court  of  Bavaria  tranfmitted  as  introductory  and  expla-
natory, together  with  the  proofs  acquired  againft  the  Sect.
But  the  archives  of  Illuminifm  were  not  difcovered  till
the  nth  and  12th  October,  1786,  and  Frederic  had  died
on  the  17th  of  Auguft  of  that  year.  His  fuccelfor  was  a
prey  to  adepts  of  another  fpecies,  almoft  as  great  knaves
as  thofe  of  Bavaria.  The  Emperor  Jofeph  had  not  yet
been  undeceived  with  refpect  to  the  Lodges  that  furround-
ed  him.  Many  other  Princes  were  either  feduced,  or  fo
'  fettered  by  the  Illuminées  that  they  could  not  act.  This
may  ferve  to  account  for  their  apparent  indifférence  ;  and
it  alio  explains  the  circumftance  of  feveral  of  them  hav-
ing viewed  the  proceedings  of  the  court  of  Munich  in  the
t  of  an  abfolute  perfecution  of  their  own  Brethren. — ■
The  Prince  Bifhop  of  Ratifbon  was  the  only  one  who

*  See  Memorial  inferted  in  No.  1%  of  the  Weltkunde,i\\z
Tubingen  Gazette.


HISTORICAL  PART.  7

feemed  to  know  his  danger,  and  who  publifhed  edicts  in
fupport  of  thofe  iffued  by  the  Elector.

Neverthelefe,  the  proofs  publifhed  by  the  court  of  Ba-  Other  fe-
varia  are  thofe  whence  the  molt  evident  demonftration  of  £retSi
the  plots  of  Illuminifm  have  been  deduced  in  thefe  Me-  '  ■  .  ^
moirs.  The  very  fcraps  of  paper  found  among  the  ar-  Original
chives  indicate  the  moft  confummate  villany.  Among  Writings,
thefe  were,  chiefly  in  /^.Y-MafTenhaufen's  hand,  and  in
the  cypher  of  the  Order,  receipts  for  making  the  aqua
toff  ana,  the  moft  acute  of  all  poifons  i  for  procuring  abor-
tion in  zvomen;  and  for  poijoning  the  air  of  an  apart-
ment :  alio  a  collection  of  one  hundred  and  thirty  feah  of
Princes,  Noblemen,  and  Bankers^  with  the  fecrët  of  tak-
ing off  and  imitating  all  thofe  for  which  the  Order  might,
according  to  circumftances,  have  occafion.  The  defcrip-
tion  of  a  lock,  of  which  the  adepts  only  fhould  have  the
fecret,  was  likewile  contained  in  thefe  papers;  alfo  the
model  of  a  coffer  wherein  to  preferve  their  papers,  and
which  mould  take  fire  immediately  if  any  of  the  prophane
attempted  to  open  it.  On  other  detached  papers  were  to
be  feen  the  plan  for  placing  fome  adepts  in  the  fuite  of  an
ambafTador,  who  mould  then  carry  on  fome  commerce  as
fraudulent  as  it  was  lucrative  for  the  Sect.  Alfo  the  fe-
cret  intimation,  that  all  the  Superiors  of  Illuminifm  mould
know  how  to  write  with  both  hands.  A  manufcriptalfo
was  found  entirely  in  Zvvack's  hand  writing,  and  looked
upon  as  very  precious  by  the  Order,  becaufe,  under  the
title  Better  than  Horus,  it  contained  all  the  blafphemies
of  Atheiim.*

Notwithstanding  the  little  impreflion  the  publication
of  thefe  difcoveries  had  made  on  the  other  Princes  of  Ger-
many, the  court  of  Bavaria  continued  its  profecutions  a
garnit  the  Sect.    About  twenty  of  the  adepts  were  cited  ^°[


More  a-
to  appear;  fome  were  difmifled  from  their  employments,  ijfhed.


others  condemned  to  a  few  years  imprifonment  ;  and  fome,
particularly  Zwack,  faved  themfelves  by  flight.  The  E-
jedtoi's  Tribunal  could  not  by  any  calumny  be  accufed
of  being  fanguinary,  as  not  one  of  the  adepts  was  con-
demned to  death.  This  punilhment  feemed  to  be  referr-
ed for  Weiihaupt  alone,  and  a  price  was  fet  upon  his
head.  The  Regency  of  Ratifbon,  which,  In  the  firft  in-
stance, had  refilled  to  drive  him  from  their  territories,  no

f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Se&.  i$>  19»  «•


l68  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

longer  dared  to  fupport  him,  at  leaft  not  openly;  and  he
took  refuge  under  His  Highnefs  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Go-
tha.     The  reafon  why  the  Founder  of  ïllurninifm,  and  a
Why  tney  number  of  his  profcribed  adepts,  found  protection  and  ftill
«farther  contmue  m  favor  at  fo  many  courts,  may  be  explained  by
courts.       ^»e  numerous  difçiples  who  enjoyed  places  of  high  impor-
tance in  the  different  courts,  and  lbme  of  whom,  indeed,
were  the  Princes  themfclves,  The  lift  of  thefe  latter,  were
it  accurately  made  out,  would   aftonifh   pofterityj  more
particularly,  fhould  the  art  with  which  Weifhaupt  feduc-
ed  them,  by  truncating  the  myfteries,  have  efcaped  the
notice  of  the  hiftorian  j  or  fhould  the  means  have  remain-
ed a  fecret  by  which  he  blinded  them  and  bound  them  to
the  Order,  by  furrounding  them  with  adepts  who  know
how  to  feize  on  the  miniitry,  on  the  Dccafteres,  or  coun-
cils, and  occupied  ail  the  places  of  confequençe  by  the m-
(elves  or  their  creatures.
ïlluminiz-      I  will  not  pretend  to  fay,  that  thefe  artifices  of  Illumi-
edPiinces  nifm  can  excufe  thofe  Princes  for  becoming  difciples  of
Weifhaupt.     But  mofî  certainly  they  were  rendered  the
dupes  of  his  impiety  before  they  became  the  fpart  of  his
coufpiraciesj  and  undoubtedly  the  latter  was  but  the  ju(t
puni  foment  of  the  former.  However  this  may  be,  we  fmcl
Lewis  Ernest  of  Saxe  Gotha  at  the  head  pf  thefe
adepts  under  the  characterise  of  Timoleon.     According
to  all  the  letters  that  I  have  received  from  Germany,  this
Prince  is  at  length  conlcious  of  his  error,  Ke,  at  prefent,
pays  much  greater  attention  to  the  happinefs  of  his  fub-
jeCls  than  to  the  myfteries  of  the  Se6t,   Weifiyaupt  is  not
even  allowed  to  appear  in  his  prefence;  but  the  goodnel;
of  his  heart  will  not  allow  the  Prince  to  withdraw  his  be-
nefactions even  from  thofe  who  have  incurred  his  difplea-
fure.  It  is  thus,  at  leaft,  that  the  penfion  he  allows  to  the
Founder  of  Illuminifm  is  explained.*      B^t  on  the  other
hand,  Weifhaupt  is  far  from  being  excluded  from  the  pre-
sence of  Maria  Charlotte  Meinungen,  the  wife  of  His
fjighnefs;  and  thus  is  explained  the  alylum  which  the

*  I  am  alfo  informed,  that  this  penfion  is  not  taken  from  the
public  treafury,  (as  I  laid  in  my  third  volume,  page  2,)  but  from
the  Duke's  private  purfe.  Thofe  indeed  who  look  upon  the  fu-
perfluities  of  this  purfe  as  foreign  to  the  duties  that  a  Prince
pwes  to  the  public,  to  decency,  or  to  his  own  honor  and  repu-
tation, may  make  the  diftincUon,  I,  for  one,  at  kaft,  fluil  ne»
yer  adopt  it.


HISTORICAL  PART»  169

contriver  of  fuch  horrid  plots  ftill  finds  at  that  court,  not-
>viihitanding  the  conversion  of  the  Prince.

I  will  not  pretend  to  pronounce  whether  Augustus
of  Saxe  Gotha  has  imbibed  a  fimilar  difguit  for  Ulu~
minifm,  as  has  his  Brother  the  reigning  Prince.  At  the
time  of  Weifhaupt's  arrival,  however,  he  was  alfo  an  a-
dept  under  the  characlerivtic  of  Prince  Walter.

Charles  AugustusDuke  of  Saxe  Weimar  was
alfo  initiated  under  the  title  of  Efchylus-,  but  he  renoun-
ced the  myfteries  of  the  Se£r.

The  late  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick,  at
once  the  martial  hero  of  Minden,  and  the  Mafonic  leader
at  Willemfbaden,  fell  a  prey  to  all  forts  of  Illuminifm. — -
Wiihermots  had  begun  by  initiating  him  in  the  Illumi-
nifm of  Swedenborg,  and  of  the  Martinifts.  His  frequent
conferences  with  Knigge  feduced  him  into  that  of  Wei-
ftiaupt,  who  created  him  his  Brother  or  Ms  High  Prieir.
Aaron^  and  His  Highnefs  died  during  his  Priefthood.

As  to  the  late  Prince  of  Neuwied,  I  know  not
what  name  was  given  him  in  recompenfe  for  his  devotion
to  the  Seclj  but  at  his  court  it  might  with  truth  be  faid,
fhe  Illuminées  had  acquired  fuch  an  afcendancy,  that  if
they  had  gained  a  fimilar  one  in  other  parts,  the  world
mull  have  been  theirs.  This  unfortunate  Prince  little
thought  that  his  own  fon  would  be  deprived  of  all  power
in  his  own  liâtes,  and  that  he  would  be  reduced  humbly
to  folicit  the  Camilla  of  the  Empire  for  leave  to  afiert  his
own  rights,  and  to  drive  out  from  his  dates  thofe  adepts  that
had  been  protected  by  his  Father,  and  his  Uncle,  the
Count  Stolberg;  or  at  leaft  for  leave  to  difmifs  them  from  .
the  employments  they  occupied,  even  from  that  of  the  e-
ducation  of  his  children,  which  they  had  feized  upon  in
Ipite  of  him.*

Y

*  This  law-fuit  between  the  Prince  and  Illuminifm  is  of  a
rnoft  extraordinary  nature  indeed.  The  reader  fhall  hear  him
lïate  his  cafe  himfelf  to  the  Diet  of  Ratiibon  in  the  year  1794:

"  Every  one  is  acquainted  with  what  this  Seel;  has  done  in
V  France.  We  have  alfo  ïttn  extraordinary  inftances  of  its
"  power  at  Neuwied:  It  has  a  Lodge  here  called  the  Three
"  Peacocks.  My  Father  and  my  firfl  Wife  greatly  favored  thefe
**  adepts,  and  my  prefent  one  in  particular  is  the  great  pro-
"  te<5trix  of  feveralof  them;  of  that  Paftor  Win  z  for  example,
"  who,  notwithftanding  the  great  iervice  I  rendered  him  in
f*  ftifling  a  profec'uiion  againft  him  for  Sociniaoifm:isnowone


^7°  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Another  {pedes  of  adept  is  My  Lord  the  Baron  of
Dalberg,   Coadjutor  to  the  Sees  of  Mentz,  Worms,

Cohftanz,  and  Governor  of  the  town  and  country  of
Er'fôrt.  We  are  led  to  {brink  back  in  aitonifhment,  and
(  Karxiihe  whether  our  e}^s  do  not  impofe  upon  us,  at  the
fight  of  a  Bifhop,  intended  to  occupy  the  fuit  Ecclefiafri-

and  Electoral  See  in  Germany,  ranked  among  this
îîîuminized  Brotherhood.     Moreover,  perfons  who  had

ri  been  in  company  with  His  Lordfhip  infilled  on  my
effacing  his  name  from  thefe  Memoirs.  They  afTured  me,
that  he  held  the  principles  of  the  modern  Philofophers  in
the  utmoft  deteftation,  and  that  to  them  he  attributed  the
French  Revolution.  I  then  produced  a  pamphlet  publifh-
ed  by  His  Lordihip,  with  all  his  titles  and  his  name  at
the  head  of  it,  entitled,  Of  the  Influence  of  Science  and
of  the  Polite  Arts  on  the  Public  Tranquillity — Jt  Er-
jo-rt,  1793.  They  then  faw  that  the  object  of  this  pam-
phlet was  tojlljie  in  the  germs  what  His  Lordfhip  calls
noxious  -prejudices  of  Jome  fiort-fighted  good  people^by
proving  to  them  that  neither  the  Philofophers  nor  the  So-
phifters  of  the  age  had  given  rife  to  the  French  Revolu-
tion, and  that  Gondorcet  himfclf  had  but  little  contributed

"  of  my  preateft  enemies.  She  was  alfo  very  clofely  connected
*'  with  the  Au. lie  Councilor  Krob&r  (the  adept  Âgif).  One
"  Schwartz,  from  Brunhvick,  and  a  titular  m?jor  of  Weimar  j
"  to  whim  my  Father  entrulted  the  education  of  one  of  my
"  children,  and  who,  to  my  great  grief,  has  ftill  two  of  them
"  under  his  care,  is  aifp  a  great  favorite  of  the  Princefs's;  ihe
"  has  placed  her  whole  confidence  in  him,  and  fees  him  very
*x  often,  although  letters  from Brur.fwick  depict  him  in  the  light
"  of  a  moft  dettftable  intriguer.  Scveial  Counfellors  and  vari-
"  ous  officers  and  other  inhabitants  of  Neuwied  are,"  like  him,
*'  members  of  the  Seel,  and  are  in  an  agreement  with  thePrin-
"  cefs.  It  is  notorious,  that  they  are  all  bound  by  oath  mutual-
*'  ly  to  fupport  each  other.  They  have  alfo  gained  over  various
•'  other  perfons  who  do  not  belong  to  their  Order  ;  and  thus  an
•*  afTociation  has  been  formed  for  my  deftruclion.''

In  tact,  the  Illuminées  had  fucceeded  in  getting  this  Prince
placed  under  an  interdict  in  his  own  ffates;  he  accufed  feveral
cf  his  f'ift  judges  as  being  adepts:  It  coft  them  little  to  de-
flare  on  their  oaths  that  they  were  not,  and  ibme  indeed  no
longer  continued  attached  to  the  Seel.  1  his  incident  occafioa-
ed  him  much  unpleafant  trouble;  but  at  length  he  was  rein-
ftated  in  his  pofjtilions  after  a  vet  y  iong  law-fuit,  which  mull
have  taught  the  German  Princes  haw  well  llluminiim  can  take
advantage  of  ii$  power  when  once  it  ha*  fucceeded  in  fur-
ibunding  them,


HISTORICAL  PART.  t  1~  1

towards  it.  This  pamphlet  alfo  abounded  in  thofe  argu-
ments of  Illuminized  Philofophifm  which  the  Sect  fet  forth
to  dupe  nations  as  to  the  tendency  of  their  confpiracy;  I
did  not  therefore  efface  the  name  of  his  Lordihip;  I,  on
the  contrary,  fubjoined  that  of  Crefcens,  his  characteriftic
among  the  Illuminées.  How  is  it  poffible  that  at  fuch  a
name  he  could  refrain  from  fhuddering  with  horror!  and
what  fervices  could  the  Order  expedi  from  him  under  fucii
a  characteriftic  ? — The  name  of  Crefcens  has  only  been
tranfmitted  to  pofterity  by  his  addiction  to  the  infamous
debauchery  of  the  Cynic  Philofophers,  and  by  his  caUurir
nies  againft  the  Chriftians,  which  obliged  St.  Jufcin  to
write  his  Second  apology  for  Christianity.  .A  proteftant
who  is  eager  to  fee  that  of  His  Lordihip  tells  us,  that  it
will  mofi  certainly  appear  in  its  proper  time,  and  we  im-
patiently wait  for  it!*  We  fhall  there  find,  1  hope,  that
His  Lordihip  ruid  not  been  initiated  into  all  the  fecrets  of
the  Seel.  They  muft  at  leaft  have  concealed  from  hirn
their  deligns  upon  the  Sees  of  Mentz,  Worm?,  and  Con-

ftanz,  to  which  His  Lordihip  was  Coadjutor. In  all

probability,  thefe  were  not  the  fecrets  of  which  his  Se-
cretary Cryjîppu S-K.OLKORN  informed  bun,  who  admit-
ted to  the  degree  of  Epopt,  was  already  become  a  half-
naturaliji  without  knowing  it,  and  from  whom  Khi
expected  the  greater!:  ferviceS.f  But  can  this  character-
iftic of  Crefcens  denote  any  other  view  than  that  of  feduc-
ing  His  Lordihip  into  an  apoftacy  fimilar  to  that  of  his
Secretary?  We  can  only  repeat,  that  it  is  with  great  an-
xiety we  wait  for  His  Lordihip's  Apology.

Buj  what  other  Apology,  than  a  clear  and  public  pro-  ancjr,,-
feffion  of  faith,  and  an  abjuration  of  Illuminiirn,  can  re-
tnftate  the  honor  of  the  Prelate  Haslein,  know
Se£t  as  the  Brother  Philo  of  Byulos!  The  Original
Writings  defcribe  this  adept  prelate  as  overloaded  with
work.  It  is  an  unfortunate  circusnftance  for  him  to  have
been  able  to  find  time  to  pen  letters  and  plans  that  could
have  placed  him  in  fuch  great  efiimation  wi  n:  .«

of  thefe  confpirators.J

*  See  the  Eudemonia.  Vol.  IV.  No  5,  Letter  of  Do  :1  or  %
H.  JimS.

f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Letter  i,  fro

t   •original  Wiitings,  Vol.  I.  Let,  from  Diam  Vol.

II.  Letter  i,from  Phin.


172  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Among  the  higher  clafs  of  adepts  may  be  ranked  Ahx~
cinder,  or  the  general  Count  of"  Pappenheim,  Govern-
or of  Ingolftadt,  and  Alfred  the  Count  of Seinsheimj
Pvlinifter  and  Vice-Preiident  of  the  Council  at  Munich.
At  getting  pofleflion  of  this  latter  Minifter,  Weifhaupt
exults,  and  on  giving  him  the  charicteriftic  of  Alfred  he
thus  writes  to  Cato: — M  What  great  men  we  daily  gain
"  over  to  our  party  at  Athens  (Munich),  and  that  with-
"  out  its  being  perceived!  Men  much  confidered,  ready
"  formed,  and  perfect  models  !  "  Weifhaupt  does  not  wifh
to  fee  this  adept  in  leading  firings,  and  therefore  difpenfes
with  his  noviciate.  He  alfo  hopes,  with  a  little  care  on
the  part  of  the  recruiters,  to  fee  his  Excellency  become  one
vf  his  greatefl  enthufiafls;  and  he  foon  found  that  he  had
judged  accurately  of  his  pupil.  The  adept  Minifter  goes
of  his  own  accord  tolngolftadt  to  be  prêtent  at  the  inaugu-
ration of  an  illuminized  church,  where  Weifhaupt  does  the
honors  inanewdifcourfe  prepared  for  the  occa/ion.  Full
or' admiration  at  the  leffons  of  the  Chief,  the  illuminized
Minifter  becomes  the  carrier  of  this  difcôurfe  to  the  Breth-
ren at  Munich;  and  all  the  town  of  Ingolftadt  were  fur-
pi  ized  at  feeing  the  Minifter,  with  fo  many  other  of  the
Brethren,  come  to  vifit  Weilhaupt.*  At  length  the  day
arrives  when  the  object  of  this  vifit  ceafés  to  be  a  mys-
tery, and  the  adept  Minifter  is  condemned  to  a  fhort  ex-'
ile:  but  it  ftill  remains  to  be  known,  whether  it  is  a  fm-
Cere  repentance  for  his  paft  enthufiafm,  or  fome  new  in-
trigue or  fecrct  influence  of  the  Brethren,  that  has  re-
called him  and  reinftated  him  in  his  former  dignities  at
the  Court  of  Munich.  All  that  I  can  gather  from  my
correfpondence  at  Bavaria  is,  that  Iliuminifm  is  very  far

tri  having  loft  its  influence  in  that  country.

Another  adept,  dear  to  the  Sect,  is  the  Count  KoLLO-
vj  h,  the  Numenius  of  Knigge,  and  whom  Wei-
fhaupt  wifhed  to  cure  of  his  theoibplucal  ideas.  He  was,
however,  eirtrufted  to  the  care  of  Brutus  Count  Savioli>
r*ho,  obferving  him  pafs  too  fuddenly  to  doubts  on  the
'/ty  of  the  foul)  began  to  iufpect.  that  his  Hidden,
converiions  to  the  fyftems  of  Iliuminifm  was  only  pre-
:d,  in  order  that  he  might  gain  adiniflîon  to  the  fe~
crets  of  the  Order.  It  he  ever  attained  the  higher  de-
grees, it  was  not  at  leaft  with  the  enthufiafm  of  Alfrâd.f

*   Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Letter  7,  9,  rS.

f  Origifui  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Lciter  from  Bruias.


HISTORICAL  PART.

Weifhaupt  alio  clafTed  Cbabrias,  the  Baron  Walbe'm-
?TEf.s,  at  Cologne,  among  the  adepts  of  high  rank:  Fie
was  the  Minifter  of  the  Elector-,  but  no  fooner  had  he
Uncovered  the  knavery  of  the  higher  myfteries  than  he
abandoned  the  Order.  Ptolemeus  Lag  us,  or  that  fame
Baron  Riedsel,  who,  in  iW;W-Dittfurt's  plan,  was  to
have  had  the  direction  of  the  Illuminized  Sifterhood,  imi-
tated this  example.  We  cannot  hope,  however,  to  tear
the  mafic  from  all  thole  confpirators  whom  Weifhaupt
has  encompafi'cd  with  darknefs,  and  who  fhould  rank  a-
mong  the  higher  clafs  of  adepts.  The  Lift  that  was  pub-
lished foon  after  the  Original  Writings,  contains  chiefly
thofe  whom  my  reader  have  already  feen  in  the  courfe  of
this  work.  I  (ball,  however,  fubjoin  it  here  with  fiich  ob-
lervations  as  time  has  imce  enabled  me  to  make.  There
will  appear  adepts  fcattered  throughout  the  Councils,  the
Magiitracy,  the  Army,  and  the  houfes  for  public  Educa-
tion j  and  this  general  view  v/ill  better  enable  the  reader
to  judge  of  the  care  with  which  the  Confpirators  fought
to  occupy  the  mcffc  important  polts  of  fociety  while  they
planned  its  ruin.

Lift  of  the  principal  Illuminées  from  the  Foundation  of
the  Seel  in  iJJ&->  till  the  Difovery  of  the  Original
Writings  in  1786.

Characleriftics.  ileal  Names  of  the  Adepts.

Spartacus  -  Weishaupt,  Profefibr  of  Laws  atîn-
golfladt,  and  Founder  of  the  Sect.

Agrippa         -      Will,  Profeflbr  at  Ingolftadt.

Ajax  -  Massenhausen,  Counfellor  at  Mu-

nich.

Akibiades  -  Hoheneicher,  Councellor  at  Mu-
nich.

Alexander  -  Co'intPAPPENHEiM,GeneralandGo-
vernor  of  Ingolftadt.

Alfred        -  Count  Seinsheim,  Vice-Prefident  at

Munich,  firft  exiled  as  an  Illuminée,
then  fent  from  Deux- Ponts  to  Ra-
tifbon,  and  at  length  returned  to, and
in  place  at  Munich.

Arrian  -  Count  CoBENZEL,Treafurer  at  Aich-
ftadt.

Attila        -  Sauf.r,  Chancellor  at  Ratifbon,


*73


*


*74


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;


Characleriftics.

Brutus

Cato

(:\](o  Danaus  and

Philip-  Strozzi)

Cdfus

Claudius

Confucius

(at  firft  Zoroajiei

Coriolanus

Viamedes

Epi  Bet  us
Mpimsnides     -

Euclid
Hannibal

Hermes  Trijme-
gijlus

Liivius  '        -

Lttdijvicus    \
Bavarus

Mahomet    \    -
Marins

Mmelaus
Mines

Alocnius
Mufet


Numa         -
NttmQ,  Pompilius
Pe,  u  les


Real  Names  of  the  Adepts.

Count  S  a  viol  i,  Counfellor  at  Mu-
nich.

Xavjkrius-Zwack,  Aulic  Counfel-
lor, and  Counfeilor  of  the  Regency.
Exiled  as  an  adept.

Baader,  Phyfician  to  the  ElecTrefs-
Dowager.

Siiwon-'Zwack.

Bajerhammer,  Judge  at  Diefen.

)       '

Troponero,  Counfellor  at  Munich.

Marquis  of  Cost  anz  a,  Counfeilor  at

Munich.
Mieg,  Counfellor  at  Heidelberg.
Fai.k,  Counfellor  and  Burgomafter  at

Hanover.
Riedl,  Counfellor  at  Munich.
Baron  Bassus,  a  Swifs  from  the  Gri-

fons.

Sol  cher,  Curate  at  Haching.
Rudorger,  Secretary  of  the  States  at
Munich.

Lori,  difmiffed  from  the  Order.

Baron  Schroekenstein.

If  ertel,  Canon  of,  and  exiled  from
Munich.

Werner,  Counfellor  at  Munich.

Baron  Dittfurt,  AffefTor  to  the  Im-
perial Chamber  of  Wetziar.

Dufresne,  Commiffary  at  Munich.

Baron  iMonj  ell  ay,  exiled  from  Mu-
nich, received  and  placed  at  Deux-
Ponts.

Sonnensels*  Counfellor  at  Vienna,
and  Ce n i or.

Count  Lodron,  Counfellor  at  Mu-
nich.

Baron  Pecker,  Judge  at  Amber-:.

Baron  Knigge,  urthe  fervke  of  Bre-
men.


HISTORICAL   PART.

Charaâertftics.  Real  Names  of  the  Adepts.

.Philo  of  Bjblcs  The  Prelate  Hasle  in,  Yrice-Prefident
of  the  Spiritual  Council  at  Munich,
and  Bifhop  In  Partibus.

■Pythagoras     -      Drexl,  Librarian  at  Munich.

Raimond de  Lulls  Fronhower,  Counfellerat  Munich.

Simonidcs      -       Ruling,  Counfellor  at  Hanover.

Solon  -  Might, anEcclefiafticatFreyfinguen.

Spinofa        -         MUnter,  Attorney  at  Hanover.

Sylla  -  Baron  M  aggenhoff,  Captain  in  the

Bavarian  fervice.

Tamerlane     -      Lang,  Counfellor  at  Aichftadt.

Thaïes  -  Kapfimger,  Secretary  to  Count  TaC-
tenbach.

Tiberius  -  Merz,  exiled  from  Bavaria,  fmce  Se-
cretary to  the  Ambaflador  of  the  Em-
pire at  Copenhagen.

Vefpaftan       -       Baron  Hornstein,  of  Munich.*

This  Lift  appears  to  have  been  chiefly  compiled  for  the
Bavarian  adepts  in  the  firft  volume  of  the  Original  Writ-
ings. The  fecond  volume  might  furnifli  us  with  the  fol-
lowing additions,  beftdes  a  multitude  of  other  adepts  vvhofe
true  names  have  not  been  difcovered.  Thofe  whpfe  names
are  not  followed  by  the  page  quoted  from  the  Original
Writings  in  this  lift,  have  been  lent  to  me  in  Private  Me-
morials and  Letters,  or  are  extracted  from  Public  Jour-
nals.


*75


Characterises.  Real  Names  of  the  Adepts.

Aaron         -  This  adept  is  only  mentioned  under  the

initials  P.  F.  V.  B.  (Prince  Ferdi-
nand von  Brunfwig),  both  when  he
fends  for  Knigge,  and  when  he  pro-
mifes  his  protection  to  the  adept  who
is  to  Illuminize  England,  (P.  122
and  104.)

Accacius  -  Doctor  Koppe,  Superintendant  flrft  at
Gotha,  after  wards  at  Hanover,  (P.

I23-)

*  This  Lift  is  taken  from  that  published  in  the  German
Journals.


i  76


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Charafleriftics.  Real  Names  of  the  Adepts.

AgatMcles  -  Schmerber,  Merchant  at  Frankfori;
on  the  Mein,  (P.  iû.)

Agis  -  Ivkober,  Governor  of  the  Prince  of

Stolberg's  children  at  Neuweid,  (P,
1S1.)

Alberoni  -  Bleueetreu,  formerly  a  Jew,  after-
wards a  Counfelior  of  the  Chamber
at  Neuweid,  (P.  181.)

Amelius  ~  Bobe,  Privy  Counfelior  at  Weimar,
(P.  213  and  221,  &c.)

Arch  elans  -  De  Barres,  formerly  a  Major  in  the
French  fervice,  (P.  183.)

Arijlodemcs  -  Compe,  High  Bailiff  at  W einburg  in
the  Elect  orate  of  Hanover.

Bayard  -  Baron  Busche,  a  Hanoverian  in  the
Dutch  fervice,  (P.  195-)

Belifarius      -      Peterson,  at  Worms.

Campanella  -  Count  Stolberg,  the  maternai  uncle
of  the  Prince  of  Neuweid  ;  and  with
him  may  be  comprifed  the  whole
court,  the  favorites,  fecretaries,  and
council  withoutexception,  (P.  69  and
189.)

Cornelius  Scipio  Berger,  a  Lecturer  at  Munich,  (P.
220.)

Crefcens  -  BaronDALBERGjCoadjutorofMentz,
(fro?n  Memorials,  Letters,  and  Ger-
?nan  Journals.)

Cbryjippus  -  KoLBORN,SecretarytotheBaronDaI-
berg,  (P.  73  and  100.)

Cy ril  -  ScHWEiCKART,at  Worms.

Gotefcak  -  Moldenhauer,  Proteftant  Profeflbr
of  Divinity  at  Keil  in  Holftein,  (P.
198.)

Hegefias  -  Baron  Greifenclau,  of  Mentz,  (P.
196.)

Leveller  -  L,EUCHSENRiNC,anAlfacian,and  Pre-
ceptor to  the  Princes  of  Heffe  Darm-
ftadt;  driven  from  Berlin,  he  took  re-
fuge at  Pans.

Lucian  ~  Nicolai,  Bookfellerand  Jqurnaliftat
Berlin  (P.  28.)


HISTORICAL  PART.


177


Charafteriftics.
Manethon

Marcus  Aurelius


Numenius

Peter  Cotton

Pic  de  la  Mi-

randole
Theognis


Timoleon
Prince  Walter


Real  Names  of  the  Adepts.

Schmelzer,  Ecclefiaftical  Councilor
at  Mentz,  (P.  196.)

Feder,*  Profeflbr  at  Gottinguen,  (P,
81.)

Munter,  Profeflor  of  Divinity  at  Co-
penhagen, (P.  123.)

Count  Kollowrath,  at  Vienna,  (P.
199.)

Volger,  Phyfician  at  Neuvveid,  (P.
188.)

Brunner,  Prieft  at  Tiefenback  in  the
Bifhoprick  of  Spire,  (P.  174.)

Fischer,  Lutheran  Minifter  in  Aus-
tria, (P.  204.)

Rontgen,  Proteftant  Minifter  at  Pet-
kam,  in  Eaft  Friefland,and  the  En-
glish Apostle  of  liluminifm.

Ernest  Lewis,  Duke  of  Saxe  Go-*-
tha,  (Private  Memorials.)

Augustus  of  Saxe  Gotha,  (Ibid.)


We  do  not  add  to  this  Lift  Efcbylus,  or  Charles  Au-
guftus  of  Saxe  Weimar,  as  he  has  declined  the  honor  of
continuing  one  of  Weiihaupt's  difciples.  The  late  Prince
of  Neuyvied  might  be  fubjoined  for  many  realbns,  and  he
would  make  the  fifth  Prince  well  known  to  have  been
connected  with  the  Sect;  but  he  is  no  more,  and  we  have
not  fufEcient  proofs  to  infcribe  on  the  lift  feveral  others
of  that  clafs  who  iu  Germany  are  fuppofed  to  belong  to
the  Sect,


*  It  was  on  feeing  the  ftrong  illufion  of  his  degree  of  E-
popt  (fo  ftrangely  impious)  on  the  Doctors  Feder  and  Koppe,
and  fome  others  of  the  Univerlity  of  Gottinguen,  that  Wei-
fliaupt  wrote  to  Cato,  "  You  cannot  conceive  how  much  my
*'  degree  of  Priejl  or  Epopt  is  admired  by  our  people  ;  but
"  what  is  the  moft  extraordinary  is,  that  feveral  great  Piotes*
'  '  tant  and  Reformed  Divines,  who  are  of  our  Order,  really  be-
*'  lieve  that  that  part  of  thedifcourfe  which  alludes  to  religion
"  contains  the  true  fpirit  and  real  fenfe  of  Christianity.  Poor
(i  mortals,  what  could  I  not  make  you  believeV  Qrig-  Writ,
Vol.  II.  Let.  18.


r;ï  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;


CHAP.  IX.


New  Chiefs  and  new  Means  of  the  Illuminées — D  evict
of  the  Jefnits  Mafonry  and  Succefs  of  that  Impojiure.

State  and  A  MONG  the  fecret  writings  that  the  Se&  had  in
«jifpofifons  J~^  vain  fought  to  conceal  from  the  eyes  of  juftice,  was
aftei^tr-eir  one  on  wh\ch  was  found  in  Ctfro-Zwack's  hand-writing,
éifcovery.  tn's  remarkable  marginal  note:  "  In  order  to  re-eftablifh
"  our  affair?,  let  fome  of  the  ableft  of  thofe  brethren  who
*c  have  avoided  our  misfortunes  take  the  places  of  our
"  rounders  ;  let  them  get  rid  of  the  difcontented,  and,  in
"  concert  with  the  new  ele£t,  labor  to  reftore  our  fociety
a  to  its  primitive  vigor."*  Weifhaupt  had  fcarcely  left
Jngolffeadt  when  he  threatened  thofe  who  difmifTed  him,
that  ere  long  their  joy  JJjould  be  converted  into  farrow  ;f
and  it  was  evident  that  the  Illuminées  were  far  from  hav-
ing abandoned  their  confpiracy.  Notwithftanding,  how-
ever, the  awful  and  menacing  aipect  which  it  prefented,  the
different  powers,  it  would  feem,  affecled  to  leave  the  con-
ipirators  in  poiïeiïion  of  means  to  profecute  their  illumini-
zing  plans  with  greater  activity.

If  we  except  Weifhaupt,  no  adept  in  Bavaria  had  been
condemned  to  a  feverer  punifhment  than  exile  or  a  fliort
imprifonment.  In  other  parts,from  Livonia  to  Strafbourg,
and  from  Holftein  to  Venice,  not  a  fmgle  inquiry  had
been  made  concerning  their  lodges.  Many  of  thofe  adepts
who  had  been  convicted  of  the  deepeft  guilt  had  met  with
protection  inflead  of  indignation  in  the  different  courts.
Notwithftading  the  cleareir.  proofs  of  his  guilt  had  been
adduced,  we  fee  Zwack,  a  very  few  days  alter,  producing
certificates  of  his  probity  and  fidelity  to  his  prince,  which
had  more  the  appearance  of  having  been  iflued  by  his  ac-
complices than  by  the  Aulic  Council  ;%  and  the  Prince
of  Salm  Kyrbourg  calls  him  to  his  court,  in  all  probabi-
lity to  be  lerved  with  a  fimilar  fort  of  fidelity  !  !     The

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  lafl  pages.

T  His  Letter  to  Fifcher.

t  See  his  Appendix  to  the  Original  Writings,  P.  35  and  36.


HISTORICAL  PART.  I79

confpirators  Brutus-Szvioli  and  Diomedes-Conftmzti
might  continue  to  recruit  for  the  Seel,  provided  it  was
not  in  Bavaria^  and  that  at  the  expenfe  of  the  Prince  who
had  difcovered  their  plots.  Tiberius-Meiz^  whofe  infa-
mous morals  are  recorded  in  the  Original  Writings,  bare-
facedly efcorted  them  in  the  retinue  of  the  amballador  of
the  empire  to  Copenhagen.  jflfred-Se\n(heim  merely
bartered  the  favor  of  his  Prince  for  that  of  the  Duke  dc
Deux-Ponts,  and  an  intrigue  was  immediately  fet  on  foot
to  reinftate  him  at  Munich.  Spartacus  himfelf  tranquilly
enjoyed  his  afylum  and  a  penfton  at  court,  though  he  had
confpired  to  annihilate  every  Prince.  Never  had  fo  men-
ilrous  a  confpiracy  been  difcovered  or  fo  publicly  denoun-
ced; yet  never  were  confpirators  fo  amply  fuppiied  with
the  means  of  continuing  their  plots  by  thole  even  againft
whom  they  were  confpiring.  Thus  plainly  did  every  thing
denote  that  the  flight  of  Weifhaupt  would  be  to  Illumin-
ifm,  what  the  Hegira  of  Mahomet  had  formerly  been  to
Moflemifm,  only  the  prelude  to  a  greater  and  more  fplen-
did  fuccefs.  Experience  now  taught  Weifhaupt  to  com-
bine new  means  according  to  his  favorite  maxim  oi  ap-
pearing idle  in  the  midjl  of  the  greateji  activity.  Per-
haps alfo,  content  with  having  laid  the  foundations  of  his
confpiracy,  and  with  having  arrived  at  that  day  which  he
had  long  iince  foretold,  when  he  could  defy  the  powers  of
the  earth  to  deftroy  his  fabric  ;  or,  perhaps,  fatisfied  at
feeing  he  had  now  formed  men  able  to  prelide  over  his
Aréopage;  he  fimply  gave  his  advice  on  important  occa-
iions,  leaving  the  common  details,  the  functions  of  an  or-
dinary chief,  to  other  adepts.  However  that  may  be,
though  it  were  proved  that  he  had  given  up  the  dignity
ef  chief,  though  the  archives  of  the  Sea;  were  more  deep-
ly concealed  than  they  are,  yet  proofs  of  the  plots  which
they  are  now  profecuting  would  not  be  wanting.  Their
public  actions  {hall  in  future  depofe  againft  them  in  de-
fault of  their  fecret  archives.  The  adepts  were  known;
it  was  therefore  eafy  'to  watch  their  labors  and  compare
their  devices.  The  German  writers  have  had  the  ltart
of  us  in  that  career;  hiffory,  therefore,  will  not  be  deiii-
tute  of  demonftrative  proofs.

The  grand  object  of  the  Illuminées,  after  the  difcovery  They  «-
of  their  iecret  papers,  was  to  perfuade  Germany  that  their  teJjPPc  ta
Order  was  extinct;  that  the  adepts  had  not  only  renoun-  ^"ex-
ced  all  their  illuminizing  myfteries,but  even  all  intercom^  iftencc


l8©  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

among  themfelves  as  members  of  a  fecret  fociety.    Thefe
are  not  the  full  Brigands  or  the  firft  Sectaries  on  record
that  have  wiihed  to  make  the  world  believe  the  idea  of
their  exillence  to  be  chimerical,  even  at  the  very  time
when  they  were  moft  actively  promoting  their  plots  and
propagating  their  principles.     But  here  error  has  belied
itfelf  even  in  the  mouths  of  its  moft  zealous  advocates*
On  the  firft  appearance  of  thofe  works  that  denounced
to  the  Britifh  nation  r.t  large  the  confpiracy  of  the  Illu-
minées, and  fhewed  how  they  were  profecuting  their  plots
in  the  occult  Lodges  of  Mafonry,  the  zealous  brethren
inhabiting  the  banks  of  the  Thames  called  on  their  Ger-
man allies  for  fuccor,  in  order  to  deftroy  thofe  ill  impres-
iions    which  the  Life    of  Zimmerman,  Mr.  R.obifon's
Proofs,  and  thefe  Memoirs,  were  making.    The  com-
plaints or  the  EnglUh  fraternity,  and  the  anfvver  of  their
auxiliary  Brother  Boetiger,  are  inferted  in  the  German
Mercury,  No.   II,  page  267.    Nearly  the  fame  anfwer
has  croiied  the  feas,  in  order  to  inform  the  EngliQi,  thro*
the  channel  or' the  Monthly  Magazine  of  January  1798)
page  3,  that  whoever  ihôuld  turn  his  reiearches  toward
Illurnintfrn  would  be  in  purfuit  of  a  chimera,  "  as  from
M  the  beginning  of  the  year  1790,  EVERY   CONCERN  OF
"  THE   Illuminati    HAS  CEASED,  and  no  Lodge  of
u  Free-mafons  in  Germany  has,  lince  that  period,  taken
"  the  lealt  notice  of  them.    Evident  proofs  of  this  afler-
"  tion  are  to  be  found  among  the  papers  of  Mr.  Bode,
K  late  Privy  Counfellor  at  Weimar,  who  was  at  the  head
11  of  the  Order  in  this  part  of  Germany,  and  who  died  in
«  1794."
Strange  1  he  foregoing  palTage,  written  by  Mr.  Boetiger,  may

avow     rc"  be  obferved  to  include  a  very  lingular  avowal,  which  has
latine  to       ,       ,     ,  •      1  •     /^  ^  I         c  r

theikih     already  been  noticed  in  Germany  to  tne  great  conruiion

of  the  adepts.  Some  zealous  writers  have  told  them:—
You  now  own  then,  that  the  mytferies  of  Illuminifm  had
become  thofe  of  the  Mafonic  Lodges,  -and  that  they  had
continued  to  be  (o  till  the  year  1790;  thofe journalirts  and
other  authors,  therefore,  who  inceliantly  called  the  atten-
tion of  fovereigns  to  the  Illuminées,  were  not  miftaken  ;
and  Zimmerman,  Huffman,  and  Dr.  Stark,  with  i'o  many
other  writers  whofe  works  the  Sect  withed  to  fupprefs,
were  correct  in  publicly  proclaiming  that  this  difaftrous
Sect  had  not  been  annihilated  when  its  plots  were  difco-
vcred  in  1780,  and  much  lefs  lb  in  1785,  as  the  adept


HISTORICAL  PART.  iSi

Waters  of  the  Brotherhood  or  their  hirelings  had  attempt*
ed  to  perfuade  the  world.*  Now  the  conspirators  think
that  it  would  fuifice  for  their  purpofe  to  make  the  world
believe  that  the  idea  of  their  exiftence^#«  the  year  1790
is  chimerical.  This  artifice  alfo  (hall  bo  unmafked,  and
nations  fhall  be  convinced  that  though  this  Sect  may  have
changed  its  form,  yet  that  in  (o  doing  it  has  only  invigo-
rated itfelf,  and  acquired  new  means  of  corruption.

The  Sieur  Boetiger-,  the  Quixotte  of  the  illuminées,  Bode  the
and  of  the  Brother  Bode  in  particular,  alfo  makes  ano-  '^w  chief
thcr  avowal,  viz.  That  his  hero  Bode  really  becané  the  °*  c"e  ^e"*
chief  of  the  Illuminées  in  his  part  of  Germany. f     No
Brother  before  him  had  ever  made  this  avowal;  but  it

*  See  Endemonia,  Vol.  VI-  No.  2.

T  The  Sieur  Boetiger»  Director  of  the  Gymnafium  at  Wei-
mar, and  the  auxiliary  adept  fo  famous  for  his  Eulogy  00  Rode,
which  was  only  laughed  at  in  Germany,  has  many  other  claims
to  ridicule  betide  thofe  recorded  in  his  writings.  Ihe  Englifh
may  overlook  the  numerous  demands  of  this  kind  that  he  has
upon  us  in  about  half  a  dozen  Magazines  and  Reviews  in  which
he  co-operates,  for  his  diflertations  on  the  Roman  Ladies,  on
their  toilets, and  on  their-./v/w;  on  America,  md  on  China;  oq
the  Etrufcau  Vafes,  on  the  Acling  of  a  Player,  and,  in  fiiort,
on  many  other  {abjects.  But  what  it  mod  concerns  trie  Englifh
people  to  know  is,  that  the  man,  whole  authority  is  fet  up  in
Favor  of  the  Brotherhood,  is  as  well  known  in  Germany  for  his
talents  as  a  leader  of  faction,  as  he  is  for  his  treadles  on  toilets
and  fans.  Nor  did  he  on  the  news  of  the  imnurtal  victory  of
Admiral  Duncan  reftrain  his  Jacobin  rage  in  his  journal's,  or
blulh  at  faying  that  it  nuas  doubtful  whether  the  Englifli  had
gained  this  victory  by  the  interference  of  heaven  or  of  hell,
whether  it  came  from  above  or  beliyw  (von  oben  oder  von  un-
ten);  and  that  it  was  the  opinion  of  many,  that  it  would  have
been  a  greater  happinefs  for  ihe  Englijh  to  have  l»Jl  the  battle
than  to  have  gained  it.  Such,  nevertheless,  is  the  man  whom
v/e  find  placed  in  competition  with,  and  even  let  upas  an  au-
thority againft  the  patriotifm  of  Mr.  Robifon.

This  very  fame  man  moreover  writes  to  inform  the  EngliuH
that  he  is  no  Illuminée.  He  may  gain  credit  in  England;  but
in  Germany  he  is  afked  what  buiinefs  he  had  with  the  Miner-
val  Lodges  of  IVtimir? — !n  what  quality  could  he  pretend  to
inherit  the  papers  of  a  chief  of  llluminifm,  which,  according
to  the  laws  of  the  Sect,  could  only  be  entrufVed  to  brethren  ?
Or  for  what  reafon,  after  having  been  lb  intimately  connected
with  Bode,  does  he  Hill  continue  to  he  th  laborious  co-opera*
tor  or  the  adept  Wieland  in  the  Nena  German  Men  ury?

Thi3  auxiliary  adept  silo  wiites  to  the  Englifh,  thar  the  Duke
of  Saxe  Gotha,  01  application  to  him  for  that  purpofe,  nuould,
•doubtleft,  permit  the  infpeclion  of  thofe  paper  1  of  Bode's.  But  no
fuch.  invitation  is  made  to  the  Germans  ;  to  them  he  talks  of  a


I§a  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

perfectly  coincides  with  the  information  that  I  had  re-
ceived concerning  this  infamous  Illumine".    It  is  under
the  direction  of  this  adept,  therefore,  whofe  talents  for
confpiracy  were  fo  much  admired  by  P^//c-Knigge,  that
we  are  now  to  trace  the  labors  and  progress  of  the  Sedr.
To  avert  the  public  attention  by  means  ef  fabulous
fcable  of      plots,  and  to  conceal  their  own  that  they  might  profecutc
the  Jetuits  tncjr  conquelts  in  the  mafonic  Lodges;  to  en fn are  that
*»d  hs  V'    c^s  ca^e^  men  °*  lctters)  a"d  at  length  taint  the  whole
ohieâ.        ma^s  °^ tne  Pe°plG  'A'itn  tne'r  principles  ;  werç  the  objects
of  jf;;ieuits-BooE,  and  of  the  new  Areopagites  who  pre-
sided over  Illuminifrn  after  Weifhaupt's  flight  and  the
tiifperfion  of  the  Bavarian  adepts.     Among  the  various
means  devifed,  one  might  appear  Angularly  ridiculous  but
for  the  aftonifhing  advantages  drawn  from  it  by  the  Sech
I  mean  the  fable  of  the  Jcfuits  Mafonry.    A  prodigious
number  of  volumes  have  been  written  in  Germany,  both
by  thofe  who  invented  the  fable,  and  by  others  who  tho't
k  incumbent  on  them  to  warn  the  public  of  this  new  arti-
fice of  Illuminifm.    I  will  not  wander  into  ufelefs  detail,
but  will  limply  lay  before  my  reader  the  leading  points  by
which  he  may  trace  the  Sedt.  until  it  attains  the  period  of
its  power  in  our  revolutions.

As  an  acf  of  homage  to  the  defpot  Weifhaupt,  Pbilo-
Knigge  was  the  nrft  who,  in  the  year  1781,  and  under

Prince  being  in  poffè/îion  of  all  Bode's  papers,  but  does  not
venture  to  name  the  prince.  He  knew  too  well  that  perfons  on
the  fpot  might  attempt  to  gain  that  admittance  to  infpect  the
papers,  if  Boetiper's  word  could  be  a  fufficient  incitement  to
thofe,  who  think  they  have  acquired  a  certainty  that  the  prince
poffelTor  has  powerful  reafons  for  not  Jhcwing  xh&iiuo  trunks
full  of  papers  that  he  bought  at  fuch  aa  immenle  rate,  and  for
not  giving  an  invitation  to  the  public  fimilar  to  that  which  the
court  of  Bavaria  ordered  to  be  inferted  at  the  head  of  the  Ori-
ginal Writings.

I,  in  my  torn ,  invite  the  Author  of  the  Monthly  Magazine  to
infert  thefe  reflecuons  in  his  publication,  as  he  did  Boetiger's
letter  in  oppofition  to  Mr.  Robifon  in  that  of  January,  1798.
My  teafon  for  making  this  invitation  is,  becaufe  I  have  been  in-
formed that  fume  pei ions  ruve  been  duped  by  that  Utter,  and
really  thought  that  the  exifrenoe  of  this  Sect,  and  or  its  plots,
the  moft  monllrous  and  moft  fubtle  that  ever  exiitedj  was  chi-
merical.

f  c^.n  t^/'o  inf.rm  my  readers,  that  ai!  the  Secret  Writings  of
Bode  are  not  at  Gotha.  Many  of  his  letters  are  at  this  moment
printing  m  my  correfpondents  inform  me,  that  they  perfect-
cord  wi-.h  the  ilateniirits  in  my  Memoirs.


HISTORICAL  PART.  l8  3

the  name  of  Aloysius  Mayer,  publiflied  this  idea  of
the  Jefuits  Mafonry.  He  took  it  up  again  in  the  circu*
lar  letter  written  by  order  of  Spartacus  to  the  Mafonic
Lodges;  he  again  infills  on  it  in  his  additions  to  the
Hijhry  of  '  Free- Mafonry.*  The  adepts  Ostertag  at
Ratifbon,  Nicolai  and  Biester  at  Berlin,  and  a  fwarm
of  other  Illuminées,  (ought  to  give  fanclion  to  this  Fa-
ble by  their  writings.  As  yet,  however,  it  was  difficult  to
form  a  precife  idea  of  this  ilory  of  the  Jefuits  Mafon-
ry, or  whether  it  was  true  or  falfe.  Bode  at  length  made
a  collection  of  every  thing  that  could  be  faid  on  the  fub-
ject,  and  fent  the  whole  of  thefe  materials  to  the  Brother
Bonneville  at  Paris. f  He  foon  publiflied  his  worlc,
entitled  'J  he  fe  faits  expelled  from  Free-mafonry\  and
this  production,  lent  to  all  the  regular  Lodges,  was  fup-
pofed  to  be  the  death-blow  to  this  terrible  phantom.

On  inveftigating  thefe  different  productions,  we  ob-
ferve,  that  their  drift  was  to  make  the  Free-maibns  be-
lieve that  ail  their  Lodges  were  fecretly  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  Jefuits  ;  that  the  whole  of  their  myftexiesj
their  fecrets  and  their  laws,  were  but  an  invention  of
the  Jefuits  ;  that  each  Mafon,  without  fufpecting  it,  was*
but  the  Have  and  inftrument  of  that  fociety  which  had
lung  fince  been  looked  upon  as  extinct,  but  whofe  mem-
bers, though  difperfed,  itill  preferved  an  afcendancy  dis-
graceful to  Mafonry,  and  dangerous  to  nations  and  their
rulers.  The  refult  of  all  this  tended  to  perfuade  the  bre»
thrcn,  that  true  Mafonry  was  not  to  be  fought  for  either
among  the  Roficrucians  or  the  Scotch  Knights,  and  ftill
lefs  among  the  Englifh  Mafons,  or  thofe  of  the  Strict
Obfervance;  but  folely  among  the  Eclectic  Lodges  that
were  under  the  direction  of  the  Illuminées.;];

The  name  of  Jefuit  is  certainly  a  formidable  bug-bear
to  many  people,  efpecially  to  thofe  who  could  never  par-
don their  zeal  for  the  Roman  Catholic  faith;  and  it  can-
not be  denied,  that  if  conftancy  in  the  caufe  of  that  reli-
gion was  hateful,  they  were  well  entitled  to  the  hatred
of  the  enemies  of  the  Catholic  faith.  It  is  obfervablej
that  it  was  in  thofe  very  parts  of  Germany  where  the

*  See  thefe  works  and  the  Original  Writings,  Vol.  If.  Let.
az,  from  Weifhaupt,  and  Let.  i.  from  Pbib. — Alfo  the  Circu»
lar  Letter,  Part  II.  Sett.  Vf.

f  Endliche  Schickfal,  Page  38.

%  See  Pbile's  Circular  Letter  and  his  conclulion.


J$4  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Lodges  were  chiefly  compofed  of  Proteftant  brethren,
Its  fuccefs.  that  this  fable  made  che  moil  aftonifhing  impreflion,  no-
thing being  talked  of  but  Jefuits  under  the  cloak  of  Ma-
fonry, and  their  great  confpiracy.  One  might  have  tho't
that  the  confpiracy  of  the  Illuminées  was  entirely  for-
gotten; but  that  was  not  their  only  objecr.  The  Mafonic
Brethren  of  the  ordinary  Lodges  heard  fo  much  of  their
being  the  dupes  of  the  Jefuits,  that  they  abandoned  the
Strict  Obfervar.ce  and  the  Roficrucians,  and  flocked  to
the  Eclectic  Mafons,  then  under  the  direction  of  the  lllu  -
mimes.  The  Mafonic  Revolution  was  fo  complete  and
fo  fatal  to  ancient  Mafonry,  that  its  zealous  Matters  and
Vénérables  declared  this  fiction  of  Jefuits  Mafonry  to  be
aco;  f  tiracy  truly  worthy  of  a  Danton  or  a  Robefpierre.*
In  vain  did  the  more  clearfighted  Mafons  point  out  the
(hare,  to  vindicate  their  reputation  and  put  a  flop  to  the
general  defertion.  Their  demonfhations  came  too  late;
befide,  they  were  written  by  Proteibnis,  who  were  ftrong-
ly  prejudiced  againft  the  Jefuits  or  knew  but  little  about
them.f  But,  unfortunately,  when  Germany  really  dis-
covered the  drift  of  the  fable,  the  greater  part  of  the  Ma-
ibns  had  united  with  the  Illuminées  for  fear  of  falling  a
prey  to  the  Jefuits,  and  many  others  had  entirely  aban-
doned the  Lodges,  chafing  to  be  neither  Illuminées  nor
Jefuits.  Thus  was  that  threat  of  Weifhaupt  accornpliih-
ed,  that  he  would  either  conquer  the  Stricl  Obfervance
and  the  Roficrucians,  or  deftroy  them.

Were  it  not  that  prejudice  often  deprives  men  of  the
ufe  of  their  reafon,  one  mould  be  afronifhed  to  fee  the  Ma-
fons fall  into  fuch  a  paltry  fnare.  Suppofing  that  I  were  to
go  to  the  Mother  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  the  Grand  Lodge
of  York  or  that  of  London,  and  fay  to  their  Directories  and
Grand  Matters,  you  thought  that  you  prended  over  the
Mafonic  World;  you  looked  upon  yourfelves  as  the  guar-
dians of  the  grand  fecrets  of  Mafonry,  and  as  the  grant-
ers  of  the  diplomas  ;  but  all  this  time  you  were  miftaken,
and  little  fufpe&ed  that  you  were,  and  iiill  continue  to  be
nothing  more  than  puppets  put  in  motion  by  the  jefuits.

•  Wahrlich  ein  project  eines  Dantons  oder  Robefpierre
Wurdig  ( Endlicbe  Schickfal,  Page  3».)

f  See  on  this  ûibjeâ  the  Endiiche  Schiekfal,  the  works  en-
titled, Der Aujgezogene  Vorbang  der  Frey  Maurery,  &c. — And
particularly  the  laft  hundred  pages  of  ihs  work  Uhsr  dit  Altsn
vudKcuen  Myfierient  Chap.  XVI.  Sec,


HISTORICAL  PAXT.  185

Could  one,  I  aflc,  invent  any  thing  more  degrading  either
to  the  human  mind,  or  to  that  common  fenfe  which  muft,
I  fuppofe,  be  granted  to  the  heroes  of  Mafonry  !  Such,
however,  was  the  whole  fable  of  the  Jefuits  Mafonry.—.
When  fpeaking  of  the  Englifh  Mafons,  the  authors  and  a-
bettors  of  this  fable  fay,  "  It  is  truey  there  are  fome  (of
«  thofe  Englifh  Mafons)  whofufpeâî  that  they  are  led  by
cc  the  ncfcy  but  thefe  arc  few.  ...  It  is  more  common  a-
"  mong  them  than  any  where  elfe>  for  certain  members  to
"  renew  from  time  to  time  the  idea  of  unknown  Superiors;'*
and  thofe  unknown  Superiors  who  lead  the  Englilh  by  the
nofe  are  always  the  Jefuits.*

Ere  long  the  reproach  becomes  general  ;  all  that  mul-
titude of  degrees  invented  in  France,  in  Sweden,  and  in
Germany,  becomes  an  invention  of  the  Jefuits,  as  well
as  the  Englilh  and  Scotch  degrees  ;  J-  and  a  fort  of  epi-
demical ftupidity  alone  hinders  the  Brotherhood  from  feel"
ing  their  bondage  ;  at  leaft  fuch  muft  be  the  natural  con-
fequence  of  this  fable.  How  could  the  German  Mafons
poiîibly  avoid  perceiving  the  abfurdity  of  it  ?  Their  pro-
found adepts  and  the  ElecT:  of  all  nations  flocked  to  Wil-
lemfbaden,  and  in  the  fpace  of  thirty  years  they  held  five
or  fix  general  afiemblies;  how  came  it  to  pafs  that  all
thefe  brethren  combining  their  fecrets,  their  government,
and  their  laws,  revifing,  meditating,  and  correcting,  not
only  their  myfteries  but  their  whole  code,  were  purblind
enough  not  to  furmife  at  leaft  that  of  which  they  were  af-
terwards fo  fully  perluaded  when  they  returned  to  their
Lodges,  viz.  "  that  they  were  but  the  vile  inftruments
and  ilaves  of  the  Jefuits  ?"  There  can  be  no  medium  5
either  the  Mafons  muft  be  the  offspring  of  the  groffeft
ftupidity  and  folly  (and  then  what  becomes  cf  their  great
lights  and  their  fcience  of  fciences  fo  much  extollea),  or,
the  invention  of  the  Jefuits'  Mafonry  muft  be  a  moft  ab-
furd  fable  (and  in  that  cafe  why  do  they  flock  to  the
Lodges  of  the  Illuminées  for  fear  of  meeting  a  bugbear  in
their  own)  ?

This  fable  too  appears  ftill  more  abfurd  when  we  re-
flect that  fuch  men  as  Philippe  D'Orléans,  Condorcet,  Sy-
eves,  or  Mirabeau,  with  16  many  other  Deifts,  Atheifts,
A  a

*  See  the  Jefuits  expelled  Mafonry ,  Part  I.  P.  ji  and  33.
f  Phih's  Circular  Letter,


I?5  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

and  moft  inveterate  enemies  and  afTaffins  of  the  Jefuits,
and  of  all  thofe  who  preached  the  fame  doctrines,  were
■  ot  the  head  of  Mafonry!

It  may  alio  be  worthy  of  remark,  at  what  period  thefe
Religious  are  transformed  into  the  Grand  Matters  and
Diredrors  of  that  multitude  of  Lodges  fpread  from  Eaft
to  Weft  ?  It  is  after  they  have  been  abohihed  ;  it  is  when,
forbidden  to  form  a  community,  they  are  difperfed  thro*-
out  the  different  diocefes  acting  the  part  of  private  mis-
fionaries  under  the  infpection  of  their  Bifhops  :  this  is  the
period  chofen  for  inftalling  them  governors  and  directors
of  a  vaft  confraternity  of  Mafons  ?  It  is  when  ftripped  of
every  thing,  driven  from  their  habitations,  having  fcarce-
Jy  wherewith  to  procure  the  neceflaries  of  life,  that  they
arc  fuppofed  to  command  all  the  funds  of  the  Mafonic
Lodges  I  It  is  when,  under  the  yoke  of  perfecution,  they
continue  to  preach  the  doctrines  of  the  Go/pel,  that  they
are  accufed  of  a  fuppofed  fecret  impiety  and  of  a  profound
policy  !  Il'  they  are  impious,  at  leaft  we  muff,  allow  them
to  be  as  aukward  in  their  impiety  and  as  imbecile  as  thofe
ivho  could  fuppofe  thern  to  have  poflefled  forne  ingenuity;
for  in  the  mid  It  of  their  fuppofed  impiety,  of  their  Deifti  -
cal  and  Atheift ical,  their  rebellious  and  anarchical  princi-
ples, they  have  been  aukward  enough  always  to  have  for
their  greateft  enemies  not  only  the  Deifts  and  Atheifls  of
Mafonry  but  thofe  of  every  other  clafs  !  On  the  other
»  hand,  they  are  fuppofed  to  be  the  authors  of  the  new  mys-
teries of  Mafonry,  and  they  are  artful  enough  to  intro-
duce them  by  means  of  proteftant  leaders,  fuch  as  a  Baron
Hund  or  a  Zinnendorff;  befide,  thefe  myfteries  are
only  multiplied  in  the  divers  Lodges  in  order  to  create
inteftine  jealoufies,  hatreds,  &c.  which  all  the  general
meetings  of  the  Sect  could  not  reprefs  !  This  alfo  muft  "
be  the  work  of  a  body  profoundly  politic  !  Did  thefe  ter-
rible Jefuits  then  think  to  add  to  their  power  by  thus  de-
ffroying  the  Mafonic  puppets  which  they  had  folong  go-
verned, in  place  of  uniting  thofe  millions  of  brethren  or
flaves  under  one  law,  who  might  have  formed  an  impene-
trable phalanx  againft  their  enemies  ?

Certainly  we  muft  be  aftonifhed  at  the  abfurdity  of  this
fable  of  the  Jefuits'  Mafonry;  but  our  aflonimment  in-
creafes  on  examining  the  proofs  whereon  it  is  grounded.*

*  Some  readers  may  perhaps  tax  me  with  treating  this  fable,
and  the  proofs  adduced  by  the  Illuminées)  as  abfurd  and  incon-.


HISTORICAL  PART.  igy

Let  us  fuppofe  that  Nicolai,  Knigge,  Bode  and  the
.other  writers  of  the  Brotherhood,  hnd  made  a  compila-

o

ceivable,  only  that  I  might  be  difpenfed  from  trouble  of  refut-
ing demonfirations  perhaps  difficult  to  be  anfwered.  Should
any  fuch  be  found  among  my  readers,  Jet  them  turn  to  thole
writings  which  fome  of  the  nsoft  famous  adepts,  fuch  for  ex-
ample as  Mirabeau,  or  rather  his  initiator  and  recruiter  Mau-
vilhn,  extol  in  the  higheft  terms  ;  and  which  are  not  (he  lays)
to  be  looked  upon  as  a  merefyfiem,  but  as  a  complete  digejl  and
exacl flatement  of  the  principal  fails  that  led  in  Germany  to  the
d if  cover  y  of  this  Mafonry  of  the  Jefuits.  (See  Mirabeau  s  Prus-
fian  Monarchy,  Vol.  V.  Book  VIII.  Page  77.)  This  famous
book  is  entitled,  The  Jefuits  expelled  from  Mafonry,  and  their
poignard  broken  by  the  Mafons.  In  the  very  firit  page  we  fee
engraven  on  a  plate  this  poignard  with  the  compafs.the  fquaxe»
the  triangles,  the  eagles,  ûars,  and  every  thing  that  he  fuppofes
to  be  the  emblems  of  Scotch  Mafonry.  Should  it  be  aiked  where
this  poignard  was  found,  no  anfwer  is  given;  but  in  the  fol-
lowing very  ingenious  manner  the  writer  pretends  to  demon-
ftrate  that  the  great  authors  and  directors  of  Scotch  Mafoniy
were  Jeluits:

ill.  Bonneville  declares  this  Mafonry  to  confia  cf  four  de-
grees, the  Apprentice,  the  Fellow-Craft,  the  Mailer,  and  the
Scotch  Mailer.  The  pafs-words  in  thefe  degrees  are  Boaz  and
Tubal-cain  for  the  firil;  Shiboleth,  Chiblin,  Notuma,  for  the  0-
thers.  Boaz  feems  to  have  puzzled  him;  he  therefore  rcj^s
it,  and  only  takes  the  four  initials,  T.  S.  C.  N.

The  Jefuits  alfo  had  four  degrees,  the  Lay  Brothers,  (that  is
to  fay)  thofe  who,  as  in  all  leligious  Orders,  were  only  admit-
ted as  fervants,  fuch  as  the  cooks»  gardeneis,  &c.    Thefe  the
Jefuits  called  Temporal  Coadjutor s .    Bonneville  overlooks  Co-,    •
adjutor,  but  takes  the  initial  of  Tt  mp»ral;  and  he  thus  gets  T,
which  demonftrates  that  the  Lay  Brother  Jefoit  is  the  fame  ss
the  Apprentice  Malbn,  alfo  denoted  by  T.  The  i  cond  degree
among  the  Jefuits  is  that  of  the  young  itudents,  and  thefe  were
called  Scolajlici,  or  Scholars;  but  when  they  had  finiihed  their
ftudies,  and  taught  in  their  turn,  they  became  At.
Matters:  The  S  in  SeoUfUci'is  convenient  for  Bonneville's  de*
monftration,  and  it  becomes  the  S  of  the  Shiboleth  of  the  Fe-'-
low-Craft.  The  third  degree  of  the  Jefuits  is  that  of  Spirit
Coadjutor,  who  took  the  three  common  re  >ws;  here

the  C  initial  of  Coadjutor  is  the  C  of  ChiUijn,  *od  Boon
has  not  the  fl'ghteft  doubt  but  the  fpirmial  Co  1  the

Tefuits  is  the  Mafler  in  Free-malonry.     At  1er  the

fourth  degree,  or  the  profeffed  Jefuits,  that  >s,  rh  to  tie

three  firft  vows  have  added  that  of  going  to  preach  the  Qoipei
in  whatever  part  cf  the  world  the  Pope  ch  1    —

Thefe  were  called  the  prqfejfèd  Jefuits;  but  the  •

would  not  ferve  Bonneville's  purpofe,  he  wa

iherefore,  that  thefe ptafeflèd  v.-
gcis  an  N,  the  evident  Notuma  of  the  Sco(
xy.    Thus  it^s  that  by  comparing  the  ï'.  S.  C.  N.  oi  Mâlbnry


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY*;

tion  of  every  thing  that  was  odious  in  Mafonry,  and  had
fubftituted  the  word  ftfuit  for  that  of  Free-mafon  or  Ro-
/uruciarifVft  (hall  then  have  a  pretty  accurate  idea  of  the
general  courfe  followed  by  the  illuminizing  Mafons.  It
would  be  exactly  as  if  any  hiftorian  were  to  take  it  into
his  head,  when  treating  of  Weimaupt's  Code,  to  fubffi-
tute  the  word  jfefuit  in  lieu  of  Illuminée,  and  that  without
being  able  to  name  a  fingîe  Jefuit  agami!  whom  the  ac-
cufation  could  be  preferred,  notwithilanding  the  ardent
defire  of  thele  barefaced  calumniators  to  mention  fome  one
at  leafl  of  the  culprit  Jefuits.  It  is  a  long  feries  of  contra-
dictions. Neither  do  they  agiee  as  to  the  time,  the  de-
grees, or  the  ruyfferies  of  this  Mafonry  of  the  Jefuits.—
The  fuie  fact  that  might  defeive  to  be  inveftigated,  had

with  the  T.  .9.  C.  /V.  that  lie  had  difcovered  among  the  Jefuits,
he  prove?  that  the  deptees  of  Scotch  Mafonry  are  the  fame  as
thofc  of  the  Jcfu.ts.  ("Stt  the  j\fuits  expelled  Mafonry  t  Vol.  II.
Page  .5  and  <'i  )

Should  the  leader  defire  to  know  how  the  word  Mafon  pre-
cifely  anfw  f.rs  to  the  peçfeâ  degree  of  the  Jefuits,  or  ft>  their
Profeffed.  Bonneviile  will  teit  him,  that  the  letters  A.  B.  C.  Sec.
ixand  for  numbers  i,  »,  ;,.  8t,c.  Su  pooP- the  Jefuits  have  adopt-
ed this  eafy  cypher,  aod  then  the  four  letters  M.  A.  S.  O.will
give  ia-fc>i-{-i8-ri4— 4?,  and  then  remains  N,  the  very  initial
letter  of  the  Nssteb  the  for  ft  ft  degree  of  the  jefuits.  to  which
the?  could enly  be  admitted  at  the  age  f  forty-five!  (Ibid.  Page
ft. J  What  a  uity  (exclaims  Bonneville)  that. this  Aro/?>.'r  mould
be  the  prtfejfed  Refait,  ptofeffus  quatuor  votorum  (Hid.  Page
6  J  ;  and  a  (till  greater  pity  (fay  1)  tor  his  polition,  that,  ac-
cording to  the  constitutions  of  the  Jefuits,  at  the  age  of  twen-
ty-five they  might  be  admitted  to  take  the  fourth  vow,  provid-
ed they  had  finifhed  their  courfe  of  divinity.  (Confit.  S-jàcî.
Jef.  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  No.  ia,  <k  Admittendis.)  Another  mis-
fortune was.  t;  thofe  jefuits  who  had  taught  in  their
coiie.es  had  generally  terminated  their  courfe  of  divinity  and
taken  Their  lair  vow  by  the  age  of  tkirty-thixs.

Were  I  to  go  en  to  ft  )w,  that  the  G,  or  the  God,  of  the  Ma-
fons  becomes  the  Gênerai  of  the  Jefuits,  becaufe  General  be-
gins with  a  G. — that  the  Jubal,  an  the  motician  ôf  the  Maibns*
is  a  Jefuit,  becai  .</  and  Jefu;t  both>  begin  with  a  J .-- ■

that  the  Hihn  of  the  myfteries  is  a  Jefuit,  becaufe

H=8  and  A  =  i  and  the  total  9=  J.;  in  fhoit,  were  I  to  pro-
c  ed  to  enumerate  live  or  hx  hun  :  of  the  fame  iia>

tme,  all  given  s  Ibtiry»  rny  readef

«   ,1  i  be  alnv  .  •  traducing  iJon-

neville.  I  muft,  therefore,  refer  him  to  tjbe  authoi  hnnifeif;  and
let  that  man  read  and  ftudy  hifti  who  is  not  difgulled  at  the
re-  ii  of  the  firft  pages»  and  at  the  impudence  with  which
this  author  wiihes  tg  impofe  upon  the  public.


HISTORICAL  PART.  1^9

any  proof  been  adduced  iii  confirmation  of  it,  was  that  oi
the  jefuits  converting  Mafonry  into  a  confpiracy  for  the
r:intfatementof  the  Stuarts  on  the  Englifla  Throne.  But
of"  what  confequence  could  tlvir  rçinftaternent  on  the
throne,  or  a  fecret  of  that  nature,  he  to  the  S  wedifli,  Rus-
fian,  Polonefe,  or  Dutch  Mafons  ;  and  how  could  one
pietend  to  perfuade  the  Engliflî  and  Scotch  Mafons  that
their  Mafonry,  Code,  and  Emblems,  long  anterior  to  the
cataftrophe  of  the  Stuarts,  were  onïy  myiferics  invented
to  reinfhte  the  Stuarts  on  the  throne  ?  Should  an  his-
torian ever  umtertake  to  write  the  nifrory  of  the  extraor-
dinary reveries  of  the  human  mind,  lei.  hirri  not  forget  thole
rth  by  the  IHumiaecs  dn  this  occallon;  and  were  it
not  for  the  eminent  ufe  it  was  of  to  them  for  the  propa-
gation of  their  plots,  I  mould  never  have  thought  of  trou-
bling my  reader  with  it,  or  of  ferioufly  refuting  lb  incohe-
rent a  fable.  We  muft  next  turn  our  attention  to  a  coa-
lition more  real  and  far  more  difa(troos,I  mean  that  known
under  the  name  of  the  Germanic  Union.


A1


199  ANTISOCIAL  CONSriRACY;


CHAP.  X.


•Its  principal  Aclors,  and  the  Con-
ouefis  it  prepared  for  the  Illuminées.

FTER  having  defcribed  fo  many  plots,  unmafked
io  much  artifice,  and  difclofcd  fuch  various  means
of  deluhon  and  Induction,  all  tfluing  from  the  dens  of  im-
,',  why  am  I  forbidden  to  lay  down  my  pen,  and  aban-
doning thcic:  dark  haunts  of  vice,  to  allume  the  plealmg
of.defcribing  the  habits  of  the  virtuous  man,  or  of  a.
n»ti<  ,  and  enjoying  the  fweets  of  peace  beneath

the  fhadow  of  its  laws,  and  that  under  a  beloved  monarch,
revered  ftiU  more  as  the  father  than  as  the  fovereign  of
his  peaceful  empire?  Alas  !  the  fight  of  fuch  a  nation
has  vaniihed  from  the  face  of  the  earth;  thrones  totter
and  diiappear  ;  fiâtes  weep  over  the  ruins  of  their  religion
and  of  their  laws,  or  are  yet  painfully  ftruggiing  with  the
devouring  monuer.  Danger  flalks  on  every  fpot;  and  if
happier  days  are  mentioned,  it  can  only  ftimulate  us  to  de-
nounce the  too  long  concealed  caufer.  of  our  misfortunes,
in  hopes  of  feeing  once  again  thofe  nearly  forgotten  days
return.  Though  the  mind  revolts  at  the  idea,  yet  for  the
:c  good  we  will  purfue  that  tribe  of  Weifliaupt ;
and  fo  far  from  giving  repofe  to  our  thoughts,  we  mall  be
once  more  hurried  into  new  plots  and  machinations  in-
vented by  the  molt  profound  adepts  of  Illuminiim,  and  hor-
ridly famous  in  Germany  under  the  name  of  the  German
I'nion.  To  underftand  perfectly  the  object  of  this  Union,
the  hiftorian  muft  revert  to  confpiracies  anterior  to  thofe
The  G«r-  of  Weiihaupt.

manic  U-         "v Vc  have  often  feen  Voltaire  boafting  of  the  progrefs

nion  ;  it*    that  Infidelity  was  making  in  the  north  of  the  German

•ngin.        Empire.    This  progrefs  was  not  folely  to  be  attributed  to

his  labors,  nor  had  he  Lhe  ieaft  fufpicion  of  the  many  co-

I  \v.  re  fecpnding  his  views.

■  in  the  very  heart  of  Prote"ftantifm  and  of  its  fchools,  a

Confpiracy  had  been  formed  againft  the  Proteftaht  and

.  led  religiffi,  inveterate  in  its  means


HISTORICAL  PART.  iÇI

and  agents  as  that  formed  by  Holbach's  club.  The  Pa-
rifian  Sophiiters  openly  attacked  Jeiws  Chrift  andall  Chris-
tianity. The  clubs,  or  rather  fchools,  or"  the  North  of
Germany,  under  rrççtence  of  purifying  the  Protejiant
Religion,  and  ol  5  it  to  the  principles  of  true  Chris-

tianity, ftripped  it  of  „♦!  the  myfteries  of  the  Gofpel,  redu-
ced it  to  that  fpecies  ...i"  Deifrn  which  they  decorate  with
the  name  of  Natural  Religion,  and  thus  hoped  to  lead
their  adepts  to  a  negr  fcion  of  all  Religion.  Thefe  new
lawgivers  did  not  absolutely  profcribe  revelation  ;  but  re-
velation was  to  be  fubjtcted  to  the  judgment  of  their  rea-
fon.

The  Antichriftian  Confpiracy  had  originated  rn  France
with  thofe  men  who  ftyled  themfelvcs  Philofophers,  and
who  profeffed  to  be  ftrangers  to  all  theological  erudition.
In  Germany  it  took  rife  in  the  heart  of  the  Univerfities,
and  among  their  Doctors  of  Divinity.  In  France  the  So-
phiiters confpiring  againft  all  Religion  cried  up  the  tole-
ration of  the  Protectants,  in  hopes  of  deftroying  the  Ca-
tholic faith;  in  Germany  the  Proteftant  Doctors  abufed
that  toleration  in  order  to  fubftitute  Philofophifm  to  the
tenets  of  their  church.

The  firft  of  thefe  German  Doctors  who,  under  the
mafk  of  Theological  difquiiitions,  engaged  in  this  Anti-
chriftian Confpiracy,  was  Semler,  protefTor  of  Divinity  Semler.
in  the  Univerfity  of  Halle,  in  Upper  Saxony.  The  only
ufe  he  appears  to  have  made  of  his  knowledge  would  lead
us  to  fuppofe  that  he  imbibed  his  principles  from  Bavle,
father  than  from  the  true  iburces  of  Theology.  Like
fiayle,  we  may  obferve  him  here  and  there  fcattering  a
few  ufeful  truths,  but  equally  inclining  toward  paradox
2nd  fcepticifm.  Rapid  as  Voltaire,  but  destitute  of  his  ele-
gance, he  can  only  be  compared  to  that  Antichriftian  Chief
for  the  multitude  of  contradictions  into  which  he  {tum-
bles at  every  ftep.  "  It  is  not  uncommon  to  fee  him  begin
"  a  fentence  with  an  opinion  that  he  contradids  before  h*
"  concludes  it.  His  predominant  fyftem,  and  the  only  one
"  that  can  be  gathered  from  his  numerous  reveries,  is,
"  that  the  fymbols  of  Christianity  and  of  all  other  Sects
M  are  objects  of  no  confequence;  that  the  Chriftian  Re-
11  ligion  contains  but  few  truths  of  any  importance  ;  and
"  that  every  perfon  may  felec~t  thefe  truths  an!  decide  up-
w  on  them  as  he  pleafes.  His  fcepticifm  has  never  per-
«  mitted  him  to  fix  upon  any  religious  opinion  for  hit»-


\$i


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;


«  felfj  unlei's  it  be  when  he  clearly  profefles,  that  Proteft-
"  antifm  is  not  founded  on  bettor  grounds  than  any  of
*(  the  other  Sects  ;  that  it  Jlill  /lands  in  need  of  a  very
u  great  reform}  and  that  this  reform  fhould  be  effected
44  by  his  Brethren  the  Doctors  of  the  Univerl'ties.'**

This'  new  reformer  began  to  propagate  his  doétrines
Ra  early  as  the  year  1754,  and  continued  to  circulate
them,  in  German  and  in  Latin,  in  a  thoufand  different
fhapes.  At  one  time  in  an  Hiftàricol  and  Critical  Col-
légien-, at  another,  in  Free  Difçvijïtions  on  the  Canons  or
Rcclefiajiicai  Laws;  then  in  an  Injiitutidn  oj  the  Chris-
tian DoStrine  ;  and,  above  ail,  in  an  Ejfay  on  the  Art  and
School  of  a  Free  Theology,  Soon  after  a  new  Doctor  ap-
pears, attempting  to  make  this  deiîred  reform,  or  to  fup-
preft  the  remaining  mvfteries  that  Luther  and  Calvin
had  not  thought  proper  to  reject.    This  was  William

Teller.  Abraham  Teller,  at  firft  ProfeflTor  at  Helmftadt  in
the  Dutchy  of  Brunfwick,  afterw.irds  Chief  of  the  Con-
fiftory  and  Provuft  of  a  Church  at  Berlin.  He  made  his
firft  efî'ay  for  deftroying  the  myfteries  by  publiflvmg  a  Ca-
techifniy  in  which,  fcoffing  at  the  divinity  of  Chrift,he  re-
duces his  religion  to  Socinianifm.  Soon  after  this,  his
pretended  Ditiionary  of  the  Bible  was  to  tep.ch  the  Ger-
mans "  methods  to  be  followed  in  explaining  the  Scrip-
"  tures;  by  which  they  were  to  fee  no  other  dodtrine  in
"  the  whole  of  Chriftianity  than  true  Naturalifm,  under
t£  the  cloak  and  fymbols  of  Judaifm."f

About  the  fame  time  appeared  two  other  Proteftant
Doctors,  who  carried  their  new-fangled  Theology  Jlill
nearer  to  t  he  J late  of  a  degraded  and  Antichriftian  Philo-

Damm       fophifm.  Thefe  w  ere  the  Doctors  Damm  and  Bahrdt  $

&  Bahrdt.  the  former  the  Rector  of  a  College  at  Berlin,  the  latter  a
Doctor  of  Divinity  at  Halle,  but  a  man  of  fuch  infamous
morals,  that  even  Philo-Krii^ge  was  afhamed  to  fee  his
name  among  Weifhaupt's  elect,  and  did  not  even  dare  to

Loffler.  pronounce  it.J  Loffler,  the  fuperin tendant  of  the
Church  of  Gotha,  ran  the  fume  career  of  impiety,  as  well
as  many  others  whofe  writings  might  have  been  taken  for
the  compofitions  of  the  Iiluminizing  Epopts.  The  faihion
of  inveftigating  religion  merely  to  overturn  its  myfteries

*  See  A"<*âz  of  a  Secret  Coa'.hion  againjl  Religion  and  Mo-
narchy. The  Appendix.  No.  9.

f  Ibid.  Appendix,  No.  1©.    i  Endliche  erklarung,  P.  13a*


HISTORICAL  PART.  173

became  fo  common  in'the  German  provinces, that  the  Pro-
teftant  Religion  Teemed  to  be  doomed  to  fall  by  the  hands
of  its  own  Doctors,  when  at  length  a  few  of  thofe  Mini-
fters  who  were  ftill  fired  with  çeal  for  their  tenets  raifed
their  voices  to  denounce  this  conspiracy.

The  Doctor  DESMAREES,Tuperintendant  of  the  Church
of  DefTau,  in  the  principality  of  Anhalt,  and  the  Doctor
Stark,  famous  for  his  erudition  and  his  conflicts  with
Uluminifm,  firft  called  the  attention  of  the  public  to  this
riling  Seel:  ;  the  former  in  his  Letters  on  the  New  Pas-
tors of  the  Protejlant  Church,  and  the  latter  in  his  Ap-
pendix to  the  pretended  Crypto-Catholicifm  andjefuitif?n.
Nothing  can  better  probe  the  wound  which  the  Proteft-
ant  Church  had  juir.  received,  than  the  fummary  view  ta-
ken of  the  doctrine  of  thefe  new  paftors,  by  the  fuperin-
tendant  of  DefTau  in  the  following  terms  :

"  Our  Proteftant  Divines  fucceflively  attack  all  the
P  fundamental  articles  of  Chriflianity.  They  do  not  let
^c  one  Tingle  article  of  the  general  fymbol  of  faith  fubfift.
**  From  the  Creation  of  Heaven  and  Earth  to  the  ReTur-
"  rection  of  the  Body,  they  combat  every  Tingle  article."*

While  thefe  theological  adepts  were  perverting  their
fcience  to  inundate  Germany  with  their  crafty  Philofo-
phifm,  a  fécond  confederation  was  forming  at  Berlin  for
the  propagation  of  thefe  works,  extolling  them  as  the  on-
ly productions  worthy  of  the  public  attention.  At  the  head
of  this  league  was  one  Nicolai,  a  Bookfeller.  Before  Nicolai*
this  man's  time  we  have  often  feen  Bookfellers  who,  actu-
ated by  avarice,  indifcriminately  fold  books  of  the  moft
impious  and  feditious,  and  others  of  the  moft  pious  ten-
dency; but  a  phenomenon  that  had  never  been  feen  be-
fore, was  a  Bookfeller  whofe  impiety  overcame  his  love
of  gain,  and  who  would  rather  Tacrifice  the  profits  to  be
acquired  by  the  fale  of  religious  works,  than  allow  them
to  be  difperfed  among  the  people.  Nicolai  was  a  BookT
feller  of  fuch  a  ftamp  as  D'AIembert  wifhed  to  find,  and
fuch  as  he  would  have  been  himfelf  had  it  been  his  pro-
B  b

*  Proteftantifche  Gottefgelehrten  greifen  einen  grund  arti-
kel  des  Chriftenthums  nach  dem  andem  an  ;  lafTen  in  ganzen
Allgemeinen  Glaubens-bekemnifs  vom  Schopfer  himmels  imd
der  erde,  bis  zur  auferftehung  des  fleifches  nicln  unan  gefoch-
ten. — ( 'Uher  die  neuen  itilicbter  der  ProtaJla?itiJchen  Kirdrj  er-
Jej  heft,  S.  10.J


1^4  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

fefïion.  It  was  exclufively  to  the  propagation  of  Impiety
that  he  had  dedicated  his  commerce  and  his  literary  ta-
lents, for  he  would  alfo  be  a  fophifficajed  writer.  He  was
not  even  initiated  into  the  myfteries  of  Weifhaupt,  when
he  had  actually  formed  the  pian  for  overturning  the  Chris-
tian Religion  in  Germany  by  one  of  thole  means  which,
governments  have  never  yet  fufficiently  attended  to,  or
been  aware  of.  At  the  head  of  his  bufinefs  as  aBookfel-
ler,  he  alfo  undertook  to  be  the  compiler  of  a  foit  of
weekly  Encyclopaedia,  which  he  entitled  The  Univerfal
German  Library.*  At  once  the  compiler  and  falefman-
of  Impiety,  he  engaged  feveral  Sophiiters  to  co-operate
with  him.  He  alio  leagued  with  many  men  cf  great  learn-
in--  and  merit,  whole  articles  being  infected  in  his  Jour-
nal were  to  ferve  as  a  cloak  for  the  more  impious  ones,
whence  the  readers  were  to  imbibe  his  baneful  principles.
The  moft  dangerous  articles  of  this  fort  were  thofe  writ-
ten by  himfelf,  by  the  famous  Jew  Mendelsohn,  by
Biester,  Librarian  to  the  King,  and  by  Gedike,
Counfellor  to  the  Confittory  of  Berhn.  It  was  not
long,  however,  before  the  tendency  of  this  Journal  waâ
difcovered.  It  was  obferved,  that  all  their  praifes  were
lavifhed  on  thofe  very  men  whofe  doctrines  were  levelled
at  the  total  overthrow  of  thofe  myfteries  of  Chriftianity
which  had  been  preferved  by  Luther  and  Calvin.  The
man  whofo  well  feconded  the  views  of  Weifhaupt  with-
out knowing  it  could  not  long  efcape  the  notice  of  the
Scrutators.  The  Seel  had  one  in  particular  whofe  name
will  hereafter  become  famous;  this  was  the  Brother  Le-
vi/Zfr-Leuchienring,  who  had  been  Preceptor  to  the  Prin-
ces at  Berlin,  and  afterward  to  thofe  of  PlefTe  Darmftadt.
A  fanatical  recruiter,  and  though  loquacious,  very  re-
feryed  on  the  myfteries,  this  Leuchfenring  was  then  tra-
velling as  an  Iniinuator.    Hanover  and  Neuwied  already


*  J  have  quoted  his  Effay  en  the  Templars  ;  and  I  thought
mvfe'f  bound  to  do  fo,  becaufe  I  found  that  his  refearches  per-
fectly coincided  with  thofe  which  I  had  made  on  the  accufa-
tions  preferred  again  ft  thole  Knights,  and  on  the  proofs  that
appeared  on  the  face  of  the  moft  authentic  documents  relating
to  their  judgment.  I  was  not,  however,  on  that  account  lefs
concerned  to  fee  the  Impiety  with  which  thefe  refearches  are
replete.  I  alio  obferved  ail  that  ridiculous  difplay  of  erudition
on  the  Eaffometoï the  Templars;  but  I  cannot  deny  that  his
quotations  are  perfectly  exact.


HISTORICAL  PART.  195

bore  teftimony  of  his  zeal.  He  had  attempted  in  vain  to
infinuate  the  Chevalier  Zimmerman  ;  but  Nicolai  af-
forded an  eafy  conqueft.  It  was  foon  complete;  Ge-
dilce  and  Biefter,  following  his  example,  only  combined
their  confpiracy  with  Weifhaupt's  myiteries.  The  Doc-
tor Bahrdt  had  fallen  as  eafy  a  prey  to  the  AlTelTor  Mi-
nos i  but  the  Doctor  viewed  what  had  been  done  by  his
new  Brethren,  to  fécond  his  views  and  writings  againft
Chriftianity,  as  of  little  avail — He  thought  he  could  lur-
pafs  all  the  artifices  of  Weifhaupt,  Knigge,  and  Nicolai  5
and  his  evil  genius  afforded  him  the  means.

The  plan  that  he  had  conceived  was  nothing  lefs  than  Its  plao.
to  reduce  all  Germany,  and  by  procefs  of  time  the  whole
world,  to  the  impoffibility  of  receiving  any  other  lelTons,
or  of  reading  any  other  productions  than  thofe  of  the  I1-.
luminees.  The  means  of  reducing  the  literary  world  to
this  new  (pedes  of  flavery  are  all  contained  in  the  laws
laid  down  by  this  ftrange  adept  for  a  coalition  famous  in
Germany  under  the  title  of  the  Germanic  Union,  Du
Dentfcbe  Union.*

*  The  Sieur  Boettivcr  writes  from  Germany,  a*d  his  letter
is  inferted  in  the  Monthly  Magazine  for  "January,  1798,  that
this  plan,  and  the  whole  confederation  of  Dr.  Bahrdt,  arc  only
known  to  Mr.  Robiion  through  the  medium  of  the  obfeureand
defpicable  Journal  of  Geijjen.  This  journal  of  Gtifien  was  ne
ver  defpicable  in  any  one's  eyes  but  thofe  ol:  the  Illuminées,  or
of  their  votaries.  They  had  their  reafons  for  crying  it  down;
and  thofe  very  reafons  mull  enhance  ils  value  in  the  eyes  ol  e-
very  honeft  man.  In  the  next  place,  how  can  this  Boettiger
preiume  to  aft'ert  that  this  Journal  was  the  only  fource  whence
Mr.  Robifon  had  derived  his  information?  The  great  numbei
of  works  quoted  by  Mr.  Robifon  mull  evidently  belie  fuch  an  a  ••
fertion,  and  1  willingly  declare  that  it  was  difficult  to  procure
more.  Had  he  been  in  pofleflion  of  no  other  than  that  famous
work  known  in  Germany  under  the  title  of  Mekr  A*  ■
Text,  order,  die  Deutfcbe  Union  it  r  .  r,—

.(More  Notes  than  I  ext  ;  or,  the  German  finionofthe  t'wen-
iy-Two,)  ihat  work  which*  according  to  Boettig  :iui-

ficed  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  public,  is  that  only  known  by  the
Journalof  Gieffen?  With  a  fimilar  aiTu  ranee  dots  this  champ
of  IlluminifmaiTert  this  work  to  have  been  written  by  B  uie,  hs
if  there  could  be  the  leaft  probability  that  Bode,  who  had  taken
fo active  a  part  in  this  confpiracy,  would  he  ve\  y  foi  ward  in  lav-
ing it  open  to  the  public,  and  expofn  :/*,
Count  if  of  Medetft,  the  daughter  of  Wandetn  («he  Sti  >!ier),
to  public  ridicuie,  a  woman  whofecharmg  lie  fo  much
and  with  whofe  writings  hs  lyas  fo  well  acquainted.     ><  :


I96  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

This  confederacy  was  to  be  governed  by  twenty-two
adepts  chofen  from  among  that  fpecies  of  men,  who  by
their  functions,  tneir  knowledge,  or  their  labors,  had  ac-
quired a  greater  facility  in  directing  the  public  opinion
toward  all  the  errors  of  the  Sect.  The  other  brethren^
difperfed  through  the  different  towns,  were  to  contribute
by  different  means  toward  the  grand  object  under  the
direction  of  the  ivjenty-two^  each  of  whom  had  his  de-
partment afligned  to  him,  as  in  Weifhaupt's  Arcopage.

The  perlons  who  were  chiefly  to  be  fought  after  were
authors,  poft-mafters,  and  booki'ellers.  Princes  and  their
minifters  were  abfolutely  excepted  againft  ;  and  people  in
favor  at  court,  or  in  the  different  public  offices,  were  not
to  be  chofeq.

Thefe  confederates  were  divided  into  fimple  officiates
and  active  Brethren-)  and  the  latter  alone  were  initiated
into  the  fecret,  means,  and  object,  of  the  coalition.  The
inftructions  imparted  to  the  brethren  were  drawn  up  in
the  fame  ftyle  and  method  that  had  long  fince  been  adopt-
ed by  Bahrdt,  and  other  apoftates  from  the  proteftant  uni-
Verfities,  to  reduce  Chriftianity  to  their  pretended  natural
religion,  by  declaring  Mofes,  the  Prophets,  and  even
Chrilt,  to  have  been  men  diftinguifhed,  it  is  true,  by  their
Wifdom,  but  who  had  nothing  divine  either  in  their  doc-
trines or  their  works.  "  To  root  out  fuperftition,  to  re-
"  ftore  mankind  to  liberty  by  enlightening  them,  to  con-
was  the  writer  of  this  publication,  which  {0  well  difplays  the
knavery  of  the  German  Union,  how  comes  it  to  pafs  that  Mr.
Gbfchen,  a  Bookfelrer  of  Leipfic,  has  avowed  himfelf  the  au-
thor of  it,  and  is  univerfally  acknowledged  as  fuch?  My  read-
ers muft  perceive,  that  by  entering  into  thefe  digreffions,  1  on-
ly dehgn  to  warn  the  public  againft  the  different  publications
which  the  Illuminées  are  daily  difper'fing  to  perfuade  nations
that  their  plots  are  chimerical,  while  they  are  puifuing  them
with  redoubled  ardor.

I  (lull  alfo  follow  nearly  the  fame  documents  that  Mr.  Ro-
bifon  has  adopted,  as  they  perfectly  coincide  with  the  memo-
rials that  I  have  received  from  Germany.  Ail  that  I  (hall  lay
before  my  readers  in  this  chapter  may  be  faid  to  be  extracts
from  the  following  German  writings:  News  of a  great  andin-
vifible  confederation  againft  the  Chrifiian  religion  and  rmnat-
chy. — The  Syflem  if  the  Cofhtopolitant  dijeovered. — The  Vienna
'Journal  by  Hoffman  —  "Notice  given  before  it  is  too  late,  by  the
urns.— More  Notes  than  Text,  iffc. — The  Knowledge  of  the
World  and  of  Men,  i£c.  betides  many  other  private  letters  and
memorials  on  the  Illuminées.


Historical  part.  197

1C  fummate  the  views  of  the  founder  even  of  Chriftianity
xt  without  violent  means,  fuch  is  our  object,  (would  they
tt  fay  to  the  Brethren).  It  is  for  that  purpofe  that  we  have
"  formed  a  fecret  fociety,  to  which  we  invite  all  thofe  who
"  are  actuated  by  the  fame  views,  and  are  properly  îenfi-
"  ble  of  their  importance."

As  a  means  of  accomplishing  thefe  objects-,  and  of  pro-
pagating their  pretended  light,  thefe  active  brethren  were
to  eftablifh  in  every  town  certain  literary  focieties,  or
reading  clubs  (lefgefchaften),  which  were  to  become  the
refort  of  all  thofe  who  had  not  the  means  of  procuring  the
daily  publications.  Thefe  were  to  attract  as  many  affo-
ciates  as  poffible  to  thefe  reading-rooms;  watch  their  opi-
nions, imbue  them  with  the  principles  of  the  Order,  leave
thofe  whofe  zeal  and  talents  gave  but  little  hopes,  among
the  common  brethren;  but  initiate  after  certain  prelimi-
nary oaths,  thofe  who  could  be  of  any  real  fervice,and  who
entered  fully  into  the  views  and  plans  of  the  Order.

The  fociety  was  to  have  its  gazettes  and  journals,
which  were  to  be  under  the  direction  of  thole  adepts
whofe  talents  were  the  moft  confpicuous  ;  and  no  pains
were  to  be  fpared  to  deftroy  all  other  periodical  prints.

The  libraries  of  thele  literary  focieties  were  to  becom-
pofed  of  books  all  according  with  the  views  of  the  Order.
The  choice  of  thefe  books  and  the  care  of  furniihing  them
were  to  be  left  to  thefecretaries>  and  particularly  to  book-
fellers  who  were  initiated  in  the  myfteries  of  the  coalition.
The  hopes  conceived  by  the  man  who  had  planned  this
aflbciation  were  held  out  to  the  elect  as  an  incitement  to
the  founding  of  new  ones.  What  advantages  (would  he
fay)  fhall  we  not  gain  over  fuperftition  by  thus  dircv
the  lectures  in  our  mufeums  ?  What  will  we  not  do  for
men  who,  zealous  in  our  caufe,  anddifperfed  in  all  parts,
circulate  every  where,  even  in  the  cottages,  the  produc-
tions of  our  choice?  fhould  we  ever  be  mafters  of  the
public  opinion,  how  eafy  will  it  be  for  us  to  cover  with
contempt,  and  bury  in  oblivion,  every  fanatical  work  that
may  be  announced  in  the  other  journals,  and  on  the  con-
trary extol  thofe  works  that  arc;  wi  ng  to  our
views.  £y  degrees  we  (ball  become  m
trade  of  bookfelling.  Then  will  it  be  in  vain  for  fanatics
to  write  in  defence  of  fuperftition  and  defpots,  as  they  will
neither  find  fellers,  buyers,  nor  readers.

X^eft  bookfellers  themfelves  fhould  protefl  t  an


IÇS  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

inftitutionof  this  nature,  they  were  to  be  drawn  into  it  by
advantages  propofed  to  them,  and  by  the  fears  of  being
ruined  fhould  they  not  accede  to  the  views  of  the  coali-
tion. They  were  to  be  aiïured,  that  the  brethren  would
employ  every  poflible  means  to  encourage  the  fale  of
works  that  met  with  the  approbation  of  the  union  ;  but
would  alfo  impede  the  circulation  of,  and  difcreditby  their
journals  all  fuch  as  were  hoftile  to  their  views.  Neither
had  they  to  fear  a  diminution  in  their  trade;  the  aflocia^»
tion  could  encourage  writers  to  multiply  their  productions
by  enfuring  their  fale;  indeed,  funds  were  to  be  eftablifh-
»  indemnify  any  bookfeller  who,  in  place  of  felling
fuçh  works  as  were  inimical  to  the  views  of  the  Union,
would  leave  them  concealed  in  his  lhop,  pretend  that  he
had  never  heard  of  fuch  works,  or  flatly  refufe  to  fell  them,
thus  abufing  by  every  poflible  means  the  confidence  of
authors  and  of  the  public.

Such  was  the  plan  of  the  Germanic  Union,  or  Dr.
Bahrdt's  mairer-piece.  Never  had  the  délire  of  tyranni-
governing  the  public  opinion  invented  a  more  per-
fidious pian.  One  might  be  led  to  think  it  the  reverie  of
j  evil  genius  who  had  fworn  to  extirpate  from  the
minus  of  the  people  all  ideas  of  any  focial  or  religious  doc-
■.  There  do,  however,  exift  crimes  which  in  the  eyes
of  the  honeifc  man  are  aim  oil:  chimerical,  but  which  pre-
fent  little  difficulty  when  undertaken  by  a  villain.  He
that  had  conceived  the  plan  was  with  mifchievous  propri-
ety placed  at  the  bead  of  the  aflbciation.  The  dilfolute-
nefs  and  infamy  of  his  morals  had  not  left  him  where-
with to  fubfiil  in  any  decent  way,  when  on  a  fudden  he
purchafed,  near  Halle,  a  large  màuûon  which  he  called
after  his  own  name  Bahrdt's-rube.  This  was  foon  con-
vened into  the  head-quarters  of  the  new  Union.  But  it
could  never  have  acquired  any  great  contingency  bad  it
not  been  for  Nicolai,  who  had  long  been  laboring  accord-
ing to  Bahrdt's  views.  The  immenfe correfpondpnc2  that
1:  ;  had  by  means  of  his  commerce  with  the  other  boo^iel-
Iers  of  Germany;  the  fort  of  dominion  that  he  enjoyed
over  the  liter  by  means  of  his  Urùverjal L i &'>**■

court  paid  to  him  by  different  authors  whofe  for-
tunes depended  on  the  rank  he  choie  to  affign  them  in
Libraryyox  m  the  Berlin  Journal,  the  Monatbfcbrift \
ana  more  particularly  the  art  with  which  he  contrived  to
.  eat  number  of  bookfeller. ,  gave  him  a  pow-


HISTORICAL  PART.  ÏQQ

cr  that  no  fovereign  could  ever  pretend  to.  His  ill  urn!-
nized  co-operators,  Biefter,  Gedike,  and  Leuchfenring,
became  more  ardent,  daring  and  impious,  than  ever  in  the
journals  which  they  compiled.  Bode  like  wife  would  have
one  at  Weimar  under  the  title  of  the  Univerjal  Literary
Gazette.    Another  of  the  fame  nature  was  fet  on  foot  at

Saltzbourg,  by  Hubner,  who  was  alfo  an  Illumine? ■

The  offspring  of  Weifhaupt  were  ail  warned  of  the  fire!*
which  they  were  to  lay  on  thefe  publications,  and  they
foon  became  a  molt  terrible  fcourge  on  all  writers  who
would  not  Sacrifice  their  principles  to  impiety.  The  fa-
ble of  the  Jefuits  Mafonry  was  now  improved  by  a  new
fiction  that  fpread  difmay  in  the  mind  of  every  writer  who
y/iOied  to  oppofe  liie  progrefs  of  Illuminilm.

Thofe  very  Jefuits  who  have  juif  hern  feén  reprefent-
ed  as  the  molt  artful  infidels,  and  as  fecretly  preiiding  over
the  Mafonic  lodges,  were  now  become  mofr  zealous  Ca-
tholics, who  had  fecretly  mingled  among  the  Ft  oteftants,
in  order  to  bring  thefe  provinces  back  to  the  Roman  Ca-
tholic religion  and  fubject.  them  to  the  dominion  of  the
Pope.  Every  man  who  dared  defend  any  one  of  thofe
myfteries  that  can  only  be  known  either  to  Catholic  or
Proteftant  through  Revelation,  every  man  who  preached
fubmiffion  to  fovereigns  and  the  laws  of  the  ftate,  was
immediately  ptoclaimed  a  Jcfaity  or  the  fervile  flave  of
Jefuitifm.  One  might  have  thought  that  all  the  proteftant
provinces  were  filled  with  thefe  Jefuits,  fecretly  confpi-
ring  agaiaft  the  proteftant  religion;  and  my  readers  will
eafily  conceive  what  an  impreffion  fuch  a  charge  muff,
have  made  to  the  difadvantage  of  any  writer  in  thofe  pro-
vinces. Neither  the  office  of  miniftcr  nor  of  fuperintend-
ant  of  a  church  could  fcreen  a  peilbn  from  {o  terrible  an
imputation.  Even  that  man  was  not  proof  againft  if,
who  out  of  zeal  for  Luther  and  Calvin,  had  given  full
vent  to  all  his  hatred  and  prejudices  againft  the  Jefuits;
I  mean  Dr.  Stark.  In  his  work  on  The  Ancient  and
Modern  Myiieriss  lie  had  declared,  «  that  fovereigns  had,
«  by  the  deftruclion  of  the  Jefuits,  rendered  an  ever  me-
«  morable  fervice  to  religion,  to  virtue,  and  to  humanity**1
Nevertheleis  M.  Stark,  at  that  time,  as  he  ftill  continues
to  be,  a  preacher  and  doctor  of  the  Lutheran  church,  and
alfo  counfellor  of  a  Confiftory  at  Darmibdt,  was  obliged
to  employ  many  pages  of  his  apology  in  proving  that" he
was  neither  a  Roman  Catholic  nor  a  Jefuit,  and  particu-


20O  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Jarly  that  he  was  not  one  of  the  profeffed  Jefuitsy  whst
having  taken  the  four  voivs,  were  obliged  at  the  command
of  the  Pope  to  go  and  preach  the  catholic  faith  wherever
he  chofe  to  fend  them.*

The  Chevalier  Zimmerman  met  with  a  fimilar  fate,
merely  became  he  had  laid  open  the  plots  of  the  Illumi-
nées, and  dared  to  ridicule  the  adept  Levcller-L,e\ich{eti-
ring,'  who  had  propofed  to  initiate  him  into  the  Brother-
hood that  was  foon  to  reform  and  govern  the  world,  f —
That  celebrated  man,  an  ornament  to  the  Royal  Society
of  London,  is  neverthelefs  reprefented  by  the  journalifts
of  the  Seel:  as  an  ignorant  fellow,  wallowing  in  fuperjli-
tzcn,  and  an  enemy  of  Light.%

The  Profelfor  Hoffman,  notwithftanding  the  high  en-
comiums that  had  been  laviihed  on  him  by  thefe  very
journals,  no  fooner  gave  proofs  of  his  zeal  for  religion
and  focial  order,  than  he  was  reprefented  in  fimilar  co-
lors. Never  had  the  difciples  of  Weifhaupt  fa  well  prac-
ifed  that  law  laid  down  by  their  teacher,  "  Difcredit  by  all
"  means  pofiible  every  man  of  talents  that  you  cannot
"  bring  over  to  your  party."  Nicolai  gave  the  fignaj
in  his  German  Library,  or  in  the  Berlin  Monathfchrift.
The  Brethren  of  Jena,  of  Weimar,  of  Gotha,  of  Bruns-
wick, and  of  Slewick,  immediately  obeyed  the  fignal,  and
repeated  the  fame  calumnies.  "  Shortly  there  were  no
u  means  of  fcreening  onefelf  from  a  fwarm  of  periodical
"  writers,  who  had  leagued  with  the  modern  Lucian  j
"  they  praifea  what  he  had  praifed  ;  they  condemned  what
"  he  had  condemned  ;  the  fame  turn  in  their  phrafes,  even
ec  the  fame  terms  are  to  be  obferved  when  they  praife  or
"  when  they  blame  an  author,  and  particularly  the  fame
"  farcafms  and  groffnefs  of  abufe."§  Scarcely  could  there
be  found  in  all  Germany  above  two  or  three  journals  that
were  not  in  the  hands  of  the  united  brethren,  or  perfons
of  the  fame  caft.

Meantime  the  adept  writers,  together  with  Bahrdt,
Schukz,  Riem,  and  even  P/^Vtf-Knigge,  who  in  abandon-
ing the  Illuminées  had  not  renounced  their  plots,  with
hundreds  of  other  writers  of  the  Sect  inundated  the  pub-

*  See  his  Apology,  Page  52  to  59.

f  Life  of  Zimmerman,  by  TifTot.  i  Ibid.

*"§  The  ultimate  fate  of  Mafonry,  Page  30;  and  News  of  as
viable  Affociation,  Appendix,  No.  ir.


'    HISTORICAL  PART.  201

V\c  with  their  libels  in  verfe  or  profe,  under  the  forms  of
comedies,  romances,  fongs,  and  diflertations.  AH  the. te-
nets of  religion,  Catholic  and  Proteftant,  were  attacked
with  the  molt  bare-faced  impudence.  Now  the  fcenc
began  to  change  ;  it  was  no  longer  to  defend  the  Pro*
teftants  againft  the  attacks  of  the  Catholicsi  but  the  ob-
literation of  every  religious  tenet  became  their  obvious
defign.  The  moll  pompous  eulogiums  were  pronounced
by  the  journalitls  of  the 'Seel:  on  all  thofe  productions  of
the  brethren  that  openly  diffeminated  every  principle  of
Impiety  and  Sedition.*  But  what  muft  appear  a  ftill  more
aftoniihing  contradiction,  though  peifeclly  coinciding
with  the  views  of  the  Sect,  is,  that  thefe  very  men  who
wiihed  fo  deVpotically  to  fway  the  public  opinion,  and
truih  every  writer  that  had  not  imbibed  their  principles,
would  pretend  to  perfuade  Sovereigns  that  their  fole  ob-
ject v/as  to  obtain  that  right  inherent  to  them  from  na-
ture, c  to  publifh  their  opinions  and  fyftems  without  dan-
ger or  conftraint.'  Bahrdt  in  particular  vindicated  this
pretended  right,  in  his  publication  On  the  Liberty  of  the
Prefs.  It  contained  the  fen  ti  men  is  of  a  rank  Atheift,
who  wiftied  to  imbue  his  reader  with  all  the  moll  abomi-
nable principles*of  Anarchy  and  Impiety;  the  author,  ne-
verthelefs,  was  extolled  by  the  hebdomadary  adepts,  and,
notwithstanding  Bahrdt's  vindication  of  the  liberty  of  the
prefs,  they  united  all  their  efforts  to  crufli  every  writer
that  dared  to  auert  an  opinion  contrary  to  theirs,

The  ufe  which  the  brotherhood  made  of  this  liberty
at  length  roufed  the  attention  of  fome  few  fovereigns.— »
Frederic  William,  King  of  Prufiia,  alarmed  at  the  pro?
grefs  which  thtfe  impious  and  feditious  writings  were
making,  thought  it  necefTary  to  put  a  curb  on  them.  He
publifhed  fome  new  regulations,  called  the  Edicts  for  Re-
ligion. This  was  received  by  the  Illuminées  with  an  au-
dacity which  feemed  to  denote  that  they  had  acquired  a
ftrength  fufficient  to  b'd  defiance  to  fovereigns,  and  both
the  Prince  and  the  Edi£fc  became  the  object  of  their  far-
cafms  and  moll  violent  declamations.  At  length  appear-
ed a  work  attributed  to  Bahrdt,  that  was  the  acme  of  in-
folence,  and,  through  denfion,  was  alio  called  the  Ediof  I^difco-
for  Religion.  The  magillrates  ordered  to  take  cogni-  erY'
w    c

*  Ibid.


H.02  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

:e  of  this  ihfult  feized  on  the  perfon  and  papers  of
rdt,  and  all  the  ncceiTary  proois  of  this  coalition  and
of  its  objecl  were  acquired.    It  might  feem  that  the  court
of  Berlin  would  have  done  well  to  have  imitated  the  ex-
■ie  of  that  of  Bavaria  by  making  them  public;  but  the
adapts  had  too  powerful  agents  about  the  miniftry;  and
lejtous  arguments  were  invented  for  condemning  to
.  archives  of  a  new  fpecies  of  confpiracy. —
Ail  that  transpired  was,  that  the  plan  had  been  really  form*
and  that  a  number  of  authors,  bookfellers,  and  peribns
even  who'  could  fcarcely  have  been  fufpeéted,  had  entered
into  the  aflbciation.    It  is  not  known  how  far  Weifhaupt
had  contributed  perfonaljy  to  it;  but  it  appears  that  he
iv  ice  attended  at  the  heao-quarters  of  the  united  brethren  j
that  he  fpent  lèverai  days  with  Bahrdt;  and  that  the  moft
lous  and  active  of  the  united  brethren  were  alfo  difci-
ples  of  Weiibaupt.    if  we  are  to  believe  JBahrdt,  his  fe-
by  two  aftbeiates  well   worthy  of  their
mailer.     Thefe.  were  two  young  libertines,  nearly  beg-
t  who  had  the  talents  and  meanneis  neceflary  to
pme  the  clerks  of  his  impiety.    Notwithftanding  the
■;s  adduced  againft  him,  he  got  off  with  a  flight  im-
prifonment,  and  fpent  the  remainder  of«his  exiftence  in
diftrefs,  but  without  atoning  for  his  vices.    He  was  re-
duced  to  keep  a  coffee-houfe  at  Bafferraorff  near  Halle,
ré  he  ended  his  days  as  miferably  as  he  had  lived.—.
The-  illuminées  have  thought  ht  to  abandon  his  memo-
ry to  that  contempt  which  bis  vicious  life  had  entailed  up-
on hi. j-.  ;  but  though  they  Mïected  to  blufh  at  his  name,
they  nevertheless  continued  to  profecute  his  plans,
its  contin-      Indeed,  at  the  time  of  the  difcovery  of  this  monftrous
uation  and  con/piracy,  it  had  gained  too  much  ground  to  be  crulhed
"ffl-  C"        by  the  fall  of  its  hilt  contriver  ;  and  Pi  uffia,  and  all  Ger-
wS*         many,  foon  became  infected  with  thofe  literary  focieties.
Nch  were  nothing  mere  than  a  modification  of  Wei-
fhaupt's  Minerval  fchoois.     Nor  was  there  in  a  fhort
time  a  town  or  a  large  village  more  free  from  this  fpecies
of  literary   focieties  that  from  the  llluminized  Lodges  j
and  they  were  all  under  the  direction  of  the  followers  of
the  modern  Spartacus.

ij.'.hrdt's  great  object  was,  to  place  the  aflbciates  and
other  readers  under  a  fort  of  impofftbility  of  procuring
any  other  writings,  or  of  applying  to  any  other  ftudies,
than  thofe  of  the  Seûj  and  the  precaution  it  had  taken


HISTORICAL  PART.  2C>3

to  initiaterfo  many  bookfellers  proved  a  powerful  (up-
port.    The  conspiracy  might  have  affumed  a  new  form;
but  it  ftill  continued  active,  and  its  effects  became  more
perceptible  after  its  difcovery.    It  was  then  that  the  co-
alition appeared  between  the  bookfellers  and  the  jour-
nalifts  of  the  Sect  to  fupprefs  all  books  that  counter-
acted the  progrefs  of  Sedition  and  Impiety.     It  was  in
vain  for  virtuous  and  pious  men  to  attempt  to  open  the
eyes  of  the  people  ;  they  could  fcarcely  find  a  hookfelk  r
or  a  printer  who  would  fell  or  print  their  works;  or   if
any  had  confented  they  would  endeavor  to  difguft  the  au-
thor by  delays,  and  a  hundred  other  pretexts.     Did  the
author  undertake  to  print  it  at  his  own  expenfe,  the  work
was  then  thrown  by  in  fome  obfeure  corner  of  the  fhop
and  never  expofed  to  fale,  nor  would  any  bookfcller  at*
tempt  to  fell  it  ;  and  the  whole  work  would  be  fent  back
to  the  author  under  pretence  that  nobody  would  buy  it.
The  very  exiirence  of  fuch  works  was  not  mentioned  at
the  fairs  held  in  Germany  for  the  fale  of  books.   At  other
times  the  author  was  ftrangely  betrayed^  the-  printer  giv-
ing up  his  manufcript  to  the  writers  of  the  beet,  and
refutation  (if  the  moil  fcurrilous  abu-fe  can  defefye
name)  was  advertifed  on  the  back  of  r.  1  as

the  firit edition  made  its  appearance.  Many  authors  n.ighr,
have  brought  actions  againft.  their  printers  oi'  a  fimifar
nature  to  that  which  Doctor  Stark  was  obliged  to  brings
and  demonitrate  a  iimilar  connivance  with  the  Seel  and
breach  of  truft.  "  At  leaft  it  is  an  undeniable  fade,
"  many  learned  writers  made  fruitlefs  applications  to
11  different  bookfellers  for  publications  that  had  been
"  fupprefled  foleiy  becaufe  they  gave  umbrage  to  the
"  Illuminées.  Their  letters  were  never  fo  much  as  an-
"fweredj  and  the  very  bookfellers  who  refufed  to  fend
"  thele  books  to  thofe  who  applied  for  them,  affec*bed  to
w  defer  the  fale  till  the  next  fairs,  as  no  buyers  were  to  be
;  found."  Many  others  of  thefe  works  had  fcarcely  b
delivered  to  the  book  fellers  when  they  were  tent  back  un-
der the  moft  opprobrious  pretences;  ând  w  i'ur-
priîe  the  reader  i%  that  no  perfons    •

ing  fuch  reluials   as  thole  who  moil  op*
Princes.    In  the  very  fiâtes  of  the  K

is  r>und   impoflible  to  get  this  foyereign's
and  his  EdiSi  for  Religion  fold  in  the  common  way.-  -
Scarcely  had  the  author  lent  a  few  copies  to  the  b'ooji
Jcrs  when  thev  were  all  returned  to  him.    But  did  the


204  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Writers  of  the  Se£r.  wifh  to  publiih  the  mcft  fcandalous
deputations  and  the  moft  fcurrilous  abufe  agairjft  fove-
reigns  and  religion,  or  againft  men  in  oflice  or  of  high
re  fpect  ability,  the  book  idlers  were  alert  in  felling  them,
the  journalilts  extolled  their  excellence,  and  fought  nu-
merous readers  for  thte  author.*

On  one  hand,  the  great  trada  in  thefe  productions  car-
ried on  by  the  Sect,  with  the  certainty  of  felling  them  to
the  literary  clubs;  and  on  the  other  the  great  pecuniary
contributions  made  by  the  rich  brethren,  formed  large
funds  for  the  coalition.  To  thefe  if  we  add  the  fums  con-
tributed by  the  brethren  whom  the  Se£t  had  Rationed  at
different  courts,  in  the  church  and  the  councils,  either  out
of  their  own  emoluments,  or  the  revenues  of  the  church
and  fhte,  the  reader  will  eaiily  conceive  how  well  thefe
funds  fufficed  for  indemnifying  thoie  bookfell-rs  who  had
fuffered  loffes  by  reftraining  their  commerce  to  works  ap-
proved of  by  the  Aréopage.  A  particular  fund  was  efta-
blifiied  for  this  purpofe.  At  the  appointed  time  the  boolc-
felier  had  but  to  produce  the  lift  of  the  works  he  had  fup-
prcired  or  reiufed  to  fell  with  the  proper  proofs,  and  he  u-
ceived  afum  of  money  fufticientto  indemnify  him  for  fuch
loflès.  The  memorials  which  Ï  have  received  from  Ger-
many, as  well  as  feveral  letters,  inform  me  that  this  fund
dill  exifts  in  that  country  ;  and  the  French  Revolution
has  only  furnifhed  it  with  many  others  means  of  enrich-
ing itfelf.

Among  the  preat  advantages  reaped  by  the  Seel  from
this  plan  which  had  been  io  well  concerted,  we  may  firft
obferve  the  impoffibility  under  which  authors  lay  of  warn-
ing the  public  againft  the  artifices  of  lllumimfm.  In  the
next  place  it  drew  over  to  their  intereft  that  fwarm  of
writers  who,  more  hungry  than  honeft,  are  regardlefs  of
truth  or  falfehood,  provided  they  obtain  a  good  price.  In
:hort,  it  emboldened  that  multitude  of  Sophifters,  more
numerous  ilill  in  Germany  than  they  were  in  France  ;  Po-
tts, Hiftonans,and  Dramatifts,  nearly  all  of  whom  court-
ed the  united  brotherhood  by  afluming  the  tone  of  impie-
ty and  anarchy.  The  moft  dangerous  device  prattilcJ  i-y
the  adepts  <  rainft  iociety  was  the  gieat  care  with  which

*  See  Nrichrichten  von  einenVgrcffen  aher  unfichtbaren  Bun-
de,  the  appendix,  Nos  8  and  13,  amd  the  Journal  of  VieDna,
by  Hoffmaa.


HISTORICAL  PART.  £(0

thev  initiated  the'different  profefibrs  of  theProteftantuni-
venicies,  the  fchool-mafters,  and  the  tutors  of  princes.-—
It  is  a  painful  truth,  but  we  muff  declare  it,  and  on  the
authority  of  thofe  who  are  belt  acotuainted  with  thehifto-
ry  and  progrefs  of  llluminifm,  that  the  greater  part  of  the
uni  verities  of  the  north  of  Germany  were  at  th  it  time,
and  ftill  continue  to  be,  the  haunts  of  llluminifm,  whence
its  baneful  poifens  are  circulated  throughout  the  neigh-
boring ftates  by  the  writings  and  lectures  of  fuch  men
as  the  Profeflbrs  Frederic  Cramer,  Ehlers,  and
Kgppe.*

.  Let  not  the  reader  think  that  the  writers  ofthe  Catho-
lic ftates  were  exempt  from  the  infection.  Vienna  was
«iverrun  with  zealots  who  fought  to  diffufe  the  principles
of  the  Sect.  The  Chevalier  de  Born,  who  fhould  have
contented  hitnfdf  with  the  high  rank  which  beheld  in
chymiftry,  degraded  himfelf  in  that  town  by  becoming  a
leader  ofthe  adepts  ;  and  when  the  Seel  was  difcovered  in
Bavaria  he  was  Co  zealous  in  the  caufe,  that  he  fent  back
his  letters  of  Ailbciate  of  the  Academy  of  Munich,  pro-
tefting  that  he  would  have  no  intercourfe  with  men  who
had  been  Co  little  able  to  judge  of  Weifhaupt's  merits.

Next  on  the  Vienna  lift  v/e  find  the  Sieur  Sonnen-
FELD,  one  of  thofe  writers  who  in  this  age  are  called  wits,
though  deflitute  of  common  fenfe.  He  alfo  was  one  of
the  propagators  of  llluminifm  under  the  mafk  of  literary
ibaeties.  I  am  informed  by  perfons  who  attended  his
clubs,  and  whom  he  wifhed  to  initiate,  that  thefe  meet-
ings began  and  were  held  as  common  academies  hold
theirs:  but  at  the  time  appointed  the  fittings  broke  up,
when,  only  the  adepts  remaining  behind,  a  fecret  council
was  held,  in  which  every  thing  was  concerted  and  plan-
ned according  to  the  laws  ofthe  united  brethren.

A  man  whole  name  would  have  given  great  weight  to
the  united  brethren,  had  he  hearkened  to  che  praifes  la-
vished on  him  by  the  Illuminées  at  that  time,f  is  the

*  See  Hoffman's  Admonition,  Seel.  XVI,  XVIÏ,  and  XVIi  F.

-f  It  is  really  laughable  to  compare  the  contempt  which  the
Illuminées affu-cl:  for  Mr.  Hoffman  at  prêtent,  with  the  high  en-
comiums which  they  pronounced  on  him  before  he  undertook
to  lay  open  their  impoAure,  or  even  with  thofeJetters  (full  of
compliment  on  his  wit,  ftyle,  and  talents)  whicr»  they  wrote  to
him  Co  lately  as  the  year  17901  in  hopes  of  ectiaktg  him  into
their  party.


206  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

Profeflbr  Hoffman,  he  who  fo  nobly  joined  with  Zim-
merman to  tear  the  mafk  from  thefe  impoftors,  and  has
ever  fince,  with  his  worthy  co-adjutor,  been  the  object  of
their  moft  virulent  declamations.  In  the  account  given
by  Mr.  Hoffman  himfelf,  we  find  that  the  Illuminizing
recruiters  followed  him  as  far  as  Pc  ft  in  Hungary.  On
the  26th  of  June,  1788,  he  received  from  the  twenty-two
f$  an  invitation  to  become  a  fellow  of  the  literary
fociety  which  they  had  already  cftabliftied  in  that  town.
*'  My  anfwer  (fays  he)  was,  that  I  hoped  they  would  give
"  me  fome  further  information  refpecting  thefe  focieties,
u  and  then  my  duty  and  my  prudence  would  diclate  the
4i  anfwer  that  I  fhould  make.  .  .  .  On  divers  occafions
"  afterward,  they  gave  me  diflant  hints  as  to  the  fpirit  of
ir  fyftem»  They  alfo  tent  me  feveral  times  a  lift  0/
"  the  new  members  ;  and  the  fignature  of  the  twenty-two
"  an  d  thefe  various  documents;  but  it  was  this

<c  very  authentication  which  made  me  conceive  the  horrid
t;  plot  that  was  concealed  under  this  affociation."

The  reader  will  eafily  conceive,  that  for  a  man  of  his
merit  and  probity,  this  was  more  than  efficient  to  make
him  reject  the  offers  of  fuch  a  brotherhood.  They  had
already  inferibed  his  name  on  their  regifters,  and  they
Uged  to  crafe  it.  As  a  proof  that  he  had  judged
dy  of  them,  he  quotes  the  letter  of  a  virtuous  and
dearfighted  ftatefrrteh,  who,  after  having  officially  examin-
ed  the  whole  plan  of  the  German  Union  and  i  •  myfte*
lies,  pronounces  them  to  be  abominations  that  wonldmake
me's  hair  jland  on  cr.d!  Such  are  his  expreillons  !

Theie  abominations,  however,  were  far  from  making

a  flmilar  impreffion  on  mëothër  apoftles  of  the  Germanic

Union.    Meanwhile  Weiihaupt,  a  tranquil  Spectator  of

the  prpgrefs  of  his  JUuminifm,  feemed  to  take  no  part  in

it.  The  moft  active  adepts  lived  round  about  him  at  Go-

t  a,  at  Wejmar,at  Jena,and  at  Berlin;  but  one  might  have

thought  him  quite  indifferent  as  to  their  fuccefs.     If  we

:pt  the  vilits  he  received  from  the  brethren,  a  few

joun  e  took,  and  particularly  thofe  which  he  had

under  of  the  Germanic  Union,' nothing

1er  or  chief  who  con-

■         Seel;.    But  let  the  reader

never  lofe  fight  of  on  the  art  of  appearing

perl  idft  of  the  gi  thirn

s  which  he  iflued  fix  months  after


HISTORICAL  PART.  207

his  flight  from  Munich  :   Let  our  enemies  rejoice.    Their
joy  fljall  foon  be  changed  into  forrow.     Don't  think  that
even  in  my  baniflvncnt  I  jhall  remain  idle*'    After  this,  it
is  eafy  to  judge  of  his  fuppofed  nullity  in  the  progrefs  of
his  confpiracy.    However  fecret  he  may  have  been  in  the
part  he  was  acting,  he  could  obferve  but  too  well  the  ap-
proaching accomplishment  of  the  prediction  he  had  made
lb  early  as  the  fécond  year  of  his  IUuminifm,  when  he
wrote  to  his  firft  adepts,  "  The  great  obftacies  are  over-
tc  come  ;  you  will  now  fee  us  proceed  with  gigantic  if  rides.'*
The  Seel  had  not  been  in  exigence  twelve  years  when
Germany  was  overrun  with  an  immenfe  number  of  adepts
and  derni-adepts.    It  was  afiuming  a  menacing  2 fpeéfc  in
Holland,  in  Hungary,  and  in  Italy.     One  of  the  adepts
called  Zimmerman,  who  began  by  being  the  chief  of  a
Lodge  at  Manheim,  and  who  foon  became  as  zealous  for
the  propagation  of  the  Seél:,  as  the  Famous  Zimmerman
had  been  to  counteract  their  dark  defigns,  would  often
brag  that  he  had  founded  more  than  a  hundred  of  thofe
confpiring  clubs  known  under  the  name  of  literary  focie-
ties,  or  of  Mafonic  Lodges,  during  his  career  thro'  Italy,
Hungary,  and  Switzerland.    To  give  the  fatal  impulfe  to
the  world,  it  now  only  remained  for  the  Seel  to  carry  its
myfterics  into  a  nation  powerful  and  active  indeed,  but
unfortunately  more  fuiceptible  of  that  effervefcence  which
bereaves  man  of  the  power  of  thinking,  than  of  that  judg-
ment which  forefees  difailers  ;  to  a  nation  which  in  its
ardor  and  cnthufiafm,  too  eafily  forgets  that  true  great-
nefs  is  not  that  courage  which  bids  defiance  to  danger  (Tor
the  vandals  and  barbarians  can  boatf.  of  iiich  heroes  ;■)  to
a  nation,  in  ihort,  that  has  ever  been  a  prey  to  illufions,-
and  which,  before  it  would  hearken  to  the  councils  of  wis-
dom, might  in  its  firft  fury  overturn  the  altar  and  (hiver
the  fcepter,  returning  to  reafon  only  in  time  to  weep  over
the  ruins,  and  lament  the  devaluation  of  which  it  had  been
the  caufe.

This  defcription  unfortunately  was  too  applicable  to
France,  which  in  many  refpects  might  claim  the  primacy
among  nations,  but  was  too  eafily  led  away  by  illufions.
The  icrutinizing  Aréopage  had  fixed  its  eyes  on  her,  and
now  judged  it  a  convenient  time  tor  lending  its  emilTa-r
fies  to  the  banks  of  the  Seine.    This  will  be  the  proper

*  Letter  to  Filher,  «jih  Auguffc,  17S5.


IQ$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

.  commencement  of  the  fourth  Epoch  of  Illuminifm.— «
Now  let  the  reader  prepare  to  contemplate  dates  convuJ-»
fed,  citizens  butchered,  in  a  word,  to  ponder  over  all  the
crimes  and  difaiters  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  Rev©*

luebns.


HISTORICAL  PART.  20Q.


CHAP.    XL


Fourth  Epoch  of  Illuminifm.

The  Deputation  from  Wcijhaupt' 's  Illuminées  to  the  Free
Mafans  of  Par is : — State  of  French  Mafonry  at  that
period. — Labors  and  Succeff'es  of  the  Deputies. — Co-
alition of  the  Confpiring  Sophi/lers,  Mafons,  and  Illu-
minées^ generating  the  facobins.


A


S  early  as  the  year  1782,  Philo  and  Spartacus  had  Pr°Je^3
formed  the  plan  of  converting  the  French  nation


to  their  Syftem  of  Illuminifm  ;  but  the  vivacity  and  ca-
pricious temper  of  the  people,  fo  difficult  to  be  reftrained,
made  it  feem  prudent  for  the  two  Chiefs  at  that  time  not
to  extend  their  attempts  beyond  Strafbourg.  The  ex-
plofion  in  France  might  be  premature;  its  too  volatile
and  impetuous  people  might  be  unwilling  to  wait  till  other
nations  were  properly  prepared  for  the  grand  objecr  ;  and
Weifnaupt,  in  particular,  was  nut  a  man  to  be  fatisfied
with  partial  or  local  infurrecfions,  which  might  only  ferve
to  put  other  Sovereigns  on  their  guard.  The  Reader  has
already  feen  him  in  fecret,  preparing  his  Adepts,  and  con-
triving the  concatenation  of  his  correfponder.ee,  in  fuch  a
manner,  that  he  had  but  to  give  the  lignai  when  the  fa-
vorable moment  fhould  come.  On  the  fatal  day  of  revo-
lution, and  at  the  appointed  hour,  legions  of  brethren
were  to  fpring  forth  on  all  fides  from  their  fecret  receffes,
whether  Lodges,  Academies,  or  under  what  other  denomi-
nation foever,  from  the  North  to  the  South,  and  from  the
Eaft  to  the  Weff.  All  Europe  in  ihort  was  to  be  revo-
lutionized at  the  fame  inifant  ;  all  nations  were  to  be  hur-
ried into  a  14th  of  July  j  and  all  kings  were,  like  Lewis
the  Sixteenth,  to  awake  prifoners  in  the  hands  of  their
own  fubje£ts.  Altars  and  thrones  were  fimultancouily
to  vanifn  from  the  earth.  According  to  this  plan,  as  has
juft  been  obferved,  the  French  were  to  be  the  laft  peopie
initiated  in  the  myfteries,  as  the  Chiefs  took  it  for  grant-r
edj  that  with  their  natural  impatience  they  would  never

Dd


219  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

be  brought  to  wait  till  the  explofion  could  be  univerfalïy
prepare.!.
haftened         Already,  however,  there  exifted  fome  adepts  in  the  very
by  Mn a-    heart  of  the  kingdom.     Some  few  had  been  initiated  bv
beau*  Knigge  at  the  time  of  the  meeting  at  Willemfbaden.—

During  that  very  year,  we  find  on  the  lift  of  brethren,
Dietrich,  that  Mayor  of  Strasbourg  who  has  fince  in
Alface  rivalled  Robefpierre  by  his  cruelties.*    Another
adept  of  vaft  importance  to  the  Se£t  was  the  Marquis  DE
Mirabeau,  who  was  afterwards  to  become  fo  famous  in
the  revolutionary  annals  of  his  country.     What  ftrange
infatuation  poflciled  the  miriifters  of  the  moft  honeft  man
that  ever  fwayed  a  fceptre,  to  entruft  this  Marquis  with
the  interefts  of  their  mafler  at  the  court  of  Berlin,  well
knowing  (as  they  did)  the  monftrous  immorality  of  his
private  life,  is  more  than  I  (hall  attempt  to  explain.    One
might  be  led  to  think  that  it  was  not  deemed  fufficient
that  Lewis   XVI.  had  faved  him  from  the  fcaffold,  but
his  villany  was  to  be  recompenfed  by  a  fecret  mifïion
which   feerned   to  denote  the  utmoft  confidence  of  his
fovereign.     Mirabeau  at  Berlin  conducted  the  King's
affairs  juft  as  he  had  formerly  done  thofe  of  his  father  and
mother,  fully  ready  to  facrifice  all  parties  and  to  fell  him-
to  the  higheft  bidder.     With  fuch  a  difpofition,  he
could  not  long  avoid  the  notice  of  the  Pruffian  Illuminées;
and  Nicolai  Biefler,  Gedike,  and  Leuchfenring  foon  be-
came his  confiant  companions.     At  Brunfwick  he  met
with  Mauvillon,  the  worthy  difciple  of  Knigge,  and
at  that  time  a  Profeilbr  in  the  Caroline  College.    This
was  the  man  who  initiated  the  profligate  Marquis  in  the
L;t  rnyfteries  of  Illuminifm.  f

Long  before  his  initiation  Mirabeau  had  been  acquaint-
ed with  all  the  revolutionary  powers  of  the  Mafonic  Lodg-
es ;  nor  did  he,  when  initiated,  undervalue  thofe  which
flawed  or  might  flow  from  Weifhaupt's  inventive  geni-
us. On  his  return  to  France  he  began  to  introduce  the
new  rnyfteries  among  fome  of  his  Mafonic  brethren. — .
His  firft  aflbciate  was  the  Abbe  Talleyrand  de  Pe-
RIGORD,  who  had  already  begun  to  act  the  part  of  Judas

'  Welt  un  menfehen  Kentnifs,  P.  130.

f  See  the  Diiconrfe  of  a  Mafler  of  a  Lodge  or.  the  ultimate
fate  <  t  Mafoory;  Appendix  to  this  Difcourfe — Important  Ad-
monition by  Hoffman,  .Vol.  II.  Sett.  VII.  Sec.  &c.


HISTORICAL  PART.  511

in  the  firfr.  order  of  the  church.  But  to  have  only  intro-
duced the  myfteries  was  not  fufficient  for  the  Marquis  ;
he  would  have  teachers  come  from  Germany,  who  were
better  verfed  than  he  was  in  the  illuminizing  arts.  Well
acquainted  with  the  reafons  that  had  induced  the  chiefs
of  the  Order  to  defer  the  converfion  of  France,  he  found
means  to  convince  them,  that  the  time  was  now  come
for  the  accomplishment  of  their  views  ;  that  the  whole
nation  only  waited  for  their  new  revolutionary  means,  to
burft  into  an  open  rebellion,  for  which  they  had  been  fo
long  prepared  by  other  confpirators  ;  and  that  the  Illu-
minées might  molt  certainly  turn  the  fcales.  A  private
correspondence  then  took  place  between  him  and  Mau-
villonj*  but  of  this  a  fufficiency  has  not  tranfpired  to
enable  the  hiftorian  to  defcribe  the  intrigues  that  took
place  on  the  occafionj  certain  it  is,  however,  that  Mira-
beau's  plan  was  adopted  by  the  Aréopage;  and  by  a  plu-
rality of  votes  it  was  decided,  that  France  fhould  be  im-
mediately illuminized.  This  was  an  undertaking  of  too
great  importance  to  be  entrufted  to  a  common  adept —
The  man  who,  fince  the  retreat  of  S 'part a eus,  had  been  Députa -
looked  upon  as  the  Chief  of  the  Order,  offered  himfelf  j  *™ n  (.;  tne
and  rfmeiius-BoDE,  the  worthy  fucceffor  of  both  Knigge  r  °  *q  '.*
and  Weifhaupt,  was  deputed  to  the  French  Lodges,  in  many.
which  the  illuminization  was  to  commence.  Bode  re-
ceived as  an  auociate  in  this  million  Bayard  that  other
pupil  of  Knigge's  whofe  real  name  was  William  Ba-
con de^Busche,  a  Captain  in  the  Dutch  fervice,  heir

*  It  is  to  this  fame  Mauvillon  that  the  German  writers  at-
tribute the  greater  part  of  thofe  two  works  published  by  Mira-
beau, under  the  titles  of  The  PruJJiav  Monarchy,  and  An  Es-
fay  o?i  the  Illuminées.  Hence  the  high  encomiums  paffed  on
Wtiihaupt  in  the  former,  (Vol.  V.  Book  VII.)  and  ail  the  cun-
ning artifice  that  is  obfervable  in  the  latter,  which  was  written
with  no  other  view  than  to  miflead  the  public,  by  profeffing  to
betray  the  fecrets  of  the  Sect,  without,  in  truth,  laying  a  fingle
word  that  could  expofe  its  views;  and  bv  leading  aftray  the
reader's  attention  to  far  diiferent  objects.  This  device  made  the
French  believe  that  they  were  thoroughly  acquainted  with  ll-
luminifm,  though  they  were  fo  perieclly  ignorant  on  the  fob-
jec~l  as  to  have  confounded  Weifhaupt's  Illuminées  with  the
Swedenborgians.  The  artifice  a|fo  ferved  aa  a  cloak  under
which  Mirabeau  introduced  Ukrainien  into  France, at  the  lime
when  he  pretended  to  write  againftit.  The  verv  appellation  of
Pbilalete  which  he  gave  to  his  adepts  was  a  trick,  as  it  denot-
ed the  Theofophical  Illuminées,  quite  another  lptcies.


212  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

to  a  large  fortune,  a  man  of  talents,  and  well  verfed  in  all
that  artifice  and  low  cunning  which  the  Infinuators  were
wont  to  flyle  prudence  and  wifdom.  This  Baron  had
been  formerly  employed  to  propagate  the  plots  of  the  Sect
in  thofe  very  provinces  which  had  a  right  to  expect  from
him  even  the  facrifice  of  his  life  in  defence  of  its  laws.*
The  zeal  with  which  he  had  fulfilled  his  firft  miffion
feemed  to  give  him  an  indifputahle  title  to  the  honor  of
attending  on  the  Chief  of  the  Order  in  his  journey  to
Paris.
State  of  Circumftances  could  not  have  been  more  favorable

MafoniV  than  they  were  at  that  time  for  the  deputies,  nor  more
in  France  difaitrous  for  France.  The  Philoibphifm  of  the  age  had
at  t..at  pe-  0perateci  on  the  Lodges  as  fully  as  could  be  expected,  to
prepare  the  reign  of  that  Equality  and  Liberty  taught  by
Voltaire  and  RofTeau,  and  which  only  needed  the  laft
myiterits  o!  Wcifiiaupt  to  convert  them  into  the  mort
abominable  impiety  and  moft  abfolute  anarchy.  A  line
had  been  drawn  between  the  degrees  of  ancient  and  of
modern  Mafonry.  The  former  with  the  puerile  paflimes»
and  obfcure  fymbols,  were  left  to  the  commonalty  of  the
Brethren.  The  latter,  ftyled  philofopkical,  comprehend-
ed thofe  which  I  have  defcribed  under  the  titles  of  Knights
of  the  Suriy  the  higher  Ro/icrucians^znd  the  Knights  Ka-
dofch.  At  the  head  of  ail  thefe  locieties  (whether  ancient
or  modern)  were  three  Lodges  at  Paris,  particularly  re-
markable for  the  authority  which  they  exercifed  over  the
reft  of  the  Order,  and  for  the  influence  that  they  poflefled
over  the  opinions  of  the  Brethren.
The  The  firft  of  thefe,  The  Grand  Orient,  was  rather  a

Grand  re-union  of  all  the  regular  Lodges  of  the  kingdom  (re-
®rKpFST  presented  by  their  deputies)  than  a  Lodge.  It  might  be
0  ar'3*  called  a  fort  of  Mafonic  Parliament  fubJivided  into  four
Committees,  which,  when  united,  formed  the  Grand
Council  or  Lodge,  where  all  the  affairs  of  the  Order  were
definitively  determined.  The  Committees  were  fub-di-
vided  into  that  of  Adminiji 'ration  of  Paris,  of  the  Pro*
winces,  and  of  the  Degrees.  Of  all  thefe,  the  latter  was
the  mainfpring  and  the  moft  impenetrable;  for  no  vifitors
were  admitted  to  it,  as  they  were  to  the  three  others,  to
the  ordinary  meetings  of  which  all  Matters  or  Vénérables
of  Lodges  had  free  accefs.

*  Original  Writings,  and  Philo's  Berichte,  6.


HISTORICAL  PART.

Three  great  Officers  of  the  order  were  attached  to  this
Mafonic  Parliament;  to  wit,  the  Grand  Majier,  the
General  Adminxjirator^  and  the  &reat  Cfrnfervator*  His
molt  Serene  Highnefs  Brother-Philip  of  Orleans,  firft
Prince  of  the  blood,  was  Grand  Matter  at  the  time  when
the  Illuminées  arrived  in  Paris.  The  two  other  offices
were  filled  by  perfons  of  the  firft  distinction;  but  their
characters  are  fucb,  that  they  will  ever  stand  incontesta-
ble proofs  of  what  I  have  already  afierted,  that  even  in  the
very  highest  degrees  of  the  Order,  there  were  modified
mysteries  for  thofe  who,  by  their  ranlc,  were  to  ferve  as  a
protection  for  its  plots  without  eyen  furmifing  their  ten-
dency.*

Such,  however,  was  not  the  cafe  with  Philip  of  Or-
leans. His  rank  of  Grand  Matter,  his  impiety,  and  in-
fatiable  thirst  for  vengeance,  fufficiently  demonstrated  to
the  Illuminizing  Miffionaries  how  well  he  was  qualified
and  how  far  prepared  to  fécond  their  defigns  in  the  mul-
titude of  Lodges  that  recognized  him  as  Grand  Mailer»
So  early  as  the  year  1787  we  find  that  France  contained
(as  may  be  feen  in  the  statement  of  its  correfpondenc)
two  hundred  and  eighty-two  towns,  in  which  were  to  be
found  regular  Lodges  under  the  direction  of  the  Grand
Matter.  In  Paris  alone  there  existed  eighty-one  j  fixteeu
at  Lyons,  feven  at  Bourdeaux,  five  at  Nantes,  fix  at  Mar»,
feilles,  ten  at  Montpellier,  ten  at  Touloufe;  in  fnort,  in
almoft  every  town  the  Lodges  were  in  pretty  juft  ratio  to
the  population.  Indeed  it  would  feem  tnat  even  this  vail
empire  over  French  Mafonry  was  not  sufficient  for  the
Grand  Orient,  as  by  the  fame  statement  we  find  the
Grand  Master  issuing  out  his  instructions  to  the  Lodges
ofChambery  in  Savoy,  of  Locle  in  Switzerland,  of  Brux-
elles in  Brabant,  of  Cologne,  Liege  and  Spa  in  West-
phalia, of  Leopold  and  Warsaw  in  Poland,  of  Mofcow
in  Ruffia,  of  Portfmouth  in  Virginia,  of  Fort  Royal  in
Grenada,  and  in  fhort  to  Lodges  in  all  the  French  Colo-
nies. Thus  did  Philip  of  Orleans  and  his  Grand  Orient
enfure  to  the  Illuminées  as  powerful  an  alliance  as  that
formerly  made  by  Knigge  with  the  German  Lodges  un-
der the  direction  of  Weiihauptf

*  Seethe  Alphabetical  Statement  of  the  Oorrefpondence  of
the  Lodges  of  the  G.  O.  of  France.

f  Ibid.  Art.  Fo  eign  States,


214  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

The  Subject  to  the  Grand  Orient  we  next  find  at  Paris  a

Lodge  of  Lodge  called  Les  Amis  Réunis  (or  United  Friends),
the  Amis  which  was  more  particularly  charged  with  all  Foreign
Coi refpondence.  ThefamousRevolutioniftSAVALETTE
de  Lange,  was  one  of  its  leading  members.  This  adept
].  !d  under  government  the  office  of  Garàe  du  Trefor
Royal;  that  is  to  fay,  he  enjoyed  that  confidence  to  which
none  but  the  moft  faithful  fubjecl:  could  be  entitled  ;  yet
at  that  very  time  was  he  engaged  in  the  various  plots  and
myfteries  of  all  the  different  Se&s.  In  order  to  form  an
union  of  them  all,  he  had  introduced  into  his  Lodge  the
different  fyftems  of  the  Sophifters,  of  the  Martinifts  and
of  the  other  Mafons  ;  and,  the  more  to  impofe  on  the
Public,  he  alfo  introduced  ail  the  luxuries  and  amufements
of  the  Great.  Concerts  and  balls  made  Brethren  of  high
rank  flock  to  his  Lodge,  and  they  came  with  the  moft
brilliant  equipages.  Soldiers  flood  fentry  in  the  avenues,
that  the  multitude  of  carriages  might  not  occafion  difor-
der;  indeed  a  Hanger  might  have  thought  that  it  was  un-
der the  aufpices  of  the  King  himfelf  that  thefe  balls  were
given.  The  Lodge  was  refplendent,  as  the  more  wealthy
Mafons  contributed  to  the  expenfes  of  the  Orcheftra,
lights,  refrefhments ,  and,  in  fhort,  of  all  thofe  diverfions
which  appeared  to  be  the  fole  object  of  their  union.  But
while  the  Brethren  were  dancing  with  their  female  adepts,
or  were  chaunting  in  the  common  Lodge-room  the  fweets
of  Equalitv  and  Liberty,  they  little  fuipedted  that  a  Se-
cret Committee  held  its  fittings  over  their  heads,  and  were
employed  in  preparing  the  means  for  diffufing  that  Equal-
ity and  Liberty  over  all  ranks  and  conditions,  from  the
palace  to  the  cot.

It  was  actually  over  the  common  Lodge-room  that  the
Committee  held  its  fittings  under  the  title  of  the  Secret  Com-
?nittee  of  United  Friends,  whofe  grand  adepts  were  two  men
equally  famous  in  the  myfteries  at  Lyons  and  at  Paris.-—
Thefe  were  Willermoz and  CHAPPEdelaHENRiERE.
During  the  whole  time  of  the  feftivity  two  tylers,  with
drawn  fvvords,  flood,  one  at  the  bottom  of  the  flair-cafe,
the  other  near  the  upper  door,  to  defend  the  entrance  of
the  new  Sanctuary,  where  were  kept  the  archives  of  the
Secret  Correfpondencs.  Even  the  man  to  whom  all  the
packets  from  the  Brethren  of  Germany  or  Italy  were  di-
rected, was  not  permitted  to  pals  beyond  the  threfnold  of
the  door.    He  was  unacquainted  with  the  cypher  ot  the


HISTORICAL  PART.  31$

Correfpondence  ;  his  duty  was  merely  to  carry  the  pack-
ets to  the  door  of  the  Committee  \*  Savalette  de  Lange
came  to  receive  them,  and  the  fecret  never  tranfpired  be-
yond the  walls  of  the  Committee,  The  Reader  may  ea-
iily  conceive  the  nature  of  this  Correfpondence,  and  of
the  Councils  held  in  coniequence  of  it,  when  he  is  inform-
ed, that  to  gain  admittance  into  this  Secret  Committee,
it  was  not  fufficient  to  have  been  initiated  in  all  the  de-
grees of  ancient  Mafonry,  but  it  was  necelTary  to  be  a
Majler  of  all  the  Philofopbical  Degrees  ;  that  is  to  fay,
to  have  (worn  hatred  to  Chrijlianity  with  the  Knights  of
the  Sun,  and  hatred  to  every  worjhipy  and  to  all  Kings
with  the  Knights  Kadofch.

There  exifted  other  lurking  haunts  of  rebellion*  lefs  The     #
known,  but  ftill  more  formidable;  fuch  as  that  in  the  Rue  ,°  ?f  '   ,
de  la  Sourdierey  where  the  Brethren  of  Avignon,  pupils  }a  souk-"
of  Swedenborg  and  St.   Martin,  came  to  mingle  their  diere.
myfteries  with  thofe  of  the  Roficrucians  and  other  Ma-
fons  both  ancient  and  fophifticated.    In  public,  under  the
difguife  of  quacks  and  vifionary  ghoft-raifers,  thefe  new
adepts  fpoke  of  nothing  but  their  powers  of  evoking  fpi-
rits,  railing  and  interrogating  the  dead,  and  a  hundred
other  phenomena  of  a  fimilar  nature.    But  in  the  dark  re-
cedes of  their  Lodges,  thefe  new  law-givers  were  fofter-
ing  plots  nearly  of  the  fame  tendency  as  thofe  of  Weifhaupt,
but  more  atrocious  in  their  conftru£tion.    I  have  alrea-
dy expofed  their  diforganizing  myfteries  in  treating  of
Swedenborg  and  St.  Martin.    I  fcarcely  dared  to  credit
the  horrid  trials  and  abominable  oaths  faid  by  feveral  wri-
ters to  be  exacted  from  the  adepts.    I  could  wifh  to  have
fpoken  of  them  on  the  authority  only  of  the  adepts  thern-

*  I  was  informed  by  one  of  the  Brethren  who  for  a  long  time
was  the  carrier  of  thefe  difpatcher,  that,  after  fome  time,  wifh-
ing  to  become  a  Member  of  the  Committee,  he  was  induced  to
get  himfelf  initiated  in  thefe  degrees;  but  that  he  forbore  do-
ing it,  becaufe  an  engagement  for  life  nvas  required,  and alfn  an
annual  contribution  ofjix  hundred  /ivres,  (%$l-J  lie  alfo  in-
formed me,  that  each  Brother  paid  a  fimiiar  contribution,  and
that  the  whole  management  of  thefe  Funds  was  left  to  the  Bro-
ther Savalette,  who  never  gave  in  any  accounts.  This  was  a
Fund  to  be  added  to  the  many  means  of  corruption  already  in
the  polTeflion  of  the  adepts  of  the  Occult  Lodges.  Who  can
fay  how  far  thefe  resources  were  extended  in  the  hands  of  a
man  who  had  the  care  of  the  Trefor  Royal?  The  Confpirators
very  well  knew  how  to  chuie  both  their  men  and  their  places.


.l6  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

felves  or  of  the  Code;  but  thofe  with  whom  I  have  as
yet  been  acquainted,  had  only  been  initiated  in  part  of  the
myfteries  ;  yet  by  what  they  had  learned,  it  will  not  be
1  difficult  tor  the  reader  to  form  a  judgment  of  the  remain-
der.

It  is  an  inconteftible  fact  to  begin  with,  that  Sweden-
borg's  Illuminées,  ityled  in  France  the  Martinifts,  and
*  alfo  calling  themfelves  the  beneficent  Knights,  had  their
travelling  adepts  after  the  manner  of  the  Illuminées  of
Weifhaupt.  It  is  ?.lfo  certain  that  the  pretended  Phi-
taletes,  or  lovers  of  truth,  had  formed  a  code  of  laws  for
themfelves,  had  organized  focieties,  and,  like  Weifhaupt,
had  intruded  them  into  the  Mafonic  Lodges,  there  to
fearch  after  men  who  might  be  difpofed  to  receive  their
myfteries,  and  adopt  their  new  degrees.  Among  the  lat-
ter was  one  called  the  Knights  of  the  Phœnix.  A  Knight
of  this  degree  giving  hnnielf  out  for  a  Saxon,  and  a  Ba-
ron of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  pofieffed  of  the  moft
pompous  certificates  from  lèverai  Princes  of  Germany,
came  to  exercife  his  Apoftlefhip  in  France  a  very  few
years  before  the  late  Revolution.*  After  having  fpent
iome  time  in  a  central  town,  vifited  the  Lodges,  and  ob-
ferved  the  Brethren,  he  thought  that  he  had  difcovered
three  worthy  of  being  initiated  in  the  higher  fciences. — >
The  Venerable  or  Mailer  of  the  Lodçe,  in  whofe  words
we  fhall  relate  the  ftory,  was  one  of  thefe  worthies.  "  All
a  things  agreed  on,  (faiu  the  Venerable)  we  three  waited
cc  on  our  Illuminée,  ardent  to  be  initiated  in  the  new  mys-
"  ries  which  he  had  promifed.

"  As  he  could  not  fubjedt  us  to  the  ordinary  trials,  he
"  difpenfed  with  them  as  much  as  lay  in  his  power.  In
"  the  middle  of  his  apartment  he  had  prepared  a  chaffing-
"  difh  and  a  brafier  full  of  fire  ;  on  his  table  were  various
"  fymbols,  and  among  others  a  Phoenix  encompaffed  by  a
cc  Serpent  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth,  forming  a  circle. —
"  The  explanation  of  the  myfteries  began  by  that  cf  the
"  brafier  and  other  fymbols.  '  This  biafier  (faid  he)  is
"  here  to  teach  you,  that  fire  is  the  principle  of  all  things;
"  that  it  is  the  great  agent  of  nature,  and  imparts  action

*  I  could  have  named  this  man,  as  he  is  mentioned  in  my
mannfeript  Memoirs  as  a  Philahie  Illuminée  very  famous  in
Pruffia.  Hnr  the  perfon  whom  the  reader  will  obferve  fo  indig»
nant  atthefe  myfteries  is  at  prefent  in  trance;  prudence,  there-
fore, on  his  account,  forbids  me  to  mention  nam2S.


HISTORICAL  PART.  2IJ

K  to  bodies.  That  man  receives  from  that  agent  life,
H  with  the  power  of  thinking  and  of  ailing.'  Such  was
f*  the  tenor  of  his  firft  leifon.  Our  Illuminée  then  pro-
w  ceeded  to  explain  the  other  fymbcls. — *  This  ferpent
K  forming;  a  circle  (fays  he)  is  the  emblem  of  the  Eterni-
"  ty  of  the  IVorld,  which,  like  this  ferpent,  has  neither
"  beginning  nor  end.  The  ferpent,  you  may  alfo  know,
"  has  the  property  of  annually  renovating  its  (kin;  this
«  will  figure  to  you  the  revolutions  of  the  univei Te,  and
V-  of  nature,  which  appears  to  weaken  and  even  to  perifli
*c  at  certain  epochs,  but  which,  in  the  immenfity  of  ages?
"  only  grows  old  to  become  young  again,  and  to  prepare
<l  for  new  revolutions.  This  Phoenix  is  a  (till  more  na-
W  tural  expolition  of  the  fucceffion  and  perpetuation  of
"  thcfe  phenomena.  Mythology  has  reprefented  this  bird
**  as  re-vivifying  from  its  own  afhes,  only  to  (how  how
"  the  univerfe  is  reproduced,  and  will  continue  to  be  fo?
«  from  itfelf.'

"  Thus  far  the  Illumiuizing  Baron  had  taught  us,  un-
*£  der  the  common  promife  of  fecrecy,  when  on  a  fudderi
"  he  flopped  and  informed  us,  that  he  could  not  proceed
"  any  farther  without  previpufly  exacting  an  oath,  the
cc  formula  of  which  he  read  to  us  to  fee  whether  we  were
"  dilpofed  to  take  it.  We  all  fhuddered  at  hearing  it. — •
*'  The  exact  words  I  do  not  pretend  to  ftate;  but  it  was
"  a  promife,  in  the  mod  execrable  terms,  to  obey  the
"  chiefs  of  his  IUuminifm,  We  endeavored  to  conceal  our
•"  indignation,  that  we  might  hear  to  what  lengths  lie
«  would  proceed;  he  thencar»e  to  the  promife  of  renoun-
"  cing  and  abjuring  the  moji  f acred  lies,  thofe  of  citizen,
"  °J fubjeel,  of  one's  family,  oj  father,  mothei  ifriend,  chil-
"  dren,  hufband.  At  thefe  words  one  of  the  three,  unable
"  to  endure  it  any  longer,  fallied  forth  from  the  room,  re-
•*  turned  with  a  drawn  fword  in  his  hand,  and  ran  at
"  the  Illuminizjng  Baron  in  a  moft  violent  rage.  We
fc  Were  happy  enough  to  ftop  and  hold  him  until  he  had
ff  recovered  his  feqles  a  little.  Then,  however,  our  col-
*c  league  burft  into  the  moft  violent  paflion,  abufing  the
■"  Baron  for  a  rafcal,  and  telling  him,  that  if  he  were  not
"  out  of  the  town  in  twenty-four  hours  he  would  have
"  him  taken  up  and  hanged."  The  reader  will  readily
fuppofe  that  the  Baron  made  the  bell  of  his  way  out  of  the
place.

Another  affair  that  will  throw  fome  light  on  this  mon-
E  e


2ll  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

itrous  Se£t  took  place  at  Vienna.  A  young  man  of  high
birth,  and  who  has  fignalized  himfelf  by  his  bravery  du-
ring this  war,  felt  an  impulfe,  like  many  others  of  his  age,
to  become  a  Free-mafon.  His  Lodge,  though  he  knew
it  not,  tvas  one  of  thole  under  the  direction  of  the  fame
fpecies  of  Illuminées.  He  had  often  been  made  the  bearer
of  letters  which  he  ilrongly  fufpecled.  At  length  he  de-
termined not  to  deliver  them,  under  pretence  that  he  had
not  found  the  perfons  at  home  to  whom  they  were  direct-
ed, but  iii  fair  btcaufe  he  did  not  wifh  to  be  made  the  in-
finiment of  treaibn.  Curiohty,  however,  getting  the  bet-
ter of  him,  he  ftill  continued  to  folicit  admiflion  to  the
higher  degrees.  At  length  his  initiation  was  fixed  for  the
next  day,  when  he  received  a  letter  demanding  an  imme-
diate interview,  and  written  in  the  moft  prefling  ityle.—
When  he  came  to  the  place  appointed  he  found  an  adept
the  former  friend  of  his  father.  "  I  am  now  taking  iucb.
"  a  ftep  (laid  he),  that  the  lead  indifcrction  on  your  part
"  will  certainly  coft  me  my  life;  but  I  thought  myfelf
"  bound  to  it  in  confequence  of  the  friendthip  which  your
"  father  always  fheweci  me  and  the  regard  that  1  have  per-
"  fonally  for  yourfelf.  I  am  a  loft  man  if  you  do  not  keep
"  my  fecret;  but  on  .the  other  hand,  you  are  forever  un-
"  done  if  you  pieicnt  yourfelf  at  the  Lodge  to  receive  the
t;  degree  for  which  you  nave  been  foliciting.  I  know  you
"  too  well  to  think  that  you  would  take  the  oath  which
"  will  be  propoled  to  you:  You  cannot  diflemble;  and
"  ftill  lefs  will  you  be  able  to  think  or  act  as  they  would
cc  wifh  to  make  you.  Horror  will  betray  you,  and  then
"  all  will  be  over  with  you.  You  are  already  on  the  black
"  list  as  fnf peeled.  Knowing  you  as  I  do, I  can  allure
u  you  that  ou  will  foon  be  on  the  Red,  or  blood  list
"  (blode  ltft)\  and  then  never  flatter  yourfelf  with  a  hope
"  to  efcape  the  poifons  or  the  aflaflins  of  the  Sect."  This
youth's  refolution  was  not  to  be  fubdued  by  fear.  Before
he  would  acquiefee,  he  w  idled  at  lead  tobe  madeacquaint-
'  ed  with  fome  of  thole  terrible  engagements  in  which  he
Was  to  bind  himfelf,  and  which  he  would  not  be  able  to
keep.  His  friend  then  explained  the  oath  that  would  bs
required,  and  he  found  it  to  be  no  other  than  the  utter  re-
nunciation of  all  the  molt  facred  ties  of  Religion,  of  foci-
ety,  and  of  nature  ;  and  a  vow  to  recognize  no  other  law
than  the  commands  of  his  Illuminizing  Superiors.  He
.  ihuddcrcd  at  hearing  of  fuch  bonds  ;  he  found  means  of


HISTORICAL  PART.  21$

-deferring  his  initiation,  and  abandoned  the  Lodges  entire-
ly before  it  was  too  late»  Since  the  Revolution,  circum-
ftances  have  induced  this  Gentleman  to  leave  the  Auftri-
an  fervice  and  engage  in  the  Englifh  ;  but  it  was  from  his
own  mouth  that  i  learned  how  much  he  feared  that  his
friend  had  been  put  on  the  Red  Lift  for  the  friendly  fer-
vice he  had  rendered  him,  Certain  it  is,  that  he  heard
of  his  death  a  ihort  time  after  this  interview  had  taken
place.

The  reader  will  naturally  wifli  to  return  to  our  Bava-
rian Illuminées  ;  but  that  he  may  better  underftand  what
was  and  what  ought  to  be  the  effect  of  their  miffion,  Ï
muft  firft  defcribe  the-compofition  of  the  Lodge  in  which
they  were  to  be  received  ;  and  for  that  purpofe,  I  muft
again  infill  on  thofe  Illuminées  fo  well  known  in  France
under  the  name  of  Thecfopbes.  Let  us  compare  the
above-mentioned  black  lift  and  blood  list  with  an  an-
ecdote that  indeed  I  could  never  credit  until  I  was  at
length  informed  of  the  circumftances  by  men  who  were
perfectly  well  acquainted  with  them.  Every  body  knew  The
that  the  large  manfion  of  Ermenonville,  belonging  to  !:"  fe  at
Mr.  Gerardin,  and  fituated  about  thirty  miles  from  Paris,  „\\\Q.
was  a  principal  haunt  of  Illuminhm.  It  is  alfo  well  known,
that  there,  at  the  tomb  of  Jean  Jaques  Rouflëau,  under
pretence  of  regenerating  man  and  reftoring  him  to  the;
age  of  nature,  the  moil:  horrible  diiiolutenefs  of  morals
was  pra&ifed.  The  famous  impoftor  Saint  Germain
prefided  over  thefe  myfteries  ;  he  was  the  God  of  them,
and  he  alfo  had  his  blood  lifi.  The  Chevalier  de  Les-
Cure  fell  a  fatal  vi&im  to  it.  He  wifhed  to  withdraw
from  this  horrid  fociety;  perhaps  even  to  difcover  it^
abominations.  Poifon  was  mingled  with  his  drink,  and
he  was  not  a  ftranger  to  the  c?ouiz  of  his  death.  Before
fee  expired  he  pofitively  declared  to  the  M:\RQUis  de
MoNTRO-l,  a.general  officer,  that  he  fell  a  victim  to  this
infamous  crew  of  Illuminées.*

*  Nothing  can  equal  the  profligacy  of  morals  that  raged  a-
niong  thefe  inhabitants  of  Ermenonville.  Every  woman  admit-
ted to  the  myfteries  became  common  to  the  Brotherhood  —
That  which  St.  Germain  had  cho'fen  fur  himfelf  was  called  the
Virgin;  fhe  alone  had  the  privilege  of  not  bcin %  delivered  over
to  chance,  or  to  the  commands  ot  thefe  true  Adamites,  unlels
St.  Germain  thought  proper  to  confer  the  title  of  Virgir
fome  other  woman.  This  viie  impofior,  more  adroit  than  C


220  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Having  afcertained  thefe  facts,  I  ftiall  no  longer  hefi-»
tate  to  conhder  as  fo  many  hiUorical  truths,  firft,  all  the
oaths  and  wilhes  for  the  destruction  of  the  Altar  and  the
Throne  ;  fecondly,  all  thofe  doctrines  i'o  exactly  coinci-
ding with  what  has  been  already  extracted  from  the  works
of  the  Seâ:  ;  and,  laftly,  all  thofe  abominable  oaths  and
horrid  trials  defenbed  by  a  multitude  of  authors.  Nor
fhall  I  be  guilty  of  any  calumny  when  I  declare,  that  the
fole  difference  between  this  Sect  and  Weifhaupt's  lies  in
the  ceremonial.  Atheif  n  is  as  precifely  the  ultimate  ob-
ject of  their  theofophy,  as  it  is  of  Weifhaupt's  myfteries.
Neither  will  allows  that  â  man  of  nature  can  be  bound  by
the  laws  of  fociety  ;  both  declare  that  fovereigns  are  no-
thing more  than  tyrants  5  and  both  agree,  that  all  means
of  annihilating  Priefts,  Kings,  Altars,  and  Laws,  (howe-
ever  atrocious  they  may  be  in  themfelves)  become  meri-
torious and  noble  when  directed  to  that  end.  But  they
excel  even  the  modern  Spartacus  in  their  arts  for  kind-
lino;  and  inflaming  the  zeal  of  their  affafiins  and  parricides.
That  the  means  of  the  former  are  not  to  be  compared
with  thofe  of  the  latter,  let  the  reader  decide  on  the  fol-
lowing itatement.

W  hen  one  of  thofe  unfortunate  men  who  have  been
Jed  away  by  the  Sect  into  all  the  illufions  of  their  vifions,
wifhes  to  be  initiated  into  the  art  of  prodigies,  the  fci*.
ence  of  fciences,  in  mort  into  the  laft  fecrets  of  the  adepts,
the  proportion  is  made  to  him  to  confummate  his  devo-
tion to  the  fUperiors  who  are  entrufted  with  thefe  fcien-
ces.    This  will  be  a  new  contract,  and  will  make  him

îioftro,  had  aftnally  perfuaded  his  adepts  that  he  was  in  pos-
feffiop  ot  ar.  Elixir  of  hnmortality  ;  that  he  had  gone  through
lèverai  changes  by  means  of  the  mitempfychofisj  that  he  had
already  died  three  times,  but  that  he  would  die  no  more  ;  that
iince  his  laft  change  he  had  lived  fifteen  hundred  years: — And
there  were  dupes  wr.o,  too  wife  to  credit  the  eternal  truths
taught  by  a  God-made-man,  firmly  believed  in  this  metemp-
fychofis  and  in  the  fifteen  hundred  years  of  their  God  St.  Ger-
main !  ! — Neither  did  they  know  that  that  period  of  time  was
no  more  than  an  aliufion  to  the  Mafonic  degrees.  According  to
the  Mafonic  fi-ftion,  an  Apprentice  is  three  years  old,  a  Fellow-
C  ah  five,  a^.d  a  Mafter  [^vtrr.  This  age  goes  on  in  fuch  an  in-
crealing  ratio  in  certain  degrees  that  a  Scotch  Knight  is  faid
to  be  five  hundred  years  old.  When  a  Mafon  therefore  comes
and  fays,  I  am  fo  many  years  o'd.  it  U  no  more  than  faying  I
am  of  lue  h  a  degree.  (  Sss  Gejchickts  der  unbekanten  on  the
Scotch  Degrees.)


HISTORICAL  PART.  221

the  blind  inftrumcnt  of  all  the  plots  into  which  he  will
tbon  be  plunged.  On  the  day  appointed  for  his  initiation
he  is  led  through  dark  windings  to  the  den  of  trials.  In
this  cavern  the  image  of  death,  the  mechanifm  of  fpcétres,
potions  of  blood,  fepulchral  lamps,  fubterraneous  voices,
every  thing,  in  fhort,  that  can  affright  the  imagination,
and  fuccefiively  hurry  him  from  terror  to  enthufiafm,  is
put  in  a&ion,  until  at  length,  worn  out  by  fright,  fatigue,
hope,  or  enthufiafm,  the  candidate  is  lb  perfectly  deprived
of  his  reafon,  that  he  cannot  help  following  any  impulie
that  he  may  receive.  Then  it  is  that  the  voice  of  the
invifible  Hierophant  burfts  forth  from  this  abyfs,  makes
the  vaults  refound  with  its  menaces,  and  prefcribes  the
following  execrable  oath,  which  the  Candidate  repeats  af-
ter him  :

"  I  here  break  all  the  ties  of  the  flefh  that  bind  me  to
€{  father,  mother,  brothers,  lifters,  wife,  relations,  friends,
"  mltireJJ'es,  kings,  chiefs,  benefactors  ;  in  fhort,  to  every
"  perfon  to  whom  I  have  promiied  faith,  obedience,  gra-
"  tude,  or  fervice."

"  I  fwear  to  reveal  to  the  new  chief  whom  I  acknow-
tc  ledge  every  thing  that  I  fhall  have  feen,dbne>read,  heard,
"  learned,  or  difcoveredj  and  even  to  feek  after  and  fpy
*'  into  things  that  might  otherwife  efcape  my  notice.  I
"  fwear  to  revere  the  Aqua  Tophana^  as  a  certain,  prompt,
"  and  neceffary  means  of  ridding  the  earth  by  the  death  or
"  ftupefa&ion  of  thofe  who  revile  the  truth,  or  feek  to
"  wreft  it  from  my  hands."*

Scarcely  has  the  candidate  pronounced  this  oath  when
the  fame  voice  informs  him,  that  from  that  inftant  he  is
releafed_/~n?/#  all  other  caîhs  that  he  had  taken  either  to  his
country  or  to  the  laws.  "  Fly  (it  fays)  the  temptation  of
"ever  revealing  what  you  have  juft  heard;  for  light—
"  ning  is  not  more  inftantaneous  than  the  dagger  that
**  fhall  reach  you  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  you  may
«  be."

Thus  did  this  atrocious  Seel:  form  its  adepts.  Spring-
ing from  the  delirious  reveries  of  a  Swedenborg,  it  tra-
vels from  England  to  Avignon,  Lyons,  and  Paris.  In
this  latter  town,  and  as  early  as  the  year  178 1,  a  club  of
this  fpecies  of  Illuminées  (to  the  number  of  125  or  130)

*  See  the  Red  Lodge  unveiled,  Page  iijand  the  Hiftory  of
the  AfTaiiination  of  Guftavus  III. King  of  Sweden,  Seel.  4.


222  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

had  formed  itfelf,  holding  its  fittings  in  the  abeve  men-
tioned Rue  de  la  Sourdiere.  Savalette  de  Lange,  the
Ame  man  whom  we  have  feen  Ço  immerfed  in  the  corres-
pondence of  the  Committee  of  the  Amis  Reunis,  pretidci
over  this  club.  The  famous  Count  St.  Germain  often
held  meetings  at  this  fame  Lodge.  Cagliostro  was
invited  to  it  by  a  fpecial  deputation  for  the  purpofe.  Hi-
therto this  man's  myfteries  had  only  been  thofe  of  anim-
poffor  ;  but  here  he  foon  learned  to  be  a  confpirator.  It
was  from  this  Lodge  that  he  derived  that  knowledge  of
the  revolution  which  he  pretended  to  foretel  in  a  fort  of
prophetic  cant  when  he  made  his  appearance  in  London
after  he  had  been  liberated  from  the  Baftille.  It  was
thence  that  he  received  his  miflions  for  Rome,  where
he  was  to  fow  the  feeds  of  Revolution.  One  of  the  A-
depts  that  had  been  deputed  to  him  was  a  Mr.  Raymond,
who  had  been  the  mafter  of  the  Poft-office  at  Befancon.
He  was  an  enthuiiaft,  and  his  imagination  was  bewilder-
ed with  Swedenborg's  vifions.  From  him  the  knowledge
wa"s  derived  of  this  Lodge  having  had  a  hundred  and  thir-
ty refident  members  at  Paris,  and  more  than  a  hundred
and  fifty  travelling  members  or  correfpondents  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  Globe;  that,  after  the  example  of  Hoi  •
bach's  club,  they  had  their  compilers  and  printers  who
were  circulating  their  revolutionary  poifons  among  all
clafles  of  the  people.*  In  the  perfon  of  Dietrich,  Se-
cretary to  the  Lodge,  we  find  svery  fpecies  of  llluminifm.
Cond'orcet  alio  was  a  member;  he  who  needed  only
to  be  made  acquainted  with  Weifhaupt's  plots  to  belong
to  every  confpiring  Seel:;  though  it  is  not  certain,  that
Dietrich  had  not  already  put  him  in  direcl:  correfpondence
with  the  modern  Spartacus. — Let  the  reader  mark  well
of  what  perfons  this  Lodge  was  compofed.  We  fhall
have  occafion  to  advert  to  it  again  for  the  illuftration  of
many  a  fanguinary  fcene.  In  the  mean  time  let  us  take  a
view  of  other  mafonic  haunts,  that  we  may  difcover  all

*  1  have  been  informed  of  all  thefe  circumftances  by  a  man
who  was  fora  long  time  connected  with  the  Poflmafter  Ray-
mond, but  who  rehired  all  his  arts  of  feda"ion.  I  his  fame
perfpos,  on  whom  I  can  perfectly  rely,  alio  informed  me,  that

;  y  were
.-^  impoF
ble  for  aay  but  the  adepts  to  read  them.


HI6T0RICAL  PART.  *23

thefe  different  Seels,  the  harbingers  of  luch  horrors,  uni-
ting and  combining  into  one  hideous  mafs  of  confpirators
under  the  difaftrous  name  of  Jacobins.

Behde  the  lodges  that  I  have  already  named,  there  ex-  ,

ifted  two  others  in  Paris,  the  more  remarkable  as  they
fhew  how  the  confpirators  would  as  it  were  clafs  them-
fclves  according  to  the  degree  of  error  they  had  adopted,
or  the  views  that  had  prompted  them  to  engage  in  the
general  confpiracy.  One  of  thefe  Lodges  was  called  the
Nine  Sijlers.  This  was  the  re-union  of  the  Mafonic
brethren  who  ftyled  themfelves  Philofopheis.  The  other
was  named  the  Lodge  of  Candor^  and  was  chiefly  compo-
fed  of  thole  Mafons  who  in  the  world  held  a  high  rank
and  bore  titles  of  nobility,  while  in  the  Lodges  they  trai-
teroully  confpirsd  againft  Nobility,  and  more  particularly
againft  the  monarchy  and  againft  religion.

The  unfortunate  Duke  de  la  Rochcjoucault,  at  once
the  dupe  and  protector  of  the  Sophiilers,  belonged  to  the
Lodge  of  the  Nine  Sifters.  Pafloret  was  the  Mafter  of  J  kf
it,  he  who  in  public  appeared  to  facrifice  to  rank  and  h°  ^  °
riches,  and  even  to  court  religion;  but  whole  révolu-  sifters,
tionary  career  would  have  caufed  lefsfurprize  had  the  ac-
tive part  he  had  taken  in  the  dark  receffes  of  this  Lodge
been  more  generally  known.  The  name  of  Condorcet  al-
io appears  here,  as  it  dots  in  every  haunt  of  rebellion. — .
Together  with  him  we  find  a  long  lift  of  all  the  Sophifters
of  the  day,  fuch  as  Bfffit,  Garat,  the  commander  Dolo-
mieu,Laccpede,  Bailly,  Camille  Def moulin  s,  Cerutti,  Four-
croi,  Danton,  Millin,  Lalandc,  Bonne,  Chateau,  Randon,
Chcnicr,  Mercier,  Gudin,  La  Aietherie,  and  the  Mar-
quis de  la  Salle,  who  not  finding  the  Lodge  of  the  Social
Contract  fufficiently  philofophized.,  had  come  over  to
Condorcet.  There  was  alfo  Cham-pfort,  who  never  could
think  that  the  revolution  of  Equality  and  Liberty  advan-
ced with  fufficient  rapidity,  till  at  length  fettered  in  fts
chains,  he  could  find  no  other  refource  in  his  Philofophifm
than  fuicide.  [Among  the  apoftate  clergy  that  had  flocked
thither,  we  find  Noel,  Pingre,  and  Mulot.  The  two  lat-
ter, together  with  Lalande,  were  alfo  members  of  the  Se-
cret Committee  of  the  Grand  Orient.  Dom  Gerlcs,  in
company  with  Rahaud  de  St.  Etienne  and  Pet  ion,  came
and  joined  the  Lodge  of  the  Nine  Sillers  in  the  early
time  of  the  Revolution.  Fauchet  took  his  ftation  at  the
Bouche  de  Fer,  with  Goupil  de  Pre/tin  and  Bonneville.


Z24  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

As  to  Sycyes,  the  moll  zealous  of  this  brotherhood  and  of
the  whole  revolutionary  crew,  he  had  formed  a  new  Lodga
at  the  Palais  Royal,  called  the  Club  of  the  Twenty-nvo,
and  compofed  of  the  chofen  of  the  Elc<5r.

Such  perfons  as  with  to  form  a  more  precife  idea  of  the
revolutionary  fpirit  that  predominated  in  this  Lodge,  need
only  to  confult  thofe  works  publifhed  by  its  members,
when  the  court,  at  the  inftigation  of  Necker,  imprudent-»
ly  invited  all  the  Sophifters  to  lay  before  the  public  their
views  on  the  compolition  of  the  otates  General.  A  work
of  this  nature,  written  by  La  Metherie,  being  read  at  the
hotel,  and  in  prefence  of  the  Duke  de  la  Rochefoucault,
a  French  nobleman,  who  has  fince  mentioned  it  to  me,
ventured  to  fay,  that  the  pofitions  laid  down  in  that  work
were  derogatory  to  the  rights  of  the  Sovereign  and  to  re-
ligion.   c  Well)  (laid  the  duke,  a  mere  dupe  of  his  Sophis-

*  ters),  either  the  court  will  admit  of  thefe  plans,  and

*  then  we  JJjall  be  able  to  arrange  matters  as  we  p  leaf e;  or

*  elfe,  the  court  will  rejecl  them,  and  in  that  cafe  we  mujl
c  do  without  a  kin  g  J  Such,  indeed,  was  the  opinion  ge-
nerally entertained  and  declared  by  the  fophifticated  Ma-
funs,  fuch  as  Bailly,  Gudin,  La  Aletherie,  Dupont,  &o*
They  wiihed  to  eifablifh  a  king  (uhjeded  to  all  their  the-
ory of  Equality,  Liberty,  and  Sovereignty  of  the  people  j
but  it  was  only  through  them  that  the  people  were  to  dic-
tate the  laws}  and  fome  of  thefe  J ':i-difant  fages  wifhed  to
annihilate  royalty  entirely.  Sevcvi  1  of  them,  fuch  as  Bris-
tox.  and  his  faction,  already  fhewea  difpofitions  to  reject
all  terms  with  the  throne  ;  and  reviling  it  was  only  the
prelude  to  its  utter  fubverlion.

There  was  another  fet  of  brethren,  who  frequented  the
The  Loge  de  la  Candeur  ;    but,   following  other  plans,  they

Lodge  de  fought  to  combine  their  ambition  with  the  Mafonic  E-
la  Can-  quaiity  and  Liberty.  There  did  La  Fayette,  the  difciple
of  Sycyes,  lifping  the  Rights  cf  Man,  and  already  avert-
ing that  infurretlion  was  a  mojl  facred  duty,  dream  that
he  was  the  rival  of  the  immortal  Washington.  The  Bro-
thers Lameth,  furnamed  the  ungrateful^ flocked  thither  to
punifii  the  court  for  the  favors  conferred  on  them  ;  Co  did
the  Mm  quis  de  Montcfquiou,  Adoreton  de  Chabrillant,
and  Cujlines,  in  hopes  of  revenge  for  having  been  flight-

*  See  the  account  given  of  their  works    in  Vol.  II.  of  thefe
Memoirs.


deur»


HISTORICAL  PART.  225

ed  by  that  fame  court.  Here  alfo  were  feated  many  agents
pf  Philio  D'Orléans,  fuch  as  his  counfellor  La  Clos^  his
chancellor  La  Touche^  Sillery  the  yileft  of  flaves,  and
f)' Aiguillon  the  moft  hideous  of  mummers.*  Thither
alio  had  reforted  the  Marquis  de  Lufignan  and  the  Prince
of  Broglio,  whofe  youth  was  about  to  tarnifti  the  glory  of
a  name  that  deferved  a  better  fate.  The  Phyfician  Guil-
lotin  is  the  only  brother  that  I  can  find  in  this  Lodge  who
did  not  bear  a  title.  He  foon  felt  the  effects  of  its  pow-
er, when  cited  before  the  Parliament  to  anfwer  for  a  fedi-
tious  publication;  he  beheld  thoufands  of  adepts  flocking
in  on  all  fides  and  threatening  the  magiftrates,  who  might
jiow  plainly  perceive  that  it  was  too  late  to  contend  againft
the  federated  bands  of  Mafonry.

Such  was  the  ftate  of  the  Lodges,  and  of  the  moft  re-
markable Brethren  at  Paris,  when  the  Deputies  of  Illu-
minifm  arrived  from  Germany.    Moft  authors  make  them
alight  at  the  Lodge  of  the  Contrat  Social,  Rue  Coq-heron.  Lod^eof
I  fear  that  I  have  myfelf  prepared  my  readers  for  a  fimi-  the  Con-
lar  error,  when  fpeaking  (in  Vol.  II.  Chap.  XIII.  of  thefe  trat  So-
Memoirs)  of  a  Lodge  eftablifhed  in  that  fame  ftreet.     I  cial.
recollect,  however,  that  I  particularly  mentioned  them  to
be  the  Sophifters  adherent  to  the  Duke  de  la  Rochefou-
cault;  and  none  of  thofe  belonged  to  the  Contrat  Social.
Though  I  may  have  miftaken  the  ftreet  in  which  they
alfembled,  I  was  not  in  any  error  with  refpecl:  to  the  per-
fons  of  the  Confpirators.    The  better  to  diftinguilh  them,
and  that  I  might  not  confound  them  with  another  fpecies
of  Mafons,  I  made  the  ftricteft  inquiries.    Among  other
documents,  I  procured  a  very  numerous  lift  of  the  Bie-
thren  of  the  Social  Contracl.f    I  therein  found  men  who
are  well  known  for  their  attachment  to  royalty,  and  not
a  fingle  one  who  had  diftinguiftied  himfelf  by  his  zeal  for
F  f

*  All  Paris  was  acquainted  with  his  accoutrements  and
remembers  the  hideous  ii^ure  that  he  cut  on  the  5th  and  6th  of
O&ober,  1789,  in  themidft  of  the  PoifTards  at  Verfaiiles.

f  1  fhould  have  given  this  lift,  but  that  I  could  not  fuppofe
that  fo  many  Dukes,  MarquiiTes,  and  Barons,  would  like  to  fee
their  names  made  public.  Befides,  I  am  not  writing  the  hiftory
of  the  dupes,  but  of  the  confpinng  Brethren. — I  think  it,  how~
ever,  proper  to  obferve,  that  when  the  federation,  of  which  I
am  about  to  fpeak,  was  undertaken,  they,  (by  the  advice  of  the
queen)  admitted  lèverai  members  of  a  lets  ariflocratic  turn,  leil
their  Lodge  mould  be  iufpe&ed  of  ariltocracy.


22â  ANTISOCIAL  CONSTIRACY;

the  revolution.  I  alfo  found  that  this  error  (To  fcancîalî-
zing  to  the  Social  Contrail)  originated  in  a  work  called
Les  Mvfques  Arrachés  publifhed  under  the  feigned  name
of  Jaques  Le  Sueur,  which  is  nothing  hut  a  fcurrilous
libel  on  perlons  of  the  higheft  refpedtability.  This  au-
thor is  men  whom  I  have  known  to  be  the  rnoft

etit  enemies  to  the  revolution  into  the  moft  zealous
abettors  of  it.  He  alfo  makes  the  Duke  de  la  Rochefou-
é  Fauchet,  Bailly,  and  La  Fayette,  mem-
bei  s  of  the  Social  Contrait,  though  they  never  belonged
to  k.  He  places  it  under  the  direction  of  the  Grand  Mas-
ter Philip  of  Orleans,  whereas  it  never  filiated  from  any
Lodge  but  that  of  Edinburgh.  He  paints  the  ve  nerable
Cardinal  of  Malines  in  the  falfeft  colors,  as  will  evidently

:ar  to  every  perfon  who  is  acquainted  with  his  high
reputation  for  virtue  and  wifdom.     On  the  whole  I  do
,  n  >t  thin:;  that  this  fuppofed  Le  Sueur  can  be  quoted  as

an  authority  in  any  thing,  except  in  what  he  fays  on- the
reception  of  the  Phitalete  Illuminées  ;  and  even  there  he
is  moft  abominable  in  his  perfonalities,  and  pretends  to
have  been  an  aâôr  in  the  fcene  when  he  is  but  the  plagi-
ary copyift  of  Mirabeau.

I  have  befides  acquired  a  certainty  that  Wcifhaupt's
ciiiif,  id  not  have  applied  to  men  more  inimical

to  his  lyfte.ns,  whether  Maforric  or  Anarchical,  than  the
members  of  the  Social  Contrail,  as  by   their   orders  the
>us  work  written  by  .Bonneville,  Bode's  great  friend,
was  burnt  in  open  Lodge.    In  fhort,  I  have  in  my  pos-
n  the  original  Utter  (or,  in  Mafonic  language,  the
.         otten  by  a  man  with  whom  1  was  ac-
quainted, and   on  the  formal  deliberation  oi' the  Social
Contract  tranfmrtfted  to  feveral  other  lodges,  to  engage
them  to  join  in  a  federation  for  the  fupport  of  Louis  XVI.
againft  the  Jacobins.    It  is  true,  that  the  royalift  brethren
of  this  Lodge   were  the  complete  dupes  of  this  projected
federation,  for  they  invited  the  Lodges  to  form  an  union,
for  the  maintainin:.r  of  the  King  according  to  the  confu-
tation of  1789-  '  Louis  XVI.  who  really  wiflied  to  keep

oath  that  nad  been  forced  from  him  to  be  true  to  the
conitituti  mï,  was  very  well  pieafed  with  the  lilt  of  the  fe-
derated Mafôrîs;  but  Mr.  de  La  Porte,  then  minifter,
was  of  a  different  opinion.  When  he  few  the  circular
letter,  and  the  number  of  peri 'jns  who -had  fubicribed  it,
he  (aid,  "  It  is  impoiiible  that  thefe  perfons  can  be  other


HISTORICAL  PART.  21J

u  than  conftitutionalifts,  or  that  they  can  ever  become
"  ftaunch  royalifts." — "  Let  us  begin  (rejoined  the  agents
«'  of  the  Social  Contract)  by  maintain?  the  king  in  his
"  prefent  ftate,  and  we  will  afterwards  had  means  of  re-
"  eltabliming  the  true  Monarchy/'  This  anfwer  may  ferve
as  a  vindication  for  the  members  of  the  Social  Contrail
but  their  good  intentions  did  not  make  their  delufion  the
Iefs  complete.    In  the  firft  place,  they  might  have  feen,
but  they  did  not  fee,  that  the  greater  number  of  thofe  who
had  figned  the  letter  were  men  who  wifhed  to  continue
to  enjoy  their  Equality  and  Liberty  under  a  King  redu-
ced to  the  condition  of  a  mere  Doge  to  the  fovereign  and
legiflative  people;  and  that  La  Fayette,  Bailly,  and  ma-
ny other  revolutionifts,  would  have  figned   this  letter,
without  ceafmg  on  that  account  to  be  jacobins  and  re-
bels.    Neither  did  they  reflect,  that  many  of  thofe  coi
tuttonal  brethren  would  have  turned  againfl  the  Social
Con  tract ,  as  foon  as  they  perceived  the  plan  for  reiniia-
•ting  the  Monarch  in  his  ancient  rights  ;  nor  that  it  was
far  more  eafy  to  entice  thefe  conftitutionalifts   into  the
raoft  outrageous  democracy  of  the  great  club,  than  to
bring  them  back  to  the  principles  of  real  monarchy.    In
ihort  they  had  overlooked  the  vaft  number  of  adepts  of
democracy  who  would  infallibly  denounce  them  as  trai-
tors to  Equality  and  Liberty,  which  afterwards  proved  to
be  the  cafe.    It  was  to  very  little  purpofe  that  the  abet-
tors of  this  federation  terminated  their  letter  with  the  fol-
lowing words: — "  This  table  is  only  for  your  chapter.
"  Make  difcreet  ufeof  it.     We  have  t.tvo  [acred  intere/is
"  to  manage,  that  of  the  French  Monarchy  and  its  King,
"  and  that  of  Mafonry  and  its  Members."    The  interdis
of  Mafonry  carried  the  day;  for,  at  the  very-  time  that
the  demi-adepts  were  fuhferibing  the  letter,  the  more  pro-
found adepts  were  from   every  quarter  denouncing  the
federation  to  the  great  club,  and  the  Social  Contract  w^.s
itfelf  profcribed.

Certain  of  this  fact,  and  obferving  that  the  brethren  o  f
the  Social  Contrail  positively  declare,  in  the  tab
[which  I  have  before  me)  that  all  political  and  delibera-
ting clubs  fkould  befuppr,.ipd;  being  alio  allured,  by
veral  Mafons,  that  it  was  from  the  Comrni
mis  Réunis  that  the  invitations  were  1
berate  with  the  Geman  deputies,  I  fin  bliged  to

differ  with  thofe  writers.ivho  declare  the  EmifTaries  of  II-
luminifm  to  have  alighted  at  the  Social  Contract,  an*


228  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

who  attribute  to  that  Lodge  the  political  committees  efta-
blifhed  on  their  arrival.    It  may  very  poflibly  have  hap-
pened, that  fome  one  of  thefe  committees  may  have  taken
its  ftation  in  the  lame  ftreet;  but  certain  it  is,  that  fuch
committee  was  not  compofed  of  members  from  the  6V
cial  Contrat.     So  likewife  is  it  a  mere  fable  that  has
been  fpread,  with  regard  to  the  infcription  fuppofed  to
have  been  written  by  Philip  of  Orleans  on  the  door  of  this
Lodge,  Hither  each  brings  his  ray  of  light.    Let  it  then
be  remembered-,  that  it  was  to  the  Committee  of  the  Amis
réunis  that  Mirabeau  had  directed  the  illuminizing  bre-
thren from  Germany. — Savalette  and   Bonneville   had
made  this  committee  the  central  point  of  revolution  and
of  the  mvfteries.     There  met  in  council,  on  the  days  ap-
pointed, not  only  the  Pariiian  adepts,  but  thofe  of  all  the
provinces  who  were  judged  worthy  of  being  admitted  to
the  profound  myiteries  of  the  Sect.    There  were  to  be
(csn  the  Ele£t  of  the  Philaletes,  the  profound  Roficrucians
and  Kniehts  Kadofch,  the  Ele£t  of  the  Hue  Sourdière^oî
the  Nine  Sijîers,  of  the  Lodge  of  Candour^  and  of  the  moft
fecret  committees  of  the  Grand  Orient.     This  was  the
landing  place  of  the  travelling  brethren  from  Lyons,  A-
vignon  and  Bourdeaux.    The  emiflaries  from  Germany
could  not  find  a  central  point  better  adapted  to  their  new
myiteries  than  this  committee;    and  there  it  was  that
they  unfolded  all  the  importance  of  their  miffion.    Wei-
fhaupt's  code  was  ordered  to  lie  on  the  table,  and  commis -
iioners  were  named  to  examine  it  and  make  their  report.
But  here  the  gates  of  this  fecret  fenate  are  fhut  againft
us.    I  do  not  pretend  to  penetrate  the  dark  recefs,  and  de-
fcribe  the  deliberations  that  took  place  on  this  occafion.
Many  brethren  have  informed  me,  that  they  remember
the  deputation,  but  they  fcarcely  recollée!  Jmelius-Boôe
?nd  Bayard-Bufche  under  any  other  denomination  than
that  of  the  German  brethren.    They  have  feen  thefe  de-
puties received  in  different  Lodges  with  all  the  etiquette
due  to  viiitors  of  high  importance  ;  but  it  was  not  on  fuch
occafions  that  a  coalition  was  debated  on,  between  the
ancient  myiteries  of  Mafonry  and  thofe  of  the  modern
Spartacus.     All  that  my  memorials  f;iy  on  the  fubject  is,
that  négociations  took  place;  that  the  deputies  reported
to  their  Aréopage;  that  the  négociations  iafted  longer  than
was  expected  ;  and  that  it  was  at  length  decided,  that  the
,     new  myfteries  fhoulft  be  introduced  into  the  French  Lodg-
es, but  under  a  Mafonic  form;  and  that  they  fhould  ali  be


HISTORICAL  PART.  229

ittuminized  without  even  knowing;  the  name  of  the  Se<5t
whofe  myfleries  they  were  adopting.  Only  fuch  parts  of
Weitbaupt'fl  code  were  to  be  feleébed  as  the  circumttances
would  require  to  haften  the  revolution.  Had  not  the  fa<Sts
that  immediately  followed  this  négociation  tranfpired  to
t  out  its  effects,  we  {hould  ftill  have  been  in  the  dark  as
to  its  great  fuccefs;  the  news  of  which  Amelias  and  Bayard
carried  back  to  their  illuminized  brethren  in  Germany.
But,  happily  for  hiftory,  fa£ts  have  fpoken;  and  it  will  be
eafy  to  fee  h'ow  far  this  famous  cmbaiFy  influenced  the
French  Revolution.

At  the  time  of  their  arrival,  Paris  fwarmed  with  impos-
tors, all  raifing  fpirits  or  conjuring  up  the  dead,  in  order
to  pick  the  pockets  of  the  living;  or  magnetizing  and
tli.  owing  into  a  crifis  certain  knotving  dupes.,  or  knaves,
who  well  knew  the  parts  they  had  to  a&.    Others  again
would  work  cures  on  healthy  dupes,  to  fwindle  away  the
money  of  thofe  who  were  really  ill.     In  a  word,  Meftner
preiided  there  in  all  his  glory.     I  make  this  observation,
becaufe  the  illuminizing  deputies  pretended  that  they  had
been  attracted  from  Germany  by  the  fame  of  Mefmer'' s
fcience,  which  had  fpread  throughout  their  country;  it
alfo  ferves  to  fliew,  that  their  arrival  could  not  have  been
later  than  the  year  1 7 8 7 ,  as  in  the  very  next  year  Mefine-
rifn  and  its  tubs  were  entirely  abandoned,  or  confined  to
a  few  adepts,  the  object  of  public  ridicule,  who  reforted
to  the  hotel  of  the  Dutchefs  of  Bourbon.    Such  a  pretext,
therefore  at  that  period  would  have  been  as  much  ridicu-
led as  were  Mefmer' s  dupes.    The  Notables,  the  Parlia-
ment, Brienne,  and  Necker,  at  that  time  furnifhed  the
Pariiians  with  more  important  matter  for  confideration.
Befide,  my  instructions,  as  well  as  many  perfons  the  bed
informed  on  the  fubjeel,  even  Mafons  at  whole  Lodges
thefe  German  brethren  attended  as  vifitors,  ftate  their  ar-
rival to  have  taken  place  about  the  time  of  the  convoca-
tion of  the  fir  ft  afTembly  of  the  Notables,  which  opened  on
the  22d  February  1787.  And,  in  facf,  it  is  from  that  very
year  that  we  may  obferve  the  code  of  Weifliaupt  influen-
cing French  Mafonry.

in  that  year  we  fee  all  the  myfteries  of  the  Amis  réunis,  The  illtt-
and  of  the  other  Lodges   that  had  adopted  the  pretended  ionization
rnyfticity  of  thi  Martinifts,  difappear.     The  very  name  ^em,,n_
oi   Phiialete  feemed  to  have  been  forgotten.     New  ex-  floated  by
planations  are  given  to  the  Mafonic  fecrets;  a  new  de-  facts.


233  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

gree  is  introduced  into  the  Lodges;  and  the  brethren  of
Paris  haften  to  tranfmit  it  to  thole  in  the  provinces.  The
adepts  flock  to  the  new  myfteries.    I  have  now  before  me
a  memorial   written  by  an  adept,  who  about  the  end  of
the  year  1787  received  the  code  at  his  Lodge,  though  he
jived  at  eighty  leagues  diflance  from  Paris.    According
to  the  agreement  made  with  the  Deputies,  all  tne  forms
of  Malbnry  were  prelerved  in  this  new  degree;  the  rib-
bon was  yellow,  the  badge  was  a  far,  and  its  fejlvvah
ivere  kept  at  the  Equinox;  but  the  ground-work  of  its
myfteries  was  a  difcourfe  entirely  copied  from  that  pro-
nounced by  the  iiiuminizing  Hierophant  in  the  degree  of
Epopt.     1  he  dawn  of  a  great  day  begins  to  break  upon  usy
when  the  fecrets  of  Alafonry  hitherto  unknotun,  foall  be-
t:ome  the  property  of  ail  free  men.    In  fhort,  it  contained
all  the  principles  of  Equality  and  Liberty,  and  of  natural
religion*  detailed  in  the  degree  of  Epopt;  rmd  even  the
enthulialm  of  ftyle  was  prelerved.    The  difcourfes  pro-
nounced by  the  Knights  oj  the  Sun,  or  Knights  Kadofch,
on  fimilar  occafions  were  not  to  be  compared  to  this. —
The  very  Mafon  who  has  given  me  this  information,
though  he  had  been  admitted  to  all  the  other  degrees,  was
ïo  difgufted  with  this,  that  he  refilled  it;  but  the  greater
part  of  the  brethren  of  his  Lodge  were  fo  much  eleCh  lfied
by  it,  that  tb<ey  became  the  m:jt  zealous  fichiers  for  the
revolution.     Some  have  even  held  confpicuous  places  in
it,  and  or.e  actuel'^  became  minifter.    In  this  new  degree,
the  reader  rr.uft  remark  the  very  name  of  Illuminée  was
not  mentioned;  it  was  merely  a  farther  explanation  of
(the  origin  and  Lcrets  of  Malbnry.    The  French  Mafons
were  now  ripe  for  fuch  an  explanation  ;  they  were  in  a
ftate  iimilar  to  that  described  by  Knigge  when  fpealcing
of  the  Brethren  who  inhabited  the  proteltant  pares  of  Ger-
many; they  needed  no  long  trials;  they  were  illuminized
with  the  fame  facility  ;  the  name  fignified  little  ;  they
received  the  degree,  and  ran  wild  with  the  fame  enthufi-
afm.

It  was  difficult,  however,  as  yet,  to  judge  by  the  difpo-

fitions  of  the  different  Lodges  what  turn  the  revolution

would  take.    The  Mafons  in  general  «via*

in  tl  tution;  but  the  chciLn  of  tl  -dune

initiated  in  all  the  <i;  ■•'  iheir  £»■

Liberty.     Their  myfteries,  it  istrue^  we'fï

grees  ;  but  it  mult  be  J(o  r»-


HISTORICAL  PART.  2Jl

membered,  that  terror  had  there  much  more  influence
than  conviction.  I  was  acquainted  with  Mafons  who
had  fwom  hatred  to  kings  on  their  reception  to  the  de-
gree of  Kadofcb  ; — neverthelefs  Ï  have  feep  them  regard-
lefs  of  that  oath  become  the  {launch  friends  of  Monarchy.
That  fpirit,  inherent  to  the  French  nation,  got  the  bet-
ter of  the  Maibnic' views  ;  that  was  the  fpirit  which  was
to  be  eradicated  from  the  minds  of  the  brethren  ;  and  a?t
the  fophiftrvand  delufions  of  the  ilhiminizing  Hierophancs
were  to  be  practifed  for  that  purpofe.  It  was  in  his  dë-
gree  of  E[>opt  that  the  modern  St>artacus  had  condenfed
all  his  potions  by  which  he  was  to  infufë  into  his  adepts
that  frantic  rage  againft  kings,  which  he  had  himfelf  im-
bibed. Such  alio  was  the  intention  and  effect  of  the  de-
gree of  the  Mafonic  'Epdpfl

But  Illuminifm  was  not  to  be  appeafed  by  feeing  the
adepts  of  the  ancient  Lodges  facrificing  at  its  (brine. — ■
The  Hierophant  tells  his  difciples,  that  they  are  to  acquire  tj
Jtrcngth  by  gaining  over  the  multitude.  This  is  alio  the
period  (at  the  introduction  of  the  new  degree,  and  the
return  of  the  deputies  to  Germany)  when  the  Lodges
are  multiplied  beyond  any  former  precedent,  bor.h  in
Paris  and  the  provinces,  and  when  the  fyftem  for  the  re-
ception of  Mafons  is  changed.  However  low  Mafonry
may  have  {looped  in  queft  of  candidates,  it  had  not  as  yet
been  {cci\  recruiting  in  the  fuburbs  among  the  loweil  rab-
ble; aii  at  once  we  fee  the  fuburbs  of  St.  Antoine  and
St.  Marceau  filled  with  Lodges  compofed  of  porters  and
laborers,  now  decorated  with  the  levelling  badges  of  Ma-
lonry.  in  the  country  towns  and  villages,  Lodges  are
opened  for  affembling  the  workmen  and  peafantry,  in
hopes  of  heating  their  imaginations  witbthe  fophifiricated
ideas  of  Equality  and  Liberty  and  the  Rights  of  Man. —
At  that  fame  period  does  Philip  of  Oi  leans  introduce  to
the  Mafonic  myfleries  thofe  French  Guards,  whom  he
deftined  to  the  fubfequent  attack  of  the  lîaftille  and  the
fiormiug  of  the  palace  of  his  royal  matter  and  kinfman.
Let  the  officers  of  thof-*  legions  be  queftioned  why  the-/
abandoned  the  Lodges;  and  they  will  tell  you,  it  was  be-
caufe  they  did  not  choole  to  be  confounded  with  their  com-
mon foljiers  in  this  Maibnic  Equality.'

At  that  fame  period  is  Paris  over-run  with  an  immenfe       «r
number  of  clubs  and  literary  focieties,  on  the  plan  of  the
Germanic  union,  and  fuch  as  it  ha  •  eibblimed  on


2^2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

the  banks  of  the  Rhine.  They  are  no  longer  Lodges,
but  Clubs,  regulating  committeeship!  political  committees.
All  thefe  clubs  deliberate.  Their  resolutions,  as  well  as
thofe  of  the  committee  of  the  Amis  des  Noirs,  are  all  trans-
mitted to  the  committee  of  correfpondence  of  the  Grand
Orient,  and  thence  are  forwarded  to  the  Vénérables  in
the  provinces.  This  is  no  more  than  that  concatenation
of  revolt,  invented  by  Weifhaupt  to  revolutionize  nations
from  the  north  to  the  fouth,  and  from  the  ealt  to  the  weft,
at  one  and  the  fame  hour.  The  chief  committee  of  thefe
regulating  committees  is  no  other  than  the  French  Ana-
page.  In  place  of  Spartacus-  Weifhaupt,  /^/Va-Knigge,
Aiariu 5-Her tel,  &c.  we  find,  wielding  the  firebrands  of
revolution  in  the  capital  of  France,  a  Philip  of  Orlca?isy
a  MirabeaUy  a  Syeyes,  a  S  avait  tie  de  Lange^-à  Condor cet ,
&c.

ÏV.  Scarcely  is  the  construction  of  this  chain  of  rebellion

made  known  to  them,  before  they  fet  about  forming  it
throughout  the  ftate.  Infrructions  are  fent  to  the  very
extremities  of  the  kingdom;  all  the  Vénérables  are  or-
dered to  acknowledge  the  reception  of  them,  andtofubjoin
to  their  anfjoer  the  oath  oj faithfully  and  punctually  exe-
cuting all  commands  they  may  receive  through  the  fame
channel.  Thofe  who  might  heiitate  at  fuch  an  oath  are
menaced  with  all  the  poignards  and  aqua  tophana  that
await  traitors  to  the  Sect.*

V.  Thofe  Mafters  of  Lodges  who  through  fear  or  difguft

were  unwilling  to  engage  in  fo  awful  an  undertaking,  had
no  other  refource  left  but  to  abandon  the  Lodge  and  the
mallet,  under  whatever  pretence  their  fears  could  fuggeft.
Thev  were  replaced  by  more  zealous  brethren, f  and  the
orders  continued  to  be  tranfmitted  until  the  meeting  of
the  States-General.  The  day  of  general  infurrection  is
fixed  for  the  14th  of  July  1789.  At  the  fame  hour,  and
in  all  parts  of  France,  the  cries  of  Equality  and  Liberty
refound  from  the  Lodges.  Paris  briltles  up  in  a  phalanx
of  pikes,  hatchets,  and  bayonets;  couriers  are  lent  into
the  provinces,  and  they  return  with  the  news  of  a  fimilar

*  See  Vol.  II.  of  thefe  Memoirs,  Chap.  XTII.
*  Thefe  letters  and  menaces  were  tranfmitted  during  the  fît-
tinc  of  the  States  of  Brittany,  that  is  to  fay,  about  June  or  July,
1788;  at  leaft  it  was  at  that  time  that  a  member  or  thofe  States,
a  Mafon  and  a  Knight  Kadofch,  received  his. — The  new  de-
gree had  been  received  at  his  Lodge  about  fix  months  before.


HISTORICAL  PART.  233

în  fur  recti  on  ;  towns,  villages,  nay,  the  very  fields  and  cots,
refound  with  the  cries  of  Equality  and  Liberty,  and  are
thus  in  unifon  with  the  brethren  of  the  capital.  On  this
fatal  day  the  Lodges  are  diffhlved.  The  grand  adepts  are
now  feated  in  the  town-houfes  in  revolutionary  commit-
tees. As  they  predominated  in  the  Electoral  AiTemblies,
fo  are  they  now  predominant  in  the  aflembly  Ityling  itfelf
National.  Their  cut-throat  bands  have  been  trying  their
ftrength,and  the  barriers  of  Paris  are  beaten  to  the  ground;
the  country-houfes  of  the  nobility  are  in  flames;  the  lan-
tern ports  are  put  in  requisition;  and  heads  are  carried  in
favage  triumph  through  the  ftreets  of  Paris.  The  Mon-
arch is  attacked  in  his  palace,  and  his  faithful  guards
butchered  ;  prodigies  of  valor  alone  could  fave  the  life  of
his  royal  confort;  and  the  King  himfelf  is  dragged  a  pri-
loncr  to  his  capital.  Good  God!  whither  ami  proceed-
ing ? — all  Europe  is  acquainted  with  the  dreadful  tale —
Let  us  return  then  to  the  hand  that  organizes  this  horrid
concatenation  of  villany.

The  Lodges  had  thus  been  transformed  into  a  vafrcor-
refponding  fociety;  and,  through  the  means  of  that  cor-
refpondence,  France  had  in  a  fingle  day  been  overwhelm-
ed by  a  million  of  demoniacs,  who  with  horrid  yell  pro-
claimed their  Equality  and  Liberty,  while  they  were  com-
mitting the  molt  abominable  outrages.  And  who  were
the  men  that  prefided  over  thefe  primitive  difaflers  ? — »
Hiftory  immediately  points  to  a  new  den  of  confpirators,
holding  their  meetings  at  Verfailles,  under  the  title  of  the
Breton  Club.  And  who  are  the  members  of  it?  Mira-
beau, Syeyes,  Barnave,  Chapdlier,  the  Marquis  de  la,
Cofte,  Giezen,  Bouche,  Petion;  in  mort,  an  aggregate
of  the  moft  profound  adepts,  both  of  the  capital  and  of  the
provinces,  who  fupply  the  place  of  the  central  commit-
tee, and  by  means  of  the  eftabiifhed  correfpondence  fix
the  time  and  manner  of  the  infurreclion.  They  are,  how-
ever, but  at  the  commencement  of  that  long  career  of
crime  and  iniquity  which  they  are  to  run  ;  they  muft
concert  new  means,  and  gain  over  hands  and  numbers  to
accomplifh  the  views  which  they  were  proLcuting.  The  Origin  of
better  to  direil  this  horrid  çourfe,  they  impatiently  wait  jhe  appel-
the  day  when  they  may  fally  forth  from  their  dark  recefs-  Xxon.  ?
es  j  and  it  is  to  the  temple  of  the  living  God, to  the  church
of  religious  men  called  Jacobins,  that  Mirabeau  convokes
the  Parilsan  adepts  ;  it  is  there  that  he  e&ablilh^s  himfelf
G  g


234,  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

vvitli  the  very  men  who  compofes  the  Breton  Club.  The
whole  confpiring  crew  flock  around  him.  From  that  in-
liant  this  temple  is  converted  into  a  den  of  confpirators,-
and  is  only  known  by  the  name  of  Club»  the  name  of  thefe
anticiu  religions  who  heretofore  made  it  refound  with  the
praiîcs  of  the  living  God,  is  given  to  this  horde  of  blas-
phemers, the  re- union  of  every  clafs  of  confpirators. —
Soon  does  all  Europe  defignate  by  the  name  of  "Jacobin
the  authors  and  abettors  ot  the  French  Revolution.  The
curie  once  pronounced  on  this  name,  it  is  but  juft  and
prpper  that  the  appellation  of  Jacobin  alone  fhould  car-
ry with  it  the  idea  of  a  general  coalition  of  the  Sophism
ters  of  Impiety  cunfpiring  againft  their  God  and  Chris-
tianity; pi  the  Sophijlers  of  Rebellion  confpiring  againft
their  G  >d  and  their  King;  and  of  the  Sopbi/hrs  of  Impi-
siy  and  Anarchy  confpiring  againft  their  God,  their  Kingy
and  all  civil  fociety  whatever.

Let  us  now  enter  this  den  of  rebellion,  which  may  be
looked  upon  as  the  prototype  of  thofe  numerous  aflbcia-
tions  v.  Inch  are  foon  ipread  under  the  fame  name  thro 'out
the  provinces.  It  is  thither,  it  is  to  that  monftrous  union
of  every  fpecies  .of  confpin-ng  Sedr,  that  the  tafk  which  I
undertook  at  the  outlet  of  thefe  Memoirs  leads  both  me
_,      _        and  mv  reader?,  to  follow  thofe  difrerent  conlpiring;  Seels

The    Uco-    -  ;    .         .    .  ,     .  .L1  ...         .    r  ,  .   o,

bins  and      "om  t'"'eir  on»,n  t0  tueir  terrible  coalition  in  this  den  or
Adepts  i-    confpirators  under  the  nâsoe  of  'Jacobins.    Darknefs  may
H<  wically  have  hitherto  encompailed  the  proceedings  of  thofe  differ-
the  lame;   LvX  Seels  ;  and  fome  readers  may  have  been  blind  to  con-
jn perlons;  vj£j.jon)  anc»   difbelieved  the  evidence  I  have  adduced  to
prove  that  the  commencement  of  this  fatal  union  is  to  be
dated  from  the  intrulion  of  the  Sophifters  into  the   Ma-
fonic  Lodges,  and  the  confummation  of  it  from  the  coali-
tion of  the  latter  with  the  deputies  of  Jlluminifm.'    But
broad  day-light  will  now  betray  their  actions  ;  behold  the
Sophifters,  the  Rebels,  the  Adepts  of  every  clafs  aflem-
bled,  all  bound  by  the  fame  oath,  whether  Rohcrucians,
Knights  Kadofch,or  difciples  of  Voltaire  and  Jean  Jaques,
whether  Knights  Templar,  Epopts  of  Illuminifm,  or  dis-
ciples of  Swedenborg  and  St.  Martin;  here,  I  lay,  all  are
holding  council  £.nd  concerting  ruin,  devastation,  and  all
that  meafurelefe  chain  of  revolutionary  crimes.

That  impious  man,  who  had  firft  ("worn  to  crufh  God
and  his  Goipel,  was  no  more;  but  his  dhciples  were  (till
in  life  and  vigor.     We  have  km  them  fpringwig  up


HISTORICAL  PART.  2J5

/rem  their  academic  meetings,  retailing  their  blafphemies
in  thofe  petty  aflemblies  pretending  to  the  bel  efprit,  un-
der the  aufpices  of  the  female  adepts,  fuch  as  the  Dutch-
efs  D'Anville,  the  Marquife  du  DefYant,or  the  Geofrins,
Efpinaces,  Neckers,  and  Staels.  They  then  framed  their
confpiracies  at  the  Hotel  D'Holbach,  To  fupport  the
illufions  of  their  Sophiltry  by  the  ftrength  of  Legion-,
they  obtrude  themfelves  on  the  Mafonic  Lodges;  but
now  they  have  abandoned  their  pettifogging  female  adepts,
their  academies,  nay,  the  Hotel  D'Holbach  and  the  Lodges
themfelves  are  deferred^  the  great  revolutionary  gulph
has  fwallowed  them  all.  Behold  them  muffled  up  in  the
red  c*,p;  the  cloak  of  Philofophy  has  been  call:  ail  Je;  be-
hold them  all,  Condorcet,  BrifTot,  Bailly,  Garat,  Ceruty,
Mercier,  Rabaud,  Cara,  Gorfas,  Dupui,  Dupont,  La-
iande,  Atheifts,  Deifts,  Encyc!  oped  ids,  CEconomifts,  in
fhort,  felf-created  Philofophers  of  every  fpecies  and  every
kind.  Here  they  appear  foremoft  in  the  ranks  of  rebel-
lion^ as  they  formerly  did  in  thofe  of  impiety.  Behold
them  intermixed  with  the  dregs  of  the  Brigands  and  of
the  Lodges,  as  well  as  with  the  leaders  of  the  bands  and
the  heroes  of  the  myfteries;  with  the  banditti  of  Philip  of
Orleans,  as  well  as  with  his  worthy  advocate  Ckabroua\
or  his  rival  La  Fayette.  Behold  them  in  council  with
the  traitors  of  ariftocracy,  as  well  as  with  the  apotlates  of
the  clergy;  with  the  Duke  of  Chartres,  the  Marquis  de
Montefqu;eu,and  de  la  Salle,  the  Counts  Pardieu,de  La-
touche,  Charles  and  Theodore  Larrieth,  Victor  Broglio,
Alexander  Beauharnois,  St.  Fargeau,  as  well  as  with
Syeyes.,  Perigord  D'Autun,  Noel,  Chabot,  Dom  Gerles,
Fauchet,  and  all  the  intruding  tribe.

It  is  not  by  accident  that  we  fee  thefe  ancient  çonfpîra-
tors,  whether  literary  or  mafonic,  coalefcing  with  the  con-
fpiring  brethren  of  the  Provinces,  fuch  as  Barrere,  ivïen-
douze,  Bonnecarrere,  and  Çollot  cFHerbois;  it  is  not  by
chance  that  the  Jacobin  clubs  both  in  Paris  and  the  Pro-
vinces become  the  general  receptacle  for  S.oficrucians,
Knights  Templars,  Knights  of  the  Sun,  and  Knights
dofch;  or  of  thofe  in  particular  who,  under  the  name  of
PbilaUtes,  were  enthufuuTically  wedded  to  the  myfte
of  Swedenborg, whether  at  Paris,  Lyons^  Avignon,  Ë
dcaux,  or  Grenoble.    The  dun  having  once  founded  the
trump  of  rebellion,  where  eife  (hould  we  go  to  iearch  for
thofe  zealous  Martinifts,  Suvaiette  cie  Lange,  Milanois,


236  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Wiliermoz,  and  men  of  their  ftamp  ?  They  had  impro-»
ved  on  ths  fyftems  of  their  forerunners  the  Roficrucians  \
they  will,  now  that  they  have  entered  the  great  club,  out-
ftrip  them  with  gigantic  ftrides.  They  had  coalefced
with  ths  illuminizing  Spartacus\  and  in  unifon  with  his
adepts  they  are  now  become  the  moft  ardent  Jacobins.*
But  to  whatever  caufe  people  may  choofe  to  afcnbe
this  general  reunion  of  fo  many  confpirators,  and  of  their
fyftems,  the  fact  certainly  cannot  be  controverted.  It  had
been  firft  fet  on  foot  on  the  arrival  (of  Bode;  it  was  com-
pleted at  the  Club  of  the  Jacobins»    The  lift  is  public,


*  See  a  Lift  of  the  principal  Jacobins  îh  a  work,  entitled,
"  Of  the  Gaufes  and  Effe&s  of  Jacobmifm."

It  is  an  observation  that  did  not  eicape  the  notice  of  the  Ger-
man writers,  and  which  1  repeatedly  find  in  the  memorials  i'ent
to  me,  that  the  greatetl  vifionaries  of  the  Rolicrucian  Mafons
and  of  the  Philaletes  are  fince  become  the  moft  zealous  apos-
tles of  WciPaaupt's  llluminifnl,  and  of  his  Revolution. — The
Germans  particularly  mark  out  one  Hulmer,  a  famous  Martin-
ift  of  Pruffia,  and  a  George  F'q/ler,  who  in  his  great  zeal  fof
the  myfteries  of  Swedenborg  would  pafs  fifteen  days  in  fall-
ing ami  prayer  to  obtain  the  vifion  of  a  fpirit,  or  todifcover  the
Phiiofopher's  Stone.  Since  that  time,  however,  they  have  both
turned  out  to  be  moft  outrageous  Jacobins. — In  France  many
examples  of  this  kind  mav  be  adduced:  Prunelle  de  Lierre ,
for  inftance,  a  man  heretofore  of  moft  amiable  character,  and
a  very  good  naturalift.  He  firft  became  a  reclufe  Martinift,  and
'{bon  after  as  outrageous  a  Jacobin  as  F'6j}er.~!±s  for  Perijfe,
the  bookfelier,  he  acted  the  fame  part  at  Lyons  for  the  corres-
pondence of  the  Martinifts,  as  Savalette  de  Lang  did  at  Parish
but  he  did  not  take  the  fame  precautions.  One  might  fee  him
going  to  the  Lodge  followed  by  his  port-folio,  which  a  fervant
could  fcarcely  carry,  Weiihaupt's  code  gained  admittance  to
this  port-folio;  the  revolution  took  place;  and  Perifle,  toge-
ther with  his  co-adept  Milanois,  became  as  outrageous  Jaco-
bins as  the  reft. — What  is  there  that  cannot  be  faid  of  the  Mar-
tinifts of  Avignon? —  Was  there  ever  fuch  atrocious  ferocity
fiiown  as  by  the  ringleaders  of  this  Lodge? — All  this  tends  to
cunrirm  the  pofition,  that  between  the  adepts  of  Swedenborg,
and  the  adepts  of  Weifhaupt,  theie  was  but  a  flight  lhade  of
ieparation.  The  fuppofed  theofophy  of  the  one  differed  but
little  from  the  atheifm  of  the  other.  Weifhaupt  goes  more  di-
rectly to  the  point;  but  the  annihilation  of  all  religion  is  the
real  object  of  both  their  myfteries.  It  is  even  worthy  of  re-
mark, that  the  modern  Spartucus  was  on  the  eve  of  grounding
all  his  myfteries  on  that  very  Theofophy  where  ft re  is  the  prin-
ciple, and  on  the  theology  of  the  Perfians,  as  did  the  Phila-

!etes  and  Martinifts. (Sde  Knights  of  the  Phoenix  t  Original

Writings*  Vol.  I.  L$t.  46  J


HISTORICAL  PART.  £37

and  it  Contains  the  names  of  all  the  profound  adepts  who
hud  hitherto  been  difperfed  among  the  Lodges.  But  let
the  reader  never  forget  that  it  is  not  a  mere  local  union,
or  an  identity  of  perlons*  it  is  an  identity  of  principles,
of  method,  of  oaths,  and  of  means;  it  is  the  general  con-
cert of  thefe  confpirators  that  proves  the  coalition.

If  we  turn  to  the  difcourles  delivered  in  the  club  (for  m  princi-
the  brethren  now  have  their  journals  and  their  public  ar-  p^s;
chives)  we  mail  find  that  Voltaire  andRouiieau  are  their
oracles,  j  uft  as  they  were  of  the  Sophifters  when  in  their
Literary  Societies.  In  that  club  do  they  repeat  all  the
blafphemous  fophiftry  againft  Chriftianity  which  they  had
formerly  uttered  at  the  Hotel  D'Holbach  ;  the  fame  en-
thufiaftic  declamations  in  favor  of  Equality  and  Liberty,
the  grand  fecret  of  thole  Sects  that  had  hidden  themfelves  |n  forms  j
in  the  occult  Lodges.  Thefe  adepts  found  themfelves
perfectly  at  home  within  this  new  den  of  confpirators;
the  cojlume  and  the  fymbols  had  changed,  it  is  true;  but
in  fubftituting  the  red,  or  rather  the  bloody,  cap  of  liber-
ty for  the  apron  and  level,  they  only  adopted  a  more  ty-
pical emblem  of  their  antique  myfteries.  The  Prefident  is
now  the  Venerable;  the  brethren  afk  leave  to  fpeak,  and  he
grants  or  refufes  it  with  all  the  parade  of  Maibnry.  When
deliberating,  the  votes  are  taken  juft  as  in  the  occult  '
Lodges.  The  laws  of  the  Free-mafons  for  the  admifiion
or  expulfion  of  brethren  are  the  fame.  As  in  the  Grand
Orient^  or  at  the  Amis  réunis,  and  in  the  Lodges  in  ge-
neral, no  candidate  is  received  uniefs  he  be  prefented  by
two  fponfors,  who  anfwer  tor  his  conduit  and  obedience;  [a  oaths  *
juft  i'o  is  it  in  the  club.  Here  the  obedience  fworn  is  pre-
ofely  the  fame  as  that  fworn  in  the  occult  myfteries  of
Mafonry.  To  be  received  a  Jacobin,  as  to  become  a
Roficrucian  or  an  Illuminée,  the  candidate  is  obliged  to
fwear  implicit  obedience  to  the  decilions  of  the  brethren  ;
and  alfo  to  obferve  and  caufe  to  be  obferved  all  decrees
paiTed  by  the  National  Aflembly  in  confequence  of  the  de-
tifions  of  the  club.  He  then  binds  himfelf  to  denounce
to  the  club  any  man  who  fhall  to  his  knowledge  coun-
teract the  decrees  propoled  by  the  club  ;  and  that  he  will
make  no  exception  in  favor  of  his  mojl  intimate  friends,  \n  govern*
of  his  father,  mother,  or  of  any  part  of  his  family,  in  ment;
fhort  he  will,  in  common  with  the  difciples  of  Illuminifm,
fwear  to  execute  or  caufe  to  be  executed  all  orders  ema-
nating from  the  privy  council  cf  the  club,   though  they


23$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Jhouldbe  repugnant  to  his  fcntiments  and  conférence?'
for  the  Jacobin  club,  like  the  Grand  Orient,  had  its  com-
mittees and  privy  counfellors.  The  brethren  have  not
abandoned  their  Lodges,  as  renouncing  all  their  means  of
haftening,  fomenting,  and  propagating  revolutions.  They
have  eftablifhed  here,  juft  as  at  the  Grand  Orient,  com-
mittees for  the  reports,  for  the  finances,  for  the  corres-
pondence, and,  laftly,  the  grand  committee  of  all,  the^r
cret  committee;  and  nearly  all  the  members  of  thefe  dif-
ferent committees  are  the  very  perlons  whom  we  have
leen  flocking  from  the  Lodges  to  the  great  club.f
in  pro-  I'1  lhis  club  of  Jacobins  too  is  to  be  found,  in  common

icriptions;  with  the  Occult  Lodges  of  illuminized  Mafonry  the  laws
of  exclufion  and  prolcription.  They  have  the  black  liji
and  the  red  lift,  and  this  is  a  lift  of  blood,  The  name  of
a  rejected  brother  is  never  inferibed  on  it  without  effecl.
Paris  has  more  than  once  feen  fuch  lifts  pofted  up;  it  has
alio  feen  thofe  devoted  victims  perilh,  or,  at  beft,  fuve
themfelves  by  fiight.t

Thus,  in  this  den  of  conl'piratots  do  we  find  every
thing  in  perfect  unifon  with  the  Occult  Lodges,  to  which
it  only  fucceeds.  Adepts,  object,  principles,  all  are  the
fame;  whether  we  turn  our  eyes  toward  the  adepts  of
impiety,  or  rebellion,  or  of  anarchy,  they  are  now  but  one
confpiring  Sect,  under  the  difaftrous  name  of  Jacobin. — »
We  have  hitherto  denominated  fome  by  the  name  of  So-
phifhrs,  others  by  that  of  Occult  Mafons,  and,  laftly,  we
have  defcribed  thofe  men  ftyled  Illuminées.  Their  very
names  will  now  difappear;  they  wiil  in  future  all  be  fully
defcribed  by  the  name  of  "Jacobin.

It  has  been  an  arduous  tafk  to  collect  the  proofs  of  this
monftrous  aftbeiation.  When  we  look  back  to  that  day
when  Voltaire  fwore  to  crujh  thefuppofed  wretch  in  fup-
portof  his  Equality  and  Liberty  j  to  that  day  when  Mon-
tefquieu  dogmatically  aiferted,  that  all  nations  fubjecl:  to
a  Monarch,  and  to  laws  that  they  had  not  made,  were
iiaves  ;  to  that  day,  in  fhort,  when  Roufleau  points  out  as
a  public  malefadtor  againft  mankind  the  man  who  had

*  See  Memoirs  of  the  Clab  of  the  Jacobins.

f  See  the  lift  of  the  committees  in  the  Caufes  and  Effetls  of
the  Revolution. — Montjoie  on  uie  Conf piracy  of  Orleans,  Book
XIII.

J  Ibrd.  and  Briffoi  to  his  Conflituents,  when  expelled  front
the  Jacobins.


HISTORICAL  PART.  239

firft  encîofed  a  field  and  was  prefumptuous  enough  to  de-
clare that  it  was  his  property,  and  thus  became  the  foun-
der of  civil  fociety  ;  from  thofe  days,  I  fay,  until  the  fata)
period  when  the  difciples  of  Voltaire,  Montefquieu,  and
Rouffeau,  in  the  name  of  that  fame  Equality  and  Liberty,
flock  to  the  club  of  the  Jacobins,  there  to  repeat  their  fo-
phifms  againft  Chrift  and  his  religion,  to  profecute  their
mafonic  plots  againft  kings,  to  propagate  the  blafphemies
of  the  modern  Sportacus  againft  their  God,  their  king,
their  country,  and  all  focial  order  ;  what  fyftems  have
we  not  been  obliged  to  inveftigate,  what  artifices  to  un-
fold, and  into  what  dark  and  loathfome  recefTes  have  we
not  been  obliged  to  penetrate,  in  order  to  trace  their  pro-
grefs  !  At  length  we  have  traced  them  to  their  general
convention  of  iniquity  and  rebellion.  Hiftory  will  have
no  further  need  of  my  refearches  to  demonfirate  all  the
crimes  and  difafters  of  the  French  revolution  that  have
ill  ued  from  this  haunt  of  confpirators.  The  hiftorian  needs
only  turn  to  the  public  records,  to  their  own  journals,  and
he  will  fee  what  crimes  of  the  French  Revolution  are  to
be  attributed  to  them,  I  might,  therefore,  look  upon  my
tafk  as  accomplifned.

There  is,  however,  a  certain  order  to  be  obferved  in
the  very  growth  and  progrefs  of  thefe  fcourges.  In  this
aftociation  appears  a  monftrous  wifdom,  that  directs  the
courfe  of  the  crimes  that  are  fucceffively  committed
and  even  at  appropriate  moments.  This  wifdom  has
taught  them  how  to  make  their  leaft  criminal  accomplices
prepare  the  w^y  for  the  blackeft  deeds  ;  it  has  taught
them  how  to  difcard  or  deftroy  thofe  agents  who,  from
difguft  or  any  other  caufe,  ceafe  to  be  their  inftruments
and  only  become  obftacles.  Thus,  in  the  very  club  of
the  Jacobins,  in  the  centre  of  iniquity,  there  exifts  a  pro-
greffton  of  wickednefs.  Each  Sect  has  retained  its  ulti-
mate object,  each  Confpirator  his  paflîons  and  his  private
views,  juft  as  in  the  Occult  Lodges*  yet  they  are  all
leagued  in  one  common  object,  in  one  common  meafure,
to  overthrow  the  exifting  government,  and  erect  their  E-
quality  and  Liberty  on  the  new  order  of  things.  But  opi-
nions will  clalh  as  to  the  choice  of  this  new  order.  All
deteft  and  hate  the  God  of  the  Gofpel;  but  fome  will
have  a  God  according  to  their  Philofophifm,  while  the
Philofophifm  of  others  reject  all  ideas  of  a  God.  La  Fay-
ette will  have  a  Doge  for  a  king,  fubjecl  to  the  laws  a»d


240  ANTUOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

will  of  a  fovereign  people.  Philip  of  Orleans  will  have
.  no  king  unlds  it  be  himfelf.  Bnfi'ot  will  neither  fubmit
to  Philip  as  king,  nor  aflent  to  La  Fayette's  Doge;  he
wifhes  to  exercife  the  magistracy  of  his  own  democracy.
Mirabeau  will  be  content  with  any  plan,  provided  he  be
the  prime  minifter.  Dietrich,  Condorcet,  Babceuf,  and
the  higher  adepts  of  Spartacusy  will  aflent to  nothing  but
the  man-king  of  llluminifm,  every  where  his  own  mafier.
Crimes  then  will  be  graduated  by  the  myfteries.  The
grand  adepts  will  be  feen  to  make  the  mere  novices  act.
Private  paûïons  will  fometimes  clog  their  progrefs;  I  {hall,
therefore,  attempt  to  point  out  in  what  order  the  French
revolution  has  brought  thefe  myfteries  into  action,  and  ap-
ply its  fucceflive  progrefs  to  the  different  Sects  that  had
lb  profoundly  meditated  and  conceived  it.


HISTORICAL  PART»  24I


CHAP.   XII.


application  of  the  three  Con/piracies  to  the  French  Rer
volution.

WHILE  I  have  been  unfolding  the  objec~l  and  means  jjent;tv0p
of  to  many  infidious  plots,  my  reader  has,  no  fa(^s  an(^
doubt,  made  frequent  applications  to  faifls  that  have  ta-  plots;
ken  place  under  his  own  eyes.  He  will  have  faid  to  him-
felf,  what  can  be  this  long  chain  of  crime,  deftrudlion,
and  horror,  with  which  the  French  Revolution  has  afto-
ni filed  all  Europe,  but  the  confequence  of  the  principles
and  plans  of  thefe  confpiring  Seels  !  In  darknefs  they  were
conceived^  but  in  broad  day  are  they  executed.  Such  may
be  the  fuccinél  hiftory  of  the  Revolution,  now  that  thefe
plots  have  been  laid  open.  It  is  fo  evidently  demonltrat-
ed,  that  it  would  be  a  ufelefs  labor  to  defçend  to  details;
we  will  alfo  pafs  over  in  our  narratiye  thofe  bloody  fcenes
which  might  rather  ferve  to  teajf  open  wounds  fcarcely
clofed,  than  convince  my  reader.  I  (hall,  therefore,  con-
fider  the  French  Revolution  in  its  preliminary  fteps,  and
in  its  fucceflive  attempts  againft  Religion,  againft  Mo-
narchy, and  againft  Society  in  general.  But  a  curfory
view  of  thefe  attempts  will  fuflicu  for  the  mod  complete
demonftration,

Let  us  revert  for  a  moment  to  that  period  when  the  •    t    p
confpirators  of  every  clafs  were  (till  lurking  in  their  hid-  jjminaries
ing-places.    The  difciples  of  Montefquieu  and  Jean  Ja-  of  the  Re-
ques  had,  fo  early  as  1771,  declared  that  men  could  on-  volution:
)y  regain  their  primitive  rights  of  Equality  and  Liberty^
and  the  people  their  inprefcriptible  right  of  legijlativefo-
vereignty  by  means  of  a  general  afiembly  of  national  de-
puties. At  that  time  alfo  the  fophifticated  adepts  had  pro-
nounced, that  the  grand  obftacle  to  thefe  pretended  rights
was  to  be  found  in  the   diftin&ions  of  the  three  eftates,
the  Clergy,  the  Nobility,  and  the  third  Eftate.*    To  ob-
tain, therefore  the  convocation  of  the  States  General,  and
to  annihilate  the  diftindtion  of  the  three  Eftates,  mull  ne-
.        Hh

*  See  Chap.  IV.  and  VI.  in  Vol.  II.  of  thefe  Memoirs.


24-1  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

ceflarily  have  been  and  really  were  the  firft  fleps  of  the
Revolution.

The  deficit  that  Necker  had  left  in  the  public  treafury,
the  depredations  and  diforders  of  an  age  deftitute  of  mo-
rals (becaufe  thefe  Sophifters  had  transformed  it  into  an
age  of  impiety)  had  reduced  a  Monarch  who  fhone  forth
viiblemiflied  in  the  midft  of  corruption,  tofummon  the
Notables  of  his  kingdom,  that  they  might  confult  for  the
happinefs  of  his  people,  which  feemed  to  be  his  only  care.
The  tender  vviih  that  he  has  fliown  is  immediately  feiz-
ed  on  by  the  confpirators,  and  ferves  as  a  pretext  for  them
to  hafteh  the  convocation  of  that  very  aflèmbly  where  all
their  horrid   plots  are  to  be  confummated.     Whatever
might  have  been  the  wifdom  of  the  Notables,  their  plans
are  rejected  beforehand.  Philip  of  Orleans  and  his  politi-
cal committees  are  likewife  eager  for  the  convocation  of
the  States  General.  Even  the  tribunes  of  the  nation  will
rife  in  judgment  againft,  and  difcufs  the  rights  of  their
Sovereign.     Foremoft  among  the  confpirators,  Philip  of
Orleans  is  alio  foremoft  in  action.  For  the  firfr.  time  does
he  pretend  to  be  zealous  in  the  public  caufe ;  and  the  firft
act  of  his  zeal  is  to   enter  a  proteff-  againft  the  difpofl-
tions  made  by  Lewis  XVI.  to  provide  for  the  wants  of
the  ftate.*     In  thefe  intrigues  againft  his  Sovereign,  he
combined  with  the  different  magiftrates   who  were  then
noted  for  their  factious  behavior,  fuch  as  Despremenil,
at  that  time  infatuated  with  the  vifions  of  the  Martinifts
and  revolutionary  principles;  JVIons-abert  and  Saba-
TiER  de  Caeres,  the  moft  ardent  enemies  of  the  Courts
and  Fr  ete  au,  who,  in  the  firff.  affembly,  was  to  become
the  worthy  affociate  of  the  Conftitutionalift  Camus. —
Philip  fo  completely  mifleads  this  firft  Parliament  of  the
kingdom,  that  they  at  length  give  the  example  of  à  law-
ful and  formal  demand  for  the  convocation  of  the  States
General.    Lewis  XVI.  feeing  the  general  ferment,  hesi-
tates; Philip  inftigates  the  people;  pays  brigands  ;  and
mobs  are  affembled  in  Paris.  The  King  at  length  thinks
proper  to  grant  the  convocation  of  the  States  General.-—
That  Sect  which  was  headed  by  Orleans,  now  only  wants
a  Mirtifter  who  fhall  direct  the  convocation  according  to
the  views  of  their  conipiracy;  and  they  turn  their  eyes
on  that  very  man  who  had  hollowed  out  the  abyfs,  that

*  See  the  Sceance  Royale  for  the  Land  and  Stamp-Tax.


HISTORICAL  PART.  243

Necker,  whofe  perfidious  policy  had  been  the  ruin  of  the
national  treafury.  He  was  the  man  of  the  ambitious  cour-
tiers, who  led  him  toward  the  throne  that  they  themfelves
might  be  drawn  nearer  to  it;  the  man  fupported  by  the
Princes  de  Beauveau  and  de  Poix,  by  the  Marefchal  Cas-
tries, by  the  Due  D'Ayen,  by  Meflrs.  Befenval  and  Gui-
bert  ;  the  man  of  the  confpiring  courtiers,  fuch  as  La  Fay-
ette and  the  Lameths;  the  man  of  the  Sophifters  of  Im-
piety, whofe  plots  had  been  contrived  in  his  own  houfe
and  at  the  hotel  D'Holbach;  the  man,  in  fhort,  whole
bull  was  to  be  carried  in  bloody  and  revolutionary  tri-
umph by  the  fide  of  that  of  his  worthy  co-operator  Phiiip
of  Orleans.

Lewis  XVI.  might  have  known  this  perfidious  minis-
ter; the  whole  plan  of  the  confpiracy  contrived  by  Neck-
er and  his  adepes  of  Philofophifm  had  been  laid  before  the
King;  but,  alas!  he  could  not  be  made  to  believe  that
fuch  wickednefs  and  hypocrify  was  to  be  fou:id  in  man.
The  day  came,  however,  when  he  forrowfully  exclaimed,
IVhy  'did  I  not  believe  it  ?  Eleven  years  ago  ivas  every
thing  foretold  that  now  befalls  me.  It  was  to  Necker  that
he  alluded;  for  during  his  firft  miniftry,  was  that  man  and
the  plots  contrived  in  his  houfe,  and  at  the  hotel  D'Hol-
bach, formally  denounced  in  a  memorial  prelented  to  Mr,
de  Maurepas  and  to  Lewis  XVI.  But  fince  that  time,
the  Confpirators  had  founded  all  their  trumpets  to  his
fame,  and  celebrated  the  fuppofed  virtues  and  talents  of
the  Genevefe  traitor.  Overpowered  by  fuch  intrigue,  the
King  was  mifled  to  think  that  this  man  would  prove  the
Saviour  of  the  liate,  and  he  entrusted  him  with  the  con-
vocation of  the  States  General.  He  was  precifely  the  man
to  throw  the  whole  of  thefe  ftates  into  the  hands  of  the
Confpirators.*     He  knew  that  their  hopes  were  in  the

*  I  was  not  fufficiently  acquainted  with  this  man's  charac-
ter, when  I  placed  him  on  the  tame  line  with  Turgotand  Ma-
îefherbes. — Let  this  artful  and  ambitious  intriguer  be  judged
by  his  own  words: — A  hundred  thou  fund  crowns  for  you  if you
ivM  m  ike  me  Controller  Gênerai. — /  am  Yich,  hut  cannot
pf  birth;  money  then  mujl  fupply  the  defeclof ahceflry. — If  one
is  poffeffed  of  money  f  it  is  not  to  be  J pared  when  it  car:  ft  .-;■
ambition. — Tou  talk  to  me  of  the  people:  they  may  he  ufefttl  t»
me,  on  I  I  "wilt  make  a  tool  of  them  ;  they  cannot  hart  us,  and  I
'Mill  pi  ay  upon  tvem. — As  to  religion,  tve  ::       .  ••■     ■       for  the

peop  e;  but  not  their  Chriflianiiy ;  we  will  deflroy  that

Let  Meeker  come  to  euquire  on  whatoccafions.or  to  whom  he


244  ANTISOCIAL  CON3PIRACYJ

multitude,  and  that  the  diftin&ion  of,  and  voting  by  e?i
tates,  would  prove  an  obftacle  to  their  views  againft  the
Sovereign.  He  farther  faw,  that  the  fpirit  of  (edition  pre-
dominated in  the  third  eftate,  that  they  were  becoming;  the
revolutionary  organs  of  the  Confpirators;  and,  to  enfure
the  majority  of  votes  to  them,  he  doubled  the  number  of
the  deputies  to  be  fent  to  the  third  eftate.  Confident  in  their
numbers,  they  immediately  declare  themfelves,  though  a-
lone,  to  conftitute  the  Actional  Ajfembly.  In  vain  did  the
clergy  and  the  nobility  infift  on  that  right  (of  far  more  con-
fequence  to  the  ftate  than  to  themfelves)  of  deliberating
feparately,  and  thus  counterpoising  the  deliberations  that
might  have  been  too  haftily  entered  upon  or  guided  by
paffion,  intereft,  or  the  faclious  pretenfions  of  party  mem
In  vain  did  the  clergy  and  nobility  facrifice  all  excluiive
privileges  or  pecuniary  advantages  in  taxation  which  they
enjoyed,  in  hopes  of  preserving  their  rights  in  delibera-
tion i  for  the  privilege  that  Necker*  and  the  other  Gon-

freld  this  monftrous  language,  and  I  will  begin  by  naming  the
perfon  who  received  the  hundred  thoufand  crowns  for  having
procured  him  the  poil  of  Controller  General;  i  will  in  the  next
place  tell  him,  that  he  held  luch  language  to  the  Lady  who
had  the  courage  to  upbraid  him  with  it  to  his  face,  and  in  the
midft  of  all  his  glory;  to  her  whom  he  reproached  with  fned-
ding  tears  over  her  murdered  brother,  while  fhe  taxed  him  with
his  murder,  becaufe  he  feared  her  brother  would  betray  his  ie-
cret;  to  that  perfon  who  refufed  to  enroll  herfelf  in  that  co^
hort  of  flatterers  that  were  to  open  the  way  for  him,  by  thou*
fands  of  calumnious  accufations,  invented  by  himfelf  and  by
his  emiflaries,  againfl  perfons  holding  ftations  that  he  coveted
For  himfelf  or  his  adheients,  and  which  his  partizans  forward-
fed  to  the  unfortunate  Lewis  XVI;  to  that  perfon  thro'  whofe
medium  lie  wifhed  to  perfuade  the  King  that  M  de  Sa'rtme  had
ftolen  twerty-twô  millions  out  of  fifty-three  entrufted  to  h'm,
though  the  minifter  needed  only  to  be  informed  of 'he  plot  to
(how  the  falfity  of  the  imputation  :  in  fine,  to  that  perfon  whom
he  courted  as  neceffary  for  his  intrigues,  who  discovered  him
to  be  a  monfter,  and  who  laid  open  all  his  plots  and  iniquities
to  M.  de  IVîaurepas  and  Lewis  XVI.  Let  him  iearn,  that  if  his
fecret  crimes  are  to.have  a  place  in  hiftory,  the  proofs  of  ail
thefe  are  not  yet  loft.

*  In  order  to  fécond  the  views  of  her  worthy  father  in  this
vvarfaie  on  thw  diftindion  of  eftates,  while  he  was  intriguing
at  the  palace,  Madam  de  Stael  was  playing  the  fame  part  in
Paris.  She  had  eftabliihed  at  her  houfe  a  fort  of  Office  of  In-
fenption.  La  Fayette  and  the  Lameths  would  bring  the  traitors
to  her  table j  and  the  names  of  thofe  daftards,  who  would  pro-


HISTORICAL  PAS.T.  24.5

fpirators  aimed  at,  was  that  power  of  counteracting  all  re-
foliations  detrimental  to  religion  or  monarchy.  It  was  in
vain  that  Lewis  XVI.  with  the  tendernefs  rather  of  a  fa-
ther than  of  a  king,  made  thofe  facrifkes  (which  of  them-
felves might  be  called  a  revolution,  fo  much  did  they  cur-
tail his  royal  prerogative)  in  his  Declaration  of  the  23  J
of  June.  But  this  was  not  the  fpecies  of  revolution  fougiit
by  the  Confpirators.  The  fophifters  had  determined,  that,
to  make  their  Equality  and  Liberty  triumph,  it  was  ne-
CefTary  to  deliberate  by  perfons  and  not  by  ejlates;  that
the  Nobility  and  Clergy  fhould  be  confounded  among
the  multitude;  and  that  the  majority,  when  deliberating
by  eftates,  fhould  prove  a  minoiity  when  united  with  the
great  numbers  of  the  third  eftate.  Lewis  XVI.  orders,
that  in  virtue  of  the  ancient  constitution  of  the  kingdom,
the  ancient  form  of  deliberating  by  eftates  fhould  be  pre-
served j  but  his  orders  are  vain;  the  Confpirators  proteft
againft  them;  their  prefident,  Bailly,  calls  them  to  a
tennis-court,  and  there  they  fwear  to  imppfe  a  conftitution
on  France  congenial  to  their  views»  They  immediately
fet  their  brigands  in  motion;  the  venerable  Arehbifhop
of  Paris  is  nearly  ftoned  to  death  ;  the  life  of  the  Monarch
is  threatened;  the  fatal  union  of  the  three  eftates  at  length
takes  place,  which  fubjetfts  the  two  firft  eftates  to  the  will
of  the  multitude;  for  the  Confpirators  were  certain  of  the
fupport  of  all  thofe  apoftates  and  daftards,  who,  by  their  in-
trigues, had  been  returned  among  the  deputies  of  the  Nobi-
lity and  Clergy,  becaufeNecker  had  doubled  the  number  of
the  deputies  of  the  third  eftate,  to  enfure  the  majority  of  the
votes  in  favor  of  the  decrees  which  the  party  were  to  pro-
pofe.  He  had  organized  the  States  General  according  to
trie  views  and  wiihes  of  the  fophifters;  he  may,  it  is  crue,
whimper  and  weep  over  the  difafters  and  crimes  of  the
Revolution;  but  the  hand  of  time  (hall  engrave  on  his
tomb,  that  he  was  the  grand  agent  of  them  all.

Having  no  farther  oppofition  to  fear,  and  certain  of  pas-
fing  whatever  decrees  they  chofe,  thefe  Confpirators  pro-
ceed to  declare  themfelves  a  National  Affimhly.  Th ./
arrogate  to  themfelves  the  right  of  making  and  of  pro-
nouncing the  law.  The  fecrets  of  the  Lodges  constitute
the  balls  of  the  Revolution  under  the  title  of  the  Rights

mife  to  abandon  their  Order  and  pafs  over  to  the  Third  Eftate,
were  immediately  inferibed  on  her  lift.


246  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

tf  Man.  The  firft  article  declares  man  to  he  equal  and
free;  that  the  principle  of  all  fovereignty  ejjentially  re-
files in  the  people-,  and  that  law  is  nothing  more  than  the
exprejfion  of  the  general  ivill.  Such  had  been  for  nearly
half"  a  century  the  doctrines  of  Argenfon,  Montefquieu,
Pvoufleau,  and  Voltaire.  Thefe  principles  of  pride  and
revolt  had  long  fince  been  the  ground- work  of  the  mys-
teries of  every  clafs  of  Sophifter,  Occult  Mafon,  or  Illu-
minée; and  now  they  decorate  the  title-page  of  the  re-
volutionary code»

This  equal,  free,  fovereign,  and  legiflative  people,  may
.will  that  their  religion  fhould  be  preferved  in  all  its  in-
tegrity; and  that  its  monarch  fhould  be  entruifed  with
the  nccefïary  power  to  crufh  fedition  and  rebellion.  Ve-
neration for  the  altar  and  affection  lor  their  prince  ftill
glowed  in  the  heart  of  the  French.  But  the  Confpirators
Wanted  an  armed  force,  drawn  from  the  body  of  that  fame
people,  docile,  and  fubfervient  to  the  views  of  the  Seel,
and  that  would  oppofe  the  will  of  the  people  whenever  it
did  not  coincide  with  theirs.  This  force  was  entirely  to
overpower  the  army  of  the  fovereign.  Every  thing  had
been  forefeen  ;  for  the  fopbifters  had  long  fmce  faid, — — -
u  Oh  that  we  could  but  once  get  rid  of  thefe  foreign  mi-
K  litary  hirelings  !  An  army  of  natives  might  be  gained
"  to  the  fide  of  Liberty,  at  lead  a  part  of  them;  but  fo-
<c  reign  troops  are  kept  on  foot  for  this  very  reafon."*-—
Their  army  of  natives  is  immediately  formed,  and  it  is  a-
gain  from  the  dark  receiles  of  Mafonry  that  the  fignal  is

*  See  the  letter  attributed  to  Montefquieu. — In  Vol.  II.  P.
94,  on  the  teftimony  of  the  Abbé  Pointe,  I  quoted  a  letter  at-
tributed to  Montefquieu  by  an  Engiifhjournalilt,  but  could  not
rame  the  paper.  It  has  fince  been  diicovered  in  the  Courier,
or  Evening  Gazette,  oT  Auguft  4,  1795.  It  is  there  (aid  that
Montefquieu  wrote  it,  a  few  years  before  his  death,  to  a  prefi-
dent  of  one  of  the  Parliaments  of  France.  I  could  with  to  have
feen  the  perfon  named  to  whom  it  was  written,  or  in  whofe
priTdHon  it  is  at  prefent,  for  it  is  of  a  complexion  to  change
our  ideas  very  much  as  to  the  moderation  of  that  writer.  It
would  immediately  clafs  him  amongtheconfoiringfophillcrs;
and,  to  pafs  fuch  a  fentence  on  this  author,  the  cleareft  proofs
fliould  be  required.  But  it  appears,  whoever  was  the  author  of
thai  'ettsr,  rim  he  was  far  advanced  in  the  plots  of  the  Se<ft,foc
he  very  accurately  defences  the  oonducl  of  the  Jacobins  with
refect  to  the  foieign  troops  in  the  French  fervice:  neither
does  he  appear  to  bs  ignorant  of  the  plan  for  feparating  Ireland
fiom  England.


HISTORICAL  PART.  *47

given.  That  fame  Savalette  de  Lange  who  prefided  over
the  fecret  committee  of  the  Amis  réunis,  and  over  the  cor-
refponience,  appeared  before  the  Municipality  of  Paris,
and  fpoke  to  the  following  effect:  "  Gentlemen,  I  am  a
"  Corporal.  Here  are  citizens  to  whom  I  have  taught  the
"  ufe  of  arms,  that  they  might  defend  the  country.  I  did
u  not  create  myielf  a  major  or  a  general,  zve  are  ail  equal,
"  I  am  limply  a  Corporal;  but  I  alfo  gave  the  example;
"  command  that  every  citizen  fhould  follow  it. — Let  the
"  nation  take  arms,  and  Liberty  will  be  invincible."  Sa-
valette, in  pronouncing  this  diicourfe,  prefcnted  feven  or
eight  brigands  accoutred  as  foldiers.  The  fight  of  thefe
few  men,  and  the  repeated  cries  of  Let  us  fave  the  nation  !
excited  euthufiafm: — An  immenfe  mob  fui  rounded  the
Town-hall,  and  Savalctte's  motion  was  inftantaneouily  .

decreed.  The  very  next  day  the  Parifian  army  is  let  on  foot,
and  millions  are  formed  into  Native  Battalions  through-
out the  empire.*  They  are  the  fworn  agents  of  the  Con-
fpirators]  and  it  is  now  time  that  the  unfortunate  Lewis
XVT.  fhould  feel  their  power.  He  had  driven  from  his
perfon  the  tieacherous  Necker;  but  the  Seel;  ftill  wanted
his  fervices,  and  it  forces  the  Monarch  to  recal  him.— -
The  King  hefitates  at  fan&ioning  the  Rights  of  Man,
and  the  force  of  the  people  is  immediately  put  in  a£tion.

In  fupport  of  thefe  rights  all  the  Confpirators  combinej
and  it  is  agreed,  that  immediately  on  his  return,  Necker
(hall  ftarve   the  people  into  rebellion;  that  the  brethren

*  Many  authors  have  fallen  into  an  error  with  refpeit  to  the
fi  ft  formation  of  the  National  Guards;  and  they  ground  their
animons  on  a  refolution  of  the  Committee  of  Eledors,  fent
from  the  town-hall  to  all  the  Sections  of  Paris,  oidering  the
formation  of  this  guard,  and  figned  Fleffclles,  Tallin,  Ds  Leu-
tre,  Faucbet,  the  Marquis  de  la  Salle;  but  it  is  a  certain  raft,
and  within  the  knowledge  of  every  body,  rft,  That  this  Nar
tional  Guard  was  formed  only  two  days  after  the  taking  of  the
Baft  tile;  and  zdly,  1  hat  Mr.  Fleffclles  was  murdered  on  the
day  of  the  taking  of  the  Baltiile.  But  a  faft  little  known  is,
that  the  minutes  of  this  refolution,  as  alfo  the  minutes  of  all
fanfarons  that  took  place  at  the  town-hall  during  the  fir  it
year  oi  the  revolution,  were  not  compiled,  till  the  fecund  year?
by  a  man  of  the  name  of  Verrier,  and  by  the  orders  of  La  Fay-
ette, who,  notwithftanding  many  obiervatiuns  made  on  the
fubjeel,  would  not  allow  any  change  to  be  made  in  what  had
been  inferted  by  his  orders,  and  would  have  been  particularly
grieved  tj  lee  the  real  origin  of  that  National  Gua'dmaie  pub-*
lie,  in  the  command  of  which  h>î  i'o  much  gloritd.


1$  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

{bal!  collect  al!  the  harp-'es  of  the  fuburbs  to  go  and  de-
mand bread  of  Lewis  XVI;  that  Baiilyand  his  afFelForSj
feated  at  the  Municipality,  (hall  order  the  legions  of  na-
tives to  follow  and  fupport  them  ;  that  La  Fayette  at  the»
head  cf  thefe  legions  mould  march  to  Verfailles;  that  he
ihould  furround  Lewis  XVL  with  thefe  bands  under  pre-
tence of  watching  for  his  fafety,  and  then  retire  to  Jleep,t
Mirabeau,  Petion,  and  Chapellier,  Montefquieu,and  Du-
port,  Charles  Lameth,  and  Laclos,  Sillery,  and  D'Ai-
guillon, will  then  inform  the  Aflembly  that  viSlims  mujl
be  thrown  to  the  people^  and  they  avail  themfelves  of  the
darknels  of  the  night  to  inflame  the  populace  and  excite
the  foldiery.  Their  hearts  were  already  as  hideous  as  the
furies:  They  now  allume  their  cojlitme,  to  lead  their  har-
pies on  to  the  commiflion  of  crime. f  D'Orléans  will  ply
his  monfters  with  the  beverage  of  rage  and  frenzy,  and
will  point  out  the  Queen  as  the  firft  vidtim  to  be  immo-
lated. Syeyes,  Grégoire,  and  a  multitude  of  other  Con-
spirators, ftand  fpectators  of  the  conteft;  but,  mould  the
Monarch  fall  in  the  affray,  they  will  tender  the  crown  to
Orleans,  as  they  may  be  certain  of  parcelling  out  its  pre-
rogative according  to  their  Equality  and  Liberty.  Neclc-
er  abfeonds,  but  his  virtuous  /poufe^  decorated  with  her
nofegays,  and  accompanied  by  her  infeparable  companion
the  Marefchale  de  Beauveau,  will  appear  in  the  galleries
of  Verfailles,  in  the  midft  of  the  carnage,  and  virtuoufly
exclaim,  Let  the  good  people  aâl>  there  is  no  danger:  and,
in  fact,  me  had  none  to  fear  j  me  had  already  written  to
her  brother  Germanic  "  Patience;  every  thing  will  ga
"  ivell\  we  can  neither  fpeak  nor  write."%

The  night  from  the  5th  to  the  6th  of  October  reveals
the  fecrets  which  this  worthy  confidant  dared  to  write»—
Hiftory  needs  not  our  labors  to  paint  the  horrors  of  that
awful  night;  they  are  defer ibed  in  the  juridical  depofi-
tions  taken  by  the  magiftiat.es  of  the  Chatelet.  Orleans
loft  courage  at  the  fight  of  a  few  faithful  Life-guards,  the
only  adherents  of  the  King  that  La  Fayette  had  permitted
to  remain  near  his  perfonj  and  never  was  a  more  heroic
phalanx  formed  than  by  thefe  brave  men  round  their  roy-

*  See  the  Sitting  of  the  5th  October,  1789.  ~

f  See  the  juridical  depofitions  of  witneffes,  157,  »>6»  *3«»
and  373.

X  See  her  letter  of  the  5th  OJlober,  1789.


HISTORICAL  PART.  249

al  matter  and  his  confort.  Though  their  courage  was  ap-
pall d  by  the  orders  or"  their  Sovereign,  they  were  flill  pro-
piga]  ot  their  own  blood;  they  refifted  a  foreft  of  pikes,*
and  Orleans  could  not  confummate  his  premeditated
crime.  Day-light  arrives  to  expofe  the  horrors  of  this
night;  the  brigand?,  his  inftruments,  are  fen  to  blufh,
and  the  National  Guards  at  length  reflect  that  they  are
Frenchmen.  They  emit  no  other  wifh  than  to  fee  Lewis
XVI.  living  in  the  mi.Sft  of  them  at  Paris  in  the  palace
of  his  forefathers.  The  unfortunate  Monarch  knows  not
what  men  had  profited  of  the  natural  effufions  of  loyalty
of  his  people  to  make  them  emit  this  wifh.  He  thought
that  he  was  entrufting  himfoif  to  the  affections  of  his  peo-
ple, when  he  was  only  obeying  the  diitates  of  the  Con-
ifpiratorSk  He  knows  not  t;;at  it  is  the  laft  (hi ft  of  the
Confpirators,  that  the  crimes  of  this  horrid  night  might
not  be  entirely  fruitlefs.  The  great  difficulty  they  had
found  in  making  the  Monarch  (auction  the  rights  of  ?nany
made  them  perceive  that  they  would  frequently  ltand  in
need  of  the  fame  brigands  to  force  his  acqmefcence  to

Ii

*  The  6th  of  October,  1^89»  was  the  laft  day  of  the  French
Monarchy. — Should  it  ever  rift  again,  let  a  monument  be  e-
recled  in  memory  of  thofe  brave  Knight3  who  would  have  fo
gloiioufly  contributed  to  fave  it,  had  not  their  courage  been
chained  down  by  the  commands  of  their  King.  May  their
names  be  at  Jeafl  preferved  bv  the  hiftorian  !  1  could  wifh  to
infert  the  names  of  the  fixty  heroes  who  fo  well  deferved  the;
appellation  of  Life-guards  an  this  awful  occahun;  but  1  have
only  been  able  to  obtain  thw  following:

OFFICERS.  deMoimandre.

Duke  de  Guiche,  Captain.  Baron  Durepaire.

Marquis  de  Savonnière,  Chef  Derniers.

de  Brigade.  Moucheron.

Vicomte  D'Ajioult.  Chev.  de  la  Tranchade*

Vicomte  de  Sefmaifons.  de  Duret.

Comte  de  Mauleon.  ■ de  Valory.

Chev.  Dampierre.  Comte  de  Mouthier.

St.  George.  Bcrnady.

M.iTrs.  Horric,  three  Brothers*

LIFE  GUARDS.  Meff.  Mi\àerzt, three  Brothers.

MefTrs.  ne  Berard,  tivo  Bro'  Chev.  RenaHy.

tkers.  de  Lam  cue.

Chev.  de  Huiiliers.  de  Montaut.

Marquis  de  Varicotirt,  killed.  de  Paget.

Chev.  Defhutes,  kiUed.


?-5'Ô  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

tHoiê  future  decrees  which  were  to  be  grounded  on  therrf*
All  the  decrees  that  were  in  fucceflion  to  annihilate  reli-.
gion  and  monarchy  were  to  be  enforced  by  an  infurrec*
tion,  and  the  pikes  and  lantcrn-pofts  were  to  be  in  per-
petual requisition,  tu  conlrrain  the  votesj  to  intimidate
the  Monarch,  and  dilcard  all  reclamation.  In  future  a
captive  in  Pans,  Lewis  XVi.  will  be  perpetually  mena-
ced by  the  brigands  iffuing  trom  the  fuburbs  or  from  the
quarries,  and  paid  by  Necker  or  Orleans.  La  Fayette
wii!  proclaim,  that  \njurreciicn  is  a  înojï  jacred  dutyy  and
iniurrection  will  become  the  {landing  order  of  the  dav; — *
Mirabeau,  Barnave,  Chapellier,  will  point  out  the  object
and  fix  the  hour:  Orders  $vili  be  lent  from  their  anti.
cnamocrs  to  the  Jacobins  and  the  fuburbs,  and  daily,  at
the  hour  fixed,  wiil  the  King,  the  Clergy,  the  Nobility,
and  ail  who  may  oppoie  the  decrees  in  debate,  find  them-
selves fiirrounded  by  a  mob  that  will  hoot  or  aâ  exactly
according  M  the  initructions  given  by  the  confpirators.*
Though  they  reaped  no  farther  benefit  from  all  the  hor-
rid derd:-  of  the  fifth  and  lixth  of  October,  yet  the  confpir-
ators knew  but  too  well  how  to  appreciate  their  fucceffes.
Madame  Necker  writes  again  to  her  brother  Germani:
V  We  are  content,  every  thing  went  on  well.  The  arifto-
"  cracy  would  have  hau  the  uppermoft,  and  we  were  oblig*
w  ed  to  make  ufe  ôf  the  rabble. "+  Here  terminate  what
may  be  called  the  preliminaries  of  the  revolution.  Neck-
er had  moulded  the  National  Afiembly  according  to  the
views  of  the  beet,  and  had  eftabhfned  it  in  the  town  that
was  judged  moit  proper  for  enabling  him  to  work  the
premeditated  revolution.  We  next  proceed  to  the  plan
traced  by  the  Sophifters  for  crujhing  the  pretended  ivretch  \
and  here  begins  the  war  waged  againft  the  God  of  Chris-
tianity.

*  Some  of  the  brigands  who  were  in  confiant  pay  for  the
purptile  of  thei'e  infui  i  tclions  were  retiring  home  between  ten
and  eleven  at  night,  and  1  heard  them  take  leave  of  each  other
in  the  following  terms:  ''  It  lias  gone  on  pretty  well  to-day  ;
"  good  bye;  we  (hall  txpeit  vou  to-morrow.—  What,  to-mor-

if  row?  at  what  o'clock?  — at  the  opening  of  the  aflsmbly.

"  Where  do  Vie  go  for  orders?  To  Mirabeau's,  Chapellier  s,  or
M  Barnave's,as  ufual." — i  own,  that  till  I  was  prefent  at  this
dilcourfe  I  never  could  belfert  that  thofe.  legiflator3  hart  daisy
interviews  with  thefe  brigands  to  fix  the  nuur  and  oojsct  of
fuch  infui  récitons.

f  Letter  8th  of  Oclober.


HISTORICAL  PART.  2$1

To  deftroy  religious  orders;  to  deprive  the  minifters  In  the  de-
Of  the
wants
ploy/t

Jes  and  the  BeiUropbons :  Such  (it  has  been  fhown)  were  fembly
the  means  combined  by  the  Sophifters  to  overturn  and
annihilate  the  altars  of  Chriftianity.  To  fubftitute  the
worfhip  of  the  great  architect  of  the  univerfe  to  that  of
Chrift;  the  light  of  the  lodges  to  the  doctrines  of  the  gos-
pel; the  god  of  their  pretended  reafon  to  the  God  of  re-
velation: Such  were  the  moft  moderate  of  the  myfteries
of  the  occult  Lodges  of  Mafonry.  To  invent  and  fubfti-
tute new  religions  in  place  of  Chriftianity,  and  toimpofe
them  on  the  people  till  every  religious  principle  could  be
eradicated  :  In  the  name  of  Equality  and  Liberty  to  ren-
der themfelves  poiuerful  and  formidable;  then  to  tie  the
hands y  Jul jugate,  ao<J  /mother  in  the  germ,  every  thing
that  could  counteradt  the  empire  of  impiety  and  atheifm  r
Such  were  the  views  and  plots  of  the  Epopt,  Regent,  and
Magus  of  Illuminifm.  This  code  and  their  oaths  have
been  laid  open  to  our  readers;  and  of  all  thefe  horrid
plots  what  particle  has  the  revolution  left  incomplete?

Religious  vows  were  immediately  fufpended  and  foori
abolifhed;  the  clergy  were  pillaged  of  their  propertv,  and
all  the  polleflions  of  the  church  were  converted  into  a  fund
for  the  fecurity  of  the  affignats;  the  facred  vellels  were
(tolen  and  prophaned;  the  churches  were  not  only  robbed
of  their  gold  and  filver,  but  the  very  brafs  and  metal  of
the  bells  were  carried  away.*  All  this  however  is  but  a
fir  fi  eflayofthat  war  which  the  revolution  is  to  wage  a-
gainft  the  Church.  Still  had  the. Church  prefçrved  irs
faith,  its  real  treafure,  pure  and  untar uifhed ;  but  it  is  ex
that  very  treafure  that  Mirabeau  will  aim  his  blows.  Hj
declared,  that  if  the  Catholic  religion  were  not  deftroyed
in  France,  the  revolution  could  never  be  conlblidatcd.— -
Immediately  after  this  decifion  a  code  is  formed  for  the
clergy,  of  a  long  fuite  of  decrees,  and  it  is  ftiled  the  civil
conjlitution  of  the  clergy.  But  it  was  merely  a  conftitu-
tion  of  fchifm  and  apoltacy.  This  was  no  more  than  thœ
firft  religion,  invented  as  the  ftepping-ftone  that  fhould
lead  the  people  to  a  nullity  of  all  religion.  Grounded  on

*  Dacrees  of  October  tfj,  November  i,  Decembei  19,  1/89  ;

and  February  13 ,  1790.


252  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

me  principles  of  Revolutionary  Equality  and  Liberty,  it
con&itutes'the  people  fovereigns  in  the  fanctuary,juft  as
thofe  fame  principles  had  conftituted  them  fovereigns  a-
round  the  throne}  it  endows  the.  people,  with  rights  that
the  gofpel  has  referved  to  the  miniflry;  it  was  no  more
than  a  repetition  of  thofe  errors  of  Camus,  of  the  apoftate
of  Ypres,  and  of  the  (chifm  of  Utrecht,  long  iince  ana-
thematized. Notwithstanding  the  difguifè  it  h?d  a  (Turned,
the  clergy  of  France  foon  dilcovered  its  real  tendency,
and  at  the  peril  of  their  lives  they  refund  to  take  the  oath
at  apoftacy.  The  faithful  paftors  were  expelled  from  their
Des  and  churches,  periecuted,  calumniated,  and  r  viled  in
the  grofieft  manner;  for  the  legifiating  committee  had
faid  to  the  people,  Dare  every  thing  againjl  the  Clergy \
you  Jhall  be  Supported.  Soon  is  the  national  worftiip  con-»
verted  into  that  of  perjury  and  intrufion,  for  the  true
priefts  of  Cbrivt  are  driven  from  his  altars;  at  Nifmes
and  Avignon  they  are  flaughtered;  and  the  man  who  had
fworn  to  crufi)  Chi  iff  and  his  altars,  who  had  declared  his
gofpel  to  be  a  gofpel  of  flaves,  together  with  him  who  had
begun  the  revolution  by  declaring  that  France  muft  be
dijcatholl%ed-s  (decatboiijée)  are  carried  in  triumph  to  one
of  the  moll  magnificent  temples  of  the  Lord,  now  con-
Verted  into  a  den  of  thieves,  into  the  pantheon  of  the  gods
of  the  revolution,  in  (hort,  into  the  burial  place  of  a  Vol-
taire, a  Jean  Jaques,  Rouffeau,  or  a  Mirabeau.*  Such,
were  the  labors  of  the  fit  ft  revolutionary  legiflators.
by  the  fe-  A  new  fet  of  legiflators  fucceed  to  the  firft,  and  profe-
cond  as-  cute  iimilar  plots  agaihft  the  priellhood»  New  oaths  are
fcmbly;  decreed,  which  {how  in  a  (till  clearer  light  that  apoftacy
is  their  object.  The  confrancy  of  the  clergy  exafperates
them.  The  apoftates  iepreknt  their  brethren  as  refracto-
ry to  the  laws,  and  decrees  of  baniihment  are  palled  a-
■gainit  thofe  who  would  not  Av.earro  their  abominations. \
Lut  t'neie  decrees  are  only  a  lignai  given  for  the  brigands
to  execute  that  which  thefe  confpiring  legiflators  dared
not  publicly  ordain.  Their  municipalities  had  taken  the
precaution  to  flow  into  different  churches  vaft  numbers  of
thefe  valiant  ConfelTprs  of  their  faith,  thefe  clergy  who

*  See  the  fittings  of  April  10,  Auguft  24»  1790;  and  Janu-
ary 4,  April  4,  May  30,  Auguft  27,  179*-

f  Decrees  November  29,  1791;  and  April  6,  May  16,  Au-
guit  26,  z;c2.


HISTORICAL  PART.  *53

were  to  be  baniihed.  The  brigands  are  then  let  loofe,
armed  with  pikes  and  hatchets,  and  the  Herculsfes  and
Beiifrophons  of  the  bloody  September  make  their  appear»
ance;  this  is  alfo  the  day  on  which  thofe  avengers  of  A-
biram  came  forward,  thofc  men  who  in  the  occuk  Lodges
had  been  taught  to  ftrike  the  victims,  to  tear  out  the
heart,  and  bear  away  in  triumph  the  heads  of  thofe  pro-
fci  ibed  perfons  ftyled  prophane.  When  the  hiftorian  fhali
proceed  to  paint  the  horrors  of  thofe  bloody  days,  let  him
not  forget  the  oaths  of  the  Knights  Kadofcb,  and  at  whom
they  were  aimed.  Let  him  follow  into  the  Lodges  thofe
brigand's  that  Philip  of  Orleans  had  initiated,  and  his  a-
ftoniihment  will  be  greatly  abated  at  the  fight  of  fo  ma-
ny pontiffs  and  priefts  immolated  on  the  fame  day,  to  the
hatred  of  the  adepts,  and  to  the  manes  of  their  premier
chief.*

Contrary  to  the  expectations  of  the  confpirators,  the
people  of  the  provinces  refufed  to  imitate  the  brigands  of
Pans;  and  thus  did  whole  hecatombs  of  victims  efcape
the  fate  to  which  they  had  been  devoted.  It  was  in  vain
that  the  municipality  of  Paris  invited  all  France  to  feek
its  fâfety  in  the  death  of  fo  many  priefts  alledged  to  be  re.
fractory.f  In  vain  did  Lafitte>  and  the  other  commnTaries

*  I  am  forry  to  fay  it,  but  it  is  a  fa<ft  that  cannot  be  hidden  ;
honeft  mafons  will  fhudder  at  it,  but  they  mull  be  informed
of  what  monfters  have  iffiied  from  their  Lodges.  During  the
\vh.,le  of  the  riots,  whether  at  the  Town -hall  or  at  the  Car-
mes, the  real  figns  for  rallying  and  fraternizing  with  the  bri-
gands were  mafonic.  During  the  time  of  the  butchery  the  mo».
derers  ottered  the  mafonic  grip  to  the  ftanders-by,  and  frater-
niZid  with  or  drove  them  off  according  as  they  anfwered  or
miiappiehended  it.  1  myfdf  faw  a  man  of  the  loweft  rabble
•who  explained  to  me  how  they  had  offered  him  their  hands,
and  that  not  knowing  how  to  anfwerthe  gi  ip  he  was  driven  a-
way  with  contempt,  while  others  who  were  not  ltiangers  to
the  fcience  were  admitted  in  the  midftof  the  carnage,  with  a
fmile.  I  am  even  acquainted  with  a  clergyman,  who,  by  means
of  the  ligns  ot  mafonry,  efcaped  from  the  bngands  at  the
'I  own-hall.  It  is  true,  that  had  he  not  been  difgruifed.  his
fcience  would  have  been  but  of  little  avail  ;  for  no  fooner  were
thofe  fame  brigands  informed  that  he  was  an  ecciefiaftic,  thaft
they  punned  him.  Neither  could  the  fcience  be  of  any  fervice
to  the  anftocranc  brethren;  and  this  preclusion  will  fuffice  to
demonftrate  to  tlie  ecciefiaftic  and  ariftocratic  members,  that
they  were  but  the  mere  dupes  of  the  occult  Lodges  of  the  fra~
ternity.

*  'ihe  addrefs  of  the  ^d  September,  1791,


'  254  antisocial  conspiracy;

of  the  confpiring  legiflators,  range  throughout  the  towns,
and  the  country,  declaring  that  the  true  fpirit  or"  the  de-
crees meant  the  death  and  not  the  banifhment  of  thefe
priefts;  die  people  were  not  yet  ripe  for  fuch  atrocities.  It
was  executioners  that  were  wanting  to  the  confpirators,
and  not  the  good  will  of  the  fécond  affembly;  but  it  is  al-
io true,  that  from  that  inftant  they  no  longer  had  it  in
their  power  to  confummate  that  which  the  firft  affembly
had  begun.  The  former  legiflators  had  ruined  and  driven
the  clergy  from  the  altar;  the  latter  had  made  a  hecatomb
of  them;  and  it  was  in  vociferating  curfes  on  thofe  who
fled  to  other  nations,  that  they  beheld  them  baffling  their
rage,  and  fubmitting  to  exile  rather  than  deny  the  faith  of
their  divine  mafter.
w  h'2  Hitherto,however,difFerent  pretences  had  concealed  the

lerabiv"  rea^  mot'vcs  °f  tne'r  perfecutions  againft  the  paftors  of  the
church.  The  Roman  Catholics,  indeed,  could  no  longer
exercife  their  religion  in  Fiance;  but  '.he  çonjlitutional
intruders^  and  the  difciples  of  Luther  and  Calvin,  ll  11
continued  to  pronounce  the  name  of  Chrift  in  their  tem-
ples The  third  affembly  now  throws  oft'  the  mafk.  The
Hierdphant»  of  IlluminiiVn  had  declared  in  their  rnyfteries,
that  a  clay  would  come  when  reafon  would  be  the  fole  code
of  man.  The  adept  Hebkrt  appears  with  this  code,
and  France  recognifes  no  other  worfhip  but  that  of  rea-
fon. It  is  at  once  the  religion  of  the  Sophifter,  vvhofe  rea-
fon tells  him  that  there  is  a  God,  as  well  as  of  him  whole
reafon  tells  him  that  there  is  no  God;  it  is  the  religion  of
the  Sophifter  adoring  himfelf,  his  own  reafon,  or  his  fup-
pofed  wildom;  as  it  is  that  of  the  vain  mortal  in  delirium;
nevei  thelefs,  this  is  the  only  worfhip  tolerated  by  the  Ja-
cobin equal  ilia  free*  The  wanton  devotees  of  Venus
appear;  one  is  immediately  fet  up  on  the  altar  and  ador-
ed as  the  Goddei's  of  Reafon;  and  the  fumes  of  inctnfe
no  longer  rife  but  in  her  worfhip.  The  infatiabie  Guil-
lotine will  now  devour  whatever  part  of  the  clergy  had
hitherto  tfcaped;  The  time  is  now  come  for  fiijiing  in
the  germ  every  thing  that  can  recal  to  mind  the  gofpel,
the  God  of  Chriliians,  his  fcafts,  or  thofe  of  his  faints.—*-
They  are  now  pioicribcd,  and  are  no  longer  to  be  ken
on  the  calendars  published  for  the  people;  thus  aflimilaN-
xng  them  to  thofè  that  had  long  imct  been  in  ufe  with  the
Sect.  The  very  order  of  the  week?,  the  months,  the  year,
k  overturned.  "  The  great  day  ol  the  Lord,  the  Sunday,


Historical  part.  *-55

is  aboliflied,  for  it  recalled  to  the  minds  of  the  people  the
exiftrnce  of  a  God  and  of  a  Creator;  bin  leaft  the  peo-
ple mould  ftill  fear  the  power  of  an  avenging  God  after
death,  they  will  read  engraved  on  the  tombs  of  their  fore-
fathers, and  on  thofe  even  into  which  they  are  to  defcend
themfelves,  that  death  is  only  an  eternal  jleep  ;  and  this
was  one  of  the  grand  myfterics.  The  few  prietts  who  re-
mained, and  who  ftill  adored  an  avenging  God  and  a
Creator,  were  either  to  abjure  the  very  character  of  the
ancient  priefthood,  or  perifh,  flowed  up  in  loathfome  dun-
geons, beneath  the  fatal  axe  of  the  guillotine,  or  irnrner-
fed  in  the  waters  of  the  Loire,  or  of  the  ocean.  Such  was
the  reign  of  the  conlpirators  Hébert;  and  Robefpierre.

The  tyrants  quarrel  among  themfelves  and  devour  each,
other;  and  even  the  revolution  may  be  faid  to  have  its  re-
volutions. Impiety,  for  a  time,  afliimes  a  different  fhape,
but  does  not  relent  in  its  perfection  againft  the  gofpel
and  the  priefthood.  One  might  have  been  tempted  to
think  that  it  was  returning  on  its  own  footfteps,  for  the
people  Would  ftill  adore  a  God,  notwithstanding  this  new
reign  of  Reafqn  ;  and  Robefpierre  allows  them,  for  a  time,
a  fupreme  being.  Next  comes  ReveilleRE-Lepaux
with  his  Tbeopbilantbropic  worfhip.  This  was  the  fourth
religion  invented  by  the  Sect.  It  is  another  tyrant  of  Is-
rael erecting  a  golden  calf,  to  hinder  the  people  from  a-
doring  the  true  God.  It  is  the  Magi  of  Illuminifm  in-
venting religion  after  religion,  and  god  after  god,  in  hopes
of  difgufting  the  people  with  every  idea  of  a  god.  They,
indeed,  allow  this  unfortunate  people  to  pronounce  his
name  again;  but  let  us  proceed  to  this  Tbeopbilantbropic
meeting.  There  every  perfori  who  ftill  believes  in  God
is  treated  as  a  man  imbued  with  vulgar  prejudices,  as  a
fool  or  a  madman.  There  they  make  no  farther  myftery
of  their  defigns,  that  if  ever  they  can  infufe  their  philofo-
phic  fpirit  into  the  people,  all  this  new  worftiip  fhall  be
banifhed  as  was  the  former.*  It  is  always  the  worfhipof
cunning  and  impious  rage  againft  the  priefthood  of  the
Lord.  The  Seel  appears  for  a  time  to  have  caft  afide  the
inftruments  of  death;  but  it  is  only  to  condemn  its  vic-
tims to  a  more  flow  and  cruel  end.  It  itèVer'ceafcs  topro-

*  This  is  the  exael  Maternent  of  an  account  that  I  received
from  a  gentleman  who  procured  initiation  into  the  myfterje*
of  the  nrefeot  Tkeophilenthropiftj  of  I;.


2$$


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;


çîaim  its  oaths  of  Equality  and  Liberty;!  thofe  two  blet*
fmgs  of  the  revolution^  however,  can  only  be  acquired  for
the  prieftheod  by  perjury  and  apoftacy.  But  wo  be  to  thofe
who  refufe  it;  in  vain  does  the  citizen  offer  them  an  afy-
lurn  in  his  houfe,  domiciliary  vifits  will  foon  difcovet  them*
* — Y5o  they  retire  into  the  forefts,  into  caverns,  they  are
hunted  down  and  banifhed  to  the  wilderneffes  of  Guya-
na; and  pilots  more  to  be  feared  than  the  tempeft  are  fent
to  convey  them.

Thus  do  all  the  different  plots  of  the  Sophifters  of  Im-
piety, which  had  been  fo  long  a  time  contriving  in  dark-
nefs,  burfl  forth  into  broad  day-light,  the  object  of  their
myfteries  is  accomplifhed;  that  wifb,  that  oath  of  crujh-
ii.g  Çhrift  and  his  religion,  with  its  minifter?,  is  confum-
mated.  But  the  reader  has  not  forgotten,  that  the  Sophis-
iters  of  Rebellion  coalefced  with  thofe  of  Impiety.  The
adepts  had  alio  fworn  to  crufh  the  monarch  and  his  throne;
here  again  my  reader  mult  have  got  the  ftart  of  me,  and
will  immediately  fay,  "  but  the  revolution  has  alfo  con-
**  fummated  their  plots  againft  the  throne,  as  it  has  thofe
"  againft  Chrift  and  his  altars."
In  the  de-  Here  again  muft  the  hiflorian  wade  through  fcenes  of
crées  a-  blood  and  horror,  and  his  fight  will  be  blalted  by  the  moll
gainlt  mo-  atrocious  crimes.  If  he  has  the  ftrength  and  patience  he
narciiy;  may  enumerate  them;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  let  him  ne-
ver lofe  light  of  the  Sect  that  has  foftered  them.  Let  him
follow  its  progrefs  ;  agents  may  vary,  confpirators  may
fucceed  each  other  in  the  legiflative  hall,  but  they  will  all
proceed  from  one  cominon  den  wherein  the  adepts  have
contrived  their  plots.  The  thread  of  this  horrid  catas-
trophe will  always  be  the  fame,  though  held  in  fucceffion
by  different  hands.  Equality  and  Liberty  will  always  be
the  principle,  and  the  confequences  will  always  ftrike  at
the  monarch  and  monarchy,  as  they  have  done  againft
Chrift  and  his  religion.  In  this  revolution  of  Equality
and  Liberty,  crimes  againft  the  church,  and  crimes  a-
gainft  the  ftate  are  entwined  together;  to-day  the  church,
to-morrow  the  fovereign,  the  day  after  proprietors  are  at-
tacked, and  this  continues  in  a  long  concatenation  which
always  takes  its  rife,  as  from  its  centre,  in  the  club  of  the
Jacobins,  in  the  reunion  of  every  fpecies  of  confpiring  a-
dept.  Their  firft  confpiring  Jegiilaiors,  fucli  as  Mirabeau,

f  Decree  January  10,1796.


HISTORICAL  PART.  257

Syeyes,  Bcirnr.ve,  Orleans,  La  Fayette,  Lameth,  Char
broud,  Grégoire,  Petion,  Bailly,  Rabaud,  Chapellier, and
^11  the  deputies  of  the  Mountain,  habitually  pals  from  the
tribune  of  the  Jacobins  to  that  of  the  manege.  There  a
fn  it  cunftitution  was  prepared,  that  was  to  overwhelm  the
throne  as  it  had  done  the  altar;  that  was  to  weaken  Lewis
XVI.  and  ftrip  him  not  only  of  his  authority,  but  alfo  of
the  affl'&ion  of  his  fubjeâs-;  that  was  to  take  from  hin*
the  command  of  the  army,  and  deprive  him  of  the  iupport
of  his  nobility;  that  was,  in  fliort,  to  rob  him  daily  of
f  >me  part  of  that  authority  which  constitutes  the  monarch,
Two  years  were  fpent  in  diifeminating  calumnies,  in  ftir-
ring  up  the  people,  or  in  paffing  decrees  as  derogatory  to
royalty  as  they  were  injurious  to  religion.  This  legisla-
tive rout  had  formed  a  code  ot  laws  againft  the  church,
that  was  to  leave  but  the  name. of  religion  to  the  French
nation;  from  the  fame  clamorous  multitude  are  iflued
laws  againft  monarchy,  that  reduced  the  unfortunate  Lew-
is XVI.  to  a  mere  cypher;  a  captive  in  his  palace,  fur-
rounded  by  brigands,  he  is  forced,  as  the  clergy  had  been,  i
to  fanclion  thofe  very  decrees  that  defpoiled  him;  the
clergy  had  pleaded  the  duties  of  the  prielthood  in  oppofi-
tion  to  the  decrees;  the  king  fets  forth  the  duties  of  the
monarch;  he  claims,  as  they  had  done,  his  liberty,  and
for  a  moment  thinks  he  has  obtained  it  by  his  flight  to
Varennes.  But  the  traitor*  La  Fayette  loon  djfpelled  the

K  k

*  Left  public  documents  fliould  not  be  fufHciently  explana-
tory of  the  conduct  of  La  Fayette  on  this  oceafion,  and  as  lè-
verai perfons  have  v/ifhed  to  perfuade  the  public  that  he  was
perfectly  ignorant  of  the  intended  flight  of  the  king,  I  here
publilh  a  true  ftatement  of  fads. —  \  German  woman,  man  ied
to  a  French-nan  of  the  name  of  Rochereuit,  was  employed  in
the  queen's  fervice  under  the  title  of  Ports  cbaift  d 'affaires .—
This  woman  ha  i  ihown  fo  much  in  hgnation,  and  had  wept  fo
bitterly  on  the  5th  and  6th  of  October,  that  the  queen,  afFecled
at  feeing  fuch  proofs  of  attachment  in  this  woman,  enttufted
her  with  the  care  of  preparing  her  broth,  and  lodged  her  in  a
ro  >ra  on  the  ground-floor  of  her  own  apartment,  which  com-
municated to  the  apattment  that  had  been  occupied  by  the
Duke  of  Villequier.  In  the  beginning  of  June,  the  queen,  who
began  to  prepare  for  her  intended  evafion,  lodged  this  Mrs.
Ruchereuil  in  another  room.  She  immediately  harbored  fufpi-
cions  of  fome  intended  plan,  and  watched  the  king  and  queen.
The  great  confidence  they  both  had  in  her  gave  her  the  oppor-
tunity of  knowing  the  whole  fcheme  of  the  kind's  flight.   Oa


258  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

illufion,  and  only  permitted  him  to  enjoy  it  for  anmftant,
that  he  might  drag  his  royal  mafter  back  to  the  capital
expofed  to  every  outrage,  there  to  keep  him  a  clofer  pri-
soner. Le^-  is,  a  prifoner,  at  length  fanclions  thisconfti-
f'.ition  of  Equality  and  Liberty;  he  ftill  bears  the  title  of
king,  when  a  new  band  of  rufEans  or  legiflative  adepts
make  their  appearance  to  form  the  fécond  National  As-
fembly.
by  the  ie-  *  ne  f-conc^  ailembly  finds  Lewis  a  captive  in  his  pa-
cond  as-  lace;  and  they  proceed  in  the  wicked  career  of  their  pre-
fcr.ibiy;  decellbrs.  Each  fitting  gave  birth  to  new  decrees  more
and  more  derogatory  to  the  authority  of  the  monarch;
daily  were  the  people  itirred  up  to  infurrection  againft  the
altar  and  the  throne.  At  length  the  day  d*ew  near  whea
both  were  to  fall  beneath  their  blows.  The  long  lift  of
clergy  that  were  to  be  immolated  had  been  already  form-
ed L>v  the  Jacobin  municipality,  and  the  Jacobin  legifla-
tois  furround  the  palace  of  Lewis  with  legions  of  bri-
gands. He  is  reduced  to  feek  an  afylum  in  the  midft  of
that  very  ailembly  that  had  lent  this  mob  of  mifcreants  a-

the  10th  of  June  foe  informed  MefFrs.  La  Fayette  and  Gouvion
cf  what  (he  had  obferved,  and  lodged  an  information  at  the
Comité  des  Recherches  of  the  National  Affembiy.  She  had  ele-
ven conferences  with  them  in  the  fpace  of  nine  days.  In  con-
fluence cf  thefe  denunciations,  M.de  la  Fayette  charged  thir-
teen officers  on  whom  he  could  depend,  to  patrole  every  night
within  the  interior  of  the  Thuilleries,  but  with  fecret  orders  to
favor  the  evalion.  His  orders  had  been  given  in  a  fimilar  man-
ner  ajorfg  the  road.  Drouet  had  been  infliucled  in  the  part  he
was  to  act-  The  remaining  part  of  that  fatal  journey  to  Varen-
res,  and  the  arreft  ation  of  the  king,  may  be  all  eafily  conceived,
excenting  that  excels  of  infolence  with  which  La  Fayette  ufed
his  victory,  and  the  outrages  he  heaped  on  the  unfortunate
Lewis,  when  dragging  him  back  to  his  prifon  of  the  Thuil-
leries.

Another  anecdore  that  may  furprize  the  reader  is,  that  when
the  queen  had  been  informed  of  the  treacherous  behavior  of
this  woman,  Kochereuil,  and  had  dihniffed  the  traitor  from
lier  fervice,  this  wretch  had  the  infolence  to  preient  a  memo-
rial, that  a  deputy  had  penned  for  her,  to  the  queen,  requeft-
ing  that  flie  might  be  admitted  again  into  her  feivice,  and  Hat-
ing that  in  her  opinion  me  could  not  have  given  her  majefly  a
greater  proof  of  her  gratitude  and  fidelity  than  by  depriving
lier  of  the  pcflibility  of  heatkening  to  the  evil  councils  ot  the
royalifts  —  I  he  queen  gave  the  memorial  to  Mr.  Prieur,  the
hiltonographer  of  France  for  the  foreign  department.  'J  he  de-
nunciation of  this  woman  is  carefully  preierved  in  what  are
ityied  the  National  Archives.


HISTORICAL  PAKfT.  259

gainft  him}  they  pronounce  his  fufpenfion,  as  according
to  the  new  forms  they  would  have  encroached  on  the  fo-
yereignty  of  the  people  in  pronouncing  the  abolition  of
royalty  ;  but  left  he  fhould  miftake  the  nature  of  his  crime,
they  proclaim  the  new  sera  and  the  new  oath  of  Equality
and  Liberty^  both  of  which  are  to  date  from  this  day. —
They  then  decree  the  convocation  of  a  new  affembly  which
is  to  pronounce  definitively  on  the  fate  of  the  monarch.
All  thefe  decrees  are  palled  in  his  prefence;  for  they  had
barbaroufly  {hue  up  him  and  his  family  in  a  tribune  ap-
propriated to  the  writers  of  a  Newfpaper,  left  he  fhould
ïofe  a  fingle  word  of  the  outrages  and  calumnies  vented
againil  his  perfon,  or  of  the  laws  pronounced  for  the  an-
nihilation of  the  throne.  But  his  death  had  been  already
refolved;  meanwhile  he  is  fent  to  the  towers  of  the  Tem-
ple to  await  his  cruel  deftiny.*

I  /hould  be  little  inclined  to  in  fi  ft  on  the  atrocious  feats  Çonfpira-
that  lignalized  thefe  horrid  triumphs  of  the  fécond  afiem-  cy  or  the
bly,  or  on  the  arts  employed  to  prepare  them,  were  it  not  rol!l  °*
that  the  true  thread  of  fuch  a  multitude  of  crimes  has  not     °^u
been  properly  difcovered.    The  whole  was  contrived  by
Briflot.  The  Seel:,  it  is  true,  furnifhed  him  with  agents.
but  he  was  conftantly  the  chief  of  the  confpiracy  of  the
loth  of  Auguft.  During  a  whole  year  he  was  employed
in  preparing  it;  he  had  conceived  it  even  before  he  was
named  a  legislator*     Initiated  in  all  the  myfteries  of  Hol-
bfcck's  club,  and  even  contending  with  Condorcet  for  the
precedency  among  the  Voltairian  Sophifters,  no  fooner
was  he  deputed  to  the  grand  affembly,  than  he  thought
himfelf  called  to  fulfil  the  decree  which  he  had  long  isnee
pronounced,    That  the  fceptre  cf  the  Bourbons  Jhould  be
foivered)  and  France  be  trunsjornwd  into  a  republic. \ — -

*  Sittings  of  Auguft  10,  ir,and  i»,  179a.

f  Lewis  XVI.  was  but  a  child  when  Sir  Horace  Walpole,
(fince  Lord  Orford,)  after  a  fliort  (lay  at  Paris,  wrote  the  fol-
lowing letter  to  Marefchal  Conway  on  the  views  and  plans  of
the  Sophifters.    It  is  dated  Oclober  28,  1765.

"  The  Dauphin  (father  to  Lewis  XVI.)  will  probably  hold
"  out  very  few  days.  His  death,  that  is,  the  near  profpeét  of
"  it,  fills  the  Philofophers  with  the  greatcft  joy,  as  ir  was  ftar*
*  ed  he  would  endeavor  the  restoration  of  the  Jetuits.  You
"  will  think  the  fentiments  oithe  Pbile/bphers  very  Qddjlate-
"  news. — But  do  you  know  what  the  Pbi'ojôphers  are,  or  what
"  the  term  means  here?  In  the  firil  place,  :t  comprehends  ai-
*'  inoit  every  body;  and  in  the  next  means  men,  who,  avowing


200  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Scarcely  was  he  feated  among  thefe  new  legislators  whe*
he  caft  his  eyes  around  him  in  queft  of  adepts  who  mig.it
co-operate  in  hurling  from  his  throne  chat  unfortunate
monarch,  whofe  power  the  preceding  aflembly  bad  reuuc-
ed  to  a  mere  phantom.  He  foon  perceived  that  fa  ne  ha-
tred to  royalty  raging  in  the  breaihof  a  Petion,a  Buzotj
a  Vergninux,  a  Gaudet,  a  Genfonné,  or  a  Louvtt,  and
to  them  he  opened  his  plans.

According  to  the  plan  contrived  by  the  confpirators,
we  [hall  fee  that  France  was  in  the  firfr  place  to  be  inun-
dated with  journals,  all  Simulating  the  people  to  com-
plete the  grand  work  of  their  liberty.  By  dint  of  libels
and  moil  odious  calumnies  againft  Lewis  XVI.  and  r,ts
queen;  they  were  to  eradicate  every  feiitiment  of  affec-
tion from  the  heart  of  the  fubjecSr.  They  next  bethought
themfeivis  of  ftiiring  up  the  foreign  povvers,  that  Lewis
XVI.  being  engaged  in  war  without,  might  fall  an  r

prey  to  intrigue  within.  We  next  hear  tne  club  refouhd-
ing  with  that  very  fentence  which  Briffot  after wardl  irrites
to  the  generals  of  his  revolution:  Europe  mail  be  fet  on
fire  at  the  four  corners',  in  thai  ourjajety  lies.*  jriy  means
of  their  adepts  and  clubs  they  weie  perpetually  exciting
the  people  to  infurrection,  in  order  to  calf  the  odium  on
the  Icing  and  queen.  Under  pretence  of  taking  me&ftlreS
againir  thefe  frequent  infurrections,  and  to  ward  off  the
danger  to  which  they  expofed  France,  they  formed  in  the
National  Alfembly  a  feCret  committee  under  the  tide  of
extraordinary  commifjicn,  and  which  was  the  head  of  tht
faction  mice  called  tne  Girondins,  from  the  depaitment

war  againft  poperv,  aim,  many  of  them,  at  afuhverfion  of
"  ad  religion,  and Jll.l  many  more  at  the  dejlruftion  of  regal
*'  power  — How  do  yon  know  this  ?  you  Will  lav:  you,  who
"  have  been  but  fix  weeks  in  France,  three  >>f  which  you  h?.ve
f<  been  confined  in  your  chambet . —  V  rue  ;  but  in  the  In  it  pe-
11  riod  >  went  every  where,  and  heard  nothing  elle)  in  the  fat*
**  ter  I  have  b?en  extremely  wilted,  and  have  had  long  and  ex-
"  pitch  conveifations  with  many  who  think  as  I  tel!  vou,  and
"  with  a  few  of  'the  other  fide,  who  are  no  Isfs  perfuaJe.i  that
"  there  are  fuch  intentions.  In  particular,  I  had  two  officers
'*  here  the  other  ni^ht,  neither  of  them  young,  whom  I  had
"  difficulty  to  keep  from  a  ferious  quarrel,  and  who.  in  the  heat
**  of  the  difpute,  informed  me  of  much  mote  than  I  coulohave
"  learned  with  great  pains.''     f  Fol.  V.)

*  See  Mallet  Du  Pan's  Conliderations  on  the  Nature  of  the
Revolution,  P.  37.


HISTORICAL  PAU*  SOI

•f  the  Gironde,  in  Gafcony.  It  was  there  that  BrifTot,at
the  head  of"  the  Elect,  and  prefiding  in  the  ccmmijjion,  pre-
pared, in  filence,  thoi'e  decrees  that  were  to  confummate
the  plots  againil  monarchy.  He  wifhedtogive  this  revo-
lution an  appearance  of  philofophy,  foliated  by  an  en-
lightened people  tired  of  its  kings,  and  willing  to  recog-
nize no  other  fovereign  than  itfelf.  He  fent  his  em.iTaries
into  the  provinces;  but  they  all  returned,  declaring  that
the  French  nation  was  unwilling  to  lacrifice  its  king.—*
He  then  founded  the  legiilative  aiTembly,  and  the  opinions
of  the  majority  alfo  coincided  with  the  wifhes  of  the  peo-
ple.— What  he  could  not  accomplifh  by  his  fophiftry,  he
now  determined  to  effectuate  by  means  of  pikes  and  his
blood-thirfty  legions  of  brigands. — He  calls  thofe  legions
from  the  South  known  by  the  name  of  Marjeillois  ;  from
the  Weft  the  Jacobins  fend  up  the  brigands  of  Breft;
Barbaroux  and  Panis,  Carra  and  Beaujois  the  intruded
vicar  of  Blois,  BeJJ'e  from  the  Drome,  Gallijfet  from  Lan-
gres,  Foiirvier  the  Weft-Indian,  General  IVeJhrmann^
Kiculin  "from  Strafbourg^  Senterre  the  brewer»  Antoine
from  Metz,  and  Gorfas  the  journalift.  combined  with  ths
Girondins.  They  hold  their  councils  ibmetitnesat  Robe-
fpierre's,  at  others  at  the  Soleil  d' Or,  (the  golden  Sun,)
a  tavern  near  the  Baftille.  Syeyesand  his  club  of  twenty-
tivoy  or  the  occult  Lodge  of  the  Jacobins,  fécond  them
With  all  their  might. — Marat,,  Prudbomme,  and  Miilin,
with  all  the  Journaliits  of  the  Partyj  daily  invent  new  ca-
lumnies againft  Lewis  and  his  royal  Confort.  Alexandre
and  the  rcnegado  Cbab^t  i\\r  up  the  fuburbs  of  St.  An-
toine and  St.  Marceau.  Philip  of  Orleans  contributes  his
money  and  his  party,  becaufe  he  is  in  hopes  of  being  him-
felf  exalted  to  the  throne,  as  foon  as  Lewis  XVT.  ihal!
be  driven  from  it;  and  even  though  he  were  not  to  f'uc-
ceed  in  obtaining  the  throne,  he  will  at  leaft  have  grati-
fied his  vengeance.

Every  thing  is  agreed  on;  the  Legions  are  arrived;  at
'ten  minutes  before  one  in  the  morning  the  alarm  bells  ring
the  prelude  to  the  terrible  iOth  of  Auguft.  The  fécond
AiTembly  has  now  fulfilled  its  talk;  Lewis  XVL  is  de-
cl;  red  to  be  deprived  of  ail  right  to  the  crown.  He  is
torn  from  the  palace  of  his  forefathers,  and  immured  with-
in the  towers  of  r'  *  Temple.  It  is  there  that  the  third
Affembly  of  Legislators  is  to  find  him,  and  are  to  lead
hi.  j  from  thence  to  the  fcaffold  to  fulfil  the  oaths  of  the
Occult  Lodges,


2Ô2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY?

Should  the  hiftorian  hefitate  at  recognizing  this  pro-
greilion  of  the  Seel,  to  conduct  us  to  the  terrible  catas-
trophe of  the  10th  of  Auguft,  let  him  turn  to  the  avow-
als of  the  adepts  themfelves. — The  day  is  come  when  they
envy  each  other  the  com  mi  (lion  of  fuch  crimes;  they  had
installed  Briflbt  the  leader  of  the  Jacobins;  but  Robe-
fpierre,  Marat,  and  Danton  (hatch  the  fceptre  from  him;
he  wifhes  to  wrelt  it  from  them  again;  and  he  publifhes
an  addrefs  to  all  the  Jacobins  of  Fiance  to  fubftantiate  his
rights.  His  apology,  as  well  as  that  of  his  co-adept  Lou-
vet  are  in  fubftance  no  more  than  the  hiftory  of  the  very
confpiracy  I  have  juft  been  defcribing.  Should  it  be  ne-
cefiary,  for  the  conviction  of  the  reader,  to  turn  to  any
part  of  if,  let  him  hearken  to  Briffot,  when  faying,  the
Triumvirs  Robefpierre,  Marat,  and  Danton,  have  accu  fed
me  "  of  being  the  author  of  the  war,  and  had  it  not  been
*'  for  the  war,  Royalty  would  have  ftill  fubfifled  !  Had  it
**  not  been  for  the  war»,  thoufands  of  talents,  thoufands  of
u  virtues  would  never  have  burft  forth  from  obfeurity!
*'  — And  had  it  not  been  for  the  war,  Savoy  and  fo  many
"  other  {rates  whofe  fetters  are  about  to  fall,  would  ne-
"  ver  have  acquired  their  Liberty. — They  were  fearful
"  of  a  war  conducted  by  a  King— Oh  !  (hallow  politi-
"ciansJ  It  was  precifely  becaufe  this  perjured  King
u  was  to  conducl:  the  war,  becaufe  he  could  only  con-
"  duel  it  as  a  traitor,  becaufe  this  treafon  alone  would  in-
"  faliibly  lead  him  to  his  ruin;  it  was  for  fuch  reafons,
"  that  it  was  neceffary  to  have  a  war  conducted  by  the
"  King. — *It  was  the  abolition  of  Royalty  that  I  had  in
"  view  when  I  caufed  war  to  be  declared — Men  who
*<  were  enlightened  underftood  me,  when  on  the  30th  of
"  December  17915  they  heard  me  anfwer  Robeipierre,
"  who  was  always  talking  to  me  of  treafons  to  be  feared,
w  /  have  but  one  fear,  which  is,  that  we  /hall  not  be  be-
**  irayed;  ive  (land  in  need  of  treachery,  for  our  whole
"  fsfety  depends  on  our  being  betrayed- — F 'or  treafons
tt  would  ibon  make  that  which  thwarts  the  greatnefs  of
"  the  French  nation  difappear,  I  mean  Royalty."

But  while  this  Sophifter  is  declaiming  fo  much  ora
treafons,  and  gloiying  in  that  which  he  had  for  fo  long  a
time  premeditated  againft  this  unfortunate  Sovereign,
vvhieh  he  makes  his  title  of  pre-eminence  in  the  eyes  of
the  jacobins,  lie  takes  care  not  to  mention  that  he  would
have  bet  rayed  the  traitors  themfelves,  had  Lewis  XVI.


HISTORICAL  PART.  2,63

had  money  fufficient  to  fupply  his  extravagant  demands.
On  the  9th  of  Auguft,  the  eve  or"  the  day  when  all  the
Confpirators  were  to  be  put  in  action,  he  Tent  to  alk  the
Kino-  tor  twelve  millions  (500,000!.)  as  a  price  for  with-
drawing from  the  Confpiracy  and  for  rendering  it  absr-
tive* — What  extraordinary  men  are  theie  Sophifters,
and  what  ideas  do  they  form  of  their  own  virtues  !  But
truth  impofes  on  us  the  difgufting  tafk  of  hearkening  to
this  man,  while  narrating  his  own  crimes.  He  will  boaft
of  the  time  that  he  employed  in  meditating  and  preparing
them,  and  will  reprelent  the  callous  indifference  with
which  he  viewed  the  canibal  fcenes  of  that  bloody  day  as
greatnefs  of  foul.  "  They  accufe  me  (he  continues)  of
«  having  preiided  over  the  extraordinary  commij/ion;  and
«  if  the  able  heads  of  that  commiffon  had  not  prepared^
««  and  that  a  long  while  previous  to  the  10th  of  Auguft,
«  thofe  decrees  that  faved  France,  fuch  as  ûïzfufpcnfion
«  of  the  King,  the  convocation  of  the  Convention,  the  or-
«  ganization  of  a  Republican  Almijîry,  if  thefe  decrees
"  had  not  been  wifely  combined,  fo  as  to  banifh  every
«  idea  of  force  or  terror  ;  had  they  not  borne  the  itamp  of
«  prandeur  and  of  cool  deliberation,  the  Revolution  of
«  the  10th  of  Auguft  would  have  appeared  to  the  eyes  of
«  all  Europe  to  have  been  a  Revolution  of  canlbah. — ■
*c  But  at  the  fight  of  wildom  presiding  in  the  midft  of
*'  thefe  ftorms,and  flaying  even  the  arm  of  carnage,  Eu-
«<  rope  then  believed  that  France  was  faved.  Let  who
«  will  calumniate  the  10th  of  Auguft,  the  valor  of  the
•«  federated  bands  and  the  deliberate  decrees  of  the  Na-
"  tional  AiTemby,  which  had  been  prepared  by  the  Com-
"  miff  on,  will  forever  immortalize  thatday."f

Let  us  follow  this  ftrange  Sophifter  ;  for,  after  fhow-
ing  how  he  betrayed  Lewis  XVI.  he  will  now  explain
the  manner  in  which  he  betrayed  both  the  Nation  and
the  Aflembly;  how  he  and  his  adherents  gradually  led
the  people,  and  the  majority  of  the  Aflembly  to  the  com-
million  of  crimes,  of  which  neither  approved.  "  My  opi-
"  nion  (of  the  qth  of  July)  on  the  depoiition  of  the  King
**  has  been  much  cavilled  at.  The  fame  has  happened  to
«  Vu:  gniaux — I  here  call  to  witnels  my  Colleagues,  all
"  thofe  who  were  acquainted  with  the  Jl ate  of  our  ÀJfem-

*  See  the  Memoirs  of  Mr.  Bertrand,  Vol.IH.  Chap.  XXII.
f  Briflbt's  Letter  to  the  Jacobins,  Oclober  a4. 1793.


264  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  bïy,  with  the  weaknefs  and  minority  of  the  patriots,  the
**  corruption  of  teiror,  the  averfion  in  which  theenthufi-
"  afts  held  the  court  party.  Doubtlefs,  it  needed  no  fmall
u-  (hare  of  courage  to  rifk  that  eloquent  hypothecs  on  the
"  crimes  of  the  King  in  the  midir  of  iuch  an  affembly  as
"  Vergniaux  did.  And  the  day  after  that  coalition,  which
"  fo  much  weakened  the  party  of  the  Patriots,  was  it  not
ct  a  tafk  that  required  courage  which  I  undertook,  to  give
"  a  lively  defcription  of  the  crimes  of  the  King,  and  to
"  propofo  his  being  brought  to  trial.  This  was  blafphe-
"  my  in  the  eyes  of  the  majority,  neverthelefs  I  dared  ta
"fpeak  it."

When  defcribing  the  Girondins,  his  chief  fupport,  he
fays,  "  perpetually  occupied  in  repairing  their  faults,  in
"  union  with  other  enlightened  patriots,  they  were  prepa-
"  ring  the  minds  to  pronounce  the  fufpenfion  of  the  King.
"  — Ihey  were  far  from  conceiving  fuch  a  Jlep;  and  this
"  was  my  reafon  for  rifking  that  famous  difcourfe  of  the
"  2bth  July  on  the  depofition,  a  difcourfe  that  in  the  con-
u  ception  of  ordinary  minds  was  a  dereliction  of  princi-
"  pie,  but  in  the  eves  of  the  enlightened,  was  only  a  pru-
*  dent  and  necejjary  manœuvre.  I  well  knew  that  the
u  Autocratical  party  vviihed  nothing  fo  much  as  to  meet
*<  the  question  on  the  deposition,  becaufe  they  tho't  them-
"  felves  certain  of  fuccei>,  and  becaufe  the  minds  were  not
<;  yet  >ipe  in  the  Departments — the  defeat  cf  the  Patri-
w  ots  was  therefore  inevitable.  It  was  neceffary  then  to
tc  tack,  in  order  to  gain  time,  to  enlighten  the  public  opi-
"  nion,  or  to  ripen  it  for  infurreclion\  for  the  depofition
*<  of  the  King  could  be  effected  but  by  one  of  thefe  two
tc  means. — Such  were  my  motives  for  pronouncing  my
*c  difcourfe  on  the  26th  of  July,  which  expofed  me  to  io
"  much  reproach,  and  even  ranked  me  among  the  fecret
"  Royalifts,  while  the  Patriote  Francois  (the  newfpaper
"  that  he  publifhed)  never  ceafed  to  prepare  the  minds  in
*c  the  Departments  for  thefe  extraordinary  ?neafures."

Amidfr  the  multitude  of  reflections  that  mult  natural-
ly arife  on  the  perufaj  of  thefe  avowals,  the  words  it  was
therefore  neceffary  to  tack,  in  order  to  gain  time,  to  en-
lighten the  public  opinion,  or  to  ripen  it  for  infurrecliony
prefent  us  with  a  great  axiom  in  the  theory  of  Révolu*-
tiom.  They  fhow  us,  that  thofe  infurrections  reprefented
as  the  grand  movements  of  a  people,  as  the  act  of  the  ma-
jority of  a  nation,  are  merely  the  efforts  ox  an  united


HISTORICAL  PART,  2&$

fa&ion  againft  the  majority  of  a  nation;  that  had  the
opinions  of  the  majority  of  the  mtion  coincided  with  the
vie«  s  of  the  Confpirators,  they  would  not  have  been  obli-
ged to  feek  the  aid  of  brigands,  in  order  to  triumph  by
arms  and  terror  over  an  unarmed  and  unfufpeâing  peo-
ple. It  may  be  obje&ed,  that  France  had  its  National
Guards;  moft  certainly  it  had;  but  Briftbt  carefully
avoid. d  calling  on  them  for  fuccor.  He  had  feen  them
il  >cking  from  all  parts  of  France  to  the  federation  on  the
14. h  oi*  J  ily  ;  but  thefe  truly  federated  bands  had  mown
the  greatefr  marks  of  attachment  to  Lewis  and  his  Royal
Confort j  and  it  was  not  to  fuch  men  that  the  Confpira-
t>rs  dared  propofe  the  depolicion  of  the  King;.  What
plan  do  the  Confpirators  adopt  ?  They  aiTemble  all  thofe
b'igands  called  Alarfeiilois,  (not  becaufe  they  were  in-
habitants of  Marfeilles  or  Provence,  but  becaufe  the  great-
er part  of  them  had  been  condemned  to  the  gallies  at  Mar-
feilles), and  furname  thefe  brigands  of  all  countries  The
Federated  Bands.  They  oblige  the  inhabitants  of  the
fuburbs  to  fail  into  the  ranks  with  them  ;  they  caufe  the
commander  of  the  National  Guard  to  be  murdered,  that»
being  without  a  chief,  it  might  have  no  unity  of  action,
and  that  thofe  who  had  been  feduced  might  join  the  bri-
gands. They  then  reprefent  as  a  general  infurreclion  of
the  peopi°,  as  the  will  of  the  nation,  that  which  they  have
themfelves  demonftrated  to  have  been  no  other  than  an
jnfurrection  of  their  own  cut-throat  bands  againft  their
King  and  the  nation  at  large.  Such  has  been  the  whole
progrefs  of  die  Revolution;  all  has  been  done  by  mobs
and  infurrections,  or,  as  the  chiefs  ftyle  it,  by  means  of
force  and  terror,  which  have  enflaved  a  nation  that  had
refitted  every  means  of  feduction.

Similar  proofs  relating  to  that  atrocious  Revolution
of  the  10th  of  Augult.  are  to  be  found  in  Louvet's  dis-
çourfe;  he  alfo  boafts  of  his  cunning  in  preparing  the
piots.  "  We  'Jacobins  yyijhed  for  war,  (he  fays)  becaufe
"  peace  muft  have  undoubtedly  killed  the  Republic — be-
"  caufe,  undertaken  in  time,  the  misfortunes  inevitable
*c  at  the  fuit  outlet  could  be  repaired,  and  would  at  once
u  purify  the  Senate,  the  Armies  and  the  Throne — Every
"  man  worthy  of  being  a  Republican  loudly  called  for
**  war.  They  dared  afpire  tojirike  a  mortal  blow  at  Rny-
"  alt  y  itfelf;  to  exterminate  it  for  ever,  in  France  fir  ft,
"  AND    THEN  THROUGHOUT    THE    UNIVERSE."     He

JL  1


266  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

then  alludes  to  the  parts  a&ed  by  his  accomplices.—
"  Thofé  whom  you  call  my  friends  (he  fays  to  Robes-
u  pierre.)  were  Roland,  who  had  denounced  Lewis  XVI.
"  to  ail  France — Servan,  who  was  involved  in  the  hon-
"  orable  retreat  of  the  Miniffer  of  the  Interior,  and  only
tC  returned  into  office  with  him,  and  that  to  fave  France
"  — Pïtîon,  whofe  conduce  at  once  vigorous  and  wife,  was
"  wearing  out  Royalty — Brifjht,  he  was  writing  againft
<c  Monarchy,"  (Condorcet  was  alfo  writing  in  the  fame
çaufe) — "  Vergniaux^  Genfnné.  and  many  others,  were
t;  preparing  before  band  the  plan  for  the  fuf pen/ion — Gau-
u  det  was  feated  in  the  chair  when  the  cannon  began  to
"  roar. — Barbaroux  was  advancing  at  the  bead  oj  the
«  Ma  jciiiois  for  the  loth  of  Augufl;  and  lucky  it  is  for
"  you  that  he  headed  them — /  (Louvetj  was  writing  the
"  Sentinelle  ;  and  your  eternal  vaporings  oblige  me  to  fay,
"  that  my  journal  contributed  much  more  to  the  Revolu-
"  tion  of  the  ioth  of  Auguft,  than  your  Defenfeur  de  la
"  Corifiitution  (written  by  Robefpierre)."*
By  the  Thus  have  thefe  fanguinary  Legiflators  furnifhed  the

thud  as-      Hiftorian  with  the  proofs  of  their  own  guilt,  and  of  their
iembly.       crimes  againft  their  Sovereign.    Let  this  Republic  then
appear,  this  Republic  of  Equality  and  Liberty,  fo  long;
chei  idled  by  the  Sophifters,  and  nurtured  by  the  adepts
in  their  Occult  Lodges  !   Lewis  is  no  longer  feated  on  the
throne  !   Let  not  Lewis,  nor  any  Bourbon,  nor  any  living
Trance  de-  creature  afpire  to  it  in  future.    Royalty  is  abolijbed,  and
dared  a       France  is  proclaimed  a  Republic.     This  is  the  firft  de-
Republic,   crée  of  thofe  Confpirators  ityling  themfelves  a  Convention^
and  fucceeding  to  thole  who  had  called  themfelves  the  fé-
cond National  Aflembly  (September  21,  1792).     The
better  to  effablilh  Equality,  every  mark  of  rank,  even
the  common  marks  of  civility  as  well  as  the  title  of  King
arc  profcribed  ;  and  Citizen  is  in  future  the  fole  appella-
tion allowed  (October  29).    Left  the  very  fight  of  a  faith-
ful fubject  ihould  acal  the  idea  of  a  King,  death  is  pro-

*  See  houvet 's  Addrefs  to  Robefpierre.  Should  the  reader
uifh  for  any  more  of  thefe  avowals  and  vapourings  of  a  multi-
tude ot  adepts  on  the  art  with  which  they  prepared  the  f.m-
Ruinary  fcenes  of  that  day,  let  them  read  Robefpierre' s  Letter
to  hh  Conflituents  ;  Petioti's  Ohfervations  o?i  that  Letter;  the
Annales  Patriotiques,  by  Carra  and  Mercier,  30th  Nov.  1792  ;
the  Chronique  de  Paris,  by  Miiliû,,  and  hts  threats  on  the  jth
of  Auguit,  179a,  &c.  &c.


HISTORICAL  PART.  207

nounced  againft  every  Emigrant  who  fhall  dare  to  fet
foot  on  the  territories  of  the  Republic  (November  10).
The  fame  puniftiment  is  pronounced  againft  any  man
who  fhould  dare  propofe  the  re-cjîablijhment  of  Royalty
in  France  (December  4).

The  Seci  now  proceeds  towards  the  completion  of  Lewis
its  myfteries.    Lewis,  who  had  been  feated  on  the  throne,  xv^-  is


exifts;  and  it  was  not  in  vain  that  the  adepts  had  __,


condemn-


to


ftill

been  taught  in  the  caverns  of  the  Knights  Kaclofch  to  death.
trample  on  crowns  and  ftab  Kings.    To  the  atrocious
games  reality  muft  fucceed  ;  Ro hefpi erre  advances  ;  but
let  him  and  his  hangman  range  for  a  time  on  the  field  j
he  is  no   more  than  a  wild  beaft  that  the  Seel:  have  let
loofe.     He  is  not  the  wretch  that  devours  the  captive
Monarch;  it  is  the  Seel.     Even  in  Lewis  are  two  dis-
tinct perfons  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jacobins.     They  would
perhaps  have  loved  and  revered  him  in  private  life;  but
he  was  King,  and  they  foam  with  rage  at  the  very  idea  ;
his  head  falls  on  the  fcaffold  ;  their  relentlefs  vengeance
even  ftrikes  the  ftatue  of  the  beloved  and  great  Henry
IV.;  every  monument  that  can  recal  the  idea  of  a  King
falls  beneath  their  blows.    It  was  not  at  Lewis,  it  was  at
Royalty,  that  thefe  modern  Vandals  aimed.    They  decla-
red Lewis  XVI.  to  be  a  tyrant  ;  they  continue  to  proclaim
it;  but  they  have  their  own  interpretation;  they  ityle  him
ib,  juft  as  the  Sophiflers  ftyled  every  King  a  Tyrant. — i
They  knew  well,  that  Lewis  XVI.  had  during  a  reign  of
nineteen  years  figned  many  a  pardon,  but  had  never  figned
a  fingle  death-warrant;  and  that  certainly  is  not  the  cha-
racter of  a  tyrant.     They  knew  well,  that  the  firft  a£t  of
Lewis  on  his  coming  to  the  throne  was  to  releafe  his  fub-
jects  from  the  tax  cuftomary  on  fuch  an  occalion  ;  he  abo-
lished thecuftomof  thçCorvées  (or  bind  days)  ;  neither  the
accufed  nor  even  the  guilty,  could  be  put  to  the  torture
during  his  reign;  and  do  fuch  edicts  befpeak  the  tyrant  ?
They  alfo  faw  him  relinquifh  in  favor  of  his  (ubje&s  all
the  feudal  rights  in  his  own  domains,  that  he  might  ob-
tain by  example  that  alleviation  for  his  people,  which  he
could  not  eftablifh  by  authority  without  making  an  at-
tack upon  private  property.    They  knew  well  that  Lewis
XVI.  was  entirely  free  from  thofe  vices  which  are  either
odious  or  burdenfome  to  nations;  he  was  religious,  an
enemy  to  orientation,  companionate  and  generous  to  the
poor;    they  had  feen  him  layifhing  Lis  privy  puife  to


205  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Warm,  to  cloath,  to  feed  the  indigent;  feen  him  even  car-
ry in  perfon  fuccor  to  the  frienukfs  cottager;  they  had
Teen  the  poor  railing  the  mow  into  a  pyramid,  and  fha-
ping  it  out  into  a  monument  of  gratituJc  to  Lewis  XVI.
mitigating  the  rigors  of  the  winter.  They  knew  wul,
that  the  giatituue  of  the  poor  is  not  fo  iiidufrrious  10
fhew  attachment  to  a  tyrant.  In  vain  they  will  upbraid
him  as  a  defpot  or  a  tyrant;  for  they  can.iot  deny,  that
never  a  Prince  was  (eated  on  a  throne  more  zealous  in
his  application  to  his  duty,  or  lefs  jealous  of  his  lights
than  Lewis  XVI.;  confluence  and  love  feem  to  be  his
leading  features 5  and  if  ever  he  fpoke  in  that  peremptory
way  which  denotes  the  determination  of  being  obeyed,  it
was,  when  fui  rounded  by  allaiïins,  he  fo  often  repeated  to
his  guards,  If  it  be  necejjary  to  Jhed  but  one  fmgle  drop  of
blood j or  my  jafety*,  Ijorbid  it  to  be  Jhed  \  and  fuch  are  the
orders  of  a  tyiant  !  !  !  Should  calumny  obifinately  periifl,
let  it  read  thele  laffc  fentiments  of  Lewis:  u  I  pray  all
"  thole  whom  I  may  have  offended  through  inadv  rtency
u  (for  I  do  not  remember  to  have  offended  any  perlon
w  knowingly ),  or  thofe  to  whom  I  may  have  given  b<.d
M  example,  01  fcandal,  to  pardon  whatever  injury  they
tc  may  think  I  can  have  done  them."  Let  the  regicide
judges  read  (for  it  is  to  them  he  fpeu£s  and  fa>s)  "  I
"  paidon  with  all  my  heart  thole  who  have  conitnu.ed
"  themfeJveS  mv  enemies  without  my  giving  them  caule,
"  and  I  pray  God  that  he  will  pardon  them."  Let  them
follow  him  to  the  fcaffoid,  and  there  contemplate  if  tluy
dare,  that  ferenity  of  his  countenance,  in  the  midft  of  his
executioners,  which  fo  well  denotes  the  tranquillity  or
his  (on)  :  and  they  dare  not  hear  his  laft  words:  Dru  :>
are  beaten  and  trumpets  founded  to  drown  his  voice;  for
they  are  confeious  that  he  has  neither  lived  nor  is  aboui  to
die  the  death  of  a  tyrant.
Real  mo-  Thefe  con fpi ring  legislators,  however,  knew  it  long
tives  of  his  before  they  fat  in  judgment  on  their  King;  ror  if  you  afk
condemn.»  them,  when  in  the  very  acl  of  regicide,  of  what  crime
■nou.  Lewis  XVI.  has  been  guilty?  They  will  anfwei,  Lewis

was  a  King,  and  our  wnti  is  the  death  of  every  King.— ■
Hearken  to  the  Jacobin  Robert  :  when  he  comes  to  voie
Le  fay?,  "I  condemn  the  tyrant  to  death;  and  in  pronoun-
"  cip.g  this  fentence,  /  bave  but  one  regret^  which  is,  that
u  my  power  does  not  extend  over  all  the  tyrants,  to  con-
u  demntbem  all  to  the  Jume  jate  :"  Hear,  again,  tne  j-co-


HISTORICAL  PART.  269

h\n  Carra;  <c  For  the  injlruclion  of  nations, in  al!  tirneSf
"  and  in  all  places,  and  for  the  coniternation  of  tyrants*  1
c'  v  tte  for  death:" — -Or  the  Jacobin  Hoilcau;  "  Nations
"  accuflomed  to  conftder  their  Kings  as  facredobjecli  will
"  neceflàrily  fav,  *  the  heads  of  Kinjs,  however,  cannot
"  be  fo  facred,  iiuce  the  axe  can  ftrike  them,  and  that  they
"  rail  beneath  the  avenging  arm  of  juftice.'  It  is  thus
"  you  are  launching  nations  into  the  career  oj  Liberty;  I
"  vote  for  death."*

Should  the  real  caufe  of  the  deith  of"  Lewis  XVI.  not
fu/ficiently  appear  in  fuch  language,  let  the  reader  revert
to  that  club  Of  the  Sophifters  where  Condorcet  was  learn-
ing that  a  day  would  come  when  the  Sun  would /hi  ne  on
none  but  free  men,  and  when  Kings  and  Priejis  jbonld
have  no  exijlence  but  in  hi/lory  or  on  the  Jlage.  Tu  m
bacK.  to  thofe  confpiring  dens  haunted  by  the  Occult  Ma-
fons,  and  doubt  for  a  moment,  if  you  can,  of  this  hittori-
cal  truth,  that  Lewis  periihed  upon  the  lcaffbJd  becaufe
he  was  King;  that  the  daughter  of  the  Cez..rs  periihed
becaufe  Jhs  zuas  ^jteen  ;  and  never  was  the  more  defer-
ving  ox  chat  exakod  itation,  than  when  fhe  (bowed  fuch
undaunted  courage  and  greatnefs  of  foul  in  the  midft  of
her  murderers.  Madame  Elizabeth  periihed,  becaufe  nei-
ther virtue,  innocence,  nor  magnanimity,  could  efface  the
ftain,  indelible  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jacobins,  of  being  the
daughter  and  filter  of  a  King.  Philip  of  Orleans  crouch-
ed into  wickednefe  and  infamy,  and  facriftced  his  immenfe
fortune  to  the  Sect;  he  cowardly  and  bafely  votes  fur  the
death  of  his  roy.d  relation  to  pleafe  the  Se£t;  he  takes  tne
name  of  Equality,  abandoning  rank  and  birth,  and  even
denies  his  father  to  court  the  SrdV,  but  no  fooner  are  hi*
crimes  unneceffary  for  the  progrefs  of  that  Se<5r,  than  he
is  dragged  away  to  the  fcaffold  becaufe  he  is  of  royal  de-
fcent.  But  the  conspirators  are  fearful,  that  if  they  (truck
at  that  model  of  virtue  and  goodnefs  theDutchefs  of  Or-
leans, the  axe  would  fall  from  the  hands  of  the  execution-
ers. The  numerous  facrifices  made  by  the  Dutchcfs  of
Bourbon  and  the  Prince  of  Gonti  proved  to  the  confpira-
tors  that  thefe  remnants  of  blood-royal  were  little  to  be
feared;  neverthelefs  they  are  obliged,  with  every  pcrfon
of  royal  extraction,  to  flv  the  territories  of  the  new  Re-
public.    To  cement  this  hatred  for  Kings,  the  day  on

*  See  the  Moniteur,  Sittings  of  Jan.  a,  and  following,  1793.


2JQ*  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

which  Lewis  XVI.  was  murdered  on  the  fcaffold  is  de-
clared a  perpetual  feftival  for  this  people  equal  and  free  ;
on  this  day  the  oath  of  hatred  to  Royalty  is  to  be  folemn-
\y  fworn  by  all  the  Magiftrates;  and  this  oath  is  to  be  in
future  a  neceflary  qualification  for  the  enjoyment  of  the
lights  of  Citizen  in  this  new  Republic;  fuch  are  the  re-
gulations decreed;  and  death  is  pronounced,  as  we  have
already  feen,  againft  whoever  dares  propofe  the  re-efta-
blifhment  of  Monarchy.

Notwithstanding   the  rivers  of  blood  that  flowed  in
France,  to  confummate  thefe  plots  againft  Royalty,  the
Se<5t  and  its  agents  behold  thefe  horrid  fcenes  with  all  the
The  atro-   brutal  exultation  of  cannibals.    The  guillotine  is  declared
«ties  of      permanent  in  Paris,  and  ambulant  in  the  Provinces  in
re  Revo-    qUeft  of  Royalifts  and  Priefls.    New  words  are  even  in-
tecTfo  a"1"  vented  to  denote  the  butcheries  that  now  take  place,  for
the  Seel.      our  forefathers  had  not  even  formed  an  idea  of  cruelties  to
fuch  an  extent.    Whole  hecatombs  of  victims  are  (hot
in  mafs,  and  this  was  ftyled  Fufillades*,  hecatombs  alfo
were  drowned,  and  that  fpecies   of  murder  they  called
Noyades.*    Is  it  the  Sect  then  that  thus  hardens  and  bru-
talizes the  hearts  of  the  Jacobins  ?  Are  we  to  turn  back  to
their  leflbns  to  explain  both  the  number  and  the  choice

*  Another  fpecies  of  cruelty  not  mentioned,  is  that  which
the  canniba's  or  Nantes  called  Des  Marriages  Patriotiques. — ■
The  reader  will  fcarcely  believe  me  when  1  tel)  him,  that  wo-
men were  comprehended  in  thefe  abominable  butcheries.  Ne-
verthelefs,  as  a  refinement  of  cruelty,  when  any  young  royalift
was  fuppofed  to  have  an  attachment  for  anv  young  woman,  they
were  tied  together,  hand  and  foot,  previous  to  their  being
tL:own  into  the  Loire,  that  they  might  pafs  in  Charon's  Bark
together  ;  or  they  would  tie  fome  venerable  old  clergyman  to
a  young  woman,  that  he  might  be  provided  with  a  young  wife
in  the  next  word.  Such  were  their  Patriotic  Marriages  ;  fuch
the  cruelties  that  muft  furprife  the  reader,  were  he  not  ac-
quainted with  thefchcol  whence  they  proceed.  At  Arras  Le
£an  would  guillotine  by  ,'Jrects  ;  and  one  night  returning  home,
a  little  drunk,  he  thought  an  execution  by  torch-ligbt  would
have  a  Patriotic  ejjecl.  The  Count  de  Bethune,  who  had  been
brought  totrial  in  the  morning  and  acquitted,  was  immediate-
ly named  as  the  viflirn  ;  but  Le  Bon  was  informed  that  he  had
h,  en  tried  and  acquitted  ;  no  matter,  we  will  try  him  again,
(fays  the  Commihary);  and  the  poor  Count  was  condemned
and  executed  becaufe  he  was fbupçpnnê  d'etre  fufpcé}.  This,
perhaps,  is  the  moft  extraordinary  crime  on  record ,J}fpec?ed
ng  afufpuiotu  charafter  for  Ariftocracy  ;  neveithelefs,  ma-
ny hundreds  periihed  uu  the  fcaffold  for  this  crime.    Tranf.


HISTORICAL  FART.  2JI

of  vi£tims,  the  cool  wicjcednefs  of  the  adepts,  the  atro-
cious joy  of  the  executioners  ?  Yes,  al!  you  who  feek  the
caufe  eifewhere,  forget  the  myfleries  ;  I  am  obliged  to
call  you  back  to  the  true  parent  of  this  fanguinary  tribe;
yes,  it  was  the  principles  of  the  Seel  that  made  Barnave
at  the  fight  of  heads  carried  on  pikes,  ferocioufly  fmile
and  exclaim,  Was  that  blood  then  fo  pure  that  one  might
not  even/pill  one  drop  of  it  ?'  Yes,  it  was  thofe  principles
that  made  Chapellier,  Mirabeau,  and  Grégoire,  when
they  beheld  the  brigands  furrounding  the  palace  of  Ver-
failles  in  languinary  rage,  thiriting  after  murder,  and  par-
ticularly after  the  blood  of  the  Queen,  exclaim,  The  Peo-
ple inujl  have  viùîims.  It  was  tnofe  principles  that  even
(mothered  the  affection  of  Brother  for  Brother,  when  the
adept  Cb enter ■;  ieeing  his  own  Brother  delivered  over  tu
the  hands  of  the  public  executioner,  coolly  laid,  If  my
Brother  be  not  in  the  truefenfe  of  the  Revolution,  let  hi  in.
be  facrificed't  that  eradicated  the  feeling  of  the  child  for
his  parents,  when  the  adept  Philip  brought  in  triumph
to  the  club  of  the  Jacobins  the  heads  of  his  father  and
mother  !  !  This  infatiable  Sect  calls  out  by  the  mouth  of
the  bloody  Marat,  for  two  hundred  and  feventy  thoufand
heads,  declaring  that  before  long  it  will  count  only  by
millions.  They  know  well,  that  their  iyfrems  and  lait
rnyfteries  of  Equality  can  only  be  accomphfhed  in  its  full
extent  by  depopulating  the  world  ;  and,  by  the  mouth  of
Le  Bo,  it  anfwers  the  inhabitants  of  Montauban,  terrified
with  the  want  of  provihons,  u  Fear  not;  France  has  a
"  J efficiency  for  twelve  millions  of  inhabitants  :  All  the
"  reft  (that  is  the  other  twelve  millions)  mufl  be  put  ta
"  death,  and  then  there  will  be  no  fear  city  of  kread."*

We  wifh  to  caft  the  odium  of  fuch  horrors  on  a  Maraty
a  Robefpierre,  or  fome  fuch  wretches  ;  but  Ba rnavc  pre-
ceded Robelpierre;  and  the  oath  of  the  Seel:  to  de-
nounce father,  mother, friends,  brothers,  and  fiflers,  and
to  look  upon  every  perfon  as  profenbed  who  mould  not
adopt  the  revolutionary  principles,  did  not  originate  with
them.  Such  was  the  oath  of  the  Lodges  long  before  the
exiltence  of  the  Jacobins.  It  was  not  from  Robefpierre,
but  in  Holbach's  club,  that  Condorcet  learned  to  ex-
claim as  he  did  in  the  legiflativc  aflembly,  Let  the  world
perijh,  rather  thanfacrifce  our  principles  of  Equality  !

*  Report  of  the  Comité  du  Salut  Publique,  Auguft  8, 1795.


272  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

It  would  not  be  the  brigands  alone,  but  Syeyes,  Carat,
the  eleit  of  the  Sophifters,  and  the  club  of  the  twenty-two^
that  would  {mile  at  the  horror  we  had  conceived  at  fuch
deeds.  Thus  did  Syeyes  anfwer  Mallet  du  Pan,  when
he  expreflcd  his  deteftation  of  the  means  employed  in  the
revolution;  You  are  nix  ays  talking  to  us  of  the  means
employed ;  but,  Sir,  it  is  the  End,  it  is  the  Objeff,  the
Ultimate  f'iew,  that  you  mujl  learn  to  confider  :  And  this
very  principle,  that  confoles  fuch  men  as  Syeyes  for  fuch
a  multitude  of  atrocities,  is  to  be  difcovered  in  the  Code
of  the  Illuminized  Lodges,  whence  it  found  its  way  into
the  Jicobin  club.*

A  day  may  come  when  hiftory  will  be  more  accurately
informed  how  and  in  what  haunts  this  blood-thirfty  Seét
pointed  out  its  victims,  and  taught  its  adepts  not  to  be
ftartled  at  the  number  of  them.  Meantime  I  have  pro-
mifed  to  lead  my  reader  back  to  that  which  held  its  fit-
tings in  the  Rue  Sourdiere,  where  Savalette  de  Lange
preiîded;  where  the  illuminées  were  received;  and  where
Dietrich,  who  was  one  of  the  firft  that  brought  the  mys-
teries into  France,  was  feated.  The  following  anecdote
may  guide  the  hiftorian  in  his  refearches  on  that  fubjecr.

At  the  time  when  the  brigands  were  put  into  requiii-
tion,  when  the  caftles  of  the  Nobility  were  being  confu-
med  by  fire  in  the  provinces,  when  the  heads  of  the  No-
bility were  being  carried  in  triumph  on  pikes,  the  Abbé
Royou,  well  known  for  his  zeal  againft  the  Sophifters,
was  obliged  to  fly  from  Paris  to  eicape  the  fury  of  the
Palais  Royal  mob.  He  had  wandered  for  fome  time  from
village  to  village,  when  he  privately  returned  to  Paris,
and  called  upon  me  about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.
On  my  queftion'mg  him  how  he  bad-paiTed  his  time  du-
ring his  flight,  H  I  lived,  (laid  he)  chiefly  with  the  cu-
"  rates,  and  was  very  well  received  by  them,  but  could
**  not  make  any  long  ftay  with  them,  left  1  Ihould  expofe
"  them  to  fimilar  danger  with  myfelf.  I  foon  began  to
v-  fufpect  the  laft  curate  with  whom  I  took  refuge  when

*  I  leave  to  Mr.  Mallet  du  Pan  himfelf,  the  talk  of  revealing
\yhat  he  heard  in  that  club,  and  the  horror  he  conceived  on  the
occah\>n.  He  may  alio  inform  the  reader  with  what  indipnation
he  received  the  invitation  of  tht  tiuenfy-tivo  to  become  a  mem-
ber of  their  club.  Hut  it  was  from  the  mouth  of  that  juftly  celer
btated  author  that  1  learned  the  anfwer  which  Syeyes  made  to
his  reproaches.


HISTORICAL  PART.  273

**  I  faw  him  receive  a  letter  from  Paris.  He  opened  and
f*  read  it  with  fuch  an  air,  that  my  fufpicions  were  great-
*'  \y  increafed.  Strongly  fufpecting  that  I  was  the  object
"  of  this  letter,  I  watched  the  opportunity  when  he  was
"  gone  to  the  church,  to  enter  his  room,  where  I  found
**  the  epiflle  couched  in  the  following  terms  :  Tour  letter,
"  my  dear  friend-,  was  read  in  prefçnce  of  the  whole  club.
11  They  were  furprized to  find jo  much  pkilofophy  in  a  vil-
tl  lage  curate.  Be  tranquil,  my  dear  curate,  we  are
li  three  hundred;  we  tnark  the  heads  and  the  fall j  only
"  keep  your  people  ready;  difpofe  your  parijhioners  to  ex-
*c  ecute  the  orders,  and  they  Jlmll  be  given  to  you  in  time,
(Signed)  f  Dietrich,  Secretary."

To  the  many  reflections  that  muft  naturally  arife  ot?
the  reading  of  fuch  a  letter,  I  mall  only  add,  that  the  club
to  which  thefe  three  hundred  belonged  had  transferred
the  place  of  its  fittings  to  the  fuburbs  of  St.  Honoré, and
that  it  aflembled  there  for  a  long  time  without  being  ob-  *
ferved  by  the  court  ;  when  a  fcene  of  drunkennels  appri-
sed the  king  of  the  fafe  that  awaited  him.  At  the  conclu-*
ilon  of  one  of  thofe  banquets  fqcred-ta fraternity,  all  the
brethren  made  a  puncture  in  their  arm  and  received  their
blood  in  their  glarTes  ;  they  then  drank  the  to< ft  Ùeath  ta
fiings,  and  thus  concluded  the  fraternal  repair.  Tijis  an7
ecdote  will  eafily  fuggefl  of  what  fpecies  of  men  the  legion
of  twelve  hundred,  propofed  by  fean  de  Brie  to  the
Convention,  was  to  be  compofed,  who  were  to  be  dis-
perfed  over  the  whole  globe  to  murder  all  the  kings  of
the  earth.

Thus  did  the  Sect,  under  the  name  of  Fraternity,  by
the -frenzy  of  its  Equality,  by  the  very  nature  of  its  prini-
ciples,  and  by  the  horrid  rites  of  its  Lodges,  io  degene-
rate the  hearts  of  its  adepts,  as  to  form  (like  the  old  man
of  the  mountain)  clubs  of  three  hundred  afTarfins  at  a
time.  Thus  do  the  myfteries  explain  the  ferocious  joy  of
a  Marat,  of  a  St.  Juft,  of  a  Le  Bon,  of  a  Carrier,  of  a
Collot  D'Herbois,  and  the  Hill  more  ferocious  ferenity  of
the  Sophilters  of  the  revolution  in  the  midit  of  maffacres
and  rivers  of  blood.

But  the  vengeance  of  that  God  who  has  permitted  fo
heavy  a  fcourge  to  befall  France,  now  appears  to  have
taken  another  turn.  In  that  country  the  altar  of  Chrift
is  overturned,  and  the  throne  of  its  kings  annihilated.— *

Mm


274  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Thofe  who  had  confpired  againft  the  altar  and  the  throne
now  confpire  againft  each  other.    The  intruded  ctergy,
the  Deifts,  and  the  Atheifts,.  butchered  the  Catholics,-—
The  Intruders,  the  Deifts,  and  the  Atheiftsnow  begin  to
cut  each  other's  throats.     The  Conflitutionalifts  drove
out  the  Royalifts,  and  are  in  their  turn  put  to  flight  by
the  Republicans.    The  Democrats  of  the  Republic  one
and  indivifible,  murder  the  Democrats  of  the  federative
Republic;  the  faction  of  the  mountain,  guillotines  the
Girondin  faction,  and  then  fplit  into  the  faction  of  Hé-
bert and  Marat,  of  Danton  and  Chabot,  of  Cloots  and
Chatitnette,  and  in  fine  into  the  faction  of  Robefpierre^
v  ho  devours  them  ali,  and  is  in  his  turn  devoured  by  the
faction  of  Tallien  and  Freron.     Briflot  and  Genfonné,
Gaodet  and  Faucher,  Rabaud  and  Barbaroux,  with  thirty
more,  are  condemned  to  death  by  Fotiquier  Tinville,  juff
as  th-y  had  condemned  their  King;  Pouquier  is  himfelf
fent  to  the  fcaffold,  juft  as  he  had  lent  Brfffot  and  Co.
Petion  and  Buzot  perifh  with  hunger  in  the  forefts,  and
are  devoured  by  the  wild  beads;  Perrin  dies  in  prifon;
Valazé  and  Labat  flab  themfelves  ;  Marat  falls  beneath
the  arm  of  Charlotte  Corday  ;  Robefpierre  dies  on  the
fcaffold,  and   Sveyes  alone  furvives,  becaufe  the  cup  of
vengeance  is  not  yet  exhausted  on  miferable  France. — »
Pentarfues  (or  the  government  of  five),  with  a  two-fold
fenate,  are  now  become  a  new  curfe  on  this  unhappy
country.    A  Revvbeî,  Carnot,  Barras,  Le  Tourneur,  and
a  ReVeillière  Lepaux,  allume  the  command  of  its  armies,
erive  away  its  deputies  equal  and  free,  fulminate  its  Sec-
tions, and  rule  it  with  a  rod  of  iron.    Every  thing  trem-
bles before  them  :  when  they  grow  jealous  of  each  other,
they  plot  deftruciion  and  drive  each  other  into  banifh-
rneat;  but  new  tyrants  fucceed  and  unite  together;  and
at  this  prefent  time  the  ruling  Deities  in  France  are  ba-
riiihment,  ftupor,  fear,  and  the  Pentarques.    Tenor  has
impofed  filence  throughout  the  Empire,  and  this  vail  pri-
fon contains  twenty  millions  of  flaves,  all  fkulking  into
obfeurity  at  the  very  name  of  a  Merlin  or  a  Rewbel,  or
at  the  threat  of  a  journey  to  Cayenne  ;  fuch  is  the  Ma-
jejly  of  that  people  fo  frequently  declared  Equal,  Freey
and  Sovereign.
The  Sett         '  jr^e  rea(]er>  perhaps,  may  think  that  in  the  midft  of  fuch
Slots  ?  US  mîlff"cres>  fo&ions,  tyrants,  and  terror,  the  See*  muft  have
gainftPro-  ^°ir.  the  thread  of  all  its  plots  ;  but  it  has  never  loft  fight


HISTORICAL  PART.  275

of  them  for  a  moment.  The  Pentarques  are  more  than  perty  and
ever  ftimulated  by  itagainft  the  Clergy  and  the  Nobility;  Society;
while  the  ultimate  mylteries  threaten  the  Pentarques
themfelves.  In  vain  fhall  they  attempt  to  preferve  a  fuf-
iiciency  of  the  Social  Order  to  keep  them  in  pofleflion  of
that  authority  which  they  have  erected  on  the  ruins  of
the  throne.  The  Sect,  has  thus  far  proceeded  fuccefsful-
ly  toward  the  accomplifhment  of  its  myfleries  ;  but  it  will
not  ftop  here;  has  it  not  fworn  to  annihilate  Property  as
well  as  the  throne  ?  During  the  firft  aflembly,  did  not
thofe  confpirators,  now  calling  themf elves  Conjtitutional-
tjh,  annihilate  the  property  of  the  clergy;  and  the  next
aflembly  that  of  the  nobility,  under  the  pretence  of  emi-
gration, while  thofe  who  remained  in  France  were  pilla-
ged under  pretence  of  confutation  ?  Then  come  the  adepts
jBruijfart,  Robefpierre,  and  the  two  Juliens;  and  th. 7
write  that  the  favorable  moment  is  now  come  to  extir  -
pate  the  mercantile  aristocracy,  as  well  as  that
of  the  Nobles,  in  their  fecret  correfpondence,  juft  as
Weifhaupt  does  in  his  mylteries,  they  declare  that  mer-
cbantifm  (negotiantifm)  muji  be  crujlied.  That  wherever*
a  large  number  oj  rich  merchants  were  to  be  found,  there
were  Jure  to  be  found  as  many  cheats,  and  Liberty  could
not  ejlabliflo  its  empire  there.*  Accordingly,  fpoliations
and  requilitions  have  robbed  the  merchants  and  citizens
of  their  property,  juft  as  the  Clergy  and  Nobility  had
been  robbed  before  them.  But  even  this  is  not  the  ac-
complifhment of  the  grand  end,  of  the  ultimate  views  of
the  Seel,  againft  all  property,  againiè  all  fociety  whatever.
Even  under  the  iron  reign  of  the  Pentarques,  let  us  attend
to  the  addrefles  publilhed  by  the  adepts  Drouct,  Bat
and  Lancelot  :

$Lxtracl  from  the  Addrefs  to  the  French  People, found  in
Babœuf's  papers.

"  People  of  France, — During  fifteen  centuries  you
**  lived  in  flavery,  therefore  unhappy,  It  is  fcarcely  lix
<l  years  lince  you  began  to  breathe  in  expectation  ■;
u  dependence,  of  happinefs,  and  of  Equality.  I\  :
w  and  in  all  places  men  have  been  lulled  with  fine  words;
"  never,  and  in  no  place,  did  they  obtain  the  thing  with
"  the  word.    From  time  immemorial  has  it  been  hy

*  See  Papers  fotind  at  Robefpierre's,  ani  printed  by  order
•f  the  Convention,  Nos.  43,  75,  89,  107,  &o.


276  antisocial  conspiracy;

<c  critically  repeated,  that  men  are  equal;  and  from  time
"  immemorial  the  molt  monftrous  inequality  has  info-
tc  lently  preffed  on  mankind.  Ever  fmce  the  exijlence  of
<r-  Civil  Societies,  the  fineft  appendage  of  man  has  undoubt-
u  edly  been  recognized,  but  has  never  been  once  reali-
"  zed.  Equality  bas  never  been  any  thing  but  a  noble
w  and Jlerile  fiât ion  of  the  laxv.  Now  that  it  is  called  for
cc  with  a  louder  voice,  they  anfwer  us,  Wretches  hold
"  your  peace  !  Equality  in  deed  is  a  mere  chimera  ;  be
c;  contented  with  a  conditional  equality.  You  are  all  equal
11  before  the  law,  ye  rafcals  !   What  more  do  you  want  ?

tc  — What  more  do  we  want  ! Te  LegiJlators,ye  Go-

K  vernors,  ye  Rich,  ye  Proprietors,  now  hearken  in  your
u  turn  :

"  We  are  all  equal. — That  principle  is  inconteftable.
(i  -  -  -  Very  tvellf  We  mean  in  future  to  live  and  die  as
K  ztee  arc  born.  We  will  have  real  Equality,  or  death.— •
a  That  is  what  we  want,  and  we  will  have  that  real  equa-
tc  Jity,  coft  what  it  will.  Wo  be  to  thofe  whom  we  fhall
"  meet  between  it  and  us  !  Wo  to  the  man  who  fhall
"dare  oppofe  (o  poiitive  a  determination  !  The  French
K  revolution  is  but  the  forerunner  oj  a  revolution  greater
li  by  far  and  much  more  Solemn;  and  which  will  be  the
«  lajl.  -  -

"  What  do  we  afk  more  than  the  Equality  of  rights  ?
"  Why,  we  will  not  only  have  that  Equality  tranferibed
"  in  the  declaration  of  the  rights  of  man  and  of  the  citi-
*'  zen  ;  we  will  have  it  in  the  midtf.  of  us,  under  the  roofs
<c  of  our  houfes.  We  confent  to  every  thing  for  the  ac*
*'  quifition  of  it,  even  to  clear  decks-,  that  we  may  poiTefs
Ci  it  alone;  Perifh  the  arts,  if  requifite,  provided  we  do
"  but  preferve  real  Equality  !

"  Legislators  and  Governors,  Proprietors,  rich  and
<c  boweUlefs,  in  vain  do  you  attempt  to  paralize  our  iacred
u  enterprize,  by  faying,  vje  are  only  re-producing  the  A-
"  grarian  law  that  has  been  fo  often  allied  for  before.

"  Calumniators  !  hold  your  peace  in  your  turn,  and  in
"  the  hlence  of  confuiion  hearken  to  our  pretentions,  dic-
M  tated  by  nature,  and  grounded  on  juftice.

"  'J  he  Agrarian  laiv,  or  the  equal  partition  of  lands^
u  was  the  momentary  tvijh  of  a  few  ibldiers  vyithout  priri-
o:  ciples,  of  a  hw  clans  actuated  rather  by  inf'tincT:  than  by
"  reafon.  We  aim  at  Jomcihing  far  more  fublime,  far
"more  equitable;   GOODS  IN  common,  or  THE  COM-


HISTORICAL  FAUT.  ftjJT

tc  MUNITY  OF  estates  !  No  more  individual  proper*
K  ties  in  land,  for  the  earth  belongs  to  nobody.  IVe  demand
"  and  will  enjoy  the  goods  of  the  earth  in  common.  The
5*  fruits  belong  to  all.

"  Difappear  now,  ye  difgufling  di/iinflions  of  rich  and
u  poor,  of  higher  and  lower,  of  majler  and  fer v ant,  of
tc  governing  and  governed  !  for  m  other  diftinclion
*■<■  Jball  exi/l  among  manhind,than  thofe  of  age  and  sex."*

The  authors  of  this  addrefs  were  certainly  too  hafty  in
their  publication  ;  but  every  reader  will  lee  that  their  lan-
guage perfectly  coincides  with  the  Man-king  of  Illumin-
iiin.  France,  it  is  true,  was  nut  yet  fufHciently  prepared
for  this  laft  plot*  but  it  is  necefl'ary  fometimes  to  detach
certain  adepts  to  found  the  way,  tbo'  afterwards  the  Seâ
fhould  find  it  neceffary  to  difavow  and  lac;  ifice  its  off-
spring. Though  Babceuf  may  have  bsen  facriiiced  to  the
myfteries,  his  accomplices  {till  livej  their  legions  impofed
upon  theiudges  and  on  the  Pentarques  themfèltfes, and
they  dared  not  condemn  Drouet.  Is  it  to  be  fuppofed,
that  after  completely  pillaging  the  Clergy  and  the  Nobi-
lity, after  fuccefsfully  dcfpoiling  many  merchants,  trades-
men, and  citizens,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  Seat  had
pillaged  the  two  firft  Orders  of  the  State,  a  fingle  defeat
fhould  fufSce  to  check  its  views  ?  or  can  we  fay,  that  it
will  not  one  day  proclaim  that  Equality  in  deed  which
which  lhall  baniih  from  the  earth  ail  thofe  diflivMions  of
rich  and  poor,  of  higher  and  lotver,  of  majler  and javant,
and  ultimately  of  governing  ûw/governed  ?

Some  perfons  may  flatter  themselves  that  our  fciences  agaînft
uuy  protract  the  day  of  barbarifm,  when  men  are  to  roam  ^v3  and.
in  cLns  without  laws  or  magift rates  ;  hut  have  we  not  Sciences;
fecn  in  the  myfteries,  that  our  fciences,  in  the  eyes  of  the
Seift,  are  no  other  than  the  prime  caufe  of  our  misfor-
tunes, of  the  alledged  flavery  of  fociety  ?f  And  if  fails
did  not  fpeak  clearly  enough,  if  the  monuments  of  art
falling  beneath  the  blows  of  the  Jacobins  did  not  fufn-
ciently  denote  the  veneration  it  oears  to  the  productions
of  genius;  if  any  apparent  relpecl:  fhould  flill  be  fhown
to  the  fathers  of  letters,  let  not  the  reader  conceive  that
the  adepts  have  really  blufhed  at  the  fight  of  thefe  modern
vandals  :  Fire  and  lword  have  only  hailened  thatprogreis

*  See  the  Papers  feized  at  BaboeuPs,
•J-  See  the  Degree  of  Regent.


a;S  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

which  they  fo  much  extol;  it  was  not  Babceuf  alone  that
would  exciaim,  Perijh  the  arts,  if '  requijite,  provided  we
do  but  prcferve  real  Equality  !  The  Jacobin  Philofophifr,
if  fincere,  will  have  no  difficulty  in  faying  what  the  legis-
lators have  fo  often  proclaimed  from  the  tribune,  "  What
need  have  we  of  all  your  colleges,  academies, and  libraries  ?
Needs  there  fo  much  ftudy  and  fo  many  books  for  learn-
ing the  only  true  fcience  ?  Let  the  nations  know  the  rights
cj  ma;i,  and  they  will  know  enough."*

i  know  that  a  mufeum  and  a  national  infritute  are  held
out  as  objects  of  magnificence,  in  which  the  revolution
would  appear  to  infufe  new  vigor  into  the  arts  and  fcien-
ces  ;  but  let  the  fage  in  the  midft  of  this  vaft  mufeum  re-
flect for  a  moment.  Thuoderftruck  at  this  immenfe  aflTem-
blage  of  theft,  pillage,  and  robbery  erected  into  trophies,
will  he  not  exclaim,  Do  thefe  men  then  barefacedly  fcofF
at  every  idea  of  property  who  thus  difplay  the  fruits  of
their, rapine  and  extortion?  After  having  pillaged  and
deftroyed  every  thing  within  their  own  country,  they  fet
off  to  defpoil  the  neighboring  States  tranquilly  repohng
on  the  banks  of  the  Scheldt,  the  Meufe,  or  the  Tiber. — .
'They  divide  the  gold  they  haveftolen  among  themfelves,
and  they  exalt  to  public  view  what  they  have  robbed  for
the  State.  Within  this  temple  of  the  arts,  therefore,  the
idea  of  property  is  as  much  blafted  as  within  the  Occult
Lodges  of  thofe  adepts  who  had  fworn  to  annihilate  the
facial  compact.

And  what  is  this  national  Lyceum,  where  we  find  the
Geometrician  La  Place,  the  Aitronomer  La  Lande,  the
Poetailer  Chenier,  the  Commentator  of  the  Zodiac  Du-
puis,  the  Hiftorian  of  the  mountains  La  Metherie,  all  con-
Iterating  their  ftudies  and  their  fcience  to  prove  that  God
does  not  exiit  ?  Behold  the  Sect  fmiling  at  their  labors  \
for  it  is  aware,  that  Atheifm  will  foon  annihilate  arts  and
fciences,  as  well  as  property  and  fociety.  Little  does  it
concern  itfelf  whether  the  greater  part  of  the  literati  ftop

*  I  do  not  exadly  remember  the  particular  na  "5  of  the  De-
puties who  wouid  hold  forth  fuch  language  at  the  tribune  ;  I
can  affirm,  however,  that  the  ibphifticaterj  Legiflator  Rabaui
de  Si.  Etienne  frequently  held  fuch  language  in  company,
which  has  more  than  once  given  rife  to  a  good  deal  of  debate.
Once,  in  particular,  he  and  Mr.  Defile t,  a  man  of  letters,  al-
moil  quarrelled  on  the  iubjecl;  and  that  was  quite  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolution.


HISTORICAL  PART.  27Q

&ort  in  the  career  of  the  myfteries  ;  for  they  are  forward-
ing the  views  of  the  Sect  without  knowing  it,  even  where
they  have  made  their  ftand.  Its  degrees  arc  progreilive,
and  it  well  knows  that  the  fophilticated  and  atheiftical
Jacobin  will  beget  the  diforganizing  Jacobin.  In  the
Lyceum,  or  adhering  to  Baboeuf  and  Drpuet,  it  beholds
its  offspring  laborious  Atheilts  profefling  its  principles,
and,  in  fhort,  true  Jacobins  ;  and  though  this  name  fhould
for  a  time  be  rejected  with  contempt,  it  will  not  forget
that  the  principles,  and  not  the  name,  conftitutes  the  dis-
ciple. Some  are  difgufted  with  the  firft  confequences
flowing  from  thefe'  principles,  and  they  ftop;  while  others
complacently  proceed  to  the  laft.  The  Sect  will  therefore
fix  the  former  in  its  firft  degrees;  the  latter  are  initiated
in  its  ultimate  rnyfteries  ;  and  whether  its  agents  are  lite-
rati or  brutes,  it  is  of  no  conlequence  to  the  Sect.  In  the
French  revolution  it  has  always  had  the  art  to  diftribute
the  different  parts  as  it  does  its  degrees,  and  to  vary  them
without  ever  lofing  fight  of  its  ultimate  object.

In  its  attack  upon  God,  we  have  (ccn  its  intruded  Cler-  Progrès-
gy,  its  Dsifts,  and  its  Atheifts.    The  firft  overturned  the  uor>  obf«r»
altars  of  the  Catholic  religion;  the  fécond,  of  the  Luthe-  VH      In
ran  and  Calvinift  church,  and  of  every  religion  adoring  aR(j  parts*
Chrift;  and  the  third  blafphemoufly  proclaimed  the  non-  a&ed  in
exi Hence  of  a  God.  therevo*

In  the  attack  on  monarchy  the  Seel:  has  had  fucceffive-  lotion.
]y  its  Neckerijh,  its  Fayetifts,  its  Conflitutionalifts,  its
Girondins,  its  Gmventionijts.  Herein  it  is  that  the  rea-
der may  o'oferve  the  Sett  varying  and  gradually  diftribu-
tins;  its  parts  to  wind  up  the  horrid  fcene  to  the  bloody
cataftrophe.  Here  we  fee  thofe  different  actors  faithfully
fulfilling  the  parts  that  had  been  distributed  to  them.—
Syeyes  pronounces  that  the  tyrant  (hall  die  :  this  tyrant
is  Lewis  XVI.  Necker  feizes  on  him  and,  delivers  him
over  to  the  legiflative  confpirators  of  the  third  order  ;  La
Fayette  and  Bailly,  with  the  Conltituent  Affembly,  leave
him  but  the  (hadow  of  a  fceptre  and  his  royal  robes  rent
afunder.  They  then  deliver  him  up,  after  having  taught
the  people  to  drag  him  ignominioufly  from  Verfailles  to
the  Town-hall  of  Paris,  from  Varennes  to  the  Thuille-
ries.  The  unfortunate  monarch  is  now  furrounded  by
banditti  armed  with  pikes.  BriJJot  and  his  Girondins  pro-
ceed in  that  career  begun  by  Neçkeï  and  La  Fayette,  and
End  that  with  a  mere  breath  the  throne  can  be  overturned  ;


283  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Lewis  is  then  dragged  from  the  Thuilleries  to  the  Tow-
ers of  the  Temple.  Robefpierre,  Petion,  and  Marat,  are
the  next  that  feize  on  his  royal  perfon  ;  and  from  the  Tem-
ple they  hurry  him  to  the  fcafFold.  In  this  long  concate-
nation of  feditions,  rebellions,  and  treafons,  to  the  very
confummation  of  the  regicide,  I  fee  various  actors  ;  but
the  guilt  of  all  and  each  is  equal.  They  arc  all  agents  in
the  confpiracy  of  Equality  and  Liberty;  all  proceed  from
the  fame  tenebrous  recehes;  all  are  Jacobins.

In  the  confpiracy  againft  property  and  all  fociety  the
fame  gradation  and  principles  are  to  be  obferved  ;  and
with  a  limilar  conftancy  does  the  Seel  tend  toward  the
grand  ultimatum*  The  irreligious  Sophifters  of  every
clafs  defpoil  the  Clergy;  the  Sophifters  commoners  plun-
der the  Nobility  ;  next  comes  the  fophifricated  banditti,
who  lay  violent  hands  on  the  riches  of  the  merchant  or
the  wealth  of  the  commoner.  Meanwhile  the  conquer-
ing Sophifters  difplay  the  fpoils  of  foreign  nations;  and
the  atheiftical  Sophifters  at  length  break  the  laft  tie  of
fociety.  The  former  had  only  admitted  one  part  of  the
myfteries  ;  the  latter  are  willing  to  confummate  them  all,
They  will  that  property  fhall  not  exift,  either  in  the
church,  the  nobility,  the  commoner,  or  in  any  mor-
tal whatever.  In  virtue  of  their  Equality,  the  earth  is  to
be  the  property  of  none,  the  produce  the  property  of  all.
In  virtue  of  their  Libertv,  Condorcet  refutes  to  obey  a
God,  Briflbt  to  recognize  a  king,  and  Baboeuf  to  fubmit
to  a  republic,  to  rnagiftrates,  or  to  any  governing  power.
And  whence  do  all  thefe  men  come  ?  All  proceed  from
the  Jacobin  club;  they  are  the  offspring  of  Holbach's
club,  of  the  A^afonic  Lodges,  and  of  the  Illuininizing
Myfteries,  Their  natural  parents  are  Voltaire,  Jean
Jaques  Roufîeau,  the  Knights  Kadofch^  and  the  Bavarian
Spartacus.

Thus  do  we  trace  the  difciples  of  the  Seel:  perpetually
aiming  at  the  accomplifhment  of  its  myfteries  ;  whether
in  their  crimes  and  fuccefs  againft  their  God  or  againft
their  king,  whether  in  their  eflays  againft  republics  or  the
Iaft  veftiges  of  fociety;  every  ftep  in  the  French  revolu-
tion demonftrates  the  activity  of  its  adepts,  brigands  of
every  degree,  purfuing  its  ultimate  views.  Indeed  it  has
not  yet  accomplifhed  all  its  defigns  ;  and  may  God  grant
that  they  may  be  foiled  in  the  attempt  !  But  let  the  mind
of  man  calculate,  if  it  be  able,  the  crimes  committed  by  the


HISTORICAL  PART.  28l

Sec"l,  and  the  difafbrs  that  have  already  befallen  France;
and  when  it  fhalihave  fucceeded  in  this  calculation,  will
it  dare  venture  to  explore  thofe  entailed  on  futurity  ?  Let
the  father  of  every  family  contemplate,  and  infcribe  on  the
threlhold  of  his  houfr,  tnat  threat  of  the  adepts  contained
in  the  following  fentence  :  The  French  Revolution  is  but
the  forerunner  of  a  Revolution  greater  by  far  ^  and  much
more  folemn.

T.lat  nations  may  be  awakened  to  their  danger,  let  us
fliow  them  that  they  are  all  without  exception,  menaced
with  furjilar  misfortunes  to  thofe  that  have  befallen  France.
Such  is  their  fate  decreed  by  the  SeCl  in  its  Myfteries;
for  their  views  are  not  confined  to  any  particular  people,
but  aim  at  ail  nations  whatever.  To  faclis  therefore,  I
will  once  more  appeal;  and  my  reader  fhall  fee  how  per-
fectly they  coincide  with  the  Code  of  the  Sect  on  the  ex-»
tent  and  univerfality  of  its  confpiracies.
N  n


2Î2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

CHAT.  XIII.


UnVUérfàlîty  of  the  Succefs  of  the  Seal  explained  ly  the
Univerjality  of  its  Plots.

Succefs       /~\^  a^  f^e  P^œnomena  of  the  French  Revolution,

l<  Hie  Ja-  V_/  perhaps,  the  molt  aiîonifhing,  and,  unfortunately,
cobms;  the  uioft  inconteftable,  is,  the  rapidity  of  thofe  conquefts
that  have  already  revolutionised  a  confiderable  part  of
jiuroptyanJ  menace  the  remainder  of  the  univerfe.  No-
thyja;  cart  be  more  furprizing  than  to  fee  the  facility  with
which'  JaCbbinitrft  has  erected  its  ftandards,  or  planted
the  tree  of  Equality  and  disorganizing  Liberty  in  Savoy,
Belgium,  Hoiland,  on  the  Banks  of  the  Rhine,  in  Svvit-
Z,erland,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Alps,  in  Piedmont,  in
the  Milanois,  and  even  at  Rome.  When  1  come  to  ex-
plain thefe  phenomena,  I  fliall  not  allow  myfelf  to  be  car-
ried aw.-.y  by  fyftem  or  by  prejudice.  1  will-  confefs,  that
genius,  bravery  and  talents,  have  frequently  wrefted  the
pal  n  of  victory.  I  candidly  confefs,  that  many  of  their
triumphs  are  due  to  men  who  by  their  courage  and  ta-
lents were  entiiled  to  ferve  a  better  caufe»  I  will  not  dis-
pute their  glory  with  them;  let  them  entwine  their  lau-
rels with  the  red  cap;  let  their  glory  mingle  with  remorie
at  the  light  of  thole  viie  Jacobins,  and  tyrannic  Pentar-
ques,  in  whofe  defence  they  have  rivalled  their  ancestors,

its  fir.  pi-    vvno  tho.'ie  in  the  days  of  Henry  IV".  or  Lewis  Xi  V

lariiy  ;  Neverthelefs,  in  the  career  of  their  con&uefts  many  points,
and  a  large  (hare  of  their  fucceiles,  are  to  be  attributed  to
other  Cdufes  than  to  their  valor.  We  have  feen  chiefs
deftkute  of  experience  or  merit  bafrlinj  the  wifdom  and
talents  of  heioes  confummate  in  the  military  art.  We
have  feen  the  Carmagnole  Bands,  foidiers  of  a  day,  make
their  triumphant  entry  into  whole  provinces,  while  all  the
difcipnne  of  the  combined  legions  of  Aurtria,  Hungary,
and  Pruilia,  could  not  impede  their  progrefs.  The  mili-
tary  fcience  acquired  by  thole  veteran  bands  in  camps  and
under  the  tuition  of  the  greater!  captains,  appears  to  have
been  ufelefs.  In  (p-ite  or  the  arts  of  a  Cohorn  or  a  Vau-
fean,  citadels  have  iAlca  at  the  light  of  the  new  conquer-


HISTORICAL  PART.  283

crsj  and  if  a  battle  is  fought,  one  only  victory,  or  even
a  defeat,  will  acquire  whole  provinces  to  their  new  do-
minion, that  would  have  coll  long  and  painful  compaigns
to  a  Marlborough  or  a  Turenne.  Another  prodigy  prefTes
Oil  our  notice.  Thefe  Jacobin  conquerors  are  received
like  brethren  by  the  vanquifhed  nations,  and  their  legions
are  fwoln  in  the  very  places  where  thofe  of  any  oLher
power  woull  dwindle  into  nothing.  They  impofe  the
har/heft  of  yokes  011  their  new  fubjecls,  are  guilty  of  eve-
ry fpecies  of  extortion,  devaluation,  and  facrilege,  over-
turning all  laws  human  and  divine,  yet  are  nevertheless
received  with  as  loud  acclamations  by  the  multitude,  as
if  it  was  their  Saviour  that  approached.  Thefe  certainly
are  phenomena  that  the  hi  ft  priais  would  in  vain  attempt
to  illuftrate  were  he  only  acquainted  with  the  viiioie  ar-
mies of  the  Seel.  To  unfold  thefe  mylleries,  let  us  bold-  its  eenera!
]y  declare  it}  the  Seel;  and  its  plots,  its  legions  of  fecret  caufe.
emilTaries,  have  every  where  preceded  the  armies  and  their
thunderbolts  of  war.  It  had  infeited  liâtes  with  its  prin-
ciples long  before  it  fent  eicher  its  PLhegru's  or  Buona-
parte's to  attack  thern.  Its  means  once  prepared,  traitors
were  to  be  found  in  the  fortress  to  open  the  gates,  they
were  to  be  found  in  the  armies,  and  in  the  councils  of
Princes,  to  render  the  plans  of  attack  or  defence  abortive.
Its  fubterraneous  Clubs,  Lodges,  Correfponding  Socie-
ties, Journals,  and  Propagandas,  had  already  difpofed
the  populace  and  prepared  the  way.  The  day  will  come
when  nations  {hall  have  written  the  hiflory  of  this  age.
Does  it  not  already  appear,  that  each  of  them  wili  have
to  dedicate  many  pages  of  that  hiflory  to  unfold  the  trea-
sons of  which  it  has  fallen  a  victim,  to  enumerate  the
traitors  that  it  has  been  obliged  to  punii'h,  or  to  defcribe
the  means  employed  to  avert  the  threatening  ftorm.  In
order  to  point  out  the  main-fpring  of  all  thefe  machina-
tions, I  fhall  turn  back  to  thofe  days  when  the  Preach
Revolution  was  firft  rifmg  into  exi Hence.

The  adepts  of  revolutionary  Equality  and  Liberty  had  Manifes-
buried  themfelves  in  the  Lodges  of  Maf.mry.     At  the*0  of  the
commencement  of  the  Revolution  a  maniféfto  is  i fitted  ,lr'm     r
to  all  the  Mafonic  Lodges,  and  to  all  the  Directories  (  who  p^Jg .
are  to  make  the  proper  uie  of  it  among  all  the  brethren
of  Europe)^  by  the  central  Lodge  of  France,  the  Grand
Orient  of  Paris,  the  fécond  Aréopage  of  liiu.ninilrii.    By
this  manifefto,  and  in  virtue  of  fraternity,  "  all  the  Lodges


co bin  Wri
ters.


234  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

«  are  fummoned  to  confederate  together,  to  unite  their
w  efforts  to  maintain  the  revolution;  to  gain  over  to  it, in
t£  all  parts,  friends,  partizans,  and  protestors;  to  propa-
tc  gate  the  flame,  to  vivify  the  fpirit,  to  excite  zeal  and
"  ardor  for  it,  in  every  ji ate,  an. 4  by  every  means  in  their
«  power"  This  is  an  indifputable  fa£t;  it  was  fenteven
into  England,  where  the  Lodges  were  leaft  difpofed  to
fécond  it.  It  was  difperfed  throughout  the  Lodges  in
Germany,  aid  Jofeph  II.  got  pollefiion  of  one  hgned
Philip  of  Orleans*
its  effeft,  Never  did  any  government  publilh  an  edi£t  fo  effica-
and  union  cious.  Immediately  all  the  adepts  in  their  public  prints
of  the  Ja-  begin  to  cry  up  the  revolution  and  its  principles.  In  Hol-
land Paulas  publifnes  his  Treatifc  on  Equality;  Paines
in  England,  his  Rights  of  Man  ;  Campe,  in  Germany,
his  French  Citizen;  and  PhUo-Km-çL^e  even  outdoes
himfelf  in  his  Profejfion  of  Political  Faith.f  In  Italy
Gorani  appears;  in  ihort,  every  nation  h^s  its  apoftle  of
Equality,  Liberty,  and  Sovereignty  of  the  People.  Thefe
incendiary  productions,  with  thouf  aids  of  Others,  are  dis-
tributed among  the  people,  and  are  even  thrown  by  fteakh
into  the  cottages.  Thde  were  but  the  general  means  of
the  Seel:.  Men  who  defpif-  the  powers  of  opinion,  or  of
public  error,  may  fmile  at  fuch  revolutionary  means;  but
great  confpirators  knew  too  wJl  how  to  appreciate  them.
The  title  of  French  Citizen  now  becomes  their  fole  title
of  Nobility,  and  Campe,  Paine,  and  Cramer,  with  many
others  who  diftinguiihed  themielves  by  their  incendiary
writings,  are  thus  rewarded  for  their  villany.  Oblcure
writers,  but  fanatic  Illuminées,  are  called  from  the  bot-
tom of  Germany,  fuch  as  N'unis,  Dorfch^  Blau,  to  com-
pile in  Paris  periodical  paper?,  that  are  to  lpread  the  re-
volutionary enthuiiafm  beyond  tne  R->ine.  They  are
furrounded  by  a  Leuchfenring,  a  Rebbmann,  a  Hoff*
man,  with  many  other  adepts,  who  fi  xxed  to  contrive
the  treafons  that  were  to  extend  their  conquefts  in  thofe

*  See  Hoffman's  Avis  Important,  Vol.  I.  Sea.  XIX.

j-  This  work  alone  might  fuffice  to  prove,  th»t  if  Philo-
Knigge  did  really  abandon  the  Order  of  the  Illuminées,  he  con-
tinued at  lead:  to  propagate  their  principles.  Should  the  reader
willi  for  a  more  linking  proof,  he  will  find  it  in  the  hiftorical
■Eulogium  upon  him,  wiitten  by  the  jacobin  George  Frederic
Rebhmctnn,\'iho  alio  wrote  the  Eulogy  of  RoSefpierre.  (See  hit
Schtldvachte,  Vol.  I.  Art.  Knigge,  and  It  kahce,  page  Z9J


HISTORICAL  PART.  385

countries  where  the  other  adepts  were  preparing  the  opin-
ions. So  well  did  they  know  the  importance  of  being
matters  of  the  public  opinion,  that  to  conquer  it  by  means
of  their  Propagandas,  Journalists,  and  other  writers,  they
fpent  no  lefs  than  thirty  millions  of  Livres  during  the
firit  year  of  their  incurlions  and  during  1797;  they  la-
vifhed  twenty-one  millions  for  the  fame  purpole.*

Let  us  then  follow  the  army,  and  combine  its  marches  Plots  that
with  the  progreis  of  the  Sedl  and  the  motions  of  its  apos-  '.-répare
ties.    Let  us  follow  them  into  Germany,  into  Belgium,  thefucceli
Holland,  Spain,  in  fhort,  wherever  its  arms  have  triumph-  arms  :„
ed  ;  and  we  fhall  then  fee  whether  the  revolution  does  Germany.
not  owe  the  progrefs  of  its  arms  as  much  to  the  occult
adepts,  as  to  the  courage  of  its  victorious  bands.

Of  all  the  French  Generals  no  one,  perhaps,  was  more
inflated  with  his  luccefles  than  Cuftim:,  and  certainly
he  had  little  reafon  to  expect  them,  as  he  was  deltitute
of  thofc  talents  and  that  intrepidity  which  deuo-.es  the
great  General.  Neverthelefs,  Europe  with  atloniïhment
beheld  him  in  one  campaign  making  himfelf  matter  of
Worms,  Spire,  and  even  Mayence.  But  when  Europe
ihail  know  how  thefe  conquefts  were  prepared,  its  afton-
.  ifhment  wiil  fubfide,  andits  indignation  will  arife  againft
the  treacherous  offspring  of  Spartacus+WeiCkauat.

Condorcet,  Bonneville,  and  Fâuchet,  had  marked  out
ecch  department  of  correfpender.ee  for  their  propagan-
dists. Strasbourg  was  the  center,  or  directory  for  the
union  and  communication  between  the  German  and
French  adepts.  The  Chiefs  of  lllutninized  Lodges,
Stamm  and  Ilyeropbiles-HERMAHti',  who,  together
with  the  Illuminée  Dietrich,  has  juftly  obtained  the
furname  of  the  Guillotiner  of  Alface,  had  diftinguifhed
themfejves  in  that  province  and  at  Strafbourg.  Beyond
the  French  frontiers  the  corresponding  adepts  for  Worms
ani  Spire  are  the  Calvinift  min;(ter  Endeman,  the  Syn-
dic Besi/hrius-PETERSONy  the  Canon  Cyril  (of  Alexan-
dria) SCHWEICKARD,  Zeno  (of'lharfes)  KoBLER^Lu-
tius  Jpuleius-jANSOîi)  t'irgilius-HuLLktï)  the  Canon

*  With  refpecî  to  the  30,000,000  fee  Dr.mourier's  Memoirs,
affir  for  the  31,000,000,  thac  are  included  in  the  accounts  of
this  year,  the  ule  to  which  they  were  put,  was  betrayed  by
one  of  thofe  deputies  whom'  the  Pentarques  wiflied  to  bsmifti
to  Cayenne.


286  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Wincklemann,  and  particularly  the  profeflbr  Boh-
Jvier  at  Worms.  Thefe  adepts  are  in  dole  connection
with  the  club  at  M.yence,  headed  by  a  man  on  whom
the  defence  of  the  t  »wn  was  chiefly  to  depend,  the  Lieu-
tenant- Colonel  of  Engineers  Eicke.mmayer,  together

With  iViETTtRNICH,  BfcNZEJL,  K'JLBORN,  VhDEKIND

Biau,  Hauser,  ^'orstlRjHaupt,  and  NiMiS.  h  is
with  regret  ta.  I  fuly  the  page  of  biitory  with  fuch  names;
but  proofs  a  e  necflary,  and  perhaps  no  one  more  appo-
iite  can  be  adduced,  than  to  ihow  tnat  the  very  nanKS  of
the  vileft  traitors  are  known.*

Long  before  this  had  all  thefe  adepts  been  occupied
with  the  plan  of  delivering  up  the  left  bank  of  the  R  line
and  the  fortrefs  of  Mayence  to  the  jacobins;  they  had
been  difpofing  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns
and  country  towards  the  revolution  by  the  encomiums
which  they  were  continually  pronouncing  on  it.  Nofooner
does  Cultina  take  the  field,  than  his  Aid-de-Camp,  fince
become  his  hiftorian,  defcribes  him  as  placing  all  the  confi-
dence in  Stamniythe  famous  adept  of  Strasbourg.  Soon  af-
ter a  deputation  of  the  principal  Illuminées  invite  Cujiine
to  advance  into  the  country,  and  allure  him  that  by  fo  do-
in<z  be  will  meet  the  wijhes  of  the  majority  of  the  inhabit-
ants', Theyaddedjthat^otfW^  be  uneafy  as  to  the  means  cf
jurviounting  certain  apparent  dijjictdiies^they  could afjure
hint,  that  they  and  their  friends  had  power  enough  to  en~
gage  to  remove  them  ail;  that  they  were  the  organs  of  a
numerous  fociety  entirely  devoted  to  him,  and  aéiuated  by
the  greatej}  zeal  for  his  fuccefs.f  At  the  head  of  this
deputation  is  the  adept  Eohmer;  and,  together  with  Stamm,
be  is  entrufted  with  the  whole  confidence  of  the  Gene*.
raj.  Thefe  adepts,  in  conjunction  with  the  fubordinare
deputies,  now  take  the  whole  direction  of  the  jacobin  ar-
my; they  lead  it  into  Worms,  and  propofe  next  to  carry
it  againit  Mavence.  Cuitine  is  in  a  tremor  at  the  idea  of
fuch  an  enterprize  ;  the  adepts  inhtt,  and  he  at  length  re-
çoives to  let  his  army  proceed  againft  this  buiwarlc  of  the
empire.  But  at  the  very  fight  of  its  ramparts  his  fears
fcizehim  again;  the  brethren  iboth  him,  and  diétate  the
fummonS  that  he  is  to  fend  General  Gimnieh,  The  an-
f.Vvr  he  receives  makes  him  prepare  for  his  retreat  even

*  See  fio&Ban  Avis  Important,  Seâ.  XV.
f  Cuitine's  Memoirs,  Vol.  I.  Page  46,  47.


HISTORICAL  PART.  287

before  be  had  thought  of  an  attack,  when,lo  !  during  the
night  a  leltef  from  the  brethren  in  Mayence  to  the  adept
B'ohmer  transforms  his  fears  into  hopes  of  fuccefs.  This
letter  ffoted,  that  the  friend  who  enjoyed  all  the  confi-
dence of  the  com  man  Jer  was  determined  to  employ  all  his
influence  ta  perfuade  hi.n  of  the  impejjibiiity  of  defending
the  place  >  that  the  brethren  had  io  xvorked  upon  the  in-
habitants, that  it  would  only  need  to  add  a  fe-w  more
threats  in  the  next  fu  nmons  that  was  made.  Faithful  to
his  inftructions,  Cuîline  affames  the  tons  of  a  conquer-
or, who  has  prepared  a  general  affault,  and  is  on  the  eve
of  delivering  Mayence  over  to  piWagë  and  all  the  fu-
ry of  the  fjldiery  in  enfe  of  refinance.  The  illuminized
friend,  or  the  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  Engineers  Eicken-
?}uyer,  who  enjoyed  the  whoie  confidence  of  the  Com-
ntandeff,  and  the  Baron  Stein,  the  Pruitian  Envoy,  join,
in  their  efforts  to  prove  to  the  Council  of  War  that  it
was  i  npomhle  to  defend  the  place  (and  this  againft  an
enemy  Wiio  had  not  the  means  to  attack  it,  and  who  was
aclu-ily  determined  to  take  to  flight  fhould  he  meet  with
rdidance),  The  other  brethren  fpread  the  alarm  among-
the  inhabitants.  The  brave  Auûujar  and  his  eleven
hundred  Au-ftrians  are  indignant,  but  in  vain;  the  capi-
tulation is  figned,  and  Cufhne,  with  an  army  of  iS,00O
men,  deifkute  of  heavy  artillery,  trembling  left  he  fhould
not  be  able  to  make  his  retreat  with  fufheient  fpeed  ihould
he  bu:  meet  with  reft  fiance,  obtains  pofieffion,  within
the  (pace  of  three  days,  and  without  firing  a  (hot,  of  thole
very  ramparts  that  had  (truck  him  with  fo  much  terror.
Li  fuch  a  manner  ate  towns  taken  in  which  the  SecTt  pre-
dominates,*

Lee  :he  hiftorian  follow  Cuftine  and  his  fucceiTors  to
Frankfort,  and  he  will  find  in  the  neighborhood  of  that
town  a  principality  of  Ifenbourg  ;  he  wiJl  there  learn  how
the  S::c  can  protect  its  adepts.  Every  part  around  this
fcnall  principality  had  been  ravaged;  but  this  little  town
was  trie  feat  of  the  Council  for  the  Illuminées,  where
Pitfch  prefided.  It  was  from  this  place  that  all  the  ne-
ceiiary  iaitruciions  were  fent  for  the  jicobin  army,  which
in  return  revered  the  faiictuary  of  Ifenbourg,  an  1  evm
the  lure  of  pillage  could  not  attract  the  foldiery.     Hue

*  Ibid.  Vol.1.  Pa^eo*.  and  Defidoard's  Hifbry  of  the
French  Revolution,  Vol.  I.  Ej^k  II.  No.  24.


288  ANTISOCIAt  conspiracy;

wVn  Pitfch  and  his  council  difappear,  the  charm  ceafes,
and  the  fertile  plains  of  Ifenbourg  are  ravaged.*
Confpîra*        The  armies  are  overthrown  and  driven  from  May-
cv  f"i  ;lie  encej  but  the  union  of  the  brotherhood  does  not  fuffer,
C!9  Khe-    antj  the  Se£{-  prepares  new  means  of  fuccefs  for  the  revo-
na-ie  ic-     Jucionary  army*     Some  of  thefe  Confpiring  adepts  difap-
pear fora  time,  and  then  return  to  Mayence,  while  others
are  received  in  Paris,  there,  in  conjunction  with  tberen-
tarques,  to  devife  new   means  for  retaking  that  town,
which  now  appears  to  bid  defiance  to  all  the  Cuftines  of
the  revolution;  and  foon  after  Europe,  with  aftofiifh-
menr,  learns  that  Mayencc  with  the  whole  left  bank  of
the  Rhine  is  once  more  fubjecled  to   the  revolutionary
power.     At  firft  it  is  the  Cis-Rhenane  Republic,  then  it
becomes  the  funple  department  of  the  Parifian  Republic.
B  h  the  adepts  are  to  be  recompenfed  for  having  effected
by  their  black  arts  of  Illuminifm,  that  which  the  Pen-
ta.  ques  mult  have  defpaired  of,  notwithstanding  the  bra-
Very  of  their  troops.    The  profefTor  Metternich  had  been
employed  as  Di:  eevtorial  CommifTary  at  Fribourg.    Hoff-
man is  iuw  intf:alled  Reiver  General  on  the  Rhine,
with  a  (alary  of  fifty  thoufand  livres.  Rebbmann,  the  pa-
negyrift  of  Robefpierre,  is  created  head  of  the  Cis-Rhe-
nane judicature.    We  next  find  acting  in  concert  with
the  above-mentioned,  the  Privy  Counfellor  to  the   Elec-
tor of  Cologn  KcmpiS)  and  his  co-illuminees  the  Profes-
for  Gerhard\  the  Advocate  Watterjal,  and  the  Ariift
Conrad;  and  that  my  reader  may  know  by  what  men  re-
volutions may  be  brought  about,  I  will  name  the  taylor
Brizen-y  the  cobler  Theijjenx  the  grocer  Fiiigel,  the  hair-.
dreffer  broches,  and  the  alehoufe-keeper  Rbodius.f
Confpîra-        Other  plots  of  the  Sect  will  bring  us  back  to  Germa-
cy  m  Bel-  ny  again;  but  in  the  mean  time  Dumourier  triumphs
SIum*  over  the  ftationary  hero  of  Verdun,  and  flies  to  take  pos-

fi.ffion  of  Belgium.  Let  eternal  darknefs  hover  round
the  machinations  that  gave  this  General  more  time  to
collect  his  fcattered  troops  than  was  fufficient  for  a  victo-
rious army  to  proceed  to  Pari?,  and  deliver  the  unfortu-
nate Lewis.  Let  no  reader  pretend  to  aifociate  the  reign-
ing Duke  of  Brunfwick  with  the  brotherhood  of  the  mo-

*  Appendix  to  the  Ultimate  F*te  of  Mafonry,  Page  17,  and
Msmoiis.

f  Memoirs  on  Mayence*


HISTORICAL  PART.  289

dern  S  part  a  eus.  I  have  pofitive  proof  that  he  detefts
them  ;  I  alio  know,  that  Frederic  William  III.  has  given
various  proofs,  notwithstanding  he  may  have  been  play-
ed upon  by  another  fpecies  of  Illuminées,  that  he  ha-
ted and  abhorred  the  diforganizing  jacobins.  But  his
councils  are  under  the  direction  of  other  councils.  Bis»
chofswerder  was  at  Berlin;  Lucbejini  held  correfpond-
ences  ;  the  adepts  are  in  the  Dicajieres  (the  Offices.) — .
Their  influence  is  mort  formidable,  and  the  Seel  has  al-
ready declared,  that  it  will  be  far  Jlrongcr  when  once  in
poffejjion  of  the  Offices  and  Councils  under  tbe  Prince^
than  if  they  bad  initiated  the  Prince  himfelf.  The  day
may  come  th.it  will  explain  the  enigma  of  this  famous
retreat  made  at  the  time  when  all  Europe  was  at  the
height  of  expectation,  and  daily  awaited  the  lad:  accounts
of  its  triumphs;  meanwhile  I  (hall  proceed  to  unfold
myfteries  that,  hitherto  unknown,  have  led  us  to  view
Dumourier  as  conquering  Belgium  in  the  fields  of  Je-
mappe.  Here  at  leaft  the  laurels  are  to  be  divided,  for
the  confpiring  Sect  has  borne  a  larger  (hare  in  this  con-
queft  than  his  armies  ;  and  it  was  in  London,  rather
than  at  Jemappe,  that  the  Auftrian  Netherlands  were
conquered,

The  Seel:  had  its  Lodges  in  Brabant,  and  Fandermol
had  brought  over  his  party  to  them.  He  knew  that  the
brethren  fought  to  reprefent  the  French  revolution  in
fuch  colors  as  to  make  the  people  eager  in  its  caufe  ;  he
was  alfo  acquainted  with  thofe  Lodges  that  had  addreffed
the  National  Afiembly,  humbly  petitioning  for  their  re-
volutionary Equality  and  Liberty.  Vandernoot  was  then
in  London,  under  the  name  of  Gobelfcrôïx.  An  emiflàry
from  the  Parifiari  club,  he  was  profecuting  his  plots,  to-
gether with  Çbàùvelin,  P 'erigord Z)' '  Jutun,  Noel,  Bomety
and  eight  other  adepts,  fent  to  fpread  the  revolutionary
principles  in  England.  Vandernoot  entrufted  himfelf  ta
perfons  with  whofe  principles  he  was  not  fuiFiciently  ac-
quainted ;  but  they  knew  him  well  ;  he  betrayed  his  ie-
cret,  and  thus  the  whole  myftery  is  come  to  light.  Dur-
ing the  difputes,  and  even  warfare,  carried  on  between
the  Belgians  and  Jofeph  II.  the  greater  part  of  them
certainly  had  not  the  moft  diftant  idea  of  fubj  edging  their
country  to  the  revolutionary  principles  of  the  Jacobins;
but  the  Seel:  had  its  partizans,  and  thefe  adepts  left  no
means  untried  to  perfuade  the  people  that  the  fole  refourcc
O  o


2()0  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

rcovering  their  liberty  was  to  unite  with  the  French,

u  1  was  well  acquainted  with  thefe  plans   (laid  Vander-

"  noot  to  his  confidant)  ;  no  fooner  were  we  informed  of

"  what  had  palled  between  the  Duke  of  Brunfwick   and

'*  Dumourier,  than  we  immediately  wrote  to  Paris  and

"  to  the  army.     The  meffengcr  brought  us  back  the  plan

u  of  the  campaign,  and  a  copy  of  the  manifefto  that  Du-

"  mourier  was   to  publiib  on  his  entry  into  the  Low

tt  Countries.    I  faw  that  the  plan  had  been  exactly  copi-

"  ed  fro'.n  that  followed  by  Cuftine  in  his  extortions  in

"  Germany.    Ï  forefaw  that  fuch  a  plan  would  appal  all

"  the  efforts  of  our  people,. and  would  only  ferye  to  league

w  the  inhabitants  againft  the  French,  whereas  if  they

'■•  would  but  follow  my   ideas,  derived  from  the  know-

u  ledge  I  had  of  that  people,  and  of  their  difpofitions,  I

u  would  anfwer  for  their  feconding  the  French  in  vail  on,

u  and  that  it  would  infallibly  turn  out  fuccefsful.    At  the

"  requeft  of  Chauvelin  and  Noel,  I  drew  up  the  plan  to

.  be  followed,  and  wrote  the  manifefto  tbat  was  to  be

"  publifhed,  framing  it  according  to  the  local  knowledge

"  and  experience  I  had  acquired  j  and  the  whole  was  im-

"  mediately  lent  off  to  Paris.     They  were  both  adopted

a  on  the  Ipot.     Dumourier  did  not  change  a  fyllable  of

"  tne  manifefto  that  I  had  written  in  Portman  Square,

"  The  people,  gained  over  by  our  agents,  and  by  this

"  manifefto,  threw  themfelves  into  our  arms, and  Flanders-

"  was  taicc-n.;'

No  reader  can  expecl  that  I  fliould  name  the  perfon?
to  whom  Vandernoot  had  thus  opened  his  plans  ;  of  this
much,  however,  I  can  allure  the  public,  that  the  v.hole
was  laid  before  the  miniftry,  who  fora  time  luffered  No-
el, Vandernoot,  and  their  accomplices  to  remain  in  Lon-
don, but  keeping  a  dole  watch  over  them  until  they  were
fent  elfewhere  to  confpire  and  profecute  their  vile  machi-
nations, againft  nations  that  they  dared  not  meet  in  the
open  field.
InîToî-  Next  to  the  conqueft  of  Belgium  came  that  of  Hol-

land, land;  and  with  equal  aftonilhment  has  Europe  {ton  the

formidable  bulwarks  of  that  republic  failing  at  the  ap-
proach of  the  Jacobin  armies.  Here  again  we  muft  re-
fort  for  the  caufe  to  the  dark  rectfles  of  the  Seel.  The
apo'Ues  of  llluminifm  had  been  laboring  in  Holland  ever
ii nee  the  year   1781.*     The  immenfe  liims  of  money

*  Original  Writings,  and  Philo's  Report-


HISTORICAL  PART.  %Çl

cr£wn  from  thofe  countries  were  not  the  only  fuccefles
of  the  Seel.    The  Stadtholder  had  already  learned,  to  his
coil,  how  much  they  could  envejio.n  faction  and  l'édition  ;
the  French  revolution  then  game  to  raife  their  expecta-
tions and  ftimulate  their  lahors.     The  Low  Countries
had  for  a  fécond  time  received  their  Jacobin  conquerors.
The  Engliih  army  fell  tnclc  to  the  frontiers  of  its  an-
cient ally  to  vindicate  its  liberties  from  the  attempts  of
<he  enemy.    Its  efforts,  however,  are  ufelef:,  for  Holland
no  longer  wills  the  liberty  of  the  true  patriot,  it  wills  that
of  the  Jacobin.    Its  wifb.es  ihali  foon  be  complied  with  5
the  brethren  of  Paris  {hall  dictate  the  law  in  Amtlerdam,
and  (hall  feize  on  its  riches  ;  the  commerce  of  Holland
fhall  be  annihilated  ;  its  colonies  wrefied  from  it;  and
foon  (hall  it  rank  among  the  powers  of  Europe,  only  as
the  firll  flave  of  the  Gallic  Penurques.    No  matter.  Let
Pichegru  approach,  tor  he  is  the  object  of  their  wifhes  ;
;-nd  the  defenders  of  their  true  liberty  may  feek  their  fde-
ty  in  retreat;  for  the  countries  they  wilh  to  defend  are
replete  with  plots  againfl  them  and  confpiracies  in  favor
of  the  revolution.    In  Amfterdam  alone  the  Sect  has  no
lefs  than  forty  clubs,  and  each  club  has  the  direction  of  two
hundred  revolutionists.    The  elect  of  theïè  clubs  form
two  committees,  the  central  and  the  correfponding  com-
mittees; and  this  latter  holds  correfpondence  with  bre-
thren both   within  and  without  the  territories  of  the  re-
public.   Thefe  are  fubject  to  a  fupreme  council,  the  true
Areopagites,  whole  refolves  are  tranfmitted  to  the  difpers*
cd  brethren.    Perlons  who  watched  over  the  public  wel-
fare have  acted  the  parts  of  aifociates  in  hopes  of  diving
into  the  myfteries;  but  the  fcrutators  at  Amtlerdam  were
as  crafty  as  thofe  of  Munich,  and  thefe  adepts  could  nev-
er penetrate  beyond  the  firfl  myfteries,  while  other  clubs
were  compofed  of  men  well  known  by  the  Sect  to  be  the
firmed  advocates  for  Jacobin  Equality  and  Liberty.

Deputies  from  Leyden  are  delegated  to  the  central
committee;  and  the  brotherhood  at  Leyden  had  made  a
greater  progrefs  in  proportion,  both  in  numbers  and  fe-
dition,  than  it  had  at  Amilerdan.  The  adepts  of  U-
frecbt  were  flill  more  ardent  revolutionifts  than  either.
The  vigilance  of  government,  and  the  neighborhood  of
the  armies,  had  put  them  to  flight;  the  chiefs,  hovvever,
aiiembled  together  in  country-houfes,  and  their  deliL
fions  were  tranfmitted  to  the  Aréopage  at  Amtteiur.n. — •


292  ANTISOCIAL  C0N3PIRACYJ

Rotterdam  appeared  to  be  neuter;  but  it  held  a  neutral-
ity that  only  waited  the  propitious  moment  for  declaring
in  favor  of  Jacobinifm.  The  minifler  and  adept  Mareux
had  made  the  conqueft  of  three  fourths  of  the  inhabitants
of  Naarden.  The  commifiary  Alglam  would  have  been
reftlcfs  had  he  known  of  a  tingle  inhabitant  of  Haarlem
that  was  not  devoted  to  the  adepts  of  Arniferdam.*

The  better  to  conduct  the  proceedings  of  the  faction,
the  French  convention  had  fent  a  fecret  agent  of  the  name
of  Malabar  to  reiide  at  Amfterdam;  he  had  two  aco-
lytes, called  V Archevêque  and  Aiglam.    At  once  enjoy-
ing the  confidence  of  Pichegru  (then  advancing  with  his
victorious  army)  and  of  the  rebels  in  the  interior,  Mala-
bar never  apppeared  but  at  the  meetings  of  the  Areopa-
gites,  where  he  dictated  the  refolves.    &  Archevêque  and
Frefme  were  employed  in  carrying  on  the  con  efpondence
with  Pichegru.  in  Amfterdam  and  Haarlem,  Aiglam  was
infpe£lor-geaeral  of  the  fubterraneous  arfenais   whither
the  brethren  were  to  flock  for  arms  on  the  fignal  given.
■ — Should  they  {land  in  need  of  the  protection  of  the  ma^
gulracy,  the  adept  Dedelle  was  burgo-rn after.    If  funds
were  wanting,  the  counting -houfes  of  lexier,  Couder r,
and  Rottereau,  are  open  to  them,  befides  the  treafures  of
the  Jew  Sporfas,  a  moll  vehement  revolutionist»  Among
the  clubiiis  the  adepts  Gulcber  and  Lapeau  diftinguifk
themfelves,  as  do  Latour  and   Perijfe  au>o;ig  their  ar-
mourers.   Next  in  queftof  enthufiaits  who  ihall  declaim
to  the  populace,  we  meet  the  adepts  'lermacbe,  Lekain,
Mi'dlner,  Schneider.,  and  many  others.    On  their  general
roll-call  they  count  40,000  men  ready  to  march  out  to
meet  the  advancing  jacobins,  or  to  charge  in  the  rear  the
armies  of  the  allies,  and  thofe  legions  that  might  ftill  re-
main faithful  to  their  duty.    Nothing  now  was  wanting
but  a  general  capable  of  directing  their  march;  and  Eu-
fcace  was  fent  from  Paris* — On  a  fudden  the  vigilance  of
the  Englifh  minifter  and  of  the  Duke  of  \  ork  feemed  to
have  counteracted  this  confpiracy,  that  had  been  fo  well
concerted  ;  and  the  government  was  informed  of  the  whole
plot.    Malabar,  the  hero  of  the  myfteries,  La  Ton  ",  Fre-
fme,  and  about  thirty  more  confpiraiois,  were  arrefted;
even  Eujiace  was  among  the  priioners,  and  all  true  citi-

*  Extratf  of  a  Secret  Memorial,  written  a  few  mouths  be-
fore uie  înyafion  of  Holland.


HISfOUIÇAL  *ART\  293

fcsns  thought  themfelvcs  delivered  from  the  Jacobin,
feourge.  Proclamations  were  ifïued,  forbidding  any  meet-
ings of  clubs  under  any  pretext  whatever;  but,  in  defi-
ance of  the  magistrates,  the  ciubiits  pubiifh  a  counter-
proclamation,  inviting  the  brethren  to  take  arms  and
rather  to  die  than  abaucon  their  clubs.  In  vain  does  the
Englifh  general  demand  that  thefe  perfous  (houlJ  be  de-
livered up  to  him,  that  he  might  fecure  their  perfons  ;  the
Seel:  even  fucceeded  in  getting  the  American  minifter  to
reclaim  Euftace,  under  pretence  that  he  was  a  fubjecl  of
the  United  States.  The  others  are  brought  to  trial,  and
are  condemned  to  be  exiled  into  thofe  very  towns  by
which  the  Jacobin  army  was  to  enter  the  republic,  and
Willemffcadt,  Breda,  Berzenopzoom,  Nimeguen,  Gor-
cum,  Utrecht,  and  Amiterdam,  fall,  juft  as  Mayence  had
done  before  them.  Moil  certainly,  had  Pichegru  no  other
claims  to  military  glory  than  this  conquetl,  he  might,
with  Dumourier  and  Cufline,  write,  *  /  came,  I  Jaw,
and  I  conquered;  but  it  was  becaufe,  in  place  of  enemies
to  combat,  I  found  none  but  adepts  to  embrace.'*

Means  of  another  fpecies  will  explain  the  triumphs  of  In  Spain,
the  Seel  in  Spain.  The  brave  Ricardo  had  reftored
rhe  Caftilians  to  their  ancient  valor;  he  had  threatened
to  retaliate  on  the  captive  Jacobins,  for  the  cruelties  ex-
ercifed  on  the  French  emigrants  that  fell  into  their  hands.
The  Aqua  Topbana  immediately  liberates  the  Sect  from.
fo  fierce  an  enemy  ;  he  dies  by  poifon.  The  bulwarks  of
Spain  fall  like  thofe  of  Holland  at  the  approach  of  the
legions  of  Equality  and  Liberty.  R.EBDELEQN  fells  the
fortrefs  of  Fizueras  for  a  million  of  livres.    He  values  his

o

treafon  too  highly,  and  going  to  Paris  he  receives  his  mil-
lion in  affignats,  then  only  worth  48,000  livres.  He
complains,  and  in  compenfation  is  fent  to  the  guillotine,
for  the  Seel  need  not  buy  traitors  at  fo  exorbitant  a
price.  His  treachery,  however,  left  Spain  at  the  difcretion
of  the  Jacobins.  Tnat  unhappy  country  fought  to  buy
peace,  and  for  a  time  it  is  fuffered  to  enjoy  a  truce;  buc
every  thing  fee ms  to  denote,  that  the  brethren  have  made
a  fufficienc  progrefs  to  leave  the  tafk  of  eftablifhing  the
1  of  Equality  and  Liberty  to  the  adepts  of  the  inte-
rior, withouc  reforting  to  arms.

in  Portugal  the  adepts  dare  not  as  yet  throw  off  the  Tn  Partu»

gal.

*  Extract  of  a  Secret  Memorial.


2Q4-  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

mpfk  ;  but  at  fome  future  day  the  Court  may  judge  prop-
er to  publiih  the  correfpondence  found  among  the  pa-
pers of  the  Brabanter  Segre.  This  propagandist  had
been  thrown  into  the  priions  of  Lihbon.  The  brethren
had  not  forgotten  the  doctrine  of  the  patet  exitus  ;  they
fend  a  mattrefs  to  the  prifoner,  and  a  razor  is  concealed
within  it.  Thé  wretched  Segre  underftands  the  meaning
of  the  S.d,  and  the  next  morning  is  found  weltering  in
his  biooa  on  this  very  mattrefs.

it  tranfpired,  however,  that  the  confpiracy  in  which  he
had  engaged  aimed  at  nothing  lefs  than  the  deftruction  of
the  royal  family,  and  the  total  overthrow  of  the  ftate.  It
v.  as  further  aiTerted  that  a  correspondence  between  him
snd  the  Prince  of Peace  was  found  among  his  papers,
find  that  the  Spanilh  minifter,  informed  of  his  arrell  im-
mediately claimed  it;  but  the  court  of  Portugal  returned
for  anlwer,  "  That  ilnce  God  had  in  his  goodnefs  pre-
1<  ive,l  the  ftate  from  the  greateft  misfortune  with  which
it  had  ever  been  threatened,  her  fvioft  Faithful  Majeity
would  only  treat  of  this  buiinefs  with  his  Catholic  Ma-
jefty  hjrnfetf."  But  even  ihould  this  fail  be  well  authen-
ticated, are  we  not  fufiîciently  aware  of  the  intrigues  of
the  SeCt?  Does  it  not  frequently  procure  fecret  commis,
fions  from  rniniircrs,  and  then,  under  pretence  of  tranfact-
ing  the  buiinefs  of  that  itate,  profecute  the  moil  viilanous
plots  ?  It  is  fufttcient  for  us  to  have  fhewn  the  Se£t  con-
spiring in  Portugal;  the  public  papers  defer i be  it  as  con-
fpiring  in  like  manner  at  Turin  and  at  Naples.  „
AtNapks.  Here  again  the  fecrecy  of  courts  has  debarred  us  from
the  details.  At  Naples  atteftations  were  taken  refpecting
the  guilty,  and  the  proofs  were  acqtn'red.  By  the  orders
of  his  Majefty,  ali  the  documents  relating  to  the  confpira-
cy had  been  collected  and  compiled  by  a  magiltrate  of  great
merit  and  known  integrity,  Mr.  Key,  the  fame  perfon
whom  Lewis  XVI.  had  intended  for  minifter  of  the  po-
lice of  Paris.  From  thefe  it  appeared,  that  many  noble-
men had  been  led  to  join  in  a  confpiracy  againft  the  royal
family,  while  the  occult  adepts  of  this  confpiracy  were  to
make  away  with  thefe  fame  noblemen,  immediately  after
the  deftrucho'i  of  the  royal  family.  The  King  and  the
Queen  of  Naples  bath  chofe  to  fhow  their  clemency  to
i  bjef  confpirators,  and  rather  let  them  prefervc  life  in
confinement,  than  fend  them  to  the  lcaffbid  which  muffc
have  bca  the  inevitable  confequence  of  a  public  trial.—


HISTORICAL  PART.  295

The  policy  that  has  buried  in  darknefs  the  details  of  this
confpiracy,  has  not,  however,  deprived  us  of  tnis  proof  of
the  univerfality  of  the  confpiracies  of  the  Seel:.

In  purfuic  of  its  plan?,  the  Sedl  marches  triumphantly  jn  a|j  rta-
to  Milan,  Venice  and  Rome.     Its  armies  entered  Italy  !y,  arid  in
with  Buonaparte,  even  more  deditute  of  every  thing  that  the  armies
canenlure  victory,  than  thofe  which  had  entered  Germa-  °*  Pancc5«
ny  under  the  command  of  Cuftine.    But  numerous  le-
gions flocked  to  their  ftandard»;  and  tiie  banks  of  the  Po,
if  we  except  Mantua,  are  as  well  prepared  for  the  revo-
lution as  were  thofe  of  the  Rhine.    This  will  ceafe  to  be
a  matter  of  of  furprife  to  thole  who  will  refleél  that  Wéi*
fbaupt  had  lent  his  apoirles  thither,  and  that  Knigge  and
Zimmerman  had  loiig  fmce  boallcd  of  the  progrefs  of
the  illuminizing  recruiters  in  thofe   parts.    If  we  turn
back  to  their   reports,  we   (hall   find  that  the  Mafonic
Lodges  had,  like  thofe  of  Germany,  been  initiated  into
the  lait  myfteries;  and  the  triumphs  oï  Buonaparte  will
be  found  to  be  not  more  afton  lining  than  thofe  of  Cus-
tine.    Were  it  neceffary  to  explain  how  the  valor  of  the
Archduke  Charles,  or  of  the  veteran  bands  of  Auftria,
was  rendered  fruitiefs  when  in  prelence  of  the  Jacobin
troops;  whence  it  arofe  that  the  faftneffes  of  countries
could  fcarcely  ibrve  the  wifdom  of  a  prince  ia  worthy  of
being  the  leader  of  heroes;  it  would  not  be  fufficient  to
fay,  that  the  adjutant-general  Fijber  was  accufed  of  hav-
ing received  one  thoufand  pounds  a  month  from  the  Pe-n-
tarques;  or,  that,  to  ftifle  all  profecution,  and  baffle  any
attempt  that  might  be  made  to  induce  him  to  difcover  the
number  or  quality  of  his  accomplices,  he  had  recourfe  to
that  grand  means  of  Illuminifm  the  Patct  exitus,  and
poifoned  himfelf.     No;  the  reader  mult  reflect,  that  the
Seel:  had  long  lince  been  educating  its  adepts  for  the  ar-
mies, procuring   poflefiion  of  the  Dicajleres,  and   thus
preparing  for  a  future  day,  when  they  forefaw  that  trea-
chery and  cowardice  would  feive  them  in  the  armies  of
princes.*

*  Jnft  as  this  fheet  was  point*  to  the  prefs  a  publication ,  en-
titled, Les  Nouveaux  Intérêts  de  l'Europe,  fell  iûto  my  lartds,
and  the  following  pr.ff.ige  appeared  to  me  lb  very  applicable  to
our  fubjeft,  that  i  have  extratted  it:  "  The  Emperor  ha?  %t^n
*'  blamed  for  figning  the  preliminaries  of  Leoben,  on  the  i8'h
"  of  April,  1798.  This  certainly  appears  to  have  been  done
•'  precipitately:  but  are  thofe  who  blâme  hi  ai  acquainted  with


296  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

At  Rome.  Need  we  explain  why  the  revolutionary  legions  pro-
ceeded  to  Rome?  Certainly  but  little  refiftance  could  bo
made  there.  An  aged  pontiff  raifing  up  his  hands  to  hea-
ven, offering  up  his  prayers  for  the  peace  and  welfare  of
the  faithful,  makes  every  facrifice  that  of  his  faith  except-
ed, in  hopes  of  mollifying  the  obdurate  hearts  of  thofe  bar-
barians. Buonaparte,  no  ftranger  to  his  virtues  feigns  a
veneration  for  them.  Eut  Pius  VI.  is  the  chief  of  that
religion  of  Chrift  which  the  Se£t  has  fworn  to  crufh,  and
Rome  is  the  centre  of  it.*    From  the  veiy  firil  moment

"  th?  reafons  that  induced  him  to  take  that  ftep?  The  Fmpe-
*'  ror  ha>i  been  informe  I  by  his  Brother,  the  drchduke  Charles*
"  of  the  ba  i  difpqfition  of  a  great  part  of  the  officers  of  ois  ar-
"'  7  of  Italy.  He  knew  that  both  at  Verona  and  Padua  they
"  affeclsd  to  ithitate  the  French  in  their  difcourfe,  manner  s  t
"  an  i  fentiments  ;  itfeemed  as  if  they  needed  but  the  tri-colonr-
«'  ,>  ;  -  make  trefetnb'ance  complete.     He  was  aware

'*  tbû  i  in  the  violi  critical  moment  of  an  aclion  ;  fi  that*

"yifpiteofexc  tera.s t  of a  well  appointed ' flaff>  and qf

"  the,  braveft  nun,  he  was  always  obliged  to  retire.  He  may,
"  p.  e  conceited  that  he  was  betrayed  by  thefe  fame

*«  ojffi  it  is  well  known,  that  Buonaparte,  in  an  unguard-

*'  ed  m  iment,  declared,  that  the  Aujlrian  army  cojihim  more
«'  than  his  own."  Trams-


:by

were  e;u*er  that  this  nation  fhould  not  give  credit  to  an  author
Who  was  about  to  iay  open  the  tenebrous  ramifications  of  tins
Wniverfal  confpiracy  •,  others  again  were  made  to  believe,  that
the  Se<5>  only  aimed  at  reforming  what  they  chofe  to  ftyle  the
errors  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  I  here  call  my  reader's  atten-
tion to  an  eventthat  hasjult  taken  piace.and  be  may  theo judge
whctht-i  rhe  author/was  correct  when  hefaid,  that  the  total
'overthrow  of  ChrifUanlty  was  the  objecl  of  the  Seel.  In  the
Propagateur,  6  Brumaire,  Tear  7  (or  15th  Oftober  1798),  we
read,  "  The  following  is  the  diftribution  of  the  edifices  (of
*'  worlhip)  <or  the  ufe  of  the  citizens  of  Paris,  as  determined
"  by  tli"  central  adminiftration  of  the  Seine."  Paris  is  divided
into  twelve  Wards,  in  lieu  cf  parishes,  each  having  the  fallow-
ing churches  annexed  to  them,  and  which  are  in  future  to  be
called  Temples  :  "  Ift.  Ward— The  church  of  St.  Philip  du
"  Roule  confer  ated  to  Concord.  II.  The  church  of  St.  Roche
"  to  Genius,  ill.  St.  Fur)  ache  to  Agriculture.  IV.  St.  Germain
♦' L'Aoxerrois  to  Gratitude.  V.  St.  Lawrance  to  Old  Age.
,5  VI.  St.  Nicholas  in  the  Fields  to  Hymen.  VII.  St.  Merry  t»
"  Commerce.  VIII.  St.  Margaret  to  Equality  WLiberty.
*'  IX.  St.  Gervais  to  2'outh.   X.  St.  Thomas  of  Acjuin  as  10


historical  part.  297

e>f  the  revolution  the  adepts  had  made  no  fecret  of  their  ha-
tred againft  Rome  and  its  pontiff.  I  was  prefent  when
Gerrutti  infolently  accofted  the  Secretary  of  the  Nuncio  at
Paris,  faying  with  a  I'neer^  "  Take  good  care  of  your
"  Pope*  take  good  càre  of  this  one,  and  embalm  him  af-
"  ter  his  death  ;  for  I  tell  you,  and  you  may  be  certain  of
"  the  fact,  that  you  will  never  have  another."  This  pre-
tender to  prophecy  little  thought  that  he  would  be  the
firft  of  the  two  to  appear  before  the  tribunal  of  that  God
who  had  promifed  that  the  gates  of  hell  fhould  never  pre-
vail againft  his  church.  But  the  Knights-JïWa/l-^,  who
had  fworn  the  death  of  Kings  and  of  the  chief  Pontiffs,
ftill  furvived;  as  alfo  that  multitude  of  adepts  who  had
long  iince  been  fmoothing  the  way  for  the  legions  of  im-
piety. Long  fince  had  Rome  b^en  the  obje£r.  of  their
conipiracies  ;  adepts  of  every  fpecies  flock  thither;  and,
in  fpite  of  every  authority,  the  pupils  of  Caglioftro  open
their  Mafonic  Lodges  in  that  capital.  The  Illuminées
of  Sweden,  Avignon,  and  Lyons,  there  unite  in  the  moft
fecret  and  moft  monftrous  of  Lodges,  and  form  the  moft
terrible  tribunal  for  Kings  ;  that,  in  fhort,  which  pointed
out  the  Sovereign  that  was  to  fall,  named  the  aûaflin,
prepared  the  poilbns,  or  fharpened  the  dagger.*

Many  of  Weifhaupt's  adepts  were  alfo  to  be  found  in
Rome  who  had  been  initiated  by  Zimmerman;  and  the
reprefentative  of  a  King  féconds  their  efforts  againft  the
altar.  The  Spanifh  Monarch  is  tottering  on  the  throne,
at  the  very  time  when  the  public  papers  defcribe  Dom
Azara,  his  amballador  at  Rome,  felicitating  the  Jaco^

"  Peace.  XI.  St.  Sulpice^  Viflory.  XIT.  St.  James -du-hauN
*'  pas  to  Benevolence,  St.  Medard  to  Laoor,and  St.  Stephen  on
"  the  Mount  to  filial  Piety."  This  needs  no  comment,  when
in  the  hands  of  a  Chriftian  reader.  Trans.

*  Should  the  hiftorian  of  the  anamination  of  Gufta-vus  of
Sweden  not  be  a  fufficient  voucher  for  the  exiftence  of  this  tri-
bunal (Seel.  IV.)  it  is,  however,  an  undoubted  raft,  that  the  SecT:
had  moft  powerful  advocates  at  Rome  ;  for  the  Nuncio  at  A-
vignon,  having  ordered  the  Illuminée  Pernetti  and  his  adepts
to  leave  the  country  in  the  fpace  of  one  month,  they  procured
from  Rome  a  counter-order  (real  or  forged)  permitting  them
to  flay.  This  bufinefs  was  followed  up  at  Rome  by  the  arreft-
ationof  an  adept,  which  threw  the  adepts  of  Avignon  into  fears
that  were  only  removed  by  the  revolution.


298  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

bins  on  their  coming  to  drive  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  from
his  capitai.  Buonaparte  may  fend  his  Lieutenants  ;  their
triumph  will  be  eafy,  for  fhame  alone  could  impede  their
progfefs  ;  but  they  have  Rifled  every  feeling,  and  feoff  at
the  very  idea  of  the  rights  of  nations,  as  well  as  at  the
overwhelming  with  affliction  an  aged  paftor  turned  of
fourfcorc.  The  upright  man  and  companionate  heart
might  fhed  tears  at  fuch  a  fight;  but  the  Jacobin,  cal-
lous to  every  feeling,  will  leap  with  joy, and  thePentarques
will  compare  their  ignominious  conqueft  to  the  ftorm-
fng  o!  ancient  Rome  by  Brennus  and  his  Gauls.  Next
in  the  feries  we  ihall  turn  our  eyes  to  a  conqueft  long
fmce  announced  in  the  Lodges  of  the  Templars,  Rofi-
crucians  an  ;  Knights  Ksdofch,  who  had  all  fworn  ven-
ge  ;  ift  M  iita  ;  and  the  fatal  day  is  now  come.

At  Malta.        Left  indignation  might  caufe  their  fecrets  to  be  difco-
'..  fche  crofs  of  .VLïltahad  for  a  long  time  been  a  badge
of  exclujioto  for  thoie  bold  Knights  fro7n  the  threshold  of
the  Mafonic  Lodges.    New  arts  will  be  now  employed
to  ren  r  courage  ufeleft.     The  adepts  have  made

ufe  of  the  feme  artifice  againff.  Malta  which  they  had  em-
ployed againfl  the  church.  So  far,  faid  they,  from  break-
ing off  all  connection  with  thefe  Knights,  let  our  adepts
become  members  of  the  Order;  through  their  means  we
fhall  become  maftefs  of  that  Ifland  that  would  proudly
bid  denance  to  our  combined  hoflile  efforts  both  by  fea
and  Laid.  Letters  from  the  virtuous  and  honorable  part
of  that  community  had  already  prepared  us  for  thecatas-
»he  that  has  fince  befallen  them  ;•  they  had  complained
that  falfe  brethren,  partie  uiarly  of  the  Spanifh  and  Italian
tongues,  hud  gained  admittance  among  them.  In  the  per-
fbfls  of  Dolomiev.y  Bofredon^znà  the  cowardly  Ho7npefcb.i
may  the  Se£t  be  faid  to  have  reigned.  Buonaparte  ap-
pears ;  and,  as  if  the  Se£l  wifhed  to  (hew  Europe  how  it
can  carry  the  moil  aftonifhing  works  of  nature  and  art
by  iieafon  alone,  it  did  not  even  give  the  confpirators  a
cloak  for  their  treachery  by  the  femblance  of  a  fiege.-—
The  adepts  of  the  exterior  uarcrnize  with  thofeof  the  in-
terior, and  thus  do  we  learn  that  the  fecret  arms  of  the  Seel
are  more  terrible  than  the  fire  of  the  embattled  legions.
Let  the  hero  of  Malta  (et  fail  for  Alexandria:  There  he
find  adepts  that  aw'ait  his  arrival:  Then  will  the
Subît  ne  Porte  learn  how  to  value  thofe  rich  prefents  fent
by  the  revolutionary  tribe,  all  itolen  from  the  royal  trea-


HISTORICAL  PART.  2.$}

fury  of  the  crown  ;  it  will  underftand  why  fuch  immenfe
funs  of  money  were  fquandered  in  its  capit.il,  to  buy  the
neu.rality  of  the  Divan,  and  thus  to  enable  the  Se<5fc  to
wreft  from  its  dominion  its  more  diftant  provinces  :  it  will
learn  that  the  Apoftles  of  the  Seel  were,  during  its  politi-
cal lethargy,  (pealing  along  the  coaits  of  Africa,  and  pene-
trating even  into  Afia.

It  was  at  Conftantinople  particularly  that  the  Se£t  was  At  Cnr-
to  be  careful  in  the  choice  of  its  adepts  and  propagandas,  "ant,n"".
and  to  adapt  each  perfon's  million  to  his  talents.  To  ||je  ^a£>_
fpread  the  doctrines  of  Equality  and  Liberty  throughout
the  ftates  that  had  long  fince  been  fubjeched  to  the  do-
minion of  the  Crefcent-  it  was  neceflary  to  find  men  well
acquainted  with  the  language,  manners,  interefts,  and  the
various  mtercourfe  of  thofe  different  nations.  In  the  per-
fon  of  the  author  of  the  lableau  de  l'Empire  Ottoman^
or  M-mradgea  d?  Hibfon,  a  Greek  by  birth,  formerly  in-
ternuncio, and  ■fince  ambafudor  from  Sweden  to  the  Sub-
lime Porte,  the  Seit  found  ail  the  requifites  for  fuch  an
undertaking.  ^\t  firft,  he  did  not  appear  to  be -fanguine
in  their  caufe  ;  large  fums  of  money,  and  penfions  then
at  the  dilpjfition  of  the  Committee  of  P,ub}ic  Safety,  (as
we  are  informed  by  our  Memoirs)  at  length  difpel  any
further  mow  of  reluctance  :  Oil  his  return  to  Conftanti-
nople, Mouradgea  places  hirnfelf  at  the  head  of  the  Jaco-
bin miffionaries  for  the  EafL  He  was  greatly  indebted
for  the  acquirements  that  had  thus  pTepared  him  for  this
new  revolutionary  career  to  a  Mr.  RuJJin,  who  com-
menced his  career  as  a  teacher  of  languages  in  Paris;  was
afterwards  an  alloc i a  te  with  the  Baron  Tott  in  Crimea;
then  attached  to  the  French  embafly  at  ConftançinOple  ;
afterwards  employed  in  the  Admiralty  at  Verfeillesj  and
finally  become  Profeflbr  of  the  Oriental  Tongues  at  the
College  Royal.  For  a  long  time  Mr.  Fjtiiflin  relill.-J  eve-
ry temptation  to  betray  the  Royal  caufe;  for  he  was  in-
debted to  the  king  for  his  education,  and  for  his  elevation
to  be  Knight  of  the  Order  of  St.  Michael.  Similar  in-
ducements, however,  make  him  fofgethis  obligations  to
his  king,  and  he  becomes  the  co-adept  of  Mour
Conftantinople.  ^ejfeps  a  young  man,  and    ■  few

furvivors  of  La  Peroyfe,  was  alfo  animated  by  (èntirnei
of  gratitude  for  Lewis  XVI.;  but,  feduce  :  twqi

apoftles,  he  joins  them,  and,  under  the  direction  of  this
triumvirate,  one  part  of  the  fubaltern  agents  did     lin


300  Antisocial  conspiracy;

their  doctrines  among  the  people  of  Conftantinople,  while
others  fpread  themfelves  throughout  Afia,  travel  into  Per-
fia,  and  to  the  Indies.  Others  again  preach  their  rights
of  man  in  the  Levant,  while  the  united  forces  of  the  Seel
make  their  defcent  on  the  coaft  of  Egypt,  and  teach  the
Ottoman  court  the  fatal  effects  of  having  neglected  to
crufh  the  firft  dawnings  of  the  Seel:.

But  a  very  few  years  prior  to  the  French  revolution,
the  Turks  abominated  Mafonry,  as  much  as  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  Eafl  did  the  Manichaeans  for  many  centuries.
The  Ottoman  court  would  not  have  fuffered  any  French
Religious  to  have  remained  at  Jerufalem,  had  it  not  known
that  it  was  their  confiant  rule  to  refufe  to  admit  any  per-
fon  known  to  be  a  Free-mafon  to  vifit  the  holy  places
that  were  under  their  care.  There  was  even  an  agree-
ment between  the  Sublime  Porte  and  the  Court  of  France,
by  which  the  Superior  of  thefe  Religious  might  and  was
obliged  to  difmifs  from  the  Levant  any  French  Conful
that  fhould  dare  to  erect  a  Mafonic  Lodge;  and  f  have
learned  from  a  Religious  who  was  on  that  miffion  for
{even  years,  that  the  Superior  had  fometimes  exercifed
this  authority.  But  the  revolution  has  annihilated  fuch
precautions,  as  well  as  many  others.  The  Propagandas
have  crolTed  the  Mediterranean  with  their  new-fangled
doctrines  ;  they  have  found  brethren  in  the  French  mer-
chants, who,  under  pretence  of  meeting  with  friends  in
all  countries,  had.got  themfelves  initiated  in  the  myfleries,
and  hence  they  needed  not  Lodges  to  be  recognized.
in  Africa;  The  fuccefles  of  the  brotherhood  in  France  inflamed
the  zeal  of  the  brethren  in  Africa;  and  the  very  manner  in
which  the  Directory  announced  the  progrefs  of  Buona-
parte in  Egypt  fufficientiy  denotes  the  arts  that  had  been
employed  by  the  emiffaries  of  the  Seel  previous  to  his
arrival.  Should  he  not  (like  Pichegru)  fall  a  victim
to  the  jéaîoufy  of  the  Pentarques,  or  (more  lucky  than
Kruey>)  efcapethe  purfuits  of  a  fécond  Nelfon,  he  will  on
the  coait  of  India  meet  with  other  brethren,  who,  in  the
Malabar  tongue  are  circulating  the  Rights  of  Man.,  E-
qual  and  Free,  and  thofe  of  the  Sovereign  an  J  Legijla-
th-e  People.  The  Englifh  General  who  took  Pondicherry
feized  both  the  types  and  preffes  employed  in  dillemin-»
ating  the  principles  of  the  Seel:  and  their  revolutionary
produit  ions.

As  the  plague  flies  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  fo  da


HISTORICAL  PART.  301

their  triumphant  legions  infect  America.  Their  apoflles
have  infufed  their  principles  into  the  fubmiffive  and  labo-
rious negroes  j  and  St.  Domingo  and  Guadaloupe  have
been  converted  into  vaft  charnel  houfes  for  their  inhabit-
ants. So  numerous  were  the  brethren  in  North  Ame-
rica, that  Philadelphia  and  Bofton  trembled,  left  their  r/->
fing  conjlitution  Jhould  he  obliged  to  make  way  for  thai  of
the  great  club;  and  if  for  a  time  the  brotherhood  has
been  obliged  to  fhrinlc  back  into  their  hiding  places;
they  are  Itill  lufficiently  numerous  to  raife  collections
and  tranfmit  them  to  the  infurgents  of  Ireland;  thus  con-
tributing towards  that  fpecies  of  revolution  which  is  the
object  of  their  ardent  wifhes  in  America.  -  God  grant
that  the  United  States  may  not  learn  to  their  coft,  that
Republics  are  equally  menaced  with  Monarchies;  and
that  the  lmmenlity  of  the  ocean  is  but  a  feeble  barrier
againft  the  univerfal  confpiracy  of  the  Sedl  !

The  triumphs  of  the  brotherhood  at  Geneva,  at  Ve-
nice, in  Holland,  and  at  Genoa,  are  demonftrative  proofs
that  it  is  not  at  Monarchs  alone  that  the  adepts  of  the
Seel  arm  their  blows.  Nations  mull  alfo  learn,  that,  whe-
ther Monarchies  or  Republics,  they  are  all  to  be  com-
prehended within  the  revolutionary  vortex;  and  that  nei-
ther fri^âdfhip,  alliance,  nor  the  molt  paflive  obedience,
can  makethe  lavage  confpirators  relent.

In  vain  did  the  Swifs  Cantons  in  fome  fort  forget  the  inSwitzer»
dignity  of  their  ancellors  ;  they  were  filent  under  the  hu-  land;
miliating  treatment  of  their  brethren  at  Aix,  the  butche-
ry of  their  troops  at  Paris,  and  the  violation  of  the  moft


*  See  Irifh  Report,  No.  XiV,— At  Qn*bec,  July  7,  1797,  a
man  of  the  name  or  David  M'Lean  was  tried  and  condemned
to  fuffer  on  the  21ft  of  the  fame  month ,  being  con vicled  of  hav-
ing come  into  Canada,  under  the  difguife  of  a  merchant,  with
a  view  of  railing  the  people  againft  the  Government,  and  to
deliver  over  the  colony  to  the  French.  He  had  taken  all  the
neceflkry  fleps  ;  the  oath  of  fecrecy,  pikes,  and  other  arms,
were  to  be  delivered  to  the  people.  The  brethren  at  Montreal
and  Quebec  were  by  the  next  fpring  to  prepare  the  way  for  an
army  of  10,000  mea  that  was  to  be  brought  over  in  a  French
fleet,  and  attack  both  thefe  towns  at  the  fame  time.  Mr.  \-
dct,  the  French  minifter  at  Philadelphia,  was  implicated  in  it  ;
thus  do  the  Pentarques  convert  their  embafladors  into  the  ring-
leaders of  the  confpiring  bands  wherever  they  are  received;
this  may  be  faid  to  be  one  of  the  marking  features  of  Jacobin-
ifra.


302  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

facred  treaties  even  on  their  own  territories.  They  bor«
with  refignatiorj  the  infults  perpetually  offered  to  them  by
the  Jacobin  dictators,  who  would  fometimes  deign  to
mingle  aiTurances  of  fraternity  and  prornifes  of  peace
With  their  outrages.  While  the  armies  of  the  Se£t  were
ravaging  the  neighboring  countries,  it  would  lull  the  cre-
dulous Swifs  into  a  fatal  fecurity  by  their  cant  of  frater-
nry  and  affection;  but  in  the  mean  time  the  adepts  were
laboring  in  the  mountains.  Weifhaupt  had  made  many
converts  in  thofe  parts;  and  a  fwarm  of  Illuminées  flock-
ed thither  from  the  Univerfity  of  Gottingen^  ail  ready  to
profecute  the  views  of  the  Sect.  Fehr^  curate  of  Nidau,
and  after  him  Buggy  correfponded  with  the  brotherhood
In  Germany;  and  the  moment  was  approaching  when
he  was  about  to  receive  the  price  of  his  zeal  by  being
elected  chief  of  the  revolutionized  Canton  of  Argau.*-— T
At  Lucern  Pffer,  at  Berne  IVeifs^dX  Bafle  Ocbs,  prefi-
ped  over  the  clubs  of  Equality  and  Liberty.  By  various
artifices,  the  Jacobins  had  formed  a  party  of  ninety-two
in  the  great  council  of  Berne.  The  Pentarque  Rewbel
fent  as  auxiliaries  from  Paris,  Maingaud,  Mangourit,  and
Guyot;  and  in  Switzerland  (as  in  Holland  and  at  May-
ence)  fecret  correfpondencc  and  fecret  iocieties  were  pre-
paring the  way  for  the  armies  of  the  Seel.  Thus  was  the
fate  of  Switzerland  to  be  fimilar,  and  an  equaWfiiare  of
glory  to  redound  to  the  victors. f
in  Sweden;  Yet  there  are  monarchies  ftill  in  exiftence,  notwith-
flanding  all  the  efforts  of  the  Sect.  True  ;  but,  if  we
except  Denmark,  whofe  neutrality  appears  to  be  of  too
great  fer  vice  to  the  Sect,  for  it  to  think  of  deftroying  that
kingdom  at  prefent,  what  other  country  is  there  in  Eu-
rope that  has  not  been  expofed  to  the  machinations  of  the
Sect?  Guftavus  III.  fell  beneath  the  blows  of  an  An-
karftroem  ;  but  this  affafKn  had  come  from  the  great  Pa-
rifian  club.  Thofe  very  perfons  who  wifh  to  ilulate  this
murder  tell  us,  that  adepts  had  declared,  that  they  knevj
cj  the  projected  murder  of  Guftavus  beforehand,  and  that
all  Europe  knew  of  it.  Who  are  thefe  men  that  were  fo
well  informed  throughout  Europe,  if  not  thofe  adepts  to
whom  the  Se<5t  has  made  known  their  determinations
againft  a  Prince  whole  activity  could  give  them  little

*  Private  Notes  on  Switzerland.

t  See  the  Hiftory  of  this  Revolution  by  Mallet  du  Pan.


Historical  part.  303

Ibopas  of  retrograde  movements  when  he  was  about  to
fight  the  enemies  of  monarchy  ?  When  thofe  fame  wri-
ters caff,  fufpicions  on  the  Duke  of  Sudermania,  they
ground  their  attack  on  his  being  Grand  Majier  of  the
Swedijk  Lodges^  as  Orleans  was  in  France.  They  fur-
ther fubiiantiate  their  charge  on  the  multitude  of  iilumini-
Zcd  Mafons  that  are  fpread  all  over  Sweden-,  and  on  the
horror  of  their  myfteries.  Is  not  that  telling  us,  that
Ankarftroem  was  but  a  mere  inftrument  of  the  S?ct,
which,  in  recompence  for  his  regicide,  erected  ftatues  to
him  in  the  Club  of  the  Jacobins?  I  will  hereafter  fhow
that  the  adepts  had  previous  knowledge  of  this  foul  deed,
and  that  it  had  even  been  clearly  expreiled  in  the  public
papers.   But  at  preterit  let  us  turn  our  eyes  toward  Ruiîïa,

On  the deathof  Lewis  X  vT,  the Emprefs  of  Ruffiaor-  In  RufSaj
dered  that  ail  the  French  within  her  dominions  fhould  take
the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  lawful  heir  of  the  Bourbons,
and  renounce  all  connection  with  France  until  monarchy
was  reftoredj  but  this  was  a  fruidefs  precaution.  The
Seat  had  many  adepts  in  Ruffia,  whom  it  had  taught  to
feoff  at  oaths;*  and  they  only  took  the  oath  of  fidelity  to
the  monarchy,  that  they  might  the  more  eafily  annihilate
the  Ruffian  diadem.  The  confpirators  were  headed  by
Genet,  heretofore  the  agent  for  the  cabinet  of  Verfailies,
but  now  become  the  agent  of  the  Jacobins.  The  zeal
With  which  he  ferved  Ins  new  maiters  had  already  filled
Peterfburg  with  clubs  compofed  of  that  fpecies  of  men
who,  having  no  homes  in  their  own  country,  travel  to  fo-
reign parts  in  hopes  of  gaining  a  livelihood.  Hair-drefs-
ers,  Cooks,  Valets,  Bankrupts,  Teachers  of  the  French
Tongue,  and  Street-porters  from  Paris,  all  v/ere  com-
bining together  to  prepare  a  pike  revolution.  The  moft
artful  and  moft  violent  of  the  confpirators  daringly  held  thf.ir
meetings  in  the  Hotel  of  Sir  Charles  Whitworth,  the
Kngliih  Ambaflador  at  Peterfburg,  They  met  there  once


*  Knigge's  apoftles  in  Coitrland  and  Livonia  had.  douhtlefs,
extended  their  million  ;  and  a  Kuilun  gentleman  informed  itk,
that  one  of  the  great  adepts  prefided  over  an  academy  at  Mos-
cow where  the  young  Nobility  were  educate'.'.  Every  ihing
feemed  to  denote  an  excellent  fchool,  when  by  degrees  it  was
ohferved,  that  the  illuminized  Rights  of  Man  was  the  ground-
work of  the  fecret  leffons  of  this  great  teacher.  They  were
obliged  todifmifs  him,  as  the  only  means  of  reitoring  his  pupils
to  the  true  principles  of  religion  and  fociety.


30+  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

a  month  by  means  of  three  French  fervants,  who  had  been
recommended  to  Sir  Charles  by  foine  of  the  party  as  moft
excellent  characters.  Public  fame,  and  foon  after  the  Am-
baflador,  informed  the  Police  of  this  meeting.    On  mak-
ing enquiries  after  the  adepts,  and  on  feizing  their  papers
that   had  been  carefully  hidden,  it  was  diicovered,  that
their  plot   had   been  contrived  according  to  the  general
plan  and  views  of  the  Se£t.     At  Rome,  the  brotherhood,
had  made  ufe  of  an  Ambaffador  of  the  King  of  Spain;  in
Ruffia,  it  is  the  Secretary  of  EmbafTy  and  Chargé  d'  Af-
f aires  from  the  Court  of  Sardinia,  a  Mr.  BoJJi,  who  is  im-
plicated in  their  foul  projects.  The  adepts  were  banifhed,
according  to  the  laws  of  Ruffia.  The  diplomatic  charac-
ter of  Mr.  Boffi  faved  him  for  fome  time  from  a  fimilar
difgrace;  but  no  fooner  was  the  Czar  Paul  feated  on  the
throne,  than  he  received  orders  to  quit  Peterfburg  in  twen-
ty-four hours,  and  the  territories  of  his  Imperial  Majefty
with  all  poihole  fpeed.*
în  Poland.      I  ihall  not  dwell  long  on  the  labors  of  the  Seel:  in  Po-
land. Among  the  number  of  its  Apoftles,  I  might  name
iionneauy  who  was  fent  to  Siberia;  Duveyrier,  who  wrote
the  Procès  Verbaux  at  Paris  for  La  Fayette,  and  who  was
difcovered  at  Copenhagen  on  a  fuppofed  million  for  buy-
ing corn,  while  his  real  obje£f.  was  to  vifit  the  brethren  of
Poland  and  Ruffia,  to  ftimulate  them;  and  our  Memoirs
inform  us,  that  on  the  road  he  was  to  make  an  attempt  on
the  life  of  the  Count  Artois,  juft  as  the  German  adepts
have  fince  done  on  that  of  Lewis  X  VIlI.  Duveyrier  was
accompanied  by  one  Lamarre,  and  that  Cajiella  fince  ar-
refted  in  company  with  Setnonville  when  proceeding  to
Conftantinople  with  the  plunder  of  the  French  crown,  in
hopes  of  bribing  the  minifters  of  that  country.     But  to
give  my  reader  an  idea  of  the  multitude  of  miffionaries
employed  by  the  Se£t  in  Poland,  it  will  fuffice  to  advert
to  CamborCs  report,  where  he  owns  that  it  has  already  coft
France  Jixty  millions  of  livres  to  fupport  the  brethren  at
Warfaw.    This  avowal  fhows  how  the  Seâ  employs  the
public  revenues,  little  caring  whether  the  creditors  of  the
interior  are  paid,  and  fending  its  vilible  legions  to  live  on
contributions  levied  on  the  exterior,  while  it  largely  pays
that  crowd  of  invifible  adepts  and  fecret  emiilaries  who
prepare  the  way  for  its  triumphs.

*  Extrad  from  a  Memorial  on  Ruflia>


HISTORICAL  PART.  305

This  alfo  demonftrates  what  great  ftrefs  the  leaders  of
the  Seel  laid  on  the  projected  revolution  in  Poland;  and,
indeed,  had  they  fucceeded  in  revolutionizing  that  coun-
try, the  Jacobins  might  have  made  a  ftrong  diveiTion  on
the  very  territories  of  the  moft  formidable  powers  that  had
entered  into  the  coalition.  Equality  and  Liberty  would
have  infufed  itfelf  throughout  Ruflia  with  much  greater
facility.  The  Pruflian  and  Auftrian  brethren  began  to
{how  themfelyes  more  openly.  Their  hopes  already  feem-
ed  to  be  crowned  with  fuccefs;  Kolkiufko  had  excited  to
revolt  Warfaw,  Wilna,  and  Lublin.  The  bifhop  of  this
latter  place,  with  many  other  gentlemen,  had  been  hang-
ed; in  vain  had  the  unfortunate  Poniatowfki  endeavored
to  allay  the  ferocity  of  the  revolution;  Poland  was  advan-
cing rapidly  towards  its  end,  and  it  finiihed  by  lofmg  both
its  king  and  its  independence.  My  object  is  not  even  to
hint  an  opinion  on  the  conduct  of  the  powers  who  have
divided  that  country  among  themfelves,  but  to  point  out
the  univerfal  confpiracy  of  the  Sect.  Germany,  which
gave  birth  to  the  moft  profound  adepts  of  the  Seel,  has
already  feverely  felt  the  effeiis  of  its  treachery,  but  has
not  yet  met  the  fate  which  the  Sect  is  preparing  for  it.

Jofeph  II.  lived  long  enough  to  deplore  his  miferable  ïnAufhi»,
policy.  He  was  lamenting  his  philofophifm,  and  that  de-
teftabiVpolicy  that  had  induced  him  to  trouble  the  inha-
bitants of  the  Low  Countries  in  the  enjoyment  of  their
religion,  thus  breaking  the  moft  folemn  treaties  and  driv-
ing to  defpair  fubjects  who  deferved  a  better  fate,  when
the  manifefto  of  the  Grand  Orient  came  to  teach  him,  that
his  policy  had  been  juft  as  erroneous  in  protecting  the
Mafonic  Lodges.  If  credit  is  to  be  given  to  Kleiner's  Re-
pott,  or  at  leaft  to  the  extract  from  it  given  nie  by  a  no-
bleman of  undoubted  veracity,  it  was  in  conf.quer.ee  of
this  manifefto  that  Jofeph  II.  gave  orders  to  Kleiner  to
get  himfelf  initiated  into  the  illuminized  Lodges,  and  by
this  means  acquired  certain  knowledge  of  the  Occult
Myfteries  of  the  Sect.  He  then  learnt,  that  the  Swediili
adepts  had  precifely  the  fame  object  in  view  as  the  off-
fpring  of  the  modern  Spartacus;  and  the  Mafonic  Lod-
ges were  the  cloaks  for  both  of  them.  I  have  learned  from
a  perlbn  who  was  frequently  in  company  with  the  Empe-
ror, that  nothing  could  equal  his  vexation,  when  he  law
that  he  had  been  fo  ftrangely  impofed  upon  by  men  whorrv
he  had  favored,  or  when  he  difcovered  that,  fo  far  from


306  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

having  himfelf  named  perfons  to  the  different  charges  of
the  ft 'ate,  he  had  only  adopted  the  choices  made  by  the  Seel,
He  then  openly  declared,  that  the  Free-mafons  were  no-
thing more  than  a  fet  of  fharpers  and  jugglers;  he  went
i'o  far  as  to  attribute  all  the  thefts  that  had  been  committed
on  the  treafury  of  the  ftate  to  the  Occult  Mafons  ;  he  de-
termined to  exclude  them  from  every  employment  civil
and  military;  he  was  indignant  at  feeing  an  imperium  in
imperio  rifing  in  the  ftate.  He  would  have  followed  up  his
indignation  too,  had  he  not  learnt  that  many  of  his  moft
faithful  fubjects,  and  fome  even  for  whom  he  had  the  great-
eft  regard,  fuch  as  the  Prince  Lichtenjtein,  were  Mafons.
The  greater  part  of  thefe,  however,  renounced  Malbnry.
Jofeph  had  undertaken  to  deftrov  the  Lodges  and  repair
the  errors  of  his  philofophifm,  when  a  premature  death
put  a  period  to  his  reign.

Leopold  his  fuccefior,  wifbing  to  be  informed  of  the
nature  and  progtefs  of  the  St£t  in  his  new  territories, ap-
plied to  Profeflor  Hoffman.  No  man  was  better  able  than
he  was  to  give  the  defired  information,  for  he  had  been
tampered  with  by  the  Seel,  who,  writing  to  him  in  the
moft  high-flown  phrafes,  endeavored  to  feduce  him  over
to  the  caufe  of  the  revolution;  but,  on  the  other  fide,
lèverai  Mafons,  a/hamed  of  having  fallen  a  prey  to  thefe-
du£lion  of  the  Illuminées,  had  difcovered  mo/i  important
fecrets  to  him,  and  joined  with  him  in  baffling  the  views
of  the  Seel:.  He  had  learned  from  them,  u  that  Mirabeau
<c  himfelf  had  declared  to  his  confidants,  that  he  carried
«  on  a  moft  extenfivc  correfpondence  with  Germany,  but
ïC  in  no  part  fo  extenfwe  as  at  Vienna,  He  knew  that  the
"  revolutionary  fyftem  was  to  be  extended  throughout  the
"  univerfe;  that  France  had  only  been  chofen  as  the  fcene
"  of  a  firft  explofion;  that  the  propagandas  were  bulled
"  in  difieminating  their  principles  throughout  every  clim-
tc  ate;  that  emiflaries    were  ciifperfed   through  the  four
"  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  particularly  in  the  capitals;
"  that  they  had  their  adherents,  and  were  particularly  ac-
"  tive  in  ftrengthenine;  their  paity  at  Vienna  and  in  the
"  Aiiflri an  dominions. — In  1 79 1  he  had  read,  as  lèverai
u  other  perfons  alio  did,  two  letters,  the  one  from  Paris,
"  the  other  from  StvzC'oourg,defcriling  in  cypher  the  names
"  °f  feven  commiffaries  of  the  Propaganda  then  refdent
"  at  Vienna,  and  to  whom  the  new  commiffaries  were  to
"  apply,  as  well  for  the  wages  of  their  labor s,  as  jor  in-


HISTORICAL  PART.  307

*Jiruclions  how  to  proceed.— *He  had  alfo  feen  feveral  of
!"  thofe  manufeript  news-papers  that  were  fent  weekly
*'  from  Vienna,  replete  with  the  moft  abominable  anec-
*'  dotes  againft  the  court,  and  with  arguments  and  prin-
"  ciples  impugning  the  government. — Thefe  papers  were
"  to  contribute  toward  the  diffemination  ofjacobinifm
u  throughout  the  towns  and  villages  of  the  empire,and  even
"  in  foreign  countries,  as  they  were  fent  poft  free,  and  with-
"  out  even  the  fubfcription  being  afked  for.  He  had  even
"  tranfmitted  fome  of  thefe  letters  to  government.  He  had
u  difcovered  the  objecl  of  the  frequent  journeys  of  the  U-
c<  luminee  Campe  to  Paris,  and  his  correfpondence  with
u  Mirabeau  and  Orleans.  He  had  acquired  certain  know-
"  ledge  of  the  plans  of  the  German  Mirabeau,"  that  is  to
fay,  of  Mauvillon,  who  had  been  Mirabeau's  Infinuator,
and  the  fame  perfon  who  had  written  thus  to  the  Illumi-
née Cuhn  [the  letter  is  preferved  in  the  archives  at  Bruns-
wick:]  a  The  affairs  of  the  revolution  go  on  better  and
a  better  in  France;  I  hope  that  in  a  few  years  this  fame
"  will  be  lit  up  every  ivj/ere,  and  that  the  conflagration
"  will  become  univerfal,  •  Then  our  Order  may  do
"  great  things."*  Mr.  Hoffman  alfo  knew  that  this  very
Mauvillon  u  had  drawn  up  a  very  explicit  plan  for  the
"  revolutionizing  of  all  Germany;  that  this  plan  had  been
"  tranfmitted  to  the  greater  part  of  the  Mufonic  Lodges,
"  and  to  the  clubs  of  the  Illuminées;  and  that  it  was  cir-
"  culated  among  the  Propagandists  and  emiffaries,  who
"  were  aJready  employed  in  exciting  to  revolt  the  people
"  on  the  out-pofts  and  frontiers  of  Germany. "f  "While
this  zealous  citizen  was  thus  unfolding  to  Leopold  the
intrigues  of  the  Sect,  he  conefponded  with  the  Great
Zimmerman  of  Bern,  who  was  ever  revered  by  the
learned,  beloved  by  all  good  citizens,  and  only  hated  by
the  illuminizing  Jacobins,  becaufc  he  no  foonèr  became
acquainted  with  their  myfteries  than  he  warned  the  Soci-
ety of  their  dangerous  tendency.  This  learned  man  was
alfo  employed  in  compofing  a  memorial  for  the  ufe  of  the
emperor,  on  the  means  of  curbing  the  proçrefs  of  the  re-
volution ;£  but  the  Jacobins  were  aware  or  the  hatred  that
Leopold  had  conceived  tor  them.  They  knew  that  tne

*  June  179L

f  Important  notice  by  Hoffman,  Vol.  I.  Seâ.  tq.

X  Hoffman's  Letter  in  the  liudemonia,  Vol.  VI.  No.  t.


308  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

chief  inftigator  of  the  treaty  of  Pilnitz  was  as  much  to  be
feared  as  Guftavus;  and  they  were  determined  to  jhoix)
that  even  an  Emperor  Jhould  net  oppofe  their  plots  with
impunity.*

Juil  at  the  time  when  the  two  fovereigns  were  mak-
ing their  preparations,  the  King  of  Pruffia  had  recalled
from  Vienna  his  ambafiador,  the  Baron  Jacobi  Kloefl,  who,
as  the  Sc6t  fuppofed,  was  favorable  to  their  caufe. — The
Count  Haugwits, who  was  more  decidedly  a  friend  to  the
meafure  of  the  treaty,  was  fent  in  his  ftead.  The  journal-
ifts  of  Strasbourg  announced  this  news  with  the  follow-
ing comment:  u  Hence  politicians  pretend,  that  the  uni-
c;  on  between  the  two  courts  will  be  confolidated.  They
"  are  certainly  in  the  right  to  make  the  French  believe  foj
"  but  in  defpotic  countries,  in  thofe  countries  where  the
11  fate  of  J  ever  al  millions  cf  men  hangs  on  a  bit  of pajle,
"  or  on  the  rupture  of  a  Utile  vein,  one  can  calculate  on
"  nothing.  Let  us  fuppofe  that  the  court  cf  Pruflia  is  a£t-
<c  ing  honeftlv  in  concert  with  the  court  of  Auftria  (which
K  is  difficult  to  be  believed),  04  that  the  court  of  Auftria
"  is  a&ing  fo  with  that  of  Pruflia  (which  is  ftill  more  in-
tc  credible),  afingle  indigefiion,  or  a  drop  of  blood  forced
"from  its  proper  veffels,  will  be  fujfeient  to  diffolve  this

"  brilliant  union." This  comment  in  the  Courier  of

Strafoourg,  No.  53,  was  dated  from  Vienna,  the  2.6th  of
February,  1792.  Leopold  died  (poiibned)  on  the  ifl  of
March  following,  and  Guftavus  was  afiaifinated  in  the
night  between  the  15'Jî  and  16th  of  the  fame  month. f

The  firft  precaution  taken  by  his  young  fucceflbr  was
to  difmifs  all  the  Italian  cooks,  that  he  might  not  be  ex-
pofed  to  the  fame  fate  as  his  father,  and  fall  a  victim  to
what  is  called  the  Naples  broth.  More  zealous  in  the  caufe,
Francis  II.  not  only  oppofed  the  Sect  by  force  of  arms,
but,  in  order  to  attack  illuminifm  in  its  dark  recedes,  he
applied  to  the  diet  of  Ratifbon  in  1794,  for  a  decree  to
fupprefs  all  fecret  lbcietics,  whether  Malons,  Roficrucians,
or  Illuminées,  of  every  fort.  They  had  powerful  fupport-
ers  in  this  firft  council  of  the  Empire,  and  they  intrigued
againft  the  proportion  of  the  Emperor.  They  pretended
that  thefe  bodies  of  Illuminées  were  nothing  more  than
little  aflbciations  of  fchool-bqys,  that  were  very  common

*  Important  notice  by  Hoffman.

f  Travels  of  two  Frenchmen  >«  the  North,  Vol.  V.  ch.  1».


HISTORICAL  PART.  3O9

in  the  Proteftant  uni vera" ties. — Through  the  organs  of
the  Pruliian,  Hanoverian,  and  Brunfwick  miniftets  it  was
objected,  that  the  Emperor  was  at  liberty  to  forbid  thefe
different  Jodges  within  his  own  ftates;  but  that,  with  re-
fpedt  to  all  others,  they  could  not  attempt  to  curtail  the
Germanic  liberty.  All  that  the  Emperor  could  obtain  was
a  decree  for  the  abolition  of  thofe  alTociations  of  lchool-
boys.  This  decree  not  only  left  the  great  adepts  in  full
polleflion  of  their  lodges,  but  was  alfo  unattended  to  in
moft  of  the  colleges,  wnere  Illuminifm  continued  to  make
the  moft  awful  progrefs,*

*  So  late  as  February  laft  (1798}  the  magiftrates  of  Jena,
were  obliged  to  puniih  about  a  dozen  fcholars,  who,  fotmed
into  an  afîbciation  calling  themfelves  dmicifls,  were  under  the
direction  of  the  adepts.  To  prepare  thefe  youths  for  the  mys-
teries of  Illuminifm,  their  fecret  fuperiors  reprefented  the  oath
appropriated  to  this  alTociation  as  the  moft  facred  engagement
that  could  be  taken  and  the  lead:  violation  of  it  as  being  imme-
diately followed  by  the  moft  terrible  punifhments. — They  were
then  questioned,  whether  they  were  fufficienily  enlightened  to
believe  that  they  could,  without  fcruple,  break  the  oath  which
they  had  fworn  to  the  Superior  of  the  college,  never  to  engage
in  any  fecret  fociety; — whether  they  believed  themfelves  fufh-
ciently  virtuous  to  accufe  themfelves  alone,  and  no  other  per-
fon,  in  cafe  the  magistrates  mould  puniih  them  for  a  breach  of
that  oath  ; — whether  they  thought  themfelves  Sufficiently  cou-
rageous to  continue  in  the  alTociation,  though  they  ihould  be
compelled  to  abjure  it. — The  Illuminée  who  had  queftioned
them,  if  latisfied  with  their  anSwers,  gave  them  the  Code  of  the
jimicifls,  and  therein  they  learned  that  they  and  their  affbei-
ates  formed  a  Jiate  within  the  fate  ;  that  they  had  I  anus  of  their
man  according  to  which  they  judged  of  affairs  that  nuere  beyond
their fphere  ;  and  this  required  the  molt  profound  fecrecy;  that
Should  lèverai  of  them  hereafter  meet  in  the  urns  town,  they
Should  eftablifh  a  lodge,  and  do  all  that  lay  in  their  power  to
propagate  the  fociety  ;  that  if  they  were  perchance  to  change
their  place  of  habitation  (which  fhouid  be  only  done  in  fome
extraordinary  cafe),  they  ihould  then  correfpond  with  their
own  lodge,  while  the  iecretary  was  to  hold  correfpondence
with  the  other  lodges,  making  his  return  of  the  name,  quality,
and  country  of  every  new  candidate  ;  that  they  would  obey
the  fuperiors  of  the  Order,  fuccor  their  brethren,  and  procure
advancement  for  them  ;  in  fhort ,  they  were  to  be  ready  to  fact  i-
fice  their  lives  a-nl  fortunes  for  the  Order.

Several  of  thefe  young  Anrcijls,  which  of  all  the  different
affociations  was  fuppofed  to  be  the  moft  innocenr,  rerufed  to
give  the  lift  of  the  brethren,  left  they  might  be  inculpated. —
They-  however,  declared  that  the  Order  comprehended  manv
men  of  quality  and  cf  high  honor ,  magiflrtfes  and  perfons  in  of


31»  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

While  the  young  Emperor  was  thus  endeavoring  to
counteract  the  plots  of  the  Seel,  it  was  confpiring  in  the
very  heart  of  the  Auftrian  fiâtes  to  overturn  the  govern-
ment. By  the  death  of  the  Chevalier  de  Bom  the  Sec~l
had  loft  at  Vienna  one  of  its  chief  adepts;  this  gentle-
man was  powerfully  rich,  yet  at  his  death  nothing  but  im-
menfe  debts  appeared,  in  confequence  of  the  fums  he  had
fpent  on  the  propagandifts.  Two  other  adepts,  as  zeal-
ous at  the  leaft,  and  far  more  enterprizing,  had  fucceed-
cd  him,     Hebenstkeit  the  Lieuteuant  déplace  at  Vi-

Jtce.  (Seethe  Minutes  of  the  Judgment  tbr  the  Staats  un  gelehrte
zeitung  of  Hamburgh,  No.  45,  13th  of  March.

Suppofing  that  the  reader  may  wifh  to  know  in  what  Rate
young  men  came  from  thefe  Lodges  and  Colleges,  I  will  here
quote  an  an  example  from  the  notes  I  have  received  from  Ger-
many. ''At  the  time  I  am  writing  this  (July  13th  1794)  at
"  the  Baths,  four  leagues  from  Hanover,  there  refides  here  a
"  young  man  who  arrived  a  few  clays  fince  from  the  univerfity
"  of  Jena,  where  he  was  educated.  It  is  the  reigning  Count
*'  Plattenberg,  one  of  the  richeft  noblemen  of  Germany,  aged
**  24,  of  Catholic  parents,  and  a  nephew  of  Prince  Kaunitz,
*  the  niinifter.  In  confequence  of  the  principles  imbibed  by
"  this  young  Count  at  the  univerfity  of  Jena,  he  drefles  in  the
"  complete  ftyle  of  a  democrat,  and  affects  the  uncouthnefs  of
*'  their  manners.  He  would  have  his  fervant  fit  next  to  him
*'  at  the  table  d'hote  but  it  was  not  permitted.  This  young
•  "  Egalité  goes  about  fmging  the  Ca  ira  and  Marfilleis  Hymn%

**  with  other  youths  whom  he  gathers  together.  Don't  let
*'  this  be  taken  in  the  light  of  an  anecdote  only  relating  to  a
"  thought  lefs  individual.  His  fo.ly  is  the  reigning  folly  of  Jlu-
"  dents  in  all  the  uviverjities  of  Germany  ;  and  this  folly  is  the
"  produce  of  thofs  doctrines  taught  by  the prcfejjbrs ,  while  go-
"  vemments  pay  no  attention  to  them.''

The  fame  notes  (and  they  are  written  by  a  Proteftant)  re-
prefeot  the  univerfity  cf  Halle  in  Saxony,  where  the  greater
pan  of  the  King  of  PrufKa's  fubjecls  go  to  finim  their  educa-
tions, as  in  a  ftate  flrnilar  to  that  of  Jena.  In  April  1794  the
chiefs  of  the  commiffion  of  religion  of  Berlin,  M.  M.  Hermes
and  Hilmer,  went,  bv  order  of  the  King  ofPrufSa,  to  vifit  the
Lutheran  college  at  Halle, and  theydiiapproved  of  many  things
that  were  going  on.  The  ftudents  received  them  with  the  cry
of  Per ear; t  (let  them  periJh),  and  obliged  them  to  feek  their
f;-fety  in  flight.  1  heir  miniilers  of  religion  are  expofed  to  fimi-
lar  infults.  Dogs  are  fet  at  them  when  preaching,  and  indecen-
cies take  place  in  the  churches  that  would  not  be  fuffered  in
the  (treejts.  "  The  Illuminées  themfelves  publijlj  thefe  abomina~
"  tions,  that  their  pupils  the  Amicifls  may  be  induced  to  aft
"  in  a  fimtlar  manner/'  Such  is  the  education  of  youth  where
the  Seâ  predominates.


HISTORICAL  TART.  3ll

entra,  was  one;  and  the  other  was  Mehalovich,  an  ex-
capuchin  of  Croatia,  whom  Jofeph  II.  had  imprudently
taken  from  the  cloifters,  and  had  given  him  a  living  ia
Hungary,  in  recompence  for  the  difpofitions  he  had  fhovvn
to  fécond  the  Emperor  in  his  pretended  reforms  in  the
church.  A  number  of  other  adepts  had  joined  thefe  two
confpirators,  among  whom  we  may  diftinguim  the  Cap-
tain Billeck,  mathematical  profeflbr  at  the  Academy  of
Neuftadt,  the  Lieutenant  Riedel>  the  profeflbr  of  philo-
fophy  Branjîàter,  the  ftupid,  but  rich  merchant,  Hackei,
and  finally  Woljlcin^  one  of  thofe  adepts  whom  the  Seéfc
had  contrived  to  fend  on  a  revolutionary  million  through-
out Europe  at  the  Emperor's  expenfe,  under  pretence  of
acquiring  knowledge  in  the  veterinary  art,  of  which  he
has  fince  been  created  profeflbr.

The  reader  may  judge  of  the  number  and  importance
of  the  confpirators  by  the  plan  that  was  agreed  upon  ia
1795.     Thro'  their  influence  at  court,  they  found  mean;;
of  forming  a  garrifon  in  Vienna  of  fubftantial  and  honed:
citizens  little  accuftomed  to  bear  arms.  They  had  felecl-
ed  them  from  this  clafs,  and  had  got  an  order  to  compel
them  into  this  fort  of  duty,  under  pretence  of  the  immi-
nent danger  of  the  State.     Always  pretending  that  they
had  the  orders  of  the  Emperor,  they  treated,  thefe  new-
raifed  corps  with  unheard  of  feverity,  in  hopes  of  indis-
pofing  them  againft  the  court  by  the  time  that  their  re-
volutionary plots  {hould  be  ready  for  execution.  The  po-
pulace was  in  their  hands,  and  daily  became  more  attach-
ed to  their  caufe,  in  confequence  of  their  being  excluded
from  the  new-raifed  corps,  and  by  making  them  partake
of  the  large  fums  diftributed  among  a  banditti  who  were
to  be  put  in  pofleflion  of  the  arfenal  on  the  day  of  infur-
redtion.  On  that  day  the  infurredtion  was  to  be  general,
during  which  Hebenjtreit,  followed  by  a  banditti,  was  to
fecure  the  perfon  of  the  Emperor;  other  detachments  of
the  banditti  were  to  take  pofleffion  of  the  arfenal,  and  poft
themielves.on  the  ramparts.  The  perfon  of  the  Emperor
being  in  their  bands,  the  confpirators  were  to  oblige  him
to  fign  the  Code  of  the  Rights  cf  Man;  that  is  to  fay,
certain  edicls  ready  prepared,  by  which  the  rights  of  all
nobility  and  great  proprietors  were  to  be  annulled;  all
were  to  be  declared  equal  and  free;  and  the  fovereignty
of  the  people  proclaimed,     Thefe  edicts  were  to  be  feut
into  the  Provinces  in  the  name  of  the  Emperor,  jull  as  if


3J2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

he  had  enjoyed  his  liberty.  Every  outward  appearance  of
lefpecT:  for  his  perfon  was  to  be  preferved;  in  fhort,  he'
was  to  have  been  treated  juft  as  the  gaoler  La  Fayette  had
treated  the  unfortunate  Lewis  XVI.  It  is  not  known,
whether  the  Aqua  Topbana  was  to  be  adminiftered  in  fuch
a  dofe  as  to  killy  or  to  Jlupif y  \  it  even  appears,  that  the
young  prince  was  to  be  kept  as  a  hoftage;  but  in  all  cas-
es, he  was  only  to  be  reftored  to  his  freedom  after  the  peo-
ple had  been  well  accuftomed  to  the  new  reign  of  Equa-
lity and  Liberty,  and  had  acquired  poflèflion  of  the  eftates
of  the  Nobility  in  fuch  a  manner  that  all  restitution  of  pro-
perty, or  revival  of  the  ancient  conftitution,  would  be  ren-
dered impoffible.  All  the  preparatory  fteps  had  been  tak-
en ;  the  Catechifms  of  the  Rights  of  Man,  and  the  moll
incendiary  performances,  had  been  profufely  difperfed  in
the  villages  and  cottages.  Female  adepts  in  the  ftyle  of
the  adepts  Necker  and  Stael  made  their  appearance.  The
Countefs  of  Aiarchowich  dittinguifhed  herfelf  by  the  zeal
fhe  fhowed  in  distributing  the  new  Catechifin.  The  fa-
tal day  was  drawing  near,  when  a  mod  fingular  circum-
ilance  led  to  the  difcovery  of  the  whole  plot.

While  the  ex-capuchin  Mehalovich  was  out  one  day,
a  domestic  playing  with  one  of  his  fellow-fervants,  took
into  his  head  to  put  on  the  capuchin  habit  which  his  mas-
ter had  preferved  among  his  cloaths,  when  all  on  a  fud-
den  Mehalovich  knocked  at  the  houfe-door.  The  fer-
Vant,  who  did  not  understand  the  nature  of  the  habit,
could  not  get  it  off  again,  fo  fent  his  comrade  to  open  the
door,  and  hid  himfelf  under  the  bed.  Mehalovich  came
in  with  Hebenfreitzna  Hachcl\  they  thought  themfelves
fecure;  the  lervant  overheard  their  whole  converfation  ;
it  related  entirely  to  the  confpiracy  that  was  to  break  out
in  three  days.  Hebenitreit  renewed  the  confpirator's  oath,
on  his  fword.  Mehalovich  took  five  hundred  thoufand  flo-
rins, which  were  hidden  in  a  harpfichord,  and  gave  them
to  him  for  the  execution  of  the  plan;  and  no  fooner  did
they  leave  the  room,  than  the  fervant  got  from  under  the
bed,  and  difcovered  the  whole  plot  to  the  Ministers  of  the
State.

The  councils  were  immediately  called  in  confequence
of  fo  important  a  difcovery,  and  the  chief  confpirators  were
arrefted  on  the  day  preceding  the  intended  explofion. —
Hebenftreit  was  hanged  at  Vienna  ;  Mehalovich,  with  fe-
ven  Hungarian  gentlemen,  his  accomplices  were  behead-


HISTORICAL  PART.  313

ed  at  Prefburg;  and  many  others  were  condemned  to  ex-
ile, or  to  perpetual  imprisonment.

The  King  of  Pruflia  had  fimilar  confpiracies  to  guard  InPnifia.
againft  at  Berlin.  The  papers  of  Z.*w//*r-Leuchfering,
which  had  been  feized,  had  already  warned  William  III,
of  the  confpiracy  that  was  brewing  in  the  Lodges;  but
in  the  mouth  of  November,  1792,  a  new  plot  was  con-
triving. The  fignal  agreed  upon  for  the  general  infurrec?
tion  was,  the  fetting  fire  to  two  houfes  in  different  quar-
ters of  the  town.  On  the  day  appointed  the  two  houfes
were  really  fet  on  fire.  The  brethren  expected  that  the
troops  in  garrifon  would  be  immediately  fent,  as  was  cus-
tomary, to  extinguifh  the  flames  and  keep  order.  While
abfent  from  their  pofts  the  rebels  were  to  feize  on  them,
and  let  their  banditti  loofe.  Happily  the  Governor  Ge-
neral MollendorfF  had  been  informed  of  the  plot.  He
commanded  the  troops  to  remain  at  their  pofts;  thecon-
fpirators,  finding  their  plans  had  been  difcovered,  did  not
dare  to  fhow  themfelves.  The  incendiaries  were  arretted,
the  plot  failed,  and  William  III.  preferved  his  Crown.

Having  acquired  certain  knowledge  of  the  views  of  the
confpirators,  and  of  their  connection  with  the  French  Ja?
cobins,  this  Prince,  as  every  reader  would  fuppofe,  ought
to  have  (hewn  more  conftancy  in  the  caufe  of  Royalty
againft  Jacobinifm.  Court  jealoufies,  and  differing  inte-
rests, that  perpetually  keep  the  cabinets  of  V  ienna  and
Berlin  at  variance,  may  have  led  him  to  agree  to  a  paci-
fication with  the  fworn  enemies  of  every  power;  but,  on  the
other  hand, it  isdifficult  toaccountfor  the  great  fway  which
thofe  very  men  muft  have  had  in  his  decifions,  whofe  dis-
organizing principles  he  fo  much  detefted.  The  reader
has  feen  the  adepts  of  the  modern  Spartacus  concealing
themfelves  in  the  Lodges  of  Mafonry;  he  has  obferved
PAZ/a-Knigge  promifing  difcoveries  that  would  give  the
Sect  fovereign  fway  over  credulous  minds.  LTnfortunate-
ly  for  Frederic  William  III.  he  had  become  a  member  of
one  of  thofe  Lodges  which  the  Illuminées,  under  the  cloak
of  Roficrucians,  had  converted  into  one  of  their  theatres
of  impofture;  and  the  following  is  an  account  given  me
by  a  learned  Proteftant  Minifter,  who  had  had  frequent
conversations  with  his  Pruflian  Majefty  on  the  fubje£t  of
Freemafonry.  He  informs  me,  that  to  divert:  his  Majefty
of  any  refpecl  he  might  have  for  the  Scripture,  thefe  Ro-
ficrucians  fucceeded  in  making  him  believe  that  the  Bible
R  r


3^4  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY^

and  Gofpel  of  the  Chriftians  were  deficient;  that  a  far
fuperior  doctrine  was  to  be  found  in  the  facred  books  of
Enoch  and  oj  Seth^  fuppofed  to  be  loft,  but  which  they
pretended  to  have  exclusively  in  their  pofteffion.  Had  it
been  poflibie  to  undeceive  the  king,  the  demonftrations
adduced  by  our  learned  correspondent  mull:  have  donefo,
imce  he  invited  his  Majefty  to  read  thofe  pretended  books
of  Enoch  and  Setb,  or  thofe  apocryphal  rhapfodies  which
thefe  irnpoftors  ottered  to  him  as  fo  precious,  fo  fecret,  and
fo  rare,  but  which  had  long  fince  been  printed  in  Fabri-
cius's  Cdleèïion.  His  Majefty  feemed  to  be  convinced  of
the  impofture  of  thefe  empirical  myftifiers;  but  curiofity
is  weak,  and  the  Roficrucians  regain  their  afcendency  un-
der the  pretence  of  apparitions.  So  notorious  was  the  cre-
dulity of  the  Pi  uflian  Monarch  on  this  fcore,  that  in  1792,
at  the  fair  of  Leipfic,  were  fold  waiftcoats  called  the  Ber-
lin fefus  waijucats  (Berlinifche  y  ejus  wejlen)ym  me-
mory of  the  brethren  having  on  a  fudden  announced  the
apparition  of  Chrift;  and  the  King  afking  how  he  was
di  died,  they  anfwered,  in  a  fsarlct  waijicoat,  with  black
facivgs,  and  golden  trejfes.  If  I  am  to  credit  what  I  have
learnt  through  the  fame  channel,  William  III.  deferved  to
be  impoied  upon  in  fo  humiliating  a  manner;  for  the  great
influence  thefe  impoftors  had  acquired  over  his  mind,  not
only  proceeding  from  their  magic  arts,  but  from  their  flat-
tering his  pallions  and  propenlity  for  the  fair  fex.  They
carried  their  impudence  fo  far,  as  to  tell  him,  that  Chrift
had  granted  him  pennijflon  to  have  twelve  wives  at  once.
The  moft  famous  ot  his  miftreffes  was  a  Madame  de
Reiz,  afterwards  created  Countefs  of  Lichtenau.  Had
the  matters  that  appeared  on  her  trial  been  made  public,
fpme  light  might  have  been  thrown  on  her  fuppoied  un-
Geritanding  with  the  French  Jacobins,  from  whom  fhe  is^
faid  to  have  received  rich  preJents,  and  with  Bifchofstver-
•  tler,  who  is  now  occupied,  as  we  are  told,  in  very  differ-
ent projects.  We  might  then  have  learned  how  to  recon-
cile that  real  hatred  which  William  had  conceived  for  the
Jacobins,  and  die  peribnal  courage  he  has  fhown  in  com-
bating them,  with  the  peace  he  made  precifely  at  the  time
when  his  armies  could  moft  efficacioufly  have  co-operat-
ed for  their  deftructlon.  But  his  fucctiTor  has  thought  pro-
per to  commit  to  the  flames  the  minutes  of  this  trial,  fay-
ing, that  he  would  not  read  them,  left perfons,  who  might
Jiill  be  ujejul  to  him,  ihould  be  implicated  in  thefe  in-


HISTORICAL  PART.  2XS

frîgues.  Some  princes  might  have  thought  it  prudent  to
read  them,  that  they  might  learn  who  were  the  perfons
that  could  trill  do  them  much  mifchief.  Without  pretend-.
ing  to  comment  on  the  deftroying  of  this  monument  of
hiftory,  we  are  happy  to  fay  that  William  IV.  has  inhe-
rited from  his  predeceflbr  all  his  hatred  for  the  Sect,  with-
out any  of  his  weakness.  The  Freemafons  of  Eerlin
went  fo  far  as  to  afk  to  have  their  Lodges  confirmed  by
letters  patent  ;  but  the  King  difmifTed  them,  faying,  that
in  fhowing  fuch  a  marked  favor  to  them,  he  would  be
wanting  in  his  duty  to  his  other  fubjects,  and  that  they
would  find  protection  as  long  as  they  did  not  trouble  the
public  peace.     The  Mafons,  we  maybe  fure,  in  return,

proinifed  to  be  moft  faithful  fubjecls  to  his  Majefty

They  made  iimilar  promifes  during  the  reign  of  the  late
king  ;  yet  I  have  feen  very  honeft'Mafons  in  London  who
were  much  alarmed  at  the  language  they  heard  in  the
Pruffian  Lodges,  and  that  but  a  fhort  time  before  the
death  of  William  III.  By  their  account  the  language  of
the  Mafons  was  as  frantic  to  the  full  as  that  of  the  Paris
Jacobins  :  "  When  mail  we  be  delivered  from  the  tyrant  ?
*c  When  (hall  we  follow  the  example  of  our  brethren  at
C£  Paris  ?  Is  it  not  high  time  for  us  to  (how  ourfelves  wor-
"  thy  of  Equality,  and  Liberty,  and  true  Mafons  ?"  Such
expreifions,  with  many  others  far  more  offenfive  to  the
dignity  and  perfon  of  the  king,  were  not  in  the  mouths  of
fo  ne  i'ew  brethren  only;  but  whole  Lodges  were  feized
with  the  phrenzy,  which  raged  moft  violently  among  the
adepts  who  were  connected  with  the  French.  Nor  is  it  a
trivial  circumftance,  or  to  be  overlooked,  that  has  ta-
ken place  in  the  Lodge  of  Berlin  calling  itfelf  The  Roy-
al Tork. — -Public  fame  has  informed  the  world,  that  this
Lodge  has  eftabiifhed  within  itfelf  a  Dircclory,  a  Se-
nate of  Ancients,  and  a  Senate  oj  Younger  s,  modelled  on
the  aclual  Government  of  France.  How  far  this  revolu-
tion in  the  Lodge  is  to  contribute  towards,  or  denote  the
impatience  with  which  the  members  third:  alter  the  uni-
verfal  revolution  which  the  Pentarques  are  endeavoring  to
operate,  I  (hall  not  pretend  to  ascertain;  but  this  much  I
can  pofitively  aflert,  that  the  auxiliaries  of  the  Paris  bro-
therhood are  not  confined  to  the  Lodges.  They  have  their
brethren,  fent  from  Paris,  in  the  Prulîian  armies.  On  the
one  hand,  thefe  foldiers  are  paid  by  his  Pruflian  Majefty
to  maintain  his  throne;  on  the  other,  they  arc  paid  by  the


316  antisocial  conspiracy;

Pentarques  to  corrupt  the  Pruffian  regiments,  and  teach
them  to  revolt  againft  the  throne.  The  generofity  of  the
Jacobins  is  fo  great,  that  the  wives  of  thefe  difguifed  apos-
tles are  penfioned  in  Fiance.  Every  one  knows,  that  the
arch-confpirator  Syeyes  is  gone  to  Berlin  in  a  diplomatic
character.  Should  his  mifliun  be  ever  accomplifhed,  thtn
will  the  hiftorian  have  to  exphin  conquefts  fimilar  to  thofe
of  Italy.  Germany  would  certainly  have  long  fince  fallen
a  prey  to  Illuminifm  had  the  plots  formed  met  with  fuc-
cefs.

Tired  of  fuch  partial  treafons,  that  only  threw  a  fingle
town  or  a  province  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  the  ie-
nate  of  the  adepts,  at  that  time  holding  its  lutings  at  Vi-
enna, had,  as  early  as  1793,  either  digcfted  a  plan  them*
felves,  or  received  one,  in  thirty  articles,  that  was  to  re-
volutionize the  whole  empire  at  the  fame  inftant. — Let-
ters, poft-paid  as  far  as  iEgra,  were  already  difpatch^d  for
Gotha,  Weimar,  Drtfd  n,  and  a  hundred  fuch  towns,
fixing  the  day  of  general  infurrecTion  for  the  firft  of  No-
vember, inviting  brethren  and  citizens  to  arm  on  that
great  day,  though  it  tvere  only  with  knives;  to  affbmble
in  the  fquares  of  the  towns,  or  in  the  fields  without;  to
form  into  centuries,  and  to  elect  chiefs;  to  feize  en  the
public  revenue,  on  the  arfenals,  on  the  powder  magazines,
and  07i  the  members  of  government.  In  compliance  with
the  fame  plan,  a  National  Jffembly  zuas  to  rear  its  bead
in  fame  tozvn  of  the  empire  on  the  fame  day,  and  the  breth-
ren in  infurrection  were  to  fend  their  deputies  to  it.  Thefe?
letters  were  fent  during;  the  month  of  October;  and  hap-
pily for  theftate,  a  fufficient  quantity  of  them  were  feiz-
ed  to  counteract  the  effects  of  the  confpiracy.  The  Sect
confoled  itfelf  in  the  idea  that  ten  years  would  not  elapfe,
as  iVfauvillon  had  declared,  before  all  Germany  would  be
revolutionized.  The  adepts,  indeedj  are  fo  very  nume-
rous, that  it  is  alrhoft  incredible  that  the  revolution  has  not
already  taken  place;  and  the  only  way  of  accounting  for
it,  is  by  confidering  the  inert  difpoluion  or  the  people,
who  cannot  be  eafily  thrown  into  that  ftrong  effervefcence
neceffary  for  an  explofion.

The  letters  from  that  country  complain  bitterly  of  the
progrefs  of  Illuminifm.  To  give  my  reader  the  means  of
judging  how  it  comes  to  pals,  that  princes,  who  are  the
beft  acquainted  with  the  views  of  the  Sect,  continue  to
tolerate  them,  I  will  tranfcribe  the  following  pafiàges  from


HISTORICAL  PART.  317

the  memorials  which  I  have  received  from  Germany,  and
which  have  been  confirmed  by  feveral  well-inform  jd  per-
fons:  "  One  of  the  Sovereigns  of  Germany,  who  has  the
"  moft  wit,  the  Duke  of  Brunfwick,  has  iufTered,  under
"  the  aufpices  of  Campe,  Mauvillon,  and  'Irapp,  three
<*  famous  Illuminées,  both  his  capital  and  his  ftates  to  be-

u  come  the  public  fchool  of  irreligion  and  Jacobinifm -

"  This  might  lead  us  to  believe,  that  the  prince  was  him*
*'  felf  tainted  with  thofe  principles,  but  it  would  be  ca-
"  lumny  to  fuppofe  it,  for  he  only  tolerates  theft  rafcals
«  that  he  may  not  fall  a  victim  to  their  plots.  Suppofing  I
"  was  to  fend  them  aivay,  faid  he,  they  would  only  go  elfe-
"  where  and  calumniate  me.  A  league  ought  to  be  enter-
"  ed  into  by  the  German  prinas,  to  fuffer  them  in  no  pai  t
*'  of  the  empire."

Meanwhile,  till  fuch  a  league  is  agreed  upon,  there  are
other  governments,  in  that  country,  that  permit  the  larfc
myfteries  of  Uluminifm  to  be  taught  publicly.  "  At  Jena,
tt  in  Saxony,  for  example,  a  profelTor  is  permitted  to  teach
"  publicly,  that  governments  are  contrary  to  the  laws  of
"  reafon  and  of  humanity  j  and,  confequently,  that,  in
"  twenty,  fifty,  or  a  hundred  years  time,  not  a  govern-
«  ment  will  exinV'*

To  go  ftill  fartherj  hw  of  the  German  princes  will
permit  writers  to  combat  either  the  Seel:  or  its  doctrines.
A  fociety  of  men  of  unblemifhed  principles,  (if  we  mav
judge  by  their  publication,  the  Eudemonia,  right  genius)
had  confecrated  their  labors  in  that  journal  to  the  un-
mafking  of  the  intrigues,  cunning,  and  principles,  of  the
Illuminées.  Not  a  fingle  prince  encourages  this  publica-
tion; feveral  have  prolcribed  it  in  their  ftate,  while  the
molt  Jacobinical  publications  are  allowed  a  free  circula-
tion. The  Eudemonia  hasjuft  been  forbidden  in  the  Aus-
trian States,  under  the  fpecious  pretext,  that  its  object  and
views  are  good,  but  that  it  makes  principles  known  that
are  not  fufficiently  refuted.  As  a  proof,  however,  that
they  were  much  better  refuted  than  the  Illuminées  could
wifh,  we  need  only  obferve,  that  the  Gazette  Littéraire
of  Gotha,  the  leading  paper  of  the  Sect,  announced  the
prohibition  before  it  was  even  known  at  Vienna. — -The
reader  will  be  lefs  furprized  at  the  artfuinefs  of  the  pre-
text, when  he  learns,  that  two  of  the  cenforsy  who  are  to

*  Memoirs  on  Jacobinifm  in  Germany.  Anno  1794.


^XS  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

pronounce  on  the  literary  productions,  are  the  well-known
Illuminées  Sonnenfels  and  Retzer,  who,  had  it  been  for  a
journal  of  another  itamp,  would  have  reclaimed  the  li-
berty of  the  prefs  in  its  favor.

We  muft  now  turn  our  attention  to  a  new  fpecies  of
Jacobins  who  are  making  an  amazing  progrefs  in  Ger-
many. Thefe  are  the  difciples  of  a  Doctor  Kant,  who,
riling  from  darknefs,  and  from  the  chaos  of  his  Catego-
ries, proceeds  to  reveal  the  myfteries  of  his  Cofmopoli-
tifm.  According  to  this  fyftem, — I.  It  is  melancholy  to
be  obliged  to  leek,  in  the  hopes  of  another  worlds  for  the
end  and  deftiny  of  the  human  fpecies. — -II.  It  is  not  of
man,  conducted  by  reafon,as  it  is  of  brutes  led  by  inftindt.
The  former  has  each  for  his  end  the  developement  of  all
his  faculties;  while,  in  the  latter,  the  end  is  accompliïh-
ed  in  each  individual  brute.  Among  men,  on  the  contra-
ry, the  end  is  for  the  fpecies,  and  not  for  the  individual  j
for  the  life  of  man  is  too  foort  to  attain  the  perfection  and
the  complete  developement  of  his  faculties.  In  the  clafs
of  man,  ail  the  individuals  pafs  and  perijh;  the  fpecies  a-
ione  furvives,  and  is  alone  immortal. — ill.  With  refpect,
to  man  again,  the  end  of  the  fpecies  cannot  be  accom-
plifhed;  that  is  to  fay,  his  faculties  can  only  be  entirely
developed  in  the  mo  ft  perfect  Jiate  of fociety. — IV.  That
perfect  flrate  of  fociety  would  be  a  general  confederacy  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  fo  united  together,  that  dis-
tentions, jealouiies,  ambition,  or  wars,  would  never  be
heard  of. — V.  Thoufands  and  thoufands  of  years  may  e-
lapfe  before  this  happy  period  of  perpetual  peace  may
come;  but,  "  whatever  may  be  the  idea  conceived  of  the
*'  free  exercife  of  our  will,  it  is  neverthelefs  certain,  that
"  the  apparent  refultof  that  volition,  the  actions  of  man,
"  are-,  as  well  as  all  the  other  facts  oj  nature,  determined
"  by  general  lazus." — This  nature  proceeds  with  a  flow
but  certain  ilep  toward  its  object.  Vices,  virtues,  fcienees,
the  diflentions  of  mankind,  are  in  her  hands,  but  the  fure
and  infallible  means  by  which  fhe  leads  the  human  fpecies
from  generation  to  generation  to  the  moil  perfect  itate  of
civilization. — Sooner  or  later  the  epoch  of  the  general
confederation,  of 'univerfal  peace,  muft  come;  neverthe-
lefs, even  at  that  period,  the  hitman  fpecies  vjiilhave  pro-
ceeded but  half  way  towards  its  perfection.* — I  know

*  Plan  of  a  General  Hiftory  in  a  Cofmopolitical  View,  by
Kant.    See  The  Spiclateur  du  Nord,  April  1798.


HISTORICAL  PART.  3»9

not  whether  this  doctrineer  Kant  will  inform  us  in  what
the  other  half  of  the  way  toward  perfection  confifts  ;  but,
in  the  meantime,  his  difciples  who  are  daily  increasing,
tell  us,  "  that  Europe  muft  neceilarily  diflblve  itfelf  into
"  as  many  republics  as  there  are  now  monarchies  ;  and
"  then  only  will  the  human  fpecies  mow  itfelf  in  all  its
"  ftrength  and  grandeur;  then  people  incapable  of  go-
"  verning  will  no  longer  be  feen  at  the  head  of  nations;
"  they  will  then  rife  to  that  high  ft  ate  of  perfection  at
«  prefent  attained  by  the  French  nation,  where  birth  is
44  nothing,  but  genius  and  talents  every  thing."*  Other
adepts,  however,  perfectly  underftand  what  is  alluded  to
by  the  other  halfway  toward  perfection;  and  thefe  ac-
knowledge man  only  to  be  in  a  ftate  of  perfection  when
he  recognizes  no  other  mailer  but  himfelf,  no  other  law
but  his  reafon.  In  ihort,  it  is  man  according  to  the  pro-
feflbr  of  Jena,  it  is  the  Magnus  of  Weiihaupt  or  of  Ba-
bceuf.f

Notwitbftanding  the  different  methods  of  proceeding,
it  is  eafy  to  fee  that  the  fyftem  of  Kant,  at  prefent  Pro-
felTor  at  Konigfherg,  ultimately  leads  to  the  fame  end  as
that  of  Weijhaupt,  heretofore  ProfelTor  at  Ingol/iadt. — »
The  fame  hatred  for  revelation  is  to  be  found  in  both,  as
well  as  the  fame  fpirit  of  impiety,  which  cannot  brook
the  idea  of  a  world  to  come,  where  all  delufion  muft  ceaic
in  the  prefence  of  the  Creator,  and  where  the  end  of  mail
and  of  the  human  fpecies  will  be  proclaimed  at  the  tri—

*  Memoirs  of  the  State  of  Jacobinifm  in  Germany.

f  I  was  not  put  to  the  trouble  of  read  in  g  Doctor  Kant's  works
in  German.  Mr.  Nitfch  has  published  a  fort  of  analylis  of  them
in  Knglifh.  Thole  who  might  tremble  at  the  idea  of  bewilder-
ing themfelves  in  his  chaos  of  Categories  may  read  the  account
given  them  in  the  Britiih  Critic,  Auguft  (796;  and  the  reader
may  eafify  judge  of  the  abfurdity  of  the  arguments  which  the
Prttffian  Doctor  heaps  up  againft  the  very  poffibility  of  revela-
tion. A  Doctor  WiUicb  has  lately  thown  himfeif  a  rival  of  Nitfch
in  proclaiming  the  glorious  feats  of  this  profefTor  of  darknefs.
Ï  have  perufed  the  analyfis  that  Dr.  Willich  has  given  us,  and
the  praifes  beftowed  on  the  projet!  of  a  perpetual  peace.  I  cou  d
not  underftand  why  he  would  only  give  the  title  of  the  work
that  relates  chiefly  to  that  point,  I  mean  of  that  very  treatife
whence  Doctor  Kant's  principles  on  Cofmopolitifin  have  been
extracted.  Was  the  diicipie  afraid  that  it  would  have  expofed
the  doctrines  of  his  matter  too  much,  and  opened  the  eyes  of:'
the  Englifh  reader  on  this  plan  of  perpetual  peace,  and  on  the
drift  of  his  whole  fyftem  of  Cofmopolitifm  ?


J20  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

bunal  of  a  remunerating  and  avenging  God.  Kant  and
IVeiJkaupt,  with  fimilar  pretenfions  to  fuperior  genius^
are  equally  baffled  in  their  attempts,  falling  into  the  molt
voluntarily  abfurd  proportions,  that  leave  the  prefent  ge-
neration no  other  confutation  in  its  afflictions,  than  the
empty  dream  of  the  imaginary  happinefs  of  thofe  futura
Coimopolit.es,  who,  in  thoufands  and  thoufands  of  years,
are,  as  we  are  told,  to  inhabit  this  earth.  In  both  we  may
obferve  that  fame  hypocrifv  pretending  to  great  fenfibility
and  virtue;  prctenciins;  not  to  know,  that  every  individual
who  (hall  be  perfuaded  that  he  is  not  born  for  any  fixed
or  perfonal  end,  will  foon  fhape  his  conduce  according  to
his  views  or  to  his  pleafurcs,  and  will  little  regard  the  fu-
ture Cofmopolites,  their  univerfal  peace,  or  the  happinefs
that  is  to  be  fpread  over  the  earth  twenty  or  thirty  ages
after  his  death.  The  fame  inept  fatalifm  is  taught  by  them
both,  wiihing  to  reprefent  nature  as  acting  exactly  as  it
pleales,  in  fpite  of  our  volition,  and  prevailing  over  our
paffions  by  its  general  la%vs\  and  neverthelefs  reprefent
mankind  as  flow  in  feconding  the  grand  object  of  Na-
ture, j nft  as  we  were  free  to  accelerate  or  to  retard  its
views  by  our  actions.  The  only  difference  that  can  be
perceived  between  thcfe  two  prototypes  of  German  Ja-
cobmifm,  if,  that  the  one  at  Konigfberg  envelopes  his
views  in  a  pacifie  cant;  while  the  other,  in  his  myiteries,
animates  and  infuriates  his  Epopts,  teaching  that  the  day
is  not  far  diftant  when  the  adepts  are  to  refort  to  force,  in
order  to  crufh  and  ftifle  every  thing  that  fhould  dare  to
rHift  them.  But  notwithstanding  the  pacific  cant  of  the
f>rmer,  his  doctrines  alfo  make  his  hearers  thirft  after  that
great  day  when  the  children  of  Equality  and  Liberty  are
to  reign.  His  colleagues  in  the  univeriities  do  not  teach
his  principles  with  his  coolnefs  ;  the  difciples  become  vio-
lent; the  Jacobins  fmile;  and  as  the  fyftem  fpreads,  the
offspring  of  both  thefe  teachers  unite  and  form  alliances  in
their  tenebrous  abodes.  Under  pretence  of  this  perpetual
peace  that  is  to  be  enjoyed  by  future  generations,  they
have  begun  by  declaring  a  war  of  cannibals  againft  the
whole  univerfe;  nor  is  there  to  be  found  fcarcely  one  of
their  offspring,  that  is  not  ready  to  betray  his  country,  his
laws,  and  his  fellow-citizens,  to  ereâ:  that  Cofmopolitan
Empire  announced  by  the  Profeffor  Kant,  or  to  enthrone
the  Man-king  of  the  modern  Spartacus.

Such  is  the  ftate  of  the  Se<St  in  Germany:  It  fways  the


HISTORICAL  PART,  £2%

Club?,  the  Lodges,  the  Literary  Societies,  the  Dicafteres^
or  Offices  of  Government,  and  even  Princes.  It  ap-
pears under  variegated  forms  and  names;  but,  however
thefe  may  differ,  it  perpetually  keeps  that  unhappy  coun-
try in  a  ftate  of  crifis.  Every  throne  is  undermined  by  a
volcano  that  menaces  explofxon  whenever  a  favorable  mo-
ment (hall  offer.

Why  will  not  truth  permit  me  to  declare,  that  the  con-  Jn
fpiring  Se£l  has  refpe£ted  that  nation  which,  content  with  England,
the  «vifdom,  and  living  happy  under  the  fhield  of  its  laws,
mud  naturally  have  been  adverfe  to,  and  confiant  in  re-
pelling the  diforganizing  plots  and  baneful  myfteries  of
Illuminifm?  But  have  we  not  feen  that  Minifter  of  Pet-
kam,  Rontgen,  Cent  to  London  under  the  protection  of
a  great  Prince?  Nor  is  he  the  only  apoftle of  Weifhaupt
th.it  has  croffed  the  feas  in  hopes  of  illuminizine;  England,
The  very  name  of  Xaverius  Zwack  in  thefe  Memoirs  re-
called to  the  minds  of  many  perfons  the  flay  which  that
famous  adept  of  Illuminifm  made  during  a  whole  year  at
Oxford,  juft  after  his  flight  from  Bavaria.  The  exactnefs
of  his  defcription,  taken  from  the  Original  Writings,  left
not  the  leaft  fhadow  of  doubt  as  to  the  perfon  of  the  Cato
of  Illuminifm.  This  has  made  people  underftand  the  real
motives  that  induced  this  adept  to  make  that  famous  town
his  habitation,  though  he  pretended  to  have  been  attract-
ed thither  by  the  fame  of  its  fcience.  Neither  the  place  nor
the  times,  however,  were  propitious  to  his  miffion,  nor  to
principles  that  entailed  upon  him  the  juft  contempt  of  the
doctors.  Mr.  Hornfby,  who  had  entrufted  him  with  fome
difcoveries  in  aftfonomy,  will  now  underftand  how  this
adept  could  barefacedly  publifh  them  in  Germany  as  the
offspring  of  his  own  genius.  This  will  alfo  explain  why
the  Cato  of  Illuminifm,  who  was  defpifed  at  the  universi-
ty, and  nearly  expelled,  never  returned,  though  he  only
pretended  a  fhort  abfence  to  the  Continent.  Other  apos-
tles have  fucceeded  him  in  his  million;  and,  in  gratitude
for  the  afylum  which  this  nation  has  granted  us,  I  muft
declare,  that  the  miffionaries  of  Weilhaupt  have  not  been
foiled  in  all  their  attempts.

When  Mr.  Robifon  published  his  affertion  that  cer-
tain Mafonic  Lodges  had  been  tainted  by  the  illumiaizing
brotherhood,  patnotifm  naturally  exclaimed  that  it  was
impoflibb.  Men  who  have  instituted  themielves  into  a
fort  of  tribunal  of  public  opinion  called  upon  this  refpec-


322  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

table  wrîter  to  produce  his  proofs.  I  know  not  what  the
anfwer  of  Mr.  Robifon  was;  all  I  know  is,  that  he  might
have  replied,  «  When  perfons  who  are  entitled  to  ques-
tion me  (hall  do  fo,  I  will  anfwer." — To  thofe  who  may
wifh  to  queftion  me,  I  will  fay,  that  there  are  circum-
Itances  which  may  forbid  me  to  anfwer;  it  is  sufficient
that  thofe  who  watch  for  the  fafety  of  the  nation  mould
be  informed  of  them,  that  they  may  take  precautions  to
counteract  the  Sed;  befides,  are  there  not  many  histori-
cal truths,  that  cannot  be  proved  in  a  court  of  justice?

I  make  thefe  obfervations  with  the  more  ail'urance  as
Government  moft  certainly  have  the  competent  proofs  m
their  hands,  which  their  vvifdom,  nevertheless,  has  kept
fecret.— I  make  them,  becaufe  Mr.  Robifon  has  fpoken
with  fufficient  ckarnefs,  in  his  Appendix,  and  in  his  Notes,
to  fhow  thathe  was  but  too  well  informed  when  he  f^oke
of  the  intrufion  of  Illurniniftn  into  certain  Enghfh  and
Scotch  Lodges,  without  being  obliged  to  particularize  the
Lodges.  But  he  certainly  acted  prudently  in  not  expos-
ing himfelf  to  the  fate  of  the  celebrated  Zimmerman,  who,
as  all  the  world  knows,  fell,  in  ftmilar  circumfhnees,  a
victim  to  the  Illuminée  P/;/7«-Knigge;  not  becaufe  he
had  accufed  him  unjuftly,  but  that  legal  evidence  was
wanting  to  prove  that  Pbilo  and  Knigge  were  names  ap-
plicable to  the  fame  perfon  ;  a  fact  now  fo  clear  both  by
his  own  works  and  thofe  of  the  adepts.  They  who  have
thus  attempted  to  brand  Mr.  Robifon  with  the  name  of
calumniator,  would  have  done  well  to  reflect  on  the  ma-
ny means  employed  by  the  Sect  to  influence  fuch  a  judg-
ment; that  it  is  a  ftanding  lav/  of  thè  Sect,  that  where
an  author  of  merit  cannot  bt  gained  over,  he  U  to  be  dis-
credited by  every  means  pcjjibie;  and  molt  certainly  he
has  a  glorious  title  to  the  hatred  of  the  Seat.  I  willingly
confefs,  that  it  would  have  given  me  great  plesfure,  had
it  been  confonant  with  prudence,  that  Mr.  Robifon  had
publifhed  all  his  proofs,  as  I  am  perfuaded  that  many  of
thofe  perfons  who  have  been  fo  hafty  and  intemperate  in'
their  judgments,  would  have  voted  him  thanks  for  the  1er-
vice  he  has  rendered  to  his  country,  actuated,  as  I  fuppofe
them  to  be,  with  the  fame  zeal  for  its  happinefs,  but  not
equally  informed  as  to  the  dangers  with  wnich  it  is  me-
naced.

Nothwithftanding  the  variance  that  is  to  be  found  be-
tween that  refpeiStable  author  and  myfelf  in  fome  articles,


HISTORICAL  PART.  323

(particularly  on  the  Catholic  religion,*  and  on  the  Jefu-
its,  whom  he  might  have  reprefented  in  different-colours,

*  I  do  not  here  pretend  to  refute  the  religious  prejudices  of
certain  writers  agaioft  the  Catholics:  But  what  has  the  French
Revolution  to  do  with  confeffion,  with  monaftic  vows,  with,
indigencies,  or  the  jurisdiction  pureiy  fpiritual  of  the  Pope,
and  articles  of  fuch  a  nature?  The  proof  that  tbefe  objects
were  far  from  contributing  to  the  Revolution  is,  that  the  Ja-
cobins fpare  no  pains  to  deftroy  them. — In  a  book  combating
«he  Jacobins,  what  can  induce  a  writer  to  vent  his  fpleen  a-
gainft  the  'teners  of  a  Catholic?  I  might  fayto  many  writers
who  have  been  guilty  of  this  moil  extraordinary  imprudence»
B;gin.  at  leaft,  gentlemen,  by  making  yourfelves  acquainted
with  our  tenets,  and  then  fee  whether  we  are  able  to  defend
them  To  orders  1  would  fay,  For  God's  fake  let  us  expofe  our
belitf  ourfelved,  Jet  us  fay  what  we  do  and  what  we  do  not  be-
iieve.  I  he  defence  you  may  with  the  beft  intentions  fet  up  for
us,  may  be  more  hurtful  than  beneficial  toourcaufe.  Mr.  Ro-
bilon,  no  d'ubt,  thought  that  he  was  fpeaking  in  favor  of  the
church  or  Fiance,  when  he  faid,  that  that  church  had  long
fince  eftablilhed  its  independence  of  the  Court  ot  Home.  If  by
the  Court  of  Rome  he  means  the  temporal  dominion  of  the
Pope,  the  French  had  no  great  trouble  in  eftabiilhing  fuch  aa
independence,  as  it  never  recognized  any  fuch  dominion  ;  if  he
means  the  purely  fpiritual  jurifdiction  ot  the  Pope,  neither  our
Catholic  Bifhopsi  Clergy,  nor  Laity,  ever  wiihed  to  throw  it
off.  They  all  continue  to  believe  what  they  always  have  be-
lieved, that  the  Pope,  as  fucceiTor  of  St.  Petîr,  has  the  juris-
diction as  firlt  paftor  over  the  Church  of  France,  as  he  has  0-
ver  all  others.  Every  one  knows,  that  this  jurifdi«Micn  cf  the  fo-
vereign  Pontiff  is  held  in  our  faith  as  an  eiXential  point  of  the
hierarchy  eftablilhed  by  Chrift;  but  every  one  alio  knows,  that
thejuiildiétion  of  the  Fope,  as  well  as  that  of  all  Bifhops,  is
not  of  this  world  ;  that  it  doss  not  militate  in  any  way  with
the  duties  we  own  to  our  fovereigns  ;  that  it  can  never  abfolve
us  from  the  fidelity  and  fubniiflion  which  we  ov/e  to  the  laws
of  the  State.  I,  therefore,  here  proteft  again  ft  all  thofe  who
may  choofe  to  interpret  the  efteem  I  have  declared  to  entertain
for  Mr.  Robifon's  work  as  alluding  to  thole  parts  of  it  that  are
abloluteiy  contrary  to  my  faith.  On  this  occailon  alfo  I  beg  to
obferve,  that  in  the  cafe  of  the  prefent  Revolution  both  Pro-
îeftants  and  Catholics  fhould  unite,  and  lay  afide  their  preju-
dices anaintt  each  other,  to  combat  the  impiety  of  the  Jaco"
•bins,  as  their  aim  is  to  annihilate  ire  religions  of  both.  Be'
what  party  has  a  right  to  boaft,  when  the  révolution  is  consid-
ered ;  Spartacus-We'ifhimpi  and  CWo-Zwack  were  two  apos-
tate Catholics —  Phtlo- Knigge  and  Z.ucian-'Nicolù  two  apos-
tate Proteftants — Thomas  Paine  an  apoftare  Anglican.  In
France,  the  Catholic  citizens  of  Paris,  the  Proteftartt  citizens
of  Nifmes  ;  in  Ireland,  large  portions  of  a  Catholic  populace
organized  into  a  revolutionary  army  under  Protettant  cl)itL„


|24  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

had  he  had,  as  we  have,  the  whole  hiftory  of  their  pretend-
ed Mafonry  before  him,  a  mere  fiction  of  the  Illuminées
to  dupe  the  Mafons,  and  avert  the  attention  of  the  public
from  the  true  confpirators);  notwithitanding  this  vari-
ance, I  (hall  never  hefitate  to  acknowledge,  that  he  is  en-
titled to  the  thanks  of  his  fellow-countrymen  for  having
denounced  a  confpiracy  that  threatens  this,  as  much  as  it
does  any  other  nation;  I  mail  always  bear  willing  tefti-
mony  to  the  juftice  of  his  caufe,  to  the  ardor  of  his  zeal,
and  to  the  uprightnefs  of  his  intentions.  Meanwhile,  till
he  may  judge  it  proper  to  publifh  his  proofs  on  the  Illu-
minifm of  certain  Englifli  Mafonic  Lodges,  I  ihall  men-
tion a  few  circumitances  that  have  come  to  my  know-
ledge.

To  my  Certain  knowledge,  there  are  two  men  in  Eng-
land who  have  been  tampered  with  by  the  Apoftles  of  11-
luminifm.  One  of  thefe,  who  belongs  to  the  Navy,  ftill
preferves  that  honeft  indignation  which  muft  naturally
arife  in  an  upright  heart  at  f  eing  itfelf  fo  atrocioufly  du-
ped by  an  Inlinuator,  who,  under  pretence  of  initiating
him  into  the  fecrets  of  Mafonry,  was  plunging  him  heaJ
foremoft  into  Illuminifm.  The  other,  a  man  of  great
merit,  who  might  have  known  more  had  he  not  difcover-
ed  his  real  fentiments;  but  his  letters  bear  teftimony  of
the  following  particulars  :

Of  thofe  books  which  (how  the  multitude  of  Illumini-
zed  LodgeSj  there  is  one  bearing  the  title  of  Paragrafmi
and  it  is  often  put  into  the  hands  of  certain  candidates  by
the  Infinuators.  In  this  production  we  may  fee  the  tra-
velling adept  Zimmerman  boafting  of  having  illuminized
Lodges  in  England,  juft  as  he  had  done  in  Italy  and  Hun-
gary. In  fome  of  thefe  Lodges  the  tenets  of  Illuminifm
were  well  received  ;  but  of  five  that  have  come  to  my  cor-
refpondent's  knowledge,  two  foon  abandoned  the  myfte-

In  Germany,  the  Il'uminees  take  their  origin  in  a  Catholic
Univerfity,  and  ail  the  Lutheran  Untverfities  are  full  of  Illu-
rninizing  Proftfihrs.  Such  confiderations  as  thefe  ihould  cer-
tainly put  an  end  to  reproach  on  either  fide.  I  muft  confefs,
that  the  Lutherans  and  Calvinifts  with  whom  1  correfpond  in
Germany  are  much  more  candid;  they  fpare  neither  fide,  and
are  the  firfl  to  point  out  thofe  of  their  own  peifuafion  who  are
tainted  with  Illuminifm.  They  behold  the  Jacobins  as  enemies
to  every  religion;  and  when  J-cobinifm  is  in  queftion,they
wifely  confefs  the  neceffity  of  uniting  all  parties  to  crulh  the
hydra.


HISTORICAL  PART.  3*5

ries  of  the  modern  Spartacus^  the  other  three  are  not
known  to  have  rejected  them.

Another  apoftle  (oon  fucceeded  to  Zimmerman;  this.
Was  a  Duclor  Ibiken,  an  alTumed  name,  perhaps,  as  it  was
cuftomary  with  the  travelling  adepts  to  change  their
names  according  to  circumftances.  Whatever  may  have
been  the  cafe,  this  Ibiken,  an  emiiTary  of'  the  Eccledtic
Lodges  of  Illuminifm,  began  by  uniting  with  fome  Qua-
kers. He  was  afterwards  received  into  certain  Lodgess
and  introduced  fome  of  the  preparatory  degrees.  He  even
fucceeded  in  completely  illuminizing  fome  of  the  duped
brethren.  He  alfo  boaited  of  his  fuccelTss  in  Ireland  and
England.  He  would  foretel  to  his  Englifh  pupils,  that  a
great  revolution  was  about  to  be  operated  in  the  pitiful
and  miferable  Mafonry  of  their  country.  Thofe  to  who.n
this  language  was  perfectly  unintelligible  at  the  time,  have
told  me,  that  they  have  perfectly  underftood  his  meaning-
fince  they  have  perufed  my  publication.  They  have  loit
fight  of  the  Doctor,  which  was  the  natural  confluence
of  his  being  admonifhed  to  depart  with  his  myftefies  by
thofe  who  watch  over  the  public  fafety.

Another  emilTary  foon  after  appeared,  and  coming  from
America  under  the  name  of  Reginhard>  declared  him-
felf  an  Alfacian,  and  formerly  an  Almoner  in  the  French
navy.  He  expected  to  be  well  received  by  certain  En-
gliih  Lodges  in  correfpondence  with  thofe  hehadjuft
left  at  Bofton,  and  which,  according  to  his  account,  had
made  a  furprizing  progrefs  lince  they  had  fraternized  with
the  brethren  that  had  gone  from  France  to  America. — .
This  Rcginhard  did  not  appear  (o  zealous  as  the  other
apoftles;  he  even  fignified  his  difguft  with  a  miffion  that
fo  little  became  his  ftation  of  life.  It  was  through  him
more  particularly  that  my  correfpondent  became  acquaint-
ed with  the  cxiftence  of  Illuminifm  on  the  banks  of  the
Thames.

This  is  certainly  enough  to  prove,  that  the  Illumini-
zation  of  England  was  not  neglected  by  the  confpiring
brethren.  I  will  fay  more,  that  notwithstanding  the  hon-
orable exception  1  have  made  in  favor  of  the  Engliih
Lodges,  I  am  no  longer  furprized  to  hear  of  Illuminifm
being  well  received  by  certain  Lodges.  And  here  I  think
it  neceffary  to  repeat,  that  when  I  made  the  exception,  I
only  meant  to  fpeak  of  what  is  called  the  National  M'a-
fonry,  rejîrièfgd  to  the  firji  three  Degrees.  I  Ihould  have


3   $  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

been  more  circumfpecl  in  my  exception,  had  I  known  of
a  pamphlet,  entitled,  Freemasonry:  a  IVard  to  the
Wife.  Here,  in  vindication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land, I  fee  the  moft  violent  complaints  preferred  againft
the  introduction  of  a  variety  of  degrees,  of  which,  in  a  po-
litical point  of  view,  it  is  certainly  the  duty  of  a  well-or-
dered government  to  reprefs  the  vice  and  immorality;  the
impiety  of  the  Roficrucians  is  particularly  complained  of
(page  9);  and  I  think  that  in  the  courfe  of  thefe  Me-
moirs 1  have  pretty  clearly  proved,  that  from  the  pro-
found Roficrucian  to  the  myfteries  of  Weifliaupt  there
is  but  a  ihort  ftep.

There  is  alfo  extant  another  work,  printed  fifty  years
ago,  On  the  Origin  and  Doctrine  of  Freemajons.  This
work  would  have  been  of  the  greateft  ufe  to  me  had  it
fallen  into  my  hands  a  little  fooner.  Let  me  no  longer  be
accufed  of  having  been  the  firft  to  reveal,  that  an  impious
?.nd  disorganizing  Equality  and  Liberty  were  the  grand
fecret  of  the  Occult  Lodges.  The  author  of  this  work
was  as  pofitive  in  this  affertion  as  myfelf,  and  at  that  time
clearly  demonftrated  it,  by  following,  ftep  by  ftep,  the
Scotch  degrees  of  Mafonry  as  they  exifted  in  thofe  days.
Time  may  have  changed  certain  forms;  but  all  the  nu-
merous degrees  ûyhd  pkilofcpbicalhave  not  been  able  to
a  dan  iota  to  the  fyirems  at  that  time  followed  in  the
Lodges  of  the  ScoUh  Jrcbite&s.  That  fpecies  of  Mafons
is  as  bad  as  the  Illuminées.  It  can  fcarcdy  be  conceived
with  what  art  they  proceed.  As  they  are  ftill  extant  in
Great  Britain,  it  is  not  too  late  to  point  the  attention  of
the  ruling  powers  toward  them.  Let  us  proceed  at  once
to  their  laft  myfteries.

«  When  a  candidate  prefents  himfelf  to  be  received  a
«  Scotch  Architect^  the  tyler  afks  him,  whether  he  has  a
«  vocation  for  Liberty,  Equality,  Obedience,  Courage,  and
«  Conflancy."  When  the  candidate  has  anfwered  Yes,  he
is  introduced  into  the  interior  of  the  Lodge.  Here  it  is
no  longer  the  representation  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon,
but  of  rive  animals,  the  Fox,  the  Monkey,  the  Lion,  the
Pelican,  and  the  Dove.  The  Signs,  and  the  word  Ado-
naiy  being  given  to  the  candidate,  the  orator  begins  an
enigmatical  difcourfe,  of  which  the  following  is  a  part:
"  Croftinefs,  Dijfi-mulation,  Courage,  Lov-e,  Sweetaefs;
«  Cunning,  imitation,  fury,  piety,  tranquillity;  mifchief,
"  nmnickry,  cruelty,  goodncfs,  and friendâiip,  are  allons


HISTORICAL  PART.  $IJ

«  and  the  (lime  thing,  and  are  generated  in  the  fame  thing.
"  They  feduce,  infpire  joy,  give  rife  to  forrow,  procure
u  advantage  and  ferene  days.  They  are  five  in  number,
"  and  ftili  they  are  but  one.  Soon- — foon — -foon — by  him
"  that  was,  is  now,  and  ever  fhall  be,  Sec.  &c."

«  The  remainder  of  the  difcourfe  (fays  my  author)  is
«  in  the  fame  ftrain.  However  obfeure  thefe  things  may
**  appear,  they  are  neverthelefs  clear  as  day,  if  attention
"  be  paid  to  the  figures  that  denote  the  character  of  F  ree-
K  mafons.  The  craft inefs  of  the  Fox  denotes  the  art  with
<*  which  the  Order  hides  its  object.  The  imitation  of  the
<c  Monkey  typifies  that  fupplenefs  of  mind,  that  addrtfs
«  with  which  the  Mafons  can  accommodate  themfelves
u  to  the  various  talents  and  taftes  of  the  candidates.  The
<c  Lion  denotes  the  ftrength  and  courage  of  thofe  win»
"  compofe  the  fociety.  The  Pelican  is  the  emblem  of
"  the  tendernefs  that  reigns  among  the  brethren,  The
11  peaceable  demeanor  of  the  Dove  isreprefentativecf  the
"  peace  of  the  golden  age,  or  of  thofe  fcrcne  days  that
*'  Freemafons  promife  to  the  univerfe."

The  author  from  whom  we  made  thefe  extracts  lived
for  a  long  time  with  Mafons  of  this  fpecies.  He  was  of-
ten prefent  at  their  Lodges  and  councils:  He  attended  at
their  deliberations  when  contriving  the  means  of  accom-
plifhing  their  plans.  He  then  continues  to  fpeak  of  the
initiation  of  a  Scotch  candidate:  "  There  is  no  rule  which
u  ordains,  that  the  object  of  the  Society  fhould  be  made
*'  known  to  him  in  clear  terms;  but  only  in  terms  that
"  would  be  infufficient  to  make  him  wholly  underftand
V-  the  morality  and  polity  that  are  univerfally  received. — -
"  On  the  night  of  his  reception  they  fimply  tell  him,  that
"  Equality  and  Liberty  among  the  brethen  is  the  fole  ob-
"  ject  of  the  Society.  But  fhould  the  new  Architect  fhow
"  iigns  of  a  perfect  preparednefs  for  the  ultimate  myftery
u  or  the  Society,  he  is  then  let  into  the  fecret,  or  rather
"  informed  of  the  grand  objeel  of  the  Society,  which  is  to
"  reduce  all  men  to  a  reciprocal  Equality,  and  to
u  reinflate  mankind  in  its  natural  Liberty.  In  fhort,
"  after  a  few  days  meeting,  they  openly  declare,  that  the
"  expreflion  of  eflablijlùng  Equality  among  men,  and  of
*'  reinstating  maiucind  in  their  natural  liberty,  ind:;iintt~
a  ly  comprehends  all  perfons  of  whatever  quality  orfla-


$*S  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

«  tion  they  may  bey  zvithout  excepting  magiftrates^  rreatt
«  or/mall."*

The  ceremonies  and  catechifm  of  this  degree  perfectly
coincide  with  thefe  explanations.  In  fhort,  every  thing  lb
cl  rarly  demonftrates  Equality  and  Liberty  to  be  the  ul-
timate object  of  their  myfteries,  that  the  author  attributes
the  origin,  or,  at  leaft,  the  reftoration  of  Mafonry  to  Crom-
well and  his  Independents.  The  author  would  have  lim-
ply attributed  the  reftoration  to  him,  had  he  been  ac-
quainted with  the  manufcript  of  Oxford.  Inferences  of
the  utmoft  importance  may  be  drawn  from  this  worlc,
both  as  to  the  hiftory  of  Freemafonry  and  the  intereftsof
Governments.  It  is  eafily  feen  at  prefent,  that  the  difor-
ganizing  myfteries  of  the  occult  Lodges  are  at  leaft  an-
terior to  the  reign  of  the  French  Sophifters.  Thefe  may
have  new-modelled  them  after  their  fafhion,  and  multi-
plied and  varied  the  degrees  j  but  their  principles  had
been  received  in  the  Lodges  long  before  Voltaire  wrote,
—The  Knight  Kadojch  was  already  extant  in  the  Scotch;
•  Jlnhitecl.  When  the  latter  is  afked  in  his  catechifm,
what  he  is  called,  he  anfwers  cunning  and  fwiple;  the
Kadojch  may  anfwer  bold  ana  impatient.  The  difference
lies  in  the  character,  and  not  in  the  fyftems.  This  degree
of  Scotch  Architect  alio  explains  whence  the  pre-emi-
nence of  the  Scotch  Lodges  arifes,  and  why  the  Lodges
of  other  countries  are  fo  defirous  of  correfponding  with
the  mother  Lodge  called  the  Lodge  Heredom  of  Kilwin-
ning, in  Scotland.  It  is  there  that  the  famous  Jrchitccls
Of  Equality  and  Liberty  are  fuppofed  to  be  the  guardians
of  the  laft  myfteries.  It  was  with  this  Lodge  al fo,  that  a
number  of  French  Lodges  at  Marfeilles,  Avignon,  Lyons,
Rouen,  &c.  &c.  would  be  affiliated,  notwithftanding  the
influence  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  Paris, f

*  Of  the  Origin  of  the  Free-mafons,  degree  of  Architect.

\  I  have  in  my  poflefllon,the  original  of  the  patents  empow-
ering a  Brother  mafon  to  ereel  Lodges  under  the  direclion  of
that  of  Rouen.  A  Provincial  holds  his  refidence  at  this  latter
place,  and  is  entrufted  with  the  power  of  judging  the  lawfuits
or  diflentions  that  may  arife  within  his  province  ;  but  when  any
thing  of  grf  at  confequence  has  happened,  it  is  referred  to  the
Lodge  of '  Heredom  for  judgment.  Had  jFofeph  II.  feen  this,  he
might  have  called  it  an  imperium  in  imperio,  or  an  empire
throughout  all  empires.  The  reader  will  remark,  that  the  bre-


HISTORICAL  PART.  $20,

In  (hort,  the  difcovery  of  this  degree  of  Grand  Archi-
tect is  of  importance  to  Governments  in  general,  and  par-
ticularly to  that  of  England;  for  it  {hows  the  dangers  to
which  a  ftate  is  expofed  where,  in  the  midft  of  thofc  breth-
ren who  dedicate  themfelves  to  an  innocent  Equality,  ex -
ifr  a  number  fufficient  to  tranfmit  the  Grand  Myfteries
of  the  Seel.

In  fpite  of  all  the  fecrecy  obferved  by  this  fpecies  of
adept,  who  is  there  that  can  view  their  very  exiftence  in
any  other  light  than  as  a  perpetual  confpiracy  againft  the
ftate?  How  then  can  we  be  furprifed  if  the  Illuminées
found  perfons  in  thefs  countries  willing  to  fraternize  with
them,  and  to  combine  their  plots  with  thofe  of  the  mis-
fionaries  ?  However-  pure  the  generality  of  the  Englifh
Lodges  may  be,  is  not  this  enough  to  fhow  that  the  moft
difaffrous  plots  may  fuddenly  burft  from  the  Lodges;  and
that  the  prefence  of  virtuous  men  may  only  ferve  as  a
cloalc  to  the  defigns  of  the  wicked? — Do  not  let  me  be
told,  that  the  Good  counteract  the  evil  intentions  of  the
Wicked;  for  the  latter  can  find  means  of  meeting  un-
known to  the  former,  though  the  fame  Lodge  may  be  an
afylum  for  them  both.  There  are  Lodges  now  extant,
that  (to  ufe  the  expreffion  of  a  brother  who  frequented
them  a  few  months  fince)  would  not  admit  a  Jingle  Aris-
tocrat.— My  reader  muft  understand  fuch  language?—
There  are  Lodges  the  entries  to  which  are  perfect  laby-
rinths. The  adepts  do  not  go  out  by  the  fame  houfes  as
they  entered;  and,  the  more  completely  to  bame  the  vi-
gilance of  the  conftituted  authorities,  they  have  changed
their  drefles.

But  let  us  for  an  inftant  fuppofe,  that  the  Sece  could
make  no  impreflion  on  the  Engliib  Lodges,  we  know  that
Chauvelin  and  Fandernoot^  on  quitting  London,  left  their
emiflaries  behind:  public  danger  is  belt  probed  by  pri-
vate facts;  and  the  reader  will  not  be  furprifed  when  he
fees  me  defcend  to  the  following  particulars  relative  to
the  emiflaries  of  Jacobinifm  in  England.

Having  been  honored  with  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.
ft

thren  fay,  Ueredom  (Harodim),  is  a  Hebrew  word  fignifying
whiefs  or  governors.  It  is  àifo.to  be  remembered,  that  there  is
another  e'egreeof  Grand  Architect  entirely" different  from  rhat
which  I  have  jull  defcribed.  The  multiplicity  of  thefe  de-
grees only  ferve  the  better  to  hide  their  objeft.


33°  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Burke,  I  introduced  to  him  a  gentleman  who  wiflied  t©
confult  him  with  refpedf,  to  a  letter  written  to  Manuel,
who  at  that  time  governed  the  Commune  of  Paris,  in  con-
junction with  Tallien,  the  fanguinary  butcher  of  the  bloo-
dy September.  This  was  in  the  firft  year  of  my  emigra-
tion. The  letter  had  been  written  for  a  French  nobleman,
who,  wifhing  to  return  to  Paris,  thought  it  might  be  ad-
vantageous to  get  a  letter  of  recommendation  to  Manuel
from  a  Jacobin  then  refident  in  London.  This  noble-
man's wife  fufpedted  fome  treachery,  and  opened  the  let-
ter. The  epiitle  really  began  with  a  fort  of  recommenda-
tion, but  ended  with  faying,  "  this  nobleman  is,  after  all,
a  rank  ariftocrat,  who  ought  to  be  got  rid  of  by  the  pikes
or  the  guillotine,  that  he  may  not  return  any  more  to  Lon-

t."  In  the  body  of  the  letter  an  account  was  given  to
Manuel  of  the  ftate  of  the  brethren  in  London.  Among
other  things  it  ftated,  that  five  hundred  perfons  were  pre-
fer^ at  their  laft"  meeting;  that  they  were  ardent  in  the.
caufe;  that  their  numbers  daily  increafed,  and  that  every
thing  denoted  the  belt  difpofitions  for  hoiiting  the  revo-
lutionary ftandard.  This  letter  was  immediately  laid  be-
fore the  miniffry.

Norwithftanding  every  method  was  adopted  that  wis-
dom could  fuggeft,  the  partizans  of  the  Seel  increafed,
inftead  of  diminifhing;  and,  in  a  (hort  time,  there  were
at  leaft  fifteen  hundred  confpirators  in  London,  worthy  of
beine  marfhalled  by  jfourdan  Coup-tcte.  There  were  at
the  fame  ';me  in  London  two  men  who  had  been  educa-
ted in  all  the  arts  of  the  police  of  Paris,  and  they  were  or-
dered to  enquire  into  the  ftate  of  the  foreigners,  and  to
liiiiinguifh  the  real  emigrants  from  the  new  comers.  It
was  loon  difcovered,  that  a  banditti  of  all  nations,  crimi-
nals from  the  Bicetre^  fiom  the  galhes^  and  who  had  es-
caped the  gallows;  the  choie n  bands  in  fhort, of  Necker,
Orleans,  and  Mirabeau,  had  been  fent  into  England  by
their  fucceifors  of  the  great  club,  to  effecl:  a  fimilar  revo-
lution. It  was  in  confequence  of  this  that  the  Alien  Bill
was  ena died.

But  the  Seél:  is  relentltfs;  it  roars  at  the  very  idea  of
the  obftacles  it  has  met  with  in  England.  At  London,  at
Edinburgh,  at  Dublin,  it  has  ;*s  national  brethren,  its  con-
f firing  and  Ccrref ponding  Societies.  In  London  we  fee
the  duped  brethren  of  the  higheif.  ariflocracy  proclaiming
the  fiver eignty  oj the  people  at  their  revels;  while,  in  the


HISTORICAL  PART.  331

hidden  retreat  of  their  fecret  focieties,  other  brethren  are
p'otting  how  to  put  the  fortunes  of  the  ariftocratic  dupes,
of  the  banker,  and  of  the  merchant,  in  requifition  for  the
ufe  of  that /over ei \n  people \  in  thofe  fame  recefTes,  under
pretence  of  Reform,  do  they  wifh  to  ereîl  on  the  ruins  of
the  Britifh  conftitution,  the  reveries  of  a  Paine,  a  Syeyes,
or  of  the  Pentarques;  they  wifh  to  plant  that  tree  of  E-
quality  and  Liberty  whofe  nourifhment  is  gore  and  pill-
age, whofe  fruit  is  murder,  mifery,  and  exile.  Others  are
training  their  deluded  followers  to  aiTaflination,  and  are
forging  pikes.— Yes,  the  fcourge  has  been  wafted  acrofs
the  ocean  with  all  its  plots;  the  adepts  have  not  forgotten
the  land  of  their  anceftors,  the  Puritans,  Anabaptifts,  and
Independents.  They  have  difcovered  their  progenitors  in
thofe  fame  dens  to  which  Cromwell  had  confined  them,
after  having,  through  their  means,  dethroned  and  mur-
dered his  king,  difïblved  the  parliament,  and  feduced  the
nation  to  his  yoke.  The  brethren  of  Avignon  recognized
the  Illuminées  of  Swedenbourg  as  their  parent  Seel;  nei-
ther were  they  unmindful  of  the  embafTy  fent  them  by  the
Lodge  of  Hampftead.  Under  the  aufpices  of  De  Mai-
nauduc,  they  have  feen  their  difciples  thirfting  after  that
celejlial  jferufalem,  that  purifying  fire  (for  thefe  are  the
expreffions  1  have  heard  them  make  ufe  of)  that  was  to
kindle  into  a  general  conflagration  throughout  the  earth
by  means  of  the  French  revolution — and  thus  was  Jaco-
bin Equality  and  Liberty  to  be  univerfally  triumphant  e-
ven  in  the  ftreets  of  London.

But  what  a  concatenation  of  confpiracies  will  the  his-
torian find  when  he  fhali  turn  to  the  archives  of  thofe
focieties  ftyling  themfelves  of  Conjiitutional  Information
or  Correfponding.  Here,  however,  Juftice  and  the  Senate
have  interpofed;  they  have  torn  away  the  mafk,  and  be-
hold the  brethren  of  Edinburgh  bound  in  the  fame  plots
and  machinations  as  thofe  of  Dublin,  of  London,oï  Shef-
field, of  Manchefter,  of  Stockport,  of  Leicejler,  and  of
many  other  towns,  all  uniting  their  willies,  invitations,
and  addrefles  to  the  Jacobin  Legislators.*    The  Mother

*  I  have  annexed  a  more  eKtenfive  application  of  thefe  Me-
moirs to  Ireland  and  Great-Britain  at  the  end  of  this  fourth
Volume.  Let  me  on  this  occalion  beg  and  befeech  every  Ma-
giftrate  and  every  Clergyman,  whofe  province  it  is  more  par-
ticularly to  inftruct  and  guide  the  people  at  large,  and  for  whom
this  work  is  more  particularly  adapted>  to  read  once  more  aud


33^  antisocial  conspiracy;

Society  at  once  demonft rates  all  the  arts  of  the  Secret
Committees  of  the  Grand  Orient  under  Philip  of  Orleans;
the  deep  cunning  of  the  Bavarian  Aréopage  under  Wei-
fhaupt;  and  the  profligate  means  of  feduclion  of  Hol-
bach' s  Club  under  D'Alembert.  All  thefe  they  combine
in  hopes  of  hurrying  away  a  generous  nation  into  the  fink
of  impiety,  and  thence  to  rebellion;  they  combine,  in
hopes  of  uniting  the  Councils  and  the  efforts  of  the  difpers-
ed  brethren  in  the  caufe  of  revolution.  Subfcriptions  are
railed  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, as  they  were  in  France,
to  print  Paine's  Code  of  Rebellion,  and  circulate  it  from
the  town  to  the  village,  and  even  in  the  very  cottage.* —
Others  of  the  brethren  are  diftributing,  at  their  own  ex-
pense, all  the  poifons  of  infidelity,  nor  do  they  blufh  to
go  and  afk  fubferiptions  from  houfe  to  houfe  for  the  re-
printing of  the  m  oft  profligate  and  impious  productions
of  Voltaire,  Diderot,  Boulanger,  La  Metherie,  and  of  o-
thsr  Deiits  or  Atheifts  of  the  age,  and  this  under  the  fpe-
cious  pretence  of  enlightening  ignorance,  and  how  ?  by
putting  all  the  blafphemies  of  the  Sophifters  into  the  hands
of  the  people.

The  brethren  of  Edinburgh,  like  thofe  of  Berlin,  were
not  to  be  contented  with  the  mere  arts  of  feduction.  One
might  be  led  to  think  that  the  adepts  Watt  and  Downie
had  received  their  inflru&ions  from  the  Pruffian  Areo-
gage.  Notwithstanding  the  immenfe  diftance  that  divides
Edinburgh  from  Berlin,  they  adopted  precifely  the  fame
plan  to  draw  off  the  attention  of  the  troops  by  means  of
tae  burning  of  fume  houfe,  and  while  the  foldiery  fh<uld
be  occupied  with  extinguifhing  the  fire  to  fall  on  them,
and  in  the  midil  of  this  popular  commotion  to  proclaim
the  jacobin  Code. — In  London  have  we  not  ken  regi-
cides? At  Paris,  Lewis  XVI.  captive  in  his  capital,  was
dragged  to  the  guillotine.  At  Ublingen,  Lewis  XVIII.
when  a  fugitive,  was  wounded  in  the  head  by  a  ball.  In
London,  was  George  III.  in  the  midii  of  the  acclama-
tions of  his  fubjedls,  aimed  at  by  the  regicide  crew;  and
if  Heaven  averted  the  ball,  is  the  Sect  lefs  treacherous  or

with  attentjoq  the  Reports  of  the  Englifli  Houfe  of  Commons
made  in  1794.  After  having  perufed  thefe  Memoirs,  they  will
view  them  in  a  very  different  light  from  what  they  formerly
did.     "l'?arf

*  ThotrUnds  of  that  abominable  pamphlet  were  fent  out  to
the  Britiih  eilablilhmenis  in  the  £afl-lndies.     Tranf.


HISTORICAL  PART.  333

lefs  abominable,  becaufe  it  did  not  fucceed  in  its  foul  at-
tempt ?  At  length,  difdaining  obfcure  crimes,  and  aiming
at  the  annihilation  of  the  Throne,  of  the  Parliament,  and
of  the  whole  Britifh  Conftitution,  they  attempt  to  Induce
the  legions  of  the  empire  from  their  allegiance  by  means
of  the  mod  inflammatory  hand-bills;  they  would  per-
fuade  gallant  troops  to  ihake  ofFdifciplme  and  butcher
their  officers,  as  had  been  done  in  France.  EmiiTaries
found  their  way  into  the  fleets;  and  the  failors  were  for
a  time  deluded  by  the  fophifms  of  thofe  feducers,  who
wifhed  to  pervert  the  bold  opponents  of  the  Jacobins  on
the  ocean,  into  the  treacherous  abettors  of  thole  lame  Ja-
cobins that  dare  not  face  an  honefl:  tar.  In  Ireland,  they
aflume  another  form;  independence  in  church  and  ftate
is  held  out  to  a  deluded  people  by  the  emifiaries  of  thole
who  have  obliterated  every  woribip  and  every  law  in
France,  in  Corfica,  in  Belgium,  in  Savoy,  in  Holland,  in
Italy,  to  fubject  the  miferable  inhabitants  of  thofe  once
flourifliing  countries  to  the  tyranny  of  the  Pentarques. — .
In  that  unfortunate  country  ail  the  arts  of  feduilion  have
been  played  off  that  Illuminifm  could  invent,  and,  its  per-
juries have  raged  to  a  frightful  excefs.  There  did  the  le-
gions of  the  Seel,  conceiving  themfeives  powerful  in  their
numbers,  (ally  forth  from  their  lurking  places.  It  was  no
longer  a  partial  treafon  to  be  puniihed;  the  force  of  ar-
mies was  necefi'ary  to  crufh  whole  legions  of  rebels  who
were  daily  expecting  fuccour  from  a  foreign  foe.

But,  Praiie  be  to  God  on  high,  who,  in  his  mercy,  has
counteracted  the  malice  of  fuch  plots,  of  fuch  feditions:
Praife  be  to  the  all-powerful  God,  who  has  preserved  this
ftate  from  the  machinations  of  its  enemies  ! — May  the
Hiftorian,  after  having  traced  the  origin,  the  code,  the  re-
union, the  attempts,  and  the  fuccciFes  of  fuch  numerous
confpiring  Sects,  againft  God  and  his  Son,  againft  thrones
and  kings,  againft  fociety  and  its  laws,  repole  himfelf,  and
complacently  view  the  happinefs  of  thefe  Ifles,  when  he
comes  to  treat  of  the  land  that  has  proved  an  afylum  to
fo  many  unfortunate  victims  !  Aday  he  triumphantly  fay,
"  There  it  was  that  the  furges  of  innirreâian  were  dafh-
ed  back  upon  itfelf,  the  attempts  of  Jacobinifm  were  as
vain  as  the  efforts  of  us  fleets" — Happy  ihall  we  be,  if,
by  entering  into  this  difquifition  on  the  fury  of  Jacobin-
ifm,  we  fhall  have  contributed  to  awaken  the  attention  of
nations  to  the  true  cauies  of  all  their  misfortunes  and  re-


334


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY?

volutionary  difafters! — Thrice  happy  fhall  we  be,  if  we
{hall  have  fucceeded  in  guarding  this  nation  againft  the
dangers  with  which  it  is  threatened;  a  nation  to  which
the  world  looks  up  for  its  fafety;  a  nation  which,  in  its
beneficence,  is  become  our  adoptive  country.  May  it
ever  behold  us  offering  up  our  prayers  to  heaven  for  the
prefervation  of  its  king,  and  for  its  profperity,  with  all
that  affection  and  zeal  that  nature  infpires  for  one's  na-
tive foil  !

To  prefume  that  we  have  fulfilled  our  tafk  in  fuch  a
manner  as  not  to  ftand  in  need  of  the  indulgence  of  our
readers,  would  be  impertinent.  We  ingenuoufly  confefs
the  inferiority  of  our  talents,  and  the  many  imperfections,
we  are  confcious  muft  exift  in  Memoirs  of  fuch  high  im-
portance to  the  public  caufe.  But  with  confidence  we
affert,  that  we  have  never  fwerved  from  truth.  It  has
been  our  conftant'and  only  guide  in  pointing  out  the  cau-
ies  of  the  revolution,  it  (hall  continue  to  be  fo  in  treating
ef  fuch  means,  and  drawing  fuçh  conclufions  as  muft  ne-
ceiTarily  follow  from  the  facts  demonstrated  in  the  courfe
of  thefe  Memoirs.


HISTORICAL  PART.  335

CONCLUSION.


WHAT  a  painful  and  difgufting  courfe  have  I  at
length  terminated  ! — Wandering  through  thofe
fubterraneous  haunts  where,  in  the  fhades  of  darknefs,
confpirators  were  plotting  againft  all  religion  and  fociety,
I  have  frequently  {hudderea  with  horror,  and  felt  my  cour-
age finking  !  Fired  with  indignation  at  the  fight  of  fuch
iniquity,  fuch  a  concatenation  of  crimes  ftill  contriving,
how  often  have  I  faid  to  myfelf,  Leave  this  abyfs  of  wick-
ednefs— -fly  the  abodes  of  thefe  vile  and  monftrous  con-
fpirators ;  it  may  be  better  even  to  fall  their  victim  than
to  fully  one's  rnind  with  the  recollection  of  fuch  villany,
treafon,  and  impiety,  or  to  be  the  accufer  to  pofterity  of
the  age  in  which  we  live. — But  have  I  not  cotempora-
ries  to  be  faved  ? — There  ftill  exift  nations  that  have  not
bent  beneath  the  Jacobin  yoke;  my  fellow-country  men
may,  perhaps,  be  induced  to  fhake  off  that  yoke,  when
they  are  made  acquainted  with  the  unparalleled  plots  and
artifices  contrived  for  their  feduifion.  And  ought  not
posterity  to  be  informed  to  what  an  extent  this  dijaftrous
Sedt.  raged  in  our  days,  that  it  may  guard  agaiiift  a
renewal  of  fimilar  horrors?  Such  thoughts  inspired  me
with  courage;  they  have  carried  me  through  this  difguM-
ing  tafk;  they  were  my  fupport  when  overpowered  with
the  odious  fight  of  legions  of  confpirators  conjuring  up
every  hellifh  art  to  heap  mifery  on  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth:  moreover  the  moft  covincing  proofs  have  never
been  wanting.

But  can  it  be  poffible  that  my  endeavors  fhould  prove
fruitlefs  ?  if  fo,  alas  !  let  thefe  pages  be  rent  afunder ;  com-
mit to  the  flames  thefe  Memoirs  which  bear  teft imony  of
fuch  a  multitude  of  hideous  plots  that  threatened  fociety.
Kings,  Pontiffs,  Magistrates,  Princes,  and  Citizens  of
every  clafs,  if  it  be  true,  that  I  have  attempted  in  vain  to
diilipate  the  fatal  illufion;  if  it  be  true,  that  the  peftifer-
ous  blaft  of  Jacobinifm  has  deadened  your  fenfes,  and
plunged  your  fouls  into  lethargy;  if  it  be  true,  that  the
torpor  of  indolence  has  rendered  you  callous  to  your  own
dangers,  as  well  as  thofe  that  threaten  your  children,  your


3,5  antisocial  conspiracy;

country,  your  religion,  and  your  laws;  if  you  are  incapa-
ble of  the  leaft  effort,  of  the  f.nalleft  (àcrifice  for  your  own
fafety  ana  for  that  of  the  public;  if  the  world  be  peopled
only  by  daftards,  who  are  ready  to  fubmit  their  necks  to
the  Jacobin  yoke,  let  them  be  carried  into  bondage,  let
them  be  (laves  to  Jacobins  and  to  they-  principles;  may
their  fortunes  fall  a  prey  to  brigands;  may  their  temples,
thrones,  governments,  "palaces,  and  habitations,  tall  be-
neath  the  blows  of  the  relentlefs  Sea».  When  you  tear
thefe  pages,  banifh  from  youj  mind  all  prefage  of  difes-
ters;  pals  your  days  in  joy,  FeTtivity  and  merriment,  till
the  knell  of  revolution  fhall  found  and  ftartk  ye  from  your
lethargy.     The  Jacobins  will  take  upon  themfclves  the
care  of  haftening  the  fatal  hour.  To  announce  it  before-
hand to  fuch  torpid  fouis  would  be  to  anticipate  their  lut-
terions; no,  fleep  the  fleep  of  death;  may  your  ears  be
deaf  to  the  found  of  thofe  chains  that  are  forging  for  you  ;
approach  not  where  truth  may  undeceive  you;  no,  follow
in  the  retinue  of  fome  talk  prophet  that  may  beguile  you.
'But  fliould  there  be  found  men  whofe  manly  courage
would  be  fired  with  zeal  for  the  public  caufe  at  the  very
recital  of  fuch  monftrous  combinations  againft  church  and
ftate  ;  for  them  I  write  ;  it  is  on  them  that  1  call  when  I  fay,
that  notwithstanding  all  the  artifices  of  the  various  Seèts,
and  the  tremendous  power  which  Jacobimfm  has  already
acquired,  Europe  is  not  yet  fubjeéted  to  them.     It  is  yet
polTible  to  crufh  that  Sect  which  has  fworn  to  crufh  your

God,  plunder  your  country,  and  annihilate  fociety. —

Your  country  and  yourfelves  may  ftill  be  faved.  But  in
the  war  that  (be  Se'tf  is  Paging  againft  you,  as  well  as  in
ail  o'her  wars,  the  firft  requitite  for  working  your  fafe-
ty is  ihe  perfect  conviction  of  your  danger,  and  an  accu-
rate knowledge  of  the  enemy,  of  his  plans,and  of  his,means.
It  was  not  unintentionally  that  1  heaped  proof  upon  proof
to  demonftrate  that  Jacobinifn  was  a  coah-ion  of  the  00-
t>  hifiers  of  Impiety  Rearing  to  crulh  the  God  of  the  Gos-
pel; of  the  Sophijiers  of  Rebellion  fwearing  to  overturn
the  thrones  of  kings;  and  of  the  Sophifters  of  Anarchy
confpiring  not  onlv  againft  the  ahar  and  throne,  but  uvear-
bg  to  annihilate  all  laws,  property,  and  fociety.  I  was
certain  that  mv  readers  would  neglect  all  means  of  idf-
prefervation  fo'long  as  they  were  not  convinced  of  their
danger.  Should  the  proofs  that  I  have  adduced  ftill  leave
them  in  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  the  plots  of  the  beet,


HISTORICAL  PART,  337

J  (hall  have  loft  my  labor;  lean  but  weep  over  their
blindnefs  ;  they  will  have  already  fallen  into  that  ftate  of
apathy  into  which  the  Seel:  wifhes  to  plunge  them.  The
lefs  credit  my  readers  {hall  give  to  the  reality  of  thefe  plots,
the  more  certain  will  the  confpirators  be  of  fuccefs.  If
Then  I  farther  infift,  let  my  inftances  meet  with  a  candid
reception  i  for,  reader,  it  is  your  fafety  and  that  of  the
public  weal  that  actuates  me.

Let  us  then  fuppofe,  for  example,  that  a  perfon  comes
to  warn  you,  that  you  are  furrounded  by  men  who,  under
the  cloak  of  friendfhip,  are  only  waiting  for  a  favorable
moment  to  execute  an  old  plan  which  they  have  contriv-
ed of  robbing  you  of  your  money  and  property,  of  firing
your  habitation^  nay  farther,  perhaps,  of  butchering  your
wife,  your  children,  your  relations  ;  fuppofing  that  the  in~
telligence  you  have  received  of  fuch  a  plot  werefupport-
ed  but  by  a  thoufandth  part  of  the  proofs  that  I  have  ad-
duced of  the  plots  contriving  againft  your  country,  and
againft  every  ftate  without  exception,  would  you  vv;ifte
that  time  in  idle  declamations  and  fuperfluous  doubts  on
your  dangers,  which  your  perfidious  friends  were  hufband-
jng  for  your  ruin  ?  or  would  you  expect  to  fee  perfons  be-

feeching  you  to  watch  for  your  own  prefervation  ?

Well,  I  now  wifh  to  convince  ye.  whether  princes,  nor-
bles,  rich,  poor,  burgeiTes,  merchants,  citizens,  in  fine,  of
every  clafs,  that  all  thefe  confpiracies  of  the  fophifticated,
mafonic,  or  illuminizing  adepts,  are  confpiracies  againft
your  perfons,  againft  your  property,  (whether  hereditary
or  mercantile,)  againft  your  families,  your  wives  and  chil-
dren. Are  you  wild  enough  to  believe,  that  while  your
country  is  delivered  over  to  the  revolutionary  conflagra-
tion, an  exception  will  be  made  in  your  favor,  becaufe
you  inhabit  fuch  or  fuch  a  place,  counting-houf/,  or  cot?
In  the  univerfal  pillage  of  the  ftate,  fhall  your  property
be  more  facred  than  that  of  your  neighbor,  and  eicape  the
rapacity  of  the  brigands,  or  the  requifkion  of  their  Fen-
tarques  ?  The  characteriftic  of  a  revolution  made  by  fec-
taries  is,  not  that  the  danger  is  diminifhed  by  its  univer-
fality,  but  that  terror,  indigence,  and  fjavery,  rufh  down
like  a  torrent,  fvvallowing  and  beating  down  without  di-
ftindtion  every  thing  that  is  to  be  found  on  its  paftage.

In  the  whole  progrefs  of  the  Sect,  wherever  it  has  ac-
quired fovereignty,  in  France,  in  Holland,  in  Brabant,  in
Savoy,  in  Switzerland,  in  Italy,  fearch  for  a  fingle  man
U  u


33^  antisocial  conspiracy;

of  property  that  has  preferved  it  entire;  a  poor  parent  thaï
has  not  had  to  fear  for  the  requifition  of  his  children,  or
his  own  labor  j  a  fmgle  family  that  has  not  to  weep  for
the  lofs,  or  ruin  of  fome  one  of  its  branches;  a  fingle  citi-
zen that  can  lay  himfelf  down  to  reft  with  the  profpect  of
being  able  to  fay»  when  he  awakes,  that  his  property,  his
liberty,,  his  life,  is  any  better  guaranteed  to  him,  than  was
that  of  the  unfortunate  vi£Ums  whom  he  had  feen  durin»"

o

the  day  plundered  of  their  property, dragged  in  chains,  or
falling  under  the  infatiable  guillotine. — No,  they  are  not
to  be  found.  Ceafe  then,  fluggard,  to  flatter  thyielf.  The
danger  is  imminent,  it  is  terrible,  it  ftares  ye  all  in  the
face  without  exception.

Yet  fink  not  under  the  prefigure  of  terror;  that  would
be  cowardice  indeed  ;  for,  though  fo  pohtive  as  to  the  cer-
tainty of  vour  danger,  I  may  boldly  fay,  Wiil  it  only,  and
your  falvation  is  certain.  I  appeal  to  the  Jacobins  them-
felves;  for  how  often  have  they  repeated,  that  K  it  is  not
poilible  to  triumph  over  a  nation  that  is  determined  to  de-
fend itfelf."  Will  as  they  do  and  you  will  have  little  to
fear  from  them.  The  true  Jacobin  is  not  to  be  difcour-
couraged  by  oppofition,  The  myfteries  infufe  into  the
adepts  a  uniform,  confiant,  and  relentlefs  determination
to  attain  the  grand  object  in  fpite  of  every  obftacle;  that

,  that  irrevocable  oath  of  overturning  the  whole  uni-
verle,  and  iuhjecting  it  to  their  fyftems,  is  the  true  prin-
ciple whence  originate  their  refources;  this  fires  the  zeal
ol  the  adepts,  and  induces  them  to  make  fuch  numerous

■hces;  it  infpires  its  warriors  with  enthufiafm  ;  itcrc-

rage  and  fury  in  the  heart  of  its  brigands.  It  is  this
principle  which  conftitutés  the  Sect;  in  that  its  force  re-
iides;  it  is  the  director  and  mover  of  its  adepts,  whether
in  arms,  in  the  clubs,  in  the  lodges,  or  deliberating  in  the
fenate. — But  what  inferences  may  not  nations  draw  from
this  very  principle  as  to  the  nature  of  their  plots?  Does
it  not  entitle  us  to  fay,  that  the  whole  of  the  French  revo-
lution is  nothing  more  than  the  offspring  of  that  oath,  of
that  premeditated  determination  of  overturning  the  altar,
the  throne,  and  fociety,  which   the  Seel  has  infufed  into

Jepts?  It  triumphs  becaufe  it  knows  how  to  will;
hence  it  is  evident,  that  to  render  their  efforts  abortive  we
need  only  îefolutely  to  ivlll  the  falvation  of  the  altar,  of
the  throne,  and  of  fociety,  and  they  are  faved.  Let  it  not
be  laid,  that  the  Jacobins  alone  can  be  fteady  in  their  caufe


HISTORICAL  PART.  339

and  predetermined  on  their  object.  To  know  the  evils
with  which  the  revolution  threatens  you,  and  to  determine
boLdly  and  refolutely  to  counteract  them,  does  not  cer-
tainly difpenfe  us  from  the  obligation  of  applying  to  the
means,  and  of  making  the  neceflary  efforts  and  facrifices
to  deliver  us  from  the  fcourge;  yet  do  not  let  it  be;  tho't
that  it  is  idle  in  me  to  infift  on  that  buldnefs,  fincerity,  and
determination.  The  French  revolution  is  in  its  nature
fimilar  to  our  parlions  and  vices:  it  is  generally  known,
that  misfortunes  are  the  natural  confequences  of  indulg-
ing them;  and  one  would  willingly  avoid  fuch  confe-
quences:  buta  faint-hearted  reiifrance  is  made;  our  pas-
fions  and  our  vices  foon  triumph,  and  man  is  hurried  away
by  them-.

But  mould  Ï,  on  the  contrary,  have  fucceeded  in  infpir-
ing  you  with  tne  courage  neceflary  to  make  you  act  with
relblution;  if  you  need  but  to  know  the  true   means  of
counteracting  the  Sect  to  adopta  firm  renltance;  then  I
may  boldly  fay,  the  Seel:   is  cruihed,  the  difafters  of  the
revolution  (hull  difappear. — But  the  reader,  whofe  human-
ity might  be  alarmed   at  my  faying  the  Seal  is  -crufoeel,
fhould  remember  that  when  i  faid  the  Seclrnuji  be  crujh-
ed  or  fociety  overthrown,  I  took  care  immediately  to  add,
"  Let  it  however  be  remembered,  that  to  crufh  a  Sect  is
"  not  to  imitate  the  fury  of  its  apofties,  intoxicated  with  its
"  (anguinary  rage  and  propenfc  to  enthufiafric  murder. — .
"  The  Sect  is  monitrous,  but  all  its  difciples  are  not  mon-
"  iters; — yes,ftrike  the  "Jacobin,  but /pare  the  Man;  the
w  Se£t  is  a  feet  of  opinion;  and  its   deftrutition  will  be
"  doubly  complete  on  the  day  when  it  fhall  be  deferted
"  by  its  difciples,  to  return  to  the  true  principles  of  rea-
**  fon  and  facial  order."*"  It  is  to  reclaim  the  unfortunate
victims  of  Jacobinifm  from  their  errors,  and  toreftore  t
to  fociety,  not  to  butcher  them,  that  i  have  been  fo  ionj*
examining  and  tracing  all  the  tortuous  windings  of  the
SscTt;  and  I  am  overjoyed   to  fee  that  fuch  weapons
felf-prefervation  are  the  natural  refait  of  thefe  Memoirs.
How  different  are  thefe  arms  from  thole  with  which  the
Sect  has  provided  its  difciples.

The  Jacobins  have  fcduced  nations  by  means  of  a  fub-
terraneous  warfare  of  illuiion,  error,  a
the  honeit  men  oppofe  them  with  wifdom,  truth,  and  light,

*  See  Preliminary  Difcoourle,  Vol.  I.  P.  xiii.


340  antisocial  conspiracy;

The  Jacobins  are  waging  againft  Princes  and  Govern*
ments  a  war  of  hatred  of  the  laws  and  of  fecial  order — à
war  of  rage  and  deftruétion  ;  let  a  war  of  fociety,  human-
ity, and  felf-prefervation  be  waged  againft  them.

The  Jacobins  are  waging  a  war  of  impiety  and  cor-
ruption againft  the  altars  and  religion  of  every  nation;
let  morality,  virtue,  and  repentance  be  oppofed  to  them.

I  explain: — when  1  fpeak  of  a  fubrerraneous  warfare
of  illulion,  error,  and  darknefs  waged  by  the  Seél,  I  al-
lude to  the  productions  of  its  fophifters,  to  the  artifiCcSof
its  emiflaries,  and  to  the  myfteriesof  its  clubs,  lodges,  and
fecret  focieties.  It  would  be  ufelefs  to  contelt  the  point;
for  we  have  incontrovertibly  demonftrated,  that  thofe  have
been  the  preparatory  means  for  all  its  revolutionary  tri-
umphs. It  is  by  fuch  means  that  Jacobinifm  has  infinua-
ted  itfelf  under  the  fpecious  forms  of  a  diforganiaing  Equa-
lity and  Liberty,  or  of  a  chimerical  Sovereignty  of  the
People,  which  has  ever  been  the  cant  of  thofe  fa&ious  tri-
bunes, who,  by  Battering  their  pride,  fought  to  enflave
that  fame  people.  It  is  by  retailing  all  the  fophifticated
doctrines  of  the  Rights  of  Man  to  the  multitude,  by  vio-
lent declamations  agairifl  the  exifting  laws,  by  captious
and  fallacious  defcriptions  of  a  fuppoied  happinefs  which
they  are  preparing  for  us,  by  urging  nations  on  tozertain
ejjays  at  leafty  by  fuch  means  do  tue  emiflaries  of  Jaco-
binifin  feduce  nations,  and  imperioufly  fway  that  public
opinion  which  will  fooner  level  your  ramparts  than  all  thé
artillery  that  they  can  bring  againft  them;  From  fuch
inconteftable  facts  I  conclude,  that  if  it  be  your  in  en  ion
to  guard  againft  the  misfortunes  which  have  befallen
France,  you  muft  begin  by  difarming  the  Sect  of  all  its
means  of  illufion.  Snatch  from  the  hands  of  the  people
all  thofe  incendiary  productions;  but  when  I  fay  people^
I  mean  from  every  clafs  of  fociety;  for  I  know  none  that
are  proof  againft  illufion;  more  particularly  would  I  fay,
from  that  clafs  which  has  been  fuppofed  fo  have  been  moft
abundant  in  learning,  that  clafs  of  literary  fophifters,  fuch
as  our  Voltaires,  D'Alemberts,  Rouflcaus,  Diciero-s,our
academicians,  and  our  doclrineers  of  the  reading  focieiies;
for  this  is*  the  clafs  of  all  others  thai  has  ihown  us  me  ex-
ample of  the  powerful  illulion  of  fophiftry.  It  was  from
this  clafs  that  the  revolutionary  minifters  Necker  and
Turgot  ftaned  up;  from  this  clafs  arofe  thofe- grand  re-
volutionary agentSj  the  Ivlirabeaux,  Syeyes,  Laclos,  Cort-


JHI'ST  ORICAL  PART.  341

dorcets;  thofe  revolutionary  trumps,  the  Brîflots,  Champ-
forts,  Garats,  Merciers,  Pailorets,  Gudins,  La  Metheries,
Lalandes,  Cheniers;  thofe  revolutionary  butchers,  the
Carras,  Frerons,  Marats;  I  will  alfo  ùy  of  that  clafs  of
advocates  fo  verbofe  and  fertile  in  delirium  ;  for  from  a-
mong  them  fprung  the  Targets,  Camus,  Treillards,  Bar-
reres,  and  all  the  tyrants  of  the  revolution,  the  Reveil-
lère-Lepaux,  Reubels,  Merlins,  and  Robefpierres.  What
have  all  thefe  men  proved,  whether  taken  from  the  acade-
mies or  from  the  bar? — that  if  they  were  the  peifons
whofe  talents  enabled  them  to  reprefent  all  this  fopbiftry
of  impiety,  of  fedition,  and  rebellion,  in  the  molt  fedu-
ting  colours,  they  were  alio  the  perfons  that  were  moft  eafi-
ly  imbued  with  and  drank  moil  deeply  of  the  poifon;—
they  were  at  once  the  moil  readily  tainted  and  the  moll
eager  to  taint  others. — No;  I  can  make  no  exception  of
chiles  5  none  are  entitled  to  an  exception  when  I  exclaim
to  Magiftrates  and  Sovereigns — Will  you  lave  the  peo-
ple from  the  difaiters  of  the  French  Revolution? — then
fnatch  from  their  hands  thofe  incendiary  productions— «
thofe  libels  of  impiety  and  fedition.  Let  that  man  be  pun-
ifhed  as  a  traitor5  who  writes  and  circulates  fuch  writings^
confeious  of  the  injury  he  is  doing  to  fociety;  let  him
meec  with  the  fate  of  a  madman,  if  he  thinks  he  can  fe-
duee,  and  Hop  the  confequences  of  feduciion.

But  I  hear  clamours  on  all  fides  ariiing  in  the  literary
world,  of  intolerance,  of  tyranny,  of  cramping  genius  ! — ■
I  forefaw  that  I  ihould  have  to  treat  with  men  lukewarm
in  the  caufe,  faying  they  were  determined,  nevertheleis  un-
willing; faying  they  detefted  the  revolution,  but  timor-
ous when  it  is  to  be  cruihed  in  the  germ.  But  you,  at
leafl,  who  profefs  to  enlighten  nations  by  your  writing?,
to  point  out  maxims  to  Princes  for  the  happinefs  of  their
people,  you  who  demoniirate  the  goodnefs  of  your  inten-
tions by  the  purity  of  your  principles,  by  your  zeal  in  de-
fence of  the  laws,  by  the  v/ifdom  of  your  writings,  is  it
from  you,  I  afk,  that  fuch  cries  arife? — No,  no:  {hackles
thrown  on  the  venemous  writer  circulating  his  poifonsj
will  never  give  concern  to  the  honeft  writer;  againft
laws  prohibiting  poignards  none  will  rebel  but  the  aifas-
fin.  Let  as  no  longer  be  led  away  by  the  ftale  cries  of
Liberty  of  the  Prefs,  Liberty  of  Genius;  fuch  cries  in
the  mouths  of  the  Jacobins  will  be  but  a  (hallow  cover  to
their  defigns;— fee  what  the  Sect  does  iifelf,  left  any  writ-


342  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

cr  ftould  open  the  eyes  of  the  people  by  the  expofition  of
real  truth;  wherever  the  adepts  have  acquired  dominion,
iifk  what  is  to  be  underftood  by  liberty  of  thinking,  of
fpeàking,  of  writing.  They  deftroy  not  only  the  author,
but  Teller,  and  even  buyer  of  every  book  thnt  combats
their  fyftems.  The  printing  prefl'es  of  Crapard,  the  pub-
lications of  La  Harpe,  or  the  difcourfe  of  Camille  du  Jour-

.,  are  fo  many  con  (piracies  punifhed  by  the  Pentarques,
with  exile  to  Cayenne.  It  is  high  time  for  nations  to  o-
pen  their  eyes,  and  difpel  the  illufion  of  all  this  pretended
oppreffioh  of  thought  and  genius.  If  Magiftrates  are  the
dupes  of  iuch  outcries,  the  people  are  the  victims,  and  na-
tions rauft  be  preferved  from  the  illuiîon  that  they  may
be  faved  from  the  revolution,  it  is  the  act  of  a  father  and
not  of  a  tyrant,  that  takes  from  the  hands  of  his  children
fuch  inftruments  as  may  prove  fatal  to  them.

Let  the  fophi&er  talk  of  ufeful  difcuffions.  Go  to  an-
tiquity, and  quefrion  the  Roman  fenate  why  it  drove  from
the  foil  of  the  republic  that  fwarm  of  Sophifts*  juif,  arri-
ved from  the  Grecian  fhores,  fo  expert  in  the  quibbling
arts  j  and  the  fenate  will  anfwer,  that  they  do  not  enter
into  difcuffions  to  know  whether  the  plague  is  ufeful,
that  they  haiten  to  feparate  from  their  fdlow  countrymen
whoever  has  been  tainted  with  it,  and  to  deftroy  what-
ever may  propagate  it.     Guard   the   people,   therefore,

tinft  fuch  vile  feducers;  tremble  at  the  effects  of  their
djfcouifesj  but  tear  ftill  more  the  puifons  of  their  impi-
ous and  feditious  productions.

Your  laws  pronounce  death  againft  a  traitor,  though
he  betrayed  his  confpiracy  but  by  a  fmgle  word  ;  and  a
confpiring  fophiiter  may  commune  and  habitually  con-
verle  with  all  your  lubjeéts  by  means  of  his  writings  !  he
is  in  the  midft  of  your  families;  he  inftils  his  principles
into  vour  children;  his  arguments   become  more  and

*  The  word  foph ifter  has  been  made  ufe  of  throughout  this
work,  to  diftinguifh  tbe  modern  rebels  from  the  G  eek  Philo-
fophers  of  the  ichool  of  Sophifts.  Johnion,  in  his  dictionary,
d  .lines  Sophister  as  a  difpulant ..'.  fubtle ;  an  art-

ful but  inj  h  is  the  ipecies  of  men  that  have

been  defe  s  work,  who,  confeious  of  their  own  fal-

lacy, but  acting  the  part  or  Satan  to  pervert  mankind,  mould
never  bë  confounded  with  thofe  men  of  antiquity  whofe  iys-
:  itttion  may  have  been  fallacious,  but  whofe  inten-

wete  upright,  and  who  did  not  combat  every  facred  or
fecial  principle  in  hopes  of  fubvertiog  fociety.    "Tranf.


HISTORICAL  PART.  343

more  cogent  ;  he  dwells  on  them  ;  they  are  prefented  un-
der all  the  dazzling  colors  that  a  perfidious  genius  could
invent  after  a  long  iludy  how  to  feduce  your  offspring,
lead  them  aftray,  or  ftir  them  up  to  revolt  againft  you  !
The  treafon  fpoken  by  the  Jacobin,  and  for  which  he  has
been  punimed,  may  have  made  but  a  flight  imprefaon  on
his  hearersj  but  this  labored  and  ftudied  concatenation
of  fophifms  will  make  a  deep  impreffion.  Your  laws
muft  be  inefficient  indeed  if  the  revolutionary  writer  is
not  flamped  as  the  moft  baneful  of  confpirators;  and,
Magistrate?  whoever  you  are,  you  mult  be  moll  unmindful
of  your  duty,  if  you  allow  his  writings  to  circulate  freely
through  town  and  country.

Are  you  ftill  a  ftranger  to  the  immenfe  power  that
fuch  productions  has  given  to  the  Seel?  The  revolution
has  not  been  ungrateful,  and  its  gratitude  points  out  its
progenitors.  Foiiow  the  Jacobin  to  the  pantheon;  fee
to  whom  he  has  decreed  honors,  to  whom  he  does  ho-
mage; afk  him  how  Voltaire  or  Jean  Jaques  can  have
deferved  fuch  tribute,  fuch  honors.  He  will  tell  you,  that
thofe  men  are  no  more,  but  that  their  fpirit  has  furvived
them  in  their  writings,  and  more  powerfully  combat  for
thecaufe  of  Jacobinifm  than  all  their  armed  legions. — .
Here  they  prepare  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  people  for
our  principles;  there  they  gain  over  the  public  opinion
to  our  caufe  ;  and  when  once  that  has  declared  for  us,  we
may  boldly  proceed  to  certain  triumph.  Should  fuch  hon-
ors dazzle  any  writer  for  an  inftant,  let  him  {lop  and  be-
hold the  (hades  of  the  victims  facrificed  to  the  revolution
flitting  round  the  monuments  erected  to  thefe  revolution-
ary deities;  fee  them  ghallly  and  enraged,  pafnng  from
the  urn  that  contains  the  allies  of  Voltaire  to  that  of
Rouileau  ;  hear  them  exclaim  in  bitter  reproaches, — ■
"  Be  fatiated  with  the  fumes  of  Jacobin  incenfe  !  h  is
not  on  Jacobins  that  we  call  down  vengeance  from  hea-
ven, for  you  were  our  real  murderers  !  You  are  n  >w
the  object  of  their  adoration;  but  you  were  our  firft
executioners,  you  brought  our  King  to  the  fcaffold,  you
Hill  continue  to  be  the  butchers  of  our  progeny. — Ô  ye
Idols  of  blafphemy  and  of  anarchy  !  may  their  blood,  may
our  blood,  may  all  the  blood  that  fhall  be  fpilt  by  the  bri-
gands formed  at  your  fchools,  fall  back  upon  you  !"

Ye  whom  the  God  of  fociety  has  endowed  with  ta-
lents which  you  may  turn  to  tie  detriment  or  conferva-


{44  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

tion  of  fociety,  beware  that  fuch  curfes  do  not  fall  upon
you,  flee  from  any  thing  that  may  hreed  remorfe.  Be  not
dazzled  wich  the  Jacobinical  tribute  paid  to  thefe  fophis-
ters  of  darknefs;  tney  may  have  fucceeded  in  obfcurinç
the  light  ;  it  is  your  duty  to  rend  the  cloud  afunder,  and
bear  in  triumph  the  fuudamental  truths.  The  God  who
formed  man  for  fociety  did  not  give  him  the  code  of  E-
quality  and  Liberty,  the  code  of  Rebellion  and  Anarchy.
The  God  who  fupports  fociety  by  the  wifdom  of  the  laws,
pever  abandoned  the  making  or  fan&ioning  of  thofe  laws
to  the  caprice  of  the  multitude..  The  God  who  has  point-
ed out  the  empire  and  (lability  of  the  laws  as  inherent  ta
that  fuburdination  of  the  citizens  to  the  magiftrates,  and
to  their  fovereigns,  d;d  not  create  as  many  magiftrates
and  f  wereigns  as  he  did  citizens.  The  God  that  ha?
bound  all  claffes  together  by  their  mutual  wants,  and
who,  in  confcquer.ee  of  this  diverfity  of  wants,  has  en-
dowed men  with  a  variety  of  talents  for  different  arts
and  profefîïons,  has  not  given  the  fame  rights  to  the  me-
chanic or  to  the  fhepherd  as  he  has  to  the  prince  that  is  to
prehde  over  the  ftate.  Reftore  to  thefe  fimple  and  plain
truths,  all  that  refplendency  which  has  for  a  moment  been
obfeured  by  the  fophifters  of  rebellion  j  and  the  dangers
of  the  revolution  will  foon  difappear.  Be  as  earneft  in
reftoring  the  people  to  light,  as  the  Jacobins  have  been
in  plunging  them  into  darknefs.  Reflore  them  to  their
principles  pure  and  untarnished.  There  is  no  compound-
ing with  error  ;  the  Sedt  cares  not  by  which  road  illuT
fion  may  lead  you  to  revolution,  provided  you  do  but  fall
a  victim.  Some  it  will  attack  with  anti-religious  fophifms,
while  it  tampers  with  others  by  means  of  its  antifocial
fophiftry.  To  fome  it  will  unfold  but  a  part  of  the  con-
fequences  to  be  drawn,  point  out  but  one  half  of  the  ca-
reer that  is  to  be  i un,  or,  under  pretence  of  reform,  pro-
pofe  fome  few  eflays  or  new  means  to  be  tried.  But  far  be
driven  from  us  thefe  demi-geniufes  of  demi-revolutions
with  their  long  train  of  demi-confequences  ?  This  is  the
tribe  whence  the  Se<5t  will  felect  a  La  Fayette  or  a  Neck-
er,  pu{h  them  forward  as  long  as  they  can  ferve  the  caufe,
and  then  abandon  fuch  non-entities  ;  or  thofe  open  re-
bels ftyling  themfelves  Conjliiutwnalifts,  or  thofe  others
called  (probably  through  derifion)  Monarchifts.  They
were  the  beginners  of  the  revolution,  and  are  at  this  pre-
fent  day  imbecile  enough  to  teftify  their  furprize  at  other


HISTORICAL  PART.  345

rebels  having  fhivered  a  fceptre  which  they  had  begun  by
disjointing.  Writers  of  this  fpecies,  fo  far  from  enlight-
ening the  people,  only  contribute  to  lead  them  into  the
path  of  error;  and  that  was  the  tafk  of  the  firft  revolu-
tionary adepts.

In  your  writings  beware  of  falling  into  an  error  fimi-
lar  to  that  of  a  celebrated  author,  who  thinks  he  is  ferving
the  caufe  of  monarchy  when  defcribing  religion  as  a  fruit-
lefs  ally.  How  is  itpoffible  that  he  fhould  not  better  feel
the  confequences  of  that  farcaftic  fentence  borrowed  from
JBayle  and  Rouffeau,  he  who,  in  the  midft  of  the  moft
prefling  and  moft  appofite  exhortations  to  princes  to  unite
and  combine  againfl  Jacobinifm,  forgets  himfelf  Co  far  as
to  ùyy  "  In  a  fimilar  crilis,  the  Romans  would  have  flown
**  to  arms  refolved  to  conquer  or  die,  the  primitive  Chris-
e<  tians  would  bave  Jung  hymns  to  Providence  and  rujhed
"  to  martyrdom.',  their  fucceffors  neither  die  nor  fight.*"
Moft  undoubtedly,  it  cannot  be  the  intention  of  the  au-
thor to  revive  that  contempt  which  the  Sophifters  fo  much
affect  for  Religion  ;  but  what  a  falfe  policy  to  reprcfent
that  alledged  nullity  as  inherent  to  Chriftianity  at  a  time
when  the  courage  of  nations  fhould  be  ftirred  up  againfl:
the  revolutionary  tyrants  !  Happily  it  is  not  true,  that  the
primitive  Chriftians  would  only  have  fung  hymns  to  Pro-
vidence and  ruihed  on  to  martyrdom.  The  primitive
Chriftians  were  not  ideots  ;  they  did  not  confound  the
legitimate  powers,  which  they  could  only  oppofe  by  the
courage  of  martyrs,  with  the  ufurped  power  of  a  tyrant
or  of  barbarians  that  came  to  inundate  the  empire.  They
could  conquer  or  die  under  the  ftandard  of  the  Csfars  as
manfully  as  the  Romans;  nay,  they  furpafied  thern  in  cou-
rage and  relignatiori,  and  their  apobgifts  were  well
grounded  when  they  let  the  Sophifters  at  defiance  to  point
out  a  fingle  coward  or  traitor  among  the  Chriftian  le-
gions. In  our  days  too,  did  thofe  heroic  Chriftians  of
the  Vendee  content  themfelves  with  finging  hymns,  they
whofe  courage  was  more  terrible  to  the  republicans  than
all  the  combined  forces  of  Clairfait  or  Beaulieu  r"  Where
have  we  feen  any  of  our  emigrants  that  have  diftinguHh-
ed  themfelves  by  their  piety,  chanting  hymns  to  Pro-
vidence during  the  hour  of  battle  ?  Whence  this  triple
X  x

*  Mercure  Britannique,  Vol.  I.  No.  IV.  P.  39».


34&  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

infuît  to  the  Chriftian  hero,  to  his  religion,  and  to  the
very  evidence  of  reafon?  Whence  this  affectation  of  re-
presenting the  powerful  and  active  incitements  of  Chrift-
ianity  as  ufelefs  to  governments  ?  Is  not  the  crown  of  a
ioldier  dying  for  laws  or  for  his  king,  which  his  God
commands  him  to  defend,  as  valuable  as  your  laurel-
wreath  ?  Tell  then  the  Chriftian  foldier,that  the  coward
and  the  traitor  (hall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Hea-
ven, and  fee  whether  he  will  not  conquer  or  die.  You
think  that  you  are  ferving  the  caufe  of  fociety  againft  Ja-
cobinifm  by  reprefenting  Chriftianity  as  imbecility.  Ja-
cobins would  reward  fuch  farcaftic  fentences,  becaufe
they  *forefee  their  confequences.  Are  our  writers  then  to
be  always  outwitted  by  theirs;  they  can  combine  their
efforts  againft  the  altar  and  the  throne;  and  fhall  we
never  be  able  to  defend  the  one  without  betraying  the  in-
terdis of  the  other  ?

What  can  be  the  caufe  of  fuch  imprudence,  fuch  falfe
lights  ?  Neither  do  they  ftudy  fufHciently  the  Se&  nor  its
artifices.  They  wifli  to  be  blind  to  its  power,  and  even  to
its  influence.  I  alfo  am  an  admirer  of  the  vigor  of  that
fame  writer,  who  feeks  to  ftir  up  the  courage  of  nations  ;
but  {hould  he  mifiake  the  real  caufes  of  our  misfortunes,
what  have  we  not  to  fear  from  writers  who  are  endowed
neither  with  his  knowledge  or  his  energy  ?  Will  not  the
Seel:  rejoice  to  hear  him  fay,  "  it  is  far  more  to  that  con-
"  tinental  fatalifm  than  to  the  illuminées,  that  we  are  to
"  attribute  the  lethargy  of  the  higher  orders  of  fociety?"
I  know  not  what  continental  or  infular_/i?fû/////z  can  fig-
nify.  God  forbid  that  Princes  fhould  for  an  iiiftant  be-
lieve in  it,  for  it  would  only  be  immerfing  them  {till  deep-
er in  their  lethargy.  No  efforts  are  made  againft  fatality  j
I  know,  at  leaft,  that  the  Illuminées  would  rejoice  to  fee
no  credit  given  to  their  exifting  influence;  for  the  lefs
they  fhall  be  feared  in  confequence  of  your  writings,  few-
er will  be  the  precautions  taken  to  guard  againft  them.
I  am  pofitive,  that  had  you  ftudied  one  half  of  the  arts
employed  by  the  Infmuators  to  feduce  the  higher  clafTes,
and  even  courts  themfelves,  you  would  be  the  firfttofind
a  very  different  caufe  than  fatalifm  for  the  continental
lethargy.*

*  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  author  of  the  Britijh  Mer-
cury never  wifhed  to  favor  the  Illuminées.   He  is  as  indignant


HISTORICAL  PART.  347

Far  be  from  me  the  abfurd  pretention  of  alone  enjoy-
ing the  means  of  giving  ufeful  counfels.  It  is,  on  the
contrary,  becaufe  I  with  that  the  public  fhould  be  im-
proved by  your's,  that  1  am  eager  to  fee  you  better  in-
formed of  the  real  caufe  of  all  our  misfortunes.  I  could
wifli  to  fee  a  holy  league  formed  of  fuch  men  of  talents
as  are  really  actuated  with  a  true  zeal  againft  the  revolu-
tionary errors.  My  reader  has  feen  the  baneful  effects
of  that  coalition  of  the  fophifticated  writers  of  Holbach's
Club,  of  the  Sophifters  of  the  Mafonic  and  of  the  Illu-
minized  Lodges  ;  he  has  feen  the  influence  of  their  prin-
ciples on  the  public  opinion,  and  of  opinion  on  our  mis-
fortunes; why  fhould  not  virtuous  and  learned  writers
then  unite  in  their  efforts  to  bring  back  the  public  opin-
ion and  the  people  to  the  true  principles,  by  laying  open
all  the  artifice  and  cunning  that  has  been  employed  by  the
Seel  to  feduce  them.

The  Code  has  been  explicit  on  the  means  to  be  em-
ployed for  the  fedu£tion  of  youth,  a  time  of  life  moft  ac-
ceffible  to  illufion.    Will  not  virtuous  fathers  take  upon

as  we  are  at  the  fucceiTes  of  the  inept  Phihfophifls  of  modern
republicanifm,  of  that  levolutionary  warfare  waging  againft
property  and  the  laws,  of  thofe  young  Jacobins  juft  corning
from  the  Univerfity  of  Gottinguen.  He  is  indignant  at  the
audacity  of  the  revolutionary  letters  and  of  the  northern  league,
that  is  to  fay,  of  a  company  of  Theologians,  Prcfeffors,  and  Phi-
lo fophers  offiolfiein,  who  afk  to  form  a  central  auembly,  having
under  it  fubordin^te  committees  to  form  and  direct  public  edu-
cation, without  being  under  any  control  of  government .  laws  or
religion  (P.  192).  He  would  have  fpoken  juft  as  we  have  done
of  the  Illuminées,  had  he  known  thefe  pbiio/cpbical  abfurdities
and  their  fucceflès  to  be  the  work  of  the  Seel;  that  the  youths
come  from  Gottinguen  were  juft  arriving  from  a  haunt  of  Illu-
mimfm  ;  that  the  northern  league  is  nothing  more  than  a  brant  h
of  the  German  Union  invented  by  the  Illuminée  Bahrdt:  that
the  plan  of  education  originated  with  the  lUuminee  Campe,
heretofore  pallor  and  preacher  to  the  gan  il'on  of  Potzdam.  call-
ed to  Brtinfwick,  protected  by  the  firft  minilter,  and  decora-
ted with  the  appellation  of  French  Citizen,  in  recompenie  for
what  he  has  more  particularly  written  on  the  independency  of
education. — (See  the  Univerfal  Revijion  of 'every  thing  relating
to  Schools,  Vol.  VI).  1  (hall  therefore  tepeat.  Studv  the  Seer,
ftudy  its  code,  its  hiftory  ;  ftudy  its  means  for  feducing  the
Great;  and.  fo  far  from  defpifing  the  influence  of  the  Seel,  you
will  find  the  caufe  of  that  difaftrous  lethargy  which  haa  feized
on  men  whofe  duty  it  is  to  be  moft  active,  far  better  explained
than  by  your  Fuialifm.


348  antisocial  conspiracy;

themfelves  to  difcard  from  their  children  matters  of  fufpi*
cious  characters, and  books  that  dilieminate  thefe  poifons?
Will  not  governments  take  as  much  pains  to  drive  the
adepts  from  the  pulpit,  from  the  chairs  of  fcience  and  pro-
feflorfhips,  as  we  have  ken  the  Se£t  taking  to  make  it-
felf  matter  of  education  and  to  corrupt  youth  ?  Unhappy
we,  fhould  the  reader  be  affrighted  at  the  detail  of  fucji
precautions,  while  the  Seel  attends  to  each  particularity^
and  we  have-  ken  it  as  eager  for  the  nomination  of  a
country  fchoolmailer,  as  for  the  fuccefs  of  an  adept  at
court,  or  the  nomination  of  the  general  who  is  to  com-
mand its  legions.

One  fpecies  of  illufion  appears  to  be  the  favorite  en-
gine of  Jacobinifm,  I  mean  that  theory  of  ellays  in  go-
vernment, and  thofe  demi- reforms.  No  art  has  been
more  powerfully  played  off  on  the  Englifh  nation  than
this  ;  let  the  people  be  put  on  their  guard  againft  this
illufion  ;  let  them  be  taught,  that  Fiance  alfo  began  by
ellays  and  demi-reforms  ;  I  need  not  hint  at  their  confe-
quuiccs.  If  it  be  neceflary  to  humble  the  pride  of  the
jacobin  Sophifrer,  and  blight  the  very  idea  of  that  pre-
tended happinefs  which  they  attach  to  their  fyftems,  let
the  people  learn  that  fuch  efTays  have  long  fince  been
made;  that  the  brigands  who  appeared  under  the  differ-
ent denominations  of  Lollards,  Bcgards,  followers  of  John
Wall,  of  Mailiotin,  and  of  Muncer,  all  promifed  the  fu-
preme  happinefs  of  Equality  and  Liberty;  that  it  was
perfectly  ufelefs  to  talk  to  us  of  the  Philofophy  of  a  revo-
lution that  was  nothing  more  than  the  repetition  of  the
errors  of  certain  Sects  of  which  the  barbarous  and  de-
vastating tenets  could  only  be  equalled  bv  the  horror  and
contempt  in  which  they  are  held  by  our  anceflors.  When*
under  pretence  of  arguing  on  certain  truths  the  Jacobin
feeks  to  lead  you  into  difcutfion,  guard  againft  his  (o-
phifrry,  by  anfv/erinp,  that  no  argumentation  can  be  held
with  Wei fh.au pt  or  Robefpierre;  the  fir  ft  will  retail  all
the  arguments  of  former  brigands,  the  latter  does  what
they  did;  for  if  our  modern  Jacobins  have  invented  any
thing  of  their  own,  it  is  a  little  more  artifice  and  an  un-
paralleled ferocity.  They  are  then  the  more  entitled  to
our  contempt  i.i:d  hatred.

If  every  where  encountered  by  this  two-fold  fentiment,
the  Sett  will  K>on  lofe  that  power  of  illufion  which  has
prepared  its  triumphs,  and  you  will  fee  it  Ihrinking  back


HISTORICAL  PART.  34-f)

into  its  fubterraneous  lurking  places,  the  occult  Loda^s
which  have  fo  long  iïnce  offered  it  an  afylum.  There
it  wiil  once  more  attempt  to  recruit  its  legions,  and  con-
trive plots  for  the  fubveriïon  of  the  altar,  of  the  throe,
and  of  fociety.  But  here  what  honed  citizen  can  be
blind  to  his  duty  ?  Under  whatever  name,  pretence,  or
form,  the  magistracy  may  have  thought  proper  to  tole-
rate thefe  clubs,  fubterraneous  hiding-places,  or  Lodges
of  fecret  focieties,  what  proofs  are  they  waiting  for  to
profcribe  them  all,  now  that  they  have  (cen  legions  of
confpirators  (allying  forth  from  thefe  recefTes  ?  You  who
look,  upon  yourfeives  as  entitled  to  an  honorable  excep-
tion, why  are  you  feated  there  Mill  ?  You  are  tender  of
your  perional  loyalty,  of  your  fidelity  to  your  religion  and
to  your  country,  how  can  you  make  fuch  fentiments  agree
with  your  predilection  for  Lodges  that  you  know  to  have
been  the  afylum  of  the  moil  confpiring  Se£ls  ?  Do  not
pretend  that  it  is  us,  for  it  is  the  Jacobins,  the  moit  mon-
strous chiefs  of  the  Jacobins,  their  correfpondence,  their
fpeeches,  and  all  the  archives  of  their  hiftory,  that  have
unfolded  to  you  the  immenfe  fupport  they  have  derived
from  your  myfteries  and  from  all  your  fecret  focieties-,  in
the  profecution  of  their  confpiracies  againftyàf/^/y  in  ge-
neral, againft  all  laws,  and  againft  every  altar.  In  vain
fhall  you  attempt  to  hide  it  ;  no  part  of  hiftory  can  be
better  authenticated;  thefe  confpiracies  are  proved  at  any
rate  to  have  gained  admittance  into  your  Lodges,  and  to
have  acquired  ftrength  and  numbers  from  them.  Your
particular  Lodge  may  not  be  one  of  thofe  with  whole
honor  the  Seel:  has  tampered;  we  are  willing  to  beiicve
it  ;  but  what  proofs  can  you  adduce  ?  the  Seel:  knows  too
well  how  to  clothe  perjury  in  the  garb  of  innocence — -
We  are  willing  to  believe  it,  and  that  will  be  another
motive  why  we  fh  mid  conjure  you  in  the  name  of  your
country  to  abandon  thofe  Lodges.  Your  prefence  is  on-
ly a  cloak  for  confpirators.  The  more  unblemifhed  may
be  your  character  of  honor,  the  more  will  the  confpiring
adepts  boait  of  your  name,  and  of  the  fraternity  and  in-
timacy in  which  you  live  with  them. — We  addrefs  our
complaints  to  you  yourfeives,  but  own  that  we  have  fuf-
ficient  grounds  to  addrefs  them  to  the  prince  or  to  the
fenate;  may  we  not  with  truth  denounce  you  as  demi-
citizens,  lince  by  your  oath  the  interefts  of  the  brother-
hood are  more  dear  to  you  than  thofe  of  your  fellovv-fub-


35©  antisocial  conspiracy;

jects  ?  Are  we  not  entitled  to  afk,  whether  you  are  not  a
fecret  enemy  to  every  citizen  who  has  the  intereft  of  re-
ligion and  his  country  at  heart,  fince  you  are  a  member
of  a  fecret  fociety,  under  the  cloak  of  which  a  multitude
ôf  brethren  are  confpiring  againft  our  religion  and  our
laws,  and  that  it  is  impoffible  to  diftinguifh  the  innocent
fr./m  the  guilty  ?  What  right  would  you  have  to  com-
plain if  the  fenate  and  your  prince  were  to  exclude  you
from  your  magiftracy,  or  from  every  office  that  requires
the  whole  attention  of  an  impartial  citizen,  and  on  whom
no  fufpicion  can  alight,  as  it  appears  that  your  affection
is  at  leaft  divided  between  fociety  in  general  and  your  fe-
cret focieties,  as  that  affection,  according  to  your  own
laws,  muft  be  greater  for  the  members  of  your  fecret  foci-
eties than  for  us;  fince,  infnort,  it  has  been  demonftrated,
that  a  large  portion  of  the  members  of  fecret  focieties  are
rr  reconfpirators?  In  vain  will  you  cbjedi  that  you  have  ne-
ver vvitnefled  any  thing  reprehensible  in  the  Lodges.  Were
you  only  initiated  in  the  myfteries  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  London,  know,  that  notwithftanding  all  the  exceptions
we  have  made  in  its  favor,  fufpicions  are  even  caft  upon
that  Lodge,  and  a  reviewer  thinks  himfelf  founded  in  de-
nying the  validity  of  fuch  exceptions.*  If  you  are  fo
Carelefs  of  your  reputation  as  to  remain  infenfible  to  fuch
fufpicions,  allow  me  at  leaft  to  addrefs  myfelf  to  you  in
the  name  of  all  mankind,  whofe  intercfts  you  tell  us  are  fo
dear  to  you.

No  longer  than  a  century  ago  the  remaining  part  of
Europe  was  nearly  a  ftranger  to  your  Lodges  and  their
myfteries.  You  made  it  the  baneful  prefent  ;  the  new-
erected  Lodges  have  filled  with  Jacobins,  and  from  them
the  moft  difaftrous  fcourge  that  has  ever  befallen  the  uni-
veiib  has  rufhed  forth  to  produce  thefc  terrible  effects;
you  imparted  to  them  the  myfteries  of  your  Equality  and
of  your  Liberty;  to  combine  and  prepare  them,  you  in-
troduced them  into  your  tenebrous  afyiums;  to  prepare
their  pupils,  you  taught  them  your  trials  and  your  oaths;
and  that  they  might  propagate  their  confpiracies  from
pole  to  pole,  you  lent  them  your  language,  your  fymbols,
your  figns>  your  cypher,  your  directories,  your  hierarchy,
and  all  die  regulations  for  your  invinble  correfpondence.

*  See  the  Monthly  Review,  Appendix  to  Vol.  XXXV.Page


HISTORICAL  PART.  351

The  offspring  may  have  improved  on  the  myfteries  of
their  progenitors;  but  has  not  their  conduct  been  fuchas
to  make  you  abjure  all  connection  with  them;  have  not
your  Lodges  been  fo  prophaned  as  to  make  you  haften  to
abandon  them;  is  not  the  difaftrous  fcourge  that  has
burft  from  them  a  Sufficient  ground  for  eternally  clofing
their  gates  ?  O  you,  whofe  fleets,  under  the  protection  of
heaven,  ride  triumphant  over  the  main,  difpelling  the
fleets  of  the  Sect?  O  grant  to  the  univerfe  a  victory,
perhaps  of  ftill  greater  importance.  At  the  fight  of  your
admirais  the  Sect  difappears;  drive  then  from  itsrecelTes
that  bantling  of  yours;  Show  that  if  the  abufe  of  your
myfterious  affociations  may  in  poifibility  be  fatal  to  the
univerfe,  you  are  willing  at  lead  to 'deprive  the  vtie  con-
Spirators  of  every  plea  that  can  tarniih  your  glory.  Show,
that  if  fports,  innocent  in  jour  hands,  could  grow  into  a
fcourge  in  the  hands  of  others,  you  are  not  backward  in
making  a  facririce  of  fuch  utility  to  nations.  Your  ex-
ample would  be  powerful;  and  it  is  incumbent  on  you
to  pronounce  the  anathema  on  fecret  focieties;  to  clofe
the  gates  of  the  Lodgts,  to  clofe  them  all  without  excep-
tion, nevermore  to  be  opened,  whatever  may  be  the  na-
ture of  their  myfteries.  None  can  exift  into  which  the
St£i  will  not  attempt  to  penetrate  ;  none  can  exiit  where
the  magistrate  and  honeft  citizen  can  fit  down  certain
that  the  Sect  has  not  intruded  with  its  plots  and  means
of  {'eduction.  The  more  zealous  you  may  be  for  the  pre-
servation of  our  laws,  the  lefs  will  you  be  enabled  to  fe-
cure  us  againft  the  plots  of  the  Sect;  for  though  it  fliall
ever  commune  with  you  it  will  not  lay  its  views  open  to
you  until  it  has  feducedyou.  Mafons  of  England,  what
a  fatal  gift  have  you  made  to  the  world  !  May  the  his-
torian who  (ball  write  the  annals  of  this  age,  when
Speaking  of  the  fcourge  that  has  ruihed  forth  from  the
Lodges,  conclude  by  faying,  if  England  made  the  banefij
preSent  to  the  univerfe,  it  was  alio  the  firit  to  facririce  its
own  Lodges  for  the  fafety  of  nations.

Why  ihould  not  every  honeft  Mafon  on  the  Conti-
nent addrefs  himfelf  in  terms  fimilar  to  thofe  in  which  we
addrefs  the  Engliih  brotherhood  ?  Their  prefence  would
no  longer  be  a  cloak  to  the  Myfteries  of  the  confpiring
Jacobins.  Left  to  themfelves,  they  could  no  longer  phad
the  innocence  of  their  Myfteries.  If  the  Magiitrates
treated  them  with  all  the  Severity  of  the  law,  he  would  not


35*  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY}

have  to  fear  the  protefts  of  honeft  citizens.  Then  would
every  thing  denote  that  the  time  was  come  to  ftrilce  all
fecret  focieties  with  the  anathema  of  the  laws;  then
would  all  the  productions  of  the  Sect  be  fupprefTed,  or
thrown  away  with  indignation  by  every  clafs  of  citizens.
True  principles  only  would  be  taught,  and  thefe  would
difcard  from  the  minds  of  the  people  all  thofe  diforgani-
zing  errors.  The  Seel:  once  diflodged  from  its  lurking
place?, truth  and  light  would  difpel  that  warfare  of  illufion,
error,  and  dapkru-fs,  which,  waged  by  the  Sophiftefs  of
Jacobinifm,  prepares  the  way  for  the  triumphant  entry  of
its  deflrroying  brigands.

But  that  long-expected  day,  that  day  of  devaluation
and  plunder  foretold  in  the  Myfteries,  has  dawned.  In
darknefs  have  the  adepts  multiplied,  and  the  legions  of
the  Sect  have  Cdlied  forth.  They  now  wage  the  war  of
pikes  and  deftructJon,  they  wave  the  firebrands  of  revo-
lution, but  have  not  abandoned  the  warfare  of  iMufion.— -
Sovereigns  and  Miniiters  of  Empires!  It  behoves  you
to  item  the  torrent  of  thefe  men  of  blood  by  the  marfhal-
led  band  of  heroes  whom  you  command.  I  do  not  pre-
tend to  Hep  over  the  threshold  of  the  chamber  where  our
warriors  kt  in  council  to  deliberate  on  the  means  of  van-
quiihing  the  Sect  in  the  field  of  battle.  But,  to  enfure
the  fuccefs  of  your  valorous  efforts,  may  we  intrude  on
your  wifdom  to  represent  that  force  fbould  not  attrait
your  entire  attention  ?  The  Jacobin  is  no  common  ene-
my. He  wages  a  war  of  Seel,  of  profelytifm  againfc  you  ;
and  Sects  are  not  to  be  vanquished  by  the  fame  arms  as
warriors  waging  a  glorious  war,  or  brigands  rufhing
forth  from  their  ungrateful  fhores  in  queft  of  pillage  and
booty.  The  feat  of  conflicf  lies  in  opinions.  The  Jaco-
bin lias  all  the  enthufiafm  of  the  Seébary,  and  has  alio  the
force  of  arms  ;  that  you  may  overpower  his  arms,  you
ftiould  know  the  object  of  his  deliriu-n.

I  began  by  declaring,  and  think  I  have  eftablifhed  the
pofition,  that  in  this  warfare  of  pikes  and  firebrands  the
Seat  fends  forth  its  legions  to  ihiver  the  fcepter,  not  to
fight  the  power;  it  has  not  promifed  to  its  adepts  the
crowns  of  Princes,  Kings,  and  Emperors,  but  has  requi-
red and  bound  thofe  adepts  by  an  oath  to  deftroy  them  all.
In  the  Sovereign  it  is  not  the  perfon  that  they  hate  ;  but
it  is  the  chief,  the  Minifter  of  the  Social  Order.  The
war  ij;  wages  againfi  a  nation  is  of  a  fimrlar  complexion  ;


HISTORICAL  PART.  35^

it  is  that  war  of  opinion,  which  hates,  not  the  Englifh.
man,  but  the  laws  of  the  Englifh,  which  abominates  not
the  German,  the  Spaniard,  or  the  Italian,  but  the  God,
the  Altars,  the  Thrones,  the  Senates  of  the  German,  the
Spaniard,  or  the  Italian,  in  (hort,  of  every  people.  Do
not  fuffer  yourfelf  to  be  mifled  ;  the  Pentarques  will  cer-
tainly attempt  to  warp  thefe  plans  and  plots  of  the  Se£t,
and  make  them  fubfervient  to  their  own  ambition;  but
have  not  the  myfteries  taught  us,  that  the  elevation  of  an
Orleans,  a  Barras,  or  a  Rewbel  to  the  throne,  never  en-
tered the  mind  of  the  adepts  when  they  murdered  their
lawful  Sovereign  ?  'It  may  fupport  its  tyrannic  Pen-
tarques in  the  deftruclion  of  kings  and  governments,  but
it  will  crufh  thefe  tyrants  in  their  turn,  when  they  mall
have  completed  the  deflruclion  of  fociety.  It  is  not  a
new  Empire  that  they  are  feeking  to  eftablilh;  it  is  at
the  annihilation  of  every  Empire,  of  all  order,  rank,  dis-
tinction, property,  and  focial  tie,  that  they  aim.  Such  is
the  Ultimate  View  of  its  myfteries  of  Equality  and  Li-
berty. Such  is  that  reign  of  anarchy  and  ablblute  inde-r
pendence,  proclaimed  in  the  fubterraneous  lurking-places,
under  the  appellations  of  patriarchal  reign,  of  the  reign  of
Reafon  and  of  Nature,

Sovereigns,  Minifters,  You  who  watch  for  the  fafety
of  the  fubje£t,  !  Is  it  clear  to  you  why  we  (o  much  in  lilt
on  this  general  and  predominating  hatred  as  the  fole  prin-
ciple and  object:  of  this  terrible  war  ?  Becaufe  it  imme-
diately points  out  that  it  behoves  you  to  combat  this  re-
lentlels  foe  by  an  ardor  and  zeal  for  the  univerfal  main-
tenance of  focial  order;  becaufe  it  is  now  more  than  ever
incumbent  on  you  to  caft  afide  all  ideas  of  perfonal  in-
terest, that  might  counteract  the  general  effort  ;  becaufe,
were  it  poffible  that  the  interefts  of  the  Sect  could  for  a
moment  coincide  with  yours,  it  would  be  only  a  duty  that
you  would  fulfil  in  fufpending  thofe  mutual  refent'ments
or  national  jealoufies  that  have  but  too  long  nurtured  en^
mities  and  bloodfh'id;  becaufe  much  woe  will  befal  you,
if  you  be  imprudent  enough  to  think  but  for  an  inftant
than  you  can  either  make  the  principles  or  the  legions  of
the  Sect  the  instruments  of  your  vengeance,  or  of  your
perfonal  views;  for  the  powers  you  put  in  motion  Ihall
{bon  fall  back  upon  you.

I  am  not  one  of  thofe  who  thought  that  they  could
trace  fuch  a  kind  of  policy  in  the  firft  motions  of  the

Y  y


354  antisocial  conspiracy;

French  revolution,  pretending  that  foreign  powers  had
abetted  the  Jacobins  with  a  view,  if  not  to  crufli,  at  leaft
to  weaken  the  ancient  and  powerful  fabric  of  the  French
monarchy.    I  have  probed  the  ftrength  of  the  Se£t  when
it  rufhed  from  its  dens.    But  let  it  not  be  overlooked  by
hiftory;  let  the  terrible  example  of  that  man  who  was
held  one  as  one  of  the  greateir.  politicians  of  the  age,  be
ever  prefent  to  the  eyes  of  fovereigns.    The  Seel:  began
to  demonfrrate  the  firft  elements  of  its  Code  of  Equality,
Liberty,  and  Sovereignty  of  the  People;  baneful  policy
ordered  La  Fayette,  D'Eftaing,  and  Rochambeau,  to  pro-
ceed to  the  fuccor  of  a  colony   afTerting  its  fovereignty
againft  its  mother  country.    I  do  not  pretend  to  difcuis
the  rights  of  London  or  of  Philadelphia  ;  but  let  the  mi-
nifter,  the  politician  Vergennes  rife  from  his    grave,  he
who  in  America  would  make,  and  in  Holland  abet,  revo-
lutions of  the  people  equal  and  free;  let  him  look  to  the
throne,  or  feek  the  (bvereign  whole  intereft  he  thought
'  to  ferve  when  ufmg  the  Seci  as  an  engine  of  ftate  !  !  Let
the  miniiler  of  Joleph  IL  \L  mean,  Mercy  D'Argenteau,
come  forth  ;  let  him  behold  to  what  an  end  the  fervices
of  thatfovereign  populace  would  lead  which  he  was  about
to  affemble  in  Brabant,  or  the  fervices  or  thofe  pretended
friends  to  the  public  fafety,  in  other  words,  of  the  emijfti-
ries  of  the  Sect,  already  omnipotent  in  Paris,  or  of  thofe
Jacobins  that  he  would  receive  and  fupport,  that  he  might
opprefs  through  the  means  of  anarchy.*    No,  the  Seel
that  has  fworn  to  (hiver  every  fceptre  will  not  avenge
any  quarrel  of  your's,  or  prove  a  fupport  in  danger. — >
JBaniih  then  every  idea  of  alliance  or  union  with  its  prin-
ciples and  means  !   it  can  never  lole  fight  of  its  Ultimate
End;  and  if  it  fhould  afFedt,  to  make  a  common  caufe
with  you  in  the  annihilation  of  the  throne  that  gives  you
umbrage,  it  will  only  be  that  it  may  find  you  Handing
alone  and  deftitute  of  allies  when  it  fhall  turn  back  upon
you.

To  renounce  fuch  temporary  and  difaftrous  fervices
can  be  no  great  faenhce.  \yhen  the  common  enemy  of
fociety  rears  its  head,  is  it  not  the  duty  of  the  chiefs  of  fo-
ciety  to  forget  all  private  quarrels,  and  unite  in  combat-
ing lo  formidable  a  foe  ?  Every  ftep  gained  againft  it,

*  See  Letters  on  the  Affairs  of  the  A uftrian  Netherlands»
Let.  II.  P.  31.

O


HISTORICAL  PART.

"will  be  a  flep  gained  for  yourfelf,  for  your  people,  and  for
that  portion  of  fociety  over  which  you  prefide.  Still  far-
ther from  your  mind  be  all  thofe  ideas  of  cold  economy,
calculating  the;  facrifices  or  efforts  you  will  have  to  make,
or  the  indemnities  you  may  claim  !  When  the  houfe  that
joins  your  palace  is  in  flames,  do  you  think  yourfelf  fafe  be-
cause you  have  not  contributed  to  the  conflagration  ?  Or
do  you  enquire  what  reward  is  offered  for  extinguishing
the  flames?  More  wildly  avaricious,  would  you  think  of
pillaging  that  houfe  while  the  flames  were  communicating
to  your  own  ?  Save  the  univerfe,  and  you  ùve  your  own
empire.  Every  throne  beat  down  by  the  Jacobin,  re-
duces an  obftacle  that  he  has  to  encounter  in  the  attack
of  yours.  Will  the  arfenals  he  fhall  pillage,  will  the  re-
quifitions  of  men,  and  legions  raifed,  in  the  newly  con-
quered ftates,  enfure  the  indemnities  you  afk  ;  or  do  you
expect,  by  complacency,  flaltery,  and  meannefs,  to  have
an  exception  made  in  your  favor  ?  Can  you  hope  to  fee
the  Pentarques  always  preferving  their  neutrality  in  your
regard,  becaufe  for  the  moment  they  are  pleafed  not  to
demand  any  farther  facrifices  from  you  ?  Or,  when  you
defert  the  common  caufe,  will  you  ground  your  fecurity
on  treaties  of  peace,  or  even  on  treaties  of  alliance  offen-
fiveand  defenlive  ?  O  virtue  !  what  defertion  of  the  com-
mon caufe  !  O  (hame  !  O  cowardice  !  No,  the  very  u'ca
of  fuch  treaties  could  never  have  entered  your  mind,  had
you  been  acquainted  wiih  the  Seel:  that  propofts  them.
You  have  figned  them  ;  but  you  do  not  enjoy  peace,  not
even  a  neutrality.  You  are  its  flave.  You  are  only  the
mouth-piece  of  its  imperious  dictates,  until  the  Seel:  fhall
choofe  to  llrip  you  of  even  the  femblance  of  authority —
You  will  tell  us,  perhaps,  that  you  have  been  neuter  in
the  conteft  j  that  is  to  fay,  you  have  not  dared  to  attack
the  Jacobin  that  only  waits  to  drag  you  into  flavery  till
he  fhall  have  cruihed  thofe  with  whom  you  fhould  have
leagued,  and  who  could  have  defended  you  or  avenged
your  death. — You  have  lived  in  peace  with  the  common
enemy  of  fociety  !  You  have  fworn  to  abandon  fociety  to
be  butchered,  thrones  to  be  annihilated  and  iceptres  to  be
fhivered  ;  and  this  without  ihowjng  the  leatr.  refifrance.
— Have  you  made  treaties  of  alliance?  then  you  have
fworn  to  fupport  the  deftroying  hordes,  and  to  contribute
towards  the  deft ruclion  and  devaluation  of  fociety.

You  are  fenlible  as  we  are  of  the  fhame,  of  the  igno-


355


356  antisocial  conspiracy;

miny,  of  fuch-a-neutrality,  peace,  or  alliance.— But  a  fa*
perior  force  commands.  .  .  .  Then  fay  that  you  are  van*
quiftied,  that  you  are  a  flave  to  the  Se£t,  and  we  (hall
then  aik,  if  on  no  occafion  a  valiant  death  be  preferable
to  fiavery  ?  Is  that  throne  faved,  around  which  you  ftill
hover,  by  permiffion  of  the  Seel:,  merely  as  the  mouth-
piece of  its  commands  ?  Are  your  people  faved,  who  are
obliged  to  fully  their  hands  with  the  crimes  inherent  to
Jacobins  ?  Is  that  Have  free,  who,  chained  to  the  bench
of  the  gallies,  can  only  handle  his  oars  in  the  fervice  of  a
pirate  ?  If  you  itill  preferve  any  glimmerings  of  Liberty,
if  your  ftrength  be  not  entirely  exhaufted,  rife,  Oh  !  rife
once  more,  and  fight  the  battles  of  fociety  ! — Could  you
ftill  be  lead  aftray  by  that  flitting  femblance  of  authority
which  the  Seel  has  allowed  you,  hearken  to  Jean  de  Brie,
propofing  in  the  name  of  the  S  ear,  in  the  midft  ofitsle-
gillators,  to  raife  a  legion  of  twelve  hundred  ajfajjins^  and
to  fend  them,  not  to  kill  one  king,  but  to  murder  every
king!  Did  not  thofe  iegifiators  announce  to  you  in  terms
fufHciently  clear  the  fate  which  they  intended  for  you  and
your  people,  when  they  declared  that  they  vto\i\<\  frater-
nize  wi  h  every  nation  that  wifhed  to  (hake  off  its  laws
or  rife  againfl:  its  m  agi  ft  rates  and  fovereign  ?*  Would
you  wifh  to  perfuade  yourfelf  that  there  exifts  a  iingle
king  who  is  not  comprehended  within  the  revolutionary
profcription,  go  and  affift  at  the  annual  celebration  of  the
feftival  held  by  the  Se£t  in  honor  of  the  murderers  of
their  king;  go  and  hearken  to  their  conftituted  authori-
ties, and  to  the  ambaffadors  whom  they  fend  to  the  neu-
tral or  allied  Powers,  all  folemnly  f wearing  the  oath  of
hatred  to  royalty.  You  have  feen  the  adepts  teaching  in
the  univerfities,  that  but  a  few  more  years  will  elapfe  be-
fore the  lait  myfteries  of  the  Seel:  ihall  be  accomplished  ;
then  neither  king  nor  magiftrate  fhall  exift,  nor  a  fingle
nation,  country,  or  fociety  governed  by  laws.  And  with
fuch  a  profpeft  before  you,  do  you  ftill  hefitate  at  throw-
ing afide  petty  jealouhes  and  perfonal  interefts  ?  Shall
pretentions,  miirrufts,  and  enmities,  between  king  and
king,  or  nation  and  nation,  difunite  you,  when  fociery
çalk  upon  you  for  the  dstfence  not  only  of  your  own  crown
but  of  every  crown,  not -only  of  your  own  nation  but  of
every  nation  wherever  laws  are  recognized  ?

*  Decree  of  the  9th  November,  179*.


HISTORICAL  PART.

It  is  not  yet  too  late.  Nations  are  {till  more  powerful
than  the  Sect;  let  then  every  nation  unite  ;  let  their  Icings,
their  fenates,  their  people,  join  in  the  commun  caufe;  let
every  man  living  in  the  ftate  of  fociety  confider  the  war-
fare waged  by  the  Se£t  againft  fociety  and  property  as
aimed  at  his  own  perfon.  Shall  the  heart  of  the  Jacobin
alone  be  inflamed  by  the  fire  of  enthufiafn  ?  Shall  the
defolation  of  your  country,  the  destruction  of  your  altars,
of  your  laws,  of  your  fortunes,  the  devaluation  of  your
towns  and  manfions,  the  tearing  away  of  your  children,
not  roufe  you  from  your  lethargy  ?  Shall  not  fuch  fights
infpire  you  with  courage,  are  ihey  not  inducements  for
facrifices  as  powerful  atleaft  as  the  enthuliaf  n  of  delirium
in  the  Jacobin  i  Shall  it  (till  continue  to  be  faid,  that  the
Brigands  alone  know  the  power  and  ftrength  of  union  ?
Kvery  where  they  are  one;  they  have  but  one  object  in
view;  they  all  ferve  but  one  and  the  fame  caufe;  they  are
brethren  wherever  they  meet,  merely  becaufe  they  uni-
verfally  aim  at  the  destruction  of  the  focial  order.  May
chiefs  of  nations  then  unite  in  one  common  tie  of  affec-
tion; for  it  is  the  common  intereit  of  all  and  each  of
them  to  preferve  that  focial  order.  Such  would  be  my
definition  of  a  war  or  zeal  for  fociety,  a  war  entirely  cii-
rected  againft  the  Sect,  and  the  only  means  of  depriving
it  of  thof;  refources  which  it  may  have  but  too  plentiful-
ly drawn  from  politicians  hacknied  in  wars  of  vengeance,
jealoufy,  and  ambition,  but  little  accultomed  to  the  idea  of
i'uch  facrifices  as  wars  for  the  general  intereft  of  fociety
may  require.

When  I  thus  wifh  to  ftir  up  ail  nations  to  make  but
one  power,  but  one  nation  in  the  common  caufe;  when  I
thus  wiih  to  fee  them  all  actuated  by  the  fame  zeal  and  ar-
dor for  combating  the  Sect;  the  reader  may  be  tempted
to  afk  me,  what  is  become  of  the  war  of  humanity,  of
felf-prefervation,  that  I  wifhed  to  fee  oppofed  to  that  war-
fare of  fury,  destruction,  and  of  fanguinary  rage  againft
fociety? — Doubtlefs,  it  mult  afflict  me  thus  to  found  the
general  alarm,  which  calls  your  embattled  legions  into  the
field  of  Mars;  but  when  we  behold  thole  of  die  Seét  nur-
tured on  blood  and  carnage;  when  thoufands  and  hun-
dreds of  thoufands  of  citizens,  whole  fluggard  tranquilli-
ty and  averlion  to  refiftance  could  not  fave  them  from  fall-
ing victims;  when  women,  aged  parents,  and  even  chil-
dren, have  been  butchered  fo  recently  in  the  mountains


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

of  Switzerland,  juft  as  they  had  been  before  in  the  fields
of"  La  Vendée,  and  in  divers  parts  of  France  ;  when  in  eve-
ry country  into  which  the  Seel  can  penetrate,  the  inha-
bitants mult  either  bend  the  knee  to  adore  the  idol,  or  per-
ifh  beneath  the  piker,;  who  will  be  the  true  friend  to  hu-
manity?  Will  that  man  fet  himfelf  down  for  a  friend  to
humanity,  and  as  having  preferved  fociety,  who  would  let
the  armies  of  the  Sect  fucceilively  proceed  from  Brabant
into  Holland,  from  Savoy  into  Switzerland,  from  Pied-
mont into  the  Milanois,  and  from  thence  to  Rome,  eve-
ry where  overturning  focial  order,  becaufe  the  Sect  eve-
ry where  met  but  with  a  feeble  and  partial  refinance?—
Which  then  {hall  be  the  true  friend  to  humanity,  the  man
who  permits  the  fcourge  to  extend  and  ravage  all  Europe,
or  he  who  excites  you  to  crufh  the  germ  of  fuch  horrors  ?
Will  the  preferver  of  your  life  be  the  man  who,  fearing
to  probe  your  wound,  (hall  let  mortification  engender  in
your  fl --in;  or  he  who,  employing  the  cauftic  or  the  blade$
ihall  confume  or  amputate  the  decayed  part  to  preferve
the  body?   Had  the  counfellors  of  fuch  a  cruel  humanity
forefeen  that  a  Sect,  whofe  empire  is  terror,  whofe  means
are  thofe  of  brigands  and  affaffins,  was  not  to  be  over-
powered by  their  perfidious  complaifance,  what  horrors,
and  what  rivers  of  blood,  would  have  been  fpared.  What
numberlefs  citizens  has  that  reign  of  terror  chained  to  the
ftandards  of  the  Seel,  citizens  even  who  abhorred  it!—
And  what  numbers  would  have  joined  your  ftandard,  in
defiance  of  the  reign  of  terror,  had  they  feen  you  Waging
a  war  againft  the  Seél,  and  not  a  war  of  ambition.  I  ne-
ver affiired  at  the  councils  of  princes,  and  am  willing  to
believe  that  my  fellow-countrymen  have  formed  an  erro-
neous judgment,  and  that  the  reports  of  partitioning  and
of  ambitious  views  may   even  have  originated  with  the
Sect,  fince  it  acquires  fuch  empire  through  its  means;  that
error  has  recruited  the  ranks  of  the  Se<5t  with  foldiers  whofe
courage  and  lives  Would  have   been  at  your  difpofal,  had
you  found   means  of  convincing   them  that  you  had  fled
to  armsfolely  to  vindicate  the  caufe  of  monarchy,  of  their
religion,  and  of  their  laws;  had  they  not  been  led  to  think,
that  between  two  enemies  they   were  obliged  to  repulfe
that  which  was  coming,  not  to  defend  them,  but  to  pro-
fit by  their  diiîcniions,  and  deliver  up  their  country  to  pill-
age, or  make  them  fhare  the  fate  of  Venice  or  Poland  ! — .
Deprive  the  Jacobins  of  this  vain  pretext;  let  every  peo-


HISTORICAL  PART.  359

pie  that  groans  under  the  bondage  of  the  Se&  learn  from
your  candid  declarations,  fupported  by  your  deeds,  that
you  only  come  as  their  faviour  and  liberator,  that  your
legions  have  no  other  obje£t  in  view  than  the  reftoring
ofthem  to  the  bleflings  of  fecial  order.
.  Bat  whither  am  I  wandering,  and  what  was  I  about  to
promit  ?  Shall  the  fate  of  my  country,  the  deftiny  of  em-
pires, folely  depend  on  the  ftrength  of  armies  ?  There  is
a  war  far  more  terrible  than  that  of  brigands,  which  the
Seel  wages  againft  us.  The  amazing  progreis  of  impi-
ety, the  corruption  of  morals,  and  general  apoftacy  of  an
age  ftvling  iifelf  the  age  of  Philofophy  ;  thefe  are  the  real
arms  of  the  Seel,  the  grand  fource  of  all  misfortunes.  Ye
who  may  be  affrighted  at  thefe  truths  became  thev  may
affeâ  you  moie  particularly,  turn  back  to  the  caufes  of
our  misfortunes,  and  you  will  trace  them  all  to  this  apos-
tacy.

Infuriate  as  a  demoniac  of  blafphemy,  a  difaftrous  So-
phifter  exclaimed,  I  will  not  ferve,  my  Reaf  m  mail   be
free.    The  God  of  Revelation  may  perfecute  me,  but  I
will  perfecute  him;  I  will  raife  a  fchool  againft  him,  I  will
furround  myfelf  withconfpiring  adepts,  i  will  fay  to  them
Cru/])  the  IVretcb — Crufh  J —  C — .     This  fchool  was
eftablifhed  on  the  earth  ;  kings  and  great  men  applauded
the  doctrines  of  this  demoniac;  they  relifhed  thembecaufe
they  flattered  and  unbridled  their  paffions.   This  was  the
fir  ft  ftep  towards  the  revolution.     Do  not  come  and
plague  me  with  idle  reprefentations;  turn  to  the  archives
of  the  impious  man  whom  thou  haft  idolized;  there  are
my  proofs.  Princes,  Nobles,  Lords  or  Knights,  fuch  was
trie  crime,  I  will  not  fay  of  each  of  you  in  particular,  but
fo  predominant  among  you,  that  I  may  in  feme  fort  call
it  the  crime  of  your  corps.     The  minifters  of  that  God
whom  you  abandoned  admonifhed  you  of  the  fcourges
with  which  apoftates  are  threatened,  and  told  you  that
your  example  would  be  fatal  to  your  people  as  well  as  to
yourfelves.    Do  you  remember  how  their  menaces  were
received  ?  Attend  for  a  moment  to  the  a£ts  of  that  fchool
which  you  fetj  up  in  oppofition  to  us.     Heaven,  in  its
wrath,  has  permitted   the  offspring  of  the  fophifte.-   to
multiply  like  unto  the  locufts.  They  thought  themfclves
the  Gods  of  Reafon;  they  alfo  raifed  their  voices,  declar-
ing that  they  would  not  ferve;  but,  turning  their  eyes  to-
ward you,  they  added,  oppreflion  and  tyranny  has  placed


36O  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

men  like  unto  us  upon  thrones;  chance  of  birth  has  made
men  Nobles  and  Grandees  who  are  not  fo  good  as  our-'
felves.  They  faid  it;  and  that  Liberty  which  you  avert-
ed againft  your  God,  when  ftimulated  by  your  paffions,
they  now  aftert  againft  you  at  the  inftigation  of  their  pride.
■ — They  con/pire  againft  the  throne  and  the  nobility  that
furrounds  it.  Abandoned  to  your  blindnefs,  you  courte-
ously received  this  cloud  of  fophifters,  juft  as  you  had  re-
ceived their  progenitor. — The  priefts  of  the  living  God
came  once  more  and  admonifhed  you,  that  this  fchool  of
impiety  would  not  only  operate  the  ruin  of  the  church,
but  fweep  away  into  the  common  mafs  of  ruin  Kings,
Princes,  Laws,  and  Magiftrates.  Reaibn  called  as  loudly
on  you  as  your  priefts;  but  you  had  turned  away  from
Revelation,  and  you  refufed  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of
reafon.

The  God  whom  you  daily  irritated  by  your  apoftacy
permitted  this  cloud  of  Sophifters  to  defcend  into  the  a-
byfs  of  the  Lodges,  and  there,  under  pretence  of  Mafonic
purfuits,  the  occult  adepts  combined  their  confpiracies
againft  the  altar,  the  throne,  and  all  diftinclions,  with  thofo
of  the  pretended  fages  whofe  dupes  you  have  been.  The
adepts  now  multiplied  as  fad  as  the  Sophifters.— ■-Under
the  aufpices  of  another  pretended  Sage,  who  could  im*.
prove  on  every  fpecies  of  impiety  and  blafphemy,  a  new
Sedt  is  foftered  under  the  name  of  Illuminées. — Thefe,
like  the  hero  of  your  apoftacy,  fwore  to  cru(h  Chrift,  as
his  offspring  fwore  to  cruih  you  yourfelves  ;  and  in  com-
mon with  all  brigands,  fwore  to  annihilate  the  empire  of
the  laws. — Such  has  been  the  fruit  of  that  Philofophifm
which  you  would  fo  obftinately  portray  as  true  wifdom.
At  length  to  diflipat.  the  illufion,  and  to  call  you  back  to
the  faith  of  his  Gofpd,  far  more  than  to  avenge  himfelf,
what  has  your  God  done?  He  has  filenced  his  prophets
and  the  doctors  of  his  law;  he  has  faid  to  them,  "Dis-
continue thofe  leiTons  with  which  you  combat  the  deliri-
um of  thefe  impious  men,  They  raife  their  Reafon  up
againft  me  ;  it  is  my  Son  whom  they  have  fworn  to  crufh.
They  wiih  to  reign  alone  over  that  people.  They  have  ta-
ken upon  themfelves  the  important  talkofleading  them  to
true  happinefs  ;  I  will  let  them  a£t;  I  abandon  that  peo-
ple to  the  wifdom  of  their  new  teachers.  You,  my  priefts
and  pontifFs,  fly  from  amidft  them,  carry  away  with  you
the  Goipel  of  rny  Son.    Let  their  iagcs  beat  down  hi3


HISTORICAL  PART.  363

altars  ;  let  them  raifc  trophies  in  his  temples  to  their  he-
roes who  had  fworn  to  erufti  him;  and  let  that  people
proceed  under  the  fole  direction  of  the  light  of  their  Rea-
fon.  Begone,  retire;  together  with  my  Son  I  abandon
both  the  people  and  their  grandees  to  their  fages  ;  let
thofe  fages  be  their  leaders,  fince  they  turn  their  backs
upon  me  and  my  Son."

Frenchmen,  the  God  of  your  forefathers  has  thus  fpo-
ken.     Oh,  how  deeply  and  eafily  can  he  confound  the
prudence  of  prudent  men  and  the  xvifdom  of  fages  !    Go  ;
proceed  through  that  vaft  empire  which  he  has  abandon-
ed to  your  pretended  Philofophy.    Hispriefts  have  aban-
doned it;  his  altars  are  beaten  down;  his  gofpel  is  no
longer  to  be  found.    Now  calculate  the  crimes  and  difas-
ters  !  !   Go  and  wander  among  thofe  ruins,  behold  thofe
mazes  and  fhapelefs  heaps  of  rubbiih.  Afk  of  the  people,
what  is  become  of  thofe  millions  of  citizens  that  former-
ly thronged  in  their  towns  and  fields;  inquire  what  in-
undation of  Vandals  has  devastated  their  land.    What  has
been  the  fate  of  that  town,  that  proudly  towered  in  mag-
nificent palaces,  or  thofe  other  towns,  the  modern  rivals
of  ancient  Tyre  ?    By  what  means  have  thofe  riches
dwindled  into  nothing  that  were  annually  brought  from
the  Ihores  of  the  ealT,  or  the  Ifles  of  the  weft.  Thofe  notes
of  mirth,  thofe  rural  fongs,  why  have  they  givW  place  to
groans  and  complaints  ?   Why  is  that  brow,  formerly  the   •
ieat  of  content  now  knitted  and  downcaft  with   terror  ;
and  why  thofe  fighs,  that  even  the  fear  of  being   heard
cannot  fupprefs  !   All  you   inhabitants  of  France,  who
were  formerly  i'o  happy  under  the  laws  of  your  forefa-
thers, but  at  prefent  victims  to  all  the  horrors  of  the  re-
volution, have  you   not  among  ye  its   Philofophers,  the
wifdom  of  its  Deifts,  of  its  Atheifts,  and  of  its  Philan-
thropists ?   And  you  in  particular,  the  difciples,  and  for  a
long  time  the  zealous  protestors  of  all  thefe  revolutiona-
ry fages,  how  comes  it  to  pais  that  you  are  now  difperfed
on  the  face  of  all  Europe,  poor  and  deferted  ?  Is  not  that
Philofophy  which  you  fo  much  idolized  now  triumphant
in  the  very  centre  of  its  empire?

Ah,  how  bitter  would  be  fuch  lan<niaG;e  in  the  mouth
of  a  God  but  too  well  revenged  !  Unhappy  victims  of
your  confidence  in  thefc  falfe  fages  !  You  now  conceive
how  terrible  it  is  to  be  abandoned  to  the  empire  of  im-
piety !  Confefs  at  laft,  that  your  credulity,  your  confi-
Z  z


3^2  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

dence  in  thefe  heroes  of  Sophiftry  has  been  difaftrous  in-
deed !  They  promifed  you  a  revolution  of  wifdom,  of
light,  of  yirtue  ;  and  they  have  curfed  you  with  a  revo-
lution of  delirium,  extravagance  and  wickednefs.  They
promifed  you  a  levolution  of  happinefs,  Equality,  Li-
berty, of  the  golden  age  ;  and  they  have  brought  down
upon  you  the  mod  frightful  revolution  that  a  God,  juft-
\y  irritated  by  the  pride  and  wickednefs  of  men,  has  ever
poured  down  upon  the  earth.  Such  is  the  end  of  all  that
impiety  which  it  has  pleafcd  you  to  ftyle  Pbilofophy.

Never  let  any  peribn  pretend  to  dilpute  the  prime
caùfe  of  all  our  misfortunes.  Voltaire  and  RouiTeau  are
the  heroes  of  your  revolution,  as  they  were  of  your  Pbi-
Iofophifm.  It  is  now  time  to  diflipate  the  illufion,  if  you
with  to  iee  the  (courge  ceafe,  and  preferve  yourfelf  from
a  iimilar  danger  in  future.  You  muft  work  a  revolution
that  will  be  the  death-blow  to  that  philofophifm  of  impi-
ety, if  you  wifli  tu  appeafethe  God  who  has  only  permit-
ted this  fcourge  to  bcfal  man  to  avenge  his  Son.  It  is  not
by  perhffing  in  the  outrage,  by  leaving  your  hearts  a
prey  to  the  prime  caufe  of  all  our  misfortunes,  that  you
will  find  the  termination  of  them.  The  great  crime  of
the  Jacobin  is  his  impiety;  his  great  ftrength  rcfts  in
yours.  The  powers  of  hell  will  fécond  him  when  he
combats  a  gain  it  Chritt;  and  will  heaven,  think  ye,  de-
■  elare  for  you,  fo  long  as  your  morals  and  your  faith  ihall
declare  you  an  enemy  to  the  Son  of  God  ?  Bv  your  im-
piety you  become  the  brother  of  the  Jacobin.  You  are  a
jacobin  of  the  revolution  againft  the  altar  j  and  it  is  not
by  periiiting  in  this  hatred  againft  the  altar,  that  yru  will
appeafe  the  God  who  avenges  the  altar  by  the  revolution
annihilating  our  thrones  and  our  laws.

Such  is  the  lait  and  moil  important  lefTon'that  we  are
to  derive  from  thofe  feourges  that  have  befallen  us  in  the
fame  gradation  as  the  fophifters  of  impiety,  the  fophifters
of  rebellion,  the  fophifters  of  anarchy  confpired. — O  that
•I  may  have  Succeeded,  when  terminating  thefe  Memoirs,
in  engraving  it  deeply  on  the  minds  of  my  readers  !  May
it  more  particularly  contribute  to  pave  the  way  for  the
restoration  of  religion,  of  the  laws,  and  of  happinefs  in  my
country  ! — May  the  refearcfres  that  I  have  made  to  disco-
ver the  caufes  of  the  revolution,  be  ferviceablc  to  nations
that  may  ft  ill  preferve  therrrfelves,  or  rid  themfelves  of
ftxrh  difafters! — Then  will  that  God  who  has  fup ported
me  in  my  puifuit,  have  blcfled  aiv  labors  with  an  ample
recompence.


HISTORICAL  CART.


HP


N  O  i

For  the  End  of  Volume  IF.  of  the  Memoirs  ilhiftrating
the  Hijlory  of  Jacobinifm.


ON  publishing  the  Tranflation  of  the  Firft  Volume  of
thefe  Memoirs,  I  declared  that  I  confidered  myfelf
as  only  fulfilling  a  duty  in  laying  open  fo  excellent  a  work
to  thofe  of  my  countrymen  who  were  not  fufficiently  vers-
ed in  the  French  language  to  read  the  original.  The  ob-
ject of  the  Author  throughout  has  been  to  fhew  the  uni-
verlal  havock  and  defolation  with  which  thefe  depredato-
ry Sects  have  threatened  all  Europe]  Mine  has  been  to
excite  the  vigilant  attention  of  my  countrymen,  left  they
fall  into  the  Inares  that  are  laid  to  entrap  them.  This  will,
I  hope,  be  thought  a  fufEcient  reafon  for  the  following
more  circumftantial  application  to  Ireland  and  Great  Bri-
tain of  the  dreadful  plots  that  have  been  detailed  in  theie
Memoirs.

IRELAND.

Ireland,  ever  fince  the  year  1782,  had  prefented  a  per-
petual fcene  of  different  affociauons  for  different  objects.
The  Volunteers  had  given  rife  to  much  debate;  the  Ro-
man Catholics  had  been  actively  employed  in  petitioning
the  legiflature  for  the  redrefs  of  certain  grievances  under
which  they  labored  j  and  their  prayer  was  at  length  part-
ly acceeded  to.

The  firft  appearance,  however,  of  the  aftociation  to
which  we  now  allude  was  in  June,  1791.  The  proposals
for  it  are  couched  in  the  ftyle  and  exact  terms  of  the  Hie-
rophants  of  Illuminifm.  They  recommend  the  formation
of  an  affociation,  or,  as  it  is  ftyled,  "  a  beneficent  con-
"  fpiracy"  to  ferve  the  people;  affuming  "  the  fecrçcy
"  and  fo  me  what  of  the  ceremonial  attacoed  to  Freema-
"  ionry."  Secrecy  is  declared  to  be  neceflary  to  make
"the  bond  of  union  more  coheiive,  and  the.  (pi  rit  of  uni-
"  on  more  ardent;  to  envelope  the  plan  with  ambiguity;
u  to  facilitate  its  own  agency;  to  confound   and  terrify


364  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

"  its  enemies  by  their  ignorance  of  the  defign,  extent,  and
"  direction,"  &c.  Its  Ceremonial  is  alfo  Mafonic,  in  or-
der to  create  enthuliafm.  "  Let  every  member  wear  (day
"  and  night)  an  amulet  round  his  neck,  containing  the
"  great  principle  which  unites  the  brotherhood,  in  letters
"  of  gold,  on  a  ribbon,  ftriped  with  all  the  original  co-
"  lour?,  and  inclofcd  in  a  (heath  of  white  filk,  to  repre-
"  fent  the  pure,  union  of  the  mingled  rays,  and  the  aboli-
"  tion  of  all  fuperficial  difrinctions,  all  colours,  and  {hades
"  of  difference,  for  the  fake  of  one  illuflrious  End.  Let
A  "  this  amulet  of  union,  faith,  and  honor,  pendent  from  the

cc  neck,  and  be  bound  about  the  body  next  to  the  fkin,
"  and  clofe  to  the  heart." — Mafonic  Secrecy,  Equality,
and  Union,  cannot  pofiibly  be  better  defcribed.

Its  members  are  to  be  chofen  from  among  men  in  the
prime  of  life,  without  diftinction  of  religion;  true  philan-
thropies, who  are  not  bound  down  to  obedience  to  that
"  wizard  word  empire,  nor  to  the  fovereigmy  of  two
<c  founding  fyllables;"  from  among  men,  in  fhort,  "  who
"  know  libertv,  who  wifh  to  have  it,  and  who  are  deter-
"  mined  to  live  and  die  free-men,  (vivre  libre  ou  mourir.)

This  aflbciation  (at  fir!!  called  the  Iriflj  Brotherhood,
and  afterwards  the  United  Irilhmen)  "  will  have,  it  is
"  faid,  an  eye  provident  and  prcfpe£tive,  a  reach  and  am-
"  plitude  of  conception  commenfurate  to  the  progreilive
"  diflufion  of  knowledge; — it  will  make  the  light  of  phi-
"  lanthropy  converge."  Its  end  is  declared  to  be  "  'J he
"  rights  of  men  in  Ireland^  the  greaieft  happinefs  of  the
"  greateft"  number  in  this  Ifiand;  the  inherent  and  inde-
"  feafible  claims  of  every  tree  nation:"  For,  "the  rights
"  of  man  are  the  rights  of  God;  and  to  vindicate  the  one
"  is  to  maintain  the  other.  We  mull  be  free,  in  order  to
"  ferve  him  whofe  fervrce  is  perfe£f.  freedom."

The  Hierophant  next  proceeds  toftate, that  "to form
"  a  fummary  of  the  national  will  and  pleafure  in  points
"  moil  interefting  to  national  happinefs,  and  then  to  put
"  this  doclrine  as  fpeedily  as  may  be  into  practice,  will  be
"  the  purpofe  of  this  Central  Society,  or  Lodge,  from
"  which  other  lodges  in  the  different  towns  will  radiate."
The  diftincrions  of  rank,  of  property,  and  of  religious
perfuaftoris,  are  to  be  abolished;  but  whether  any  thing
fhort  of  "  great  convuljion"  can  effectually  and  fpeedily
procure  the  reform  propofed,  is  to  be,  with  many  other
principles  of  (edition,  the  fubjeâ;  of  future  difcuflion  by
the  afïociatiôn.


HISTORICAL  PART.  3^5

The  whole  body  was  to  meet  four  times  a  year,  and
the  (regulating)  committee  once  a  month.  Thefe  meet-
ings were  to  be  "convivial;  conversational,  not  adebat-
"  ing  fociety;  and  confidential,  the  heart  open  and  the  door
"  locked."  Their  external  buftnefs  to  confifr,  "  I  ft,  in
"  publications  to  propagate  their  principles  and  effectu-
"  ate  their  ends.  All  papers  for  mis  purpofe  are  to  be
"  fandrioned  by  the  Committee. — 2dly,  Communication
';  with  the  different  towns  to  be  affiduoufly  kept  up,  and
"  every  exertion  ufed  toaccomplifh  a  National  Conven-
"  tion. — 3  lly,  Communication  with  Jimilar  focieties  a-
"  broad,  as  the  Jacobin  Club  at  Paris,  the  Revolution
"  Society  in  England,  the  Committee  of  Reform  in
"  Scotland."

Eulogies  were  to  be  pronounced  (as  in  the  Minerval.
Schools)  "  on  fuch  men  us  fliall  have  deferved  well  of  their
u  country  until  death,  whofe  works  mould  live  in  a  li-
<(  brary  to  be  formed  by  ihe  fociety  and  dedicated  to  Jibe  »
"  ty."  The  arilrocracv  (poor  dupes)  were  to  be  made  their
"  inftrumems." — (Iri/h  Report,  appendix,  ATo.  IF.) —
Such  was  the  plan  on  which  this  afl'ociation  was  to  be
formed,  and  it  was  recommended  to  the  people  of  Belfrul
by  a  Air.  Tone.  On  the  9th  of  November,  1 79 1,  the  day
on  which  theaffociation  was  inftituted  at  Dublin,  a  (mil-
iar invitation  was  publifhed  by  it,  and  was  iigned  Napper
Tandy.  Thus  do  we  find  that  Liberty,  Equality,  Secre-
cy, Union,  and  the  Rights  of  Man,  were  the  real  objects
of  this  allocution.  It  is  true  that  Parliamentary  Reror.n
and  Catholic  Emancipation  were  held  out  as  their  only
objects;  but  it  has  fince  appeared  upon  oath,  that  thefe
were  only  pretexts,  and  that  "  the  people  in  Leinfter,
"  Munfter,  and  Connaught  did  not  care  the  value  of  a  pen,
"  or  the  drop  of  ink  it  contained,  for  Parliamentary  Re-

"form,  or  Catholic  Emancipation." (Appendix,  No.

XXXI.

Their  Forms  and  Regulations  were  alfo  Mafonic. —
Members  were  honorary  or  ordinary,  and  admitted  be-
tween two  fpon fors,  who  vouched  for  the  characters  and
principles  of  the  candidates.  The  fign  and  word  were  a-
dopted.  Funds  were  produced  by  admiiïion  Les,  loans,
and  voluntary  contributions  of  the  **  Arijhcrats."  Taxes
alfo  of  one  penny  per  month  were  levied  on  the  individ-
uals of  the  aflociation,  and  were  generally  tranfmii ted
through  regular  gradations  to  the  High  Superior?.  Many


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

changes,  however  took  place  on  this  fubject,  and  Iatter-
ly  three  pence  per  month  was  levied.  Thefe  funds  were
not  even  entrufted  to  the  Provincial  Committees;  but  a
member  of  ihe  Executive  attended  to  carry  away  the  mo-
nies as  foon  as  they  were  received.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that
the  Executive  acounied  to  ihe  Provincial  Committee  once
every  three  months.

A  Chairman,  or  Mafter,  prefided  over  the  Lodges,
whofe  duty  it  was  to  preferve  order  and  direcSt  debates;
he  had  the  power  of  fining  ref.aclory  members  to  the  a-
mount  of  five  {hillings,  and  even  of  expelling  the  member
if  he  continues  to  be  contumacious;  as  alfo  to  erafe  fuch
members  as  did  not  attend  their  duty  after  they  had  been
ferved  with  a  regular  no.  ice.  Officers  were  appointed,
and  the  fecretanes  always  belonged  to  a  higher  degree. —
The  concatenation  of  the  degrees  perfectly  coincides  with
Wehhaupt's  plan,  as  the  following  fcale  of  correfpond-
ence  (of  National,  Provincial,  County,  and  Baronial
Committees,  emanating  from  the  Individual  Societies)
will  demonstrate.

N


i

.1

p

1

t

c

c

1

1

c

1

c

BBB        BBBBBB        BBB

-A-   _/v   -/y,    S>.      S^      -K.        _A_.A.^    .A»   .A-   -*-
III   III   III    III   III   III    III   III   III    III   III   III

When  an  Individual  Society  amounted  to  thirty-fix
members,  it  was  equally  divided  by  lot.  The  fir  it  eigh-
teen drawn  by  the  Secretary  were  confidered  as  the  fenior
fociety,  the  remaining  eighteen  formed  the  junior  fplit,
and  received  its  number  from  the  Baronial  Committee
through  the  medium  of  the  fenior  fplit.

The  Baronial  Committee  was  compofed  of  the  fecre-
taries,  treafurers,  and  a  delegate  from  each  individual
fociety  under  their  direction.  The  County  and  Provincial
Committees  were  to  be  compofed  of  the  fecretaries,  trea-
furers,  and  a  delegate  from  the  Committees  immediately
under  them. — (Ibid.  No.  II.)  Ireland  was  fubdivided  in-
to its  four  Provinces,  and  its  thirty-two  Counties»;  but


HISTORICAL  PART.  ^7

as  (bon  as  two  County  Committees  were  formed,  the  Pro-
vincial Committee  of  that  province  was  to  be  chofen.-—
When  two  Provincial  Committees  had  been  elected,  the
National  was  formed  of  five  members  from  each  Provin-
cial Committee.

No  perfon  whatever  could  mention  the  names  of  com-
mittee-men; they  were  not  even  known  to  thofe  who  had
elected  them  in  the  cafe  of  the  National  or  Executive
Committee,  the  fecretaries  of  the  Provincial  that  examin-
ed the  ballot  only  informing  the  perfons  who  had  the  ma-
jority of  voies,  without  reporting  to  the  Electors.  Thus
was  the  fociety  entirely  governed  by  unknown  Superiors.

When  any  queftions  were  propofed  in  an  inferior  focie-
ty, and  this  fociety  vviflied  to  tranfmit  them  to  other  fo-
cieties  (either  to  get  information  on  the  (u'oject,  or  for  any
other  reafon)  it  was  to  fend  them  to  the  committee  under
whole  immediate  direction  it  might  be.

Strange  members  were  admitted  to  the  meetings,  (or,
as  they  termed  it,  "  to  the  honors  of 'the  fitting* ')  on  pro-
ducing their  credentials;  but  the  fecretaries  made  no  re-
turns in  their  prefence.  ^

A  teft  was  taken  by  every  candidate  previous  to  his  ad-
miffion,  in  a  feparate  room,  in  prefence  of  his  two  fpon-
fors,  and  of  a  member  delegated  by  the  Mafter  for  that
purpofe.  The  tell  was  declared  to  be  "  a  facial  and  fa~
créa  compati"  and  was  in  the  words  following:  "  I  A.  B.
u  do  voluntarily  declare,  that  I  will  perfevere  in  endeavor-
"  ing  to  form  a  brotherhood  of  affection  among  Iriihmen
"  of  every  religious  periuafion,  and  that  I  will  alfo  perfe-
"  vere  in  my  endeavors  to  obtain  an  equal,  full,  andade-
"  quate  reprefentauon  of  all  the  people  of  Ireland.  I  do
"  farther  declare,  that  neither  hopes  nor  fears,  rewards  nor
a  punishments,  Shall  ever  induce  me,  directly  or  indirect-
"  ly  to  inform  or  give  evidence  againft  any  member  or
"  members  of  this  or  fimilar  focieties,  for  any  act  or  ex-
"  preffion  of  theirs  done  or  mado:  collectively  or  individ-
"  udly,  in  or  out  of  this  fociety,  in  purfuance  of  the  ipirit
"  of  this  obligation." — (Ibid.  No.  II.)

Dublin,  Belfaft,  and  Newry,  were  now  become  the
head-quarters  of  the  new  conspiracy.  The  latter  town
even  enjoyed  the  exclufive  privilege  of  printing  the  con-
stitutions of  the  affociation,  till  by  a  decree  of  the  7th  De-
cember 1796,  it  was  refolved,  that  they  Should  be  printed
in  three  different  parts  of  the  Kingdom  for  conveniency's


36S  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Jake.     A  delegate  was  alfo  deputed  from  thence  into  the
county  of  Cavan  and  the  province  of  Leinfter,  where  he
founded   a  number  of  focieties.     The  whole  county  of
Antrim  was  foon  in  a  ferment;  its  inhabitants  were  dis—
fenters,  whofe  religious  tenets  bordered  on  democracy. — -
The  new-fangled  Rights  of  Man  began  to  be  the  favorite
theme  of  all  tne  difcontented  in  Europe;  Paine's  Works
Were  profufely  diftributed  among  the  Iriih  ;  publications
of  all  fores  and  fizes  were  circulated,  holding  out  "  Ig:io-
"  rancc  as  the  demon  of  difcord — Union,  as  power,  wis-
"  dom,  and  the  road  to  liberty,"  and  teaching  the  riling
brotherhood  "  that  a  more  unjuft  conftitution  could  not
K  be  devifed,  than  that  which- condemned  the  natives  of  a
"  country  to  perpetual  fervitude  under  the  arbitrary  do-
"  minion  of  flaves  and  (trangers; — that  the  firir  and  in-
£<  difpenfable  condition  of  the  laws  in  a  free  frate  is,  the
"  aflent  of  thofe  whofi  obedience  they  require — that  the
*  will  of  the  nation  mud  be  declared. — Away  from  us
£t  (cries  the  Hierophant)  and  from  our  children  thofe  pu-
"  erile  antipathies   fo  unworthy  the  manhcod  of  nations,
tl  which  infulate  man  as  well  as  countries,  and  drive  the
*c  citizen  back,  to  the  favage."    No  longer  {hall  man  con-
fine his  attention  to  fome  few  fragments  of  the  temple  of
Liberty.     In  future,  "  the  ample  earth  is  to  be  its  area,
"  and  the  arch  of  heaven  its  dome." — (Ibid  No.   V.) —
The  means  of  acccmpliihing  thefe  great  things  were  the
union  of  the  whole  people;  and  England,  Scotland,  and
Ireland,  were  fimultancoufly  to  raife  their  voice.  In  ftiort,
the  clergy,  gentry,  and  government,  were  held  out  as  the
real  oppreffors  of  the  people  ;  and  thus  were  all  the  prin-
ciples of  anarchy  and  deftruction  of  property  to  be  infufed
into  that  fame  people.  Clubs  and  meetings  were  held  un-
der various  denominations  ;  the  Defenders  were  invited  to
unite  and  make  a  common  caufe  ;  and  the  County  Com-
mittees were  particularly  entniited  with  the  care  of  mak-
ing an  union  between  the  Orange  Men  and  the  Catho-
lics, though  great  precaution  was  to  be  obferved  in  fpeak-
ing  of  the  latter,  left  die  Proteftants  fhould  take  alarm.
Union  among  themfelves  and  difafïeâion  to  government
was  to  conftitute  their  whole  ttrength.    It  was  feared  that
the  Catholic  Clergy  would  impede  their  iinifter  defigns;
reports  were  fpread,  "  that  the  titular  Bifhops  had  been
"  lummoned  before  the  Privy  Council,  and  that  they  had
"  received  a  bribe  of  five  hundred  guineas  ;   that  they


HISTORICAL  PART.  369

11  were  to  fummon  all  their  Priefts,  and  command  them
«  to  do  all  in  their  power  to  difcover  fuch  of  their  flock
«  as  >vefe  United  Infhmen,  or  had  any  connection  with
"  fuch." — (Ibid  No.  II). — In  thofe  parts  where  the
whole  population  was  Catholic,  hand-bills  were  distribu-
ted, pu,  porting  to  be  the  Constitution  of  the  Orange
Men,  which  was  death  and  destruction  to  every  Catholic;
for,  if  the  common  people  could  be  once  Stirred  up  to  re-
bellion, it  waseaSy  to  turn  their  minds  againft  government
as  the  centre  of  the  Orange  union  (and  what  great  weight
muft  this  aSTertion  have  lately  acquired,  when  that  badge
was  worn  by  perfons  whofe  duty  it  is  to  be  ever  above
party  prejudice!)  while,  as  in  the  county  of  Armagh,
which  had  been  the  fceneofmuch  Strife  between  the  con-
tending parties,  the  Sect  Succeeded  in  uniting  and  leaguing
them  in  one  common  caufe  againft  thole  who  were  held
out  as  the  oppreflbrs  of  the  State.

The  chain  of  correspondence  once  perfectly  eftablifhed,
communications  were  opened  with  England  and  Scotland,
and  négociations  carried  on  with  the  French  during  the
laft  fix  months  of  1795;  and  in  April  1796  the  outlines
of  a  Treaty  with  France  was  drawn  up  by  the  National
Committee,  and  tranfmitted  to  the  French  Directory. — •
In  the  mean  time  the  Seel  continued  to  propagate  its
principles  and  enroll  recruits,  and  on  the  8th  of  Novem-
ber all  the  aSSociations  received  orders  to  hold  themfelves
in  readinefs  to  rife,  and  to  procure  arms  and  ammunition,
as  the  French  were  immediately  expeJied.

On  the  24th  of  December  the  French  really  did  make
their  appearance  at  Bantry;  and,  Strange  to  fay,  they  were
not  Seconded  in  their  attempts  by  the  people,  who  unir
verSally  roSe  in  the  South  to  oppoSe  their  invaders;  but
this  is  accounted  for  in  a  Still  more  extraordinary  manner.
The  Executive  had  received  news,  that  the  French  had
deferred  their  expedition  till  Spring  ;  this  circurnftançe
threw  them  "  off  their  guard,  and  in  confequence  of  it
"  no  meafures  were  taken  to  prepare  the  people  for  the
"  reception  of  the  French  army.  The  people  were  left  to
"  themfelves."  I  hope  in  God  that  this  avowal,  made  by
one  of  their  intended  Governors,  may  prove  a  wholefome
lefTon  to  that  Same  people,  and  encourage  them  to  follow
the  loval  and  genuine  dictates  of  their  hearts. — (Ibidenu
No.  XXXI).

In  future,  the  bufinefs  that  will  chiefly  occupy  the
A  aa


370  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

Committees  will  be  reports  on  men,  arms,  and  money,
which  latter  article  appears  to  have  been  a  fubject  of  great
contention.    Each  degree  thought  itfelf  intitled  to  dis-
pofeof  at  leaf!  a  part  of  their  funds;  and  fuch  had  been
the  law  originally;  but  the  High  Superiors  found  it  ne-
ceffàry  to  declare,  that  no  Committee  below  the  County
fliould  be  empowered  to  difpofe  of  the  funds.     Soon  after
this  power  was  confined  to  the  Provincial,~and  ultimately
one  of  the  Executive  Directors  always  attended  at  the
Provincial  Committee  to  carry  away  with  him  to  the  Na-
tional Committee  whatever  contributions  had  been  levied
on  the  brotherhood.     The  jealoufy  of  the  brotherhood
obJiged  the  National  Committee  at  one  time  to  ifiue  a
piociamation,  declaring  that  not  "  one  penny  of  their  mo-
ney had  been  expended  any  other  way  than  that  it  was
intended  for.1'     The  vigilance  of  Government  greatly
contributed  to  augment  the  expenfes  of  the  Seel:,  as  ma-
ny of  the  members  were  taken  up  and  brought  to  trial.
Thefe  were  defended  at  the  expenfe  of  the  brotherhood.
A  regular  Committee  for  the  defence  of  prifbners  travel-
led the  circuits  ;  and  the  eminent  talents  of  Mr.  Curran
(employed  at  a  great  expenfe)  will  ever  ftand  a  voucher
that  juflice  was  done  the  prifbners  wherever  he  was  pre-
fers.   Large  fums  were  fubferibed  by  all  clafies,  and  the
duped  ariftocrats  (or,  as  one  of  the  fecrctaries  ftyles  them,
the  Arajior  ricks)  contributed  at  one  fingle  fubfeription,
in  the  county  of  Antrim,  374I.    At  the  fpring  afiizes  of
1797,  held  in  the  county  of  Down,  750I.  were  expend-
ed, and  a  fafe  conveyance  had  been  procured  to  the  pri-
soners that  were  confined  in  the  jail  of  that  county. —
This,  however,  was  not  the  only  means  of  defence  devi-
fed  ;  for  it  was  given  as  the  opinion  of  a  County  Com-
mittee, "  that  if  there  is  any  United  Irifhmen  on  the  ju-
*'  ry  that  will  commit  any  of  the  prifoners  that  is  confi-
"  ned  for  being  United  Irifhmen,  ought  to  lofe  their  ex-
"  ijlcnce."     The  expenfes  became  fo  heavy  at  length,
from  buying  arms  and  fupporting  and  defending  prifoners,
that  a  lottery  was  fct  on  foot;  but  what  reader  would  fus-
peét.  (as  was  really  the  fact)  that  this  meafure  was  ob-
jected to,  on  the  plea  that  it  encouraged  the  immorality  of
the  people  ?

To  return  to  the  new  military  organization  of  the  Sect.
It  was  ordered,  that  every  Baronial  Committee  fhould
form  its  three  individual  focieties  into  a  company  of  one


HISTORICAL  PART.  37  I

hundred  men,  choofing  one  captain,  two  lieutenants,  and
five  fergeants;  total  108.  The  reader  has  already  fcen
how  exactly  thecorrefponding  fcale  coincided  with  Wei-
fliaupt's  Illuminifm;  but  when  the  military  formation  be-
gan to  take  effe£t,  and  the  numbers  increafed  beyond  all
expectation,  it  was  deemed  neceflàry  to  extend  and  change
certain  parts  of  this  fcale.  Greater  danger  attending  the
taking  of  arm?,  the  individual  focieties  began  to  fplit  as
foon  as  their  numbers  amounted  to  twelve.  Thefe  were
to  be  near  neighbors,  the  better  to  watch  over  each  other's
actions  and  to  enfure  fecrecy.  The  fecretai  ies  alone  were
to  form  the  higher  committees.  They  were  the  bearers
of  all  orders  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  degrees;  they
reported  the  progrefs  made  by,  and  the  views  of,  the  Se£t,
in  as  much  as  it  was  thought  necefiary  to  let  them  into
the  fecret;  for  we  find  that  even  the  County  Commit-
tees were  not  in  the  fecret  as  to  the  nature  of  the  en-
gagements entered  into  with  the  French.  What  unhap-
py deluded  people  then  were  the  lower  aiTociators,  who
were  informed  of  nothing,  but  were  to  be  the  mere  agents
of  rebellion  and  murder,  and  were  hurried  on  into  this
abyfs  of  horrors  by  a  t'cw  political  libertines  who  grafp-
ed  at  dominion,  and  wilhed  to  wade  to  the  helm  of  the
ftate  through  the  blood  of  their  countrymen!  Neverthe-
lefs  every  petty  piece  of  information  that  was  tranfmitted
to  the  lower  degrees  was  ftyled  a  Report  to  their  ConJIi-
tuents.

According  to  the  new  fcale  it  was  ordained,  that  te  M
Individual  Societies  mould  be  under  the  direction  of  one
Baronial  Committee;  TEN  Baroniah  to  one  upper  Baro-
nial; and  in  large  towns  TEN  upper  Baroniah  to  one
Dijiricl.  Eut  as  foon  as  a  County  contained  four  or  more
Diftrict  Committees,  the  County  Committee  was  creat-
ed. When  committees  had  been  appointed  in  two  coun-
ties, the  Provincial  Committee  was  formed  of  two  dele-
gates from  each,  and  the  National  Committee  (or  the  Ex-
ecutive) of  five  delegates  from  each  of  the  four  Provin-
cial Committees,  though  the  National  Committee  was
formed  as  foon  as  two  Provincial  Committees  had  been
elected.  A  part  of  this  Executive  was  ftationary  in  each
province;  and  it  appears  that  Dublin,  Cork,' and  Gal-
way,  were  their  reiidence  in  three  provinces;  but  with
refpect  to  Ulfter,  it  does  not  appear  whether  BclfaM,  Ar-
magh, or  Newry,  could  claim  the  honor.  From  this  v.  iv


372  antisocial  conspiracy;

formation,  each  upper  Baronial  will  be  found  to  contain
a  regiment— (Ibid.  XXIV.)


One  Individual  Society
One  Baronial
One  upper  Baronial  |  10


\%  Men.

izo

I2CO


The  captains  elecled  the  colonels,  and  the  latter  pro-
pofed  three  perfons,  one  of  whom  was  created  adjutant-
general  by  the  national  committee.  It  may  not  be  impro-
per here  to  remark  the  care  with  which  thefe  higher con-
fpirators  fought  to  preferve  their  authority  in  their  own
hand?,  even  in  cafe  of  a  revolution;  for  when  there  was  a
queftion  afterward  of  forming  a  National  Jjfembly,  it  was
refolved  that  each  of  the  thiuy  two  counties  fhould  de-
pute one  perfon  to  be  added  to  the  Executive,  all  lower
focieties  being  caft  out  of  the  balance,  and  only  to  be  con-
sidered as  agents,  who,  after  having  been  robbed  of  every
moral  and  civil  virtue,  were  to  raife  on  high  their  fangui-
nary  chiefs  and  feducers,  glutted  with  the  blood  of  their
lawful  governors.

Here  we  fee  the  amazing  progrefs  made,  and  the  great
power  acquired  fincethe  9th  of  November,  179 1.  Every
thing  now  took  a  ferious  and  military  turn.     The  new-
eledted  officers  werj  in/lrucledtojludy  tallies  and  acquire
every  fpecies  of  military  information  with  refpeel:  to  roads,
magazines,  mills,  &c.  Plans  were  devifed  for  the  fupport
of  the  wives  and  children  "  during  the  exertions  of  the  Bro-
"  therhood  in  the  field."     Every  thing  that  could  thwart
government  was  difculTed  and  refolved.     The  confump-
tion  of  fpirits  was  prohibited,  in  order  to  hurt  the  excife;
bank-notes  were  cried  down;  and  even  the  buying  of
quit-rents  was  exprefsly  forbidden.  In  the  mean  time  the
High  Superiors  faw  that  this   armed  mob  could  not  be
competent  of  themfelves  to  cope  with  the  king's  troops;
a  means  of  debauching  the  latter  from  their  allegiance
was  therefore  contrived.     Hand-bills  were  privily  circu-
lated, holding  out  their  officers  "  as  tyrants  that  had  re-
<c  belled  againft  the  rights  of  man^  and  whofe  orders  were
"  damnable  ;"  bills,  in  fhort  of  the  moft  inflammatory  na-
ture   were  difperfed   among  the  military  by  the  towns-
people, who  were  charged  with  the  feduction  of  the  troops
of  their  garriion.  They  fwore-in  fome  few  of  the  foidiers;
r::t:!c  fwore  others;  and  when  their  number  was  fuffi-
Cicnt,  focieties  was  formed  in  the  regiments.  Here  again


HISTORICAL  PART.

we  find  the  fign  and  word-,  which   were  changed  every
month  j  the  cateclnfm  for  recognizing  a  true  brother;  and
the  oath,  which  was,  ct  to  be  true  to  the  French  Repub-
"  lie,  and  to  take  the  life  of  any  man  who  would  attempt
**  to  difcover."  .  .  . — The  rule  for  reckoning  on  friends
among  the  military  was,  "  that  in  cafe  the  perfon  fworn
"  is  an  United  Irishman,  and  has  not  taken  any  aclive  fL-ps
"  againft  the  body  or  any  of  its  members,  out  of  the  line
"  of  his  proftjjion,  he  was  to  be  deemed  frill  the  Friend  of
"  the  United  Iriihmen."— (Ibid.  No.  XIV.)— The  bet-
ter to  propagate  the  fyftem,  it  was  held  out  to  the  mili-
tary, "  that  when  the  French  fhould  come,  the  foldiers
"  were  to   be   fuch  as   them;  that   there  were  to  be  no
•  "  richibut  all  Equality;  and  that  there  was  no  ufe
"  in  their  going  againlt  the  French,  became  when  all  the
"  Powers  were  againir.  them,  they  could  make  no  hand
"  of  them." — They  were  alio  tampered  with  refpe&ing
their  pay.     When  all  this  had  fufficiently  fucceeded,  "  a
"  foidier  in  each  company  was  appointed  to  make  a  re-
"  turn  of  united  men  in  his  refpective  company,  while
"  two  of  the  fteadiefr.  men,"  from  each  regiment,  "  were
"  employed  to  carry  thefe  returns"  to  the  towns-people.
Thefe,  in  return,  informed  them  of  the  progrefs  made  by
the  Seel:  in  Ireland,  and  of  its  numbers  on  board  the  En~
glifn  and  Fi  ench  fleet;  as  alfo  of  all  kinds  of  news  from
the  latter.  A  plan  was  fettled,  "  that  upon  a  lignai  given,
"  (and  this  was  fetting  fire  to  a  houfe,  or  fome  fuch  to-
"  ken,)  if  i't  was  by  day-light,  the  men  fhould  turn  out
"  of  the  ranks;  and  if  it  was  by  night,  and  it  could  be  lb
"  contrived,  an  United  Irifhman  fhould  be  fentry  at  the
"  gate,  who  was   to  fell  the  barracks;  and  fuch  United
"  Irifhmen  as  were  within  the  barracks  were  to  exert
"  themfelves  in  feizing  fuch  arms  and  ammunition  within
<{  as  they  could  get. — If  there  were  but  thirty  friends  in
4C  the  barracks,  by  having  them  difperfed  up  and  down  in
"  the  rooms,  when  the  attack  was  to  be  made,  they  could
"  give  the  arms  to  the  towns-people." — If  any  part  of  the
garrifon  were  not  to  be  depended  upon,  the  cannons  feiz-
ed  were  to  be   pointed  on  the  barracks,  or  whole  corps
were  to  be  cut  off  for  refilling  to  coalefce  with  them. — >
Some  of  the  brotherhood  even  went  (o  far  as  to  attempt
to  fet  fire  to  the  (lores;  but  the  burning  coals  were  luck-
ily difcovered  by  a  dragoon.     Such  was  the  plan  for  gar-
rifons  and  towns  ;  the  mode  of  proceeding  in  carap  is  ex-


ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

empli  fied  in  that  of  Bandon:  "  On  the  I  ft  of  Jul)',  1 797,
M  the  country  was  to  be  fet  on  fire  on  both  ends,  and  in
"  the  middle  j  and  then,  with  what  friends  Mr.  O'Brien,
"  near  Bandon,  could  fend  them,  and  what  friends  they
"  had  in  camp,  about  Four  Hundred,  they  intended  firit
M  taking  the  cannon,  and  then  talcing  the  bell-tents,  with
w  the  iraall  arms,  which  they  would  give  to  the  country
"  people  lent  by  Mr.  O'Brien,  and  then  go  put  General
w  Gtote  and  as  many  officers  as  they  could  to  death,  and
t(  retreat  to  Bantry,  take  pofTeffion  of  the  battery,  and
"  keep  it,  if  poffible,  till  the  French  would  land."  It  ap-
peared that,  at  a  future  time,  when  a  rifing  was  alfo  to
have  taken  place,  that  the  foldiers  tvere  to  put  all  their
cpcers  to  death,  and  the  yeomanry  alfo  if  they  oppofed  them.
Li  return  for  (o  £gnal  a  fervice,  the  town  of  Sicibbereen
was  to  be  given  upr<?  the  foldiers  for  pillage  during  eight
hours. — (Ibid.  XXIX.)  Thus  do  we  fee  the  gradual  pro-
grtfs  of  this  horrid  ailociation  toward  its  cruel  and  fangui-
nary  object — the  great  end  i  ! — The  committees  in
future  proceed  with  the  greateft  eagerncfs  to  prepare  every
thing  that  can  involve  their  country  in  rebellion  and  blood-
shed. After  the  example  of  the  bloody  Marat,  and  accord-
ing to  the  true  principles  of  the  Sect,  a  paper,  entitled,  the
Union  Star,  was  publifhed  atBelfaft,  printed  only  on
one  fide,  fo  that  ic  could  be  pafted  on  the  walls  of  the
ftreets. — Let  this  paper  defcribe  itfelf: — "  As  the  Union
"  Star  is  an  official  paper  (of  the  Brotherhood)  the  mana-
"  gers  promife  the  public  that  no  characters  (hall  be  ha-
"  zarded  but  fuch  as  are  denounced  by  authority,  as  be-
**  ing  the  partners  and  creatures  of  Pitt  and  his  fanguina-
"  ry  journeyman  Luttrell."  (that  is  to  fay,  Lord  Car-
"  hampton,  the  commander  in  chief.)  "  The  Star  offers  to
"  pubjic  juftice  the  following  deteftable  traitors,  as  fpies
"  and  perjured  informers.  Perhaps  fame  arm  more  lucky
"  than  the  reft  may  reach  their  hearts,  and  free  the  world
"  from  bondage."  Then  was  given  a  lift  of  profcriptions,
exactly  fuch  as  Marat  gave  when  he  ftyled  himfelf  the
political  calculator,  becaufe,  when  four  men  had  been  torn
to  pieces  by  the  demoniacs  of  Paris,  he  ftated,  that  fub-
tracting  4  from  30,000  there  ftili  remained  29,996  aris-
tocrats to  fall  beneath  the  national  vengeance.  Now  this
official  writer,  in  his  frantic  rage,  thus  addreiles  his  Sove-
reign: "  Let  the  indignation  of  man  be  raifed  againftthe
u  impious  wretch  who  profanely  affumes  the  title  of  reign-


HISTORICAL  PART.  375

*{  ing  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  imnudently  tells  the  world
"  he  can  do  no  wrong. — Oh,  man!  or  rather  lefs, — Oh
"  king  !  will  the  fmothered  groans  of  my  countrymen,
"  who,  in  thy  name,  fill  the  innumerable  dungeons  you
u  have  made,  for  ajftrting  the  rights  of  man,  be  confid-
"  ered  no  wrongs? — -Go,  impious  blafphemer!  and  your
u  hypocritical  (bcerers,  to  the  fate  Philosophy,  Jufiice,
"  and  Liberty  configns  thee.  'Tis  inevitable,  thy  im-
•*  pofitions  are  detected;  thy  kind  have  been  brought  to
"juftice.  The  nrft  poiTeiîbr  of  thy  trade  has  recently  bled
"  for  the  crimes  of  the  craft. — We  appeal  to  thy  noble
u  and  venerated  name,  O  Brutus  !  who  bravely  aflafftn-
"  ated  the  tyrant  of  your  country  amidil  his  cohorts^  and
"  in  the  prefence  of  his  penfioned  fenate." — (XXFH.)

Thefe  are  literal  extracts  from  this  paper;  and  no

Knight  Kadofch  of  Mafonry,  nor  Man-king  of  illumin-
ilm  could  hold  more  violent  language. — Another  paper,
nearly  as  wild,  called  The  Press,  was  publifhed  by  Mr,
Arthur  O'Conner,  with  a  fimilar  view  of  inflaming  the
minds  of  the  people.  The  violence  of  his  own  productions
may  beprefumed  from  the  fentence  he  paries  on  all  the  moil
violent  papers  of  England  in  his  letter  to  his  Brother.—-
"  We  (Burdett  and  himlèlf)  ordered  you  the  Courier;
*'  as  to  the  morning  papers  they  are  mere  lumber  in  your
"  ofHce;  (o  we  did  not  fend  you  more  than  the  Courier,
<c  as  in  the  bufinefs  of  the  Prefs  we  found  it  ufeiîfs  to  have
u  any  other." — (Trials  at  Maidjione.)

The  Committees  continued  to  receive  daily  reports  of
the  motions  and  determinations  of  their  allies,  the  French;
of  their  friends  in  England  and  in  Scotland;  and  of  the
immenfe  progrefs  that  the  Seel  was  making.  November,
1796,  they  are  informed,  "  that  four  new  Societies  arc
"  organized  in  Scotland,  and  that  the  County  of  Kerry
"  Militia  required  one  hundred  conftitutions  for  their  own
"  ufe." — In  April,  1797,  "  that  their  numbers  are  im-
u  menfe  in  Leinfter,  though  unacquainted  with  the  fys-
"  tern  of  organization.  In  Ulfter  there  were  1 16,844  men
"  organized."*

*  The  refolutions  entered  into  by  the  united  focieties  of
Donagbadee  and  its  vicinity  (and  feized  on  the  14th  of  April,
1797)  are  too  explicit  to  be  omitted  here.  They  refclved,  that
"  all  power  is  radically  in  the  people  ;"  that  "  at  the  prefmt
"  crifi-5  the  people  being  united  mould  arm,  chufe  their  officers,
•■  and  taks  a  ârft,  fécond,  and  third  requifition  of  fuch  as  ate


376  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

In  May,  a  new  fecne  opens  kfelf,  which  unfortunately
{hews  us,  that  the  Iriih  Broherhood  were  no  ftrangers  to
deliberate  atFafîination. — Between  the  hours  of  eight  and
nine  of  a  Sunday  moining,  the  7th  of  May,  1797,  a  man
of  the  name  of  James  Dunn  (a.  imith  and  farrier,  who  had
been  in  Lord  Carhampton's  fervice  for  the  fpace  of  fif-
teen years,  and  lived  in  a  houfe  at  his  lordfhip's  park-
gate)  preferred  himfclf  at  a  Baronial  Committee^  held  in
a  pubiic-houfe,  Strand-ftreet,  Dublin.  Maurice  Dunn,
the  keeper  of  the  houfe,  was  his  fponfor,  and  "  would  en-
K  gage  his  life  for  him  that  he  was  up  or  Jiraight."  Here-
upon the  figns  of  the  Brotherhood  were  put  to  him;  and
having,  by  his  anfwers,  proved  that  he  was  a  true  and  ac-
cepted Brother,  the  chairman  took  die  chair.  James  Dunn
then  fubmitted  to  the  Society,  "  that  he  and  a  few  more
"  friends  were  thinking  of  doing  out  ((hooting^  Carhamp-
"  ton,  becaufc  he  was  a  great  hindrance  to  matters  get-
ct  ting  forward."  This  n^ws  electrified  the  whole  com-
mittee with  joy. — One  exclaimed,  "It  is  great  news/8
— "  It  is  glorious  news,"  cried  another:  "  It  is  the  beft
"  news  we  have  heaid  yet,"  laid  a  third:  and  a  fourth  de-
clared, that  "  it  would  do  more  for  the  caufe  than  had
"  ever  been  done  before."  Dunn  then  mentioned  a  nar-r
row  part  of  the  road  leaning  to  Luttrelftown,  and  aftone
wail  from  whence  he  might  have  -a  flap  at  Lord  Carhamp-
ton,  who,  he  faid,  was  damned  wary.,  and  always  carried
piftols  with  him;  but  one  good  bkmderbufs  would  do  as
much  as  ten  piftols.  He  then  declared  that  four  friends,
John  Broderick,  Peter  K.eilly,  Patrick  Catty,  and  Ed.
Martin,  had  engaged  to  join  him;  on  which  the  Commit-
tee named  feven  of  their  members  to  deliberate  on  fo  im-
portant a  bulinefs,  and  ordered  them  to  meet  at  feven

"  able  to  $ro  forth  to  war  in  defence  of  their  tights  as  men  ;"
that  "  if  any  prove  hoftile  to  liberty,  their  eftates  or  property
"  fhall  be  confifcated,  and  converted  to  the  national  fund." —
All  enemies  to  the  caufe  were  to  be  tried  by  a  jury,  "  accord"
*'  ing  to  the  law  then  extfling ;"  and  a  Revolutionary  Commit-
tee was  to  be  eftabiimed.  Jt  is  true,  that  this  patriotic  zeal  was
condemned  by  the  Provincial  Committee  as  premature  ;  but  it
is  to  be  remembered,  that  the  High  Superiors  of  the  Ssct  feared
nothing  but  a  premature  infurreclion  ;  *'  for  (fay  they),  by  that
"  means  Government  would  have  it  in  their  power  to  put  us
"  down,  never  to  rife,  at  lead  for  a  century;  and  like  wife  we
"  have  paid  a  great  deal  of  money  to  the  people  in  gaol,  and
*'  it  will  take  a  targe  i'um  of  money  to  affift  them  all  winter."
~-( 'Appendix  No.  II).


HISTORICAL  PART.  377

e'clock  the  fame  evening,  when  Dunn  and  his  compa-
nions were  to  attend.  The  cuftomary  oath  of  fecrecy  was
taken  by  all  prefent,  to  the  number  of  17;  they  then  part-
ed, after  giving  as  the  new  word  tc  A  good  act." — At
feven  in  the  evening  the  delegated  members  met,  one  ex-
cepted. The  oath  of  fecrecy  having  been  adminiftered  to
the  four  friends,  they  were  introduced.  Thomas  Byrne
then  faid,  "  I  fuppofe  thofe  arc  friends  and  gentlemen;— -
"  I  fuppofe  we  all  underftand  what  we  are  met  about  V*
— "  If  they  were  not,"  anfwered  Dunn,  "  I  would  not
"  bring  them  here." — "  We  know  the  bufinefs  we  are
"  metabout  (fays  Byrne)  ;  let  us  proceed."  Various  plans
were  then  propofed  for  doing  his  Lordfhip  out. — Dunn
repeated  his;  Byrne  would  have  at  lead  a  party  of  nine
mounted;  but  John  Ferrai,  with  fanguinary  zeal,  infilled
that  every  perfon  prefent  Ihould  partake  of  the  foul  deed;
and  his  opinion  was  adopted.  Another  refolution  propos-
ed by  Byrne  then  pafTed:  "  That  three  at  leaftfhouldgo
"  out  difguifed  with  loofe  coats  and  blunderbufTes;  and
"  the  reft,  as  yeoman  cavalry,  to  be  armed  with  piftols."

The  plan  of  execution  was,  that  "  thofe  with  blun-

"  derbulTes  were  to  come  at  the  back  of  the  carriage  and
u  to  fire  in;  thofè  with  the  piftols  were  then  to  ride  on,
"  and  lire  in  at  the  windows,  left  the  fire  from  behind
"  fhould  not  have  taken  effect;  and  as  thev  paffed  the
"footman  and  pojlillion  they  were  alio  to  difpatch  them;
"  they  were  then  to  recharge  their  pieces,  ride  on  in  a
"  body  towaids  Dublin,  and  keep  together,  fo  as  to  fe-
u  cure  their  retreat."  A  new  oath  was  then  taken,  "  to
"  be  ftaunch  and  fteady,  and  true  to  one  another  in  the
"  bufinefs." — When  the  book  came  to  John  Ferrai,  he
enthuliaftically  exclaimed,  "  If  this  bufinefs  milles,  if pro-
"  vifion  be  made  for  my  family,  I  will  undertake  to  da
"  him  in  the  ftreets."  Several  meetings  were  afterwards
held  on  the  fubjecl;;  for  never  was  a  murder  more  deli-
berately planned. — Money  being  neceflary  for  procuring
arms,  the  chairman  of  the  committee  applied  to  the  Baro-
nial Secretary,  who  referred  him  to  the  Treafurer;  and
the  Sunday  after  (May  14)  James  Dunn  and  Patrick  Car-
ty  were  arrefted  in  the  Phcenix-Park.  Carty  had,  togeth-
er with  his  father  (a  Chelfea  penfioner)  been  a  confiant
laborer  on  Lord  Carhampton's  demefne,  and  had  a  houle
rent-free.  The  day  after  the  arreft  Lord  Carrmmpton  vi-
lited  Dunn  in  prifon,  in  the  hope  that  he  would  difcover
B  bb


37?  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

what  had  become  of  ihe  three  other  aflafilns,  but  he  re-  „
ceived  no  fatisfadtory  anfwer.    On  his  Lorufhip  exprefs-
iïrg  his  furprize  that  the  prifoner  fhould  be  capable  of  fo
atrocious  a  deed,  the  alTaflîn  anfwerèd,  that  "  he  thought

*  it  was  a  gnod  ail;  that  he  had  no  perfonal  diflilce  to  his
K  Lordfhip,  and  would  never  execute  it  alone,  but  with

•  his  party;  that  he  had  never  fuffered  any  injury  from
u  him  ;  but  that  he  was  fworn  to  execute  it,  and  if  he  were
"  out  of  that  (the  pnibn)  he  would  execute  it  if  he  could."
As  to  the  murdering  the  poor  innocent  poftillion,  "  it
"  was  to  do  the  thing  completely." — After  this  are  we  to
be  hi i  prized  at  the  horrid  murders  that  have  taken  place.
Lord  Cat  hampton,  fome  time  after  the  arreft  of  the  fon,
had  an  interview  with  Carty,  the  father,  and  told  him,
"  that  if  his  fon  would  give  examinations,  he  was  inclined
"  to  let  him  do  fo;  and  in  that  cafe  he  thought  his  life
u  might  be  faved;  and  he  defired  the  father  would  tell  the
K  fon  fo." — The  father  faid,  "  he  was  apprehenfive,  that
"  if  his  fon  gave  examinations,  he  would  be  murdered."
I  have  dwelt  on  this  example,  as  it  was  the  fubject  of  a
trial,  in  which  the  Attorney-General  proiecuted  for  the
crown,  and  four  counfel  attended  on  the  part  of  the  pri-
foner, Mr.  Curran,  Mr.  M'Nally,  Mr.  Greene,  and  Mr.
Emmet t,  who  had  himfelf  been  a  member  of  the  Execu-
tive Directory  from  January  to  the  beginning  of  May. —
Such  able  counfel,  and  fo  public  a  trial,  will  ever  ftamp
this  as  an  authentic  document. — f  See  Report  of  the  Trials
of  Carty  and  Dunn,  publijhed  by  Ridgeway.)

In  June,  the  captains  were  informed,  that  the  national
committee  had  been  fitting  fifteen  days;  but  as  only  ten
thoufand  men  of  the  County  of  Antrim  would  rife,  the
bufinefs  was  retarded.  The  colonels  of  the  County  of
Down  were  unanimous  for  the  rifing.  In  July  their  hopes
were  buoyed  up  by  an  intimation  that  75,000  men  were
embarked  at  the  Texel  for  Ireland;  but  theie  were  irre-
parably broken  by  the  immortal  Duncan  on  the  nth  of
Odober.

In  Auguft  they  received  news,  that  a  number  of  focie-
ties  had  been  formed  in  North  America,  and  that  thefehad
iranfmitted  211  dollars  to  their  Brethren  in  Ireland.— In
October  a  perion,  juft  arrived  from  Scotland,  attended  at
the  county  meeting,  held  at  Down  Patrick,  and  «fleived
"  a  Scotch  conjiitution,  which  was,  word  fop  word,
tl  the  fame  as  ihe  Jrijh;  only  that  the  words  North


HISTORICAL  PART.  379

<c  Britons  were  put  in  the  place  o/Trishmen."  No-
vember 14th,  inquiries  were  made  of  the  delegates  of  the
Province  of  Ulfter,  "  whether  they  thought  that  they
"  could  difarm  the  military  within  themfelves;  and  they
"  all  faid  that  they  could,  except  Armagh." — (Appendix^
No.  XIV.) — On  the  28th  of  December,  «  One  confti-
"  tution  was  voted  to  a  member,  to  be  given  to  part  of
"  a  Jhip's  company  lying  in  Bclfaft  Lough,  for  the  propa-

<c  gation  of  the  general  principle." At  the  Provincial

Meeting  for  UHter,  held  the  ift  of  February,  1798,  it
Was  reported,  that  "  three  delegates  (of  whom  the  unfor-
"  tunate  Quigley,  fince  executed  at  Maidftone,  was  one)
"  had  juft  arrived  from  France;  that  the  French  were  go-
"  ing  on  with  the  expedition j  and  that  it  was  inagreat-
*«  er  ftate  of  forwardnefs  than  was   expected  j  but  what
"  was  mod  flattering,  was,  that  three  delegates  had  been
<c Jent  from  the  United  Britons  to  the  fri/h  National
u  Committee',  and  that  from  that  very  moment  they  were
"  to  conjider  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  aja
u  one  people  acting  for  one  common caufe:   Theie  were
"  Legiflators  now  chofen  from  the  three  kingdoms  to  act
**  as  an  executive  for  the  whole." — They  were  alio  in-
formed, that  Quigley  and  one  Arthur  Mac  Mahon,  of
Hollywood,  had  been  the  two  principal  perlons  who  c/ar-
ing  the  preceding  fammer,  had  opened  the  communication
with  the  United  Britons — (Ibid.)     The  delegates  from
England  brought  an  addrefs  from  the  United  Britons  to
the  United  Iriih.     In  high  flown  and  patriotic  language,
the  United  Britons  informed  their  fellow  men,  that
"  various  political  focieties  had  been  inftituted  for  the  pur-
"  pofe  of  reform.— But  they  had  vanifhed,  or  difcon-
"  tinued  their  exertions.  The  Loneon'Correspond-
"  ING.  Society^  and  other  focieties  in  union  with   it,  had
u  1  ifen  upon  their  ruins."  That  England  was  never  with-
out friends  to  fubftantial  Liberty;  but  that  the  flame  of
Liberty  had  been  for  a  long   time   lmothered,  "  till  the
"  French  revolution  again  fanned  its  dying  embers  into  ;i
"  glow,  which,  they  hoped  and  trufted,  would  never  be
"  extinguifhed — Our  numbers  (fay  they)  are  irnmenfe,
u  our  influence  dill  more  considerable,  and  our fentiments
**  accord  with  yours.    We  are  unthinned  by  the  tyranny
"  of  the  law  or  of  the  fw.oxd.-~ Our  delegate  is  ei  ti  '
"  to  lay  before  you  our  proceedings."  And  they  conclude,
"  With  beft  wiihes  for  the  amelioration  of  the  condition


3$0  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

t£  of  man,  and  hopes  that  your  exertions  and  virtues,  aid-
"  ed  by  an  united  people,  will  fpeedil_y  emancipate  your
tc  country: — We  remain,  in  bonds  of  Brotherhood  and
"  Union,

"  Yours  fraternally."
Friday,  Jan.  5,  1798.

(Seal.)

It  appears  on  the  evidence  of  John  Hughes,  (Lords^
No.  I.)  a  printer  of  Belfatt,  that  the  delegate  was  a  Mr.
Bonham,  who  was  accompanied  by  Citizen  Baily  and  the
younger  Binns.  The  latter,  who  was  introduced  to  Hughes
by  Quigley,  faid  that  he  had  distributed  molt  of  the  print-
ed acdrcffcs,  and  defired  to  have  an  edition  of  them  print-
ed. Accordingly  a  thoufand  were  printed,  and  three  gui-
neas paid  for  them  by  a  perfon  of  Belfaft.

During  this  month  a  regular  military  committee  was
appointed  by  the  Executive,  "  to  confider  and  digeft  fuch
"  plans,  and  direct  the  military  force  in  fuch  manner,  as
tc  might  be  neceflary  in  cafe  of  infurrection;*and  in  cafe
"  of  invafion  to  co-operate  with  the  French."

On  the  27 ch  of  February  it  was  reported,  that  the  As-
fociation  had  at  that  time  fourteen  delegates  in  France,
and  that  there  had  been  held  in  London  a  meeting  of  all
the  delegates  of  England  and  Scotland.  In  March,  the
brotherhood  of  the  Province  of  Leinfter  iuftained  a  con-
siderable fhock,  by  the  arrefcof  fome  of  its  leading  mem-
bers; but  on  the  25th  of  the  fame  month  it  appears,  that
"  the  Provincial  Committee  of  Leinfter  had  perfectly  re-
"  covered  from  the  fhock;  they  (the  delegates  of  Leins-
"  ter)  were  only  four  days  from  the  time  they  were  tak-
"  en  before  they  had  the  whole  province  in  a  complete
14  ftate  of  organization;  the  Government  had  alfo  taken
*'  three  of  the  Executive,  but  there  were  three  appointed
•  "  in  their  place  the  very  evening  after  they  were  taken."
How  truly  does  this  demonstrate  Weiihaupt's  afTertion,
that  when  he  once  has  properly  organized  his  bands,  he
will  bid  defiance  to  all  his  opponents.

Another  principle  ot  that  prototype  of  rebellion  had,  un-
fortunately, been  too  well  understood  by  the  founders  of
the  Iriih  brotherhood,  and  that  was  to  make  themielves
mafters  of  the  education  of  youth.  Many  fchoolmafters
(as  I  have  been  credibly  informed)  have  mown  them-
ielves extremely  active  in  the  whole  courfe  of  this  unfor-


HISTORICAL  PART.  3<>A

tunate  affair.  The  very  fiift  man  who  was  tried  and  exe-
cuted in  Ireland,  for  (wearing  in  the  deluded  Irifh  to  be
true  to  the  French,  was  a  fchoolmaiter  called  Laurence
O'Connor. — The  following  are  extracts  from  his  papers,
and  proved  on  his  trial:  "  I,  A.  B.  do  fwear  in  the  pre-
u  fence  of  Almighty  God,  that  1  will  be  true  to  the  pre-
uJent  United  States  of  France  and  Ireland,  and  every
"  other  Kingdom  in  Chrijlianity,  without  its  being  hurt-
"  ful  to  ibul  or  body,  as  long  as  they  prove  fo  to  me.—
"  And  that  /  will  not  come  as  evidence  againft  any  of  my
"  brethren  or  committees,  in  any  court  or  place  whatfo-
u  ever,  excepting  in  court-martial,  under  penalty  of  be-
"  ing  excluded,  or  death  without  mercy. — All  brothers  to
"  live  lovingly  and  harmonioufly,  and  quarrelious  to  be
u  excluded,  as  the  Committee  thinks  proper."

"  Thefe  articles  are  according  to  the  Foreign  United
"  States  of  France  and  Ireland,  by  order  of  our  commit-
tee of  L.  G.  No.  1 6."

A  fécond  paper  was  in  thefe  words  :  "  The  bearer,  A.
"  B.  was  initiated  into  our  fublime  degree  of  L.  L.  L.  by
«  me  C.  D."

There  was  alfo  found  on  the  prifoner  three  regular  cer-
tificates, one  of  Free  Mafons,  a  lécond  of  Royal  Arch,  and
a  third  of  Knights  Templars,  fhowing  that  O'Connor
was  of  thefe  Orders.  One  of  the  Counfel  attempted  to
explain  away  the  oath,  reprefenting  it  as  "  the  mere  rhap-
fody  of  a  warm  imagination,  ufed  to  exercife  itfelf  on  Ma-
fonic  myfteries;"  he  reprelented  to  the  jury,  that  "it
would  be  a  cruel  verdict  indeed  that  would  convict  a  man
of  high  treafon,  merely  for  ujing  a  fexv  cabaliflical  words
andfymbols." — I  will  venture  to  affirm,  that  fhould  the
learned  counfel  ever  chance  to  perufe  the  Memoirs  of  y#~
cobinifm,  he  will  have  a  clearer  infight  into  the  Caufe  he
had  to  defend,  than  when  at  Naas  at  the  adjournment  of
the  fummer  amzes  in  1795. — (See  his  Trial.)

What  a  melancholy  icene  did  the  feat  of  fcience  (I  mean
the  Univerhty  of  Dublin)  prefent,  when  on  the  19th,
20th,  and  21ft  of  April,  1798,  it  appeared  on  thecleareft:
evidence  that  a  body  of  United  Infhmen  had  organized
themfelves  within  the  walls  of  the  College!  had  confult-
ed  about  providing  themfelves  with  arms,  and  had  elec-
ted officers  ! — Nineteen  ftudents  were  expelled,  and  foma
other  perfons  cenfured. — [Viptation  held  by  Lord  Clare.)

In  the  mean  time  open  rebellion  continued  its  progrefs;


j|8.£  antisocial  conspiracy;

and  on  the  ift  of  April  it  is  reported  to  a  committee, that
a  letter  had  been  received  u  from  Bartholemew  Teeling
K  (executed  in  September  1798,  being  talcing  in  arms  with
"  the  French  in  their  invaiion  at  Killala)  who  was  one
"  of  the  delegates  in  p  rânee,  ftating,  that  the  French
"  troops  would  mofl  certainly  be  on  board  by  the  middle
"  of  this  month.    The  troops  from  Breft  and  that  neigh-
"  borhood  were  determined  to  try  to  evade  the  Britifh
<c  fleet,  and  to  land  in  Ireland  ;  of  courfe  the  Bntifh  fleet
"  would  follow  them;  and  while  thus  drawn  ofF,  all  the
u  other  troops  embarked  at  other  ports  would  make  a
"  decent  on  England.    Whatever  might  refultfrom  this
"  attempt,  it  was  the  fixed  determination  of  the  National
tc  Committee,  in  cafe  the  French  (hould  be  fruftrated,
"  that  the  brotherhood  Jhould  of  themfehes  make  a  rifing.
*'  The  citizens  of  Dublin,  it  was  fuppofed,  with  the  as-
"  hitance  of  the  army,  could  feize  the  capital  at  any  mo-
"  ment."    Unfortunately,  the  principles  of  the  Sect  had
made  iuch  a  progrefs,  that  as  early  as  February  the  re-
turns declared  the  number  of  the  brotherhood  to  amount
in  Ulfier  to  110,990,  in  Munfter  to  100,634,  and  in
Li.  liter  to  08,272;  and  out  of  8,000  military  in  Dublin
alone,  it  was  ftated  that  3,800  would  act  againft  Govern-
ment.   The  Executive  proceeded  to  carry  their  determin-
ation into  execution.   Dublin,  Chaptl-izoo',  the  camp  and
the  government,  were  to  be  feized  on  at  one  and  the  fame
time;  and  the  iignal  was  to  be  given  to  the  whole  coun-
try, by  the  burning  of  the  mail  coaches.    But,  in  order
to  get  poilefllon  of  the  camp  at  Lehaunftown,  the  Meffrs.
ares  applied  to  Captain  Armitrong,  who,  true  to  his
duty  (and  happily  for  his  country),  laid  open  the  whole
of  the  plan  to  his  commanding  officer  at  whofe  expr._  is
deiire  he  continued  to  commune  with   the  confpirators.
He  was  queitioned  by  them  as  to  the  ftrcng  and  weak
fides  of  the  camp;  and  a  Mr.  Lawlefs  (a  furgeon),  with
the  natural  humanity  of  his  Seel:,  obierved,  that  <c  the
trees  on  the  right  of  the  camp  would  be  veiy  convenient
for  hanging  people."    At  length  it  was  agreed,  between
the  Meifrs.  Sheares   (John  was  a  member  of  the  Exe-
cutive) and  Captain  Armftrong,  that  the  latter  fhould
"  erect  a  ftandard   upon  the  night  to  be  fixed  upon  for
"  the  attack  upon  the  camp,  which  was  to  be  joined  by
"  all  whom  he  had  previoufly  known  to  be  United  Irifh-
"  men;  that  no  per  Jon  was  to  be  /pared;  and  they  were


HISTORICAL  PART.

**  not  to  be  given  the  option  of  joining  at  the  time  of  the
"attack."

The  camp  once  carried,  and  Dublin  fallen  into  the
hands  of  the  confpirators,  we  may  judge  of  the  ufe  they
meant  to  make  of  their  victory,  by  the  following  para-
ges of  a  proclamation  found  in  the  poll'effion  of  Mr.  Hen-
ry Sheares,  and  in  the  hand- writing  of  John  Sheares,  the
member  of  the  Executive  :

•  "  Irifhmen  !  your  country  is  free,  and  you  are  about
K  to  be  avenged.  That  vile  government,  which  has  fo
**  long  and  fo  cruelly  oppreffed  you,  is  no  more.  Some
<c  of  its  molt  atrocious  monflers  have  already  paid  the
"forfeit  of  their  lives.,  and  the  reft  are  in  our  hands.— —
"  Arife  then,  United  Sous  of  Ireland  !  Rife  like  a  ejreat
*'  and  powerful  people,  determined  to  live  free  or  die  ! — >
"  Arm  yourfeives  by  every  means  in  your  power,  and
"  rujb  like  liens  on  your  foes — in  the  caufe  of  Liberty,
4c  inaction  is  cowardice,  and  the  coward  Jhall  forfeit  the
<c  property  he  has  not  the  courage  to  protect.  :  let  his  arms
"  be  feized,  and  transferred  to  thofc  gallant  fpirits  who
u  want  and  will  ufe  them.  Yes,  Irifhmen,  we  ("wear  by
"  that  eternal  juji 'ice,  in  whofe  caufe  you  fight,  that  the
"  brave  patriot  who  furvives  the  prefent  glorious  ftruggle,
<{  and  the  family  of  him  who  has  fallen  or  (hall  fall  here-
**  after  in  it,  fhall  receive  from  the  hands  of  a  grateful  na-
**  tion  an  ample  recompenfe  out  of  that  property  which
11  the  crimes  of  our  enemies  have  forfeited  into  its  hands.
"  But  ive  likewije  fwear^  to  punijl)  robbery  with  death
"  and  infamy  !  !  !

"  As  for  thofe  degenerate  wretches  who  turn  their
"  fwords  againfr  their  native  country,  the  national  ven-
"  geance  aivaits  them  :  let  them  find  no  quarter^  unlefs
"  they  fhall  prove  their  repentance  by  fpeedily  dfert-
«  ing, — 5cc.  &c.

u  Many  military  feel  the  love  of  liberty  glow  within
"  their  breafts,  and  have  joined  the  national  ftartdàrd.
u  Receive  with  open  arms  fuch  a9  fhall  follow  fo  glori-
"  ous  an  example.  But  for  the  wretch  who  turns  his  fword
"  aguinft  his  native  country,  /*■/  the  national  vengeance
*'  be  viftted  on  him;  let  him  find  no  quarter." — ('1  rial  of
ÂfeJJrs.  Sheares.

The  foregoing  is  more  than  fufficient  to  (how  the  na-
ture of  this  anociation.  My  object  has  not  been  to  write
the  hiftory  of  the  late  rebellion,  but  merely  to  (how  that


3*3


3&f  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

its  object, end,  and  means,  were  entirely  fimihr  to  that  of
the  infernal  Seel  defcribed  in  the  Memoirs  that  have  jult
been  laid  before  the  Engliih  reader.  May  my  country-
man profit  of  this  awful  example  in  Ireland,  and  guard
againft  the  infidious  progress  of  that  Sect  in  Great  Bri-


tain


GREAT  BRITAIN.

When  we  turn  our  eyes  toward  Great  Britain,  alTo-
ciations  of  a  fimilar  tendency  appear;  under  a  great  di-
vcrfity  of  names  indeed,  but  all  actuated  by  a  fimilar  Spi-
rit. Their  firft  object  was,  to  captivate  the  minds  of  the
people  by  means  of  tt  lectures  delivered  on  political  fub-
"  jecls,  calculated  by  their  very  extravagance  to  catch
"  the  attention  of  the  audience  ;  and  in  the  courfe  of  them
a  every  topic  was  employed  that  could  inflame  their
"  minds,  alienate  them  from  the  laws  and  conftitution  of
"  their  country,  and  habituate  them  to  principles  of  fe-
"  dition  arid  rebellion.  The  moft  violent  publications
"  to  the  fame  effect  were  fecretly  but  generally  circulated
"  in  hand-bills,  both  in  the  metropolis  and  in  the  remote
"  parts  of  the  country.  Every  point  that  could  excite
"  difeontent,  according  to  the  purfuits,  interefts,  or  pre-
judices, of  different  clailes,  has  been  fucceffiveiy  dwelt
"  on,  and  always  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  connect  it  with
"  the  leading  deiign.  The  attempt  to  accomplifh  this
"  End  has  appeared  in  the  fhape  even  of  play-bills  and
"  fongs  ;  feditious  toails,  and  a  itudied  felection  of  the
"  tunes  which  have  been  moft  in  ufe  in  France  fince  the
*■-  Revolution,  have  been  applied  to  the  fame  purpofe,  of
"  endeavoring  to  render  deliberate  incitements  to  every
"  fpecies  of  treafon  familiar  to  the  minds  of  the  people."
(Eng.  2d  Report,  p.  20.  ) — "  In  the  fame  manner  (ùy
"  the  confpirators)  that  a  farmer  may  be  roufed  by  the
u  mention  of  tithes,  the  jhoe-makers  may  by  the  excejfive
"  dearnefs  of  leather,  the  inn-keeper  by  the  numerous  and
"  unneceffary  Jianding  army,  and  ALL  by  a  temperate
a  and  difpajfionate  relation  of  the  immenfe  number  of  fine-
"  cure  places  and  ufeiefs  offices,  in  which  the  corrupt  and
"  proftitute  favorites,  agents,  &c.  of  the  Rich  and  Great
"  riot  in  the  fpoils  and  plunder  wrefted  from  the  hufband-
u  man,  mechanic,  &c. — (Jp.  C.  p.  28.)

The  alTociatiou  that  took  the  lead  was,  the  Society


HISTORICAL  PART.  385

for  Constitutional  Information,  which  on  the
23  J  of  March,  1 79 1,  voted  thanks  to  Thomas  Paine  for
His  work  on  the  Rights  of  Man. — ( Ibid  21.)  Other  (o-
cieties,  fuch  as  thpfe  of  Shefneld,  Manchcfier,  &c.  palled
ftmijar  votxs  for  his  having  demonft rated  the  rights  of
man  in  a  manneryâ  char  and  convincing.  In  May,  1792,
this  fociety  fefolved,  that  a  communication  fhould  be
opened  with  the  Jacobin  Club  of  Paris  ;  and  an  addrefs
to  that  ciub  was  ti  anfmitted,  figned  by  the  chairman.  An
addrefs  was  aifo  voted  to  the  National  Convention  on  tr  e
gth  of  November,  1792,  in  confequence  of  the  attack  of
tne  luth  of  August  on  the  French  Monarchy  ftyling  the
Convention  "  frvants  of  the  fvcreign  people,  and  bene-
«  faclors  of  ma  <tkind.  'i  he  benefits  (  t  hey  fay  )  will  in  part
«  be  ours,  but  the  glory  will  be  all  your  own;  and  it  is  the
«  reward  of  your  perfeveran.ee;  it  is  the  prize  of  virtue."
--.(Ibid  24.)

Another  aff  -dation,  calling  itfelf  the  London  Cor-
responding Societ  y,  was  inftituted  in  January,  1792.
It  immediately  formed  a  clofe  connection  with  the  Society
for  Coratitutional  Information;  on  the  12m  October,
I7Q2,  it  framed  an  addrefs  to  the  French  Convention;
the  deputies  who  prefented  it,  "  after  pointing  out  their
«  wilhes  to  effect  in  this  country  a  revolution  fimilar  to
«  that  made  in  France,  cohfider  the  example  of  France  as
"  having  made  revolutions  eafy  ;  adding,  that  it  would  not
«  be  extraordi'i'iiy,  if  in  a  fhort  fpace  of  time  the  French
"  ihould  fend  addreflès  of  congratulation  to  a  National
"  Convention  of  England;  and  the  prefident  in  his  ànfwer
«  fays,  the  moment,  without  doubt,  approaches  when  the
«  French  will  bring  congratulations  to  the  National  Con-
«  vention  of  Great  Britain." — (Ibid.  25.  J  The  frater-
nal embrace  and  the  honors  of  the  fitting  were  the  natu-
ral recompenfe  of  fuch  patriotic  declamation.  The  ùn-
o-uinary  Barrere,  St.  André,  and  the  infolent  Roland  were
declared  honorary  members,  and  the  fpeeches  of  the  two
former  on  the  trial  of  Louis  XVI.  were  entered  on  the
books  of  the  fociety.

Various  fociettes  were  now  formed  in  different  parts
of  EnMand,  all  correfponding  with  thofe  in  London,  as
their  centre.  Reform  in  parliament,  univerfal  fufFrage,
and  annual  elections,  were  the  objecls  held  out  to  the  over-
credulous.  Soon  we  find  the  London  Society  for  Con-
stitutional Information  and  the  London  Cor-
Ccc


386  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

responding  Society  in  clofe  connection  with,  and
actually  directing,  fimilar  focieties  at  Hertford  ;  at
Cambridge  ;  in  Norfolk,  at  Norwich;  atLiECES-
ter;  in  Warwickshire, at  Coventry  and  Birming-
ham; at  Nottingham;  in  Derbyshire,  at  Derby
and  Be/per;  in  Cheshire,  at  Stockport;  in  Lanca-
shire, at  Liverpool  and  Manchejier  ;  in  Yorkshire,
in  the  Weft-Riding,  at  Shejficild,  Leeds,  Bradford,  Hal-
ifax, Huddersfield,  and  Wakefield;  in  Northumber-
land, at  Ne-wcaflle  upon  lyne,  &cc.  Aflociations  were
alio  formed  at  Bristol.  With  refpe<5r.  to  Scotland,
Edinburgh  appears  to  have  been  the  central  point  for
that  country  correfponding  with  London.  In  the  interior
of  Scotland,  and  under  its  direction,  we  find  many  towns,
fuch  as  Leith,  Dundee,  Perth,  Stirling,  Kilfyth,  Kyrkin-
tulhch,Glafgow  (which  alfo  correfponded  with  London)
Paijley,  Strathaven,  Dalkeith,  Sec.  The  fame  rules  of
proceeding,  and  for  fubdividing  the  focieties,  are  to  be
traced  again.  But  nothing  can  better  illuftrate  the  na-
ture of  thefe  aflociations  than  that  of  Sheffield.

This  affectation  they  tell  us  (Appendix  D.)  themfelves,
"  originated  in  an  afTembly  of  five  or  fix  mechanics,  who
"  by  their  meeting  at  fome  one  of  their  houfes,  and  con-
w  verjSng  ahotit  the  enormous  high  price  of  provifions;  the
"  grofs  abufes  this  nation  labors  under  from  the  unbound,
"  ed  authority  of  the  Monopolifers  of  all  ranks,  from  the
"  king  to  the  peasant;  the  wafteandlavilliof  the  pub-
t{  lie  property  by  placemen,  penfioners,  luxury,  and  de-
"  bauchery,  fources  of  the  grievous  burthens  under  which
"  the  nation  groans  ;  together  with  the  mock  reprefent-
"  ation  of  the  people; — thefe  being  the  fubjects  of  their
"  converfation,  they  concluded,  that  nothing  but  dark-
"  ness  and  ignorance  in  the  people  could  fuller  the
"  rights  of  every  freeman  to  be  thus  violated."  They
then  invited  their  neighbors  to  deliberate  on  this  patrio-
tic difcovery;  they  re-printed  an  edition  of  1600  copies
of  Paine' s  Rights  of  Man,  and  fold  it  at  fix-pence  to  en-
lighten their  fellow-countrymen.  They  ftyle  themfelves
the  Society  for  Conftitutional  Information,  write  up  to
London,  on  the  15th  of  January,  1792,  to  requeft  the
favor  "  of  forming  a  connection  with  all  the  like  fbci-
4t  eties  in  England,  and  efpecially  with  thofe  or  lome  of
"  them  in  London,  the  Thatchtd-houfe,  the  London-ta-
"  vcrn,  or  others,  and  humbly  folicit  their  advice  and  as-


HISTORICAL  PART.  387

<(  fiftance  In  the  accompliftiing  thereof,  in  order  to  form
**  our  refolvesftmilar  to  theirs  ;  becaufe,  as  we  are  aétu-
*'  ated  by  the  same  caufe  and  principle,  and  all  our  in-
"  terefts  being  one,  our ■  fentiments  ought  and  mujl  be  the
"fame."  In  about  four  months  after,  they  inform  the
London  Society,  that  "  not  only  their  large  and  popu-
u  lous  town,  but  the  zvhole  neighborhood  for  many  miles
**  round  about,  have  an  attentive  eye  upon  them  ;  and  that
"  molt  of  the  towns  and  villages  were  forming  themfelves
*'  into fimilar  aJfociations,Jtr  icily  copying  after  us ."  They
alfo  declare  their  object  to  be,  "  a  radical  reform  of
"  the  Country  as  foon  as  prudence  and  difcretion  would
M  permit,  and  eftabliflied  on  that  fyftem  which  is  confilt-
"  ent  with  the  rights  of  man."  They  requeft  that  cer-
tain  members  of  their  aiTociation  may  be  admitted  to  the
London  meeting,  which  now  becomes  the  regulating  cora-
mitiee,  that  u  a  more  clofe  connection  might  be  formed
u  and  communication  be  maintained,  "  for  the  extenhon  of
"  ufeful  knowledge  from  town  to  vi liage ,and  from  village
"  to  town,  until  the  whole  nation  be  lufficiently  enlight-
"  ened  and  united  in  the  fame  caufe,  which  cannot  fail  of
"  being  the  cafe  wherever  the  molt  excellent  works  of
"  Thomas  Paine  find  reception."  Should  any  perfon
wifh  to  be  convinced,  that  all  thefe,  as  well  as  the  Irilh
focieties,were  formed  on  Weifhaupt'scorrefponding  fcale,
let  him  attend  to  the  improvement  which  the  Sheffield
people  were  about  to  adopt  at  the  end  of  the  4th  month,
and  after  this  offspring  of  the  difcontented  mechanics  had
correfponded  with  London  :  "  It  is  certainly  (they  fay)
"  the  beft  way  of  managing  large  bodies,  as  in  great  and
"  populous  towns;  viz.  dividing  them  into  fmall  bodies
"  or  meetings  of  ten  perfons  each,  and  thofe  ten  to  ap
"  point  a  delegate.  Ten  of  thefe  delegates  form  another
"  meeting,  and  fo  on,  delegating  from  one  to  another,  till
u  at  laft  they  are  reduced  to  a  proper  number  for  confti-
"  tuting  the  Committee  or  Grand  Council."  After
this,  it  is  really  ufclefs  to  trouble  my  reader  with  any
thing  more  on  the  nature  or  principles  of  the  focieties  of
Great  Britain.  We  find  fubicriptions  carried  on  for  the
defence  of  the  profecuti on  commenced  againft  Thomas
Paine.  The  Scotch  Societies  agree  with  thufe  of  Eng-
land to  hold  a  Convention,  which,  tho'  not  general  from
England,  met  in  Octooer,  1793. — (Appendix  F.) — A
letter  was  there  read  from  the  four  united  fucieties  of  ire-


3?H  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

land.  Citizens  Hamilton  Rowan  :nd  Simon  Buthr  at-
tended from  Dublin,  but  were  n:<t  delegated;  however,
the  latter  made  a  report  to  the  convention'  on  the  ftate  of
Ireland.  Margaret^  a  London  delegate,  laid,  «  The  fo-
"  cieties  in  Lon  Ion  arc  very  numerous,  though  fomewhat
"  fluctuating.  In  fomê  parts  of  England  whole  towns
"  aie  reformers;  Sheffield  and  its  environs  have  50, OOO.
u  In  Norwich  there  are  30  focieties  in  one. — If  we  could
"  get  a  convention  of  England  and  Scotland  called,  we
"  might  reprefent  fix  or  /even  hundred  tho'-fand  males,
**  which  is  a  majority  of  all  the  adules  in  the  kingdom;
"  and  miniitry  would  not  dare  to  refufe  us  our  right1-."
They  had  held  fourteen  fittings,  when  the  m  igilirates
thought  proper  to  put  a  (top  to  it  and  arreft  fome  of  the
members j  others  aped  the  conduct  of  the  tiers  etat  at
Versailles,  when  ordered  to  difperie,  and  adjourneu  from
place  to  place;  happily,  however,  they  did  not  fucc^ed.
All  their  forms,  and  even  their  modes  of  fpeech,  were
fervilely  copied  from  the  French.  After  the  numerous
adherents  that  they  had  feduced,  it  is  natural  to  think  that
the  teachers  of  the  Sect  thought  it  time  to  bind  the  mon-
Jiers  who  dared  oppofe  them  ;  to  effectuate  this,  pikes
were  forged  in  different  parts  of  Great  Bnuin.  "  A
"  plan  (writes  the  fecretary  of  the  Sheffield  focie  y,  m
w  April,  1794)  has  been  formed  for  carrying  into  effect
"this  neceliitry  bufinefs  (of  arming).  Pike-t>lades  are
tc  made  with  hoops  for  the  fhaft  to  fit  the  top  enJs;  the
"  bottom  end  of  the  (hafts  lhould  be  about  an  inch  thick-
M  er,  and  fir  is  recommended  for  the  (hafts,  feledted  by
"  perfons  who  are  judges  of  wood.  The  blades  a, id
u  hoops  will  be  fold  at  the  rate  of  one  (hilling,  properly
<l  tempered  and  polifhed.  The  money  fent  with  the  or-
"  ders." — -(2d  Report,  p.  2) — 'J  be  fecretary  of  the  Cor-
ref ponding  Society  gave  directions  tvhere  the  pikes  ?night
be  procured  (page  5)  ;  thofe  who  could  procure  mus-
kets learned  the  ufe  of  them,  exercifing  by  candle-light,
or  under  pretext  of  loyal  aflbciatibns  ;  that  which  affumed
the  name  of  Loyal  Lambeth  would  admit  none  but  thofe
•who  were  members  of  the  Corresponding  Society,  or  who
prOmifed  to  become  fo;  nor  had  this  armed  alTociation
been  authorifedbv  government.  Meanwhile  ScotlanJ  had
i:iade  fuch  progrefs,  that  the  brethren  there  not  only  be-
gan to  arm  with  pikes,  but  alfo  turned  their  mind  towards
acting-!  The  plot  was  fortunately  difcovered.  A  (heriff's


HISTORICAL  PART.  389

officer  went  to  fearch  the  houfe  of  a  Mr.  Watt-,  for  forne
goods  which  were  fuppofed  to  have  been  fecretéd,  -s  be-
longing to  a  bankrupt  of  the  name  of  Ncilfon,  and  who
has  lince  commenced  preacher  in  England.  In  this  fearch
he  found  fome  pikes;  and  in  a  fécond  (mure  in  the  fame
week,  on  the  15th  of  May,  1794)  many  more  were  dis-
covered in  a  clofet.  This  gave  rife  to  enquiries,  and  it
was  found  that  no  lefs  than  4000  pikes  had  been  ordered
for  Perth,  beiide  thofe  wanted  for  Edinburgh.  It  was  far*
ther  difcovered,  that  this  Watt  was  a  member  of  the  Com-
mittee of  TV  ay  s  and  Means  delegated  from  the  remnants
of  the  convention;  that  he  had  in  this  committee  read  a
plan  "  For  feizing  on  the  Lord  Juftice  Clerk, the  Lords
u  of  Sefïion,  and  the  Lord  Provoft*  A  fire  was  to  be
"  lighted  at  the  Excife,  and  when  the  foldiers  werecom-
"  ing  down,  the  people  were  to  fall  on  them  and  feize  the
"  Banks."  As  foon  as  this  had  fucceeded,  a  proclama-
tion was  to  be  iflued,  "Defiring  all  farmers  not  to  remove
"  their  grain  under  pain  of  death,  and  all  gentlemen  not
"  to  go  three  miles  from  their  houfes."  This  grand  plan
was  communicated  to  the  Societies  by  means  of  travel-
ling adepts,  who  had  a  certificate  authorizing  them  to
call  at  the  Societies.  It  was  not  figned,  but  feals  were
attached  to  the  commiiîion.  The  plan  executed,  and  the
tc  Arijlocrats  feized"  couriers  were  to  be  fent  to  the
country  with  the  news.  In  Watfs  houle  were  alfo  found
the  types  of  the  hand-bill  contained  in  Appendix  A.  No.
1.  and  dated  Dundee,  April  12,  1794,  which  was  diftri-
buted  among  the  Fenciblcs,  to  ftir  them  up  to  revolt —
The  manner  of  diftributing  them  is  worthy  of  remark,  as
being;  common  to  England  as  well  as  to  Scotland.  Dow-
tue,  who  was  alfo  a  member  of  the  Committee  of  Ways
and  Means,  and  who  was  convicted  with  Watt,  after
giving  fome  to  a  perfon  who  was  to  diftribute  them,
"  defired  him  to  throw  the  parcel  on  the  floor  ;  and  if
"  any  body  allied  him  where  he  got  it,  he  might  fay  he
"  found  it."  A  fhort  time  after,  thefe  hand-bills  found
their  way  to  the  foldiers  in  garrifon  at  Dalkeith. — (See
the  7 rials  of  Watt  and  Downie,  in  Augujl  and  Septem-
ber, 1794.;

On  the  12th  of  April,  1797,  England  witnefïed  the
awful  fight  of  its  fleet  in  open  insurrection.  Here,  as  on
land,  we  find  oaths  of  fecrecy  and  of  union,  delegates,  and
accord  of  fyftem  pervading  the  whole  mutiny.  At  Portf-


39<>  antisocial  conspiracy;

mouth  it  was  happily  quelled,  in  a  great  degree,  by  the
20th  of  April;  fome  draggling  fhips  would  indeed  (how
fynptoms  of  revolt,  from  time  to  time,  both  there  and  at
Plymouth  :  At  length  the  great  mutiny  at  the  Nore  broke
out  on  the  \%th  of  May,  and  was  not  fuppreiled  till  the
month  of  June.  Many  of  the  mutineers  were  brought  to
trial;  and  Parker,  their  leader,  was  hanged  on  the  30th
of  June.  No  authentic  document  appeared  on  thefe  trials,
indeed,  that  could  connect  this  mutiny  with  the  fecret  fo-
cieties  on  land;  but,  if  we  look  to  dates,  it  will  be  evi-
dent, that  the  Corresponding  Society  did  not  view  this  in-
iurre&ion  of  the  fleet  with  an  indifferent  eye.  I  here  al-
lude to  the  papers  that  appeared  on  the  trial  of  a  man  of
the  name  of  Fellowes,  who  had  been  a  journeyman  car-
penter before  he  took  to  the  patriotic  line;  he  was  tried
at  Maidirone  on  the  13th  of  March,  1798.,  (bis  trial  hav-
ing been  deferred  at  his  own  requeft)  and  fentenced  to  two
years  imprifonment.  The  account  of  the  tranfa<5tion  giv-
en by  the  prifoner,  as  appeared  in  evidence,  is  as  follows:
<;  That  he  lodged  at  a  Mr.  Wratten's  houfe  in  Maidllone  ;
"  that  a  parcel  came  there  on  the  iSth  of  May,  1797,  (the
"  fleet  in  full  mutiny)  directed  to  Mr.  W ratten,  by  a
**  Charing-Crofs  coach. — The  wife  opened  the  parcel;
"  and,  as  Mr.  Wratten  was  from  home,  he  (Fellowes)
u  told  the  wife,  that  the  papers  it  contained  belonged  tô
"  one  of  the  focieties;  there  was  to  be  a  meeting,  he  told
"  her, on  that  night  at  the  Rofe  and  Crown-,  that  he  would
"  carry  them  there,  and  take  the  fenfe  of  the  meeting.  He
"  accordingly  did  fo;  read  one  of  them,  and  none  of  the
"  fociety  made  any  objection.  He  then  laid  them  on  the
"  table,  and  the  members  of  the  fociety  helped  themfehes
"  as  they  thought  proper,"  (or,perhaps,found  tbem,as  was
the  cafe  with  the  hand-bills  in  Scotland.)  Some  of  the
bills  were  carried  from  this  meeting  to  another  divifion
of  the  fociety,  fitting  at  the  Cajile  Inn,  under  the  pretence
of  knowing  whether  they  were  legal  ;  but,  whether  legal
or  not,  they  were  distributed  before  morning  among  the
foldiers  then  at  Maidftone. — The  paper  began  thus: —
4l-  To  the  Briti(h  Army: — Comrades,  are  we  not  men?
"  — is  it  not  high  time  we  fhould  prove  we  know  otif-
t:  feives  tobeluch? — Are  we  any  where  reflected  as  111.11
u  — and  why  arc  we  not? — Have  not  wrong  notions  of
*'  difcipline  led  us  to  our  prefent  defpifed  condition  ?: — Is
"  there  a  man  amon::  us  who  does  not  with  to  defend  his


HISTORICAL  PART.  3QI

*c  country,  and  who  would  not  willingly  do  it  without  be-
"  ing  fubject  to  the  infolence  and  cruelty  of  effeminate
"  puppies?  IVere  not  the  Sailors  (at  that  time  in  full
"  infurre£tion),  like  us,  m  eked  for  want  of  thought,  tho'
"  not  fo  much  defpifed  for  poverty  as  we  are?  Have  they
"  not  proved  that  they  can  THINK  and  ACT  for  them-
" [elves,  and  preferve  every  ufeful  point  of  difcipline  full
"  as  well,  or  better  than  when  under  the  tyranny  of  their
w  officers?"  Then  comes  a  heap  of  declamation  againffc
the  officers,  againft  Parliament,  again!!  barracks,  (a  teiv
rible  grievance,  as  it  guards  the  foldiers  from  falling  an
eafy  prey  to  the  difcontented)  and  on  the  fy  Mem  of  cloth-
ing; the  Addrefs  then  proceeds: — "  Thefe  are  a  few  of
"  our  grievances,  and  but  a  few;  what  (hall  we  do? — ■
"  The  tyranny  of  what  is  falfely  called  difcipline  prevents
"  us  from  ailing  like  other  men.  We  cannot  even  give  in
"  a  petition  for  that  which  common  honefly  would  freely
"  have  given  us  long  ago.  We  have  only  tivo  choices,  ei-
"  ther  to  fubmit  to  the  prefent  impositions,  or  demand  the
"  treatment  proper  for  men.  The  power  is  all  our  own.
"  The  regiments  which  fend  you  this  are  willing  to  do
"  their  part."  (Can  the  Correfponding  Society  here  de-
nominate themfelves  regiments,  in  confequence  of  their
pilce-bufmefs?)  "  They  can  fhow  their  countrymen  they
"  can  be  foldiers  without  being  Jlaves,  and  will  make  their
"  demands  asfoon  as  they  know  you  will  not  draw  the

"  TRIGGER  AGAINST  THEM. Of  this  We    will   judge

"  when  we  know  you  have  diftributed  this  bill,  not  only
"among  your  comrades,  but  to  every  foldier  whom  you
u  know  in  every  part  of  the  country — Be  fober — Be
"  ready."  The  whole  of  this  trial  took  place  in  prefence
of  feveral  of  the  members  of  the  Correfponding  Society
of  Maidftone;  and  after  the  fentence  of  two  years  impri-
fonment  was  palTed  on  Fellowes,  and  that  he  was  taking
from  the  bar,  fome  of  his  friends  confoled  him  by  faying,
"  Two  years  !  that  is  a  long  while;  but  Buonaparte  will
"  be  here  before  that."  However  this  vapouring  Camé-
léon is  little  to  be  dreaded  by  Britons.

f  land-bills  of  the  fame  nature  were  difperfed  among  the
army  in  other  parts,  and  particularly  in  London  ;  but,  like
true  foldiers,  they  only  anfwered  by  offering  rewards
(collected  from  their  pay)  for  the  difcovery  of  the  mis-
creants who  had  conceived  fo  mean  an  opinion  of  them
as  to  think  they  could  be  feduced  from  their  duty.  A  p.ir-


y)1  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

eel  of  hand-bills,  in  the  very  terms  here  mentioned,  was
thrown  into  the  fiables  of  the  Second  Regiment  of Horfê
Guards,  between  the  hours  of  one  and  three  in  themorn-
in -,  but  was  treated  with  the  contempt  it  deferred.  The
ciftnb'itMn  of  fuch  hand-bills,  and  the  proof  adduced  at
I A  lidftone,  will  caufe  much  leis  furprize,  when  it  is  known,
that  "  the  delign  of  endeavoring  to  feducethe  army  from
"  their  duty  had  been  the  frequent  fubject  of  conversation
"  among  fome  members  of  the  Correspond:  rig  Society  ;  it
"  even  appears,  that  a  project  was  repeatedly  agitated  a-
"  mong  them,  of  ftriking  a  hidden  blow,  and  beginning
"  bv  fecuring  the  Royal  Family  and  the  Members *»f  both
"  Houfes  of  Parliament,  with  the  hope  (as  it  was  exprefs-
"  ed)  that  the  army  being  zvithout  leader \î,  would  no  long-
"  er  opfcfe  their  attempts. — (2d  Report,  p.  17.)

The  Itiili  fy  Ire  m  mi»  now  fully  adopted  in  Scotland;
as  on  the  21  il  October,  1797)  a  perfon  jutl  arrived  from
Scotland  brought  a  Scotch  Constitution toaCountvMeet-
iiig  at  Down  Patrick,  "which  was  ward  far  ward 'the
"  lame  as  that  of  the  iiiih,  only  the  words  United  North
"  Britons  were  fubitituted  for  United Irishmen." — >
(Inijb  Appendix,  No.  XIV.) — And  on  the  5J1  of  Janu-'
ary,  1798,  'I he  United  Britons  fend  the  addrefs  already
mentioned  in  the  account  of  Ireland, declaring  that  tf  'The
<c  Society  of  the  Friends,  of  the  People  and  f /tar  for Gonjii-
"  tutional  Information  had  difconunued  their  exertions;
'•  that  the  London  Cûrrefponding  oV/V/y,  and  other  focie-
4t  ties  /;;  union  with  it,  had  ariien  upon  their  ruins." —
(Ibid.) —  The  delegates  who  carried  it  informed  the  Na-
tional Committee  of  Ireland,  that  **  England,  Scotland,
"  and  Ireland,  were  in  future  to  be  coniiciered  as  one  peo-
ple, acYmg  for  one  common  caufe;  that  legiflators  were
"  now  chofen  from  the  three  kingdoms,  to  act  as  an  Exc-
"  cntivejor  the  whole/' — Whither  does  this  infor-
mation naturally  lead  us  ?  Surely  to  that  paper  which  gavé
rife  to  the  famous  trial  at  Maidftone  of  Quiglev,  i>;nn>,
O'Connor,  &c?  It  began  thus:  "  The  See  ret  Committee
"  of  England  to  the  Executive  Direèlory  of  France —
"  Health  and  Fraternity — 'he  6th  of  Pluvi  >fe  (or  Janu-
"  arv  25th,  exactly  twenty  days  after  the  addrefs  to  Ire-
"  land.)  Citizen  Directors— -we  are  called  toge-
"  ther,  on  the  wing  of  the  moment,  to  communicate  to
f*  you  our  fentiments;  the  citizen  who  now  prefents  them
"  to  you,  and  who  was  the  bearer  of: them  before,  having


HISTORICAL  PART.  393

M  but  a  few  hours  to  remain  in  town,  expect  not  a  labor-
"  ed  addrefs  from  us  ;  but  plainnefs  is  the  great  charac-
"  teriftic  of  republicans.

"  Affairs  are  now  drawing  to  a  great  and  awful crifis;
"  tyranny,  uiak.cn  to  its  bails,  feems  about  to  be  buried
"  in  its  o'vn  ruins.  With  the  tyranny  of  England  that  of
"  all  Europe  muil  fall.  Hafte  then,  Great  Nation, pour
llf  forth  thy  gigantic  force  !  Let  the  bafe  defpot  feel  thine
"  avenging  Stroke,  and  let  one  opprefTed  nation  carol  forth
"  the  praifes  of  France  at  the  altar  of  liberty.

"  We  law  with  rapture  your  proclamations  ;  they  met
"  our  wanneft  wifhes,and  removed doubts  from  theminds
"  of  millions.  Go  on  !  Englijhmen  will  be  ready  to  fécond
"  your  efforts  !  !  !"  What  fpurious  breed  of  Englishmen
are  thefe  ?  What  race  of  Englishmen  have  fuffered  them-
felves  to  be  led  away  by  fuch  bafe-born  cowards  ?  Is  it  in
the  life-time  of  a  Howe,  a  Hood,  a  Bridport,  a  St.  Vin-
cent, a  Duncan,  or  a  Nelfon,  that  they  dare  invite  thefe
enemies  of  the  human  race  to  come  and  pillage  this  flou-
rishing country  ?  Are  the  fans  culottes  then  to  lord  it  ia
London  Streets,  bearing  on  pikes  in  Sanguinary  triumph
the  heads  of  ihe  beft  men  of  England,  with  the  hideous
yells  of  Equality  and  Liberty  ?  Vainly  Shall  fuch  fyco-
phants,  in  the  hope  of  partaking  of  the  general  piiiage
and  of  defpoilins  their  fellow-countrymen  (for,  from  the
king  to  the  peafant,  all  are  declared  monopolizers)  fpread
the  terror  of  French  arms  and  the  impossibility  of  refifr-
ing  them.  No  ;  far  from  us  be  fuch  teachers  and  fuch
leaders,  who  only  beguile  the  unheedy  to  lead  them  to
beggary,  wretchednefs,  or  the  gallows.  Englishmen
are  loyaly  manly  y  and  brave;  and  when  once  they  Shall
have  unmaSked  thefe  infidious  brethren,  they  need  never
doubt  of  victory.  But  to  return  to  the  addrei's  : — The
nation  is  reprefented  to  be  on  the  eve  of  bankruptcy;  as
making  great  progrefs  in  democracy  ;  and  as  placing  little
confidence  in  the  leaders  of  oppofition  fat  lealt  fuch  was
the  explanation  of  that  palTage  given  by  the  Counfel  for
Mr.  O'Connor).    It  then  proceeds:

"  Already  have  the  EngliSh  fraternized  with  the  Irifli
"  and  the  Scots;  and  a  delegate  from  each  now  fits
"  with  us.  The  facred  flame  of  liberty  is  rekindled,  the
"  holy  obligation  OF  brotherhood  is  received  ivitben-
"  thufiafm.  Even  in  the  F leets  and  Armies  it  makes
Ddd


394-  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

i(  fome  progrefs.  Disafff.ction  prevails  in  both,  and
"  United  Britain  burns  to  break  her  chains."

I  had  forgotten  to  fpeak  of  a  circumftance  relating  to
the  fleets.  Englishmen  have  viewed  with  horror  the  fcene
of  the  Hermione  frigate,  vvhofe  crew  role  on  their  officers,
murdered  them,  and  carried  the  (hip  into  the  enemy's
port.  They  have  feenmany  other  plots  laid  (but  fortunate-
ly difcove-red)  to  murder  the  officers  and  give  up  the  ihips
to  the  enemy.  Looking  back  to  the  oath  adminiftered  to
the  military  in  Ireland,  **  to  be  true  to  the  French,"  and
the  plans  agreed  upon  u  to  murder  their  officers  and  de-
liver the  arms  up  to  the  towns-people,"  the  reader  will
not  be  fo  much  at  a  lofs  to  judge  whence  fuch  atrocious
plots  could  arife,  or  what  the  progrefs  of  the  brother-
hood in  the  fleets  can  mean.  God  forbid,  that  I  ûtould
mention  this  with  any  idea  of  reproach  to  thofe  gallant
men  who  have  fmce  (o  glorioufly  obliterated  every  ftain
that  could  have  attached  to  their  conduct  during  the  mu-
tiny. They  Gw  with  regret  chat  they  had  fallen  victims
to  induction,  and  they  glorioufly  revenged  themfelves  on
the  enemies  of  their  country.  They  have  counteracted
the  atrocious  plans  of  the  confpii  ing  Brotherhood  ;  and
when  I  mentioned  the  mutiny,  it  was  only  to  remind  them,
that  crafty  feducers  could  perchance  furpriae  their  natural
honci'ry.

It  continues:  "•  United  as  we  are,  we  only  wait  with
"  impatience  to  fee  the  Hero  of  Italy,  and  the  brave  ve-
terans of  the  Great  Nation.  Myriads  will  hail  their
"  arrival  with  fhouts  of  joy;  they  will  foon  finifh  their
"  glorious  campaign  !  Tyranny  will  vani/h  from  the
■"  face  of  the  earth,  and,  crozvned  with  laurels,  the  in-
"  vincible  army  of  France  will  return  to  its  native  coun-
"  try,  there  long  to  enjoy  the  VJell  earned  praife  of  a  grate-
"  ful zuorld,ivhofep  cedom  they  have  purchajedwith  thiir
"bind."  '     (L.S.)

Did  fycophants  ever  beg  more  earnefHy  for  the  plun-
der and  devaluation  of  their  fellow-countrymen  ;  for  ihey
could  no  longer  plead  ignorance  of  the  views  of  the
French  ?  Colonel  Tate  had  made  his  defcent  on  the  coaft
of  Wales  the  22I  of  February,  1797,  and  his  inftru&ions,
figned  by  Hoche,*  the  faithlcls  conqusror  of  Quiberon,

*  Thefe  inflruflions  were  much  cavilled  at  by  thofe  papers
that  are  ever  founding  the  praties  or  the  French  Revolution  ;


HISTORICAL  PART.  395

•rdered  him  w  to  execute  a  coup  de  main  on  Briftol  ;"
for  its  deftruftion  was  "  of  the  very  laft  importance,  and
<*  every  poflible  effort  fhould  be  made  to  accomplifh  it,"
on  account  of  its  riches  and  commerce.  The  troops  were
to  be  landed  by  night  u  within  five  miles  of  the  town,
"  in  the  greater!  filence,  and  being  fupplied  with  com-
u  buftible  matter,  were  to  advance  rapidly  in  the  dark,
*c  on  that  fide  of  Briftol  which  might  be  to  windward,
"  and  immediately  fet  fire  to  that  quarter.  If  the  enter-
*'  prize  be  conducted  (they  fay)  with  dexterity, u  cannot
u  tail  to  produce  the  total  ruin  of  the  town,  the  port,  the
"  docks,  and  the  vefTels,  and  to  ftrike  terror  and  amaze-
"  ment  into  the  very  heart  of  the  capital  of  England."
Let  the  inhabitants  of  Briftol  now  call  on  thofe  inJiduou»
brethren  who  dare  commune  with  them,  and  afk  them,
Whether  they  alfo  approve  of  this  invitation  of  the  bro-
therhood to  the  French,  as  they  "  applauded  and  appro-
"  ved  the  refolution  oj forming  another  general  convention"
on  the  24th  of  Apni,  I794>  after  the  difperiion  of  the
Scotch  Convention  in  December,  1793.  After  reading
H  jche's  lnfti  uclions,  will  they  write  again  to  the  London
Correfponding  Society-*-"  we  read — we  blufhed — we
"  took  courage— we  did  more  ;  for  we  refolved  on  re-as-
"  fembling."  If  fo  they  do,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  they
will  do  it  for  the  purpofe  of  making  public  atonement  to
their  fellow-townfmen  for  their  paft  conduce;  for  they
can  no  longer  fay  "  'tis  a  noble — 'tis  a  virtuous — 'tis  a
**  god-  like  and  immortal  caufe— m  which  we  are  now  mu-
„  tually  embarked."-— (Appendix  H.)

and  even  fo  late  as  the  31ft  of  O&ober,  1798,  the  Courier
boldly  declares  them  to  be  a  clumfy  fabrication  of  the  ministe-
rial writers.  The  Koglifh  nation  at  large  ihou!o  know  that
thofe  inftru&ions  were  never  doubted  of  by  any  well  informed
perfon,  from  the  firil  feizure  of  them  by  Lord  Cawdor  in  Fe-
bruary, 1797;  that  they  were  depofited  at  the  Secretary  of
State's  office  ;  that  they  are  alluded  to  in  the  report  made  the
9th  of  May,  1 798,  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons  On  the  treatment
oj  '  prifoiers  of  war,  and  are  publifhed  in  the  Appendix  ( /L
No.  XCJ  to  that  report.  When  the  reader  is  informed  that
an  office  is  eftablifhtd,  Rug  du  B'uq,  for  the  delivery  of  the
C'ourifk  at  Pari:,  that  it  is  ftronfcry  FeeorarrMencred  by  a  crea-
ture of  the  Directory,  in  one  of  tl.nr  periodical  papers,  while
aii  other  Engliih  papers,  but  one,  are  proscribed,  his  furprize
will  ceafé,  as  it  is- natural  to  expecl  that  fome  rerarn  rnuft  Le
made  to  the  Direclory  by  the  editor  of  this  pap^r  ior  fo  mail-
ed a  favor,  though  it  were  at  xhz  expenie  ct  troth.


396  antisocial  conspiracy;

The  Intl  ructions  proceed  :  "  The  expedition  under
li  Colonel  Tate  has  in  view  three  principal  objects  ;  thé
"  firtr.  is,  if  pofiible,  to  raife  an  infurreclion  in  the  coun-
"  try  ;  the  fécond  is,  to  interrupt  and  embarrafs  the  com*
"  rnerce  of  the  enemy  j  and  the  third,  to  prepare  and  faci-
"  litate  the  way  for  a  defcent,  by  diftradting  the  attention
**  of  the  Englifh  government.

"  In  all  countries  the  poor  are  the  clafs  moft  prone  to
"  infurrecYion  ;  and  this  difpofttion  is  to  be  cherijked  by
"  diftributing  money  and  drink  ;  ^/inveighing  again/?
"  the  government,  as  the  cause  of  the  public  dis-
"  tress  ;  by  recommending  and  facilitating  a  rifing,  to
"  plunder  the  public  ftores  and  magazines,  and  the  pro-
"  perty  of  the  rich,  whofe  affluence  is  the  natural  fubject
«  of  envy  to  the  poor."  By  fuch  means  "numbers  of
"  artizans  and  workmen,  of  vagabonds  and  idlers,  and
"  even  malefactors,"  were  to  be  attracted  and  "  formed
"  into  new  companies  under  the  command  of  French  of-
*'  ncers.

"  The  commerce  of  the  enemy  in  the  country  is  to  be
{C  interruptedby  breaking  down  bridges, cutting  ofTdykes,
"  and  ruining  caufeways,  which  is,  at  the  fame  time,  es-
"  fentially  neceffary  for  the  prefer vation  of  the  army;  by
tc  plundering  all  convoys  of  fubiiftence,  the  public  ftages
lt  and  waggons,  and  even  private  carriages;  the  cu  ting
"  off  the  fupplies  of  provifions  from  the  principal  towns,
*'  burning  all  vefTels  and  boats  in  the  rivers  and  canals,
"  deftroying  magazines,  fetting  fire  to  docks  and  coal-
"  yards,  rope-walks,  great  manufactories,  &c.  &c.  It  is
tc  to  be  obferved  likewife,  that  by  thefe  means  a  crowd  of
*'  artisans  will  be  thrown  out  of  employ,  and  of  courfe
"  be  ready  to  embark  in  any  meafure  which  holds  out  to
"  them  fubfiftence  and  plunder  without  labor  or  fatigue."
To  be  fuie,  the  poor,  the  workmen,  and  artizans,  are
here  held  out  as  a  moft  profligate  race  ;  but  Hoche,  it  is  to
be  remembered,  fpeaks  from  the  example  of  France,  where
tiie  deftruclion  of  manufacturing  towns  was  looked  upon
as  a  means  of  recruiting  the  Jacobin  ranks.  Secret  foci-
etits  had  prepared  them  for  fuch  horrid  deeds  in  France;
and  SherHeld,  Birmingham,  and  Alanchefter,  appear  to
have  been  the  firft  objects  of  the  patriotic  labors  of  the
i'ecret  Societies  in  England.

u  Sublicence  is  to  be  feized  wherever  it  can  be  found  ;
**  if  any  town  or  village  refufe  to  iupply  it  at  the  moment,


HISTORICAL  PART.

"  it  is  to  be  given  up  to  immediate  pillage  -,  your  foldiers
"  are  to  carry  with  them  nothing  but  their  arms;  they
"  will  find  every  where  clothes,  linen,  and  flwes  ;  the  in-
"  habitants  muji  fuppiy  your  wants,  and  the  feats  of  the
"  gentry  are  to  be  your  magazines.  Wherever  the  le-
u  çion,  or  any  of  its  columns,  is  ported,  if  the  neighboring
'*  panihes  do  not  give  injlant  notice  oj  the  approach  of  the
u  enemy  by  ringing  bells,  or  otherwife,  they  are  to  be  giv-

u  en  Up  TO  FIRE   AND  SWORD.

"  With  boldnefs  and  intelligence  combined,  you  may
*c  eafily  poiTefs  yourfelf  of  Chejler  or  Liverpool,  which
"  you  will  ruin  by  burning  the  magazines,  and  filling  up
w  the  ports,  or  at  leall  you  will  cut  off"  all  communication
"  between  thofe  cities  and  the  interior. — In  order  to
"  fprcad  the  confternation  and  aftonifhment  as  widely  as
"  pofTible,  after  the  deftruétion  of  Liverpool,  (for  this
"  point  is  capital),  you  muff  follow  your  blow,  aud  feize
"  upon  fome  fmall  town  or  fea-port  on  that  coaft,  which
*  you  will  lay   under  contribution."    Was  it  (I  would
afk)  to  prepare  the  town  of  Liverpool  for  fuch  a  fate  that
lb  early  as  1792,  fome  of  its  inhabitants  entered  into  a  di-
rect correfpondence  with  the  London  focieties  that  were
at  that  time  addrerline;;  the  Jacobins  of  Paris  and  hailing
them  as  brothers?  Did  they  then  conceive,  that  within
the  fpace  of  fix  years  an  addrefs  would  be  fent  to  invite
thofe  Jacobins  into  England,  bearing  fuch  inftruclions  as
are  now  laid  before  the  reader? — During  this  time  Floche,
in  perfon  was  fuppofed  to  be  in  Ireland  ;  and  my  reader
may  eafily  conceive,  by  thefe  inftrudtions,  the  horrors  that
he  would  have  committed  himfclf,  had  he  fucceeded  in  his
attempt  at  Bantry-B:iy.   Two  other  French  parties  were
to  have  been  acting  in  concert  with  Tate,  in  all  probabi-
lity with  fimitar  initructions,  in  Yorkshire,  Durham,  and
Northumberland;  and  without  doubt  thefe  parties,  if  fuc-
cefsful,  would  have  as  radically  re  formed  the  conhStution
as  could  have  been  defued  by  that  aflbciation  ai  Newcas-
tle upon  Tyne,  which  wrote,  on  the  24th  of  April,  1794,
to  inform  the  London  Correfponding  Society  how  cun'-
ningly  they  met  every  week,  "  admitting  none  but  known
"friends,  and  afluming  no  name  but  thai  of  newspa-
"  PER-coMPANiEs."    News  indeed  !  their  town  burnt,
their  port  devfxoyed — Great  news — bloody  news  for  the
friends.     Should  they,  ho.vever,  not  have  been  the  fifft
object  of  the  rapacity  of  the  implacable  enemy,  and,  learn-


^g?  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACY;

ing  by  the  example  of  Briftol,  have  conceived  hopes  of
preferving  their  town,  by  petitioning  his  majefty  for  a
military  force,  would  they  (I  make  bold  to  afk)  patrioti-
cally finiih  their  petition,  by  "  Farewell, hoping  theUY-

"  DRA  OF  TYRANNY   AND  IMPOSITION  Jhall foon fall

"  under  the  cuii,lotiN£  of  truth  and  reason  !  1"
Let  them  learn  before  it  is  too  late. — (Appendix^  H.  p,

m  February  laft,  the  United  Britifli  were  fwearing  in,
proielytes  in  the  Borough;  and  thefe  feducers  would  have
continued  their  feditious  practices,  had  they  not  been  put
to  flight  by  the  magiftrates  of  Union-hall  ;  and  John  Cor-
mick,  m  his  declaration  of  July,  1798,  itated,  that  "he
"  knows  there  is  an  agent  for  the  United  Britifh  refident
u  in  Paris,  and  that  there  are  agents  both  for  the  United
"  Briiiin  and  Irifh  refident  at  Hamburg."— ( Irijb  Ap,
No.  XXXII.) — -Thus  are  we  led  to  July,  1798,  by  au-
thentic documents,  which  will  be  more  than  enough  to
convince  the  molt,  obflinate  fceptick,  that  this  confpiring
.Sect  is  ever  active  and  vigilant  to  betray  its  countrymen
into  the  hands  of  the  molt  implacable  of  enemies.

Would  to  God  that  every  Englishman  would  reflect
on  the  proceedings  of  Secret  Societies!  how  clearly
might  he  perceive  their  twofold  object— of  overturning
a  conititution  that  has  led  England  to  the  fummit  of  glo-
ry and  profperity  ;  and  of  erecting  a  power,  on  bloodfhed,
rapine,  and  the  neglect  of  every  focial  duty.  On  the  one
fiue,  we  lee  the  Rights  of  man,  Equality  and  Liberty,  kt
forth  by  thefe  infidious  teachers,  to  prove  to  the  induitri-
ous  laboror  and  unwary  artizan,  tnat  it  is  a  breach  of
their  rights  to  fee  the  inhabitants  of  thee.mhdiftinguifh-
ed  into  dalles  fubordinate  to  different  ranks  and  fubject
to  Superiors;  that  were  thefe  distinctions  of  monopolizers
oiice  broken,  the  people  would  be  then  repolleifed  of  their
imprefcnptihle  rights;  that  tyrannical  laws  would  no
longer  reprefs  the  glorious  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  man-
kind, and  defpoticaiiy  condemn  thefe  real  patriots,  the
fi  u:nds  of  man  an  J  the  defenders  of  their  rights.  The
exi'ting  governments  are  reprefented  as  an  infringement
of  .ne  rights  of  tii e  poop!-;  the  magiftrates  and  military
as  agents  of  defp  >tifin;  the  clergy  as  impofrors.  Oil  the
othei  fi  la,  to  eihibiuh  the  rebellious  power  of  the  Secret
Societies,  anv  number  of  perlons  being  rendered  difcoa-
tiitea  by  hearing  the  perpetual  declamations  ot  thole  ^0-


HISTORICAL  FART*  399

Utical  libertines,  an  oath  of  fecrecy  and  union  is  tendered
to  their. j  their  curioiity  and  enthufiafin  is  next  worked
upon  by  the  hopes  of  fecrets  of  high  importance;  they
make  profelytes;  their  afl'emblies  icon  become  too  nu-
merous; it  is  hinted  that  it  would  be  dangerous,  under
the  exifting  circuinftances,  to  meet  in  fueh  numbers;  it
is  propofecl  and  agreed  that  they  ibould  divide,  by  tern  for
example;  that,  in  order  to  eftablilh  a  fort  of  lubordina-
tion,  each  fociety  fhould  choofe  a  delegare  ;  then  the  ten
delegates  depute  one  of  theirs  to  a  higher  degree;  fo  from
degree  to  degree  we  rife  to  the  Grand  and  Regulating  "
Committee.  One  would  think  they  ftad  forgotten  their
declamations  againlf.  rank  and  Superiors.  The  leait  breach
of  fecrccy  is  to  be  puniftied  by  poifon  or  the  dagger.  Dis-
obedience is  feverely  punilhed  ;  and  when  we  loo;c  to  the
Jacobin  oath  we  find  that  neither  Father,  Mother,  Frier  i^
Relation,  nor  even  Ali/lrefs,  are  to  be  fpared,  when  the
good  of  the  caule  is  in  queilion.  Is  it  that  a  few  rebels,
ftyiing  themielves  a  Secret  Committee,  may  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  moff  inveterate  enemies  of  thefe  kingdoms
plunder  and  defpoil  their  fellow-countrymen,  that  Englifh-
men  will  hearken  to  thefe  feducers?  Shall  a  few  frantic
J.icobin?,  becaule  they  are  arrived  at  the  fummit  of  the
pyramid,  there  to  receive  the  loathfome  fumes  of  hialuhe-
my  and  rebellion,  lord  it  over  a  nation  that  can  boatt  of  a
S  n'ereign  whofe  virtues  and  paternal  affection  have  rather
made* him  the  father  than  the  ruler  of  the  nation; — of  a
Houfe  of  Lords,  defcribed  even  by  the  Jacobin  Lacroix,
"  as  precious  to  the  nation,  becaufe  it  is  a  rampart  of  its
w  liberties," — of  a  Houfe  of  Commons  ever  watchful  of
the  real  rights  of  the  people,  in  fpite  of  the  declamations
of  the  Brotherhood  to  repreient  it  as  the  contrary  \*  over

*  Few  people  would  fufpecl,  that  the  debates  in  Parliament
could  ever  be  converted  into  a  tool  for  the  propagation  of  the
views  of  the  Correfponding  Society,  i  he  following  letter,
however,  will  (how  how  carefully  our  anceftors  had  forefeen
every  danger,  when  they  ordained  that  the  debates  <hould  be
kept  feciet  ;  it  will  alfo  ferve  to  explain  the  vehemence  of  ma-
ny, on  the  occafion  of  the  recent  clearing  of  the  galleries  and
bar  during  certain  debates  of  high  and  ticklilh  importance,  fuch,
for  example,  as  the  Iriih  bufinefs.  This  letter  from  the  Lon-
don Corresponding  Society  (  Appendix  E.  March  4.  17c  ;)  is
written  to  a  fociety  at  Sheffield  :  "  With  regard  to  petitioning
"  Pailiament,  we  are  unanimous  in  the  opmio.i,  that  fuch  a
"  petition  will  not  produce  a  reform  ;  yet,  from  many  conii-


40»  ANTISOCIAL  conspiracy;

a  nation,  in  fhort,  that  can  boaft  of  Laws  which,  formed
by  the  mutual  confent  of  King,  Lords,  and  Commons,
have  led  it  to  unparalleled  glory,  profperity,  and  riches  ?
Is  it  to  men  who  have  been  feated  on  juries,  who  have
attended  the  public  courts  of  juftice,  that  thefe  feducers
ihall  hold  forth  on  the  mal-adminiftration  of  juftice?  Shall
a  loyal  army  and  victorious  navy  be  reprefented  as  the
agents  of  defpotifm  and  tyranny,  becaufe  they  will  not
murder  their  officers  and  defert  to  the  enemy  ? — No,  En-
glifhmen;  fuch  efforts  ihall  ever  meet  with  the  contempt
they  deferve;  union,  honefty,  and  loyalty,  fiiall  lead  us
to  victory;  and,  ever  mindful  of  our  duties  to  God  and
man,  we  may  bid  defiance  to  the  malignity  of  our  inter-
nal, and  the  rapacity  of  our  external  foes.

So  be  it  !

"  derations,  we  are  now  perfuaded,  that  if  every  fociety  in  the
"  Hand  would  fend  forward  a  petition,  we  fhould  ultimately
"  gain  ground  ;  far  as  much  as  it  iviil  ferce  the  prefent  mem~
"  bers  of  thefénate  repeatedly  to  difcufs  thejhbjeiî  :  and  their
"  deliberations,  printed  in  the  different  neivfpapert,  will  moll
"  naturally  awaken  the  public  mind  towards  the  objeii  of  our
"  pur  fait  ;  the  nation  once  informed  that  a  reform  in  Parlia-
"  men  is  fought  for  from  different  quarters,  gives  rife  to  de-
*{  bates  in  the  Iloufe  of  Commons,  and  is  acknowledged  by
*'  every  rank  to  be  wanting,  iviil  begin  to  exercife  its  onvn  rea-
"Jbn  on  the  lur-j?cl  (probably,  as  we  have  feen  five  or  fix  me-
"  chanics  of  Sheffield  doing).  Arrived  at  that  period,  we  pre-»
M  fame  that  our  buiinefs  will  be  neatly  accompldhed."


END  OF  THE  FOURTH  AND  LAST  PART»
