The Magus, or Celestial Intelligencer (Francis Barrett, 1801)
==========================================================
Barrett's 1801 Magus; the complete system of occult philosophy that revived English magic. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b24926735).

Glasgow

‘Clniversttp  ^Library


fferguson  Collection
1921


5.


t


THE


MAGUS,


OR


CELESTIAL  INTELLIGENCER;

BEING

A COMPLETE  SYSTEM  OF


OCCULT  PHILOSOPHY.


Knight  and  Compton,  Prii


Middle  Street,  Cloth  Fair.


in  2016


THE


MAGUS,


BEING

A COMPLETE  SYSTEM  OF

OCCULT  PHILOSOPHY.


IN  THREE  BOOKS:

Containing  the  Antient  and  Modern  Practice  of  the  Cabaliftic  Art,  Natural  and  Celcftial  Magic,  &rc.  (hewing  the  wonderful
Effects  that  may  be  performed  by  a Knowledge  of  the

Celestial  Influences,  the  occult  Properties  of  Metals,  Herbs,  and  Stones,

application  of  active  to  passive  principles,

EXHIBITING

THE  SCIENCES  OF  - NATURAL  MAGIC;

Alchymy,  or  Hermetic  Philosophy ;

ALSO

THE  NATURE  CREATION,  AND  FALL  OF  MAN;


THE  CONSTELLATORY  PRACTICE,  or  TALISMANIC  MAGIC ;

The  Nature  of  the  Elements,  Stars,  Planets,  Signs,  Sec.;  the  Conftruclion  and  CompoGtion  of  all  Sorts  of  Magic  Seals,
Images,  Rings,  Glaffes,  Sec. ;

The  Virtue  and  Efficacy  of  Numbers,  Characters,  and  Figures',  ofgood  and  evil  Spirits.

MAGNETISM,

AND  CABALISTICAL  OR  CEREMONIAL  MAGIC;

In  which  the  fceret  Myltexies  of  the  Cabala  are  explained ; the  Operations  of  good  arid  evil  Spirits ; all  Kinds  of  Cabaliflic  Figures,
Tables,  Seals,  and  Names,  with  their  Ufe,  Arc.

THE  TIMES,,  BONDS,  OFFICES,  AND  CONJURATION  0F_  SPIRITS.

to  wniea  is  added

Biographia.  Antiqua,  or  the  Lives  of  the  most  eminent  Philosophers,  Magi,  8$c.

The  Whole  illustrated  with  a great  Variety  of

CURIOUS  ENGRAVINGS,  MAGICAL  AND  CABALISTICAL  FIGURES,  &c.
BY  FRANCIS  BARRETT,  F.R.C.

Professor  of  Chemistry,,  natural  and. occult  Philosophy,  the  Cabala,  &c.  &c.


LONDON:

PRINTED  FOB,  LACKINGTON,  ALLEN,  AND  CO.,  TEMPLE  OF  THE  MUSES,
PINSBUR.Y  SQUARE.

1801.


^Tasco vj

IvAilVE-R^iTY
l LIBRARY :


PREFACE.


I N this  Work,  which  we  have  written  chiefly  for  the
information  of  those  who  are  curious  and  indefatigable  in  their  enquiries  into
occult  knowledge,  we  have,  at  a vast  labour  and  expence,  both  of  time  and
charges,  collected  whatsoever  can  be  deemed  curious  and  rare,  in  regard  to  the
subject  of  our  speculations  in  Natural  Magic— the  Cabala — Celestial  and
Ceremonial  Magic— Alchymy— and  Magnetism ; and  have  divided  it  into  two
Books,  sub-divided  into  Parts  : to  which  we  have  added  a third  Book,  contain-
ing a biographical  account  of  the  lives  of  those  great  men  who  were  famous  and
renowned  for  their  knowledge  ; shewing  upon  whose  authority  this  Science  of
Magic  is  founded,  and  upon  what  principles.  To  which  we  have  annexed  a
great  variety  of  notes,  wherein  we  have  impartially  examined  the  probability  of
the  existence  of  Magic , both  of  the  good  and  bad  species,  in  the  earliest,  as  well
as  in  the  latter,  ages  of  the  world.  We  have  exhibited  a vast  number  of  rare
experiments  in  the  course  of  this  Treatise,  many  of  which,  delivered  in  the
beginning,  are  founded  upon  the  simple  application  of  actives  to  passives ; the
others  are  of  a higher  speculation.

In  our  history  of  the  lives  of  Philosophers,  &c.  we  have  omitted  nothing
that  can  be  called  interesting  or  satisfactory.  We  have  taken  our  historical
characters  from  those  authors  most  deserving  of  credit ; we  have  given  an
outline  of  the  various  reports  tradition  gives  of  them ; to  which  are  annexed
notes,  drawn  from  the  most  probable  appearance  of  truth,  impartially  describ-
ing their  characters  and  actions ; leaning  neither  to  the  side  of  those  who  •
doubt  every  thing,  nor  to  them  whose  credulity  takes  in  every  report  to  be
circumstantially  true.


b


At


VI


PREFACE.


At  this  time,  the  abstruse  sciences  of  Nature  begin  to  be  more  investigated
than  for  a century  past,  during  which  space  they  have  been  almost  totally
neglected  ; but  men  becoming  more  enlightened,  they  begin  to  consider  the
extraordinary  effects  that  were  wrought  by  ancient  philosophers,  in  ages  that
were  called  dark.  Many,  therefore,  have  thought  that  time,  nature,  causes,
and  effects,  being  the  same,  with  the  additional  improvements  of  mechanical
and  liberal  arts,  we  may,  with  their  knowledge  of  Nature , surpass  them  in
the  producing  of  wonderful  effects ; for  which  cause  many  men  are  naturally
impelled,  without  education  or  other  advantage,  to  dive  into  the  contemplation
of  Nature;  but  the  study  thereof  being  at  first  difficult,  they  have  recourse
to  lay  out  a great  deal  of  money  in  collecting  various  books  : to  remedy
which  inconvenience  and  expence,  the  Author  undertook  to  compose  The
Magus,  presuming  that  his  labours  herein  will  meet  with  the  general  appro-
bation of  either  the  novitiate  or  adept : for  whose  use  and  instruction  it  is  now
published.

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  our  Book  : we  have,  in  the  First  Part,  fully
explained  what  Natural  Magic  is  ; and  have  shewn  that,  by  the  application  of
actives  to  passives,  many  wonderful  effects  are  produced  that  are  merely  natural,
and  done  by  manual  operations.  We  have  procured  every  thing  that  was
valuable  and  scarce  respecting  this  department  of  our  work,  which  we  have
introduced  under  the  title  of  Natural  Magic  ; and  a variety  of  our  own  expe-
riments likewise.  In  the  possession  of  this  work,  the  laborious  and  diligent
student  will  find  a complete  and  delectable  companion  ; so  that  he  who  has
been  searching  for  years,  for  this  author  and  the  other,  will  in  this  book  find
the  marrow  of  them  all.

But  I would  advise,  that  we  do  not  depend  too  much  upon  our  own  wisdom
in  the  understanding  of  these  mysteries  ; for  all  earthly  wisdom  is  foolishness  in
the  esteem  of  God— I mean  all  the  wisdom  of  mq.n,  which  he  pretends  to  draw
from  any  other  source  than  God  alone.

We  come  next  to  the  Second  Part  of  our  First  Book,  treating  of  the  art
called  the  Constellatory  Practice,  or  Talismanic  Magic ; in  which  we  fully  de-
monstrate the  power  and  efficacy  of  Talismans , so  much  talked  of,  and  so  little

understood,


PREFACE.


vii

understood,  by  most  men  : we  therefore  explain,  in  the  clearest  and  most  intel-
ligible manner,  how  Talismans  may  be  made,  for  the  execution  of  various
purposes,  and  by  what  means,  and  from  what  source  they  become  vivified,  and
are  visible  instruments  of  great  and  wonderful  effects.  We  likewise  shew  the
proper  and  convenient  times ; under  what  constellations  and  aspects  of  the
planets  they  are  to  be  formed,  and  the  times  when  they  are  most  powerful  to
act ; and,  in  the  next  place,  we  have  taught  that  our  own  spirit  is  the  vehicle
of  celestial  attraction,  transferring  celestial  and  spiritual  virtue  into  Seals,
Images,  Amulets,  Rings,  Papers,  Glasses,  &c.  Also,  we  have  not  forgot  to  give
the  most  clear  and  rational  illustration  of  sympathy  and  antipathy— attraction
and  repulsion.  We  have  likewise  proved  how  cures  are  performed  by  virtue
of  sympathetic  powers  and  medicines — by  seals,  rings,  and  amulets,  even  at
unlimited  distances,  which  we  have  been  witnesses  of  and  are  daily  confirmed
in  the  true  and  certain  belief  of.  We  know  how  to  communicate  with  any
person,  and  to  give  him  intimation  of  our  purpose,  at  a hundred  or  a thousand
miles  distance;  but  then  a preparation  is  necessary,  and  the  parties  should
have  their  appointed  seasons  and  hours  for  that  purpose  ; likewise,  both  should
be  of  the  same  firm  constancy  of  mind,  and  a disciple  or  brother  in  art.
And  we  have  given  methods  whereby  a man  may  receive  true  and  certain
intimation  of  future  things  (by  dreams),  of  whatsoever  his  mind  has  before
meditated  upon,  himself  being  properly  disposed.  Likewise,  we  have  recited
the  various  methods  used  by  the  antients  for  the  invocation  of  astral  spirits,
by  circles,  crystals,  &c. ; their  forms  of  exorcism,  incantations,  orations,  bonds,
conjurations ; and  have  given  a general  display  of  the  instruments  of  their
art;  all  of  which  we  have  collected  out  of  the  works  of  the  most  famous
magicians,  such  as  Zoroaster,  Hermes,  Apollonius,  Simon  of  the  Temple,
Trithemius,  Agrippa,  Porta  (the  Neapolitan),  Dee,  Paracelsus,  Roger  Bacon,
and  a great  many  others  ; to  which  we  have  subjoined  our  own  notes,  endea-
vouring to  point  out  the  difference  of  these  arts,  so  as  to  free  the  name  of  Magic
from  any  scandalous  imputation  ; seeing  it  is  a word  originally  significative
not  of  any  evil,  but  of  every  good  and  laudable  science,  such  as  a man  might
profit  by,  and  become  both  wise  and  happy  ; and  the  practice  so  far  from
b 2 being


Vlll


PREFACE.


being  offensive  to  God  or  man,  that  the  very  root  or  ground  of  all  magic  takes
its  rise  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  viz.— “ The  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of
all  wisdom  ; ’’—and  charity  is  the  end  : which  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning
of  Magic ; for  Magic  is  wisdom,  and  on  this  account  the  wise  men  were  called
Magi.  The  magicians  were  the  first  Christians  ; for,  by  their  high  and  excel-
lent knowledge,  they  knew  that  that  Saviour  which  was  promised,  was  now
born  man — that  Christ  was  our  Redeemer,  Advocate,  and  Mediator  ; they
were  the  first  to  acknowledge  his  glory  and  majesty ; therefore  let  no  one  be
offended  at  the  venerable  and  sacred  title  of  Magician — a title  which  every
wise  man  merits  while  he  pursues  that  path  which  Christ  himself  trod,  viz.
humility,  charity,  mercy,  fasting,  praying,  &c. ; for  the  true  magician  is  the
truest  Christian,  and  nearest  disciple  of  our  blessed  Lord,  who  set  the  example
we  ought  to  follow;  for  he  says— “ If  ye  have  faith,  &c.  ; ” and  “ This  kind
comes  not  by  fasting  and  prayer,  &c.  and  “Ye  shall  tread  upon  scorpions,
&c. ; ” and  again,  “ Be  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves.”— Such  instruc-
tions as  these  are  frequently  named,  and  given  in  many  places  of  the  Holy
Scriptures.  Likewise,  all  the  Apostles  confess  the  power  of  working  miracles
through  faith  in  the  name  of  Christ  J esus,  and  that  all  wisdom  is  to  be  attained
through  him  ; for  he  says,  “ I am  the  light  of  the  world  ! ”

We  have  thought  it  adviseable,  likewise,  to  investigate  the  power  of  num-
bers, their  sympathy  with  the  divine  names  of  God ; and,  seeing  the  whole
universe  was  created  by  number,  weight,  and  measure,  there  is  no  small  efficacy
in  numbers,  because  nothing  more  clearly  represents  the  Divine  Essence  to
human  understanding  than  numbers ; seeing  that  in  all  the  Divine  holy  names
there  is  still  a conformity  of  numbers,  so  that  the  conclusion  of  this  our  First
Book  forms  a complete  system  of  mathematical  magic ; in  which  I have  collected
a vast  number  of  curious  seals  from  that  famous  magician  Agrippa,  and  likewise
from  Paracelsus,  noting  them  particularly,  as  I have  found  them  correspondent
with  true  science  on  experiment.

The  Second  Book  forms  a complete  treatise  on  the  mysteries  of  the  Cabala
and  Ceremonial  Magic  ; by  the  study  of  which,  a man  (who  can  separate
himself  from  material  objects,  by  the  mortification  of  the  sensual  appetite-

abstinence


PREFACE.


IX


abstinence  from  drunkenness,  gluttony,  and  other  bestial  passions,  and  who  lives
pure  and  temperate,  free  from  those  actions  which  degenerate  a man  to  a brute)
may  become  a recipient  of  Divine  light  and  knowledge ; by  which  they  may
foresee  things  to  come,  whether  to  private  families,  or  kingdoms,  or  states,
empires,  battles,  victories,  &c. ; and  likewise  be  capable  of  doing  much  good  to
their  fellow-creatures  : such  as  the  healing  of  all  disorders,  and  assisting  with
the  comforts  of  life  the  unfortunate  and  distressed.

We  have  spoken  largely  of  prophetic  dreams  and  visions  in  our  Cabalistic
Magic,  and  have  given  the  tables  of  the  Cabala,  fully  set  down  for  the  infor-
mation of  the  wise  ; some  few  most  secret  things  being  reserved  by  the  Author
for  his  pupils  only,  not  to  be  taught  by  publication.

The  Third  Book  forms  a complete  Magical  Biography,  being  collected
from  most  antient  authors,  and  some  scarce  and  valuable  manuscripts  ; and
which  has  been  the  result  of  much  labour  in  acquiring.  Therefore,  those  who
wish  to  benefit  in  those  studies,  must  shake  off  the  drowsiness  of  worldly  vanity,
all  idle  levity,  sloth,  intemperance,  and  lust ; so  that  they  may  be  quiet,
clean,  pure,  and  free  from  every  distraction  and  perturbation  of  mind,  and
worthily  use  the  knowledge  he  obtains  from  his  labours.

Therefore,  my  good  friend,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  desirest  to  accomplish
these  things,  be  but  persuaded  first  to  apply  thyself  to  the  Eternal  Wisdom,
entreating  him  to  grant  thee  understanding,  then  seeking  knowledge  with  dili-
gence, and  thou  shalt  never  repent  thy  having  taken  so  laudable  a resolution,
but  thou  shalt  enjoy  a secret  happiness  and  serenity  of  mind,  which  the  world
can  never  rob  thee  of.

Wishing  thee  every  success  imaginable  in  thy  studies  and  experiments,
hoping  that  thou  wilt  use  the  benefits  that  thou  mayest  receive  to  the  honour
of  our  Creator  and  for  the  profit  of  thy  neighbour,  in  which  exercise  thou  shalt
ever  experience  the  satisfaction  of  doing  thy  duty  ; remember  our  instructions —
to  be  silent : talk  only  with  those  worthy  of  thy  communication— do  not  give
pearls  to  swine  ; be  friendly  to  all,  but  not  familiar  with  all ; for  many  are,  as
the  Scriptures  mention — wolves  in  sheep  clothing.


FRANCIS  BARRETT.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Page.


DVERTISEMENT i

Introduction 3

Of  the  Influences  of  the  Stars ib.

The  Use  and  Abuse  of  Astrology,  &c 4

An  Oration  to  God 9

Of  Natural  Magic  in  general 10

The  First  Principles  of  Natural  Magic 13


Page.

Chap.  IX.  Of  the  Mixtures  of  Natural  Things
one  with  another,  and  the  Production  of

Monsters 4*

Chap.  X.  Of  the  Art  of  Fascination,  Binding,
Sorceries,  Magical  Confections,  Lights,  Can-
dles, Lamps,  &c.  being  the  conclusion  of
Natural  Magic 44


BOOK  I.— PART  I.

Chap.  I.  Natural  Magic  defined  ; of  Man  ; his
Creation,  Divine  Image,  and  Fall ; and  of  the
spiritual  and  magical  Virtue  of  the  Soul ib.

Chap.  II.  Of  the  Wonders  of  Natural  Magic,
displayed  in  a Variety  of  sympathetic  and  oc-
cult Operations,  in  Animals,  Minerals,  and


Vegetables,  treated  of  miscellaneously. 24

Of  the  Serpent 28

Chap.  III.  Of  Amulets,  Charms,  and  Enchant-
ments ; an  Amulet  for  the  Flux  of  Blood 30

Chap.  IV.  Of  Unctions,  Philters,  Potions,  &c.  32

Their  magical  Virtue 33

Chap.  V.  Of  Magical  Suspensions  and  Alliga-
tions ; shewing  by  what  power  they  are  effica-
cious in  Natural  Magic 34

Chap.  VI.  Of  Antipathies 35

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  occult  Virtues  of  Things


which  are  inherent  in  them  only  in  their  Lives,


and  such  as  remain  in  them  after  Death 37

Chap.  VIII.  Of  the  wonderful  Virtues  of  some
Kinds  of  precious  Stones 39


ALCHYMY.


The  Secret  of  the  Philosophers’  Stone 51

Epistle  to  Museus 53

Epistle  to  the  Reader 55

Of  Alchymy,  and  its  Divine  Origin 56

Discovered  to  Man  by  Uriel ib.

Zoroaster  made  Gold  from  the  Seven  Metals ib.

Zoroaster  was  the  Father  of  Alchymists ib.

The  Authors  who  have  wrote  upon  it ib.

The  comparison  of  Alchymists 57

What  an  Adept  is ib.

Van  Helmont’s  Account  of  Alchymy 58

Kircher’s  Account  of  Alchymists ib.

The  Description  of  the  Philosophers’  Stone ib.

Account  of  a real  Transmutation 59

Account  of  Flammel,  the  Alchymist ib.

History  of  Butler’s  Universal  Medicine ib.

What  is  not  universally  understood  generally

referred  to  the  Black  Art 63

Of  the  Preparation  necessary  to  qualify  a Man

for  the  Search  of  the  Philosophers’  Stone 64

Of  the  Prima  Materia ib.


Ten


Xll


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Page.

Ten  Lessons,  teaching  the  Transmutation  of  base

Metals  into  Gold 64

Lesson  XI.  XII.  XIII.  and  XIV.  teaching  the
Manner  of  extracting  the  Prima  Materia  of
the  Lapis  Philosophonun  j and  the  Use  it  is
of  in  purifying  imperfect  Metals,  to  Change
them  into  good  Gold 68

PART  II.


Chap  I.  Of  the  Four  Elements,  and  their  Na-
tural Qualities 73

Chap.  II.  Of  the  Properties  and  wonderful  Na-
ture of  Fire  and  Earth 75

Chap.  III.  Of  the  Water  and  Air 77

Chap.  IV.  Of  compound  or  mixed  Bodies  ; in
what  Manner  they  relate  to  the  Elements  ; and
how  the  Elements  correspond  to  the  Souls,

Senses,  and  Dispositions  of  Men 81

Chap.  V.  That  the  Elements  are  in  Stars,
Devils,  Angels,  Intelligences,  and  in  God  him-
self.  83

Chap.  VI.  That  the  Wisdom  of  God  works  by
second  Causes  is  proved  beyond  Dispute  in

this  Chapter 85

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  Spirit  of  the  World 87

Chap.  VIII.  Of  the  Seals  and  Characters  im-
pressed by  Celestials  upon  Natural  Things 88

Chap.  IX.  Of  the  Virtue  and  Efficacy  of  Per-
fumes ; and  to  what  Planets  they  are  attributed  89


Chap.  X.  Of  the  Composition  of  Perfumes  attri-


buted to  the  Planets 92

General  Fumes  of  the  Planets 93

Chap.  XI.  Of  the  magical  Virtue  of  Rings 94

Chap.  XII.  That  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  are
assisted  by  Celestials  ; and  how  necessary  the

constancy  of  the  Mind  is  in  every  Work 96

Chap.  XIII.  How  a Man’s  Mind  maybe  joined
with  the  Celestial  Spirits  and  Intelligences,  and
with  them  impress  wonderful  Virtues  upon  in-
ferior Things 97


Page.


Chap.  XIV.  Shewing  the  Necessity  of  Mathe-
matical Knowledge  ; and  [of  the  great  Power
and  Efficacy  of  Numbers  in  the  Construction

of  Talismans,  &c 99

Chap.  XV.  The  great  Virtues  of  Numbers,  as

well  in  natural  as  super-natural  Things.. 102

Chap.  XVI.  Of  the  Scales  of  Numbers  ; the

Scale  of  Unity 103

Chap.  XVII.  Of  the  Number  Two,  and  the

Scale 104

Chap.  XVIII.  Of  the  Number  Three,  and  the
Scale 106


Chap.  XIX.  Of  the  Number  Four,  and  the  Scale  108
Chap.  XX.  Of  the  Number  Five,  and  the  Scale  114
Chap.  XXI.  Of  the  Number  Six,  and  the  Scale...  115
Chap.  XXII.  Of  the  Number  Seven,  and  the


Scale 1 17

Chap.  XXIII.  Of  the  Number  Eight,  and  the

Scale 128

Chap.  XXIV.  Of  the  Number  Nine,  and  the

Scale 130

Chap.  XXV.  Of  the  Number  Ten,  and  the  two
Scales 132


Chap.  XXVI.  Of  the  Numbers  Eleven  and
Twelve,  with  the  Scale  of  the  Number  Twelve  136
Chap.  XXVII.  Of  the  Notes  of  the  Hebrews
and  Chaldeans,  and  other  Characters  used  by


Magicians 140

Chap.  XXVIII.  The  magical  Tables  of  the
Planets,  their  Form  and  Virtue ; with  the
Divine  Names,  Intelligences,  and  Spirits  that

are  set  over  them 142

Chap.  XXIX.  Of  the  Observation  of  the  Ce-
lestials necessary  in  all  magical  Works 148

Chap.  XXX.  When  the  Planets  are  most  power-
ful  149

Chap.  XXXI.  Observations  on  the  fixed  Stars,

with  their  Names  and  Nature 150

Chap.  XXXII.  Of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and

their  magical  Considerations 152

Chap.  XXXIII.  Of  the  Twenty-eight  Mansions
of  the  Moon,  and  their  Virtues 1 53


Chap.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Xlll


Page.

Chap.  XXXIV.  That  some  artificial  Things,
as  Images,  Seals,  and  the  like,  may  derive


Virtue  from  the  Celestial  Bodies 157

Chap.  XXXV.  Of  the  Images  of  the  Zodiac ;
what  Virtues,  being  engraven,  they  receive  from

the  Stars 158

Chap.  XXXVI.  Of  the  Images  of  the  Seven

Planets  ; Images  of  Saturn....  , 159

Chap.  XXXVII.  Of  the  Images  of  Jupiter. 160

Chap.  XXXVIII.  Images  of  Mars 161

Chap.  XXXIX.  Images  of  the  Sun 162

Chap.  XL.  Images  of  Venus ib.

Chap.  XLI.  Images  of  Mercury 163

Chap.  XLI  I.  Images  of  the  Moon 164

Chap.  XLI  1 1.  Images  of  the  Dragon’s  Head
and  Dragon’s  Tail ib.


Page.

Chap.  XLIV.  Images  of  the  Twenty-eight

Mansions  of  the  Moon 165

Chap.  XLV.  That  human  Imprecations  natu-
rally impress  their  Powers  upon  external
Things ; and  how  Man’s  Mind,  through  a
Degree  of  Dependencies,  ascends  into  the  In-
telligible World,  and  becomes  like  the  more

sublime  Spirits  and  Intelligences 168

Chap.  XLVI.  The  Conclusion  of  Talismanic
Magic  ; in  which  is  included  the  Key  of  all
thathas  been  written  upon  the  Subject ; shewing
the  Practice  of  Images,  and  the  Composition
of  Talismans,  by  way  of  Example  ; and,  like-
wise, the  necessary  Observations  of  the  Ce-
lestials requisite  for  the  Perfection  of  all
Talismanic  Operations 172


BOOK  II.— -PART  I.


MAGNETISM 3

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Magnetic  or  Attractive  Faculty  4

Chap.  II.  Of  Sympathetic  Medicines 8

Chap.  III.  Of  the  Magnetic  or  Sympathetic
Unguent ; the  Power  of  Sympathy,  Armary,
Unguent ; and  curing  of  Wounds,  Ecstasies,

Witchcraft,  Mummies,  &c 9

Chap.  IV.  Of  the  Weapon  Salve 12


Chap.  V.  Of  the  Imaginative  Power,  and  the
Magnetism  of  the  Natural  Spirits,  Mummial
Attraction,  Sympathies  of  Astral  Spirits,  and
their  Bodies,  upon  which  is  founded  the  whole


Art  of  Necromancy 13

Chap.  VI.  Of  Witchcraft  in  particular 18

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  Vital  Spirit 20

Chap.  VIII.  Of  the  Magical  Power,  &c 22

Chap.  IX.  Of  exciting  or  stirring  up  the  Magical
Virtue 24


Chap.  X.  Of  the  Magical  Virtue  of  the  Soul,


and  the  Medium  it  Acts  by 27

The  End  of  the  Magnetism 29


CABALISTICAL  MAGIC.


Chap.  I.  , Of  the  Cabala,  &c 33

Chap.  II.  What  Dignity  and  Preparation  is  ne-
cessary to  Him  who  would  become  a true  Ma-
gician  34

Chap.  III.  That  the  Knowledge  of  the  true

God  is  necessary  for  a Magician... 35

Chap.  IV.  Of  Divine  Emanations,  and  Ten  Se-
phiroths,  and  Ten  most  sacred  Names  of  God

which  rule  them,  and  their  Interpretation ib

Chap.  V.  Of  the  Power  and  Virtue  of  the
Divine  Names 39


XIV


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Page.


Chap.  VI.  Of  Intelligences  and  Spirits ; and  of
the  threefold  Kinds  of  them,  and  their  different
Names ; and  of  Infernal  and  Subterraneous

Spirits 42

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  Order  of  Evil  Spirits  ; their

Fall,  and  different  Natures 46

Chap.  VIII.  The  Annoyance  of  Evil  Spirits,
and  the  Preservation  we  have  from  Good

Spirits 49

Chap.  IX.  That  there  is  a threefold  Keeper  of

Man  ; and  from  whence  each  proceeds 52

Chap.  X.  Of  the  Tongues  of  Angels,  and  their

speaking  amongst  themselves,  and  with  us 53

Chap.  XI.  Of  the  Names  of  Spirits,  and  their
various  Imposition ; and  of  the  Spirits  that
are  set  over  the  Stars,  Signs,  Corners  of  the

Heavens,  and  the  Elements 55

Chap.  XII.  How  the  Cabalists  draw  forth  the


Names  of  Angels  from  Sacred  Writ ; and  of
the  Seventy-two  Angels  that  bear  the  Names
of  God  ; with  the  Tables  of  Ziruph,  and  the


Commutations  of  Names  and  Numbers 58

Chap.  XIII.  Of  finding  out  the  Names  of  Spi-
rits and  Genii,  from  the  Disposition  of  the

Celestial  Bodies 60

Chap.  XIV.  Of  the  calculating  Art  of  such

Names,  by  the  Tradition  of  the  Cabalists 61

Chap.  XV.  Of  the  Characters  and  Seals  of

Spirits 64

ChAp.  XVI.  Another  Way  of  making  Characters,

according  to  the  Tradition  of  Cabalists ib.

Chap.  XVII.  There  is  another  Sort  of  Cha-
racters, of  Spirits  received  by  Revelation 66

Chap.  XVIII.  Of  the  Bonds  of  Spirits,  and

their  Adjurations  and  casting  out 67

Chap.  XIX.  By  what  Methods  Magicians  and
Necromancers  call  up  the  Souls  of  the

Dead 68

Chap.  XX.  Of  Prophetic  Dreams 70


Page.

PART  II.


The  Perfection  and  Key  of  the  Cabala,  or  Ce-
remonial Magic ..„ 73

The  Calculations  of  the  Names  of  Good  and  Evil

Spirits 74

Of  Magic  Pentacles,  the  Manner  of  constructing

them 80

A Pentacle  for  Victory  over  Enemies 81

against  Serpents,  Poisons,  &c 82

Deprecations 83

The  Consecration  of  all  Magical  Instruments  and

Materials  used  in  this  Art 85

Consecration  of  Water. 86

Consecration  of  Fire 87

Consecration  of  Oil ib.

Consecration  and  Benediction  of  Lights ib.

Lamps,  Wax,  &c ib.

Consecration  of  Ground,  Circle,  Place,  &c 88

Of  the  Invocation  of  Spirits  ; the  binding  of,

and  constraining  them  to  appear 89

Description  and  Use  of  a Book  of  Virgin  Parch-
ment, or  abortive  Vellum,  in  which  the  Names

of  Spirits  are  registered 90

Consecration  of  the  aforesaid  Book 91

Invocation  of  good  Spirits  in  particular 92

The  Invocation  Prayer 93

The  particular  Form  of  Lamens 94

Of  receiving  Oracles  in  Dreams 96

Of  the  Methods  of  raising  Evil  Spirits,  or  Fa-
miliars, or  the  Souls  of  the  Dead,  by  a Circle  99


The  Suffumigations  used  in  raising  Ghosts,  Sha-
dows, and  departed  Spirits  ; and  what  Places
are  appropriate  to  this 101

PART  III.

The  particular  Composition  of  the  Magic  Circle ;
and  of  the  Forms  of  the  Exorcisms,  Bene-
dictions,


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


XV


Page.

dictions,  and  Conjurations,  for  every  Day  and
Hour  in  the  Week ; and  the  Manner  of


working  fully  described 105

A Table  of  the  Magical  Names  of  the  Hours,

by  Day  of  Night 107

Angels  of  the  Seasons,  &c 108

Exorcism  of  Fire 109

The  Habit  of  the  Exorcist ib.

The  Pentacles  of  Solomon ib.

An  Exorcism  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Air. hi

A Prayer  to  be  said  in  the  Four  Parts  of  the

Circle 113

An  Oration 114

Of  the  Appearance  of  the  Spirits.. ib.

Considerations  and  Conjurations  for  every  Day

in  the  Week 116

The  Consideration  and  Conjuration  for  Sunday..  117

The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Monday. 118

The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Tuesday. 119

The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Wednesday 121

The  Conjuration,  &c„  of  Thursday 123

The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Friday 125

The  Conjuration,  &c.,  of  Saturday 126


PART  IV.

Translation  of  Trithemius ; the  Translator’s
Letter 13 1


Page.

The  Conjurations  of  Spirits  into  a Crystal ; the
Description  of  this  Instrument ; and  the  Form


and  Ceremony  of  a Vision 134

Table  for  the  Inspection  of  Names  of  Spirits
governing  the  Planetary  Hours  by  Day  and

Night 138

The  End  of  the  Magus,  or  Celestial  Intelli-
gencer  139

THE  BIOGRAPHY.

Zoroaster,  the  Son  of  Oramasus 144

Hermes,  surnamed  Trismegistus 150

Apollonius,  of  Tyana 152

Peter  De  Abano 155

Apuleius,  the  Platonic 158

Aristotle 162

Artimedorus,  of  Ephesus 166

The  Babylonians 168

Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa 170

Albertus  Magnus 180

Roger  ( alias  Friar)  Bacon 181

Raymond  Lully 184

George  Ripley 186

John  and  Isaac  Holland ib.

Theophrastus  Paracelsus 188

John  Rudolph  Glauber. 194

Doctor  Dee,  and  Sir  Edward  Kelly 195

The  Conclusion 197


DIREC-


DIRECTIONS  FOR  PLACING  THE  PLATES.


BOOK  I.

Page.

The  Author’s  Portrait  to  front  the  Title.

Magic  Tables,  Plate  I.  to  front 143

The  Three  other  Plates  of  Magic  Tables,  beginning  at  that  of  the  Sun,  Mercury,

and  the  Moon,  to  front 144

Geomantic  Characters,  to  front 158

Magic  Seals,  or  Talismans,  to  front 174

BOOK  II.

The  Cabala,  Holy  Sigils  of  the  Names  of  God,  to  front 41

Fallen  Angels,  Plate  I.  to  front 42

Vessels  of  Wrath,  to  front 44

Ophis  and  Spirit  of  Antichrist,  to  front 46

Evil  Daemons,  to  front 48

Four  Plates,  Tables  of  the  Cabala,  to  front 62

Calculations  of  the  Names  of  Spirits  under  the  Seven  Planets  and  Twelve  Signs,  to

front 64

The  Mysterious  Characters  of  Letters,  to  front 64

The  Cabala,  to  front 66

Characters  of  Good  and  Evil  Spirits,  to  front 78

The  Magic  Book,  &c.,  to  front  the  Title  of  Book  II.  Part  III

The  Magic  Circle,  &c.,  to  front 106

Form  of  the  Crystal  Lights,  Magic  Wand,  the  Tripod,  &c.,  to  front  the  Title  of
Book  II.  Part  IV.


ADVERTISEMENT.


-/Vs  an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Natural  Magic,
we  have  thought  fit  to  premise  a short  discourse  on  the  Influence  of  the  Stars,
and  on  Natural  Magic  in  general,  showing  how  far  the  influences  of  the  heavenly
bodies  are  useful  to  our  purposes,  and  likewise  to  what  extent  we  may  admit
those  influences  ; rejecting  some  speculations  concerning  the  planetary  inclina-
tions, as  far  as  they  appertain  to  questionary  abuses,  that  seem  to  us  idle,
and  of  no  validity,  or  yet  founded  on  any  principles  of  sound  philosophy,  or
corresponding  to  the  word  of  God  in  the  Scriptures.  In  which  discourse  we
have  fully  set  down  our  reasons  for  rejecting  some  parts  of  astrology,  and
admitting  others  which  are  founded  on  good  principles,  and  coinciding  with
the  Scriptures  and  Natural  Philosophy  : our  purpose  being  to  clear  the
understanding  of  errors,  and  not  to  enforce  any  thing  but  what  appears  to  be
substantiated  by  nature,  truth,  and  experiment.


Book  I.


A


INTRO-


INTRODUCTION


TO  THE

STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.


OF  THE  INFLUENCES  OF  THE  STARS.

I T has  been  a subject  of  ancient  dispute  whether  or  not
the  stars,  as  second  causes,  do  so  rule  and  influence  man  as  to  ingraft  in  his
nature  certain  passions,  virtues,  propensities,  &c.,  and  this  to  take  root  in  him
at  the  very  critical  moment  of  his  being  born  into  this  vale  of  misery  and
wretchedness  ; likewise,  if  their  site  and  configuration  at  this  time  do  shew
forth  his  future  passions  and  pursuits ; and  by  their  revolutions,  transits,  and
directed  aspects,  they  point  out  the  particular  accidents  of  the  body,  marriage,
sickness,  preferments,  and  such  like;  the  which  I have  often  revolved  in  my
mind  for  many  years  past,  having  been  at  all  times  in  all  places  a warm
advocate  for  stellary  divination  or  astrology  : therefore  in  this  place  it  is  highly
necessary  that  we  examine  how  far  this  influence  extends  to  man,  seeing  that  I
fully  admit  that  man  is  endowed  with  a free-will  from  God,  which  the  stars
can  in  no  wise  counteract.  And  as  there  is  in  man  the  power  and  apprehension
of  all  divination,  and  wonderful  things,  seeing  that  we  have  a complete  system
in  ourselves,  therefore  are  we  called  the  microcosm,  or  little  world ; for  we  carry
A 2 a heaven


4 INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC,

a heaven  in  ourselves  from  our  beginning,  for  God  hath  sealed  in  us  the  image
of  himself;  and  of  all  created  beings  we  are  the  epitome,  therefore  we  must
be  careful,  lest  we  confound  and  mix  one  thing  with  another.  Nevertheless,
man,  as  a pattern  of  the  great  world,  sympathizes  with  it  according  to  the
stars,  which,  agreeably  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  are  set  for  times  and  seasons,  and
not  as  causes  of  this  or  that  evil,  which  may  pervade  kingdoms  or  private
families,  although  they  do  in  some  measure  foreshew  them,  yet  they  are  in  no
wise  the  cause ; therefore  I conceive  in  a wide  different  sense  to  what  is  gene-
rally understood  that  “ Stars  rule  men,  but  a wise  man  rules  the  stars  to
which  I answer,  that  the  stars  do  not  rule  men,  according  to  the  vulgar  and
received  opinion ; as  if  the  stars  should  stir  up  men  to  murders,  seditions,  broils,
lusts,  fornications,  adulteries,  drunkenness,  &c.,  which  the  common  astrologers
hold  forth  as  sound  and  true  doctrine ; because,  they  say,  Mars  and  Saturn,
being  conjunct,  do  this  and  much  more,  and  many  other  configurations  and
afflictions  of  the  two  great  infortunes  (as  they  are  termed),  when  the  benevolent
planets  Jupiter,  Venus,  and  Sol,  happen  to  be  detrimented  or  afflicted ; therefore,
then,  they  say  men  influenced  by  them  are  most  surely  excited  to  the  commission
of  the  vices  before  named  ; yet  a wise  man  may,  by  the  liberty  of  his  own
free-will,  make  those  affections  and  inclinations  void,  and  this  they  call  “To
rule  the  stars but  let  them  know,  according  to  the  sense  here  understood,
first,  it  is  not  in  a wise  man  to  resist  evil  inclinations,  but  of  the  grace  of  God,
and  we  call  none  wise  but  such  as  are  endued  with  grace ; for,  as  we  have  said
before,  all  natural  wisdom  from  the  hands  of  man  is  foolishness  in  the  sight  of
God ; which  was  not  before  understood  to  be  a wise  man  fenced  with  grace ;
for  why  should  he  rule  the  stars,  who  has  not  any  occasion  to  fear  conquered
inclinations  ? — therefore  a natural  wise  man  is  as  subject  to  the  slavery  of  sin
as  others  more  ignorant  than  himself,  yet  the  stars  do  not  incline  him  to  sin.
God  created  the  heavens  without  spot,  and  pronounced  them  good,  therefore  it
is  the  greatest  absurdity  to  suppose  the  stars,  by  a continual  inclining  of  us  to
this  or  that  misdeed,  should  be  our  tempters,  which  we  eventually  make  them,
if  we  admit  they  cause  inclinations ; but  know  that  it  is  not  from  without,  but
within,  by  sin,  that  evil  inclinations  do  arise  : according  to  the  Scriptures,

“ Out


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.


5


“ Out  of  the  heart  of  man  proceed  evil  cogitations,  murmurs,  adulteries,  thefts,
murders,  &c.”  Because,  as  the  heavens  and  apprehension  of  all  celestial  virtues
are  sealed  by  God  in  the  soul  and  spirit  of  man  ; so  when  man  becomes  depraved
by  sin  and  the  indulgence  of  his  gross  and  carnal  appetite,  he  then  becomes  the
seat  of  the  Infernal  Powers,  which  may  be  justly  deemed  a hell;  for  then  the
bodily  and  fleshly  sense  obscures  the  bright  purity  and  thinness  of  the  spirit,
and  he  becomes  the  instrument  of  our  spiritual  enemy  in  the  exercise  of  all
infernal  lusts  and  passions.

Therefore  it  is  most  necessary  for  us  to  know  that  we  are  to  beware  of  grant-
ing or  believing  any  effects  from  the  influences,  of  the  stars  more  than  they
have  naturally  ; because  there  are  many  whom  I have  lately  conversed  with,
and  great  men,  too,  in  this  nation,  who  readily  affirm  that  the  stars  are  the
causes  of  any  kinds  of  diseases,  inclinations,  and  fortunes ; likewise  that  they
blame  the  stars  for  all  their  misconduct  and  misfortunes.

Nevertheless,  we  do  not  by  these  discourses  prohibit  or  deny  all  influence  to
the  stars  ; on  the  contrary,  we  affirm  there  is  a natural  sympathy  and  antipathy
amongst  all  things  throughout  the  whole  universe,  and  this  we  shall  shew  to  be
displayed  through  a variety  of  effects ; and  likewise  that  the  stars,  as  signs,  do
foreshew  great  mutations,  revolutions,  deaths  of  great  men,  governors  of
provinces,  kings,  and  emperors  ; likewise  the  weather,  tempests,  earthquakes,
deluges,  &c. ; and  this  according  to  the  law  of  Providence.  The  lots  of  all
men  do  stand  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  for  he  is  the  end  and  beginning  of  all
things ; he  can  remove  crowns  and  sceptres,  and  displace  the  most  cautious
arrangements  and  councils  of  man,  who,  when  he  thinks  himself  most  secure,
tumbles  headlong  from  the  seat  of  power,  and  lies  grovelling  in  the  dust.

Therefore  our  astrologers  in  most  of  their  speculations  seek  without  a light,
for  they  conceive  every  thing  may  be  known  or  read  in  the  stars  ; if  an  odd
silver  spoon  is  but  lost,  the  innocent  stars  are  obliged  to  give  an  account  of  it ;
if  an  old  maiden  loses  a favourite  puppy,  away  she  goes  to  an  oracle  of  divination
for  information  of  the  whelp.  Oh  ! vile  credulity,  to  think  that  those  celestial
bodies  take  cognizance  of,  and  give  in  their  configurations  and  aspects,  con-
tinual information  of  the  lowest  and  vilest  transactions  of  dotards,  the  most

trivial


6


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.


trivial  and  frivolous  questions  that  are  pretended  to  be  resolved  by  an  inspection
into  the  figure  of  the  heavens.  Well  does  our  legislature  justly  condemn  as
juggling  impostors  all  those  idle  vagabonds  who  infest  various  parts  of  this
metropolis,  and  impose  upon  the  simple  and  unsuspecting,  by  answering,  for  a
shilling  or  half-crown  fee,  whatever  thing  or  circumstance  may  be  proposed
to  them,  as  if  they  were  God’s  vicegerents  on  earth,  and  his  deputed  privy
counsellors.

They  do  not  even  scruple  ever  to  persuade  poor  mortals  of  the  lower  class,
that  they  shew  images  in  glasses,  as  if  they  actually  confederated  with  evil
spirits  : a notable  instance  I will  here  recite,  that  happened  very  lately  in  this
city.  Two  penurious  Frenchmen,  taking  advantage  of  the  credulity  of  the
common  people,  who  are  continually  gaping  after  such  toys,  had  so  contrived
a telescope  or  optic  glass  as  that  various  letters  and  figures  should  be  reflected
in  an  obscure  manner,  shewing  the  images  of  men  and  women,  &c.  ; so  that
when  any  one  came  to  consult  these  jugglers,  after  paying  the  usual  fee,  they,
according  to  the  urgency  of  the  query,  produced  answers  by  those  figures  or
letters  ; the  which  affrights  the  inspector  into  the  glass  so  much,  that  he  or  she
supposes  they  have  got  some  devilish  thing  or  other  in  hand,  by  which  they  remain
under  the  full  conviction  of  having  actually  beheld  the  parties  they  wished  to
see,  though  perhaps  they  may  at  the  same  time  be  residing  many  hundreds  of
miles  distance  therefrom  ; they,  having  received  this  impression  from  a pre-con-
ceived  idea  of  seeing  the  image  of  their  friend  in  this  optical  machine,  go  away,
and  anon  report,  with  an  addition  of  ten  hundred  lies,  that  they  have  been
witness  of  a miracle.  I say  this  kind  of  deception  is  only  to  be  acted  with  the
vulgar,  who,  rather  than  have  their  imaginations  balked,  would  swallow  the
most  abominable  lies  and  conceits.  For  instance,  who  would  suppose  that  any
rational  being  could  be  persuaded  that  a fellow-creature  of  proper  size  and
stature  should  be  able  by  any  means  to  thrust  his  body  into  a quart  bottle  ? — the
which  thing  was  advertised  to  the  public  by  a merry  knave  (not  thinking
there  were  such  fools  in  existence),  to  be  done  by  him  in  a public  theatre-
Upwards  of  600  persons  were  assembled  to  behold  the  transaction,  never
doubting  but  the  fellow  meant  to  keep  his  word,  when  to  the  great  mortification

and


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  7

and  disgrace  of  this  long-headed  audience,  the  conjuror  came  forth  amidst  a
general  stir  and  buz  of  “Ay,  now!  see!  now!  see!  he  is  just  going  to  jump
in.” — “ Indeed,”  says  the  conjuror,  “ladies  and  gentlemen,  I am  not ; for  if  you
were  such  fools  as  to  believe  such  an  absurdity,  I am  not  wise  enough  to  do  it : ” —
therefore,  making  his  bow,  he  disappeared,  to  the  great  discomfort  of  these  wise-
heads,  who  straightway  withdrew  in  the  best  manner  they  could.

As  for  the  telescope  magicians,  they  were  taken  into  custody  by  the  gentle-
men of  the  police  office,  in  Bow  Street ; nor  would  their  familiar  do  them  the
kindness  to  attempt  their  rescue.

But  to  have  done  with  these  things  that  are  unworthy  our  notice  as  philoso-
phers, and  to  proceed  to  matters  of  a higher  nature : it  is  to  be  noted  what  we
have  before  said,  in  respect  of  the  influences  of  the  stars,  that  Ptolemy,  in  his  qua-
drapartite,  in  speaking  of  generals , comes  pretty  near  our  ideas  on  the  subject
of  planetary  influence,  of  which  we  did  not  at  any  time  doubt,  but  do  not  admit
(nay,  it  is  not  necessary,  seeing  there  is  an  astrology  in  Nature), — that  each  action
of  our  life,  our  afflictions,  fortunes,  accidents,  are  deducible  to  the  influential
effects  of  the  planets  : they  proceed  from  ourselves ; but  I admit  that  our
thoughts,  actions,  cogitations,  sympathize  with  the  stars  upon  the  principle  of
general  sympathy.  Again,  there  is  a much  stronger  sympathy  between  persons
of  like  constitution  and  temperament,  for  each  mortal  creature  possesses  a Sun
and  system  within  himself ; therefore,  according  to  universal  sympathy,  we  are
affected  by  the  general  influence  or  universal  spirit  of  the  world,  as  the  vital  prin-
ciple throughout  the  universe  : therefore  we  are  not  to  look  into  the  configura-
tions of  the  stars  for  the  cause  or  incitement  of  men’s  bestial  inclinations,  for
brutes  have  their  specifical  inclinations  from  the  propagation  of  their  principle
by  seed,  not  by  the  sign  of  the  horoscope  ; therefore  as  man  is  oftentimes  capable
of  the  actions  and  excesses  of  brutes,  they  cannot  happen  to  a man  naturally
from  any  other  source  than  the  seminal  being  infused  in  his  composition  ; for
seeing  likewise  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  and  endued  with  free-will,  which  acts
upon  the  body,  the  soul  cannot  be  inclined  by  any  configuration  of  the  stars
either  to  good  or  evil ; but  from  its  own  immortal  power  of  willingly  being
seduced  by  sin,  it  prompts  to  evil ; but  enlightened  by  God,  it  springs  to  good,  on

either


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.


either  principle,  according  to  its  tendency,  the  soul  feeds  while  in  this  frail  body ;
but  what  further  concerns  the  soul  of  man  in  this,  and  after  this,  we  shall  fully
investigate  the  natural  magic  of  the  soul,  in  which  we  have  fully  treated  every
point  of  enquiry  that  has  been  suggested  to  us  by  our  own  imagination,  and  by
scientific  experiments  have  proved  its  divine  virtue  originally  sealed  therein  by
the  Author  of  its  being.

Sufficient  it  is  to  return  to  our  subject  relative  to  astrology,  especially  to  know
what  part  of  it  is  necessary  for  our  use,  of  which  we  will  select  that  which  is
pure  and  to  our  purpose,  for  the  understanding  and  effecting  of  various  experi-
ments in  the  course  of  our  works,  leaving  the  tedious  calculation  of  nativities,
the  never-ceasing  controversies  and  cavillations  of  its  professors,  the  dissensions
which  arise  from  the  various  modes  of  practice ; all  which  we  leave  to  the
figure-casting  plodder,  telling  him,  by-the-by,  that  whatever  he  thinks  he  can
foreshew  by  inspecting  the  horoscope  of  a nativity,  by  long,  tedious,  and  night-
wearied  studies  and  contemplations  ; I say,  whatever  he  can  shew  respecting
personal  or  national  mutations,  changes,  accidents,  &c.  &c.,  all  this  we  know  by
a much  easier  and  readier  method ; and  can  more  comprehensively,  clearly,
and  intelligibly,  shew  and  point  out,  to  the  very  letter,  by  our  Cabal,  which
we  know  to  be  true,  without  deviation,  juggling,  fallacy,  or  collusion,  or  any
kind  of  deceit  or  imposture  whatsoever ; which  Cabal  or  spiritual  astrology  we
draw  from  the  Fountain  of  Knowledge,  in  all  simplicity,  humility,  and  truth;
and  we  boast  not  of  ourselves,  but  of  Him  who  teaches  us  through  his  divine
mercy,  by  the  light  of  whose  favour  we  see  into  things  spiritual  and  divine  :
in  the  possession  of  which  we  are  secure  amidst  the  severest  storms  of  hatred,
malice,  pride,  envy,  hypocrisy,  levity,  bonds,  poverty,  imprisonment,  or  any
other  outward  circumstance ; we  should  still  be  rich,  want  nothing,  be  fed  with
delicious  meats,  and  enjoy  plentifully  all  good  things  necessary  for  our  support :
all  this  we  do  not  vainly  boast  of,  as  figurative,  ideal,  or  chimerical ; but  real,
solid,  and  everlasting,  in  the  which  we  exult  and  delight,  and  praise  his  name
for  ever  and  ever  : Amen.

All  which  we  publicly  declare  to  the  world  for  the  honour  of  our  God,  being
at  all  times  ready  to  do  every  kindness  we  can  to  our  poor  neighbour,  and,

as


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  9

as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  comfort  him,  sick  or  afflicted  ; in  doing  which  we  ask  no
reward  : it  is  sufficient  to  us  that  we  can  do  it,  and  that  we  may  be  acceptable
to  Him  who  says — “ I am  the  light  of  the  world;  to  whom  with  the  Father,
and  Holy  Spirit,  be  ascribed  all  power,  might,  majesty,  and  dominion  : Amen.”


To  the  faithfid  and  discreet  Student  of  Wisdom.


Greeting :

Take  our  instructions;  in  all  things  ask  counsel  of
God,  and  he  will  give  it ; offer  up  the  following  prayer  daily  for  the  illumination
of  thy  understanding  : depend  for  all  things  on  God,  the  first  cause ; with  whom,
by  whom,  and  in  whom,  are  all  things  : see  thy  first  care  be  to  know  thyself ;
and  then  in  humility  direct  thy  prayer  as  follows.


A Prayer  or  Oration  to  God.


Almighty  and  most  merciful  God,  we  thy  servants  approach
with  fear  and  trembling  before  thee,  and  in  all  humility  do  most  heartily  beseech
thee  to  pardon  our  manifold  and  blind  transgressions,  by  us  committed  at  any
time  ; and  grant,  O,  most  merciful  Father,  for  his  sake  who  died  upon  the
cross,  that  our  minds  may  be  enlightened  with  the  divine  radiance  of  thy  holy
wisdom  ; for  seeing,  O,  Lord  of  might,  power,  majesty,  and  dominion,  that,  by
reason  of  our  gross  and  material  bodies,  we  are  scarce  apt  to  receive  those
spiritual  instructions  that  we  so  earnestly  and  heartily  desire.  Open,  O,
blessed  Spirit,  the  spiritual  eye  of  our  soul,  that  we  may  be  released  from
this  darkness  overspreading  us  by  the  delusions  of  the  outward  senses,  and
may  perceive  and  understand  those  things  which  are  spiritual.  We  pray
thee,  oh,  Lord,  above  all  to  strengthen  our  souls  and  bodies  against  our
Book  I.  B spiritual


10


ORATION  TO  GOD.


spiritual  enemies,  by  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  our  blessed  Redeemer,
thy  Son,  Jesus  Christ;  and  through  him,  and  in  his  name,  we  beseech  thee  to
illuminate  the  faculties  of  our  souls,  so  that  we  may  clearly  and  comprehensively
hear  with  our  ears,  and  understand  with  our  hearts ; and  remove  far  from
us  all  hypocrisy,  deceitful  dealing,  profaneness,  inconstancy,  and  levity ; so  that
we  may,  in  word  and  act,  become  thy  faithful  servants,  and  stand  firm  and
unshaken  against  all  the  attacks  of  our  bodily  enemies,  and  likewise  be  proof
against  all  illusions  of  evil  spirits,  with  whom  we  desire  no  communication  or
interest ; but  that  we  may  be  instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  things,  natural
and  celestial  : and  as  it  pleased  thee  to  bestow  on  Solomon  all  wisdom,  both
human  and  divine  ; in  the  desire  of  which  knowledge  he  did  so  please  thy
divine  majesty,  that  in  a dream,  of  one  night,  thou  didst  inspire  him  with  all
wisdom  and  knowledge,  which  he  did  wisely  prefer  before  the  riches  of  this
life  ; so  may  our  desire  and  prayer  be  graciously  accepted  by  thee ; so  that,
by  a firm  dependence  on  thy  word,  we  may  not  be  led  away  by  the  vain  and
ridiculous  pursuits  of  worldly  pleasures  and  delights,  they  not  being  durable,
nor  of  any  account  to  our  immortal  happiness.  Grant  us,  Lord,  power  and
strength  of  intellect  to  carry  on  this  work,  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  thy
holy  name,  and  to  the  comfort  of  our  neighbour  ; and  without  design  of  hurt
or  detriment  to  any,  we  may  proceed  in  our  labours,  through  J esus  Christ,  our
Redeemer  : Amen.


OF  NATURAL  MAGIC  IN  GENERAL.

Before  we  proceed  to  particulars,  it  will  not  be  amiss
to  speak  of  generals  ; therefore,  as  an  elucidation,  we  shall  briefly  show  what
sciences  we  comprehend  under  the  title  of  Natural  Magic  ; and  to  hasten
to  the  point,  we  shall  regularly  proceed  from  theory  to  practice ; therefore,
Natural  Magic  undoubtedly  comprehends  a knowledge  of  all  Nature,  which
we  by  no  means  can  arrive  at  but  by  searching  deeply  into  her  treasury,

which


OF  NATURAL  MAGIC  IN  GENERAL.


11


which  is  inexhaustible  ; we  therefore  by  long  study,  labour,  and  practice,  have
found  out  many  valuable  secrets  and  experiments,  which  are  either  unknown,
or  are  buried  in  the  ignorant  knowledge  of  the  present  age.  The  wise
ancients  knew  that  in  Nature  the  greatest  secrets  lay  hid,  and  wonderful  active
powers  were  dormant,  unless  excited  by  the  vigorous  faculty  of  the  mind  of
man  ; but  as,  in  these  latter  days,  men  give  themselves  almost  wholly  up  to
vice  and  luxury,  so  their  understandings  have  become  more  and  more
depraved  ; ’till,  being  swallowed  up  in  the  gross  senses,  they  become  totally
unfit  for  divine  contemplations  and  deep  speculations  in  Nature;  their  intel-
lectual faculty  being  drowned  in  obscurity  and  dulness,  by  reason  of  their  sloth,
intemperance,  or  sensual  appetites.  The  followers  of  Pythagoras  enjoined
silence,  and  forbade  the  eating  of  the  flesh  of  animals  ; the  first,  because  they
were  cautious,  and  aware  of  the  vanity  of  vain  babbling  and  fruitless  cavilla-
tions  : they  studied  the  power  of  numbers  to  the  highest  extent ; they  forbade
the  eating  of  flesh  not  so  much  on  the  score  of  transmigration,  as  to  keep  the
body  in  a healthful  and  temperate  state,  free  from  gross  humours ; by  these
means  they  qualified  themselves  for  spiritual  matters,  and  attained  unto  great
and  excellent  mysteries,  and  continued  in  the  exercise  of  charitable  arts,  and
the  practice  of  all  moral  virtues  : yet,  seeing  they  were  heathens,  they  attained
not  unto  the  high  and  inspired  lights  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  that  were
bestowed  on  the  Apostles,  and  others,  after  the  coming  of  Christ;  but  they
mortified  their  lusts,  lived  temperately,  chaste,  honest,  and  virtuous  ; which
government  is  so  contrary  to  the  practice  of  modern  Christians,  that  they
live  as  if  the  blessed  word  had  come  upon  the  earth  to  grant  them  privilege
to  sin.  However,  we  will  leave  Pythagoras  and  his  followers,  to  hasten  to  our
own  work;  whereof  we  will  first  explain  the  foundation  of  Natural  Magic,  in
as  clear  and  intelligible  a manner  as  the  same  can  be  done.


B 2


THE


THE


FIRST  PRINCIPLES

NATURAL  MAGIC


BOOK  THE  FIRST.

CHAP.  I.

NATURAL  MAGIC  DEFINED OF  MAN HIS  CREATION DIVINE  IMAGE AND  OF  THE

SPIRITUAL  AND  MAGICAL  VIRTUE  OF  THE  SOUL.

Natural  magic  is,  as  we  have  said,  a comprehen-
sive knowledge  of  all  Nature,  by  which  we  search  out  her  secret  and  occult
operations  throughout  her  vast  and  spacious  elaboratory  ; whereby  we  come
to  a knowledge  of  the  component  parts,  qualities,  virtues,  and  secrets  of
metals,  stones,  plants,  and  animals  ; but  seeing,  in  the  regular  order  of  the
creation,  man  was  the  work  of  the  sixth  day,  every  thing  being  prepared  for
his  vicegerency  here  on  earth,  and  that  it  pleased  the  omnipotent  God,  after
he  had  formed  the  great  world,  or  macrocosm,  and  pronounced  it  good,  so  he
created  man  the  express  image  of  himself ; and  in  man,  likewise,  an  exact
model  of  the  great  world.  We  shall  describe  the  wonderful  properties  of  man,
in  which  we  may  trace  in  miniature  the  exact  resemblance  or  copy  of  the
universe ; by  which  means  we  shall  come  to  the  more  easy  understanding  of
whatever  we  may  have  to  declare  concerning  the  knowledge  of  the  inferior
nature,  such  as  animals,  plants,  metals,  and  stones ; for,  by  our  first  declaring
the  occult  qualities  and  properties  that  are  hid  in  the  little  world,  it  will  serve
as  a key  to  the  opening  of  all  the  treasures  and  secrets  of  the  macrocosm,  or

great


14


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.

great  world  : therefore,  we  shall  hasten  to  speak  of  the  creation  of  man,  and
his  divine  image  ; likewise  of  his  fall,  in  consequence  of  his  disobedience ;
by  which  all  the  train  of  evils,  plagues,  diseases,  and  miseries,  were  entailed
upon  his  posterity,  through  the  curse  of  our  Creator,  but  deprecated  by  the
mediation  of  our  blessed  Lord,  Christ.


THE  CREATION,  DISOBEDIENCE,  AND  FALL  OF  MAN.

According  to  the  word  of  God,  which  we  take  in  all  things  for  our  guide,
in  the  ist  chapter  of  Genesis,  and  the  26th  verse,  it  is  said — God  said,  let
us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  ; and  let  them  have  dominion
over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  the  cattle,  and
over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the
earth.” — Here  is  the  origin  and  beginning  of  our  frail  human  nature ; hence
every  soul  was  created  by  the  very  light  itself,  and  Fountain  of  Life,  after  his
own  express  image,  likewise  immortal,  in  a beautiful  and  well-formed  body,
endued  with  a most  excellent  mind,  and  dominion  or  unlimited  monarchy
over  all  Nature,  everything  being  subjected  to  his  rule,  or  command;  one
creature  only  being  excepted,  which  was  to  remain  untouched  and  consecrated,
as  it  were,  to  the  divine  mandate  : “ Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest
freely  eat ; ” “ But  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou
shalt  not  eat  of  it ; for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  of  it,  thou  shalt  surely  die.”
Gen.  ii.  ver.  16.  Therefore  Adam  was  formed  by  the  finger  of  God,  which
is  the  Holy  Spirit ; whose  figure  or  outward  form  was  beautiful  and  propor-
tionate as  an  angel ; in  whose  voice  (before  he  sinned)  every  sound  was  the
sweetness  of  harmony  and  music  : had  he  remained  in  the  state  of  innocency
in  which  he  was  formed,  the  weakness  of  mortal  man,  in  his  depraved  state,
would  not  have  been  able  to  bear  the  virtue  and  celestial  shrillness  of  his
voice.  But  when  the  deceiver  found  that  man,  from  the  inspiration  of  God,
had  began  to  sing  so  shrilly,  and  to  repeat  the  celestial  harmony  of  the
heavenly  country,  he  counterfeited  the  engines  of  craft  : seeing  his  wrath

against


Chap.  I.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  15

against  him  was  in  vain,  he  was  much  tormented  thereby,  and  began  to  think
how  he  might  entangle  him  into  disobedience  of  the  command  of  his  Creator,
whereby  he  might,  as  it  were,  laugh  him  to  scorn,  in  derision  of  his  new  crea-
ture, man.

Van  Helmont,  in  his  Oriatrike,  chap,  xcii.,  speaking  of  the  entrance  of  death
into  human  nature,  &c.,  finely  touches  the  subject  of  the  creation,  and  man’s
disobedience  : indeed,  his  ideas  so  perfectly  coincide  with  my  own,  that  I
have  thought  fit  here  to  transcribe  his  philosophy,  which  so  clearly  explains
the  text  of  Scripture,  with  so  much  of  the  light  of  truth  on  his  side,  that  it  carries
along  with  it  the  surest  and  most  positive  conviction.

“ Man  being  essentially  created  after  the  image  of  God,  after  that,  he  rashly
presumed  to  generate  the  image  of  God  out  of  himself  ; not,  indeed,  by  a
certain  monster,  but  by  something  which  was  shadowly  like  himself.  With  the
ravishment  of  Eve,  he,  indeed,  generated  not  the  image  God  like  unto  that
which  God  would  have  inimitable,  as  being  divine ; but  in  the  vital  air  of  the
seed  he  generated  dispositions  ; careful  at  some  time  to  receive  a sensitive,  dis-
cursive, and  motive  soul  from  the  F ather  of  Light,  yet  mortal,  and  to  perish ;
yet,  nevertheless,  he  ordinarily  inspires,  and  of  his  own  goodness,  the  substantial
spirit  of  a mind  showing  forth  his  own  image  : so  that  man,  in  this  respect,
endeavoured  to  generate  his  own  image  ; not  after  the  manner  of  brute  beasts,
but  by  the  copulation  of  seeds,  which  at  length  should  obtain,  by  request,  a
soulified  light  from  the  Creator ; and  the  which  they  call  a sensitive  soul.

“ For,  from  thence  hath  proceeded  another  generation,  conceived  after  a
beast-like  manner,  mortal,  and  uncapable  of  eternal  life,  after  the  manner  of
beasts ; and  bringing  forth  with  pains,  and  subject  to  diseases,  and  death  ; and
so  much  the  more  sorrowful,  and  full  of  misery,  by  how  much  that  very  propa-
gation in  our  first  parents  dared  to  invert  the  intent  of  God.

“ Therefore  the  unutterable  goodness  forewarned  them  that  they  should
not  taste  of  that  tree  ; and  otherwise  he  foretold,  that  the  same  day  they
should  die  the  death,  and  should  feel  all  the  root  of  calamities  which  accom-
panies death.”

Deservedly,  therefore,  hath  the  Lord  deprived  both  our  parents  of  the  benefit
of  immortality ; namely,  death  succeeded  from  a conjugal  and  brutal  copulation  ;

neither


16  NATURAL  MAGIC.  Book  I.

neither  remained  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  with  man,  after  that  he  began  to  be
flesh.

Further;  because  that  defilement  of  Eve  shall  thenceforth  be  continued  in
the  propagation  of  posterity,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  from  hence  the
sin  of  the  despised  fatherly  admonition,  and  natural  deviation  from  the  right
way,  is  now  among  other  sins  for  an  impurity,  from  an  inverted,  carnal,  and
well  nigh  brutish  generation,  and  is  truly  called  original  sin ; that  is,  man
being  sowed  in  the  pleasure  of  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  shall  therefore
always  reap  a necessary  death  in  the  flesh  of  sin ; but,  the  knowledge  of  good
and  evil,  which  God  placed  in  the  dissuaded  apple,  did  contain  in  it  a seminary
virtue  of  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  that  is,  an  occult  forbidden  conjunction,
diametrically  opposite  to  the  state  of  innocence,  which  state  was  not  a state  of
stupidity ; because  He  was  he  unto  whom,  before  the  corruption  of  Nature,  the
essences  of  all  living  creatures  whatsoever  were  made  known,  according  to
which  they  were  to  be  named  from  their  property,  and  at  their  first  sight  to
be  essentially  distinguished  : man,  therefore,  through  eating  of  the  apple,  attained
a knowledge  that  he  had  lost  his  radical  innocency ; for,  neither  before  the
eating  of  the  apple  was  he  so  dull  or  stupified  that  he  knew  not,  or  did  not
perceive  himself  naked  ; but,  with  the  effect  of  shame  and  brutal  concupiscence,
he  then  first  declared  he  was  naked.

For  that  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  signifies  nothing  but  the  concu-
piscence of  the  flesh,  the  Apostle  testifies  ; calling  it  the  law,  and  desire  of  sin.
F or  it  pleased  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  to  insert  in  the  apple  an  incentive
to  concupiscence  ; by  which  he  was  able  safely  to  abstain,  by  not  eating  of  the
apple,  therefore  dissuaded  therefrom  ; for  otherwise  he  had  never  at  any  time
been  tempted,  or  stirred  up  by  his  genital  members.  Therefore  the  apple
being  eaten,  man,  from  an  occult  and  natural  property  ingrafted  in  the  fruit,
conceived  a lust,  and  sin  became  luxurious  to  him,  and  from  thence  was  made
an  animal  seed,  which,  hastening  into  the  previous  or  foregoing  dispositions  of
a sensitive  soul , and  undergoing  the  law  of  other  causes , reflected  itself  into  the
vital  spirit  of  Adam  ; and,  like  an  ignis-fatuus,  presently  receiving  an  archeus


or


Chap.  I.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  17

or  ruling  spirit,  and  animal  idea,  it  presently  conceived  a power  of  propagating
an  animal  and  mortal  seed,  ending  into  life.

F urthermore,  the  sacred  text  hath  in  many  places  compelled  me  unto  a perfect
position,  it  making  Eve  an  helper  like  unto  Adam  ; not,  indeed,  that  she  should
supply  the  name , and  room  of  a wife , even  as  she  is  called,  straightway  after
sin,  for  she  was  a virgin  in  the  intent  of  the  Creator,  and  afterwards  filled
with  misery  : but  not,  as  long  as  the  state  of  purity  presided  over  innocency,
did  the  will  of  man  overcome  her  ; for  the  translation  of  man  into  Paradise
did  foreshew  another  condition  of  living  than  that  of  a beast ; and  therefore
the  eating  of  the  apple  doth  by  a most  chaste  name  cover  the  concupiscence
of  the  flesh , while  it  contains  the  “ knowledge  of  good  and  evil  ” in  this  name,
and  calls  the  ignorance  thereof  the  state  of  innocence  : for,  surely,  the
attainment  of  that  aforesaid  knowledge  did  nourish  a most  hurtful  death,  and
an  irrevocable  deprivation  of  eternal  life  : for  if  man  had  not  tasted  the  apple,
he  had  lived  void  of  concupiscence,  and  offsprings  had  appeared  out  of  Eve
(a  virgin)  from  the  Holy  Spirit.

But  the  apple  being  eaten,  “ presently  their  eyes  were  opened,”  and  Adam
began  lustfully  to  covet  copulation  with  the  naked  virgin,  and  defiled  her,  the
which  God  had  appointed  for  a naked  help  unto  him.  But  man  prevented  the
intention  of  God  by  a strange  generation  in  the  flesh  of  sin ; whereupon  there
followed  the  corruption  of  the  former  nature,  or  the  flesh  of  sin,  accompanied  by
concupiscence  : neither  doth  the  text  insinuate  any  other  mark  of  “ the  know-
ledge of  good  and  evil”  than  that  they  “ knew  themselves  to  be  naked”  or,
speaking  properly,  of  their  virginity  being  corrupted,  polluted  with  bestial
lust,  and  defiled.  Indeed,  their  whole  “ knowledge  of  good  and  evil  ” is
included  in  their  shame  within  their  privy  parts  alone  ; and  therefore  in  the
8th  of  Leviticus,  and  many  places  else  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  privy  parts
themselves  are  called  by  no  other  etymology  than  that  of  shame  ; for  from
the  copulation  of  the  flesh  their  eyes  were  opened,  because  they  then  knew
that  the  good  being  lost,  had  brought  on  them  a degenerate  nature,  shame-
fulness, an  intestine  and  inevitable  obligation  of  death  ; sent  also  into  their
posterity.

Book  I.


C


Alas!


18


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.

Alas  ! too  late,  indeed  they  understood,  by  the  unwonted  novelty  and
shamefulness  of  their  concupiscence,  why  God  had  so  lovingly  forbade  the
eating  of  the  apple.  Indeed,  the  truth  being  agreeable  unto  itself,  doth  attest
the  filthiness  of  impure  Adamical  generation  ; for  the  impurity  which  had
received  a contagion  from  any  natural  issues  whatsoever  of  menstrues  or  seed,
and  that  by  its  touching  alone  is  reckoned  equal  to  that  which  should  by  degrees
creep  on  a person  from  a co-touching  of  dead  carcases,  and  to  be  expiated  by
the  same  ceremonious  rite  that  the  text  might  agreeably  denote,  that  death  began
by  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh  lying  hid  in  the  fruit  forbidden ; therefore,
also,  the  one  only  healing  medicine,  of  so  great  an  impurity  contracted  by
touching,  consisted  in  washing  : under  the  similitude  or  likeness  thereof,  faith
and  hope,  which  in  baptism  are  poured  on  us,  are  strengthened.

For  as  soon  as  Adam  knew  that  by  fratricide  the  first  born  of  mortals,
whom  he  had  begotten  in  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  had  killed  his  brother,
guiltless  and  righteous  as  he  was ; and  foreseeing  the  wicked  errors  of  mortals
that  would  come  from  thence,  he  likewise  perceived  his  own  miseries  in
himself ; certainly  knowing  that  all  these  calamities  had  happened  unto  him
from  the  sin  of  concupiscence  drawn  from  the  apple,  which  were  unavoidably
issuing  on  his  posterity,  he  thought  within  himself  that  the  most  discreet  thing
he  could  do,  was  hereafter  wholly  to  abstain  from  his  wife,  whom  he  had
violated ; and  therefore  he  mourned,  in  chastity  and  sorrow,  a full  hundred
years ; hoping  that  by  the  merit  of  that  abstinence,  and  by  an  opposition  to
the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  he  should  not  only  appease  the  wrath  of  the
incensed  Deity,  but  that  he  should  again  return  into  the  former  splendour  and
majesty  of  his  primitive  innocence  and  purity.  But  the  repentance  of  one  age
being  finished,  it  is  most  probable  the  mystery  of  Christ’s  incarnation  was
revealed  unto  him  ; neither  that  man  ever  could  hope  to  return  to  the  bright-
ness of  his  ancient  purity  by  his  own  strength,  and  much  less  that  himself
could  reprieve  his  posterity  from  death  ; and  that,  therefore,  marriage  was  well
pleasing,  and  was  after  the  fall  indulged  unto  him  by  God  because  he  had
determined  thus  to  satisfy  his  justice  at  the  fulness  of  times,  which  should,

to


Chap.  I.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  19

to  the  glory  of  his  own  name , and  the  confusion  of  Satan,  elevate  mankind  to  a
more  sublime  and  eminent  state  of  blessedness.

From  that  time  Adam  began  to  know  his  wife,  viz.  after  he  was  an  hundred
years  old,  and  to  fill  the  earth,  by  multiplying  according  to  the  blessing  once
given  him,  and  the  law  enjoined  him — “ Be  fruitful  and  multiply.”— Yet  so,
nevertheless,  that  although  matrimony,  by  reason  of  the  great  want  of  propa-
gation, and  otherwise  impossible  coursary  succession  of  the  primitive  divine
generation,  be  admitted  as  a sacrament  of  the  faithful.

If,  therefore,  both  our  first  parents,  after  the  eating  of  the  apple,  were
ashamed,  they  covered  only  their  privy  parts ; therefore  that  shame  doth  pre-
suppose, and  accuse  of  something  committed  against  justice — against  the  intent
of  the  Creator — and  against  their  own  proper  nature  : by  consequence,  there-
fore, that  Adamical  generation  was  not  of  the  primitive  constitution  of  their
nature,  as  neither  of  the  original  intent  of  the  Creator ; therefore,  when  God
foretels  that  the  earth  shall  bring  forth  thistles  and  thorns,  and  that  man  shall
gain  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  they  were  not  execrations,  but  admo-
nitions, that  those  sort  of  things  should  be  obvious  in  the  earth  : and,  because
that  beasts  should  bring  forth  in  pain — should  plow  in  sweat — should  eat  their
food  with  labour  and  fear,  that  the  earth  should  likewise  bring  forth  very  many
things  besides  the  intention  of  the  husbandman ; therefore,  also,  that  they  ought
to  be  nourished  like  unto  brute  beasts,  who  had  begun  to  generate  after  the
manner  of  brute  beasts.

It  is  likewise  told  Eve,  after  her  transgression,  that  she  should  bring  forth  in
pain.  Therefore,  what  hath  the  pain  of  bringing  forth  common  with  the
eating  of  the  apple,  unless  the  apple  had  operated  about  the  concupiscence  of
the  flesh,  and  by  consequence  stirred  up  copulation  ; and  the  Creator  had
intended  to  dissuade  it,  by  dehorting  from  the  eating  of  the  apple.  For,  why
are  the  genital  members  of  women  punished  with  pains  at  child-birth,  if  the  eye
in  seeing  the  apple,  the  hands  in  cropping  it,  and  the  mouth  in  eating  of
it,  have  offended  ? for  was  it  not  sufficient  to  have  chastised  the  life  with  death,
and  the  health  with  very  many  diseases  ? — Moreover,  why  is  the  womb  afflicted,
C 2 as


NATURAL  MAGIC.


20  NATURAL  MAGIC.  Book  I.

as  in  brutes,  with  the  manner  of  bringing  forth,  if  the  conception  granted  to
beasts  were  not  forbidden  to  man  ?

After  their  fall,  therefore,  their  eyes  were  opened , and  they  were  ashamed :
it  denotes  and  signifies  that,  from  the  filthiness  of  concupiscence,  they  knew
that  the  copulation  of  the  flesh  was  forbidden  in  the  most  pure  innocent  chas-
tity of  nature,  and  that  they  were  overspread  with  shame,  when,  their  eyes
being  opened,  their  understandings  saw  that  they  had  committed  filthiness  most
detestable.

But  on  the  serpent  and  evil  spirit  alone  was  the  top  and  summit  of  the  whole
curse,  even  as  the  privilege  of  the  woman,  and  the  mysterious  prerogative  of  the
blessing  upon  the  earth,  viz.  That  the  woman’s  seed  should  bruise  the  head  of
the  serpent.  So  that  it  is  not  possible  that  to  bring  forth  in  pain  should  be  a
curse  ; for  truly  with  the  same  voice  of  the  Lord  is  pronounced  the  blessing  of
the  woman,  and  victory  over  the  infernal  spirit.

Therefore  Adam  was  created  in  the  possession  of  immortality.  God  intended
not  that  man  should  be  an  animal  or  sensitive  creature,  nor  be  born,  conceived,
or  live  as  an  animal  ; for  of  truth  he  was  created  unto  a living  soul, , and
that  after  the  true  image  of  God ; therefore  he  as  far  differed  from  the
nature  of  an  animal,  as  an  immortal  being  from  a mortal,  and  as  a God-like
creature  from  a brute.

I am  sorry  that  our  school-men,  many  of  them,  wish,  by  their  arguments  of
noise  and  pride,  to  draw  man  into  a total  animal  nature  (nothing  more),
drawing  (by  their  logic)  the  essence  of  a man  essentially  from  an  animal
nature  : because,  although  man  afterwards  procured  death  to  himself  and
posterity,  and  therefore  may  seem  to  be  made  nearer  the  nature  of  animal
creatures,  yet  it  stood  not  in  his  power  to  be  able  to  pervert  the  species  of  the
divine  image  : even  so  as  neither  was  the  evil  spirit,  of  a spirit,  made  an
animal,  although  he  became  nearer  unto  the  nature  of  an  animal,  by  hatred  and
brutal  vices.  Therefore  man  remained  in  his  own  species  wherein  he  was
created  ; for  as  often  as  man  is  called  an  animal , or  sensitive  living  creature,
and  is  in  earnest  thought  to  be  such,  so  many  times  the  text  is  falsified  which
says,  “ But  the  serpent  was  more  crafty  than  all  the  living  creatures  of  the

earth,


Chap.  I.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  21

earth,  which  the  Lord  God  had  made  ; ” because  he  speaks  of  the  natural  craft
and  subtilty  of  that  living  and  creeping  animal.  Again,  if  the  position  be
true,  man  was  not  directed  into  the  propagation  of  seed  or  flesh , neither  did
he  aspire  unto  a sensitive  soul ; and  therefore  the  sensible  soul  of  Adamical
generation  is  not  of  a brutal  species,  because  it  was  raised  up  by  a seed  which
wanted  the  original  ordination  and  limitation  of  any  species  ; and  so  that,  as
the  sensitive  soul  in  man  arose,  besides  the  intent  of  the  Creator  and  Nature  ;
so  it  is  of  no  brutal  species,  neither  can  it  subsist,  unless  it  be  continually  tied
to  the  mind,  from  whence  it  is  supported  in  its  life.

Wherefore,  while  man  is  of  no  brutal  species,  he  cannot  be  an  animal  in
respect  to  his  mind,  and  much  less  in  respect  to  his  soul,  which  is  of  no  species.

Therefore  know,  that  neither  evil  spirit,  nor  whole  nature  also,  can,  by  any
means  or  any  way  whatever,  change  the  essence  given  unto  man  from  his
Creator,  and  by  his  foreknowledge  determined  that  he  should  remain  con-
tinually such  as  he  was  created,  although  he,  in  the  mean  time,  hath  clothed
himself  with  strange  properties,  as  natural  unto  him  from  the  vice  of  his  own
will ; for  as  it  is  an  absurdity  to  reckon  man  glorified  among  animals,  because
he  is  not  without  sense  or  feeling,  so  to  be  sensitive  does  not  shew  the
inseparable  essence  of  an  animal.

Seeing,  therefore,  our  first  parents  had  both  of  them  now  felt  the  effect
throughout  their  whole  bodies  of  the  eating  of  the  apple,  or  concupiscence
of  the  flesh  in  their  members  in  Paradise,  it  shamed  them  ; because  their  mem-
bers, which,  before,  they  could  rule  at  their  pleasure,  were  afterwards  moved  by
a proper  incentive  to  lust.

Therefore,  on  the  same  day,  not  only  mortality  entered  through  concu-
piscence, but  it  presently  after  entered  into  a conceived  generation ; for  which
they  were,  the  same  day,  also  driven  out  of  Paradise  : hence  followed  an
adulterous,  lascivious,  beast-like,  devilish  generation,  and  plainly  incapable  of
entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  diametrically  opposite  to  God’s  ordination  ;
by  which  means  death,  and  the  threatened  punishment,  corruption , became
inseparable  to  man  and  his  posterity.


Therefore,


22


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


Therefore,  original  sin  was  effectively  bred  from  the  concupiscence  of  the
flesh,  but  occasioned  only  by  the  apple  being  eaten,  and  the  admonition
despised  : but  the  stimulative  to  concupiscence  was  placed  in  the  dissuaded
tree,  and  that  occult  lustful  property  radically  inserted  and  implanted  in  it.
But  when  Satan  (besides  his  hope , and  the  deflowering  of  the  virgin,  nothing
hindering  of  it)  saw  that  man  was  not  taken  out  of  the  way,  according  to  the
forewarning  (for  he  knew  not  that  the  Son  of  God  had  constituted  himself  a
surety,  before  the  Father,  for  man)  he,  indeed,  looked  at  the  vile,  corrupted,
and  degenerated  nature  of  man,  and  saw  that  a power  was  withdrawn  from
him  of  uniting  himself  to  the  God  of  infinite  majesty,  and  began  greatly  to
rejoice.  That  joy  was  of  short  duration,  for,  by  and  by,  he  likewise  knew
that  marriage  was  ratified  by  Heaven — that  the  divine  goodness  yet  inclined
to  man — and  that  Satan’s  own  fallacies  and  deceits  were  thus  deceived  : hence
conjecturing  that  the  Son  of  God  was  to  restore  every  defect  of  contagion,
and,  therefore,  perhaps,  to  be  incarnated.  He  then  put  himself  to  work  how,
or  in  what  manner,  he  should  defile  the  stock  that  was  to  be  raised  up  by
matrimony  with  a mortal  soul,  so  that  he  might  render  every  conception  of
God  in  vain  : therefore  he  stirred  up  not  only  his  fratricides,  and  notoriously
wicked  persons,  that  there  might  be  evil  abounding  at  all  times ; but  he  pro-
cured that  Atheism  might  arise,  and  that,  together  with  Heathenism,  it  might
daily  increase,  whereby  indeed,  if  he  could  not  hinder  the  co-knitting  of  the
immortal  mind  with  the  sensitive  soul,  he  might,  at  least,  by  destroying  the  law
of  Nature,  bring  man  unto  a level  with  himself  under  infernal  punishment  : but
his  special  care  and  desire  was  to  expunge  totally  the  immortal  mind  out  of  the
stock  of  posterity.

Therefore  he  (the  Devil)  stirs  up,  to  this  day,  detestable  copulations  in
Atheistical  libertines  : but  he  saw  from  thence,  that  nothing  but  brutish  or
savage  monsters  proceeded,  to  be  abhorred  by  the  very  parents  themselves ;
and  that  the  copulation  with  women  was  far  more  plausible  to  men ; and  that
by  this  method  the  generation  of  men  should  constantly  continue  ; for  he  endea-
voured to  prevent  the  hope  of  restoring  a remnant,  that  is,  to  hinder  the
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  ; therefore  he  attempted,  by  an  application  of

active


Chap.  I.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  23

active  things,  to  frame  the  seed  of  man  according  to  his  own  accursed  desire ;
which,  when  he  had  found  vain  and  impossible  for  him  to  do,  he  tried  again
whether  an  imp  or  witch  might  not  be  fructified  by  sodomy ; and  when  this
did  not  fully  answer  his  intentions  every  way,  and  he  saw  that  of  an  ass  and  a
horse  a mule  was  bred,  which  was  nearer  a-kin  to  his  mother  than  his  father ;
likewise  that  of  a coney  and  dormouse  being  the  father,  a true  coney  was
bred,  being  distinct  from  his  mother,  only  having  a tail  like  the  dormouse ;
he  declined  these  feats,  and  betook  himself  to  others  worthy,  indeed,  only  of  the
subtile  craft  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness.

Therefore  Satan  instituted  a connexion  of  the  seed  of  man  with  the  seed
and  in  the  womb  of  a junior  witch,  or  sorceress,  that  he  might  exclude  the
dispositions  unto  an  immortal  mind  from  such  a new,  polished  conception  : and
afterwards  came  forth  an  adulterous  and  lascivious  generation  of  Faunii,
Satyrs,  Gnomes,  Nymphs,  Sylphs,  Driades,  Hamodriades,  Neriads,  Mermaids,
Syrens,  Sphynxes,  Monsters,  &c.,  using  the  constellations,  and  disposing  the
seed  of  man  for  such  like  monstrous  prodigious  generations.

And,  seeing  the  Faunii  and  Nymphs  of  the  woods  were  preferred  before  the
others  in  beauty,  they  afterwards  generated  their  offspring  amongst  themselves,,
and  at  length  began  wedlocks  with  men,  feigning  that,  by  these  copulations,
they  should  obtain  an  immortal  soul  for  them  and  their  offspring  ; but  this
happened  through  the  persuasions  and  delusions  of  Satan  to  admit  these
monsters  to  carnal  copulation,  which  the  ignorant  were  easily  persuaded  to  ;
and  therefore  these  Nymphs  are  called  Succubii  : although  Satan  afterwards
committed  worse,  frequently  transchanging  himself,  by  assuming  the  persons  of
both  Incubii  and  Succubii,  in  both  sexes  ; but  they  conceived  not  a true
young  by  the  males,  except  the  Nymphs  alone.  The  which,  indeed,  seeing  the
sons  of  God  (that  is,  men)  had  now,  without  distinction,  and  in  many  places,
taken  to  be  their  wives,  God  was  determined  to  blot  out  the  whole  race  begotten
by  these  infernal  and  detestable  marriages,  through  a deluge  of  waters,  that  the
intent  of  the  evil  spirit  might  be  rendered  frustrate.

Of  which  monsters  before  mentioned,  I will  here  give  a striking  example
from  Helmont  : for  he  says,  a merchant  of  Aigina,  a countryman  of  his,

sailing


NATURAL  MAGIC.


24  NATURAL  MAGIC.  Book  I.

sailing  various  times  unto  the  Canaries,  was  asked  by  Helmont  for  his  serious
judgment  about  certain  creatures,  which  the  mariners  frequently  brought  home
from  the  mountains,  as  often  as  they  went,  and  called  them  Tude-squils  ; *
for  they  were  dried  dead  carcasses,  almost  three-footed,  and  so  small  that  a boy
might  easily  carry  one  of  them  upon  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and  they  were  of  an
exact  human  shape  ; but  their  whole  dead  carcass  was  clear  or  transparent
as  any  parchment,  and  their  bones  flexible  like  gristles  ; against  the  sun,  also,
their  bowels  and  intestine  were  plainly  to  be  seen  ; which  thing  I,  by
Spaniards  there  born,  knew  to  be  true.  I considered  that,  to  this  day,  the
destroyed  race  of  the  Pygmies  were  there ; for  the  Almighty  would  render
the  expectations  of  the  evil  spirit,  supported  by  the  abominable  actions  of
mankind,  void  and  vain  ; and  he  has,  therefore,  manifoldly  saved  us  from  the
craft  and  subtilty  of  the  Devil,  unto  whom  eternal  punishments  are  due,  to  his
extreme  and  perpetual  confusion,  unto  the  everlasting  sanctifying  of  the  Divine
Name.


CHAP.  II.

OF  THE  WONDERS  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC,  DISPLAYED  IN  A VARIETY  OF  SYMPATHETIC  AND
OCCULT  OPERATIONS  THROUGHOUT  THE  FAMILIES  OF  ANIMALS,  PLANTS,  METALS,  AND
STONES,  TREATED  OF  MISCELLANEOUSLY.

THE  wonders  of  Animal  Magic  we  mean  fully  to  display  under  the  title  of
Magnetism.  But  here  we  hasten  to  investigate  by  what  means,  instruments,
and  effects,  we  must  apply  actives  to  passives,  to  the  producing  of  rare  and
uncommon  effects  ; whether  by  actions , amulets , alligations  and  suspensions
— or  rings , papers , unctions , suffumigations , allurements , sorceries,  enchantments ,
images,  lights,  sounds,  or  the  like-  Therefore,  to  begin  with  things  more
simple  : — If  any  one  shall,  with  an  entire  new  knife,  cut  asunder  a lemon,
using  words  expressive  of  hatred,  contumely,  or  dislike,  against  any  individual,


Stude-quills,  or  Stew’d  quills.


the


Chap.  II.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  25

the  absent  party,  though  at  an  unlimited  distance,  feels  a certain  inexpres-
sible and  cutting  anguish  of  the  heart,  together  with  a cold  chilliness  and
failure  throughout  the  body ; — likewise  of  living  animals,  if  a live  pigeon  be
cut  through  the  heart,  it  causes  the  heart  of  the  party  intended  to  affect  with
a sudden  failure ; likewise  fear  is  induced  by  suspending  the  magical  image  of
a man  by  a single  thread  ; — also,  death  and  destruction  by  means  similar  to
these  ; and  all  these  from  a fatal  and  magical  sympathy.

Likewise  of  the  virtues  of  simple  animals,  as  well  as  manual  operations,  of
which  we  shall  speak  more  anon  : — The  application  of  hare’s  fat  pulls  out  a
thorn ; — likewise  any  one  may  cure  the  tooth-ache  with  the  stone  that  is  in  the
head  of  the  toad  ; also,  if  any  one  shall  catch  a living  frog  before  sun-rise,
and  he  or  she  spits  in  the  mouth  of  the  frog,  will  be  cured  of  an  asthmatic
consumption  ; — likewise  the  right  or  left  eye  of  the  same  animal  cures  blind-
ness ; and  the  fat  of  a viper  cures  a bite  of  the  same.  Black  hellebore  easeth
the  head-ache,  being  applied  to  the  head,  or  the  powder  snuffed  up  the  nose
in~a  moderate  quantity.  Coral  is  a well-known  preservative  against  witchcraft
and  poisons,  which  if  worn  now,  in  this  time,  as  much  round  children’s  necks
as  usual,  would  enable  them  to  combat  many  diseases  which  their  tender  years
are  subjected  to,  and  to  which,  with  fascinations,  they  often  fall  a victim.  I
know  how  to  compose  coral  amulets,  or  talismans,  which,  if  suspended  even
by  a thread,  shall  (God  assisting)  prevent  all  harms  and  accidents  of  violence
from  fire,  or  water,  or  witchcraft,  and  help  them  to  withstand  all  their  diseases.

Paracelsus  and  Helmont  both  agree,  that  in  the  toad,  although  so  irreverent
to  the  sight  of  man,  and  so  noxious  to  the  touch,  and  of  such  strong  violent
antipathy  to  the  blood  of  man,  I say,  out  of  this  hatred  Divine  Providence
hath  prepared  us  a remedy  against  manifold  diseases  most  inimical  to  man’s
nature.  The  toad  hath  a natural  aversion  to  man  ; and  this  sealed  image,  or
idea  of  hatred,  he  carries  in  his  head,  eyes,  and  most  powerfully  throughout  his
whole  body  : now  that  the  toad  may  be  highly  prepared  for  a sympathetic  remedy
against  the  plague  or  other  disorders,  such  as  the  ague,  falling  sicknesses,  and
various  others  ; and  that  the  terror  of  us,  and  natural  inbred  hatred  may  the  more
strongly  be  imprinted  and  higher  ascend  in  the  toad,  we  must  hang  him  up
Book  I.  D aloft


26


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.

aloft  in  a chimney,  by  the  legs,  and  set  under  him  a dish  of  yellow  wax,  to  receive
whatsoever  may  come  down,  or  fall  from  his  mouth  ; let  him  hang  in  this  po-
sition, in  our  sight,  for  three  or  four  days,  at  least  till  he  is  dead  ; now  we
must  not  omit  frequently  to  be  present  in  sight  of  the  animal,  so  that  his  fears
and  inbred  terror  of  us,  with  the  ideas  of  strong  hatred,  may  encrease  even
unto  death.

So  you  have  a most  powerful  remedy  in  this  one  toad,  for  the  curing  of
forty  thousand  persons  infected  with  the  pest  or  plague.

Van  Helmont’s  process  for  making  a preservative  amulet  against  the  plague
is  as  follows  : —

“In  the  month  of  July,  in  the  decrease  of  the  moon,  I took  old  toads,  whose
eyes  abounded  with  white  worms  hanging  forth  into  black  heads,  so  that  both
his  eyes  were  totally  formed  with  worms,  perhaps  fifty  in  number,  thickly
compacted  together,  their  heads  hanging  out ; and  as  oft  as  any  one  of  them
attempted  to  get  out,  the  toad,  by  applying  his  fore-foot,  forbade  its  utterance.
These  toads  being  hung  up,  and  made  to  vomit  in  the  manner  before  men-
tioned, I reduced  the  insects  and  other  matters  ejected  from  the  toad,  with  the
waxen  dish  being  added  thereto  ; and  the  dried  carcass  of  the  toad  being  re-
duced into  powder  I formed  the  whole  into  troches,  with  gum-dragon ; which,
being  borne  about  the  left  breast,  drove  speedily  away  all  contagion ; and
being  fast  bound  to  the  place  affected,  thoroughly  drew  out  the  poison  : and
these  troches  were  more  potent  after  they  had  returned  into  use  divers  times
than  when  new.  I found  them  to  be  a most  powerful  amulet  against  the
plague ; for  if  the  serpent  eateth  dust  all  the  days  of  his  life,  because  he  was
the  instrument  of  sinning ; so  the  toad  eats  earth,  (which  he  vomits  up)  all
the  days  of  his  life ; and,  according  to  the  Adeptical  philosophy,  the  toad  bears
an  hatred  to  man,  so  that  he  infects  some  herbs  that  are  useful  to  man  with
his  poison,  in  order  for  his  death.  But  this  difference  note  between  the  toad
and  the  serpent : the  toad,  at  the  sight  of  man,  from  a natural  quality  sealed
in  him,  called  antipathy,  conceives  a great  terror  or  astonishment ; which  ter-
ror from  man  imprints  on  this  animal  a natural  efficacy  against  the  images  of
the  affrighted  archeus  in  man  For,  truly  the  terror  of  the  toad  kills  and  anni-
hilates


Chap.  II.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  27

hilates  the  ideas  of  the  affrighted  archeus  in  man,  because  the  terror  in  the
toad  is  natural,  therefore  radical.”

F or  the  poison  of  the  plague  is  subdued  by  the  poison  of  the  toad,  not  by  an
action  primarily  destructive,  but  by  a secondary  action  ; as  the  pestilent  idea  of
hatred  or  terror  extinguishes  the  ferment,  by  whose  mediation  the  poison  of  the
plague  subsists,  and  proceeds  to  infect  : for  seeing  the  poison  of  the  plague  is
the  product  of  the  image  of  the  terrified  archeus  established  in  a fermental,
putrified  odour,  and  mumial  air,  this  coupling  ferments  the  appropriate  mean,
and  immediately  the  subject  of  the  poison  is  taken  away.

Therefore  the  opposition  of  the  amulet  formed  from  the  body,  &c.,  of  the
toad,  takes  away  and  prevents  the  baneful  and  most  horrible  effects  of  the
pestilential  poison  and  ferment  of  the  plague.

Hence  it  is  conjectured  that  he  is  an  animal  ordained  by  God,  that  the  idea
of  his  terror  being  poisonous  indeed  to  himself,  should  be  to  us,  and  to  our
plague,  a poison  in  terror.  Since,  therefore,  the  toad  is  most  fearful  at  the
beholding  of  man,  which  in  himself,  notwithstanding,  forms  the  terror  con-
ceived from  man,  and  also  the  hatred  against  man,  into  an  image  and  active
real  being,  and  not  consisting  only  in  a confused  apprehension ; hence  it
happens  that  a poison  ariseth  in  the  toad,  which  kills  the  pestilent  poison  of
terror  in  man  ; to  wit,  from  whence  the  archeus  waxeth  strong,  he  not  only
perceiving  the  pestilent  idea  to  be  extinguished  in  himself ; but,  moreover,
because  he  knoweth  that  something  inferior  to  himself  is  terrified,  dismayed,
and  doth  fly.  Again,  so  great  is  the  fear  of  the  toad,  that  if  he  is  placed
directly  before  thee,  and  thou  dost  behold  with  an  intentive  furious  look,  so
that  he  cannot  avoid  thee,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  he  dies,*  being  fascinated
with  terror  and  astonishment.

* I have  tried  this  experiment  upon  the  toad,  and  other  reptiles  of  his  nature,  and  was  satisfied  of  the
truth  of  this  affirmation.


D 2


OF


28


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


OF  THE  SERPENT.

Hippocrates,  by  the  use  of  some  parts  of  this  animal,  attained  to  himself
divine  honours  ; for  therewith  he  cured  pestilence  and  contagion,  consumptions,
and  very  many  other  diseases ; for  he  cleansed  the  flesh  of  a viper.  The
utmost  part  of  the  tail  and  head  being  cut  off,  he  stripped  off  the  skin,  casting
away  the  bowels  and  gall ; he  reserved  of  the  intestines  only  the  heart  and
liver ; he  drew  out  all  the  blood,  with  the  vein  running  down  the  back-bone  ;
he  bruised  the  flesh  and  the  aforesaid  bowels  with  the  bones,  and  dried  them  in
a warm  oven  until  they  could  be  powdered,  which  powder  he  sprinkled  on
honey  ; being  clarified  and  boiled,  until  he  knew  that  the  fleshes  in  boiling
had  cast  aside  their  virtue,  as  well  in  the  broth  as  in  the  vapours  ; he  then
added  unto  this  electuary  the  spices  of  his  country  to  cloak  the  secret.  But
this  cure  of  diseases  by  the  serpent  contains  a great  mystery,  viz.  that  as  death
crept  in  by  the  serpent  of  old,  itself  ought  to  be  mitigated  by  the  death  of  the
serpent ; for  Adam,  being  skilful  in  the  properties  of  all  beasts,  was  not  ignorant
also  that  the  serpent  was  more  crafty  than  other  living  creatures,  and  that  the
aforesaid  balsam,  the  remedy  of  death,  lay  hid  in  the  serpent ; wherefore  the
spirit  of  darkness  could  not  more  falsely  deceive  our  first  parents  than  under
the  guileful  serpent’s  form  ; for  they  foolishly  imagined  they  should  escape  the
death,  so  sorely  threatened  by  God,  by  the  serpent’s  aid.

Amber  is  an  amulet  : — a piece  of  red  amber  worn  about  one,  is  a preservative
against  poisons  and  the  pestilence.

Likewise,  a sapphire  stone  is  as  effectual.  Oil  of  amber,  or  amber  dissolved
in  pure  spirit  of  wine,  comforts  the  womb  being  disordered  : if  a suffumigation
of  it  be  made  with  the  warts  of  the  shank  of  a horse,  it  will  cure  many  disorders
of  that  region.

The  liver  and  gall  of  an  eel,  likewise,  being  gradually  dried  and  reduced  to
powder,  and  taken  in  the  quantity  of  a filbert-nut  in  a glass  of  warm  wine,
causes  a speedy  and  safe  delivery  to  women  in  labour.  The  liver  of  a serpent
likewise  effects  the  same.


Rhubarb,


NATURAL  MAGIC.


29


Chap.  II.

Rhubarb,  on  account  of  its  violent  antipathy  to  choler,  wonderfully  purges
the  same.  Music  is  a well-known  specific  for  curing  the  bite  of  a tarantula,  or
any  venomous  spider  ; likewise,  water  cures  the  hydrophobia.  Warts  are  cured
by  paring  off  the  same ; or  by  burying  as  many  pebbles,  secretly,  as  the  party
has  warts.  The  king’s-evil  may  be  cured  by  the  heart  of  a toad  worn  about
the  neck,  first  being  dried. — Hippomanes  excites  lust  by  the  bare  touch,  or  being
suspended  on  the  party.  If  any  one  shall  spit  in  the  hand  with  which  he  struck,
or  hurt,  another,  so  shall  the  wound  be  cured ; — likewise,  if  any  one  shall  draw
the  halter  wherewith  a malefactor  was  slain  across  the  throat  of  one  who  hath
the  quinsey,  it  certainly  cures  him  in  three  days ; also,  the  herb  cinque-foil  being
gathered  before  sun-rise,  one  leaf  thereof  cures  the  ague  of  one  day  ; three
leaves,  cures  the  tertian  ; and  four,  the  quartan  ague.  Rape  seeds,  sown  with
cursings  and  imprecations,  grows  the  fairer,  and  thrives  ; but  if  with  praises,
the  reverse.  The  juice  of  deadly  nightshade,  distilled,  and  given  in  a propor-
tionate quantity,  makes  the  party  imagine  almost  whatever  you  chuse.  The
herb  nip,  being  heated  in  the  hand,  and  afterwards  you  hold  in  your  hand
the  hand  of  any  other  party,  they  shall  never  quit  you,  so  long  as  you  retain
that  herb.  The  herbs  arsemart,  comfrey,  flaxweed,  dragon-wort,  adder’s-
tongue,  being  steeped  in  cold  water,  and  if  for  some  time  being  applied  on
a wound,  or  ulcer,  they  grow  warm,  and  are  buried  in  a muddy  place,  cureth
the  wound,  or  sore,  to  which  they  were  applied.  Again,  if  any  one  pluck
the  leaves  of  asarabacca,  drawing  them  upwards,  they  will  purge  another,  who
is  ignorant  of  the  drawing,  by  vomit  only  ; but  if  they  are  wrested  downward
to  the  earth,  they  purge  by  stool.  A sapphire,  or  a stone  that  is  of  a deep
blue  colour,  if  it  be  rubbed  on  a tumour,  wherein  the  plague  discovers  itself,
(before  the  party  is  too  far  gone)  and  by  and  by  it  be  removed  from  the  sick,
the  absent  jewel  attracts  all  the  poison  or  contagion  therefrom.  And  thus
much  is  sufficient  to  be  said  concerning  natural  occult  virtues,  whereof  we  speak
in  a mixed  and  miscellaneous  manner  coming  to  more  distinct  heads  anon.


CHAP.


30


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


CHAP.  III.

OF  AMULETS,  CHARMS,  AND  ENCHANTMENTS.

THE  instrument  of  enchanters  is  a pure,  living,  breathing  spirit  of  the
blood,  whereby  we  bind,  or  attract,  those  things  which  we  desire  or  delight  in  ;
so  that,  by  an  earnest  intention  of  the  mind,  we  take  possession  of  the  faculties
in  a no  less  potent  manner  than  strong  wines  beguile  the  reason  and  senses  of
those  who  drink  them ; therefore,  to  charm,  is  either  to  bind  with  words,  in
which  there  is  great  virtue,  as  the  poet  sings —

“ Words  thrice  she  spake,  which  caus’d,  at  will,  sweet  sleep  ;
xc  Appeas’d  the  troubled  waves,  and  roaring  deep.”

Indeed,  the  virtue  of  man’s  words  are  so  great,  that,  when  pronounced
with  a fervent  constancy  of  the  mind,  they  are  able  to  subvert  Nature,  to
cause  earthquakes,  storms,  and  tempests.  I have,  in  the  country,  by  only
speaking  a few  words,  and  used  some  other  things,  caused  terrible  rains  and
claps  of  thunder.  Almost  all  charms  are  impotent  without  words,  because
words  are  the  speech  of  the  speaker,  and  the  image  of  the  thing  signified  or
spoken  of ; therefore,  whatever  wonderful  effect  is  intended,  let  the  same  be
performed  with  the  addition  of  words  significative  of  the  will  or  desire  of  the
operator ; for  words  are  a kind  of  occult  vehicle  of  the  image  conceived  or
begotten,  and  sent  out  of  the  body  by  the  soul ; therefore,  all  the  forcible
power  of  the  spirit  ought  to  be  breathed  out  with  vehemency,  and  an  arduous
and  intent  desire ; and  I know  how  to  speak,  and  convey  words  together,  so  as
they  may  be  carried  onward  to  the  hearer  at  a vast  distance,  no  other  body
intervening,  which  thing  I have  done  often.  Words  are  also  oftentimes  de-
livered to  us,  seemingly  by  others,  in  our  sleep,  whereby  we  seem  to  -talk  and
converse  ; but  then  no  vocal  conversations  are  of  any  effect,  except  they  proceed
from  spiritual  and  occult  causes  : such  spirits  have  often  manifested  singular
things  to  me,  while  in  sleep,  the  which,  in  waking,  I have  thought  nought
of,  until  conviction  of  the  truth  taught  me  credulity  in  such  like  matters.

In


Chap.  III.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  31

In  the  late  change  of  Administration,  I knew,  at  least  five  days  before  it  actually
terminated,  that  it  would  be  as  I described  to  a few  of  my  friends.  These
things  are  not  alike  manifested  to  every  one  ; only,  I believe,  to  those  who
have  long  seriously  attended  to  contemplations  of  this  abstruse  nature ; but
there  are  those  who  will  say  it  is  not  so,  merely  because  they  themselves  cannot
comprehend  such  things.

However,  not  to  lose  time,  we  proceed.  There  are  various  enchantments,
which  I have  proved,  relative  to  common  occurrences  of  life,  viz.  a kind  of
binding  to  that  effect  which  we  d.esire  : as  to  love,  or  hatred  ; or  to  those
things  we  love,  or  against  those  things  we  hate,  in  all  which  there  is  a magical
sympathy  above  the  power  of  reasoning ; therefore,  those  abstruse  matters  we
feel,  are  convinced  of,  and  reflect  upon,  and  draw  them  into  our  use.  I will  here
set  down,  while  speaking  of  these  things,  a very  powerful  amulet  for  the
stopping,  immediately,  a bloody-flux  ; for  the  which  (with  a faith)  I dare  lay
down  my  life  for  the  success,  and  entire  cure.


An  Amulet  for  Flux  of  Blood.

“In  the  blood  of  Adam  arose  death — in  the  blood  of  Christ  death  is  ex-
‘‘  tinguished — in  the  same  blood  of  Christ  I command  thee,  O,  blood,  that
“ thou  stop  fluxing  ! ”*

In  this  one  godly  superstition  there  will  be  found  a ready , cheap,  easy
remedy  for  that  dreadful  disorder  the  bloody-flux,  whereby  a poor  misera-
ble wretch  will  reap  more  real  benefit  than  in  a whole  shop  of  an  apothecary’s
drugs.  These  four  letters  nirv  are  a powerful  charm,  or  amulet,  against  the
common  ague ; likewise,  let  them  be  written  upon  a piece  of  clean  and  new
vellum,  at  any  time  of  the  day  or  night,  and  they  will  be  found  a speedy  and
certain  cure,  and  much  more  efficacious  than  the  word  Abracadabra : how-
ever, as  that  ancient  charm  is  still  (amongst  some  who  pretend  to  cure  agues,
&c.)  in  some  repute,  I will  here  set  down  the  form  and  manner  of  its  being

* Let  the  party  who  pronounces  these  words  hold  the  other’s  hand.

written


32  NATURAL  MAGIC.  Book  I.

written  ;*  likewise  it  must  be  pronounced,  or  spoken,  in  the  same  order  as  it  is
written,  with  the  intent  or  will  of  the  operator  declared  at  the  same  time  of
making  it.


CHAP.  IV.

OF  UNCTIONS,  PHILTERS,  POTIONS,  &C. THEIR  MAGICAL  VIRTUES.

UNGUENTS,  or  unctions,  collyries,  philters,  &c.,  conveying  the  virtues  of
things  natural  to  our  spirits,  do  multiply,  transform,  transfigure,  and  transmute
it  accordingly ; they  also  transpose  those  virtues,  which  are  in  them,  into  it,  so
that  it  not  only  acts  upon  its  own  body,  but  also  upon  that  which  is  near  it,
and  affects  that  (by  visible  rays,  charms,  and  by  touching  it)  with  some
agreeable  quality  like  to  itself.  For,  because  our  spirit  is  the  pure,  subtil,
lucid,  airy,  and  unctuous  vapour  of  the  blood,  nothing,  therefore,  is  better
.adapted  for  collyriums  than  the  like  vapour,  which  are  more  suitable  to  our
spirit  in  substance ; for  then,  by  reason  of  their  likeness,  they  do  more  stir  up,
attract,  and  transform  the  spirit.  The  same  virtue  have  other  ointments,  and
confections.  Hence,  by  the  touch,  often  plague,  sickness,  faintings,  poisoning,
and  love,  is  induced,  either  by  the  hands  or  clothes  being  anointed ; and
often  by  kissing,  things  been  held  in  the  mouth,  love  is  likewise  excited.


* It  is  here  to  be  particularly  noticed  by  us,  that,  in  forming  of  a charm,  or  \ ABRACADABRA
amulet,  it  will  be  of  no  effect  except  the  very  soul  of  the  operator  is  strongly  and  \ BRACADABRA
intensely  exerted  and  impressed,  as  it  were,  and  the  image  of  the  idea  sealed  on  the  \ raCADABRA


charm,  or  amulet ; for,  without  this,  in  vain  will  be  all  the  observation  of  times,  hours,
and  constellations  ; therefore,  this  I have  thought  fit  to  mention,  once  for  all,  that  it  may
be  almost  always  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  the  operator,  for,  without  this  one  thing
being  observed  and  noticed,  many  who  form  seals,  &c.,  do  fall  short  of  the  wished-for
effect.


ACADABRA
CADABRA
ADABRA
DABRA
ABRA
BRA


Now


NATURAL  MAGIC.


33


Chap.  IV.

Now  the  sight,  as  it  perceives  more  purely  and  clearer  than  the  other  senses,
seals  in  us  the  marks  of  things  more  acutely,  and  does,  most  of  all,  and  before
all  others,  agree  with  our  fantastic  spirit ; as  is  apparent  in  dreams,  when  things
seen  do  more  often  present  themselves  to  us  than  things  heard,  or  any  thing
coming  under  the  other  senses.  Therefore,  when  collyriums  transform  the
visual  spirits,  that  spirit  easily  affects  the  imagination,  which,  being  affected
with  divers  species  and  forms,  transmits  the  same,  by  the  same  spirit,  unto  the
outward  sense  of  sight,  by  which  there  is  formed  in  it  a perception  of  such
species  and  forms,  in  that  manner,  as  if  it  were  moved  by  external  objects,  that
there  appear  to  be  seen  terrible  images,  spirits,  and  the  like.  There  are  some
collyriums  which  make  us  see  the  images  of  spirits  in  the  air , or  elsewhere ;
which  I can  make  of  the  gall  of  a man , and  the  eyes  of  a black  cat , and  some
other  things.  The  same  is  made,  likewise,  of  the  blood  of  a lapwing,  bat,  and
a goat ; and  if  a smooth  shining  piece  of  steel  be  smeared  over  with  the  juice  of
mugwort,  and  be  made  to  fume,  it  causes  invocated  spirits  to  appear.  There
are  some  perfumes,  or  suffumigations  and  unctions,  which  make  men  speak  in
their  sleep,  walk,  and  do  those  things  that  are  done  by  men  that  are  awake,
and  often  what,  when  awake,  they  cannot,  or  dare  not  do  ; others,  again,  make
men  hear  horrid  or  delightful  sounds,  noises,  and  the  like.

And,  in  some  measure,  this  is  the  cause  why  mad  and  melancholy  men
believe  they  hear  and  see  things  equally  false  and  improbable,  falling  into  most
gross  and  pitiful  delusions,  fearing  where  no  fear  is,  and  angry  where  there  is
none  to  contend.  Such  passions  as  these  we  can  induce  by  magical  vapours ,
confections , perfumes , collyries , unguents , potions , poisons , lamps , lights , &c.  ;
likewise  by  mirrors , images , enchantments , charms , sounds , and  music ; also  by
divers  rites , observations , ceremonies,  religion , &c.


Book  I.


E


CHAP.


34*


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


CHAP.  V.

OF  MAGICAL  SUSPENSIONS  AND  ALLIGATIONS— “SHEWING  HOW,  AND  BY  WHAT  POWER,
THEY  RECEIVE  VIRTUE,  AND  ARE  EFFICACIOUS  IN  NATURAL  MAGIC.

WHEN  the  soul  of  the  world,  by  its  virtue,  doth  make  all  things  (that
are  naturally  generated,  or  artificially  made)  fruitful,  by  sealing  and  impressing
on  them  celestial  virtues  for  the  working  of  some  wonderful  effect,  then  things
themselves  not  only  applied  by  collyry,  or  suffume,  or  ointment,  or  any
other  such  like  way  ; but  when  they  are  conveniently  bound  to,  or  wrapped  up,
or  suspended  about  the  neck,  or  any  other  way  applied,  although  by  ever  so
easy  a contact,  they  do  impress  their  virtue  upon  us  : by  these  alligations,
&c.,  therefore,  the  accidents  of  the  body  and  mind  are  changed  into  sickness
or  health,  valour,  fear,  sadness  or  joy,  and  the  like ; they  render  those  that  carry
them,  gracious,  terrible,  acceptable,  rejected,  honoured,  beloved,  or  hateful
and  abominable.

N ow  these  kind  of  passions  are  conceived  to  be  infused  no  otherwise  than  is
manifest  in  the  grafting  of  trees,  where  the  vital  life  and  virtue  is  communi-
cated from  the  trunk  to  the  twig  engrafted  into  it,  by  way  of  contact  and  alli-
gation ; so  in  the  female  palm-tree,  when  she  comes  near  to  the  male,  her
boughs  bend  to  the  male,  which  the  gardener  seeing,  he  binds  them  together  by
ropes  across,  but  soon  becomes  straight,  as  if  by  the  continuation  of  the  rope
she  had  received  a propagating  virtue  from  the  male.  And  it  is  said,  if  a woman
takes  a needle,  and  bewray  it  with  dung,  and  put  it  up  in  earth  in  which  the
carcass  of  a man  has  been  buried,  and  carry  it  about  her  in  a piece  of  cloth
used  at  a funeral,  no  man  can  defile  her  as  long  as  she  carries  that.

Now  by  these  examples  we  see  how,  by  certain  alligations  of  certain  things,
also  suspensions,  or  by  the  most  simple  contact  or  continuation  of  any  thread,
we  may  be  able  to  receive  some  virtues  thereby  ; but  it  is  necessary  to  know
the  certain  rule  of  magical  alligation  and  suspension  ; and  the  manner  that  the
art  requires  is  this,  viz.  that  they  must  be  done  under  a certain  and  suitable
constellation ; and  they  must  be  done  with  wire,  or  silken  threads,  or  sinews

of


Chap.  VI.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  35

of  certain  animals;  and  those  things  that  are  to  be  wrapped  up,  are  to  be
done  in  the  leaves  of  herbs,  or  skins  of  animals,  or  membraneous  parchments,
&c.  F or,  if  you  would  procure  the  solary  virtue  of  any  thing,  this  is  to  be
wrapped  up  in  bay  leaves,  or  the  skin  of  a lion,  hung  round  the  neck  with
gold,  silk,  or  purple  or  yellow  thread  : while  the  sun  reigns  in  the  heavens,  so
shalt  thou  be  endued  with  the  virtue  of  that  thing.  So  if  a saturnine  quality
or  thing  be  desired,  thou  shalt  in  like  manner  take  that  thing,  while  Saturn
reigns,  and  wrap  it  up  in  the  skin  of  an  ass,  or  in  a cloth  used  at  a funeral,
especially  if  melancholy  or  sadness  is  to  be  induced,  and  with  a sad,  or  ash,
or  leaden,  or  black  silk  or  thread,  hang  it  about  thy  neck  ; and  so  in  the  same
manner  we  must  proceed  with  the  rest.


CHAP.  VI.

OF  ANTIPATHIES.

IT  is  necessary,  in  this  place,  to  speak  of  the  antipathies  of  natural  things ,
seeing  it  is  requisite,  as  we  go  on,  to  have  a thorough  knowledge  of  that
obstinate  contrariety  of  N ature,  where  any  thing  shuns  its  contrary,  and  drives  it,
as  it  were,  out  of  its  presence.  Such  antipathy  as  this  has  the  root  rhubarb
against  choler ; treacle  against  poison ; the  sapphire  stone  against  hot  biles ,
feverish  heats,  and  diseases  of  the  eyes ; the  amethyst  against  drunkenness  ;
the  jasper  against  the  bloody-flux  and  offensive  imaginations  ; the  emerald,
and  agnus  castus  against  lust ; achates  or  agates  against  poison ; piony  against
the  falling  sickness ; coral  against  the  ebullition  of  black  choler,  and  pains  of
the  stomach ; the  topaz  against  spiritual  heats,  such  as  are  covetousness,  lust,
and  all  manner  of  love  excesses.  The  same  antipathy  is  there,  also,  of
pismires  against  the  herb  organ,  and  the  wing  of  a bat,  and  the  heart  of  a
lapwing,  from  the  presence  of  which  they  fly.  Also,  the  organ  is  contrary  to  a
certain  poisonous  fly  which  cannot  resist  the  sun,  and  resists  salamanders,  and
loaths  cabbage  with  such  a deadly  hatred  that  they  cannot  endure  each  other.

E 2 So


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


36

So  they  say  cucumbers  hate  oil.  And  the  gall  of  a crow  makes  even  men
fearful,  and  drives  them  from  the  place  wherein  it  is  placed.  A diamond  dis-
agrees with  a loadstone ; that  being  present,  it  suffers  no  iron  to  be  drawn  to  it.
Sheep  avoid  frog-parsley  as  a deadly  thing  ; and,  what  is  more  wonderful,  Na-
ture hath  depictured  the  sign  of  this  antipathy  upon  the  livers  of  sheep,  in
which  the  very  figure  of  frog-parsley  doth  naturally  appear.  Again,  goats
hate  garden-basil,  as  if  there  was  nothing  more  pernicious.  And,  amongst
animals,  mice  and  weasels  disagree ; so  a lizard  is  of  a contrary  nature  to  a
scorpion,  and  induces  great  terror  to  the  scorpion  with  its  very  sight,  and  they
are  therefore  killed  with  the  oil  of  them  ; which  oil  will  likewise  cure  the
wounds  made  by  scorpions.  There  is  a great  enmity  between  scorpions  and
mice ; therefore  if  a mouse  be  applied  to  the  bite  of  a scorpion,  he  cures  it.
N othing  is  so  much  an  enemy  to  snakes  as  crabs ; and  if  swine  be  hurt  by
them,  they  are  cured  by  crabs  ; the  sun,  also  being  in  Cancer,  serpents  are
tormented.  Also,  the  scorpion  and  crocodile  kill  one  another;  and  if  the
bird  ibis  does  but  touch  a crocodile  with  one  of  his  feathers,  he  makes  him  un-
moveable. The  bird  called  a bustard  flies  away  at  the  sight  of  a horse ;
and  a hart  at  the  sight  of  a ram,  or  a viper.  An  elephant  trembles  at  the
hearing  of  the  grunting  of  a hog ; so  doth  a lion  at  the  crowing  of  a cock ;
and  a panther  will  not  touch  them  that  are  anointed  with  the  fat  of  a hen,  espe-
cially if  garlick  has  been  put  into  it.  There  is  also  an  enmity  between  foxes
and  swans  ; bulls  and  jackdaws.  And  some  birds  are  at  a perpetual  variance,
as  daws  and  owls ; kites  and  crows  ; turtle  and  ring-tail ; egepis  and  eagles  ;
also,  harts  and  dragons.  Amongst  water  animals,  there  is  a great  antipathy
between  dolphins  and  whirlpools ; the  mullet  and  pike  ; lamprey  and  conger  ;
pourcontrel  and  lobster,  which  latter,  but  seeing  the  former,  is  nearly  struck
dead  with  fear ; but  the  lobster  tears  the  conger.  The  civet-cat  cannot  resist
the  panther ; and  if  the  skins  of  both  be  hung  up  against  each  other,  the  skin
or  hairs  of  the  panther  will  fall  off.  Apollo  says,  in  his  hieroglyphics,  if

any  one  be  girt  about  with  the  skin  of  a civet-cat,  he  may  pass  safe  through
his  enemies.  The  lamb  flies  from  the  wolf ; and  if  the  tail,  skin,  or  head  of
lupus  be  hung  up  in  the  sheeps’-cot,  they  cannot  eat  their  meat  for  very  fear.

And


Chap.  VII.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  37

And  Pliny  mentions  the  bird  called  the  marlin,  that  breaks  the  eggs  of  the  crow,
whose  young  are  annoyed  by  the  fox ; that  she  also  will  pinch  the  whelps  of
the  fox,  and  the  fox  likewise,  which,  when  the  crow  sees,  they  help  the  fox
against  her  as  against  a common  enemy.  The  linnet  lives  in,  and  eats  thistles  ;
yet  she  hates  the  ass,  because  he  eats  the  thistles  and  flowers  of  them.  There
is  so  great  an  enmity  between  the  little  bird  called  esalon  and  the  ass,  that  their
blood  will  not  mix  ; and  that,  at  the  simple  braying  of  the  ass,  both  the  esalon’s
eggs  and  young  perish  together.  There  is,  also,  a total  antipathy  of  the  olive-
tree  to  the  harlot ; that,  if  she  plant  it,  it  will  neither  thrive  nor  prosper,  but
wither.  A lion  fears  lighted  torches,  and  is  tamed  by  nothing  sooner.  The
wolf  fears  not  sword  or  spear,  but  a stone  ; by  the  throwing  of  which  a wound
being  made,  worms  breed  in  the  wolf.  A horse  fears  a camel  so  much  that
he  cannot  endure  the  picture  of  that  beast.  An  elephant,  when  he  rages,
is  quieted  by  seeing  a cock.  A snake  is  afraid  of  a naked  man,  but  pur-
sues one  clothed.  A mad  bull  is  tamed  by  being  tied  to  a fig-tree.  Amber
attracts  all  things  to  it  but  garden-basil,  and  things  smeared  with  oil,  between
which  there  is  a natural  antipathy.


CHAP.  VII.

OF  THE  OCCULT  VIRTUES  OF  THINGS  WHICH  ARE  INHERENT  IN  THEM  ONLY  IN  THEIR
LIFE-TIME,  AND  SUCH  AS  REMAIN  IN  THEM  EVEN  AFTER  DEATH.

I T is  expedient  for  us  to  know  that  there  are  some  things  which  retain  virtue
only  while  they  are  living,  others  even  after  death.  So  in  the  cholic,  if  a live
duck  be  applied  to  the  belly,  it  takes  away  the  pain,  and  the  duck  dies.
If  you  take  the  heart  out  of  any  animal,  and,  while  it  is  warm,  bind  it  to  one
that  has  a quartan  fever,  it  drives  it  away.  So  if  any  one  shall  swallow  the
heart  of  a lapwing,  swallow,  weasel,  or  a mole,  while  it  is  yet  living  and
warm  with  natural  heat,  it  improves  his  intellect,  and  helps  him  to  remember,
understand,  and  foretel  things  to  come.  Hence  this  general  rule, — that  what-


ever


38


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


ever  things  are  taken  for  magical  uses  from  animals,  whether  they  are  stones,
members,  hair,  excrements,  nails,  or  any  thing  else,  they  must  be  taken
from  those  animals  while  they  are  yet  alive,  and,  if  it  is  possible,  that  they
may  live  afterwards.  If  you  take  the  tongue  of  a frog,  you  put  the  frog  into
water  again  ; — and  Democritus  writes,  that  if  any  one  shall  take  out  the
tongue  of  a water-frog,  no  other  part  of  the  animal  sticking  to  it,  and  lay  it
upon  the  place  where  the  heart  beats  of  a woman,  she  is  compelled,  against
her  will,  to  answer  whatsoever  you  shall  ask  of  her.  Also,  take  the  eyes  of
a frog,  which  must  be  extracted  before  sun-rise,  and  bound  to  the  sick  party,
and  the  frog  to  be  let  go  again  blind  into  the  water,  the  party  shall  be  cured  of
a tertian  ague  ; also,  the  same  will,  being  bound  with  the  flesh  of  a nightingale
in  the  skin  of  a hart,  keep  a person  always  wakeful  without  sleeping.  Also,
the  roe  of  the  fork  fish  being  bound  to  the  navel,  is  said  to  cause  women
an  easy  child-birth,  if  it  be  taken  from  it  alive,  and  the  fish  put  into  the  sea
again.  So  the  right  eye  of  a serpent  being  applied  to  the  soreness  of  the
eyes,  cures  the  same,  if  the  serpent  be  let  go  alive.  So,  likewise,  the  tooth  of
a mole,  being  taken  out  alive,  and  afterwards  let  go,  cures  the  tooth-ache  ; and
dogs  will  never  bark  at  those  who  have  the  tail  of  a weasel  that  has  escaped.
Democritus  says,  that  if  the  tongue  of  the  cameleon  be  taken  alive,  it  conduces
to  good  success  in  trials,  and  likewise  to  women  in  labour ; but  it  must  be  hung
up  on  some  part  of  the  outside  of  the  house,  otherwise,  if  brought  into  the
house,  it  might  be  most  dangerous.

There  are  very  many  properties  that  remain  after  death  ; and  these  are  things
in  which  the  idea  of  the  matter  is  less  swallowed  up,  according  to  Plato ,
in  them  : even  after  death,  that  which  is  immortal  in  them  will  work  some
wonderful  things  : — as  in  the  skins  we  have  mentioned  of  several  wild  beasts,
which  will  corrode  and  eat  one  another  after  death  ; also,  a drum  made  of  the
rocket-fish  drives  away  all  creeping  things  at  what  distance  soever  the  sound
of  it  is  heard ; and  the  strings  of  an  instrument  made  of  the  guts  of  a wolf,  and
being  strained  upon  a harp  or  lute,  with  strings  made  of  sheep-guts,  will  make
no  harmony.


CHAP.


Chap.  VIII.


NATURAL  MAGIC.


39


CHAP.  VIII.

OF  THE  WONDERFUL  VIRTUES  OF  SOME  KIND  OF  PRECIOUS  STONES.

IT  is  a common  opinion  of  magicians,  that  stones  inherit  great  virtues,
which  they  receive  through  the  spheres  and  activity  of  the  celestial  influ-
ences, by  the  medium  of  the  soul  or  spirit  of  the  world.  Authors  very  much
disagree  in  respect  of  the  probability  of  their  actually  having  such  virtues  in
potentia,  some  debating  warmly  against  any  occult  or  secret  virtue  lying  hid  in
them ; others,  as  warmly,  shewing  the  causes  and  effects  of  these  sym-
pathetic properties.  However,  to  leave  these  trifling  arguments  to  those  who
love  cavil  and  contentions  better  than  I do>  and,  as  I have  neither  leisure  nor
inclination  to  enter  the  lists  with  sophists,  and  tongue-philosophers  ; I say,  that
these  occult  virtues  are  disposed  throughout  the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral
kingdoms,  by  seeds,  or  ideas  originally  emanating  from  the  Divine  mind,  and
through  supercelestial  spirits  and  intelligence  always  operating,  according  to
their  proper  offices  and  governments  allotted  them  ; which  virtues  are  infused,
as  we  before  said,  through  the  medium  of  the  Universal  Spirit,  as  by  a general
and  manifest  sympathy  and  antipathy  established  in  the  law  of  Nature.  Amongst
a variety  of  examples,  the  loadstone  is  one  most  remarkable  proof  of  the
sympathy  and  antipathy  we  speak  of.  However  to  hasten  to  the  point.
Amongst  stones,  those  which  resemble  the  rays  of  the  sun  by  their  golden
sparklings,  (as  does  the  glittering  stone  aetites)  prevent  the  falling-sickness
and  poisons,  if  worn  on  the  finger  ; so  the  stone  which  is  called  oculis  solis,
or  eye  of  the  sun,  being  in  figure  like  to  the  apple  of  the  eye,  from  which
shines  forth  a ray,  comforts  the  brain,  and  strengthens  sight ; the  carbuncle,
which  shines  by  night,  hath  a virtue  against  all  airy  and  vaporous  poisons ;
the  chrysolite  stone,  of  a light  green  colour,  when  held  against  the  sun,  there
shines  in  it  a ray  like  a star  of  gold ; this  is  singularly  good  for  the  lungs,
and  cures  asthmatical  complaints ; and  if  it  be  bored  through,  and  the  hollow
filled  with  the  mane  of  an  ass,  and  bound  to  the  left  arm,  it  chases  away  all
foolish  and  idle  imaginations  and  melancholy  fears,  and  drives  away  folly.

The


NATURAL  MAGIC.


40  NATURAL  MAGIC.  Book  I.

The  stone  called  iris,  which  is  like  crystal  in  colour,  being  found  with  six
corners,  when  held  in  the  shade,  and  the  sun  suffered  to  shine  through  it,  repre-
sents a natural  rainbow  in  the  air.  The  stone  heliotropium,  green,  like  a
jasper  or  emerald,  beset  with  red  specks,  makes  the  wearer  constant,  renowned,
and  famous,  and  conduces  to  long  life ; there  is,  likewise,  another  wonderful
property  in  this  stone,  and  that  is,  that  it  so  dazzles  the  eyes  of  men,  that  it
causes  the  bearer  to  be  invisible  ; but  then  there  must  be  applied  to  it  the  herb
bearing  the  same  name,  viz.  heliotropium,  or  the  sun-flower  ; and  these  kind  of
virtues  Albertus  Magnus,  and  William  of  Paris,  mention  in  their  writings.  The
jacinth  also  possesses  virtue  from  the  sun  against  poisons,  pestilences,  and
pestiferous  vapours  ; likewise  it  renders  the  bearer  pleasant  and  acceptable ;
conduces,  also,  to  gain  money ; being  simply  held  in  the  mouth,  it  wonderfully
cheers  the  heart,  and  strengthens  the  mind.  Then  there  is  the  pyrophilus,  of
a red  mixture,  which  Albertus  Magnus  reports  that  Aisculapius  makes  mention  of
in  one  of  his  epistles  to  Octavius  Cmsar,  saying,  “ There  is  a certain  poison,  so
intensely  cold,  which  preserves  the  heart  of  man,  being  taken  out,  from  burning ;
so  that  if  it  be  put  into  the  fire  for  any  time,  it  is  turned  into  a stone,  which
stone  is  called  pyrophilus : ” it  possesses  a wonderful  virtue  against  poison  ; and
it  infallibly  renders  the  wearer  thereof  renowned  and  dreadful  to  his  enemies.
Apollonius  is  reported  to  have  found  a stone  called  pantaura,  (which  will  attract
other  stones,  as  the  loadstone  does  iron)  most  powerful  against  all  poisons  : it
is  spotted  like  the  panther,  and  therefore  some  naturalists  have  given  this  stone
the  name  of  pantherus  : Aaron  calls  it  evanthum  ; and  some,  on  account  of  its
variety,  call  it  pantochras.


CHAP.


Chap.  IX.


NATURAL  MAGIC.


41


CHAP.  IX.

OF  THE  MIXTURES  OF  NATURAL  THINGS  ONE  WITH  ANOTHER,  AND  THE  PRODUCING  OF
MONSTROUS  ANIMALS,  BY  THE  APPLICATION  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.

MAGICIANS,  students,  and  observers  of  the  operations  of  Nature,  know
how,  by  the  application  of  active  forms  to  a matter  fitly  disposed,  and  made,
as  it  were,  a proper  recipient,  to  effect  many  wonderful  and  uncommon  things
that  seem  strange,  and  above  Nature,  by  gathering  this  and  that  thing  bene-
ficial and  conducive  to  that  effect  which  we  desire  ; however,  it  is  evident  that
all  the  powers  and  virtues  of  the  inferior  bodies  are  not  found  comprehended
in  any  one  single  thing,  but  are  dispersed  amongst  many  of  the  compounds
here  amongst  us  ; wherefore  it  is  necessary,  if  there  be  a hundred  virtues
of  the  sun  dispersed  through  so  many  animals,  plants,  metals,  or  stones,
we  should  gather  all  these  together,  and  bring  them  all  into  one  form,  in  which
we  shall  see  all  the  said  virtues,  being  united,  contained.  Now  there  is  a
double  virtue  in  commixing  : one,  viz.  which  was  once  planted  in  its  parts,
and  is  celestial ; the  other  is  obtained  by  a certain  artificial  mixture  of  things,
mixed  among  themselves,  according  to  a due  proportion,  such  as  agree  with
the  heavens  under  a certain  constellation  ; and  this  virtue  descends  by  a certain
similitude  or  likeness  that  is  in  things  amongst  themselves,  by  which  they
are  drawn  or  attracted  towards  their  superiors,  and  as  much  as  the  following  do
by  degrees  correspond  with  them  that  go  before,  where  the  patient  is  fitly
applied  to  its  agent.  So  from  a certain  composition  of  herbs , vapours , and  such
like,  made  according  to  the  rules  of  Natural  and  Celestial  Magic,  there  results
a certain  common  form  ; of  which  we  shall  deliver  the  true  and  infallible  rules
and  experiments  in  our  Second  Book,  where  we  have  written  expressly  on  the
same.

We  ought,  likewise,  to  understand  that  by  how  much  more  noble  and  ex-
cellent the  form  of  any  thing  is,  by  so  much  the  more  it  is  prone,  and  apt  to
receive,  and  powerful  to  act.  Then  the  virtue  of  things  do  indeed  become
wonderful ; viz.  when  they  are  applied  to  matters,  mixed  and  prepared  in  fit
Book  I.  F


seasons


42


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.

seasons  to  give  them  life,  by  procuring  life  for  them  from  the  stars,  our  own
spirit  powerfully  co-operating  therewith  ; for  there  is  so  great  a power  in
prepared  matters,  which  we  see  do  then  receive  life,  when  a perfect  mixture  of
qualities  do  break  the  former  contrariety  ; for  so  much  the  more  perfect  life
things  receive,  by  as  much  the  temper  and  composition  is  free  from  contrariety.
Now  the  heavens,  as  a prevailing  cause,  do,  from  the  beginning  of  every  thing,
(to  be  generated  by  the  concoction  and  perfect  digestion  of  the  matter)  together
with  life,  bestow  celestial  influences  and  wonderful  gifts,  according  to  the  capa-
city that  is  in  that  life  and  sensible  soul  to  receive  more  noble  and  sublime
virtues.  For  the  celestial  virtue  otherwise  lies  asleep,  as  sulphur  kept  from
flame  ; but  in  living  bodies  it  doth  always  burn,  as  kindled  sulphur,  which,  by
its  vapour,  fills  all  the  places  that  are  near.

There  is  a book  called,  “ A Book  of  the  Laws  of  Pluto,”  which  speaks  of
monstrous  generations,  which  are  not  produced  according  to  the  laws  of  Nature.
Of  these  things  which  follow  we  know  to  be  true  ; viz.  of  worms  are  generated
gnats  ; of  a horse,  wasps  ; of  a calf  and  ox,  bees.  Take  a living  crab,  his  legs
being  broken  off,  and  he  buried  under  the  earth,  a scorpion  is  produced.  If  a
duck  be  dried  into  powder,  and  put  into  water,  frogs  are  soon  generated ; but
if  he  be  baked  in  a pie,  and  cut  into  pieces,  and  be  put  in  a moist  place  under
ground,  toads  are  generated.  Of  the  herb  garden-basil,  bruised,  and  put
between  two  stones,  are  generated  scorpions.  Of  the  hairs  of  a menstruous
woman,  put  under  dung,  are  bred  serpents ; and  the  hair  of  a horse’s  tail,  put
into  water,  receives  life,  and  is  turned  into  a most  pernicious  worm.  And  there
is  an  art  wherewith  a hen,  sitting  upon  eggs;  may  be  generated  the  form  of  a
man,  which  I myself  know  how  to  do,  and  which  magicians  call  the  mandrake,
and  it  hath  in  it  wonderful  virtues.

You  must,  therefore,  know  which  and  what  kind  of  matters  are  either  of
art  or  nature,  begun  or  perfected,  or  compounded  of  more  things,  and  what
celestial  influences  they  are  able  to  receive.  For  a congruity  of  natural  things
is  sufficient  for  the  receiving  of  influence  from  celestial ; because,  nothing  hin-
dering, the  celestials  send  forth  their  light  upon  inferiors  ; they  suffer  no  matter
to  be  destitute  of  their  virtue.  Wherefore  as  much  matter  as  is  perfect  and

pure


Chap.  X.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  43

pure  is,  as  we  before  said,  fitted  to  receive  celestial  influences  ; for  that  is  the
binding  and  continuing  of  the  matter  of  the  soul  to  the  world,  which  doth
daily  flow  in  upon  things  natural,  and  all  things  which  Nature  hath  prepared,
that  it  is  impossible  that  a prepared  matter  should  not  receive  life,  or  a more
noble  form.


CHAP.  X.

OF  THE  ART  OF  FASCINATION,  BINDING,  SORCERIES,  MAGICAL  CONFECTIONS,  LIGHTS,
CANDLES,  LAMPS,  &C.  &C.  ; BEING  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  NATURAL  MAGIC.*

WE  have  so  far  spoken  concerning  the  great  virtues,  and  wonderful  efficacy,
of  natural  things ; it  remains  now  that  we  speak  of  a wonderful  power  and
faculty  of  fascination  ; or,  more  properly,  a magical  and  occult  binding  of
men  into  love  or  hatred,  sickness  or  health  ; — also,  the  binding  of  thieves,  that
they  cannot  steal  in  any  place ; or  to  bind  them  that  they  cannot  remove,
from  whence  they  may  be  detected  ; — the  binding  of  merchants,  that  they
cannot  buy  nor  sell the  binding  of  an  army,  that  they  cannot  pass  over
any  bounds ; — the  binding  of  ships,  so  that  no  wind,  though  ever  so  strong,
shall  be  able  to  carry  them  out  of  that  harbour ; — the  binding  of  a mill,  that
it  cannot,  by  any  means  whatsoever,  be  turned  to  work  ; — the  binding  of  a
cistern,  or  fountain,  that  the  water  cannot  be  drawn  up  out  of  them  ; — the
binding  of  the  ground,  so  that  nothing  will  bring  forth  fruit,  or  flourish  in  it ;
also,  that  nothing  can  be  built  upon  it ; — the  binding  of  fire,  that,  though  it

be  ever  so  strong,  it  shall  burn  no  combustible  thing  that  is  put  to  it ; — also,

the  binding  of  lightnings  and  tempests,  that  they  shall  do  no  hurt ; — the
binding  of  dogs,  that  they  cannot  bark  ; — also,  the  binding  of  birds  and  wild
beasts,  that  they  shall  not  be  able  to  run  or  fly  away ; and  things  familiar  to

* The  latter  part  of  this  Chapter  serves  as  a rule  to  be  observed  in  the  composition  of  all  kinds  of  mixed
experiments  ; and  it  is  as  appropriate  to  the  materials  collected  for  talismans,  seals,  &c.  treated  of  in  our
Celestial  Magic,  Book  II.  F.  B.

F 2 these,


44


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  T.


these,  which  are  hardly  creditable,  yet  known  by  experience.  Now  how  it
is  that  these  kind  of  bindings  are  made  and  brought  to  pass,  we  must  know.
They  are  thus  done  : by  sorceries,  collyries,  unguents,  potions,  binding  to  and
hanging  up  of  talismans,  by  charms,  incantations,  strong  imaginations,  affec-
tions, passions,  images,  characters,  enchantments,  imprecations,  lights,  and  by
sounds,  numbers,  words,  names,  invocations,  swearings,  conjurations,  consecra-
tions, and  the  like.


OF  SORCERIES.

The  force  of  sorceries  are,  no  doubt,  very  powerful;  indeed,  they  are  able
to  confound,  subvert,  consume,  and  change  all  inferior  things ; likewise  there
are  sorceries  by  which  we  can  suspend  the  faculties  of  men  and  beasts.  Now,
as  Ave  have  promised,  we  will  shew  what  some  of  these  kind  of  sorceries
are,  that,  by  the  example  of  these,  there  may  be  a way  opened  for  the  whole
subject  of  them.  Of  these,  the  first  is  menstruous  blood,  which,  how  much
power  it  has  in  sorcery,  we  will  now  consider  : — First,  if  it  comes  over  new
wine,  it  will  turn  it  sour ; and  if  it  does  but  touch  a vine,  it  will  spoil  it  for
ever ; and,  by  its  very  touch,  it  renders  all  plants  and  trees  barren,  and  those
newly  set,  die ; it  burns  up  all  the  herbs  in  the  garden,  and  makes  fruit  fall
from  trees  ; it  makes  dim  the  brightness  of  a looking-glass,  dulls  the  edges  of
knives  and  razors,  dims  the  beauty  of  polished  ivory,  and  makes  iron  rusty  ;
it  likewise  makes  brass  rusty,  and  to  smell  very  strong  ; by  the  taste,  it  makes
dogs  run  mad,  and,  being  thus  mad,  if  they  once  bite  any  one,  that  wound
is  incurable  ; it  destroys  whole  hives  of  bees,  and  drives  them  away,  if  it  does
but  touch  them  ; it  makes  linen  black  that  is  boiled  with  it ; it  makes  mares
cast  their  foals  by  touching  them  with  it,  and  women  miscarry ; it  makes
asses  barren  if  they  eat  of  the  corn  touched  by  it.  The  ashes  of  menstruous
clothes  cast  upon  purple  garments,  that  are  to  be  washed,  change  their  colour,
and  likewise  take  away  the  colour  of  flowers.  It  also  drives  away  tertian
and  quartan  agues,  if  it  be  put  into  the  wool  of  a black  ram,  and  tied  up  in  a

silver


Chap.  X.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  45

silver  bracelet ; as  also  if  the  soles  of  the  patient’s  feet  be  anointed  therewith,
and  especially  if  it  be  done  by  the  woman  herself,  the  patient  not  knowing  what
she  uses.  It  likewise  cures  the  falling  sickness  ; but  most  especially  it  cures
them  that  are  afraid  of  water  or  drink  after  they  are  bitten  by  a mad  dog,  if  only  a
menstruous  cloth  be  put  under  the  cup.  Likewise,  if  a menstruous  woman  shall
walk  naked,  before  sun-rise,  in  a field  of  standing  corn,  all  hurtful  things  perish  ;
but  if  after  sun-rise,  the  corn  withers  ; also,  they  are  able  to  expel  hail,
rain,  thunders,  and  lightnings  ; more  of  which  Pliny  mentions.  Know  this,
that  if  they  happen  at  the  decrease  of  the  moon,  they  are  a much  greater
poison  than  in  the  increase,  and  yet  much  greater  if  they  happen  between  the
decrease  and  change  ; but  if  they  happen  in  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon,
they  are  a most  incurable  and  violent  poison.  But  they  are  of  the  greatest
force  when  they  happen  in  the  first  years  of  the  virginity,  for  then  if  they  but
touch  the  door-posts  of  a house,  no  mischief  can  take  effect  in  it.  And  some
say  that  the  threads  of  any  garment  touched  therewith  cannot  be  burnt,  and  if
they  are  cast  into  a fire,  it  will  spread  no  farther.  Also  it  is  noted,  that  the
root  of  piony  being  given  with  castor,  and  smeared  over  with  a menstruous  cloth,
it  certainly  cureth  the  falling  sickness.

Again,  let  the  stomach  of  a hart  be  roasted,  and  to  it  be  put  a perfume  made
with  a menstruous  cloth  ; it  will  make  cross  -bows  useless  for  the  killing  of  any
game.  The  hairs  of  a menstruous  woman,  put  under  dung,  breeds  serpents ;
and  if  they  are  burnt,  will  drive  away  serpents  with  the  fume.  So  great  and
powerful  a poison  is  in  them,  that  they  are  a poison  to  poisonous  creatures.

We  next  come  to  speak  of  hippomanes,  which,  amongst  sorceries,  are  not
accounted  the  least  : and  this  is  a little  venemous  piece  of  flesh,  the  size  of
a fig,  and  black,  which  is  in  the  forehead  of  a colt  newly  foaled,  which,  unless
the  mare  herself  doth  presently  eat,  she  will  hardly  ever  love  her  foies,  or  let
them  suck ; and  this  is  a most  powerful  philter  to  cause  love,  if  it  be  pow-
dered, and  drank  in  a cup  with  the  blood  of  him  that  is  in  love  : such  a potion
was  given  to  Medea  by  Jason.

There  is  another  sorcery  which  is  called  hippomanes,  viz.  a venomous  liquor
issuing  out  of  the  share  of  a mare  at  the  time  she  lusts  after  the  horse.  The


civet-


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


46

civet-cat,  also,  abounds  with  sorceries  ; for  the  posts  of  a door  being  touched
with  her  blood,  the  arts  of  jugglers  and  sorcerers  are  so  invalid  that  evil  spirits
can  by  no  means  be  called  up,  or  compelled  to  talk  with  them  : — This  is  Pliny’s
report.  Also,  those  that  are  anointed  with  the  oil  of  her  left  foot,  being
boiled  with  the  ashes  of  the  ancle  bone  of  the  same  and  the  blood  of  a weasel,
shall  become  odious  to  all.  The  same,  also,  is  to  be  done  with  the  eye  being
decocted.  If  any  one  hath  a little  of  the  strait-gut  of  this  animal  about  him,
and  it  is  bound  to  the  left  arm,  it  is  a charm  ; that  if  he  does  but  look  upon  a
woman,  it  will  cause  her  to  follow  him  at  all  opportunities ; and  the  skin  of  this
animal’s  forehead  withstands  witchcraft.

We  next  come  to  speak  of  the  blood  of  a basilisk,  which  magicians  call  the
blood  of  Saturn. — This  procures  (by  its  virtue)  for  him  that  carries  it  about
him,  good  success  of  petitions  from  great  men  ; likewise  makes  him  amazingly
successful  in  the  cure  of  diseases,  and  the  grant  of  any  privilege.  They  say,
also,  that  a tike,  if  it  be  taken  out  of  the  left  ear  of  a dog,  and  it  be  altogether
black,  if  the  sick  person  shall  answer  him  that  brought  it  in,  and  who,  standing
at  his  feet,  shall  ask  him  concerning  his  disease,  there  is  certain  hope  of
life  ; and  that  he  shall  die  if  he  make  him  no  answer.  They  say,  also,  that
a stone  bitten  by  a mad  dog  causes  discord,  if  it  be  put  into  drinks  ; and
if  any  one  shall  put  the  tongue  of  a dog,  dried,  into  his  shoe,  or  some  of  the
powder,  no  dog  is  able  to  bark  at  him  who  hath  it ; and  more  powerful  this,  if
the  herb  hound’s-tongue  be  put  with  it.  And  the  membrane  of  the  secundine
of  a bitch  does  the  same  ; likewise,  dogs  will  not  bark  at  him  who  hath  the
heart  of  a dog  in  his  pocket.

The  red  toad  (Pliny  says)  living  in  briers  and  brambles,  is  full  of  sorceries,
and  is  capable  of  wonderful  things  : there  is  a little  bone  in  his  left  side,  which
being  cast  into  cold  water,  makes  it  presently  hot ; by  which,  also,  the  rage  of
■dogs  are  restrained,  and  their  love  procured,  if  it  be  put  in  their  drink,  making
them  faithful  and  serviceable ; if  it  be  bound  to  a woman,  it  stirs  up  lust.  On
the  contrary,  the  bone  which  is  on  the  right  side  makes  hot  wrater  cold,  and
it  binds  it  so  that  no  heat  can  make  it  hot  while  it  there  remains.  It  is  a
•certain  cure  for  quartans,  if  it  be  bound  to  the  sick  in  a snake’s  skin  ; and  like-


wise


Chap.  X.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  47

wise  cures  all  fevers,  the  St.  Anthony’s  fire,  and  restrains  love  and  lust.  And
the  spleen  and  heart  are  effectual  antidotes  against  the  poisons  of  the  said  toad.
Thus  much  Pliny  writes.

Also  it  is  said,  that  the  sword  with  which  a man  is  slain  hath  wonderful
power  ; for  if  the  snaffle  of  a bridle,  or  bit,  or  spurs,  be  made  of  it,  with  these
a horse  ever  so  wild  is  tamed,  and  made  gentle  and  obedient.  They  say,  if  we
dip  a sword,  with  which  any  one  was  beheaded,  in  wine,  that  it  cures  the
quartan,  the  sick  being  given  to  drink  of  it.  There  is  a liquor  made,  by
which  men  are  made  as  raging  and  furious  as  a bear,  imagining  themselves  in
every  respect  to  be  changed  into  one  ; and  this  is  done  by  dissolving  or  boiling
the  brains  and  heart  of  that  animal  in  new  wine,  and  giving  any  one  to  drink
out  of  a skull,  and,  while  the  force  of  the  draught  operates,  he  will  fancy
every  living  creature  to  be  a bear  like  to  himself ; neither  can  any  thing  divert
or  cure  him  till  the  fumes  and  virtue  of  the  liquor  are  entirely  expended,  no
other  distemper  being  perceivable  in  him.

The  most  certain  cure  of  a violent  head-ache,  is  to  take  any  herb  growing
upon  the  top  of  the  head  of  an  image ; the  same  being  bound,  or  hung  about
one  with  a red  thread,  it  will  soon  allay  the  violent  pain  thereof.


OF  MAGICAL  LIGHTS,  CANDLES,  LAMPS,  &c.

There  are  made,  artificially,  some  kinds  of  lamps,  torches,  candles,,  and
the  like,  of  some  certain  and  appropriate  materials  and  liquors  opportunely
gathered  and  collected  for  this  purpose,  which,  when  they  are  lighted  and  shine
alone,  produce  some  wonderful  effects.  There  is  a poison  from  mares,  after
copulation,  which,  being  lighted  in  torches  composed  of  their  fat  and  marrow,
doth  represent  on  the  walls  a monstrous  deformity  of  horses’  heads,  which
thing  is  both  easy  and  pleasant  to  do  : the  like  may  be  done  of  asses  and  flies.
And  the  skin  of  a serpent  or  snake,  lighted  in  a green  lamp,  makes  the  images
of  the  same  to  appear ; and  grapes  produce  the  same  effect,  if,  when  they  are

in


NATURAL  MAGIC.


48  NATURAL  MAGIC.  Book  I.

in  their  flowers,  you  shall  take  a phial,  and  bind  it  to  them,  filled  with  oil,
and  shall  let  them  remain  so  till  they  are  ripe,  and  then  the  oil  be  lighted  in  a
lamp,  you  shall  see  a prodigious  quantity  of  grapes  ; and  the  same  in  other
fruits.  If  centaury  be  mixed  with  honey  and  the  blood  of  a lapwing,  and  be
put  in  a lamp,  they  that  stand  about  will  be  of  a gigantic  stature  ; and  if  it  be
lighted  in  a clear  evening,  the  stars  will  seem  scattered  about.

The  ink  of  the  cuttle-fish  being  put  into  a lamp,  makes  Blackamoors  appear.
So,  also,  a candle  made  of  some  saturnine  things,  such  as  man’s  fat  and  marrow,
the  fat  of  a black  cat,  with  the  brains  of  a crow  or  raven,  which  being  extin-
guished in  the  mouth  of  a man  lately  dead,  will  afterwards,  as  often  as  it  shines
alone,  bring  great  horror  and  fear  upon  the  spectators  about  it.

Of  such  like  torches , candles , lamps , &c.,  (of  which  we  shall  speak  further  in
our  Book  of  Magnetism  and  Mummies)  Hermes  speaks  largely  of ; also  Plato
and  Chyrannides  ; and,  of  the  later  writers,,  Albertus  Magnus  makes  particular
mention  of  the  truth  and  efficacy  of  these,  in  a treatise  on  these  particular  things
relative  to  lights,  &c.


OF  THE  ART  OF  FASCINATION,  OR  BINDING  BY  THE  LOOK
OR  SIGHT.

We  call  fascination  a binding,  because  it  is  effected  by  a look,  glance,  or
observation,  in  which  we  take  possession  of  the  spirit,  and  overpower  the  same,
of  those  we  mean  to  fascinate  or  suspend  ; for  it  comes  through  the  eyes,  and  the
instrument  by  which  we  fascinate  or  bind  is  a certain,  pure,  lucid,  subtil  spirit,
generated  out  of  the  ferment  of  the  purer  blood  by  the  heat  of  the  heart,  and
the  firm,  determined,  and  ardent  will  of  the  soul  which  directs  it  to  the  object
previously  disposed  to  be  fascinated.  This  doth  always  send  forth  by  the  eyes
rays  or  beams,  carrying  with  them  a pure  subtil  spirit  or  vapour  into  the  eye  or
blood  of  him  or  her  that  is  opposite.  So  the  eye,  being  opened  and  intent
upon  any  one  with  a strong  imagination,  doth  dart  its  beams,  which  are  the

vehicle


Chap.  X.  NATURAL  MAGIC.  49

vehicle  of  the  spirit,  into  whatever  we  will  affect  or  bind,  which  spirit  striking
the  eye  of  them  who  are  fascinated,  being  stirred  up  in  the  heart  and  soul  of
him  that  sends  them  forth,  and  possessing  the  breast  of  them  who  are  struck,
wounds  their  hearts,  infects  their  spirits,  and  overpowers  them.

Know,  likewise,  that  in  witches,  those  are  most  bewitched,  who,  with  often
looking,  direct  the  edge  of  their  sight  to  the  edge  of  the  sight  of  those  who
bewitch  or  fascinate  them  ; whence  arose  the  saying  of  “ Evil  eyes,  &c.”
For  when  their  eyes  are  reciprocally  bent  one  upon  the  other,  and  are  joined
beams  to  beams,  and  lights  to  lights,  then  the  spirit  of  the  one  is  joined  to
the  spirit  of  the  other,  and  then  are  strong  ligations  made ; and  most  violent
love  is  stirred  up,  only  with  a sudden  looking  on,  as  it  were,  with  the  darting
a look,  or  piercing  into  the  very  inmost  of  the  heart,  whence  the  spirit  and
amorous  blood,  being  thus  wounded,  are  carried  forth  upon  the  lover,  and
enchanter ; no  otherwise  than  the  spirit  and  the  blood  of  him  that  is  murdered
is  upon  the  murderer,  who,  if  standing  near  the  body  killed,  the  blood  flows
afresh,  which  thing  has  been  tried  by  repeated  experiments.

So  great  power  is  there  in  fascination  that  many  uncommon  and  wonderful
things  are  thereby  effected,  especially  when  the  vapours  of  the  eyes  are  sub-
servient to  the  affection ; therefore  collyries,  ointments,  alligations,  &c.  are
used  to  affect  and  corroborate  the  spirit  in  this  or  that  manner  : to  induce
love,  they  use  venereal  collyriums,  as  hippomanes,  blood  of  doves,  &c.  To
induce  fear,  they  use  martial  collyriums,  as  the  eyes  of  wolves,  bear’s  fat,
and  the  civet-cat.  To  procure  misery,  or  sickness,  they  use  saturnine,  and
so  on.

Thus  much  we  have  thought  proper  to  speak  concerning  Natural  Magic,
in  which  we  have,  as  it  may  be  said,  only  opened  the  first  chamber  of  Nature’s
storehouse  ; indeed  we  should  have  inserted  many  more  things  here , but  as
they  fall  more  properly  under  the  heads  of  Magnetism , Mummy,  &c.,  to
which  we  refer  the  reader,  we  shall  take  our  leave  of  the  reader  for  the
present,  that  we  may  give  him  time  to  breathe,  likewise  to  digest  what  he  has
here  feasted  upon ; and,  while  he  is  preparing  to  enter  the  unlocked  chambers

Book  I.  G of


50


NATURAL  MAGIC.


Book  I.


of  Magic  and  Nature,  we  will  procure  him  a rich  service  of  most  delicious
meats,  fit  for  the  hungry  and  thirsty  traveller  through  the  vast  labyrinths  of
wisdom  and  true  science.


END  OF  THE  NATURAL  MAGIC.


THE  Author  having,  under  the  title  of  Natural  Magic,  collected  and
arranged  every  thing  that  was  curious,  scarce,  and  valuable,  as  well  his  own
experiments,  as  those  in  which  he  has  been  indefatigable  in  gathering  from
the  science  and  practice  of  Magical  Authors,  and  those  the  most  ancient  and
abstruse,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  list  at  the  end  of  the  Book,  where  he  has  put
down  the  names  of  the  authors,  from  which  he  has  translated  many  things
that  were  never  yet  published  in  the  English  language,  particularly  Hermes ,
Tritemius , Paracelsus , Bacon , Dee,  Porta , Agrippa,  & c.  &c.  &c. ; from  whom
he  has  not  been  ashamed  to  borrow  what  he  thought  and  knew  would  be
valuable  and  gratifying  to  the  sons  of  Wisdom,  in  addition  to  many  other  rare
and  uncommon  experiments  relative  to  this  art.


THE
