On the Threshold of the Unseen (William F. Barrett, 1917)
=========================================================
William F. Barrett — The SPR founder's synthesis of forty years of psychical research — the movement's standard survey. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (india.history.resource.117426) — 1917 first edition.

PA aA a A A aa A Cae A A OE
) NOT TO BE ISSUED (
) OUT OF THE LIBRARY. q

a ec

00059812

: ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY §
® Town Hall, Bombay. §
Lesenadecacocoeesacaenes!

oo bas, -~, oe
trae these +

TTT
00059812 .

Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
on 11 March, 2020

ON THE THRESHOLD OF THE UNSEEN

Dedication

TO THE DEAR MEMORY
OF ONE WHOSE RADIANT FAITH GAVE HER ‘‘ THE AS-
SURANCE OF THINGS HOPED FOR”’ AND NEEDED NOT
THE EVIDENCE OF THINGS UNSEEN WHICH THIS
BOOK MAY POSSIBLY GIVE TO SOME STRICKEN SOULS
AND OTHER SEEKERS AFTER TRUTH. ~

CONTENTS

CHAPTER PAGE

PREFACE a
Part I
1 INTRODUCTION - “ - : I
If PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND PUBLIC
OPINION - 7 7 : : - 15
111 CONFLICTING OBJECTIONS OF SCIENCE
AND RELIGION” - - . - - 25
Part II
IV PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUALISM = 35
Vv bDiTTO .- : . : : : =: ST

VI LEVITATION AND IMMUNITY FROM FIRE - 69
VIL ON CERTAIN MORE DISPUTABLE PHENOM-
ENA OF SPIRITUALISM: ECTOPLASMS;
DIRECT VOICE; MATERIALIZATION ;

SPIRIT PHOTOGRAPHY; THE AURA -_—s 81

Part III
VUL THE CANONS OF EVIDENCE IN PSYCHICAL
RESEARCH > - —_ - - 95
IX THEORIES - - < 7 J - 103
X THE PROBLEM OF MEDIUMSHIP  - = II7

XI HUMAN PERSONALITY; THE SUBLIMINAL
SELF - - - - - - - 127
vii

Vill
CHAPTER
XII
XII
XIV
Xv
XVI

XVII

XVI
XIX

XX

XXI

XXIL
XXII

XXIV

Contents

Part IV
APPARITIONS - - 7 - -
AUTOMATIC WRITING. THE EVIDENCE
FOR IDENTITY - - * 7 -
PROOF OF SUPERNORMAL MESSAGES ;
THE OUIJA BOARD - - - -
FURTHER EVIDENCE OF SURVIVAL AFTER
DEATH - . - - - .
EVIDENCE OF IDENTITY IN THE DISCAR-
NATE - - 7 - - :
EVIDENCE FROM ABROAD OF SURVIVAL -«

PART V
CLAIRVOYANCE, PSYCHOLOGY OF TRANCE
PHENOMENA - a : 7

DIFFICULTIES AND OBJECTIONS CONSID-
ERED - - - - - .

CAUTIONS AND SUGGESTIONS - - -|

Part VI
THE LESSON OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE IN-
TERPRETATION OF NATURE - - -
THE MYSTERY OF HUMAN PERSONALITY -
THE DIVINE GROUND OF THE SOUL; RE-
INCARNATION - - oe -
TELEPATHY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS - .

APPENDICES »* ‘

A SUPERSTITION AND THE SUPERNATURAL;

MIRACLES) - - - - 7 .

B‘’ NOTE BY THE LATE PROF. BALFOUR STEWART,

yo

EUSAPIA PALADINO =. - - -

F.R.S. - . ° - - -

,

SUGGESTIONS FOR INVESTIGATORS - “°

PREFACE

‘*A mind unwilling to believe, or even undesirous
to be instructed, our weightiest evidence must ever fail
to impress. It will insist on taking that evidence in bits
and rejecting it item by item. The man who announces
his intention of waiting until one single absolutely con-
clusive bit of evidence turns‘up, is really a man not
open to conviction, and if he be a logician he knows it.
For modern logic has made it plain that single facts
never can be ‘‘ proved ’’ except by their coherence in a
system. But as all the facts come singly, anyone who
dismisses them one by one is destroying the conditions
under which the conviction of new truth could ever
arise in his mind.’’*

DURING the greater part of the last century,
and that whith. preceded it, the learned world
as a whole treated with scorn and contempt
all those obscure psychical phenomena’ which
lie between the territory already conquered
by science and the dark realms of ignorance

“ Dr. F. C. S; Schiller, “ Proceedings of the Society for Psychicat
Research,”’ Vol. xviii, p. 419.
ix
a*

x Preface

and superstition. Many causes have in recent
years contributed to lessen this aversion,
which is not only passing away but giving
place to an earnest desire to know what
trustworthy evidence exists on behalf of
super-normal,—often, but erroneously, called
super-natural,—phenomena.

Although many eminent scientific men in
the past and present generation, both in
England and abroad, have testified to the
genuineness and importance of these pheno-
mena official science still stands aloof. ‘This
no doubt is largely due to the essential differ-
ence between physical and psychical pheno-
mena, a difference by no means clearly
recognized and which can never be broken
down. The main object of physical science
is to measure and forecast, and from its
‘phenomena free will must be eliminated.
Psychical states on the contrary can neither
be measured nor forecast, and from them the
disturbing influence of life and will can neither
be eliminated nor foreseen.

The association of ideas and methods of
investigation. in physical research are there-
fore widely different from those in psychical
research. Accordingly minds working i in the

Preface xi

former line of thought become more or less
impervious to facts belonging to the other
line of thought, however well attested those
facts may be. ‘The new association of ideas
is foreign and uncongenial and has apparently
no harmonious relation to accepted scientific
truths. Nevertheless, as I have endeavoured
to point out in the introductory chapters,
when these differences are realized, and the
rapidly accumulating weight of evidence on
behalf of phenomena, hitherto unrecognised
by official science, is critically and fairly
examined, the general acceptance of these
phenomena by science can only be a question
of time.

That this is likely to be the case is seen
from the fact that all enduring additions to
our knowledge of the universe rest upon a
similar basis. They are the result of pro-
longed and cautious enquiry, the investigation
and discussion of a number of circumstances,
each of which by itself may appear to be
insignificant, but taken collectively point to
some wide generalization. Such evidence
though conclusive to a trained observer makes
little appeal to the popular mind, which has
no time nor inclination to master the necessary

xii. Preface

details, and asks for some one piece of con-
clusive evidence,—some  “ knockdown blow,’
—to compel its attention and assent. ‘This
however cannot be given,—as that acute
thinker Dr. F. C. S. Schiller has pointed out
in the quotation at the head of this Preface,—
and there is nothing for it but a tiresome
study of detailed evidence, the strength of
which rests on its cumulative character.

In the following pages I ‘have given some
of this evidence with as little tedium as
possible, and also ventured to touch, perhaps
too daringly, upon many subjects which need
fuller exposition than was possible in a small
volume, the history of which is as follows.

More than twenty years ago an address on
the phenomena of spiritualism, which I de-
livered in London, was expanded into a little
book,—the nucleus of the present volume,—en-
titled «‘On the Threshold of a New World of
Thought.” Although an edition of that book
was printed off in 1895 its publication was
delayed for more than a dozen years for the
following reason. Considerable public interest
was at that time being taken in a well known
Italian medium, Eusapia Paladino ; several
eminent continental savants, and subsequently

Preface xiii

a few distinguished ‘members of the Society
for Psychical Research, after a searching
investigation in 1894, had- attested the
genuineness of many remarkable phenomena
occurring with this medium. Their report was
quoted in my former book, but just before
it was issued an opposite opinion was arrived
at’ by others, equally competent, after a
subsequent investigation in 1895. It seemed
wiser therefore to delay the publication ofthe
volume until more conclusive evidence, one
way or the other, was forthcoming. More-
over I felt that if Eusapia were really nothing
more.than a clever and systematic impostor,
able to deceive several eminent investigators,
both English ‘and foreign, this fact would
certainly shake the value of other scientific
testimony to the supernormal, and undermine
the stability of many of the conclusions
reached in my book.

As will be seen by referring to the history
ofjthis case, which I have given on pp. 65-67
and in Appendix C of the present work,
repeated critical investigation in later years
showed that this notorious medium really
possessed genuine supernormal power, albeit,
like so many. professional mediums of a low

XIV Preface

moral type, she sometimes lapsed into fraud-
ulent practices, which however were quickly
detected by trained observers.

Accordingly ‘‘On the Threshold of a New
World of Thought” was issued in 1908 and
the edition quickly sold out. The remarkable
series of experiments, carried out by the
Society for Psychical Research, on the evid-
ence for~survival after death was then in
progress and I postponed the publication of
a new edition until further trustworthy
evidence on this vital question was attainable.
This, in my opinion, has now been obtained ;
my early book was therefore recast, an outline
of some of the evidence for survival included,
and the present volume is the result. Mean-
while the editors of the Home University Lib-
vary had asked me to write the volume on
““Psychical Research’ for their series, and
after this was published, various circum-
stances prevented the completion of this book
until the present year. . Now, alas, the war
has rendered printing and paper a great
difficulty for the publishers, to whom my
teaders will I. trust-extend their indulgence
for any shortcomings in this respect.

It will thus be seen that the conclusions

Preface: XV

reached in this book arg not the result of
hasty and superficial examination. Upwards
of forty years ago I began the investigation
of alleged super-normal phenomena with a
perfectly’ detached and open mind. The
urgent need for a Society which should pre-
serve continuity of records -of investigation
and a high standard of experimental work
became apparent, and with the co-operation
of one or two friends the Society for Psychical
Research was founded early in 1882. Forty-
six volumes of its Proceedings and Journal
have now been published, and in addition
its sister society in America,—which through
the assistance of some eminent friends in
Boston and Harvard I was enabled to initiate
in 1884,—has also published a large library
of its Proceedings and Jqurnal, -undet the
indefatigable editorship of Professor Hyslop.
Thus a vast collection of. sifted .evidence is
being accumulated and printed, which will be
of immense value for future reference and -
study. ’

As regards the so-called ‘‘ physical pheno-
mena ’”’ of spiritualism, described in. Part 2,
bizarre and sometimes repellent ‘as such
manifestations are,—and meaningless except

XVi Preface

as affording illustrations of the operation of
some unknown intelligence and power,—the
evidence cited seems to me indisputable,
though some of my readers may hesitate to
accept it. A.wholesome scepticism is desir-
able, but to attribute imbecility or hallucin-
ation to eminent and cautious scientific
investigators, or fraud to men of high in-
telligence and probity like the Rev. Stainton
Moses (“M.A. Oxon”) is simply puerile.
Nevertheless, in the British Weekly, the
writer of a lengthy review of Sir Oliver Lodge’s
book Raymond expresses amazement that
Sir Oliver refers ‘ without a word of caution
to the record of Stainton Moses,” and justifies
this stricture by quoting from the writings of
the late Mr. F. Podmore. It is true Mr.
Podmore did useful work in connection with
psychical research, but he was chiefly known
for his ingenuity in discrediting, or attribut-
ing to telepathy, any psychical phenomena
outside his limited range of view. Those
who, like myself, knew both the above named
gentlemen feel the only ‘‘word of caution ’”
that is necessary .is with regard to ‘the
opinions of Mr, Podmore, who howevér never
cast any aspersion on the character of Mr. S.

Preface XVii

Moses. It was necessary to refer to this matter,
as the evidence of phenomena associated with
Mr. Stainton Moses, which I have quoted in
Part 2, might otherwise be regarded with
suspicion by those who do not know the facts.

In selecting some illustrations from the
growing mass of trustworthy evidence on
behalf of survival after death, given in Part 4,
it will be noticed that /I have refrained from
citing any such évidence obtained through
paid professional mediums, who are naturally
regarded by the public with more or less
distrust. Nor car the love of notoriety, or
other inducement to deceive, be brought
against those through whom the evidence
for survival given in this book has come.

The question has naturally and often been
asked,—if .communication with those who
have passed into the unseen be possible,
why should it be necessary to have a connect-
ing link in a so-called medium, usually a
perfect stranger and .of another order of
mind? Surely our loved ones who have
recently entered the spiritual world would try
to communicate directly with those dearest
‘to them! a father‘or mothet would be more
likely to be sensitive to the spiritual presence

XVili Preface

of their beloved child than an uncongenial

stranger. This question I have discussed

in Chapter X., and would also beg my readers
‘to refer to the Cautions and Suggestions given

in Chapter XX.

Those who like St. Thomas cannot believe
in survival after bodily death, without some
material demonstration, will probably find in
continued sittings with one or two friends, in
the manner described in Appendix D, a
response to their yearnings and‘ an aid to
their faith’ Having attained this assurance
I do not advise them to pursue the mattet
further, but rather learn more of the spiritual
world. and spiritual communion from the
Christian mystics of all countries ; especially
would I commend a book by the late Mr. J. H.
Spalding, where the teaching of that gifted
seer Swedenborg is luminously and dispassion-
ately set forth?

None will find in automatic writing, or

. other spiritualistic phenomena, the chaniel
1 Anyone wating to make experiments on; and a study of,
automatic writing, is advised to read the tate Mrs. Verrall’s
account of her own experience and method given in the ‘* Pro-
ceedings of the Society for Psychical Research,’’ Vole XX, and
also Mr. Myers’ paper in Vol. IV, p. 209, etc.
2“ The Kingdom of Heaven,” by J. H. Spaiding (Dent & Co.,

3/6 net ; my little book on “ Swedenborg ” (J. H.. Watkins, 1/-
ab, may also interest the reader.

Preface xix

for ‘the “communion of saints,” which is
independent of material agency and attained
only in stillness and serenity of soul. For the
psychical order is not the spiritual order ;
it deals, as I have said elsewhere, only “‘ with
the external, though it be in an unseen world ;
and its chief value lies in the fulfilment of
its work whereby it reveals to us the in-
adequacy of the external, either here or
hereafter, to satisfy the life of the soul.”

The paramount importance of psychical re-
search is found in correcting the habit of.West-
ern thought,—of the average men we meet,—
‘that the physical plane is the whole of Nature,
or at any rate the only aspect of the universe
which really concerns us. Under this false
and deadly assumption all wider views and
spiritual conceptions wither and die as soon
‘as they are born. This vast and devastating
war has, however, brought certain spiritual
tendencies and aspirations into the lives of a
multitude of men and led many to the con-
viction, which Lowell expresses, that—

‘“ We see but half the causes of our deeds,

Seeking them wholly in the outer life,
And heedless of the encircling spirit world,

Which though unseen, is felt, and sows in us
All germs of pure and world-wide purposes.”’ \

xX Preface

My warmest thanks are due to my friend
the Rev. M. A. Bayfield, M:A., for kindly
reading the proof sheets of this book and for
many valuable suggestions.

W. F. BARRETT. .
31, Devonshire Place,
London, W.

NOTE TO SECOND EDITION

A few slight verbal corrections have been made in the
present issue, for noting these and for other suggestions
I wish to thank my friends Sir Oliver Lodge, Mr. W. W.
Asquith, Mr. J. A. Hill and Miss H. A. Dallas, and also
my sister Miss Rosa Barrett who kindly prepared the
Index. F

It is desirable to say, what I think must be obvious
to every careful reader; that I do not regard the absence
of any paid medium in psychical research as a guarantee
that fraud and error are eliminated. I quite agree
with the reviewer in the Westminster Gazette that “‘ the
passion for the marvellous has subtle and far-reaching
effects ” and that we need to guard against selfleception
even in people whose character ‘is beyond reproach.
Hence, as stated on p. 210, it is necessary to submit
all evidehce of ‘the supernormal “ to the most’ cigorous
scrutiny before deciding on its probable origin.”

ON THE
THRESHOLD OF THE,\UNSEEN

Part 1

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

‘‘If anyone advances anything new which contra-
dicts, perhaps threatens to overturn, the creed which
we have for years repeated, and have handed down to
others, all passions are raised’ against him, and every
effort is made to crush him. People resist with all
their might; they act as if they neither heard nor could
comprehend; they speak of the new view with con-
tempt, as if it were not worth the trouble of even so
much as an investigation or a regard, and thus a new
truth may wait a long time before it can make its
way. BRD
THERE are many people, and their number is
rapidly increasing, who feel, as ‘the late
_ Professor Henry Sidgwick has said, “it is a

scandal that the dispute as to the reality
of the marvellous phenomena of Spiritualism?

> is Cobecrastions of Goethe " (Bohn’s coe Pp. 47).

2 Spiritism is 4 better term, see p.
B

2 Chapter I

should still be going on,—phenomena of which
it isquite impossible toexaggerate the scientific
importance, if only a tenth part of what has
been alleged by generally credible’ witnesses
could be shown to be true.” Taking an
unprejudiced view of the subject, such persons
are anxious to know what amount of truth
underlies the alleged facts. To these this
little book may be of service.

There are others who, whilst not denying
that the subject may possibly be a legitimate
object of scientific investigation, prefer to
give the whole matter a wide berth ; contend-
ing either that it is a worthless will-o' -the-wisp,
luring its victims, by an imaginary prospect
of knowledge, into a miserable morass, or
that it is distinctly forbidden by the Scriptures
and condemned by the Church, so that its
practice, and some would even add its
investigation, is unlawful.

‘On the other hand,. the popular habit of
thought, whether lay or scientific, regards the
whole thing as too contemptible for any
inquiry, that it reeks, not of the bottomless
pit, but of the dunghill ; superstition, fraud,
and tomfoolery amply ,accounting for all the
alleged ‘‘phenomena.” Hence they regard
with complacency the many shallow quidnuncs,
ever on the look-out for something néw, who.
find in fourth-hand stories of “ spooks.”

Introduction 3

abundant material for the entertaininent of
their friends. In a busy world, occupied
with other things—where the fierce struggle
for material existence, wealth, and position
dominates everything—such a state of mind
is very natural. But I have failed to find
that a single person who ridicules Spiritualism
has given to the subject any serious and
patient consideration ; moreover, I venture to
assert that any fair-minded person who devotes
to its careful and dispassionate investigation
as many days, or even hours, as some of us
have given years, will find it impossible to
continue sitting in the seat of the scornful,
whatever other position he may, take up.

No doubt the popular hesitation in accept-
ing unseen intelligences as ‘a cause of these
phenomena arises not so much from inability
to explain the modus operandi, but from a
preconceived theory that such an explanation
is impossible, and perhaps also from the fear
of being laughed at as unscientific or super-
stitious in adopting it.

There: are, however, some able thinkers
who decline to accept or even investigate
these phenomena on ‘the ground that with
our limited faculties successful investigation
is impossible, and with our present limited
knowledge whatever results are obtained
would probably be misinterpreted by us, so
that any conclusions drawn as to the super-

4 Chapter I

normal character of the phenomena are
worthless, or, at any rate, to be distrusted.

Even those who do not go so far as this,
regard psychical research, whether it be
telepathy or Spiritualism, as unworthy of
serious attention, because the phenomena are
either zmpossible or utterly trivial ; therefore
in either case a sheer waste of time.

There are some things, I admit, which it
would be utter folly to waste our time upon,
such as “circle -squaring,” or “ perpetual
motion,” &c. These things are beyond the
pale of rational investigation at the present
day on account of the extent of our knowledge
in those particular regions. But there are
other things which to-day appear impossible
only from the extent of our ignorance in those
directions. Such, for example, as, say, the
sea serpent, thought-transference, or Spiritual-
istic phenomena ; a few years ago we should
also have included the telephone and wireless
telegraphy. The essential difference between
these two classes of improbable events is that
the first ‘involves a contradiction of experience
or of laws well established, the second involves
an unforeseen extension, but no po edition,
of existing knowledge and experience. :

To assert that mind can act upon mind in-
dependently of any recognised channel of
sense, or that mind can exist associated with an

Introduction 5

imperceptible form of matter, is a considerable
extension of our knowledge,—if true as I
believe it to be—but involves no rejection or
contradiction of other knowledge equally true.
On the other hand, to assert that 2 and 2
makes 5, and also make 4, would involve
intellectual confusion ; similarly, to believe in
materialism; as now understood, and also in
these phenomena, would involve a. contra-
diction of thought and consequent intellectual
confusion ; hence one or the other must be
rejected. So that the “ impossibility ” that
is urged refers, not to the phenomena them-
selves, but only to certain popular theories:
or conceptions about those phenomena.

But it is urged that the utterly trivial
character of the phenomena renders them too
contemptible for serious inquiry. ‘‘ Even if
true, we don’t care for the results you obtain,”’
is a common observation. This was doubtless
the feeling that prompted the illustrious
Faraday to decline any further investigation;
for he stated in his well-known letter to Sir
Emerson Tennant’ that he had found in the
phenomena “nothing worthy of attention,”
or’capable of supplying “‘ any force or inform-
ation of the least use or value to mankind.”
With all deference to one whom I knew and
revered so highly, this surely was a wrong

1 Pall Mall Gasette, May 19th 1868. The whole correspondence
is given in Light, February and March, 1888.

6 Chapter I

position to take up. Long ago Benjamin
Franklin, most practical of men, disposed of
that argument; but the whole of Faraday’s
great career showed he valued truth for its
own sake, irrespective of any commercial
consideration, and supplies the best answer
to the words of his I have quoted. Never-
theless, we still find some scientific men of the
highest eminence taking precisely the same
ground. Thus Professor Huxley replying to
Mr. A. R. Wallace, O:M. (who had described
some spiritualistic phenomena he had
witnessed), said ‘It may be all true for
anything I know to the contrary, but really
I cannot get up any interest in the subject.”’.

Some time ago, in 1894, the distinguished
physicist and courageous investigator Sir
Oliver Lodge answered such objectors in the
columns of the official scientific journal
“Nature,” as followss;:— '

“This attitude of ‘not caring’ for the results of
scientific investigation in unpopular regions, even if
those results be true, is very familiar to some of us
who are engaged. in a quest which both the great
leaders in the above-remembered controversy [Lord
Kelvin and Professor Huxley] agree to dislike and
despise. It is an attitude appropriate to a company
of shareholders, it is a common and almest universal
sentiment of the noble atmy of self-styled ‘ practical
men,’ but it is an astonishing attitude for an acknow-
ledged man of science, whose whole vocation is the

Introduction 7

discovery and reception of new truth. Certain obscure
facts have becn knocking at the door of human
intelligence for many centuries, and they are knocking
now, in. the most scientific era the world has yet seen.
It may be that they will have to fall back disappointed
for yet another few centuries ; it may be that they
will succeed this time in effecting a precarious and
constricted right of entry ; the issue appears to depend
upon the attitude of scientific men of the present and
near future, and no one outside can help them.”

But fifty years ago Professor A. De Morgan,
with inimitable satire, had already exposed
the unphilosophical and illogical position still
taken up on these questions by such honoured
leaders of science as Lord Kelvin and Professor
Huxley. Nothing more brilliant or amusing
has ever been written on the whole subject
than De Morgan’s preface to his wife’s book,
“From Matter to Spirit,’’ and I ‘earnestly
commend its perusal to fhe scientific men of
to-day. And to those who prefer Bishop
Butler to De Morgan for their guide let me
quote the following words from the ‘‘Analogy’’;
“ After all, that which is true must be
admitted ; though: it should show us the
shortness of our faculties, and that we are
in no wise judges of many things, of which
we are apt to think ourselves very competent
Ones.”

. Nevertheless the argument is ‘sometimes

8 Chapter I

heard ‘that, if these super-normal psychical
phenomena are true they.ought to be_re-
produced and demonstrated at pleasure. This
was urged by that eminent physiologist Dr.

_ Carpenter, speaking in reply to my paper at
the British Association in 1876, when for the
first time evidence on behalf of thought
transference and other psychical phenomena
was brought before a scientific society. That
able publicist Mr. R. H. Hutton in his journal
the Spectator showed the absurdity of such an
argument, remarking that if it were valid we
should have to reject as imaginary many of
the psychological and pathological facts given
by Dr. Carpenter and other writers on mental
physiology.’ And as the late Professor Henry
Sidgwick said, ‘‘ I have never seen any serious
attempt to justify this refusal [to accept the
evidence of rare and fitful phenomena] on
- general principles of, scientific method.’”” We
do not know’‘at present all the conditions of
success, and it is to be expected they may be
sometimes present and sometimes absent.
Moreover, whether the phenomena originate
in the unconscious self of the medium, or the
operation of some unseen intelligence, in.
neither case can we control the exercise of
the will.

Before proceeding’ further it is desirable to
1See Spectator for September 30th, 1876. +

Introduction 9

define the exact meaning of the word Spiritual-
ism. On the Continent this word is often
‘replaced by the term “‘Spiritism ’’ to dis-
tinguish it from the broad sense of thé word
as used by philosophical writers, to denote a
metaphysic opposed to materialism. But the
generally accepted sense in which the word
is used to-day is defined (1) by Mrs. Henry
Sidgwick, in the article: “ Spiritualism,’’: in
the last edition of the ‘“‘ Encyclopedia
Britannica,” as ‘“‘a belief that the spiritual
world manifests itself by producing in the
physical world effects , inexplicab e by the
known laws of nature,” or (2) by \Dr. A. me
Wallace, in ‘ Chambers’: Encyclopedia,”
“the name applied to a great and eared
series of abnormal or preter-normal pheno-
mena, purporting to be Ae the most part
caused by spiritual beings,”’ or (3) by a writer
in the “ Spiritual: Masdzine whose definition
I curtail, as “a belief based solely on facts
open to the world through an ‘extensive
system of mediumship, its. cardinal truth,
established by experiment, being that of a
world of spirits, and the continuity ‘of the
existence of the individual spirit through the
momentary eclipse of death.”

These definitions, it will be noticed, are
Somewhat progressive ; the last is doubtless
the usual meaning attached to the word by
‘Spiritualists. I see nothing to dissent from

10 Chapter I

in it, and, speaking for myself, I do not
hesitate to affirm that a careful and dis-
passionate review of my own experiments,
extending over a period of forty years,
together with the investigation of the evidence
of competent witnesses, compels my belief
in Spiritualism, as so defined.

‘There can be little doubt that the. im-
patience with which orthodox science regards
spiritualism and psychical research in general
arises from the difficulty of finding any
explanation of the phenomena which is related
to existing scientific knowledge. Hence, as
. Goethe remarked, in one of his conversations
quoted at the head of this chapter, ‘a new
truth may wait a long time before it can make.
its way.” My friend the late Mr. C. C.
Massey has well pointed out :—

““When we see how a thing can have
happened we are much more ready to give a
fair hearing to evidence that it has happened,
than when the material offered is’ quite
indigestible by our intelligence. And thus an
explanatory hypothesis is hardly less necessary
for the reception of facts of a certain character,
than are facts for the support of a hypo-
thesis.’”? ,
So also -more recently the late Professor

.

1 Preface to Du Prel’s ‘* Philosophy of Mysticism.’*

Introduction at

William James has said: ‘It often happens
a‘fact is strenuously denied until a welcome
interpretation comes with it, then it is
admitted readily enough.”’

The insistence of the demand ‘for some
explanation of these phenomena which we
find within us, is only a special case of that

“continuous pressure of the causal instinct ”’
which characterises our reason; and it is
because of the difficulty of finding any
adequate explanation of them in known ‘and
familiar causes, that science distrusts the
existence of the phenomena themselves. ‘The
reasoning faculty, in rejecting every known
cause as inadequate, satisfies’ its unrest by
rejecting the occurrences as improbable or
unproved. In truth, there is, strictly speak-
ing, no scientific explanation of the higher
phenomena of Spiritualism. Secondary causes,
with which science deals, are only antecedents
or previous states of a phenomenon, and have
more remote antecedents or previous states,
which, in turn, need to be accounted for,
and so on in an endless chain; thus to the
Scientific materialist,God necessarily becomes
an infinite et cetera.

With a real or true cause—still less with
the ultimate cause of things—science cannot
grapple! A real cause, though of limited

1 See on this subject the remarkably suggestive and able work,

en: Human and_ Divine,’’ by the late Canon Illing-
Wort

12 Chapter I

range, we find in ourselves, in our personality :
and such a cause, perhaps of wider range, we
find in the intelligence that lies behind many
of the phenomena here discussed. But the
operation of unseen intelligences—who, in
some unknown manner, can affect us, and also
affect material things around us, just as our
personality can affect the grey matter of our,
brain, and through it things outside ourselves
—this, although it may be a true cause, is as
far beyond scientific explanation as the
phenomepa of consciousness itself. Until

science Can explain how consciousness is’

related to the brain,—which, although a fact
of daily experience, is wholly incomprehen-
sible,—we cannot expect from it any explan-
ation as to how discarnate intelligences can
operate upon matter, or. whence the energy
fs derived. (See Note at end of chapter.)
_ But a change of thought on this subject is
coming over the educated world. Some of the
most cultured minds and acute investigators
of recent years have satisfied themselves of
the genuineness of the phenomena of Spiritual-
ism, or at least that there is a strong prima
facie case for serious investigation, and are
profoundly impressed with the issues opened
up and the vast movement of thought the
general acceptance of these phenomena would
create. Some,’it is true, desire to suspend
their judgment as to the explanation of the

Introduction 13

facts, whilst a surprisingly large number
unreservedly accept the facts as an ‘“‘ assur-
ance of things hoped for, the proving of
things not seen.” ‘‘ When we last met,”
said Holman Hunt to Ruskin, “ you declared
you had given up all belief in immortality.”
“I remember well,’ replied Ruskin, “ but
what has mainly caused the change in my
views is the unanswerable evidence of spirit-
ualism.~ I know there is much vulgar fraud
and stupidity connected with it, but under-
neath there is, I am suré, enough to convince
us that there is personal life independent
of the body, but with this once proved, I
have no further interest in spiritualism.’

Many stricken ment and women in this:
gigantic and devastating war have found
similar solace in the dark hours of their
bereavement. They have seen in it a ray
of heavenly light falling—

“ Upon the great world’s altar-stairs
That slope through darkness up to God.”

» Notr.—There are of course various Philosophical
theories to account for consciousness and its relation to
brain processes ; in Chapter XI. I have briefly referred
to this subject. Uluimately; as Dr. W. McDougall,

ene nce
1“ The Pre-Raphaelite Beathe ticed, a by Holman Hunt, O.M.,
Vol. Ii., p. 271.

14 Chapter I

F.R.S., has shown, we are compelled to choose between
Materialism and Spiritualism, using this latter word in
its true metaphysical sense, ‘‘ the soul theory.’? This
theory involves psycho-physical interaction, and the
argument that such interaction is impossible because it
is inconceivable, has been answered by Lotze as fol-
lows :—‘‘ It is easy to show that in the interaction
between body and soul there lies no greater riddle than
in any other example of causation, and that only the
false conceit that we understand something of the one
case, excites our astonishment that we understand no-
thing of the other.’’ I-quote this from Dr. McDougall’s
masterly and well-known work, ‘‘ Body and Mind.”
It is a significant fact—although Prof. W. James said
some time ago, ‘‘ Souls have gone out of fashion ”’ (in
science and philosophy)—that to-day not only Dr.
McDougall, but many other distinguished psycholo-
gists and metaphysicians, support the soul theory.

CHAPTER II

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND PUBLIC
OPINION

‘« Wherever there is the slightest possibility for the
mind of man to know, there is a Icgitimate problem for
science.’’—Professor Karl Pearson. -

Ir will I think be generally admitted that
public opinion has taken a new departure
with regard to the large class of important
and interesting phenomena which lie on the
boundary of an unseen world. We are on
the Threshold of a new World of Thought, and
the existence of the Society for Psychical
Research, with the long list of distinguished
men who are members of the Society or have
giveh it their cordial support, is of itself a
proof that a profound change of thought has
taken place in recent years. Among the past
presidents of that Society is a former Prime
Minister of this country, the Right Hon. A.
J. Balfour, who in his presidential address to
the Society. in 1894 spoke as follows’ :—

1 “* Proceedings Society for Psychical Research,” Vol. X, p. 6,
et seq. The lapse of time since the foundafion of the Society in

1882 has left Mr. Balfour and myself the sole survivors of the
original Vice-Presidents of the Socicty. , :

1S

16 Chapter II

“ T think the time has now come when it is desirable
in their own interests, and in our interests, that the
leaders of scientific thought in this country and else-
where should recognise that there are well attested
facts which, though they do not easily fit into the
the framework of sciences, or of organised experience as
they conceive it~yet require investigation and explan-
ation, and which it is the bounden duty of science,
if not itself to investigate, at all events to assist us
in investigating. . . . All arbitrary limitations of
our sphere of work are to be avoided. It is our
business to record, to investigate, to classify, and if
possible to explain, facts of a far more startling and
impressive character than these modest cases of
telepathy. Let us not neglect that business. . . .
If many are animated by a wish to get evidence, not
through any process of laborious deduction, but by
direct observation, of the reality of intelligences not
endowed with a physical organisation like our own,
I see nothing in their action to criticise, much less to
condemn. . . . If I rightly interpret the results
which these many years of labour have forced upon
the members of this Society, and upon others not
among our number, who are associated by a similar
spirit, it does seem to me that there is at least strong
ground for supposing that outside the world (as we
have, from the point of view of science, been in‘the
habit of conceiving it), there does liea region . ,
not open indeed to. experimental observation in the
same way as the more familiar regions of the material
world are open to it, but still with regard to which
some experimental information may be laboriously
gleaned. Even if we cannot entertain any confident
hope of discovering what laws these half-seen pheno-

The Psychical Research Soctety ‘17

mena obey, at all events it will be some gain to have
shown, not as a matter of speculation or conjecture,
but as a matter of ascertained fact, that’ there are
things in heaven and earth not hitherto dreamed of
in our stientific philosophy.

These are the words of a statesman not'of
a dreamer or a fanatic; they express the
opinion moreover of a singularly acute and
philosophic mind, accustomed to sift and
weigh evidence, and experienced in the errors
and illusions as well as in the knowledge and
thought of his fellow men.

Another famous Prime Minister, the Right
Hon. W. E. Gladstone, also gave his great
name to the support of the Psychical Re-
search Society, and for many years before
his death was an Honorary Member. So also
were the poet Laureate, Alfred Tennyson, the
great painters G. F. Watts and Lord Leighton,
as well as the famous writers John Ruskin
and R. L. Stevenson. ;

Foremost men of science both in England
and abroad have shown their hearty approval
by joining the Council or becoming members
of the Society. Among these are to be found
the recent Presidents of the Royal Society, on
all of whom have been conferred the Order of
Merit: Lord Rayleigh, Sir Arch. Geikie, Sir
W. Crookes, and Sir J. J. Thomson. Another
Past president of the Royal Society, also given

the O.M., Sir William Huggins, assured me
QO

18 Chapter II

of his support, when I issued invitations to
the conference -which led to the foundation
of the Society for Psychical Research in 1882."
Sir Wm. Huggins, however (like Archbishop
Benson, who was also in hearty sympathy),
for various reasons did not wish to become a
member of the Society, though he had been
convinced of the genuineness of certain super-
normal phenomena he himself had witnessed.

The active work of Sir Oliver Lodge in
connection with the Society, of which he has
been President, is well known to everyone.
On the Continent and in America many
eminent savants have given their valued
adhesion to the Society,-e.g. Professor Charles
Richet of Paris and Professor William James of
Harvard, both of whom have been Presidents
of the Society, and among other foreign
members are to be found the names of
Professors Janet, Bernheim, . Lombroso,
Schiaperelli, .Flammarion, and that most
strenuous worker Dr. Hyslop; nor must we
forget the late Professor Hertz, “the lustre
of whose name,” as Mr. Balfour remarked in
his presidential address, gave an added dignity
to our proceedings. Nor have the more
enlightened clergy held aloof, such as the late
Bishop of Carlisle, the Rev. R. J. Campbell,

- To may mention here that in the foundation of the Society my.
friends the late Mr. Dawson Rogers and Mr. F. W. Myers
co-operated.

The Psychical Research Society 19

and Bishop Boyd Carpenter, who has! beer
a recent President of the Society, his suc-
cessors being Professor Henri Bergson, Dr.
‘Schiller of Oxford, Professor Gilbert Murray
D.Litt, and Dr. L. P. Jacks, who is now (1917)
the President of the Society.

* There can be little doubt that much of the
success the Society has won is due to the
wise guidance and indefatigable labour so long
given by the first President, Professor Henry
Sidgwick,—work most ably and zealously
continued by his widow. It is almost needless
to mention the immense service rendered to
psychical research by the well-known names
of those brilliant and gifted men—both Fellows
of Trinity College, Camb.—Mr. Ed. Gurney
and Mr. F. W. H. Myers, who were the first
Honorary Secretaries of the Society. Some
of us know the disinterested courage, the
eminent fairness, and the self-sacrificing labour
which Sidgwick; Myers and Gurney, brought
to bear on the study of these difficult problems,
and there can be little doubt that in another
generation or two the names of these eminent
pioneers will be held in honour throughout
the educated world.

Some think, not unnaturally, that the
S.P.R.; as its title is usually designated,
Proceeds too slowly and cautiously and has
hot shown a sufficiently open mind towards
the physical phenomena of spiritualism.

20 Chapter II

There is no doubt some truth in this latter
criticism, but we must remember that the
caution with which the Society for Psychical
Research’ proceeds is characteristic of alt
scientific investigation, and is doubly necessary
in a region where there are so many pitfalls
for the unwary. But if it builds up slowly
it builds securely, and next to the ‘addition
of fresh knowledge within its domain, .it
welcomes most heartily that investigator who
can prove that any of the conclusions at which
it has arrived are incorrect. It has no
retaining-fee on behalf of telepathy or ‘of
ghosts, no vested interest in the super-normal.
Theories, however plausible, that do not cover
the whole of the facts observed must be
rejected ; superstition reverses this process,
but science should know nothing of prejudices
and prepossessions. As Sir John Herschel
has well said: ‘“‘ The perfect observer will
have his eyes, as it were, opened, that they
may be struck at: once with any occurrence
which, according to received theories, ought
not to happen, for these are the facts which
serve as clues to new discoveries.’”!

It was this openness of mind which led the
brave pioneers in the investigation of spiritual-
istic phenomena, to risk their reputation and
encounter ridicule and obloquy by their

1 “ Discourse on Natural Philosopby,’’ sec. 5.

The Psychical Research Society 21

etiquiry ; and when they had obtained what
appeared to them conclusive evidence of the
genuineness of the phenomena, they published
their opinions with what then required rare
courage. Foremost amongst these was our
own great exposer of fallacies and para-
doxes, the eminent mathematician, Professor
A. De Morgan, who wrote in 1863: ‘I am
perfectly convinced that I have both seen and
heard, in @ manner which should make
unbelief impossible, things called spiritual
which cannot be' taken by any rational being
to be capable of explanation by imposture,
coincidence, or mistake.’’ Similar testimony
has been borne by Dr. A. R. Wallace, O.M.,
and others of note, whilst Sir W. Crookes’
famous researches in Spiritualism are known
td all.

But not only these and other eminent men
have been convinced of the facts, multitudes of
men and women in all parts of the world have
come to a‘similar belief. Long ago Dr. A. R. ~
Wallace stated in'an article in ‘“‘ Chambers’
Encyclopedia,” ‘“ Spiritualism has grown and
Spread continuously till, in spite of ridicule,
Misrepyesentation, and persecution, it has
Sained converts in every grade of society and

l Preface to ‘* From Matter to Spirit '* (Longman's). An ad-
Mirable summary of the statements made by distinguished
'‘ndividuals who have been led to a belief in Spiritualism, is given

Y Dr. A. RB. Wallace in his ‘‘ Miracles and Modern Spiritualism."

22 Chapter II

in every civilised portion of the globe.” They
have had in their own experience indubitable’
evidence of the existence of phenomena
entirely new to the science of to-day—
phenomena which receive their simplest solu-
tion upon the hypothesis of a spiritual world
and of intelligent beings therein, able through
certain channels at times to communicate
with us. Neither the blazing light of public
opinion, nor the rogues that have too often
duped the credulous, have shaken a faith
which stretches back to a remote past,' and
which has grown in strength with the accumu-

1 Cf. Myers’ ‘' Classical Essays,’’ p. 83, et. seq. Sce also
Howitt’s ‘* History of the Supernatural,’’ Vol. J., Chapter IX.

Delitzsch, in his ‘* Biblical Psychology,” Sect. XVII., shows
that ‘‘ table turning ’’ was practised i in many Jewish circles in the
seventeenth century ; the “table springs up even when laden with
many hundredweight.’’ Jn a work published in 1614 this is de-
nounced as magic. Zebi, in 1615, defends the practice as not due
to magic but to the power of God, ‘‘ for we sing to the table
sacred psalms and songs, and it can be no devil’s wotk where
God is remembered.”

But, going back 2,or0 years, I am informed a. prominent
feature in the enlightened creed of the early Essenes was their
belief in Spiritualism, tending to angel worship. In fact, the
tenets of this mystic sect resembled in several other things the
views held by many modern Spiritualists.

The early Church Councils, e.g. of. Elvira, a.p. 305,—a ‘little
later of Ancyra,—warned Christians against augury and spiritual-
istic phenomena as the work of the devil and his demons, but In
the Ancyra ‘‘ Canon Episcopi ’’ about goo a.p., these phenomena
were dénounced as pure illusions. This was not, however, the
opinion of St. Thomas Aquinas in the.s3th century nor of the
Roman Catholic Church then and now. See Canon McClure’s
brochure on, Spiritualism published by the S.P.C.K.

The Psychical Research Society 23

lating evidence forthcoming from time to
time and place to place.

Now the philosopher Fichte has said:
“i Everything great and good upon which our
present existence rests, and from which it has
proceeded, exists only ‘beeause noble and wise
men have resigned the enjoyments of life for
the sake of ideas.”' What a man affirms
is the idea he has made his own, and this is
always interesting and generally worth listen-
ing to; and what a number of men affirm
and continue unshaken to affirm through
years of opposing prejudice, or may be of
persecution, is certainly a matter to which
oe honest lover of truth should give some

eed.

On the other hand, what men deny is either
valueless, or evidence of the rarity or novelty
of the occurrences denied,—unless indeed the
denial be a mode of affirming another truth,
like the denial of perpetual motion. Thus for
anyone to deny the possibility of the electric
telephone, as some scientific sceptics did in
my hearing in’ 1877, is of no importance
compared with competent witnesses who have
seen and heard the telephone.

. How comes it then that the denials of the
ignorant or the prejudiced as regards Spiritual-
istic prenomens have had more weight in

1 “ Fichte’s Works,’’ Vol 'VH, p. 416

24 Chapter IT

scientific and popular estimation than the
affirmative evidence of the many witnesses
we have referred to? The consideration of
this question must be deferred to the next
chapter.

CHAPTER III

CONFLICTING OBJECTIONS OF SCIENCE
AND RELIGION -

‘“Is anything of God’s contriving endangered by
inquiry? Was it the system of the universe or the
monks that trembled at the telescope of Galileo? Did
the circulation of the firmament stop in terror because
Newton laid his daring finger on its pulse? ’’—Lowell.

Way, we may well ask, in an age pre-
eminent for its fearless inquiry, and for the
daring advance that has been made in regions
where ignorance has for centuries reigned
-Supreme, has there not been much more
advance in a direction which would appear
to be so important? Surely the supreme
problem for science to solve if she can, is
whether life, as we know it, can exist without
protoplasm, or whether we are but the
creatures of an idle day ; whether the present
life is the entrance to an infinite and unseen
world beyond, or “‘ the Universe but a soulless
interaction of atoms, and life a paltry misery
Closed in the grave.” And although the
province of religion is the region of faith, yet,
Surely, as a handmaid to faith, the evidence
afforded by Spiritualism ought to be welcomed
25

26 Chapter III -

by it. Yet, strangely enough, it is these two
great authorities, Science and Religion, which
have largely blocked the way. And when
we ask the leaders of thought in each to give
us the ground for their opposition, we find
their reasons are mutually destructive.

Our scientific teachers of the last generation,
largely influenced by German materialism,
denied, and many still deny the possibility
of mind withott a material brairi, or of any
information or knowledge being gained except
through the recognised channels of sensation.
But our religious teachers stoutly oppose
this ; they assert, that a spiritual world does
exist, and that the inspired writings contain
a system of. knowledge supersensibly given
toman. Both views cannot be true, yet both
are urged in antagonism to Spiritualism.
Their common ground is that all extension
of our existing knowledge in their respective
departments must only come through the
legitimate channels they prescribe ; in the one .
case the channel is that bounded by the known
‘senses, and the known properties of matter, .
and in the other the channel is that sanctioned
by Authority. Everything outside these
channels is heresy, and must be discredited.
I am, of course, speaking generally, for we
all know éminent men, both in science and:
‘theology, who take a broader and more

rational view,

Scientific Objections 27

‘At the same time there is much to be said
on behalf of orthodoxy. The inertia of
Conservatism is useful, nay, eyen necessary,
in helping to suppress rash or hasty deviation
from the recognised order of things; hence
mere aberrations of intellect meet with a
steady resistance, but that which is true,
however novel it may be, has a resiliency
which grows stronger the greater the resist-
ance it encounters, and finally wins its way
among our cherished and enduring possessions.

There are some cogent reasons which both
Science and religion might give for their
opposition to this subject. The effect of their
opposition has not been by any ‘means an
unmixed evil. In the address already referred
to Mr. A. J. Balfour has well stated one of
these reasons. He says: “If we.took it by
itself we should say that. scientific men have-

_Shown in connection with it a bigoted intoler-
ance, an indifference to strictly scientific
evidence, which is, on the face of it, dis-
creditable. I believe that although the course
they pursued was not one which it is very
easy rationally to justify, nevertheless there
was a. great deal more of practical wisdom in it
than might appear at first sight.”"" He then

1 “ Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research,” Vol. x,
Pp. 4; Mr. Balfour is here speaking of mesmerism, but the re-
marks equally apply to Spiritualism.

28 Chapter III .

proceeds to show that as no nation or age
can do more than the special work which
lies before it at the time, so natural science,
during its comparatively short life, has had
enough to do in building up the whole body
of the natural and experimental sciences,
which within the last century have been
reconstructed from top to bottom. ‘‘If science
had at first attempted to include in its survey
not only physical but psychical phenomena,
it might for a century have lost itself in
dark and difficult regions, and the work of
science to-day would then have been less,
not more, complete.”

I quite agree with this. Not only had our
knowledge of nature to be first learnt, but the
foundation of our ‘scientific faith in the un-
deviating ordev of nature had also to be laid
by the investigation of the laws of matter and
motion and the discovery of the orderly
evolution of life. What science has ‘now
established, and holds as ,eternally true, is
that the universe is a cosmos, not a chaos,
that amidst all the mutability of visible
things there is no capriciousness, no disorder ;
that in the interpretation of nature, however
entangled or obscure the phenomena may be,
we shall never be put to intellectual confusion.

The magnificent procession of phenomena in
the midst of which we stand ;~the realms and
. magnitudes above us, too vast for the mind

Scientific Objections 29

to grasp; the molecules and movements
around us, too minute or too rapid for the
-eye to see or the mind to conceive, are all
marching to the music of a Divine and Eternal
order. On this system of the orderly govern-
ment of the world, our faith:in a Supreme
Being is rooted ; and the progress of modern
Science has made this faith an integral part
of our daily life, whether we regard the
Supreme as an impersonal power or as a
beneficent Father. Now, if instead of invest-
igating natural phenomena (I use that term
in its common meaning, all phenomena are,
strictly speaking, natural, only the Deity is
supernatural)' science had first grappled with
supernormal phenomena, I doubt whether it
would have yet emerged from the abyss ;
certainly it would not have reached its present
assured belief in areign of law. For psychical
phenomena are so elusive, the causes’ so
obscure, that we need the steadying influence
of the habit of thought engendered by science
to enable us patiently and hopefully to pursue
our way.

A similar argument holds good jn relation
to religion. The seers and prophets of the
Old Testament were the statesmen and men
of science of their day : they were in advance

1 See Appendix A.

30 Chapter IIT

of the people, because their thinking was based
upon a philosophy illuminated with the
Divine idea,—the idea that through all the
strife of nature and men one eternal purpose
runs. And from Moses to Isaiah we find
them united in warning the people against
any attempts to peer into and forecast the
future, or to meddle with psychical pheno-
mena for this or any lower purpose. Divin-
ation, enchantment, witchcraft, astrology, and
sorcery were various methods of augury, or
of attempts to inflict injury on an enemy,
veiled in a cloud of mystery to impress the
beholder ; and necromancy, or the attempt to
hold communication with the dead, seems, to
have been resorted to chiefly. for the same
purpose.

These practices were condemned in un-
measured terms by the Hebrew prophets,
and this irrespective of any question as to
whether the phenomena were genuine or
merely the product of trickery and super-
stition. They were prohibited—as a study
of the whole subject undoubtedly shows—not
only, or chiefly, because they were the
practice, and part of the religious rites, of
the pagan nations around, but mainly because
they tended to obscure the Divine idea, to
weaken the supreme faith in, and reverent
worship of, the One Omnipotent Being, whom
the nation was set apart to proclaim. And

Religious Objections 31

the reason was obvious. With no knowledge
of the great world-order such as we now
Possess, the intellectual and moral sense of
the people -would only have been confounded
by these psychical phenomena.

Still worse, a sense of spiritual Confusion
would have ensued. Not only might the’
thought, the industry, and the politics of the
nation have: been hampered or paralysed by
giving heed to an oracle rather than to the
dictates of reason, but the calm unwavering
faith of the nation in an infinitely wise and
tighteous Ruler of all might have been shaken.
Instead of the ‘‘ arm of the Lord ” beyond and
above thei? a motley crowd of pious, lying,
vain, or jibbering spirits would have peopled
the unseen ; and’ weatiness, perplexity, and,
finally, despair would have enervated and
“destroyed the nation. As a learned and
suggestive theologian has said : “‘ Augury and
divination wearied a people’s intellect, stunted
their enterprise, distorted their conscience.
Isaiah saw this and warned -the people:

‘Thy spells and enchantments ‘with which
thou hast wearicd thyself ‘have led thee
astray.’ And in later years, Juvenal’s strong
Conscience expressed the same sense of the
Wearisomeness and waste of time of ,these
Practices.’”*

1 Principal Sir G. A. Smith's ‘‘ Isaiah,” Vol. I., p. 199.”

32 Chapter II

With these feelings many of us can sympa-
thise, as we have felt much the same in the
quest of these elusive phenomena. , But be-
yond this weariness, which in the search
for truth we must endure, the. perils which
beset the ancient world in the pursuit of
psychical knowledge do not apply to ‘scientific
investigation to-day, which is based on the
acknowledged omnipresence of order.

The aversion that undoubtedly still exists
among many Christian men and women to the
whole scope of these enquiries is based, I
believe, partly upon the «warnings contained
in the Scriptures, to which I have alluded,
and partly upon the more general ground that.
our investigations are an attempt to force an
illegitimate entrance into the spiritual realm,
a presumptuous effort to draw aside the veil,
which both Scripture and our most sacred
feelings ‘have closed over the portals of death.
’ What can we reply to this? JI think the’
feeling largely arises from a misconception of
the position. I have already dealt with the
ground upon which those magnificent men,
the Jewish prophets, so strenuously forbade
all psychical inquiry—-grounds most wise and
‘rational then, but inapplicable now. In the
New Testament the condition, to some extent,
changes ; unmistakable watnings are uttered
of the spiritual dissipation and danger which

Religious Objections 33

the early Christians would suffer if they
allowed their religion to be degraded by the
Spiritual thaumaturgy still prevalent among
neighbouring nations. -

.The civilised world of that time believed in
the existence of spirits in the air, and the
illuminated spiritual insight of the Apostles
saw (and I, for one, believe we shall all see this
more clearly as our knowledge grows) that the
unseen around us is tenanted by many
Spiritual creatures whose influence is some-
times good and sometimes evil. Hence aa
apostolic injunction ‘ to try the spirits,’
use our moral judgment and not be led sey
by the foolish but common notion that every
communication that comes from the unseen
is good and worthy of.credence. In fact the
meSsages often spring from, and are invariably
influenced by, the medium’s own sub-conscious
life.

Moteover, the Apostle ‘saw clearly, as
every Christian sees, that the foundation of
religious life, which consisted of faith in a
risen Lord, is seriously imperilled when the
seen is substituted for the unseen, the phan-
tasms of the spiritualistic séance for the
realities of the Kingdom of Heaven, which
Cometh not with observation.

The same peril exists to-day, and always
Willexist. This every thoughtful and reverent

Mind must admit, and.jit is a distinct warning.
at)

' 34 Chapter III

against making a religion of Spiritualism—
But this is not an argument against the study
of the phenomena as a branch of psychical or
psychological science. Whatever be the power
or intelligence behind these phenomena, the
fact that it manifests itself to us—that,
directly or indirectly, it impinges on our
senses, and so affects our perceptive faculties,
or can leave some permanent record of its
presence—this fact not only places Spiritual-
ism within the pale of legitimate experimental
inquiry, but invites and demands the attention
of science.

It may be that these psychical phenomena
are so elusive, depend so largely on conditions
beyond our control, such as the abtivities of
the subliminal self, or the volition of dis-
carnate agents, that we shall never arrive at
the laws that underlie them. But that need.
not prevent our observing, recording, and
classifying the phenomena, noting the physical
and psychical conditions most favourable to
their production, and the variations induced
‘by a change in these conditions. Only thus
can we hope to link the unknown to the
known,’ and so to correlate’ these obscure
phenomena with the general body of recog-
nised knowledge. Until this is done they
will remain an outstanding puzzle, and the
educated world will continue to shun them.

Part 2

CHAPTER IV

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA
-OF SPIRITUALISM

‘ Science is bound by the everlasting law of honour
to face fearlessly every problem which can fairly be
presented to it.”’—Lord Kelvin.

It is now time to turn from the somewhat
lengthy discussion in the preceding pages,
and submit some of the evidence which has
come under my own observation and has
convinced me of the genuineness of the
phenomena themselves. It is however hardly
possible to convey to others who have not
had a similar experience an adequate idea of
the strength and cumulative force of the
evidence that has compelled one’s own belief.

Unfortunately, where there is good coin
‘there is also false, and Spiritualism has suffered
from atfraudulent imitation trading on the

Credulity of the ignorant or uncritical. In a
35

36 Chapter IV

paper’ I contributed to the proceedings of the
Society for Psychical Research in 1886 I
stated that “‘ reviewing the numerous séances
I have attended with different private and
professional mediums during the last 15 years ©
J find that by far the larger part otf the results
obtained had absolutely no‘evidential value
in favour of Spiritualism ; either the condition
of total darkness forbade any trustworthy
conclusions, or the results were nothing more
than could be explained by a low order of
juggling. A few cases, however, stand out as
exceptions.” These I proceeded to cite, and
will here give the substance of two of them,
as they offer, in-my opinion, unexceptionable '
evidence of what has been called the ‘ physical
phenomena’ of Spiritualism,—that is to say,
the movement of objects, raps and other
sounds displaying an unseen intelligence,
for which no jmormal explanation can be
found.

‘For these manifestations Mr. Myers has
suggested the term telekinetic, as spiritualistic
is a question-begging expression, for they
afford in themselves no evidence of the survival
of human personality after death. As a rule
they are grotesque and meaningless, it is only

1“ Proceedings, Society for Psychical Research,’’ Vol. IV, p. 28.

See Appendix B, where I have reprinted a note on this paper
which was written by that distinguished and far-seeing scientific
man the late Professor Balfour Stewart.

4

Physical Phenomena a9

when the content of some of the messages
that are conveyed by telekinesis are examined,
that any slight and dubious evidence is found
of another personality than that of the
‘medium. The main question is the genwtne-
ness of telekinesis itself.

It is therefore important to note that not
only did the phenomena I am about to
describe take place either in broad daylight
or in sufficient artificial light to enable me to
detect any fraud, had such been attempted,
but there were no paid or professional mediums
present, and the sittings were held in any
place I selected and even in my own house ;
notes were taken at the time of the sittings,
or shortly after.’

The first case I will cite occurred when I
was, writing an article giving reasons for the
opinion expressed in a paper I read before
the British Association in 7876, that where
fraud did not explain these physical pheno-
mena, and the observers were men of un-
impeachable integrity and competence, such
as Sir W. Crookes and Professor De Morgan,
the witnesses thought they saw what they
describe, owing to mal-observation or some
hallucination of the senses such ‘as occurs in
incipient hypnosis. In fact I began the whole
investigation of these phenomena convinced
that this was their true explanation, and it.

38 Chapter IV

was not until after stretching this hypothesis
to illegitimate lengths that I found the actual
facts completely shattered my theory.

An English solicitor of high standing,
Mr. C., had taken for the summer season the
suburban residence of a friend of mine, not
far from my own house in Kingstown, Co.
Dublin. Upon making Mr. C.’s acquaintance
I was surprised to find that he had in his own
family what appeared to be spiritualistic
phenomena then and there going on. They .
were not spiritualists and were puzzled and
somewhat annoyed by the raps and other
inexplicable noises that frequently occurred
when theit daughter Florrie was present—a
frank, intelligent child at that time about
ten years old. They naturally thought their
young daughter was playing some childish
tricks, but they soon cenvinced themselves
this was impossible. The governess com-
plained of rappings in different parts of the
school room whenever Florrie was idle, and
the music mistress asserted that often loud
raps would come inside the piano, when Florrie
was listlessly playing her scales.

Mr. and Mrs. C. gladly acceded to my
request for a personal investigation, and I
came the next day after breakfast. It was
10 o'clock and a bright summer morhing—
Mr. and Mis. C. with Florrie and myself, no
one else present, sat at a large dining table,

Physical Phenomena 39

with no cloth on, and the French windows
opening on to the lawn, let in a flood of
sunlight, so that the sitters hands and feet
could be perfectly -well seen. A scraping
sound was soon heard, then raps, sometimes
on the tabla, sometimes on\the backs of our
chairs. Florrie’s hands and feet were closely
watched, they were absolutely motionless
when the sounds, which rapidly grew in loud-
ness, were heard. The noise was exactly
such as would be made by hammering small
nails into the floor, and my first thought was
that some carpenters were in the room above
or below, but on examination no one was,
there. We found the raps grew in intensity
when a merry song was struck up, or music
was played ; the raps in a most amusing way
keeping time with the music, occasionally
changing to a loud rhythmic scraping, as if
the bow of a ’cello were drawn on a piece of
wood. Again and again | placed my ear on
the very spot whence this rough fiddling
appeared to proceed and felt distinctly the
rhythmic vibration going on in the table, but
no tangible cause was visible either above or
below the table.

Doubts have been suggested as to the possi-
bility of localising sounds ; with some kinds
of sounds this is difficult, but direct experi-
ments which I made for this purpose showed
that when blindfolded most people can pretty

40 Chapter IV

accurately locate the position of sounds such
as I heard on this occasion.

Sometimes the raps travelled away and
were heard in different parts of the room out
of reach of anyone present. On one occasion
I asked for the raps to come on a small table
near ine, which Florrie was not touching,
they did so ; I thert placed one of my hands
on the upper and the other on the under
surface of the table, and in this position I felt
the slight jarring made by the raps on the
part of the table enclosed between my hands.
It made no difference whether -Florrie and I
were alone in the room, as was often the case,
or other observers were called in. This latter
was done occasionally when the raps were going
on, to test my hallucination theéry, but every-
one- heard the sounds.

The alphabet was slowly repeated and
questions were answered by the wnseen
intelligence giving q¢ rap when the right letter
was arrived at. In this way we were told
the communicator was a lad named ‘ Walter
Hussey,’ and Mrs. C. later. on told me that
frequently when she went to her child’s
bedroom to say good-night to her daughter,
she heard raps going on and Florrie having.
an animated conversation with her invisible
companion, the alphabet being rapidly spelt
over and raps occurring at the right letters.
I took down some ofthe answers obtained

Physical Phenomena 4!

by means of the alphabet, they were just such
as the child herself would have given, merry
and meaningless, the unseen intelligence
corresponded to that of the'child and to my
surprise the spelling was also that of the child !
For upon asking Florrie to write down some
words that had occurred in, the messages, the
same childish mis-spelling occurred.

Of course the sceptic will say the whole
thing was due to a clever child, who enjoyed
bamboozling a professor. The sceptic is quite
welcome to hold this opinion if it pleases him.
All I can say is that after some weeks searching
investigation every theory propounded by
myself and by my sceptical friends—some of
whom were allowed to join in the enquiry—
caused me and my friends likewise, to abandon
all preconceived theories of fraud and illusion
and mal-observation. The phenomena were
inexplicable except on the supposition of an
unseen intelligence like or actually that of the
child. But the: force that was sometimes
exerted far exceeded that which the child
could exert. Movements of fumiture occasion-.
ally took place. On one occasion in_ full
sunlight when seated with Mr. and Mrs. C.
and Florrie at the large mahogany dining
table, big enough to seat twelve at dinner,
all our fingers visibly resting on the’top of
the table, suddenly three legs of the table
deliberately rose off the floor to a height

42 Chapter IV

sufficient to enable me to put my foot beneath
the castors. Let anyone try to imitate this
by using all the muscular force he possesses,
and he will find, as I did, that even allowing
the hands to grasp the table, which those
present did not attempt to do, the feat can
only be done with difficulty and practice by
a strong man.

To test a favourite anatomical theory that
the raps were due to a trick which the medium
might have acquired of slipping the toe or knee
joints partially in and out with a click, I asked
Florrie to put her hands flat against the wall
and to see whether, when I did the same, she
could stretch out her feet away from the wall
as far as I could, pretending it was a new game
between us. When we were both in this
‘strained position, and any muscular move-
ment of the limbs impossible, I asked ‘Walter ’
if he was amused at our game; instantly a
brisk pattering of raps came in the room, the
child’s hands and feet being absolutely motion-
‘ less, while no one but Florrie and myself were
presentinthe room. ‘Trickery by the servants
was out of the question, in fact Mr. C. told me
that: when he was out of doors with his
‘ daughter he had obtained raps on the handle
of his umbrella.

After the family had returned to England
Mrs. C. informed me that the phenomena died
away and they were very glad as they feared

Physical Phenomena 43

the health of their daughter might have
suffered, but so far no injury whatever had
occurred. “ Of the genuineness of the pheno-
mena (Mrs. C. wrote) I never had the slightest
doubt, then or now.” ‘The manifestations,
they informed me, were often more .violent
than any I had witnessed and always of a
meaningless or frivolous nature.

Let me now narrate a second case where
the medium was an adult, a lady who lived
with the family of her cousin, a leading
photographer in Dublin. I will call her
Miss l,.; needless to say she was neither a
paid nor a professional medium, and I was
greatly indebted to Mr. and Miss L. for
giving me every opportunity to investigate the
Phenomena, often at considerable inconveni-
ence to themselves. None of the sittings were
in darkness ; when held in the evening there
was sufficient gas light to enable me to read
small print, and of course to see any movement
on the part of those present. On one occasion,
only Mr. L., Miss L. and myself being present,
loud raps, which quite startled me, were given _
on the table at which we sat, and when I
asked the unseen visitor to rap the number
of fingers I held open, my hand being held
out of sight and the opened fingers unseen by
anyone, the correct number was rapped out ;
this was done twice. Knocks came in answer

44 Chapter IV

to my request, when we all removed our
hands and withdrew a short distance from the
table.

Whilst the hands and feet of all were clearly
visible and no one touching the table it sidled
about in an uneasy manner. It was a four-
legged table, some 4 feet square and heavy.
In obedience to my request, first the two legs
nearest me and then the two hinder legs rose
8 or 10 inches completely off the ground and
thus remained a few moments ; not a person
touched the table the whole time. I with-
_ drew my chair further, and the table then
moved towards me,—Mr. and Miss L. not
touching ‘the table at all,—finally the table
came up to the arm chair in which I sat and
imprisoned me in my seat. When thus under
my very nose the table rose repeatedly, and
enabled me to be perfectly sure, by the
evidence of touch, that. it was quite off the
ground and that rio human being had any part
in this or the other movements. -To suppose
that the table was moved by invisible and
non-existent threads, worked by.an imaginary
accomplice, who must have floated in the air
unseen, is a conjecture which sceptics are at
liberty to make if they, choose.

Subsequently at my request Mr. and Miss L.
‘came to mry house at Kingstown, which they
had never visited ,before, and we three had
a sitting in the afternoon, with plenty of

Physical Phenomena 45

daylight enabling me to see everything in the
room. After a short time raps, varying from
faint ticks to loud percussive sounds, were
heard, not muffled sounds as would be made
by the feet in the carpeted room, but clear
and distinct, and not the slightest movement
of the hands or feet of any of the three present
could be seen. Suddenly, the tips of our
fingers only being on the table, the heavy loo
table at which-we sat began a series of
prancing movements; so violently did the
claws of the table strike the floor that I had
to stop the performance fearing for the safety
of the chandelier in the room below. I tried
to imitate this movement afterwards and
found it could only be done by a persor
using both hands and all his strength. ;
As in the previous case the messages that
‘were spelt out were just such as the medium,
who was a Methodist, would have given,
serious and pious platitudes.

The foregoing were among my earliest
experiences of the physical phenomena of
Spiritualism, and taken along with my later
experience and the evidence of others to which
I will refer presently, left no shadow of doubt
on my mind of the super-normal character
of the manifestations. I will now briefly
narrate my latest experience which occurred
only a few months ago, Christmas 1915.

46 Chapter. IV

In the following case I was indebted for
my introduction to the sitting to Dr. Crawford
—lecturer on Mechanical Engineering at the
Queen’s University and at the Technical
College, Belfast, a trained scientific man hold-
ing the D.Sc. degree. Dr. Crawford had for
some months been investigating the remark-
able physical phenomena that occurred in a
small family circle of highly respectable and
intelligent working people in Belfast. The
medium was the eldest daughter of the family,
a girl, Kathleen, of some 17 years. The
family had become interested ih Spiritualism
and had sat regularly one or two evenings a
week for a year or more, to see if they could
obtain any evidence of survival after bodily
death. They made a sort of religious cere-
mony of their sittings, always opening with
prayer and hymns, and when at last pheno-
mena came, their unseen visitors were greeted
with delight and respect. Obviously they
were uncritical, simple, honest, kind hearted
people ; Dr. Crawford having assured himself
they had no pecuniary or other motive such as
notoriety to gain, was allowed and indeed
welcomed to make a searching and critical
investigation. ‘This he did, devising elaborate:
and ingenious apparatus to test the pheno-
mena, which he describes in a work he has
recently published. Inter alia he found that
the weight of, the medium increased as the

Physical Phenomena 47

amount of the weight of the table or other
object which was levitated had decreased.

I was permitted to have an evenjng sitting
with the family, Dr. Crawford accompanying
me. We sat outside the small family circle ;
the room was illumimated with a bright gas
flame burning in a lantern, with a. large red
glass window, on the mantelpiece. The roonr
was small and as our eyes got accustomed to’
the light we could see all the sitters clearly.
They sat round a small table with hands
joined together, but no one touching the table.
Very soon knocks came and messages were
spelt out as ohe of us repeated the alphabet
aloud. Suddenly the knocks increased in
‘violence, and being encouraged, a tremendous
bang came which shook the room and re-
sembled the blow of a sledge hammer on an
anvil. A tin trumpet which ‘had been placed
below ‘the table now poked out its smaller end
close under the top of the table near where
I was sitting. I was allowed to try and catch
it, but it dodged all my attempts in the most
amusing way, the medium on the opposite side
sat perfectly still, while at my request all held
up their joined hands so that I could ‘see no
one was touching the trumpet, as it played
peep-bo with me. Sounds like the sawing of
wood, the bouncing of a ball and other noises
occurred, which were inexplicable.

Then the table began to rise from the floor

48 Chapter IV

some 18 inches and remained so suspended and
quite level. I was allowed to go up to the
table and saw clearly no one was touching it,
a clear space separating the sitters from the
table. I tried to press the table down, and
though I exerted all my strength could not do
so; then I climbed up on the table and sat
on it, my feet off the floor, when I was swayed
to and fro and finally tipped off. The table
of its own accord now turned upside down,
no one touching it, and I tried to lift it off
the ground, but it could not be stirred, it
appeared screwed down to the floor. At my
request all the sitters’ clasped hands had been
kept raised above their heads, and I could
see that no one was touching thé table ;—
when I desisted from trying to lift the inverted
table from the floor, it righted itself again
of its own accord, no one helping it. Numerous
sounds displaying an amused intelligence then
came, and after each individual present had
been greeted with some farewell raps the
sitting ended.

It is difficult to imagine how the cleverest
conjurer with elaborate apparatus could have
performed “what I have described ; here were
a simple family group of earnest seekers, on
whose privacy I had intruded and who had
suffered, Dr. Crawford for 4 months or more
to put them to the greatest inconvenience
without any remuneration whatever, -

Physical Phenomena 49

But it is.the cumulative force of the evidence
coming from different places and different
witnesses, some of which will be given in the.
next chapter, that carries conviction. The
objection as to the foolish and meaningless
character of the phenomena will be met later,
here I will only ask my readers to imagine
how a dumb and invisible visitor coming to
a house at night would try to attract the
attention of the inmates; his efforts to com-
municate would be not unlike the knockings
and sounds made by these unseen visitants.
That there is an unseen intelligence behind
these manifestations is all we can say, but
that is a tremendous assertion, and if admitted |
destroys the whole basis of materialism.

I am not so foolish as to suppose anything
I can say will make an appreciable difference
in public opinion, or that my testimony is
superior to, or ought to have more weight
attached to it, than that of several other
observers. But it will, I hope, lead other
witnesses to come forward and relate any
unexceptionable evidence they possess, until
‘“‘we drive the objector into being forced to
admit the phenomena as inexplicable, at least
by him, or to accuse the investigators either .
of lying, cheating, or of a blindness or forgetful-
ness incompatible with ‘any intellectual
condition except absoluté idiocy.”

It is true that much of what passes as evid-

E

50 Chapter IV

ence among certain Spiritualists has no claim
to this distinction, and is only evidence of the
difficulty of preserving a sound judgment and
uninterrupted attention when dealing with
these obscure phenomena. Nor is this to be
wondered at. When any of us have obtained
what we deem conclusive proof of some
amazing occurrence, and are thereby con-
vinced, we are all apt to relax the stringency
of our inquiry, and accept as corroborative
evidence what to an unconvinced outsider
may seem capable of quite a different and
more familiar explanation. At the outset we
all start from very much the same level ;
some, of course, are worse observers than
others : some jump to conclusions too readily,
their judgment is less valuable; but the
uniformity of the laws of nature is the common
experience of mankind, and the man who tells
us his gooseberry bush is bearing cucumbers
does not expect to be believed until he can
verify so outrageous a statement.

CHAPTER V
PHYSICAL PHENOMENA CONTINUED

‘In saying that a marvel is contrary to experience
we can mean no more than that it is unlike previous
experience; or rather that it is unlike that portion of
experience which has been collected, handed down,
and systematised by competent persons. But this only
means that it is entirely novel and strange: and the
greater the marvel the better must be the testimony
{on its behalf].”—Henry Sidgwick.

LET us now turn to,some of the undeniable
evidence of similar supef-normal phenomena
that has been obtained by other witnesses.
In the most searching examination of: this
subject which has ever been undertaken,
Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, Litt.D., in a paper
published in the Proceedings of the Psychical
Research Society for 1886,' states her own
conviction that ‘‘ notwithstanding the absence
of what may be called crucial evidence for the
existence of these physical phenomena beyond
the recognised laws of nature, there is still
sorhe evidence which ought not to be set
\ ®
\ ‘* Proceedings S, P. R.,’’ Vol. IV, p. 72, et seq.
5!

52 Chapter: V

aside, and affords a prima’ facie case for
further investigation.” Mrs. Sidgwick then
cites in illustratign the Count de Gasparin’s
careful experiments with his own family and
friends on the movement of tables -without
contact, published by him in Paris in 1854;
also the evidence for similar phenomena obtain-
ed by a committee of the Dialectical Society
in 1870; Sir W. Crookes experiments with D.
D. Home, published in the Quarterly Journal
of Science, ndon 1874, and the Rev. Stain-
ton Moses’ account of phenomena occurring
through his own mediumship about the same
period.

Mrs. Sidgwick has been unfortunate’ in
her own protracted experience with pro-
fessional mediums, but nevertheless states
“it is not because I disbelieve in the physical
phenomena of spiritualism, but because I
think it more probable than not that such
things occasionally occur, that I am interested
in estimating the evidence for them.” ‘There
is not a single sceptic in the world who has
devoted as many hours’ to this enquiry as
Mrs. Sidgwick has given years, and I doubt
if there exists a more competent critical and
cautious investigator than this distinguished.
lady. Had she been fortunate enough to
witness what.I have described in the previous
chapter, ‘or to have had any sittings with
D.‘D. Home, her opinion, I venture to think,

Physical Phenomena, continued 53

would have been not very different from my
own.

The London‘ Dialectical Society consisted
of some well-known professional men, and in
1870 they published the report of a special
committee appointed to investigate these
-so-called , physical phenomena. They state
no paid mediums were employed, the psychics
tested being persons of good social position
and integrity who had no pecuniary interest.
to serve. The Committee report the fre-
quent’, odcurrence of raps showing unseen
intelligence, and the movement of solid objects
without any visible or known cause. On one
accasion the committee knelt on chairs placed
arouhd, and about a foot away from, a large
mahogany dining table, the hands of each
person held' behind his back ; under these
conditions in full light distinct movements of
the table occurred several times and swayed
about in one direction or another without
contact or the possibility of contact with any
person present. Raps also occurred on the
floor and on the table in answer to request.!

This report mentions many other remark-
able super-normal phenomena, but it is
needless to go into further detail, for these
results, and those that I have witnessed, came
far short of what Sir W. Crookes obtained in
= own laboratory, under the most stringent

“Report of the area Society * (Burns & Co., London),
P- 391-

4 Chapter V

Ht

conditions {that his unrivalled experimental
skill could devise. .

Sir Wm] Crookes asserts that his experi-
ments demonstrate the, occurrence of the
following phenomena inexplicable by any

Own agehcy :—

(t) Raps add percussive sounds varying in loudness
from afmere tick to loud thuds, which appeared
ty be caused by an unseen intelligent operator.

(2) The moYement both of small and light, as well as
large and heavy, bodies without visible cause
of the ebntact of any human being.

(3) The altefatioh in the weight of bodies.

(4) The levitation of heavy objects without contact -
with any person ; on threé occasions he saw the
medium; D. D. Home, raised completely off the

a2tgund in good light no one touching him.

(s) Musical instruments played without human inter-
vention, and under conditions rendering them
impossible to be played by normal means.

(6) Luminous appearances; more than once he _-

affirms that under strict test conditions he has
seen a luminous cloud appear, which condensed
into’ the shape of a perfectly formed hand, that
presently faded away.

(7) Intelligent messages written by unseen hands,—
“ direct writing ” as it is termed.

(8) Handling red hot coals and placing the hand in
a blazing fire without any injury. :

(9) Most astonishing of all, phantom forms and faces
have appeared, and, under elabbrate test con-
ditions a materialized and beautiful female figure
several times appeared, clothed in a white robe,

Physical Phenomena, continued 55,

so real that not only was its pulse taken but: it
was repeatedly photographed, sometimes by the
aid ‘of the electric arc light, and on one occasion
simultaneously with ,and beside the entranced
nedium, who was plainer, darker, and consider-
‘ably smaller than the’ preternatural Visitant, the
latter coming into and vanishing from a previously
searched, closed, locked room in Mr.: Crookes
own house.

Since these almost incrédible, phenomena
occurred (many of them witnessed not only
by Mr.—now Sir Wm.—Crookes’ own family,
but also by other persons) I haye been assured
by Sir William that no, subsequent criticism
has failed to shake his opinion of their super-
normal character, ‘the elaborate precautions
he took preventing tlte possibility of any
fraud. Moreover, /Sir Wm. Crookes in his
Presidential address to the British Association
in 1898 had the courage to’ state in reference
to these investigations he had -nothing to
retract and that he adhered to the statements
he had published.

What can be said of these miracles? They
are so foreign to ordinary experience that
one naturally thinks .the observer was a
victim of hallucination or of some clever trick.
In a paper I published jointly with Mr. F. W.
H. Myers in 1889 we said that on general
principles the testimony of no single savant,

56 Chapter V

however eminent, could compel general belief
in phenomena so incredible, if they remained
unattested by other trustworthy investigators.
Now as regards* nearly all the phenomena
described by Sir W. Crookes this additional
testimony has been forthcoming.

For example, an able investigator, Professor
Alexander of Rio de Janeiro; published in the
“Proceedings of the Society for Psychical
Research ”’ for July, 1891, the details of some
carefully conducted experiments he had made
which authenticate some of the things attested
by Sir Wm. Crookes. In Professor Alexander’s
case the medium was one or other of two ‘little
gitls, daughters of a friend of his, and here,
not only did the movement of heavy objects
by unseen intelligences occur, but “ direct
writing,’’ under test conditions, took place
_in full lamplight; an unseen hand wrote
messages on a slate, touched by the child’s
fingers only, the writing being far superior
in execution to the childish hand-writing of the
medium. Then luminous appearances pre-
sented themselves, at first a flitting, playful
light, then growing in definiteness till a form
was said to be seen by the little mediums,
though ‘not by others present. The clairvoy-.
ance was apparently shared by a dog, who
gazed upward and barked at the figure, and
at another time shared by a baby, who, gazing
with astonishment, and pointing to an unseen

Physical Phenomena, continued 57

figure, called, “‘ Man, man,” and at last said,
“All gone!’ Unseén hands were felt by
all the sitters,«caressing those present, and
eventually the imprint of a tiny baby foot,
far smaller than that belonging to ariy of the
sitters present, was obtained on a school slate,
over which a coating of flour had been spread.
This brief narrative gives an imperfect deés-
cription of-the phenomena dbtained and the
precautions taken, by Professor Alexander,
but it is enough to show that independent and
‘able investigators in different parts of the’
world, with dffferent psychics, have obtained
similar extraordinary results.!

By far the most remarkable psychic or
“medium ’ whose powers have ever been
investigated was Mr. D. D. Home, with whom
many of Sir W. Crookes’ experiments were
made. Both Mr. F. W. H. Myers and myself
devoted. considerable time to examining the
evidence on. behalf of his’ super-normal gifts,
and also the charges of fraud brought against
him ; we found plenty of rumours of trickery

\

*1 The question whether the whole of the phenomena may not be
explained away by ascribing to every witness gross and persistent
exaggeration may be dismissed, as it cannot be seriously main-
tained ; neither is it possible to sustain an explanation founded on
a system of laborious and disinterested deception, though isolated
cases of this kind are known. _ Professor Sidgwick has dealt with
this point (‘‘ Journal of the Society for Psychical Research,”’ July,
1894), and, moreover, such actors not only shrink from scientific
scrutiny, but sooner or later get tired of their motiveless decep-
tion, or their fraud comes té light.

58 Chapter V

but’ no conviction of fraud. Robert Brown-
ing’s poem ‘Sludge the Medium,” which
was supposed to express Hissopinion about
Home, may possibly have been written
to discount Mrs. Barrett Browning’s enthu-
siastic conversion to Spiritualism. Mr. Myers
knéw Browning personally, and he asked the
poet what foundation there was for his bad opin-
ion of Home; Browning replied that he once
heard a lady (since dead) tell him that another
lady, also deceased, told her, that Home was
once found in the act of experimenting with
phosphorus in order to produce * spirit lights.’
Of this third hand story we could find no
written or any other confirmation whatever,
it was an old story when Browning heard it,
and probably originated,—like other gossip
we hawe traced to its source,—in someone
saying ‘‘Home must have produced these
spirit lights with phosphorized oil rubbed on
his hands,”’ a pure assumption for which we
could not find a particle of evidence.!

,

2 Another charge against Home's character was that he had by
fraudulent means persuaded a Mrs. Lyon to leave him her
property, a case which led to litigation that went against Home.
This case we submitted to a high legal expert, who wrote that
whether it was to Home’s discredit or not rests on one’s belief
in the reality of the communications purporting to ‘come from
Mrs, Lyon's deceased husband, who urged the gift, Mr. W. M.
Wilkinson, an eminent and upright lawyer, and other witnesses
in the case declared that Mrs. Lyon made the gift to Home of
her own free will, and independent of ahy unfair influence from
Home. But in any case this litigation has no bearing on the
reality of Home’s paychie powers.

Physical Phenomena, continued 59

In fact, Home courted the fullest enquiry,
and made no objection to the stringent tests
often imposed. «I “quite agree with what Sir
William Crookes has said, though I never had
the opportunity of meeting Home :—

“JT think it is a cruel thing that a man like D. D.
Home, gifted with such extraordinary powers, and
always willing, nay, anxious, to place himself at the
disposal of men of science for investigation, should
have lived so many years in London, and with one or
two exceptions no one of weight in the scientific world
should have thought it worth while to look into the
truth or falsity of things which were being talked
about in society on all sides. To those who knew
him Home was one of the most lovable of men, and
his perfect genuineness and uprightness were psyene
suspicion.’

In the report which Mr. Myers and the
present writer published in the ‘ ‘ Journal of
the Society for Psychical Research ’’ for July,
1889, we gave several first-hand accounts of
the marvellous phenomena witnessed by our.
informants in the presence of Home.

I will first quote the evidence given to me
by my friends the late General and Mrs.
Boldero, neither of whom were Spiritualists.
Notes of what took place had been written
down by my friends and the evidence was
given to me verbaliy and independently by

60 Chapter V

each observer. Home had been staying with
the late Lord Dunraven,—who published for
private circulation a small book giving an
account of the marvellous phenomena he had
witnessed in Home’s presence,—and had
never before visited the house where Genetal,
then Colonel, Boldero was staying in Scotland,
where he held a high military appointment.
Here is the account given to me by General.
Boldero :—

“It was at. the end of February, 1870, that Home
came to visit me by invitation, at my house in Coupar,
Fife. He arrived immediately before dinner, and
after dinner we, Mrs. Boldero, Home, and myself, sat
in the drawing-room for any manifestations that
might occur. The room was quite light, the gas being
lighted, and a bright fire burning. Home sat with
his back to the fire, at a small table, with a cloth on it.
I was opposite to him, and Mrs. Boldero was on his
right hand. A piano and Mrs. Boldero’s harp were
at the end of the drawing-room some roft. or 12{t.
away.

“Almost immediately some remarkable manifestations
occurred ; in a little while the table moved towards
the piano.” I saw a hand come out on my side from
under the table, pushing out the table-cloth and.
striking notes on the pidno. Afterwards I saw a
whole hand as far as the wrist appear without the
tablecloth and strike the notes, playing some chords
on the piano. At this time Hame was some distance

’ off, and it was physically impossible for him to have
struck the piano. It was equally impossible for him

‘

Physical Phenomena, continued 61

to have used his foot fot the purpose. I was perfectly
confident at the time and am now that trickery on the
part of Home was out of the question. After that
some chords were faintly struck on the harp standing
immediately behind me. Weasked for them to play
louder, and a reply came by raps, ‘We have not
power.’ Then voices were heard speaking together
in the room, two different persons, judging from the
intonation. We could not make out the words spoken,
as Home persisted in speaking to us all the time.
We remonstrated with him far speaking, and he replied,
‘I spoke purposely that you might be convinced the
voices were not due to any ventriloquism on my part,
as this is impossible when anyone is speaking in his
natural voice.’ Home’s voice was quite unlike that
of the voices heard in the air.”

The differences and similarities in the
account given by husband and wife are
instructive. ‘On my reading to him the
following account given me by Mrs. Boldero,
the General said that where there was a
difference his wife’s account was probably
the more correct. Mrs. Boldero said :—

“On February 28th, 1870, Home artived at our
house shortly before dinner. After dinner we agreed
to sit in the drawing-room at a square card-table near
the fire. In a few minutes, a cold draught of air was
felt on our hands and knockings occurred. Several
messages of no consequence came, questions . being

‘ asked and answered. I was exhorted to pray more.
A rustling of dresses was heard, as of a stiff silk dress

62 Chapter V

in the room. (General Boldero recollects this also.]
My gold bracelet was unclasped whilst my hands were
on the table, and fell upon the floor. [General Boldero
agrees to this.] My dress was pulled several times.
I think I asked if the piano could be played ; it stood
at least r2ft. or r4ft, away from us. Almost at once
the softest music sounded. I went up to the piano
and opened it.’ J then saw the keys depressed, but
no one playing. I stood by its side and watched it,
hearing the most lovely chords; the keys seemed to
be struck by some invisible hands ; all this time Home

' was far distant from the piano. Then a faint sound
was heard upon my harp, as of'the wind blowing over
itsstrings. I asked if it could be played louder ; an
answer came, there was insufficient power.

“Later on in the evening, we distinctly heard two
voices talking together in the room ; the voices appeared
to come from opposite corners, near the ceiling, arid
apparently proceeded from a man and child, but we

‘could not distinguish the words. They sounded far
off. Home was talking the whole time the voices
were heard, and gave as his reason that he might not
be accused of ventiiloquism. During the whole of
this séance, the whole room seemed to be alive with
something, and I remember thinking that no manifest-
ation would surprise me, feeling that the power, present
could produce anything. Home himself remarked
that he had rarely had so satisfactory a séance.

‘Throughout, Home seemed to be intensely, and very
genuinely, interested in the whole séance. I am
perfectly sure that Home could not possibly have
played the piano himself ; -his touching it was wholly
out of the question. General Boldero saw a hand
playing on the piano, but I did not see this.”

Physical Phenomena, continued — 63:

General Boldero also informed me that
at another séance with Home he saw a large
round table, on the top of which the sitters
hands were placed, rise completely off the
ground to a height‘as great, as the upstretched
arms of the sitters would allow and then the
table gently descended. At another time
the table, on which were glasses and a lamp,
tilted to such an angle that ordinarily ever-
thing would have fallen off, but they remained
undisturbed. A similar incident has been
witnessed at other places by other persons ;
thus the Rector of Edmonthorpe, ‘Rutland,
the late Rev. H. Douglas, a man of acute and
scholarly mind and keen intelligence, writes
that at a sitting with Home in Lady Poulett’s
house in London: ‘‘ We all saw the supper
table on which there was a quantity of glass
and china full of good things, rise to an angle of
45 degrees, I should say, without anything
slipping in the least, and then it relapsed to its
normal position.” My friends the late Lord
and Lady Mount Temple were present on this
occasion and they confirmed not only the
story, but gave me an account of many other
weird phenomena they had witnessed with
Home. . ;

The late Major-General Drayson, R.E.,
gave me in writing some of his experiences
with Home: he said he had had, more than
50 sittings with Homie, and though at first

64 Chapter V

absolutely incredulous, was soon convinced
of the genuineness of the amazing phenomena
he had witnessed, as Home gave him every
opportunity for close investigation. General
Drayson says: ‘‘I have seen tables, chairs,
boxes, &c., suddenly rise in the air, or move
from distant parts of the room to positions
close beside me ; I have heard a locked piano
in my own house play a piece of music. I
have seen in Home’s presence, at the late
Sir W. Gomm’s house, an accordion carried
round the room, playing a tune when no
visible hand held it.” General Drayson-re-
lates many other things he has witnessed and
adds, “it is of course impossible to give in
detail all tircumstances ‘which convinced me
that imposition or delusion was impossible,—
the séances being mostly in my own house,—
and finally led me to abandon my former
belief in materialism.”

It would be wearisome to quote further
from the abundant first-hand evidence of
Home’s powers‘attested by men of probity
and intelligence. - There are however two or
three extraordinary phenomena which Home
occasionally exhibited that are worthy of more
than a passing notice ; these will be discussed
in the next chapter.

This little book would extend beyond its
limits if I were to quote even selections from
the mass of first-hand evidence given ‘by

Physical Phenomena, continued 65

numerous critical observers of these ‘physical
Phenomena, and obtained through trust-
worthy mediums both in England and abroad.
I would refer specially to the able work of
Mr. Maxwell on meta-psychical phenomena
for further evidence. Before closing this
chapter it is desirable to refer to another and
less satisfactory aspect of this subject as
illustrated by the psychic Eusapia Paladino,
a paid professional medium of a very different
and much lower type than D. D. Home.

In 1894 Sir Oliver Lodge read a paper
before the Society for Psychical Research
in which he described the phenomena that
took place in his presence, and that of Professor
Charles Richet of Paris, when Eusapia was
secluded in a small island in the Mediterranean
(fle Roubaud) on which Professor Richet had
a summer residence. After a searching and
prolonged investigation, both of these savants
were convinced of the genuineness of the
phenomena that -occurred, and Sir Oliver
published the following summary of the results
witnessed :—

“The things for which I wish specially to vouch, as
being the most easily and securely observed, and as
being amply sufficient in themselves to establish a
scientifically unrecognised truth, are (always under
conditions such as to prevent normal action on the
part of the medium) :—

¥

66 Chapter V

(x) The movements of a distant chair, visible in the
moonlight, under circumstances such as to Satisfy
me that there was no direct mechanical connection.

(2) The distinct and persistent bulging and visible
movement of a window-curtain in absence of wind or
other ostensible cause.

(3) The winding-up and locomotion of the untouched
chalet. [A musical cigar-box,'shaped like a chalet.]

(4) The sounding of the notes of the untouched
accordion and piano.

(5) The turning of the key on the inside of the
sitting-room door, its removal on to the table, and
subsequent replacement in door.

(6) The audible movements and peadual inversion
of an untouched heavy table, situated behind the
medium and out of the circle; and the finding it
inverted afterwards:

(7) The visible raising of a heavy table under
conditions in: which it would be ordinarily impossible
to raise it.

(8) The appearance of blue marks on a surface
previously blank, without ostensible means of writing.

(9) The graspings, pattings, and clutchings of my
head, and arms, and back, while the head, and hands,
and feet of the medium were under complete control
and nowhere near the places touched.’”!

It is needless to add that the observers
satisfied themselves that no, other person had
any part in these occurrences,

Subsequently, a series of experiments were
made with Eusapia at Cambridge in 1895,

/
t** Journal of the S:’P. R.,”? Vol, VI, November, 1894, p- 310.

Physical Phenomena, continued 67

in which Dr. Hodgson, Professor Hy. Sidgwick,
Mr. Myers (all alas now deceased), and others‘
took part, the result being that the investi-
gators found what seemed to them clear
evidence of trickery an the part of the medium.
Still further experiments a little later on by
Professor Richet and Mr. Myers, after taking
special precautions against fraud, led to their
conviction that Eusapia had: unquestionably
super-normal ‘powers.' She was further
critically and independently tested by several
‘notable scientific men in Italy,—including the
eminent criminologist Professor Lombroso,
and the neurologist Professor Morselli, of
Genoa; these and other competent invest-
igators were convinced of the geunineness of.
the extraordinary phenomena they witnessed.
Finally, three members of the Society for
Psychical« Research specially qualified to
detect imposture, were commissioned by the
Society to investigate this notorious medium,
and they unanimously reported in favour of
the genuineness of the supernormal phenomena
they obtained.

Nevertheless, although Eusapia appears to
have these super-riormal powers, she is a
medium of a low moral type,.who has been
convicted of imposture both in England and
America and with whom therefore I should
not care to have any sittings. My reason
for referring to her at all is the notoriety

68 Chapter V

she has gained, and the instructive psycho-
jogical and moral considerations her career
affords.

I will only add that in fairness to Eusapia,
and also in corroboration of Sir Oliver Lodge’s
original report, I have given in Appendix C
a more detailed account of the favourable
results obtained through her mediumship by
the Italian investigators and others, together
with some remarks on this case which is,
I fear, too often typical of paid professional,
mediums who sit for physical phenomena.

CHAPTER VI

LEVITATION AND IMMUNITY FROM
FIRE

‘‘ There is nothing that need hinder Science from
dealing successfully with a world in which personal
forces are the starting point of new effects. .
The systematic denial on Science’s part of personality
as a condition of events . . . . may conceivably
prove to be the very defect that our descendents will
be most surprised at in our own boasted Science.’’—
Professor W. James.

Amonc the many amazing phenomena which
numerous credible, and indeed eminent,
witnesses assert that they have seen in
connection with the medium D. D. Home,
is that of his levitation or floating in the air,
like the miracle recorded of St. Teresa and
others in still more remote times. As late as
1760, Lord Elcho states that he heard, when
in Rome, witnesses swear to the levitation
of a holy man about to be canonized. The
samhe fact is recorded, Mr. A. Lang tells us, in
Buddhist and Neoplatonic writings and later

among the Red Indians, and in Tonquin,
69 .

70 Chapter VI

where in 1730 a Jesuit priest asserted he saw
this phenomena, which he describes.

In 1871 the Master of Lindsay (the late
Lord Crawford and Balcarres, F.R.S.) gave the
following evidence, which was corroborated by
the two other spectators, the late Earl of Dun-
raven (then Lord Adare) and Captain Wynne :—

fe wastsitting on- December 16th, 1868, in Lord
Adare’s rooms in * Ashley Piace, London, S.W., with
Mr. Home and Lord Adare and a cousin of his. During
the sitting, Mr. Home went into a trance, and in that

- state. was carried out of the window in the room next
to where we were, and was brought in at our window.
The distance between the windows was about seven.
feet six inches, and there was not the slightest foothold
between them, nor was there more than a twelve-inch
projection to each window, which served'as a ledge to
put flowers on. We heard the window in the next

‘yoom lifted up, and almost immediately after we saw
Home floating in the air outside our window. The
moon was shining full into the room; my back was
to the light, and I saw the shadow on the wall of the
window sill, atid Home’s feet about six inches above it.
He remained in this position fot a few seconds, then
raised the window and glided into the room feet
foremost and sat down. :

“Lord Adaré then went into the next room to look
at the window from which he had’ been carried. It
was raised about eighteen inches; and he expressed

‘his wonder how Mr. Home had been taken through so
natrow an aperture. Home said; still entranced,
‘I will show you,’ ayd then with his back to the

Levitation 71

window he leaned back and was shot out of the
aperture, head first, with the body rigid, and then
returned quite quietly. The window is about seventy
feet from the ground. ‘The hypothesis of a mechanical
arrangement of ropes or supports outside has been
suggested, but does not cover the facts as described.”

In an article in the Contemporary Review
for January, 1876, Dr. Carpenter, the eminent
physiologist, commenting on the foregoing
Says it illustrates how differently a believer
and a sceptic view the same incident: ‘A
whole party of believers will say they saw
Mr. Home float out of one window and in at
another, while a single*lronest sceptic declares
Mr. Home was sitting in his chair all the time.”
As the only person present whose testimony
was not published was Captain Wynne he was
written to, and when asked if he had contra-
dicted Lord Crawford’s statement, he replied :
“* The fact of Mr. Home having gone out of one
window and in at another I can swear to:
anyone who knows me would not for a
' moment say I was a victim to hallucination
or any other humbug of the kind.” Like
many other controversialists Dr. Carpenter
drew on his imagination for his facts in order
to support his case. *

One naturally supposes, however, that the
witnesses must have been mistaken, or suffer-
‘ing from some excitement or hallucination of

+72 Chapter VI

the senses. But it is not easy to suppose
that three educated men, to whom nothing
was said beforehand of what they might
expect to see, could all have been hallucinated
exactly in the same way: for the accounts
given by each are alike. Nor is it easy to
believe that the numerous witnesses of the
levitation of saints and others in past times
and in different countries, knowing nothing
of each other, were likewise all hallucinated ;
nor, as Mr. A. Lang says, is it “very easy
to hold that a belief—to which. the collective
evidence is so large and universal, as the
belief in levitation,—was caused by a series
of saints, sorcerers ant “others, thrusting their
head and shoulders out of a window where
the observers could not see them as one
sceptic has suggested.”

Another singular phenomenon reported in
connection with Home, as bizarre as it ‘is
unaccountable, is the enormous elongation
of his body, which sometimes occurred when
he was in a trance. The numerous witnesses
to this took every precaution to prevent them-
selves being deceived and they are unanimous
in their statement that this amazing pheno-
mena actually occurred. My friend the late
General Boldero, when Home was staying
with him in Scotland, saw this occur several
times, took exact measurements and assured

Levitation 73

me that neither deception nor hallucination

were possible. The Neo-platonists report that

a similar thing occurred in their day to certain
" possessed ’ men.

- Bewildering and inconceivable as were some
of the phenomena associated with Home’s
mediumship they were not all unparalleled.
For the Rev. Stainton Moses to whom I have
already referred, experienced levitation no
less than ‘ten times. Of Mr. Moses’ high
character,-of his sanity and probity, Mr. F.
W. H. Myers says, “neither I myself, nor so
far as I know any person acquainted with
Mr. Moses, has ever entertained a doubt.”
I knew Mr. Moses personally for many years,
and like other of his friends, I believe he was
wholly incapable of deceit. Mr. Sefjeant
Cox, not himself a Spiritualist, relates that on.
one occasion when Mr. Moses was in his hquse,
in broad daylight a large very heavy mahogany
dining table,—which required the effort of
two strong men to move,—suddenly and
violently. rocked to and fro, then it rose, or
tilted up, several inches from the floor, first
on one side and then on the other.

, Frequent loud rappings also came upon the
- table, on which there was no cloth, and the
light fell under it so that they could see no
One was concealed beneath the table. In
fact Serjeant Cox and Mr. Moses were the
only persons present'in the room, they wete

74 Chapter VI

both standing some two feet distant from the
table, one on eaclt side of it, their hands not
touching the table but held some 8 inches
over it. The whole incident was published
by Serjeant Cox, and described by him to
Mr. Fred. Myers, whose detailed report of the
marvels that occurred through Mr. S. Moses’
mediumship is worth careful perusal.’

On another occasion, when Mr. Moses was in
a friend’s house, a child’s organ on the table
was ‘lifted up and floated round the room,
playing all the time by some invisible agency.
The chair on which Mr. Moses sat was suddenly
drawn across the room, turned round so as to
face the wall, no one touching the chair ;
then, Mr. Moses himself, by the same invisible
agency, was steadily lifted up from the chair
and raised till his head was near the ceiling ;
as he was close to the wall he made a pencil
mark on it, level with his chest ; he was then
lowered into his chair again ; the height of
the, mark when measured was found to be
over six feet from the floor. All the facts
were noted at the time, and even more striking
cases of his levitation are described:; Mr.
Moses discouraged these manifestations which
however continued for some time.

To return to Home, like the youths in the’

1 ‘* Proceedings, 'S: P. R.,’? Vol. IX, pp. 245-352.

Immunity from Fire 75

Babylonian fiery furnace, Home in his trance
was uninjured by fire. Here I will quote
Mr. A. Lang, who has given much attention
to the subject of the ‘ Fire-walk ’

“ Many-persons in many ages, are said to have
handled or walked through fire, not only without
suffering pain, but without lesion of the skin.
‘Iamblichus mentions this as among the peculiarities
of his ‘ possessed ’ men ; and in ‘Modern Mythology ’
(1897) I have collected first-hand evidence for the feat
in classical times, and in India, Figi, Bulgaria, Trinidad,
the Straits Settlements, and many other places. The
evidence is that of travellers, officials, missionaries,
and others, aud is backed (for what photographic
testimony is worth) by photographs of the perform-
ance. To hold glowing coals in his hand, and to
communicate the’ power of doing so to others, was in
Home's repertoire. Lord Crawford saw it done on
eight occasions, and himself received from Home’s
hand the glowing coal unharmed. A friend of my
own, however, still bears the blister of the hurt
received in the process. Sir W. Crookes’ evidence
follows :—~

‘“‘ At Mr. Home's request, whilst he was entranced
I went with him to the fireplace in the back drawing-
room. He [the influence controlling Home], said.
‘We want you to notice particularly what Dan [i.e.
Home] is doing.’ Accordingly I stood close to the
fire, and stooped down to it when he put his hands
in. . . .*. ‘Mr. Home then waved the handker-
chief about in the air two or three times, held it above
his head, and then folded it up and laid it on his hand

76 Chapter VI

like a cushion. Putting his other hand into the fire,
he took out a large lump of cinder, red-hot at the
lower part, and placed the red part on the handker-
chief. Under ordinary circumstances it would have
been in a blaze. In about half a minute he took it off
the handkerchief with his hand, saying, ‘ As the power
is not strong, if we leave the coal longer # will burn.’
He then put it on his hand, and brought it to the table
in the front room, where all but myself had remained
seated.”’

Not only have we Sir W. Crookes’ evidence,
but a former President of the Royal Society,
the late Sir W. Huggins; O.M., witnessed the
same feat with Home and gave me a detailed
account of it. So also did Mr. S. C. Hall’ who
was present on another occasion, when a
white hot coal was put on his head and his
white hair gathered over it, but he told me
he felt no heat and his hair was wholly
uninjured.

Various other eye witnesses have informed
me that they have seen Mr. Home handle
with impunity red hot coals ; among others
a shrewd and able solicitor, the late Mr. W.
M. Wilkinson, writing to’ me from Lincoln’s
Inn’ Fields, London, states that in the \winter
of 18695— |

“T saw Mr. Home take out of our drawing-room‘
fire a red-hot coal, a little less in size than a cricket-
ball, and carry it up and down the room. He said

Immunity from Fire 77

to Lord Adare,—now Earl Dunraven,—who "was
present, ‘ Will you take it from,me? It will not hurt
you.’ Lord Adare took it from him and held it in
his hand for about half a minute, and before he threw
it back in the ‘fire I put my hand close to it and felt
the heat like that of a live coal.”

It is impossible to explain this by some
fire resisting substance, surreptitiously put over
the skin by Home, for Sir W. Crookes, than
whom no higher authority on Chemistry can
be cited, tells us he knows of no chemical
preparation that will accomplish this ; more-
Over, he says he examined Home’s hands
Carefully,\ after he had carried a live coal
about and he could see no burning nor any
preparation over the skin, “which (he remarks)
was soft and delicate like a woman’s.”’

Now these phenomena are too gross and
palpable to be explained by misdescription or
lack of attention on the'part of the observers.
They must have thought they had seen what
took place,—a collective hallucination,—or
else some miraculous manifestation actually
occurred. For all attempts to explain the
occurrences as due to clever conjuring on
Home’s part have signally failed. Experts in
Conjuring whose opinions have’ been taken,
however little they ‘believe in Home’s pre- ©
tensions, prefer to reject the testimony whole-
Sale rather than attempt to explain these
remarkable records.

78 Chapter VI

Can we reject the testimony,—not because
+the witnesses told-conscious falsehoods, that is
impossible to believe, but because they were
hallucinated ? Now at Nancy and other
medical schools, where hypnotic suggestion
is used therapeutically, it is invariably found
that even the best subjects exhibit marked
differences in suggestibility, one subject sees
the suggested object more clearly and not
quite the same as another. But in these
marvels recorded with Home, the witnesses
were not hypnotic subjects and all perceived
the same thing, and only occasionally did they
receive from Home any suggestion as to what
was about to occur. The manifestations are
recorded by those present as having been '
sudden, startling and usually unannounced.

If suggestion on Home’s part be the explan-
‘ation, it must have been purely mental; and
dificult as it is to Suppose all present are
equally susceptible to verbal suggestion, the
difficulty is vastly intensified when we assume
unspoken mental suggestion, acting equally
upon all the spectators.’ Nor must we for-
get that the witnesses in some cases: were

1 In the ‘* Proceedings, S. P. R.,’’ Vol. XII, p. 21, an inter-
esting paper by Mr. Barrows shows "that mental suggestion, with-
out hypnosis, can operate at a distance upon different individuals ;
but only a single person is affected, 2nd in Home’s case we must
assume a ‘collective hallucination created by an unspoken sugges-
tion, of which we have no experimental proof, though | admit this
is the most plausible hypothesis of the phenomena described in
this chapter.

Poltergeists 79

entire strangers to Home, and fully aware of,
and on their guard against, any possible
hallucination.’ -

Nor is it likely that the sporadic cases, of
levitation recorded in history can all be
explained away. Teresa was not the only
saint of whom levitation is recorded. In the
Acta Sanctorum similar phenomena are attri-
buted to more than 4o saints or other persons,
and said to‘be attested by crowds of their
contemporaries. The Bishop of Valencia was
believed to have been miraculously suspended
for some hours and was thus seen by his
Clergy: and a multitude of others. In fact
unless we deny the whole of the past and
present recotds of these phenomena, attempted
explanations are as difficult to accept as the
miracles themselves.

Then again both in ancient and recent
times we have first-hand evidence of the
Spontaneous occurrence of many of the physical
Phenomena such as were described in the last
chapter. Without warning, pieces of furniture
and crockery are thrown about a room, bells:
are constantly rung, disturbances of all kinds
are produced, without any visible cause, and
all attempts to catch the supposed practical

1 The reader who wishes for more information on Home’s
Marvellous record should read the two volumes ‘* Incidents in my
Life,’” by D. D. Home, or the excellent narrative by Madame

‘Dunglas Home called ‘‘ The Gift of D. D. Home ’’ (Kegan Paul,
Trench & Co.)

80 Chapter VI

joker have signally failed. In fact numerous
witnesses, whom I have personally cross-
examined, have assured me they have seen
these things take place in broad daylight or
in abundant artificial light, and no person
had touched or even come near the things
that were moved or thrown about the room.
I have published a lengthy paper on the
evidence for these Poltergeist phenomena, as
they are called ; and no doubt ‘whatever rests
on my own mind as to the reality and super-
normal character of these utterly meaningless
phenomena.'

All we can do at.present is to collect
additional evidence and refrain from speculat-
ing on the object of these preposterous and
futile occurrences, which appear not to have
the ,smallest ethical or religious value.
Scientific and philosophical value they have
undoubtedly, as must be obvious to any’
thoughtful reader.

1 See ‘‘ Proceedings, S. P. R.,’’ Vol. XXV, P- 377, and Psychical
Research (Home Univ. Series), chapter 13.

CHAPTER VII

ON CERTAIN MORE DISPUTABLE PHENOMENA
OF SPIRITUALISM

ECTOPLASMS; “DIRECT” VOICE AND WRITING;
MATERIALIZATION ; ALLEGED SPIRIT
PHOTOGRAPHY ; THE AURA

‘* By cherishing as a vital principle an unbounded
Spirit of enquiry and ardency of expectation reason
unfetters the mind from prejudices of every kind....
guarding only against enthusiasm and self deception by
a habit of strict investigation . . . . The character of
the true philosopher is to hope all things not impossible
and fo believe all things not unreasonable.’’!

THERE are certain other aspects of spiritual-
istic phenomena to which I have not referred
in the preceding pages because the evidence
on their behalf is less conclusive. ' The opinion
of some psychical researchers is indeed adverse
to their genuineness, or at least their super-
normal character. I refer to the alleged
“ Direct voice sand ‘‘ Direct writing ’’ ; that
is the speaking and writing of the soi-disant

1 Sir John Herschel, Discourse on Natural Philosophy, § 5.
81
ce]

82 Chapter VII

spirit without controlling the medium’s
muscles, or using them in any way. To this
may be added the transport of eee
objects without human agency, ‘‘ apports ”’
they are termed. Further, there are aiibged
cases of “ spirit photography,” where impres-
sions of persons, both deceased and living, and
of luminous patches, are said to occur on a
photographic plate without any corresponding
objective or known cause. All these pheno-
mena,—like that of the alleged materialisation
of part or the whole of the spirit form, (to
which reference was made in Chapter v)—
are comparatively rare and hence less access-
ible to critical investigation.

So far as my own experience goes I have
repeatedly witnessed all these rare phenomena,
but they were nearly always with paid
professional mediums, and the usual conditions
were such as to prevent conclusive evidence
being obtdined. Nevertheless I have a
perfectly open mind on these disputed pheno-
mena; and will go even further, for in some
cases, which I investigated, their genuine
super-normal character was very: difficult to
deny.

As regards the “‘ direct voice ’’ and “‘ direct.
writing,”’ many years ago I had some sittings
at the house of my friend the late Mr. Dawson
Rogers, with a lady medium, a friend of his,

** Direct’ Writing 83

where both these phenomena were produced.
The results were remarkable, and obtained
under conditions which would have been
perfectly satisfactory had there been enough
light (which there was not) to form a conclu-
Sive opinion.

Reference has been made on p. 56 to the
direct writing obtained by Professos® Alex-
ander, who was well known to Mr. Myers.
In this case the sitting was in full light, and
the medium was the young daughter of a
personal friend of the Professor, who says
“it was impossible that anyone could have
written without being immediately detected” ;
hevertheless writing by an unseen hand came
Several times on a slate on which a small
Piece of slate pencil had been placed. (‘‘ Proc.
S.P.R.,” Vol. VII., p. 181). It is very
difficult to explain away other cases of direct
writing, such as those quoted by Dr. Walter
Leaf “ Proc..S.P.R.,” XIX., p. 400, and the
Numerous cases in which it occurred. with the
Rev. Stainton Moses, cited in Mr. Myers’
tecord of the experiences of this gifted
medium, which were published in the ‘“ Pro-
Ceedings of the S$.P.R.,” Vols. IX. and XT.

Sir W. Crookes records a remarkable attempt
at’ “direct writing ’’ by an unseen hand,
Which took place through the mediumship of
Mr. D. D. Home. ‘The sitting was in the
4ight at his own house, and only a few private

84 Chapter VIT

friends present. Sir W. Crookes, having
asked for a written message, says :—

“A pencil and some pieces of paper were lying on
the centre of the table ; presently the pencil rose on
its point, and after advancing by hesitating jerks
to the paper, fell down. It then rose and again fell.
A third time it tried, but with no better result. After
this a small wooden lath, which was lying upon the
table, slid towards the pencil, and rose a few inches
from the table ; the pencil rose again, and propping
itself against the lath, the two together made an
effort to mark the paper. It fell and then a joint
effort was again made. After a third trial, the lath
gave it up and moved back to its place, the pencil
lay as it fell across the paper, and an alphabetic
message told us, ‘ We have tried to do as you asked,
but our power is exhausted.’ ’?

As this took place in the light, under the
close inspection of Sir W. Crookes and in his
own room, neither fraud nor hallucination
can reasonably ‘explain the occurrence.

With the well known professional medium,
Slade I had many sittings 40 years ago, and
obtained what was alleged to be direct spirit.
writing on my own marked slate, in full
daylight, and under conditions which certainly
rendered any explanation by fraud or mal-
observation difficult to conceive. I believe
Slade had genuine super-normal powers ;

1 ** Researches in Spiritualism,’ by Sir W. Crookes, p. 93-

The ‘‘ Direct’? Voice 85

this can hardly be doubted after reading the
reports given by “M.A.” (Oxon), in his book
Psychography, or by Zéllner in his Tran-
scendental Physics. Nevertheless, like so many
other professional mediums, it is equally true
he resorted to trickery, and was convicted of
cheating in a notorious case tried in London.

Whilst the evidence against Slade in this
case was biased and weak, yet it is obvidus
we must regard with the gravest: doubt all
phenomena obtained through any medium
who has not a perfectly clean record. More-
over, as Dr. Hodgson and Mr. S. J. Davey
have shown conclusively in the ‘“‘ Proceedings
of the S.P.R.,” Vol. IV., it is very easy for an
expert conjurer to simulate what many have
Considered to be genuine super-normal pheno-
Mena, such: as occurred with Slade, Eglinton,
and other professional mediums. The same
volume of the Proceedings also contains a
critical paper by Mrs. H. Sidgwick on her
Spiritistic experiences which, with the discus-
sion thereon, should be read by | all. /enquirers,

As regards. the ‘direct voice,” this was
the usual form in which communidations came
from a well-known American medium, with
whom I had several sittings. Here however
there was complete darkness, although this
was not always resorted to by her. Some
remarkable evidence professedly came through
the communicating voice, identifying the

86 Chapter VII

speaker with deceased friends utterly un-
‘known to the medium, and in some cases in
languages unknown to the medium. But
here also -the medium was not free from
suspicion, hence to a critical outsider the
evidence cannot have the value which many
sitters have attached to it.

More remarkable are the luminous appear-
ances accompanying the mediumship of D. D.
Home, the Rev. Stainton Moses and others,
which have been observed under such stringent
conditions that they cannot be set aside as
fraudulent, Points of light darting about
the room and floating luminous patches, I
have frequently witnessed, and once also,
in the late Mr. W. De Morgan’s studio, a

“ materialized ’’ bust, under what aapeared
to be excellent conditions, but the inevitable
darkness of the room compelled me to regard
the evidence as inconclusive. Here however
is a record by Sir W. Crookes, who, needless
to say, took every precaution to prevent
being imposed ‘upon by phosphorized oil or
other means ; moreover, with all his chemical
knowledge ‘and skill he failed to imitate the
appearance artificially.. ‘‘ Under the strictest
test conditions ”’ Sir W. Crookes says :—

“I have seen a solid self-luminous body, the size
and nearly the shape of a turkey’s egg, float noiselessly
about the room, at one time higher than anyone
present could reach standing on tiptoe, and then.

Ectoplasms 87

gently descend to the floor. It was visible for more
than ten minutes, and before it faded away it strick
the table three times with a sound like that of a hard
solid body. During this time the medium was ‘lying
back, apparently insensible, in an easy chair.”’

The still more astonishing results recorded
by Sir W. Crookes of the ‘f materialization ”’
of spirit hands or the whole body (see p. 54),
remain to this day absolutely inexplicable.

All these phenomena have been termed
ectoplasms by Mr. Myers adapting a word
Suggested by Professor Ochorowicz of Warsaw,
whose valuable and confirmatory researches
in spiritism I have not space to, describe.’
By Ectoplasy is meant the power of forming
outside the body of the medium a concentra-
tion of vital energy, or vitalised matter,
which operates temporarily in the same way
as the body from which it is drawn ; so that
visible, audible or tangible human-like pheno-
mena are produced. This is very much like
the pyschic force hypothesis under a' new
name (see p. 107).

As regards “ apports;”’ those I have wit-
nessed with professional mediums were not
convincing, and one well-known medium, now
dead, I caught in, flagrant trickery. But a

1 Those who wish for fullef information on these phenomena
-May consult ‘‘ Human Personality,’? Vol. II., p. 544 ef seq. or
Mr, Henry Holt’s ‘‘ Cosmic Relations,” Vol. L, p. 149 ef seq.

88 Chapter VII

friend of mine, sitting with a few friends in
‘the country, and no professional medium, gave
me the detailed account of an “apport ”’
brought from his own house in London which
was so convincing to. him and so inexplicable,
that I gave a detailed account of it in Light.
This formed one of a series of articles I wrote
for that Journal in 1881, entitled ‘“Piéces
Justificatives,’”’ for the formation of a Society
for Psychical Research.

I will now turn to the debateable subject of
alleged “spirit photography.” Mrs. Henry
Sidgwick, who made a careful examination of
this question, came'to the conclusion that
the alleged cases of the appearance of a
deceased person on’a photographic plate, were
either wilfully fraudulent or capable of a
normal explanation.'

Since Mrs. Sidgwick’s investigation ‘other
cases have occurred which prima facte seem
inexplicable in: either of these ways. For
example, Dr. Hyslop has published a lengthy
paper on this subject in the ‘“‘ Proceedings of
the American Society for Psychical Research,”
giving the reproduction of numerous photo-
graphs which appear to afford evidence of a
super-normal origin, though I think he will

1 See ‘‘ Proceedings §.P.R.,'’ Vol. VIL, also ‘“‘ Journal §.P.R.,”
Vol. V., for a discussion on the ‘Subject.

** Spirit’? Photographs 89

agree with me the evidence is far from
conclusive.

While professing, for my own part, to leave
the question of spirit-photography an open
one, I may here relate a very curious and
interesting case of asupposed spirit photograph
which some years ago I submitted to searching
examination and experiment. Lady C., the
relative of a friend of mine, had taken for
the summer the late Lord Combermere’s
country house, Combermere Abbey, in Ches-
hire. The library in the house was a fine
panelled room, and Miss'C. (as she then was)
‘was anxious to secure a photograph of it.
Accordingly, placing her half-plate camera on
its stand in a favorable position,—fronting the
unoccupied carved oak arm chair on which Lord
Combermere always used to sit,—she opened
a new box of photographic plates in the dark
room, put a plate in the dark slide, and after
focussing the camera, inserted and,exposed the
plate. On developing the plate by herself, she
was amazed to find the figure of a leg-ess old
man seated in the carved oak arm chair.

Shortly after this they found Lord Comber-
’ mere had died from an accident he met with
in London, and was being buried in the family
vault, a few miles from his country house,
at the very time the photograph was taken.
This curious’ coincidence came out after the
photograph had been developed and led to a

go Chapter VII

surmise whether the ghostly figure resembled
the late nobleman.

At this point the facts were communicated
to me, and I received a print of the photo-
graph. I wrote to the members of Lord
Combermere’s family and sent them the
photograph. The figure was somewhat in-
distinct and opinions differed as to the
likeness ; on the whole it was considered to
be like him, especially in the peculiar attitude
which was habitual to him when seated in
his chair.

In reply to my enquiries Miss G. informed
me the exposure of the plate was lengthy,
some 15 minutes, and that she had for a
short time left the empty room during -the
exposure of the plate. I thought it possible
one of the men servants had come in and
seated himself in the chair until he heard
Miss C. returning. Accordingly I made a
photographic test of this surmise. Exposing.
a half-plate in the panelled library of the house
of my friend the late Mr. Titus Salt, where
I happened to be staying, I asked his eldest
son, then a youth, to walk into the room,
sit down in the oak arm chair, cross and
uncross his legs, move his head slightly sand
then walk out of the room.

This was done and we developed the photo-
graph together; when lo! there came out
almost a duplicate of the Combérmere photo-.

** Spirit’? Photographs QI

graph, a shadowy rather aged man with ns
legs seated in the chair, and no signs of anyone
coming into or leaving the room. I wrote a
paper on the whole matter and published it,
with a reproduction of the two photographs,
in the “ Journal of the Society for Psychical
Research ”’ for December, 1895.

There I thought the matter ended, with a
young footman as the sot-disant Lord Comber-
mere; but I found that Miss C. and some
others of the family‘strongly dissented from
my view. They had closely examined their
servants and had reason to believe that the
denial, by the footman and others,—of any
visit to the room at the time when the ex-
posure took place,—was perfectly correct and
straightforward.

Some time later an article of mine, which
appeared in the Westminster Gazette, and con-
tained a reference to this photograph, brought
me the following letter from one of Lord
Combermere’s married, relatives, which dis-
closed a fact of which I was previously
unaware.

“Dear Sir,Having read your interesting article
on the supernormal in the Westminster Gazette of the

‘ gth inst., I cannot resist adding one detail to the
account of Lord Combermere’s supposed spirit photo-

grgph.
You say he had-not lost his legs, but he died from
an accident in which they were so much injured, he

‘92 Chapter VII

could never have used them again. He was cun over
by a wagon at Knightsbridge, crossing the street,
and only lived a few weeks.

“Lord Combermere was my father-in-law and I
lived some years at the Abbey with him, and was
much interested in Miss C ’s written account of
the photograph, which she gave me. The face was
always too indistinct to be quite convincing to me,
though some of his children had no doubt at all of
the identity. I may add, none of the men servants
in the house in the least resembled the figure and were
all young men; whilst the outside .men were all
attending the funeral, which was taking place at the
Church four miles off, at the very time the photograph
was being done. I give you the pour et contre quite
disinterestedly, as I am not myself persuaded one
way or the other.— Yours very truly,

“ JANE S. C——.””

There I leave the matter sharing Mrs. C.’s
opinion.

Both the late Mr. A. R. Wallace, O.M., and
Mr. W. T. Stead, with some other investigators
in England and abroad, have been convinced
of the genuineness and veridical character of
spirit photography ; but it is so easy to fake
a photograph by double exposure and othér-
wise, and there are so many accidental causes
that give. a vraisemblance to ghostly impres-
sions, that we need more conclusive evidence,
on this subject than has yet been obtained,
and this we hope will be forthcgming in the
near future.

Luminosity of Magnetic Field 93

In conclusion I may allude in passing to
Baron Reichenbach’s “odic lights*’ and
“aura ’’ round the human body. There is
nothing inconceivable in such phenomena, in
fact some experiments I made in this direction
years ago led me to think Reichenbach was
not mistaken. But I was more interested in
the alleged luminosity which Reichenbach
declared his sensitives saw round the poles of
a magnet and which in 1883 I set myself to
examine. |

For this purpose it was necessary to
construct an absolutely dark room, to try a
large number of people, each of whom had
to remain at least half an hour in this darkened
chamber to render their eyes sufficiently
Sensitive to any faint luminosity. When this
was done two or three sensitives were found
who distinctly saw the luminosity and were
able to discover the position of an artificial
magnet which, unknown to them, I had
secreted in the dark room., Then a powerful
electro-magnet was tried and careful pre-
cautions were taken to avoid any unconscious
suggestion or telepathic influence, or detection
of the faint sound that accompanies magnet-
isation, the sound being by proper means
Suppressed. |

The sensitives immediately drew what they
had seen on their return to. daylight, their
drawings, made independently, agreed, and

94 Chapter VII

L published the results both in the official
scientific journal, the Philosophical Magazine
for April 1883; and in the Proceedings of the
Society for Psychical Research for the same
year. ‘ Nevertheless, though I myself am
perfectly satisfied of the existence of this
luminosity, the evidence needs further corro-
boration before it can be accepted by the
scientific world.' No trace of any photo-
graphic impression of this alleged luminosity
was obtained even after long exposure with
extremely sensitive’plates, nor after following
the suggestions made to me by the late Sir
Wm. Huggins, O.M., who took much interest
in the matter.

In all these curious and debateable psychical
developments the difficulty consists in finding
the sensitive whose organization has the
peculiar and necessary idiosyncracy which
enables them to become in some cases (like
the dowser or water-finder) clairvoyant, in
others a medium for physical phenomena or
automatic writing. This leads us back to the
interesting psychological problem of medium-
ship, which is discussed in another chapter,
and which will form a fruitful field for experi-
mental psychology in the next generation.

ra ®
1 The late Earl,Crawford, then Lord Lindsay, tried similar
experiments, at first with doubtful success; but with the medium
Home, in 1871, Lord, Lindsay states he obtained clear proof of
the existence of this luminosity emanating from the poles of a
large permanent magnet he had secreted in a dark room.

Part 8

CHAPTER VIII

THE CANONS OF EVIDENCE IN PSYCHICAL,
RESEARCH

‘* Nothing can destroy the evidence of testimony in
any case but a proof or probability that persons are
not competent judges of the facts to which they give
testimony, or that they are actually under some
indirect influence in giving it in such particular case,
Till this is made out the testimony must be admitted.”

—Bishop Butler.)
Ir is doubtless improbable that those who have
never witnessed any of the phenothena we
have been discussing will be able to believe
in them fully or at all. A natural and proper
reservation of mind always accompanies th
reception of evidence which is opposed to’ the
general experience of mankind. Even Sir
W. Crookes writes that, in recalling the details
of what he witnessed, he finds an antagonism
in his mind between his reason on the ‘one
hand, and on the other the evidence of his

1 * Analogy,”? part IL., chap. 7.
95 ‘

96 Chapter VIII

senses, corroborated as it was by that of other
witnesses who were, present. Yet, as Reid
states in his essay on ‘‘ Mind,” and as jurists
know, no counsel would venture to offer as
an argument that we ought not to put faith
in the sworn testimony of trustworthy eye-
witnesses because what they assert is in-
credible ; few judges would listen to such
pleading.

But, in spite of all logic, we are conscious
that

“ Events may be so’extraordinary that they hardly
can be established by testimony. We should not give
credit to a man who should affirm that he saw an
hundred dice thrown in the air and they all fell on the
same faces. If we had ourselves been spectators of
such an event, we should not believe our own eyes till
we had scrupulously examined all the circumstances,

and assured ourselves that there was no trick or‘

deception. After such an examination we should not
hesitate to admit it, notwithstanding its great im-
probability, and no one would have recourse to an
inversion of the laws pf vision in order to account for it.
This shows that the probability of the continuance of
the [recognised] laws of nature is superior, in our
estimation, to every other evidence. One may judge,
therefore, of the weight of testimony necessary to
prove a Suspension of those laws, and how fallacious
it is in stich cases te apply the-~common rules of
evidence.”

1 Laplace, Essat Philosophique sur les Probabilités, p. 76.

Canons of Evidence 97

Hence Bertrand, in hts ‘‘ Traité du Somn-
ambulisme,; says, with regard to’ kindted
amazing phenomena, that though by listening
to weighty evidénce we may conclude there
are sufficient reasons for believing them,
“yet one really does believe them only after
having seen them.’’ We may entertain a
limited belief, one tempered with scepticism,
but unreserved assent to miracles, ancient or
modem, requires actual experience of similar
marvels, or absolute faith not only in the
wisdom, but also in the strict accuracy and
moral worth of the person who attests them ;
in fact, the inner witness of our spiritual
nature to what would otherwise be incredible.
Albeit the position taken up by St. Thomas
in the Gospels does not justify the scornful
attitude of many sceptics. It is utterly
unphilosophical to ridicule or deny well-
attested phenomena because they are int
explicable. Laplace, Abercrombie, Herschel,
. and many others might be quoted to this
effect, but it is needless to verify so obvious
a proposition. Only “in proportion to the
difficulty’ there seems of admitting the facts
Should be the scrupulous attention we bestow
on their examination.”

This brings me to the perfectly legitimate
position which many take up, and which is
justified by the caution that characterises all
sound advance in knowledge. It is that the

H

98 Chapter VIII

antecedent improbability of these phenomena
is so great, they are so far removed from the
common experience of mankind, and, more-
over, they involve ideas so unrelated to our
existing scientific knowledge, that, before we
can accept them, we must have, not only
evidence, but incontestable evidence, on their
behalf.!

This is common sense and obviously neces-
sary. Such undeniable evidence I have en-
deavoured to place before my readers, though
it may not be adequate to carry conviction of
some of the amazing phenomena related, such
as the ‘‘ materialization ” of a spirit form,—
on this indeed I reserve my own opinion. On
the real objective existence of most of these
super-normal physical phenomena the evid--
ence appears to me to be overwhelming.

1 In a paper, ‘‘ On the Value of Testimony in Matters Extra-
ordinary,’’ Mr. C. C. Massey, following Dr. A. R. Wallace, has
urged that the antecedent improbability of an event is simply
equivalent to the improbability that affirmative evidence, reaching
a certain standard of intrinsic value, will be forthcoming, and
therefore vanishes with the occurrence of such evidence; so that
adverse presumption ought neyer to prejudice the reception and
estimation of evidence on behalf of some fact outside our experi-
ence. Hence (according to this view) we must dissent from the
proposition commonly adopted that ‘‘ improbability ”’ legitimates
the demand for an extraordinary amount of evidence, and have re-
gard rather to the positive presumption which experience affords,
that thé best human testimony, after taking account of all ele-
ments of fallacy in the particular case, is only to be found co-
existing with the actual fact testified to. .

In his presidential address to the S.P.R. in 1889 Professor H.
Sidgwick fully discussed, and said the lagt word on, ‘‘ The Canons
of Evidence in Psychical Research.”

Canons of Evidence 99

Surely it is the business of science to extend
its domain in these fruitful fields of research,
and it is only because the trained scientific
investigator has, until quite recently, turned
his back on these phenomena, that the humble
Spiritualists have had to try and do the
neglected work of science in this very difficult
region of inquiry ; and now having done’ it
to the best of their ability, they are scorned
and pelted by the educated world and told
they are guilty of ‘intellectual whoredom,”’
whilst their painstaking effort to enlarge the
sum of human knowledge is stigmatised as the
“ recrudescence of superstition” ; and this by
the leaders and organs of scientific thought,
where one would have expected a welcome
even to the humblest seeker after*truth.’ I
heartily agree with our great ‘logician, De
Morgan (if I may be excused quoting him
again), who says :—

“The Spiritualists, beyond a doubt, are in the track
that has led to all advancement in physical science ;
their opponents are the representatives of those who’
have striven against progress. ... . I say the
deluded. spirit-rappers are ou the right track ; they
have the spirit and the method of the grand old times
when those paths were cut through the uncleared
forests in which #t is now the daily routine to walk.

V This was written many years ago; happily such ferocious hos-
tility is now rarely found except amongst those steeped in German
Ways. of thought.

100 Chapter VIII

What was that spirit ? It was the spirit of universal
exdmination wholly unchecked by fear of being
detected in the investigation of nonsense. When the
Royal Society was founded the Fellows set to work
to prove all things, that they: might hold fast that
which was good. They bent themselves to the ques-
tion whether sprats were young herrings. They made
a circle of the powder of a unicorn’s horn and sct a
spider in the middle of it ; ‘ but it immediately ran
out '; they tried several times and the spider ‘ once
made some stay in the powder.’ Then they tried
Kenelm Digby’s sympathetic powder, and those
members who had any of the powder of sympathy
were desired to bring some of it at the next meeting.”

But these childish researches, as we now
see them, showed that the inquirers had really.
been inquiring. Then De Morgan proceeds
to show that “Spiritualists have taken the
method of the old time,’ that they have started
a theory and seen how it works, for without
a theory facts are a mob, not an army. ‘This
was the method of Newton ; he started one
of the most outrageous ideas that ever was
conceived and tried how its consequences
worked. For Newton’s theory: was, “ that
there is not.a particle of salt in the salt-cellars
of the most remote star in the Milky Way
that is not always pull, pull, pulling every
particle of salt ») the salt-cellars of our earth
—aye, the peppér in the pepper-boxes, too—
our pepper and salt, of course, using retaliatory

Canons of Evidence IOI

measures.’ So the great law of gravitation
came to be our heritage ; rigorous investiga-
tion and overwhelining -evidence on behalf of
this most improbable idea has established it
as a universal truth.

Again, it has now become a scientific heresy
to disbelieve in an imperceptible, imponder-
able, infinitely rare and yet infinitely elastic
all-pervading kind of matter, the so-called
lumintferous ether, which is both interstellar
and interatomic, a material medium of a
wholly different order of matter from anything
known to our senses, and the very existence of
which is only known inferentially. For it is to
be noted that this staggering but fruitful idea
is based not upon direct but indirect evidence,
and this notwithstanding its “ antecedent
improbability.”” Moreover, modern science
has taught us that there are myriads of waves
in the ether which are too short or too long
to affect our unaided senses. They might for
ever have been falling on us, bringing a
coristant stream of energy from the sun to the
earth, and still we could never have become
aware of their existence, or of the medium
which carried them, had we trusted solely to
the direct evidence of our senses.

A recognised authority has said in a standard
text-book, “in earlier times the suggestion
of such a medium by anyone would probably

r Preface of ‘‘ Matter to Spirit,” p. xix., et. seq.

102 Chapter VIII

‘be looked upon as strong evidence of insanity.
Even with the evidence which wé now have
in ‘favour of a space-filling ether, there are
many who would rather doubt such evidence
than believe in a thing which they cannot
taste or smell (or of which we have no direct
sense perception]. However, considering the
medium as only hypothetical, the fact that it
might, certainly exist and fill important
functions in the life of the universe and still
never be detected .or suspected by us, is a
strong reason why the postulation of such a
medium for the explanation of natural pheno-
mena should not be branded as irrational
or unphilosophic.’”!

This leads us to ask is there any theory
“not irrational or unphilosophic’’ that can
be suggested to account for the startling and
bizarre phenomena described in these chapters.
To that let us now turn our attention.

1 Preston’s ‘‘ Theory of Heat,’ p. 56.

CHAPTER IX
THEORIES

‘‘ Hypotheses have often an eminent use; and a
facility in framing them, if attended with an equal
facility in laying them aside when théy have served
their turn, is one of the most valuable qualities a
Philosopher can possess.’’—-Sir John Herschel.!

Ler us now consider what hypotheses can’
be framed to account for the amazing pheno-
Mena we have been considering.

_ The popular view that all mediums are
impostors and all the manifestations associated
with them! are due to fraud, is a convenient
explanation for those who will not take the
trouble to enquire. But I have never yet
met with anyone who has seriously studied
the evidence, or engaged in prolonged invest-
ilgation of this subject, who holds that view,
however strongly he may have held it before-
hand.? Apart from the investigations of the

1 ** Discourse on National Philosophy,’’ p. 204.
«2A reviewer of Sir O. Lodge’s book ‘t Raymond ”’ recently said,
There never yet, we believe, was a medium, unless perhaps it
was D. D. Home, who was not sooner or later convicted of gross

103 ,

104 Chapter LX

Psychical Research Society,—the most notable
instance of a body of able enquirers,—with
no bias in favour of spiritualism,—who proved
40 years ago that the phenomena could not
be explained by imposture, is the Committee
of the Dialectical Society already referred to.
No doubt fraudulent paid mediums exist,
just as bad coins do, and their existence '
is due to the fact that there are genuine ones
to imitate. Sir W. Crookes, O.M.; whose
high position in the scientific world shows
him to be one of the most exact and accom-
plished of experimental investigators,—has
said that he began his inquiry into /the
phenomena of Spiritualism, believing the
whole affair was superstition and trickery,
but he ended by “staking his scientific
reputation ”’ that his preconceived ideas were
wrong and that a class of phenomena wholly
new to science did really exist.

Putting aside the imposture theory, what
reasonable hypothesis can we entertain ?
Hallucination naturally suggests itself, (and
I have already referred to this in an earlier

and deliberate fraud.”” Such a sweeping statement is simply

ludicrous, when the word medium includes men of such probity

as the Rev. Stainton Moses and many others, as well as dis-

tinguished ladies such as the late Mrs. Verrall and others to be -
named in jater chapters. Moreover, we must remember that

what appears to be fraud may not always be so (see p. 123), and

further, that it is to Spiritualists themselves we mainly owe the

exposure of ae asia mediums.

Theories 105

chapter. I was at one time disposed to think
it was an adequate explanation. In fact, in
a paper read before the British Association
in 1876 on ‘“‘ Abnormal conditions of mind,”
which is printed in the ‘‘ Proceedings of the
Society for Psychical Research’’ (vol. 1,
p. 238), I detailed some experiments I had
‘made, showing that by suggestion it was easy to
lead a subject, when in a light hypnotic trance,
to hold the most extravagant beliefs, e.g.
that he had floated round the room, and this
for some days after complete waking. But
hallucination cannot account for the per-
manent records Sir William Crookes obtained,
even if it extended to all the numerous
witnesses who were sometimes present with
him on these occasions. Hence, though
admitting that it is of great importance to be
On one’s guard against hallucination and
mal-observation, as well as fraud, I am fully
Satisfied that these causes are quite inadequate
to explain all the phenomena before us.

Let us therefore consider what. other
hypotheses can be framed to account for the
‘phenomena under discussion. A provisional
theory which physiologists might be disposed
to accept, when they admit the genuineness
of the simpler physical phenomena of spiritual-
Ism, is that of an Exo-neural action of the
brain. But this must be a_ sub-conscious

106 Chapter LX

action, an effect of the subliminal self to
which we shall refer later on. Moreover, this
must be supplemented by a store of available
energy in the unseen, which can not only be
controlled. and liberated by- the subliminal
self, but also, in some unknown way, can be
made to act directly upon lifeless matter.

So far as I am aware, the first person to
suggest an exo-neural action of the mind was
Dr. Mayo, F.R.S., in his admirable little book
on the “. Truths contained in Popular Super-
stitions,”” published in’ 1851. He says in
explanation of mesmeric clairvoyance or
lucidity, “I hold that the mind of a living
person in its most normal state is always, to
a certain extent, acting exo-neurally or beyond
the limits of the bodily person, and in the
lucid state this exo-neural apprehension seems
to extend to every object and person around.”
The high position held by Dr. Mayo as
Professor of Physiology in King’s College and
the Royal College of Surgeons, London,
entitled his suggestions to greater consider-
ation than they received.

A theory of this kind was indeed proposed
by Count de Gasparin, in 1854, to explain the
physical .phenomena of Spiritualism, as the
result of his prolonged experiments, and a
little later by Professor Thury, of Geneva,
and again later by Serjeant Cox. This,may
be called the theory of “ ecteni¢”’ or “ psychic

Theories 107

force,” and it attributes the phenomena. to
some extension in space of the nervous force
of the medium, just as the power of 2 magnet,
or of an electric current, extends beyond itself
and can influence and move certain distant
bodies which lie within the field of the magnetic
or electric force.

It is, however, worth noting that the
“ psychic force ”’ theory, often adopted at the
outset by enquirers, is usually abandoned by
them later on as it is inadequate to explain
the phenomena we shall discuss subsequently,
where an intelligence apart from those present
Is manifested; hence advanced enquirers
usually fall back upon the spirit theory as the

‘Simplest explanation of all the manifestations.

Thus Professor Lombroso, in an article pub-
lished in the “ Annals of Psychical Science ”’
for 1908, states he advocated the psychic
force theory until he found it impossible to
explain by that hypothesis many of the
Phenomena which he proceeds to detail.
Nevertheless some such theory, as an exo-
heural action of our organism, which covers

. the simpler physical phenomena of Spiritual-

Ism, may be enunciated in the future by
physiologists who wish to escape from the
implications involved in the theory of a
discarnate intelligence.

There is another hypothesis, somewhat

108 Chapter IX

allied to that of psychic force, which is worth
consideration. It may be that the intelligence
operating at a séance is a Thought-projection
of ourselves—that each one of us has his
stmulacrum in the unseen. That with the
growth of our life and character here, a
ghostly image of oneself is growing up in the
invisible world; nor is this inconceivable.
As thought, will, and emotion can affect, and
to some extent mould, the gross matter of
which our bodies are composed,—

For of the soule the bodie forme doth take,
For soule is forme and doth the bodie make,” me

a more perfect impress is quite conceivable
upon the finer matter of the unseen universe.
The phenomena of telepathy show either that
thought can powerfully affect an unseen
material medium, or else project particles of
thought-stuff through space, or that telepathy
is the direct operation of our transcendental
or intuitive self, as Mr. Constable has‘said in
his suggestive work on Personality and Tele-
pathy. Physics teaches us that light, heat,,
electricity, and magnetism affect the matter
of an invisible world, the all pervading ether,
more perfectly than they do the matter of the
visible. world. Suns and stars, as well as
much of the world in which we live, would have

1 Spenser. ‘‘ Hymne in honour of Beautie,” line 132.

Theories 109

no existence for us but for the influence they
impress upon the unseen ether.

May not thought be able to act in like
manner? In fact it has been suggested by
two profound and distinguished scientific men,
Professors Balfour Stewart and P. G. Tait,
“that thought conceived to affect the matter
of another universe simultaneously with this
may explain a future state.””" ”

The ancient Buddhist doctrine of Karma
also teaches that our future state is the result
of our thoughts and actions, the sum of our
merit or demerit ,—

“ All that total of a soul
Which is the things it did, the thoughts it had.”

Karma is thus the relentless operation and
Spiritual embodiment of the law of cause and
effect, from which none of us can escape. In
modern Theosophy we find the same idea,
developed in connection with the doctrine of
te-incarnation. The thoughts of each in-
dividual life, generate a thought-body in the
unseen, which becomes the next dwelling
place of our soul on its return to earth.

1 The whole passage runs as follows: ‘‘ If we now turn to
thought, we find that inasmuch as it affects the substance of the
present visible universe, it produces a material organ of memory.
But the motions which accompany thought must also affect the
invisible order of things, while the forces which cause these
motions are likewise derived from the same region, and thus it
follows that thought conceived to affect the matter of another
universe simultaneously with this may explain a future state.’”’

— ‘The Unseen Universe,” p. 199. (Fourth Edition.)

110 Chapter LX

Hence the innate dispositions of a child are
the result of its own unconscious past, the
character it has moulded for itself during a
previous existence on earth.

'If, in a more concrete manner than Long-
fellow meant,

“No action whether foul or fair
Is ever done but it leaves somewhere
A record written by fingers ghostly,”

if our thoughts and characters are faithfully
and indelibly being written on the unseen,
we are, in fact, involuntarily and inexorably
creating not only in our own soul, but possibly
in the invisible world, an image of ourselves,
a thought-projection, that embraces both our
outer and our innermost life. And it may be
that during a séance a quasi-vitality is given
to these conceivable. thought-bodies which
disappears when the sitting is over : there is,
as we all know, sorne drain on the medium’s
vitality during a successful séance. But
whatever explanation we adopt, there appears
to be some sympathetic response, something
analogous to resonance in the unseen, occurring
in these psychical phenomena. Possibly it is
this which so often causes the manifesting
intelligence to appear but a reflection of the
mind of the medium, and leads to the danger,
of which investigators are well aware, of
deceptive communications.

The Super-sensible World 111

Or we may reverse this hypothesis and hold,
with Plato, that the world of sensible things
‘is only an image of the world of ideas existing
in a super-sensible world, that objects of
sense have only a borrowed existence received
from the eternal realities, or ideas in the
unseen. This was very much Swedenborg’s
view, that the objects in the natural world
are merely ephemeral counterparts and effects
of things and causes in the more real spiritual
world into which we pass after this life. We
are thus incarnate ghosts of our true selves,
fleeting material phantasms of our true and
enduring personality.

To return from this digression,—What
other theory can be proposed to account for
the physical manifestations of what appear to

e active and unseen intelligences ? The usual
theory: of Spiritualists is that the phenomena
are due to the action of discarnate human
beings, who thus seek to make their continued
existen¢e known to us. But although these
manifestations show intelligence, they afford
ho proof whatever of the continued existence
of humah beings after death. Evidence of
this, derived from other psychical phenomena,
we shall consider later on, and, if the spiritual-
istic theory be accepted, it may then seem
to be the simplest solution of all the pheno-
mena, albeit some of the marvels connected,

II2 Chapter 1X

. with the medium Home will remain an out-
standing puzzle.

Meanwhile it is not a very incredible thing
to suppose that in the lumintferous ether (or in
some other unseen material medium) J:fe of
some kind exists ; and that the law of evolu-
tion—the Divine law of progress—has been at
work, maybe for zons prior to the formation
of ahabitable earth. Ifthe grosser matter we
are familiar with is able to be the vehicle of
life, and respond to the Divine spirit, the finer
and more plastic matter of the ether might
more perfectly manifest and more easily
respond to the inscrutable Power that lies
behind phenomena. There is nothing extra-
vagant, nothing opposed to our present
scientific knowledge, in this assumption.

It is, therefore, in harmony with all we know
to entertain a belief in an unseen world, in
which myriads of living creatures exist, some
with faculties like our own, and others with
faculties beneath or transcending our own ;
and it is possible that the evolutionary
development of such a world has run on
parallel lines to our own.’ The rivalry ‘of

1 Isaac Taylor, in his well-known and suggestive book, ‘' Physi-
cal Theory of Another Life,’’ chan. 17, ‘which I have read since
the above was written, has a similar conjecture, and maintains
that the Scriptures support the existence of an entire order of
both good and evil beings around us; he holds that ‘‘ one well-
attested instance of the presence and intelligent agency of an in-
visible being would be enough to carry the question of an invisible
economy pervading the visible universe ’’ (p. 264). ‘

Life in the Invisible 113

life, the existence of instinct, intellect, con-
science, will, right and wrong are as probable
there as. here. And, in course of time,
consciousness of our human existence may
have cgme to our unseen neighbours, and
some means of mental, or even material,
communication with us may have been found.
For my own part, it seems not improbable
that many of the fhysical manifestations
Witnessed in a Spiritualistic séance are the
product of human-like, but not really human,
intelligences—good or bad daimonia they may
be, elementals some have called them, which
aggregate round the medium; drawn from
that particular plane of mental and moral
development in the unseen which corresponds
to the mental and moral plane of the medium.
The possible danger of such influences I will
refer to in d subsequent chapter (see page 250).

But if such unseen intelligences have for
ages past existed in our midst, may they not
have had some share in the history of life on
_ this earth? We know how largely man can
modify both organic and inorganic nature by
the exercise of his intelligence and will ; if we.
can even alter the varieties of plants and
animals by artificial selection, is it unreason-.
able to suppose that the psychical operation
of unseen intelligences may have influenced
the course’of evolution through the ages ?
It is possible that some of the unsolved

I

114 Chapter 1X

problems in the doctrine of evolution may
have to be shifted from the world of sense
and gross matter to the unseen world around
us, just as in physics we are gradually shifting
our penultimate explanation of perceptible
things to the imperceptible ether ? The great
First Cause must ever lie beyond our ken, but
science, which deals with secondary causes,
is finding that to many obscure questions the
visible world appears to offer no intelligible
solution.

The existence of a fourth dimension in space
is not an explanation of the origin of the
phenomena of Spiritualism, but a mathe-
matical conception that shows the possibility
for some of those phenomena to four-
dimensional beings, provided they could,
under certain circumstances, produce effects
visible to us three-dimensional beings. , Some
of these effects, we can theoretically predict,
e.g. the passage of matter.through matter, or
the knotting of a single endless cord, or loop,
or ring of leather. An intelligent being,
having the power to produce on this cord
four-dimensional bendings, would be able to.
tie one or more knots on it without loosening
the sealed ends of the cord or cutting the ring
of leather. Though this feat is to us, of
course, impossible, it is asserted that it .was
successfully performed in-a few minutes, in

Zillner’s Experiments 115

full light, in December, 1877, through the
instrumentality of a well-known medium, and
in the presence of some distinguished and
critical German men of science, Professors
Zoliner, Weber, Fechner, and Scheibner. The
full account, with the precautions taken to
avoid deception, is given in Mr. Massey’s
translation of Zéllner’s ‘‘ Transcendental
Physics.”” Nor was this a unique experience ;
for a similar experiment, a knot tied in an
unseamed ring of leather, is reported tothave ,
been successfully made'in, Russia, and vouched
for by the Hon. A. Aksakof. On the other
hand, I am not aware of any corroboration of
these experiments in recent years, and whilst
it seems impossible to explain them away by
deception, or gross exaggeration or ‘mal-
observation, it is wiser to suspend our judg-
ment on these, and some other of the rarer
Spiritualistic phenomena and regard them as
“not proven” -until more ‘abundant and
conclusive evidence is forthcoming.

This long discussion of various theories has
I fear wearied my readers, but psychical
tesearchers are cutting a path through un-
cleared forests, and all conjectures regarding
the right way are useful. To change the simile
we are laying the foundations of a new and
Spacious annexe to the temple of knowledge,
and we must be prepared to see a forest of
Scaffolding—in the shape of theories and

116 Chapter LX

‘working hypotheses—arise. Only thus can
the solid stones of fact be laid and the temple
upbuilt, then in course of time, <“‘ the facts
will tell their own story and supply their own
explanation ; at present we have to labour
and to wait.”

CHAPTER X

THE PROBLEM OF MEDIUMSHIP

‘«Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie

Thy Soul’s immensity.”
—Wordsworth.

Ir may be asked, and many have asked
scornfully, why should a medium be necessary
in these Spiritualistic manifestations ?

As we are all aware, the production of the
phenomena appears to be inseparably con-
nected with some special living organisations
that are called ‘“‘ mediumistic.”” And it may
well be, granting the existence of a spiritual
world, that a medium is as necessary there as
here ; in fact, there seems evidence in all the
communications purporting to come from
deceased persons that they find an inter-
mediary between themselves and the medium
on earth is necessary to them as tous. Looked
at from a purely scientific standpoint, there
is nothing remarkable in this. Certain
persons, happily not all of us, are subject to
abnormal states of body and mind, and the

alienist or pathologist. does not refuse to
117

118 Chapter X

investigate insanity or epilepsy because
restricted to a limited number of human
beings.

Furthermore, physical science affords abun-
dant analogies of the necessity for a medium,
or intermediary, between the unseen and the
seen. We know nothing of any of the physical
energies, such as electricity, magnetism, light,
gravitation, &c., except through their effects
on material bodies. They are unseen and,
unknowable until manifested by their action
on matter. We do not see electricity in a
lightning flash, only atmospheric particles
madei white hot through the resistance they
offer to the electric discharge. In like manner
the waves of the luminiferous ether require a
material medium to absorb them’ before they
‘can be perceived, by our senses ; the inter-
mediary may be the photographic plate, the
rods and cones of:-the retina, a blackened
surface, or the electric resonators of wireless
telegraphy, according to the respective length
of those waves; but some medium, formed
of ponderable matter, is absolutely necessary
to render the chemical, luminous, thermal,
or electrical effects of these waves percep-
tible to us. And the more or less perfect
rendering of these effects depends on the
more or less perfect synchronism between
those ethereal waves "and their mundane
receiver.

Problem of Mediumship 11g

Thus we find certain definite physical media
are necessary to enable operations to become
perceptible which would otherwise remain
imperceptible. Through these media, energy
from the unseen physical world without us
enters the seen, and passing through the seen
affects thereby the unseen mental world within
us. The extreme ends of the operation are
unknown to us, and it is only during the
transition stage that the flux of energy
appeals to our senses, and therefore it is
only with this stage of appearances, that
is to say with phenomena, that science can
deal.
This is also true of Uife itself’; for life of
any kind, however lowly it may be, is unseen
by and unknowable to us per se; we only
know life through its varied manifestations in
Organic matter, that is in living phenomena.
This is, of course, equally true of our mind,
‘which reveals itself through the brain, and in
like manner a discarnate mind requires a
medium for its manifestation. And we may
take it as unquestionable, whatever shrinking
our religious instincts may at first feel, that
anything and everything that enters the world
of phenomena becomes thereby a legitimate
and promising subject of scientific investiga-
tion. As Sir Oliver Lodge has well said): .
“The least justifiable 4ttitude is that which
holds that there are certain departments of

120 Chapter X

truth in the universe which it is not lawful to
investigate.”

The nexus between the seen and the unseen
may be, as we have shown, physical, physio-
logical, or psychical, but whichever it may be,
it is a specialised substance, or organ, or
organism ; in many cases it is a body in a
state of unstable equilibrium, and in that
case, therefore, of a delicate nature, a body to
be handled carefully, and its behaviour or
idiosyncrasies need to be studied and known
beforehand.

It is doubtless a peculiar psychical state
that confers mediumistic power, but we know
nothing of its nature, and we often ruin our
experiments and lose our results by our
ignorance. Certainly it is very probable that
the psychical state of those present at a
séance will be found to re-act on the medium.
We should get no results if our photographic
plates were exposed to the light of the room
simultaneously with the luminous image
formed by the lens. In every physical pro-
cess, we have to guard against disturbing
causes.

If, for example, the late Prof. S. P. Langley,
of Washington, in the delicate experiments he
conducted for so many years—exploring the
ultra red radiation of the sun—had allowed.
the thermal radiation of “himself. or - his

Problem of Mediumship 121

assistants to fall on his sensitive thermoscope,
his results would have been confused and
unintelligible. We know that similar confused
results are obtained in psychical research,
especially by those who fancy the sole function
of a scientific investigator is to play the part
of an amateur detective; and accordingly
what they detect is merely their own in-
Competency to deal with problems the very
elements of which they do not’ understand
and seem incapable of learning. Investigators
who, taking an exalted view of their own
Sagacity, enter upon this inquiry with their
minds made up as to the possible or impossible,
are sure to fail. Such people should be
Shunned, as their habit of thought and mode
of action are inappropriate, and therefore
essentially vulgar, for the essence of vulgarity
1s inappropriateness.

Inasmuch as we know nothing of the
Peculiar | psychical state that constitutes
mediumship, we ought to collect and record
all conditions which attend a successful séance.
Mediumship seems in some points analogous
to “rapport ’’ in mesmeric trance, and it
would be interesting to know whether a
Mesmeric sensitive is more open to medium-
ship than the rest of mankind. Again, are
those who are good percipients in telepathic

eriments also percipients in spontaneous
belepatiig: such as apparitions at the moment
’ \

122 Chapter X

of, death, and are these again hypnotic
sensitives ? Similar questions also arise as
to somnambulists ;- in a word, is there any-
thing” in common between the obscure
psychical ‘states of these different classes of
sensitives ? Very probably there is, for, all
psychical phenomena, as we shall see directly,
involve to a greater or less extent the operation
of an unconscious part of our personality, a
hidden self which in a medium emerges from
its obscurity, as the normal consciousness and
self-control subsides. This fact does, indeed,
afford some clue to the peculiar psychological
condition of mediumship.

Here we may remark that our conscious
life expresses itself in voluntary muscular
movements, such as speech or gesture ;
whereas our sub-conscious life expresses itself
in involuntary muscular action, such as auto-
matic writing or speaking or the motion of a
planchette or the “‘ dowsing rod,” &c.. Such
instrumental appliances for revealing our
hidden, sub-conscious self, I have called
autoscopes. If the will or reason concerns
itself with any of these automatic actions,
the motion becomes voluntary and passes
from the control of the sub-conscious to that
of the conscious self. Hence under such
circumstanees those psychical phenomena
which spring from the sub-conscious self,

Problem of Mediumship 123

will either yield a confusing result or fail
entirely.

All I wish to point out here is that mediums
ship depends on the emergence of the sub-
conscious life and therefore the ordinary
waking' consciousness must be more or less
passive. It is the lack of the normal conscious
control of his thoughts and actions that renders
the medium so liable to the influence of any
inimical suggestion from the sitters. For a
medium is eminently a suggestible subject, and
may sometimes unconsciously be the victim,
and not the conscious originator, of the fraud
which dominates the opinion of those sceptical
investigators who believe all mediums are
impostors. In fact, as Dr. Hyslop and many

uropean psychiatrists have shown, an
entranced medium is not in a.normal condition
but shows evidence of hysteria. '

It must be borne in mind that the medium
understands the phenomena as little as the
investigator, or even less if possible, for he has
less experience of what’ goes on, being very
often in a trance; hence the medium’s
Opinion or explanation of the manifestations,
in his normal state, is, quite valueless. The
Medium should, in fact, be treated as has been
already said, and as Sir Oliver Lodge has also
Said, “‘as a delicate piece of apparatus where-
with we are making an investigation. . The
medium is an instrument whose ways and

124 Chapter X

idiosyncrasies must be learnt, and to a certain
extent humoutred, just as one studies and
humours the. ways of some much less delicate
piece of physical apparatus turned out by a
skilled instrument maker.”

This is quite consistent with taking all
needful precautions against deception. The
stricter methods which, I think wisely, the
Society for Psychical Research have adopted,
have no doubt eliminated much that passed
as evidence amongst Spiritualists, and also
cleared off a number of those detestable
professional rogues who prey on the grief and
credulity of mankind.

The -word ‘‘medium” is certainly , an
objectionable one. In the public mind it is
usually associated with various degrees of
rascality, and so long as paid mediums
and dark séances are encouraged, and rogues
and fools abound, the evil odour which sur-
rounds the nazhe “medium” is likely to
remain.

But there i is another objection to the word.
A “ medium ”’ is too often taken to imply an
intermediary between the spirit-world and out
own-; whereas, many so-called Spiritualistic
communications are nothing but the un-
conscious revelation of .the medium’s “own
thoughts;-or latent memory, or “ subliminal
self.” I agree, therefore, with my friend

Problem of Mediumship 125

the late Frederic Myers, who calls the word
medium ‘a barbarous-and question begging
term,” and suggests the use of the word

‘automatist ’’; others have suggested, and
Some have used, the word “ psychic.” Either
of these words is preferable, if usage were
not against them, until a wider interest in,’
and knowledge of, the whole subject leads to
a new terminology.

I have thought it better to keep to the
Common phraseology, disclaiming,; however,

‘the common implication, namely, that the

word medium always implies an agent between
Ourselves and a spiritual world, or a personal-
ity, external to the medium. It may be, and
Very often is, only the unconscious world or
Unrecognised personality within the medium.
or the whole of our personality, as is
Well known, is not included in the normal
ee with which we are familiar in our waking
ie,
_ There is in each of us an outer as well as an
Inner court to our personality. The outer
eing our conscious ego and the inner our
Sub-conscious ego. To this latter, this self
below the threshold (limen) of consciousness,
a new significance and importance has been
Siven by Mr. Myers, and the wider term he
Suggested, the subliminal self, is now familiar.
It may here be useful for those of my readers

who have not-studied psychology to consider

126 Chapter X’

the subject of Human personality and Con-
sciousness more closely, as it throws some
light on the nature of, mediumship and the
phenomena we are discussing.

Note.—It has ‘been pointed out on p. 123 that the
medium belongs to that class of persons whom Prof. P.
Janet in his masterly work ‘‘ L’Automatisme Psycho-
logique’’ terms les individus suggestibles; persons
controlled by an idea or suggestion either self-origin-
ated (auto-suggestion) or coming from without, it may
be from the unseen. Something typical of this sug-
gestibility of certain individuals, and not of others in
their order, is seen even in lower forms of life, in the
way their coloration is affected by tha, colour of their
surroundings, &c. (see p. 156).

CHAPTER XI

HUMAN PERSONALITY :

THE SUBLIMINAL SELF

‘‘ What a piece of work is a man! how noble in
reason ! how infinite in faculty! . . . in apprehension
how like % gad!’

—Hamlet I., 2.

Our consciousness is the fundamental fact,
the most real thing, of which we are aware,
and although it consists of a succession of
states of mind, no two of which’ are exactly
alike, it is nevertheless combined into a
continuous personal identity which we call
“ ourself.” Even when there are interrup-
tions of our self-consciousness, as‘in sleep, we
recognise the self that wakes up in the morning
as the same self that went to sleep overnight.
So also throughout our life we are conscious
of the same identity, the same self, albeit the
whole material of body, brain and sensory
Organs has been repeatedly swept away and
Tenewed. ' :
Hence our personality is not a mere bundle

("7

128 Chapter XI

of loose sensations : no sutcession of states of
mind, no series of thoughts or feelings can
fuse themselves into a single resultant
consciousness, with a knowledge and memory
of all the other states.

Everyone is now familiar with the rapid
succession of instantaneous photographs seen
in the cinematograph, where, for example,
a series of pictures of a man running swiftly
gives us the appearance of a single moving
figure. But the photographs remain distinct;
the combination is effected by something
, external to the pictures, our own perception.
And so there must be something lying in the
background of our consciousness which com-
bines the series of i impressions made upon us,
or the states of feeling within us ; this unifying
power we may call our Ego or soul.

Even if the stream of consciousness be, as
some believe, an epi-phenomenon, a series of:
shadows cast by the motion of brain processes,
or if consciousness be an attribute of the
molecules of organic matter, matter preceding
mind, there must be some transcendental and
permanent nexus, a soul, which unites
successive sensations and perceptions into a
coherent self-conscious personality ; some-
thing which gives a meaning to and holds
together the stream of manifold ideas.

It is a remarkable fact, that a multitude
of impressions are constantly being made

Human Personality 129

upon us, to which this Ego appears to pay no
heed. Either because they are not strong
enough to pierce our consciousness—for a
certain intensity must be reached before an
impression ‘can stir our Ego,—a relatively
feeble stimulus, such as the light of the stars
in daytime, cannot cross the threshold of our”
consciousness and gain an entrance to our
mind—or because among the crowd of strong
impressions which do enter, the Ego exercises
a selective power. We direct our attention
upon a few, chiefly because they interest us ;
these we are conscious of and can afterwards
recall by an effort of memory. The will,
moved in the first instance by desire—that is,
by what interests us, our ruling love—deter-
mines the attention we give to particular
impressions ; thus we become conscious of, or
alive to, thoughts or sensations excited by
certain impressions, and let the rest go by
unheeded. Our choice thus determines our
experience, what we include in our material
and mental possessions, our conscious ‘‘me”’ ;
the “‘me”’ being the known, the “I” the know-
ing, self: all else we regard as the “ not me.”
Furthermore, this process of selection, if we
do it regularly, soon becomes habitual or
automatic ; the effort of attention is no longer
tequired, and the will is set free for some-other
purpose ; for instance, we walk, or we combine

the letters in reading instinctively without
K ;

130 Chapter XI

rbeing conscious of the steps in the process.!
And so with the world within ourselves, we
do not perceive the regular and continuous
beating of the heart, hence the processes of
respiration, circulation, and nutrition go on
unconsciously in a healthy body. And to
some extent this is also true of the nutrition
of the mind, for the character is built up, in
part, by the stream of unconscious impressions
made upon us.

Again, consciousness is not aroused by a
continuous succession of uniform impressions.
We should be utterly unconscious of warmth,
however hot things might be, if everything
were at one uniform temperature, and we
should be equally unconscious of light if the
universe and all material objects were illumin-
ated with a continuous and uniform..bright-
ness. Itis differences of state that we perceive,
or the ratio of the strength of one sensation to
another. The actual span of our conscious-
ness is, therefore, very: narrow. As the late

1 Edycation is, in’ great part, the training tg do automatically
and unconsciously what would oth2rwise have to be done with
conscious effort. Genius is a still more striking example of the
powef of-unconscious acts. And what is done by the unconscious
self is more easily and better done than by the conscious self ;
hence it would seem as if the summit of attainment would lead to
the absence of any conscious effoct at all. This, indeed, is the
_logical outcome of all Naturalistic hypotheses of human life. In
a striking passage in the second .chapter of ‘‘ Foundations of
Belief,”’ the Right Hon. A. J. Balfour has dealt With this very
question.

Human Personality 131

Professor W. Jamies, of Harvard, remarks in
his valuable text-book on Psychology :—,

One of the most extraordinary facts of our life is
that, although we are besieged at every moment by
impressions from our whole sensory surface, we notice .
so very small a part of them. The sum total of our
impressions never enters into our expersence, con-
sciously so called, which runs through this sum total
like a tiny rill through a broad flowery mead. Yet
the physical impressions which do not count are there
as much as those which do. Why they fail to pierce
the mind is a mystery, and not explained when we
invoke die Enge des Bewussiseins, ‘‘ the narrowness
of consciousness,” as its ground.

All these impressions, whether we are
conscious of them or not, leave some mark
behind ; they weave a visible or invisible
thread into the fabric of our life ; like every
trivial act we perform, they make a perceptible
‘or an imperceptible indent on our personality.
We know that this is the case, that impressions
not perceived when they were made have,
nevertheless, effected a lodgment within us,
for, although we cannot recall them at
pleasure, they often emerge from their latent
State ‘in a fragmentary and disconnected
manner. ‘This is the case when the attention
is withdrawn from things around us in reverie
or ‘‘ crystal gazing,’ or often in illness or
dream, and still more in somnambulism or in

132 Chapter XI

hypnotic trance, and in many cases of auto-
matic writing, or other so-called Spiritualistic
phenomena.

Our Ego or soul is therefore not merely
co-extensive with those things of: which we
are or have been conscious : the range of our
personality must be extended to include some-
thing more than our normal self-tonsciousness.
Not only are there, as it were, horizontal
strata in'our personality, from the material
or lowest ‘‘ me ’”’ up to the spiritual or highest
“me,” but there is also a vertical division
which runs through all. On one side of this
vertical plane of cleavage lie all those im-
pressions which have penetrated our conscious-
ness, all those states of thought and feeling
which in our waking life memory can restore ;
on the other side lie the vastly greater number
of impressions made upon us of which we
were unconscious at the time, or, being
conscious, have completely forgotten. One
part of our Ego is, therefore, illuminated
by consciousness, and another part lies, in the‘
dark shadow of unconsciousness.

Thus the outer or conscious self, as said, is
not our entire self, any more than the visible
or earth-turned face of the moon is the whole
moon. Mr. Frederic Myers has well com-
pared our normal self-consciousness to the
visible spectrum of sunlight ; beyond it on
either side is a wide tract, imperceptible to

TIuman Personality 133

the eye, yet crowded with radiation. Each
pencil of sunlight embraces these invisible, as
well as the visible, rays, and so each human
personality embraces the unconscious as well
as the conscious self. And just as experi-
‘mental physics has within the present century
tevealed the existence’ of ultra-violet and
infra-red portions of the spectrum, and shown
us how we may, in part, render these obscure
rays visible, so with the growth of experimental
psychology we are beginning to discover the
complex nature of our personality, and how
that part of our Ego which is below the
threshold of consciousness may be led to
emerge from its obscurity. As the bright
light of day quenches the feebler light of the
Stars, so the vivid stream of consciousness in
our waking life must usually be withdrawn or
enfeebled before the dim record of unheeded
past impressions, or the telepathic impact of
an extraneous mind, becomes apparent.

Hence, as we have already pointed out, a
State of passivity is favourable to the emerg-
ence of the subliminal consciousness, and this
is one of the ‘characteristics of mediumship.
It is true that in many cases of automatic
writing by planchette or otherwise, long
coherent messages are given whilst the
thoughts of the medium are engaged on other
matters, but the effort of attention is relaxed,
and.if it be directed to the writing, or any

134 Chapter XI

conscious effort made to assist it, the spell is
broken, and the inner self sinks again into
obscurity. 1 Furthermore, and ‘singularly
enough, this secondary or subliminal self
never identifies itself with the ordinary waking
self. Another person seems to have taken
control of-the hand or voice of the’medium,
a distinct intelligence that has its own past
history, but with little, if any, knowledge of
the past of the other self. The foreign nature
of the ‘‘control’’ naturally. suggests, the
agency of an external intelligence, a spirit or
demon, “ possessing’’ the medium, or of
another personality that.alternates with the
normal soul.

The well-known facts of ‘‘ double conscious-
ness’’ illustrate the latter;? a remarkable case
of this.kind I was personally acquainted with
and investigated some years ago. ‘The subject,

1 A similar sensitiveness to conscious attention is seen in experi-
ments in thought-transference, and even in the pseudo thought-
reading of the ‘‘ willing game’’; and ignorance of this fact is
what usually leads to failure. The intrusion of the will, of con-
scious effort, is therefore prejudicial in all such experiments. The
well meaning endeavours of those who tell the percipient ‘' to try
earnestly ’? to guess the thing thought of, defeat the object in
view. If the percipient does try, his will comes in and prevents
the emergence. ¢ of the hidden and responsive part of his person-
ality. In fact, ‘‘ psychical research’ in general deals with the
varied manifestations and operations of the unconscious part of
our personality.

2 A possible, though only partial,” explanation of dual cohscious-
ness is the separate action of the two lobes of thé brain caused by
an alternating inhibition of the functions ofeach lobe.

Human Personality 135

since dead, was the son of a London clergyman,
and the duration of the abnormal state became
so extended that it was difficult to call it by
that name, but however many days had
elapsed since the transition from one state to
the other,—a brief period of insensibility.
Separating the two,—on the return to the
previous state, the -old conversation was
resumed precisely at-the point where it was
interrupted ; in the abnormal state consider-
able musical knowledge was possessed, of
which the, subject appeared to be quite
ignorant in the other state; the life, the
interests, the conversation were quite dis-
tinct *,even the parentage and family were
regarded as different in the two states.!
These cases of alternating personality resemble
some of the delusions of the ‘insane, and from
time immemorial have led to the belief that
the rightful owner of the body has been
témporarily or permanently displaced, and
another soul has taken “ possession,” like a
cuckoo, of a nest that is not its own.

The whole subject of the dissociation of
personality has in recent years received careful
Study by eminent psychologists, and the
reader will find an admirable discussion of
this question in Chapter 2 of Mr. F. W. H.
Myers’ great work on ‘‘ Human Personality.”

1 This case is given in full in ‘‘ Proceedings S. P. R.,"’ Vol. Tv,
Pp. 230-232.

136 Chapter XI

Multiple, as well as secondary, personalities,
sometimes are exhibited by the same subject.
Such for example are the well known cases of
Léonie, investigated by Professor P. Janet ;
Louis Vive; Sally Beauchamp, investigated
by Dr. Morton Prince, of Boston, U.S.A. ;
and other instances known to psychologists.

More recently a remarkable case of multiple
personality in an American. girl named Doris
Fischer has received minute and continuous
study by Dr. Walter Prince. His report fills
two bulky volumes of the Proceedings of the
American §.P.R., to which Dr. Hyslop has
contributed a lengthy and valuable addition.

The classical case of Miss Beauchamp,
fully described in Dr. Morton Prince’s work
The Dissociation of a Personality! is briefly’
as follows :—

A mental shock which Miss Beauchamp received
at College in 1893 produced the first disintegration of
consciousness, she became modified into what Dr.
Prince terms B 1. This personality alternated with
another B 2, at first induced by hypnotic treatment.
In course of time a new and wholly different person-
ality appeared B 3, which called itself “Sally.”

;

1 Also in ‘ Proceedings S.P.R.,”* Vol. XV., and ‘“‘ Human
Personality,’? Vol. I., p. 360 et seqg.. Mr. Norman Pearson in
his recent able and suggestive work, ‘‘ The'Soul and its Story,"
(to which I am _ glad to draw attention), also gives an abstract
of this case. But the most important discussion ‘of the whole
subject is by Dr. W. McDougall, F.R.S., in ‘* Proceedings
S.P.R.,”” Vol. XIX. ae

¢

Human Personahty 137

Whilst B 1 was cultivated, quiet and deeply religious,
B 3 was the reverse and full of mischief. Later on
another personality appeared B 4, proud, selfish and
dignified. B 1 and B 4 knew nothing of the others,
B 2 knew only B 1, but B 3 (Sally) ‘knew all the others,
was always awake and alert to annoy Miss Beauchamp,
Bt.

Dr. Morton Prince.calls B £ the Saint, B 4 the
Woman, and B 3 the Devil. For Sally made B x tell
lies, sent her things she detested, and constantly
mortified and distressed the truthful and good B 1.
No wonder Miss Beauchamp wrote, ‘‘ Oh, Dr. Prince
save me from ‘myself, from whatever it is that. is
absolutely merciless; I can bear anything but not
this mocking devil.”

Eventually by hypnotic suggestion, and with the
help of Sally, all except B 3, became merged into what
was the original Miss Beauchamp. Sally, B 3, now
tended to sink out of sight, going back, as she said,
“to where I came from.’”’ Where wasthat ? Accord-
ing to Dr. Prince it was the subliminal self of Miss
Beauchamp for a time developed into an independent
personality, her other personalities being cleavages
from the primary conscious self.

But I agree with Dr. McDougall that Dr.
Prince’s explanation of Sally is unsatisfactory.
It is using an hypothesis, the subliminal self,
not even accepted by all psychologists, as a
mere cloak for our ignorance. Dr. McDougall
Inclines to the view that Sally was a distinct
psychic being controlling the body of Miss

eauchamp. The case of Doris Fischer,

138 Chapter XI

which in many respects resembles the fore-
going, lends support to this view, that
occasionally a human body may be the seat
of a real invasion from the spirit world, a
case of obsession. If we admit. the spirit
hypothesis there is nothing improbable in
this view. .In Doris, the invading spirit, if
such it wére, assisted, like Sally, in the cure
and ultimate restoration of the subject to a
normal condition, after many years of suffer-
ing and periodical alternations of personality.
One of the most extraordinary cases of
changed personality is the following :—

Lurancy Vennum was an American girl who, at
the age of 14, became controlled apparently by the
spirit of Mary Roff, a neighbour’s daughter, who had
died at the age of I9, when Lurancy was only 15
months’ old. The two families lived far apart, except
for a short time, and had only the slightest acquaint-
ance with each other. Nevertheless Lurancy, in her
new personality, called the Roffs’ her parents, knew
intimate details of their family life, recognised and
called by name the relatives and friends of the Roffs,
knew trivial incidents in the life of Mary Roff, and
for four months really seemed to be a re-incarnation
of Mary Roff.

This brief summary gives an inadequate
idea of the whole story,! which rests upon
*1 Given in Dr. Stevens’ brochure ‘‘ The Watseka Wonder,”’

published at Rochester, U.S.A., and also in ‘ Huan Person-
ality,’’ Vol. I., p. 360 et seq.

Human Personality 139

€Xcellent testimony. Dr. Hodgson, who
personally investigated this case, was of
Opinion that Lurancy was really controlled by
the spirit of the deceased Mary Roff.
Probably few psychologists to-day would
accept this conclusion, but the vital import-
ance of an unbiased discussion of cases of
multiple personality, such as Sally Beau- ,
champ, has been pointed out by Dr. W.
McDougall, F.R.S. We cannot of course
lightly set aside the weight of evidence which
Shows the apparent dependence of memory
and therefore of personality, on the persist-
ence of the brain and the: physical changes
Produced in it by our experience. Never-
theless, as Dr. W. McDougall remarks :—

“If we accept Dr. Prince’s description of Sally
Beauchamp we can only account for her by adopting
the view that: the normal personality consists of body
and soul in interaction, the soul being not dependant
upon the brain, or other physical basis, for its memory,
but having the faculty of retaining and remembering
among its other faculties. . . . This conclusion would
give very strong support to the spiritistic explanation
of such cases as Mrs. Piper, and would go far to justify
the belief in the survival of human personality after
the death of the body.’’!

This conclusion will receive additional
ustration and support in the succeeding
Chapters.
1“ Proc. S.P.R.," Vol. xix, p. 430.

Part 4

CHAPTER XII

APPARITIONS

** Dare I say
No spirit ever brake the band
That stays him from the native land,
Where first he walk’d when claspt in clay? ”’
—In Memoriam xciii.

WE must now pass on from the bizarre and
perplexing phenomena we have so far dis-
cussed, to the more important question of the
evidence spiritualism affords of the continu-
ance of human life after it has, to all appear-
ance, ceased in the material body. Before
entering upon the experimental part of this
enquiry it is desirable to consider the evidence
on behalf of survival derived from apparitions
of the dying and the dead. This aspect of
our subject meets with wider acceptance, and
less objection from religious minds, than the
evidence derived from sittings with some

medium, which many regard as illegitimate. 7
140

Apparitions 141

One of the most cautious and philosophical
among our distinguished men of science of
the last generation, the late Dr. R. Angus
Smith, F.R.S., wrote to me, forty years ago,
that he was not aware of any law of nature,
except the most obvious, that was sustained
by so much and such respectable evidence
as the fact of apparitions about the time of
death.’ In a subsequent interview I learnt
from him that this’ opinion was arrived at
only after long and careful investigation of
the evidence attainable at that time. Since
then the Society for Psychical Research has
obtained a mass of additional and confirm-
atory evidence, which is incorporated in the

: 1 As the whole letter may be of future interest, I give it here in
ull :-— ‘ .
‘* MANCHESTER,
. “ October 18th 1876,

‘*My Drar Prorsssor Barrett,—I see you are deep in that
fascinating study, the action of mind freed from the organism. It
surprises me much that any man is found to think it of little im-
Portance, and that any man is found who thinks his own opinion
so important that he cares for no evidence. I have not been able
to find a book which contains all the laws of nature needed to sus-
tain the world, but some men are easily satisfied.

“It is difficult to obtain such proofs as men demand for free mind.
Visions are innumerable, and under circumstances that seem to
render the sight of the absent, especially about the time of death,
a reality. Fam not aware of any law of nature (except the most
obvious, such as are seen by common observers) which is sus-
tained by so many assertions so well attested, as far as respecta-
bility of evidence goes. The indications we have point out to
some mighty truth more decidedly than even the aberrations of
Uranus to the newest of the great planets. If we could prove
the action of mind at a distance by constant experiment it would.
be a discovery that would make ail other discoveries seem trifles,
+ Yours sincerely, R. Ancus Smitu."*

142 Chapter XII

two bulky volumes on ‘“ Phantasms of the
Living ’’ published by the Society.

In that monumental work, chiefly due to
the labour and learning of Mr. Edmund
Gurney, the interval between death and the
apparition of the dying or deceased person
was limited to 12 hours. First-hand records
were however received where this interval
was greatly exceeded, whilst the fact of death .
was still unknown to the percipient at the
time of his experience. After rigorous scrut-.
iny 134 first-hand narratives are given where
the coincidence between death and _ the’
recognised ‘‘appearance’’ (whether by a visual
or auditory experience) of the deceased to a
distant person, who was not aware of the
death, is exact, or within an hour; in 39
cases the apparition was seen more than an
hour, but within 12 hours of death, and in
38 cases the apparition was seen shortly
before death, or when death did not follow,
. though the person was seriously ‘ill! In
.104 cases it was not known whether the per-
cipients’ experience shortly preceded or fol-
lowed the death; owing to this uncertainty
these cases were not taker into account. |

Mr. Gurney and Mr. Myers contributed a
valuable paper to Vol. V. of the ‘‘ Proceedings
of the S.P.R.,’’ where additional first-hand evi-
dence was given of “apparitions occurring soon

1 “‘ Proceedings S.P.R.,’* Vol. V., p. 408.

Statistical Enquiry 143

after death.” This was supplemented by a
paper Mr. Myers contributed to Vol. VI. on
“ apparitions occurring more than a year after
death,” where 14 veridical and recognised
apparitions are recorded on first-hand
evidence.

The result of a critical examination of the
evidence left no doubt in the mind of any
Student that these apparitions were veridical
or truth telling, and that their occurrence
was not due to any illusion of the percipient
or.chance coincidence. As regards this latter,
In order to arrive at a statistical proof Mr.
Gurney obtained a numerical comparison of
the veridical apparitions with those which were
purely accidental, ie. did, not coincide with
death. For this purpose he obtained nearly
6,000 replies to the question he addressed to
adults, whether they had had any such
apparition or hallucination during the preced-
ing ten years. This was followed by a still
more elaborate census of a similar kind, taken
by Professor Henry and Mrs. Sidgwick, where-
in 17,000 replies: were received. When the
relative frequency of veridical to accidental
hallucinations was critically examined the
Possibility of chance coincidence as an explan-
ation could be proved or disproved. ‘The
result showed, in the Sidgwick census alone,
that the proportion of veridical and recog-
nized apparitions (i.e. coincidental cases) to the

144 Chapter XII

meaningless (i.e. non-coincidental cases) was
'440 times greater than pure chance would
give. The elaborate examination of this
census by experts fills Vol. X. of the Proceed-
ings of the S.P.R., and the definite but
rates laos haa conclusion is reached
that—

“Between deaths and ‘apparitions of the dying
person a connection exists which is not due to chance
alone. This we hold to be a proved fact.' The
discussion of its full implications cannot be attempted
in this paper, nor, perhaps, exhausted in this age.”

Such a result refutes the common idea that
it was a mere chance the apparition happened
to coincide with the death of that particular
person, and that the hits are remembered and
the misses forgotten.

It was found in the course of these lengthy
enquiries that the number of recognised
apparitions decreases rapidly in the few days
after death, then more slowly, and after a
year or more they become far less frequent and
more sporadic. This indeed might have been
expected ; for on any theory as to the nature
of these apparitions it is likely that the power
of communication between the dead and those
living on earth would lessen as the time of
transition from this life becomes more and
more remote. We need not conclude from
this that the’ soul of the departed is gradually

Apparitions 145,

extinguished, for we cannot track the course
of the soul nor know its’ affinities in the
larger life» beyond. There are, moreover,
cases} to which we will refer in a later chapter,
where evidence of. survivdl has been given
more than a generation after the communi-
cator has passed from earth-life.

Those who have witnessed the apparition
.of a distant deceased friend, of whose death
they were wholly unaware, or have heard the
Statement at first hand, are far more im-
pressed by this single occurrence than by any
amount of evidence derived from reading
teports of apparitions. This was thé case with
myself when a young friend of mine narrated
to me the following account of the apparition
She experienced ; nor did the searching cross“
€xamination to which she was submitted at the’
meeting of the Psychical Research Society
where I read the account, shake her testimony
in the least. The full report will be found
in the ‘Journal of the S.P.R.” for May, 1908.
An important feature of this incident is that
the percipient was at the time at school in a
convent in Belgium, where she had absolutely
ho access to newspapers, or any other sources
of information which might have suggested
the apparition. Briefly the case is as follows :

A gentleman, of some note, shot himself in London
in the spring of 1907. There cay be little doubt that
i 5

146 Chapter XII

his mind was unhinged'at the time by the receipt that
morning ofa letter from a lady that blighted all his
hopes ; before taking his life he scribbled a memor-
andum leaving an annuity to my young friend, who
was his god-child and to whom he was greatly attached.
Three days aftetwards (on the day of his funeral) he
appeared to this godchild, who, as stated, was being
educated in a convent school on the Continent,
informing her of the fact of his sudden death, of its
manner, and of the cause which had.led him to take
his life, and asking her to pray for him.

The mother, anxious to conceal from her daughter
the distressing circumstances of her godfather’s death,
waited to write until a few days after the funeral, and
then only stated that her uncle (as he was called)
had died suddenly. Subsequently, upon meeting her
daughter on her return from the Continent, the
mother was amazed to hear not only of the apparition,
but that it had communicated to her daughter all the
circumstances which she had never intended her
daughter to know. Careful inquiry shows that it was
impossible for the information to have reached her
daughter through normal-means. _

A member of the §.P.R., Miss Charlton, who kindly
went to the convent to make enquiries into this case,
states that the girls*in the convent never see any
newspapers, all letters are supervised, and no one in
the convent seems to have known of the deceased
gentleman; hence ‘“‘that any knowledge of her god-
father’s suicide, or of the reason for it, could have
reached the percipient by ordinary channels, cannot
be entertained for a moment.”’

The mother. 6f the percipient, who is ‘a personal
friend of mine, asstred me that neither she nor any

apparitions 147

of her relatives (had they known of the suicide, which
they did not) wrote ta the convent on the matter,
except as narrated above,

Sometimes, ‘as in the foregoing case, the
phantasm is not only seen but apparently
heard to speak ; sometimes it may announce
Its presence by audible signals. We may
regard such cases as auditory as well as visual
hallucinations. Rapping was heard as well
as the apparition seen, in the following case,
which was investigated by Professor Sidgwick
In 1892, and the house also visited by Mrs.
Sidgwick. The percipient was the Rev.
Matthew Frost of Bowers Gifford, Essex,
who made the following statement :—

“ The first Thursday in April 1881, while sitting at
tea with my back to the window and talking with
my wife in the usual way, I plainly heard a rap at the
window, and looking round at the window I said to
my wife, ‘ Why, there’s my grandmother,’ and went
to the door, but could not see anyone ; still feeling
sure it was my grandmother, and knowing, though
she was eighty-three years of age, that she was very
active and fond of a joke, I went round the house,
but could not see any one. My wife did not hear. it.
On the following Saturday, I had news my grand-
mother died in Yorkshire about half-an-hour before
the time I heard the rapping. ““The last time I saw
her alive I promised, if well, I: would attend her
funeral : that was somé two years before. .I was in>

148 Chapter XII

good: health and had no trouble, age twenty-six years.
I did not know that my grandmother was ill.”

Mrs. Frost writes :—

““T beg to certify that I perfectly remember all the
circumstances my husband has named, but I heard
and saw nothing myself.”

Professor Sidgwick learned from Mr. Frost. that the
last occasion on which he had seen his grandmother,
three years before the apparition, she promised: if
possible to appear to him at her death. He had no
cause for anxiety on her account; news of the death
came to him by letter, and both Mr. and Mrs. Frost
were then struck by the coincidence. It was full
daylight when Mr. Frost saw the figure and thought
that his grandmother had unexpectedly arrived in the
flesh and meant to surprise him. Had there been a
real person Mrs. Frost would both have seen and
heard; nor could a living person have got away in the
time, as Mrs. Sidgwick found the house stood ina
garden a good way back from the road, and Mr. Frost
immediately went out to see if fhis grandmother was
really there.

The following case was carefully invest-
igated, and corroborative evidence obtained,
by Mr. Ed. Gurney, soon after the experience
occurred to the narrator, Mr. Husbands':—

“‘ September 15th, 1886.
‘The facts are simply these. I was sleeping in a
hotel in Madeira early in 1885. It was a bright
moonlight night. The windows were open and the

1“ Proceedings S.PR.,” Vol. V., 1889.

Apparitions 149

blinds up. I felt some one was in my room. On
opening my eyes, I saw a yoling fellow about twenty-
five, dressed in flannels, standing at the side of my bed
and pointing with the first finger of his right hand to
the place [was lying in. I lay for some seconds to
convince myself of some one being really there.
I then sat up and lookéd at him. I saw his features .
so plainly that I recognised them in a photograph
- which was. shown me some days after. I asked him
what he wanted ; he did not speak, but his eyes and
hand seemed to tell me I was in his place. As he
did not answer, I.struck out at him with my fist as
Isat up, but did not reach him, and as I was going to
spring out of bed he slowly vanished through the door,
which was shut, keeping'his eyes upon me all the time.
“ Upon inquiry I found that the young fellow who
appeared to me died in the room I was occupying.
“ Jorn E. HusBanps.”

The following letter is from Miss Falkner,
of Church Terrace, Wisbech, who was resident,
at the hotel’ when the above incident
happened :— ,

“ October 8th, 1886.
“The figure that Mr. Husbands saw, while in

Madeira was that of a young fellow who died un-

expectedly some months previously, in the room

which Mr. Husbands was occupying. Curiously
enough, Mr. H. had never heard of him or his death.

He told me the story the morning after he had seen

the figure, and I recognised the young fellow from the

description. It impressed me very much, but I did

not mention it to him or any one. I loitered about

until I heard Mr. Husbands tell the same tale to my

150 Chapter’ XII

brother; we left Mr, H. and said simultaneously,
‘ He has seen Yr. D.’

“No more was*said on the subject for days ; then
I abruptly showed the photograph. Mr. Husbands
said at once, ‘ This is the yottng fellow who appeared
to me the other night, but he was dressed differently ’
—describing a dress he often wore—‘ cricket suit (or
tennis) fastened at the neck with a sailor knot.’ I
must say that Mr. Husbands is a most practical man,
and the very last one would expect a ‘spirit’ to
visit.

“K. FALKNER.”

On further enquiry it was found that the
young man who appeared to Mr. Husbands
had died just a year previously, that the room
in. which -he died had subsequently been
occupied by other visitors, who apparently
had not seen any apparition, and that it must
have been February 2nd or 3rd that Mr.
Husbands took the room and saw the figure.
Miss Falkner’s sister-in-law, who was also at
the hotel at the time, corroborates the above |
facts, and remembers Mr. Husbands. telling
her the incident ; she also gave Miss Falkner
the photograph ‘of the deceased which Mr.
Husbands recognized.

Even if Mr. Husbands had heard of the
death of Mr. D. and forgotten the circum-
stance, this would not enable him to recognize
the likeness when he was shown the photo-
graph. Mr. Gurney, as I lave said, carefully

Apparitions 151

investigated this.case, and saw “both Mr.
Husbands and Miss, Falkner, réceiving full
viva voce accounts from each* Mr. Gurney
remarks :—

“They are both,thoroughly practical and as far
removed as possible from a superstitious love of
marvels ; nor had they any previous interest in this
or any other class of super-normal experiences. So
far as I could judge Mr. Husbands’ view of himself
is entirely correct—that he is the last person to give
a spurious importance to anything that might befall
him, or to allow facts to be distorted by imagination.
As will be seen, his account of his vision preceded any
knowledge on his part of the death which had occurred
in the room.”

‘It would extend this book unduly were I to
give any further selections from the numerous,
remarkahle and well authenticated cases of
apparitions which are recorded in the ‘‘ Pro-
ceedings of the S.P.R.’' They are in fact so
common and so generally accepted that the
chief scepticism regarding them has been as to
“the ghosts of the clothes’ they wore, as in
the last case. This, would be puzzling if they
were regarded as objective realities, external
to the percipient. But if we regard apparitions
of the dying and dead as phantasms projected
from the mind of the percipient, the difficulties

, ;

1A few other striking cases are given in Chapter X of my book on
Psychical Research in the Home University Library.

152 Chapter XIT

of clothes, and the ghosts -of animal pets
which sometimes are seen, disappear.

There & nothing improbable in this subjective
theory‘ofsapparitions, for all the things we see
are phantasms projected from our mind ,into
the external world. Itis frue that a minute and
real inverted picture of the objects around us
is thrown on the retina by the optical arrange-
ments in the eye, but we do not look at that
picture as the photographer does in his
camera ; it creates an impression on certain
brain cells, and then we mentally project
outside ourselves a large erect phantasm of
the retinal image. It is true this phantasm
has its origin in the real image on the retina,
but it is no more a real thing than is the
virtual image of ourselves we see in a looking
glass. If now, instead of the impression
being made on certain cells in the brain
through the fibres of the optic nerve, ‘an
impression be made directly on, those same
brain cells by some telepathic impact, it may
reasonably be supposed that a visual reaction
follows, and a corresponding image would be
projected by our mind into external space.

Nor is this pure hypothesis. Actual experi-
ments in telepathy have been repeatedly
made where the percipient has seen an
apparition of the distant person who mentally
. desired his presence to be known. The first
successful attempt at this,.under conditions

Experinental Phantasms 153

that admit of no dispute, was made in 1881
by a, personal friend, Mr. S. H. Beard, one of
the earliest menibers of the Society for
Psychical Research.s On several occasions
Mr, Beard, by an effort of his will, was able
to cause a phantom of himself to appear,
three miles away, to certain acquaintances
who were not aware of his intention to make
the experiment. The phantom appeared, so
real and solid that the percipient thought
Mr. Beard himself had suddenly come into
the room ; and on one occasion the figure was
Seen by two persons simultaneously. Similar
results have been obtained by at least nine
other persons, independently of each other,
living, in fact, in different parts of the world,
more than one carefully conducted and success-
ul experiment being made in each case.'
_ Doubtless these apparitions, though appear-
Ing so life-like and substantial, were hallucin-
ations, but by what process is thought able
to reproduce itself in a distant mind, and
thus cause these phantoms to be projected:
from it? Either, thought in A. by some un-
known means, affects the brain matter in B.,
‘and so excites the impression,. or thought
exists independently of matter. Whichever
alternative we take, as Mr. F. W. H. Myers
Says,+—

1 Full details of these cases will be found in Mr, Myers’ Human
Personality, Vol. 1, pp. 292 et seg and pp. égs et seq. '

154 Chapter XII

‘It is the very secret of life that confronts us here ;
the fundamental antinomy between Mind and Matter.
But such confrontations with metaphysical problems
reduced to concrete form are a speciality of our
research ; and since this problem does already exist—
since the brain cells are, in fact, altered either by the
thought or along with it—we have no right to take
for granted that the problem, when more closely
approached, will keep within its ancient limits, or that
Mind, whose far-darting energy we are now realising,
must needs be always powerless upon aught but the
grey matter of the brain.” (‘‘ Proceedings ”’ S.P.R.,
Vol. X., p. 421).

Certainly amongst mankind a conscious
thought always strives and tends to external-
ise itself, to pass from a conception to an
expression. Creation is the externalised
thought of God, and this God-like attribute
we, as part of the Universal Mind, share in a
partial, limited degree. Our words and actions
are a constant, though partial, embodiment
of our thoughts, effected through the machin-
ery of our nervous and muscular systems.
But without this machinery thought can
sometimes, as we have shown, transcend its
ordinary channels of expression, and act, not
mediately, but directly, upon another mind,
producing not only visual and auditory
impressions but also physiological changes.

In fact tarefully conducted experiments,

The Stigmata 155

some of which I have myself witnessed, have
shown that startling physiological changes can
be produced in a hypnotised subject merely
by conscious or sub-conscious mental sug-
gestion. ‘hus a red.scar or a painful burn
can be ‘caused to appear on the body of the
subject solely through suggesting the idea.
By some local disturbance of the blood vessels
in the skin, the unconscious, self has done
what it would be impossible for the conscious
self to perform. And so in the well attested
cases of stigmata, where a close resemblance
to the wounds on the body of the crucified
Saviour appear on the body of the ecstatic.
This is a case of unconscious se/f-suggestion,
arising from the intent and adoring gaze of
the ecstatic upon the bleeding figure on the
‘crucifix. With the abeyance of the conscious
self the hidden powers emerge, whilst the
trahce and mimicry of the wounds are strictly
parallel to the experimental cases previously
referred to.
May not the effects of pre-natal impressions
on the offspring (if such cases are proved).
also have a similar origin? And if I may
make the suggestion, may not the well-known
Cases of mimicry in animal life originate; like
the stigmata, in a reflex action,—as physiolo-
gists would say,-—below the level of conscious-
hess, created to some extent by a predominant
impression? I venture to think ‘that ere long

156 Chapter XII

biologists will recognise the importance of the
psychical factor in evolution. ,

Adaptation to environment is usually a
slow process spread over countless generations,
but here also the same causes, txter alia, may
be at work. Moreover, even rapid changes
sometimes occur. Thus the beautiful experi-
ments of Professor Poulton, F.R.S., have
shown that certain caterpillars can more than
once in their lifetime change their colour to
suit their surroundings. I have seen a
brilliant green caterpillar acquire a black skin
when taken from its green environment and
placed among black twigs. It is no explan-
ation to say that the nervous stimulus which
produced these pigmentary deposits is excited
by a particular light acting on the surface of
the skin.

_ Through what wonder-working power is ‘this
marvellous change accomplished? Not, of
‘course, through any conscious action of the
caterpillar, for even the pupe of these cater-
pillars undergo a like change, a light-coloured

chrysalis becoming perfectly black when’

placed on black paper; even patches of
. metallic lustre, exactly like gold, appear on
its integument, as I can testify, when the
chrysalis is placed on gilt paper! Does it
not seem as if animal life shared with us, in
some degree, certain super-normal powers,
and that ‘these colour changes’ ment be due

i}

Are Apparitions Objective? 157

to the influence of causes séinewhat analogous
to those producing the stigmata, 7.¢., sug-
gestion, unconsciously derived from the
environment? If so, we have here something
like the externalising of unconscious thought
in ourselves.

To return from this digression. Whether
all apparitions are unsubstantial and sub-
jective, due to a telepathic impact from the
living or the dead, I am not prepared to say.
There are cases which this hypothesis covers
only with difficulty where several people have
witnessed the apparition and where it has
seemed to have a definite objective existence
in successive positions. In any case we need
to be on our guard against pressing the
telepathic theory to absurd extremes, as some
psychical researchers seem disposed to do.

We are in fact, only on the threshold of
our knowledge of this obscure and difficult‘
region of enquiry, and humility of mind no
less than confidence of hope should be our
habit of thought. As Sir Oliver Lodge has
remarked, “ Knowledge can never grow until
it is realised that the question * Do you believe
in these things ? ’ is puerile unless it has been
Preceded by the enquiry, ‘What do you know
about them?’” It is invariably those who
know nothing of the subject who scornfully
Say “‘ surely you don’t believe in these things |’

158 Chapter XII

There are some remarkable instances where
the dying person, before the moment of
transition from earth, appears to see and
recognize some of his deceased relatives or
friends. One cannot always attach much
weight to this evidence, as hallucinations of
the dying are not infrequent. Here however
is a case, one of many recorded in that useful
journal Light, which much impressed the
‘physician who narrates it.

Dr. Wilson of New York, who was present
at the last.moments of Mr. James Moore, a
well-known tenor in the United States, gives
the following narrative :—

“It was about 4 a.m., and the dawn for which he
had been watching was creeping in through the
shutters, when, as I leant over the bed, I noticed that
his face was quite calm and his eyes clear. The poor
fellow looked me in the face, and, taking my hand in
both of his, he said: ‘ You’ve been a good friend to
me, doctor.’ Then something which I shall never
forget to my dying day happened,—semething which
is utterly indescribable. While he appeared perfectly
rational and as sane as any man I have ever seen, the
only way that I can express it is that he was trans-
ported into another world, and although I cannot
‘satisfactorily explain the matter to myself, I am fully
convinced that he had entered the golden city—for he
said in a stronger voice than he had used since I had
attended him: ‘There is mother! Why, mother,
have you come here to seé me 2 No, no, I am coming
to ‘see you. Just wait, mother, I am almost over.

* Wait, mother, wait, mother,!’~

Visions of the Dying 159

“On his face there was a look of inexpressible
happiness, and the way in which he said the words
impressed me as I have never been before, and I am
as firmly convinced that he saw and talked with his
mother as I am that I am sitting here.

“In order to preserve what I believed to be his
conversation with his mother, and also to have a
record of the strangest happening of mf life, I immedi-
ately wrote down every word he said: It was one of
the most beautiful deaths I have ever seen.”

Miss Cobbe in her Peak in Darien gives
another instance of this kind, but the following
Narrative is éven more striking. It is vouched
for ‘by my friend the late Mr. Hensleigh
Wedgwood, who contributed it to the Spectator.
Mr. Wedgwood writes :—

“ Between forty and fifty years ago, a young girl,
a near connection of mine, was dying of consumption.
She had lain for some days in a prostrate condition,
taking no notice of anything, when she opened her
eyes, and, looking upwards, said slowly, ‘ Susan—and
Jane—and Elien!’ as if recognising the presence of
her three sisters, who had previously died of the same
disease. Then, after a short pause, ‘And Edward,
too!’ she continued,—naming a brother then supposed
to be alive and well in India,—as if surprised at seeing
him in the company. She said no more, and sank
Shortly afterwards. In, course of the post, letters
Came from India announcing the death of Edward
from an accident, a week or-two previous to the death
of his sister. This was told to me by an elder sister .

160 Chapter XIT

who nursed the dying girl, and was present at the bed-
side at the time of the apparent vision.”

This last instance is difficult to explain
away, if correctly narrated. I am also person-
ally acquainted with one or two similar cases,
which my informants consider too, sacred to
be made public. Several remarkable cases of
visions of the dying are given in the ‘‘ Pro-
ceedings and Journal of the S.P.R.,”’ which I
regret are too long to be quoted here; the
reader is specially referred to the following :
“ Proc.,” Vol. III., p. 93; V., p. 459, 460;
VI., p..294. The evidence seems indisputable
that, in some rare cases, just before death
the veil is partly drawn aside and a glimpse
of the loved ones who have passed over is
given to the dying person.

CHAPTER XIII

AUTOMATIC WRITING : THE EVIDENCE
FOR IDENTITY

“Is there an answering voice from the void,
Or vain and worthless my passionate prayer?
Are all my hopes for ever destroyed
In blackness of darkness, depth of despair? ”’
—F. W. H. Myers.

LET us now enquire what further experimental
evidence is afforded by psychical research
for survival after death. No candid student
of the evidence, so carefully sifted in recent
years, can (in my opinion) resist the conclusion
that there exists an unseen world of intelligent
beings, some of whom, as the succeeding
chapters will show, have striven to prove,
with more or less success, that they once lived
on earth. It would seem as if the mode in
Which the manifestation of these unseen
intelligences takes place varies from time to
time. At one period hauntings and. polter-
geists appear to be most frequent, at another
apparitions, at another super-normal physical

phenomena, such as were ‘discussed in the
M 161

162 Chapter XIII

earlier chapters ; at the present time automatic
writing appears to be the most common.

It is interesting to note that automatic
writing is also one of the oldest recorded
forms of super-normal communication. More
than 2,000 years ago it was mentioned by a
Hebrew seer as follows: ‘“‘ Ail this the Lord
made me to understand in writing with His
hand upon me.’ Automatic messages may
take place either by the automatist passively
holding a pencil on a sheet of paper, or by the
planchette, or by the “ouija board.” In
this last method an indicator,—which may be
a small board shaped like a planchette, or
any other contrivance,—is lightly touched by
the automatist’s fingers and after a time it
moves more or less swiftly to the different
letters of the alphabet which are printed on a
board below or arranged on a table.

All these modes of communication have the
objection that the automatist, even when
absolutely above suspicion, may unconsciously
guide the pencil or indicator; hence the
necessity for a critical examination of the
evidence so obtained and of the contents of
the messages themselves.’ In the first place
can the communications made through trust-

1 1. Chronicles xxviii. 19.
% The reader will bear in mind that the unseen intelligence may
be, and probably is in some cases, only the subliminal of the
medium. ae :

Automatic Writing 163

worthy automatists or mediums, be reasonably
accounted for by thought-transference from
those who are sitting with the medium, or
telepathy from other living persons who may
know some of the facts that are automatically
written ?

This explanation has indeed been held by
some investigators; but even assuming the
fact of thought-transference, of which many
automatic messages afford an interesting
confirmation, that only helps us a little
further ; clairvoyance may occur, far-seeing
as well as far-feeling. Then there is often a
curious reflection of the prevailing sentiment
of the community, “ As if’ (Professor James
remarks), ‘‘ the sub-conscious self was peculiar-

ly susceptible to a certain stratum of the

Zeit-Geist.”” “Itis conceivable,”’ as Mr. Myers
remarks,

“that thought transference and clairvoyance may
be pushed to the point of a sort of terrene omniscience ;
so that to a man’s unconscious self some phantasmal
Picture should be open of all that men are doing or
have done. All this might be, but before such a
hypothesis as this could come within the range of
discussion by men of science there must be a change

of mental] attitude so fundamental that no argument
at present could tell for much in the scale.”

But it may beurged thatthe revival of lapsed
Memories, and of some of the many un-

164 Chapter XIIT

conscious impressions made on our personality,
may afford an explanation more in harmony
with our present state of knowledge and the
scientific views of to-day. This uprush of
past impressions would come as a revelation
to the subject, unrecognisable 4s belonging to
his own past experience, and _ therefore
regarded as no part of his own personality,
but looked at merely with the curiosity and
fainter interest that attaches to the “ not
me.” Moreover, the series of unfamiliar
nervous discharges, accompanying the emerg-
ence of new sensations and ideas from pre-
viously dormant nerve cehtres, would appear as
foreign to the automatist asthe reproduction of
one’s voice in the phonograph, or the reflection
of one’s face in a mirror, if heard or seen for
the first time. The sensation of “ otherness ”’
thus produced would give rise to the feeling
of another Ego usurping the body, hence the
‘control’! would be designated by some
familiar or chance nate other than the
subject’s own, or by a name that appeared
to fit the ideas expressed.

But is this explanation sufficient ? It may
be a vera.causa, but does it account for a// the
facts that are definitely known about double
consciousness and about these automatic and
trance communications? > Regarding the

1 See p- 242 for definition-of this term.

Automatic Writing 165

latter, I know that it certainly does not.

Whilst it disposes of, perhaps, the bulk of the

Inessages usually attributed to disembodied
Spirits or Satanic agency, it does not cover all
the ground. The late Hon. A. Aksakof—a
distinguished Russian savant—whose opinion,
formed after a painstaking and life-long study
of the whole subject, is deserving of the
highest respect of scientific men as well as of
Spiritualists—points out, (and the evidence he
adduces fully bears out his statement,) that
the unconscious self of the medium cannot
explain ali the facts, but that an external and
invisible agency is occasionally and unmistak-
ably indicated. The opinion of the Russian
savant is corroborated by the experience of
Other investigators ; for instance, I will cite
two distinguished and most competent author-
ities, who have made a careful study of this
Part of our subject.

In his text-book on “ Psychology,’ the late
Professor W. James, of Harvard, writes
(p. 214) :—

I am however, persuaded by abundant acquaint-
atice with the trances of one medium that the “control”
may be altogether different from any osstble waking-
Self of the person. In the case’I have in mind it
professes to be a certain departed French doctor, and
is, I am convinced, acquainted with facts about the
circumstances, and the living and dead relatives and
acquaintarices, of numberless sitters whom the medium

166 Chapter XUII

never met before, and of whom she has never heard
the names. . . . I am persuaded that a serious
study of these trance-phenomena is one of the greatest
needs of psychology.

Professor W. James not only speaks with
authority as an eminent psychologist, but he
has had unusual opportunities for a careful
investigation of the case of the well known
medium Mrs. Piper, to whom he here refers,
atid he reiterates,—in a letter to Mr. Myers,
published in the te Proceedings of the Society
for Psychical Research,”’ Vol. VI., p. 658,—
that :— '

I feel as absolutely certain as I am of any personal
fact in the world that she knows things in her trances
which she cannot possibly have heard in her waking
state.

Sir Oliver Lodge, F.R.S., the other witness
I will cite, has also made a prolonged study
of Mrs. Piper, and he fully endorses Professor
James’ opinion; he says :—_

Mrs. Piper’s trance personality is undoubtedly (I
use the word in the strongest sense) aware of much to
which she has no kind of ordinarily recognised clue,
and of which she, in her ordinary state, knows nothing.
Bat how does she get this knowledge ?

That is the question we have to face, and
for this purpose what we have to do is to
collect truth-telling, vertdical, messages, and

Automatic Writing 167

critically examine whether their contents were
known to the deceased person and nof known
to the medium, or automatist, or to, the.
Sitters. This is now being done, and has
‘Yor n many years past been done, by careful and
Skilled investigators connected with the
English and American Societies for Psychical
Research. The ‘result has confirmed the
Opinion I have long held, and expressed in
my book A New World,of Thought (published
many years ago), in the following sentences,
which remain unchanged :—

There is in my opinion evidence of occasional
Communications from those who have once
lived on earth—not as satisfactory as one
would wish, and never a complete revelation
of their personality, but in general affording
the same trivial and fragmentary presentation
that we have in our own dreams. But the
messages are more than the incoherent mutter-
ings of a man in his sleep. Behind them:
there is the same evidence of a combining
and reasoning power as we have in our own
normal self-consciousness ; evidence of an
unseen personality, with an intelligence and
character of its own entirely distinct from that
of the subject’s normal self.1_ It has been held
by some investigators that this person is only
Part of the personality of the medium, the

1 See the ren-arkable cases quoted by Mr. Myers in “* Proceedings
S.P.R.," Vol. VI, p. 341 et #64.

168 Chapter XIII

transcendental Ego of she unconscious -self ;
but, if so, it is; I am convinced, during trance
in touch with those who have, once lived on
earth, evidence of some extra-terrene com-
municator certainly exists, unsatisfactory and
dream-like though the communication often
is. As Professor (now Sir Oliver) Lodge has
pointed out concerning Mrs. Piper when her
“control’’ is asked as to the source of its
information :—

‘“She herself, when in the trance state,
asserts that she,” 7.e., her ‘‘ control,” or that
part of her which calls itself Dr. Phinuit,
“gets it by conversing with the’ deceased
friends and relatives of people present... :
but even when the voice changes and messages
come apparently from these. very people
themselves, it does not follow that they
themselves are necessarily aware of the fact,
nor need their conscious mind (if they have
any) have anything to do with the process.’”?

This opinion Sir Oliver Lodge expressed in
1894, but the wider experience we have
gained in more recent years, especially the
evidence of “‘ cross correspondence ”’ (to which
I will refer in a moment), has led all serious
students of psychical researeh to the con-
viction that there is a conscious and designed
effort on the part of the unseen communicators .
to convince us of their survival after death.

. 4" Proceedings S.P.R.,” Vol. X, pp~4g and 17.

Automatic Writing 169

In fact the communications appear to fall
into two groups, with an indefinite line of
demarcation petween them. In one group,
the cause appears to be the operation of
hidden powers that lie wrapped up in our
present human personality, and which the
peculiar organisation of the medium renders
manifest; in the other group the cause
appears to be the operation of the same
powers, controlled by unseen personalities,
who have once, lived on earth, or claim to
have done so.

That is to say, the unconscious mind of the
medium is the instrument from which in the
former case and through which in the latter
the messages come.. We must not, however,
conclude that these latter are in every case
extra-terrene in their origin, for a telepathic
influence from livirfg and distant persons may
sometimes be ‘their cause :—ds, for instance,
in the well-known case of Rev. P. H. and Mrs.
Newnham, where Mrs. Newnham’s hand auto-
‘matically wrote answers to questions pre-
viously written’ down by her husband, and
of the purport of which her conscious self was
wholly ignorant. This shows how necessary
it is to submit all “ spiritualistic ’ communi-
cations to the most rigorous scrutiny before
deciding on their probable origin.

With full knowledge of all these points |

170 Chapter XIII

before they passed from earthy*both Mr.
Frederick Myers and Dr. Hodgson were’
convinced, from their own personal enquiry,

that these automatic communications estab-

lished the fact of survival after death. Since

these pioneers in psychical research entered

the unseen world, they themselves appear to

have specially directed many of the com-

munications, so as to avoid possible telepathy

from those on earth, or the emergence of' a

sub-conscious memory on the part of the

medium. This they have done by making

evident the presence of a combining and

reasoning intelligence, apart from and beyond

that of the automatist. The significance of

the more recent communications—through

Mrs. Piper, the late Mrs. Verrall, and several:
other automatists—which contain what have

been galled ‘“cross-correspéndences’’—is -pre-

cisely this, that they seem inexplicable except

on the recognition that some intelligence,

which certainly is not the conscious intelligence

of, any incarnate mind, has planned, co-

ordinated and directed them.

The intricacy and elaboration of these
incidents makes them difficult to deal with in
a work like this. But it is impossible to pass
them by altogether, and an illustration will
be given later on. They evince not only the '
presence of intelligent and selective direction,
but also in some cases they contain fresh and

The Question of Identity 171

impressive-evidence indicative of the identity
of the intelligence at work. In the last two
chapters of my little book on “Psychical
Research,’ in the Home University. series, I
have giyen several instances of these ‘‘ cross-
correspondences,” and to these chapters the
reader is referred. It is however very difficult
to compress into a brief narrative the sub-
stance of this evidence, and its cogency can
only be felt by a careful perusal of the lengthy
papers by Miss Johnson and others published
in the “Proceedings of .the Society for
Psychical Research.”

The enormous difficulty of verifying the
identity of the intelligence with that of the
deceased person it professes to be, is vastly |
increased when the claimant is invisible,
when “‘ personatiorf’? seems to be a common
practice, when ‘telepathy is admitted, and
when the evidence is of a fitful and fragment-
ary character. Even in the law-courts we
have protracted trials, such as the Tichborne
case, when the sole question at issue is the
identity of a particular claimant. If the
identity of the intelligence which communicates
through the medium with a person who has
once lived on earth can be established, even
in a single instance, all other questions sink
into comparative insignificance. Those, how-
ever, who will take the trouble critically to

172 Chapter XIII

examine the ample records of the com-
munications made through the -mediumship
of Mrs. Piper, which have-been published,
will find that it needs a great deal of ingenuity
and a great many hypotheses to get rid ofthe
inference that we are here, in several instances,
actually in touch with tha'veritable persons
who assert they have: once .lived on earth,
and whom we know to have done so. This
inference is, of course, a matter of individual
judgment, in which no doubt each person’s
mental bias will come into play, be he as
judicial as he will. oe.

- Here we find a striking illustration that our
knowledge of each other is to a large ex-
tent incommunicable to other persons. Those
who have had repeated sittings with Mrs.
Piper and other genuine mediums for auto-
matic writing or speakin$, have been con-
vinced of the survival of friends who have
passed from earth. On the other hand, those
who have not had, such opportunities, but
have laboriously read the, evidence that has
been published, may feel its weight and value,
though they may not attain the confident
conclusion reached by' the investigators them-
selves. The reason is ‘that we know one
another not by any verbal testimony of our
identity but by an instant recognition, either
from appearance or familiar traits of speech
or action. If a long absent friend, whom we

The Question of Identity 173

may. have thought dead, is at the other end
of a telephone line, and through loss of voice
unable to speak to us except through. an
intermediary, how difficult it would be for
him to prove his identity. To do this he
would not talk about, current events, but cite
trivial incidents inltis past life which he hoped
we might remember. This experiment with
the telephone has ‘actually been made, one
person trying to identify himself to another
at the other end of the line.

As Dr. Hodgson and others have pointed
out, the best proof of identity is to be found
in accurate references to incidents of a simple
nature, that might be recalled by the sitter
but are unknown to the medium .or to the
public generally. And so we notice that in
the messages which purport to come from a
deceased friend, trivial incidents are recalled,
which are likely to have been unknown to
any but the sitter. Such communications
may seem silly and ‘worthless to the general
reader of the record, but they often carry
conviction to the person receiving them.
Illustrations of this will be given in the
succeeding chapters.

We now come to another interesting‘point :
if in automatic writing the hand af the auto-
matist is controlled and guided by some
discarnate spirit we should expect to find,

174 Chapter XIII

and we do sometimes find, words written in
a language unknown to the writer.' Still
more striking would be the evidence of super-
normal guidance if very young children, as
yet unable to write in their normal state,
could occasionally have intelligible automatic’
writing coming through them. This, of course,
involves the possession of psychic power by
such children, and therefore the instances’
are likely to be rare. ;
There is however some trustworthy evid-
ence of this kind. Mr. Myers in Human
Personality (Vol. II., p. 484 e. seq.) gives a
couple of cases which are well attested, wherein
children, who had not been taught writing
and could not write a word in their normal
state, were found to write intelligible words
automatically. One was a child nearly five
years old who had not learned a single letter
. of her alphabet, the other a child just four
years of age who had no knowledge whatever
of writing. This latter case was investigated
by Dr. Hodgson, who inspected the writings,
which were madé with a pencil held between
the middle fingers of the child’s left hand.
Mr. Myers adds: ‘I have seen a tracing of
the last written phrase ‘ Your Aunt Emma.’
%

1 My friend Mr. W. B. Yeats informs me that he has received,
not through a professional medium, the most conclusive evidence of
this. Words were given in various languages, e.g., Italian,
Greek and Latin, known to the controls but utterly unknown to
the medium. See also ‘‘ Proceedings S.P.R.,’" Vols. XIII. p.

3373 XX. p. 30.

Automatic Writing 175

It is a free scrawl, resembling the planchette
writing of an adult rather than the first effort
of a child.” The child had an Aunt Emma
who had died some years before, and the child
herself died soon after this unexpected
message had come through her hand. The
parents it may be added were not spiritualists,
and the mother testifies that their child “‘ had
not been taught the alphabet, nor how to
hold a pencil.”

Further evidence of the super-normal source
of these automatic messages will be given in
the next chapter; it is obviously of para-
mount importance to establish the fact of this
‘super-normal source before entering upon the
discussion of the contents of the messages
themselves.

CHAPTER XIV

PROOF OF SUPERNORMAL MESSAGES:
THE OUIJA BOARD

‘* Out of the deep, my child, out of the deep,
From that true world within the world we see,
Whereof our world is but the bounding shore.’*

—Tennyson.

‘ In the previous chapter reference was made
to the so-called ouzja, board, whereby messages
are communicated through the movement of
a small triangular table; or indicator, which
runs on three legs tipped with felt. The
automatist’s fingers rest lightly on this indi-
cator, which smoothly glides over the board
and spells out the messages by pointing to
one or other of the letters of the alphabet
printed on the board below. Though this
méthod of communication is slow and labor-
ious it has its advantages. Frequently it is
successfully used by those who fail to get
automatic writing with a ‘pencil; moreover
with patience and practice speed and accuracy
in indicating the right letters can be obtained.
176

The Ouija Board 177

But the most valuable feature in this method
of communication is the suppression of any
sub-conscious guidance of the indicator, which
can be brought about by careful blindfolding
of the sitters.

A small private circle of friends of mine
in Dublin have devoted themselves for a few
years past to experiments with the ouija
board and have. obtained some remarkable
results. A joint‘paper by myself and one of
the sitters,—the Rev. Savill Hicks, M.A.,—-
was read by the latter before the S.P.R.
wherein some of the communications were
given.’ The sitters found when they were
carefully blindfolded that the indicator moved
with as great ease and precision as when they
could see the letters of the alphabet. Ques-
tions were promptly answered and the
indicator often moved so rapidly that their
hands had some difficulty in keeping pace
with it : in fact the recorder who took down
the communications had frequently to resort
to shorthand.

I asked the “control” if I might turn
round the board with its alphabet. Instantly
the reply was spelt out ‘‘ Yes, it makes no
difference.’’ So the sitters, still blindfolded,
taised the indicator and I turned the board
so that the alphabet was now upside down to
1 See also ‘my paper published in the ‘‘ Proceedings of the Ameri-

can Society for Psychical Research *’ for September, 1914.
N

178 Chapter XIV

the sitters, and even could they have seen,
there would have been some difficulty in
‘picking out the right letter. But there was
not the least hesitation, the indicator moved
as promptly and correctly as before to the
right letter. I asked could any friend of mine
communicate. A message was spelt out
from a deceased friend, whom I will call Sir
John Hartley, giving his full christian and
surname correctly, and he sent a message to
the Dublin “ Grand Lodge of Freemasons ”’

Sir John when on earth had held a very
high rank in the Masonic order, though this
fact was quite unknown to,the sitters.

I then asked one of the sitters to allow me
to take his place, and this I did after being
securely blindfolded. On putting my fingers
on the indicator, along with the two other
sitters, the extraordinary vigour, decision and
swiftness with which the indicator moved
startled me, and it seemed incredible that any
coherent message could be in process of
delivery. But the recorder had taken down
the message which came as follows: ‘‘ The
same combination must always work together
_,in order to obtain the important messages,
as it is very tiring unless the same three are
_ present; there is one _ Present who is un-
suited for the receiving.” ‘The recorder asked
who this was and was told that it referred to
myself! It was not until we removed the

Blindfolded Sitters 179

bandages from our eyes that any of the sitters
knew the purport of the messages given.'
Objection might be made that it is very
difficult to blindfold a person effectually by
bandaging the eyes. Although the sitters,
who were personal friends of mine, declared
they could see nothing, it was desirable to
meet this objection. Accordingly opaque eye
screens were made and fastened over the eyes
with an elastic cord round the head : a space
was cut for the nose so that the screen fitted
closely to the cheeks and forehead, and thus
resembled the eye screens used by patients
after au operation for cataract. I tried one
of these screens and found it pleasanter to use
than a bandage and absolutely effective in
preventing vision. But communications came
just as easily when these screens were worn ;
and a new control unexpectedly came who
called himself Peter Rooney. 3
A new pattern of “ board ’’ was now made ;
this consisted of a sheet of plate glass resting
on a table of the same size, beneath the glass
an alphabet was placed, and the indicator,
which had very short legs tipped with felt,
now moved more freely over the smooth glass
surface. The letters of the alphabet were on

1 It may be well to state here that I-myself am not in the least
psychic, and have never had psychical gifts of any kind; perhaps
happily so, as one is better able'to preserve a detached and critical
Spirit.

180 Chapter XIV

separate bits of thin card, and could be
sarranged in any way we pleased on the table
beneath the plate glass.

A clerical friend, who was an interested
but sceptical enquirer, was invited to be
present at some of the sittings, and whilst
the indicator was rapidly spelling out a
communication through the blindfold sitters,
he silently held a large opaque fire screen over
the moving indicator and alphabet below ;
but it made no difference, the message went
on, though it could only be read by the
recorder bending his head down to see between
the ‘screen and the alphabet. I asked my
friend, the Rev. W. P. Robertson, M.A., to
send me a brief report of this sitting, ‘here
it is :—

“When present with Sir Wm. Barrett at the sitting
in question, I observed that the interposition of the
opaque screen made no appreciable difference in the
speed at which the message was spelt out, and cértainly
it caused no interruption, much less a cessation of the
message. The letters of the alphabet were arranged
in three lines and in order beneath the plate glass.

It occurred to me that possibly the sitters knew the
position of each letter, as a good typist knows her
key-board, though they might be unconscious of the
fact themselves. I ventured to suggest that the
letters be jumbled. ‘The sitters agreed and Sir Wm.

. Barrett and I re-arranged the letters at random, the
sitters being blindfolded all the time. On resuming,

Blindfolded Sitters 181

with the alphabet thus altered, the movement of the
indicator was at first very slow, it travelled three times
in and out between the letters and then proceeded to
spell ott, slowly and deliberately: ‘There is a disturbe
ing person.’ Here we laughed and asked the‘ control’
to indicate which of us was the culprit— the Professor
or the clergyman ?

At this point theré occurred what, to my mind,
was the most impressive feature of the sitting. We all
expected some sort of answer to this question. The
shorthand writer said, ‘It seems to be writing non-
sense now.’ The ‘ nonsense’ on examination proved
to be~ ‘ ality in the room.’ ‘That is, our question was
ignored and the ‘control’ calmly finished what he
intended to say. A second instance of ignoring a
question and continuing a séntence that we thought
had been completed, occurred at the same sitting.

So far as I could judge the blindfolding of the sitters
was perfect, and their bona fides is to me beyond
question. When the opaque screen was‘ held over
the board, the letters were visible only to the reporter
who bent down to see underneath the screen.

“W. P. ROBERTSON.”

I have given these details to establish the
fact that whatever may have been the source
of the intelligence displayed it was absolutely
beyond the: range of any normal human
faculty. As for the numerous messages that
came through the blindfolded sitters, one
from the control, Isaac David Solomon, on
October Ig9th, I912,—just after the first
Balkan war shad broken out,—was as follows :

182 Chapter XIV

“Blood, blood everywhere in the near East. A
great nation will fall and a small nation will rise.
A great religion will stand in danger. Blood every-
where. News that will astonish the civilized world,
will come to hand within the next week.”

. Now, whatever the source of this message
it was perfectly true, for within a week after-
wards the first victory of the Bulgarians at
Kirk Kilisse was announced and later on, as
we know, a great nation (Turkey) fell and a
small nation (Bulgaria) rose; whilst more
recently Europe has been drenched in blood.

_This control passed and the ‘American-
Irishman Peter Rooney, persistently intruded
himself and told us the story of his life and
recent death. The purport of it was that he
had lived a wretched and bad life, mostly in
gaol, and, he added, life at last became so
unendurable that ten days previously he
threw himself under a tramcar in Boston and
so committed suicide. It was only after-
wards that,the blindfold sitters knew the
purport of the message, they were laughing
and chatting together during its delivery.
To us lookets-on it seemed very incongruous,
for the message was delivered in the most
life-like manner, with evident pain and reluct-
ance leading up to the tragic conclusion.

The next day I wrote to the Governor of
the State Prison at Boston, Mass., to the

Fictitious Messages 183

Chief of Police in that city, to the Chief of
Police. at Boston, Lincolnshire, to the dis-
tinguished corresponding member, of the
S.P.R., Dr. Morton Prince, of Boston, U.S.A.,
and to Dr. Hyslop, Hon. Sec, of the American
S.P.R.,' asking if any information could be
given me concerning this Peter Rooney, and
requesting a reply as soon as possible.

In the course of a few weeks I obtained
answers to my enquiries. No man of this
name was known at Boston in England, no
Peter Rooney had been in confinement at
Boston Prison, Mass., and no former inmate
of that prison had recently committed suicide.
The Chief Inspector of Police at Boston, Mass.,
made a thorough investigation and found that
no Peter Rooney had been sent to prison
from Boston, or had been committed to the
Reformatory, or had committed suicide. Dr.
Morton Prince, of Boston, however, obtained
from the Police records of Boston that a Peter
Rooney had fallen from the elevated railway
in Boston in August, 1910, had received a
scalp wound, was attended by a doctor, laid
up for a month, and was still ‘living in his
home, York Street, Boston. It was probably
only a chance coincidence that a man of the
Same name had met with an accident in
Boston.

‘The whole elaborate story was therefore
fictitious, and characteristic of the dramatic

184 Chapter XIV

inventions, like externalised dreams, which so
often come through these automatic ¢hannels,
and which are so misleading to the novice
and so productive of mischief to the credulous.

Nevertheless other messages subsequently
came through another control, giving names
and addresses of two persons recently deceased
in England which on investigation proved to
be perfectly correct ; though the names were
entirely unknown,to myself or any of the
sitters. Such is the curious mixture of truth
and fiction which these automatisms so
frequently display. I have not space to give
details of these two cases, but will cite a later
and remarkably veridical communication that
came through the /ouija board in Dublin.
The sitters in this case were not blindfolded, '
one was the same lady who took part in the
former sittings, the wife of a well-known
Dublin physician and daughter of the late
Professor Dowden, Mrs. Travers Smith. ‘The
other was her friend, Miss C., the daughter ‘of
a medical man, and evidently possessing
great psychic power.

THE PEARL TIE-PIN CASE.

Miss C., the sitter, had a cousin’an officer with our
Army in France, who was killed in battle a month
previously to the sitting: this she knew. One day
after the name of her cousin had unexpectedly been

"spelt out on the ouija board, and her name given in

The Pearl Tie-Pin 185

answer to her query “ Do you know who I am?”
the following message came :—

“Tell mother to give my pearl tie-pin to the girl
I was‘going to marry, I think she ought to have it.”
When asked what was the name and address of the
lady both were given, the name spelt out included
the full Christian and surname, the latter being a very
unusual one and quite unknown to both the sitters.
The address given in London was either fictitious or
taken down incorrectly, as a letter sent there was
returned, and the whole message was thought to be
fictitious.

Six months later, however, it was discovered that
the officer had been engaged, shortly before he left for
the front, to the very lady, whose name was given ;
he had however told no one. Neither his cousin nor
any of his own family in Ireland were aware of, the
fact and had never seen the lady nor heard her name,
‘until the War Office sent over the deceased officer’s
effects. Then they found that he had put this lady's
name in his will as his next of kin, both Christian and
surname being ‘precisely the same as given through
the automatist; and what is equally remarkable, a
pearl tie-pin was found in his effects.

Both the ladies have signed a document they sent
me, affirming the accuracy of the above statement.
The message was recorded at the time, and not written
from memory after verification had been obtained.
Here there could be no explanation of the facts by
‘subliminal metnory, or telepathy or collusion, and
‘the evidence points unmistakably to a telepathic
message from the deceased officer.

186 Chapter XIV

Other remarkable evidential’ cases came
through the ouija board. One was on the
occasion of the sinking of the Lusitania, and
Mrs. Travers Smith has kindly furnished me
with the following report (see also Note pp.
189) :—

THE HUGH LANE CASE.

“ On the evening of the day on which news had come
that the Lusitania was reported sinking, Mr. Lennox
Robinson and I sat at the outja board; the Rev.
Savill Hicks taking the record. We did not know
that Sir Hugh Lane was on board. We were both
personal friends of his, and knew he was in America, ©
but had no idea he was coming back so soon.

“Our usual ‘control’ came and then the words

Pray for the soul of Hugh Lane.’ I asked ‘ Who is
speaking ?’ the reply was ‘I am Hugh Lane.’ He
gave us an account of the sinking of the ship and said
it was ‘a peaceful end to an exciting life.’ At this
point we heard the stop-press evening paper called
in the street and Mr. Robinson ran down and bought
apaper. I went out of the room to meet him, and he
pointed to the name of Sir Hugh Lane among the
passengers. We were both much disturbed, but

_ Continued the sitting. Sir Hugh gave me messages
for mutual friends and ended this sitting by saying
‘I did not suffer, I was drowned and felt nothing.’
“At subsequent sittings he spoke of his will; but
never mentioned the codicil now in dispute. He
- hoped no memorial would be erected to ‘him in the
shape of a gallery or otherwise, but was anxious about
his pictures. ‘The messages were--always coherent

Sir ITugh Lane 187

and evidential and always came through Mr. Robinson
and me.
(Signed) HESTER TRAVERS SMITH.”

This is a very evidential case, for no
information of the death of Sir Hugh Lane
was given until some days later.

Another veridical message, through the
same sitters, came to a friend of mine who
was in profound distress through the death
in battle of his son, an officer with our army
in France. ‘This message, together with others
he obtained later on through a lady in London,
who knew nothing of my friend beforehand,
absolutely convinced him of the identity of
his son and of his survival after death. The
result‘was a very happy one; from almost
heartbroken grief- he is now in serene and
perfect confidence of his son’s survival.

Besides the foregoing group of sitters, a
well-known and esteemed member of the
Society of Friends and friend of mine in
Dublin, has for several years past had a small
private circle of sitters with the ouija board.
Hethas thus obtained some choussics of
communications, chiefly from deceased mem-
bers of. his family, which have demonstrated |
to him the fact of their survival after death,
and thus afforded great consolation to himself
and other stricken friends. These communi-
cations are not evidential to an outsider, but

188 Chapter XIV

they give some remarkable statements as to
he conditions of life and occupation in the
unseen world, which are more or less in
accordance with similar communications (un-
known to these sitters) obtained by others.

A digest of the spirit teachings coming
through a medium in America who is much
esteemed by Dr. Hyslop, has lately been
published by Mr.’ Prescott Hall in the “Journal
of the American Society for Psychical Re-
search ’’ for November and December, 1916.
As Mr. Hall points out, if we find on collating
a number of communications through different
mediums, of different training, in “different
countries, that they substantially agree upon
certain facts as to the nature and conditions’
of spirit life, the result may be of interest
and value.

' But this will depend upon the fact whether
the descriptions given are not to be found in
spiritistic literature and therefore not likely to
be the common opinion of mediums generally.

- Unfortunately it is usual to find stich descrip-
tions are only a reflection of the medium’s
own opinions and reading, and therefore the
product’ of the memory or sub-conscious
impressions of the medium. ‘This is conspicu-
ous when attempts at scientific or philoso-
phical disquisitions are made by the medium,

Spirit Teachings 189

which rarely exhibit anything more than the
grotesque assertions of an ignorant mind.
Mr. Prescott Hall, however, is doing good
service in classifying these spirit teachings,
examining their source and testing their
consistency.

By far the most remarkable and interesting
collection of ‘‘ Spirit Teachings”’ was published
some years ago by the late Rev. Stainton
Moses (M.A. Oxon), to whom reference has
already been made. These were given
through his own mediumship and are well
worth careful perusal, as also is-his book on
“ Spirit Identity and the higher aspects of
Spiritualism.”

In the next chapter will be found ‘some
glimpses of the spirit world obtained through
two ladies, neither of whom were spiritualists ;
‘one was a personal friend, and both were of
unimpeachable veracity.

Note to the Hugh Lane case, p. 186. In a subsequent
sitting at which I was present, Hugh Lane said it was
the control ‘‘ Peter Rooney” (a Roman Catholic)
brought him to the sitters, and said, “ Pray for the soul
of Hugh Lane.” A fuller teport with further particulars
of these sittings will be found in a paper by the author
in the POCKETS of the S.P.R. 1918.

CHAPTER XV

FURTHER EVIDENCE OF SURVIVAL
AFTER DEATH

‘* The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God.
In the sight. of the unwise they seem to die and their
departure is taken for misery and their going away
from’ earth to be utter destruction—but they are in
peace.’”!

THE super-normal character of many of the
conimunications that reach us through the
medium or automatist having been established,
let us now turn to further evidence of survival
and of the identity of the discarnate intellig-
ences, together with occasional glimpses of
‘their condition after death.

Some years ago I was staying at a friend’s
house in the country, which I will call Haw-
thorn Manor, and found that my. hostess,
Mrs. E.—the wife of a lawyer holding a
responsible official position, and herself a
matronly lady of great acumen and common-
sense, the centre of a circle of religious and
charitable activity—had accidentally discovered ,

1 From the Wisdom of Solomon, iii. 1-3.
. 190

Evidence of Survival I9I

that fee hand was occasionally impressed
by some power she could not coritrol. Long
messages, the purport of which were at the
time unknown to her, were thus written.

The curious feature of this automatic writing
was that it came on her suddenly; when
writing up some household accounts she fell
into a dreamy or semi-trance-like state, and
then felt the fingers of another hand—belong-
ing apparently to an invisible person seated
opposite to her—laid on her right hand, and a
sudden vigorous scribbling ensued. But the
writing was all upside down, each line begin-
ning at her right hand side ‘of the page, and
could only be read by turning the page round,
Mrs. E. assured me, and I have no reason to
doubt her word, that it was quite impossible
for her to write a single word correctly in this
way in her normal state. Anyone who will
make the attempt will find how difficult such
a mode of writing is to execute, especially in
the clear and characteristic caligraphy, which ~
here occurred.

Mrs. E. was not a spiritualist and had no
_ knowledge of the subject, in fact rather an
aversion to it. Hence no serious attention was
given to this abnormal writing until a message
came containing certain specific statements,,
wholly outside the knowledge of herself or
husband, which they subsequently discovered
-to be perfectly true incidents in the life of a

192 Chapter XV

deceased relative, who asserted he was present
and guiding the lady’s hand. Other com-
‘munications followed, which also were verified.
Then on another evening came the instance
to which I have referred as affording proof
of identity.

THE CHATHAM CASE.

In this case the communicating intelligence was
unknown to Mrs. E. The circumstances, written
down at the time, were as follows :—A cousin of my
hostess, an officer in the Engineers, named B., was
paying a visit to Hawthorn Manor. I was not present,
but the facts were sent to me; some, indeed, came
undér my own knowledge.’ B. had a friend, a brother
officer, Major C., who died after B. left Chatham, and
to whose rooms in the barracks he frequently went to
play on C.’s piano, both being musical: of this Mrs. E.
assured me she knew absolutely nothing. At the
sitting in question, much to B.’s amazement, for he
was quite ignorant of spiritualism, the Christian name
and surname of Major C, were unexpectedly given,
followed by the question, addressed to B., ‘“ Have
you kept up your music ?”’ Then came some private
matter of a striking character, when suddenly the
unseen visitant interjected the question, ‘‘ What was
done with the. books?” ‘What books?” was
asked. “Lent to me,” was C.’s reply. ‘‘ Who lent
you the books?” ‘The reply came at once, ‘' A—,”
giving the name of another brother officer, of whose
existence Mrs. E. was also wholly unaware. “ Shall
I write to ask A— if he has them?” B. asked.
‘Yes,’ was the reply. All present assert on their

The Chatham Case 193

word of honour they knew of no such loan, nor was
the officer named in any of their thoughts, nor had
Mrs. E. ever heard A—’s name mentioned before.

A— was written to, and the question about the books
incidentally asked, but in a reply that came some
time after no notice was taken of the question. Two
months later, however, B. accidentally met his friend
A—, when, in the course of conversation on other
matters, A— suddenly exclaimed: “ That was a rum
thing you asked me about in your letter; I mean
about Major C. and the books. I did lend him some
books, but I don’t know what became of them after
his death.”

An objector might urge that it is conceivable
B. might once have seen some books belonging
to A.—in Major C.’s, room, and afterwards
forgotten the fact, and that this latent memory
had telepathically (and unconsciously to all
concerned) impressed Mrs. E., but obviously
this explanation will not cover other cases,
some of which I will cite. For these some.
more elaborate hypothesis must be invented,
and our ingenuity becomes severely taxed
when we remember that these are only stray
illustrations of a growing mass of sifted
evidence pointing in the direction of survival
after death. Much of this evidence has been
published, but other cases are privately known
to me, and each case requires new and often
absurd assumptions if we attempt to explain
it, away.

1 ¢)

194 Chapter XV

I will now cite some further illustrations
of the automatic script that came through
my friend Mrs. E.’s hand, and in the earlier
stages came in the wonderful manner already
mentioned; the remarkable point being that
Mrs. E. did not know what her hand had
written until the paper was turned completely
round and the message read. I know of no
other case where messages were written in
this inverted script, though there may be such.
“Mirror writing ’’ is not uncommon, ¢that is
messages written (as postcards are sometimes
written) in a script which can only be read
whien viewed in a mirror; this art is not so
difficult to acquire as inverted writing.

The following communications -are also
unlike the usual type, inasmuch as they give
us a glimpse,—if they are really veridical,—
of the state of the soul immediately after
death. Mrs. E. assured ‘me that: these mess-
ages were quite foreign to her thoughts, and
entirely beyond her ability to compose. She
had lost during the preceding winter a dearly
loved brother, who was studying at an
Engineering College near London. A friend of
his, who had been a sufferer, had pre-deceased
him, but no thought of this friend ‘was in
Mrs. E.’s mind whien one evening her hand
wrote :-——

“ T want you to believe, your friends live still and
can think of you. . . . On opening the eyes of my

Survival after Death 195

spiritual’ body I found myself unaltered, no terror,
only a strange feeling at first, then peace, a comforted
heart, love, companionship, teaching. I am ——=
[giving here his full name], and have written this, but
your brother ——— [giving the name] is here and wants
to speak to you.”

After an interval Mrs. E. felt her hand
again impelled to write, and the following
message came :—

‘““T am here (giving her brother’s name] and want
to tell you about my awakening into spirit life. I was
at first dimly conscious of figures moving in the room
and round the bed. Then the door was closed and
all was still. I then first perceived that\I was not
lying on the bed, but seemed to be floating in the air
a little above it. I saw in the dim light the body

. Stretched out. straight and with the face covered.
My first idea was that I might re-enter it, but all
‘desire to do this soon left me—the tie was broken. I
stood upon the floor, and looked round the room
where I had been so ill and been so helpless, and where
I could now once more move without restraint. The
‘room was not empty. Close to me was my father’s
father [giving the name correctly]. He had been with
me all through. There were others whom I love now,
even if I did not know much of them then. I passed
out of the room, through the next, where my mother
and were [relatives still in this life], I. tried to
speak to them. My‘voice was plain to myself, and
even loud, yet they took no notice of all I could say.
I walked through the college rooms ; much blackness

196 Chapter XV

but some light. Then I went out under the free
heavens. I will write more another sitting—power
too weak now. Good-night.’’ [His signature follows].

At another sitting, a night or two later,
the same name was written, and the thread
of the preceding narrative was abruptly taken
up without any preface :-—

“TI saw the earth lying dark and cold under the
stars in the first beginning of the wintry sunrise.
It was the landscape I knew so well, and had looked at
so often. Suddenly' sight was born to me; my eyes
became open. I saw the spiritual world’ dawn wpon
the actual, like the blossoming of a flower. For this
I have no words. Nothing I could say would make
any of you comprehend the wonder of that revelation,
but it will be yours in time. I was drawn as if by
affinity to the world which is now mine. But I am
not fettered there. I am much drawn to earth, but
by no unhappy chain. I am drawn to those I love ;
to the places much endeared.”

These messages are deeply interesting: some
of them were written in my presence and, as
I have stated, Mrs. E. in her normal waking
consciousness was convinced she could not
have composed: them. But the subliminal
self, the uprush of which Mr. Myers has
suggested lies at the root of genius; has gifts
far beyond the power of the normal self and
it is possible, though not in my opinion prob-
able, that these communications are only the

Survival after Death 197

dramatised products of Mrs. E.’s own hidden
and ,unsuspected powers. This explanation
however fails to account, for the veridical
messages that came through Mrs. E., giving
information beyond the knowledge ‘of any
persons present ; nor can it explain many of
the communications that have come through.
other automatists, such as the other cases
already cited and those which follow.

But why should we think it so extravagant
to entertain the simplest explanation—that
occasionally a channel opens from the unseen
world to ours, and that some who have
enteted that world are able to make their
continued existence known to us? Why
some, we cannot tell. And why so paltry a
manifestation ? But is anything paltry that
manifests life ?

In the dumb agony which seizes the soul
when some loved one is taken from us, in the
awful sense of separation which paralyses us
as we gaze upon the lifeless form, there comes
the unutterable yearning for some voice, some
sign from beyond ; and if, in answer to our
imploring cry for an assurance that our faith
is not in vain, that our dear one is living still,
a smile were to overspread the features of the
dead, or its lips to move, or even its finger
to be lifted, should we deem any action a
paltry thing that assures us death has not yet

198 Chapter XV

ended life, and still more that death will not
end all?
Though it be

“ Only a signal shown and a voice from out of the
darkness,”

it is not paltry! Only the dead in spirit care
not for the faintest, the rudest sign that
assures us, who are “ slow of heart to believe
in all that the prophets have spoken,” that
the soul lives freed from the flesh, that the
individual mind and memory remain, though
the clothing of,the body and brain be gone.

And it is just this natural human longing
‘that renders a dispassionate consideration of
the facts, a calm and critical weighing of the
evidence, so difficult and yet so imperative.
This is now being done, as the following case
illustrates, with a care that grows by experi-
ence, and with an honesty that none can
dispute.

MRS. HOLLAND’S SCRIPTS

Some of the most remarkable’ automatic
scripts,—which have been discussed with
critical acumen by the Research Officer of the
S.P.R.,—came to a lady of education and

‘social position resident in India. This lady
was not a spiritualist, and at the time had no
acquaintance with the members of the Society

Mrs. UWolland’s Scripts 199

for Psychical Research. As her family dis-
liked the whole subject she prefers to be known
under. the pseudonym of ‘‘ Mrs. Holland.”
Subsequently, on her return to England, she
became personally known to and esteemed by
many of the leaders and officials of the S.P.R.
Her attention having been once -casually
drawn to the subject of automatic writing
she tried the experiment and to her surprise
found her hand wrote both verse and prose
without any volition on her part; the first
asa were headed by the impromptu
ines :—

Believe in what thow canst not see,
Until the vision come to thee.

Mrs. Holland says she remains fully con-
scious during the writing, “but my hand
moves so rapidly that I seldom know what
I am writing.”’ Her interest in the subject
increased and she obtained and read Mr.
Myers’ monumental work Human Personality,
which was published after Mr. Myers’ death.
Though she did not know the author, it -was
natural that 'much of her automatic script
purported to be inspired by him. A careful
study of the messages so inspired has com-
pelled the belief that the spirit of Mr. Myers
really did control some of these messages.
Here for instance -is a very characteristic

200 Chapter XV

communication purporting to come from Mr.
Myers :-—

“To believe that the mere act of death enables a
spirit to understand the whole mystery of death is as
absurd as to imagine that the act of birth enables
an infant to understand the whole mystery of life.
I am still groping—surmising—conjecturing. The
experience is different for each one of us. . . One was
here lately who could not believe he was dead; he
accepted the new conditions as a certain stage in the
treatment of his illness.”

Then follows, not quite verbally correct,
the first two lines of Mr. Myers’ poem Sé.
Paul—a poem which Mrs. Holland declares
she had never read and of which she knew
nothing whatever. Of course it’ is possible
that she had somewhere seen these lines
quoted, though she has no recollection of this.
The automatic script is as follows :—

“ Vea, Yam Christ’s—and let the name suffice ye—
E’en as for me He greatly hath sufficed.! If it were
possible for the soul to die back into earth life again
I should die from sheer yearning to reach you—to tell
you all that we imagined is not half wonderful enough
for the truth—that immortality, instead of being a
beautiful dream, is the one, the only ‘reality, the
strong golden thread on which all the illusions of all

1 The actual lines in Mr. Myers’ St. Paul are:
a‘ Christ ! I am Christ's! and let the name suffice you,
Ay, for me too He greatly hath sufficed.”’

Mrs. Holland’s Scripts 201

the lives are strung. If I could only reach you—if I
could only tell you—I long for power, and all that
comes to me is an infinite yearning—an infinite Paty
Does any of this reach you, reach anyone, or am
only wailing as the wind wails—wordless and un-
heeded ? "—Proceedings S.P.R., Vol. XXI, p. 233.

On another occasion the Myers control
wrote :—

“It may be that those who die suddenly suffer
no prolonged obscuration of consciousness, but for
my own experience the unconsciousness was exceed-
ingly prolonged.”

And again,

“The reality is infinitely more wonderful than our
most daring conjectures. Indeed, no conjecture is
sufficiently daring.”

The hypothesis that these messages are due
to dramatic creations of Mrs. Holl&4nd’s sub-
liminal.self becomes increasingly difficult to
believe when we find other wholly different
types of messages purporting to come from
Mr. Ed. Gurney and the Hon. Roden Noel,
who were also entirely unknown to Mrs.
Holland. When they were on earth I knew
these distinguished men personally, and, was
in frequent correspondence with each of them ;
hence from my own knowledge I can affirm
that these communications are singularly

202 Chapter XV

characteristic of the respective and diverse
emperaments of each.

But there was more than this, for not only
was some very striking blank ,verse written
by the Roden Noel control, but mention is
made of places and persons associated with
Mr. Roden Noel that were unknown to Mrs.
Holland. In fact the automatist did not
know who was controlling her hand when it
wrote :—

“‘T was always a seeker,—until it seemed at times
as if the quest was more to me than the prize,—only
the attainments of my search were generally like
rainbow gold, alway beyond and afar. . . I am not
oppressed with the desire that animates some of us
to share our knowledge or optimisms with you all
before the time. The solution of the great Problem
I could not give you—I am still very far away from
it ; the abiding knowledge of the inherent truth and
beauty into which all the inevitable ugliness of exist-
ence finally resolve themselves will be yours in time.”

Preceding this had come the following :—

“ This is for A.W., ask him what the date, May 26th,
1894, meant to him—to me—and to F.W.H. I do
not think they will find it hard to recall, but, if so,
let them ask Nora.”

Here it is to be noted Mrs. Holland, who
was in India, knew nothing of Dr. A. W.

Mrs. ITolland’s Scripts 203

Verrall, whose name is suggested by the
initials A.W., nor that Mrs. Sidgwick was
called Nora (her Christian name being Eleanor)
but the whole context eventually suggested
to Miss Johnson (the Research Officer of the
S.P.R.), to whom the script was sent, a
message.from Roden Noel, who was known —
both to Dr. Verrall, Mr. F. W. H. Myers, and
Mrs. Sidgwick. Miss Johnson adds : “It was
appropriate Wwe should be told to ask Nora
(Mrs. Sidgwick) if we could not find out for
ourselves, since he (Roden Noel) was an
intimate friend of Dr. Sidgwick.”” Now the
date given was precisely that of the death of
Roden Noel. ‘Though Mrs. Holland thought
she may have once seen some poems of Mr.
Noel’s, she knew nothing of him personally
nor of the date of his death.

The fetish of subliminal or telepathic know-
ledge is here hard to invoke and becomes.
absurd when we find one of the earliest of
Mrs. Holland’s scripts, written in India and
purporting to come from Mr. Myers, gives a
minute and lengthy description of an elderly
gentleman, which ends up as follows :—

“Jt is like entrusting a°“message on which infinite
importance deperids to a sleeping person. Get a
proof,—try for a proof if you feel this is a waste of
time without. Send this to Mrs. Verrall, 5, Selwyn
Gardens, Cambridge.”

204 . Chapter x V

When this script was received by Miss
Johnson she at once recognized the description
as resembling Dr. Verrall, and Mrs. Verrall’s
address given was perfectly correct. Further,
when the script was shown to Mrs. Verrall
she said the whole description was remarkably
good and characteristic of her husband, who
was then living. Mrs. Verrall, who now alas !
has also passed:into the unseen, states that
no portrait or description of her husband had
ever been published, nor was her address
given in “Human Personality,’’ which, as
stated, Mrs. Holland had read. On being
questioned Mrs. Holland declared she had
never seen, and had no conception of Mrs.
Verrall’s address. Of the good faith of Mrs.
Holland there is no doubt whatever, and she
herself was most anxious to find out whether
any of her automatic writing came from her
sub-conscious memory.

Other very remarkable cases of super-
normal knowledge in Mrs. Holland’s script
are described in Miss Johnson’s long memoir
in the Proceedings of the‘S.P.R., one in
particular is: worth noting. Mrs. Holland’s
hand wrote, on January 17th, 1904,—purport-
ing to be under the control of Mr. Myers :—

““The sealed envelope is not to be opened yet. I
am unable to make your hand form Greek characters
and so I cannot give the text as I wish—only the

“| na

Cross-Correspondence 205 -

reference—z Cor. xvi., 13 [‘ Watch ye, stand fast in’
the faith, quit you like men, be strong’]. Oh I am
feeble with eagerness. How can I best be identified !
It means so much apart from the mere personal love
and longing. Edmund’s [Mr. Ed. Gurney] help is not
here with me just now. I am trying alone amid
unspeakable difficulties.”

Now Mrs. Sidgwick had asked Mrs. Verrall,
who was also a remarkable automatist, as a
test to give a favourite text of her husband’s
and a fairly satisfactory answer was obtained ;
of this Mrs. Holland knew absolutely nothing,
but om the very same day, Jan. 17th, 1904,
that Mrs. Verrall’s script in Cambridge made
teferences to a sealed letter and to a text,
Mrs.-Holland’s hand in India automatically
wrote the message just quoted. The. text
1 Cor. 16, 13, was not the one asked for by
Mrs. Sidgwick, but it is the one inscribed
in Greek over the gateway of Selwyn College,
Cambridge, which Mr. Myers constantly
passed, and on which, owing to a slight verbal
error in the Greek inscription, Mr. Myers had
more than once remarked to Mrs. Verrall.
Mrs. Holland had never’ been in Cambridge,
had no connection with the University, and
knew absolutely nothing of the Greek in-
Scription on the gateway of Selwyn College.

The text incident may be an example of
what has been already referred to as “‘ cross-
correspondence,” that is two widely separated

206 Chapter XV

automatists, giving somewhat similar replies,
‘or giving a sentence the meaning of which
is unintelligible until it is supplemented by a
urther communication through another auto-
mist, who has no knowledge of the other
fragmentary message. All this looks as if a
single unseen personality controlled the two
automatists, in order to avoid any explanation
by telepathy or the subliminal self. The
interesting point being, as I have pointed out
already, that only since the death of Mr.
Myers and Dr. Hodgson,—who were familiar
with this favourite method of explaining away
the significance of these messages,-—have
numerous cases of cross-correspondence arisen
among independent and widely separated
automatists.

CHAPTER XVI

EVIDENCE OF IDENTITY IN THE
DISCARNATE

‘<The Ghost in man, the Ghost that once was man
But cannot wholly free itself from man,
Are calling to each other thro’ a dawn
Stranger than earth has ever seen; the veil
Is rending and the voices of the day
Are heard across the voices of the dark.”’
— Tennyson.

THESE well-known’ lines of our great poet
are to-day receiving ampler confirmation than
was thought possible a generation ago. In
the present chapter I will cite some remarkable
evidence of survival obtained through personal
friends of my own.

I have previously given illustrations of
the wonderful mediumistic power of the Rev.
Stainton Moses and of the high regard in
which he was held. No one who knew him
could for a moment doubt, as Mr. Myers says,
“his sanity or his sincerity, his veracity or
his honour,” and those who knew him person-
ally, as I did, could understand the esteem and _

207

208 Chapter XVI

affection which his colleagues at University
College School and hig intimate friends always
felt for him. I will here briefly narrate two
remarkable cases in favour’ of the identity
of the sot disant spirit’ which came through
Mr. Moses. These cases are well known to
those familiar with the literature of spiritual-
ism, but may not be known to many of my
readers :-—

THE ABRAHAM FLORENTINE CASE.

In.August, 1874, Mr. Moses was staying with a
friend, a medical man, in the Isle of Wight, and at
one of the “ sittings’? which they had together a
communication was received with singular impetuosity
purporting to be from a spirit who gave the name
Abraham Florentine, and stated that he had been
engaged in the United States war of 1812, but only
lately had entered into the spiritual world, having
died at Brooklyn, U.S.A., on August 5th, 1874, at
the age of eighty-three years, one month, and seven-
teen days. None present knew of such a person, but
Mr. Moses published the particulars as above stated
in a London newspaper, asking at the same time
American journals to copy,.so that, if possible, the
statements made might be verified or disproved.

In, course of time an American lawyer, a “ claim-
agent,” who had been auditing the claims of soldiers in
New York, saw the paragraph, and wrote to an Ameri- -
can newspaper to say that he had come across the name
A. Florentine, and that a full record of the person
who made the claim could be obtained from the U:S.
Adjutant-General’s office, Accordingly .the head-

Abraham Florentine Case 209

quarters of the U.S. army was applied to, and an official
teply was received, stating that a private named
Abraham Florentine had served in the American war
in the early part of the century. Ultimately the
widow of Abraham Florentine was found to be alive.

Dr. Crowell, a Brooklyn physician, by means of a
directory, discovered her address in Brooklyn, and
saw and. questioned the widow. She stated that her
husband had fought in the war of 1812, that he was
a rather impetuous man, and had died in Brooklyn
on August 5th, 1874, and that his eighty-third birth-
day was on the previous June 8th. He was therefore
eighty-three years, one month, twenty-seven days old
when he died, the only discrepancy being seventeen
for twenty-seven days, a mistake that might easily
have arisen in recording the message made through
Mr. Moses when entranced in the Isle of Wight. Full
details of this case were published in Vol. XI. of the
“ Proceedings of the S.P.R.”

What are we to say to this evidence ? The
newspaper files remain to attest the facts,
which seem to be absolutely irrefragable.
The only surmise that can be made is that
Mr. Moses had seen some notice of the man’s
death and career in an American newspaper,
and either had forgotten the fact or had
purposely deceived his friends. But then,
this could only have been one of many similar
cases of forgetfulness or deception, and before
we can asstume this we have to prove that
Mr. Moses did obtain the required information
by means of newspapers or other mundane

PY

210 Chapter XVI

channels of information. ‘This Mrs. Moses is
‘certain he did not, and no one as yet has been
able to show that he did, or to find a particle
of evidence on behalf of the wearisome and
motiveless deception which must, in this
event, habitually have characterised a man of
spotless integrity and honour. Moreover, it
is wholly unlikely an obscure private soldier
should have an obituary notice in an American
newspaper, or if it were so, that it should
have been noted by English readers. In
fine, after critically examining this case, Mr.
F. W. H. Myers remarks: “I hold that the
surviving spirit of Abraham Florentine did
really communicate with Mr. Moses.’”

It is, however, necessary tq submit every
case of “ spiritualistic ”’ communication to the
most rigorous scrutiny before deciding on its
probable origin ; what to a novice may seem
to have an extra-terrene origin may really be
a telepathic influence from some living person
or the revival of some forgotten impression.

: Long experience in the work of psychical
research has shown the danger arising from
what has been called cryptomnesia, i.e. a
hidden memory. This explanation has indeed
been suggested by some psychical reseatchers
as possible in the foregoing case (unwarrant-
ably I think), but it cannot apply to the next.;
which affords another of the remarkable proofs

1 Proc. S.P.R.,” Vol. XI, p.\407.

Blanche Abercromby Case 21

of spirit identity obtained through the auto-
matic writing of Mr. S. Moses.

THE BLANCHE ABERCROMBY CASE.

The following case Mr. Myers considered to be one
of extreme interest and value, owing to the fact that
only after Mr.- Moses’ death a series of chances led
Mr. Myers to discover additional proofs of its veracity.
The spirit purporting to communicate through Mr.
Moses was that of a lady, known to Mr. Myers, and
who will be called Blanche Abercromby. This lady
died on a Sunday afternoon at a country house some
200 miles from London. Of her illness and death
Mr. Moses knew absolutely nothing, but that same
Sunday evening a communication, purporting to come
from her, and stating that “she had just quitted the
body,” was matie to Mr. Moses at his secluded lodgings
in London.

A few days later Mr. Moses’ hand was again
controlled by ‘the same spirit and a few lines were
written purporting to come from her and asserted
by the spirit to be in her own handwriting, as a proof
of her identity. There is no reason to suppose Mr.
Moses had ever seen her handwriting, for he had only
met her once casually at a séance. The facts com-
mounicated to Mr. Moses by the deceased lady were
private; actordingly he mentioned the matter to no
‘one, and gummed down the pages of the communica-
tion in his note book and marked it “private matter.”

-When after the death of Mr. Moses his documents
were examined by Mr. Myers, he received permission |
from the executors to open these sealed pages. To
his astonishment he found the communication to be

212 Chapter XVI

from the lady whom he had known, and on comparing
the handwriting of the script with letters from this
lady when on earth he found the resemblance was
incontestable. He submitted the matter to the lady’s
son and to an expert in handwriting and both affirmed
that the spirit writing and that by the lady when
living were from the same person. Numerous
peculiarities were found common to the two, and the
contents of the automatic script were also character-
istic of the deceased lady. The ordinary handwriting
of Mr. Moses is quite different from that which usually
comes in his automatic script, and that again was
wholly unlike the caligraphy in the present case.

Here no hypothesis of telepathy from the
living, or forgotten memory, or the sub-
liminal self of Mr. Moses, affords any explan-
ation, and I regard this case as one of the
strongest links in the chain ‘of evidence on
behalf of survival after death.. As a rule the
caligraphy of the dutomatic script is not the
same as that of the person who purports to
communicate, nor should we expect it to be
so, if the communication be effected by tele-
pathy from the deceased person.

There are however some other cases where
the soi-disant spirit occasionally seems able to
guide the hand of the medium so perfectly
as to produce an accurate reproduction of the
deceased’s handwriting- A notablé instance
of this occurred in the case of the late Professor
Henry Sidgwick, from whom a characteristic

Evidence of Handwriting 213

communication came through automatic
writing to which his signature was affixed.
This signature is identical with that in the
many letters I received from Prof. Sidgwick
When on earth, and here also there is no
reason to believe the medium, a lady I know
personally, had ever seen Professor Sidgwick’s
handwriting.’ .

Bearing in mind the hypothesis of crypt-
omnesia, I will now cite some remarkable
messages which were sent to us by my
venerable friend the late Mr. Hensleigh
Wedgwood, the cousin and brother-in-law of
Charles Darwin, and himself a well-known
savant. Mr. Wedgwood was deeply interested
in psychical research and had many sittings
for automatic writing (by planchette) with
two valued friends of his, ‘‘ Mrs. R.”’ and her
sister ‘‘ Mrs. V.,’’ both of whom were psychic.
In the present case Mrs. R. was the auto-
matist, a lady known for some years to Mr.
Fred. Myers, and of whose scrupulous good
faith there can be no more question than of
that of Mr. Wedgwood himself. Mrs. R. and
Mr. Wedgwood sat opposite each other at a
small table, the former with her left hand and

1 In Human Personality, Vol II, p. 168, Mr. Myers refers to
this element of handwriting as a proof of indentity, and gives a
remarkable «case in point on p. 466. An able, critical paper by
Sir H. Babington Smith, C.B, which discusses this and other
_ evidence given by automatic writing, was published in Vol. V of
the Proceedings S.P.R. :

214 Chapter XVI

the latter with his right on the planchette.
Mr. Wedgwood states that the writing came
upright to him but upside down to his partner,
and so far from guiding the planchette his only
difficulty was to avoid interfering with its
rapid movement. His partner declared the
same, and moreover could not have written
rapidly, or at all, in this inverted manner.
Mrs. R.’s notes, confirmed by Mr. Wedgwood,
are as follows :—

THE DAVID BRAINERD CASE.

October roth, Friday, at ——, Mr. Wedgwood and
I sitting. The board moved after a short pause and
one preliminary circling.

“ David—David—David—dead 143 years.”

The butler at this moment announced lunch, and
Mr. Wedgwood said to the sot-disant spirit, ‘‘ Will
you go on for us afterwards, as we must break off
now?” |

“Yowill try.”

During lunch Mr. Wedgwood was reckoning up the
date indicated as 1747, and conjecturing that the con-
trol was perhaps David Hume, who he thought had
died about then. On our beginning again to sit,
the following was volunteered :—

“Tam not Hume I have come with Theodora’s
sister. I was attracted to her during her life in
America. My work was in that land, and my earthly
toil was cut short early, as hers has been. I died at
thirty years old. I toiled five years, carrying forward
the lamp of God’s truth as I knew it.”

The David Brainerd Case 215

Mr. ‘Wedgwood remarked that he must have been
a missjonary.

“Yes, in Susquehannah and other places.”

“ Can you give any name besides David ?””

“ David Bra—David Bra—David Brain—David Brainé
—David Brain.”

Mr. W,: ‘ Do you mean that your name is Braine ?”’

“ Very nearly right.”

Mr. W.: “ Try again.”

“ David Braine. Not quite all the name; right so
far as it goes. .;. . I was born in 1717.”

Mr. W.: ‘‘ Are you an American ? ”

“ America I hold to be my country as we consider
things. I worked at——’’ (sentence ends with a
line of D’s).

After an interval Mr. Wedgwood said he thought
it had’ come into his head who-our control was. He
had some recollection that in the 18th century a man
named David Brainerd was missionary to the North
American Indiansé We sat again and the following
was written :—

““T am glad you know me. I had not power to
complete name or give more details. I knew that
secret of the district. It was guarded by the Indians,
and was made known to two independent circles.
Neither of them succeeded, but the day will come
that will uncover the gold,’ A

It was suggested that this meant Heavenly truth.

“I spoke of earthly gold.”

Mr. Wedgwood said the writing was so faint he
thought power was failing, +

“Yes, nearly gone. I wrote during my five years
of work. It kept my heart alive.”

Mr. Wedgwood writes :—

216 Chapter XVI

f could not think at first where I had ever heard
of Brainerd, but I learn from my daughter in London
that my sister-in-law, who lived with me 40 or 50
years ago, was a great admirer of Brainerd, and
seemed to have an account of his life, but I am quite
certain that I never opened the book and knew
nothing of the dates, which are all correct, as well as
his having been a missionary to the Susquehannahs.

My daughter has sent me extracts from his life,
stating that he was born in 1718, and not 1717 as
planchette wrote. But the Biographical Dictionary
says that he died in 1747, aged 30.

Mrs. R. writes that she had no knowledge whatever
of David Brainerd before this.

The Biographical Dictionary gives the following :—

“Brainerd, David. A celebrated American.mission-
ary, who signalised himself by his successful endeavours

- to convert the Indians on the Susquehannah, Dela-
ware, &c. Died, aged 30, 1747.”

It is perhaps noteworthy in connection with the last
sentence of the planchette writing that in the life of
Brainerd by Jonathan Edwards extracts given from his
journal show that he wrote a good deal, e.g., ‘‘ Feb. 3,
1744. Could not but write as well as meditate,” &c.
“Feb. 15, 1745. Was engaged in writing almost all
the day.” He invariably speaks of comfort in, con-
nection with writing.

The other case given by Mr. Wedgwood
is too lengthy ‘to quote in detail, but a brief
summary. is given because, like the preceding,
it is one of the few cases where the sot-disant
spirit asserts he lived on earth very many
years ago.

The Colonel Gurwood Case 217

THE COLONEL GURWOOD CASE.

In this case the automatist was also Mr.
Wedgwood’s friend Mrs. R., a lady of un-
impeachable integrity as already stated, and
the mode of sitting with planchette was the
same as described in the previous case. The
sitting took place in June, 1889, and is
recorded in the Journal of the S.P.R. for
that ‘year. Notes of the sitting were written
at the time and the planchette writing copied.

As soon as the sitting began planchette wrote that
a-spirit was present who wanted to draw ; forthwith
a rough drawing was made of the top of an embattled
wall, or mural coronet, from which an arm holding a
sword arose. Planchette wrote, “Sorry I can’t do
better, was meant for a test, J.G.” Asked what the
drawing represented, the answer came, “ Something
that was given me.” Asked if J.G. was a man or
woman, planchette wrote “Man, John G.” Mr.
Wedgwood said he knew a J. Giffard, was that right ?
The reply came, ‘“ Not Giffard, John Gttrwood, no
connection of yours.”’ Asked How he died, “I killed
iyself on Christmas Day, it will be forty-four years
ago next Christmas,” ie. in 1845. Asked if he were
in the Army, the reply came, “‘ Yes, but it was the
pen, not the sword that did for me.” Asked if pen
was tight, and if so, was he an author who failed ?
the teply was “ Yes, pen, I did not fail, the pen was
too much for me after the wound.” Asked where he
was wounded the reply was ‘‘ In the Peninsular in the
head, I was wounded in 1810.”” Asked if the drawing

218 Chapter XVI

was a crest and had anything to do with the wound

‘planchette wrote ‘‘ It came from that and was given
me, the drawing was a test; remember my name,
power fails to explain, stop now.”

Mr. Wedgwood then recalled that a Colonel Gurwood
edited the despatches of the Duke of Wellington, but
he had never read any history of the Peninsular war
and knew no details of Gurwood’s life or of his crest :
Mrs. R. was wholly ignorant of the matter. After
the sitting Mr. Wedgwood looked up the matter and
found’ that Colonel Gurwood led the forlorn hope at
the storming of Ciudad Rodrigo in 1812,} and the
Annual Register states that he then “ received a
wound in the skull which affected him for the remainder
of his life.” In recognition of his bravery he received
a grant of arms in 1812, which are specified in the.
Book of Family Cvrests,—and symbolised in the
crest,—as follows, “‘ Out of a mural coronet, a ruined
castle in centre, and therefrom an arm, holding a
scimitar.” The drawing given as a test is practically
this crest, though the ruined castle was doubtless too
difficult to be drawn by planchette. Furthermore,
the Annual Register for 1845 states that Colonel
Gurwood committed suicide on Christmas: Day that
year, in a fit of despondency, and remarks that it was
probably owing to the overstrain caused by his
‘laborious work in editing the despatches ; this explains
the automatic writing, ‘‘Pen was too much for me
after the wound.” None of these facts were known
to Mr. Wedgwood or Mrs. R. before the automatic
writing came.

1 Planchette wrote 1810, if the figures were correctly read.

Evidence of Identity 219

In subsequent sittings Colonel Gurwood
again controlled planchette and gave some
further details of his life, the storming of the
fort and names of persons, all of which were
found to be correct so far as they could be
verified. But the evidential value of these
later sittings must be discounted, owing to the
fact that Mr. Wedgwood had meanwhile
looked up Napier’s Peninsular War and might
have gained some of the information from its
pages.

Many other striking illustrations of survival
after death might be given, but the reader
who is interested must go to the original
papers to which I have referred earlier. Sir
Oliver Lodge has had some remarkable casés
of “spirit identity’ through other auto-
matists, and especially through Mrs. Piper,
with whom he has had numerous sittings.
These cases he has critically investigated:
many of them relate to himself and his family,
revealing facts entirely unknown to the
medium and at the time unknown to Sir
Oliver, which subsequently have been found
to be correct. The conviction to which
Sir Oliver has been driven, from his own
personal and long continued experience,
and which he has publicly avowed, is that
there is undeniably evidence of survival after
death.

One of the most recent cases corroborative

220 Chapter XVI

of this conclusion telates to messages purport-
ing to come from his gallant and beloved son
Lieut. Raymond Lodge, who lost his life in
the war. Particulars of this case were read
before the Society for Psychical Research,
and I made an abstract of that paper,—kindly
revised by Sir O. Lodge,—for insertion , in
this place. But since then Sir’Oliver has
published his work ‘‘ Raymond,’ where
additional evidence is given, and as this book
has been so widely read and noticed in the
press it seems needless to refer to the matter
further. Moreover, nearly all the evidence
I have cited has come through private and
unpaid mediums, and this was not the case
in all the Raymond messages.

The Right Hon. Gerald Balfour has recently
(Dec. 1916) read a paper before the S.P.R.,
which in the opinion of some competent judges
affords the most striking evidence of survival
yet obtained. For it apparently demonstrates
the continued and vigorous mental activity
of the late Professor A. W. Verrall and the
late Professor Butcher, both eminent classical
scholars. The evidence exhibits a range of
knowledge, and tonstructive ability in framing
a classical puzzle, such as could not be
accounted for by telepathy, or the subliminal
self of the automatist. The automatic script
came through a lady who is well known to
Mr. Balfour, and to whom reference has

The Ear of Dionysius. 221

already been made under her pseudonym of
“Mrs. Willett.”

Mr. Balfour affirms with confidence that
Mrs. Willett is as little familiar with classical
‘subjects as the average of educated women.
‘Nevertheless recondite classical allusjons con-
nected with the ‘“ Ear of Dionysius” (which
forms the title of the paper) and other obscure
topics were given in the script, the whole
forming a literary puzzle which remained
insoluble, until later on the script furnished
the key. Mr.‘ Balfour says it is difficult to
suppose that the materials employed in the
construction of this puzzle could have been
drawn from the mind of any living person ;
he believes they must be ascribed to some
disembodied intelligence or intelligences, and
there are cogent reasons for believing that the
‘real authors were,—as they profess to be,—
the late Professors Verrall and Butcher. The
paper has now been published in the “ Pro-
ceedings ” of the S.P:R. Vol. XXIX.

CHAPTER XVII
EVIDENCE FROM ABROAD OF SURVIVAL

‘* There is no death, what seems so is transition;
This life of mortal breath .
Is but a suburb-of the life Elysian,
Whose portal we call death.”’
—Longfellow.

Ir must be borne in mind that competent
psychical researchers in other parts of ‘the
world besides the United Kingdom have. for
many years past been at work, and obtained
what they deemed to be conclusive evidence
of survival. In this chapter I will cite a
fragment of the evidence that comes to us
from America and Russia.

No investigator of psychical phenomena
has given more time to the critical investigation
of the evidence on behalf of survival than the
late Dr. Hodgson during his residence in the.
United States. In fact he made this subject
practically his sole occupation for many years
before his death. He was so far from being
credulous that he detected and exposed many
spurious phenomena, a in my opinion he

Evidence from Abroad 223

carried his scepticism too far as regards other
mediums than Mrs’ Piper, with whom he had
innumerable sittings. At first he attempted
to explain away the results he obtained
through Mrs. Piper ; but ultimately was
driven to the spirit hypothesis; his own
words are: ‘‘ Having tried the hypothesis
of telepathy from the living for several years

I have no hesitation in affirming with
the most absolute assurance that the ‘ spirit ’
hypothesis is justified by its fruits and the
other hypothesis is not.’

The conclusion at which Dr. Hodgson
arrived, after his prolonged and critical experi-
mental study of Mrs. Piper, he summed up
in the following words :—

“AY the present time I cannot profess to have
any,doubt but that the chief ‘communicators’ to
whom I have referred in the foregoing pages [of his
report] are veritably the personalities that they claim
to be, that they have survived the change we call
death, and that they have directly communicated
with us whom we call living, through Mrs. Piper’s
entranced organisin.””! :

However improbable sceptics may consider
this conclusion, we must remember ‘that Dr.
Hodgson began his long and arduous invest-.
igation with just the same doubt and even

1“ Proc S.P.R.,” Vol. XIII, p. 406.

224 Chapter XVIT

disbelief in the “ spiritualistic ’ hypothesis as
any of his critics may entertain. Moreover
he was not only a remarkably sane and
shrewd investigator, but one specially skilled
in exposing fraud and illusion. This was
shown, as I have remarked, by his exposure
of various alleged spiritualistic phenomena
which had mystified and baffled some of the
ablest enquirers. Hence those who have not
had Dr. Hodgson’s experience have no right
to place mere notions of what is probable and
improbable, or possible and impossible, against
his deliberate opinion, arrived at after many
years of patient and painstaking enquiry.

If it appeared that any othef competent
investigator, after an equally exhaustive
research, had come to an opposite conclusion,
sceptics would be justified in their hesitancy
to accept the experimental evidence of survival
after death. But this is precisely what cannot
be adduced. On the contrary, so far as I
know, every trained observer, of any nation-
ality, who has devoted, years to a similar
experimental research, either has arrived at
practically the same:conclusion as Dr. Hodgson
and -other able investigators, or has been
forced to admit that the phenomena in
question are at present wholly inexplicable.

Since Dr. Hodgson’s death his work in
America has been chiefly carried on by his
friend Dr. J. H. Hyslop, formerly Professor

American Investigators 225

at Columbia University. Dr. Hyslop, who
now lives in New York, has devoted his life
to this work and is pre-eminent as an able,
courageous and indefatigable worker at
psychical research. Amid his amazingly
voluminous contributions to the ‘‘Proceed-
ings” and ‘Journal of the Américan Society
for Psychical Research,” there are numerous
papers affording striking evidences of survival
after death. This evidence has driven him to
abandon the agnostic views he formerly held
and become a tonvinced believer in the spirit
hypothesis. As Dr. Hyslop is a trained
psychologist his opinion is all the . more
valuable.

During the last six years Dr. Hyslop has
had constant sittings with a lady, Mrs.
Chenoweth (pseudonym), who has developed
strong mediumistic powers. The following is
a brief narrative of one of the evidential cases
of survival obtained through Mrs. Chenoweth,
whose entire trustworthiness and honesty are
not disputed. This case illustrates the trivial
nature of the incidents given to afford identi-
fication.

THE TAUSCH CASE.

. Dr. Hyslop states that he received a letter from

a lady in Germany, of whom he had never heard

before, asking him if he could recommend a psychic,
Q

~

226 Chapter XVII

as she had recently lost her husband, and in her great
distress wanted to find some evidenee that would
assure her of her husband’s continued existence.
Dr. Hyslop answered that he knew of no psychic in
Germany, but if she would come to America he would
arrange for sittings with a psychic in whom he had
“confidence. The lady replied that this was impossible,
but gave the name (different’ from, her own) and
address of a sister in Boston, U.S.A., who might take
her place.

Accordingly Dr. Hyslop arranged for the sister to
meet him, but gave her no information of thé psychic’ s
name or address; nor did he give any information, to
the psychic (Mrs. Chenoweth) of the visitor or the
object of the sitting. Before admitting the visitor
Dr. Hyslop put Mrs. Chenoweth into ‘a trance state,
avhen the normal faculties are in abeyance ; in fact,
Dr. Hyslop was satisfied that the medium did not
even know whether her visitor wag a man or a woman.

Automatic ‘writing. by Mrs. Chenoweth’s hand
began and the unseen communicator indicated that
a gentleman was present who was anxious to make
his existence known to his wife, that he was a phil-
osopher and a friend of the late Professor William
James of Harvard, that his: mother was dead, and to
indicate his identity pointed to a cavity in his,mouth
where a tooth had been extracted. Of course none of
these facts were known to Dr. Hyslop, but in the
hope they might apply to the husband of the lady
who wrote to him, he communicated them to the
widow in Germany and found they were all correct ;
her husband had been a lecturer on philosophy, was
a friend of*Prof. W. James ‘and had lost a tooth,

_ though the tavity was not visible. Then the unseen

The Tausch Case 227

communicator stated the gentlemay just before his
‘decease, had great pain in his head, with ‘confusion
of ideas and longed for home, sadding that he was
not away from homé where he‘died, but it was not
like his home, All this turned out to be true, he died
in his old hont in Germany and not in his home in
America.

Then some striking evidence.of identity’came, the
communicatot stated the deceased wished to prove
that he was not a fool to believe in spirit, and that
he avas greatly interested in some records which had
been lent to him “ by his friend James.’’ In response
‘to Dr, Hyslop’s enquiries the-widow wrote that before
her husband’s death Prof. James had lent him some
records to read which had impressed him. All present
at the sitting were of course wholly ignotant of this
and of the other incidents. The unseen communitator
went on to say that he was fondbf fixing things and
putting clocks,to right; that he -used to annotate
his books and apparently attempted to sign his name,
for the letters T. h. came. In reply to enquiries the
widow wrote to Dr. Hyslop that her husband, did
fuss a great deal about clocks, that he annotated his
books and alwalys read with a*pencil ‘in his hand.
Now the name of the deceased was Tausch, the first
and last letters-of which wére given.

‘Later ont the communicator made great efforts to
give his name, by automatic writing through the
entranced Mrs. Chenoweth, and without any help
from Dr. Hyslop (who of course knew the namé
but no other particulars) there came “ Taussh, Tauch
and Taush,” phonetically correct. Dy. Hyslop then
addressed the communicator in German and got
replies in German, among them that the visitor was

228 Chapter XVII

his ‘‘ Geschwister,” which was correct, though Mrs.

Chenoweth (through whom of course the automatic
writing came) only knew four, words of German, not
included in these replies. Other points of interest
establishing identity also came, such as that the’
deceased used to carry a small bdg ‘containing’ his
manuscripts and reading glass, and that he had taker
a long tailway j journey shortly before his death. In
reply to enquiry Mrs. Tausch wrote that her husband
always used to carry a small bag in which he put his
manuscripts and eye glasses, and that he had, taken
a long rail journey shortly before his death.

Dr. Hyslop says, all the incidents described were
unknown to him and required confirmation by cor-
respondence with Mrs. Tausch in Germany, the only
living person whd knew their ‘truth. Nor in all
his years of sittings with Mrs. Chenoweth has Dr.
Hyslop ever had any commuhications containing
similar incidents to those above described. The name
might have been filched by telepathy from Dr. Hyslop’s
mind, but there is no evidence that Mrs. Chenoweth
has the slightest telepathic . pefcipience. Even if
Mrs. Chenoweth had known the name and address
of Mrs. Tausch'in Germany (which of course she did
not), she could not have communicated with her, as
only 36 hours elapsed from the first to the last sitting.
There was no one in America who could have given
her the information.

I agree with Dr. Hyslop that no adequate
explanation of ‘this case by telepathy or
subliminal 'knowledge or collusion on the
part ,of the medium can be given, and'that

Russian Investigators 229

the simplest and most reasonable solution is
that the information was derived frorn the
mind of the deceased person.

But I must draw to a close my imperfect
selection from the mass of first-hand evidence
that is being accumulated in proof of spirit
identity.

The following case is chosen because it
comes from wholly independent and able
investigators in Russia. Here too any explan-
ation based on collusion, telepathy, or the
knowledge. of those present, is out of the
question. Unfortunately the evidence is
soinewhat lengthy, but as it combines the
manifestation of physical phenomena with
evidence of the identity of the communicating
intelligence, it forms an important link be-
tween the two classes of phenomena. No paid
or professional mediums were present, and the
bona fides ‘of all taking part appears to be
unquestionable.

‘This case is quoted front Vol. VI. of the
“ Proceedings”’ of the S.P.R., where the
reader will find other similar evidential cases
in a valuable paper by Mr. F: W. H. Myers.

THE PERELIGUINE CASE,

A sitting was held in the house df M. A. Nartzeff,
at Tambof, Russia, on Nov. 18th, 1887. M. Nartzeff
belongs to the Russian nobility and is a landed

230 Chapter XVII

proprietor; his aunt, housekeeper and the official
physician to the municipality of Tambof were the
only other persons present.

The sitting began at 10 p.m. at a table placed in
the middle of the room, by the light of a night-light
placed on the mantelpiece. All doors were closed.
The left hand of each sitter was placed on the right
hand of his neighbour, and each foot touched the
neighbour’s foot, so that* during the whole of the
sitting all hands and feet were under control. Sharp
raps were heard in the floor, and afterwards in the
wall and the ceiling, after which the blows sounded
immediately in the middle of the table, as if someone
had struck it from above with his fist ; and with such
violence, and so often, that the table trembled the
whole time.

M. ‘Nartzeff asked, ‘‘Can you answer rationally,
giving three raps for yes, one for no?” “ Yes.”
“Do you wish to answer by using the alphabet ? ”
“Ves.” “Spell your name.” «The alphabet was
repeated, and the letters indicated by three raps—
“ Anastasie Péréliguine.” ‘‘I beg you to say now
why you have come and what you desire.” “Iama
wretched woman. Pray for me. Yesterday, during
the day, I died at the hospital. The day before
yesterday I poisoned myself with matches.” ‘‘ Give
us some details about yourself. How.old were you?
Give a rap for each year.” Seventeen raps. ‘ Who
were you?” ‘‘I was housemaid. I poisoned myself
with ' matches.” ‘‘ Why did you poison yourself?”
“JT will not say. I will say nothing more.”

After this a heavy table which was near the wall,
outside the chain of hands, came..up rapidly three
times towards the table round which the chain was

The Péréliguine Case 231

made, and each tine it was pushed backwards, no
‘one knew by what means. Seven raps (the- signal
agreed upon for the close of the sitting) were now
heard in the wall; and at 11.20 p.m. the séance came
to an end.

(Here follow the signatures of all those present,
with their attestation).

Those who were present also signed the following
attestation :—

““The undersigned having been present at the
séance of November 18th, 1887, at the house of M.A.
N. Nartzeff, hereby certify that they had no previous
knowledge of the existence or the death of Anastasie
Péréliguine, and that they heard her name for the
first time at the above mentioned séance.”

Enquiries were then made as to the truth of the
message purporting to have come from an unknown
suicide. Dr. Touloucheff, the official physician who
was present at the sitting, and who signed the above
documents, states that at first he did not believe
there was any truth in the message. For he writes :—

“In my capacity as physician of the municipality
I am at once informed by the police of all cases of
suicide. But as Péréliguine had added that her death
had taken place at the hospital, and since at Tambof
we have only one Hospital, that of the ‘ Institytions
de Bienfaisance,’ which is not within my official
survey, and whose authorities, in such cases as this,
themselves send for the police, or the magistrate ;—
I sent a letter to my colleague, Dr. Sundblatt, the
head physician of this hospital, and without explaining
my reason ‘simply asked him to inform me whether —
there had been any recent case of suicide at the
- hospital, and, if so, to give me the name and partic-

232 Chapter XVII

ulars. The following is a copy of his reply, certified
by Dr. Sundblatt’s own signature.
(Signed) ‘‘ N. TouLoucHeErr.”

“ November Igth, 1887.
“My dear Colleague,—On the 16th of this month
I was on duty; and on that day two patients were
admitted to the Hospital, who had poisoned them-
selves with phosphorus. The first, Vera Kosovitch,
aged 38, wife of a clerk in the public service . . . was
taken in at 8 p.m.; the second, a servant named
Anastasie Péréliguine, aged 17, was taken in at 10
p.m. This second patient had swallowed, besides
an infusion of boxes of matches, a glass of kerosene,
and at the time of hér admission was already very ill.
She died at 1 p.m. on the 17th, and the post-mortem
examination has been made to-day. Kosovitch died
yesterday, and the post-mortem is fixed for to+
morrow. Kosovitch said that she had taken the
phosphorus in an access of melancholy, but Péréliguine

did not state her reason for poisoning herself.
" (Signed) “ Tu. SuNDBLAT®.”’

When M. ,Nartzeff was asked if the housekeeper,
who was at the sitting, could possibly have heard of
the suicide, he replied as follows :—

“In answer to your letter I inform you that my
aunt’s housekeeper is not a housekeeper strictly
speaking, but rather a friend of the family, having
been nearly fifteen years with us, and possessing our
entire confidence. She could not have already learnt
the fact of the suicide, as she had no relations or
friends in Tambof, and never leaves the house.

“ The hospital in question is situated at the other
end of the town, about § versts from amy house. Dr.

Identity of the Discarnate 233

Sundblatt informs me, on the authority of the procés-
verbal of the inquest, that Péréliguine was gble to
tead and write. (This was in answer to the inquiry
whether the deceased could have understood alpha-
betic communication).”

There are few cases which in my opinion
afford so simple and striking a demonstration
of the identity of the discarnate personality
as the foregoing. ‘There was no professional
medium ; all the witnesses concerned give
their full names ; they are persons of repute,
and after the facts were published their

testimony was never impugned.

Those who remain in doubt as to the value
of the evidence adduced in the foregoing
chapters should remember that it is, and
probably always will be, impossible to obtain
such conclusive logical demonstration of
survival after death as will satisfy every
agnostic. But “ formal logical sequence ”’ as
Cardinal Newman said in his ‘“‘ Grammar of
Assent,’ “‘ is not, in fact, the method by which
we are enabled to become certain of what is
concrete. . . The real and necessary method

. is the cumulation of probabilities, in-
dependent ‘of each other, arising out of the
nature and circumstances of the particular
case which is under review,” and so the truth
of the spirit hypothesis, and of spirit-identity,

234 Chapter XVII

like the truth of all disputed matters, is to be
judged in this way,—that is, by the whole
evidence taken together.!

In concluding this chapter I wish to draw
attention to a valuable and brightly written
work in two volumes, strangely entitled ‘On
the Cosmic Relations,” by Mr. Henry Holt,
the widely esteemed American publisher. In
this work Mr. Holt gives a mass of evidence
obtained by himself, as well as by Dr. Hodgson
and others, that has convinced him of the
existence of super-normal phenomena, and
the impossibility of explaining away by
telepathy or otherwise the evidence on behalf
of survival after bodily death.

1 Kant knew nothing of telepathy or psychical research, but
even his critical mind admitted that ‘‘ in regard to ghost stories,
while I doubt any one of them, still I have a certain faith in the
whole’ of them taken together.” —-Dreams of a Spirit Seer, p. 88.

Part 5

CHAPTER XVIII

CLAIRVOYANCE
PSYCHOLOGY OF TRANCE PHENOMENA

‘** We all walk in mysteries. We are surrounded by
an atmosphere of which we do not know what is stirring
in it, or how it is connected with our own spirit. So
much is certain, that in particular cases we can put out
the feelers of our soul beyond its bodily limits, and that
a ‘presentiment, nay, an actual insight into, the immedi-
ate future, is accorded to it.’”!

Many difficulties and perplexing problems
arise in reviewing the ‘brief and imperfect
outline of spiritualistic phenomena that I
have attempted to give in the preceding
pages. These it {1s desirable to consider in
the present and the succeeding chapter.

Some of these difficulties may be removed
when we obtain a fuller knowledge of the

\
1, Goethe ‘‘ Conversations with Eckermann,”’ Bohn’s Library,
Pp. 290.
235

236 Chapter XVIII

whole subject. Those of my readers who
approach these problems for the first time
will of course bear in mind, that only a frag-
ment of the already accessible evidence could
be presented within the compass of.a small
volume. Moreover, I have been obliged to
omit certain portions of the wide field of
psychical research, which have received pro-
longed and critical, investigation, and must
be considered in any explanation of spiritual-
istic phenomena. One of these is telepathy,
now largely accepted, and to ‘which I will
return in the last chapter ; another is alleged
clairvoyance. On this latter a few words
must now be said."

The term clairvoyance unfortunately ‘is
used to denote two distinct aspects of super-
normal faculty. In one sense it is employed
to express the transcendental perception of
distant scenes or of hidden material objects.
That such a faculty exists I have not the
least doubt ; it may be evoked in the higher
stages of hypnotic trance or it may occur in
certain'sensitives in their nornral state. Mrs.
H. Sidgwick has published a searching investi-
gation of what: has been called “ travelling

i‘

1 In a letter published in the London Times so long ago as
1876, I said that before we could hope to arrive at any definite
conclusions upon alleged spirit communications we must know
whether clairvoyance and (what is now.called) telepathy really
exist.

Clairvoyance 237

clairvoyance,”! and in my lengthy researches
on the so-called Divining—or Dowsing—trod,
I have shown that a good dowser unquestion-
ably possesses a somewhat similar faculty,
though one unrecognised by science.? The
term tel-esthesta has been suggested by Mr.
F. W. H. Myers for this faculty; implying the
perception of terrestrial objects or conditions
independently of the recognised channels of
sense, and also independently of any possible
knowledge derived from telepathy.

The word Glairvoyance has also been used
to denote the transcendental vision of beings
on another plane of existence. It is alleged
that many mediums have this faculty in their
normal state, or in their entranced condition,
and also in their ‘“ waking stage’’ between
the two. Here also the evidence on behalf
of such a faculty appears to me indisputable ;
but the difficulty of obtaining conclusive
evidence on this point is great, owing to the
possible intrusion of telepathy,—that con-
venient and hard worked hypothesis.

I have little doubt that clairvoyance in
’ both its meanings, as well as telepathy, enter
largely into, and afford some explanation of,
the communications ‘which purport to come

1 See Proceedings S.P.R., Vol. VII et seq.
. 2 See Proceedings S.P.R., Vols. XIII and XV; also for a
brief résumé of the whole subject see Chap. XII of my book on
Psychical Research in the ‘‘ Home University Library.”’

238 Chapter XVIII

from the spirit world. But we must assume
telepathy from the dead as well as the living,
and we need evidence that the medium
actually possesses power as a percipient, or
unconscious receiver, of a telepathic impress.
It is quite time experimental psychologists
and psychical researchers should admit that
super-normal phenomena do occur, and ¢est,
as well as propose, various theories, now
often advanced without proof.

Students of psychical research will find
the most important and critical examination
of the psychology of the trance phenomena
of’ spiritualism in the monograph, by Mrs.
Henry Sidgwick, which fills the bulky volume
of the “ Proceedings of the S‘P.R.” for
December, 1915. ‘This laborious _ research
deals with Mrs. Piper’s trance plienomena
—but applies more or less fully to other
genuine mediums—when evidence is afforded
of knowledge acquired otherwise than through
the senses, whether from the living or.from
the dead. ‘The object of the paper is to throw
light on the question

| ‘
‘‘ Whether the intelligence that speaks or writes
in the trance,,and is sometimes in telepathic com-
munication with other minds (whether of the living
or of the dead) is’other than a‘ phase, or centre of
consciousness) gf Mrs. Piper herself.”’

Psychology of Trance Phenomena 239

Mrs. Sidgwick emphatically admits that
Mrs. Piper has super-normal means of obtain-
ing knowledge, but comes to the conclusion
that Mrs. Piper’s trance, and presumably
that of other similar mediums—

“Is probably a state of self-induced hypnosis in
which her hypnotic self personates different characters
either consciously and deliberately, or unconsciously
and believing herself to be the person she represents,
and sometimes probably in a state of consciousness
intermediate between the two. . . And further...
she can obtain imperfectly, and for the most part
fragmentarily, telepathic impressions. . . Such im-
pressions are not only received by her as the result of
her own telepathic activity or that of other spirits—
spirits of the living or may be of the dead—but rise
partially 6r completely into the consciousness operat-
ing in the trance communications, and so are recog-
nized.’

Telepathy from the living, and also some-
times front the discarnate, combined with.a
real or imaginary dissociation of personality
of the meditim during the trancé state, is
therefore Mrs. Sidgwick’s view of such
phenomena. iThis was ‘in substance Dr.
Hodgson’s opinion in the earlier stage of his
investigations. But, as Mrs. Sidgwick says,
“he had apparently already “abandoned this
hypothesis when he published his first re-

1 “ Proceedings S.P.R.,"" Vol. XXVIII, P- 330.

240 Chapter XVIIT

port.” -As is well known, and was pre-
viously mentioned, p. 223, Dr. Hodgson and
Mr. Myers, like many other critical students,
eventually were driven to accept the spirit
hypothesis as the most consistent and simplest
solution.

Mrs. Sidgwick’s conclusions are unquestion-
ably entitled to careful consideration, and
doubtless will commend themselves to many
psychologists and conservative thinkers. To
a large extent, if without presumption I may
express an opinion, I believe they are justified,
and explain many of the perplexing anomalies,
faise statements’ and personation of great
names, in these trance communications.

Thus in a sitting with Mrs. Piper, in 1899,
the Jewish lawgiver “ Moses of old” pur-
ported to communicate, and prophesied that
in the near future there would be great wars .
and bloodshed and then the approach of the
millenniim. But in this great war Russia
and France would be on, one side against
England and America on the other, whilst
Germany would not take any serious part in
the war. After this “‘ Moses’ added’ a good
deal of solemn twaddle.

Then another time Sir Walter Scott purports
to communicate and tells Dr. Hodgson that
if he wishes to know anything about the
planet Mars he was to be sure torcall up the
novelist, as he had. visited all the planets ;

Psychology of Trance Phenomena 241

asked if he had seen a planet further away
than Saturn, the sot-disant Walter Scott
answered “Mercury”! Julius Czesar also
purports to control and Madame Guyon; but
another and more frequent control was George
Eliot (the novelist), who sometimes acts as
the communicator, for she says,

“We speak by thought unless we act upon some
machine, so-called medium, when our thotights are
expressed to the controlling spirit who registers them
for us,”

This may be true enough; but the real
George Eliot would never speak so uwun-
grammatically as to say, “I hardly know as
there is enough light to communicate,” or
again, ‘‘Do not know as I have ever seen a
haunted house,” words which are reported to
be her own. Similar grammatical mistakes
are made by other educated controls.

But some of the most conclusive evidence
of personation is given by the control who
purported to be the Rev. Stainton Moses.
The names of three spirit friends (the
“Imperator band ’’), whom the real Stainton
Moses could never .have forgotten,: were
given, and “not one of these names is true
or has the least semblance of truth,’’ Pro-
fessor Newbold tellg us. Again Dr. Stanley
Hall in a sitting with Mrs.. Piper, asked

if a niece, Bessie Beals, could communicate ?
R

242 Chapter XVIII

She professed to come and gave various
messages at several sittings, but she had
never existed, Dr. Hall having given a
fictitious name and relationship !

Thus it will be seen that we cannot take
these communications at their face value,
as they are sometimes manifestly false,
although presented to the sitter with a
dramatic distinctness and corresponding char-
acter, which give them a life-like reality.
They probably represent phases of the
hypnotic self of Mrs. Piper, created by some
verbal or telepathic suggestion from the mind
of the sitter. In spite of this unquestionable
personation of deceased personalities Mrs.
Sidgwick admits that—

“ Veridical communications are received, some of
which, there is good reason to believe come from the
dead,!and therefore imply a genuine communicator
in the background ” (p. 204).

Here it is well to note the meaning attached
to the words “control”? and ‘“ communi-
cator.” By the former is meant the in-
telligence which is, or professes to be, in
direct communication with the sitter through
the voice or writing of the medium. By
“communicator ”’ is meant the intelligence
for which the control acts as amanuensis or
interpreter, or whose remarks or telepathic
impress the control répeats to the sitter

Difficulties of Communication -243

through the medium. This definition, given
by Mrs. Sidgwick, is generally accepted:

The difficulties of communicating are
necessarily great, as we cannot suppose that a
physical process or physical organs of speech
and hearing are employed by the commun-
icators. In fact they tell us, as Swedenborg
told us long before telepathy was discovered,
that spirits converse by thought. Visual
perception is sometimes suggested. One un-
seen communicator says :

“If you could see me as I stand here, you would
see every gesture I make, which is copied by Rector
[the control] ; he imitates me as I speak to you.”

Mental pictures, as Dr. Hyslop has stated,
float, before the mind of the medium and the
difficulty seems to be in selecting the appro-
priate one. Difficulties of hearing, or tele-
pathic percipience, are also mentioned,
especially the difficulty in getting a name.
Then there is mind wandering and mental con-
fusion, one communicator, speaking through
Mrs. Piper, says :—

“T am talking as it were through a thick fog and
it often suffocates me,” and again, “I can’t get the
tight word, my mind is so confused’; “ the con-
ditions are suffocating,”

The sceptic of course will assert this is

244 Chapter X VIII

only the clever way the medium assumes to
cloak her ignorance, but there is every reason
to believe it represents a genuine difficulty in
the transmission of ideas from the unseen to
the seen. We know the uncertain conditions
of telepathy here, and they may exist on the
other side when the control is, trying to
impress ideas on the sub-conscious self of the
medium.

Some light is thus thrown on the scrappy,
disjointed, and confused nature of many
veridical messages. The primary need of
establishing their identity probably explains
why the communications are so largely frag-
mentary reminiscences of the earth life of
the deceased.

Whilst the bulk of the communications
appear .to exhibit a truncated, dream-tike
intelligence on the part of the deceased,—as
if a dream zone intervened between the two
worlds,—this is not always the case. Some
recent scripts, as in Mr. Gerald Balfour’s
paper on the Ear of Dionysius, show not only
the co-operation of two or more discarnate
‘minds, but also, as stated on p, 220, give
positive evidence of an ability and wide
classical knowledge, quite beyond the power
of the automatist. The cryptic allusions, it
is true, need considerable ingenuity, learning
and skill to make the evidence intelligible to
ordinary minds. ‘This recoiidite mode of

A Recent Classical Script 245

communication may be adppted to prevent
suspicion that the message is derived from
terrene minds by telepathy or other sources
of error. Those who have not the necessary
time or knowledge to unravel these mosaics
of classical scholarship, must rest content
with the assurance that competent and un-
biassed investigators have been convinced
that they afford convincing evidence of the
identity of the deceased persons from! whom
they profess to come.

CHAPTER XIX

DIFFICULTIES AND OBJECTIONS
CONSIDERED

“« But trust that those we call the dead
Are breathers of Qa ampler day
For ever nobler ends.’
—In Memoriam cxviii.

In the course of our discussion we have seen
a dreary agnosticism, and the materialistic
tendency of scientific enquiry and modern
commercialism, confronted with the indisput-
able facts of psychical research. The revolu-
tion in thought which those facts imply and
necessitate, will in course of time be apparent,
and be a great gain both to knowledge and
religion,

There remain, however, many unsolved
problems. Why are the unseen communi-
cators so seldom conscious of other friends
on earth, outside the narrow circle of the
sitters ? Are earth memories only revived by
some association of ideas in the communicator
or control ‘with those in the minds of the

circle? Why have we no messages that will
246

Difficulties and Objections 247

stand critical enquiry, from the greatest or
the saintliest men and women who once lived
on earth? Why is there no clear and con-
sistent account of the surroundings, and the
occupation, of those who have passed into
the spiritual world ? These and many other
questions naturally arise and we can only
hope that in the future more light may be
thrown upon these perplexities. °

There has certainly been a thinning of the
veil which separates us from those who have
passed into the unseen, but one is tempted
to ask why only a corner of the veil has been
lifted here and there, and no full revelation
given to us of life in the spiritual world ?
Moreover, what is given appears so inadequate
and so unsatisfying.

But it is probable we shall never. be able
to see behind the veil with the clearness and
assurance that Swedenborg claimed to
possess, although he warned others off the
ground he trod. There may be, and are I
believe, good reasons for this obscure, vision.
- If everyone were as certain as they are of day
following night, that after the momentary

darkness of death they would pass into an
endless life of brightness and ,freedom, such
-aS many spiritualists depict, it is possible
few would wish to remain on earth. May be
multitudes of earth-worn and weary souls
-would resort to some painless and lethal drug,

248 Chapter XIX

that would enable them to enter a realm
where they hoped their troubles would be
for ever ended. A vain and foolish hope, for
the discipline of life on earth is necessary
for us all, and none can attain a higher
life without the educative experience of trial
and conflict.

- Doubtless much of the scepticism that
‘exists in religious minds, as to the genuineness
of these automatic communications, arises
from the belief that messages which might
reach us from beyond this life would
authenticate themselves by their elevated
wisdom and piety, or by their transcendent
knowledge. Such a belief has its root in the
popular we n that at. death we are suddenly
transformed by our passage out of this world
into a state of sublime holiness and wisdoni,
or else of utter_and hopeless. misery. The”
good are supposed to enter at once into their
final state of endless bliss, and the evil, by
their transition from earth, into their final
state of an endless Hell. One of the immense
benefits which Swedenborg has conferred on
theology is the shattering of this crude
medieval creed,—not only among his followers,
but in a much wider circle ; and to-day the
same may be, said of spiritualism, which
confutes thé popular idea of-heaven and hell
and teaches us the continuity of our existence

Difficulties and Objections 249

here and hereafter. Long ago Milton with
singular prescience wrote :—

“ What if Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more than on Earth is thought ras

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who has publicly
expressed his belief in spiritualism, remarks :
“We find ourselves in apparent commuunica-
tion with the dead very shortly after they
leave us, and they seem to be exactly as fhey
were before we parted ”s and he adds that
though spiritualism i is in no way antagonistic
to Christianity it removes many of the crude
conceptions and modifies Some of the doctrines
which are popularly held.

Turning now to those who like the Roman
Catholics and many’others, believe all spirit-
ualistic phenomena to be the work of evil
spirits and therefore to be shunned, the best
reply is ‘‘ by their fruits ye shall kitow them.”
We are told “to believe not every spirit but
prove the spirits whether they are of God.”
An able Roman Catholic: layman, Mr. J. G.
Raupert, who has had considerable experience
of spiritualism, has written much on the
dangers of this subject, and with much that
he says I agree; but like the late Monsignor
Benson he naturally regards the whole matter
as one banned by his Church, ‘and therefore

250 Chapter XLX

as he remarks, “it is an eating of the fruit
of the forbidden tree of knowledge.””! \

Most of the anathemas pronounced against
Spiritualism by Protestant and Roman
ecclesiastics come from the lips of men who
know little or nothing of the subject. Some
who have taken the trouble to enquire, have
come to believe: that spiritism reveals the
existence ‘of some mysterious power which
may be of a more or less malignant character.

Certainly the Apostle: Paul in the Epistle
to the Ephesians, points to a race of spiritual.
creatures, not made of flesh and blood, in-
habiting the air around us, and able injuriously
to affect mankind. Good as well as mischie-
vous agencies doubtless exist in the unseen ;
this, of course, is equally true if the pheno-
mena are due to those who have once lived
on the earth. ‘“‘ There are as great fools
in the spirit world as there ever were. in
this,’ as Henry More said over 200 years
ago. In any, case, granting the existence
of a spiritual world, it is necessary to
be on our guard against the invasion of our
will by a lower order of intelligence and
morality.

The danger to the medium lies, in my

1 Miss H. A. Dallas has written an admirable little book dealing
with the objections to spiritualism from a religious point of view,
and furnishes a cogent reply to many of*the points raised by Mr.
Raupert.

Difficultics and Objections 251

opinion, not only in the loss of spiritual
stamina, but in the possible deprivation of
that birth-right we each are given to cherish,
our individuality, our true self-hood ; just as
in another way this may be impaired by
sensuality, opium, or alcohol.

The great object of our life on earth appears
to be, on the one hand, the upbuilding,
strengthening, and perpetuation of our.
separate and distinct personalities ; and,.on
the other, the awakening and development
in each of the consciousness of an underlying
Unity, which links each person into a larger
Personal Life common to all, “ in Whom we
live and move and have our being’; in a
word, the realisation of the fact that we are
integral parts and members of one Body.
In so far as Spiritualism aids or thwarts these
objects its moral effect must be judged ; like
mysticism, I think it aids the latter object,
but is apt to endanger the former.

What I have said, let me once again repeat,
has obviously no bearing on prudent scientific
inquiry. Indiscriminate condemnation and
ignorant credulity are, in truth, the two most
dangerous elements with which the public
are confronted in connection with Spiritualism.
The explorer speedily discovers that both are
out of place, and in the ardour of the search—
unless properly. equipped and. guided by the
lumen siccum of the scientific spirit—is likely

252 Chapter XIX

to become engulfed in a Serbonian bog, even
if no worse fate befall him.

It is because I feel that in the fearless
pursuit of truth it is the paramount duty of
science to lead the way, and erect such sign-
posts as may be needed in the vast territory
we dimly see before us, that I so strongly
deprecate the past and the present scornful
attitude of many in the scientific world.
Furthermore, as a famous philosopher has
remarked of cognate facts, ‘‘ The phenomena
under discussion are, at least from a philoso-
phical standpoint, of all facts presented to us
by the whole of. experience, without com-
parison the most important ; it is,. therefore,
the duty of every learned man to make
himself thoroughly acquainted with them.’

1 Schopenhauer ; who is here speaking of mesmerism and clair-
voyance, but his observation applies still more emphatically to the
‘ phenomena of Spiritualism. The passage is from the ‘' Versucht

tiber Geistersehen,’’ and is quoted in Du Prel’s ‘‘ Philosophy of
Mysticism. ’’ ;

CHAPTER XX

CAUTIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

‘* How pure at heart and sound in head,
With what divine affections bold
Should be the man whose thought would hold
An hour’s communion with the dead.”’
—In Memoriam xciv.

BEFORE bringing this book to a close, it is
desirable we should consider what weight
can fairly be claimed for the argument often
urged by candid friends, that the dangers of
psychical inquiry more than counterbalance
its possible usefulness.

I do not deny that there are some risks
(in what branch of novel inquiry are there
not risks?), but they have been greatly
exaggerated, and ‘those who know least of
the whole subject are apt to magnify the
dangers most. As a leading weekly Journal
has recently said :—

‘In any case it is right and reasonable to investigate
the phenomena, or alleged phenomena, as Jong as
they are investigated in a scientific spirit. No one
proposes to stop chemical inquiry because foolish

253 i

254 Chapter XX

people may poison themselves or blow themselves up.
Similarly, provided the dangers are understood,
psychic investigation ought not to be forbidden or
hindered merely because certain psychological and
moral risks attach thereto.’”!

Public performances’ of mesmerism by
travelling showmen ought to be prohibited by
law, in the same way as public performances
of the effects of chloroform by a quack doctor
should be, and would be, prohibited. But
experiments in thought-transference, to say
the' least, are entirely harmless, so far as my
knowledge ‘goes, and I speak with some
authority on this matter.’

All scientific investigations teed to be
-conducted with prudence and common setise,
and when these are exercised in psychical
résearch there is no reason to apprehend any
dangers, such as may undoubtedly befall
those who, with ignorant and unbalanced -
minds,‘ and from idle curiosity, venture to
rush into a region which may prove to them
a treacherous psychical quicksand.

: . . ° wo ae,
Certain precautions in the investigation of

1 Spectator, Nov. 18, 1916.

2 It is amusing to hear how often timid and uninstructed friends
have said to me that they were sure strange psychical phenomena
were ‘‘ the work of the devil or else electricity ;’’ either or both of
these mysterious agencies being, to many pergons, the probable
cause of all novel’ and otherwise inexplicable disturbances.

Cautions and Suggestions 255

Spiritualistic phenomena are however neces-
Sary and it may be useful to set them forth.

First and foremost as regards those taking
part in a séance for physical phenomena, or
in the more familiar sittings for automatic
writing, trance speaking, or clairvoyance,
let mesquote the words of that wise and
experienced spiritualist Mr. Epes Sargent,
who long ago wrote as follows :-—

‘* The circumstance that scientific persons have, as
a general rule, kept aloof from the whole of this
subject, partly through a misgiving as to their ability
to cope with it, and partly through their own @ priori
objections and rooted prejudices, has left it largely
in the hands of those who, from defective training,
or from a lack of the critical faculty, have supposed
that all which may come from the unseen world must
be authoritative and right. Messages that violate, all
the laws of logic and common-sense have thus been
accepted as bona fide communications from the world’s
great departed thinkers.”}

This was written some years ago but to-day
it cannot be said that spiritualists are as ‘a
body so uncritical as they once were. I have
been invited to address their large gatherings
and found them as intelligent and anxious to
atrive at the truth as any other body of
English men and women. What has struck

..‘ The Scientific Basis of Spiritualism,” by Epes Sargent, p. 34!

256 Chapter. XX

me ‘most forcibly is the spirit of fellowship
and freedom of opinion to be found amongst
them, and the reverent tone of their devotional
meetings. Doubtless the inexperienced are
often credulous and too ready to accept the
messages given by automatic writing or trance
speaking at their face value.

As regards the general and uninstructed
public, it is obvious that these phenomena,
and the type of alleged clairvoyance described
on p. 237, lend themselves to gross abuse by
those charlatans and rogues who prey upon
the credulity or the distress of mankind.
This is one of the misfortunes of the whole
subject, and has so largely discredited it.
Silly and credulous folk listen and pay for
the rubbish that is told them by would be
astrologers, fortune tellers, crystal-gazers, e¢
hoc genus onine. ‘There are genuine cases of
clairvoyance in the incipient hypnosis induced
by crystal-vision, as Mr. Andrew Lang and
others have shown; and there are genuine
cases of prevision or precognition of events, as
‘Mr. Myers has demonstrated, just as there
are veridical dreams and premonitions.' But
these genuine cases are exceptional and rarely |
to be found in a certain class of advertising
mediums who swindle the public.

1 See.on all these subjects the ‘‘ Proceedings of the S.P.R.,"* oy
Myers’ ‘‘ Human Personality,” chapters vi and ix,

Cautions and Suggestions 257

Anyone who possesses genuine psychic
power has, of course a perfect right 'to be
remunerated, when his or her time is occupied
by the exercise of that power. There are,
I am sure, many honorable and gifted pro-
fessional mediums, far removed from the
charlatans referred to in the last paragraph.
The mischief largely arises when the ignorant
public go to such honest pyschics and expect
an immediate return for their money. The
natural tendency of the medium is not to
disappoint the sitter, aid the temptation
therefore arises to supplement genuine by
spurious phenomena. It cannot be too often
insisted on that super-normal gifts are rare
and elusive, and require patience, knowledge
and discrimination on the part of the enquirer.

For this reason I should rather dissuade
uninstructed -persons from resorting to medi-
ums than encourage them to do so. Even
those who yearn to pierce the veil for “‘ The
touch ‘of a vanished hand and the sound of
a voice that is still,’ would in my opinion,
if they have not Christian faith, do better to
test content with a perusal of the evidence
for suryival that is now being accumulated
by rigorous and laborious expert enquiry.

It is easier to give than to follow such
advice, and some mourners have, after a time,
found in quiet, continuous, private sittings
with one or two friends, the assurance they

$s

258 Chapter XX

longed to obtain. If they are not thereby
led to neglect the paramount duties of their
life and work and if they preserve a sane and
wholesome judgment no harm can result.

In a previous chapter I have referred to
one of the most provoking things in these
communications, the not infrequent person-
ation of great namesin history. The absurdity
is so transparent that only the ignorant are
misled, but, even with perfectly honest
psychics, these freaks of the subliminal self
often add to the perplexity of the inquirer
and to the contempt of the scoffer. A
century before modern Spiritualism arose
Swedenborg uttered warnings on the delusive
character of ‘many of the communications
from “spirits.” In the ‘‘ Arcana Celestia ”’
he says :—

. “‘ When spirits begin to speak with ‘man they conjoin
themselves with his thoughts and affections ; hence
it is manifest none other but similar spirits speak with
man and operate upon him... . They put on all
things of his memory, thus all things which the man
has learned and imbibed from infancy the spirits
suppose these things to be their own ; thus they act,
as it were, a part of man with men.”: [This we
should now call the emergence of the sub-conscious
self of the psychic]. ‘‘ Wherefore let those who speak

1“ Arcana Celestia,’ §§ 6192 and 58so.

Cautions ‘and Suggestions 259

with spirits beware lest they be deceived, when they
say that they are those whom they know or pretend
to be,’”!

And so Preiswerk, in a German work published
in 1856, giving an account of Spiritualism
among the Swiss, says it was found “ that
the communications by table rapping were
only an echo and reflection of the mind of the
persons engaged.’ This, as we know, is
frequently the case, and indicates that the
source of some of the ‘‘ physical phenomena ”
‘may also be the unconscious self of the
medium, as I have already suggested.

Very often, I think, we are apt to judge
the medium too harshly. We must remember
the abnormal condition and loss of normal
self-control involved in mediumship, and
surely it would be as unjust to.charge a
deeply-entranced medium with conscious
fraud as ta accuse a somnambulist walking
.on a housetop with consciously jeopardising
his life. It is this weakening of self-control
and personal responsibility, on the. part of a
medium, that constitutes, in my opinion, the
chief peril of Spiritualism. Hence the steps
‘of a novice need to be taken with care ; even
the level-headed should walk warily, and the

1 Spiritual Diary,’’ §§ 1622, 2686, et seqes Cf. also ‘‘ Apoca-
lypse Explained, % § 1182.
2 Delitzsch, ‘‘ Biblical Psychology,” p- 369.

260 Chapter XX

excitable .and emotional should have nothing
to do with it; for the fascination of the
subject is like a candle to moths, it attracts
and burns the silly, the credulous, and the
crazy.

Every Spiritualist knows the mischief of
promiscuous sittings of ignorant people, and
many feel as strongly as I do that paid
professional mediums who have been convicted
of fraud should be sedulously avoided. ‘Dark
séances are also undesirable and should be
discouraged. The best sittings I ever had
have been in full light; so with Sir W.
Crookes’ wonderful observations. In fact,
Home, I believe, always refused to sit in the
dark: and probably with any medium, by
patience and perseverance, the light could -be
gradually increased without serious injury to
the results, and with enormous gain to the
accuracy and precision of the observations.

Spiritualism has sometimes been accused
of creating insanity and fostering immorality. _
No reliable evidence in support of such
sweeping charges has ever been adduced, '
whilst unsupported accusations of a similar
character are familiar in the history of nearly
every new and disturbing. phase of thought.
Isolated cases, no doubt, exist ; but, as Mrs.
Henry Sidgwick points out in an article in
the ‘‘ Encyclopedia Britannica,” “the fact
that the delusions of the insane not in-

Cautions and Suggestions 261

frequently take the form of converse with
invisible beings’’ has probably led to this
widespread and mistaken inference.

Passing on to other effects produced on
the medium, I doubt if any harm has ever
resulted from sittings for automatic writing
or speaking, in the normal or trance condition.
But there is certainly some evidence indicating
that continual sittings for physical phenomena
cause an illegitimate and excessive drain on
the vitality of a medium, creating a nervous
exhaustion which is apt to lead, in extreme
cases, to mental derangeinent, or “to .an.
habitual resort to stimulants with a no less
deplorable.end. If this be the fact we must,
of course, be on our guard, as no gain to
science would ever justify experiment heedless
of a risk so great ; but on this point we want
more knowledge. Sometimes D. D. Home
stiffered severely after a long series of séances.
Sir W. Crookes states Home was prostrated
after some experiments, “‘ pale, speechless and
almost fainting he lay upon the floor ; showing
what a drain on his vital powers was caused
by the evolution of the ‘ psychic force.’ ”

As regards the impression made on the
general public by such phenomena, Mr. C. C.
Massey, whose intimate acquaintance with
the whole subject I have already referred to,
wrote to me in 1895 as follows :—

262 Chapter XX

‘* Much of the opposition to phenomenal spiritualism
(so-called) arises from disgust of the grotesque incon-
gruity between spiritual mysteries and the vulgar

‘manifestations of which the world chiefly hears in
connection with this subject.”

Everyone outside a lunatic asylum, at least
every reverent person, must revolt from the
nightmare of a spiritual realm peopled by the
guast ticket-of-leave ghosts so often met with
in ,these manifestations. Compare such
buffdonery with our cherished ideals as ex-
pressed by Archbishop Trench :—

“ Where thou hast touched, O wondrous death,
Where thou hast come between,
Lo ! there for ever perisheth
The common and the mean.”

Well-informed and experienced Spiritualists
say that serious risk to the health, both of
mind and body, of the medium sitting for
physical manifestations, is incurred by any
sudden light or violent awakening of the
medium from the ‘state of trance. To a
scofiing public this plea seems obviously
invented to secure immunity from detection
of the medium by a sudden seizure in a dark
sitting. But the sniffs and scoffs of the
ignorant do not advance, our knowledge ;
what we want to know—is there any con-
clusive evidence one way or the other on this

Cautions and Suggestions 263

point ? We need experienced and unpre-.
judiced physicians to decide this question.
Whatever the conclusion might be, it is really
absurd to suppose that the resources of science
are so far exhausted that, highly-trained
investigators cannot determine, with reason-
able precision, whether certain physical
movements or appearances are due to a known
or an unknown cause, without resort to the
aid of clumsy and possibly hazardous police
expedients.

It certainly appears to be the fact that the
best and most conclusive physical manifest-
ations occur when the investigator treats the
phenomena as if they were produced by a
timid animal, a sensitive living thing, that
will shrink into obscurity and disappear at a
sudden disturbance or surprise of any kind,
often by a mental as well as material shock.
Imagine you are watching the unfolding of a
rare and highly organised polyp, and observing
the capricious movements of its long and
sensitive tentacles, and you will be able to
realise how a shock or even a sudden ray of
light may. startle it to instant closure, though
it may by training be accustomed to unfold
in full and steady light.

In concluding this chapter it may be well
to consider briefly what are the best conditions -
for obtaining evidence in sittings with good

264 Chapter XX

psychics. There can be no. doubt that
suspicion is fatal to success: sympathy,
combined with critical faculty, is essential.
The relation of faith to psychical research has
been well expressed by the late Mr. C. C.
Massey and Mr. Stainton Moses. ‘“ Faith”
Mr. Massey says ‘‘ is the condition of evidence,
the key to the gate of the invisible world.”

In reference to this Mr. Moses remarks :—

““ What Mr. Massey calls ‘ faith ’ is a predisposition
and attention, a sympathetic state of mind which
establishes between an observer and a medium a
rapport without which no results are to be had that
are worth the having. So when the dispassionate
critic makes a merit of the absence of prejudice i in his
mind he does well. It is conceivable that this negative
side may render him harmless; it may even enable
him to get personal experience under exceptionally
favourable circumstances. But, it may be, as Mr.
Massey well points out, ‘that this negative qualifica-
tion is not enough, and . . . there is need of a positive
sympathy ’ before any real progress can be made.”

It is useless for the sceptic to say we do
not require “‘ sympathy ”’ when we are testing
the evidence for some novel physical or
chemical discovery. No; they are dealing
with the world of matter and must conduct
their experiments in such a way that pre-
judicial effects in their domain do not vitiate
the results. But here we are dealing with

Cautions and Suggestions 265

delicate psychical conditions and must, ascer+
tain what are the favorable or unfavorable
conditions for success in that region. Mr.
Moses goes on to say :— :

“Tf a man goes to a medium with the strongest
desire to witness phenomena, but bringing with him
the deterrent attitude of mind which is the antipodes
of faith, he will most probably fail, unless he is fortun-
ate enough to meet with a fully-developed psychic
whom his coldness cannot wholly chill.” “I should
say,” Mr. Massey remarks, “ that the most-unfavour-
able disposition to take to a medium is suspicion, and
the most favourable is confidence. But this is to
deliver oneself over a prey to the deceiver! Yes,
such men do get taken in.”” JI agree with Mr. Massey ;
they do. I also agree with him when he adds, “I
believe that their success will be, on the whole, of
such an amount and character as more than to com-
pensate for these disadvantages.”

Confidence is certainly misplaced when you
are sitting with a doubtful or fraudulent
medium, and in any case it must not be
regarded as synonymous with credulity. It
is the most experienced investigator who is
the least credulous, and it is also unquestion-,
ably true that it is those psychical researchers
bristling with suspicion, who have never
been able to obtain conclusive evidence of the
physical phenomena of spiritualism, They

1 Light, Oct. 23, 1886.

‘266 Chapter XX

are not abler or more critical investigators
than Sir W: Crookes and other scientific men,
who have had overwhelming proofs, but they
bring with them a psychical atmosphere that
is as unfavorable to success as a damp atmos-
phere is to the working of a frictional or Holtz
electrical machine.

It was said of old ‘In quietness and
confidence shall be your strength,’ and this
attitude of mind, combined with alert observ-
ation and unwearied patience, we commend
to the psychical researcher who wishes to
obtain the best results.

Part 6

CHAPTER XXI

THE LESSON OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE
INTERPRETATION OF NATURE

‘* By that I know the learned lord you are!
What you don’t touch, is lying leagues afar ;
What you don’t grasp, is wholly lost to you;
What you don’t reckon, think you, can’t be true;
What you don’t weigh, it has no weight, alas
What you don’t coin, you’re sure it will not pass !’’F

In an early chapter (III.) we discussed the
objections raised by science and religion to
spiritualistic phenomena and briefly referred
to the fact that one reason which has pre-
vented the general recognition of these
phenomena, is because modern science, or
tather the dominant school of scientific
thought, is, or perhaps yas, essentially
matertalistic. ‘This school, as Mr. F. W. H.

1 Bayard Taylor’s translation of ‘‘ Goethe’s Faust,’’ Part 11,
: p. 1
267

268 Chapter XXI

Myers has eloquently said, “‘ insists, in tones
louder sometimes and more combative than
the passionless air of science is willing to echo
or convey, that all inquiries into man’s
psychical nature, all inquiries which regard
him as possibly more than a portion of
organised matter, are no longer open, but
closed, and closed against his aspirations for
ever.” \ The materialist is imprisoned within
the limits of his senses ; hence a world which
has no continuous relation with his senses
has no existence for him. -Life without
ponderable matter he confidently asserts is
impossible, and he prophesies that the atoms
of such matter contain within thentselves,
as Dr. Tyndall asserted in his British Associ-
ation address, ‘the promise and potency of
every form and quality of life.’

Science ,having done so much for human
thought and life, public opinion naturally
inclined to the view held by a recent school of
scientific thought, which denies the possibility
of any life without protoplasm, 7.c., a particular
grouping of the molecules of matter which
form the basis of all earthly life.. Many of
our leading physicists. have however dis-
sociated themselves from this habit of thought.
So long ago as 18812, that eminent man
Professor Balfour Stewart, who has long

~

1“ Fragments of Science,’’ Vol. I, p. 210.

The Lesson of Philosophy 269

Since passed into the unseen, wrote to ‘me as
follows :-—

“It-seems quite clear that the scientific recognition
of the unseen, is the point wanting in the intellectual
teaching of our race, and I do not doubt that this
will be ‘provided for.”

His confidence seeins to have been abun-
dantly justified, for the psychological climate
of to-day is distinctly more favorable to
psychical research. Physicists no longer
believe in the Lucretian atom “strong in
solid singleness,”’ but are pushing the ultimate
nature of matter into the realm of the in-
comprehensible and intangible ether. The
mechanistic theory of the universe, which so
delights the German mind, is breaking down.
The confident and complacent assumptions of
materialism have it is true long been impugned
by philosophy. In fact—

“The common supposition that the material
universe and the conscious beings around us are
directly and indubitably known, and constitute a
world of ‘ positive ’ facts, on which reason can certainly
pronounce without any exercise of faith... is an
entire mistake, based upon astonishing ignorance of
the essential limitations of human knowledge, of
which thinkers who lived in the very dawn of phil-
osophy were perfectly aware. The fact is, we are
equally obliged to transcend phenomena, and to put
faith in events and powers and fealities which do not

270 Chapter XXI

appear, when we recognise the past, or the distant,
or the material universe, or the minds of men, as when
we infer the existence of God and of the unseen
world.”!

Matter, the world outside our consciousness,
is the mystery to be explained’; for we only
know matter in terms of consciousness, hence
we can never find in matter an intelligible
explanation of mind and will. A mechanistic
theory. of the universe reduces consciousness
to a mere by-product of matter, and volition’
to an illusion of the mind.

And if science replies to this that the
premises on which it rests are furnished by
immediate experierice in the shape of observ-
ation and experiment— *

“What are we to say about these same experiences
when we discover, not only that they may be wholly
false, but that they are never wholly true ;
nine-tenths of our immediate experiences of objects
are visual, and all visual experiences, without excep-
tion, are, according to science, erroneous,/’?

that is to say, the degrees of brightness, form,
or. colour whereby we perceive objects are,
as optics teaches, not properties of the things
seen but sensations produced in us by undula-
tions in the ether. Hence, psychologically

‘ The Realistic Assumptions of Modarn Science Examined,” by
Professor Herbert, M.A., 455-.
2 ‘The Foundations of Belief,’ by the RL Hon: A. J. Balfour.

The Lesson of Philosophy 271

regarded, it may be said, as Mr. Balfour goes
on to remark, that—

“ Our perceptions, regarded as sources of inform-
ation, are not merely occasionally inaccurate but
habitually mendacious.’”!

For instance, every stimulus given to the
optic nerve, whether by light, or pressure,
or electricity, or a chemical reagent, reveals
itself as a flash of light and is so called by us.
The same may be said, mutatis mutandis, of
the other specialised sense organs.

Again, how different would be our concept
of the external world if we were deprived of
some of our senses, such for example as sight
or touch; and again how different if we had
other gateways of sense, profounder avenues
to a knowledge of the world outside ourselves.
If we were restricted to a single sense, such as
_ sight, we should infer all phenomena, all
material things; to consist of Variations in
luminosity or colour. Hence our ideas of the
world would expand or contract in-proportion
to the extent of the means by which that
world is perceived.

It is our ignorance, or our forgetfulness, of
these facts, our neglect of the vast difference
between our perceptions and the realities for

1 ‘* The Foundations of Belicf,” page 111.

272 Chapter X XI

which they stand, that gives rise to many
of the perplexities we encounter, and some
of the conflicts between science and faith.
This is worth a moment’s further considera-
tion by those who have not considered the
subject.

The first lesson taught by mental philosophy |
is that all we know of external objects and
material phenomena are certain sensations
within wus, as already remarked; of the
things-in-themselves we know absolutely noth-
ing. The things we do know are certain
states of consciousness, certain symbols—or
tekmeria, as the late Dr. Johnstone Stoney,
F.R.S., proposed to call them'—signs evoked
in our mind by events happening in the
universe outside our mind. Accordingly we
do ‘not perceive the actual material world,
nor anything like it, and have not, therefore,
the remotest idea of what the thing we call
matter. is in itself.

We can watch the movements of a tele-
graphic needle and learn to read the message
it brings, but the moving needle does not
enable us to perceive the operator at the other
end who is causing it to move, nor does it
even remotely resemble the operator; its

1 See a suggestive paper by Dr. Storey in the ‘* Proceedings of
the Royal Dublin Society,’’ Vol. VI, p. 475.

The Lesson of Philosophy 273

Signals give us, it is true, an intelligible
message, but it is intelligible only because
the intelligence of the operator has been and is
telated to our intelli nae In like manner
the mental signs otr brain and nervous
mechanism give us of the material world
outside are not the things, nor a resemblance
to the things, in themselves ; the real world
around us, the world of oztology, is absolutely’
inaccessible to us. But the reason why the
material world is intelligible, why we can
interpret the signs it gives us, is because
there is an Intelligence behind the universe
which has been and is related to our in-
telligence.

To the pure materialist the universe ‘is
self-sustained and has -no deeper meaning
than the appearance it presents to our senses ;
these appearances are to him the ultimate
reality. If le forms a mechanical theory of
nature by endowing atoms with some occult
power, or consciousness, he confers on them
the very properties which have to be explained.
Hence we are driven to believe in a Supreme
Intelligence and to regard the universe as the
expression of the Divine Thought perpetually
sustained by the Divine Will. ‘This is surely
the simplest and truest miter pretenon of
nature.

There are few more honoured names in
science than that of Sir John Herschel, and

T

274 Chapter XXI

in this connection a passage from one of his
essays appears to me so valuable a contribution
to our belief in a Suprente Mind that I venture
to. quote it. The whole essay, like all Sir John
wrote, is full of luminous thought.

“ The universe presents us with an assemblage of
phenomena—physjecal, vital, and intellectual—the
contlecting link between the worlds of intellect and
matter being that of organised vitality, occupying the’
whole domain of animal and vegetable life, throughout"
which, in some way inscrutable to us, movements
among the molecules of matter are originated of such
a character as apparently to bring them under the
control of an agency other than physical, superseding -
the ordinary laws which regulate the movements of
inanimate matter, or, in other words, giving rise to
movements which would not result from.the action of
those laws uninterfered with ; and therefore implying,
on the very same principle, the origination of force.

“The first and greatest question which Philosophy
has to resolve in its attempts,to make out a Cosmos—
to bring ‘the whole of the phenomena. exhibited in
these three domains of existence under the contem-
plation of the mind as a congruous whole—is, whether
wé can derive any light from our internal consciousness
of thought, reason, power, will, motive, design, or
not; whether, that issto say, Nature is or is not
more tnterpretable by supposing these things (be they
what they, may) to have had, or to have, to do with
its arrangements.

“ Constituted as the human mind is, if Nature be
not interpretable through these conceptions it is not
interpretable at all; and the only reason we can

The Lesson of Philosophy 275

have for troubling ourselves about it is either the
utilitarian one of bettering our condition by ‘ subduing
Nature’ to our use, through a mote complete under-
standing of its ‘laws,’ so as to thrpw ourselves into
its grooves, and thereby-reach our ends more readily
and effectually ; or the satisfaction of that sort of
aimless curiosity which can find its gratification in
scrutinising everything and comprehending nothing.
But if these attributes of mind are not consenianeous,
theyare useless in the way of explanation. Will
without’ motive, power without reason, thought
opposed to reason, would be admirable in explaining
a chaos, but would render little aid in accounting for
anything else.””!

It was formerly so integral a part of modern
scientific thought to regard mind and matter
as distinct entities that we forget this common
dualistic conception may be an‘ entirely
fallacious idea. Just as language.is a mani-
festation of thought and indissolubly con-
nected with it, sO matter may, be only a
manifestation to us of spirit. To human
intelligence, spirit is always’. manifested
through matter; so that spirif and matter,
like force arid matter, or thought and language,
seem to us inseverable and even unthinkable
apart. ‘The .essential unity whichs underlies
thought and its expression in language affords

1 ‘* On the Origin of Force,” p. 473. | ‘‘ Lectures on Scientific
Subjects,’”’ by Sir J. F. W. Herschel, Bart., D.C.L., F,R.S., ete, .

276 Chapter X.XI

an interesting analogy to spirit and matter.
As a suggestive writer has remarked—

“ Language is the mode in which thought takes
shape, its way of becoming known to itsélf, and
therefore dependent on thought for its existence, but
their relationship is a far more intimate one than
that of cause and effect... . We cannot ‘ account
for’ thought by the laws of language, simply because
thought unconsciously makes those laws by way of
attaining to a clearer recognition of itself. In the
same way we cannot ‘ account for’ mind by the laws
of matter, because those laws are, in reality, the
principles according to which human intelligence
apprehends the material universe. In them, mind
recognises itself in the external world. As thought
is essentially self-manifesting so the life of the spirit
is éssentially self-manifesting, hence as language is
the utterance of the one so matter is the utterance
of the other.””!

Experimental science is still young and has
not wholly émerged from the Cartesian stage
of thought where matter and mind, nature
and spirit are absolute opposites, their an-
tagonism reconciled only in the Divine in-
comprehensible’ Will. As our knowledge
progresses and our interprétation, of nature
becomes more adequate, we begin to recognise

1 “ Progressive Revelation,’’ chap. v., by Miss Caillard; see
also my brochure entitled ‘‘ Creative’™*Thought,’’ published by
Watkins, Ceci] Court, London, W.C.

The Lesson of Philosophy 277

that the dualism and antithesis of nature and
spirit disappear, and miracles as, well as all
super-normal phenomena become less in-
credible, when nature is seen to be, as Novalis
said, ‘“‘ an illuminated table of the contents
of the spirit.”

CHAPTER XXII

THE MYSTERY OF HUMAN PERSONALITY

‘* One Life through all the immense creation runs,
One Spirit is the moon’s, the sea’s, the sun’s;
All forms in the air that fly, on the earth that creep,
, And the unknown nameless monsters of the deep—
Each breathing ‘thing obeys one Mind’s control,
And in all substance is a single Soul.”
—Virgil.

A BRIEF consideration of some aspects of
human personality was necessary in an earlier
portion of this book. It may not be out of
place in conclusion to note some of the higher
aspects of this. subject. We have seen that
our personality is a very complex and myster-
ious thing. Probably in each of us, certainly
in many, there are potentialities which far
outstrip the capabilities of our - conscious
voluntary intelligence; nay more, which’
transcend: the limitations of our senses, of
space, of time, and even of our thought and
consciousness. But if these supernormal

1 Book VI of the ** Eneid,’’ translated by Mr. Myers.
: 278

The Mystery of Personality 279

faculties exist—and of their existence such
acute thinkers as Schopenhauer and E. von
Hartmann were convinced—other manifest-
ations of them than those we are acquainted
with in spiritualism, somnambulism, hypnotic
trance, &c., might be expected.

The dark continent within, us, is in fact
much more than a hidden record of unheeded
or forgotten past impressions; there is an
ultra-liminal as well as a sub-liminal self ;!
one that has higher perceptive powers
than our normal consciousness, something in
us that is able to respond to directed thought,
whether the thinker be ‘in the body or out
of the body,” something that links our
individual life to the Source of that life, and
to the ocean of universal life. This was
firmly believed by that great philosopher,
Kant, who, anticipating our present know-
ledge, slight as that is, was led by the mere
strength of his penetrating intellect to assert: -

It is therefore, as good as proved . . . that the
human soul, even in this life, stands in indissoluble
community with all immaterial natures of the spirit

1 Mr. Myers has used the word supra-liminal to connote our con-
scious waking life, but this might perhaps more appropriately be
called cis-liminal, withjn the threshold of consciousness : 1 have used
the word ultra-liminal to signify the higher transcendental self. The
great work on ‘‘ Human Personality ’? by Mr. Myers (which was
published long after this chapter was written in the original edition
of this book) should be read by all who wish a fuller knowledge of
the subject.

280 Chapter X XII

world, that it mutually acts upon them and receives
from them impressions, of which, however, as man,
it is unconscious, as long as all goes well.

And again he says :—

It is, therefore, truly one and the same subject
which belongs at the same time to the visible and to
the invisible world, but (since representations of the
one world are not associated with ideas of the other)
what I think as spirit is not remembered by me as
man.!

This was also Swedenborg’s view. He
repeatedly states :—

Man is so constituted that he is at the same time
in the spiritual world and in the natural world: the
spiritual world-is where the angels are, and the natural
world is where men are.

‘Plotinus, who. lived in the third century,
also held a very similar belief, speaking of

se

men as “ amphibia,” who live partly in the

1 Kant: ‘* Werke ’’ (Rosenkranz), vii., 53, 59, quoted by Dr. Du
Prel in his ‘* Philosophy cf Mysticism *’ (Redway, London), This
quotation is frorr. Kant’s ‘‘ Dreams of a Spirit-seer,”’ a translation
of which is published by Swan Sonnenschein & Co. Du Prel’s work
has been, with loving labour, admirably translated by the late Mr.
C. C. Massey, not the least valuable part of the work being the

‘translator's own suggestive: preface. Mr. Massey has also ren-
dered great service to English readers by his translation of E. von
Hartmann’s ‘‘ Spiritism.”” Like other candid enquirers, this emi-
nent German philosopher, having with painstaking care made
himself acquainted with the facts of Spiritualism, states that they
afford ‘‘an urgent challenge to science.to' enter upon the exact
research of this phenomenal province.”’

The Mystery of Personality | 281

natural and partly in the spiritual world.
In fact, the teaching of the Neo-platonists
and mysticism generally is that the soul has
a two-fold life, a lower and a_ higher.
Iamblichus believed that even in sleep the
soul is freed from the constiaint of the body
and enters on its divine life of intelligence :
the night-time of the body being the day-time
of the.soul.’ The ‘‘ecstasy’”’ of Plotinus,
and earlier still of Philo, was, according to
them, the temporary liberation of the soul
from its finite consciousness and its union
with the Infinite.®

Thus we see the opinion of many of the
world’s great thinkers in the past is quite in
accord with recent evidence, which teaches
us that our Ego is more than our self-
consciousness reveals. As the roots of a tree
are hidden in the earth, so we may regard
the root of our Ego as sunk in a world beyond
our consciousness, and the Neo-platonic idea—
that the soul is only partially known in its

I See that delightful and well-known work, Vaughan’s ‘ Hours
with ithe Mystics.” Professor Harnack’s article on ‘* Neo-platon-
ism,” in the Encyclopedia Britannica, should be read by all who
are patente in this subject.

2 Indeed, a belief in the soul's power to have commerce with
the spirit-world has a place in Greek philosophy as early as the
6th century B.C., for Aeschylus was echoing a Pythagorean doc-
trine when he wrote, ‘‘ The mind in sleep is bright with eyes '’ (to
receive spiritual impressions). | am indebted to my friend the
Rev. M. A. Bayfield for this and many other valued suggestions
in this book.

282 Chapter XXII

normal, or physically-conditioned, conscious-
ness—becomes intelligible.

There is certainly a world beyond our
normal consciousness from which neither
space nor time divides us, but only the
barrier of our sense-perceptions. This barrier
constitutes what has been well termed the
“threshold of sensibility,’ and limits the
area of our consciousness. In the progress
of evolution, from lower to higher forms
of life this threshold has been successively
shifted, with a corresponding exaltation of
consciousness. The organism-of an oyster,
for instance, constitutes a threshold which
shuts it out from the greater part of our
sensible world ; in like manner the physical
organism of man forms a threshold which
separates him from the larger arid trans-
cendental world of which he forms a part.
But this threshold is not immovable: Occa-
sionally in rapture, in dream, and in hypnotic
trance it is shifted, and the human spirit
temporarily moves in ‘ worlds not realised ”’
by sense. In the clairvoyance of deep hypno-
tic sleep, and in somnambulism, the threshold
is still further shifted and a higher intelligence
emerges, with a clearness and power propor-
tional to the more or less complete cessation
of the functions and Consciousness of our
ordinary waking life.

This intelligence, as has been sow above,

The Mystery of Personality 283

has ‘powers afid perceptions wider and deeper
than those of the normal waking consciousness.
Accordingly, since the exercise of these facul-
ties in our daily life is apparently hindered
by our bodily organism, we may infer that
when we are freed from ‘‘ this muddy vesture
of decay,” and the soul enters on its larger
life, these faculties will no longer be tram-
melled as they are now. As, one by one,
the avenues of sense close for ever, the
threshold of sensibility is not suddenly
removed ;. and so, as our loved ones pass from
us, it is probable that in most cases the ‘‘ dawn
behind all‘dawns”’ creeps gently upward,
slowly awakening them to the wider and
profounder consciousness that, for good or ill,
awaits us all.

“Peace, peace! he is not dead, ‘he doth not sleep,
He hath awaken’d from the dream of life.’”?

1 Shelley: ‘‘ Adonais.”*

CHAPTER XXIII

THE DIVINE GROUND OF THE SOUL

RE-INCARNATION

‘« All outward vision yields to that within,
Whereof nor creed nor canon holds the key ;
We only feel that we have been
And evermore shall be.’’

—Bayard Taylor,

THE transcendental phenomena we have been
discussing so far from excluding, of necessity
presuppose the ‘‘ Divine ground of the soul,”
to use a phrase of the mystics. Encompass-
ing the supernormal within us, lies the
supernatural,, in the true meaning of that
word. For “’Behind consciousness itself must
‘certainly be placed the ultimate Reality of
which consciousness offers only a reflection
or faint representation.’ The intimacy and
immediacy of the union between the soul and
God, the Infinite manifesting itself in and
through the finite, is the fundamental idea,

1 See upon this subject the striking work on ‘ Personality ” by
the Rev. J. R. Illingworth, especially Lecture II and the note on
p- 240, where the views of von Hartmann and Lotze are con-
trasted-

284

1

The Province of Religion 285

not only of the mystics, but of the New
Testament, and of all great Christian thinkers.
The attainment of this profounder conscious-
ness, and therefore of our full personality, is,
however, the province of religion, the “ true
theme of which is not the future life but the
higher life.”’

This knowledge of God, not of the methods
of his working, but the consciousness of His
presence, is what is meant by religion. From
this point of view it is obvious spiritualism is
not and cannot be a religion, which rests
essentially upon those higher instincts of the
soul we call faith. For, as Canon Scott
Holland says in ‘ Lux Mundi” (p. 15)— -

“ Faith is the power by whfch conscious life attaches
itself to God. . . . Faith, then, opens an entirely new
career to creaturely existence; and the novelty of

‘this career is expressed in the word ‘Supernatural.’
The supernatural world opens upon us as soon as
faith is in being.”

In this sense also spiritualjsm cannot even
afford to us knowledge of the supernatural, as
it is often claimed to do.’ In its true meaning
supernatural knowledg¢ is incommunicable
from! without ; it is the voice of the Spirit

1 In Appendix ‘‘ A ” I have discussed more fully the conflicting
pepular notions that Spiritualism is cn the ene hand a “‘ recru-
descence of superstiticn’ and on the other, ‘ evidence of the
“supernatural.”

286 Chapter XXIII

to the spirit, or, as Plotinus said, ‘‘ The
flight of the Alone to the alone,’’ for ‘‘ the
soul must be very still to hear God speak.”
Of this Divine unveiling the humblest human
souls have knowledge, no less than the greatest
' prophets and poets.

“ For more than once when I
Sat all alone, revolving in myself
The word that is the symbol of myself,
The mortal limit of the Self was loosed,
And past into the Nameless, as a cloud
Melts into Heaven. I touch’d' my limbs, the limbs
Were strange, not mine—and yet no shade of doubt
But utter clearness, and thro’ loss of Self
The gain of such large life as mgtch’d with ours
Were Sun to spark—unshadowable in words,
Themselves but shadows of a shadow-world.”?

It is this ‘“‘ loss of self,”’ this self-surrender,
which enables the consciousness of God to
enter into’ our life. Our own will dies and
God’s will lives in us, and in so far as this is
the case we attain the object of our earthly
existence, that is, the realisation of a higher
and wider consciousness, the discovery of our
true personality, which is immortal. This
cannot persist until it has been attained, and
its attainment is the Way of Jife ; as Lotze
says, ‘‘ Perfect personality i is in God alone.”

1 Tennyson; ‘‘ The pacer pees

The Question of Immortality 287

In other words, when we are conscious of the
Divine life and love dwelling within us, our
human life becomes a conscious partaker of
the endless life of God; without this con-
sciousness human life is not only unsatisfying
‘but unenduring.'

Here let me remark that the inference
commonly drawn 'that spirit communications
teach us the necessary and inherent immortal-
ity of the soul is, in my opinion, a mischievous
error. It ‘is true they show us that life can
exist in the unseen, and—if we accept the
evidence for ‘ identity ’’—that some we have
known on earth are still living and near us,
but entrance on a life after death does not
necessarily mean immortality, 1.e., eternal
persistence of our personality ; nor does it
prove that survival after death extends to all.
Obviously no experimental evidence can ever
demonstrate either of these beliefs, though it
may and does remove the objections raised
as to the possibility of survival.

Theré are many who believe with the devout

and learned Henry More, and other Platonists,
together with several eminent thinkers of the

1 This view of potential immortality was and is held not only b
some learned theologians, both ancient and modern (see Rev. Ed.
White’s *‘ Life in Christ ’’), but also by not a few devout and
eminent scientific mef such as the late Sir G. G. Stokes, a past
President of the Royal Society. of London.

288 Chapter XXIII

present day, such as Dr. J. Ellis McTaggart,
that the survival of the soul after death
involves the assumption of its pre-natal
existence. If so, as Mr. C. C. Massey has
said, “‘ The whole conception of immortality
undergoes an important change if we regard
the personal consciousness with its Ego as a
mere partial and temporary limitation of a
larger self, the growth of many seasons, as it
were, of earthly life.”

The lack of any memory of our past exist-
ences, if such there were, has been urged against
the idea of re-incarnation,)but this may be
only a temporary eclipse. It is possible that
recollection of our past liyes may gradually,
return, as in the course of our spiritual progress
we gain a larger life and deeper consciousness :
the underlying subliminal life, may be the
golden thread that binds into one all our past
and future lives.

As this question of re-incarnation is at
present attracting much attention it may be
of interest to quote another sentence or two
from the devout and suggestive writer named
above :—

““ We may find,” remarks Mr. C. C. Massey, “‘ the
ground of re-incarnation in an attraction to this
world or principle of life. . . . Whatever has brought
us here oncd’ will presuunably bring us here again
and again till the motive power changes.... .
Regeneration (a new-nature) alone exempts from

Te-incarnation 289

re-incarnation ; the bonds ‘of desire to the external
nature being thus severed, all the tendrils of attach-
ment to it are thus eradicated. ... The idea of
Christianity it seems to me, is that this attachment
is broken (for all who desire it broken) by attachment
to the Personal Power, that has, in principle, accom-
plished the rupture. The Buddhist says ‘ conquer
desire,’ but that is only negative: Christ supplies
the positive; desire Him and-you are already free
from the grip of earthly desire: for the two desires
cannot co-exist.”

: Doubtless some readers will consider the
foregoing remarks out of place in this book,
but the subject of spiritualism is so intimately
connected with, and throws so much light on,
the whole question of eschatology, that I have
ventured to enter upon an inexhaustible
subject, one of age long interest and dis-
cussion. Immortality, Matthew Arnold de-
fined as ‘living in the eternal order which never
dies’: but the soul craves for more than an
impersonal existence of love and goodness,
truth and beauty, which are in the eternal
order, timeless and boundless.

Let us however recognise our ignorance,
we cannot see far ahead, ‘‘ We have but faith :
we cannot know.’ It may be as Indian
philosophy teaches, and the learned Domini-
can martyr, Bruno, believed, that -human

. ”
1“ Thoughts of a Modern Mystic,’’ edited by Sir W. F. Barrett.
/ Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.
U

290 Chapter XXII

personality, the individualisation of the soul,
is but a fleeting event, which in the infinite
bosom of time has only an ephemeral stability
and duration, though as a portion of the
Divine life it is immortal. The whole universe
was to Bruno, as to many later thinkers, a
living Cosmos, an eternal transmutation of
the World-soul, of the ever present Divine
Word.

Certainly all religions must admit that
God is the centre, and the manifestation of God
the circumference, of all existence. Within
this vast circle lies the Whole creation, like
the myriad cell life in the human body. Each
of ‘these cells in our body has a life of its own,
yet all are related to a unitary consciousness,
a personality which far transcends the life of
each cell. Some mysterious mode of inter-
communication possibly exists, and appears
to be necessary, between the individual cells
and the sub-conscious self.

‘Thus also we may conceive the human race
as the constituent cells, the many members,
of the one Body to which all are related and
yet all transcended in the one supreme in-
effable Being. Nor can’ we doubt that some
mode of communication and influence passes
between the Creator and all creaturely exist-
ence.. For—.

“* All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is, and God the soul.”

Re-incarnation 291

“Inevitably,” Frederick Myers remarks, ‘as our
link with other spirits strengthens, as the life of the
‘organism pours more fully through the individual
cell, we shall feel love more ardent, wider wisdom,
higher joy; perceiving that this organic unity of Soul,
which forms the inward aspect of the telepathic law,
is in itself the Order‘of the Cosmos, the Summation
of Things.’””?

On the possibility of this Divine influx
some light is thrown by the discovery of
Telepathy, the implications of which we will
briefly consider in the concluding chapter.

1 “ Human Personality,’ ii, 294-

CHAPTER XIV
TELEPATHY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS

‘* Each creature holds an insular point in space;
Yet what man stirs a finger, breathes a sound,
But all the multitudinous beings round
‘In all the countless worlds, with time and place
For their conditions, down to the central base,
Thrill, haply, in vibration and rebound,

Life answering life across the vast profound,
In full antiphony, by a common grace? ’!

I HAVE dealt in this book mainly with
Spiritualistic phenomena; it was not my
intention heré to treat of other subjects of
psychical research, most of which are of a less
startling character and some, like, hypnotism
and telepathy, are, in my opinion, almost as
fully established as many of the accepted
truths of science. We have added consider-
ably to the weight of evidence since Schopen-
hauer wrote: “‘ Who at this day doubts the
facts of mesmerism and its, clairvoyance i is not
to be-called sceptical but ignorant.” And
this remark would now apply to.other branches

1 Mrs. Browning : Sonnet on ‘ Life.’?
292

Telepathy and its Impkcations 293

of' our inquiry. Deeply interesting scientific
problems lie before us in the immediate future.
I can only hint at some of these.

In Thought-transference is it the idea or
the word that is transmitted ; is it the emotion
or the expression of the emotion ? I believe it
is the former in both cases. But ifso, may not
this afford a hint towards the possibility of an
interchange of thought amongst men in spite
of differences in language? Language is but
a clumsy instrument of thought, “ consisting
as it does of arbitrary signs, it is a rudiment
of a material system ” ;' and we: may expect
it to disappear under the action of evolutionary
forces. For how much more perfectly should
we be able to transmit complex ideas and
subtle emotions by the naked intercourse of
minds than by the mechanism of speech. *

Or again, may not the animals share with
man this power? Evidence exists that
domestic animals often perceive apparitions,

1 Isaac Taylor: ‘i Physical Theory of Another Life,"’ p. 102.
This book, written nearly fifty years before telepathy was heard of,
contains some suggestions very like the above, though I was un-
aware of this till quite lately. Owing to the use of the phrase
thought-reading, the absurd idea is prevalent that thought-trans-
ference means reading all the thoughts in another’s mind. Only
a dominant idea in the agent’s mind'is passed on to the percipi-
ent, and that apparently requires‘an effort of will, so that filching
one another’s thoughts is not possible, and the sanctity and privacy
of our minds must always be within our power and possession, so
long as we retain our true self-hood. Professor H. Drummond,
in his *‘ Ascent of Man,’’ has also the same idea as I. Taylor:
‘* telepathy,”? he remarks. ‘‘is theoretically the next stage in the
evolution of language,’’ p. 233.

.

294 Chapter XXIV

and are frequently keener in their perception
than man. It would be worth while to try
whether animals are open to telepathy ; will
a favourite dog, for example, respond to the
unuttered call of ,his name, no sense per-
ception reaching him? The habits of ants
and bees seem to indicate the possession of a
mode of communication unknown to us. If
our domestic animals are in any degree open
to thought-transference, may we not thus get
into somewhat closer communion with them ?
But leaving, aside such speculations, the
wider recognition of the fact of thought-
transference will inevitably lead to its culture
and development. Does it not already. play
some part in the growing sense of sympathy
and humanity we find in the world around ?
But if it were as common here among men,
as it is doubtless common in the intercourse
of the spiritual world, what a change would
be wrought! If we were involuntarily sharers
in one another’s pleasures and pains, the
brotherhood of the race would not be a pious
aspiration or a strenuous effort, but the reality
of all others.most vividly before us ; the factor
in our’ lives which would dominate all our
conduct. What would be the use of a
luxurious mansion at the West End and
Parisian cooks if all the time fhe misery and
starvation of our fellow creatures at the East
End were telepathically part and parcel of

Telepathy and its Implications — 295

our daily lives? On the other hand what’
bright visions and joyous emotions would
enter into many dreary and loveless lives if
this state of human responsiveness were
granted to the race! For, as Shakespeare
says, in one of his Sonnets (xLIv.) :—

“Tf the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance would not stop my’ way.”

It may be that telepathy is the survival
of an old and once common possession of the
human race that has fallen into disuse and
almost died out with the growth of language.
More probably, I think, it is a rudimentary
faculty, or possibly an early and special case
of the great human rapport which is slowly
awakening the race to the sense of a larger
self : to

= + A heart that beats
In all its pulses with the common heart
Of human-kind, which the same things make glad,
The same make sorry.”

In relation to psychical inquiry, however,
one often hears the question: still raised “ Of
what use is it? ’’ When all is said and done,
and the facts we are slowly accumulating
are generally recognised and accredited, what
will be the gain? None at all to such as
Peter Bell, to whom a primrose by the river’s

296 Chapter AXIV

‘brim will only excite regret that he cannot
eat or drink it ; none to the simple, contented
heart ; none to those saints whose supreme
faith has enabled them to transcend all
earthly doubt, and who daily “ live as seeing
‘Him who is invisible’’; but very much to
the rest of mankind, in which most of us are
included.-

For, as the learned Dr. Glanville says in
the dedication of his famous ‘‘Sadducismus

- Triumphatus,” “these things relate to our

biggest interests ; if established, they secure
some of the outworks of religion, and regain
a parcel of ground which bold infidelity hath
invaded.” But our scope is wider than
Glanville had before him, and our philosophical
need is greater. A false and paralysing
materialistic philosophy must either disappear
or be reconstructed, when the phenomena we
attest can no longer be denied ; and so, too,
the popular assaults on the Christian religion,
based on its incredibility, will be deprived of
much of the force they now possess in certain
minds. ; .

The most profound change in human
thought that has occurred since the Christian
era will, in all probability, follow the general
recognition by science of the immanence of a
spiritual world. Faith will no longer be
staggered by trying to conceive of life in the
unseen ; death will no pHonEEe he felt. to have

Telepathy and its Implications 297

so icy a grip over even Christian heatts ;
miracles will no longer seem to be the super-
stitious relics of a barbarous age ; the “‘ prayer
of faith’ will no longer find an adequate
explanation in the subjective response it
evokes, nor the “‘ Word of the Lord ” in mere
human aspiration. On the contrary, if, as I
hold, telepathy be indisputable, if our crea-
turely minds can, without voice or language,
impress each other, the Infinite and Over-
shadowing Mind is likely thus to have revealed
itself in all ages to responsive human hearts.
To some gifted souls were given the inner ear,
the open vision, the inspired utterance, but
to all there comes at times the still small
voice, the faint echo within us of that larger
Life which is slowly but surely expressing
itself in humanity as the ages gradually unfold.
Wordsworth felt this when he wrote,

“ Not less I deem that there are Powers
Which of themselves our minds impress.”’

But even to those who prefer to regard
these phenomena from a purely scientific
aspect there will be great gain. I have
already alluded to the possible solution which
they afford of many perplexing, and at present,
inscrutable, scientific problems, the opening
up of new regions of fruitful experimental
inquiry, the impulse they will give to a truer
Psychology and a healthier philosophy. But

298 Chapter XXIV

in addition to this, they will tend to bring
more forcibly before our minds the solidarity
of the race, the immanence of the unseen, the
dominance of thought and. spirit—in a word,
the transcendent unity and continuity of life.

Our scientific as well as our political
memories are short-lived. We only see
vividly that in the midst of which we live.
What has gone before us is as if it had not
been and never could be. So the science of
to-day forgets, as has been well said,

_ “That the tendency of all the earlier systems of
physical philosophy was to supernaturalise natural
actions, whereas the tendency of modern science is td |
force into the phenomenal world ultimate causes
that must ever be ultra-phenomenal. The older
writers on physical science delighted in symbolical
designs in which the forces of nature were represented
each at,his appointed work, and over all they placed
a cloud from which issued the hand of God, directing
the several agents of the Universe.’’!

‘The symbol is not unjust, for,

“Tis the sublime of man,
Our noontide majesty, to know ourselves
Parts and Proportions of one wondrous whole !
. . But ’tis God
Diffused voueh all, that doth make all one whole.’’,

1 Rodwell: Preface to Dictionary of Science.’’
2 Coleridge: ‘‘ Religious Musings.”*

Telepathy and its Implications 299

We are not isolated in or from the great
Cosmos, the light of suns and stars reaches us,
the mysterious force of gravitation binds the
whole material universe into an organic whole,
the minutest molecule arid the most distant
orb are bathed in one.and the self-same
medium. But surely beyond and above all
these material links is the solidarity of mind.
As the essential significance and unity of a
honeycomb is not in the cells of wax, but in
the common life and purpose of the builders
of those cells, so the true significance of nature
is not in the material world but in the Mind
that gives to it a meaning, and that underlies
and unites, that transcends and creates, the
phenomenal world through which for a
moment each of us is passing.

THE END

APPENDIX A

SUPERSTITION AND THE SUPERNATURAL
MIRACLES

§ 1x.

The spiritualistic phenomena we have described in
this book are usually characterised by sceptics as a

“ recrudescence of superstition,” ! and by believers as
“evidence of the supernatural.” If either of these
statements be true they have serious and far-reaching
consequences, and as they ‘are both supported by some
authority, it is eminently desirable we should examine
these assertions carefully. And, first, what is the
meaning to be attached to “ superstition” on the one
hand,? and ‘‘supernatural”’ on the other? Super-
stition (Lat., superstitio) is etymologically the standing
over a thing in amazement or awe. By so doing we shut
out the light of inquiry and regson ; where this light
enters superstition fades away, so that we no longer
enshroud a mystery by standing over it, but begin to
under-stand it. Superstition is, therefore, the antithesis

1 Leading review in Nature, Vol. LI, 1894, p. 22.

2 Johnson gives several definitions; the best is “‘ unnecessary
fear.’’ Cicero says it is ‘‘ a certain empty dread of the gods.”’
Plutarch’s definition, in his interesting essay on Superstition, re-
sembles this.

gor

302 Appendix A

of understanding, and of that faith in the intelligibility
of the universe which is the sheet anchor of science and
the lode-star of all intellectual progress.

The definition given by a learned writer, Sir G. W.
Cox, seems to me near the truth, if supplemented by the
clause I have added in brackets, viz. : Superstition is a
belief not in accordance with facts [wherein a false cause
ts assumed for a fact or occurrence], and issues in super-
- stitious practices when such a belief is regarded as capable
of affording help or injury. Hence, when a primary
hypothesis is not only erroneous, but unrelated to the
facts in question, we have the basis of superstition and
its attendant jevils, though the deductive reasonings
‘from that hypothesis may be irrefragable. The witch
mania was thus a horrible superstition. False ideas of
the Cosmos are fruitful sources of absurd and sometiimes
revolting superstitions,

We are now ih a position to test the first assertion :
Is Spiritualism—using the word in the sense defined
on page 9—a superstition? Certainly it is, if not in
accordance with facts; but those who assert this are
the very persons who, on a priorz grounds, deem the facts
impossible or unverifiable, and have therefore never
given to the subject any painstaking study whatever.
Those who have been eye-witnesses and made it a
subject of laborious investigation, at first hand, assert
that certain phenomena entirely new to science do exist,
that the facts are there ; in fine, although differences
of opinion- may exist as to the interpretation of those
facts, no one has yet proved that a belief in these pheno-
mena is utterly groundless. On the contrary, every
painstaking and honest investigator who has endeavoured
to prove this, so far as I know, haS failed, and many
such have eventually changed sides.

Superstition 303

But if this be so, it is obvious that, with regard to
these phenomena, the primary hypothesis of many
Scientific and educated men to-day—which leads them
to reject the evidence adduced—is not in accordance
with fact ; and such a belief issues in a conduct opposed
to the attainment of truth. Is it not, therefore, the
average man of science, the average public opinion of
to-day, that is on this subject foolishly superstitious ?
Nor must we forget the consequences of this erroneous
belief upon the holders themselves. As the able and
thoughtful writer, whose definition of superstition I
have adopted, has said :—

“It follows that every belief and every practice not
based on, or not in accordance with, actual fact, must
have an injurious effect on the mental and moral state
of the thinker or actor. How great may be the mischief
so produced, and how far it may check the growth of
all literature, art, and science, the reader may gather
from the 9th chapter of Hallam’s “Middle Ages.’”!

We are all familiar with one mischievous effect of this
erroneous habit of thought on the part of the material-
istic school of scientific thought. Starting from, the
fundamental prineiple of the denial of an unseen or
spiritual world, everything is made to give way to that ;
albeit the ludicrous arrogance of this denial is obvious
when we consider the narrow limits both of our know-
ledge and of our senses. According to this school, ‘‘ anys
solution of a difficulty is more probable than one which
would concede that a miracle had really occurred. This
explains their seeming want of candour, and why they
meet with evasions, proofs that seem to be demon-

1“ Dictionary of Science,’? by Dr. Brande, F.R.S., and Sir G. W.
Cox, M.A.; Art., ‘* Superstition.”

304 Appendix ‘A

strative.”! These .are the words a former learned
Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, Dr: Salmon, applies
to the Biblical critics of that school, and they are equally
true of many ferocious sceptics in connection with
Psychical Research. - :

§ 2.

Let us now examine the second and opposite assertion,
“that Spiritualism is “evidence of the supernatural.”
Putting aside that school of thought which denies
the supernatural 1 ¢ofo, numerous attempts have been
made to define the word supernatural. Strictly speak-
‘ing, as God is the Creator and Source of all things, He
only can be over or above Nature. Archbishop Whately
remarks :—-

“ As Nature is another word to signify the state of
things atid course of events God has appointed, nothing’
that occurs can pe Strictly called supernatural. Jesus
Himself describes His works, not as violations of the
laws of Nature,’ but as ‘ works which none other man
did.’ Superhuman would, perhaps, be a better word
than supernatural.”

But this was not the idéa_of the writers either-in the
Old or New Testaments. Their idea was one common
to the age in which they lived, viz., that of the arbitrary
action of a Supreme Being breaking in upon the ordinary
course of events for a special purpose ; a miracle was
thus a sign or wonder wrought in order to attest His
existence ‘and power. Obviously, until science had

1 Of such it has been truly’ remarked, ‘‘ There is a bigotry of un-
belief quite as blind and irrational, involving quite as thorough
an abnegation of the highest faculties of the hum4n mind, as can
possibly be the case with the bigotry of superstition.’’—Rev. J. J.
Lias: ‘‘ Are Miracles Credible?” p. 12. :

Nature and the Supernatural | 305

given us conclusive evidence of an undeviating order in
Nature, there could be -no clear idea of a miracle as
involving a violation of that order, no correct view of
the ‘‘ supernatural.”

An interesting discussion on the caeauiae of the word
supernatural is to be found in Dr. Horace Bushnell’s
suggestive and well-known work, “Nature and the.
Supernatural.” Bishop Butler gives a sound view of
the matter, He says in his ‘‘ Analogy,’’, Part I., chap. 1:

“The only distinct meaning of that word {natural] is—
stated, fixed, or settled ; since what is natural, as much
requires and presupposes an intelligent agent to render
it so, z.e., to effect it continually or at stated times ; as
what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect. it
for once. And from hence it must follow that persons’
notion of what is natural will be enlarged in proportion
to their greater knowledge of the works of God, and
the dispensations of His providence. Nor is there any
absurdity in supposing that there may be beings in the
;wniverse whose capacities and knowledge and views
may be so extensive, as that the whole Christian dis-
pensation may to them appear natural, t.e., analogous
or conformable to God’s dealings with other parts of
His creation ; as natural as the visible known course of
things appears to us.’

Similarly St, Augustine remarked : “‘ Miracles do not
happen in contradiction to nature, but only in con-
tradiction to that which is known to us of nature.”
This is the view held by most modern theologians.

In fine, as a former Savilian: Professor of Geometry
in the University of Oxford, the Rev: Baden Powell,
F.R.S., said in his admirable series of essays on the
“‘ Order of Nature,” p. 232, ef seq. —~

“ The limits of the study of nature do not bring us to
v

306 Appendix A

the supernatural . « . if at any particular point science
finds a present limit, what is beyond science is not there-
fore beyond nature; it is only unknown nature; when
we cease to trace law we are sure law remains to be
traced. Whatever amount of the marvellous we
encounter in the investigation of facts, such extra-
ordinary phenomena will be sure at some future time to
receive their explanation. As Spinoza argued, we cannot
pretend to determine the boundary between the natural
and the supernatural until the whole of Nature is open
to our knowledge... . From the very conditions of
the case it is evident that the supernatural can never be
a matter of science or knowledge, for the moment it is
brought within the cognisance of reason it ceases to be
supernatural.”

From this point of view it will be seen that spiritualisin
is not and cannot be “‘ evidence of the supernatural.”

The popular meaning attached to the word super-
natural is, however, ‘Some occurrence which affords
evidence of an unseen or spiritual world outside ourselves,
and therefore not belonging to the present or visible
order of nature.’”’ In this sense only but still improperly
we might speak of certain well-attested spiritualistic
phenomena as supernatural.

Those who deny all miracles assume they know all
the laws of the universe. On such men argument is
wasted and they. must be left alone if they refuse ,to
listen to good evidence. As Archbishop Whately in.an
Essay on Superstition, wisely says, ‘If either Roman
Catholics, or any others, will give sufficient proofs of the
occurrence of a miracle, they ought to be listened to ;
but to pretend to, or to believe in, any miracle without
sufficient proof is clearly superstition.’

In view of the phenomena of Spiritualism, I would

Definition, of Miracles 307

venture to suggest the definition that miracles are
supernormal and therefore rare manifestations of mind,
and as such they may be evidence either (i.) of the
Infinite Mind, or (ii.) of a finite mind in the unseen, or
(iii.) of a higher transcendental part of the human mind.

Another and vital distinction must be drawn between
miracles which are voluntary exhibitions of supernormal
power for a Divine purpose ; and miracles, such as some
of the phenomena we have been considering, which are
manifestations of an intelligence and a power wholly
beyond the control of the psychic, and with which his
volition is concerned only so far as the withdrawal of
any opposing mental condition. Of these latter
(relative miracles) it is probable that the progress of
research may render the miracle of to-day the accepted
scientific fact of to-morrow. But tbe former being
self-determined are not in the same category, and
therefore will ‘remain, as Kant ‘says, among “ events
in the world the operative laws of whose causes are,
and must remain, utterly unknown to us.”

‘It will thus be seen that the common Protestant ,
belief that miracles, using this term in its widest sense,
are credible in Scripture, but incredible out of it, is
inaccurate. As Dr. Bushnell has well shown, so far
from the age of miracles being past, there is unbroken :
testimony, from the apostolic times to the present, of,
the existence of miracles, 7.¢., evidence of a supernotmal
character on behalf of the existence and operation of
unseen Intelligence.

APPENDIX B
NOTE BY PROF. BALFOUR STEWART, LL.D.,F.R.S.}

I HAVE read with much interest the paper by Professor
Barrett, on some Physical Phenomena commonly called
_Spiritualistic witnessed by him. He expresses his
conclusions in the following words: “ Assuming the
evidence to be trustworthy, I, for one, believe it points
to the conclusion that, under conditions which are so
restricted that we are not put to intellectual confusion
by frequent interruptions of the ordinary course’ of
material laws, mind occasionally and unconsciously .can
exert a direct influence upon lifeless matter.””

As this is a subject to which I have given a good
deal of thought, I trust the Psychical Society will allow
me to make one or two remarks upon it, and I am very
sure my friend, Professor Barrett, will not object to
this course. ;

‘Viewing the ‘Conservation of Energy” as the
representative of physical laws, I nevertheless do not
regard it in its birth, at least, as anything else)than a
scientific assertion—a very sagacious one, no doubt,
but yet an assertion. We are in profound ignorance
not only of the ultimate constitution of matter, but of
the nature of those forces which animate the atom and

1 This note formed the supplement to my“paper on the “' Physi-
cal Phenomena of Spiritualism ’’ and was published in_ the

** Proceedings S.P.R.,’’ Vol. IV., p. 42-
308

Note by Dr. Balfour Stewart 309

the molecule. Under these circumstances, chiefly to
advance physical knowledge by means of a working
hypothesis, but partly, it may be, as a weapon against
visionaries, we have formulated an assertion known as
the ‘‘ Conservation of Energy.” It is unquestionable
that this so-called law has greatly extended our know-
ledge of physics; nor have we met with any strictly
physical experiment capable of repetition under fixed
conditions that is inconsistent with this law. Now,
what should be our course of action when a visionary
comes before us with some variety of “ Perpetual
Motion’’? The moral certainty that we are invaded
by presumptuous ignorance is, no doubt, a sufficiently
good excuse for not discussing the project. But we have
a less objectionable method of dealing with such a man
by asking him to put his project in execution, and to
produce his machine, which we will then carefully
examine. The fact that no such machine has been
‘produced, and, as I said before, that,no physical experi-
ment contradicts the great laws of Energy, goes surely
very far to justify us in regarding these laws as true—
as laws which hold in what I may ‘call the physical
market of the world, ruling the physical transactions
between man and man.

But there are many who are not content with such
a limited application of physical laws. In the first
place, they repudiate the doctrine of free-will because
they regard it as being inconsistent with such laws;
secondly, they repudiate the possibility of what are
called miracles ; and, lastly, they repudiate (with con-
tempt) the evidence for telepathy, and more especially
that for Spiritualistic phenomena which has come
before the Society for Psychical Research.

One consequence of this mental posture is that

310 Appendix B

interminable discussions have arisen between a certain
class of men of science and the supporters of Christianity,
the latter of whom have been far from judicious in their
method of defence. These have until recently con-
sidered miracles as Divine interferences with ordinary
laws, and hence as abnormal and intellectually incom-
prehensible occurrences, while the Protestant theologians
have imagined that the power to work miracles ceased
with the Apostles.! This latter doctrine was probably
assumed as a polemical weapon at the time of thé great
controversy with the Church of Rome. It goes without
saying that this method of looking at things will not
xecommend itself to men of science, and thus an em-
bittered and useless discussion has continued between
two classes of men, neither of whom has seemed to be
either able or willing to enter into the position assumed
by the other.

Of late years, however, miracles have come to be
regarded not as breaks of law, but as phenomena embrac-
ing a higher law—a doctrine which is a great advance
upon its predecessor. Now the question naturally arises,
if there be this higher law, may there not be occasional
traces of it to be met with in the world, even at this
present age? It is, I think, exceedingly unfortunate
that, a large class of theologians have attempted to
decide this question in the negative. It is not a question
for them to decide, but for those who investigate matters
of fact. This is in reality the question upon which the
Psychical Society are engaged, and the circumstances
which I have mentioned appear to me to lend an unusual.
importance to their investigations. Let us begin by
allowing that the laws of Energy dominate the scientific

1 See Appendix A., p. 307-

Note by Dr. Balfour Stewart. 311

market-place, and the scientific dealings between man
and man’ We are, I conceive, extending this scientific
assertion so far. But are we justified in extending it
further ? Are we, for instance, justified in asserting
that under the very different conditions of things
contemplated by the Psychical Society there may not
be at least an apparent and prima facie breakdown of
these laws; and more especially, are we justified in
absolutely shutting our eyes to all evidence that may
be brought before us in favour of such apparent interrup-
tions? I cannot think so. We must examine every-
thing. Because a scientific statement applies to one
set of conditions, must it necessarily apply to everything
else? I have always thought that this had to be
ascertained. by investigation, and not ‘by dogmatic
assertion, and I therefore conceive that our Society is
abundantly justified in applying the Baconian method
of research to all occurrences.

APPENDIX C
EUSAPIA PALADINO

AFTER the favourable reports by Professor Charles
Richet and Sir Oliver Lodge upon their experiments
with Eusapia, referred to on page 65, as there stated
further séances were held with her at Cambridge in
1895.! I was not present, and, indeed, have never had
the opportunity nor the desire to experiment with
Eusapia, but those present at Cambridge came to the
conclusion, on what appeared to them to be an adequate
trial, that there was clear evidence of trickery on the
part of Eusapia,? although Sir Oliver Lodge adhered
to his opinion that thé phenomena he witnessed in the
Ue Roubaud were genuine.?

This opinion was corroborated by that of the eminent
physiologist, Professor Charles Richet. After the séances
at Cambridge he for a time suspended his judgment,
but subsequently, both in conversation with myself and
on other- occasions, has stated that he was absolutely
convinced of the supernormal character of some of the
manifestations which occur with Eusapia. This also
was the opinion of the well-known astronomical writer,

1 See “ Journal >f the S.P.R.,’’ Vol. VI, p. 306.
_ 2 ibid., Vol. VII, p. 148.
& ibid., p. 135.

312

Eusapia Paladino 313

Camille Flammarion, who in his work, ‘‘ Les Forces
Naturelles Inconnues,”’ deals at length with the pheno-
mena occurring with Eusapia, and is convinced of their
supernormal character.

But the most remarkable testimony in favour of
Eusapia came from some of the leading scientific men
of Italy, men specially trained in the investigation of
psychological and physiological phenomena. Perhaps
the most notable witness was the late Professor Lom-
broso, who conducted the investigation of Eusapia’s
powers in his laboratory in the University of Turin,
every precaution being taken against fraud. The result
was that Lombroso publicly bore witness to the genuine-
ness of these extraordinary physical manifestations.
The opinion of so experienced and able a criminologist
as Lombroso—whose high scientific status is recognised
throughout Europe—necessarily carried great weight.
In an article published in 1908 in the “ Annals of’Psy-
chical Science,” Lombroso refers to various phases of
these phenomena, including phantasms and apparitions
of deceased persons. He points out that sometimes
several phenomena occurred simultaneously, and hence
were beyond the power of one person to perform, and
also that there is evidence of thé intrusion of another
will, which could not be attributed to the medium or to
any person present, but which was in opposition to all,
and even to'the control, “ John.” He lays stress upon
the importance of these facts in relation to the hypothesis
that the occurrences are explicable by the ‘“ psychic
forces ” of the medium and circle alone: an hypothesis
which at an earlier stage of the inquiry he himself
adopted; but which he now regards as inadequate.

Independent testimony came from Dr. Enrico Morselli,
Professor of Neurology and Psychiatry (mental thera-

314 Appendix C

peutics), in the University, of Genoa, who presided over
a set of séances with Eusapia in that city.!

The control of the medium was very strict. Her
hands and feet were held by Dr. Morselli and Sig. Barzini,
editor of the ‘! Corriere della Sera,” who states that he
was present ‘‘ with the object of unmasking fraud and
trickery,” but was in the end convinced of the reality
of some of the phenomena. The person of the medium
was thoroughly searched before the séance, and the
room was also searched ; the light was never. entirely
extinguished.

Under these conditions Dr. Morselli testifies to the
occurrence of the following phenomena: movements of
the table, raps on the table and sounds on musical
instruments without contact ; complete levitations of
the table; movements of objects ‘at a distance from
the medium seen in the light, and, also, the operation |
of self-registering instruments by the unseen agency ;
apports, t.e., objects brought into the room from outside ;
the sound of human voices not proceeding from any
visible person; impressions on plasti¢ substances of
hands, feet and faces ; the appearance of dark prolong-
ations of the medium’s body, of well delineated forms of
faces, heads and busts. Although entirely sceptical
at the outset of his experiments he declares himself
convinced that most of the phenomena alleged to occur
with Eusapia are “ real, authentic, and genuine.”

Dr. Morselli was disposed to interpret these pleno-
mena by what he terms the hypothesis of special psychic
or bio-dynamic forces ; that is to say, he attributes them
to some peculiar Rows emanating from the person of the

1 A very full report of these is given in the Annals of Psychical
‘ Science for February, March, May, and June, 1907.

Eusapia Paladino 315

medium. This is practically the psychic force theory
of many earlier English investigators.

Shortly after the séances held under the direction of
Dr. Morselli in the University of Genoa, another series
of experiments, in Turin, was conducted by Doctors
Herlitzka, C. Foa, and Aggazzotti;! Dr. Pio Foa, Pro-
fessor of Pathological Anatomy, being present at the -
most remarkable of this set of: experiments. These
séances yielded similar positive results to those held by
Professors Lombroso and Morselli.

Another competent witness is Dr. Giuseppe Venzano,
stated by Dr. Morselli to be an “ excellent observer."
He contributed an important article to, the ‘Annals of
Psychical Science’’ (August -and September, 1907),
containing a‘ detailed record and critical analysis of his
experiences with : ,Eusapia, under conditions of strict
control, and sometimes in the full light given by an
electric lamp of sixteen-candle power. Dr. Venzano, in
the course of his experiments with Eusapia, the light in
the room being sufficient to enable both the medium
and his fellow-sitters to be clearly seen, perceived a
woman’s form beside him, felt her touch and heard her
speak; the form spoke with fulness of detail of certain
family affairs not known to anyone present except
himself. ‘The whole incident is a most amazing one,
and Dr. Venzano states that, in his opinion, any explan-
ation of this experience based on the poésibility of fraud
or of hallucination is impossible. '

Professor Philippe Bottazzi, Director of the Physig-
logical Institute at the University of Naples, having
read the report of Dr. Morselli’s experiments at Genoa,
made an attempt to verify the phenomena by means of

1 Assistants of Professor Mosso, an eminent physiologist.

316 Appendix C

an elaborate and carefully arranged set of self-registering
instruments, in the hope of obtaining an automatic
graphic record of the psychic force exercised by the.
medium. Such a record would negative the hypothesis
of hallucination or misdescription on the part of the
observer. These important experiments, carried out
with the collaboration of several able professors of the
same University, were remarkably successful, and
‘Professor Bottazzi’s article concludes by stating that
these experiments have “ eliminated the slightest trace
of suspicion of uncertainty relative to the genuineness
of the phenomena. We obtained the same kind of assur-
ance as that which we have concerning physical, chemical,
ot physiological phenomena. From henceforth sceptics
can only deny the facts by accusing us of fraud and
charlatanism.’”!

In 1909 three members of the S.P.R., the Hon.
Everard Feilding, Mr. W. W. Baggally and Mr. Hereward
Carrington were commissioned by the Society to carry
out another serious investigation with this’ medium.
The selection was specially made with a view to the
qualifications of the investigators. Mr. Carrington was
a clever amateur conjuror, and for ten years had carried
on investigations on these physical phenomena in the
‘United “States. His book on this subject shows his
familiarity with the methods adopted by fraudulent
mediums and his cautious attitude towards all such
experiences. Mr. Baggally was also an aniateur con-
juror with much experience, and had come to a
negative conclusion as to the possibility of any genuine

1 See Annals of ‘Psychical Science, September, 1907, p. 149;
October, 1967, p. 260; December, 1907, p. 377; where a full ac-
count of these experiments will be found, with illustrations show-
ing ‘the tracings made by the self-registering instruments.

Eusapia Paladino 317

physical phenomena. Mr. Feilding’s attitude was the
same, and, moreover, he had had extensive experience
in investigating physical phenomena. .

The result of this investigation was that all three of
these well qualified men were convinced of the absolute
genuineness of the remarkable supernorinal phenomena:
they witnessed at their hotel in Naples. Since then they
have had another series of séances which yielded quite
different results and in which they obtained nothing
convincingly supernormal and much that was obviously
normal and probably spurious. The same thing was also
found in sittings with Eusapia in America.

How can we reconcile these conflicting results? I
am not concerned to defend Eusapia, on the contrary.
I am more disposed to loathe her, but we must be fair,
and give even the devil his due. Like other psychics,
especially those who exhibit similar amazing supernormal
phenomena, she is most sensitive to “ suggestion,” even
when unexpressed ; and in the trance, when her con-
sciousness and self-control are largely inhibited, she is the
easy prey of external influences. -In the absence of the
steadying, though subconscious, influence of a high
moral nature, she unblushingly cheats whenever the
conditions are unfavourable for the production of super-
normal phenomena. We have no right to assume that
she is wholly conscious of so doing, for Professor Hyslop
has shown that mediumship is often accompanied with
abnormal’ bodily as well as mental conditions. We
know little or nothing of what constitutes the peculiar
faculty or environment for the necessary production of
these physical phenomena.

« Ifthey are due, as some have thought, to an external-
ization of the nerve force of the psychic, it is not im-
probable that the degree of this externalization will vary

318 Appendix C

with the favorable or unfavorable mental state of those
present. We may even conceive that when this psychic
force is restricted or not externalized, it may create
movements of the limbs of the psychic which will cause
her to perform by normal actions (in perhaps a semi-
conscious state) what under good psychical conditions
would be done supernormally. This would produce the
impression of intentional fraud. Every one who has
had much experience in these perplexing investigations
knows that what seems purposeless and stupid fraud
often intrudes itself, after the most conclusive evidence
of genuine phenomena has been obtained. It is this
which renders the whole enquiry wholly unfitted for
the hasty and unskilled investigator.

APPENDIX D

SUGGESTIONS FOR INVESTIGATORS
IN CONDUCTING PSYCHICAL EXPERIMENTS

There are many earnest enquirers who wish to know
how to conduct experiments for the investigation of
psychical phenomena, and a few suggestions to this end
may therefore be useful.

(1). Thought-transference.

Although the evidence for telepathy is both abundant
and weighty, additional evidence is always welcome
especially with a view to a better knowledge of the
conditions of success. A recent paper by Professor
Gilbert Murray, Litt. D., giving a record of his own
successful experiments, in guessing incidents thought
of by others, should be read in this connection ; it will be
found in the ‘‘ Proceedings of the S.P.R.” for Nov., 1916.
Professor Murray points out how important it is to avoid
tedium and lack of interest in all concerned in the
experiment. Hence experiments in guessing a card or
a number, though useful and necessary for statistical
purposes, soon bore and weary the percipient, defeating
the end in view. In my original experiments with the |
children of the Rev. A. M. Creery, 35 years ago, I found
the same thing ; and in the report of these experiments
which Myers, Gurney, and myself published in the

A 319 ; ro.

320 Appendix D

first volume of the Proceedings S.P.R. (1882) we stated
that the more varied the experiments were made the
better were the results obtained. Always. remember
that the essential thing is to keep alive the interest of
the percipient.

Further, it is necessary to avoid distraction of the
mind, or any disturbances, and also emphatically to
avoid any special anxiety for success. Make the con-
ditions as stringent as possible, but at the same time
endeavour to conduct the experiments as if they were
an amusing game. Nor should the agents,—that is
the persons who have selected the subject to be guessed,—
mentally exert themselves as if they were studying a
difficult proposition. It is not the conscious part of our
personality that is effective, but the sub-conscious ;
possibly thought transference occurs universally. If
this is so it would appear that only in a limited number
of persons does the telepathic impact emerge into the
consciousness of the percipient. In this emergence
delay often occurs, hence all the “‘ guesses” should be
noted down, as occasionally it will be found that an
earlier impression emerges in place of, or with, a later
one.

Again Professot Murray confirms what I noticed long
ago, that when the “agent” holds the hand of the
percipient very often better results are obtained. This
is worth further investigation, care being taken to avoid
anything like ‘‘ muscle reading ” or hyper-cesthesia,

A series of experiments should not be continued too
long at one time, as sometimes it is found the trials tire
or exhaust the percipient. Some correspondents have
told me the experiments produce giddiness, &c. (see
note on p. 57, “ Proc. S.P.R.,”’ Vol. i.). But I, myself
have never noticed this, nor seen any ill effects from

Suggestions for Experimenters 321

these experiments, nor from experiments on ‘‘ dowsing ”
(see Chap. 8 of my little book on Psychical Research,
Home University Library.)

(2). The Dowsing Rod and the Pendule Explorateur.

Various autoscopes, as I have called them, can be
used to reveal involuntary muscular action on the part
of the atttomatist. The forked dowsing rod is the
simplest and most widely successful, but the twisting
of the rod is no evidence of any supernormal faculty,
nor does it imply success in the discovery of underground
water or metallic ores. Its movement is due to in-
voluntary and unconscious muscular action, and may
be caused’ by any sub-conscious suggestion arising in
the mind of the dowser.

The same explanation covers the motion of the
so-called pendule explorateur, a ring or other small
object suspended by a thread held between the fingers
of one hand; or passed over the ball of the thumb,
the elbow resting on the table. An alphabet arranged
in a circle round the pendule, will enable words to be
spelt out as the pendule swings to each letter! It is
tedious, but very amusing and curious results sometimes
are found ; unexpected messages and answers to ques-
tions nay be yiven. If the holder of the pendule be
blindfolded and the alphabet re-arranged, it will be seen
how much is due to his unconscious muscular action
and involuntary mental guidance.

In both these cases, however, as in the use of all
other autoscopes, certain persons will be found whq

1 Two centuries ago the forked dowsing-rod was used for the
same purpose and cee purporting to come from different
Planets were recorded !

- WwW

322 Appendix D

possess super-normal power, and the results so obtained
cannot be explained away by any human faculty hitherto
recognized by official science. In the case of the good
dowser,—who may bea child or wholly unlettered person
of either sex, or a-distinguished man like the late Mr. A.
Lang or others of note,—the faculty of clairvoyance
reveals itself, not by a conscious perception but by an
automatic action such as the twisting of the rod, when-
ever the object of search is found ; whether it bea hidden
coin, or underground spring, or metallic lode. On the
continent the pendule is often used for the same purpose,
but when messages: are spelt out by its means the
explanation falls under the next heading.

(3). ‘ Automatic Writing, the Ouija Board, etc.

Here we come to a branch of psychical research which
probably excites the most interest, and in which caution
is necessary. Those who are new to the subject should
read the suggestions given in Chapter XX and refer to
p. “viii of the Preface. Young persons, and those who
have little to ‘interest or employ their time and
thoughts, should be strongly discouraged from making
any experiments in this perplexing region.

_ Moreover, it not infrequently happens, as some friends
of mine found, that after some interesting and veridical
messages and answers to questions had been given,
mischievous and deceptive communications took place,
interspersed with profane and occasionally obscene
language. How far the sitters subliminal self is respon-
sible for this, it is difficult to say ; they were naturally
disquieted and alarmed, as the ideas and words were
wholly foreign: to their thoughts, and they threw uP
the whole matter in disgust.

With this preliminary caution, and urging all in-

Suggestions for Eaperimenters 323

vestigators to preserve a sane and critical spirit, the
best results can be obtained when two or more friends
agree to sit regularly at some convenient and quiet hour.
A pencil may be held on a sheet of paper or a planchette
used or the ouija board, already described p. 176.1
This last auéoscope usually furnishes the easiest, though
the most tedious, mode of automatic action. It has
also the advantage that the person, or two persons,
who .touch the travelling indicator, can be carefully
blindfolded and the alphabet re-arranged without their
knowledge. If messages can thus be obtained, the
conscious, or unconscious and unintentional, movement
of the indicator by the sitters, can thus be eliminated
more or less perfectly.

If after a few trials no results are obtained the circle
should be changed and others allowed to try. When
any messages ate received, it is well to question the
unseen intelligence and ‘ascertain what are the best
conditions and who is the most promising medium.
Unwearied patience and regular sittings will be found
necessary to-obtain the best results. Whether the game
is worth the candle, the enquirers must decide for them”
selves ; personally I don’t think it is, except for those
engaged in purely psychological investigation.

(4). Physical Phenomena.

These are less easy to obtain; though table-tilting
and the movements of other objects touched by the
sitters often occur, and may usually be traced to the
unconscious and involuntary muscular action of the
sitters. Raps and the movement of objects without

1 This board can be obtained for a few shillings from the office
of Light; 110, St. Martin’s Lane, London, W.C.

324 Appendix D

contact, cannot be so explained; nor can all of the
remarkable motions of bodies which occur with contact.
This will be clear from a perusal of Chapters IV. and V.
dealing with physical phenomena. When raps first
occur in a private circle, they are usually very faint
ticks, and grow in loudness and frequency with continued
sittings.

Perhaps the best rules for the conduct of circles
sitting for spiritistic phenomena are those long ago
published by “M.A. (Oxon) ”—the Rev. Stainton Moses.
After instructing sitters to place their hands flat on the
upper surface of the table round which they sit, he Be
‘on to say :—

“Do not concentrate attention too fixedly on the expected

manifestation. Engage in cheerful but quot frivolous con-
versation. Avoid dispute or argument. *Scepticism has no
deterrent effect, but a bitter spirit of opposition in a person:
of determined will may totally stop or decidedly ‘impede
manifestations., If conversation flags, music is a great help,
if it be agreeable to all, and not of a kind to irritate the sensitive
ear, Patience is essential, and it may be necessary to meet
ten or twelve times at short intervals, before anything occurs
If after such a trial you still fail, form a fresh circle. An hour
should be the limit of an unsuccessful séance.
; ‘If€ the table moves, let your pressure be so gentle on its
surface that you are sure you are not aiding its motions.
After some time you will probably find that the movement
will ee if your hands are held over, but not in contact
with, Do not, however, try this until the moyen: is
peed and be in no hurry to get messages.

‘“ When yon think that the time has come, let someone
take command of the circle and act as spokesman. Explain
to the unseen Intelligence that an agreed code of signals is
desirable, and ask that a tilt may be given as the alphabet
is slowly repeated, at the several letters which form the word

‘

Suggestions for Experimenters 325

that the Intelligence wishes to spell. It is convenient to use
o single tilt for No, three for Yes, and two to express doubt
‘or uncertainty. .

** When a satisfactory communication has been established,
ask if you are rightly placed, and if note what order you should
take. After this ask who the Intelligence purports to be,
which of the company is the medium, and such relevant
questions. If you only satisfy yourself at first that it is
possible to speak with an Intelligence separate from that of
any person present, you will have gained much.

“ The signals may take the form of raps. If so, use the same
code of signals, and ask as the raps become clear that they may
be made on the table, or in a part of the room where they are
demonstrably not produced by any natural means, but avoid
any vexatious imposition of restrictions on free communication.
Let the Intelligence use its own means, It rests greatly with
the sitters to make the inanifestations elevating or frivolous
and even tricky.

“‘ Should an attempt be made to entrance the medium, or to
manifest by any violent methods, ask that the attempt may
be deferred till you can secure the presence of some experienced
Spiritualist. If this request is not heeded, discontinue the
sitting. The process of developing a trance-medium is one
that might disconcert an inexperienced inquirer.

“Lastly, try the results you get by the light of Reason.
Maintain a level head and a clear judgment. Do not believe
everything you are told, for though the great unseen world
contains many a wise and discerning spirit, it also has in it the
accumulation of human folly, vanity, and error; and this
lies nearer to the surface than that which is wise and good.
Distrust the free use of great names. Never for a moment
abandon the use of your reason. Do not enter into a serious
investigation in a spirit of idle curiosity or frivolity. Cultivate
4 reverent desire for what is pure, good, and true. You will
be repaid if you gain only a well-grounded conviction that there
is a life after death, for which a. pure and good life before
death is the best and wisest preparation.”

326 Appendix D

The concluding sentence above must be read in
connection with the various theories of these physical
phenomena which I have given in Chapter IX. For
my own part I consider all these manifestations are so
closely associated with the subliminal self of the medium,
that it would be rash to infer they proceed from a
discarnate human personality ; though the Russian case
cited on p. 229, as well as Rev. S. Moses’ own experience,
supports the view that in some cases they may do so.

As a rule the higher and more spiritual the content
of the messages, the less palpable and material is their
manifestation. The silent ‘‘ communion of saints” is
very far removed from a spiritistic séance. Telepathic
such communion may be, and probably is, but, as the
mystics in all ages have taught, calmness of body and
mind is essential,

‘* Some have striven
Achieving calm, to.whom was given
The joy that mixes man with Heaven,”

And “Into that silent heaven the Great Soul floweth
in,’’ as Plotinus tells us.

INDEX

A
Page
Abercromby, Blanche, case - - - - 211
Abraham, .Florentine, case - - - - 208

Aksakof, the late Hon. A. - - - 115, 165
Alexander, Prof. (Rio Janeiro), evidence of - 56, 83
Apparitions of Dying and Dead - - ~ 140-158
e of Living Persons - - - 153
Apports - - - - - - 82, 87, 88
Arnold, Matthew - - - - - - _ 289
Auditory hallucination - - - - + 147
Augury - - - - - - - 30, 31
Author, the, papers by and experience of _
10, 38-48, 55, 57-59 sa

Authority, influence of - - 2
Automatic action - - - - - 129, 130, 321
” writing - - - 162, 191-206, 322
” +» | Supernormal source - - 176-181
” »» through young children - 174
Autoscopes, meaning of - - - - 122, 321
. B
Baggally, W. Ww. “ ~ - a . as 316
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. - - * - 15, 16, 27
at Rt. Hon. Gerald - = - - 220, 244
Bayfield, Rev. M. A. - - “ 7 - xx, 281

327

328 Index

Page

Beard, S. H., experiments by - - - - 153
Beauchamp, Sally, case - - - - - . 136
Boldero, General and Mrs., Papeete -59-63, 72
Brainerd, David, case of - - - 214-216
British Association, author’s paper at (1876) - 37, 105
Browning, R. B. and Mrs. - - - - 58
ix Mrs., quotation - - - - 292

Butler, Bishop, quotations from ~ - 7) 95s 305

Cc

Cc , Mrs., experiences of - - - 38-43
Caillard, Miss, quotation from - - - 276
Carpenter, Bishop Boyd - r - - - 19
‘5 Dr. W. B. - - -f . - 8,71
Carrington, Hereward° - - - - = 316
Caterpillars, change of colour- —- - - 156
‘Causes, secondary - 2. It
Census of apparitions of dead - - - 143
Chatham, case, the - - - - - 192
Chenoweth, Mrs., the medium - - - 225-8
Clairvoyance - - - - - - 236, 237
° and charlatans - - - - 256
Combermere, Lord, case - - - - 89-92

Communications from discarnate, difficulties

of - - - - - - - 243
Communications from discarnate, ace of ‘
170, 185 et seq.

Communicator, definition of - ‘- - - 242
Conscious self, a fragment of whole self - 132, 278
Consciousness - os - - - 12, 127-133

3 ‘double - - - - - 134
Constable: Mr. F.C. - zs - - - 108
Control, definition of  - - - - - 242
Convent, apparition in Bolemia - oo - 145-6

Cox, Serjeant - - - - - 73, 106:

Index 329

Page
Crawford, the late Lord, experiences of - 70, 78, 94
iy Dr. W. J. researches of = - 46-48

Crookes, Sir W., opinions and experiments
17) 21) 37» $3-S5» $9 75» 77» 84, 86, 104, 261

Cross-correspondence = - = 170, 205-6

Cryptomnesia - - - - = - 210
D ;

Dallas, Miss H. A.* - - - - - —- 250

Dangers of spiritualism considered
250, 251, 253, 259-261

De Morgan, Professor, quoted - - 7, 21, 9Q,'100
Delitzsch, Dr., quoted - - - - = 22, 259
Dialectical Society - - - - - 53, 104

Difficulties considered - - - - + = 235*25%
Direct writing and speaking - - - - 81-85
Divining rod, see Dowsing

Douglas, Rev. H., testimony of -~ - = 63
Dowsing |. - - - > * © 122, 237, 331
Doyle, Sir A. Conan - - - - 249
Drayson, General, experiences of - - - 63, 64
Dunraven, the late Earl, experiences of - - 70,77
E* 4
E S, Mrs., inverted script - - - 191-196
Ectoplasms, meaning of - - - - - 87
Ego, the - - - + - - 128-132, 281
Elongation of body - + - - 72
Eminent believers in spiritualism - -  - 2t
Ether, the luminiferous - - + - 10}
Eusapia Paladino, conflicting evidenee 65-68, 302-308 '
Evidence, canons of - - ~ - 95-98

Evidence of survival ‘after death sat 161-171, 207, 219

from Russia 229-233

America
225-228, 234

>? 9 ”
»”» » ” >

330 Index
Evolution of life in the unseen -

Exo-neural action of brain - 7

F
Faith, region of - - - -
Faraday on spiritualism - -
Feilding, Hon. Everard - - -
Fichte, G., on ideas - - -
Fire-walk, A. Lang on - - -

Fischer, Doris, case of - - -
Florentine, Abraham, case ,- -
Fourth dimension - -
+
G
Gasparin, Count de - -

God, consciousness of - ‘ a
Goethe, quotations from - 7

Home, D. D., experiments with

: Page
- - 112-114
106

29) 33+ 264. 285
5,6
316
- - 23
te 75
136
208
134

- ~ 52, 106
o - 285, 286
“I, 10, 235, 267

Gladstone, Rt. Hon. W. E. - - i 7 27
Glanville, Dr. - - - - - - 296
Gurney, Edmund - - - - 19, 142, 151, 201
Gurwood, Colonel, case of - - Ss (= 217-9
Hall, S.C. - - - - - - - 76
Hallucination, collective - - - - 77,78
theory of - - - - 37, 105

Herschel, Sir John, quotations from
* - 20, 81,,103, 273, 274
Hertz, Professor - - - - -, - 18
Hodgson, . Dr. - = 173, 206, 222-3, 239, 240
Holland, Mrs., scripts - - - - - 198-206
e Canon Scott - - +: - = 285,
Holt, Mr. Henry - - - - - - 87, 234

57» 59-64, 70-72, 75» ‘86, 260

Index 331

Page

Huggins, Sir W. - - - - - 27, 76, 94
Human Personality - + + 127-138, 278-283 '
Husbands, apparition seen by Mr. - - - 148-151
Hutton, R. H. 7 s - - - 8
Huxley, Professor - - - - - 6
Hypnotic suggestion = - - - - - 78
Hypotheses, various - - - = 104-109
Hyslop, Professor - xv, 18, 136, 224-228, 243

if :

Iamblichus = - - “ ~ 7 s ad 281
Identity of the discarnate, evidence of - 161 et seq.
Immortality ~- = = ee = 287-289
Imposture hypothesis - - - - = 2, 104

J

James, Professor W., the late 18, 69,

131, 165, 166

Johnson, Miss A. pe Me 171, 203, 204
K
Kant, quotations from - - - : - 279, 280
Karma, doctrine of - - - - - 109
Kelvin, Lord, quotation from - - - - "33
Knots made in endless cord - - - = 114
L
L——-, Miss, experiments with - - - 43°45
Lane, Sir Hugh, the late - - - 186
Lang, the late Andrew - - - 6, 72, 75, 256
Language and thought - = 2 275
Laplace - - - - - > 96
Leighton, Lord : - - - - Ce 7
Levitation - - - - - - 54, 69-74, 79
Life, evolution in the unseen - _ - - 112, 189

»» Conditions after death « - -

188, 247, 283

332 Index

Page
Lodge, Sir Oliver 6, 18, 65, 123, 157) 166, Be G8 219, 312
Lodge, the late Lieut. Raymond - = 220
Lombroso, Prof. - - - - 7; - 18, 107, 313
Lotze - - - - - - - - 14, 286
Lowell, quotations from- - - -: = XiX, 25
Luminous appearances - - - - 54, 86, 93

M

McDougall, Professor W.  - - 13, 14, 137, 139
McTaggart, Dr. J. E. - - - - = 288
‘Magnet, luminosity ‘of field - - - 93
Massey, C. C., quotations from 10, 98, 261, 264, 288
Materialisation - - - - - 86, 87
Materialism discussed - - - - - 267-270

Matter, mystery of - - - - - 269, 270, 275
Mayo, Dr.’ - - - - © = = 10
Mediums, professional - - - -7257, 260

r risk of health - - - - 261, 262
Mediumship, problem of - eek. 103, 117-126, 259-266
Mental suggestion - - - - - 78, 155
Miracles discussed - - - - - 97, 306, 307
Morgan, Professor de, see de OEE ONS, :
Morselli, Dr. - - - r 314, 315

Moses, Rev. Stainton (M. A., Oxon.)
xvi, 73, 74, 189, agate 241, 263, 265, 324

Multiple personality - - - 136-139
Murray, Prof. Gilbert - - - 19, 319, 320
Myers, F. W. H. 19, 36, 55, 58, by, 125, 163, 174, 268
99 " apparent communications
‘from the spirit of o>. 8 - 200, 201, 204
N
Necromancy -- - - - = 30
Neo-Platonistsi - - - - 281

233
201-203

Newman, Cardinal, quotation from -
Noel, Hon. Roden - - - =

x

Index 333

Page
O
Objections considered - - 7 -. = 25-34
Ochorowicz, Professor - - - - - 87
Ouija board experiments - - - - 162, 176-188
Pp
Passivity helpful - - - - - - 133
Pearson, Prof. Karl, quoted -; = - = 15
Pendule explorateur - - - - - 321
Péréliguine case, the - = - - 229-233
Personal experiences and belief, the author's ‘
10, 36-48, 177-183, 190-196
Personality, human . - - - 128-135, 278, 290

3% multiple - - - + = 136139
Personation of great names - - = 240-2, 258
Phantasms of the dead -. - “foe - 142-151

Ss induced telepathic - - - + 153

‘9 objective hypothesis - - 7 157
Physical phenomena of spiritualism

35-68, 111-114, 261-3, 323

Piper, Mrs., experiments with 166, 170 1725 21Q, 223

Plato, world of ideas’ - - - MI
Plotinus - - - - - 280, 281, 286, 326
Podmore,, the late F. - - - - ° = xvi
Poltergeists - = é . - = 7 8o .
Possession - - - - - - 135-139
Poulton, Prof. W. B. - = = - - 156
Powell, Rev. Baden - 5 2 ee 305
Preigwerk..¢  s Os) (a) a oe 259
Prince, Dr. Morton- —- - = - 136

», Dr. Walter ° - - “er 5. Oe 137
Psychic force, hypothesis- - - 106, 107, 110

Psychical Research 2% pus, 36, 51, 94, 238, etc.

334 Index

Page
R
Raps and percussive sounds - - - 30-42, 45-
Raupert, Mr. J. G. - - - - 3 2 ihe 7S
Rayleigh, Lord - - - - z 2 17
Reichenbach, odic lights, &c. - - é - 93
Re-incarnation - - - - = - 109, 288
Religion, spiritualism not a - - S = 34, 285
Religious objections - = = 27034, 248-25q
Richet, Prof. Chas. - + 18, 65, 67, 312
Robertson, Rev. W. P., evidence of 5 2 180
Rooney, Peter, control - - - - 182-3
Ruskin, John, evidence of = - - - - 13,17
S
Sargent, Epes - - - - - - 255
Schiller, Dr. F. C. Ss. - - - ‘o ix, xi, 19
‘Schopenhauer - - - - = - 252
Scientific objections - = = = 26, 99

Scriptural warnings discussed- = - = - ' =~. 30-33
Séances, pretautions and suggestions

33). 255-266, 322

Senses often illusory = - - - - - 270-272
Sidgwick, Professor Henry 1, 8, 19, 51, 143, 147, 213
i3 Mrs. x 9, 19, 51, 52, 85, 88, 203,
205, 238-243, 260

Slade the medium - - - - - - ° 8%
Smith, Dr. Angus, letter from - - - - 14i
» Mrs. Travers, automatic script - - 184, 187

» Principal SirG. A. - - - - 31

Spalding, J. Howard - - - - - xviii
Spirit photography, alleged - - - -82, 88-92
Spiritualism, cautions and suggestions - 33, 250-266

Spiritualism or spiritism, definition of — - - 9
Stead, Ww. Ts3 the late - ~ - ee es 92
Stevenson, R. L. - - « a5, “ 17

Stewart, Prof. Balfour - - - " 36, 109, 268, 308 '

4

Index 335.

Page
Stigmata - - - - = 3 = 155
Stoney, Dr. Johnstone - - - - - 272
Sub-liminal self — - - - - - 125, 288
Suggestions for experimenters - BE aab6. 319-326
Supernatural, misuse of word - - 29, 285, 304-307
.Super-normal, evidence for - - - 51, 176, etc.
Superstition discussed - - - - = 301-304
Survival after death - - - - 161, 170, ete.

Swedenborg, quotations from
IIT, 243, 247, 248, 258, 280

T
Tausch case, the - - = = z = 225-228
Taylor, Isaac, theory of another life - - 112, 293
Tekmeria - - a = = - 7 272
Telesthesia - - ‘ - = = 2 237
Telekinetic - - a a 2 : a 36

Telepathy - = = = + 108, 236, 293-7
Tennyson, Alfred—17; quotations from
" 140, 176, 253, 286

Theories, necessary and discussed - - - 103, 115
Thomson, Sir J. J. - - - - - - 17
Thought-body - - - - - - 109, 110
Thought, projection, influence of - - - 108-110
Thought-transference - - - - - 293-5
Trance phenomena, psychology of -—- - 238-242
Trench, Archbishop - - - - - 262
: Triviality of phenomena often urged = - 4) 5) 197
Tyndall, Dr. - - - - - 5) ° - 268
U
Universe, a costhos - - - - - 26, 28, 273
Unseen intelligences, evidence of - 41, 49,113, 161

‘* Unseen Universe,’? work on, by Stewart
-and Tait - - - oo ve * 7a 109

336 Index

Page
Vv
Vennum Lurancy, case of + - -" 138
Verrall, the late Professor and Mrs. es 203-205, 220
Vision, human - - - * - - 152
Visions of the dying - = - 5 158
Ww
‘Wallace, the late Dr. A. R. - - - 6,9, 21, 92
Watts, G. F. - - - - - - 17
Wedgwood, Henle - - - ~ 159, 213-219
Whateley, Archbishop - - - - - 304
Wynne, Captain - - - - - - 71
Z
Zéllner, Professor - - - — - - 85,115

pen

Printed in Great Britain by Hbenezer Baylis & Son, Worcester.

TO
00059812

Digitized with financial assistance from

Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
on 11 March, 2020

-

oi

.
-
.
.
he
>
srinal
ty
Caw
