Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, Vol. 3 (Abbé Augustin Barruel (trans. Robert Clifford), 1797)
==========================================================
Barruel's third volume: the Sophisters of rebellion and the Masonic lodges. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/memoirsillustrat03barr).

is^    ;^-i- .  \  V  -~;'^w.™.  ^


*

^


H'-S


LIBRA.RY

w.

OF   THE                                                                                    1

Theological   Seminary,

•    ^

PRINCETON,    N.J.                                 \

1

•.  1

Case, .S->.L-.JS-*r.

Shelf, / i O^.r^.......

^

Boole,         ^\     :^    ... ..                                         '

MEMOIRS,


ILLUSTRATING    THE


HISTORY  OF  JACOBINISM.


A  TRANSLATION  FROM  THE  FRENCH  OF


The  abbe  BARRUEL.


PART  III. VOL.  III.

THE  ANTISOCIAL  CONSPIRACT.


N  EW  -  Y  0  R  Ki

PRINTED    BY     I  S  AAC  '  CO  L  L  I  N  S,    FOR
Cornelius  Davis,  No.  94,  Water-street


1799.


CONTENTS.


PrELIMINJRT  OBSERFylTIONS


Page


Chap.  I.  Spartacus-Weifliaupt,  Founder  of  the  Il-
luminées        -         -         -         -         -  .        I

Chap.  II.     Code  of  the  Illuminées. — General  Syf-

tem,  and  Divifion  of  the  Code         -  i  (

Chap.  III.  Firfl  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illumi-
nées.— Of  the  Brother  Infinuator  or
the  Recruiter         -         -         -         -         20

Chap.  IV.  Second  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illumi-
nées.— Firft  preparatory  Degree  ;  of
the  Novice  and  of  his  Teacher         -        37

Chap.  V.  Third  Part  of  the  Cede  of  the  Illumi-
nées— Second  preparatory  Degree —
The  Academy  of  llluminifm,  or  the
Brethren  of  Minerva  -         -  55

Chap.  VI.  Fourth  Part  of  the  Code  of  Illuminées
— Third  preparatory  Degree — The
Minor  Illuminée         -         -         -  63

Chap.  VII.  Fifth  Part  of  the  Code  of  tlie  Illumi-
nces — Fourth  preparatory  Degree —
The  Major  Illuraince,  or  the  Scotch
Novice  -  -  -  -  ^r

Chap.  VIII.     Sixth  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Ilînmi-

nces Intermediary  Clafs The

Scotch    Knight  of  llluminifm  ;  or
D;rc(ftin,'z  IllamiEee         -         -  S  2


ir  CONTENTS.

Chap.  IX.  Seventh  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illumi-
nées— Clafs  of  the  Myderies — Of
the  Lefler  Myfterics  ;  the  Epopt  or
Prieft  of  lUuminifm  -  '  94.

CuAt*.  X.     CoBtiouation  of  the  Difcourfe  on  the  lef-

fer  Myfteries         -         -         -         -     j  1 8


Chap.  XI.  Eighth  Part  of  the  Code  of  Illuminées
— The  Regent  or  the  Prince  Illumi-
nes        -         -         -         .         .


j^f


Chap.  XII.  Ninth  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illumi-
nées— Of  the  Grand  Myfteries  ;  the
Mage  or  the  Philofopher,  and  the
Man-King         -         -         .         -  141

Chap.  XllL  Tenth  and  kft  Part  of  the  Code  of
the  Illuminées — Government  of  the
Order — General  Idea  of  that  Go-
Tcrnment,  and  of  the  Share  which
the  Inferior  ClalTes  of  Illuminifm
bear  in  it         -         -         -  -  1 75

Chap.  XIV.     Of  the  Government  and  Political  In-

ftruâloDS  for  the  Epopts       -       -  183

Chap.  XV.  Inftrudions  for  the  Regent  or  Prince
Illuminée,  on  the  Government  of  the
Order 159

Chap.  XVI.  Continuation  of  the  Inftrudlions  on  the
Government  of  the  Illuminées —
Laws  for  Local  Superiors  -  210

Chap.  XVII.     Inflruilions  for  the  Provincial         -       «23

Chap.  XVIII.  Of  the  National  Direftors,  of  the
Areopagites,  and  of  the  General
of  llluminifm         .         -         -  229

Notes  relating  to  feme   Pajfages  contained  in  the  tivo

frjî  Volumes         -         -         -  251


î>kELiMINARY  OBSERVATIONS

On  îhe  Illm}iinees*  and  on  the  different  Works  whereon
thi'Ji'  Memoirs  are  grounded.

THE  third  cohfpiracy,  which  I  am  now  about  to
inveftigate,  is  that  of  the  Atheijiicd  lUumineeSy
which  at  my  oittCet  f  I  denominated  the  confpiracy  of
the  Sophijiers  of  Impiety  and  Anarchy  ngainji  every  relu
-gion  natural  or  revealed  ;  not  only  agahiji  kings,  but
againji  every  government,  agatnji  all  civil  fockty^  even
*igainjf  all  property  vjhatfoever.

The  name  of  Ilkiminee  which  this  Seft  (the  moft
difaftroLis  in  its  principles,  the  moll  extenfive  in  its  views,
the  moft  atrocioiifly  cunning  in  its  means)  has  chofen,
is  of  ancient  ftanding  in  the  annals  of  diforganizing
Sophiftry.  It  was  the  name  which  Manes  and  his  difci-
ples  firft  affi-fted,  gloriantur  Manichcei  fe  de  cœlo  illumî-
natos-X  The  firft  Roficrucians  ûlfo,  who  appeared  in
Germany,  called  themfelves  Illuminées.  And  later,  in
our  time,  the  Martinijts  (with  many  other  feels)  have
pretended  to  Illaminifm.  As  an  outhne  for  hiftory  I
diftinguifli  them  by  their  plots  and  tenets,  and  will  re-
duce them  into  two  clafles,  the  Atheijiical  and  the  The-
vfophical  Illuminées.  Thefe  latter  more  particularly
comprehend  the  Martînijis,  whom  I  have  already  men-
tioned in  my  fécond  volume,  and  the  Sivedenbourgians,
whom  I  fliall  mention  in  their  proper  place,  where  alfo
I  fhall  give  what  information  I  have  been  able  to  colled
relating  to  them.  The  Atheijiical  Illuminées  are  the
objefts  of  the  prefent  volume,  and  it  is  their  confpiracy
that  I  mean  to  difclofe.

The  very  numerous  letters,  books,  and  manufcripts,

■*  The  Tranflator  thinks  it  proper  to  inform  the  Reader,  that,  confi-
6ering  how  much  the  abufe  of  terms,  fuch  as  of  Plnlofopb^,  Reafon,  &c.
êcc.  has  contributed  to  diffufe  the  new-fangled  dodlrines,  he  has  adopted
in  the  prefent  volume  (whicli  may  be  faid  to  be  the  firft  methodical
■work  publifhed  on  the  fubjed:  of  which  it  treats)  the  words  Illuminée,
Jlliiminize,  and  Ilhimin'ixation,  though  Illinninatc  and  Illumination  might
|)erhaps  be  more  corredl  expreffions.  Every  reader  will  feel,  that  the
illumination  of  the  world,  and  to  illuminate  mankind,  are  objeéts  wor-
thy of  the  true  pliilofopher.  But  may  the  man  be  ever  accurft  who
ihall  attempt  to  iiluminize  his  countrymen,  or  aim  at  the  illuminixatiçn  «(f
^e  world  !     T.

j-  Vol.  I.  Page  sxii.       i  Gaultier,  Verbo  MANic«iEi,  Sç4l>  3.

Vol.  III.  B


VÎ  PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATIONS.

which  I  have  received  fince  the  publication  of  my  pro»
pofals,  has  rendered  it  impoffible  for  me  to  comprife
the  propofed  inveftigation  in  one  volume.  The  baleful
projcélsof  the  Seft  and  the  laws  for  their  execution  are
lb  ftrangely  combined,  that  1  thought  it  neceflary  to
begin  by  making  my  reader  perfedly  acquainted  with
its  code  ;  that  is  to  fay,  with  the  regular  progreffion  of
its  degrees,  mylleries,  and  government.

This  alone  requiring  an  entire  volume,  I  am  reduced
to  the  neceffity  of  giving  2i  fourth,  in  which  I  fliall  de-
velope  the  Hiftory  of  Illuminifm,  and  make  an  applica-
tion of  the  triple  confpiracy  to  the  French  Revolution.
I  have  more  particularly  apphed  myfelf  to  the  inveftiga-
tion of  the  legiflative  part  of  this  confpiring  Se6l,  as  no
work  has  yet  been  publiflied  in  which  the  whole  of  their
code  is  to  be  found.  Detached  parts  only  were  to  be
met  with  fcattered  throughout  the  papers  which  had
been  feized  by  the  public  authority.  Thefe  I  have  col-
leded  and  digefted  ;  thus  enabling  the  reader  more
eafily  to  judge  what  has  been  and  what  mull:  have  been
the  refult  of  fuch  laws.  In  fuch  an  undertaking,  I  feel
myfelf  bound  to  lay  before  the  public  an  account  of
the  documents  on  which  I  ground  my  proofs.  The
following  then  is  a  lift  of  the  principal  works,  with  a
few  obfervations  on  each,  that  the  reader  may  form  his
own  judgment  as  to  their  authenticity.

I.  The  firft  is  a  colleftion  entitled  "  Some  of  the
"  Original  Writings  of  the  Seel  of  Illuminées,  which
"  were  difcovered  on  the  nth  and  12th  of  Odober,
"  1786,  at  Landfliut,  on  a  fearch  made  in  the  Houfe  of
"  the  Sieur  Zwack,  heretofore  Counfellor  of  the  Regen-
"  cy  ;  and  printed  by  Order  of  His  Highnefs  the  Eledor.
"  Munich,  by  Ant.  Franz,  Printer  to  the  Court*."

II.  The  fécond  is  a  fupplement  to  the  Original  Wri-
ihigSy  chiefly  containing  thofe  which  were  found  on  a
fearch  made  at  the  caftle  of  Sandersdorf,  a  famous
hawit  oj  the  Illuminées,  by  order  of  His  Highnefs  the
Elector.    Munich,  1787.I

Thefe  two  volumes  contain  irrefragable  proofs  of  the
aiioft  deteftable  confpiracy.  They  difclofe  the  principles,

*  Einige  original  fchriften  des  Illuminaten  Ordens,  welche  bey  dem
gewefenen  regierungfrath  Zwack,  durch  vorgennotnmene  haus  vilifation
zu  Landihut  den  ii  und  la  OtSob.  1786,  vorgefunden  worden.  Auf
hochften  befehl  (ciner  churf iirftlichen  Durchleucht  zum  druck  befordcrt.
Munchen.    Gedruckt  bey  Ant.  Franz  churfl  :  hof-buch-drucket,

f  Nachrithten  von  wcitern  Original  fchriften,  &c.  ^w


PRELIMINARY   OBSERVATIONS.  vii

the  ob]e<51:,  and  the  means  of  the  Seft  ;  the  eflcntiat
parts  of  their  code,  the  diligent  correfpondence  of  the
adepts,  particularly  that  of  their  chief,  and  a  itatement
of  theii-  progrtfs  and  future  hopes.  The  editors  indeed
have  carried  their  attention  fo  far,  as  to  mention  by
whofe  hand  the  principal  documents  or  letters  were
written.  At  the  beginning  of  the  firft  volume,  and  on
the  frontifpiece  of  the  fccond,  is  feen  the  following  re-
markable  advertifiment  by  order  of  the  Eledor  : —
*'  Tliofe  who  may  harbour  any  doubt  as  to  the  authen-
*'  ticity  of  this  collcftion,  have  only  to  apply  to  the
*'  office  where  the  fecret  archives  are  kept,  at  Munich,
*'  and  where  orders  are  left  to  fliow  the  originals.'^

I  entreat  that  my  readers  will  recoiled  this  advertife-
nient  whenever  they  (hall  fee  the  Original  Writings  cited.

III.  "  The  True  Illuminée^  or  the  real  and  perfed
"  Ritual  of  the  Illuminée  ;  comprehending  the  Prepa-
"  ration,  the  Noviciate,  the  Minerval  Degree,  that  of
*'  the  Minor  and  Major  Illuminée,  all  without  addition
"  or  omiflion."— With  refped  to  the  authenticity  of  this
work,  we  need  only  quote  the  teftimony  of  the  Baron
Knigge,  furnamed  P/;ifo,  the  mofl:  famous  of  the  Illumi-
nées after  the  Founder  of  the  Sed  ;  and  who  was  ac-
tually the  chief  compiler  of  its  Code,  as  he  tells  us  him-
felf  :  "  All  thefe  degrees  (fays  he)  fuch  as  I  compofed
**  them,  have  been  printed  this  year  at  Eilejfe  (Frank-
*^  fort  on  the  Mein)  under  the  title  of  the  True  Illumi-
"  nee.  I  am  ignorant  of  the  author  ;  but  they  appear
*'  exaâly  as  they  flozued  from  my  pen  ;  that  is  to  fay,  as
**  I  compiled  themj."  This  certainly  is  an  authenti-
cated document  on  the  fed,  and  recognized  by  the
compiler  himfelf.

IV.  I  now  proceed  to  a  work  which  was  publiflied
by  this  fame  Philo,  under  the  title  of  "  Lajl  Ohfervations,
"  or  Injt  JVords  ofPJnlo,  and  Anfwers  to  divers  Quefti-
**  ons  on  ray  connections  with  the  Illuminées.'*  In  this
work  Philo  Knigge  gives  us  an  account  of  himfelf  and
of  his  Illuminifm,  of  his  agreements  with  the  chiefs  of
the  Seft,  and  of  his  labours  for  it.  His  vanity,  how-
ever, makes  this  narrative  fulfomc.     The  reader  will

*  Wer  an  der  aechtheit  diefer  verfammlung  cinen  zweifel  tragt,  mag
fich  nur  bey  den  hiefigen  geheinien  archiv  melden,  all  wo  man  ihm  die
Urfchrifften  felbft  vorzu  legen  befehliget  ifl.    Miinchsn  a6  Marz  1787.

t  PMo's  Ëudliche  erklâiung,  &c.  Page  96.


Viii  PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATION».

obferve  in  his  writings  one  of  thofe  pretended  Piiilofo-
phers  who  treat  all  religious  objeds  with  that  contempt
which  they  themfelves  delerve.  Thisis  of  no  confcquencc;
he  attempts  to  jiiftify  his  own  condiid  ;  his  avowals  may
therefore  be  received  in  teftimony  againft  the  Seft.

V.  "  The  lad  Works  of  Spartacus  and  Philo  ;"  Die
neiijien  Arbeiten  des  Spartacus  iind  Philo.  Except  the
Orinnal  JVritinzSy  this  is  the  moft  intellio-ent  and  im-
portant  work  that  has  been  publiflied  on  the  Illumi-
nées. It  contains  the  two  degrees  of  the  greatefl  con-
fideration  both  on  account  of  the  myfteries  revealed  in
them  by  the  SecT:,  and  of  the  laws  laid  down  for  the
adepts. — Not  a  fliadow  of  doubt  can  be  maintained  as
to  the  authenticity  of  this  work.  Thefe  degrees  and  laws
are  publiflied  with  a  certificate  of  Philo  attefting  their
conformity  with  the  original,  and  under  the  feal  of  the
Order.  This  certificate  was  fcarcely  neceflTary.  JVbo-
ever  can  read  muft  eafily  perceive  that  thele  degrees
and  thefe  laws  are  no  other  than  a  compilation,  and
often  (in  the  moft  efTential  parts)  but  a  copy  of  the  dif-
coLirfes,  precepts  and  principles,  contained  in  the  Origu
nal  Writings .  The  publi flier  is  a  man  who  has  palte'd
through  all  the  degrees  of  Illuminifm.  More  dexterdus
than  Philo,  he  makes  himfclf  mafter  of  his  fecret,  and
of  that  of  the  whole  Seft.  The  better  to  unmafk  Illu-
ir.inifm,  he  becomes  an  Illuminée  ;  and  he  has  fo  well
fucceeded,  that  no  member  of  the  Order  was  better  ac-
quainted with  it  than  himfelf.

VI.  The  fame  writer  has  pnblidied  A  Critical  Hijinry  of
the  Degrees  ofIllnmin{/jn,nv<i]ua.h\e  work,  in  which  every
thing  is  proved  from  the  very  letters  of  the  grand  adepts.

VII.  The  Dïreâing  Illuminée ^  .or  the  Scotch  Knight.
This  may  be  faid  to  be  the  counterpart  of  the  Laji
Works  of  Philo  and  Spartacus.  It  is  a  defcription  of
the  moft  important  intermediary  degree  of  lUaminifrq.
The  Editor  does  not  indeed  pubHfli  it  under  the  fignet
of  the  Order;  but  when  the  reader  has  compared  it
with  the  Origïîial  Writings^  and  even  with  the  criticifni
on  it  by  the  chief,  who  was  not  much  pleafed  with  the
compiler,  he  will  foon  decide  that  the  grand  feal  of  the
Order  is  not  neceffary  to  authenticate  it.

VIII.  Kernarkal'le  Depofitions  refpeâing  the  Illumi-
nées. Thefe  are  tliree  juridical  depofitions  on  oath,
and  figned  ill  by  Mr.  Co/hudey,  Canon  and  Profeflbr  é^t


PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATIONS."  "îx

Munich  ;  îdly  by  Mr.  Rcnncr,  Priefl:  and  ProfeiTor  of
the  lame  Academy  ;  3diy  by  Mr.  Utzfihncifer,  Coun-
fellor  of  the  Eledorar  Chamber  ;  4th]y  by  Mr.  George  ^
Grwnhrg,  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  and
Profeffor  of  Mathematics.  As  every  thing  is  juridical
in  thefe  depofitions,  it  woiikl  be  nftlcfs  for  me  to  infill:
on  the  weio'ht  they  muft  carry  with  them.  Thefe  were
four  pupils  who  did  not  wait  to  be  initiated  in  the  grand
myfteries  of  the  Sea:  to  form  their  judgment  on,  and  to
quit  the  Sect.  They  were  cited  at  a  tribunal  to  declare
all  they  knew,  and  they  anfwered  with  moderation  and
truth.  Their  dépolirions  will  find  a  place  in  the  hif-
torical  part  of  this  work.

IX.  The  Apologies  publiflied  by  fome  of  the  lead  err
of  the  Seel  are  alio  to  be  claifed  among  the  incontro-
vertible evidence  which  v/e  have  acquired.  Thefe  gen-
tlemen will  not  be  expected  to  have  aggravated  their
own  wickednefs.

X.  The  lift  would  be  endlefs  were  I  to  fubjoin  all
•the  works  that  have  been  written  .  againft  the  Seft.
•But  I  muft  diftinguifli  in  this  place  the  works  of  Mr.
Jioffjiian,  ProfefTor  at  the  Univerfity  of  Vienna.  I  am
but  little  acquainted  with  thofe  of  Dodor  Zimmerman^
though  I  have  been  informed  by  letter,  that  he  furnifh-
ed  many  valuable  articles  in  a  journal  publillied  at  Vi:-
cnna,  and  chiefly  directed  againft  the  Seel.  I  often  find
Mr.  Starkh  name  mentioned  as  a  ftrenuous  opponent  of
the  Seel.  I  have  feen  no  publication  with  his  name  to
it,  except  an  Apology  in  Anfwer  to  the  Calumnies  of
the  Sed,  which  it  continues  to  repeat,  notwithftanding
the  viftorious  manner  in  which  he  has  anfwered  them.

Among  the  anonymous  writings  I  find  an  excellent
work  entitled  the  Ultimate  fate  of  the  Free  mafoiis  (En-
dliches  fchickfal  des  Frey-mniirer  Ordens).  It  is  a  dif-
courfe  pronounced  at  the  breaking-up  of  a  Frecmafons
Lodge.  The  writer  of  this  difcourfe  gives  an  excellent
ftatement  of  the  reafons  why  the  Lodges  fhould  fuf^
pend  their  labours  fince  Illuminifm  had  intruded  itfelf
into  Mafbnry. — I  believe  he  would  have  pronounced
•this  difcourfe  much  fooner,  had  he  known  that  all
Lodges  were  not  fo  pure  as  his  own.

I  have  alfo  perufed  tlie  Biographical  Fragments  of  the
Sieur  Bole,  a  famous  Illuminée;  thefe  will  be  very  ufe-
f«I  in  our  Hiftorical  Volume.     As  to  numberlefs  other

\


PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATIONS,

Works  which  I  have  read  on  the  fame  fubjec%  it  will
fuffice  to  give  the  titles  of  them  when  quoted.  I  have
faid  more  than  enough  to  (hew  that  I  am  not  in  the
dark  with  refped  to  the  fubjcét  on  v/hich  I  am  writing.

I  could  with  to  exprefs  my  gratitude  to  thofe  virtuous
men  who,  by  their  correfpondence,  and  the  memorials
which  they  have  fent  me,  have  greatly  advanced  my
undertaking.  But  open  expreflions  of  fuch  a  gratitude
would  prove  fatal  to  them.  To  have  contributed  to  the
public  utility  is  a  fuiiicient  reward  for  their  virtue  ;  and
if  my  work  is  not  fo  perfect  as  it  ought  to  be,  it  arifes
not  from  any  want  of  energy  in  their  endeavours.

I  lind  myfelf  much  againlt  my  will  obliged  to  anfwer
certain  objcdions  which  my  Tranflator  has  made,  and
which  will,  doubtlcfs,  be  repeated  by  many  other  read-
ers, grounded  on  the  work  of  Mr.  Robil'on,  entitled
Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy  againji  all  the  Keligions  and  Go-
vernmsfits  of  Ewope,  &c.  drc.  That  work  was  pub-
lilhed  juft  as  this  Third  Volume  was  going  to  the  prefs.
Its  author  had  not  then  met  with  my  two  firft  Volumes;
but  in  a  fécond  Edition  he  is  pleafed  to  mention  them
in  his  Appendix.  •  I  am  much  flattered  by  his  approba-
tion, heartily  congratulate  him  on  the  zeal  he  has  hira-
felf  fliown  in  combating  the  public  enemy,  and  am  hap-
py to  fee  that  he  has  wrought  on  the  beft  materials.
Without  knowing  it,  we  have  fought  for  the  fame  caufe
with  the  fame  arms,  and  purfued  the  fame  courfe  ;  but  the
public  are  on  the  eve  of  feeing  our  refpeftive  quotations,
and  will  obferve  a  remarkable  difference  between  them.
I  fear  left  we  fhould  be  put  in  competition  with  each
other,  and  the  caufe  of  truth  fuifer  in  the  conflid.  I
entreat  the  reader  to  obferve,  that  thefe  differences
arife  from  the  different  methods  followed  by  him  and
myfelf.  Mr.  Robifon  has  adopted  the  eafieft,  though
the  mofl  hazardous  method.  He  combines  together  in
one  paragraph  what  his  memory  may  have  compiled
from  many,  and  fometimes  makes  ufe  of  the  expreflions
of  the  German  author  when  he  thinks  it  neceffary.  Be-
fides,  he  has  fecn  much,  and  read  much,  and  relates  it  all
together  in  the  paragraphs  marked  by  inverted  Conmms»
The  warning  he  has  given  in  his  preface  will  not  fuffice
to  remove  the  objedions  of  fome  readers.  In  fome  pa{^
fages  he  has  even  adopted  as  truth  certain  affertions
which  the  correfpondcnce  of  the  Illuminées  evidently


PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATIONS.  Xj

demon ftrate  to  have  been  invented  by  them  agaînfi:
their  adverfaries,  and  which  in  my  Hiilorical  Volume
I  (hall  be  obliged  to  treat  in  an  oppofite  fenfe-  Nor
will  I  pretend  to  fay,  that  Illuminifm  drew  its  origin
from  Malbnry  ;  for  it  is  a  faft  demonftrated  beyond  all
doubt,  that  the  founder  of  Illuminifm  only  became  aMa-
fon  in  1777,  and  that  two  years  later  than  that  he  was
wholly  unacquainted  with  the  myfteries  of  Mafonry*.

I  know  perfedly  well,  that  this  will  not  make  Ilkimi-
nifm  lefs  difaftrous;  neverthclefs  I  am  obliged  to  differ
from  Mr.  Robifon  when  treating  on  that  fubjcél,  as  well
as  on  fome  other  articles.— So  much  for  objeftions;
here  is  my  reply.

In  the  firll  place  Mr.  Robifon  and  I  always  agree  as
to  the  eflential  fads  and  the  Confpiracy  of  the  Illumiiv
ized  Lodges  ;  we  alfo  agree  on  their  maxims  and  de-
grees ;  and  this  muft  be  fufficient  to  convince  the  reader.

In  the  next  place,  in  his  general  view  of  the  Sed  he
has  obferved  its  deteftable  and  mod  dangerous  princi-
ples.    Like  a  traveller  he  has  feen  the  1
Monftrum  horrendum,  informe,  iiigens  . . .

But  he  has  not  defcribed  its  forms,  its  manners,  and
its  habits.  Nor  would  it  be  very  prudent  to  rejed  Ms
narrative  becaufe  fome  few  circumftances  are  not  per-
fcdly  authenticated,  or  becaufe  here  and  there  fome
want  of  order  may  be  obfervable.

In  fhort,  if  we  except  one  or  two  letters,  which  may
be  faid  to  be  tranflations,  all  the  other  quotations
(though  in  the  form  of  letters)  cannot  be  called  fo,  for
they  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  letters  of  the  Illuminées,
They  are  Extrads  from  different  parts,  all  brought  to-
gether under  one  head  ;  Mr.  Robifon  has  given  them  to
the  public  in  his  own  llyle,and  fometimes  makes  the  Illu-
minées fpeak  in  clearer  terms  than  is  done  in  the  Origi-
nals. His  addition  in  the  Tranllation  of  the  famous
letter  from  Spartacus  to  Marius,  page  165-61,  has  given
rife  to  numberlefs  queftions,  how  the— even  d—,  was
expreifed  in  the  German  text.  A  parênthefis  follows
(can  this  mean  death  ? )  I  was  obliged  to  anfwer  that  the
even  d — ,  as  well  as  the  parenthefis,  were  additions  ;
but  at  the  fame  time  they  were  not  additions  contrary
to  the  fenfe  of  the  letter.     I  could  willingly  have  attri-

*  Original  Writings,  VoL  I.  Let.  6,  to  Ajax.    Ibid.  Let.  36,  to  M.  C.
Porcius — and  the  firft  Pages  of  the  Critical  Hiitvry  t»f  the  Pegr^es,
\  See  Page  4,  of  this  Yelwaç.


Xî  PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATIONS,

buted  thefe  deviations  to  a  difference  in  the  editions-*»!
the  Orl^vinal  Writings  ;  but  a  new  work  mud  be  fup-
pokd,  aï  well  as  new  letters,  to  jullify  the  quotations,
and  all  Germany  mull  have  noticed  fuch  changes.  In
the  firil  place,  the  Court  of  Bavaria  would  have  proteft-
ed  againft  fuch  a  fuppofition  ;  as  the  Original  Writings
could  not  have  coincided  with  an  edition  fo  diffimilar;
next,  the  Illuminées  who  have  not  fpoken  in  fuch  clear
language,  th.ough  clear  enough  in  their  letters;  in  fine
the  authors  who  ha^  combated  lUuminifra,  and  whofe
quotations  all  exatT:ly  agree  with  the  Edition  of  Munich.
The  Pages  may  change  in  different  Editions  ;  but  whole
Letters  and  Difcourfes  cannot,  efpecially  when  the  public
may,  as  we  have  feen  above,  have  accefs  to  the  Originals.
As  for  me,  whofe  name- cannot  be  expected  to  have
fuch  authority  as  ^L■.  Robifon's,  I  have  taken  all  the
precautions  of  which  I  felt  myfelf  to  ftand  in  needf .
1  never  make  a  quotation  but  with  the  Original  before
me  ;  and  when  I  tranllate  any  paffage  which  may  ftag-
ger  the  reader,  I  fubjoin  the  original,  that  each  may
^  explain  and  verify  the  text.     I  follow  the  fame  line  of

conduct  when  I  compare  the  different  teftinionies.  I
never  mention  a  fingle  law  in  the  code  without  having
the  original  before  me,  or  the  pradice  of  it  to  vouch
for  my  aflertion.  Hence  it  will  be  perceived,  that
we  are  not  to  be  put  in  competition  with  each  other  ;
Mr.  Pvobifon  taking  a  general  view,  while  I  have  at-
tempted to  defcend  into  particulars  :  as  to  the  fub-
ftance  we  agree.  I  heartily  congratulate  him  on  his
zeal  in  combating  the  monfter  ;  and  though  we  do  not
agree  in  certain  particularities,  we  both  evince  the
monilrous  nature  of  the  Seft,  and  the  certainty  of  it»
horrible  Confpiracies.

f  I  am  alfo  afraid  the  difference  that  exifts  between  the  degrees  of  Rofi-
erufian,  of  which  Mr.  Robifon  is  in  pofTeflion,  and  thofe  which  I  have
mentioned,  may  give  rife  to  argument.  I  anfwer,  ift.  That  I  am  ac-
quainted with  three  degrees  of  Roficrtifians,  very  different  in  theni-
fclves  ;  2dly.  That  the  Catcchifcis,  Queftions  and  Rituals  for  the  fame
*  degree  greatly  differ  in  different  countries  ;  3dly.  That  I  have  followed
the  works  of  Afr.  L'Alibi-  Le  Franc,  which  Mr.  Robifon  lias  quoted  ;
4thiy.  That  Mr.  Robifon  allows  the  degree  of  Knr^rhis  of  the  Sun  as  de-
fcribed  by  me  to  be  fmiilar  to  that  which  he  is  in  poffeffion  of.  Since
the  publication  of  my  Second  Volume,  I  have  received  an  account  of  the
fame  degree  which  coincides  with  what  I  had  faid,  and  this  degree  is  a
i'ufficient  groimd  for  all  that  Mr.  Robinfon  or  myfelf  have  afferted  on  the
attack  cauicd  on  by  MivTomy  agaliift  Religion  snd  Ggvenuiicuts,


THE


ANTISOCIAL   CONSPIRACY.


CHAP.  I.

SpartacuS'WeiJJiaupt,  Founder  of  the  Illuminées,

THERE  fometimes  appear  men  formed  with  fuch  Spartacus
unhappy  difpofitions,  that  we  are  led  to  confider  Weilhaupt.
them  in  no  other  view  than  as  emanations  from  the
evil  genius,  bereft  by  the  avenging  God  of  the  power
of  doing  good.  Imbecil  in  the  fphere  of  wifdom,  fuch
men  arc  only  efficient  in  the  arts  of  vice  and  deftruélion  ;
they  are  ingenious  in  thofe  conceptions,  fkilful  in  that
cunning,  and  fruitful  in  thofe  refources  which  enable
them  defpotically  to  reign  in  the  fchools  of  falfehood,
depravity,  and  wickednefs.  In  competition  with  the
Sophifters,  thefe  men  will  furpafs  them  in  the  arts  of
exhibiting  error  in  falfe  and  delufive  colours  ;  of  dif.
guifing  the  vicious  paffions  under  the  malk  of  virtue  ;
and  of  clothing  impiety  in  the  garb  of  philofophy.  In
the  den  of  confpirators  they  are  pre-eminent  Ijy  the
atrocity  of  their  deeds  ;  they  excel  in  the  arts  of  pre-
paring revolutions,  and  of  combining  the  downfal  of
the  Altar  with  that  of  Empires.  If  their  career  be  ever
impeded,  it  is  only  when  they  approach  the  paths  of
virtue  and  of  real  fcience.  When  Heaven  in  its  wrath
permits  a  being  of  this  fpecies  to  appear  on  the  earth,
it  has  only  to  put  nations  within  the  fphere  of  his  adivi-
ty,  and  it  will  be  awfully  avenged.

With  fuch  quaHties,  and  under  fuch  aufpices,  was
born  in  Bavaria,  about  the  year  1748,  Adam  Weis-
HAUPT,  better  known  in  the  annals  of  the  fed  by  the
name  of  Spartacus.  To  the  eternal  fliame  of  his  Se-
rene protedor,  this  impious  man,  heretofore  Profelfor
of  Law  at  the  Univerfity  of  Ingolftadt,  .but  now  banifh-

Vol.  III.  C


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

cil  from  his  country  as  a  traitor  to  his  prince  and  to  the
whole  univerlc,  peacefully,  at  the  court  of  Erncil  Lewis
duke  of  Saxe  Gotha,  enjoys  an  afylura,  receives  a  pcn-
lion  from  the  public  treafury,  and  is  dignified  with  the
title  of  Honorary  Counlellor  to  that  Prince.

An  odious  phenomenon  in  nature,  an  Atheiil  void  of
remorfe,  a  profound  hypocrite,  dellitute  of  thofe  fupe-
rior  talents  which  lead  to  the  vindication  of  truth,  he  is
pofTelfed  of  all  that  energy  and  ardour  in  vice  which
generates  conlpirators  for  impiety  and  anarchy.  Shun-
ning, like  the  ill-boding  owl,  the  genial  rays  of  the  fun,
he  wraps  around  him  the  mantle  of  darknefs  ;  and  hif-
tory  Ihall  record  of  him,  as  of  the  evil  fpirit,  only  the
black  deeds  which  he  planned  or  executed.  Of  mean
birth,  his  youth  was  palled  in  ohfcurity,  and  but  a  fmgle
trait  of  his  private  life  has  pierced  the  cloud  in  which
he  had  enveloped  himfclf; — but  it  is  one  of  hateful  de-
pravity and  of  the  mod;  confummate  villany. — Inceftu-
ous  Sophifter  !  it  was  the  widow  of  his  brother  whom
he  feduced. — Atrocious  father!  it  was  for  the  murder  of
his  offspring  that  he  folicited  poifon  and  the  dagger.—
Execrable  hypocrite!  he  implored,  he  conjured  both  art
and  friendfliip  to  deftroy  the  innocent  vidim,  the  child
whofe  birth  muft  betray  the  morals  of  his  father.  The
fcandal  from  which  he  fhrinks  is  not  that  of  his  crime  ;
it  is  (he  fays  and  writes  it  himfelf)  the  fcandal  which,
publilhing  the  depravity  of  his  heart,  would  deprive  him
of  that  authority  by  which^  under  the  cloak  of  virtue,
lie  plunged  youth  into  vice  and  error. — Monllrous  So-
philler  !  he  accufes  the  devils  of  not  having  Ikreened
him  from  this  fcandal  by  thofe  abominations  wliicli
called  the  vengeance  of  the  God  of  Nature  on  the  fon
of  Judah.— Then,  impudently  daring,  he  perjures  him-
felf; he  calls  every  thing  that  is  facred  to  witnefs,  that
neither  he  nor  his  friends  ever  knew  of  the  exiftence  of
thofe  poifons  or  fecret  means  of  fcreening  him  from  in-
famy, much  lefs  that  they  had  ever  propoled,  fougljt,  or
employed  them.  He  challenges,  and  at  length  forces,  the
magiflirates  to  prove  the  accufation  ;  they  produce  the
letters  of  the  perjured  Sophiller,  and  therein  we  behold
him  entreating  a  firft,  a  fécond,  and  even  a  third  confi-
dant, to  feek,  or  caufe  to  be  fought,  and  to  communi-
cate to  him,  thefe  horrid  arts.  We  fee  him  recalling
promifes  of  three  years  llaAding  with  rcfpeci  to  thefc


*rHE    ANTISOCIAI,    CONSPIRACY.

means.  He  complains  of  the  little  fiiccefs  of  his  at-
tempts, he  accufcs  the  agents  of  timidity  or  of  igno-
rance ;  he  entreats  and  conjures  tliem  to  renew  their
attempts,  telling  them,  that  it  was  not  yet  too  late,  but
that  expedition  was  neccilliry.  Wha  can  paint  the  de-
pravity of  this  fingle  trait.  How  monltrous  the  being
who  could  have  combined  fuch  depravity  !  That  the
God  who  humiliates  the  Sophifter  lliould  have  permit-
ted this  lingle  trait  to  have  been  brought  to  light,  will
fuffice  to  Ihow  how  far  wickednefs  may  be  carried  by
the  man,  who,  with  virtue  on  his  tongue,  and  under  the
fhade  of  that  facred  name,  was  forming  and  fanaticilîng
the  blood-thirfty  legions  of  a  Robefpierre.

After  fo  fliocking  an  acculation  the  reader  will  natu-
rally  expect  us  to  produce  incontrovertible  proofs.  We
will,  therefore,  firft  lay  before  him  the  letter  of  JVcifi
P?aiipt  to  his  adept  Hertel  ;  it  is  the  Third  L.ettcr  in  the
Second  Volume  of  the  Original  Jfiitiugs  of  the  lilu-
tniuees  in  Bavaria.

**  Now,"  fays  Weifliaupt  to  this  adept,  "  let  me,  under
"  the  rnoft  profound  fecrecy,  lay  open  the  fituation  of  my
*'  heart.  It  deilroys  my  reil,  it  renders  me  incapable  of
*'  every  thing.  I  am  almoll  defperate.  My  honour  is  i:i
"  danger,  and  I  am  on.  the  eve  of  lofing  that  reputation
"  vjhich  gave  me  fo  great  an  authority  over  our  people.
"  My  fjier-in-lazt/  is  luith  child.  I  have  fcnt  her  to  Athens
"  (Munich)  to  Euriphon,  to  folicit  a  marriage  licence
*'  from  Rome.  You  fee  how  neceilary  it  is  that  file  fliouid"
"  fucceed,  and  that  without  lofs  of  time  ;  every  moment
*'  is  precious.  But  ihould  flie  fail,  what  fliall  I  do  ?--How
"  fhall  I  rellore  the  honour  of  a  perfon  who  is  the  vic-
^'  tim  of  a  crime  that  h  wholly  mine  ?  fFe  have  already-
"  made  feveral  attempts  to  dejlroy  the  child  ;  llie  was
"  determined  to  undergo  all;  but  Euriphon  is  too  timid.
*''■  Yet  I  fcarcely  fee  any  other  expedient.  Could  I  dc-
"  pend  on  Celft's  fecrecy  (the  provcfibr  Buder  at  Mu-
''  nich),  he  could  be  of  great  fervice  to  me  ;  he  had  pro-.
"  inipd  me  his  aid  three  years  ago.  Mention  it  to  him
*'  if  you  think  proper.  Sec  what  can  be  done.  I  fliould
^'  be  forry  that  Cato  knew  any  thing  of  it,  left  he  fliould
"  tell  all  his  friends.  If  you  could  extricate  me  from
^'  this  unfortunate  (lep,  you  would  reftore  me  to  life,  to
"  honour,  to  reft,  and  to  authority  (that  is  over  his  peo-
'■■^  ple^.  If  you  cannot;  I  forewarn  you  of  it,  I  wJ,U  lia-.
Ç  z


THE   ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

''  zard  a  defperate  blow,  for  I  neither  can  nor  will  lofc
"  my  honour.  I  know  not  what  devil"  ....  [Here
decency  obliges  us  to  be  filent  ;  but  he  continues]  "  As
*'  yet  nobody  knows  any  thing  of  it  but  Euriphon  ;  it  is
"  not  too  late  to  make  an  attempt,  for  flie  is  only  in  her
''  fourth  month,  and  the  word  of  it  is,  that  ic  is  a  cri-
*'  minal  cafe,  and  that  alone  makes  the  greateft  efforts
*'  and  the  moft  extreme  (or  boldeft)  refolution  neceflary.
"  Be  well  and  live  happier  than  I  do,  and  do  think  of
*'  fome  means  which  can  extricate  me  from  this  affair.
"  I  am  yours,  &-c.  Spartacus."

Notwithftanding  his  repugnance  to  let  Cato  into  the
fecret,  Weifliaupt  is  at  length  obliged  to  write  to  him
on  the  fubjed,  and,  after  repeating  that  which  through
decency  we  have  omitted  above,  this  monfter  of  hypo-
crify  fays,  "  what  vexes  me  the  moft  in  all  this  is,  that
*'  my  authority  over  our  people  will  he  greatly  dimmifhed
*'  —that  I  have  expofed  a  weak  fide,  of  which  they  will
"  not  fail  to  advantage  themfelves  whenever  1  may
*'  preach  morality,  and  exhort  them  to  virtue  and  mo-
*'  defty."*

Now  let  us  obferve  the  fame  Weifhaupt  barefacedly
faying  in  his  apology,  "  I  think  and  declare  before  God
*'  (and  Iwifli  this  writing  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  moft  fo-
*•  lemn  declaration),  that  in  all  my  life  I  have  never  heard
*'  of  thofe  fecret  means  (of  abortion)  nor  of  thofe  poi-
**  fons  ;  that  I  have  never  feen  nor  had  knowledge  of
"  any  occafion  when  I  or  my  friends  could  even  have
"  thought  of  advifing,  adminiftering  or  making  any  ufe
*'  whatever  of  them.  And  this  I  fay  in  tejiimony  and
**  affirmation  of  the  truth.^'f  It  is  thus  that  by  the  moft
abominable  hypocrify  he  fuftains  a  barefaced  and  de*
teftable  perjury.

So  much  for  the  moral  virtue  of  this  man  ;  but  our
chief  objeâ;  is,  to  confider  him  in  his  character  of  a
Confpirator.  Let  us  then  defcend  into  that  baleful
abyfs,  and  obferve  him  in  the  fchools  of  impiety,  rebel-
lion, and  anarchy.  Here  again  he  appears  to  have  been
ignorant  of  the  gradations  of  crime,  of  the  fpace  that
lies  between  the  llightcft  deviation  from  rectitude  and
the  moft  profound  wickednefs.  Here,  fcarccly  have
the  magiftrates  caft  their  eyes  upon  him  when  they  find

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Let.  6i,  to  Cato.
■}•  lutrodudion  to  his  Apology,  p.  6.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  *

him  at  the  head  of  a  confpiracy  which,  when  compared
with  thofe  of  the  clubs  of  Voltaire  and  D'Alembtir,  or
with  the  fecret  committees  of  D'Orlcans,  make  thefe
latter  appear  like  the  faint  imitations  of  puerility,  and
fliow  the  Sophifter  and  the  Brigand  as  mere  novices  in
the  arts  of  revolution.  It  is  not  known,  and  it  would
be  difficult  to  difcover,  whether  JVei/hmipt  ever  had  a
mafter,  or  whether  he  is  himielf  the  great  original  of
thofe  monftrous  doftrines  on  which  he  founded  his
fchool.  There  exifts,  however,  a  tradition  which  on
the  authority  of  fome  of  his  adepts  we  iliall  lay  before
the  reader.

According  to  this  tradition  a  Jutland  merchant,  who  Tradition
had  lived  fome  time  in  Egypt,  began  in  the  year  1771  ^^ ^°  ^
to  overrun  Europe,  pretending  to  initiate  adepts  in  the
ancient  myfteries  of  Memphis.  But  from  more  exaft
information  I  have  learned  that  he  {topped  for  fome
time  at  Malta,  where  the  only  myfteries  which  he
taught  were  the  diforganizing  tenets  of  the  ancient
Illuminées,  of  the  adopted  flave  ;  and  thefe  he  feduioujP-
ly  infufed  into  the  minds  of  the  people.  Thefe  princi-
ples began  to  expand,  and  the  iiland  was  already
threatened  with  revolutionary  confuiion,  when  the
Knights  very  wifely  obliged  our  modern  Illuminée  to
feek  his  fafety  in  flight.  The  famous  Count  (or  rather
moiintebank)  Caglioftro  is  faid  to  have  been  a  difciple
of  his,  as  well  as  fome  other  adepts  famous  for  their
llluminifm  in  the  county  of  Avignon  and  at  Eyons.  In
his  perigrinations,  it  is  faid,  he  met  with  Weifliaupt,
and  initiated  him  in  his  myfteries.  If  impiety  and  fe-
crecy  could  entitle  a  perfon  to  fuch  an  initiation,  never
had  any  man  better  claims  than  Weiftiaupt.  More
artful  4»nd  wicked  than  Caglioftro,  he  knew  how  to  di-
red  them  among  his  difciples  to  very  different  ends.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  faft  with  refpecT:  to  this
fir  ft  m  after,  it  is  very  certain  that  Weiftiaupt  needed
none.      In   an   age   when  every  kind  of  error  had  He  mzkcs
taken  root,  he  did  what  is  naturally  to  be  expeded  choice  of
from  men  who,  guided  by  their  unhappy  bias  both  in  '^'^  fyftcmt
religious  and  political  opinions,  always  feled  the  moft
abominable.     He  muft  have  had  fome  notion  of  the
ancient  Illuminées,  for  he  adopted  their  name,  and  the
diforganizing  principles  of  their  horrid  fyftem.     Thefe
notions  were  ftrengthened;  without  doubt,  by  his  fa-


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

vorite  application  to  the  diforganizing  myfteries  of  Au-
liichœifni,  iince  we  may  obferve  him  recommending  the
ftudy  of  them  to  liis  difciples  as  a  preparatory  {t<p  for,
and  as  having  a  clofe  connexion  with,  thofe  for  which
he  was  preparing  them.*  But,  perfed  Atheift  a"»  he
was,  and  fcorning  every  idea  of  a  God,  he  foon  defpifed
tlie  twofold  God  of  Ancient  lUuminifm,  and  adopted
the  doélrines  of  Manes  only  in  as  much  as  ihey  threat-
ened every  government,  and  led  to  univeifal  anarchy.
He  was  acquainted  with  the  fyfiems  of  the  modern
Sophiilers  ;  but,  notwithftanding  ail  t'neir  democracy,
he  did  not  think  they  had  given  fiifficient  latitude  to
their  fyftems  of  Liberty  and  Equality.  He  only  adopted
their  hatred  for  God,  or  pure  Atheifm.  One  elafs  led
to  the  deftruc^ion  of  all  civil  and  political  laws,  the
other  to  the  overthrow  of  all  religion  ;  he  combined
them  both,  and  formed  a  monftrous  digeft,  whofe  ob-
jed  was  the  mod  abfolute,  the  mod  ardent,  the  molt
frantic  vow  to  overthrow,  without  exception,  every  re^
ligion,  every  government,  and  all  praperty  luhatfosver.
He  pleafed  himfelf  with  the  idea  of  a  diftant  polTibillty
that  he  might  infufe  the  fame  wifli  throughout  the
world  ;  he  even  alfared  himfelf  of  fuccefs.

With  the  talents  of  a  vulgar  Sophiller  fuch  a  hope
■would  have  been  the  fummit  of  folly  ;  but  with  a  genius
Jike  that  of  Weifliaupt,  formed  for  great  crimes,  it  was
tiic  confidence  of  unlimited  wickednefs.  The  Bavarian
Sopliiftcr  knew  his  powers;  he  believed  no  crime  im-
poiîible;  he  only  fought  to  combine  them  all  to  reduce
his  fyftems  to  practice.  The  mediocrity  of  his  fortune
liad  obliged  him  to  confecrate  the  latter  years  of  his
education  to  the  ftudy  of  the  laws.  Whether  by  dif-
limulation  he  concealed  the  plans  foflered  in  bis  brcaft,
or  whether  he  had  not  as  yet  digeftcd  them  all,  he  how-
ever found  means  of  getting  himfelf  named  to  the  chair
of  Laws  in  the  univerilty  of  Ingolftadt,  before  he  had
attained  his  twenty-eighth  year.  On  the  loth  of  March
1778,  he  writes  to  Zvjack  that  he  was  not  yet  thirtj»
years  of  age  ;  and  in  the  fame  letter  he  informs  him,
mnler  fecrecy,  of  his  future  projecTis  on  lUuminifm,
which  he  had  founded  two  years  before.

»  See  the  degree  of  Blre^Jrg  Illumhicc,  cdcr  Scottifcher  riter  (Scotch
'Kiii^t)  page  22.


The  antisocial  conspiracy.  7

•  He  mufl  have  known  himfelf  pttflcired  of  profound  Origin  and
diffimulation  ;  he  mull  have  been  mailer  of  (Irange  re-  ^J^^  }^^  '^
fources,  to  ground  his  plans  ^ov  the  fubverfion  of  all
laws  throughout  all  empires,  on  the  very  funftion  of
public  interpieter  of  the  law..  It  was  neverthelefs
at  the  college  of  Ingoliladt  that  Weilbaupt,  affecting
the  greatt  jl  zt-al  for  his  duty,  conceived  himfelf  to  be
admirably  fituated  for  forming  and  condu(î:ling  by  in-
vifible  means  the  great  revolution  which  he  had  plan-
ned. He  jullly  eftimated  the  influence  which  his  office
of  teacher  gave  him  over  his  fcholars,  and  he  had  the
courage  to  fupply  in  private  the  deficiency  of  thofe  lef-
fons  which  he  was  obliged  to  give  to  them  in  public.

But  it  would  have  been  too  poor  a  conqueit  for  An-
archy or  Impiety  to  have  gained  only  thofe  who  were
under  the  eye  of  tlie  founder.  Weifliaupt  beheld  man-
kind fubjed  to  religious  and  political  laws  from  pole  to
pole,  and  his  jealous  z,eal  weighed  the  means  which  the
(aints  had  employed  to  extend  the  faith  of  Chrifr.
These  flill  exilled  the  fcattered  remnants  of  an  order
■which  the  imprudent  policy  of  Kings  had  obliged  the
Sovereign- Pontiff  to  facrifice  to  the  machinations  of  a
philofophifm,  the  profeffed  enemy  of  both  Kings  and
Pontiffs.  Weilliaupt  knew  how  to  appreciate  the  fup-
port- which  the  laws  had  acquired  from  men  who  vi^ere
heretofore  fpread  throughout  all  Catholic  countries,  and
who,  in  the  towns  and  villages,  publicly  taught  youth,
thundered  from  the  pulpit  againfl;  vice,  direcled  Chrif-
tians  toward  the  path  of  virtue,  and  went  to  preach  the
faith  of  Chriil  to  idolatrous  and  barbarous  nations.  He
well  knew  how  much  empires  were  indebted  to  religi-
ous orders,  that  in  preaching  the  duty  which  each  man
«wed  to  his  God,  ftrengthened  the  ties  that  bound  him
to  his  neighbour  and  to  his  Prince.  Though  he  in  his
heart  detcilcd  the  children  of  Benedid,  Francis,  or  Ig-
natius, he  admired  the  inllitutions  of  thefe  holy  found-
ers, and  was  particularly  charmed  with  thofe  of  Ignatius,
whole  laws  directed  lb  many  zealous  men  dilperfed
throughout  the  world  toward  the  fame  object  and  under
one  head  :  he  conceived  that  the  fame  forms  might  be
adopted,  though  to  oPerat-j  hi  a  fenfe  diametrically  oppo-
Jite.*  "  What  thefe  men  have  done  for  the  Altar  and
tne  Throne  (laid  he  to  himfelf)  why  fliould  not  1  do  i»

*  Mirabeau  de  la  Monarchie  Pruijienne,  vol.  j,  p-,)ge  97.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

oppofition  to  the  Altar  and  the  Throne  ?  With  legions
of  adepts  fubjec!:!;  to  my  laws,  and  by  the  lure  of  niyf-
teries,  why  may  not  I  deftroy  under  the  cover  of  dark-
nefs,  what  they  edilied  in  broad  day  ?  What  Chrift  even
did  for  God  and  for  Ccfar,  why  fliall  not  I  do  againft
God  and  Cefar,  by  means  of  adepts  now  become  my
apoftles  ?"

In  attributing  fuch  a  wicked  emulation  to  Weifliaupt,
I  will  not  leave  the  hiilorian  to  fruitlefs  conjedures.
No,  thefe  very  willies  in  plain  language  are  contained
in  his  confidential  letters  to  his  difciples  ;  and  he  even
reproaches  them  with  not  imitating  the  fubmiflion  of
the  followers  of  thofe  holy  founders.*  His  moft
celebrated  adepts  have  declared,  that  they  had  ob-
ferved  him  copying  them  throughout  his  code  ;f
they  muft  alfo  have  remarked,  that  Weifliaupt,  in  plan-
ning his  fyilenis  according  to  the  forms  adopted  by
thofe  religious  founders,  had  referved  it  to  himfelf  to
add  all  the  artifices  which  the  moll  infernal  policy  could
fuggell.  At  the  adual  period  when  this  confpirator
formed  his  plans,  he  was  ignorant  of  the  objeft  of
Freemafonry  4  He  only  knew  that  the  fraternity  held
fccret  meetings  :  he  obierved  that  they  were  bound  by
myderious  ties,  and  recognized  each  other  for  brethren
by  certain  figns  and  words,  whatever  might  be  their
country  or  religion.  In  his  mind,  therefore,  he  com-
bined the  plan  of  a  fociety,  which  was  at  once  to  par-
take as  much  as  convenient  of  the  government  of  the
Jefuits,  and  of  the  myllerious  filence  and  fecret  condud:
of  Malonry.  Its  objed  was,  the  propagation  of  the
mod  Antifocial  Syftems  of  ancient  Illuminifm,  and  of
the  mofl  Antireligious  Syftems  of  modern  Philofo-
phifm.

Brooding  over  this  difaftrous  projed,  Weifliaupt  cafl;
his  eyes  on  the  young  pupils  whom  government  had
entrutled  to  his  care  to  form  them  for  magiftrates  of
their  country,  and  defenders  of  the  laws,  and  he  re-
folved  to  begin  his  warfare  againft  both  by  the  perver-
lion  of  thefe  youths.  He  beheld  in  diftant  fucceffion  his
firft  difciples  feducing  others,  thofe  again,  fubjeét  to  his

*  Vid.  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  let.  27,  to  Cato.
f  See  the  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  InJ}ru{îio  pro  rec'ipientihus,  art.  B.— •
Let.  2,  to  Ajax. — Divers  letters  to  Cato.— Lad  Obfervations  of  Philo,
\  See  hereaftci-  the  chapter  on  Maf^nr^  itluminiziJ.


TfÎE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRÀdV*  a

laws,  forming  further  adepts  ;  and  thus  b^'  degrees  ha-
came  complacently  to  view  his  legions  multiplying  and-
fjM-cading  from  the  towns  to  the  country,  and  rendent-
even  in  the  courts  of  Princes.  He  already  heard  thofe-
oaths  which,  under  the  fecrecy  of  the  Lodges,  were  to  bind
the  minds  and  hearts  of  thole  new  legions  who,  replete-
M'ith  his  diforganizing  fpirit,  Were  filently  to  undermin©
tlie  Altar  and  the  Throne.  He  calculated  the  time
necelTary)  and  fmiled  to  think  that  he  would  one  day
have  only  to  give  the  fignal  for  the  general  explofion.

Scarcely  had  this  modern  Ératoltratus  attained  his  He  founds
eight-and-twentieth  year»  ere  he  had  laid  the  founda-  ^''*  lUumin-
tions  of  thofe  laws  which  he  meant  to  give  to  his  dif-
organizing  fed:.  Though  he  had  not  adually  written
his  code,  he  had  arranged  it  in  his  mind,  and  he  made
his  firft  ertay  on  two  of  his  pupils,  one  named  Majfen*
haufen  (whom  he  furnamed  Ajax),  about  twenty  years
of  age,  and  afterwards  a  Counlellor  at  Burkhaufcn  j
the  other  called  Merz  (whom  he  furnamed  Tiberius)'^
nearly  of  the  fame  age,  but  whofe  morals  and  chai'ader
proved  fo  abominable>  that  they  made  even  his  vile  fe*
ducer  blufli.  Thefe  two  difciples  foon  vying  with  their
mafter  in  impiety,  he  judged  them  worthy  of  being
admitted  to  his  myfteries,  and  conferred  on  them  the
liighell  degree  that  he  had  as  yet  invented.  He  callecl
them  Areopagi,  inftalled  himfelf  their  chief,  and  called
this  monftrous  alTociation  the  order  of  Illuminées.

It  was  on  the  firft  of  May  1 776,  that  the  inauguration
was  celebrated.  Let  the  reader  well  obferve  this  epoch.
It  indicates  a  feeble  beginninf?;  ;  it  preceded  the  Frenclji
Revolution  but  by  a  few  years  ;  that  however  was  the
time  when  that  abominable  fed  firft  ftarted  into  exift-
tnce,  which  was  to  combine  all  the  errors,  all  the  con-
fpiracies,  and  all  the  crimes  of  the  adepts  of  Impiety,
Rebellion,  or  Anarchy,  and  which,  under  the  name  of
Jacobin,  was  to  confummate  the  dreadful  Revolution..
Such  was  the  origin  of  that  fed  which  I  had  in  view
when  I  proclaimed  to  all  nations,  and  unfortunately
with  too  much  truth,  "  That  whatever  their  govern-

*  Weilhaupt,  in  a  letter  to  Zwacki  fays,  "  My  three  firft  colleagues
were  JJax,yr>i',  and  Merz."  [Let.  15,  Feh.  1778.^  This  clearly  ftates,  that
Mcr-z  was  the  'Tiberhis  who  was  illuminized  with  yijjx  ;  for  it  is  clear  ,_j,
that  Ztvack  was  only  initiated  ten  months  after  the  two  adepts  -Ajux  i.nà
Tiberius.     See   Orlg.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  See}.  IV.

t  Orig.  Wilt.  Vol.  I.  Se(ft.  IV.— Let.  2,  to  Philip  Strczzi.
Vol.   HL  D


fO  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRA'CY.

"  ment  or  religion  might  be,  to  whatever  rank  they
''  might  belong  in  civil  ibcicty,  if  Jacobinilm  triumph-
"  ed  all  would  be  overthrown  ;  that  flioiild  the  piails
"  and  wilhcs  of  the  Jacobins  be  accomplillied,  their
"  religion  with  its  Pontiffs,  their  government  with  its
"  laws,  their  magillrates  and  their  property,  all  would
*'  be  fwept  away  in  the  common  mafs  of  ruin  !  Their
"  riches  and  their  fields,  their  houfcs  and  their  cotta-
"  ges,  their  very  wives  and  children  would  be  torn
"  from  them.  You  have  looked  upon  Jacobinical  fac-
"  tion  as  exhaufling  itfelf  in  France,  when  it  was  only
"  making  a  fportive  tflay  of  its  ftrength."*

According  to  the  wiflies  and  intentions  of  this  terrible
and  formidable  fe6l,  nations,  aftoniflied,  have  yet  only
feen  the  firft  part  of  the  plans  formed  for  ftiat  general
Revolution  which  is  to  beat  dov/n  every  Throne— over-
turn every  Altar— .7ry/?ov  all  property— h\ot  out  every
law — and  conclude  by  the  total  diltolution  of  all  fociety  !
Plan  of  this  The  omen  is  fatal  ; — but  (more  fatal  ftill  !)  1  have
volume.  nirmberlefs  proofs  to  demonftrate  the  truth  of  this  aifer-
tion.  With  refpeft  to  the  Confpiracies  of  lUuminifm,
I  fliall  draw  my  proofs  from  their  own  code  and  their
archives.  I  will  begin  with  their  code  ;  it  will  lay
open  the  objeél,  the  extent,  the  manner,  the  means  and
inconceivable  depth  of  the  Confpiracies  of  the  feft.
This  Firlt  Part  will  comprehend  the  plan  of  their  con-
fpiracies, the  extraft  and  analyfis  of  the  code  of  laws
Xvhich  they  had  conllruéled  for  attaining  their  ends.
The  Second  Part  will  fliew  their  progrtfs  and  their  {vic-
cedes  from  their  firft  origin,  till  that  period  when,
powerful  in  Revolutionary  Legions,  without  leaving
their  fecret  dens,  they  unite  and  confound  themfelves
with  the  Jacobins,  and  in  iinifon  with  them  profecute
that  war  of  defolation  which  menaces  with  total  ruin
the  Altar  of  every  God — the  Throne  of  every  Monarch
— the  Law  of  every  Society — and  the  Property  of  every
Citizen.  O  !  that  I  could,  in  delineating  what  the
feft  has  done,  what  it  is  doing,  and  what  it  ftill  medi-
tates to  do— that  I  con  Id  but  teach  nations  and  the
chiefs  of  nations  what  they  themfelves  ought  to  do,  to
"avert  the  impending  danger  ;  thofe,  I  fay,  who  have
.miftakcn  thefe  dilafters  for  a  fudden  explofion,  while
they  are  in  fad  but  an  elUiy  of  the  ftrength  of  the  fcft,
and  the  commencement  of  their  general  plan.


THE    ANTioOCIAL     COJNSriRACV.


II


•^^^^-    }^^   .'■  J  orb  01  nn

£oJc  of  the  IlluiulHee,s..--Gi^ncml,:$yJjd}i2f  ,m(l  f^ivlpiri

of  the  co^Kii.:,;/^^:;/;^.,,^

BY  the  cede  of"  tlie  fcâ:  of  I]Iuùlineés,I,.,jiiéa,u,,,thf  Weilhaupt
pi-jnciples  and  fylltms  which  it,  bad  ferai td.  tq  ,ié-  1,!^^?'^^^^^
^lj[  on  lit  iijrjou  and  ^  Civil  Society,  or  rath't;r  4gaii"v^  of"  the  illn-
iali  Religion  and  ajl  Civil  Society  whatever';  T  mejH^  "^'n«'^'*-

the  government  and  the  laws  whicli  it.  îjas.  «idopted  .tp
-realize  its  plans,  and  to  guide  the  adepts,'  in,  bringing
,the  whole  univerfe  into  its  iyftpms.   .  TJils  was  not;  lb

jViiich  a  code  fpringing  from  an  ardent,  wiind,  .and.'^n
IcDthufiadic  zeal  for  a- great.revolupon,'  as'tlje  o^ispqiig
,pf  rcflcdioh  on  the  means  of  renderii^g  it  infallible;

f<)r  no  fooner  had  Weilhaupt  conceived  a.  plan,  than  he
.forefaw  the  obilaclcs  which  niight.thwart- its  fucccfs.
.Though  he  decorated  the  firfl  pupils  whom  he.'had,fe-
.duced  with  the  title  of  his  profound  adtpts,.  yet  he  di4

not  dare  unfold  to  them  the  vafl  extent  of  his  plans.

Pleafed  with  having  laid  the  foundation,,  he  did  nQt
,  hurry  the  elevation  of  that  edifice,^  vv'hich  might  ha\fe
(been  expofed  to  fall  for  want  of  the  proper  precavj-

tions  ;  no,,  he  wiihed  it  to  be  as  durable  as  time  itfe'f.
•  For  five  whole  years  he  meditated  ;  and.  he  forefaw
.that  he  fliould  ftill  have  to  paufe  for  many  a  tedioys
.day  on  the  means  of  fecuring  the  fuccefs  of  his  plans.
■  His  plodding  head  filently  ruminated  and  flowly  combi-
,n.ed  that  code  of  laws  or  rather  of  cunning,  of  artifice,
..of  fnares  and  ambuflies  by  which  he  was  to  regulate

the  preparation  of  candidates,  the  duties  of  the  initia-
.  ted,  the  fundions,,  the  rights,  the  conduct  of  "tl>e  chiefs,

and  even  his  own..  He  watched  every  means  of  feduc-
.  tion,  w^eighed  and  compared  thofe  means,  tried  them
.  one  after  the  other^  and  when  he  had  adopted  any  of

them  would  ftill  referve  the  power  of ^  changing  them,

ill  cafe  he  fliould  happen  to  fall  upon  any  that  would

be  more  difaftrous.

Meanwhile  his  firft  difciples,  now  liis  apoflles,  gained

him  many  paitizans;  he  feduced  many  himfelf,  anddi;-
Yoh.  HI.  D.  2.


li  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACT.

reded  their  condu(^  by  letter.  His  advice  was  adapted
to  circumftances,  and  artfully  hiilbanding  bis  proniife";,
he  kept  the  minds  of  his  difciples  perpetually  in  fufpenfe
as  to  the  laft  niyllerîes.  To  his'trufty  adepts  he  pro-
miles /î^/l^wj  of  morality,  of  edticatiofi,  and  of  polity,  all
entirely  tievj  ;  and  they  might  eafily  fiirmife  that  this
future  code  would  be  no  other  than  that  of  a  moi-ality
without  rellraint,  of  a  religion  without  a  God,  and  of  a
polity  without  laws  or  any  dependence  whatfoever  ;*
though  he  did  not  dare  entirely  to  throw  away  the  maflc.
But  his  laws  appeared  imperfeâ:,  his  fnares  were  not
fufficiently  concealed,  and  he  was  convinced  that  time
and  experience  alone  could  perfect  the  work  on  which
he  had  fo  long  meditated.  Such  are  the  colours,  at
leaft,  in  which  we  fee  him  reprtfenting  hinifelf  wheii
his  adepts,  impatient  to  be  initiated  in  the  laft  myfteries,
reproach  him  with  the  flowncfs  of  his  proceedings':
".  It  is  from  time  and  experience,"  fays  he,  "  that  W6
«  are  to  learn.  I  daily  put  to  the  teft  what  I  made  lail
*'  year,  and  I  find  that  my  performances  of  this  year  are
■*'  far  fuperior.  Give  me  then  time  to  refied  on  what  may
**  forward  and  on  what  may  delay  tlie  execution  of  oiir
"  plans  ;  to  weigh  what  may  be  expefted  of  our  peopïe
"left  to  thenifelves  or  led  and  conduced  by  us.— Ré-
■'''iiîember  that  what  is  done  in  hafte,  fpeedily  falls  tip
'*'  ruin.  Leave  me  then  to  myfelf,  let  me  ad  alone  ;  and
"  believe  me,  time  and  I  are  vjorth  any  other  tvjo."-\-
His  alarms.  Let  not  the  reader  imagine  that  thefe  meditations  of
Weiflialipt  alluded  to  the  objed  of  his  views  ;  that
never  varied  ;  the  deftf  iw^ion  of  Religion,  the  deftruc-
tiori  of  Society  and  the  civil  Laws,  the  deftrudion  of  all
property,— that  was  the  point  at  which  he  always  aim-
ed ;  and  this  impious  man  too  well  knew  his  crime  not
to  be  alarmed  ;  we  fee  him  writing  to  his  confidant,
"**  ïoii  know  the  fitnation  in  which  I  Itand.  I  miift  di-
'^*'t£6i  the  whole  by  means  of  five  or  fix  perfons.  It  is
-^''"^àibfôlutely  neceflary  that  I  fliould  during  my  life  re-
'**  main  unknown  to  the  greater  part  of  the  adepts
"  themfelves.— I  am  often  overwhelmed  with  the  idea
"  that  all  my  meditations,  all  my  fervices  and  toils  are
♦^perhaps  only  twilling  a  rope  or  planting  a  gallows

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Let.  to  Marius  and  Cato.

t  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Letters  3,  4,  47,  60,  &c.  to  Marius  and


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


i3


*' for  myfclf;  that  the  indifcretion  or  impvnclence  of
*'  but  one  man  may  overturn  the  moll  beautiful  edifice
*'  that  ever  was  reared."*

At  other  times  wifhing  to  appear  above  fuch  fears,
biit  rtill  reproaching  ilie  adepts  with  want  of  caution,
he  fays,  "  If  our  aftairs  aheady  go  on  ft)  ill,  the  whole
"  will  foon  be  undone  ;  the  fault  will  be  thrown  upon
*'  me,  and,  as  author  of  every  thing,  I  fhall  be  the  firit
*'  facriliced.  Yet  that  is  not  what  frightens  me;  I  kn(»w
*'  how  to  rake  every  thing  on  my  own  fcore  ;  but  if
*'  the  imprudence  of  the  Brethren  is  to  coft  me  my  life,
*'  let  me  at  leaft  not  have  to  bluHi  before  men  of  re-
**  llcdion,  nor  to  reproach  myfelf  with  an  inconfiderate
•*'  and  rafli  conducl."-t-

•    Thus  does  every  motive  ftimulate  this  famous  Coni-  Termi-
fpirator  to  transfufe  into  his  code  every  precaution  that  nat'isiii»
could  at  the  fame  time  fkreen  him  from  condign  pu-  *^°'''"
nifliment,    and   fecure   the  fuccefs   of  his  plots.      At
length,  after  five  years  meditation  on  his  fide,  and  nu-
•nierous  confultations  with  his  trufty  adepts,  particularly
with  Philo,  or  the  Baron  Knlgge,  who  afts  a  very  exalt-
ed part  in  TUmninifm,  Weitliaupt  had  regulated  thfe
mode  of  his  myfteries,  and  had  digefted  the  code  of  h:s
-fed,  that  is  to  fay,  the  principles,  the  law^,  and  govern-
ment  adopted  by  the  Illuminées  to  accomplilh   the
•grand  objecl  of  their  Confpiracy.     Before  we  lead  our
readers  through  the  immenfe  labyrinth  of  this  code,  let
us  give  a  general  idea  of  the  fyilem  which  ftimulated,
its  author  to  the  formation  of  thofe  laws.

The  more  we  meditate  on  that  part  of  the  code  General
Avhich  we  (liall  lay  before  our  readers  when  we  come  pl^»  "f  !"«
to  treat  of  the  myfteries  of  lUuminifm,  the  more  clear-  ^î'^^*^-
ly  we  obferve  Weiflaaupt  adopting  the  principles  of
Equality  and  of  Liberty,  (propagated  by  modern  Philo-
fophifm)  in  order  to  prefent  them  in  a  new  light,  and
to  lead  his  difciples  to  the  ultimate  confequences  of  the
moft  abfolute  Impiety  and  Anarchy.

The  modern  Sophifters,  fome  following  Voltaire,
others  Roulfeau,  had  begun  by  faying,  that  all  men
were  equal  and  free,  and  they  had  concluded  ivlth  re-
fpeâ  to  Religion,  that  nobody,  though  fpeaking  in  the
name  of  a  God  who  reveals  himfelf,  had  the  right  of

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Let.  ii  and  aj,  to  Cato.
•}•  Let.  22,  to  Goto.


14  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONS-PIRACY.

■prefcribing  rules  to  their  faith  ;  the  amhority  of  rr\'c-
Jation  beino-  call  allele,  they  left  no  other  balîs  for  Rth-^
gion  to  rell  upon,  but  the  lopliittry  of  a  reafon  the  per-
petual prey  of  oih"  palFioiis.  Tiiey  had  annihilated
Chriflianity  in  the  minds  of  their  adepts.  JVith  rcfihâ
to  Govcnimcnt  they  had  aUo  alfcrted,  that  all  men  were
equal  and  free,  and  they  had  concluded  thiU  every  citi-  '
zen  had  an  equal  rig.ht  to  form  tlie  laws,  or  to  the  title
of  Sovereign;  this  cqniequcnce  abandoning  all  authori-
ty to  the  capricious  fludiiations  of  the-, multitude,  no
government  could  be  legitimate  .but  that  founded  on
Cliaos,  or  the  volca',iic  explofions  uf  the  democratiœ
and  lovereign  populace.

\yeifliaupt,  reafoning  on  the  fame  principles,  believ.
ed  both  the  Sophiilers  and  the  Democratic  Populace  to
be  too  timid  in  drawing  their  inferences,  and  the  follow-
ing may  be  faid  to  be  the  ellcnce  of  all  his  myfteries.

"  Liberty-and  Equality  are  the  elTtntial  rights  that
.'*  man  fn  his  original  and  primitive  perfection  received
"  from  nature.  Property  llruck  the  lirfl:  blow  at  Eqiia^
^'  lit}'  ;  political  Society,  or  Governments,  were  the  iir.il
"  oppreifors  oï  Liberty  ;  the  fiipporters  ofGovernm.vit^
}'  and  property -are  the  religious  and  civil. Icnvs-;  there,-
"  fore,  to  reinftate  man  in  his  primitive  rights  of  Equa-
*'  lity  and  Liberty,  we  mufl:  begin  by  deftroying  all  Re-
"  ligion,  all  civil  fociety,  and  linilli  by  tl>e  deitrucliou
"  of  all  property."

Had  true  Phiiofophy  but  gained  admittance  to  thefe
lodges  of  Uluminifm,  how  clearly  would  file  have  de-
mondratcd  the  abfurdity  of  each  and  all  of  thefe  princi-
ples, and  the  extravagance  and  wickednefs  of  i'uch  coiv
i'cquences,  both  to  the  mafter  and  his  adepts!  She  would
have  Ihown,  that  the  rights  and  laws  of  primitive  man
alone  upon  earth,  or  parent  of  a  fcanty  generation,
neither  were  nor  ought  to  be  the  rights  and  laws  of
man  living  on  an  inhabited  globe.  She  would  have
proved,  that  Nature,  when  file  ordained  that  man
,  .Hiould  increafe  and  multiply  on  this  earth,  and  that  he
fhould  cultivate  it,  clearly  announced  that  his  poilerity
were  hereafter  to  live  under  the  empire  of  focial  laws.
She  would  have  obferved,  that  without  property  this
earth  would  have  remained  uncultivated  and  uninha-
bited ;  that  without  religious  and  civil  laws  the  fame
earth  would  have  only  nurtured  ftraggling  hordes  oT


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


15


vagabonds  and  favages.  Then  would  our  Bavarian  Tl-
Uniiinee  have  concluded,  that  his  Equality  and  l/ibcrty,
far  from  being  the  effential  rights  of  man  in  the  Hate
of  perfedion,  would  only  be  the  inilruments  of  his  de-
gradation, and  aflimilate  him  to  the  beads  of  the  earth,
if  they  were  to  be  incompatible  with  Property,  Religion,
and  Society.  But  true  Philoibphy  was  an  alien  to  his
fchooi  ;  and  Weifhaupt,  with  his  deteftable  genius
formed  for  error,  applauds  the  fophifm,  makes  it  the
bafis  of  his  lyilem,  and  the  ultimate  fecret  of  his
myft^ries.

I  am  not  Hmply  to  prove  that  fuch  is  the  grand  ob-  its  dssigcx,
jecft  of  the  Confpiracy,  and  of  the  ultimate  revolution
which  he  is  preparing  with  all  his  adepts.  Were  that
my  only  taiTc,  I  lliould  cite  the  blejfTmgs  which  the  hie-
rophant  of  Illuminiiin  pours  out  on  thofe  hordes  that
roam  without  laws  or  fociety,  and  the  curfes  which  he
vents  againft  thofe  men  wlio,  Hxing  their  abodes,  name
chiefs  and  conllituted  dates.  The  very  menaces  of  the
teacher  unfold  the  whole  of  the  Confpiracy.  **  Yes,
princes  and  nations  fliall  difappcar  from  off  the  face  of  the
earth  ;  yes,  a  time  /J?all  come  ivhen  luanfmll  ackuoxvledge
no  other  Lnv  but  the  great  book  of  nature  :  'This  revolution
J}}all  be  the  ivork  of  the  secret  societies,  aiid  that  is  one
of  our  grand  niyjkries.*  This  fmgle  palikge  of  the  code
5s  fufficient  to  demonftrate  both  the  objed  of  the  Con-
fpiracy and  the  extent  of  the  projeds  of  the  feet  ;  but
though  the  Confpiracy  fhould  be  clearly  proved,  ftill
that  would  be  doing  little  for -the  public  good.  Inilead
of  a  terrible  and  formidable  fed,  nations  and  chiefs  of
nations  might  millake  the  Illuminées  for  a  band  of
fcnfelefs  madmen,  plodding  without  means  a  chimeri-
cal Revolution  ;  therefore  little  to  be  feared,  and  too
defpicable  to  deferve  notice.  Thus  would  wickednefs
find  a  cloak  in  its  excefles;  the  fed  would  profccute  its
hellilli  plots  more  adively,  more  confidently,  and  more
fuccefsFully,  merely  becaufe  their  objeél  was  fuppofed
impoflible.  Society  would  be  difiblved  ;  our  laws,  our
religion,  and  our  property,  would  be  wrefted  from  us^
becaufe  we  believed  them  proof  againft  any  attempt.
Nations  would  tranquilly  fiumber  on  the  brink  of  the
-precipice,  and  be  plunged  into  deftruction  while  they
confidered  the  fatal  caufe  as  the  delufioii  of  delirium,

*  Sec  her«tt{'tvr  tlie  Difcourfc  un  the  Myftcriis.


l6  TI«    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRAc\'.

and  fmiled  on  the  plots  of  Illuminifm.  And  its  foundet"
forefaw  this  :  for  he  I'ays  to  his  adepts,  "  Let  the  laughers
laugh,  L'l  the  fcoffers ftojf' ;  he  that  compares  the  paji  ivith
the  prejl-nt,  vjill  fee  that  nature  continues  its  courje  with*
out  the  pojfilnliiy  of  diverting  it.  Its  progrefs  is  imper*
ceptihL  to  the  man  lOho  is  not  formed  to  obfeive  it  ;  but
it  does  not  efcape  the  attention  of  the  Philofopher.*

Society  then  calls  upon  me  to  develop  more  than  the
exiltence,  or  even  the  extent  of  the  plots  of  the  fed —
I  lay,  it  calls  on  me  loudly  to  proclaim  the  dangers
which  threaten  us  ;  yes,  the  evils  which  threaten  all  fo-
ciety  muft  be  clearly  fhown.  A  manner  of  proceeding
and  an  artful  cunning  big  with  crime,  which  will
fpeedily  plunge  nations  into  thofc  difaflcrs  which  they
may  believe  chimerical,  is  to  be  clearly  afcertained.
I  have  to  unfold  the  whole  of  a  fyftem^  an  entire
code,  in  which  each  inftitute,  each  maxim,  each
regulation,  is  a  new  ftep  toward  a  univedal  révolu»
tion  which  fhall  ftrike  fociety  a  mortal  blow.  I  am
not  then  about  to  inform  each  citizen  that  his  religion,
liis  countiy,  his  property ^  that  every  fociety,  people,  or
nation,  are  menaced;  unfortunately  that  would  be  a
talk  too  eafily  performed.  But  I  am  bound  to  fay,  "  In
this  horrible  plot,  fuch  are  the  dangers  which  threaten
your  country,  and  fuch  the  perils  that  hang  over  your
perfons."  I  muft  fliow  extenfive  refources  combined
with  confummate  villany,  where  you  imagined  that
nothing  exifted  but  the  delirium  of  modern  Philofo-
pbifm,  deflitute  of  means.

Weilliaupt,  like  yourfelves,  had  forefeen  numerous
obflacles  to  his  conlpiracy  ;  and  it  appears  that  he  had
€ven  exaggerated  them.  That  for  which  his  moft  fa-
mous adepts  feem  to  defpife  their  countrymen,  fliould
be  mentioned  here  as  redounding  to  their  honour,
Weifliaupt,  furrounded  by  the  faithful  Bavarians,  faith-
ful to  their  God  and  to  their  country  (rather  fpeculating
on  the  human  heart  from  his  books,  than  clofely  ob-
ferving  men  in  the  common  intercourfe  of  life),  was
not  aware  how  very  much  Philofophifm  had  forward-
.cd  his  fyftems.f  The  generation  which  had  attained
the  age  of  manhood  appeared  too  much  infeded  with
the  antiquated  ideas  on  religion  and  government.    But;^

*  See  hereafter  the  Difcourfe  on  the  Myfteries,
f  See  the  lull  Obkrvutions  of  Philo.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONèiPIRACV.

urtfortiinately,  faâ;s  foon  undeceived  him,  and  this  error
only  ferved,  by  deferring  his  hopes,  to  turn  his  mind  to
farther  precautions  and  meditations,  which  fooner  or
later  were  to  render  his  fuccels  infallible.  He  would
fay  to  himfelf,  he  would  fay  to  his  trufty  brethren,
^'  According  to  my  vievjs,  I  ccinnot  employ  men  as  they
"  are  ;  I  r^iiijt  form  tbe?n;  each  clafs  of  my  order  mull
"be  a  preparatory  fchool  for  the  next;  and  all  this
"  muft  necelfarily  be  the  work  of  time."*  But  to  ac-
celerate the  time  he  caft  his  eyes  on  that  clafs  of  young
men,  which,  jurt  entering  the  world,  eafily  fall  a  prey
to  error,  becaufe  at  that  age  they  are  under  the  influ-
ence of  their  paflions.  I  fliall  hereafter  fliow  what  it
was  that  both  lliortened  the  time,  and  abridged  their
education,  in  prefenting  him  with  whole  legions  of
adepts  ready  formed  to  his  myfteries.  It  is  firlt  necef-
fary,  however,  that  the  reader  fhould  be  acquainted
with  the  profundity  of  his  fyflem  ;  becaufe,  had  the
French  revolution  not  taken  place,  that  fyftem  would
alone  have  fufficed  to  render  it  certain  and  infallible  ;
for  could  the  French  Revolution  be  done  away  at  the
prefent  moment,  and  the  ancient  regimen  be  reftored,
this  code  would  furnilli  Illuminifm  with  all  the  means
of  eiFcduating  one  that  fhould  be  ftill  more  difaftrous.
Let  us  then  ftudy  it,  let  us  diffipate  the  cloud  in  which
it  is  enveloped.  Reader,  your  own  intereft  requires
that  you  Ihould  follow  our  fteps  ;  and  obferve  all  the
fnares  that  have  been  laid  for  you  ;  fee  with  what  art
its  difciples  are  beguiled,  with  what  precaution  it
chopfes,  calls,  and  difpofes  its  adepts.  Its  proceedings
appear  indeed  to  be  flow,  but  they  are  neverthelefs
fure.  ,  It  feems  to  exhaufl:  all  its  art  to  acquire  a  fmgle
profelyte,  but  the  fame  allurements  attraél  whole  le-
gions. Its  fprings  are  fecret,  but  the  reader  mufl:  know
their  power  and  with  what  confl:ancy  they  move  toward
and  dired  the  common  ruin.  He  has  feen  the  people
agitated,  animated,  and  even  mifled  to  ferocity  ;  but
he  mull  alfo  be  informed  how  thofe  adepts  were
created  who  fanaticifed  the  people  and  rendered  them
ferocious.

Weifliaupt  lays  down  as  an  invariable  and  infallible
principle,  that  the  "  grand  art  of  rendering  any  revo-

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Let.  to  Cato.

Vol.  III.  £


Ï7


i8  The  antisocial  Conspiracy.

*'  liition  whatfoever  certain — is  to  enlighten  tlie  people»
"  —and  to  enlighten  them  is,  ini'enlibly  to  turn  the  pub-
"  lie  opinion  to  the  adoption  of  thole  charges  which
"  are  the  given  object:  of  the  intended  revolution.

"  When  that  objed  cannot  be  pronuilged  without
"  expofing  him  that  has  conceived  it  to  public  ven-
"  geance,  he  muft  know  how  to  propagate  his  opinions

IN    SECRET   SOCIETIES.

"  When  the  objeél  is  an  univerfal  Revolution,  all  the
"  members  of  thefe  ibcieties,  aiming  at  the  fame  point,
"  and  aiding  each  other,  mull  find  mfAns.of  gov^'niing  in-
"  vifibly^  mid  vjithout  any  appearance  of  violent  meafnreSy
*'  not  only  the  higher  and  more  dijfingriifl^ed  chfs  of  aivy
"  particular  (late,  hut  men  of  all  Jtations^  of  all  nation  s  ^
"  aiid  of  eveiy  religion — Infinuate  the  fame  fpirit  cveiy
"  vjhere — //•/  fiL^nce,  but  with  the  greatcji  aâivity  pvf/ible,
"  (Urea  the  fattered  inhabitants  of  the  earth  tovjard  the
^^  fame  points  This  is  what  he  calls  the  grand  prob-
lem on  the  polity  of  dates,  on  wliich  he  grounds  the
force  of  fcret  fociefies,  and  on  which  the  empire  of  his
Illuminifm  was  to  reft.*

"  This  empire  once  eftabliilied  by  means  of  the  union
**  and  multitude  of  the  adepts,  let  force  fucceed  to  the
"  invilible  power.  I'ie  the  hands  of  thofe  who  refiji;
"  fubdiie  and  JHfle  wickediiefs  in  the  gerin  ;"  that  is  to
fay,  crufli  thofe  whom  you  have  not  been  able  to  con-
vince.-]- He  that  teaches  fuch  doctrines  is  not  to  be  look-
ed on  as  a  weak  enemy.  When  Weifhaupt  rcferved
them  for  his  myfteries,  as  well  as  the  revelation  of  his
ultimate  object,  he  knew  too  well  that  they  were  only
fitted  for  men  who  had  long  been  trained  to  view  them
as  the  lelTons  of  nature  and  of  philofophy  ;  and  lliould  he
meet  with  any  who  had  anticipated  them,  it  wc»uld  only
abridge  their  noviciate.  But  he  needed  nothing  let's
than  a  whole  gena-ation.  It  was  therefore  to  multiply
the  number  of  the  adepts,  to  difpofe  them  by  infenlible
degrees  to  receive  his  dodrines;  by  an  invifible  hand  to
direA  their  ideas,  their  widies,  their  actions,  and  their
combined  efforts,  that  the  code  of  laws  which  he  fram-
ed for  Illuminifm  conftantly  tended.
Its  divifion. ■  According  to  thefe  laws,  the  fed  is  divided  into  two
grand  clalies,  and  each  of  thefe  again  fubdivided  into  lef-
fer  degrees  proportionate  to  the  progrefs  of  the  adepts.

*  See  the  DlTcoui-fe  on  the  Myfteries.  f  Ibid.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.^

The  fîijî  clafs  is  that  of  Preparation.  It  contains
four  degrees,  thofe  of  N'roicc,  of  Muioval,  of  Minor
lUunwiec  or  Illunnnùtus  Minor,  and  of  Major  Illuminée
or  lUuminatus  Major,

Some  intermediary  degrees  belong  to  the  chifs  of
pREPAiiATioH,  which  may  be  called  ot  Iritrnjion;  fiich
are  thoie  which  the  fed  liave  borrowed  fiom  Frcema-
f)nry,  as  a  means  of  propagiUinr: .  Of  thcfe  mafonic
degrees  the  code  of  Illuminées  (ilmjt  ths  three  firjt  xvith-
out  any  altération:  it  adapts  more  particularly  to  the
views  of  the  feci  the  degree  of  Scotch  Knight  as  an  ul-
timate preparation  for  its  myfteries,  and  it  is  ftiled  the
degree  of  Direâing  Illumince  or  Illuminai  us  Dirigcns.

The  fécond  clajs  is  that  of  the  Mysteries,  and  this  is
fubdivided  into  the  lefer  and  greater  myjieries.  The
lejfer  comprehend  the  priellhood  and  adminiftration  of
die  fecT:,  or  the  degrees  of  Friejts  and  of  Kegents  or
Princes.

In  the  greater  mvfleries  are  comprized  the  two  de-
grees of  Magi  or  Philofopher  and  of  the  Man  King..
The  Eleâ  of  the  latter  compofe  the  council  and  the  de-
gree of  Areopagites.*

In  all  ihefe  clalfes  and  in  every  degree,  there  is  a
part  of  tile  iitmoft  confequence,  and  which  is  common
to  all  die  Brethren.  It  is  that  employment  known  in
the  code  by  the  appellation  of  Brother  Infinuator  or
Recruiterf.  The  whole  ftreiigth  of  the  feel:  depends
on  this  part  ;  it  is  that  which  furniflies  members  to  the
different  degrees  ;  and  Weifliaupt,  well  knowing  the
importance  of  the  talk,  turned  all  his  genius  toward  it.
Let  us  therefoi'e  begin  by  direding  our  attention  to  the
dJfcovery  of  it.

*  See  the  Original  Writings,  Chap.  II.  Part  II.  page  8.  and  the  bft
Obfervation  of  Philo,  page  89,  «Sec.   &c.

f  This  is  not  a  term  of  my  invention  ;  it  really  is  to  be  found  in  the .
code.  Infinuator  or  A/iTrerlur  (fignifying  no  niter)  are  the  two  words  .
generally  niade  uie  of  to  exprefs  this  chara6tcr.


19


Vol.  III.  E.i


2^  .  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


CHAP.     III.

Fir/i  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illwnmees.-.Oftl>e  Biotl?cr
Infinuator,  or  the  KecritUer.

Obje^  of     "O  Y  the  appellation  of  B>  other  Infinuator,  is  to  be
the  infinua-  XJ  underflood  the  Illuminée  whofe  peculiar  office  is
°^'  to  make  profelytes  for  the  feet.     Some  brethren  were

'  more  pai'ticiilarly  inftrufted  for  that  end  ;  they  might,,

indeed,  be  called  the  Apollles  or  Millionaries  of  the
Order,  being  thofe  whom  the  fuperiors  fent  to  the
different  towns  and  provinces,  and  even  into  diftant
countries,  to  propagate  its  doétrines  and  to  eftablifli
new  Lodges.  Thcfe  had  received,  in  addition  to  the
common  rules,  farther  inftructions  peculiar  to  the  high-
er degrees,  f  Thefe  (as  Weifliaupt  writes)  may  fome-
times  be  the  moft  imbecile,  and  at  other  times  the  mod
ingenious  of  the  Brotherhood."  From  the  former  he
can  depend  on  a  blind  obedience  to  the  rules  he  lay^
down,  which  are  never  to  be  deviated  from  ;  and  with
refped  to  the  latter,  provided  they  be  zealous  and
punftual,  fhould  they  even  tranfgrefs  any  of  the  laws,
it  would  not  be  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  commit  either
their  own  fafety  or  that  of  the  Order  ;  and  they  would
foon  make  amends  for  their  indifcretion  by  fome  new
artifice.  But,  whatever  may  be  the  fenfe  of  the  Illu-
minée, he  is  obliged  once  or  twice  in  his  life  to  ad  the
part  of  Brother  Infinuator,  and  that  with  a  certain
iliccefs,  by  the  acquifition  of  two  or  three  profelytes,
under  pain  of  perpetually  remaining  in  the  lower  de-
grees. Some  Brethren  of  high  rank  may  have  been
djfpenfed  fj-om  this  formality  ;  but  as  to  the  generality
o.f  them  there  exifts  a  pofitive  law  on  that  point.*  To
ftimulate  the  zeal  of  the  Biethren,  the  Inhnnator  is  by
tlie  laws  of  the  code  eftabliflied  fuperior  over  every
novice  that  he  has  gained  to  the  Order  :  It  is  expreffed
as  follows  :  "  Every  Illuminée  may  form  to  himfelf  a
"  petty  empire  ;  and  from  his  litlkuefs,  emerge  to  great-
"  ncfs  and  poiuer.Y^

*  Original  Writings.    The  Statutes  reformed.  Art.  1 8.  f  Ibid,


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  ^1

Such  then  is  the  firft  duty  impofed  upon  every  Illu-
minée for  the  propagation  of  the  fed  ;  and  this  is  the  '
part  which  iirit  claims  our  attention,  in  order  that  we
may  be  able  to  form  an  idea  of  the  immenfurablc
powers  of  Weifhaupt  for  feduclion.

This  part  may  be  faid  to  he  fubdivided  into  three,  part.  I.  of
The  rules  laid  down  are,  iirll,  thofe  which  are  to  guide  Y^^  miffinn.
the  Brother  Iiifniudtor  in  the  choice  of  prrfons  to  be  ^j-  q^^^^^
admitted  or  excluded  ;  then  follow  thofe  which  are  to  dates.
teach  him  how  to  entice  into  the  order  thofe  perfons
whom  he  has  judged  proper  for  it  ;  and  laftly  come
thofe  rules  and  arts  by  which  novices  are  to  be  formed,
and  even  involved  in  llluminifm  before  they  are  of-
^cially  admitted.

In  order  to  judge  of  the  qualifications  of  the  per-
fons whom  he  may  enlill,  every  Illuminée  is  to  begin
by  procuring  tablets,  which  he  is  to  keep  in  the  form
of  a  Journal  ;  and  this  is  bis  Diary.  Affiduouily  pvying
into  every  thing  that  furrounds  him,  he  mull  vigilantly
obferve  all  perlons  with  whom  he  becomes  acquainted,
or  whom  he  meets  in  company,  without  exception  of
relations,  friends,  enemies,  or  entire  ftrangcrs;  he  mud
endeavour  to  difcover  their  ftrong  and  their  weak  iide;
their  pallions  and  prejudices  ;  their  intimacies,  and,
above  all,  their  adlions,  interefts  and  fortune  ;  in  a
word,  every  thing  relating  to  them  :  and  the  remarks
of  every  day  he  mud  enter  in  his  Diary.

A  twofold  advantage  is  to  be  reaped  from  thefe  par-
ticulars of  information  ;  firft,  by  the  order  in  general
and  its  fuperiors;  fecondly,  by  the  adept  himfelf.  Twice
every  month  he  will  make  a  general  ftateraent  of  his
cbfervations,  and  he  will  tranfmit  it  to  his  fuperiors.
By  thefe  means  the  Order  will  be  informed  what  men,
in  every  town  or  village,  are  friendly  or  inimical  to  it.
The  means  of  gaining  over  the  one  or  deftroying  the
other  will  naturally  occur.  With  refped  to  the  In-
fmuntor,  he  will  learn  how  to  judge  of  thofe  who  are
proper  perfons  to  be  received  or  rejeded,  and  he  will
carefully  infert  his  reafons  for  the  admiffion  or  rejedioii
of  thofe  perfons  in  his  monthly  ftatements.*

*  Original  Writings. — The  Statutes  reformed,  Art.  9,  I,;,  and  follow-
ing.— Inllrucfiions  for  the  Infinuators,  SeiSt.  XI,  No.  i.— lor  tliC-  Iniinu-
atcd  Nos.  I,  3,  5,  &Ç. — Let.  the  4th  to  A]-iic.


2Z  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.\CY.

The  Recruiting  Brother  will  carefully  guard  againft
giving  the  molt  dillant  hint  that  he  is  an  Illuminée.:
This  law  is  peremptory  for  the  lii-erhren,  but  more  par-
ticularly for  all  the  Lifimuitors,  whole  fucceis  may  often
clïcntially  depend  on  it.  It  is  to  them  that  the  legillator
fo  llrongly  recommends  all  that  exterior  of  virtue  and
of  perfeAion,  that  care  of  ilinnning  all  publick  fcandals
which  might  deprive  them  of  their  afcendancy  over  the
minds  of  thofe  whom  they  fcek  to  entice  into  the  Or-
der.* The  law  exprefsly  lays,  "  Apply  yonrfilvcs  to  the
acquiring  of  interior  and  exterior  perfcÛion  ;"  but  lefh
they  lliould  conceive  tiiat  this  perfection  even  hinted  at
the  maftering  of  their  pillions,  and  at  renouncing  the
pleafures  of  the  world,  he  adds,  "  Attend  particularly  to
the  art  of  dilfembling  and  of  ditguifing  your  adions,  the
better  to  obfcrve  thofe  of  others,  and  to  penetrate  into
their  inmoil  thoughts.  Die  kunji  zu  erlcrncn  ficb  zu
verfh'llen,  aniere  zu  (yeohiichtrn,  und  mis  zu  for sc hen.**
It  is  for  that  reafon  that  thefe  three  gi^eat  precepis  are
to  be  found  in  the  fummary  of  the  Code  :   hold  thy

TONGUE BE  PERFECT DISGUISE  THYSELF aluioft  fol-
lowing each  other  in  the  fame  page,  and  ferving  as  aa
explanation  of  each  other.f
Who  are  to  Having  made  himfelf  perfectly  mafter  of  thefe  pre-
be^exclu-  cepts,  and  particularly  of  the  lalf,  the  lujinmtor  is  next
to  turn  his  attention  to  thofe  perlons  whom  he  may  ad-
mit or  ought  to  rejeft.  He  is  not  to  adn^iit  into  the  Or-,
der  either  Pagans  or  Jews  ;  but  he  is  ec]ually  to  rejed
dl  religious  ;  and  above  all  to  fhun  the  Ex-Jefuits  as  he
•would  the  plague.  Ordens  gcijHiche  durfcji  nie  aufgenom-
men  werden,  und  die  Ex-Jefuiten  foil  inan  'ivie  die  pcji
flieheti.X

The  caufe  of  fuch  exclulions  is  obvious.  To  fpeak
of  religion,  and  admit,  without  any  precaution,  Jews,
Turks  and  Pagans,  would  be  too  open  a  manifeftation
of  what  their  religion  was  ;  and  not  to  reject  religious,
would  be  expoiing  themfelves  to  be  betrayed  by  their
own  adepts.

Unlefs  they  gave  evident  figns  of  a  fincere  amend-
ment, all  indifcreet  talkers  were  to  be  rejecled  ;   and

*  See  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  i,  and  9.

f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  p.  40.  Nos.  4,  6,  and  8.

\  The  Lafi:  Works  of  Spartacus  and  Philo. — Inftruélion  for  the  Sta-
tionary Prcfeds  and  Superiors,  Page  15;?,  Let.  the  2d. — And  Original
Writings,  Inllruâio  pro  Rccipientibus,  Nos.  i,  and  5.


ded.


The  antisocial  conspiracy.

ttlfo  thofe  men  whole  pride,  or  head-ftrong,  interefted,
and  inconflanc  minds  denoted  that  it  would  be  i'mpoRl-
ble  to  iniufe  into  them  that  zeal  lb  necellary  for  the
Order  ;  al!  thole  again,  whole  drunken  exceffes  might
injure  that  reputation  of  virtue  which  the  Order  was  to
acquire  ;  all  tliole,  in  llioit,  whofe  meannefs  and  groif-
n els  of  manners  would  render  them  too  untradable  to
give  hope  for  their  ever  becomino-  pfmnt  and  ufeful.*

"  Letive  thof?  drutes,  thofe  chnotii/b  and  thick-headed
fel'/nvsP  he  exclaims  in  his  Chajjter  on  Exclufions;  but,
though  he  excluded  thefe  thick-headed  fellows,  Weif-
haupt  was  aware  that  there  exiiled  a  good  fort  of  be-
ings which  fome  might  call  llupid,  but  who  are  not  to
be  told  fo,  as  advantage  may  be  taken  of  their  ftupidi-
ty.  Such  were,  for  example,  a  Baron  D'Ert,  and  many
others,  who  holding  a  certain  rank  in  the  world,  though
deftitute  of  common  fenfe,  have  at  leall  their  riches  to
recommend  them.  "  Thc/è  are  a  good  fort  of  htingSy^
fays  our  illuininizing  legillator  ;  "  they  are  neceflary  be-
*'  ings.  They  augment  our  number  and  fill  our  coffers,
•**  auvent  numerum  et  œrarumi.  Courage  then  !  and
*'  make  thefe  gentry  fwallow  the  bait  ;  but  beware  of
"  communicating  to  them  our  fecrets  ;  For  this  /pedes
"  of  adept  nmjt  always  he  perfimded  that  the  degree  they
**  are  in  is  the  highe/t.^^f

Indeed,  there  is  a  fort  of  half  exclulion  for  princes.
The  Code  ordains  that  they  fliall  feldom  be  admitted,
and  even  when  they  are,  fliall  fcarcely  ever  rife  beyond
the  degree  of  Scotch  Knight  ;  or,  in  other  words,  they
are  never  to  pafs  the  threlliold  of  the  myftcries.  Here-
after we  lliall  fee  the  Legillator  finding  an  expedient
for  introducing  them  beyond  that  degree,  but  ftill
without  giving  them  any  further  infight  into  the  myf-
teries  ;|  and  being  particularly  careful  to  hide  from
them  certain  Laws  of  the  Order. §

I  cannot  take  upon  myielf  to  fay,  whether  a  fimilar
expedient  had  been  found  as  an  exception  to  the  gene-
tal  rule  which  excluded  women  ;  but  it  is  certain,  that
this  law  was,  during  a  long  time  at  leaft,  only  provi-
•fio'nal  ;  and  many  of  the  brethren  fought  to  revoke  it.

*  Inflrudio  pro  Recipientibus,  page  94,  and  Weifliaupt's  l,etters,
pafSni.

f  Original  Writings.     See  the  firfl  Letters  to  Ajax  aiiil  Cato,
i  See  De{i;ree  of  Regent,  page  154,  Letter  N.
§  See  InftruClipns  for  the  rfoviaeiul,  No.  1 6.


24  THK    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Freemafonry  had  its  female  adepts,  and  the  lUumirtees

Plar  for  the  wilhed  to  liave  theirs.     The  plan  is  written  in  Zwack's

admarjonof  ^j^^j-j  hand-writiiig,  and  he  was  tiie  mod  intimate  friend

and  confidant  of  Weilhaupt,  in  flîort,  his  hicomparable

man.     It  is  couched  in  the  following  terms  :

*'  Plan  for  an  Order  of  JVonieu.— This  Order  fliall  be
fubdivided  into  two  dalles,  each  forming  a  feparate  fo-
ciety,  and  having  a  different  fecret.  I'he  firft  Ihall  be
compofcd  of  virtuous  women  ;  the  fécond,  of  the  wild,
the  giddy,  and  the  voluptuous,  iVj/Jracifcnden.

"  Both  claffes  are  to  be  ignorant  that  they  are  under

the  direction  of  men.     The  two  fuperiors  are  to  be

I  pedliadcd  that  they  are  under  a  mother  Lodge  of  the

fame  fex,  which  tranfmits  its  orders  ;  though  in  reality

thefe  orders  are  to  be  tranfmitted  by  men.

"  The  Brethren  who  are  intruded  with  this  fupeiin-
tendance  fliall  forward  their  inftrudions  without  mak-
ing themfelves  known.  They  (liall  conduft  the  firft,
by  promoting  the  reading  of  good  books,  but  fliall
form  the  latter  to  the  arts  oï  ficretly  gyatifyhig  their
p(yJJÏous,  durch  begmigung  ibrer  leidenfchajtcn  im  "vc-r-
borgcncn.''^

A  preliminary  difcourfe  prefixed  to  this  plan  points
out  the  object  and  future  fervices  of  thefe  illuminized
lifters.  "  The  advantages  which  the  real  order  would
reap  from  this  female  order  would  be,  firft,  the  money
which  the  lifterhood  would  pay  at  their  initiation  ;  and,
fecondly,  a  heavy  tax  upon  their  curiofity,  under  the
fuppofition  of  fecrets  that  are  to  be  learned.  And  this
ajfbciation  might  moreover  Jerve  to  gratify  thofe  brethren
vjho  had  a  turn  for  fenfual  pleafnreJ'*

A  lill:  and  defcription  of  eighty-five  young  ladies  of
iVtanheim  accompanied  this  project:  of  Zwack,  very
properly  furnamed  the  Cato  of  lUuminifm  ;  from  among
whom,  in  all  probability,  the  founders  of  thefe  two
clafles  were  to  be  chofen.  Circumftances  not  having
favoured  our  modern  Cato's  views,  we  obferve  feveral
other  adepts  propofing  iimilar  plans.  An  afleffor  of
the  Imperial  Chamber  at  Wetzlaar  of  the  name  of
Dijîfurt,  known  among  the  Illuminées  by  that  of  Mi-
nos, and  who  rofe  to  the  degree  of  Regent,  and  to  the
dignity  of  Provincial,  feemed  to  difpute  the  honor  of
this  invention,  both  with  Brother  Hercules  and  even

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Seû.  V,

\


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CÔNSPIRACV.

With  Cato  himfeîf  :  We  mufl:  allow,  at  leaft,  ^bat  no-
body was  more  anxious  for  the  execution  of  the  projed
than  he  was.  He  had  already  fubmitted  his  ideas  to
the  Baron  Knigge^  and  he  applies  anew  to  Weilliaupt.
He  even  dcfpairs  of  ever  bringing  men  to  the  grand
objed  of  the  order  without  the  fupport  of  female
adepts.  Indeed,  fo  ardent  is  his  zeal,  that  he  makes
an  offer  of  his  own  wife  and  his  four  daughters-in-law
to  be  the  firft  adepts.  The  eldeft  was  exaélly  the  per-
fon  for  the  philofophized  fifterhood  ;  flie  was  four-and-
twenty  years  of  age,  and  with  rejpeû.  to  religion  her
ideas  were  far  above  thofe  of  her  fix  ;  they  were  model-
led on  her  father's.  He  had  attained  to  the  degrees  of
Regent  and  Prince  of  the  Illuminées,  and  flie  would
have  been  Regent  and  Princefs,  In  the  higher  myfte-
ries,  together  with  Ptolemy's  wife^  we  fliould  have
feen  the  one  correfponding  with  her  father,  the  other
with  her  hufband.  Thefe  illuminized  Princehes  would
be  the  only  two  perfons  of  the  order  who  fliould  know
that  they  were  all  under  the  direélion  of  men.
They  Would  prefide  over  the  trials  and  receptions  of
Minervals^  and  would  initiate  thofe  whom  they  judged
worthy  into  the  grand  projects  of  the  fifterhood  for  the
reform  of  governments  and  the  happinefs  of  mankind.*
But,  notwithrtanding  all  the  plans  and  zeal  of  the
Brethren,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  legillator  ever
confented  to  the  eftablifliment  of  the  fifterhood.  Yet
he  fupplied  the  want  of  fuch  an  inftitution  by  fecret
inftrudions  which  he  gave  the  Regents  on  the  means
of  making  the  influence  of  women  over  men  fubfervi-
ent  to  the  order  v/ithout  initiating  them  in  any  of  the
fecrets.  He  fays,  that  the  fair  fcx  having  the  greatcll
part  of  the  world  at  their  dlfpofition,  no  jtudy  was  more
**  worthy  of  the  adept  than  the  art  of  flattery  in  order
*'  to  gain  them  ;  that  they  were  all  more  or  lefs  led
'^  by  vanity,  curiolity,  the  pleafures  or  the  love  of  no-
*'  velty  ;  that  it  was  on  that  fide  they  were  to  be  at-
"  tacked,  and  by  that  they  were  to  be  rendered  fer-
"  viceable  to  the  order."f  He  neverthekfs  continued
to  exclude  great  talkers  and  women  from  all  the  de-

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  let.  of  Minos,  p.  1C9.
f  See  the  New  Works  of  Spartacus  and  Pliilo,  and  InftniAion»   for
the  degree  of  Reger.t,  No.  6.

Vol.  III.  F


^5


2i  The    ANTISOCIAI.    CONSPIRACY.

grees,  nor  was  the  fixth  article  of  his  inftrnclions  for
the  Infiimator  rcfcindcd.
WTio  arc  to  Notwithftanding  all  thefc  exckiiion?,  the  lejviilutor
be  cholen.  leaves  a  fufficient  I'cope  wherein  the  Inlinuator  may  (  x-
ercife  his  zeal.  He  recommends  generally  young  nun
of  all  dations  from  eighteen  to  thirty  ;  but  more  })::r-
ticularly  thofe  whole  educations  were  not  compleud,
eiiher  becaufe  he  thought  they  would  more  eiihly  im-,
bibe  his  principles,  or  would  be  more  grateful  and
more  zealous  for  dodrines  for  which  they  were  indebt-
ed folely  to  him.f

But  this  preference  is  not  an  exclufion  for  men  of  a
certain  age,  provided  they  are  not  pall  fervice,  and
iire  already  imbued  with  the  principles  of  llluminirrn.J
This,  however,  chiefly  regards  thofe  perfons  whofe  rank
in  life  can  give  confiqueuce  and  afford  protcciion  to  the
order.  The  Recruiters  are  particularly  inftructed  to
infinuate  themfelves  into  the  good  opinion  of  fuch  per-
fons, and  if  poffible  to  entice  them  into  the  order.

There  is  yet  another  fpecies  of  men,  who  have  fpeech
as  it  were  at  command  ;  fuch  as  attornies,  counfellors,
and  even  phyficians.  "  Thofe  are  worth  having,"  fays
Weiiliaupt  ;  "  but  they  are  fomet'mies  real  devils,  fo
"  difficult  are  they  to\be  led  ;  they  however  are  ivorth
*'  havincr  vjhen  they  can  be  gained  over."*

The  Infimiator  is  alio  to  admit  artiils,  mechanics  of
all  profeflions,  painters,  engravers,  white-fmiths  and
black-fmiths  ;  but  above  all  bookfellers,  tliofe  who  keep
poft-horfes,  and  fchool-mallers.  Hereafter  the  reader
will  fee  the  uie  for  which  thefe  men  were  intended.^

To  yet  another  clafs  of  men  our  legillator  often  tails .
the  attention  of  the  Infviiiator  :  "  Seek  me  out,  for
"  examplc^^  fays  Weifliaupt,  "  the  dexterous  and  dafh-
*'  ing  youths-.  iVc  iniijl  have  adepts  v:ho  are  injinua--
"  ting,  iutrigidng,  full  ofnfource,  bold  and  enterprijin^r^;-
"  they  mujl  alfo  kc  fiexible  and  traâahlc,  obedient,  doàle y
"  and  fociablc.  Seek  out  alio  thofe  who  are  diflin-'
"  guiflied  by  their  po%ver,  nobility,  riches,  or  learning,
"  nobilcs,    potentes,    divites,   doélos,  quaerite— -Sparc  ■

f  Ori^.  Writ.  InftruiSHones  pro  Recipientibus,  Pnge  54,  No.  4  ;  and  •
Page  ^Si  No.  18.

I  Ibid.  Vol.  II.  Part  the  2d,  Scftion  and  degree  cf  Regent.

-*  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Let.  to  Ajax.

§  See  Inftrudtions  for  the  Infinuator,  No.  /].— Wclfliaupt'i  Letters,
pallim— and  thç  degree  of  Regent.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr.

^  no  pains,  fpare  notliiiig  in  die  acquUition  of  fuch
"  adepts.    If  heaven  refiife  its  aidance,  conjure  hell.

"    Flefierc  fi  nequfiis  f^ipeios^   Acberonta   moiicio.    *

With  refpeft  to  religions,  he  prefers  the  difciples  of
Lutiier  and  Calvin  to  the  Roman  Catholics,  ami  j^'reatly
prefers  the  former  to  the  latter.  This  diltinéViou
Ihould  alone  fiiffice  to  open  the  eyes  of  many  who  with
to  perfuade  themfclves  that  the  whole  of  the  revoUition-
ary  fury  is  aimed  at  the  Roman  Catholic  religion.
This  motley  crew  certainly  did  the  Cathohcs  the  ho-
nour of  direéling  their  fliafts  more  pointedly  at  them,
>as  ftrenuous  opponents  of  their  impiety  and  of  their  re-
ligious and  civil  anarchy  ;  hut  it  was  to  preferve  the
Proteftant  rehgion  that  Wcifliaupt  gives  them  fuch  a
preference,  ia  hopes  of  making  them  fuhfervient  tt)  his
plots  ?  That  he  did  give  fuch  a  preference  cannot  be
doubted,  when  we  lee  him  exprefsly  writing  to  aa
:adept  whom  he  had  commiflloned  to  look  out  for  a
•perfon  proper  to  be  received  into  the  higher  mylleries
and  to  found  a  new  colony  of  Illuminées, — were  this
mail  a  Protcjiant  I  (hould  like  biui  mvd)  better. — JVare
fi  ein  Prottjkant,  fo  ivare  es  mir  iim  fo  lieèer.f  Weif-
haupt's  moft  •  famous  adept  conftantly  manifells  the
fome  predtleélion  ;  he  even  wi flies  to  retrench  certain
parts  of  tlie  mylleries  that  he  may  not  alarm  the  Ca-
tholics, and  feems  always  to  hint  at  Frederic  the  lid's
iaying,  JFe  Protejiants  go  on  brifzer.X  Moft  certainly
this  proves  beyond  a  poilibility  of  doubt,, -that  the  de-
llruétion  of  all  Proteftant  laws,  whether  civil  or  reli-
gious, had  place  in  their  plans.  Nor  were  the  Pro-
teftants  of  Germany  the  dupes  of^  fuch  a  policy,  aa
many  of  the  moft  determined  antagonifts  of  lllurainifni
were  of  that  rcligioji.

■  Further,  he  wiihes  to.  enti-ce  men  into  his  order  who
have  fixed  j-efidences  in  towns,  fuch  as  merchants  and
avions,  who  might  afliduoully  propagate  his  doélrinesj
and  eftablilli  them  in  their  neighbourhoods. §

The  Recruiter  iivuft  ufe  every  art  (for  an  obvious
reafon)  to  engage  fcboolnwjicrSy  and  to  iniinuate  his

*  Ibid.  I,c-!:.  ;,d  to  Ajs^c.
-f  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Let.  to  Tiberius,  p.  223.
\  See  Vol.  I.  page  t,},.

§  InRruccions  lor  the  Provincial  and  Ori^-.  V/rit.  Vol.  I.  Purt  II,  Nq».
3,  page  :6.

Vol.   III.  F   2


^7


2%  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

<3o<5lriiies  into,  and^gain  adepts  in  the  military  académie f,
and  other  places  of  education;  he  is  even  to  attempt  the
fediiftion  of  the  fuperiors  of  ecclcfiallicnl  femhiaries.X

"  He  will  fpare  no  trouble  to  gain  the  Prince's  offi-
"  cers,  whether  preliding  over  provinces,  or  attending
**■  him  in  his  councils.  He  that  has  fucceedcd  in  this
**  has  done  rnorc,'^  fays  the  code,  "  than  if/;:'  had  engaged
"  the  Frvice  himfilf.*  In  line,  the  Provincial,  or  the
"  chief  Infinuator,  is  to  recruit  every  thing  that  can  be
*'  tainted  with  Illuminifm,  or  can  be  ferviceable  to  its

«  caufe.^t

The  following  extraordinary  inftruélions  are  alfo
given  by  Weifliaupt  reipefting  the  choice  of  adepts  :
*<  Above  all  things  (he  fays  to  liis  Inlinuators)  pay  atten-
•*'  tion  to  the  figure,  and  felecT:  the  well-made  men  and
*'  handlbme  young  fellows.  They  are  generally  of  enga-
*'  ging  manners  and  nice  feelings.  When  properly  form-
**ed,  they  are  the  bell  adapted  for  négociations;  for  firft
"  appearances  prepoflefs  in  their  fiwour.  It  is  true,  they
"  have  not  the  depth  that  men  of  more  gloomy  coun-
*'  tenances  often  have.  They  are  not  the  perfons  to  be
'^  entrujied  with  a  revolt  y  or  the  care  of  JHrring  up  the
*'  people  ;  but  it  is  for  that  very  reafon  that  we  mnft
"  know  how  to  choofe  our  agents.  I  am  particularly
*'  fond  of  thofe  men  whofe  very  foul  is  painted  in  their
*'  eyes,  whofe  foreheads  are  high,  and  whofe  counte-
<*  nances  are  open.  Above  all,  examine  well  the  eyes,
**  for  they  are  the  very  mirrors  of  the  heart  and  foul.
<*  Obferve  the  look,  the  gait,  the  voice.  Every  exter-
*'  nal  appearance  leads  us  to  didingiiifli  thofe  who  are
*'  fit  for  our  fchool.§

"  Seled:  tho/e  in  particular  who  have  met  with  viisfor-
*'  times,  720t  from  accidents,  but  by  fome  aél  of  injuilice;
*'  that  is  to  fay,  in  other  words,  the  discontented  ;  for
^\fuch  are  the  men  to  be  called  into  the  bofom  of  Illumiyi'
"  ifm,  as  into  their  proper  afi'lum.'*%

Let  not  the  reader  already  exclaim,  How  deep  are
the  views  of  this  illuminizing  Sophifter  !  How  has  he
forefeen  every  point  !  With  what  difçernment  does  he
lay  his  fnares  to  entrap  thofe  who  are  to  be  the  future

:J  Ihid.  Nos.  II  and  13.
<     *  Ibid.  No.  15.  t  Ibid.  No.  i8,

5  hit.  nth  to  Mantis  and  Cato.
^  îaRriitftioii  for  the  Local  SuperiorSj  letter  II.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


*$>


agents  of  his  plots  !  The  reader  ha*as  ytt  feen  merely
p.  Ichedule  of  thofc  perfons  who  may  be  admitted  or
rejcded  ;  but  that  does  not  fufficiently  fecure  the  order
with  refpcd:  to  the  eleftions  which  the  Tnfinuator  may
have  made.  Before  he  undertakes  the  initiation  of  any
perfon  whom  he  may  have  thought  proper,  he  is  to  make
a  ftatement  from  his  diary  of  every  thing  that  he  may
have  obferved  witli  rtfpect  to  his  morals,  opinions,  con-
duft,  and  even  of  his  connexions  in  life.  He  is  to  fub-
mit  this  flatement  to  his  fuperiors,  who  will  compare -«t
with  the  notes  they  are  already  in  pcjlfellion  of,  or  may
acquire  from  other  adepts,  relpefting  the  candidate,  *or
even  with  a  new  ftatement,  in  cafe  they  judge  the  lal^
to  be  infufficient.  Even  when  the  choice  u^ade  by  the
Infinuator  is  approvetl  of,  all  is  not  fettled  ;  the  fuperi-
ors have  to  determine  which  of  the  Infinuators  is  to  be
entruflcd  with  the  care  of  enticing  the  approved  perfon
into  the  order:  for  all  this  is  forefeen  in  the  code.  It
is  not  allowed  to  all  the  brethren  to  exercife  promifcu-
ouily  fo  important  a  truH:  ainong  the  prophane,  though
they  may  have  pointed  out  the  perfon  proper  for  recep-
tion. The  young  adept  is  not  to  meafure  his  ftrength
with  the  man  who  has  the  advantage  over  him  in  years
and  experience,  nor  is  the  tradefnian  to  undertake  the
magiftrate.  The  fuperior  is  to  name  the  moft  proper
Infinuator,  judging  from  the  circumftances,  age,  merits,
dignities,  or  talents  of  the  future  candidate.*  At  lengUi,
when  the  miffion  is  given,  the  Infinuator  begins  to  lay
his  fnares.---Such  is.  the  fécond  part  of  this  extraordina-
ry funftionary,  and  all  his  fubfequent  fteps  are  regulated
by  the  code.

Candidate,  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  word,  ^^^  ^^•
means  a  perfon  who  has  fliown  a  defire  or  taken  fome  ti^lhe  '^"'
fteps  to  enter  into  fome  order,  or  to  acquire  fome  dig.  Candidates.
pity.     In  Illurainifm  it  means  the  perfon  on  whom  the
prder  has  fixed  its  attention.    It  often  happens  that  the
candidîîte  is  ignorant  of  the  very  exiftence  of  the  feci;.
It  is  the  Infinuator's  bufinefs  to  infpire  him  with  the
wilh  of  entering  it.     To  accomplifli  this  grand  objec%
two  different  methods  are  inculcated.     The  firfl:  is,  for
the  Inlmuator  who  has  fome  candidate  in  view  remark-
able for  his  fcience,  or  of  a  ceitain  age.     The  fécond,

*  Inftrucfijones  pro  Recipientibus,     Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Nos.  z  and  7,


J9  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV,

for  him  who  is  entrufled  with  young  men  from  eio;h-
teen  to  thirty,  and  who  are  fiifccptible  of  a  fccond  edu-
cation. A  third  method  was  propofed  for  \vorkmen>
and  thofe  clownifh  fellows  whofe  education  had  been
but  little  attended  to.  We  may  obferve  Weiihaupt
confulting  with  his  confidant  Zwack  on  this  part  of  the
code  ;  but  whether  it  was  never  digeded,  or  that  he
■faw  tlie  Inliniiators  could  eafily  fiipply  the  defc(i:l:,  no
further  mention  is  made  of  the  third  method.  Let  us
tîien  examine  the  cffence  of  the  firft  two.

To  exemplify  the  firft  method,  let  us  firppofe  one  of
thofe  men  who  have  gone  through  a  complete  courfe
of  modern  Philofophifm,  who,  fliould  they  not  feoff  at
Chriftianiiy,  would  at  leall  hefitate  at  every  thing  which
is  called  religion  ;  for  the  code  forcwai'ns  the  Infmua-
tor,  that  his  efforts  would  be  vain  fliould  he  attempt  to
ièduce  Philofophei's  of  another  ftahip,  men  of  found
judgment,  and  who  would  never  be  partizans  of  doc-
trines which  could  not  endure  the  tight  of  hoad  day.
But  when  he  fliali  have  difcovered  one  of  the  former
■who  has  already  pretty  well  imbibed  the  prinv"iplV:s  of
the  feel,  he  v.'ill  aifume  the  chara6ler  of  a  Philofopher
well  vcrfed  in  the  myfteries  of  antiquity.  He  will  have
little  difficulty  in  acTmg  fuch  a  part,  as  he  will  find
ample  inftruc^ions  in  the  code.  To  follow  thofe  in-
ftruftions  faithfully,  he  mud  begin  "  by  defcanting  oil
''  the  fupreme  felicity  of  being  verfcd  in  fcienccs  which
*'  few  can  approach,  of  walking  in  the  paths  of  light
"  while  the  vulgar  are  groping  in  darknefs.  He  muft
*'  remark,  that  there  exift  doifhrines  folely  tranfinittéd
''  by  fecret  traditions,  becaufe  they  are  above  thé
"  comprehenfion  c>f  common  minds.  'In  proof  of  his
*'  aflertions  he  will  cite  the  Gymnofophifts  in  the  Indies^
"  the  Prieids  of  Ifis  in  Egypt,  and  thofe  of  Eleufis  and
*'  the  Pythagorean  fchoot  in  Greete."  He  will  felecH^
certain  fentences  from  Cicero,  Seneca',  Ariilides,  and
Ifocrates  ;  and,  left  lie  Ihould  ever  be  taken  unawares^
he  will  learn  thofe  hy  heart  which  the  legillator  has
carefully  inferted  in  the  code.  Though  it  would  be
very  eafy  to  demonftrate  from  thole  very  authors,  that
the  ancient  myfteries  laid  down  no  fixed  principles  on
the  important  points  of  the  Providence  of  God,  and  of
the  origm  and  order  of  the  univerfc,  the  Infinuator  is
ueveithelefs  to  quote  thofe  texts  to  prove  that  there


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.\CY.

T^îfls  a  fc-crct  doctrine  on  thele  objecls,  and  above  all  a
doclrine  calculated  to  render  life  moj-c  agreeable,  and
pain  moi  e  fuppor table  ;  and  to  efilarge  our  ideas  on  the
maji^jh  of  God.  "  Let  hJm  add,  that  all  the  lagcs  of
antiquity  were  acquainted  with  thefe  doclvines  ;  let
him  inlill  on  the  uncertainty  that  man  is  in  with  relpeél
to  the  nature  of  the  Joid,  its  iii/mortalitv,  and  its  jt:ture
defliny.  He  will  then  Ibund  his  candidate,  to  know
whether  he  would  not  rejoice  at  having  fome  fatisfac-
tory  aufwers  on  olijefts  of  fuch  great  importance.  At
the  fame  time  he  will  hint  that  he  has  had  the  happinds
of  being  initiated  into  thefe  doftrines,  and  that,  fliould
rîie  candidate  wilh  it,  he  would  do  his  bed  to  procure
him  the  fame  felicity  ;  but  tiiat  it  was  a  fcience  gradu-
ally unparted,  and  that  certain  men  polfelfed  the  talent
of  guiding  him  from  a  diftance,  of  leading  him  to  the
difcovery  of  this  new  world,  and  that  without  being
ever  in  his  prefence.*

When  the  Infinuator  has  by  fuch  language  facceedcd
in  excitiug  the  curiofity  of  his  candidate,  he  mud  then
afcertain  his  opinions  on  fome  particular  articles.  He
will  pi'opofe  the  difcnffion  of  certain  queftions  in  writ-
ing, and  of  certain  principles,  as  the  groundwork  on
which  they  are  in  future  to  proceed.  The  code  does
not  determine  what  thefe  queilions  are  to-be,  becaufe
tliey  vary  according  to  the  political  and  religious  difpo-
fitions  which  the  4nfinuator  may  have  obferved  in  the
candidate.  Should  thefe  diifertatioi^is  no  way  agree
with  the  principles  of  the  feel,  the  Infmuator  will  aban-
don his  prey.  Should  the  fophillicated  candidate,  or
the  man  of  importance,  be  found  properly  dijpufed,  he
will  be  admitted  to  the  very  threlhold  of  the  myfte-
ries.  The  Infinuator  will  fimply  explain  the  inferior
degrees  to  him,  and  mention  the  divers  trials  which  the
order  has  difpenfed  with  in  confidcration  of  his  merit.f

Notwithftanding  the  artifice  obfervable  in  this  me-
thod, it  is  dill  referved  for  thofe  who  need  only  to  be
acquainted  with  llluminifm  to  adopt  its  tenets.  But
Iliould  i\ic  Infinuator  be  entrulfed  with  a  young  candi-
date or  with  one  whole  principles  no  way  coincide  with
thofe  of  the  fei^l:,  and  who  is  yet  to  be  formed  j  it  is  thei>
that  Wcilhaupt  developcs  that  imraenfe  theory  of  art

'  *  Original  Writings,  Vol.  11.  Part  II.  Set^.  I.
.  •}•  Orijjiu*!  vVriuugs,  Vvl,  II,  Par;  11.  Sea.  I.


31


3»


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

and  cimnincr  by  wliich  he  is  infenfibly  to  enlnare  hit
viélinis.  "  Let  your  tirft  care,"  he  fays  to  the  infinua-
tors,  "  be  to  gain  the  afFertion,  the  contidence,  and  the
"  erteem  of  thofe  peifons  whom  you  are  to  entice  into
"  the  order— let  your  whole  conduct  be  fuch,  that  they
"  fliail  furmife  fomcthing  more  in  you  than  you  wilh
*'  to  fliow— hint  that  you  belong  to  fomc  fccret  and
"  powerful  fociety — excite  little  by  little,  and  not  at
"  once,  a  willi  in  your  candidate  to  belong  to  a  fimilar
"  focicty— Certain  arguments  and  certain  books  which
"  the  infinuator  mull  have,  will  greatly  contl-ibute  to
"  raife  fuch  a  wifli;  fuch  are,  for  example,  thofe  which
"  treat  of  the  union  and  (Irenirth  of  aifociations.'*
The  Legiflator  then  carefully  adds  a  lift  of  thofe  books,
and  the  order  charges  itfelf  with  the  care  of  furnilTiing
a  certain  number  of  them  to  the  adepts.  The  works
of  Marner  s ,  and  particularly  oi  BnJfadowSf  are  frequent*
ly  recommended  by  WeiQiaupt,  as  the  beft  litted  to  in-
fpire  their  readers  with  the  love  and  principles  of  fecret
iocieties.  But  nothing  can  equal  the  art  with  which  he
himfelf  has  drawn  up  the  reafons,  by  the  hel])  of  which
the  Infinuator  is  to  perfuade  his  young  candidate  of  the
pretended  neceffity  for  thefe  myfterious  aflbciations»

"  One  reprefents,  for  example,"  fays  the  code,  "  a
"  child  in  the  cradle  ;  one  fpeaks  of  its  cries,  its  tears,
**  its  weaknefs — One  remarks  how  this  child,  abandon-
"  ed  to  itfelf,  is  entirely  helplefs  ;  but  that,  by  the  help
"  of  others  it  acquires  flrength — One  fliows  how  the
*'  greatnefs  of  Princes  is  derived  from  the  union  of  their
*'  ilibjeds— One  exalts  the  advantages  of  the  ftate  of
"  fociety  over  the  ftate  of  nature — Then  one  touches
*<  on  the  art  of  knowing  and  direding  mankind — How"
*'  eafily,  you  will  fay,  could  one  man  of  parts  lead
**  hundreds,  even  thoufands,  if  he  but  knew  his  own
"  advantages.  This  is  evidently  proved  by  the  organi-
"  zation  of  armies,  and  the  amazing  power  which
*'  princes  derive  from  the  union  of  their  fubjecT;s."

After  having  defcanted  on  the  advantages  of  fociety
in  general,  touch  upon  the  defeâs  of  civil  Jociety,  and  fc.y
hovj  little  relief  is  to  ke  obtained  even  from  one's  heji
friends, — and  how  very  necejfary  it  vjould  be  to  fupporf
each  other  in  thefe  days.  Add^  that  meti  ivoidd  triumph
even  over  heaven  ivere  they  but  imited — That  it  is  their
difiwioa  vjbieh  fiibjeâs  them  to  the  ;'(?A'.'.— This  is  to  be


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CÔNSPlkACV.

«xplained  by  the  fable  of  the  wolf  and  the  two  dogSj
the  latter  of  whom  could  only  be  vanquilhed  by  the
former  after  he  had  parted  them  ;  and  by  many  other
examples  of  the  fame  kind  which  the  Infmuator  will
colled.*

As  a  proof  of  what  great  and  important  things  fecret
focieties  can  elîeéluate,  he  will  adduce  the  examples  of
the  Freemafons,  of  the  myfterious  focieties  of  antiqui-
ty, and  even  of  the  Jefuits.  He  will  alTert,  that  all  the
great  events  of  this  world  are  dependent  on  hidden
caufes,  which  thefe  fecj-et  focieties  powerfully  influence;
he  will  aivake  in  the  breajl  of  his  pupil  the  defire  of Jecrct'
ly  reigning,  of  prepming  in  his  clofet  a  nexv  conjiitution
for  the  world  y  and  of  governing  thofe  who  think  they  go-
vern  us.-f

"  When  you  fliall  have  got  thus  far,"  fays  the  code>
*'  begin  to  ihow  (as  it  were  unguardedly)  that  you  are
not  entirely  ignorant  of  thofe  fecrets  ;  throw  out  fome
half  fentences  which  may  denote  it.  Should  your  can-
didate take  the  hint,  prefs  him,  and  return  to  the
charge,  until  you  fee  him  betray  fymptoms  of  a  deflrc
inftantaneoufly  to  unite  with  fuch  a  fociety.

"  The  Inlinuator,  however,  who  has  thus  far  fuc-
ceeded  in  infpiring  his  pu|  ''.  with  fuch  a  wifh,  has  not
played  oft'every  engine  with  which  the  code  hasfurnillied
him.  To  found  the  very  bottom  of  his  mind,  he  will
pretend  to  confult  him  as  if  he  had  been  entrufted  with
certain  fecrets,  he  will  make  objedions  on  the  fecrecy
of  thefe  focieties  ;  but  fliould  they  make  too  much  inv
preffion  he  will  refolve  them  himfelf.  At  other  times,
to  llimulate  the  curiofity  of  his  pupil,  he  will  hold  a
letter  in  his  hand  written  in  a  cypher,  or  he  will  leave
it  half  open  on  his  table,  giving  his  candidate  fufficient
time  to  obferve  the  cypher,  and  then  fliut  it  up  with  all
the  air  of  a  man  who  has  important  correfpondences  to
keep  fecret.  At  other  times  ftudying  the  conneftions
and  anions  of  his  pupil,  he  will  tell  him  of  certain  cir-
£umllances  which  the  young  man  will  think  he  has

*  Extract  of  the  InftruAions  for  the  Brethren  charged  to  enroll  and
recieve  the  candidates — Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Se6l.  IX.  and  XII.—.
A'.fo  in  the  degree  of  Illiuninatus  Major,  inftrucSlions  on  the  fame  objeifl,
Document  A.

f  Original  Writings,  ibid.  No.  Ii  and  l% — IlluminatUS  Major,  DocH-
aicnt  A,  and  Letters  K.  L.

Vol.  411.  G


33


34


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


learned  by  means  of  thefe  fecret  focieties,  from  whom
nothing  is  hidden,  though  they  are  concealed  from  all
the  relt  of  the  world."*

Thefe  artifices  may  be  greatly  abridged,  according
as  the  fricndlhip  or  communicative  difpolition  of  the
candidate  fliall  have  laid  him  more  open  ;  but  on  the
other  hand,  ihould  they  not  fuffice,  the  Infmuator  is  not
on  that  account  to  abandon  his  purpofe  ;  let  him  try  to
accomplifli  by  others  what  he  has  failed  in  himfelf. —
Let  him  examine  his  own  conduce,  and  fee  if  he  has  not
neglecMied  fome  one  or  more  of  the  rides  prefcribed  in
the  code  ;  let  him  redouble  his  attention  and  his  com-
plaifance.  Should  it  be  neccllary  to  humble  himfelf  in
order  to  command,  let  not  tlie  hihnuator  forget  the
formal  precept  of  his  legillator,  "  Learn  alfo  to  ad  the
"  valet  in  order  to  become  mafter."  Auch  zu  votilen
den  hiecbt  gemacbt,  urn  derehijt  herr  zu  vjerden.\

After  fuch  a  long  feries  of  condefceniions  and  difcui^
fions  the  candidate  at  length  muft  pronounce.  If  he  fubmit
to  all  thefe  infinuations,  he  is  admitted  among  the  novices
of  the  order  ;  but  fliould  he  perfifl:  in  his  refufal,  let
him  learn  the  fate  which  awaits  him  from  thofe  who
The  fate  of  bave  expci-ienccd  it.  "  Ufihnppy,  fiipretnely  vjretched  is
indocile  "  the  yoiith  xvhoni  the  Illwi.'.iees  have  fought  in  vain  to
candidutes,  «  entice  itito  their  fed.  Should  he  even  efcape  their
*'  fnares,  do  not  let  him  flatter  himfelf  with  being  proof
"  againft  their  hatred  ;  and  let  him  take  jcare.  The
*'  vengeance  of  secret  societies  is  not  a  coimnon  ven-
"  geance  ;  it  is  the  hidden  fire  of  wrath.  It  is  irrecon-
"  cilalie,  and  farcelv  ever  does  it  ceafe  the  purfuit  of  its
*'  viâims  mitil  it  has  feen  them  immolated ^''X  Such  at
Icaft  is  the  account  which  hifhory  gives  us  of  thofe  who
have  been  guarded  enough  to  withftand  the  inhnua-
tions  of  the  fed,  and  particularly  of  thofe  who,  after
having  gone  the  firil  fleps  with  the  Infinuator,  have
refufed  to  proceed  any  farther  with  him.

I  could  cite  divers  examples;  though  I  once  thought
that  I  had  met  with  one  of  a  quite  oppofite  nature,  in
the  perfon  of  Camille  de  Jourdan,  the  fame  deputy  who
was  to  have  been  involved  in  the  fcntence  of  tranf-
portation  againft  Barthélémy  and  Pichegru  after  the

*  Original  Writings,  ibid.  No.  17  to  22.

f  Ibid.  Let.  3d,  to  Ajax.

i  ImportuLt  Advice,  (Sec.  by  Hofiiiiau.    Preface  to  Vol.  JÎ.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

revolution  of  the  4tli  of  Sept-ember,  but  who  luckily
efcaped  from  the  grafp  of  the  triumvirate.  I  heard
him  fpeaking  in  the  highed:  terms,  of  one  of  thefe  In--
finuators  who  had  fur  a  long  time  emleavoured  to  en-
tice him  into  the  order.  He  was  much  aftonilhcd  at:
hearing  me  fpeak  of  tlicfc  men  as  confumniatc  in  all
tlie  artifices  of  the  moll:  villanous  hypocrily.  He  main-
tained that  his  Illuminée  was  mikl,  modeil,  and  mode-
rate ;  full  of  relpect  for  the  Gofpcl  ;  in  a  word,  one  of
the  mofl:  virtuous  men  he  had  ever  known.  In  reply,
I  enumerated  all  the  proceedings  of  the  Inlinuator,  and
the  artiiicf-s  he  had  played  off  before  he  quitted  his
prey.  To  all  that  Mr.  Camille  anfvv^ered,  "  It  is  true  ;
"  fuch  was  his  behaviour  :  but  it  was  his  zeal  for  the
"  fec^  which  blinded  him,  and  made  hhn  have  recourfe
"  to  fuch  expedients  in  order  to  work  what  he  called
"  my  converlion  ;  yet,  with  all  that,  it  was  impoffible
*'  for  any  body  to  fpeak  of  virtue  and  religion  in  fo
"  impreiiive  a- manner  as  he  did  without  being  at  leaft
"  an  iioneft  man."—"  Well,''  faid  I,  "  I  will  venture  to
"  aflert,  that  the  lall  attempt  of  your  Infinuator  was  as
"  follows.  He  propofed  to  you  to  give  your  thoughts
*'  in  writing  on  certain  quelHons  ;  you  did  fo  ;  your
"  opinions  proved  diredly  oppofite  to  his  ;  he  never.
"  faw  you  after,  became  your  implacable  enemy,  and
'*  has  never  fmce  ceafed  calumniating  you."  "  All
"  that  again,"  anfwered  Mr.  Camille,  "  is  very  true  ;
"  nor  was  it  his  fault  that  I  did  not  lofe  both  friends
*'  and  fortupx.  Before  that  affair  he  ufed  to  praife  me  ;
"  afterwards,  however,  he  reprefented  me  as  a  molt
"  dangerous  man.  You  cannot  conceive  what  lies  he
"  invented  about  me,  and  I  was  unfortunate  enough  to
"  obferve  that  they  had  made  imprellion." — Is  it  poffi-
ble  to  be  believed  ?  Mr.  Camille  could  not  yet  be  per-
fuaded  but  that  his  Iniinuator  was  a  virtuous  man  ;  fo
profound  are  the  arts  of  hypocrify  which  are  to  be
imbibed  from  Weifliaupt's  laws  !  I  was  acquainted  with
two  bitliops,  who  had  as  completely  mlflaken  the  cha-
racT;ers  of  their  Infrnuators  as  Mr.  C  iniille  de  Jourdan.

But  I  will  cite  the  example  of  Mr.  Stark.  I  never
could  conceive  what  this  Mr.  Stark  was  whom  I  faw
perpetually  abufed  by  the  Illuminées.  Nicolai  and  Mi-
rabeau fpared  no  pains  to  render  him  odious  to.  the

Vol   HI.  G  i


6:)


3^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Pt'oteflants  in  Germany  ;  ihey  faid  he  had  received  the
Catholic  orders  of  prielthood  privately,*  though  every
thing  feemed  to  denote  that  he  was  a  Proteilant.  I
took  fonie  pains  to  inform  myfelf  who  this  Mr.  Stark
was,  and  I  found  him  one  of  the  mod  learned  Protcft-
ant  niinillers  in  Germany  :  that  liis  zeal  for  his  religion
had  aquired  him  the  degree  of  Doctor,  and  had  pre-
ferred him  to  be  Grand  Almoner  and  Counfellor  to  the
Landgrave  of  Jiefle  Darmltadt  ;  but  that  in  common
with  feveral  other  learned  men,  fuch  as  Hoffman  and
Zimmerman,  he  had  had  the  misfortune  of  being  fought
after  by  the  Illuminées  ;  that  he  would  not  hearken  to
them  ;  that  the  Illuminées  had  expreifed  a  wifh  to  have
an  adept  near  the  perfon  of  the  prince,  and  that  he  had
been  bold  enough  to  anfwer  his  Infmuator,  "  If  you
*'  Jèek  fupport,  I  am  too  lit  de  and  fiiy  prince  too  great  to
^'  proteâ  you." — And  every  candidate  who  will  make
the  fame  refolute  Hand  againfl:  the  agents  of  the  order
mufl  expeét  to  be  repaid  with  fimilar  calumnies.  The
law  of  the  order  is  invariable  and  precife,  particularly
with  refped  to  thofe  whofe  talents  may  be  obnoxious
to  lUuminifm.  They  mttji  be  gained  over  or  rid?ied  in
the  public  opinion.^  Such  is  the  text,  fo  foil  man  den
fchriji  Jteller  zii  gevjinnen  fuchen  oder,  verfchreyen.^
But  it  is  now  time  to  follow  the  candidate  who  has
fliown  himfelf  more  docile  through  the  various  pre-
paratory degrees.

*  Mirabeau  Monarchie  Pruflienne,  Vol.  V.  art.  Religion^
I  Inflruélions  for  the  Regent,  No.  ij.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


CHAP.     IV.

Second  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illwnviees.— Fir/}  prepa-
ratory Degree,  of  the  Novice  and  of  bis  Teacljcr.

IN  the  early  ftages  of  IlUiniinifm  the  duration  of  tlie  LenptB
tiaie  of  trial  for  the  Novice  was  three  years,  for  *^*  ^^^
tliole  who  were  not  eighteen  years  or  aj^e  ;  two  years
for  thofe  between  eighteen  and  twcrity-Fonr  ;  and  one
year  for  thofe  who  were  near  thiity.*  Circumftances
have  fince  occafionally  canfed  the  time  to  be  abridged  ;
but,  whatever  may  be  the  difpofitions  of  the  Novice,
though  the  time  may  be  difpenfed  with,  he  mull  go
through  the  different  trials,  or  have  got  the  ilart  of
them  before  he  is  admitted  into  the  other  degrees.
During  this  interval  he  has  no  other  fuperior  but  tire
Inlinuator  to  whom  he  is  indebted  for  his  vocation,  and
during  the  whole  time  of  the  novitiate,  the  Inhniiator
is  exprefsly  forbidden  to  inform  his  pupil  of  any  other
member  of  the  order.  This  law  was  made  to  llcreen
the  order  from  the  dangers  which  might  refult  from
any  indifcretion  of  the  Novice,  and  to  render  the  Tnhnu-
ator  alone  refponfible  in  fuch  cafes  ;  for  fiiould  the  No-
vice unfortunately  be  an  indifcreet  talker,  the  code  ex-
prefsly fays  his  imprudence  would  at  moft  betray  only  one  T.
of  the  brethren. t    The  firft  leflbns  of  the  Infmuator  (in  ^l^^l^'^.

r  ^  1  •  i_\^  •!  1-  J  the  Novice.

future  his  teacher)  treat  entirely  on  the  importance  and  secrecj.
the  inviolability  of  the  fecrefy  which  is  to  be  obierved
in  lUuminifm.  He  will  begin  by  telling  his  Novice,
**  Silence  and  fecrecy  are  the  very  foul  of  the  order,  and
*'  you  will  carefully  obferve  this  (ilence  as  well  with
**  thofe  whom  you  may  have  only  reafon  to  fuppofe  are
"  already  initiated,  as  with  thofe  whom  you  may  here-
*'  after  know  really  to  belong  to  the  order.  You  will
*'  remember,  that  it  is  a  conilant  principle  among  us,
"  that  ingeniioufnefs  is  only  a  virtue  with  rcfpeâ  to  our
*'  fuperior  s ,  but  that  difrujf  and  rcferve  are  the  fvnda'
*'  mental  principles.  You  will  never  reveal  to  any  per-
"  fon  at  prefent  or  hereafter,  the  llighteft  circumirance
*'  relative  to  your  admifîion  into  the  order,  the  degree
<'  you  have  received,  nor  the  time  when  adu/utcd  ;  in
*  The  Statute»  rsfomied,  No.  7.     f  The  .Statufcs  reformed,  No.  i6.


3^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY*.

'^  a  word,  you  will  never  fpeak  of  any  objecl  relaling
"  to  the  order  even  before  Brethren,  without  the
"  ftrongefl  neceflity,"*

Under  the  reftridions  of  this  fevere  law,  one  Illunii-
nee  will  often  be  a  ftranger  to  anotlier  ;  and  the  No-
vice will  fee  in  this  no  more  than  a  ineafiire  of  fafety
for  the  oi-dtr,  which  might  be  ruined  by  the  Icall  in-
difcrcrion.f

More  certainly  to  afllirc  himfelf  of  the  difrretion  of
the  Novice,  the  Infinuator  will  give  him  no  further  in-
fight,  nor  entrull  him  with  any  writing  relative  to  the
order,  until  he  has  obtained  the  following  declariition  :
"  I  the  undcrilgned  pi'on^ife  upon  my  honour,  and'
"  without  any  refervation,  never  to  reveal  either  by
"  words,  fignsoradionsjorinsny  poffible  manner,  to  any
"  perfon  whatever,  either  relations,  allies,  or  moft  inti-
"  mate  fiends,  any  thing  that  fliall  be  entrufted  to  me
"  by  my  Introducer  relative  to  my  entrance  into  a  /'-..
'^^  crct  joc'icty  ;  and  this  whether  my  reception' fliall
**  take  place  or  not.  I  fubjecl  myfelf  the  more  wil-
**  lingly  to  this  fecrecy,  as  my  Introducer  a[fiires  ms
*'  thiXt  nothing  is  ever  tranfaâed  in  this  fociety  hurtful  to
"  religion,  morals,  or  the  Jtate.  With  refpeél  to  all  writ-
**  ings  which  I  may  be  entrufted  with,  and  letters
"  which  I  may  receive  concerning  the  fame  objeft,  I
"  engage  myfelf  to  return  them,  after  having  made  for
*'  my  fole  uie  the  necelfary  extracls."|

Thcfe  writings  or  books  relative  to  the  order  are
only  lent  to  the  Novice  at  firft  in  fmall  numbers,  and
for  a  fhort  time  ;  and  then  he  muft  promife  to  keep
them  out  of  the  reach  of  the  profane  ;  but  as  he  is  pro-
moted in  rank,  he  may  preferve  them  for  a  longer
time,  and  is  entrufted  with  a  larger  quantity  ;  though
not  without  having  informed  the  order  of  the  precau-
tions he  fliall  have  taken,  left  in  cafe  of  his  death  any
of  thefe  writings  fliould  fall  into  profane  hands.  f|
He  will  afterwards  learn,  that  the  Brotherhood  take
many  other  precautions  for  fecrecy,  not  only  refpcding
the  ftatutes,  but  even  with  regard  to  the  very  exiftence

*  Oritrinal  Writings,  Statutes,  No.  20.  Statutes  reformed,  No.  27.
True  Illuminifm,  General  Statutes,  No.  31,  3a.

f  Summary  of  the  Statutes,  No.  15,  B.

\  Original  "Writings,  and  the  true  Ilium.  Art.  Jifvrrfr.

il  Infîltutes  of  the  Iniinuated,  No.  8.  Orig.  ^^"rit.  the  real  lHuminee
ÏJo.  7.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  3^

of  the  order.  He  will  fee,  for  example,  in  its  law?,
that  Ihould  any  of  the  brotherhood  fall  fick,  the  other
brethren  are  alfiduoully  to  vifit  him,  in  the  firll  place
to  fortify  him,  that  is  to  fay,  to  hinder  him  from  mak-
ing any  declarations  at  the  hour  of  his  death  ;  and,  fe-
condly,  to  carry  away  whatever  writings  relative  to  the
order  the  Tick  man  may  have  had  in  liis  poireliion,  as
loon  as  any  fymptoms  of  danger  appear. f  jj

He  will  at  length  learn,  that  to  fruftrate  all  attempts  stud/.
to  trace  even  their  very  exiftence,  the  order  does  nut
exiji  every  where  under  the  same  name,  but  that  they
are  to  afTume  the  name  oï  fame  other  order,  perhaps
even  of  a  literary  fociety,  or  meet  without  any  name
which  can  attraél  the  attention  of  the  public.

The  iirit  writing  delivered  to  the  Novice,  to  accuf-  ^fll°^,
torn  him  to  profound  fecrecy,  is  what  may  be  called  the  ^er.
Dictionary  of  lUuminifm.  He  muft  begin  by  learning
the  language  of  the  feel,  that  is  to  fay,  the  art  of  com-
municating with  the  fuperiors  and  other  adepts  without
the  polFibility  of  being  underftood  by  the  profane.
By  means  of  this  language,  the  Illuminées  are  to  be
able  to  correfpond  with  each  other,  without  running
the  rilk  of  its  being  difcovered  of  what  Brother  they
fpeak;  from  what  place,  in  what  language,  at  what  pe-
riod, and  to  whom,  or  by  whom  the  letter  is  written.

To  avoid  the  difcovery  of  perfons,  the  Novice  will  Chara<Sef-
karn,  that  no  Brother  bears  the  fame  name  in  the  ''^.'?  name»
order  which  he  does  in  the  world;  indeed,  had  he  been  Membei-^
initiated  in  the  higher  degrees  of  Mafonry,  he  would
have  feen  the  fame  precaution  taken,  where  the  Roii-
crucians  receive  what  they  call  ikeir  Characierijiic  or
their  adoptive  name.  The  Novice  will  receive  the
charafteriftic  immediately  on  his  admiffion,  and  it  will
in  fome  meafure  in-;ply  the  parts  which  he  is  in  future
to  aft  in  the  general  confpiracy.  It  will  be  his  tafk:
hereafter  to  ihidy  and  write  the  hiftory  of  his  new  pa-
tron ;  he  will  by  this  method  recogniie  in  the  qualities
and  adions  of  his  hero  the  particular  ferviccs  which  the
order  will  expeél  from  him.*  This  name  will  be  cho-
fen  as  conformably  as  pollible  to  the  difpofitions  ob-
Girved  in  him.    Has  he  Ihown  any  propenfity  to  repeat

■\  Statutes  of  the  A-Iincrval,  No.  12.

"   Original  Writiiigs,  VbL  I.     hulrutTiioiw  fyr  the  ïaSûa^tî^l^  No.  7>
and  Vol.  U.  Lit.  15.


^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIILA.CY.

the  impieties  of  Philofophifm  againft  the  Gofpel,  he
will  be  cliilkd  with  the  Celli  and  Porphivii,  or  with  the
Tindals  and  Shaftefljurys  ;  fliould  his  turn  be  toward
the  hatred  lA'  Kings,  or  Ihould  his  talents  be  jiidgt-d
uictal  for  the  p -.lity  of  the  order,  then  his  characleriftic
will  be  of  the  Brutus,  Cato,  or  Machiavel  tribe.  He
will  not  be  told  what  he  is  to  do  to  deferve  his  name,
but  they  will  contrive  that  it  lliall  occur  to  him.  Nei-
tlicr  '  ill  he  be  told  why  Weilliaupt  aiTumed  the  name
of  Spartacus  (a  name  fo  famous  in  R'^me  becaufe  he
waged  the  war  of  the  Haves  againil  their  mafters);  but
fliould  he  ever  be  admitted  to  the  higher  myfteries,  he
will  ealily  recognize  the  reafon.f
&s  Gcogra-  llie  place  from  whence  they  write,  as  well  as  the
V^J-  perlons  of  whom  or  to  whom  they  write,  is  in  like

manner  to  be  kept  fecret  ;  a  new  Geography  is  there-
fore taught  the  Novice.  He  will  tlience  learn,  that
Bavay'ia,  the  country  of  their  founder,  is  denominated
Ashaiu  ;  SiViiùm,  Pannonia  ;  Franconia,  Aiijiria,  mid
Tyrol  are  denoted  by  Illyiia,  Egypt,  and  Pelopormefus  ;
Munich  is  called  Athens  ;  Bamberg,  Antioch  ;  Iiifprnck,
Samoj  ;  Vienna  in  Audria,  Koine  ;  JViirtzhirg,  Car-
thage ;  Frankfort  on  the  Mehi  becomes  Thebes  ;  and
Heidelberg  Lhica.  Ingoljladt,  the  natal  foil  of  the  or-
der, was  not  fufficiently  denoted  by  Ephefus  ;  this  pri-
vileged town  was  to  be  decorated  with  a  more  myf-
terious  name,  and  the  profound  adepts  bellowed  on  it
tliat  of  Elcitfis.

Should  th.e  Novice  ever  be  fcnt  on  a  miflion  out  of
his  own  country,  or  to  diftant  fliores,  he  will  then  receive
farther  inftruc'iions  in  the  Geography  of  the  feft.*
Its  Calen-         ^^^  mxx^i  alfo  Icarn  how  to  date  his  letters,  and  be
diir.  converfant  with  the  Hluminized  Hegira  or  Calendar  ;

for  all  letters  which  he  will  receive  in  future  will  be
dated  according  to  the  Perfian  era,  called  Jezdegert
and  beginning  A.  D.  630.  The  year  begins  with  the
Illuminées  on  the  firft  of  Phnravardin,  which  anfwers
to  the  2 1  il  of  March.  Their  firll  month  has  no  lefs
than  forty-one  days  ;  the  following  months,  inftead  of
being  called  May,  June,  July,  Anguft,  September,  and
October,  are  A'-iurpahaJcht,  Chardad,  Thirnieh,  Merded-
tneh,  Sbabai-i;neh,  Meharmeh:  November  and  Deceui-

•{■  Original  Writings  Vol.  I.  Sec.  4.
•  Oi'igiual  Writings,  Sc<S.  a  and  3.


^-^-

__n

t.

A  ___®

/^.

-^-

^_u

u .

.  -l_..=o

c.^

.r  _

--C

?'.

--4  --_  =

^._

T  _

__  n

n\.

.-^-.^r-,

c  .^

.,J  __

-_  *

œ .

-->l--_rt.

/-

.1:

-cf..

_     •

_  L

-   ' 1      1

Ô..

-+    -

/\

/.  .

_I  _-

.-  -m-

^   _

4..

o-a

7Z.-

_T__

J.-

6..

.:v<l

A-

_±-_

_  □
-    ^

x__

-  e

cj..

._..>§

,<^.-

-0--

-  o

0.  .

•

>  -

•

-  txq

J  —

9

l--6cj

THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPlRACr.


41


ber  are  Ahemneh,  Adameb  :  January  and  February,  Dh
mehy  and  Benmeh  :  The  month  of  March  only  has
twenty  days,  and  is  called  AJplmiidar*

The  Novice  muft  next  learn  how  to  decyfher  the  its  Cypter,
letters  he  may  receive  ;   in  order  to  which,  he   miifl
make  himfelF  mafter  of  that  cypher,  which  is  to  ferve
him  until  initiated  into  the  higher  degrees,  when  he
will  be  entrufted  with  the  hieroglyphics  of  the  Order.f

He  will  alfo  remember,  that  he  is  never  to  write  the
name  of  his  order  ;  fo  venerable  a  word  cannot  be
expofed  to  prophane  eyes,  and  a  circle  0  with  a  point
in  the  middle  of  it  will  fupply  this  facred  word,  and  a
long  fquare  or  parellelogram  □  will  denote  the  word.
Lodge.

After  thefe  preliminary  fludies,  the  young  brother       "T-
receives  a  part  of  the  code,  under  the  title  oï  Statutes  ^'"^Jj.  *
of  the  Illumbiees.     But  thefe  lirft  ftatutes  are  nothing
more  than  a  fnare,  and  the  young  Novice,  with  plea-
fure  no  doubt,  fees  them  begin  with  the  following'
words  :

"  For  the  tranquillity  and  fecurity  of  all  the  Bre-
"  thren,  whether  Novices  or  adive  Members  of  the
**  Society,  and  to  prevent  all  ill-grounded  fufpicions,
"  or  difagreeable  doubts,  the  venerable  order  declares,
'*  that  it  abfolutely  has  in  view  no  projeâ,  enîerprize,
**  or  undertaking  hurtful  to  the  Jiate,  to  religion,  or  to-
"  good  morals  ;  and  that  it  favours  nothing  of  that  na-
*'  tiire  in  any  of  its  members.  Its  defigns,  all  its  toils,
"  folely  tend  to  infpire  men  with  a  zeal  for  the  perfec-
"  tion  of  their  moral  charafters,  to  impregnate  them
"  with  humane  and  fociable  fentiments,  to  countera(;:l:
"  the  plans  of  the  wicked,  to  fuccour  opprcfled  and
**  fuftering  virtue,  to  favour  the  advancement  of  mea
"  of  merit,  and  to  render  thofe  fciences  univerfal  which

*  See  the  real  lllimiinee  firft  degree.

f  The  common  cypher  of  the  Illuminées  confift  in  numbers  corref-
fonding  to  letters  in  the  following  order  :

12.       II.       10.       9.       8.       7.       6.

a.  b.  c.  d.  e.  f.  g.
13.  14.  xj.  i6.  17.  18.  19.  20.
n.      o.      p.       q.      r.      s.       t.       u.

The  hieroglyphics  are  contained  in  the  oppofite  Plate,  and  are  copied
■from  thofe  publiflied  at  the  end  of  the  degree  of  Scotch  Knight  or
Direéling  Illumincc.  Tli'.re  is  a  third  cypher,  but  that  has  ncvei  bc«i
jjubliflied.

Vol.  HI.  H


5-
h.

4-
i.

3.          2.
k.           1.

21.

22.

23.      24.

W.

X.

y.       z.

4î  TII£    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

'^  are  as  yet  hidden  from  the  generality  of  men.  SiicH
"  is  not  the  coloured  pretext,  but  the  real  objcd  of  the
«  order."*

Even  fliould  the  Novice  not  have  entirely  laid  afidc
all  his  fufpicions  refpcding'the  intentions  of  the  order,
ftill  fo  pofitive  a  declaration  he  muft  think  vould  gua-
rantee him  as  to  all  obligations  which  might  be  impofed
upon  him.  His  grand  aim  is  to  be,  to  joriu  his  heart,
in  fuch  a  m.anner  as  to  gain  not  only  the  afFcclion  of
his  friends  but  even  of  his  enemies.  He  is  pofitively
ordered  to  endeavour  %vitb  all  bis  might  to  acquire  both
interior  and  exterior  perfcâion.  It  is  true  that  he  is
foon  after  as  pofitively  ordered  to  Jhioy  the  arts  of  dif-
jiiuubting  and  difguife  ;  but  then  the  Brother  Ininiuator
is  at  his  elbow,  to  explain  to  him  how  that  art  coin-
cides with  true  perftclion,  and  thus  fuppi'efs  any  fuf-
picions which  might  arife  from  a  comparifon  of  thefe
two  injunftions.  Befides,  the  Novice  has  many  other
duties  to  fulfil,  which  will  deprive  him  of  opportunity
for  fuch  reflcdions.
jy_  He  is  next  told,  that  the  Brethren  rauft  have  but  on©

Study  the  mind,  one  will,  and  fimilar  fentiments  ;  that,  to  efftcl»
moniiity  of  ^jate  this,  the  order  has  made  choice  of  certain  works,
"'^'  to  which  he  muft  apply  with  the  greateft  attention.
Should  the  Novice  be  one  of  thofe  men  whom  an  at-
tachment to  the  Gofpel  rendered  more  circumfpt'd  as
to  the  fnares  laid  for  his  belief,  the  very  choice  of  the
"books  would  fuffice  to  fliew  him,  that  the  firft  object
of  the  Infmuator  was  to  perfuade  him,  that  it  is  not
even  neccflliry  to  be  a  Chriftian  to  acquire  the  perfec-
tion enjoined  by  the  ftatutes.  The  Morality  he  is  taught
is  that  OÎ  Epiftctiis,  Seneca,  Antoninus,  and  Plutarch,  all
foreign  to  Chriftianity.  He  will  alfo  receive  the  works
of  modern  Sophifters,  fuch  as  JVielaiui,  Mciners,  and
Bajfadovjs,  who  by  no  means  make  perfection  to  confift
in  Chriftianity.  Under  the  foothing  and  mellifluous
language  of  a  moderate  and  fpecious  Philofophy,  he
will  be  led  to  lubricity  and  impiety,  traced  by  thé
fophifticated  pen  of  Helvetius  in  his  celebrated  work
de  L^E/prit.f     But  the  Infmuator  muft  previoufly  have

'*  The  True  ilUimhiee,  General  Statute:— Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.
Scd:  8.  .

t  See  the  liil  of  thefe  works  in  the  Oiiginal  V\*ritir;g*  in  the  Statute*
r^onueJ,  No.  2j,


THE    ANTISOCIAI.    CONSPIRACY.  a-,

fiifficiencly  ftudied  the  difpofinons  of  his  pupil  to  know
whether  fiich  propolitioiis  would  any  longer  ftarile
him.  Bi-fides,  nothing  is  better  calculated  to  dilTipate
all  fuch  fears,  than  the  confiant  application  that  is  re-
quired to  thofe  books  which  are  put  into  the  hands  of
the  Novice,  added  to  the  care  taken  to  deprive  him  of
all  fuch  as  mlglit  infpire  hinî  with  contrary  ideas.  The
Teacher  is  carefully  to  attend  to  all  the  rules  laid  down
in  the  code  on  this  fubjed,  and  to  fee  that  his  Novices
fultil  the  intentions  of  the  order  in  this  refpec^.  He
is  frequently  to  converfe  with  them  ;  he  is  to  mark
out  their  occupations  for  them  ;  he  is  even  to  make
them  unexpefted  viiits  to  furprife  them,  and  thus  to
fee  in  what  manner  they  apply  to  the  code  and  other
writino-s  with  which  the  order  has  entrufted  them.  He
is  to  require  an  account  of  what  they  have  read,  and
extrads  from  the  diflerent  works  ;  he  will  aflifl:  them
by  his  explanations  ;  in  fliort,  nothing  is  to  be  negleél-
ed  which  can  fecure  their  progrefs  in  the  fpirit  and
morals  of  the  order.*

An  object  of  far  greater  imjiortance  next  attraâ;3  the  v.
attention  of  the  Novice  ;  it  is  that  which  the  code  calls  ^^^^v  tj^-^'
the  çrreûteji  of  all  ;  it  is,  the  knovjlcdae  of  nurn.  The  of  n^^ifi-ind,
teacher  will  reprefent  this  to  his  pupil  as  the  ?noJi  inte-
rejllng  of  all  fat' nee s.f  To  make  himfelf  mailer  of  this
fcience,  the  Novice  receives  the  model  of  a  journal  in
the  form  of  tablets,  and  his  teacher  fliows  him  how
they  are  to  be  ufed.  Provided  with  tiiis  journal,  he  is
to  make  his  obfervations  on  every  body  he  finds  himfelf
in  company  with  ;  he  is  to  trace  their  characflers,  and
account  to  himfelf  for  every  thing  he  has  fcen  or  heard.
Left  his  memory  fhould  fail  him,  he  muft  always  be
provided  with  a,  loofe  paper  or  fnmll  tablets,  on  which
he  may  at  ail  hours  note  his  obfervations,  which  he  is
afterwards  carefully  to  digeft  ia  his  journal.  To  be
certain  of  tiie  Novice's  attention  to  this  point,  the  Bro-
ther teacher  v/ill  examine  his  tablets  and  his  journal
from  time  to  time.  To  render  him  more  expert  in  the
art  of  drawing  tlis  characters  of  the  living,  he  will  ex-
crciic  the  Novices  on  ancient  aiiLhors,  and  on  the  hc-

*  See  InflruClioiifs  pro  Infinuantibus  et  Recipiontibu^;.

f  Thz  true  Illuminée.     Inllructions  on  the  Art  of  forming  Pupl!?.,

Vol.  HI,  H  2


44  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

roes  of  antiquity.  No  ftudy  or  ciiflom  is  fo  frequently
recommended  as  this  in  all  the  code  of  lUuminiliîi.  It
is  to  be  tiie  grand  ftudy  of  the  Novice,  and  the  prime
occupation  of  every  degree.*

It  is  by  his  afiiduity  in  this  great  art  that  the  Novice
will  learn  how  to  diftinguilli  thofe  whom  he  may  here-
after judge  proper  to  be  admitted  into  or  rejc  cted  from
the  order  ;  and  it  is  with  that  veiw  that  the  Preceptor
perpetually  prefles  him  to  propofc  thofe  \ulx)m  he  rury
think  fit  jor  the  order. \  By  this  means  a  double  objcft
is  attained  ;  tirfl,  the  propagation  of  the  order  ;  and,
fecondly,  a  knowledge  of  its  friends  or  enemies  ;  the
dangers  it  may  be  threatened  with  ;  and  the  means  to
be  adopted,  or  the  perfons  to  be  gained  or  courted,  to
avert  the  impending  llorm  ;  in  line,  of  extending  its
conquefts.  Whether  the  Illuminée  be  a  Novice,  or  in
any  other  degree,  he  is  bound  by  the  laws  of  the  order
to  make  his  report  in  the  prefciibcd  forms  at  leall  once
a  month, I
The  Bonds  "While  the  Novice  is  perpetually  making  refearches
of  the  No-  of  this  nature,  he  is  not  aware  that  he  is  as  carefully
^"^  watched  by  his  Infinuator,  who  on  his  fide  notes  and

writes  down  every  thing  that  he  obferves  either  as  to
the  failings  or  the  progrefs,  the  ftrong  or  weak  fide  of
liis  pupil,  and  thele  he  as  regularly  tranfmits  to  the
fuperiors.§

The  pupil  little  fufpefts  that  the  grand  objeA  of  his
Infinuator  is  to  bind  him  in  fuch  a  manner  to  lllumi-
nifm,  even  long  before  he  is  acquainted  vùîh  any  of  its
f'crets,  that  it  fliall  be  impoffible  for  him  to  break
thofe  bonds  which  fear  and  terror  fhall  have  impofed
upon  him,  fliould  he  ever  wifli  to  fhrink  ft-om  the
horrid  plots  and  fyftems  which  he  might  thereafter
difcover.
His  Mind  Thîs  profound  policy  of  binding  the  Novices  to  IllUf
phedicnce.  minifm  confids,  firft,  in  giving  the*m  a  magnificent
idea  of  the  grandeur  of  the  projeéls  of  the  Sed,  and,
fecondly,  in  a  vow  of  blind  obedience  to  the  fuperiore  in

*  See  Ibid.  No.  13. — Original  Writings,  the  Statutes  reformed,  No,
Ç,  ic,  I-;,  14. — Inflirudio  pro  Infinu;:ntibus,  No.  5.  pro  Recipientibus,
No.  x6,  &c.  &c.

f  Inftriicliones  pro  Recipientibus,  No.  11.

i  Inftnidrions  for  the  Infiiiuatcd,  No.  5.  C.  and  Orijr'nal  Writings,  &C.

§  Inftrudions  for  the  Infinuator,  No.  3  and  4.— The  real  Illuminée,
Inlirudions  on  the  art  of  forniing  the  Brethren,  Np.  i,  z.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

every  thing  which  they  judo'e  conducive  to  the  ends  of
the  Order,  which  vow  the  [nfmuator  is  to  lind  means
of  extorting  from  his  pupil.

It  is  here  particularly  that  Weifliaupt  appears  to
wifli  to  aflimiiate  the  government  of  his  fed  to  that
of  the  religious  orders,  and  efpecially  to  that  of  the
Jcfuits,  by  a  total  I'acriiice  of  their  own  will  and  judg-
ment, which  he  exads  of  the  adepts  ;  and  to  the  t  xcr-
cifing  of  th.e  Novices  in  tlîis  point,  he  exprcisly  adverts
in  his  inftrudions  to  the  Infmuators.*  But  this  is  prc-
cifely  the  place  to  remark  on  the  amazing  difference
between  the  illuminized  and  the  religious  cbedienc-C-
Of  that  immenfe  number  of  religious  who  follow  tlie
inftitutes  of  St.  Bafil,  St.  Benedid",  St.  Dominic,  or  St.
Francis,  there  is  not  one  wiio  is  not  thoroughly  con-
vinced that  there  exills  a  voice  far  more  imperious
than  that  of  his  fuperior,  the  voice  of  his  confcience,  of
the  gofpel,  and  of  his  God.  There  is  not  one  of  them
who,  iliould  his  fuptrior  command  any  thing  contraiy
to  the  duties  of  a  Cnriftian,  or  of  an  honeft  man,  would
not  immediately  fee  that  fuch  a  command  was  a  re-
leafe  from  his  vow  of  obedience.  This  is  frequently
repeated  and  clearly  expreffed  in  all  the  religious  in-
flitutes,  and  no  where  more  explicitly  or  pofitiveiy  than
in  thofe  of  the  Jefuits.  Tliey  are  ordered  to  obey  their
fuperior,  but  in  cafes  only  where  ilich  obedience  is  not
linful,  iil'i  non  cenieretiir  peccatnin.-f  It  is  only  in  cafes
where  fuch  obedience  can  have  no  finfiil  tendency
whatever,  u!'i  dcfinlri  non  poffit  diquod  pecco.ti  crcntis
intercedere.X  And,  as  if  this  were  not  fufticitntly  ex-
preffed, we  hear  their  founder,  at  the  very  time  when
he  recommends  obedience  to  his  religious,  exprcfsly
faying,  hut  reniend'er  thntyoiir  voiu  is  binding  oidy  vjhcn
the  cntmmmds  of  wan  are  not  contrary  to  thofe  of  God,
id'i  Deo  contraria  non  prœcipit  homo*  All  thole  ]7er-
fons  therefore  who,  like  Mirabeau,  furmifcd  ceriaiii
coincidences,  or  as  he  calls  them  points  nf  contaâ,  be-
tween the  religious  inftitutes,  and  the  code  of  the  Illu-
minées, fliould  have  begun  by  obferving,  that  religious

*  Mirabeau  Monarchie  PrufTienne,  Vol.  V.  aiid  Efiay  on  die  Illumi-
nées, Chap.  III. — Lail  Obfervations  by  Phiîo,  page  6i.

f  Conltitution  of  the  Jefuits,  Part  III.  Chap.  1.  Parag.  2,  Vol.  I,  Edi-
tion of  Prague.  \  Ibid.  Part.  VI.  Chap.  I.

*  lipiil.  Iguatii  De  ObedieiUiii.


45


4^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

obedience  is  in  its  very  eflcnce  an  obligation  of  doiiTg
all  the  good  which  may  be  prelcribed  without  the  leall
taint  of  harm.  It  was  eafy  for  them  on  the  contrary
to  dcmonllratc,  that  the  obedience  fought  for  by  Weil-
haupt's  code  was  a  dilpolition  to  obey  every  order  re-
ceived from  the  fuperior  in  fpite  of  confcience,  and  un-
heedful  of  the  m.oll  iniquitous  guilt,  provided  it  tended
to  the  good  of  the  order.  "  Our  fociety  (for  fuch  are
the  exprefilons  of  the  code)  exaéls  from  its  members
^'  the  lacriiice  of  their  liberty,  not  only  with  refpecT:  to
*'  all  things,  bitt  ahfolutcly  with  rcfpcd  to  every  means
*'  of  attaining  its  end.  Yet  the  prefuniption  on  the
"  goodnefs  of  the  means  prefcribed  is  ahvays  in  fnivin'
'*  of  the  orders  given  by  the  fii-pcriors.  They  are  clear-
<•  er-fighted  on  this  objed;  ;  ihcy  are  better  acquainted
"  with  it  ;  and  it  is  on  this  very  account  that  they  are
''  nominated  fuperiors — It  is  their  bufmefs  to  lead  you
''^  through  the  labyrinth  of  errors  and  darknefs  ;  and  in
*'  fuch  a  cafe  obedience  is  not  only  a  duty,  but  an  ob-
**je6l  for  grateful  acknowledgment."*

Such  is  the  obedience  of  the  Illuminées  ;  nor  is  there
a  finglc  exception  to  be  found  in  all  their  code.  We
iliall  fee  the  Novice,  before  he  terminates  his  trials,
<:)bliged  to  explain  himfelf  explicitly  with  refped  to  or-
ders which  he  may  receive  from  his  fuperiors,  and
which  he  may  think  contrary  to  his  confcience.
In  the  firft  place  his  teacher  is  to  entangle  him,  and
make  himfelf  perfectly  m.after  of  his  moft  fecret
thoughts.  Under  the  pretence  of  knowing  himfelf
Pis  fecrets  better,  while  lludying  the  art  of  knowing  others,  the
difcovered.  Novice  is  to  draw  a  faithful  pidure  of  himfelf,  to  un-
fold his  interefts  and  connexions,  as  well  as  thofe  of  his
family.

Here  again  the  Iniinuator  furnilhes  him  with  the  ta-
blets in  the  requifite  form,  that  he  may  give  this  new
proof  of  confidence  to  the  order  ;  but  this  will  neither
be  the  laft  nor  the  moft  important  one  for  which  he
will  be  called  upon.

On  thefe  tablets,  the  Novice  is  to  write  down  his
name,  age,  fundions,  country,  and  abode  ;  the  fpecies
of  ftudy  in  which  he  occupies  himfelf,  the  books  of  ivbicb
his  library  is  compofdj  and  the  fecret  v/ritings  of  which

'*  Statutes  reformed,  No.  I,  4,  and  2j. — 'I'lic  true  IIiuniir.ec,  General
Statutes,  Na.  11, 13.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


N.


fr


ht  m.iy  be  in  poflellion  ;  his  revenue,  his  friends,  his
enemies,  and  the  reafon  of  his  enmities  ;  in  line,  his
acquaintances  and  his  protetftors.

To  this  table  he  is  to  fubjoin  a  fécond,  explaining
the  fame  objeéts  with  refpcd  to  his  father,  his  mother,
and  all  their  other  children.  He  is  to  be  very  explicit
witli  rcfpecl  to  the  education  they  received,  to  their  ]:af
fions  and  préjudices,  to  their  Jhoag  ûnd  vjeak  fides.

We  will  exemplify  this  lecond  table  by  an  extra<3f
from  the  Original  Writings,  by  which  the  reader  will
perceive  that  parents  are  not  very  much  favoured —

"  The  Novice,  Francis  Antony  St aged  22,  re-

'*  prcfents  his  father  as  violent,  and  of  foldierlike  man-
"  ners  ;  his  mother  as  a  little  avaricious  ;  the  weak  fide
"  of  both  to  be  flattery  and  interefl  ;  both  living  after
"  the  old  fafbion,  and  with  an  antiquated  franknefs;  in
"  their  devotion,  headftrong,  arrogant  ;  with  difficulty
*'  abandoning  an  ill-conceived  projeft,  and  ilill  more
*'  unforgiving  to  their  enemies  ;  that  they  neverthelefs
"  were  little  hated,  becaufe  little  feared  ;  and  hardly
"  in  the  way  of  doing  any  body  any  harm."

While  the  Novice  is  thus  occupied  in  revealing  all
his  fccrets,  and  thofe  of  his  family,  the  Infmuator  on  his
fide  is  drawing  up  a  new  itatement  of  every  thing  he
has  been  able  to  difcover  during  the  whole  time  of  his
pupil's  trial,  either  with  refpeft  to  him  or  to  his  relations.

On  comparing  the  two  llatements,  fliould  the  fupe-
rior  approve  of  the  admiffion  of  the  Novice  to  the  laft
proofs,  he  is  then  to  anfwer  the  grand  queflions.  It
is  by  thcfe  quellions  that  the  Novice  is  to  judge  of  the
extent  of  the  facrifice  he  is  about  to  make,  and  of  the
awful  fubjeftion  of  his  whole  will,  confcience,  and  per-
fon,  to  Illuminifm,  if  he  wiflies  to  gain  admittance.

The  Quellions  are  twenty- four  in  number,  and  couch-  Qrcflionj
ed  in  the  following  terms  :  '^e  is  to

I.  Are  you  ftill  defirous  of  being  received  into  the  *'^'^*'*"
Order  of  the  Illuminées?

II.  Have  you  ferioufly  reflefted  on  the  importance
of  the  ftep  you  take,  in  binding  y ourfelf  by  engagements
that  are  iinknoivn  to  you?

III.  Wliat  hopes  do  you  entertain,  or  by  what  reafon^
are  yoii  induced  to  enter  among  us?

IV.  Would  you  ftill  perfevere  in  that  wifh,  though
you  fliuuld  âjid  that  wt  had  no  other  ybjeft  or  advar^*


/^Z  THE    .'\NTISOCL\L    CONSPIRACV.

tagc  whatever  in  view  but  the  perfedion  of  mankind  ?

V.  What  would  be  your  condud  ihould  the  Order
be  of  new  invention  ?

VI.  ShoulJ  you  eve?-  difcover  hi  the  Order  any  thw<r
ivicked,  or  uitjnjl  to  be  done,  what  part  vjoidd  you  take  ,*
Wenn  unanftandige,  ungereclue  fachen  vorkamen,  wie
er  lich  verhalten  wiirde  ?

VII.  Can  you  and  vjUI  you  look  upon  the  vjelfare  of  the
Order  as  your  own  ?

VIII.  We  cannot  conceal  froni  you,  that  Members,
entering  into  our  Order  without  any  other  motive  than
to  acquire  power,  greatnefs,  and  confideration,  are
not  thofe  whom  we  prefer.  In  many  cafes  one  muft
know  how  to  lofe  in  order  to  gahi.  Are  you  aware
of  all  this  ?

IX.  Can  you  love  all  the  Members  of  the  Order,
even  fuch  of  your  enemies  as  may  be  members  of  it  ?

X.  Should  it  fo  happen  that  you  Iliould  be  obliged
to  do  good  to  your  enemies  who  are  of  the  Order,  to
recommend  them,  for  example,  or  extol  them  ;  would
you  be  dii'pofed  to  do  fo  ?

XI.  Do  you,  moreover,  grant  the  power  of  life  and
DEATH  to  our  Order  or  Society  ?  On  what  grounds
would  you  rcfufe,  or  recognize  in  it  fuch  a  right  ;  Oh
er  dicjer  gcfelschajt,  oder  order  auch  das  jus  vit^  et
NEcis,  aus  was grunden,  odernich  zugejiehe  ?

XII.  Are  you  dijpofed  on  all  occafions  to  give  the  pre-
ference to  men  of  our  Order,  over  all  other  men  P

XIII.  How  would  you  wifli  to  revenge  yourfelf  of
any  injuftice,  either  great  or  fmall,  which  you  may
have  received  from  ftrangers  or  from  any  one  of  our
Brethren  ?

XIV.  What  would  be  your  conduct  flîould  you  ever
repent  of  having  joined  our  Order  ?

XV.  Are  you  wiUing  to  fhare  with  us  happinefs
and  misfortune  ?

XVI.  Do  you  renounce  the  idea  of  ever  making
your  birth,  employment,  dation,  or  power,  ferve  to  the
prejudice  or  contempt  of  any  one  of  the  Brethren  ?

XVII.  Are  you,  or  have  you  any  idea  of  becoming
a  Member  of  any  other  fociety  ?

XVIII.  Is  it  from  levity,  or  in  hopes  of  foon  being
acquainted  with  our  conllitution,  that  you  fo  tafiiy
make  thefe  promiies  i


*rHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

XIX.  Are  you  fully  determined  to  obferve  our
laws  ?

XX.  Do  yoit  fuhjeâ  yourfdf  U  a  blind  obedience

WITHOUT     ANY     RESTRICTION     WHATEVER  ?      AlUl    cio    yOtt,

knoiv  tbi  jtrcn^th  of  fucb  an  eno^ûgement  F  Ober  unbe-
diugten  gehorlam  angelobe,  und  wiffc  was  das  fey  ?

XX[.  Is  there  no  confidcration  that  can  deter  you.
from  entering  into  our  Order?

XXIIi  îViïl  you,  in  cafe  it  is  required,  aff.jl  in  the  prO'
pagation  of  the  Order,  fupport  it  by  your  conufls,  by  your
money,  and  by  all  other  means  ?

XXIII.  Had  you  any  expedation  tliat  you  would
have  to  anfwcr  any  of  thefe  queflions  ;  and  if  fo,,
which  queilion  was  it  ?

XXIV.  What  fecurity  can  you  give  us  that  you
will  keep  thefe  promifes  ;  and  to  what  puniiliment
will  you  fubjecl  yourfelf  in  cafe  you  fliould  break  any
of  them  \*

In  order  to  judge  of  the  nature  of  the  anfwers  writ-
ten and  figned  by  the  Novice,  and  confirmed  by  his
oath,  it  will  be  fuflicient  to  call  our  eyes  on  the  account
of  the  reception  of  two  Brethren,  as  it  is  contained  in  the
archives  of  the  feci.  To  the  Vlth  queftion  fiould  yon
ever  difcover  in  the  Order  any  thing  wicked  or  imjiijl  lo  he
done,  %vhat  part  vjould  you  take  P  The  firfl  of  thefe  two

iSTovices,  aged  22,  and  named  Francis  Anthony  St

cnfvjers,  fwears,  and  figns,  "  I  would  certainly  execute
"  thofe  things,  if  fo  commanded  by  the  Order,  becaufe
*'  it  may  be  very  poffible  that  I  am  not  capable  of
"judging  of  what  is  juft  or  unjuft.  Befidcs,  Ihould  they
"  be  unjuil  under  one  afped,  they  would  ceafe  to  be
*^fo  as  foon  as  they  became  a  means  of  attaining  happi-
^'  nefs,  the  general  end."

The  Novice   Francis  Xaverius  B anfwers,

fwears,  and  figns,  in  like  manner,  "  I  would  not  refufe
*'  to  execute  thofe  things  (wicked  and  unjuft)  provided
*'  they  contributed  to  the  general  good."

To  the  Xlth  queftion,  on  life  and  death,  the  firft  No-
vice anfwers  with  the  fame  formalities,  "  Yes,  I  ac-
«  knowledge  this  right  in  the  Order  of  Illuminées  ;
«  and  why  fliould  I  refufe  it  to  the  Order,  fliould  it  ever

•  Original  Writings.  The  account  of  the  reception  of  two  Novices,
Vol.  I.  Std.  17.

Vol.  III.  I


4?


50  t'Ke    antisocial    CONSPtRACr.

"  find  itfelf  necelïïtated  to  excrcifc  it,  as  pefhaps  with»
"  out  fuch  a  right  it  might  have  to  fear  its  avjjiil  rii'in.
"  The  Jiate  ivquld  lofe  little  by  it,  fincè  the  den:!  man
"  vjoidd  he  replaced  by  fo  many  others.  Btfides,  I  refer
*^  to  my  anfwer  to  qucllion  VI.  ;"  that  is  to  fay,  where
he  promifcd  to  execute  whatever  was  jull  or  unjufi:,'
provided  it  was  with  the  approbation  or  by  oidcr  of
the  Superiors.

The  fécond  anfwers,  fwears,  and  figns  to  the  fame
queftion,  "  The  fame  reafon  which  makes  me  recog-
*'  nize  the  right  of  life  and  death  in  the  governors  of
"  nations,  leads  nie  to  recognize  mod  willingly  the
'^  fame  power  in  m>y  Order,  which  really  contributes  t(i
*'  the  happinefs  of  mankind  as  much  as  governors  of
*'  nations  ought  to  do."

On  the  XXth  queilion,  on  bïmd  obedience  vfithont  re-
Jirïâion,  one  anfw-ers,  "  Yes,  without  doubt,  the  prontijè
"  is  of  the  utmnji  iinportcmce  ;  ncverlhclcf  I  look  tipoti
"  it  as  the  orJy  poffilie  jt leans  by  vjhirh  the  Order  con
"'gain  its  ends. ''^  The  fécond  is  Icfs  precife  :  "  When
**  I  confider  our  Order  as  of  modern  invention  and  aâ
*'  little  extended,  I  have  a  fort  of  repugnance  in  bind-
"  ing  myfelf  by  fo  forinidable  a  promife  ;  becaufe  in  that
"  cafe  1  am  juftified  in  doubting  whether  a  want  of
^^  knowledge,  or  even  fome  domineering  paflion  might
**  not  fomctimes  occafion  things  to  be  commanded  to-
*'  tally  oppofite  to  the  propofed  objeél  of  the  general
"  welfare.  Eut  v/hen  I  fuppofe  the  Order  to  be  more
*'  univerfally  fpread,  I  then  believe,  that  in  a  focicty
"  comprehending  men  of  fuch  different  ftations,  froni
'*  the  higher  to  the  lower,  thofe  men  are  beft  er.ablec!
*'  to  know  the  courfe  of  the  w^orld,  and  how  to  diflin-
"  guifn  the  means  of  accompli  filing  the  laudable  pro-
«Oe^'^^ofthe  Order."

This  doubt  of  the  Novice  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the
Order  muft  have  difplcafed  Weifliaupt,  who  fpared  no
pains  to  make  it  appear  that  llluminifm  w-as  of  ancient
date,  the  better  to  excite  the  curicjfity  and  the  venera-
tion of  the  pupils,  being  content  to  enjoy  the  glory  (f
liis  invention  with  his  profound  adepts  to  whom  only
he  revealed  the  fecret  of  the  invention  in  the  hightfl
degrees  and  with  the  lafl  mylleries.  But  our  Novice
went  on  to  fay,  that  on  the  whole  he  rather  believed  the
Oidcr  to  be  of  ancient  than  of  modern  invention  j  and.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  ^\

like  his  fellow  Novice,  he  "  promift  s  to  be  faithful  to
all  the  laws  "  of  his  Order,  to  llipport  it  with  his  coun-
"  fels,  his  fortune,  and  all  other  means  ;  and  Hnilhcs
*•'  by  fidjcâing  bhv.fclf  to  forjtit  his  honour,  nnd  evcîi
"  his  LIFE,  fnoulil  he  eve?-  break  his  pj-ojuif.'*^'

When  the  Infiniiator  has  found  means  of  binding  the
Novice  to  the  Order  by  fuch  oaths,  and  cfpecially  wlieii
the  young  candidate  fhall  have  recognized  without  hc-
fitation  that  (Irange  and  awful  right  which  fubjcc^s
the  life  of  every  citizen  to  the  fatellites  of  Illuminifm,
Ihould  any  be  unfortunate  enf)ugh  to  difpleafe  its  fu-
periors  ;  when  the  Novice  is  blinded  to  fuch  a  degree
as  not  to  perceive  that  this  pretended  right,  far  from
implying  a  fociety  of  fages,  only  denotes  a  band  of
ruiîi.ms  and  a  federation  of  affàllins  like  the  emiiTaries
of  the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain  ;  when,  in  fliort,  he
fhall  have  fubmitted  himfelf  to  this  terrible  power,  the
oath  of  the  modern  Seyde  is  fcnt  to  the  archives  of  the
Order.  His  difpofltions  then  prove  to  be  fuch  as  the
fuperiors  required  to  confer  on  him  the  fécond  degree
of  the  preparatory  clafs  ;  and  the  Infmuator  concludes
his  miffion  by  the  Introdndion  of  his  pupil.

At  the  appointed  time  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  the  The  pro-
Novice  is  lead  to  a  gloomy  apaitment,  where  two  men  mt^tion  of
are  waiting  for  him,   and,   excepting  his  hifinuator,  '  '^  l^o^^'^s»
thefe  are  the  iirll  two  of  the  fed:  with  whom  the  No-
vice is  made  acquainted.     The  fuperior  or  his  dele-
gate holds  a  lamp  in  his  hand   half  covered  with  a
made  ;   his  attitude  is  fevere  and  imperious  ;   and  a
naked  fword  lies  near  him  on  the  table.     The  other
man,  who  ferves  as  Secretary,  is  prepared  to  draw  up
the  a;^:  of  Initiation.     No  mortal  is  introduced  but  the
Novice  and  his  Infinuator,  nor  can  any  one  elfe  be  pre-
fent.     A  queftion  is  firil  afked  him,  whether  he  ftill
perfeveres  in  the  intention  of  entering  the  Order.    On
his  anfwering  in  the  afRinnative,  he  is  fent  by  himfelf
into  a  room  perfectly  dark,  there  to  meditate  again  on
his  refolution.     Recalled  from  thence,  he  is  queftioned
again  and  again  on  his  firm  determination  blindly  to
obey  all  the  laws  of  the  Order.     The  introducer  an-
fwers  for  the  difpofltions  of  his  pupil,  and  in  retaru.
requells  the  prQtedion  of  the  Order  for  him.

*  See  the  two  accounts,
Vol.  III.  I  2


^i  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  Your  reqiieft  is  jiift,"  replies  the  fuperior  to  the
Novice.  "  In  the  mime  of  the  moft  Sc-rene  Order
"  from  which  I  hold  my  powers,  and  in  the  name  of
"  all  its  JMembers,  1  promife  you  protedion,  jufliee,
*'  and  help.  Moreover,  I  protetl;  to  you  once  more,
"  thrJ  you  vjill  find  nothing  among  us  hnrtfitl  either  ta
"  Religion,  to  Mords,  or  to  the  State  f — here  the  Ini-
"  tiator  takes  in  his  hand  the  naked  fword  which  lay
upon  the  table,  and,  pointing  it  at  the  heart  of  the  No-
vice, continues,  "  but  fliould  you  ever  be  a  traitor  or
*'  a  perjurer,  affure  yourfelf  that  every  Brother  will  be
"  called  upon  to  arm  againft  you.  Do  not  flatter  your-.
"  felf  with  the  poffibility  of  efcaping,  or  of  finding  a
"  place  of  fecurity. — Wherever  thou  mayeft  be,  the
"  rage  of  the  Brethren,  fliame  and  remorfe  fliall  fol-
*'  low  thee,  and  prey  upon  thy  very  entrails."- — He  lays
dov%'n  the  fword.—"  But  if  you  perfift  in  the  defign  of
"  being  admitted  into  our  Order,  take  this  oath  :"
The  oath  is  conceived  in  the  following  terms  :

"  In  prefence  of  the  all  powerful  God,  and  of  you
<'  Plenipotentiaries  of  the  moil  high  and  moft  ex-
*'  cellent  Order  into  which  I  alk  admittance,  I  acknow-
"  ledge  my  natural  weaknefs,  and  all  the  infufficiency
"  of  my  ftrength.  I  confels  that,  notwithftanding  all
"  the  privileges  of  rank,  honours,  titles,  or  riches  which
''  I  may  pofll-fs  in  civil  fociety,  I  am  but  a  man  like
"  other  men  ;  that  I  may  lofe  them  all  by  other  mor-
*•■  tals,  as  they  have  been  acquired  through  them  ;  that
*'  I  am  in  abfolute  want  of  their  approbation  and  of
"  their  efteem  ;  and  that  I  muft  do  my  utmoft  to  de-
*•  ferve  them  both.  I  never  will  employ  either  the
''  power  or  confequence  that  I  may  polTefs  to  the  pre-
'^  judice  of  the  general  welfare.  I  will,  on  the  con-
*•  tvary,  rcfift  with  all  m.y  might  the  enemies  of  human
"  nature,  and  of  civil  fociety  .^^  Let  the  reader  obferve
thefe  lall  words  ;  let  him  remember  them  when  read-
ing of  the  myfteries  of  lUuminifm  ;  he  will  then  be
able  to  conceive  how,  by  means  of  this  oath  to  main-
tain civil  fociety,  Weilliaupt  leads  the  adepts  to  the
oath  of  eradicating  even  the  laft  veftige  of  fociety.
*'  I  promife,"  continues  the  adept,  "  ardently  to  leiz,e
"  every  opportunity  of  ferving  humanity,  of  improving
*'  my  mind  and  my  will,  of  employing  all  my  ufeful
<'  ^çcompîixlimcnts  for  the  gejiera!  good,  in  as  muck


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

<*  as  the  tvelfare  and  the  Jiatutes  of  the  fociely  Jl?a!l  re-
*'  quire  it  of  me.

"  I  vovj  (ich  gelobe)  cm  eternal  filence,  an  invlolaHe
*'  obedience  and  fidelity  to  all  tny  fnperiors  and  to  the
"  Jtatutes  of  the  Order.  With  respect  to  what  may
**  BE  THE  OBJECT  OF  THE  Order  /  Jully  and  at'Joluîely
*'  renounce  iny  q%wi  penetration  and  my  on.vn  judgment,

*'  I  promif'c  to  look  upon  the  interefts  of  the  Order
*'  as  my  own  ;  and  as  long  as  I  fliall  be  a  Member  of
"  it,  I  pr  on  life  to  ferve  it  with  my  life,  r,iy  honour,  and
"  my  ejîates.  Should  I  ever,  through  iir.prudence,
"  paflion,  or  wickednefs,  aét  contrary  to  the  laws  or  to
"  the  welfare  of  the  Serene  Order,  /  then  fulfâ  mv-
"  fclf  to  whatever  pimifmient  it  may  pleafe  to  infid
"  upon  me."

"  I  alio  promife  to  help  the  Order,  to  the  beft  of
"  my  power,  and  according  to  my  confcience,  with
"  my  counfels  and  my  actions,  and  without  the  lead
*'  attention  to  my  perfonal  intereft  ;  alfo,  to  look  upon
"  all  friends  and  enemies  of  the  Order  as  my  own,
"  and  to  behave  to  them  as  the  Order  fliall  dircft.  I
*'  am  equally  difpofed  to  labour  with  all  my  might  and
"  all  my  means  at  the  propagation  and  advancement
"  of  the  Order.

*'  III  thefe  promifes  I  renoimce  every  fecret  refrva'
"  tlon,  and  engage  to  fulfil  them  all,  according  to  the
"  true  purport  of  the  words,  afid  according  to  the  figndfi-
*'  cation  attached  to  them  by  the  Order  w/jen  it  prefcri-
<'  bed  the  Oath—

"  So  help  me  God:^     n.  it.

The  oath  being  figned  by  the  Novice,  and  enregif-
tered  in  the  minutes  of  the  Order,  the  Initiator  de-
clares his  admillion,  telling  him  at  the  fame  time  that
he  is  not  to  expect  to  know  all  the  members,  but  thofe
only  who,  being  of  the  fame  degree,  are  under  the
fame  fuperior. — From  that  moment  advanced  to  the
degree  of  Mhierval,  he  is  inftruéted  in  the  figns  of  his
new  degree,  which  are  much  of  the  fame  nature  as
thofe  of  M-ifonry.  He  is  then  enjoined  to  give  an  ex-
aél  liji  of  all  his  books,  particularly  of  thofe  which  might
be  precious  or  ufeful  to  the  Order.  He  alfo  receives
the  following  queftions  which  he  is  to  anfwer  ia
Wi'iting.


52


^.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

I.  What  fliould  you  willa  to  be  the  object  of  our
Order  ?

IL  What  means,  either  primary  or  fccondary,  do
you  think  mofl;  conducive  to  the  attainment  of  that
objcd  ?

III.  What  other  things  would  you  wifli  to  find
among  us  ?

IV.  What  men  do  you  either  hope  to  meet,  or  not
to  meet,  among  us  ?*

The  anfwers  given  to  thefe  queftions  will  enable  the
fuperiors  to  judge  how  far  the  young  adept  has  iml)i-
fced  the  principles  of  the  Order.  But  other  helps  are
preparing  for  him,  that  he  may  be  able  to  demonftrate
\)y  his  anfwers  both  the  progrefs  he  has  made  and  that
which  he  may  be  expected  to  make.

Thus  admitted  to  the  degree  of  Minerval,  he  will
find  himfelf  in  future  a  Member  of  the  Academy  of
the  fed.  Let  us  then  obferve  well  both  the  Scholars
find  their  Mailers  j  for  they  (till  bt^long  to  the  clafs  of
preparation.

*  True  Illuminçe  ifl  initiation,  Page  51  and  following.  OrigIn:4
Writings,  Vol.  I.  Se(ft.  ij.


tllE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV.  r-


CHAP.    V.

Third  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  I lliimhices— Second  pre-
paratory Dt'ii'-ee—The  Academy  oj  Ilhanini/ùi,  or  the
Brethren  of  Minerva.

WEISHAUPT,  ruminating  on  what  tum  he  flionld  oi)jc(ft  oF
give  to  liis  Code  of  Illuuiiniin-i,  that  its  progrefs  ^^'^  degree,
might  be  more  fubtile  and  infallible,  expreffes  himfelf
in  the  following  terms,  on  the  preparatory  degrees
which  were  to  fucceed  to  the  novitiate  of  his  pupils.
"  I  am  thinking  of  eftabliflîing,  in  the  next  degree,  "a
"  fort  of  an  academy  of  Literati.  My  deiign  would
**  include  the  fmdy  of  the  Ancients,  and  an  applica-
*'  tion  to  the  art  of  obferving  and  drawing  characters
*'  (even  thofe  of  the  living  ;)  and  treatilcs  and  quef-
*'  tions,  propofed  for  public  comportions,  fliould  form
"'  the  occupations  of  our  pupils.—/  JJ.wîdd  ivifi,  more
*'  cjpecially,  to  make  them  fpies  over  each  other  in  par*-
*'  ttctdar,  and  over  all  in  general.  It  is  from  this  clafs
*'  that  I  would  feleél  thole  who  have  fliown  the  great-
*'  eft  aptnefs  fjr  the  myfteries.  My  determination,  in
"  fii(jrt,  is,  that  in  this  degree  they  fliall  labour  at  the
"  difcovery  and  extirpation  of  prejudices.  Every  pu*
*'  pil  (for  example)  fliall  declare,  at  leaft  once  a  month,
"  all  thofe  which  he  may  have  difcovered  in  himfelf;
*•  which  may  have  been  his  principal  one,  and  how  far
"  he  has  been  able  to  get  the  better  of  it."

Ever  influenced  by  a  bitter  hatred  againft  the  Jefu-
its,  he  does  not  blufli  to  fay—"  1  mean  that  this  dc-
"  claration  fliall  be  among  us,  what  confcffion  was
*'  among  them."  He  was,  however,  unfortunate  in
liis  application  ;  for  in  the  Order  of  the  Jefuits,  no  fu-
pcrior  could  ever  hear  the  confefiions  of  the  inferiors  ;
and  thus  their  very  inftitutes  rendered  the  horrid  abufe
jmpoflible,  under  which  Wcifliaupt  affeàled  to  cloak
the  abominable  breach  of  coniidence  with  refpeft  to
his  pupil?,  when  he  fays,  "  by  thefe  means  I  fliall  dif-
**  ccrn  thofe  who  flîow  difpofuions  for  certain  fpecial
"  Doârines  relative  to  Government  or  to  KcFmon."*

*  Oiig.  Writ.  Vuî,  I — Let.  4.  to  Cato. .


î«


TKE    ANTISOCIAL     C0NSPIR.A:C7;


The  ftatiites  of  their  Minerval  degree  are  drawn  up
with  a  httle  niore  circumfpeélion,  and  limply  declare,
*'  that  the  Order  in  that  degree  wiflies  to  be  confidered
"  only  as  a  learned  fociety  or  academy,  confe crating
"  its  toils  to  form  the  hearts  and  minds  of  its  young
"  pupils  both  by  example  and  precept."f  Thefe  are
called  the  Brethren  of  Minerva^  and  are  under  the  di-
reélion  of  the  Major  or  Minor  Illumincés.  The  aca-
demy properly  fo  called  is  compofed  of  ten,  twelve,
and  lbmetiir.es  fifteen  Minervals,  under  the  diredioii
and  tuition  of  a  major  Ilhinilnee.
Of  the  Mi-  ^"  ^^^^  kalendar  of  the  kdi,  the  days  on  which  the
Du-rvai  Aca-  academy  meets  are  called  holy,  and  its  fittings  are  ge-
demy.  Its  nerally  held  twice  a  month  ;  always  at  the  new  moon^
tiings.  rpj^g  place  where  they  meet  is  called,  in  their  language,
a  Church.  It  mull  always  be  preceded  by  an  anti-
chamber,  with  a  ftrohg  door  armed  with  bolts,  which
is  to  be  fliut  during  tlie  time  of  the  meeting  ;  and  the
whole  apartment  is  to  be  fo  difpofed,  that  it  fliall  be  im-
poffible  for  intruders  either  to  fee  or  hear  any  thing
that  is  soing;  forward.*

At  the  commencement  of  each  fitting,  the  Prefident
is  always  to  read,  and,  after  his  fafliion,  comment  on
fome  chofen  palTages  of  the  Bible,  or  Seneca,  or  Epic'^
tetiis,  Marcus  Aurellus,  or  Confucius.X  The  care  he
takes  to  give  to  all  thefe  works  the  fame  weight  and
authority,  will  be  fufficient  to  make  the  pupils  view  the
Bible  in  a  fimilar  light  with  the  works  of  the  Pagan
Philofophers.

This  lecTiure  over,  each  pupil  is  queilioned  "  as  to
*'  the  books  which  he  has  read  fmce  the  laft  meet-
"  ing  ;  on  the  obiervations  or  difcoveries  he  may  have
*'  made  ;  and  on  his  labours  or  fervices  toward  the  pro-
"  grefs  of  the  Order."
Tts  Library  ^^^  '^'"^  ^^^^  lludies  and  the  books  of  which  the
'  Brethren  are  to  give  an  account,  left  to  their  own
choice.  To  each  of  thefe  academies  there  is  appropri-
ated a  particular  library,  whenever  circumftances  udll
permit,  calculated  to  infure  the  fpirit  of  the  Orc'er  ;
and  this  coUedion  the  feel  takes  care  to  furnifli.     By

how  procu-  three  different  means  it  is  accomplillied.     Firfl,  by  the
red.

•f-  Statutes  of  the  Minerval,  No.  i6.

»  Sec  the  ML-icrval  PJtusI.  ^  IbiO»


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACT.

"money  which  the  Brethren  contribute  ;  fecondly,  hy
the  lift;  of  his  own  private  library,  which  is  exaded
from  each  candidate,  who  is  obliged  to  furnifli  there-
from fuch  books  as  may  be  required  of  him  ;  the  third
means  is  derived  from  Weiflianpt's  grand   principle,

that  EVERY  THING  WHICH  IS  USEFUL  IS  AN  ACT  OF  VIR-
TUE. Now  as  it  would  be  very  iilbful  for  the  Order
to  get  pofteffion  of  thofe  rare  books  and  precious  ma-
nufcripts  which  Princes,  Nobles,  and  Religious  Ordcrâ
keep  fhut  up  among  their  archives  or  in  the  libraries  ;
all  Illuminées  ading  as  librarians  or  archive-keepers
are  admonifhed,  exhorted,  and  ferioufly  preifed  not  to
make  any  fcruple  of  fecretly  ftealing  fuch  books  or
manufcripts,  and  putting  them  into  the  pofleffion  of
the  fe(5t.  This  is  one  of  the  mod  explicit  leflbns  that
Wcifliaupt  gives  to  his  adepts  ;  at  one  time  telling
them  not  to  make  a  cafe  of  confdence  of  giving  to  the
Brethren  what  they  may  have  belonging  to  the  libravp-
ofthe  Court;  at  another,  fending  a  lill  of  what  fliould
be  ftolen  from  that  of  the  Carmes,  he  fays,  "  all  tbefe
vjoidd  be  of  much  greater-  nfe  if  they  were  in  our  bauds. —
What  do  thofe  rafcals  do  %vith  all  thofe  books  /"'*

Yet,  notwithilanding  the  caution  with  which  the
founder  as  yet  withholds  certain  books  from  the  hands
of  the  Minerval,  it  is  clear  from  the  very  aflortment  of
the  libraries  of  the  Order,  that  he  does  not  hefitâte  at
giving  the  pupils  a  certain  number  direftly  lending  to
the  grand  objed,  and  particularly  of  thofe  which  may
create  a  contempt  for  religion.  He  wiflies  much  to
fee  an  impartial  hijlory  of  the  church  ;  aiid  he  even
propofcs  hereafter  to  publifli  one  himfelf,  or  at  Leall  to
contribute  many  articles  toward  fuch  a  work.  Ho
calls  the  attention  of  the  young  adepts  to  Sarpi^  to  Le.
Brefs  ar final  of  calumnies,  and  in  fiiort  to  all  that  has
been  written  againft  Religious  Orders.f  He  had  even
put  on  the  lift;  thofe  impious  works  which  appeared
under  the  name  of  Freret.  He  fe^med  to  have  for-
gotten for  a  moment  his  ordinary  prudence  ;  but,
warned  of  it  by  Knigge,  he  correded  his  error.J  Many
other  books,  however,  were  to  be  comprehended  m

■*  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Let.  45.  f  Jbid.

\  Letter  of  Philo  to  Cato,  '   "

Vol.  Ill;  S


57


gfi  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

ille  Mnerval  libi-ary,  which  were  to  difguire  tlie  ob»
jed  of  it  ;  and  it  was  one  duty  of  the  Preliding  lllumi«-
nee  to  felfcl  Aich  as  would  graduaily  direcl  his  pupils
to  the  grand  objc6t  of  the  led  ;  always  remembering,
that  the  moft  impious  and  feditious  vjcre  rejèrved  for
iipe  higher  degrees.  Should  the  Prefident  chance  to  find
the  Syjieni  of  Nature,  Natural  Polity,  I-jilvetius  on  Man,
or  other  luch  books,  in  the  hands  of  his  pupil,  he  ivas
to  avoid  fhowing  fns  pleajure  or  difpleofure,  and  leave
them.*  In  fhort,  it  is  in  the  Miuerval  fchools  that  the
teachers  are  in  a  particular  manner  to  pradife  that
great  art  of  making  the  adepts  rather  as  it  were  invent
than  learn  the  principles  of  the  Order  ;  becaule  they
Avili  then,  looking  upon  them  as  the  ofispring  of  their
own  genius,  more  ftrongly  adhere  to  tliem.

There  is  yet  another  fcheme  in  thefe  fchools  for  at-

boiM.  taching  the  young  adepts  to  the  Order.— Every  bro-

ther  is,  at  his  lirft  reception,  to  declare  to  what  art  or
fcience  he  means  principally  to  apply,  unlefs  his  ftaiion,
genius,  or  particular  circumttances,  debar  him  front
the  literary  career  ;  in  which  latter  cafe,  pecuniary
contributions  are  to  be  an  equivalent  for  thofe  fervice»
which  his  talents  cannot  contribute. f  If  the  Brethren
adopt  literary  purfuits,  then  the  Order  enters  into  en»
gagements  to  furnlili  them  with  all  poffible  affiftaiice
to  forward  their  undertakings  in  the  art  or  fcience  on
which  they  fliall  have  determined  ;  unlefs  they  fliould
have  chofen  Theology  or  Jurifprudencey  two  fcienccs
which  the  Order  abfolutely  excepts  from  any  fucli
agreement.:]:

Thefe  fuccours  for  the  Minerval  have  a  twofold  ten-
dency.    On  the  one  fide,  they  ferve  to  prove  that  the

^  adept  does  not  neglcâ  the  fcience  he  has  determined  on>

as  he  is  to  give  an  annual  account  of  the  difcovehes  he
has  made,  and  of  the  authors  from  which  he  i'las  made
felecTions.  On  tlie  other  hand,' the  brethren  following
the  fame  branches  of  iludy  are  defired  to  help  him  with
all  the  means  in  theii-  power.  Should  he  meet  with
difficulties  which  he  cannot  folve,  he  may  apply  to  his
fuperiorj  who  will  either  folve  themi  himftlf,  or  fend
riiem  to   other  members  of  the  Order,   who,  better

*  Letter  ,^,  to  C:ito.

f  Grig.  Writ.  Vol.  I — Summary  of  the  îufiitute,  No.  9.

i  Statutes  of  the  Miiitrval,  No.  j.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


59


*erfecl  in  thofe  fciences,  and  bound  to  enligliten  theif
orethren,  will  fend  the  required  loKuious.§

That  this  degree  of  Minerval  may  have  all  the  ap-  its  prlzc^i
pearances  of  a  literary  iociety,  the  fuperiors  annually
propofe  fome  qdeftion  for  a  public  compofition.  The
anfwers  or  diflertations  are  judged  as  in  academies,
and  tlie  dilcourfe  which  obtains  the  prize  is  printed  at
the  expenfe  of  the  Order.  The  <ame  advantages  are
held  out  to  all  adepts  who  wiih  to  publifli  their  works,
provided  they  are  not  foreign  to  the  views  of  the
Founder.*— They  are  furc  to  coincide  with  his  inten-
tions lliould  they  be  of  the  nature  of  thofe  which  he
calls  pafiiuilsy  or  fuch  as  woxild  create  mirth  among  the
people  at  the  expenfe  of  the  prieilhood,  and  of  rr/'/g-foz/j'
truths  ;  fuch  as  parodies  on  the  Lamentations  of  Jere-
miah, or  hurkfqùe  imitations  of  the  Prophets  ;  in  a
word,  all  fuch  fatires  as  difpofe  the  people  to  the  grand
objeft  of  the  Sed.  The  Minerval  can  give  no  bettei*
proofs  than  thefe  of  his  progrefs.     The  led  has  book-  _

I'ellers  who  put  thefe  works  into  circulation,  and  the
profits  are  tranfmitted  to  the  coffers  of  the  Order.

It  is,  however,  to  be  obferved,  that  fhould  a  Miner-
val, or  any  other  of  the  Brethren,  make  a  difcovery  iiï
any  art  or  lucrative  fcience,  he  is  obliged,  under  pain
of  being  looked  upon  as  a  falfe  Brother,  to  impart  the
fecret  to  the  Order,  who  will  look  upon  itfelf  as  pro-
prietor of  fuch  fecrets  lliould  they  have  been  difcovcred
by  a  Brother  after  his  admilîion  among  them.f

Left  he  fliould  be  unobferved  when,  travelling,  the
Minerval  is  never  to  undertake  any  journey  without
previoufly  informing  his  luperiors,  who  will  fend  him
letters  of  recommendation  for  différent  Brethren  on  the
road.  lie,  in  return,  muft  carefully  report  every  thing
that  he  fliall  difcover  during  his  travels,  which  may  be
to  the  advantage  or  difadvantage  of  the  Order.J  ^

But  we  mufb  not  forget  to  mention,  that  during  the  its  repH-
ûcademic  fittings,  the  prefiding  Illuminée  is  at  leaft  mancU.
once  a  month  to  take  a  review  of  the  principal  fr.ults
which  he  may  have  obferved  in  any  of  his  pup^s.     He

5  Ibid.  No.  2.

■*  Statutes  of  the  Minerval,  No<î.  6  and  lo.

f  Summary  of  the  Inftitutes,  No.  ii. — ^The  true  Illumi.ice.

^  Statutes  of  tlie  Minerval,  No.  ii.

Yol.  III.  IC  2


^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSFIRACT.

IS  to  interrogate  them  concerning  tbofe  which  thej
may  have  obferved  themlelves  ;  *'  and  it  would  be  a»
unpardonable  negled,"  fays  the  flatutes,  "  ihoulcl  any
pupil  pretend  that  during  the  fpace  of  a  whole  month
he  had  remarked  nothing  repi-ehenfible.  This  would
be  a  proof  of  the  utniojt  negligence  bi  the  training  of  bis
^  mind  to  ohfervation  ;  and  the  Superior  mnji  not  fitffer  it
to  pafs  luithont  rcprehenfion.  He  miifl  alfo  make  his
obfervations  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  excite  tlieir  ferions
attention,  and  effedually  to  imprefs  them  with  proper
notions,  fo  that  each  on  returning  home  fliall  be  ready
to  put  in  praé^icc  his  advice  for  the  advantage  of  the
Order.*  Befide,  the  Superior  is  as  much  as  poflibk  to
avoid  letting  a  day  pafs  without  feeing  his  pupils,  either
he  vifiting  them,  or  they  liim.j-

But  what  can  be  the  objeiJil  of  fuch  vigilance,  fuch
unremitting  attention  to  the  Minerval  Academy?  A
fingie  word  from  the  adept  who,  under  the  infpeélioii
of  Weilliaupt,  organized  its  laws,  wijl  explain  the
enigma.  It  is,  to  adopt  Knigge'?,  expreflions,  by  th»
works  required  of  the  young  Academicians  that  the
Order  will  be  able  to  judge  whether  they  are  of  that
fort  ofjhff  (that  is  to  fay  of  that  turn  of  mind,  i'uù
'ï"he  ind')--  ceptible  of  all  the  principles  of  Impiety  and  Anarchy)
ment  of  The  which  is  neceffary  for  the  higher  degrees.  After  a\\
M'lnervsl.  t]-,efe  labours,  fhould  the  Minerval  adept  ftill  retain  any.
of  what  they  call  religionijl  indinations ,  he  will  then  re-
ceive the  three  firft  Mafonic  degrees,  and  in  them  he
may  moulder  during  the  reft  of  his  life  in  the  infignificant
Jiiidy  of  all  their  hieroglyphics.  He  will  indeed  ftill  conti-
nue under  the  infpeftion  of  the  Superiors  of  the  Order  j
but  he  may  reft  allured,  that  he  will  always  remain  a
Minerval,  with  a  brevet  of  imbecility,  on  the  regiftere
of  tlje  fed.J  On  the  contrary,  fliould  he  have  fhown
a  fufïicient  want  of  attachment  to  religion  or  to  hi&
Prince  ;  fliould  he  enthufiaftically  imbibe  the  principles
of  Illur.iinifm,---he  will  certainly  be  promoted  to  high-
er degrees.  During  his  Academical  courfe  the  feft
has  had^  unerring  means  of  judging  him,  viz.  by  the
qucftioîîs  he  has  folvcd  (and  which  were  put  by  th«
Order,  not  fo  much  with  a  view  of  cxercifing  his  ta-

*  Inftriidions  for  the  Minerval,  No.  4.

\  n,vd.  No.  :■,.

\  Lail  wor<]  from  PJiilo,  Page  90.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  6l'

lents  as  of  prying  into  his  opinions),  and  by  the  jflatc-,
nienrs  delivered  in  by  the  Scrutators,  of  the  impreflloii
made  by  the  different  principles  which  they  had  dil-
feminated  cither  in  the  Ihape  of  converfation,  or  by
way  of  refutation,  to  try  the  young  Minerval.

The  queilions  which  he  has  had  to  invelligate  during
his  courfe  fometimes  regarded  the  fccret  of  the  Seft  ;
■at  others,  the  fecurity  of  the  adepts,  and  of  the  fu-
periors.  To  envelop  the  chiefs  in  impenetrable  dark-
jiefs,  and  that  their  afyluni  may  be  proof  againll  all
attempts,  death  itfelf  is  to  be  diverted  of  its  horrors.
The  Minerval  muft  not  finifh  his  Academical  courfe
till  he  has  fliown  how  far  fuch  fears  have  loll  tlieir  in-
fluence over  him  ;  he  fliall  declare  whether  he  is  ready
to  ilibmit  to  every  torture,  rather  than  give  the  lealt
information  concerning  the  Order  ;  or  even  evade  the
temptation  by  poifon  or  fLiicide.  A  dilTertation  upon
Cuto,  for  example,  will  be  given  him  as  a  talk  ;  and
his  management  of  it  will  fliow  whether  he  is  ready  to
fall  by  his  own  hand  for  the  prefervation  of  the  Bre-
thren. The  patet  exitus,  or  the  exit  is  free,  that  is  to
fay,  that  every  man  is  free  to  leave  this  life  at  pleafure,  is
one  of  thofe  grand  principles  which  muft  be  advanced  ;
it  muft  be  commented  on  and  difcuffed  by  the  young
adept  ;  and  fhould  any  of  thofe  puerile  ideas  appear,
which  lead  to  believe  in  a  God  the  avenger  of  fuicide,
he  is  not  the  man  to  be  entrufted  with  the  fccret,  and
he  fliall  be  rejefted.*

Many  other  queftions  are  propofed  in  order  to  con-
vince the  feft  of  the  principles  of  the  young  Academi-
cian. It  muft  found  his  opinions  on  the  means  it
employs,  and  on  thofe  in  which  he  may  hereafter  be
inftrumental.  He  will  be  ordered  to  difcufs  Wcif-
haupt's  famous  doctrine,  that  the  end  Janâifies  the
means  ;  that  is  to  fay,  that  there  are  no  means,  not
even  theft,  poifon,  homicide,  or  calumny,  but  are  jiift
and  laudable  when  ufed  for  the  attainment  of  objects
which  the  Order  may  choofe  to  ftyle  juft  or  holy.f

After  all  this,  the  Minerval  fliall  fuvnifli  fome  dif-
fertatiou  from  which  his  opinions  on  Kings  and  Pricfts
may  be   afcertained  ;X   but  the  prefiding  adept  muft    .
carefully  avoid   compromifmg  himfelf;  he  muft  not

*  See  hereafter  the  Chapter  on  Juridical  Depofitioiis.
t  Ibid.  ,4  n>liii


1^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

openïy  applaud  the  epigrams,  farcafms,  or  even  btaf^
phemies  of  his  pupil  ;  that  mull:  be  left  to  the  brcthi-eii,
vifitors,  who  will  infinuate  and  encourage  them  with-
out ever  hinting  that  they  are  in  perfed  unifon  with
the  myileries  of  the  Order.  He  miift  not  fail,  how-
ever, to  obfcrve  which  of  his  pupils  are  the  mod
zealous  for  fuch  doi^lrines,  and  who  complacently  re-i
peat  thefe  farcaHns  or  blafphemies  ;  thofe,  in  fhort,;
who  enthufiallically  blend  them  in  their  Academical
coinpofitions.  This  accompli ilied,  they  have  run  their
Academic  career,  and  ai'c  next  promoted  to  the  de-^
gree  of  Minor  lilnmines.


The  antisocial  conspir.\cy,  ^j.


CHAP.   VI.

Fourth  Part  of  the  Code  of  Illuminées. —Third  prépara*
tory  Degree — The  Minor  Illuminée.

THE  objeâ:  of  the  degree  of  Minor  Illuminée  is,  Double  or?.
not  only  to  difpofe  the  Brethren  more  and  more  J^"^^  °^  ^^
for  the  fecrets  which  have  not  yet  been  revealed  to     ^'^^^'"
them  ;  but  it  has  alfo  in  view  their  preparation  for
preiiding  over  the  Minerval  Academies  in  which  they
have  already  fliown  their  talents,  and  their  z,eal  for
the  Seft.     The  means  which  are  to  produce  this  dou-
ble effeft  are  worthy  of  remark,  on  account  of  one
of  thofe  artifices  which  Weifliaupt  alone  could  have
invented.

The  Minor  Illuminées  hold  fittings  fimilar  to  thofe
of  the  Minerval  Academy.  The  Prclident  muft  necef-
farily  be  one  of  thofe  adepts  who,  initiated  in  the  higher
mylteries  of  Illuminifm,  have  attained  the  degree  of
Priefh  He,  alone  having  any  knov/ledge  of  thefe
higher  myfteries,  is  particularly  enjoined  to  keep  his
■pupils  in  the  perfuaiion  that  beyond  the  degree  in
which  he  is  there  is  no  farther  fecret  to  impart  to
them.  But  he  is  to  fpare  no  pains  to  infufe  thofe
opinions  into  their  minds,  of  which  the  laft  myfterieâ
are  but  the  development.  The  Minor  Illuminées  are
imperceptibly  to  become  as  it  were  the  inventors  and
authors  of  Weilliaupt's  principles  ;  that,  believing  theni
to  be  the  offspring  of  their  own  genius,  they  may
more  zealoufly  defend  and  propagate  them.  "  It  is
*'  necelHu'y,"  fays  the  code,  "  that  the  adept  jhould  look
**  upon  himfelf  as  the  founder  of  the  new  Order ^^  that
hence  he  may  conceive  a  natural  ardour  for  its  fuccefs:.
To  effcéluate  this  objedt,  an  exordium  is  appropriated
to  the  initiatix)n  in  this  degree.  It  is  one  of  thofe  dif-
Conrfes,  which,  replete  with  voluntary  obfcurilies,  pre»
fents  the  moll  monftrous  errors  to  the  mind,  but  ex-
prefsly  mentions  none.  The  veil  which  is  thrown  over
tiiem  is  neither  coarfe  enough  to  hide,  nor  fine  enough
clearly  to  fiiew  them  ;  all  that  the  new  adepts  can  ol>
ferve  at  a  firil  haaiing  i?,  that  the  ohjcci  of  the  Orden
is  wpriliy  of  admirat.iori  ^nd  Zi^al  ;  that  a;i  a*  dv^nt  ca]*


6^  THE    ANTISOCIAI.    CONSPIRACY:

thafiafai  fliould  inflame  tlie  mind  of  the  young  adept
for  the  attainment  of  the  grand  objcd  of  all  the  la-
bours of  îlluminifni  ;.  that  the  enjoyment  of  this  happi-
nefs  depended  much  more  on  the  nâions  than  on  the
•words  of  the  adepts.  What  then  is  this  ob)c6l,  and
what  are  the  obilacles  that  are  to  be  overcome  ?  Of
what  fpecies  are  thofe  adions,  thofe  labours  of  the
adept,  which  are  to  forward  its  views  ?  It  is  in  thefe
points  that  enigma  and  obfcurity  veils  the  intent,  and
it  is  here  that  genius  is  to  invent.  That  the  errors  of
the  fed:  might  be  confidered  as  originating  with  tlie
adepts,  it  goes  on  to  fay,  the  fame  difcourfe  ffjall  fcrve
in  future  as  a  text  for  all  thofe  -which  the  Brethren  fJmll
prepare  for  the  meetings  of  the  Order.  The  Preildent
will  feied  the  obfcure  palTages  which  may  lead  to  the
development  of  thofe  opinions  which  he  wiflies  to  inftil
into  his  pupils  ;  fuch  will  be  the  fn/'jeâs  chofen  for  their
themes f  and  he  will  carefully  exad  praâical  condufions.*
But  to  give  the  reader  a  better  idea  of  what  thefe
themes  or  commentaries  are  to  be,  we  fliall  quote  a
part  of  the  original  text.

"  There  certainly  exift  in  the  world  public  crimes
*'  ivhich  every  ivife  and  honeji  tnan  would  wiJJ.)  to  fup-
"*'  prefs.  When  we  coniider  that  every  man  in  this
*'  delightful  world  might  be  happy,  but  that  their  hap-
*'  pinefs  is  prevented  by  the  misfortunes  of  fome,  and
*'  by  the  crimes  and  errors  of  others  ;  that  the  wicked
''  have  power  over  the  good  ;  that  oppofition  or  partial
<*  infurreâion  is  uflefs;  that  hardfliips  generally  fall  up-
"  on  men  of  worth  ; — then  naturally  refidts  the  ivifj  of
"feeing  an  afociation  formed  of  men  of  vigorous  and
"  noble  minds,  capable  of  refilling  the  wicked,  of  fuc-
"  couring  the  good,  and  of  procuring  for  themfelvcs
"  reft,  content  and  {^Stly—oi  producing  all  thefe  effeâsy
f  by  means  dravjn  from  the  greateji  degree  of  force  of
"  ivhich  human  nature  is  capable.  Such  views  aduat-
"  ijig  a  Secret  Society  would  not  only  be  innocent,
"  but  moil  worthy  of  the  wife  and  well  inclined
"  n>an."'f

What  an  ample  field  already  opens  itfclf  to  the
commentating  genius  of  the  young  adept!  The  Minor
Illuminée    will   begin   by   inveftigating   thofe  general

*  The  true  Illuminée,  Inftruflion»  for  the  Supcriprs  of  this  degree  ;
-}  Difcoarff  on  this  Degree.  .


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr.

twnes  to  which  the  Sed  wifhes  to  put  an  ^end.  And
what  are  the  crimes,  who  are  the  ivicked  perjbns  that
ditlurb  the  peace  of  mankind  by  means  o£  poxuer  cxcr- ,
cij^d  over  the  good  ?  What  Secret  Societies  are  they
which  are  deiVmcd  to  confuminate  the  wilhes  of  the
fages,  not  by  partial  infurreâiof is,  hut: f'V  the  greateji
degree  of  farce  of  xvhich  human  nature  is  capable  ?  In
a  word,  what  is  that  new  order  of  things,  which
are  by  fiicli  unheard  of  exertions  to  be  fubltituted  iii
place  of  exilling  inllitutions  ?

Tlie  greater  progrels  the  adept  fliall  make,  and  the
nearer  his  commentaries  (liall  coincide  with  the  fpirit
of  the  Order,  fo  much  the  more  worthy  Ihall  he  be
judged  to  fuliil  the  fécond  objeél  of  this  degree.  He
is  not  yet  to  prefide  over  a  ÎS'ïincrval  Academy,  he  is
too  inexperienced  in  the  arts  of  a  fuperior  ;  and  the
Order  only  entrufts  him  with  two  or  three  of  thofe
pupils  ;  bur,  as  a  confolation  for  the  fmallnefs  of  his
flock,  he  reads  in  his  inllrudions,  that  jhould  he  have
only  formed  one  or  tiuo  men  far  the  Order  during  his.
whole  life  he  will  have  done  a  noble  aâ.

Small  as  this  miffion  is,  ftill  the  adept  is  not  left  t(x
his  own  prudence  in  the  execution  of  it  ;  he  receives^
inllrudions  by  which.he  is  to  be  guided.  I  forewarn-
ed my  reader,  that  in  this  pait  of  my  Memoirs  on
Jacobinifm,  iîiy  obj eft  was,  not  folely  to  prove- the
Confpiracy  of  the  Illuminées,  but  to  render  confpicuotis
the  dangers  which  threatened  fociety,  while  I  was  un-
veiling the  means  adopted  by  the  Seft.  Among  théfé
means,  the  laws  laid  down  by  Weifliaupt  for  the  Mi-
nor Illuminées  are  to  be  eminently  diftinguiflied  ;  as
the  authority  given,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  to
be  exercifed  (at  foil  over  two  or  three  adepts  only,)
naturally  prepare  them  for  more  extenfive  commands.
Thefe  laws  and  thele  inftruftions  feem  to  be  traced
with  the  venom  of  the  prudent  lerpent,  unfortunately
fo  much  more  aftive  and  ingenious  in  the  arts  of  vice
and  feduftion  than  good  men  are  in  the  caufe  of  vir-
tue. This  part  of  Weilliaupt's  Code  is  called — Injlritc-
fions  for  forjuing  ufeful  labourers  in  Illiiminifm,  and
from  it  I  fliall  make  a  large  extraft.  Let  the  reader
meditate  on  the  tendency  and  probable  confequences
of  fuc h  precepts,  fudi  Uws,  and  ai'tiike?;  ull  defignei;!
.     Vol.  IIL       .  h


^5


^5  THE    ANTISOCLVL    CONSPIRACY.

to  form  adepts  for  the  mod  general,  moft  aftonifhirtg)
and  rnoft  dreadful  Confpiracy  that  ever  exiftcd.
For  the  fe-  "  AfTiduoully  obfervc  (fay  thefe  inftrudions)  every
condobjed.  Brother  entrufted  to  your  care  ;  watch  him  particularly
on  all  occafions  where  he  may  be  tempted  not  to  be
what  he  ought  to  be  ;  that  is  precifely  the  moment
when  he  muft  fhow  himfelf  ;  it  is  then  that  the  pro-
grcfs  he  has  made  is  to  be  difcovered.  Obferve  him
again  at  thofe  times  when  he  lead  fufpec^s  it,  when
neither  the  defire  of  being  praifed,  the  fear  of  being
blamed,  nor  the  (liame  of,  or  reflexion  on  the  punifli-
ment,  can  aftuate  his  condud.  Be  exaél  on  fuch  occa-
fions in  making  your  notes  and  obfervations.  You  will
gain  much  both  with  refpeiR;  to  yoiirfelf  and  to  your  pupil.

"  Be  careful  left  your  own  inclinations  fhould  bias
your  judgment.  Do  not  think  a  man  excellent  becaufe
he  has  a  brilliant  quality,  nor  judge  him  to  be  wicked
becaufe  he  has  fome  ilriking  dcfed:  ;  for  that  is  the
grand  failing  of  thofe  who  are  captivated  at  firft  fight.

*'  Above  all,  guard  againft  believing  your  man  to
be  a  tranfcendant  genius  becaufe  his  difcourfe  is  bril-
liant. We  are  to  judge  by  fads  alone,  whether  a  man
is  deeply  interefted.

*'  Have  little  confidence  in  rich  or  powerful  men  ;
their  converfion  is  very  flow.

*'  Your  chief  object  muft  be  to  form  the  heart.  He
|hat  is  not  deaf  to  the  cries  of  the  unfortunate  ;  he
that  is  conftant  though  in  adverfity,  and  unfliaken  in
his  plans  ;  he  that  feels  his  foul  glow  for  great  enter-
prizes  ;  and  he,  particularly,  who  has  formed  liis  mind
to  obfervation,  is  the  man  of  whom  we  are  in  queft.
Rej eel  thofe  feeble  and  narrow  minds  who  know  not
how  to  quit  their  nfual  fphere.

"  Read  with  your  pupils  thofe  books  which  are  eafy
to  be  underftood,  which  abound  in  the  pidurefque,  and
are  calculated  to  elevate  the  mind.  Speak  to  them
often  ;  but  let  your  difcourfes  proceed  from  the  heart,
and  not  from  the  head.  Your  auditors  eafily  kindle
when  they  fee  you  full  of  fire.  Make  them  thirjt  after
the  moment  when  the  grand  objeâ  is  to  be  accompliJ1)ed.  '■

"  Above  ally  JHmulate  them  to  the  love  of  the  objefi.
Let  them  view  it  as  grand ,  important,  and  congenial  to
their  interejis  and  favoinite  pajjions.  Paint  in  Jhong
colours  the  niiferies  of  the  world  ;  iell  the7?i  what  men


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

ttre,  and  vibat  tÎKy  might  be  ;  what  line  of  condiiâ:  they
fboiild  adopt  ;  how  little  they  know  their  own  intcrells;
how  anxiovifly  our  fociety  labours  for  them  ;  and  defire
thetn  to  judge  what  they  may  expeft  from  it,  by  what
we  have  already  done  in  the  tirfl:  degrees/'

"  Shun  familiarity  on  all  occafions  where  your  weak
fide  may  be  feen  ;  always  fpeak  of  lUuminifm  in  a
dignified  ftyle."

"  Infpire  elleem  and  refpe(5l  for  our  Superiors  ;  and
dwell  ftrongly  on  the  neceflity  of  obedience  in  a  well-
organized  fociety."

"  Kindle  the  ardour  of  your  pupil  by  laying  great
ftrels  on  the  utility  of  our  labours  ;  avoid  dry  and  me»
taphyfical  difcuilions.  Let  what  you  require  of  youf
pupils  be  within  their  means.  Study  the  peculiaf
habits  of  each  ;  for  men  may  he  turned  to  any  thing
by  him  roho  knov^s  how  to  take  advantage  of  their  ruling
jpaffions.

"  To  infiife  into  them  a  fpirit  of  obfervation,  begin
by  llight  eflays  in  converfation.  Ailc  fonle  eafy  quef-
tions  on  the  means  of  difcovering  the  charafter  of  a
man  notwithftandino-  all  his  diffimulation.  AfFcél  to
think  the  anfwet  a  better  one  than  you  côukî  have  giv-
en yoLirfelf  ;  that  gives  confidence,  and  joiv  will  find
fome  other  opportunity  of  delivering  your  own  fenti-
ments.  Inform  them  of  what  obfervations  you  may
have  made  concerning  their  voice,  gait,  or  phifiogno-
my.  Tell  them  alfo,  that  they  have  the  bell  difpofi-
tions,  and  that  they  only  want  praftice.  Praife  fome
in  order  to  ftimulate  others."

"  Having  thus  become  acquainted  with  the  immenfé
diffi-Lilty  attending  on  the  art  of  bringing  men  to  the
point  whither  you  wifhed  to  lead  them,  negled  no  oc-
cafion  of  diffeminating  the  gobd  principles  wherevef
you  can,  and  of  infpiring  your  pupils  with  courage
and  refolutior.;  but  never  forget,  that  he  vjho  zvijhes
to  convert  too  many  at  once  ivill  convert  nobody.  In  the
towns  where  you  refide,  divide  the  tafk  with  the  other
Illuminées  of  the  fame  degree  as  yourfelf.  Chufê  one
or  two,  at  mofl:  three,  Minervals  among  thofë  ovet
whom  you  have  the  greateft  influence  or  authority  ;
but  fpare  neither  labour  nor  pains.  You  ivill  have  ac^
compUftjed  a  great  ttndertakino-  if  ditrinor  your  ivholç

Yoi.  III.  La.


07


fa  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPHLICT.

life,  you  form,  but  two  or  th-ee  men.  Le\  thofè  rjhont
you  have  filcâed  be  the  confiant  objeéi  of  all  your  obferv-
ations.  JVhcn  one  method  does  not  Jucceed,  fcek  out
çnùthcr  ;  and  fo  on,  till  you  have  found  a  proper  one.
Study  to  find  out  what  your  pupil  is  beft  fitted  for  ;
in  vjhat  intermediary  principles  he  may  be  deficient,  and
therefore  inaccefjible  to  the  fundameyital  ones.  The
grand  art  confiils  in  profiting  of  the  right  moment  ;
at  one  time  it  is  warm,  at  another  cool  reafoning
which  .will  perfilade. — Let  your  pupil  always  think  that
it  is  to  himfelf,  and  not  to  you,  that  he  is  indebt-
ed for  the  progrefs  he  makes.  If  he  falls  in  a  paffion^
never  contradid  ; 'hearken  to  him  though  he  be  in  the
ivrong..  Never  controvert  the  confcjuences,  but  always
the  principle.  Wait  for  ct  favourable  7noment  when
you  may  explain,  y  our  fentiments  without  appearing  to
contradid  his.  The  beji  method  is  to  agree  with  another
pejfon,  whom  you  will  pretend  to  attack  on  ihofe  fitb-
jeéts,' white  the'  candidate  'i.'jhom  you  really  wifl)  to  con-
vince is  Oiily  a' flander-by  and  takes  no  part  in  ihe^  dif^
pute  :■  then  fupport  your  arguments  with' all  the  vigour
of  which  you  are  capable^  :;  " . .  i  r,  ^

"  Whatever  failings  you  wifli  to  correft  in  him,
Ipeak  of  them  as  if  they  were  not  his  ;  tell  the  ftory
as  if  fomebody  eUe  had  been  guilty  of  them  ;  then
take  his  advice  on  the  fubjecl  ;  and  by  thefe  means  he
becomes  his  own  judge.       .  :'f;-r:;:>/'  '

"  All  this,  it  is  true,  requires  tiniê  :  'hurry  nothing;
it  is  folidity  and  facility  of  adion  .that  we  want  in  our
adepts.  Often  to  read,  meditate,  hearken  to,  fee  the
fame  thing,  and  then  to  ac%  is  what  gives  that  facility
which  foon  becomes  nat;ural "

"  Do  you  wi 111  to  draw  forth  his  opinion  ?  Propofe
a  difiertation  dii  Certain  quellions  relative  to  your  olx
jed,  as  it  were  merely  tQ  cxercife  his  genius.  He  thus
karns  how  to  meditate  on  the  principles  while  you
make  a  difcovery  of  thofe  which  it  is  your  objed  to
eradicate  from  his  mind-.**

*;*  Ipilruct,  advife  ;  but  beware  of  cold  declamations  :
clr<>,p  a, few  words  to  the  purpofe  when  you  fiiall  per-
ceive his  ipind  to  be  in  a  proper  ftate  to  receive  them.'*
'  "-Never  aflc  too  much  at  once  ;  let  your  conduéi  be

provident,  paternal,  and  (blicitous.— Never  defpair  ;  for
one  may  do  what  one  plcafès  with  men.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSflRACT.  69

"  Mike  yoni"fc:lf  raafter  of  the  motives  of  the  prin-
ciples your  pupil  has  acquired  from  his  education.  If
they  be  not  confonant  with  our  views,  weaken  them  by
infenfible  gradations,  and  fubftitute  and  ftrengthen
others.  But  great  prudence  is  neceffary  to  operate
this."

"  Obferve  what  religion,  feels,  and  politics,  make
men  do.— one  may  enthuliailically  wed  them  to  fol-
lies ;  it  is  therefore  in  the  manner  of  leading  them  that
the  whole  art  of  giving  the  upper  hand  to  virtue  and
truth  confifts.  Onlv  employ  the  fame  means  for  a  good
piirpofe  which  impojiors  employ  for  evil,  and  you  will
fuccecd.  If  the  wicked  are  powerful,  it  is  becaufe
the  good  are  too  timid  and  too  indolent.  There  may
he  circicmlhnces  olfo,  under  ivhich  it  ivlU  become  nccef-  ^
fuy  to  Pmiv  difpleafurey  and  even  anger j  in  defence  of
the  rights  of  man.'"

"  Tell  your  pupils,  that  they  are  only  to  attend  to
the  purity  of  the  views  which  aduate  the  Order  ;  and
that  antiquity,  power,  or  riches,  fliould  be  perfectly
indifferent  to  them."

"  Tell  them,  that  fliould  they  find  elfewhere  a  fo-
ciety  which  would  lead  them  with  greater  fpeed  or
with  more  certainty  to  the  deflred  end,  the  Order
would  eternally  regret  the  not  having  been  acquainted
with  it  before — That  in  the  mean  time  we  obey  the
laws  of  our  Superiors,  labouring  in  peace,  and  perfe-
cuting  no  man.— Follow  thefe  rules  of  conduct,  and
once  more  remember,  that  you  will  have  rendered  an
elTential  fervice  to  the  world,  though  you  fliould  form
but  two  men  according  to  our  principles.

"  Carefidly  profit  of  tbofe  moments  xvbcn  your  pupil  is
difiontented  iviib  the  vjorld,  and  vjben  £very  thing  goes
contrary  to  his  ivifljes  ;  thofe  moments  when  the  mojl
powerful  man  feels  the  want  of  the  fupport  of  others j
to  attain  a  better  order  of  things.  It  is  then  that  you
mull  prefs  the  fwelling  heart,  llimulate  the  fenflbility,
and  demonftrate  how  neceffary  fecret  focicties  are,  Jor
the  attainment  of  a  better  order  of  things.''^
■  "  But  be  not  too  eafy  in  your  belief  with  refpecT:  to
the  reality  or  conftancy  of  fuch  feelings.  Indignation
may  be  the  effcd  of  far,  or  of  the  fleeting  hopes  of  fome
pnffion  which  one  w'i/])cs  to  gratify.  Such  feelings  are
not  naturalized;  men  are  not  perfed  in  fo^lliort  a


70


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACT.

time  ;  prepare  for  the  ivorjt,  and  then  infiji.     A  heart
^vhic■h  ealily  melts  eafily  changes."

"  Never  promifc  too  much,  that  you  may  be  able  to
perform  more  than  you  promife.  Rekindle  cxhaufted
courage  ;  reprefs  excellive  ardour  j  infpire  Iwpe  in
misfortune,  and  fear  in  fuccefs."

"  Such  are  tlie  rules  which  will  form  you  for  a  good
preceptor  and  a  leader  of  men.  By  an  exaét  attention
to  them  you  will  add  to  the  number  of  the  ele6l.  If
your  own  happinels  be  dear  to  yon,  labour  (under  our
direction)  at  delivering  many  thoulunds  of  men,  who
wilh  to  be  good,  from  the  dire  necelTity  of  being  wick-
ed.— Believe  us,  for  it  is  the  precept  of  experience,
bereave  vice  of  its  power, — and  every  thing  will  go  well
in  this  world  :  for  if  vice  be  powerful,  it  is  only  becaitfe
one  part  of  the  good  is  too  indolent,  while  the  other  is
too  ardent  ;  or  elfe,  that  men  fuffcr  themfelves  to  be
divided,  or  leave  the  care  of  Revolutions  to  futurity  ;
the  fact  is,  that  in  the  mean  time  they  had  rather  bend
under  the  yoke,  than  efficaciouHy  refill  vice.  If  they
once  became  fenfible  that  virtue  does  not  entirely  confijl
in  patience,  but  in  aâion  alfo,  they  would  ftart  from
their  ileep— For  your  part,  unite  with  the  Brethren  j
place  your  conhdence  in  our  Society  ;  nothing  is  im-
polnble  to  it,  if  w^e  follow  its  laws.  We  labour  to  fc-
cure  to  merit  its  juft  rewards  ;  to  the  weak  fupport,  to
tlie  wicked  the  fetters  they  defer ve  ;  and  to  man  his
dignity.  Such  is  the  new  Canaan,  the  new  land  of
Promife,  the  land  of  abundance  and  blefling;  but  which
as  yet,  alas  !  we  difcover  but  from  a  diftance.'"'*

I  was  frequently  tempted  to  interrupt  the  courfe  of
this  extrad  by  my  reflexions  ;  but  what  reader  is  there
that  will  not  afk  himfelf,  What  zeal,  what  ftrange  ar-
dour is  this,  that  can  have  led  Weilhaupt  to  combine
and  diclate  means  fo  powerful  to  captivate  the  minds,
of  his  pupils  ?  Is  there  a  parent,  is  there  a  preceptor,
vvhofe  love  for  his  child  or  his  pupil  ever  fuggefted
more  efficacious  rules?  Thefe,  however,  are  only  a
few  of  the  lelTbns  which  the  Minor  Illuminée  is  always
to  have  prefent  to  his  mind  to  direct  him  in  the  train-
ing of  the  young  adepts.  He  is  not  alone  entrufted
with  the  talk.     All  the  Brethren  of  the  fome  degree

*  E;itra6i  from  the  Inrcruclions  C.  and  D.  Tor  t'ae  Minor  Illuminées..


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

partake  in  the  care  of  watching  over  the  lower  ones,
and  each  notes  on  his  tablets  even  the  moft  inlignificanc
circumftances.  Their  feveral  obJ'ervations  are  com-
pared, and  of  the  whole  a  general  ftatenient  is  formed
according  to  which  each  pupil  will  be  judged  by  his
fuperiors.f  Meanwhile  it  is  natural  to  a(k,  what  can
thefe  principles  be  for  which  the  youth  is  fo  carefully
trained  ?  What  can  be  the  fuhlhne  virtue  that  is  to  be
the  refult  of  fo  much  care  ?  We  Ihall  foon  difcover
them,  the  principles  of  fhamelefs  villany.  fThls  fuHime
virtiie  is  the  combination  of  every  art  that  can  plunge
mankind  into  corruption,  and  immerfe  him  in  all  the
horrors  of  univerfal  anarchy.  Yes,  we  fliall  fee  the
man  who  fays  to  his  difciples,  employ  the  fame  înenris
for  a  good  purpofe  which  impojiors  employ  for  evil,
proved  to  be  the  arch-impoftor,  training  his  difciples
to  every  crime,  and  preparing  the  moft  terrible  difaf-
ters  for  fociety  with  more  ardour  and  more  artifice
than  ever  the  upright  man  has  been  feen  to  employ
zeal  and  wifdom  in  the  caufe  of  virtue  and  the  fupport
of  the  laws.

The  better  to  difpofe  the  young  adepts,  the  Minor
Illuminée  is  afliftcd  in  his  funélions  and  overlooked  by
the  Major  Illuminée,  that  is  to  fay,  by  the  adepts  of  the
■highell  degree  among  thofe  of  the  preparatory  clafs.

t  lollruélion  C.  Sefl.  II.  A.  a.


71


j^  The  antisocial  conspir.\cy.


CÎIAP.    VIÎ.

J^iflh  Pari  of  the  Ilhnninees— Fourth  preparatory  Dc»
gree — The  ALijor  lUunnnse,  or  the  Scotch  Novice.

fiî^"  <?■  f  'TpHE  degree  which  follows  that  oï  Minor  Illumîneç
this  Degree.  -*-  ^^  fonietiines  called  Major  Illuminée;  at  other
times,  Scotch  Novice.  Under  this  two-fold  dtnomina-?
tion  a  double  objeci:  is  comprised.  As  Scotch  Novice,
the  adept  is  turned  in  upon  Mafonry  ;  and  it  is  only  a
fnare  for  impofing  upon  the  credulity  of  tliofe,  who
have  not  given  the  requilite  jymptoms  for  being  ini-
tiated in  the  higher  myll:erit5  of  the  Scd:.  It  is  an
inti-odudion  to  the  degree  of  Scotch  Knight,  which
terminates  the  career  of  the  dupes.  But  as  a  degree
of  Illuminifm,  it  will  encompafs  the  adept  with  ne\Y
bonds,  more  extraordinary  and- more  firm  than  the  for-
mer; it  is  a  more  immediate  preparation  for  the  grand
myfteries;  in  (liort,  it  is  from  this  degree  that  the  maf-
ters  for  the  Minerval  Academies  are  felecled.

Let  us  begin  by  laying  open  the  artifice  of  that
ftrange  bond  which  the  adept  will  never  dare  to  rend
afunder,  though  he  iliould  willi  to  withdraw  fi"om  lUu-
niinifm,  or  more  particularly  fliould  he  be  tempted  to
reveal  what  he  may  have  already  difcovered  of  the  ar-
tifices, principles,  or  grand  objeét  of  the  Seft.
Prelimi-  Before  the  candidate  is  admitted  to  the  new  degree,

nary  quef-  he  is  informed  that  his  reception  is  refolvcd  on,
provided  he  gives  fatisfadtory  anfwers  to  the  following
queftions  :

I.  Are  you  acquainted  with  any  fociety  grounded  on
a  better  conftitutiôn,  or  more  holy  and  folid  than  ours,
and  which  tends  with  more  certainty  or  expedition  to
the  object;  of  your  willies  ?

II.  Was  it  to  fatisfy  your  curiofity  that  you  entered
our  fociety  ?  or,  was  it  to  concur  with  the  chofen
among  men  to  univei-fal  happinefs  ?

III.  Are  you  fatisfied  with  what  you  have  feen  of
our  laws  ?  Will  you  labour  according  to  our  plan,  or
have  you  any  objedion  to  propofe  againfl  it  ?

IV.  As  tlierc  will  be  no  medium  for  you,  declare  at


«Uons.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR^ICY.


73


once,  whether  you  wifli  to  leave  iis,  or  whether  you
will  remain  attached  to  us  for  ever  ?

V.  Are  you  a  member  of  any  other  fociety  ?

VI.  Does  that  fociety  impofc  any  thing  detrimental
to  our  interefts  ;  for  example,  the  difcovery  of  our
fecrets  ;  or,  does  it  require  you  to  labour  for  itfelf
exclufively  ?

VII.  Should  fuch  things  be  ever  required  of  you,  tell
us  upon  your  honour,  whether  you  would  be  difpofed
to  acquiefce  in  them?.

Thefe  queftions  anfwered,  there  flill  remains  another  Life  of  th^
proof  of  confidence  which  the  Order  expeds  fi-om  the  Candidate
candidate.  This  is  nothing  lefs  than  an  exad  and  can-  ^  ""^"^"»
did  account  of  his  ivhole  life,  written  without  any  reJh-~
vation  or  dijjiim dation  whatever.  The  neceflary  time
is  given  him  ;  and  this  is  the  famous  bond,  or  rather
fnare,  into  which  when  Weifliaupt  has  once  brought
the  candidate  he  exiiltingly  exclaims,  "  Now  I  hold
**  him  ;  I  defy  him  to  hurt  us  ;  if  he  fmuld  ivifh  to  be*
*'  tray  us,  ive  have  alfo  his  fecrets.^^  It  would  be  in
vain  for  the  adept  to  attempt  to  diffimulate.  He  will
foon  find  that  the  moft  fecret  circumftances  of  his  life,
thofe  which  he  would  moft  anxioufly  wifli  to  hide,  are
all  known  by  the  adepts.  The  arts  which  he  has  hi-
therto praftifed  to  pry  into  the  moft  fecret  motions  of
the  hearts  of  his  pupils,  into  their  tempers  and  pallions,
their  connexions,  their  means,  their  interefts,  their
adlions  and  opinions,  their  intrigues  and  faults,  have  all
been  more  artfully  employed  by  others  in  watching
himfelf.  Thofe  who  compofe  the  lodge  into  which  he
is  going  to  be  received,  are  the  very  perfons  that  have
been  fcrutinizing  his  paft  life.

All  the  difcoveries  made  by  his  Infinuator,  all  the
ftatements  he  has  been  obliged  to  give  of  himfelf  as
required  by  the  Code,  every  thing  which  the  Brother
Scrutators,  either  known  or  unknown,  have  been  able
to  difcover  concerning  him  during  his  degrees  of  Mi-
nerval  or  of  Minor  Illuminée,  have  been  accurately
tranfmitted  to  the  Brethren  of  the  new  lodge.  Long
before  his  admiffion,  they  had  accompliftied  themfelves

in   the  fcrutinizing   arts Thefe  wretches  then

will  mimick  even  the  canonization  of  the  faints  !   The
very  precautions  which  Rome  takes  to  difcover  the

Vol.  IIL  M


2^  TIIE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR^VCf:

fcaft  taint  in  thofe  whom  it  propofcs  to  the  veneration
of  the  faithful,  this  ilkniiinizing  fed  will  adopt,   in
order  to  fatisfy  itfelf  that  in  its  adepts  no  civil  nor  reli-
gions virtne  can  be  traced.     Yes,  the  villains  in  their
dens  wifhed  to  know  each  other,  and  fmiled  to  fee
their  accomplices  as  wicked  as  themftlves.
The  Scru-        ^  cannot  conceive  whence  Weifliaupt  could   have
tutors,  or     taken  this  part  of  his  Code  ;   but  let  the  reader  form
perfed        an  idea  of  a  feries  of  at  leall  fifteen  hundred  queftions
^'^*'  on  the  life,  the  education,  the  _  body,  the  mind,   the

heart,  the  health,  the  paffions,  the  inclinations,  the  ac-
quaintances, the  connections,  the  opinions,  the  abode,
the  habits,  and  even  the  favorite  colours  of  the  candi-
date ;  on  his  relations,  his  friends,  his  enemies,  his  con-
dud,  his  difcourle,  his  gait,  his  gefture,  his  language,
his  prejudices,  and  his  weaknelfcs.  In  a  word,  quef-
tions  which  relate  to  every  thing  that  can  denote  the
life  or  charader,  the  political,  moral,  or  religious  fen-
timents,  the  interior,  or  exterior  of  the  man  ;  every
thing  he  has  faid,  done  or  thought,  and  even  what  he
would  fay,  do,  or  think,  under  any  given  circumftances.
Let  the  reader  form  an  idea  of  twenty,  thirty,  and
fometimes  a  hundred  queftions  on  each  of  thefe  heads.
Such  will  be  the  catechiim  to  which  the  Major  Illumi-
née muft  be  able  to  anfwer  ;  fuch  are  the  rules  he  is  to
follow  in  tracing  the  lives  or  charaders  of  the  young
brethren,  or  even  of  thofe  profane  of  whom  the  fed
wiflies  to  have  particular  information.  Such  is  the
fcrutinizing  Code  which  has  direded  the  refcarches
made  as  to  the  life  of  the  candidate  antecedent  to  his
admiffion  to  the  degree  of  Mjor  lUnniinec.  Thefe
ftatutes  are  called  by  the  Order  the  Nofce  te  ipfmn
(know  thyfelf).  When  one  brother  pronounces  thefe
words,  the  other  anfwers  Nofce  alios  (know  others)  ;
and  this  anfwer  denotes  much  better  the  objed  of  the
Code,  which  might  very  properly  be  Ityled  the  perfcâ
Jpy.    Let  it  be  judged  by  the  following  queflions  :

"  On  the  Phyjiognomy  of  the  Candidate  :---Is  he  of  a"
florid  complexion,  or  pale  ?  Is  he  white,  black,  fair,  or
brown  ?  Is  his  eye  quick,  piercing,  dull,  languilhing,
amorous,  haughty,  ardent,  or  dejeded  ?  In  Ijpeaking,
does  he  look  full  in  the  face  and  boldly,  or  does  he
look  fideways  I  Can  he  endure  being  ilared  full  in  the
JLp.Qç  I  Is  his  look  crafty,  oi:  is  it  open  and  free  ;  is  it


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSHRAC?.

gloomy  and  penfive,  or  is  it  abfent,  light,  infigniilcanf,
friendly,  or  ferions  ?  Is  his  eye  hollow,  or  level  with  the
head,  or  does  it  flare  ?  Hi^  forehead,  is  it  wrinkled,
an<l  how  ;  perpendicularly,  or  horizontally  V  &-c.

"  His  Coimtcncnicc  : — Is  it  noble  or  common,  open,
eafy,  or  conftrained  ?  How  does  he  carry  his  head  ;
ered  or  inclined,  before,  behind,  or  on  one  fide,  firm
©r  lliaking.  funk  between  his  flioiilders,  or  turning
from  one  fide  to  the  other  ?"  &c.

"  His  Gait:— Is  it  flow,  quick  or  firm  ?  Are  his  fteps
long,  fliort,  dragging,  lazy,  or  (kipping  ?"  &c.

"  His  Language  :—h,  it  regular,  diforderly,  or  inter-
rupted ?  In  fpeaking,  does  he  agitate  his  hands,  his
head,  or  his  body,  with  vivacity  ?  Does  he  clofe  upon
the  perfon  he  is  fpeaking  to  ?  Does  he  hold  them  by
the  arm,  clothes,  or  button-hole  ?  Is  he  a  great  talker,
or  is  he  taciturn  ?  If  fo,  why  ?  Is  it  tlirough  prudence,
ignorance,  refpeft,  or  floth  ?"  &c.

*'  His  Education  .• — To  whom  does  he  owe  it  ?  Ha3
he  always  been  under  the  eyes  of  his  parents  ?  How
has  he  been  bi-ought  up,  and  by  whom  ?  Has  he  any
efteem  for  his  mafters  ?  To  whom  does  he  think  him-
fclf  indebted  for  his  education  ?  Has  he  travelled,  and.
in  what  countries  ?"

Let  the  reader,  by  thefe  queftions,  judge  of  thofe
•which  treat  of  the  mind,  the  heart,  or  the  pafiions  of
the  candidate.     I  will  juft  note  the  following  :

"  When  he  finds  himfelf  with  difi:erent  parties,  which
does  he  adopt,  the  ftrongeft  or  the  weakefl,  the  witti-
eft  or  the  moft  fliupid  ?  Or,  does  he  form  a  third  ?  h
he  conllant  and  firm  in  fpite  of  all  obftacles  ?  How  is
he  to  be  gained,  by  praife,  flattery,  or  low  courtfliip  ;
or  by  women,  money,  or  the  entreaties  of  his  friends  ?"
&c. — "  Whether  he  loves  fatire,.  and  on  what  he  exer-
cifes  that  talent;  on  religion,  fuperllition,  hypocrify,
intolerance,  government,  miniflers,  monks?"  î^c.  &-c.

This  however  is  not  all  that  the  fcrutators  are  to
note  in  their  ftiatements.  They  are  to  elucidate  each
anfwer  by  a  fadl,  and  by  fuch  fads  chiefly  as  charaâerizc
iJje  man  at  a  mo^nent  ivhen  he  leajt  fufpeâs  it.*  They
are  to  follow  their  prey  to  his  boliler,  luhere  they  luil^.

*  See  Weifliaupt's  LetUrs.

YoL  III.  M  2.


75


75  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr.'

learn  ivhether  he  is  a  hard  JleepeVy  •whether  he  dreams,
and  vjhether  he  talks  when  dreaming  ;  whether  he  is  eajily
or  with  difficulty  awakened  ;  and  p)ould  he  be  fuddenlyy
forcibly,  or  unexpeâedly  avjokened  from  his  Jleepy  vjhat
iniprejfon  would  it  jnake  on  him  ?

Should  any  of  thefe  queftions,  or  any  part  of  the
Candidate's  life,  not  have  been  fufficiently  inveftigated
by  the  Lodge,  divers  of  the  brethren  are  ordered  to
dired  all  their  enquiries  towards  that  point.     When  at
length  the  refult  of  all  their  refearches  is  found  to  co-
incide with  the  wilhes  of  the  Sed;,  the  day  for  his
reception  is  appointed.     Neglecting  all  the  infignili-
cant  particularities  of  the  mafonic  rites,  we  fliall  attend
entirely  to  thofe  circumftances  which  peculiarly  belong
to  liluminifm.
Reception        The  adept,  introduced  into  a  gloomy  apartment,
to  the  (le-    reiterates  his  oath  to  keep  fecret  whatever  he  may  fee
M^*^  °^iii    ^"  ^^  learn  from  the  Order.     He  then  depohts  the  hif-
v^l.     ""  fo*"y  of  li's  life  (fealed  up)  in  the  hands  of  his  intro-
ducer.    It  is  read  to  the  Lodge,  and  compared  with
the  hiftorical  table  which   the  brethren  had  already
formed  refpeéling  the  candidate.     This  done,  the  In-
Lîfe  of  the  ^''oducer  fays  to  him,  "  You  have  given  us  a  welcome
Candidate    "  ^^'^^  valuable  proof  of  your  confidence  ;  but  mdeed
by  the        <'  we  are  not  unworthy  of  it  ;  and  we  hope  that  it  will
brethren.     <«  tvtw  increafe  iii  proportion  as  you  become  better
'^  acquainted  with  us.     Among  men  whofe  fole  ob.
"  jeél  is  to  render  themfelves  and  others  better,  and
"  to  refcue  the  whole  world  from  its  miferies,  no  difi
*'  fimulation  fliould  fubfill.     Far  be  any  referve  from
"  us.     We  ftudy  the  human  heart — and  do  not  heli-
*'  tate  or  blufli  at  revealing  to  each  other  our  faults
"  or  errors. — Here  then  is  the  pidlure  which  the  Lodge
-*'■'  had  drawn  of  your   perfon.     You  muft  own  that
*'  fome  features  are  not  unlike.     Read,  and  then  an-
*'  fwer,  whether  you  flill  wilh  to  belong  to  a  fociety
**  which  (luch  as  you  are  reprefented  here)  opens  its
"  arms  to  receive  you."

Could  indignation  operate  more  powerfully  on  the
inind  of  the  Candidate  at  the  fight  of  his  having  been
fo  treacheroufly  watched,  than  the  fear  of  abjuring  a
fociety  which  henceforth  poiltlfes  fuch  arms  againll
him,  he  would  not  hefitate  at  afking  for  his  difmiifion  ;
but  he  fees  the  confcquences  of  fuch  a  ftep;  and  feels


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

that  it  miglit  coll  him  very  dear.  Befides,  he  is  fo
famiiiari/.cd  with  the  fcri]tiniz,ing  lyllein,  that  he  can
fcai'cely  be  offended  witli  it,  though  operating  on  hiiii-
felf.  He  is  left  for  a  certain  time  to  his  meditations.
The  defire  of  ac(iuiring  a  new  degree  works  upon
him  and  at  length  turns  the  fcales  ;  he  is  introduced
to  the  Lodge  of  the  Brethren  ;  and  there  the  veil
which  hides  the  fecrets  of  the  SecT:  is  partly  raifed  ;  or,
rather,  he  is  himfclf  ftill  more  unveiled,  that  the  Std:
may  difcern  whether  all  his  views  and  wiihes  coincide
with  theirs.

After  a  fuitable  preamble,  the  Initiator  tells  him,
"  that  he  has  dill  fome  few  queflions  to  anfwer,  rela-
"  tive  to  objeds  on  which  it  is  abfolutely  neceffary  tiiat
*'  the  opinions  of  candidates  fliould  be  known.'*

The  reader  is  delired  to  pay  particular  attention  to
thefe  queftions  ;  as  it  will  enable  him,  when  he  iliall
come  to  read  of  the  myfteries,  more  clearly  to  obferve
the  fucceffion  and  gradation  with  which  fuch  princi-
ples are  infufed  into  the  mind  of  the  adept,  as  if  he
had  invented  and  conceived  them  all  hinifelf.

"  I.  Do  you  hnd  that,  in  the  world  we  live  in,
virtue  is  rewarded  and  vice  puniflied  ?  Do  you  not  on
the  contrary  obferve,  that  the  wicked  man  is  exteriorly
more  comfortable,  more  confidered,  and  more  pow*
erful,  than  the  honeft  man  ?  In  a  word,  are  you  con-
tent with  the  world  in  its  prefent  fituation  ?"

"  II.  In  oi'der  to  change  the  prefent  order  of  things,
would  you  not,  if  you  had  it  in  your  power,  affcmble
the  good  and  clofely  unite  them,  in  order  to  render
them  more  powerful  than  the  wicked  ?  "

"  III.  If  you  had  your  choice,  in  what  country
would  you  wifli  to  have  been  born  rather  than  in  your
own  ?  "

"  IV.  In  what  age  would  you  wiili  to  have
lived  ?  "

"  V.  Always  premiilng  the  liberty  of  choice,  what
fcience  and  what  ftate  of  life  would  you  prefer  ?  "

"  VI.  With  refped  to  hiftory,  who  is  your  favourite
author  or  your  mafter  i  "

"  VII.  Do  you  not  think  yourfelf  in  duty  bound  to
procure  all  the  exterior  advantages  polTible  for  your
tried  friends,  in  order  to  recompenfe  them  for  their
•probity,  and  to  render  life  more  agreeable  to  them  ?


77


7  8  '^^E    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr;

Ai'C  you  ready  to  do  what  tlie  Order  exads  of  cactt
member  in  this  degree,  when  it  ordains  that  each  one
lliall  bind  himielf  to  give  advice  every  month  to  the
fuperiors,  of  the  employments,  fupport,  benefices,  or
other  fuch  like  dignities,  of  which  he  can  difpofe,  or
procure  the  poireirion  by  means  of  his  recommenda-
tions ;  that  the  fiiperiors  may  prcfent  worthy  fubjeft»
of  our  Order  to  all  fuch  employments  :  "

The  anfwers  of  the  candidate  are  to  be  returned
in  writing,  and  inferted  in  the  regifters  of  the  Lodge.
It  will  naturally  be  expeéled,  that  the  greateft  diflatis-
fadion  with  the  prefcnt  order  of  things  is  to  be  ex-
prefied,  as  well  as  an  ardent  wifli  for  a  revolution
which  {liall  change  the  whole  face  of  the  Univerfe.
He  will  alfo  promife  to  fupport,  by  ail  the  means  in
his  power,  the  eledion  of  none  but  worthy  brethren
\  to  offices  of  emolument  and  truft,  or  fuch  as  may  aug^

ment  the  power  or  credit  of  Illuminifm,  whether  about
the  court  or  among  the  people.  On  his  declaring
fuch  to  be  his  fentiments,  the  Initiator  addreifes  him
in  the  following  difcourfe  :

"  Brother,  you  are  a  witnefs,  that  it  is  after  having
*'  tried  the  beil  of  men,  that  ive  feck  little  by  little  ta
**  reward  thetn,  and  to  give  them  fupport^  that  ive  may
"  infôufil'ly  fucceed  in  new  modelling  the  world.  Since
*'  you  are  convinced  how  imperfedly  men  have  fulfil-
"  led  their  real  deiliny  ;  how  every  thing  has  degcne-
*'  rated  hi  their  civil  injiiiutions  ;  how  little  the  teach-
"  ers  of  w-ifdom  and  of  truth  have  enhanced  the  value
*'  of  virtue,  or  given  a  happier  difpofition  to  the
"  world  ;  you  miift  be  perfuaded,  that  the  error  lies  ia
"  the  means  which  the  fages  have  hitherto  employ-
"  ed.  Thofe  means,  therefore,  muft  be  changed,  in
*'  order  to  reinftate  in  its  rights  the  empire  of  truth
*'  and  wifdom.  And  this  is  the  grand  objeft  of  the
*'  labours  of  our  Order.  Oh,  my  friend  !  my  bro-
"  ther  !  my  fon  !  when  here  convened,  far  from  the
"  profane,  we  confider  to  what  an  extent  the  world
"  is  abandoned  to  the  yoke  of  the  wicked,  how  per-
*'  fecution  and  misfortune  is  the  lot  of  the  honeft
"  man,  and  how  the  better  part  of  human  nature  is
*'  facrificed  to  perfonal  intereft.  Can  we  at  fuch  a
*'  fight  be  filent,  or  content  ourfclves  with  fighing?  Shall
f'  "we  not  attempt  to  fnake  off  the  yoke  P—YeSy  my  Iro-


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

•*  ther^  relv  upon  its.  Seek  faithful  co-operators,  but
"  feek  them  not  in  tumuks  and  in  ftoriîis  ;  they  are
<'  hidden  in  darknefs.  PiQîeâjd  by  the  jhades  of  nlght^
*'  fditary  and  filent,  or  reunited  in  fmall  nund'ers,  they,
**  docile  chiUren,  pnrfue  the  grand  vjork  under  the  di-
*'  reâion  of  their  fuperiors.  They  call  aloud  to  tlie
"  ciiildren  of  the  world,  who  pal's  by  in  the  intoxica-

"  tion  of  pieafure how  few   hearken  to  them.

'^  He  alone  who  has  the  eye  of  the  bird  of  Minerva,
"  who  has  placed  his  labours  under  the  protecT:ion  of
*'  the  ftar  of  night,  is  fiire  of  finding  them."

But,  left  this  difcourfe  fliould  not  have  given  the
Candidate  a  fuificient  infight  as  to  the  object:  of  the
new  degree,  the  Secretary  opens  the  Code  of  the
Lodge,  entitled  A  generrd  view  of  the  fjjieni  of  the
Order.  Here  the  young  Illuminée  learns,  that  the  ob-
}eft  of  the  Order  is  to  ditfufe  the  pure  truth,  and  to
make  virtue  triumph.  Nothing,  however,  is  explicitly
faid  on  what  is  to  be  underftood  by  the  pure  truth.
He  is  only  told,  that  in  order  to  diffufe  it,  "  he  mult
begin  by  liberating  men  from  their  prejudices,  and  by
enlightening  their  underftandings  ;  then  reunite  all  the
common  forces  for  the  refinement  of  all  fciences  from
the  drofs  of  ufelefs  fubtilties,  and  for  the  eftablifliment
of  principles  drawn  from  Nature. — To  attain  tliis,'*
continues  the  Secretary,  "  we  mull  trace  the  origin  of
all  fciences  ;  we  muft  reward  opprefied  talents  ;  we
muft  raife  from  the  duft  the  men  of  genius  ;  vje  niuji
undertake  the  education  of  youth  ;  and,  forming  an  in-
diiroluble  league  among  the  mofl:  powerful  geniufes,  we
muft  boldly,  though  with  prudence,  combat  fuperjii-
tion,  incredulity,  and  folly  ;  and  at  length  form  our
people  to  true,  juft,  and  uniform  principles  on  all
fubjeéls.

"  Such  is  the  objed  of  our  Minerval  Schools,  and
of  the  inferior  degrees  of  Mafonry,  over  which  our
Order  wiflies  to  acquire  all  the  influence  polfible,  ill
order  to  direct  it  towards  our  objeft.  We  alfo  have
our  fuperior  degrees,  where  the  brethren,  after  having
palfcd  through  all  the  preparatory  degrees,  become  ac-
quainted with  the  ultimate  refult  of  the  labours  and  of
all  the  proceedings  of  the  Order."

To  obtain  the  completion  of  that  refult,  "  it  will  be
nsceifary  to  diveft  vice  of  its  power,  that  the.  houtiljj


79


Soi  "THE    AK^ISOCIAL    CONSPIItrVCr.

mnn  may  find  his  fecompenfe  even  in  this  world  ;  but
in  this  o\-and  projeft,  vjâ  are  connternâed  by  the  Princes
ani  the  Pricjioood;  the  political  cofijiitutions  of  nations
oppofe  our  proceedings.  In  fiich  a  (late  of  things  tlien
what  remains  to  be  done  ?  To  inlligate  revolutions,'
overthrow  every  thing,  oppofe  force  to  force,  and  ex-
change tyranny  for  tyranny  ?  Far  be  from  us  fuch
means.  Every  violent  reform  is  to  be  blamed,  becaufe
it  will  not  ameliorate  things  as  long  as  men  remain  as'
they  are,  a  prey  to  their  pafjtons  ;  and  becaufe  luifdom
iieedeih  not  the  arm  of  violence.''^

"  The  whole  plan  of  the  Order  tends  to  form  men,
not  by  declamation,  but  by  the  protedion  and  rewards
which  are  due  to  virtue.  TVe  mnjt  infe}ifibly  bind  the
hands  of  the  protcâors  of  diforder,  and  govern  them
"ivithout  appearing  to  domineer^

"  In  a  word,  we  muft  eftablifh  an  univerfal  empire
over  the  whole  world,  without  dellroying  the  civil  ties.
Under  this  nevj  empire,  all  other  governments  miifi  be
able  to  pu'-fue  their  iifital  procefs,  and  to  exercife  every
povjer,  excepting  that  of  hindering  the  Order  from  at"
taining  its  ends,  and  rendering  virtue  triumphant  over
•vice."

"  This  victory  of  virtue  over  vice  was  formerly  the
objeél  of  Chrift,  when  he  ellablifhed  his  pure  religion.
He  taught  men,  that  the  path  to  wifdom  coiififted  in
letting  themfelves  be  led  for  their  greater  good  by  the
beft  and  wifeft  men.  At  that  time  preaching  might
fuffice  ;  the  novelty  made  truth  prevail  ;  but  at  prefent,
more  powerful  means  are  neceflary.  Man,  a  flave  to  his
fenfes,  muft  fee  fenfible  attrapions  in  virtue.  The  fource
of  pajfons  is  pure  ;  it  is  neceffary  that  every  one  jhoultl
he  able  to  gratify  his  within  the  bounds  of  virtue,  and
that  our  Order  flmuld  fiumifh  him  ivith  the  means.''*

"  It  confequently  follows,  that  all  our  brethren,  edu-
cated on  the  lame  principles,  and  ftriétly  united  to  each
other,  lliould  have  but  one  obje*^  in  view.  We  muji
cncompafs  the  Powers  of  the  earth  with  a  legion  of  inde^
fatigable  men,  all  direâing  their  labours,  according  to  the
plan  of  the  Order,  towards  the  happincfs  of  human  nature
■  but  all  that  is  to  be  done  in  lilence;  our  brethren
are  mutually  to  fupport  each  other,  to  fuccoiir  the
good  labouring  under  oppreffion,  and  tofek  to  acquire
ti)ofe  places  which  give  pQ-wcr,  for  the  good  of  the  caife,*[


tHË    ANTISOCI.AX    CONSPIRACY.  g  I

*'  Had  we  a  certain  number  of  fuch  men  in  every
country,  each  miglit  form  two  others.  Let  them  only
be  united,  and  nothing  will  be  impoffible  to  our  Order;
it  if  thus  that  in  Ji'ence  it  has  already  performed  much  j or
the  (rood  of  bîinianify."

"  You  behold,  Brother,  an  immenfe  field  opening'  to
your  aAivity  ;  become  our  faithful  and  worthy  co-ope-
rator, by  feconding  us  with  all  your  might  ;  and  re-
member, that  no  fervice  will  pafs  without  its  jult
reward."

After  this  IcllxMi,  two  chapters  diredly  treating  on
llie  fundions  of  the  major  Illuminée  are  read  to  him»
With  the  tirft  he  is  already  acquainted  :  it  is  the  Code
of  the  Infinuator  or  Brother  Recruiter.  He  is  alfo  now
entrufted  with  it,  as  it  is  part  of  his  duty  in  future  to
judge  of  the  pupils  of  all  the  Infmuators.  The  fécond
treats  of  the  duties  of  the  Scrutator;  this  is  alfo  deli-
vered into  his  care,  becaufe  he  muft  particularly  exer-
cife  that  art  while  prefiding  over  the  Minerval  acade-
mies :  and  he  muft  necefllu-ily  learn  how  his  new  bre-
thren found  means  of  tracing  fo  exact  an  hiftorical
portrait  of  himfelf,  and  of  penetrating  even  more  fuc-
cefsfully  than  he  could  into  the  interior  recelTes  of  his
heart  :  he  muft  alfo  learn  to  diftinguifli  fuch  pupils  as,
with  difpoiitions  limilar  to  his  own,  are  worthy  of  be*
ing  admitted  to  his  new  degree.  He  now  has  but  one
more  degree  to  go  through,  before  he  is  admitted  into
the  clafs  of  the  myfteries,  and  this  is  termed  by  the
Sea  the  Scotch  Knight."^

*  The  whole  of  this  chapter  is  nothing  more  than  an  extradl  front
the  (/fnnv  cf  Major  Illuminée,  and  from  the  inftru<5tions  contained  in  the
ritual  of  that  code  in  the  Titu-  Jlluminse.


Vol.  ni.  N


ti  THt    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


CHAP.   VIII.

Sixth  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illuminées. — IntermeiHivJ
Clafs—The  Scotch  Knight  of  lUiiminifm  ;  o?-  Dircâiug
Illuminée.

UNDER  the  appellation  of  Intermediarv  Clafs    of
obecs  ot  Illiiminilm  might  be  comprehended  all  the  De-

Uu«Degree.  g'"ees  which  Weifliaupt  had  borrowed  from  Freen^aa-
fonry.  In  that  cale  we  fhoiild  comprize  under  this
denomination  the  three  degrees  of  Apprentice^  Fcllovj-
Craft,  and  Majlcr.  But  it  has  been  already  faid,  that
theie  degrees  are  fiinply  a  paiTport  for  the  Seét  into
the  Mafonic  Lodges  ;  and  that  its  objedl  may  be  lefs
confpicLious,  it  leaves  them  in  their  original  Mafonic
flate.  This,  however,  is  not  the  cafe  with  the  higher
degrees  of  Scotch  Mafonry.  The  Seft  Ihrewdly  fur-
miled  that  the  views  of  thcfe  degrees  coincided  with
their  own  :  befides,  it  wanted  fome  of  thefe  fuperior
degrees,  either  for  the  diredion  of  thofe  Mafonic
Lodges  which  it  compofed  of  its  own  members,  or
who  were  to  gain  admittance,  dominate,  and  prefide
over  other  Lodges  which  were  not  devoted  to  Illumi-
nifm. — The  great  veneration  in  which  the  Scotch
Knights  are  generally  held  by  Mafons,  more  (Irongly
determined  the  Baron  Knigge  to  niake  himfelf  malter
of  this  degree,  and  engraft  it  on  llluminifm.  The
Sed  has  conftituted  this  into  both  an  intermediary  and
a  fiationary  degree.  It  is  Jiationary  for  thofe  into
whom  it  defpairs  of  ever  infuhng  the  principles  re-
quired for  a  further  admilTion  to  the  myfterits  ;  bur  it
is  only  intermediary  for  thofe  who  have  fliown  difpofi-
tions  more  accordant  with  the  purfuits  of  the  Sect.*
Its  prelim!-  Whatever  may  be  his  delliny,  no  Brother  is  ever  ad-
«arie*.  mitted  into  this  new  degree,  until  he  has  preVioufly
given  proofs  of  the  progrefs  he  has  made  in  the  arts  of
Scrntiitor,  whofe  code  mull  have  been  his  chief  ftudy
fince  his  admiffion  to  the  degree  of  Major  Illuminée.
The  fecret  Chapter  of  the  Knights  has  had  the  precau-
tion to  propole  certain  queilions  to  him  to  aiccrtain

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Part  I.  Sed.  ii.


^HE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  S^

liow  far  he  is  capable  of  judging  of  the  Jlate  of  thff
mind  by  exterior  ûppcannices.  He  will  have  had  to  an-
fwer,  for  example,  to  the  following  ones  : — "  What  is
"  the  charaéler  of  a  man  whofe  eyes  are  perpetually
**  in  motion,  and  whofe  countenance  is  changeable  ?
"  Wiiat  features  denote  voluptuoufnefs,  melancholy,
"  and  pufillanimity  ?"*

''.  As  a  further  proof  of  the  progr'efs  he  has  made,  he
is  to  tranfmit  to  his  fuperiors  another  differtation  on
the  life  of  the  hero  whufc  name  he  bears  for  his  cha-
rafteriftic.  The  hiftory  of  his  own  Hfe,  which  he  had
delivered  in  the  antecedent  degree,  had  laid  open  the
whole  of  his  exiftence,  and  all  his  actions  through  Hfe.
This  new  dilfertation  wiH  fliow  the  Order  what  he  ad-
mires or  difapprovcs  of  in  others,  and  will  particularly
demonftrate  whether  he  has  difcovered  thofe  qualities
in  his  patron  which  the  Order  widTcd  he  fliould  im-
bibe and  imitate  when  it  gax^e  him  his  charadcrifticl
Should  any  part  of  his  hfe  have  efcaped  the  vigilance
of  the  Scrutators,  he  is  ftill  at  liberty  to  give  a  new
proof  of  his  confidence  in  the  Order  ;  and  this  is  de-
fcribed  as  a  meritorious  aâ;  j  but  he  may  relerve  it  for
the  cognizance  of  the  Superior  of  the  Order  only.f
He  is  then  to  declare  under  his  hand-writing,  that  he
looks  upon  the  Superiors  of  lUuminifm  as  the  fecret
and  unbioivn  though  legitimate  fuperiors  of  Frecmnfon-
ry  ;  that  he  adheres  and  always  will  adhere  to  the  iliu-.
minized  fydem  of  M.ifonry,  as  the  bell  and  moft  ufeful.
exifting  ;  that  he  utterly  renounces  every  other  aflbci-
ation  ;  that  he  is  in  fliort,  fo  perfuaded  of  the  excel-
lence of  lUuminifm,  that  he  fully  adopts  its  principles,
and  firmly  believes  himfelf  bound  to  labour,  under  the
direét.ion  of  his  fuperiors,  at  the  oljeâ  and  according  to
the  intentions  of  the  Order  for  the  happinefs  of  man-.
kind.ll

After  having  received  thefe  numerous  pledges,  the  j^,  ceremofr.
Scotch   Knights   invite  the   new   Bi'othcr  to  a  fecret  nies  of  re-
CJ}apter,   for  fuch   is  the  name   given  to  the  Lodges  ception..
of  this  degree.     It  is  hung  with  green,  richly  deccv
rated   and  brilliantly  lighted.      The   Prefedl  of  the

*  See  this  degree,  Se<ft.  4"No.  %  and  3.

\  See  fécond  Inflrudion  for  this  degree,  No.  8.

t   Ibid.  No.  8.  t

tl  Ibid.  Reverfal  Letters.

YoK  HI.  N  z


S4  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Knights,  booted  and  fpurred,  is  feated  on  a  throne
treded  undtr  a  canopy  all  of  the  fame  colour.  On  hi$
apron  a  green  crofs  is  feen,  and  on  his  breaft  the  liai?
of  the  Order  ;  he  wears  the  riband  of  St.  Andrew  iji
falter  from  right  to  left,  and  holds  a  mallet  in  hia
hand.  On  liis  right  Hands  the  brother  fword-bearer,
liolding  the  fword  of  the  Order  ;  on  his  left  the  mafter
of  the  ceremonies  with  a  (lick  in  one  hand,  and  the
ritual  in  the  other.  The  Knights  aflembled  are  all
booted  and  fpurred,  each  girt  with  a  fword,  and  alt
wear  the  croîs  fufpended  at  their  necks  by  a  green  ri-'
band.  The  Officers  of  the  Order  are  to  be  diftin-
guiflied  by  a  plumage,  and  a  pried  of  the  Order  com-
pletes the  Lodge.  The  Prefccl  then  delivers  himfelf  a^-
follows  to  the  Candidate  :

"  You  here  behold  a  part  of  thofe  unknown  legion?",
*'  which  are  united  by  indiflbluble  bonds  to  combat  for-
*'  the  caufe  of  humanity.  Are  you  willing  to  make-
"  yourfelf  worthy  of  watching  will)  them  for  the  fane-
"^  "  tuary  ?  Your  heart  muft  he  pure,  and  a  heavenly  ar-,
*'  dour  for  the  dignity  of  nature  muft  lire  your  breaft.
*'  The  ftep  you  are  taking  is  the  moft  important  one'
"  of  your  life.  Our  games  arc  not  vainly  ceremonial.
''  In  creating  you  a  knight  we  expeét  of  you  that  you
*'  will  perform  exploits  grand,  noble,  and  worthy  of
"  the  title  you  receive.  Long  life  to  you,  if  you  come
*'  to  us  to  be  faithful  ;  if  honeft  and  good,  you  anfwer
"  our  expedations.  Should  you  prove  a  falfe  Brother,
"  be  both  curfed  and  unhappy,  and  may  the  grand'
"  Architecl  of  the  Univerfe  hurl  you  into  the  bottom-.
"  lefs  pit  !  Now  b»nd  thy  knee,  and  on  this  fword
"  take  the  oath  of  the  Order."

Ac  thefe  words  the  Prefed  feats  himfelf,  the  Knights
are  ftanding  with  their  fwords  drawn,  and  the  Candi-
d::te  pronounces  the  following  oath  : —

^'  I  promife  obedience  to  the  excellent  Superiors
"  of  the  Order.  In  as  much  as  it  fliall  depend
"  upon  me,  I  engage— never  to  favour  the  admiflioii
*'  of  any  unworthy  member  into  thefe  holy  degrees
*»■  *'  — to  labour  at  rendering  the  Ancient  Malbnry  tri-

*'  umphant  over  the  falfe  fyftems  wlîich  have  crept
"  into  it — to  fuccour,  like  a  true  Knight,  innocence,
*'  poverty,  or  opprelled  honefty— .Vf^w  to  be  the  flat-
y  Urer  of  the  greût,  nor  the  Jlave  oj  Pi'mccs  ;-'lo  coiHi


THE    AI-mSOCIAL    CONSPIRACV-

"  bat  coiirageoiifly,  though  prudently,  in  the  caiife  of
"  Virtue,  Liberty,  and  JVrf.io-.ii—X.o  rdlft  boldly,  both
*'  for  the  advantage  of  the  Order  and  of  the  world,
*•'  SiiperjUtion  ami  Dcfpotifni.  I  never  will  prefer  my
*'  own  private  intereft  to  that  of  the  Ordtr.  1  will
**  defend  my  Brethren  againft  calumny.  /  ivill  dedicate
*'  my  life  to  the  dif.overy  of  the  true  Religion  and  real
*5  dotirines  of  Freevufonry,  and  I  will  inipait  my  difo-
"  veries  to  r.iv  Superiors.  I  will  difclole  the  fecrets  of
"  my  heart  to  my  Superiors  as  to  my  bed  friend'^.  So.
"  long  as  I  fli'.ill  remain  in  the  Order  I  Ihall  look  upon
*'  the  being  a  Member  of  it  as  a  fupremc  felicity.  1
"  alfo  engage  to  look  upon  all  my  domcftic,  civil,  and
"  f(jcial  duties  as  moft  lacred.  So  help  me  God,  both
"  for  the  happinefs  of  my  life,  and  for  the  peace  of
*'  my  mind."

In  return  for  this  oath  the  Prefeft  declares  to  the
Candidate  that  he  is  going  to  create  him  a  Kniglit  of
St.  Andrew,  according  to  the  ancient  ulage  of  the
Scotch—"  Rife,^^  he  fays,  "  and  in  future  beware  of
"  ever  bending  thy  knee  before  him  who  is  only  man
«  like  thyfelf."*

To  thefe  ceremonies  the  adept  Knigge  added  a  cer-
tain number  of  others  which  were  mere  derilions  of
the  rites  of  the  Church.  Such,  for  example,  was  the
triple  benedidion  which  the  Pried  pronounced  over
the  new  Knight,  fuch  the  atrocious  mockery  of  the
lad  fupper,  wiiich  terminated  the  ceremony.  But,  im-
pious as  is  the  imitation,  Weifliaupt  declares  it  to  be
difgujiing  becaufe  it  is  dill  religious,  thcofophlcnl,  and
borrovjed  from  fuperJlition.X  But  what  perfcclly  coin-
cided with  the  views  of  the  Bavarian  founder  were,
the  indrudions  given  to  the  new  Knight.  He  is  en-
raptured with  that  difcourfc,  where  one  may  obferve
the  Illuminizing  Orator  feleéling  the  mod  impious,
artful,  and  diforganizing  fydems  of  Mafonry,  to  make
them  at  once  the  myderies  of  their  Mafonic  Lodges,
and  an  immediate  preparation  for  thofe  of  Illuminifm,

L-t  the  reader  recal  to  mind  what  was  faid  in  the
Second  Volume  of  thefe  Memoirs  f  concerning  the
Apocalypfe  of  the  Martinids,  entitled  Of  Errors  and
of  Truth.     He  will  there  have  read  of  a  time  when

*  Ibid.  Se<ft.  7.

J  See  the  lall  word  of  Fhllo,  Page  icc.  |  Chap.  XL


85


8^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

man,  difengaged  from  tlic  fenfes  and  free  from  mat-
ter, was  ftiil  more  free  from  the  yoke  of  the  lav.'s  and
from  political  bondage,  to  which  he  was  only  fiibjeéled
by  his  fall.  He  will  there  have  feen,  that  the  daily
efforts  of  man  inoiild  tend  to  the  overthrow  of  Go-
vernments, that  he  may  recover  bis  former  purity  and
ancient  liberty,  and  thus  retrieve  his  fall.  I  might
there  have  demonltrated  that  abfurd  Idealifiii  reducing
our  fenlcs  to  vain  tiétions,  that  the  proftitution  of  them
might  be  but  a  chimerical  crime  ;*  there,  in  fhort,  I

*  When  treating  in  the  Second  Volume  of  the  religious
and  political  tenets  of  the  Martinifls,  I  did  not  extend  my
refearches  to  their  dodrine  of  Ichalifm,  and  I  frankly  confcfs
that  I  did  not  fufficiently  underfland  that  part  of  their  Apo-
calypfe.  Since  the  publication  of  chat  Volume,  however,
I  have  met  with  a  Gentleman  perfedly  capable  of  compre-
hending any  intelligible  fyftem  whatever  ;  I  mean  the  Abbé
Bertins,  refiding  at  prefent  at  Oxford.  He  reproached  me
in  terms  fimilar  to  thofe  in  which  fome  other  people  had  re-
proached me  refpefting  the  Roficrucians.  What  you  hwve  nvrit-
teriy  faid  he,  Is  ALL  true,  but  you  have  not  told  the  WHOLE
truth.  I  had  indeed  faid  a  great  deal  of  thofe  gentry,  and  I  ne-
ver will  advance  any  point  which  I  cannot  prove.  The  Abbé
Bertins  ccndefcendcd  to  give  me  fome  little  infight  into  the
doflrines  of  this  famous  St.  Martin.  It  fully  confirmed  every
thing  which  I  had  advanced  on  the  tenets  of  the  Martinifts,
with  refpetfb  to  the  nature  of  the  foul,  and  to  the  pretended;
origin  of  that  foul  forming  a  part  of  God,  of  the  ejfence  of  Godf
end  of  the  fame  fuhflance — But  what  I  had  not  faid  was,  that
according  to  the  fame  fyftem  matter  has  no  real  exigence,  or
at  lead  has  fuch  a  feparate  exigence,  and  is  fo  entirely  null
with  refpedt  to  the  foul,  that  there  neither  is  nor  cau  be  any
relation  whatever  between  it  and  the  foul  ;  in  fine,  that  ;/  /V,
with  refpedt  to  us,  as  if  it  were  not.  I  had  furmifed  thefe  con-
fequences  in  a  converfation  which  I  had  had  with  an  eftimable
young  man,  the  Vicomte  de  Maimbourg,  whom  the  Martin-
ids  had  endeavoured  to  taint  with  their  erroneous  doctrines.
When  they  came  to  treat  of  the  pleafure  of  the  fenfes,  throiu
that  to  the  fire.,  they  fay  in  their  treatife  of  morality  ;  to  the
fre  :  give  to  the  fire  all  it  afks  ;  that  is  not  the  fpirit,  all  that
4lt  does  not  affect  the  foul  ;  and  this  f re  is  matter  ;  it  is  the  fenfes,  the

body.  Is  it  not  in  the  fame  fenfe  that  the  Martinift  tells  us,
**  It  is  in  vain  that  the  enemy  purfues  me  with  his  illufions.
*'  Matter  fhall  not  have  remembrance  of  me  here  below.
«  Does  man  tafte  the  pleafures  of  matter  ?    When  the  fenf*s


TîlE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

«light  have  fliown  accorcTing  to  the  Martinift,  that  in
all  a^'cs,  this  i'yllem  of  corruption  and  diforder  has
been  the  doélrine  and  fecret  of  true  Philofophy.  .  This
intermediary  degixre  was  deftined  by  Wtiiliaiipt  to
lerve  as  a  point  of  union  between  the  Mafonic  Lodges
and  Illuminifin.  It  was  but  natural  that  he  lliould
liave  fclected  the  moft  monftrous  and  moft  artful  fylleni
of  the  Craft.  Let  not  the  reader  tlierefore  be  allon-
idled  when  he  fees  the  Antithcolophift,  the  Atheiil,
the  MAtcriaiift  Weifliaupt  borrowing  in  tliis  degree
the  doArines  of  the  Martinifts  on  the  two-fold  princi-
ple or  double  fpirit.  But  let  it  be  aHb  remembered,
that  whenever,  in  confequence  of  this  artiiice,  he  is
obliged  to  ufe  the  words  fpirit  or  funl,  he  informs  the
candidate,  that  fuch  words  are  employed  in  the  Code,
only  to  conform  to  the  vulgar  expreffion.  This  pre-
caution taken,  the  Initiator  may  without  appreheniion
repeat  the  fophifticated  leifons  on  the  twofold  princi-
ple. And  indeed  one  might  be  tempted  to  think,  that
the  dodrines  he  lays  down  as  the  grand  object  of  Free-

**  feel  pain  or  pleafure,  is  it  not  eafy  to  perceive  that  it  is
*'  not  man  that  feeis  this  pain  or  pleafure  ?"  (No.  235,  of
the  Man  of  Dc/îre,  by  the  Author  of  a  work  On  Errors  and  on
Truth.)  How  fi-ightfnl  is  this  enigmatical  language'.  If  ail
the  paillons  and  fenfes  are  foreign  to  man,  if  he  may  grati-
fy them  without  afFefling  his  foul  either  for  the  better  or  for
the  worfe,  what  monflrous  confequences  muft  enfue  to  morals  !
And  indeed  a  Danifh  Martinift  was  confulted  by  the  Vifcount,
who,  more  candid  than  the  recruiting  Brethren,  anfwered,
*'  Beware,  dear  Sir,  of  ever  entering  into  our  myfleries  ; —
*'  I  am  unfortunately  engaged,  and  fliould  in  vain  attempt
"  to  withdraw  myfelf  from  them.  I  could  not  fucceed  ;
•*  but,  for  your  part,  take  care  never  to  deliver  yourfelf
"  over  to  thofe  men."  The  Vifcount  followed  his  advice.  A»
to  the  Abbé  Bertins,  he  was  too  much  for  Mr.  de  St.  Martin,
who  had  to  argue  with  a  man  that  perpetually  objcvfted — if
my  foul  is  part  of  God,  and  of  the  fubftance  of  God,  my
foul  mud  be  God.  After  three  months  leffons,  which  the
reader  will  readily  fuppofe  the  Abbe  Bertins  only  fubmittcd
to  through  curiofity,  the  learned  teacher  violently  exclaimed,
"  I  fee  I  never  fJjall  be  able  to  cotrjtnce  a  Divine  :"  and  thus
Mr.  de  St.  Martin  took  leave  of  a  fcholar  far  more  ficrecj,
to  teach  hira  real  knowledge  than  to  receive  his  fo^jbiftie*.»
«Mi  kâbns.


88  *rHE    A>mS0CIÀL    CONSPIRACr.

Mafonry  had  all  been  copied  from  the  Martinift  fyftem*
He  begins  by  deploi  injr  a  great  Revolution  which  had
in  former  a^^es  deprived  man  of  his  primitive  dignity.
He  then  rcprelents  man  as  having  had  the  fiicuity  of
recovering  his  ancient  fplendoiir  ;  but  that  by  tiie  abiife
of  his  facukies  he  had  again  immeried  himfclf  Hill
deeper  in  hiï  detiled  and  degraded  ftation.  The  very
fenfes  are  blunted,  and  faid  to  lead  him  into  error  on
the  nature  of  things.  Every  thing  that  he  beholds  in
its  actual  ftate  is  Jnlfihooa,  /how,  and  Uliifwn  ;  and  he
lays  particular  ftrefs  on  thofe  fchools  of  fages  which
had,  ever  fmce  the  time  of  the  giand  Revolution,  pre-
ferved  the  fecret  principles  of  the  antique  doctrines,  or
of  true  Mafonry.  Nor  does  the  monftrous  hierophant
blufli  at  placing  Jesus  of  Nazareth  am.ong  thofe
fages,  and  blafphemonlly  numbering  the  God  of  the
Chriftians  among  the  Grand  Mafters  of  lUuminifm.
But  foon  was  the  doélrine  of  Chriit  falfiiied,  and  Priefts  '
and  Philofophers  raifed  on  thefe  divine  foundations  an
edifice  of  jolly,  prejudice ,  and  fdj-iutereji.  Soon  dfo
does  the  tyranny  of  Priejlhood  and  the  Defpotifni  of
Princes  coalefce  in  the  opprejfion  of  fuffering  humanity.
Free  Mafonry  oppofes  thefe  difaftrous  attempts,  and
endeavours  to  preferve  the  true  doftrine  ;  but  it  has
over-burdened  it  with  fymbols,  and  its  lodges  gradu-
ally fubfide  into  feniinaries  of  ignorance  and  error.--
The  Illuminées  alone  are  in  pofieffion  of  the  real  fe-
crets  of  Mafonry  ;  many  of  them  are  even  ftill  to  be
the  objeds  of  their  refearches  ;  and  the  new  Knight
is  to  devote  all  his  attention  to  their  difcovery.  He  is
particularly  recommended  to  jtndy  the  doârines  of  the
ancient  GnojHcs  and  Manichœans,  vMch  may  lead  him
to  many  important  difoveries  on  this  real  Mafonry.  He
is  alfo  told,  that  the  great  enemies  which  he  will  have
to  encounter  during  this  inveftigation  will  be,  ambi-
tion, and  other  vices  which  make  humanity  groan  iin^
dcr  the  opprcffion  of  Princes  and  of  the  Priejlhood.*
The  obfcurity  which  enwraps  thefe  lellons  on  the
f-  new  and  grand  Revolution  which  is  to  counteract  the

ravages  of  the  former,  is  not  the  flighteft  of  Weif-
Jiaupi's  artifices.  \Vith  refpect  to  Princes,  this  is  the
ia(t  degree  to  which  they  are  admitted.  They  are  to  be

*  Sec  this  degree,  Art.  8.  Inrvrmfiioii  on  the  Mafonk  Hieroglyphics.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV.


«9


perfuaded,  that  the  antique  Revolution  was  no  other
than  the  coalition  of  the  powers  of  the  earth  with  the
Pricfthood,  in  order  to  fupport  the  empire  of  religious
prejudice  and  fuperftition  ;  and  that  the  new  Revolu-
tion to  he  effcded  is  the  re-union  of  Princes  with  Phi-
lofophy,  to  overthrow  that  empire  and  enfure  the  tri-
umph of  reaibn.  Should  the  ferene  adept  be  ftartled.
at  his  having  fworn  neiier  to  flatter  the  great  nor  to  he
a /lave  to  Princes,  he  will  be  reconciled  again  by  the  lat-
ter part  of  the  oath,  where  he  engages  to  look  upon  bis
domeflic,  civil,  and  focial  duties  as  moji  [acred.  But
let  him  form  what  opinion  he  may  as  to  his  initiation,
he  has  neverthelefs  fworn,  that  he  will  protect  the  Bro-
therhood from  fuperllition  and  defpotifm  ;  that  he  will
obey  the  moji  excellent  fuperiors  oj  the  Order  ;  that  he
will  favour  its  progrefs  with  all  his  power,  and  that
he  believes  it  alone  to  be  in  pofleffion  of  the  fecrets  of
real  Mafonry.

In  the  lefs  important  clafs  of  adepts,  fliould  any  ftill
hanker  after  their  TheofopJncal  ideas,  that  is  to  fay,
fliould  Weifliaupt  defpair  of  ever  infufmg  into  them
its  Anarchical  and  Atheiftical  principles,  they  are  con-
demned to  become  flationary  in  this  degree  ;  and  he
impofes  on  them  as  a  tafk  the  explication  of  ail  the
Hieroglyphics  of  Mafonry,  which  they  may  fet  to  the
tune  of  the  grand  Revolution.  Under  pretence  of  dif-
covering  a  more  perfe(5l  religion,  he  perfuaded  them
that  Chriftianity  was  at  this  day  nothing  more  than  fu-
perftition and  tyranny.  He  has  infufed  into  them  his
hatred  for  the  Priefthood  and  the  exiiling  forms  of
Government.  That  will  fuffice  to  procure  him  agents
of  deftru6lion  ;  as  to  re-editication,  he  has  not  fo  much
as  mentioned  it  to  them.

But  (hould  there  be  found  among  the  number  of  its  duties
Knights  men  who  of  themfelves  dive  into  Che  meaning  ^"^^  ^^^*'
of  that  great  Revolution  which  only  deprived  man  of
his  primitive  dignity  by  fubjefting  him  to  the  laws  of
civil  fociety,  fhould  they  have  comprehended  the
meaning  of  this  other  revolution  which  is  to  reftore
every  thing  by  re-eftabli(hing  man  in  his  primitive  in-
dependence, fuch  men  will  be  pointed  out  by  the  Scru-
tators. It  is  at  them  that  tlîe  Code  particularly  aims
when  it  fays,  Lit  the  Scotch  Kyii^hts  fcrioitfly  reji.-â,

Vol.  HI.  O


9©  THE    ANTISOCIAL    C0NSPIRAC7.

that  they  are  prefuling  over  a  strand  ejiahlifmnent,  ivhofe
objeâ  is  the  happhicfs  of  iiiankhid.  In  fliort,  thete
Knights  have  to  ad  the  parts  of  fiiperiors  in  the  order  ;
they  are  the  Infpcdors  or  the  Dirctiors  of  all  the  pre-
paratory clafs.  They  have  on  that  account  affemblics
peculiar  to  themfelves,  called  Secret  Chapters.  The
iirft  duty  of  thefe  chapters  is,  to  watch  over  the  in-
terefts  of  the  Order  within  their  diftrid.  "  The  Scotch
Knights,  fays  their  firft  inilrudion,  are  to  pay  parti-
cular attention  to  the  difovery  of  any  plans  ivhich  may
contribute  to  fill  the  coffers  of  the  Order.,  It  were
much  to  be  wijhed  that  they  could  devife  meaus  of  put-
ting the  Order  into  pojfjfwn  of  fonie  coiifideraUe  reve-
nues in  their  province. — He  that  fl?all  have  rendered
fo  fignal  a  fervlce  imiji  never  hcfitate  at  believing  that
thefe  revenues  are  employed  in  the  nioji  noble  piapofcs.—
The  vjhole  muji  labouf  vAth  all  their  might  to  confo-
lidate  the  edifice  little  by  little  vjithin  their  dijirid,  until
the  finances  of  the  Order  finill  he  found  to  be  competent
to  its  vievjs.*

The  fécond  part  of  the  Code  entrufls  thefe  Knights
with  the  government  of  the  preparatory  clafs.  Each
Knight  is  to  corrcfpond  wiàl  a  certain  number  of
brethren  who  have  the  diredion  of  the  Minerval  aca-
demies. The  Code  contains  inflruclions  which  point
out  to  them  upon  what  objeds  they  are  permitted  to
decide  ;  what  brethren  they  are  to  forward  or  thwart
in  their  promotion  ;  and  what  reports  they  are  to
make  to  their  fuperiors.  In  their  correfpondence  with
their  inferiors  they  make  ufe  of  the  common  cypher,
but  when  they  write  to  the  chiefs  they  employ  a  pecu-
liar charader  which  may  truly  be  called  hieroglyphic.

They  are  particularly  charged  with  the  inlpedion
of  the  Major  Illuminées.  "  The  Scotch  Knights,"
fays  the  Code,  "  iliall  be  particularly  attentive  that
''  the  Major  Illuminées  do  not  neglecT:  to  mention  in
*'  their  monthly  letters  -fuch  employments  as  they  may
"  have  to  difpofe  of."f

I  have  iliown,  in  the  foregoing  chapter,  how  ufe-
ful  and  indeed  how  neceflary  this  precaution  proved
for  recompenhng  the  zeal  of  the  brethren.  The  adept
Knigge  wiflied  to  demonili-ate  that  it  might  be  equally

*  See  firft  Inftruâion  for  this  degree.
•)•  Second  Irilruction,  No.  12.


*rHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  pi

ufeful  for  princes,  when  comVined  with  the  fcrutini-
zing  code.  "  Let  us  iuppofe,"  lays  he,  "  that  a  Priiice,
"  haviniT  an  Ilkiniin.ee  for  his  Minifter,  willies  to  find
"  a  proper  pcrfon  to  nil  any  vacant  office  ;  oy  means
"  of  the  Scrutators,  the  Miniller  may  immediately
"  prefent  the  faithful  portrait  of  divers  perfonages,
"  from  among  whom  the  Prince  will  only  have  to
"  make  his  eleftion."*  But  every  reader,  1  hope,  will
recollecl,  that  in  confeqiience  of  the  oath  that  has
been  taken  by  the  Minifter  to  difpofe  of  all  places  in
favour  of  the  brethren,  and  that  according  to  the  di-
rection of  the  Knights,  he  will  only  prefent  fuch  adepts
for  thofe  offices  as  the  Order  fliall  have  chofen  ;  and  '
thus  will  Ilhmiinifm  foon  difpofe  of  all  benefices,  em-
ployments, and  dignities,  and  have  the  entire  direction
of  the  whole  power  of  the  State.

Meanwhile,  until  the  Se6t  fliall  exert  this  influence  its  infiruo
over  Courts,  the  Scotch  Knights  are  to  acquire  an  ab-  "^î""*  ^^^^'
folute  fway  in  the  Mafonic  lodges.     Their  laws  on  this  pi-ee-Ma-
head  deferve  particular  attention.     We  fhall  felect.  the  fonrjv
following*  :

"  In  every  town  of  any  note  fituated  within  their
diOirid:,  the  fecret  chapters  Ihall  eflablilli  lodges  for
the  three  ordinary  degrees,  and  fliall  caufe  men  of
found  morals,  of  good  repute,  and  of  eafy  circum-
ftances,  to  be  received  in  tliefe  lodges.  Such  men
are  much  to  be  fought  after,  and  are  to  be  made
Mafons,  even  though  they  Jlmidd  not  he  of  any  Jcwice.
to  Illuminifm  in  its  ulterior  proj'eâs.'^f

"  If  there  already  exifts  a  lodge  in  any  given  town',
the  Knights  of  Illuminifm  mufl:  find  means  of  efta-
bli  filing  a  more  legitimate  one  ;  at  leaft,  they  fliould
fpare  no  pains  to  gain  the  afcendancy  in  thofe  which
they  find  eftablifhed,  either  to  reform  or  to  dejlroy
thcm:'\

"  They  mufi:  flirongly  exhort  the  members  of  our
lodges  not  to  frequent  (without  leave  of  their  fuperi-
ors)  any  of  thofe  pretended  conilituted  lodges,  vjIjo
hoLl  nothing  of  the  Englif)  but  their  diplomas,  and  fojne
few  fymbols  and  ceremonies  vjhich  they  do  not  tinder-^

*  I.afl  Obfervations  of  Philo,  Paj^e  95.

f.  TliirJ  Inftruâion  for  the  fame  degree,  No.  i.

\.  Third  Inflrudioa-for  the  fame  degree,  No.  3..

Vol.  III.  Q  z


52  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV.

Jhvid.  All  fuch  brethren  are  perfedly  ignorant  of
true  Mafonry,  of  its  grand  objed,  and  its  real  patrons.
Though  fome  of  the  greateft  merit  are  to  be  found  in
fuch  lodges,  we  neverthekfs  have  ftrong  reafons  for
not  readily  allowing  them  to  vilit  ours."*

"  Our  Scotch  Knights  mull  pay  great  attention  to
the  regularity  of  the  fubordinate  lodges,  and  mvji
above  all  things  attend  to  the  preparation  nf  candidates.
It  is  here  that  in  a  private  iniercotpfe  they  will  fliow  a
man  that  they  have  probed  him  to  the  quick.  Surprifè
him  by  Jome  cnfnaring  que/Hon  in  order  to  obicrve
whether  he  has  any  prefcnce  of  mind.  If  he  be  not
{launch  to  his  principles,  and  fhoujd  expofe  his  weak
fide,  make  him  feel  how  great  his  neccflities  are,  and
how  neccllary  it  is  for  him  to  be  guided  entirely
by  us."f

"  The  Deputy  Mailer  of  the  Lodge  (who  is  generally
the  auditor  of  the  accounts)  muft  alfo  be  a  member  of
our  Secret  Chapter.  He  %vill  perfuade  the  lodges  that
they  alone  difpofe  of  their  funds  ;  but  he  vfill  take  care  to
employ  them  according  to  the  vievjs  of  the  Order.  Should
it  at  any  time  be  neceflhry  to  help  one  of  our  brethren,
the  propofition  Is  made  to  the  lodge  ;  though  the  bro-
ther fliould  not  even  be  a  Mafon,  no  matter.,  fome  ex-
pedient miijl  be  foimd  to  carry  the  point."

"  No  part  of  the  capital,  however,  mufl  in  any  cafe
be  alienated,  that  hereafter  lue  may  find  the  nccejfary
f  funds  for  the  mofi  important  undertakings.     The  tenth

part  of  the  fubfcriptions  of  thefe  lodges  mufl  be  an-
Kually  carried  to  the  Secret  Chapter.  The  treafurer  to
whom  thefe  funds  muft  be  tranfmitted,  fliall  colIe6l
them,  and  endeavour  by  all  kinds  of  expedients  to
augment  them."^

"  But  before  any  part  of  our  own  funds  are  appro-
priated to  the  help  of  any  of  our  brethren,  every  effort
fhall  be  made  to  procure  the  necefïàry  fuccours  from
the  funds  belonging  to  lodges  which  do  not  pertain  to
our  fyilera. — In  general,  the  money  ivhich  thefe  lodges
fpend  in  a  nfilcfs  manner,  fhoidd  be  converted  to  the  ad-
vancement of  our  grand  obJeâ."§

"  Whenever  a  learned  Mafon  fliall  enter  our  Order,

*  Ibid.  No.  5,  f  Ibid.  No.  9.

:)  I'hird  Inftruvftion  for  the  fame  degree.  No.  li,  >'         §  Ibid.  13.


TrtE    ANTISOCLIL    CONSPIRACY.

he  mud  be  put  under  the  immediate  direflion  of  ouf
Scotch  Knights."*

From  what  code  can  Weiihaupt,  or  his  compiler
Knigge,  have  fel^^ctcd  fuch  laws  as  thtfe  for  tlieir
Scotch  Knights  ?  M.uiy  readers  will  be  ready  to  anfwer,
that  they  muft  have  learned  them  from  a  Mandrin,  a
Cartouche,  or  fome  hero  of  the  gibbet.  But  it  is  no
fuch  thing  : — their  own  ingenuity  was  fufficient  to  in-
vent fuch  doArines.  Weiihaupt  lays  down  as  a  prin-
ciple, that  the  end  jujtïfies  the  jiwant.-  he  made  the  ap-
plication of  it  when  he  taught  his  adepts  to  rob  the
libraries  of  Princes  and  Religious  Orders  ;  liis  compiler
Knigge  applies  the  fame  principle  to  the  funds  of  the
honelt  Mafons  ;  and  we  (hall  focm  fee  what  ule  they
made  of  thofe  funds.  It  will  be  in  vain  for  the  Illumi-
née (more  zealous  for  the  honour  of  his  founder  than
for  that  of  the  compiler  Knigge)  to  objeft,  that  Weif-
haupt  never  approved  of  the  degree  of  Scotch  Knight.
It  is  true  he  never  much  admired  it.  But  it  is  not  the
fyllem  of  theft  (evidently  deduced  from  his  own  prin-
ciples) that  he  reprobates  ;  not  a  fingle  expreffion  in
any  of  his  letters  can  denote  that  he  did  fo  ;  for  Knigge
might  have  anfwered,  ivhat  do  thofe  fools  of  Mcfons  do
ivith  that  money  P  juft  as  Weifliaupt  had  written  ivhat
do  thofe  rafcdls  of  Monks  do  vjith  their  rare  books  F  He
blamed  it  not  for  its  principles,  but  becaufe  he  thought
it  a  mifirahle  conipofition  :  der  elende  Scottifche  riiter
grade  are  the  terms  in  which  he  exprefles  his  contempt.
When  he  correded  this  degree,  the  thefts  were  not  the
parts  which  he  expunged  ;  they  were  too  ferviceable
to  the  Order.  Weifliaupt,  however,  confented  to  let
this  degree  (fuch  as  it  was)  ferve  as  a  preparation  for
the  myileries  of  his  Epoptes;  that  is  to  fay,  for  hi?
priejis  of  lUuminifm  ;  and  when  confidered  in  that
liglit  it  may  be  truly  faid,  that  the  Knights  brhxands
were  but  pitiful  and  miferable  indeed.  I  will,  how-
ever, give  the  reader  an  opportunity  of  judging  for
himfelf.

I

*  Thy.-d  Inflrudlion  for  the  fame  degree,  No.  i6k


93


v

*


54  THE    ANTISOCLU.    CONSPIRACY.


CHAP.     IX.

Seventh  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illuminées. — CLif  of  the-
Myjierics. — Of  the  kjjer  Myjieiies  ;  the  Epopi  or
Pricji  of  Illiiniin'ifm.

OWEVER  accurately  the  SecT;  may  bave  afcer-
tained  the  pro^Tefs  of  its  adepts  in  the  prepara-
tory degrees,  ftill  Weifhaupt  feems  to  fear  that  fome
may  be  Itartlcd  when  they  come  to  be  acquainted  with
tlie  ultimate  views  of  Illuminifm.  He  willies  therefore
to  lead  them  to  his  darkeft  plots  by  gradual  iliades.
Hence  the  divilion  of  leflcr  and  greater  myfteries,  and
the  hibdivilion  into  degrees.  The  firft  degree  into
"which  the  adepts  are  initiated  in  this  clafs  is  that  of
Epopt  ;  but  thefe  new  dignitaries  are  only  known  by
that  title  to  the  inferior  clafs  ;  the  higher  degrees  caU
them  Priejls.*

Let  not  the  reader  take  alarm  at  the  denomination
of  Icjfer  myjieries,  as  if  they  were  of  no  confequence  ;
for  he  will  gradually,  as  he  afcends,  difcover  their  dark
deligns  and  dealings.  But  before  the  adept  is  allowed
to  proceed,  he  mull:  colled  every  thing  that  his  mind,
his  memory,  or  all  his  former  leflbns  can  afford,  of
anti-religious  and  anti-facial  principles,  to  enable  him  to
give  written  anfwers  to  the  following  queftions  :

"  I.  Do  you  think  the  prefent  (late  of  nations  corre-

eTpréirmi-  ^pouds  with  the  objid  for  which  man  was  placed  upon

rary  esani-  earth?  For  example,  do  governments,  civil  alfociations,

ination.        or  religion,  attain  the  ends  for  which  they  were  de-

figned  ?    Do  the  fciences  to  which  men  apply  furnifli

them   with  real  lights;   are  they  conducive   (as  they

ought  to  be)  to  real  happinefs?    Are  they  not,  on  the

contrary,  the  offspring  of  numberlefs  wants,  and  of  the

unnatural  flate  in  which  men  live  ?    Are  they  not  the

crude  inventions  of  crazy  brains,  or  of  geniufes  labori-

oufly  fubtle  ?"

"  H.  What  civil  aiTociations  and  what  fciences  do  you
think  tend  or  do  not  tend  to  the  grand  objcA  ?  Did
there  not  formerly  exift  an  order  of  things  more  inn-
pie  ?  What  fort  of  an  idea  can  you  form  of  that  an-
cient flate  of  the  world  ?"

*  Philo  to  Spartacus. — lailrudlions  for  this  decree.


^HE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  III.  Now  tliat  we  have  prilled  through  all  thofe
Hullities  (07-  through  all  thofe  uJcLfs  and  vain  forms  of
ear  civil  corijiitutions)  do  you  think  that  it  would  be
poflible  to  return  back  to  the  original  and  noble  ilmpHci-
ty  of  our  forefathers  ?  Suppofing  we  had  returned  to  it,
V\rould  not  our  pad  misfortune  render  that  ilate  more
durable?  Would  not  all  mankind  be  in  a  fniiilar  ftate
with  an  individual  who,  having  enjoyed  the  fweets  of
innocence  during  his  childhood,  and  fallen  a  prey  to
error  and  his  pallions  duving  his  youth,  at  length,  in-
ftruded  by  the  rifles  he  has  run,  and  by  experience,
endeavoui-s  to  return  to  that  innocence  and  purity
which  rendered  his  childhood  fo  happy  ?"

"  IV.  What  means  were  bcft  to  be  employed  for
rcftoring  mankind  to  that  happy  ftate  ?  Should  it  be
by  public  meauires,  by  violent  revolutions,  or  by  any
means  that  Ihould  enfure  fucccfs  ?"

"  V.  Does  not  the  Chriftian  Religion  in  all  its  puri-
ty afford  Ibme  indications,  does  it  not  hint  at  fome
ftate  or  happincfs  fuiiilar  to  this?  Does  it  not  even
prepare  it?"

"  VI.  Is  this  holy  and  fimple  religion  really  what
different  feds  profefs  it  to  be  at  this  prefent  day,  or  is
it  more  perfed  ?"

"  VII.  Can  this  more  perfeft  Qiriftianity  be  known
or  tauo;ht  ?  Could  the  world  (fuch  as  it  now  is)  fupport
a  ftronger  degree  of  light  ?  Do  you  not  think  that,  be-
fore the  numberlefs  obftacleg  could  be  removed,  it
would  be  proper  to  preach  to  mankind  a  religion
more  perfed,  a  philofophy  more  elevated,  and  the  art
of  each  one's  governing  himfelf  according  to  his
greateft  advantage  ?"

"  VIII.  Would  not  our  moral  and  political  views
lead  men  to  oppofe  this  bleffing  ?  From  our  political
and  moral  views  then,  or  from  an  ill-judged  intereft,
or  even  from  deep-rooted  prejudices,  thei'e  obftacles
originate.  If  men,  therefore,  oppofe  the  renovation
of  human  happinefs,  is  it  not  becaufe,  (laves  to  ajicient
forms,  they  rejcél  and  reprobate  every  thing  which  is
not  to  be  found  in  thofe  forms,  tliough  it  fliould  be  the
moft  natural,  the  grandcft,  and  moft  noble  of  all
polFiblc  things  ?  Docs  not  perf<inal  intereft,  alas  !  at
prefent  predominate  over  the  general  intereft  of  mai>
kind  ?"


95


^<  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR„\Cr.

"  IX.  Mull  we  not  then  filently  and  gradually  reme-»
cly  ihole  dilorJers  before  we  can  flatter  oiii Iclves  with
the  re-eftabiinii.-nent  of  the  golden  age?  Meanwhile,  is
it  not  advileable  to  dijfeniinate  the  ti  itth  in  Seci'et
Socuîïes  f"'

''  X.  Can  we  trace  any  fuch  fecret  doélrine  in  the
ancient  fchools  of  the  fages,  or  in  the  allegorical
Iclfons  o'iven  by  Jefiis  Chrift,  the  Saviour  and  liberator
of  mankind,  to  his  nioll  intimate  difciples  ?  Have  you
not  obfcrvcd  a  fort  of  gradual  education  in  that  art
whicli  you  fee  has  been  tranfmitted  to  our  Order,  from
the  highei'l  antiquity  r"*
Initiation  of  Should  the  anlwers  of  the  Candidate  to  all  thefe
the  Epopt.  quertions  Ihow  that  the  progrefs  he  has  ma,de  in  his
gradual  education  is  not  what  the  Order  had  reafon
to  expeft,  he  will  folicit  in  vain  the  advancement  he
hoped  for.  Should  his  anfwers  be  equivocal,  he  will
receive  ordeis  to  prepare  new  ones,  or  to  be  more  ex-
plicir.f  But  if  he  lliow  the  proper  diipofitions,  and
the  Seel  forefee  no  probability  of  his  being  Itartled  at
the  lellons  of  the  ,Hiercphant  on  thofe  grand  objeds
V'hich  are  to  be  difclofed  to  him,  the  Superiors  give
their  affent,  and  a  fynod  of  the  illuminized  priefthood
is  held.  The  day  of  the  initiation  is  fixed.  At  the
hour  agreed  upon,  the  introducing  adept  waits  upon
his  new  profelyte  and  takes  him  into  a  carriage.  The
windows  being  clofed,  the  candidate  blind- ft)lded,  and
the  coachman  continually  winding  and  varying  his
courfe,  are  precautions  more  than  fufficient  to  hinder
the  pi-ofelyte  from  ever  being  able  to  trace  the  fpot
to  which  he  is  conduced.  Led  by  the  hand,  and  rtiil
.  Mind-folded,  he  flowly  afcends  to  the  porch  of  the
temple  of  the.  myfteries.  His  guide  then  diverts  him
of  the  Mafonic  infignia,  puts  a  drawn  fword  into  his
liand,  takes  off  the  bandage  from  his  eyes,  and  leaves
him,  llridly  forbidding  liinî  to  proceed  a  ftcp  until  he
heai-s  the  voice  which  is  to  call  him.  He  is  then  left
to  his  reflétions.

With  rcfpeél  to  the  pomp  of  the  myfteries,  when
the  Brethren  celebrate  them  in  all  their  fplendour,  the
walls  of  the  temple  are  hung  in  red,  and  lighted  up
with  an  immenfe  number  of  candles  or  lamps.       A

*  IiiRrmSlion  for  this  degiee.

f  IbiA  further  initruvfcions  on  the  admiflion  to  the  degree  of  Pïieft.


1


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

voke  is  at  length  heard,  faying,  "  Come  !  enter  unhap-
*'  py  fugitive  !  The  fathers  wait  for  you  ;  enter  and
"  lliut  the  door  after  you."  The  profelyte  obeys  the
voice  which  calls  him.  At  the  bottom  of  the  temple
he  beholds  a  throne  under  a  rich  canopy  with  a  table
before  it,  on  which  lie  a  crown,  a  fceptre,  a  fword,
(bme  pieces  of  gold  money,  and  precious  jewels,  all
interlaid  with  chains.  At  the  foot  of  this  table,  on  a
fcarlet  cufliion,  is  thrown  a  white  robe,  a  girdle,  and
the  fimple  ornaments  of  the  faccrdotal  coftume.  The
profelyte,  {landing  at  the  bottom  of  the  temple  and  in
fi-ont  of  the  throne,  is  addrelled  by  the  Hierophant  as
follows  :  "  Behold  and  fix  thine  eyes  on  the  fplcndour
"  of  the  throne»  If  all  this  childifh  mummery,  thefe
"  crowns,  thefe  fceptres,  and  all  thefe  monuments  of
"  human  degradation,  have  any  charms  in  your  eyes,
**  fpeak  ;  and  it  may  be  in  our  power  to  gratify  your
*'  wiflies.  Unhappy  man  !  if  fuch  are  your  objeds,  if
*'  you  willi  to  rife  to  power  that  you  may  affift  in  the
*'  opprefTion  of  your  Brethren,  go,  and  at  your  peril
"  make  the  trial.  Are  you  in  queft  of  power,  of
*'  force,  of  falfe  honours,  and  of  fuch  fuperfluities,
"  we  will  labour  for  you  ;  we  will  procure  fuch  tran^
*'  fient  advantages  for  you,  we  will  place  you  as  near
•'  the  throne  as  you  can  defire,  and  will  leave  you  to
*'  the  confequences  of  your  folly  ;  but  obferve,  our
"  fanduary  fliall  be  for  ever  fliut  againfl:  you."

"  On  the  contrary,  do  you  wifli  to  be  initiated  into
*'  wifdom,  would  you  teach  the  art  of  rendering  men
*'  better,  more  free  and  more  happy,  then  be  welcome,
"  be  thrice  welcome.  Here  you  behold  the  attributes
*'  of  Royalty,  and  there,  on  the  cufliion,  you  fee  the
*'  modeil  velbnent  of  innocence  ;  make  thy  choice,  and
''  let  it  be  the  choice  which  thy  heart  fliall  didate."

If  contrary  to  all  expectations,  the  Candidate  fliould
make  choice  of  the  regalia,  he  hears  a  thundering
voice  exclaim,  "  Monflier,  retire  !  ceafe  to  pollute  this
*'  holy  place  !  Begone,  fly,  before  it  be  too  late."  At
thefe  words  he  is  led  out  of  the  temple  by  the  Brother
who  introduced  him.— But  fliould  he  chufe  the  white
robe,  how  different  will  be  the  language  !  "  Health
"  and  falutation  to  thy  great  and  noble  foul  !  Such
*'  was  the  choice  wc  expeded  from  you.     But  flop,  it

Vok  HI.  P


97


9^  THS    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY."

**  is  not  permitted  to  you  to  inveft  yourfelf  with  tliaf
*'  robe,  until  you  have  learned  to  what  you  are  in
"  future  deftiiied  by  us."*

The  Candidate  is  then  ordered  to  be  feated.  The
Code  of  the  Myflerits  is  opened,  and  the  Brethren  in
filcnce  attend  to  the  Oracles  of  the  Hierophant.

Now,  reader,  you  who  have  been  through  lb  long  a
courfe  of  trials,  queflions,  rituals,  and  infidious  degrees;
who  have  been  led  through  all  the  preparatory  laby-
rinth of  illuminized  education,  if  ftill  you  be  in  the;
dark  as  to  the  objecT:  of  fuch  precautions  and  artifices,
follow  me  into  this  den  which  the  Std  dares  call  the
holy  place  ;  feat  thyfclf  by  the  adept,  and  liften  to  their
Oracles.— This  is  the  mailer-piece  of  the  founder.  Hear
with  patience,  though  your  indignation  fliould  be  ex-
cited by  his  monftrous  fertility  in  Sophifm,  in  impiety,
in  blafphemy  againft  your  gofpcl  and  your  God,  treach-
ery againft  your  Magiftrates,  your  country,  and  its
laws,  againft  your  titles  and  your  rights,  againft  thofe
of  your  anceftors  and  your  progeny— Let  Kings  and
Subjeds,  the  rich  and  poor,  the  merchant  and  the  la-
bourer, let  every  clafs  of  citizens  attend  ;  let  them
hearken,  and  learn  at  length  what  hellifli  plots  are
contriving  againft  them  in  the  dark  recedes  of  thefe
diabolical  dens.  In  vain  fhall  the  lethargic  foul  accufe
us  of  credulity  or  grotindlefs  terrors.  Thofe  leflbns
which  the  Sc6l  view  as  the  mafter-piece  of  their  code
lie  before  me,  fuch  as  they  flowed  from  the  pen  of  the
Legiflator,  fuch  as  they  were  publiflied  by  order  of  the
Sovereign  who  feized  the  archives  of  the  Seel,  that  all
nations  might  learn  the  dreadful  dangers  with  which
they  were  menaced.f  I  have  them  again  embellifhed
by  the  compiler  of  the  Sed;,  correcled  and  reviewed  by
the  Council  of  the  Areopagites,  attefted  by  the  compiler
as  true  and  conformable  to  the  copy  ligned  and  fealed
with  the  fignet  of  the  Seel.:}:

Read  then,  and  rock  thyfelf  to  fleep  in  t^ie  cradle  of
voluntary  ignorance  if  thou  canft,  content  with  having
alTured  thyi'elf  that  every  confpiracy  againft  the  ex-
iftence  of  civil  fociety  or  of  all  government  whatever,

*  Ihid.  further  Inftrudions  on  the  admiffion  to  the  degree  of  Prieft.
^  Original  WVitingjs,  VoL  II.  Part  2.

\  Laft  Works  of  Philo  and  Spartacus,  from  Page  10  to  "jO^  and  certi"» .
^cates  of  Fhilg  at  tlie  begiiuiiug  of  this  degree.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSÏ>IRACV^

every  confpiracy  againft  the  exigence  of  property,  can
be  but  a  chimera.

It  is  to  the  Candidate,  and  in  prefence  of  the  Breth-
ren ah'eady  initiated  to  thefe  mylleries,  tliat  the  IlUi-
loinizing  Prefident  addreffes  the  following  difcourfe  r

Difiourfe  of  the  Hierophaut  for  the  Degree  of  Prieji  or
Epopt  of  the  Illuminée s.X

"  At  length  (he  fays)  the  time  of  your  reward  fuc-
ceeds  to  the  trials  of  an  affiduoiis  preparaiitjn.  At
prefent  you  know  yourfelf,  and  have  learned  to  know
others  ;  you  are  what  you  ought  to  be,  fuch  as  we
wiflied.  to  fee  you.  It  will  now  be  your  duty  to  con-
dud  others. — What  you  already  know,  and  what  you
are  about  to  learn,  will  expofe  to  your  view  the  ex-
ti"eme  weakneis  of  human  nature.  In  this  advantage
(ilone  lies  the  true  fource  of  power  which  one  man  ex-
ercifes  over  another.  The  dark  clouds  dilîîpate  ;  the
fun  of  light  rifes  ;  the  gates  of  the  fanftuary  unfold  ;
a  portion  of  our  myfteries  is  going  to  be  revealed  to
you.  Let  the  gates  of  the  temple  be  flîut  againft  the
profane  ;  I  will  only  fpeak  to  the  lUuftrious,  to  the
Holy,  to  the  Eled:.  I  fpeak  to  thofe  who  have  ears
to  hear,  who  have  tongues  which  they  can  com-
jiiand,  and  who  have  minds  fuiïiciently  enlightened
to  underftand.

"  Surrounded  by  the  Illuftrious,  you  are  about  to
çnter  into  that  clals  which  bears  an  effential  part  in  the
government  of  our  fublime  Order.  But  do  you  know
what  it  is  to  govern,  can  you  conceive  what  this  right
can  be  in  a  fecret  fociety  ?  To  exercife  fuch  an  empire,
not  over  the  vulgar  or  the  grandees  of  the  people,  but

I  I  have  compared  the  two  editions  of  this  difcourfe.  The  firfl  gives
k  jull  as  Weifhuupt  compofed  and  pronounced  id  at  his  firfl  initiations.
The  fécond  has  been  correéted  by  his  adept  the  Baron  Kuiggc,  known
by  the  characSeriftic  of  Philo.  All  the  difference  that  I  could  obferve
was  a  flight  refinement  of  the  fiyle  in  fome  parts,  while  prolix  paf-
fages  had  been  added  in  others.  I  remarked,  that  the  Compiler  Knigge
had  literally  copied  all  the  impious,  feditious,  and  frantic  ieflbns  of  the
original — I  have  given  the  preference  to  the  original.  In  place  of  adding,
I  fhall  rather  retrench,  and  only  mention  the  moft  ftriking  pafTages,
making  fuch  refle(5tions  as  circumftances  may  require.  Weifliaupt,  ac-
cording to  the  idiom  of  the  German  language,  always  addrefied  the
Candidate  in  the  third  perfon  plural  :  in  this  particular,  we  have  follov/--
•fd  Knigge 's  corresSion,  as  more  fuitable  with  our  language.

Vol.    III.  P    2


99


ÏO»  "THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY

over  the  moft  accomplîflied  men,  over  men  in  all  fta*
tions,  of  all  nations,  of  all  religions  ;  to  reign  over  them
without  any  exterior  conllraint,  to  keep  them  united
by  du:-able  bonds,  to  infpire  them  all  with  one  fpirit  ;
to  govern  with  all  poffible  precifion,  aélivity,  and  fi-
lence,  men  fpread  over  the  whole  furface  of  the  globe,
even  to  its  utmoll  confines.  This  is  a  problem  which
ro  political  wifdom  has  ever  been  able  to  folve.  To
reunite  the  diftinclions  of  Equality,  Defpotifm,  and  Li-
berty ;  to  prevent  the  treafons  and  perfccutions  which
would  be  the  inevitable  confequences  ;  of  nothing,  to
create  great  Uiings  ;  to  (land  firm  againft  the  fwelling
torrent  of  evils  and  abufe  ;  to  make  happinefs  univer-
fally  fiîine  on  human  nature  ;  would  be  a  mafter-piece
of  morality  and  polity  reunited.  The  civil  conftitu-
tlons  of  dates  offer  but  little  aid  to  fuch  an  undertake
ing.  Fear  and  violence  are  their  grand  engines  ;
with  us,  each  one  is  voluntarily  to  lend  his  affiilance.
....  Were  men  what  they  ought  to  be,  we  might  on
their  firft  admiffion  into  our  fociety  explain  the  great-
nefs  of  our  plans  to  them  ;  but  the  lure  of  a  fecret  is
perhaps  the  only  mean  of  retaining  thofe  who  might
turn  their  backs  upon  us  as  foon  as  their  curiofity  had
been  gratified  :  The  ignorance  or  imperfed  education
of  many  makes  it  requifite  that  they  fliould  be  firft
formed  by  our  moral  leflbns.  The  complaints,  the
murmurs  of  others  againft  the  trials  to  which  we  are
obliged  to  condemn  them,  fufficiently  fliow  you  what
pains  we  muft  beftow,  with  what  patience  and  what
conftancy  we  muft  be  endowed;  how  intenfely  the  love
of  the  grand  objed  muft  glow  in  our  hearts,  to  make
lis  keep  true  to  our  pofts  in  the  midft  of  fuch  unthank-
ful labour  ;  and  not  abandon  for  ever  the  hope  of  re-
generating mankind."

"  It  is  to  partake  with  ns  of  thefe  labours  that  you
have  been  called.  To  obferve  others  day  and  night  ;
to  form  them,  to  fuccour  them,  to  watch  over  them  ;
to  ftimulate  the  courage  of  the  puiillanimous,  the  ac-
tivity and  the  zeal  of  the  lukewarm  •  to  inftrud  the  ig-
norant ;  to  raife  up  thofe  who  have  fallen,  to  fortify
thofe  who  ftagger  ;  to  reprefs  the  ardour  of  raflmefs,
to  prevent  difunion  ;  to  veil  the  faults  and  weakntlfes
of  others  ;  to  guard  againft  the  acute  inquifitivenefs  of
>vit  ',  to  prevent  imprudtnc&  and  treafon  j  in  fliort,  tQ


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  101

maintain  the  fubordination  to  and  ellcem  of  our  Sip-
periors,  and  friendihip  and  union  among  the  Brethren,
are  the  duties,  among  others  dill  greater,  that  we
imp(ife  upon  you."

"  Have  you  any  idea  of  fecret  focieties  ;  of  the  rank
they  hold,  or  of  the  parts  they  perform  in  the  events
of  this  world  ?  Do  you  view  them  as  infigniiicant  or
tranfient  meteors  ?  O,  Brother  !  God  and  Nature,  when
difpofing  of  all  things  according  to  the  proper  times
and  places,  had  their  admirable  ends  in  view  ;  and  they
tnakj  life  of  tbefs  fecret  focieties  as  the  only  and  as  the
indifpei  fable  means  of  conduUing  us  thither ^

"  Hearken,  and  may  you  be  tilled  with  admiration  !
This  is  the  point  whither  all  the  moral  tends  ;  it  is  on
this  that  depends  the  knowledge  of  the  right  of  fecret
focieties,  of  all  our  dodlrine,  of  all  our  ideas  of  good
and  bad,  of  jult  and  unjuft.  You  are  here  fituated  be-
tween the  world  pail  and  the  world  to  come.  Cad
your  eyes  boldly  on  what  has  paffed,  and  in  an  inilant
ten  thoufand  bolts  (hall  fall,  and  thoufands  of  gates
fliall  burft  open  to  futurity — You  (hall  behold  the  inex-
hauilible  riches  of  God  and  of  Nature,  the  degradation
and  the  dignity  of  man.  You  fliall  fee  the  world  and
human  nature  in  its  youth,  if  not  in  its  childhood,  even
there  where  you  thought  to  find  it  in  its  decrepitude
and  verging  towards  its  ruin  and  ignominy."

Should  this  long  exordium,  which  I  have  neverthe-
lefs  abridged,  have  fatigued  the  reader,  let  him  reft
and  refled  for  an  inftant.  The  enthuiiaftic  ftrain
which  predominates  in  this  firft  part  pervades  the
whole.  Weifhaupt  thought  it  neceflary  to  his  objeét
to  afford  his  profelytes  no  time  for  refleélion.  He  be-
gins by  inflaming  them  ;  he  promifes  great  things  ;
though  this  impious  and  artful  mountebank  knows
that  he  is  going  to  fob  them  off  with  the  greatcll  fol-
lies, the  grolfell  impieties  and  errors.  I  have  called
him  an  impious  and  artful  mountebank  ;  but  that  is
falling  far  Ihort  of  what  the  proofs  atteft.  Weifliaupt
knows  that  he  deceives,  and  wiflies  to  delude  his  pro-
felytes in  the  moll  atrocious  manner.  When  he  has
milled,  he  feoffs  at  them,  and  with  his  contidants  de-
rides their  imbecility.  He  has,  however,  his  reafons
for  beguiling  them,  and  knows  for  what  ufes  he  in-
tends ihcm  when  he  has  ijifufed  into  them  his  erroneous


lOÎ  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

and  vicious  principles.  Tlie  gi-eater  the  confideration
they  may  enjoy  in  the  world,  the  more  heartily  he
Liughs  at  their  delulion.  He  thus  writes  jto  his  inti-
mate friends  :  "  You  cannot  conceive  how  much  my
**  degree  of  Priell;  is  admired  by  our  people.  But
*'  what  is  the  mofl  extraordinary  is,  that  lèverai  great
*^  protcftant  and  reformed  divines,  who  are  of  our  Or-
«  der,  really  believe  that  that  part  of  the  difcourfe
**  which  alludes  to  religion  contains  the  true  fpirit  and
**  real  fenie  of  Chriftianity  ;  poor  mortals  !  what  could
«  /  not  make  you  helievc-  ? — Candidly  I  own  to  you,
"  that  I  never  thought  of  becoming  the  founder  of  a
*'  religion."*  In  this  manner  does  the  impoftor  de-
lude his  followers,  and  then  feoffs  at  them  in  private.
Tiiefe  great  divines  were  probably  of  that  clafs  among
the  proteftants  which  we  fliould,  among  us,  call  apol-
tates,  a  Syeyes  or  an  Autun,  for  example  ;  for  it  is
impo'Bble  that  any  man  endowed  with  common  fenfe
or  candour  could  avoid  feeing  that  the  whole  tendency
of  this  long  difcourfe  is  the  total  overthrow  of  all  re-
ligion and  of  all  government.

A  fécond  obfervation  well  worthy  the  notice  of  our
readers  is,  the  extreme  importance  which  the  Seel  gives
to  flxret  focictiesy  and  what  mighty  expedations  it
grounds  on  their  myfterious  exillence.  Let  nations
and  chiefs  of  nations  examine  themfelves,  reflect  whe-
ther they  have  ever  calculated  the  means  and  impor-
tance of  thcfe  fecret  focieties  fo  well  as  thofe  who
founded  them  ;  and  fay,  whether  fear  and  difndencç
on  the  one  fide  fliould  not  keep  pace  with  the  cxpeda-
tions  and  conlidcnce  of  the  other.  But  let  us  retur»
to  the  Lodge  wherein  Weifhaupt  initiates  his  adepts.

Continuing  his  enthuiiaftic  (train,  the  Hierophant  in-
forms the  profelyte,  tliat  Nature,  having  a  great  plan
to  develop,  begins  by  the  lefler  and  moft  imperftft
parts  ;  that  flie  then  regularly  proceeds  to  the  middle
terms,  to  bring  things  to  a  ftate  of  perfection  ;  which
ftate  may  ferve  as  a  point  whence  ilie  may  again  de>«
part,  to  raife  them  to  a  higher  order  of  perfedion.

"  Nature  (fiiys  he)  makes  us  begin  at  infancy,  from

'  infancy  flie  raifes  us  to  manhood.     She  at  firft  left  us

in  the  favage  ftate,  but  foon  brought  us  to  civilization,

•  Grig.  Writ.  Vol.  II.  Let.  i8,  from  Weifhaupt  to  Zwack


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

perhaps  that  we  might  be  more  fenfihle,  more  enrap-
tured and  tenacious  of  what  we  are,  from  viewing  the
contraft  of  what  we  were.  But  to  what  changes,  and
thole  of  an  order  infinitely  more  important,  does  our
future  deftiny  lead  us!"

Were  the  candidate  mafter  of  his  own  reafon,  he  ^
mufl  conclude  from  thefe  jMinciples,  that  human  na-
ture had  acquired  perfection  when  palling  from  the
lavage  Hate  to  that  of  civil  fociety  ;  that  if  he  is  ftill
to  acquire  perfection  it  can  never  be  by  returning  to
his  primitive  ftate.  But  fophifters  have  their  tortuofi-
ties,  and  the  adepts  are  involved  in  a  folly  and  blind-
nefs,  with  which  the  Almighty  God  permits  them  to
be  ftricken,  fince  they  prefer  error  to  truth,  and  im-
piety to  Chrillianity.

"  As  has  the  individual  man  (continues  the  Hiero-
phant)  fo  human  nature  in  the  aggregate  has  its  child-
hood, its  youth,  its  manhood,  and  its  old  age.  At  each
of  thefe  periods  mankind  learn  and  are  fubjed  to  frelh
wants- — hence  arife  their  political  and  moral  revolu-
tions  It  is  at  the  age  of  manhood  that  human  na---

ture  appears  in  all  its  dignity.  It  is  then  that,  taught
by  long  experience,  man  conceives  at  length  how  great
a  misfortune  it  is  for  him  to  invade  the  rights  of  others,
to  avail  himfelf  of  fome  few  advantages,  purely  exte-
rior, to  raife  himfelf,  to  the  prejudice  of  others.  It  is
then  that  he  fees  and  feels  the  happinefs  and  dignity  of
man."

"  The  firft  age  of  mankind  is  that  of  favage  and
uncouth  nature.  A  family  is  the  whole  fociety  ;
hunger  and  thirft  eafily  quenched,  a  flielter  from  the
inclemency  of  the  feafons,  a  woman,  and  after  fatigue,
reft,  are  then  the  only  wants.  At  that  period,  men  en-
joyed the  tvjo  moji  iiicjlwiable  hlejjings  Equality  Ana
Liberty  ;  they  enjoyed  them  to  their  utw.oji  extent  ;
they  zcould  have  forever  enjoyed  them,  had  they  chofcn  to
fclloiv  the  track  vjhich  Nature  had  traced  for  them — or
had  it  not  entered  the  plans  of  God  and  Nature  firft  to
fliow  man  for  ivhat  happinefs  he  luas  dejîhied  ;  happi-
nefs the  more  precious,  as  he  had  begun  by  tafting  of
it;  happinefs  fo  early  loft,  but  inftantancoully  regretted
and  fruitlefsly  fought  after,  until  he  fliould  have  learn-
ed liow  to  make  a  proper  life  ofhisjirength,  and  how  to
conduct  himfelf  i.o  bis  intercQUxie  with  the  reft  of


loj


'104  *'HE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

mankind.  In  his  primitive  ftate  he  was  deflitute  of
tlie  conveniencies  of  life,  but  he  was  not  on  that  ac-
count unhappy  ;  not  knowing  them  he  did  not  feel
the  want  of  them.  Heakh  was  his  ordinary  ftate,  and
phyfical  pain  was  his  only  fource  of  uneafinefs — Oh
hippy  mortals  /  ivho  ivere  not  fufficicntly  enlightened  to
ililliirh  the  repofc  of  your  mind,  or  to  feel  tbofe  great
agents  of  our  niifcries  the  love  of  power  and  of  diji inc-
itons, the  propenlity  to  fenfuality,  the  thirft  after  the
repreientative  ligns  of  all  wealth,  thofe  t;uly  original
fus  with  all  their  progeny,  envy,  avarice,  intempe-
rance, ficknefs,  and  all  tlie  tortures  of  imagination  V

Thus  we  fee  this  primitive  and  favage  ftate,  this
firft  cflay  of  Nature,  already  transformed  (in  the
mouth  of  the  Hierophant)  into  the  happieft  ftate  that
man  ever  knew  :  Equality  and  Liberty  are  the  fove-
reign  principles  of  happinefs  in  that  ftate.  Should  the
reader  be  as  much  blinded  as  the  profelyte,  and  not
fee  whither  all  this  is  tending,  let  him  proceed,  and
hear  how  man  was  deprived  of  this  happinefs  by  the
inftitution  of  civil  focieties.

"An  unfortunate  germ  foon  vivifies  in  the  breaft  oî
man,  and  his  primitive  peace  and  felicity  difappear."

"  As  families  multiplied,  the  means  of  lubfiftence
began  to  fail  ;  the  nomade  (or  roaming)  life  cenfd,  and.
PROPERTY  farted  into  exijience  ;  men  choie  habi-
tations ;  agriculture  made  them  intermix.  Language
became  univerfal  ;  living  together,  one  man  began  to
meafure  liis  ftrength  with  another,  and  the  weaker
were  diftinguillied  from  the  ftrongcr.  This  undoubt-
edly created  the  idea  of  mutual  defence,  of  one  indi-
vidual governing  divers  famihes  reunited,  and  of  thus
defending  their  perfons  and  their  fields  againft  the  in-
vafion  of  an  enemy  ;  but  hence  Liberty  ivas  ruined
in  its  foundation  and  Equality  difappeared.

"  Oppreifed  with  wants  unknown  until  that  period,
man  perceived  that  his  own  powers  were  no  longer
fufficient.  To  fupply  this  defeft,  the  weakeft  impru-
dently fubmitted  to  the  ftrongeft  or  to  the  wifcft  ;  not
however  to  be  ill-treated,  but  that  he  might  be  pro-
teded,  conducTied,  and  enlightened.- — All  fubmiffion,
therefore,  even  of  the  moft  unpoliflied  mortal,  has  an
■  cxiftence  only  in  as  much  as  he  wants  the  perfon  to
whom  he  fubjeds  himfelf,  and  on  the  exprefs  conditioa


t-HE    A^ISOCIAL    CONSPÎIUOT.

that  Aat  pei-fon  can  fuccour  him.  His  power  ceafei
when  my  weaknefs  no  longer  exijis,  or  xvben  ahother
acquires  fuperiority.  Kings  are  fathers  ;  the  paternal
power  is  at  an  end  when  the  child  has  aapdred  his
Jirength.  The  father  would  offend  his  childreti  if  he
pretended  to  prolong  his  rights  beyond  that  term.  Every,
man  having  attained  to  years  uf  difcretion  may  govern
himfelf;  when  a  vjholc  nation  therefore  is  arrived  at
that  period^  there  can  exiji  no  further  plea  for  keeping .
it  in  wardpnp.^^

In  putting  fuch  language  into  the  mouth  of  the  Hie-
rophant,  the  founder  of  Ilkiaiinifm  had  too  well  (ludicd
the  llrength  and  ilkiilon  of  words  ;  he  had  been  too
cautious  in  the  choice  and  preparation  of  his  adepts
ever  to  fear  that  any  of  them  would  anfwer,  ^'  You
who  thus  give  oracles,  what  do  you  linderftand  by  na-
tions having  attained  their  majority?  Without  doubt
fuch  as,  having  emerged  from  ignorance  and  bar-
barifm,  have  acquired  the  lights  necelfary  for  their
happinefs  ;  and  to  what  can  they  be  indebted  for  thefe
lights  and  this  happinefs,  if  not  to  their  civil  affocia-
tion  I  It  will  be  then,  if  ever,  that  they  will  find  it
both  reafouable  and  neceflary  to  remain  under  the
guardianflnp  of  their  laws  and  of  tlieir  government^
lell  they  fliould  fall  back  into  the  barbarifm  and  ig-
norance of  the  roaming  clans,  or  be  precipitated  into
the  horrors  of  anarchy,  from  revolution  to  revolution,
under  the  fuccelTive  tyranny  of  the  brigand,  of  the  ex-
ecutioner of  the  fophifticated  defpot,  or  under  that  of
a  fophifter  Syeyes  and  his  colegiflative  Marfeillois,  of.
a  Robefpierre  and  his  guillotines,  of  the  Triumvirs
and  their  profcriptions.  The  populace  alone  in  the
minority  of  ignorance,  the  fophifters  alone  in  the
majority  of  wickcdnefs  and  corruption,  fliall  applaud
thy   myfteries."

Certain  of  not  meeting  with  fuch  refleftlons  from
the  adepts,  the  Hierophant  continues  to  inculcate  his
principles  by  attributing  every  thing  to  ftrength,  and
deftroying  all  principles  of  morality  or  of  reafon,
though  he  will  affcd  the  tone  of  both  ;  and  ends  by
forming  his  judgment  on  man  in  fociety,  as  he  would
judge  tigers  and  wild  beafts  in  the  fore  il*— Thefe  ar«
Jiis  new  doctrines.

Yol.  III.  Q^


■J05


I0(î  "fHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV.

"  Never  did  ftrength  fubmit  to  weaknefs.— Nature
has  deftined  the  weak  to  ferve,  becaufe  they  have
wants  ;  the  (b-ong  man  to  govern,  becaui'e  he  can  be
lifeful.  Let  the  one  lofe  his  force,  and  the  other  ac-
quire it,  they  will  then  change  fituations,  and  he  that
obeyed  will  command.  He  that  ftands  in  need  of  an-
other, alfo  depends  upon  him,  and  he  has  renounced
to  him  his  rights.  Hence  few  wants  is  the  firfl:  ftep  to-
wards liberty.  It  is  for  this  reafon  that  the  favages  are
the  mojl  enlightened  of  men,  and  perhaps  they  alone  are-
free.*  Wlien  wants  are  durable,  fervitude  is  alfo  lad-
ing. Safety  ;s  a  durable  want.  Had  men  refrained
from  all  injuftice,  they  would  have  remained  free  ;  it
was  injuftice  which  made  them  bend  beneath  the  yoke.
To  acquire  fafety,  they  depofited  the  whole  force  in
the  hands  of  one  man  ;  and  thus  created  a  new  evilj,
that  of  fear.  The  work  of  their  own  hands  frighten-
ed them  ;  and  to  live  in  fafety  they  robbed  thenifelveà
of  that  very  fafety.  This  is  the  cafe  of  our  govern-
ments— Where  then  Jlmll  %ue  find  a  pi'oteâing  force  ?  In
imion  ;  but  how  rare  alas  !  is  that  union,  except  in  our
'  new  and  fecret  afiociations,  better  guided  by  wildoîTi»,

and  leagued  in  flraitcr  bonds  !  and  hence  it  is  that  na-
ture itfelf  inclines  us  towards  thcfe  affociations."

Subtle  as  is  the  artifice  in  this  defcription  of  human
nature,  and  in  that  affcclation  of  beholding  on  the  one
lide  nothing  but  tyrants  and  defpots,  and  on  the  other
only  opprelîed  and  trembling  flaves  in  the  ftate  of  fo-
ciety  ;  whatever  fliare  nature  may  have  had  in  the  in-
ftitution  of  fecial  order,  or  in  reclaiming  mankind  fi'om
forefts  and  wildcrncfies  to  live  under  laws  and  a  com-
mon chief;  the  Hierophant  neverthelefs  exultingly  ex-
claims, "  Such  is  the  faithful  and  philofophic  pifture  of
clefpotifni  and  of  liberty,  of  our  wiflies  and  of  our
fears,  Defpotifm  was  engrafted  on  liberty,  and  fronl
defpotifm  fliall  liberty  once  more  fpring.  The  re-
union of  men  in  focicty  is  at  once  the  cradle  and  the
grave  of  defpotifm  ;  it  is  alfo  the  grave  and  cradle  of
liberty.  We  ivere  once  poJJl'Jfed  of  liberty,  and  ive  lofi'
it,  but  to  find  it  ngahi  and  7iever  to  lofe  it  more  ;  to  leai  n
hy  tJ)e  very  privation  of  it  the  art  of  better  enjoying  it  in
Juiiire.^'     Reader,  obierve  thefe  words;  if  they  do  not

*  Barum  find  -vvilde,  un  J  im  hochHen  grad  au'";;jekKirtc,  veiUcichv
die  eiiizigc  frcyc  menfcheu.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPiRACY.

«viJeiitly  point  out  the  objecl  of  the  Seel,  if  you  do  not
perceive  the  willi  of  bringing  mankind  back  to  thofe
ri!nes  of  the  fionmde  herds  of  favages,  and  of  men  dei-
titute  oi property,  laws,  or  government,  read  and  con-
vince yourfelf  by  what  follows  :  "  Nature  drevj  men
from  the  favage  Jtate  atid  re-united  them  in  civil  focie-
ties  ;  from  thefe  focieties  ive  proceed  to  furth.'r  •ivif?es,
and  to  a  vAfer  choice  (aus  den  Jiaaten  tretten  ivir  in  fieue
kliiger  gewahlte.)  New  ajfociutions  prefint  thcmfehes
to  thefe  %uip?es,  and  by  their  means  we  return  to  the  Ji ate
whence  xve  came,  not  again  to  run  the  former  courfe^

hut  better  to  enjoy  our  new  dejiiny let  us  explain

this  myftery."

"  Men  then  had  pa(fed  from  their  peaceable  fif.te  to  the
yoke  of fè?-vitude  ;  Eden,  that  terrejirial  paradifi,  was  loji
to  them,  Suhjeâs  of  (in  and  Jlavery,  they  were  reduced
to  /èrvitude,  and  obliged  to  gain  their  bread  by  the  fweat
of  their  bro%u. — In  the  number  of  thefe  men  fome  pro-
mifed  to  proteft,  and  thus  became  their  chiefs— at  lirft
they  reigned  over  herds  or  clans — thefe  were  foon  ei-
ther conquered,  or  united  together  in  order  to  form  a
numerous  people  ;  hence  arofe  nations  and  their  chieft
—Kings  of  nations.  At  the  formation  of  ftates  and
nations,  the  world  ceafed  to  be  a  great  family,  to  be  a
fingle  empire  j  the  great  bond  of  nature  was  rent
alunder."

The  impudence  of  fuch  alTertions  mull;  aftonifh  the
reader  ;  he  will  alk  himfelf,  can  there  poffibly  exift
beings  thus  belying  evidence  itfelf,  and  pretending  to
fliuw  the  univerfe  forming  but  one  and  the  fame  fami-
ly, and  the  grand  bond  of  nature  in  thofe  roaming  and
fcattered  herds,  where  the  child  can  fcarcely  walk
when  he  is  feparated  from  liis  father  ?  How  is  it  pof-
fible  to  reprefent  mankind  as  divorcing  from  the  great
family,  at  the  very  period  when  they  unite  under  the
fame  chiefs  and  the  fame  laws,  for  their  mutual  pro-
tection and  fafety  ?  But,  reader,  fiifpend  thy  indigna-
tion. Let  us  call  up  in  evidence  againft  the  Seal  thofe
■brigands  and  fophiflicated  murderers  which  it  decora-
ted with  the  high-founding  title  of  Patriots,  and  which-
it  ftimulated  to  bloodllied  and  methodized  murder  by
t'ne  fanaticiling  founds  of  people,  nation,  country.  At
-tlie  very  time  that  they  rend  the  air  with  fuch  accents^,

Vol.  III.  CL  2


107


lot  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

with  names  fo  dear  as  they  pretend,  hear  the  maledic-
tions which  their  myfleries  heap  upon  every  people,
every  nntion,  every  couutiy.

At  th;it  pericKi  when  men  re-united  and  formed  na-
tions, "  they  ceafed  to  acknowledge  a  common  name —
Natmiallfin,  or  the  love  for  a  particular  nation,  took
place  of  the  j^eneral  love.  With  the  divifion  of  the
globe  and  of  its  ftates,  benevolence  was  reftrained
within  certain  liniits,  beyond  ^vhich  it  could  no  longer
trtTpafs.- — Then  it  became  a  merit  to  extend  the
bounds  of  dates  at  the  expence  of  the  neighbouring
ones.  Then  it  became  lawful  to  abufe,  oifcnd,  and
defpile  foreigners,  to  attain  that  end — and  this  vi?'tue
\vas  Jtykd  patrioiifm  ;  and  he  was  ftyled  a  patriot  y  who,
juft  towards  his  countrymeh,  and  unjuft  to  others,  was
blind  to  the  merits  of  llrangers,  and  believed  the  very
vices  of  his  own  country  to  be  perfections. — In  fuch  a
cafe,  why  not  reftrain  that  love  within  a  narrower
compafs,  to  citizens  living  in  the  fame  town,  or  to  the
members  of  one  family  ;  or  why  even  fliould  not  each
perfon  have  concentrated  his  affcdions  in  himfelf  ?  We
really  beheld  Patriotijm  generating  Localifm,  the  confined
fpirit  of  families,  and  at  length  Egotifm.  Hence  the  ori-
gin of  ji ate  s  and  governments,  and  of  civil  fociety,  has
really  proved  to  be  the  feeds  of  difcord,  and  Patriotiftn
has  found  its  pnnifmient  in  itfelf.  ....  Dhninifh,  re-
jcd  that  love  of  the  country,  and  mankind  will  once  more
learn  to  knoiv  and  love  each  other  as  men.  Partiality
heing  caft  afide,  that  union  of  hearts  will  once  more
appear  and  expand  itfelf— on  the  contrary,  extend  the
bonds  of  Patriotifm,  and  you  will  teach  man  that  it  is
inipoHible  to  blame  the  cloier  contraftion  of  love,  to  a
fingle  family,  to  a  fingle  perfon,  in  a  word,  to  the
fîrïdfi  Egotifn:'

But  let  us  abridge  thefe  blafphemies.  The  Hiero-
phant,  under  pretence  of  his  univerfal  love,  may  vent
his  fpleen  againft  the  diftinélions  of  Greeks  or  Komaîis,
of  French  or  Englifli,  of  Italian  or  Spanilli,  oï  Pagan
or  Jev:,  of  Chriflians  or  Mahometans,  which  denote
nations  and  their  religions  :  he  may  repeat,  if  he
pltafes,  that  amidft  thele  different  denominations  that
of  man  is  ovei looked;  what  will  be  the  refult  of  fuch
declamation: — With  our  illuminizing  docS:or,  in  conv*
»ion  with  every  dafs  of  the  diforganiz,ing  fophifters.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

is  not  this  pretended  univerfal  love  to  be  a  cloak  for
the  moft  odious  hypocrify  ?  He  only  pretends  to  uni-
vcrfal  philanthropy,  that  he  may  difpenie  with  loving  his
neighbour.  He  detefts  the  love  of  one's  country,  only
becaufe  he  detefts  the  laws  of  nations  ;  he  cannot  even
brook  the  love  of  one's  family  (he  has  given  us  a  line
fpecimen  in  the  perfon  of  his  lifter,)  and  he  will  iubfti-
tute  that  univerfal  love  becaufe  he  is  no  more  attached
to  them  than  he  is  to  the  Chinefe,  the  Tartar,  or  the
Hottentot,  which  he  neither  has  feen  nor  ever  will  fee,
and  that  all  human  nature  may  be  equally  indifferent
to  him.  He  extends  the  bond  that  it  may  lofe  its  elaf-
ticity  and  difcontinue  its  adion.— He  calls  himfelf  citi-
zen of  the  univerfe,  that  he  may  ceafe  to  be  a  citizen
in  his  own  country,  a  friend  in  fociety,  or  a  fond  father
and  dutiful  child  in  his  own  family.  His  love,  he  tells
us,  extends  from  pole  to  pole,  that  he  may  love  no-
thing that  is  near  him.  Such  is  the  philanthropy  of
our  Cjfmopolites  !

The  profelyte  ftands  aftoniflicd  in  ftupid  admiration
at  thefe  expreffions  of  univerfal  love.  The  Hierophanc
proceeds  to  the  Codes  of  Nations.  Still  in  extafy  at
thefe  dodrines,  he  learns  that  they  are  in  dired  oppoii-
tion  to  the  lavjs  of  nature  ;  nor  will  he  even  perceive
that  his  new  code  is  in  dired  oppoiition  to  the  very
firft  laws  of  nature,  as  it  eradicates  the  love  of  one's
own  family  and  that  of  one's  country.  Nor  will  he
alk,  why  the  fulfilling  of  his  duty  towards  his  fellow-
countrymen  fhould  hinder  him  from  treating  the  bar-
barian or  the  favage  with  proper  affedion  ?  Then
follow  new  fophifras,  to  perfuade  the  adept  that  the
original  fault  of  man  was,  the  derelidion  of  the  Equa-
lity and  Liberty  of  the  favage  ftate  by  the  inftitution  of
civil  laws.

Here,  more  than  ever,  are  calumny  and  hatred
blended  with  enthufiafm  by  the  Hierophant,  who,  re-
viewing the  different  ages  of  the  world  fmce  the  exift-
ence  of  civil  inftitutions,  pidures  nations  as  groaning
under  oppreffion,  defpotifm,  and  flavery,  oi*  glutted
with  the  blood  of  wars  and  revolutions,  which  always
terminate  in  tyranny.  At  one  time  it  is  the  repi-efen-
tation  of  Kings  furrounding  themfelves  with  herds  or
legions  called  fokliers,  in  order  to  gratify  their  ambi-
tion by  conquefts  on  ftrangers,  or  to  reign  by  terrov


1 09


jlQ  THE    AJS:TISaCIAL    CONSPIRACY,

over  llicir  enflaved  fubjefts  ;  at  other  times,  it  is  the
people  themfelves  brandifhing  their  arms,  not  to  attack
tyranny  in  its  fource,  but  merely  to  change  their  ty-
rants. If  they  think  of  giving  themfelves  reprefenta-
tives,  it  is  thefe  very  rcprefentatives,  ivbo,  jorgetting
that  they  only  hold  their  miffions  and  poivers  from  th<i
people,  form  Arijhcraciss  and  Oligarchies,  which  all  end
by  flowing  into  the  general  refervcir  of  Monarchy  and
Defpotifm.  He  never  lofes  fight  of  his  fbphifm  of  hu-
ïiian  nature  degraded  and  vilined  under  the  yoke  of
tyranny.  Thefe  declamations,  enthuiiaflically  pro-
nounced, at  length  make  the  profelyte  exclaim,  in  uni-
fon  with  his  mailer,  "  Are  fuch  then  the  confequeiices  of
"  the  inJHtution  of  Jiates  and  of  civil  focicty  ?  0  folly  f
*'  oh  peopk  /  that  you  did  not  forefee  the  fate  that  await.
"  ed  you;  that  you  (hoidd  yourfelvcs  have  feconded  your
*'  defpots  in  degrading  human  nature  to  fervitude,  and
"  even  to  the  condition  of  the  brute  /"

Could  a  true  philofopher  have  been  prefent,  his  heart
muft  have  buril  with  generous  indignation  ;  he  would
have  abruptly  challenged  the  Hierophant  to  declare
whence  he  had  learned  to  metamorphofe  the  annals  of
fociety  into  thofe  of  brigands  and  monfters  I  Is  the
hiftory  of  man  then  reduced  to  the  records  of  plagues^
famines,  ftorms,  tempefts,  or  of  convuUed  elements  ?
Have  no  ferene  days  Ihone  on  man  ?  Shall  the  fun  be
reprefented  as  a  malevolent  objec^^  becaufe  it  is  fome-
times  obfcured  by  fogs  or  clouds  ?  Are  we  to  fly  from
our  habitations  becaufe  many  have  been  deftroyed  by
fire  ?  Shall  we  curfe  life  and  health  becaufe  we  are
fubjeél  to  pains  and  infirmities  ?  Why  elfe  this  fable
painting  of  the  difailers  which  have  in  the  courfe  of
ages  befallen  civil  fociety  ?  Why  are  we  to  be  iilent
on  the  misfortunes  from  which  it  has  preferved  us,  or
on  the  advantages  which  it  has  heaped  on  man,  in  re-
claiming him  from  the  forefls  ?

But  the  voice  of  reafon  cannot  penetrate  into  the
den  of  confpiracy.  The  oracles  of  Wcifhaupt  fnall
there  be  confidently  repeated  by  the  Hierophant.  He
draws  nigher  and  nigher  to  the  grand  objed,  to  the
means  of  making  thofe  misfortunes  difappear,  which
originate,  as  he  pretends,  in  the  inftitution  of  laws
îind  gov>.  rnments.  "  Oh  nature  !"  he  continues,  "  how
great  and  iaconteilible  are  thy  rights  !     It  is  from  the


T!îE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY;  ill

womb  of  dilafter  and  mutual  deflruc^ion  that  tlie
means  of  f.ifety  fpring  !  OppreflTion  difappears  becaufe
it  meets  with  abettors,  and  reafon  regains  its  riglits
becaufe  people  willi  to  ftifle  it.  He,  at  leall,  who
wiihes  to  millead  others,  Ihould  feek  to  govern  them
by  the  advantages  of  inllrutftion  and  fcience.  Kings
themfelves  at  length  perceive,  that  there  is  little  glory
in  reigning;  over  ignorant  herds — Legiflators  beoin  to
acquire  wiidom,  and  they  favour  property  and  induftry:
— perverfe  motives  propagate  the  fcience?,  and  King.'i
proted  them  as  agents  of  oppreffion.  Other  mcil
profit  of  them  to  inveftigate  the  origin  of  their  rights^
They  at  length  feize  on  that  unknown  mean  of  for-
warding a  revolution  in  the  human  mind,  and  of  thus
triumpl:!ing  for  ever  over  oppreffion.  But  the  triumph
would  be  of  ihort  duration,  and  man  would  fall  back
iiito  his  degraded  Hate,  had  not  Providence  in  thofe
dillant  ages  hufbanded  the  means  which  it  has  tranfmit-
ted  down  to  us,  of  fecretly  meditating  and  at  length
operating  the  falvation  of  human  kind.

"  Tbefd  means  tire,  the  fecret  fcbools  of  Philofophy.
Tb.Ji'  Jchools  have  been  hi  all  ages  the  archives  of  nature

find    OF    THE    RIGHTS    OF    MAN.        Thcfc  fchools    f^dU  OUC

dnv  retrieve  the  fall  of  himinJi  nature,  and  Princhs  and
Nations  shall  disappear  from  the  face  of  the
EARTH,  and  that  ivithoiit  any  violence.  Human  nature
fhall  form  one  great  family,  and  the  earth  fliall  become
the  habitation  of  the  man  of  reafon.— Morality  fliall
alone  produce  this  great  Revolution.  The  day  fJmll
come  ivhen  each  father  fliall,  like  Abraham  and  the  Pa-
Iriarchs,  become  the  Priejl  and  abfolute  fovereign  of  his
family.  Reason  shall  be  the  only  book  of  laws,
the  fole  code  of  man.  This  is  one  of  our  grand
MYSTERIES.  Attcnd  to  the  demonjlratio?!  of  it,  and
karn  how  it  has  been  trnnfmitted  down  to  us.'*

I  have  already  faid,  that  had  my  objeft  been  only  to
prove  the  reality  of  a  Confpiracy  formed  by  Illuminifnt
againft  the  cxiftencc  of  every  focicty,  every  civil  code,
and  every  nation  ;  thcfc  lelfons  of  the  Hierophanc
would  render  every  other  proof  fuperfluous.  But  that
thiC  reader  may  know  the  full  extent  of  tlie  dangers
which  threaten  us,  it  is  rectflary  that  he  fliould  be
fliown  how  thofe  plots  of  frenzy  become  really  tranl^
formed  into  plots  of  prufound  v/ickcdj^efs  ;    that  he


lia  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

fhoukl  be  acquainted  with  the  means  employed  enthu-
liaftically  to  inflame  the  minds  of  whole  legions  of
adepts.  Let  us  tlien  attend  to  the  Hicrophant.  If
patience  be  neccffary  to  follow  him,  greater  Hill  has
been  necclVary  to  enable  me  to  tranfcribe  fuch
doclrint-s.

"  What  ftrange  blindnefs  can  have  induced  men
to  imagine  that  human  nature  was  always  to  be  go-
verned as  it  has  hitherto  been.

"  Where  lliall  we  find  a  man  acquainted  with  all
the  refources  of  nature  ?  Who  dare  prefcribe  limits,
and  fay  thus  far  (halt  thou  proceed,  and  no  farther ,  to
that  nature,  whofe  law  is  unity  in  the  variegated  infi-
nite ?  Whence  fliall  iilue  the  command,  that  it  fliall
always  run  the  fame  courfe,  and  for  ever  renew  it
again— Where  is  the  being  who  has  condemned  men,
the  bel]:,  the  wifeft,  and  the  mofc  enlightened  of  men,
to  perpetual  ilavery  ?  Why  fl)oidd  himian  natin-e  he
bereft  oj  its  inoji  perfcâ  attribute,  that  of  governing  it-
felf  P  Why  are  thofe  perfons  to  be  always  led  ivho  are
capable  of  cofidiiâing  thcmfehes  ?  Is  it  then  impojjlble
for  mankind  or  at  Icaji  the  greater  part,  to  come  to  their
majority  ?  If  one  be  enabled  to  do  it  why  fliould  not
another  ;  fhow  to  one  perfon  what  you  have  taught
another  ;  teach  him  the  grand  art  of  maftering  his
pallions  and  regulating  his  defires  ;  teach  him,  that
from  his  earlic-lt  youth  he  (lands  in  need  of  others  ;
that  he  muft  abilain  from  giving  offence  if  he  wifhes
not  to  be  offended  ;  that  he  muft  be  beneficent  if  he
willies  to  receive  favours.  Let  him  be  patient,  in-
dulgent, wife,  and  benevolent.  Let  thefe  virtues  be
made  eafy  to  him  by  principles,  experience,  and  ex-
amples ;  and  you  will  foon  fee  whether  he  needs
another  to  conduft  him  ?  If  it  be  true,  that  the  great-
er part  of  mankind  are  too  weak  or  too  ignorant  to
conceive  thefe  fimple  truths,  and  to  be  convinced  by
them  ;  Oh  then  our  happinefs  will  be  at  an  end,  and
let  us  ceafe  to  labour  at  rendering  mankind  better,  or
at  lecking  to  enlighten  them."

"  Oh  prejudice  !  oh  contradiélion  of  the  human
mind  !  fliall  the  empire  of  reafon,  the  capacity  of  go-
verning ourfelves  be  but  a  chimerical  dream  for  the
greater  number  of  men,  while  on  the  other  hand  pre-
judice leads  m;  to  believe  that  fuch  is  the  inherent  right


The  antisocial  conspiracy.

of  the  children  of  Kings,  of  reigning  families,  and  of
every  man  whom  wifdom  or  particular  circuuiflanccs
render  independent  !"

What  horrid  artifice  is  contained  in  thefe  fentences  !
The  poor  profelyte  really  imagines  that  he  fees  the
mod  Ib'iking  coutradidions  in  the  very  foundations  of
our  civil  focietits.  He  really  thinks  that  we  believe
them  to  reft  on  the  hereditary  privilege  of  Kings  and
of  their  children,  to  be  born  with  all  the  neceHary  wif-
dom to  conduél  themfelves,  while  nature  has  refufed
fuch  gifts  to  other  mortals  ;  though  Weilliaupt,  who
feoffs  in  private  at  the  credulity  and  folly  of  his  adepts,
knows  as  well  as  we  do,  that  fuch  has  never  been  the
idea  even  of  the  moft  ignorant  populace.  He  knows
that  we  believe  Kings  to  be  born  children  like  other
men,  with  the  fame  weaknefles,  the  fame  paffions,  and
like  incapacity  ;  he  knows  as  well  as  we  do,  that  the
gift  of  conducing  ourfelves  and  others  is  to  be  acqui-
red by  education,  and  by  the  helps  and  lights  with
which  a  man  may  be  cncompaffed  ;  and  we  know  as
well  as  he  does,  that  the  child  of  the  moft  obfcure  pa-
rentage would  often  make  a  better  king  than  many
Sovereigns  ;  as  he  might  alfo  be  an  excellent  magif-
trate,  or  a  great  general,  had  he  received  a  propor-
tionate education.  But  does  there  hence  follow  any
contradiftion  in  civil  fociety,  becaufe,  uncertain  as  to
the  perfons  who  would  be  the  moft  proper  for  govern-
ing, but  certain  of  the  intrigues  and  broils  which
would  accompany  the  ele^lion  of  Kings',  it  has  obviated
thofe  inconveniences  by  hereditary  crowns  and  em-
pires ?  And  after  all,  what  is  the  meaning  of  that
lophifticated  pretence  founded  on  the  power  of  being
able  to  conduc!:  one's  felf  ?  Queftion  the  moft  prudent
and  the  wifelt  of  men,  and  he  will  readily  iay,  though
I  do  not  ftand  in  need  of  laws,  magiftratcs,  or  Kings,
to  reftrain  me  from  being  unjuft  towards  others,  or
from  opprelling  and  plundering,  I  yet  want  their  affift-
ance  to  fccure  me  from  being  oppreflèd  or  plundered.
The  lefs  I  am  inclined  to  injure  others,  the  more  I
need  the  proteétion  of  the  law  from  all  injury.  You
are  pleafed  to  call  my  fubmiffion  to  the  laws,  llavery  ;
I,  on  the  contrary,  look  to  it  as  my  lafety,  and  as
the  guarantee  of  that  liberty  which  enables  iiic  to  do

Vol.  III.  'R


"3


114  '^^    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr.

good  and  to  live  happy  and  at  peace  in  fociety.  I
have  never  heard  of  laws  which  forbad  me  to  live
like  an  honeft  man.  It  is  the  wicked  man  only  who
recognizes  liberty  but  in  the  impunity  of  his  crimes  ;
I  fcorn  fuch  liberty,  and  blefs  the  hand  that  deprives
me  of  it.  You  call  him  a  tyrant  and  a  defpot,  I  call
him  my  King  and  my  benefador.  The  better  I  know
how  to  conduol  myfelf  with  refpeét  to  others,  the  more
thankful  I  am  to  him  who  hinders  others  from  be-
having ill  to  me.

The  reader  muft  pardon  me  for  thefe  reflet5lions  ;  I
know  they  are  fuperfluous  to  thofe  who  think  ;  but
may  not  this  work  fall  into  the  hands  of  perfons  as
credulous  as  the  unhappy  profelyte.  In  expofmg  the
envenomed  weapons  of  the  Sect,  let  it  not  be  faid
that  I  withhold  the  antidote.  Should  any  be  ftill
blind  enough  not  to  perceive  the  tendency  of  all  thefe
fophifms  of  Illuminifm,  let  them  hearken  to  the  Se<5t
ardently  declaring  their  hopes  ;  the  Hierophant  con-
tinues :

"  Are  we  then  fallen  from  our  dignity  fo  low  as  not
even  to  feel  our  chains,  or  to  hug  them,  and  not  che-
rilh  the  flattering  hope  of  being  able  to  break  them,
or  to  recover  our  liberty,  not  by  rebellion  and  violence
(for  the  time  is  not  yet  come,)  but  by  the  force  of  rea-
ibn.  Becaufe  a  thing  cannot  be  accompliflied  to-mor-
row, fiiould  we  defpair  of  ever  being  able  to  efFed  it  ?
Abandon  fuch  J})ort-[ighted  men  to  their  oivn  reafonings
and  their  oivn  concliifions  ;  they  may  conclude  again  and
again;  but  nature  ivill  continue  to  ad.  Inexorable  to
all  their  inteYeJied  renionjirances,  (he  proceeds,  and  no-
thing can  impede  her  majejiic  courfe.  Some  events  may
take  place  contrary  to  our  vjifljes ;  hut  they  ivill  all  r edify
of  themfclves  ;  inequalities  vjill  be  levelled,  andalajiing
cahii  J])all  ficceed  the  tempeji.  The  only  conclu fion  to
be  drawn  from  all  thefe  objeélions  is,  that  we  are  too
much  accuftomed  to  the  prefcnt  (late  of  things,  ©r
perhaps  fe!f-intereft  has  too  great  fway  over  us,  to  let
lis  ovm  that  it  is  not  impofible  to  attain  univerfal  indepen-
dence—Let then  the  laughers  laugh  and  the  feoffers  feoff.  He
that  obferves  and  compares  what  nature  has  done  with
what  (he  does  at  prefcnt,  will  foon  fee,  that  in  fpite  of
all  our  intrigues  fne  tends  invariably  towards  her  objed.
Her  proceedings  are  imperceptible  to  him  who  reflects


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

but  little  ;  tliey  are  vifible  only  to  the  fage  whofe
mind's  eye  penetrates  even  to  the  womb  of  time.—
From  the  fummit  of  the  mount  he  difcovers  in  the
horizon  that  diftant  country,  the  very  exiftence  of
which  is  not  furmifed  by  the  fervile  multitude  of  the
plain."

The  principle  means  which  Weifliaupt  offers  to  his
adepts  for  the  conqueft  of  this  land  of  promife,  this
foil  of  independence,  are,  to  diminifli  the  wants  of  the
people,  and  to  enlighten  their  minds.  Hearken  to  his
leffons,  you  who,  heretofore  protefted  by  your  laws>
peaceably  exercifcd  an  honourable  and  lucrative  pro-
feffion,  and  you  who,  once  rivals  of  the  flourifliing
commerce  of  Great  Britain  on  the  immenfity  of
the  ocean,  are  now  but  the  forrowful  and  dejeded
coafters  of  the  Texel,  imprudent  difciples  of  a  difor-
ganizing  Sea:. — Learn,  that  it  is  in  the  fecret  hatred
fworn  againft  you  by  the  Sed  in  its  myfteries,  that  you
are  to  feek  the  deftrudlion  of  Lyons,  the  pillage  of
Bourdeaux,  the  ruin  of  Nantes  and  Marfeilles,  the  fate,
in  Ihort,  of  fo  many  other  towns  flourifliing  in  com-
merce, even  the  fate  of  Amfterdam  itfelf  ;  and  then  let
your  aching  eye  glance  on  your  trees  of  Equality  and
Libert}^  At  the  very  time  when  you  thought  that  you
were  feconding  the  views  of  the  feel  againft  the  No-
bles, Priefts,  and  Monarchs,  only  to  reinftate  the  peo-
ple in  their  rights  of  Liberty  and  Equality,  the  Seft
was  aiming  its  blows  at  you  as  the  grand  artificers  of
Defpotifm.  At  that  very  period  your  profeffion  was
already  profcribed  by  the  myfteries,  as  that  which  of
all  others  moft  furcly  tended  to  retain  the  people  in
flavery  ;  the  lUurainizihg  Jacobin  was  teaching  his
adepts,  that  "  he  who  wiflies  to  fubjed  nations  to  his
"  yoke,  need  but  to  create  wants  which  he  alone  can
"  fatisfy.- — Ereft  the  mercantile  tribe  (die  kaufman-
"  fchaft)  into  an  hierarchical  bt)dy  ;  that  is  to  fay,  confer
"  on  it  Ibme  rank  or  fome  authority  in  the  government,
"  and  you  will  have  created  perhaps  the  moft  formida-
**  ble,  the  moft  defpotic  of  all  powers.  You  will  fee  it
"  giving  laws  to  the  univerfe,  and  on  it  alone  will  reft
"  the  independence  of  one  part  of  the  world  and  the
'*  flavery  of  the  other.  For  tliat  man  dilates  the  lav/
"  who  has  it  in  liis  pov/cr  to  create  or  forcfce,  to  ftiflle^

YgL  IIL  R  Z


"5


Il6  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr.

"  weaken,  or  fatisfy  want.  And  who  are  better  ena-
"  hied  to  do  this  than  merchants?"  Thus  we  fte  that,
thofc  very  men  who  were  fuch  ardent  fupporters  of
Jacohinilm  ia  our  commercial  towns,  with  a  view  to
partake  of  the  government,  are  precifely  thofe  whofe
profelTioii  the  profound  Jacobin  chiefly  detcfts  in  every
form  of  government.  May  the  elucidation  of  this
myftcry  infpire  the  induftrious  inhabitants  of  hofpitable
Britain  with  new^  zeal  for  their  laws  !  The  difcovcry  of
fuch  a  fuare  is  of  too  great  importance  to  their  fafety,
to  allow  me  to  conceal  it  from  them.

In  the  next  place  the  Hierophant  proceeds  from  the
art  of  diminifliing  wants  in  order  to  operate  the  inde-
pendence of  nations,  to  the  duty  of  diffufmg  what  he
calls  light.  "  He  on  the  contrary  (thofe  are  his  words)
who  willies  to  render  mankind  ft"ee,  teaches  them  how
to  refrain  from  the  acquifition  of  things  which  they
cannot  afford  :  he  enlightens  them,  he  infufes  into
them  boidnefs  and  inflexible  manners.  He  that  teaches
tjiem  fobriety,  temperance,  and  economy,  is  more
dangerous  to  tlie  throne  than  the  itian  who  openly
preaches  regicide. — If  you  cannot  diffufe  at  the  fame
infbnt  this  degree  of  light  among  all  men,  at  leafl;
begin  by  enlightening  yourfelf,  and  by  rendering  your-
felf  -better.  Serve,  oj/l/t,  and  mutually  fupport  each
other;  augment  our  numbers;  render  yourfelvcs  at  leaft
independent,  and  leave  to  time  and  pojlerity  the  care  of
doing  the  reji.  When  your  numbers  lliall  be  augment-
ed to  a  certain  degree,  when  you  fiiall  have  acquired
ftrengrh  by  your  union,  bcfitnte  no  lojiger,  but  begin  to
render  yourfdf  powerfid  aiul  formidable  to  the  wicked
(that  is  to  fay  to  all  who  will  refift  their  plans  ;)  the
very  circumftance  of  your  being  fufficiently  numerous
to  talk  of  force,  and  that  you  really  do  talk  of  it,  that
circumftance  alone  makes  the  profane  and  ivicked
tremble — That  they  may  not  be  overpowered  by  num-
bers, many  will  become  good  (like  you)  of  themfelves,
and  will  join  your  party.-^- Yozf  ndll  foo?i  acquire  fuffi-
cimt  force  to  bind  the  hands  of  your  opponents,  to  fiibjii-
gate  the:?!,  and  to  fiifle  vjickedn'efs  in  the  embryo.^'*  That
is  to  fay,  as  it  may  be  underftood  in  future,  you  will
fcon  be  able  to  flifle  every  principle  of  law,  of  govern-
ment, of  civil  or  political  fociety,  whofe  very  inftitu-
tion  in  the  eyes  of  an  liluminee  is  the  germ  of  all  the


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  II7

vices  and  misfortunes  of  human  nature.  "  The  mode
of  diffuling  univerfal  light  is,  not  to  proclaim  it  at
once  to  the  whole  world,  ùut  to  begin  ivith  yowfelf;
then  turn  towards  your  next  neighbour  ;  you  txvo  can
enlio-hten  a  third  ntul  fourth  ;  let  tbefi  in  the  fivme  nian-
tier  extend  and  multiply  the  number  of  the  chiUrcn  of
light,  until  numbers  and  force  f)aU  throiv  power  into  our
ha}ids."*

I  obferve  in  the  ritual  of  this  degree,  that  fliould  the
Hierophant  be  fatigued  by  the  length  of  this  difcourfe,
he  may  take  breath,  and  let  one  of  the  adepts  continue
the  inftruftion  of  the  profelyte.f  Our  readers  alfo
may  avail  themfelves  of  this  permiffion,  and  they  have
copious  matter  for  retledion  in  what  they  have  hither-
to read.  They  may  perhaps  be  inclined  to  afk,  to
what  degree  the  people  muft  diminiih  their  wants  not
to  (land  in  need  of  laws?  They  will  perceive  that
bread  irfelf  muft  be  denied  them  ;  for  as  long  as  fields
are  cultivated,  laws  will  be  neceflary  to  proted  the  crops
and  to  reftrain  men  from  reaping  that  which  they
have  not  fown  ;  and  if  on  the  lirft  view  the  Sophifni
appears  wicked,  the  reader  will  foon  perceive  that  it  is
but  folly  in  the  garb  of  Sophillry.

The  better  to  form  their  judgments  on  the  lefTons  of
the  Hierophant,  they  will  have  to  compare  that  Revo-
lution, which  is  to  be  the  effed  of  iuJiruCiion  alone,  and
which  is  infenfibly  to  take  place  without  the  leajl  fhock  or
rebellion,  with  that  period  when  the  adepts  ihall  have
acquired  nwnbers,  Jorce,  and  power,  enabling  them  to
bind  the  hands  of  their  opponents,  and  to  futjugate  all
who  may  ftill  fliow  any  affeftion  for  their  laws,  or  for
that  civil  order  in  focic'ty  which  the  Sci^l  willies  to
fupprefs.

»  See  Difcourfe  on  the  lefler  Myftcries  d  lUuminifm.

•f-  This  Difcourfe  actually  requires  at  kufl  two  hour»  to  read  it.
That  part  from  which  I  have  made  extraiîl s  exicnds  in  Vol.  II.  of  the
Original  Writings,  from  Page  44  to  93,  and  in  the  Ay?  ivorks  of  Pbiin  and
Spartiieus,  (which  are  in  much  fmailer  print)  from  Pago  10  to  48.  I
paean  to  abridge  tlîe  remaining  part  ftill  more  ;  but  fliall  be  fcrupuloufly
exad  in  the  tranflation  of  all  remarkable  pafiiiges.


H8  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY^

CHAP.    X.
Continuation  of  the  Difcowfe  on  the  lejfsr  Myjleries^  ^

IN  that  part  of  the  difcourfe  which  remains  to  be
laid  before  the  reader,  the  Hierophant,  inlifting  on
the  necelllty  of  enlightening  the  people  to  operate  the
.grand  revolution,  feems  to  fear  that  the  candidate  has
not  clearly  conceived  the  real  plan  of  this  revolution,
which  is  in  future  to  be  the  fole  objed  of  all  hb  in-
ftruâions.  "  Let  your  inftruftions  and  lights  be  uni-
verfally  diffufed  ;  fo  fhall  you  render  mutual  fecurity
imivcrfal  ;  Mid  ficurity  and  injirudion  ivill  enable  us  to
live  vjithout  prince  or  government.  If  that  were  not
the  cafe,  why  fliould  we  go  in  queft  of  either  ?"*

Here  then  the  candidate  is  clearly  informed  of  the
gi"and  objeft  towards  which  he  is  to  direâ:  all  his  fu-
ture inftruftions.  To  teach  the  people  to  live  without
pinces  or  governments j  without  laws  or  even  civil  fo-
ciety,  is  to  be  the  general  tendency  of  all  his  Icifons.
But  of  what  nature  mull  thefe  lefibns  be  to  attain  the
defired  objed  ? — They  are  to  treat  of  morality  and  of  mo-
rality alone.  "  For  (continues  the  Hierophant)  if  ligiit
be  the  work  of  morality,  light  and  fecurity  will  gain
ftrength  as  morality  expands  itfelf.  Nor  is  true  nw-
ralitv  any  other  than  the  art  of  teaching  men  to  fmke  off
their  wardfJnp,  to  attain  the  age  of  manhood,  and  thus  to
need  neither  princes  nor  governments. ''^■\

When  we  fhall  fee  the  fed;  enthufiallically  pro-
nouncing the  word  morality,  let  us  recoiled  the  defini-
tion which  it  has  juft  given  us  of  it.  Without  it,  we
could  not  have  underftood  the  real  fenfe  of  the  terms
honeji  îuen,  virtue,  good  or  vjicked  men.  We  fee  that,
according  to  this  definition,  the  honeji  man  is  he  who
labours  at  the  overthrow  of , civil  fociety,  its  laws,  and
its  chiefs:  for  thefe  are  the  only  crimes  or  virtues  men-
tioned in  the  whole  code.     Pre-fuppoiing  that  the  can-

*  Und  al'gemeine  aufklaning  und  ficherheit  machen  furften  und
ftaaten  entbehriich.     Oder  wo  zu  braucht  man  fie  fodann.

•{•  Die  moral  ift  alfo  die  kunfl:  welclie  menfchen  lehrt  volljshrig  zu
werden,  der  vorniundfchaft  los  7.u  werden,  in  ilir  nianuiichcs  alt;r  zu.
tretteii,  and  die  fiirfcen  zu  tntbwhrea.


tHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY,

didate  may  objed  that  it  would  be  impoffible  to  bring
mankind  to  adopt  fuch  dodrines,  the  Hierophant  an-
ticipates the  objeoVion,  and  exclaims,  "  He  is  little  ac-
quainted with  the  powers  of  reafon  and  the  attradions
of  virtue  ;  he  is  a  very  novice  in  the  regions  of  light,
who  (liall  harbour  fuch  mean  ideas  as  to  his  own  ef-

fence,  or  the  nature  of  mankind If  either  he  or

I  can  attain  this  point,  why  fliould  not  another  attain
it  alfo  ?  V/hat  !  when  men  can  be  led  to  defpife  the
•  horrors  of  death,  when  they  may  be  inflamed  with
the  enthufiafm  of  religious  and  political  follies,  fliall
they  be  deaf  to  that  very  doélrine  which  can  alone
lead  them  to  happinefs?  A^o,  no;  man  is  Jiot  fo  luicked
as  an  arbitrary  morality  would  make  him  appear.  He
is  wicked,  becaufe  JReligion,  the  State,  and  bad  exam-
ple, perverts  him.  It  would  be  of  advantage  to  thofe
who  wifli  to  make  him  better,  were  there  fewer  per-
fons  whofe  intered  it  is  to  render  him  wicked  in  order
that  they  may  fupport  their  power  by  his  wickednefs."

*'  Let  us  form  a  more  liberal  opinion  of  human  na-
ture. We  will  labour  indefatigably,  nor  fliall  difficul-
ties affright  us.  May  our  principles  become  the  foun-
dation of  all  morals  !  Let  reafon  at  length  be  the  religion
of  men,  and  the  problem  is  fohed."*^

This  preffing  exhortation  will  enable  the  reader  to
folve  the  problem  of  the  altars,  the  ivorpnp^  and  the
fejiivals  of  Reafon,  in  the  French  Revolution  ;  nor  will
they  be  any  longer  at  a  lofs  to  know  from  what  loatli-
fome  den  their  flianielefs  Goddefs  rofe.

The  candidate  alfo  obtains  the  folution  of  all  that
inay  have  appeared  to  him  problematic  in  the  courfe
of  his  former  trials.  "  Since  fuch  is  the  force  of  mo-
rality and  of  morality  alone,  (fays  the  Hierophant,)
fince  it  alone  can  operate  the  grand  revolution  which
is  to  reftore  liberty  to  mankind,  and  abolifli  the  empire
of  impofture,  fuperftition,  and  defpotifm  ;  you  mull
row  perceive  why  on  their  firft  entrance  into  our  Or-
der we  oblige  our  pupils  to  apply  clofely  to  the  ftudy
of  morality,  to  the  knowledge  of  themfelves  and  of
others.  You  muft  fee  plainly,  that  if  we  permit  each
novice  to  introduce  his  friend,  it  is  in  order  to  forv.i  a
legion  that  may  more  jujily  le  called  holy  and  brSmcibls

*  Undenlich  macht  die  vernunft  zur  raligJon  der  menfch^n,  fo  ifl  die
aufgabc  aufgeloftt.


119


I20  *HE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.'^CTj

than  that  of  the  Jhchans  ;  fmce  the  battles  of  the  friend
fighting  by  the  llde  of  his  friend  are  thofe  which  are
to  reinilaie  human  nature  in  its  rights,  its  liberty,  and
its  primitive  independence."

"  The  morality  which  is  to  perform  this  miracle  is
not  a  morality  of  vain  fubtiltics.  It  is  not  that  niorality
which,  degrading  man,  renders  him  carelefs  of  the  goods
of  this  world,  forbids  him  the  enjoyment  of  the  innocent
pleafnres  of  life,  and  infpires  him  with  the  hatred  of
his  neighbour.  It  miifl  not  be  a  morality  favouring
the  interefts  only  of  its  teachers,  which  prefcribes  per-
fecution  and  intoleration,  which  militates  againft  rea-
fon,  which  forbids  the  prudent  ufe  of  the  paffions  ;
whofe  virtues  are  no  other  than  inaction,  idlencfs,  and
the  heaping  of  riches  on  the  flothfid. — Above  ell,  it
mvji  not  be  that  morality  which,  adding  to  the  iniferies
of  the  miferable,  throws  them  into  a  jiate  of  pnfUani-
mity  and  defpair,  by  the  threats  of  hell  and  the  fear  of
devils.

"  It  mtift,  on  the  contrary,  be  that  morality  fo
much  difregarded  and  defaced  at  the  prefent  day  by
ItUifiinefs,  and  replete  with  heterogeneous  principles.
It  mufl  be  a  divine  doclrine, -fuch  as  Jefus  taught  to
his  difciples,  and  of  which  he  gave  the  real  interpreta-
tion in  his  fecret  conferences."

This  fudden  tranfition  naturally  leads  Weifhaupt  to
the  developement  of  a  myftery  of  iniquity  for  which
we  have  long  fmce  feen  him  preparing  his  Major  Illu-
iiiiiiees,  and  particularly  the  Scotch  Knights  of  illumin-
ization.  The  better  to  underfliand  this  myftery,  let
us  recal  to  mind  how  the  Infmiiators  or  the  teachers
began  by  foiemnly  aflliring  their  different  Candidates,
Novices,  or  Minerval  Academicians,  that  in  all  tl:e
lodges  of  Illuniinifm  there  never  arifes  a  queftion  in
the  leaft  degree  prejudicial  to  religion  or  the  ftate.
All  thefe  promifes  have  been  gradually  loft  fight  of,
and  the  profelyte  has  had  rime  to  accuftom  his  ears  to
declamations  againil  the  priefthood  and  royalty.  It
has  already  been  infmuated,  that  the  Chriftianity  of
our  times  is  very  different  from  that  taught  by  Jefus
Chrill  ;  the  time  was  not  arrived  for  numbering  Chrifb
himfelf  among  the  impoftors  :  his  name,  his  virtues,
might  ftill  be  venerated  by  certain  adepts.  Some  there
were,  perhaps,  v.-ho  v/ould  be  flîockcd  at  bare-faced


Toe  A>rrisôciÀL  conspiracy,  ï^i

Atheîfni  ;  and  it  is  on  their  account  that  Weiflilupt
has  thus  treated  of  Chrift.  In  the  preceding  degree
he  had  contented  himfelf  with  hinting,  that  the  doc-
trines of  this  divine  teacher  had  been  perverted  ;  noj^
had  he  declared  what  fp^-cies  of  political  revolutioA
was  (as  he  pretended)  pointed  out  in  the  Gofpel.  But
here  the  execrable  fophiiler  apodrophizes  the  God  of
the  Chriftians  in  language  fimilar  to  that  in  which  we
have  fince  feen  the  too  famous  Fauchet  declaiming  in
the  revolutionary  pulpit.  It  is  here  that  Weilliaupt
declares  Jefus  Chritl  to  be  the  Father  of  the  Jacobins,
or  rather  (to  fpeak  the  revolutionary  language)  the
great  Doftor  of  the  Sans-culottes.  But,  to  enable  us
the  better  to  judge  of  the  cunning  and  premeditated
villany  of  this  deteftable  artifice,  let  us  firft  attend  to
the  correfpondence  of  the  adept,  who,  under  Weif-
haupt,  is  charged  with  the  compiling  of  the  Code.
Knigge,  like  the  monftrous  prototype  of  lUuminifm,
fubdivides  the  adepts  into  thofe  who  fcofF  at  and  deteft
revelation,  and  thofe  who  (land  in  need  of  a  revealed
religion  to  fix  their  ideas.  It  is  to  explain  this  that
Knigge  writes  the  following  letter  to  Zwack  :

"  To  unite  thefe  two  dalles  of  men,  to  make  them
"  concur  and  co-operate  towards  our  objeél,  it  was
*'  neceffary  to  reprelent  Chriftianity  in  fuch  a  light  as
"  to  recall  the  fupevftitious  to  reafon,  and  to  teach  our
"  more  enlightened  fages  not  to  rejeél  it  on  account
"  of  its  abufe.  This  fliould  have  been  the  fecret  of
**  Mafonry,  and  have  led  us  to  our  obje6i:.  Meanwhile
*'  defpotifm  ftrengthens  daily,  though  liberty  univer-
"  (ally  keeps  pace  with  it.  It  was  necelTary  then  to
"  unite  the  extremes.  We  therefore  aflert  here,  that
"  Chrift  did  not  eftablifli  a  new  religion,  but  that  his
*'  intention  was  fimply  to  reinftate  natural  religion  in
"  its  rights  ;  that  by  giving  a  general  bond  of  union
"  to  the  world,  by  diffuling  the  light  and  wifdom  of
"  his  morality,  and  by  diffipating  prejudices,  his  inten-
"  tlvi  was,  to  teach  us  the  means  of  govcrnwg  oiir-
*^  fdvcs,  and  to  re-ejiahlijl),  vjithout  the  violent  means  of
"  revolutions,  the  reign  of  Liberty  and  Equnli/y  among
"  men.  This  was  eafily  done  by  quoting  certain  texts
**  from  Scripture,  and  by  giving  explanations  of  them,
</  true  or  falfe  is  of  little  confcqucnce,  provided  each

Vol.  III.  S


laft  THE    ANTISOCL\L    CONSPIRACT.

**  one  finds  a  fenfe  in  thefe  doctrines  of  Chrift  confo»
"  nant  with  his  reafon.  We  add,  that  this  religion,  fo
"  fimple  in  iifelf,  was  afterwards  defaced  ;  but  that,
*'  by  means  of  inviolable  fecrecy,  it  has  been  tranfmit-
"  ted  in  purity  to  iis  through  Free-Mafonry."

*•  Spartacus  (Weiiliaupt)  had  colleéled  many  mate-
"  rials  for  this,  and  I  added  my  difcoveries  in  the
*'  inftruclions  for  thefe  two  degrees.  Our  people,
*'  therefore,  being  convinced  that  we  alone  are  poilef-
"  fed  of  the  real  fecrets  of  Chrillianity,  vje  hive  but.
"  to  add  a  fevj  ivords  againji  the  Clergy  and  Pi  if  ices.
*'  In  the  lall  myfteries  we  have  to  unfold  to  our  adept»
*'  this  pious  fraud,  and  then  by  v/ritings  denîonftrate
"  the  origin  of  all  religious  impolitions,  and  their  mii-
*'  tuai  connexion  with  eadi  other."*

'If  the  reader  be  not  too  much  difo;ufted  with  this
j)îous  fraud,  but  can  ftill  attend  to  the  declamations  of
the  Hierophant,  let  us  once  more  enter  that  den  of
demons  wherein  prefides  the  triple  genius  of  impiety,
hypocrify,  and  anarchy.

The  Hierophant  is  about  to  fay,  "  that  their  grand
and  ever-celebrated  mailer,  Jefus  of  Nazareth,  appear-
ed in  an  age  when  corruption  was  univerfal  ;  in  the
midft  of  a  people  who  from  time  immemorial  had
been  fubjeded  to  and  feverely  felt  the  yoke  of  flave-
ry  ;f  and  who  eagerly  expedited  their  deliverer  an-
nounced by  the  Prophets.  Jefus  appeared  and  taught
the  dodrine  of  reafon  ;  to  give  greater  efficacy  to
thefe  dodrines,  he  formed  them  into  a  religion,  and
adopted  the  received  traditions  of  the  Jews.  He  pru-
dently grafted  his  new  fchool  on  their  religion  and
their  culloms,  which  he  made  the  vehicle  of  the  ef-
iènce  and  fecrets  of  his  new  dodrines.     He  did  not

*  Orig.  Writ.  Vol  II.  Letter  from  Philo  to  Cato,  Page  104,  and
following.

f  Here  is  another  example  of  the  manner  in  which  hiftory  is  falfified
—The  Jews  were  enflaved  from  time  immemorial  !  Does  this  nation
then  m^ke  its  whole  hiltory  confiil  in  the  years  of  its  captivity  ?  Had
it  forgot  its  liberty  and  its  triumphs  under  Jofhua,  David,  Solomon^
and  its  other  Kings  ?  Was  it  juil  emerged  from  its  captivity  when  it
fell  under  the  dominion  of  the  Romans,  a  dominion  under  which  it  re-
mained at  the  tinie  of  Chrift's  birth  ?  The  adept  has  heard  talk  of
the  captivity  of  the  Jew?,  cf  thofe  periods  when  Almighty  God,  as  ^
punifliment  for  their  crimes,  delivered  them  over  to  their  enemies  ;
and  he  inconfiderately  concludes,  that  their  whole  kiltory  is  but  one
Gvutixiuçd  fccne  of  bondage..


«fÎTE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

fcleft  Pages  for  his  new  difciples,  but  ignorant  men
chofen  from  the  lowed  clafs  of  the  people,  to  fhow  that
his  doc'trine  was  made  for  all,  and  fuitable  to  every
OIK 's  iinderftanding  ;  to  {how  too,  that  the  knowledge
of  the  grand  truths  of  reafon  was  not  a  privilege  pe-
culiar to  the  greati  He  does  not  teach  the  Jews  alone,
bur  all  mankind,  the  meaiîs  of  acquiring  their  liberty,
by  the  obfervation  of  his  precepts.  He  (iipported  his
doflrincs  by  an  innocent  life,  and  fealed  them  with
his  blood."

'*  His  precepts  for  the  falvation  of  the  world  are^
fimply,  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  our  neigh-^
bour  ;  he  afks  no  more.  .  .  .  Nobody  ever  reduced  and
confolidated  the  bonds  of  human  fociety  within  their
real  hmits  as  he  did No  one  was  ever  more  intelli-
gible to  his  hearers,  or  more  prudently  covered  the
fuhlime  fignification  of  his  doftrine.  No  one,  indeed,
ever  laid  a  fwer  foundaîion  for  liberty  than  our  grand
majhr,.  Jefiis  of  Nazareth.  It  is  true,  that  on  all  oc-
eafions  (in  ganzen)  he  carefully  concealed  the  fublime
meaning  and  natural  confequences  of  his  do6lrinesj
for  he  had  a  ficret  doarine  as  is  evident  from  more
than^  one  pafTagc  of  the  Gofpcl."

It  was  during  the  time  that  he  was  writing  this  hy-
pocritical hiftory  of  the  MelTiah,  that  Weifliaupt  was
turning  the  credulous  profelyte  into  ridicule  ;  as  to  the
other  adepts,  he  well  knew  that  they  anticipated  fuch  ex-
planations, or  at  lead  would  be  delighted  with  them.
Hence  that  impudence  v/ith  which  he  faUlfies  the  Scrip-'
tures.  To  prove  the  exiftence  of  this  {itcvzt  fchool,
the  doftrines  of  which  are  referved  for  the  initiated
alone,  he  cites  thefe  words  of  Chvill  :  "  To  you  is
**  given  to  know  the  myftery  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;•
"  but  to  them  that  are  without,  all  things  are  done  in
"  parables/'*  But  he  carefully  avoids  mentioning  the
order  vvhich  Chrifl  gives  to  his  difciples,  "  That  which
"  I  tell  you  in  the  dark,  fpeak  ye  in  the  light  ;  and
^'  that  which  you  hear  in  the  ear,  preach  ye  upon  the
"  houle -tops."f  Weilhaupt  then  proceeds  to  thefe
words  :   "  And  their  princes  have  power  over  them— *

*  St.  Mark,  Ch.  iv.  V.  ii.
f  Sî,  Matthew,  Ch.  x.  V.  2  7.

Vol.  III.  a  2


tit


124  "FHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  but  it  is  not  fo  among  you  ;  but  whofocver  will  be
"  greater  fliall  be  your  niiniller."*  This  precept,  as
well  ?s  all  thofe  on  Chriftian  humility,  he  transforms
into  principles  of  diforganizing  equality  inimical  to  all
conitil'itt  ci  authorities. — With  equal  eafe  he  avoids  all
thofe  kifons  fo  often  repeated  both  by  Chrift  and  his  A-
poilks,  on  the  obllgaiîon  of  rendering  to  Cefar  what  is
Cefar's,  of  paying  tribute,  and  of  recognising  the  au-
thority of  God  hiinfelf  in  that  of  the  law  and  of  the
magilbates.  If  Cliriil:  has  preached  the  love  of  our
neighbour,  or  fi-aternal  love,  his  words  are  immedi-
ately perverted  by  Weifxmpt  into  a  love  of  his  Equa-
lity. If  Chrift  exhorts  his  difciples  to  contemn  riches,
the  impoftor  pretends  it  is  to  prepare  the  ivorld  for  that
CQuimwiity  oj  riches  which  deftroys  all  property.  In
fine,  the  concUUions  drawn  from  tbefe  impious  and  de-
riding explanations,  and  from  many  others  of  a  {imilar
nature,  are  contained  in  the  following  words  :

"  If  therefore  tJye  ohjcft  of  the  fecret  of  Jcfus,  which
has  been  preferved  by  the  inftitution  of  the  myfteries,
and  clearly  demonftrated  both  by  the  condudl  and  the
difcourfes  of  this  divine  mafter,  luas  to  reinjîate  uiankiitd
in  their  original  Liberty  and  Eqndity,  and  to  prepare
the  means  j  how  many  things  immediately  appear
clear  and  natural,  which  hitherto  feemed  to  be  contra-
didory  and  unintelligible  !  This  explains  in  vjhat  fenfe
Chriji  was  the  faviour  and  the  liberator  of  the  world.
Novj  the  doâiine  of  original  [11:^  of  the  fall  of  man,  and
of  his  regeneration,  can  be  under jîooâ.  The  ftate  of  pure
nature,  of  fallen  or  corrupt  nature,  and  the  J  tut  e  of  grace,,
iviil  no  longer  be  a  problem.  Maiikind,  in  quitting  their
Jiate  of  original  liberty,  fell  from  the  Jiate  of  nature  and
loji  their  dignity.  In  their  civil  fj  ciel  y ,  under  their  go-
verwncntSy  they  no  loJîger  live  in  the  Jiate  of  pure  na-
ture, hut  in  that  of  fallen  and  corrupt  nature.  If  the
inoderatiny  cf  their  paffions  and  the  diminution  of  their
ivants,  reinjliite  them  in  their  p}i?mtive  dignity,  that
luill  really  coiijUtute  their  redemption  and  their  Jiate  of
grace.  It  is  to  this  point  that  morality,  and  the  mojl
perfecl  of  all  morality,  that  of  Jefus,  leads  matikind.,
JVhen  at  length  this  doÛrine  Jhall  be  genercUzed  through-.

*  St.  y.zrk,  Ck.  3.  V.  42,  43.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

9îit  the  ivorkly  the  reign  of  the  good  and  of  the  elcâ  fhaU
be  ejiahlifhed:'*

This  language  is  furcly  not  enigmatical.  The  pro-
fclyce,  once  mailer  of  the  myileries  it  contains,  needs
only  to  be  informed,  how  the  great  revolution,  which
they  foretell,  became  the  objed  of  fecret  focieties,  and
what  advantages  accrus  to  thefe  focieties  from  the
fecrecy  in  which  they  exift.

The  ?Iierophant  then,  for  the  inilrudion  of  the  pro-
felyte,  goes  back  to  the  origin  of  Mafonry  ;  he  declares
it  to  be  the  original  fchool  and  depofitory  of  the  true
dodrine.  He  takes  a  view  of  its  hieroglyphics  and
fhapes  them  to  his  fyftem.  The  rough  Jtone  of  Ma-
fonry  becomes  the  lymbol  of  the  primitive  Jiate  of
man,  fîroage  but  free. — The  Jioiie  fplit  or  broken  is  the
ftate  of  fallen  nature,  of  mankind  in  civil  fociety,  no
longer  united  in  one  family,  but  divided  according  to
their  jîates,  governments,  or  religions.  The  polijlied
Jione  reprefents  mankind  rcinffated  in  its  primitive  dig-
nity, in  its  independence.  Yet  Mafonry  has  not  only
loft  thefe  explanations  ;  but  the  illuminizing  orator
goes  fo  far  as  to  fay,  "  The  Frcemafns,  like  Priejh
**  and  chiefs  of  nations,  have  banifxd  reafon  from  the
"  earth.  They  have  inundated  the  vjorld  v/uh  tyrants,
*'  impofiors,  fpeâres,  corpfes,  and  meji  like  to  ivild
*'  beajis."

Should  any  reader  be  furprifed  at  feeing  the  Hiero-
phant  give  this  account  of  Mafonry,  let  him  rctleél  on
the  hatred  which  Weifhaupt  had  fworn  againft  every
fchool  where  the  name  of  any  deity  was  preferved.
The  Jehovah  or  the  Grand  ArchiteÛ  of  Mafonry,  the
t"v 0-fold  god  of  the  Rofycrufian  magicians,  fti  11  render
the  occult  lodges  a  fchool  of  fome  fort  of  Thcofophy.
But  how  referved  foever  the  Hierophant  may  be  with
regard  to  Atheifiii,  the  profelyte  mufl,  neverthelefs,
forefee,  that  fliould  he  be  admitted  to  one  degree
higher,  neither  the  Grand  ArchiteÛ  nor  the  ivjo-fold
God  will  meet  a  better  fate  than  the  God  of  the  Chril-


*  Grig.  Writ.  Part  II.  P.  io6,  7.— The  laft  Works  of  Sp:vrtacus,  P.
5S. —  1  he  author  has  tranfcribed  the  whole  of  what  is  printed  in  Italics
in  German,  left  his  tranflation  of  this  extraordinary-  paffage  flioxild  be
ftifpeâed  of  being  exaggerate»:'..  As  he  perfecflly  iindenlands  the  Ger-
jnan  language,  p.rd  is  a  man  of  undoubted  veracity,  I  have  emitted  it»
but  in  fo  doing  think  it  my  duty  to  mention  it.  T.


125


120!  THE    ANTISOCrAL    CONSPIRACY.

tians.  And  therefore  it  is  that  Wcifliaiipt  declaim*
againft  thole  Jphits,  apparitions,  and  all  the  ftipdjii-^
tinns  of  Freemafonry  ;  hence  the  thecjfophic  Maions
are  involved  in  the  general  malediction  pronounced
againll  the  priellhood  and  the  throne.

It  can  be  calily  conceived  that  Weifhaupt  mvift  re-
prefent  true  Mafonry,  or  the  pretended  real  Chrilliani-^
ty,  as  folely  extant  in  Illuminifm.  But  the  Hicrophant
enjoins  the  profelytc  not  to  think  that  this  is  the  only
it<lvantag3  rohich  the  Order  and  the  vjhole  iinivcrfi  dravj
from  this  myjierious  ajfodatian.

Here  let  magiftrates,  the  chiefs  of  nations,  every
man  who  ftiil  retains  any  regard  for  the  fnpport  of
latvs  and  empires,  and  of  civil  fociety,  let  them,  I  fay,
read,  and  meditate  on  thefe  other  advantages.     The'

leflbn  is  of  tlie  iitmoft  importance -Whtjever  yoit

Are  ;  all  honeft  citizens,  whether  Mnfom,  KofycrnfianSy
%lopfcs,  Heivers  of  Wood,  Knights  ;  all  you  who  third-
after  the  myfteries  of  the  lotiges,  ceafe  to  accufe  me ,
of  conjuring  up  chimerical  dangers.  I  am  not  the
man  who  fpeaks  :  it  is  he  who  of  all  others  has  beeii^
the  hejl  acquainted  with  your  aflbciation,  and  has  knowrt
what  advantages  could  be  drawn  from  them  by  able*
and  patient  confpirators.— Read  ;  and  tell  us  which  \i
the  mod  imprefllve  on  your  mind,  the  pleafures  you*
may  find  in  your  lodges,  or  the  dangers  of  your  coun-
try. Read  ;  and  if  the  name  of  citizen  be  ftill  dear
to  you,  refiecT:  whether  yours  fhould  remain  infcribed  ort
the  regiilers  of  a  fecret  fociety.  You  were  ignorant
of  the  dangers  ;  the  mod  monllrous  of  confpirators
will  lay  them  open  to  you,  and  he  will  call  them  ad-
vantages. He  literally  fays,  "  Though  thefe  myfteri--
ous  Afibciations  fnould  not  attain  our  objeCl:,  they
prepare  the  way  for  us  ;  they  give  a  new  intertft  to  the
caufe  ;  they  prefent  it  under  points  of  view  hitherto
iinobfcrved  ;  they  ilimuiate  the  inventive  powers  and
the  expeélations  of  mankind  ;  they  render  men  move  in-
different as  to  the  iniercjis  of  governments  ;  they  biing
men  of  divers  nations  and  religions  v/ithin  the  fame
bond  of  union;  they  deprive  the  church  and  jtate  of  their
ahlejl  oîid  moji  laborions  members  ;  they  bring  men  to-
gether who  would  never  otherwife  have  known  or
niet  each  other.  By  this  method  alone  they  nndermine
the  foundation  of  JiateSj  though-  they  had  really  no  fucb


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPltlACVl  iij

frojeâ  In  vieiv.  They  throiv  them  together  mid  mue
them  claflj  one  agaitijî  the  other.  They  teach  nian.kind
the  power  and  force  of  union  ;  they  point  out  to  ihem
the  imperfedion  of  their  political  conjHtiitions,  and  that
without  cxpofing  them  to  the  fufpicions  of  their  ene*
mies,  fuch  as  magiftrates  and  pubUc  governmcnrs.
They  mnjk  our  progrefi,  and  procure  lis  the  facility  of
incorporating  in  our  plans  and  of  admitting  into  our
Order,  after  the  proper  trials,  the  mnji  able  men,  v:hofe
patience,  long  abufid,  thhjis  after  the  grand  idtimatmn.
By  this  means  they  weaken  the  enemy  ;  and  though
they  ilîould  never  triumph  over  him,  they  ivill  at  leaji
diminif)  the  numbers  and  the  zeal  of  his  pardzans  ;
they  divide  his  troops  to  cover  the  attack.  In  propor-
tion as  thefe  new  aitociations  or  fecrct  focietics,  form-
ed in  different  liâtes,  lliall  acquire  ilrength  and  pru-
dence at  the  expence  of  the  former  ones  (that  is  to
fay,  of  civil  fociety,)  the  latter  muji  "weaken,  and  in-,
fenfibly  fallP

"  Befides,  our  Society  originates,  and  mull:  naturally
and  elFentialiy  deduce  its  origin  from  thofe  very  go-
vernments whofe  vices  have  rendered  our  union  necel^
fary.  We  have  no  objed  but  that  better  order  of
things  for  which  we  incefiiintly  labour  ;  all  the  efforts,
therefore,  of  Princes  to  Jîop  our  pr  ogre fs  will  be  fndtlcfs  j
the  fpark  may  long  remain  hidden  in  the  af^es,  but  tl)C
day  mujt  come  in  ivhich  fnall  burji  forth  the  general
flame.  For  nature  naufeates  alv/ays  to  run  the  fame-
courfe.  The  heavier  the  yoke  of  oppreffion  weighs,
on  man,  the  m.ore  fediiloufly  will  he  labour  to  throw  ic
off;  and  the  liberty  he  fecks  ihall  expand  itfelf.  The-
fed  ii  fovm  ivhence  fidl  fpring  a  nciv  vsorld  ;  the  roots
extend  themfclves  ;  they  haree  acquired  too  much  Jtrength-,
they  have  been  too  indvfriou/Iy  propagated,  for  the  day
of  harvejî  to  fail  zfj.— Perhaps  it  may  be  neceflliry  to
wait  thoufands  and  thoufands  of  years  ;  but  fooner  or
later  nature  fhall  confummate  its  grand  v;ork,  and  lli«
fliall  reftore  that  dignity  to  man  for  fjhich  Le  vjas  def
lined  from  the  beçrinning."

Reader,  you  have  heard  tîiem.  Thefe  confpirators
have  faid  more  than  I  foould  have  dared  to  hint  at
on  the  nature  and  danger  of  thefe  afibtiations.  It
would  be  ufelefj  for  rae  to  rcfl  longer  on  this  point.
X  ihall  end  by  Ibo^fc'ing  by  what  artitkcs  the.  Hiercr


128  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV.

phaiit"  endeavours  to  tranquilize  the  confciences  of
thofe  adepts  who  may  have  been  ftartled  at  thele  pré-
dirions. Notwithftandino-  all  that  he  has  faid  of  thofc
times  when  Illuminirm  fliall  find  means  of  ['hiding
hinds  and  fid jii gating;  notwithftanding  all  that  aver*
fion  againfl;  governments  which  he  fecks  to  infufe  into
the  adepts,  he  concludes  in  a  hypocritical  (train  pecu-
liar to  wickednefs.  "  We  are  here  at  once  the  ob-
fervers  and  the  inilruments  of  nature.— We  do  not
wiHi  to  precipitate  her  fteps.  To  enlighten  men,  to
correft  their  morals,  to  infpire  them  with  benevolence,
fuch  are  our  means.  Secure  of  fuccefs,  we  abftaia
from  violent  commotions.  To  have  forefeen  the  hap-
pinefs  of  pofterity,  and  to  have  prepared  it  by  irre-
proachable means,  fuffices  for  our  felicity.  The  tran-
quility of  our  confciences  is  not  troubled  by  the  re-
proach of  aiming  at  the  ruin  or  overthrew  of  dates
and  thrones.  Such  an  accufation  could  M-iih  no  more
propriety  be  preferred  againfl  us,  than  it  might  againft
the  ftatefmen  who  had  forefeen  and  foretold  the  im-
pending and  inevitable  ruin  of  the  ftate. — As  alfiduous
cbfervers  of  Nature,  we  admire  her  majeltic  courfe  ;
and,  burning  with  the  noble  pride  of  our  origin,  we
felicitate  ourfclves  on  being  the  cliildren  of  men  and
of  God."

"  But  carefully  obferve  and  remember,  that  we  do
not  impofe  our  opinions  ;  we  do  not  oblige  you  to
adopt  our  doftrines.  Let  the  truth  you  can  acknow-
ledge be  your  only  guide.  Free  man,  exercife  here
thy  primitive  right  ;  feek,  doubt,  examine,  do  you
know  of,  or  can  you  find  elfewhere,  any  thing  that
is  better  ?— Make  us  acquainted  v^'ith  your  views,  as
we  have  expofed  ours  to  you.  We  do  not  blufh  at
the  limits  of  our  underftandings  ;  we  know  that  we
are  but  men  :  we  know  that  fuch  are  the  difpofitions
of  nature,  fuch  the  lot  of  man,  that  he  is  not  to  ex-
peel  to  attain  perfedlion  at  his  outfet  ;  he  can  attain  it
but  by  degrees.  It  is  by  gaining  experience  from  our
errors,  by  profiting  of  the  lights  acquired  by  our  fore-
fathers, that  we  fliall  become  at  once  the  children  of
wifdom,  and  the  parents  of  a  Hill  wifer  progeny.  If,
therefore,  you  think  that  you  have  found  truth  in  the
whole  of  our  docTirine,  adopt  the  whole.  Should  you
perceive  any  error  to  have  ftolen  in  with  it,  remember


tïîÈ    A^iSÔCIAL    CONSPIliACYi

tViat  truth  is  not  the  lefs  eftimable  on  that  accotiiih
tf  you  have  met  with  nothing  that  pleafcs  you  liera,
rejcft  the  whole  without  fear  ;  and  remember,  that
in  many  things,  at  leaft,  we  only  need  further  relearch
Dr  a  new  invefligation.  Do  you  obferve  any  thing
blâmable  or  laudable,  fee  and  make  choice  of  what
you  approve.  Sliould  you  be  more  enlightened  your*
ielf,  then  your  eye  may  have  difcovered  truths  which
are  Hill  denied  to  us.  The  more  art  we  employ  in
the  indruftion  of  our  pupils  to  lead  them  to  the  paths
of  wifdom,  the  lefs  you  will  be  inclined  to  refufe  us
a  portion  of  your  applaufe.'*

Thus  ends  the  difcourfe  o^  the  Hierophant.— The
profelyte  who  has  heard  it  without  Ihuddering,  may
flatter  himfelf  with  being  worthy  of  this  priefthood.
But  before  he  is  facrilegioufly  anointed,  he  is  led  back
to  the  porch,  where  he  is  inverted  with  a  white  tunic.
He  wears  a  broad  filken  fcarlet  belt  ;  the  fleeve  is
tied  at  the  extremity  and  middle  with  bandages  of  the
fame  colour,  which  make  it  bulge  out.*  I  am  par-
ticular in  the  defcription  of  this  drefs,  becaufe  it  was
in  a  fimilar  one  that,  during  the  French  Revolution,  a
comedian  appeared  perfonally  attacking  Almighty  Godj
faying)  *'  No  !  thou  doft  not  exift.  If  thou  haft  pow*
*'  er  over  the  thunder-bolts,  grafp  them  ;  aim  the;n  at
"  the  man  who  dares  fet  thee  at  defiance  in  the  face
"  of  thy  altars.  But  no,  I  blafpheme  thee,  and  I  ftill
"  live.  No,  thou  doft  not  exift.'*  In  the  fame  cof-
tume,  and  to  prepare  him  for  the  fame  blafphemies,
the  Epopt  is  recalled  into  the  temple  of  myfteries.
He  is  met  by  one  of  the  brethren,  who  does  not  per-
mit him  to  advance  till  he  has  told  him,  "  that  he  i&
*'  fent  to  enquire  whether  he  (the  profelyte)  has  per-
*'  fedly  under ftood  the  difcourfe  which  has  been  read
"  to  him--whether  he  lias  any  doubts  concerning  the
"  doctrines  which  are  contained  in  it— whether  his
"  heart  is  penetrated  with  the  fanftity  of  the  princi-
*'  pies  of  the  Order— whether  he  is  fenfible  of  the  call,
"  feels  the  ftrength  of  mind,  the  fervent  will,  and  all
"  the  difintereftednefs  requiiite  to  labour  at  the  grand
"  undertaking— whether  he  is  ready  to  make  a  facrifice

•  L,aft  VTorks  of  Philo  and  Spartacus,  at  the  end  of  the  Pifcourfç»

yd.  m.  J


t«>


130


THE    ANTrSOCIAL    CONSPIRACY,

"  cf  his  will,  and  to  fiifFcr  himfelf  to  be  led  by  the  moft
"  excellent  ruperiors  of  the  Order."

I  will  fpare  the  reader  the  dilgufting  impiety  of  the
ceremonial  which  immediately  follows.— The  rites  of
the  preceding  degree  were  in  derifion  of  the  Lad
Supper  ;  thek  are  an  atrocious  mimicry  of  the  facer-
dotal  ordination.  A  curtain  is  drawn,  and  an  altar
appears  with  a  crucifix  upon  it.  On  the  altar  alfo  is  a
bible  ;  and  the  ritual  of  the  Order  lies  on  a  reading
dtfk  ;  on  the  fide  a  cenfer,  and  a  phial  full  of  oil.
The  Dean  a6ls  the  part  of  a  Bifliop,  and  he  is  fur-
rounded  with  acolytes.  He  prays  over  the  profelyte,
bleflcs  him,  cuts  hair  from  the  top  of  his  head,  clothes
him  in  the  veftraents  of  the  priefthood,  and  pronoun-
ces prayers  after  the  fafliion  of  the  feci.  On  prefcnt-
ing  the  cap  he  fays,  "  Cover  thyfelf  vjith  this  cap,  it  ii
"  more  valuable  than  the  crown  of  Kings."  The  very
cxpreflions  of  the  Jacobin  with  his  red  cap.  The  com-
munion confirts  in  honey  and  milk,  which  the  Dean
gives  to  the  profelyte,  faying,  "  This  is  what  Nature
*'  gives  to  man.  Refleft  how  happy  he  would  ftill
*'  have  been,  if  the  defire  of  fuperfluities  had  not,  by
*'  depriving  him  of  a  tafte  for  fuch  fimple  food,  multi-
**  plied  his  wants,  and  poifoned  the  balm  of  life."

All  the  preceding  part  of  this  degree  fufficiently
explains  the  real  meaning  of  thefe  words.  The  cere-
monies are  terminated  with  delivering  to  the  Epopt
that  part  of  the  code  which  relates  to  his  new  degree.
I  fliall  relate  all  that  is  neceflary  for  the  reader  to  be
informed  of,  when,  after  having  treated  of  the  degree
of  Regent,  and  of  the  Grand  Myfteries,  I  fhall  come
to  inveftigate  the  government  of  the  Order.


Tï-IE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


*3»


CHAP.    XT.

•Eighth  Part  of  the  Code  of  Illnminees—The  Regent ^
or  the  Prince  Illimiitiee.

**  TXT  HEN  one  of  our  Epopts  has  fufficiently  dif-  Qualitieg
"  VV  tingiiillied  himfelf  to  bear  a  part  in  the  poli-  rctiuired.
*'  tical  government  of  our  Order  ;  that  is  to  fay,  when

*  he  unites  prudence  with  the  liberty  of  thinking  and
"  of  aâing  ;  when  he  knows  how  to  temper  boldneis
"  with  precaution,  refolution  with  complaifance  ;  fub-
**  tlety  with  good-nature  ;  loyalty  with  fmiplicity  ;  fin-
"*  gularity  with  method  ;  tranfcendency  of  wit  with
"  gravity  and  dignity  of  manners  ;  when  he  has  learn-
"  ed  opportunely  to  fpeak  or  to  be  filent,  how  to  obey
"  or  to  command  ;  when  he  fliall  have  gaijied  the
"  efleem  and  affeftion  of  his  fellow-citizens,  though
"  feared  by  them  at  the  fame  time  ;  when  his  heart
"  fhall  be  entirely  devoted  to  the  interefts  of  our  Or-
"  der,  and  the  common  welfare  of  the  univerfe  fliall
"  be  uppermoft  in  his  mind  ; — then,  and  then  only,  let
"  the  Superior  of  the  province  propofe  him  to  the  na-
"  tional  Infpedor  as  worthy  of  being  admitted  to  the
"  degree  of  Reaent."

Such  are  the  qualities  required  by  the  Sed  for  the
admiflion  of  its  adepts  to  the  degree  which  in  the
C(jde  is  fometimes  termed  Regent,  at  others  the  Prince
Illuminée.  Such  are  the  very  words  to  be  found  in
the  preamble  of  the  rules  of  this  degree.

•  "  Three  things  of  the  utmoft  confequence  (fays  the
*'  code)  are  to  be  obferved.  In  the  hrft  place,  the
"  greateft  refer ve  is  necelfary  with  rcfpeft  to  this  àe-
"  gree.  Secondly,  thofe  who  are  admitted  into  it
''  muft  be  as  much  as  poflible  free  men  arid  imlepend-
"  ent  of  all  Princes  :  they  muft  indeed  have  clearly
*'  manifefted  their  hatred  for  the  (general  couJUtidio)i
*'  or  the  a6lual  ftate  of  mankind  ;  have  fliown  how
"  ardently  they  wifli  for  a  change  in  the  government
"  of  the  world  ;  and  how  much  the  hints  thrown  out
"  in  the  degree  of  Prirft  has  inflamed  their  wiflies  foe
"  a  better  order  of  things."

Vol.  HI.  T  z


Iji  '         ^HE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr.

Precautions  ^^  ^^^  ^^i^^e  requifites  are  to  be  found  in  the  Candî-
and  prelim-  date,  then  let  the  national  Infpeftor  once  more  exam-
ûo7  ^^^^'  ^"^'  '^^  '^^^  records,  every  tiling  relative  to  the  conduft
and  character  of  the  new  adept,  let  him  infped  the
divers  qutllions  which  have  been  put  to  him,  and  dil^
cover  where  he  has  fliown  his  ftrong  or  his  weak  fide.
According  to  the  refult  of  this  examination,  let  the  In-
ipedor  propofe  fome  new  queftions  on  thofe  articles
on  wliich  the  Candidate  may  have  iliown  the  greateft
referve.     For  example,  fome  of  the  following  :*

"  I.  Would  you  think  a  fociety  objedtionable,  which
*'  fhould  (till  nature  l'hall  have  ripened  its  gi-and  revo-
*'  lutions)  place  itfelf  in  a  fituation,  which  would  de-
*'  prive  Monarchs  of  the  power  of  doing  harm,  though
*'  they  fliould  wifli  it  ?  A  fociety  whofe  invifible
**  means  fliould  prevent  all  governments  from  abufing
f  their  power  ?  Would  it  be  impoflihle  through  the
<*  influence  of  fuch  a  fociety,  to  form  a  new  ftate  in
*'  each  fl:ate,  fiaîus  hi  Jîatu  ;''  that  is  to  fay,  would  it
be  impoflihle  to  fubjed  the  rulers  of  every  ftate  to
this  lUiiminizing  Society,  and  to  convert  them  into
mere  tools  of  the  Order  even  in  the  government  of
their  own  dominions  ?

"  IL  Were  it  to  be  objeded,  that  fuch  a  fociety.
^'  might  abnfe  its  power,  would  not  the  following  con^
*'  fiderations  do  away  inch  an  objeftion  ? — Do  not  our
*'  preftnt  rulers  daily  abufe  their  power  ?  And  are  not
*'  the  people  filent,  notwithfi:anding  fuch  an  abufe  ?  I5
<*  this  power  as  fecnrc  from  abufe  in  the  hands  of
*'  Princes,  as  it  would  be  in  thofe  of  our  adepts  whom
*'  we  train  up  with  fo  much  care  ?  If  then  any  go,
*'  vernment  could  be  harmlefs,  would  it  not  be  our's,
^'  which  would  be  entirely  founded  on  morality,  for&»
*'  fight,  wifdom,  liberty,  and  virtue  ?"

*'  111.  Though  this  univerfal  government,  founded
*'  on  morality,  iliould  prove  chimerical,  would  it  not
**  be  wortk  ivhils  to  nuike  at  eij'ay  of  it  ?

"  IV,  Would  not  the  moii  fceptical  man  find  a
"  futficicnt  guarantee  againft  any  abufe  of  power  on
«  the  part  of  our  Order,  in  the  iibtrty  of  abandonirig
<*  it  at  pleafure  ;  in  the  happinefs  of  having  Superiors
*'  of  tried  merit, .who,  unknown  to  each  other,  could

*  înfruâions  for  confcriirg  the  degree  of  Regait,   Nos.  i,    î,  ^
Xaft  \Vorks  of  Philo  and  Spartacus.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

*<  not  poflibly  fuppoit  each  other  in  their  treafonable
**  combinations  agaiiiH:  the  general  welfare  ;  Superiors,
"  in  fhort,  who  would  be  deterred  from  doing  harm
^  by  the  fear  of  the  exifiing  chiefs  of  empires?"

"  V.  Should  there  exift  any  other  fecret  means  of
«  guarding  againfl  the  abule  of  that  authority  en-
"  trullcd  by  the  Order  to  our  Superiors,  what  might
*'  they  be  ?

"  VI.  Suppofing  defpotifm  were  to  enfue,  would  it
*'  be  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  men  who,  from  the
"  very  firft  ftep  we  made  in  the  Order,  teach  us  no-
''  thing  but  fcience,  liberty,  and  virtue  ?  Would  not
"  that  defpotifm  lofe  its  fling  in  the  confideration  that
"  thofe  chiefs  who  may  have  conceived  dangerous
"  plans  will  have  begun  by  difpofing  a  machine  in  di^
"  red  oppofition  to  their  views."*

To  underftand  the  tendency  of  thefe  queftions,  let
us  refled  on  the  meaning  given  by  the  Sec!:!:  to  llbertv
^nd  general  ivelfare.  Above  all,  let  us  not  forget  the
leflbn  already  given  to  the  adepts  on  morality  ;  the  art
of  teaching  men  to  fhake  ofl'  the  yoke  of  their  mi-
nority, to  fet  afide  Princes  and  Rulers,  and  to  learn  to
govern  themfelves.  This  leiTon  once  well  underftood,
the  mod  contracted  underrtanding  muft  perceive,  in
fpite  of  the  infidious  tenour  of  thefe  queftions,  that
their  fole  tendency  is  to  alk,  whether  "  a  Sed  would
be  very  dangerous  who,  under  pretence  of  hindering
the  chiefs  of  nations,  Ivings,  Minifters,  and  Magiftrates,
from  hurting  the  people,  lliould  begin  by  maftering
the  opinions  of  all  thofe  who  furrounded  Kings,  Mini-
fters, or  Magiftrates  ;  or  fliould  feek  by  iuv'ilîble  means
to  captivate  all  the  councils,  and  the  agents  of  public
authority,  in  order  to  reinftate  mankind  in  the  rights
of  their  pretended  majority  ;  and  to  teach  the  fubjed
to  throw  off  the  authority  of  his  Prince,  and  learn  to
govern  himfelf  ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  deftroy  every
King,  Minifter,  Law,  Magiftrate,  and  public  authority
whatever  ?"  Tlie  Candidate,  too  well  trained  to  the
fpirit  of  likiminirm  not  to  fee  the  real  tendency  of
thefe  queitions,  but  alfo  too  much  perverted  by  it
to  be  ftartled  at  them,  knows  what  aniwers  he  is  to
give  to  obtain  the  new  degree.     Should  he  ftiil  har-

*  Inftrudions  for    co-.'errlng  the  dw~ree   of   Regent,    No.  i,  2,  3Î
JLaft  Works  of  Philo  and  Epartacua»


131


guration.


IrtîE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.\dr.'

hour  any  doubts,  the  ceremonies  of  his  inftallatinri
would  dived  him  of  them.  Thefe  are  not  theofophi-
cal  or  infitrnilicant  ceremonies  ;  every  (lep  demon-
ftrates  the  diforganizing  genius,  and  the  hatred  fuj-  all
authority,  which  irritates  the  fpleen  of  their  impious
author  ;  and  it  is  therefore  that  Weifliaupt,  when  writ-
ing to  Zwack,  reprefents  them  as  infinhcly  more  im-
portant than  thofe  of  the  preceding  degree.*

When  the  admiiTlon  of  the  new  adept  is  rcfolvcd
3^^J"^"'  on,  he  is  informed,  "  that  as  in  future  he  is  to  be  en-
"  trufted  with  papers  belonging  to  the  Order,  of  far
"  greater  importance  than  any  that  he  has  yet  had  in
"  his  poffcilion,  it  is  neceflary  that  the  Order  fliould
**  have  further  fecurities.  He  is  therefore  to  make
"  his  will,  and  infert  a  particular  claufe  with  refpecl:
*'  to  any  private  papers  which  he  may  leave  in  cale
"  of  fuddcn  death.  He  is  to  get  a  formal  and  juri-
**  dical  receipt  of  that  part  of  his  will  froni  his  fa-
*'  mily,  or  from  the  public  Magiilrate,  and  he  is  to
*'  take  their  proraifes  in  writing  that  they  will  fulfil
"  his  intentions/':}:

This  precaution  taken,  and  the  day  for  the  initiation
fixed,  the  adept  is  admitted  into  an  anti-chamber  hung
with  black.  Its  furniture  confifts  in  a  flceleton  elevated
on  two  ftep?,  at  the  feet  of  which  are  laid  a  crown  and
a  fword — There  he  is  afked  for  the  written  difpofiiions
be  has  made  concerning  the  papers  with  which  he  may
be  cntruftcd,  and  the  juridical  promife  he  has  received
that  his  intentions  fliall  be  fulfilled.  His  hands  are
then  loaded  with  chains,  as  if  he  were  a  flave  ;  and  he
is  thus  left  to  his  meditations.f  The  Provincial  who
performs  the  functions  of  Initiator  is  alone  in  the  firfl:
faloon,  featcd  on  a  throne.  The  Introducer,  having
left  the  Candidate  to  his  refledions,  enters  this  room,
and  in  a  voice  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  the  new
adept,  the  following  Dialogue  takes  place  between
them.

"  Provincial.     Wiio  brought  this  flave  to  us  ?**

^'  Introducer.  He  came  of  his  own  accord  ;  he
"  knocked  at  the  door.''

"  Prov.     What  does  h'^  want  ?"

•  Orign;aI  Writings,  Vol.  II.  I.ct.  24,  from  Weifliaupt  to  Cato.
^  Inftniftions  for  onf erring  this  degree,  No.  5.
■{•  Ritual  of  this  degree,  No.  l.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  1 35

*<  IiitroJ.  He  is  in  fcarch  of  Liberty,  and  aflcs  to  be
«  freed  from  his  chains."

"  Prov.  Why  does  lie  not  apply  to  thofe  who  have
"  chained  him  ?"

"  Introd.  They  refiife  to  break  his  bonds  ;  they  ac-
"  quire  too  great  an  advantage  from  his  llavery."

"  Prov.  Who  then  is  it  that  has  reduced  him  to
"  this  ftate  of  ilavery  ?"

"  IntroiL  Society,  governments,  the  fcicnces,  and
"  falfe  religion."  Die  ge/èlfchafiy  dcr  /i\uit,  die  gelehr-
^*  Jhmkeh,  die  falfths  religion. ^^

"  Prov.  And  he  wimes  to  caft:  off  this  yoke  to  be-
"  come  a  feditious  man  and  a  rebel  ?"

"  Introd.  No  ;  he  willies  to  unite  with  us,  to  join
*'  in  our  lights  againft  the  conftitution  of  governments,
"  the  corruptions  of  morals,  and  the  profanation  of  re-
"  ligion.  He  wiflies  through  our  means  to  become
*^  powerful,  that  he  may  attain  the  grand  iiitimatum."

"  Prov.  And  who  will  anfwer  to  us,  that  afier  hav-
"  ing  obtained  that  power  he  will  not  alio  abufe  it,
"  that  he  will  not  be  a  tyrant  and  the  author  of  new
"  misfortunes?"

.  "  Introd.  His  heart  and  his  reafon  are  our  guaran-
"  tees— the  Order  has  enlightened  him.  He  has  learn-
"  ed  to  conquer  his  paffions  and  to  know  himfelf.  Ouc
"  Superiors  have  tried  him."

"  Prov.  That  is  faying  a  great  deal— -Is  he  aKo
."  fuperior  to  prejudice.  Does  he  prefer  the  general
**  intereft  of  the  univerfe  to  that  of  more  limited
**  alfociations  ?"

"  Introd.    Such  have  been  his  promifes."

**  Prov.  How  many  others  have  made  fimilar  pro-
"  mifes  who  did  not  keep  them  ?  Is  he  matter  of  him-
"  fclf  ?  Can  he  refift  temptation  ?  Are  perfonal  confide-
*'  rations  of  no  avail  with  refped  to  him  ?  Afk  him,
"  whether  the  fkeleton  he  has  before  him  is  that  of  a
5*  king,  a  nobleman,  or  a  beggar?"

"  Introd.  He  cannot  tell  ;  nature  has  dcflroyed  all
"  that  marked  the  depraved  ftate  of  inequality  ;  ail
"  that  he  fees  is,  that  this  fkeleton  was  man  like  us  ;
"  and  the  ^harcnc^:er  of  man  is  all  that  he  attends  to."

"  Prov.  If  fuch  be  his  ftntiments,  let  him  be  free
"  at  bis  own  rilk  and  peril.     But  hs  knows  us  not.


136  ,  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACr,

*'  Go  and  aflc  him  why  he  implores  our  proteftion  ?***

This  dialogue  ended  (and  the  reader  will  not  be  at
a  lofs  to  perceive  the  drift  of  it,)  the  Introducer  returns
to  the  Candidate,  and  fays,  "  Brother,  the  knowledge
*'  you  have  acquired  can  no  longer  leave  you  in  doubt
"  as  to  the  grandeur,  the  importance,  the  difinterefted*
'*  nefs  and  lawfulnefs  of  our  great  objeft.  k  mufl:
"  therefore  be  indifferent  to  you  whether  you  are  ac-
'*  quainted  with  our  Superiors  or  not  ;  neverthelefs,  I
"  have  fome  information  to  impart  to  you  on  that
"  fubied.'"*

This  information  is  nothing  more  than  a  fummary
of  a  pretended  hiftory  of  Mafonry,  going  back  to  the
deluge  ;  and  of  what  the  Sed  calls  the  fall  of  man,
the  lofs  of  his  dignity,  and  of  the  true  doftrine.  The
ftory  then  continues  to  Noah  and  the  few  who  efcaped
the  deluge  in  the  ark  ;  thcfe,  he  fays,  were  a  feW
Shges  or  Freemafons,  who  have  maintained  the  true
principles  in  their  fecret  fchools.  It  is  for  that  reafon,
lays  the  Inftrudor,  that  Mafonry  has  preferved  the  de-
nominations of  Noachijis  and  Patriarch  s '-T\\e\\  comes
a  recapitulation  of  what  had  been  faid  in  the  degree
of  Epopt  on  the  pretended  views  of  Chrift,  on  the  de-
cline of  Mafonry,  and  on  the  honour  referved  to  Illu-
minifm  to  prefervc  and  revive  thefe  true  and  ancient
myfteries — "  When  queflioned  (fays  the  Inftrudor)  aa
to  whom  we  are  indebted  to  for  the  adual  conllitution
of  our  Order,  and  the  prefent  form  of  the  inferior  de^
grees,  the  foliov/ing  is  the  anfwer  we  give  :

"  Our  founders,  without  doubt,  hacl  extenfive  know-
ledge, fince  they  have  tranfmitted  fo  much  to  us.—
Aduated  by  a  laudable  zeal  for  the  general  welfare,
they  formed  a  code  of  laws  for  our  Order;  but,  partly
through  prudence,  and  partly  to  guard  againft  their
own  pafTions,  they  left  the  diredion  of  the  edifice  they
had  raifed  to  other  hands,  and  retired.  Their  names
will  for  ever  remain  in  oblivion— The  chiefs  who  go-
vern the  Order  at  prefent  are  not  our  founders;  but
pofterity  will  doubly  blefs  thofe  unknown  benefadors
who  have  defpifed  the  vain  glory  of  immortalizing
their  names.  Every  document  which  could  have
thi-ov>n  light  on  our  origin  has  been  committed  to
the  flames,"

'  S^ituaJ  pf  UÙS  degree,  N».  {.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

''  you  will  jiow  be  under  the  diredllon  of  other  men  )
men  who,  gradually  educated  by  the  Order,  have  at
length  been  placed  at  the  htlm.  You  will  luon  make
one  of  their  number— 'Tell  me  orily,  whether  you  Hill
harbour  any  doubt  as  to  the  objeA  of  the  Order."

The  Candidate,  who  has  long  fince  been  paft  all
poffibiliiy  of  doubt,  advances  with  his  Introducer  to-
wards another  faloon  ;  but,  on  opening  the  door,  feve-

ral  of  the  adepts  run  and  oppofe  their  entrance. >

A  new  dialogue  takes  place  in  the  ftyle  of  the  firft ■

Who  goes  there  ?  Who  are  you  ^--It  is  a  flave  who  has

ikd  from  his  mafters -No  flave  fliall  enter  here—

He  has  fled  that  he  might  ceafe  to  be  a  flave  ;   he

craves  an   afylum   and  protedion- But    fhould  his

mafter  follow  ? — He  is  fafe,  the  doors  are  fliut Bun

flîjuld  he  be  a  traitor  ?— He  is  not  one,  he  has  beeiv
educated  under  the  eyes  of  the  Illuminées.  They  hav«
imprinted  the  divine  feal  on  his  forehead. — The  door
opens,  and  thofe  who  oppofed  the  Candidate's  entrance
efcort  him  to  the  third  faloon.  Here  new  obftacles
occur,  and  another  dialogue  takes  place  between  an
adept  in  the  infide  and  the  Introducer.  In  the  mean
ti;ne  the  Provincial  has  left  his  former  fl:ation,  and  has
feated  himfelf  upon  a  throne  in  this  third  room.  [It  is
worthy  of  remark  that  thefe  enemies  of  thrones  ars
themfelves  always  feated  on  a  throne.]  The  Provincial
.gives  orders  that  the  Candidate  may  be  admitted,  and
defires  to  fee  whether  he  really  bears  the  print  of  the
feal  of  liberty.  The  B.'ethren  accompany  the  new
adept  to  the  foot  of  the  throne.

"  Prov.  Wretch  !  You  are  a  flave  :  and  yet  dare
*'  enter  an  aflembly  of  free  men  !  Do  you  know  ths
"  fate  that  awaits  you  ?  You  have  paffed  through  two
"  doors  to  enter  this  ;  but  you  fliall  not  go  hence  un-
."  puniflied,  if  you  profane  this  fanduary."

"  IntiOil.  That  will  not  happen  ;  I  will  be  his  gua-
**  rantee.  You  have  taught  him  to  thirll  after  liberty;
"  and  now  keep  your  promife."

*'  Pivv.  Well,  Brother,  we  have  fubjeded  you  to
"  various  trials.  The  elevation  of  your  fentiments  has
'^  made  us  conceive  you  to  be  both  proper  and  worthy
^'  of  being  admitted  into  our  Order.  You  have  thrown
<'  yourfelf  with   confidence  and  without  referve  into

Vol.  III.  U


tQ7


J 38  tHE    ANTISOCLVL    C0ÎÏSP1RÀCY.

^^  our  nrms  :  and  it  is  time  to  impart  to  you  that  li»
"  berty  which  we  have  painted  to  you  in  luch  bewitch.
*'  in 2:  colours.  JVe  have  been  your  o-uide  during  (ill  the
*•  time  that  you  jiood  in  need  oj  one.  You  are  nov)
"  Jirong  enough  to  conduâ  yourjilf  ;  be  then  in  future
"  your  own  guide,  be  it  at  your  own  peril  and  rijk.  Be
"  free  ;  that  is  to  fiy,  be  a  man,  and  a  man  who  knows
"  how  to  goverti  himfelf;  a  man  who  knows  his  duty,
"  and  his  imprefcriptible  rights  ;  a  man  who  ferves  the
"  univerfe  alone  ;  whofe  aâions  are  folely  direâed  to  the
*'  general  benefit  of  the  wmid  and  of  human  nature.
*'  Every  thing  elfi  is  hijujiice — Be  free  and  independent  i
"  in  future  be  jo  of  yowfif-'-Here,  take  back  the  engage'.
"  incuts  you  have  hitherto  contraâed  with  us.  To  you  '
"  we  return  them  all.'*

As  he  pronounces  thefe  words,  the  Provincial  re-
turns him  all  the  writings  whicli  concern  him,  fuch
as  his  oaths,  his  promires,  the  minutes  of  his  admiffiou
to  the  preceding  degrees,  the  hiftory  of  his  Ufe  which
he  had  tranfmitted  to  the  fuperiors,  and  all  the  notes
taken  by  the  Scrutators  concerning  him.

This  perliaps  is  one  of  the  molt  delicate  traits  of  po-
licy of  the  feet.  The  chiefs  have  had  full  leifurc  to  pry
into  the  moil  fecret  recedes  of  his  heart,  and  the  Scru-
tators have  no  further  difcoveries  to  make.  The  can-
didate may  take  back  his  oaths  and  his  fecrets,  but  re-
collerions (perhaps  copies)  ftill  remain,  and  the  Initi-
ator may  well  continue  :  "  In  future  you  will  owe  us  no-
■"  thing  but  that  which  your  heart  Ihall  diftate.  Wc
"  do  not  tyrannize  over  men,  we  only  enliglnen  them.
"  Have  you  found  contentment,  reft,  fatisfii(5tion,  hap-
''  piuefs,  among  us  ?  You  will  not  then  abandon  us.
*'  Ciui  we  have  miftaken  you,  or  can  you  have  milla-
"  ken  us:  It  would  be  a  misfortune  for  you  ;  but  you
"  are  free.  Remember  only  that  men  free  and  inde-
"  pendent  do  not  offend  each  other  ;  on  the  contrary,
"  they  affift  and  mutually  proted  each  other.  Remem-
"  her,  that  to  ofllnJ  another  man,  is  to  give  him  the
'•'  rigiit  of  defending  himfelf.  Do  you  wifii  to  make
"  a  noble  ufe  of  the  power  we  give  to  you?  rely  on
"  our  word  :  you  fliall  find  zeal  and  protedion  among
^-  us.  Could  a  difintcrefted  zeal  for  your  brethren
*'  glow  in  yom*  heart,  then  labour  at  the  grand  obj-:  (^,
"  Labour  for  unfortunate  human  nature,  aiid  thy  lad


I


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

**  hour  fliall  be  blefl.  We  aik  nothing  elfe  from
*''  you,  we  afk  nothing  for  ourfclves.  Qiicftion  your
*<  own  heart,  and  let  it  fay  whether  our  condiid  to
"  you  has  not  been  noble  and  difuiterefttd.  After  fo
"  many  favours,  could  you  be  ungrateful,  your  heart
"  iliould  avenge  us,  and  chaftifc  you.  But  no  ;  many
"  trials  have  proved  you  to  be  a  man  of  conftancy  and
*'  refoUition.  Be  fuch  your  charafter,  and  in  future
"  govern  with  us  opprefied  man,  and  labour  at  rtn-
"  dering  him  virtuous  and  free."

"  Oh,  Brother  !  what  a  fight,  what  hopes  1  when
**  one  day  happinefs,  afFedion,  and  peace  fliall  be  the
"  inhabitants  of  the  earth  !  when  mifery,  error,  and
"  opprelUon,  fhall  difappear  with  fupertlnous  wants  î
**  when,  each  one  at  his  flation  labouring  only  for  the
*'  general  good,  every  father  of  a  family  fhall  be  fo-
"  vereign  in  his  tranquil  cot  !  when  he  that  iv't fires  to
"  invade  thefe  ficj-ed  rights  fnall  not  find  an  ojj-fwn  on
"  the  face  of  the  emth !  when  idlenefs  fiiall  be  no  longer
*'  fuftcred  î  ivhen  the  clod  of  iifAefs  fciences  fl)aH  be  caji
*'  afide,  and  none  fliall  be  taught  but  thofe  which  con-
*'  tribute  to  make  man  better,  and  to  reinfcate  him  in
*'  his  primitive  freedom,  his  future  delliny  Î  when  we
"  may  flatter  ourfelves  with  having  forwarded  that
*'  happy  period,  and  complacently  view  the  fruits  of
"  our  labours  !  when  in  fine,  each  man  viewing  his
"  brother  in  bis  fellow-creature,  fliall  extend  a  fuc-
"  couring  hand — with  us  and  ours  you  fhall  find  hap-
"  pinefs  and  peace,  fliould  you  continue  faithful  and
**  attached  to  us.  You  will  alio  remark,  that  the  iign  of
<*  this  degree  conlKls  in  extending  youi*  arms  to  a  bro-
*'  ther  with  your  hands  open,  to  fliow  that  they  are  not
"  luliied  by  injuftice  or  opprefTion,  and  the  gi  ipe  is  to
^*  feize  the  brother  by  the  two  elbows,  as  it  were  ta
"  hinder  him  from  falliug.    The  ivord  is  redemption.^*

The  foregoing  pafTages  fo  clearly  demon  (Irate  the
meaning  of  this  word  redemption,  that  the  reader  mult
be  furpriled  at  learning  that  there  ftill  remain  further
myfteries  to  be  revealed. — T!ie  candidate  is  not  yet
admitted  into  the  hig'ieft  clafs.  He  is  only  the  Prince
Illuminée,  and  has  to  gain  admilHon  to  the  two  de-
grees of  Phil<)jopher,  and  of  the  Man  King,  He  is
ill  veiled  in  hi*  new  principalitv  bv  receiving  a  biicklcTj,

Yol.  UK  u  2   ■'


»39


140  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

boot?,  a  cloak,  and  a  hat.     The  words  pronounced  Jtt
the  inveiliture,  are  worthy  of  the  reader's  attention.

On  prefentitiir  the  buckler,  the  Initiator  fays,  "  Arm
"  thyfclf  with  tidtlity,  truth,  and  conftancy  ;  be  a  true
*'  Chrijiian,  and  the  fnafts  of  calumny  and  misfortune
*'  Ihail  not  pierce  thee."  Be  a  Chrifi'um  !  (itnd  fey  ein
Chriji)  !  !  What  a  ftrangc  Chrillian  ;  what  a  wicked
wretch  tiien  nnill  be  the  Initiator  who  dares  carry  his
difiiiTJulation  to  fuch  lengths,  and  profane  that  facred
name  in  myfheries  fo  evidently  combined  for  the  eradi-
cation of  evei-y  trace  of  Chrillianity  !  But  the  adept
fmiles,  or  his  lîupidity  mud  be  beyond  exprefTion  if  he
does  not  fee  thraugh  fo  miferable  a  cant.

On  prefinùiig  the  boots  :  "  Be  aftive  in  the  fer  vice
*'  of  the  good,  and  fear  no  road  which  may  lead  to
*'  the  propagation  or  difcovery  of  happinefs."  This
will  recall  to  our  minds,  the  principle,  whatever  may  he
the  means,  fear  not  to  employ  them  when  they  lead  to
what  the  firél  calls  happinefs.

On  giving  the  cloak  :  "  Be  a  prince  over  thy  people  ;
"  that  is  to  fay,  be  fincere  and  wife,  the  benefaftor  of
"  thy  brethren,  and  teach  them  fciende."  The  reader
will  not  be  at  a  lofs  to  underftand  what  fcience.

The  formula  of  tije  hat  is,  "  Beware  of  ever  ex-
"  changing  this  hat  of  liberty  (diejèu  frey  heitfimt)  for
"  a  cro\vn."

Thus  decorated,  the  Piincc  Illuminée  receives  the
fraternal  embrace.— He  then  hears  read  the  inftrudions
for  his  new  degree  ;  but  as  they  eutirely  relate  (like
ihofe  of  the  preceding  degree)  to  the  government  of
the  brethren,  they  will  be  treated  of  in  the  laft  part
.  of  the  code.  It  i"  now  time  to  proceed  to  the  Granti
^lylleries.


THE    ANTISOCÎAI.    CONSPIRACY.  j^l


CHAP.    XIT.

Ninth  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illuminées. r-Clafs  of  the
Grand  Myjieries  ;  the  Mage  or  the  Philojbpher,  and
the  Man  Kins:.


Y  the  great  importance  which  the  £<:&.  places  in  The  text

obtained.


the  lall  niyfteries  of  lUuminiim,  and  the  many  "°'  ^°  ^^


precautions  it  has  taken  to  conceal  them  from  the  pub
lie  view,  I  am  compelled  to  begin  this  chapter  with
candidly  declaring,  that  every  attempt  to  difcover  the
original  text  of  this  part  of  the  Code  has  been  fruitlefs.
Such  an  avowal,  however,  {liquid  not  difconcert  the
reader.  Though  the  real  text  may  be  wanting,  we
have  abundant  matter  to  fupply  its  place.  .We  have
Weifliaupt's  familiar  correfpondence  ;  we  are  in  poC
fefiion  of  the  letters  of  many  of  the  adepts  who  en-
thufiaftically  admired  them  ;  and  the  avowals  are  ftill
extant  of  other  adepts,  who  indignantly  beheld  fuch
abominations.  Our  judgment  will  be  guided  by  laws
laid  down  by  Wcilhaupt  himfelf  ;  and  the  famous  apo-
logy of  this  monftroiis  legifiator  will  teach  us  how  to
appreciate  them.  Such  materials  are  more  than  fuffi-
citnt  to  fupply  the  dehciency  of  the  literal  text.  It  is
true,  that  the  crafty  cant  and  aifedled  enthufiafm  of
the  Hierophant  will  be  wanting  ;  but  the  fubftance  of
his  declamation,  the  extent  and  monftrolity  of  his
ultimate  plots  will  lofe  nothing  of  their  evidence.  Let
us  begin  then  by  atter.ding  to  their  author,  and  from
him  receive  our  firft  impreiïions.

Wciiliaupt,  when  writing  to  Zv:ack  his  incomparchle  Weif-
man,  and  fpeaking  of  the  degree  of  Epoptc,  wherein  ^^^P}^
impiety    and  rebellion   fcem   to  have   ftrained    evei"y  on  thefe
nerve  to  difleminate  their  venemous  principles  againfl  myfterie
church  and  (late,  he  fays,  "  One  migiit  be  tempted
<*  to  think  that  this  degree  was  the  lall  and  the  mod  fub-
<*  lime:  I  have,  neverthelcfs,  three  more  of  infinitely
<<  meaicr  i:nporta':cc,  ivhlck  I  refirve  for  our   Grand
"  Myjieries.    But  thefe  I  keep  at  home,  and^  only  fliow
**  them  to  the  Areopagites,  or  to  a  few  other  brethren
"  the  mod  diftinguiilied  for  their  merit  and  their  fcr-
^'  vices.— Were  you  here,  I  would  admit  you  to  m>y


't


142  "YHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACT.

"  degree,  for  you  are  worthy  of  it— But  I  never  fuffer
"  it  to  go  out  of  my  hancis.  It  is  of  too  Jerious  tm
*'  iynport  ;  it  is  the  key  of  the  ancient  and  modern,  the
"  religions  and  political  hiftory  of  the  univerfe."

"  That  I  may  keep  our  provinces  in  due  fubordina-
"  tion,  I  will  take  care  to  have  only  three  copies  of
"  this  degree  in  all  Germany  ;  that  is  to  fay,  one  in
«  each  Infpcetion."  He  foon  after  writes  again  to  the
fame  adept  :  "  I  have  compofed  four  more  degrees
«  above  that  of  Regent  ;  and  with  refpeél  to  thefe
"  four,  even  the  loweft  of  them,  our  degree  of  Prieft
"  will  be  but  child's  play"-J'Fo  gegen  dm  fchlechejien
der  priejler  gi-ad  kinder  fpiel  fiyn  foil.*

Before  we  draw  any  conclufion  toward  forming  oiw
indgraeut,  let  me  recall  to  the  mind  of  the  reader
thofe  letters  wherein  Weifhaupt  declares,  that  every
degree  fliall  be  an  apprenticefhip  for  the  next,  a  fort
of  Novitiate  for  the  higher  degrees.  That  thefc  degrees
were  always  to  be  in  crefcendo  ;  in  fine,  that  in  the  laft
rlafs  of  the  myfteries  a  perfcd  ftatement  of  the  max-
ims and  polity  of  Illuminifm  was  to  be  given.  Und
am  ende  folgt  die  totale  dnficht  in  die  politic  iind  max-
imen  des  ordens.f  After  fuch  letters,  the  text  of  thefe
myfteries  is  fcarcely  ncceilary,  I  know  that  thefc
degrees  were  reduced  to  two  for  the  lall  clafs  of  the
myfteries  ;  I  know,  from  the  agreement  made  by  tlic
founder  and  his  intimate  xidcpts,  that  the  firft  was  the
Mage,  or  Pbilofophcr  ;  the  other,  the  Man  King.X  I
will  ftart  from  thefe  data,  and  fliall  not  h'.-fitate  to
fay,  that  this  monfter  of  impiety  and  of  wickednefs
impofes  on  himfclf  when  he  fpeaks  of  degrees  infinitely
•more  iurporiant  for  tlie  higher  myfteries,  or  when  be
pretends  that  thofe  of  Epopi  and  Regent  are  h\it  puerile
in  comparifon  with  thofe  which  he  referves  for  his
intimate  adepts.  His  execrable  pride  may  flatter  him
with  furpafling  even  the  devils  thcmfelvcs,  in  his  wic-
ked inventions  for  fending  forth  the  peftiferous  blaft  ;
but  their  combined  cfl-orts  could  not  fuggeft  more
hideous  plots  than  thofe  in  which  Weifliaupt  glories
when  calling  them   his  leffer  n?yjhries. —Whzt  i    the

*  Orig.  Wik.  Vo].  U.  Let.  15,  16,  3?,  to  Cato-Z'.vacfc.
j-  Ibid.  Vol.  !.  Let.  4,  to  Catc.

t  Ibid.  Vol.  II.  Let.  I,  to  Philo,  srîd  Second  Tart  of  ^^fecmén^  ctf
ttic  Aieopagites.  ,-  ,  •'•      -     .


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

VOW  of  annihilating  every  idea  of  religion,  even  to  the
very  name  of  a  God  ;  the  plan  for  overthrowing  every
government,  even  to  the  obliteration  of  every  vellige
of  laws,  authority,  or  civil  fociety  ;  the  wifli  of  de-
ftroying  our  arts  and  fciences,  our  towns,  and  even
villages,  that  they  may  realise  their  fyllems  of  Liberty
and  Equality  ;  the  deûre  of  exterminating  the  greater
part  of  human  nature,  to  work  the  triumph  of  their
vagabond  clans,  over  the  remaining  part  of  mankind.
Thefe  vows  and  wifhes,  thefe  plots  and  plans,  have
already  appeared  in  the  Icfier  myfteries,  and  his  adepts
muft  have  been  as  ftupid  as  he  wiflies  them  to  be
impious  and  wicked,  if  they  have  not  feen  through  th«
web  that  veils  from  their  fight  the  baleful  abyfs.  "  And,
after  all,  it  is  not  the  ohjed  or  the  fuhjiancc  of  tlieir
plots  which  is  thus  flightly  veiled  ;  the  terms  alone  arc
concealed.  There  only  reniains  to  fay,  that  all  religion
Ihall  be  deftroyed  for  the  adoption  of  Atheifm  ;  cvci  y
conftitution,  whether  monarchical  or  republican,  (hall
be  overthrown  in  favour  of  abfolute  independence  ;
property  fliall  be  annihilated  ;  fcience  and  arts  (hall
be  fiipprelTed  ;  towns,  houfes,  and  fixed  habitations,
reduced  to  allies,  for  the  re^eftabliflrment  of  the  roam-
ing and  favage  life,  which  the  hypocrite,  in  his  cant,
calls  the  patritvchal  life.  Such  are  the  terms  ;  and  the
fcroU  of  this  hideous  pantomime  needed  only  to  be  un-
rolled, to  tell  the  names  of  thofe  who  were  to  appear
on  the  gloomy  ftage  of  the  lad  myfteries.  Tlie  adept
had  long  fince  inhaled  the  deleterious  air  with  which
Weifliaupt  had  fpared  no  pains  to  furround  him  ;  and
could  he  naufeate  this,  or  turn  away  from  thefe  dif-
artrous  Uiachinations,  the  gates  of  the  myfterious  pit
Were  (liut  againft  him.  At  fuch  a  fight  nature  fliud-
ders — The  reader  will  cry  out.  None  but  monfters
could  have  conceived  or  abetted  fuch  plots.  Be  it  fo  ;
I  will  not  contradiift  him  ;  I  only  wifli  to  name  thefe
monfters.— Behold  Weifhaupt  and  his  profound  adepts!
The  reader  will  find  the  proofs  of  this  exclamation  in
their  own  writings.

Weifiiaupt,  who  divided  his  myfteries  into  two
clafles,  alio  diitributed  his  laft  fccrtts  under  two  heads.
Firfi;,  Rtligion  ;  which  was  the  ohjtd  of  the  Mages  ••
The  other  comprehended  what  he  c-alled  his  P<,.lity  j
and   he  referved  it  for  the  Man  King.     Let  us  fepa-


*43


144


TliE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


Secret  of
the  Miigej
AtlieiXm.


l*rdved  by
Weif-
taupt's
letters.


lately  invcfligate  each  of  tliefe  degrees,  commencing
with  that  principle  which  he  himlelf  lays  down,  and
from  which  he  never  deviates,  that  each  degree  fliall
be  a  preparatory  concatenation  of  principles  and  doc-
trines, the  ultimate  tendency  of  which  was  to  form
the  objeft  of  the  laft  myfteries.  Such  a  principle  is
more  than  fufficient  to  demonllrate  that  the  fecrct  to
be  imparted  to  his  Mages  can  be  no  other  than  the
mod  abfolute  Atheifm,  and  the  total  fubverfion  of
every  Religion.  The  adept,  however,  has  already
imbibed  fuch  horrid  principles  ;  and  the  fecrct  confifts
in  telling  him,  in  plain  terms,  that  it  was  towards  that
point  the  Sed  had  long  fince  been  leading  him,  and
that  in  future  all  his  thoughts^  words,  and  atlions,  muft
lend  to  fécond  the  views  of  the  Seel  in  their  monllrous
undertaking;  that  in  the  preceding  degrees  the  name
of  Kelhyion  had  only  been  prclerved  the  better  to
deftroy  the  thing  ;  but  that  in  future  the  very  name
would  only  be  the  exprefiion  of  chimeras,  of  liipcr-
ftition,  of  fanaticifm,  fupported  by  dcfpotifm  and  am-
bition^ as  a  tool  for  enllaving  mankind.

This  explication  is  no  vain  fancy  of  mine.  Sec
Wcifliaupt  confidentially  writing  to  his  intimate  and
incomparable  Cato-Zwack  :

"  I  firmly  believe,  that  the  fecrct  doctrine  of  Chrift
"  had  no  other  object  in  view  than  the  rc-cftablifliment
"  of  Jewifh  Liberty,  which  is  the  explanation  1  give  of  it.
"  I  even  believe,  that  Freemafonry  is  nothing  but  r
"  Chriftianity  of  this  fort  ;  at  leaft,  my  explanation  of
"  their  Hieroglyphics  perfedly  coincides  with  fuch  an
'•'  explanation.  In  this  fenfe,  nobody  could  bkifh  at
"  being  a  Chriftian  ;  for  I  prefirve  the  name,  and  fub-
*•  Jihute  7X'cifo}i,—(lenn  ich  lajfe  den  nnmeny  nnd  futJH-
"  tuiere  ihm  die  vernunji"—]lc  continues  :  "  It  is  no
"  trivial  matter  to  have  difcovered  a  new  Religion
"  and  a  new  PoUty  in  thefe  tenebrous  Hieroglyphics  ;"
and  he  goes  on  to  fay,  "  One  might  be  induced  to
**  think  that  this  was  my  highelt  degree  ;  1  have,  never-
*'  thelefs,  three  of  infinitely  more  importance,  for  cur
*'  grand  myileries."*  Here  then  is  Weilliaupt's  deci-
fion  on  the  degree  of  Epopt  or  Illimiinized  Pdejî.— It
is  Chriftianity  preferving  the  name  of  Religion ^  with


*  Original  Writings,  Vol,  II.  Let.  I  J,  to  Cato.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

rhe  Gofpel  converted  into  a  code  by  means  of  which
Chi-ift  taught  the  Jacobinical  Equality  and  Liheriy.\
Here  Weifliaupt  is  tranfcendant  in  his  wickednefs  and
his  impiety  ;  it  is  undt  r  the  iacred  name  of  RcHgion
that  he  teaches  his  diiorganizing  principles  of  Equality
and  Liberty.  After  having  led  his  Epopts  to  the  pin-
nacle of  Impiety,  to  what  farther  lengths  can  he  polll-
bly  lead  his  Mage  ? — He  may  erafe  the  names  of  Keli-
gion  and  God  F  And  this  he  will  do  in  his  higher  myf-
teries  ;  for  who  can  exped  to  find  them  when  he  fays,
*'  Yon  know  that  the  Unity  of  God  was  one  of  the  fe-
"  crets  revealed  in  the  myileries  of  Eleufis  ;  as  for  that,
**  there  is  no  fear  of  any  fiich  thing  being  jound  in
"  mine"*

After  this,  can  the  name  of  God  be  expeéled  ever
to  be  found  in  the  myfteries  of  the  Illuminized  Mage
for  any  other  purpofe  than  to  be  blafphemed  ?  We  fee
this  fame  Weilhaupt  referving  all  the  Atheiftical  pro*
duclions  for  this  degree  ;  he  writes  again  to  his  incom-
parable man  :  "  With  our  beginners  let  us  aét  prudently
"  with  refpeél  to  books  on  Religion  and  Polity.  In
*'  my  plan  I  referve  them  for  the  grand  myjleries.  At
*'  firfl  we  muft  put  only  books  of  hiftory  or  of  meta-
"  phyfics  into  their  hands.  Let  Morality  be  our  pur-
"  fuit.  Robinet,  Mirabeau  (that  is  to  fay  the  fyflem  of
*'  nature  written  by  Diderot,  though  attributed  to  Mi-
"  rabeau,)  the  Social  Syjlem,  Natural  Polity,  the  Philo'
"  fophy  of  Nature,  and  fuch  works,  are  referved  for
"  my  higher  degrees. — At  prefent  they  muft  not  even
*'  be  mentioned  to  our  adepts,  and  particularly  Hel-
"  vetius  on  Man.'^t  The  reader  here  fees  a  hft  of
the  moft  Anti-religious  and  the  moft  Atheiftical
works,l|  and  that  they  are  referved  for  thefe  lafl:
myfteries.  As  a  preparation  for  them  (horribile  dic'
in .')  the  very  idea  of  a  God  muft  be  eradicated  from
the  mind  of  the  adept.  Can  we  doubt  of  this,  when
we  fee  Weifliaupt  tlnis  write  :  "  Do  put  Brother  Nit-
"  jnetiius  m  correfpondcnce  with  me,  I  muft  try  to
"  cure  him  of  his  Theofophical  ideas,  and  properly

f  See  the  Difcourfe  on  the  Dej^ree  of  Epopt.

*  Original  Wrkir.p:s,  Vol.  I.  Let.  4,  to  Cato.

\  Ibid.  Let.  3,  to  Cato.

IJ  See  the  Helvienne  Letters  on  thefe  Works.

\^ol.  III.  X


^


M5


146  THE    AMTÎSOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  prepare  him  for  our  views.— A/;  ivill  ihn  fuchetf  von
"  der  Tljeojoph'ie  zu  airier  en,  tin>l  zu  un  fer  en  abfichten
"  zu  beJiimmcn.^*-\-  The  Theofopher,  or  the  man  flill
beHeving  in  a  God,  is  not  tit  for  thefe  myfteries  ;  Re-
■  ligion  then  muft  of  courfe  be  ineconcileable  with
them.  Were  the  confequenccs  lefs  evident,  and  flioiild
we  rejeft  thefe  fecret  correfpondences,  or  condemn  the
laft  oracles  of  the  Hierophant  to  remain  ivithin  the
huhdred  bolts  which  keeps  them  hidden  from  the
adepts  ;  I  fay,  even  then,  to  afcertain  what  the  tenets
of  the  Scd  are  as  to  any  worfliip  or  religion,  we
fliould  not  be  neceflitated  to  enter  that  den  of  myfte-
ries.  Though  Wcifliaupt  had  not  mentioned  Religion
in  his  intimate  correfpondence,  the  Atheillical  Confpi-
racy  of  his  myfteries  would  be  evident,  and  why  ft- ek
private  documents  whtn  he  has  given  us  irrefragable
proofs  of  guilt  in  that  which  he  publifncs  as  his
apology  ?
_  j^j,  ^  Two  years  after  his  flight,  Weifliaupt  moft  daringly
logy.  ^  aflerts,  that  the  Syfteras  of  his  lUuminifm  (as  publiflied
by  the  civil  powers)  are  but  a  mere  Iketch,  a  plan  as
yet  too  ill-digefted  for  the  public  to  form  any  judg-
ment either  on  him  or  his  adepts,  fi"om  the  Original
Writings  or  his  Confidential  Correfpondence.  He
publiflies  a  new  code,  and  calls  it  The  correded  Syjfem
of  Illumhiifm,  ivith  its  degrees  and  co7ifHtutions,  by
Adam  JVeifliaiipt,  Coimfllor  to  the  Duke  of  Saxe  Gotha.
Here  at  lead  we  have  a  right  to  judge  him  and  hiâ
inyfteries,  both  in  his  apology  and  his  correded  de-
grees. But  the  reader  will  now  view  him  in  a  new
light.  He  is  not  only  the  confpiring  infidel,  but  the
infolent  Sophiller,  infulting  the  public  with  all  the
haughtinefs  of  tlie  mod  daring  Athcift,  flirugging  his
flioulders  in  difdain  at  the  reft  of  mankind  ;  and  with
impertinent  pity  faying  to  us  all,  as  he  did  of  the
adepts  whom  he  had  duped,  poor  créatures/  %vhat  could
one  not  make  you  believe  !

I  deign  to  caft  my  eyes  on  this  apology,  or  the  Illu-
minifm  correc^led.  »  He  begins  by  telling  us,  that  to
have  fuppofcd  him  capable  of  compofing  fo  extenfive
a  work  in  two  years  ivas  doing  him  the  honour  of  ftp-
^ofing  him  gifted  with  niojt  extraordinary  tiûents  ;  ai  id

•}■  Ibid.  Vol.  II.  Let.  15,  to  Cuto.


THE    ANTISOCL\L    CONSPIRACY.

k  is  in  fuch  terms  that  the  Sophifter  informs  the  public
that  he  takes  them  for  great  fools.  Let  the  contempt
with  which  he  treats  his  readers  be  retorted  upon  him-
féif  ;  let  neither  him  nor  his  accomplices  exped  to
defcend  to  pofterity  with  any  other  dil'linftion  than  as
the  phenomena  of  vice  and  infamy.  Are  we  to  crouch
in  token  of  homage  before  the  men  who  infolently  feoff
at  their  God  and  at  the  public  weal  ?  I  know  not  whe-
ther Weilhaupt  needed  extraordinary  talents  or  not,
though  I  grant  him  all  tiie  art  and  cunning  of  the
Sophiller  ;  but  mofl:  certainly  he  muft  have  prefumed
much  on  the  force  of  impudence  when  he  flattered
himfelf  that  the  public  would  inevitably  ûnd  that  his
correded  code  contained  no  principles  but  fuch  as
would  elevate  the  mind  and  tend  to  form  great  men.*
What  I  find  is,  that  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  medley
of  all  the  arts  of  his  original  code  for  the  education  or
rather  depravation  of  his  adepts.  Did  I  with  to  form
a  ftupid  atheitl,  this  would  be  the  work  I  fliould  chufe
to  put  into  his  hands.  As  early  as  the  third  degree,
in  place  of  a  God  reigning  as  freely  as  he  does  pow-
erfully over  this  univerfe,  I  find  the  univerfe  tranf-
formed  into  a  vail  machine,  in  which  every  thing  is
held  together  or  put  in  motion  by  I  know  not  what
fatality,  decorated  fometimes  by  the  appellation  of
God,  at  others,  of  nature.  Again  :  did  I  wifli  to  de-
corate with  the  name  of  providence  a  defliny  ivhicJy
cannot  annihilate  a  fmgle  atom  xvithaut  deprivitig  the
jiiirs  of  their  fupport  and  involving  the  ivho-le  imiverfî
in  ndn,  this  would  be  the  work  I  (hould  recommend  :
I  would  give  it  to  the  narrow-minded  adept,  who,  in
a  world  where  every  thing  is  faid  to  be  neceifary,
fliould  ftiil  pretend  to  talk  of  virtue  or  vices,  or  who
could  comfort  himfelf  for  all  the  harm  which  the
wicked  could  do  him,  by  learning  that  the  wicked  like
the  virtuous  man  only  followed  the  courfe  which  na-
ture had  traced  for  him  ;  and  that  tiiey  would  both
arrive  at  the  fame  point  as  himfelf;  In  fine,  I  would
put  it  into  the  hands  of  the  imbecile,  who  would  call
the  art  of  making  m:rry  the  art  of  being  always  happy

*  So  hoffe  ich  doch  follcn  alle  darin  ubereinkommen,  daft  die  m
diefcn  graden  auj^eftellten  grund-saz£  fiihig  (eyeiL,  groffe  und  erhiiheafi
ttienfchen  zu  hï\à.^l\—I;dioJu£îion  to  his  corrected Jyfiem,

Vol.  III.  X  2


M7


14!^  THE   ANTISOCIAL    CONSriR.\CY,'

(nrs  femper  gaudcmli  ;)  the  art  of  peiTuading  cne*s  ielf
that  one's  misfortunes  are  incurable,  or  that  they  are
all  neceflary.*  But  what  reader  will  brook  the  impu-
dence of  that  confpiring  infidel,  who,  dedicating  his
myftcries  as  an  apology  to  the  whole  world  and  all
mankind — ler  ivcU  inul  dem  mc7ifchlichen  gefchlccht —
and  pretending  to  prove  that  his  original  myfteries  are
not  a  confpiracy  againfl  Religion,  puts  a  difcourfe  in
the  mouth  of  his  new  Hierophants,  whofe  very  title
charaderiz-es  the  mofl:  determined  one  both  againfl:
God  and  Religion  ;  he  calls  it,  An  injîruâmi  for  the
adepts  vjbo  are  inclined  to  the  fancy  of  hclicving  in  or  of
fldoring  a  God  !  I  know  it  may  be  alfo  tranflated.  An
injhuaion  for  the  Brethren  inclinuiçr  towards  Theofo-
phical  or  Religious  enthufiafm.\  But  if  both  thefe
tranflations  be  not  fynonimous  in  the  language  of  the
Sophifters,  let  the  reader  judge,  from  the  exordium  of
the  difcourfe,  which  is  the  mofl  accurate.

"  He  who  willies  to  labour  for  the  happinefs  of
"  mankind,  to  add  to  the  content  and  reft  of  the  hu-
"  man  fpecies,  to  decreafe  their  diflatistaélion  (thefe
"  are  literally  the  words  of  our  Antitheofophical  So-
"  phifter,)  muft  fcrutinize  and  weaken  thofe  prificiples
"  which  trouble  their  reft,  contentment,  and  happinefs.
"  Of  this  fpecies  are  all  thofe  fyftems  which  are  hoftile
"  to  the  ennobling  and  perfeding  of  human  nature  ;
"  which  unneceflarily  multiply  evil  in  the  world,  or
"  reprefent  it  as  gi'eater  than  it  really  is  :  all  thofe
"  fyftems  which  depreciate  the  merit  and  the  dignity
*'  of  man,  which  diminifti  his  confidence  in  his  own
*'  natural  powers,  and  thereby  render  him  lazy,  pufil-
**  lanimous,  mean,  and  cringing  :  all  thofe  alfo  which
'*  beget  enthufiafm,  which  bring  human  reafon  into
"  difcredit,  and  thus  open  a  free  courfe  for  impofture  ;
"  M  the  fheofophical  aiid  Myjilcal  Syflems  ;  all  thofe
''  xvhich  have  a  direi't  or  indireâ  tendency  to  fuch  Syf
"  terns  ;  in  Jhort,  all  the  principles  derived  from  Iheojb'
'*  phy,  lubich,  concealed  in  our  hearts,  often  finifh  by
"  leading  men  back  to  it,  belong  to  this  clfi."

In  the  courfe  of  his  inftrudions,  the  reader  is  not  to
cjiped  that  Weifliaupt  will  make  any  exception  in  fa-

*  See  in  the  corrected  Ryflem  the  Difcourfe  on  the  third  clafs.
f  Unterritt  fiir  alle  mitgkidtr,  welche  zu  Theofophifclicn  fchwSr-
mcreyen  geneight  find.


THE    AMTISOCTAL    CONSPIRACY.  1^

vour  of  the  revealed  Religion,  not  even  a  hint  at  fuch
an  exception  is  to  be  ken.— The  Religion  oF  Chrill  is
reprefenrcd  as  a  medley  of  the  reveries  of  Pythagoras,
of  Plato,  and  of  Judaifm.  It  is  in  vain  for  the  If-
raelites  to  believe  in  the  Unity  of  God,  in  the  coming
of  a  MelTiah  ;  it  is  in  vain  to  aflert  that  fuch  was  the
faith  of  their  forefathers,  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Ja-  ..
cob,  long  before  they  entered  Egypt  or  Babylon  ;  it  is
in  vain  to  prove,  that  the  adoration  of  the  golden  Calf,
or  of  the  god  Apis,  was  punifhed  by  the  Almighty  as
a  prevarication  of  their  Religion  :  Nothing  will  ferve
the  Sophifter  ;  he  will  declare  in  his  correClcd  code,  that
the  Religion  of  the  Jews  was  but  a  modification  of
the  reveries  of  the  Egyptians,  of  Zoroaller,  or  of  the
Babylonians.  To  coma  his  adepts,  he  teaches  them
to  cafl;  afide  the  Creation  as  a  chimera  unknown  to
antiquity,  and  to  reduce  all  Religion  to  two  Syftems —
The  one,  that  of  matter  co-eternal  with  God,  a  part  of
God,  proceeding  from  God,  cad  forth  and  feparated
from  God,  in  order  to  become  the  world — The  other,
matter  co-eternal  with  God,  without  being  God,  but
worked  by  God,  for  the  formation  of  the  univerfe.
Oil  thefe  foundations  he  builds  a  general  hiftory  of  all
Religions  and  makes  all  appear  equally  abfurd.  The
reader  might  be  tempted  to  think  that  thefe  lefTons
had  been  compofed  before  the  hegira  or  rather  pro-
fcription  of  the  author  of  lUuminifm.  They  may  liave
been  compiled  for  one  of  thofe  difcourfes  which  he
declares  to  be  of  more  importance  than  that  of  the
Hierophant  in  the  degree  of  Epopt.— He  precifely  fol-
lows the  courte  which  Knigge  reprefents  as  the  grand
objeft  of  the  lait  myfteries.  He  makes,  after  his  fa-
fîîiôn,  a  general  compilation  of  all  the  fchools  of  Phi-
Jofophifra  and  of  its  Syftems  ;  and  hence  he  deduces
Chriftanity  and  all  Religions.  The  refult  of  the  whole
is,  that  all  Religions  are  founded  on  impofture  and
chimera,  all  end  in  rendering  man  coivardly,  lazy,
cringr^'T  and  fuperjiltiou n  all  degrade  him,  and  trouble
liis  repoie.*  And  it  is  thus  that  this  Sophifter,  under
pretence  of  his  juftincation,  daringly  ads  that  part  in
public  which  before  he  had  only  ventured  to  aft  under
the  cover  of  his  myfteries.     Ke  fallies  forth  from  his

*  See  the  laft  difcourfe  of  Illuminifm  correfted.


'50


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


baleful  abyfs  but  to  proclaim  to  the  world  what  here-
tofore he  had  only  hinted  to  his  adepts  in  private, —
that  the  time  was  at  length  come  for  the  overthrow  of
every  Altar,  and  the  annihilation  of  every  Religion.
By  Knig-  Are  any  further  proofs  necc  ffary  to  demonftrate  the
ge*8  tefti-  objeeT:  of  the  grand  my(teries  î  The  teftimony  of
*^™y-  Knigge  cannot  be  objeéled  to,  nor  can  Kniggc  pre-
tend or  wilh  to  miflead  Zwack  when  confidentially
correfponding  with  him.  Both  had  iigned  the  agree-
ment of  the  Areopagites  refpe<^ing  the  compilation  of
the  degrees  of  Uluminifm.*  Let  us  then  attend  to
thefe  two  adepts — Philo-Knigge  has  been  exhibiting  all
that  he  has  done,  according  to  Wcifliaupt's  inftruftions,
in  the  degree  of  Epopt,  to  demonftrate  that  Chrifl  had
no  other  view  than  the  eftablifhment  of  natural  Reli-
gion, or,  in  the  language  of  Uluminifm,  the  rights  of
Liberty  and  Equality.  Knigge  then  continues  :  "  Af-
"  ter  having  thus  fliown  to  our  people  that  we  are
"  the  real  Chriftians,  we  have  only  a  xvord  to  add
*'  againfl  Priefts  and  Princes.  I  have  made  ufe  of
"'  iuch  precaution  in  the  degrees  of  Epopt  and  of  Re-
"  gent,  that  I  Ihould  not  be  afraid  of  conferring  them
"  on  Kings  or  Popes,  provided  they  had  undergone
"  the  proper  previous  trials.  In  our  laft  myfteries  we
^'  have  to  acknowledge  this  pious  fraud  ;  to  prove,
"  upoI^the  teftimony  of  authors,  the  origin  of  all  the
"  religious  impoftures,  and  to  expofe  the  whole  with
"  their  conne<5lions  and  dependencies."!

Such,  reader,  is  that  vjord  to  add,  which  was  to  be
fpoken  only  in  the  laft  myfteries  of  Uluminifm  !  That
ivord  againft  priefts  and  the  minifters  of  every  worr
fhip  J  That  vjord  on  the  pious  fraud,  or  rather  laby-
rinth of  impiety,  in  which  the  fe<5l  had  involved"  ^tjie
candidate  on  his  firft  entrance  into  the  Order,  only  to
extricate  him  when  he  was  judged  worthy  of  tlieir  laft

*  See  this  agreement  in  the  Original  Writings,  Vol.  TI.  Part  II.  figncd
the  »0  Adarmeth  1551,  or  Anno  Domini,  20  December  1781.

f  Da  nun  die  leute  fchen  dafs  wir  die  cinzigen  achten  wahren  Chrif»
ten  find,  fo  diirfen,  wir  da  gegen  ein  word  mehr  gcgen  pfaffen  tind
fiirften  rcden  ;  doch  habe  ich  dicls  fo  gethan,  dafs  ich  piipftf  und  konige
pach  vorhergegangener  priifimg,  in  dicfe  grade  aufnehmcn  wollte.  In-
dem  hoheren  myfcerien  follte  man  dann  A  à\e{c  piam  frauJcm  entdeckcn,
und  B  aus  alien  fchrifften  den  urfprung  aller  rcligiôzen  liigen,  und
dereu  zufemnienhang  cntwickeln— 0/^'>i//  IFritiiigs,  VJ.  11.  l,ct.  I5
from  Fhilo  to  Qct'J,


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

myfteries  !  The  adept  miift  certainly  be  of  weak  intel-
leds,  and  his  crtdulity  m  lift  border  on  ftupidity,  if  he
has  not^  in  the  degree  of  Epopt,  and  long  before,  ob-
ferved  whither  they  were  leading  him.  But  fhould
lie  really  be  ftill  in  the  dark,  or  could  he  view  with
indignation  the  artilices  which  have  been  ufed  with
him  ;  if  all  reflection  have  not  abandoned  him  ;  what
will  not  the  very  term  o( pious  fraud  difcover  to  him?
Will  it  not  recall  to  his  mind,  "  that  on  the  firft  invita-
*^  tions  of  the  feci,  to  entice  him  into  their  Order,  they
*'  began  by  telling  him,  that  nothing  contrary  to  reli-
*'  gion  would  ever  enter  the  projeéb  of  the  Order  ?
"  Does  he  not  remember,  that  this  declaration  was  re-
"  peated  on  his  admiflion  into  the  noviciate,  and  reite-
"  rated  when  he. was  received  into  the  minerval  aca-
"  demy  ?  Has  he  forgotten,  how  ftrongly  the  fed
"  enforced  the  ftudy  of  morality  and  of  virtue  in  the
«  firft  degrees,  and  how  carefully  it  ifolated  both
"  from  religion  ?  When  pouring  forth  its  encomium  on
**  religion,  did  not  the  fed  infinuate,  that  true  religion
''  widely  differed  from  thofe  myfteries  and  worfhip
*'  which  had  degenerated  in  the  hands  of  the  prieft-
"  hood  ?  Does  he  remember  with  what  art  and  affeded
<'  rcfped  it  fpoke  of  Chrift  and  his  Gofpel  in  the  de-
"  grees  of  Major  Illuminée,  of  Scotch  Knight,  and  of
"  Epopt;  how  the  Gofpel  was  infenfibly  metamorphof-
"  ed  into  illuminized  reafon,  its  morality  into  that  of
*'  Nature  ;  and  from  a  moral,  reafonable,  and  natural
"  religion,  how  a  religion  and  a  morality  of  the  riglus
"  of  man,  of  Liberty  and  Equality,  were  deduced  ?
«  Does  he  refled  how  all  the  different  parts  of  this
«  fyftem  and  opinions  of  the  fed  were  infniuated  to
"  him,  how  naturally  they  occurred  and  appeared  to
«  have  been  foftered  in  his  own  breaft  ?  Could  not
"  the  Sed  fay  to  him,  'tis  true,  we  put  you  on  the
*<  way,  but  you  were  much  more  earneft  in  folving
"  our  quellions  than  we  in  anfwering  youi's.  When,
«  for  example,  we  alked  whether  the  religions  which
«  nations  had  adopted  fulfilled  the  objeds  for  which
"  they  were  intended  ;  whether  the  pure  and  fimple
«  religion  of  Chrift  was  really  that  which  different
"  Seds  proftrffcd  at  this  prcfent  day,  we  knew  what  to
"  believe,  but  we  wiflied  to  know  how  far  you  had
"  inhaled   our  principles.      We  had  a   mukitude  of


'5«


15*


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


"  prejudices  to  conquer  in  you,  before  we  could  fuc-
"  ceed  in  perfuading  you  that  the  pretended  religion
"  of  Chrift  was  but  an  invention  of  prieft-craft,  ini-
"  pofture,  and  tyranny.  If  fuch  be  the  cafe  with  the
**  much-admired  and  loudly  proclaimed  Gofptl,  what
*'  are  we  to  think  of  all  other  religions  ?  Learn,  then,
"  that  they  are  all  founded  on  fidion,  all  originate  in
"  impofition,  error,  irapoilure,  and  chimera.  Such  is
"  our  fecret.  All  the  windings  we  made  ;  the  hypo-
«  thefes  we  afllimed  ;  the  prouiifes  fet  forth  ;  the  pa»
"  negyric  pronounced  on  Clirill  and  his  fecret  fchools  ;
"  the  fable,  of  Mafonry  being  for  a  long  time  in  pof-
"  feflion  of  his  true  doétrines,  and  our  Order  being
"  at  prefent  fole  depofitary  of  his  myfteries,  can  no
"  longer  be  fubjecT:s  of  furprife.  If,  to  overturn  Chrif-
"  tianity  and  every  religion,  we  pretended  folely  to
*'  poflefs  true  Chriftianity,  the  true  religion,  remember
"  that  the  end  fanâifies  the  means,  that  the  fage  muji
"  make  u/è  of  all  thofe  means  for  good  purpofes,  which
"  the  luicked  do  for  evil.  The  means  we  have  em-
<'  ployed  to  rid  you,  and  which  we  continue  in  order  to
"  rid  mankind  of  all  religion,  are  but  a  piojis  Jraud,
"  which  we  always  meant  to  reveal  to  you  when
"  admitted  to  the  degree  of  Mage,  or  of  llluminized
*'  Philofopher  !  !  !"
IÎV  tKe  To  thefe  refledions  on  the  word  to  be  added  in  the

avowal  of  laft  mytleries  (fufliciently  demonftrated  by  the  afccniion
an  honcft  ^^  ^.j^^  degrees,  by  Weifhaupt's  apology,  by  his  intimate
correfpondcnce,  and  that  of  his  mofc  perfecl  adepts)
let  us  fubjoin  the  avowal  of  a  man  little  calculated
indeed  for  a  member  of  fuch  an  abominable  tribe,  but
who  has  better  than  any  perfon  known  how  to  tear
the  mafk  from  their  hideous  countenances,  and  expofe
their  wickednefs.  I  am  acquainted  with  his  real
name  ;  1  am  aware  that  it  would  greatly  add  to  the
confidence  of  the  public  ;  but  I  aifo  know  that  could
lUurainifm  difcovcr  his  afylum,  it  would  follow  him  to
drink  his  blood,  though  it  were  to  the  fouthern  pole.
He  is  then  entitled  to  lecrecy  ;  till  now  it  has  been  ob-
ferved,  nor  will  I  be  the  firll  to  infringe  his  right.
The  Germans  have  paid  him  homage,  and,  ignorant
<if  his  name,  they  have  furnamed  him  Biederinnn,  or
Man  of  Honour;  at  leaft,  it  is  under  that  denomina-
tion that  his  works  are  generally  cited.      All  that  I


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

can  fay  in  addition  to  what  the  public  is  already  in
pofTeffion  of  refpefting  this  gentleman  is,  that  nothing
could  have  induced  him  to  continue  fo  difgufting  a
courfe,  but  a  zeal  for  the  public  welfare,  and  a  juft
opinion,  that  the  only  means  of  preventing  the  efFeéts
of  the  confpiracy  of  the  feel  was  to  make  their  machi-
nations public—Having  palfed  tlirough  all  the  degrees,
he  was  at  length  admitted  to  the  laft  myfteries.  He
publiflied  thoie  of  Epopt  or  Pneji^  and  of  Kegenty
under  the  title  of  Laji  JVorks  of  Philo  and  Spartaciu.
He  fubjoincd  the  inftruc^ions  belonging  to  thofe  de-
grees, with  a  Critical  Bijtory  of  all  the  degrees  of  Ilbimi-
nifm.  Had  I  no  other  guarantee  of  the  veracity  of  his
alTertions,  than  their  glaring  coincidence  with  the  ori-
ginal writings,  which  is  beyond  all  doubt  with  the  at-
tentive invelliigator,  I  fliould  not  hefitate  in  declaring
him  to  be  the  man  that  has  given  the  trued  account,
and  was  beft  acquainted  with  the  fc6l.  The  certiii-
cate  at  the  head  of  the  degree  of  Epopt  and  Regent^
for  a  more  perfed  knowledge  of  which  the  public  is
indebted  to  him,  I  look  upon  as  undoubtedly  genuine.
1  know  a  perfon  who  has  leen  and  read  tjiis  certificate
in  the  original,  in  PAi/o-Knigge's  own  hand- writing,
and  who  has  feen  the  feal  of  the  Order  attached  to
this  certificate.  I  thus  particularize  becaufe  the  pub-
lic is  entitled,  in  difcuffions  of  this  importance,  to
know  how  far  I  have  extended  my  refearches,  and
how  far  the  grounds  I  work  upon  deferve  to  be  cre-
dited.— The  paflage  1  am  about  to  quote  is  looked
upon  as  fundamental  by  all  German  authors  ;  it  is
from  Biederman,  and  occurs  near  the  end  of  his  Cri-
tical Hijiory.

"  With  refpe(5l  to  the  two  degrees  of  M':ige  and  of
"  Man  King,  there  is  no  reception^  that  is  to  fay,  there
*'  are  no  ceremonies  of  initiation.  Even  the  Eled:  are
'^  not  permitted  to  tranfcribe  ihefe  degrees,  they  only
"  hear  them  read  ;  and  that  is  the  realcn  why  I  do  not
"  publifh  them  with  this  work."

"  The  firit  is  that  of  Mage^  alio  called  Philofopher.
"  It  contains  the  fundamental  principles  of  Spinofifm,
<'  Here  every  thing  is  material;  God  and  the  world
<'arebutone  and  the  fame  thing;  all  religions  arc.

vqi,  HI.  y


153


^54


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  hiconjijienty  chiiiieiical,  and  the  invention  of  ambi-
"  tious  men."*

*  Der  erfte,  welcher  Magus  auch  Ph'ilofophus  heift,  en-
tlialt  fpinofiftiche  grunds'àtze,  nach  welchen  allés  matériel!,
Gott  iind  die  welt  einerley,  allé  religion  unflatthaft,  und  eine
erfinduno  herf  iichtioer  menfchen  ift.

I  might  have  quoted  the  teuimony  of  another  adept,  who
writes  as  follows  to  the  authors  of  the  Eiidemonia  :  (Vol.  III.
No.  2,  Art.  4.)  "I  alfo  can  declare  that  I  have  been  prefent
"  at  the  grand  myfteries  ;  particularly,  that  in  175^5  I  was
"  entrufted  with  the  inlhuiflions  of  the  degree  of  Mage  or
"  Philofopher  ;  and  that  the  fliort  defcription  given  in  the
*'  Endliches  Schicksal  (or  the  laft  objeft  of  Free-.
"  mafonry)  is  perfeftly  exaft  and  well-grounded."  The
author  of  the  Endliches  Shichfal  has  only,  like  myfelf,  copied
the  text  from  Biederman.  1  have  no  knowledge  of  this  new
adept.  1  fee  he  has  figned  his  letter,  defiring  the  authors  of
the  Eudemonia  not  to  make  gfe  of  his  name  without  an  ab-
folute  neceflity.  "  Befides,"  he  adds,  "  I  am  a  Roman  Ca-
*'  tholic  ;  and  in  the  country  in  which  1  live  might  find  dif^
"  agreeable  confequences  from  not  having  aflced  to  be  ab-
"  folved  from  my  oath,  before  I publi/ked  ivhat  I  had promifed
"  to  keep  fecrei.^'  Sir,  1  am  a  Catholic  as  well  as  yourfelf,
and  fiiould  wifh  to  know  where  you  have  learned,  that  the
oath  you  had  taken  to  the  Illuminées  was  fuperior  to  that  you
had  taken  to  the  ftate.  How  then  could  you  reconcile  with
your  confcience  the  keeping  back  from  the  magiftrate  or  the
prince  fuch  proofs  as  you  had  acquired  of  a  confpiracy  againft
the  ftate  ?  Yes,  do  penance,  and  afk  abfolution  for  having
taken  fuch  an  oath,  and  for  not  having  been  true  to  the  oath
of  allegiance  which   you  had  fworn  to  the  ftate,  and  from

which  you  could  not  be  abfolved  by  any  power  on  earth.

"What  lingular  ideas  are  fometimcs  formed  of  probity  !  To.
perliiade  one's  felf  that  one  is  bound  by  an  oath  to  a  band  of
confpinitors,  while  the  oath  of  allegiance  is  overlooked  !—
Sir,  had  you  faid,  that  it  was  pecefFary  to  take  proper  pre-
cautions for  your  fecnrity,  that  'zvretches  pretending  to  the  power
of  life  and  death  might  not  afTaflinate  you,  nothing  could  be
rîore  natural  ;  take  your  precautions  while  informing  the  pub-
iic  magiftrute,  but  do  not  come  and  give  us  as  an  excufe  your
fidelity  to  an  oath,  which  in  itfeif  is  nothing  Icfs  than  a  per-
jury to  the  ftate.

Notwithftanding,  however,  the  reproach  juftly  merited  by
this  adept,  his  tellimony  is  not  to  be  ncgleif^ed,  fince  he  has.
fcnt  his  name  to  the  editors  of  the  Eudemonia,  a  journal
Drintcd  at  Franckfort  oa  the  Mein,  and  highly  defervinj;  cf


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY,


^55


"  Divers  principles,*'  continues  the  author,  "  thrown
"  out  in  the  preceding  degrees  might  in  fome  meafure
'*  point  out  the  object  the  icd  had  in  view."  Certainly
nothing  could  be  Ijetter  grounded  than  fuch  a  furniife
—Nature,  Co  often  united  with  God,  reprclented  aftive
like  (}od,  follov/ing,  with  the  fame  immenfity  of  pow-
er, the  fame  wildom  as  God,  the  courfe  which  it  had
traced  ;  a  hundred  fuch  expreffions  in  the  mouth  of
the  Hierophant  evidently  indicated,  that  the  God  of
Weifliaupc  was  that  of  Spinofa  or  Lucretius,  no  other
than  matter  and  the  univrrfe  ;  in  fine,  the  God  of  Athe-
ifm.  Let  the  Sieur  D'Alembert  aflert,  that  nothing
tan  be  more  oppolite  to  Atheifm  than  Spinofifm  ;*  or
let  Spinofa  fay,  that,  fo  far  from  being  an  Atheifl,  he
converts  every  thing  into  God  ;  will  fuch  an  excufe
raife  pity  or  indignation  in  the  reader?  To  deny  that
there  is  any  other  God  than  the  world,  is  evidently
denying  the  only  being  that  can  juftly  be  called  God.
It  is  laughing  at  men,  to  wifh  to  make  them  believe,
that  the  perfon  is  preferved  becaufe  they  do  not  dare
deilroy  the  name,  at  the  very  time  that  the  name  of
God  is  only  ufed  as  an  agent  for  the  annihilation  of
every  idea  of  a  Deity.

I  think  I  have  fufficientiy  demonflrated,  that  the
firll  objecl  of  thefe  grand  myileries  of  lUuminifm,
prepared  with  fo  much  art  and  cunning,  is  no  other
than  to  plunge  the  adepts  into  a  monftrous  Atheifm,
to  perfuade  all  nations  that  religion  is  but  an  invention
of  ambitious  impoflors,  and  that  to  deliver  nations
from  this  defpotifm  of  impofture,  and  recover  the  fa-
mous rights  of  man.  Liberty  and  Equality,  they  mufl
begin  by  annihilating  every  religion,  every  worfhip,
every  altar,  and  ceafe  to  believe  in  a  God.

Let  us  continue  the  declaration  of  Biederman,  and  The  Maa
the  objecl  of  the  lall  part  of  the  myfteries  (or  the  de-  ^'"^'  ^^
gree  of  the  Man  King)  will  be  equally  clear.  adept.

encouragement  for  the  vigour  with  which  the  editors  combat
the  Illuminées.  Their  writings  have  frequently  corroborated
materials  that  1  had  received  from  Auftria  and  Bavaria,  which
gives  me  great  confidence  in  the  refearches  1  have  made.

*  Panegyric  of  Montefquieu.

Vol.  iiL  y  2


a  56  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  The  fécond  degree  of  the  grand  myfteries,"  he
fays,  "  called  the  Man  King,  teaches  that  evtry  m-
"  habitant  of  the  country  or  town,  every  father  of  a
"  family,  is  fovereign,  as  men  formerly  were  in  the
"  times  of  the  patriarchal  life,  to  which  mankind  is
"  once  more  to  be  carried  back  ;  that,  in  confequence,
"  all  authority  and  all  magiftracy  miifl  be  deftroyed.
*'  —I  have  read  thefe  two  degrees,  and  have  pafled
*<  through  all  thofe  of  the  Order/'f

How  well  authenticated  foever.this  teftimony  may
be,  ftill  one  is  loth  to  think  that  there  could  have  ex-
ifted  men  at  once  fo  abfurd  and  fo  wicked  as  to  take
fuch  exquilite  pains  to  educate  their  adepts  merely  to
addrefs  them  in  the  end  to  the  following  purpofe  :
"  All  that  we  have  done  for  you  hitherto  was  only  to
"  prepare  you  to  co-operate  with  us  in  the  annihilation
"  of  all  Magiftracy,  all  Governments,  all  Laws,  and
"  all  Civil  Society  ;  of  every  Republic  and  even  De-
"  mocracy,  as  well  as  of  every  Ariftocracy  or  Monar-
*'  chy — It  all  tended  to  infufe  into  you  and  make  you
"  infenilbly  imbibe  that  which  we  plainly  tell  you  at
"  prefeut— All  men  are  equal  and  free,  this  is  their
"  imprefcriptible  right  ;  but  it  is  not  only  under  the
"  dominion  of  Kings  that  you  are  deprived  of  the  ex-
*'  ercife  of  thefe  rights.  They  are  annulled  wherever
"man  recognizes  any  other  law  than  his  own  will.
"  We  have  frequently  fpoken  of  Dcfpotifm  and  of
"  Tyranny  ;  but  they  are  not  confined  to  an  Arifto-
*'  cracy  or  a  Monarchy  :  Defpolilm  and  Tyranny  as
"  eflcntially  reiide  in  the  Democratic  fovereignty  of
"  the  people,  or  in  the  legiflative  people,  as  in  the
"  legiflative  King.  What  right  has  that  people  to
"  fubjeél  me  and  the  minority  to  the  decrees  of  its
"  majority  ?  Are  fuch  the  rights  of  nature  ?  Did  the
"  fovereign  or  legiflative  people  cxift  any  more  than
"  Kings  or  Ariftocratic  Legillators  at  that  period  when
"  man  enjoyed  his  natural  Liberty  and  Equality  ? —
"  Here  then  are  our  myfteries— All  that  v/e  have  faid

f  Der  zweytc,  JRex  gcnnant,  Ichrc  dafs  jecler  Bauer,  Burger  und
haiifviiter  ein  fou-veraln  fey,  wie  in  dem  patriar^halilchen  leben,  auf  v/cl-
chea  die  k-ute  weider  ziiruck-gebracht  werden  miiftcn,  gewefenfey;
iind  dais  folgiich  allé  cbrigkeit  wegfallen  niufTe — Diele  beydeii  gradeti
Jiab.'  audi  ich,  der  ich  in  dan  ordcn  allés  dunchgegangen  bin,  fslfbft


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  1 57

"  to  you  of  Tyrants  and  Dcfpots,  was  only  defigned  in»
"  fenlibly  to  lead  you  to  what  we  had  to  impart  con-
"  earning  the  defpotifm  and  Tyranny  of  the  people
"  themfelves.  Democratic  governments  are  not  more
"  confonant  with  nature  than  any  others.  If  you  aik^
**  How  it  will  be  poflible  for  men  aflembled  in  towns
*'  to  live  in  future  without  laws,  magiftrates,  or  con*
"  ftituted  authorities, — the  anfwer  is  clear,  Defert  your
*'  towns  and  villages,  and  fire  your  houfes.  Did  men
"build  houfes,  villages,  or  towns  in  the  days  of  the
"  Patriarchs  ?  They  were  all  equal  and  free  ;  the  earth
*'  belonged  to  thein  all,  each  had  an  equal  right,  and
"  lived  where  he  chofe.  Tlieir  country  was  the  world,
"  and  they  were  not  confined  to  England  or  Spain,  to
*'  France  or  Germany  ;  their  country  was  the  whole
*'  earth,  and  not  a  Monarchy  or  petty  Republic  in
"  fome  corner  of  it.  Be  equal  and  free,  and  you  will
"  be  cofmopoUtes  or  citizens  of  the  world.  Could  you
"  but  appreciate  Equality  and  Liberty  as  you  ought,
'^  you  would  view  with  indifference  Rome,  Vienna,  Pa-
"  ris,  London,  or  Conftantinople  in  flames,  or  any  of
*'  thole  towns,  boroughs,  or  villages  which  you  call  your
"  country. — Friend  and  Brother,  fuch  is  the  grand  fe-
"  cret  which  we  referved  for  our  Mylleries  !  !  !"

It  is  painful  indeed  to  believe,  that  ftupidity,  pride,
and  wickednefi.,  fliould  have  thus  combined  to  prepare
adepts,  who,  attending  Weifhaupt's  Myfterics,  could
miftake  them  for  the  Oracles  of  true  Wifdom  and
tranfcendant  Philofophy.  How  may  Jacobins  and  thole
pretended  patriots  of  Democracy  blulli,  when  they
learn  the  real  objedl  of  the  Sed  which  directs  their
aClions  ;  when  they  learn  that  they  have  only  been  the
tools  of  a  Scd  whofe  ultimate  objecl  is  to  oveiturii
even  their  Democratic  Conftitutions  U-But  in  attribut-
ing fach  language  to  the  Hierophant  of  the  laft  Myfte-
ries,  what  more  have  I  faid  than  the  Illuminizing  Le-
gillator  has  already  declared  !  What  other  can  be  the
meaning  of  his  Patriarchal  or  of  his  Nomade  or  roam-
iug  life,  of  thofe  vagabond  clans,  or  of  man  ftill  in  Bytheforc-
the  lavage  (late?*  What  Democracy  even  could  con-  g°'"S*^^"
nit  with  the  Patriarchal  life  or  the  vagabond  clans  ?
Where  is  the  neceffity  for  attending  the  laft  Mylleries,

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  10,  to  Cato.


1^8  THE    AÎ4TIS0CIAL    CONSPIRACY.

to  learn  from  the  Seel  itfelf  the  extent  of  their  con-
fpiracies?  We  have  feen  Wcifliaupt  curling  that  day
as  one  of  the  moft  difaftrous  for  mankind,  when,  unit-
ing themfelves  in  civil  fociety,  they  inftituted  Laws
arid  Governments,  and  firft  formed  natmis  and  peoj.'le.
We  have  {etn  him  depreciate  nations  and  the  natiofial
fpirit  as  the  grand  fource  of  Egotifm  ;  call  down  ven-
geance on  the  /lîu'j-,  on  the  rights  of  nations  as  incom-
patible with  the  lavjs  and  rights  of  nature.  What
elfe  can  the  Sed  mean  by  faying,  that  nations  fhall
difappear  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  than  the  annihila-
tion of  ail  civil  or  national  fociety  ?  Why  thofe  blaf-
phemies  againft  the  love  of  om^s  country,  if  not  to  per-
Itiade  the  adei>ts  to  acknowledge  none  ? — Have  we  not
heard  the  Hierophant  teaching  that  true  morality  con-
fifted  in  the  art  of  cafiing  Princes  and  Governors  afide
mid  of  p-oveniing  one's  flf;  that  the  red  o?igifial  Jin
in  mankind  was  theii"  uniting  under  the  laws  of  civil
fociety  ;  that  their  redemption  could  be  accompliflied
only  by  the  abolition  of  this  civil  ftate  ?  And  when  his
frantic  hatred  againft  all  government  exalts  his  imagi-
nation, does  he  not  enthufiaftically  exclaim,  Let  the
itingbers  laugh,  the  finffers  feoff  ;  Jiill  the  day  ivill  come,
vj'oen  Princes  and  Nations  fhall  difippcar  from  the  face
of  the  earth  ;  a  time  xvhen  each  man  flmll  recognize  no
other  lavj  hut  that  of  his  reafon  ?  Nor  does  he  hefitate
to  fay,  that  this  Jhall  be  the  grand  vjork  of  Secret
Societies.  Tiiey  are  to  reinftate  man  in  his  rights  of
Equality  and  Liberty,  in  an  independence  of  every  law
but  that  of  his  reafon.  Such  he  formally  declares  to
be  one  of  the  grand  myfteiies  of  his  Illuminifm  ;*  and
can  the  reader  quietly  fit  down  and  think  that  all  thefe
declarations  of  the  author  of  Illuminirm,  who  muft
be  fuperior  to  his  Myfteries,  have  not  the  abfolute  ruin
of  every  law,  government,  and  civil  fociety  in  view  ?
Has  he  not  feen  the  Se6l  anticipating  thofe  objeélions
which  evidence  might  have  fuggefted  againft  fyfteinS
ftill  more  wicked  than  ftupid  ;  forewarning  the  adepts,
that  independence  once  more  reftored  among  men,  it
was  not  to  meet  the  fame  fate  it  formerly  had,  and
was  never  to  be  loft  again  ;— teaching  that  mankind,
having  acquired  wifdoni  by  its  difafters,  will  refemble

*  See  the  Degree  of  Epopt.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  J5P

a  man  coiTeded  of  his  errors  by  long  experience,  and
who  carefully  avoids  thofe  faults  which  were  the  caufe
of  his  pail  misfortunes?  Has  not  the  reader  heard
him  proclaim  to  his  eled,  that  tliis  independence  once
recovered,  the  empire  of  the  laws  and  all  civil  fociety
would  ceafe  ;  and  will  he  ftiil  continue  to  dilbelievc
the  exiftence  of  the  mod  deliberate  and  mofL  danger-
ous Confpiracy  that  ever  was  formed  againll  fociety  !

Should  any  of  my  readers  be  weak  enough  to  be
feduced  by  the  imaginary  tweets  of  a  patriarchal  life,
fo  artfully  promifed  by  Weifliaupt,  let  them  receive
the  explanation  of  that  life  from  thefe  pretended
Apoftlcs  of  Nature.

At  my  outfet  I  did  not  only  declare,  that  the  de-
flrudion  of  civil  fociety  was  the  objeél  of  their  views;
I  did  not  confine  myfelf  to  faying,  that  (hould  Jaco-
binifm  n-iumph  every  Religion  and  every  Government
would  be  overthrown  ;  but  I  added,  that  to  whatever
rank  in  fociety  you  may  belong,  your  riches  and  your
fields,  your  houfes  and  your  cottages,  even  your  very
wives  and  children  vjould  be  torn  from  you.*"  I  alfo  re-
jefted  fanaticifn  and  enthufirfm  in  my  own  and  ray
reader's  name.  I  have  faid  it,  and,  adopting  the  lim-
plcft  conftruélion,  do  not  proofs  of  the  inoft  extenfive
plots  croud  upon  lis  from  the  very  lefTons  of  the  Seel  ?
Can  common  fenfe,  nay  can  the  ilrongeft  prejudice,
refufe  to  admit  fuch  powerful  evidence?

Let  him  who  may  wifli  to  prtferve  his  field,   his    plots  of  tlie
houle,  or  the  fmalieil  part  of  his  property,  under  this  Seôlagainft
patriarchal  life,  go  back  to  the  lepr  Myjieries  ;  there  ''Roi'EKTr.
let  him  hear  the  Hierophant  teaching  the  adept,  that
it  would  have  been  happy  for  man,  "  Had  he  known
"  how  to  prefcrve  himielf  in   the  primitive  ftate   in
"  which  nature  had  placed  hini  !— But  foon  the  un-
"  happy  germ  developed  itfelf  in  his  heart,  and  reft
"  and  happincfs  diiappeartd.     As  families  multiplied,
*•  the  nectiiary  means  of  fubfivtence  began  to  fail.  The
"  Nomade  or  roaming  life  ccafid  ;  Propeity  began;  Men
*'  cbofe  fixed  habitations  ;  Agriculture  br origin  them  to-
'^  gcîh:rP     \Vhat  were   in  the  eyes  of  the   Scd  the
dreadful  confequences  of  this  deviation  from  the  No-
made  or  Patriarchal  life  ?— Why  the  Hierophant  haft-

■'  Chap.  I.


l6o  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

ens  to  tcU  us,  Liberty  ivas  mined  hi  its  foutidationSf  and
E.piality  difappcnred.  This  Patriarchal  or  Nomade  life
is  then  no  other  than  that  which  preceded  property,
the  building  of  fixed  babitatio7is,  of  houfes,  cottages,
or  th::  cultivation  of  your  fields.  It  was  this  beginning
of  property  therefore,  the  building  of  habitations,  the
cultivation  of  lands,  which  ftruck  the  firfl  mortal  blow
at  Ec|uality  and  Liberty.  Should  any  one  wifli  to
return  to  the  Patriarchal  or  Nomade  life  with  fuch
wretches  as  thefe  apoftles  of  Liberty  and  Equality,  let
him  begin  by  icnoancing  his  property  ;  let  him  aban-
don his  houfe  and  his  fîeid  ;  let  him,  in  unifon  with  the
Stél,  declare,  that  the  lirft  blafphemy  which  was  utter-
ed againft  Equality  and  Liberty  was  by  the  man  who
fiill  faid  my  Held,  ;;/}-  houfe,  my  property.

It  muft  be  voluntary  blindnefs,  indeed,  in  the  man
who  will  not  fee  the  hatred  conceived  and  the  Confpi-
racies  entered  into  by  the  Sedt  againfl  titles  or  pre-
tenfions  to,  nay  againft  the  very  exiftence  of  property.
It  will  acknowledge  none,  nor  can  it  in  any  fliapc  be
compritible  with  their  explanations  of  Equality  and  Li-
berty, or  with  that  priinitive  ftate  of  nature  which  no
more  entitles  you  or  me  to  the  pofleffion  of  this  gold
or  lilver,  or  that  field,  than  it  does  a  third  perfon.

Here  it  is  not  limply  the  queftion  of  ellablifliing
the  Agrarian  Laivs,  where  lands,  riches,  and  other
properties  are  to  be  equally  diftributed  among  all  ;  it
is  not  limply  to  abolifli  the  didinclion  of  rich  and
poor  ;  no,  every  property  is  to  be  dcftroyed,  that  of
the  poor  like  that  of  the  rich.  The  firft  man  who
was  weary  of  the  Nomade,  roaming,  vagabond,  and
fav'age  life,  built  a  cot  and  not  a  palace.  The  iirft
who  furrowed  the  earth  was  in  queft  of  bread  and  not
of  gold  ;  but  he  ncverthekfs,  according  to  the  princi-
ples of  the  Seel,  was  the  man  who  ftruck  the  firfl
deadly  blow  at  Equality  and  Liberty.  Poor  or  rich
man  then,  according  to  the  doftrine  of  the  Seft,  the
field  you  have  recovered  from  the  wafte,  and  that
you  have  cultivated,  belongs  to  me  equally  as  to  you,
or  elfe  to  nobody  ;  I,  though  idle  and  inactive,  am
entitled  to  the  fruit  of  your  labours  ;  I  have  a  right  to
fliare  thofe  fruits  which  you  have  raifed  on  the  land
which  I  left  uncultured.  Does  not  Equality  diiappcar,
y.'hether  it  be  a  poor  or  rich  man  who  lli^dl  pi(;tciK{


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIEl.\CY.  1^1

ko  be  entitled  to  or  fay  this  field  is  mine,  I  have  tliat
property  ?  If  the  poor  man  has  a  title  to  his  proper-
ty, has  not  the  rich  man  alfo  one  ?  Treafures  and
palaces  are  no  more  property  than  the  cot  or  cottage.
Here  an  Illuminée  fpies  want,  there  abundance  ;  Equa-
lity and  Liberty  are  every  where  baniflied  ;  Defpotifni
or  Slavery  is  univerfal.  Neverthelefs,  Liberty  and
Equality  in  his  eyes  are  the  rights  of  nature,  and  he
beholds  them  mortally  wounded  on  the  firll  appear-
ance of  property,  when  man  became  ftationary.  Poor  '
or  rich,  you  all  imbrued  your  hands  in  this  foul  alTaffi-
natioa  of  Equality  and  Liberty  when  you  pretended  to
property  ;  from  that  inftant  you  are  both  involved
in  the  curfe  pronounced  in  the  myderies  ;  you  are  both
objec^ts  of  the  Confpiracies  of  the  Sed  from  the  firfl:
inllant  that  you  dared  alfert  your  right  to  your  habi-
tations whether  cots  or  palaces,  to  your  properties,
whether  fields  or  domains.  But  thefe  cannot  be  the
whole  of  the  fecrets  ;  they  are  only  thofe  of  the  lelfer
myfteries.  Weifliaupt  has  revealed  them  to  his  Epopts  ;
he  referves  the  grander  fecrets  for  his  Mage  and  Ma72-
Klng  ;  then  let  any  man  rich  or  poor  harbour,  if  he
can,  a  hope  of  feeing  the  Seft  reipecT;  his  property.
Or  rather  let  him  behold  the  Sed;  at  prcfent  pillaging
the  rich  in  favour  of  the  poor.  The  lad  myfteries  or
ultimate  confpiracy  will  take  place  ;  and  then  the  poor
man  will  learn,  that  if  Illuminifm  begins  by  pillaging
the  rich,  it  is  only  to  teach  him  that  he  is  no  better
entitled  to  his  property  than  the  rich  man  was,  and
that  the  time  is  near  when  he  will  alfo  be  pillaged  and
fall  a  viélim  to  the  curfe  which  has  been  pronounced
againft  every  proprietor.

The  progrefs  of  this  Sophifni  is  worthy  of  remark.
If  we  judge  by  its  prefent  growth,  what  a  gigantic
form  will  it  alTume  for  pofterity  !  The  Genevefe  So-
philler  of  Liberty  and  Equality,  anticipating  the  mo-
dern Spartaciis,  had  already  dogmatically  aflèrted,
**  That  the  man  who,  having  enclofed  a  piece  of
"  ground,  firfi:  took  upon  himielf  to  fay  this  is  mine,
*'  and  found  beings  fwiple  enough  to  believe  him,  wa5
"  the  true  founder  of  civil  fociety."  He  then  conti-
"  nues  : — "  What  crimes,  what  wars,  what  murders,
"  what  mifcries;  what  horrors  would  that  man  have

Vol.   IIL  Z


102  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  fpared  mankind,  who,  tearing  down  the  fences  of
"  tilling  up  the  ditches  of  this  new  encloliire,  had  cal-
"  led  out  to  his  equals,  beware  of  hearkening  to  this
*'  impoftor,  you  are  ruined  if  ever  you  forget  that  the
"  fruits  belong  to  all,  though  the  land  belongs  to  none."^'*
How  many  crimes  and  fpoliations  would  RoulTcau
have  fpared  tl:e  French  Revolution,  if,  contemning  fo
difailrous  a  paradox,  he  had  faid  with  more  judgment
and  veracity,  "  The  iirft  man  who  enclofcd  a  piece  of
land  and  took  upon  himfelf  to  fay,  this  belongs  to  no-
body, I  will  cultivate  it,  and  from  fterile  it  fliall  be-
come fertile  ;  I  will  follow  the  courfc  which  nature
lliall  point  out  to  me,  to  raife  fuftenance  for  me,  my
wife  and  children,  and  this  lafid  ivill  become  my  pro-
perty. The  God  of  nature,  who  as  yet-has  given  it
to  nobody,  offers  and  will  give  it  to  him  who  lliall
firil  cultivate  it  in  reward  for  his  labour.— The  lirft
man  who  held  fuch  language,  fecondino-  the  views  of
nature,  and  meetmg  with  beings  ly//.-  enough  to  imi-
tate him,  was  the  true  benefador  of  mankind.  He
taught  his  children  and  his  equals,  that  they  were  not
made  to  difpute  the  wild  fruits  of  the  earth  one  with
another,  nor  with  the  favage  bealls  of  the  forefl  :  no,
he  taught  them,  that  there  exifted  focial  and  domeflic
virtues  far  preferable  to  the  roaming  and  often  fero-
cious life  of  the  Nomades.  His  polleriiy  was  bkfied,
his  generations  were  multiplied.  If  it  was  not  in  his
power  to  avert  all  the  evils,  he  at  leart  dcftroyed  the
firil  of  them,  that  fterility  which  flinted  the  very
growth  of  life  and  drove  the  fcanty  population  of  the
earth  into  the  foreils  like  wild  beads,  and  too  (îfteii
aflirailated  them  to  the  lion  or  the  tiger,  to  whom
they  frequently  fell  a  prey.

Had  the  Sophiller  of  Geneva  held  this  language,  he
would  not  have  exj^oC^d  fiimfelf  to  the  ignominy  of
being  the  precurfor  of  Weiibaupt. — But  human  imbe-
cility has  laviihed  its  praifes  on  this  paradox,  and  have
decorated  it  with  the  name  of  Philofophy  !  The  Ba-
varian Sophifter  adopts  the  doftrine  of  Roufleau,  and
the  delirium  of  pride  has  only  reiined  on  the  phrenzy
of  wickednefs.  That  which  in  the  moMth  of  tlie  mai-
ler had  been  but  a  paradox  in  fupport  of  the  wildcfl

*  EilcouiTc  un  tl;c  inecjuaiity  of  flatlons,  VoL  II.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPinACV.  1 6-,

independence,  becomes  in  the  fcholar  (without  divefl-
ing  itfelf  of  its  folly)  the  blacktft  of  confpiracies.

It  is  now  too  kite  to  fay,  that  thofe  were  the  wild
chimeras  of  the  Sophifters  ;  at  prefeiit  we  are  com-
pelled to  fay,  fuch  arc  the  plots  contriving  againfl  all
and  each  one's  property,  plots  which  have  been  aw-
fully illiiftrated  by  tiie  fpoliation  of  the  Church,  of  the
Nobility,  of  the  Merchants,  and  of  all  rich  proprietors
— Let  them  be  called  chimeras  if  you  are  fo  determin-
ed ;  but  remember,  that  they  are  the  chimeras  of
Weiuiaupt,  of  the  genius  of  confpiring  brigands,  of  a
genius  the  mod  fertile  in  fophifms  and  artifice  for  the
execution  of  thofe  plans  fuppofcd  to  be  chimerical.
What  Jean  Jaques  teaches  his  Sophirters,  the  modern
Spartacus  infufes  into  his  Illuminized  legions,  Thcfiiiits
belong  to  all,  the  land  to  tione.  He  farther  ftates  in  his
dark  reccffcs,  When  property  hegon^  Equality  and  LU
hi^rty  difappeared  ;  and  it  is  in  the  name  of  this  Equa-
lity and  of  this  Liberty  that  he  confpires,  that  he  in-
vites his  confpii-ators  to  reftore  mankind  to  the  patri-
archal or  wandering  life.

Let  not  the  reader  be  impofed  upon  by  the  term  Againfl
patriarchal  life.  The  illuminizing  Kierophant  fpcaks  paternal^
of  Abraham  and  of  the  patriarchs,  of  the  father /j/zV//  ^"'-^°"'î"'
and  king,  fole  fo-vereign  over  his  family.  He  is  not  to
expeél  to  fee  the  father  furroundcd  by  his  children,
excrcifing  the  fweeted  of  all  dominions,  and  each  child,
docile  to  the  dit^ates  of  nature,  revering  the  orders
and  anticipating  the  will  of  a  beloved  father.  No  ;
this  empire  is  as  imaginary  as  his  priellhood.  We
have  feen  in  the  degree  of  I\'Lge,  that  the  illuminized
patriarch  can  no  more  pretend  to  the  acknowledgment
of  a  God  than  can  an  Atlieift.  We  muft  then  begin
by  withdrawing  from  the  patriarchal  life  that  intereft-
ing  fight  of  the  father  offering  up  to  heaven  the  pray-
eis  of  his  children,  facrificing  in  tlieir  name,  and  exer-
ciling  in  the  midft  of  them  the  fun(5lions  of  the  prieft
of  the  living  God.  In'  the  next  degree  of  the  myf-
teries  all  his  dominion  over  his  children  is  to  difappcar,
as  his  pricfthood  has  already  done.  Nor  was  I  afraid
to  ailcrt  in  the  beginning  of  this  work,  If  Jacobinifni
triumph— yov.r  very  chillren  fhali  be  torn  from  you.  I
»ow  repeat  it  ;   all  this  pretended  fovereignty  of  the

Y6l.  III.  ,  Z  2.


164  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

father  is  but  a  confplracy  agaimi  the  paternal  auth  ori-
ty.    The  proofs  arc  extant  in  the  codes  of  the  fed.

Here  again  is  Weifliaupt  deprived  of  the  glory  of
the  invention.  Rouirean  and  the  Encyclopeditls  had
long  (ince  told  us,  that  the  authority  of  the  father  ce  a  Jed
with  the  wants  of  the  fon;  this  was  one  of  their  princi-
ples of  rebellion.  Tiie  man  who  invented  his  lllumi-
nifni  only  to  covert  it  into  the  common  fewer  of  every
îinti-chrillian  and  antifocial  error,  could  not  leave  your
children  in  the  dark  as  to  thcfe  Icflbns  of  indepen-
dence, though  under  the  fanéluary  of  the  paternal
roof;  nor  with  refpcft  to  the  pretended  right  of  go-
verning themfclves,  and  of  acknowledging  no  other
la,w  than  that  of  their  reaion,  as  foon  as  they  were
ftrong  enough  to  difobey,  or  no  longer  needed  your
affiftance.  Tell  the  illuminiz,ing  Hierophant,  that  your
children  belong  to  you  ;  it  will  be  ufelefs,  for  he  has
already  anfwered,  "  The  paternal  authority  ceafes  with
*^  the  wants  of  the  children  ;  the  father  would  wrong  his
*'  children,  (î)ould  he  pretend  to  any  authority  over  them
*'  after  thai  period."  This  is  but  a  principle  laid  down
in  the  leffer  myfteries.  Follow  up  the  confequences,
or  i-ather  leave  it  to  the  revolution  to  develop  fuch  a
principle.  The  reader  will  foon  fee  to  what  this  au-
thority of  the  father  is  reduced.  Scarcely  can  the
child  jifp  the  words  Liberty  and  Equality,  or  that  of
Reafon,  when  the  commands  of  his  parents  become
the  moll  horrid  dcfpotifm,  oppreffion,  and  tyranny. —
Nf)r  is  the  patriarchal  foverelgn  to  expeft  any  more
aftedion  than  obedience  from  his  fubjects  or  his  chil-
dren. In  imparting  the  dodtrines  of  Liberty  and
Equality,  the  Hierophant  had  taught  them  to  blaf-
pheme  the  love  of  otu*s  family  even  ftill  more  than
■the  national  love,  or  the  love  of  one's  country,  as  being
the  more  dircél  and  immediate  principle  of  the  moft
diiailrous  Epotlfu.  Let  the  father  then  enquire  by
what  bonds  his  children  ftill  rei'nain  united  to  him,  or
how  they  are  fubieclcd  to  him,  when,  without  fear,
they  may  openly  rehft  his  patriarchal  power  as  foon  as
their  feeble  arms  have  acquired  fufficient  ftrength  to
gather  the  fruits  which  were  to  ferve  them  as  food.
|N[o,  this  heliifli  feci  acknowledges  no  ties.  All  thofe
of  nature,  as  well  as  thofe  of  government  or  religion,
wcrç  tQ  be   dilfolvçd  in  Weilhaupt's  laft  mytleries.


THI    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  ,6r

Tlie  child,  like  tlie  favage  tyger  of  the  forefl:,  was  to
abandon  his  parents  when  ftrong  enough  to  go  alone
in  queft  of  his  prey.  And  this  is  what  the  led  calls
reftoring  man  to  his  primitive  ftate  of  nature,  to  the
pati'iarchal  life,  to  thofe  days  when  filial  piety  coin-
penfated  for  all  the  neceflary  laws  of  civil  ibciety.
Yes,  it  is  by  the  n)oft  abandoned  depravation  of  all
morals,  by  the  extinftion  of  the  pureft  and  jufteft  fen-
timents  of  nature,  that  thcfe  conlpirators  confummate
their  laft  myfteries.  In  the  name  of  Liberty  and
Equality  they  abjure  the  love  and  authority  of  their
country  ;  in  that  name  they  curfe  the  authority  and
love  of  their  own  family.

As  I  proceed  in  revealing  thefe  plots,  I  know  not
whether  the  reader  does  not  frequently  alk  himfelf,
What  then  can  thefe  men  want?  Have  they  not  fortunes
to  preferve  in  our  ftate  of  fociety?  Have  they  not  chil-
dren in  their  families  ?  Can  they  be  confpiring  againft
themfelves  ?  or,  are  they  ignorant  that  their  coni'pira-
cies  will  fall  back  upon  themfelves  ? — Thofe  who  can
propofe  fuch  queftions  are  little  acquainted  with  the
enthufiafm  of  error  when  inflated  by  the  fpirit  of  inde-
pendence and  pride,  of  impiety  and  jealoufy.  They
have  not,  like  us,  heard  the  cant  of  the  heroes,  demi-
heroes,  and  fans-cîdoites  of  the  revolution — They  will
be  equal  and  free  ;  they  will  it  above  all  things. — \t
muft  coft  thein  many  facrifices,  but  they  are  ready  to
make  them — They  will  lofe  their  fortunes  in  the  pur-
fuit,  but  you  will  not  preferve  yours — He  that  ferved
will  become  the  equal,  nor  will  he  recognize  either
God  or  man  above  him. — Have  we  not  feen  the  prince
of  the  fallen  angels  exclaiming  in  his  pride,

Here  at  leaft

We  (hall  be  free  ; —

Here  we  may  reign  fecure,  and  in  my  choice.
To  reign  is  worth  ambition,  tho'  in  hell  :
Better  to  reign  in  hell,  than  ferve  in  heaven.

It  is  not  to  one  of  Weidiaupt's  adepts  that  the  ties
of  nature  are  to  be  objeds.  He  mnft  be  hcedlefs  of
the  duty  he  owes  to  his  parents  as  of  the  affection  due
to  his  children,  or  the  baleful  cor.fequences  of  the  myf-
teries cannot  afFed  him.     Can  the  reader  have  forp-ot-


l66  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

ten  the  precept  laid  down  for  t'ne  lufiuuators  or  Re.
cruitas  ?—The  principles  ;  look  rdways  to  the  principles f
never  to  the  corîfèqucnces.  Or,  in  other  words,  ftrcnu-
oiiily  fupport  and  infill  upon  rhcfe  great  principles  of
Liberty  and  Equality;  never  be  frightened  or  (topped  by
the  conftqiiences,  however  difaftrous  they  may  appear.
Thefe  wretches,  blinded  by  their  pride,  do  not  know,
then,  that  one  fingle  confequence  proved  to  be  falie,
contrary  to  nature,  or  hurtful  to  mankind,  is  a  fuffi-
cient  demonfcration  that  both  nature  and  truth  hold
tlie  principle  in  deteflation  as  the  prime  mover  of
thefe  difiillers.  Thefe  madmen,  with  all  the  confi-
dence of  an  athciflical  Condorcet,  when  once  become
the  adepts  of  Wei(b;uipt,  will  exclaim  even  in  the  very
tribime  of  the  National  Aiïembly,  Perifh  the  iifiivcrfe,
but  may  tlje  principle  remain  !  They  will  not  fee,  that
this  principle  of  Liberty  and  Equality,  devaftating  hu-
man nature,  cannot  be  a  Liberty  and  Equality  conge-
nial to  mankind.  Thefe  unhappy  men  fall  vidims,
perilliing  under  the  axe  of  thefe  diforganizing  prin-
ciples, and  fpend  their  lad  breath  in  crying,  Liberty
and  Equality  for  ever.  No  ;  tliey  are  all  ignorant  of
the  power  of  error  ftin)ulated  by  pride,  who  could
think  of  counterading  the  plots  of  the  fed  by  the  cries
of  nature,  or  even  by  the  felf-interefi:  of  the  illuminized
adept. — They  have  not  fiifficitntly  comprehended  the
artitice  with  which  the  Hiercphant  infnuir.te?,  vivities,
and  inflames  the  enthuliallic  zeal  of  his  adepts.

Tile  reader  may  reft  aiTured,  that  villany  never
fjLimbers  ;  it  watches  incelTantly  the  opportunity  for
the  con'iplction  of  its  views.  It  will  perfuade  the  im-
becile adept,  that  ail  his  wants  are  to  difappear  on  the
ePcabHrament  of  the  reign  of  Liberty  and  Equality  ;
that  he  will  be  as  free  from  wants  as  the  favage  ;  that
Nature  uiall  provide  for  them  ;  and  this  heedlefs  adept
thirds  after  fuch  an  Equality.  If  tlie  adept  ruffian  be
tauHit  that  the  fruits  behnz  to  alL  thouzh  the  land  to
7!one,  he  will  eafily  find  means  of  obtaining  his
fiiarc.

But  am  T  really  thinking  of  reconciling  the  adepts
with  their  plots  ?  What  is  it  to  them  whether  you  fee
any  agreement  between  theni  or  not  ?  Villany,  we  all
kuov»',  is  replete  with  contradictions  ;  but  is  it  the  Icfs
wicked  on  that  account,  or  are  its  aiuîcs  kfs  real  ?


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR^\CY.  jg^

III  vain  would  the  reader  objecl  and  fay,  Wliat  can
thele  men  want  with  their  raonflirous  Equality,  with
their  plots  againft  our  civil  laws,  our  title  to  even  the
very  name  of  property  ?  Muft  v/c  then,  to  plcafe
them,  abandon  our  habitations  ;  mud  we  renounce  all
arts  and  fciences,  and  end  with  burning  our  cities,
towns  and  villages,  to  follow  them  in  herds  like  the
favage  and  nomade  clans  ?  Are  half  the  inhabitants  of
the  globe  to  be  (laughtered,  the  better  to  fcatter  thefe
roaming  herds  ?  What  can  be  the  objtd  of  thofe  arts
and  fciences,  and  particularly  of  thofe  Minerval  acade-
mies of  Illuminifm  ?  Can  it  be  for  the  propagation  of
fcience,  or  the  involving  mankind  again  in  the  difaf-
ters  of  baibarifm,  that  all  this  parade  of  fcience  is
made  ?  Can  thefe  Illuminées  refemble  the  Goths,  Huns,
or  Vandals  ?  And  is  Europe  once  more  threatened  with
an  inundation  of  barbarians  like  thofe  which  formerly
fallied  from  the  North?— In  anTwering  fuch  queftions
the  reader  may  expecl  that  I  would  put  certain  relbic-
tions  on  the  views  of  the  fed  !  Nothing  like  a  reftric-
tion  or  qualification.  No  ;  you'mufl:  renounce  all  the
arts,  all  the  fciences  ;  you  niull  begin  by  firing  your  ha-
bitations, not  only  yonr  palaces,  but  your  cities,  tovviis,
and  villages,  in  fliort  all  your  fixed  habitations,  unlefs
you  flop  the  diforganizing  carter  of  the  fed.  Yes,
wherever  its  legions  fliall  be  at  liberty  to  ad  and  ac-
complifli  the  gi-and  objed  of  the  fed,  there  you  may
exped  to  fee  thofe  fcenes  of  plunder,  rapine,  and  dévas-
tation, which  heretofore  traced  the  awful  progrefs  of
the  Huns,  Goths,  or  Vandals;  and  this  inference  is  fairly
drawn  from  the  very  code  of*  the  fed.

lias  not  the  reader  heard  the  Hierophant  infinuating
the  deligns  of  the  fed  upon  tiie  arts  and  fciences?
Has  he  not  taught  the  adept  to  anfwer,  when  afked
what  misfortunes  reduced  huuian  nature  to  flavery,
that  it  lui'j.  nv'U  focicty,  the  Jîate,  governments,  and
fcloices  P  Has  he  not  heard  him  exclaim.  When  fhall
the  day  come  when,  the  clod  of  ufckfs  Jcietues  hawfûcd
from  the  earth,  man  (liall  recognize  no  other  but  the
lavage  or  nomade  ftate,  and  which  the  fed  ilylcs  pa-
triarchal, primitive,  natural  ?  Has  he  not  declared,  tliat
the  happinefs  and  glory  of  the  fed  would  be  at  its
7/:niih,  when,  beholding  thofe  happy  days,  it  could  fay,
This  is  o.i.r  xvork  ?  (JVatn  die  hcfdl:umgung  diefer  pe-


l68  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY,

riodCj  iinfer  vjerk  ijî?*)  Are  we  to  be  duped  by  Ûié
name  of  Minerval  Academies,  with  which  the  fed  de-
corates its  fchools  ?  Can  we  obferve  there  any  other
ftiidy  than  that  of  applying  the  fciences  to  the  fubverfion
of  fcience,  as  well  as  to  the  total  annihilation  of  all
religion  or  fociety,  when  we  remark  the  anxiety  with
which  the  fed  puts  the  following  queftions  to  the  adept
on  his  coming  out  of  thefe  academies^  wifliingto  know
what  progrcfs  he  has  made  in  its  principles  before  he
is  admitted  to  the  illuminized  priefthood  :

"  Do  the  geiierai  and  common  fciences  to  which
"  men  apply  infufe  real  light  ?  Do  they  lead  to  true
"  happinels?  Are  they  not  rather  the  offspring  of  va-
"  riegated  wants,  or  of  the  anti-natural  Hate  in  which
"  men  exift?  Are  they  not  the  invention  of  crazy
**  brains  laborioufly  fubtile  ?"f  The  reader  has  heard
thefe  queftions,  he  has  heard  the  feet  blafpheme  fci^
ence,  and  will  he  ftill  believe  that  lUuminifm  recog-
nizes any  other  fciences  but  thofe  of  the  man-favagc
equal  and  free,  roaming  in  the  forefts  ?  Have  not  the
revolutionary  devaftations,  the  multitude  of  monuments
fallen  beneath  the  hatchet  of  the  Jacobin  brigand,  al-
ready demonftrated  the  frantic  hatred  of  the  modern
Vandals  ?  But  the  myfteries  elucidate  this  enigma  in
a  clearer  manner.

Reader,  give  vent  to  your  indignation.  Afk  again^
What  can  this  Weifliaupt  be  ?  What  are  thefe  adepts
of  lUuminifm  ?  Treat  them  as  barbarians,  as  Huns,  or
Oftrogoths  ;  but  fee  him  fmiling  at  your  contempt,
and  teaching  his  adepts  to  honour  themfelves  by  imi-
tating, and  glory  in  the  hope  of  hereafter  furpafling,

the  difaftrous  devaftations  of  thole  barbarians.

Do  you  know  in  what  light  the  illuminizing  legillator
views  thefe  northern  clans  fallying  from  their  forefts
and  def(^laring  the  moft  flourifliing  countries  of  Eu-
rope, firing  its  towns,  beating  down  its  empires,  and
ftrewing  the  earth  with  ruins?  He  complacently  be-
holds ll'.e  precious  remains  of  the  patriarchal  race,  the
true  oftspring  of  Nature  ;  it  is  with  their  hatchets  that

*  See  above,  the  Prince  Illuminée.

■f-  Befordern  die  ^remeine  wiiTenfchaften  warhafte  aufklSrung,  wahre
menfchliijhe  gluckftligkeit  ;  oder  find  fie  vielmehr  kinder  der  noth,  der
verficliàltigti-n  bediirinifle,  dts  wicdern;itur!ich«.  zuflandcs  erundiingsH
fpitzfindigei-  eiclvr  k opfe  ?


HK    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  I  ($9

he  means  to  regenerate  mankind,  and  fhape  them  out
to  the  views  of  the  feft.  I  did  not  note  the  leflbns
of  the  Hierophant  on  this  fiibjcd:,  when  leduring  ths

future  Epopr -Here  the  account  which  Weifliaupt

gives  of  thefe  clans,  when  he  pretends  to  hiftorify  hu-
man nature,  at  tliat  epoch  marked  in  the  annals  of  Eu-
rope as  a  fcourge,  and  called  the  inundation  of  the
barbarians.     Here  is  his  defcription  :

At  that  period,  when  all  Europe  had  fallen  a  prey  to
corruption,  "  Nature,  which  had  preferved  the  true
"  race  of  men  in  its  original  vigour  and  purity,  came
"  to  the  afiiftance  of  mankind.  From  diftant,  but
"  poor  and  fterile  countries,  fhe  calls  thofe  favoge  na-
"  tions  and  fends  them  into  the  regions  of  luxury  and
*'  voluptuoufnefs  to  infufe  new  life  into  the  enervated
**  fpecies  of  the  fjuth  ;  and  with  new  laws  and  morals
"  to  reflore  that  vigour  to  human  nature  which  flou^
"  rillied  until  an  ill-extinguilhcd  germ  of  corruption
"  infefted  even  that  portion  of  mankind  which  origi-
"  nally  arrived  in  fo  pure  a  date,"  or  thofe  barbarians
the  pretended  regenerators  of  Europe  fent  by  Nature.

Such  are  the  encomiums  laviflied  by  the  feet  on  the
Goths  and  Vandals.  You  thought  it  would  be  offend-
ing this  illuminized  tribe  to  compare  them  to  barba-
rians ;  whereas  they  glory  in  the  comparifon.  Hiftory
has  defcribed  thefe  northern  clans  as  carrying  every
where  fire  and  fword,  as  ravaging  countries,  firing
towns,  deftroying  the  monuments  of  the  arts,  depopu-
lating empires  ;  their  courfe  is  to  be  traced  by  ruins
and  waftes,  and  in  their  train  appear  ignorance  and
the  iron  age.  But  in  the  eyes  of  the  adept  this  is  not
the  exceptionable  part  of  their  conducT:  ;  on  the  con-
trary, it  was  by  fuch  means  that  they  were  to  regene*
rate  mankind,  and  fécond  the  grand  objed  of  nature.
Thefe  barbarians  leave  the  regeneration  in  an  imperfed:
ftate  ;  in  time  they  adopt  our  ufages  and  manners  ;
they  are  civilized  ;  the  plains  rife  once  more  in  fertile
crops  ;  fociety  is  re-eflablifhed  ;  fcience  returns  ;  the
arts  irlourifli  under  the  protedtion  of  the  laws  ;  towns
are  re-peopled  ;  the  fi-vage  and  ■primitive  race,  con-
founded among  the  citizens,  is  fubjeded  to  the  fame
laws,  and  governments  acquire  their  priftine  lullre.

Vol.  III.  A  a


170  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY

Here,  irutlie  eyes  of  the  adept,  is  the  grand  crime  of
thefe  barbarians  ;  the  Hierophant,  deploring  their  full,
exclaims,  "  Oh  had  there  remained  any  fages  among
"  them  happy  enough  to  have  preferved  themfeives
"  from  the  contagion,  how  would  they  iigh  after,  and
"  ardently  wifli  to  return  to  the  former  abodes  of  their
"  anccftors,  there  again  to  enjoy  their  former  plca-
"  fures  on  the  banks  of  a  rivulet,  under  the  fliade  of  a
"  tree  laden  with  fruit,  by  the  ilde  of  the  objeft  of
"  their  afFedions  !  It  was  then  that  they  conceived  the
"  high  value  of  Liberty,  and  the  greatnefs  of  the  fault
"  they  had  committed  in  placing  too  much  power  in
"  the  hands  of  one  man — It  was  then  that  the  want  of
*'  Liberty  made  them  fenlible  of  their  fall,  and  feek
"  means  of  foftening  the  rigour  of  Slavery  ; — but  even
"  then  their  efforts  were  only  aimed  againft  the  tyrant,
"  and  not  againft  tyranny."

It  is  thus  that  the  infidious  and  declaiming  Sophifter,
but  able  Confpirator,  leads  the  adept  through  the  la-
byrinth of  his  leffer  myfteries,  not  barely  to  imitate
thefe  barbarians,  but  to  furpafs  their  devouring  rage,
by  conftancy,  perfeverance,  and  the  perpetuation  of
their  devaftations.  Thus  are  to  be  explained  all  thofe
queftions  on  the  danger  of  reconquering  Equality  and
Liberty  only  to  lofe  them  again.  Hence  thofe  exhor-
tations "  to  unite  and  fupport  each  other  ;  to  increafe
"  their  numbers  ;  and  to  begin  by  becoming  powerful
*'  and  terrible — You  have  already  done  it,  for  the  mul-
"  titude  iides  with  you — The  wicked,  who  fear  you,
"  feek  protedion  beneath  your  banners — Henceforward
'^  your  ftrength  will  be  iufficient  to  bind  the  remainder
"  of  mankind,  fubjugate  them,  and  ftifle  vice  in  its
.  «  origin."*

Such  will  be  the  explanation  of  the  revolutionary'
rage  and  madnefs  which  has  levelled  beneath  its  blows
fuch  a  multitude  of  majeftic  and  invaluable  monuments
of  the  arts  and  fciencts — The  cry  of  indignation  riling
from  every  clafs  fufpends  for  a  moment  the  fanguinary
crimes  of  the  Jacobin  Vandal,  and  he  even  pretends  tq
weep. — Wait,  and  the  laft  myfteries  fliall  be  accom-
pliflied  :  wait,  and  you  fliall  fee  the  awful  bodings  of

*  Nun  feyd  ihr  ftark  genug  den  noch  ûbrigen  reft  die  hande  zii
binden,  fie  zu  untcrwcrien,  und  die  boflieit  cher  in  ihrem  keime  z»
çjriticken.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

the  Hierophant  fulfilled,  and  with  fire  and  iword  fhallt
he  annihilate  your  laws,  your  Iciences  and  arts,  and
crafe  your  towns  and  habitations.

Here  in  particular  is  to  be  found  the  origin  of  that
revolutionary  ferocity,  that  third  of  blood,  thofc  infa-
tiable  profcriptions,  thofe  inctffant  executions,  and  fi-
nally thofe  banifliraents  more  artfully  cruel  than  the
relentlcfs  guillotine.  Yes,  the  tin^e  drag's  near  when
tliey  fliall  I'hid  the  hands,  fu/jiigate,  and  criijh  in  their
origin,  what  the  Sed  calls  the  vjukedy  or,  in  other
words,  all  who  are  proof  againft  their  vile  efforts  ;  the
time  for  fuljiiçratin^  and  deji/oyino;  every  citizen  zeal-
ous in  the  caufe  of  Religion,  or  wilhing  to  fupport  the
laws,  civil  fociety,  or  property.  Like  Huns  and  Van-
dals, the  Scd  has  begun  its  career  ;  but  it  will  carefully
avoid  terminating  it  like  them  ;  the  devaftatiors  of  its
followers  Ihall  be  perpetuated,  and  they  will  be  Van-
dals to  the  laft,  until  Religion,  property,  and  the  laws
iliall  be  irrecoverably  loft.  Such  atrocious  plots  are
only  the  confequences  of  the  leffer  mylleries  ;  but  truft
the  author  of  the  Sed,  the  modern  Spartacus,  '  for  the
farther  development  of  them.  Has  he  not  told  yoiTy
that  his  laft  myfteries  were  but  the  confequences,  a
clearer  and  more  abfolute  expolidon  of  the  foregoin-g
fecrets  of  the  Order  ?  He  informed  you,  that  nations,
together  with  their  laws  and  focial  inftitiitions,  fliall
vanifli,  and  that  they  fliall  diiappear  before  the  all-
powerful  arm  of  his  adepts,  or  his  niodern  Vandals.
What  new  fecret  then  remains  to  be  difcovered,  unlcfs
it  be  that  no  time  fliall  blunt  the  fword  or  flack  the
unrelenting  fury  of  his  profelytes  ;  that  they  fliall  per-
fevere  until  the  end  of  time  in  their  Vandalifm,  left
Religion,  fociety,  fcience,  arts,  the  love  of  their  coun-
try, and  refpecl  for  property,  fliould  flicxît  forth  again,
and  overfliadow  the  venemous  growth  of  his  Illumi-
nized  Liberty  and  Equality  ?

But  Spartacus  is  not  to  be  contented  with  thefe  laft
ccrets  of  the  Confpiracy  ;  his  pride  cannot  endure  that
others  fliould  ufurp  the  glory  of  the  inventipn.  Hi-
tlîerto  we  have  feen  him  phiy  upon  the  credulity  of
his  adepts,  inflame  their  zeal,  and  acquire  their  refpeft
by  the  pretended  antiquity  of  his  Order  ;  and  fuccef-
fively  attribute  the  honour  of  inftituting  his  myfteries

Vol.  IH.  A  a  2


171


17-2  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

to  the  children  of  the  Patriarchs,  the  Sages,  even  to
the  God  of  Chriftianity,  and  to  the  founders  of  the
Mafonic  Lodges.  But  now  the  time  is  come  when  the
adept,  initiated  in  the  higher  myfteries,  is  fuppofed  to
be  iiiifitiently  cnthuriallic  in  his  admiration  of  the  Or-
der for  the  chiefs  no  longer  to  fear  to  difdofe  the  real
hijiory  of  Illuminifni.*  Here  they  inform  him,  that
this  iecret  fociety,  which  fo  artfully  led  him  from
royftery  tç)  myftery,  which  has  wilh  fuch  perfevering
induftry  rooted  from  his  heart  every  principle  of  Re-
ligion, all  falfc  ideas  of  love  of  the  country  oi*  affec-
tion for  his  family,  all  prctenfions  to  property,  to  the
exclufive  right  to  riches,  or  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth  ;
this  fociety,  which  took  fuch  pains  to  demonftrate  the
tyranny  and  defpotifm  of  all  that  he  calls  the  laws  of
empires  ;  this  fociety,  which  has  declared  him  free,
and  teaches  him  that  he  has  no  fovereign  but  himfelf,
no  rights  to  refpeel  in  others,  but  thofe  of  perfeél
Equality,  of  abfolute  Liberty,  and  of  the  moll  entire
independence  ;  this  fociety  is  not  the  ofispring  of  ail
ignorant  and  fuperftitious  antiquity,  it  is  that  of  mo-
dern phiiofophy,  in  a  word,  it  is  of  our  own  inven-
tion. The  tn;e  father  of  Uluminifm  is  no  other  than
Spartacus  Weishaupt.

We  may  alfo  perceive  by  many  of  Weifliaupt's  let-
ters, that  this  latter  part  of  the  fecret,  which  attribut-
ed to  him  the  whole  honour  of  the  invention,  always
remained  a  myllery  to  the  greater  part  of  his  Mages
and  Meu-K'wgs'.  Thofe  alone  who,  under  the  title  of
Areopagites,  formed  the  grand  council  of  the  Order,
were  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  real  chief  and
founder,  except  in  certain  cafes  where  an  adept  was
judged  worthy  of  fo  diftinguiflied  a  mark  of  confi-
dence.f  Whatever  merit  the  adept  might  boaft,  Weif-
haupt  knew  no  higher  recompence  than  to  tell  them
in  the  end,  "  Tiiis  general  overthrow  of  the  Altar,  of
the  Throne,  and  of  all  Society,  is  a  conception  of
my  Qwn  ;  to  n^e  and  to  me  alone  is  due  the  whole
glory."
'*  I  have  revealed  the  difaftrous  fecrets  of  Uluminifm;

I  have  laid  open  the  gradation  and  progreflive  degrees^
the  long  chain  of  artifice,  by  which  the  Seel  prepares

*  Originnl  Writings,  Vol.  IT.  Letter  from  Knigge  to  ZwacL
f  Original  Writings,  Vol.  I.  Let.  25,  to  Cato.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

its  adepts  for  the  laft  myfteries,  to  behold  them  ftript
of  their  veil  without  lliuddering,  and  to  embrace  them
with  enthuiiaftic  ardour. — We  mutt  either  commit  the
Code  of  the  Se6t  to  the  flames,  and  deny  the  truth  of
its  annals  ;  even  refufe  the  evidence  of  the  familiar
correfpondence  of  Spartactis  Weifhaupt  the  founder^
and  of  P/pi/o-Knigge  the  principal  compiler  ;  we  mull
difpute  all  the  agreements  of  its  molt  arduous  co-
operators,  or  elfe  mult  we  wait,  as  the  only  poffible
demonllration,  the  entire  and  fatal  execution  of  thefe
difaftrous  plots-,  before  we  politively  pronounce,  that
the  fole  obje(n:  of  their  infernal  plans  and  of  their
frantic  wiflies  is  no  other  than  the  total  overthrow  of
every  Altar,  of  every  Throne  or  Magiftracy  ;  the  an-
nihilation of  all  authority  and  of  all  civil  or  religious
fociety  ;  the  deftruftion  of  property  whether  in  the
hands  of  the  rich  or  of  the  poor  ;  and  the  very  arts
and  fciences  which  can  only  be  cultivated  in  civil  fo-
ciety are  to  be  baniflied  from  the  face  of  the  earth.
Liberty  and  Equality,  together  with  the  molt  abfolute
independence,  are  to  be  the  fubftitutes  for  all  rights
and  all  property  :  Our  morals  and  focial  inter courfe
are  to  make  place  for  the  favage,  vagabond,  roaming
life,  which  the  Sed;  alternately  decorates  with  the
name  of  Nmnade  or  of  Patriarchol.  The  means  to
be  employed  in  operating  tliis  change  will  be  found  in
the  artiiice,  deceit,  illufion  and  wickednefs  vi'hich  the
Sophifters  are  mafters  of,  until  the  force  of  numbers
fliall  have  declared  for  the  Sed  ;  but  when  at  length,
powerful  in  numbers,  the  Seft  ihall  have  acquired
flrength,  it  fhall  not  only  hind  hands,  fuhjiignte,  mur-
der, ravage,  and  renew  all  the  horrors  and  atrocities
of  the  barbarians  of  the  North,  but  alio  fui'pafs  thofe
Vandals  in  the  arts  of  deltruftion,  and  without  pity  or
diltinclion  butcher  all  that  part  of  mankind  that  fliall
dare  to  oppofe  the  progrefs  of  the  Seel,  prefume  to
heave  a  figh  over  the  ruins  of  religion,  fociety,  or  pro-
perty, or  attempt  to  raife  them  from  their  allies. — If  I
have  not  proved  that  fuch  are  the  wiflies,  the  fecret
machinations  of  the  Seel  and  of  its  flagitious  princi-
ples, let  me  be  informed  what  is  to  be  underltood  by
proof,  or  what  is  to  be  the  operation  of  evidence  on
the  human  mind.— Were  it  poflible  that  any  of  my
readers  fl:ill  confoled  thcnifelves  with  the  idea  that  the


173


174


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

frantic  extravagance  of  thefe  plots  furpaflcd  their  wic-
kednefs,  let  them  remember  that  I  have  itill  fomething
more  to  lay. — I  have  ilill  to  invelligate  the  laws  and
interior  government  of  the  Seel,  laws  adopted  for  the
dellruclion  of  every  other  law  or  government,  and
that  it  might  hereafter  prove,  that  however  moiiftrous
the  objed  of  the  plots  of  tlie  Sccl  may  be,  it  was  far
from  being  chimerical.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY;  ijc


CHAP.    XIII.

Tenth  and  laji  Part  of  the  Code  of  the  Illuminées,-'
Government  of  the  Order. — General  Idea  of  that  Go-
vernmcnt,  and  of  the  Share  v:huh  the  Inferior  ClaJJes
of  lUuininifm  bear  in  it.

IT  is  not  enoiijvh  for  the  founder  of  a  SeA  of  Con-  Of  the fe-
fpirators  to  have  fixed  the  precife  objedt  of  his  palate  and
plots,  the  trials  and  degrees  through  which  his  adepts  ooverlZ'^
are  to  rife  infenfibly  to  the  acquifition  of  iiis  profound-  ment  of  the
eft  myfterics.  His  accomplices  muft  form  but  one  Lodges^
body  animated  by  one  fpirit  ;  its  members  muft  be
moved  by  the  fame  laws,  under  the  infpeclion  and
government  of  the  fame  chiefs,  and  all  muft  tend  to*
wards  the  fame  obje»5l.  Such  a  genius  as  Weifliaupt's
could  not  be  fufpecled  of  having  overlooked  in  his
Code  fo  important  a  mean  of  fuccefs.  From  what  I
have  already  faid,  the  reader  will  have  obferved  what
connexion  and  fubordination  fublifted  in  the  gradation
of  his  myfteries  ;  how  all  the  adepts  of  a  given  town
formed,  notwithftandino*  the  inequality  of  their  de-
gixes,  Ijut  one  and  the  fame  academy  of  confpirators,
while  each  one  laboured  feparately  at  the  overthrow
of  religion  and  the  laws  in  <he  ftate  in  which  he  lived.
In  this  academy  the  Candidate  and  the  Novice  are  un-
der the  direftion  of  the  Lifmuator,  who  introduces
them  into  the  Minerval  Lodges  ;  thefe  Lodges  are
governed  by  the  Minor  IllumhieeSf  who  in  their  turn
are  infpc6led  by  the  Major  Iduminees.  Next  to  thefe
preparatory  degrees  follow  the  intermediary  or  Mafon-
ic  degree,  called  the  Scotch  Knight  ;  and  his  power
extends  on  the  one  fide  over  the  Major  IllumineeSf
and  on  the  other  over  the  lUuminized  Mafons  ;  or,  in
general,  over  all  that  part  of  the  Order  ftiled  in  the
Code  the  lovjer  part  of  the  eaifice.  After  thefe  we
meet  the  Epopts  and  Regents  or  Princes  of  the  Icifer
3nyfteries,  and  laftly,  in  the  higher  myfteries,  the  Mage
and  Man-King.

The  aggregate  of  all  thefe  degrees  forms  a  com-
plete academy  of  Confpirators,  and  impendent  ruin
threatens  the  country  where  fuch  a  one  exifts.     Tho-


\y6  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Magiftrate  and  the  Citizen  may  expecl  to  fee  theii*
property  and  their  religion  annihilated.  The  Se6t  re*
cognizes  no  country  but  the  univerfe,  or  rather  ac-
knowledges none  ;  the  very  term  country  is  a  blaf-
phemy  againft  the  rights  of  man,  againft  Equality  and
Liberty.  What  each  member  in  his  particular  acade-
my performs  by  himfelf  is  performed  throughout  all
of  them  by  the  Sed  in  general,  and  the  combined
efforts  of  the  whole  are  regularly  diredted  towards
the  concerted  plan  of  devaftation.  The  Miners  have
received  their  inftruclions,  that  each  may  bore  his  fub-
terraneous  galleries,  and  lodge  the  chamber  of  his
mines  in  fuch  a  manner  that  partial  explofions  may
forward  the  views  of  the  Sed,  without  endamaging
the  grand  chamber,  which  fliall  involve  the  whole
world  in  the  premeditated  exjilofion  of  univerfal  de-
ftruftion.  To  produce  this  effect  general  laws  and
mutual  conimunications,  common  chiefs  and  direélors
are  requifite.  Each  Confpirator,  wherever  his  field
of  aélion  may  lie,  mud  be  certain  that  he  ads  in  con-
cert with  his  Brethren,  that  he  will  not  be  croifed  in
his  plans,  but  on  the  contrary  meet  every  where  with
fupport  and  correfponding  agents.

Wcifhaupt  was  aware,  that  the  farther  the  fphere  of
diforganization  was  to  extend  the  more  perfeél  fhoiild
be  the  organization  of  his  power.  The  more  eager
he  was  to  call  down  univerfal  anarchy,  and  make  it
take  place  of  all  laws,  the  more  did  he  wifh  to  efta-
blifli  fubordination,  and  concentrate  the  forces  of  the
Order,  the  better  to  direft  its  motions.  To  accoraplilh
this,  the  oath  of  implicit  obedience  to  Superiors  was
not  enough.  It  was  hot  fufficient  for  the  adept  to
have  blindly  fubmitted  his  life  and  fortune  to  the  de{-
potic  power  of  unknown  chiefs,  fliould  they  ever  fuf-
ped  him  of  treachery  or  rebellion.  The  Superiors
themfelves  were  to  be  bound  by  laws  and  principles
common  to  all,  that  they  might  proceed  in  all  points
by  a  regular  and  uniform  impulfe.
ttr  -n,    .,»       It  coft  Weifliaupt  much  meditation  before  he  could

vveilnaupt  /^   n    i  •         i  r  •  n      i        t->'

meditates     perfea  liis  plan  ot  government  as  he  wilhed.     five

on  the  laws  years  after  the  eftabliQiment  of   the  Sed,  he  writes

îernmenr   "  '^^■'^^  "^''^^"'•'^''^^  <>f  ^WJ"  miiji  be  fa  pcrfeâly  fimple  that

"  a  child  could  direâ  it  ;"  and  luter  he  writes,  "  allow


à


tttE    ANTISOCIAL    CÔNSPIlUCf.  .  177

^  me  time  to  digefl  my  fpeculations,  that  I  may  pro*
•*  perly  marflial  our  forces."*

So  prc-occupied  \C-as  Weilhaupt  with  his  fpeculations
on  the  government  of  the  Seel,  that  all  his  letters
written  to  his  principal  adepts  are  replete  with  his
maxims  and  political  councils.  One  muft  have  heard
or  read  them  one's  felf  to  credit  the  deep-laid  villany
of  his  means  and  his  infernal  policy.  Here  is  an
example  :

In  the  fame  letter  which  I  have  juft  quoted  of  the
!5  Afphandar  I151  he  gives  two  rules  to  be  inferted
among  the  inftrudions  of  the  Areopagites — The  one>
to  be  on  the  refer ve  with  Candidates  Jrom  among  the
clafs  of  the  rich,  becaufe  that  fort  of  men,  proîul,  ig-
iiorant,  averfe  to  labour,  and  impatient  of  fubordination-,
only  feek  admidion  to  our  myfteries  in  order  to  make
them  an  objcd  of  ridicule  and  mockery  ;  the  other,
not  to  take  the  fmallefl  pains  to  prove,  that  Illuminifm
is  in  the  fole  poireffion  of  the  true  Mafonry,  hecaujè
the  beji  poffihk  demonjlration  is  to  give  none.  Let
Weifliaupt  himfelf  explain  a  third  law,  which  is  to
make  a  part  of  his  political  collection.

"  That  lue  may  be  uncontrotded  in  our  difcourjè,  let
"  our  pupils  remark,  that  the  Superiors  enjoy  a  great
"  latitude  in  that  rejpeÛ  ;  that  ive  fometimes  [peak  in
*'  Oîie  way,  fometimes  in  another  ;  that  we  often  quef^
"  tion  with  great  afliirance  only  to  found  the  opinions
"  of  our  pupils,  and  to  give  them  an  opportunity  of
"  (liowing  it  by  their  anfwers.  This  hibterfuge  re-
''  pairs  many  errors.  Let  us  always  fay,  that  the  end
*'  will  difcover  which  of  our  obfcrvations  conveys  our
"  true  fentiments. — Thus  we  may  fpeak  fometimes  in
*'  one  way,  at  others  in  a  quite  different  one,  that  we
'*  may  never  be  embarraded,  and  that  our  real  fenti-
*'  ments  may  always  be  impenetrable  to  our  inferiors.
"  Let  this  be  alfo  inferted  in  the  inflruftions,  etiam  hoc
'^  inferatur  injiniâioni.  It  would  ftill  have  a  better
"  eifcCl,  if  you  gave  in  charge  to  our  Major  Illitmi'
"  nees  to  vary  their  converfation  with  their  inferiors,
"  for  the  above  reafons,  ex  rationibus  fupra  diâis.'*

*  Letters  to  Cato,  15th  March  1781,  and  i6th  February  178a.

Vol.  III.  B  b


17»


General
lubordina-
tion  and
gradation
of  the
fuperioro.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Thefe  infertions  of  Latin  are  from  Weifliaupt,  wTio
frequently  makes  ufe  of  that  language  in  his  letters.
It  is  immediately  after  having  given  thefe  principles  of
government  to  the  Areopagites,  the  chief  fuperiors  of
his  Illuminifm,  that  Weifliaupt  adds,  "  I  entreat  that
"  the  maxims  which  are  fo  often  to  be  found  in  my
"  letters  may  not  be  loft.  Colled  them  for  the  ufe  of
"  our  Areopagites,  as  they  are  not  always  prefent  to
"  my  mind.  With  time  they  might  form  an  excel-
*^  lent  political  degree.  Philo  has  long  fince  been  en>
*'  ployed  about  it.  Communicate  alfo  your  private
''  inftru6lions  to  each  other,  which  may  in  time  grow
"  into  an  uniform  code.  Read  them  attentively,  that
^'  they  may  become  familiar  to  you.  Tliough  I  know
"  them  well  and  pradlife  them  (una  aticb  darnach  haii-
"  die)  they  would  take  me  too  much  time  to  digeft
"  them  fyftematically;  Thefe  maxims  once  engraved
"  in  your  mind,  you  will  enter  better  into  my  plans,
"  and  you  will  proceed  more  conformably  to  my  mode
«'  of  operation."*

Let  the  reader  alfo  profit  of  thefe  inftruftions.  They
muft  bear  evidence  in  my  behalf  while  revealing  all
the  monftrous  artifices  of  the  remaining  part  of  the
illuminized  code.  From  thefe  long  meditated  coiiibi-
nations,  fprang  forth  that  chain  of  laws  which  was  to
dired  each  Illuminée  in  all  his  proceedings.

We  firft  remark  in  this  government,  as  a  means  of
fubordination,  a  general  divifion  of  command,  as  well
as  of  locality.  Each  department  has  a  particular
lodge  for  its  adepts  ;  each  Minerval  lodge  has  a  fupe-
rior  from  among  the  preparatory  clafs,  under  thç  in-
fpeclion  of  the  intermediary  clafs.  In  the  fécond
place,  we  find  the  divifion  into  diftricts  which  contain
fevcral  lodges,  all  which  as  well  as  the  Prefed  are
under  the  diredion  of  the  fuperior  of  the  diilric^  whom
the  Order  calls  Dean.  He  is  alfo  fubjeded  to  the  Pro-
vincial, who  has  the  infpeclion  and  command  over  all
the  lodges  and  deanries  of  the  province.  Next  in  rank
comes  tiie  Nationul  Superior,  who  has  full  powers
over  all  within  his  nation,  Provincials,  Deans,  lodges,
&-C.  &c.      Then  comes  the  fupreme  council  of  the.


*  Letter  to  Cato,  ijth  March,  1781»


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.


V9


Order,  or  the  Areopagites,  prefided  by  the  real  General
of  Illuminilm.

The  fame  hierarchy  is  preferved  in  their  communi-  correfpon-
cations.     The  fimple  Illuminée   correfponds  with  his  dence  of
immediate  fuperior,  the  latter  with   his  Dean,    and  *^^  fuFf»-
thus  gradually  afcending  to  the  National   Superiors,  feriois.
Thefe  latter  are    in   direft   correfpondence   with   the
Areopagites  ;  and  they  alone  are  arquainted  with  their
refidence.     In  this  council  there  is  always  a  member
whofe  particular   office  is  to  receive  and  anfwer  their
letters,  and  to  tranfmit  orders,  which  gradually  defcend
to  the  perfon  or  perfons  who  are  the  objeéls  of  them.
The  Areopagites  alone  are  entrufted  with  the  name
and  refidence  of  the  General,  excepting  in  cafes  which
I  have  already  noticed,  where  particular  confidence  or
remarkable  fervices  have  gained  for  an  adept  the  fig-
nal  honour  of  knowing  and  approaching  the  modern
Spartacus.

It  is  eafy  to  perceive,  from  the  very  regulations  of  itsobjeiîh
the  lirft  degrees,  how  voluminous  this  correfpondence
mull  be.  Each  brother,  in  the  firfl  place,  as  the  na-
turnl  fcrutator  of  his  co-adepts  and  of  the  profane,  is
bound  to  tranfmit  at  leaft  one  letter  each  month,  with
a  flatement  of  all  the  obfervations  he  has  made,  whe-
ther favourable  or  detrimental  to  the  Order.  He  is
alfo  to  give  an  account  of  the  progrefs  which  himfelf
and  his  brethren  htive  made  ;  of  the  orders  he  has  re-
ceived, and  of  their  execution  ;  and  he  is  each  month
to  inform  his  higher  fuperiors  whether  he  is  pleafed
with  the  conduél  of  his  immediate  fuperior.  Each
brother  Infinuator  is  to  report  the  progrefs  of  his  can-
didates, and  the  profped  he  has  of  adding  to  their
number.  Next,  to  fwell  the  volume,  come  all  the
portraits  of  the  adepts,  the  extrafts  of  tablets  or  daily
obfervations  made  on  the  friends  or  enemies  of  the
Order  :  alfo  the  minutes  of  initiations,  the  characters
and  lives  of  the  initiated,  the  returns,  made  by  the
lodges,  thofe  by  the  fuperiors,  and  an  infinity  of  other
articles  which  the  Illuminée  is  bound  to  make  known
to  his  chiefs — -All  this  occurs  without  noticing  the
numberlefs  orders  and  inftruélions  which  arc  pcrpct'i-.
^lly  tranfmitting  to  the  inferiors.

VoL  III,  Bb  2


l8o  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Its  grada-        Befidcs  the  fecret  language  already  explained,  anA
tion.  of  which  the  grand  objed  was  to  render  this  corrcf-,

pondence  unintelligible  to  the  profane,  the  feft  had
fecret  means  of  tranfmitting  their  letters,  left  they
might  be  intercepted.  The  Order  ftyles  thefe  letters
j-elative  to  their  Illun:>inifm  ^dbus  Licefs  (or  to  thofc
who  have  a  right.)  The  origin  of  this  appellation  is
the  diredion  of  thefe  letters  which  confifts  of  the  two
words  ^nbus  Licet  or  fimply  the  initials  Q^  L.  When,
therefore,  we  find  in  the  Original  Writings,  that  fuçh
an  adept  has  been  lined  in  i'uch  a  month  for  having
negleded  his  Q^  L.  it  muft  be  underftood  that  he  leç
fuch  a  month  pafs  without  writing  to  his  fupcriors.*

When  the  letter  contains  fecrets  or  complaints  which
the  adept  choofes  to  keep  from  the  knowledge  of  liis
immediate  fupcrior,  he  adds  to  the  diredlion  Soli  or
Primo  (io  him  done,  to  the  fir jh)  this  letter  will  then
be  opened  by  the  Fro'-cmàal,  the  National  Superior,,
or  will  reach  the  Ai  cnpagiîes,  or  General,  according  to
the  rank  of  the  perfon  from  whom  it  comes.

Next  to  thefe  general  means  of  graduated  corref-
Powcr»  of  pondence,  come  the  meetings  proper  to  each  degi'çc,
each  degree  ^„d  their  refpe^^ive  powers.  We  have  already  feen,
tîiircon-cf-  ^^^^^  thofe  of  the  Minerval  academy  are  regulai'ly  held
pondence.  twice  a  month.  The  Minor  Illuminées,  who  are^  the
magiftrates  of  this  degree,  and  the  Major  Illuminée,
or  the  Scotch  Knight,  who  prefides  in  them,  have  no
direél  fiiai'e  in  the  government,  farther  than  to  infpcd:
the  ftudies  and  watch  over  the  conduft  of  the  young
INIinervals,  and  report  to  the  lodges  of  the  Maior  IlKi-
rainees.  It  is  in  that  degree  that  the  authority  begins
to  extend  beyond  the  limits  of  the  affembly.  It  is  ta
the  Major  Illuminées  that  all  the  tablettes  or  inftruc-^
tions  relative  to  the  brethren  of  Minerva  are  fent^
Here  thefe  ftatements  are  digeftcd,  and  receive  addi-
tions and  notes,  before  they  are  forwarded  to  the  af-
fembly  of  the  next  fuperior  degree..  Here  are  judged
and  determined  the  promotions  of  the  Novices,  Mi-
ncrvals,  and  Minor  Illuminées  ;  and  alfo  all  difference?
and  contefts  which  may  arife  in  the  inferior  degrees,
u'nlcfs  the  importance  of  the  debate  be  fuj;h  as  to  re-

"■'.  Vol.  il.  Let.  i,  frcin  Sjpn:;iacu8  to  CatQ,


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  ,8^

^iiire  the  interference  of  a  higher  tribunal.  They  are
the  guardians  of  the  firft  tablets  and  reverfa,!  letters  of
the  brethren.  As  to  what  knowledge  a  Major  Illuminée
may  have  acquired  either  relative  to  other  fecret  focie-
ties,  or  to  employnients  or  dignities  which  might  be
obtained  for  adepts,  he  is  bound  to  report  it  to  his
lodge,  which  will  note  it,  and  inform  the  affembly  of
the  DirecTiing  Illuminées  or  Scotch  Knights.*

When  treating  of  the  intermediary  degree  of  Scotch
Knight,  I  gave  an  account  of  their  particular  funetion'',
and  cfpecially  their  charge  of  fuperintending  the  Ma-
fonic  lodges.  The  part  they  aft  in  the  general  govern-
ment of  the  Order,  chiefly  confifts  in  hearing  all  the
^dlnis  Licets  of  the  preparatory  cla{res  read  in  their
chapters,  even  thofe  of  the  Novices  which  had  already
been  opened  by  the  officers  of  the  Minerval  fchool  ;
the  latter  having  only  the  power  of  deciding  provi-
fionally  on  thefe  letters.

The  authority  which  the  Scotch  Knights  exercife
over  this  correfpondence  feems  to  give  ftill  more  pro-
priety to  their  denomination  of  intermediary  degi-ee.
Their  ^libus  Licets  are  direftly  fent  to  the  provincial
lodge,  which  is  compofed  entirely  of  adepts  initiated  in
the  myllcries  of  the  Order.  But  the  Knights  read  all
letters  coming  from  the  preparatory  clafs  which  have
not  the  diftinc^ion  of  Primo  or  Soli.  They  clailify  and
make  extrafts  from  all  the  ^dhiis  Licets  of  lefler
importance  coming  from  the  inferior  degrees,  and
fend  the  general  extraft  to  the  Provincial.  To  thefe
extrafts  they  fubjoin  a  circumilantial  account  of  every
thing  that  is  going  forward  in  the  lodges  of  the  pre-
paratory clafs,  to  which  they  tranfmit  all  the  orders
coming  from  the  adepts  initiated  in  the  myfteries,  even
from  thofe  of  the  higheft  degrees  with  the  very  names
of  which  they  are  unacquainted,  and  thus  conftitute  a
link  between  the  two  extremities.f

Both  the  intermediary  and  preparatory  clafles,  how-
ever, form  but  the  lower  part  of  the  edifice.  The
Prefccls  of  the  Chapters  of  the  Scotch  Knights  are  ra-
ther tools  than  fuperiars  ;  they  recwivc  their  impulfe

*  Degree  of  Major  Illuminée,  Infl;ru<5lion  4th.
f  Sec  this  deçreci  Inftruétioa  the  îd,  No.  2.


J  82  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

from  tlie  liigber  inyfteries.  It  is  there  that  the  grand
polity  of  the  Order  is  to  be  fought  for  in  the  inllruc-
tions  laid  down  for  the  Epopt  and  the  Regent,  and
thefe  are  tlie  inftruclions  which  beginning  with  thofc
of  the  Epopt,  demand  our  utnioft  attention.


THï:    ANTISOCIAL    CONSriRAGY.  jg^j


CHAP.    XIV.

Of  the  Government  and  Political  Injlruâions  for  the
Epopts.


E


NLIGHTEN  nations  ;  that  is  to  fay,  efface  from  Objed  of


the  minds  of  the  peo})le  what  we  call  religious
and  political  prejudices  ;  make  yourfelf  mailer  of  the
piibhc  opinion  ;  and,  this  empiie  once  eftabliflied,  all
the  conftitutions  which  govern  the  world  will  dilap-

pear. Such  are  the  grand  means,  fuch  the  hopes^

on  which  Weifliaupt  has  been  obferved  in  his  myfteries
to  have  grounded  his  hopes  of  fuccefs.  We  have
feen  even  the  fciences  involved  in  the  vortex  of  his
confpiracies.  They  were  to  be  fwept  into  the  com-
mon mafs  of  ruin  with  religion,  laws,  Princes,  nations,
our  towns  and  ftationary  habitations.  Vandalifm  and
the  era  of  barbarifm  were  to  be  revived,  and  fciencc
was  to  be  reduced  to  that  of  the  nomade  and  Javags
clans  equal  aiid  free.  This  gigantic  mafs  of  deftruc-
tion  could  be  the  operation  but  of  a  general  corrup-
tion and  perveriion  of  the  public  opinion,  which  is
Jtfelf  dependent  on  fcience,  or  at  leall  upon  the  repu-
tation of  wifdom  and  knowledge  which  he  pofftiles
who  pretends  to  inftrud  us.  To  prepare  the  attack,
therefore,  it  was  neceflary  to  make  the  fciences  ferve
under  the  banners  of  the  Seft  in  the  caufe  of  their
own  annihilation,  and  through  their  means  captivate
the  public  opinion  in  favour  of  the  Sed.  Its  errors
once  triumphant,  and  every  thing  dear  and  facred  to
man  vandalized  and  overthrown  ;  fciences  would  of
themfclves  llirink  back  and  vanifli  from  before  thé
man  favage  and  free.  Such  were  the  fruits  of  Weif-
haupt's  meditations,  fuch  the  fpirit  which  diélated  the
laws  given  to  his  Epopts.  This  degree  was  to  exterrd
the  conquells  of  the  Sed:  over  public  opinion  by  fcience,
or,  in  other  words,  to  difpenfe  its  anti-religious  and
anti-focial  doftrines  under  the  bewitching  name  of
fcience.  He  entirely  devoted  his  degree  of  Epopts  to
the  fciences,  and  may  be  faid  to  have  foreflalled  them
all,   that  lie   might   uiurp  and  dictate  to  the  public


thefe    in-
ftruâicns.


l8;j  THÉ    ANtlSOCLA.L    CONSPIRACV.

opinion  ;  or,  rather,  tainted  them  all,  to  make  them
fubfervient  to  his  views  ;  well  afTured  that  they  would
hot  furvive  the  contagion.  In  his  Minerval  degree,  it
was  the  minds  of  the  young  adepts  that  he  wilhed  to
pervert  ;  bui  in  his  degree  of  Epopt,  his  means  and
views  expand,  and,  under  the  fame  mailc,  he  aims  at
nothing  lefs  than  the  perverfion  of  the  whole  univerfe.
He  formed  it  into  a  fecret  academy,  whofe  hidden
ramifications,  widely  fpreading  throughout  the  globe,
\vere,  by  means  of  the  difaftrous  laws  he  had  combi-
ned, at  one  blow  to  annihilate  all  fociety  and  the  era*
pire  of  fcience.

Tlie  plan  may  appear  inconceivable,  and  above  the
reach  of  the  moft  diforganizing  geiiius  ;  but  let  the
reader  remember  how  clearly  it  has  been  proved  in
the  myfteries,  that  Weilliaupt  and  his  followers  were
,  firmly  refolved  to  bring  back  the  human  race  to  the
days  of  the  Huns  and  Vandals,  and,  by  means  of  this
Vandalifm,  to  all  the  ignorance  of  the  nomade  and
favage  clam  ;  and  to  reduce  the  ftandard  of  fcience
to  that  of  the  Liberty  and  Equality  of  Sans-culotifm.
Let  the  reader  now  condefcencl  to  follow  me  in  the  ex-
pofition  of  the  leflbns  which  the  Secl  has  appropriated
to  the  inftruftion  of  its  Epopts,  and  the  organization
of  their  academy.
The  acade-  "  The  illuminizcd  Priefts,  or  Epopts,  are  jjrefided
my  of  the  over  by  a  Dean  chofen  by  themfelves.  They  are  to
popts.  ^ç  known  to  the  inferior  degrees  only  under  the  ap-
pellation of  Epopt — their  meetings  are  called  Synods.
All  the  Epopts  within  the  circle  of  the  fame  diftridt
compofe  a  Synod  ;  but  each  diftrid  fhall  contain  no
more  than  nine  Epopts,  exclufive  of  the  Dean  and
Prefect  of  the  Cha]>ter.  The  higher  fuperiors  may
attend  thefc  Synods."

*'  Of  the  nine  Epopts,  feven  prefide  over  the  fci-
ences  diftributed  under  as  many  heads  in  the  following
order  :

"  L  P/;r//('r.— Under  this  head  are  comprehended
*'  Dioptrics,  Catoptrics,  Hydraulics  and  Hydroftatics  ;
"  Eleftricity,  Magnctifm,  Attraftion,  &c.^^

"  H.  Mi.ï//cf;/t'— comprifing  Anatomy,  Chirurgery,
"  Chymiftry,  e^r."

"  HL   M<i//.'r;/2:///cv.— Algebra  j    Architeelure,    civil


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  jg-

•^  and  military  j    Navigation,  Mechanics,  Aftronomy;

"  IV.  Natural  /////ory. —Agriculture,  Gardening,
**  Economics,  the  Knowledge  of  Infcfts  and  Animals
"  including  ^lan,  Mineralogy,  Metallurgy,  Geology,
"  and  the  icicnce  of  the  earthly  phenomena."

"  V,  PolilkS'-which  embrace  the  ftudy  of  Man,
*'  a  branch  in  which  the  Major  Illuminées  furnifli  the
"  materials  ;  Geography,  Hiftory,  Biography,  Anti-
*'  quity,  Diplomatics  ;  the  political  hiftory  of  Orders,
"  their  deiign,  their  progrefs,  and  their  mutual  dif-
"  fentions.*'  This  lad  article  ieems  to  have  the  divers
Orders  of  Mafonry  in  view.  A  ?wta  Iciie  is  added  in
the  original,  with  a  particular  injunction  to  attend  to
thi!  article^  which  the  difllntions  of  the  Illuminées  and
Freemalbns  had  probably  rendered  of  great  import-
ance to  the  Std.

"  VI.  The  /^/tj-.— Mechanics,  Painting,  Sculpture,
"  Engraving,  Mufic,  Dancing,  Eloquence,  Poetry,
*'  Rhetoric,  all  the  branches  of  Literature  ;  the
i'  Trades."

"  VII.  The  Occult  Sciences.— The  ftudy  of  the  Ori-
*'  ental  tongues,  and  others  little  known,  the  fecret
"  methods  of  writing,  the  art  of  decyphering  ;  the
"  art  of  raifing  the  feals  of  the  letters  of  others,  and
**  that  of  preferving  their  own  from  fimilar  pradices  ;
"  Petcjh  aften  zit  erbrechen,  unci  fur  das  crhrechen  zit
**  bcwahrcn.  The  ftudy  of  ancient  and  modern  hie-
"  roglyphics  ;  and,  once  more,  of  fecret  focieties,
"  Mafonic  fyftems,  &-c.  &-c"

Should  the  reader  feel  his  indignation  roufed  by  the
art  of  raifing  the  feals  and  violating  the  fecrecy  of
letters,  and  at  feeing  an  adept  named  in  each  diftrid
to  prelide  over  this  ftrange  fcience,  let  him  not  forget
that  I  am  but  the  tranllator  and  tranfcriber  of  the
code  of  the  fed.*

The  two  remaining  Epopts,  who  in  the  fyncd  are
named  to  prefide  over  any  particular  fcience,  are  made
fecretaries  to  the  Dean,  and  ferve  him  as  coadjutors.
Thefe  fundions  once  diftributed,  the   Epopts  are  to

Vol.  III.  C  c

*  Inftrudions  for  this  degree,  Nos.  i,  2,  3,  4, 1I4


l86  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIIL^CV.

renounce  all  other  bufmefs  political  or  domeftic,  ana
every  care  bi'.t  that  of  perfeding  themlelves  in  the
branch  of  fcicnce  which  they  are  to  fuperintend,  and
of  fecretly  forwarding  the  brethren  of  the  injferior
degrees  in  the  fciences  to  which  they  had  devoted
themfelvts.

The  grand  objeft  of  this  inftitution  is  to  infpire  the
pupils  with  the  greateft  confidence  in  the  Order,  from
an  idea  that  it  will  furnifli  them  with  all  the  means
and  lights  neceffary  for  the  profecution  of  the  ftudy
they  have  adopted.  The  Infmuators  have  held  out
the  promife  to  them,  and  the  Order  has  engaged  to
fulfil  it.  This  idea  of  a  fcientific  fociety,  and  of  which
they  have  the  honour  of  being  members,  is  to  encou-
rage in  them  a  docility  and  veneration  for  their  chiefs
naturally  due  to  men  whofe  precepts  appear  to  be
emanations  of  light  and  of  the  mod  tranfcendent  wil^
dom.  The  artifice  in  fome  fort  anfwers  to  the  pro-
mife.

Every  Novice,  on  being  admitted  into  the  Minerval
fchools,  was  to  begin  by  declaring  to  what  art  or  fci-
cnce he  meant  to  devote  himfelf,  unlefs  indeed  his
pocket  was  to  be  aflefied  for  the  tax  which  his  genius
could  not  pay.  This  declaration  is  tranfmitted  from
the  inferior  lodges  to  the  Provincial,  who  forwards  it
to  the  Dean  ;  by  whom  notice  of  it  is  given  to  the
Epopt  who  prelides  over  that  particular  branch  of
fcience  ;  and  he  infcribes  his  name  on  the  lift  of  thofe
pupils  whofe  labours  fall  under  his  infpedion.  In  fu-
ture, and  by  the  fame  conveyance,  all  the  eflays,  diU
courfes,  treatifcs,  &c.  which  the  Sed  requires  of  the
young  Minerval  are  tranfmitted  to  the  fame  Epopt.
The  firft  advantage  accruing  to  the  Order  from  this
law  is  the  pointing  out  to  the  infpecling  Epopt  thofe
whom  the  codexalls  the  bcji  heads  of  the  Order.

Should  any  doubts  arife  in  the  minds  of  the  pupils,
any  difficulties  to  vanquifh,  or  any  queftions  to  pro-
pofe  ;  they  have  been  taught  that  the  Order  is  the
fountain  of  fcience,  that  they  have  but  to  apply  to  their
fuperiors,  and  light  will  inllantaneouOy  fliine  upon
them.  They  are  ignorant  as  to  who  thefe  fuperiors
may  be  ;  but  that  will  not  hinder  their  doubts  and
queftions  from  reaching  the  prefiding  Epopt  :  and  he


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.\CY.  iS;

has  divers  means  of  folving  them,  and  of  never  being
taken  unawares.

In  the  fii-ft  place  the  Epoot  mufl:  have  prepared
himfelf  for  certain  queftions,  which  he  either  has  or
ought  to  have  forefeen.  Many  of  them  will  have
been  already  folved  by  his  predecefl'ors,  by  his  brother
Epopts  of  other  diftrids  or  even  nations.  The  Order
is  exceedingly  careful  in  collecting  all  thefe  anfwers,
and  putting  them  mto  fuch  hands  as  may  employ  them
according  to  the  viev/s  of  the  feci.  Each  Epopt  is
particularly  enjoined  to  ftudy  thole  which  relate  to  his
branch  ;  he  is  even  to  make  an  alphabetical  entry  of
them  on  his  tablets,  that  he  may  always  have  them  at
hand  whenever  he  wiflies  to  turn  to  them.  If,  not-
withftanding  all  thefe  precautions,  the  Epopt  fliould
find  himfelf  unprepared  or  unable  to  folve  the  diffi-
culty  propofed,  he  will  apply  to  the  Dean,  who  will
fend  the  required  folution  or  have  recourfe  to  the
Provincial.  But,  lell  the  Superiors  flioukl  find  their
occupations  too  often  interrupted  by  fuch  appHcations,
it  is  exprefsly  enjoined  to  the  Epopt  not  to  have  re-
courfe to  them  but  in  cafes  of  abfolute  neceflity,  and
not  to  make  the  acquifitions  of  their  Superiors  an  en-
couragement to  their  own  negligence.— It  may  fo  hap-
pen, that  the  Provincial  is  not  able  to  give  the  required
folution  ;  he  will  then  propofe  it  to  all  the  Epopts  of
his  province.  If  that  does  not  fucceed,  application  is
made  to  the  National  Infpedor,  and  from  him  it  is
referred  to  the  Areopagites  and  General.  On  fuch
occafions  all  the  learned  men  of  the  Order  are  con-
fulted.  Before  this  laft  appeal,  it  is  ordained  in  the
ftatutes,  that  the  Epopt  may  propofe  the  queftions  to
the  profane  ;  but  in  fo  doing  he  is  on  no  account  to
difcover  that  the  fed  has  recourfe  to,  or  ftood  in  need
of  their  information,  nor  what  ufe  it  makes  of  it.
This  is  particularly  enjoined  to  the  prefiding  Epopt  in
the  following  terms  : — "  As  often  as  your  own  know-
*'  ledge  and  that  of  your  pupils  fiiall  not  fuffice,
"  you  may>  aflc  the  advice  of  learned  ftrangers,  and
*'  turn  their  hioivledge  to  the  advuntage  of  our  Order  y
"  hut.  imihout  letting  them  perceive  il  .•"  (olme  dafs  fie
es  bewerkeîi.J  This  precaution  is  the  more  to  be  in-
fifted  on,  as  one  of  the  grand  objeds  of  the  Epont

Vol.  lU.  C  c  i


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACTf.

niiift  be,  "  to  attain  fuch  perfe6lion  in  fcience,  that
"  Illuminifm  fliall  never  be  beholden  to  the  profane  ;
"  but  that  the  latter,  on  the  contrary,  fhall  perpetually
"  ftand  in  need  of  the  lights  of  the  Order."*

Tliat  the  Epopt  may  not  recur  too  frequently  to  the
fuperiors,  or  to  the  profane,  an  artifice  has  been  in-
vented by  which  he  may  profit  of  all  the  acquifitions
of  the  pupils  of  his  diftric%  while  he  makes  them  be-
lieve that  the  whole  flows  from  the  unknown  fuperiors.
This  artifice  confifts  in  propofing  fuch  queftions  as  he
is  not  perfectly  mafter  of,  to  the  difterent  lodges,  and
then  fiudying  and  combining  the  various  anfwers  that
he  receives.  All  the  Epopts  of  the  province  do  as
much  in  their  feveral  diftrids.  Each  one  feleds  thofe
parts  which  he  has  judged  worthy  of  notice  in  the  pro-
du(5lions  of  the  lodges  ;  thefe  he  infpeéts,  and  lays  them
before  the  provincial  and  annual  aflembly.  There
other  Epopts  are  employed  in  compiling  from  thefe
feleftions,  and  in  preparing  the  required  folutions  of
the  propofed  queftions,  or  in  commenting  on  fuch  paf-,
(ages  as  may  elucidate  others  that  may  hereafter  rife.
The  fame  plan  is  followed  in  all  the  provinces,  and
the  reports  of  the  provinces  will  form  a  new  collection
to  be  digeflied  under  the  infpecT:ion  of  the  National
Chief,  or  even  of  the  Areopagites.  This  will  be  a
new  treafure  for  the  fecret  library  of  the  Epopts,  and
fnrnifli  them  with  new  means  of  maintaining  in  the
minds  of  their  pupils  the  high  idea  they  have  conceived
of  the  knowledge  of  their  Supcriors.f  It  will  alfo  fur-
nifli  materials  for  the  formation  of  a  fyftematic  Code
or  complete  courfe  of  ftudy  for  the  ufe  of  the  Sed.J

Here  we  cannot  but  remark  how  much  arts  and
fciences  would  be  benefited  and  promoted  by  the  la-
bours of  a  fociety  wliich,  actuated  by  quite  other  views,
and  defpifing  that  affectation  of  lecrecy,  fliould  em-
ploy the  fame  means  and  be  animated  with  a  fimilar,
zeal  in  the  difcuffion  of  uicful  truths.  But  the  united
eiForts  of  the  Epopts  are  concentrated  in  their  purfuit
of  fcience,  only  to  debafe  it,  by  direéting  all  its  pow-
ers towards  the  overthrow  of  Religion  and  Govcrn-
aients,  the  triumph  of  their  diforganizing  fyfteniSj  and

*  Irflru(5licns  for  this  degree,  No.  2,  5,  6,  9.
f  Nos.  5  and  ij,.  ^  No.  15.


The  antisocial  coNSPirL\CY.

always  under  the  dale  pretext  of  fubjeding  mankind
to  Nature  alone.*

Should  the  reader  be  curious  to  know  to  what  ufes
the  Epopt  turns  all  the  fcience  which  he  is  fuppofed
to  acquire  daily,  let  him  obferve  the  quellions  which
this  prefiding  Illuminée  either  folves  himfelf,  or  pro-
pofes  for  the  folution  of  the  adepts.  Let  his  judgment
on  the  queftions  and  on  their  tendency,  be  guided  by
the  expreffions  of  the  Code  :

"  The  Epopt,"  fays  the  Code,  "  mufl  keep  a  lift
"  of  a  very  great  number  of  important  queftions  pro-
*'  per  for  inveftigation,  and  which  he  may  eventually
"  propofe  to  the  young  adepts.- — In  the  branch  of
"  pradical  Philofophy,  for  example,  he  will  propofe
"  for  inveftigation  the  queftion,  how  far  the  pi-iiîciple
*'  is  true,  that  all  means  are  alloxvable,  when  employ ed
"  for  a  laudable  end  P  How  far  this  maxim  is  to  be
*'  limited  to  keep  the  proper  medium  between  Jefuiti-
"  cal  abufe,  and  the  fcrupulofity  of  prejudice? — Quel-
*'  tions  of  this  nature  fiiall  be  fent  to  the  Dean,  who
"  fliall  tranfmit  them  to  the  Minerval  fchools  for  the
"  inveftigation  of  the  young  adepts,  and  their  diffcrta-
"  tions  will  fwarm  with  a  multitude  of  ideas,  nerjf
"  bold,  and  iifejul,  which  will  greatly  enrich  our  Ma-
"  gazme."f

We  defpife  this  infamous  afperfion  on  the  Jefuits.
Let  thofe  pafs  fentence  on  them  who  have  learned  to
judge  them  by  their  conducT:  and  by  their  real  doc-
trines, and  not  by  calumnious  affcrtions,  or  fatires
which,  in  fpite  of  all  the  powers  of  genius  and  irony,
have  been  juftly  condemned  by  various  tribunals  as
replete  with  falfehood  and  mifreprefentation.ij:  Let
tliofe  who  have  been  educated  by  the  Jefuits  ;.^ronounce
on  thefe  atrocious  imputations  of  the  Illuminées.  I  do
not  think  mylelf  bound  to  follow  the  example  of  the
celebrated  Hoffman,  Profellor  at  the  Univerfity  of
Vienna,  one  of  the  moft  formidable  advcrfaries  of  the

*  Das  der  Order  die  bifherigen  fyfteme  entbchren,  und  eigcne,  auf
die  natur  allein  gegriindete  fyflcnie  feinen  aiihangtr  vorlegen  konne.

t  Ibid.  No.  7.

t  See  Art.  Pascal  in  the  Hiftorical  DiAionary  of  Flexicr  Durcval,
laft  Edition.


189


190  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPlRACr.

Illuminizing  Sed,  by  inferring  a  long  juftification  of
that  perfecuted  Order.*  But  it  is  impoffible  not  to
obferve,  that  the  legiflator  of  Illuminifni  has  not  the
mort  diftant  idea  of  modifying  or  limiting  this  famous
principle,  the  etid  fanciifies  the  means  ;  his  objed  is
evidently  to  give  rife  to  ideas,  nev:,  bold,  and  tijèfid  to
the  Sc^t  ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  difpofe  the  young
adepts  hereafter  to  decide  as  he  has  already  done,  that
tiothmg  is  crinihid,  not  even  robbery  or  theft,  pi-ovi-
ded  it  be  ufiful  to  the  views  and  forward  the  grand
objeâ:  of  Illuminifm.  He  wiflies  by  means  of  thefe
queftions  to  acquire  an  early  infight  into  the  minds  of
the  adepts  and  to  diftinguifli  thofe  who  will  hereafter
be  the  mod  worthy  of  his  higher  myfteries,  by  the
gi*eater  or  fmaller  difpofition  they  fliow  to  iVifle  the
cries  of  confcience  and  remorfe  in  the  perpetration  of
the  crimes  necefiary  for  the  future  fuccefs  of  his  plots.
'  This  is  the  fum  total  of  the  fcience  to  be  carefully
inculcated  by  the  Epopts  in  the  branch  of  prafticd
Philofophy.

With  refpeft  to  Religion,  it  is  not  even  admitted
among  the  fciences  to  be  iludied  by  the  Epopts  ;  the
Code  has,  however,  furniflied  them  with  a  means  of
traducing  and  blafpheming  it.— That  the  Epopt  may
never  be  at  a  lofs  for  queftions  of  this  nature  to  folve
or  propofe,  he  will  have  them  noted  on  a  regifter  in
alphabetical  order.  "  For  example,  fays  the  Code,
^  at  the  letter  C  in  the  regifter  of  fecret  fciences  and
"  hieroglyphics  the  word  Crofs  is  to  be  found,  and
"  under  it  is  the  following  note— For  the  antiquity  of
*'  this  hieroglyphic,  confuk  fuch  a  work,  printed  fuch
*'  a  year,  fuch  a  page,  or  elfe  fuch  a  manufcript,  fig-
*'  nature  M."t  Is  it  neceflary  to  be  endowed  with
any  extraordinary  lliare  of  perfpicacity  to  fee  that  the
whole  objed  of  theie  pretended  fjcret  fciences,  or  hie-
roglyphics, is  merely  to  teach  the  young  pupils  to
view  the  Crofs  in  no  other  light  than  as  an  ancient
hieroglyphic  erecled  by  ignorance  and  fuperftition  in-
to a  fymbol  of  the  redemption  of  mankind?  The
illuininized  explanation  of  this  glorious  fymbol  will,
doubtlefs,  Ions  remain  buried  in  the  Occult  Sciences

•  Vide  Hoch  wichtige  erliuierungen— Von  i.copolJ-alois— Hoflican.
Sfd.  V.  Page  279  to  307.
t  Ibid,  No.  15.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

of  the  Order.  Meanwhile  we  may  defy  them  to  point
out  in  the  hiftory  of  mankind  any  nation  whatever
revering  the  crofs  as  the  fymbol  of  ialvation  anterior  to
the  grand  epocli  when  the  Son  of  Man  died  on  the
crofs  to  confummate  the  triumph  of  Chriftianity.

The  Epopts  have  alfo  their  hillorians  and  annalifts,
and  their  duties  are  laid  down  in  the  Code. — The  fol-
lowing rules  may  be  remarked.— Each  province  of  11-
luminifni  mull  have  its  hiftorian,  in  imitation  of  the
ancient  annalifts  and  chronologifts.  He  is  to  keep  a
journal,  in  which,  belides  fads  of  public  notoriety,  he
will  particularly  colled,  and  even  give  the  prejerence  to,
anecdotes  of  fecret  lAjiory.—He  will  endeavour  to  re«
deem  from  oblivion  all  men  of  merit,  however  deep
they  may  have  funk  into  obfcurity — He  will  make  theui
known  to  the  Provincial,  who  will  inform  the  Bre-
thren of  their  lltuation — Each  Provincial  will  have  a  ca-
lendar of  his  own,  in  which  (inilead  of  faints)  for  each
day  of  the  year  fliall  be  inicribed  the  name  of  forae
man  as  an  objed  of  veneration  or  execration,  accord-
ing as  he  has  merited  or  demerited  of  the  Sect.

My  name  may,  perhaps,  be  infcribed  under  the
black  letter  ;  but  I  anticipate  the  glory  and  confolatioii
of  feeing  it  by  the  fide  of  that  of  Zimmerman  and
of  Hoffman,  who,  like  myfelf,  are  entitled  to  the  fa-
ble wreath  twined  by  Illuminifm  for  its  mod  ilrenuous
opponents.  But  how  different  is  that  to  which  the
Code  declares  that  all  the  Brethren  may  afpire  !- —
Probably,  to  be  feated  befide  a  Brother  Mirabeau  or
a  Marat.

The  fanie  laws  ordain,  that  the  Chronologift  fliall
inform  the  Minerval  Lodges  of  all  memorable  facTis — ■
He  v/iU  not  fail  to  "infert  all  mean  and  odious  actions,
nor  to  paint  them  in  their  proper  colours.  He  will
not  pafs  unnoticed  tbofi  of  men  occupying  the  firji
dignities,  or  enjoying  the  higheji  conjideration*

Next  to  the  laws  of  the  hillorian  follow  thofe  for
the  Epopt  who  iuperintends  that  branch  of  fcience  re-
lating to  politics,  and  particularly  to  the  knowleage
of  mankind.  The  reader  has  already  feen  what
flrefs  the  Order  lays  upon  this  fcience,  and  how
much  they  make  it  depend  on  the  fpirit  of  obfervatioii

*  Ibid.  No.  1 8.


19%


192


THE    A^mS0CIAL    CONSPIRACY.

—Let  no  Brother  pretend  to  the  dignity  of  Epopt,
nor  to  the  honour  of  prefiding  over  any  branch  ot  fci-
ence,  until  he  has  aniwered  the  three  following  quef-
tions— What  is  the  fpirit  of  obfervation  ?*-How  is  this
fpirit  to  be  acquired,  and  what  conftitutes  a  good
obferver  ?— What  method  is  to  be  followed,  in  order
to  make  juft  and  cxad  obfervations  ?— When  an  Epopt
has  fiifficiently  diftinguifhed  himfelf  by  his  anfwers  on
thefe  heads,  to  be  judged  worthy  of  being  chofen  the
chief  of  the  obfervcrs  or  fcrutators,  he  is  entrufted
with  all  thofe  notes  which  the  reader  has  feen  the  Seel
fo  carefully  collcding  on  the  characT:er,  the  paffions,
the  talents,  and  hiftory  of  the  Brethren.  When  thefe
notes  contain  the  portrait  or  life  of  any  adept  more
than  commonly  interefting,  he  will  make  him  (with-
out naming  him)  the  objeél  of  various  qucflions  to  be
propofed  to  the  Minerval  Schools.  He  will  alk,  for
example.  What  are  the  ideas  which  a  man,  with  fuch
and  fuch  paffions  or  difpofitions,  will  adopt  or  rejecl  i
— How  on  fuch  data  can  fuch  and  fuch  inclinations  be
encouraged  or  weakened  ? — What  adept  could  be  em-
ployed with  mofh  advantage  in  fuch  a  bufmefs  ? —
Wliat  mufh  fuch  a  man's  ideas  be  on  Religion  and
Governments  ?— Can  he  be  looked  upon  as  being  fupe-
rior  to  all  prejudices,  and  ready  to  facrifice  his  own
pcrfonal  intercil  to  that  of  Truth  ?—- Should  he  be
deficient  in  confidence  and  attachment,  what  means
fliould  be  employed  to  invigorate  them,  and  what  fort
of  man  would  be  the  fitteft  for  fuch  an  undertaking  ?
— Finally,  ivhut  ciuployme7it  in  the  Jiûîe,  or  in  the  Ol-
der, would  be  fill  to  the  greateji  advantage,  or  in  which
woidd  he  he  the  moji  ufafidP^^

The  Scrutator  in  chief  digefts  thefe  anfwers  into  a
proper  ftatement,  which  he  fends  to  the  Dean.  The
Provincial  receives  it  from  the  Dean,  and  is  thus  ena-
bled to  form  his  judgment,  whether  that  particular
adept  be  a  moral,  difuiterejfed,  heneficejit  man,  and  free
from  all  prejudice  ;  whether  he  can  be  life  fid  to  the  Or-
der,  and  in  what  way  he  can  be  beji  employed. — From
the  refult  of  fuch  obfervations,  the  fcrutiniz,ing  Epopt
will  carefully  feltcT:  rules  and  general  maxims  on  the
knowledge  of  mankind.  He  will  make  a  compilation
of  them,  and  tranfmit  them  to  the  Superiors.*
*  Ibid.  No.  ig.


*H*    AîITlSOCÎIAL    CONSPIRACV.

*'  By  means,"  fays  the  Code,  "  of  thefe  and  fuch  like
ùbfervations,  the  Order  will  be  enabled  to  make  dif-
coveries  of  every  kind,  to  form  new  fyfliems,  and  to
give  on  all  fiib',ccT:s  irrefra^;ahle  proofs  of  its  labours
and  its  immenfe  fnnd  of  fcience  ;  and  the  public  will

five  it  credit  for  being  in  pofleflion  of  all  human
nowledge."*

Lell  any  of  the  profane  fliould  partake  of  this  ho'-
noiir,  or  that  any  one  of  the  members  fliould  not  di-
fed  thefe  fciences  towards  the  objed  of  Illuminifm,
precautions  are  taken  in  the  Code  to  affure  the  exclu-
five  advantage  of  thefe  labours  to  the  Sed.  "  Parti'^
"  cular  parts  of  thefe  fciences  and  difcoveries  may  be
**  printed  by  permiffion  of  the  Superiors  ;  but  the  law
"adds,  not  only  thefe  books  fliall  not  be  communis
"  cated  to  any  of  the  profane^  but  as  they  will  never
"  be  printed  clfewhere  than  at  the  prefles  of  the  Seel,
**  they  will  only  be  eritrufted  to  the  Bretlu'en  according
*  to  the  rank  they  hold  in  the  Order."f

"  That  our  worthy  co-operators  may  not  be  divefted
••'  of  the  glory  of  their  labours,  every  new  principle
**  laid  down,  machine  invented,  or  difcovery  made>
"  fliall  for  ever  bear  the  name  of  its  inventor,  that  his
"  memory  may  be  revered  by  future  agcs."|

"  On  the  fame  gi^ounds  it  is  ftriftly  enjoined,  that  no
•*  member  fliall  ever  communicate  to  the  profane  any
**  difcovery  that  he  may  have  made  in  the  Order-^
**  No  book  treating  of  thefe  difcoveries  fliall  be  printed
**  without  the  permiffion  of  the  Superiors  ;  and  hence
"  arifes  the  general  regulatioUj  that  no  Brother  fliall
"  publifli  any  of  his  produdions  without  leave  of  the
"  Provincial.  He  alfo  is  to  decide  whether  the  work
"  is  of  a  nature  to  be  printed  by  the  fecret  prefles  of
"  the  Order,  and  what  particular  Brethren  may  be  aU
"  lowed  the  perufal  of  it— Should  it  be  necelTary  to  dif-
^  mifs  any  of  the  Brethren  from  the  Order,  the  local  Su»
'^  perior  is  to  receive  notice  that  he  may  have  the  ne-
"  ceflary  time  to  withdraw  from  him  not  only  the
"  manufcripts,  but  even  the  printed  works  of  the
«  Order."§

•  Ibid.  No.  io,  f  Ibid.  No.  17.

\   Ibid.  No.  33.  §  Ibid.  No.  24.

Vol.  III.  pa


Î9S


'94


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRAC*.

The  Illuminizing  Legiflator,  in  juftification  of  afl
thefe  precautions,  alleges,  in  the  tirll  place,  the  unde-
niable light  vefted  in  the  Order  to  all  the  labours  of  its
Brethren  ;  then  the  lure  of  fecrecy,  which  Ilimulates
curiofity  and  the  third  of  fcience  ;  finally,  the  advan-
tage accruing  to  the  fciences  themfelves,  by  being  pre-
ferved  among  men  who  only  impart  them  to  others  fa
prepared  as  to  render  them  of  the  greateft  poffible  util-
ity. Befides,  fays  he,  every  man  has  it  in  his  power  to
make  himfelf  an  lUuteiinec  if  he  pleafes,  and  to  par-
take of  their  fcience  ;  and  who  better  able  to  render
them  ufeful  to  mankind,  or  to  preferve  them,  than  wc
-aj-e  ?  After  this  juftification,  which  the  reader  may
appreciate,  he  returns  to  his  Epopt,  and  tells  them,
that  it  is  incumbent  on  them  to  direct  and  turn  all  the
fciences  towards  the  views  of  llluminifm.  "  The  wants
"  of  every  country  are  to  be  maturely  confidered,  as
"  well  as  thofe  of  your  diftricT:  ;  let  them  be  the  objeéls
"  of  deliberation  in  your  Synods  ;  and  afk  inftrudioni
"  of  your  Superiors."  Then  the  Legiflator  makes  a
fudden  tranfition,  and  expands  his  views  far  beyond
his  Lodges.  The  reader  will  fcarcely  fnfped  whither
they  tend.  Let  him  read,  and  learn  the  grand  objed
of  the  Epopts,  what  conquefts  they  are  to  make  for
the  Order,  and  whither  they  are  to  extend  the  fyftems  of
llluminifm.  "  You  will,"  abruptly  exclaims  the  legifla-
tor, "  incefllantly  form  new  plans,  and  try  every  means,
"  in  your  refpedive  provinces,  to  feize  upon  the  public
"  education,  the  ecclefiaftical  government,  the  chairs
"  of  literature,  and  the  pulpit."*— This  is  one  of  the
grand  objefts  of  the  Sed,  and  we  fliall  fee  the  Code
treating  of  it  again  in  another  part.

To  enhance  the  merits  of  his  plans,  and  to  infinuatd
his  adepts  into  the  ecclefiaftical  feîninarits,  and  even
into  the  pulpit,  under  the  fliadow  of  his  pretended  fci-
ence, "  the  Epopt  muft  find  means  of  acquirïrig  the  re-
**  putation  of  a  man  of  tranfcendent  learning  ;  where-
"  ever  he  appears,  whether  walking  or  ftopping,  fit-
*'  ling  or  ftanding,  let  rays  of.  light  encircle  his  head,
"which  fliall  enlighten  all  who  approach  him.  Let
*'  every  one  think  himfelf  happy  in  hearing  the  pur©

*  Miiflen  ftets  neue  plane  ennvorfcii  iind  eingefiihrt  werdcn  :  Wie
man  die  hânde  in  erziehungfweien,  geiilliche  rcgicrung,  lehr,  uad  pre-
digt-ltiihle  in  der  provinz  bekonime.      lâUi.  N<j.  %%.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSÎ»ÎÏL\CY.

**  truth  from  his  lips.  Let  him  on  all  occafioiis,  com-
**  bat  prejudice  ;  hut  vAth  precaution,  and  according
•  to  the  rules  laid  down,  vnth  dexterity  and  with  alt
"  the  re/pea  due  to  the  perfons  he  is  OildreJJifigP*'
Who  could  believe  that  thefe  were  leflbns-  given  to  a
modern  Vandal  by  his  diforganizing  legiflator,  whole
heart  thirds  after  the  happy  period  when  that  encir-^
cling  light  of  his  Epopts  fhall  have  Vandalized  the
whole  univerfe,  and  nations  fliall  have  difappeared
from  off  the  foce  of  the  earth  ?

But  the  Epopt  has  yet  to  aim  at  another  conquefl:^
that  of  the  empire  over  the  literary  world.  "  In  the
**  literary  world  certain  writings  generally  take  the
"  lead  for  a  time,  according  to  the  fafnion,  and  infpire
**  feeble  minds  with  admiration.  At  one  time  the  en-
*'  thufiaflic  produftions  of  religion,  at  another  the  fen-
*'  timental  novels  of  wit,  or  perhaps  philofophical  re-
"  veries,  paftorals,  romances  on  chivalry,  epic  poems,
"  or  odes  will  inundate  the  republic  of  letters.  The
"  Epopt  will  turn  all  his  fkill  towards  bringing  into
"  fafliion  the  principles  of  our  Order,  the  fole  tenden-
"  cy  of  which  is  the  happinefs  of  mankind."  Or,  ia
other  words,  thofe  baleful  principles  which,  under  the
pretence  of  rendering  human  nature  more  happy  and
united  in  one  family,  aim  at  nothing  lefs  than  deftroy-
ing  every  Pveligion,  every  title  to  property,  every  town,
every  fixed  refidence,  and  every  nation.

"  Our  principles  muft  be  made  falliionable,  that  the
"  young  writers  may  diffufe  them  among  the  people,
"  and  ferve  the  Order  without  intending  it."f

"  In  order  to  raife  the  public  fpirit,  he  muft  with
the  greateft  ardour  preach  up  the  general  interejt  of
humanity,  and  inculcate  the  utmoji  indifference  for  all
affhciations  or  fecret  unions  ivhich  are  only  formed
among  the  fuJjeds  af  one  particular  nation. t  Here  the
impious  legillator  blafphemoully  cites  for  an  example
Chrift,  and  his  pretended  indifference  for  his  family..
Becaufe  Chrift  died  for  the  redemption  of  all  manldnd,
bscaufe   his  aftjftion  for  the  moft  holy  of  mothers

*  Ibid.  No.  2.

f  Damit  junge  fchriftfteller  dergleichen  unter  Jas  volk  aufbreitcn»
und  uns,  ohne  dafs  fie  es  wiffen,  dienen.
I  Ibid.  No.  3,

Vol.  III.  D  d  2


Ï95


iS^


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

never  made  him  lofe  fight  of  that  great  work,  is  that
a  ground  on  which  the  illumini-zing  Epopt  fliall  per-
fuade  his  ilniple  auditory  that  to  love  all  mankind  is
to  dilïblve  the  bonds  of  nations  ?

As  a  farther  rule  for  acquiring  this  literary  empire,
*'  He  will  take  care  that  the  writings  of  the  members
"  of  the  Order  fliall  be  cried  up,  ar>d  that  the  trumpet
''  of  fame  (liall  be  founded  in  tiieir  honour.  He  will
''  alfo  find  means  of  hindering  the  reviewers  from
"  calling  any  fufpicions  on  the  writers  of  the  fed."t

With  refpecS:  to  the  Lit^ratïf  and  vjrhcts  inho,  with-
out belonging  to  the  Order,  fioiv  principles  coinciding
vjilh  ours,  Ihould  they  be  what  we  call  good,  "  ckfi
*'  them  among  ihoje  who  are  to  be  enrolled.  Let  the
«'  Dean  have  a  liji  of  ihofe  me?i,  a7id  from  time  to  time
"  be  ivill  hand  it  about  ardong  the  brethren. '''X

Let  us  now  take  a  curfory  view  of  thefe  laws,  and
of  their  gradual  tendency  to  infecl;  the  whole  literary
world,  in  its  Minerval  academies  the  fe(?c  begins  by
forming  its  pupils  ;  and  the  care  with  which  its  difor.
ganizing  principles  are  inftilled  into  the  young  adept
has  already  been  difplayed.  Leil  any  of  thefe  princi-
ples fliould  fwerve  from  the  grand  objed,  the  Epopts
overfee  all  the  fchools  of  the  fame  diftrict  j  thefe  latter
have  their  provincial  aflemblies,  where  every  thing  is,
prepared,  combined,  and  forefeen.  At  this  affembly
the  Epopt  attends,  bringing  v/ith  him  his  notes  and
ol>rervations  on  his  particular  diftrii^,  and  on  thofe
means  which  may  there  contribute  to  the  advance-
ment or  difparagement  of  the  iiluminizing  principles
and  fcience.  The  minutes  of  thefe  aflemblies  are  fent
to  the  National  InrpecTior,  who  overlooks  the  whole,
and  fees  that  the  original  fpirit  is  every  where  pre-
fcrved  ;  and  the  Areopagltes  hold  the  liinie  line  of
condud  with  refped  to  all  nations,  that  he  does  within
his  particular  one.  litnce  then  the  Minerval  acade-
mies, the  Epopts,  the  Provincials,  the  National  Infpec-
tors,  in  a  word,  the  diforganizing  whole,  form  but  one
and  the  fame  invifible  academy,  fpreading  its  fubter-
raneous  ran\incations,  every  where  infufing  the  fame
principles,  aduatetl  by  the  lame  fpirit,  and  fubjefted  to
I  he  f.ane  laws  :  sii-id  thcle  laws^  tti^s  fcience,  are  but  the

!J-  Ilnd.  No.  4^.  ^  Ibid.  No.  5.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

imachinations  and  the  foreb©dings  of  univerfal  impiety
and  diforganization.

But  the  union  and  univerfality  of  this  confpiring
academy  is  not  fufficient  for  the  Seft  ;  it  extends  its
views  to  the  public  fchools  and  to  the  pulpit.  The
man  of  letters,  the  tranfcendent  genius,  all  are  to  bend
beneath  its  laws,  and  falTiion  is  to  iecond  its  plots,
prom  the  child  that  fpells,  to  the  Doftor  enveloped  in
mazy  fcience,  all  are  to  be  fubjeéled  to  lUuaiinifin  j
and  fcience  itfeif,  fo  inftrumental  to  the  progrefs  of
the  Seel,  fliall  link  beneath  the  effort  of  bringing  forth
that  Vandaiifm  which  is  to  annihilate  the  altar  and
the  throne,  all  laws,  individual  property,  and  national
fociety.

Let  the  reader  compare  the  inyfteries  of  the  Seft
with  the  code  of  its  Epopts,  and  pronounce  if  fuch  be
not  the  real  tendency  of  this  Empire  of  Science.
Horror  impiefies  the  mind,  and  indignation  rifes  at
fuch  a  fight.— But  the  monftrous  legillator  who  has
compiled  them  pretends  that  they  are  entitled  to  the
admiration  of  the  young  adepts  ;  and  it  is  his  Epopta
who  are  to  infpire  them  with  this  admiration.  "  You
"  muft,"  fays  he,  "  infufe  fo  great  a  refpecl  for  the
"  fublimity  and  finftity  of  our  Order,  that  a  promife
"  made  by  the  adepts  on  the  honour  of  lUurainifni
**  fhall  be  more  binding  than  the  moil  facred  oath."*
At  length  the  xA.theift  has  found  an  equivalent  for  the
name  of  God.  He  feeks  bonds  to  bind  his  follow-
ers, and  he  has  broken  thofe  of  confcience  ;  he  ap-
peals to  honour,  and  perverts  it  into  a  bond  of  villany.
**  He  (fays  Weifliaupt)  ivbo  fnall  dare  violate  the  oath
**  he  Jliall  have  fworn  on  the  honour  of  my  Society,  Jimll
*'  be  declared  infamous.  I  care  7îot  rchat  his  rank  may
*'  be,  his  i?ifamy  fhnll  be  proclaimed  tkroiighont  the  whole
**  Order,  and  it  fl)all  be  fo  zuithout  remifflon  or  hope  of
"  pardon.  My  intention  is,  that  the  Members  fliould
*'  be  informed  of  this,  that  they  fliould  deliberately
*<  refled  on  the  facredntfs  of  this  oath  in  fuy  Order,  I
"  mean  that  the  confequences  of  it  fhould  be  clearly
<'  and  warmly  reprefented  to  them.f  "

The  Epopts  charged  with  this  million  are  of  a  de-
gree too  much  revered  in  the  Order  to  compromifc

*  Ibid.  No.  29.  -t  Original  Writings,  Vol,  II.  Let.  8,  to  Cato.


197


ip'â  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

their  dignity.     They  attend,  at  pleafure,  the  meeting*
of  the  inferior  degrees,  but  they  are  never  to  occupy
any  office  in  them,  excepting  that  of  Prefect  of  the
<  Scotch  Knights.     Their  prefence  might  overawe  and

intimidate  the  young  adepts,  and  thus  be  detrimental
to  the  obfervations  they  are  ordered  to  make  ;  for  (fo
far  from  conftraint,)  the  Epopt  is  to  endeavour  to
ftudy  them  in  their  mod  unguarded  moments.  He  is
therefore  never  to  intermix  with  them  but  as  their
equal.  There  is  a  particular  law  forbidding  him  to
diiclofe  the  degree,  or  the  clafs  to  which  he  belongs,
or  even  his  coilume.f  Thus,  hiding  his  fuperiority,
and  feated  on  the  fame  benches  befide  the  young
adepts,  he  exercifes  his  funéVions  of  Scrutator  more
freely  among  them  in  their  mutual  intercourfe,  and
he  judges  better  of  the  talents  of  each.  His  Icflbns,
coming  from  an  equal,  will  fmk  deeper  into  their
minds  ;  and,  without  betraying  his  authority,  he  will
the  better  obferve  their  progrefs  and  their  failings-
Should  any  of  thefe  pupils  have  fliown  a  zeal  and  fide-
lity beyond  all  doubt,  he  may  take  them  into  his  confi.
dence  ;  he  will  point  them  out  to  the  Dean,  who  may
call  them  about  his  perfon,  and  make  them  his  Aco-
lites.  The  Deaiî  may  even  throw  a  great  part  of  the
weight  of  his  correfpondence  on  them,  and  carry  them
to  the  Synod  of  the  Epopts,  until  they  fhall  have
fliown  themfelvcs  worth.y  of  being  initiated  to  all  the
myfteries  referved  for  this  clafs4

Thus  ends  that  part  of  the  Code  which  is  to  be
communicated  to  the  Epopts.  The  following  Chap-
ters will  delineate  the  laws  and  inftrudions  which  are
to  guide  their  conduft  when  admitted  to  the  degree
of  Kegent  or  Prince  of  Illimîîiàfm.

f  Ibid.  No.  31^  \  Ibid.  No.  33.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPltL\C\^.  199


CHAP.    XV.

Inflniâions  for  the  Regent  or  Prince  Illuminée j  on  tho
Governmejit  of  the  Ordeî\

THE  prominent  feature  of  all  the  inftru6lions  giv-  ^^^^
en  by  the  Illuminizing  Legiflator  to  his  Epopts  of  thcfe  la*
is  the  confecration  of  their  degree  to  the  perverfion  of  ftrudious.
the  public  opinion,  and  to  the  attainment  of  the  em-
pire of  fciences,  that  he  may  direél  them  all  to  the
lupport  of  his  diforganizing  Liberty  and  Equality  and
to  univerfal  anarchy.  This  miffion  of  perverfion  re-
quires an  affiduity  to  which  not  many  men  are  equal  ;
but  adepts  may  be  found,  who,  unable  to  diilinguifli
themfelves  in  fuch  m-iffions,  may  yet  be  endowed  with
a  fufficient  zeal  and  with  the  necelfdry  talents  for  the
fuperintendence  and  direftion  of  the  Brethren.  There
are  others  again  whofe  difaflrous  fuccefles  are  to  be
recompenftd  by  the  higher  employments  in  the  Order  ;
and  it  is  from  thefe  two  clafTes  of  Epopts  that  the
Order  felefts  its  Regents.  It  is  alfo  for  their  inftruélion
that  the  Legiflator  defcends  into  all  the  gubernatory
minutiae  of  his  lUuminifm. — His  inftrudions  are  com-
prifed  under  four  different  heads.  L  General  Syileni
of  Government  for  the  Order.-.-U.  InftrucT:ions .  for
the  degree  of  Regent.— HL  Inflruftions  for  the  Pre-
feds  or  Local  Superiors.— IV.  Inftrudions  for  the
Provincial.*

I  have,  it  is  true,  been  obliged  to  anticipate  many
parts  of  this  Code  when  unfolding  the  artifices  of  the
lower  degrees  ;  but  as  a  confirmation  of  what  has  al-
ready been  expofed,  in  order  to  bring  the  different
objcds  within  one  point  of  view,  and  to  fliow  the
dangers  of  his  dififtrous  combinations,  let  us  attend  to
tlie  Legiflator  when  treating  of  the  whole  colleftively.
V/liat  particularly  endeared  this  degi-ee  of  Regent  to
Weilhaupt  was,  tliat  part  of  his  inftruftion  which
takes  a  general   view,  and  which  lays  open  the  pro-

freflive  plan  to  be  obfervcd  in  the  governnient  of  the
rclhren.     The  reader  perufing  the  inftructions  in  the


Lall  Woit;  of  Philo  and  Spartacu«,  degree  of  Regent.


iOd  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY,,

fame  order  in  which  Weiflianpt  has  written  them  will
more  eafily  conceive  the  caule  of  his  predileélion.


Injîi-uâhn  J.     Plm  of  the  General  Government  cf  thi-
Order.

"  I.  The  mod  high  and  excellent  Superiors  of  thô
illuftrious  Order  of  true  Freemafonry  do  not  immedi-
ately attend  to  the  minutiae  of  the  edifice.^-They  mnft
not,  however,  on  that  account  be  confidered  as  contri*
buting  lefs  to  our  happinefs,  by  their  counfels,  their
kfTons,  their  plans,  and  the  many  and  powerful  re*
fources  with  which  they  furnifli  us.

"  II.  Thefe  excellent  and  moil  gracious  Superiors
have  eftablillied  a  clafs  of  Mafons_  to  whom  they  have
entrufted  the  v.'hole  plan  of  our  Order.  This  clafs  is
that  of  the  Regents

"  III.  In  this  plan  our  Regents  hold  the  firfl  digni-
ties. Until  admitted  to  this  degree,  no  pei-fon  call
hold  the  office  of  Prcfeâ  or  of  Local  Superior.

"  IV.  Every  country  has  its  national  Superior,  who
holds  an  immediate  correfpondence  with  our  Fathers,
at  the  head  of  whom  is  a  general  who  holds  tlie  helm
of  the  Order.

"  V.  Under  the  National  and  his  AJfiJiants  are  the
Provincials,  who  each  govern  their  Circle  or  their
Province.

"  VI.  Every  Pi-ovincial  is  furrounded  by  his  Coun-
fellors.

"  VII.  Each  Provincial  alfo  commands  a  certain
number  of  Prcfeds,  who  may  in  like  manner  have
their  coadjutors  in  their  diftrids.  All  thefe,  as  well  aS
the  Deaji,  belong  to  the  clafs  of  Regents.

"  VIII.  All  thefe  offices  are  for  Ufe,  excepting  in
cafes  of  depofition  or  ejeclmcnt.

"  IX.  The  Provincial  is  to  be  chofen  by  the  Ke-
gents  of  his  province  and  the  Nation-.il  Superiors,  andf
approved  by  the  National.— {\  do  not  underftand  how
the  Code  diftinguiihes  between  the  feveral  National
Superiors  and  the  National  in  chief  ;  unlefs  it  be,
that  it  denotes  in  this  place  as  Superiors  thofe  whicii
are  called  a  little  higher  up  Afjijtants  (Gchulfen)  of
this  chief.]


1-HE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  201

"  X.  The  whole  fuccefs  of  Illuminifm  depending
'on  the  Regents,  it  is  but  juft  that  their  domeftic  wants
fliould  be  provided  for.  They  fliall  therefore  be  the
firll  fupplied  from  out  of  the  funds  of  the  Order.

"  XI.  The  Regents  of  each  Province  form  a  par-
ticular body  immediately  under  the  Provincial,  whom
they  are  to  obey

"  XII.  The  offices  of  Illuminifm  not  being  confi-
dered  in  the  light  of  dignities,  nor  of  places  of  honour^
but  as  mere  cinployme7its  freely  accepted,  the  Regents
muft  be  always  ready  to  labour  for  the  good  of  the
Order,  each  according  to  his  fituation  and  to  his  tal-
ents. Age  is  never  to  be  fet  forth  as  a  title.  It  may
often  happen,  that  the  youngeft  is  chofen  Provincial,
and  the  eldeft  only  a  Local  Superior  or  Counfellor,
fliould  the  one  live  in  the  center,  while  the  other  only
inhabits  the  extremity  of  the  Province  ;  or,  fliould
the  forwicr,  on  account  of  his  natural  activity  or  his
ftation  in  life,  be  more  fitted  for  the  place  of  Superior
than  the  latter,  though  far  more  eloquent.— In  many
cafes,  for  example,  a  Regent  is  not  to  think  it  beneath
bis  dignity  to  offer  himfelf  to  difcharge  any  of  the  Ici^
fer  offices  in  the  Mbiervd  churches  (lodges)  in  which
he  may  be  nfeful.'*

"  XIII.  That  the  Provincial  may  not  be  over-bur-
dened with  too  extenfive  a  correfpondence,  all  the
^iibus  Licets  and  all  the  letters  of  the  Regents,  Ihall
pafs  through  the  hands  of  the  Prefeft,  unlefs  the  Pro-
vincial gives  Orders  to  the  contrary."

"  XIV.  But  the  Prefect;  fhall  not  open  the  letters  o^
the  Kegents.  Thofe  he  mufl  tranfmit  to  the  Provincial,
who  will  forward  them  to  their  proper  deitination."

**  XV.  The  Provincial  has  the  power  of  convoking
the  whole  of  his  Regents,  or  merely  thofe  whom  he
may  think  proper,  confidering  the  exigencies  of  the
province.  He  who  cannot  attend  according  to  his
lummons  muft  give  the  proper  notice  at  leall  four
weeks  prior  to  the  meeting.  Befides,  he  is  always  to
be  ready  to  give  in  an  account  of  what  he  has  done
for  the  Order  until  that  period,  and  fliow  his  willing^
nefs  to  fulfil  the  intentions  of  his  Provincial  and  of  his

Vol.  III.  E  e


201  tHE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIÎL\CV.

high  fuperiors.   The  convocation  of  Regents  muft  talwè
place  at  leaft  once  a  vear."

"  XVI.  The  following  inftrucTion  (B)  will  point
out  more  particularly  to  the  Regents  thofe  objecls  to
which  tliey  nuift  chiefly  attend."

«  XVII.  It  has  been  already  obferved,  that  great
attention  is  to  be  paid  to  the  gradually  procuring  of
funds  for  the  Order.  This  may  be  accompliflied  Ixy
attending  to  the  following  rules  :

"  Each  province  is  to  be  entrufled  With  tlie  expen-
diture of  its  own  monies,  and  only  remit  fmall  contri-
butions to  the  fuperiors  for  the  expences  of  poftage.
Each  lodge  alfo  is  to  enjoy  the  full  propriety  of  its
funds  (eigenthwnlich) — when  for  any  great  enterprize
the  afiembly  of  the  Regents  levy  contributions  on  the
funds  of  the  diiFcrent  lodges,  they  fliall  be  confidered
but  as  loans,  and  (hall  be  made  good  to  the  lodges
with  full  intereft."

Has  the  illuminiz,ing  legiflator  then  forgotten,  that
it  was  Property  which  gave  the  firft  deadly  ùlow  to
Eqiidity  and  Liberty  ?  Certainly  not  ;  hut  more  than
ONE  great  eiiterprize  will  be  neceflai-y  to  prepare  the
tAST,  which  is  to  annihilate  all  property  whatfoever  ;
meanwhile  the  Order  is  glad  to  enjoy  its  own,  and  to
make  the  inferior  lodges  believe  that  tiiey  are  not  to
be  pillaged  of  any  thing  that  belongs  to  them.

*'  The  Provincial  has  no  fund  allotted  to  him,  but  he
has  an  exaél  return  of  all  thofe  of  his  province."

"  The  general  receipts  will  confift — \°.  In  the  contri-
butions paid  on  the  receptions  of  Mafons  (freymaurer-
receptionS'gelder) — 2°.  In  the  overplus  of  the  monthly
contributions— -3°.  In  voluntary  fubfcriptions— -4°.  In
lines — 5".  In  legacies  and  donations — 6°.  In  our  com-
merce and  traffic  fbandel  mid  gewerbe,)'^

"  The  expences  are — 1".  The  expences  of  the  meet-
ings, poftage,  decorations,  and  fome  few  journies —
2°.  Penfions  to  the  poor  brethren  who  have  no  other
means  of  fubliftcnce— 3°.  Sums  paid  for  the  promotion
cf  the  grand  ohjcâ  of  the  Order — 4°.  Sums  paid  for  the
encouraging  of  talents — 5°.  The  expences  of  experi-
ments and  trials-"6".  For  widows  and  cliildren— 7°.
For  foundations.

Thus  terminates  the  firft  part  of  the  inftrudions  for
the  Regent.     After  the  reading  of  this>   which  takes


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.\CY.  203

)>lace  on  the  day  of  his  inauguration,  his  attention  U
called  to  the  following  :

Ififlruâion  ^  for  the  nvhok  degree
of  Regent.

The  reader  has  feen  {iit  fnpray  art.  xvi.)  the  Regent  ^d  PartoP
forewarned  to  pay  a  particular  attention  to  this  fccond  the  inftmc-
part  of  the  inllrudions.     Let  the  reader  alfo  profit  of  ^''^"^'
the  hint.     He  will  fee  that  many  of  the  arcana  of  the
fe(^l  ftilj  remain  to  be  revealed.

"  I.  The  objed;  of  the  Order  being  to  render  man
more  happy,  virtue  more  attractive,  and  vice  lefs  pow-
erful, it  is  neceflliry  that  our  brethren,  the  teachers  and
governors  of  mankind,  fliould  publicly  affume  an  unim-
peachable charaéter.  A  Regent  of  lUuminifm  there-
fore will  be  the  mod  perfcd:  of  men.  He  will  he
.prudent,  provident,  ingenious,  irreproachable,  and  of
manners  fo  urbane  that  his  company  fliall  be  courted
with  avidity.  He  is  to  acquire  the  reputation  of  being
enlightened,  benevolent,  honefl,  dihnterefted,  and  full
of  ardour  for  great  and  extraordinary  enterprifes,  all
contributing  to  the  general  good."

It  would  be  ufelefs  to  recall  to  the  mind  of  my  read-
er what  is  to  be  underftood,  in  the  language  of  lUumi-
nifm, by  virtue,  vice,  or  public  good.  He  will  there-
fore on  reflexion  be  the  lefs  furprifed  at  perufing  the
following  inftrudions  framed  for  thefe  virtuous  teach-
ers and  governors  of  mankind.

"  n.  The  Regents  are  to  ftudy  the  means  of  ruling
and  governing  without  betraying  any  fuch  intention.*
Under  the  mafk  of  humility,  but  of  a  real  and  candid
humility,  grounded  on  the  perfuafion  of  their  own
weaknefs,  and  on  the  conviction  that  their  ivhole
Hrcugth  re/is  on  our  union,  they  mull:  exercife  an  abfo-
lute  and  boundlefs  dominion,!  and  muft  dired  every
thing  towards  the  attainment  of  the  views  of  the
Order."

"  Let  them  avoid  a  pedantic  referve,  at  once  dif,
gufting  and  ridiculous  in  the  eyes  of  the  fage.  Let
them  give  the  example  of  a  refpeftful  fubmiffion  to.

*  Die  Regenten  follen  die  kunft  ftudiren  zu  hcrfchcn,  ohpc  das  anfcV
Jien  davon  zu  h:iben.

•}■  SrUen  fie  ununifchrankt  regieren.

Vol.  IIJ.  i;  e  ^


204  "Tf^    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRAC?.

the  Superiors.  Should  they  be  poflefTed  of  the  advai»-
tages  of  birth,  it  will  be  an  additional  reafon  for  fhow-
ing  their  obedience  to  a  Superior  born  in  a  lower  Ra-
tion of  life — Let  their  condud:  vary  according  to  the
perfons  with  whom  they  have  to  deal.  Let  the  Re-
gent be  the  confidant  of  one,  the  father  of  another,
the  fcholar  of  a  third  ;  very  feldom  a  fevere  and  inex-
orable Superior,  and  even  on  fuch  occafions  let  him
ihow  with  how  much  unwillingnefs  he  exercifes  fuch
fe verity.  He  will  fay,  foï"  example,  that  he  fmcerely
wifhes  the  Order  had  given  fo  difagreeable  a  commif-
fion  to  fome  other  perfon  ;  and  that  he  is  weary  of
aéting  the  part  of  fchoolmafter  with  a  man  who  fliould
long  fince  have  known  how  tq  condud  himfelf.

"  in.  The  grand  objeft  of  our  facred  legion  fpreaè
throughout  the  univerfe  being  the  triumph  of  virtue
and  of  wifdom,  every  Regent  mull;  endeavour  to  efta-
blifli  a  certain  equality  among  men. — Let  him  take  the
part  of  thofe  who  are  too  much  debafed,  and  humble
Che  proud.  Let  him  never  fuffer  the  fool  to  lord  it
too  much  over  the  man  of  wit,  the  wicked  over  the
good,  the  ignorant  over  the  learned,  nor  the  weak
over  the  ftrong,  though  the  latter  fhould  in  reality  be
in  the  wrong.*-

"  IV,  The  means  of  acquiring  an  afcendancy  over
men  are  incalculable.  Who  could  enumerate  them
all  ?  . .  .  They  muft  vary  with  the  difpoiltion  of  the
times.  At  one  period  it  is  a  tafte  for  the  marvellous
and  extraordinary  that  is  to  be  wrought  upon.  At
another  the  lure  of  fecret  focitties  is  to  be  held  out,
'^*  For  this  reafon  it  is  ve? y  proper  to  make  your  inferiors
believCy  vjithout  telling  them  the  red  jiate  of  the  cafe,
that  all  other  fecret  focietks,  particularly  that  of  Free-
mafmryy  are  fccrctly  direâed  by  us.     Or  elf,  and  it  is

REALLY  THE  FACT  TV  SOME  STATES,  THAT  POTENT  Mo-
MARCHS     ARE     GOVERNED     BY     OUR     OrDER.  When     aUy

thing  remarkahle  or  important  conies  to  pafs,  huit  that  it
origifiaied  with  our  Order.— Should  any  perfm  by  hts
merit  acquire  a  great  reputation,  let  it  be  generally  un"
dcrjlood  that  he  is  one  of  us.''"'

How  fmoothly   flows  this  combination  of  artifice

*  Fr  foil  nicht  Icidcn  dafs  der  diimmere  iiber  den  kliigern — der
Schwiichere  iil^er  den  ftarkeru,  audi  Wfnn  dicfcr  unrccht  haben  folltc^

ju  f;hr  den  mciUcr  IVicIc.      ■'  •


THE    ANTISOCI^VL    CONSPIRACY.

from  the  pen  of  the  lUuraiiiîzing  Legiflator  !  But  ^
hope  that  my  reader  will  not  exped  to  find  a  meihod
in  my  tranflation,  where  the  Legillator  has  diltlained.
method.  It  is  eafy  to  perceive,  that  to  heap  artitice
upon  artifice  is  much  more  his  objert,  than  to  give  a
ftiidied  connexion  to  principles  with  which  he  fuppofes
his  adepts  to  be  fufficiently  imprelfed.  Or  may  it  not
be  iaid,  that  this  diforder  is  the  efFeél  of  ftudied  art?
But  let  us  proceed  and  trace  the  fteps  of  Weilliaupt.

"  With  no  other  objeft  than  to  give  your  orders  the
appearance  of  coming  from  a  myfterious  hand,  you
may,  for  example,  put  a  letter  under  the  plate  of  an
adept  when  dining  at  an  inn,  though  it  might  have
been  a  much  lefs  trouble  to  forward  it  to  him  at  his
own  lodgings — You  may  attend  large  and  commercial
owns  during  the  time  of  fairs  in  different  charac-
ters, as  a  Merchant,  an  Officer,  an  Abbe.  Every  where
you  will  perfonate  an  extraordinary  man  having  im-
portant buiinefs  on  your  hands. — But  all  this  mull  be
done  with  a  great  deal  of  art  and  caution,  left  you
flîould  have  the  appearance  of  an  adventurer.  It  is  to
be  well  underftood,  that  thefe  characters  are  not  to  be
affiimed  in  towns  where  you  are  likely  to  \i&  difcovered
either  by  the  Police  or  the  ftanders-by — At  other
times,  you  may  write  your  orders  with  a  chemical
preparation  of  ink  which  difappears  after  a  certain
time.

"  V.  A  Regent  is  as  much  as  poflible  to  hide  from
his  inferiors  all  his  weakutiTes,  even  his  ill-health,  or
difgufts  ;  at  any  rate  he  is  never  to  complain.

"  VI.  Here  he  repeats  the  inftrudion  on  the  art  of
flattering  and  gaining  over  women  to  their  caufe,  al-
ready tranfcribed,  page  25.

**  VII.  You  mull  aUo  gain  over  to  the  Order  the
COMMON  PEOPLE.  The  great  plan  for  fucceeding  in
this  is  to  influence  the  Schools.  You  may  alio  attempt
it  by  liberalities,  or  by  great  (liow  and  fplendour  ;  at
other  times  by  niaking  yourfelf  popular,  and  even  to-
lerating, with  an  air  of  patience,  prejiir.ices  which  nicy
hereafter  be  gradually  eradicated.

"  VIII.  When  you  have  fucceeded  any  where  in
making  yourfelf  mafter  of  the  public  authority  and
government,  you  will  pretend  not  to  have  the  leait:
powei',  for  fear  of  awakening  the  attention  of  thoie


205


2o6  "THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

>vlio  may  oppofe  us.  But,  on  the  contrary,  when  yow
find  it  impolfible  to  fucceed,  you  will  aflljme  the  cha-
racter of  a  perfon  who  has  evei-y  thing  at  his  coni-
rnand.  That  will  make  us  both  feared  and  fought
after,  and  of  courfc  will  ftrengthcn  our  party.

"  IX.  All  the  ill  fuccefs  or  clifgufts  which  may  befaU
the  Order  are  to  be  concealed  with  the  utmoft  caution
from  the  inferiors.

"  X.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Regents  to  fiipply  the
wants  of  the  Brethren,  and  to  procure  the  Ihji  employ-
ments for  them,  after  having  given  the  proper  intima-
tion to  the  Superior.

"  XL  The  Regents  fhall  be  particularly  cautious  and
difcreet  in  their  difccuife  ;~,but  lliall  carefully  avoid
any  thing  denoting  the  leaft  perplexity  of  mind —
There  are  even  forae  occalions  whereon  an  extenlive
genius  is  to  be  affeded  ;  on  others,  they  may  pretend
that  their  friendfliip  has  made  them  fay  a  word  too
much  ;  by  thefe  means  the  fecrecy  of  the  inferior  is
put  to  the  teft.  They  may  alfo  fpread  certain  reports
among  cur  people,  v/hich  may  prepare  them  to  re-^
ceive  ideas  which  the  Order  willies  to  infufe  into  their
minds.  On  all  doubtful  occafions,  the  Regent  will
confuk  his  Superiors  by  means  of  a  ^dbus  Licet.^

"  XII.  Whatever  rank  or  flation  a  Regent  may
hold  in  the  Order,  he  will  feldom  anfwer  the  queftions
of  the  inferiors  verbally,  but  generally  in  M'riting,  that
he  may  have  time  to  reflect  or  even  confuk  on  the
anfwers  he  fliould  give."

"  Xlll.  The  Regents  will  unceafmgly  attend  to
every  thing  relating  to  the  grand  interefts  of  the  Or-
der, to  tiie  operations  of  commerce,  or  fiich  things  as
may  in  any  way  contribute  to  augment  the  povjer  of
the  Order.  They  will  tranfmit  all  plans  of  that  na-
ture to  the  Provincial.  Should  it  be  a  cafe  requiring
expedition,  he  will  give  him  advice  of  it  by  fome  other
channel  than  the  J^dlnis  Licets,  which  the  Provincial
has  not  the  power  of  opening."

*'  XIV.  They  will  follow  the  fame  line  of  conduce
with  refpeft  to  every  thing  that  tends  to  influence  the
Order  in  general  ;  and  lind  means  of  putting  its  united
forces  in  motion  at  one  and  the  fame  time."

"  XV.  When  an  author  fets  forth  principles  true  in
thcmfeh/es,  but  vjbkh  do  not  as  yet  fuit  our  gencrdl  plan


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

Qf  education  for  the  vjorlcl  ;  or  principles  the  puhlicatioft
of  -which  is  premature  ;  every  effort  miiji  be  made  to
gain  over  the  author  ;  but  fJ)ould  all  our  attempts  faîl,
and  lue  Jlmuld  be  unable  to  entice  him  into  the  Order,  leu
him  be  difcredited  by  every  pojffible  means'*

"  XVI.  //"  n  Regent  JJmuld  conceive  hopes  of  fucceed-
ing  in  fupprelfing  any  religious  houfs,  and  of  applying
their  revenues  to  our  objeft,  for  example,  to  the  ejîa-
bUPiment  of  proper  country  schools.;  he  may  depend
on  it,  that  fuch  a  projed  would  be  particularly  grateful
to  the  Superiors."

*'  XVil.  The  Regents  will  alfo  turn  their  attention
towards  a  folid  plan  for  eftablifliing  a  fund  to  fiipport
the  widows  of  the  brethren."

"  XVIII.  One  of  our  moji  important  objcâs  muji  be^
to  hinder  the  fervile  veneration  of  the  people  for  Princes
from  being  carried  too  far.  All  fuch  abjecl  flattery
tends  only  to  make  thofe  men  worfe  who  are  already
for  the  mofl  part  of  very  common  and  weak  under-
Handings.  You  will  fliow  an  example  of  the  proper
conduce  to  be  held  in  this  refpec^.  Shun  all  familiarity
with  them  ;  behave  to  them  politely,  but  without  con-
Jiralntj  that  they  may  honour  and  fear  you.  Write  and
(peak  of  them  as  you  would  of  other  men,  that  they
may  be  made  to  recollect  that  they  are  but  men  like
other  people,  and  that  their  authority  is  a  thing  purely
conventional."*

"  XIX.  When  there  happens  to  be  a  man  of  merit
among  our  adepts  but  little  known  by  or  entirely  un-
known to  the  public,  no  pains  are  to  be  fpared  to  ac-^
quire  celebrity  for  him.  I^ct  our  difguifed  brethren  eve-»
ry  where  found  the  trumpet  of  his  praifes,  and  force
envy  and  party  fpirit  to  be  filent."

*'  XX.  The  eflay  of  our  principles  and  of  our  fchools
is  moll  eailly  and  mofl:  fuccelsfully  made  in  fmall
ftates.  The  inhabitants  of  capitals  and  commercial
towns  are  too  corrupt,  too  much  a  prey  to  their  paf-
fions,  and  think  thcmfclves  too  much  enlightened,  to
fubiuit  tt)  our  lellbns."

*'  XXI.  It  is  ufeful  to  fend  vifitors  from  time  to  time,
or  to  give  a  Regent  that  is  travelling  the  commiflion
to  vifit  the  meetings,  to  all:  for  the  minutes,  and  to  call

*  Eine  unfcrer  vornehmften  forgen  mufs  auch  feyn,  unter  das  volkc
fclaviiclit  rUrikn  vçrelining  nicht  za  Uocli  ûeigen  zu  lallen,  &c.  &c.


207


20 s  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CGNéPIRACY.

bn  the  brethren  in  order  to  examine  their  papers  or
journals,  and  receive  their  complaints.— Thefe  Plenipo^
tentiaries,  prefenting  thenifelves  in  the  name  of  the
high  Superiors,  may  correél  many  faùhs,  and  boldly
fupprefs  abiifes  which  the  Prefers  had  not  the  courage
to  reform,  though  ready  to  enforce  the  commands  of
the  vifitor.

"  XXII.  If  our  Order  cannot  eftablifh  itfelf  in  any
particular  place  with  all  the  forms  and  regular  pro-
grefs  of  our  degrees,  fonie  other  form  miijt  be  njfwned.
Ahvays  have  the  objcâ  in  view  ;  that  is  the  ejfentiat
point.  No  matter  what  the  cloak  may  be,  provided  you
fucceed  ;  a  cloak  is  however  ahvays  necejfary,  for  in  fe-
irecy  our  ftrength  principally  lies."

"  XXIÎI.  For  this  reafon  we  fhould  always  conceal
ourfelves  under  the  name  of  fome  other  aflbciation.
The  inferior  lodges  of  Freemasonry  are  the  moji  con-
venient cloaks  for  our  grand  objeél,  (das  fchickliche  kleid
fur  unfere  hohere  ziueckej  becaufe  the  world  is  already
familiarized  with  the  idea  that  nothing  of  importance,  or
worthy  of  their  attention  can  fpring  from  Mafonry. —
The  name  of  a  literary  fociety  is  alfo  a  proper  mafk
for  our  firll  claires.  Under  fuch  a  mafk,  fliould  our
alTemblies  be  difcovered,  we  may  confidently  alfert,
that  the  reafon  of  our  holding  lecret  aflemblies  was
partly  to  give  a  greater  intereft  and  charm  to  our
purfuits  ;  partly  to  keep  off  the  crowd,  and  not  to  ex-
pofe  ourfelves  to  the  bantering  and  jealoufy  of  others  ;
in  fhort  to  hide  the  weaknefs  of  an  aflbciation  as  yet
but  in  its  infancy."

"  XXIV.  It  is  of  the  utiTK)fl  importance  for  us  to
ftudy  the  conlVitutîons  of  other  fecret  focieties  and  to
govern  them.  The  Regent  is  even  bound,  after  hav-
ing  obtained  leave  of  his  fuperiors,  to  gain  admit-
tance into  thole  focieties,  but  he  mull:  not  undertake
too  many  engagements.  This  is  an  additional  reafon
why  our  Order  Iliould  remain  fecret."

"  XXV.  The  higher  degrees  mull  always  be  hidden
from  the  lower.  J  pcrfon  more  "ivillingly  receives  or-
ders  from  a  Jiraiiger  than  from  men  in  -luhom  he  gradu"
ally  difcovers  a  ninllitnde  ofdefeÛs.  By  this  precaution
one  may  keep  the  inferiors  in  a  more  proper  awe  ;  for
they  naturally  pay  greater  attention  to  their  behaviour
when  tl:ey  thiiik   themfelves  furrounded   by  perfons


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

V^ho  are  obferving  them  ;  at  firft,  their  virtue  may  be
the  effect  of  conilraint,  but  cuilom  will  foon  make  it
babicual."

"  XXVr.  Never  lofe  fight  of  the  military  fchools,
of  the  academies,  printing  prelTcs,  libraric;s,  catliedial
chaptei's,  or  any  public  ellabliihnicnts  that  can  intiu-
chcc  education  or  govcrnmçilt.  Let  our  Regents  per-
petually attend  to  the  vArioiis  nien.ns,  and  form  plans
for  making  u»  mafters  of  all  thele  eftablifhments."*

"  XKVil.  In  general,  and  indojiendent  of  their  par*
dcular  employment,  the  grand  objedl  of  our  Regents
inuft  be  an  habitual  and  conllant  application  to  every
thing  which  can  in  any  way  add  to  the  perfe.ftion  and
to  the  power  of  our  Order,  that  it  may  become  for
future  ages  the  moft  prrfe^l  model  of  government
that  can  ePiter  the  mwid  of  man  ;"  or  in  other  words,
that  it  may  be  hereafter  faid,  fuch  was  the  famous  af*
fociation  which,  by  perpetually  perfcfling  its  laws  and
governments,  at  length  taught  mankind  to  caft  off
every  law  and  every  government.  It  would  be  ufejefs
for  me  to  think  of  adducing  farther  proofs  to  demon-'
ftrate  that  fuch  is  the  real  objeâ  of  the  pretended  per-
fection of  lUuminifm.  The  myfteries  of  the  Seft  liavcî
been  too  clearly  laid  open  for  us  to  harbour  the  fmaU
left  doubt  of  their  intention.  But  to  ac(piire  this  per-
feélion  and  power  for  the  Sec^,  Weilliaupt  has  model-
led ftill  farther  laws  for  his  Regent',  according  to
the  different  offices  they  hold  in  the  Hierarchy  of  the
Order.f

*  Militair»-fchulen,  academien,  lîuchdruckrreycii,  Buchladen,  D>oni-
capit«I,  und  allés  was  cin  einllufs  auf  bildung  und  rcgierung  hat,  nuifs
rie  RUS  den  auger,  gelaffcn  wtrden  ;  und  die  Regenrcn  follt^n  unauf-
horlich  plane  entwerfen,  wie  man  es  anlangcn  k'June,  ubcr  diefclbcn
gewah  zu  'bekommen.

f  For  the  whole  of  the  Second  Part  of  this  Chapter  fee  the  Tiifti;i5:l-  ■)
B  for  the  D:-grtc  of  Regent,  of  which  it  is  nearly  (  litjrul  tranlkrtlou.


2,09


Vol.  iir.  F  f


2IO  THE    AKri50LL\L    CONSPIRACY.


CHAP.    XVI.

Continimtim  of  ihe  Injhiiâions  on  the  GovermneTit  of
the  Illwninees—Laivs  for  the  Local  Superiors.

GREAT  as  the  authoi-ity  of  the  Majtn'  lUunmees
over  the  Minerval  Academies  may  appear  at  firfl;
light,  no  perfon  of  the  preparatory  clafs  is  in  fa6t  en-
tr Lifted  with  any  real  authority.  Even  the  Scotch
Knight  in  his  intermediary  clafs  does  not  enjoy  any.
The  Order  recognizes  as  real  Superiors  none  but  thofc
who  have  been  initiated  into  the  clafs  of  the  Myfte-
ries.  Even  in  that  clafs  the  adept  niuft  have  attained
the  degree  of  Regent  before  he  can  be  named  Prefcél
for  the  Scotch  Knights,  or  Dean  of  his  diftriél.  Thofe
are  the  fir  ft  two  offices  which  the  Order  confiders  as
having  any  real  authority  over  the  Brethren.

Though  the  Code  exprefsly  declares,  that  each
Superior  fliall  find  in  his  inftrudions  the  refpcdive
laws  concerning  his  particular  duty,  it  certainly  con-
tains none  for  the  office  of  Dean.  A  ftngle  Chapter
is  indeed  to  be  found  in  the  Code  on  his  election  and
confecration.  On  the  firft  eftabliihment  of  a  new  dif-
trift  he  is  eleéled  by  the  Provincial  ;  but  on  his  depo-
fition  or  death  the  Epopts  aifemble  and  choofe  a
fucceflbr  by  the  plurality  of  votes,  the  Provincial  only
having  the  right  of  confirming  fuch  an  eleftion.  With
regard  to  what  the  Code  terms  his  confecration  (Wei-
hiing  des  decani,)  it  is  generally  performed  by  what
is  called  a  Plenipotentiary,  and  in  a  fort  of  barbarous
Latin,  extremely  inelegant.  Were  not  the  impiety  of
it  as  abominable  as  the  ceremonial  is  low,  it  might
form  an  excellent  fcene  for  the  theatres  of  Bartholo-
mew fair.  The  llluminizing  Legiflator,  a  very  inferior
copyift  of  Moliert's  Malade  Lnaginaire,  ridicules  St.
Paul,  Mofes,  and  all  religious  cereinonies,  as  Molière
did  the  quack  difciples  of  Hippocrates.  Little  wit  is
required  to  feoff  at  religious  rites,  and  yet  our  Legif-
lator has  only  fucceeded  in  being  difguftingly  impious.
Such  turpitude  is  not  wcathy  our  notice,  for  nont;  but


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  21 1

Epopts  can  admire  it  ;  this  neverthelefs  is  all  the  infor-
mation the  Code  can  give  us  refpecling  the  Dean.*

*  Should  any  adept  wifh  for  a  fpecimen  of  this  miferable
farce,  let  him  figure  to  himfelf  an  aflembly  of  Epopts  in  their
facerdotal  habits.  The  delegate  opens  the  piece  by  Domine
aperi  os  meum  :  The  two  Affiftants  repeat  the  fame — the
Plempotentiary  Fili  mi  quid  poftulas  ?  The  Delegate  Ut  Deus
et  Superiores  noftri  concédant  nobis  Decanum  hunc  quern  ad
te  duco. — Plenip.  Habeti^  decretum  ? — Habemus — Legatur—
Communi  yoto  atque  confenfa  fuperiorum  elegimus  nobis  in
Decanum  Fratrem  N.  N.  Prefbiterum  Nortrae  Provincioe,
Majoris  Ordinis  verum  atque  prudentem  hofpitalem,  mori-
bus  ornatum,  fapientcm,  illuminatum  et  manfiietum,  Deo  et
fuperioribus  noftrii  per  omnia  placentemque  ad  Celfitudinis
veftrae  dignitatem  adducere,  quatenus  amore  Domino  nobis
velut  idoneus  Decanus  prje-efle  valeat  «t  prodefle,  nofque  fub
ejus  fapienti  regimine  in  fecuritate  ac  quiste  magnis  fcientiis
aliifque  operibus  curare  poffimus — Plenip.  Difpofuiffi  domui
tuae  ? — The  EkB  Difpofui — Nofti  quanta  fit  Decani  cura  et
qua  pœnâ  iniligantur  infidèles  et  Delatores  ?— Duce  me  Do-
mine— Ego  aufloritate  fuperiorum  induftus  firmitcr  fub  inter-
minatione  anathematis,  inhibeo  tibi,  ne  quid  de  fcientiis  oc-
cultis,  vel  fecreta  tibi  revelanda  abducas,  furripias,  vel  alicui
profano  commi>nices.  Si  tu  autem  aliquid  attentare  prjefum-
feris,  malediflus  eris  in  domo  et  extra  domuni,  malediftus  in
civitate  et  in  agro,  maledidus  vigilando  et  dormiendo,  ma-
kdicflus  manducando  ct  bibendo,  maledi(5tus  ambulando  et
fedendo,  maledida  erunt  caro  et  ofTâ,  et  fanitatem  non  habebis
à  planta  pedis  ufque  ad  verticem.  Veniat  tunc  fuper  te
iraledicftio  quam  per  Moyfen  in  lege  filio  iniquitatis  Domhius
promifit.  Deleatur  noraea  luum  in  libre  viventium,  et  cum
jnftis  non  araplius  fcribatur,  fiat  pars  et  hereditas  tna  cum  Caiil
fratricidà,  cum  Dathan  et  Abiron,  cum  Ananiâ  et  Saphirâ,
cum  Simone  Mago  et  Juda  proditore.  Vide  eigo  ne  quid
feceris,  quo  anathema  mereris^ — Here  folloiv  the  mpofition  of
hamhy  the  exhortations^  am!  the  benedictions,  all  in  JLalin,  The
G^ciator,  extending  his  huniis  agoin  en  the  head  of  the  Elect,,
terminates  the  ceremony  ivith  the  fotloivir.g  iverds  :■  Sicut  ros
Hermon  qui  defcendit  in  montem  Sion,  (ic  defcendat  fuper  te
Dei  fummcE  fapientiîE  benediflio  (fee  the  lajl  ivorks  of  Spar~
tacus — Nachricht  von  IVeihuug  cities  Decani.)    What  execrabl«  »

impiety  mufl  the  Sea;. hate  infufed  into  irs  Epopts  to  expecl
that  fuch  an  impious  derifion  of  the  Scriptures  and  of  the
moft  facred  rights  could  give  them  pjeafure  ?     Lti  not  ths.

Vol.  IIL  F  f  2


1I2  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

The  fame  cannot  bé  faid  of  the  inftnic^ions  for  the
Prefeds.  Thefe  Local  Superiors  may  have  as  many  as
eight  Lodges  at  a  time  under  their  command,  partly
Mincrval,  and  partly  Mafonic.  The  Prefccl  is  the  hrlt
Regent  within  his  prefcfturey  and  has  the  direction  of
'  all  that  part  of  the  Order  ftiled  in  the  Code  the  lovjer
part  of  the  edifice.  All  the  ^libus  Licets  of  his  diftrift
pafs  through  his  hands.  He  opens  thofe  of  the  Scotch
Knights,  and  the  Satis  of  the  Novices  and  Minervals  ;
but  every  thing  elfe  he  tranfmits  to  the  higher  Sji-
periors.  When  he  founds  new  Lodges,  or  receive^
new  Brethren,  he  gives  the  new  Geographical  names
and  Chnrûâerijîics,  wliich  he  fclecfts  from  the  lift  that
he  has  received  from  the  Piovincial.  He  makes  a  ge-
neral report  to  the  Provincial  of  every  thing  that  has
happened  within  his  prefe«flm'e  once  a  month  ;  and
everv  three  months  tranfmits  the  reverfal  letters,  the
tablets  fent  by  the  Scrutators  with  notes  on  their  politi-
cal and  niorat  condud,  and  an  exa<5l  return  of  the  ftatc
of  the  funds  belonging  to  each  Lodge.  He  decides
on  the  promotion  of  the  Brethren  a«  far  as  Scotch
Knjght,  but  can  confer  the  latter  degree  only  with  the
«ronlent  of  the  Provincial. — He  has  the  right  once  a
year  of  commanding  all  the  adepts  under  his  diredion
U)  I'etLirn  whatever  writings  the  Order  may  have  en-
trufled  them  with— He  returns  them  to  thofe  on  whofe
fidelity  he  has  reafun  to  rely,  but  not  to  thofe  whom
bs  muv  have  any  reafun  to  Jiifpcâ,  or  ivbo  are  intend'
ed  to  he  difnijfed*

The  foundation  of  the  Edifice  refts  folely  on  the
vigilance,  experience,  and  zeal  of  the  Prefect:. — And
it  was  to  the  direction  of  their  conduft  in  every  part
of  the  Government  that  Weifhaupt  dedicated  his  lef-
lons  under  the  following  heads  :^-L  Preparation. — H.
Tuition  of  îIk  Pupils. — IH.  Spirit  or  love  of  the  Order.
— IV.  Subordination.—^ .  Secrecy. — Each  of  thefe  arti-
cles contains  a  cloud  of  thofe  artifices  which  the  rea-
der has  feen  interfpcrfed  in  divers  parts  of  the  Code,
but  which  now  become  the  peculiar  ftudy  of  the  Pre-

reader  think  that  I  have  exa;^gerated  this  barbarous  cant.
The  whole  ceremony  is  a  buffoonery  of  the  Joweft  clafs.  Im-
piety depraves  every  thing,  even  the  tafle  for  literature.

*  Infl;r;i(5licns  C  for  the  Regents,  and  No.  i — X.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

feâh  I  flîail  only  extrad:  the  mod  ftriking,  or  thofe
on  which  the  Legiflator  particularly  infills  ;  fiich,  for
example,  as.  the  following,  to  be  found  in  the  firlt
pages  of  the  head  P réparation.

"  Our  ftrength  chiefly  confifls  in  numbers  ;  but
much  will  alfo  depend  on  the  means  employed  to  form
the  pupil— Young  people  are  pliant  and  eaiily  take  the
i'mprelTIon. — "  The  Prefcft  will  therefore  fpare  no
"  pains  to  gain  pofTefTion  of  the  Schools  which  lie
."  within  his  diltrift,  and  alfo  of  their  teachers.  He
*'  will  find  means  of  placing  theiii  under  the  tuition
"  of  members  of  cnir  Order  ;  for  this  is  tht  true  mc-
<'  thod  of  infufing  our  principles  and  of  training  our
"  young  men  :  it  is  thus  that  the  moft  ingenious  men
*'  are  prepared  to  labour  for  us  and  are  brought  into
"  difcipline  ;  and  tlnis  the  affection  conceived  by  our
"  young  pupils  for  the  Order,  will  gain  as  deep  root
"  as  do  all  other  early  imprefïîons."

Under  the  fame  head  are  to  be  found  inftrudions
for  the  Prefeft  equally  curious,  on  the  propagation
of  the  Order.

"  When  a  new  colony  is  to  be  founded,  begin  by

*  choofing  a  bold  and  enterprifing  adept  entirely  de-
"  voted  to  the  Order.  Send  him  fome  time  before-
''  hand  to  live  on  the  fpot  where  you  intend  making
"  the  new  eftablifliment."

"  Before  you  proceed  to  people  the  extremities,  bc-
^  gin  by  making  your  ground  good  at  the  centre.'*

"  Your  next  objcft  mud  be,  to  gain  over  fuch
"  perfons  as  are  confiant  refidents,  as  Merchants  and
"  Canons."

"  Such  mifHons  fliould  only  be  entrufted  to  brethren

*  of  independent  fortune,  and  who  would  occafion  no
"  expence  to  the  Order  ;  for  though  all  the  brethren
"  are  entitled  to  fuccour  when  in  real  want,  yet  thole
*'  of  one  province  are  as  feldom  as  polBble  to  be  an
"  expence  to  the  neighbouring  ones.  Nor  are  the
*'  other  diftricls  by  any  means  to  be  made  acquainted
*'  with  the  weaknefs  of  the  Order  in  yours.  Befidcs,
"  the  funds  mull  find  a  fufficiency  to  fuccour  thofe  of
"  the  Minerval  fchool  who  may  lland  in  need  of  it,
"  that  our  promifes  in  their  cafe  may  be  performed."

'f  You  will  not  ieek  to  extend  yourfelr  till  you  have


213


■14


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  confolidated  your  eflablifliment  in   the  capital    of
**  your  diftrid."

"  You  will  ferioiifly  examine  and  cautioufîy  fckdl
from  the  brethren  thole  who  are  the  moft  able  to  un-
dertake fuch  a  miffion.— You  will  next  confider  whe-
ther it  will  be  proper  to  begin  your  eftablifhuunt  by
a  Minervd  church  or  a  Malonic  lodge."

"  Pay  moil  particular  attention  to  the  man  whom
you  place  at  the  head  of  the  new  colony  ;  oblerv*
whether  he  is  courageous,  zealous,  prudent,  ex.a<fl,  and
pinidual  ;  whether  fitted  for  the  forming  new  adepts  ;
whether  he  enjoys  a  good  reputation  or  is  much  con-
fidered  ;  whether  he  is  a  man  of  bufinefs  and  capable
of  a  ferions  and  confiant  application  :  in  fliort,  whe-
ther he  has  all  the  neceflary  qualifications  for  an  un-
dertaking of  fuch  high  importance."

"  Confider  alfo  tlie  locality.  Is  the  place  propofed
near  to  or  diftant  from  the  capital  of  your  diftrid  ? —
Is  it  a  dangerous  or  fafe  fituation  for  fuch  an  under-
taking ?— Is  it  great  or  fmall,  more  or  lefs  populous  ?
— By  what  means  can  you  beil  fucceed,  and  which  can
be  eafiell  employed  ? — What  time  would  be  requifite
for  the  perfeding  of  fuch  an  eftablifliment  ?— To  what
perfons  can  you  apply  on  firft  fctting  oif  ? — If  your
fii-ft  apphcations  be  ill  made,  all  future  attempts  will
be  fruitlefs.— What  pretence  or  what  name  is  to  be
affumed  ?— How  is  the  new  colony  to  be  fubordinated
or  co-ordinated  ?  that  is  to  fay,  what  fuperiors  (hall  it
be  under,  and  with  what  lodges  fliall  it  correfpond  ?'*

"-When  you  fhall  have  acquired  fufficient  ftrength
in  your  new  colony,  and  particularly  if  our  brethren
enioy  the  firft  dignities  of  the  ftate,  if  they  may  freely
and  openly  fnow  themfelves  formidcible  to  their  oppo-
nents, and  make  them  feel  the  painful  confequences  of
counteracting  the  views  of  the  Order  ;  if  you  have
wherewith  to  fatisfy  the  wants  of  t'ne  brethren  ;  if,  fo
far  from  having  to  fear  from  the  government,  the
Order  directs  thofe  who  hold  the  reins — Then  be  af-
fured  that  we  fliall  not  be  wanting  in  numbers  or  in
the  choice  of  adepts  ;  we  fliall  Toon  have  more  than
w^e  have  occafion  for.  /  cannot  too  Jirongly  recommend
this  method  of  procceoing.^^

"  If  it  be"neceflary  for  us  to  be  mailers  of  the  or-
'-  dinary  fchooh,  of  \\o\v  much  moi-e  importance  will


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSI*IRACV.

'^  it  be  to  gain  over  the  ecclefiaJHcal  fcminaries  and  their
"  fuperiors  /  IVith  them  ive  gain  over  the  chief  part
*<  of  the  country  ;  we  acquire  the  fupport  of  the  greatcji
"  enemies  to  innovation  ;  and  the  grand  point  of  all  is,
"  that  through  the  clergy  ive  become  mctjiers  of  the  mid'
"  die  and  lower  clajfes  of  the  people.^'

"  But  remember,  that  great  caution  is  neceflary
«  with  the  Ecckfiartics.  Thefe  gentlemen  are  gene-
"  rally  either  too  free  or  too  fcrupulous  ;  and  thofc
"  who  are  too  free  have  feldom  any  morals."  The^
legiflator  then  proceeds  to  the  exclufion  of  the  reli-
gious, and  tells  the  Inlinuator  to  avoid  the  Jefuits  asl
he  would  the  plague.

While  perufuig  theie  laws,  I  fuppofe  the  reader
makes  nearly  the  lame  refledions  which  I  am  tempted'
every  inftant  to  commit  to  paper.— Should  the  follow-
ing article  ever  meet  the  eye  of  a  Prince,  it  will  give
him  ample  room  for  refleftion.

"  When  the  Prefed  floall  have  gradually  fucceeded
"  in  placing  the  moft  zealous  members  of  the  Order
"  in  the  councik  and  offices  under  the  Prince,  he  will
"  have  arrived  at  the  full  extent  of  his  commiffion.
"  He  will  have  done  much  more  than  if  he  had  initia-
"  ted  the  Prince  himfelf."*

"  In  general,  Princes  are  net  to  be  admitted  into
"  the  Order,  and  even  thofe  who  are  received  are  fel-
"  dom  to  be  permitted  to  rife  above  the  degree  or
"  Scotch  Knight':.'

After  what  ha^  been  feen  of  this  degree  and  thofe
that  precede,  it  is  rather  extraordinary  that  Weifliaupt
fliould  deign  to  grant  admiflion  to  Princes  ;  for  he  did
not  wait  for  this  degree  before  he  clearly  infuuiated
his  plans.  Princes,  at  leaft,  who  had  not  furniifed
them  before  their  admiffion  to  that  degree  muft  have
been  void  of  penetration  indeed.  What  hopes  then
could  the  logiilator  entertain  of  their  not  perceiving
his  plots  againft  all  legitimate  authority?  His  conli-
dential  letters  will  explain  the  enigma  : — "  Brethren,"
he  writes  to  his  i^reopagites,  "  you  will  take  care  to
"  have   the  following   corredlions   made   before   you

•  Kann  der  Priifeél  die  f  iirftlichen  Dicafterien  und  Rathe  nach  vvA
nach  mit  cifrigen  ordens-mit-gliedern  bcfetzen,  fo  hat  er  allés  gethan,
was  er  thun  konte.  Es  ilï  melir,  als  wenn  cr  den  f  ufften  icYoù  »uir
gcnommen  hatts.


V5


Ql6  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPlRACYi

"  {how  the  conftitutions  of  our  degrees  to  the  Ele<5lo)*v
"  — In  the  degree  of  Minor  Illimnnee  in  place  of  the
"  words  imbecile  Monks  fay  imbecile  7nen—-\n  the  de-
"  gree  of  Major  Ilhimi?iee  blot  out  the  words  Priejh
"  (md  Princes  are  m  our  way.  With  refpe<ft  to  tlie
"  degree  of  Prieji  fliow  no  part  of  it  excepting  the
"  difcourfe  onfcicrices,  and  read  that  over  carefully  left
*'  any  allufion  or  reference  to  any  other  part  of  the  dc"
**  gree  fJjould  remain.^'*  Thefe  corre«^ions  begin  to
clear  the  enigma  ;  a  more  infidious  expedient  will  veil
his  plots  in  complete  darknefs.  ^  I  mean/*  fays  Weif-
haupt  when  fpeaking  to  the  Arcopagites  of  the  infe-
rior degiees,  "  to  rcvifc  the  luhole  fyjic^n.'^  Then,
attributing  to  the  Jefuits  his  own  inur.orahty,  he  fays,
"  I  mean  that  it  (liould  be  a  complete  Jcfuitical  piece  j
'^  not  a  fingle  word  (liall  be  found  \i\  it  that  can  in  any
"  way  be  cavilled  at  by  religious  or  political  goverui-
"  ments.  Let  us  acl  with  caution  ;  do  nothing  with-
"  out  a  reafon  ;  things  mud  be  prepared  and  brought
"  on  ftep  by  ilep/'f  The  adept  who  has  given  us  the
moft  complete  and  candid  account  of  the  degrees  of
llluminifm  allures  us,  that  he  had  feen  a  difcourfe  for
the  degree  of  Epopt  iji  which  every  thing  refpeding
religion  and  government  was  omitted4

Here  then  we  find  Weifliaupt  not  only  correcting
but  even  forming  fiftitious  degrees  to  dupe  the  priiîcc*
iy  adept,  and  to  perfuade  him  that  the  dark  and  myf»
lerious  receifes  of  the  hireling  crew  have  been  laid
open  to  him,  while  the  real  adept  fmiles  at  his  cre-
dulity. Such  artifice  certainly  aggravates  Weiihaupt's
criminality.  But  will  that  excuie  the  princely  adejx  ?
Notwithftanding  the  veil  artfully  thrown  over  the  im-
pious and  feditious  principles  of  the  fed,  did  he  not
begin  by  fwearing  obedience  and  proteâion  to  the  Or-
der? His  court  foon  fwarms  with  Illuminées  ;  he  thinks
he  reigns  over  them,  but  is  no  more  than  their  ftately
captive.  And  (liould  he  fall  their  vidim,  will  it  not
be  faid  that  he  met  with  his  juft  fate  ?  What  ftrange
madnefs  can  induce  Princes  to  infcribe  their  names  on
the  regifters  of  fecret  focieties  !  Have  they  not  duties
to  fulfil  towards  the  public  ?    On  what  right  can  their

*  Orig.  Writ.  Vol.  IT.  2d  Jan.  17S5.

I  Ibid. — Weifhaiipl's  Let.  15th  March,  1781.

I  Gefchichtt  dcr  illumin.  Grad.  Page  66.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  %iy

oaths  of  fubmifllon  and  protediou  be  grounded,  fworh
in  the  receflcs  of  fecret  lodges,  to  men  who  hide  them*  '
fclves  from  public  view  ;  when  their  laboms,  cares,  and
proteding  power,  are  to  extend  over  the  whole  ftate
and  to  all  its  citizens?  On  the  throne,  or  with  preteii-
llons  to  it,  do  they  not  degradingly  fwear  obedience
and  protedion  to  Mafters  of  Lodges  !  By  what  right
will  they  promulgate  laws  emanating  from  lodges?
■yVhen  their  iubjefts  fwore  allegiance  and  fidelity  to
them,  did  tliofe  fubjec^  exped  to  be  governed  by  a
(lave,  or  be  fubjefted  to  laws  proclaimed  indeed  by,
their  Prince,  but  didated  by  fome  Majier  illuminée  or
Koficruc'ian  ?  And  ye,  magiftratcs  of  the  people,  who
are  to  fit  in  judgiVicnt  over  the  mutual  and  difpiited
claims  of  the  ciiizens  in  general^  what  confidence  can
be  placed  in  you  after  you  have  fworn  obedience  and
proteftion  to  this  i'luminizing  fed,  even  in  aftions  juft
or  tinjuji  ?  Such  rcAeAions  will  rife  refulgent  from
the  page  of  hiftory  5  and  would  to  God  that  the  Revo-
lution had  not  aire  ady  indelibly  engraved  them  !

If  ever  felf-lovc  liiould  have  direded  the  adlions  of
men,  and  fuppiied  the  place  of  nobler  motives,  the
princely  dupe  will  have  found  ample  matter  in  the
laws  of  Illuminifivi  to  ftimulate  his,  when  he  but  cafts
his  eye  on  the  following  article  contained  in  the  in-
ftrudions  for  the  Prefeds,  or  local  Superiors,  under
the  head  fonnaiion  of  pupils:  "  What  will  numbers
avail  us,  if  unity  and  fimilarity  of  fentiment  do  not
prevail  l---No  rnnk,  no  Jial-e  of  life,  can  difpenfe  the  bre-
thren from  our  labours  or  our  trials.  To  accuftoin
them  to  defpife  all  di{lin6tions,  and  to  view  the  world  .
and  human  nature  in  the  grand  fcale,  the  Prefed  (liall
carefully  colled  all  the  anecdotes  he  can>  remarkable
either  for  their  generofity  or  meannefs>  not  regarding
to  whom  they  relate  Whether  Princes  or  Citizens^  rich
or  podr»  He  will  tranfmit  them  to  the  Maders  of  the
Minervals  ;  and  thefe  will  expofe  them  in  a  proper
manner  to  their  pupils.  They  will  not  forget  to  give
the  name  of  the  Prince  or  great  perfonage,  though
the  trait  fliould  dilhonour  him  ;  "  for,"  lays  the  Code,
*'  every  member  muft  be  made  fenfible,  that  we  diRri-
"  bute  impartial  juflicej  and  that  among  us  the  wicked
"  man  upon  the  throne  is  called  a  villain  (ein  fclmrki

Vol.  III.  G  g


21^  Tt«î    AlJtlSOCIAL    ÔONSPIILACY.

"  heîjî)  jiift  as  ft-eely,  if  not  more  Tô,  than  the  criminal
"  who  is  being  îed  the  gallows.*'

Uiîdcr  the  t'ame  heaa  we  may  obferve  another  arti-
cle remarkable  enough,  on  the  means  of  rendering  the
language  of  the  adepts  more  uniform  when  fpeaking
before  any  of  the  Order,  or  of  fads  relating  to  it.

On  thefe  occafions  the  Prefeft  will  take  care  fecretlf
to  inftrud:  the  l(nver  Superiors  in  what  ftyle  they  are  to
Rold  forth,  what  ideas  to  propagate,  and  in  what  man-
ner they  fliould  make  their  pupils  fpeak.  "  Hence
"  the  pupils  will  conftantly  accord  themfelves  in  cver^
**  thing,  whether  in  language  or  adion,  with  the  Su-
*^  periors,  though  their  motives  may  be  unknown  to
"  them.  By  thefe  means  we  fliall  all  tend  towards
"  the  fame  obje6l  ;  the  young  adepts  will  accultom
"  themfelves  to  fearch  and  dive  into  the  intentions  of
"  the  Order  ;  to  refrain  from  ading,  or  to  be  filent  on
**  all  doubtful  occafions,  till  they  have  received  the
"  advice  or  orders  of  their  Superior  as  to  what  they
"  ought  to  do  or  fay.'*

Under  the  head  Love  or  Spirit  of  the  Order,  the  Pre-
fect is  inftrufted,  that  fuch  Love  or  Spirit  is  to  be  in-
fufed  by  defcanting  on  the  beauty  and  importance  of
the  object  of  the  Seft,  the  integrity  of  its  members,
the  greatnefs  and  certainty  of  its  means,  the  utility  of
the  inllruélion  imparted,  and  fecurity  promifed  to  all
its  pupils  by  the  Order.— This  Love  will  always  be
proportionate  to  the  certainty  of  king  happy  ivhile  at-
f  ached  to  the  Order ^  and  of  finding  real  happinefs  in  nd
oth$r  place.  To  flimulate  it,  he  miiji  ahvays  feed  them
ivith  the  hopes  of  nsiv  difcoveries  more  and  more  impor-
tant; and,  left  their  zeal  fhould  diminifh,  "  try  to  hep
our  pupils  conjlantly  occupied  ivith  ohjcâs  relating  to
the  Order  ;  jnake  it  their-  favorite  pwfrit.—See  what
tbe  Roman  Catholic  Church  does  to  make  its  religion
familiar  to  its  followers,  how  it  keeps  their  attention
inceflantiy  towards  it  ;  model  yourfelf  by  that.— -It
would  be  impoflible  to  forefee  all  cafes  and  lay  down
rules  for  them  ;— Let  it  then  be  the  conftant  ftudy  of
the  Prefefts  and  other  Superiors  to  prepare  themfelves
for  unforefeen  events— Let  them  propok;  and  diftribute
prizes  for  the  bed  compofitions  on  fuch  cafes.  Perpe-
tual vigilance  will  render  it  impoflible  ior  the  ediiice
not  fooner  or  later  to  fucceed,  and  to  take  a  proper


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

cxaiG&ency  accoi*dir>g  to  tlie  local  circumftances.  Ex-
hort the  Brethren  to  complacency,  beneficence,  and  ge,-
nerofity  towards  each  other  and  tovjanU  the  Order  J^

The  next  article  treats  of  Obedience.  Here  the  Pre-»
fed  is  informed,  "  That  flioiild  he  li4,ve  been  diligenf
and  fuccefsful  in  iinprelBng  the  young  pupils  with  the
grandeur  of  the  views  of  the  Stc%  they  will  doubtlef»
obey  the  Superiors  with  pleafurc.  J-Iow  can  they  do
otherwife  than  fubmit  themfclves  to  bs  conducted  by
Superiors  who  have  fo  carefully  guided  them  hitherto,
who  contributed  To  much  to  their  prefcnt  happinefs,
and  who  promife  to  perpetuate  it  in  Ibture  ?  May  the
man  who  is  not  to  be  enticed  iiUo  obedience  by  fuch
{idvantages  be  rejcded  from  aiBong  us  ;  let  him  be  call
out  from  the  fociety  of  the  elect  /  The  fjiirit  of  obedi-
ence is  to  be  more  particularly  infufed  hy  example  and
inftrudion---by  the  convidion,  that  to  obey  our  Superi-
ors is  in  fad  only  fulhllmg  our  own  inclination— |)y  the
gradual  progrefs  of  the  degrees— by  the  hopes  >of  dif-
covering  more  important  truths— by  fear  propei'ly  ma-
.  paged — by  honoui's,  rewards,  and  diftindions  grantid
to  the  docile— by  contempt  caft  -on  the  ftubborn— by
avoiding  familiarity  with  the  inferiors— by  the  exem-
plary punilliment  of  the  rebellious— by  the  feledion  of
thofe  whom  we  know  to  be  devoted  to  us  and  ready
to  execute  all  our  commands— by  a  particular  atten-
tion to  the  J^iibus  Licets  whereby  we  may  fee  how  far
fhe  Orders  of  the  Superiors  have  been  executed  v~and
by  the  puncT:uality  of  the  intermediary  Superiors  jn
Tending  the  tablets  or  reports  refpeding.tlieir  .inferiors.
The  more  particular  thefe  tablets  are  y  the  better  they  luill
le  ;  for  it  is  on  l^em  îlmt  all  the  operations  of  the  Order
are  grounded.  It  is  by  their  means  that  the  progrefg
•and  number  of  the  Brethren  is  to  be  known  ;  that  the
ilrength  or  weaknets  of  the  machine,  and  the  propor-
tion and  adhefion  of  all  its  parts  is  to  be  calculated,
and  that  the  promotion  of  the  brethren,  the  merits
and  demerits  of  the  affemblies,  of  the  Lodges,  and  of
their  Superiors,  is  to  be  judged.

When  treating  of  Secrecy,,  "  the  Prefed  is  informed,
that  this  is  the  nioji  ejfential  article  ;  ajid  it  is  on  tlvit
account  that  even  in  countries  where  the  S'-cl  may

Yo.  HI.  G  2:  i


219


Stt  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPîR.\CY.

have  acquired  fufficient  power  to  throw  off  the  mafk,
it  is  to  remain  veiled  in  darknefs."

"  The  PrefeiH:  is  always  to  hide  with  dexterity  the
4;eal  objecl  of  his  views  according  to  local  circumft^-
ces.  Let  him  agree  with  the  Provincial  on  what  fliape
he  fhall  adume  to  conceal  the  Order.— As  in  the  re-
ligious inflitutions  of  the  Roman  Church,  where  reli-
gion, alas }  is  but  a  pretext  ;  exaftly  fo,  ofily  in  a
■Nobler  manner,  nii(/t  toe  eJti^rap  our  Order  in  the  farms
of  a  mere antile  JocietVx  or  form  other  exterior  of  a  (i-
milar  natureJ*

In  vain  would  the  reader  alk  me,  ■whence  the  Illu-^
minized  Code  had  taken  the  idea  of  Religion  being
only  a  pretext  for  the  religious  inflitutions  m  the  Ca-
tholic Church,  It  has  not  come  to  my  knowledge,
that  the  mod  barefaced  Sophifters  have  ever  advanced
a.  calumny  of  this  fort.  I  have  feen  the  religious  foun-
ders, fuch  as  St.  Francis,  St.  Benedift,  or  St.  Baiil,  and
other  founders  of  orders,  defcribed  by  the  Sophifters
a«  fuperftitious  enthuliafts.  But  even  among  the  apof-«
rates  who  muft  have  been  acquainted  with  the  Orders
they  had  lived  in,  we  have  never  heard  one  pretend
that  Religion  was  only  a  pretext  either  for  the  inftitu-
tion  they  abandoned,  or  for  their  ancient  brethren  Î
Did  any  of  them  ever  aflert,  that  ambition,  avarice,
or  any  pretext  befides  Religion,  had  given  rife  to  the
foundation  of  the  Order  of  the  Capuchins,  Friars,  Be-
nediftines,  or  Carmelites,  and  of  fo  many  other  con-
vents deftined  for  men  or  women  ?  This,  however,
is  not  a  calumny  originating  with  Weiflîaupt  ;  it  is  noE
to  be  found  in  his  inftruftions  fent  to^  Knigge,  and  on
which  the  latter  formed  the  Code  of  Laws  for  the
Regents  and  Local  Superiors,  though  he  fubjoined  ma-
ny of  his  own  ideas.  Knigge  was  totally  ignorant  of
every  thing  relating  to  religious  Orders.  Weifliaupt
was  born  a  Roman  Catholic,  and  might  indeed,  in  his
impiety,  have  repeated  the  ideas  of  many  apoflate
Sophifters,  or  have  left  this  ft  range  comparifon  of  his
illumin.ifm  with  the  religious  inftitutes,  lince  it  was  in
the  Code  :  but  1  fliould  be  truly  furprized  were  I
to  find  that  it  was  a  calumny  of  his  invention.  He
knew  too  well  how  much  he  Itood  in  need  of  dark-
nefs to  envelope  liis  defigns  ;  and  he  alto  knew,  that
in  the  Rom;;i!i  Catholic  Church  no  religious  inftitutç


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIiLVCV.  221

was  adopted,  until  it  had  been  made  public  and  exam-
ined by  the  conftituted  authorities.

After  this  abfurd  calumny  follows  a  recapitulation
of  every  thing  we  have  already  expofed  to  our  readers
in  the  hrft  Chapters  of  this  Volume,  on  the  necclGty
of  hiding  the  proceedings  and  even  the  very  exillencc
of  the  Lodges.  But  I  find  the  following  additions  in
this  place,

"  Left  the  number  of  the  Brethren  fliould  expof«
them  to  difcovery,  by  their  afiemblies  being  too  nu-
merous, the  Prcfed  will  take  care  that  no  more  than
ten  members  fhall  afTemblc  in  the  fame  Mhicrod
Church."

"  Should  any  place  contain,  a  greater  number  of
"  pupils,  the  Lodges  muft  he  multiplied,  or  different
'*  days  of  aflembly  muft  be  afiigned,  that  all  may  not
"  meet  at  once  ;  and  fliould  there  be  feveral  Minerval
*'  Churches  in  the  fam»  town,  the  Prefeft  will  take
"  care  that  thofe  of  one  Lodge  fhall  know  nothing
*<  of  the  others."  For  the  better  diredion  of  the  low-
çr  part  of  the  edifice,  be  will  obferve  the  follow-
ing rules — He  is  to  nominate  the  Magiftratcs  of  the
Minervals  ;  but  the  chief  of  thefe  Magiftrates  can  only
be  named  with  the  confent  of  the  Provincial.  He  will
be  refponfible  for  thofe  he  names.— He  will  overlook
the  Mafonic  and  Minei-val  Lodges,  to  fee  that  every
thing  is  regularly  ajid  pundually  executed.  He  will
not  permit  any  difcourfes  to  be  delivered  there  which
may  give  any  ftrong  fufpicions  of  what  is  contriving
again  ft  Religion,  the  ft  ate,  or  morals.— He  will  fuffer
no  Brother  to  be  advanced  to  the  higher  degrees  be-
foi-e  he  has  acquired  the  requifite  qualities  and  princi-
ples ;  on  this  point,  fays  the  Code,  he  cannot  carry  his
precautions,  anxiety,  and  fcnipulofity  too  far.

"  l!;,.has  already  been  ftated  in  the  rules,  that  per-
fons  not  belonging  to  the  Order  may  be  received  into
the  Mafonic  Lodges  of  lUuminifm.— The  Prefeél  will
carefully  watch  left  any  of  thefe  ftrangcrs  fliould  take
the  lead  in  the  Lodges— They  fliould  as  far  as  poffible
be  honeft  men,  fedate,  and  quiet  \  but  by  fome  means
or  other  they  fliould  be  made  ufcful  to  th.e  Order.—
Without  leave  of  the  Provincial,  the  Prefeft  fliall  hold
jio  correfpondence  on  matters  relating  to  the  Order
with  any  perfo^  out  of  his  province— as  his  peculiar


ft22  l'Ï^E    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

objed  will  be,  to  watch  over  and  to  inftrud  tfce  Supe-
riors of  the  Minerval  and  Mafonic  Lodges,  he  wJU
have  recourfe  to  the  Provincial  in  all  doubtful  cafes
of  any  impoitauce.

"  Let  the  Prefecl:  make  himfelf  perfeâ  Tnaftef  of
thefe  rules;  let  him  follow  them  with  precifion  ;  let
him  always  attend  to  the  whole  of  the  objeâ;  ;  let  hiiw
take  care  that  each  one  may  attend  to  his  duty,'  doi?ig
nciiher  nlore  nor  left  than  the  lavj  requires  ;  and  he  will
iind  in  this  inftrudion  all  that  is  i^ecefiary  for  the  regu-
lation of  his  condiK^."

Such  is  the  promile  which  terminates  tl>e  Jaws  lor
the  Prefe^^  of  Illuminifm.  The  five  articles  created
■of  in  tliefe  regulations  are  .prefaced  by  a  far  more
pompous  proniife  :  "  If,  it  is  faid  we  have  exa(^ly
♦'  forefeen  every  thing  relating  to  tbefc  five  articles^
*'  nothing  will  be  impoflible  for  us  in  any  country  un.
"  der  the  San."*

*  Ift  nun  in  diefen  fiinf  ftiicken  allés  gehôrjg  beforgt,  fo  ift  in  iedej^

lànàe  unter  der  fontie  hichts  unmoglich T*he  -vvhcde  of  this  Chapter

is  eKtrafted  from  the  Inftruifticms  C  fôV  -tfie  iPrefe<ftj  fr«>hi  Bage  14J
%o  i6().  !  -


THE    Aî^lSdCLVL    CONSPIRACV»  223

CHAP.  xvir.

injiruâiotus  for  the  Pf.oviiicia!.

BY  far  the  greater  part  of  the  code  of  laws  which
has  jul\  been  laid  before  the  reader  as  relating
Co  the  Regents  and  Prefeâs  of  the  Illuminées,  was
originally  written  by  Weifliaupt  for  the  inftni6tion  frf
his  Provincials.  This  is  evident  from  the  firft  digeft
of  thefe  laws,  as  they  appear  in  the  fécond  part  of  the
fécond  volume  of  the  Origirial  Writings  of  the .  Sed,
from  page  17  to  43.  It  is  even  one  of  thofe  parts
which  Knigge  looked  upon  as  a  mafter-piece  of  poli-
tics.* So  replete  with  artifice  did  he  think  it,  that  he
deemed  it  a  pity  to  circumfcribe  the  knowledge  of  it
to  the  Provincials  alone.  The  readçr  has  feen  what
life  he  has  made  of  them,  thoroughly  perfuaded  that
the  Regents  in  general,  and  particularly  the  Local  Su-
periors, could  greatly  bene nc  the  Order  by  attending
to  them.  The  Areopagiies  and  General  confented  to
thefe  new  difpofitions  ;  but  the  follov/ing  part  of  this
chapter  remained  appropriated  to  the  Provincials.

"  I.  The  Provincial  fnall  make  liimfelf  perfecl  maf-
ter  of  the  whole  tonftitution  of  the  Order.— Tlie  fyf-
tera  of  it  fhould  be  as  familiar  to  him  as  if  he  had
invented  it."

"  II.  As  a  guide  for  all  his  aftions,  he  (hall  adopt
the  whole  government  and  the  infl:ru(5lions  already
laid  down  for  the  Regents  and  Local  Superiors,  not
neglefting  a  fmgle  rule."

"  III.  The  Provincial  (hall  be  chofen  by'the  Regents
of  his  Province,  and  be  confirmed  by  the  National  Su-
perior .  .  .  ■.  .f  The  high  Superiors  (the  Aréopage
and  General)  have  the  power  of  depofing  him."

"  IV.  He  fhall  be  a  native  of,  or  at  leaft  be  tho-
roughly acquainted  with  the  province  under  his  in-
fpeftion."

"  V.   He  fhall  be  engaged  as  little  as  pofTible  in

*  See  his  lafl  Observations.

f  There  is  an  omillion  in  the  copy  from  whicli  thefe  rules  have  been
printed,  which  makes  part  of  this  article  unintciiigible.


224  "^^^    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIIlACYi

public  concerns,  or  in  any  other  enterprize,  that  he
may  devote  all  his  rime  to  the  Order."

"  VI.  He  fhall  ajpitme  the  chara{ier  of  a  man  retired
from-  the  world,  and  vjho  only  feeks  reJL"

"  VII.  He  fhall  fix  his  refidence  as  nearly  as  poffi^
ble  in  the  centre  of  his  province,  the  better  to  watch
over  the  different  diftrid:s."

"  VIII.  On  his  being  named  Provincial,  he  fliall
'eave  his  former  charaéteriftJc,  and  afliime  that  which
the  high  Superiors  fhall  give  him.— The  fame  Supe-
riors will  fend  him  the  imprefHon  of  the  feal  he  is  to
bear,  and  he  will  wear  it  engraved  on  his  ring."

"  IX.  The  archives  of  the  province,  which  the  Re-
gents will  have  taken  care  to  feal  up  and  carry  away
on  the  demife  of  his  predecefTor,  aie  to  be  entrufted
to  him  on  his  nomination.'*

"  X.  The  Provincial  will  monthly  tranfmit  the  ge-
neral report  of  his  province  to  the  National  Infpcétor
immediately  over  him.  As  he  himfelf  only  receives
the  reports  of  the  Local  Superiors  a  fortnight  after
the  month  is  up,  he  will  necelTarily  be  always  a  month
behind-hand,  making,  for  example,  the  report  of  May
about  the  end  of  June,  and  fo  on.  This  report  will
be  fubdivided  into  as  many  parts  as  he  has  Prefeéls
under  his  infpcélion.  He  will  carefully  note  every
thing  of  confequence  that  has  happened  in  any  of  the
fchools  or  lodges  :  alfo  the  names,  ages,  country,  fta-»
tion  in  life,  and  the  date  of  the  reverfal  letters,  of  each
new  adept  ;  the  high  fuperiors  wifting  to  have  no  fur-
ther information  concerning  the  new  adepts  until  they
come  to  the  clafs  of  Regent,  unlefs  on  fome  particular
occafion.'*

"  XL  Befides  this  monthly  report,  he  is  to  apply  to
the  National  Superior  in  all  extraordinary  cafes  which
are  not  left  to  his  deciiion.  He  is  alfo  to  fend  in  his
perfonal  tablets  every  three  months  ;  and  he  will  un-
dertake no  political  enterprize  without  having  firft
confulted."

"  XII.  He  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  other  Pi-ovin-
cials.  Let  things  go  on  well  or  ill  in  a  neighbouring
province,  it  is  no  bufmefs  of  his.  If  Itc  wifhes  to  afk
any  thing  of  the  other  Provincials,  let  him  apply  to  the
National  Infpcdor."


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

"  Xiri.  If  be  has  any  complaint  to  make  againfl:  the
Iiifpedor,  he  will  direft  his  letter  Soli  or  PrimoJ^

"  XIV.  All  the  Regents  of  the  province  are  his
coiinfellors  ;  they  are  to  fécond  and  help  him  in  all  his
enterprizes.  If  it  be  convenient  to  him,  he  (houkl
have  two  of  them  near  his  perfon,  to  ferve  him  as
fecretarics."

"  XV.  He  confirms  the  nominations  of  all  the  Su'
^eriors  of  the  inferior  degrees.  He  alfo  names  the
Prefects,  but  they  mud  be  approved  by  the  Diredor,
who  can  rcfafe  his  fanâion."

"  XVI.  He  has  a  right  to  fend  the  brethren  ivbo  wc
pcnfioued  by  the  Order,  and  to  employ  them  in  thofe
parts  of  the  province  where  he  may  think  them  mod
ufeful.'^

"  XVIt.  and  XVIÎI.  He  tranfinits  the  charafteriftics
of  the  brethren  and  geographical  names  of  the  lodges
to  the  Prefefts,  as  he  receives  them  from  the  high  Su-
J)criors."

"  XIX.  He  is  alfo  to  fend  the  names  of  the  excluded
brethren,  that  an  exadt  lift  may  be  preferved  in  all  the
alTemblies."

"  XX.  When  he  has  any  reprimand  to  make  to  a
Brother,  whom  it  may  be  dangerous  to  offend,  he  will
alfume  an  unknown  hand,  and  the  fignature  of  Bafyle.
This  name,  which  no  Member  of  the  Order  bears,  is
peculiarly  preferved  for  that  objeft.

"  XXI.  He  will  fometimes  write  to  the  Inferior  de-
grees ;  and  on  the  propofition  of  the  Epopts  he  will
decide  what  books  are  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  the
young  adepts  according  to  the  degrees  they  are  in.— •
He  is  as  much  as  poffible  to  promote  libraries,  cabinets
of  natural  philofophy,  Mufœwns,  collections  of  manu-
fcripts,  &-C.  in  the  moft  convenient  parts  of  his  Pro-
vince ;  thefe,  it  may  eafily  be  conceived,  are  only  in-
tended for  the  adepts.

"  XXII.  The  Provincial  opens  the  letters  of  the
Minor  and  Major  Illuminées  which  a^e  directed  Soli.
He  alfo  reads  the  ^libus  Licets  of  the  Epopts  and
Prhnos  of  the  Novices  ;  but  can  neither  open  the  Pri'
mo  of  the  Minerval,  the  Soli  of  the  Knight,  nor  the

Vol.  HI.  H  h


225


2i6  I'HE    ANTISOCIAL    GONSPIIL^CV;

^tiluis  Licet  of  tlie  Regent."*  This  gradual  po\i'er
of  opening  the  letters  of  the  Brethren  according  to  the
degree  they  belong  to,  plainly  indicates  that  fome
mark  peculiar  to  each  degree  is  made  ufe  of;  but  I
have  not  been  able  to  difcover  that  mark.  The  read-
er will  have  obferved,  that  all  the  letters,  even  the
^dbus  Licets,  are  opened  by  Brethren  of  a  higher
degree  than  that  of  the  adept  who  writes  ;  and  coflfe-
quently  he  never  can  know  who  it  is  that  anfwers  him,
as  the  rules  of  this  Hierarchy  are  only  made  known  to
the  Brethren  in  proportion  as  they  rife  in  dignity.
The  Provincial  hinifelf  can  only  form  a  conjecture  as
to  the  perfons  v.'ho  open  his  letters  and  thofe  of  the
other  Brethren  which  he  is  not  permitted  to  oj>en
himfelf.

«  XXIII.  He  fliall  raife  no  Brother  to  the  degree  of
Regent,  without  having  firft  obtained  the  confent  of
the  National  Infpeélor.

"  XXIV.  He  is  to  inform  the  Dean  of  the  branch  of
fcience  which  each  new  adept  has  made  choice  of  on
liis  admiffion  into  the  Minerval  Academy.

*'  XXV.  Left  any  of  the  Archives  (hould  be  miflaid,
he  will  take  care  to  form  but  one  bundle  of  all  the
tablets,  reverfal  letters,  and  other  documents  relating
to  the  fame  adept.

"  XXVI.  He  will  apply  himfelf  to  procure  as  many
co-operators  as  poffible  for  the  Order,  in  the  fcientific
branches.

"  XXVII.  He  will  tranfmit  to  the  Deans  all  remark-
able treatifes  or  difcourfes,  and  every  thing  relative  to
the  degree  of  Epopt  ;  fcr  example,  the  lives  hiftorical
or  ciiarufteriftic,  dillertations,  &-c.

"  XXVIII.  If  among  the  Epopts  any  men  be  found
,  endowed  with  great  talents,  but  little  fitted  for  the
political  government  of  the  Order,  the  Provincial  muft
devife  means  of  removing  them  from  fuch  fundions.

"  XXIX.  When  the  Chapt&i-s  of  the  Scotch  Knights
are  compofcd  of  more  than  twelve  Knights,  he  will
raife  the  ableft  among  them  to  the  degree  of  Epopt.

"  XXX.  In  each  Chapter  he  will  have  a  confiden-
tial Epopt,  who  will  be  his  fccret  cenfor  or  fpy.

*  This  article  is  cxtraâeJ  from  the  inflruélions  for  the  PreftiS  ;  but,
be-iag  dire  (illy  iddreilvd  to  the  Prcvincial,  I  have  placed  it  here.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACTi',

**  XXXI.  The  Provincial  will  receive  his  letters
patent  from  the  National  Superior— When  he  ilfues
thofe  for  the  Chapters  of  the  Scotch  Kniglits,  he  will
make  ufe  of  the  following  formula  :  "  We  of  the
"  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Gcrma7ilc  Orient,  conftitiited
"  Provincial  and  Mailer  of  the  diftricT:  of  N  N^  make
'*  known  that  by  thefe  prefents  we  give  to  the  venera-
**  ble  Brother  (here  is  the  charafterillic  and  true  name
"  of  the  new  Venerable  or  Mafter)  full  powers  to
"  ereft  a  fecret  Chapter  of  the  7noJ]:  holy  Scotch  Ma-
**'  fonry,  and  to  propagate  this  Royal  Art  conformably
"  to  his  inftriidions  by  the  eftablifliment  of  new  Ma-
"  fonic  Lodges  of  the  three  fymbolic  degrees— Given
«  at  the  Diredory  of  the  Diilriét—

(L.  S.)  Secret  Provincial

OF  THE  Directory.
**  TVithout  any  further  fignatwe.

"  XXXIIL  To  fay  every  thing  in  a  few  words,
the  Provincial  has  the  fpccial  charge  of  putting*  his
province  in  a  proper  fituation  for  attempting  every
thing  for  the  general  good,  and  for  preventing  all  evil.
—  Happy  the  Jtate  inhere  our  Order  flidl  have  acquired
fiich  poiver  !  Nor  will  it  prove  a  difficult  talk  for  the
Provincial  who  fliall  implicitly  follow  the  inftrudions
of  his  high  Superiors. — Seconded  by  fo  many  able  men
deeply  ver  fed  in  moral  fcicnces,  fubmiffive  ajid  fecretly
labouring  like  bimfelf,  there  can  be  no  noble  euter-
p-ize  which  he  may  not  undertake,  nor  evil  delign
which  he  cannot  avert — Therefore  let  there  be  no
connivance  at  faults  ;  no  Nepotifm,  no  private  piques  j
no  views  but:  for  the  general  good  ;  no  objcft,  no  mo.^
lives  but  thofe  of  the  Order.  "  And  let  the  Brethren
**  rely  upon  us,  that  we  fliall  never  create  any  Pro-
"  vincials  but  fuch  as  are  capable  of  fulfilling  thefe  du*
^  ties  ;  hut  let  it  he  alfo  rernenihered,  that  we  referve
"  in  our  hands  all  the  means  necejfary  for  chajiifing  the
"  snan  vjho  fJ)oidd  prefume  to  abiifé  the  power  he  has
"  received  from  ns"*

"  XXXIV.  This  power  mud  never  be  employed
but  for  the  good  of  the  Brethren.     We  fliould  ir^ieed

*  See  the  Inftrudlion  D  for  the  izgrte  of  Regents

Vol.  III.  H  h  z


227


i2^  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

help  all  whom  we  can  help  ;  but  when  the  circumftan-
ces  are  limilar,  the  members  of  our  (bciety  are  always
to  have  the  preference.--- Particularly  as  to  thofe  whofe
fidelity  is  proof  againft  all  the  powers  of  feduélion.
In  their  fupport  let  us  be  prodigal  of  our  toils,  our
money,  our  honour^  our  goods,  even  our  blood  ;  and
let  the  Icaji  affront  offered  to  any  Illuminée  be  the  gene-
ral caufi  of  the  Order P

Thus  terminate  the  inftriiftions  for  the  Provincial.
They  forewarn  us  of  the  exigence  of  a  moft  tremen-
dous power  above  him  whence  all  the  authority  of  the
Order  emanates  ;  a  power  which  referves  to  itfelf  the
means  of  chaftifing  whoever  fliall  abufe  that  portion
which  it  has  entruded  to  any  of  its  adepts  ;  that  is  to
fay,  who  fliall  not  have  made  it  fublervient  to  the
grand  ohjeàl  and  to  all  the  plots  of  the  Sed: — There
are,  in  fad,  three  offices  in  the  Hierarchal  Order  of
Superiors  above  the  Provincial.  Firft,  the  N^monal
Direâors,  then  the  Supreme  Council  called  the  Areopa-
gites  by  the  Sed,  the  authority  of  which  extends  over
the  Illuminées  of  all  nations  ;  and  that  is  prefided
over  by  the  General  of  the  Order.  The  following
Chapter  will  give  every  light  on  thefe  fupreme  Magiff,
trates  of  Illuminirm  v/hich  the  known  Archives  of  the
Seft  can  rcfleél.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONgPIRACY.


CHAP.      XVIII.

Of  ihe  National  Direâors,  of  the  Areopaghes,  and  of
the  General  of  Illniiibnfm.

IN  the  general  plan  of  the  Government  of  the  Illu-
minées it  is  (aid,  that  every  Brother  fliall  receive
particular  inftrudlions  according  to  the  rank  he  holds
in  the  Hierarchy  of  the  Order  :  Yet  I  have  never  been
able  to  difcover  thofe  intended  for  the  life  of  the  Na-
tional Direftors.  This  part  of  the  Code  is  not  to  be
found  either  in  the  tivo  volumes  fo  often  cjuoted  of
the  Original  JVritings,  or  in  that  of  Philo  ami  Sparta^
eus  which  has  thrown  fo  much  light  on  the  myfterics.
It  does  not  appear,  that  any  of  the  German  writers
who  have  been  the  bell  informed  on,  and  the  mofl:
flreniious  opponents  of,  Illuminifm  have  ever  been
able  to  difcover  them.  For  fome  time  I  even  enter-
tained doubts  whether  the  Superiors  called  National
Direâors,  and  thofe  ftyled  Infpeciors,  were  not  of  the
fame  degree  in  the  Hierarchy  of  the  Scft. — They  were
certainly  diftincT:  employments  in  the  year  1782;  for
Wcifliaupt's  letters  at  that  period  mention  Germany  as
divided  into  three  infeâions,  each  Infpeâor  having  fe-
veral  Provincials  fubordinate  to  him.*  But,  on  the  other
fide,  the  general  account  which  the  Order  puts  into
the  hands  of  its  Regents,  and  the  laft  works  of  Philo
printed  in  1788,  mention  no  intermediate  office  be-
tween the  Provincials  and  the  Nationals,  which  latter
are  fometimes  defcribed  as  National  Superiors,  at  others
as  National  Infpcdors.  Their  correfpondence  and  fub-
ordination  is  direft  from  the  Supreme  Council. f  It  is
therefore  evident,  that  in  the  lall  digell  of  the  Code
the  two  offices  of  National  Infpeâor  and  Dircdor  were
united.  But  in  vain  would  the  Scd  conceal  the  iur
ftriiclions  which  it  has  appropriated  to  the  fundions  of
thefe  National  Superiors.  The  denomination  alone
teilifies  the  importance  which  attaches  to  their  office  ;
and  if  the  precife  nature  of  their  duties  be  wanting,

*  Original  Writings,  Vol.  II.  Let.  15,  to  Cato.

•j-  Diredions,  .Syfum  No.  ;,  and  Philo's  Endliche  trk\arung,  page  .Si,


'22y


233


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

it  is  eafy  to  fiipply  the  deficiency,  by  what  has  already
cfcaped  the  vigilance  of  the  Seel  in  the  foregoing  parts
of  the  Code.

Let  the  reader  rccal  to  his  mind  what  has  been  faid
.  in  the  Chapter  on  the  Epopts,  of  the  fyftems  which
they  were  to  fonn  in  order  to  feize  on  the  empire  of
the  Sciences  and  dired  them  all  towards  the  accom-
phfliment  of  the  plots  of  the  Sed.  In  the  fame  de-
gree we  have  feen  them  annually  afTenibling  in  each
l)rovince,  and  compiling  from  their  partial  attacks
every  means  that  their  inventions  could  fiirnifli,  infen-
fibly  to  cnilave  the  public  opinion,  and  to  eradicate
from  the  minds  of  the  people  what  the  Sed  is  pleafcd
to  call  religious  prejudices.  We  have  feen  the  clafs
of  tlie  Regents  more  particularly  occupied  in  fapping
the  foundations  of  the  throne,  and  in  defti'oying  that
veneration  in  which  nations  held  the  serions  and
fundions  of  their  Sovereigns — Nay,  there  exifts  a  par-
ticular law  framed  for  the  Epopts  which  has  not  yet
been  cited,  and  which  muft  here  be  introduced.  It  is
to  be  found  in  the  Second  Volume  of  the  Original  Wri-
tings, fécond  Seâion,  intîtled — Articles  agreed  upon  by
the  Arenpagites  in  AcUirmcth  1151  (A.  D.  December
i78i)--.There,  under  the  article  High  Mysteries,  I
read,  "  If  among  our  Epopts  any  fpeculative  geniitfes
"  are  to  be  found,  they  Ihall  be  admitted  to  the  de-
"  grec  of  Mr^j'.— Thefe  adepts  111  all  be  employed  in
"  colleding  and  digefting  all  the  grand  philofophical
^'  fyftems,  and  will  invent  or  compile  for  the  people  a
*'  fyftem  of  religion  which  our  Order  means  as  fooii
"  as  pofiiblc  to  give  to  the  univerfe."*

I  do  not  forget  that  I  am  to  treat  of  the  National
Direâors  ;  but  am  fomewhat  afraid  that  my  readers
may  adduce  this  plan  for  giving  a  new  religion  to  the
whole  univerfe,  as  invalidating  their  plot  for  the  de-
llrudion  of  every  religion.  Let  fuch  readers,  howe-
ver, rcfled  on  the  religion  thich  Weifliaupt  has  him-,
felf  laid  down  for  his  Mages.  It  is  the  rankeft  -Spino-
fifm,  admitting  of  no  God  but  the  world  itfelf  ;  that  is

•  So  werden  die  felbeti  Magi — Diefe  famrneln  und  bringcn  die  lie.-
here  philofophifche  fyilenie  in  ordiiung,  und  bearbeittn  ein  ■volis-reli^iony
vvelche  d-rr  Orden  demnhchften  der  wtlt  geben  will. — !n  the  orig;naI^
■whicb  is  in  Cato  'Z-.va:k's  hand-writing,  the  Avords  ■volh-religlan  are  ia
cypher  thus  ac,  14,  2,  3, 18—17,  S,  J,  4>  6,  4>  I4>  ij-


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  2,3!

to  fay,  abfolnte  Atheifm.  Let  them  alfo  remember,  that
one  of  the  lall  fecrets  of  the  Grand  Myfteries,  is  to
reveal  to  the  adepts  that  all  religions  are  grounded  on
and  are  the  invention  of  impofture.  Nor  is  it  by  any
means  difficult  to  account  for  thefe  two  fchemes  of  the
SeS.,  the  one  for  the  creation  of  a  new  religion,  tlic
other  for  the  deftruflion  of  all'.  Thefe  plans  are  to
be  fucceiîive  in  their  operations.  Sentiments  of  Reli-
gion are  too  deeply  engraven  in  the  minds  of  the  peo-
ple for  Weifliaupt  to  flatter  himfelf  with  fuddenly
eradicating  it,  or  at  lead  without  fubflituting  fomc
capricious  and  fophifticated  faith,  which  in  reality
would  no  more  conftitute  a  religion  than  the  IVor/JAp
o/Keafon,  of  which  the  French  Revolution  has  given
us  an  impure  elfay.  The  religion,  therefore,  to  be
invented  by  the  Mages  of  Illuminifm  is  no  more  than
a  preparatory  fhep  that  Ihould  deftroy  the  religion  of
Chrift  throughout  the  univerfe.  This  advantage  gain-
ed, it  will  remain  no  very  difficult  tafk  to  open  the
eyes  of  the  whole  world  on  the  inanity  and  impofture
of  their  own  ;  and  thus  it  will  have  ferved  as  a  fcaf-
folding  which  naturally  difappears  with  the  edifice  that
is  to  be  pulled  down.  This  religion  to  be  invented
may  be  confidered  as  on  a  parallel  with  thofe  new
governments,  thofe  democracies,  which  are  to  amufe
the  people  until  the  period  (hall  come  when  their  illu-
minizing  Equality  and  Liberty  fliall  have  taught  them,
that  each  one  is  ellentially  his  own  fovereign,  that  this
fovereignty  is  an  imprefcriptible  right  inherent  in  each
man,  in  dired  oppofition  to  democracy,  and  even  to  all
property  or  focial  compaél.

Such  is  the  general  tenour  of  the  fyftems  to  be  in-
vented and  profecuted  by  the  Sed,  for  attaining  the
grand  objeél  of  thefe  confpirators.  All  the  adepts
which  the  Seel  comprifes  under  the  denomination  of
fpeciilative  geniiifes  are  perpetually  labouring  at  thefe
fyftems  under  the  diredion  of  the  Provincials.  But
they  are  not  the  perlons  who  complete  the  plans  ;
they  are  only  to  prefent  the  firft  fketch,  which  each
Provincial  is  obliged  to  tranfmit  to  the  Naîlond  D'l-
reâory,  there  to  undergo  a  further  Inveftigation  and
receive  its  final  poliih.*     One  of  the  firft  duties,  there-

•  Inftru(ftIon»  for  the  degreç  of  Epopt,  No*.  13  aud  14.


33^.  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

fore,  of  the  National  Direâor  vvitl  be,  to  colIe<fl  all
thefe  anti-religions  and  anti-focial  fyftems,  to  pafs  judg-
ment on  them,  and  to  declare  how  far  they  can  contri-
bute towaj-ds  the  univerfal  diforganization.  But  even
thefe  cotild  not  alone  fuffice  for  fo  great  a  work  ;
they  are  furrotmded  by  the  Eled  of  the  nation  as  the
Provincial  is  by  the  Chofen  of  the  provinces.  This
council  of  tiie  Eleft,  after  mature  deliberation,  declare
which  are  the  fyftems  that  are  worthy  of  being  adopt-
ed by  the  Order  ;  and  they  will  make  ail  the  additions
and  corrections  that  they  may  conceive  conducive  to  the
fuccefs  of  the  general  plan.  Thus  corrected  and  di-
gefted,  thefe  fyftems  of  impiety  and  diforganization
are  depofitcd  in  the  archives  of  the  Dîreétoi*,  which
no^v  become  jintional.  It  is  to  thefe  tliat  the  Provin-
cials have  rccourfe  in  all  their  doubts,  and  hence  flow
all  thofe  lights  which  are  to  expand  themfelves
througliout  the  nation  :  it  is  hence  alfo  that  the  Na-
tional Diredor  -f-  will  take  all  the  new  regulations
which  he  may  jndge  neceflary  for  the  better  combina-
tion and  concordance  of  the  efforts  of  the  National
Brethren.— But  the  Seft  does  not  confine  its  views  to
one  nation.  It  has  formed  within  itfelf  a  fupreme
tribunal,  wliich  has  fubjecTied  all  nations  to  its  inquifi-
tion.  Compoftd  of  twehe  Peers  of  the  Order,*  it  is
prefided  over  by  the  General  ;  and,  under  the  name  of
Areopagites,  it  becomes  the  common  centre  of  com»
munication  from  the  adepts  of  all  nations,  as  the  Nd'
tional  is  the  centre  of  one  particular  nation,  the  Pro-
inncid  of  one  province,  the  Local  Superior  of  tlie
lodges  of  his  diftrid,  the  ATmerval  Majler  of  his  aca-
demy, the  Venerable  of  his  Mafonic  lodge  ;  and,  finally,
as  the  Infmiiator  or  Recruiter  is  of  his  novices  or  can-
didates. Thus,  from  the  firft  ftep  to  the  pinnacle  of
the  Order,  every  thing  is  conneded  and  gradually
afcends  by  means  of  the  ^ibus  Licets,  Solis  and  Pri-

f  Defwegen  kommen  jarlieh  ein  mal  aile  Prefbyter  einer  proviflz
&uf  der  grolTen  Synode  zufammen,  machen  ein  grofles  verzeiohnifs  det
in  diefem  jahr  gtfainnilten  beylagcn  an  die  National  DireBion  wo  fcl'oft
cs  in  die  haupt  katalcg  eingetragen,  und  damit  ein  fchatz  von  kennt-
niflen  formirt  wird,  woraus  jeder  befridigt  werden  kann  :  denn  daraus
werden  die  regci  abftrahirt,  und  was  noch  fehlt,  weitere  beobachtungs
aufgaben,  wie  fchon  eivahnt  werden,  aufgefchriebcn  urn  feue  fatze  z»
brkommcn.     ILiiL  No.  15.

*  Philo's  Endliche  erkiiirung,  Page  119.


tHÉ    ANTISbCL\L    CONSPIRACY»

{;iO/.---Every  thing  that  happens  in  each  nation  gradu-
ally afcends  to  the  NiUiofial,  and  from  thefe  Directors
all  is  traniinitted  to  the  centre  of  all  nations,  to  the
luprcme  council  of  the  Areopagites,  and  the  General  \xi
chief,  the  univerfal  Director  of  the  Confpiracy.

The  grand  point,  therefore,  to  be  obfcrved  in  the
code  concerning  the  National  Diredor  is,  his  direct  cor-
refpondence  with  the  Areopagites.  It  is  evident  from
the  terms  exprefled  in  the  general  plan  of  the  govern-
ment which  the  Sed  reveals  to  its  Regents  :  "  In  every
"  nation  there  fliall  be  a  National  Director  aflbciated
*'  and  in  dired  communication  with  our  Fathers,  the
"  firft  of  wliom  holds  the  helm  of  the  Order."*  Thi?
accounts  for  the  injiindiion  given  to  the  Provincial,  to
make  frequent  and  exaft  returns  to  the  National  Di-
rector of  every  thing  that  may  take  place  in  his  pro-
vince ;  to  have  recourfe  to  him  on  all  doubtful  occa^
fions,  or  in  cafes  of  efpecial  importance  ;  and  never  to
take  any  ftep  in  politics  v/ithout  having  firft  confulted
liim.f  This  explains  why  the  choice  of  thofe  adepts
which  arc  to  be  advanced  to  the  political  degree  of
Regent,  or  to  the  Prefedfhips  of  diftri<n;s,:l:  is  left  to
the  option  of  the  National,  or  even  the  nomination  ot
the  Provincials. §  This  informs  us  why  all  the  ^nbus
Licets  of  the  Regents  are  rcferved  to  the  Diredor,
that  is  to  fay,  that  all  the  fecrcts  of  their  political  dif-
coveries  may  more  certainly  reach  the  hands  of  him
who  is  to  leave  no  fecret  hidden  from  the  Fathers  of
the  Order. II

Such  then  are  the  rights  of,  fuch  the  laws  for  the
National  Infpeâior  of  tUuminiim  ;  and  fo  great  is  the
importance  which  the  Scd  attaches  to  this  office.  To
him  are  forwarded  all  the  fecrets  of  the  brethren
I'pread  throughout  the  provinces,  the  Courts,  or  towns  J
to  him  are  fent  all  the  projeds,  all  the  reports  on  the
fuccefles  gained  by,  or  dangers  impending  over  the
Order;  on  the  progrefs  of  its  plots;  on  employments,
dignities,  and  power  to  be  acquired  for  the  adepts  ;
on  the  candidates  to  be  rcjcdcd,  the  enemies  to  bs
crufhed,  the  councils  and  ftate  offices  of  princes  to  be
feizicd.     To  him,  in  fliort,  are  reported  all  the  means

*  D'aeaions  Syfem,  No.  4.  f  ^^^^'  No.  10  and  IX.

t  Ibid.  No.  15  and  ^3.  «  Ibid.  Np.  j.  [I  ^^i^^-  No.  2?.>

Vol.  III.  I  i


'-n


234  '^^^    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

which  can  retard  or  accelerate  the  fall  of  the  Altaf
and  of  empires,  the  dilbrganization  of  every  church
and  (late  within  his  infpecT:ion. — It  is  by  means  of  his
direft  correfpondence,  and  that  of  his  Co-nationals,
that  the  diftoveries  of  the  Scrutators,  the  political
plans  of  the  brethren,  the  fpeculations  of  the  plodding
geniufes  of  the  Order,  the  plans  propofed  and  debated
in  the  coiincils  of  Princes,  and  every  thing,  in  fliort,
which  can  weaken  or  ftrengthen  the  opinion  of  the
people  ;  which  is  to  be  forefeen  or  hindered,  to  be  an-
ticipated or  haftened  in  each  town,  court,  or  family,
are  concentrated,  and  fubjeéted  to  the  views  of  the
llipreme  council  of  the  Sedl.  Hence  no  fovereign,  no
minifter  of  Hate,  no  father  of  a  family,  no  man  in  the
bonds  of  the  moll:  intimate  friendihip,  can  fay.  My  fe-
cret  is  my  own,  it  has  not,  it  will  not  come  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Areopagites.  By  means  of  thefe  fame
National  DirecT:ors  too,  we  behold  all  the  orders  of  the
illuminizing  Peers  gradually  defcending  to  the  adepts
of  all  nations,  of  all  provinces,  academies,  and  lodges,
whether  Minerval  or  Mafonic  ;  and  immediately  re-
afcending  through  thefe  fame  Nationals  an  exaft  ftatc-
ment  to  the  Areopagites  in  what  manner  each  com-
,  niand  has  been  executed.     It  is  by  the  Nationals  too,

that  the  fupreme  council  is  informed  of  the  negligent
bretliren  who  need  to  be  ftimulated,  of  the  tranfgref-
fors  and  ilubborn  adepts  who  deferve  punifliment,  and
{land  in  need  of  being  reminded  that  they  have  fworn
to  fubmit  both  their  lives  and  fortunes  to  the  commands
of  the  high  Superiors  (the  unknown  Fathers)  of  the
Areopagites.  In  vain  would  the  Seft  drive  to  ct)nceal
the  laws  which  the  code  lays  down  for  thci'e  lufpcCtors.
After  what  the  reader  has  already  feen  of  the  laws  of
the  Order,  he  mull  miturally  conclude  that  fuch  are
evidently  the  myfleries  comprehended  in  thofe  words,
T^here  jball  be  in  each  empire  a  National  Direâor  ajfu-
eiated  or  in  direfi  correfpondence  -with  t})e  Fathers  of  the
Order.

With  refpeft  to  the  laws  and  interior  economy  of
the  councils,  it  is  eafy  to  be  conceived,  that  the  Seel
has  fuccecded  in  encoir^pafllng  them  with  impenetrable
darknels.  Some  few  rays  of  light,  however,  have  been
eafl  on  it,  and  that  by  the  Fathers  themfelves.

In  the  iiift  place,  we  fee  ^/5?i'o-Knigge,  in  his  Apo-


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CON&PIRACY.

logy,  fpeaking  as  follows  of  thefe  fupreme  magiftrates
of  Ilkiminifm  :  "  Their  labours,  with  regard  to  the
"  parts  purely  fpeculativc,  were  to  have  in  view  the
"  knowledge  and  the  tradition  of  all  the  important,
**  holy,  and  fublime  difcoveries  to  be  made  in  the  re-
*'  lighus  myfteries  and  in  the  higher  philofophy.
*'  Twelve  Areopagites  only  are  to  compofe  this  tri-
**  bunal  ;  and  one  of  them  is  to  be  the  chief.  When
"  any  one  of  the  members  dies,  or  retires,  his  fucceffor
"  is  chofcn  fi'om  among  the  Regents."*  This  general
idea  given  by  Knigge,  of  the  Supreme  Council  is  in-
deed niyfterious  ; — but  he  could  fcarcely  be  expefted
to  piulifi)  more,  knowing  as  he  did  the  fate  which
awaits  thofe  who  betray  the  fecrets  of  the  Seel.  He
has,  however,  at  leaft  laid  enough  to  give  us  clearly
to  underfland,  that  all  the  religious  and  philofophical
or  rather  impious  and  fopbifticated  fpeculations  of  the
Epopts,  perpetually  perverting  the  iciences  and  ope-
rating  the  extinction  of  all  religious  ideas,  are  concen-
trated within  the  council  of  the  Areopagites  ;  we  have
fecn  them  combining,  digefting,  approving,  or  rejeft-
ing  thofe  plans  of  a  ne-w  religion  which  the  Mages  are
direAed  to  invent,  and  which  the  Seel  mea?is  viconti-
nently  to  give  to  the  ivorU.

In  his  familiar  correfpondence,  Spartacus  fpeaks
more  openly  and  with  greater  latitude  to  his  beloved
Cato.  Therein  it  appears,  that  anti-religious  fyftems
do  nf)t  alone  employ  the  meditations  of  the  Fathers  ;
for,  foon  after  having  mentioned  the  objeâ:  of  thofe
^dbus  Liccts  in  which  the  young  adepts  were  to  give
an  account  of  the  prejudices  they  might  have  difcover-
ed  in  themfelves,  which  of  them  predominated^  and
how  far  they  had  fucceeded  in  deflroying  them,  he
proceeds  ta  fay,  "  It  is  by  thefe  means  that  I  difcover
"  fuch  of  our  Order  as  have  the  proper  difpofitions
**  for  adopting  certain  fpecial  dodrines,  and  more  ele-
"  vated,  on  governments  and  religious  opinions."f
He  then  continues  :  "  The  maxims  and  politics  of  the
"  Order  are  completely  explained  in  the  end.     Here,

*  Laft  Obfervations  of  Philo,  Page  115^

f  Aus  diefen  kaiin  ich  erfehen  welche  geneigt  find  jrewifle  fonderbarc
ftaats  lehren,  wcitcrs  hinauf  religions  meyuungen  anzunclimeo.

Vol,  IK.  I  i  2


^^S


2^6  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACT.

"  in  tlie  Supreme  Council,  they  projecl  and  examine
"  the  plans  to  be  adopted  for  gradually  enabling  us
"  to  attack  the  enemy  of  reafon  and  human  nature
^'  perfondiy  (mif  den  leib.)  Here  alfo  the  mode  of
"  introducing  fiich  plai\5  into  tlie  Order  is  difcufied,
"  and  it  is  decided  to  which  brethren  they  are  to  be
*'  entrufted,  and  how  far  each  one  can  be  employed
"  in  their  execution,  in  proportion  to  the  infight  given
«  to  him.":}:

The  reader  is  already  too  well  aeqiKiinted  with  the
maxims  and  policy  of  Illuminifm,  not  to  join  with  me
in  faying,  Here  then  is  the  grand  object  of  this  Su-
preme Council  of  tlie  Seftî  It  is  in  that  dark  recefs
that  all  thofe  artiiices  s  re  devifed  for  rendering  tlie
diforganizing  fyftems  of  Libsrty  and  Equality  familiar
to  the  iiluminizing  adepts  :  There  is  exactly  afcertain-
ed  the  proportion  which  each  ckfs  of  the  brethren
can  bear  in  this  univerfal  deftruc^tion  of  religion,  em-
pire, fociety,  and  property  ;  there  again  is  the  day
anxioully  fought  and  the  means  prepared,  for  here-
after throwing  off  the  mafk,  and  attacking  pcrfonally
ihe  defenders  of  religion,  laws,  and  property,  as  fo
many  enemie:-.  to  reafon  and  humanity  ;  there  concen-
tiate  all  the  declarations,  the  reports,  the  plans  of  all
the  brethren  difperfed  throughout  the  univerfe,  that
the  SecT:  may  judge  of  its  own  (Ircngth,  and  compare
it  with  that  of  the  friends  to  the  Altar  and  the  Laws.
To  fum  up  all,  it  is  there  that  the  artifices  and  means
are  determined  on,  and  the  merits  and  powers  of  the
higher  adepts  are  invelligated  prior  to  their  being  en-,
trufted  witli  that  pait  of  the  grand  confpiracy  to  which
their  abilities  are  bed  adapted.  Let  the  reader  re-
member, that  it  is  not  a  ftranger  to  the  Sed  who  has
thus  defcribed  the  Aréopage  :  it  is  tlie  gi'and  legifla-
tor  of  Illuminifm  himfelf.  Can  we  any  longer  iland
in  need  of  the  regulations  for  this  council  ?  No  ;  we
well  know  what  they  muft  be  ;  we  know  that  impi-
ety, and  the  moft  confummate  arts  in  feducT;ion  and

•i

\  Und  am  end  folgt  die  totale  einficht  in  die  Pol'tk  und  maximen
des  Ordens.  In  diefen  oberften  Confeil,  werden  die  project:  entworfen,
wie  den  feinden  der  vernunft  und  Mervfchlichkeit  nach  und  nach  auf
dc:i  Lib  zu  gehen  feye  :  Wie  die  fache  unter  den  Ordens  mitgliedern
einzuleiten,  wen  es  anzuvertaiien  ?  Wie  ein  jeder  a  proportio:ie  feiner
einficht  kânne  dazu  gebraucht  werdea.— Original  Writings,  Letter  tic
CatocZ-wace,  joih  March,  \T]Z.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

fedition,  are  to  be  their  leading  features  ;  we  further
know,  that  its  members  muft  refemblc  Weifliaupt
himfelf,  before  they  can  be  permitted  to  fit  with  him
in  council.  Wiiat  other  bond  of  union  do  they  need,
befldes  the  machination  of  the  moft  hideous  plots,  the
juft  or  unjuft  means  of  forwarding  the  interefts  of  the
Scfï  as  much  as  circumftances  will  permit,  and  the
enfiiring  of  fuccefs  by  the  blackefl:  and  moft  profound
artifices  that  depravity  can  invent  ?  The  fertile  genius
of  the  legillator,  however,  would  not  commit  the  fuc-
cefs of  the  Icaft  of  his  crimes  to  chance.  He  attempt-
ed to  fketth  a  code  of  laws  for  his  Areopagites,  and
for  any  future  Spartacus  that  might  fucceed  to  him.
The  code  contains  but  a  fkificb  of  what  he  calls  laivx
ad  interim.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the  ninth  fedion  of
the  firft  volume  of  the  Original  Writings,  and  is  ad-
dreOed  to  the  Areopagites.  Many  other  paffigts  of
his  letters  relate  to  the  fame  objeâ:.— I  have  tranfcribed
the  follovv'ing  articles  :---

"  The  Areopagites  fhall  form  the  Supreme  Counxil
(literally,  the  Supreme  College.) — Their  occupation-?
iliall  relate  to  affairs  of  the  greateft  importance,  and
they  111  all  pay  little  or  no  attention  to  ftich  as  are  lefs
çflential. — They  may  recruit,  it  is  true  (konuen  jic  zvjar
recroiitiren  ;)  that  is  to  fay,  they  may  entice  Candi-
dates into  the  Order  ;  but  they  mud  leave  the  care  of
Çheir  inftrudion  to  fome  intelligent  adept.  From  time
to  time  they  will  vifit  thefe  Candidates,  to  infpire  them
with  frefli  ardour,  to  ftimulate  their  zeal— They  will
be  particularly  careful  in  feeing  that  the  progrefs  and
method  of  our  Illuminées  is  every  where  uniforni— -
They  will  more  particularly  watch  over  Athens  (Mv-*
fiich,  the  principal  Lodge  after  that  of  Ingolitadt,
where  Weifliaupt  refided  at  the  time  he  wrote  thefe
•inftrudions.)  They  will  make  no  reports  concerning
that  Lodge  to  any  body  but  Spartacus.  Tliey  will
fend  monthly  a  Itatement  of  ail  the  principal  events,  a
fort  of  Gazette  (Ein  art  von  Zeitwig,)  to  the  brethren
(Cnvfcii  ;)  that  is  to  fay,  to  thofe  only  who  are  initia-
ted in  the  lad  fecrets.  But  (continues  Weifliaupt)  nota
hciic,  this  Gazette  as  yet  has  been  no  more  tlian  our
common  journal  ;  the  Confcii  muft  compofe  one  for
the  ufe  of  the  Areopagites.— Thefe  latter  will  labour
ar  projcâf,  r.nî.'liorûîioiiSj  and  other  objects  of  a  fimiiar


'37


238  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIR.A.CY.

nature,  which  are  to  be  made  known  to  the  Confc'd
by  circular  letters.  They  are  the  people  who  are  to
bear  a  part  of  the  weight  of  the  general  correfpontl-
ence— They  are  not  allowed  to  open  the  letters  of
complaint  (Jie  litter  as  gravatoriales  ;)  that  is  to  fay,
thofe  containing  any  complaints  againfl:  them.  Theie
are  to  be  tranfmitted  to  the  general,  to  Spartacus,  as
a  fure  medns  of  informing  him  that  they  fiillil  their
tluty.  This  inftruftion  being  only  provifional,  and  re-
lating folely  to  the  Aréopage,  fliall  not  be  circulated  ;
but  the  council  will  take  a  copy  and  fend  back  the
Original  to  Spartacus.*

"  The  aifembling  of  the  council  is  to  be  regulated
according  to  the  feafts  marked  in  the  calendar  of  the
Order.  (Nach  dem  calendario  Illumlnatorum  an  Or-
dens  fcfien.)  But  this  was  foon  found  to  be  infufficient,
and  Weifliau])t  exhorts  his  Areopagites  to  meet  in  their
fcnate  every  polt-day,  and  at  the  hour  of  the  delivery
of  the  Ictrcrs.'*

Short  as  this  fkeich  of  a  Code  for  the  Areopagites
may  feem,  it  clearly  denotes  the  eifence  of  their  func-
tions, and  (liows  how  they  are  to  aél  as  a  central  point,
for  the  whole  Seel.  A  grand  qucftion  was  ftill  unde-
cided when  Spartacus  gave  thefe  laws  to  the  council  ;
wliich  was  nothing  lels  than,  Whether  Spartacus  was
to  preferve  a  legiflative  and  foverejgii  power  over  the
Members  of  this  Council,  Jimilar  to  that  authority
vhich  they  were  to  exercife  over  the  rell  of  the  Or-
der I — Great  Confpirators  will  feldom  brook  controul
even  by  their  fellows.  They  will  be  equal  among
Ihemfelves  and  in  their  dens  of  confpiracy.  Sp'artùcus-
Weifliaupt  was  naturally  of  a  defjiotic  difpoiition.  His
Areopagites  for  a  long  time  complained  of  it.f  But
lie  contended,  that  as  iounder,  he  had  the  indefeafible
right  of  giving  to  the  aflociation  thofe  laws  and  regu-
lations which  he  judged  necefiiiry  for  its  perpetuation,
lie  foon,  indeed,  repented  of  the  dccifion  he  had
given  againil  himfelf  in  favour  of  his  Senate,  "  That
"  the  piiirditv  of  votes  iliould  diclate  the  eternal  laws
«  of   the    Seil"  (Lex  fimper  vulitwa.l)      Notwith-

*  Extrads  from  tlie  InftruAioa  tp  Cato,__Mariu5,  and   Scrpio,  Ori-
ginal Writiugv  Vol.  I.  Sedb.   ix.

-f-  Letters  of  Philo  to  Cuto  and  la{l  Obfcrvations  of  Philo.
\  Letter  of  the  5Jth  November,  i-;8.


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRfACY

ftanding  thefe  complaints  of  the  Areopagites,  however,
he  fpee'dily  found  nieans  of  re-inftating  himfelf  in  that
authority,  the  privation  of  which  only  thwarted  his
artful  conceptions,  by  fubjeéling  them  to  the  opinions
of  perfons  lefs  confummate  in  the  confpiring  arts  than
their  mailer.  He  fometimes  fubmits  to  the  juftitica-
tion  of  his  condud  ;  but  that  is  the  very  moment  in
which  the  reader  fhould  obferve  him  artfully  reclaim-
ing all  the  rights  and  pretending  to  the  exercife  of
unlimited  defpotifm,  though  his  cant  appears  to  reject
the  very  idea  of  it.  Addreffing  his  opponents  in  the
fliape  of  his  pupils,  he  recalls  to  their  minds  the  mon-
ilrous  fervices  he  has  rendered  them  in  their  youth,
as  fo  many  benefadlions  of  the  moft  tender  friendlliip,
and  afks  them  "  of  what  they  can  in  their  confcienccs
complain?"  "  When  (fays  he)  did  you  ever  obferve
harfhnefs  or  haughtinefs  in  my  conduél,  with  refpeft
to  you  ?  When  did  I  ever  aifume  the  tone  of  Maftcr  ?
Is  it  not  rather  with  an  excefs  of  confidence,  of  good-
iiefs,  of  opennefs  with  my  friends,  that  I  may  be  re-
proached ?"— When  in  this  manner  Weiihaupt  has  cap.
tivated  his  Areopagites,  he  comes  to  the  point  :-—
"  Read  then  (he  fays)  my  letters  over  and  over  again.
''  You  will  therein  perceive  that  the  grand  ohjed  of
"  our  Society  is  not  a  thing  of  fmall  confequence  for
"  me  ;  that  I  knov/  how  to  view  it,  and  treat  it  alfo,
*'  in  the  moll  ferions  manner  ;  that  I  have  always
"  aimed  at  the  ellablifliment  of  order,  lubmiffion,
"  dilcipline,  and  adivity,  as  the  Ible  means  that  can
"  lead  you  to  the  grand  objeft.  In  undertaking  a
*'  work  of  fuch  vail  importance,  was  I  not  obl'ged  by
"  prayers,  exhortations  and  advice,  to  maintain  and
"  ftimulate  the  ardour  of  my  hril,  my  dearell  com*
*'  panions,  on  whom  every  thing  depended  ?- — If  I
*'  wifli  to  keep  xht  fuprems  direétion  in  r.^y  own  hands,
"  hear  my  reafons,  which  are  moll  certainly  of  great
"  weight  :

"  In  the  firil  place,  I  mull  necellarily  know  with
*'  whom  I  iiave  to  deal,  and  mull  be  alcertained  of
"  the  hdelity  of  ©ur  people  ;  and,  to  eiRiTtuate  this,
"  I  am  not  to  receive  reports  from  a  lixth  hand,  or
"  perhaps  one  flill  more  remote,  on  the  execution  of
"  my  plans,  which  have  been  approved  of  by  the  Elecl
"  of  our  Mylleries .  .  .  In  ths  next  place,  am  I  not


239


;^0        «  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

<''  the  Coîijhuâor  of  this  grand  Edifice!'  Is  there  nO
"  refpeel  due  to  me  ?  ...  .  When  my  fyftem  fhall  he
"  completed,  will  it  not  he  neceflary  for  me  to  infpecl
'*  the  whole  and  keep  every  man  at  his  dation  ?  It  is
"  a  great  and  radical  defed  in  a  fociety,  where  a  Su-
"  peri«)r  is  dependent  on  the  Inferiors,  as  it  has  been
"  attempted  to  render  me.

"  Bur,  to  (how  you  how  mUch  I  value  the  friend-
"  flr.p  of  my  former  friends,  above  all  the  authority
"  I  may  extrcife  over  others,  I  renounce  all  my  rights,
"  all  niy  authority.  Accept  my  warmcft  acknow.»
"  ledgments  for  all  your  pad  labours  and  patience.  I
"  flatter  myfclf  they  have  been  hurtful  to  nobody,  and
"  that  many  have  acquired  from  me  lights  on  fecrtt
"  focieties  which  they  would  not  eafily  have  found
"  elfewhere.  The  purity  of  my  intentions  is  my  con-
"  folation  and  my  recompenfe.  From  this  inllant  I
"  betake  myfelf  to  obfcurity  and  repofe,  where  I  (hall
"  not  meet  with  zealous  and  envious  opponents.  There
'.'  I  lliall  be  my  own  mafter,  and  my  own  fubjeél:."*

The  Illuminizing  Defpot  thus  artfully  pleaded  his
caufe.  The  Areopagites  were  impatient  of  his  au»
thority,  but  at  the  fame  time  felt  the  want  of  fo  difori;
ganizing  a  genius  ;  and  that  they  might  not  be  de-
prived of  its  co-operation  they  reproached  the  Legiila*
tor  with  the  extindion  of  his  zeal — The  lire,  however^
was  only  hidden  beneath  the  embers  ;  they  once  more
fubmit  to  the  yoke  of  their  former  chief,  who,  in-
flamed with  zeal,  diélates  the  conditions  on  which
alone  he  will  deign  to  place  himfelf  once  more  at
their  head.  Every  thing  is  worthy  of  being  remarked
in  rhem.  The  haughty  fpirit  in  which  they  are  con*
teived,  the  nature,  objed,  and  extent  of  the  power  lie
aflnmes  over  the  Supreme  Council  and  Eled  of  the
Oi'der,  are  all  worthy  of  our  attentive  notice.

"  I  begin  (fays  he)  by  telling  you  beforehand,  that
it  may  not  any  niiore  be  a  fubjed  of  furprize,  that  I
will  be  more  fevere  than  ever.  I  will  not  overlook  a
flngle  fault,  and  fhall  in  that  refpecT:  be  much  more
llrid  towards  perlons  whom  I  know  than  towards
thole  wiih  whom  1  am  not  fo  familiar.  My  objed
and  views  require  it.     And  to  whom  would  you  have

*   Original  Wrirings,  Vol.  I-  Sc<ft.  />,<).


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  ^24 1

me  addrefs  inyfelf,  if  not  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Order,
fince  they  alone  are  in  dired  correfpondence  with  me  ?
That  things  may  fuccecd,  it  is  necefHiry  that  we  fliould
be  aduated  hut  by  one  opinion,  onje  fcntiment,  and  be
acquainted  but  witli  one  language  !  And  how  can  that
be  accomplilhed,  if  I  cannot  freely  fpeak  my  mind  to
our  people?  I  will  then  re-alfume  my  poil  of  General
on  the  following  conditions  :

"  I.  That  you  will  execute  neither  more  nor  lefs
"  than  what  I  fhall  command.  1  fliall  cxpe(5l  it  in  fu-
"  tare  ;  at  leaft,  (hould  any  change  be  thought  neccl-
"  fary,  I  am  to  receive  previous  notice  of  it.

"  II.  I  expeft  that  eveiy  Saturday  a  proper  report
'*  flîall  be  fent  to  me  of  every  thing  that  has  taken  place
"  during  the  week,  and  that  it  lliall  be  in  the  form  of
"  ?d'wiites  figncd  by  ail  the  Eled  prefcnt.

"  III.  That  I  fjîail  be  informed  of  all  the  Members
"  that  have  been  recruited,  or  perfons  that  are  to  be
"  recruited,  witli  an  outline  of  their  characters  ;  and
"  let  fonie  particulars  concerning  them  be  added  when
"  they  arc  admitted.

"  IV.  That  the  ftatutes  of  the  clafs  in.  which  yoti
"  labour  be  punftually  obferved,  and  that  no  difpenfa-
''  tions  be  granted  without  previous  inveftigation.  For
"  Ihould  each  one  take  upon  himfclf  to  make  fuch
"  changes  as  he  pleafed,  where  would  be  the  unity  of
"  the  Order. — What  I  cxaft  from  yon,  you  fliall  cxaft
"  from  thofe  that  are  fubject  to  you,  If  there  be  no
"  order  and  fubardination  in  the  higher  ranks,  there
'^  will  be  none  in  the  lower."*

It  was  on  the  25th  of  May  1779,  that  Weifliaupt
dictated  thefe  laws  to  his  Aréopage.  A  Hfth  condition
Teems  to  have  made  them  merely  provilionai,  and  to
have  entruftcd  tiie  defpotic  power  in  Weifliaupt's
hands  only  until  the  Order  had  acquired  a  proper  con-
lillency  ;  but  he  took  care  not  ^gain  to  lofe  the  newly-
acquired  fupremacy  ;  though  the  Areopagites  ftill  re-
gretted the  lofs  of  ibeir  Ariftocracy,  and  the  being  re-
duced to  be  the  mere  agents  or  prime  minifters  of  the
Spartacus  of  the  Order.  But  let  us  attend  to  that
Spartacus,  who  has  always  rcprtfcnted  the  mod  legiti-

*  Original  ^VI•it;nTs,  Yc\.  H.  Letters  49  and  M.-

Vol.  lU.  ^    K  k


241  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACV.

mate  authority  as  an  outrage  on  human  nature.  Let
us  hear  him  invoking  Machiavel  in  fupport  of  that
which  he  \vi flies  to  exercife  over  the  Order.  He
pleads  his  own  caufè  with  Zwack,  who  is  alio  jealous
,  of  his  Mafter,  by  fliowing  all  the  diforder  it  occa-
fioned,  by  every  body  wifliing  to  introduce  his  own
ideas  into  the  Order,  and  then  quotes  the  following
palfages  from  Tvlachiavel  :  "  It  muft  be  laid  down  as  a
"  general  rule,  that  it  feldom  or  never  happens  that
"  any  Government  is  either  well-founded  at  firft,  or
"  thoroughly  reformed  afterwards,  except  the  pUin  be
"laid  and  conduâed  l'y  one  man  okly,  who  has  the
"  fole  power  of  giving  all  orders  and  making  all  laws
**  that  are  necelTary  for  its  eflablifliment.  A  prudent
"  and  virtuous  Founder  of  a  State,  therefore,  whofc
"  chief  aim  is  to  promote  the  welfare  of  many  rather
**  than  to  gratify  his  own  ambition,  to  make  provifion
"  for  the  good  of  his  country,  in  preference  to  that  of
"  his  heirs  or  fuccelfors,  ought  to  endeavour  by  all
"  means  to  get  the  fupreme  authority  wholly  into  his
"  hdJids  :  nor  will  a  reufonable  man  ever  condemn  him
"  for  taking  any  meafures  (even  the  mofc  extraordinary,
"  if  they  are  neceffary)  for  that  purpofe  :  The  mea:is
"  indeed  Jim  fiem  culpable,  but  the  end  will  juftify
"  him  if  it  be  a  good  one  ; — for  he  only  is  blameable
"  who  ufes  violence  to  throw  things  into  confufion  and
"  diibadion  ;  and  not  he  who  does  it  to  eftablifli
**  peace  and  good  order."  After  this  long  quotation
which  Weilîiaupt  has  made  from  a  French  tranflation
gf  Machiavel,  Chap.  IX.  Difcowfa  upon  the  firji  De-
cad  of  Livy,  he  continues  in  a  forrowful  tone  :  "  but  1
"  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  fo  favourable  a  decifion»
*'  The  Brethren  have  viewed  that  which  is  but  a  necef-
"  lary  law  in  the  art  of  governing,  in  the  light  of  am-
"  bition  and  a  tliirft  of  dominion."*  In  the  midfl  of
this  contention  for  power,  he  felt  himfelf  fo  fuperior  in
the  art  of  governing  confpiring  alTociations  at  leaft,
that  he  did  not  hcfitate  at  writing  to  his  Areopagites,
y'ls  to  politics  and  morality,  Gent'kmcn,  you  îuuji  confifs ,
that  you  are  as  yat  at  a  great  dijiance  behind  me.f  lie
at  length  fucceeded  in  perfuading  them,  that  it  was
necelTary  that  the  General  of  the  Order  fnould  alfo,  as

*  Original  Writingr.,  Vol.  II.  Let,  2,  to  Cato.
t  IHJ.  Let.  10-


THE    ANTISOCIAL    ÇONSPIR.VCY.

.prclidcnt  of  the  Areopagkes  holding  the  hslni  of  the
Onler,  be  the  abfulutc  cllrcélor4

Weilhaupr,  who  left  nothing  relating  to  tlie  difor-
ganizing  arts  in  an  iinperfcd  ftate,  niuft,  no  doubt,
have  compofed  inllrudions  to  guide  liis  fucctflbrs  in
the  cxercile  of  their  lupreniacy,  and  to  teach  thcna
how  to  make  the  fame  ufe  of  it  which  he  intended.
But  the  reader  will  ealily  conceive,  that  thefe  nevtr
could  have  efcaped  the  vigilance  of  the  Sed,  nor
pierced  the  dark  cloiid  with  wliich  it  had  erivelopcd  it-
lelf.  It  may  even  be  polfible  that  Wcil'haupt  had  not  fuf-
iicient  confidence  in  his  Areopagites  to  entrufl  them
with  the  entire  plan.  Throughout  the  whole  hierar-
chy of  lUumiuifm  the  lower  degree  is  entirely  ignorant
of  the  particular  inlli-u>5lions  of  the  fuperior  degrees  ;
and  why  fiiould  not  Weifliaupt,  who  wiflied  to  per-
petuate his  diforganizing  genius  in  all  the  fucceeding
•Generals,  have  followed  the  fame  plan  ?  He  undoubt-
edly diftated  laws  and  ruks  for  their  condud,  gave
thcni  rights  which  were  to  maintain  both  themfelvcs
and  their  xAreopagites  in  their  hierarchal  fuperiority,
and  fécond  them  in  the  purfuit  of  their  grand  objed  ;
and  thefe  were  entitled  Inftrudions  for  the  General  of
the  lUiimiiiees.  No  hiflorian  can  flatter  liimfelf  with
the  difcovery  of  fuch  a  code  of  artifice  and  cunning  ;
the  moft  unrelenting  wickednefs  and  bypocrify  had  in-
vented it  ; .  and  genius  alone  cannot  pretend  to  dive
into  fuch  fecrets.  The  biftorian  can  only  pretend  to
collccT:  thofe  articles  which  are  to  be  found  in  Weif-
haupt's  familiar  correfpondcnce,  or  in  other  parts  of
llie  code  or  writings  of  the  Sed.  Were  we  to  throw
this  compilation  into  the  form  of  initrudions,  the  fok
lowing  might  be  nearly  the  refult  of  our  refearch.

I.  The  General  fnall  be  chofen  by  the  twelve  Peers
of  the  Aréopage,  on  the  plurality  of  votes.*

II.  The  Areopagites  can  only  eled  one  of  the  mem-
bers of  their  fenate  for  General  ;  (ehi  p.us  iJjrher  mitte
geiuabltes  oberliaupt  ;)\  that  is  to  fay,  a  man  who  has
Jufficiently  dillinguilhed  himfelf  among  the  Regents
to  be  admitted  among  the  twelve  fuprome  adepts  of
Illuminifm,  and  who  has  afterwards  made  himfelf  !aj!

\  General  Plan  of  the  Order,  No.  5.

*  JL;ift  Obfervations  of  Philo,  Page  iij.  f  Ibid,

Vol.  HI.  K  k  2


243


^44  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

eminent  in  their  council,  that  he  is  judged  fo  be  the
firfl  lihiminee  ii)  the  world.

III.  The  adept  is  fuppofed  to  poflcfs  qualities  re-
quifite  for  a  General  in  confequencc  of  ihofc  he  may
have  evinced  before  lie  was  called  to  the  Supreme
Couiicil.  As  he  is  to  prcfide  over  the  whole  Order,
he  nnifl  (more  than  any  body  ellV)  be  im.pre(icd  with
the  principles  of  the  founder,  and  be  divefted  of  aH
rclir^ious,  political,  or  national  prejudices.  The  grand
objetfi:  of  the  Order  muft  be  more  particularly  incul-
cated into  him,  namely,  that  of  teaching  the  v/hole
iiniverfe  to  fct  afide  all  government,  laws,  and  altars  ;
and  he  muil:  perpetually  attend  to^  the  grand  interefts
of  human  nature.  His  zeal  is  to  be  ftimulated  at  the
fi^ht  of  every  man  who  is  fubjefted  to  any  authc^rity.
It  is  to  rcinllate  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  in  their
original  Liberty  and  Equality  that  he  is  conftitutcd
General  of  all  tlie  Illuminées  that  are  or  will  be  fpread
over  the  woild  during  his  reign,  all  labouring  at
the  acconîpiilhment  of  the  grand  revolution  of  the

IV.  The  General  fliall  have  immediately  under  hrm
the  twelve  Peers  of  the  Supreme  Council,  and  the  va-
rious agents  and  fecretnries  which  he  fnail  judge  necefw
fary  to  fetond  hi;n  in  the  cxercife  of  his  funAions.^

V.  The  better  to  fecure  himfelf  from  the  notice  of
the  civil  and  ecclcriailical  powers,  he  may  aflTume,  af-
ter the  example  of  tlie  founder,  fome  public  office
under  the  very  Powers  the  annihilation  of  which  is  to
be  his  fole  objeél.  But  he  will  be  only  known  to  the
Areopagites  and  to  his  agents  and  fecrctaries  in  his
quality  of  General.*  Tiie  better  to  conceal  the  rell-
dence  of  the  General,  the  town  where  he  has  fixed
will  have  three  names.  The  common  name  known
to  all  ;  the  geographical  one  peculiar  to  the  Order  ;
and  a  third  known  only  to  the  Areopagites  and  the
Confcii  or  Elcft.f

VI.  Our  fucccfs  greatly  depending  on  the  moral
condud  of  the  Areopagites,,  the  General  will  pay  par-
ticular attention  to  prevent  all  public  fcandals  which
might  hurt  the  reputation  of  the  Order.     He  will  rc-

\  See  the  Myficrlcs.  §  Sci  above.

^  Orig.  Writ.  Sp.utacus's  I,cUer«,  pnlTiiTi,  tt  fupia.
t  Oriff.  Writ.  Vol.  I.  Seel.  '..        '


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.  245

puffent  têthem  in  tlie  ftrongeft  colours  how  much  bad
example  will  contribute  to  alienate  from  the  Order  the
minds  of  perfons  who  might  othervvife  prove  its  moil
uicful  members.^

VIL  The  better  to  pi*eferve  that  refpeft  which  vir-
tue commands  from  inferiors,  tiic  General  will  aiïiniie
the  charader  of  aullere  morals.  That  he  may  always
have  the  grand  objeél  prefcnt  to  his  mind,  and  be
"wholly  occupied  with  the  duties  he  has  to  fulfil  ;  let
him  never  lofe  fight  of  that  great  maxim  To  frequently
inculcated  in  his  letters  by  the  founder,  as  tlje  leading
feature  to  which  he  owed  all  his  fuccefi<"s.  MultniPi
fudavit  et  aljlt,  ahjiinuit  venerc  et  vino.  He  neither  fecV'
td  heat  nor  cold  ;  he  ahjhnned  from  wine  and  vjonien,
that  he  might  always  be  mafter  of  his  fecret,  always
be  mafter  of  himfelf,  and  prepared  for  all  exigencies
where  the  interefts  of  the  Order  might  require  it.*

VIII.  The  General  fhaU  be  the  central  point  for  the
Areopagites,  as  the  latter  are  for  tlie  whole  body  of  Illu-
minées. That  is  to  fay,  each  Arcopagite  holding  cor-
refpondence  with  the  National  Infpeétors  is  to  make  a
report  of  all  the  ^litus  Licets  fent,  and  of  all  the  fe-
rrets difcovered  by  the  correfponding  Infpedor  ;  the
fecrcts  thus  flowing  from  all  parts  will  ultimately  fettle
under  the  eye  of  the  General.f

IX.  The  funcS:ions  of  the  General,  and  the  fiiccefs  of
his  difpofitions,  greatly  depending  on  the  information
be  receives  by  means  of  this  correipondencc,  he  Vvull
diftribute  it  among  his  Areopagites,  affigning  to  each
that  of  a  particulyar  nation  whofe  Infpedor  is  to  tranf-
mit  ail  his  reports  to  him. 4:

X.  The  principal  heads  of  this  correfpondence  fliail
be~ift.  The  nunîber  of  the  brethren  in  general,  that
the  force  of  the  SeA  may  be  afcertained  in  each  nation,
—idly,  Thofe  brethren  who  diltinguifli  themfelvcs  the
molt  by  their  zeal  and  intelligence.— 3dly,  Thofe  adepts
who  hold  important  offices  about  the  Court,  in  the
Church,  Armies,  or  MagiPcracy  :  alfo  what  kinds  of
fervices  might  be  expected,  from  or  prefcribed  to  theni
in  the  grand  revolution  which  our  Order  was  pre-
paring for  human  nature.— 4thly,  The  general   pro-

§  lb.  Vol.  II.  Let.  9  and  ic.  *  Ibid.  Vol.  I.  Let.  16.  &c.

t  Vide  fiipra.  +  Ibid.  Vol.  I^.  Let.  6,  13,  &c.


g^Q  TBE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

grefs  which  our  maxims  and  our  dodrine  were  mak-
ing in  the  public  opinion  ;  how  far  nations  were  pre-
pared for  the  grand  revolution  ;  what  ftrength  and
means  of  defence  Hill  remained  in  the  hands  of  the
civil  and  ccclcfiartical  powers  ;  what  perlons  were  to
be  placed  or  difplaced  ;  what  engines  were  to  be  play-
«d  off,  to  haftcn  and  leciire  the  fuccefs  of  our  revolu-
tion ;  and  the  means  neceifary  to  buid  the  hands  of
thoTe  who  might  relilt.*

XL  If  from  this  correfpondence  he  fliould  judge  it
neceflary  to  difmifs  any  of  the  brethren  from  the  Or-
der, (and  all  the  rights  recognized  by  the  adepts  as  in-
herent in  the  Order,  particularly  that  oï  Life  and  Death
being  in  the  hands  of  the  General)  he  will  have  to  de-
cide wjjat  further  puniihment  is  to  follow  the  ejed
ment  :  whether  the  culprit  is  to  be  declared  infamous
throughout  all  the  lodges  of  the  Order,  or  whether  the
pain  of  deatii  is  to  be  pronounced  againft  him.f

XII.  The  General,  after  having  chailifed  the  impru-
dent, cowardly,  and  treacherous  adepts,  will  turn  his
attention  towards  tl^e  diicovery  of  thofe  brethren  who
may  be  beft  fitted  for  feconding  his  views  in  each  em-
pire. Without  making  himfelf  known  to  them,  he
will  eflabUili  a  line  of  communication  between  them.
He  will  himfelf  prepare  the  links  of  this  immenfe
chain  after  the  manner  laid  down  by  our  founder  as
the  grand  means  of  governing,  from  his  myllerious
centre,  all  the  diverging  ramifications  of  the  Seel  to
the  extremities  of  the  earth  ;  as  a  means  of  vivifying
invifible  armies  in  an  inflant,  of  putting  them  in  mo-
tion, of  directing  their  courfe,  and  of  irretrievably
executing  the  mod  aftoniHùino;  revolutions,  even  bc-
fore  the  very  Potentates  whole  thrones  are  overturned
ha\^  had  time  to  furniife  their  danger.

XIII.  The  ufe  of  the  chain  is  obvious  and  eafy.  To
touch  the  iirft  link  is  a\l  that  is  required.  A  lingle
flroke  of  a  pen  is  the  grand  fpriug  that  imparts  mo-
tion to  the  whole.  But  the  fuccefs  depends  on  the
choice  of  the  time.  In  his  hidden  abode  the  General
fliall  meditate  the  means,  and  catch  the  propitious
moment.     Tlie  fignal  of  univcrfal  revolution  (hall  not

*  See  the  diiTercnt  degrees  and  the  views  with  which  the  ^Hui
i^iceis  and  tablets,  &c,  &c.  are  written.

■\  Orig.  Writ.  VoL  lUI.et.  8,  et  fupr?,  Oath  of  the  Novic^;.


THE    Ah^nSOClAL    CONSPIR.\CV.  ^47

be  givtn  tHl  a  time  when  the  combined  force  and  in»
ftantaneous  efforts  of  the  brethren  fhall  be  irrefiftible.

The  illuminizing  General  who  fhall  have  n::anagecî
this  chain  with  the  greateft  art,  who  fliall  have  fpread
it  both  far  and  near,  who  fhall  have  imparted  ro  it  a
fiifficient  power  of  aétion  to  bear  away  and  overturn
^t  a  fingle  elîbrt  every  throne  and  every  altar,  all  po-
litical and  religious  inftitutions,  and  rtiall  drew  the
earth  with  the  ruins  of  empires—He  will  be  the  creator
of  the  Mcm-Kincr,  fole  king,  fole  Jbvereign  of  his  actions
as  of  his  thoughts.  To  that  General  is  referved  the
glory  of  confumraating  the  grand  revolution  which  has
fo  long  l)een  the  ultimate  objeft  of  our  myderies.

Whatever  proofs  I  may  have  adduced,  that  mult  na-
turally lead  my  readers  to  fuch  a  conclufion,  it  may
neverthelefs  be  an  objed  of  furprife  to  them  to  fee
that  Wcifhaupt  had  really  planned  this  long  chain  of
fubterraneous  communications,  by  which  himfelf  and
his  fuGceflors  were  empowered  invifibly  to  aduate
thoufands  of  legions,  which  inftantaneoufly,  on  a  day
prefcribed,  might  burft  into  exiftence  armed  with
pikes  and  torches,  and  all  the  horrid  implements  of
wnivcrfal  revolution.  Let  my  readers  then  cafl  their
eyes  on  this  fèrîcs  of  progreffion,  which  Weifliaupt  has
with  his  own  hand  traced  in  liis  letters  firfl:  to  Cato-
î?iwack  and  afterwards  to  Celfus-Y>diàtY.  The  expla-
nations are  his  own,  and  let  them,  be  particularly  at-
teiided  to.

"  For  the  prefcnt,  dired  nobody  to  me  but  Cortez^
"  that  I  may  have  fome  leifure  to  digcU  my  fpecula-
*'  tions,  and  determine  each  one's  place  ;  for  every
"  thing  depends  on  that.  My  operations  with  yoiï
"  fliall  be  direded  by  the  following  table  :


BO  OB        CO*        O  C


00000000

«^"^-n     fvA^n     r^-^     (■«-'■^1     (^'-^^     r»>»-^      rvA-n     r^.^^

V   00    00    00    00    00   00   00   O


24.8  THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIIL\CY<

"  Immediately  under  me  I  have  two  adepts,  into
"  whom  I  infule  my  whole  fpirit  ;  each  of  thefe  cor-
'^  refponds  witii  two  others,  and  fo  on.  By  this  me-
"  thod  and  in  the  fimpleft  way  pofTible,  I  can  inflame
*'  and  put  in  motion  thoufands  of  m.en  at  once.  It  is
*'■  by  fuch  uîeans  that  orders  are  to  be  tranfmitted  and
"  political  op-rations  carried  on.*

A  few  days  after  he  writes  to  Cc-^j-Bader,  and  tells
him,  "  I  have  fent  to  Cato  a  table  (fcbemn)  Ihowing
"  how  one  may  methodic  ally  and  without  much  trouble
"  arrajige  a  great  iimltitude  of  men  in  the  jineji  order
"  pofikle.  He  will  probably  have  fliown  it  to  you  ;  if
"  he  has  not,  afli  for  it.  Here  is  the  figure  (ihe7i  fol-
hvjr  the  figure.  J

"  The  fpirit  of  the  firft,  of  the  moft  ardent,  of  the
moll  profound  adept  daily  and  incellantly  communi-
cates itfclf  to  the  two  A,  A  ;  by  the  one  to  B,  B  ;  by
"  tlîe  other  to  C,  C  :  B  B  and  C  C  communicate  it  to
*•  the  eight  following  ;  thele  to  the  next  fixteen,  from
^'  thence  to  the  thirty-two  and  to  downwards.  I  have
"  written  a  long  explanation  of  it  all  to  Cato.  In  a
"  word,  ei'ery  man  has  hi!  Aid^-Major,  l'y  vjhofi  means
*'  Jie  imrmdiateiy  acts  on  all  the  others,  jhe  ivhole  force
'*  firjt  if  lies  from  the  centre  and  then  Jiows  back  again
*'  to  it.  Each  caie  iuhjec^s,  as  it  were,  to  his  own  per-
"  fon,  tvjo  men  whom  he  f  arches  to  the  bottom,  vjpom

*  I  here  feci  it  incumbent  on  me  to  infert  the  original
text,  to  fliov/  that  I  do  not  exaggerate  Weifliaupt's  meaning.
The  following  are  the  terms  in  which  he  writes  to  Cato  : —
*'  An  mich  feibfi:  aber  vervcifen  fie  dermalen  noch  keinen  un-
*'  mittelbar  als  d.cn  Cortezy  bis  ich  fchreibe,  darnit  ich  in-
*'  de/Ten  fpeculiren,  und  die  leiite  gefchickt  rangieren  kann  ;
**  den  davon  hdngt  allés  ab.  Ich  werde  in  diefer  figur  mit
*'  ihnen  operiren."  (Here  (lands  the  fgure  already  inferted
above  :  The  Letters  ABC  allude  to  the  exphmation  given  in  the
Letter  to  Celfns.)  "  Ich  habe  zwey  uninittclbar  unter  mir  wel-
*'  chen  ich  nielnen  ganzen  gcifl  einhauchc,  und  von  diefen
*'  zwcyen  hat  wieder  jeder  zwey  andere,  und  fo  fort.  Auf
**  diefe  art  kano  ich  auf  die  cinfachiîe  art  taufend  menfchen
*•  in  bewegung  und  flanimen  fctzen.  Auf  eben  diefe  art
**  mufs  man  die  ordres  ertheilen,  und  ira  pclitifchen  opieren."
Original  JVritlngs,  Fol.  IL  Let.  8.  to  Cato,  of  the  I  6th  Feb'
ruary  1782.  It  may  be  remarked  that  Weifhaupt's  fiile  is
none  of  the  purefl.


TItt:    ANTÎSOCL^L    CONSPIRACY.  249

**  he  oh/èrver^  difpofes,  inflames  and  drills,  as  it  Were,
"  like  recruits,  that  they  may  hereafter  exercile  and
"  fire  with  the  whole  regiment.  The  fame  plan  may
*•*  be  followed  throughout  all  the  degrees."!

This  is  not  a  document  which,  like  many  others,
flowed  unintentionally  from  Weifhaupt's  pen,  and
which  he  left  his  difciples  to  colled,  in  order  to  form
the  political  Code— Give  me  leifure  to  digeji  my  fpecn-
liitUms,  and  to  deterjnim  each  one's  place— It  ij  hy  fuch
means  that  orders  are  to  be  tranfmitted,  and  political
operations  carried  on.  Thcfe  words  evidently  demon-
ftrate,  that  it  is  not  a  provifionai  law  which  he  is  about
to  pronounce,  but  a  premeditated  one,  that  is  to  laft
till  that  fatal  period  v/hen  whole  legions,  fired  with  his
fpirit,  are  to  be  led  to  that  terrible  exercife  for  which
he  had  fo  long  been  drilling  them  ;  that  time  fo  ex-
prefsly  foretold  by  Weifhaupt  and   his   Hierophants,

f  The  original  text  of  this  letter  is  to  be  found  in  the
Original  Letters,  Vol.  II.  Let.  13,  to  Ci?^x  without  any
date.  It  is  as  follows  :  "  Ich  habe  an  Cato  ein  fchema  gef-
"  chickt,  wie  man  planmaffig  eine  grofle  menge  menfchen  in
**  der  fchonften  otdnung  .  .  .  abrichten  kann.  .  .  Es  ift  diefc
"  forme."

"  Der  geift  des  erften,  warmften,  und  einfichtfvolleftert
"  communicirt  fich  unaufhorlich  und  tdglich  an  A  A — A  an
"  B  B  :  und  das  andere  an  C  C' — B  By  und  C  C  communi-
*'  ciren  fich  auf  die  n'àmliche  art  an  die  unteren  8.  Diefe  an
*♦  die  weitere  16,  und  16  an  32,  und  fo  weiter.  An  Cuto  hab
*'  ich  es  weitl'àufiger  gefchrieben  :  Kurz  !  Jeder  hat  zwey
"  fliigel  adjutanten,  wodurch  er  mittelbar  in  all  iibrige  wirkt.
"  Im  centro  geht  allé  kraft  aus,  und  vereinigt  fich  audi
"  wie'der  darinn.  Jeder  fucht  fich  in  gewiffer  fubordinatioa
*'  zwey  manner  aus,  die  er  ganz  ftudiert,  beobachtet,  abrich*
"  tet,  anfeuerr,  und  fo  zu  fagen,  wie  recroutcn  abrichtet,  -
**  damit  fie  dereinlt  mit  dem  ganzen  regiment  abfeuern  und
*'  exerciren  konncn.  Das  kann  man  durch  alle  grade  fo  -
"  einrichten."

I  do  not  find  the  long  explanation  mentioned  as  fent  to
Cato  by  Weifhaupt,  nor  do  I  remember  to  have  feen  it.  It
would  mofl  certainly  be  curious,  and  we  fiiould  fee  in  a  clear-
er light  how  he  was  to  infufe  his  fpirit  into  and  fire  the  minds
of  thoufands  of  men  ;  but  ftill  thefe  two  letters  are  proofs
more  than  fiifficient  for  our  purpofe.

Vol.  III.  L  I


250


THE    ANTISOCIAL    CONSPIRACY.

when  they  were  to  tie  haiuh,  to  fuhjiigatCy  fire  on,  and
vandalize  the  whole  uiiiverfe.

When  this  fatal  law  fliall  be  fulfilled,  then  will  the  laft
Spartacus  fally  forth  from  his  baleful  den,  and  triumph-
antly claim  the  fanguinary  palm  of  murder  and  de-
ftrudion  from  the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,  who
would  fcarcely  have  been  worthy  of  bcin^  his  pre-
curfor.  The  earth  loaded  with  the  ruins  of  laws  and
empires  ;  mortals  blafpheming  their  God  ;  nations  la-
menting p\er  their  conflagrating  towns,  their  palaces,
public  monuments  and  arts,  and  even  their  cottages,
all  ovei'thrown  ;  fociety  weeping  over  its  laws  ;--luch
fliall  be  the  fight  which  the  lait  Spartacus  will  con-
template with  joy,  when  he  fhall  exultingly  exclaim,
"  At  length,  my  Brethren,  the  long-wiflied  for  day  is
come  ;  let  us  celebrate  the  name,  and  dedicate  this  day
as  facred  to  the  memory  of  Weifhaupt,  our  founder.
We  have  confummated  his  grand  myfteries  ;  no  laws
fliall  exill,  but  thofe  of  his  Order.  Should  nations  be
ever  tempted  to  rctiuii  to  their  "Wickecinefs,  (to  lawa
and  fociety)  this  code,  which  lias  once  deftroyed  their
bonds,  may  do  it  again."

Will  not  hell  vomit  forth  its  legions  to  applaud  this
ïaft  Spartacus,  to  contemplate  in  amazen^ent  this  work
of  the  lUuminizing  Code  .'--Will  not  Satan  exclaim,
"  Here  then  are  men  as  I  wiflied  them.  I  drove
them  from  Eden  ;  AVeifliaupt  has  driven  them  to  the
forefls.  I  taught  them  to  offend  their  God  ;  he  has
made  them  rejeft  their  God  entirely.  I  had  left  the
earth  to  repay  them  for  the  fweat  of  their  brow  ;  he
has  ftricken  it  with  ilerility  ;  for  it  will  be  in  vain  for
them  to  pretend  to  till  and  fow  that  which  they  fliall
not  reap.  I  left  them  in  their  inequality  of  riches  ;
but  he  has  fwept  all  away  ;  he  has  dciboycd  the  very
idea  of  property  ;  he  has  transformed  mankind  into
brigands.  Thtir  vijtues,  happinefs,  and  greatnefs  un-
der the  protcding  laws  of  fociety  or  of  their  country,
was  an  oljed  of  jealouly  to  me  ;  but  he  has  curfed
their  laws  and  their  country,  and  has  reduced  them  to
the  flupid  pride  and  ignorance  of  the  roaming,  fa-
vage,  and  vagabond  clans.  In  tempting  them  to  fm,
I  could  not  deprive  them  of  repentance  and  the  hope
of  pardon  ;  but  Weifliaupt  has  taught  them  to  feoff  at
crime  and  dcfpife  repentance.      Villany  without  re-


THE    ANTISOCL\L    CONSPIRACY.  2  <?  t

Miorfe,  and  hopelefs  misfortune,  is  all  that  he  has  left
to  the  niilcrable  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ?•

Meanwhile,  before  Satan  Ihall  exultingly  enjoy  this
triumphant  fpeftacle,  which  the  Illuminizing  CqcIc  is
preparing,  let  us  examine  how  far  fuccefs  has  hitherto
attended  on  its  footfteps-î  What  (liare  has  it  borne  in
that  revolution  which  has  already  defoiated  To  many
countrie<?,  and  tnenaces  fo  many  others.  How  it  en-
gendered that  difaftrous  monder  called  Jacobin,  raging
iincontrouled,  and  alinofl  unoppofed,  in  thefe  days  of
horror  and  devaftation.— In  Ihort,  what  effèfts  this
Code  of  the  Illuminées  has  produced,  and  what  effects
it  may  produce.— This  will  be  the  ohjeft  of  the  hijio-
rkd  part  of  the  Seét^  and  of  the  IVth  and  Inft  Volume
of  thefe  Memoirs.

Emd    of    the   third    Part.


APPENDIX.

Notes  relating  to  fome  Pajfages  contained  in  the.
two  Jirjl  Volumes.

I.

THE  public  has  felt  convinced  hov»  nearly  it  is  concern-
ed in  the  confpiracies  which  form  the  fubjefl  of  thefe
Memoirs  ;  and  to  this  circumflance  it  is,  that  I  am  indebted
for  the  great  fuccefs  they  have  met  with,  and  the  fale  of  an
entire  Edition  of  looo  Copies  before  the  Third  Volume  was
fent  to  the  prefs.*  By  fueh  an  extraordinary  mark  of  public
approbation,  I  am  naturally  excited  to  vindicate  thçle  Me-
moirs from  any  afperfions  that  might  in  the  flightefl:  manner
impugn  their  authenticity.  Not  indeed  that  any  fuch  danger
is  to  be  apprehended  from  a  letter  fenr  to  the  Editors  of  the
Britifh  Critic,  and  which  its  author  only  choofes  to  fign  with
the  initials  D.  J.  I  arm  not,  however,  the  lefs  obliged  to  the
anonymous  writer  ;  for,  by  treating  what  I  have  faid  concern-
ing Voltaire's  death  as  calumny  and  vulgar  report  (though  I
had  afferted  nothing  bur^what  was  grounded  on  juridical  mi-

*  The  Englilh  Edition  has  founJ  nearly  a  fiiiiilar  demand,  though
*he  tran.'lation  was  only  undertaken  after  the  I'rtiich  Original  liad  bccij
fcu>fi  time.  publKhed.

Vol.  n\.  h  1  2


APPENDIX.

frates  depofit€d  at  Paris  in  the  hands  of  Monf.  Momet,  No-
tary Public,  and  on  the  teftimony  of  the  celebrated  Mr.  Tron-
chin,)  he  affords  me  the  opportunity  of  laying  before  the
public  the  folfbvving  letter  from  M.  D^.  Luc,  a  name  that
needs  no  obfervation  from  me  to  enhance  the  value  of  its
leflimony.

Letter  from  M.  De  Luc  on  the  Death  of  Voltaire.

"    SIR,

**  Your  Memoirs  illujlraiing  the  Hifiory  of  jfacohinifm  having
been  the  other  day  the  fubjedt  of  converfation,  it  was  object-
ed, that  the  defcription  of  Voltaire  (fo  prominent  a  feature  in
your  Work)  was  fo  very  diilimilar  to  that  given  by  the  other
hiftorlans  of  his  life,  that  perlons  at  a  diftance  from  the  fourcc
of  information  were  at  a  lofs  what  judgment  to  form.  The
difference  between  your  account  of  his  death,  and  that  which
appeared  in  a  Life  of  Voltaire  tranflated  from  the  French  by
Mr.  Monke,  and  publiHied  in  London  1787,  was  particularly
noticed,  and  incited  me  to  confult  that  work.'  The  Tranfla-
tor  defcribes  himfelf  as  a  young  naval  ajficer^  tvhoy  luhile  at
Paris  i  'wijhed  to  emfloy  his  recefs  from  profeffional  duty^  both  to
his  itnprovement  and  advantage.  Nothing  but  the  youth  of  Mr.
Monke,  and  his  want  of  experience,  can  excufe  his  under-
taking ;  for,  to  let  his  countrymen  benefit  by  the  proficiency
he  was  making  at  Paris,  he  diffufed  among  them,  through  the
medium  of  this  tranflation,  all  that  poifon  which  was  then  fo
induftrioufly  emitted,  to  produce  an  cffed  now  but  too  well
known,  and  which  I  hope  he  does  not  at  this  day  contemplate
without  horror.

-  "  I  wilt  nïake  no  obfervations  on  this  Life  of  Voltaire  ;  you
knovv  from  what  fource  it  came,*  and  how  little  capable  it  was
of  feducing  any  but  heedlefs  youths  who,  without  any  know-
Jedge  of  the  age  they  lived  in,  were  fHll  fufceptible  of  a  fort
of  admiration  for  every  thing  that  was  greaty  though  in  vice
and  villany.  As  one  of  the  artifices  of  inipiety  is  to  repre-
fent  its  champions  salmly  breathing  their  laft  in  the  bed  of
honour,  I  feel  it  incumbent  on  me  to  confirm  what  you  have
faid  on  one  of  thofe  circumftancf?  of  the  death  of  Voltaire
which  is  fo  clofely  connected  with  all  the  reft.

"  Being  at  Paris  in  1781,  I  v.as  often  in  company  with
one  of  thofe  perfons  whofe  teftimony  you  invoke  on  public  re-
ports, 1  mean  Mr.  Tronchin.  He  was  an  old  acquaintance  of
Voltaire's  at  Geneva,  whence  he  came  to  Paris  in  quality  of
firll  phyGcian  to  the  father  of  the  ?at,e  Duke  of  Orleans.    He

*  Ï  have  ftt n  this  life  of  Voltaire.  Mr.  dc  Viil-.-rt  •  v.as  the  author  nf
it  ;  and  Mr.  Monke  might  jiiil  as  well  hav^'  ciciciTcd  his  talents  iu
ti-anfliîtin-/  C'ondcrcet.


APPENDIX.

was  called  in  during  Voltaire's  laft  (îcknefs  ;  and  I  have  heard
him  repeat  all  thofe  circumftances  on  which  Paris  and  the
whole  world  were  at  that  time  full  of  converfation,  refpeding
the  horrid  ftate  of  this  impious  man's  foul  at  the  approach  of
death.  M.  Tronchin  (even  as  phyfician)  did  every  thing  in
his  power  to  calm  him  ;  for  the  agitation  he  was  in  was  Co
violent,  that  no  remedies  could  take  efFe<5l.  But  he  could
not  fuccced  ;  and,  unable  to  endure  the  horror  he  felt  at  the
peculiar  nature  of  his  frantic  rage,  he  abandoned  him-

**  So  violent  a  ftate  in  an  exhaufted  frame  could  not  be  of
iong  duration.  Stupor,  the  forerunner  of  diffolution,  mull  na-
|urally  fucceed,  as  it  generally  .does  after  any  violent  agitations
generated  by  pain  ;  and  it  is  this  latter  ftate  which  in  Voltaire
lias  been  decorated  by  the  appellation  of  calm.  Mr.  Tronchia
wiflied  to  difcredit  this  error  ;  and  with  that  laudable  view,  as
an  eye  witnefs,  he  immediately  published  in  all  companies  the
real  fa(5ls,  and  precifely  as  you  have  ftated  them.  This  he  did
to  furnifh  a  dreadful  leffon  to  thofe  who  calculate  on  being
able  in  a  death-bed  to  inveftigate  the  difpofitions  moft  proper
to  appear  in  before  the  judgment-feat  of  the  Almighty.  At
that  period,  not  only  the  ftate  of  the  body,  but  the  condition
of  the  foul,  may  fruftrate  their  hopes  of  making  fo  awful  an
inveftigation  ;  for  jujtice  and  fandity  as  well  as  goodnefs  are
attributes  of  God  ;  and  he  fometimes,  as  a  wholefome  admo-
nition to  mankind,  permits  the  punifhments  denounced  againfl:
the  impious  man  to  begin  even  in  this  life  by  the  tortures  of
jremorfe.

"  But  this  inaccuracy  refpeding  the  death  of  Voltaire  is
not  the  only  one  with  which  the  aforenamed  author  might  be
upbraided.  He  has  fupprefled  many  well-known  circumftances
relating  to  his  firft  difpoiition  to  return  to  the  church,  and  his
confequent  declarations,  which  you  have  given  on  well-au-
thenticated records,  all  anterior  to  that  anguifli  of  mind  which
his  co-operators  have  wiflied  to  fupprefs,  and  of  which  they
tbemfelves  were  too  probably  the  caufe.  They  furroundcd
him,  and  thus  cut  him  off  from  that  which  alone  could  reftore
tranquillity  to  his  foul,  by  employing  the  few  moments  he  ftill
had  to  live  in  making  what  reparation  he  could  for  the  evil  he
had  done.  But  this  artiiice  could  not  deceive  thofe  who  were
better  acquainted  with  Voltaire's  charafter  ;  for,  not  to  notice
the  ads  of  hypocrify  which  earthly  confiderations  frequently
made  him  commit,  thofe  of  which  the  fudden  fear  of  a  future
ftate  have  made  him  guilty  are  alfo  known.  I  will  give  you  an
example  of  one,  which  was  related  to  me  at  Gouinguen  in  De-
cember 1776  by  Mr.  Dicze,  fécond  librarian  of  that  Univerfi-
Xy  ;  .and  you  may,  Sir,  make  what  ufe  of  it  you  pleafe.

**  Dunnp  Yo'ltaire's  refidencc  in  S.axonv,  where  Mr.  Dieze


'^


254


APPENDIX.

ferved  him  as  fecretary,  he  fell  dangeroufly  ill.  As  foon  as  he
was  apprized  of  his  fuuation  he  fent  for  a  prieft,  cotifefled  to
him,  and  begged  to  receive  the  facrament,  which  he  aftually
did  receive,  Ihovving  all  the  exterior  figns  of  repentance,  which
laded  as  long  as  his  danger  ;  but  as  foon  as  that  was  over,  he
affedted  to  laugh  at  what  he  called  his  lillknefsy  and,  turning
to  Mr.  Dieze,  "  My  friend  (faid  he)  you  have  feen  the
iveaknffs  of  the  mcin.^^

"  It  is  alfo  to  human  iveaknefs  that  the  fectarics  of  his  im-
piety have  attributed  the  paroxyfms  of  fear  in  him  and  fome
others  of  his  accomplices.  Sicknefs,  fay  they,  weakeos  the
mind  as  well  as  the  body,  and  often  produces  pufillanimity.— r
Thefe  fymptoms  of  converfion  in  the  wicked  at  the  approach
of  death,  are,  undoubtedly,  figns  of  a  great  tveainefs ;  but  to
what  is  it  to  be  attributed  ?  is  it  to  their  underftanding  ?  cer-
tainly not  ;  for  it  is  in  that  awful  moment  that  every  thing
Tanilhes  which  had  clouded  it  during  their  life.  That  iveak^
vefs,  therefore,  is  to  be  wholly  attributed  to  their  internal  con^
•<v'i8ion  that  they  have  finned.

"  Led  away  by  vanity,  or  fome  other  vicious  palTion,  thofé
men  afpire  at  creating  a  Sedl  :  ignorance  and  the  pafiions  of
other  men  fécond  their  undertaking.  Inebriated  with  their
triumph,  they  perfuade  themfelves  that  they  are  capable  of
giving  laws  to  the  v/hole  wotld  :  they  boldly  make  the  at-
tempt, and  the  hood-winked  crowd  become  their  followers.
Having  attained  the  zenith  of  happinefs  for  the  proud  and
vain  glorious  foul,  they  abandon  themfelves  to  all  the  wanton-
nefs  of  imagination  and  defire.  The  world  then,  in  their  eyes,
becomes  a  vafi:  field  of  new  enjoyments,  the  legitimacy  of
which  has  no  otiier  ftandard  but  their  ov/n  inclinations  ;  and
tlie  fames  of  an  incenfe  lavifhed  on  them  by  thofe  whom  they
have  taught  to  feoff  like  themfelves  at  every  law,  perpetuates-
their  delirium.  But  when  ficknefs  has  difperfed  the  flattering
cohort,  has  blafted  their  pleafures,  and  all  hopes  of  new  tri-
umphs ;  when  they  feci  themfelves  advancing,  abandorted  and
naked,  towards  that  awful  eternity  on  which  they  have  taken
upon  themf-"lves  to  decide,  not  only  for  themfelves  but  for  all
thofe  who  have  been  led  away  in  the  whirlwind  of  their  fic-
tions. —  If  in  this  terrible  moment,  when  pride  has  loft  itç
fapport,  they  come  to  refleft  on  the  arguments  on  which  they
grounded  their  attack  againft  the  univerfal  belief  of  a  Revè-
iadon  which  v/as  to  ferve  man  as  a  pofitive  and  univerfal  rule
in  matters  of  faith — the  nveaknefs  then  of  their  arguments
(which  they  dare  no  longer  attire  in  the  garb  of  fophiflry)
{lares  them  in  the  face  ;  and  nothing  but  the  total  extinction
of  their  feelings  can  quell  the  terrors  of  a  confciencç  which


APPENDIX;  Q^j

tdls  them  that  they  are  about  to  appear  before  thS  tribuhatof
the  Author  of  that  fame  i2fw/«/;o«.

"  It  is  to  point  out  this  real  iveaknefs  of  the  anti-chriflian
chiefs  that  we  muft  labour  throughout  their  whole  hiftory,  foi*
the  benefit  of  thofe  who,  without  any  further  examination  (and
perfuaded  that  thefe  opinions  arc  grounded  on  deep  refearch)
become  their  dupes  and  difciples  :  It  is,  I  fay,  incumbent  on  us
to  fhow  that  thofe  men  had  not,  any  more  than  their  fedtaties,
any  real  conviîlion,  and  that  their  obftinacy  in  their  opinions
folely  proceeded  from  the  narcotic  fumes  of  the  incenfe  of
their  admirers.  For  this  purpofe  it  is  my  intention  Hiortly
to  give  to  the  public,  in  confirmation  of  what  you  have  faid
of  Voltaire,  all  that  my  former  acquaintance  with  him  has
brought  to  my  knowledge.  The  times  in  which  we  live  make
it  the  duty  of  every  man  who  has  had  a  nearer  vitw  of  the
plots  laid  by  the  Seft  againft  Revelation  to  unfold  all  the
clrcumftances  of  them,  which  are  as  fhameful  from  their  vo-  .
luntary  ignorance,  as  from  their  atrocity  ;  and  it  is  this  fen-
timent,  Sir,  which  makes  me  partake  in  common  with  all
true  friends  to  humanity,  of  that  admiration  and  gratitude
which  are  due  to  you  for  your  generous  exertions  in  this
charitable  career.

"  I  remain,  Sir,  Your's,  &Ci  &c.

"  De  Luc.'*

W'mdfor,  the  Z^J  08.  1797*

After  fuch  a  teflimony,  let  people  talk  of  Voltaire  dyin^;
with  the  calmnefs  of  a  Hero.  1

II.

In  the  Second  Volume  there  is  a  paflage  of  a  different
nature,  (page  43S,)  but  which  has  given  rife  to  objedions
far  better  grounded.  It  relates  to  Mr.  Sinetty's  arrival  at
Lille  as  deputy  from  the  Grand  Orient  of  Paris.  I  know  not
by  what  millake  he  was  faid  to  be  an  officer  of  cavalry,  when
in  reality  he  was  an  officer  of  infantry.  As  to  the  fa  £1  related^
it  is  of  little  importance  in  which  he  ferved  ;  but  the  miflaka
«light  inculpate  two  other  officers  of  the  fame  name  who
ferved  in  the  cavalry,  and  whofe  loyalty  and  attachment  to
their  King  could  never  be  affefted  by  the  Jacobin  Miffion-
ary  bearing  the  fame  name.  This  miftake,  however,  haâ
given  rife  to  much  refearch.  Mr.  Le  Comte  de  Martange,
(whom  I  mentioned  as  being  in  the  regiment  of  La  Sane  in
1776,  and  who  has  long  flnce  been  a  general  officer,)  was
applied  to,  and  in  the  firft  anfwer  he  returned  appeared  to
have  miftaken  the  fenfe  of  my  Memoirs  (indeed  he  only
knt-w  them  by  public  report  at  that  time,)  thinking  that  I


2£()  APPENDIX.

had  chargecf 'the  Military  Lodge  of  Lifle  with  havirtg  cou*
trived  and  fet  on  foot  the  Jacobin  Confpiracy.  The  reader
will  eaflly  conceive  how  he  muft  have  treated  fuch  an  afler*
tion  ;  but  fo  far  was  1  from  hinting  at  any  fuch  thing,  that
I  faid  the  officers  o(  the  regiment  of  La  Sarre  had  taken  this
emiflary  for  an  enthit/iajl  and  a  madman^  who  on  his  fide  foon
found  that  the  officers  were  not  Mafons  of  his  Jlamp.  The
Count  alfo  fays,  that  he  never  was  acquainted  with  any  othef
Sinetty  than  the  officer  of  cavalry  whofe  charaéler  is  univer-
{aliy  and  defervedly  efteemed  by  every  body.  Though  it  may
be  very  poffible  for  the  Count  to  have  loft  all  memory  of  a
perfon  whom  he  had  only  fèen  twenty  years  ago  for  a  few
hours,  neverthelefs  this  is  the  only  expreflion  that  feeras  to
denote  that  he  was  not  prefent  at  the  fcene  I  have  mentioned.
I  am  intitled  howevei  to  fay,  that  the  Count  has  fince  written
a  fécond  letter,  in  which  he  fays  that  he  has  read  my  Memoirs^
and  that  he  has  there  found  fuch  a  concatenation  of  demon-
ftrations  as  tempts  him  to  think  that  the  perfon  who  gave  me
the  information  might  have  been  miftaken  only  as  to  foma
names  or  particular  circumftances.  That  thefe  particulars  do
Bot  invalidate  the  fatl  is  evident,  as  the  Chev.  de  Myon  (an
officer  in  the  fame  regiment)  has  conftantly  refufed  to  con-
tradi<S  it,  notwithftanding  many  preffing  folicitations  to  that
efFe(5t.  In  corroboration  of  the  whole,  many  officers  who
were  then  in  garrifon  at  Lifle  have,  fince  the  publication  of
the  Second  Volume,  declared  that  they  rertiembered  the  fafl,
though  in  the  lapfe  of  twenty  years  they  had  forgotten  the
particular  circumftances.  In  ffiort,  as  an  ultimate  proof  I
will  adduce  the  candour  with  which  the  perfon  who  thought
liimfelf  moft  interefted  in  getting  the  denial  of  the  fadl  afcer-
tained  declared  th:it  he  was  perfedly  convinced  of  the  truth
of  it.  Thus,  fhould  I  lofe  the  teftimony  of  a  witnefs  whom  1
had  cited,  1  ffiall  have  replaced  it  by  the  verdift  of  an  im-
partial judge.  The  fait  is,  however,  that  I  had  taken  too
many  precautions  to  have  been  mlfinformed  on  a  fad  with
which  I  had  long  fince  been  acquainted,  but  which  I  would
print  only  on  the  teftimony  of  an  eye  witnefs.

in.

I  muft  farther  inform  my  readers  that  frequent  errors  have
been  committed  in  the  prefs  among  the  figures  in  the  quota-
tions ;  and  in  Voltaire's  Letters  fome  Readers  may  be  mifled
by  the  variety  of  Editions.  But  I  again  repeal,  that  not  a
Cngle  quotation  has  been  made  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
works  quoted  ;  and  a  general  Errata  fliall  be  given  at  the  end
of  the  Fourth  Volume,  in  which  the  Dates  ihall  be  added
to  the  Letters.


m


'^'    ■  '^Wi^^^^Wm^


^
