The Pentamerone (Giambattista Basile (trans. John Edward Taylor), 1634; public domain)
===============================================================================
The first European fairy-tale collection (1634-36) — sea-wonder tales including the Dolphin bridegroom; Taylor's 1850 English translation. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_69xzOsMJH7wC).

NAZIONALE 


FONDO 
DORI  A 


X 

55 


NAPOLI 


>■ . mm 


< 

3 

o 

5 

m 

Z 


i_ 


Kv./ 


- ^/.  r y/ . y.>//  / /.j  //r . 


’ -I'  'I  ' 


rw  f.' 


^'■'  • ' . ■ •*'’ '.'  " >’:  ■ 'j '■  ^ 

'-'■V,  V- 'r  '’:t'  '■.. 

— > ^ ' • ' .-■  -::  ■^'  k ^ : ^'t^.-^UPCTlIv  . » • ^ 


oogle 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 

! 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE 


OR 

THE  STORY  OF  STORIES, 

mm  (F®K  ™i  LfllTTiLi  ®!Mlgu 

BV 

GIAMBATTISTA  BASILE. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  NEAPOLITAN  BV 

JOHN  EDWARD  TAYLOR. 

WITH  ILLUSTRATIONS  BY  GEORGE  CRUIKSHANK. 

^rcantt 
LONDON : 

DAVID  BOGIJE,  86  FLEET  STREET: 

M.DCCC.L. 


Digitized  by  Google 


X'  5*^ 


% 


TrinteJ  hy  Richard  and  John  K.  Tnyl«»r,  Red  Lion  Court,  Fleet  Street. 


9640S8 


CONTENTS 


: Jtatt  flTO.fggel, 

Pagf 

THE  MYBTLE ‘ U 

PBEUOWTO  22 

VARDIEIiIiO  ^ 

THE  FLEA SS 

CENERENTQLA 6a 

THE  MERCHANT 74 

THE  GOAT-FACE  ! 08 

THE  ENCHANTED  DOE  loa 


ifegCOnlt  fflgg,  PafrellS. 


PETROSINELLA 117 

THE  THREE  SISTERS  Ufi 

VIOLET 135 

GAGLIUSO lu 

THE  SERPENT  143 

THE  SHE-BKAB ite 

THE  DOVE  180 


Digitized  by  Google 


IV 


CONTENTS. 


I 

Cl)irt>  fflap.  Page  i&g. 

. Page 

CANNKTELLA 201 

CORVKTTQ  2U 

THE  BOOBY 22A 

jrottrt!)  fflap,  Page  235. 

THE  STONE  IN  THE  COCK’S  HEAD 230 

THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES  242 

THE  DRAGON 25fi 

THE  TWO  CAKES 226 

THE  SEVEN  DOVE3  287 

THE  RAVEN 302 

Saj?,  Page  336. 

THE  MONTHS 330 

P1NTQ3MALTQ  338 

THE  GOLDEN  ROOT 348 

SUN,  MOON  AND  TALIA 362 

WENNTI.I.O  AND  NENNEULA  370 

THE  THREE  CITRONS 32fi 

Conrttutton,  Pwesoa. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE 


The  reader  will  probably  wish  to  know  something  of  the 
author  of  this  collection  of  tales,  and  I shall  introduce  the 
few  remarks  I intend  to  make  with  the  following  account  of 
Basile  and  his  writings,  given  by  MM.  Grimm  in  the  Notes 
to  the  Kinder-  und  Ilaus-Marchen. 

“ In  the  seventeenth  centur}'-  a collection  of  Fairy  Tales 
in  the  Neapolitan  dialect,  by  Giambattista  Basile,  appeared 
in  Naples,  called,  in  imitation  of  the  Decamerone,  ‘ II  Pen- 
tamerone,’ — a work  which  has  remained  almost  wholly 
unknown  in  other  countries,  and  was  first  introduced  to  us 
by  Femow*.  The  author,  whose  name  was  also  trans- 
posed into  Gian  Alesio  Abbattutisf,  lived  at  the  beginning 
of  the  seventeenth  century.  After  spending  his  early  youth 
in  the  island  of  Crete,  he  visited  Venice,  and  was  admitted 
into  the  Accademia  degli  Stravaganti.  lie  followed  his  sister 

* Rnmtsche  Studien.  The  various  rare  editions  which  Femow  collected  are  now 
in  the  Grand  Ducal  Library  at  Weimar. 

t Hit  full  title  was  II  Cavalier,  Conte  di  Torrone  and  Conte  Palatino,  and  his  por> 
tnut  is  given  in  “Le  Gloric  degli  Incogniti,”  (p.  209,)  of  which  Society  he  was  a 
member.  There  were  other  authors  of  the  s,-\mc  name ! — Domenico  Basile,  Giovan 
Battista  Basile  of  Catania,  a doctor  of  theology,  and  another  Battista  Basile  of 
Palermo. 


Digitized  by  Google 


VI 


PREFACE. 


Adriana*,  a celebrated  singer,  to  Mantua,  and  entered  the 
service  of  the  Duke,  whose  favour  he  enjoyed.  He  travelled 
much  in  Italy,  and  returned  to  Naples,  where  he  must 
have  died  about  the  year  1G37.  . . The  numerous  editions 
which  the  work  has  gone  through  would  alone  bespeak  a 
certain  value,  but  we  may  add  that  this  collection  of  tales 
is  indeed  the  best  and  richest  that  has  been  made  in  any 
country^  Not  only  was  tradition  at  that  period  more 
complete,  but  the  author  possessed  peculiar  skill  in  seizing 
upon  it ; in  addition  to  which  he  had  a perfect  knowledge 
of  the  Neapolitan  dialect.  These  stories  are  consequently 
almost  entire  ...  in  two-thirds  of  them  we  observe  the 
same  leading  features  as  in  the  German  tales,  existing  to 
the  present  day.  Basile  has  introduced  no  alteration, 
scarcely  a single  addition  of  any  importance,  and  this  cir- 
cumstance gives  his  work  a peculiar  value.  His  narration 
has  all  the  sportive,  witty,  and  lively  spirit  of  the  Neapoli- 
tan people ; he  makes  continual  allusion  to  the  manners 
and  customs  of  the  country,  as  well  as  to  ancient  history  and 

• Adriana  of  Mantua — for  her  beauty  called  “ la  bella  Adriana  ” — and  her  daugh- 
ter Leonora  Baroni,  were  the  ilneiit  singers  of  their  day  in  Italy.  A volume  of  poenu 
in  Adriana’s  honour  was  published  in  1623,  entitled  ‘Teatro  della  gloria  d’Adri- 
ana.’  Anotlicr  volume,  in  Greek,  Latin,  Italian,  French,  and  Spanish,  in  praise  of 
Leonora,  was  printed  at  Rome  in  1636,  called  ‘Applausi  poctici  alle  glorie  della 
tSignora  Leonora  Baroni.’  M.  Maugars,  in  his  ‘Discours  sur  la  Musique  d’ltalie,’ 
printed  in  Paris  in  1672,  has  given  a long  account  of  I«onora  and  her  mother.  **  I 
must  not  forget,”  says  he,  “ that  one  day  she  did  me  the  particular  favour  to  sing 
with  her  mother  and  sister : her  mother  played  upon  the  lute,  her  sister  upon  the 
harp,  and  herself  upon  the  theorbo.  This  concert  so  powerfully  captivated  my  senses, 
tiiat  I forgot  my  mortality,  et  crus  tire  d^ji  parmi  Its  anges.”  Milton  wu  intro- 
duced to  Adriana  and  her  daughter  and  heard  them  play  at  the  concerts  of  Cardinal 
Barberini  at  Rome ; he  has  celebrated  Leonora  in  three  of  his  Latin  Epigrams,  and 
in  an  Italian  Canzone. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PEEPACE. 


VU 


mythology,  an  acquaintance  with  which  is  pretty  generally 
diflFused  in  Italy  : in  this  respect  these  tales  present  a 
striking  contrast  to  the  quiet  and  simple  style  of  the  Ger- 
man stories.” 

Basile  was  also  the  author  of  an  epic  poem  entitled  ‘Carlo 
Quinto,’  and  a ‘ Raccolta  di  Madrigali,  Canzoni  e Sonetti.’ 
The  Pentamerone  first  appeared  in  1637,  imder  the  title  of 
‘Lo  Cunto  de  li  Cunte,  overo  Trattenemiento  de  li  Peccerille.* 

Dr.  Jacob  Grimm,  in  his  valuable  preface  prefixed  to  Mr. 
Liebrecht’s  German  translation  of  this  work*,  (of  which  I 
shall  speak  presently,)  says : — “The  reader  of  Basile’ s sto- 
ries sees  at  a glance  that  the  materials  and  the  basis  of  them 
all  are  taken  from  existing  tradition ; and  nothing  proves  the 
imperishable  nature  of  these  elements  more  than  the  cir- 
cumstance, that  even  an  extravagance  of  imagery,  unsuited 
to  their  simplicity,  fails  to  deprive  them  of  their  charm  or 
injure  them  in  any  way.  Straparola  had  previously  pro- 
duced a number  of  similar  tales,  taken  directly  from  the  peo- 
ple themselves,  which  are  more  broad  and  less  animated ; 
but  wherever  he  comes  upon  the  same  ground  as  the 
Neapolitan,  we  must  give  the  palm  of  imagination  in  all 
cases  to  Basile. . . How  inexhaustible  is  the  imagery  with 
which  in  every  page  daybreak  and  sunset  are  described! 
and  although  these  descriptions  may  often  seem  forced 
and  misplaced,  they  are  yet  full  of  ingenuity  and  strictly 

* I much  regret  that  I have  not  space  to  give  this  entire,  as  I had  intended ; it 
contains  a critical  examination  of  several  of  the  tales.  The  student  will  also  dnd 
many  particulara  relating  to  the  Neapolitan  writers  and  their  works  in  Mr.  Lieb- 
recht’s Appendix. 


Digitized  by  Google 


vm 


PREFACE. 


in  keeping.  In  the  most  graceful  and  varied  similes  is 
expressed  the  rushing  of  the  stream,  the  murmuring  of 
the  brook,  the  depth  and  darkness  of  the  forest  shades, 
and  the  warbling  of  the  birds ; and  in  the  midst  of  a tor- 
rent of  Eastern  imagery,  the  quiet  and  faithful  observation 
of  nature  takes  us  by  surprise.  The  language  is  rich 
to  overflowing  in  similes,  play  upon  words,  proverbs  and 
rimes,  which  our  language  is  for  the  most  part  incapable  of 
rendering ; and  we  may  notice  here  a peculiarity  in  these 
tales  (which  they  share  with  all  good  ones  of  a similar  cha- 
racter), namely  a continual  recurrence,  in  the  important  and 
descriptive  parts  of  the  narrative,  of  simple  but  inimitable 
rimes,  which  give  animation  to  the  narrator  and  fix  the 
attention  of  the  listener.  Thus  in  Peruonto, — ‘ Damme 
passe  e fiico  se  vuoje  che  te  lo  ddico and  in  Cenerentola, 
‘ Spoglia  a te,  e vieste  a me.’  ” 

Extravagant  as  Basile’s  language  and  imagery  are,  we 
must  recollect  that  a puerile  fondness  for  concetti  was  cha- 
racteristic of  his  age,  in  which  the  Italian  language  was  in 
its  decline.  Few  withstood  the  prevalent  perverted  taste, 
and  the  writings  of  Guarini,  Testi,  Chiabrera  and  Pascali  arc 
but  partial  exceptions.  Basile  however  can  scarcely  be  re- 
proached with  the  bad  taste  of  the  Seicentiati,  for  the  very 
excess  of  his  conceits  is  their  justification.  In  fact,  as  the 
author  of  Lo  Vemaccliio  (a  Neapolitan  critic  of  the  last 
century)  observes,  not  only  are  Basile’s  images  perfectly 
in  the  spirit  of  the  Neapolitan  people,  but  he,  as  well 
as  his  friend  Cortese,  frequently  intended,  by  their  pur- 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE. 


IX 


posed  extravagance  of  metaphor,  to  burlesque  the  faults  of 
the  Seicentisti ; thus  skilfully  drawing  from  them  a new 
source  of  amusement,  turning  absurdity  into  humour,  and 
legitimizing  the  follies  of  his  age  by  giving  them  a different 
aud  original  character. 

I may  here  obseire,  that  Sir  Philip  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  one 
of  our  earliest  specimens  of  heroic  romance,  offers  several 
points  of  comparison  with  Basile’s  writings.  In  that  jar  of 
sweets  we  find  continually  recurring  metaphors  and  expres- 
sions scarcely  less  extravagant,  and  often  remarkably  similar 
to  those  which  Basile  is  so  fond  of  employing.  Take  for  in- 
stance the  following : — 

“ It  was  in  the  time  that  the  Earth  begins  to  put  on  her  new  apparel  against  the 
approach  of  her  lover,  and  that  the  Sun,  running  a most  even  course,  becomes  an 
indifferent  arbiter  l>ctween  Night  and  Day,”  Ac. 

'*  O my  Cloius,  hither  we  ore  now  come  to  pay  the  rent  for  which  we  are  so  called 
unto  by  over-busie  Remembrance.” 

“ Upon  this  place  where  we  last  (alas  that  the  word  last  should  so  long  last),”,  . . 
“ To  leave  those  steps  unkissed  where  Urania  printed  the  farewell  of  all  beauty.” 
“ Wlicre  the  care  of  cunning  chirurgions  had  brought  Life  to  the  possession  of  his 
own  right.  Sorrow  and  Shame,  like  two  corrupted  servants,”  Ac. 

” In  the  time  that  the  Morning  did  strew  roses  and  violets  in  the  heavenly  floor 
against  the  coming  of  the  Sun,  . . . rising  from  under  a tree,  which  had  been  their 
pavilion,  they  went,”  Ac. 

“You  have  beaten  your  sorrow  against  such  a wall,  which  with  the  force  of  re- 
bound may  well  make  your  sorrow  stronger.” 

” His  joys  so  held  him  up,  that  he  never  touched  ground.” 

Besides  this  similarity  of  style  and  language,  we  may  note 
other  points  of  coincidence*,  such  as  the  “twenty  specified 
shepherds,  some  for  exercises  and  some  for  eclogues,”  in 

• Sir  Philip  Sidney  attempted  to  introduce  the  Italian  versification  into  En- 
gland, and  his  songs  “ to  the  tunc  of  a Neapolitan  Villanell,”  and  “ to  the  time  of 
a Neapolitan  song,”  may  be  mentioned  here  in  connection  with  the  class  of  songs 
referred  to  by  Baaile  at  page  336. 


Digitized  by  Google 


X 


PREFACE. 


whom  Basilius  “taketh  great  recreation;”  nay,  the  very 
description  of  the  spot  where  the  shepherds  meet  to  enter- 
tain Basilius*: 

*'  A place  of  delight,  through  the  midst  of  which  ran  a sweet  brook,  which  did 
both  hold  the  eye  open  with  her  azure  stream,  and  yet  seek  to  close  the  eye  with  the 
purling  noise  it  made  upon  the  pebbly  stones  . . . with  such  pleasant  arbours  that 
they  became  a gallery  aloft  from  tree  to  tree,  which  below  gave  a pleasant  refuge 
from  the  choleric  look  of  Phoebus.” 

The  oriental  character  of  Basile’s  imagery  is  sufficiently 
striking,  but  it  partakes  more  of  that  of  the  Persian  than 
the  Hindoo  poetry,  which  Mr.  Elphinstone  well  contrasts. 
In  speaking  of  the  figures  employed  by  the  two  nations  he 
observes : “ Those  of  the  Persians  are  conventional  hints, 
which  would  scarcely  convey  an  idea  to  a person  not  ac- 
customed to  them  : a beautiful  woman’s  form  is  a c}'press, 
her  locks  arc  musk,  in  blackness,  her  eyes  a languid  nar- 
cissus, and  the  dimple  in  her  chin  a well.  But  the  San- 
scrit similes,  in  which  they  deal  more  than  in  metaphors, 
are  in  general  new  and  appropriate,  and  are  sufficient,  with- 
out prenous  knowledge,  to  place  the  points  of  resemblance 
in  a vivid  liglitf 

We  can  only  conjecture  where  Basile  collected  these  Sto- 
ries ; it  is  very  improbable  that  all,  if  any  of  them,  were  in- 
digenous in  the  south  of  Italy,  and  we  may  rather  infer 
with  Mr.  Keightley  that  he  met  with  them  during  his  resi- 
dence in  Crete  (which  by  the  way  Boccaccio  also  visited)  and 
Venice.  Left  thus  in  doubt  upon  this  point,  it  is  interest- 
ing to  open  any  soiuce  of  inference  as  to  their  origin.  The 

* See  infra,  p.  235.  t HUtory  of  India,  i.  2Q3. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE. 


XI 


resemblance  between  some  of  the  tales  and  the  northern 
mythology  mentioned  by  Dr.  Grimm  are  most  curious  ; as 
he  well  observes,  “ these  are  unquestionably  the  wonderful 
and  last  echoes  of  very  ancient  mythes,  which  have  taken 
root  over  the  whole  of  Europe,  and  opened  in  an  unexpected 
manner  passages  of  research  which  were  considered  to  be 
closed  up,  and  given  the  clue  to  the  relationship  of  Fable 
in  general.” 

Several  writers  have  drawn  largely  upon  the  Pentameroue. 
Salvator  Rosa  gave  a copy  of  the  book  to  his  friend  Loreixzo 
Lippi,  the  Florentine  artist,  who  embodied  some  of  Basile’s 
stories  in  his  celebrated  production,  the  “ Malmantile  rac- 
quistato,”  which  first  appeared  in  1676, — a work,  upon 
which,  as  Sismondi  says,  more  pains  and  criticism  have  per- 
haps been  bestowed  than  on  any  other  Italian  work,  except- 
ing the  Divina  Commedia.  (^arlo  Gozzi  in  like  manner  bor- 
rowed materials  from  several  tales  in  the  Peutamerone,  as 
the  ‘ Cuorvo,’  and  ‘ Le  tre  Cetre,’  which  last  is  the  basis  of 
his  drama,  ‘ I tre  Melarangole.’ 

It  is  not  a little  remarkable  that  so  interesting  a collection 
of  tales,  and  one  so  popular  that  no  less  than  ten  editions 
of  it  appeared  in  Naples,  had  until  the  j)ast  year  never  been 
translated  into  any  language  out  of  Italy*.  But  a circum- 
stance scarcely  less  remarkable  is,  that,  after  this  lapse  of 
above  two  centuries,  two  translations  should  have  been 
made,  quite  indej)endently  of  one  another,  and  given  to  the 

* An  abridged  and  mutilated  translation  into  the  current  language  of  Italy,  ap- 
peared in  Naples  in  1/.54,  and  a reprint  in  2/6g.  Another  translation  into  the  Bo- 
lognese dialect  appeared  in  1/42.  Femow  also  mentions  a third  into  the  Modenese. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Xll 


PREFACE. 


press  nearly  at  tlie  same  time, — one  into  German  by  Mr. 
Felix  Liebrecht,  and  the  present  one  into  English. 

My  attention  was  first  particularly  drawn  to  the  Penta.- 
merone  in  the  year  1 834,  by  the  publication  of  Mr.  Keight- 
ley’s  Tales  and  Popular  Fictions,  in  which,  and  in  his  Fairy 
Mythology,  he  has  given  a translation  of  several  of  these 
stories.  I had  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  a copy  of  the 
work,  which  is  very  scarce  in  this  country ; but  at  length, 
through  the  kindness  of  a friend,  I procured  one  from 
Naples*.  From  that  time  to  the  present  I have  con- 
tinued the  translation  of  it  at  intervals  of  leisure,  as  in- 
clination prompted,  and  have  had  about  twenty  of  the 
stories  lying  by  me  nearly  completed  for  several  years. 
I had  however  no  definite  intention  of  giving  them  to 
the  press,  until  the  publication  of  my  selection  from  the 
Kinder-  und  Haus-Marchen  suggested  to  me  the  wish  to 
give  this  volume  of  Neapolitan  tales  as  a companion  to  the 
German  collection  f.  When  I first  began  to  translate,  un- 
aided by  any  vocabularv^  the  difficulties  appeared  insur- 
mountable, not  only  from  the  peculiarities  of  the  dialect, 

* Even  in  Naples  the  work  is  almost  unknown,  and  very  scarce. 

t I had  in  consequence  been  some  time  engaged  in  revising  and  completing  my 
manuscript,  und  had  actually  two  proof-sheets  of  the  work  lying  before  me,  when  I 
was  informed  that  a German  translation  of  the  Pentamerone  was  announced.  I in- 
stantly sent  to  Germany  for  a copy,  and  waited  with  no  ordinary  anxiety  to  ace  the 
execution  of  a work  to  which  I had  given  so  much  thought  and  labour.  At  the  same 
time  I at  onee  resolved  to  complete  my  translation  independently  from  the  Neapoli- 
tan. This  plan  I have  scrupulously  followed ; line  by  line,  and  word  by  word,  it  has 
carefully  been  rendered  from  the  original.  I bad  neither  the  aid  of  Galiani’a  Trea- 
tise on  the  Neapolitan  Dialect,  nor  of  the  Vocabolario  Napolctano,  until  within  the 
last  few  months,  when  the  latter  work  was  lent  me  by  a friend.  In  fact  the  only  as- 
sistance I had  was  derived  from  Fasano’s  ‘Tasso  Napoletano,’  in  which  I studied 
the  dialect  by  comparison. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE. 


Xlll 


and  the  great  number  of  words  of  foreign  origin*  (Greek, 
Spanish,  Arabic,  Turkish,  etc.),  but  from  the  continual  allu- 
sions to  local  usages  and  manners,  proverbs  and  idioms, 
which  no  one  but  a Neapolitan  can  interpret.  In  all  these 
cases  of  difficulty  I have  received  the  valuable  aid  of  my 
friend  Mr.  Rossetti,  (himself  a Neapolitan  by  birth),  whose 
kindness  I desire  particularly  to  acknowledge.  To  my  friend 
Mr.  Keightley  I am  under  an  equal  amount  of  obligation : 
he  first  encouraged  me  to  undertake  the  work,  and  not  only 
allowed  me  to  reprint  such  stories  as  he  had  himself  pub- 
lished, but  liberally  gave  me  several  others  which  he  had  in 
manuscript ; adding  to  his  kindness  the  favour  of  revising 
the  whole  work  as  it  went  through  the  press,  and  com- 
paring it  with  the  original.  And  here  let  me  bear  m'y  ready 
testimony  to  the  erudition,  ability  and  careful  accuracy  with 
which  Mr.  Liebrccht  has  executed  his  translation ; and  my 
gratification  in  expressing  this  opinion  is  the  greater,  be- 
cause there  is  probably  no  person  who  can  so  fully  estimate 
all  the  difficulties  he  has  encountered  as  myself,  simply  from 
the  circumstance  of  my  having,  like  him,  gone  through  the 
work  word  by  word. 

“The  brothers  Grimm,”  says  Mr.  Liebrccht,  “have  spoken 
of  the  unusual  difficulties  attending  a translation  of  Basilc, 
and  I can  only  confirm  what  they  have  said  in  its  fullest  ex- 
tent ; and  all  the  more,  as  I have  not  attempted  to  give  a 

* TTie  reader  will  remark  a frequent  similarity  to  Irish  expressions,— /ora  deli 
fora,  ' beyond  the  beyonds  fine  del  fine,  ‘ the  end  of  the  end  n’aeeiio,  figlio  de 
la  mala  forluna,  ‘ an  ass,  the  son  of  ill-luck.’  So  Violet  says  at  p.  138,  “ If  I don’t 
cut  off  your  nose,  it  is  only  that  you  may  smell  the  bad  odour  of  your  reputation.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


XIV 


PREFACE. 


free  translation,  but  to  render  the  Pentamerone  as  exactly, 
and  at  the  same  time  as  German  as  possible,  without  in- 
juring too  mueh  the  peeuliar  eolouring  of  the  w'ork.” 

In  elose  fidelity  to  the  original  the  present  version  follows 
the  same  plan  as  that  of  Mr.  Liebreeht,  but  I have  pur- 
posely avoided  substituting  an  English  for  the  Neapolitan 
dress ; thus  in  all  metaphors,  proverbs,  and  even  idioms, 
as  far  as  was  admissible,  I have  adhered  to  the  original. 
The  colouring  ought,  in  my  opinion,  to  correspond  to  the 
form ; and  the  modes  of  thought,  the  turns  of  expression, 
and  above  all  the  proverbs, — those  exponents  of  a people’s 
character  and  mind, — contain  a distinctive  impress,  and  are 
on  that  account  valuable.  In  the  popular  stories  of  Ger- 
many we  feel  this  peculiarly,  since  both  the  language  and 
the  tales  themselves  spring  from  the  soil,  and  indicate  its 
nature.  In  Basile’s  stories,  the  very  imcertainty  of  their  ori- 
gin— of  the  design  of  the  picture — in  my  opinion  imparts 
the  greater  value  to  the  colouring  given  to  them,  and  this 
is  national  and  characteristic. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  each  of  the  four  first  Days 
of  the  Pentamerone  concludes  with  an  Eclogue,  or  dialogue 
between  two  of  the  Prince’s  senants,  given  in  imitation  of 
the  Canzone  which  concludes  each  Day  in  the  Decamerone. 
These  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  translate,  and,  having 
no  connection  with  the  stories,  they  are  here  omitted.  Their 
versification  has  great  merit. 

The  Pentamerone  contains  fifty  stories,  of  which  I have 
given  thirty.  The  gross  license  in  which  Basile  allowed  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE. 


XV 


humour  to  indulge  is  wholly  inadmissible  at  the  present 
day  in  a work  intended  for  the  general  reader ; the  moral 
sense  of  our  age  is  happily  too  refined  and  elevated  to  tole- 
rate indelicacy.  At  the  same  time,  as  Dr.  Grimm  justly 
observes,  such  offensive  license  in  style  and  language  did 
not  convey  to  the  Neapolitan  in  the  seventeenth  century 
the  same  degree  of  coarseness  as  it  does  to  our  ears,  sim- 
ply because  he  connected  with  it  very  different  ideas  of  pro- 
priety. Dr.  Grimm  advised  Mr.  Liebrecht  to  omit  all  the 
objectionable  portions  of  the  work  in  his  translation,  and  I 
regret  that  he  has  not  done  so.  I resi>ect  his  scruples  as  a 
scholar  to  mar  the  integrity  of  the  work ; nevertheless,  as 
all  the  most  valuable  portion  may  safely  be  retained,  by 
the  omission  of  some  stories  and  the  occasional  modifica- 
tion of  expressions,  I think  he  has  needlessly  restricted 
the  circle  of  his  readers,  and  rendered  his  work,  like  the 
original,  a sealed  book  to  all  except  the  scholar  and  literary 
student.  For  these  reasons,  and  acting  upon  an  opposite 
principle,  I have  omitted  all  those  stories  which  I considered 
objectionable,  and  carefully  removed  all  matter  of  offence. 

In  conclusion,  let  me  express  the  hope  that  this  work  may 
find  some  readers  inclined,  with  me,  to  attach  to  it  a more  se- 
rious interest  than  belongs  to  a mere  collection  of  children’s 
stories.  “At  the  present  day,”  says  Dr.  Grimm,  “no 
excuse  is  required  for  applying  to  popular  tradition  the 
same  earnest  and  accurate  research  which  we  have  at  length 
come  to  bestow  upon  the  language  and  songs  of  the  people 
at  large.  These  stories  may  continue,  as  they  have  so  long 


Digitized  by  Google 


XVI 


PREFACE. 


(lone,  to  cheer  and  to  amuse ; but  they  now  lay  claim  also 
to  a philosophical  character  and  worth,  which  acquires  for 
them  a much  larger  and  more  general  acknowledgment.” 
At  the  same  time  this  volume  will,  I hope,  likewise  prove 
attractive  to  my  younger  readers,  who  may  derive  pleasure 
and  amusement  from  a ramble  in  the  Fairyland  of  the 
South. 

J.  E.  T. 

London,  Dec.  21,  1847. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE 


PENTAMERONE, 

OR, 

THE  STORY  OF  STORIES. 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  ia  an  old  saying,  that  he  who  seeks  what  he  shonld 

m 

not,  finds  what  he  would  not ; and  every  one  has  heard 
of  the  ape,  who,  in  trying  to  pull  on  the  boots,  was 
caught  by  the  foot.  And  it  happened  in  like  manner 
to  a wretched  slave,  who,  though  she  never  had  shoes  to 
her  feet,  wanted  to  wear  a crown  on  her  head.  But  as 
the  straight  road  is  the  best,  and,  sooner  or  later  a day 
comes  which  settles  all  accounts,  at  last,  having  by  evil 
means  usurped  what  belonged  to  another,  she  fell  to  the 
ground;  and  the  higher  she  had  mounted,  the  greater 
was  her  fall,  as  you  will  presently  see. 

B 


Digitized  by  Google 


2 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Once  upon  a time,  the  Icing  of  Woody  Valley  had  a 
daughter  named  Zoza,  who,  like  another  Zoroaster  or 
Heraclitus,  was  never  seen  to  laugh.  The  unhappy  fa- 
ther, who  had  no  other  comfort  in  life  but  this  only 
daughter,  left  nothing  untried  to  drive  away  her  melan- 
choly. Accordingly  he  sent  for  folks  who  walk  on  stilts, 
for  fellows  who  jump  through  hoops,  for  boxers,  for 
Master  Roggicro*,  for  jugglers  who  perfoi-m  sleight-of- 
hand  tricks,  for  men  as  strong  as  Hmniles,  for  dancing 
dogs,  for  leaping  clowns,  for  the  jackass  that  drinks  out 
of  a tumbler,  for  Lucia-canazzaf, — and  in  short  he  tried 
first  one  thing  and  then  another  to  make  her  laugh. 
But  all  was  time  lost,  for  neither  Master  Grillo’sJ  re- 
medy, nor  the  Sardonic  plant,  nor  a skilful  punch  on  the 
diaphragm,  could  have  brought  a smile  upon  her  lips. 

So  at  length  the  poor  father,  to  make  a last  trial, 
and  not  knowing  what  else  to  do,  ordered  a large  foun- 
tain of  oil  to  be  made  in  front  of  the  palace  gates ; 
thinking  to  himself,  that  when  the  oil  ran  down  the 
street,  alpng  which  the  people  passed  to  and  fro  like  a 
troop  of  ants,  they  would  be  obliged,  in  order  not  to 
soil  their  clothes,  to  skip  like  gi’asshoppers,  leap  like 
goats,  and  nm  like  hares ; while  one  would  go  picking 
and  choosing  his  way,  and  another  go  creeping  along 
close  to  the  wall.  In  short,  he  hoped  that  something 

* A coi^uror.  t Neapolitan  dance.  t A noted  physician. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


3 


might  come  to  pass  that  would  make  his  daughter 
laugh. 

So  the  fountain  was  made ; and  as  Zoza  was  one  day 
standing  at  the  window,  grave  and  demure,  and  looking 
as  sour  as  vinegar,  there  came  by  chance  an  old  woman, 
who,  soaking  up  the  oil  with  a sponge,  began  to  fill  a 
little  pitcher  which  she  had  brought  with  her.  And  as 
she  was  labouring  hard  at  this  ingenious  device,  a pert 
young  page  of  the  court,  passing  by,  threw  a stone  so 
exactly  to  a hair,  that  he  hit  the  pitcher  and  broke  it  in 
pieces.  Whereilpon  the  old  woman,  who  had  no  hair 
upon  her  tongue,  turned  to  the  page  full  of  wrath,  and 
exclaimed,  “ Ah  ! you  impertinent  young  dog,  you  mule, 
you  gallows-rope,  you  spindle-legs,  at  whom  even  the 
fleas  cough  ! ill  luck  to  you ! may  you  be  pierced  by  a 
Catalan  lance  ! may  you  be  hung  with  a rope's-end,  and 
your  blood  be  not  spilt — may  a thousand  ills  befall  you, 
and  something  more  to  boot,  you  thief,  you  knave !” 

The  lad,  who  had  little  beard  and  less  discretion, 
hearing  this  string  of  abuse,  repaid  the  old  woman  in 
the  same  coin,  saying,  “Have  you  done,  you  devil’s 
grandmother,  you  old  hag,  you  child-strangler  ?” 

When  the  old  woman  heard  these  compliments,  she 
flew  into  such  a rage,  that  losing  hold  of  the  bridle,  and 
escaping  from  the  stable  of  patience,  she  acted  like  a mad 
woman,  cutting  capers  in  the  air  and  grinning  like  an 

B 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


4 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


ape.  At  this  strange  speetaclc,  Zoza  burst  into  such  a 
fit  of  laughter  that  she  well  nigh  fainted  away.  But 
when  the  old  wouaan  saw  herself  played  this  trick,  she 
flew  into  a passion,  and  turning  a fierce  look  on  Zoza, 
she  exclaimed,  “May  you  never  have  the  least  little  bit  of 
a husband,  unless  you  take  the  Prince  of  Roundfield.” 
Upon  hearing  this,  Zoza  ordered  the  old  woman  to 
be  called,  and  deshed  to  know  whether  in  her  words  she 
had  laid  on  her  a curse,  or  had  only  meant  to  insult  her. 
And  the  old  woman  answered,  “ Know  then,  that  the 
prince  whom  I spoke  of  is  a most  handsome  creature, 
and  is  named  Taddeo,  who,  by  the  wicked  spell  of  a 
fairy,  having  given  the  last  touch  to  the  pictm’e  of  life, 
has  been  placed  in  a tomb  outside  the  walls  of  the  city ; 
and  thci’c  is  an  inscription  upon  a stone,  saying,  that 
whatever  woman  shall  in  three  days  fill  mth  her  tears  a 
pitcher  which  hangs  there  upon  a hook,  will  bring  the 
prince  to  life  again,  and  shall  take  him  for  a husband. 
But  as  it  is  impossible  for  two  human  eyes  to  weep  so 
much  as  to  fill  a pitcher  that  would  hold  half  a barrel,  un- 
less it  were  those  of  Egeria,  who,  as  Pve  heard  say,  was 
turned  into  a fountain  of  tears  at  Rome,  I have  wished 
you  this  wish,  in  return  for  your  scoffing  and  jeering 
at  me ; and  I pray  Heaven  that  it  may  come  to  pass,  to 
avenge  the  wi’ong  you  have  done  me.”  So  saying  she 
scudded  down  the  stairs,  for  fear  of  a beating. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


Zoza  pondered  over  the  words  of  the  old  woman, 
and  after  mminating  and  turning  over  a hundred 
thoughts  in  her  mind,  until  her  head  was  like  a mill 
full  of  doubts,  she  was  at  last  struek  by  a dart  of  the 
passion  which  blinds  the  judgement  and  puts  a spell 
upon  the  reason  of  man ; and  taking  with  her  a handful 
of  dollars  from  her  father’s  coffers,  she  left  the  palace, 
and  walked  on  and  on,  until  she  arrived  at  the  castle  of 
a fairy,  to  whom  she  unburdened  her  heart.  The 
fairy,  out  of  pity  for  such  a fair  young  girl,  who  had  two 
spurs  to  make  her  fall — little  help,  and  plenty  of  love 
for  an  unknown  object — gave  her  a letter  of  recommen- 
dation to  a sister  of  hers,  who  was  also  a faiiy.  And 
this  second  fairy  received  her  likewise  with  gi-eat  kind- 
ness; and  on  the  following  morning,  when  Night  com- 
mands the  birds  to  proclaim,  that  whoever  has  seen 
a flock  of  black  shadows  gone  astray  shall  be  well  re- 
warded, she  gave  her  a beautiful  w'alnut,  saying,  “ Take 
this,  my  dear  daughter,  and  keep  it  carefully;  but 
never  open  it  except  in  time  of  the  greatest  need.” 
And  so  saying,  she  in  like  manner  gave  her  a letter, 
commending  her  to  another  sister. 

After  journeying  a long  way,  Zoza  arrived  at  the 
faii^’s  castle,  and  was  received  with  the  same  affec- 
tion as  before.  And  the  next  morning  this  fairy  like- 
wise gave  her  a letter  to  another  sister,  together  with  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


6 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


chestnut;  but  cautioning  her  at  the  same  time  as 
before. 

' After  travelling  on  for  some  time,  Zoza  came  to  the 
castle  of  the  fairy,  who  showered  on  her  a thousand 
caresses.  The  next  morning,  at  her  departure,  the 
fairy  gave  her  a filbert,  cautioning  her  in  like  manner 
never  to  open  it,  imless  the  greatest  necessity  obliged 
her.  Then  Zoza  set  out  upon  her  journey,  and  tra- 
velled so  far,  and  passed  so  many  forests  and  rivers, 
that  at  the  end  of  seven  years,  just  at  the  time  of  day 
when  the  Sun,  awakened  by  the  crowing  of  the  cocks, 
has  saddled  his  steeds  to  run  his  accustomed  stages,  she 
arrived  almost  lame  at  Roundfield. 

There,  at  the  entrance  to  the  city,  she  saw  a marble 
tomb,  at  the  foot  of  a foimtain,  which  was  weeping  tears 
of  crystal  at  seeing  itself  shut  up  in  a porphyry  prison. 
And  lifting  up  the  pitcher,  which  hung  over  it,  she 
placed  it  in  her  lap,  and  began  to  weep  into  it,  and  imi- 
tating the  fountain  to  make  two  little  fountains  of  her 
eyes.  And  thus  she  continued  unthout  ever  raising  her 
head  from  the  mouth  of  the  pitcher ; until,  at  the  end 
of  two  days,  it  was  full  within  two  inches  of  the  top. 
But  being  wearied  with  so  much  weeping,  she  was  una- 
wares overtaken  by  sleep,  and  was  obliged  to  rest  for  an 
hour  or  two  under  the  canopy  of  her  eyelids. 

Meanwhile  a certain  Slave,  with  the  legs  of  a grass- 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


7 


hopper,  came,  as  she  was  wont,  to  that  fountain,  to  fill 
her  water-cask.  Now  she  knew  the  meaning  of  the 
inscription,  which  was  talked  of  everywhere ; and  when 
she  saw  Zoza  weeping  so  incessantly,  and  making  two 
little  streams  from  her  eyes,  she  \vas  always  watching  and 
spying  until  the  pitcher  should  be  full  enough  for  her  to 
add  the  last  drops  to  fill  it,  and  thus  to  leave  Zoza  with 
a handful  of  flies*.  Now  therefore,  seeing  Zoza  asleep, 
she  seized  the  opportunity,  and  dextrously  removing  the 
pitcher  from  under  Zoza,  and  placing  her  own  eyes  over 
it,  she  filled  it  in  four  seconds.  But  hardly  was  it  full, 
when  the  prince  arose  from  the  white  marble  shrine,  as 
if  awakened  from  a deep  sleep,  and  embraced  that  mass 
of  black  flesh;  and  carrying  her  straightways  to  his 
palace,  feasts  and  marvellous  illuminations  were  made, 
and  he  took  her  for  his  wife. 

"VlTien  Zoza  awoke,  and  saw  the  pitcher  gone,  and  her 
hopes  with  it,  and  the  shrine  open,  her  heart  gi’cw  so 
heavy  that  she  was  on  the  point  of  unpacking  the  bales 
of  her  soul  at  the  custom-house  of  Death.  But  at  last, 
seeing  that  there  was  no  help  for  her  misfortune,  and 
that  she  could  blame  only  her  own  eyes,  which  had  so  ill 
watched  the  calf  of  her  hopesf,  she  went  her  way,  step 
by  step,  into  the  city.  And  when  she  heard  of  the  feasts 
which  the  Prince  had  made,  and  the  dainty  creature  he 

• i.  e,  cheated  of  her  hopes.  t AUucUng  probably  to  the  story  of  Argos. 


Digitized  by  Google 


8 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


had  taken  to  wife,  she  instantly  conceived  how  all  this 
mischief  had  come  to  pass ; and  said  to  herself,  sighing, 

Alas,  two  dark  things  have  brought  me  to  the  ground 
— sleep  and  a black  slave.”  Then,  in  order  to  try  all 
means  possible  to  avert  death,  against  whom  every  ani- 
mal defends  itself  all  in  its  power,  she  took  a handsome 
house  facing  the  palace  of  the  Prince ; from  whence,  al- 
though she  could  not  see  the  idol  of  her  heart,  she 
viewed  at  least  the  walls  of  the  temple,  wherein  the  trea- 
sure she  sighed  for  was  enclosed. 

But  Taddeo,  who  was  constantly  flying  like  a bat 
around  that  black  night  of  a Slave,  chanced  to  perceive 
Zoza,  and  he  became  an  eagle,  to  gaze  fixedly  at  her 
person,  the  casket  of  the  graces  of  Nature,  and  the 
Tie-plus-ultra  of  the  bounds  of  Beauty.  When  the  Slave 
perceived  this,  she  was  beside  herself  with  rage;  and 
being  now  in  the  family  way,  she  threatened  her  hus- 
band, that  if  he  did  not  instantly  leave  the  window,  the 
child  should  not  be  born  alive. 

Taddeo,  who  was  anxiously  expecting  the  birth  of  the 
child,  trembled  like  a reed  at  ofiending  his  wife,  and  tore 
himself  away,  like  a soul  from  the  body,  from  the  sight  of 
Zoza ; who,  seeing  this  little  balm  for  the  sickness  of  her 
hopes  taken  from  her,  knew  not  what  to  do  in  her  extreme 
need.  But  recollecting  the  gifts  which  the  fairies  had 
given  her,  she  opened  the  walnut,  and  out  of  it  hopped  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


9 


little  dwarf,  like  a doll,  the  most  gi’aceful  toy  that  ever 
was  seen  in  the  w'orld.  Then,  seating  himself  upon  the 
window,  the  dwarf  began  to  sing  with  such  a trill,  and 
gurgling,  and  passavolants,  that  he  seemed  a second 
Juuno,  surpassed  Pizzillo,  and  did  not  yield  a hair  to  the 
Blindman  of  Potenza,  or  the  King  of  the  Birds*. 

The  Slave,  when  she  saw  and  heard  this,  was  so  en- 
raptured, that,  calling  Taddeo,  she  said,  “ Bring  me  the 
little  fellow  who  is  singing  yonder,  or  the  child  shall  not 
be  bom  alive.^^  So  the  Prince,  who  allowed  the  ugly 
woman  to  put  the  saddle  on  his  own  back,  sent  instantly 
to  Zoza,  to  ask  if  she  would  sell  the  little  dwarf.  Zoza 
answered  that  she  was  not  a merchant,  but  that  he  was 
welcome  to  it  as  a gift.  So  Taddeo  accepted  the  offer ; 
for  he  was  anxious  to  keep  his  wife  in  good  humour,  in 
order  that  she  might  bring  the  child  safely  to  light. 

Four  days  after  this  Zoza  opened  the  chestnut,  when 
out  came  a hen  with  twelve  little  chickens,  all  of  pure 
gold.  And  being  placed  on  the  same  window,  the 
Slave  saw  them,  and  took  a vast  fancy  to  them ; then 
calling  Taddeo,  she  showed  him  the  beautiful  sight,  and 
said,  “ Get  me  the  hen  and  chickens,  or  depend  upon  it 
the  child  shall  not  be  bora  alive.”  So  Taddeo,  who 
let  himself  be  caught  in  the  net,  and  become  the  sport 
of  the  ugly  creature,  sent  again  to  Zoza,  offering  her  any 

* These  were  all  famous  singers. 


Digitized  by  Google 


10 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


price  she  might  ask  for  the  beautiful  hen.  But  Zoza 
gave  the  same  answer  as  before,  that  he  might  have 
it  as  a gift,  but  that  as  for  selling,  it  was  only  a loss 
of  time.  Taddeo  therefore,  who  could  do  no  otherwise, 
made  necessity  kick  at  discretion ; and  taking  the  beau- 
tiful present,  he  was  obliged  to  confess  himself  outdone 
by  the  liberality  of  woman,  who  is  by  nature  so  greedy 
that  not  all  the  gold  of  India  contents  her. 

But  after  four  days  paore  Zoza  opened  the  hazel-nut, 
and  forth  came  a doll,  which  spun  gold, — a sight  in- 
deed to  amaze  one.  And  as  soon  as  it  was  placed  at  the 
same  window,  the  Slave  saw  it,  and  calling  to  Taddeo, 
said,  " Bring  me  the  doll,  or  I promise  you  the  child 
shall  not  be  bom  alive.”  Taddeo,  who  let  his  proud 
hussy  of  a wife  toss  him  about  like  a shuttle,  and  lead 
him  by  the  nose,  had  nevertheless  not  the  heart  to  send 
to  Zoza  for  the  doll,  but  resolved  to  go  himself,  recol- 
lecting the  saying,  ^No  messenger  is  better  than  your- 
self;' and,  ^If  a man  wants  a thing,  let  him  go  for  it, — 
if  he  does  not  want  it,  let  him  send;'  and,  'Let  him 
who  would  eat  a fish  take  it  by  the  tail.'  So  he  went 
and  besought  Zoza  to  pardon  his  impertinence,  on  ac- 
count of  the  caprices  of  his  wife;  and  Zoza,  who  was 
in  ecstacies  at  beholding  the  cause  of  her  sorrow,  put  a 
constraint  upon  herself,  so  as  to  let  him  entreat  her 
the  longer,  and  to  keep  in  her  sight  the  object  of  her 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


11 


love,  who  was  stolen  from  her  by.  an  ugly  slave.  At 
length  she  gave  him  the  doll,  as  she  had  done  the  other 
things ; but  before  placing  it  in  his  hands,  she  prayed 
the  little  doll  to  put  a desire  into  the  heart  of  the  Slave 
to  hear  stories  told  her.  And  when  Taddeo  saw  the 
doll  in  his  hand,  without  his  paying  a single  carlino, 
he  was  so  filled  with  amazement  at  such  courtesy,  that 
he  ofiered  his  kingdom  and  his  life  in  exchange  for 
the  gift.  Then,  returning  to  the  palace,  he  gave  the 
doll  to  his  wife,  who  had  no  sooner  placed  it  in  her 
bosom,  to  play  with  it,  than  it  seemed  to  be  Love  in 
the  form  of  Ascanius  in  Dido's  bosom*,  who  shot  a dart 
into  her  breast ; for  instantly  such  a longing  seized  her 
to  hear  stories  told,  that,  being  unable  to  resist,  and 
fearing  to  give  birth  to  a son  who  should  fill  a ship  with 
beggars,  she  called  her  husband,  and  said,  “ Bid  some 
story-tellers  come  and  tell  me  stories,  or  I promise  you 
the  child  shall  not  be  bom  alive.” 

Taddeo,  to  get  rid  of  this  March  malady,  ordered  a 
proclamation  instantly  to  be  made,  that  all  the  women 
of  the  land  should  come  on  an  appointed  day.  And  on 
that  day,  at  the  hour  when  the  star  of  Venus  appears, 
who  awakes  the  Dawn,  to  strew  the  road  along  which 
the  Sun  has  to  pass,  the  ladies  were  all  assembled  at 
the  appointed  place.  But  Taddeo,  not  wishing  to  detain 

* Alluding  to  £neid  i.  685. 


Digitized  by  Google 


12  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

such  a rabble  for  the  mere  amusement  of  his  wife,  and 
being  moreover  suffocated  by  the  crowd,  chose  ten  only 
of  the  best  of  the  city,  who  appeared  to  him  most  capable 
and  eloquent.  These  were.  Bushy-haired  Zeza,  bandy- 
legged Cecca,  wen-necked  Meneca,  long-nosed  Tolla, 
humpbacked  Popa,  bearded  Antonella,  dumpy  Ciulla, 
blear-eyed  Paola,  bald-pated  Ciommetella,  and  square- 
shouldered  Jaeova.  These  he  wrote  down  on  a sheet  of 
paper,  and  then,  dismissing  the  others,  he  arose  with 
the  Slave  from  under  the  canopy,  and  they  went  gently 
gently  to  the  garden  of  the  palace,  where  the  leafy 
branches  were  so  closely  interlaced,  that  the  Sun  could 
not  separate  them  with  all  the  industry  of  his  rays. 
And  seating  themselves  under  a pavilion,  formed  by  a 
trellis  of  \unes,  in  the  middle  of  which  ran  a great  foun- 
tain— the  schoolmaster  of  the  courtiers,  whom  he  taught 
every  day  to  murmur — Taddeo  thus  began : — 

There  is  nothing  in  the  world  more  glorious,  my 
gentle  dames,  than  to  listen  to  the  deeds  of  others ; nor 
was  it  without  reason  that  the  great  philosopher  placed 
the  highest  happiness  of  man  in  listeningto  pretty  stories; 
since,  in  hearing  pleasing  things  told,  griefs  vanish,  trou- 
blesome thoughts  are  put  to  flight,  and  life  is  length- 
ened. And  for  this  reason  you  see  the  artisans  leave 
the  workshops,  the  merchants  their  counting-houses,  the 
lawyers  their  causes,  the  shopkeepers  their  business,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


13 


all  repair  with  open  mouth  to  the  barbers’  shops  and 
the  groups  of  chatterers,  to  listen  to  stories,  fictions  and 
gazettes  in  the  air.  I cannot  therefore  but  pardon  my 
wife,  who  has  gotten  this  strange  fancy  into  her  head 
of  hearing  stories  told ; and  so,  if  you  will  please  to  sa- 
tisfy the  whim  of  my  princess,  and  comply  w'ith  my 
wishes,  you  will,  during  these  four  or  five  days  until 
the  birth  takes  place,  each  of  you  relate  daily  one  of 
those  tales  which  old  w'omen  are  w'ont  to  tell  for  the 
amusement  of  the  little  ones.  And  you  will  come  re- 
gularly to  this  spot,  where,  after  a good  repast,  you 
shall  begin  to  tell  stories,  so  as  to  pass  life  pleasantly, 
and  son’ow  to  him  that  dies  !” 

At  these  w'ords,  all  present  bowed  assent  to  the  com- 
mands of  Taddeo.  And  the  tables  being  meanwhile  set 
out,  and  the  feast  spread,  they  sat  down  to  eat ; and 
when  they  had  done  eating,  the  Prince  made  a sign 
to  bushy-haired  Zeza  to  set  fire  to  the  train;  upon 
which,  making  a low  bow  to  the  Prince  and  his  wife, 
she  began.  ’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


14 


THE  MYRTLE. 

There  lived  in  the  village  of  Miano  a man  and  his 
wife,  who  had  no  children  whatever,  and  they  longed 
with  the  greatest  eagerness  to  have  an  heir.  The  wo- 
man, above  all,  was  for  ever  saying,  “ 0 heavens ! if  I 
could  but  bring  something  into  the  world — I should 
not  care,  were  it  even  a sprig  of  myrtle.”  And  she 
repeated  this  song  so  often,  and  so  wearied  Heaven  with 
these  words,  that  at  last  her  wish  was  granted ; and  at 
the  end  of  nine  months,  instead  of  a little  boy  or  girl, 
she  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  midwife  a fine  sprig  of 
myrtle.  This  she  planted  with  great  delight  in  a pot, 
oraamented  with  ever  so  many  beautiful  figures,  and  set 
it  in  the  window,  tending  it  morning  and  evening  with 
more  diligence  than  the  gardener  does  a bed  of  cabbages, 
from  which  he  reckons  to  pay  the  rent  of  his  garden. 

Now  the  king’s  son  happening  to  pass  by,  as  he  was 
going  to  hunt,  took  a prodigious  fancy  to  this  beautiful 
plant,  and  sent  to  ask  the  mistress  of  the  house  if  she 
would  sell  it,  for  he  would  give  even  one  of  his  eyes  for 
it.  The  woman  at  last,  after  a thousand  difficulties  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MYRTLE. 


15 


refusals,  allured  by  his  offers,  dazzled  by  his  promises, 
fnghtened  by  his  threats,  overcome  by  his  prayers,  gave 
him  the  pot,  beseeching  him  to  hold  it  dear,  for  she 
loved  it  more  than  a daughter,  and  valued  it  as  much 
as  if  it  were  her  own  offspring.  Then  the  prince  had 
the  flowerpot  carried  with  the  gi'eatest  care  in  the  world 
into  his  own  chamber,  and  placed  it  in  a balcony,  and 
tended  and  watered  it  with  his  own  hand. 

It  happened  one  evening,  when  the  prince  had  gone 
to  bed,  and  had  put  out  the  candles,  and  all  were  at 
rest  and  in  their  first  sleep,  that  he  heard  the  sound 
of  some  one  stealing  through  the  house,  and  coming 
cautiously  towards  his  bed ; whereat  he  thought  it  must 
be  some  chamber-boy  coming  to  lighten  his  purse  for 
him,  or  some  Monaciello  * to  pull  the  bed-clothes  off 
him.  But  as  he  was  a bold  fellow,  whom  even  the  ugly 
devil  himself  could  not  frighten,  he  acted  the  dead 
cat,  waiting  to  see  the  upshot  of  the  affair.  "Wlien  he 
perceived  the  object  approach  nearer,  and  stretching 
out  his  hand  felt  something  smooth,  and  instead  of  lay- 
ing hold,  as  he  expected,  on  the  prickles  of  a hedgehog, 
he  touched  a httlc  creature  more  soft  and  fine  than 
Barbai*y  wool,  more  pliant  and  tender  than  a marten’s 
tail,  more  delicate  than  thistle- doum,  he  flew  from  one 
thought  to  another,  and  taking  her  to  be  a fairy  (as 

* A little  Neapolitan  sprite  or  kobold.  Observe  its  nationality — ‘ the  little  monk.* 


Digitized  by  Google 


16 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


indeed  she  was),  he  coneeived  at  once  a great  afiection 
for  her.  The  next  morning,  before  the  Sun,  hke  a chief 
physician,  went  out  to  visit  the  flowers  that  are  sick  and 
languid,  the  unknown  fair  one  arose  and  disappeared, 
leaving  the  prince  filled  with  curiosity  and  wonder. 

But  when  this  had  gone  on  for  seven  days,  he  was 
burning  and  melting  with  desire  to  know  what  good 
fortune  this  was  that  the  stars  had  showered  down  on 
him,  and  what  ship  freighted  with  the  graces  of  Love  it 
was  that  had  come  to  its  moorings  in  his  chamber.  So 
one  night,  when  the  fair  maiden  was  fast  asleep,  he  tied 
one  of  her  tresses  to  his  arm,  that  she  might  not  escape ; 
then  he  called  a chamberlain,  and  bidding  him  light  the 
candles,  he  saw  the  flower  of  beauty,  the  miracle  of 
women,  the  looking-glass  and  painted  egg*  of  Venus, 
the  fair  bait  of  Love,  he  saw  a little  doll,  a beautiful 
dove,  a Fata  Morgana,  a banner, — he  saw  a golden 
trinket,  a hunter,  a falcon’s  eye,  a moon  in  her  fifteenth 
day,  a pigeon’s  bill,  a morsel  for  a king,  a jewel, — he 
saw,  in  short,  a sight  to  amaze  one. 

In  astonishment  he  cried,  “ Away  with  you,  0 Cy- 
prian goddess ! go,  Helen,  and  put  a rope  about  your 
neck  ! back  with  you  to  Criosa,  O Fiorella  ! for  all  your 
beauties  arc  not  worth  an  old  shoe  in  comparison  with 
this  beauty  with  two  suns,  this  paragon  of  loveliness,  this 

* CMCCO/M'n^o— applied  to  anything  beautiful — from  the  painted  egga  at  Eaatcr. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MYRTLE. 


perfect  beauty,  in  which  is  no  blemish,  no  mole-spot. 
O sleep,  sweet  sleep ! heap  poppies  on  the  eyes  of  this 
lovely  jewel ; interrupt  not  my  delight  in  viewing  as 
long  as  I desire  this  triumph  of  beauty.  O lovely 
tress  that  binds  me ! O lovely  eyes  that  inflame  me ! 
0 lovely  lips  that  refresh  me ! 0 lovely  bosom  that 
consoles  me ! Oh  where,  at  what  shop  of  the  wondei's  of 
Nature,  was  this  living  statue  made?  what  India  gave 
the  gold  for  these  hairs  ? what  Ethiopia  the  ivory  to 
form  these  brows?  what  seashore  the  carbuncles  that 
compose  these  eyes  ? what  Tyre  the  purple  to  die  this 
face  ? what  East  the  pearls  to  string  these  teeth  ? and 
from  what  mountains  was  the  snow  taken  to  spinnkle 
over  this  bosom  ? — snow  contraiy  to  nature,  that  nur- 
tures the  flowers  and  bums  hearts 

So  saying  he  made  a vine  of  his  arms,  and  clasping 
her  neck,  she  awoke  from  her  sleep  and  replied,  with 
a gentle  smile,  to  the  sigh  of  the  enamoured  prince; 
who,  seeing  her  open  her  eyes,  said,  “ O my  treasure,  if 
viewing  without  candles  this  temple  of  love  I was  in 
transports,  what  will  become  of  my  life  now  that  you 
have  lighted  two  lamps  ? 0 beauteous  eyes,  that  with 

a trump-card  of  light  make  the  stars  bankrupt,  you 
alone  have  pierced  this  heart,  you  alone  can  make 
a poultice  for  it  like  fresh  eggs ! O my  lovely  physi- 
cian, take  pity,  take  pity  on  one  who  is  sick  of  lovei 

c 


Digitized  by  Google 


18  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

t 

« 

« 

who,  having  changed  the  air  from  the  darkness  of  night 
to  the  light  of  this  beauty,  is  seized  by  a fever;  lay 
your  hand  on  this  heart,  feel  my  pulse,  give  me  a pre- 
scription. But,  my  soul,  why  do  I ask  for  a prescrip- 
tion? Apply  a cupping-glass  to  these  lips  with  that 
lovely  mouth ; I desire  no  other  comfort  than  a touch  of 
that  little  hand ; for  I am  cei*tain  that  with  the  cordial 
of  that  fair  grace,  and  with  the  healing  root  of  that  tongue 
of  thine,  I shall  be  sound  and  well  again.” 

At  these  words  the  lovely  fairy  grew  as  red  as  fire, 
and  replied,  Not  so  mueh  praise,  my  lord  prince  ! I 
am  your  servant,  and  would  do  anything  in  the  world 
to  serve  that  kingly  face ; and  I esteem  it  great  good 
fortune  that  from  a branch  of  myrtle,  set  in  a pot  of 
earth,  I have  become  a branch  of  laurel  hung  over  the 
inn-door  of  a heart  of  flesh*, — of  a heart  in  which 
there  is  so  much  greatness  and  virtue.” 

The  prince,  melting  at  these  words  like  a tallow- 
candle,  began  again  to  embrace  her ; and  sealing  the  let- 
ter with  a kiss,  he  gave  her  his  hand,  saying,  “ Take  my 
faith,  you  shall  be  my  wife,  you  shall  be  mistress  of  my 
sceptre,  you  shall  have  the  key  of  this  heart,  as  you  hold 
the  helm  of  this  life.”  After  these  and  a hundred 
other  ceremonies  and  discourses  they  arose.  And  so  it 
went  on  for  several  days. 

But  as  spoil-sport,  marriage-parting  Fate  is  always 

* ^VhcneTer  any  one  has  wine  to  sell,  he  hangs  a branch  of  laurel  over  his  door. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MYRTLE. 


19 


a hindrance  to  the  steps  of  Love,  it  fell  out  that  the 
prince  was  summoned  to  hunt  a gi’eat  wild  boar  which 
was  ravaging  that  country.  So  he  was  forced  to  leave 
his  wife,  or  rather  to  leave  two-thirds  of  his  heart.  But 
as  he  loved  her  more  than  his  life,  and  saw  that  she  was 
beautiful  beyond  all  beautiful  things,  from  this  love  and 
beauty  there  sprung  up  the  feeling  of  jealousy,  which  is  a 
tempest  in  the  sea  of  love,  a piece  of  soot  that  falls  into 
the  pottage  of  the  bliss  of  lovers, — which  is  a serpent 
that  bites,  a worm  that  gnaws,  a gall  that  poisons,  a 
frost  that  kills, — making  life  always  restless,  the  mind 
unstable,  the  heart  ever  suspicious.  So,  calling  the 
faiiy,  he  said  to  her,  “ I am  obliged,  my  heart,  to 
be  away  from  home  for  two  or  three  days;  Heaven 
knows  with  how  much  gi’ief  I tear  myself  from  you, 
who  are  my  soul ; and  Heaven  knows  too  whether,  ere  I 
set  out,  my  life  may  not  end ; but  as  I cannot  help  go- 
ing, to  please  my  father,  I must  leave  you.  I therefore 
pray  you,  by  all  the  love  you  bear  me,  to  go  back  into 
the  flowerpot,  and  not  to  come  out  of  it  till  I return, 
■which  will  be  as  «oon  as  possible.” 

“ I wull  do  so,”  said  the  fairy,  " for  I cannot  and  w ill 
not  refuse  what  pleases  you.  Go  therefore,  and  may  the 
mother  of  good  luck  go  with  you,  for  I w'ill  serve  you 
to  the  best  of  my  power*.  But  do  me  one  favour ; leave 


• Te  tervo  a la  meaning,  ‘ I help  you  to  the  best  part,’ — a common  ss}-ing 

in  Naples,  taken  from  the  butcher’s  shop. 


c2 


Digitized  by  Google 


20 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


a thread  of  silk  with  a hell  tied  to  the  top  of  the  myrtle, 
and  when  you  come  back  pull  the  thread  and  ring, 
and  immediately  I will  come  out  and  say,  Here  I 
am !” 

The  prince  did  so,  and  then  calling  a chamberlain 
said  to  him,  Come  hither,  come  hither,  you ! open  your 
ears  and  mind  what  I say.  Make  this  bed  every  evening, 
as  if  I were  myself  to  sleep  in  it.  Water  this  flowerpot 
regularly,  and  mind,  I have  counted  the  leaves,  and  if  I 
find  one  missing,  I will  take  from  you  the  means  of  earn- 
ing your  bread.”  So  saying  he  mounted  his  horse,  and 
went,  like  a sheei>  that  is  led  to  the  slaughter,  to  follow  a 
boar.  In  the  meanwhile  seven  wicked  women,  with  whom 
the  prince  had  been  acquainted,  began  to  grow  jealous ; 
and  being  cimious  to  piy^  into  the  secret,  they  sent  for  a 
mason,  and  for  a good  sum  of  money  got  him  to  make  an 
undergi’ound  passage  from  their  house  into  the  princess 
chamber.  Then  these  cunning  jades  went  through  the 
passage,  in  order  to  explore.  But  finding  nothing, 
they  opened  the  window ; and  when  they  saw  the  beau- 
tiful myrtle  standing  there,  each  of  them  plucked  a leaf 
from  it  ; but  the  youngest  took  off  the  entire  top,  to 
which  the  little  bell  was  hung ; and  the  moment  it  was 
touched  the  bell  tinkled,  and  the  fairy,  thinking  it  was 
the  prince,  immediately  came  out. 

As  soon  as  the  wdeked  women  saw  this  lovely  crea- 
ture, they  fastened  their  talons  on  her,  crying,  “ You 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MYRTLE. 


21 


are  she  who  turns  to  your  own  mill  the  stream  of 
our  hopes ! you  it  is  who  have  stolen  the  favour  of 
the  prince  1 but  you  are  come  to  an  end  of  your  tricks, 
my  fine  lady ! you  are  nimble  enough  in  running  off*; 
but  you  are  caught  in  your  tricks  this  time,  and  if  you 
escape,  you  were  not  born  in  nine  months.” 

So  saying  they  flew  upon  her,  and  instantly  tore  her 
in  pieces,  and  each  of  them  took  her  part.  But  the 
youngest  would  not  join  in  this  cruel  act ; and  when 
she  was  invited  by  her  sisters  to  do  as  they  did,  she 
would  take  nothing  but  a lock  of  those  golden  hairs. 
So  when  they  had  done,  they  went  quickly  away  by  the 
passage  through  which  they  had  come. 

Meanwhile  the  chamberlain  came  to  make  the  bed, 
and  water  the  flowerpot,  according  to  his  master’s  or- 
ders ; and  seeing  this  pretty  piece  of  work,  he  had  like 
to  have  died  with  terror.  Then,  biting  his  nails  with 
vexation,  he  set  to  work,  gathered  up  the  remains  of  the 
flesh  and  bones  that  were  left,  and  scraping  the  blood 
from  the  floor,  he  piled  them  all  up  in  a heap  in  the 
pot;  and  having  watered  it,  he  made  the  bed,  locked 
the  door,  put  the  key  xmder  the  door,  and  taking  to  his 
heels  ran  away  out  of  the  town. 

When  the  prince  came  back  from  the  chase,  he 

* AJe  pegJiato  vajano.  Vigano  U a village  near  Naples,  and  from  its  similarity  of 
■ound  to  vat,  va,  has  arisen  the  saying,  pigliar  oajano,  {se  ne  andare),  to  go  away. 


Digitized  by  Google 


22 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


pulled  the  silken  string,  and  rung  the  little  bell ; but 
ring  as  he  would,  it  was  all  lost  time*  j he  might  sound 
the  tocsin,  and  ring  till  he  was  tired,  for  the  fairy 
gave  no  heed.  So  he  went  straight  to  the  chamber, 
and  not  having  patience  to  call  the  chamberlain  and 
ask  for  the  key,  he  gave  the  lock  a kick,  burst  open  the 
door,  went  in,  opened  the  window,  and  seeing  the  myrtle 
stript  of  its  leaves,  he  fell  to  making  a most  doleful 
lamentation,  crying,  shouting  and  bawling,  “ 0 wretch- 
ed me  ! unhappy  me  ! O miserable  me  ! who  has  played 
me  this  trickf?  and  who  has  thus  trumped  my  card? 
O ruined,  banished  and  undone  prince ! O my  leadess 
myrtle ! my  lost  fairy  ! 0 my  wretched  life  ! my  joys 
vanished  into  smoke ! my  pleasures  turned  to  vinegar ! 
What  will  you  do,  xmhappy  Cola  MarchioneJ  ? Leap 
quickly  over  this  ditch  ! you  have  fallen  from  all  happi- 
ness, and  will  you  not  cut  your  throat  ? you  are  robbed 
of  eveiy  treasure,  and  will  you  not  open  a vein  ? you  are 
expelled  from  life,  and  do  you  not  go  mad  ? Where  are 
you  ? where  are  you,  my  myrtle  ? and  what  soul  more 
hard  than  marble  has  destroyed  this  beautiful  flowerpot? 
0 cm*sed  chase,  that  has  chased  me  from  all  happiness  I 


• Sana  ca  piglie  qtMglie,— tona  cu  patta  to  PUcopo — literally,  ‘ Ring,  for  they  ’re 
catching  quail* — ring,  for  the  bishop  is  going  by.’ 
t Chi  m’  ha  fatto  $la  varva  df  ttoppa — literally,  ‘ Who  has  made  me  this  beard  of 
tow  ?’  a common  expression  in  Naples  when  any  one  comes  in  late  to  a dinner.party . 
} The  prince’s  name : Cola  is  Nicola. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MTRTLE. 


23 


Alas ! I am  done  for,  I am  overthrown,  I am  ruined, 
I have  ended  my  days : it  is  not  possible  for  me  to  get 
through  life  without  my  life;  I must  streteh  my  legs*, 
since  without  my  love  sleep  ^^all  be  lamentation,  food 
poison,  pleasure  insipid,  and  life  sour.” 

These  and  many  other  exclamations,  that  would  move 
the  very  stones  in  the  streets,  were  uttered  by  the  prince  ; 
and  after  repeating  them  again  and  again,  and  wailing 
bitterly,  full  of  sorrow  and  woe,  never  shutting  an  eye 
to  sleep,  nor  opening  his  mouth  to  eat,  he  gave  such 
way  to  grief,  that  his  face,  which  was  before  of  oriental 
vermilhon,  became  of  gold  paint,  and  the  ham  of  his 
lips  became  rusty  bacon. 

The  fairy,  who  had  sprouted  up  again  from  the  re- 
mains that  were  put  in  the  pot,  seeing  the  misery  and 
tribulation  of  her  poor  lover,  and  how  he  was  turned  in 
a second  to  the  colour  of  a sick  Spaniard,  of  a venomous 
lizard,  of  the  sap  of  a leaf,  of  a jaundiced  person,  of  a 
dried  pear,  of  a beccaficco’s  tail,  was  moved  with  com- 
passion ; and  springing  out  of  the  pot,  like  the  light  of 
a candle  shooting  out  of  a dark  lantern,  she  stood  be- 
fore Cola  Marchione,  and  embracing  him  in  her  arms 
she  said,  Take  heart,  take  heart,  my  prince ! have  done 
now  with  this  lamenting,  wipe  your  eyes,  quiet  your 
anger,  smooth  your  face : behold  me  ahve  and  handsome, 

• Stennere  li  piedi—i,  e.  to  die. 


Digitized  by  Google 


24 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


in  spite  of  those  wicked  women,  who  split  my  head  and 
treated  me  as  Tesone  did  the  poor  friar*.” 

Tlie  prince,  seeing  this  when  he  least  expected  it, 
ai'osc  again  from  death  to  life,  and  the  colour  returned 
to  his  cheeks,  warmth  to  his  blood,  breath  to  his  breast. 
After  giving  her  a thousand  caresses  and  embraces,  he 
desired  to  know  the  whole  affair  from  head  to  foot ; and 
when  he  found  that  the  chamberlain  was  not  to  blame, 
he  ordered  him  to  be  called,  and  giving  a great  banquet, 
he,  with  the  full  consent  of  his  father,  manied  the  fairy. 
And  he  invited  all  the  great  people  of  the  kingdom, 
but,  above  all  others,  he  would  have  present  those  seven 
serpents  who  had  committed  the  slaughter  of  that  sweet 
sncking-calf. 

And  as  soon  as  they  had  done  eating,  the  prince 
asked  all  the  guests,  one  after  another,  what  he  de- 
served who  had  injured  that  beautiful  maiden — ^pointing 
to  the  fairy,  w'ho  looked  so  lovely  that  she  shot  hearts 
like  a sprite  and  di’cvv  souls  like  a windlass. 

Then  all  who  sat  at  table,  beginning  with  the  king, 
said,  one  that  he  desen  ed  the  gallows,  another  that  he 
merited  the  wheel,  a third  the  pincers,  a fourth  to  be 
thrown  from  a precipice ; in  short  one  proposed  this 
punishment,  and  another  that.  At  last  it  came  to  the 
turn  of  the  seven  wicked  women  to  speak,  who,  although 

* Thi*  allude*  to  a Neapolitan  romance. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MYRTLE. 


26 


they  did  not  much  relish  this  conversation,  yet,  as  the 
truth  comes  out  when  the  wine  goes  about,  answered, 
that  whoever  had  the  heart  basely  to  touch  only  this 
quintessence  of  the  charms  of  love  desen  ed  to  be  buried 
alive  in  a dungeon. 

“As  you  have  pronounced  this  sentence  with  your 
own  lips,”  said  the  prince,  “ you  have  yourselves  judged 
the  cause,  you  have  yourselves  signed  the  decree.  It 
remains  for  me  to  cause  your  order  to  be  executed,  since 
it  is  you  who  with  the  heart  of  a negro,  with  the  cruelty 
of  Medea,  made  a fritter  of  this  beautiful  head,  and 
chopped  up  these  lovely  hmbs  like  sausage-meat.  So 
quick ! make  haste,  lose  not  a moment ! throw  them 
this  very  instant  into  a large  dungeon,  where  they  shall 
end  their  days  miserably.” 

So  this  order  was  instantly  carried  into  execution. 
The  prince  married  the  youngest  sister  of  these  wicked 
creatm'cs  to  the  chamberlain,  and  gave  her  a good  por- 
tion. And  giving  also  to  the  father  and  mother  of  the 
myrtle  w'herew  ithal  to  live  comfortably,  he  himself  spent 
his  days  happily  with  the  fair)-^ ; while  the  wicked  women 
ended  their  lives  in  bitter  anguish,  and  thus  verified 
the  proverb  of  the  wise  men  of  old — 

“ The  lame  goat  will  hop 
If  he  meets  with  no  stop.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


26 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


All  present  were  highly  delighted  at  the  consolation 
which  the  poor  prince  received,  and  the  punishment  of 
the  wicked  women.  But  as  it  was  now  Meneca^s  turn 
to  speak,  an  end  was  put  to  the  chattering,  and  she 
began  the  following  story. 


Digitized  by  Google 


27 


PERUONTO. 

A Goop  deed  is  never  lost : he  who  sows  courtesy  reaps 
benefit,  and  he  who  plants  kindness  gathers  love. 
Pleasure  bestowed  upon  a grateful  mind  was  never 
sterile,  but  generates  gratitude,  and  begets  reward.  In- 
stances of  this  occur  continually  in  the  actions  of  men, 
and  you  will  see  an  example  of  it  in  the  story  which  I 
will  tell  you. 


A GOOD  w’oman  at  Casoria*,  named  Ceccarella,  had  a 
son  called  Peruonto,  who  was  the  most  hideous  figure, 
the  greatest  fool  and  the  most  doltish  idiot  that  Nature 
had  ever  created.  So  that  the  heart  of  his  unhappy 
mother  was  blacker  than  a dish-clout,  and  a thousand 
times  a day  did  she  bestow  a hearty  curse  on  all  who 
had  a hand  in  bringing  into  the  world  such  a block- 
head, who  was  not  worth  a dog’s  mess.  For  the  poor 
woman  might  scream  at  him  till  she  burst  her  throat, 
and  yet  the  moon-calf  w’ould  not  stir  to  do  the  slightest 
hand’s  turn  for  herf. 

* A village  near  Naples.  Ceccarella  ia  Fannjr.  • 

t So  marditto  lenitio — literally,  ‘ a cursed  service.* 


Digitized  by  Google 


28 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


At  last,  after  a thousand  dinnings  at  his  brain,  and 
a thousand  splittings  of  his  head,  and  a thousand  ‘‘  I 
teU  you  ” and  “ I told  you,^^  bawling  today  and  yelling 
tomorrow,  she  got  him  to  go  to  the  wood  for  a faggot, 
saying,  “ Come  now,  it  is  time  for  us  to  get  a morsel  to 
eat ; so  run  off  for  some  sticks,  and  don’t  forget  yourself 
on  the  way,  but  come  back  as  quick  as  you  can,  and  we 
will  boil  ourselves  some  cabbage,  to  keep  the  life  in  us.” 
Away  went  Peruonto,  the  blockhead,  and  he  went 
just  like  one  that  was  going  to  the  gallows* ; away  he 
went,  and  he  moved  as  if  treading  on  eggs,  with  the 
gait  of  a jackdaw,  and  counting  his  steps,  going  fair 
and  softly,  at  a snail’s  gallop,  and  making  all  sorts  of 
zig-zags  and  cii’cumbendibuscs  on  his  way  to  the  wood, 
to  come  there  after  the  fashion  of  the  ravenf.  And 
when  he  reached  the  middle  of  a plain,  through  which 
a river  ran,  growling  and  murmuring  at  the  want  of 
manners  in  the  stones  that  were  stopping  his  way,  he 
met  three  youths,  who  had  made  themselves  a bed  of  the 
grass,  and  a pillow  of  a flint  stone,  and  were  lying  dead 
asleep  under  the  blaze  of  the  Sun,  who  was  shooting  his 
rays  down  point  blank.  When  Peruonto  saw  these 
poor  creatures,  who  were  made  a fountain  of  water  in 

* Comme  vi  chiUo  che  slA  mmiexzo  a li  con/rate : that  is,  * among  the  friars  who 
attend  criminals  lo  the  gallows.’ 

t Peffare  la  venuta  de  la  euorno.  A common  expression  in  Naples,  when  a 
person  has  gone  away  not  to  return,  is,  ' Hafatto  I'andata  del  caorvo,' 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERUONTO. 


29 


the  midst  of  a furnace  of  fire,  he  felt  pity  for  them,  and 
cutting  some  branches  of  an  oak  he  made  a handsome 
arbour  over  them,  hlean while  the  youths,  who  were 
the  sons  of  a fairy,  awoke,  and  seeing  the  kindness 
and  courtesy  of  Peruonto,  they  gave  him  a charm,  that 
everything  he  asked  for  should  be  done. 

Pemonto,  having  performed  this  good  action,  went  his 
ways  towards  the  wood,  where  he  made  up  such  an  enor« 
mous  faggot  that  it  would  require  an  engine  to  drag  it ; 
and  seeing  that  it  was  all  nonsense  for  him  to  think  of 
canying  it  on  his  back,  he  got  astride  on  it,  and  cried, 
"Oh  what  a lucky  fellow  I should  be  if  this  faggot 
would  carry  me  riding  a-horseback !”  And  the  word  was 
hardly  out  of  his  mouth,  when  the  faggot  began  to  trot 
and  to  gallop  like  a Bisignanian  horse*;  and  when  it 
came  in  front  of  the  king’s  palace,  it  pranced  and  capered 
and  curveted  in  a way  that  would  amaze  you.  The 
ladies,  who  were  standing  at  one  of  the  windows,  on 
seeing  such  a wonderful  sight,  ran  to  call  Vastolla,  the 
daughter  of  the  king,  who,  going  to  the  window  and 
observing  the  caracoles  of  a faggot  and  the  bounds  of  a 
bundle  of  wood,  burst  out  a-laughing, — a thing  which, 
o’wing  to  a natural  melancholy,  she  never  remembered 
to  have  done  before.  Peruonto  raised  his  head,  and 

* The  prince  of  Bisignano  (in  Apulia)  had  a famotu  breed  of  horses.  The  Apu* 
lian  horses  were  celebrated  in  the  Middle  Ages. 


Digitized  by  Google 


30 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


seeing  that  it  was  at  him  they  were  laughing,  exclaimed, 
0 Vastolla,  I wish  you  were  with  child !”  and  so  say- 
ing, he  struck  his  heels  into  the  flanks  of  his  faggot, 
and  in  a dashing  faggoty  gallop  he  was  at  home  before 
many  minutes,  with  such  a train  of  little  boys  at  his 
heels,  bawling  and  shouting  after  him,  that  if  his  mother 
had  not  been  quick  to  shut  the  door,  they  would  have 
killed  him  with  rotten  fniit  and  vegetables. 

Meanwhile  Vastolla  began  to  feel  certain  qualms,  and 
a palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  other  symptoms,  which 
convinced  her  that  she  was  in  the  family  way.  She  did 
all  in  her  power  to  keep  her  condition  concealed,  but  at 
length  the  matter  could  no  longer  be  a secret.  The 
king,  when  he  discovered  it,  was  like  a bedlamite*; 
and  he  summoned  his  council,  and  said,  Ye  know  by 
this  time  that  the  moon  of  my  honour  has  got  horns : 
ye  know  by  this  time  that  my  daughter  has  provided  me 
with  matter  for  having  chronicles,  or  rather  cornicles,  of 
my  shame  written ; so  now  speak,  and  advise  me.  My 
own  opinion  would  be,  to  make  her  bring  forth  her  soul 
before  she  brought  forth  an  ill  breed.  1 should  be  for 
making  her  feel  the  pangs  of  death  before  she  felt  the 
pains  of  labour  ; it  would  be  my  wish  to  put  her  out  of 
the  world  before  she  brought  any  offspring  into  it.^’ 

The  councillors,  who  had  in  their  time  consumed  more 

• Facenno  coxa  dell'  autro  munno, — ‘ doing  things  of  the  other  world.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERUONTO. 


31 


oil  than  wine*,  said,  “ Of  a truth  she  deserves  to  he 
severely  punished;  and  the  haft  of  the  knife  which 
should  take  away  her  life  ought  to  be  made  of  the  honis 
that  she  has  placed  on  your  brows.  Nevertheless,  if 
we  put  her  to  death  before  the  child  is  born,  that  auda- 
cioTis  scoundrel  who,  to  put  you  into  a battle  of  annoy- 
ances, has  armed  both  your  left  and  your  right  wingf — 
who,  to  teach  you  the  .policy  of  Tiberius  |,  has  set  a 
Cornelius  Tacitus  before  you — who,  to  represent  to 
you  a true  dream  of  infamy,  has  made  you  come  out 
through  the  gate  of  horn  § — he  will  escape  through  the 
broken  meshes  of  the  net.  Let  us  wait  then  till  it  comes 
to  light,  and  we  discover  the  root  of  this  disgrace,  and 
then  we  will  think  it  over,  and  resolve  cum  gram  salts 
what  were  best  to  be  done.”  This  counsel  pleased  the 
king;  for  he  saw  that  they  spoke  like  sensible,  prudent 
men : so  he  held  his  hand,  and  said,  " Let  us  wait  and 
see  the  end  of  this  business.” 

But,  as  Heaven  would  have  it,  the  hour  of  the  birth 
came,  and  V’^astolla  brought  into  the  world  tw  o little  boys, 
like  two  golden  apples.  The  king,  who  w'as  still  full  of 
wrath,  summoned  his  councillors  to  advise  with  him ; and 
he  said,  “ Well,  now  my  daughter  is  brought  to  bed,  it  is 

* That  is,  had  studied  much  and  drunk  little. 

t In  the  military  language  of  the  Romans,  the  wings  were  called  cornua. 

J That  is,  ‘ to  teach  you  cruelty.’  Observe  the  allusion  to  horns  in  CometiKS, 

^ Alluding  to  the  Odyssey,  T.  S62 ; and  i£ncid,  vi.  894, 


Digitized  by  Google 


32 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


time  for  us  to  follow  up  the  business  by  knocking  out 
her  brains.”  “ No,”  said  those  wise  old  men,  (and  it  was 
all  to  give  time  to  Time,)  let  us  wait  till  the  little  ones 
grow  big  enough  to  enable  us  to  discover  the  features 
of  their  father.”  The  king,  who  never  wrote  without 
having  the  ruled-lines  of  his  council  to  prevent  his 
miting  crooked,  shrugged  up  his  shoulders,  but  had 
patience,  and  waited  till  the  childi’en  were  seven  years 
old.  At  which  time,  summoning  his  councillors  anew, 
he  urged  them  to  make  an  end  of  the  business : then  one 
of  them  said,  “ Since  you  have  not  been  able  to  draw^  the 
secret  out  of  your  daughter,  and  find  out  who  the  false 
coiner  is  that  has  altered  the  crown  on  your  image,  we 
will  now  hunt  out  the  stain.  Order  then  a great  ban- 
quet to  be  prepared,  and  let  every  nobleman  and  every 
man  of  rank  in  the  city  come  to  it ; and  let  us  be  on  the 
watch,  and,  w ith  our  eyes  on  the  alert*,  sec  to  whom  the 
little  children  shall  turn  most  willingly,  moved  there- 
to by  nature ; for  beyond  doubt  that  will  be  the  father, 
and  w’e  will  instantly  lay  hold  on  him  and  put  him  out 
of  the  way.” 

The  king  w'as  pleased  with  this  counsel,  and  ordering 
the  banquet  to  be  got  ready,  he  invited  all  the  people  of 
rank  and  note.  And  wiien  they  had  done  feasting,  he 

• Literally,  ‘ on  the  chopping-block,’  tagUero;  to  keep  one’*  eyes  upon  it,  is  to 
watch  the  cats,  that  they  run  away  with  nothing. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERUONTO. 


33 


had  them  all  placed  in  a row,  and  made  the  children 
pass  before  them ; but  the  children  took  no  more  notice 
of  them  than  Alexander’s  bull-dog  did  of  the  rabbits ; 
80  that  the  king  was  outrageous,  and  bit  liis  lips ; and 
though  he  did  not  want  for  shoes,  yet  this  pump  of 
grief  was  so  tight  for  him  that  he  stamped  his  feet  on  the 
ground.  But  the  councillors  said  to  him,  “ Softly,  softly, 
yomr  Majesty  1 quiet  your  wrath.  Let  us  make  another 
banquet  tomorrow,  not  for  people  of  condition,  but  for 
the  lower  sort ; maybe,  as  a woman  always  attaches  her- 
self to  the  worst,  we  shall  find  among  the  cutlers,  and 
bead-makers,  and  comb-sellers,  the  root  of  your  anger, 
which  we  have  not  discovered  among  the  cavaliers.” 

This  reasoning  jumped  with  the  humour  of  the  king, 
and  he  ordered  a second  banquet  to  be  prepared;  to 
which,  on  proclamation  being  made,  came  all  the  rifi- 
raff  and  tag-rag-and-bobtail  of  the  city,  such  as  rogues, 
scavengers,  tinkers,  pedlars,  penny-boys,  sweeps,  beg- 
gars, and  such-like  rabble,  who  were  all  in  high  glee ; 
and  taking  their  seats,  like  noblemen,  at  a great  long 
table,  they  began  to  feast  and  gobble  away. 

Now  when  Ceccarella  heard  this  proclamation,  she 
began  to  urge  Peruonto  to  go  there  too,  until  at  last 
she  got  him  to  set  out  for  the  feast.  And  scarcely  had 
he  arrived  there,  when  the  pretty  little  children  came 
running  round  him,  and  began  to  caress  him,  and  to 

D 


Digitized  by  Google 


34 


THE  PENTAMEBOXE. 


fawn  upon  him  beyond  the  beyouds*.  When  the  king 
saw  this  he  tore  his  beard,  seeing  that  the  beau  of  this 
cakef,  the  prize  in  this  lottery,  had  fallcm  to  an  ugly 
beast,  the  very  sight  of  whom  was  enough  to  make  one 
sick;  who,  besides  having  a shaggy  head,  owls'  eyes, 
a parrot's  nose,  a deer's  mouth,  was  bandy-  and  bai’e- 
legged ; so  that,  without  reading  Fioravanti  %,  you  might 
see  at  once  what  he  was.  Then  heaving  a deep  sigh,  the 
king  said,  “ What  can  that  jade  of  a daughter  of  mine 
have  seen  to  make  her  take  a fancy  to  this  sea-ogre, 
or  strike  up  a dance  with  this  hairy-foot  ? Ah  vile,  false 
creatm’e,  what  metamorphosis  is  this  ? But  why  do  we 
delay  ? let  her  suffer  the  punishment  she  deserves : let 
her  undergo  the  penalty  that  shall  be  decreed  by  you ; 
and  take  her  from  my  presence,  for  I cannot  endm*e  the 
sight  of  her." 

Then  the  councillors  consulted  together,  and  they  re- 
solved that  she,  as  well  as  the  malefactor  and  the  childi'en, 
should  be  shut  up  in  a cask,  and  thrown  into  the  sea ; 
so  that,  without  the  king's  dipping  his  hands  in  his  own 
blood,  they  might  put  a full  stop  to  the  sentence  of  their 
lives.  No  sooner  was  the  judgement  pronounced,  than 
the  cask  was  brought,  and  all  four  were  put  into  it ; but 

• Literally— /ora  de  lifora. 

t It  is  the  custom  in  Italy  and  France  to  make  a cake  on  the  Epiphany,  in  which 
a bean  is  put ; the  cake  is  broken  and  divided,  and  the  person  who  gets  the  bean  ia 
king  for  the  evening.  I believe  the  custom  exists  ini  parts  of  England.  In  Ireland 
a ring  is  put  into  the  twelfth  cake.  t A writer  on  physiognomy. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERUONTO. 


35 


before  they  coopered  it  up,  some  of  Vastolla’s  ladies,  cry^ 
ing  and  sobbing  as  if  their  hearts  would  break,  put  into 
it  a little  basket  of  raisins  and  dried  figs,  that  she  might 
have  wherewithal  to  live  on  for  some  little  time.  And 
when  the  cask  was  closed  up,  it  was  carried  and  flung 
into  the  open  sea,  along  which  it  went  floating  as  the 
wind  drove  it. 

Meanwhile  Vastolla,  weeping  and  making  two  rivers 
of  her  eyes,  said  to  Peruonto,  “ What  a sad  misfortune 
is  this  of  ours,  to  have  the  cradle  of  Bacchus  for  our 
coffin ! Oh,  if  I but  knew  who  has  played  me  this 
trick,  to  have  me  caged  in  this  dungeon  ! Alas,  alas  ! 
to  find  myself  in  this  plight  without  knowing  how. 
Tell  me,  tell  me,  O cruel  man,  what  incantation  was  it 
you  made,  and  what  wand  did  you  employ,  to  bring 
me  within  the  circle  of  this  cask?^^  Peruonto,  who 
had  been  for  some  time  lending  her  a chapman^s  ear, 
at  last  said,  If  you  want  me  to  tell  you,  you  must 
give  me  som^  figs  and  raisins.^^  So  Vastolla,  to  draw 
the  secret  out  of  him,  gave  him  a handful  of  both ; and 
as  soon  as  he  had  his  gullet  full,  he  told  her  accurately 
all  that  had  befallen  him  with  the  three  youths,  and 
then  with  the  faggot,  and  then  with  herself  at  the 
window;  which  when  the  poor  lady  heard,  she  took 
heart,  and  said  to  Peruonto,  Brother  of  mine,  shall  we 
then  let  our  lives  run  out  in  a cask  ? Why  don’t  you 

D 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


36 


THE  FENTAMEBONE. 


Cause  this  tub  to  be  ehanged  into  a fine  ship,  and  run 
into  some  good  harbour  to  escape  this  danger  ?”  And 
Peruonto  replied, 

If  you  would  have  me  say  the  spell. 

With  figs  and  raisins  stuff  me  well.^^ 

So  Vastolla,  to  make  him  open  his  throat,  instantly 
filled  his  throat  j and,  like  a fisherwoman  at  the  Carni- 
val*, with  the  figs  and  raisins  she  fished  the  words  fresh 
out  of  his  mouth.  And  lo ! as  soon  as  Peruonto  had 
said  what  she  desired,  the  cask  was  turned  into  a ship, 
with  all  the  rigging  necessary  for  saihng,  and  with  all 
the  sailors  required  for  working  the  vessel.  There  you 
might  see  one  pulling  at  a sheet,  another  mending  the 
rigging,  one  taking  the  helm,  another  setting  the  sails, 
another  mounting  to  the  round-top,  one  crying  ‘ Lar- 
board !’  and  another  * Starboard  one  sounding  a trum- 
pet, another  firing  the  guns,  one  doing  one  thing  and 
one  another;  so  that  Vastolla  was  in  the  ship,  and  was 
swimming  in  a sea  of  delight. 

It  being  now  the  hour  when  the  Moon  begins  to  play 
at  see-saw  with  the  Sunf,  Vastolla  said  to  Peruonto, 
" My  fine  lad,  now  make  this  ship  be  changed  into  a 

* At  the  carnival  persons  are  sometimes  drest  like  fisberwomen,  standing  with  an 
angling-rod  and  line  baited  with  bon-bons. 

t A kiate  e veniate  e lo  luoco  te perdiaae.  The  name  of  a popular  game  at  Naples : 
it  seems  to  answer  to  a game  we  have,  in  which  the  fun  consists  in  a scramble  for 
seats,  one  person  being  always  left  out.  See-aatv  is  more  properly  the  Neapolitan 
Sciunnola.  Scarica-a-barile  is  Leap-frog. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERUONTO. 


37 


beautifW  palace,  for  we  shall  then  be  more  secure : you 
know  the  saying,  Praise  the  sea,  but  keep  to  the  land.^^ 
And  Peruonto  replied. 

If  you  would  have  me  say  the  spell. 

With  figs  and  raisins  stulF  me  well.” 

So  Vastolla  instantly  repeated  the  operation ; and 
Peruonto,  swallowing  them  down,  asked  what  was  her 
pleasure ; and  immediately  the  ship  came  to  land,  and 
was  changed  into  a beautiful  palace,  fitted  up  in  a most 
complete  manner,  and  so  full  of  furniture,  and  curtains, 
and  hangings,  that  there  w^as  nothing  left  to  desire. 
So  that  Vastolla,  who  a little  before  would  have  given 
her  life  for  a farthing*,  would  not  now  change  places 
with  the  greatest  lady  in  the  world,  seeing  herself  served 
and  treated  like  a queen.  Then,  to  put  the  seal  to 
all  her  good  fortune,  she  besought  Peruonto  to  obtain 
grace  to  become  handsome  and  polished  in  his  man- 
ners, that  they  might  live  happy  together ; for  though 
the  proverb  says,  * Better  to  have  a pig  for  a husband 
than  an  emperor  for  a lover,’  still,  if  his  appearance 
were  changed,  she  should  consider  it  the  most  fortunate 
thing  in  the  world.  And  Peruonto  replied  as  before, 

“ If  you  would  have  me  say  the  spell. 

With  figs  and  raisins  stuff  me  well.” 

• Pe  tre  eaealle — Utendljr,  ‘ for  three  hones.'  The  Hone  is  the  srmt  of  Naples, 
and  is  impressed  on  a small  piece  of  money,  worth  about  one-thirtieth  of  an  Enf^lish 
penny.  The  lowest  coin  now  used  at  Naples  is  a piece  of  Sei  cavalli. 


Digitized  by  Google 


38 


THE  FENTAMEEONE. 


Then  VastoUa  quickly  removed  the  stoppage  of  his 
speech ; and  scarcely  had  he  spoken  the  word,  when  he 
was  changed  from  an  owl  into  a nightingale,  from  an  ogre 
into  a Narcissus,  from  a scarecrow  into  a dapper  little 
doll.  Vastolla,  seeing  such  a transformation,  clasped  him 
in  her  arms,  and  was  almost  beside  herself  with  joy. 

Meantime  the  king,  who  from  the  day  that  this  cala- 
mity befell  him  had  been  full  up  to  the  very  throat  with 
^ Let-me-alone,’  was  one  day  for  amusement  brought 
out  to  hunt  by  his  courtiers.  Night  overtook  them, 
and  seeing  a light  in  the  window  of  that  palace,  he  sent 
a servant  to  inqvdre  if  they  woidd  entertain  him ; and  he 
was  answered,  that  he  might  not  merely  break  a glass 
but  even  smash  a jug  there.  So  the  king  went  to  the 
palace ; and  going  up  the  staircase,  and  passing  through 
the  chambers,  he  saw  no  living  being  save  the  two  little 
boys,  who  skipped  about  him,  crying,  “Grandpapa! 
grandpapa !”  The  king,  surprised  and  astonished, 
stood  like  one  that  was  enchanted;  and  sitting  down 
to  rest  himself  at  a table,  to  his  amazement  he  saw  in- 
visibly spread  on  it  a Flanders  tablecloth,  with  dishes 
full  of  roast  meats,  and  viands  of  various  kinds;  so 
that  he  feasted  in  truth  hke  a king,  waited  on  by  those 
beautiful  children : and  all  the  while  he  sat  at  table,  a 
concert  of  lutes  and  tambomines  never  ceased, — such 
delicious  music  that  it  went  to  the  very  tips  of  his  fingers 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERUONTO. 


39 


and  toes.  \Micn  lie  had  done  eating,  a bed  suddenly 
appeared,  all  made  of  gold ; and  having  his  boots  taken 
off,  he  went  to  rest,  and  all  his  courtiers  did  the  same, 
after  having  feasted  heartily  at  a hundred  tables,  which 
were  laid  out  in  the  other  rooms. 

^Vhen  morning  came,  and  the  king  was  about  to  de- 
part, he  wished  to  take  with  him  the  two  little  children. 
But  Vastolla  now  made  her  appearance  with  her  hus- 
band, and  casting  herself  at  his  feet,  she  asked  his  par- 
don, and  related  to  him  her  whole  story.  The  king, 
seeing  that  he  had  found  two  grandsons  who  were  two 
jewels,  and  a son-in  law  who  was  a fay*,  embraced  first 
one  and  then  the  other,  and  taking  the  children  up  in 
his  arms,  he  carried  them  with  him  to  the  city.  Then  he 
made  a great  feast,  that  lasted  for  many  days,  on  account 
of  this  good  luck,  solemnly  confessing  to  his  whole  court 
that 

^'Man  proposes. 

But  God  disposes.” 


When  Meneca  had  ended  her  story,  which  was  con- 
sidered no  less  beautiful  than  the  former  one,  from  the 
number  of  curious  adventures,  which  kept  the  atten- 
tion of  the  hearers  awake  to  the  very  end,  Tolla,  at  the 
command  of  the  Prince,  began  the  following  story. 

* No  fato, — the  masculine  of  fata,  fairy. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


40 


VARDIELLO. 

Ip  Nature  had  given  to  animals  the  necessity  of  clo- 
thing themselves,  and  of  buying  their  food,  the  race  of 
quadrupeds  would  inevitably  be  destroyed.  Therefore 
it  is  that  they  find  their  food  mthout  trouble, — without 
gardener  to  gather  it,  purchaser  to  buy  it,  cook  to  pre- 
pare it,  or  cancer  to  cut  it  up ; whilst  their  skin  defends 
them  from  the  rain  and  snow,  without  the  merchant 
giving  them  cloth,  the  tailor  making  the  dress,  or  the 
errand-boy  begging  for  a drink-penny.  To  man  how- 
ever, who  has  intelligence.  Nature  did  not  care  to- grant 
these  indulgences,  since  he  is  able  to  procure  for  him- 
self what  he  wants.  This  is  the  reason  that  we  com- 
monly see  clever  men  poor,  and  blockheads  rich ; as  you 
may  gather  from  the  story  which  I am  going  to  tell  you. 


Grannonia  of  Aprano  was  a woman  of  great  sense 
and  judgement,  but  she  had  a son  named  Vardiello*, 
who  was  the  greatest  booby  and  simpleton  in  the  whole 

* From  the  Latin  hardu*,  ttupid. 


Digitized  by  Google 


VARDIELLO. 


41 


country  round  about.  Nevertheless,  a mother’s  eyes 
are  bewitched  and  see  what  does  not  exist,  she  doted 
upon  him  so  much,  that  she  was  for  ever  caressing  and 
fondling  him  as  if  he  were  the  handsomest  creature 
in  the  world. 

Now  Grannonia  kept  a brood-hen,  that  was  sitting 
upon  a nest  of  eggs,  in  which  she  placed  all  her  hope, 
expecting  to  have  a fine  brood  of  chickens,  and  to 
make  a good  profit  of  them.  And  having  one  day  to  go 
out  on  some  business,  she  called  her  son,  and  said  to 
him,  “My  pretty  son  of  your  own  mother,  listen  to 
what  I say ; keep  your  eye  upon  the  hen,  and  if  she 
should  get  up  to  scratch  and  pick,  look  sharp  and  drive 
her  back  to  the  nest ; for  otherwise  the  eggs  will  grow 
cold,  and  then  we  shall  have  neither  eggs  nor  chickens.” 

Leave  it  to  me,”  replied  Vardiello,  “you  are  not 
speaking  to  deaf  ears.” 

“ One  thing  more,”  said  his  mother ; “ look-ye,  my 
blessed  son,  in  yon  cupboard  is  a pot  full  of  certain  poi- 
sonous things ; take  care  that  ugly  Sin  does  not  tempt 
you  to  touch  them,  for  they  would  make  you  stretch 
yoiur  legs  in  a trice.” 

Heaven  forbid !”  replied  Vardiello ; “ poison  indeed 
will  not  tempt  me  j but  you  have  done  wisely  to  give  me 
the  warning  j for  if  I had  got  at  it,  I should  certainly 
have  eaten  it  all  up.” 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


42 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Thereupon  the  mother  went  out,  but  Vardiello  staid 
behind ; and,  in  order  to  lose  no  time,  he  went  into  the 
garden  to  dig  holes,  whieh  he  eovered  with  houghs  and 
earth,  to  catch  the  little  thieves  who  come  to  steal  the 
fruit.  And  as  he  was  in  the  midst  of  his  work,  he  saw 
the  hen  come  running  out  of  the  room ; whereupon  he 
began  to  cry,  “ Hish,  hish  ! this  way,  that  way  !”  But 
the  hen  did  not  stir  a foot ; and  Vardiello,  seeing  that 
she  had  something  of  the  donkey  in  her,  after  crying 

Hish,  hish,”  began  to  stamp  with  his  feet ; and  after 
stamping  with  his  feet,  to  throw  his  cap  at  her,  and 
after  the  cap  a cudgel,  which  hit  her  just  upon  the  pate, 
and  made  her  quickly  stretch  her  legs. 

When  Vardiello  saw  this  sad  accident,  he  bethought 
himself  how  to  remedy  the  evil ; and  making  a virtue  of 
necessity,  in  order  to  prevent  the  eggs  growing  cold,  he 
set  himself  down  upon  the  nest ; but  in  doing  so,  he  gave 
the  eggs  an  unlucky  blow,  and  quickly  made  an  omelet  of 
them.  In  despair  at  what  he  had  done,  he  was  on  the 
point  of  knocking  his  head  against  the  wall : at  last  how- 
ever, as  all  grief  turns  to  hunger,  feeling  his  stomach 
begin  to  grumble,  he  resolved  to  eat  up  the  hen.  So 
he  plucked  her,  and  sticking  her  upon  a spit,  he  made  a 
great  fire,  and  set  to  w ork  to  roast  her.  And  when  she 
was  cooked,  Vardiello,  to  do  eveiything  in  due  order, 
spread  a clean  cloth  upon  an  old  chest ; and  then,  taking 


Digitized  by  Google 


VARDIELLO. 


43 


a flagon,  he  went  down  into  the  cellar  to  draw  some 
wine.  But  just  as  he  was  in  the  midst  of  drawing  the 
wine,  he  heard  a noise,  a disturbance,  an  uproar  in  the 
house,  which  seemed  like  the  clattering  of  horses’  hoofs. 
Whereat  starting  up  in  alarm,  and  turning  his  eyes,  he 
saw  a big  tom-cat,  which  had  run  off  with  the  hen,  spit 
and  all;  and  another  cat  chasing  after  him,  mewing, 
and  crying  out  for  a part. 

Vardiello,  in  order  to  set  this  mishap  to  rights,  darted 
upon  the  cat  like  an  unchained  lion,  and  in  his  haste  he 
left  the  tap  of  the  barrel  running.  And  after  chasing 
the  cat  through  every  hole  and  comer  of  the  house,  he 
recovered  the  hen;  but  the  cask  had  meanwhile  all  run 
out ; and  when  Vardiello  returned,  and  saw  the  wine 
running  about,  he  let  the  cask  of  his  soul  empty  itself 
through  the  tap-holes  of  his  eyes.  But  at  last  judge- 
ment came  to  his  aid,  and  he  hit  upon  a plan  to  remedy 
the  mischief,  and  prevent  his  mother’s  finding  out  what 
had  happened : so  taking  a sack  of  flour,  filled  full  to 
the  mouth,  he  sprinkled  it  over  the  wine  on  the  floor. 

But  when  he  meanwhile  reckoned  up  on  his  fingers 
all  the  disasters  he  had  met  with,  and  thought  to  him- 
self that,  from  the  number  of  fooleries  he  had  com- 
mitted, he  must  have  lost  the  game  in  the  good  graces 
of  Grannonia,  he  resolved  in  his  heart  not  to  let  his 
mother  see  him  again  alive.  So  thrusting  his  hand 


Digitized  by  Google 


44 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


into  the  jar  of  pickled  walnuts,  which  his  mother  had 
said  contained  poison,  he  never  stopped  eating  until  he 
came  to  the  bottom ; and  when  he  had  right  well  filled 
his  stomach,  he  went  and  hid  himself  in  the  oven. 

In  the  meanwhile  his  mother  returned,  and  stood 
knocking  for  a long  time  at  the  door ; but  at  last,  see- 
ing that  no  one  came,  she  gave  it  a kick ; and  going  in, 
she  called  her  son  at  the  top  of  her  voice.  But  as  nobody 
answered,  she  imagined  that  some  mischief  must  have 
happened,  and  with  increased  lamentation  she  went  on 
crying  louder  and  louder,  “ Vardiello ! Vardiello ! are 
you  deaf,  that  you  don’t  hear  ? have  you  the  cramp,  that 
you  don’t  run  ? have  you  the  pip,  that  you  don’t  answer? 
Where  are  you,  you  gallows-faced  rogue  ? where  are  you 
hidden,  you  naughty  fellow  ? Oh  that  I had  strangled 
you  when  I brought  you  forth  !” 

Vardiello,  on  hearing  all  this  hubbub  and  abuse, 
cried  out  at  last  with  a piteous  voice,  Here  I am ! 
here  I am  in  the  oven ; but  you  will  never  see  me  again, 
mother !” 

“ WTiy  so  ?”  said  the  poor  mother. 

“ Because  I am  poisoned,”  replied  the  son. 

“ Alas ! alas !”  cried  Grannonia,  “ how  came  you 
to  do  that  ? what  cause  have  you  had  to  commit  this 
homicide  ? and  who  has  given  you  the  poison  ?”  Then 
Vardiello  told  her,  one  after  another,  all  the  pretty 


Digitized  by  Google 


VARDIELLO. 


45 


things  he  had  done ; on  which  account  he  wished  to  die, 
and  not  to  remain  any  longer  a laughing-stock  in  the 
world. 

The  poor  woman,  on  hearing  all  this,  was  miserable 
and  wretched,  and  she  had  enough  to  do  and  to  say  to 
diive  this  melancholy  whimsey  out  of  Vardiello^s  head. 
And  being  infatuated  and  dotingly  fond  of  him,  she 
gave  him  some  nice  sweetmeats,  and  so  put  the  affair 
of  the  pickled  walnuts  out  of  his  head,  and  convinced 
him  that  they  were  not  poison,  but  good  and  comforting 
to  the  stomach.  And  having  thus  pacified  him  with 
cheering  words,  and  showered  on  him  a thousand  ca- 
resses, she  drew  him  out  of  the  oven.  Then  giving 
him  a fine  piece  of  cloth,  she  bade  him  go  and  sell  it, 
but  cautioning  him  not  to  do  business  with  folks  of  too 
many  words. 

“Tut,  tut!”  said  Vardiello ; “let  me  alone, — I know 
what  I ^m  about,  never  fear.”  So  saying  he  took  the 
cloth,  and  went  his  way  through  the  city  of  Naples, 
crying,  “ Cloth  ! cloth  1”  But  whenever  any  one  asked 
him,  “ What  cloth  have  you  there  ?”  he  replied,  “ You 
are  no  customer  for  me — you  are  a man  of  too  many 
words.”  And  when  another  said  to  him,  “How  do 
you  sell  your  cloth  ?”  he  called  him  a chatterbox,  who 
deafened  him  with  his  noise.  At  length  he  chanced 
to  espy,  in  the  courtyard  of  a house  which  was  deserted 


Digitized  by  Google 


46 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


on  account  of  the  Monaciello,  a plaster  statue ; and  be- 
ing tired  out,  and  wearied  with  going  about  and  about, 
he  sat  himself  down  upon  a bench.  But  not  seeing  any 
one  astir  in  the  house,  which  looked  like  a sacked  vil- 
lage, he  was  lost  in  amazement,  and  said  to  the  statue, 
*^Tell  me,  comrade,  does  no  one  live  in  this  house 
Vardiello  waited  awhile ; but  as  the  statue  gave  no  an- 
swer, he  thought  this  surely  was  a man  of  few  words. 
So  he  said,  “ Friend,  will  you  buy  my  cloth  ? I ^11  sell 
it  you  cheap.^^  And  seeing  that  the  statue  still  re- 
mained dumb,  he  exclaimed,  “ ^Faith  then  I\e  found 
my  man  at  last ! there,  take  the  cloth,  examine  it,  and 
give  me  what  you  will;  tomorrow  1^11  return  for  the 
money 

So  saying,  Vardiello  left  the  cloth  on  the  spot  where 
he  had  been  sitting,  and  the  first  mother’s  son  who 
passed  that  way  found  the  prize  and  carried  it  off*. 

"When  V ardiello  returned  home  without  the  cloth,  and 
told  his  mother  all  that  had  happened,  she  well-nigh 
swooned  away,  and  said  to  him,  “ When  will  you  put  that 
headj)iece  of  yom’s  in  order  ? See  now  what  tricks  you 
have  played  me — only  think  ! but  I am  myself  to  blame, 
for  being  too  tender-hearted,  instead  of  having  given 
you  a good  beating  at  first ; and  now  I perceive,  that  a 
pitiful  doctor  only  makes  the  wound  incurable.  But 
you  ’ll  go  on  with  your  pranks,  until  at  last  we  come  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


VARDIELLO.  47 

a serious  falling  out,  and  then  there  will  be  a long 
reckoning,  my  lad  !” 

Softly,  mother,”  replied  Vardiello;  matters  are  not 
so  bad  as  they  seem : do  you  want  more  than  crown- 
pieces  bran  new  from  the  mint  ? do  you  think  me  a fool, 
and  that  I don^t  know  what  I am  about  ? Tomorrow  is 
not  yet  here — wait  awhile,  and  you  shall  see  whether  I 
know  how  to  fit  a handle  to  a shovel.” 

The  next  morning,  as  soon  as  the  shades  of  Night, 
pursued  by  the  constables  of  the  Sun,  had  fled  the 
country,  Vardiello  repaired  to  the  courtyard  where  the 
statue  stood,  and  said,  “ Good-day,  friend  ! can  you 
give  me  those  few  pence  you  owe  me  ? come,  quick,  pay 
me  for  the  cloth  !”  But  when  he  saw  that  the  statue 
remained  speechless,  he  took  up  a stone,  and  hm’led  it 
at  its  breast  with  such  force  that  it  burst  a vein,  which 
proved  indeed  the  cure  to  his  own  malady ; for  some 
pieces  of  the  statue  falhng  off,  he  discovered  a pot  full  of 
golden  crown-pieces.  Then  taking  it  in  both  his  hands, 
off  he  ran  home,  head  over  heels,  as  fast  as  he  could 
scamper,  crying  out,  “ Mother,  mother ! see  here,  what  a 
lot  of  red  lupins  I Ve  got ! how  many,  how  many  !” 
His  mother,  seeing  the  crown-pieces,  and  kno\\nng 
very  well  that  Vardiello  would  soon  make  the  matter 
public,  told  him  to  stand  at  the  door,  until  the  man  with 
milk  and  new-made  cheese  came  past,  as  she  wanted 


Digitized  by  Google 


48 


THE  FENTAMEKONE. 


to  buy  a pennyworth  of  milk.  So  Vardiello,  who  waa 
a great  glutton,  went  quickly  and  seated  himself  at 
the  doorj  and  his  mother  showered  down  from  the 
window  above  raisins  and  dried  figs  for  more  than  half 
an  hour.  Whereupon  Vardiello,  picking  them  up  as 
fast  as  he  could,  cried  aloud,  “ Mother,  mother ! bring 
out  some  baskets,  give  me  some  bowls ! here,  quick 
with  the  tubs  and  buckets ! for  if  it  goes  on  to  rain 
thus  we  shall  be  rich  in  a trice.”  And  when  he  had 
eaten  his  fill  Vardiello  went  up  to  sleep. 

It  happened  one  day  that  two  countrymen — the  food 
and  life-blood  of  the  law-courts — fell  out,  and  went  to 
law  about  a gold  crown-piece  which  they  had  found  on 
the  ground ; and  Vardiello  passing  by  said,  What  jack- 
asses you  are  to  quarrel  about  a red  lupin  like  this  I for 
my  part  I don’t  value  it  at  a pin’s  head,  for  I ’ve  found 
a whole  potful  1 of  them.” 

When  the  judge  heard  this  he  opened  wide  his  eyes 
and  ears,  and  examined  Vardiello  closely,  asking  him 
how,  when  and  where  he  had  found  the  crowns.  And 
Vardiello  replied,  ‘‘1  found  them  in  a palace,  inside  a 
dumb  man,  when  it  rained  raisins  and  dried  figs.” 
At  this  the  judge  stared  with  amazement ; but  instantly 
seeing  how  the  matter  stood,  he  decreed  that  Vardiello 
should  be  sent  to  a madhouse,  as  the  most  competent 
tribunal  for  him.  Thus  the  stupidity  of  the  son  made 


Digitized  by  Google 


VARDIELLO. 


49 


the  mother  rich,  and  the  mother^s  wit  found  a remedy 
for  the  foolishness  of  the  son  : whereby  it  is  clearly  seen 
that 

“ A ship  when  steered  by  a skilful  hand 
Will  seldom  strike  upon  rock  or  sand.” 


The  Prince  and  the  Slave  laughed  till  they  were  ready 
to  burst  at  Vardiello’s  stupidity,  and  praised  the  clever- 
ness of  his  mother,  who  had  the  wit  to  foresee  and  pro- 
vide against  his  folly.  But  when  all  the  others  had 
turned  the  key  on  their  chattering,  Popa,  being  requested 
to  tell  a story,  began  as  follows. 


E 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


THE  FLEA. 

Resolutions  taken  without  thought  bring  disasters 
without  remedy.  He  who  behaves  like  a fool,  repents 
like  a wise  man;  as  happened  to  the  King  of  High- 
Hill,  who,  through  unexampled  folly,  committed  an  act 
of  madness,  putting  in  jeopardy  both  his  daughter  and 
his  honour. 


Once  upon  a time  the  King  of  High-Hill,  being  bitten 
by  a flea,  caught  him  by  a wonderful  feat  of  dexterity ; 
and  seeing  how  handsome  and  stately  he  was,  he  could 
not  in  conscience  pass  sentence  on  him  upon  the  bed  of 
his  nail.  So  he  put  him  into  a bottle,  and  feeding  him 
every  day  with  the  blood  of  his  own  arm,  the  little 
beast  grew  at  such  a rate,  that  at  the  end  of  seven 
months  it  was  necessary  to  shift  his  quarters,  for  he  was 
grown  bigger  than  a sheep.  When  the  king  saw  this, 
he  had  him  flayed,  and  the  skin  dressed.  Then  he 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  FLEA. 


61 


issued  a proclamation,  that  whoever  could  tell  to  what 
animal  this  skin  had  belonged  should  have  his  daughter 
to  wife. 

As  soon  as  this  decree  was  made  known,  the  people 
all  flocked  in  crowds,  and  they  came  from  the  ends  of 
the  world  to  be  present  at  the  scrutiny,  and  to  try  their 
luck.  One  said  that  it  belonged  to  an  ape,  another  to 
a lynx,  a third  to  a crocodile,  aud  in  short  some  gave 
it  to  one  animal,  and  some  to  another ; but  they  were 
all  a hundred  miles  from  the  truth,  and  not  one  hit  the 
nail  on  the  head.  At  last  there  came  to  this  anatomi- 
cal trial  an  ogre,  who  was  the  most  frightfully  ugly 
being  in  the  world,  the  very  sight  of  whom  would 
make  the  boldest  man  tremble  and  quake  with  fear. 
But  no  sooner  had  he  come,  and  turned  the  skin 
round  and  smelt  it,  than  he  instantly  guessed  the 
truth,  saying,  ^'This  skin  belongs  to  the  arch-rascal  of 
the  fleas !” 

Now  the  king  saw  that  the  ogre  had  hit  the  apple ; 
but,  not  to  break  his  word,  he  ordered  his  daughter 
Porziclla  to  be  called.  Porziclla  had  a face  like  milk 
and  blood,  and  was  such  a miracle  of  beauty  that  you 
could  devour  her  with  your  eyes,  she  was  so  lovely. 
And  the  king  said  to  her,  My  daughter,  thou  knowest 
the  proclamation  I have  issued,  and  thou  knowest  who 
I am ; in  short,  I cannot  go  back  from  my  promise,— 

E 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


62 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


either  a king  or  a beggar*.  My  word  is  given ; I must 
keep  it,  though  my  lieart  should  break.  Who  could 
ever  have  imagined  that  this  prize  would  have  fallen 
to  an  ogre  ? But  since  not  a leaf  shakes  without  the 
will  of  Heaven,  we  must  believe  that  this  marriage 
has  been  made  tirst  there  above,  and  then  here  below. 
Have  patience  then,  and  if  thou  art  a good  and  dutiful 
girl  do  not  oppose  thy  father,  for  my  heart  tells  me 
that  thou  wilt  be  happy,  since  treasures  arc  often  found 
inside  a rough  earthen  jar.’’ 

MTien  Porziella  heard  this  sad  resolution,  her  eyes 
grew  dim,  her  face  tunicd  yellow,  her  lips  fell,  her  legs 
trembled,  and  she  was  on  the  point  of  letting  fly  the  fal- 
con of  her  soul  after  the  quail  of  grief.  At  last,  bursting 
into  tears,  she  said  to  her  father,  “ What  crime  have  I 
committed  that  I should  be  punished  thus  ? How  have 
I acted  ill  toward  you,  that  I should  be  given  up  to  this 
monster  ? O wretched  Porziella,  behold  you  are  running 
like  a weasel  into  the  toad’s  throat  of  your  own  accord ! 
like  an  unfortunate  sheep  you  are  the  prey  of  a ravenous 
wolf ! Is  this,  0 father,  the  affection  you  bear  your  own 
blood  ? is  this  the  love  you  show  to  her  whom  you  used 
to  call  the  joy  of  your  soul?  do  you  thus  tear  from 
your  heart  her  who  is  a part  of  your  blood  ? do  you 
drive  from  your  sight  her  who  is  the  apple  of  your  eye  ? 

• Scorza  de  c/iiwpo— literally,  ‘ piece  of  poplar-bark.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  FLEA. 


53 


0 father,  0 cruel  father ! you  surely  are  not  born  of 
human  flesh ; the  sea-orks  gave  you  blood,  the  wild-cats 
suckled  yoii*.  But  why  do  I talk  of  beasts  of  the  land 
and  sea?  for  every  animal  loves  its  young;  you  alone 
loathe  and  hate  your  own  offspring,  you  alone  hold 
your  daughter  in  abhorrence.  Oh,  better  had  it  been 
if  my  mother  had  sti’anglcd  me  at  my  birth,  if  my  cradle 
had  been  my  deathbed,  my  nurse’s  breast  a bottle  of 
poison,  my  swaddling-clothes  a halter,  and  the  whistle 
they  tied  round  my  neck  a millstone ; since  I have  lived 
to  see  this  evil  day,  to  sec  myself  caressed  by  the  hand 
of  a harpy,  embraced  by  two  bear's  paws,  and  kissed  by 
two  boar's  tusks." 

Porziella  was  going  on  to  say  more,  when  the  king, 
in  a furious  rage,  exclaimed,  “ Stay  your  anger,  for 
sugar  is  dear  ! fair  and  softly,  for  appearances  deceivef  ! 
stop,  stop,  for  the  lees  are  running  out;  hold  your 
tongue,  you  ill-mannered  chatterbox  ! what  I do  is  well 
done.  Is  it  for  a girl  to  teach  her  father  forsooth  ? 
have  done,  I say,  and  don’t  drive  the  mustard  up  into 
my  nosej;  for  if  I lay  these  hands  upon  you.  I’ll  not 
leave  a whole  bone  in  your  skin,  and  will  make  you 
bite  the  dust.  Prithee  how  long  has  a child,  with 
the  milk  still  upon  her  lips,  dared  to  oppose  my  will  ? 

* See  Iliad,  l6,  33,  syq.  and  .^neid,  4,  36S,  gqq. 

t Co  li  brocchiere  to  de  chiuppe — ‘ for  the  ahields  are  of  poplar.’ 

X i,  e.  ‘ make  me  in  a rage.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


64 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Quick  then,  I say  ! take  his  hand,  and  set  off  with  him 
home  this  very  instant ; for  I will  not  have  that  saucy, 
impudent  face  a minute  longer  in  my  sight.” 

Poor  Porziella,  seeing  herself  thus  caught  in  the  net, 
with  the  face  of  a person  condemned  to  death,  with  the  eye 
of  one  possessed,  with  the  mouth  of  one  who  has  taken 
an  emetic*,  with  the  heart  of  a person  whose  head  is 
lying  between  the  axe  and  the  block,  took  the  hand  of 
the  ogre,  who  dragged  her  off,  without  any  one  accom- 
panying them,  to  a wood,  where  the  trees  made  a palace 
for  the  meadow,  to  prevent  its  being  discovered  by  the 
sun,  and  the  brooks  murmured  at  having  knocked 
against  the  stones  in  the  dai'k,  whilst  the  wild-beasts 
wandered  where  they  liked  without  paying  toll,  and 
went  safely  through  the  thieket,  whither  no  man  ever 
came  unless  he  had  lost  his  way.  Upon  this  spot, 
which  was  as  black  as  an  unswept  chimney,  and  hideous 
as  the  face  of  hell,  stood  the  ogre’s  house,  ornamented 
and  hung  all  round  with  the  bones  of  men  whom  he 
had  devoured.  Think  but  for  a moment,  good  Chris- 
tians, on  the  trembling,  the  quivering,  the  horror  and 
affright  which  the  poor  girl  endured ! depend  upon  it 
there  did  not  remain  a drop  of  blood  in  her  body. 

But  all  this  was  nothing  at  all  in  comparison  with 
what  was  to  come.  Before  dinner  she  had  peas,  and 

* Chi  ha  pigliato  lo  Dotnene  Agottino—ti  common  expreuion. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


THE  FLEA. 


55 


after  dinner  parched  beans.  Then  the  ogre  went  out  to 
hunt,  and  returned  home  laden  with  the  quarters  of 
men  whom  he  had  killed,  saying,  “ Now,  wife,  you  can- 
not complain  that  I don^t  take  good  care  of  you ; here ’s 
a fine  store  of  eatables  for  you ; take  and  make  merry, 
and  love  me  well,  for  the  sky  will  fall  before  I let  you 
want  for  food.” 

Poor  Porziella  was  siek  at  this  hon'ible  sight,  and 
turned  her  face  away.  But  when  the  ogre  saw  this,  he 
cried,  “ Ha ! this  is  throwing  sweetmeats  before  swine : 
no  matter  however ; only  have  patience  till  tomorrow 
morning ; for  I have  been  invited  to  a wild-boar  hunt, 
and  will  bring  you  home  a couple  of  boars,  and  we  ^11 
make  a grand  feast  with  our  kinsfolk,  and  celebrate 
our  wedding.”  So  saying,  away  he  went  into  the 
forest. 

Now  as  Porziella  stood  weeping  at  the  window,  it 
chanced  that  an  old  woman  passed  by,  who,  being  fa- 
mished with  hunger,  begged  some  refreshment  of  her. 

Ah,  my  good  woman !”  said  Porziella,  Heaven  knows 
I am  in  the  power  of  a devil,  who  brings  me  home  nothing 
but  quarters  and  pieces  of  men  he  has  killed ; indeed  1 
know  not  how  it  is  that  I have  the  stomaeh  even  to  look 
upon  such  odious  things.  I pass  the  most  miserable  life 
that  ever  a Christian  soul  led ; and  yet  I am  the  daugh- 


Digitized  by  Google 


56 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


ter  of  a king,  and  have  been  reared  on  dainties*,  and 
passed  my  life  in  plenty.”  And  so  saying,  she  began 
to  cry  like  a little  girl  who  sees  her  bread  and  butter 
taken  away  from  her. 

The  old  woman^s  heart  was  softened  at  this  sight, 
and  she  said  to  Porziclla,  “ Be  of  good  heart,  my 
pretty  girl ; do  not  spoil  your  beauty  with  crying,  for 
you  have  fallen  in  with  luck ; I can  help  you  to  both 
saddle  and  trappings.  Listen  now,  I have  seven  sons, 
w'ho,  you  see,  ai’c  seven  oaks,  seven  giants, — Mase, 
Nardo,  Cola,  IMicco,  Petrullo,  Ascaddeo  and  Cecconef, — 
who  have  more  virtues  than  rosemary,  especially  Mase ; 
for  every  time  he  lays  his  ear  to  the  ground,  he  hears 
all  that  is  passing  within  thirty  miles  around : Nardo, 
every  time  he  spits,  makes  a great  sea  of  soap-suds: 
every  time  that  Cola  throws  a bit  of  iron  on  the  gi’ound, 
he  makes  a field  of  sharp  razors : Micco,  every  time  he 
flings  down  a little  stick,  makes  a tangled  wood  spring 
up : Petrullo,  whenever  he  throws  on  the  ground  a drop 
ofw'ater,  makes  a terrific  river:  Ascaddeo,  every  time 
he  flings  a stone,  causes  a strong  tower  to  spring  up ; 
and  Ceccone  shoots  so  straight  with  a cross-bow,  that  he 

* So  creaciuta  a pappalardiello—  i.  e,  fed  on  bread  and  lard, — a dainty  to  the  poor ; 
thence  the  aaying. 

t Maae  U Thomas— Nardo,  Leonard — Cola,  Nicholas — Micco,  Dominick — Pe- 
tniUo,  Peter—  Ascaddeo,  Ihadeus — Ceccone,  Frank. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  FLEA. 


67 


can  hit  a hen’s  eye  a mile  off.  Now  with  the  help  of 
my  sons,  who  are  all  courteous  and  friendly,  and  who 
will  all  take  compassion  on  your  condition,  I will  con- 
trive to  free  you  from  the  claws  of  the  ogre ; for  such 
a delicate  morsel  is  not  food  for  the  huge  throat  of  this 
monster.” 

No  time  is  better  than  now,”  replied  Porziella ; 
“ for  that  evil  shadow  of  a husband  of  mine  is  gone  out, 
and  will  not  retuim  this  evening,  and  we  shall  have  time 
to  slip  off  and  run  away.” 

“ It  cannot  be  this  evening,”  replied  the  old  woman ; 
for  I live  a long  way  off ; but  I promise  you  that  to- 
morrow morning  I and  my  sons  will  all  come  together 
and  help  you  out  of  your  trouble.” 

So  saying  the  old  woman  departed,  and  Porziella 
went  to  rest  with  a light  heart,  and  slept  soundly  all 
night.  But  as  soon  as  the  birds  began  to  cry,  Long 
live  the  Sun !”  lo  and  behold  there  was  the  old  woman 
with  her  seven  sons ; and  placing  Porziella  in  the  midst 
of  them,  they  proceeded  towards  the  city.  But  they 
had  not  gone  above  half  a mile  w hen  Mase  put  his  ear 
to  the  ground,  and  cried,  “ Hollo,  have  a care  ! here ’s 
the  fox ! The  ogre  is  come  home,  and  not  finding  his 
wife,  he  is  hastening  after  us  with  his  cap  under  his  arm.” 
No  sooner  did  Nardo  hear  this,  than  he  spat  upon 
the  ground,  and  made  a sea  of  soap ; and  when  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


68 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


Ogre  came,  and  saw  all  the  suds,  he  ran  home,  and  fetch- 
ing a sack  of  bran,  he  strewed  it  about,  and  worked 
away,  treading  it  down  with  his  feet,  until  at  last  he  got 
over  this  obstacle,  though  with  great  difficulty. 

But  Mase  put  his  ear  once  more  to  the  ground,  and 
exclaimed,  Look  sharp,  comrade ! here  he  comes !” 
Thereupon  Cola  flung  the  piece  of  iron  on  the  ground, 
and  instantly  a field  of  razors  sprung  up.  When  the 
ogre  saw  the  path  stopped,  he  ran  home  again,  and  clad 
himself  in  iron  from  head  to  foot,  and  then  returned, 
and  got  over  this  peril. 

Then  Mase,  again  putting  his  ear  to  the  ground, 
cried,  “ Up,  up,  to  arms  ! to  arms  ! for  see  here  is  the 
ogre  coming  at  such  a rate  that  he  is  actually  flying.” 
But  Micco  was  ready  with  his  little  stick,  and  in  an 
instant  he  caused  a terrible  wood  to  rise  up,  so  thick 
that  it  was  quite  impenetrable.  When  the  ogre  came 
to  this  difficult  pass,  he  laid  hold  of  a Carrara  knife  that 
he  wore  at  his  side,  and  began  to  fell  the  poplars  and 
oaks  right  and  left,  to  tumble  down  the  pine-trees  and 
cornel-trees;  insomuch  that  with  four  or  five  strokes 
he  laid  the  whole  forest  on  the  ground,  and  got  clear 
out  of  the  maze. 

Presently  Mase,  who  kept  his  ears  on  the  alert  like  a 
hare,  again  raised  his  voice  and  cried,  “ Now  we  must 
be  off,  for  the  ogre  has  put  on  wings,  and  see  here  he 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  PLEA. 


59 


is  at  our  heels !”  As  soon  as  Petrullo  heard  this,  he 
took  a sip  of  water  from  a little  fountain  that  was  spurt- 
ing out  of  a stone  basin,  squirted  it  on  the  ground,  and 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  a large  river  rose  up  on  the 
spot.  When  the  ogre  saw  this  new  obstacle,  and  that 
he  could  not  make  holes  as  fast  as  they  found  bungs  to 
stop  them,  he  stripped  himself  stark  naked,  and  swam 
across  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  with  his  clothes  upon 
his  head. 

Mase,  who  put  his  ear  to  every  chink,  heard  the  ogre 
coming,  and  exclaimed,  “ Alas  ! matters  go  ill  with  us 
now ; I already  hear  the  clatter  of  the  ogre’s  heels : 
Heaven  help  us ! So  let  us  be  upon  our  guard,  and 
prepare  to  meet  this  storm,  or  else  we  are  done  for.” 
Never  fear,”  said  Ascaddeo,  “ I will  soon  settle  this 
ugly  ragamuffin.”  So  saying  he  flung  a pebble  on 
the  ground,  and  instantly  up  rose  a tower,  in  which  they 
all  took  refuge  without  delay  and  barred  the  door. 
But  when  the  ogre  came  up,  and  saw  that  they  had 
betaken  themselves  to  a place  of  safety,  he  ran  home, 
got  a vine-dresser’s  ladder,  and  hied  with  it  on  his 
shoulder  back  to  the  tower. 

Now  Mase,  who  kept  his  ears  hanging  down,  heard 
at  a distance  the  approach  of  the  ogre,  and  cried,  We 
are  now  at  the  butt-end  of  the  candle  of  hope  ! Ceccone 
is  our  last  resource,  for  the  ogre  is  coming  back  in  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


60 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


terrible  fury.  Alas,  how  my  heart  beats,  for  I foresee 
an  evil  day !” 

“ You  coward  \”  answered  Ceccoue ; ‘‘  let  little  Domi- 
nick alone*,  and  I will  hit  him  with  a ball. 

As  Ceccone  was  speaking,  the  ogre  came,  planted  his 
ladder,  and  began  to  climb  up;  but  Ceccone,  taking 
aim  at  him,  shot  out  one  of  his  eyes,  and  laid  him  at 
full  length  on  the  ground,  like  a pear  dropped  from  the 
tree : then  he  went  out  of  the  tower,  and  cut  off  the 
ogre’s  head  with  the  big  knife  he  carried  about  him, 
just  as  if  it  had  been  new-made  cheese  f.  Thereupon 
they  took  the  head  with  great  joy  to  the  king,  wdio  re- 
joiced at  recovering  his  daughter,  for  he  had  repented  a 
hundred  times  having  given  her  to  an  ogre.  And  not 
many  days  after,  the  king  procured  a handsome  hus- 
band for  Porziella,  and  he  hea}>ed  riches  on  the  seven 
sons  and  their  mother,  who  had  delivered  his  daughter 
from  such  a wretched  life.  Nor  did  he  omit  to  call 
himself  a thousand  times  to  blame  for  his  conduct  to 
Porziella,  and  having  out  of  mere  caprice  exposed  her 
to  such  peril,  without  thinking  what  an  en’or  he  com- 
mits who  goes  looking  for  wolf’s  eggs. 


* iMua  fare  a Menechiello—&  common  saying  for  ‘ Trust  to  me.’  Slenechiello  is 
the  diminutive  of  Domenico ; the  expression  originated  with  a person  of  that  name  in 
Naples  who  pretended  to  know  everything. 

t Caso-recotta — see  Keightlcy’s  Notes  on  Virgil,  p.  341. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  FLEA. 


61 


Tlie  auditors  looked  like  statues,  as  they  sat  listening 
to  the  stoiy  of  the  Flea,  and  they  deelared  one  and  all 
that  King  Stupid  was  an  ass,  to  put  in  peril  the  wel- 
fare of  his  o^vn  flesh  and  blood,  and  the  inheritance  of 
his  kingdom,  for  just  nothing  at  all.  When  they  had 
all  shut  their  mouths  again,  Antonella  opened  hers, 
and  began  the  following  story. 


Digitized  by  Google 


62 


CENERENTOLA.* 

In  the  sea  of  Malice  Envy  frequently  gets  out  of  her 
depth ; and  whilst  she  is  expecting  to  see  another 
drowned,  she  is  either  drowned  herself,  or  is  dashed 
against  a rock,  as  happened  to  some  envious  girls,  about 
whom  I will  tell  you  a story. 


There  once  lived  a prince,  who  was  a widower,  but 
who  had  a daughter,  so  dear  to  him  that  he  saw  with 
no  other  eyes  than  hers ; and  he  kept  a governess  for 
her,  who  taught  her  chain-work,  and  knitting,  and  to 
make  point-lacc,  and  showed  her  such  aftection  as  no 
words  can  tell.  But  after  a time  the  father  married 
again,  and  took  a wicked  jade  for  his  wife,  who  soon 
conceived  a violent  dislike  to  her  stepdaughter ; and  all 
day  long  she  made  sour  looks,  wry  faces  and  fierce  eyes 
at  her,  till  the  poor  child  was  beside  herself  with  terror, 
and  was  for  ever  bewailing  to  her  governess  the  bad 

• The  title  of  this  story  is  ‘ La  Gatta  Cenercntola,’ — Puss  on  the  hearth. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CENERENTOLA. 


63 


treatment  she  received  from  her  stepmother,  sajdng 
to  her,  “ 0 heavens,  that  you  had  been  my  mother,  you 
who  show  me  so  much  kindness  and  affection  !”  And 
she  went  on  thus,  sighing  and  singing  to  this  tune,  till 
at  last  the  governess,  having  a wasp  put  in  her  ear  and 
blinded  by  the  Mazzamauriello*,  said  to  her  one  day, 
" If  you  will  do  as  this  foolish  he-ad  of  mine  advises,  I 
shall  be  mother  to  you,  and  you  will  be  as  dear  to  me  as 
the  apple  of  my  eye.” 

She  was  going  on  to  say  more,  when  Zczollaf  (for 
that  was  the  girl’s  name)  said,  " Pardon  me  if  I stop 
the  word  upon  your  tongue.  I know  you  wish  me  well, 
therefore  hush ! enough — only  show  me  the  way  to 
get  out  of  my  trouble ; do  you  write,  and  I will  sub- 
scribe.” 

“Well  then,”  answered  the  governess,  “open  your 
ears  and  listen,  and  you  will  get  bread  as  white  as  the 
flowers  J.  Wlien  your  father  goes  out,  ask  your  step- 
mother to  give  you  one  of  the  old  dresses  that  arc 
in  the  large  chest  in  the  closet,  in  order  to  save  the 
one  you  have  on.  Then  she,  who  would  like  of  all 
things  to  see  you  go  in  rags  and  tatters,  will  open  the 
chest,  and  say,  ‘ Hold  up  the  lid !’  and  whilst  you  are 
holding  it  up,  and  she  is  rummaging  about  inside,  let 
it  fall  with  a bang,  so  as  to  break  her  neck.  When 

• A vricked  little  imp.  t Lucrcti*.  J «.  e. ' you  shall  have  your  wish.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


64 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


this  is  done,  as  you  know  well  enough  that  your  father 
would  even  eoin  false  money  to  please  you,  do  you  en- 
treat him  when  he  is  earessing  you  to  take  me  to  wife ; 
for  then,  bless  your  stars  ! you  shall  be  the  mistress  of 
my  life/^ 

\Vhen  Zczolla  heard  this,  every  hour  seemed  to  her  a 
thousand  years  until  she  had  done  all  that  her  gover- 
ness had  advised;  and  as  soon  as  the  mourning  for  the 
stepmother^s  death  was  ended,  she  began  to  feel  her  fa- 
ther’s pulse,  and  to  entreat  him  to  marry  the  governess. 
At  first  the  prince  took  it  as  a joke,  but  Zezolla  went  on 
shooting  so  long  past  the  mark,  that  at  length  she  hit 
it,  and  he  gave  way  to  her  entreaties.  So  he  took  Car- 
mosina  (that  was  the  name  of  the  governess)  to  wife, 
and  gave  a great  feast  at  the  wedding. 

Now  whilst  the  young  folks  were  dancing,  and  Ze- 
zolla was  standing  at  a window  of  her  house,  a dove 
came  flying  and  perched  upon  a wall,  and  said  to  her, 

^Mienever  you  desire  anything,  send  the  request  to  the 
Dove  of  the  Fairies  in  the  island  of  Sardinia,  and  you 
will  instantly  have  what  you  wish.” 

For  five  or  six  days  the  new  stepmother  overwhelmed 
Zezolla  with  caresses,  seating  her  at  the  best  place  at 
table,  giving  her  the  choicest  morsels  to  eat,  and  clothing 
her  in  the  richest  apparel.  But  ere  long,  forgetting 
entirely  the  good  service  she  had  received,  (woe  to  him 


Digitized  by  Google 


CENEBENTOLA. 


65 


who  has  a bad  master !)  she  began  to  bring  forwai’d  six 
daughters  of  her  own,  w hom  she  had  until  then  kept  con- 
cealed ; and  she  praised  them  so  much,  and  talked  her 
husband  over  in  such  a manner,  that  at  last  the  step- 
daughters engrossed  all  his  favour,  and  the  thought  of 
his  own  child  w^ent  entirely  from  his  heart : in  short,  it 
fared  so  ill  w ith  the  poor  girl,  bad  today  and  worse  to- 
morrow, that  she  was  at  last  brought  down  from  the 
royal  chamber  to  the  kitchen,  from  the  canopy  of  state 
to  the  hearth,  from  splendid  apparel  of  silks  and  gold  to 
dishclouts,  from  the  sceptre  to  the  spit.  And  not  only 
was  her  condition  changed,  but  even  her  name ; for  in- 
stead of  Zezolla,  she  was  now'  called  Ccncrentola. 

It  happened  that  the  prince  had  occasion  to  go  to 
Sardinia  upon  affairs  of  state ; and  calling  the  six  step- 
daughters,— Imperia,  Calamita,  Fiorella,  Diamante,  Co- 
lombina,  Pascarella, — he  asked  them  one  by  one  what 
they  would  like  him  to  bring  them  on  his  return.  Then 
one  wished  for  splendid  dresses,  another  to  have  head- 
ornaments,  another  rouge  for  the  face,  another  toys 
arid  trinkets ; in  short,  one  wished  for  this  thing  and 
another  for  that.  At  last  the  prince  said  to  his  own 
daughter,  as  if  in  mockery,  “ And  what  w ould  you  have, 
child  “ Nothing,  father,^^  she  replied,  but  that  you 
commend  me  to  the  Dove  of  the  Fairies,  and  bid  her 
send  me  sometlung ; and  if  you  forget  my  request,  may 

r 


Digitized  by  Google 


66 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


you  be  unable  to  stir  either  backwards  or  forwards : so 
remember  what  I tell  you,  for  it  will  fare  with  you  ac- 
cordingly.” 

Then  the  jirince  went  his  way,  and  transacted  his 
affairs  in  Sardinia,  and  procured  all  the  things  which 
his  stepdaughters  had  asked  for ; but  poor  Zezolla  went 
quite  out  of  his  thoughts.  And  embarking  on  board 
a ship,  he  set  sail  to  retmm;  but  the  ship  could  not 
get  out  of  the  harboiu’;  there  it  stuck  fast,  just  as 
if  held  back  by  a sea-lamprey*.  The  captain  of  the 
ship,  who  was  almost  in  despair  and  fairly  tired  out, 
laid  himself  down  to  sleep ; and  in  his  dream  he  saw  a 
fairy,  who  said  to  him,  Know  you  the  reason  why  you 
cannot  work  the  ship  out  of  port?  it  is  because  the 
prince  who  is  on  board  with  you  has  broken  his  promise 
to  his  daughter,  remembering  every  one  except  his  own 
blood.” 

Then  the  captain  awoke,  and  told  his  dream  to  the 
prince,  who,  in  shame  and  confusion  at  the  breaeh  of 
his  promise,  went  to  the  Grotto  of  the  Fairies,  and 
commending  his  daughter  to  them,  asked  them  to  send 
her  something.  And  behold  there  stepped  forth  from 
the  grotto  a beautiful  maiden,  who  told  him  that  she 
thanked  his  daughter  for  her  kind  remembrance,  and 
bade  him  tell  her  to  be  merry  and  of  good  heart,  out  of 

* Remora.— Set  Pliny,  Nat.  Hi»t.  ix.  88. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


CENERENTOLA. 


67 


love  to  her.  And  thereupon  she  gave  him  a date-tree, 
a hoe  and  a little  bucket  all  of  gold,  and  a silken  napkin ; 
adding,  that  the  one  was  to  hoe  with  and  the  other  to 
water  the  plant. 

The  prince,  marvelling  at  this  j)resent,  took  leave  of 
the  fairy  and  rcturaed  to  his  own  country.  And  when 
he  had  given  the  stepdaughters  all  the  things  they  had 
desired,  he  at  last  gave  his  own  daughter  the  gift  which 
the  fairy  had  sent  her.  Then  Zezolla,  out  of  her  wits 
with  joy,  took  the  date-tree  and  planted  it  in  a pretty 
flowerpot,  hoed  the  eai*th  around  it,  watered  it,  and 
wiped  its  leaves  morning  and  evening  with  the  silken 
napkin ; so  that  in  a few  days  it  had  grown  as  tall  as  a 
woman,  and  out  of  it  came  a fair)',  who  said  to  Zezolla, 
“ What  do  you  wish  for  ?”  , And  Zezolla  rcphed,  that 
she  wished  sometimes  to  leave  the  house  without  her 
sisters^  knowledge.  The  fairy  answered,  “ Whenever 
you  desire  this,  come  to  the  flowerpot  and  say, 

* My  little  Date-tree,  my  golden  tree, 

With  a golden  hoc  I have  hoed  thee. 

With  a golden  can  I have  w ater’d  thee, 

With  a silken  cloth  I have  wiped  thee  dry. 

Now  strip  thee,  and  dress  me  speedily !’ 

And  when  you  wish  to  undi'ess,  change  the  last  verse, 
and  say,  ‘ Strip  me,  and  dress  thee/  ” 

p 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


68 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


' When  the  time  for  the  feast  was  come,  and  the  step- 
mother’s daughters  appeared,  drest  out  so  fine,  all  rib- 
bands and  flowers,  and  slippers  and  shoes,  sweet  smells 
and  bells,  and  roses  and  posies,  Zezolla  ran  quickly  to 
the  flowerpot ; and  no  sooner  had  she  repeated  the  words 
which  the  fairy  had  told  her,  than  she  saw  herself  ar- 
rayed like  a queen,  seated  upon  a palfrey,  and  attended 
by  twelve  smart  pages  all  drest  in  their  best.  Then 
she  went  to  the  ball  where  the  sisters  had  gone,  whose 
mouths  watered  with  envy  of  the  beauty  of  this  gi’aceful 
dove. 

Now  as  luck  would  have  it  the  king  himself  came  to 
that  same  place,  who,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  marvellous 
beauty  of  Zezolla,  stood  magic-bound  with  amazement, 
and  ordered  a trusty  servant  to  find  out  who  that  beau- 
tiful creature  was,  and  where  she  lived.  So  the  servant 
followed  in  her  footsteps;  but  Zezolla,  observing  the 
trick,  threw  on  the  ground  a handful  of  crown-pieces, 
which  she  had  made  the  date-tree  give  her  for  this  pur- 
pose. Then  the  servant  lighted  the  lantern,  and  in  his 
eagerness  to  fill  his  pockets  with  the  crown-j)icccs  he 
forgot  to  follow  the  palfrey.  In  the  meantime  Zezolla 
hastened  home,  and  midresscd  herself  as  the  faiiy  had 
told  her.  Soon  afterwards  the  wicked  sisters  returned, 
and,  in  order  to  vex  her  and  excite  her  envy,  they  told 
her  of  all  kinds  of  beautiful  things  that  they  had  seen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CENERENTOLA. 


69 


Meanwhile  the  servant  came  back  to  the  king,  and 
told  him  what  had  happened  with  the  crown-pieces; 
whereupon  the  king  flew  into  a great  rage,  telling  him 
that  for  a few  paltry  farthings  he  had  sold  his  pleasure, 
and  commanding  him  at  all  events  to  find  out  at  the 
next  feast  who  the  beautiful  maiden  was,  and  where  this 
pretty  bird  had  its  nest. 

When  the  next  feast  was  come,  the  sisters  all  went  to 
it  decked  out  smartly,  leaving  poor  Zezolla  at  home  on 
the  hearth.  Then  Zezolla  ran  quickly  to  the  date-tree, 
and  repeated  the  words  as  before ; and  instantly  there 
appeared  a number  of  damsels,  one  with  a looking-glass, 
another  with  a bottle  of  pumpkin-water,  another  with 
the  curling-irons,  another  with  a comb,  another  with 
pins,  another  with  dresses,  and  another  with  capes  and 
collars.  And  decking  her  out  till  she  looked  as  beauti- 
ful as  a sun,  they  placed  her  in  a coach  drawm  by  six 
horses,  attended  by  footmen  and  pages  in  livery.  And 
no  sooner  did  she  appear  in  the  room  where  the  for- 
mer feast  was  held,  than  the  hearts  of  the  sisters  were 
filled  with  amazement,  and  the  breast  of  the  king  with 
fire. 

When  Zezolla  went  away  again,  the  servant  followed 
in  her  footsteps  as  before;  but,  in  order  not  to  be 
caught,  she  threw  down  a handful  of  pearls  and  jewels ; 
and  the  good  fellow,  seeing  that  they  were  not  things 


Digitized  by  Google 


70 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


to  lose,  stayed  to  pick  them  up.  So  Zezolla  had  time 
to  slip  home  and  take  oflF  her  fine  dress  as  before. 

Meanwhile  the  servant  returaed  slowly  to  the  king, 
who  exclaimed  w'hen  he  saw  him,  By  the  souls  of  my 
ancestors,  if  you  don^t  find  out  who  she  is.  I’ll  give 
you  a sound  thrashing,  and,  what’s  more.  I’ll  give 
you  as  many  kicks  as  you  have  hairs  in  that  beard  of 
thine !” 

MTien  the  next  feast  was  held,  and  the  sisters  had 
gone  to  it,  Zezolla  went  to  the  date-tree,  and  repeating 
the  words  of  the  charm,  in  an  instant  she  was  splen- 
didly arrayed,  and  seated  in  a coach  of  gold,  with 
ever  so  many  servants  around,  so  that  she  looked  just 
like  a queen.  The  envy  of  the  sisters  was  excited  as 
before;  and  when  she  left  the  room,  the  king’s  ser- 
vant kept  close*  to  the  coach.  But  Zezolla,  seeing  that 
the  man  kept  running  at  her  side,  cried,  “ Coachman, 
drive  on !”  and  in  a trice  the  coach  set  off  at  such  a 
rattling  pace,  that  Zezolla  lost  one  of  her  slippers,  the 
prettiest  thing  that  ever  was  seen.  The  servant,  being 
unable  to  overtake  the  coach,  which  flew  like  a bird, 
picked  up  the  slipper,  and  carrying  it  to  the  king  told 
him  all  that  had  happened.  Whereupon  the  king, 
taking  it  in  his  hand,  said,  “ If  the  basement  indeed  is 
so  beautiful,  what  must  the  building  be  ? O beauteous 

* The  Neapolitan  ia  very  prettjr — te  cotette  a ffito  duppio. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CENE&ENTOLA. 


71 


candlestick,  where  is  the  candle  that  consumes  me? 
O tripod  of  the  bright  boiler  in  which  life  simmers ! 
O beautiful  cork,  fastened  to  the  angling-hne  of  Love, 
with  which  he  has  caught  my  soul ! Lo,  I embrace 
you,  I press  you  to  my  heart ; and  if  I cannot  reach 
the  plant,  I adore  at  least  the  roots ; if  I cannot  possess 
the  capital  of  the  column,  I kiss  the  base.  You  who 
until  now  were  the  prison  of  a white  foot,  are  now  the 
fetter  of  an  unhappy  heart.” 

So  saying  he  called  his  secretary,  and  commanded  the 
trumpeter  to  sound  a " Too,  too  !”  and  make  proclama- 
tion, that  all  the  women  of  that  country  should  come 
to  a feast  and  banquet  which  he  had  taken  it  into  his 
head  to  give.  And  when  the  appointed  day  was  come, 
heyday,  what  a feasting  and  frohe  was  there ! from 
whence  in  the  world  came  all  the  pies  and  pasties? 
whence  the  stews  and  ragouts?  whence  the  maccaroni 
and  sweetmeats  ? In  short  there  was  enough  to  feed  a 
whole  army. 

And  when  the  women  were  all  assembled,  noble  and 
ignoble,  rich  and  poor,  old  and  young,  beautiful  and 
ugly,  and  when  all  was  ready,  the  king  tried  the  slipper 
first  on  one  and  then  on  another  of  the  guests,  to  see 
whom  it  should  fit  to  a hair,  and  to  be  able  thus  to  dis- 
cover by  the  form  of  the  slipper  the  maiden  of  whom  he 
was  in  search ; but  not  finding  one  foot  which  would  fit 


Digitized  by  Google 


72 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


it  exactly,  he  began  to  despair.  However,  having  or- 
dered silence,  he  said,  Come  again  tomorrow,  and  eat 
a bit  of  dinner  with  me ; and  as  yon  love  me,  don’t  leave 
a single  girl  or  woman  at  home,  be  she  who  she  may.” 
Then  the  prince  said,  “ I have  indeed  another  daughter 
at  home ; but  she  is  always  on  the  heaiih,  and  is  such  a 
gi’accless  simpleton  that  she  is  unworthy  to  sit  down  to 
eat  at  your  table.”  But  the  king  said,  Let  her  be  the 
very  first  on  the  list,  for  so  I will.” 

So  all  the  guests  departed,  and  the  next  day  they  as- 
sembled again,  and  with  Carmosina’s  daughters  came 
Zezolla.  The  instant  the  king  saw  her,  he  imagined  it 
was  she  whom  he  longed  to  find ; but  this  he  kept  to 
himself.  And  when  the  feasting  was  ended,  came  the 
trial  of  the  slipper ; but  as  soon  as  ever  it  approached  Ze- 
zolla’s  foot,  it  darted  of  itself  to  the  foot  of  that  painted 
egg*  of  Venus,  as  the  iron  flies  to  the  magnet;  at  the 
sight  of  which  the  king  ran  to  her,  and  made  a press 
for  her  with  his  arms,  and  seating  her  under  the  royal 
canopy  he  set  the  crown  upon  her  head;  whereupon 
all  made  their  obeisance  and  homage  to  her  as  their 
queen. 

When  the  sisters  beheld  this,  they  were  full  of  spite 
and  rage ; and  not  having  patience  to  look  upon  this 
object  of  their  hatred,  they  shpped  quietly  away  on  tip- 

• See  note,  p.  l6. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


CENERENTOLA.  73 

toe,  and  went  home  to  their  mother,  confessing  in  spite 
of  themselves  that 

“ He  is  a madman  who  resists  the  stars/^ 


It  is  impossible  to  conceive  how  much  the  good  for- 
tune of  Zezolla  touched  the  heart  of  every  one  present ; 
but  greatly  as  they  praised  the  liberality  of  Heaven  to 
the  poor  girl,  they  considered  the  punishment  of  Carmo- 
sina’s  daughters  far  too  trifling ; for  there  is  no  punish- 
ment which  pride  does  not  deseiwe,  no  misfortune  that 
envy  does  not  merit.  But  in  the  midst  of  all  the  bab- 
bling about  this  story,  the  Prince  Taddeo  placed  the 
forefinger  of  his  right  hand  across  his  lips,  and  made  a 
sign  for  silence ; whereupon  all  stopped  in  an  instant, 
as  if  they  had  seen  a wolf ; or  like  a schoolboy,  who  in 
the  height  of  the  fun  sees  the  master  unexpectedly  ap- 
pear. Then  the  Prince  made  a sign  to  Ciulla  to  com- 
mence her  story,  and  she  thus  began. 


Digitized  by  Google 


74 


THE  MERCHANT. 

Troubles  are  usually  the  brooms  and  shovels  that 
smooth  the  road  to  a man^s  good  fortune,  of  which  he 
little  dreams;  and  many  a man  curses  the  rain  that 
falls  upon  his  head,  and  knows  not  that  it  brings  abun- 
dance to  drive  away  hunger ; as  is  seen  in  the  person 
of  a young  man,  of  whom  I will  tell  you. 


It  is  said  that  there  was  once  a very  rich  merchant 
named  Antoniello,  who  had  two  sons,  Cienzo  and  Meo, 
so  alike  that  there  was  no  telling  the  one  from  the 
other.  It  happened  that  Cienzo,  the  elder  brother,  was 
one  day  playing  at  throwing  stones  on  the  seashore  with 
the  son  of  the  king  of  Naples,  and  by  chance  broke  his 
companion’s  head.  Whereat  Antoniello  flew  into  a rage, 
and  said  to  him,  Bravo  ! here ’s  a pretty  piece  of  work 
indeed!  write  to  your  friends  and  boast  of  what  you 
have  done  I you  have  broken  what  was  worth  a groat — 
you  have  broken  the  head  of  the  king’s  son,  and  never 
counted  the  cost,  you  blockhead ! What  will  become 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


76 


of  you  now  ? You  have  cooked  a pretty  mess  indeed ! 
I would  not  give  a farthing  for  your  chance  of  escaping 
out  of  the  king^s  hands  if  you  stay  here ; for  he  has 
long  arms,  you  know,  that  reach  into  every  hole  and 
comer,  and  I warrant  he  ^11  make  the  room  too  hot  to 
hold  you.^’ 

After  his  father  had  repeated  tliis  over  and  over  again, 
Cienzo  answered,  "Sir,  I have  always  heard  say,  that 
better  is  the  law-court  than  the  doctor  in  one’s  house. 
Would  it  not  have  been  worse  if  he  had  broken  my 
head  ? It  was  he  who  began,  and  provoked  me  j we 
are  but  boys,  and  there  are  two  sides  to  the  quarrel. 
After  all,  ’tis  a fii'st  fault,  and  the  king  is  a man  of 
reason;  but  let  the  worst  come  to  the  worst,  what 
great  haim  can  he  do  me  ? Let  him  who  will  not  give 
me  the  mother,  give  me  the  daughter — let  him  who 
will  not  send  me  cooked  meat,  send  me  raw ; the  wide 
world  is  one’s  home,  and  let  him  who  is  afraid,  turn 
constable.” 

" What  can  he  do  to  you  indeed !”  replied  Antoni- 
ello ; " he  can  drive  you  out  of  the  world, — send  you  for 
a change  of  air ; he  can  make  you  a schoolmaster,  with 
a ferule  four-and-twenty  feet  long,  to  thrash  the  fishes* 
and  teach  them  to  speak ; he  can  send  you  off  with  a 
soaped  collar  three  feet  long,  to  make  merry  with  the 

• Affare  cavalle  a li  pisce. 


Digitized  by  Google 


76 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


widow*;  and,  instead  of  taking  the  maiden^s  hand, 
make  you  touch  the  confessor’s  foot.  Therefore  don’t 
stand  here  at  the  risk  of  your  lifef,  hut  march  off  this 
very  instant,  so  that  nobody  may  hear  a word  either  new 
or  old  of  what  you  have  done,  and  you  may  not  be  kept 
here  by  the  foot.  A bird  in  the  bush  is  better  than  a 
bird  in  the  cage.  Here  is  money — ^take  one  of  the  two 
enchanted  horses  which  I have  in  the  stable,  and  a 
dog  which  is  also  enchanted,  and  tarry  no  longer  here : 
better  to  scamper  off  and  use  your  own  heels,  than 
to  be  touched  by  another’s ; better  to  throw  your  legs 
over  your  back,  than  to  carry  your  head  between 
two  legs  ; better  to  run  a thousand  feet,  than  to  stay 
here  with  three  feet  of  rope;  if  you  don’t  take  your 
knapsack  and  be  off,  neither  Baldo  nor  Bartolo§  will 
help  you.” 

Then,  begging  his  father’s  blessing,  Cienzo  mounted 
his  horse,  and  tucking  the  little  dog  under  his  arm,  he 
went  his  way  out  of  the  city.  But  turning  his  head 
round  when  he  had  passed  through  the  Capuan  gate, 
he  fell  to  exclaiming,  " Farewell,  for  I must  leave  thee, 
my  beautiful  Naples ! who  knows  whether  I shall  ever 
see  thee  again  ? Ye  bricks  of  sugar-candy,  ye  walls  of 

• Death  is  often  called  by  the  Neapolitans  la  Vedoln. 

t Co  to  cuojero  a ppetone  fra  lo  panuo  e V axseimatore.  Literally,  ‘ with  your 
skin  between  the  cloth  and  the  press.'  } See  note,  p.  87. 

^ Two  celebrated  lawyers : Baldo  was  a friend  of  Petrarch ; Bartolo  was  a pnpil 
of  Cino  da  Pistoja. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


77 


sweetmeats  ! where  the  stones  are  of  manna,  the  rafters 
of  sugar-cane,  the  doors  and  windows  of  wafer-cakes ! 
Alas ! as  I leave  thee,  lovely  Pennino*,  I seem  to  be 
going  to  the  gallows  f;  as  I tear  myself  from  thee,  0 
Chiazza-Larga,  my  breath  grows  short ; in  parting  from 
thee,  O Lanziere,  I seem  pierced  by  a Catalan  lance ; 
A^Tiere  shall  I find  another  Puorto,  thou  port  of  all  the 
riches  of  the  world  ? where  another  Loggia,  in  which 
plenty  abides  and  pleasure  is  lodged?  Alas,  as  I 
tear  myself  from  thee,  my  Lavinaro,  a stream  of  lava 
flows  from  these  eyes ! I cannot  leave  thee,  O Mer- 
cato,  without  purchasing  a store  of  grief!  Adieu,  ye 
carrots  and  juicy  cabbages  J I adieu,  pancakes  and  pud- 
dings 1 adieu,  ye  broccoli  and  pickled  tunnies  ! adieu,  yc 
salt-fish  and  salads  1 adieu,  cakes  and  tartlets ! adieu, 
thou  flower  of  cities,  glory  of  Italy,  painted  egg§  of 
Europe,  thou  mirror  of  the  world ! Farewell,  Naples, 
thou  spot  where  virtue  has  set  her  limits  and  grace  her 
boundary  ! I depart,  and  leave  for  ever  the  soups  and 

* This  and  the  following  names  arc  those  of  squares  and  streets  in  Naples. 
1 have  omitted  a few,  in  which  the  play  upon  the  words  could  not  lie  translated. 

t Ire  CO  lo  pennone.  The  pennone  (literally  ‘ standard  ’)  came  to  be  applied  in 
Naples  only  to  the  flag  borne  by  the  hangman,  who  headed  the  procession  to  an  exe- 
cution. 

i The  Neapolitans  had  such  a passion  for  cabbages  at  the  time  this  was  wi-itten, 
that  they  got  the  name  of ' Mangia  foglia.’  Hence  the  lines — 

Pecch^  Napole  mio,  dica  chi  voglia. 

Non  si  Napole  cchiu  si  non  haie  foglia.” 

S See  above,  note  at  p.  16. 


Digitized  by  Google 


78 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


pottage*;  I fly  from  this  beautiful  village f — ye  dear 
cabbage-stalks,  I leave  you 

So  saying,  and  making  a winter  of  tears  with  a sum- 
mer of  sighs,  he  went  his  way,  and  travelled  on  and  on, 
until  the  first  evening  he  came  to  a wood  in  that  part 
of  Cascano  which  kept  the  mule  of  the  Sun  outside  its 
limits,  whilst  it  was  amusing  itself  with  Silence  and 
the  Shades.  There  stood  an  old  house  at  the  foot  of  a 
tower ; and  Cienzo  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  tower ; 
but  the  master  being  in  feai*  of  robbers,  as  it  was  already 
night,  would  not  open  the  door ; so  that  poor  Cienzo 
was  obliged  to  remain  in  the  ruined  old  house;  and 
turning  his  horse  out  to  graze  in  a meadow,  he  threw 
himself  on  some  straw  which  he  found  there,  with  the 
dog  at  his  side.  But  scarcely  had  he  closed  his  eyes, 
when,  awakened  by  the  barking  of  the  dog,  he  heard 
footsteps  stin'ing  in  the  old  house.  Cienzo,  who  was 
bold  and  ventui’ous,  seized  his  sword  and  began  to  lay 
about  him  in  the  dark ; but  perceiving  that  he  hit  no 
one,  and  that  he  only  struck  at  the  wfind,  he  turned 
round  again  and  stretched  himself  out.  But  after  a few 
minutes,  feeling  himself  pulled  gently  by  the  foot,  he 
turned  to  lay  hold  of  his  cutlass,  and  jumped  up  again, 

* 3Ime  parto  pe  stare  sempe  ridolo  ds  le  ppignate  mmar state.  A famous  soup 
in  Naples  is  called  pigjiata  maritata:  the  point  is  of  course  lost  in  translation. 

t Casale.  Naples  is  often  called  by  the  inhabitants  ‘ to  Casalone,’  as  a term  of 
endearment. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


79 


exclaiming,  “ Hollo  there  ! you  ai’e  getting  too  trouble- 
some ; but  leave  oflF  this  sport,  and  let  have  a bout 
of  it,  if  you  have  any  pluck,  for  you  have  found  the 
last  to  your  shoe.” 

At  these  w ords  he  heard  a shout  of  laughter,  and  then 
a hollow  voice  saying,  “ Come  down  here,  and  I will  tell 
you  who  I am.”  Then  Cienzo,  without  losing  courage, 
answered,  ‘^Wait  awhile,  I ^11  come.”  So  he  groped 
about,  until  at  last  he  found  a ladder,  which  led  to  a 
cellar;  and  going  down,  he  saw  a lighted  lamp,  and 
three  ghost-looking  figures,  who  were  making  a piteous 
clamoiu*,  erying,  “ Alas,  my  beauteous  treasure,  I must 
lose  thee !” 

When  Cienzo  saw  this,  he  began  himself  to  cry  and 
lament  for  company  sake ; and  after  he  had  wept  for 
some  time,  the  Moon  having  now  with  the  axe  of  her 
rays  bi-oken  the  bar  of  the  Sky,  the  three  figures  who 
were  making  the  outcry  said  to  Cienzo,  Take  this 
treasure,  which  is  destined  for  thee  alone,  but  mind 
that  you  take  care  of  it.”  And  so  saying  they  vanished, 
like  one  who  has  never  appeared.  Then  Cienzo,  espy- 
ing the  sunlight  through  a hole  in  the  wall,  wished  to 
climb  up  again,  but  he  could  not  find  the  ladder ; whereat 
he  set  up  such  a cry,  that  the  master  of  the  tower,  who 
had  come  to  hunt  for  something  in  the  old  house,  heard 
him,  and  asked  him  what  he  was  about ; and  when  he 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


80 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


was  told  what  had  passed^  he  fetched  a ladder,  and  go- 
ing down  discovered  a great  treasure.  Then  he  wished 
to  give  a part  of  it  to  Cienzo,  but  Cieuzo  would  not 
have  any;  and  taking  the  dog,  and  mounting  his  horse, 
he  set  out  again  upon  his  travels. 

After  a while  he  arrived  at  a wild  and  dreary  forest, 
80  dark  that  it  made  you  shudder.  There,  upon  the 
bank  of  a river,  which,  to  please  the  shades  of  which  it 
w'as  enamoured,  was  winding  about  in  the  meadows  hke 
a snake,  and  leaping  over  the  stones,  he  found  a fairy, 
surrounded  by  a band  of  robbers.  Cienzo,  perceiving  the 
wicked  intention  of  these  rogues,  seized  his  sword  and 
soon  made  a slaughter  of  them.  Then  the  fairy,  who 
saw  that  this  deed  was  done  for  her  sake,  showered  on 
him  thanks,  and  invited  him  to  a palace  not  far  distant, 
that  she  might  make  a return  for  the  serviee  he  had 
done  her.  But  Cienzo  replied,  It  is  a mere  nothing 
at  all — thank  you  kindly — another  time  I will  accept 
the  favour,  but  now'  I am  in  haste,  on  business  of  im- 
portance.^' 

So  saying  he  took  his  leave;  and  travelling  on  a 
long  way,  he  came  at  last  to  the  palace  of  a king, 
which  w'as  all  hung  with  mourning,  so  that  it  made  one's 
heart  grow  black  to  look  at  it.  Then  Cienzo  inquired 
the  cause  of  the  mourning,  and  the  folks  answered, 
A di'agon  with  seven  heads  has  made  his  appearance 


Digitized  by  Goog[e 


THE  MERCHANT. 


81 


in  this  country,  the  most  terrible  monster  that  ever  was 
seen  in  the  world,  with  the  crest  of  a cock,  the  head  of 
a cat,  eyes  of  fire,  the  mouth  of  a bulldog,  the  wings 
of  a bat,  the  claws  of  a bear,  and  the  tail  of  a serpent. 
Now  this  dragon  swallows  a Christian  evei*y  day,  and 
so  it  has  gone  on  up  to  the  present  time,  until  at  last 
the  lot  has  fallen  upon  Menechella,  the  daughter  of 
the  king ; on  which  account  there  is  a great  weeping 
and  wailing  in  the  royal  palace,  since  the  fairest  crea- 
ture in  all  the  land  is  doomed  to  be  devoured  and  swal- 
lowed by  this  horrid  beast,” 

When  Cienzo  heard  this  he  stepped  aside,  and  saw 
Menechella  pass  by  with  the  mourning  train,  accom- 
panied by  the  ladies  of  the  court  and  all  the  women 
of  the  land,  wringing  their  hands,  and  tearing  out  their 
hair  by  handfuls,  and  bewailing  the  sad  fate  of  the  poor 
girl,  saying,  Who  would  have  imagined  that  this  un- 
happy maiden  should  make  a cession  of  the  wealth  of 
life  in  the  body  of  this  brute  beast  ? who  could  have 
thought  that  this  beautiful  goldfinch  should  have  the 
belly  of  a dragon  for  a cage  ? who  could  have  foretold 
that  such  a beauteous  little  angel  should  be  doomed  to 
end  her  life  in  this  dark  cavern  ?” 

As  they  were  exclaiming  thus,  behold  the  dragon 
came  out  of  a cave.  O mother  of  mine,  what  a horrid 
sight ! the  sun  hid  himself  in  teiTor  within  the  clouds ; 

G 


Digitized  by  Google 


. 82 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


the  sky  grew  darkenec^  the'  hearts  of  beholders  shri- 
velled up  like  a mummy,  and  all  the  folks  trembled  and 
shook  like  an  aspen-leaf.  Then  Cienzo,  who  saw  all 
this,  laid  hold  on  his  sword,  and  slapdash  struck  oflf 
a head  in  a trice.  But  the  dragon  went  and  rubbed  his 
neck  on  a certain  plant  which  grew  not  far  off,  and  sud- 
denly the  head  joined  itself  on  again,  like  a lizard  join- 
ing itself  to  its  tail.  When  Cienzo  saw  this  he  ex- 
claimed, “ He  who  dares  not,  wins  not and  setting 
his  teeth,  he  struck  such  a furious  blow  that  he  cut 
off  all  seven  heads,  which  flew  from  the  necks  like  peas 
from  the  pan.  Whereupon  he  took  out  the  tongues,  and 
putting  them  in  his  pocket,  he  flung  the  heads  a mile 
apart  from  the  body,  so  that  they  might  never  come 
together  again.  Then  he  took  a handful  of  the  plant 
which  had  united  the  dragon's  neck  with  the  head,  sent 
IMenechclla  home  to  her  father,  and  went  himself  to  re- 
pose in  a tavern. 

When  the  king  saw  his  daughter,  his  delight  is  not 
to  be  told ; and  having  heard  the  manner  in  which  she 
had  been  freed,  he  ordered  a proclamation  to  be  instant- 
ly made,  that  whosoever  had  killed  the  dragon  should 
come  and  take  his  daughter  to  wife.  Now  a rascal  of 
a countrj'^-fellow  happening  to  hear  this  proclamation, 
took  the  heads  of  the  dragon,  went  to  the  king,  and 
said,  “ jMenechella  has  been  saved  by  me ; these  hands 


• Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


83 


have  freed  the  land  from  destruction ; behold  the  dra- 
gon's heads,  which  are  the  proofs  of  my  valour ; there- 
fore recollect,  every  promise  is  a debt."  As  soon  as  the 
king  heard  this,  he  lifted  the  crown  from  his  own  head 
and  set  it  upon  the  countryman's  poll,  who  looked  just 
like  a thief  on  the  gallows*. 

The  news  of  this  proclamation  flew  through  the  whole 
country,  till  at  last  it  came  to  the  ears  of  Cienzo,  who 
said  to  himself,  “ Verily  I am  a great  blockhead ! I had 
hold  of  Fortune  by  the  forelock,  and  I let  her  escape 
out  of  my  hand : here 's  a man  who  offers  to  give  me 
the  half  of  a treasure  he  finds,  and  I care  no  more  for  it 
than  a German  for  cold  water ; the  faiiy  wishes  to  enter- 
tain me  in  her  palace,  and  I care  for  it  as  little  as  the 
ass  for  music ; and  now  that  I am  called  to  the  crown, 
here  I stand,  like  a tipsy  woman  with  her  spindle,  and 
allow  a hairy-footed  bumpkin  to  pass  me  by,  and  let  a 
rascally  thief  cheat  me  out  of  my  trump- card."  So  say- 
ing he  took  an  inkstand,  seized  a pen,  and  spreading  out 
a sheet  of  paper,  began  to  write : — 

“ To  the  most  beautiful  jewel  of  women,  Menechella, 
the  Infanta  of  Lost-Wits. — Having  by  the  favour  of 
Sol  in  Leo  saved  thy  life,  I hear  that  another  plumes 
himself  with  my  labours,  that  another  claims  the  reward  • 

* Alluding  to  the  crown,  or  milera,  placed  upon  the  head  of  criminals  when 
hung.  The  same  custom  was  in  some  countries  practised  with  persons  going  to  be 
burnt  by  the  Holy  Office. 

G 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


84 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


of  the  service  which  I have  rendered.  Thou  therefore, 
who  wast  present  at  the  dragon’s  death,  canst  assure  the 
king  of  the  truth,  and  prevent  his  allowing  another  to 
gain  this  sinecure,  whilst  I have  had  all  the  toil ; for  it 
will  be  the  right  effect  of  thy  fair  royal  grace,  and  the 
merited  reward  of  this  strong  Scanderbeg’s  fist*.  In 
conclusion,  I kiss  thy  delicate  little  hands. — From  the 
Flow'crpot  Inn,  this  day,  Sunday.” 

Having  written  this  letter,  and  sealed  it  with  a w'afer, 
he  placed  it  in  the  dog’s  mouth,  saying,  Run  oflF  as 
fast  as  you  can,  and  take  this  to  the  king’s  daughter ; 
give  it  to  no  one  else,  but  place  it  in  the  hand  of  that 
silver-faced  maiden  herself.” 

Away  ran  the  dog  to  the  palace  as  if  he  were  flying, 
and  going  up  the  stairs  he  found  the  king,  who  was  still 
paying  compliments  to  the  country  cloum.  When  the 
man  saw  the  dog  with  the  letter  in  his  mouth,  he  ordered 
it  to  be  taken  frmn  him  ] but  the  dog  would  not  give  it 
to  any  one,  and  bounding  up  to  Menechella  he  placed  it 
in  her  hand.  Then  Menechella  rose  from  her  seat,  and 
making  a curtsey  to  the  king,  she  gave  him  the  letter  to 
read ; and  M'hen  the  king  had  read  it,  he  ordered  that 
the  dog  should  be  followed,  to  see  where  he  went,  and 
that  his  master  should  be  brought  before  him.  So  two 

* Scanderbeg  was  a faiuoua  Albanian  hero,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  who  withatood 
the  whole  power  of  Turkey. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


85 


of  the  courtiers  immediately  followed  the  dog,  until  they 
came  to  the  tavern,  where  they  found  Cienzo;  and 
delivering  the  message  from  the  king,  they  conducted 
him  to  the  palace,  into  the  presence  of  the  king,  who 
asked  him  how  it  happened  that  he  boasted  of  having 
kUled  the  dragon,  since  the  heads  were  brought  by 
the  man  who  was  sitting  crowned  at  his  side.  And 
Cienzo  answered,  " That  fellow  deserves  a pasteboard 
mitre*  rather  than  a crown,  since  he  has  had  the  im- 
pudence to  tell  you  a bouncing  lief.  But  to  prove  to 
you  that  I have  done  the  deed,  and  not  this  rascal, 
order  the  heads  to  be  produced,  for  none  of  them  can 
speak  to  the  proof  without  a tongue,  and  these  I have 
brought  with  me  as  witnesses  to  convince  you  of  the 
truth.^^ 

So  sapng  he  pulled  the  tongues  out  of  his  pocket, 
while  the  countryman  was  struck  all  of  a heap,  not 
knowing  what  would  be  the  end  of  it ; and  the  more 
so  when  Menechella  added,  “ This  is  the  man  ! Ah  you 
dog  of  a countryman,  a pretty  trick  you  have  played 
me !”  When  the  king  heard  this,  he  took  the  crown 
from  the  head  of  that  false  loon,  and  placed  it  on 
Cienzo^s ; and  he  was  on  the  point  of  sending  the  fel- 
low to  the  galleys,  but  Cienzo  begged  the  king  to  have 

* That  is,  to  be  himg : see  Note,  p.  83. 

t Daret*  a rentennere  vetieAe  pe  Uanterne, — a common  expression. 


Digitized  by  Google 


86 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


mercy  on  him,  and  to  confound  his  wickedness  with 
courtesy.  Then  the  tables  were  spread,  and  there  was 
a royal  banquet ; which  being  ended,  they  went  to  rest 
in  a splendid  bed. 

When  morning  came,  and  the  Sun,  brandishing  the 
two-handed  sword  of  the  Light  in  the  midst  of  the  Stars, 
cries,  Back,  you  rabble !”  Cienzo,  standing  at  the 
window,  saw  at  a house  opposite  a fair  young  girl ; and 
turning  round  to  Menechella,  he  said,  “ What  beautiful 
creature  is  that  standing  in  yon  window  opposite  — 
**  What  does  that  matter  to  you  ?”  answered  his  wife : 
'^what  are  you  staring  at?  what  fancy  have  you  got 
in  your  head  now  ?”  Upon  this  Cienzo  hung  his  head, 
like  a cat  that  has  been  up  to  some  mischief,  and  said 
nothing;  but  making  a pretence  of  going  out  on  an 
affair  of  business,  he  left  the  palace,  and  went  to  the 
house  of  the  maiden  opposite,  who  was  verily  an  exqui- 
site morsel ; you  might  fancy  yourself  looking  at  a de- 
licate junket,  a sugar  pasty ; she  never  turned  the  but- 
tons* of  her  eyes,  but  she  made  an  amorous  blister  on 
all  hearts ; she  never  opened  the  saucepan  of  her  lips,  but 
she  poured  scalding  water  upon  souls ; she  never  moved 
a foot,  but  she  pressed  down  the  shoulders  of  him  who 
hung  suspended  by  the  cord  of  hopef.  But  beside  all 

* Alluding  to  the  manner  of  forming  a fontanel  in  Italy  with  a small  heated  iron 
ball  or  button. 

t The  hangman  sat  on  the  shoulders  of  a person  executed,  to  hasten  his  death. 


Digitized  by  Google 


TUB  MERCHANT. 


87 


these  bewitching  charms,  she  possessed  a magic  power, 
by  w'hich,  whenever  she  wished  it,  she  spellbound  and 
chained  men  with  her  hair,  as  she  now  did  Cienzo, 
who  had  no  sooner  set  foot  in  the  house  than  he  w as 
instantly  held  fast  like  a colt  with  a clog  to  its  foot. 

Meanwhile  Meo,  the  younger  brother,  hearing  no 
tidings  of  Cienzo,  took  it  into  his  head  to  go  in  search 
of  him  : so  he  asked  leave  of  his  father,  who  gave  him 
another  horse  and  another  enchanted  dog.  Then  Mco 
set  out,  and  travelled  on  and  on,  till  in  the  evening 
he  came  to  the  very  tower  where  Cienzo  had  been ; and 
the  master  of  it,  thinking  it  was  Cienzo,  received  him 
with  the  greatest  affection  in  the  world,  and  offered  him 
money,  but  Meo  would  not  accept  it.  When  Meo  saw 
all  the  kindness  and  attention  shown  him,  it  occurred 
to  him  that  his  brother  must  have  been  there,  and  this 
gave  him  hope  of  finding  him.  So  as  soon  as  the  Moon, 
the  enemy  of  poets,  turned  her  back  upon  the  Sun,  Meo 
set  out  again,  and  travelled  on  until  he  came  to  the 
palace  of  the  fairy,  who,  thinking  it  was  Cienzo,  received 
him  with  the  utmost  kindness,  saying  again  and  again, 
^'Welcome,  dear  youth,  who  saved  my  life!”  Meo 
thanked  her  for  her  kindness,  but  said,  Excuse  my  not 
staying  longer  now,  as  I am  in  haste.  Adieu,  till  we 
meet  again  on  my  return  1”  Away  w'ent  Mco,  rejoicing 
in  his  heart  at  finding  traces  of  his  brother  wherever  he 


Digitized  by  Google 


88 


THE  PENTAME&ONE. 


went ; and  lie  journeyed  on  and  on,  until  in  the  morn- 
ing he  arrived  at  the  king^s  palace,  just  at  the  moment 
when  Cienzo  was  bewitched  by  the  fairy^s  hair.  Then 
Meo  went  into  the  palace,  and  was  received  by  the  ser- 
vants mth  great  honour;  and  the  young  maiden  em- 
braced him  affectionately  and  said,  “ Welcome  back,  my 
husband ! the  morning  passes,  the  evening  comes,  when 
every  bird  returns  to  seek  its  nest.  Where  hast  thou 
been  all  this  while,  my  Cienzo  ? how  couldst  thou  re- 
main away  from  Menechella  ? thou  hast  taken  me  out 
of  the  dragon^s  jaws,  and  now  thrustest  me  into  the 
throat  of  jealousy,  since  thou  dost  not  keep  me  ever 
before  the  mirror  of  thine  eyes.” 

Meo,  who  was  a clever  fellow,  instantly  thought  to 
himself  that  this  must  be  his  brother's  wife ; and  turn- 
ing to  Menechella,  he  excused  his  absence,  wishing  not 
to  undeceive  her,  and  embracing  her  they  went  to  din- 
ner. But  when  the  Moon,  like  a brood-hen,  calls  toge- 
ther the  Stars  to  pick  up  the  dewdrops,  they  all  retired 
to  rest ; and  Meo,  pretending  to  be  unwell,  begged  to 
sleep  in  a room  alone. 

The  next  morning,  when  the  Night  being  pursued  by 
the  Sun,  the  Twilight  gives  her  time  to  collect  her  bun- 
dles and  be  off,  Meo,  who  was  standing  at  the  window, 
beheld  the  same  maiden  who  had  entrapped  Cienzo; 
and  being  much  pleased  with  her,  he  said  to  Menechella, 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


89 


Who  is  that  hussy  standing  at  yon  window  And 
Menechella  in  a great  rage  replied,  “ So  so,  if  matters 
stand  thus,  I know  where  I am : yesterday  you  teased 
me  about  that  ugly  face,  and  I fear  that  the  tongue 
goes  in  truth  to  the  aching  tooth.  You  ought  however 
to  pay  me  some  respect,  for  at  all  events  I am  the 
daughter  of  a king,  and  every  clod  of  dirt  has  its  use ; 
but  if  I find  you  out,  take  care  lest  I act  like  a mad 
person,  and  make  the  chips  fly  through  the  air.” 

Meo,  who  had  eaten  bread  from  more  than  one  oven, 
soothed  her  with  soft  words,  and  said  and  swore  that 
he  would  not  exchange  his  wife  for  the  most  beautiful 
creature  in  the  world,  and  that  she  was  the  very  core 
of  his  heart ; until  Menechella,  reconciled  at  length  by 
these  words,  went  into  a closet,  to  have  the  waiting* 
maids  pass  the  glass  over  her  face*,  braid  her  hair, 
dye  her  eyebrows,  and  in  short  adorn  her,  so  that  she 
might  appear  still  more  beautiful  to  her  supposed  hus- 
band. 

In  the  meanwhile  Meo,  who  began  to  suspect  from 
what  had  fallen  from  Menechella  that  Cienzo  was  stay- 
ing at  the  house  of  that  maiden,  took  the  little  dog, 
and  leaving  the  palace  went  to  her  house ; and  hardly 
had  he  entered  the  door  when  she  exclaimed,  ‘‘Hairs 
of  mine,  bind  this  man  !”  But  Meo  lost  no  time,  and 

* An  old  practice,  to  poliah  the  skin. 


Digitized  by  Google 


90 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


instantly  cried,  “ Quick,  little  dog,  eat  up  this  woman  !” 
^Tiereupon  the  dog  flew  at  her  and  swallowed  her  do^vn 
like  the  yolk  of  an  egg.  Then  Meo  went  further  into 
the  house,  and  there  he  found  his  brother  seemingly  en- 
chanted; but  laying  two  of  the  dog's  hairs  upon  him, 
Cienzo  appeared  to  awake  as  if  from  a deep  sleep.  Then 
Meo  told  his  brother  all  that  had  happened  to  him  on 
his  travels,  and  lastly  at  the  palace ; and  he  was  going 
on  to  tell  him  of  Mencehella,  and  how  she  had  mistaken 
him,  when  Cienzo  in  a sudden  fit  of  jealousy  snatehed 
up  an  old  sword,  and  cut  off  his  brother's  head  like  a 
cucumber. 

Hearing  the  rout  the  king  and  his  daughter  both 
came  out ; and  when  Mcnechclla  saw  that  Cienzo  had 
slain  a man  exactly  hke  himself,  she  asked  him  the  cause. 
And  Cienzo  said  to  her,  “ Ask  yourself,  you  unfaithful 
woman ; it  is  all  through  yoiu:  fault  that  I have  killed 
him." — “ Alas  !'.'  said  Menechella,  how  many  are  slain 
wrongfully  ! a brave  deed  truly  you  have  done !"  And 
then  she  told  him  how  innocent  and  discreet  his  brother 
had  been. 

WTien  Cienzo  heard  this,  he  repented  bitterly  the 
error  he  had  committed  in  his  sudden  passion  (the  son 
of  a hasty  judgement  and  the  father  of  stupidity)  and 
he  tore  his  hair  with  grief.  But  suddenly  recolleeting 
the  plant  which  the  dragon  had  shown  him,  he  rubbed 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MERCHANT. 


91 


it  upon  his  brother’s  neck,  which  instantly  drew  close 
and  joined  on  to  the  head,  so  that  Meo  became  sound 
and  well  again.  Then  Cienzo  embraced  his  brother 
joyfully,  begging  him  to  pardon  his  hasty  passion,  and 
the  wrong  he  had  done  in  sending  him  out  of  the  world 
without  first  hearing  the  afiair  to  the  end.  AVhereupon 
they  all  went  in  a coach  to  the  palace,  whither  they  sent 
to  invite  Antoniello,  together  with  all  his  family ; and 
Antoniello  soon  got  into  great  favour  with  the  king, 
and  saw  in  the  person  of  his  son  the  saying  verified — 

A straight  port  to  a crooked  ship*.” 


As  soon  as  Ciulla  had  ended  her  stoiy,  which  was  as 
sweet  as  sugar,  Paola,  whose  turn  it  was  to  take  up  the 
dance,  began  as  follows. 


• * More  by  luck  than  wit.* 


Digitized  by  Google 


92 


THE  GOAT-FACE. 

All  the  ill  deeds  that  a man  commits  have  some  colour 
of  excuse, — either  contempt  which  provokes,  necessity 
which  compels,  love  which  blinds,  or  anger  which  breaks 
the  neck.  But  ingratitude  is  a thing  that  has  no  ex- 
cuse, true  or  false,  upon  which  it  can  fix;  and  it  is 
therefore  the  worst  of  vices,  since  it  dries  up  the  foun- 
tain of  compassion,  extinguishes  the  fire  of  love,  closes 
the  road  to  benefits,  and  causes  vexation  and  repentance 
to  spring  up  in  the  heart  of  the  ungrateful  person ; as 
you  will  see  in  the  story  which  I am  going  to  relate. 


A PEASANT  had  twelve  daughters,  not  one  of  whom  was 
a head  taller  than  the  next ; for  every  year  their  mother, 
good  Mistress  Ceccuzza,  presented  him  with  a little  girl ; 
so  that  the  poor  man,  to  support  his  family  decently,  went 
every  morning  as  a day-labourer  and  dug  hard  the  whole 
day  long.  Enough,  with  the  little  his  labour  produced, 
he  kept  his  flock  of  little  ones  from  dying  of  hunger. 

He  happened  one  day  to  be  digging  at  the  foot  of  a 
mountain,  the  spy  of  the  other  mountains  that  thrust 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOAT-FACE. 


93 


its  head  above  the  clouds  to  see  what  they  were  doing 
up  in.  the  sky,  and  close  to  a cavern  so  deep  and  dark 
that  the  sun  was  afraid  to  enter  it.  Out  of  this  cavern 
there  came  a green  lizard  as  big  as  a crocodile,  and  the 
poor  man  was  so  teirified  that  he  had  not  power  to  run 
away,  expecting  every  moment  the  end  of  his  days  from 
a gulp  of  that  ugly  animal.  But  the  lizard  approaching 
him  said,  “Be  not  afraid,  my  good  man,  for  I am  not 
come  here  to  do  you  any  harm,  but  only  for  your  good.” 
When  Masaniello  (for  that  was  the  name  of  the  la- 
bourer) heard  this,  he  fell  on  his  knees  and  said,  **  Mis- 
tress What’s-your-name,  I am  wholly  in  your  power; 
act  then  worthily,  and  have  compassion  on  this  poor 
trunk  that  has  twelve  branches  to  support.” 

“ It  is  on  this  very  account,”  said  the  lizard,  “ that  I 
am  disposed  to  serve  you ; so  bring  me  tomorrow  morn- 
ing the  youngest  of  your  daughters ; for  I will  rear  her 
up  like  my  own  child,  and  love  her  as  my  life.” 

At  this  the  poor  father  was  more  confounded  than  a 
thief  when  the  stolen  goods  ai’c  found  on  his  back ; for 
hearing  the  lizard  ask  him  for  one  of  his  daughters,  and 
that  too  the  tendcrest  of  them,  he  concluded  that  the 
cloak  was  not  without  wool  on  it,  and  that  she  wanted 
her  for  a tit-bit  to  stay  her  appetite.  Then  he  said  to 
himself,  “ If  I give  her  my  daughter,  I give  her  my  soul ; 
if  I refuse  her,  she  will  take  this  body  of  mine ; if  I yield 


Digitized  by  Google 


94 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


her  up,  I am  robbed  of  my  heart ; if  I deny  her,  she  will 
suck  out  my  blood ; if  I consent,  she  takes  away  a part 
of  myself ; if  I refuse,  she  takes  the  whole.  What  shall 
I resolve  on  ? what  course  shall  I take  ? what  expe- 
dient shall  I adopt  ? Oh  what  an  ill  day^s  work  have  I 
made  of  it ! what  a misfortune  has  rained  down  from 
heaven  upon  me !” 

While  he  was  speaking  thus,  the  lizard  said  to  him, 
“ Resolve  quiekly,  and  do  what  I have  told  you,  or  else 
you  will  leave  your  rags  here ; for  so  I will  have  it,  and 
so  it  must,  be.”  Masaniello  hearing  this  deei*ee,  and 
having  no  one  to  whom  he  eould  appeal,  returned  home 
quite  melancholy,  as  yellow  in  the  face  as  if  he  had 
the  jaundice;  and  Ceccuzza,  seeing  him  so  moping  and 
crestfallen*,  ehoked  and  swoln,  said  to  him,  “What  has 
happened  to  you,  husband  ? have  you  had  a quarrel  with 
any  one  ? is  there  a warrant  out  against  you  ? or  is  the 
ass  dead?” 

“ Nothing  of  the  kind,”  answered  Masaniello;  “but 
a horned  lizard  has  put  me  into  a fright,  for  she  has 
threatened  that,  if  I do  not  bring  her  our  youngest 
daughter,  she  will  make  me  rue  it.  My  head  is  turn- 
ing round  like  a reel.  I know  not  what  fish  to  take ; 
on  the  one  side,  love  eonstrains  me ; on  the  other,  the 

* The  original  is  beautiful : appagliaruto  expresses  the  appearanee  of  a bird  when 
sick,  with  its  head  retracted  under  its  wings — ascelluto  is  with  its  wings  drooping. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOAT- PACE. 


95 


burden  of  my  family.  I love  Renzolla  dearly,  I love  my 
own  life  dearly.  If  I do  not  give  the  lizard  this  portion 
of  my  heart,  she  will  take  the  whole  compass  of  this 
unfortunate  body.  So  now,  Ceccuzza  dear,  advise  me, 
or  I am  ruined.” 

When  his  wife  heard  this,  she  said,  “ WTio  knows,  hus- 
band, but  this  may  be  a lizard  with  two  tails*  that  will 
make  om*  fortune  ? who  knows  but  this  lizard  may  put 
an  end  to  all  our  miseries  ? See  how  most  times  we 
ourselves  put  the  axe  to  our  foot,  and  when  we  should 
have  an  eagle’s  sight  to  discern  the  good  luck  that  is 
running  to  meet  us,  we  have  a cloth  before  our  eyes, 
and  the  cramp  in  our  hand  when  w^e  should  lay  hold  of 
it.  So  go,  take  her  aw'ay,  for  my  heart  tells  me  that 
some  good  fortune  awaits  the  poor  little  thing.” 

These  w'ords  pleased  Masanicllo ; and  the  next  morn- 
ing, as  soon  as  the  Sun  with  the  brush  of  his  rays 
whitewashed  the  Sky,  which  the  shades  of  Night  had 
blackened,  he  took  the  little  girl  by  the  hand  and  led 
her  to  the  cave.  As  soon  as  the  lizard,  who  w’as  on 
the  w'atch  for  the  countryman’s  coming,  saw  him,  she 
came  out  of  her  hiding-place,  and  taking  the  child,  gave 
the  father  a bagful  of  crown-pieces,  saying,  Go  now, 
marry  your  other  daughters  with  this  money,  and  live 

* The  Neapolitans  have  a belief,  that  he  who  finds  a lizard  with  two  tails  has  made 
his  fortune : it  has  become  proverbial.  • 


Digitized  by  Google 


96 


THE  PENTAMEROXE. 


happy^  Renzolla  has  found  both  father  and  mother ; 
and  happy  is  she  to  have  met  with  this  good  fortune.” 

Masaniello,  overjoyed,  thanked  the  lizard  and  went 
home  to  his  wife,  and  told  her  the  matter,  and  showed 
her  the  money,  with  which  they  married  all  their  other 
daughters,  and  had  enough  vinegar  remaining  for  them- 
selves to  enable  them  to  swallow  with  relish  the  toils 
of  life. 

ITie  hzard,  as  soon  as  she  got  Renzolla,  caused  a most 
beautiful  palace  to  appear,  and  placed  her  in  it,  and 
brought  her  up  in  such  state  and  magnificence  as  w ould 
have  dazzled  the  eyes  of  any  queen ; and  the  story  goes 
that  she  even  did  not  want  for  ant’s  milk*.  Her  food 
was  fit  for  a count,  her  clothing  for  a prince : she  had  a 
hundred  maidens  ready  to  wait  upon  her;  and  with 
such  good  treatment  in  a short  time  she  gi’ew  as  round 
as  an  oak-tree. 

It  happened,  as  the  king  was  out  hunting  in  these 
woods,  that  night  overtook  him ; and  as  he  stood  look- 
ing around,  not  knowing  where  to  lay  his  head,  he  saw 
a candle  shining  in  this  palace ; whereupon  he  sent  one 
of  his  servants  to  it,  to  pray  the  owmer  to  give  him  shel- 
ter. "NATien  the  servant  came  to  the  palace,  the  lizard 
appeared  before  him  in  the  shape  of  a beautiful  lady, 

Oreeka  lud  ‘ Bird's  nulk,’  nnd  we  say  ‘ Pigeon’s  milk,'  to  express  what  is 
'Wes  ‘Wolf's  eggs,' page  60. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOAT-PACE. 


97 


who,  after  hearing  his  message,  said  that  his  master 
should  be  a thousand  times  welcome,  and  that  neither 
bread  nor  knife  should  be  wanting  there.  The  king,  on 
hearing  this  reply,  w’ent  to  the  palace,  and  was  received 
like  a cavalier : a hundred  pages  went  out  to  meet  him 
with  lighted  torches,  so  that  it  appeared  like  the  grand 
funeral  of  a rich  man : a hundred  other  pages  brought 
the  dishes  to  the  table,  who  looked  like  so  many  at- 
tendants in  an  hospital  carrying  cups  of  broth  to  the 
sick  : a hundred  others  made  a deafening  din  with  mu- 
sical instruments;  but,  above  all,  Renzolla  served  the 
king,  and  handed  him  drink  with  such  gi*ace  that  he 
di'ank  more  love  than  wine. 

When  dinner  was  over,  and  the  tables  were  removed, 
the  king  went  to  bed,  and  Renzolla  herself  di’ew  the 
stockings  from  his  feet  and  the  heart  from  his  breast 
so  cleverly  that,  when  touched  by  her  fair  hand,  he 
felt  the  amorous  poison  rise  from  the  tips  of  his  feet  and 
infect  his  very  soul.  So,  to  prevent  his  death,  he  re- 
solved to  try  and  get  the  antidote  to  these  beauties ; and 
calhng  the  fairy  in  whose  care  Renzolla  was,  he  asked 
her  for  his  wife ; whereupon  the  fairy,  who  wished  for 
nothing  but  Renzolla^s  good,  not  only  freely  consented, 
but  gave  her  a dowry  of  seven  millions  of  gold. 

The  king,  overjoyed  at  this  piece  of  good  fortune, 
departed  with  Renzolla,  who,  ill-maunered  and  ungratc- 

H 


Digitized  by  Google 


98  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

ful  for  all  the  fairy  had  done  for  her,  went  oflf  with  her 
husband  without  uttering  a single  word  of  thanks.  Then 
the  fairy,  beholding  such  ingratitude,  cursed  her,  and 
wished  that  her  face  should  become  like  that  of  a she- 
goat ; and  hardly  had  she  uttered  the  words,  when  Ren- 
zolla^s  mouth  stretched  out,  with  a beard  a span  long 
on  it;  her  jaws  shrunk,  her  skin  hardened,  her  cheeks 
grew  hairy,  and  her  plaited  tresses  turned  to  pointed 

horns. 

When  the  poor  king  saw  this  he  was  thunder- 
struck, not  knowing  what  had  happened,  that  so 
erveot  a beauty*  should  be  thus  transformed ; and  with 
sighs  and  tears  he  every  moment  kept  exclaiming, 
« Where  are  the  locks  that  bound  me  ? where  are  the 
eyes  that  transfixed  me  ? where  is  the  mouth  that  was 
the  pitfall  of  my  soul,  the  trap  of  my  breath,  and  the 
ca'^e  of  my  heart?  must  I then  be  the  husband  of 
a she-goat  ? no,  no,  my  heart  shall  not  break  for  such 
a goat-face.”  So  saying,  as  soon  as  they  reached  his 
palace,  he  put  Renzolla  into  a kitchen  along  with  a 
chamber-maid,  giving  to  each  of  them  ten  bundles  of 
flax  to  spin,  and  desiring  them  to  have  the  thread  ready 

at  the  end  of  a week. 

The  maid,  in  obedience  to  the  king,  set  about  carding 
the  flax,  preparing  and  putting  it  on  the  distaff,  twirling 

• Na  bellezxa  a doge  $ole,—x  xers  common  expreicion. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOAT-FACE, 


99 


her  spindle,  reeling  it,  and  working  away  like  a dog ; so 
that  on  Saturday  evening  her  thread  was  all  done.  < But 
RenzoUa,  thinking  she  was  still  the  same  as  in  the  fairy^s 
house,  not  having  looked  at  herself  in  a glass,  threw  the 
flax  out  of  the  window,  saying,  “ A pretty  thing  indeed 
of  the  king  to  set  me  such  work  to  do  ! If  he  wants 
shirts  let  him  buy  them,  and  not  fancy  that  he  picked 
me  up  out  of  the  gutter.  But  let  him  remember  that  I 
brought  him  home  seven  millions  of  gold,  and  that  I 
am  his  wife  and  not  his  servant;  methinks  too  he  is 
somewhat  of  an  ass  to  treat  me  in  this  way.” 

Nevertheless,  when  Saturday  morning  came,  seeing 
that  the  maid  had  spun  all  her  share  of  the  flax,  Ren- 
zolla  w^as  greatly  afraid  of  getting  a httle  carding ; so 
away  she  went  to  the  palace  of  the  fairy,  and  told  her 
her  misfortune.  Then  the  fairy  embraced  her  with 
great  afiection,  and  gave  her  a bag  full  of  spun  thread, 
to  present  to  the  king,  and  show  him  what  a notable 
and  industrious  housewife  she  was.  RenzoUa  took  the 
bag,  and,  without  saying  one  word  of  thanks  for  the 
service,  she  went  to  the  royal  palace ; so  that  the  fairy 
was  quite  angered  at  the  conduct  of  this  graceless  girl. 

When  the  king  had  taken  the  thread,  he  gave  two 
little  dogs,  one  to  RenzoUa  and  one  to  the  maid,  telhng 
them  to  feed  and  rear  them.  The  maid  reared  hers 
upon  bread-cnmibs,  and  treated  it  like  a child ; but  Ren- 

H 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


100 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


zolla  gi’uinbled, — " A pretty  thing  truly ! as  my  grand- 
father used  to  say,  prithee  are  we  living  under  the 
Turks?  have  I indeed  to  comb  and  wait  upon  dogs?” 
And  so  saying,  she  flung  the  dog  out  of  the  window, 
which  was  a very  difiereut  thing  to  leaping  through  the 
hoop. 

Some  months  after  this  the  king  asked  for  the  dogs ; 
whereat  Renzolla,  losing  heart,  ran  off*  again  to  the 
fairy ; and  at  the  gate  stood  an  old  man  who  was  the 
porter:  “"VMio  are  you,”  said  he,  ‘'and  whom  do  you 
want  ?”  Renzolla,  hearing  herself  accosted  in  this  off- 
hand way,  rephed,  “Don’t  you  know  me,  you  goat- 
beard  ?” 

“ Are  you  handing  me  the  knife  ?”  said  the  old  man  : 
“ this  is  the  thief  following  the  baihff : keep  off,  said 
the  tinker,  you  ’re  dirtying  me  ! throw  yourself  forward, 
or  you  ’ll  fall  on  your  back.  I a goat-beard  indeed ! 
you  ’re  a goat-beard  and  a half,  for  you  merit  this  and 
worse  for  your  presumption.  Wait  awhile,  you  impu- 
dent slut;  I’ll  presently  enlighten  you,  and  you  will 
see  to  what  your  airs  and  your  impudence  have  brought 
you.” 

So  saying,  he  ran  into  a little  room,  and  taking  a 
looking-glass  set  it  before  Renzolla,  who,  when  she  saw 
her  ugly,  hairy  visage,  had  like  to  have  died  of  terror. 
Rinaldo’s  horror  when  he  saw  himself  in  the  enchanted 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOAT-FACE. 


101 


shield,  so  changed  from  what  he  had  been*,  was  nothing 
to  her  dismay  at  seeing  her  face  so  altered  that  she  did  not 
know  herself.  Whereupon  the  old  man  said  to  her,  “You 
ought  to  recollect,  Renzolla,  that  you  are  the  daughter 
of  a peasant,  and  that  it  was  the  fairy  who  raised  you  to 
be  a queen ; but  you,  rude,  unmannerly  and  thankless 
as  you  are,  having  little  gratitude  for  such  favours,  have 
kept  her  waiting  in  the  ante-chamber  without  show- 
ing her  the  slightest  mark  of  affection.  So  take  and 
spend;  go  off  with  this,  and  come  back  for  the  rest. 
You  have  brought  the  quarrel  on  yourself : see  what  a 
face  you  have  got  by  it ! see  to  what  you  are  brought  by 
your  ingratitude;  for  through  the  fairy’s  malediction 
you  have  not  only  changed  face  but  condition.  But 
if  you  will  do  as  this  white-beard  advises,  go  and  look 
for  the  fairy ; throw  yourself  at  her  feet,  tear  your  beard, 
scratch  your  face,  beat  your  breast,  and  ask  pardon 
for  the  ill-treatment  you  have  shown  her ; for,  as  she  is 
tender-hearted,  she  will  be  moved  to  pity  at  your  mis- 
fortune.” 

BenzoUa,  who  was  touched  to  the  quick,  and  felt 
that  he  had  hit  the  nail  on  the  head,  followed  the  old 
man’s  advice.  Then  the  fairy  embraced  and  kissed  her, 
and  restoring  her  to  her  former  appearance,  she  put  on 
her  a dress  which  was  quite  heavy  with  gold ; and  placing 

* Tasso,  Gcr.  Lib.  cant,  xvi,  st.  31. 


Digitized  by  Google 


102 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


her  in  a magnificent  coach,  accompanied  by  a crowd  of 
servants,  she  brought  her  to  the  king.  When  the  king 
beheld  her,  so  beautiful  and  splendidly  attired,  he  loved 
her  as  his  own  life ; blaming  himself  for  all  the  misery 
he  had  made  her  endure,  but  excusing  himself  on  ac- 
count of  that  odious  goat-facc  which  had  been  the  came 
of  it.  Thus  Rcnzolla  lived  happy,  loving  her  husband, 
honouring  the  fairy,  and  showing  herself  grateful  to  the 
old  man,  having  learned  at  her  cost  that 

“ It  is  always  good  to  be  mannerly.” 


Every  one  present  sat  with  open  mouth  listening  to 
Paola^s  beautiful  story ; and  they  all  agreed,  that  the 
humble  man  is  like  a ball,  which  springs  the  higher  the 
harder  it  is  thrown  upon  the  ground ; and  hke  the  he- 
goat,  which  butts  with  greater  force  the  further  he  re- 
treats. But  Taddeo  having  made  a sign  to  Ciommetella 
to  follow  the  nibric,  she  speedily  set  her  tongue  in 
motion. 


Digitized  by  Google 


103 


THE  ENCHANTED  DOE. 

Great  is  doubtless  the  power  of  friendship,  whieh 
makes  us  bear  toils  and  perils  willingly  to  serve  a friend. 
We  value  our  wealth  as  a trifle,  honour  as  nothing  at  all, 
life  as  a straw,  when  we  can  give  them  for  a friend’s  sake  j 
fables  teach  us  this,  history  is  full  of  instances  of  it, 
and  I will  give  you  an  example  which  my  grandmother 
Semmonella — may  she  be  in  glory ! — ^used  to  relate  to 
me.  So  open  your  ears  and  shut  your  mouths,  and 
hear  what  I shall  tell  you. 


There  was  once  a certain  king  of  Long-Trellis  named 
Giannone,  who,  desiring  greatly  to  have  children,  had 
prayers  continually  made  to  the  gods  that  they  would 
grant  his  wish  : and  in  order  to  incline  them  the  more 
to  give  him  this  gratification,  he  was  so  charitable  to 
beggars  and  pilgrims  that  he  shared  with  them  all  he 
possessed.  But  seeing  at  last  that  matters  were  pro- 
tracted, and  there  was  no  end  to  putting  his  hand  into 


Digitized  by  Google 


10-1 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


his  pocket,  he  bolted  his  door  fast,  and  shot  with  a cross- 
bow at  whoever  came  near. 

Now  it  happened  that  at  this  time  a long-bearded 
Capuchin  was  passing  that  way,  and  not  knowing  that 
the  king  had  turned  over  a new  leaf,  or  perhaps  know- 
ing it  and  wishing  to  make  him  change  his  mind  again, 
he  went  to  Giannone  and  begged  for  entertainment  in 
his  house.  But,  with  a fierce  look  and  a terrible  growl, 
the  king  said  to  him,  “ If  you  have  no  other  candle  than 
this,  you  may  go  to  bed  in  the  dark.  The  time  is  gone 
by  when  Bertha  span* ; the  kittens  have  their  eyes  open, 
and  there  ^8  no  more  mammy  now  And  when  the 
old  man  asked  what  was  the  cause  of  this  change,  the 
king  replied,  “ From  my  desire  to  have  children,  I 
have  spent  and  have  lent  to  all  who  came  and  all  who 
went,  and  have  squandered  away  all  my  wealth.  At 
last,  seeing  that  the  beard  was  gone,  I stopped  and 
laid  aside  the  razor.” 

“ If  that  be  all,”  replied  the  old  man,  you  may  set 
your  mind  at  rest,  for  I promise  that  your  wish  shall 
be  forthwith  fulfilled,  on  pain  of  losing  my  ears.” 

“ Be  it  so,”  said  the  king,  “ and  I pledge  my  word 
that  I will  give  you  one  half  of  my  kingdom.”  And 
the  man  answ'ered,  “ Listen  now  to  me, — if  you  wish 
to  hit  the  mai'k,  you  have  only  to  get  the  heart  of  a sea- 

* A saying  well  known  also  in  Germany.  t <•  e-  * I amno  longer  a child  or  a fool.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ENCHANTED  DOE. 


105 


dragon,  and  have  it  drest  by  a young  maiden,  who,  from 
the  mere  steam  that  will  come  out  of  the  dish,  will  in- 
stantly become  in  the  family  way.  And  as  soon  as  the 
heart  is  drest,  give  it  to  the  queen  to  eat,  and  you  ^11 
see  that  what  I say  will  speedily  come  to  pass.*^ 

**  How  is  that  possible  ?”  replied  the  king ; **  to  tell 
you  the  truth,  it  seems  to  me  rather  hard  to  swal- 
low.” 

“ Do  not  be  surprised,”  said  the  old  man ; for  if  you 
read  the  fables  you  will  find,  that  as  Juno  went  through 
the  Olenian  fields  and  passed  over  a flower,  she  became 
pregnant  and  brought  forth  a child*.” 

“ If  that  be  the  case,”  replied  the  king,  I must  this 
very  moment  get  the  dragon’s  heai*t.  At  the  worst  I 
lose  nothing  by  the  trial.” 

So  he  sent  a hundred  fishermen  out,  and  they  got 
ready  all  kinds  of  fishing-tackle,  drag-nets,  casting-nets, 
seine-nets,  bow-nets,  and  fishing-lines ; and  they  tacked 
and  turned,  and  cruized  in  all  directions,  imtil  at  last 
they  caught  a di’agon ; then  they  took  out  its  heart  and 
brought  it  to  the  king,  who  gave  it  to  a handsome  young 
lady  to  dress.  So  she  shut  herself  up  in  a room,  and 
scarcely  had  she  set  the  heart  on  the  fire,  and  the  steam 
began  to  come  out  of  the  boiler,  when  not  only  did  the 
fair  cook  herself  feel  its  effects,  but  all  the  furniture 

• S«e  Orid’i  Futi,  v.  229,  et  teq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


106 


THE  PENTAMEBONE. 


in  the  room  followed  her  example,  and  in  the  course  of 
a few  days  they  all  lay-in ; so  that  the  state  bed  brought 
forth  a little  bed,  the  chest  a pretty  little  box,  the  chairs 
pretty  little  babies’  chairs,  the  table  a little  table,  and 
the  pitcher  brought  forth  a little  jug,  so  pretty  that  it 
was  quite  a pleasure  to  look  upon. 

When  the  heart  was  drest,  the  queen  had  no  sooner 
tasted  it  than  she  felt  the  effects,  and  in  a few  days  she 
and  the  young  lady  brought  forth  at  the  same  time 
each  of  them  a son,  so  like  the  one  to  the  other  that 
nobody  could  tell  which  was  which.  And  the  boys  grew 
up  together  in  such  love  for  one  another  that  they  could 
not  be  pai*ted  for  a moment ; and  their  attachment  was 
so  great  that  the  queen  began  to  be  jealous,  at  seeing  her 
son  testify  more  affection  for  the  son  of  one  of  her  ser- 
vants than  he  did  for  herself,  and  she  knew  not  in  what 
way  to  remove  this  thorn  from  her  eyes. 

Now  one  day  the  prince  wished  to  go  a-hunting  with 
his  companion;  so  he  had  a fire  lighted  in  a fireplace  in 
his  chamber,  and  began  to  melt  lead  to  make  balls ; and 
being  in  want  of  I know  not  what,  he  went  himself  to 
look  for  it.  Meanwhile  the  queen  came  in  to  see  what 
her  son  was  about,  and  finding  nobody  there  but  Can- 
neloro,  the  son  of  the  maiden,  she  thought  to  put  him 
out  of  the  world.  So  stooping  down  she  flung  the  hot 
bullet-mould  at  his  face,  which  hit  him  over  the  brow 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ENCHANTED  DOE. 


107 


and  gave  him  an  ugly  wound.  She  was  just  going  to 
repeat  the  blow,  when  her  son  Fonzo  came  in ; so  pre- 
tending that  she  was  only  come  to  see  how  he  was,  after 
giving  him  a few  trifling  caresses  she  went  away. 

Canneloro,  pulhng  his  hat  down  on  his  forehead, 
said  nothing  of  his  wound  to  Fonzo,  but  stood  quite 
quiet,  though  he  was  burning  with  the  pain.  And  as 
soon  as  they  had  done  making  balls,  he  requested  leave 
of  the  prince  to  go  out.  Fonzo,  all  in  amazement  at 
this  new  resolution,  asked  him  the  reason ; but  he  re- 
plied, “ Enquire  no  more,  my  dear  Fonzo ; let  it  suffice 
that  I am  obliged  to  go  away,  and  Heaven  knows  that 
in  parting  with  you,  who  are  my  heart,  the  soul  is 
ready  to  leave  my  bosom,  the  breath  to  depart  from  my 
body,  and  the  blood  to  run  out  of  my  veins ; but  since 
it  cannot  be  otherwise,  farewell,  and  keep  me  in  remem- 
brance V’ 

Then,  after  embracing  one  another  and  shedding 
many  tears,  Canneloro  went  to  his  own  room,  where 
taking  a suit  of  armour  and  a sword  (which  had  been 
brought  forth  by  another  weapon  at  the  time  when  the 
dragon's  heart  was  drest),  he  armed  himself  from  top  to 
toe ; and  having  taken  a horse  out  of  the  stable,  he  was 
just  putting  his  foot  into  the  stirrup  when  Fonzo  came 
weeping  and  said,  that  since  he  was  resolved  to  aban- 
don him,  he  should  at  least  leave  him  some  token  of  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


108 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


love,  to  diminish  his  anguish  for  his  absence.  There- 
upon Canneloro  laid  hold  on  his  dagger  and  stuck  it 
into  the  ground,  and  instantly  a fine  fountain  rose  up. 
Then  said  he  to  the  prince,  “ This  is  the  best  memorial 
I can  leave  you;  for  by  the  flowing  of  this  fountain 
you  will  know  the  course  of  my  life ; if  you  see  it  run 
clear,  know  that  my  life  will  likewise  be  clear  and 
tranquil ; if  you  see  it  turbid,  think  that  I am  passing 
through  troubles ; and  if  you  find  it  dry,  (which  Heaven 
forbid!)  depend  on  it  that  the  oil  of  my  lamp  is  all 
consumed,  and  I have  paid  the  toll  that  belongs  to 
Nature.” 

So  saying  he  took  his  sword,  and  sticking  it  into  the 
ground,  he  made  a plant  of  myrtle  spring  up,  saying  to 
the  prince,  “ As  long  as  you  see  this  myrtle  green,  know 
that  I am  green  as  a leek ; if  you  see  it  wither,  think 
that  my  fortunes  are  not  the  best  in  the  world ; but  if 
it  becomes  quite  diied  up,  you  may  say  a requiem*  for 
your  Canneloro.” 

So  saying,  after  embracing  one  another  again,  Can- 
neloro set  out  on  his  travels;  and  journeying  on  and  on, 
after  various  adventures  which  would  be  too  long  to 
recount, — such  as  quarrels  with  vetturini,  disputes  with 

• Bequie,  tcarpe,  e sroecoli.—The  two  first  words  arc  a corruption  of  reguie*eat 
in  pace,  and  zoccoli  (slippers)  is  added  to  answer  to  tcarpe  (shoes) ; or  because  the 
Frati  Zoccolanti  (Franciscans)  usually  attended  funerals.  The  dead  were  borne  to 
the  grave  drest,  and  with  shoes  on  them. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ENCHANTED  DOE. 


109 


landlords,  murderous  attacks  by  toll-gatherers,  perils  of 
bad  roads,  encounters  with  robbers, — he  at  length  ar- 
rived at  Long-Trellis*,  just  at  the  time  when  they  were 
holding  a most  splendid  tournament,  the  hand  of  the 
king’s  daughter  being  promised  to  the  victor.  Here 
Canneloro  presented  himself,  and  bore  him  so  bravely 
that  he  overthrew  all  the  knights  who  were  come  from 
divers  parts  to  gain  a name  for  themselves.  Where- 
upon Fenicia,  the  king’s  daughter,  was  given  to  him  to 
wife,  and  a great  feast  was  made. 

\^Tien  Canneloro  had  been  there  some  months  in 
peace  and  quiet,  an  unhappy  fancy  came  into  his  head 
for  going  to  the  chase.  Then  he  told  it  to  the  king, 
who  said  to  him,  Take  eare  of  your  legs,  my  son-in- 
law;  do  not  be  blinded  by  the  evil  one;  be  wise  and 
open  your  eyes,  sir ! for  in  these  woods  there  is  the 
devil’s  own  ogre,  who  changes  his  form  every  day,  one 
time  appearing  like  a wolf,  at  another  like  a lion,  now 
like  a stag,  now  like  an  ass,  now  like  one  thing  and  now 
like  another ; and  by  a thousand  stratagems  he  decoys 
those  who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  meet  him,  into  a cave, 
where  he  devours  them.  So,  my  son,  do  not  put  your 
safety  in  peril,  or  you  will  leave  your  rags  there.” 

Canneloro,  who  did  not  know  what  fear  was,  paid  no 

• Bttsile  forgot  lh«t  thia  was  the  name  of  Canncloro’a  birthplace,  from  whence  he 
set  out. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


110 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


heed  to  the  advice  of  his  father-in-law;  and  as  soon 
as  he  Sun  with  the  broom  of  his  rays  had  cleared 
away  the  soot  of  the  Night,  he  set  out  for  the  chase; 
and  on  his  way  he  came  to  a wood,  where,  beneath  the 
awning  of  the  leaves,  the  Shades  had  assembled  to  main- 
tain their  sway,  and  to  make  a conspiracy  against  the 
Sun.  The  ogre,  seeing  him  coming,  turned  himself  into 
a handsome  doe,  which  as  soon  as  Canneloro  perceived 
he  began  to  give  chase  to  her ; then  the  doe  doubled 
and  turned,  and  led  him  about  hither  and  thither  at 
such  a rate,  that  at  last  she  brought  him  into  the  very 
heart  of  the  wood,  where  she  made  such  a tremendous 
snow-storm  arise  that  it  looked  as  if  the  sky  was  going 
to  fall.  Canneloro,  finding  himself  in  front  of  the 
ogress  cave,  went  into  it  to  seek  shelter;  and  being 
benumbed  with  the  cold,  he  took  some  sticks  which  he 
found  within  it,  and  pulling  his  steel  out  of  his  pocket 
he  kindled  a large  fire.  As  he  was  standing  by  it 
to  dry  his  clothes,  the  doe  came  to  the  mouth  of  the 
cave  and  said,  “ Sir  knight,  pray  give  me  leave  to  warm 
myself  a little  while,  for  I am  shivering  with  the 
cold.”  Canneloro,  who  w'as  of  a kind  disposition,  said 
to  her,  “ Draw  near,  and  welcome.”  “ I would  gladly,” 
replied  the  doe,  “ but  that  I am  afraid  you  would  kill 
me.”  “ Fear  nothing,”  answered  Canneloro ; “ come, 
trust  to  my  word.”  '^If  you  wish  me  to  enter,” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ENCHANTED  DOE. 


Ill 


rejoined  the  doe,  tie  up  those  dogs,  that  they  may 
not  hurt  me,  and  tie  up  your  horse  that  he  may  not 
kick  me.^’ 

So  Canneloro  tied  up  his  dogs  and  fettered  his  horse, 
and  the  doe  said,  I am  now  half  assured,  but  unless 
you  bind  fast  your  sword,  by  the  soul  of  my  grand- 
sire  I will  not  go  in  !”  Then  Canneloro,  who  wished  to 
become  friends  with  the  doe,  bound  his  sword,  as  a 
countryman  does  his  when  he  carries  it  in  the  city 
for  fear  of  the  constables.  As  soon  as  the  ogre  saw 
Canneloro  defenceless,  he  took  his  own  form,  and  lay- 
ing hold  on  him,  flung  him  into  a pit  that  was  at  the 
bottom  of  the  cave,  and  covered  it  up  with  a stone, 
to  keep  him  to  eat. 

But  Fonzo,  who  morning  and  evening  visited  the 
myrtle  and  the  fountain,  to  learn  news  of  the  fate  of 
Canneloro,  finding  the  one  withered  and  the  other  trou- 
bled, instantly  thought  that  his  friend*  was  passing 
through  some  misfortunes ; and  being  desirous  of  giving 
him  succom*,  he  mounted  his  horse  w'ithout  asking  leave 
of  his  father  or  mother,  and  arming  himself  well,  and 
taking  two  enchanted  dogs,  he  went  rambling  through 
the  world ; and  he  roamed  and  rambled  here  and  there 
and  everywhere,  until  at  last  he  came  to  Long-Trellis, 
which  he  found  all  in  mourning  for  the  supposed  death 

* C(vdatcio, — an  intimate  £riend— an  Arabic  word,  Cardatch, 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


112 


THE  PENTAMERONB. 


of  Canneloro.  And  scarcely  was  he  come  to  the  court, 
when  every  one,  thinking  it  was  Canneloro  from  the 
likeness  he  bore  him,  hastened  to  tell  Fenicia  the  good 
news,  who  ran  tumbling  down  the  stairs,  and  embracing 
Fonao  exclaimed,  “ My  husband ! my  heart ! where 
have  you  been  all  this  time  ?” 

Fonzo  immediately  perceived  that  Canneloro  had 
come  to  this  country,  and  had  left  it  again;  so  he 
resolved  to  examine  the  matter  adroitly,  to  learn  from 
the  princesses  discourse  where  he  might  be  found ; and 
hearing  her  say  that  he  had  put  himself  in  such  great 
danger  by  that  accursed  hunting,  especially  if  the  cruel 
ogre  should  meet  him,  he  at  once  concluded  that  his 
friend  must  be  there. 

The  next  morning,  as  soon  as  the  Sun  had  gone  forth 
to  give  the  gilded  pills  to  the  Sky,  he  jumped  out  of  bed, 
and  neither  the  prayers  of  Fenicia  nor  the  commands  of 
the  king  could  keep  him  hack,  but  he  would  go  to  the 
chase.  So  mounting  his  horse,  he  went  with  the  enchanted 
dogs  to  the  wood,  where  the  same  thing  befell  him  that 
had  befallen  Canneloro ; and  entering  the  cave,  he  saw 
Canneloro^s  arms  and  dogs  and  horse  fast  bound,  by 
which  he  became  certain  that  his  friend  had  there  fallen 
into  a snare.  Then  the  doe  told  him  in  like  manner  to  tie 
his  arms,  dogs  and  horse ; but  he  instantly  set  them  upon 
her,  and  they  tore  her  to  pieces.  And  as  he  was  looking 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ENCHANTED  DOE. 


113 


about  for  some  other  traces  of  his  friend,  he  heard  his 
voice  down  in  the  pit ; so  lifting  up  the  stone  he  drew 
out  Canneloro,  with  all  the  others  whom  the  ogre  had 
buried  alive  to  fatten.  Then  embracing  each  other  with 
great  joy,  the  two  friends  went  home,  where  Fenicia, 
seeing  them  so  much  alike,  did  not  know  which  to  choose 
for  her  husband ; but  when  Canneloro  took  off  his  cap, 
she  saw  the  womid,  and  recognized  and  embraced  him. 
And  after  staying  there  a month,  taking  his  amusement, 
Fonzo  wished  to  return  to  his  own  country,  and  to  go 
back  to  his  nest ; and  Canneloro  wrote  by  him  to  his 
mother,  bidding  her  come  and  partake  of  his  greatness, 
which  she  did,  and  from  that  time  forward  he  never 
would  hear  cither  of  dogs  or*-of  hunting,  recollecting 
the  saying, 

“ Unhappy  is  he  who  corrects  himself  at  his  own  cost.’' 


This  story  was  ended  just  at  the  time  when  the  Sun, 
like  a student  expelled  from  school,  has  an  hour  allowed 
him  to  take  his  departure  from  the  fields  of  the  Sky ; 
whereupon  the  Prince  commanded  Fabiello,  the  master 
of  the  robes,  and  Ghiacovuccio,  the  steward  of  the  house- 
hold, to  be  called,  that  they  should  come  and  give  the 
dessert  to  the  day's  feast.  And  lo!  they  appeared  as  quick 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


114 


THE  EENTAMERONE. 


as  the  constable,  one  clothed  in  long  black  stockings,  a 
coat  in  the  shape  of  a bell,  with  buttons  as  big  as  a foot- 
ball, and  a flat  cap  drawn  over  his  ears ; the  other,  with  a 
trencher-cap,  a doublet,  and  tight  yellow  flannel  panta- 
loons. Then  entering  a bower  of  myrtle,  which  served 
as  a scene,  these  two  began  a pleasant  pastoral  dialogue, 
accompanied  with  such  gestures  and  grimaces  that  it 
threw  all  who  heard  it  into  fits  of  laughter*.  But  as 
the  grasshoppers  were  now  beginning  to  call  the  folks 
home  from  the  fields,  the  Prince  dismissed  the  women, 
requesting  them  to  return  the  following  morning  and 
continue  the  amusement;  then,  accompanied  by  the 
Slave,  he  retired  to  his  chamber. 

* CUepotiee  cacciare  lidiente  da  quanta  U’ntesero.  Literally,  ‘ that  you  might 
draw  the  teeth  of  all  who  heard  them,’— to  express  their  grinning. 


Digitized  by  Googli 


115 


^econti 


The  Dawn  had  gone  forth  to  grease  the  wheels  of  the 
Slinks  chariot,  and,  with  the  fatigue  of  stirring  the  fat 
into  the  wheelbox  with  a stick,  had  gi’own  as  red  as  a 
rosy  apple,  whenTaddeo,  after  stretching  his  hmbs,  called 
the  Slave;  and  dressing  themselves  in  a few  seconds,  they 
went  down  into  the  garden,  where  they  found  the  ten 
women  already  ari’ived.  Then,  after  gathering  for  each 
of  them  some  fresh  figs,  which  with  their  beggar^s  jacket, 
gallows  heads  and  ladies’  tear-drops*,  made  every  one’s 
mouth  water,  they  began  a thousand  sports  to  cheat  the 
time  until  the  banquet  was  ready ; among  which  they 
did  not  omit  either  ' Anca  Nicola,’  or  ^ Hopscotch,’  or 
* Look-ye,  wife,’  or  * Hide  and  seek,’  or  ‘ Comrade  I ’m 
wounded,’  or  ^ Proclamation  and  command,’  or  ^ Wel- 
come, master,’  or  Rentinola  my  Rentinola,’  or  ‘ Close 
the  cask,’  or  ^ Jump  a yard,’  or  ‘ Stone  in  the  bosom,* 

* Depicting  a ripe  fig,  with  a cracked  skin,  a bent  stalk,  and  drops  of  juice  upon  it. 

I 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


116 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


or  ^ Sca-fish/  or  'Angel/  or  ' Anola  tranola/  or  ‘ King 
Macebearer/  or  ' Klind  cat*,^  or  ' The  lamp  to  the  lamp/ 
or  ‘ Draw  my  curtain/  or  ‘ Long-beam/  or  ' Hen  and 
chiekens/  or  ' The  old  man  is  not  come/  or  ' Leap-frog/ 
or  ' Ride  a cheriy-stone/  or  ' Mannikin  leap  !’  or  ' The 
Robbers/  or  ' Come  hither*,  come  hither,^  or  ‘ AVho  has 
the  needle  and  thread  V or  ' Bird,  bird,  an  iron  handle/ 
or  ' Wine  or  vinegar,^  or  ' Open,  open  the  door  for  poor 
Gosshawk  !^t 

But  the  time  being  at  length  come  for  the  feast,  they 
all  seated  themselves  at  table ; and  when  they  had  eaten 
their  fill,  the  Prince  bade  Zeza  bear  herself  like  a brave 
woman  and  begin  her  story ; whereupon  Zeza,  who  had 
her  head  so  full  of  stories  that  they  overflowed  from  her 
lips,  calling  them  over  one  by  one,  selected  as  the  best 
that  which  I will  now  tell  you. 

* ‘Blindman’a  Buff’ 7 

t i.  e.  ‘ Frog  in  the  middle ' 7— The  Neapolitan  names  for  these  games,  and  remarks 
on  them,  I shall  probably  give  in  the  Notes  to  this  volume. 


Digitized  by  Google 


117 


PETROSINELLA*. 

So  great  is  my  desire  to  keep  the  Princess  amused,  that 
the  whole  of  the  past  night,  when  all  were  sound  asleep 
and  nobody  stirred  hand  or  foot,  I have  done  nothing 
but  turn  over  the  old  papers  of  my  brain,  and  ransack 
all  the  closets  of  my  memory,  choosing  from  among  the 
stories  which  that  good  soul  Mistress  Chiarella  Usciolo, 
my  uncle^s  grandmother  (whom  Heaven  take  to  glory  !) 
used  to  tell,  such  as  seemed  most  fitting  to  relate  to  you ; 
and  unless  I have  put  on  my  spectacles  upside  down,  I 
fancy  they  will  give  you  pleasure ; or,  should  they  not 
serve,  as  armed  squadrons,  to  drive  away  tedium  from 
your  mind,  they  will  at  least  be  as  trumpets  to  incite  my 
companions  here  to  go  forth  to  the  field,  with  greater 
power  than  my  poor  strength  possesses,  to  supply  by 
the  abundance  of  their  wit  the  deficiencies  of  my  dis- 
course. 


• Paraley. 


Digitized  by  Google 


118 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


There  was  once  upon  a time  a woman  named  Pasca- 
dozzia,  who  was  in  the  family  way;  and  as  she  was 
standing  one  day  at  a window,  which  looked  into  the 
garden  of  an  ogress,  she  saw  a beautiful  bed  of  parsley, 
for  which  she  took  such  a longing  that  she  was  on  the 
point  of  fainting  away ; and  being  unable  to  resist  her 
desire,  she  watched  until  the  ogress  went  out,  and  then 
plucked  a handful  of  it.  But  when  the  ogress  came 
home,  and  was  going  to  cook  her  pottage,  she  found 
that  some  one  had  been  at  the  parsley,  and  said,  “ 111 
luck  to  me  but  I ^11  catch  this  long-fingered  rogue*,  and 
make  him  repent  it,  and  teach  him  to  his  cost  that  every 
one  should  eat  off  his  o^vn  platter,  and  not  meddle  with 
other  folks’  cups.” 

The  poor  woman  went  again  and  again  down  into 
the  garden,  until  one  morning  the  ogress  met  her,  and 
in  a furious  rage  exclaimed,  ‘‘  Have  I caught  you  at 
last,  you  thief,  you  rogue  ! prithee  do  you  pay  the  rent 
of  the  garden,  that  you  come  in  this  impudent  way  and 
steal  my  plants?  by  my  faith,  but  I’ll  make  you  do 
penance  without  sending  you  to  Rome !” 

Poor  Pascadozzia,  in  a terrible  fright,  began  to  make 
excuses,  saying  that  neither  from  gluttony  nor  the  cra- 
ving of  hunger  had  she  been  tempted  by  the  devil  to 
commit  this  fault,  but  from  her  being  pregnant,  and  the 

* Literally — ‘ the  handle  of  this  hook.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


PETROSINELLA. 


119 


fear  she  had  lest  the  child  should  be  bom  with  a crop 
of  parsley  on  its  face ; and  she  added  that  the  ogress 
ought  rather  to  thank  her,  for  not  having  given  her  sore 
eyes*. 

Words  are  but  wind,”  answered  the  ogress ; " I am 
not  to  be  caught  >vith  such  prattle;  you  have  closed 
the  balance-sheet  of  life,  unless  you  promise  to  give  me 
the  child  you  bring  forth,  girl  or  boy,  whichever  it 
may  be.” 

Poor  Pascadozzia,  in  order  to  escape  the  peril  in  which 
she  found  herself,  swore  with  one  hand  upon  another  f to 
keep  the  promise  : so  the  ogress  let  her  go  free.  But 
when  her  time  was  come,  Pascadozzia  gave  birth  to  a 
little  girl,  so  beautiful  that  she  was  a joy  to  look  upon, 
who,  from  having  a fine  sprig  of  parsley  on  her  bosom, 
was  named  Petrosinella.  And  the  little  girl  grew  from 
day  to  day,  until  when  she  was  seven  years  old  her 
mother  sent  her  to  school ; and  every  time  she  went 
along  the  street  and  met  the  ogress,  the  old  woman  said 
to  her,  Tell  your  mother  to  remember  her  promise.” 

t 

And  she  went  on  repeating  this  message  so  often,  that 
the  poor  mother,  having  no  longer  patience  to  listen  to 
the  music,  said  one  day  to  Petrosinella,  " If  you  meet  the 

* It  is  the  common  belief  in  Naples,  that  if  a person  leaves  an;  wish  which  a 
pregnant  woman  expresses  ungratified,  this  disease  of  the  eyes  (agliarvio)  is  the 
punishment. 

t Making  the  sign  of  the  cross.  The  Irish  cross  their  fingers  in  the  same  wa;. 


Digitized  by  Google 


120 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


old  woman  as  usual^  and  she  reminds  you  of  the  hateful 
promise,  answer  her,  “ Take  it !” 

When  Petrosinella,  who  dreamt  of  no  ill,  met  the 
ogress  again,  and  heard  her  repeat  the  same  words,  she 
answered  innocently  as  her  mother  had  told  her ; where- 
upon the  ogress,  seizing  her  by  her  hair,  earned  her  off 
to  a wood,  which  the  horses  of  the  Sun  never  entered,  not 
having  paid  the  toll  to  the  pastures  of  those  Shades.  Then 
she  put  the  poor  girl  into  a tower,  which  she  caused  to 
arise  by  her  art,  and  which  had  neither  gate  nor  ladder, 
but  only  a little  window,  through  which  she  ascended 
and  descended  by  means  of  Petrosinella’s  hair,  which 
was  very  long,  as  the  sailor  is  used  to  run  up  and  down 
the  mast  of  a ship. 

Now  it  happened  one  day,  when  the  ogress  had  left 
the  tower,  that  Petrosinella  put  her  head  out  of  the  little 
window,  and  let  loose  her  tresses  in  the  sun ; and  the  son 
of  a prince  passing  by  saw  those  two  golden  banners, 
which  invited  all  souls  to  enlist  under  the  standard  of 
Love ; and  beholding  with  amazement  in  the  midst  of 
those  gleaming  waves  a siren’s  face,  that  enchanted  all 
hearts,  he  fell  desperately  in  love  with  such  wonderful 
beauty ; and  sending  her  a memorial  of  sighs,  she  de- 
creed to  receive  him  into  favour.  Matters  went  on  so 
well  with  the  prince,  that  there  was  soon  a nodding  of 
heads  and  a kissing  of  hands,  a winking  of  eyes  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


PETROSINELLA. 


121 


bowing,  thanks  and  oflFerings,  hopes  and  promises,  soft 
words  and  compliments.  And  when  this  had  continued 
for  several  days,  Petrosinella  and  the  prince  became  so 
intimate  that  they  made  an  appointment  to  meet,  and 
agreed  that  it  should  be  at  night,  when  the  Moon 
plays  at  hide-and-seek*  with  the  Stars ; and  that  Petro- 
sinella should  give  the  ogress  some  poppy-juice,  and 
draw  up  the  prince  with  her  tresses.  So  when  the  ap- 
pointed hour  came,  the  prince  went  to  the  tower,  where 
Petrosinella,  letting  fall  her  hair  at  a given  signal,  he 
seized  it  with  both  his  hands,  and  cried,  “ Draw  up 
And  when  he  was  drawn  up,  he  crept  through  the  httle 
window  into  the  chamber. 

The  next  morning,  before  the  Sun  taught  his  steeds 
to  leap  through  the  hoop  of  the  Zodiac,  the  prince  de- 
scended by  the  same  golden  ladder,  to  go  his  way  home. 
And  having  repeated  these  visits  many  times,  a gossip  of 
the  ogress,  who  was  for  ever  prying  into  things  that  did 
not  concern  her,  and  poking  her  nose  into  every  comer, 
got  to  find  out  the  secret,  and  told  the  ogress  to  be  upon 
the  look-out,  for  that  Petrosinella  made  love  with  a 
certain  youth,  and  she  suspected  that  matters  would 
go  further ; adding,  that  she  saw  what  was  going  on, 
and  feared  they  would  be  off  and  away  before  May  f* 

* Pattara  muta — a Neapolitan  game,  in  irhich  the  children  follow  one  another 
■lowly  in  a line. 

t In  Naples  remorals  inyariably  take  place  in  May. 


Digitized  by  Google 


122 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


The  Ogress  thanked  her  gossip  for  the  information,  and 
said  she  would  take  good  care  to  stop  up  the  road ; and 
as  to  Petrosinella,  it  was  moreover  impossible  for  her  to 
escape,  as  she  had  laid  a spell  upon  her,  so  that,  unless 
she  had  in  her  hand  the  three  gallnuts  which  were  in 
a rafter  in  the  kitchen,  it  would  be  labour  lost  to  at- 
tempt to  get  away. 

Whilst  they  were  talking  thus  together,  Petrosinella, 
who  stood  with  her  cars  wide  open,  and  had  some  suspi- 
cion of  the  gossip,  overheard  all  that  passed.  And  when 
Night  had  spread  out  her  black  garments  to  keep  them 
from  the  moth,  and  the  prince  had  come  as  usual,  she 
made  him  climb  on  to  the  rafters  and  find  the  gallnuts, 
knowing  well  what  eftect  they  would  have,  as  she  had 
been  enchanted  by  the  ogress.  Then,  having  made  a 
rope-ladder,  they  both  descended  to  the  ground,  took  to 
their  heels,  and  scampered  off  towards  the  city.  But  the 
gossip  happening  to  see  them  come  out,  set  up  a loud 
halloo,  and  began  to  shout  and  make  such  a noise 
that  the  ogress  awoke ; and  seeing  that  Petrosinella  had 
fled,  she  descended  by  the  same  ladder,  which  was  fas- 
tened to  the  window,  and  set  off  running  after  the  lovers, 
who,  when  they  saw  her  coming  at  their  heels  faster 
than  a horse  let  loose,  gave  themselves  up  for  lost.  But 
Petrosinella,  recollecting  the  gallnuts,  quickly  threw  one 
on  the  ground,  and  lo ! instantly  a Corsican  bulldog  start- 


Digitized  by  Google 


FETB08INELLA. 


123 


ed  up, — O mother,  such  a terrible  beast ! — which  with 
open  jaws  and  barking  loud  flew  at  the  ogress  as  if  to 
swallow  her  at  a mouthful.  But  the  old  woman,  who  was 
more  cunning  and  spiteful  than  the  devil,  put  her  hand 
into  her  poeket,  and  pulling  out  a piece  of  bread,  gave  it 
to  the  dog,  which  made  him  hang  his  tail  and  allay 
his  fury.  Then  she  turned  to  run  after  the  fugitives 
again ; but  Petrosinella,  seeing  her  approach,  threw  the 
second  gallnut  on  the  ground,  and  lo  ! a fierce  lion 
arose,  who,  lashing  the  earth  with  his  tail,  and  shak- 
ing his  mane,  and  opening  wide  his  jaws  a yard  apart, 
was  just  preparing  to  make  a slaughter  of  the  ogi*ess ; 
when,  turning  quickly  back,  she  stripped  the  skin  ofi" 
an  ass  that  was  grazing  in  the  middle  of  a meadow,  and 
ran  at  the  lion,  who,  fancying  it  a real  jackass,  was  so 
frightened  that  he  boimded  away  as  fast  as  he  eould. 

The  ogress,  having  leaped  over  this  second  ditch, 
turned  again  to  pursue  the  poor  lovers,  who,  hearing  the 
clatter  of  her  heels  and  seeing  the  cloud  of  dust  that  rose 
up  to  the  sky,  conjectured  that  she  was  eoming  again. 
But  the  old  woman,  who  was  every  moment  in  dread  lest 
the  lion  should  pursue  her,  had  not  taken  off  the  ass^s 
skin ; and  when  Petrosinella  now  threw  down  the  third 
gallnut,  there  sprang  up  a wolf,  who,  without  giving  the 
ogress  time  to  play  any  new  trick,  gobbled  her  up  just  as 
she  was,  in  the  shape  of  a jaekass.  So  the  lovers,  being 


Digitized  by  Google 


124 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


now  freed  from  danger,  went  their  way  leisurely  and  * 
quietly  to  the  kingdom  of  the  prince,  where,  with  his 
father’s  free  consent,  he  took  Petrosinella  to  wife ; and 
thus,  after  all  these  storms  of  fate,  they  experienced  the 
truth,  that 

“ One  hour  in  port,  the  sailor  freed  from  fears 
Forgets  the  tempests  of  a hundred  years.” 


Zeza’s  story  w'as  listened  to  with  such  delight  to  the 
end,  that,  had  it  even  continued  for  an  hour  longer,  the 
time  would  have  appeared  only  a moment.  But  it  now 
being  Cecca’s  turn,  she  began  as  follow  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


t 


Digitized  by  Google 


125 


THE  THREE  SISTERS*. 

It  is  a great  truth,  if  wc  make  the  saying  good,  that  from 
the  same  wood  are  formed  the  statues  of  idols  and  the 
rafters  of  the  gallows,  kings^  thrones  and  cobblers’  stalls; 
and  another  strange  thing  is,  that  from  the  same  rags 
is  made  the  paper  on  which  the  wisdom  of  sages  is  re- 
corded, and  the  cro^vn  which  is  placed  on  the  head  of  a 
fool, — a thing  that  would  puzzle  the  cleverest  astrologer 
in  the  world.  The  same  too  may  be  said  of  a mother, 
who  brings  forth  one  good  daughter  and  another  bad, 
one  an  idle  hussy,  another  a good  housewife ; one  fair, 
another  ugly;  one  spiteful,  another  kind;  one  unfor- 
tunate, another  bom  to  good  luck, — who,  all  being  of 
one  family,  ought  to  be  of  one  nature.  But  leaving  this 
subject  to  those  who  know  more  about  it,  I will  merely 
give  you  an  example  of  what  I have  said,  in  the  story  of 
three  daughters  of  one  and  the  same  mother,  wherein 
you  will  see  the  difference  of  manners,  which  brought 

• The  title  of  thU  story  Is  "Verde  Prato,”— Green  Meadow  ; but  as  this  name 
seems  to  have  no  connection  with  the  story,  I have  changed  it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


126 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


the  wicked  daughters  into  a ditch,  and  the  good  daugh- 
ter to  the  top  of  the  wheel  of  fortune. 


There  was  one  time  a woman  who  had  three  daughters, 
two  of  whom  were  so  unlucky  that  nothing  ever  suc- 
ceeded with  them;  all  their  projects  went  wrong,  all 
their  hopes  were  tuimcd  to  chaff.  But  the  youngest,  who 
was  named  Nella,  was  bom  to  good  luck,  and  I verily 
believe  that  at  her  birth  all  things  conspired  to  bestow 
on  her  the  best  and  choicest  gifts  in  their  power : the 
Sky  gave  her  the  perfection  of  its  light,  Venus  a match- 
less beauty  of  form.  Love  the  first  dart  of  his  power. 
Nature  the  flower  of  manners.  She  never  set  about 
any  work,  that  it  did  not  go  off  to  a nicety ; she  never 
took  anything  in  hand,  that  it  did  not  succeed  to  a hair ; 
she  never  stood  up  to  dance,  that  she  did  not  sit  down 
with  applause.  On  which  account  she  was  envied  by  her 
jealous  sisters,  and  yet  not  so  much  as  she  was  loved 
and  wished  well  to  by  all  others;  and  greatly  as  her 
sisters  desired  to  put  her  underground,  still  much  more 
did  other  folks  carry  her  on  the  palms  of  their  hands. 

Now  there  was  in  that  country  an  enchanted  prince, 
who  sailed  along  the  sea  of  her  beauty,  and  flung  out 
the  hook  of  amorous  servitude  to  this  beautiful  gold- 


Digilized  by  Google 


TH£  THREE  SISTERS. 


127 


fish,  until  at  length  he  caught  her  by  the  gills  of  affec- 
tion and  made  her  his  own.  And  in  order  that  they 
might  enjoy  one  another’s  company  without  exciting 
the  suspicion  of  the  mother,  who  was  a wicked  woman, 
the  prince  made  a crystal  passage,  which  led  from  the 
royal  palace  directly  into  Nella’s  apartment,  although  it 
was  eight  miles  distant ; and  giving  her  a certain  pow- 
der, he  said,  Every  time  you  wish  to  feed  me,  like  a 
sparrow,  with  a sight  of  your  charming  beauty,  throw  a 
little  of  this  powder  into  the  fire,  and  instantly  I will 
come  through  the  passage  as  quick  as  a bird,  running 
. along  a crystal  road  to  gaze  upon  this  face  of  silver.” 
Having  arranged  it  thus,  not  a night  passed  that 
the  prince  did  not  go  in'  and  out,  backwards  and  for- 
wards, along  the  crystal  passage ; until  at  last  the  sis- 
ters, who  were  spying  the  actions  of  Nella,  found  out 
the  secret,  and  laid  a plan  to  put  a stop  to  the  sport. 
And  in  order  to  cut  the  thread  at  once,  they  Avent  and 
broke  the  passage  here  and  there  j so  that  when  the  un- 
happy  girl  threw  the  powder  into  the  fire,  to  give  the 
signal  to  her  lover,  the  prince,  who  used  always  to 
come  running  in  furious  haste,  hurt  himself  in  such  a 
manner  against  the  broken  crystal  that  it  was  truly  a 
pitiable  sight  to  see.  And  being  unable  to  pass  further 
on,  he  turned  back,  all  cut  and  slashed  like  a Dutch- 
man’s breeches.  Then  he  laid  himself  in  his  bed,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


128 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


sent  for  all  tlie  doctors  in  the  town ; but  as  the  crystal 
was  enchanted,  the  wounds  were  mortal,  and  no  human 
remedy  availed.  When  the  king  saw  this,  despairing  of 
his  son's  condition,  he  sent  out  a proclamation,  that 
whoever  would  em’e  the  wounds  of  the  prince, — if  a 
woman,  she  should  have  him  for  her  husband, — if  a man, 
he  should  have  half  his  kingdom. 

Now  when  Nclla,  who  was  pining  away  for  the  loss  of 
the  prince,  heard  this,  she  dyed  her  face,  and  disguised 
herself,  and  unknown  to  her  sisters  she  left  home,  to  go 
and  see  him  before  his  death. ' But  as  by  this  time  the 
Sun's  gilded  balls,  with  which  he  plays  in  the  fields  of 
Heaven,  were  running  towards  the  west,  night  overtook 
her  in  a wood,  close  to  the  house  of  an  ogre,  where,  in 
order  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  danger,  she  chmbed  up  into 
a tree.  Meanwhile  the  ogre  and  his  wife  were  sitting 
at  table,  wuth  the  windows  open,  in  order  to  enjoy  the 
fresh  air  while  they  ate ; and  as  soon  as  they  had  emptied 
their  cups,  and  put  out  the  lamps,  they  began  to  chat  of 
one  thing  and  another;  so  that  Nella,  who  was  as  near 
to  them  as  the  mouth  to  the  nose,  heard  every  word 
they  spoke. 

Among  other  things,  the  ogress  said  to  her  husband, 
“ My  pretty  Hairy-hidc,  tell  me,  what  news  ? what  do 
they  say  abroad  in  the  world?"  And  he  answered, 
*^Trust  me  there's  not  a hand's-breadth clean;  everything 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  SISTERS. 


129 


is  going  topsy-turvy  and  awry.^' — “ But  what  is  it  V* 
replied  his  wife. — “ Why,  I could  tell  pretty  stories  of 
all  the  confusion  that  is  going  on,^^  said  the  ogre ; for 
one  hears  things  that  are  enough  to  drive  one  mad, 
such  as  buffoons  rewarded  with  gifts,  rogues  esteemed, 
cowards  honoured,  robbers  and  assassins  protected,  and 
honest  men  little  thought  of  and  less  prized.  But  as 
these  things  are  enough  to  make  one  burst  nith  vexa- 
tion, I will  merely  tell  you  what  has  befallen  the  king^s 
son.  He  had  made  a crystal  path,  along  which  he 

used  to  go  to  visit  a pretty  lass ; but  by  some  means 
or  other,  I know  not  how,  all  the  road  has  been  broken ; 
and  as  he  was  going  along  the  passage  as  usual  he  has 
wounded  himself  in  such  a manner,  that  before  he  can 
stop  the  leak  the  whole  conduit  of  his  life  will  run  out. 
The  king  has  indeed  issued  a proclamation,  with  great 
promises  to  whoever  cures  his  son ; but  it  is  all  labour 
lost,  an(fthe  best  thing  he  can  do  is  quickly  to  get  ready 
mourning  and  prepare  the  funeral.^^ 

When  Nella  heard  the  cause  of  the  princess  illness, 
she  sobbed  and  wept  bitterly,  and  said  to  herself,  “ ^\Tio 
is  the  wicked  soul  that  has  broken  the  passage  along 
which  my  painted  bird  used  to  pass,  so  that  the  channel 
through  which  my  spirits  run  may  break  But  as  the 
ogress  now  went  on  speaking,  Nella  was  as  silent  as  a 
mouse  and  listened. 

K 


Digitized  by  Google 


130 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


**  And  is  it  possible/’  said  the  ogress,  “ that  the  world 
is  lost  to  this  poor  prince,  and  that  no  remedy  can  be 
found  for  his  malady  ? Bid  physic  then  creep  into  the 
oven — bid  the  doctors  put  a halter  round  their  necks — 
bid  Galen  and  Mesue*  return  the  money  to  their  pupils, 
since  they  cannot  find  any  effectual  recipe  to  restore 
health  to  the  prince.” 

Hark-ye,  Granny,”  replied  the  ogre,  “ the  doctors 
are  not  called  upon  to  find  remedies  that  may  pass  the 
bounds  of  nature.  This  is  no  common  cholic  that  an 
oil-bath  might  remove ; it  is  not  a boil  to  be  cured  with 
fig-poultices,  nor  a fever  that  will  jield  to  medicine  and 
diet;  much  less  are  these  ordinary  wounds  which  re- 
quire pledgets  of  lint  and  oil  of  hypericon;  for  the 
charm  that  was  on  the  broken  glass  produces  the  same 
effect  as  onion-juice  does  on  the  iron  heads  of  arrows, 
which  makes  the  wound  incurable.  There  is  one  thing 
only  that  could  save  his  life ; but  don’t  ask  me  to  tell  it 
you,  for  it  is  a thing  of  importance.”  " Do  tell  me, 
dear  old  Long-tusk !”  cried  the  ogress ; " tell  me,  if 
you  would  not  see  me  die.”  ^^WeU  then,”  said  the 
ogre,  “ 1 will  tell  you,  provided  you  promise  me  not  to 
confide  it  to  any  living  soul ; for  it  would  be  the  ruin 
of  our  house  and  the  destruction  of  our  lives.”  " Fear 

• There  were  two  famous  phyaicians  of  this  name ; one  phjrsician  to  the  Khalif 
Haroun  al  Baschid  in  the  ninth  century ; the  other  lived  at  Cahira  in  the  eleventh 
century. — L. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  SISTERS. 


131 


nothing,  my  dear  sweet  little  husband, replied  the 
ogress j “for  you  shall  sooner  see  pigs  with  horns, 
apes  with  tails,  moles  with  eyes,  than  a single  word 
shall  pass  my  lips.”  And  so  saying  she  put  one 
hand  upon  the  other  and  swore  to  it.  “You  must 
know  then,”  said  the  ogre,  “ that  there  is  nothing  un- 
der the  sky  nor  above  the  ground  that  can  save  the 
prince  from  the  snares  of  death  but  our  fat;  if  his 
wounds  are  anointed  with  this,  his  soul  will  be  arrested 
which  is  just  on  the  point  of  leaving  the  dwelling  of  his 
body.” 

Nella,  who  overheard  all  that  passed,  gave  time  to 
Time,  to  let  them  finish  their  chat ; and  then  getting 
down  from  the  tree,  and  taking  heart,  she  knocked  at 
the  ogress  door,  crying,  “ Ah  ! my  good  ogrish  masttj^, 
I pray  you  for  charity,  alms,  some  sign  of  compassion  ! 
have  a little  pity  on  a poor,  miserable,  wretched  crea- 
ture, who  is  banished  by  fate  far  from  her  own  country 
and  deprived  of  all  human  aid,  who  has  been  overtaken 
by  night  in  this  wood  and  is  dying  of  cold  and  hunger.” 
And  crying  thus,  she  went  on  knocking  and  knocking 
at  the  door. 

Upon  hearing  this  deafening  noise,  the  ogress  was 
going  to  throw  her  half  a loaf  and  send  her  away ; but 
the  ogre,  who  was  more  greedy  of  Christian  flesh  than 
the  squirrel  is  of  nuts,  the  bear  of  honey,  the  cat  of  fish, 

K 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


132 


THE  FENTAMEKONE. 


the  sheep  of  salt,  or  the  ass  of  bran,  said  to  his  wife, 
**  Let  the  poor  creature  come  in ; for  if  she  sleeps  in  the 
fields,  who  knows  but  she  may  be  eaten  up  by  some 
wolf.'^  In  short  he  talked  and  talked  so  much  that  his 
wife  at  length  opened  the  door  for  Nella;  whilst,  with 
all  his  pretended  charity,  he  was  all  the  time  reckoning 
on  making  four  mouthfuls  of  her.  But  the  glutton 
counts  one  way  and  the  host  another ; for  the  ogre  and 
his  wife  having  drunk  till  they  were  fairly  tipsy  and  lain 
down  to  sleep,  Nella  took  a knife  from  a cupboard  and 
made  a hash  of  them  in  a trice ; then  she  put  all  the  fat 
into  a phial,  and  went  straight  to  the  court,  where  pre- 
senting herself  before  the  king  she  offered  to  cure  the 
prince.  At  this  the  king  was  overjoyed,  and  led  her  to 
the  chamber  of  his  son ; and  no  sooner  had  she  anointed 
him  well  with  the  fat,  than  the  wound  closed  in  a mo- 
ment, just  as  if  she  had  thrown  water  on  a fire,  and  he 
became  as  sound  as  a fish. 

When  the  king  saw  this,  he  said  to  his  son,  “ This 
good  woman  dcsciwes  the  reward  promised  by  the  pro- 
clamation, and  that  you  should  take  her  to  wife.”  But 
the  prince  replied,  “ It  is  hopeless,  for  I have  no  store- 
room full  of  hearts  in  my  body  to  share  among  so  many ; 
my  heart  is  already  disposed  of,  and  another  woman  is 
the  mistress  of  it.”  Nella,  hearing  this,  replied,  “ You 
should  no  longer  think  of  her  who  has  been  the  cause  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  SISTERS. 


133 


all  your  misfortune.^^ — ^‘My  misfortune  has  been  brought 
on  me  by  her  sisters,”  answered  the  prince,  and  they 
shall  repent  it.” — Then  do  you  really  love  her  ?”  said 
Nella : and  the  prince  replied,  “ More  than  my  own 
life.”  “Embrace me  then,”  said  Nella,  “for  I am  the 
fire  of  your  heart.^^  But  the  prince,  seeing  the  dark 
hue  of  her  face,  answered,  “ I should  sooner  take  you 
for  the  coal  than  the  fire;  so  keep  off — don’t  blacken 
me.”  Whereupon  Nella,  perceiving  that  he  did  not 
know  her,  called  for  a basin  of  clean  water  and  washed 
her  face ; and  as  soon  as  the  cloud  of  soot  was  removed, 
the  sun  shone  forth;  and  the  prince  recognizing  her, 
pressed  her  to  his  heart  like  a polype,  and  took  her  for 
his  wife.  Then  he  had  her  sisters  thrown  into  an  oven, 
that  like  leeches  they  might  discharge  in  the  ashes  their 
blood,  that  was  corrupted  by  envy,  thus  proving  the 
truth  of  the  old  saying, 

“No  evil  ever  went  mthout  punishment.” 


This  story  went  to  the  hearts  of  all  who  heard  it, 
and  they  praised  the  prince  a thousand  times  for  his 
conduct  to  Nella’s  sisters,  and  his  taking  the  measure 
of  their  jacket ; while  they  lauded  to  the  stars  the  deep 


Digitized  by  Google 


134 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


love  of  the  maiden,  who  had  with  such  pains  cured  the 
princess  wounds.  But  Taddeo,  making  a sign  for  all 
to  be  silent,  now  commanded  Meneca  to  do  her  part, 
and  she  consequently  paid  the  debt  in  the  following 
manner. 


Digitized  by  Google 


135 


VIOLET. 

Envy  is  a wind  which  blows  with  such  violence,  that  it 
throws  down  the  props  of  the  reputation  of  good  men, 
and  levels  with  the  ground  the  crops  of  good  fortune. 
But  very  often,  as  a punishment  from  Heaven,  when 
this  envious  blast  seems  as  if  it  would  cast  a person  flat 
on  the  ground,  it  aids  him  instead  to  attain  the  happi- 
ness he  is  expecting  sooner  even  than  he  hoped ; as  you 
will  hear  in  the  story  which  I shall  now  tell  you. 


There  was  once  upon  a time  a good  kind  of  man  named 
Cola  Aniello,  who  had  three  daughters.  Rose,  Pink  and 
Violet ; the  last  of  whom  was  so  beautiful  that  her  very 
look  was  a syrup  of  love,  which  relieved  the  hearts  of 
beholders  of  all  uneasiness.  Ciullone,  the  king^s  son, 
was  burning  with  love  of  her,  and  every  time  he  passed 
by  the  little  cottage  where  these  three  sisters  sat  at  work, 
he  took  off  his  cap  and  said,  (lood  day,  good  day. 


Digitized  by  Google 


136 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Violet !”  and  she  replied,  “Good  day,  king’s  son ! I know 
more  than  you.”  At  these  words  her  sisters  grumbled 
and  murmured,  saying,  “You  arc  an  ill-bred  creature, 
and  will  make  the  prince  in  a fine  rage  !”  But  as  Violet 
paid  no  heed  to  what  they  said,  they  made  a spiteful  com- 
plaint of  her  to  their  father,  telling  him  that  she  was  too 
bold  and  forward,  and  that  she  answered  the  prince 
without  any  respect,  as  if  she  were  just  as  good  as  he, 
and  that  some  day  or  other  she  would  get  into  trouble, 
and  suffer  the  just  punishment  of  her  offence.  So  Cola 
Aniello,  who  was  a prudent  man,  in  order  to  prevent  any 
mischief,  sent  Violet  to  stay  with  an  aunt  named  Cucce- 
pannella,  to  be  set  to  w^ork. 

Now  the  prince,  when  he  passed  by  the  house  as  usual, 
no  longer  seeing  the  object  of  his  love,  was  for  some 
days  like  a nightingale  that  does  not  find  her  young 
ones  in  the  nest,  and  goes  from  leaf  to  leaf  wailing  and 
lamenting  her  loss ; but  he  put  his  ear  so  often  to  the 
chink,  that  at  last  he  discovered  where  Violet  lived. 
Then  he  went  to  the  aunt,  and  said  to  her,  “ Madam, 
you  know  who  I am,  and  what  power  I have ; so,  be- 
tween ourselves,  do  me  a favour,  and  then  ask  me  for 
whatever  you  wish.”  “ If  I can  do  anything  to  serve 
you,”  replied  the  old  woman,  “I  am  entirely  at  your 
command.”  “ I ask  nothing  of  you,”  said  the  prince, 
but  to  let  me  give  Violet  a kiss.”  “ If  that ’s  all,” 


Digitized  by  Google 


VIOLET. 


137 


answered  the  old  woman,  “ go  and  hide  yourself  in  the 
room  downstairs  in  the  garden,  and  I will  find  some 
pretence  or  another  for  sending  Violet  to  you.’^ 

As  soon  as  the  prince  heard  this,  he  stole  into  the 
room  without  loss  of  time,  and  the  old  woman,  pre- 
tending that  she  wanted  to  cut  a piece  of  cloth,  said 
to  her  niece,  “ Violet,  if  you  love  me,  go  down  and 
fetch  me  the  yard-measure.”  So  Violet  went,  as  her 
aunt  bade  her ; but  when  she  came  to  the  room,  she 
perceived  the  ambush,  and  taking  the  yard-measure  she 
slipped  out  of  the  room  as  nimbly  as  a cat,  leaving  the 
prince  with  his  nose  lengthened  out  of  pure  shame  and 
bursting  ^Tith  vexation. 

When  the  old  woman  saw  Violet  come  running  so 
fast,  she  suspected  that  the  trick  had  not  succeeded; 
so  presently  after  she  said  to  the  girl,  “ Go  down- 
stairs, niece,  and  fetch  me  the  ball  of  Brescian  thread 
that  is  on  the  top  shelf  in  the  cupboard.”  So  Violet 
ran,  and  taking  the  thread  slipped  like  an  eel  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  prince.  But  after  a little  while  the 
old  woman  said  again,  “ Violet,  my  dear,  if  you  do  not 
go  downstairs  and  fetch  me  the  scissors,  I am  totally  un- 
done.^' Then  Violet  went  down  again,  but  she  sprang 
as  vigorously  as  a dog  out  of  the  trap ; and  when  she 
came  upstairs,  she  took  the  scissors  and  cut  off  one 
of  her  aunt’s  ears,  saying,  "Take  that,  madam,  as  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


138 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


reward  for  your  pains — every  deed  deserves  its  meed; 
and  if  I don^t  cut  off  your  nose,  it  is  only  that  you 
may  smell  the  bad  odour  of  your  reputation.”  So  say- 
ing she  went  her  way  home  ^lith  a hop,  skip  and 
jump,  leaving  her  aunt  eased  of  her  car,  and  the  prince 
full  of  Let-me-alone. 

Not  long  afterwards  the  prince  again  passed  by  the 
house  of  Violet^s  father,  and  seeing  her  at  the  window 
where  she  was  used  to  stand,  he  began  to  his  old  tune, 
“ Good  day,  good  day,  Violet !”  whereupon  she  answer- 
ed as  quickly  as  a good  parish-clerk*,  “ Good  day, 
king^s  son ! I know  more  than  you.”  But  VioleVs 
sisters  could  no  longer  bear  this  behaviour,  and  they 
plotted  together  how  to  get  rid  of  her.  Now  one  of 
the  windows  looked  into  the  garden  of  an  ogre;  so 
they  proposed  to  drive  the  poor  girl  away  through  this ; 
and  letting  fall  from  it  a skein  of  thread,  with  which 
they  were  working  a door-curtain  for  the  queen,  they 
cried,  Alas,  alas ! we  are  ruined  and  undone,  and  shall 
not  be  able  to  finish  the  work  in  time,  if  Violet,  who  is  the 
smallest  and  lightest  of  us,  does  not  let  herself  down  by 
a cord  and  pick  up  the  thread  that  has  fallen.” 

Violet  could  not  bear  to  see  her  sisters  grieving  thus, 
and  instantly  offered  to  go  down ; so  tying  a cord  to 

• Da  buono  Jacono—'  like  a good  deacon.’  Occaaionalljr  (but  rarely)  I lubititnte 
a purely  English  allusion,  as  in  this  instance,  where  it  best  translates  the  point  or 
meaning  of  the  original,— departing  from  the  letter,  to  retain  the  sense. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


VIOLET. 


139 


her,  they  lowered  her  into  the  garden ; bnt  no  sooner 
did  she  reaeh  the  ground,  than  they  let  go  the  rope. 
It  happened  that  just  at  that  time  the  ogre  came  out 
to  take  a look  at  his  garden;  and  having  caught  cold 
from  the  dampness  of  the  ground,  he  gave  such  a tre- 
mendous sneeze,  with  such  a noise  and  explosion,  that 
Violet  screamed  out  with  terror,  " O mother,  help 
me  Thereupon  the  ogre  turned  round,  and  seeing 
the  beautiful  maiden  behind  him,  he  received  her  with 
the  greatest  kindness  and  afFection;  and  treating  her 
as  his  own  daughter,  he  gave  her  in  charge  to  three 
fairies,  bidding  them  take  care  of  her,  and  rear  her  up 
on  cherries. 

The  prince,  no  longer  seeing  Violet,  and  hearing  no 
news  of  her,  good  or  bad,  fell  into  such  grief,  that  his 
eyes  became  sw'ollen  like  a bladder,  his  face  gi’ew  pale  as 
ashes,  his  lips  livid,  and  he  neither  ate  a morsel  to  get 
flesh  on  his  body,  nor  slept  a wink  to  get  any  rest  to  his 
mind.  But  tiying  all  possible  means,  and  ofiering  large 
rewards,  he  went  about  spying  and  inquiring  every- 
where, until  at  last  he  discovered  where  Violet  was. 
Then  he  sent  for  the  ogre,  and  told  him  that,  finding 
himself  ill  (as  he  might  see  was  the  case),  he  begged  of 
him  permission  to  spend  a single  day  and  night  in  his 
garden,  adding  that  a small  chamber  would  suffice  for 
him  to  repose  in.  Now,  as  the  ogre  was  a subject  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


140 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


the  prince’s  father,  he  could  not  refuse  him  this  trifling 
pleasure ; so  he  ofiiered  him  all  the  rooms  in  his  house, 
if  one  was  not  enough,  and  his  very  life  itself.  The 
prince  thanked  him,  and  chose  a room  which  by  good 
luck  was  near  to  Violet’s;  and  as  soon  as  Night  came 
out  to  play  at  * Stretch-my-curtain’*  with  the  Stars,  the 
prince,  finding  that  Violet  had  left  her  door  open,  as  it 
was  summer-time  and  the  place  was  safe,  stole  softly 
into  the  room,  and  taking  Violet’s  arm  he  gave  her  two 
pinches.  Thereupon  she  awoke,  and  exclaimed,  “ 0 
father,  father,  what  a quantity  of  fleas !”  Then  she 
went  to  another  bed,  and  the  prince  did  the  same 
again,  and  Violet  cried  out  in  the  same  way ; then  she 
changed  first  the  mattress,  and  afterwards  the  sheet, 
and  so  the  sport  went  on  the  whole  night  long,  until 
the  Dawn,  having  brought  news  that  the  Sun  was 
alive,  the  mourning  that  was  hung  around  the  sky  w'as 
all  removed. 

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  prince  passing  by  that 
house,  and  seeing  the  maiden  at  the  door,  said  as  he  was 
wont  to  do,  “ Good  day,  good  day,  Violet !”  and  when 
Violet  replied,  Good  day,  king’s  son ! I know  more 
than  you,”  the  prince  answered,  “ O father,  father,  what 
a quantity  of  fleas  !” 

The  instant  Violet  felt  this  shot,  she  guessed  at  once 

* A Neapolitan  game, — sec  page  116. 


Digitized  by  Google 


VIOLET. 


141 


that  the  prince  had  been  the  cause  of  her  annoyance 
in  the  past  night;  so  off  she  ran  and  told  it  to 
the  fairies.  “ If  it  be  he,”  said  the  faiiies,  “ we  will 
soon  give  him  tit  for  tat  and  as  good  in  return ; and  if 
this  dog  has  bitten  you,  we  will  contrive  to  get  a hair 
from  him : he  has  given  you  one,  and  we  will  give  him 
back  one  and  a half.  Only  get  the  ogre  to  make  you 
a pair  of  slippers  covered  with  little  bells,  and  leave  . 
the  rest  to  us : we  will  take  care  to  pay  him  in  good 
coin.” 

Violet,  who  was  eager  to  be  revenged,  instantly  got 
the  ogre  to  make  the  slippers  for  her;  and  waiting 
until  the  Sky,  like  a Genoese  woman,  had  wrapped  the 
black  taffety  about  her  face,  they  went  all  four  together 
to  the  house  of  the  prince,  where  the  fairies  and  Violet 
hid  themselves  in  the  chamber.  And  as  soon  as  ever 
the  prince  had  closed  his  eyes,  the  fairies  made  a great 
noise  and  racket,  and  Violet  began  to  stamp  with  her 
feet  at  such  a rate  that,  what  with  the  clatter  of  her 
heels  and  the  jingling  of  the  bells,  the  prince  awoke  in 
great  terror  and  cried  out,  '‘O  mother,  mother,  help 
me !”  And  after  repeating  this  two  or  three  times,  they 
slipped  away  home. 

The  next  morning  the  prince,  having  taken  some  - 
citron-juice  and  other  cordials  to  relieve  his  fear,  went 
to  take  a walk  in  the  garden ; for  he  could  not  live  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


142 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


moment  without  the  sight  of  Violet,  who  was  a pink  of 
pinks.  And  seeing  her  standing  at  the  door,  he  said, 
“ Good  day,  good  day,  Violet !”  and  Violet  answered, 
“ Good  day,  king^s  son ! I know  more  than  you.” 
Then  the  prince  said,  “ O father,  father,  what  a quan- 
tity of  fleas !”  but  Violet  replied,  “ 0 mother,  mother, 
help  me !” 

WTien  the  prince  heard  this,  he  said  to  Violet,  You 
have  won — you  have  outwitted  me : I yield — you  have 
conquered ; and  now  that  I see  you  really  know  more 
than  I do,  I will  marry  you  without  further  ado.^^  So 
he  called  the  ogre,  and  asked  her  of  him  for  his  wife ; 
but  the  ogre  said  it  was  not  his  affair,  for  he  had  learat 
that  very  morning  that  Violet  was  the  daughter  of  Cola 
Aniello.  So  the  prince  ordered  her  father  to  be  called, 
and  told  him  of  the  good  fortune  that  was  in  store  for 
his  daughter ; whereupon  the  maniage  feast  was  cele- 
brated with  great  joy,  and  the  truth  of  the  saying  was 
seen,  that 

" A fair  maiden  soon  gets  married.” 


The  delight  is  unspeakable  which  all  felt  at  the  good 
fortune  which  Violet  had  obtained  by  her  cleverness,  in 
spite  of  the  malice  of  her  sisters,  who,  the  enemies  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


VIOLET. 


143 


their  own  blood  and  kindred,  played  her  so  many  tricks 
on  purpose  to  make  her  break  her  neck.  But  it  being 
now  time  for  Paola  to  pay  the  debt  she  owed,  she  dis- 
bursed from  her  mouth  the  golden  money  of  her  beauti- 
ful discourse,  and  thus  cleared  her  account. 


Digitized  by  Google 


144 


GAGLIUSO. 

Ingratitude,  my  lord,  is  a nail,  which,  driven  into 
the  tree  of  courtesy,  causes  it  to  wither ; it  is  a broken 
channel,  by  which  the  foimdations  of  affection  are  un- 
dermined ; and  a lump  of  soot,  which  falling  into  the 
dish  of  friendship  destroys  its  scent  and  savour;  as  is 
seen  in  daily  instances,  and  among  others  in  the  story 
which  I will  now  tell  you. 


There  was  one  time  in  my  dear  city  of  Naples  an  old 
man,  who  was  as  poor  as  poor  could  be : he  was  so 
wretched,  so  bare,  so  light,  and  with  not  a farthing  in 
his  pocket,  that  he  went  naked  as  a flea.  And  being 
about  to  shake  out  the  bags  of  life,  he  called  to  him 
his  sons,  Oratiello  and  Pippo,  and  said  to  them,  " I am 
now  called  upon  by  the  tenor  of  my  bill  to  pay  the 
debt  I owe  to  Nature ; and  believe  me,  if  you  are  Chris- 
tians, that  I should  feel  great  pleasure  in  leaving  this 


Digitized  by  Google 


GAGLIUSO. 


145 


abode  of  misery*,  this' den  of  woes,  but  that  I leave  you 
here  behind  me,  a pair  of  miserable  fellows,  as  big  as 
Santa  Chiara  on  the  five  ways  of  Melitof,  without  a stitch 
upon  your  backs,  as  clean  as  a barber^s  basin,  as  nimble 
as  a serjeant,  as  dry  as  a plum-stone,  without  so  much 
as  a fly  can  carry  upon  its  foot ; so  that  were  you  to  run 
a hundred  miles,  not  a farthing  would  drop  from  you. 
My  ill-fortune  has  indeed  brought  me  to  such  beggary 
that  I lead  the  life  of  a dog,  and  just  as  I am,  they  may 
put  me  down  in  their  books ; for  I have  all  along,  as 
you  well  know,  gaped  with  hunger  J and  gone  to  bed 
without  a candle.  Nevertheless,  now  that  I am  dying, 
I wish  to  leave  you  some  token  of  my  love.  So  do 
you,  Oratiello,  who  are  my  first-bom,  take  the  sieve 
that  hangs  yonder  against  the  wall,  with  which  you  can 
cam  your  bread ; and  do  you,  little  fellow,  take  the  cat, 
and  remember  your  daddy.^’  So  saying  he  began  to 
whimper,  and  presently  after  said,  “ God  be  with  you, 
for  it  is  night !” 

Oratiello  had  his  father  buried  by  charity,  and  then 
took  the  sieve,  and  went  riddling  here  and  there  and 
everywhere  to  gain  a livelihood ; and  the  more  he  rid- 

* ilantracchio : a n^erable  port  of  Naple*  so  named.  Tlie  word  is  Arabic, 
and  signifies  a Port.  t A place  near  Naples. 

X Literally,  * I have  always  made  gapings  and  crosses.’  This  refers  to  a super- 
stitious practice  formerly  common  in  Naples  of  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  over 
the  mouth  when  a person  gaped : it  arose  from  the  notion  that  the  evil  spirits  seized 
such  moments  to  enter  the  body. 

L 


Digitized  by  Google 


146 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


died  the  more  he  earned.  And  Pippo,  taking  the  cat, 
said,  “Only  see  now  what  a pretty  legacy  my  father 
has  left  me ! I,  who  am  not  able  to  support  myself, 
must  now  provide  for  two.  Who  ever  beheld  such  a 
miserable  inheritance?”  But  the  cat,  who  overheard 
this  lamentation,  said  to  him,  “ You  arc  grieving  with- 
out need,  and  have  more  luck  than  sense ; but  you  little 
know  the  good  fortune  in  store  for  you,  and  that  I am 
able  to  make  you  rich  if  I set  about  it.”  When  Pippo 
heard  this,  he  thanked  her  pussyship,  stroked  her  three 
or  four  times  on  the  back,  and  commended  himself 
warmly  to  her.  So  the  cat  took  compassion  upon  poor 
Gagliuso*,  and  every  moniing,  when  the  Sun,  with  the 
bait  of  light  upon  his  golden  hook,  fishes  for  the  shades 
of  Night,  she  betook  herself  either  to  the  shore  of  the 
Chiaja  or  to  the  Fish-rock  t,  and  catching  a goodly  grey 
mullet,  or  a fine  dory,  she  bagged  it,  and  carried  it  to 
the  king,  and  said,  “ My  lord  Gagliuso,  your  Majesty^s 
most  humble  slave,  sends  you  this  fish  with  all  reverence, 
and  says,  ‘ A small  present  to  a great  lord.^  ” Then  the 
king  with  a joyful  face,  as  one  usually  shows  to  those 
who  bring  a gift,  answered  the  cat,  “ Tell  this  lord, 
whom  I do  not  know,  that  I thank  him  heartily.” 

A t another  time  the  cat  would  run  to  the  marshes  or 

* He  it  before  called  Pippo,  which  U probably  an  abbreviation  of  piccolo.  In  an- 
other tale  Miuccio  is  called  Pippo. 

t The  Chiaja  and  Preta  de  lo  Petce — places  in  the  bay  of  Naples. 


Digitized  by  Google 


GAGLIUSO. 


147 


fields,  and  when  the  fowlers  had  brought  down  a black- 
bird, a snipe  or  a lark,  she  caught  it  up,  and  presented 
it  to  the  king  with  the  same  message.  She  repeated 
this  trick  again  and  again,  until  one  morning  the  king 
said  to  hei’,  I feel  infinitely  obliged  to  this  lord  Ga- 
gliuso,  and  am  desirous  of  knowing  him,  that  I may 
make  a return  for  the  kindness  he  has  shown  me.” 
And  the  cat  replied,  “ The  desire  of  my  lord  Gagliuso  is 
to  give  his  life  and  blood  for  your  Majesty’s  crown,  and 
tomoiTOw  morning  -without  fail,  as  soon  as  the  Sun  has 
set  fire  to  the  stubble  of  the  fields  of  air,  he  will  come 
and  pay  his  respects  to  you.” 

So  when  the  morning  came  the  cat  went  to  the  king, 
and  said  to  him,  “ Sire,  my  lord  Gagliuso  sends  to  ex- 
cuse himself  for  not  coming ; as  last  night  some  of  his 
servants  robbed  him  and  ran  off,  and  have  not  left  him 
a single  shirt  to  his  back.”  When  the  king  heard  this, 
he  instantly  commanded  his  servants  to  take  out  of  his 
wardrobe  a quantity  of  clothes  and  linen,  and  sent  them 
to  Gagliuso  j and  before  two  hours  had  passed,  Gagliuso 
went  to  the  palace,  conducted  by  the  cat,  where  he  re- 
ceived a thousand  compliments  from  the  king,  who 
made  him  sit  beside  him,  and  gave  him  a banquet  that 
would  amaze  you. 

While  they  were  eating,  Gagliuso  from  time  to  time 
turned  to  the  cat  and  said  to  her,  My  pretty  puss, 

L 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


148 


TUB  PENTAMERONE. 


prithee  take  care  that  those  i*ags  don’t  slip  through 
our  fingers.”  Then  the  cat  answered,  “Be  quiet,  be 
quiet ; don’t  be  talking  of  these  beggarly  things.”  The 
king  wishing  to  know  what  it  w as,  the  cat  made  answer 
that  he  had  taken  a fancy  for  a small  lemon,  where- 
upon the  king  instantly  sent  out  to  the  garden  for  a 
basketful.  But  Gagliuso  returned  to  the  same  tune 
about  the  old  clothes  and  shirts,  and  the  cat  again  told 
him  to  hold  his  tongue.  Then  the  king  once  more 
asked  what  was  the  matter,  and  the  cat  had  another  ex- 
cuse ready  to  make  amends  for  Gagliuso’s  rudeness. 

At  last,  when  they  had  eaten  and  had  chatted  for 
some  time  of  one  thing  and  another,  Gagliuso  took  his 
leave ; and  the  cat  staid  mth  the  king,  describing  the 
w'orth,  and  the  genius,  and  the  judgement  of  Gagliuso, 
and  above  all  the  great  wealth  he  had  in  the  plains  of 
Rome  and  Lombardy,  which  well  entitled  him  to  marry 
into  the  family  of  a crowned  king.  TKen  the  king 
asked  what  might  be  his  fortune ; and  the  cat  replied, 
that  no  one  could  ever  count  the  moveables,  the  im- 
moveables, and  the  household  furniture  of  this  immense- 
ly rich  man,  who  did  not  even  know  what  he  possessed ; 
and  if  the  king  wished  to  be  informed  of  it,  he  had  only 
to  send  people  with  her  out  of  the  kingdom,  and  she 
woidd  prove  to  him  that  there  was  no  w'ealth  in  the 
world  equal  to  his. 


Digitized  by  Google 


GAGLIUSO. 


149 


Then  the  king  called  some  trusty  persons,  and  com- 
manded them  to  inform  themselves  minutely  of  the 
truth  j so  they  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  the  cat, 
who,  as  soon  as  they  had  passed  the  frontier  of  the 
kingdom,  from  time  to  time  ran  on  before,  under 
the  pretext  of  providing  refreshments  for  them  on  the 
road ; and  whenever  she  met  a flock  of  sheep,  a herd 
of  cows,  a troop  of  horses  or  a drove  of  pigs,  she  would 
say  to  the  herdsmen  and  keepers,  “ Ho  ! have  a eare ! 
there  ^s  a troop  of  robbers  coming  to  carry  off  every- 
thing in  the  eountry.  So  if  you  wish  to  escape  their 
fury,  and  to  have  your  things  respected,  say  that  they 
all  belong  to  the  lord  Gagliuso,  and  not  a hair  will  be 
touched.” 

She  said  the  same  at  all  the  farm-houses  that  she 
passed  on  the  road ; so  that  wherever  the  king’s  people 
came,  they  found  the  pipe  tuned ; for  everything  they 
met  with,  they  were  told,  belonged  to  the  lord  Gagliuso. 
So  at  last  they  were  tired  of  asking,  and  went  back 
to  the  king,  telling  seas  and  mountains  of  the  riches 
of  lord  Gagliuso.  The  king,  hearing  this  report,  pro- 
mised the  cat  a good  drink  if  she  should  manage  to 
bring  about  the  match ; and  the  cat,  playing  the  shuttle 
between  them,  at  last  concluded  the  marriage.  So 
Gagliuso  came,  and  the  king  gave  him  his  daughter 
and  a large  portion. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


150 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


At  the  end  of  a month  of  festivities  Gagliuso  said  he 
wished  to  take  his  bride  to  his  estates ; so  the  king  ac- 
companied them  as  far  as  the  frontiers,  and  he  went  to 
Lombardy,  where,  by  the  eat’s  advice,  he  purchased  a 
quantity  of  lands  and  territories,  and  became  a baron. 

Gagliuso,  now  seeing  himself  so  extremely  rich, 
thanked  the  cat  more  than  w^ords  can  express,  saying 
that  he  owed  his  life  and  his  gi’eatness  to  her  good 
offices,  and  that  the  ingenuity  of  a cat  had  done  more 
for  him  than  the  wit  of  his  father ; therefore  she  might 
dispose  of  his  hfe  and  property  as  she  pleased ; and  he 
gave  her  his  word  that  when  she  died,  which  he  prayed 
might  not  be  for  a hundred  years,  he  w^ould  have  her 
embalmed  and  put  into  a golden  coffin,  and  set  in  his 
own  chamber,  that  he  might  keep  her  memory  always 
before  his  eyes. 

The  cat  listened  to  these  lavish  pi’ofessions,  and  be- 
fore three  days  she  pretended  to  be  dead,  and  stretched 
herself  at  her  full  length  in  the  garden ; and  when  Ga- 
gliuso’s  wrife  saw  her,  she  cried  out,  0 husband,  what 
a sad  misfortune  1 the  cat  is  dead !” — Devil  die  with 
her!”  said  Gagliuso,  “better  she  than  we!” — “What 
shall  we  do  with  her  ?”  replied  the  wife. — “ Take  her 
by  the  leg,”  said  he,  “ and  fling  her  out  t)f  the  win- 
dow.” 

Then  the  cat,  who  heard  this  fine  reward  when  she 


Digitized  by  GoogI( 


GAGLIUSO. 


151 


least  expected  it,  began  to  say,  "Is  this  the  return 
you  make  for  ’my  taking  you  from  beggary  ? is  this 
the  thanks  I get  for  freeing  you  from  rags  that  you 
might  have  hung  distaflFs  with  ? is  this  my  reward  for 
having  put  good  clothes  on  your  back,  and  fed  you 
well  when  you  were  a poor  starved,  miserable,  tatter- 
brogued  ragamuffin  ? But  such  is  the  fate  of  him  who 
washes  an  ass’s  head.  Go,  a curse  upon  all  I have 
done  for  you ! you  are  not  worth  spitting  upon  in  the 
face.  A fine  gold  coffin  you  had  prepared  for  me ! a 
fine  funeral  you  were  going  to  give  me  ! Go  now,  serve, 
labour,  toil,  sweat,  to  get  this  fine  reward ! Unhappy 
is  he  who  does  a good  deed  in  hopes  of  a retmm  ! Well 
was  it  said  by  the  philosopher,  * He  who  lies  down  an 
ass,  an  ass  he  finds  himself.’  But  let  him  who  does 
most  expect  least : smooth  words  and  ill  deeds  deeeive 
alike  both  wise  and  fools.” 

So  saying  she  threw  her  eloak  about  her,  and  went 
her  way;  and  all  that  Gagliuso  with  the  utmost  humi- 
lity could  do  to  soothe  her  was  of  no  avail : she  wordd 
not  return,  but  kept  running  on  without  ever  turning 
her  head  about,  and  saying. 

Heaven  protect  us  from  a rich  man  grown  poor. 

And  from  a beggar  who  of  wealth  has  got  store.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


162 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


The  poor  cat  was  compassionated  beyond  measure  for 
seeing  herself  so  ill  rewarded ; but  one  of  those  present 
observed,  that  she  might  have  found  some  consolation  in 
not  being  alone ; for  at  the  present  day  ingratitude  has 
become  a domestic  evil ; and  there  are  many  others 
also  who,  after  they  have  worked  and  toiled,  and  spent 
their  money,  and  ruined  their  health,  to  serve  this  race 
of  ungrateful  people,  and  have  fancied  themselves  sure 
of  another  and  a better  reward  than  a golden  coffin, 
find  themselves  destined  to  be  buried  in  the  hospital. 
Meanwhile,  seeing  that  Popa  was  preparing  to  speak, 
all  present  were  silent,  and  she  began  as  follows. 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


153 


THE  SERPENT. 

It  always  happens  that  he  who  is  over-curious  in  prjnng 
into  the  affairs  of  other  people  strikes  his  own  foot  with 
the  axe;  and  the  King  of  Long  Furrow  is  a proof  of 
this,  who,  by  poking  his  nose  into  secrets,  brought  his 
daughter  into  trouble,  and  ruined  his  unhappy  son-in- 
law,  who,  in  attempting  to  make  a thmst  with  his  head, 
was  left  with  his  head  broken. 


There  was  once  on  a time  a gardenePs  wife,  who  longed 
to  have  a son  more  than  the  suitor  longs  for  a sentence 
in  his  favour,  a sick  man  for  cold  water,  or  the  inn- 
keeper for  the  arrival  of  the  mail-coach*. 

It  chanced  one  day  that  the  poor  man  went  to  the 
mountain  to  get  a faggot ; and  when  he  came  home  and 
opened  it,  he  found  a pretty  little  serpent  among  the 
twigs.  At  the  sight  of  this,  Sapatella  (for  that  was  the 
name  of  the  gardener^s  wife)  heaved  a deep  sigh  and 
said,  “ Alas ! even  the  serpents  have  their  little  ser- 

^ Se«  above,  note,  page  138. 


Digitized  by  Google 


154 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


pents ; but  I brought  ill-luck  udth  me  into  this  world.” 
At  these  words  the  little  serpent  spoke,  and  said,  “ Well 
then,  since  you  eaunot  have  children,  take  me  for  a 
child,  and  you  will  make  a good  bargain,  for  I shall  love 
you  better  than  my  own  mother.”  Sapatella,  hearing  a 
serpent  speak  thus,  had  like  to  have  fainted ; but  pluck- 
ing up  courage  she  said,  ‘^If  it  w'ere  for  nothing  else 
than  for  the  aflFection  which  you  offer,  I am  content  to 
take  you,  and  treat  you  as  if  you  were  really  my  o\vn 
child.”  So  saying,  she  assigned  him  a hole  in  a corner 
of  the  house  for  a cradle,  and  gave  him  for  food  a share 
of  what  she  had,  with  the  greatest  affection  in  the 
world. 

The  serpent  increased  in  size  from  day  to  day ; and 
when  he  was  grown  pretty  big,  he  said  to  Cola  Matteo, 
the  gardener,  whom  he  looked  upon  as  his  father, 
“ Daddy,  I want  to  get  married.” — With  all  my 
heart,”  said  Cola  Matteo ; “ we  must  look  out  for  an- 
other serpent  like  yourself,  and  try  to  make  up  a match 
between  you.” — “ What  serpent  are  you  talking  of  ?” 
said  the  little  serpent : “ I suppose,  forsooth,  we  are 
all  the  same  with  the  vipers  and  adders  ! It  is  easy  to 
see  you  are  nothing  but  an  Antony,  and  make  a nosegay 
of  every  plant.  I want  the  king’s  daughter ; so  go  this 
very  instant  and  ask  the  king  for  her,  and  tell  him  it  is 
a serpent  that  demands  her.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


155 


Cola  Matteo,  who  was  a plain,  straightforward  sort 
of  man,  and  knew  nothing  about  matters  of  this  kind, 
went  innocently  to  the  king  and  delivered  his  message, 
saying,  “ The  messenger  should  not  be  beaten  more,  than 
the  sands  upon  the  shore.  Know  then  that  a serpent 
wants  your  daughter  for  his  wife,  and  I am  come  there- 
fore to  try  if  we  can  make  a match  between  a serpent  and 
a dove.”  The  king,  who  saw  at  a glance  that  he  was  a 
blockhead,  to  get  rid  of  him  said,  Go  and  tell  the  ser- 
pent that  I will  give  him  my  daughter  if  he  tuims  all 
the  fruit  of  this  oi’chard  into  gold.”  And  so  saying,  he 
burst  out  a-laughing  and  dismissed  him. 

AVTien  Cola  Matteo  went  home,  and  delivered  the  an- 
swer to  the  serpent,  he  said,  “ Go  tomorrow  morning 
and  gather  up  all  the  fruit-stones  you  can  find  in  the 
city,  and  sow  them  in  the  orchard,  and  you  will  see 
pearls  strung  on  rushes.”  Cola  Matteo,  who  was  no 
conjuror,  neither  knew  how  to  comply  or  refuse;  so 
next  morning,  as  soon  as  the  Sun  with  his  golden 
broom  had  swept  away  the  dirt  of  the  Night  from  the 
fields  watered  by  the  Dawn,  he  took  a basket  on  his 
arm,  and  went  from  street  to  street  picking  up  all  the 
stones  of  peaches,  plums,  nectarines,  apricots  and  cher- 
ries that  he  could  find : then  he  went  to  the  orchard 
of  the  palace,  and  sowed  them  as  the  serpent  had  de- 
sired. In  an  instant  the  trees  shot  up,  and  stems  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


156 


THE  PENTAMEROXE. 


branches,  leaves,  flowers  and  fruit,  were  all  of  glisten- 
ing gold;  at  the  sight  of  which  the  king  was  in  an 
ecstasy  of  amazement,  and  cried  aloud  with  joy. 

But  when  Cola  ]\Iattco  was  sent  by  the  serpent  to  the 
king  to  demand  the  perfonnance  of  his  promise,  the 
king  said,  “ Fair  and  easy,  I must  first  have  something 
else,  if  he  would  have  my  daughter ; and  it  is  that  he 
make  all  the  walls  and  the  ground  in  the  orchard  to  be 
of  precious  stones.”  • 

When  the  gardener  told  this  to  the  serpent,  he  made 
answer,  “ Go  tomoiTow  morning  and  gather  up  all  the 
bits  of  broken  crockeiy-warc  you  can  find,  and  throw 
them  on  the  walks,  and  on  the  wall  of  the  orchard,  for 
we  will  not  let  this  difficulty  stand  in  our  vray.”  As 
soon  therefore  as  the  Night,  having  stood  by  and  backed 
the  robbers,  is  banished  from  the  sky,  and  goes  about 
collecting  the  faggots  of  twilight.  Cola  Matteo  took  a bas- 
ket under  his  arm,  and  went  about  collecting  bits  of  tiles, 
lids  and  bottoms  of  pipkins,  pieces  of  plates  and  dishes, 
handles  of  jugs,  spouts  of  pitchers ; picking  up  all  the 
spoilt,  broken,  flawed,  cracked  lamps,  and  all  the  frag- 
ments of  pottery  of  every  sort  he  could  find  in  his  way. 
And  when  he  had  done  all  that  the  serpent  had  told 
him,  there  was  to  be  seen  the  whole  orchard  mantled 
with  emeralds  and  chalcedonies,  and  coated  with  rubies 
and  carbuncles,  in  such  sort,  that  the  lustre  sequestered 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


157 


the  sight  in  the  warehouses  of  the  eyes,  and  planted  ad- 
miration in  the  fields  of  the  heart.  The  king  was  struck 
all  of  a heap  at  the  sight,  and  knew  not  what  had  be- 
fallen him.  But  when  the  sei*pent  sent  again  to  let 
him  know  that  he  was  expeeting  the  performance  of  his 
promise,  the  king  answered,  “ Oh ! all  that  has  been 
done  is  nothing,  if  he  does  not  tunr  this  palace  into 
gold.” 

When  Cola  ^lattco  told  the  serpent  this  new  fancy 
of  the  king’s,  the  serpent  said,  “ Go  and  get  a bundle  of 
herbs  of  diflcrent  kinds,  and  rub  the  bottom  of  the  palace 
walls  with  them  : we  shall  see  if  we  cannot  satisfy  this 
whim.”  Away  went  Cola  Matteo  that  very  moment, 
and  made  a great  broom  of  cabbages,  radishes,  rockets, 
purslain,  turnips  and  carrots ; and  when  he  had  rubbed 
the  lower  part  of  the  palace  with  it,  instantly  you  might 
see  it  shining  like  a gilded  pill  to  purge  melancholy 
from  a hundred  houses  that  were  ill-treated  by  fortune. 
And  when  the  gardener  came  again  to  demand  the  prin- 
cess to  wife  in  the  name  of  the  serpent,  the  king,  seeing 
all  retreat  cut  off,  called  his  daughter,  and  said  to  her, 
" ]\Iy  dear  Grannonia,  I have  endeavom’ed  to  get  rid  of 
a suitor  who  asked  you  for  his  wife,  by  making  such 
conditions  as  seemed  to  me  impossible ; but  seeing  my- 
self foiled,  and  obliged  to  consent  I know  not  how,  I 
pray  you,  as  you  arc  a dutiful  daughter,  to  enable  me 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  PENTAMEKONE. 


lS8 

to  keep  my  word,  and  to  be  content  with  what  Heaven 
wills  and  I am  obliged  to  do.” 

Do  as  you  please,  papa,”  said  Grannonia ; “ I shall 
not  oppose  a single  jot  of  your  will.”  The  king  hear- 
ing this  bade  Cola  Matteo  tell  the  serpent  to  come. 

The  serpent,  on  receiving  the  invitation,  set  out  for 
the  palace  mounted  on  a car  all  of  gold,  and  drawn  by 
four  golden  elephants.  But  wherever  he  came  the 
people  fled  away  in  terror,  at  seeing  such  a large  and 
frightful  serpent  making  his  progress  through  the  city : 
and  when  he  arrived  at  the  palace,  the  courtiers  all 
trembled  like  rashes,  and  ran  away,  and  even  the  very 
scullions  did  not  dare  to  stay  in  the  place.  The  king 
and  queen  also,  shivering  with  fear,  crept  into  a cham- 
ber, and  Grannonia  alone  stood  her  ground ; for  though 
her  father  and  her  mother  kept  crying  out,  " Fly,  fly, 
Grannonia ! save  yourself,  Rienzo*  !”  she  would  not  stir 
from  the  spot,  saying,  “Why  should  I fly  from  the 
husband  ^vhom  you  have  given  me  ?”  And  when  the 
serpent  came  into  the  room,  he  took  Grannonia  by  the 
waist  in  his  tail,  and  gave  her  such  a shower  of  kisses, 
that  the  king  m’ithed  like  a worm ; and  I warrant,  if 
he  had  been  bled,  not  a single  drop  of  blood  would  have 
come.  Then  tlie  serpent  carried  her  into  another  room, 

• This  opparently  alludes  to  the  fate  of  Cola  Rienzo  (Nicola  di  Lorenzo),  the 
Roman  patriot,  which  may  have  become  proverbial. — K, 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


169 


and  fastened  the  door ; and  shaking  off  his  skin  on  the 
ground,  he  beeame  a most  beautiful  youth,  with  a head 
all  covered  with  ringlets  of  gold,  and  with  eyes  that 
would  enchant  you. 

When  the  king  saw  the  serpent  going  into  the  room 
with  his  daughter,  and  shutting  the  door  after  him,  he 
said  to  his  wife,  “ Heaven  have  mercy  on  that  good  soul 
my  daughter ! for  she  is  dead  to  a certainty,  and  that 
accursed  serpent  has  doubtless  swallowed  her  down  Uke 
the  yolk  of  an  egg  Then  he  put  his  eye  to  the  key- 
hole, to  see  what  had  become  of  her ; but  when  he  saw 
the  exceeding  beauty  of  the  youth,  and  the  skin  of  the 
serpent  that  he  had  left  lying  on  the  ground,  he  gave 
the  door  a kick ; then  in  they  rushed,  and  taking  the 
skin  flung  it  into  the  fire  and  burned  it. 

When  the  youth  saw  this,  he  cried  out,  ^‘Ah  you 
renegade  dogs,  you  have  done  for  me  V’  and  instantly 
he  turned  himself  into  a dove,  and  was  going  to  fly 
away  through  the  window;  but  he  struck  his  head 
against  the  panes  until  he  broke  them,  and  cut  himself 
in  .such  a manner  that  there  did  not  remain  a whole 
spot  on  his  pate. 

Grannonia,  who  thus  saw'  herself  at  the  same  moment 
happy  and  unhappy,  joyful  and  miserable,  rich  and 
poor,  tore  her  face  and  bewailed  her  fate,  reproaching 
her  fathrt*  and  mother  for  this  interruption  of  pleasure. 


Digitized  by  Google 


160 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


this  poisoning  of  sweets,  this  overthrow  of  good-fortune; 
but  they  excused  themselves,  declaring  that  they  had 
not  meant  to  do  harm.  But  Grannonia  went  on  weep- 
ing and  wailing,  until  Night  came  forth  to  illuminate 
the  catafalque  of  the  sky  for  the  funeral  pomp  of  the 
Sun ; and  w’hen  she  saw  that  all  were  in  bed,  she  took 
her  jewels,  which  were  in  a writing-desk,  and  went  out 
by  a back-door,  intending  to  search  cvciywherc  till  she 
found  the  treasure  she  had  lost. 

So  she  went  out  of  the  city,  guided  by  the  light  of 
the  moon,  and  on  her  w ay  she  met  a fox,  w'ho  asked  her 
if  she  wished  for  company.  “ Of  all  things,  my  friend,'^ 
answered  Grannonia,  I should  be  dehghted,  for  I am 
not  over- well  acquainted  w ith  the  countiy.^'  So  they  tra- 
velled along  together  till  they  came  to  a wood,  where 
the  trees,  at  play  like  children,  w^ere  making  baby- 
houses  for  the  shadows  to  lie  in ; and  being  now  wearied 
with  their  journey,  and  wishing  to  repose,  they  retired 
to  the  covert  of  the  leaves,  where  a fountain  was  play- 
ing carnival  pranks  with  the  green  grass,  flinging  the 
water  on  it  by  dishfuls ; and  stretching  themselves  on  a 
mattress  of  tender  soft  grass,  they  paid  the  duty  of  re- 
pose which  they  owed  to  Nature  for  the  merchandize 
of  life. 

They  did  not  awake  till  the  Sun,  with  his  usual  fire, 
gave  the  signal  to  sailors  and  couriers  to  set  out  on 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


161 


their  road ; and  after  they  awoke,  they  still  stayed  for 
some  time  listening  to  .the  singing  of  the  various  birds, 
for  Grannonia  showed  great  pleasure  in  hearing  the 
warbling  and  twittering  they  made ; and  the  fox  seeing 
this,  said  to  her,  You  would  feel  twice  as  much  plea- 
sure if  you  understood,  like  me,  what  they  are  saying.^^ 
At  these  words  Grannonia — for  women  are  by  nature  as 
ciu*iou8  as  they  are  talkative — begged  the  fox  to  tell  her 
what  he  had  heard  the  birds  saying  in  their  own  lan- 
guage. So  after  having  let  her  entreat  him  for  a long 
time,  in  order  to  raise  her  curiosity  about  w^hat  he  was 
going  to  relate,  he  told  her  that  the  birds  were  talking 
to  one  another  of  what  had  lately  befallen  the  king^s  son, 
who  was  as  beautiful  as  a fay,  and  because  he  would  not 
comply  with  the  wishes  of  a wicked  ogress,  had  been  laid 
under  a spell  by  her  magic  power  to  pass  seven  years 
in  the  form  of  a serpent ; that  he  had  nearly  ended  the 
seven  years,  when  he  fell  in  love  with  the  daughter  of  a 
king ; and  being  one  day  in  a room  with  the  maiden, 
and  having  cast  his  skin  on  the  ground,  her  father  and 
mother,  out  of  curiosity,  rushed  in  and  burned  his  skin ; 
whereupon  as  the  prince  was  flying  away  in  the  shape  of 
a dove,  he  broke  a pane  in  the  window  to  escape,  and 
had  hurt  his  head  in  such  a manner  that  he  was  given 
over  by  the  doctors. 

Grannonia,  who  thus  heard  her  own  onions  spoken 

M 


Digitized  by  Google 


162 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


of,  first  of  all  asked  whose  son  this  prinee  was,  and  then 
if  there  was  any  hope  of  eure  for  his  aeeident.  And 
the  fox  replied,  that  the  birds  had  said  his  father  was 
the  king  of  Big  Valley,  and  that  there  was  no  other 
secret  for  stopping  the  holes  in  his  skull,  to  prevent  his 
soul  getting  out  at  them,  than  to  anoint  his  wounds 
with  the  blood  of  those  very  birds  who  had  been  telling 
the  story.  When  Grannonia  heard  these  words,  she 
fell  down  on  her  knees  to  the  fox,  entreating  of  him  to 
obhge  her  by  catching  those  birds  for  her,  that  she 
might  get  their  blood;  adding,  that  then,  like  honest 
comrades,  they  would  share  the  gain.  **  Fair  and 
softly,”  said  the  fox,  let  us  wait  till  night,  and  when 
the  birds  are  gone  to  bed,  let  your  mammy  alone,  for  I 
will  chmb  up  the  tree  and  weasen  them  one  after  an- 
other.” 

So  they  passed  the  whole  day,  talking  one  time  of  the 
beauty  of  the  young  prince,  then  of  the  mistake  made 
by  the  maiden's  father,  then  of  the  mishap  that  had 
befallen  the  prince,  chatting  and  chatting  away  till  Day 
w^as  gone,  and  Earth  had  spread  out  her  large  black 
piece  of  pasteboard,  to  collect  the  wax  that  might  drop 
from  the  tapers  of  Night.  Then  the  fox,  as  soon  as  he 
saw  all  the  birds  fast  asleep  on  the  branches,  stole  up 
quite  softly,  and,  one  after  another,  throttled  all  the  lin- 
nets, larks,  tomtits,  blackbirds,  woodpeckers,  thrushes. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


163 


jays, flycatchers,  little  owls,  goldfinches,  bullfinches,  chaf- 
finches and  redbreasts  that  were  on  the  trees.  And 
when  he  had  killed  them  all,  they  put  the  blood  into  a 
little  bottle  which  the  fox  carried  with  him  to  refresh 
himself  on  the  road. 

Grannonia  was  so  overjoyed  that  she  hardly  touched 
the  ground ; but  the  fox  said  to  her,  “ What  fine  joy  in 
a dream  is  this,  my  daughter ! you  have  done  nothing 
unless  you  have  my  blood  also  to  mix  with  that  of  the 
birds  j”  and  so  saying  he  set  ofl"  running  away.  Gran- 
nonia, who  saw  all  her  hopes  destroyed,  had  recourse  to 
women^s  art,  cunning  and  flattery ; and  she  said  to  him, 
" Gossip  fox,  there  would  be  some  reason  for  your  saving 
your  hide  if  I were  not  under  so  many  obligations  to  you, 
and  if  there  were  no  other  foxes  in  the  world;  but  as 
you  know  how  mueh  I owe  you,  and  know  also  that 
there  is  no  scarcity  of  the  like  of  you  in  these  plains, 
you  may  rely  on  my  good  faith.  So  don^t  act  like  the 
cow  that  kicks  down  the  pad  when  she  has  just  filled 
it  with  milk.  You  have  done  the  chief  part,  and  now 
you  fail  at  the  best.  Do  stop ; believe  me,  and  come 
with  me  to  the  city  of  this  king,  where  you  may  sell 
me  for  a slave  if  you  will.^’ 

The  fox,  who  never  dreamed  that  the  quintessence 
of  foxery  was  to  be  met  with,  found  himself  out-foxed 
by  a woman.  So  he  agreed  to  travel  on  with  Gran- 

M 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


164 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


nonia;  but  they  had  hardly  gone  fifty  paces,  when 
she  lifted  up  the  stick  she  carried,  and  gave  him  with 
it  such  a neat  rap  that  he  forthwith  stretched  his  legs. 
Then  cutting  his  throat,  she  quickly  took  the  blood 
and  poured  it  into  the  little  bottle;  and  setting  off 
again,  she  stopped  not  until  she  came  to  Big  Valley, 
where  she  went  straightway  to  the  royal  palace,  and 
sent  word  to  the  king  that  she  was  come  to, cure  the 
prince. 

Then  the  king  ordered  her  to  come  into  his  presence, 
and  he  was  astonished  at  seeing  a girl  undertake  a thing 
which  the  best  doctors  in  his  kingdom  had  failed  to  do : 
how  ever,  as  a trial  could  do  no  harm,  he  said  that  he 
wished  greatly  to  see  the  experiment  made.  But  Gran- 
nonia  answered,  ^'If  I show  you  the  effect  that  you 
desire,  you  must  promise  to  give  him  to  me  for  a hus- 
band.” The  king,  who  looked  upon  his  son  to  be  all  one 
as  dead,  answ  ered  her,  “ If  you  give  him  to  me  safe  and 
sound,  I will  give  him  to  you  sound  and  safe ; for  it  is 
no  great  matter  to  give  a husband  to  her  who  gives  me 
a son.” 

So  they  went  to  the  chamber  of  the  prince,  and 
hardly  had  she  anointed  him  with  the  blood,  when  he 
found  himself  just  as  if  nothing  had  ever  ailed  him. 
And  Grannonia,  when  she  saw  the  prince  stout  and 
hearty,  bade  the  king  keep  his  w'ord;  whereupon  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


165 


king  turning  round  to  his  son  said,  “My  son,  a mo- 
ment ago  you  were  all  but  dead,  and  now  I see  you 
alive,  and  can  hardly  beheve  it.  Therefore,  as  I have 
promised  this  maiden,  that  if  she  cured  you  she  should 
have  you  for  a husband,  now  that  Heaven  has  shown 
you  favour,  enable  me  to  perform  my  promise,  by  all 
the  love  you  bear  me,  since  gratitude  obliges  me  to  pay 
this  debt.^^ 

When  the  prince  heard  these  words  he  replied,  “ Sir, 
I would  that  I had  such  freedom  of  my  will  as  to  prove 
to  you  the  love  I bear  you;  but  as  I have  already 
pledged  my  faith  to  another  woman,  you  would  not 
consent  that  I should  break  my  word,  nor  would  this 
maiden  wish  me  to  do  such  a wrong  to  her  whom  I 
love ; nor  can  I indeed  alter  my  mind.” 

Grannonia,  hearing  this,  felt  a secret  pleasure  not 
to  be  described  at  finding  herself  still  alive  in  the 
memory  of  the  prince ; her  whole  face  became  crimson, 
and  she  said,  “ If  I should  induce  this  maiden  whom 
you  love  to  resign  her  claims  to  me,  would  you  then 
consent  to  my  wish?” — “Never,”  replied  the  prince, 
never  will  I banish  from  this  breast  the  fair  image 
of  her  I love ; and  whether  she  makes  for  me  a con- 
serve of  her  love,  or  gives  me  a dose  of  cassia,  I shall 
ever  remain  of  the  same  mind  and  will;  and  I would 
sooner  see  myself  in  danger  of  losing  my  place  at 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


166 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


the  table  of  life,  than  play  such  a trick  or  make  this 
exchange/^ 

Grannonia  could  no  longer  remain  in  the  trammels 
of  disguise,  and  discovered  to  the  prince  who  she  was ; 
for  the  chamber  being  darkened  on  account  of  the 
wounds  in  his  head,  and  she  being  disguised,  he  had 
not  known  her.  But  the  prince,  now  that  he  recog- 
nized her,  embraced  her  with  a joy  that  would  amaze 
you,  telling  his  father  who  she  was,  and  what  he  had 
done  and  suffered  for  her.  Then  they  sent  to  invite 
her  parents,  the  king  and  queen  of  Long-Field,  and  they 
celebrated  the  wedding  with  wonderful  festivity,  making 
great  sport  of  the  ninny  of  a fox,  and  concluding  at  the 
last  of  the  last,  that 

“ Pain  doth  indeed  a seasoning  prove 
Unto  the  joys  of  constant  love.*^ 


From  beginning  to  end  Popa’s  story  made  the  women 
laugh  outright;  but  where  it  spoke  of  their  cunning, 
which  was  sufficient  to  outwit  a fox,  they  were  near 
bursting  their  sides.  And  tnily  woman  has  artful  de- 
vices strung  like  beads  by  hundreds  on  every  hair  of 
her  head : fraud  is  her  mother,  falsehood  is  her  nurse. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SERPENT. 


167 


flattery  her  governess,  deceit  her  counsellor,  and  illusion 
her  companion,  so  that  she  turns  and  twists  man  about 
just  as  she  pleases.  But  let  us  return  to  Antonella, 
who  was  impatient  to  speak ; and  presently,  after 
mustering  her  thoughts,  she  spoke  as  follows. 


Digitized  by  Google 


168 


THE  SHE-BEAR. 

Truly  the  wise  man  said  well,  that  a command  of  gall 
cannot  be  obeyed  like  one  of  sugar.  A man  must  re- 
quire just  and  reasonable  things,  if  he  would  see  the 
scales  of  obedience  properly  trimmed.  From  orders 
which  are  improper  springs  resistance  which  is  not 
easily  overcome ; as  happened  to  the  King  of  Rough- 
Rock,  who,  by  asking  what  he  ought  not  of  his  daugh- 
ter, caused  her  to  run  away  from  him,  at  the  risk  of 
losing  both  honour  and  hfe. 


There  lived,  it  is  said,  once  upon  a time  a King  of 
Rough-Rock,  who  had  a wife  the  very  mother  of  beauty ; 
but  in  the  full  career  of  her  years,  she  fell  from  the 
horse  of  health  and  broke  her  life.  Before  the  candle 
of  life  went  out  at  the  auction  of  her  years*,  she  called 
her  husband  and  said  to  him,  **  I know  you  have  always 

* It  U customary  in  Naples  (as  also  in  France  and  Spain)  to  light  a candle  at 
auctions ; and  when  it  is  burnt  out,  no  further  bidding  can  be  made.  Goods  used 
^ to  be  sold  thus  in  this  country,  by  what  was  called  ‘ inch  of  candle.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SHE-BEAR. 


169 


loved  me  tenderly ; show  me  therefore  at  the  close  of 
my  days  the  completion  of  your  love,  by  promising  me 
never  to  marry  again,  unless  you  find  a woman  as  beau- 
tiful as  I have  been ; otherwise  I leave  you  my  curse, 
and  shall  bear  you  hatred  even  in  the  other  world.” 

The  king,  who  loved  his  wife  beyond  measure,  hear- 
ing this  her  last  wish,  burst  into  tears,  and  for  some 
time  could  not  answer  a single  word.  At  last,  when  he 
had  done  weeping,  he  said  to  her,  “ Sooner  than  take 
another  wife,  may  the  gout  lay  hold  on  me,  may  I have 
ray  head  cut  off  like  a mackarel*  ! My  dearest  love, 
drive  such  a thought  from  your  mind ; do  not  believe 
in  dreams,  or  that  I could  love  any  other  woman ; you 
were  the  first  new  coat  of  my  love,  and  you  shall  carry 
away  with  you  the  last  rags  of  my  affection.” 

As  he  said  these  words,  the  poor  young  queen,  who 
had  the  death-rattle  in  her  throat,  turned  up  her  eyes 
and  stretched  out  her  feet.  When  the  king  saw  her 
life  thus  running  out,  he  unstopped  the  channels  of 
his  eyes,  and  made  such  a howling  and  beating  and 
outcry,  that  all  the  Court  came  running  up,  calling  on 
the  name  of  the  dear  soul,  and  upbraiding  Fortune  for 
taking  her  from  him ; and  plucking  out  his  beard,  he 
cursed  the  stars,  that  had  sent  him  such  a misfortune. 

* Sia  fatto  comm’  a ttarace.  A starace  u a flab,  which  ia  eaten  with  ita  head 
pulled  off. 


Digitized  by  Google 


170 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


But  bearing  in  mind  the  maxim,  “ Pain  in  one's  elbow 
and  pain  for  one’s  wife  are  alike  hard  to  bear,  but  are 
soon  over,”  ere  the  Night  had  gone  forth  into  the  place- 
of-arms  in  the  sky  to  muster  the  bats,  he  began  to  count 
upon  his  fingers  and  to  reflect  thus  to  himself : Here 

is  my  wife  dead,  and  I am  left  a wretched  widower,  with 
no  hope  of  seeing  any  one  but  this  poor  daughter  whom 
she  has  left  me.  I must  therefore  try  to  discover  some 
means  or  other  of  having  a son  and  heir.  But  where 
shall  I look  ? where  shall  I find  a woman  equal  in  beauty 
to  my  wife  ? every  one  appears  a witch  in  comparison 
with  her ; where  then  shall  I find  another  with  a bit  of 
stick,  or  seek  another  with  the  bell*,  if  Nature  made 
Nardella  (may  she  be  in  glory  I)  and  then  broke  the 
mould  t?  Alas,  in  what  a labyrinth  has  she  put  me, 
in  what  a perplexity  has  the  promise  I made  her  left  me  ! 
But  what  do  I say  ? I am  running  away  before  I have 
seen  the  wolf ; let  me  open  eyes  and  ears  and  look  about : 
may  there  not  be  some  other  she-ass  in  Nardella’s  stable  ? 
is  it  possible  that  the  world  should  be  lost  to  me  ? is  there 
such  a dearth  of  women,  or  is  the  race  extinct  ?” 

So  saying  he  forthwith  issued  a proclamation  and 
command  by  Master  Chiommiento,  that  all  the  hand- 
some women  in  the  world  should  come  to  the  touch- 

* As  children  htmt  for  an3rthing  lost  in  the  sand  with  a little  stick  ($pruoccoU>j, 
and  the  town-crier  goes  about  u-ith  his  bell. 

t So  Ariosto  says — “ Natura  il  fece  e poi  ruppe  la  stampa.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SHE-BEAR. 


171 


stone  of  beauty,  for  he  would  take  the  most  beautiful  to 
wife  and  endow  her  with  a kingdom.  Now  when  this 
news  was  spread  abroad,  there  was  not  a woman  in  the 
universe  who  did  not  come  to  try  her  luck, — not  a witch, 
however  ugly,  who  staid  behind ; for  when  it  is  a ques- 
tion of  beauty,  no  scullion-wench  will  acknowledge  her- 
self surpassed,  no  sea-ork  will  yield : every  one  piques 
herself  on  being  the  handsomest ; and  if  the  looking- 
glass  tells  her  the  truth,  she  blames  the  glass  for  being 
untrue,  and  the  quicksilver  for  being  put  on  badly. 

When  the  town  was  thus  filled  with  women,  the  king 
had  them  all  drawn  up  in  a line ; and  he  walked  up  and 
down,  from  top  to  bottom,  like  a baboon  that  is  never 
still ; and  as  he  examined  and  measured  each  from  head 
to  foot,  one  appeared  to  him  wry-browed,  another  long- 
nosed,  another  broad-mouthed,  another  thick-lipped, 
another  tall  as  a maypole,  another  short  and  dumpy, 
another  too  stout,  another  too  slender;  the  Spaniard 
did  not  please  him  on  account  of  her  dark  colour,  the 
Neapolitan  was  not  to  his  fancy  on  account  of  her  wad- 
dling gait,  the  German  appeared  cold  and  icy,  the 
Frenchwoman  frivolous  and  giddy,  the  Venetian  with  her 
light  hair  looked  like  a distaff  of  flax.  At  the  end  of 
the  end,  one  for  this  cause  and  another  for  that,  he  sent 
them  all  away,  with  one  hand  before  and  the  other  be- 
hind ; and  seeing  that  so  many  fair  faces  were  all  show 


Digitized  by  Google 


172 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


and  no  wool,  he  turned  his  thoughts  to  his  own  daugh* 
ter,  saying,  "Why  do  I go  seeking  Maria  at  Ravenna, 
when  my  daughter  Preziosa  is  formed  in  the  same  mould 
of  beauty  as  her  mother  ? I have  this  fair  face  here  in 
my  house,  and  yet  go  looking  for  it  at  the  fag-end  of 
the  world.” 

WTien  Preziosa  heard  this,  she  retired  to  her  chamber, 
and  bewailing  her  ill  fortune,  she  did  not  leave  a hair 
upon  her  head ; and  whilst  she  was  lamenting  thus,  an 
old  woman  came  to  her,  who  was  her  confidant.  As 
soon  as  she  saw  Preziosa,  who  seemed  to  belong 
more  to  the  other  world  than  to  this,  and  heard  the 
cause  of  her  grief,  the  old  woman  said  to  her,  " Cheer 
up,  my  daughter;  do  not  despair;  there  is  a remedy 
for  every  evil  save  death.  Now  listen : if  your  father 
speaks  to  you  thus  once  again,  put  this  bit  of  wood  into 
your  mouth,  and  instantly  you  will  be  changed  into  a 
she-bear ; then  off  with  you ! for  in  his  fright  he  will  let 
you  depart ; and  go  straight  to  the  woo^  where  Heaven 
has  kept  good-fortune  in  store  for  you  since  the  day  you 
were  born : and  whenever  you  wish  to  appear  a woman, 
as  you  are  and  will  remain,  only  take  the  piece  of  wood 
out  of  your  mouth,  and  you  will  return  to  your  true 
form.”  Then  Preziosa  embraced  the  old  woman,  and 
giving  her  a good  apronful  of  meal,  and  ham  and  bacon, 
sent  her  away. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SHE-BEAR. 


173 


As  soon  as  the  Sun  began  to  change  his  quarters,  the 
king  ordered  the  musicians  to  come;  and  inviting  all 
his  lords  and  vassals  he  held  a great  feast.  And  after 
dancing  for  five  or  six  hours,  they  all  sat  down  to  table, 
and  ate  and  drank  beyond  measure.  Then  the  king 
asked  his  courtiers  whether  he  could  not  marry  Preziosa, 
as  she  was  the  picture  of  his  dead  wife.  But  the  instant 
Preziosa  heard  this,  she  slipped  the  bit  of  wood  into  her 
mouth,  and  took  the  figure  of  a terrible  she-bear ; at  the 
sight  of  which  all  present  were  frightened  out  of  their 
wits,  and  ran  off  as  fast  as  they  could  scamper. 

Meanwhile  Preziosa  went  out,  and  took  her  way  to  a 
wood,  where  the  Shades  were  holding  a consultation  how 
they  might  do  some  mischief  to  the  Sun  at  the  close  of 
day.  And  there  she  staid,  in  the  pleasant  companionship 
of  the  other  animals,  until  the  son  of  the  king  of  Run- 
ning-Water came  to  hunt  in  that  part  of  the  country, 
who  at  the  sight  of  the  bear  had  like  to  have  died  on  the 
spot.  But  when  he  saw  the  beast  come  gently  up  to  him, 
wagging  her  tail  hke  a little  dog  and  rubbing  her  sides 
against  him,  he  took  courage,  and  patted  her,  and  said, 
” Good  bear,  good  bear  ! there,  there  ! poor  beast,  poor 
beast !”  'Phen  he  led  her  home,  and  ordered  that  she 
should  be  taken  good  care  of ; and  he  had  her  put  into 
a garden  close  to  the  royal  palace,  that  he  might  see  her 
from  the  window  whenever  he  wished. 


Digitized  by  Google 


174 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


One  day,  when  all  the  people  of  the  house  were  gone 
out,  and  the  prince  was  left  alone,  he  went  to  the  win- 
dow to  look  out  at  the  bear ; and  there  he  beheld  Pre- 
ziosa,  who  had  taken  the  piece  of  wood  out  of  her  mouth, 
combing  her  golden  tresses.  At  the  sight  of  this  beauty, 
which  was  beyond  the  beyonds,  he  had  like  to  have 
lost  his  senses  with  amazement,  and  tumbling  down  the 
stairs  he  ran  out  into  the  garden.  But  Preziosa,  who 
was  on  the  watch  and  observed  him,  popped  the  piece 
of  wood  into  her  mouth,  and  was  instantly  changed  into 
a bear  again. 

When  the  prince  came  down  and  looked  about  in 
vain  for  Preziosa,  whom  he  had  seen  from  the  window 
above,  he  was  so  amazed  at  the  trick  that  a deep  melan- 
choly came  over  him,  and  in  four  days  he  fell  sick,  cry- 
ing continually,  “ My  bear,  my  bear  !”  His  mother, 
hearing  him  wailing  thus,  imagined  that  the  bear  had 
done  him  some  hurt,  and  gave  orders  that  she  should 
be  killed.  But  the  servants,  enamoured  of  the  tame- 
ness of  the  bear,  who  made  herself  beloved  by  the  very 
stones  in  the  road,  took  pity  on  her,  and,  instead  of 
killing  her,  they  led  her  to  the  wood,  and  told  the 
queen  that  they  had  put  an  end  to  her. 

When  this  came  to  the  ears  of  the  prince,  he  acted 
in  a way  to  pass  belief ; ill  or  well  he  jumped  out  of 
bed,  and  w'as  going  at  once  to  make  mincemeat  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SHE-BEAR. 


175 


servants.  But  when  they  told  him  the  truth  of  the 
affair,  he  jumped  on  horseback,  half-dead  as  he  was, 
and  went  rambling  about  and  seeking  everywhere,  until 
at  length  he  found  the  bear.  Then  he  took  her  home 
again,  and  putting  her  into  a chamber  said  to  her,  “ O 
lovely  morsel  for  a king  who  art  shut  up  in  this  skin  1 
O candle  of  love,  who  art  enclosed  within  this  hairy 
lanthom ! wherefore  all  this  trifling  ? do  you  wish  to 
see  me  pine  and  pant,  and  die  by  inches  ? I am  wast- 
ing away,  without  hope,  and  tormented  by  thy  beauty ; 
and  you  see  clearly  the  proof,  for  I am  shrunk  two- 
thirds  in  size,  like  wine  boiled  down,  and  am  nothing 
but  skin  and  bone,  for  the  fever  is  double-stitched  to 
my  veins.  So  lift  up  the  curtain  of  this  hairy  hide, 
and  let  me  gaze  upon  the  spectacle  of  thy  beauty  I 
raise,  O raise  the  leaves  off  this  basket,  and  let  me  get 
a sight  of  the  fine  fruit  beneath ! lift  up  that  cm^tain, 
and  let  my  eyes  pass  in  to  behold  the  pomp  of  wonders ! 
Who  has  shut  up  so  smooth  a creature  in  a prison  woven 
of  hair?  who  has  locked  up  so  rich  a treasure  in  a 
leathern  chest  ? Let  me  behold  this  display  of  graces, 
and  take  in  payment  all  my  love ; for  nothing  but  this 
bear^s-grease  can  cure  the  nervous  spasms  I endure.” 
But  when  he  had  said  and  had  said,  this  and  a great 
deal  more,  and  still  saw  that  all  his  words  were  thrown 
away,  he  took  to  his  bed  again,  and  had  such  a despe- 


Digifized  by  Google 


176 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


rate  fit  that  the  doctors  prognosticated  badly  of  his 
case.  Then  his  mother,  who  had  no  other  joy  in  the 
world,  sat  down  by  his  bedside,  and  said  to  him,  My 
son,  whence  comes  all  this  grief?  what  melancholy 
humour  has  seized  you  ? you  are  young,  you  are  loved, 
you  are  great,  you  are  rich, — what  then  is  it  you  want, 
my  son?  speak — a bashful  beggar  carries  an  empty 
bag.  If  you  want  a wife,  only  choose,  and  I will  bring 
the  match  about ; do  you  take,  and  I ’ll  pay.  Do  you  not 
see  that  your  illness  is  an  illness  to  me?  your  pulse 
beats  with  fever  in  your  veins,  and  my  heart  beats  with 
illness  in  my  brain,  for  I have  no  other  support  of  my 
old-age  than  you.  So  be  cheerful  now,  and  cheer  up 
my  heart,  and  do  not  see  the  whole  kingdom  thrown 
into  mourning,  this  house  into  lamentation,  and  your 
mother  forlorn  and  heart-broken.” 

When  the  prince  heard  these  words,  he  said,  “ No- 
thing can  console  me  but  the  sight  of  the  bear ; there- 
fore, if  you  wish  to  see  me  well  again,  let  her  be  brought 
into  this  chamber : I will  have  no  one  else  to  attend 
me,  and  make  my  bed,  and  cook  for  me,  but  she  her- 
self ; and  you  may  be  sure  that  this  pleasure  will  make 
me  well  in  a trice.” 

Thereupon  his  mother,  although  she  thought  it  ridi- 
culous enough  for  the  bear  to  act  as  cook  and  cham- 
bermaid, and  feared  that  her  son  was  not  in  his  right 


Digitized  by  Google 


TH£  SHE-BEAR. 


177 


mind,  yet,  in  order  to  gratify  him,  had  the  bear 
fetched.  And  when  the  bear  came  up  to  the  princess 
bed,  she  raised  her  paw,  and  felt  the  patient’s  pulse; 
which  made  the  queen  laugh  outright,  for  she  thought 
every  moment  that  the  bear  would  scratch  his  nose. 
Then  the  prince  said,  “ My  dear  bear,  will  you  not  cook 
for  me,  and  give  me  my  food,  and  wait  upon  me  ?”  and 
the  bear  nodded  her  head,  to  show  that  she  accepted 
the  oflSce.  Then  his  mother  had  some  fowls  brought, 
and  a fire  lighted  on  the  hearth  in  the  same  chamber, 
and  some  water  set  to  boil ; whereupon  the  bear  laying 
hold  on  a fowl,  scalded  and  plucked  it  handily,  and 
drew  it,  and  then  stuck  one  portion  of  it  on  the  spit, 
and  with  the  other  part  she  made  such  a deheious 
hash,  that  the  prince,  who  could  not  rehsh  even  sugar, 
licked  his  fingers  at  the  taste.  And  when  he  had  done 
eating,  the  bear  handed  him  drink  with  such  grace, 
that  the  queen  was  ready  to  kiss  her  on  her  forehead. 
Thereupon  the  prince  arose,  and  the  bear  quickly  set 
about  making  the  bed;  and  running  into  the  garden, 
she  gathered  a clothful  of  roses  and  citron-flowers,  and 
strewed  them  over  it,  so  that  the  queen  said  the  bear 
was  worth  her  weight  in  gold,  and  that  her  son  had 
good  reason  to  be  so  fond  of  her. 

But  when  the  prince  saw  these  pretty  oflSces,  they 
only  added  fuel  to  the  fire ; and  if  before  he  wasted  by 

N 


Digitized  by  Google 


1/8 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


ounces,  he  now  melted  away  by  pounds;  and  he  said 
to  the  queen,  My  lady  mother,  if  I do  not  give  this 
bear  a kiss,  the  breath  will  leave  my  body.”  Where- 
upon the  queen,  seeing  him  fainting  away,  said,  “ Kiss 
him,  kiss  him,  my  beautiful  beast ! let  me  not  sec  my 
poor  son  die  of  longing.”  Then  the  bear  went  up  to 
the  prince,  and  taking  him  by  the  cheeks*  kissed  him 
again  and  again.  IMeanwhile  (I  know  not  how  it  was) 
the  piece  of  wood  slipped  out  of  Preziosa’s  mouth,  and 
she  remained  in  the  arms  of  the  prince  the  most  beau- 
tiful creature  in  the  world;  and  pressing  her  to  his 
heart  he  said,  I have  caught  you,  my  little  rogue  ! you 
shall  not  escape  from  me  again  without  a good  reason.” 
At  these  words  Preziosa,  adding  the  colour  of  modesty 
to  the  picture  of  her  natural  beauty,  said  to  him,  I am 
indeed  in  your  hands, — only  guard  my  honour,  and  take 
me  where  you  will.” 

Then  the  queen  inquired  who  the  beautiful  maiden 
was,  and  what  had  brought  her  to  this  savage  life ; and 
Preziosa  related  the  whole  story  of  her  misfortunes,  at 
which  the  queen,  praising  her  as  a good  and  virtuous 
girl,  told  her  son  that  she  was  content  that  Preziosa 
should  be  his  wife.  Then  the  prince,  who  desired  no- 
thing else  in  life,  forthwith  pledged  her  his  faith ; and 

* Pigliatala  a pezzechille.  A common  practice  at  Naples  in  kissing  is  to  nip  the 
person  on  each  cheek  at  the  same  time  with  finger  and  thumb. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SHE-BEAR. 


1/9 


the  mother  giving  them  her  blessing,  this  happy  mar- 
riage was  eelebrated  with  great  feasting  and  illumina- 
tions, and  Preziosa  experienced  the  truth  of  the  saying, 
that 

“ One  who  acts  well  may  always  expect  good.” 


When  Antonella^s  story  was  ended,  it  was  loudly  ap- 
plauded as  beautiful  and  charming,  and  offering  a good 
example  of  a virtuous  maiden.  And  now  Giulia’s  turn 
being  come,  she  began  as  follows. 


N 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


THE  DOVE. 

He  who  is  born  a prince,  should  not  act  like  a beggar- 
boy  : a man  who  is  high  in  rank  ought  not  to  set  a bad 
example  to  those  below  him,  for  the  little  jackass  learns 
from  the  big  one  to  eat  straw.  It  is  no  wonder  therefore 
that  Heaven  sends  him  troubles  by  bushels,  as  happened 
to  a prince,  who  was  brought  into  constant  trouble  for 
ill-treating  and  tormenting  a poor  woman  j so  that  he 
was  near  losing  his  life  miserably. 


About  eight  miles  from  Naples,  in  the  direction  of  the 
Astruni*,  there  was  once  a wood  of  fig-trees  and  poplars, 
which  the  sun^s  darts  shot  at,  but  could  never  penetrate. 
In  this  wood  stood  a half-ruined  cottage,  in  which  dwelt 
an  old  woman,  who  w'as  as  light  of  teeth  as  she  was  bur- 
dened with  years,  as  high  with  her  hump  as  she  was 
low  in  fortune : she  had  a hundred  WTinkles  in  her  face, 
but  a great  many  more  in  her  purse ; and  although  her 

• A circular  valley  near  the  Lago  d’ Agnano,  not  far  from  Naplea : it  forma  a royal 
deer-park. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


181 


head  was  covered  with  silver,  she  had  not  the  hundred- 
and-twentieth  part  of  a carlino  to  revive  her  spirit; 
so  that  she  went  from  one  thatched  eottage  to  another 
begging  alms,  to  keep  life  in  her.  But  as  folks  now-a- 
days  much  sooner  give  a pmse  full  of  crowns  to  a crafty 
spy  than  a farthing  to  a poor  needy  man,  she  had  to 
labour  for  a whole  day  to  get  a dish  of  kidney-beans,  and 
at  a time  when  there  was  such  a plenty  of  them  in  the 
land  that  few  houses  could  contain  the  heaps.  But  of  a 
truth  an  old  kettle  never  lacks  holes  and  bumps,  nor  a 
starved  horse  flies,  nor  a fallen  tree  the  axe.  Now  one 
day  the  poor  old  woman,  after  having  washed  the  beans, 
and  put  them  into  a pot,  and  placed  it  outside  the  win- 
dow, went  her  way  to  the  wood  to  get  some  sticks,  in  or- 
der to  boil  them.  And  as  she  was  going  and  retmTiing, 
Nardo  Aniello,  the  king^s  son,  passed  by  the  eottage  on 
his  way  to  the  chase,  and  seeing  the  pot  at  the  window 
he  took  a great  fancy  to  have  a fling  at  it ; and  he  made 
a bet  with  his  attendants,  to  see  who  should  fling  the 
straightest,  and  hit  it  in  the  middle  with  a stone.  Then 
they  began  to  throw  at  the  innocent  pot,  and  in  three 
or  four  casts  the  prince  hit  it  to  a hair  and  won  the 
wager. 

The  old  woman  returned  just  at  the  moment  when 
they  had  gone  away ; and  seeing  the  sad  disaster,  she 
began  to  act  as  if  she  were  beside  herself,  crying,  “ Ay, 


Digitized  by  Google 


182 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


let  him  stretch  out  his  arm,  and  go  about  boasting  how 
he  has  broken  this  pot ! the  villainous  rascal,  who  has 
sown  my  beans  out  of  season ! And  yet,  if  he  had  no 
compassion  for  my  misery,  he  should  have  had  some 
regard  for  his  own  interest,  and  not  have  cast  to  the 
gi’ound  the  escutcheon  of  his  own  house,  nor  trodden 
underfoot  things  that  other  folks  carry  on  their  heads*. 
But  let  him  go ! and  I pray  Heaven  on  my  bare  knees, 
and  from  the  bottom  of  my  soul,  that  he  may  fall  in' 
love  with  the  daughter  of  some  ogress,  who  may  plague 
and  torment  him  in  every  wayf.  May  his  mother-in- 
law  give  him  such  a curse,  that  he  may  see  himself  live 
on  and  bewail  himself  as  dead;  and  being  spell-bound 
by  the  beauty  of  the  daughter  and  the  arts  of  the  mother, 
may  he  never  be  able  to  escape,  but  be  obliged  to  remain, 
— ay  indeed  till  he  burst  with  the  tormentings  of  that 
odious  harpy ! and  may  she  order  him  about  with  a 
cudgel  in  her  hand,  and  give  him  bread  with  a little 
forkj,  that  he  may  have  good  cause  to  sigh  and  lament 
over  my  beans  which  he  has  spilt  on  the  ground.^^ 

The  old  woman’s  curses  took  wing  and  flew  up  to 
heaven  in  a trice ; so  that,  notwithstanding  w'hat  the 
proverb  says,  “For  a woman’s  curse  you  are  never  the 
worse,”  and  “ The  coat  of  a horse  that  has  been  cursed 

• 1.  e.  ‘ esteemed  so  highly.’  t C/ie  lofaccia  bollere  e mmale  cocere. 

X i,  e.  ‘ give  him  plenty  of  work  and  little  to  cat.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


183 


always  shines,”  she  rated  the  prince  so  soundly  that  he 
well-nigh  jumped  out  of  his  skin. 

Scarcely  had  two  hours  passed,  when  the  prince, 
losing  himself  in  a wood  and  parted  from  his  attend- 
ants, met  a beautiful  maiden,  who  was  going  along 
picking  up  snails,  aud  saying  with  a laugh. 

Snail,  snail,  put  out  your  horn. 

Your  mother  is  laughing  you  to  scorn. 

For  she  has  a little  son  just  boru*.” 

When  the  prince  saw  appear  before  him  this  cabinet 
of  the  most  precious  things  of  Nature,  this  bank  of  the 
richest  deposits  of  heaven,  this  arsenal  of  the  most 
powerful  shafts  of  Love,  he  knew  not  what  had  befallen 
him ; and  as  the  beams  from  the  eyes  of  that  plump 
crystal  face  fell  upon  the  tinder  of  his  heart,  he  was  all 
in  a flame,  so  that  he  became  a limekiln,  wherein  the 
stones  of  designs  were  bm*nt  to  build  the  house  of  hopes. 

Now  Filadoro  (for  so  the  maiden  was  named)  was  no 
wiser  than  other  people  f ; and  the  prince,  being  a smart 
young  fellow  with  handsome  moustachios,  pierced  her 
heart  through  and  through ; so  that  they  stood  looking 
at  one  another  for  compassion  with  their  eyes,  and,  even 
if  their  tongues  had  had  the  pip,  their  looks  were  trum- 

* The  reader  will  recall  the  English  saying;  in  Germany  the  children  have  a 
mnular  one.  t motinava  nneapole — ‘ did  not  peel  medlars.* 


Digitized  by  Google 


184 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


pets  of  the  Vicaria*,  that  proclaimed  aloud  the  secret  of 
the  soul.  After  they  had  both  remained  thus  for  a 
long  time,  with  the  mumps  in  their  throat,  unable  to 
utter  a single  word,  the  prince  at  last,  turning  the  stop- 
cock of  his  voice,  addressed  Filadoro  thus : — From 
what  meadow  has  this  flower  of  beauty  sprung  ? from 
what  heaven  has  this  store  of  grace  been  showered 
down  ? from  what  mine  has  this  treasure  of  beauteous 
things  come  to  light?  O happy  woods,  0 fortunate 
groves,  which  this  nobility  inhabits,  which  this  illumi- 
nation of  the  festivals  of  love  irradiates ! O ye  groves 
and  woods,  in  which  are  cut,  not  broomsticks  or  beams 
for  the  gallows  or  lids  for  pitchers,  but  gates  of  the 
temple  of  beauty,  rafters  of  the  dwelling  of  the  Graces, 
and  rods  for  the  shafts  of  Love  \” 

“ Kiss  this  hand,  my  lord,^^  answered  Filadoro ; " not 
so  much  modesty ; for  all  the  praise  that  you  have  be- 
stowed on  me  belongs  to  your  virtues,  not  to  my  merits ; 
for  I am  a woman,  who  am  my  own  standard,  and  I do 
not  wish  to  be  measured  by  another;  such  as  I am, 
handsome  or  ugly,  black  or  white,  fat  or  thin,  notable 
or  stupid,  a witch  or  a faiiy,  as  pretty  as  a little  doll  or 
as  frightful  as  a dragon,  I am  wholly  at  your  command ; 
for  your  manly  form  has  captivated  my  heart,  your 

* The  Vicaria  ia  the  highest  tribonal  in  Naples,  in  which  the  Vicario  presides  as 
viceregal  judge. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


185 


princely  mien  has  pierced  me  through  from  side  to  side, 
and  from  this  moment  I give  myself  up  to  you  for  ever 
as  a chained  slave.” 

These  were  not  words,  but  the  sound  of  a trumpet, 
which  called  the  prince  to  the  table  of  amorous  joys, 
or  rather  summoned  him  to  horse  in  the  combat  of 
love;  and  as  soon  as  he  saw  but  a finger  of  tender- 
ness held  out  to  him,  he  seized  at  once  her  whole 
hand,  kissing  the  ivory  hook  that  had  caught  his  heart. 
At  this  ceremony  of  the  prince,  Filadoro’s  face  grew 
as  red  as  scarlet,  or  rather  like  the  palette  of  a painter, 
on  which  are  seen  mixed  the  vermilion  of  shame,  the 
white-lead  of  fear,  the  verdigris  of  hope  and  the  cinna- 
bar of  desire.  But  the  more  Nardo  Aniello  wished  to 
continue  speaking,  the  more  his  tongue  seemed  tied ; for 
in  this  wretched  life  there  is  no  wine  of  enjoyment  with- 
out dregs  of  vexation,  no  rich  broth  of  pleasure  without 
the  scum  of  annoyance ; and  just  at  this  moment  Fda- 
doro^s  mother  suddenly  appeai'cd,  who  was  such  an  ugly 
ogress  that  Nature  seemed  to  have  formed  her  as  a 
model  of  hon’ors ; she  had  hair  like  a besom  of  holly, 
not  fit  indeed  to  cleanse  houses  of  soot  and  cobwebs, 
but  to  sweep  upon  the  hearts  of  all  beholders  the  clouds 
of  fright  and  terror ; her  forehead  was  a Genoa  stone, 
to  sharpen  the  dagger  of  fear  which  she  stuck  into  all 
breasts ; her  eyes  were  comets,  that  predicted  trembling 


Digitized  by  Google 


186 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


of  the  legs,  icy  dread  at  tlie  heart,  and  shuddering  of  the 
spirit ; for  she  carried  terror  in  her  face,  affright  in  her 
looks,  horror  in  her  steps,  and  dread  in  her  words ; her 
mouth  had  tusks  like  a boards,  was  wide  as  an  abyss^ 
opening  like  that  of  a person  who  has  the  apoplexy, 
and  slabbering  like  a mule’s.  In  short,  from  head  to 
foot  she  looked  a quintessence  of  ugliness,  an  hospital 
of  distempers ; insomuch  that  the  prince  must  for  certain 
have  carried  some  story  of  Mark  or  Fiorclla*  sown  into 
his  doublet,  that  he  did  not  faint  away  at  the  sight. 
Then  the  ogress  seized  Nardo  Aniello  by  the  nape 
of  his  neck,  saying,  Hollo  ! what  now,  you  thief,  you 
rogue !” 

“ Yourself  the  rogue  !”  replied  the  prince : " back 
with  you,  old  hag !”  And  he  was  just  going  to  draw 
his  sword,  which  was  an  old  Damascus  blade,  when  all 
at  once  he  stood  fixed,  like  a sheep  that  has  seen  the  wolf 
and  can  neither  stir  nor  utter  a sound ; so  that  the  ogress 
led  him  like  an  ass  by  a halter  to  her  house.  And  when 
they  came  there  she  said  to  him,  Mind  now,  and  work 
like  a dog,  unless  you  wish  to  die  like  a hog ; and  for 
your  first  task,  take  care  in  the  course  of  today  to  have 
this  acre  of  land  dug  and  sown  as  level  as  this  room  : 
and  recollect,  that  if  I return  in  the  evening  and  do  not 
find  the  work  finished,  I shall  eat  you  up.”  Then  bid- 

* A charm. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE.  187 

ding  her  daughter  take  eare  of  the  house,  she  went  to  a 
meeting  of  the  other  ogresses  in  the  wood. 

Nardo  Aniello,  seeing  himself  dragged  into  this  di- 
lemma, began  to  bathe  his  breast  with  tears,  cursing 
his  fate,  which  had  brought  him  to  this  pass.  But 
Filadoro,  on  the  other  hand,  comforted  him,  bidding 
him  be  of  good  heart,  for  that  she  would  even  risk  her 
life  to  assist  him;  and  adding,  that  he  ought  not  to 
lament  his  fate,  which  had  led  him  to  that  house,  where 
he  was  loved  so  dearly  by  her,  and  that  he  showed  little 
return  for  her  love  by  standing  so  in  despair  at  what 
had  happened.  The  prince  replied,  I am  not  grieved 
at  having  come  down  from  the  horse  to  the  ass,  nor  at 
having  exchanged  the  royal  palace  for  this  hovel,  the 
splendid  banquets  for  a crust  of  bread,  the  troop  of  ser- 
vants for  field-labour,  the  sceptre  for  a spade,  nor  at 
seeing  myself,  who  have  terrified  armies,  now  frightened 
by  this  hideous  scarecrow;  for  I should  deem  all  my 
disasters  good-fortune  to  be  with  you,  and  to  gaze  upon 
you  w'ith  these  eyes.  But  what  pierces  me  to  the  heart 
is  that  I have  to  dig  till  my  hands  are  covered  with  hard 
skin, — I whose  fingers  were  as  delicate  and  soft  as  Bar- 
bary wool ; and,  what  is  still  worse,  I have  to  do  more 
than  two  oxen  could  get  through  in  a day ; and  if  I do 
not  finish  the  task  this  evening,  your  mother  will  eat 
me  up : yet  withal  I should  not  grieve  so  much  to  quit 


Digitized  by  Google 


188 


THE  PENTAMEBONE. 


this  wretched  body  as  to  be  parted  from  so  beautiful  a 
creature.” 

So  saying  be  heaved  sighs  by  bushels  and  shed  tears 
by  casksful.  But  Filadoro,  drying  bis  eyes,  said  to  him, 
" Fear  not,  my  life,  that  my  mother  will  touch  a hair  of 
your  bead;  trust  to  Filadoro,  and  fear  not;  for  you 
must  know  that  I possess  magical  powers,  and  am  able 
to  make  water  set  cream,  and  to  darken  the  sun. 
Enough  and  sufficient — be  of  good  heart,  for  by  the 
evening  the  piece  of  land  will  be  dug  and  sown,  without 
any  one^s  stirring  a hand.^^ 

When  Nardo  Aniello  heai’d  this,  he  answered,  “ K you 
have  magic  power,  as  you  say,  0 beauty  of  the  world, 
why  do  we  not  fly  from  this  country  ? for  you  shall  live 
like  a queen  in  my  father’s  house.”  And  Filadoro 
replied,  "A  certain  conjunction  of  the  stars  prevents 
this ; but  the  trouble  wiU  soon  pass,  and  we  shall  be 
happy.” 

With  these  and  a thousand  other  pleasant  discourses 
the  day  passed ; and  when  the  ogress  came  back,  she 
called  to  her  daughter  from  the  road,  and  said,  " Fila- 
doro, let  down  your  hair!”  for  as  the  house  had  no 
staircase,  she  always  ascended  by  her  daughter’s  tresses. 
As  soon  as  Filadoro  heard  her  mother’s  voice,  she  un- 
hotmd  her  hair  and  let  fall  her  tresses,  making  a golden 
ladder  to  an  iron  heart:  whereupon  the  old  woman 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


189 


mounted  up  quickly  and  ran  into  the  garden.  But 
when  she  found  it  all  dug  and  sown,  she  was  beside 
herself  wuth  amazement;  for  it  seemed  to  her  impos- 
sible that  a delicate  lad  should  have  accompUshed  such 
dog's  labour. 

But  the  next  morning,  hardly  had  the  Sun  gone  out 
to  warm  himself,  on  account  of  the  cold  he  had  caught 
in  the  river  of  India,  when  the  ogress  went  dowTi  again, 
bidding  Nardo  Aniello  take  care  that  in  the  evening  she 
should  find  ready  split  six  stacks  of  wood  which  were 
in  the  cellar,  with  eveiy  log  cleft  into  four  pieces ; or 
otherwise  she  would  cut  him  up  like  bacon,  and  make  a 
fry  of  him  for  supper. 

On  hearing  this  decree  the  poor  prince  had  like  to 
have  died  of  terror ; and  Filadoro,  seeing  him  half-dead 
and  pale  as  ashes,  said,  ^Vhy,  what  a coward  you  are 
to  be  frightened  at  such  a trifle !"  “ Do  you  think  it 

a trifle,”  replied  Nardo  Aniello,  “to  split  six  stacks  of 
wood,  with  every  log  cleft  into  four  pieces,  between  this 
time  and  the  evening  ? Alas ! I shall  sooner  be  cleft 
in  halves  myself,  to  fill  the  mouth  of  this  horrid  old 
woman.” 

“ Fear  not,”  answered  Filadoro ; for  without  your 
giving  yourself  any  trouble,  the  wood  shall  all  be  split 
in  good  time ; but  meanwhile  cheer  up  if  you  love  me, 
and  do  not  split  my  heart  with  such  lamentation.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


190 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Now  when  the  Sun  had  shut  up  the  shop  of  his  rays, 
in  order  not  to  sell  light  to  the  Shades,  the  old  woman 
returned,  and  bidding  Filadoro  let  down  the  usual  lad- 
der, she  ascended ; and  finding  the  wood  all  ready  split, 
she  began  to  suspect  that  it  was  her  daughter  who  had 
given  her  this  checkmate.  And  the  third  day,  in  order 
to  make  a third  trial,  she  ordered  the  prince  to  clean 
out  for  her  a cistern  which  held  a thousand  casks  of 
water,  for  she  wished  to  fill  it  anew ; adding,  that  if  the 
task  were  not  finished  by  the  evening  she  would  make 
mincemeat  of  him. 

When  the  old  woman  went  away,  Nardo  Aniello  be- 
gan again  to  weep  and  wail;  and  Filadoro,  seeing  that 
the  labours  increased,  and  that  the  old  woman  had 
something  of  the  jackass  in  her  to  burden  the  poor 
fellow  with  such  tasks  and  troubles,  said  to  him,  Be 
quiet,  and  as  soon  as  the  moment  is  past  that  interrupts 
my  art,  before  the  Sun  says  ^ I am  off,^  we  will  say  good- 
by  to  this  house ; sure  enough  this  evening  my  mother 
shall  find  the  land  cleared,  and  I will  go  off  with  you, 
alive  or  dead.^'  The  prince,  on  hearing  this  news, 
opened  his  heart, — all  the  more  easily  as  he  w'as  before 
ready  to  burst ; and  embracing  Filadoro  he  said,  “ Thou 
art  the  pole-star  of  this  storm-tossed  bark,  my  soul ! 
thou  art  the  prop  of  my  hopes.^’ 

Now  when  evening  drew  nigh,  Filadoro  having  dug 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


191 


a hole  in  the  garden,  under  which  there  was  a large 
underground  passage,  they  went  out  and  took  the  way  to 
Naples.  But  when  they  arrived  at  the  grotto  of  Poz- 
zuolo,  Nardo  Aniello  said  to  Filadoro,  “It  will  never 
do,  my  dear,  for  me  to  take  you  to  the  palace  on  foot 
and  drest  in  this  manner;  therefore  wait  at  this  inn, 
and  I will  soon  return  with  horses,  cari’iages,  servants 
and  clothes.”  So  Filadoro  stayed  behind,  and  the  prince 
went  his  way  to  the  city. 

Meanwhile  the  ogress  returned  home,  and  as  Filadoro 
did  not  answer  to  her  usual  summons,  she  grew  suspi- 
cious, ran  into  the  wood,  and  cutting  a great  long  pole, 
placed  it  against  the  window,  and  climbed  up  like  a cat. 
Then  she  went  into  the  house,  and  hunted  everywhere, 
inside  and  out,  high  and  low,  but  found  no  one : at  last 
she  perceived  the  hole,  and  seeing  that  it  led  into  the 
open  air,  in  her  rage  she  did  not  leave  a hair  upon  her 
head,  cursing  her  daughter  and  the  prince,  and  praying 
that  at  the  first  kiss  Filadoro’s  lover  should  receive  he 
might  forget  her. 

But  let  us  leave  the  old  woman  to  say  her  wicked 
paternosters,  and  return  to  the  prince,  who  on  arriving 
at  the  palace,  where  he  was  thought  to  be  dead,  put  the 
whole  house  in  an  uproar,  every  one  running  to  meet 
him  and  crying,  Welcome,  welcome  I here  he  is  safe 
and  sound ! how  happy  we  are  to  see  him  back  to  this 


Digitized  by  Google 


192 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


country !”  and  a thousand  other  words  of  aflfection. 
But  as  he  was  going  up  the  stairs,  his  mother  met  him 
half-way,  and  embraced  and  kissed  him,  saying,  ^‘My 
son,  my  jewel,  the  apple  of  my  eye,  where  have  you 
been  ? how  is  it  you  have  stayed  away  so  long,  to  make 
us  all  die  with  anxiety  ?”  The  prinee  knew  not  w'hat  to 
answer,  for  he  did  not  wish  to  tell  her  his  misfortunes ; 
but  no  sooner  had  his  mother  kissed  him  w ith  her  poppy 
lips,  than,  owing  to  the  curse  of  the  ogress,  all  that  had 
passed  went  from  his  memory.  Then  the  queen  told  her 
son  that,  to  put  an  end  to  his  going  to  the  chase  and 
wasting  his  life  in  the  woods,  she  w ished  to  have  him 
manied.  “'Well  and  good,^^  replied  the  prince;  “I  am 
ready  and  prepared  to  do  all  that  my  lady  mother  desires.'^ 
— “ Spoken  like  a blessed  son  !”  answered  the  queen. 
So  it  was  settled  that  within  four  days  they  should  lead 
home  to  him  the  bride,  who  w'as  a lady  of  distinction 
just  arrived  in  that  city  from  the  country  of  Flanders ; 
and  thereupon  a great  feasting  and  banquets  were  held. 

But  meanwhile  Filadoro,  seeing  that  her  husband 
stayed  aw'ay  so  long,  and  hearing  (I  know  not  how) 
of  the  feast,  the  new's  of  w^hich  had  spread  everywhere 
far  and  wide,  waited  in  the  evening  till  the  servant-lad 
of  the  inn  had  gone  to  bed ; and  then  taking  his  clothes 
from  the  head  of  the  hed,  she  left  her  owm  in  their  place ; 
and  disguising  herself  like  a man,  she  went  to  the  court 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


THE  DOVE. 


193 


of  the  king,  where  the  cooks^  being  in  want  of  help 
as  they  had  so  much  to  do,  took  her  as  kitchen-boy. 
And  when  the  appointed  morning  was  come,  at  the 
hour  when  the  Sun  displays  upon  the  counter  of  heaven 
the  certificates  given  him  by  Nature,  sealed  with  light, 
and  sells  secrets  for  sharpening  the  sight,  the  bride 
arrived  with  the  sound  of  flutes  and  trumpets.  Then 
the  tables  were  set  out,  and  they  all  took  tlicir  seats ; 
and  just  as  the  dishes  were  showering  dowui,  and  the 
carver  was  cutting  up  a large  English  pie,  which  Fi- 
ladoro  had  made  with  her  own  hands,  lo ! out  flew 
such  a beautiful  dove,  that  the  guests  in  their  as- 
tonishment forgetting  to  eat,  fell  to  admiring  the 
pretty  bird,  which  said  to  the  prince  in  a piteous 
voice,  “ Have  you  eaten  the  brains  of  a cat,  0 prince, 
that  you  have  so  soon  forgotten  the  love  of  Filadoro  ? 
have  all  the  services  you  received  from  her,  ungrateful 
man,  gone  from  your  memoiy?  is  it  thus  you  re- 
pay the  benefits  she  has  done  you, — she  who  took  you 
out  of  the  claws  of  the  ogress,  and  gave  you  life  and 
her  own  self  too  ? is  this  the  return  you  make  to  the 
unhappy  maiden  for  all  the  love  she  has  shown  you  ? 
tell  her  to  get  up  and  be  off ! bid  her  pick  this  bone 
until  the  roast-meat.  come.  Woe  to  the  woman  that 
trusts  too  much  to  the  words  of  men,  who  ever  requite 
kindness  with  ingratitude,  benefits  wuth  thanklcssness, 

o 


Digitized  by  Google 


194 


THE  FENTAHERONE. 


and  pay  debts  with  forgetfulness ! Just  when  the  poor 
girl  was  imagining  that  she  should  live  with  you  and 
share  your  fortunes,  she  is  left  and  forsaken* ; she  was 
thinking  to  break  a tumbler  with  you,  and  now  she  has 
broken  the  pitcher.  But  go  ! forget  your  promises,  false 
man  ! and  may  the  curses  follow  you  which  the  unhappy 
maiden  sends  you  from  the  bottom  of  her  heart ! you 
shall  Icam  what  it  is  to  deceive  a young  maiden,  to  make 
sport  of  a poor  girl,  to  cheat  an  innocent  damsel,  play- 
ing her  such  a fine  trick,  putting  her  on  the  back  of  the 
page,  whilst  she  carried  you  in  her  heart,  and  treating  her 
with  contempt  whilst  she  served  you  so  faithfully.  But 
if  Heaven  has  not  bandaged  its  eyes,  if  the  gods  have  not 
locked  up  their  ears,  they  will  witness  the  wrong  you  have 
done  her ; and  when  you  least  expect  it,  the  lightning 
and  thunder,  the  fever  and  the  illness  will  come  to  you. 
Enough ! eat  and  drink,  take  your  sports  and  frolics 
and  triumph  with  the  new  bride ! for  unhappy  Filadoro, 
deceived  and  forsaken,  will  leave  you  the  field  open  to 
make  merry  with  your  new  wife.”  So  saying  the  dove 
flew  away  quickly  and  vanished  hke  the  wind. 

The  prince,  hearing  the  murmuring  of  the  dove,  stood 
for  aw'hile  stupified : at  length  he  inquired  whence  the 
pie  came,  and  when  the  carver  told  him  that  a scul- 

* Literally  a*  follows : — “ The  poor  girl  was  thinking  of  maldng  the  cake  in  the 
pan  (?)  with  thee,  and  now  she  sees  herself  play  at  ‘ Cut  the  cake.’  ’’—(See  note  at 
pane  34.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


195 


lion-boy  who  had  been  tahTen  to  assist  in  the  kitchen 
had  made  it,  he  ordered  him  to  be  brought  before  him. 
Then  Filadoro,  throwing  herself  at  the  feet  of  Nardo 
Aniello,  and  shedding  a torrent  of  tears,  said  merely, 
“ What  have  I done  to  you  Whereupon  the  prince, 
struck  by  Filadoro^s  beauty,  at  once  recalled  to  mind 
the  engagement  he  had  made  with  her,  face  to  face  in 
the  court  of  Love;  and  instantly  raising  her  up,  he 
seated  her  by  his  side.  And  when  he  related  to  his 
mother  the  great  obligation  he  was  under  to  this  beau- 
tiful maiden,  and  all  that  she  had  done  for  him,  and 
how  it  was  necessary  that  the  promise  he  had  given 
should  be  fulfilled,  his  mother,  who  had  no  other  joy 
in  life  than  her  son,  said  to  him,  “Do  as  you  please, 
so  that  you  offend  not  the  honour  or  the  good  pleasure 
of  this  lady  whom  I have  given  you  to  wife.” 

“Be  not  troubled,”  said  the  lady,  “for,  to  tell  the 
truth,  I am  very  loth  to  remain  in  this  country ; with 
your  kind  permission,  I wish  to  rctmm  to  my  dear 
Flanders,  to  find  the  grandfathers  of  the  glasses  which 
they  use  here  in  Naples*,  where,  whilst  I was  thinking 
to  light  a lantern  and  set  it  before  met,  flie  lamp  of  my 
life  has  been  nearly  extinguished.” 

* Basile  considers  Flanders  as  part  of  Germany : he  alludes  here  (as  frequently 
dsewhere— see  p.  83)  to  the  old  joke  against  the  Germans  of  being  strong  drinkers. 

‘ The  grandfathers  of  the  glasses’  means  that  they  were  so  mueh  bigger. 

t The  light  hung  out  at  the  end  of  the  Molo  at  Naples  was  in  Basile’s  thought. 

o2 


Digitized  by  Google 


196 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Thereupon  the  prince  with  great  joy  offered  her  a 
vessel  and  attendants;  and  ordering  Filadoro  to  be 
dressed  like  a princess,  when  the  tables  w’ere  removed, 
the  musicians  came,  and  they  began  the  ball,  which 
lasted  until  evening.  But  as  soon  as  the  Earth  was 
covered  with  mourning  for  the  obsequies  of  the  Sim, 
the  lights  w'ere  brought ; and  suddenly  a great  noise  of 
bells  was  heard  on  the  stairs ; whereat  the  prince  said 
to  his  mother,  “ This  must  sm’ely  be  some  pretty  mas- 
querade, to  do  honour  to  the  feast ; upon  my  w'ord  the 
Neapolitan  cavaliers  are  vastly  polite,  aud  when  called 
upon  they  spare  neither  pains  nor  money*.” 

But  whilst  they  were  discom’sing  thus,  there  appeared 
in  the  middle  of  the  hall  an  ugly  figure,  who  was  not 
more  than  three  feet  high,  but  as  big  as  a tub ; and  step- 
ping up  to  the  prince  she  said,"  Know,  Nardo  Aniello,that 
your  caprices  and  ill-deeds  brought  on  you  all  the  trou- 
bles you  have  gone  through : I am  the  spirit  of  that  old 
woman  whose  pot  you  broke,  so  that  she  died  of  hunger. 
I laid  a curse  upon  you,  wishing  that  you  might  be 
seized  by  the  claws  of  an  ogress,  and  my  wish  was  ful- 
filled: by  the  power  of  this  beautiful  faiiy  however 
you  escaped  from  those  troubles,  but  afterwards  you  re- 
ceived another  curse  from  the  ogress,  that  at  the  first 
kiss  given  you,  you  should  forget  Filadoro ; your  mother 

• Literally—*  Sparc  neither  cooked  nor  raw.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DOVE. 


197 


kissed  you,  and  Filadoro  went  out  of  your  mind.  But 
now  I lay  another  curse  upon  you,  that  in  remembrance 
of  the  injury  you  did  me,  you  may  always  have  before 
you  those  beans  of  mine  which  you  threw  on  the  ground, 
so  that  the  proverb  may  come  true,  ‘ He  who  sows  beans 
gets  a crop  of  homs.^  ” So  saying  she  vanished  like 
quicksilver,  and  not  a trace  of  smoke  was  to  be  seen. 

The  fairy,  seeing  the  prince  grow  pale  at  these  words, 
bade  him  take  coiu’age,  saying,  “ Fear  not,  my  husband, 
I mil  save  you  from  the  fire.”  Then  she  pronounced  the 
words, — “ Scatola  and  matola ! thus  the  charm  of  all 
power  I disarm and  instantly  the  spell  was  at  an  end. 

So  the  feast  being  now  ended,  they  all  betook  them- 
selves to  rest;  and  the  prince  and  Filadoro  lived  happy 
ever  after,  proving  the  truth  of  the  proverb,  that 

" He  who  stumbles  and  does  not  fall. 

Is  help’d  on  his  way  like  a rolling  ball.” 


“ Of  a truth,”  said  the  Prince,  “ every  man  ought  to 
act  according  to  his  station, — the  nobleman  as  a noble-  ' 
man,  the  lacquey  as  a lacquey,  and  the  constable  as  a 
constable;  for  as  the  beggar-boy,  wishing  to  act  the 
prince,  becomes  ridiculous,  so  the  prince  acting  like  a 
beggar-boy  loses  his  reputation.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


198 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


The  listeners  were  so  absorbed  by  Giulia’s  story,  they 
had  not  perceived  that  the  Sun,  having  been  too  prodi- 
gal of  his  light,  had  become  bankrupt,  and  placing  the 
golden  keys  under  the  door*  had  run  away.  But  Cola 
Ambruoso  and  Marchionno  now  made  their  appearance, 
drest  in  chamois-leather  breeches  and  doublets  of  scal- 
loped serge,  and  began  the  second  pastoral  dialogue. 
This  was  concluded  at  the  same  time  that  the  Sun  con- 
cluded the  day.  So,  having  appointed  to  return  the 
following  morning  with  a new  store  of  stories,  they  all 
went  to  their  homes  satisfied  with  words  and  full  of 
appetite. 

* Alluding  to  tlie  practice  of  person*  running  away  without  paying  their  rent,  and 
leaving  the  key  under  the  door.  It  U done  in  Ireland. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ere  all  the  Shades,  imprisoned  by  the  tribunal  of 
Night,  were  liberated  by  the  visit  of  the  Sun,  the  Prince 
and  his  wife,  together  with  the  women,  returned  to  the 
customary  spot,  to  pass  pleasantly  the  hours  from 
morning  until  dinner-time.  Then  they  summoned  the 
musicians,  and  began  to  dance  with  great  delight 
the  ‘ Roggiero,^  ‘ Villanella,^  * The  story  of  the  Ogre,' 

* Sfessania,'  * The  countryman  thrashed,'  * The  whole 
day  long  with  that  Dove,'  ‘ Blue-bottle  Fly,'  ^ Nymphs' 
Dance,'  ^ The  Gipsy,'  ‘ The  Coquette,'  ‘ My  bright  Star,' 

* My  sweet  amorous  flame,'  ‘ She  whom  I seek,'  ^ The 
pretty  girl  and  the  pretty  little  girl,'  ‘ Up  and  down/ 
‘ The  Chiaranzana,'  * Take  care  of  him  who  enamours 
me,'  ' The  clouds  that  skim  through  the  air,'  ‘ The  Devil 
in  a shirt,'  ‘ To  live  upon  hope,'  ^ Change  hands,'  * The 


Digitized  by  Google 


200 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Cascarda*/  ‘ Spagnoletta/  concluding  the  dances  with 
Lucia  Canazza,  to  amuse  the  Slave.  Thus  the  time 
ran  swiftly  away,  and  ere  they  were  aware  the  dinner- 
hour  had  arrived,  when  there  appeared  all  the  good 
things  under  heaven,  which  may  perhaps  be  eaten  still. 
And  when  the  tables  were  removed,  Zeza,  who  was  on 
thorns  of  impatience  to  tell  her  story,  began  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner. 

* ‘The  Cascade.'  Probably  some  dance  in  which  the  couples  advance  and  "cast 
off,” — as  in  “Sir  Roger  de  Coverly,”  Some  of  these  dances  are  perhaps  named 
from  the  first  line  of  songs,  to  the  tune  of  which  they  were  danced.  See  Notes  at 
the  end  of  this  volume. 


J 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


201 


CANNETELLA. 

It  is  an  evil  thing,  my  Lord,  to  seek  for  better  than 
wheaten  bread ; for  a man  comes  at  last  to  desire  what 
others  throw  away,  and  must  content  himself  with 
honesty.  He  who  loses  all,  and  walks  on  the  tops  of 
the  trees,  has  as  much  madness  in  his  head  as  danger 
under  his  feet ; as  was  the  case  with  the  daughter  of  a 
king,  who  is  the  subject  of  the  story  I have  now  to  tell 
you. 


There  was  once  on  a time  a king  of  High-Hill,  who 
longed  for  children  more  than  the  porters  do  for  a 
funeral,  that  they  may  gather  wax*;  insomuch  that  he 
made  a vow  to  the  goddess  Syrinx,  that  if  she  would 
cause  him  to  have  a daughter,  he  would  name  her  Can- 
netella,  to  commemorate  her  having  been  turned  into  a 
reedf.  And  he  prayed  and  prayed,  until  at  length  he 
found  favour,  and  his  wife  Renzolla  presented  him  with 

* At  funerals  and  in  public  processions  the  poor  people  pick  up  the  wax  that  falls 
from  the  tapers,  and  the  flowers  that  are  dropt  by  the  way, 

t Canna. 


Digitized  by  Google 


202 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


a little  gid,  to  whom  he  gave  the  name  he  had  pro- 
mised. 

The  child  grew  by  palms,  and  when  she  was  as  tall 
as  a pole,  the  king  said  to  her,  My  daughter,  you  are 
now  grown  (Heaven  bless  you !)  as  large  as  an  oak, 
and  it  is  full  time  to  provide  you  wth  a husband 
worthy  of  that  pretty  face.  Since  therefore  I love  you 
as  my  own  life,  and  desire  to  please  you,  tell  me  I pray 
what  sort  of  a husband  you  would  like,  what  kind  of 
a mau  would  suit  your  fancy  ? Will  you  have  him  a 
scholar  or  a dunce  ? a boy,  or  a man  in  years  ? brown, 
or  fair  and  ruddy?  tall  as  a maypole,  or  short  as  a 
spigot  ? small  in  the  waist,  or  round  as  an  ox  ? Do  you 
choose,  and  I am  satisfied 

Cannetclla,  hearing  these  lavish  ofiers,  thanked  her 
father,  but  told  him  that  she  would  on  no  account 
encumber  herself  with  a husband.  However,  being 
urged  by  the  king  again  and  again,  she  said,  Not  to 
show  myself  ungrateful  for  so  much  love,  I am  willing 
to  comply  with  your  wish,  provided  ,I  have  such  a man 
as  that  he  has  no  like  in  the  world.” 

Her  father,  dehghted  beyond  measure  at  hearing  this, 
took  his  station  at  the  window  from  morning  till  even- 
ing, looking  out  and  sun^eying,  measuring  and  exa- 
mining every  one  that  passed  along  the  street.  And  one 
day  seeing  a good-looking  man  go  by,  the  king  said  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


CANNETELLA. 


203 


his  daughter,  “ Eun,  look  out,  Cannetella ! and  see  if 
yon  man  comes  up  to  the  measure  of  your  wishes.^* 
Then  she  desired  him  to  be  brought  up,  and  they  made 
a most  splendid  banquet  for  him,  at  which  there  was 
everything  he  could  desire.  And  as  they  were  feasting 
away,  an  almond  fell  out  of  the  youth’s  mouth,  where- 
upon stooping  down,  he  picked  it  up  dextrously  from 
the  ground  and  put  it  under  the  cloth  j and  when  they 
had  done  eating,  he  went  away.  Then  the  king  said  to 
Cannetella,  “ Well,  my  life,  how  does  this  youth  please 
you  ?” — Take  the  fellow  away !”  said  she ; “ a man 
so  tall  and  so  big  as  he  should  never  have  let  an  almond 
drop  out  of  his  mouth.” 

When  the  king  heard  this  he  returned  to  his  place  at 
the  window,  and  presently  seeing  another  well-shaped 
youth  pass  by,  he  called  his  daughter,  to  hear  whether 
this  one  pleased  her.  Then  Cannetella  desired  him  to 
be  shown  up ; so  he  was  called,  and  another  entertain- 
ment was  made.  And  when  they  had  done  eating,  and 
the  man  had  gone  away,  the  king  asked  his  daughter 
whether  he  had  pleased  her;  whereupon  she  replied, 
" What  in  the  w^orld  should  I do  with  such  a miserable 
fellow,  who  wants  at  least  to  have  a couple  of  servants 
with  him  to  take  off  his  cloak  ?” 

**  If  that  be  the  case,”  said  the  king,  **  it  is  plain  that 
these  are  merely  the  excuses  of  a bad  paymaster,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


204 


THE  PENtAMERONE. 


you  are  only  looking  for  pretexts  to  refuse  me  this  plea- 
sure. So  resolve  quickly,  for  I am  determined  to  have 
you  married.”  To  these  angry  words  Cannetella  re- 
plied, “ To  tell  you  the  truth  plainly*,  papa,  and  as  I 
really  feel,  you  are  digging  in  the  sea  and  making 
a wrong  reckoning  on  your  fingers;  for  I never  will 
subject  myself  to  any  man  living  who  has  not  a golden 
head  and  teeth.”  The  poor  king,  seeing  his  daughter's 
head  thus  turned,  issued  a proclamation,  bidding  any 
one  in  his  kingdom  who  should  answer  to  Cannetella^s 
wishes  to  appear,  and  he  would  give  him  his  daughter 
and  the  kingdom. 

Now  this  king  had  a mortal  enemy  named  Fioravante, 
whom  he  eould  not  bear  to  see  so  much  as  even  painted 
on  a wall,  who,  when  he  heard  of  this  proclamation, 
being  a cunning  magician,  called  a parcel  of  that  evil 
brood  to  him,  and  commanded  them  forthwith  to  make 
his  head  and  teeth  of  gold.  So  they  did  as  he  de- 
sired ; and  when  he  saw  himself  with  a head  and  teeth 
of  pure  goldf,  he  walked  past  under  the  window  of 
the  king,  who  when  he  saw  the  very  man  he  was  look- 
ing for,  called  his  daughter : and  as  soon  as  Canne- 
tella set  eyes  upon  him,  she  cried  out,  “Ay,  that  is 


* Fora  de  li  diente — ‘ out  of  the  teeth.’  In  Ireland  folks  ss}?  in  like  manner  ‘ out 
of  the  face.’ 

t Literally,  * four-and- twenty  carats  fine,’ — the  standard  of  pure  gold. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CANNETELLA. 


205 


he ! he  could  not  be  better  if  I had  kneaded  him  with 
my  own  hands.” 

When  Fioravante  was  getting  up  to  go  away,  the 
king  said  to  him,  “ Wait  a little,  brother, — why  in  such 
a hurry  ? one  would  think  you  had  a pledge  in  the 
hands  of  a J ew,  or  quicksilver  in  your  body,  or  a branch 
of  fm’ze  tied  behind  you.  Fair  and  softly  ! I will  give 
you  my  daughter,  and  baggage  and  servants  to  accom- 
pany you,  for  I wish  her  to  be  your  wife.” 

thank  you,”  said  Fioravante,  ^‘but  there  is  no 
necessity : a single  horse  is  enough,  if  the  beast  will 
carry  double ; for  at  home  I have  servants  and  goods  as 
numerous  as  the  sands  on  the  seashore.”  So  after 
arguing  awhile,  Fioravante  at  last  prevailed,  and  placing 
Cannctclla  behind  him  on  a horse  he  set  out. 

In  the  evening,  when  the  red  horses  arc  taken  aw^ay 
from  the  corn-mill  of  the  sky,  and  the  white  oxen  are 
yoked  in  their  place,  they  came  to  a stable  where  some 
horses  were  feeding ; and  leading  Cannetella  into  it,  Fio- 
ravante said  to  her,  “Listen  ! I have  to  make  a jornmey 
to  my  owm  house,  and  it  will  take  me  seven  years  to  get 
there.  Mind  therefore  and  wait  for  me  in  tliis  stable, 
and  do  not  stir  out,  nor  let  yourself  be  seen  by  any  living 
person,  or  else  I will  make  you  remember  it  as  long  as 
you  live.”  Cannetella  replied,  “ You  are  my  lord  and 
master,  and  I will  perform  your  command  to  a tittle ; 


Digitized  by  Google 


206 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


but  I should  like  merely  to  know  what  you  will  leave 
me  to  live  upon  in  the  meantime.”  And  Fioravante  ' 
answered,  “ What  the  horses  leave  of  theii*  corn  will  be 
enough  for  you.” 

Only  conceive  how  poor  Cannetella  now  felt,  and 
guess  whether  she  did  not  curse  the  hour  and  the  mo- 
ment when  she  was  born  ! cold  and  frozen,  she  made  up 
with  her  tears  what  she  wanted  in  food,  cursing  her 
fate  and  abusing  the  stars,  which  had  brought  her  down 
from  a royal  palace  to  a stable,  from  mattresses  of  Bar- 
bary wool  to  straw,  and  from  nice  delicate  morsels  to 
the  leavings  of  horses.  And  she  led  this  miserable  life 
for  several  months,  during  which  time  com  was  given 
to  the  horses  by  an  unseen  hand,  and  what  they  left 
supported  her. 

But  at  the  end  of  this  time,  as  she  was  standing  one 
day  looking  through  a hole,  she  saw  a most  beautiful  gar- 
den, in  which  there  were  so  many  espaliers  of  lemons, 
and  grottos  of  citrons,  and  beds  of  flowers,  and  fruit- 
trees  and  trellises  of  vines,  that  it  was  a joy  to  behold. 

At  this  sight  a great  longing  seized  her  for  a fine  bunch 
of  grapes  that  caught  her  eye,  and  she  said  to  herself, 
“Come  what  will,  and  if  the  sky  fall,  I will  go  out 
silently  and  softly  and  pluck  it : what  will  it  matter  a 
hundred  years  hence  ? w'ho  is  there  to  tell  my  husband  ? 
and  should  he  by  chance  hear  of  it,  what  will  he  do  to 


^ Digitized  by  Coogle 


CANNETELLA. 


207 


me?  moreover  these  grapes  are  none  of  the  common 
sort.”  So  saying  she  went  out,  and  refreshed  her 
spirits,  which  were  weakened  by  hunger. 

A little  while  afterwards,  and  before  the  appointed 
time,  her  husband  came  back,  and  one  of  his  horses 
accused  Cannetella  of  having  taken  the  grapes ; whereat 
Fioravante  in  a rage,  drawing  a knife  from  his  breeches 
pocket,  was  going  to  kill  her ; but  falling  on  her  knees 
upon  the  ground,  she  besought  him  to  stay  his  hand 
from  the  deed,  since  hunger  drives  the  wolf  from  the 
wood.  And  she  begged  so  hard,  that  Fioravante  replied, 
" I forgive  you  this  time,  and  grant  you  your  life  out  of 
charity;  but  if  ever  again  you  are  tempted  to  disobey 
me,  and  I find  that  you  have  let  the  sun  see  you,  I will 
make  mincemeat  of  you.  Now  mind  me, — I am  going 
away  once  more,  and  shall  for  certain  be  gone  seven 
years ; so  take  care  and  plough  straight,  for  you  will  not 
escape  so  easily  again,  but  I shall  pay  you  off  the  new 
and  the  old  scores  together.” 

So  saying  he  departed,  and  Cannetella  shed  a river 
of  tears ; and  wringing  her  hands,  beating  her  breast, 
and  tearing  her  hair,  she  cried,  ‘^Oh  that  ever  I was 
bom  into  the  world,  to  be  destined  to  this  wretched 
fate ! 0 father,  how  have  you  ruined  me ! but  why  do 
I complain  of  my  father,  when  I have  brought  this  dl 
upon  myself?  I alone  am  the  cause  of  my  misfor- 


Digitized  by  Google 


203 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


tunes.  Here  have  I been  msliing  for  a head  of  gold,  only 
to  fall  into  trouble*  and  die  by  iron.  Alas,  how  richly 
I deserve  it ! by  wishing  my  teeth  of  gold,  I am  making 
the  golden  tooth.  This  is  the  punishment  of  Heaven, 
for  I ought  to  have  done  my  father^s  will,  and  not  have 
had  such  whims  and  fancies  : he  who  minds  not  what  his 
father  and  mother  say,  goes  a road  he  does  not  know.^'^ 

Not  a day  passed  that  she  did  not  make  this  lament, 
until  her  eyes  were  become  two  fountains,  and  her  face 
was  so  thin  and  sallow  that  it  went  to  one’s  heart  to 
see  her.  Where  now  were  those  sparkling  eyes  ? where 
those  rosy  apples?  where  the  little  smile  upon  that 
mouth  ? her  own  father  would  not  have  known  her. 

At  the  end  of  a year  the  king’s  locksmith,  whom 
Cannetclla  knew,  happening  to  pass  by  the  stable,  she 
called  to  him,  and  went  out.  The  smith  hearing 
himself  called  by  his  name,  and  not  recognizing  the 
poor  girl  (she  was  so  altered),  was  in  utter  amaze- 
ment ; but  when  he  heard  who  she  was,  and  how  she 
had  become  thus  changed,  partly  out  of  pity,  for  the 
maiden  and  partly  to  gain  the  king’s  favour,  he  put 
her  into  an  empty  cask,  which  he  had  with  him  on 
a pack-horse,  and  trotting  off  towards  High-Hill,  he 
arrived  at  midnight  at  the  king’s  palace.  Then  he 
knocked  at  the  door,  and  the  servants,  going  to  the 

* Laterally,  pe  cadere  'nchiummo—*  to  fall  into  lead.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


. CANNETELLA. 


209 


window  and  hearing  that  it  was  the  locksmitli,  fell  to 
abusing  him  soundly,  calling  him  an  ill-mannered  fellow 
for  coming  at  such  an  hour  to  disturb  the  sleep  of  the 
whole  house ; adding,  that  he  would  come  off  cheaply 
if  they  did  not  pelt  him  with  stones  and  give  him  a 
broken  pate. 

The  king,  hearing  the  uproar,  and  being  told  by  a 
chamberlain  what  was  the  matter,  ordered  the  smith  to  be 
instantly  admitted;  judging  that  since  he  made  bold  to 
come  at  such  an  unusual  hour,  something  extraordinary 
must  have  happened.  Then  the  smith,  unloading  his 
beast,  knocked  out  the  head  of  the  cask,  and  foi*th  came 
Cannetella,  who  required  something  more  than  words 
to  make  her  father  recognize  her ; and  had  it  not  been 
for  a wart  on  her  right  arm,  she  might  have  taken 
herself  off.  But  as  soon  as  he  was  assured  of  the 
whole  truth,  he  embraced  her  and  kissed  her  a thou- 
sand times ; then  he  instantly  commanded  a warm  bath 
to  be  got  ready,  and  when  she  was  washed  from  head 
to  foot,  and  had  drest  herself,  he  ordered  breakfast 
to  be  brought,  for  she  was  dying  with  hunger.  Then 
her  father  said  to  her,  " Who  would  ever  have  told  me, 
my  child,  that  I should  see  you  in  this  plight  ? what  a 
face  indeed!  who  has  brought  you  to  this  sad  condi- 
tion ?”  And  she  answered,  Alas,  my  dear  sir ! that 
Barbary  Turk  has  made  me  lead  the  life  of  a dog,  so 

p 


Digitized  by  Google 


210 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


that  I was  every  hour  on  the  point  of  giving  up  the 
ghost*.  But  I will  not  tell  you  all  I have  suffered,  for 
greatly  as  it  exceeds  human  endurance,  so  much  does  it 
pass  human  belief.  Enough,  my  father,  that  I am  here  ! 
and  never  again  will  I stir  from  your  feet ; rather  will 
I be  a servant  in  your  house,  than  a queen  in  the  house 
of  another ; rather  will  I wear  sackcloth  where  you  are, 
than  a golden  mantle  away  from  you ; rather  will  I turn 
a spit  in  your  kitchen,  than  hold  a sceptre  under  the 
canopy  of  another.” 

Meanwhile  Fioravante  returning  home,  was  told  by 
the  horses  that  the  locksmith  had  carried  off  Cannetella 
in  the  cask ; on  hearing  which,  burning  with  shame 
and  all  on  fire  with  rage,  off  he  ran  towards  High-Hill ; 
and  meeting  an  old  woman  who  lived  opposite  to  the 
king’s  palace,  he  said  to  her,  “ What  will  you  take, 
good  mother,  to  let  me  see  the  king’s  daughter?” 
Then  she  asked  a hundred  ducats;  and  Fioravante 
putting  his  hand  in  his  purse  instantly  counted  them 
out,  one  a-top  of  another;  whereupon  the  old  woman 
led  him  up  on  to  the  roof,  from  whence  he  saw 
Cannetella  out  on  a balcony  drying  her  hair.  But 
— ^just  as  if  her  heart  had  whispered  to  her — the 
maiden  turned  that  way,  and  perceiving  the  snare, 
rushed  down  the  stairs  and  ran  to  her  father,  crying 

• Co  to  Mpirelo  a li  ditnte, — ‘ with  the  breath  between  my  teeth.' 


Digitized  by  Google 


CANNETELLA. 


211 


out,  “]\Iy  lord,  if  you  do  not  this  very  instant  make 
me  a chamber  with  seven  iron  doors,  I am  lost  and 
undone !” 

"1  will  not  lose  you  for  such  a trifle,^^  said  her  fa- 
ther j I would  pluck  out  an  eye  to  gratify  such  a dear 
daughter.”  So,  no  sooner  said  than  done,  the  doors  were 
instantly  made. 

When  Fioravante  heard  of  this,  he  went  again  to  the 
old  woman,  and  said  to  her,  “ What  shall  I give  you 
now?  go  to  the  king’s  house  under  pretext  of  sell- 
ing cups  of  rouge,  and  entering  the  room  where  his 
daughter  is,  contrive  to  slip  this  little  piece  of  paper 
among  the  bed-clothes,  saying  in  an  under  tone  as  you 
place  it  there, 

* Let  every  one  now  soundly  sleep. 

But  Cannctella  awake  shall  keep  !’  ” 

So  the  old  woman  agreed  for  another  hundred  ducats, 
and  she  served  him  faithfully.  Woe  to  him  who  allows 
these  vile  jades  to  come  to  his  house  ! for  under  the 
pretence  of  carrying  about  articles  of  di’ess,  they  dress 
your  very  life  and  honour  into  morocco-leather. 

Now  as  soon  as  the  old  woman  had  done  this  good 
office,  such  a sound  sleep  fell  on  the  people  of  the  house, 
that  they  seemed  just  as  if  they  had  all  their  throats 
cut.  Cannetella  alone  remained  awake,  apd  when  she 

2 p 


Digitized  by  Google 


212 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


heard  the  doors  bursting  open,  she  began  to  cry  aloud 
as  if  she  were  burnt;  but  no  one  heard  her — there 
was  no  one  to  run  to  her  aid;  so  Fioravante  threw 
down  all  the  seven  doors,  and  entering  the  chamber 
seized  up  Cannetclla,  bed-clothes  and  all,  to  carry 
her  oflF;  but  as  luck  would  have  it,  the  paper  which 
the  old  woman  had  put  among  them  fell  on  the 
ground,  and  the  powder  was  spilt;  whereupon  the 
people  of  the  house  awoke,  and  hearing  Cannetella's 
shrieks,  they  ran — cats,  dogs,  and  all — and  laying 
hold  on  the  ogre,  quickly  cut  him  in  pieces  hke  a 
pickled  tunny.  Thus  he  was  caught  in  the  same  trap 
that  he  had  prepared  for  poor  Cannetella,  learning  to 
his  cost  that 

No  one  suffereth  greater  pain 

Than  he  who  by  his  own  weapon  is  slain.^’ 


Wlien  Zeza  had  ended  her  story,  all  were  of  opinion 
that  Cannetella  deserved  this,  and  even  worse,  for  seek- 
ing a hair  inside  the  egg:  they  rejoiced  however  to 
see  her  at  length  freed  from  all  her  troubles,  and  ob- 
served, that  she  who  had  held  her  head  so  high  and 
scorned  all  men,  was  brought  at  last  to  humble  herself 


Digitized  by  Google 


CANNETELLA. 


213 


to  a smith,  and  beg  him  to  help  her  out  of  trouble. 
But  the  desire  to  hear  Ciulla  put  a stop  to  the  conver- 
sation, and  the  ears  of  all  present  stood  erect  at  the 
motion  of  her  lips. 


Digitized  by  Google 


214 


CORVETTO. 

I ONCE  heard  say,  that  Juno  went  to  Candia  to  find 
Falsehood;  but  if  any  one  were  to  ask  me  where  fraud 
and  hypocrisy  might  truly  he  found,  I should  know 
of  no  other  place  to  name  than  the  Court,  where  de- 
traction always  wears  the  mask  of  amusement,  slander 
goes  drest  as  a Graziano*,  treachery  as  a Zany,  and  vil- 
lainy as  a Polichinello ; where  at  the  same  time  people 
cut  and  sew  up,  wound  and  heal,  break  and  glue  to- 
gether ; of  which  I will  give  you  only  one  instance,  in 
the  story  which  I am  going  to  tell  you. 


There  was  once  upon  a time  in  the  service  of  the  King 
of  Wide-River  an  excellent  youth  named  Corvette, 
who  for  his  good  conduct  was  beloved  by  his  master, 
and  for  this  very  cause  was  disliked  and  hated  by  all 
the  courtiers ; in  fact  they  were  such  bats  of  ignorance, 
that  they  could  not  see  the  lustre  of  the  virtue  of  Cor- 
vette, who  purchased  his  masterts  favour  with  the  ready 

• A clown. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CORVETTO. 


215 


money  of  good  behaviour.  But  the  zephyrs  of  the 
kindness  which  the  king  showed  Corvetto  were  sciroc- 
cos  to  the  spite  and  mahce  of  these  courtiers,  who  were 
bursting  with  envy ; so  that  all  the  day  long,  in  every 
corner  of  the  palace,  they  did  nothing  but  tattle  and 
whisper,  murmur  and  grumble  at  the  poor  lad,  say- 
ing, ‘^What  sorcery  has  this  fellow*  practised  on  the 
king,  that  he  takes  such  a fancy  to  him  ? how  comes  he 
by  this  luck,  that  not  a day  passes  but  he  receives  some 
new  favours,  whilst  we  are  for  ever  going  backwards 
like  the  rope- maker,  and  getting  from  bad  to  worse, 
though  we  slave  like  dogs,  sweat  like  field-labourers, 
and  race  about  like  deer,  to  hit  the  king’s  pleasure  to  a 
hair  ? Truly  one  must  be  bom  to  good  fortune  in  this 
world,  and  he  who  has  not  luck  may  as  well  throw 
himself  into  the  sea.  What  is  to  be  done  ? we  can  only 
look  on  and  burst.” 

These  and  other  words  flew  from  the  bow  of  their 
mouth,  like  poisoned  arrows  aimed  at  the  butt  of  Cor- 
vetto’s  ruin.  Alas  for  him  who  is  condemned  to  that  in- 
fernal den  the  court,  where  flattery  is  sold  by  kilderkins, 
mahgnity  and  ill  offices  are  measured  out  in  bushels, 
deceit  and  treachery  are  weighed  by  the  ton  ! But  who 
can  count  all  the  bits  of  orange-peel  these  courtiers 
put  under  his  feet  to  make  him  slip,  or  tell  the  soap  of 

• Slo  caccia-V appatcere — a name  for  a booby ; because  the  greatest  fools  were 
commonly  “sent  to  tend’’  the  swine,  &c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


216 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


falseness  with  which  they  besmeared  the  ladder  to  the 
king^s  ears,  to  make  Corvetto  fall  and  break  his  neck  ? 
who  can  tell  the  pitfalls  of  deceit  dug  in  the  king^s 
brain,  and  covered  over  with  the  sticks  and  straws  of 
pretended  zeal,  to  make  him  tumble  ? But  Corvetto,  who 
was  enchanted,  and  perceived  the  traps  and  discovered 
the  tricks,  was  aware  of  all  the  nets,  and  was  up  to  all 
the  intrigues,  the  ambuscades,  the  plots  and  conspira- 
cies of  his  enemies,  kept  his  ears  always  on  the  alert 
and  his  eyes  open,  in  order  not  to  set  a false  step,  well 
knowing  that  the  fortune  of  courtiers  is  glass.  But  the 
higher  the  lad  continued  to  rise,  the  lower  the  others 
fell ; and  at  last  being  puzzled  to  know  how  to  take 
him  oflf  his  feet,  as  their  slander  was  not  believed,  they 
thought  of  leading  him  to  a precipice  by  the  path  of 
flattery  (an  art  invented  in  a certain  hot  house,  and 
perfected  in  the  court),  which  they  attempted  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner. 

Ten  miles  distant  from  Scotland,  where  the  seat  of 
this  king  was,  there  dwelt  an  ogre,  the  most  inhuman 
and  savage  that  had  ever  been  in  ogre-land,  who,  being 
persecuted  by  the  king,  had  fortified  himself  in  a lone- 
some wood  on  the  top  of  a mountain,  where  no  bird 
ever  flew,  and  which  was  so  thick  and  tangled  that  it 
could  never  get  a sight  of  the  sun.  This  ogre  had  a 
most  beautiful  horse,  which  looked  as  if  it  were  formed 
with  a pencil;  and  amongst  other  wonderful  things  was 


Digitized  by  Google 


COE^ETTO.  217 

that  it  could  speak  like  any  man.  Now  the  courtiers, 
who  knew  how  wicked  the  ogre  was,  how  thick  the 
wood,  how  high  the  mountain,  and  how  difficult  it  was 
to  get  at  the  horse,  went  to  the  king,  and  telling  him 
minutely  the  perfections  of  the  animal,  which  was  a 
thing  worthy  of  a king,  added  that  he  ought  to  en- 
deavour by  all  means  to  get  it  out  of  the  ogress 
claws,  and  that  Corvetto  was  just  the  lad  to  do  this, 
as  he  was  expert  and  clever  at  escaping  out  of  the 
fire.  The  king,  who  knew  not  that  under  the  flowers 
of  these  words  a serpent  was  concealed,  instantly  called 
Corvetto,  and  said  to  him,  “ If  you  love  me,  see  that  in 
some  way  or  another  you  obtain  for  me  the  horse  of 
my  enemy  the  ogre,  and  you  shall  have  no  cause  to  re- 
gret having  done  me  this  service.” 

Corvetto  knew  well  that  this  drum  was  sounded  by 
those  who  wished  him  ill;  nevertheless,  to  obey  the 
king,  he  set  out  and  took  the  road  to  the  mountain ; 
then  going  very  quietly  to  the  ogress  stable,  he  saddled 
and  mounted  the  horse,  and  fixing  his  feet  firmly  in  the 
stirrup  took  his  way  back.  But  as  soon  as  the  horse 
saw  himself  spurred  out  of  the  palace,  he  cried  aloud. 
Hollo  ! be  on  your  guard  1 Corvetto  is  riding  off  with 
me.^^  At  this  alarm  the  ogre  instantly  set  out,  with  all 
the  animals  that  served  him,  to  cut  Corvetto  in  pieces : 
from  this  side  jumped  an  ape,  from  that  was  seen  a . 


Digitized  by  Google 


218 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


large  bear,  here  sprang  forth  a lion,  there  came  running 
a wolf.  But  the  youth,  by  the  aid  of  bridle  and  spur, 
distanced  the  mountain,  and  galloping  without  stop  to 
the  city,  arrived  at  the  court,  where  he  presented  the 
horse  to  the  king. 

Then  the  king  embraced  him  more  than  a son,  and 
pulling  out  his  purse  filled  his  hands  with  crown-pieces. 
At  this  the  rage  of  the  courtiers  knew  no  bounds; 
and  whereas  at  first  they  were  pufied  up  with  a little 
pipe,  they  were  now  bursting  with  the  blasts  of  a 
smith’s  bellows ; seeing  that  the  crowbars  with  which 
they  thought  to  lay  Corvetto’s  good  fortune  in  ruins, 
only  served  to  smooth  the  road  to  his  prosperity. 
Knowing  however  that  walls  are  not  levelled  by  the  first 
attack  of  the  battering-ram,  they  resolved  to  try  their 
luck  a second  time,  and  said  to  the  king,  “ We  wish 
you  joy  of  the  beautiful  horse  ! it  will  indeed  be  an  or- 
nament to  the  royal  stable ; but  what  a pity  you  have 
not  the  ogre’s  tapestry,  which  is  a thing  more  beautiful 
than  words  can  tell,  and  would  spread  your  fame  far 
and  wide  ! there  is  no  one  however  able  to  procure  this 
treasure  but  Corvetto,  who  is  just  the  lad  to  do  such  a 
kind  of  service.” 

Then  the  king,  who  danced  to  every  tune,  and  ate 
only  the  peel  of  this  bitter  but  sugared  fruit,  called 
Corvetto,  and  begged  him  to  procure  for  him  the  ogre’s 


Digitized  by  Google 


COEVETTO. 


219 


tapestry.  OfiF  went  Corvetto,  and  in  four  seconds  was 
on  the  top  of  the  mountain  where  the  ogre  lived : then 
passing  miseen  into  the  chamber  in  which  he  slept,  he 
hid  himself  under  the  bed,  and  waited  as  still  as  a 
mouse,  until  Night,  to  make  the  Stars  laugh,  puts  a 
carnival-mask  on  the  face  of  the  Sky.  And  as  soon  as 
the  ogre  and  his  wife  were  gone  to  bed,  Corvetto  stripped 
the  walls  of  the  chamber  very  quietly,  and  wishing  to 
steal  the  counterpane  of  the  bed  likewise,  he  began  to 
pull  it  gently.  Thereupon  the  ogre,  suddenly  starting  up, 
told  his  wife  not  to  pull  so,  for  she  was  dragging  all  the 
clothes  off  him,  and  would  give  him  his  death  of  cold. 

“ Why  you  are  uncovering  me  !”  answered  the  ogress ; 

there  ^s  not  a thing  left  upon  me  !” 

Where  the  deuce  is  the  counterpane  ?”  replied  the 
ogre;  and  stretching  out  his  hand  to  the  floor,  he 
touched  Corvetto’s  face ; whereupon  he  set  up  a loud 
cry,  The  monaciello  ! the  monaciello*  ! hollo,  here, 
lights  ! run  quickly  !”  till  the  whole  house  was  turned 
topsy-tm’vy  with  the  noise.  But  Corvetto,  after  throw- 
ing the  clothes  out  of  the  window,  let  himself  drop 
down  upon  them.  Then  making  up  a good  bundle,  he 
set  out  on  the  road  to  the  city,  where  the  reception  he 
met  with  from  the  king;  and  the  vexation  of  the  com*- 
tiers,  who  were  bursting  with  spite,  are  not  to  be  told. 

* See  note,  page  15. 


Digitized  by  Google 


220 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Nevertheless  they  laid  a jilan  to  fall  upon  Corvetto  with 
the  rear-guard  of  their  roguery,  and  went  again  to  the 
king,  who  was  almost  beside  himself  with  dehght  at 
the  tapestiy,  which  was  not  only  of  silk  embroidered 
with  gold,  but  had  besides  more  than  a thousand  de- 
vices and  thoughts  worked  on  it;  and  amongst  the 
rest,  if  I remember  right,  there  was  a cock  in  the  act  of 
crowing  at  daybreak,  and  out  of  its  mouth  was  seen 
coming  a motto  in  Tuscan, — If  I only  see  you* ; and  in 
another  part  a drooping  heliotrope  with  a Tuscan  motto. 
At  sunset',  with  so  many  other  pretty  things  that  it 
would  require  a better  memory  and  more  time  than  I 
have  to  relate  them. 

When  the  courtiers  came  to  the  king,  who  was  thus 
transported  with  joy,  they  said  to  him,  **As  Corvetto 
has  done  so  much  to  serve  you,  it  would  be  no  great 
matter  for  him,  in  order  to  give  you  a signal  pleasure, 
to  get  the  ogress  palace,  which  is  fit  for  an  emperor  to 
live  in ; for  it  has  so  many  rooms  and  chambers,  in- 
side and  out,  that  it  can  hold  an  army ; and  you  would 
never  believe  all  the  courtyards,  porticos,  colonnades, 
balconies,  and  spiral  chimneys  which  there  are,  built 
with  such  marvellous  architecture,  that  art  prides  her- 
self upon  them,  nature  is  abashed,  and  stupor  is  in 
delight.” 

* There  U a play  upon  the  words  in  the  Italian, — “ Sol  (Sun)  ch'  io  ti  miri  I" 


Digitized  by  Google 


CORVETTO. 


221 


The  king,  who  had  a fruitful  brain  which  conceived 
quickly,  called  Corvetto  again,  and  telling  him  the 
great  longing  that  had  seized  him  for  the  ogress  palace, 
begged  him  to  add  this  service  to  all  the  others  he 
had  done  him,  promising  to  score  it  up  with  the  chalk 
of  gratitude  at  the  tavern  of  memory.  So  Corvetto,  who 
was  a brimstone  match  and  made  a hundred  miles  an. 
hour,  instantly  set  out  heels  over  head ; and  ai’riving  at 
the  ogress  palace,  he  foimd  that  the  ogress  had  just 
given  birth  to  a fine  little  ogreling;  and  whilst  her 
husband  was  gone  to  invite  the  kinsfolk,  she  had  got 
out  of  bed,  and  was  busying  herself  with  preparing  the 
feast.  Then  Corvetto  entering,  with  a look  of  compas- 
sion, said,  “Good-day,  my  good  woman  ! truly  you  are  a 
brave  housewife ! but  why  do  you  torment  the  very  life 
out  of  you  in  this  way  ? only  yesterday  you  were  put  to 
bed,  and  now  you  are  slaving  thus,  and  have  no  pity  on 
your  owm  flesh. 

"\^Tiat  woiJd  you  have  me  do  ?”  replied  the  ogress, 
“ I have  no  one  to  help  me.” 

“ I am  here,”  answered  Corvetto,  ready  to  help  you 
tooth  and  nail.” 

Welcome  then !”  said  the  ogress ; “ and  as  you 
profier  me  so  much  kindness,  just  help  me  to  split  four 
logs  of  wood.” 

“ With  all  my  heart,”  answered  Cor\'etto ; “ but  if  four 


Digitized  by  Google 


222 


THE  PENTAMEKONE. 


logs  are  not  enow,  let  me  split  five.”  And  taking  up  a 
newly-ground  axe,  instead  of  striking  the  wood,  he  struek 
the  ogress  on  the  neck,  and  made  her  fall  to  the  ground 
like  a pear.  Then  running  quickly  to  the  gate,  he  dug 
a deep  hole  before  the  entrance,  and  covering  it  over 
with  bushes  and  earth,  he  hid  himself  behind  the  gate. 

As  soon  as  Corvetto  saw  the  ogre  coming  with  his 
kinsfolk,  he  set  up  a loud  cry  in  the  courtyard,  “ Stop, 
stop  ! I ’vc  caught  him  !”  and  “ Long  live  the  king  of 
Wide-River  1”  When  the  ogre  heard  this  challenge,  he 
ran  like  mad  at  Corvetto,  to  make  a hash  of  him ; but 
rushing  furiously  towards  the  gate,  down  he  tumbled 
with  all  his  companions,  head  over  heels  to  the  bottom 
of  the  pit,  where  Corvetto  speedily  stoned  them  to 
death.  Then  he  shut  the  door,  and  took  the  keys  to 
the  king,  who  seeing  the  valour  and  cleverness  of  the 
lad,  in  spite  of  ill-fortune  and  the  envy  and  annoyance 
of  the  courtiers,  gave  him  his  daughter  to  wife ; so  that 
the  crosses  of  envy  had  proved  rollers  to  launch  Cor- 
vette’s bark  of  life  on  the  sea  of  greatness;  whilst  his 
enemies  remained  confounded  and  bursting  with  rage, 
and  went  to  bed  without  a candle ; for 

The  punishment  of  ill  deeds  past. 

Though  long  delay’d,  yet  comes  at  last.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


CORVETTO. 


223 


There  were  courtiers  in  plenty  around  the  Prince  who 
would  have  betrayed  their  anger  at  seeing  him  touched 
to  the  quick  by  this  story,  had  they  not  possessed  the 
art  of  dissembling;  nor  could  they  say  which  was 
greatest,  their  vexation  at  hearing  themselves  upbraided 
for  their  roguery,  or  their  envy  at  Corvette’s  happiness. 
But  Paola  now  began  to  speak,  and  drew  their  soul  out 
of  the  well  of  their  o^m  feelings  with  the  hook  of  these 
words. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


THE  BOOBY. 


An  ignorant  man  who  associates  with  clever  people  has 
always  been  more  praised  than  a wise  man  who  keeps 
the  company  of  fools;  for  as  much  profit  and  fame 
as  one  may  gain  from  the  former,  so  much  wealth  and 
honour  one  may  lose  by  the  fault  of  the  latter ; and  as 
the  proof  of  the  pudding  is  in  the  eating*,  you  w'ill 
know  from  the  story  which  I am  going  to  tell  you 
whether  my  proposition  be  true. 


There  was  once  a man  who  was  as  rich  as  the  sea,  but 
as  there  can  never  be  any  perfect  happiness  in  this 
world,  he  had  a son  so  idle  and  good-for-nothing  that 
he  could  not  tell  a carob  from  a cucumber.  So  being 
unable  any  longer  to  put  up  w ith  his  folly,  he  gave  him 
a good  handful  of  crowns,  and  sent  him  to  trade  in  the 
Levant ; for  he  well  knew  that  seeing  various  countries 

• Literally,  ‘ as  the  proof  of  the  ham  is  in  the  stick,’— which  a person  thrusts  into 
the  meat  to  taste  its  flavour. 


Digitized  by  Google 


btgitizod  by  Googk 


\ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  BOOBY. 


225 


and  mixing  with  divers  people  awaken  the  genius, 
sharpen  the  judgement,  and  make  men  expert. 

Moseione  (for  that  was  the  name  of  the  son)  got  on 
horseback,  and  began  his  journey  towards  Venice,’  the 
arsenal  of  the  wonders  of  the  world,  to  embark  on  board 
some  vessel  bound  for  Cairo ; and  when  he  had  travelled 
a good  day’s  journey,  he  met  with  a person  who  was 
standing  fixed  at  the  foot  of  a poplar,  to  whom  he 
said,  ‘^What  is  your  name,  my  lad?  whence  are  you? 
and  what  is  your  trade  ?”  And  the  lad  replied,  “ My 
name  is  Lightning;  I am  from  Arrowland,  and  I can 
run  like  the  wind.” — “1  should  like  to  see  a proof 
of  it,”  said  Moseione;  and  Lightning  answered,  “Wait 
a moment,  and  you  will  see  whether  it  is  dust  or  flour.” 

When  they  had  stood  waiting  a little  while,  a doe 
came  bounding  over  the  plain,  and  Lightning,  let- 
ting her  pass  on  some  way,  to  give  her  the  more  law, 
darted  after  her  so  rapidly  and  light  of  foot,  that  he 
would  have  gone  over  a place  covered  with  flour  with- 
out leaving  the  mark  of  his  shoe,  and  in  four  bounds 
he  came  up  with  her.  Moseione,  amazed  at  this  ex- 
ploit, asked  if  he  would  come  and  hve  with  him,  and 
promised  to  pay  him  royally. 

So  Lightning  consented,  and  they  went  on  their  way 
together;  but  they  had  not  journeyed  many  miles 
when  they  met  another  youth,  to  whom  Moseione 

Q 


Digitized  by  Google 


226 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


said,  “ What  is  your  name,  comrade  ? M'hat  country  are 
you  from  ? and  what ’s  your  trade  ?”  " My  name,^*  re- 

plied the  lad,  ''is  Hare^s-ear;  I am  from  Vale-Curious; 
and  when  I put  my  ear  to  the  ground  I hear  all  that 
is  passing  in  the  world  without  stirring  from  the  spot. 
I perceive  the  monopolies  and  agreements  of  trades- 
people to  raise  the  prices  of  things,  the  ill-offices  of 
courtiers,  the  appointments  of  lovers,  the  plots  of  rob- 
bers, the  reports  of  spies,  the  complaints  of  servants, 
the  gossiping  of  old  women,  and  the  oaths  of  sailors ; 
so  that  neither  Lucianos  cock*  nor  Franco’s  lantern 
discovered  so  much  as  my  ears  can.” 

“If  that  be  true,”  said  Moscione,  “tell  me  what 
they  are  now  saying  at  my  home.” 

So  the  lad  put  his  ear  to  the  ground,  and  replied,  “ An 
old  man  is  talking  to  his  wife,  and  saying,  ' Praised  be 
Sol  in  Leo ! I have  got  rid  from  my  sight  that 
fellow  Moscione,  that  face  of  old-fashioned  crockery, 
that  nail  in  my  heart.  By  travelling  through  the  world 
he  will  at  least  become  a man,  and  no  longer  be  such  a 
stupid  ass,  such  a simpleton,  such  a lose-the-day  fellow, 
such  a — ” 

“ Stop,  stop !”  cried  Moscione ; “ you  tell  the  truth, 
and  I believe  you.  So  come  along  with  me,  for  you 
have  found  the  road  to  good-luck.” 

* See  lAdaa’a  ‘*Somnium,  vd 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  BOOST. 


227 


Well  and  good  said  the  youth.  So  they  all  went 
on  together  and  travelled  ten  miles  further,  when  they 
met  another  man,  to  whom  Moscione  said,  "V/hat  is 
your  name,  my  brave  fellow  ? where  were  you  bora  ? 
and  what  can  you  do  in  the  world  ?”  And  the  man 
answered,  “My  name  is  Shootstraight ; I am  from 
Castle  Aimwell ; and  I can  shoot  with  a crossbow  so 
point-blank  as  to  hit  a crab-apple  in  the  middle.” 

should  like  to  see  the  proof,^^  said  Moscione. 
So  the  lad  charged  his  crossbow,  took  aim,  and  made  a 
pea  leap  from  the  top  of  a stone ; whereupon  Moscione 
took  him  also  like  the  others  into  his  compjuiy.  And 
they  travelled  on  another  day^s  journey,  till  they  came 
to  some  people  who  were  building  a large  pier  in  the 
scorching  heat  <A  the  sun,  and  who  might  well  say, 
“ Boy,  put  water  to  the  wine,  for  my  heart  is  burning.^^ 
So  Moscione  had  compassion  on  them,  and  said,  “ My 
masters,  how  is  it  you  have  the  head  to  stand  in  this  fur- 
nace, which  is  fit  to  roast  a buffalo  ?”  And  one  of  them 
answered,  “ Oh,  we  are  as  cool  as  a rose ; for  we  have  a 
young  man  here  who  blows  upon  us  from  behind  in  such 
a manner  that  it  seems  just  as  if  the  west  wind  were 
blowing.”  “ Let  me  see  him,  I pray,”  cried  Moscione. 
So  the  mason  called  the  lad,  and  Moscione  said  to  him, 
“ Tell  me,  by  the  life  of  your  father,  what  is  your  name  ? 
what  country  arc  you  from  ? and  what  is  your  profess- 

Q 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


228 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


sion  ?”  And  the  lad  replied,  " My  name  is  Blowblast ; 

I am  from  Windy- land ; and  1 can  make  all  the  winds 
with  my  mouth.  If  you  wish  for  a zephyr,  I will  breathe 
one  that  will  send  you  into  transports ; if  you  wish  for 
a squall,  I will  throw  down  houses.” 

“ Seeing  is  believing,”  said  Moscione.  Whereupon 
Blowblast  breathed  at  first  quite  gently,  so  that  it  seemed 
to  be  the  wind  that  blows  at  Posilippo  towards  evening; 
then  turning  suddenly  to  some  trees,  he  sent  forth  such 
a furious  blast  that  it  uprooted  a row  of  oaks. 

When  Moscione  saw  this  he  took  him  for  a com- 
panion ; and  travelling  on  as  far  again,  he  met  another 
lad,  to  whom  he  said,  What  is  your  name,  if  I may 
make  so  bold  ? whence  are  you,  if  one  may  ask  ? and 
what  is  your  trade,  if  it  is  a fair  question  ?”  And  the 
lad  answered,  “My  name  is  Strongback;  I am  from 
Valentino,  and  I have  such  strength  that  I can  take  a 
mountain  on  my  back,  and  it  seems  to  me  only  a 
feather.” 

If  that  be  the  case,”  said  Moscione,  “ you  deserve 
to  be  the  king  of  the  custom-house,  and  you  should  be 
chosen  for  standard-bearer  on  the  first  of  May*.  But 
I should  like  to  sec  a proof  of  what  you  say.^^ 

Then  Strongback  began  to  load  himself  with  masses 

* The  porters  in  the  custom-house  at  Naples  are  remarkablo  for  their  strength. 
A f£te  is  held  in  that  city  on  the  first  of  May,  in  which  a standard  with  a pole  of  an 
enormous  height  is  carried  by  the  strongest  man. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  BOOBY. 


229 


of  rock,  trunks  of  trees,  and  so  many  other  weights, 
that  a thousand  large  waggons  could  not  have  carried 
them ; which  when  Moscione  saw,  he  agreed  with  the 
lad  to  join  him. 

So  they  travelled  on,  till  they  came  to  Fair-Flower, 
the  king  of  which  place  had  a daughter  who  ran  like 
the  wind,  and  could  pass  over  the  waving  com  with- 
out bending  an  ear ; and  the  king  had  issued  a procla- 
mation, that  whoever  could  overtake  her  in  ranning 
should  have  her  to  wife,  but  whoever  was  left  behind 
should  lose  his  head. 

When  Moscione  arrived  in  this  country,  and  heard 
the  proclamation,  he  went  straight  to  the  king,  and 
offered  to  run  with  his  daughter,  making  the  wise  agree- 
ment either  to  win  the  race  or  leave  his  noddle  there. 
But  in  the  morning  he  sent  to  inform  the  king  that  he 
was  taken  ill,  and  being  unable  to  run  himself,  he  would 
send  another  young  man  in  his  place.  “Come  who 
will !”  said  Ciannetella  (for  that  was  the  king^s  daugh- 
ter), “ I care  not  a fig — it  is  all  one  to  me.” 

So  when  the  great  square  was  filled  with  people, 
come  to  see  the  race,  insomuch  that  the  men  swarmed 
like  ants,  and  the  windows  and  roofs  were  all  as  full 
as  an  egg.  Lightning  came  out  and  took  his  station  at 
the  top  of  the  square,  waiting  for  the  signal.  And  lo  ! 
forth  came  Ciannetella,  drest  in  a little  gown,  tucked  half- 


Digitized  by  Google 


230 


THE  PENTAMlHftONE. 


way  up  her  legs,  and  a neat  and  pretty  little  shoe  witk 
a single  sole.  Then  they  placed  themselves  shoulder  to 
shoulder ; and  as  soon  as  the  tarantara  and  too-too  of  the 
trumpets  was  heard,  off  they  darted,  running  at  such  a 
rate  that  their  heels  touched  their  shoulders,  and  in  truth 
they  seemed  just  like  hares  with  the  greyhounds  after 
them,  horses  broken  loose  from  the  stable,  dogs  with 
kettles  tied  to  their  tails,  or  jackasses  with  furze-bushes 
behind  them.  But  Lightning  (as  he  was  both  by  name 
and  nature)  left  the  princess  more  than  a handsbreadth 
behind  him,  and  came  first  to  the  goal.  Then  you  should 
have  heard  the  huzzaing  and  shouting,  the  cries  and  the 
uproar,  the  whistling  and  clapping  of  hands  eff  all  the 
people,  bawling  out, " Hurra ! Long  life  to  the  stranger  P' 
'Whereat  Ciannetella^s  face  turned  as  red  as  a schooL 
boy^s  who  is  going  to  be  whipped,  and  she  stood  lost 
in  shame  and  confusion  at  seeing  hersdff  vanquished. 
But  as  there  were  to  be  two  heats  to  the  race,  she  fell 
to  planning  how  to  be  revenged  for  this  affront ; and 
going  home,  she  put  a charm  into  a ring,  of  such  power, 
that  if  any  one  had  it  upon  his  finger,  his  legs  would 
totter  so  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  walk,  much  leas 
to  run;  then  she  sent  it  as  a present  to  Lightning; 
begging  him  to  wear  it  on  his  finger  for  love  of  her. 

Quickear,  who  heard  this  trkk  plotted  between  the 
father  and  daughter,  said  nothing,  and  waited  to  see  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  BOOBY. 


231 


upshot  of  the  affair.  And  when,  at  the  trumpeting  of 
the  birds,  the  Sun  whipped  on  the  Night,  who  sat 
mounted  on  the  jackass  of  the  Shades*,  they  returned 
to  the  field,  where  at  the  usual  signal  they  fell  to  plying 
their  heels.  But  if  Ciannetella  was  like  another  Ata- 
lanta.  Lightning  had  become  no  less  like  a shoulder- 
slipped  ass  and  a foundered  horse,  for  he  could  not  stir 
a step.  But  Shootatraight,  who  saw  his  comrade's 
danger,  and  heard  from  Quickear  how  matters  stood, 
laid  hold  on  his  crossbow,  and  shot  a bolt  so  exactly 
that  it  hit  Lightning's  finger,  and  out  fiew  the  stone 
from  the  ring,  in  which  the  virtue  of  the  charm  lay; 
whereupon  his  legs,  that  had  been  tied,  were  set  freei 
and  with  four  goat-leaps  he  passed  Ciannetella  and  won 
the  race. 

The  king  seeing  this  victory  of  a blockhead,  the  palm 
thus  carried  off  by  a simpleton,  the  triumph  of  a fool, 
bethought  himself  seriously  whether  or  no  he  should 
give  him  his  daughter;  and  taking  counsel  with  the 
wiseacres  of  his  court,  they  replied  that  Ciannetella  was 
not  a mouthful  for  the  tooth  of  such  a miserable  dog 
and  lose-the-day  bird,  and  that  without  breaking  his 
word  he  might  commute  the  promise  of  his  daughter 
for  a gift  of  crowns,  which  would  be  more  to  the  taste 

* One  mode  of  pnnUhraent  in  Naples  wu  for  the  criminal  to  ride  throngh  the 
cit]r  on  a jackass,  with  a paper  ci^>  (mitera)  on  lua  head,  and  whipped  on  his  naked 
back. 


Digitized  by  Google 


232 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


of  a poor  beggar  like  Moscione  than  all  the  women  in 
the  world. 

This  advice  pleased  the  king,  and  he  asked  Moscione 
how  much  money  he  would  take  instead  of  the  wife 
who  had  been  promised  him.  Then  Moscione,  after 
consulting  with  the  others,  answered,  "I  will  take  as 
much  gold  and  silver  as  one  of  my  comrades  can  carry 
on  his  back.”  The  king  consented;  whereupon  they 
brought  Strongback,  on  whom  they  began  to  load  bales- 
of  ducats,  sacks  of  patacas,  large  purses  full  of  crowns,, 
barrels  of  copper  money,  chests  full  of  chains  and  rings  ; 
but  the  more  they  loaded  him  the  firmer  he  stood,, 
just  like  a tower,  so  that  the  treasury,  the  banks,  the' 
usurers,  and  the  money-dealers  of  the  city  did  not  suffice, , 
and  he  sent  to  all  the  great  people  in  every  direction' 
to  borrow  their  silver  candlesticks,  hasins,  jugs,  plates, 
trays  and  baskets ; and  yet  all  was  not  enough  to  make 
up  the  full  load.  At  length  they  went  away,  not  laden, 
but  tired  and  satisfied. 

When  the  councillors  saw  what  heaps  and  stores- 
these  four  miserable  dogs  were  carrying  off,  they  said 
to  the  king  that  it  was  a great  piece  of  assery  to  load 
them  with  all  the  sinews  of  his  kingdom,  and  that  it 
would  be  well  to  send  people  after  them  to  lessen  the 
load  of  that  Atlas  who  was  carrying  on  his  shoulders  a 
heaven  of  treasm’e.  The  king  gave  ear  to  this  advice. 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


THE  BOOBY.  233 

and  immediately  despatched  a party  of  armed  men^ 
foot  and  horse,  to  overtake  Moscione  and  his  friends. 
But  Quickear,  who  had  heard  this  counsel,  informed  his 
comrades;  and  while  the  dust  was  rising  to  the  sky 
from  the  trampling  of  those  who  were  coming  to  unload 
the  rich  cargo,  Blowblast,  seeing  that  things  were  come 
to  a had  pass,  began  to  blow  at  such  a rate,  that  he  not 
only  made  the  enemies  fall  flat  on  the  ground,  but  he 
sent  them  flying  more  than  a mile  distant,  as  the  north 
wind  does  folks  who  pass  through  that  country.  So 
without  meeting  any  more  hindrance,  Moscione  arrived 
at  his  father’s  house,  where  he  shared  the  booty  with ' 
his  companions,  since,  as  the  saying  goes,  a good  deed 
deserves  a good  meed.  So  he  sent  them  away  content 
and  happy ; but  he  stayed  with  his  father,  rich  beyond 
measure,  and  saw  himself  an  ass  laden  with  gold,  not 
giving  the  lie  to  the  saying, 

“ Heaven  sends  biscuits  to  him  who  has  no  teeth.” 


No  sooner  was  this  story  ended,  than,  according  to 
the  command  of  the  Prince,  Giallaise  and  Cola  Jacovo, 
one  the  cook  and  the  other  the  butler  of  the  Court, 
made  their  appearance,  clad  in  the  old  Neapohtan  dress. 


Digitized  by  Google 


234 


THE  PBNTAMERONE. 


and  began  a dialogue^  which  was  vastly  relished  by 
all  the  auditors,  who,  enchanted  with  the  pleasure,  were 
scarcely  aware  that  the  Sun,  tired  of  journeying  the 
whole  day  long  through  the  fields  of  heaven,  having 
driven  the  Stars  to  the  torch-dance,  had  retired  to 
change  his  shirt.  But  as  it  w'as  now  growing  dusk, 
after  receiving  the  usual  command  to  return  the  next 
day,  they  all  retired  to  their  homes. 


Digitized  by  Google 


235 


jTourtf)  ©ap. 


A LITTLE  before  the  Dawn  went  forth  to  a draught 
from  the  labourers,  having  brought  the  news  of  the 
Sun^s  approach,  the  princely  pair,  one  white  and  the 
other  black,  were  at  the  appointed  place,  where  the  ten 
women  had  arrived  shortly  before,  who  having  feasted 
on  mulberries,  had  made  their  mouths  just  like  a dyer’s 
hands.  Then  sitting  down  all  together  beside  a foun- 
tain, which  served  as  a looking-glass  to  the  feet  of  some 
citron-trees,  that  were  interlacing  their  heads  to  prevent 
the  Stm’s  peeping  through,  they  bethought  them  how  to 
pass  the  time  until  the  hour  arrived  to  set  their  jaws  to 
work,  so  as  to  afford  amusement  to  Taddeo  and  Lucia; 
and  they  began  to  discuss  whether  they  should  play  at 
‘ Saw-brick,’  ‘ Head  or  tail,’  ‘ Egg  or  wind*,’  * Spring- 

* A game  in  which  one  peison  holds  out  both  hands  cloied,  and  the  other  gneaaes 
which  hand  contains  the  prize. 


Digitized  by  Google 


236 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


stick*/  * Morra/  ‘ Even  or  odd/  ^ the  Bell/  ^the  Boaster,’ 
' Little  Castles,’  * Throw  the  ball  here,’  ^ Two  or  one,’ 
* The  Owl,’  or  * The  Ball.’ 

At  length  the  Prince,  tired  of  these  games,  com- 
manded some  instruments  to  be  brought,  and  that  they 
should  sing  awhile;  and  instantly  a number  of  attend- 
ants, who  were  dilettanti  in  music,  came  with  lutes,  tam- 
bourins,  guitars,  harps,  mandolins,  violins,  castanets, 
flutes  and  cornets;  and  giving  a beautiful  concert, 
and  playing  the  harmonies  of  the  Abbate  Zefero,  and 
Cuccara  Gianmartino,  and  the  Florentine  dance,  they 
sang  a number  of  Canzoni  of  the  good  old  time,  which 
are  now  more  easily  sighed  for  than  found  again ; and 
amongst  the  rest  they  sang  the  followingf : — 

“ Fie  for  shame,  O Margarita ! 

’Tis  indeed  too  cruel  this, 

That  for  every  little  kiss 
I must  to  a new  gown  treat  her. 

Fie  for  shame,  O Margarita !” 

And  this  one : — 

“ O cruel  Fair ! I fain  would  see 
Myself  a slipper,  but  to  be 
Under  that  foot ; yet  if  she  knew  it, 

She 'd  stamp  and  run,  to  make  me  rue  it  t" 

* Maxz'e  ppitixo,  A game  very  common  in  our  streets ; a hoy  strikes  the  tip  of 
a little  bit  of  wood  on  the  ground,  and  makes  it  spring  into  the  air.  For  remarks  on 
these  games,  see  the  Notes  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 

t The  difficulty  of  translating  these  verses  into  corresponding  measures  is  my 
excuse  for  their  lameness. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


FOUETH  DAY, 


237 


Then  followed  this : — 

“ Come  forth,  come  forth,  O Sun ! 

Shine  on  the  Emperor. 

My  little  box  of  silver, 

'Which  is  worth  four  hundred. 

One  hundred  and  fifty. 

Sings  the  whole  night  long. 

Sings  'Viola, 

The  master  of  the  school. 

O master,  O master. 

Send  us  away  quickly ! 

For  Master  Tiesto ’s  coming  down 
'With  lances  and  with  swords, 

And  follow’d  by  the  birds. 

Sound,  sound  the  little  pipe. 

For  I ’ll  buy  you  a little  gown, 

A little  gown  of  scarlet  red. 

But  if  you  don’t  play,  I ’ll  break  your  head.” 

Nor  did  they  omit  the  following : — 

” Sun,  sun,  keep  off  the  rain  I 
For  I must  turn  the  com  and  grain 
Of  Master  Giuliano. 

O Master,  lend  me  a lance,  .. 

For  I will  go  to  France, 

From  France  to  l.ombardia, 

'Where  dwells  my  fair  Lucia.” 

Whilst  they  were  in  the  midst  of  the  singing,  the 
dishes  were  placed  upon  the  table,  and  they  ate  till  they 
were  near  bursting.  Then  Taddeo  told  Zeza  to  begin, 
and  usher  in  the  day  with  her  song ; so,  in  accordance 
with  the  command  of  the  Prince,  she  spoke  as  follows. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 

238 


THE  STONE  IN  THE  COCK’S  HEAD. 

The  robber’s  wife  does  not  always  laugh : he  who 
weaves  fraud,  works  his  own  ruin:  there  is  no  deceit 
which  is  not  at  last  discovered,  no  treachery  that  does 
not  come  to  light : walls  have  ears,  and  are  spies  to 
rogues : the  earth  gapes  and  discovers  theft ; as  I will 
prove  to  you  if  you  pay  attention. 


There  was  once  in  the  city  of  Dark  Grotto  a certain 
man  named  Minccco  Aniello,  who  was  so  persecuted  by 
fortune,  that  all  his  fixtures  and  moveables  consisted  only 
of  a short-legged  cock,  which  he  had  reared  upon  bread- 
crumbs. But  one  moraing,  being  pinched  with  appetite, 
(for  hunger  drives  the  wolf  from  the  thicket,)  he  took 
it  into  his  head  to  sell  the  cock ; and  taking  it  to  the 
market,  he  met  two  thievish  magicians,  with  whom  he 
made  a bargain,  and  sold  it  for  half  a crown.  So  they 
told  him  to  take  it  to  their  house,  and  they  would  count 


Digitized  by  Google 


3H£  COCIC’S  HBAV 


THE  STONE 


■J^inecco  Aliitllo  ieforc  J'Cmj  Jiosecont^ 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  STONE  IN  THE  COCK’s  HEAD.  239 

him  out  the  money.  Then  the  magicians  went  their 
way,  and  Minecco  Aniello  following  them,  overheard 
them  talking  gibberish  together  and  saying,  “Who 
would  have  told  us  that  we  should  meet  with  such  a 
piece  of  good  luck,  Jennarone  ? this  cock  will  make  our 
fortune  to  a certainty  by  the  stone  which,  you  know, 
he  has  in  his  pate:  we  will  quickly  have  it  set  in  a 
ring,  and  then  we  shall  have  everything  we  can  ask 
for.” 

“ Be  quiet,  J acovuccio,”  ansr^’^ered  Jennarone ; “ I see 
myself  rich  and  can  hardly  believe  it ; and  I am  longing 
to  twist  the  cock^s  neck,  and  give  a kick  in  the  face  of 
beggary ; for  in  this  world  virtue  without  money  goes 
for  nothing,  and  a man  is  judged  of  by  his  coat.” 

When  Minecco  Aniello,  who  had  travelled  about  in 
the  world  and  eaten  bread  from  more  than  one  oven, 
heard  this  gibberish,  he  turned  on  his  heel  and  scam- 
pered off.  And  running  home  he  twisted  the  cock^s 
neck,  and  opening  its  head  found  the  stone,  which  he 
had  instantly  set  in  a brass  ring.  Then,  to  make  a 
trial  of  its  ^d^tue,  he  said,  I wish  to  become  a youth 
eighteen  years  old.” 

Hardly  had  he  uttered  the  words,  when  his  blood  be- 
gan to  flow  more  quickly,  his  UCTves  became  stronger,  his 
limbs  firmer,  his  flesh  fresher,  his  eyes  more  fiery,  his 
silver  hairs  were  turned  into  gold,  his  mouth,  which 


Digitized  by  Google 


240 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


WM  a sacked  village,  became  peopled  with  teeth,  his 
beard,  which  was  as  thick  as  a wood,  became  like  a 
nursery-garden;  in  short  he  was  changed  to  a most 
beautiful  youth.  Then  he  said  again,  “ I wish  for  a 
splendid  palace,  and  to  marry  the  king’s  daughter.” 
And  lo ! there  instantly  appeared  a palace  of  incredible 
magnificence,  in  which  were  apartments  that  would 
amaze  you,  columns  to  astound  you,  pictures  to  fill  you 
with  wonder:  silver  glittered  around,  and  gold  was 
trodden  underfoot;  the  jewels  dazzled  your  eyes;  the 
servants  swarmed  like  ants,  the  horses  and  carriages 
were  not  to  be  counted ; in  short,  there  was  such  a dis- 
play of  riches,  that  the  king  stared  at  the  sight,  and 
willingly  gave  him  his  daughter  Natalizia. 

Meanwhile  the  magicians,  having  discovered  Minecco 
Aniello’s  great  wealth,  laid  a plan  to  rob  him  of  his 
good  fortune ; so  they  made  a pretty  little  doll,  which 
played  and  danced  by  means  of  clockwork ; and  dress- 
ing themselves  like  merchants,  they  went  to  Pentella, 
the  daughter  of  Minecco  Aniello,  under  pretext  of  sell- 
ing it  to  her.  When  Pentella  saw  the  beautiful  little 
thing,  she  asked  them  what  price  they  put  upon  it; 
and  they  replied,  that  it  was  not  to  be  bought  for 
money,  but  that  she  might  have  it  and  welcome  if  she 
would  only  do  them  a favour,  which  was,  to  let  th^ 
see  the  make  of  the  ring  which  her  father  possessed. 


THE  STONE  IN  THE  COCK^S  HEAD.  241 

f 

in  order  to  take  the  model  and  make  another  like  it ; 
then  they  would  give  her  the  doll  without  any  payment 
at  all. 

Pentella,  who  had  never  heard  the  proverb,  “ Tliink 
well  before  you  buy  anything  cheap,”  instantly  accepted 
this  offer ; and  bidding  them  return  the  next  morning, 
she  promised  to  ask  her  father  to  lend  her  the  ring. 

So  the  magicians  went  away,  and  when  her  father  re- 
turned home,  Pentella  coaxed  and  caressed  him,  until 
at  last  she  persuaded  him  to  give  her  the  ring,  making  * 
the  excuse  that  she  was  sad  at  heart,  and  wished  to 
divert  her  mind  a little. 

When  the  next  day  came,  as  soon  as  the  scavenger  of 
the  Sun  sweeps  the  last  trace  of  the  Shades  from  the 
streets  and  squares  of  Heaven,  the  magicians  returned; 
and  no  sooner  had  they  the  ring  in  their  hands,  than 
they  instantly  vanished,  and  not  a trace  of  them  was  to 
be  seen ; so  that  poor  Pentella  had  like  to  have  died 
with  terror. 

But  when  the  magicians  came  to  a wood,  where  the 
branches  of  some  of  the  trees  were  dancing  the  sword- 
dance,  and  the  boughs  of  others  were  playing  together 
at  hot-cockles,  they  desired  the  ring  to  destroy  the  spell 
by  which  the  old  man  had  become  young  again.  And 
instantly  Minecco  Aniello,  who  was  just  at  that  minute 

K 


Digitized  by  Google 


242  ' 


THE  PEKTAMERONE. 


in  the  presence  of  the  king,  was  suddenly  sedn  to  grow 
hoary,  his  hairs  to  whiten,  his  forehead  to  wrinkle, 
his  eyebrows  to  grow  bristly,  his  eyes  to  sink  in,  his 
face  to  be  furrowed,  his  mouth  to  become  toothless,  his 
beard  to  grow  bushy,  his  back  to  be  humped,  his  legs  to 
tremble,  and  above  all  his  glittering  garments  to  turn 
to  rags  and  tatters. 

The  king,  seeing  this  miserable  beggar  seated  be- 
side him  at  table,  ordered  him  to  be  instantly  driven 
' away  with  blows  and  hard  words  j whereupon  Aniello, 
thus  suddenly  fallen  from  his  good  luck,  went  weeping 
to  his  daughter,  and  asked  for  the  ring  in  order  to  set 
matters  to  rights  again.  But  when  he  heard  the  fatal 
trick  played  by  the  false  merchants,  he  was  ready  to 
throw  himself  out  of  the  window,  cursing  a thousand 
times  the  ignorance  of  his  daughter,  who  for  the  sake 
of  a silly  doll  had  turned  him  into  a miserable  scare- 
crow, and  for  a paltry  thing  of  rags  had  brought  him 
to  rags  himself;  adding  that  he  was  resolved  to  go 
wandering  about  in  the  world,  hke  a bad  shilling,  until 
he  should  get  tidings  of  those  merchants.  .So  saying 
he  threw  a cloak  about  his  neck  and  a wallet  on  his 
. back,  drew  his  sandals  on  his  feet,  took  a staff  in  his 
hand,  and  leaving  his  daughter  all  chilled  and  frozen, 
he  set  out  walking  desperately  on  and  on  until  he  ar- 


r 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  STONE  IN  THE  COCK^S  HEAD.  243 

rived  at  the  kingdom  of  Deep-Hole,  inhabited  by  the 
mice,  where,  being  taken  for  a big  spy  of  the  cats,  he 
was  instantly  led  before  Rosecone*  the  king.  Then  the 
king  asked  him  who  he  was,  whence  he  came,  and  what 
he  was  about  in  that  country;  and  Minecco  Aniello> 
after  first  giving  the  king  a cheese-paring,  in  sign  of 
tribute,  related  to  him  all  his  misfortunes  one  by  one, 
and  concluded  by  saying  that  he  was  resolved  to  con- 
tinue his  toil  and  travel,  until  he  should  get  tidings  of 
those  thievish  villains  who  had  robbed  him  of  so  pre- 
cious a jewel,  taking  from  him  at  once  the  flower  of  his 
youth,  the  source  of  his  wealth,  and  the  prop  of  his 
honour. 

At  these  words  Rosecone  felt  pity  nibbling  at  his 
heart ; and  wishing  to  comfort  the  poor  man,  he  sum- 
moned the  eldest  mice  to  a council,  and  asked  their  opi- 
nions on  the  misfortunes  of  Minecco  Aniello,  command- 
ing them  to  use  aU  diligence  and  endeavour  to  obtain 
some  tidings  of  those  false  merchants.  Now  among 
the  rest  it  happened  that  Rudolo  and  Saltariellof  were 
present, — mice  who  were  weU  used  to  the  ways  of  the 
world,  and  had  lived  for  six  years  at  a tavern  of  great 
resort  hard  by ; and  they  said  to  Aniello,  “ Be  of  good 
heart,  comrade ! matters  will  turn  out  better  than  you 
imagine.  You  must  know  that  one  day,  when  we  were 

* NibUcr.  t <•  Nibbler  and  Skipjack. 

& 2 

a 


Digitized  by  Google 


244 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


in  a room  in  the  hosteliy  of  the  ^ Horn/  where  the  most 
famous  men  in  the  world  lodge  and  make  merry,  two 
persons  from  Hook-Castle  came  in,  who,  after  they  had 
eaten  their  fill  and  had  seen  the  bottom  of  their  fiagon, 
fell  to  talking  of  a trick  they  had  played  a certain  old 
man  of  Dark-Grotto,  and  how  they  had  cheated  him 
out  of  a stone  of  great  value,  which  one  of  them  named 
Jennarone  said  he  would  never  take  from  his  finger, 
that  he  might  not  run  the  risk  of  losing  it  as  the  old 
man^s  daughter  had  done. 

When  Minecco  Aniello  heard  this,  he  told  the  two 
mice,  that  if  they  would  trust  themselves  to  accompany 
him  to  the  country  where  these  rogues  lived,  and  re- 
cover the  ring  for  him,  he  would  give  them  a good  lot 
of  cheese  and  salt  meat,  which  they  might  eat  and  enjoy 
with  his  majesty  the  king.  Then  the  two  mice,  after 
bargaining  for  a reward,  offered  to  go  over  sea  and 
mountain ; and  taking  leave  of  his  mousy  majesty,  they 
set  out. 

After  journeying  a long  way,  they  arrived  at  Hook- 
Castle,  where  the  mice  told  Minecco  Aniello  to  remain 
under  some  trees  on  the  brink  of  a river,  which  hke  a 
leech  drew  the  moisture  from  the  land  and  discharged 
it  into  the  sea.  Then  they  went  to  seek  the  house 
of  the  magicians ; and  observing  that  Jennarone  never 
took  the  ring  from  his  finger,  they  sought  to  gain  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  STONE  IN  THE  COCK^S  HEAD.  245 

victory  by  stratagem.  So  waiting  till  Night  had  dyed 
with  purple  grape-juice  the  sunburnt  face  of  Heaven, 
and  the  magicians  had  gone  to  bed  and  were  fast 
asleep,  Rudolo  began  to  nibble  the  finger  on  which 
the  ring  was ; whereupon  J ennaronc,  feeling  the  smart, 
took  the  ring  off  and  laid  it  on  a table  at  the  head 
of  the  bed.  But  as  soon  as  Saltariello  saw  this,  he 
popped  the  ring  into  his  mouth,  and  in  four  skips 
he  was  off  to  find  Minecco  Aniello,  who  with  even 
greater  joy  than  a man  at  the  gallows  feels  when  a par- 
don arrives,  instantly  turned  the  magicians  into  two 
jackasses ; and  throwing  his  mantle  over  one  of  them, 
he  bestrode  him  like  a noble  count  j then  he  loaded  the 
other  with  eheese  and  bacon,  and  set  off  toward  Deep- 
Hole,  where  having  given  presents  to  the  king  and  his 
councillors,  he  thanked  them  for  all  the  good  fortune 
he  had  received  by  their  assistance,  praying  Heaven 
that  no  mousetrap  might  ever  lay  hold  of  them,  that 
no  cat  might  ever  harm  them,  and  that  no  arsenic  might 
ever  poison  them. 

Then  leaving  that  country,  ]\Iinccco  Aniello  returned 
to  Dark-Grotto  even  more  handsome  than  before,  and 
was  received  by  the  king  and  his  daughter  with  the 
greatest  affection  in  the  world.  And  having  ordered 
the  two  asses  to  be  cast  down  from  a rock,  he  lived 
happy  with  his  wife,  never  more  taking  the  ring  from 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


246 


THE  FENTAHEBONE. 


his  finger,  that  he  might  not  again  commit  such  a folly ; 
for 

“ The  dog  who  has  been  scalded  with  hot  water  has 
ever  after  a dread  of  cold  water.” 


The  adventures  of  Minecco  Aniello  gave  great  satis* 
faction  to  the  Prince  and  his  wife,  and  they  blest  the 
mice  a thousand  times  for  getting  the  stone  again  for 
the  poor  man,  and  rewarding  the  magicians  with  0 plus 
0*  and  a broken  neck  into  the  bargain.  But  as  Me- 
neca  had  now  taken  her  station  on  the  racecourse  of 
story-telling,  all  present  barred  the  door  of  words  with 
the  bolt  of  silence,  and  she  began  as  follows. 

* Co  lo  chirchio  de  to  dilo. 


Digitized  by  Google 


247 


THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES. 

Once  upon  a time  the  King  of  Green-Bank  had  three 
daughters,  who  were  perfect  jewels,  with  whom  three 
sons  of  the  King  of  Fair- Meadow  were  desperately  in 
love ; hut  these  princes  having  been  changed  into  ani- 
mals by  the  spell  of  a fairy,  the  king  of  Green-Bank 
disdained  to  give  them  his  daughters  to  wife.  Where- 
upon the  first,  who  was  a beautiful  Falcon,  called  toge- 
ther all  the  birds  to  a council ; and  there  came  the  chaf- 
finches, tomtits,  woodpeckers,  flycatchers,  jays,  black- 
birds, cuckoos,  thrushes,  and  a/ia  genera  pennatorum. 
And  when  they  were  all  assembled  at  his  summons,  he 
ordered  them  to  destroy  all  the  blossoms  on  the  trees  of 
Green-Bank,  so  that  not  a flower  or  leaf  should  remain. 
The  second  prince,  who  was  a Stag,  summoning  all  the 
goats,  rabbits,  hares,  hedgehogs,  and  other  animals  of 
that  country,  laid  waste  all  the  corn-fields,  so  that 
there  was  not  a single  blade  of  grass  or  corn  left. 
The  third  prince,  who  was  a Dolphin,  consulting  to- 
gether with  a hundred  monsters  of  the  sea,  made 


Digitized  by  Google 


248 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


such  a tempest  arise  upon  that  coast,  that  not  a boat 
escaped. 

Now  when  the  king  saw  that  matters  were  going 
from  bad  to  worse,  and  that  he  could  not  remedy  the 
mischief  which  these  three  wild  lovers  were  causing,  he 
resolved  to  get  out  of  his  trouble,  and  made  up  his  mind 
to  give  them  his  daughters  to  wife;  and  thereupon, 
without  wanting  either  feasts  or  songs,  they  carried 
their  brides  off  and  out  of  the  kingdom. 

On  parting  from  her  daughters,  Granzolla  the  queen 
gave  each  of  them  a ring,  one  exactly  like  the  other, 
telling  them  that  if  they  happened  to  be  separated,  and 
after  awhile  to  meet  again,  or  to  see  any  of  their  kins- 
folk, they  would  recognize  one  another  by  means  of 
these  rings.  So  taking  their  leave  they  departed ; and 
the  Falcon  carried  Fabiella,  who  was  the  eldest  of  the 
sisters,  to  the  top  of  a mountain,  which  was  so  high  that, 
passing  the  confines  of  the  clouds,  it  reached  with  a dry 
head  to  a region  where  it  never  rains ; and  there,  leading 
her  to  a most  beautiful  palace,  she  lived  like  a queen. 

The  Stag  carried  Vasta,  the  second  sister,  into  a wood, 
which  was  so  thick,  that  the  Shades,  when  summoned 
by  the  Night,  could  not  find  their  way  out  to  escort  her. 
There  he  placed  her,  as  befitted  her  rank,  in  a wonder- 
folly  splendid  house  with  a ^den. 

The  Dolphin  swam  with  Rita,  the  third  sister,  on  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES. 


249 


back  into  the  middle  of  the  sea,  where  upon  a large 
rock  he  showed  her  a mansion  in  which  three  crowned 
kings  might  have  lived. 

Meanwhile  Granzolla  gave  birth  to  a fine  little  boy, 
whom  they  named  Tittone.  And  when  he  was  fifteen 
years  old,  heariug  his  mother  lamenting  continually  that 
she  never  heard  any  tidings  of  her  three  daughters,  who 
were  married  to  three  animals,  he  took  it  into  his  head 
to  travel  through  the  world,  until  he  should  obtain  some 
news  of  them.  So  after  begging  and  entreating  his  father 
and  mother  for  a long  time,  they  granted  him  permis- 
sion, bidding  him  take  for  his  journey  attendants  and 
everything  needful  and  befitting  a prince;  and  the 
queen  also  gave  him  another  ring,  similar  to  those  she 
bad  given  to  ber  daughters. 

Tittone  went  his  way,  and  left  no  comer  of  Italy,  not 
a nook  in  France,  nor  any  part  of  Spain  unsearched ; 
then  he  passed  through  England,  and  traversed  Slavo- 
nia, and  visited  Poland,  and  in  short  travelled  both  east 
and  west.  At  length,  leaving  all  his  servants,  some  at 
the  taverns  and  some  at  the  hospitals,  he  set  out 
without  a farthing  in  his  pocket,  and  came  to  the  top 
of  the  mountain  where  dwelt  the  Falcon  and  Fabiella. 
And  as  he  stood  there,  beside  himself  with  amazement, 
contemplating  the  beauty  of  the  palace,  the  corner- 
stones of  which  were  of  porphyry,  the  walls  of  alabaster. 


Digitized  by  Google 


250' 


THE  FENTAMEBONE. 


the  windows  of  gold  and  the  tiles  of  silver,  his  sister  ob- 
served him;  and  ordering  him  to  be  called,  she  de- 
manded who  he  was,  whence  he  came,  and  what  chance 
had  brought  him  to  that  country.  When  Tittone  told 
her  his  country,  his  father  and  mother,  and  his  name, 
Fabiella  knew  him  to  be  her  brother,  and  the  more 
when  she  compared  the  ring  upon  his  finger  with  that 
which  her  mother  had  given  her ; and  embracing  him 
with  great  joy,  she  concealed  him,  fearing  that  her 
husband  would  be  angry  when  he  returned  home. 

As  soon  as  the  Falcon  came  home,  Fabiella  began  to 
tell  him  that  a great  longing  had  come  over  her  to  see  her 
parents ; and  the  Falcon  answered,  “ Let  the  wish  pass, 
wife ; for  that  cannot  be,  unless  the  humour  takes  me.*' 
**  Let  us  at  least,”  said  Fabiella,  “ send  to  fetch  one 
of  my  kinsfolk,  to  keep  me  company.” 

And  pray  who  will  come  so  far  to  see  you  ?”  replied 
the  Falcon. 

“ Nay,  but  if  any  one  should  come,”  added  Fabiella, 
• - would  you  be  displeased  ?” 

^ “Why  should  I be  displeased?”  said  the  Falcon; 
. * “'t  would  be  enough  that  he  were  one  of  your  kinsfolk, 
to  make  me  take  him  to  my  heart.” 

When  Fabiella  heard  this  she  took  courage,  and  call- 
' ing  to  her  brother  to  come  forth,  she  presented  him  to 
the  Falcon,  who  exclaimed,  “ Five  and  five  make  ten ; 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES. 


251 


love  passes  through  the  glove,  and  water  through  the 
hoot.  A hearty  welcome  to  you ! you  are  master  in 
this  house;  command,  and  do  just  as  you  like.”  Then 
he  gave  orders  that  Tittone  should  be  served  and  treated 
with  the  same  honour  as  himself. 

Now  when  Tittone  had  stayed  a fortnight  on  the 
mountain,  it  came  into  his  head  to  go  forth  and  seek 
his  other  sisters;  so  taking  leave  of  Fabiella  and  his 
brother-in-law,  the  Falcon  gave  him  one  of  his  feathers, 
saying,  ^‘Take  this  and  prize  it,  my  dear  Tittone;  for 
you  may  one  day  be  in  trouble,  and  you  will  then  esteem 
it  a treasure.  Enough — take  good  care  of  it,  and  if 
ever  you  meet  with  any  mishap,  throw  it  on  the  groimd 
and  say,  * Come  hither,  come  hither  and  you  shall 
have  cause  to  thank  me.” 

Tittone  wrapped  the  feather  up  in  a sheet  of  paper, 
and  putting  it  in  his  pocket,  after  a thousand  ceremo- 
nies departed.  And  travelling  on  and  on  a very  long 
way,  he  arrived  at  last  at  the  wood  where  the  Stag  lived 
with  Vasta ; and  going,  half-dead  with  hunger,  into  the 
garden  to  pluck  some  fruit,  his  sister  saw  him,  and  re- 
cognized him  in  the  same  manner  as  Fabiella  had  done. 
Then  she  presented  Tittone  to  her  husband,  who  re- 
ceived him  with  the  greatest  friendship,  and  treated  him 
truly  like  a prince. 

At  the  end  of  a fortnight,  when  Tittone  wished  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


252 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


depart^  aud  go  in  search  of  his  other  sister^  the  Stag 
gave  him  one  of  his  hairs,  repeating  the  same  words  as 
the  Falcon  had  spoken  about  the  feather.  And  setting 
out  on  his  way,  with  a bagful  of  crown-pieces  which  Uie 
Falcon  had  given  him,  and  as  many  more  which  the 
Stag  gave  him,  he  walked  on  and  on  until  he  came 
to  the  end  of  the  earth,  where,  being  stopped  by 
the  sea  and  unable  to  walk  any  further,  he  took  ship, 
intending  to  seek  through  all  the  islands  for  tidings  of 
his  sister.  So  setting  sail,  he  went  about  and  about, 
until  at  length  he  was  carried  to  an  island,  where  lived 
the  Dolphin  with  Rita.  And  no  sooner  had  he  landed, 
than  his  sister  saw  and  recognized  him  in  the  ssyoae 
manner  as  the  others  had  done,  and  he  was  received 
by  her  husband  wth  all  possible  affection. 

Now  after  awhile  Tittone  wished  to  set  out  again,  to 
go  and  visit  his  father  aud  mother,  whom  he  had  not 
seen  for  so  long  a time.  So  the  Ddphin  gave  him  one 
of  his  scales,  telling  him  the  same  as  the  others  had ; 
and  Tittone,  mounting  a horse,  set  out  on  his  travels. 
But  he  had  hardly  proceeded  half  a mile  from  the  sear 
shore,  when  entering  a wood — the  abode  of  Fear  and  the 
Shades,  where  a continual  fair  of  darkness  and  terror  was 
kept  up — ^he  found  a great  tower  in  the  middle  of  a lake^ 
whose  waters  were  kissing  the  feet  of  the  trees,  and  en- 
treating them  not  to  let  the  Sun  witness  their  pranks. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES. 


263 


At  a window  in  the  tower  Tittone  saw  a most  beau- 
tiful maiden^  sitting  at  the  feet  of  a hideous  dragon, 
who  was  asleep.  WTien  the  damsel  saw  Tittone,  she 
said  in  a low  and  piteous  voice,  " 0 noble  youth,  sent 
perchance  by  Heaven  to  comfort  me  in  my  miseries  in 
this  place,  where  the  face  of  a Christian  is  never  seen, 
release  me  from  the  power  of  this  tyrannical  serpent, 
who  has  carried  me  off  from  my  father,  the  king  of 
Bright- Valley,  and  shut  me  up  in  this  frightful  tower, 
where  I must  die  a miserable  death.” 

“ Alas,  my  beauteous  lady,”  replied  Tittone,  what 
can  I do  to  serve  thee  ? who  can  pass  this  lake  ? who 
can  climb  this  tower?  who  can  approach  yon  horrid 
dragon,  that  carries  terror  in  his  look,  sows  fear, 
and  causes  dismay  to  spring  up  ? But  softly ; wait  a 
minute,  and  we  ^11  find  a way  with  another's  help  to 
drive  this  serpent  away.  Step  by  step — the  more  haste 
the  worse  speed  * : we  shall  soon  see  whether  ^tis  egg 
or  windf.”  And  so  saying  he  threw  the  feather,  the 
hair  and  the  scale,  which  his  hrothers-in-law  had 
given  him,  on  the  ground,  exclaiming,  Come  hither, 
come  hither !”  And  falling  on  the  earth  like  drops  of 
summer  rain,  which  makes  the  frogs  spring  up,  sud- 
denly there  appeared  the  Falcon,  the  Stag  and  the  Dol- 

* A p<u$o  a potto  diceva  Grudatsn,  A common  laying,  but  1 believe  uncon- 
nected with  Gradauo  of  the  Orlando  Innamorato. 

t See  above  page  335,  note. 


Digitized  by  Google 


264 


THE  FENTAMEBONE. 


phin,  who  cried  out  all  together,  "Behold  us  here  I 
what  are  your  commands  ?” 

When  Tittone  saw  this,  he  said  with  great  joy,  " I 
wish  for  nothing  but  to  release  this  poor  damsel  from 
-the  claws  of  yon  dragon,  to  take  her  away  from  this 
tower,  to  lay  it  all  in  ruins,  and  to  carry  this  beautiful 
lady  home  with  me  as  my  wife/^ 

" Hush !”  answered  the  Falcon ; " for  the  bean  springs 
up  where  you  least  expeet  it.  We  ^11  soon  make  him 
dance  upon  a sixpence,  and  take  good  eare  that  he  shall 
have  little  groimd  enough.” 

" Let  us  lose  no  time,”  said  the  Stag  j troubles  and 
macaroni  are  swallowed  hot.” 

So  the  Falcon  summoned  a large  floek  of  griffins,  who 
flying  to  the  window  of  the  tower  carried  off  the  damsel, 
bearing  her  over  the  lake  to  where  Tittone  was  standing 
with  his  three  brothers-in-law:  and  if  from  afar  off 
she  appeared  a moon,  believe  me  when  near  she  looked 
truly  like  a sun,  she  was  so  beautiful. 

Whilst  Tittone  was  embracing  her,  and  telling  her 
how  he  loved  her,  the  dragon  awoke ; and  rushing  out 
of  the  window,  he  came  swimming  across  the  lake  to 
devour  Tittone.  But  the  Stag  instantly  called  up  a 
squadron  of  hons,  tigers,  panthers,  bears  and  wild-cats, 
who  falling  upon  the  dragon  tore  him  in  pieces  with 
their  claws.  Then  Tittone  wishing  to  depart,  the  Dol- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES. 


25& 


phin  said,  “ I likewise  desire  to  do  something  to  serve 
you.”  And  in  order  that  no  trace  should  remain  of 
that  frightful  and  accursed  place,  he  made  the  sea  rise 
so  high  that,  overflowing  its  bounds,  it  attacked  the 
tower  furiously  and  overthrew  it  to  its  foundations. 

When  Tittone  saw  these  things,  he  thanked  the  ani- 
mals in  the  best  manner  he  could,  telling  the  damsel  at 
the  same  time  that  she  ought  to  do  so  too,  as  it  was 
by  their  aid  she  had  escaped  from  peril.  But  the  ani- 
mals answered,  *^Nay,  we  ought  rather  to  thank  this 
beauteous  lady,  since  she  is  the  means  of  restoring  us  t(J 
our  proper  shapes ; for  a spell  was  laid  upon  us  at  our 
birth,  caused  by  our  mother’s  having  offended  a fairy, 
and  we  were  compelled  to  remain  in  the  form  of  ani- 
mals, until  we  should  have  freed  the  daughter  of  a king 
from  some  great  trouble.  And  now  behold  the  time  is 
arrived  which  we  have  longed  for;  the  fruit  is  ripe*, 
and  we  already  feel  new  spirit  in  our  breasts,  new  blood 
in  our  veins.”  So  saying,  they  were  changed  into 
three  handsome  youths,  and  one  after  another  they 
embraced  their  brother-in-law,  and  shook  hands  with 
the  lady,  who  was  in  an  ecstasy  of  joy. 

When  Tittone  saw  this,  he  was  on  the  point  of  faint- 
ing away ; and  heaving  a deep  sigh  he  said,  0 heavens ! 
why  have  not  my  mother  and  father  a share  in  this 

* Ecco  maturato  »to  tpognilt  de  torva.  The  Sorba  is  a kind  of  medlar,  g;athcred 
green  and  hung  up  to  ripen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


256 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


happiness?  they  would  be  out  of  their  wits  with  joy 
were  they  to  see  such  graceful  and  handsome  sons-in- 
law  before  their  eyes.” 

“Nay,”  answered  the  princes,  “^tis  not  yet  night; 
“ the  shame  at  seeing  ourselves  so  transformed  obliged 
us  to  flee  from  the  sight  of  men ; but  now  that,  thank 
Heaven  1 we  can  appear  in  the  world  again,  we  will  all 
go  and  live  with  our  wives  imdcr  one  roof,  and  spend 
our  lives  merrily.  Let  us  therefore  set  out  instantly,  and 
before  the  Sun  tomorrow  morning  unpacks  the  bales  of 
his  rays  at  the  custom-house  of  the  East,  our  wives 
shall  be  with  you.*’ 

So  saying,  in  order  that  they  might  not  have  to  go 
on  foot, — ^for  there  was  only  an  old  broken-down  mare 
which  Tittone  had  brought, — ^the  brothers  caused  a 
most  beautiful  coach  to  appear,  drawn  by  six  lions,  in 
which  they  all  five  seated  themselves ; and  having  tra- 
velled the  whole  day,  they  came  in  the  evening  to  a 
tavern,  where,  whilst  the  supper  was  being  prepared, 
they  passed  the  time  in  reading  all  the  proofs  of  men’s 
ignorance  which  were  scribbled  upon  the  w'alls*.  At 
length,  when  all  had  eaten  their  fill  and  retired  to 
rest,  the  three  youths,  feigning  to  go  to  bed,  went  out 
and  walked  about  the  whole  night  long,  till  in  the 
morning,  when  the  Stars,  like  bashful  maidens,  retire 

I 

* Buile  repeatedly  allndea  to  the  practice  of  acribbling  over  the  widls  of  pnblic- 
hoiuea. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  ENCHANTED  PRINCES.  257 

from  the  gaze  of  the  Sun,  they  found  themselves  in  the 
same  inn  with  their  wives;  whereupon  there  was  a 
great  embracing,  and  a joy  beyond  the  beyonds.  Then 
they  all  eight  seated  themselves  in  the  same  coach,  and 
after  a long  journey  arrived  at  Green-Bank,  where 
they  were  received  with  incredible  afiection  by  the 
king  and  queen,  who  had  not  only  regained  the  capital 
of  four  children,  whom  they  had  considered  lost,  but 
likewise  the  interest  of  three  sons-in-law  and  a daugh- 
ter-in-law, who  were  verily  four  columns  of  the  temple 
of  Beauty.  And  when  the  .news  of  the  adventures 
of  their  children  was  brought  to  the  kings  of  Fair- 
Meadow  and  Bright-Valley,  they  both  came  to  the 
feasts  which  were  made,  adding  the  rich  ingredient 
of  joy  to  the  porridge  of  their  satisfaction,  and  re- 
ceiving a full  recompense  for  all  their  past  misfor- 
tunes ; for 

" One  hour  of  joy  dispels  the  cares 
And  sufferings  of  a thousand  years.” 


All  praised  Meneca^s  story,  which  she  had  told  with 
such  spirit  as  to  bring  events  that  had  happened  at 
so  great  a distance  before  the  eyes  of  all  present, 

a 


Digitized  by  Google 


258 


THE  PENTAMEBONE. 


But  Popa,  being  unwilling  to  yield  a jot  to  Meneca, 
embarked  on  the  sea  of  fables  with  the  following 
story. 


Digitized  by  Google 


V 


269 


THE  DRAGON. 

He  who  seeks  the  injury  of  another,  finds  his  own  hurt ; 
and  he  who  spreads  the  snares  of  treachery  and  deceit, 
often  falls  into  them  himself;  as  you  shall  hear  in  the 
story  of  a queen,  who  with  her  own  hands  constructed 
the  trap  in  which  she  was  caught  by  the  foot. 


There  was  one  time  a king  of  High-Shore,  who  prac- 
tised such  tyranny  and  cruelty,  that  whilst  he  was  once 
gone  with  his  wife  on  a visit  of  pleasure  to  a castle  at 
a distance  from  the  city,  his  royal  seat  was  usurped  by 
a certain  sorceress.  T\Tiereupon,  having  consulted  a 
wooden  statue  which  used  to  give  oracular  responses,  it 
answered,  that  he  would  recover  his  dominions  when 
the  sorceress  should  lose  her  sight.  But  seeing  that  the 
sorceress,  besides  being  well  guarded,  knew  at  a glance 
the  people  whom  he  sent  to  annoy  her,  and  did  dog’s 
justice  upon  them,  he  became  quite  desperate ; and  out 
of  spite  to  her,  he  deprived  all  the  women  of  that  place 

s2 


Digitized  by  Google 


260 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


whom  he  could  get  into  his  hands  first  of  honour  and 
then  life. 

Now  after  hundreds  and  hundreds  had  been  led 
thither  by  their  ill-luck,  only  to  lose  their  reputation 
and  their  life,  there  chanced,  among  others,  to  come 
a maiden  named  Porziella,  the  most  beautiful  creature 
that  could  be  seen  on  the  whole  earth.  Her  locks  were 
manacles  of  the  constables  of  Love,  her  forehead  a 
tablet  on  which  was  written  the  inscription  over  the 
shop  of  amorous  charms,  her  eyes  two  lighthouses, 
her  mouth  a cave  of  honey  between  two  hedges  of 
roses. 

When  Porziella  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  king,  he 
was  going  to  kill  her  like  the  rest ; but  just  as  he  was 
raising  the  dagger,  a bii'd  let  fall  a certain  root  upon  his 
arm,  and  he  was  seized  with  such  a trembhng  that  the 
weapon  fell  from  his  hand.  This  bird  was  a fairy,  who, 
a few  days  before,  having  gone  to  sleep  in  a wood, 
where  beneath  the  tent  of  the  shades  Fear  kept  watch 
and  defied  the  Sun^s  heat,  a certain  satyr  was  about  to 
ill-treat  her,  when  she  was  awakened  by  Porziella;  and 
for  this  kindness  she  continually  followed  her  steps,  in 
order  to  make  her  a return. 

When  the  king  saw  this,  he  thought  that  the  beauty 
of  Porziella^s  face  had  arrested  his  arm,  and  bewitched 
the  dagger,  to  prevent  its  piercing  her  as  it  had  done 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DRAGON. 


261 


SO  many  others.  He  resolved  therefore  not  to  make 
the  attempt  a second  time,  hut  that  she  should  die 
built  up  in  a garret  of  his  palace.  No  sooner  said 
than  done : the  unhappy  creature  was  enclosed  within 
four  walls,  without  having  anything  to  eat  or  drink, 
and  left  to  waste  away  and  die  little  by  little. 

The  bird,  seeing  her  in  this  wretched  state,  consoled 
her  with  kind  words,  bidding  her  be  of  good  cheer,  and 
promising,  in  return  for  the  great  kindness  she  had 
done  her,  to  aid  her  if  necessary  with  her  very  hfe.  In 
spite  however  of  all  the  entreaties  of  PorzieUa,  the  bird 
would  never  tell  who  she  was,  hut  only  said  that  she  was 
under  obligations  to  her,  and  would  leave  nothing  un- 
done to  serve  her.  And  seeing  that  the  poor  girl  was 
famished  with  hunger,  she  flew  out,  and  speedily  return- 
ed with  a pointed  knife  which  she  had  taken  from  the 
king’s  pantry,  and  told  her  to  make  a hole  in  the  comer 
of  the  floor  just  over  the  kitchen,  through  which  she 
would  regularly  bring  her  food  to  sustain  her  life.  So 
PorzieUa  bored  away,  until  she  had  made  a passage  for 
the  bird,  who  watching  till  the  cook  was  gone  out  to  fetch 
a pitcher  of  water  from  the  well,  went  down  through  the 
hole,  and  taking  a flne  fowl  that  was  cooking  at  the  fire 
brought  it  to  PorzieUa ; then  to  relieve  her  thirst,  not 
knowing  how  to  carry  her  any  drink,  she  flew  to  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


262 


THE  PENTAMEBONE. 


pantry,  where  there  was  a quantity  of  grapes  hanging, 
and  brought  her  a fine  bunch : and  this  she  did  regu- 
larly for  many  days. 

Meanwhile  Porziella  gave  birth  to  a fine  little  boy, 
whom  she  suckled  and  reared  with  the  constant  aid  of 
the  bird.  And  when  he  was  grown  big,  the  fairy  ad- 
vised his  mother  to  make  the  hole  larger,  and  to  raise 
so  many  boards  of  the  floor  as  would  allow  Mhtcdo 
(for  so  the  child  was  called)  to  pass  through ; and  thmi, 
after  letting  him  down  with  some  cords  which  the  bird 
brought,  to  put  the  boards  back  into  their  place,  that  it 
might  not  be  seen  where  he  came  from.  So  Porziella 
did  as  the  bird  directed  her ; and  as  soon  as  the  cook 
was  gone  out,  she  let  down  her  son,  desiring  him  never 
to  tell  whence  he  came  nor  whose  son  he  was. 

AVhen  the  cook  returned,  and  saw  such  a fine  little 
boy,  he  asked  him  who  he  was,  whence  he  came,  and 
what  he  wanted ; whereupon  the  child,  remembmng  his 
mother^s  advice,  said  that  he  was  a poor  forlorn  boy, 
who  was  looking  about  for  a master.  As  they  were 
talking  the  butler  came  in,  and  seeing  the  spritely  little 
fellow,  he  thought  that  he  would  make  a pretty  page 
for  the  king.  So  he  led  him  to  the  royal  apartments  i 
and  when  the  king  saw\im  look  so  handsome  and  lovely 
that  he  appeared  a very  jewel,  he  was  vastly  pleased 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DRAGON. 


263 


with  him,  and  took  him  into  his  service  as  a page 
and  to  his  heart  as  a son,  and  had  him  taught  all  the 
exercises  befitting  a cavalier,  so  that  Miuccio  grew  up 
the  most  accomplished  one  in  the  court,  and  the  king 
loved  him  much  better  than  his  stepson.  Now  the 
queen  on  this  account  began  to  take  a dislike  to  him, 
and  to  hold  him  in  aversion ; and  her  envy  and  malice 
gained  ground  just  in  proportion  as  the  favours  and 
kindness  which  the  king  bestowed  on  Miuccio  cleared 
the  way  for  them : so  she  resolved  to  soap  the  ladder  of 
his  fortune,  in  order  that  he  should  tumble  down  from 
top  to  bottom. 

Accordingly  one  evening,  when  the  king  and  queen 
had  tuned  their  instruments  together  and  were  making 
music  of  their  discourse,  the  queen  told  the  king  that 
Miuccio  had  boasted  he  would  build  three  castles  in  the 
air.  So  ^e  next  morning,  at  the  time  when  the  Moon, 
the  schoolmistress  of  the  Shades,  gives  a holiday  to  her 
scholars  for  the  festival  of  the  Sun,  the  king,  either 
from  surprize  or  to  gratify  his  wife,  ordered  Miuccio  to 
be  called,  and  commanded. him  forthwith  to  build  the 
three  castles  in  the  air  as  he  had  promised,  or  else  he 
would  make  him  dance  a jig  in  the  air. 

When  Miuccio  heard  this,  he  went  to  his  chamber, 
and  began  to  lament  bitterly,  seeing  what  glass  the 
favour  of  princes  is,  and  how  short  a time  it  lasts.  And 


Digitized  by  Google 


264 


THE  PENTAMEBONE. 


while  he  was  weeping  thus,  lo  ! the  bird  came,  and  said 
to  him,  “ Take  heart,  Miuccio,  and  fear  not  while  you 
have  me  by  your  side,  for  I am  able  to  draw  you  out  of 
the  fire.”  Then  she  directed  him  to  take  pasteboard 
and  glue  and  make  three  large  castles ; and  calling  up 
three  large  griffins,  she  tied  a castle  to  each,  and  away 
they  flew  up  into  the  air.  Thereupon  Miuccio  called 
the  king,  who  came  running  with  all  his  court  to  see 
the  sight ; and  when  he  saw  the  ingenuity  of  Miuccio, 
he  had  a still  greater  afiection  for  him,  and  lavished  on 
him  caresses  of  the  other  world,  which  added  snow  to 
the  envy  of  the  queen  and  fire  to  her  rage,  seeing  that 
all  her  plans  failed ; insomuch  that,  both  sleeping  and  * 
waking,  she  was  for  ever  thinking  of  some  way  to  re- 
move this  thorn  from  her  eyes.  So  at  last,  after  some 
days,  she  said  to  the  king,  " Husband,  the  time  is  now 
come  for  us  to  return  to  our  former  greatness  and 
the  pleasures  of  past  times,  since  Miuccio  has  offered  to 
blind  the  fairy,  and  by  the  disbursement  of  her  eyes  to 
make  you  recover  your  lost  kingdom.” 

The  king,  who  felt  himself  touched  in  the  sore  place, 
called  for  Miuccio  that  very  instant,  and  said  to  him, 

" I am  greatly  surprised  that,  notwithstanding  all  my 
love  for  you,  and  that  you  have  the  power  to  restore  me 
to  the  seat  from  which  I have  fallen,  you  remain  thus 
careless,  instead  of  endeavouring  to  reheve  me  from 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DRAGON. 


265 


the  misery  I am  in, — reduced  thus  from  a kingdom  to 
a wood,  from  a city  to  a paltry  castle,  and  from  com- 
manding so  great  a people,  to  be  hardly  waited  on  by 
a parcel  of  half-starved  menials*.  If  therefore  you  do 
not  wish  me  ill,  run  now  at  once  and  blind  the  eyes  of 
the  fairy  who  has  possession  of  my  property;  for  by 
shutting  up  her  shops  you  will  open  the  warehouse  of 
my  greatness, — by  putting  out  her  lanterns,  you  will 
light  the  lamps  of  my  honour,  that  are  now  dark  and 
dismal.” 

When  Miuccio  heard  this  proposal,  he  was  about  to 
reply  that  the  king  was  ill-informed,  and  had  mistaken 
him,  as  he  was  neither  a raven  to  pick  out  eyes  nor  an 
auger  to  bore  holes;  but  the  king  said,  “No  more 
words ; — so  I will  have  it,  so  let  it  be  done  ! Remem- 
ber now,  that  in  the  mint  of  this  brain  of  mine  I have 
the  balance  ready : in  one  scale  the  reward,  if  you  do 
what  I tell  you ; in  the  other  the  punishment,  if  you 
neglect  doing  what  I command.^^ 

Miuccio,  who  could  not  butt  against  a rock,  and 
had  to  do  with  a man  who  was  not  to  be  moved, 
went  into  a comer  to  bemoan  himself;  and  the  bird 

• SertmU)  da  quatto  pane  a parte— or  Settepanelle — a poor  ill-paid  cerrant. 
Until  the  diicovery  of  America  introduced  such  quantities  of  the  precious  metals, 
the  old  Roman  custom  prevailed  in  Italy  of  paying  the  servants  small  wages  in 
money  and  the  rest  in  food.  The  bread  was  baked  once  a week,  and  a certain  num. 
ber  of  loaves  (at  least  sceen)  given  to  each  servant  for  the  week.  See  also  Horace, 
Sat.  i.  5,  08. 


Digitized  by  Google 


266 


THE  FENTAMBBONE. 


came  to  him  and  said,  it  possible,  Miuccio,  that 
you  will  always  be  drowning  yourself  in  a tumbler 
of  water  ? If  I were  dead  indeed  you  could  not  make 
more  fuss.  Do  you  not  know  that  I have  more 
regard  for  your  life  than  for  my  own?  Therefore 
don^t  lose  courage : come  with  me,  and  you  shall  see 
what  I can  do.”  So  saying  off  she  flew,  and  alighted 
in  the  wood,  where  as  soon  as  she  began  to  chirp, 
there  came  a large  flock  of  birds  about  her,  to  whom 
she  told  the  story,  assuring  them  that  whoever  would 
venture  to  deprive  the  sorceress  of  sight,  should 
have  from  her  a safeguard  against  the  talons  of  the 
hawks  and  kites,  and  a letter  of  protection  against 
the  guns,  crossbows,  longbows,  and  bird-lime  of  the 
fowlers. 

There  was  among  them  a swallow,  who  had  made  her 
nest  against  a beam  of  the  royal  palace,  and  who  hated 
the  sorceress,  because,  when  making  her  accursed  con- 
jurations, she  had  several  times  driven  her  out  of  the 
chamber  with  her  fumigations ; for  which  reason,  partly 
out  of  desire  of  revenge  and  partly  to  gain  the  reward 
that  the  bird  promised,  she  offered  herself  to  perform 
the  service.  So  away  she  flew  like  lightning  to  the 
city,  and  entering  the  palace  found  the  fairy  lying  on  a 
couch,  with  two  damsels  fanning  her.  Then  the  swal- 
low came,  and  alighting  directly  over  the  eyes  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DBAGOX. 


267 


fairy  deprived  her  of  sight*.  Whereupon  the  fairy, 
thus  seeing  night  at  mid-day,  knew  that  by  this  closing 
of  the  custom-house  the  merchandise  of  the  kingdom 
was  all  lost ; and  uttering  yells  of  a condemned  soul, 
she  abandoned  the  sceptre  and  went  off  to  hide  herself 
in  a certain  cave,  where  she  knocked  her  head  continu- 
ally against  the  wall,  until  at  length  she  ended  her 
days. 

Wken  the  sorceress  was  gone,  the  councillors  sent 
ambassadors  to  the  king,  praying  him  to  come  back 
to  his  castle,  since  the  blinding  of  the  sorceress  had 
caused  him  to  see  this  happy  day.  And  at  the  same 
time  that  they  arrived  came  also  Miuccio,  who,  by  the 
bird^s  direction,  said  to  the  king,  “1  have  served  yon 
to  the  best  of  my  power : the  sorceress  is  blinded,  the 
kingdom  is  yours ; wherefore,  if  I deserve  recompense 
for  this  service,  I wish  for  no  other  than  to  be  left  to 
my  ill-fortune,  without  being  again  exposed  to  these 
^Umgers.” 

But  the  king  embracing  him  with  great  affection, 
bade  him  put  on  his  cap  and  sit  beside  him ; and  how 
the  queen  was  enraged  at  this.  Heaven  knows  I for  by 
the  bow  of  many  colours  that  appeared  in  her  face, 
might  be  known  the  wind  of  the  storm  that  was  brew- 
ing in  Jier  heart  against  poor  Miuccio. 

* In  the  same  as  Tobit  was  blinded.  This  superstition  is  widely  spread. 


Digitized  by  Google 


268 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


Not  far  from  this  castle  lived  a most  ferocious  dragon, 
who  was  born  the  same  hour  with  the  queen ; and  the 
astrologers  being  called  by  her  father  to  astrologize  on 
this  event,  said  that  his  daughter  would  be  safe  as  long 
as  the  dragon  was  safe,  and  that  when  one  died  the  other 
would  of  necessity  die  also.  One  thing  alone  could  bring 
back  the  queen  to  life,  and  that  was  to  anoint  her 
temples,  chest,  nostrils  and  pulse  with  the  blood  of  the 
same  dragon. 

Now  the  queen,  knowing  the  strength  and  fury  of 
this  animal,  resolved  to  send  Miuccio  into  his  claws, 
well  assured  that  the  beast  would  make  but  a mouthful 
of  him,  and  that  he  would  be  like  a strawberry  in 
the  throat  of  a bear.  So  turning  to  the  king  she  said, 
“ Upon  my  word,  this  Miuccio  is  the  treasure  of  your 
house,  and  you  would  be  ungrateful  indeed  if  you  did  not 
love  him,  especially  as  he  has  expressed  his  desire  to  kill 
the  dragon,  who,  though  he  is  my  brother,  is  neverthe- 
less your  enemy ; and  I care  more  for  a hair  of  my  hus- 
band’s head  than  for  a hundred  brothers.” 

The  king,  who  hated  the  dragon  mortally,  and  knew 
not  how  to  remove  him  out  of  his  sight,  instantly 
called  for  Miuccio,  and  said  to  him,  “ I know  that  you 
can  put  your  hand  to  whatever  you  wUl;  therefore, 
as  you  have  done  so  much,  grant  me  yet  anoth^  plea- 
sure, and  then  turn  me  whithersoever  you  will.  Go  this 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DRAGON. 


269 


very  instant  and  kill  the  dragon;  for  you  will  do 
me  a singular  service,  and  I will  reward  you  well  for 
it."' 

Miuccio  at  these  words  was  near  losing  his  senses, 
and  as  soon  as  he  was  able  to  speak,  he  said  to  the  king, 
“ Alas,  what  a headache  have  you  given  me  by  your  con- 
tinual teazing ! Is  my  life  a black  goat-skin  rug,  that 
you  are  for  ever  wearing  it  away  thus  ? This  is  not  a 
pared  pear,  ready  to  drop  into  one's  mouth,  but  a dragon, 
that  tears  with  his  claws,  breaks  to  pieces  with  his  head, 
crushes  with  his  tail,  craunehes  with  his  teeth,  poisons 
with  his  eyes,  and  kills  with  his  breath.  Wherefore  do 
you  want  to  send  me  to  death  ? Is  this  the  sinecure  you 
give  me  for  having  given  you  a kingdom  ? Who  is  the 
wicked  soul  that  has  set  this  die  on  the  table*  ? what 
son  of  perdition  has  taught  you  these  capers,  and  put 
these  words  into  your  mouth  ?"  Then  the  king,  who, 
although  he  let  himself  be  tossed  to  and  fro  as  light  as 
a ball,  was  firmer  than  a rock  in  keeping  to  what  he  had 
once  said,  stamped  with  his  feet  and  exclaimed,  “ After 
all  you  have  done,  do  you  fail  at  the  last  ? but  no  more 
words, — go,  rid  my  kingdom  of  this  plague,  unless  you 
would  have  me  rid  you  of  life." 

Poor  Miuccio,  who  thus  received  one  minute  a favour, 
at  another  a threat,  now  a pat  on  the  face,  and  now  a 

* t.  e.  ' that  haa  cauaed  thia  trouble.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


270 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


kick,  now  a kind  word,  now  a crael  one,  reflected  how 
mutable  court-fortune  is,  and  would  fain  have  been  with- 
out the  acquaintance  of  the  king.  But  knowing  that  to 
reply  to  great  men  is  a foUy,  and  like  plucking  a lion 
by  the  beard,  he  withdrew,  cursing  his  fate,  which  had . 
led  him  to  the  court  only  to  curtail  the  days  of  his 
life.  And  as  he  was  sitting  on  one  of  the  doorsteps, 
with  his  head  between  his  knees,  washing  his  shoes  with 
his  tears  and  warming  the  ground  with  his  sighs,  be- 
hold the  bird  came  flying  with  a plant  in  her  beak,  and 
throwing  it  to  him  said,  “Get  up,  Miuccio,  and  take 
courage ! for  you  are  not  going  to  play  at  ‘ Unload  the 
ass*'  with  your  days,  but  at  backgammon  with  the  life 
of  the  dragon.  Take  this  plant,  and  when  you  come 
to  the  cave  of  that  horrid  animal,  throw  it  in,  and  in- 
stantly such  a drowsiness  will  come  over  him  that  he 
will  fall  fast  asleep ; whereupon  nicking  and  sticking  him 
vidth  a good  knife,  you  may  soon  make  an  end  of  him. 
Then  come  away,  for  things  wiU  turn  out  better  than 
you  think." 

Enough !"  replied  Miuccio  j know  what  I carry 
under  my  belt ; we  have  more  time  than  money,  and  he 
who  has  time  has  life.”  So  saying  he  got  up,  and  stick- 
ing a pruning-knife  in  his  belt,  and  taking  the  plant, 
he  went  his  way  to  the  dragon's  cave,  which  was  under 

* Scareea  I’ateno—a  game. 


Digitized  by  Goog[e 


THB  DBAOON. 


271 


a mountain  of  such  goodly  growth,  that  the  three 
mountains  that  were  steps  to  the  Giants  would  not  have 
reached  up  to  its  waist.  When  he  came  there,  he  threw 
the  plant  into  the  cave,  and  instantly  a deep  sleep  laid 
hold  on  the  dragon,  and  Miuccio  began  to  cut  him  in 
pieces. 

Now  just  at  the  time  that  he  was  busied  thus,  the 
queen  felt  a cutting  pain  at  her  heart ; and  seeing  her- 
self brought  to  a bad  pass,  she  perceived  her  error  in 
having  purchased  death  with  ready  money.  So  she  called 
her  husband,  and  told  him  what  the  astrologers  had 
predicted, — how  her  life  depended  on  that  of  the  dra- 
gon, and  how  she  feared  that  Miuccio  had  killed  him, 
for  she  felt  herself  gradually  sliding  away.  Then  the 
king  replied,  " If  you  knew  that  the  life  of  the  dragon 
was  the  prop  of  your  life  and  the  root  of  your  days,  why 
did  you  make  me  send  Miuccio  ? who  is  in  fault  ? you 
have  yourself  done  the  mischief,  and  you  must  suffer  for 
it  j you  have  broken  the  glass,  and  you  may  pay  the 
cost.”  And  the  queen  answered,  “I  never  thought 
that  such  a stripling  could  have  the  skill  and  strength 
to  overthrow  an  animal  which  made  nothing  of  an 
army ; and  I expected  that  he  would  have  left  his  rags 
there ; but  since  I reckoned  without  my  host,  and  the 
bark  of  my  projects  is  gone  out  of  its  course,  do  me 


Digitized  by  Google 


272 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


one  kindness  if  you  love  me, — ^when  I am  dead,  take  a 
sponge  dipped  in  the  blood  of  this  dragon,  and  anoint 
with  it  all  the  extremities  of  my  body  before  you  bury 
me.” 

That  is  but  a small  thing  for  the  love  I bear  you,” 
replied  the  king ; and  if  the  blood  of  the  dragon  is  not 
enough,  I will  add  my  own  to  give  you  satisfaction.” 
The  queen  was  about  to  thank  him,  but  the  breath  left 
her  with  the  speech;  for  just  then  Miuccio  had  made 
an  end  of  scoring  the  dragon*. 

No  sooner  had  Miuccio  come  into  the  king’s  presence, 
with  the  news  of  what  he  had  done,  than  the  king 
ordered  him  to  go  back  for  the  dragon’s  blood;  but 
being  curious  to  see  the  deed  done  by  Miuccio’s 
hand,  he  followed  him.  And  as  Miuccio  was  going 
out  of  the  palace-gate,  the  bird  met  him  and  said. 
Whither  are  you  going?”  and  Miuccio  answered, 
am  going  whither  the  king  sends  me;  he  makes 
me  fly  backwards  and  forwards  like  a shuttle,  and 
never  lets  me  rest  an  hour.”  "What  to  do?”  said 
the  bird.  “To  fetch  the  blood  of  the  dragon,”  said 
Miuccio.  And  the  bird  replied,  ‘‘  Ah  wretched  youth  ! 
this  dragon’s  blood  will  be  bulls’  blood  f to  you,  and 

• Scomputa  de  fare  tormina — ‘ finished  making  pickled  tunny.’ 
t Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  zi.  38 ; zxTiii.  10. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DRAGON. 


273 


make  you  burst ; for  this  blood  will  cause  to  spring  up 
again  the  evil  seed  of  all  your  misfortunes  ! The  queen  is 
continually  exposing  you  to  new  dangers,  that  you  may 
lose  your  life ; and  the  king,  who  lets  this  odious  crea> 
ture  put  the  pack-saddle  on  him,  orders  you,  like  a cast- 
away, to  endanger  your  person,  which  is  his  own  flesh 
and  blood  and  a shoot  of  his  stem.  But  the  wretched 
man  does  not  know  you,  though  the  inborn  affection  he 
bears  you  should  have  betrayed  your  kindred.  More- 
over the  services  you  have  rendered  the  king,  and  the 
gain  to  himself  of  so  handsome  a son  and  heir,  ought  to 
obtain  favour  for  unhappy  Porziella,  your  mother,  who 
has  now  for  fourteen  years  been  buried  alive  in  a garret, 
where  is  seen  a temple  of  beauty  built  up  within  a little 
chamber.” 

While  the  fairy  was  speaking  thus,  the  king,  who 
had  heard  every  word,  stepped  forward,  to  learn  the 
truth  of  the  matter  better;  and  finding  that  Miuccio 
was  his  own  and  Porziella’s  son,  and  that  Porziella  was 
still  alive  in  the  garret,  he  instantly  gave  orders  that  she 
should  be  set  free  and  brought  before  him.  And  when 
he  saw  her  looking  more  beautiful  than  ever,  owing  to 
the  care  taken  of  her  by  the  bird,  he  embraced  her  with 
the  greatest  affection,  and  was  never  satisfied  with  press- 
ing to  his  heart  first  the  mother  and  then  the  son, 
praying  forgiveness  of  Porziella  for  his  ill-treatment 

T 


Digitized  by  Google 


274 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


of  herj  and  of  liis  son  for  all  tlie  dangers  to  which  he 
bad  exposed  him.  Then  he  ordered  her  to  he  clothed 
in  the  richest  dress  of  the  dead  queen,  and  took  her  to 
wife.  And  when  the  king  heard  that  her  preservation, 
and  the  escape  of  his  son  from  so  many  dangers,  were 
entirely  owing  to  the  bird,  which  had  given  food  to  the 
one  and  counsel  to  the  other,  he  offered  her  his  king- 
dom and  his  life.  But  the  bird  said  she  desired  no 
other  reward  for  her  services  than  to  have  Miuccio  for  a 
husband ; and  as  she  uttered  the  words  she  was  changed 
into  a beautiful  maiden,  and,  to  the  great  joy  and 
satisfaction  of  the  king  and  Porziella,  she  was  given  to 
Miuecio  to  wife.  Then  the  newly  married  couple,  to 
give  still  greater  festivals,  went  their  way  to  their 
own  kingdom,  where  they  were  anxiously  expected; 
every  one  ascribing  this  good  fortune  to  the  fairy,  for 
the  kindness  that  Porziella  had  done  her;  for  at  the 
end  of  the  end 

“ A good  deed  is  never  lost.” 


Popa^s  story  gave  the  greatest  pleasure,  and  all  felt 
glad  at  Porziella's  happy  lot.  No  one  however  envied 
her  good  fortune,  which  was  purchased  with  such  hard- 


Digilized  by  Google 


THE  DRAGON. 


275 


ships ; since  to  attain  the  royal  state,  she  had  all  but 
quitted  her  personal  state.  But  Antonella,  observing 
that  Porziella's  sufferings  had  troubled  the  minds  of 
the  princely  pair,  wished  to  revive  their  spirits  a little, 
and  began  as  follows. 


T 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


276 


THE  TWO  CAKES. 

I HAVE  always  heard  say,  that  he  w'ho  gives  pleasure 
finds  it:  the  bell  of  Manfredonia  says,  “Give  me,  I 
give  thee he  who  does  not  bait  the  hook  of  the 
affections  with  courtesy,  never  catches  the  fish  of  kind- 
ness ; and  if  you  wish  to  hear  the  proof  of  this,  listen 
to  my  story,  and  then  say  whether  the  covetous  man 
does  not  always  lose  more  than  the  liberal  one. 


There  were  once  two  sisters,  named  Luceta  and  Troc- 
cola,  who  had  two  daughters,  Marziella  and  Puccia. 
Marziella  was  as  fair  to  look  upon  as  she  was  good  at 
heart ; whilst,  on  the  contrary,  Puccia  by  the  same  rule 
had  a face  of  ugliness  and  a heart  of  pestilence ; but 
the  girl  resembled  her  parent,  for  Troccola  was  a harpy 
within  and  a very  scarecrow  without. 

Now  it  happened  that  Luceta  had  occasion  to  boil 
some  parsnips,  in  order  to  fry  them  with  green  sauce ; so 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  TWO  CAKES  277 

she  said  to  her  daughter,  “ Marziella,  my  dear,  go  to  the 
well  and  fetch  me  a pitcher  of  water/’ 

" With  all  my  heart,  mother,”  replied  the  girl ; " but 
if  you  love  me  give  me  a cake,  for  I should  like  to  eat 
it  with  a draught  of  the  fresh  water.” 

" By  all  means,”  said  her  mother  j so  she  took  from 
a basket  that  hung  upon  a hook  a beautiful  cake  (for 
she  had  baked  a batch  the  day  before),  and  gave  it  to 
Marziella,  who  set  the  pitcher  on  a pad  upon  her  head, 
and  went  to  the  fountain,  which  like  a charlatan  upon  a 
marble  bench,  to  the  music  of  the  falling  water,  was  sell- 
ing secrets  to  drive  away  thirst.  And  as  she  was  stoop- 
ing down  to  fill  her  pitcher,  up  came  an  old  woman,  who 
upon  the  stage  of  a large  hump  represented  the  tragedy 
of  Time ; and  seeing  the  beautiful  cake,  which  Marziella 
was  just  going  to  bite,  she  said  to  her,  " My  pretty 
girl,  give  me  a little  piece  of  your  cake,  and  may  Hea- 
ven send  you  good  fortune  I” 

Marziella,  who  was  as  generous  as  a queen,  replied, 
" Take  it  all,  my  good  woman,  and  I am  only  sorry  that 
it  is  not  made  of  sugar  and  almonds,  for  I would  equally 
give  it  you  with  all  my  heart.” 

The  old  woman,  seeing  Marziella’s  kindness,  said  to 
her,  " Gro,  and  may  Heaven  reward  you  for  the  good- 
ness you  have  shown  me ! and  1 pray  all  the  stars  that 
you  may  ever  be  content  and  happy, — that  when  you 


Digitized  by  Google 


278  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

breathe,  roses  and  jessamines  may  fall  from  your  mouth; 
that  when  you  comb  your  locks,  pearls  and  garnets  may 
fall  from  them,  and  when  you  set  your  foot  on  the 
ground,  lilies  and  violets  may  spring  up/^ 

Marziella  thanked  the  old  woman,  and  went  her  way 
home,  where  her  mother  having  cooked  a bit  of  sup> 
per,  they  paid  the  natural  debt  to  the  body,  and  thus 
ended  the  day.  And  the  next  morning,  when  the  Sun 
displayed  in  the  market-place  of  the  celestial  fields  the 
merchandize  of  light  which  he  had  brought  from  the 
East,  as  Marziella  was  combing  her  hair,  she  saw  a 
shower  of  pearls  and  garnets  fall  from  it  into  her  lap ; 
whereupon  calling  her  mother  with  great  joy,  they  put 
them  all  into  a basket,  and  Luceta  went  to  sell  a great 
part  of  them  to  a usurer,  who  was  a friend  of  hers. 
Meanwhile  Troccola  came  to  see  her  sister,  and  finding 
Marziella  in  great  delight  and  busied  with  the  pearls,  she 
asked  her  how,  when  and  where  she  had  gotten  them. 
But  the  maiden,  who  did  not  understand  the  ways  of  the 
world*,  and  had  perhaps  never  heard  the  proverb,  "Do 
not  all  you  are  able,  eat  not  all  you  wish,  spend  not  all 
you  have,  and  tell  not  all  you  know,”  related  the  whole 
affair  to  her  aunt,  who  no  longer  cared  to  await  her 
sister’s  return,  for  every  hour  seemed  to  her  a thousand 
years  until  she  got  home  again.  Then  giving  a cake  to 

* Tiitenll^ — ‘ how  to  muddy  water.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  TWO  CAKES. 


279 


her  daughter,  she  sent  her  for  water  to  the  fountain, 
where  Puccia  found  the  same  old  woman.  And  when 
the  old  woman  asked  her  for  a little  piece  of  cake,  she 
answered  gruffly,  " Have  I nothing  to  do  forsooth  but 
to  give  you  cake  ? do  you  take  me  for  such  an  ass  as 
to  give  you  what  belongs  to  me  ? Look-ye,  charity  be- 
gins at  home*.^^  And  so  saying  she  swallowed  the  cake 
in  four  pieces,  making  the  old  woman^s  mouth  water, 
who  when  she  saw  the  last  morsel  disappear,  and  her 
hopes  buried  with  the  cake,  exclaimed  in  a rage,  Be- 
gone ! and  whenever  you  breathe  may  you  foam  at  the 
mouth  like  a doctor^s  mule,  may  toads  drop  from  your 
lips,  and  every  time  you  set  foot  to  the  ground  may 
there  spring  up  ferns  and  thistles !” 

Puccia  took  the  pitcher  of  water  and  returned  home, 
where  her  mother  was  all  impatience  to  hear  what  had 
befallen  her  at  the  fountain.  But  no  sooner  did  Puccia 
open  her  lips,  than  a shower  of  toads  fell  from  them ; 
at  the  sight  of  which  her  mother  added  the  fire  of  rage 
to  the  snow  of  envy,  sending  forth  flame  and  smoke 
through  nose  and  mouth. 

Nowit  happened  some  time  afterwards  that  Ciommo, 
the  brother  of  Marziella,  was  at  the  court  of  the  king  of 
Chiunzo ; and  the  conversation  turning  on  the  beauty 

• So  cchiii  becino  li  dientt  che  li  pariente,—’  the  teeth  ire  nearer  than  the  kina* 
folk.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


280 


THE  PENTAMEBONE. 


of  various  women,  he  stepped  forward  unasked  and 
said,  that  all  the  handsome  women  might  hide  their 
heads*  when  his  sister  made  her  appearance,  who,  be> 
side  the  beauty  of  her  form,  which  made  counterpoint 
on  the  canto  fermo  of  a noble  soul,  possessed  also  a 
wonderful  virtue  in  her  hair,  mouth  and  feet,  whidi  was 
given  to  her  by  a fairy.  When  the  king  heard  these 
praises,  he  told  Ciommo  to  bring  his  sister  to  the  court, 
adding  that,  if  he  found  her  such  as  he  had  repre> 
sented,  he  would  take  her  to  wife. 

Now  Ciommo  thought  this  a chance  not  to  be  lost ; 
so  he  forthwith  sent  a messenger  post-haste  to  his 
mother,  telling  her  what  had  happened,  and  begging 
her  to  come  instantly  with  her  daughter,  in  order  not 
to  let  slip  the  good  luck.  But  Luceta,  who  was  very 
unwell,  commending  the  lamb  to  the  wolf,  begged  her 
sister  to  have  the  kindness  to  accompany  Marziella  to 
the  court  of  Chiunzo  for  such  and  such  a thing.  Where- 
upon Troccola,  who  saw  that  matters  were  playing  into 
her  hand,  promised  her  sister  to  take  Marziella  safe  and 
sound  to  her  brother,  and  then  embarked  with  her  niece 
and  Puccia  in  a boat.  But  when  they  were  some  way  out 
at  sea,  whilst  the  sailors  were  asleep,  she  threw  Marzi- 

* Literally — ‘might  go  and  throw  honea  on  the  bridge.’  Ttua  alludes  to  the 
Ponte  della  Maddelena,  near  Naples,  behind  which  dead  dogs  and  rubbish  are  thrown. 
The  bridge  is  very  large, — the  stream  under  it  (the  Sebeto)  eery  small:  a Spaniard 
it  exclaimed,  " O meno  ponte,  o pih  flume  I” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  TWO  CAKES. 


281 


ella  into  the  water ; and  just  as  the  poor  girl  was  on 
the  point  of  being  drowned,  there  came  a most  beauti- 
ful syren,  who  took  her  in  her  arms  and  carried  her  off. 

When  Troccola  arrived  at  Chiunzo,  Ciommo,  who 
had  not  seen  his  sister  for  so  long  a time,  mistook 
Puccia,  and  received  her  as  if  she  were  Marziella,  and 
led  her  instantly  to  the  king.  But  no  sooner  did  she 
open  her  lips,  than  toads  dropped  on  the  ground ; and 
when  the  king  looked  at  her  more  closely,  he  saw,  that 
as  she  breathed  hard  from  the  fatigue  of  the  journey, 
she  made  a lather  at  her  mouth,  which  looked  just  like 
a washtub ; then  looking  down  on  the  ground,  he  saw 
a meadow  of  stinking  plants,  the  sight  of  which  made 
him  turn  quite  sick.  Upon  this  he  drove  Puccia  and 
her  mother  away,  and  sent  Ciommo  in  disgrace  to  keep 
the  geese  of  the  court. 

Then  Ciommo,  in  despair  and  not  knowing  what  had 
happened  to  him,  drove  the  geese  into  the  fields,  and 
letting  them  go  their  way  along  the  seashore,  he  used  to 
retire  into  a little  straw  shed,  where  he  bewailed  his  lot 
until  evening,  when  it  was  time  to  return  home.  But 
whilst  the  geese  were  running  about  on  the  shore, 
Marziella  would  come  out  of  the  water,  and  feed  them 
with  sweetmeats,  and  give  them  rose-water  to  drink; 
so  that  the  geese  grew  as  big  as  a sheep,  and  were  so 
fat  that  they  could  not  see  out  of  them  eyes.  And  in  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


282 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


evening  when  they  came  into  a little  garden  under  the 
king^s  window,  they  began  to  sing — 

“ Pire,  pire,  pire  I 

The  sun  and  the  moon  are  bright  and  clear. 

But  she  who  feeds  us  is  still  more  fair.” 

Now  the  king,  hearing  this  goose-music  every  even- 
ing, ordered  Ciommo'  to  be  called,  and  asked  him 
where,  and  how,  and  upon  what  he  fed  his  geese.  And 
Ciommo  replied,  " I give  them  nothing  to  eat  but  the 
fresh  grass  of  the  field.”  But  the  king,  who  was  not 
satisfied  with  this  answer,  sent  a trusty  servant  after 
Ciommo,  to  watch  and  observe  where  he  drove  the 
geese.  Then  the  man  followed  in  his  footsteps,  and  saw 
him  go  into  the  little  straw  shed,  leaving  the  geese  to 
themselves  \ and  going  their  way,  they  had  no  sooner 
come  to' the  shore  than  Marziella  rose  up  out  of  the  sea; 
and  I do  not  believe  that  even  the  mother  of  that  blind 
boy  who,  as  the  poet*  says,  “ desires  no  other  alms  than 
tears,”  ever  rose  from  the  waves  so  fair.  When  the 
servant  of  the  king  saw  this,  he  ran  back  to  his  master, 
beside  himself  with  amazement,  and  told  him  the  pretty 
spectacle  he  had  seen  upon  the  stage  of  the  seashore. 

The  curiosity  of  the  king  was  increased  by  what  the 
man  told  him,  and  he  had  a great  desire  to  go  him- 
self and  see  the  beautiful  sight.  So  the  next  morning, 

* Scrattendio,  an  old  poet,  who  was  called  the  Neapolitan  Petrarch. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  TWO  CAKES. 


283 


when  the  Cock,  the  ringleader  of  the  birds,  excites 
them  all  to  arm  mankind  against  the  Night,  and 
Ciommo  went  with  the  geese  to  the  accustomed  spot, 
the  king  followed  him  closely;  and  when  the  geese 
came  to  the  seashore,  without  Ciommo,  who  remained 
as  usual  in  the  little  shed,  the  king  saw  Marziella  rise 
out  of  the  water.  And  after  giving  the  geese  a tray- 
full  of  sweetmeats  to  eat  and  a cup-full  of  rose-water 
to  drink,  she  seated  herself  on  a rock  and  began  to 
comb  her  locks,  from  which  fell  handfuls  of  pearls  and 
garnets ; at  the  same  time  a cloud  of  flowers  dropped 
from  her  mouth,  and  under  her  feet  was  a Syrian  carpet 
of  hlies  and  violets. 

When  the  king  saw  this  sight,  he  ordered  Ciommo  to 
be  called,  and  pointing  to  Marziella,  asked  him  whether 
he  knew  that  beautiful  maiden.  Then  Ciommo  recog- 
nizing his  sister  ran  to  embrace  her,  and  in  the  presence 
of  the  king  heard  from  her  all  the  treacherous  con- 
duct of  Troccola,  and  how  the  envy  of  that  wicked  crea- 
ture had  brought  that  fair  fire  of  love  to  dwell  in  the 
waters  of  the  sea. 

The  joy  of  the  king  is  not  to  be  told  at  the  acquisi- 
tion of  so  fair  a jewel ; and  turning  to  the  brother,  he 
said  that  he  had  good  reason  to  praise  Marziella  so  much, 
and  indeed  that  he  found  her  three  times  more  beautiful 
than  he  had  described  her ; he  deemed  her  therefore  more 


Digitized  by  Google 


284 


THIS  F£NTAM£BON£. 


than  worthy  to  be  his  wife,  if  she  would  be  content  to 
receive  the  sceptre  of  his  kingdom. 

“Alas,  would  to'  Heaven  it  could  be  so!”  answered 
Marziella,  “and  that  1 could  serve  you  as  the  slave  of 
your  crown  1 but  see  you  not  this  golden  chain  upon 
my  foot,  by  which  the  sorceress  holds  me  prisoner? 
When  I take  too  much  fresh  air,  and  tarry  too  long  on 
the  shore,  she  draws  me  into  the  waves,  and  thus  k^pg 
me  held  in  rich  slavery  by  a golden  chain/' 

“What  way  is  there,”  said  the  king,  “to  free  you 
firom  the  claws  of  this  syren  ?” 

“ The  way,”  replied  Marziella,  “ would  be  to  cut  this 
chain  with  a smooth  file,  and  to  loose  me  from  it.” 

“ Wait  till  tomorrow  morning,”  answered  the  king ; 
“I  will  then  come  with  all  that  is  needful,  and  take 
you  home  with  me,  where  you  shall  be  the  pupil  of  my 
eye,  the  core  of  my  heart,  and  the  life  of  my  soul.” 
And  then  exchanging  a shake  of  the  hands  as  the 
earnest-money  of  their  love,  she  went  back  into  the 
water  and  he  into  the  fii’e, — and  into  such  a fire  indeed 
that  he  had  not  an  hour's  rest  the  whole  day  long. 
And  when  the  black  old  hag  of  the  Night  came  forth 
to  have  a country-dance  with  the  Stars,  he  never  closed 
an  eye,  but  lay  ruminating  in  his  memory  over  the 
beauties  of  Marziella,  discoursing  in  thought  of  the 
marvels  of  her  hair,  the  miracles  of  her  mouth,  and  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  TWO  CAKES. 


285 


wonders  of  her  feet;  and  applying  the  gold  her 
graces  to  the  touchstone  of  judgement,  he  found  that  it 
was  four*and-twenty  carats  fine.  But  he  upbraided  the 
Night  for  not  leaving  off  her  embroidery  of  the  Stan, 
and  chided  the  Sun  for  not  arriving  with  the  chariot  ol 
light,  to  enrich  his  house  with  the  treasure  he  longed 
for, — a mine  of  gold  which  produced  pearls,  a pearl- 
shell  from  which  sprang  flowers. 

But  whilst  he  was  thus  at  sea,  thinking  of  her  who 
was  all  the  while  in  the  sea,  behold  the  pioneers  of  the 
Sun  appeared,  who  smooth  the  road  along  which  he  has 
to  pass  with  the  army  of  his  rays.  Then  the  king 
dressed  himself,  and  went  with  Ciommo  to  the  seashore, 
where  he  found  Marziella ; and  the  king  with  his  own 
hand  cut  the  chain  from  the  foot  of  the  beloved  object, 
with  the  file  which  they  had  brought,  but  all  the  while 
he  forged  a still  stronger  one  for  his  heart;  and  setting 
her  on  the  saddle  behind  him — she  who  was  already 
fixed  on  the  saddle  of  his  heart — he  set  out  for  the 
royal  palace,  where  by  his  command  all  the  handsome 
ladies  of  the  land  were  assembled,  who  received  Mar- 
ziella as  their  mistress  with  all  due  honour.  Then  the 
king  married  her,  and  there  were  great  festivities ; and 
among  all  the  casks  which  were  burnt  for  the  illumina- 
tions, the  king  ordered  that  Troccola  should  be  shut  up 
in  a tub,  and  made  to  suffer  for  the  treachery  she  had 


Digitized  by  Google 


286 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


shown  to  Marziella.  Then  sending  for  Luceta,  he  gave 
her  and  Ciommo  enough  to  live  upon  like  princes; 
whilst  Puccia,  driven  out  of  the  kingdom,  wandered 
about  as  a beggar;  and,  as  the  reward  of  her  not 
having  sown  a little  bit  of  cake,  she  had  now  to  suffer 
a constant  want  of  bread ; for  it  is  the  will  of  Heaven 
that 

” He  who  shows  no  pity  finds  none.” 


The  story  of  the  two  cakes  was  verily  a cake  stuffed 
full  of  plums,  which  all  relished  so  much  that  they 
licked  their  fingers  after  it.  But  as  Paola  was  ready  to 
start  with  the  relation  of  her  story,  the  Prince's  com- 
mand was  like  a wolf’s  eye*,  which  robbed  every  one  of 
speech,  and  she  began  as  follows. 

* The  belief  that  a person  who  was  seen  by  a wolf  before  seeing  the  animal  him* 
self,  lost  his  sight,  prevailed  among  the  ancients:  see  remarks  in  Keightley’s  Notes 
on  Virgil,  p.  126. 


Digitized  by  Google 


287 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 

He  wbo  gives  pleasure  meets  with  it : kindness  is  the 
bond  of  friendship  and  the  hook  of  love : he  who  sows 
Dot  reaps  not ; of  which  truth  CiuUa  has  given  you  the 
foretaste  of  example,  and  I will  give  you  the  dessert,  if 
you  wUl  hear  in  mind  what  Cato  says,  " Speak  little  at 
table.”  Therefore  have  the  kindness  to  lend  me  your 
ears  awhile;  and  may  Heaven  cause  them  to  stretch 
continually,  to  listen  to  pleasant  and  amusing  things. 


There  was  once  in  the  county  of  Arzano  a good  woman 
who  every  year  gave  birth  to  a son,  until  at  length  there 
were  seven  of  them,  who  looked  like  a sjnrinx  of  the  god 
Pan,  with  seven  reeds,  one  larger  than  another.  And 
when  they  had  changed  their  first  teeth,  they  said  to 
Jannetella  their  mother,  who  was  again  in  the  family 
way,  " Hark-ye,  mother,  if,  after  so  many  sons,  you  do 
not  this  time  have  a daughter,  we  are  resolved  to  leave 


Digitized  by  Google 


288 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


home,  and  go  wandering  through  the  world  like  the 
sons  of  the  blackbirds/^ 

When  their  mother  heard  this  sad  announcement, 
she  prayed  Heaven  to  remove  such  an  intention  from 
her  sons,  and  prevent  her  losing  seven  such  jewels  as 
they  were.  And  when  the  hour  of  the  birth  was  at 
hand,  the  sons  said  to  Jannetella,  “We  will  retire  to 
the  top  of  yonder  hill  or  rock  opposite;  if  you  give 
birth  to  a son,  put  an  inkstand  and  a pen  up  at  the 
window ; but  if  you  have  a little  girl,  put  up  a spoon 
and  a distafiF.  For  if  we  see  the  signal  of  a daughter, 
we  shall  return  home  and  spend  the  rest  of  our  lives 
under  your  wings ; but  if  we  see  the  signal  of  a son, 
then  forget  us,  for  you  may  know  that  we  have  taken 
om^ielves  off*.” 

Soon  after  the  sons  had  departed  it  pleased  Heaven 
that  Jannetella  should  bring  forth  a pretty  little  daugh- 
ter ; then  she  told  the  nurse  to  make  the  signal  to  the 
brothers,  but  the  woman  was  so  stupid  and  confused 
that  she  put  up  the  inkstand  and  the  pen.  As  soon  as 
the  seven  brothers  saw  this  signal,  they  set  off,  and 
walked  on  and  on,  until  at  the  end  of  three  years 
they  came  to  a wood,  where  the  trees  were  perfonning 
the  sword-dance  to  the  sound  of  a river  which  made 

• Ca  nee puoje  mettere  name penna — ^Uterally,  ‘for  you  may  give  us  the  name 
Wing.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


289 


counterpoint  upon  the  stones.  In  this  wood  was  the 
house  of  an  ogre,  whose  eyes  having  been  bhnded  whilst 
asleep  by  a woman,  he  was  such  an  enemy  to  the  sex 
that  he  devoured  all  whom  he  could  catch. 

When  the  youths  arrived  at  the  ogre’s  house,  tired  out 
with  walking  and  exhausted  with  hunger,  they  begged 
him  for  pity’s  sake  to  give  them  a morsel  of  bread.  And 
the  ogre  replied,  that  if  they  would  serve  him,  he  would 
give  them  food,  and  they  would  have  nothing  else  to  do 
but  to  watch  over  him,  like  a dog,  each  in  turn  for  a 
day.  The  youths,  upon  hearing  this,  thought  they  had 
found  mother  and  father;  so  they  consented,  and  re- 
mained in  the  service  of  the  ogre,  who  having  gotten 
their  names  by  heart,  called  one  while  Giangrazio,  at  an- 
other Cecchitiello,  now  Pascale,  now  Nuccio,  now  Pone, 
now  Pezzillo,  and  now  Carcavecchia,  for  so  the  brothers 
were  named ; and  giving  them  a room  in  the  lower  part 
of  his  house,  he  allowed  them  enough  to  live  upon. 

Meanwhile  their  sister  had  grown  up;  and  heai-ing 
that  her  seven  brothers,  owing  to  the  stupidity  of  the 
nurse,  had  set  out  to  walk  through  the  world,  and  that 
no  tidings  of  them  had  ever  been  received,  she  took  it 
into  her  head  to  go  in  search  of  them.  And  she  begged 
and  prayed  her  mother  so  long,  that  at  last,  overcome  by 
her  entreaties,  she  gave  her  leave  to  go,  and  dressed  her 
like  a pilgrim.  Then  the  maiden  walked  and  walked, 

u 


Digitized  by  Google 


290 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


asking  at  every  place  she  came  to  whether  any  one 
had  seen  seven  brothers.  And  thus  she  journeyed 
on,  until  at  length  she  got  news  of  them  at  an  inn, 
where  having  inquired  the  way  to  the  wood,  one  morn- 
ing, at  the  hour  when  the  Sun  with  the  penknife  of  his 
rays  scratches  out  the  inkspots  made  by  Night  upon  the 
sheet  of  Heaven,  she  arrived  at  the  ogre’s  house,  where 
she  was  recognized  by  her  brothers  with  great  joy,  who 
cursed  the  inkstand  and  pen  for  writing  falsely  such 
misfortune  for  them.  Then  giving  her  a thousand 
caresses,  they  told  her  to  remain  quiet  in  their  chamber, 
that  the  ogre  might  not  see  her;  bidding  her  at  the 
same  time  give  a portion  of  whatever  she  had  to  eat  to  a 
cat  which  was  in  the  room,  or  otherwise  she  would  do 
her  some  harm.  Cianna  (for  so  the  sister  was  named) 
wrote  down  this  advice  in  the  pocket-book  of  her  heart, 
and  shared  everything  with  the  cat,  like  a good  com- 
panion, always  cutting  justly,  and  saying,  '^This  for 
me — this  for  thee, — this  for  the  daughter  of  the  king !” 
giving  the  cat  a share  to  the  last  morsel. 

Now  it  happened  one  day  that  the  brothers,  going  to 
hunt,  for  the  ogre,  left  Cianna  a little  basket  of  chick- 
peas to  cook ; and  as  she  was  picking  them,  by  ill-luck 
she  foimd  among  them  a hazel-nut,  which  was  the  stone 
of  disturbance  to  her  quiet;  for  having  swallowed  it 
without  giving  half  to  the  cat,  the  latter  out  of  spite  ran 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


291 


up  to  the  hearth  and  put  out  the  fire.  Ciauna  seeing 
this,  and  not  knowing  what  to  do,  left  the  room,  con- 
trary to  the  command  of  her  brothers,  and  going  into 
the  ogre’s  chamber  begged  him  for  a little  fire.  Then 
the  ogre,  hearing  a woman’s  voice,  said,  ^‘Welcome, 
ynadam ! wait  awhile, — you  have  foimd  what  you  are 
seeking.”  And  so  saying  he  took  a Genoa  stone,  and 
daubing  it  with  oil  he  fell  to  whetting  his  tusks.  But 
Cianna,  who  saw  the  cart  on  a wrong  track,  seizing  a 
lighted  stick  ran  to  her  chamber ; and  bolting  the  door 
inside,  she  placed  against  it  bars,  stools,  bedsteads,  tables, 
stones,  and  everything  there  was  in  the  room. 

As  soon  as  the  ogre  had  put  an  edge  on  his  teeth, 
he  ran  to  the  chamber  of  the  brothers,  and  finding  the 
door  fastened,  he  fell  to  kicking  it  to  break  it  open. 
At  this  noise  and  disturbance  the  seven  brothers  came 
home,  and  hearing  themselves  accused  by  the  ogre 
of  treachery  for  making  their  chamber  the  Benevento* 
of  his  women  enemies,  Giangrazio,  who  was  the  eldest 
and  had  more  sense  than  the  others,  and  saw  matters 
going  badly,  said  to  the  ogre,  "We  know  nothing  of 
this  affair,  and  it  may  be  that  this  w'icked  woman  has 
perchance  come  into  the  room  whilst  we  were  at  the 
chase;  but  as  she  has  fortified  herself  inside,  come 

* The  famotu  vaIimt.tTee  at  Benevento  ia  to  the  preaent  day  beliered  to  be  the 
great  rendearoua  of  the  witchea : hence,  in  speaking  ill  of  a woman,  a common  ex> 
preuion  ia,  *'  She  cornea  from  Beneeento.” 

u 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


292 


THE  FENTAMEBONE. 


with  me,  and  I will  take  you  to  a place  where  we  can 
seize  her  without  her  being  able  to  defend  herself.” 

Then  they  took  the  ogre  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  to 
a deep  deep  pit,  where  giving  him  a push  they  sent  him 
headlong  to  the  bottom;  and  taking  a shovel,  w'hich 
they  found  on  the  ground,  they  covered  him  with  earth. 
Then  they  bade  their  sister  unfasten  the  door,  and  they 
rated  her  soundly  for  the  fault  she  had  committed,  and 
the  danger  in  which  she  had  placed  herself ; telling  her 
to  be  more  careful  in  future,  and  to  beware  of  plucking 
grass  upon  the  spot  where  the  ogre  was  buried,  or  they 
would  be  turned  into  seven  doves. 

“ Heaven  keep  me  from  bringing  such  a misfortune 
upon  you !”  replied  Cianna.  So  taking  possession  of 
all  the  ogre’s  goods  and  chattels,  and  making  them- 
selves masters  of  the  whole  house,  they  lived  there  mer- 
rily enough,  waiting  until  winter  should  pass  away,  and 
the  Sun,  on  taking  possession  of  the  house  of  the  Bull, 
give  a present  to  the  Earth  of  a green  gown  embroi- 
dered with  flowers,  when  they  might  set  out  on  their 
journey  home. 

Now  it  happened  one  day,  when  the  brothers  were 
gone  to  the  mountains  to  get  firewood,  to  defend  them- 
selves against  the  cold,  which  increased  from  day  to 
day,  that  a poor  pilgrim  came  to  the  ogre’s  wood,  and 
made  faces  at  an  ape  that  was  perched  up  in  a pine-tree; 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


293 


whereupon  the  ape  threw  down  one  of  the  fir-apples 
firom  the  tree  upon  the  man^s  pate,  which  made  such  a 
terrible  bump  that  the  poor  fellow  set  lip  a loud  cry. 
Cianna  hearing  the  noise  went  out,  and  taking  pity  on 
his  disaster,  she  quickly  plucked  a sprig  of  rosemary 
from  a tuft  which  grew  upon  the  ogress  grave ; then  she 
made  him  a plaster  of  it  with  chewed  bread  and  salt, 
and  after  giving  the  man  some  breakfast  she  sent  him 
away. 

Whilst  Cianna  was  laying  the  cloth,  and  expecting 
her  brothers,  lo ! she  saw  seven  doves  come  flying,  who 
said  to  her,  “ Ah  ! better  that  your  hand  had  been  cut 
off,  you  cause  of  all  our  misfortune,  ere  it  plucked  that 
accursed  rosemary  and  brought  such  a calamity  upon 
us  1 Have  you  eaten  the  brains  of  a cat,  0 sister,  that 
you  have  driven  our  advice  from  your  mind  ? Behold 
us  turned  to  birds,  a prey  to  the  talons  of  kites,  hawks 
and  falcons ! behold  us  made  companions  of  water- 
hens,  snipes,  goldfinches,  woodpeckers,  jays,  owls,  mag- 
pies, jackdaws,  rooks,  starlings,  woodcocks,  cocks,  hens 
and  ehickens,  turkey-cocks,  blackbirds,  thrushes,  chaf- 
finches, tomtits,  jenny- wrens,  lapwings,  linnets,  green- 
finches, crossbills,  flycatchers,  larks,  plovers,  kingfishers, 
wagtails,  redbreasts,  redfinches,  sparrows,  ducks,  field- 
fares, woodpigeons  and  bullfinches  ! A rare  thing  you 
have  done ! and  now  we  may  return  to  our  country  to 
find  nets  laid  and  twigs  limed  for  us ! To  heal  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


294 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


head  of  a pilgrim,  you  have  broken  the  heads  of  seven 
brothers ; nor  is  there  any  help  for  our  misfortune;,  un- 
less you  find  the  Mother  of  Time,  who  will  tell  you  the 
way  to  get  us  out  of  trouble.” 

Cianna,  looking  like  a plueked  quail  at  the  fault  she 
had  committed,  begged  pardon  of  her  brothers,  and 
offered  to  go  round  the  world  until  she  should  find  the 
dwelling  of  the  old  woman.  Then  praying  them  not 
to  stir  from  the  house  until  she  returned,  lest  any  ill 
should  betide  them,  she  set  out,  and  journeyed  on  and  on 
without  ever  tiring;  and  though  she  went  on  foot,  hw 
desire  to  aid  her  brothers  served  her  as  a sumpter-mule, 
with  which  she  made  three  miles  an  hour.  At  last  she 
came  to  the  seashore,  where  with  the  blows  of  the  waves 
the  sea  was  banging  the  rocks  which  would  not  repeat 
the  Latin  it  gave  them  to  do.  Here  she  saw  a huge 
whale,  who  said  to  her,  “ My  pretty  maiden,  what  go 
you  seeking  ?”  And  she  replied,  “ I am  seeking  the 
dwelling  of  the  Mother  of  Time.'^ — " Hear  then  what 
you  must  do,”  replied  the  whale : “ go  straight  along 
this  shore,  and  on  coming  to  the  first  river,  follow  it  up 
to  its  source,  and  you  will  meet  with  some  one  who  will 
show  you  the  way : but  do  me  one  kindness, — when  you 
find  the  good  old  woman,  beg  of  her  the  favour  to  tell 
me  some  means  by  which  I may  swim  about  safely, 
without  so  often  knocking  upon  the  rocks  and  being 
thrown  on  the  sands.** 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


295 


"Trust  to  me,”  said  Cianna:  then  thanking  the 
whale  for  pointing  out  the  way,  she  set  off  walking  along 
the  shore ; and  after  a long  journey  she  came  to  the 
river,  which  like  a clerk  of  the  treasury  was  disbursing 
silver  money  into  the  bank  of  the  sea.  Then  taking 
the  way  up  to  its  source,  she  arrived  at  a beautiful  open 
country,  where  the  meadow  vied  with  the  heaven,  dis- 
playing her  green  mantle  starred  over  with  flowers ; and 
there  she  met  a mouse,  who  said  to  her,  " Whither  are 
you  going  thus  alone,  my  pretty  girl  ?”  And  Cianna 
replied,  " I am  seeking  the  Mother  of  Time.^* 

You  have  a long  way  to  go,”  said  the  mouse ; '^but 
do  not  lose  heart, — everything  has  an  end:  walk  on 
therefore  toward  yon  mountains,  which  like  the  free 
lords  of  these  fields  assume  the  title  of  Highness,  and 
you  will  soon  have  more  news  of  what  you  are  seek- 
ing. But  do  me  one  favour, — when  you  arrive  at  the 
bouse  you  wish  to  find,  get  the  good  old  woman  to  tell 
you  what  we  can  do  to  rid  us  of  the  tyranny  of  the 
cats ; then  command  me,  and  I am  your  slave.” 

Cianna,  after  promising  to  do  the  mouse  this  kind- 
ness, set  ofiF  toward  the  mountains,  which,  although 
they  appeared  to  be  close  at  hand,  seemed  never  to  be 
reached.  But  having  come  to  them  at  length,  she  sat 
down  tired  out  upon  a stone;  and  there  she  saw  an 
army  of  ants,  carrying  a large  store  of  grain,  one 


Digitized  by  Google 


296 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


of  whom  turning  to  Cianna  said,  “Who  art  thou, 
and  whither  art  thou  going  ?”  And  Cianna,  who  was 
courteous  to  every  one,  said  to  her,  **  I am  an  unhappy 
girl,  who  for  a matter  that  concerns  me  am  seeking 
the  dwelling  of  the  Mother  of  Time/^ 

“ Go  on  further,"  replied  the  ant,  “ and  where  these 
mountains  open  into  a large  plain  you  will  obtain  more 
news.  But  do  me  a great  favour, — get  the  secret  from  the 
old  woman,  what  we  ants  can  do  to  live  a little  longer ; for 
it  seems  to  me  a folly  in  worldly  affairs  to  be  heaping 
up  such  a large  store  of  food  for  so  short  a life,  which, 
like  an  auctioneer's  candle,  goes  out  just  at  the  best 
bidding  of  years*.” 

“ Be  at  ease,”  said  Cianna ; “ I will  return  the  kind- 
ness you  have  shown  me." 

Then  she  passed  the  mountains  and  arrived  at  a wide 
plain;  and  proceeding  a little  way  over  it,  she  came 
to  a large  oak-tree, — a memorial  of  antiquity,  whose 
fruit  (a  mouthful  which  Time  gives  to  this  bitter  age 
of  its  lost  sweetness  t)  tasted  like  sweetmeats  to  the 
maiden,  who  was  satisfied  with  little.  Then  the  oak, 
making  lips  of  its  bark  and  a tongue  of  its  pith,  said 
to  Cianna,  “ Whither  are  you  going  so  sad,  my  little 
daughter?  come  and  rest  under  my  shade.”  Cianna 

• See  page  KJ6,  Note. 

t Alluding  to  the  Golden  Age,  when  tnan  waa  said  to  live  upon  aeom*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


297 


thanked  him  much,  but  excused  herself,  saying  that  she 
was  going  in  haste  to  find  the  Mother  of  Time.  And 
when  the  oak  heard  this  he  replied,  You  are  not  far 
from  her  dwelling ; for  before  you  have  gone  another 
day^s  journey  you  will  see  upon  a mountain  a hoTise,  in 
which  you  will  find  her  whom  you  seek.  But  if  you 
have  as  much  kindness  as  beauty,  I prithee  learn  for 
me  what  I can  do  to  regain  my  lost  honour  j for  instead 
of  being  food  for  great  men,  I am  now  only  made  the 
food  of  hogs.” 

Leave  that  to  me,^*  replied  Cianna ; “ I will  take 
care  to  serve  you.”  So  saying  she  departed,  and  walk- 
ing on  and  on  without  ever  resting,  she  came  at  length 
to  the  foot  of  an  impertinent  mountain,  which  was 
poking  its  head  into  the  face  of  the  clouds.  There  she 
found  an  old  man,  who  wearied  and  wayworn  had  lain 
down  upon  some  hay ; and  as  soon  as  he  saw  Cianna, 
he  knew  her  at  once,  and  that  it  was  she  who  had  cured 
his  bump. 

When  the  old  man  heard  what  she  was  seeking,  he 
told  her  that  he  was  carrying  to  Time  the  rent  for  the 
piece  of  earth  which  he  had  cultivated,  and  that  Time 
was  a tyrant  who  usurped  everything  in  the  world, 
claiming  tribute  from  all,  and  especially  from  people 
of  his  age;  and  he  added,  that  having  received  kind- 
ness from  Cianna,  he  would  now  return  it  a hundred- 


Digitized  by  Google 


298 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


fold,  by  giving  her  some  good  information  about  her 
arrival  at  the  mountain ; and  that  he  was  sorry  he  could 
not  accompany  her  thither,  since  his  old-age,  which  was 
condemned  rather  to  go  down  than  up,  obliged  him  to 
remain  at  the  foot  of  those  mountains,  to  cast  up  ac- 
counts with  the  clerks  of  Time,  which  are  the  labours, 
the  sufferings  and  the  infirmities  of  life,  and  to  pay  the 
debt  of  Nature.  So  the  old  man  said  to  her,  *^Now, 
my  pretty  innocent  child,  listen  to  me : you  must  know 
that  on  the  top  of  this  mountain  you  will  find  a ruined  ‘ 
house,  which  was  built  long  ago  time  out  of  mind : the 
walls  are  cracked,  the  foundations  crumbling  away,  the 
doors  worm-eaten,  the  furniture  all  worn  out,  and  in 
short  everything  is  gone  to  wrack  and  ruin.  On  one  side 
are  seen  shattered  columns,  on  another  broken  -statues, 
and  nothing  is  left  in  a good  state  except  a coat-of- 
arms  over  the  door,  quartered,  on  which  you  will  see  a 
serpent  biting  its  tail,  a stag,  a raven,  and  a phoenix*. 
When  you  enter,  you  will  see  on  the  ground  files,  saws, 
scythes,  sickles,  pruning-hooks,  and  hundreds  and  hun- 
dreds of  vessels  full  of  ashes,  with  the  names  written  on 
them,  like  gallipots  in  an  apothecary^s  shop ; and  there 
may  be  read  Corinth,  Saguntum,  Carthage,  Troy,  and 
a thousand  other  cities,  the  ashes  of  which  Time  pre- 
serves as  trophies  of  his  conquests. 

* SymboU  of  eternity,  twianeea,  great  age,  and  reaurrection. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


299 


When  you  come  near  the  house,  hide  yourself  until 
Time  goes  out ; and  as  soon  as  he  has  gone  forth,  en- 
ter, and  you  will  find  an  old,  old  woman,  with  a beard 
that  touches  the  ground  and  a hump  reaching  to  the 
slcy : her  hair,  like  the  tail  of  a dapple-grey  horse,  covers 
her  heels ; her  face  looks  like  a plaited  collar,  with  the 
folds  stiffened  by  the  starch  of  years.  The  old  woman 
is  seated  upon  a clock,  which  is  fastened  to  a wall ; mid 
her  eyebrows  are  so  large  that  they  overshadow  her 
eyes,  so  that  she  will  not  be  able  to  see  you.  As  soon 
as  you  enter,  quickly  take  the  weights  off  the  clock; 
then  call  to  the  old  woman,  and  beg  her  to  answer  your 
questions ; whereupon  she  will  instantly  call  her  son,  to 
come  and  eat  you  up ; but  the  clock  upon  which  the 
old  woman  sits  having  lost  its  weights,  her  son  cannot 
move,  and  she  will  therefore  be  obliged  to  tell  you  what 
you  wish.  But  do  not  trust  any  oath  she  may  mak^ 
unless  she  swear  by  the  wings  of  her  son : then  give 
faith  to  her,  and  do  what  she  tells  you,  and  you  will  be 
content.” 

So  saying,  the  poor  old  man  fell  down  and  crumbled 
away,  like  a dead  body  brought  from  a catacomb  to  the 
light  of  day.  Then  Cianna  took  the  ashes,  and  mixing 
them  with  a pint  of  tears,  she  made  a grave  and  buried 
them,  praying  Heaven  to  grant  them  quiet  and  repose. 
And  ascending  the  mountain,  till  she  was  quite  out  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


300 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


breath,  she  waited  until  Time  came  out,  who  was  an 
old  man  with  a long  long  beard,  and  who  wore  a very 
old  cloak  covered  with  slips  of  paper,  on  which  were 
worked  the  names  of  various  people:  he  had  large 
wings,  and  ran  so  fast  that  he  was  out  of  sight  in  an 
instant. 

WTien  Cianna  entered  the  house  of  his  mother,  she 
started  with  affright  at  the  sight  of  that  black  old  chip ; 
and  instantly  seizing  the  weights  of  the  clock,  she  told 
what  she  wanted  to  the  old  woman,  who  setting  up  a loud 
cry  called  to  her  son.  But  Cianna  said  to  her,  ‘'You 
may  butt  your  head  against  the  wall  as  long  as  you  like, 
for  you  will  not  see  your  son  whilst  I hold  these  clock- 
weights. 

Thereupon  the  old  woman,  seeing  herself  foiled,  be- 
gan to  coax  Cianna,  saying,  “ Let  go  of  them,  my  dear, 
and  do  not  stop  my  son^s  course ; for  no  man  living  has 
ever  done  that.  Let  go  of  them,  and  may  Heaven  pre- 
serve you ! for  I promise  you  by  the  aquafortis  of  my 
son,  with  which  he  corrodes  everything,  that  I will  do 
you  no  harm.” 

“ That's  time  lost,”  answered  Cianna  j “ you  must 
say  something  better  if  you  would  have  me  quit  my 
hold.” 

“ I swear  to  you  by  those  teeth  which  gnaw  all  mor- 
tal things,  that  I will  tell  you  all  you  desire.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


301 


''That  is  all  nothing/'  answered  Cianna;  "for  I 
know  you  are  deceiving  me.” 

" Well  then,”  said  the  old  woman,  " I swear  to  you 
by  those  wings  which  fly  over  all,  that  I will  give  you 
more  pleasure  than  you  imagine.” 

Thereupon  Cianna,  letting  go  the  weights,  kissed  the 
old  woman's  hand,  which  had  a mouldy  feel  and  a 
musty  smell.  And  the  old  woman,  seeing  the  courtesy 
of  the  damsel,  said  to  her,  " Hide  yourself  behind  this 
door,  and  when  Time  comes  home  I will  make  him  tell 
me  all  you  wish  to  know.  And  as  soon  as  he  goes  out 
again — for  he  never  stays  quiet  in  one  place — you  can 
depart.  But  do  not  let  yourseK  be  heard  or  seen,  for 
he  is  such  a glutton,  that  he  does  not  spare  even  his 
own  children;  and  when  all  fails,  he  devours  himself, 
and  then  springs  up  anew.” 

Cianna  did  as  the  old  woman  told  her,  and  lo  ! soon 
after  Time  came  flying  quick,  quick,  high  and  light, 
and  having  gnawed  whatever  came  to  hand,  down  to 
the  very  mouldiness  upon  the  walls,  he  was  about  to 
depart,  when  his  mother  told  him  all  she  had  heard 
from  Cianna,  beseeching  him  by  the  milk  she  had 
given  him  to  answer  exactly  all  her  questions.  After 
a thousand  entreaties  her  son  replied,  "To  the  tree 
may  be  answered,  that  it  can  never  be  prized  by  men 
so  long  as  it  keeps  treasures  buried  under  its  roots : — to 


Digitized  by  Google 


302 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


the  mice,  that  they  will  never  be  safe  from  the  cat,  un- 
less they  tie  a bell  to  her  leg,  to  tell  them  when  she  is 
coming: — to  the  ants,  that  they  will  live  a hundred 
years,  if  they  can  dispense  with  flying ; for  when  the 
ant  is  going  to  die  she  puts  on  wings : — to  the  whale, 
that  it  should  be  of  good  cheer,  and  make  Mends  with 
the  seamouse*,  who  will  serve  him  as  a guide,  so  that 
he  will  never  go  wrong : — and  to  the  doves,  that  when 
they  aUght  on  the  column  of  wealth,  they  will  return  to 
their  former  state/^ 

So  saying.  Time  set  out  to  run  his  accustomed  post ; 
and  Cianna,  taking  leave  of  the  old  woman,  descended 
to  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  just  at  the  very  time  that 
the  seven  doves,  who  had  followed  their  sister’s  foot- 
steps, arrived  there.  Wearied  with  flying  so  far,  they 
stopped  to  rest  upon  the  horn  of  a dead  ox;  and  no 
sooner  had  they  alighted,  than  they  were  changed  into 
handsome  youths,  as  they  were  at  first.  But  while  they 
were  marvelling  at  this,  they  heard  the  reply  which 
Time  had  given,  and  saw  at  once  that  the  horn,  as  the 
symbol  of  plenty,  w'as  the  column  of  wealth  of  which 
Time  had  spoken.  Then  embracing  their  sister  with 
great  joy,  they  all  set  out  on  the  same  road  by  which 
Cianna  had  come.  And  when  they  came  to  the  oak- 

* Lo  torece  marino—Qie  Latin  Mutcului  marinut,  which  Pliny  aayi  swam  before 
the  whale,  and  guided  it  from  the  thoala.  See  Nat.  Hist.  ix.  63. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


303 


tree^  and  told  it  what  Cianna  had  heard  from  Time^  the 
tree  begged  them  to  take  away  the  treasure  from  its 
roots,  sinee  it  was  the  eause  why  its  acorns  had  lost 
their  reputation.  Thereupon  the  seven  brothers,  taking 
a spade  which  they  found  in  a garden,  dug  and  dug, 
until  they  came  to  a great  heap  of  gold  money,  which 
they  divided  into  eight  parts,  and  shared  amonfg  them- 
selves and  their  sister,  so  that  they  might  carry  it  away 
conveniently.  But  being  wearied  with  the  journey  and 
the  load,  they  laid  themselves  down  to  sleep  under  a 
hedge.  Presently  a band  of  robbers  coming  by,  and 
seeing  the  poor  fellows  asleep,  with  their  heads  upon 
the  cloths-full  of  dollars,  bound  them  hand  and  foot  to 
some  trees,  and  took  away  the  money,  leaving  them  to 
bewail  not  only  their  wealth,  which  had  slipped  through 
their  fingers  as  soon  as  found,  but  their  life ; for  being 
without  hope  of  succour,  they  were  in  peril  of  either 
soon  dying  of  hunger  or  allaying  the  hunger  of  some 
wild  beast. 

As  they  were  lamenting  their  unhappy  lot,  up  came 
the  mouse,  who  as  soon  as  she  heard  the  reply  which 
Time  had  given,  in  return  for  the  good  service  nib- 
bled the  cords  with  which  they  were  bound  and  set 
them  free.  And  having  gone  a little  way  further  they 
met  on  the  road  the  ant,  who,  when  she  heard  the  ad- 
vice of  Time,  asked  Cianna  what  was  the  matter,  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


304  THE  FENTAMERONE. 

she  was  so  pale-faced  and  cast  down.  And  when  Cianna 
told  her  their  misfortune,  and  the  trick  which  the  rob- 
bers had  played  them,  the  ant  replied,  Be  quiet,  I can 
now  requite  the  kindness  you  have  done  me.  You 
must  know,  that  whilst  I was  carrying  a load  of  grain 
underground,  I saw  a place  where  these  dogs  of  assas- 
sins hide  their  plunder;  they  have  made  some  holes 
under  an  old  building,  in  which  they  shut  up  all  the 
things  they  have  stolen ; they  are  just  now  gone  out  for 
some  new  robbery,  and  I will  go  with  you  and  show 
you  the  place,  so  that  you  may  recover  your  money 
So  saying  she  took  the  way  toward  some  tumbled- 
down  houses,  and  showed  the  seven  brothers  the  mouth 
of  a pit ; whereupon  Giangrazio,  who  was  bolder  than 
the  rest,  entering  it,  found  there  all  the  money  of  which 
they  had  been  robbed.  Then  taking  it  with  them,  they 
set  out,  and  walked  towards  the  seashore,  where  they 
found  the  whale,  and  told  him  the  good  advice  which 
Time — who  is  the  father  of  counsel — ^had  given  them. 
And  whilst  they  stood  talking  of  their  journey,  and  all 
that  had  befallen  them,  they  saw  the  robbers  suddenly 
appear,  armed  to  the  teeth,  who  had  followed  in  their 
footsteps.  At  this  sight  they  exclaimed,  “ Alas,  alas ! 
we  are  now  wholly  lost,  for  here  come  the  robbers 
armed,  and  they  will  not  leave  the  skin  on  our  bodies  V* 
“ Fear  not,”  replied  the  whale ; “for  I can  save  you 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SEVEN  DOVES. 


305 


out  of  the  fire,  and  will  thus  requite  the  love  you  have 
shown  me : so  get  upon  my  backj  and  I will  quickly 
carry  you  to  a place  of  safety 

Cianna  and  her  brothers,  seeing  the  foe  at  their  heels 
and  the  water  up  to  their  throat,  chmbed  upon  the 
whale,  who,  keeping  far  off  from  the  rocks,  carried 
Uiem  to  within  sight  of  Naples ; but  being  afraid  to  land 
them  on  account  of  the  shoals  and  shallows,  he  said. 
Where  would  you  like  me  to  land  you  ? on  the  shore 
of  Amalfi  ? And  Giangrazio  answered,  See  whether 
that  cannot  be  avoided,  my  dear  fish ; I do  not  wish 
to  land  at  any  place  hereabouts ; for  at  Massa  they  say 
barely  good-day,  at  Sorriente  thieves  are  plenty,  at  Vico 
they  say  you  may  go  your  way,  at  Castel-a-mare  no  one 
says  how  are-ye  ?” 

Then  the  whale,  to  please  them,  turned  about  and 
went  toward  the  Salt-rock,  where  he  left  them;  and 
they  got  put  on  shore  by  the  first  fishing-boat  that 
passed.  Thereupon  they  returned  to  their  own  country, 
safe  and  sound  and  rich,  to  the  great  joy  and  consola- 
tion of  their  mother  and  father;  and,  thanks  to  the 
goodness  of  Cianna,  they  enjoyed  a happy  life,  verifying 
the  old  saying, 

^*Do  good  whenever  you  can,  and  forget  it.” 


X 


Digitized  by  Google 


306 


THE  EENTAMERONE. 


If  I had  a throat  a hundred  yards  long,  a breast  of 
brass,  and  a thousand  tongues  of  steel,  I should  not  be 
able  to  describe  the  pleasure  that  Paola's  story  gave, 
seeing  that  none  of  Cianna’s  good  deeds  went  unre- 
warded ; so  that  the  dose  of  entreaties  for  Cionunetella 
to  tell  her  story  had  to  be  increased,  as  she  equally 
with  the  others  had  lost  the  courage  to  draw  the  chariot 
of  the  command  of  the  Prince.  But  not  being  able  to 
do  less  than  obey,  in  order  not  to  spoil  the  game,  she 
began  as  follows. 


Digitized  by  Google 


307 


THE  RAVEN. 

It  is  truly  a great  proverb, — Rather  a crooked  sight 
than  a crooked  judgement;”  but  it  is  so  difficult  to 
adopt  it,  that  the  judgement  of  few  men  hits  the  nail 
on  the  head.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  sea  of  human 
affairs,  the  greater  part  are  fishers  in  smooth  waters, 
who  catch  crabs ; and  he  who  thinks  to  take  the  most 
exact  measure  of  the  object  at  which  he  aims,  often  shoots 
widest  of  the  mark.  The  consequence  of  this  is,  that 
all  are  running  pell-mell,  all  toiling  in  the  dark,  all 
thinking  crookedly,  all  acting  child^s-play,  all  judging 
at  random,  and  with  a hap-hazard  blow  of  a foolish 
resolution  bringing  upon  themselves  a bitter  repent- 
ance ; as  was  the  case  with  the  king  of  Shady-Grove ; 
and  you  shall  hear  how  it  fared  with  him,  if  you  sum- 
mon me  within  the  circle  of  modesty  with  the  bell  of 
courtesy,  and  give  me  a little  attention. 


It  is  said  that  there  was  once  a king  of  Shady-Grove 
named  Milluccio,  who  was  so  devoted  to  the  chase,  that 

x2 


Digitized  by  Google 


308 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


he  neglected  the  needful  affairs  of  his  state  and  house- 
hold to  follow  the  track  of  a hare  or  the  flight  of  a 
thrush.  And  he  pursued  this  road  so  far,  that  chance 
one  day  led  him  to  a thicket,  which  had  formed  a solid 
square  of  earth  and  trees,  to  prevent  the  horses  of  the 
Sun  from  breaking  through.  There,  upon  a most  beau- 
tiful marble  stone,  he  found  a raven,  which  had  just 
been  killed. 

The  king,  seeing  the  bright  red  blood  sprinkled  upon 
the  white  white  marble,  heaved  a deep  sigh  and  ex- 
claimed, “ 0 heavens ! and  cannot  I have  a wife  as  white 
and  red  as  this  stone,  and  with  hair  and  eyebrows  as 
black  as  the  feathers  of  this  raven  ?”  And  he  stood  fiar 
awhile  so  buried  in  this  thought,  that  he  became  a 
counterpart  to  the  stone,  and  looked  like  a marble  statue 
making  love  to  the  other  marble.  And  this  unhappy 
fancy  fixing  itself  in  his  head,  as  he  searched  for  it 
everywhere  with  the  lanthom  of  desire,  it  grew  in 
four  seconds  from  a picktooth  to  a pole,  from  a crab- 
apple  to  an  Indian  pumpkin,  from  a barber's  embers  to 
a glass  furnace,  and  from  a dwarf  to  a giant ; inaomueh 
that  he  thought  of  nothing  else  than  the  unage  of  that 
object  incrusted  in  his  heart  as  stone  to  stone.  Where- 
ever  he  turned  his  eyes,  that  form  was  always  presented 
to  him  which  he  carried  in  his  breast ; and  forgetting 
all  besides,  he  had  nothing  but  that  marble  in  his  head; 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  HAVEN. 


309 


in  short  he  became  in  a manner  so  worn  away  upon  the 
stoue,  that  he  was  at  last  as  thin  as  the  edge  of  a pen- 
knife ; and  this  marble  was  a millstone  which  crushed  hia 
life,  a slab  porphyry  upon  which  the  colours  of  his 
days  wnere  ground  and  mixed,  a tiuder-box  which  set  fire 
to  the  brimstone  match  of  his  soul,  a loadstone  which 
attracted  him,  and  lastly  a rolling-stone  which  could 
never  rest. 

At  length  his  brother  Jennariello,  seeing  him  so  pale 
and  half-dead,  said  to  him,  “ My  brother,  what  has  hap- 
pened to  you,  that  you  carry  grirf  lodged  in  your  eyes, 
and  despair  sitting  under  the  pale  banner  of  your  face*? 
What  has  befallen  you  ? Speak— open  your  heart  to 
your  brother ; the  smell  of  charcoal  shut  up  in  a chamber 
poisons  people — ^powder  pent  up  in  a mountain  blows 
it  into  the  air;  open  your  lips  therefcHC,  and  tell  me 
what  is  the  matter  with  you ; at  all  events  be  assured 
that  1 wmild  lay  down  a thousand  lives  if  1 could  to 
help  you.” 

Then  Milluccio,  mingling  words  and  sighs,  thanked 
hhn  for  his  love,  saying  that  he  had  no  doubt  of  hia 
affection,  but  that  there  was  no  remedy  for  his  ill,  since 
it  spnuig  from  a stone,  where  he  had  sown  dedres  with- 
out hope  of  fruit, — a stone  from  which  he  did  not  ex- 
pect a mushroom  of  content, — a stone  of  Sisyphus, 

• An  aHttiBon  to  the  Boman  anny. 


Digitized  by  Google 


310  THE  FENTAMEBONE. 

which  he  bore  to  the  mountain  of  designs,  and  when  it 
reached  the  top  rolled  over  and  over  to  the  bottom. 
At  length  however,  after  a thousand  entreaties,  Milluc- 
cio  told  his  brother  all  about  his  love ; whereupon  Jen- 
nariello  comforted  him  as  much  as  he  could,  and  bade 
him  be  of  good  cheer,  and  not  give  way  to  an  unhappy 
passion ; for  that  he  was  resolved,  in  order  to  satisfy  him, 
to  go  all  the  world  over  until  he  found  a woman  the 
counterpart  of  that  stone. 

Then  instantly  fitting  out  a large  ship,  filled  with 
merchandize,  and  dressing  himself  like  a merchant,  he 
sailed  for  Venice,  the  wonder  of  Italy,  the  receptacle  of 
virtuous  men,  the  great  book  of  the  marvels  of  art  and 
nature;  and  having  procured  there  a safe-conduct  to 
pass  to  the  Levant,  he  set  sail  for  Cairo.  "When  he 
arrived  there,  and  entered  the  city,  he  saw  a man  who 
was  carrying  a most  beautiful  falcon ; and  Jennariello 
at  once  purchased  it,  to  take  to  his  brother,  who  was  a 
sportsman.  Soon  afterwards  he  met  another  man,  with 
a splendid  horse,  which  he  also  bought ; whereupon  he 
went  to  an  inn,  to  refresh  himself  after  the  fatigues  he 
had  suffered  at  sea. 

The  following  morning,  when  the  army  of  the  Stars 
at  the  command  of  the  general  of  the  Light,  strikes 
the  tents  in  the  camp  of  the  sky,  and  abandons  the 
post,  Jennariello  set  out  to  wander  through  the  city. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RAVEN. 


311 


having  his  eyes  about  him  like  a lynx,  looking  at  this 
woman  and  that,  to  see  whether  by  chance  he  could 
find  the  likeness  to  a stone  upon  a face  of  flesh. 
And  as  he  was  wandering  about  at  random,  turning 
continually  to  this  side  and  that,  hke  a thief  in  fear  of 
the  constables,  he  met  a beggar  carrying  an  hospital  of 
plasters  and  a Giudecca  of  rags*  upon  his  back,  who 
said  to  him,  " My  gallant  sir,  what  makes  you  so  fright- 
ened ?” 

“ Have  I forsooth  to  tell  you  my  affairs  answered 
Jennariello : 'faith  I should  do  well  to  tell  my  reason 

to  the  constable.” 

“ Softly,  my  fair  youth !”  replied  the  beggar,  “ for 
the  flesh  of  man  is  not  sold  by  weight : if  Darius  had 
not  told  hia  troubles  to  a groom,  he  would  not  have 
become  king  of  Persiat.  It  will  be  no  great  matter 
therefore  for  you  to  tell  your  affairs  to  a poor  beggar ; 
for  there  is  not  a twig  so  slender  but  it  may  serve  for  a 
toothpick.” 

When  Jennariello  heard  the  poor  man  talking  sen- 
sibly and  with  reason,  he  told  him  the  cause  that  had 
brought  him  to  that  country;  whereupon  the  beggar 
replied,  " See  now,  my  son,  how  necessary  it  is  to  make 
account  of  every  one;  for  though  1 am  only  a heap  of 

* The  Giudecca  is  the  Jevi;,  or  quarter  of  the  town  inhabited  by  the  Jewi. 

t Herodotus,  iii.  8&. 


Digitized  by  Google 


312 


THE  FENTAMEBONE. 


rubbish;  yet  I shall  be  able  to  enrich  the  garden  of  your 
hopes.  Now  listen; — under  the  pretext  of  begging  almS; 
I will  knock  at  the  door  of  the  young  and  beautiful 
daughter  of  a magician:  then  open  your  eyes  wide, 
look  at  her,  contemplate  her,  regard  her,  measure  her 
from  head  to  foot,  for  you  will  find  the  image  of  her 
whom  your  brother  desires.”  So  saying,  he  knocked  at 
the  door  of  a house  close  by,  and  Liviella  opening  it 
threw  him  a piece  of  bread. 

As  soon  as  Jennaricllo  saw  her,  she  seemed  to  him 
built  after  the  model  which  Milluccio  had  given  him : 
then  he  gave  a good  alms  to  the  beggar,  and  sent  him 
away,  and  going  to  the  inn  he  dressed  himself  like  a 
pedlar,  carrying  in  two  caskets  all  the  wealth  of  the 
world.  And  thus  he  walked  up  and  down  before 
Liviella’s  house,  crying  his  wares,  until  at  length  she 
called  him,  and  took  a view  of  the  heautiful  net-caps, 
hoods,  ribbands,  gauze,  edgings,  lace,  handkerchiefs, 
collars,  needles,  cups  of  rouge,  and  head-gear  fit  for  a 
queen,  which  he  carried.  And  when  she  had  examined 
all  the  things  again  and  again,  she  told  him  to  show  her 
something  elsej  and  Jennariello  answered,  "My  lady, 
in  these  caskets  1 have  only  cheap  and  paltry  wares; 
but  if  you  will  deign  to  come  to  my  ship,  I will  show 
you  things  of  the  other  world,  for  I have  there  a host 
of  beautiful  goods  worthy  of  any  great  lord,” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RAVEN. 


313 


Liviella,  who  was  full  of  curiosity,  not  to  belie  the 
nature  of  her  sex,  replied,  **  If  my  father  indeed  were 
not  out,  he  would  have  given  me  some  money.” 

Nay,  you  can  come  all  the  better  if  he  is  ouV'  re- 
phed  Jennariello;  “for  perhaps  he  might  not  allow  you 
the  pleasure ; and  I ^11  promise  to  show  you  such  splen- 
did things  as  will  make  you  rave — such  necklaces  and 
earrings,  such  bracelets  and  sashes,  such  workmanship 
in  paper — ^in  short  I will  perfectly  astound  you.” 

When  Liviella  heard  of  all  this  display  of  finery, 
she  called  a gossip  of  hers  to  accompany  her,  and  went 
to  the  ship.  But  no  sooner  had  she  embarked,  than 
Jennariello,  whilst  keeping  her  enchanted  with  the 
sight  of  all  the  beautiful  things  he  had  brought,  craftily 
ordered  the  anchor  to  be  weighed  and  the  sails  to  be 
set;  so  that  before  Liviella  raised  her  eyes  from  the 
wares  and  saw  that  she  had  left  the  land,  they  had  al- 
ready gone  many  miles.  When  at  length  she  perceived 
the  trick,  she  began  to  act  Olympia*  the  reverse  way; 
for  whereas  Olympia  bewailed  being  left  upon  a rock, 
Liviella  lamented  leaving  the  rocks.  But  when  Jenna- 
riello told  her  who  he  was,  whither  he  was  carrying  hCT, 
and  the  good  fortune  that  awaited  her,  and  pictured  to 
her  moreover  Milluccio^s  beauty,  his  valour,  his  virtues, 
and  lastly  the  love  with  which  he  would  receive  her,  he 

* Orlando  Fnrioao,  x.  10,  &c.  ' 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


314 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


sncceeded  in  pacifying  her,  and  she  even  prayed  the 
wind  to  bear  her  quickly  to  see  the  colouring  of  the 
design  which  Jennariello  had  drawn. 

As  they  were  sailing  merrily  along,  they  heard  the 
waves  grumbling  beneath  the  ship ; and  although  they 
spoke  in  an  under  tone,  the  captain  of  the  ship,  who 
understood  in  an  instant  what  it  meant,  cried  out,  All 
bands  aboard!  for  here  comes  a storm,  and  Heaven 
save  us !”  No  sooner  had  he  spoken  these  words,  than 
there  came  the  testimony  of  a whistling  of  the  wind ; and 
behold  the  sky  was  overcast  with  clouds,  and  the  sea 
was  covered  with  white-crested  waves.  And  whilst  the 
waves  on  either  side  of  the  ship,  eurious  to  know  what 
the  others  were  about,  leaped  uninvited  to  the  nuptials 
upon  the  deek,  one  man  baled  them  with  a bowl 
into  a tub,  another  drove  them  off  with  a pump ; and 
whilst  every  sailor  was  hard  at  work,— as  it  concerned 
his  own  safety, — one  minding  the  rudder,  another  haul- 
ing the  foresail,  another  the  mainsheet,  Jennariello  ran  up 
to  the  top-mast,  to  see  with  a telescope  if  he  could  dis- 
cover any  land  where  they  might  cast  anchor.  And  lo ! 
whilst  he  was  measiuing  a hundred  miles  of  distance  with 
two  feet  of  telescope,  he  saw  a dove  and  its  mate  come 
flying  up  and  alight  upon  the  sailyard.  Then  the  male 
bird  said,  “ Eucche,  rucche !”  And  bis  mate  answered, 
** What’s  the  matter,  husband,  that  you  are  lament- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  EAVBK. 


316 


ing  BO  ?” — “ This  poor  prince/^  replied  the  other,  “ has 
bought  a falcon,  which  as  soon  as  it  shall  be  in  his  bro- 
ther's hands  will  pick  out  his  eyes ; but  if  he  does  not 
take  it  him,  or  if  he  warns  him  of  the  danger,  he  will 
turn  to  marble.”  And  thereupon  he  began  again  to 
cry,  “ Rucche,  rucche !”  And  his  mate  said  to  him, 
*'What,  still  lamenting!  is  there  anything  new?” — 
" Ay  indeed,”  answered  the  male  dove ; “ he  has  also 
bought  a horse,  and  the  first  time  his  brother  rides  him 
the  horse  will  break  his  neck ; but  if  he  does  not  take 
it  him,  or  if  he  warns  him  of  the  danger,  he  will  turn  to 
marble.  "Rucche,  rucche!”  he  cried  again.  "Alas 
with  all  these  Rucche,  rucche”  said  the  female  dove ; 
" what  ^8  the  matter  now  ?”  And  her  mate  said,  " This 
man  is  taking  a beautiful  wife  to  his  brother  j but  the 
first  night,  as  soon  as  they  go  to  sleep,  they  will  both 
be  devoured  by  a frightful  dragon ; yet  if  he  does  not 
take  her  to  him,  or  if  he  wains  him  of  the  danger,  he 
will  turn  to  marble.” 

As  he  spoke,  the  tempest  ceased,  and  the  rage  of  the 
sea  and  the  fury  of  the  wind  subsided ; but  a far  greater 
tempest  arose  in  Jennariello^s  breast,  from  what  he  had 
heard,  and  more  than  twenty  times  he  was  on  the  point 

throwing  all  the  things  into  the  sea,  in  order  not  to 
carry  to  his  brother  the  cause  of  his  ruin.  But  on  the 
other  hand  he  thought  of  himself,  and  reflected  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


316 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


charity  begins  at  home ; and  fearing  that,  if  he  did  not 
carry  these  things  to  his  brother,  or  if  he  warned  him 
of  the  danger,  he  should  turn  to  marble,  he  resolved  to 
look  rather  to  the  nomen  propritan  than  to  the  appeUa- 
timrni,  since  the  shirt  was  closer  to  him  than  the  jacket. 

When  he  arrived  at  Shady-Grove,  he  found  his  bro- 
ther on  the  shore,  awaiting  with  great  joy  the  return  of 
the  ship,  which  he  had  seen  at  a distance.  And  when 
he  saw  that  it  bore  her  whom  he  carried  in  his  heart, 
and  confronting  one  face  with  the  other  perceived  that 
there  was  not  the  difference  of  a hair,  his  joy  was  so 
great  that  he  was  almost  weighed  down  under  the  ex- 
cessive burden  of  delight.  Then  embracing  his  brother 
fervently,  he  said  to  him,  *‘\\Tiat  falcon  is  that  you 
are  carrying  on  your  fist?”  And  Jennariello  an- 
swered, " I have  bought  it  on  purpose  to  give  it  you.” 
— "I  see  clearly  that  you  love  me,”  replied  Milluccioi, 
" since  you  go  about  seeking  to  give  me  pleasure ; truly 
if  you  had  brought  me  a costly  treasure,  it  could  not 
have  given  me  greater  delight  than  this  falcon  And 
just  as  he  was  going  to  take  it  in  his  hand,  Jennariello 
quickly  drew  a large  knife  which  he  carried  at  his  side 
and  cut  off  its  head.  At  this  deed  the  king  stood 
aghast,  and  thought  his  brother  mad  to  have  done  such 
a stupid  act ; but  not  to  interrupt  the  joy  at  his  atri- 
val,  he  remained  silent.  Presently  however  he  saw  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  KAVEN. 


317 


horse,  and  on  asking  his  brother  whose  it  was,  heard 
that  it  was  his  own ; then  he  felt  a great  desire  to  ride 
him,  and  just  as  he  was  ordering  the  stirrup  to  be 
held,  Jennariello  quickly  cut  off  the  horse^s  legs  with 
his  knife.  Thereat  the  king  waxed  wrath,  for  his  bro- 
ther seemed  to  have  done  it  on  purpose  to  vex  him, 
and  his  choler  began  to  rise;  however  he  did  not  think 
it  a right  time  to  show  resentment,  lest  he  should 
poison  the  pleasure  of  the  bride  at  the  first  sight,  whom 
he  could  never  gaze  upon  enough. 

When  they  arrived  at  the  royal  palace,  he  invited 
all  the  lords  and  ladies  of  the  city  to  a grand  feast, 
at  which  the  hall  seemed  just  like  a riding-school  full 
of  horses,  curvetting  and  prancing,  with  a number  of 
foals  in  the  form  of  women.  But  when  the  ball  was 
ended,  and  a great  banquet  had  been  despatched,  they 
aU  retired  to  rest. 

Jennariello,  who  thought  of  nothing  else  than  to  save 
his  brother's  life,  hid  himself  behind  the  bed  of  the 
bridal  pair ; and  as  he  stood  watching  to  see  the  dragon 
come,  behold  at  midnight  a fierce  dragon  entered  the 
chamber,  who  sent  forth  flames  from  his  eyes  and  smoke 
from  his  mouth,  and  who,  from  the  terror  he  carried  in  his 
look,  would  have  been  a good  agent  to  sell  all  the  anti- 
dotes to  fear  in  the  apothecaries'  shops.  As  soon  as 
Jennariello  saw  the  monster,  he  began  to  lay  about  him 


Digitized  by  Google 


318 


THE  PENTAMERONE, 


right  aud  left  with  a Damascus  blade  which  he  had 
hidden  under  his  cloak,  and  he  struck  one  blow  so  furi- 
ously that  it  cut  in  halves  a post  of  the  king^s  bed ; at 
which  noise  the  king  awoke,  and  the  dragon  disap- 
peared. 

When  Milluccio  saw  the  sword  in  his  brother's  hand, 
and  the  bedpost  cut  in  two,  he  set  up  a loud  cry, 
“ Help  here ! hola ! help  1 this  traitor  of  a brother  is 
come  to  kill  me!”  Whereupon  hearing  the  cries,  a 
number  of  servants  who  slept  in  the  anteehamber  came 
running  up,  and  the  king  ordered  Jennariello  to  be 
bound,  and  sent  him  the  same  hour  to  prison. 

The  next  morning,  as  soon  as  the  Sun  opened  his 
bank,  to  deliver  the  deposit  of  light  to  the  creditors  of 
the  Day,  the  king  summoned  the  council ; and  when  he 
told  them  what  had  passed,  confirming  the  wicked  inten- 
tion shown  in  killing  the  falcon  and  the  horse,  on  pur- 
pose to  vex  him,  they  judged  that  Jennariello  de^rved 
to  die.  The  prayers  of  Liviella  were  all  unavailing  to 
soften  the  heart  of  the  king,  who  said,  "You  do  not 
love  me,  wife ; for  you  have  more  regard  for  your  brother- 
in-law  than  for  my  life.  You  have  seen  with  your  own 
eyes  this  dog  of  an  assassin  come  with  a sword  that 
would  cut  a hair  in  the  air*  to  kill  me ; and  if  the  bed- 
post (the  column  of  my  life)  had  not  protected  me,  you 

• The  Irish  say,  “ to  cut  wool  upon  water.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RAVEN. 


319 


would  at  this  moment  have  been  a widow.*'  So  saying 
he  gave  orders  that  justice  shoidd  take  its  course. 

When  Jennariello  heard  this  sentence,  and  saw  him- 
self so  ill-rewarded  for  doing  good,  he  knew  not  what 
to  think  or  to  do ; if  he  said  nothing,  bad — if  he  spoke, 
worse ; and  whatever  he  should  do  was  a fall  from  the 
tree  into  the  wolf's  mouth : if  he  remained  silent,  he 
should  lose  his  head  under  an  axe, — if  he  spoke,  he 
should  end  his  days  in  a stone.  At  length,  after  various 
resolutions,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  disclose  the  matter 
to  his  brother ; and  since  he  must  die  at  all  events,  he 
thought  it  better  to  tell  his  brother  the  truth,  and  to 
end  his  days  with  the  title  of  an  innocent  man,  than  to 
keep  the  truth  to  himself  and  be  sent  out  of  the 
world  as  a traitor.  So  sending  word  to  the  king  that 
he  had  something  to  say  of  importance  to  his  state,  he 
was  led  into  his  presence ; where  he  first  made  a long 
preamble  of  the  love  he  had  always  borne  him ; then  he 
went  on  to  tell  of  the  deception  he  had  practised  on 
Liviella,  in  order  to  give  him  pleasure,  and  then  what 
he  had  heard  from  the  doves  about  the  falcon,  and 
how,  to  avoid  being  turned  to  marble,  he  had  brought 
it  him,  and  without  revealing  the  secret  had  killed  it, 
in  order  not  to  see  him  without  eyes. 

As  he  spoke,  be  felt  his  legs  stiffen  and  turn  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


320  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

marble ; and  when  be  went  on  to  relate  the  affair  of  the 
horse  in  the  same  manner,  he  became  visibly  stone  up 
to  the  waist,  stiffening  miserably, — a thing  which  at 
another  time  he  would  have  paid  in  ready  money,  but 
which  now  his  heart  wept  at.  At  last,  when  he  came 
to  the  affair  of  the  dragon,  he  stood  hke  a statue  in  the 
middle  of  the  hall,  stone  from  head  to  foot.  When  the 
king  saw  this,  reproaching  himself  for  the  error  he  had 
committed  and  the  rash  sentence  he  had  passed  upon 
80  good  and  loving  a brother,  he  mourned  him  more 
than  a year,  and  every  time  he  thought  of  him  he  shed, 
a river  of  tears. 

Meanwhile  Liviella  gave  birth  to  two  sons,  who  were 
two  of  the  most  beautiful  creatures  in  the  world.  And 
after  a few  months,  when  the  queen  was  gone  into  the 
country  for  pleasure,  and  the  father  and  his  two  little 
boys  chanced  to  be  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  hall, 
gazing  with  tearful  eyes  on  the  statue — the  memorial  of 
his  folly,  which  had  taken  from  him  the  flower  of  men,~ 
behold  a stately  and  venerable  old  man  entered,  whose 
long  hair  fell  upon  his  shoulders  and  whose  beard 
covered  his  breast.  And  making  a reverence  to  the 
king,  the  old  man  said  to  him,  What  would  your  Ma- 
jesty give  to  have  this  noble  brother  return  to  his  for- 
mer state  ?”  And  the  king  answered,  “ I would  give 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RAVEy. 


321 


my  kingdom/'  ^^Nay,”  replied  the  old  man,  “this  is 
not  a thing  that  requires  payment  in  wealth,  but  being 
an  affair  of  life  it  must  be  paid  for  with  as  much  again 
of  life/' 

Then  the  king,  partly  out  of  the  love  he  bore  Jenna- 
riello,  and  partly  from  hearing  himself  reproached  with 
the  injuiy  he  had  done  him,  answered,  “Believe  me, 
my  good  sir,  I would  give  my  own  hfe  for  his  life ; and 
provided  that  he  came  out  of  the  stoue,  I should  be 
content  to  be  enclosed  in  a stone." 

Hearing  this  the  old  man  said,  “Without  putting 
your  life  to  this  risk, — since  it  takes  so  long  to 
rear  a man, — the  blood  of  these  your  two  little  boys, 
smeared  upon  the  marble,  would  suffice  to  make  him 
instantly  come  to  life."  Then  the  king  replied,  “ Chil- 
dren I may  have  again,  but  I have  a brother,  and 
another  I can  never  more  hope  to  see."  So  saying,  he 
made  a pitiable  sacrifice  of  two  little  innocent  kids 
before  an  idol  of  stone,  and  besmearing  the  statue 
with  their  blood,  it  instantly  became  alive ; whereupon 
the  king  embraced  his  brother,  and  their  joy  is  not  to 
be  told.  Then  they  had  those  poor  little  crcatm*es  put 
into  a coffin,  in  order  to  give  them  burial  with  all  due 
honour;  but  just  at  that  instant  the  queen  returned 
home,  and  the  king,  bidding  his  brother  hide  himself, 
said  to  his  wife,  “ What  would  you  give,  my  heart,  to 

Y 


Digitized  by  Google 


322 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


have  my  brother  restored  to  life  V*  I would  give  this 
whole  kingdom,”  replied  Liviella.  And  the  king  an- 
swered, Would  you  give  the  blood  of  your  children  V* 

Nay,  not  that  indeed,”  replied  the  queen;  “ for  I could 
not  be  so  cruel  as  to  tear  out  with  my  own  hands  the 
apple  of  my  eyes.”  Alas  !”  said  the  king,  "in  order 
to  see  a brother  alive,  I have  killed  my  own  children ! 
for  this  was  the  price  of  Jennariello^s  hfe.^^ 

So  saying,  he  showed  the  queen  the  little  boys  in  the 
coffin ; and  when  she  saw  this  sad  spectacle,  she  cried 
aloud  like  one  mad,  saying,  " 0 my  children ! you  props 
of  my  life,  joys  of  my  heart,  fountains  of  my  blood ! 
who  has  painted  red  the  windows  of  the  sun*?  who 
has  without  a doctor^s  licence  bled  the  chief  vein  of  my 
life  ? Alas,  my  children,  my  children ! my  hope  now 
taken  from  me,  my  light  now  darkened,  my  joy  now 
poisoned,  my  support  now  lost ! you  are  stabbed  by  the 
sword,  I am  pierced  by  grief ; you  are  drowned  in  blood, 
I in  tears.  Alas  that,  to  give  life  to  an  uncle,  you  have 
slain  your  mother ! for  I am  no  longer  able  to  weave 
the  thread  of  my  days,  without  you,  the  fair  counter- 
poises of  the  loom  of  my  unhappy  life.  The  organ  of 
my  voice  must  be  silent,  now  that  its  bellows  are  taken 
away.  O children,  children,  why  do  ye  not  give  answer 

* A red  mark  made  upon  a penou’a  house  used  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  greatest 
insult. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RAVEN. 


323 


to  your  mother,  who  once  gave  you  the  blood  in  your 
veins,  and  now  weeps  it  for  you  from  her  eyes  ? But 
since  fate  shows  me  the  fountain  of  my  happiness  dried 
up,  I will  no  longer  live  the  sport  of  fortune  in  the 
world,  but  will  go  at  once  to  find  you  again 

So  saying  she  ran  to  a window,  to  throw  herself  out ; 
but  just  at  that  instant  her  father  entered  by  the  same 
window  in  a cloud,  and  called  to  her,  “ Stop,  Liviella ! 
I have  now  accomplished  what  I intended,  and  killed 
three  birds  with  one  stone*:  I have  revenged  myself 
on  Jennariello,  who  came  to  my  house  to  rob  me  of  my 
daughter,  by  making  him  stand  all  these  months  like  a 
marble  statue  in  a block  of  stone ; I have  punished  you 
for  your  ill  conduct  in  going  away  in  a ship  without 
my  permission,  by  showing  you  your  two  children, 
your  two  jewels,  killed  by  their  own  father ; and  I have 
punished  the  king  for  the  caprice  he  took  into  his  head, 
by  making  him  first  the  judge  of  his  brother,  and  after- 
wards the  executioner  of  his  children.  But  as  I have 
wished  only  to  shear  and  not  to  flay  you,  I desire  now 
that  all  the  poison  may  turn  into  sweetmeats  for  you. 
Therefore  go,  take  again  your  children  and  my  grand- 
children, who  are  more  beautiful  than  ever.  And  you, 
Milluccio,  embrace  me, — I receive  you  as  my  son-in- 
law  and  as  my  son ; and  I pardon  Jennariello  his  oflence, 

* Fatlo  no  viaggio  e ttre  tervixie, 

y2 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


324 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


having  done  all  that  he  did  out  of  love  to  so  excellent  a 
brother.” 

As  he  spoke,  the  little  children  came,  and  the  grand- 
father was  never  satisfied  with  embracing  and  kissing 
them;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  rejoicings  Jennariello 
entered,  as  a third  sharer  in  them,  who  after  suffering 
so  many  storms  of  fate  was  now  swimming  in  maccaroni 
broth.  But  notwithstanding  all  the  after  pleasures  that 
he  enjoyed  in  life,  his  past  dangers  never  went  from  his 
mind,  and  he  was  always  thinking  on  the  error  his  bro- 
ther had  committed,  and  how  careful  a man  ought  to  be 
not  to  fall  into  the  ditch,  since 

“All  human  judgement  is  false  and  pciwerse.” 


If  Ciommetella  had  not  quickly  caused  the  magician 
to  appear  and  throw  w ater  on  the  fire,  the  spirits  of  all 
present  would  have  been  exhausted  out  of  pity  for  Livi- 
ella,  for  their  breath  already  began  to  grow  short ; but 
in  the  consolation  of  poor  Liviella  they  all  found  con- 
solation themselves  and  were  satisfied. 

The  stories  set  down  in  the  list  for  this  day  being 
now'  finished,  the  Prince  called  Cicco  Antuono  and  Nar- 
duccio,  and  ordered  them  to  perform  their  part ; then 
they  came  forth  from  a corner  of  the  garden,  with 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RAVEN. 


325 


trencher-caps,  black  breeches  with  knee-ties,  and  slashed 
doublets  with  lace  ruffles,  and  recited  a pastoral  dia- 
logue. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  beginning  or  the 
end  of  the  beautiful  banquet  of  this  Day  pleased  the 
most ; for  if  the  one  was  relished  greatly  by  all  present, 
the  other  penetrated  to  the  very  tips  of  their  fingers. 
And  the  Prince  was  in  such  delight  that,  to  show  him- 
self generous  and  like  a great  lord,  he  called  the  master 
of  the  wardrobe,  and  commanded  him  to  give  the  re- 
citers of  the  dialogue  the  lining  of  an  old  cap  which  had 
belonged  to  his  grandfather.  But  the  Sun  having  been 
now  called  in  haste  to  the  other  pole,  to  give  succour  to 
his  dominions  which  were  usurped  by  Darkness,  they  all 
rose  from  their  seats  and  went  their  way  home,  after 
receiving  the  injunction  to  return  on  the  morrow  to  the 
same  spot. 


Digitized  by  Google 


326 


Already  had  the  birds  related  to  the  ambassadress 
of  the  Sun  all  the  tricks  and  intrigues  that  had  been 
perpetrated  during  the  night,  when  the  Prince  Taddeo 
and  the  Princess  Lucia  repaired  early  in  the  morning 
to  the  accustomed  spot,  where  nine  women  out  of  the 
ten  were  already  assembled.  Then  the  Prince  inquired 
why  Jacova  had  not  come ; and  on  being  told  that  she 
had  taken  a cold  in  her  head,  he  commanded  that  an- 
other woman  should  be  found  to  supply  her  place.  So 
they  summoned  Zoza,  who  lived  opposite  to  the  royal 
palace;  and  she  was  received  by  Taddeo  with  great 
compliments,  both  on  account  of  the  obligations  he 
owed  her  and  the  affection  he  felt  for  her. 

Then  the  women  all  gathered  flowers,  one  blossoming 
mint,  another  spikenard,  another  the  five-leaved  rue,  in 
short  one  this  plant  and  another  that.  And  one  made 


Digitized  by  Google 


FIFTH  DAY. 


327 


herself  a garland  as  if  she  were  going  to  recite  a farce, 
another  a nosegay,  a third  stuck  a full-blown  rose 
in  her  bosom,  a fourth  put  a variegated  carnation  in 
her  mouth.  But  as  it  wanted  nearly  four  hours  to 
midday,  the  Prince  commanded,  in  order  to  pass  the 
time  pleasantly  till  dinner,  that  some  game  should  be 
played  for  the  amusement  of  his  wife : and  giving  the 
hint  to  Cola  Jacovo  the  carver,  a man  of  great  ingenu- 
ity, Cola,  as  if  he  had  a pocketful  of  inventions,  quickly 
found  one,  saying,  “ Those  pleasures,  my  lord,  have  ever 
been  insipid  which  are  not  connected  with  some  ob- 
ject of  usefulness ; entertainments  and  evening  parties 
were  not  invented  for  useless  pleasure,  but  rather  for 
pleasurable  profit ; for  this  kind  of  amusement  not  only 
affords  pastime,  but  the  wits  are  sharpened  and  rendered 
quick  in  determining  and  answering  the  questions  put ; 
and  this  is  just  the  case  with  that  game  of  games  which 
is  played  in  the  following  manner.  I will  propose 
some  game  to  one  of  these  ladies,  who,  without  taking 
thought,  has  to  tell  me  instantly  that  it  does  not  please 
her,  and  the  reason  why ; and  she  who  hesitates  to  re- 
ply, or  replies  in  an  inappropriate  manner,  has  to  pay 
a forfeit,  which  the  Princess  shall  appoint.  So,  to  start 
the  game,  I should  like  to  play  with  Signora  Zeza  a 
hand  at  trumps  for  half  a crown  And  Zeza  instantly 
rephed,  “ I ^11  not  play  at  that,  for  I am  no  robber.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


328 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


“ Bravo !”  said  Taddeo ; ^'for  he  who  robs  is  too  often 
a knave  of  trumps/^ 

Well,  then,”  replied  Cola  Jacovo,  “ Signora  Cecca 
will  play  with  me  a game  at  Bankrupt.” — “ You  ’ll  not 
catch  me  at  that,”  answered  Cecca,  **  for  I am  no  mer- 
chant.” 

**  She  is  right,”  said  Taddeo,  " for  that  game,  is  made 
for  them.” 

" At  all  events,  Signora  Popa,”  continued  Cola  Ja- 
covo, “ let  us  play  at  * Twenty-figures  ’,  and  I ’ll  give 
you  the  lead.” — “By  no  means,”  replied  Popa,  “for 
that  is  a game  which  flatterers  play.” 

**  Spoken  like  Orlando !”  said  Taddeo ; **  for  they 
make  twenty  and  even  thirty  figures,  transfonning 
themselves  whenever  they  like,  to  put  a poor  prince  in 
a sack.” 

“The  deuce  take  it  I”  continued  Cola  Jacovo,  “I  see 
that  the  time  will  pass  away  without  my  having  any 
sport,  unless  Signora  CiuUa  will  play  with  me  the  game 
of  * Call’  for  a pint  of  beans.” — “Do  you  take  me  for  a 
constable  ?”  replied  Ciulla : and  Taddeo  quickly  rejoined, 
“ In  truth  she  has  said  wisely,  for  it  is  the  business  of 
the  sheriffs  and  constables  to  call  folks  to  the  court.” 

“ Come  now.  Signora  Paola,”  rejoined  Cola  Jacovo, 
“ let  us  play  at  piquet  for  a penny.” — “ Wrong  again,” 
replied  Paola,  “for  I am  no  courtier.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


FIFTH  DAY. 


329 


She  *8  a doctor  in  woman’s  clothes  I”  answered  the 
Prince ; for  there  is  no  place  where  people’s  reputation 
is  more  picked  at  than  in  our  courts.” 

‘^Well/’  said  Cola  Jacovo,  cannot  believe  that 
Signora  Zoza  will  refuse  my  invitation  like  the  rest; 
she  will  give  me  the  pleasure  of  playing  with  her  a 
game  of  'Beg  of  my  neighbour’*.” — “Eh  indeed  !”  re- 
plied Zoza;  “that’s  a game  for  children.” 

“ A forfeit,  a forfeit !”  exclaimed  Taddeo ; “ for  this 
is  a game  which  all  folks  play  at,  down  to  old  people ; 
and  therefore.  Signora  Lucia,  it  remains  for  you  to 
name  the  punishment.” 

Then  Zoza  rising  from  her  seat  went  and  knelt 
before  the  Princess,  who  commanded  her  by  way  of 
penance  to  sing  a Neapolitan  Villanella.  Whereupon 
Zoza,  calling  for  the  tambourine,  whilst  the  Prince’s 
coachman  played  on  the  citem,  sang  a Canzona,  which 
was-  listened  to  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  and  was 
finished  just  as  the  tables  were  laid  out,  on  which  was 
spread  plenty  to  eat  and  drink.  When  all  had  eaten 
their  fill  and  the  cloth  was  removed,  the  command  was 
given  to  Cecca  to  open  the  conclusion  of  the  Stories,  and 
she  began  as  follows. 

* I have  Bubstitnted  this  game,  and  abridged  the  whole  of  this  introduction  to  the 
Fifth  Day. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


330 


THE  MONTHS. 

It  is  a saying  worthy  to  be  written  in  letters  as  big  as 
those  on  a catafalque,  that  silence  never  harmed  any 
one : and  let  it  not  be  imagined  that  those  slanderers 
who  never  speak  well  of  others,  but  are  always  cut- 
ting and  stinging,  and  pinching  and  biting,  ever  gain 
anything  by  their  malice ; for  when  the  bags  come  to 
be  shaken  out,  it  has  always  been  seen,  and  is  so  still, 
that  whilst  a good  word  gains  love  and  profit,  slander 
brings  enmity  and  ruin;  and  when  you  shall  have  heard 
how  this  happens,  you  will  say  I speak  with  reason. 


Once  upon  a time  there  were  two  brothers, — Cianne, 
who  was  as  rich  as  a lord,  and  Lise,  who  had  barely 
enough  to  live  upon : but  poor  as  one  was  in  fortune, 
so  pitiful  was  the  other  in  mind,  for  he  would  not  have 
given  his  brother  a farthing  were  it  to  save  his  life ; so 
that  poor  Lise  in  despair  left  his  country,  and  set  out 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MONTHS. 


331 


to  wander  over  the  world.  And  he  wandered  on  and  on, 
till  one  wet  and  cold  evening  he  came  to  an  inn,  where 
he  found  twelve  youths  seated  around  a fire,  who  when 
they  saw  poor  Lise  benumbed  with  cold,  partly  from 
the  severe  season  and  partly  from  his  ragged  clothes, 
invited  him  to  sit  down  by  the  fire. 

Lise  accepted  the  invitation,  for  he  needed  it  greatly, 
and  began  to  warm  himself.  And  as  he  was  warming 
himself,  one  of  the  young  men,  whose  face  was  such  a 
picture  of  moroseness  as  to  make  you  die  of  affright, 
said  to  him,  ^^What  think  you,  countryman,  of  this 
weather 

“ What  do  I think  of  it  ?”  replied  Lise ; I think 
that  all  the  months  of  the  year  perform  their  duty  j but 
we,  who  know  not  what  we  would  have,  wish  to  give 
laws  to  Heaven ; and  wanting  to  have  things  our  own 
way,  we  do  not  fish  deeply  enough  to  the  bottom,  to 
find  out  whether  what  comes  into  our  fancy  be  good  or 
evil,  useful  or  hurtful.  In  winter,  when  it  rains,  we  want 
the  sun  in  Leo,  and  in  the  month  of  August  the  clouds 
to  discharge  themselves ; not  reflecting,  that  were  this 
the  case,  the  seasons  would  be  turned  topsy-turvy,  the 
seed  sown  would  be  lost,  the  crops  would  be  destroyed, 
the  bodies  of  men  would  faint  away,  and  Nature  would 
go  head  over  heels.  Therefore  let  us  leave  Heaven  to 
its  own  course;  for  it  has  made  the  tree  to  mitigate 


Digitized  by  Google 


332 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


with  its  wood  the  severity  of  winter,  and  with  its  leaves 
the  heat  of  summer/' 

*^You  speak  like  Samson!”  said  the  youth;  "but 
you  cannot  deny  that  this  month  of  March,  in  which 
we  now  are,  is  very  impertinent  to  send  all  this  frost 
and  rain,  snow  and  hail,  wind  and  storm,  these  fogs 
and  tempests  and  other  troubles,  that  make  one's  life  a 
burden.” 

" You  tell  only  the  ill  of  this  poor  month,”  replied 
Lise,  "but  do  not  speak  of  the  benefits  it  yields  us; 
for,  by  bringing  forward  the  Spring,  it  commences  the 
production  of  things,  and  is  alone  the  cause  that  the 
Sim  proves  the  happiness  of  the  present  time,  by  leading 
him  into  the  house  of  the  Ram.” 

The  youth  was  gi’eatly  pleased  at  what  Lise  said,  for 
he  was  in  truth  no  other  than  the  month  of  March  it- 
self, who  had  arrived  at  that  inn  with  his  eleven  bro- 
thers; and  to  reward  Lise's  goodness,  who  had  not 
even  found  anything  ill  to  say  of  a month  so  sad  that 
the  shepherds  do  not  like  to  mention  it,  he  gave  him 
a beautiful  little  casket,  saying,  " Take  this,  and  if  you 
want  anything,  only  ask  for  it,  and  opening  this  box 
you  will  see  it  before  you.”  Lise  thanked  the  youth, 
with  many  expressions  of  respect,  and  laying  the  little  box 
under  his  head  by  way  of  a pillow,  he  went  to  sleep. 

As  soon  however  as  the  Sun,  with  the  pencil  of  his 


■ Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MONTHS. 


333 


rays,  had  retouched  the  dark  shadows  of  Night,  Lise 
took  leave  of  the  youths  and  set  out  on  his  way.  But 
he  had  hardly  proceeded  fifty  steps  from  the  inn,  when, 
(gening  the  casket,  he  said,  **  Ah,  my  friend,  I wish  I 
had  a litter  lined  with  cloth,  and  with  a little  fire  in- 
side, that  I might  travel  warm  and  comfortable  through 
the  snow  V*  No  sooner  had  he  uttered  the  words,  than 
there  appeared  a litter,  with  bearers,  who  lifting  him 
up  placed  him  in  it ; whereupon  he  told  them  to  carry 
him  home. 

When  the  hour  was  come  to  set  the  jaws  to  work, 
Lise  opened  the  little  box  and  said,  J.  wish  for  some- 
thing to  eat.^^  And  instantly  there  appeared  a profu- 
sion of  the  choicest  food,  and  there  was  such  a banquet 
that  ten  crowned  kings  might  have  feasted  on  it. 

One  evening  having  come  to  a wood,  which  ‘did  not 
give  admittance  to  the  Sun  because  he  came  from  sus- 
pected places*,  Lise  opened  the  little  casket,  and  said, 
“ I should  hke  to  rest  tonight  on  this  beautiful  spot, 
where  the  river  is  making  counterpoint  upon  the 
stones  as  accompaniment  to  the  canto-fermo  of  the  cool 
breezes.”  And  instantly  there  appeared,  under  an  oil- 
cloth tent,  a couch  of  fine  scarlet,  with  down  mattresses, 
covered  with  a Spanish  counterpane  and  sheets  as  light 

* Alluding  to  the  quarantine  which  ships  were  lubject  to  coming  from  the 
East.— L. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


334 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


as  a feather.  Then  he  asked  for  something  to  eat,  and 
in  a trice  there  was  set  out  a sideboard  covered  with 
silver  and  gold,  fit  for  a prince,  and  under  another  tent 
a table  was  spread  with  viands,  the  savoury  smell  of 
which  extended  a hundred  miles. 

When  he  had  eaten  enough,  he  laid  himself  down  to 
sleep;  and  as  soon  as  the  Cock,  who  is  the  spy  of 
the  Sun,  announced  to  his  master  that  the  Shades  of 
Night  were  worn  and  wearied,  and  it  was  now  time  for 
him,  like  a skilful  general,  to  fall  upon  their  rear  and 
make  a slaughter  of  them,  Lise  opened  his  little  box 
and  said,  I wish  to  have  a handsome  dress,  for  today. 
I shall  see  my  brother,  and  I should  like  to  make  his 
mouth  water.”  No  sooner  said  than  done:  immedi- 
ately a princely  dress  of  the  richest  black  velvet  ap- 
peared, with  edgings  of  red  camlet  and  a lining  of  yel- 
low cloth  embroidered  all  over,  which  looked  like  a field 
of  flowers.  So  dressing  himself,  Lise  got  into  the  litter 
and  soon  reached  his  brother’s  house. 

When  Cianne  saw  his  brother  aiTive,  with  all  this 
splendour  and  luxury,  he  wished  to  know  what  good 
fortune  had  befallen  him.  Then  Lise  told  him  of  the 
youths  whom  he  had  met  in  the  inn,  and  of  the  present 
they  had  made  him ; but  he  kept  to  himself  his  conver- 
sation with  the  youths. 

Cianne  was  now  all  impatience  to  get  away  from  hia 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MONTHS. 


335 


brother,  and  told  him  to  go  and  rest  himself,  as  he  was 
no  doubt  tired:  then  he  started  post-haste,  and  soon 
arrived  at  the  inn,  where,  finding  the  same  youths,  he 
fell  into  chat  with  them.  And  when  the  youth  asked 
him  the  same  question,  what  he  thought  of  that  month 
of  March,  Cianne,  making  a big  mouth,  said,  Con- 
found the  miserable  month ! — the  enemy  of  the  shep- 
herds, which  stirs  up  all  the  ill-humours  and  brings 
sickness  to  our  bodies, — a month  of  which,  whenever 
we  would  announce  ruin  to  a man,  we  say,  * Go,  March 
has  shaved  you  — a month  of  which,  when  you  want 
to  call  a man  presumptuous,  you  say,  ^What  cares 
March?** — a month  in  short  so  hateful,  that  it  would 
be  the  best  fortune  for  the  world,  the  greatest  blessing 
to  the  earth,  the  greatest  gain  to  men,  were  it  excluded 
from  the  band  of  brothers.” 

March,  who  heard  himself  thus  slandered,  suppressed 
his  anger  till  the  morning,  intending  then  to  reward 
Cianne  for  his  calumny ; and  when  Cianne  wished  to 
depart,  he  gave  him  a fine  whip,  saying  to  him, 
‘‘Whenever  you  wish  for  anything,  only  say,  ‘Whip, 
give  me  a hundred  !*  and  you  shall  see  pearls  strung 
upon  a rush.” 

Cianne,  thanking  the  youth,  went  his  way  in  gre^ 
haste,  not  wishing  to  make  trial  of  the  whip  until  he 

* Che  ccuw  Marxo  7 I do  itot  understand  tins. 


Digitized  by  Google 


336  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

reached  home.  But  hardly  had  he  set  foot  in  the  house, 
when  he  went  into  a secret  chamber,  intending  to  hide 
the  money  which  he  expected  to  receive  from  the  whip. 
Then  he  said,  “ Whip,  give  me  a hundred  and  there- 
upon the  whip  gave  him  more  than  he  looked  for,  ma- 
king counterpoint  on  his  legs  and  face  like  a musical 
composer,  so  that  Lise,  hearing  his  cries,  came  running 
to  the  spot ; and  when  he  saw'  that  the  whip,  hke  a run- 
away horse,  could  not  stop  itself,  he  opened  the  little 
box  and  brought  it  to  a stand-still.  Then  he  asked 
Cianne  what  had  happened  to  him,  and  upon  hearing 
his  story,  he  told  him  he  had  no  one  to  blame  but  him- 
self ; for  like  a blockhead  he  alone  had  caused  his  own 
misfortune,  acting  like  the  camel,  that  wanted  to 
have  horns  and  lost  its  ears;  but  he  bade  him  mind 
another  time  and  keep  a bridle  on  his  tongue,  which  was 
the  key  that  had  opened  to  him  the  storehouse  of  mis- 
fortune ; for  if  he  had  spoken  well  of  the  youths,  he 
would  perhaps  have  had  the  same  good  fortune,  especi- 
ally as  to  speak  well  of  any  one  is  a merchandise  that 
costs  nothing,  and  usually  brings  profit  that  is  not  ex- 
pected. In  conclusion  Lise  comforted  him,  bidding 
him  not  seek  more  wealth  than  Heaven  had  given  him, 
for  his  little  casket  w’ould  suffice  to  fill  the  houses  of 
thirty  misers,  and  Cianne  should  be  master  of  all  he 
possessed,  since  to  the  generous  man  Heaven  is  treasu- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  MONTHS. 


337 


rer  j and  he  added  that,  although  another  brother  might 
have  borne  Cianne  ill-will  for  the  cruelty  with  which  he 
had  treated  him  in  his  poverty,  yet  he  reflected  that  his 
avarice  had  been  a favourable  wind  which  had  brought 
him  to  this  port,  and  therefore  wished  to  show  himself 
grateful  for  the  benefit. 

When  Cianne  heard  these  things,  he  begged  his  bro- 
ther's pardon  for  his  past  unkindness,  and  entering  into 
partnership  they  enjoyed  together  their  good  fortune,  and 
from  that  time  forward  Cianne  spoke  well  of  everything, 
however  bad  it  might  be ; for 

^^The  dog  that  is  scalded  with  hot  water,  has  ever 
after  a dread  of  cold  water.” 


WTien  Cecca  had  finished  her  story,  with  which  all 
were  extremely  pleased,  Meneca,  who  was  on  thorns 
to  disbiirden  hers,  seeing  that  all  present  were  listening 
attentively,  began  as  follows. 


z 


Digitized  by  Google 


338 


PINTOSMALTO*. 

It  has  always  been  more  difficult  for  a man  to  keep 
than  to  get;  for  in  the  one  case  fortune  aids,  which 
often  assists  injustice,  but  in  the  other  case  sense  is 
required.  Therefore  we  frequently  find  a person  defi- 
cient in  cleverness  rise  to  wealth,  and  then,  from  want 
of  sense,  roll  head  over  heels  to  the  bottom ; as  you  will 
see  clearly  from  the  story  I am  going  to  tell  you,  if  you 
are  quick  of  understanding. 


A MERCHANT  once  had  an  only  daughter,  whom  he 
wished  greatly  to  see  married ; but  as  often  as  he  struck 
this  note,  he  found  her  a hundred  miles  off  from  the 
desired  pitch ; for  the  foolish  girl  would  never  consent 
to  marry,  and  the  father  was  in  consequence  the  most 
unhappy  and  miserable  man  in  the  world.  Now  it  hap- 
pened one  day  that  he  was  going  to  a fair ; so  he  asked 
his  daughter,  who  was  named  Betta,  what  she  would  like 

• Jnglice—'  Punted  Smelt.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


PINTOSMALTO. 


339 


him  to  bring  her  on  his  return.  And  she  said,  Papa, 
if  you  love  me,  bring  me  half  a hundredweight  of  Pa- 
lermo sugar,  and  as  much  again  of  sweet  almonds,  with 
four  to  six  bottles  of  scented  water,  and  a little  musk 
and  amber,  also  forty  pearls,  two  sapphires,  a few  gar- 
nets and  rubies,  with  some  gold  thread,  and  above  all  a 
trough  and  a little  silver  trowel.”  Her  father  wondered 
at  this  extravagant  demand ; nevertheless  he  would  not 
refuse  his  daughter ; so  he  went  to  the  fair,  and  on  his 
return  brought  her  all  that  she  had  requested. 

As  soon  as  Betta  received  these  things,  she  shut  her- 
self up  in  a chamber,  and  began  to  make  a great  quan- 
tity of  paste  of  almonds  and  sugar,  mixed  with  rose- 
water and  perfumes,  and  set  to  work  to  form  a most 
beautiful  youth,  making  his  hairs  of  gold  thread,  his 
eyes  of  sapphires,  his  teeth  of  pearls,  his  lips  of  rubies ; 
and  she  gave  him  such  gi’ace,  that  speech  alone  was 
wanting  to  him.  When  she  had  done  all  this,  having 
heard  say  that  at  the  prayers  of  a certain  king  of  Cyprus* 
a statue  had  once  come  to  life,  she  prayed  to  the  goddess 
of  Love  so  long  that  at  last  the  statue  began  to  open 
its  eyes ; and  increasing  her  prayers,  it  began  to  breathe; 
and  after  breathing,  words  came  out ; and  at  last  disen- 
gaging all  its  limbs,  it  began  to  walk. 

With  a joy  far  greater  than  if  she  had  gained  a king- 


• Pye^alion. 


z 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


340 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


dom,  Betta  embraced  and  kissed  the  youth,  and  taking 
him  by  the  hand  she  led  him  before  her  father,  and  said, 
" My  lord  and  father,  you  have  always  told  me  that  you 
wished  to  see  me  married,  and  in  order  to  please  you  I 
have  now  chosen  a husband  after  my  own  heart/’  When 
her  father  saw  the  handsome  youth  come  out  of  his 
daughter’s  room,  whom  he  had  not  seen  enter  it,  he 
stood  amazed,  and  at  the  sight  of  such  beauty,  which 
folks  w'ould  have  paid  a halfpenny  ahead  to  gaze  at,  he 
consented  that  the  marriage  should  take  place.  So  a 
great  feast  Avas  made,  at  which,  among  the  other  ladies 
present,  there  appeared  a great  unknown  queen,  who 
seeing  the  beauty  of  Pintosmalto  (for  that  was  the 
name  Betta  gave  him),  fell  desperately  in  love  with  him. 
Now  Pintosmalto,  who  had  only  opened  his  eyes  on  the 
wickedness  of  the  world  three  hours  before,  and  was 
as  innocent  as  a babe,  accompanied  the  strangers  who 
had  come  to  celebrate  his  nuptials  to  the  stairs,  as  his 
bride  had  told  him ; and  when  he  did  the  same  with 
this  queen,  she  took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him 
quietly  to  her  coach,  drawn  by  six  horses,  which  stood 
in  the  courtyard ; then  taking  him  into  it,  she  ordered 
the  coachman  to  drive  off  and  away  to  her  country, 
where  the  simple  Pintosmalto,  not  knowing  what  had 
happened,  became  her  husband. 

After  Betta  had  waited  awhile,  in  vain  expecting  Pin- 


Digitized  by  Google 


PINTOSMALTO. 


341 


tosmalto  to  return,  she  sent  down  into  the  courtyard  to 
see  whether  he  were  speaking  with  any  one  there ; then 
she  sent  up  on  to  the  roof,  to  see  if  he  had  gone  to  take 
fresh  air ; but  finding  him  nowhere,  she  directly  ima- 
gined that,  on  account  of  his  great  beauty,  he  had  been 
stolen  from  her.  So  she  ordered  the  usual  proclama- 
tions to  be  made ; but  at  last,  as  no  tidings  of  him  were 
brought,  she  formed  the  resolution  to  go  all  the  world 
over  in  search  of  him ; and  dressing  herself  as  a poor  girl, 
she  set  out  on  her  way.  After  some  months  she  came 
to  the  house  of  a good  old  woman,  who  received  her 
with  great  kindness ; and  when  she  had  heard  Betta’s 
misfortune,  she  took  compassion  on  her,  and  taught  her 
three  sayings:  the  first  was,  “Tricche  varlacche,  the 
house  rains !”  the  second,  “ Anola  tranola,  the  fountain 
plays !”  the  third,  Scatola  matola,  the  sun  shines  \” 
— telling  her  to  repeat  these  words  whenever  she  was 
in  trouble,  and  they  would  be  of  good  service  to  her. 

Betta  wondered  greatly  at  this  present  of  chaflF ; never- 
theless she  said  to  herself,  “ He  who  blows  into  your 
mouth*  does  not  wish  to  see  you  dead,  and  the  plant  that 
strikes  root  does  not  wither;  everything  has  its  use; 
who  knows  what  good  fortune  may  be  contained  in  these 
words  So  saying,  she  thanked  the  old  woman,  and 
set  out  upon  her  w^ay.  And  after  a long  journey  she 

* To  restore  breath  to  a person. 


Digitized  by  Google 


71 


342  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

came  to  a beautiful  city  called  Round-Mount,  where 
she  went  straight  to  the  royal  palace,  and  begged  for 
the  love  of  Heaven  a little  shelter  in  the  stable.  So 
the  ladies  of  the  court  ordered  a small  room  to  be 
given  her  on  the  stairs;  and  while  poor  Betta  was 
sitting  there,  she  saw  Pintosmalto  pass  by,  where- 
at  her  joy  was  so  great  that  she  was  on  the  point  of 
slipping  down  from  the  tree  of  life.  But  seeing  the 
trouble  she  was  in,  Betta  wished  to  make  proof  of  the 
first  saying  which  the  old  woman  had  told  her ; and  no 
sooner  had  she  repeated  the  words,  “ Tricche  varlacche, 
the  house  rains,”  than  instantly  there  appeared  be- 
fore her  a beautiful  little  coach  of  gold  set  all  over 
with  jewels,  which  ran  about  the  chamber  of  itself  and 
was  a wonder  to  behold. 

When  the  ladies  of  the  court  saw  this  sight,  they 
went  and  told  the  queen,  who  without  loss  of  time  ran 
to  Betta’s  chamber;  and  when  she  saw  the  beautiful 
little  coach,  she  asked  her  whether  she  would  sell  it, 
and  offered  to  give  whatever  she  might  demand. 
But  Betta  replied  that,  although  she  was  poor,  she 
would  not  sell  it  for  all  the  gold  in  the  world ; but  if 
the  queen  wished  for  the  little  coach,  she  must  allow 
her  to  pass  one  night  at  the  door  of  her  husband's 
chamber. 

The  queen  was  amazed  at  the  folly  of  the  poor  girl. 


Digitized  by  Google 


PINTOSMALTO. 


343 


who  although  she  was  all  in  rags  would  nevertheless 
give  up  such  riches  for  a mere  whim ; however  she  re- 
solved to  take  the  good  mouthful  offered  her,  and,  by 
giving  Pintosmalto  a sleeping-draught,  to  satisfy  the 
poor  girl  but  pay  her  in  bad  coin. 

As  soon  as  the  Night  was  come,  when  the  stars  in  the 
sky  and  the  glow'worms  on  the  earth  were  to  pass  in  re- 
view, the  queen  gave  a sleeping-draught  to  Pintosmalto, 
who  (lid  everything  he  was  told,  and  sent  him  to  bed. 
And  no  sooner  had  he  thrown  himself  on  the  mattress, 
than  he  fell  as  soimd  asleep  as  a dormouse.  Poor 
Betta,  who  thought  that  night  to  relate  all  her  past 
troubles,  seeing  now  that  she  had  no  audience,  fell  to 
lamenting  beyond  measure,  blaming  herself  for  all  that 
she  had  done  for  his  sake ; and  the  unhappy  girl  never 
closed  her  mouth,  nor  did  the  sleeping  Pintosmalto  ever 
open  his  eyes,  until  the  Sun  appeared  with  the  aqim 
regia  of  his  rays  to  separate  the  shades  from  the  light, 
when  the  queen  came  down,  and  taking  Pintosmalto  by 
the  hand  said  to  Betta,  "Now  be  content.^^ 

*^May  you  have  such  content  all  the  days  of  your 
life !”  replied  Betta  in  an  under  tone ; " for  I have 
passed  so  bad  a night  that  1 shall  not  soon  forget 
it.” 

The  poor  girl  however  could  not  resist  her  longing, 
and  resolved  to  make  trial  of  the  second  saying : so  she 


Digitized  by  Google 


344 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


repeated  the  words,  “ Anola  tranola,  the  fountain  plays  I” 
and  instantly  there  appeared  a golden  cage,  with  a beau- 
tiful bird  made  of  precious  stones  and  gold,  which  sang 
like  a nightingale.  When  the  ladies  saw  this,  they  went 
and  told  it  to  the  queen,  who  wished  to  see  the  bird ; 
then  she  asked  the  same  question  as  about  the  little 
coach,  and  Betta  made  the  same  reply  as  before; 
whereupon  the  queen,  who  perceived,  as  she  thought, 
what  a silly  creature  Betta  was,  promised  to  grant  her 
request,  and  took  the  cage  with  the  bird.  And  as  soon 
as  night  came,  she  gave  Pintosmalto  a sleeping-draught 
as  before,  and  sent  him  to  bed.  When  Betta  saw  that 
he  slept  like  a dead  person,  she  began  again  to  wail 
and  lament,  saying  things  that  would  have  moved 
a flint-stone  to  compassion;  and  thus  she  passed  an- 
other night,  full  of  trouble,  weeping  and  wailing  and 
tearing  her  hair.  But  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  queen 
came  to  fetch  her  husband,  and  left  poor  Betta  in  grief 
and  sorrow,  and  biting  her  hands  with  vexation  at  the 
trick  that  had  been  played  her. 

In  the  morning,  when  Pintosmalto  went  to  a garden 
outside  the  city-gate  to  pluck  some  figs,  he  met  a 
cobbler,  who  lived  in  a room  close  to  where  Betta  lay, 
and  had  not  lost  a word  of  all  she  had  said.  Then 
he  told  Pintosmalto  of  the  weeping,  lamentation  and 
crying  of  the  unhappy  beggar-girl;  and  when  Pinto- 


Digitized  by  Google 


PINTOSMALTO. 


345 


smalto,  who  already  began  to  get  a little  more  sense, 
heard  this,  he  guessed  how  matters  stood,  and  resolved 
that,  if  the  same  thing  happened  again,  he  would  not 
drink  what  the  queen  gave  him. 

Betta  now  wished  to  make  the  third  trial ; so  she 
said  the  words,  Scatola  matola,  the  sim  shines  I” 
and  instantly  there  appeared  a quantity  of  stuffs  of 
silk  and  gold,  and  embroidered  scarfs,  with  a golden 
cup ; in  short  the  queen  herself  could  not  have  brought 
together  so  many  beautiful  ornaments.  When  the 
ladies  saw  these  things,  they  told  their  mistress, 
who  endeavoured  to  obtain  them  as  she  had  done  the 
others ; but  Betta  replied  as  before,  that  if  the  queen 
wished  to  have  them  she  must  let  her  spend  the  night 
at  the  door  of  the  chamber.  Then  the  queen  said  to 
herself,  “ WTiat  can  I lose  by  satisfying  this  silly  girl, 
in  order  to  get  from  her  these  beautiful  things  ?”  So 
taking  all  the  treasures  which  Betta  offered  her,  as  soon 
as  Night  appeared,  the  instrument  for  the  debt  contracted 
with  Sleep  and  Repose  being  liquidated,  she  gave  the 
sleeping-draught  to  Pintosmalto ; but  this  time  he  did 
not  swallow  it,  and  making  an  excuse  to  leave  the  room, 
he  spat  it  out  again,  and  then  went  to  bed. 

Betta  now  began  to  the  same  tune  again,  saying  how 
she  had  kneaded  him  with  her  own  hands  of  sugar  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


316 


THE  PENTAMEROXE. 


almonds,  how  she  had  made  his  hair  of  gold,  and  his 
eyes  and  mouth  of  pearls  and  precious  stones,  and  how 
he  was  indebted  to  her  for  his  life,  which  the  gods  had 
granted  to  her  prayers,  and  lastly  how  he  had  been 
stolen  from  her,  and  she  had  gone  seeking  him  with 
such  toil  and  trouble.  Then  she  went  on  to  tell  him 
how  she  had  watched  two  nights  at  the  door  of  his 
room,  and,  for  leave  to  do  so,  had  given  up  two  trea- 
sures, and  yet  had  not  been  able  to  hear  a single  word 
from  him,  so  that  this  was  the  last  night  of  her  hopes 
and  the  conclusion  of  her  life. 

When  Pintosmalto,  who  had  remained  awake,  heard 
these  words,  and  called  to  mind  as  a dream  all  that  had 
passed,  he  rose  and  embraced  her;  and  as  Night  had 
just  come  forth  with  her  black  mask  to  direct  the  dance 
of  the  Stars,  he  went  very  quietly,  into  the  chamber 
of  the  queen,  who  was  in  a deep  sleep,  and  took  from 
her  all  the  things  that  she  had  taken  from  Betta,  and 
all  the  jewels  and  money  which  were  in  a desk,  to 
repay  himself  for  his  past  troubles.  Then  returning 
to  his  wife,  they  set  off  that  veiy  hour,  and  travelled 
on  and  on  until  they  arrived  at  her  father^s  house, 
where  they  found  him  alive  and  well;  and  from  the 
joy  of  seeing  his  daughter  again  he  became  like  a boy 
of  fifteen  years.  But  when  the  queen  found  neither 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


PIXTOSMALTO.  34/ 

husband,  nor  beggar-girl,  nor  jewels,  she  tore  her  hair 
and  rent  her  elothes,  and  called  to  mind  the  saying, 

**  He  who  eheats  must  not  complain  if  he  be  cheated.” 


More  than  one  of  those  present  would  have  given 
a finger  to  have  had  the  pow'er  of  making  a hus- 
band or  a wife  at  pleasure, — especially  the  Prince,  who 
would  then  have  seen  a paste  of  sugar  at  his  side,  where 
he  now  had  a mass  of  poison.  But  it  being  Tolla’s 
turn  to  carry  on  the  game,  she  did  not  wait  for  an  exe- 
cution to  make  her  pay  the  debt,  but  spoke  as  follows. 


Digitized  by  Google 


348 


THE  GOLDEN  ROOT*. 

A PERSON  who  is  over-curious,  and  wants  to  know 
more  than  he  ought,  always  carries  the  match  in  his 
hand  to  set  fire  to  the  powder-room  of  his  own  for- 
tunes ; and  he  who  pries  into  others^  afiairs  is  frequently 
a loser  in  his  own ; for  generally  he  who  digs  holes  to 
search  for  treasures,  comes  to  a ditch,  into  which  he 
himself  falls;  as  happened  to  the  daughter  of  a gar- 
dener in  the  following  manner. 


There  was  once  a gardener,  who  was  so  very  very  poor 
that,  however  hard  he  worked,  he  could  not  manage  to 
get  bread  for  his  family  : so  he  gave  three  little  pigs  to 
three  daughters  whom  he  had,  that  they  might  rear 
them,  and  thus  get  something  for  a little  dowry.  Then 
Pascuzza  and  Cice,  who  were  the  eldest,  drove  their  little 
pigs  to  feed  in  a beautiful  meadow,  but  they  would  not 
let  Parmetella,  who  was  the  youngest  daughter,  go  with 
them,  and  drove  her  away,  telling  her  to  go  and  feed 

• Lo  Turzo  d'Oro—'  the  Trank  of  Gold  ’ — here,  the  part  of  the  trank  where  the 
roots  begin. 


Digitized  by  Google 


6 NAPOU 


JbSAfL 


2^^  gQ  L D ).7  N ^ f- 


^ JVEIVNrLIiO  ^ J^^E^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  OOLDEX  ROOT. 


349 


her  pig  somewhere  else.  So  Pai’metella  drove  her  httle 
animal  into  a wood,  where  the  Shades  were  holding  out 
against  the  assaults  of  the  Sun ; and  coming  to  a pas- 
ture, in  the  middle  of  which  flowed  a fountain,  that 
like  the  hostess  of  an  inn  where  cold  water  is  sold, 
was  inviting  the  passers-by  with  its  silver  tongue, 
she  found  a certain  tree  with  golden  leaves.  Then 
plucking  one  of  them,  she  took  it  to  her  father,  who 
w'ith  great  joy  sold  it  for  more  than  twenty  ducats, 
which  served  to  stop  up  a hole  in  his  aflairs.  And  when 
he  asked  Parmetella  where  she  had  found  it,  she  said, 
" Take  it,  sir,  and  ask  no  questions,  unless  you  would 
spoil  your  good  fortune.^*  The  next  day  she  returned 
and  did  the  same,  and  she  went  on  plucking  the  leaves 
from  the  tree  until  it  was  entirely  stript,  as  if  it  had 
been  plundered  by  the  winds  of  Autumn.  Then  she 
perceived  that  the  tree  had  a large  golden  root,  which 
she  could  not  pifll  up  with  her  hands ; so  she  went  home, 
and  fetching  an  axe  set  to  ^vork  to  lay  bare  the  root 
around  the  foot  of  the  tree ; and  raising  the  trunk  as 
well  as  she  eould,  she  found  under  it  a beautiful  por- 
phyry stairease. 

Parmetella,  who  was  curious  beyond  measure,  went 
down  the  stairs,  and  walking  through  a large  and 
deep  cavern,  she  came  to  a beautiful  plain,  on  which 
was  a splendid  palace,  where  nothing  but  gold  and 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


350 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


silver  were  trodden  underfoot,  and  pearls  and  precious 
stones  everywhere  met  the  eye.  And  as  Parmetella 
stood  wondering  at  all  these  splendid  things,  not  see- 
ing any  person  moving  among  so  many  beautiful  fix- 
tures, she  went  into  a chamber,  in  which  were  a num- 
ber of  pictures ; and  on  them  were  seen  painted  various 
beautiful  things,  especially  the  ignorance  of  a man 
esteemed  wise,  the  injustice  of  him  who  held  the  scales, 
and  the  injuries  avenged  by  Heaven, — things  truly  to 
amaze  one : and  in  the  same  chamber  also  was  a splendid 
table,  set  out  with  things  to  cat  and  to  drink. 

Seeing  no  one,  Parmetella,  who  was  very  hungry,  sat 
down  at  table  to  eat  like  a fine  count ; but  while  she 
was  in  the  midst  of  the  feast,  behold  a handsome 
slave  entered,  who  said,  “ Stay ! do  not  go  away,  for  I 
will  have  you  for  my  wife,  and  will  make  you  the  hap- 
piest woman  in  the  world.”  In  spite  of  her  fear  Par- 
metella took  heart  at  this  good  ofier,  and  consenting  to 
what  the  Slave  proposed,  a coach  of  diamonds  was  in- 
stantly given  her,  drawn  by  four  golden  steeds,  with 
wings  of  emeralds  and  rubies,  who  carried  her  flying 
through  the  air,  to  take  an  airing;  and  a number  of 
apes  clad  in  cloth-of-gold  were  given  to  attend  on  her 
person,  who  forthwith  arrayed  her  from  head  to  foot, 
and  adorned  her*  so  that  she  looked  just  like  a queen. 

• La  metero  nforma  de  ragno.  Literally,  ‘ put  her  in  epider-fonn.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  ROOT. 


351 


When  night  was  come,  and  the  Sun,  desiring  to 
sleep  on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  India  untroubled  by 
gnats,  had  put  out  the  light,  the  Slave  said  to  Parmetclla, 
“ My  dear,  now  go  to  rest  in  this  bed ; but  remember 
first  to  put  out  the  candle,  and  mind  what  I say,  or  ill 
will  betide  you.”  Then  Parmetclla  did  as  he  told  her ; 
but  no  sooner  had  slie  closed  her  eyes,  than  the  blacka- 
moor, changing  to  a handsome  youth,  lay  down  to  sleep. 
But  the  next  morning,  ere  the  Dawn  went  forth  to  seek 
fresh  eggs  in  the  fields  of  the  sky,  the  youth  arose  and 
took  his  other  form  again,  leaving  Parmetclla  full  of 
wonder  and  curiosity. 

And  again  the  following  night,  when  Parraetella  went 
to  rest,  she  put  out  the  candle  as  she  had  done  the  night 
before,  and  the  youth  came  as  usual  and  lay  down  to 
sleep.  But  no  sooner  had  he  shut  his  eyes,  than  Par- 
metella  arose,  took  a steel  which  she  had  provided,  and 
lighting  the  tinder  applied  a match:  then  taking  the 
candle,  she  raised  the  coverlet,  and  beheld  the  ebony 
turned  to  ivory,  the  caviar  to  milk  and  cream,  and 
the  coal  to  chalk.  And  whilst  she  stood  gazing  with 
open  mouth,  and  contemplating  the  most  beautiful  pen- 
cilling that  Nature  had  ever  given  upon  the  canvas  of 
Wonder,  the  youth  awoke,  and  began  to  reproach  Par- 
metella,  saying,  “Ah,  woe  is  me ! for  your  prying  curio- 
sity I have  to  suffer  another  seven  years  this  accursed 


Digitized  by  Google 


352 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


punishment : but  begone  ! run,  scamper  oflf,  take  your- 
self out  of  my  sight ! you  know  not  what  good  fortune 
you  lose.”  So  saying  he  vanished  like  quicksilver. 

The  poor  girl  left  the  palace,  cold  and  stiff  with 
affright,  and  with  her  head  bowed  to  the  ground ; and 
when  she  had  come  out  of  the  cavern  she  met  a fairy, 
who  said  to  her,  “ My  child,  how  my  heart  grieves  at 
your  misfortune ! Unhappy  girl,  you  are  going  to  the 
slaughter-house,  where  you  will  pass  over  the  bridge  no 
wider  than  a hair*;  therefore,  to  provide  against  your 
peril,  take  these  seven  spindles,  with  these  seven  figs, 
and  a Httle  jar  of  honey,  and  these  seven  pair  of  iron 
shoes,  and  walk  on  and  on  without  stopping  mitil  they 
are  worn  out ; then  you  will  see  seven  women  standing 
upon  a balcony  of  a house,  and  spinning  from  above 
down  to  the  gi’ound,  with  the  thread  wound  upon  the 
bone  of  a dead  person.  Remain  quite  still  and  hidden, 
and  when  the  thread  comes  down,  take  out  the  bone  and 
put  in  its  place  a spindle  besmeared  with  honey,  with  a 
fig  in  the  plaee  of  the  little  button.  Then  as  soon  as  the 
women  draw  up  the  spindles,  and  taste  the  honey,  they 
will  say,  * He  who  has  made  my  spindle  sweet,  shall  in 
return  with  good  fortune  meet !’  And  after  repeating 
these  words,  they  will  say  one  after  another,  ^ 0 you  who 
have  brought  us  these  sweet  things,  appear!*  Then 

* Perbapi  alluding  to  the  bridge  in  the  Koran.— £. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


THE  GOLDEN  ROOT. 


353 


» 

you  must  answer,  ‘Nay,  for  you  will  eat  me.^  And 
they  will  say,  ‘ We  swear  by  our  spoon  that  we  will  not 
eat  you!’  But  do  not  stir;  and  they  will  continue, 
‘We  swear  by  our  spit  that  we  will  not  eat  you!’ 
But  stand  firm,  as  if  rooted  to  the  spot ; and  they  will 
say,  ‘We  swear  by  o^r  broom  that  we  vidll  not  eat 
you  V Still  do  not  believe  them ; and  when  they  say, 
‘We  swear  by  our  pail  that  we  will  not  eat  you!’ 
shut  your  mouth,  and  say  not  a word,  or  it  will  cost 
you  your  life.  At  last  they  will  say,  ‘We  swear  by 
Thunder-and-Lightning  that  we  w'ill  not  eat  you !’ 
Then  take  courage  and  mount  up,  for  they  will  do  you 
no  harnT.” 

When  Parmetella  heard  this,  she  set  off  and  walked 
over  hill  and  dale,  until  at  the  end  of  seven  years  the 
iron  shoes  were  worn  out;  and  coming  to  a large 
house,  with  a projecting  balcony,  she  saw  the  seven 
women  spinning.  So  she  did  as  the  fairy  had  advised 
her,  and  after  a thousand  wiles  and  allurements, 
they  swore  by  Thunder-and-Lightning,  whereupon  she 
showed  herself  and  mounted  up.  Then  they  all  seven 
said  to  her,  “ Traitress,  you  are  the  cause  that  our  bro- 
ther has  lived  twice  seven  long  years  in  the  cavern,  far 
away  from  us,  in  the  form  of  a blackamoor ! But  never 
mind — /ilthough  you  have  been  clever  enough  to  stop 
our  throat  with  the  oath,  you  shall  on  the  first  oppor- 

2 A 


Digitized  by  Google 


354  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

tunity  pay  off  both  the  old  and  the  new  reckoning.  But 
now  hear  what  you  must  do : hide  yourself  behind  this 
trough,  and  when  our  mother  comes,  who  would  swallow 
you  down  at  once,  rise  up  and  seize  her  behind  her 
back;  hold  her  fast,  and  do  not  let  her  go  until  she 
swears  by  Thunder-and- Lightning  not  to  hann  you.^’ 
Parmetella  did  as  she  was  bid,  and  after  the  ogress  had 
sworn  by  the  fireshovel,  by  the  spinning-wheel,  by  the 
reel,  by  the  sideboard  and  by  the  peg,  at  last  she  swore 
by  Thunder-and-Lightning ; whereupon  Parmetella  let 
go  her  hold,  and  showed  herself  to  the  ogress,  who  said. 
You  have  caught  me  this  time ; but  take  care,  traitress  ! 
for  at  the  first  shower  I ^11  send  you  to  the  Lava*.” 

One  day  the  ogress,  who  was  on  the  look-out  for 
an  opportunity  to  devour  Parmetella,  took  twelve  sacks 
of  various  seeds — peas,  ehick-peas,  lentils,  vetches, 
kidney-beans,  beans  and  lupins — and  mixed  them  all 
together ; then  she  said  to  her,  “ Traitress,  take  these 
seeds  and  sort  them  all,  so  that  each  kind  may  be  sepa- 
rated from  the  rest;  and  if  they  are  not  all  sorted  by 
this  evening,  Pll  swallow  you  like  a penny  tart.” 

Poor  Parmetella  sat  down  beside  the  sacks,  weeping, 
and  said,  “O  mother,  mother,  how  will  this  golden 
root  prove  a root  of  woes  to  me ! Now  is  my  misery 
completed ; by  seeing  a black  face  turned  white,  all  has 

* An  impctooui  waterconne  in  Naplei  in  the  Strada  della  Verg;ine. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


THE  GOLDEN  ROOT. 


355 


become  black  before  my  eyes.  Alas  ! I am  ruined  and 
undone — there  is  no  help  for  it : I already  seem  as  if  I 
were  in  the  throat  of  that  horrid  ogress;  there  is  no 
one  to  help  me,  there  is  no  one  to  advise  me,  there  is 
no  one  to  comfort  me !” 

As  she  was  lamenting  thus,  lo  ! Thunder-and-Light- 
ning  appeared  like  a flash,  for  the  banishment  laid 
upon  him  by  the  spell  had  just  ended.  Although  he 
was  angry  with  Parmetella,  yet  his  blood  could  not 
turn  to  water,  and  seeing  her  grieving  thus  he  said  to 
her,  “ Traitress,  what  makes  you  weep  so  ?”  Then  she 
told  him  of  his  mother’s  ill-treatment  of  her,  and  her 
wish  to  make  an  end  of  her  and  eat  her  up.  But 
Thunder-and-Lightning  rephed,  “ Calm  yourself  and 
take  heart,  for  it  shall  not  be  as  she  said.”  And  in- 
stantly scattering  all  the  seeds  on  the  ground,  he  made 
a deluge  of  ants  spring  up,  who  forthwith  set  to  work 
to  heap  up  all  the  seeds  separately,  each  kind  by  itself, 
and  Parmetella  flUed  the  sacks  with  them. 

When  the  ogress  came  home  and  found  the  task 
done,  she  was  almost  in  despair,  and  cried,  “ That  dog 
Thunder-and-Lightning  has  played  me  this  trick ; but 
you  shall  not  escape  thus ! So  take  these  pieces  of 
bed-tick,  which  are  enough  for  twelve  mattresses,  and 
mind  that  by  this  evening  they  are  filled  with  feathers, 
or  else  I will  make  mincemeat  of  you.” 

2 A 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


366 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


The  poor  gii’l  took  the  bed-ticks,  and  sitting  down 
upon  the  ground  began  to  weep  and  lament  bitterly, 
making  two  fomitains  of  her  eyes.  But  presently 
Thunder-and-Lightning  appeared,  and  said  to  her,  Do 
not  weep,  traitress, — leave  it  to  me,  and  I will  bring 
you  to  port : so  let  down  your  hair,  spread  the  bed-ticks 
upon  the  ground,  and  fall  to  weeping  and  wailing,  and 
crying  out  that  the  king  of  the  birds  is  dead ; then  you  ^11 
see  what  will  happen.*^ 

Parmetella  did  as  she  was  told,  and  behold  a cloud 
of  birds  suddenly  appeared  that  darkened  the  air ; and 
flapping  their  wings  they  let  fall  their  feathers  by  bas- 
kets-full,  so  that  in  less  than  an  hour  the  mattresses  were 
all  filled.  When  the  ogress  came  home  and  saw  the  task 
done,  she  swelled  up  with  rage  till  she  almost  burst,  say- 
ing, “Thimder-and-Lightning  is  determined  to  plague 
me,  but  may  I be  dragged  at  an  ape’s  tail  if  I let  her 
escape !”  Then  she  said  to  Parmetella,  “ Run  quickly 
to  my  sister’s  house,  and  tell  her  to  send  me  the  musical 
instruments;  for  I have  resolved  that  Thunder-and- 
Lightning  shall  marry,  and  we  will  make  a feast  fit  for 
a king.”  At  the  same  time  she  sent  to  bid  her  sister, 
when  the  poor  girl  came  to  ask  for  the  instruments,  in- 
stantly to  kill  and  cook  her,  and  she  would  come  and 
partake  of  the  feast. 

Parmetella,  hearing  herself  ordered  to  perform  an 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  ROOT. 


367 


easier  task,  was  in  great  joy,  thinking  that  the  wea- 
ther had  begun  to  grow  milder.  Alas,  how  crooked  is 
human  judgement ! On  the  way  she  met  Thunder- 
and-Lightning,  who,  seeing  her  walking  at  a quick  pace, 
said  to  her,  Whither  are  you  going,  wretched  giid? 
see  you  not  that  you  are  on  the  way  to  the  slaughter, 
that  you  are  forging  your  own  fetters,  and  sharpening 
the  knife  and  mixing  the  poison  for  yourself,  that  you 
are  sent  to  the  ogress  for  her  to  swallow  you?  But 
listen  to  me  and  fear  not:  take  this  little  loaf,  this 
bundle  of  hay,  and  this  stone ; and  when  you  come  to 
the  house  of  my  aimt,  you  will  find  a bulldog,  which 
will  fly  harking  at  you  to  bite  you ; hut  give  him  this 
little  loaf,  and  it  will  stop  his  throat.  And  when  you 
have  passed  the  dog,  you  will  meet  a horse  running 
loose,  which  will  run  up  to  kick  and  trample  on  you ; 
but  give  him  the  hay,  and  you  will  clog  his  feet.  At 
last  you  will  come  to  a door,  banging  to  and  fro  con- 
tinually; put  this  stone  before  it,  and  you  will  stop 
its  fury.  Then  mount  upstairs,  and  you  will  find  the 
ogress,  with  a little  child  in  her  arms,  and  the  oven  ready 
heated  to  bake  you.  Whereupon  she  will  say  to  you, 
* Hold  this  little  creature,  and  wait  here  till  I go  and 
fetch  the  instruments.*  But  mind — she  will  only  go  to 
whet  her  tusks,  in  order  to  tear  you  in  pieces.  Then 
throw  the  little  child  into  the  oven  without  pity,  take 


Digitized  by  Google 


368 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


the  instruments  which  stand  behind  the  door,  and  hie 
off  before  the  ogress  returns,  or  else  you  are  lost.  The 
instruments  are  in  a box,  but  beware  of  opening  it,  or 
you  will  repent.” 

Parmetella  did  all  that  Thunder-and-Lightning  told 
her;  but  on  her  way  back  with  the  instruments  she 
opened  the  box,  and  lo  and  behold ! they  all  flew  out 
and  about — here  a flute,  there  a flageolet,  here  a pipe, 
there  a bagpipe,  making  a thousand  different  sounds  in 
the  air,  whilst  Parmetella  stood  looking  on  and  tearing 
her  hair  in  despair. 

Meanwhile  the  ogress  came  downstairs,  and  not  find- 
ing Parmetella,  she  went  to  the  window,  and  called 
out  to  the  door,  " Crush  that  traitress  !”  But  the  door 
answered,  “ I will  not  use  the  poor  girl  ill,  for  she  has 
made  me  at  last  stand  still.”  Then  the  ogi’ess  cried  out 
to  the  horse,  “ Trample  on  the  thief !”  But  the  horse 
replied,  “Let  the  poor  girl  go  her  way,  for  she  has 
given  me  the  hay.”  And  lastly  the  ogress  called  to  the 
dog,  saying,  “ Bite  the  rogue  !”  But  the  dog  answered, 
I ’ll  not  hurt  a hair  of  her  head,  for  she  it  was  who 
gave  me  the  bread.” 

Now  as  Parmetella  ran  crying  after  the  instruments, 
she  met  Thunder-and-Lightning,  who  scolded  her  well, 
saying,  Traitress,  will  you  not  leaim  at  your  cost 
that  by  your  fatal  curiosity  you  are  brought  to  this 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  ROOT. 


369 


plight  ?”  Then  he  called  back  the  instruments  with  a 
whistle,  and  shut  them  up  again  in  the  box,  telling 
Parmetella  to  take  them  to  his  mother.  But  when  the 
ogress  saw  her,  she  cried  aloud,  0 cruel  fate ! even 
my  sister  is  against  me,  and  refuses  to  give  me  this 
pleasure.^’ 

Meanwhile  the  new  bride  arrived — a hideous  pest,  a 
compound  of  ugliness,  a harpy,  an  evil  shade,  a horror, 
a monster,  a large  tub,  who  with  a himdred  flowers  and 
boughs  about  her  looked  like  a newly  opened  inn.  Then 
the  ogress  made  a great  banquet  for  her;  and  being  full  of 
gall  and  malice,  she  had  the  table  plaeed  close  to  a well, 
where  she  seated  her  seven  daughters,  each  with  a torch 
in  one  hand ; but  she  gave  two  torches  to  Parmetella,  and 
made  her  sit  at  the  edge  of  the  well,  on  purpose  that, 
when  she  fell  asleep,  she  might  tumble  to  the  bottom. 

Now  whilst  the  dishes  were  passing  to  and  fro,  and 
their  blood  began  to  get  warm,  Thunder-and-Lightning, 
who  turned  quite  sick  at  the  sight  of  the  new  bride, 
said  to  Parmetella,  Traitress,  do  you  love  me  Ay, 
to  the  top  of  the  roof,”  she  replied.  And  he  answered, 
"If  you  love  me,  give  me  a kiss.”  "Nay,”  said  Par- 
metella, " you  indeed,  who  have  sueh  a pretty  ereature 
at  your  side ! Heaven  preserve  her  to  you  a hundi’ed 
years  in  health  and  with  plenty  of  sons*  !”  Then  the 

* A common  Bilutation  in  Naples — “ Sanitate  e figlie  mascolc  1” 


Digitized  by  Google 


360 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


new  bride  answered,  “ It  is  very  clear  that  you  are  a 
simpleton,  and  would  remain  so  were  you  to  live  a hun- 
dred years,  acting  the  prude  as  you  do,  and  refusing  to 
kiss  so  handsome  a youth,  whilst  I let  a herdsman  kiss 
me  for  a couple  of  chestnuts.” 

At  these  words  the  bridegroom  swelled  with  rage  like 
a toad,  so  that  his  food  remained  sticking  in  his  throat ; 
however  he  put  a good  face  on  the  matter,  and  swal- 
lowed the  pill,  intending  to  make  the  reckoning  and 
settle  the  balance  afterwards.  But  when  the  tables 
were  removed,  and  the  ogress  and  his  sisters  had  gone 
away,  Thunder-and-Lightning  said  to  the  new  bride, 
“ Wife,  did  you  see  this  proud  creature  refuse  me  a 
kiss  ?”  She  was  a simpleton,”  replied  the  bride,  " to 
refuse  a kiss  to  such  a handsome  young  man,  whilst  I 
let  a herdsman  kiss  me  for  a couple  of  chestnuts.” 
Thunder-and-Lightning  eould  contain  himself  no 
longer ; the  mustard  got  up  into  his  nose,  and  with  the 
flash  of  scorn  and  the  thunder  of  action,  he  seized  a 
knife  and  stabbed  the  bride,  and  digging  a hole  in  the 
cellar  he  buried  her.  Then  embracing  Parmetella  he 
said  to  her,  “ You  are  my  jewel,  the  flower  of  women, 
the  mirror  of  honour ! Then  turn  those  eyes  upon  me, 
give  me  that  hand,  put  out  those  lips,  draw  near  to  me, 
my  heart ! for  I will  be  yours  as  long  as  the  world  lasts.^^ 
The  next  morning,  when  the  Sun  aroused  his  fiery 


Digitized  by  Goog[e 


THE  GOLDEN  BOOT. 


361 


steeds  from  their  watery  stable,  and  drove  them  to  pas- 
ture on  the  fields  sown  by  the  Dawn,  the  ogress  came 
with  fresh  eggs  for  the  newly-married  couple,  that  the 
young  wife  might  be  able  to  say,  Happy  is  she  who 
marries  and  gets  a mother-in-law  !”  But  finding  Par- 
metella  in  the  arms  of  her  son,  and  hearing  what  had 
passed,  she  ran  to  her  sister,  to  concert  some  means  of 
removing  this  thorn  from  her  eyes  without  her  son^s  be- 
ing able  to  prevent  it.  But  when  she  found  that  her  sis- 
ter, out  of  grief  at  the  loss  of  her  daughter,  had  crept  into 
the  oven  herself  and  was  burnt,  her  despair  was  so  great, 
that  from  an  ogress  she  became  a ram,  and  butted  her 
head  against  the  wall  until  she  broke  her  pate.  Then 
Thunder-and-Lightning  made  peace  between  Parmetella 
and  her  sisters-in-law,  and  they  all  lived  happy  and  con- 
tent, finding  the  saying  come  true,  that 

“ Patience  conquers  all.” 


The  fate  of  the  ogress,  instead  of  exciting  any  com- 
passion, was  only  the  cause  of  pleasure,  every  one  re- 
joicing that  matters  turned  out  with  Parmetella  much 
better  than  was  expected.  This  story  being  ended, 
Popa,  whose  turn  it  now  was  to  speak,  and  who  had  her 
foot  already  in  the  stirrup,  began  as  follows. 


Digitized  by  Google 


362 


SUN,  MOON  AND  TALIA. 

It  is  a well-known  fact,  that  the  cruel  man  is  generally 
his  own  hangman ; and  he  who  throws  stones  at  Heaven, 
frequently  comes  off  with  a broken  head.  But  the  re- 
verse of  the  medal  shows  us  that  innocence  is  a shield 
of  fig-tree  wood,  upon  which  the  sword  of  malice  is 
broken,  or  blunts  its  point ; so  that,  when  a poor  man 
fancies  himself  already  dead  and  biuied,  he  revives  again 
in  bone  and  flesh,  as  you  shall  hear  in  the  story  which 
I am  going  to  draw  from  the  cask  of  memory  with  the 
tap  of  my  tongue. 


Therx:  was  once  a great  lord,  who,  having  a daughter 
born  to  him  named  Talia,  commanded  the  seers  and 
wise  men  of  his  kingdom  to  come  and  tell  him  her 
fortune ; and  after  various  counsellings  they  came  to  the 
(inclusion,  that  a great  peril  awaited  her  from  a piece 
of  stalk  in  some  flax.  Thereupon  he  issued  a com- 
mand, prohibiting  any  flax  or  hemp,  or  such-like  thing. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


SUN,  MOON  AND  TALIA.  363 

to  be  brought  into  his  house,  hoping  thus  to  avoid  the 
danger. 

When  Talia  was  gro^sTi  up,  and  was  standing  one  day 
at  the  window,  she  saw  an  old  woman  pass  by  who  was 
spinning ; and  never  having  seen  a distaff  or  a spindle, 
and  being  vastly  pleased  with  the  twisting  and  twirUng 
of  the  thread,  her  euriosity  was  so  great  that  she  made  the 
old  woman  come  upstairs.  Then  taking  the  distaff  in  her 
hand  Talia  began  to  draw  out  the  thread,  when  by  mis- 
chanee  a piece  of  stalk  in  the  flax  getting  under  her  finger- 
nail, she  fell  dead  upon  the  ground ; at  which  sight  the 
old  woman  hobbled  downstairs  as  quickly  as  she  could, 

Wlien  the  unhappy  father  heard  of  the  disaster  that 
had  befallen  Talia,  after  paying  for  this  cask  of  As- 
prino*  with  a barrel  of  tears,  he  placed  her  in  that  pa- 
lace in  the  country,  upon  a velvet  seat  under  a canopy 
of  brocade ; and  fastening  the  doors,  he  quitted  for  ever 
that  place  which  had  been  the  cause  of  such  misfor- 
tune to  him,  in  order  to  drive  all  remembrance  of  it 
from  his  mind. 

Now  a certain  king  happened  to  go  one  day  to  the 
chace,  and  a falcon  escaping  from  him  flew  in  at  a win- 
dow of  that  palace.  When  the  king  found  that  the 
bird  did  not  return  at  his  call,  he  ordered  his  attend- 
ants to  knock  at  the  door,  thinking  that  the  palace 
was  inhabited;  and  after  knocking  for  some  time,  the 

* A sour  Neapolitan  wine. 


Digitized  by  Google 


364 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


king  ordered  them  to  feteh  a vinedresser’s  ladder,  wish- 
ing himself  to  seale  the  house  and  see  what  was  in- 
side. Then  he  mounted  the  ladder,  and  going  through 
the  whole  palace,  he  stood  aghast  and  looked  just  like 
a mummy,  at  not  finding  there  any  living  person.  At 
last  he  came  to  the  room  where  Talia  was  lying,  as  if 
enchanted ; and  when  the  king  saw  her,  he  called  to 
her,  thinking  that  she  was  asleep,  but  in  vain,  for  she 
still  slept  on,  however  loud  he  called.  So,  after  ad- 
miring her  beauty  awhile,  the  king  returned  home  to 
his  kingdom,  where  for  a long  time  he  forgot  all  that 
had  happened. 

Meanwhile  Talia  gave  birth  to  little  twins,  one  a 
boy  and  the  other  a girl,  who  looked  like  two  little 
jewels;  and  two  fairies  appeai’ed  in  the  palace,  who 
took  care  of  the  children,  and  placed  them  at  their 
mother’s  breast.  But  once,  when  they  w'anted  to  suck, 
not  finding  the  breast,  they  seized  by  mistake  her  finger, 
and  went  on  sucking  until  they  drew  out  the  splinter. 
Thereupon  she  seemed  to  awake  as  from  a deep  sleep ; 
and  when  she  saw  those  little  jewels  at  her  side,  she 
took  them  to  her  heart,  and  loved  them  more  than  her 
life;  but  she  wondered  greatly  at  seeing  herself  quite 
alone  in  the  palace  with  the  two  children,  and  food  and 
refreshment  brought  her  by  unseen  hands. 

After  a time  the  king,  calling  Talia  to  mind,  took  oc- 
casion one  day  when  he  went  to  the  chace  to  go  and  see 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUN,  MOON  AND  TALIA.  365 

her ; and  when  he  found  her  awakened,  and  with  two 
beautiful  little  creatures  by  her  side,  he  was  struck 
dumb  with  rapture.  Then  the  king  told  Talia  who  he 
was,  and  they  formed  a great  league  and  friendship, 
and  he  remained  there  for  several  days,  promising  as  he 
took  leave  to  return  and  fetch  her. 

When  the  king  went  back  to  his  own  kingdom,  he 
was  for  ever  repeating  the  names  of  Talia  and  her  little 
ones,  insomuch  that,  when  he  was  eating  he  had  Talia 
in  his  mouth,  and  Sun  and  Moon  (for  so  he  named 
the  children) ; nay,  even  when  he  went  to  rest  he  did 
not  leave  off  calling  on  them,  first  one  and  then  the 
other. 

Now  the  king’s  wife  had  grown  suspicious  at  her  hus- 
band’s long  absence  at  the  chace,  and  when  she  heard 
him  calling  thus  on  Talia,  Sun  and  Moon,  she  waxed 
wrath,  and  said  to  the  king’s  secretary,  **  Hark-ye, 
friend,  you  stand  between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  be- 
tween the  hinge  and  the  door,  between  the  axe  and  the 
block ; tell  me  who  it  is  that  my  husband  is  enamoured 
of,  and  I will  make  you  rich ; but  if  you  conceal  the 
truth  from  me,  I ’ll  make  you  rue  it.” 

The  man,  moved  on  the  one  side  by  fear,  and  on  the 
other  pricked  by  interest,  which  is  a bandage  to  the 
eyes  of  honour,  the  blind  of  justice,  and  an  old  horse- 
shoe to  trip  up  good-faith,  told  the  queen  the  whole 
truth,  calling  bread  bread  and  wine  wine.  Whereupon 


Digitized  by  Google 


S66 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


she  sent  the  secretary  in  the  king’s  name  to  Talia,  saying 
that  he  wished  to  see  the  children.  Then  Talia  sent  them 
with  great  joy;  but  the  queen,  with  the  heart  of  a Medea, 
commanded  the  cook  to  kill  them,  and  serve  them  up 
in  various  ways  for  her  wretched  husband  to  eat. 

Now  the  cook,  who  had  a tender  heart,  seeing  the  two 
pretty  little  golden  pippins,  took  eompassion  on  them, 
and  gave  them  to  his  wife,  bidding  her  keep  them  con- 
cealed then  he  killed  and  dressed  two  little  kids  in  a 
hundred  different  ways.  When  the  king  came,  the  queen 
quickly  ordered  the  dishes  to  be  served  up;  and  the 
king  fell  to  eating  with  great  delight,  exclaiming,  “ By 
the  life  of  Lanfusa*  how  good  this  is  ! Oh  how  excellent, 
by  the  soul  of  my  grandfather !”  And  the  queen  all 
the  while  kept  saying,  “ Eat  away ! for  you  eat  what  is 
your  own.”  At  first  the  king  paid  no  attention  to  what 
she  said;  but  at  last,  hearing  the  music  continue,  he 
replied,  **  Ay,  I know  well  enough  that  what  I eat  is 
my  own,  for  you  brought  nothing  to  the  house.”  And 
at  last  getting  up  in  a rage,  he  went  off  to  a villa  at 
a little  distance  to  cool  his  anger. 

Meanwhile  the  queen,  not  satisfied  with  what  she  had 
done,  called  the  secretary  again,  and  sent  him  to  fetch 
Talia,  pretending  that  the  king  wished  to  sec  her. 
At  this  summons  Talia  went  that  very  instant,  longing 

• The  mother  of  Ferrah,—  »cc  Orlando  Furioso,  i.  30.  The  habit  of  aweating  by 
an  object  the  deareat  to  a person  is  quite  Spanish,  as  is  also  the  use  of  terms  of  kin* 
died  out  of  mere  tenderness  or  fomiliaiity, 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


SUN,  MOON  AND  TALIA. 


367 


to  see  the  light  of  her  eyes,  and  not  knowing  that  only 
the  smoke  awaited  her.  But  when  she  came  before  the 
queen,  the  latter  said  to  her,  with  the  face  of  a Nero 
and  full  of  poison  as  a viper,  “Welcome,  IMadam  Sly- 
cheat ! are  you  indeed  the  pretty  mischief-maker  ? are 
you  the  weed  that  has  caught  my  husband’s  eye  and 
given  me  all  this  trouble  ? So  so,  you  are  come  at  last 
to  purgatory,  where  I ’ll  make  you  pay  for  all  the  ill  you 
have  done  me.” 

When  Talia  heard  this  she  began  to  excuse  herself; 
but  the  queen  would  not  hsten  to  a word ; and  having  a 
large  fire  lighted  in  the  courtyard,  she  commanded  that 
Talia  should  be  thrown  into  the  flames.  Poor  Talia, 
seeing  matters  come  to  a bad  pass,  fell  on  her  knees  be- 
fore the  queen,  and  besought  her  at  least  to  grant  her 
time  to  take  the  clothes  from  oflF  her  back.  Where- 
upon the  queen,  not  so  much  out  of  pity  for  the  un- 
happy  girl,  as  to  get  possession  of  her  dress,  which  was 
embroidered  all  over  w'ith  gold  and  pearls,  said  to  her, 
“ Undress  yourself — I allow  you.”  Then  Talia  began  to 
undress,  and  as  she  took  off  each  garment  she  uttered 
an  exclamation  of  grief;  and  when  she  had  stripped  off 
her  cloak,  her  gown  and  her  jacket,  and  was  proceeding 
to  take  off  her  petticoat,  they  seized  her  and  were  drag- 
ging her  away.  At  that  moment  the  king  came  up,  and 
seeing  the  spectacle  he  demanded  to  know  the  whole 


Digitized  by  Google 


368 


■ THE  FENTAMERONE. 


^rutb ; and  when  he  asked  for  the  children,  and  heard 
that  his  wife  had  ordered  them  to  be  killed,  in  revenge 
for  his  unfaithfulness,  the  unhappy  king  gave  himself  up 
to  despair,  exclaiming,  “ Alas  then,  I have  myself  been 
the  wolf  to  my  httle  lambs  ! Woe  is  me ! why  did  not 
my  veins  recognize  that  they  were  the  fountain  of  their 
blood  ? Ah,  renegade  Turk,  what  barbarous  act  have 
you  done  ? but  your  wickedness  shall  be  punished;  you 
shall  do  penance  without  being  sent  to  the  Coliseum.” 
So  saying  he  ordered  her  to  be  thrown  into  the  same 
fire  which  had  been  lighted  for  Talia,  and  the  secretary 
with  her,  who  was  the  handle  of  this  cruel  game  and 
the  weaver  of  this  wicked  web.  Then  he  was  going  to 
do  the  same  with  the  cook,  thinking  that  he  had  killed 
the  children;  but  the  cook  threw  himself  at  the  king^s 
feet  and  said,  “ Truly,  sir  king,  I would  desire  no  other 
sinecure  in  return  for  the  serviee  I have  done  you  than 
to  be  thrown  into  a furnace  full  of  live  coals,  I would 
ask  no  other  gratuity  than  the  thrust  of  a spike,  I would 
wish  for  no  other  amusement  than  to  be  roasted  in  the 
fire,  I would  desire  no  other  privilege  than  to  have  the 
ashes  of  a cook  mingled  with  those  of  a queen.  But 
I look  for  no  such  great  reward  for  having  saved  your 
children,  and  brought  them  back  to  you  in  spite  of  that 
wicked  creature  who  wished  to  kill  them.” 

When  the  king  heard  these  words  he  was  quite  be- 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUN,  MOON  AND  TALIA. 


369 


side  himself;  he  appeared  to  dream,  and  could  not  be- 
lieve what  his  ears  had  heard.  Then  he  said  to  the 
cook,  “ If  it  is  true  that  you  have  saved  the  children, 
be  assured  I ^^'ill  take  you  from  turning  the  spit,  and 
place  you  in  the  kitchen  of  this  breast,  to  turn  my  will 
as  you  please,  rewarding  you  so  that  you  shall  call  ^ 
yourself  the  happiest  man  in  the  world.” 

a^s  the  king  was  speaking  these  words,  the  wife  of 
the  cook,  seeing  the  dilemma  her  husband  was  in, 
brought  Sun  and  Moon  before  the  King,  who  playing 
at  the  game  of  three  with  his  wife  and  children,  went 
round  and  round  kissing  first  one  and  then  another. 

Then  giving  the  cook  a large  reward,  he  made  him  his 
chamberlain : and  he  took  Talia  to  wife,  who  enjoyed  * 
a long  life  with  her  husband  and  children,  acknow- 
ledging that 

He  who  has  luck  may  go  to  bed. 

And  bliss  will  rain  upon  his  head.” 


2 B 


Digitized  by  Google 


370 


NENNILLO  AND  NENNELLA*. 

Woe  to  him  who  thinks  to  find  a governess  for  his  ehil- 
dren  by  giving  them  a stepmother ! he  only  brings  into 
his  house  .the  cause  of  their  ruin.  There  never  yet  was 
a stepmother  who  looked  kindly  on  the  children  of  an- 
other ; or  if  by  chance  such  a one  were  ever  found,  she 
would  be  regarded  as  a miracle  f,  and  be  called  a white 
crow.  But  beside  all  those  of  whom  you  may  have  heard, 
I will  now  tell  you  of  another,  to  be  added  to  the  list 
of  heartless  stepmothers,  whom  you  will  consider  well 
deserving  the  punishment  she  purchased  for  herself  with 
ready  money. 


There  was  once  a good  man  named  Jannuccio,  who 
had  two  children,  Nennillo  and  Nennella,  whom  he  loved 
as  much  as  his  own  life.  But  Death  having  with  the 
smooth-file  of  Time  severed  the  prison-bars  of  his  wife^s 
soul,  he  took  to  himself  a cruel  woman,  who  had  no 
sooner  set  foot  in  his  house  than  she  began  to  ride  the 

• These  names  (Spanish  Nino)  sigpiify  ‘ little  boy  ’ and  ‘ little  girl.’ 
t mettere  to  tpruoccolo  a ioperttuo. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


NENNILLO  AND  NENNELLA.  371 

high  horse,  saying,  ‘^Am  I come  here  indeed  to  look 
after  other  folks’  children?  A pretty  job  T have  un- 
dertaken, to  have  all  this  trouble  and  be  for  ever  teased 
by  a couple  of  squalling  brats  ! Would  that  I had  broken 
my  neck  ere  I ever  came  to  this  place,  to  have  bad  food, 
worse  drink,  and  get  no  sleep  at  night ! Here ’s  a life  to 
lead ! Forsooth  I came  as  a wife,  and  not  as  a servant ; 
but  I must  find  some  means  of  getting  rid  of  these  crea- 
tures, or  it  will  cost  me  my  life : better  to  blush  once, 
than  to  grow  pale  a hundred  times ; so  I ’ve  done  with 
them,  for  I am  resolved  to  send  them  away,  or  to  leave 
the  house  myself  for  ever.” 

The  poor  husband,  who  had  some  affection  for  this 
woman,  said  to  her,  Softly,  wife  ! don’t  be  angry,  for 
sugar  is  dear ; and  tomorrow  morning,  before  the  cock 
crows,  I will  remove  this  annoyance  in  order  to  please 
you.”  So  the  next  morning,  ere  the  Dawn  had  hung 
out  the  red  counterpane  at  the  window  of  the  East 
to  shake  oft’  the  fleas,  Jannuccio  took  the  children,  one 
by  each  hand;  and  with  a good  basketful  of  things 
to  eat  upon  his  arm,  he  led  them  to  a wood,  where  an 
army  of  poplars  and  beech-trees  were  holding  the  shades 
besieged.  Then  Jannuccio  said,  “My  little  children, 
stay  here  in  this  wood,  and  eat  and  drink  merrily ; but 
if  you  want  anything,  follow  this  line  of  ashes  which  I 
have  been  strewing  as  we  came  along;  this  will  be  a 

2b2 


Digitized  by  Google 


3/2 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


clue  to  lead  you  out  of  the  labjTinth  and  bring  you 
straight  home/’  Then  giving  them  both  a kiss,  he  re- 
turned weeping  to  his  house. 

But  at  the  hour  when  all  creatures,  summoned  by  the 
constables  of  Night,  pay  to  Nature  the  tax  of  needful 
repose,  the  two  little  children  began  to  feel  afraid  at 
remaining  in  that  lonesome  place,  where  the  waters  of  a 
river,  which  was  thrashing  the  impertinent  stones  for 
obstructing  its  course,  would  have  frightened  even  a 
Rodomonte.  So  they  went  slowly  along  the  path  of 
ashes,  and  it  was  already  midnight  ere  they  reached 
their  home.  When  Pascozza,  their  stepmother,  saw 
the  children,  she  acted  not  like  a woman,  but  a per- 
tect  fury,  crying  aloud,  ^vringing  her  hands,  stamping 
with  her  feet,  snorting  like  a frightened  horse  and  ex- 
claiming, ‘'What  fine  piece  of  work  is  this?  Is  there 
no  w^ay  of  ridding  the  house  of  these  creatures?  Is 
it  possible,  husband,  that  you  are  determined  to  keep 
them  here  to  plague  my  very  life  out  ? Go,  take  them 
out  of  my  sight ! I ’ll  not  wait  for  the  crowing  of  cocks 
and  the  cackling  of  hens : or  else  be  assured  that  to- 
morrow morning  off  I ’ll  go  to  my  parents’  house,  for 
you  do  not  deserve  me.  I have  not  brought  you  so 
many  fine  things,  only  to  be  made  the  slave  of  children 
who  are  not  my  own.” 

Poor  Jannuccio,  who  saw  the  boat  on  a wrong  tack. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


NENNILLO  AND  NENNELLA.  373 

and  matters  growing  rather  too  warm,  immediately  took 
the  little  ones  and  returned  to  the  wood ; where  giving 
the  children  another  basketful  of  food,  he  said  to  them, 
“ You  see,  my  dears,  how  this  wife  of  mine — who  is 
come  to  my  house  to  be  your  ruin  and  a nail  in  my 
heart — ^hates  you ; therefore  remain  in  this  wood,  where 
the  trees  more  compassionate  will  give  you  shelter  from 
the  sun,  where  the  river  more  charitable  will  give  you 
drink  without  poison,  and  the  earth  more  kind  will  give 
you  a pillow  of  grass  without  danger.  And  when  you 
want  food,  follow  this  little  path  of  bran  which  I have 
made  for  you  in  a straight  line,  and  you  can  come  and 
seek  what  you  require.”  So  saying  he  turned  away  his 
face,  not  to  let  himself  be  seen  to  weep  and  dishearten 
the  poor  little  creatures. 

When  Nennillo  and  Nennella  had  eaten  all  that  was 
in  the  basket,  they  wanted  to  return  home ; but  alas  ! a 
jackass — the  son  of  ill-luck — had  eaten  up  all  the  bran 
that  was  strewn  upon  the  ground ; so  they  lost  their  way, 
and  wandered  about  forlorn  in  the  wood  for  several 
days,  feeding  on  acorns  and  chestnuts  which  they  foimd 
fallen  on  the  ground.  But  as  Heaven  always  extends 
its  arm  over  the  innocent,  there  came  by  chance  a prince 
to  hunt  in  that  wood.  Then  Nennillo,  hearing  the  bay- 
ing of  the  hounds,  was  so  frightened  that  he  crept  into 
a hollow  tree ; and  Nennella  set  off  running  at  full  speed. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


374  THE  PENTAMERONE. 

and  ran  until  she  came  out  of  the  wood,  and  found 
herself  on  the  seashore.  Now  it  happened  that  some 
pirates,  who  had  landed  there  to  get  fuel,  saw  Nennella 
and  cai’ried  her  off:  and  their  captain  took  her  home 
with  him,  where  he  and  his  wife,  having  just  lost  a httle 
girl,  took  her  as  their  daughter. 

]\Ieanwhile  Nennillo,  who  had  hidden  himself  in  the 
tree,  was  surrounded  by  the  dogs,  which  made  such  a 
furious  barking  that  the  prince  sent  to  find  out  the 
cause;  and  w’hen  he  discovered  the  pretty  little  boy, 
who  was  so  young  that  he  could  not  tell  who  were  his 
father  and  mother,  he  ordered  one  of  the  huntsmen 
to  set  him  upon  his  saddle  and  take  him  to  the  royal 
palace.  Then  he  had  him  brought  up  with  great  care, 
and  instructed  in  various  arts,  and  among  others  he 
had  him  taught  that  of  a carver ; so  that,  before  three  or 
four  years  had  passed,  Nennillo  became  so  expert  in  his 
art  that  he  could  carve  a joint  to  a hair. 

Now  about  this  time  it  was  discovered  that  the  cap- 
tain of  the  ship  who  had  taken  Nennella  to  his  house 
was  a sea-robber,  and  the  people  wished  to  take  him 
prisoner ; but  getting  timely  notice  from  the  clerks  in 
the  law-courts,  who  were  his  friends,  and  whom  he  kept 
in  his  pay,  he  fied  with  all  his  family.  It  was  decreed 
however,  perhaps  by  the  judgement  of  Heaven,  that  he 
who  had  committed  his  crimes  upon  the  sea,  upon  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


NENNILLO  AND  NENNELLA. 


375 


sea  should  suflfer  the  punishment  of  them ; for  having 
embarked  in  a small  boat,  no  sooner  was  he  upon  the 
open  sea  than  there  came  such  a storm  of  wind  and 
tumult  of  the  waves,  that  the  boat  was  upset  and  all 
were  drowned — all  except  Nennella,  who  having  had  no 
share  in  the  corsair’s  robberies,  like  his  wife  and  chil- 
dren, escaped  the  danger;  for  just  then  a large  en- 
chanted fish,  which  was  swimming  about  the  boat, 
opened  its  huge  throat  and  swallowed  her  down. 

The  little  girl  now  thought  to  herself  that  her 
days  were  surely  at  an  end,  when  suddenly  she  found  a 
thing  to  amaze  her  inside  the  fish, — beautiful  fields  and 
fine  gardens,  and  a splendid  mansion,  with  all  that 
heart  could  desire,  in  which  she  lived  like  a princess. 
Then  she  was  carried  quickly  by  the  fish  to  a rock, 
where  it  chanced  that  the  prince  had  come  to  escape 
the  burning  heat  of  summer,  and  to  enjoy  the  cool  sea 
breezes.  And  whilst  a great  banquet  was  preparing, 
Nennillo  had  stepped  out  upon  a balcony  of  the  palace 
on  the  rock  to  sharpen  some  knives,  priding  himself 
greatly  on  acquiring  honour  from  his  office.  When  Nen- 
nella saw  him  through  the  fish’s  throat,  she  cried  aloud, 
“ Brother,  brother,  your  task  is  done. 

The  tables  are  laid  out  every  one ; 

But  here  in  the  fish  I must  sit  and  sigh. 

For,  0 brother,  without  you  I soon  shall  die !” 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


3/6 


THE  FENTAMERONE. 


Nennillu  at  first  paid  no  attention  to  the  voice ; but 
the  prince,  who  was  standing  on  another  balcony  and 
had  also  heard  it,  turned  in  the  direction  whence  the 
sound  came,  and  saw  the  fish.  And  when  he  again 
heard  the  same  words,  he  was  beside  himself  with 
amazement,  and  ordered  a number  of  servants  to  try 
whether  by  any  means  they  could  ensnare  ihe  fish 
and  draw  it  to  land.  At  last,  hearing  the  words 
“ Brother,  brother !”  continually  repeated,  he  asked  all 
his  servants,  one  by  one,  w’hether  any  of  them  had  lost 
a sister.  And  Nennillo  rephed',  that  he  recollected,  as  a 
dream,  having  had  a sister  when  the  prince  found  him  in 
the  wood,  but  that  he  had  never  since  heard  any  tidings 
of  her.  Then  the  prince  told  him  to  go  nearer  to  the 
fish,  and  see  what  was  the  matter,  for  perhaps  this 
adventure  might  concern  him.  As  soon  as  Nennillo 
approached  the  fish,  it  raised  up  its  head  upon  the 
rock,  and  opening  its  throat  six  palms  wide,  Nennella 
stepped  out,  so  beautiful  that  she  looked  just  like  a 
nymph  in  some  interlude,  come  forth  from  that  animal 
at  the  incantation  of  a magician.  And  when  the  prince 
asked  her  how  it  had  all  happened,  she  told  him  a part 
of  her  sad  story,  and  the  hatred  of  their  stepmother; 
but  not  being  able  to  recollect  the  name  of  their  father 
nor  of  their  home,  the  prince  caused  a proclamation  to 
be  issued,  commanding  that  whoever  had  lost  two  chil- 


NENNILLO  AND  NENNELLA. 


377 


dren,  named  Nennillo  and  Nennella,  in  a wood,  should 
come  to  the  royal  palace,  and  he  would  there  receive 
joyful  news  of  them. 

Jannuccio,  who  had  all  this  time  passed  a sad  and 
disconsolate  life,  believing  that  his  children  had  been 
devoured  by  wolves,  now  hastened  with  the  greatest  joy 
to  seek  the  prince,  and  told  him  that  he  had  lost  the 
children.  And  when  he  had  related  the  story,  how  he 
had  been  compelled  to  take  them  to  the  wood,  the  prince 
gave  him  a good  scolding,  calling  him  a blockhead  for 
allowing  a woman  to  put  her  heel  upon  his  neck,  till  he 
was  brought  to  send  away  two  such  jewels  as  his  chil- 
dren. But  after  he  had  broken  Jannuccio’s  head  with 
these  words,  he  applied  to  it  the  plaster  of  consolation, 
showing  him  the  children,  whom  the  father  embraced 
and  kissed  for  half  an  hour  without  being  satisfied. 
Then  the  prince  made  him  pull  off  his  jacket,  and 
had  him  drest  like  a lord ; and  sending  for  Jannuccio^s 
wife,  he  showed  her  those  two  golden  pippins,  asking 
her  what  that  person  would  deserve  who  should  do  them 
any  harm  and  even  endanger  their  lives.  And  she  re- 
plied, ‘^For  my  part,  I would  put  her  into  a closed 
cask,  and  send  her  rolling  down  a mountain.^^ 

^'So  it  shall  be  done!”  said  the  prince:  “The  goat 
has  butted  at  herself.  Quick  now  ! you  have  passed  the 
sentence,  and  you  must  suffer  it,  for  having  borne  these 


Digitized  by  Google 


378 


THE  PENTA.MERONB. 


beautiful  stepchildren  such  malice/'  So  he  gave  orders 
that  the  sentence  should  be  instantly  executed.  Then 
choosing  a very  rich  lord  among  his  vassals,  he  gave 
him  Nennella  to  wife,  and  the  daughter  of  another  great 
lord  to  Nennillo;  allowing  them  enough  to  live  upon, 
with  their  father,  so  that  they  wanted  for  nothing  in 
the  world.  But  the  stepmother,  shut  into  the  cask  and 
shut  out  from  life,  kept  on  crying  out  through  the  bung- 
hole  as  long  as  she  had  breath, 

“ To  him  who  mischief  seeks  shall  mischief  fall ; 

There  comes  an  hour  that  recompenses  all.” 


The  pleasure  whieh  Paola's  story  gave  to  all  the  lis- 
teners is  not  to  be  told ; but  it  being  now  Ciommetella’s 
turn  to  speak,  on  receiving  the  signal  she  began  as  fol- 
lows. 


Digitized  by  Google 


379 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 

Well  was  it  in  truth  said  by  the  wise  man,  ‘‘Do  not 
say  all  you  know,  nor  do  all  you  are  able;”  for  both 
one  and  the  other  bring  unknown  danger  and  unfore- 
seen ruin ; as  you  shall  hear  of  a certain  slave  (be  it 
spoken  with  all  reverence  for  my  lady  the  Princess), 
who,  after  doing  all  the  injury  in  her  power  to  a poor 
girl,  came  off  so  badly  in  the  court,  that  she  was  the 
judge  of  her  own  crime,  and  sentenced  herself  to  the 
punishment  she  deserved. 


The  king  of  Long-Tower  had  once  a son,  who  was  the 
apple  of  his  eye,  and  on  whom  he  had  built  all  his 
hopes;  and  he  longed  impatiently  for  the  time  when  he 
should  find  some  good  match  for  him,  and  hear  him- 
self called  grandpapa.  But  the  prince  was  so  averse 
to  marriage  and  so  obstinate,  that  whenever  a wife  w’as 
talked  of  he  shook  his  head  and  wished  himself  a hun- 
dred miles  off ; so  that  the  poor  king,  finding  his  son 
stubborn  and  perverse,  and  foreseeing  that  his  race  would 
come  to  an  end,  was  more  vexed  and  melancholy,  cast 


Digitized  by  Google 


380 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


down  and  out  of  spirits,  than  a merchant  whose  corre- 
spondent has  become  bankrupt,  or  a peasant  w'hose  ass 
has  died.  Neither  could  the  tears  of  his  father  move 
the  prince,  nor  the  entreaties  of  the  courtiers  soften 
him,  nor  the  counsel  of  wise  men  make  him  change  his 
mind ; in  vain  they  set  before  his  eyes  the  wishes  of  his 
father,  the  w'ants  of  the  people,  and  his  own  interest, 
representing  to  him  that  he  was  the  full-stop  in  the 
line  of  the  royal  race ; for  with  the  obstinacy  of  Ca- 
rella*  and  the  stubbornness  of  an  old  mule  with  a 
akin  four  fingers  thick,  he  had  planted  his  foot  reso- 
lutely, stopped  his  ears,  and  closed  his  heart  against 
all  assaults.  But  as  frequently  more  comes  to  pass 
in  an  hour  than  in  a hundred  years,  and  no  one  can 
say.  Stop  here  or  go  there,  it  happened  that  one  day, 
when  all  wxre  at  table,  and  the  prince  w'as  cutting  a 
piece  of  new-made  cheese,  whilst  listening  to  the  chit- 
chat that  was  going  on,  he  accidentally  cut  his  fin- 
ger ; and  two  drops  of  blood,  falling  upon  the  cheese, 
made  such  a beautiful  mixtm’e  of  colours,  that — either 
it  was  a punishment  inflicted  by  Love,  or  the  will  of 
Heaven  to  console  the  poor  father, — the  whim  seized 
the  prince  to  find  a woman  exactly  as  white  and  red 
as  that  cheese  tinged  with  his  blood.  Then  he  said 
to  his  father,  “ Sir,  unless  I have  a wife  as  white  and  red 

* A person  who  was  proTerbiaU;  obstinate. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


381 


as  this  cheese,  it  is  all  over  with  me : so  now  resolve,  if 
you  wish  to  see  me  alive  and  well,  to  give  me  all  I re- 
quire to  go  through  the  world  in  search  of  a beauty 
exactly  like  this  cheese,  or  else  I shall  end  my  life  and 
die  by  inches.” 

TVTien  the  king  heard  this  mad  resolution,  he  thought 
the  house  was  falling  about  his  cars ; his  colour  came  and 
went,  but  as  soon  as  he  recovered  himself  and  could 
speak,  he  said,  My  son,  the  life  of  my  soul,  the  core 
of  my  heart,  the  prop  of  my  old-age,  what  mad- 
brained fancy  has  made  you  take  leave  of  your  senses  ? 
Have  you  lost  your  wits  ? You  want  either  all  or  nothing : 
first  you  wish  not  to  marry,  on  purpose  to  deprive 
me  of  an  heir,  and  now  you  are  impatient  to  drive 
me  out  of  the  world.  Whither,  0 whither  would  you 
go  wandering  about,  wasting  your  life  ? and  why  leave 
your  house,  your  hearth,  your  home  ? You  know  not 
what  toils  and  perils  he  brings  on  himself  who  goes 
rambling  and  roving.  Let  this  whim  pass,  my  son;  ’ 
be  sensible,  and  do  not  wish  to  see  my  life  worn  out,  this 
house  fall  to  the  ground,  my  household  go  to  ruin.” 

But  these  and  other  words  went  in  at  one  ear  and 
out  at  the  other,  and  were  all  cast  upon  the  sea ; and 
the  poor  king,  seeing  that  his  son  was  as  immoveable 
as  a rook  upon  a belfry*,  gave  him  a handful  of  dollars, 

* Na  ciaola  de  campanaro. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


382 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


and  two  or  three  servants;  and  bidding  him  farewell, 
he  felt  as  if  his  soul  was  tom  out  of  his  body.  Then 
weeping  bitterly,  he  went  to  a balcony,  and  followed 
his  son  with  his  eyes  until  he  was  lost  to  sight. 

The  prince  departed,  leaving  his  unhappy  father  to 
his  grief,  and  hastened  on  his  way  through  fields  and 
woods,  over  mountain  and  valley,  hill  and  plain,  visit- 
ing various  countries,  and  mixing  with  various  peoples, 
and  always  with  his  eyes  wide  awake  to  see  whether 
he  could  find  the  object  of  his  desire.  At  the  end  of 
several  months  he  arrived  at  the  coast  of  France,  where, 
leaving  his  servants  at  an  hospital  with  sore  feet,  he 
embarked  alone  in  a Genoese  boat,  and  set  out  toward 
the  Straits  of  Gibraltar.  There  he  took  a larger  vessel 
and  sailed  for  the  Indies,  seeking  everywhere,  from 
kingdom  to  kingdom,  from  province  to  province,  from 
country  to  country,  from  street  to  street,  from  house 
to  house,  in  every  hole  and  comer,  whether  he  could 
find  the  original  likeness  of  that  beautiful  image  which 
he  had  pictured  to  his  heart.  And  he  wandered 
about  and  about,  until  at  length  he  came  to  the  Island 
of  the  Ogresses,  where  he  cast  anchor  and  landed.  There 
he  found  an  old  old  woman,  withered  and  shrivelled 
up,  and  with  a hideous  face,  to  whom  he  related  the 
reason  that  had  brought  him  to  that  country.  The  old 
woman  was  beside  herself  with  amazement  when  she 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


383 


heard  the  strange  whim  and  the  fanciful  chimera  of  the 
prince,  and  the  toils  and  perils  he  had  gone  through  to 
satisfy  himself ; then  she  said  to  him,  Hasten  away, 
my  son  1 for  if  my  three  daughters  meet  you,  I would 
not  give  a farthing  for  your  life;  half  alive  and  half 
roasted,  a frying-pan  would  be  your  bier  and  a belly 
your  grave.  But  away  with  you  as  fast  as  a hare! 
and  you  will  not  go  far  before  you  find  what  you  are 
seeking.” 

When  the  prince  heard  this,  frightened,  terrified 
and  aghast,  he  set  off  running  at  full  speed,  and  ran 
till  he  came  to  another  country,  where  he  again  met 
an  old  woman,  more  ugly  even  than  the  first,  to  whom 
he  told  all  his  story.  Then  the  old  woman  said  to  him 
in  like  manner,  “ Away  with  you ! unless  you  wish  to 
serve  for  a breakfast  to  the  little  ogresses  my  daugh- 
ters ; but  go  straight  on,  and  you  will  soon  find  what 
you  want.” 

The  prince,  hearing  this,  set  off  running  as  fast  as  a 
dog  with  a kettle  at  its  tail ; and  he  went  on  and  on, 
until  he  met  another  old  woman,  who  was  sitting  upon 
a wheel,  with  a basket  full  of  little  pies  and  sweetmeats 
on  her  arm,  and  feeding  a number  of  jackasses,  which 
thereupon  began  leaping  about  on  the  bank  of  a river 
and  kicking  at  some  poor  swans.  When  the  prince 
came  up  to  the  old  woman,  after  making  a hundred 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


384 


THE  PENTAMEROXE. 


salaams*,  he  related  to  her  the  story  of  his  wanderings ; 
whereupon  the  old  woman,  eomforting  him  with  kind 
words,  gave  him  such  a good  breakfast  that  he  licked 
his  fingers  after  it.  And  when  he  had  done  eating,  she 
gave  him  three  citrons,  which  seemed  to  he  just  fresh 
gathered  from  the  tree ; and  she  gave  him  also  a beau- 
tiful knife,  saying,  You  are  now  free  to  rctura  to  Italy, 
for  your  labour  is  ended,  and  you  have  what  you  were 
seeking.  Go  your  way  therefore,  and  when  you  are 
near  your  own  kingdom,  stop  at  the  first  fountain  you 
come  to  and  cut  a citron.  Then  a fairy  will  come  forth 
from  it,  and  mil  say  to  you,  ‘ Give  me  to  drink  V Mind 
and  be  ready  with  the  water,  or  she  will  vanish  like 
quicksilver.  But  if  you  are  not  quick  enough  with  the 
second  fairy,  have  your  eyes  open  and  be  watchful  that 
the  third  does  not  escape  you,  giving  her  quickly  to 
drink,  and  you  shall  have  a wife  after  your  own  heart.^' 
The  prince,  overjoyed,  kissed  the  old  woman^s  hairy 
hand  a hundred  times,  which  seemed  just  like  a hedge- 
hog’s back.  Then  taking  his  leave  he  left  that  country, 
and  coming  to  the  seashore  sailed  for  the  Pillars  of 
Hercules,  and  arrived  at  our  Sea ; and  after  a thousand 
storms  and  perils,  he  entered  port  a day’s  distance  from 
his  own  kingdom.  There  he  came  to  a most  beautiful 
grove,  where  the  Shades  formed  a palace  for  the  Mea- 

* Uccatalemme — the  Alecum-aalam  omlutotion  of  tiie  Arabs. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRON'S. 


385 


dows,  to  prevent  their  being  seen  by  the  Sun;  and 
dismounting  at  a fountain,  which  with  a crystal  tongue 
was  inviting  the  people  to  refresh  their  lips,  he  seated 
himself  on  a Syrian  carpet  formed  by  the  plants  and 
flowers.  Then  he  drew  his  knife  from  the  sheath  and 
began  to  cut  the  first  citron,  when  lo ! there  appeared 
like  a flash  of  lightning  a most  beautiful  maiden,  white 
as  milk  and  red  as  a strawberry,  who  said,  '‘Give  me  to 
drink !”  The  prince  was  so  amazed,  bewildered  and  cap- 
tivated with  the  beauty  of  the  fairy,  that  he  did  not  give 
her  the  water  quickly  enough,  so  she  appeared  and  va- 
nished at  one  and  the  same  moment.  Whether  this  w'as 
a rap  on  the  prince’s  head,  let  any  one  judge  who,  after 
longing  for  a thing,  gets  it  into  his  hands  and  instantly 
loses  it  again. 

Then  the  prince  cut  the  second  citron,  and  the  same 
thing  happened  again ; and  this  was  a second  blow  he 
got  on  his  pate ; so  making  two  little  fountains  of  his 
eyes,  he  w'ept,  face  to  face,  tear  for  tear,  drop  for  drop, 
with  the  fountain,  and  sighing  he  exclaimed,  “Good 
heavens,  how  is  it  that  I am  so  unfortunate  ? twice  I 
have  let  her  escape,  as  if  my  hands  were  tied ; and  here 
I sit  hke  a rock,  when  I ought  to  run  like  a gi’eyhound. 
Faith  indeed  I have  made  a fine  hand  of  it ! But 
courage,  man ! there  is  still  another,  and  three  is  the 
lucky  number*;  either  this  knife  shall  give  me  the 

• In  the  original,  ‘A  le  ttri  venee  lo  Rri.’ 

2 c 


Digitized  by  Google 


386 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


fay,  or  it  shall  take  luy  life  away.”  So  saying  he 
cut  the  third  citron,  and  forth  came  the  third  faiiy, 
who  said  like  the  others,  “ Give  me  to  drink !”  Then 
the  prince  instantly  handed  her  the  water;  and  be- 
hold there  stood  before  him  a delicate  maiden,  white 
as  a junket  with  red  streaks,  who  looked  like  an  A- 
bruzzi  ham  or  a Nola  sausage, — a thing  never  before 
seen  in  the  world,  with  a beauty  without  compare,  a 
fairness  beyond  the  beyonds,  a grace  more  than  the 
most.  On  that  hair  Jove  had  showered  down  gold*, 
of  which  Love  made  his  shafts  to  pierce  aU  hearts; 
that  face  the  god  of  Love  had  tinged  with  red,  that 
some  innocent  soul  should  be  hung  on  the  gallows 
of  desire ; at  those  eyes  the  sun  had  lighted  two  fire- 
works, to  set  fire  to  the  rockets  of  sighs  in  the  breast 
of  the  beholder ; to  the  roses  on  those  lips  Venus  had 
given  their  colour,  to  wound  a thousand  enamoured 
hearts  with  their  thorns ; on  that  breast  Juno  had  shed 
her  milk,  to  nurture  human  desires.  In  a word  she 
was  so  beautiful  from  head  to  foot,  that  a more  ex- 
quisite creature  was  never  seen.  The  prince  knew  not 
what  had  happened  to  him,  and  stood  lost  in  amaze- 
ment, gazing  on  such  a beautiful  offspring  of  a citron ; 
and  he  said  to  himself,  ‘'Are  you  asleep  or  awake,  Ciom- 
metiello  ? are  your  eyes  bewitched,  or  are  you  blind  ? 
What  fair  white  creature  is  this  come  forth  from  a yel- 

• Alluding  to  Dsuiae. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


337 


low  rind  ? what  sweet  dough,  from  the  sour  juice  of  a 
citron  ? what  lovely  maiden  sprung  from  a citron- 
pip  V*  At  length,  seeing  that  it  was  all  tme  and  no 
dream,  he  embraced  the  fair}',  giving  her  a hundred  and 
a hundred  kisses;  and  after  a thousand  tender  words 
had  passed  between  them — words  which,  as  a canto- 
fermo,  had  an  accompaniment  of  sugared  kisses — the 
prince  said,  “ ]\Iy  soul,  I cannot  take  you  to  my  father^s 
kingdom  without  handsome  raiment  worthy  of  so  beau- 
tiful a person,  and  an  attendance  befitting  a queen ; 
therefore  climb  up  into  this  oak-tree,  where  Nature 
seems  purposely  to  have  made  for  us  a hiding-place  in 
the  form  of  a little  room,  and  here  await  my  return ; for 
I will  come  back  on  wings,  befoi’e  a tear  can  dry,  with 
dresses  and  servants,  and  carry  you  off  to  my  kingdom.^^ 
So  saying,  after  the  usual  ceremonies  he  departed. 

Now  a black  slave,  who  was  sent  by  her  mistress  with 
a pitcher  to  fetch  water,  came  to  that  well,  and  seeing 
by  chance  the  reflection  of  the  fairy  in  the  water,  she 
thought  it  was  herself,  and  exclaimed  in  amazement, 
^'Poor  Lucia,  what  do  I see?  me  so  pretty  and  fair, 
and  mistress  send  me  here ! No,  me  will  no  longer 
bear.”  So  saying  she  broke  the  pitcher  and  returned 
home;  and  when  her  mistress  asked  her,  "Why  have 
you  done  this  mischief?”  she  replied,  " Me  go  to  the 
well  alone,  pitcher  break  upon  a stone.”  Her  mis- 

2c2 


Digitized  by  Google 


388 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


tress  swallowed  this  idle  story,  and  the  next  day  she 
gave  her  a pretty  little  cask,  telling  her  to  go  and  fill 
it  with  water.  So  the  slave  returned  to  the  fountain, 
and  seeing  again  the  beautiful  image  reflected  in  the 
water,  she  said  with  a deep  sigh,  ‘‘  Me  no  ugly  slave, 
me  no  broad-foot  goose  ! but  pretty  and  fine  as  mistress 
mine,  and  me  not  go  to  the  fountain !”  So  saying, 
smash  again ! she  broke  the  cask  into  seventy  pieces, 
and  returned  grumbhng  home,  and  said  to  her  mistress, 
“ Ass  come  past,  tub  fell,  down  at  the  well,  and  all  was 
broken  in  pieces.”  The  poor  mistress,  on  hearing  this, 
could  contain  herself  no  longer,  and  seizing  a broom- 
stick she  beat  the  slave  so  soundly  that  she  felt  it  for 
many  days ; then  giving  her  a leather  bag,  she  said, 
Hun,  break  your  neck,  you  wretched  slave,  you  grass- 
hopper-legs, you  black  beetle!  run  and  fetch  me  this 
bag  full  of  water,  or  else  I ’ll  hang  you  like  a polyp  and 
give  you  a good  thrashing.” 

Away  ran  the  slave  heels  over  head,  for  she  had  seen 
the  flash  and  dreaded  the  thunder ; and  while  she  was 
filling  the  leather  bag,  she  tunied  to  look  again  at  the 
beautiful  image,  and  said,  “ Me  fool  to  fetch  water ! 
better  live  by  one’s  wits : such  a pretty  girl  indeed  to 
serve  a bad  mistress  !”  So  saying,  she  took  a large  pin 
which  she  wore  in  her  hair,  and  began  to  prick  holes  in 
the  leather  bag,  which  looked  like  an  open  place  in  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


389 


garden  with  the  rose  of  a watering-pot*  making  a hun- 
dred little  fountains.  When  the  fairy  saw  this  she 
laughed  outright ; and  the  slave  hearing  her,  turned 
and  espied  her  hiding-place  up  in  the  tree;  whereat 
she  said  to  herself,  “ 0 ho ! you  make  me  he  beaten  ? 
but  never  mind !”  Then  she  said  to  her,  “What  you 
doing  up  there,  pretty  lass  And  the  fairy,  who  was 
the  very  mother  of  courtesy,  told  her  all  she  knew, 
and  all  that  had  passed  with  the  prince,  whom  she  was 
expecting  from  hour  to  hour  and  from  moment  to  mo- 
ment, with  fine  dresses  and  servants,  to  take  her  with 
him  to  his  father’s  kingdom,  where  they  should  live 
happy  together. 

When  the  slave,  who  was  full  of  spite,  heard  this,  she 
thought  to  herself  that  she  would  get  this  prize  into  her 
own  hands;  so  she  answered  the  fairy,  “You  expect 
your  husband, — me  come  up  and  comb  your  locks,  and 
make  you  more  smart.”  And  the  fairy  said,  “Ay, 
welcome  as  the  first  of  May !”  So  the  slave  climbed 
up  the  tree,  and  the  fairy  held  out  her  white  hand  to 
her,  which  looked  in  the  black  paws  of  the  slave  like  a 
crystal  mirror  in  a frame  of  ebony.  But  no  sooner  did 
the  slave  begin  to  comb  the  fairy’s  locks,  than  she  sud- 
denly stuck  a hair-pin  into  her  head.  Then  the  faiiy, 
feeling  herself  pricked,  cried  out,  “Dove,  dove!”  and 

* Co  Vacqua  a trademiento. 


Digitized  by  Google 


390 


THE  PEXTAMERONE. 


instantly  she  became  a dove  and  dew  away;  whereupon 
the  slave  stripped  herself,  and  making  a bundle  of  all 
the  rags  that  she  had  worn,  she  threw  them  a mile 
away : and  there  she  sat,  up  in  the  tree,  looking  like  a 
statue  of  jet  in  a house  of  emerald. 

In  a short  time  the  prince  returned  with  a great 
cavalcade,  and  finding  a cask  of  caviar  where  he  had 
left  a pan  of  milk,  he  stood  for  awhile  beside  himself 
.with  amazement.  At  length  he  said,  Who  has  made 
this  great  blot  of  ink  on  the  fine  paper  upon  which  I 
thought  to  write  the  brightest  days  of  my  life  ? Who 
has  hung  with  mourning  this  newly  whitewashed  house, 
where  I thought  to  spend  a happy  life  ? How  comes 
it  that  I find  this  touchstone,  where  I left  a mine  of 
silver,  that  was  to  make  me  rich  and  happy  ?”  But  the 
crafty  slave,  observing  the  prince’s  amazement,  said, 
Do  not  wonder,  my  prince ; for  me  turned  by  a wicked 
spell  from  a white  lily  to  a black  coal.” 

. The  poor  prince,  seeing  that  there  was  no  help  for 
the  mischief,  drooped  his  head  and  swallowed  this  pill ; 
and  bidding  the  slave  come  down  from  the  tree,  he  or- 
dered her  to  be  clothed  from  head  to  foot  in  new  dresses. 
Then  sad  and  sorrowful,  cast-down  and  woebegone,  he 
took  his  way  back  with  the  slave  to  his  own  country, 
where  the  king  and  queen,  who  had  gone  out  six  miles 
to  meet  them,  received  them  with  the  same  pleasure  as 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


391 


a prisoner  feels  at  the  announcement  of  a sentence  of 
Suspendatur*,  seeing  the  fine  choice  their  foolish  son 
had  made,  who  after  travelling  about  so  long  to  find  a 
white  dove  had  brought  home  at  last  a black  crow. 
However,  as  they  could  do  no  less,  they  gave  up  the 
crown  to  their  children,  and  placed  the  golden  tripod 
upon  that  face  of  coal. 

Now  whilst  they  were  preparing  splendid  feasts  and 
banquets,  and  the  cooks  were  busy  plucking  geese, 
killing  little  pigs,  flaying  kids,  basting  the  roast-meat, 
skimming  pots,  mincing  meat  for  dumplings,  larding 
capons,  and  preparing  a thousand  other  delicacies,  a 
beautiful  dove  came  flying  to  the  kitchen  window,  and 
said, 

0 cook  of  the  kitchen,  tell  me,  I pray. 

What  the  king  and  the  slave  are  doing  today.” 

The  cook  at  first  paid  little  heed  to  the  dove;  but 
when  she  returned  a second  and  a third  time,  and  re- 
peated the  same  words,  he  ran  to  the  dining-hall  to  tell 
the  marvellous  thing.  But  no  sooner  did  the  lady  hear 
this  music,  than  she  gave  orders  for  tlie  dove  to  be  in- 
stantly caught  and  made  into  a hash.  So  the  cook 
went,  and  he  managed  to  catch  the  dove,  and  did  all 
that  the  slave  had  commanded.  And  having  scalded 

t.  «.  ‘ Let  him  be  banged.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


392 


THE  PENTAMERONE. 


the  bird,  in  order  to  pluck  it,  he  threw  the  water  with 
the  feathers  out  from  a balcony  on  to  a garden-bed,  on 
which  before  three  days  had  passed  there  sprung  up  a 
beautiful  citron-tree,  which  quickly  grew  to  its  full  size. 

Now  it  happened  that  the  king,  going  by  chance  to 
a window  that  looked  upon  the  garden,  saw  the  tree, 
which  he  had  n*iever  observed  before;  and  calling  the 
cook,  he  asked  him  when  and  by  whom  it  had  been 
planted.  No  sooner  had  he  heard  all  the  particulars  from 
Master  Pot-ladle,  than  he  began  to  suspect  how  matters 
stood ; so  he  gave  orders,  under  pain  of  death,  that  the 
tree  should  not  be  touched,  but  that  it  should  be  tended 
with  the  greatest  care. 

At  the  end  of  a few  days  three  most  beautiful 
citrons  appeared,  similar  to  those  which  the  ogress  had 
given  Ciommetiello ; and  when  they  were  grown  larger, 
he  plucked  them ; and  shutting  himself  up  in  a cham- 
ber, with  a large  basin  of  water  and  the  knife  which  he 
always  carried  at  his  side,  he  began  to  cut  the  citrons. 
Then  it  all  fell  out  with  the  first  and  second  fairy  just 
as  it  had  done  before ; but  when  at  last  he  cut  the  third 
citron,  and  gave  the  fairy  who  came  forth  from  it  to 
drink,  behold  there  stood  before  him  the  self-same 
maiden  whom  he  had  left  up  in  the  tree,  and  who  told 
him  all  the  mischief  that  the  slave  had  done. 

Who  now  can  tell  the  least  part  of  the  delight  the 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


393 


king  felt  at  this  good  turn  of  fortune  ? Who  can  describe 
the  shouting  and  leaping  for  joy  that  there  was  ? for 
the  king  was  swimming  in  a sea  of  delight,  and  was 
wafted  to  heaven  on  a tide  of  rapture.  Then  he  embraced 
the  fairy,  and  ordered  her  to  be  handsomely  drest  from 
head  to  foot ; and  taking  her  by  the  hand  he  led  her 
into  the  middle  of  the  hall,  where  all  the  courtiers 
and  great  folks  of  the  city  were  met  to  celebrate  the 
feast.  Then  the  king  called  on  them  one  by  one,  and 
said,  “ Tell  me,  what  punishment  would  that  person  de- 
serve who  should  do  any  harm  to  this  beautiful  lady?” 
And  one  replied  that  such  a person  would  deserve  a 
hempen  collar — another,  a breakfast  of  stones — a third, 
a good  beating  on  his  stomach — a fourth,  a draught  of 
scammony — a fifth,  a millstone  for  a brooch ; in  short, 
one  said  this  thing  and  another  that.  At  last  he  called 
on  the  black  queen,  and  putting  the  same  question,  she 
replied,  *'Such  a person  would  deseiwe  to  be  burned, 
and  that  her  ashes  should  be  thrown  from  the  roof  of 
the  castle.” 

When  the  king  heard  this  he  said  to  her,  “You 
have  struck  your  own  foot  with  the  axe,  you  have  made 
your  own  fetters,  you  have  sharpened  the  knife  and 
mixed  the  poison,  for  no  one  has  done  this  lady  so  much 
harm  as  yourself,  you  good-for-nothing  creature  ! Know 
you  that  this  is  the  beautiful  maiden  whom  you  wounded 


Digitized  by  Google 


394 


THE  PENTAMEROXE. 


with  the  hair-pin  ? Know  you  that  this  is  the  pretty 
dove  which  you  ordered  to  be  killed  and  cooked  in  a 
stewpan  ? What  say  you  now  ? it  is  all  your  own  do- 
ing, and  one  who  does  ill  may  expect  ill  in  return.”  So 
saying  he  ordered  the  slave  to  be  seized  and  cast  alive 
on  to  a large  burning  pile  of  wood,  and  her  ashes  were 
thrown  from  the  top  of  the  castle  to  all  the  winds  of 
heaven,  verifying  the  truth  of  the  saying,  that 

“ He  who  sows  thorns  should  not  go  barefoot.” 


All  sat  listening  attentively  to  Ciommetella’s  story; 
and  some  praised  the  skill  with  which  she  had  related 
it,  whilst  others  murmured  at  her  indiscretion,  saying 
that  she  ought  not  in  the  presence  of  the  Princess  slave 
to  have  exposed  to  blame  the  ill  deeds  of  another  slave, 
and  run  the  risk  of  stopping  the  game.  But  Lucia  sat 
upon  thorns,  and  kept  turning  and  twisting  herself  about 
all  the  time  the  story  was  related ; insomuch  that  the 
restlessness  of  her  body  betrayed  the  stonn  which  was 
in  her  heart,  at  seeing  in  the  history  of  another  slave 
the  exact  image  of  her  own  tricks.  Gladly  would  she 
have  dismissed  the  whole  company,  but  that,  owing 
to  the  desire  which  the  doll  had  given  her  to  hear  sto- 
ries, she  could  no  more  do  without  them  than  a man 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  THREE  CITRONS. 


396 


bitten  by  a tarantula  can  dispense  with  music;  and 
partly  also  not  to  give  Taddeo  cause  for  suspicion,  she 
swallowed  this  bitter  pill,  intending  to  take  a good  re- 
venge in  proper  time  and  place.  But  Taddeo,  who  had 
grown  quite  fond  of  this  amusement,  made  a sign  to 
Zoza  to  relate  her  story,  and  after  making  her  curtsey 
she  began. 


Digitized  by  Google 


396 


CONCLUSION*. 

“ Truth,  my  lord  Prince,  has  always  been  the  mother 
of  hatred,  and  I would  not  wish  therefore,  by  obeying 
your  commands,  to  offend  any  one  of  those  around  me ; 
for  not  being  accustomed  to  weave  fietions  or  to  invent 
stories,  I am  constrained,  both  by  nature  and  habit, 
to  speak  the  truth ; and  although  the  proverb  says. 
Tell  truth  and  fear  nothing,  yet  knowing  well  that 
truth  is  not  welcome  in  the  presence  of  princes,  I 
tremble  lest  I say  anything  that  may  perchance  offend 
you/^ 

“Say  all  you  wish,”  replied  Taddeo;  “for  nothing 
but  what  is  sweet  can  come  from  those  pretty  lips.” 
These  words  were  stabs  to  the  heart  of  the  Slave,  as 
would  have  been  seen  plainly  if  black  faces  were,  like 
white  ones,  the  book  of  the  soul.  And  she  would  have 
given  a finger  of  her  hand  to  have  been  rid  of  these 
stories,  for  all  before  her  eyes  had  grown  blacker  even 
than  her  face.  She  feared  that  the  last  story  was  only 
the  announcement  of  mischief  that  was  to  follow,  and 

• See  the  Introduction,  pogesi-13. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONCLUSION. 


397 


from  a cloudy  morning  she  foretold  a bad  day.  But 
Zoza  meanwhile  began  to  enchant  all  around  her  with 
the  sweetness  of  her  words,  relating  her  sorrows  from 
first  to  last,  and  beginning  with  her  natural  melancholy, 
— the  unhappy  augm’y  of  all  she  had  to  suffer ; bearing 
from  the  cradle  the  bitter  root  of  her  misfortunes, 
which  on  account  of  a forced  laugh  had  forced  her  to 
shed  so  many  tears.  Then  she  went  on  to  tell  of  the  old 
woman’s  curse,  her  painful  wanderings,  her  arrival  at 
the  fountain,  her  bitter  weeping,  and  the  treacherous 
sleep  which  had  been  the  cause  of  her  ruin. 

The  Slave,  hearing  Zoza  tell  the  story  in  all  its  breadth 
and  length,  and  seeing  the  boat  going  out  of  its  course, 
exclaimed,  “ Be  quiet,  and  hold  your  tongue ! or  little 
Greorgy  shall  not  be  bom  alive.”  But  Taddeo,  who  had 
discovered  how  matters  stood,  could  no  longer  contain 
himself ; so  stripping  off  the  mask  and  throwing  the  sad- 
dle on  the  ground,  he  exclaimed,  “ Let  her  tell  her  story 
to  the  end,  and  have  done  with  this  nonsense  about  little 
George  or  big  George ; for  I have  been  made  a fool  of 
long  enough ; and  if  the  mustard  gets  up  into  my  nose, 
better  that  you  had  never  been  bora  !”  Then  he  com- 
manded Zoza  to  continue  her  story,  in  spite  of  his  wife ; 
and  Zoza,  who  had  only  waited  for  the  sign,  went  on  to  tell 
how  the  Slave  had  found  the  pitcher,  and  had  treache- 
rously robbed  her  of  her  good  fortune.  And  thereupon 


Digitized  by  Google 


398 


THE  PENTAMEEONE. 


she  fell  to  weeping  in  such  a manner,  that  every  person 
present  was  affected  at  the  sight. 

Taddeo,  who  from  Zoza’s  tears  and  the  Slave’s  silence 
discerned  the  truth  of  the  matter,  gave  Lucia  such  a 
scolding  as  he  would  scarcely  have  bestowed  on  a jackass, 
and  made  her  confess  her  treachery  with  her  own  lips. 
Then  he  gave  instant  orders  that  she  should  be  buried 
alive  up  to  her  neck,  that  she  might  die  a more  painful 
death.  And  embracing  Zoza,  he  caused  her  to  be  treated 
with  all  honour  as  his  Princess  and  Avife,  sending  to  in- 
vite the  King  of  Woody- Valley  to  come  to  the  feasts. 

With  these  fresh  nuptials  terminated  the  greatness  of 
the  Slave  and  the  amusement  of  these  Stories.  And 
much  good  may  they  do  you,  and  promote  your  health  1 
and  may  you  lay  them  down  as  unwillingly  as  I do, 
taking  my  leave  with  regret  at  my  heels  and  a good 
spoonful  of  honey  in  my  mouth. 


Digitized  by  Google 


399 


NOTES. 


It  was  my  Intention  to  have  appended  to  this  Collection  of  Sto- 
ries a body  of  illustrative  Notes,  including  Dr.  Grimm’s  highly 
interesting  analysis  of  some  of  the  most  curious  ones ; but  the 
extent  to  which  the  volume  has  already  gone  precludes  my  in- 
dulging this  wish.  I shall  therefore  subjoin  only  a few  remarks 
upon  the  passages  in  the  work  to  which  I have  called  attention  : 
for  these  I am  chiefly  indebted  to  Jlr.  Liebrecht’s  Notes. 


Fairy  Mythology  of  the  Pentamerone. — The  mythological  cha- 
racters introduced  in  these  stories,  Dr.  Grimm  obser\-es,  may  be 
divided  into  two  classes  ; “ the  gentle  and  kind  ones  are  always 
feminine,  the  inimical  and  bad  ones  are  common  to  both  sexes  : 
the  former  are  called  Fate,  the  latter  Uorco  and  Uorca.”  We 
also  meet  with  the  masculine  Fato,  a fay,  who  is  however  not 
necessarily  a beneficent  being,  but  simply  a person  fatato  (fern. 
fatata) — chi  ha  la  fatazione,  i.  e.  under  a spell,  or  is  gifted  with 
supernatural  powers.  On  the  nature  of  the  Uorco  and  Uorca 
much  might  be  said ; I can  only  here  refer  to  Mr.  Keightley’s 
remarks  in  his  Tales  and  Popular  Fictions,  p.  223,  and  his  Fairy 
Mythology,  ii.  237.  The  Oreo  (from  the  Latin  Orcus,)  resembles 
the  Persian  Ghool,  and  corresponds  to  the  French  Ogre ; the 
nearest  approach  to  him  in  Germany  is  the  Wilde  Man.  Mr. 
Liebrecht  has  translated  the  Uorca  by  the  German  Hexe : our 
English  Witch  is  however  a very  different  creature ; the  Ogress 
is,  like  her  husband,  a caimibal,  which  is  a sufficient  distinction. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


400  ■ NOTES. 

The  Monaciello,  or  little  monk,  occurs  frequently  in  these  tales; 
he  is  a kind  of  little  lucubo.  “ The  people  of  Naples,”  says  Mr. 
Keightley,  ” describe  him  as  a short,  thick  kind  of  little  man, 
dressed  in  the  long  garments  of  a monk,  with  a broad-brimmed 
hat.  lie  appears  to  people  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  beckons  to 
them  to  follow  him.  If  they  have  courage  to  do  so,  he  leads 
them  to  some  place  where  treasure  is  concealed.” 

Another  frolicksome  little  Neapolitan  sj)rite  is  the  Mazzamau- 
riello,  of  whose  peculiar  features  I am  ignorant. 

The  Maya  answ'ers  to  our  Sorceress ; she  is  also  called  a Fata, 
as  in  the  stor)’  of  the  Dragon.  A belief  in  Mei*maids,  or  SjTcns, 
prevailed  in  modem  Italy  ; we  have  an  instance  of  it  in  the  Story 
of  ‘ The  Two  Cakes.’ 


Lucia  Canazza.  Page  2. — A kind  of  country-dance  or  Catubba, 
in  which  the  man  says  to  his  partner,  ” Lucia,  Lucia  Canazza !” 
(Lucia,  you  rogue!).  The  poet  Sgruttendio,  in  his  “Tiorba 
e Taccone.”  describes  this  dance  as  follows : — 


“ O Lucia,  all  Lucia 
Lucia,  Lucia  mia, 

Sticnnetc,  accostatc,  nzcccate  cck; 
Vide  sto  core  ca  ride,  e ca  sguazza ; 
Anza  sso  pedc,  ca  zompo,  canazza ; 
Cucurucii, 

Zompa  mo  bu  ; 

Vecco  ca  sauto,  ca  giro,  ca  zompo ; 
Nnante,  che  zompo, 

Zompa  Lucia,  ch’  addanzo  io  dacck; 
Tubba  catubba,  e nonia  niL” 


O Lucia,  ab  Lucia! 

O Lucia,  Lucia  mine  t 

Stretch  younelf,  itretch  yourself,  come  here. 

See  how  I laugh  and  shout  with  joy ; 

Lift  your  feet,  you  rogue,  like  me ; 

Cucurucu 

Jump  and  spring ; 

See,  I leap,  I turn,  I jump ; 

Forward  I spring. 

Spring,  spring,  Lucia,  I dance  now  there, 
Tubba,  Catubba,  and  nania  na.’' 


Second  Day.  Page  115. — The  following  is  the  list  of  games  men- 
tioned here : — Anca  Nicola — Rota  de  li  cauce — Guarda  mogliere 
— Covalera — Compagno  mio  ferutosd — Banno  e commannami- 
ento  — Ben  venga  lo  Masto  — Rentinola  mia  Rentinola  — Sareta 
la  Botta — Ssauta  parmo — Preta’uzino — Pesce  marino — Agnelo 


Digitized  by  Google 


NOTES. 


401 


— Anola  tranola  — Rre  mmazziero  — Gatta  cecata  — La  lampa 
a la  lampa — Stienne  mia  cortina — Ttravo  luongo — Le  Galle- 
nelle  — Lo  viecchio  n’  S benuto — Scarreca  varrile  — Mammara 
a Nnocella  — Saglie  pengola  — Li  Forasciute  — Sgarriglia  Masto- 
datto — Vienela  vienela  — Che  tiene  ’mmano  I’aco  e lo  ffilo  — 
Auciello,  aucicllo,  mancca  de  fieiTO  — Grieco  o Acito  — Aprite, 
aprite  portc  a ppovere  Farcone. 

Covalera  is  similar  to  our  ‘ Hide  and  Seek’ ; but  in  the  Nea- 
politan game  one  seeks  and  all  the  rest  hide  themselves.  Cor- 
tese  (a  contemporarj"  poet  and  friend  of  Basile)  explains  it  thus : 
— The  seeker  is  chosen  by  counting  olf  the  party  (Juocano  a lo 
tuocco) : he  must  declare  that  he  will  not  look  where  the  others 
hide.  Wlien  all  arc  hidden,  they  call  out  ‘ Vienela,  viene !’ 
(Come,  come !).  VrTien  he  finds  any  one,  he  holds  him  fast  and 
cries  out,  ‘Auciello,  auciello !’  (Bird,  bird !),  upon  w'hich  the  one 
caught  has  in  turn  to  seek. 

Cortese,  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Messer  Uneco,  (probably  Basile 
himself  under  this  name,)  gives  a description  of  most  of  these 
games,  and  many  more.  That  called  here  Agnelo  is  probably 
a dance  in  a ring  mentioned  in  his  “ Ciullo  e Penia,”  in  which 
they  sing — 


“ A la  rota,  a la  rota. 
Mastr’  Angelo  ce  joca. 
Nee  joca  la  Zita 
E Madama  Margarita.” 


‘‘  Round  about,  round  about, 

Master  Angel,  play  with  lu. 

The  young  wife  also  plays  with  ns, 
And  Madame  Margarita.” 


The  rest  of  the  verses  are  wanting,  Galiani  observes ; but  the 
song  appears  to  come  from  the  times  of  Charles  III.  of  Durazzo 
(died  1386),  and  Queen  Margaretha  of  Anjou. 

Scarreca  Varrile  (Unload  the  cask)  is  similar  to  our  Leap- 
frog, only  that  one  jumps  upon,  not  over,  the  other’s  back. 

Mammara  a Nocella  is,  I think,  like  our  ‘ Ride  a-cherry-stone.* 
Two  persons  join  hands,  4!ld  form  a seat,  ujx)n  which  a third  sits 

2 D 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


402 


NOTES. 


and  is  thus  carried  about,  whilst  they  sing  this  unmeaning 
verse : 

“ A mammara  e nocella 
No  succo  (le  pcdctella 
Tanta  ne  fece  mammata 
Che  roppe  la  eaudara." 

Aprite,  aprite  porte.  See. — Om  * Frog  in  the  middle  and  can’t 
get  out.’  All  danee  round  in  a circle,  except  the  one  in  the 
middle,  who  sings : — “ Aprite,  ajirite  porte  a povere  Farcone !” 
or  as  Cortese  quotes  them, — “ Aperc  le  porte,  ca  Farcone  vole 
ntrare.”  Upon  which  all  lift  up  their  hands,  without  letting  go, 
and  sing,  “ Le  porte  stnnno  aperte,  si  Farcone  vole  entrare,” 
(The  gates  stand  open,  if  Falcon  wishes  to  come  in).  If  the  Fal- 
con can  then  get  out  of  the  ring,  he  is  free ; if  not,  the  dance 
begins  again.  See  Galiani,  Del  Dial.  Napol.  p.  118. 


Fourth  Day,  Page  235. — The  games  mentioned  here  are  as 
follows : — Sseca-mautone  — Ccapo  o croce  — Cucco  o viento  — 
Mazz’  e ppiuzo  — La  Morra  — Paro  o sparo  — La  Campana  — 
Le  ’Nnorchic  — Le  Ccastellucce  — Accosta  palla  — Chioppa  o 
separa  — Lo  Tuocco  — La  Palla  — Li  Shriglie. 

Capo  0 croce. — A game  known  to  the  Romans  by  the  name 
of  ‘ Caput  aut  navim.’  Our  ‘ Toss  up,’  or  ‘ Head  or  tail.’ 
Mazza  e piuzzo. — Explained  above  at  page  236,  note. 

La  Morra. — A well-known  game.  The  Romans  called  it  ‘Mi- 
care,’  (sc.  digitis).  It  w'as  foi-merly  played  in  Germany,  and 
called  ‘ Fingerlein  snellen.’ 

Paro  0 sparo. — ‘ Even  or  odd.’  It  was  called  by  the  Greeks 
artiazein,  and  by  the  Romans  ‘ Par  impar.’ 

Lo  Tuocco. — Perhaps  our  English  game  of  ‘ Tag  ’ (Touch, 
from  the  Latin  tango  or  tago),  in  which  one,  who  is  called  Tag, 
runs  after  and  tries  to  touch  the  oth^ ; when  he  succeeds  he 
cries  Tag,  and  the  one  touched  becomes  Tag  in  his  turn. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NOTES. 


403 


Galiani  (in  his  treatise  Del  Dial.  Napol.  p.  114)  has  collected 
the  little  songs,  or  fragments  of  songs,  found  in  Basile  and  Cor- 
tese.  The  first  here  given  runs  as  follows  : — 

“ Fniste  cci  Margaritella, 

Ca  si  troppo  scannalosa, 

Che  ped’  ogne  poco  cosa 
Tu  Tuoje  'nnanze  la  gonncUa, 

Fruste  cca  Margaritella.” 

It  is  vety  difficult,  Galiani  observes,  to  determine  the  date  of 
the  origin  of  this  song,  as  there  have  in  all  ages  been  many  Mar- 
garitas  who  have  in  like  manner  demanded  a httle  gown.  The 
seeond  song,  which  Galiani  has  overlooked,  runs  thus : — 

“ Vorria  crudel  tomare, 

Chianelletto,  e po  stare 
Sotto  sso  pede,  ma  si  lo  ssaplsse, 

Pe  straziaremc  sempre  corrarrisse.” 


The  third  song  he  assigns  to  the  time  of  Frederic  II. : — 


" Jpsce,  jesce  sole, 
Scaglicnta  ’Mperatore, 
Scanniello  mio  d’argiento, 
Che  bale  quatto  ciento, 

• Ciento  cinquanta, 

Tutta  la  notte  canta, 

Canta  viola 

J/O  masto  dc  la  scola, 

O masto,  masto, 


Mannacenne  priesto, 

Ca  scenne  Masto  Tiesto, 

Co  llanze  c co  spate, 

Dali'  aucielle  accompagnato. 
Sona,  sona  zampognella, 

Ca  t’accatto  la  gonnella 
La  gonnella  de  scarlato. 

Si  non  suone  te  rompo  la  capo.” 


The  fourth  he  thinks  originated  in  the  time  of  the  kings  of 
the  House  of  Anjou,  and  may  allude  to  their  journeys  to  Pro- 
vence and  Lombardy.  The  two  last  were  formerly  sung  with 
dancing  in  a ring,  , , 

“ Non  ehiovere,  non  chiovere, 

Ca  voglio  ire  'n  Franza, 

Da  Franza  a Lombardia, 

Dove  sth  Maddamma  Luda.” 


Digitized  by  Google 


404 


NOTES. 


Sword-dance.  Page  241. — This  amusement,  which  Basile  refers 
to  in  several  places,  is  common  to  many  countries,  and  of  ancient 
origin.  In  Naples  the  people  dance  it  either  with  naked  swords 
in  their  hands,  or  with  sticks  uTcathed  round  with  flowers  : hence 
the  dance  has  the  name  of  ’Mperticata  (stick-dance) ; it  is  more 
commonly  called  Intrezzata.  Dming  the  Carnival,  parties  of 
men  of  the  lower  class  dance  this  in  masks.  The  song  which 
accompanies  the  dance  is  also  called  'Mperticata.  The  custom 
prevailed  in  Spain  in  ancient  times,  and  is  mentioned  in  Don 
Quixote.  Mr.  Liebrecht  suggests  that,  if  not  derived  from  the 
Romans,  it  may  have  been  introduced  into  Naples  by  the  Spa- 
niards. In  Germany  the  Waffentanz  w'as  also  of  very  ancient 
origin,  and  was  brought  to  this  country  by  the  Anglo-Saxons. 
See  Strutt’s  Sports  and  Pastimes  for  a description  of  the  Moms 
Dancers.  Until  within  a few  years,  it  was  retained  in  the  annual 
processions  of  the  civic  Guild  at  Nonvich — a cmious  relic  of  our 
ancient  pageantry,  which  the  ruthless  spirit  of  innovation  has 
sw'ept  away.  The  Norwich  “ Whifflers,”  or  sword-dancers,  ac- 
companied by  “ Snap,”  (a  large  figure  of  a ebagon,  derived  from 
the  story  of  St.  George)  preceded  the  Mayor  and  Corporation  in 
their  procession  on  Guild-day : the  whifflers  were  di'essed  in  a 
motley  costume,  and  whiffled  or  swung  a sword  about  them  witji 
inconceivable  dexterity.  The  whifflers  are  mentioned  by  Shake- 
spear,  and  were  formerly  known  in  London  pageants. 


THE  END. 

964638 


Printed  by  RicliArd  and  John  B.  Taylor,  Bed  Lion  Court,  Fleet  Street. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google
