The Beginnings of Life (Henry Charlton Bastian, 1872)
=====================================================
H. Charlton Bastian — The Beginnings of Life (London, 1872). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (beginningslife00bastgoog).

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


THE   BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


TOU  XT' 


THE 


BEGINNINGS    OF    LIFE: 


BEING 
SOME    ACCOUNT   01*    THE   NATURE, 
MODES    OF   ORIGIN  AND    TRANSFORMATIONS 

OF 

LOWER    ORGANISMS. 


BY 


H.   CHARLTON   BASTIAN,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S. 

Fellorw  ^ the  ReytU  CaiUge  ^Physicians; 
Prtfessor  0/"  Path^«gicml  Anatomy  in  University  C«lUge,  London  ; 
Physician  to  University  College  Hospital; 
AssiUani  Physician  to  the  National  Hospital /or  the  Paralyse  and  Epileptic, 


IN    TWO    VOLUMES. 


VOL.  II. 


IVITH   NUMEROUS  ILLUSTRA 


MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 
1S12. 


fflliS'O 


r.  CaaibE,H.A.,  E.B.CI 


CONTENTS. 

PART  U.     [Can/ifiMd.] 
Archebiosis. 

CHAPTER   Xn. 
Explanaticm  of  Apparent  Discrepancies  and  Difficulties     ..  1-41 

CHAPTER   Xm. 

Crystals  and  Organisms :  Causes  which  determine  their  Form 

and  Structure  ..  ..  ..  ..         43^85 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
The  Fundamental  Properties  of  Living  Matter  ..      86-119 

CHAPTER   XV. 

Development  of  the  Primordial  Forms  of  Life :  their  Relation- 
ship to  one  another  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..     110-167 

PART  III. 
Heterogenesis. 

CHAPTER   XVI. 
Andent  and  Modem  Views  concerning  Heterogenesis       ..     171-19T 

CHAPTER  XVn. 
Synthetic  Heterogenesis  ..  ..         ..  ..  ..     192-2^3 

CHAPTER  XVni. 
The  Panspermic  Hypothesis 264-306 


vi  CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER   XIX. 
Heterogenesis  in  Higher  Organisms  ..  ..  ..  ..     307-368 

CHAPTER   XX. 
Heterogenesis  in  Lower  Organisms    ..         ..         ..  ..     369-437 

CHAPTER   XXL 

Transformations  of  Euglenae  and  other  Organisms:  Modes 

of  Origin  of  Ciliated  Infusoria    ..  ..  ..  ..     428-490 

CHAPTER   XXU. 

Transformations  of  Ciliated  Infusoria :  Modes  of  Origin  of 

Rotifers,  Tardigrades,  and  Nematoids      ..  ..  ..     491-540 

CHAPTER   XXni. 
Individuals,  Ephemeromorphs,  and  Species     ..  ..         ..     54 1-604 

CHAPTER   XXIV. 
General  Considerations :  Conclusion    . .  . .  . .  . .     605-640 


APPENDICES. 

AppencUx  A.  On  some  Organisms  and  other  Products  of 
Uncertain  Nature  met  with  in  boiled  Solutions  of 
Ammonic  Tartrate,  and  also  in  others  containing 
Ammonic  Silicate  ..  ..•         ..  ..  ..  ..  i-xiv 

Appendix  B.  On  the  Living  Matter  and  Organisms  con- 
tained within  Crystals  of  Neutral  Ammonic  Tartrate      xv-xxix 

Appendix  C.    Comparative  Experiments        ..  ..  ..       xxz-lii 

Appendix  D.    On  the  Variability  of  the  Lower  Forms  of 

Living  Matter         . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .     liii-cviii 

Appendix  E.   On  the  *  Germ-theory '  in  relation  to  Epidemic 

and  'Specific'  Contagious  Diseases       ..         ..  ..       cix-clv 


I 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Fit  Pom* 

59.    CeUuIar  Forms  of  Crystalline  Matter  from  a  Solution  of 

Ammonic  Sulphate  and  Potassic  Bichromate     ..  ..       60 

40.  Globalar  Carbonate  of  Lime  (Rainey)         ..  ..  63 

41.  Globular  Carbonate  of  Lime  in  later  stages — Formation  of 

Calcoli  by  *  Molecular  Coalescence'  (Rainey)    ..  ..       63 

43.  DifiGerent  kinds  of  Starch-granules  contrasted  with  Globular 

Carbonate  of  lime  (Rainey)         ..  ..  ..  ..       66 

4J.     Peculiar  Forms  assumed  by  Albuminoid  Concretions  from 

an  old  Infusion  of  Hay     ..  ..  ..         ..  ..       69 

44.  Difierent    Forms    assumed    by    Crystals    of  Ammoniaco- 

magnesian  Phosphate  (Beale)        ..         ..         ..         ..      114 

45.  Evolution  of  a  Primordial  Speck  of  Living  Matter  through 

Torula-forms  into  Fungus-filaments  (Pouchet)   ..         ..      115 

46.  Bacteria  growing  into  Vibriones,  Leptothrix,  and  Spirillum     159 

47.  Different  Forms  of  Torulae  (Turpin)  ..  ..  *.      141 

4S.     Forms  illostrating  the  Interchangeability  of  Tomlx  and 

Bacteria         ..  ..  ..         ..  14a 

49.  Development  of  Torabe  found  in  Cider  (Pouchet)  ..  147 

50.  Another  Fungus  found  in  Cider  (Pouchet)  ..  152 

51.  Mode  of  Origin  of  PenidUium  (Pineau)     ••         ..  ..  195 
53.  Origin  of  Mooas  lens  (Pouchet)       ..         ..         ..  ..  197 

53.  Devdopment  of  Corpuscular  Organisms  from  Pellicle     . .     199 

54.  Gradual  enlargement  of  Corpuscular  Orgamsms,  and  con- 

version of  one  of  them  into  an  Amoeba     . .  .«     201 

55.  Mode  of  Origin  of  Germs  of  Fungi  from  portibtis  of  the 

Pellicle  upon  an  Infusion  of  Hay  ^         ..         ..     303 

j^     Simplest  Mode  of  Defelopment  of  Monads  and  Fuogi  from 

the  Feltiole 211 

^.     Segmentation  of  EmbiTOiial  Areas  into  Monads   ..  3i6 


viii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Fig.  Page 

58.  Phases  in  the  Life-history  of  Monads  and  Amoebae         ..  220 

59.  Similar  Organisms,  segmenting  into  brown   Fungus-germs 

or  developing  into  Amoebae           ..          ..          ..          ..  227 

60.  Segmentation  of  Embryonal  Areas  into  Fungus-germs     ..  232 

61.  Mode  of  Origin  and  Development  of  an  Embryo  of  un- 

certain nature           ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  236 

6a.    Ciliated  Infusoria         ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  138 

63.  Mode  of  Origin  of  Parameda  from  the  Pellicle,  after  Pouchet  240 

64.  Mode  of  Origin  of  Parameda           ..          ..          ..          ..  247 

65.  Mode  of  Origin  and  Development  of  Vorticellae  (Pineau)  253 

66.  Fungus    with    minute    spores,    found    in    a    dosed     flask 

(Pouchet) 287 

67.  Development  of  Embryos  in  Paramedum  (Cohn)             ..  294 

68.  Development  of  Embryos  in  dying  Kerona  (Pouchet)      ..  295 

69.  Pouchet's  Apparatus   for  showing  that   Ciliated   Infusoria 

are  derived  from  the  Pellicle        ..         ..          ..         ..  300 

70.  Conversion  of  Milk-globules  into  Fungus-germs  (Turpin)  313 

71.  Origin  of  Amylobacter  within  cells  and  laticiferous  vessels 

of  Plants  (Tr^cul) ..  319 

72.  Illustrating  the  Development   of  Boirytis   Bassiana   in   the 

Blood  of  Animals  suffering  from   Muscardine   (Gu^rin- 
M6neville)      ..  ..  ..  ••  >•  ••  ..327 

73.  More    developed    form    of  Botrytis  Bassiana   as   it   grows 

through  the  Tissues  (Audouin)     ..          ..          ..          ..  329 

74.  Psorosperms  and  thdr  Mode  of  Development  (Balbiani)..  355 

75.  Heterogenetic  Origin  of  Monads  from  Nitella  (Carter)  379 

76.  Mode  of  Origin  of  Trichomonas,  and  its  Transformation 

into  Actinophrys  and  Amoeba  (Nicolet)             ..          ..  384 

77.  Formation  of   Pythium  and  of  Astasise  within    cells    of 

Spirogyra  (Carter)   . .          . .          . .          . .          . .          . .  390 

78.  Transformations  of  Vaucheria  protoplasm  ..          ..          ..  397 

79.  Lower  Transformations  of  the  substance  of  Nitella          ..  403 

80.  Higher  Transformations  of  the  substance  of  Nitella        . .  405 

81.  Transformations  of  Chlorophyll  Corpusdes            ..         ..  409 


*  UST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS,  ix 

Ft^.  Pagt 

S2.     Modes  of  oiigin  of  Desmids  and  Diatoms  . .  41 7 

83.  Origin  of  Euglenae  from  the  Cell-contents  of  a  Conferva 

(Gros)  ..  ..  ..         ..  ..  ..  ..      421 

84.  Resolution  of  Euglenae  into  Smaller  Organisms  . .     438 

85.  Origin  of  Diatoms,  Desmids,  Pediastrese,  and   Algae  from 

Euglenae  and  other  V^etal  Matrices  (Gros)       ..  447 

S6.     Modes  of  Origin  and  Development  of  CUiated  Infusoria . .      463 

87.  Development  of  Infusoria  from  the  Protoplasm  of  Chara 

(Nicolet)        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  476 

88.  Mode  of  Origin  (?)  and  Development  of  Otostoma  (Carter)    481 

89.  Arcelbe  and  Peranema  derived  from  Pangenesis  of  Rotifers 

(Gros)  486 

90.  Transformations  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  (Pineau  and  Haime)    495 

91.  Conversion  of  Encysted  Euglena  into  Rotifer  (Gros)       ..     508 

92.  Origin  of  similar  Rotifers  from  Vorticellae  and  by  direct 

Transformation  of  Algoid  Corpuscles      ..  ..  511 

93.  Transformation  of  a  mass  of  Chlorococcus  Corpuscles  into 

the  'winter  ^gs'  of  Hydatina  senta       ..  ..         ..      516 

94.  Origin  of  Nematoids  from  Euglenae  (Gros)  ..  527 

95.  Development  of  Nematoids  from  Spores  of  Vaucheria     ..      531 

96.  Homogenetic  Pangenesis  in  Tardigrades  (Gros)     ..  550 

APPENDICES. 

a.       Sarcina    and    allied    products   from    Solutions    containing 

Amnionic  Tartrate  and  Sodic  Phosphate  ..  ..        iv 

h.       Mass  of  Spiral  Fibre  from  a  Solution  of  Ammonic  Tartrate 

and  Sooic  Phosphate  . .  . .         . .  vi 

c.  Embryonic  Spiral  Fibres   from   a  Solution   of  Ammonic 

Carbonate  and  Sodic  Phosphate  ..  ..         ..       vii 

d.  Sporangium-like  body  amidst  mass  of  Spiral  Fibre         ..        ix 

t.        Spiral    Fibre    vrith   Sarcina-like   bodies   attached,   from   a 

Solution  of  Sodic  Silicate  and  Ammonic  Phosphate    ..      xiv 

/.        Spores  and  Filaments  similar  to  those  found  within  Crystals 

of  Anunonic  Tartrate         ..         ..         ..         .•         ••    xviii 


PART  II. 


ARCHEBIOSIS. 


[Conhnued,] 


THE    BEGINNINGS   OF  LIFE. 


CHAPTER    XII. 


EXPLANATION    OF  APPARXNT   DISCRXPANaSS   AND  DIFFICULTIES. 


Importuit  oonsideimttons.  Dead  Bacteria  in  Air  not  sufficient.  They 
are  unable  to  resist  Desiccation.  Living  Bacteria  not  abundant  in 
Air.  Experiments  with  bent-neck  Flasks.  Refutations  of  Pasteur's 
Theory.  Value  of  Comparative  Experiments.  Rival  Theories  of 
Fermentation.  Pasteur's  results  explicable  by  either  of  them.  Two 
Degrees  of  Fermentability.  Distribution  of  Atmospheric  Particles. 
Thdr  Subsidence.  Pasteur's  '  ens^encements.'  Explanation.  Ex- 
periments with  airless-flasks.  Conclusions  oonoeming  Fermentation 
and  Archebioais. 

Formatioo  of  Specks  of  Living  Matter.  Transition  from  colloidal  mole- 
cules to  *  physiological  units.'  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  Argument. 
Chemical  Affinities  producing  complex  Compounds.  Universal  play 
of  *  natural  affinities.'  Growth  of  Plants.  Easy  Transition  from 
not-living  to  '  living.'  Growth  and  Reproduction  in  Saline  Solutions. 
Influence  of  pre-existing  Protoplasm.  Last  remnants  of  '  Vitalism.' 
Changes  in  impure  Saline  Solutions.  Influence  of  Organic  Impurities. 
Origination  and  Growth  compared.  Pure  Crystalloids.  Easy  transi- 
tions from  crystalloid  to  colloid  Mode  of  Combination.  Colloids  as 
Dynamic  Aggregates. 

IN  order  to  ensure  the  more  general  acceptance  of 
the  conclusions  concerning  the  nature  and  origin 
of  Living  Matter  to  which  the  experimental  evidence 


VOL*  II* 


B 


'J^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


has  Compelled  us  to  arrive,  it  remains  for  me  to  show, 
how  the  facts,  to  which  M.  Pasteur  and  others  call 
attention  in  support  of  the  atmospheric  ^germ  theory,* 
are  capable  of  quite  a  different  interpretation;  and  how 
(in  the  presence  of  new  fects)  the  initiation  of  fer- 
mentative processes  is  even  more  explicable  fix)m  a 
point  of  view  which  they  almost  utterly  n^lect,  than 
it  is  from  their  own  standpoint.  M.  Pasteur's  celebrated 
experiments  with  fermentable  fluids  which  had  been 
boiled  in  flasks  with  long,  narrow,  and  bent  necks; 
those  where  the  fluids  were  exposed  to  the  air  of 
various  localities ;  and  those  in  which  previously  sterile 
fluids  had  been  rendered  fertile  by  an  inoculation  with 
atmospheric  particles — all  these,  so  far  from  being  con- 
clusively in  favour  of  his  own  doctrines,  are  even  much 
more  explicable  in  accordance  with  the  wider  doctrines 
concerning  fermentation  held  by  Baron  Liebig. 

Two  considerations — both  of  them  almost  ignored 
by  M.  Pasteur  and  his  followers — require  to  be  con- 
tinually borne  in  mind  in  interpreting  the  results  of 
any  experiments  bearing  upon  the  cause  of  fermentation 
and  upon  the  possibility  of  the  de  novo  origination  of 
organisms.     They  are  these : — 

I.  That  dust  filtered  from  the  atmosphere  has  not 
been  proved  to  contain  living  Bacteria^  though  it 
is  well  known  to  contain  a  multitude  of  organic 
particles,  which,  in  accordance  with  Liebig's 
hypothesis,  are  capable  of  acting  as  ferments  in 
the  presence  of  water. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


%.  That,  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  evolution- 
ists, ^life'  may  be  considered  to  represent  the 
sum-total  of  properties  displayed  by  certain  kinds 
of  organic  matter;  and  that  these  higher  proper- 
ties may  be  deteriorated  or  rendered  non-existent 
by  an  amount  of  heat  which  may  not  be  adequate 
wholly  to  decompose  the  organic  matter  itself. 

The  first  is  a  very  important  consideration.  It  should 
be  dearly  understood,  that  even  if  we  could  demon- 
strate the  presence  of  Bacteria  in  the  atmosphere,  this 
alone  would  not  be  enough.  The  panspermatists  ought 
to  be  able  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  universally 
disseminated  Yvfvca^  Bacteria^  and  therefore  they  may  be 
fairly  asked  to  show — what  as  yet  they  have  never 
attempted — ^that  Bacteria  are  well  capable  of  resisting 
such  an  amount  of  desiccation  as  must  be  involved  by 
their  presence  for  an  indefinite  time  in  the  atmosphere 
even  of  the  hottest  and  driest  regions  of  the  earth.  For 
organic  substances  in  solution  do  not  only  putrefy  in 
moist  weather  or  moist  climates ;  they  putrefy,  on  the 
contrary,  most  rapidly  and  surely  when  the  temperature 
is  high,  and  quite  irrespectively  of  the  amount  of 
moisture  contained  in  the  atmosphere.  The  capability 
of  resisting  the  eflFects  of  desiccation — ^the  possession 
of  which,  by  Bacteria^  is  so  necessary  for  the  truth  of 
M.  Pasteur's  argument— ought  to  have  been  shown  by 
scientific  evidence  to  be  a  real  attribute  of  such  organ- 
isms; thou^  it  seems,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  been 

B  2 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


assumed  to  exist  by  nearly  all  those  who  have  taken 
part  in  the  controversies  concerning  the  possibility  of 
'spontaneous  generation/  This  error  may  again  be 
ascribed  to  the  misguiding  influence  of  a  treacherous 
analogy.  Whilst  it  may  be  true  that  certain  seeds 
and  spores,  and  also  that  Rotifers,  'Sloths/  and  some 
Nematoids  are  capable  of  resisting  the  influence  of  a 
prolonged  exposure  to  desiccating  influences,  it  may 
well  be  asked,  whether  the  same  fact  necessarily  holds 
good  for  organisms  such  as  Bacteria^  having  no  chi- 
tinous  or  other  envelopes  to  protect  them,  and  which 
are  merely  minute  fragments  of  naked  protoplasm. 
Having  elsewhere  ^  shown  how  far  presumptions  had 
stolen  a  march  upon  established  facts,  in  reference  to 
the  supposed  possession  of  a  similar  property  by  the 
Free  Nematoids,  my  eyes  were  opened  to  the  reality 
of  this  uncertainty  with  regard  to  Bacteria.  It  is, 
however,  no  easy  matter  definitely  to  prove  or  to 
disprove  the  possession  of  this  property  by  organisms 
so  minute  as  Bacteria^  and  therefore  so  difficult  to 
identify.  If  dried  Bacteria  are  added  to  a  drop  of  a 
suitable  solution — similar  to  that  in  which  they  had 
been  bred — it  soon  becomes  quite  impossible  to  dis- 
tinguish those  which  have  been  added  from  those  which 
arise   in   the   fluids.     Taking   into   consideration   the 

^  'Philosophical  Transactions/  1866,  pp.  616-619. 

'  And  similarly  if  we  introduce  dried  Bacteria  into  a  solution  which 
will  nourish  them,  although  it  had  previously  no  tendency  to  breed  them 
de  novot  and  Bacteria  are  subsequently  produced,  we  cannot  safely  affirm 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


fate  of  other  simple  organisms,  however,  it  is  by  no 
means  improbable  that  they  should  be  killed  even  by 
a  short  desiccation.  I  have  found,  for  instance,  that 
desiccation  for  half-an-hour  in  a  room  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  65**F  suffices  to  kill  all  the  larger,  naked,  lower 
organisms  with  which  I  have  experimented,  including 
Aracebse,  Monads,  Chlamydomonads,  Euglenx,  Desmids, 
Vorticelke,  and  other  Ciliated  Infusoria. 

And  as  a  result  of  his  more  recent  experiments, 
Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson  ^  has  definitely  come  to  the  con- 
dusion,  not  only  that  ^  the  germinal  particles  of  micro- 
zymes  are  rendered  inactive  by  thorough  drying  without 
the  application  of  heat,'  but  also  that  *  fully-formed 
Bacteria  are  deprived  of  their  power  of  further  develop- 
ment by  thorough  desiccation.'  The  amount  of  desic- 
cation induced  being  merely  that  occasioned  by  keeping 
them  for  two  or  three  days  in  an  uncovered  condition 
exposed  to  a  temperature  of  104**  F,  which  is,  of  course, 
a  br  lower  temperature  than  that  to  which  the  Bacteria 
and  their  germs  would  be  exposed  in  the  atmosphere, 
in  many  hot  countries,  where  putrefaction,  nevertheless, 
occurs  with  amazing  facility. 

Certain  other  evidence  also  seems  to  speak  most 
authoritatively  against  the  supposition  that  the  air  con- 

ibat  these  are  the  Intimate  descendants  of  the  dried  Bacteria  which  were 
styvni,  because  we  cannot  be  sare  that  the  dried  mass  may  not  have 
*Cted  as  a  mere  dead  fennent,  which  by  its  motoT'deeay  determined  a  rf* 
•0*0  prodoctioQ  of  Baettria  in  the  test4iquid. 
^  Thirteenth  Report  of  the  Medical  Officer  of  the  Privy  Council,  p.  61. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


tains  any  notable  quantity  of  living  Bacteria^  or  of  their 
germs,  whether  visible  or  invisible.  I  have  always 
found  that  a  simple  solution  of  ammonic  tartrate, 
which  has  been  placed — without  previous  boiling — in 
a  corked  bottle  of  greater  capacity,  will  become  turbid 
in  two  or  three  days,  owing  to  the  presence  of  myriads 
oi  Bacteria  i  whilst  a  similar  solution,  previously  boiled, 
may  remain  for  ten  days,  three  weeks,  or  more,  without 
showing  the  least  trace  of  turbidity,  although  the  open 
neck  of  the  bottle  or  flask  in  which  it  is  contained  may 
be  covered  only  by  a  loose  cap  of  paper.  And  yet, 
at  any  time,  in  order  to  make  this  fluid  become  turbid 
in  twenty-four  to  forty-eig^t  hours,  all  that  one  has 
to  do  is  to  bring  it  into  contact  with  a  small  glass 
rod  which  has  just  been  dipped  into  a  solution  con- 
taining living  Bacteria '. 

If  we  find  that  an  eminently  inoculable  fluid  will 
remain  for  two  or  three  weeks,  or  perhaps  more,  in 
contact  with  the  air  without  becoming  turbid,  though 
it  will  always  become  turbid  in  two  or  three  days  if 
brought  into  contact  with  living  Bacteria^  what  can  we 
conclude,  but  that  living  Bacteria  are  not  very  common 
in  the  atmosphere  ?  These  most  striking  facts  can  be 
easily  verified  by  other  observers  2. 

On   this  subject   also,  I  am  glad  to  find  that  my 

*  The  solution  during  the  whole  time  being  exposed  to  a  temperature 
of  75' to  85"  F. 

*  Somewhat  similar  facts  were  indeed  first  recorded  by  Prof.  Cantoni, 
*  Rendiconti  di  Lombardo,'  Nov.  25, 1869. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


conclusions  have  been  independently  confirmed  by  the 
results  oi  the  recent  ezperimients  of  Dr.  Burdon  Sander- 
son ^  Speaking  q£  ^Pasteur^s  solution,'  with  which 
he  had  been  working,  he  says: — ^^No  amount  of  ex- 
posure has  any  effect  in  determining  the  evolution  of 
microzymes.  This  conclusion,  although  it  is  in  com- 
plete accordance  with  what  we  have  already  learned  as 
to  their  relations,  both  in  the  visible  and  invisible 
state,  to  moisture,  is  of  such  importance  that  it  seemed 
necessary  to  establish  it  by  special  experiments/  The 
foUowing  is  the  most  striking  of  the  experiments  which 
were  made  with  this  object  in  view.  ^January  7. — The 
bent  glass  tube  for  the  absorption  of  carbonic  acid  by 
potash,  known  as  Liebig's  bulbs,  was  heated  to  zod'C 
and  filled  with  boiling  test  solution.  It  was  then 
attached^  by  a  vulcanite  connector  which  had  been 
[deviously  boiled,  to  an  aspirator.  During  the  follow- 
ing week  air  was  drawn  through  it  for  a  few  hours 
daily.  On  the  23rd  there  were  numerous  Torula  cells 
with  submerged  tufts  of  mycelium  in  the  liquid,  espe- 
cially in  those  bulbs  to  which  the  air  had  access  first, 
but  no  trace  of  microzymes.  The  result  shows  in  the 
most  striking  manner  not  only  that  asr  is  entirely  free 
fnm  living  m$cro%jmes^  but  that  the  activity  of  the 
development  of  penicillium  is  in  proportion  to  the 
degree  of  exposure.' 
M.  Pasteur^  Prof.  Lister,  Prof.  Huxley,  and  others, 

'  Loc  cit,  p.  59. 


)'  that  ori^.inisnis  arc  not  hmnd  in  s 
'  the  hypothetical  atmospheric  ^|i;eri 
he  Bacteria  and  Vihriones  of  infusions  a 
jd,  are  arrested  either  in  the  flexures  of 
he  cotton -wool.  It  is  obvious,  how( 
explanation  be  the  correct  one,  the  pre 
be  equally  well  marked  in  all  cases — c 
:ly  of  the  amount  of  albumenoid  or  otl 

material  which  the  fluid  contains, 
s  to  the  rule  should  at  once  suggest  < 
validity  of  the  explanation, 
it  was  shown*  in  1865  by  M.  Victor 
lilst  some  fluids  were   preserved   afte: 
oiled   in  a  vessel  of  this   kind,  othe 
:ed   to   the   same    treatment,  speedily 
Tom  the  presence  of  Bacteria  and  oth( 

By    these    experiments    he    ascertaii 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


Strong  infusions  frequently  changed,  whilst  weak  ones 
mi^t  be  preserved ;  and  that  even  a  strong  infusion 
might  be  prevented  from  undergoing  change,  if  the 
period  of  ebullition  were  sufficiently  prolonged.  Prof. 
Cantoni  also  found  that  VsMones  were  plentifully  pro- 
duced within  such  flasks  when  very  strong  organic 
fluids  were  employed,  and  when  the  daily  temperature 
of  the  air  was  not  less  than  77°F  i. 

The  fluids  most  frequently  employed  by  M.  Pasteur 
were  yeast- water,  yeast-water  sweetened  by  sugar,  urine, 
infusion  of  beet-root,  and  infusion  of  pear. 

Taking  urine  as  a  fair  example  of  such  a  fluid,  I 
have  found  that  the  statements  of  M.  Pasteur  and  of 
Prof.  Lister  are  perfectly  correct.  This  fluid  may 
generally  remain  for  an  indefinite  period  in  such 
vessels  without  becoming  turbid,  or  undergoing  any 
apparent  change.  The  same  is  generally  found  to  be 
the  case  with  an  infusion  of  turnip;  and  occasionally 
an  infusion  of  hay  may  be  similarly  prevented  from 
undergoing  fermentation.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the 
turnip-solution  be  neutralized  by  the  addition  of  a  little 
ammonic  carbonate,  or  liquor  potassse ;  or,  better  still, 
if  even  half  a  grain  of  new  cheese  be  added  to  the 

*  After  speaking  of  the  vital  resistance  to  heat  of  Vibriones,  he  says 
(•Gat  Med.  Italiana-Lombaidia/  serie  vi.  torn.  I.  1868)  •.— •  The  tempe- 
latnre  at  whidi  the  production  of  Vibriones  ceases  in  an  organic  solution 
varies  with  the  quality  of  the  organic  matter  dissolved  in  it,  with  the 
qsantity  of  air  endosed  in  the  flasks  together  with  the  solution,  and  also 
(and  more  notably)  with  the  temperature  of  the  air  in  which  the  flaska 
vt  kept  after  bdog  heated.' 


lO  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

infusion  before  it  is  boiled,  then  I  have  found  that  the 
fluid  speedily  becomes  turbid,  owing  to  the  appearance 
of  multitudes  of  Bacteria\  In  an  infusion  to  which 
a  fragment  of  cheese  had  been  added,  I  have  seen  a 
pellicle  form  in  three  days,  which,  on  microscopical 
examination^  proved  to  be  composed  of  an  aggregation 
of  Bacteria^  FiMtmeSy  and  Leptothrix  filaments.  Again, 
a  mixture  of  albuminous  urine  and  turnip-infusion  has 
rapidly  become  turbid  in  a  vessel  of  this  kind  owing  to 
the  presence  of  multitudes  of  Bacteria^  and  so  also  has 
a  mixture  containing  one-third  of  urine  with  two-thirds 
of  infusion  of  turnip  2. 

Other  infusions  have  been  boiled  for  ten  minutes  in 
a  vessel  with  a  horizontal  neck  two  feet  long,  into 
which,  during  ebullition,  a  good  plug  of  cotton-wool 
had  been  carefully  pushed  down  for  a  depth  of  twelve 
or  fourteen  inches,  and  cautiously  increased  in  quantity 
during  the  continuance  of  the  ebullition.  Immediately 
after  the  withdrawal  of  the  heat,  the  plug  of  wool  was 
made  more  dense,  and  the  outer  portion  of  the  tube 
was  rapidly  filled  up  with  the  same  material  to  the 
whole  depth  of  twelve  or  fourteen  inches.  When  pre- 
served in  such  a  vessel,  a  specimen  of  urine  remained 
unchanged ;  a  hay-infusion  also  underwent  no  apparent 

^  Of  course  germs  may  be  in  the  minute  fragments  of  cheese,  just  as 
they  may  be  in  the  organic  infusion  itself.  All,  however,  must  be  killed 
during  the  process  of  ebullition,  and  the  subsequent  results  must  be 
ascribed  in  part  to  the  superior  molecular  mobility  still  remaining  in 
the  particles  of  boiled  cheese. 

*  See  numerons  experiments  recorded  in  Appntdix  C. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  1 1 

alteration;  whilst  a  very  strong  infusion  of  turnip 
became  turbid  in  five  days,  and  ultimately  showed  a 
large  quantity  of  deposit  ^ 

The  results  not  being  uniform,  the  explanation 
ofiered  by  M.  Pasteur  and  others,  as  to  the  cause  of  the 
preservation  of  the  particular  fluids  with  which  they 
experimented,  is  at  once  rendered  doubtful.  More  espe- 
cially is  there  room  for  doubt  on  this  subject  when  the 
result  of  the  experiment  can  be  predicated  beforehand, 
within  certain  limits,  as  I  have  found,  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  fluid  employed.  If  the  organisms 
in  these  experiments  all  proceed  from  pre-existing 
gerais,  which  can  be  filtered  from  the  air  by  a  certain 
mechanical  contrivance,  then,  if  it  be  alleged  that 
it  is  on  account  of  such  filtration  that  certain  boiled 
fluids  do  not  change,  all  fluids  placed  under  these 
conditions  ought,  on  this  theory,  to  be  similarly  pre- 
served. Exceptional  cases  cannot  be  accounted  for  on 
this  hypothesis.  To  others,  however,  who  say  that 
onanisms  are  capable  of  arising  de  novOy  and  that 
fermentation  can  be  initiated  without  the  agency  of 
living  things,  the  above  facts  appear  quite  natural. 
They  think  that  the  more  the  nitrogenous  or  protein 
materials  contained  in  a  solution  are  complex  and 
abundant,  the  more  is  the  solution  fitted  to  undergo 

*  Sec  Appendix  C.  p.  xndii.  These  are  the  only  experiments  which 
1  bate  perfonned  with  the  very  long  plugs  of  cotton-wooU  though  in 
other  previous  trials  with  plugs  about  i\"  long,  I  have  several  times 
obtained  positive  results. 


1 2  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

such  fermentative  changes  as  are  accompanied  by  the 
de  novo  origination  of  living  things.  The  above-men- 
tioned apparently  exceptional  results  are,  therefore, 
just  as  compatible  with  the  notions  of  M.  Liebig  and 
his  school,  as  they  are  antagonistic  to  those  of  M.  Pas- 
teur.  Certain  simpler  fluids  do  not  undergo  change, 
whilst  others  of  a  more  complex  description,  under  the 
influence  of  similar  conditions,  da  ferment 

The  complete  untenability  of  M.  Pasteur's  explana- 
tions are,  however,  best  revealed  by  having  recourse  to 
a  series  of  comparative  experiments,  in  which  portions 
of  the  same  fluid  are  boiled  for  an  equal  length  of  time 
in  vessels  of  diflFerent  kinds,  and  are  subsequently  sub- 
mitted, in  a  water-bath,  to  the  influence  of  the  same 
temperature.  Owing  to  the  different  behaviour  of  the 
same  fluids  under  different  conditions,  we  are  enabled 
to  draw  some  very  important  conclusions;  but  from 
the  different  behaviour  of  different  fluids  under  these 
respective  conditions,  we  are  enabled  to  eliminate 
many  of  the  explanations  of  M.  Pasteur  and  others, 
whilst  at  the  same  time  facts  are  revealed  of  the  most 
decisive  nature,  bearing  upon  the  relative  merits  of  the 
two  doctrines  as  to  the  cause  of  fermentation  and 
putrefaction '. 

Such  experiments  show  quite  conclusively  that  M. 
Pasteur's  explanations  are  altogether  inadequate  to 
account  for  the  occasional  preservation  of  boiled  fluids 
^n  bent-neck  flasks.    The  preservation,  far  from  being 

'  Appendm  C  is  a  record  of  experiments  of  this  kind. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  13 

universal,  is  only  occasional,  and  whether  this  or  an 
opposite  fate  awaits  the  different  fluids,  is  shown,  as 
already  stated,  to  be  almost  wholly  dependent  upon  their 
nature.  The  comparative  experiments  not  only  lend 
no  countenance  to  M.  Pasteur's  theory,  that  fermentation 
cannot  be  initiated  without  the  agency  of  living  fer- 
ments— they  are,  on  the  contrary,  wholly  opposed  to 
this  restriction. 

The  plug  of  cotton-wool,  or  the  narrow  and  bent 
tube,  may,  it  is  true,  protect  the  boiled  fluid  from  subse- 
quent contact  with  living  *  germs;'  but  that  the  fluids 
do  not  undergo  change  on  account  of  such  deprivation 
cannot  be  safely  afErmed,  when  the  same  means  would 
also  filter  from  the  fluid  some  of  the  multitudinous 
particles  of  organic  matter  (dead),  which  the  air  un- 
doubtedly contains,  and  which  may  act  as  ferments. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  main  object  of  M. 
Pasteur's  investigation  was  to  determine  whether  fer- 
mentation took  place  under  the  agency  of  mere  dead 
nitrogenous  matter,  as  Liebig  and  others  affirm,  or 
whether  it  is  only  initiated  by  living  organisms,  as 
he  himself  supposes.  Obviously,  therefore,  the  same 
filtration  which  purified  the  air  from  any  living  organ- 
isms would  filter  from  it  its  nitrogenous  particles, 
which  are  the  other  possible  ferments :  so  that  no  con- 
clusion could  be  drawn  from  such  experiments  more 
fevourable  to  the  one  than  to  the  other  of  these  two 
hypotheses.  All  that  could  have  been  safely  affirmed 
was,  that  by  boiling  the  fluid,  and  then  protecting  it 


14  THE  BEGINNINCS  OF  LIFE. 

from  subsequent  contact  with  everything  that  could  act 
33  a.  ferment,  fermentation  would  not  take  place. 

But  now,  even  this  cannot  be  truly  affirmed  to  be 
a  general  rule.  Some  inftisions  still  preserve  a  first 
degree  of  fcrmentability  even  after  boiling,  whilst  others 
are  reduced  by  this  process  to  the  second  degree  of 
fermentability.  The  latter,  unlike  the  former,  are  un- 
able to  initiate  changes  by  virtue  of  their  own  inherent 
instability :  molecular  re-arrangements  require  to  be  set 
on  foot  in  them  by  contact  with  an  unstable  substance 
(dead  or  living)  which  is  itself  undergoing  change '. 

That  such  is  the  correct  explanation  of  the  reason 
why  stmt  fluids  do  not  ferment  in  bent-neck  flasks, 
seems  obvious  from  the  discordant  results  obtained  in 
many  other  experiments,  after  the  fi-ee  admission  of 
uncalcined  air  to  the  fluids  which  had  been  boiled. 
The  fluids  were  deprived  of  their  virtues  in  some  cases 

'  In  the  face  of  these  lival  doctrines  of  fermenUtioii  and  the  similarly 
UDsettled  state  of  ooi  knowledge  concerning  all  tlic  modes  of  origin  of 
Batltria,  it  may  now  be  seen  how  rash  and  unscientific  was  the  asstunp- 
tion  at  ODce  indulged  in  b;  M.  Fastmr  and  liis  followers  (who  are  con- 
stantly tmtnpeting  the  logical  acumen  of  their  chief),  that  because  the 
contact  of  atmospberic  particles  with  the  fcrmcnlablc  fluids  could  be 
shown  to  be  the  cause  of  their  fennentation,  therefore  living  germs 
must  have  existed  amongst  these  atmospheric  particles.  As  I  have 
previoaslf  ptunted  out,  such  a  conclusion  could  only  be  rendered  valid 
on  the  strength  of  the  postulate  that  '  all  life  proceeds  from  pre-existing 
life,'  that  is  to  say,  on  the  strength  of  a  postulate  whidi  settled  before- 
hand the  problem  which  their  investigations  were  destined  to  solve. 
Many  of  the  remariu  of  Dr.  Buidon  Sanderson  (loc  dt.)  concerning  the 
cause  of  the  zymotic  qualities  of  water  seem  to  me  to  be  open  to  the 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  15 


by  the  heat  to  which  they  had  been  subjected,  so  that 
whether    they  underwent   change  or   not,  may   have 
depended  upon  the  accidental  presence  or  absence  of 
suitable   unheated  organic  fragments  in  the  air  ad- 
mitted to  the  fluid.    If  germs  were  as  omnipresent  as 
fliey  have  been  represented  to  be,  such  fluids  ought 
always  to  have  undergone  change.    Owing  to  facts 
of  this  nature,  M.  Pasteur  ^  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  ^  germs '  are  not  so  universally  distributed  as  they 
had  been  supposed  to  be  by  Bonnet  and  Spallanzani  ^. 
The  unprejudiced  inquirer,  however,  will  perceive  that 
M.  Pasteur  was  entitled  to  come  to  no  such  conclusion 
concerning  germs  which  was  not  equally  applicable  to 
minute  fragments  or  dibris  di  organic  matter  floating 
m  the  air.     And,  similarly,  the   evidence  which   he 
adduces  with  regard  to  the  diminution  in  the  number 
of  the  fertile  flasks  when  they  were  filled  with  some  of 
the  still  air  of  the  caves  of  the  observatory,  or  with  the 
air  of  some  high  mountain  regions  ^,  far  away  from  the 
haunts  of  men,  had  no  bearing  upon  the  distribution  of 
germs  which  was  not  equally  applicable  to  that  of  dead 
organic  particles.    Such  evidence,  therefore,  was  value- 
less for  settling  between  the  rival  doctrines  of  ferment- 
ation, and  could  not  possibly  help  us  to  decide  whether 
living  or  dead  ferments  were  necessary.    Dead  organic 
particles  would  sink  in  still  air  in  the  same  manner  as 


1  *  Ann.  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique/  1862,  p.  71. 
'  Loc.  dt,  pp.  75  and  76.  *  Loc.  cit.,  pp.  83  and  84. 


l6  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

living  organisms '  ^  and  similarly,  dead  organic  par- 
ticles have  been  shown  to  be  less  and  less  numerous  in 
the  atmosphere  in  proportion  to  the  elevation  obtained  ^. 
In  these  latter  experiments  M.  Pasteur  made  use  of 
yeast-water  (alone  or  sweetened),  and  of  urine — all 
three  of  them  fluids,  which,  after  having  been  boiled, 
are  apt  to  possess  only  the  second  degree  of  fermenta- 
bility.  So  that  when  we  find  M.  Pouchet,  in  concert 
with  MM.  Jolly  and  Musset,  repeating  these  experi- 
ments,  with  the  sole  diflFerence  that  they  took  strong 
infusions  of  hay — ^which  experiment  has  almost  inva- 
riably shown  to  possess  the  first  degree  of  fermenta- 
bility— -and  that  all  their  flasks,  after  a  time,  yielded 
organisms  from  whatever  mountain  elevation  the  air 
had  been  taken,  this  combined  evidence  tends  most 
strongly  against  the  view  of  M.  Pasteur.  As  the 
germs  in  the  fluids  and  in  the  flasks,  in  each  set  of  ex- 
periments, had  been  previously  destroyed  by  ebullition, 
and  since  in  each  set,  also,  air  of  the  same  character 

^  The  subsidence  of  the  atmospheric  particles  has  been  demonstrated 
by  Professor  Tyndall  (•  Proceedings  of  Royal  Inst/  1870,  p.  11).  After 
speaking  of  experiments  in  closed  flasks,  in  which  the  air  has  been 
either  calcined  or  filtered,  Gerhardt  (' Chimie  Organique/  t.  iv.  p.  545) 
says: — 'Si  dans  les  premieres  experiences  I'air  caldn^  ou  tarnish  s'est 
montrd  beaucoup  moins  actif  que  I'air  non  soumis  k  ce  traitement,  c'est 
que  la  chaleur  rouge  ou  le  tamisage  enl^ve  k  I'air  non  seulement  les 
germes  des  infusoires  et  des  moisissures,  mais  encore  les  d<*bris  des 
matifcres  en  decomposition  qui  y  sont  suspendues,  c*est-4-dire  les  ferments 
dont  I'activite  viendrait  s'ajouter  k  celle  de  I'oxygfene  de  Tair.' 

*  See  M.  Pouchet's  *  Nouvelles  Experiences  sur  la  Generation  Spon- 
tanee/  &Cm  p-  69. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


IT 


I 


had  been  admitted  to  the  boiled  fluids,  the  diflFerent 
results  seemed  to  show  that  fermentation  or  non* 
fermentation,  in  such  cases^  depends  wholly  upon  the 
quality  of  tbe  fluids  employed. 

Other   evidence  which  is  so  much  vaunted  by  M. 
Pasteur  and  his  supporters^  as  to  the   possibility  of 
inducing  fertility  in  i»-eviously  sterile   flasks  by  the 
addition  of  a  portion  of  asbestos,  containing  the  solid 
particles  filtered  from  the  atmosphere  \  is  also  equally 
vafaieless  for  confirming  tbe  proposition  that  fermenta* 
tioQ  is  only  capable  of  being  initiated  by  living  fer- 
ments.   The  same  asbestos  which  may  contain  living 
germs  or  organisms,  does  undoubtedly  contain  many  de* 
composable  particles  and  fi agments  of  organic  matter  2. 
Tbe  previously  barren  solution  may  therefore  be  ren- 
dered fertile  by  the  mere  addition  of  those  portions 
of  unstable  organic  matter,  whose  molecular  mobility 
bas  not  been  wholly  impaired  by  the  agency  of  heat, 
so  that  they  are  still  capable  of  initiating  fermenta* 
live  changes.   This  view  is  strengthened,  as  M.  Pouchet 
has  pointed  out,  by  the  fact  that  in  these  cases,  instead 
of  meeting  some  of  the  various  kinds  of  organisms  which 
are  considered  to  have  representatives  in  the  air^  and 
whose  spores  or  ova  may  be  supposed  to  have  beea 
sown,  it  is  often  merely  Bacteria  which  are  encountered* 
And  these  diflFer  in  no  respect  from  those  that  may  pre- 
sent themselves  in  a  somewhat  similar  in&sion,  which 

'  Lo&  ciL,  p.  40. 

'  Sre  M.  I\mchet*s  •  Nouv«U«s  Experiences,'  i8'^3,  pp.  94-»07- 

VOL.  11.  C 


1 8  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

has  undergone  change  in  a  closed  flask  without  any  such 
hypothetical  sowing  of  living  spores  or  germs.  It  is 
more  especially  important  to  bear  this  consideration  in 
mind,  seeing  that  portions  of  organic  matter  can  always 
be  easily  demonstrated  amongst  such  atmospheric  dust ; 
whilst  living  Bacterid  have  been  shown  by  Cantoni, 
Sanderson,  and  myself  to  be  almost  always  absent  ^. 

The  views  hitherto  expressed  with  reference  to  the 
causes  of  fermentation  and  putrefaction,  and  concerning 
the  interpretations  which  M,  Pasteur's  experiments  are 
capable  of  receiving,  seem  to  derive  all  the  additional 
support  that  can  be  needed,  from  the  results  of  my^own 
experiments  with  boiled  fluids  in  sealed  flasks  from 
which  all  air  had  been  expelled. 

Some  of  a  given  fluid  being  taken  and  divided  into 
three  parts,  each  portion  is  placed  in  a  separate  flask, 
in  which  it  is  boiled  for  a  period  of  ten  minutes.  One 
of  the  flasks  (A)  is  provided  with  a  long  and  bent  neck, 
so  that  the  air  which  re-enters  is  deprived  of  its  germs 
and  organic  particles;  another  (B)  has  only  a  short 
neck,  and  to  this,  the  access  of  germs  and  organic 
particles  is  freely  permitted  till  the  fluid  has  become 
cool,  when  the  neck  of  the  flask  is  hermetically  sealed; 
whilst  the  last  (C)  is  sealed  during  ebullition,  after 
all  air  has  been  expelled.  Now,  if  Pasteur's  theory 
of  fermentation,  and  the  prevalent  notions  concerning 
the  universal  distribution  of  'germs'  throughout  the 

'  On  what  other  supposition  can  one  explain  the  results  of  E*pt. 
Ivii-licv?  * 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  19 


\ 


atmosphere  were  true,  it  might  be  expected  that  the 
fluid  in  B  would  always  rapidly  change;  that  that  in 
A  would  always   remain  pure;  and  that  the  fluid  in 
C  would,  similarly,  undergo  no  alteration.     The  facts, 
however,  are  quite  the  reverse :  if  a  properly  prepared 
tomip-infusion  be  employed,  the  fluid  in  A  will  almost 
always  remain  unchanged;  that  in  B  will  sometimes 
rapidly  change,  and  at  other  times  will  remain  quite 
pure;  whilst  that  in  C  will  almost  invariably  become 
tmbid  in  from  two  to  six  days.    So  that  even  if  it  were 
not  the  case  that  some  fluids,  different  from  those  used 
by  M.  Pasteur,  will  almost  invariably  undergo  change 
in  bent-neck  vessels,  his  explanation  of  the  cause  of  the 
preservation  would  have  been  altogether  upset  by  the 
fact  that  some  iff  the  very  fluids  *which  remain  pure  in  the 
hewt-mtck  apfaratus  will  kecome  fettid  if  shut  up  in  vacuo  ^. 
If  M.  Pasteur's  theory  were  true,  exclusion  of  all  air 
from  the  flask  should  prove  just  as  efficacious  in  pro- 
tecting the  fluid  as  any  process  of  filtration.     And  the 
fact  that  some  of  the  very  fluids  which  are  protected  as 
long  as  they  are  in  contact  with  air  devoid  of  particles, 
can  be  made  to  ferment  and  swarm  with  living  things 
through  the  mere  expulsion  of  this  purified  air  2,  is  the 
death-blow  to  M.  Pasteur's  theory,   and  one   of  the 
strongest  proofe  of  the  occurrence  of  Archebiosis. 
The  cause  of  the  change  in  the  latter  case  seems  also 

*  See  Appendix  C,  E»pt.  vii-iz,  xiii-xv,  &c. 

*  This  has  been  done  on  several  occasions.    See  Expt,  ix  and  xv.  and 
uini  and  zzscvL 


20  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

pretty  evident.  Germs  and  atmospheric  particles  being 
equally  got  rid  of  in  both  modes  of  experimentation, 
the  great  diflFerence  between  them  is  that  the  weight  of 
the  atmosphere  is  also  got  rid  of  in  my  experiments — 
the  fluids  being  contained  in  vacuo.  But,  as  I  have 
already  pointed  out  i,  it  has  been  ascertained  by  Mr. 
Sorby,  that  pressure  undoubtedly  influences  ^chemical 
changes  taking  place  slowly/  and  such  as  are  therefore 
'probably  due  to  weak  or  nearly  counterbalanced 
affinities ^^  and  it  has  also  been  shown  that  'pressure 
will  more  or  less  influence  such  chemical  actions  as  are 
accompanied,  by  an  evolution  of  gas^  so  that  it  may 
cause  a  compound  to  be  permanent,  which  otherwise 
would  be  decomposed.'  But,  if  increase  of  pressure 
retards,  a  diminution  of  pressure  may  be  expected  to 
facilitate  such  chemical  changes,  so  that  one  can  only 
explain  the  results  whidi  I  have  obtained,  on  the 
ground  that  many  boiled  fluids,  which  will  not  undergo 
change  when  protected  from  the  influence  of  atmo- 
spheric particles  (living  or  not  living)  at  the  same  time 
that  they  are  subjected  to  ordinary  or  increased  pressure, 
will,  on  the  contrary,  pass  through  such  changes  when 
pressure  is  diminished,  by  the  fluids  being  preserved 
in  vacuo^.  It  is  not  pretended  that  this  is  a  rule 
applicable  to  all  fermentable   fluids  —  far   from  it^. 

*  See  vol.  i.  p.  350. 

s  On  this  subject,  see  vol.  i.  pp.  4x8-420. 

'  I  very  soon  convinced  myself,  in  fi&ct,  that  diminutioa  of  pre^ure 
exercised  very  little  effect  over  the  changes  which  take  place  in  solutioiis 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


21 


i4 


Diminution  of  pressure  seems,  however,  to  be  a  very 
potential  cause  of  change  in  some  fluids.  The  extent 
to  which  changes  of  a  fermentative  character  can  pro- 
gress in  the  absence  of  atmospheric  oxygen,  is  also 
evidently  subject  to  much  variation,  in  accordance 
with  the  nature  of  the  dissolved  fermentable  sub- 
stances. 

Thus,  in  accordance  with  the  doctrines  of  Baron 
Liebig,  my  experiments,  as  well  as  those  of  many  other 
investigators,  tend  to  show  that  fermentative  and 
piitre&ctive  changes  are  merely  processes  of  chemical 
rearrangement,  which  frequently  take  place  —  as  it 
were  ^spontaneously*— owing  to  the  inherent  insta- 
bility (^certain  nitrogenous  compounds  in  the  presence 
of  free  oxygen.  My  experiments  have,  however,  also 
revealed  the  additional  fact  that,  under  the  combined 
influence  of  a  moderate  heat  and  diminished  pressure, 
some  fluids  will  undergo  fermentation  even  in  closed 
vessels,  from  which  all  air  has  been  expelled.  And,  at 
the  same  time,  they  compel  us  to  believe  that  the 
lowest  organisms,  when  present,  are  often  mere  con- 
comitant products  (some  of  which  have  arisen  de  navo)^ 
rather  than  invariable  or  necessary  causes  of  the  fer- 
mentative changes. 

of  amnumic  tartnite  and  sodic  phosphate.  The  facts  recorded  by  Dr. 
SiBdenoD  (loc.  dt.,  p.  54)  as  to  its  lack  of  influence  over  'Pasteur's 
sohtioa,'  is  therefore  quite  what  might  have  been  expected.  It  was  a 
mistake  to  suppose  that  I  considered  diminution  of  pressure  to  be  in- 
"nnMf  Cavounible  to  the  occurrence  of  £ermentable  changes  in  all  fluids 
enable  of  nndogoiDg  dus  dumge. 


33  THE  BEGINmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

Turning  now,  however,  to  another  aspect  of  the 
question,  and  accepting  the  feet  that  specks  of  living 
matter,  which  speedily  develop  into  the  simplest 
organic  forms,  are  capable  of  arising  de  novCj  we  are 
at  once  met  with  the  query — Out  of  what  materials  has 
this  living  matter  been  developed,  and  what  were  the 
steps  of  the  process?  In  my  experiments  I  have 
employed,  (i)  Simple  infiisions  containing  organic 
matter;  (2)  Saline  solutions  to  which,  in  addition  to 
any  unknown  organic  impurities,  a  fragment  of  organic 
matter  had  been  purposely  added;  and  also  (3)  Saline 
solutions  to  which  nothing  was  added,  but  which  may 
have  contained  accidental  organic  impurities. 

So  far  as  the  oi^anic  infusions  arc  concerned,  we 
know  that  these  contain  complex  colloidal  molecules  in 
solution,  which,  though  altered  and  more  or  less  degraded 
in  quality  by  the  influence  of  the  high  temperatures, 
have  probably  still  retained  some  of  their  characteristic 
properties.  So  that,  after  a  time,  under  the  continued 
influence  of  heat,  light,  and  other  agencies,  new  com- 
binations may  have  been  brought  about  amongst  these 
mobile  compounds,  till  continuous  changes  of  a  fer- 
mentative character  were  initiated,  which  resulted  in  the 
coincident  production  of  specks  of  living  matter.  These 
are  supposed  to  be  formed  by  the  occurrence  of  new 
combinations  amongst  the  colloidal  molecules  them- 
selves, of  a  kind  similar  to  those  which  must  occur 
when  the  elements  of  ammonic  cyanate  assume  the 
more  complex  arrangement  which  converts  them  into 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  23 

urea.  The  resulting  compounds,  being  insoluble,  sepa- 
rate from  the  solution  in  the  form  of  minutest  specks  of 
living  matter,  which  speedily  develop  into  this  or  that 
kind  of  primordial  organism.  Such  higher  compounds 
mi^t  be  considered  to  correspond  to  the  '  physiological 
units'  whose  existence  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer^  postulates 
in  order  to  explain  the  various  phenomena  coming 
under  the  head  of '  organic  polarity.* 

After  pointing  out  that  the  phenomena  cannot  be 
accounted  for  if  we  suppose  such  '  polarity '  to  be  pos- 
sessed by  the  ordinary  chemical  constituents  of  living 
things — by  their  mere  molecules  of  fibrine,  albumen,  or 
gelatine ;  and  also  that  the  phenomena  are  even  more 
inexplicable  if  we  assume  that  such  polarity  is  the 
property  of  any  kind  of  morphological  unit  (such  as 
a  'cell*)  existing  in  living  things,  Mr.  Spencer  adds: — 
'  If  then  this  oi^nic  polarity  can  be  possessed  neither 
by  the  chemical  units  nor  the  morphological  units,  we 
must  conceive  it  as  possessed  by  certain  intermediate 
units,  which  we  may  term  fhjmlopcaL  There  seems 
no  alternative  but  to  suppose  that  the  chemical  units 
combine  into  units  immensely  more  complex  than 
themselves,  complex  as  they  are;  and  that  in  each 
organism  the  physiological  units  produced  by  this 
further  compounding  of  highly  compound  atoms,  have 
a  more  or  less  distinctive  character  *.    We  must  con- 

'  *  Piinciples  of  Biology/  vol.  L  p.  182. 

'  For  further  suggestions  with  regard  to  these  physiological  units,  the 
mder  may  consnlt  the  Appendix  (p.  486)  to  Mr.  Spencer's  *  Principles 
of  Biology/ 


24  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

elude  that  in  each  case  some  slight  difference  of  com- 
position in  these  units^  leading  to  some  slight  di£R?rence 
in  their  mutual  play  of  forces,  produces  a  difference  in 
the  form  which  the  aggregate  of  them  assumes/ 

When  we  suppose— not  voluntarily,  but  on  account 
of  facts  otherwise  inexplicable — ^that  some  such  higher 
combinations  arise  'spontaneously'  amongst  the  mole- 
cules of  oi^nic  matter  contained  within  hermetically 
sealed  flasks,  it  must  not  be  thought  that  we  are 
appealing  to  processes  which  are  new  and  previously 
unrecognized.  On  the  contrary,  chemists  are  perfectly 
familiar  with  such  '  spontaneous  *  combinations  taking 
place  amongst  the  molecules  of  various  complex  sub- 
stances. And,  occasionally,  these  changes  result  in  the 
formation  of  isomeric  compounds,  differing  from  those 
previously  in  existence  by  reason  of  their  greater  mole- 
cular complexity,  just  as  '  physiological  units '  are  sup- 
posed to  differ  from  the  higher  colloid  molecules.  As 
instances  of  this  kind  of  change,  we  may  call  attention 
to  the  following  well-known  facts.  Cyanate  of  ammonia 
(C  N*  H*  O)  in  aqueous  solution  is  converted  by  the  aid 
of  heat,  or  '  spontaneously '  when  left  to  evaporate  at 
a  low  temperature,  into  urea  (C^N^H^O^).  Cyanic 
acid  (CNHO)  in  aqueous  solution  is  spontaneously 
converted  into  cyanelide  (CNHO)*.  Cyanimide 
(CN^H")  at  150*  C  is  converted  into  cyanuramide 
(C  3  N « H «).  Common  aldehyde  (C  2  H  *  O)  in  aqueous 
solution,  with  a  mere  trace  of  oil  of  vitriol,  is  changed 
into  an  oily  aldehyde  (C«  H^^  0»).   Anhydrous  sulphuric 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE  25 

acid  (SO3)  soon  after  preparation  becomes  converted  into 
a  body  of  the  same  percentage  composition,  though  oi 
higher  melting  point.  There  are,  moreover,  very  goocl 
reasons,  approved  by  chemists,  for  believing  that  nitric 
peroxide  gas,  N  O^,  when  at  a  low  temperature,  be- 
comes N^O^;  that  the  composition  of  hydric  acetate 
(vinegar)  is  C*  H^  O^  in  the  liquid  state,  but  C^  H*  O^ 
in  the  gaseous  state  j  and  that  bitter  almond  oil,  in 
presence  of  certain  reagents,  is  capable  of  doubling 
itself  (C^H«0  into  C^^Hi^O*),  even  with  change 
of  chemical  constitution— for  C^  H«  0  =  (C''  H*  O)  H, 
or  hydride  of  benzoyl,  whilst  C"H>2  0a=(C'' H^O) 
(C7H7)  O,  or  benzoate  of  benzyl.  Strictly  analogous, 
also,  to  these  reactions  between  similar  molecules  are 
those  in  which  two  or  more  dissimilar  molecules  coalesce 
—as  when  two  oxides,  two  chlorides,  two  cyanides, 
two  sulphates,  &c.,  unite  to  form  double  oxides,  double 
chbrides,  double  cyanides,  double  sulphates,  &c.  Similar 
unions  are  also  known  to  take  place  between  organic 
or  carbon  compounds,  e.g.  cyanamide  (CN^H^)  and 
glycocol  (C^  H*NO*),  which  are  both  obtainable  syn- 
thetically, combine,  when  present  together  in  aqueous 
solution,  to  yield  glycocyamine  (C^  H''  N^  O*),  a  body 
homologous  in  properties  and  composition  with  krea- 
tinci. 
If  we  are  asked  to  explain  why,  or  in  what  manner, 

>  My  attention  has  kindly  been  called  to  these  synthetic  changes  by 
Mr.  Tem|^  Onne,  of  University  College,  to  whom  I  have  been  much 
iidebted  for  iafonnatioo  of  this  kind. 


26  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

colloid  molecules  combine  and  undergo  molecular  re- 
arrangements leading  to  the  formation  of  those  insoluble 
compounds  which  separate  from  the  solution  in  the 
form  of  specks  of  living  matter,  we  can  only  give  ex- 
pression to  our  profound  ignorance  on  the  subject.  At 
the  same  time,  however,  we  can  eicpress  only  the 
same  ignorance  as  to  the  reason  why  any  of  the  other 
more  simple  chemical  changes  occur,  as  it  were  spon- 
taneously.  The  fact  that  the  new  products  do  make 
their  appearance  in  the  latter  set  of  cases,  leaves  no 
doubt  as  to  the  conclusion  that  they  have  originated 
by  molecular  rearrangements  which  have  taken  place 
amongst  the  pre-existing  elements.  And  in  the  face 
of  the  evidence  which  has  been  adduced,  it  seems  to 
me  almost  equally  certain  that  the  organisms  which 
have  been  found  in  some  of  our  flasks  must  have  de- 
veloped from  specks  of  living  matter,  which  had  them- 
selves originated  from  a  molecular  rearrangement  and 
combination  occurring  amongst  the  colloid  molecules 
of  the  solution.  Just  as  the  colloids  themselves  have 
been  produced  as  a  result  of  the  molecular  interaction  of 
substances  having  a  simpler  composition,  so  may  living 
matter  be  produced  through  the  molecular  interaction 
of  colloids  under  the  influence  of  heat  and  other  physical 
agencies.  We  cannot  explain  why  such  interaction 
and  molecular  rearrangement  should  take  place  amongst 
colloidal  molecules,  and  there  may  be  all  the  less  room 
for  surprise  at  this  when  we  reflect  that  we  are  equally 
powerless  to  explain  why  even  the  most  simple  chemical 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  27 

union  occurs.  Why  does  oxygen  unite  with  hydrogpn 
to  form  water  ?  why  docs  hydrogen  unite  with  nitrogen 
to  form  ammonia?  Probably  for  a  reason  similar  to 
that  which  enables  colloid  molecules  to  give  rise  to 
those  much  subtler  combinations  which  form  the  basis 
of  what  we  call  *  living  matter  \ 

It  is,  we  think,  of  importance  to  call  attention  to 
this  consideration  that  living  matter  is  the  result  of  a 
molecular  combination,  towards  the  occurrence  of  which 
(with  suitable  materials)  there  may  be  just  as  natural 
an  aptitude  as  there  is  to  the  formation  of  any  of  the 
simpler  combinations  which  are  daily  occurring  on  all 
sides  of  us.  Let  us  look  to  the  facts,  and  see  how 
capable  they  are  of  bearing  such  an  interpretation  if 
we  could  but  clear  away  all  the  misconceptions  which 
are  only  too  apt  to  warp  our  judgment. 

Nitrate  or  carbonate  of  ammonia,  free  carbonic  add, 
and  water  with  a  few  saline  substances,  constitute  the 
materials  which,  under  the  influence  of  the  modified 
physical  forces  operating  in  the  living  plant,  fall  into 
similar  modes  of  combination,  and  go  to  increase  the 
bulk  of  its  living  tissues.  Thus  out  of  simplest  ele- 
ments is  living  protoplasm  continually  being  produced 
in  the  substance  of  every  plant  that  grows — thus  are 
those  higher  combinations,  resulting  in  the  production 
of  living  matter,  continually  brought  about — ^thus  is 
the  supposed  gulf  between  the  living  and  the  not-living 
continually  bridged.  No  higher  compounds  are  needed 
as  starting-points   for  carrying  on   the  nutrition   of 


28  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

plants  \  The  most  simple  not-living  or  mineral  con- 
stituents coming  into  relation  with  one  another  in  the 
presence  of  preexisting  protoplasm,  appear,  for  aught 
we  know  to  the  contrary,  to  fall  at  once  into  those 
subtle  combinations  which  constitute  the  basis  of  living 
protoplasm  2.  The  rapidity  of  the  process  mocks  and 
defies  all  theoretical  explanation.     Here,  at  all  events, 

^  *  M.  Boussingault  has  demonstrated  that  plants  in  full  growth  always 
take  carbon  from  the  carbonic  acid  of  the  air,  hydrogen  from  the  water 
which  bathes  them,  and  frequently  azote  from  the  air.  .  .  .  The  soil  he 
used  for  the  growth  of  his  plants,  the  subjects  of  experiment,  was  a 
siliceous  sand,  which  was  first  sifted,  then  kept  at  a  red  heat  for  some 
time,  in  order  to  destroy  every  trace  of  organic  matter  within  it  It 
was  then  moistened  with  distilled  water,  and  the  seeds  sown ;  after  an 
interval  of  a  few  days,  the  seeds  which  did  not  genninate  were  removed. 
.  .  .  Peas  planted  in  a  soil  absolutely  barren,  and  watered  with  pure 
water,  may  attain  to  complete  maturity,  passing  through  all  the  phases 
of  their  natural  growth,  and  bearing  flowers  and  ripe  seeds.  During  this 
process,  they  fix  a  large  quantity  of  azote,  which  they  must  derive  either 
from  the  air  dissolved  in  the  water  which  they  absorb  by  their  roots,  or 
from  the  air  that  surrounds  their  stalks  and  leaves.*  (*  Chemical  and 
Physiolog.  Balance  of  Organic  Nature,'  by  Dumas  and  Boussingault. 
Lond.  1844,  pp.  76-90.)  Whether  the  nitrogen  is  absorbed  directly 
from  the  air  by  the  leaves,  whether  it  passes  into  the  plant  as  a  con- 
stituent of  the  air  which  is  dissolved  in  the  water  taken  up  by  the  roots, 
or  whether  it  is  derived  from  an  infinitely  small  quantity  of  ammoniacal 
vapour  which  constantly  exists  in  the  atmosphere,  is  a  question  which 
cannot  be  considered  as  settled,  though  many  probabilities  point  to  the 
latter  source  as  that  whence  plants  derive  their  nitrogen. 

'  Or  else  it  may  be  that  rearrangements  are  brought  about  amongst 
the  elements  of  the  substances  dissolved,  and  of  the  aqueous  medium 
itself,  resulting  primarily  in  the  formation  of  colloidal  combinations, 
which  secondarily  (and  under  the  continued  influence  of  similar  physical 
forces)  are  capable  of  permitting  the  occurrence  of  new  modes  of  col- 
location resulting  in  the  evolution  of  the  minutest  specks  of  living 
matter. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  29 

there  seems  to  be  no  laborious  process  of  synthesis — 
no  long  chain  of  substitution  compounds — before  the 
&nal  product  is  evolved. 

But  the  property  of  decomposing  ammonia  and  of 
feeding  upon  elementary  mineral  substances  is  by  no 
means  confined  to  the  higher  plants.  The  same  power 
is  possessed  by  Conferva  vulgaris  and  other  low  algx, 
as  was  demonstrated  by  M.  Bineau  nearly  twenty  years 
ago  1 ;  whilst  nearly  ten  years  afterwards  it  was  ascer- 
tained by  M.  Pasteur  that  some  of  the  lowest  kinds  of 
ftiDgi,  the  MucetUnea^  were  capable  of  growing  and 
multiplying  in  a  solution  of  sugar  and  tartrate  of 
ammonia,  to  whidi  a  trace  of  some  phosphate  had  been 
added.  Referring  to  Pasteur's  observations.  Baron 
liebig  says : — ^  It  is  astonishing  that  this  discovery  has 
not  attracted  more  attention  in  regard  to  a  special 
point,  for  it  comprises  a  fact  of  very  great  significance 

*  His  experiments  were  made  with  Cot^erva  vulgaris  and  Hydrodictyon 
ptKtagomaU,  M.  Bineau  says : — *  Des  quantit^s  jug^  k  Vodl  <^gales 
eatre  eOes  de  cfaacune  des  deux  esp^ces  d'Algues  mentionn^es  fiirent 
eofenn^  dans  des  flacons  a  I'dmeri  bien  bouch^  d'un  peu  plus  d'un 
demi-litre,  avec  350  centimetres  cubes  d'eau,  contenant  12  millioni&mes 
f  ammooiaqae,  ajoutte  h  T^tat  de  chlorhydrate  et  une  quantity  un  peu 
noindre  d*azotate  de  chaux.  Les  flacons  furent  ensuite  expose,  les  uns 
sv  une  feoitre  oil  ils  recevaient  les  rayons  du  soleil  les  autres  dans 
le  toisinage,  mais  dans  Tobscurit^.  .  .  .  Apr^  dix  jours,  le  liquide  de 
cluqoe  flacon  fiit  filtre  et  soumis  a  un  essai  ammoniam^trique.  ...  On 
*  troore  que  V Hydrodictyon  avail  fait  disparaitre  au  soleil  presque  les 
trois  quarts  de  rammoniaque,  et  le  Conferva  vulgaris  pr^s  de  la  moiti^. 
A  l*obscarit6  Tabsorption  de  I'ammoniaque  fut  environ  moiti^  momdre. 
-  •  •  Dans  ancim  des  liquides  des  flacons  il  ne  resta  la  moindre  trace 
appr^ble  d'azote/    ('  M^m.  de  I'Acad.  des  Sciences  de  Lyon/  t.  liL 


30  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

for  physiology,  viz.,  the  formation  of  albuminates  in 
plants,  respecting  which  we  are  in  possession  of  scarcely 
anything  beyond  conjecture;  hitherto  this  has  been 
regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of  organic 

nature If  yeast   cells,  placed"  in   a  mixture  of 

ammonia,  tartaric  acid,  sugar,  and  phosphate,  could 
propagate  and  multiply,  it  is  evident  that  an  albuminate 
must  have  been  formed  from  the  elements  of  this 
mixture,  since  one  of  the  chief  constituents  of  the  yeast 
fungus  is  an  albumenoid  substance  ^/ 

All  that  is  here  said  by  Liebig  becomes  even  still 
more  striking  after  my  own  observations,  as  to  the 
freedom  with  which  Bacteria  and  ToruU  multiply  not 
only  in  solutions  of  ammonic  tartrate  to  which  a 
phosphate  has  been  added,  but  also  in  solutions  of 
tartrate  of  ammonia  alone.  The  fact  that  this  occurs 
shows  that  these  simple  saline  substances  not  only  con- 
tain the  elements  necessary  for  the  formation  of  living 
matter,  but  that  the  passage  must  be  comparatively  easy 
from  the  saline  mode  of  collocation  of  the  elements 

*  Although  quite  willing  to  believe  that  this  may  take  place,  Liebig 
contends  that  Pasteur  has  not  proved  that  it  does  occur.  Some  of 
Liebig's  objections  are,  however,  we  think,  based  upon  possible  mis- 
conceptions. Actual  beer-yeast  contains  sulphur  as  a  constituent,  an 
element  which  was  not  known  to  exist  in  Pasteur's  mixture.  It  seems 
quite  possible,  however,  that  Torula  closely  resembling  beer-yeast  in 
appearance  may  exist,  into  whose  composition  sulphur  does  not  enter. 
The  freedom  with  vhich  Bacteria  and  Torula  develop  in  a  simple 
solution  of  tartrate  of  ammonia  in  distilled  water  make  it  doubtful 
whether  the  presence  even  of  phosphorus  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
formation  of  the  simplest  kinds  of  protoplasm. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  31 

into  that  by  which  they  are  converted  into  living 
protoplasnu  Nay,  more,  seeing  that  the  multiplication 
of  living  things  takes  place  with  so  much  more  energy 
and  rapidity  in  a  solution  of  ammonic  tartrate  than  it 
does  in  one  of  the  oxalate,  the  acetate,  or  even  the 
carbonate,  it  seems  to  show  that  the  ammonic  tartrate 
state  of  combination  is  an  especially  favourable  platr 
forai  for  the  initiation  of  these  new  and  more  complex 
modes  of  combination  *. 

Again,  then,  it  may  be  argued  that  the  production  of 
living  matter  from  such  simple  not-living  constituents 
could  not  take  place  unless  there  were  a  great  natural 
tendency  for  the  molecules  of  certain  compounds  to 
fell  into  the  more  complex  modes  of  combination 
which  exist  in  living  matter. 

If  in  answer  to  this  it  is  urged  that  such  mysterious 
combinations  can  only  occur  in  connection  with,  and 
under  the  immediate  influence  of,  pre-existing  living 
matter,  the  reader  will  now  be  in  a  position  to  estimate 
the  real  value  of  the  reply.  We  have  shown  how  over- 
whelming is  the  evidence  in  fevour  of  the  de  novo  evolu- 
tion of  living  matter  even  under  the  influence  of  con- 
ditions which  might  be  deemed  little  favourable  for  the 
occurrence  of  such  a  process.  If,  then,  such  combina- 
tions can  occur  after  the  materials  have  been  exposed 
to  the  influence  of  very  high  temperatures  within  herme- 
tically-sealed flasks,  how  much  more  likely  are  they  to 
take  place  when  unaltered  organic  solutions  are  freely 

^  See  Afptndix  C,  pp,  xlyi-zlviii. 


32  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

exposed  to  various  physical  agencies,  which  play  upon 
them  in  the  world  without,  and  how  probable  does  it 
become  that  living  things  are  continually  arising  de 
novo^  on  account  of  the  'spontaneous'  occurrence  of 
such  combinations  wherever  organic  matter  exists  in 
solutipn.  It  is  only  by  denying  such  possibilities — 
now  almost  converted  into  certainties^ — that  biologists 
can  reject  the  notion  of  living  matter  being  formed 
by  virtue  of  chemical  combinations  which  are  naturally 
prone  to  occur  when  heat  and  other  physical  forces 
act  upon  suitable  materials — ^just  as  chlorine  is  prone 
to  unite  with  hydrogen  under  the  influence  of  light, 
or  just  as  cyanimide  has  a  natural  tendency  to  unite 
with  glycocol,  when  both  coexist  in  aqueous  solution, 
so  as  to  form  glycocyamine. 

But  few  can  bring  themselves  to  look  at  the  facts  in 
an  unbiassed  manner.  Refuge  is  unconsciously  taken 
in  the  last  stronghold  of  vitalism :  powerfully  influenced 
by  an  analogical  argument  in  support  of  their  belief  in 
the  continuity  of  life,  certain  biologists  in  the  present 
day  would  endow  pre-existing  protoplasm  with  marvel- 
lous and  unique  powers,  at  the  same  time  that  they 
deny  the  existence  of  any  special  vital  force.  They 
have  not  yet  fairly  cast  oflF  the  old  vitalistic  theories 
which  they  profess  to  repudiate.  They  shut  their  eyes 
against,  or  will  not  be  convinced  by,  all  the  evidence 
which  speaks  loudly  for  the  'spontaneous'  occurrence 
of  the  changes  which  give  birth  to  living  matter,  and 
consequently   they    still    proclaim  a   belief    in    their 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  33 

favourite  assumption,  as  to  its  sole  origin  under  the 
influence  of  pre-existing  protoplasm.  Thus  alone  are 
they  enabled  to  deny  what  others  believe  to  be  the 
proper  interpretation  of  known  facts;  thus  will  they 
reject  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a  natural  tendency 
amongst  certain  kinds  of  molecules  to  fall  into  com- 
binations and  rearrangements  which  terminate  in  the 
fonnation  of  ^  living '  matter. 

So  much  may  be  said  concerning  the  origin  of  specks 
of  living  matter  in  the  flasks  containing  organic  com- 
pounds. And  with  reference  to  those  in  which  a  small 
portion  of  organic  matter — cheese,  for  instance — has 
been  added  to  a  saline  solution  containing  the  elements 
necessary  for  the  nutrition  of  the  simplest  living  things, 
tbc  origin  of  those  that  have  been  found  may  perhaps 
have  been  due  to  rearrangements  which  took  place 
amongst  the  elements  of  the  added  organic  matter;  or 
else  the  molecular  changes  which  it  initiates  may  have 
suflBced  to  induce  life-giving  combinations  amongst 
the  disturbed  elements  of  the  saline  substances  them- 
selves^  The  living  specks  thus  initiated  would  sub- 
sequently grow  and  multiply  at  the  expense  of  the 
elements  of  the  saline  substances,  just  as  organisms  do 
which  are  purposely  added  to  such  solutions. 

With  reference,  on  the  other  hand,  to  those  saline 
fluids  in  which  no  organic  matter  had  been  purposely 
added,  but  in  which  some  may  have  existed  in  the  form 

'  Wheoerer  these  were  suitable  for  the  initiation  of  such  changes. 
VOL.  II.  D 


34  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

of  accidental  impurities,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that 
such  compounds  may  require  an  admixture  of  some 
more  unstable  substance  before  living  things  are  capable 
of  being  evolved.  This  more  unstable  substance 
(existing  as  ^dead'  organic  matter)  may  act  as  a 
ferment  and  may  initiate  changes  which  would  not 
occur  if  the  saline  substance  existed  alone  in  isolution  \ 
Certainly,  in  my  experiments,  1  have  been  able  to  find 
no  valid  evidence  that  living  things  have  presented 
themselves  without  such  admixture.  Minute  fragments 
of  vegetable  fibre  of  different  kinds — which  it  is  nearly 
impossible  altogether  to  exclude  —  have  almost  inva* 
riably  been  present  in  the  saline  solutions  employed. 
Such  fragments  are,  indeed,  constantly  present  within 
the  crystals  of  ammonic  tartrate  which  I  have  em- 
ployed; whilst  other  evidence,  previously  alluded  to, 
makes  it  probable  that  the  crystals  themselves  contain 
a  ferment.  Thus,  a  solution  of  ammonic  tartrate 
with  some  sodic  phosphate  when  not  previously  heated, 
rapidly  becomes  turbid  on  exposure  to  the  air  or  in 

^  Just  as  motion  (produced  by  constant  slight  shocks)  amongst  the 
molecules  of  amorphous  iron  favours  the  lapse  of  these  into  crystalline 
modes  of  aggregation,  so  may  motion  amongst  the  particles  of  a  saline 
compound  tend  to  disturb  existing  modes  of  combination,  and  facilitate 
the  assumption  of  new  modes  of  combination,  towards  the  occurrence  of 
which  there  is  a  natural  tendency.  And,  as  Liebig  says : — *  All  organic 
substances  become  exdtors  of  fermentation,  as  soon  as  they  pass  into  a 
state  of  decomposition :  the  changing  condition  once  imparted,  propa- 
gates itself  in  every  organic  atom,  which  is  not  itself,  that  is,  by  its  own 
inherent  energy,  capable  of  annihilating  the  imparted  motion  by  pre- 
senting an  adequate  resistanoe/  ('  Letters  on  Chemistry,'  p.  208.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UIE.  35 

VMM ;  whilst  a  similar  solution  which  has  been  boiled 
for  some  minutes  does  not  at  all  readily  become  turbid 
even  when  exposed  to  the  air,  although  it  will  do  so  in 
a  few  hours  if  some  living  Bacteria  be  purposely  added. 
Such  facts  seem  to  show,  not  only  that  living  Bacteria 
arc  scarce  in  the  air,  but  also — from  the  fact  that  the 
unboiled  solution  will  rapidly  become  turbid — that  the 
solution  originally  contained  some  ferment  whose 
virtues  were  to  a  certain  extent  destroyed  by  the  heat^ 
Destroyed,  however,  only  to  a  certain  extent — ^since 
the  ammonic  tartrate  and  sodic  phosphate  solution 
which  will  no  longer  become  turbid  from  presence  of 
Bacteria^  will,  after  a  long  period,  yield  Tarula  or  one 
of  the  simplest  kinds  of  FunpK  Destroyed  only  to  a 
certain  extent  also,  because  the  citrate  of  iron  and 
ammonia  solution  will  even  yield  Bacteria  in  addition 
to  other  organisms,  after  an  exposure  to  a  temperature 
of  145**C,  and  the  solution  of  ammonic  carbonate  will 
also  yield  Bacteria  after  an  exposure  to  a  still  higher 
temperature  for  a  longer  period. '  Thus  the  saline  solu- 
tions employed  have,  perhaps,  needed  the  presence  of 
nwre  unstable  matter  which  might  act  the  part  of  a 
ferment,  before  life-giving  changes  could  be  initiated. 

However  difficult  it  may  be,  at  first,  to  imagine 
that  living  things  are  capable  of  springing  up  de  novo 
in  a  solution  of  tartrate  of  ammonia  and  phosphate  of 

'  The  fennent  most  hftve  been  originally  either  in  the  water,  in  the 
QTsttls,  or  in  both* 
*  See  Appmdim  A,  pp.  i.  and  iL 

D2 


36  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

soda  or  in  one  of  citrate  of  iron  and  ammonia,  this 
difficulty  is  considerably  mitigated  if  we  steadfastly 
remember  that  living  organisms  are  capable  of  grow- 
ing and  multiplying  in  similar  solutions.  This  fact, 
that  growth  and  multiplication  can  take  place  at 
the  expense  of  the  elements  of  the  saline  solution, 
shows  that  under  a  certain  influence — ^that  of  the  pre- 
existing living  matter — ^the  elements  of  the  saline 
solution  are  capable  of  reacting  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
fall  into  new  modes  of  combination,  whereby  they  give 
rise  to  'living*  compounds.  Now  we  must  again  contend 
that  as  no  special  or  peculiar  forces  are  at  work  within 
pre-existing  organisms,  the  molecular  movements  con- 
stituting their  'life'  must  be  determined  purely  by 
natural  affinities,  so  that  they  can  only  exert  an  action 
which  is  essentially  chemical  upon  the  molecules  of  the 
matter  with  which  they  are  brought  into  contact.  If, 
then,  under  the  influence  of  these  chemical  actions  the 
molecules  of  the  saline  substances  undergo  a  rearrange- 
ment and  combination  whereby  they  are  converted  into 
living  protoplasm,  we  are  compelled  to  assume  the 
truth  of  what  appears  (as  we  have  already  said)  to  be 
on  other  grounds  so  probable,  that  there  is  a  natural 
aptitude  for  the  disturbed  molecules  of  the  saline  sub- 
stances to  fall  into  such  modes  of  combination.  The 
facts  revealed  by  our  experiments  compel  us  to  believe, 
moreover,  that  the  molecular  movements  impressed 
upon  the  saline  materials  by  unstable,  though  dead, 
substances^  are  also  of  such  a  nature  as  to  allow  those 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  37 

natural  aptitudes  of  the  molecules  to  come  into  play, 
whereby  they  fall  into  living  modes  of  combination. 

We  are  quite  prepared  to  expect  that,  in  a  short 
time,  some  solution  of  saline  substances  may  be 
discovered  capable  of  retaining  its  power  of  passing 
through  life-evolving  changes,  even  after  having  been 
subjected  within  hermetically-sealed  vessels  to  very  high 
temperatures.  That  is  to  say,  we  believe  that  some 
day  a  saline  solution  will  be  found  in  which,  without 
aid  from  co-existing  organic  matter,  synthetic  life- 
giving  combinations  may  occur.  In  order  to  attain 
this  end,  a  combination  of  substances  will  be  needed 
capable  of  withstanding  an  exposure  (under  pressure^) 
to  such  high  temperatures  as  would  suffice  to  break  up 
all  peculiarly  ^organic'  compounds,  and  yet  leave  the 
total  constituents  of  the  sealed  flask  in  such  a  condition 
as  to  enable  them  to  lapse  into  living  modes  of  combi- 
nation— ^just  as  easily  as  the  elements  of  ammonic 
tartrate  and  water  do  under  the  influence  of  a  dead 
ferment. 

These  considerations  are  replete  with  interest.  They 
insensibly  lead  us  on  to  the  enquiry  as  to  whether  living 
things  can  now  originate  upon  the  surface  of  our  globe 
after  the  same  manner  in  which  alone  (in  accordance 


'  The  higher  the  degree  of  heat,  the  greater  does  the  pressure  become 
within  the  flask.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  under  such  influences 
alone  there  is  the  possibility  of  synthetic  changes  taking  place.  As 
before  mentioiied  (p.  24),  cyanimide  (CN»  H«)  is  converted  into  cya- 
ttiamide  (CN*  IP)  at  a  temperature  of  150^0. 


38  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

with  scientific  teachings  and  the  evolution  hypothesis) 
they  could  have  originated  in  those  far  remote  ages^ 
when  what  we  call  ^  Life '  first  began  to  dawn  upon  the 
still  heated  surface  of  the  earth.  Before  organic  mate- 
rials of  the  ordinary  kind  could  exist,  organisms  must 
have  been  present  to  produce  them.  Organizable  com- 
pounds of  a  certain  kind  must  nevertheless  have  pre- 
ceded organisms.  And  just  as  chemists  are  now  able 
to  build  up  a  great  number  of  so-called  organic  com- 
pounds in  their  laboratories,  so  it  seems  almost  certain 
that  some  such  mobile  compounds  may  have  been 
evolved  by  the  agency  of  natural  forces  alone  acting 
on  the  heated  surface  of  the  earth  at  a  period  anterior 
to  the  advent  of  living  things.  That  mere  saline  sub- 
stances are  capable  of  undergoing  change  and  rearrange- 
ments under  the  influence  of  physical  forces  is  a  well- 
established  &ct  which  nobody  denies,  and  of  which 
we  have  an  admirable  instance  in  the  conversion  of 
ammonic  cyanate  into  urea.  It  is  also  certain,  as  Prof. 
Graham  showed,  that  one  and  the  same  saline  sub- 
stance may  exist  with  its  molecules  now  in  the  crystal- 
loid and  now  in  the  colloidal  mode  of  aggregation — 
according  to  the  different  influences  to  which  it  has 
been  subjected  or  under  which  it  has  been  produced. 
This,  for  instance,  is  the  case  with  silica,  with  the 
sesquioxides  of  chromium  and  iron,  and  with  other 
mineral  substances.  Nay,  more,  the  absence  of  any 
natural  barrier  between  the  crystalloid  and  the  colloidal 
mode  of  aggregation  may  be  still  further  seen  by  the 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  39 

&ct  that  even  the  most  typical  colloids  are  capable  of 
undergoing  that  kind  of  isomeric  molecular  change 
which  converts  them  into  crystalloids.  As  one  of  the 
best  instances  of  this  we  may  mention  the  fact  of  the 
dange  which  blood  pigment  undergoes.  Hsematoidin 
is  frequently  met  with  in  the  form  of  oblique  rhombic 
crystals,  and  in  addition  there  are  other  crystalline 
fomis  of  albumenoid  substances  obtainable  from  blood  ^. 
Amongst  these  may  be  included  certain  tetrahedral 
crystals  discovered  by  Reichert  in  connection  with  the 
placenta  of  the  guinea-pig,  the  behaviour  of  which  to 
reagents  renders  it  certain  that  they  were  of  an  albu- 
menoid or  protein  nature.  Chlorophyll  also  has  been 
observed  in  a  crystalline  state  by  M.  TrecuP,  whilst 
Dr.  Montgomery  ^  has  depicted  the  results  of  a  similar 
change  which  a  tube  of  myeline  had  undergone. 
These  idxXs  sufficiently  prove  that  no  impassable  bar- 
rier exists  between  the  crystalloid  and  the  colloid 
states  of  matter*.    Do  we  not  see  that  simple  saline 

'  See  an  aitide  on '  Albmninous  CrystaUisation'  in  'Brit,  and  For. 
Med.  dir.  Rer./  Oct  1853. 

'  *  Comptes  Rendus,'  t  bd.  p.  436. 

'  •  On  the  Formation  of  so-called  Cells  in  Animal  Bodies,'  1867. 

*  In  a  paper  recentiy  read  before  the  Royal  Society  (Proceedings, 
ToL  zix.  [1871]  p.  455),  by  Dr.  Marcet,  entitled,  '  An  Experimental 
Inquiry  into  the  Constitution  of  the  Blood  and  the  Nutrition  of 
Mascnlar  Ussne,*  he  states,  *  that  a  mixture  of  colloid  phosphoric 
anhydride  and  potash  can  be  prepared  artificially  by  the  dialysis  of  a 
solution  of  chloride  of  potassium  and  phosphate  of  sodium,  and  that 
the  colloid  mass  thus  obtained  appears  to  retain  the  characters  of  the 
neutral  tribasic  phosphate/  Dr.  Marcet  finds,  moreover,  *  that  blood 
cootains  phosi^oric  anhydride  and  iron  in  a  perfect  colloid  state,  or 


40  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

substances  may  pass  into  the  colloidal  condition,  and 
that  even  typical  colloids  may  assume  a  crystalloid 
mode  of  aggregation?  It  surely  is  not  difficult  to 
imagine,  therefore,  that  molecular  rearrangements  may 
take  place  amongst  the  constituents  of  ammoniacal 
salts  of  greater  complexity,  whereby  a  more  complex 
colloid  may  be  produced — one  which  may  diflFer  in  no 
essential  respect  from  the  simplest  forms  of  protein. 
And  if  such  a  change  does  take  place,  it  would  be 
only  rational  for  us  to  suppose  that  the  new-formed 
protein  would  be  just  as  prone  to  undergo  change  as 
this  substance  generally  is.  If  ordinary  protein  com- 
pounds, therefore,  which  have  been  built  up  in  living 
things,  are  capable  of  going  through  certain  life-giving 
changes,  it  would  be  quite  natural  to  suppose  that  the 
differently  evolved  protein — that  which  comes  into 
existence  ^  spontaneously,'  or  without  the  influence 
of  pre  existing  living  matter — would  go  through  similar 
changes. 

Wherever  life-giving  combinations  occur,  therefore, 
we  are  entitled  to  look  upon  them  as  actions  resulting 
from  the  influence  of  physical  forces  upon  material 
collocations  whose  molecular  constitution  is  of  such  a 
nature  as  to  render  them  most  prone  to  undergo 
rearrangements.      A  series  of  reactions  takes  place 

quite  undifTusible  when  submitted  to  dialysis.*  In  summing  up  the 
results  of  his  researches,  he  comes  to  the  conclusion — •  That  there  is  a 
constant  change,  as  rotation  in  nature,  from  crystalloids  to  colloids,  and 
from  colloids  to  crystalloids.' 


7HB  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


41 


between  such  material  collocations  and  their  environ- 
ment, leading  to  fiirther  combinations,  and  as  a  result 
living  matter  appears.  Such  a  tendency  to  undergo 
diange  is  inherent  in  colloidal  compounds.  As  Prof. 
Graham  told  us: — ^  Their  existence  is  a  continual 
metastasis.  .  .  .  The  colloidal  is,  in  fact,  a  dynamical 
state  of  matter,  the  crystalloid  being  the  statical  con- 
dition.' 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

CRYSTALS  AND   ORGANISMS :   CAUSES  WHICH   DETERMINX  THEIR 

FORM   AND  STRUCTURE. 

Fluidity  and  Solution.  Molecular  qualities  retained.  Action  of  Heat 
Solution  a  State  of  Chemical  Combination.  Modes  of  precipitation 
of  Saline  Substances.  Properties  of  all  Bodies  dependent  upon 
Molecular  Composition.  Allotropism.  Simple  and  compound 
Substances.  Relations  of  Crystalloids  to  Colloids.  Conditions 
favourable  to  Crystallization.  Slowness  of  Union.  Influence  of 
weak  Galvanic  Currents.  Dimorphism  under  different  *  Conditions.* 
Changes  in  Colour  as  well  as  of  Shape.  Dr.  Bennett's  Cellular 
Crystals.  Mr.  Rainey's  Calculi.  Fusion  of  these.  Structure  of 
Starch-grains  similar.  Their  Fusion.  Albumenoid  Concretions. 
Mere  amorphous  Granules.  Specks  of  *  living '  Matter.  These 
assume  Organic  Forms.  Products  differ  as  Heat  acts  rapidly  or 
slowly.  Different  origin  of  Crystals  and  Organisms.  Views  of 
Maupertuis,  Burdach,  Schwann,  Herbert  Spencer,  and  G.  H.  Lewes. 
Passage  of  not-living  into  •  living '  Matter,  in  Growth  of  Plants. 
Influence  of  pre-existing  Protoplasm  determines  the  Quality  of  the 
new  Matter.  Same  with  pre-existing  Crystalline  Matter.  Crystalline 
Polarities  shown  by  Repair.  Modifications  producible  by  different 
*  Conditions.'  Dimorphism  of  Mercuric  Iodide  and  other  Salts. 
Such  Modifiability  should  be  more  marked  in  the  case  of  '  living  * 
Matter. 

THE  States  of  fluidity  and  solution  are  conditions 
to  which  most  forms  of  matter  may  be  reduced, 
and  from  which  all  solid  forms  must,  in  accordance  with 
the  Evolution  hypothesis,  have  originally  emerged. 
Fluidity  or  fusion  is  due,  for  the  most  part,  to  the 


) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  43 

dissociating  agency  of  heat,  which  tends  to  increase 
the  distance  between  the  ultimate  atoms  and  molecules 
of  bodies^.  The  chemical  affinities  holding  together 
the  constituent  atoms  or  molecules  of  certain  com- 
pounds are,  however,  too  feeble  to  withstand  the 
dissociating  influence  of  an  intense  amount  of  heat. 
As  the  temperature  rises,  the  chemical  affinities  which 
bind  together  the  dissimilar  atoms  into  compound 
molecules  become  more  and  more  weakened,  and  may 
be  at  last  overccxne  before  liquefaction  takes  place. 
Still  larger  is  the  number  of  compounds  which  are 
anable  to  endure  the  disruptive  agency  of  the  higher 
temperatures  necessary  to  reduce  them  to  the  state  of 
gas  or  vapour.  In  the  case  of  those  substances,  more- 
over, which  are  capable  of  being  reduced  to  either 
I^ysical  condition  by  the  aid  of  heat,  innumerable 

>  'Bimsen  and  Hopkins  have  shown  that  substances  which  expand 
wben  fused  have  their  point  of  fusion  raised  by  mechanical  pressure, 
that  is  to  say,  sinoe  mechanical  force  must  be  overcome  in  melt- 
iag,  the  tendency  to  melt  must  be  overcome  by  heat  before  that 
oppodtioii  can  be  overcome ;  and  the  pressure  required  to  keep  them 
solid  at  any  temperature  above  their  natural  point  of  fusion  may  be 
kkoked  npon  as  the  mechanical  representative  of  the  force  with  which 
they  tend  to  fuse  at  that  temperature.  Prof.  W.  Thomson  has  shown 
diat,  00  the  contrary,  water,  which  expands  in  freezing,  has  its  point 
of  fiision  lowered  by  pressure ;  that  is  to  say,  since  mechanical  force 
nnst  be  overcome  by  crystallizing,  crystallization  will  not  take  place 
nder  increased  pressure,  unless  the  force  of  crystalline  polarity  be 
increased  by  reducing  the  temperature.  .  .  .  Similar  principles  hold  true 
with  respect  to  the  solubility  of  salts  in  water.' — Bakerian  Lecture,  *  On 
the  Direct  Correlation  of  Mechanical  and  Chemical  Forces,'  by  H. 
C.  Sorby  ('  Proceed,  of  Royal  Soc.'  voL  xiL  1863,  p.  540). 


44  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

differences  exist  as  to  the  amount  of  beat  which  is 
necessary  for  converting  them  into  the  one  or  the  other 
state.  In  short,  the  particular  temperatures  at  which 
different  elementary  or  compound  substances  are  capa- 
ble of  existing  respectively  as  solids,  fluids,  or  vapours, 
varies  ad  infinitum^  in  accordance  with  differences  in 
the  molecular  nature  and  properties  of  the  bodies 
themselves.  Most  of  their  distinctive  chemical  charac^ 
ters  remain,  however,  essentially  the  same,  in  whatevo' 
physical  condition  the  matter  may  at  the  time  exist — 
whether  that  of  gas,  fluid,  or  solid  \ 

When  reduced  to  the  state  of  solution,  also,  bodies 
lose  the  obvious  physical  characters  which  originally 
distinguished  them.  Their  individual  and  separate 
existence  has  gone — their  constituent  molecules  have 
parted  company,  and  are,  for  the  time,  more  intimately 
related  to  the  molecules  of  the  solvent.  The  solvent 
itself  may   vary   much   in   nature,   though  that   with 


^  The  molecular  relationships  of  liquids  and  their  vapours  has 
further  elucidated  in  a  recent  memoir  by  Prof.  Tyndall,  '  On  the  Action 
of  Rays  of  high  Refrang^ibility  upon  Gaseous  Matter/  in  which  he  makes 
the  following  highly  interesting  statements  : — •  i.  The  vaporous  nitrite 
of  amyl  absorbs  with  such  avidity  the  rays  competent  to  decompose  it  that 
a  very  small  depth  of  the  vapour  quenches  the  efficient  rays  of  a  power- 
ful beam  of  solar  or  electric  light.  2.  The  vaporous  iodide  of  allyl,  on 
the  contrary,  permits  a  beam  to  traverse  it  for  long  distances  without  very 
powerfully  diminishing  the  chemical  power  of  the  beam.  3.  The  liquid 
nitrite  of  amyl,  in  a  stratum  one  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  quenches  all  the 
rays  which  could  act  chemically  upon  its  vapour.  4.  The  liquid  iodide 
of  allyl,  on  the  contrary,  in  a  stratum  of  four  times  the  thickness  just 
mentioned,  does  not  materially  diminish  the  power  of  the  beam  to  ad 
upon  its  vapour.'    (•  PhiL  Trans/  1870,  p.  344.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  45 

whose  action  we  are  most  familiar  is  water.  This 
fluid  dissolves  a  great  variety  of  different  substances. 
And  although  the  materials  so  dissolved  lose  the 
diaracteristics  which  distinguished  them  as  solid  ag- 
gregates— such  as  form,  hardness,  specific  gravity,  and 
odier  physical  qualities — ^the  actual  matter  is  still  there^ 
in  a  state  of  molecular  diffusion  and  with  all  its 
chemical  properties  comparatively  unaltered.  It  is 
recoverable,  also,  in  the  form  of  a  solid  aggregate — 
either  by  the  dissipation  of  the  water  by  means  of 
heat,  or  else  by  the  use  of  reagents  for  which  the 
molecules  of  water  have  a  stronger  affinity. 

Many  elementary  substances  and  compounds  that 
cannot  be  made  by  the  agency  of  heat  to  assume  the 
fluid  form  (as  well  as  many  which  can  be  so  reduced) 
are  dissolved  by  immersion  in  water.     And  just  as  in- 
numerable variations  are  met  with  in  the  behaviour 
of  difierent  simple  and  compound  substances  under  the 
influence   of  a  given  degree  of  heat,  so  innumerable 
variations  exist  in  the  behaviour  of  diflFerent  substances 
when  brought  into  contact  with  water  of  a  given  tem- 
perature.   Some  are  very  soluble,  some  less  soluble,  and 
others  quite  insoluble  j  these  differences  being  depen- 
dent upon  the  different  properties  of  the  molecules  of 
the  substances  in  relation  to  those  of  water.     A  union, 
which  can  only  be  termed  chemical,  takes  place  between 
the  molecules  of  the  substance  dissolved  and  that  of  its 
solvent^  5  though  where  these  molecules  are  complex, 

'  Speaking  of  the  force  which  detennines  solution,  Mr.  Sorby  says. 


46  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

as  with  salts,  they  may  be  broken  up  into  simpler  units^ 
which  enter  separately  into  combination  with  the 
molecules  of  water.  The  state  of  solution  is,  therefore^ 
to  be  regarded  as  a  new  chemical  combination — one 
which  carries  with  it,  like  many  other  such  combi- 
nations, marked  differences  in  physical  quality. 

In  such  respects,  therefore,  the  state  of  solution  differs 
notably  from  the  mere  state  of  fluidity  to  which  the 
molecules  of  a  simple  body  may  be  reduced  by  the 
agency  of  heat. 

But  solution  is  a  state  of  combination  whose  dura- 
bility, like  that  of  all  other  chemical  combinations,  is 
absolutely  dependent  upon  the  strength  of  the  affinity 
existing  between  the  molecules  of  the  solvent  and  those 
of  the  substance  dissolved.  Solubility,  accordingly,  is 
amenable  to  the  influence  of  all  those  causes  which 
generally  tend  to  affect  the  stability  of  compounds. 
A  little  diminution  or  a  little  increase  of  heat  may 
render  a  pre-existing  union  no  longer  possible.  Thus, 
when  a  hot  saturated  solution  of  alum  or  nitre  is 
allowed  to  cool,  some  of  the  salts  crystallize  out  of  the 

• 

(loc.  cit.  pp.  546,  542) : — •  We  cannot.  I  think,  deny  that  the  force 
represents  some  modification  of  chemical  affinity,  or  is,  at  all  events, 
most  closely  allied  to  it.  .  .  .  The  solnbility  of  salt  in  water  appears  to 
me  to  result  from  a  kind  of  affinity  which  decreases  in  force  as  the 
amount  of  salt  in  solution  increases.  This  affinity  is  opposed  by  te 
crystalline  polarity  of  the  salt;  and  when  the  two  forces  are  equal,  the 
solution  is  exactly  saturated.  As  is  well  known,  a  change  in  temperature 
alters  this  equilibrium ;  and,  according  to  my  experiments,  mechanical 
pressure  relatively  increases  one  or  other  of  these  opposing  forces, 
according  to  the  mechanical  relations  of  the  salt  in  dissolving.' 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  47 

sohition;  when  heat  is  applied  to  a  solution  of  lime, 
aoinc  of  it  becomes  precipitated ;  whilst,  when  either 
heat  or  cold  is  applied  to  a  solution  of  sodic  sulphate 
already  at  a  temperature  of  33^  C,  some  of  this  salt 
separates  from  the  state  of  solution^.  Here,  as  in 
other  cases  of  decomposition,  the  molecules  of  the  dis- 
stdvcd  substance  and  of  the  solvent,  being  themselves 
different,  are  diflFerently  affected  by  the  influence  of  the 
same  change  or  disturbing  influence^.  And  we  must 
suppose  the  amount  of  difference  induced  to  be  so  great 
as  to  weaken  or  wholly  destroy  the  affinity  which  had 
previously  held  them  tcgether,  so  that  the  molecules  of 
the  water  under  the  new  conditions  are  no  longer  able 
to  hold  asunder  the  molecules  of  the  substance  with 
which  they  were  previously  in  combination.  Or  a 
similar  effect  may  be  brought  about  by  the  addition  of 
a  (xmsiderable  quantity  of  a  substance  more  soluble 
than  that  which  is  already  in  solution  s.  Thus,  sodic 
chloride  crystallizes  from  its  aqueous  solution  on  the 

>  Mr.  Sulliyui  considers  (*  Rep.  of  Brit.  Assoc'  1859,  p.  392)  that  the 
solubility  of  very  many  salts  (like  that  of  sodic  sulphate)  attains  a  maxi- 
mum at  some  particular  temperature,  above  or  below  which  it  diminishes. 
This  temperature  may  frequently  be  above  lOo'^C;  hence  the  common 
bdief  that  solubility  alwacyt  increases  with  rise  of  temperature,  because 
tesqieimtures  higher  than  100°  C  are  rarely  resorted  to.  Calcic  sulphate 
(gypsum)  is  less  soluble  in  boiling  than  in  cold  water,  and  is  quite 
isoliible  in  water  at  I40°C. 

'  See  voL  I.  pp.  98-104. 

'  Even  saturated  solutions  of  certain  substances,  however,  will  permit 
a  solotion  of  some  other  salts  without  occasioning  a  precipitation  of  those 
origiaaUy  dimdved. 


48  THE  BEGINNINGS  01'  LIFE. 

addition  of  calcic  chloride,  whilst  nitre  does  the  same 
on  the  addition  of  alcohol.  Greater  solubility  implies 
greater  chemical  affinity,  under  the  influence  of  which, 
the  molecules  of  water,  leaving  those  of  the  substance 
first  dissolved,  may  combine  with  the  new  molecules, 
whilst  the  old  are  free  to  aggregate  in  the  form  of  a  pre- 
cipitated salt^  The  case  is  only  a  little  more  complex 
where  what  is  called  ^double  decomposition'  takes  place. 
But  facts  of  a  slightly  difFerent  nature  must  also  be 
borne  in  mind.  Some  salts  which  are  capable  of  re- 
maining in  solution  together  at  certain  temperatures, 
may  be  incapable  of  doing  so  when  the  solution  is 
not  maintained  at  a  temperature  within  this  range.  In 
such  a  case,  one  of  two  things  may  happen  :  either  one 
of  the  two  salts  originally  dissolved  may  be  precipitated, 
or  else  a  ^double  decomposition*  may  take  place — lead- 
ing to  the  deposition  of  one  of  the   alternate  salts, 

'  In  the  highly  interestiDg  memoir  already  referred  to,  Prof.  T3mda]l 
says : — *  Carbonic  acid  is  decomposed  by  the  solar  beams  in  the  leaves 
of  plants ;  but  here  it  is  in  presence  of  a  substance  chlorophyll,  ready, 
as  it  were,  to  take  advantage  of  the  loosening  of  the  atoms  by  the 
solar  rays.  The  present  investigation  has  furnished  numerous  cases  of  a 
similar  mode  of  action.  All  the  vapours  examined  may  be  more  or  less 
powerfully  affected  in  their  actinic  relations  by  the  presence  of  a  second 
body  with  which  they  can  interact.  The  presence,  for  example,  of 
nitric  acid,  or  of  hydrochloric  acid,  may  either  greatly  intensify  or  greatly 
diminish  the  visible  action  of  the  light  on  many  vapours  decomposable 
alone  or  when  mixed  with  air ;  while  the  presence  of  the  one  or  the 
other  of  the  same  acids  may  provoke  energetic  action  in  substances  which 
are  wholly  inactive  when  left  to  themselves.'  Nitrite  of  amyl,  nitrite  of 
butyl,  and  lienol  afford  good  examples  of  this  mode  of  action,  which  is 
very  similar  to  that  referred  to  in  the  text,  and  which  is  often  instru- 
mental in  aiding  fermentative  changes. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  49 


whilst  the  other  acid  and  base  still  continue  in  a  state 
of  solution.  This  is  an  occurrence  of  much  importance, 
since  it  tends  to  show  that  chemical  affinities  which 
may  be  held  in  abeyance  at  certain  temperatures  may, 
at  other  temperatures,  assert  themselves,  and  thus  lead 
to  the  initiation  of  molecular  combinations  which 
result  in  the  emergence  from  the  solution  of  a  new  kind 
of  solid  aggregate. 

We  have  illustrated  our  remarks  hitherto  by  a 
reference  to  the  behaviour  of  simple  saline  substances, 
though  all  the  observations  that  have  been  made  are 
equally  applicable  to  chemical  substances  in  general. 
It  is  quite  immaterial  whether  we  have  to  do  with 
simple  substances  or  with  highly  complex  bodies :  the 
properties  of  all  alike  are  dependent  upon  their  mole- 
cular composition  and  nature.  Molecular  comfosition  is 
an  important  item  even  with  reference  to  substances 
which  are  looked  upon  as  elementary — diffijrent  modes 
of  composition  or  arrangement  of  the  atoms  sufficing  to 
produce  what  are  called  ^  allot ropic'  states.  We  are 
most  familiar  with  these  as  they  are  presented  to  us  in 
the  various  forms  of  carbon.  The  differences  between 
the  diamond,  graphite,  anthracite,  and  pure  charcoal 
are  most  striking,  and  yet  these  are  all  different  states 
of  one  and  the  same  substance  whose  ultimate  atoms 
are    diflFerently    grouped.      Oxygen^,   sulphur 2,    and 

'  Ordinary  oxygen,  and  ozone  whose  molecule  is  supposed  to  be 
represented  by  O4. 
'  Sulphur  crystallizes   in    rhombic  octahedrons   belonging   to  the 

VOU  II.  E 


50  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

phosphorus^,  as  well  as  arsenic,  antimony  and  other 
metals,  also  exist  in  allotropic  states  in  which  they 
exhibit  wholly  diflFerent  properties.  It  will  be  easily 
understood,  therefore,  that  in  compound  substances  a 
greater  and  greater  possibility  of  molecular  rearrange- 
ment arises  in  proportion  to  their  atomic  complexity- 
Gradually,  in  feet,  this  becomes  the  all -important 
character  of  a  compound,  and  one  to  which  the  nature 
of  the  constituent  atoms  is  altogether  subordinate.  In 
proof  of  this,  one  has  only  to  refer  to  the  multitudes 
of  isomers  with  wholly  different  properties  which  are 
compounded  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen,  in  the 
same  relative  proportions. 

Although  so  much  depends,  therefore,  upon  the 
number  and  arrangement  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule, 
still  the  properties  of  the  molecule  can  be  nothing 
more  than  the  resultant  of  the  properties  of  the  dif- 
ferent atoms — modified  by  their  mutual  influence  upon 

trimetric  system,  and  also  in  rhombic  prisms  belonging  to  the  mono- 
clinic  system.  The  latter  have  a  deep  yellow  colour  and  are  translucent : 
they  always  exhibit  a  great  tendency  to  pass  by  molecular  rearrange- 
ment— accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat — into  the  opaque,  straw- 
yellow,  octahedral  crystals. 

*  The  two  varieties  of  this  substance  arc  known  by  the  name  of 
Normal  and  Red  Phosphorus.  The  first  variety  is  much  more  poisonous 
than  the  second ;  it  is  also  colourless,  cr^'stallizable  in  rhomboid  do- 
decahedra,  soluble  in  sulphide  of  carbon,  easily  oxidizable,  phospho- 
rescent, and  inflammable  at  a  low  temperature.  The  second  form  is 
scarlet  red,  amorphous,  much  less  soluble,  non-phosphorescent,  and  only 
inflammable  at  high  temperatures.  Mr.  Lemoine  has  shown  that  heat  is 
the  most  available  means  for  converting  the  one  form  into  the  other, 
and  that  the  transformation  is  always  only  partiaL 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  51 

one  another  in  that  particular  mode  of  collocation  which 
bebng^  to,  and  constitutes,  the  molecule  in  question. 
The  phenomena  of  allotropism,  as  we  have  previously 
hinted,  and  various  other  considerations,  tend  to  show 
that  even  simple  bodies — such  as  phosphorus,  sulphur, 
and  the  metallic  elements — are  made  up  of  molecules 
composed  of  similar  atoms  existing  in  a  definite  number 
and  grouping  in  each  allotropic  state  or  separate  sub- 
stance. An  alteration  of  the  number  or  grouping  of 
the  atoms  in  the  molecules,  or  of  both,  seems  to  be  the 
only  way  of  accounting  for  the  wholly  different  proper- 
ties and  crystalline  form  of  one  and  the  same  sub- 
stance, such  as  sulphur,  under  the  influence  of  different 
physical  conditions.  And  thus  vanishes  the  difference 
between  simple  or  elementary,  and  compound  bodies. 
They  are  all  made  up  of  molecules;  only  those  of 
the  simple  substances  are  aggregates  of  similar  atoms, 
whilst  those  of  compound  substances  are  a^regates  of ' 
dissimilar  atoms. 

Different  compound  substances  vary  immensely  in 
their  degree  of  complexity.  Some,  such  as  ordinary 
adds  or  bases,  are  aggregates  of  simply  complex  mole- 
cules; others  are  aggregates  of  doubly  complex  mole- 
cules— that  is  to  say,  two  simply  complex  molecules 
combine  to  form  a  doubly  complex  molecule,  and, 
when  a^egated  together,  these  include,  amongst  other 
compounds,  a   very  common  class  known  as  salts  \ 

'  As  a  general  nile,  it  may  be  said  that  decomposition  follows  the 
icfcise  order.      The  larger  molecules  separate  most  easily;    and  the 

£  % 


52  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

Seeing  that  in  bodies  of  this  class  a  compound  radicle, 
such  as  cyanogen  (CN)  or  ammonium  (NHJ,  may 
replace  one  of  the  simple  metallic  elements,  and  that 
two  such  salts  may  combine  together  to  constitute  a 
double  salt;  or  that  the  metallic  element  may  be  re- 
placed by  a  more  complex  radicle,  such  as  urea 
(C-  N2  H^  02)  or  kreatinine  (Q  H^  N3  QJ,  or  even  by 
one  of  the  still  more  complex  bodies  known  as  alka- 
loids ^,  we  may  be  somewhat  amazed  at  the  marvellous 
atomic  complexity  which  is  to  be  attained  even  by 
crystallizablc  bodies  known  as  salts. 

In  each  case  we  have  to  do  with  atomic  and  mole- 
cular properties,  and  looked  at  in  this  light,  the  diflFer- 
ences  between  what  are  called  simple  and  complex 
substances  gradually  vanish.  All  alike  have  a  mole- 
cular constitution,  though  the  molecules  may  be  simple 
or  compound,  and  made  up  of  like  or  unlike  units. 

What  has  been  said  concerning  crystallizable  bodies 
obtains  also  with  regard  to  the  compounds  known  as 
colloids.  We  will  not  recapitulate  what  has  been  al- 
ready said^  concerning  these  remarkable  compounds; 
we  will  merely  state  that  they  are  supposed  to  be 
generally  characterized  by  the  large  size  and  complexity 

constituent  atoms  of  the  simple  molecules  are  the  last  to  part  com- 
pany. 

*  The  composition  of  narcotine,  for  instance,  is  said  to  be  C«  H» 
NO",  and  that  of  morphine,  C54  H"  NO«  +  a  HO.  Both  bodies  have 
distinct  crystalline  forms. 

*  See  vol.  i.  pp.  88-91. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  53 

of  the  molecules  of  which  they  are  compounded.     Prof. 
Graham  says : — ^  It  is  difficult  to  avoid  associating  the 
inertness    of    colloids    with    their    high    equivalents, 
particularly    where    the    high   number  appears   to   be 
attained  by  the  repetition  of  a  smaller  number.     The 
enquiry  suggests   itself  whether  the   colloid   molecule 
may  not  be  constituted  by  the  grouping  together  of  a 
number  of  smaller  crystalloid  molecules,  and  whether 
the  basis  of  colloidality  may  not  really  be  this  com- 
posite character  of  the  molecule.'     In  all  probability, 
two  of  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  colloids, 
namely,  their  very  slow  rate  of  diffusion  and   their 
want  of  any  tendency  to  assume  a  crystalline   form, 
are  rcferrible  to  this  large  size  and  complexity  of  the 
molecules  of  which  they  are   compounded.     No  hard 
and  fest  line,  however,  separates  the  colloids  from  the 
crystalloids.       Although    multitudes    of    bodies    exist 
which  may  be  easily  placed  in  one  or  the  other  class, 
multitudes  of   others  are    to    be    met    with    having 
properties   of   an   altogether    intermediate    character. 
Nay,  even   the   most   typical  colloids  may  undergo  a 
rearrangement   of   their   elements,   whereby  they  are 
converted   into   crystalloids^.       Nothing    could   show 
more  plainly  than  this  that  the  diflFerence  between  a 
crystalloid  and  a  colloid  is  merely  one  of  degree,  and 
that  the  properties  of  colloids  are  different  merely  by 
reason  of  the    more   complex   molecular  arrangement 

*  Sec  p.  39. 


54  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

which  prevails — an  arrangement,  however,  which,  by 
the  mere  influence  of  physical  conditions,  the  molecules 
of  certain  crystalloids  are  known  ^spontaneously*  to 
assume.  A  further  consequence  directly  flowing  from 
this  superior  complexity  of  the  colloid  molecule,  is, 
as  we  have  previously  endeavoured  to  show,  the  greater 
instability  which  characterizes  them  as  a  class.  Very 
slight  changes  in  the  conditions  or  influences  to  which 
the  colloid  is  exposed  lead  to  changes  in  its  constitu- 
tion— owing  to  the  ease  with  which  a  re-arrangement 
is  brought  about  amongst  its  constituent  atoms  or 
elementary  molecules.  Its  vtr"^  existence,  as  Prof. 
Graham  pointed  out,  is  one  of  ^  continual  metastasis,* 
and  ^  may  be  compared  in  this  respect  to  water  while 
existing  liquid  at  a  temperature  under  its  usual  freezing 
point,  or  to  a  supersaturated  saline  solution.' 

Colloids,  like,  crystalloids,  are  soluble — sometimes 
largely  so — though  generally  'they  are  held  in  solution 
by  a  most  feeble  force.'  The  feeble  force  with  which, 
when  in  the  state  of  solution,  their  molecules  are  com- 
bined with  those  of  water,  is  another  peculiarity  emi- 
nently favourable  to  the  occurrence  of  rearrangements 
or  recompositions  amongst  their  molecules.  Thus 
when  in  a  state  of  solution  colloids  are  most  favour- 
ably situated,  in  all  respects,  for  undergoing  whatever 
changes  the  incidence  of  physical  forces  is  capable  of 
effecting. 

It  will  be  well  now  to  enquire  a  little  more  fiilly 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  55 

ii^o  the  nature  and  respective  characters  of  the  solid 
aggregates,  which,  under  the  influence  of  different  con- 
ditions, may  be  made  to  emerge  from  crystallizable 
and  colloidal  solutions  respectively. 

Although  saline  materials  so  frequently  aggregate 
into  crystalline  shapes  when  they  emerge  from  the  state 
of  solution^,  still,  in  many  cases,  the  assumption  or  not 
of  such  a  form  is  entirely  dependent  upon  the  con- 
ditions under  which  the  separation  takes  place. 

Many  substances  which,  in  the  chemist's  laboratory, 
arc  only  seen  in  the  form  of  insoluble  precipitates 
made  up  of  amorphous  granules,  could  have  been 
procured  in  a  crystalline  condition  if  the  same  decom- 
position which  had  given  rise  to  the  amorphous 
precipitate  had  been  allowed  to  take  place  more  slowly. 


'  The  conditions  under  which  crystallization  occurs  are  thus  given  in 
Watts's  Dietionary  of  Chemistry: — *To  enable  a  body  to  assume  the 
crystalline  state,  its  particles  must  possess  a  certain  freedom  of  motion ; 
hoQoe  the  fluid  state  is  for  the  most  part  an  essential  preliminary  to 
czystallization.  Sometimes,  indeed,  an  amorphous  solid — that  is  to  say, 
ooe  which  has  no  definite  structure,  either  crystalline  or  organized— 
passes   spontaneously    into    the    crystalline    state    without    previous 

liqae&ction. But,  generally  speaking,  it  is  in  the  passage  of  a 

body  from  the  liquid  or  gaseous  to  the  solid  state  that  the  regular  and 
S3Fmnietrical  arrangement  of  the  molecules  takes  place  which  constitutes 
crystallization.  The  vapours  of  many  substances  when  they  come  in 
ooDtact  with  cold  surfaces  pass  at  once  to  the  state  of  crystalline  solids, 
e.g.  sulphur,  iodine,  benzoic  acid,  arsenious  acid,  camphor,  8cc.  It  is, 
liowever,  in  the  transition  from  the  liquid  to  the  solid  state  that 
oystallizatioa  most  frequenUy  takes  place.  If  the  body  has  been 
brought  into  the  liquid  state  by  the  action  of  heat  alone,  it  may  be 
made  to  crystallise  by  cooling,  e.  g.  bismuth,  sulphur.' 


56  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

If,  instead  of  pouring  a  certain  amount  of  a  solution  of 
potassic  sulphate  into  one  of  baric  chloride,  we  allow 
the  mixture  to  take  place  gradually  by  means  of 
dialysis,  then  crystals  of  calcic  sulphate  are  formed 
rather  than  an  amorphous  precipitate.  It  has  been 
ascertained  by  M.  Fr^my^  that  insoluble  compounds 
generally,  which  appear  in  the  laboratory  as  a  result 
of  double  decomposition  in  *  the  form  of  amorphous 
precipitates,  can  almost  invariably  be  obtained  in  a 
crystalline  condition  when  the  chemical  reaction  is 
allowed  to  take  place  very  slowly.  This  may  be 
brought  about  by  making  the  saline  solutions  mix  after 
osmosis — either  through  membranes,  wooden  vessels, 
or  porous  porcelain.  By  one  or  other  of  these 
methods,  he  obtained  many  very  insoluble  salts  in  the 
crystalline  condition — such  as  the  sulphates  of  baryta, 
strontia,  and  lead,  the  carbonates  of  baryta  and  lead, 
oxalate  of  lime,  chromate  of  baryta,  and  several  sul- 
phides 2.     These  facts  are  highly  interesting  because  a 

*  *  Compt.  Rend.*  t.  Ixiii.  p.  714. 

*  We  find  in  Watts's  Dictionary  the  following  statement,  which  has  an 
explanatory  bearing  upon  what  has  been  above  stated : — •  The  more  slowly 
the  liquified  body  is  brought  back  to  the  solid  state,  and  the  more  the 
liquid  is  kept  at  rest,  the  smaller  the  number  and  the  greater  the  size 
and  regularity  of  the  crystals  ;  but  if  the  solvent  be  cooled  or  separated 
quickly  the  crystals  are  numerous,  but  small  and  ill-defined.  In  the 
former  case,  the  particles  of  the  solidifying  body  have  time  to  unite 
themselves  regularly  with  those  which  separate  first  from  the  fluid  and 
form  nuclei  of  crystallization ;  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  crystallization 
takes  place  rapidly,  a  great  number  0/ particles  solidify  at  the  sams  time, 
each  forming  a  nucleus  to  which  other  portions  attach  themselves,  and 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  57 

coQsideration  of  the  circumstances  under  which  such 
ai)stances  axe  fcHind  naturally,  as  crystalline  minerals, 
makes  it  probable  that  they  have  also  resulted  from 
double  decompositions  brought  about  with  great 
slowness. 

It  was,  moreover,  ascertained  by  M.  Becquerel  and 
Mr.  Robert  Were  Fox,  that  many  crystalline  minerals 
which  had  not  previously  been  procured  artificially, 
were  to  be  obtained  by  the  long-continued  action  of 
weak  galvanic  currents  upon  solutions  containing  the 
necessary  ingredients.  These  investigations  were  after- 
wards taken  up  by  Mr.  Crosse,  who  succeeded  in  pro- 
curing a  long  list  of  crystallized  minerals  similar  to 
those  which  had  hitherto  been  known  to  exist  only  in 
mineral  veins  and  other  situations  ^. 

Variation  in  the  ^conditions*  under  which  the  crystal- 
lization of  any  particular  substance  occurs,  often  gives 
rise  to  the  most  marked  variation  in  its  crystalline 
fbrm^.  Thus,  referring  to  the  article  ^Dimorphism*  in 
Watts*s  *  Dictionary  of  Chemistry,'  we  find  the  following 
statements  : — ^  Many  substances,  both  simple  and  com- 
pound, crystallize  in  forms  which  belong  to  two  or  three 
different  systems  of  crystallization,  or  which,  even  if 

thus  wc  obtain  x  number  of  crystals  irregularly  formed  and  interlacing 
each  other  in  all  directions/  The  transition  between  small,  ill-formed 
crystals  and  mere  amorphous  granules,  is  easily  to  be  accounted  for  by  a 
still  greater  rapidity  of  separation. 

*  For  a  brief  account  of  these  experiments,  see  *  Report  of  British 
Association '  for  1836. 

«  Sec  Fig.  44. 


58  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

they  belong  to  the  same  system,  yet  exhibit  such 
differences  in  their  corresponding  angles  as  to  render 
it  quite  impossible  to  reduce  them  to  the  same  form : 
this  was  first  shown  by  Mitscherlich,  in  1823  (Ann, 
Ch.  Phys.  [2]  xxiv.  264).  Such  bodies  are  said  to  be 
dimorphous  and  trimorphous.  The  difference  of  crys- 
talline form  which  they  exhibit  is  associated  with 
difference  of  specific  gravity,  hardness,  colour,  and 
other  properties.  Whether  a  body  shall  crystallize  in 
one  system  or  another   seems  to  depend  chiefly  upon 

temperature Sometimes  the  form  of  the  crystal 

varies  according  to  the  solvent  from  which  it  separates : 
thus  arsenious  anhydride  crystallizes  from  water  or 
hydrochloric  acid  in  regular  octahedrons,  but  from 
alkaline  solutions  in  trimetric  prisms/  Taking  some 
other  specific  instances,  we  find  that — ^  a  hot  solution 
of  saltpetre  yields,  when  slightly  cooled,  nothing  but 
prismatic  crystals,  but  at  io°C  prismatic  and  rhombo- 
hedral  crystals  appear  together^  if  alcohol  be  added, 
the  latter  are  formed  most  abundantly  j  the  addition  of 
potash,  nitric  acid,  or  n;trate  of  sodium  produces  no 
alteration/  Again,  the  modifying  influence  of  tempe- 
rature is  shown  by  the  fact  that, — ^If  a  solution  of 
carbonate  of  calcium  in  water  containing  carbonic 
acid  be  left  to  evaporate  at  the  ordinary  temperature, 
nothing  is  obtained  but  calc-spar,  in  microscopical,  and, 
for  the  most  part,  truncated  primitive  rhombohedrons  5 
if,  on  the  contrary,  the  solution  be  evaporated  over  the 
water-bath,  arragonite   is  obtained  in  small  six-sided 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  59 

prisms — ^mixed  with  a  few  crystals  of  calc-spar,  because 
the  temperature  of  the  solution  is  lower  at  first  than  it 
afterwards  becomes.'  In  other  examples  we  may  find 
not  only  a  striking  diflFerence  in  physical  form,  but 
also  a  notable  change  in  colour,  occasioned  by  the  new 
molecular  rearrangements  which  the  change  of  tem- 
perature seems  to  necessitate: — ^Protoxide  of  lead 
crystallizes  after  fusion,  as  well  as  from  a  saturated 
solution  in  hot  concentrated  caustic  potash,  in  yellow 
rbombic  octahedrons.  If,  however,  the  solution  is  not 
fully  saturated  with  oxide  of  lead,  so  that  crystallization 
docs  not  take  place  till  after  complete  cooling,  red 
crystalline  scales  are  deposited  on  the  yellow  rhombic 
octahedrons  just  formed :  if  the  red  crystals  are  heated, 
they  turn  yellow  in  cooling,  in  consequence  of  passing 
into  the  first  form.' 

But  in  addition  to  these  variations  in  which  a  crys- 
talline form  of  one  kind  or  another  is  always  present, 
we  may  occasionally  find  that  in  saline  solutions,  solid 
products   make   their  appearance   whose  outlines  are 
rounded  instead  of  being  bounded  by  right  lines  and 
angles.    Thus,  Dr.  Hughes  Bennett^  has  figured  a  pecu- 
liar pellicle  that  forms  on  the  surface  of  lime-water, 
in  which  the  crystalline  material  very  closely  resembles 
a  layer  of  tesselated  epithelial  cells.     And  lately  I  have 
seen  a  somewhat  similar  crystalline  pellicle  make  its 
appearance   on  the    surface    of  a  solution   {in  vacuo) 
containing  small  quantities  of  ammonic  sulphate  and 

^  '  Lancet,'  1863.  vol.  i.  p.  3. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


potassic  bichromate^   The  cell-like  compartments  were 
here  much  smaller  than  those  of  the  substance  described 


Flo.  39- 

Cellulsr  Forms  of  Cr^'stalline  Matter,  from  a  solulioD  of  Ammooic 

Sulphate  with  Potassic  BidiTomate.    (  x  800.) 

by  Dr.  Bennett,  and  each  contained  one  or  two  unclear- 
looking  particles.  The  whole  mass  polarized  light  in 
the  most  beautifiil  manner,  and  sank  rapidly  in  water 
when  its  upper  surface  was  wetted. 

In  addition  to  these  modifications  of  crystalline  form 
under  different  conditions,  there  are  still  others  whose 
nature  has  been  elucidated  by  Mr.  Rainey.  He  has 
shown  that  when  carbonate  of  lime  is  slowly  pre- 
cipitated in  viscid  solutions  of  gum,  albumen,  or 
even  glycerine,  the  molecules  of  the  nascent  carbonate 
unite  with  portions  of  the  viscid  ingredient,  and 
then  —  instead  of  arranging  themselves  into  either 
octahedral  or  hexagonal  crystals — the  combined  parti- 

'  See  voL  L  p.  451. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  6i 

des  assume  the  form  of  calculi,  with  distinct  con- 
centric layers.  These  experiments  have  already  been 
alluded  to»,  and  I  will  now  only  add  a  few  additional 
particulars,  which  have  a  most  important  bearing  upon 
our  present  subject.  Mr.  Rainey  says: — '  The  mechani- 
cal conditions  required  to  act  in  conjunction  with  the 
chemical  means  are,  the  presence  of  such  a  quantity  of 
the  viscid  material  in  each  solution  as  will  be  sufficient 
to  make  the  two  solutions,  when  mixed  tc^ether,  of 
about  the  same  density  as  that  of  the  nascent  carbonate 
of  lime,  and  a  state  of  perfect  rest  of  the  fluid  in  which 
the  decomposition  is  going  on  j  so  that  the  newly-formed 
compound  may  be  interfered  with  as  little  as  possible  in 
its  subsidence  to  the  sides  and  bottom  of  the  vessel. 
This  will  require  two  or  three  weeks  or  longer,  accord- 
ing to  the  size  and  completeness  of  the  calculi  2/  The 
early  forms  assumed  by  this  globular  carbonate  of  lime^ 

*  See  Tol.  i.  pp.  302-304. 

'  Just  as  the  process  of  crystallization  can  be  induced  when  it  would 
not  otherwise  occur,  by  the  influence  of  electricity,  so  Mr.  Bridgman,  of 
Xorwich,  has  ascertained  that  under  its  influence  the  formation  of 
these  calculi  may  be  materially  hastened.  By  availing  himself  of  the 
inflneoce  of  a  weak  galvanic  current  he  has  succeeded  *  not  only 
is  producing  them  in  a  very  much  shorter  period  of  time,  but  also 
in  obtaining  a  membranous  matrix  out  of  albiunen,  having  within  it 
tbese  deposits  in  a  definite  layer,  coalescing  and  aggregating  together, 
and  closely  approaching  the  appearance  presented  at  the  edge  of  a 
natnial  bone  in  its  early  stage  of  formation.'  ('Transact,  of  Odont. 
Soc*  vol.  iii.  p.  410.) 

'  Mr.  Rainey  found  that  *  muriate  of  baryta  and  muriate  of  strontia 
when  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  the  muriate  of  lime,  furnish  each  a 
^bbolar  carbonate,  the  spherical  form  of  the  latter  being  particularly 


62 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


are  strikingly  like  the  forms  exhibited  by  the  simplest 
organisms.  They  seem  to  increase  in  size,  however, 
by  a  very  remarkable  process  of  '  coalescence,'  all  the 


a   A) 


«>-'i'*'^j'?^'; 


@ 


C30    O. 


© 


© 


<g)@§) 


Fio.  40. 

Globular  Carbonate  of  Lime.    (Rainey.) 
a.  Earliest  forms  assumed. 
h.  Larger  globules  showing  different  stages  of  coalescence.    (  x  450.) 

Steps  of  which  have  been  fiilly  described  by  Mr.  Rainey. 
He  gives  an  account  of  the  process  by  which  lamination 
takes  place,  and  also  describes  the  mode  in  which  two 
or  three  of  these  calculi,  coming  into  contact,  will  gra-' 
dually  fuse  by  a  process  of  molecular  rearrangement 


perfect  and  beautiful.  But  muriate  of  magnesia  when  decomposed  in 
the  same  manner  and  under  precisely  the  same  conditions,  does  not 
furnish  globules,  but  crystals  of  carbonate  of  magnesia,  evincing  no 
tendency  to  become  globular.*  These  various  bodies  have  different 
atomic  weights,  and  this,  doubtless,  has  much  to  do  with  the  difference 
of  result  The  atomic  weights  of  the  four  are  as  follows :  —  Barium  137, 
strontium  8  7 '5,  calcium  40,  and  magnesium  24.  That  magnesium  is  too 
light  to  enter  well  into  combination  with  the  gum  is  rendered  all  the 
more  probable  by  the  fact  that  the  effects  with  strontia  are  even  better 
than  those  with  lime. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


63 


into  2  single  larger  calculus.  The  change  is  a  most 
remarkable  one,  during  which  there  is  brought  about 
*lhc  perfect  coalescence  into  one,  of  two  or  more  glo- 
bules of  carbonate  of  lime  as  much  as  yjy"  of  an  inch 
in  diameter,  perfectly  transparent,  of  a  hardness  nearly 
equal  to  that  of  glass  ...  the  incorporation  of  these 
globules  being  so  complete,  that  the  resulting  one  has 
the  same  spherical  form,  the  same  degree  of  trans- 


Glofanlar  Carbonate  of  Lime  b  later  stages — fonnalion  of  Calculi  by 

'  Molecular  Coalescence.'  (Rainey.) 
act  1^  Molbeiry-like  bodies  due  to  the  aggrcEation  of  several  small 
globules.  These  gradually  undergo  change  from  circumfer- 
ence to  centre.  The  external  globules  first  coalesce  into  an 
amorphous  groaular  layer,  which  gradually  becomes  moie 
tmupatent,  and  similar  changes  extend  inwards. 
iV  h"  b"'  Futher  st^es  of  aj^^regation  and  molecalai  coalescence. 


64  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

parency,  and  the  same  hardness  and  structure  as  the 
component  ones.*  And  yet  the  fact  that  these  eflFects 
are  brought  about  solely  'by  the  mutual  attraction  of 
the  two  globules/  must  show,  quite  plainly,  that  the 
molecules  of  such  structures  have  an  extraordinary 
mobility  and  capability  of  rearrangement  which  may 
dimly  remind  us  of  the  molecular  mobility  and  or- 
ganizing tendencies  of  living  matter. 

It  is  a  fact  of  considerable  interest,  moreover,  that 
the  shapes  of  such  bodies  should  so  closely  resemble 
those  of  primordial  living  things.  The  shapes  of  the 
former  are  undoubtedly  determined  by  the  mere  physical 
properties  of  the  molecules  of  which  they  are  composed, 
which,  owing  to  the  combination  of  the  saline  matter 
with  some  of  the  viscid  material,  are  probably  large  and 
complex  ^     And,  therefore,  we  can  only  suppose  that 

*  Mr.  Rainey  says  : — *  If  the  density  of  the  alkaline  solution  exceed 
much  the  degree  mentioned  in  the  formula,  and  if  that  of  the  simple 
solution  of  gum  is  not  equal  to  the  degree  there  specified,  the  alkali 
diffusing  itself  through  the  simple  solution  of  gum  more  rapidly  than  the 
gum  contained  in  the  lower  solution,  a  larger  quantity  of  carbonate  will 
be  formed  than  there  >^ill  be  gum  to  combine  with  it  in  the  proportion 
necessary  to  form  the  globular  carbonate,  and  consequently  the  carbonate 
of  lime  formed  in  the  upper  part  of  the  bottle  will  be  deficient  in  gum, 

and  therefore  it  will  be  crystalline  and  not  globular Hence,  in 

the  case  just  specified,  the  uppermost  part  of  the  deposit  will  exhibit 
perfect  crystals,  that  immediately  beneath  it  cr)rstals  beginning  to  have 
their  angles  roimded  off,  and  the  examination  thus  continued  successively 
upon  still  lower  portions  will  show  the  gradual  passage  of  imperfectly 

rectilinear  figures  into  forms  perfectly  spherical In  the  former 

case  the  molecules  of  carbonate  of  lime  are  uncombined,  and,  therefore, 
in  its  crystalline  state  it  may  be  regarded  as  pure ;  in  the  latter,  the  car- 
bonate of  lime  is  combined  with  the  viscid  substance,  as  can  be  shown 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE,  65 

the  ^pes  of  organisms  (which  are  also  compounded  of 
complex  colloidal  molecules)  are  in  all  probability  solely 
due  to  the  properties  of  their  molecules,  as  operated 
upon  by  surrounding  influences.  There  is,  therefore, 
a  double  approximate  similarity  of  these  aggregates 
to  organisms:  first,  on  account  of  their  molecular 
mobility,  and  secondly,  by  reason  of  the  forms  which 
they  assume  on  emerging  from  the  state  of  solution. 
And  both  these  characteristics  are  probably  referrible  to 
the  molecular  complexity  of  their  component  units. 

If  we  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  solid  aggregates 
which  may  emerge  from  solutions  of  colloidal  matter, 
we  shall  find  that  they  also  are  extremely  variable  in 
nature,  according  to  the  '  conditions'  under  which  they 
arc  formed. 

The  starch^rains  gradually  deposited  within  the  cells 
of  certain  plants,  present  a  structure  which,  in  many 
respects,  closely  resembles  the  calculi  we  have  just 
been  describing.  They,  too,  are  produced  slowly,  and 
s^jparently  by  a  process  of  deposition  within  the  tissue 
of  the  plant ;  they  frequently  coalesce ;  they  exhibit  a 
laminated  structure;  and  they  polarize  in  a  very 
characteristic  manner.  The  transition  from  the  calculi 
previously  described  to  starch-grains  is,  in  fact,  most 
easy  and  natural,  since  Mr.  Rainey  has  ascertained 
that  a  certain  amount  of  mineral  matter,  in  the  form 

^  chemical  analysis,  and  therefore,  in  its  globular  form  it  is  obviously 
in  impure  carbonate — a  compound  of  this  substance  and  gum  or  albu- 
(Loc.  dt.,  pp.  35  and  31.) 

TOL.  II.  F 


€6 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


of  silica  and  pboepliates,  always  enters  into  the  com- 
position of  the  latter.  In  the  calculi  there  is  much 
mineral  matter  and  a  smaller  quantity  of  colloidal  ma- 
terial, whilst  in  starch-grains  there  is  a  large  proportion 


Different  kinds  of  Starch^ranules  contrasted  vith  Globular  Carbonate 
of  lime.    (Raioey.) 
a-a"'.  Ordinary  forms  of  potatoe-starch. 
i,  b'.  Compound  gnmnles  of'  lous  les  mois'  slarcJi. 

c.  Two  carbonate  of  lime  '  calculi '  coalescing,  from  the  taidfjvag 
Ehell  of  an  03'$ter. 

of  colloidal  material  and  a  small  proportion  of  mineral 
matter. 

The  mode  of  appearance  and  the  character  of  the 
starch-grains  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  cellular  tissue, 
are  best  studied  by  making  thin  sections  of  any  grow- 
ing plants  in  which  starch  is  usually  formed  in  large 
quantities.  Very  young  potatoe-tubers  answer  well  for 
this  purpose.  When  submitted  to  microscopical  exami- 
nation, Mr.  Rainey  says' :—' In  such  sections,  in  this 
and  the  majority  of  plants,  the  starch-cells  in  the 

'  See '  Jnl.  Microsc.  Science,'  \S6o,  p.  a. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  67 

Yicinity  of  the  ramifications  of  the  vessels  will  be  seen 
to  cxmtain  very  small  spherules  of  starch,  many  of  them 
too  minute  to  be  accurately  measured ;  yet,  notwith- 
standing their  minuteness,  their  figure  is  well  defined, 
and  they  are  made  black  or  blue  by  iodine,  proving  that 
tiicy  are  as  much  starch  as  the  larger  globules,  and 
differing  from  them  in  nothing  but  size.   These  spherules 
may  be  either  free  in  their  starch-cells  or  conglomerated 
and  joined  together  in  pairs  or  threes,  producing  dumb- 
bell or  somewhat  triangular  forms.    Sometimes  they  are 
found  with  shreds  of  membrane,  and  at  others  are  in- 
vested more  or  less  by  an  utricle.     In  the  starch-cells 
more  remote  the  granules  are  larger  and  fewer,  so  that 
their  increase  in  size  is  attended  with  a  diminution  in 
number,  showing  most  clearly  that  the  largest  are  the 
product  of  the   union   of  those   of  an  inferior   size. 
Indeed,  the  number  of  granules  of  a  small  size  is  such  in 
some  of  the  starch-cells  that  it  would  be  impossible  that 
they  all  could  become  developed   into   large  granules 
without  the  space  containing  them  undergoing  a  most 
inordinate  increase  in  size,  which  is  not  the  fact ;  the 
spaces  in  which  the  middle-sized  granules  are  lodged 
being  about  the   same   size   as  those  containing  the 
largest  granules.     But  the  chief  evidence  in  support  of 
this  conclusion  must  be  obtained  from  the  microscopic 
examination  of  all  the  various  forms  of  starch,  beginning 
with  that  which  is  merely  granular  and  going  up  to  that 
which  is  most  perfect.      Such  an  examination  will 
show  that  there  are  exactly  the  same  class  of  appear- 


68  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

ances  to  be  found  in  starch,  indicative  of  a  coalescence 
of  its  particles,  as  arc  presented  by  the  several  forms 
of  carbonate  of  lime,  whether  prepared  artificially  or 
occurring  in  organized  tissues.' 

Other  substances,  such  as  leucine,  found  in  animal 
fluids,  appear  as  minute  hyaline  bodies  which  exhibit 
concentric  markings — although  they  yield  no  colour  re- 
actions with  the  polariscope.  I  have  frequently  seen, 
in  drops  of  blood  taken  from  persons  suffering  from 
various  diseases,  bodies  almost  similar  in  appearance 
and  about  t^so"  in  diameter,  which  probably  had  an 
albuminoid  constitution.  In  other  cases  irregular  ag- 
gregations of  various  sizes,  composed  of  rounded  bodies 
presenting  no  concentric  markings,  have  been  met 
with  J  and  these  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  re- 
garding as  insoluble  modifications  of  an  albuminoid 
substance,  which  had  probably  been  reduced  to  this 
state  by  reason  of  some  molecular  rearrai^ements 
that  had  taken  place  in  the  dissolved  materials  of  the 
fluid  from  which  they  have  been  derived.  A  change 
might  easily  occur  whereby  the  previously  soluble  com- 
pound becomes  no  longer  soluble ;  and  then,  as  it 
appears,  it  may  separate  from  the  blood  and  grow  in 
the  form  of  rounded  masses.  And  these  forms  are  just 
as  much  the  expression  of  its  resultant  molecular  attrac- 
tions as  the  intersecting  fibres  of  fibrine  which  separate' 

'  The  process  miy  be  watchtd  in  a  drop  of  the  blood  beneath  the 
microscope  ;  and  ill  the  more  euilj  if  the  specimen  bos  been  taken  from 
the  finger  of  a  person  suffering  from  themaalic  fever. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  69 


from  cx)agulating  blood  represent  morphological  states 
necessitated  by  its  molecular  aflBnities. 

Occasionally,  too,  when  organic  infiisions  are  exposed 
to  conditions  unfavourable  for  the  formation  of  organ- 
isms (more  especially  when  their  virtues  have  been,  in 
great  part,  eidiausted  by  a  previous  abundant  growth), 
this  kind  of  pseudo-crystallization  occurs,  and  peculiar 


Fig.  43. 

Pecaliar  Forms  assumed  by  Albuminoid  Concretions  from  an  old  Hay 

Infusion.    (  x  800.) 

bodies  are  produced,  which  seem  to  grow  after  the 
(a^on  of  crystals  into  all  kinds  of  odd  shapes.  A 
great  similarity  of  form,  however,  often  obtains  between 
tiic  concretions  which  occur  in  the  same  fluid.  Such 
aggr^tes  are  in  feet  in  every  way  analogous  to  crys- 
tals, and  their  diflFerences  of  form  are  probably  just  as 
rcferrible  to  differences  of  molecular  composition  ^ 

It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  the  products 
obtainable  from  certain  saline  solutions  differ  according 

*  We  may  here  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  the  different  shapes 
iHiich  are  assumed  by  the  granular  particles  entering  into  the  composition 
of  the  pdlides  or  deposits  found  after  a  time  in  certain  saline  solutions. 
7^  were  curiously  branched  and  knobbed  in  Experiment  w. 


7o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OP  LIFE. 

to  the  rate  at  which  they  emerge  from  the  state  of 
solution.  Molecules  which  come  tc^ether  suddenly  and 
tumultuously  aggregate  into  mere  formless  granules, 
whilst  those  which  come  together  more  slowly  are 
enabled  to  collocate  into  that  geometrical  form  in 
which  their  molecules  exist  in  a  state  of  polar  equi- 
librium. The  crystalline  Is,  undoubtedly,  a  higher 
mode  of  a^regation  than  the  amorphous,  and  it  is  the 
highest  form  which  it  is  possible  for  the  molecules  of 
a  crystalloid  to  assume.  But  when  we  turn  to  the 
different  kinds  of  colloidal  matter,  we  shall  find,  as 
might  be  expected  from  a  consideration  of  its  superior 
molecular  complexity,  that  a  still  more  marked  differ- 
ence exists  between  the  various  solid  a^regates  which, 
under  the  influence  of  ditFerent  conditions,  can  be  made 
to  emerge  from  solutions  containing  such  matter. 

When  many  albuminous  fluids  are  heated  to  140°— 
2ia°F,  it  causes  an  isomeric  modification  of  the  pro- 
tein substances  and  their  precipitation  throughout  the 
iiid  in  the  form  of  minute  particles^.  These  are  tole- 
rably similar  in  size  and  form  to  those  which  appear 
when  a  saline  substance  is  precipitated  in  the  condition 
of  an  insoluble  powder,  owing  to  the  rapid  and  simul- 
taneous union  of  constituents  whose  affinity  for  one 

'  This  is  one  of  the  best  means  of  seeing  Brownian  movements  of  the 
most  typical  kbd,  especially  if  a  drop  of  the  fluid  be  eumiiied  whilst 
still  wBnn.  Heavier  saline  granules  no  larger  in  size  may  not  exhibit 
such  movements  at  all,  or  else  only  toy  imperfectly.  The  albuminoid 
molecules  also  cease  to  vibrate  in  syrup,  glycerine,  or  fluids  of  similar 


THR  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  71 

another   is   much  stronger  than  for  the  molecules  of 
the  solvent.     But  the  slow  and  long-continued  action 
of  a  more  moderate  amount  of  heat,  will  lead  to  those 
hi^er  kinds  of  collocation  that  are  possible  for  such 
more  complex  molecules,  and  by  which  specks  of  what 
wc  call  ^  living '  matter  make  their  appearance  through- 
out the  fluid.     These  speedily  grow  into  primordial 
organisms  known  as  Bacteria,  and — more  especially  if 
the  separation  has  taken  place  still  more  slowly — into 
Ttnla  or  other  kinds  of  Fungus-germs,     We  must  con- 
sider such  well-known  organisms  to  be  just  as  much 
immediate  products  derivable  from  colloidal  matter,  as 
crystals  are  the  results  of  those  modes  of  aggregation 
which  are  habitual  and  necessary  among  simpler  mole- 
cules ^. 

When  we  consider,  moreover,  that  heat  is  consumed 
in  the  building  up  of  colloidal  matter,  and  in  the 
growth  (and  therefore  probably  in  the  genesis)  of 
orguiisras,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  heat  is  emitted 
or  given  out  when  crystals  form,  we  may  get  some  dim 
indications  as  to  why  the  latter  are  stable  or  statical 

^  We  haye  already  mentioned  the  fact  shown  by  Crosse,  that  elec- 
tricity has  a  most  marked  influence  in  determining  the  formation  of 
o;^s.  It  has  been  seen  also,  from  the  observations  of  Bridgman,  that 
dectridty  hastens  the  formation  of  such  artificial  calculi,  as  were 
^ttdibed  by  Rainey.  From  the  fact  of  the  great  proneness  of  organic 
lobstances  to  putrefy  or  ferment  during  or  before  the  advent  of  a 
thmder-storm,  and  in  view  of  the  definite  observations  recorded  at 
^l  L  p.  288,  it  would  seem  highly  probable  that  electrical  influence 
nay  also  favour  the  formation  of  organisms  and  the  evolution  of  living 
matter. 


7»  THE  SEG/XX/XGS  OF  UFE. 

aggregates,  and  wbjr  the  former  arc  unstable  or  djr- 
oaniical  aggregates.  The  molecules  in  the  crystal  are 
delivered  over  to  the  action  of  their  natural  affinities, 
which  are  perhaps  few  and  simple ;  whilst  is  the  col- 
loidal and  living  aggregates  more  and  more  potential 
heat  or  motion  is  retained,  so  as  to  constitute  an  in- 
herent condition  so  fa^~oUTnble  to  molecular  rearrange- 
ments, that  they  are  induced  by  the  slightest  external 
influences. 

The  highest  product  formabic  from  the  one  kind  of 
matter  is  known  as  a  erystsiy  whilst  the  highest  product 
fbrmable  from  the  other  is  called  an  frgminm.  We 
name  the  process  by  which  the  one  arises  •  crj-stalUza- 
tion,'  and  that  by  which  the  other  appears  '  archebiosis ' 
— with  the  understanding  that,  in  the  latter  case,  a 
material  combination  has  been  initiated  possessing 
such  a  set  of  qualities  as  we  are  accustomed  to  desig- 
nate by  the  word  *  life.'  The  crystal  is  resolvable  into 
comparatively  simple  molecules,  which  have,  however, 
themselves  been  produced  by  those  combinations  rf 
acid  with  base  which  occasion  their  separation  from 
the  state  of  solution;  whilst  the  organism  is  made  up 
of  highly  complex  coiL^tituent  m'.ilecules,  which  have 
been  derived  from  synthetic  diaogcs  amongst  colloidal 
molecules  preceding  the  hoal  union  which  ouses  them 
to  separate  from  the  state  of  solution.  Just  as  the 
origin  of  the  crystal  is  due  to  the  i^^ration  of  molecular 
affinities,  under  the  infiuence  of  the  ' conditions '  which 
are  operative  in  its  medium,  so  is  the  ofigin  c*  the 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  73 

organism  referrible  to  molecular  affinities,  of  a  more 
complex  order,  under  similar  influences.     Nay,  further, 
just  as  the  form  and  properties  of  the  crystal  are  to  be 
taken  as  the  natural  outcome  of  the  properties  of  its 
constituent  molecules  under  the  influence  of  its  envi- 
ronment, so  are  the  form  and  properties  of  the  organism 
to  be  considered  as  the  natural  outcome  of  the  proper- 
tics  of  its  molecules,  entering  into  combination  under 
the  influence  of  their  environing  conditions. 

Views  analc^us  to  these  have  been  more  or  less 
fully  expressed  by  many  writers.  The  essential  simi- 
larity in  the  laws  regulating  crystalline  and  organic 
forms  was  even  suggested  by  Maupertuis  in  1744^ 
Crystals  and  organisms  were  spoken  of  by  Burdach^ 
as  statical  and  dynamical  a^regates  respectively.  We 
have  seen,  moreover,  that  the  formation  of  organisms 

*  MOne-Edwards  says  (•  Physiologic  et  Anatom.  Comp.*  t.  viii.  p.  247  ): 
'Manpertuis  dont  la  cdlebrit^  est  due  surtout  au  voyage  qu'il  fit  en 
Laponie  avec  Clusant  et  quelques  autres  savants  pour  verifier  les  id^ 
dc  Newton  touchant  I'aplatisement  de  la  tcrre  aux  poles  combattait  for- 
tcment  la  throne  de  la  pr^e»stence  et  de  Temboitement  des  germes.  II 
out  poovoir  e3q>liquer  la  fonnation  des  organismes  en  supposant  que 
ks  Qol^coles  de  la  mati^re  organisable  sont  douses  d'une  sorte  d'attrac- 
tion  di-ctive  en  vertu  de  laquelle  ces  atomes  se  rapprocheraient  et 
s'mdnuent  dans  certains  rapports,  de  fa^on  ^  donner  naissance  ^  des 
assemblages  analogues  ^  ceux  dont  ces  memes  molecules  proviennent 
propria  qu*il  comparait  tantot  ^  Taffinitd  chimique  ou  2i  Tattraction  en 
^otQe  de  laquelle  les  parties  constitutives  d'un  cristal  se  r^unissent  sui- 
vnt  on  ordre  d^termin^,  tantot  ^  une  sorte  d*instinct  ou  de  souvenir  d'un 
^  ant^enr.  Les  premiers  Merits  de  Maupertuis  sur  ce  sujet  parurent 
pa  d'ann^  avant  ceux  de  Buffon.'  (CEuvres,  t.  ii.  p.  3, 1 744-) 

*  See  voL  i.  p.  298,  note  3. 


74  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

was,  in  1836,  definitely  compared  by  Schwann  to 
formation  of  crystals.  Cells,  which  were  then  believe 
to  be  the  types  of  all  rudimentary  organisms,  were 
thought  by  him  to  owe  their  form  to  a  process  essen- 
tially similar  to  crystallization ;  the  characteristic  shapes 
being  due,  in  the  case  of  cells,  to  a  peculiarity  in  the 
nature  of  the  substance  of  which  they  were  composed. 
As  Schwann  expresses  it : — '  The  formation  of  the  ele- 
mentary shapes  of  organisms  is  but  a  crystallization 
of  a  substance  capable  of  imbibition.  The  organism  is 
but  an  aggregate  of  such  imbibing  crystals^.'  But 
as  may  have  been  gathered  f  om  statements  already 
made,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  has,  within  the  last  few 
years,  much  more  fully  worked  out  the  doctrine  that 
the  structures  and  shapes  of  organisms  are  the  results 
of  the  'polarities'  of  their  constituent  organic  units^ 
under  the  continually  modifying  influence  of  external 
conditions*.     To  his  full  and  admirable  treatment  of 


*  A  doctrine  somewhat  similar  to  Schwann's  has  been  more  recently 
advocated  by  Dr.  Montgomery.  He  sums  up  a  memoir  published  in 
1867,  *0n  the  Formation  of  so-called  Cells  in  Animal  Bodies/ with 
these  words : — *  The  experiments  which  I  have  communicated  go  a 
good  way  to  show  that  a  plastic  imbibing  material  driven  into 
individual  shapes  by  a  crjrstallizing  influence  is  the  cause  of  "  cell  *" 
formation/ 

•  See  more  especially  the  Appendix  to  his  *  Principles  of  Biology/  In 
the  work  itself  he  appeared  to  lay  too  much  stress  upon  'inherent 
tendencies,'  and  this  has  given  rise  to  adverse  criticisms.  In  the 
Appendix,  Mr.  Spencer  admits  that  he  did  not  'adequately  explain'  that 
•  the  proclivity  of  units  of  each  order  toward  the  specific  arrangement 
seen  in  the  organism  they  form,  is  not  to  be  understood  as  resulting 


THR  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  75 

the  subiect  we  shall  subsequently  allude  more  in  detail. 
We  must,  however,  now  call  attention  to  a  very  im- 
portant essay  by  Mr.  G.  H.  Lewes  *,  in  which  he  promi- 
nently develops  those  aspects  of  the  doctrine  which  pre- 
viously had  not  been  sufficiently  elucidated.     He  dwells 
upon  the  extreme  importance  of  variation  or  similarity 
in  external  conditions  in  inducing  living  things  (in 
whidi  *we  observe  such  a  community  of  elementary 
substance*)  to  vary  or  resemble  one  another  in  their 
organic  forms.     In  one  passage  he  says^: — 'Although 
observation  reveals  that   the    bond    of   kinship  does 
really  unite  many  divergent  forms,  and  the  principle  of 
Descent  with  Natural  Selection  will  account  for  many 
of  the  resemblances  and  diflFerences,  there  is  at  present 
no  warrant  for  assuming  that  all   resemblances   and 
difiFerences    are   due   to   this   one  cause,  but,  on   the 
contrary,  we  are  justified  in  assuming  a  deeper  principle 
whidi   may  be    thus    formulated:     All   the    complex 
organisms  are  evolved  from  organisms  less  complex,  as 
these  were  evolved  from  simpler  forms :  the  link  which 
unites  all  organisms  is  not  always  the  common  bond  of 
heritage,  but  the  uniformity  of  organic  lofws  acting  under 

nlform  conditions It  is  therefore  consistent  with 

the  hypothesis  of   evolution   to   admit   a  variety  of 
origins  or  starting-points/     In  this  paper  the  immense 

frwn  thdr  own  structures  and  actions  only,  but  as  the  product  of  these 
ind  the  enrironing  forces  to  which  they  are  exposed/ 

*  •  Darwin's  Hypotheses/  in  Fortnightly  Review,  1868. 

*  Loc  dL,  p.  370. 


76  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

importance  of  the  influence  of  external  conditions  as 
compared  with  that  attributable  to  the  inherent 
aptitudes  of  living  protoplasm  has  been  dwelt  upon 
perhaps  more  strongly  than  by  any  previous  writer, 
and  has  led  Mr.  Lewes  to  announce  a  most  important 
modification  of  the  Darwinian  hypothesis.  Before  I 
had  read  Mr.  Lewes's  essay,  though  several  months  after 
it  had  been  published,  the  results  of  my  own  experi- 
ments had  driven  me  to  adopt  a  similar  notion. 
When  once  it  had  been  proved  that  living  matter 
could  come  into  being  de  novo^  a  belief  in  the  truth 
of  such  doctrines  was  a  logical  necessity,  as  further 
explanations  will  suffice  to  show. 

Crystals  can  be  traced  back  only  as  far  as  their  first 
emergence  in  a  speck-like  form  from  the  fluid  in  which 
they  arise ;  and  similarly,  some  organisms  can  be  traced 
back  to  the  minutest  visible  specks  which  appear  in 
a  filtered  infusion  of  organic  matter.  Concerning  the 
existence  of  mvisihle  germs  of  organisms  we  have  no 
knowledge — we  know  no  more  of  them,  and  have  little 
more  right  to  assume  their  universal  difFiision  than 
we  have  to  calculate  upon  the  universal  diffusion  of 
invisible  crystalline  germs.  We  have  seen,  moreover, 
how  the  experimental  evidence  completely  upsets  the 
mere  hypothesis  that  all  living  things  which  now  appear 
have  been  derived  from  pre-existing  living  things ; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  we  know  that  an  over- 
whelming amount  of  evidence  can  be  brought  forward 
to  show  that  the  first  particles  of  organisms  may  be 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  77 

produced  under  the  influence  of  physical  forces  alone, 
just  as  it  is  admitted  that  the  first  particles  of  a  crystal 
are  formed    by   ^spontaneous'  combination.    Just  as 
all  subsequent   portions  of  the   crystal   form  in  obe- 
(Uence  to  the  same  molecular  properties  and  physical 
forces  as  lead  to  the  collocation  of  the  first  particles, 
so  may  the   first   particles  of  an   organism   combine 
by  virtue  of  the   same   chemical   and   physical   influ- 
ences   as    those    which    subsequently    determine    its 
inaease  *. 

The  plant  takes  not-living  mineral  ingredients  from 

earth  and  air,  and  under  the  influence  of  solar  light  and 

heat,  these  simple  materials  assume  within  its  tissues 

those  higher  modes  of  combination  which  are  necessary 

in  order  that    they  may  be  converted  into  '  living ' 

matter.    The  forces  at  work  In  and  upon  the  plant  are 

supposed   to   be   nothing  more  than  ordinary  physical 

forces.     Here,  however,  it  is  true,  matter  passes  from 

the  lifeless  to  the  living  state  of  combination  under 

the  influence  of  pre-existing  protoplasm.     No  unknown 

and  independent  forces   are  now  supposed  to  be  at 

work  within   living  tissues,   and    therefore   we   must 

suppose  that,  under  the  influence  of  the  physical  forces 

within  and  those  without  the  organism,  lifeless  com- 

*  Uring  matter,  like  crystalline  matter,  is  only  formable  by  a  synthesis 
of  its  elements.  As  Crystals  have  not  the  power  of  self-multiplication, 
^  have  only  one  mode  of  origin.  But  because  Organisms  have  repro- 
^**i^  powers,  the  obviousness  of  these  modes  of  increase  has  sufficed 
<o  cast  donbts  upon  the  reality  of  the  independent  origin  of  living  units. 
(See  vol  i.  p.  473.) 


78  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

pounds  fall  more  or  less  immediately  into  such  and 
such  living  combinations  '.  The  influence  of  the  pre- 
existing protoplasm  would  seem  to  expend  itself  chiefly 
in  the  building  up  of  living  matter*  ^ar^^  tts  own  like- 
ness. This,  however,  is  a  property  possessed  by  crystals 
as  well  as  organisms,  and,  as  Mr.  Lewes  pointed  out, 
such  a  resemblance  has  been  alluded  to  by  earlier 
writers.  Mr.  Lewes  says*: — ^The  nourishment  of 
various  organs  from  a  common  fluid,  each  selecting 
from  that  fluid  only  those  molecules  that  are  like  itself, 
rejecting  all  the  rest,  is  very  similar  to  the  formation 
of  various  crystals  in  a  solution  of  diflFerent  salts,  each 
salt  separating  from  the  solution  only  those  molecules 
that  are  like  itself.     Reil  long  ago  called  attention  to 

*  Here,  at  all  events,  the  facts  would  not  seem  to  show  that  there 
is  any  extraordinary  difficulty  to  be  overcome  in  order  that  matter  may 
fall  into  *  vital  *  modes  of  combination.  And  the  absolute  necessity  for 
long  intervals  of  time  during  which  numerous  intermediate  stages  may 
be  passed  through,  seems  from  this  alone  to  be  rendered  somewhat 
improbable,  even  had  we  not  an  abimdancc  of  experimental  evidence 
to  bring  forward  in  opposition  to  this  mere  theoretical  supposition. 
We  may  perhaps  derive  some  valuable  hints  as  to  the  facility  with 
which  protoplasm  and  chlorophyll  make  their  appearance,  by  reference 
to  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the  seed-cells  of  (Edogonium,  Paltno- 
glaa,  and  other  algae  (see  vol.  i  p.  1 78).  In  the  midst  of  the  living  tissue, 
fat  and  starch  globules  are  gradually  formed,  till  it  seems  to  be  almost 
totally  converted  into  these  products  which  are  ordinarily  deemed  life- 
less. But,  after  a  time,  and  under  the  genial  influence  of  heat,  light 
and  moisture,  a  molecular  re-arrangement  in  the  inverse  order  begins 
to  take  place.  The  needful  elements  are  all  there ;  the  old  combinations 
are  disturbed,  new  combinations  arise,  and  again  there  slowly  appears 
the  chlorophyll-containing,  living  plotoplasm. 

'  Loc.  cit,  p  619 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  79 

this  analogy.    He  observed  that,  if  in  a  solution  of  nitre 
and  sulphate  of  soda  a  crystal  of  nitre  be  dropped,  all 
the  dissolved  nitre  crystallizes,  the  sulphate  remaining 
in  solution^   whereas,  on  reversing  the  experiment,  a 
crystal  of  sulphate  of  soda  is  found  to  crystallize  all  the 
dissolved  sulphate,  leaving  the  nitre  undisturbed.     In 
like  manner,  muscle  selects  from  the  blood    its    own 
materials,  which  are  there  in  solution,  rejecting  those 
which  the  nerve  will  select/     And,  in  fact,  the  more 
we  study  the   phenomena  of  nutrition,  growth,  and 
repair — wheresoever  taking  place — the  more  we  may 
become  convinced  of  the  fact  that  the  influence  of  pre- 
existing living  matter  does,  in  the  main,  show  itself 
in  this  way.     It  may  be  seen  by  the  mode  in  which 
an  ulcer  heals.     The  new  skin  forms,  under  ordinary 
circumstances,   only   at    the    edges    of   the    sore    in 
continuation  with  pre-existing  skinj   and  the  method 
recently  adopted   by  surgeons,  of  transferring  a  small 
portion  of  epidermis  to  the  midst  of  a  large  surface 
which  has  been  denuded  by  a  bum,  is  but  a  practical 
application   of   this   physiolc^ical   fact'.       From   the 

^  This  admirable  method  of  treatment  was  initiated  by  M.  Reverdin, 
o^Hris,  and  first  practised  in  this  country  by  Mr.  Pollock.  The  latter 
A73:  *It  has  appeared  to  me  that  when  this  process  of  cicatrization 
H'proadies  the  margin  of  the  original  ulcer,  although  this  may  have  been 
indolent  or  stationary,  there  is  a  stimulus  given  to  the  latter,  and  a  fresh 
Process  of  cicatrization  commences  from  this  edge,  and  new  tissue  is 
fonned  in  a  direction  to  meet  that  from  the  transplanted  portion.  It  has 
*^  appeared  to  me  that  the  process  of  cicatrization  is  more  rapid  in  the 
tnnsplaoted  portion  on  the  side  nearest  the  edge  of  the  original  sore,  when 
tile  two  edges  approach  each  other/  (*  Trans,  of  Clinical  Society/  vol.  iv.) 


8a  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

minute  transplanted  mass  which  takes  root,  skin  grows 
as  from  a  centre,  and  the  wound  that  was  previously 
intractable  rapidly  heals  *. 

But  it  may  be  asked.  What  is  the  cause  or  meaning 
of  this  tendency  shown  by  crystals  and  by  different 
kinds  of  living  matter  to  mould  suitable  saline  or 
organizable  materials  into  structures  similar  to  them- 
selves ? 

In  the  case  of  crystals,  only  one  answer  can  be 
given.  There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  as  to  the 
truth  of  the  supposition  that  the  form  of  the  crystal  is 
a  resultant  necessity,  predetermined  by  the  molecular 
properties  of  the  matter  which  composes  it,  and  the 
sum  total  of  conditions  acting  thereupon  at  the  time  of 
collocation.^  That  a  crystalline  structure  once  initiated, 
therefore,  should  continue  to  grow  in  the  same  manner 
in  a  solution  of  a  suitable  kind,  is  only  to  be  ascribed 
to  the  natural  similarity  of  effect  produced  by  uniform 
forces  acting  under  uniform  conditions.    And  similarly, 

'  This  affords  another  instance  illustrative  of  the  fact  that  mere 
growth  can  take  place  under  conditions  amidst  which  development  or 
evolution  would  cease.  And,  as  Watts  says  (loc.  dt..  vol.  ii.  p.  115), 
'crystallization  is  also  especially  facilitated  by  introducing  into  the 
liquid  a  crystal  of  the  substances  previously  formed.  A  solution  satu- 
rated at  a  high  temperature  may,  under  certain  circumstances,  be  cooled 
down  several  degrees  without  depositing  crystals ;  but  the  introduction 
of  the  crystal  of  a  substance  causes  the  whole  to  solidify  instantly  into 
a  aystalline  mass.  This  phenomenon  is  easily  exhibited  with  Glauber's 
salt*  That  thb  difference  is  only  one  of  degree,  however,  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  crystallization  will  take  place  spontaneously  if  the  tempe- 
rature be  still  further  lowered. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  JJFE,  8 1 

the  injured  form  of  a  crystal  is  restored  when  it  is 
placed  under  suitable  conditions,  because  such  a  crys- 
talline form  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  physical  expression 
of  thai  mode  of  aggregation  under  which  alone  (within 
certain  narrrow  limits)  a  polar  equilibrium  of  its  mole- 
cules can  exist  ^.    If  there  is  not  such  a  connection 
between  particular  crystalline  forms  and  certain  kinds 
of  matter   under  the   influence   of  given  conditions, 
then,  what   reason  would  there   be   for  the   uniform 
similarity  of  result  which  is  observable  ?    Why  should 
difierent  substances  have  definite   crystalline   forms? 
Whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  relationship  of  this 
kind  docs  exist,  it  is  more  easy  for  us  to  understand 
that  the  repair  of  a  broken  crystal  should  be  effected 
witii  such  undeviating  regularity.    The  molecules  of 
any  kind  of  matter,  when   under   the   simultaneous 
influence  of  diflFerent  forces,  ultimately  tend  to  lapse 
into  a  state  of  more  or  less  stable  equilibrium  *. 
If  further  proof  were  needed  of  the  truth  of  this  view, 

*  On  this  subject  Mr.  Lewes  says  (loc.  cit.  p.  623): — *  That  it  is  the 
polarity  of  the  molecules  which,  at  each  moment,  determines  the  group 
those  molecules  wiU  assume,  is  well  seen  in  the  experiments  of  Lavalle, 
BCDtiooed  by  Brown  {Morphdog.Studiin  uber  die  Gestaltung-Gesetze,  1 858). 
He  showed  that,  if  when  an  octohedral  crystal  is  forming,  an  angle  be 
est  away  so  as  to  produce  an  artificial  surface,  a  similar  surface  is 
pradooed  spontaneously  on  the  corresponding  angle,  whereas  all  the 
otiber  angles  are  sharply  defined/  This  cutting  away  of  the  angle  of 
the  crystal  is  a  change  which  does  not  interfere  with  the  essential  nature 
of  the  crystalline  form,  so  that  the  polar  balance  may  be  perfectly 
"Btored  by  the  formation  of  another  opposing  flat  surface. 

'  Spencer's  *  First  Principles,'  and  ed.  pp.  484,  495. 

VOL.  11.  G 


89  THE  BBGINNIlfGS  OF  UFE. 

it  would  be  afforded  by  the  fects  which  we  are  now 
about  to  cite,  referring  to  the  influence  of  variatips  in 

*  conditions,'  even  upon  the  structure  of  a  fiilly  formed 
crystal  Such  facts,  however,  are  cited  principally  for 
the  purpose  of  showing,  more  clearly  than  we  have 
hitherto  done',  how  very  potent  in  some  cases  is  the 
ii^fluence  of  varying  'conditions'  in  determining  the 
nature  of  crystalline  forms,  as  compared  with  that 
assignable  to  tiie  inherent  tendencies  of  the  matter 
itself.  TTie  citation  of  a  few  of  the  many  phenomena 
which  are  Jamiliar  enough  to  the  chemist  will  serve 
to  make  plain  this  general  principle,  by  showing  that 
the  whole  nature  of  a  crystal  already  in  existence 
may  be  changed  by  the  action  of  causes  which  seem 

.  the  most  trivial :  a  slight  elevation  of  temperature, 
or  even  the  most  delicate  touch,  in  some  cases.  Is 
capable  of  initiating  changes  which  spread  throu^ 
their  entire  substance,  or  throughout  a  whole  aggre- 
gate of  a)hering  crystals'.     In  the  same  article  on 

*  Dimorphism'  in  Watts's  'Dictionary  of  Chemistry,'  to 
which  we  have  already  referred,  we  find  the  follow- 
ing statement : — ^  Crystab  formed  at  one  particular 
temperature,  and  tiien  exposed  to  that  temperature  at 

'Seep,  sr- 

*  The  formi  ditpla^  bj  cohering  ojitab  are  oftoi  most  beandM,  - 
and  somMimex  sliikitigly  Tcsemble,  in  thdr  genenl  ontlines,  thoM  of 
shrubs  or  trees.  We  need  only  TeTer  to  the  bcantiftd  fomu  ununed 
by  mow  ciysUU,  to  the  tree-like  nunifialions  of  ic»cr]^tab  on  the 
window  pane,  or  to  the  lead  and  nlver  'tree*'  vrhidi  deli^  so  many 
in  their  diildhood. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  83 

which  crystals  of  a  di£Ferent  kind  are  produced,  often  lose 
thdr  transparency^  and  without  alteration  of  external 
fwm^  became  changed  into  an  aggregate  of  small  crystals 
tftbe  latter  kind:  examples  of  this  alteration  of  struc- 
tore  are   a€Ebrded   by  sulphur,  carbonate  of  calcium^ 
mercuric  iodide,  and  many  other  bodies/    Again: — 
^Meranic  ioMde  separates  from  solution,  and  likewise 
sid>limes  at  a  very  gentle  heat,  in  scarlet  tables  belong- 
ing to  the  dimetric  system ;  but  when  sublimed  at  a 
hi^icr  temperature  in  sulphur-yellow,  rhombic  tables 
of  the  monoclinic  system.    The  red  crystals  turn  yellow 
when  heated,  and  resume  their  red  tint  on  cooling. 
The  yellow   crystals  obtained   by  sublimation   retain 
their  colour  when  cooled;  but,  on  the  slightest  rubbing 
or  stirring  with  a  pointed  instrument,  the  part  which 
is  touched  turns  scarlet,  and  this  change  of  colour 
extends  with  a  slight  motion,  as  if  the   mass  were 
alive,  throu^out  the  whole  group  of  crystals  as  far 
as  they  adhere  together.*    (Vol.   ii.  p.  332.)     Then 
again-. — ^Nitrate  of  potassium  usually  crystallizes  in  the 
form  of  arragonite:    but  if  a  drop  of  the   aqueous 
solution  of  this  salt  be  lefl  to  evaporate  on  a  glass 
plate  and  the  crystallization  observed  under  the  micro- 
scope, it  will   be  found  that,  side  by  side  with  the 
prismatic  crystals  at  the  edge  of  the  drop,  a  number 
of  obtuse    rhombohedrons  of  the  calcspar  form  are 
produced,  just  like  those  in  which  nitrate  of  sodiiun 
crystallizes.    As  the  two  kinds  of  crystals  increase  in 
size  and  approach  one  another,  the  rhombohedrons 
I  G  % 


84  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

become  rounded  off  and  dissolve,  because  they  are 
more  easily  soluble  than  the  othei?,  while  the  arrago- 
oite-shapcd  prisms  go  on  increasing  in  size.  When 
the  two  kinds  of  crystals  come  into  immediate  coatact, 
the  rbombohedral  ones  instantly  become  turbid,  acquire 
an  uneven  surface,  and  after  a  short  time  throw  out 
prisms  from  all  parts  of  their  surfaces.  Contact  with 
foreign  bodies  also  brings  about  the  transfbrmattoa  of 
the  rhombohedrons  while  they  are  wet.  If  the  drops 
are  so  shallow  that  the  liquid  dries  round  the  rhombo- 
hedrons beftwe  they  are  disturbed,  they  will  remain  for 
weeks  without  disintegrating,  and  bear  gentle  pressure 
with  foreign  bodies  without  alteration;  but  stronger 
pressure,  or  scratching,  or  the  mere  contact  of  a  pris- 
matic crystal  of  saltpetre,  causes  them  to  change,  a 
delicate  film  proceeding,  as  it  were,  from  the  point  of 
contact,  and  spreading  itself  over  their  surfaces ;  they 
then  behave  towards  foreign  bodies  like  a  heap  of  fine 
dust,  but  retain  their  transparency.  The  rhombo- 
hedrons  are  also  transformed,  without  alteration  of 
external  appearance,  when  heated  considerably  above 
loo^C:  they  then  become  much  harder,  because  the 
fine  powder  first  produced  bakes  t<^ether  into  prismatic 
crystals.'  (lot  cit.  p.  333.) 

These  bets,  together  with  those  already  cited,  seem 
to  show  clearly  enough,  not  only  that  the  crystalline 
form  of  any  crystallizable  material  is  variable  to  a 
remarkable  extent  when  it  is  allowed  to  crystallize 
under  different  conditions,  but  that,  even  when  fi^rmed. 


THR  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


85 


a  crystal  produced  under  a  certain  set  of  conditions 
may  be  compelled  by  its  very  nature,  when  these  are 
changed,  to  undergo  an  entire  molecular  rearrangement 
before  a  polar  equilibrium  can  be  again  established 
between  the  sarae  molecules  and  the  new  influences 
to  whidi  they  are  subjected.  New-bom  matter  of  all 
kinds  ought  to  show,  to  a  more  or  less  marked  extent, 
a  similar  plasticity :  and  if  the  combinations  which 
constitute  ^  living  matter'  are  more  unstable  than  those 
to  which  we  have  just  been  referring,  then  the  forms 
assamed  by  such  sensitive  matter  under  different  con- 
ditions ought  to  become  more  and  more  divergent. 


CHArTI'.R    XIV. 

THE   FUNDAMENTAL    PROPERTIKS   OK    r.IVlN'r    MAI  IKK 

Specks  of  living  Matter  unfold  into  known  Forms.  This  also  the 
case  with  Cr}'5tairme  Matter.  Powerful  influence  of  *  Conditions ' 
over  Crystalline  form.  Transitions  between  Crystalline  and  Organic 
Forms.  Organic  Polarities  shown  by  phenomena  of  Repair  and 
Gemmation.  Gradual  limitation  uf  Reproductive  Faculty.  Cause 
and  Explanation  of  Gcmmiparous  Reproduction.  Explanation  of 
Reproduction  of  higher  Organisms.  Phenomena  of  Heredity. 
Nature  of  Germ-cells  and  Sperm-cells.  '  Physiological  units*  versus 
•Pangenesis.*  Heredity  the  Conservative  Agency.  How  potent, 
and  why,  in  complex  Organisms.  Lower  Organisms  more  and 
more  free  from  influence  of  Heredity.  Potency  of  *  Conditions' 
over  Forms  of  lowest  Organisms  and  Cr}'stals.  How  to  account 
for  Origin  of  present  lowest  Organisms.  Either  from  Archaic 
Ancestors  or  else  comparatively  New  Products.  Probability,  and 
proof,  of  latter  view.  Explanation  of  similarity  between  pre-existing 
low  Organisms  and  those  producible  tU  novo.  Fundamental  cause 
of  organic  *  Reproduction.'  Same  Molecuhir  Laws  governing  the 
production  of  Crystals  and  Organisms  respectively.  Transitions 
between  not-living  and  *  living  *  matter.  Highest  modes  of  Mole- 
cular Composition  in  other  Planets  and  Systems. 

WHEN  specks  of  living  matter  appear  Je  m§v9  in 
any  fluid,  they  soon  assume  one  or  other  of  the 
shapes  with  which  we  are  more  or  less  familiar,  just  as 
specks  of  crystalline  matter,  of  whatsoever  nature  they 
may  be — whether  previously  known  or  altogether  new — 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  87 

&1I  into  shapes  belonging  to  one  or  other  of  the  ordi- 
nary crystalline  types  of  form. 

But  the  prevailing  shapes  of  crystals  and  of  organisms 
respectively — ^those  differences  of  form  which  are  sup- 
posed to  be  characteristic  and  peculiar  to  each — are  ob- 
viously referrible  in  part  to  the  nature  of  the  constituent 
molecules,  and  in  part  to  the  nature  of  the  medium 
in  whidi  these  molecules  aggregate.    The  more  closely 
the  molecules  of  the  crystalloid  and  the  medium  in 
which  they  unite  approximate  to  colloidal  complexity 
and  the  kind  of  media  in  which  organisms  are  found, 
the  more  do  the  shapes  of  the  crystalloid  aggregates 
resemble  those  of  the  simplest  organisms.    This  has 
been  conclusively  shown  by  Mr.  Rainey's  experiments ; 
and  they,  together  with  other  considerations  now  to 
be  mentioned,  almost  compel  assent  to  the  correctness 
of  the  view  already  advanced   by  Mr.  Spencer  and 
several  others,  to  the  effect  that  the  shape  and  structure 
of  any  organism  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  result  of 
die  play  of  the  molecular  affinities  of  the  organizable 
matter  under  the  influence  of  the  forces  operative  in  its 
medium — that,  in  fiact,  organisms  are  produced  owing 
to,  and  under  the  influence  of,  precisely  the  same  laws 
as  those  which  give  birth  to  and  regulate  the  form 
of  crystals.    Unless  this  be  so,  how  are  we  to  explain 
tiie  various  cases  of  restoration  of  lost  parts  in  animals 
—how,  in  fact,  are  we  to  give  an  account  of  the 
pbenomena  of  reproduction  by  fission  or  gemmation, 
in  which  mtit  isolated  parts  of  an  organism  grow  so 


88  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

as  to  produce  an  organism  similar  to  that  from  which 
they  were  derived?  It  is  well  known  that  minute 
fragments  cut  from  a  Hydra  or  from  a  Medusa — when 
placed  in  suitable  situations — are  capable  of  developing 
into  perfect  organisms  similar  to  those  from  which 
they  had  been  derived;  just  as  a  mere  fragment  of 
a  crystal  thrown  into  an  almost  super-saturated  solution 
of  the  same  salt  will  lead  to  the  formation  of  a  perfect 
crystal.  We  are  told,  moreover,  by  Dr.  Hooker  *,  that 
there  is  ^a  species  of  Begonia^  the  stalks,  leaves,  and 
other  parts  of  which  are  superficially  studded  with 
loosely  attached  cellular  bodies,*  and  that  ^  any  one  of 
these  bodies,  if  placed  under  favourable  conditions,  will 
produce  a  perfect  plant  similar  to  its  parent.*  The 
power  of  repair  and  reproduction  of  lost  parts  which 
is  exhibited  by  many  animals  comparatively  high  in 
the  scale  of  organization,  is  due  to  precisely  the  same 
causes.  Multiplication  by  gemmation  is,  in  fact,  only 
an  extreme  form  of  the  phenomenon  which  takes 
place  when  the  crustacean  reproduces  a  lost  limb^ 
when  the  lizard  and  the  triton  reproduce  a  tail  that 
has  been  accidentally  or  purposely  severed,  or  evin 
when  the  fish  reproduces  a  similar  part  * :  both  sets  of 

*  •Report  of  Brit.  Association;  1868. 

*  Facts  of  this  kind  have  been  only  recently  made  known  in  respect 
to  animals  so  high  in  the  scale  as  fish.  The  following  quotation 
('Athenaeum/  Aug.  19,  1871)  refers  to  a  communication  made  at  the 
meeting  of  the  British  Association  in  Edinburgh :  —  *  Prof.  Traqnair 
described  two  specimens  of  Pro/o//lrrus  anneetens,  in  which  the  external 
configuration  and  internal  structure  rendered  it  evident  that  a  oonsi^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  89 

phenomena  are  only  explicable  on  the  assumption  that 
the  form  and  structure  possessed  by  each  organism  is 
that  which  is  most  consistent  with  the  nature  and 
properties  ^  of  the  complex  organic  molecules,  or  par- 

<fanble  portion  of  the  tail  had  been  broken  off.  and  that  in  the  one  case 
a  kss,  and  in  the  other  a  greater  amount  of  restoration  had  taken  place. 

In  the  second  specimen,  which  measured  9}  inches  in  length,  and 

kad  evidently  been  truncated  or  mutilated  at  a  distance  of  about  7^  inches 

ban  the  tip  of  the  snout,  or  1}  inch  from  the  origin  of  the  ventral 

fins,  the  restorative  process  had  proceeded  to  a  much  greater  length. 

Ahhoogh  the  boundary  between  the  old  and  new  textures  was  sufficiently 

indicated  on  the  outside  of  the  fish,  by  the  sudden  diminution  in  the 

thickness  of  the  specimen  and  in  the  size  of  the  scales,  the  outline  of  the 

posterior  extremity  of  the  animal  was  very  well  restored,  though  the  whole 

tail  was  still  proportionately  shorter  than  if  no  mutilation  had  taken 

place.    The  restored  portion  of  the  tail  measured  3^  inches  in  length, 

and  on  dissection  showed  not  only,  as  in  the  former  case,  a  reproduction 

of  the  notochord,  but  also  of  the  neural  and  haemal  arches,  spines,  and 

fin-sapports,  these  elements  remaining,  however,  entirely  cartilaginous, 

and  being  much  more  irregularly  disposed  than  in  the  normal  tail.  They 

also  cease  to  be  traceable  after  i^  inch  from  the  commencement  of  the 

Kw  portion  of  the  tail,  though  the  notochord  proceeds  to  its  ultimate 

fihfinn  tennination.    In  addition  the  spinal  cord,  the  lateral  muscles, 

and  the  fin  lays  and  their  muscles  were  in  this  specimen  reproduced  as 

wdl  as  the  scales  on  the  external  surface.  Both  externally  and  internally 

the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  old  and  new  textures  was  distinctly 


*  Lot  dt,  p.  18  f : — *  For  this  property  there  is  no  fit  term.  If  we 
accept  the  word  polarity  as  a  name  for  the  force  by  which  inorganic 
Baits  are  aggregated  into  a  form  peculiar  to  them,  we  may  apply  this 
aaae  to  the  analogous  force  displayed  by  organic  units.  But,  as 
fthoie  admitted,  polarity  as  ascribed  to  atoms  is  but  a  nanu  for  some- 
li>Y  of  ubicb  ufg  are  ignorant — a  name  for  a  hypothetical  property 
vhich  as  much  needs  explanation  as  that  which  it  is  used  to  explain. 
Neveithdess,  in  default  of  another  word,  we  must  employ  this ;  taking 
cue,  however,  to  restrict  its  meaning.  If  we  simply  substitute  the  term 
"polarity  "  for  the  circuitous  expression, "  the  power  which  certain  units 


90  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

ticular  ^  physiological  units,'  of  which  it  is  composed. 
On  this  important  subject  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  says': — 
<  We  must  infer  that  a  plant  or  animal  of  any  species 
is  made  up  of  special  units,  in  all  of  which  there 
dwells  the  intrinsic  aptitude   to  aggr^ate   into   the 
form  of  that  species :  just  as  in  the  atoms  of  a  salt 
there  dwells  the  intrinsic  aptitude  to  crystallize  in 
a  particular  way.     It  seems  difficult  to  conceive  that 
this  can  be  so;  but  we  see  that  it  h  so.    Groups 
of  units  taken  from  an  organism  (providing  they  are 
of  a  certain  bulk  and  not  much  differentiated  into 
special    structures)    have   this   power  of  rearranging 
themselves;  and  we  are  thus  compelled  to  recognize 
the  tendency  to  assume  the  specific  form  as  inheren 
in  all  parts  of  the  organism.    Manifestly  too,  if  w 
are  thus  to  interpret  the  reproduction  of  the  oi^anis 
from  one  of  its  amorphous  fragments,  we  must  tb 
interpret   the   reproduction  of  any  minor  portion 
an  organism  by  the  remainder.      When  in  place 
its  lost  claw  a  lobster  puts  forth  from  the  same 
a  cellular  mass,  which,  while  increasing  in  bulk 
sumes  the  form  and  structure  of  the  original 
we  can  have  no  hesitation  in  ascribing  this  resul 

have  of  arranging  themselves  into  a  special  form/'  we  ma 
out  assuming  anything  more  than  is  proved,  use  the  term 
polarity  "  or  "  polarity  of  the  organic  units  "  to  signify  the  j 
cause  of  the  ability  which  organisms  display  of  reproducing  ^ 
or  of  their  having  assumed  the  shape  and  structure  which 
to  them/ 
*  'Principles  of  Biology/  1864,  vol.  i.  p.  181. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  91 

play  of  forces  like  that  which  moulds  the  materials 
contained  in  a  piece  of  Begoniar-leaf  into  the  shape  of 
a  young  Begonia.  In  the  one  case  as  in  the  other^  the 
vitalized  molecules  composing  the  tissues  show  their 
proclivity  towards  a  particular  arrangement^  and  whether 
such  proclivity  is  exhibited  in  reproducing  the  entire 
fonn,  or  in  completing  it  when  rendered  imperfect, 
matters  not/ 

But  the  reader  may  ask,  What  is  the  meaning  or 
explanation  of  this  power  of  reproducing  their  like 
iriiich  is  possessed  by  all  living  things? 

In  order  to  answer  the  question  we  must  look  rather 
to  ^^t  occurs  amongst  the  lowest  organisms  than  to 
the  phenomena  presented  by  higher  plants  and  animals. 
The  fundamental  nature  of  the  process  of  reproduction 
is  revealed  most  clearly  by  a  consideration  of  the  pro- 
cesses of  *  fission*  and  *  gemmation/  What  we  know 
about  these  processes,  clearly  shows  that  all  parts  of  a 
lower  organism  when  separated  from  the  parent  have 
the  power  of  developing  into  living  things  of  a  similar 
kind.    This,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  is  pre- 
cisely analogous  to  the  process  whereby  a  fragment 
Mtt%  from  a  pre-existing  crystal  and  thrown  into  a 
suitable  solution  gradually  grows  into  a  perfect  crystal, 
similar  to  that  from  which  it  had  been  derived.     But 
organisms  are  dynamical  aggregates  amongst  the  mole- 
cules of  which  new  motions  and  new  arrangements 
are  continually  being  assumed,  in  the  course  of  which 
there  frequently  arises  a  *  spontaneous '  division  of 


92  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

the  parent  mass — that  is  to  say,  fission  or  gemmatiod 
takes  place.  Nothing  similar  occurs  in  the  crystal, 
because  this  is  a  statical  aggregate  in  which  no  mole- 
cular rearrangements  habitually  occur.  The  tendency 
which  the  molecules  display  to  grow  into  a  given  form 
is,  however,  not  much  more  manifest  in  the  crystal 
than  it  is  in  the  organism.  The  fundamental  difference 
between  the  two  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  one  is  a 
statical  and  the  other  a  dynamical  aggregate.  As  a  result 
of  this  difference,  we  find  that  the  growth  of  the  one  is 
always  continuous,  whilst  that  of  the  other  is  frequently 
discontinuous — a  ^  spontaneous '  separation  of  a  portion 
of  its  substance  may,  and  frequently  does,  take  place 
in  the  case  of  the  growing  organism  whereby  self- 
reproduction  is  brought  about  ^. 

^  Referring  to  the  products  of  the  multiplication  of  a  single  germ, 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  points  out  that  *  total  insubordination  among  the 
centres  of  development  is  shown  where  the  units  or  cells,  as  fast  as  they 
are  severally  formed,  part  company  and  lead  independent  lives.  This,  in 
the  vegetable  kingdom,  habitually  occurs  among  the  Protopbyta ;  and  in 
the  animal  kingdom,  among  the  Protozoa.  Partial  insubordination  is 
seen  in  those  somewhat  advanced  organisms  that  consist  of  units  which, 
though  they  have  not  separated,  have  so  little  mutual  dependence  that 
the  aggregate  they  form  is  irregular.  Among  plants,  the  Thallogens 
very  generally  exemplify  this  mode  of  development.  Lichens,  spreading 
with  flat  or  corrugated  edges  in  this  or  that  direction,  as  the  conditions 
determine,  have  no  manifest  co-oi-dination  of  parts.  In  the  Alga,  the 
Nostocs  similarly  show  us  an  unsymmetrical  structure.  Of  Fungi,  the 
sessile  and  creeping  kinds  display  no  further  dependence  of  one  part  on 

another  than  is  implied  by  their  cohesion To  distinguish  that  kind 

of  development  in  which  the  whole  product  of  a  germ  coheres  in  one 
mass  from  that  kind  of  development  in  which  it  does  not.  Professor 
Huxley  has  introduced  the  words  *'  continuous  **  and  *'  discontinuous ; " 


f 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  93 


Thus  ^reproduction'  amongst  such  simple  organisms 
is,  after  all,  nothing  but  discontinuous  growth.  This 
simple  interpretation  of  the  distinctive  peculiarity  of 
living  things  was  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Prof.  Huxley; 
and  the  fact  that  growth  is  frequently  discontinuous  in 
living  matter  flows  directly,  as  we  have  hinted,  from 
the  circumstance  of  the  extreme  molecular  mobility  of 
its  constituent  units.  All  the  higher  modes  of  repro- 
duction which  are  to  be  witnessed  in  living  things  are 
only  specializations  of  the  process  of  ^  gemmation.* 

By  reason  of  the  molecular  mobility  of 'living'  matter, 

and  the  continuous  rearrangements  brought  about  therein 

under  the  influence  of  ordinary  physical  conditions,  it 

gradually  becomes  more  and  more  complex  in  internal 

stnicture,  and  also  undergoes  variations  in  its  external 

fbrm^  But  to  whatsoever  grades  of  development  organ- 

isms  may  have  attained,  the  reproductive  faculty  (due  to 

the  power  of  discontinuous  growth)  still  remains  as  one 

of  the  chief  characteristics  of  living  things.     And  it 

always  happens,  that  suitable  portions  thrown  ofi^  from 

the  parent  organism  have  the  power  of  developing  into 

wganisms  of  a  similar  kind  —  however  complex  and 

■»d  tbesc  seem  the  best  fitted  for  the  purpose.  Multicentral  develop- 
nat,  then,  is  divisible  into  continuous  and  discontinuous.'  i^  Principles 
rf  Kology/  vol.  i.  p.  135.) 

*  Abundant  evidence  on  this  subject  will  be  found  in  Appendix  D. 
**«ny  of  the  changes  there  recorded  far  surpass  the  metamorphoses 
^"'Wght  about  in  such  crystals  as  those  of  mercuric  iodide  under  the 
"'ftjence  of  new  conditions— though  they  arc  otherwise  comparable  with 
t^  metamoiphoses. 


94  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

however  long  the  developmental  processes  may  be  which 
have  to  be  passed  through  before  the  parent  form  can 
be  assumed.  The  human  ovum  develops  as  surely  into 
a  human  being,  as  that  of  a  fish  docs  into  a  similar  fish. 
The  process  is,  in  fact,  everywhere  the  same — whether 
we  have  to  do  with  mammal,  bird,  reptile,  or  li^  or 
whether  the  recently  separated  portion  of  an  Arnvha,  of 
a  Hjrdr^  or  of  some  plant  undergoes  development.  lo 
each  case  there  is  a  reproduction  of  like  from  like,  quite 
irrespective  of  the  grade  of  development  which  has  been 
attained  by  the  parent  organism.  These  phenomena 
have  been  generalized  under  a  '  Law  of  Heredity,' 
whose  meaning  (after  the  most  careful  consideration 
of  the  facts)  has  been  thus  admirably  rendered  by 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer.  He  says  • : — *  Bringing  the  ques- 
tion to  its  ultimate  and  simplest  form,  we  may  say 
that,  as  on  the  one  hand  physiolt^ical  units  will, 
because  of  their  special  polarities,  build  themselves  into 
an  organism  of  a  special  structure^  so,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  the  structure  of  this  organism  is  modified  by 
modified  fonction,  it  luiV/  imprest  teme  correifatJimg 
medificatio*  on  tht  structure  and  pelaritiei  tf  its  tmits. 
TTie  units  and  the  a^rcgate  must  act  and  re-act  on 
each  other.  The  forces  exercised  by  each  unit  on  the 
aggregate  and  by  the  aggregate  on  each  unit  must 
ever  tend  towards  a  balance.  If  nothing  prevents, 
the  units  will  mould  the  aggregate  into  a  form  in 
equilibrium  with  their  pre-existing  polarities.  If,  con- 
'  '  Prindpki  of  Biology,'  toL  i.  p.  156. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  95 

trariwise,  the  aggregate  is  made  by  incident  actions  to 
take  a  new  form,  its  forces  must  tend  to  remould  the 
units  into  harmony  with  this  new  form.  And  to  say 
that  the  physiological  units  are  in  any  degree  so  re- 
moulded as  to  bring  their  polar  forces  towards  equi- 
librium with  the  forces  of  the  modified  a^regate,  is 
to  say  that  when  separated  in  the  shape  of  reproduc- 
tive centres,  the  units  will  tend  to  build  themselves 
up  into  an  a^r^ate  modified  in  the  same  direction/ 

Amongst  simple  organisms  almost  any  part  of  the  sub- 
stance which  separates,  or  is  separated,  from  one  of  them 
is  capable  of  developing  into  a  similar  simple  oi^nism. 
Bat  as  organisms  grow  more  and  more  complex  in  their 
structure,  so  we  find  that  a  diflFerence  arises  in  the  re- 
productive powers  of  diflFerent  tissues — till  at  last  the 
capacity  to  reproduce  the  entire  organism  (either  with- 
out fertilization  or  only  after  this  has  occurred)  becomes 
restricted  to  the  morphological  units  which  are  produced 
in  special  organs  \    How  much  this  restriction  of  the 
reproductive  function  is  due  to  a  general  specialization 
is  obvious  fiiom  the  fact  that  it  is  most  marked  where 
complexity  of  organization  attains  its  maximum.   Com- 
plexity of  structure  necessarily  carries  with  it  complexity 
of  function,  and  in  proportion  as  distinct  functions 

'  The  necessity  for  the  fertilization  of  some  of  these  reproductive  de- 
ments, and  the  evolution  of  sexual  differences  amongst  the  animals  and 
pilots  amongst  which  this  necessity  obtains,  is  merely  a  superadded 
cooplezity — a  difference  of  degree  and  not  of  kind.  The  fundamental 
F^^eBomeoa  of  reproduction  are  essentially  similar  in  sesroal  and  sexless 
<«pnioiis.    (Sec  Spencer's  •  Principles  of  Biology,'  vol.  i.  pp.  118-223.) 


96  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

are  performed  by  special  parts  of  the  organism,  so  aie 
the  several  parts  more  and  more  bound  together  ioto 
one  organic  whole.     This  difference  is  well  seen  in 
plants  and  highly-organized  animals.    The  plant,  it  is 
true,  develops  seeds  and  pollen  in  special   parts  or 
organs;  but  just   as  the  plant,  taken  as  a  wholc^  is 
to  a  great  extent  a  repetition  of  similar  parts  whose 
organization  is  by  no  means  complex,  so  do  these  sepa* 
rate  parts,  when  severed  firom  the  parent  organism, 
retain  that  reproductive  power  which  enables  them, 
under  suitable  conditions,  to  grow  into  plants  of  a 
similar  kind.    But  in  animals  which  are  even  low  in 
the  scale  of  complexity  all  this  is  changed.    They  are 
not  mere  repetitions  of  separate  parts — each  having 
a  potential  individuality  of  its  own :  they  are  rather 
aggregations  of  different    parts   bound  together  and 
constituting  one  organic  whole  by  means  of  vascular 
and  nervous  systems  which  serve  as  bonds  of  unity. 
The  higher  the  grade  of  development  of  the  organism — 
the  more  its  tissues  have  become  differentiated — thf 
less  are  they  severally  endowed  with  a  reproductiv 
power,  even  of  a  partial  kind.     In  such  organisms,  w 
find  that  each  part  has  a  distinct  function  to  perfbrr 
and  therefore  the  reproductive  function  is  restrict 
to  the  elements  produced  in  definite  organs.    Althoi 
restricted  in  their  place  of  origin,  however,  there 
reason  to  believe  that  sperm-cells  and  germ-cells 
comparatively  unspecialized  products — they  are,  ind 
in  almost  all  cases  new-formed  elements,  which 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE  97 

but  recently  come  into  being  ^.    After  a  careful  sum- 
mary of  what  is  known  on  the  subject,  Mr.  Spencer 
says: — ^'The  assumption  to  which  we  seem  driven  by 
the  emsewiile  of  the  evidence  is,  that  sperm-cells  and 
germ-cells  are  essentially  nothing  more  than  vehicles 
in  which  are  contained  small   groups  of  the  physio- 
logical units  in  a  fit  state  for  obeying  their  proclivity 
towards  the  structural  arrangement  of  the  species  they 
belong  to.  ...  .  Thus,  the  phenomena  of  Heredity 
are  seen   to  assimilate  with  other  phenomena;   and 
the  assumption  which  these  phenomena  thrust  on  us 
appears  to  be  equally  thrust  on  us  by  the  phenomena 
of  Heredity.    We  must  conclude  that  the  likeness  of 
any  organism  to   either  parent   is  conveyed   by   the 
special  tendencies  of  the  physiological  units  derived 
from  that  parent.     In  the   fertilized   germ  we   have 
two  groups  of  physiological   units,  slightly  diflFerent 
in  their   structures.      These   slightly   diflFerent   units 
severally  multiply  at  the   expense  of  the   nutriment 
supplied  to  the  unfolding  germ,  each   kind   moulding 
this  nutriment  into  its  own  type.     Throughout  the  pro- 
cess of  evolution  the  two  kinds  of  units  mainly  agreeing 
in  their  polarities  and  in  the  form  which  they  tend  to 
build  themselves  into,  but   having  minor  diflPereaces, 
'^ork  in  unison  to  produce  an  organism  of  the  species 

'  SecTol.  i.  pp.  1 99-107.  We  have  already  pointed  out  the  great  cvolu- 
^Kxal  capacities  that  seem  to  be  possessed  by  the  phosphoric  fats,  which, 
'Bte  so  largely  into  the  composition  of  ova  (vol.  i.  p.  a^i  a).  These  &ts  ax;e 
^^7  allied  to  myeline  and  other  remarkable  fatty  extracts  (see  p.  118)^ 

VOL.  II.  H 


98  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

from  which  they  were  derived,  but  work  in  antagonism 
to  produce  copies  of  their  respective  parent  organisms  j 
and  hence,  ultimately^  results  an  organism  in  which  traits 
of  the  one  are  mixed  with  traits  of  the  other/  (p.  254.) 
Unless  we  have  recourse  to  considerations  of  this 
kind,  or  to  some  such  hypothesis  as  that  which  Mr. 
Darwin  has  put  forth  under  the  name  of  ^Pangenesis' 
it  seems  absolutely  impossible  for  us  to  give  any  ex- 
planation of  the  familiar  fact,  that  in  the  ordinary 
processes  of  reproduction,  all  organisms,  whether  high 
or  low  in  the  scale  of  complexity — animal,  vegetal,  or 
protistic — produce  oflfepring  which  more  or  less  directly 
develop  into  organisms  similar  to  themselves.  Very 
grave  difficulties  appear  to  stand  in  the  way  of  Mr. 
Darwin's  hypothesis,  which  looks  like  a  relic  of  the 
old,  rather  than  a  fitting  appanage  of  the  new  Evolu- 
tion philosophy  2.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Spencer's 
totally  diflFerent  hypothesis  concerning  ^physiological 

■ 

^  *  Plants  and  Animals  under  Domestication/  vol.  ii.  p.  357.  Mr. 
Darwin  says : — *  Gemmules  are  supposed  to  be  thrown  off  by  every  cell 
or  unit,  not  only  during  the  adult  state,  but  during  all  the  stages  of 
development.  Lastly,  I  assume  that  the  gemmules  in  the  dormant  state 
have  a  mutual  affinity  for  each  other,  leading  to  their  aggregation  either 
into  buds  or  into  the  sexual  elements.  .  .  .  Hence  ovules  and  pollen- 
grains, — the  fertilized  seed  or  egg  as  weU  as  buds, — include  and  consist 
of  a  multitude  of  gtrm&  throum  off  from  taeb  separatt  atom  of  thi 
organism*  So  that  Pangenesis  *  implies  that  the  whole  organisation,  in 
the  sense  of  every  separate  atom  or  unit,  reproduces  itself  (pp.  374  and 

358). 

'  See  an  article  entitled  'Darwin's  Hypotheses,'  by  Mr.  G.  H.  Lewes, 
in '  FortnighUy  Review'  for  1868,  and  Mr.  St.  George  Mivart's  *  Genesis 
of  Species '  (1871),  chap.  z. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  99 

onits'  seems  to  be  supported  by  many  facts  otherwise 
ineiplicable,  and  to  be  altogether  in  harmony  with 
gmeral   biological    principles,  and  with  the  modern 
Evolution  hypothesis — as  opposed  to  that  of  Bonnet  re- 
fecting the  continual  unfolding  of  pre-existing  germs. 
We  may  say,  therefore,  that  ^  inheritance,'  acting  in 
the  manner  above  indicated,  is  the  potential  conserva- 
tive agency  tending  to  assimilate  the  products  of  re- 
production to  the  likeness  of  the  organisms  from  which 
they  have  been  produced.     But  where  simple  organisms 
are  exposed  to  changes  in  their  environment,  they  are, 
by  virtue  erf  these  changes,  subjected  to  influences  which 
may  be  capable  of  inducing  functional  and  structural 
modifications.    Great  diflFerences,  however,  exist  with 
rc^)cct  to  the  degree  of  variation  that  may  be  induced 
in  di£Ferent  organisms  within  similar  periods,  under  the 
influence  of  any  given  changes  in  their  environments. 
Changes,  which  may  be  almost  inoperative  in  producing 
a  modification  of  some  organisms,  may  produce  profound 
alterations  in  others.     And,  similarly,  whilst  a  very 
pidonged  continuance  of  altered  conditions  is  needful 
to  effect  some  organisms^  the   influence  of  changed 
conditions    on    others    is    rapid    and    more    or    less 
inunediate. 

The  greater  the  diflFerentiation  and  complexity  of  any 
organism,  the  less  is  it  likely  to  be  influenced  by  slight 
or  temporary  modifications  in  the  *  conditions '  or  influ- 
ences to  which  it  is  subjected.  The  complexity  has  been 
padually  attained,  and  each  part  or  organ  has  functions 

H  a 


tO«  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

and  structures  which  are  definitely  related  to  the 
functions  and  structures  of  other  parts.  The  whole  is 
composed  of  parts  working  in  accord  with  one  another, 
and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  establish  a  harmony 
between  the  actions  going  on  within  and  those  without 
the  ot^anism.  The  result  of  this  interaction  during 
past  time  has  been  the  gradual  elaboration  of  an 
organism  of  a  certain  structure ;  so  that  this  structure 
and  form  are  only  to  be  r^arded  as  the  physical 
expression  of  an  approximate  equilibrium  between 
numerous  related  iactors — between  the  inherent  ten- 
dencies of  '  physiological  units '  under  the  influence  of 
all  past  'conditions,'  and  the  present  operation  t^ 
externa]  forces  upon  the  now-acquired  structure.  When, 
therefore,  unaccustomed  conditions  act  upon  such  or- 
ganisms, they  arc  unable  easily  or  within  short  periods 
to  produce  direct  modifications  of  the  organs  principally 
affected,  because  a  change  in  one  important  ot^an  would 
necessitate  other  changes  throughout  the  whole  organism, 
in  order  to  establish  a  new  balance  of  functions.  This^ 
in  feet,  is  the  only  conclusion  which  seems  consistent 
with  doctrines  of  Evolution.  Mr.  Spencer  sajre: — 'If 
we  assume,  as  we  must  according  to  this  hypothesis, 
that  the  structure  of  any  oi^nism  is  the  product  of  the 
almost  iniinite  series  of  actions  and  reactions  to  which 
all  ancestral  organisms  have  been  exposed,  we  shall 
sec  that  any  unusual  actions  and  reactions  brought 
to  bear  on  an  individual  can  have  but  an  infinitesimal 
effect  in  permanently  changing  the   structure  of  the 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  loi 

onanism  as  a  whole.     The  new  sets  of  forces  com- 
pounded with  all  the  antecedent  sets  of  forces  can  but 
inappreciably  alter  that  moving  equilibrium  of  functions 
which  all  these  antecedent  sets  of  forces  have  estab- 
lished.     Though    there     may    result    a    considerable 
perturbation  of  certain   functions — a  considerable  di- 
vergence from  their  ordinary  rhythms — yet  the  general 
centre  of  equilibrium  cannot  be  sensibly  changed.    On 
the  removal   of   the    perturbing  cause,  the    previous 
balance   will   be   quickly   restored,   the   eflFect  of  the 
new  forces  being  almost  obliterated  by  the  enormous 
aggr^te   of  forces  which   the   previous   balance   ex- 
presses ^!    Thus,  variations  which  may  be  induced  for 
a  time  in  higher  organisms,  continually  tend,  when  the 
modifying  influences  have  disappeared,  to  be  dwarfed 
and  perhaps  ultimately  abolished,  owing  to  the  sum  total 
of  internal  forces  acting  in  such  a  manner  as  gradually 
to  reproduce  the  former  condition  of  equilibrium  2. 

But  how  diflFerent  are  the  facts  when  we  turn  our 
attention  to  lower  organisms!  Almost  all  naturalists 
admit  the  greater  amount  and  range  of  variability 
amongst  the  lower  forms  of  life,  although  we  think 

*  For  m  fuller  escplanation  of  the  reasons  why  this  should  be  than  we 
ve  tUe  »ow  to  enter  upon,  we  must  refer  the  reader  to  Mr.  Spencer  s 
'  Pnndples  of  Biology,'  vol.  L  pp.  192-198. 

'  It  ts  this  tendenqr  which  was  formerly  spoken  of  in  medical  works 
^t^vU  medieatrix  nature.  Were  it  not  for  such  a  tendency,  the  success 
<if  tke  i^ijriidan  in  combating  with  internal  diseases,  or  of  the  surgeon  in 
Afointending  wounds  and  injuries,  would  be  much  less  manifest  than 
<iiM  present 


lOl  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

that  a  perusal  of  Appendix  D  (in  which  we  have 
given  an  account  of  some  of  the  most  remarkable 
and  well-actcsted  variations  of  these  lower  forms)  may 
perhaps  bring  more  prominently  before  many  of  our 
readers  the  full  extent  of  this  plasticity  than  if  they 
were  to  read  mere  isolated  statements.  We  have  seen 
how  the  structure  and  nature  of  certain  crystals  may  be 
wholly  changed  by  some  modification  in  the  conditions 
to  which  they  are  subjected.  We  have  learned,  in  fact, 
how  potent,  within  certain  limits,  is  the  influence  of 
the  forces  of  the  environment,  in  comparison  with  that 
comprised  under  the  head  of  '  inherent  tendencies,'  in 
determining  crystalline  form  j  so  that  if  a  similar 
characteristic  should  be  displayed  by  new-born  living 
matter,  or  by  simple  organisms,  this  would  be  merely  a 
verification  of  what  might  have  been  predicted  i  fritri. 

We  have  now  frequently  stated  that  the  essential 
characteristic  of  living  matter  is  its  extreme  plasticity, 
and  its  power  of  carrying  on  a  reciprocal  series  of 
changes  and  rearrangements  amongst  its  constituent 
molecules  in  response  to  changes  in  its  medium  or 
environment.  Its  history  is  one  of  continual  flux  and 
change.  And  seeing  that  those  causes  which  operate 
in  checking  the  modifying  influence  of  external  con- 
ditions in  complex  and  more  completely  individual- 
ized organisms,  do  not  come  into  play  in  the  most 
elementary  organisms  or  in  others  which  are  made  up 
to  a  large  extent  by  a  repetition  of  similar  parts,  we 
might  expect  that  the  latter  would  be  prone  to  imdeiso 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  103 

change,  other  things  equal,  in  direct  proportion  to  the 
simplicity  of  their  organization.  We  are  driven  to  the 
coochisioii,  in  fact,  that  the  simpler  the  organisms 
with  which  we  have  to  deal,  the  weaker  will  become 
the  influence  of  Heredity;  and  that  in  independent  or 
new-formed  living  matter  this  conservative  tendency 
would  be  no  more  potent  than  it  is  in  crystalline 
matter. 

This  legitimate  conclusion  once  arrived  at,  the  con- 
sideration of  a  most  important  problem  is  forced  upon 
us.  What  explanation,  it  may  be  asked,  is  to  be  given 
of  the  existence  of  multitudes  of  the  lower  forms  of 
life  at  the  present  stage  of  the  earth's  history?  It 
seems  only  possible  to  account  for  their  presence  by 
one  or  other  of  two  explanations.  Each  of  these  we 
will  iMiefly  consider. 

I.  Thtfnj  of  Hamogenests, 

Thcjse  who  disbelieve  in  the  occurrence  of  Archebiosis 
and  of  Heterogenesis — ^the  disciples  and  advocates,  in 
fact,  of  the  biological  doctrines  at  present  most  widely 
accepted — ^would  have  us  believe  that  no  independent 
^ution  of  life  has  taken  place  upon  our  globe  since  a 
period  shrouded  in  the  far-remote  depths  of  geologic 
time.  Since  many  of  these  are  willing  to  admit  that 
progressive  specific  transitions  have  continually  been 
taldog  place  through  these  ages,  and  that  all  the  various 
ferms  of  life  which  have  ever  clothed  the  earth  are  to 
^  considered  as  representatives  of  such  developmental 


104  '^HE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

variations  ^,  it  is  onJy  to  be  expected  that  they  should 
attempt  to  offer  some  explanations  as  to  the  cause  ol- 
the  persistence  of  so  many  of  the  very  lower  forms — 
why,  in  feet,  these  particular  representatives  have  not 
undergone  any  notable  evolutional  changes  during 
this  long  succession  of  ages*  We  are  told  by 
Dr.  Carpenter  2  that  ^  there  is  strong  reason  to  regard 
a  large  proportion  of  existing  Foraminifera  as  the  iUrect 
lineal  descendants  of  those  of  very  ancient  geological 
epochs,'  on  account  of  the  great  resemblance  existing 
between  the  fossil  remains  of  the  latter  and  the  organ- 
isms met  with  at  the  present  day.  He  thinks  their  pro- 
genitors may  be  traced  back  even  as  far  as  the  upper 
Triassic  rocks.  If  we  turn  now  to  the  reasons  oflFered 
for  this  long-continued  essential  similarity,  we  find 
Dn  Carpenter  writing  as  follows : — '  It  can  scarcely  be 
questioned  that  such  a  continuity  of  the  leading  types 
of  Foraminifera,  maintained  through  so  long  a  series  ot 
geologic  periods,  and  the  recurrence  of  similar  varietal 
departures  from  these  types,  are  results  of  the  facility 
with  which  creatures  of  such  low  and  indefinite  organic 
zation  adapt  themselves  to  a  great  diversity  of  externa) 
conditions;  so  that,  on  the  one  hand,  they  pass  uahvmed 

'  Instead  of  having  recourse  to  a  special  creative  fiat  or  Biraciilom& 
intervention,  in  order  to  account  for  the  presence  of  eaoh  separate  kinti 
of  animal  or  plant.  For  a  comparison  of  the  evidence  bearkig  respec** 
lively  upon  these  two  hypotheses,  we  may  refer  the  reader  to  Mr.  Spencer's 
*  Principles  of  Biology,'  vol.  i.  pp.  333-345- 

^  In  the  very  interesting  Prifaa  to  his  '  Introduction  to  the  Study  oC 
Foraminifera.*    (Ray  Society,  x86i,  p.  viuO 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  105 

through  changes  in  those  conditions  which  are  hXaX 
to  beings   of  higher  structure  and    more  specialized 
constitution;  whilst,  on  the  other,  they  undergo  such 
modifications  under  the  influence  of  those  changes  as 
may  produce  a  very  wide  departure  from  the  original 
type'     These  views  now  seem  somewhat  inconsistent 
and  contradictory.     Extreme  variability  is  predicated 
on  the  one  hand,  and  yet  extreme  stability  is  affirmed  to 
have  been  displayed  through  long  geologic  ages.    Doubt- 
less, the  ^conditions'  obtaining  at  the  bottom  of  deep 
oceans  in  past  times  may  not  have  been  very  different 
from  what  they  are  at  present  *  \  but  such  uniformity  of 
conditions  could  not   entail   the  long-continued   pre- 
servation of  the  same  simple  structural  types,  unless 
we  suppose  that  all  internal  causes  of  change  in  the 
organisms  themselves  had  ceased  to  exist.     And  yet 
the  continuous  existence  of  internal  causes  of  change 
isj  in  reality,  the  essential  attribute  of  living  matter, 
which  could  no  more  have  been  absent  from  Forami- 
nifera  during  all  these  ages  of  apparent  non-development, 
than  it  is  absent  at  the  present  day  in  the  ever- varying 
Fungi,  Algae,  and  Lichens,  which  astonish  us  by  their 
rapid  and  protean  changes  of  form.    It   is  certain, 
rooreover,  that  those  who  believe  exclusively  in  the 

*  If  certain  lower  organisms,  therefore,  developed  into  Foraminifera 
in  Rmote  geologic  ages,  there  b  no  reason  why  they  should  not  develop 
in  the  present  day  into  essentially  similar  forms ;  and  variation  may 
now  tend  to  manifest  itself  in  the  same  fashion  as  it  did  formerly,  owing 
to  the  fiu:t  that  the  causes  (both  intrinsic  and  extrinsic)  leading  to  this 
nriation  arc  csscptially  similar. 


I06  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

*  continuity  of  life  *  by  processes  of  Homogenesis  (and 
are  yet  sufficiently  scientific   to  reject,  as  untenable 
and  absurd,  the  hypothesis  of  special  creative  fiats)  would 
be  compelled  to  believe  that  the  simple  Monad  which 
now  lashes  about  in  an  organic  infusion,  or  the  almost 
structureless  Amoeba  which  now  creeps  amongst  decaying 
vegetable  tissue,  must  be  derived  from  an  incalculably 
longer  line  of  ancestry  than  Man  himself.     In  accord- 
ance with  any  evolution  hypothesis,  Man  must  be  con- 
sidered as  a  comparatively  recent  organic  form;  and 
those  whose  views  are  at  present  most  widely  accepted 
would  have  to  believe  that  ages  and  ages  befiDre  the 
advent  of  Man  or  his  immediate  predecessors  upon  the 
earth,  the  ancestry  of  the  Monad,  of  the  Mould,  of 
the  Amoeba  or  of  any  of  the  other  Infusorial  animal- 
cules now  to  be  seen  in  their  respective  habitats,  had 
been  tenants  of  our  globe.     The  mere  su^estion  seems 
to  carry  absurdity  in  its  face.     If  this  were  really  so, 
then   we    could   only  expect   that   such  forms  would 
be  the  very  types  of  conservatism  and  stability,  whereas, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  all  such  organisms  are  rather  the 
best  types  of  change  and  mutability.    On  this  subject 
there  is  a  general  unanimity  of  opinion  j  and  the  very 
existence   of  the  changes  which  are   now  known  to 
take  place,  seems  absolutely  antagonistic  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  direct  lineal  descent  of  the  present  lowest  and 
most  variable   forms  of  life,  from  similar  extremely 
ancient  forms  possessed  of  a  like  mutability. 

The  more  we  reflect  upon  it,  in  fact,  the  more  im- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  loy 

possible  does  it  seem  that  this  theory  can  be  true.    All 
developmentalists  would  start  in  bygone  ages  with  living 
matter  existing  in  its  simplest  form  or  forms  3  and  this 
must  be  supposed  to  be  far  more  mobile  and  changeable 
than  crystalline   matter.    How  this   latter  may  vary 
under  the  influence  of  changing  conditions  we  have 
already  shown:  we  may  fairly  expect,  therefore,  that 
the  newly-evolved,  primordial,  living  matter  would  be 
even  more  prone  than  this  has  been  shown  to  be,  to 
assume  new  developmental  forms  under  the  influence  of 
dianging  external  conditions.    We  sec  our  way,  there- 
fore, quite  plainly  to  an  advance  in  the  developmental 
scale,  and,  owing  to  the  tendency  of  organisms  to  re- 
produce their  like  (under  the  influence  of  Heredity),  we 
may  understand  how  a   continual   widening    of  the 
successive  platforms  may  take  place,  upon  some  parts 
of  iriiich  further  developmental  differentiations  may  be 
initiated.    In  their  turn,  the  various  different  and  often 
more  complex  forms  thus  produced,  are  multiplied  by 
fiirthcr  reproductive  processes,  and  so  on  through  in- 
numerable series  and  ramifications, — organisms  being 
gnidually  evolved  whose  complexity  makes  it  more  and 
nwre  difficult  to  bring  about  permanent  alterations, 
even  when  aided  by  the  powerfully  modifying  agencies 
included  under  the  head  of  *  Natural  Selection.'   Longer 
^  longer  periods  become  necessary  to  induce  even 
slight  specific  alterations.     Change,  therefore,  is  rapid 
amongst  the  lower  terms  of  the  series,  and  more  and 
more  slow  as  we  ascend  in  the  scale  of  complexity  and 


lo8  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

■ 

individuation.  All  this  seems  to  follow  naturally  &om 
the  mutability  of  new-bom  living  matter  on  the  one 
hand,  and  that  conservative  tendency  (due  to  Heredity) 
which  increases  with  complexity  of  organization.  Mu- 
tability being  the  essential  quality  of  living  matter,  as 
such,  it  would  seem  almost  impossible  for  us  to  believe 
that  whilst  some  of  the  lowest  organisms,  such  as 
Moulds  and  Amoebae,  developed  into  forms  continually 
higher  and  higher,  others  should,  in  spite  of  their 
intrinsic  mutability  (which  present  observation  shows 
to  be  retained),  persistently  preserve  the  same  almost 
primordial  simplicity  as  their  ancestors  possessed  in  an 
incalculably  remote  past.  That  some  Moulds,  Amoebae, 
and  other  lowest  organisms  should  have  lived  in  un- 
broken continuity  through  pre-Silurian  epochs,  amidst 
all  the  changes  of  the  Carboniferous,  Triassic,  Oolitic, 
Cretaceous,  and  more  recent  geologic  ages,  with  that 
mutability  as  an  essential  characteristic  which  they  are 
now  seen  to  display,  and  yet  that  they  should  have 
undergone  little  or  no  alteration,  seems  to  me  almost 
too  incredible  to  be  seriously  entertained. 

But  what  view  can  be  substituted  which  will  offer 
a  more  consistent  explanation  of  the  facts  ? 

a.  Theory  of  Archehiosh^  Heterogeneshy  and  Homogenesis, 

Guided  by  the  results  of  experimental  evidence,  we 
are  entitled  to  believe  that  Miving'  matter  can  and 
does  continually  come  into  existence,  owing  to  the 
synthesis  and  gradual  elaboration  of  not-living  mate- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.^  109 

rials.     What   takes   place    now   has   probably   taken 

place  in  all   intermediate  time,  between  the   present 

epoch  and  that  of  the  first  appearance  of  Life  upon  our 

globe.     The  variability  of  this  new-born  living  matter 

and  of  the  lowest  forms  evolved  therefrom   is   most 

marked,  and  probably  has  always  been  so  in  past  ageSr 

In  all  periods,  therefore,  whilst  there  have  been  forms  of 

life,  both  animal  and  vegetal,  of  varying  degrees  of 

complexity  and  of  varying  stability,  reproducing  their 

kind  by  the  different  modes  of  homogenetic  reproduction, 

there  have  always  been  a  teeming  multitude  of  more 

variable  and  plastic  forms,  more  or  less  immediately 

dcvck)ped  from  the  new-born  living  matter  which  is 

continually  springing  into    existence.       These    lower 

fiMTns,  produced  in  the  same  epoch,  dijBFer  in  accordance 

with  the  conditions  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and 

the  variations  in  the  exact  nature  of  the  molecules  from 

whidi  they  arise  j   some  of  these  first  forms  may  have 

differed  notably  from  epoch  to  epoch,  and  we  are  by  no 

means  to  conclude  that  all   the  primordial   forms  of 

to^iay  are  similar  to  those  which  made  their  appearance 

during  the  Silurian  or  Carboniferous  ages,  when  the  sum 

total  of  telluric  conditions,  capable  of  influencing  such 

lower  forms,  may  have  been  so  different  ^      All  that 

*  Hence,  there  may  have  been  many  different  starting-points,  along 
*iuch  evolution  may  have  progressed  to  a  certain  though  variable 
ortcnL  This  view  lessens  the  difficulties  of  the  naturalist,  who  is  no 
longer  bound  to  look  upon  all  animals  and  plants  as  members  of  a 
»nglc  imperfect  series.    The  routes  which  have  given  rise  to  all  the 


no  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

we  are  entitled  to  say  is,  that  Bacteria^  ToruU^  and 
Ammba  are  known  to  be  some  of  the  present  primordial 
forms  of  life.  Being  primordial,  all  theoretical  conside- 
rations would  lead  us  to  believe  that  these  organic 
forms  would  be  as  variable  as  careful  observation  has 
shown  them  to  bej  and  that  a  similar  variability, 
gradually  growing  less  and  less,  would  characterize 
the  different  forms  into  which  they  might  chance  to 
develop.  This,  also,  is  thoroughly  in  accordance  with 
the  experience  of  those  who  have  made  such  forms  of 
life  the  subject  of  long  and  careful  study  ^. 

If,  then,  new-bom  living  matter  may  develop  at  once 
into  different  kinds  of  Tarula  and  thence  into  Fungi — 
or  else  into  essentially  similar  organic  forms  only  after 
it  has  passed  through  the  intermediate  gx2Ats  of  Bacteria 
and  Leftothrix  filaments, — does  it  not  almost  certainly 
indicate  that  there  must  be  some  harmony  between  the 
structure  and  modes  of  growth  of  such  lower  kinds  of 
Fungi,  and  the  sum  total  of  conditions  by  which  they 
are  influenced?  But,  during  their  growth,  and  as  a 
natural  consequence  of  their  intrinsic  molecular  move- 
ments, these  simple  organisms  may  throw  off  buds  and 
segments  which  (like  portions  broken  off  from  a  crystal) 

known  forms  of  life  may  have  been  many,  and  the  different  evolutional 
series  may  have  been  arrested  at  different  stages,  or  may  be  still  in 
progress. 

>  To  what  extent  this  %  ariability  is  met  with,  and  how  complex  are 
the  organisms  which  may  spring  into  existence  without  previous  parents 
of  the  same  kind,  will  be  shown  in  subsequent  chaptersi  and  in 
AppindmT>. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  III 

always  tend,  if  left  under  the  same  conditions,  to 
develop  into  structures  similar  to  those  from  which 
they  had  been  derived. 

Thus  we  shall  find  that  it  is  but  a  direct  conse- 
quence of  their  very  nature  and  mode  of  growth  that 
many  Fungi  develop  various  kinds  of  *  fructification/ 
And  in  this  case  we  find  that  portions  (usually  called 
^conidia'  or  *  spores')  into  which  the  living  matter 
divides   or   buds,   have   the    power  —  when  separated 
from  the  parent — of  developing,  under  similar  condi- 
tions, into  organisms  which  resemble  those  from  which 
they  had  been  derived.    Why  do  they  possess  such  a 
power?     Because,  being  fragments  of  living  matter 
formed  in,  or  as  parts  of,  an  organism  of  a  given 
character,  they  have  derived  from  it  (or  'inherited') 
certain  developmental  capacities  by  which,  when  sepa- 
rate, they  are  enabled  to  grow  into  organisms  like  the 
parent— just  as  a  bud  from  the  surfece  of  Hydra  vtridis 
will  develop  into  another  polype   of  the  same  kind. 
The  parent  Fungus  assiuned  the  organic  form  which 
it  po^essed,  because  such  form  had  been  the  joint  and 
necessary  product  of  the  « conditions,'  acting  upon  the 
p^cular  molecular  mobilities  and  modes  of  growth  of 
plastic  new-bom  living  matter.    Mr.  Spencer  says  * : — 
*As  certainly  as   molecules   of   alum   have   a   form 
of  equilibrium,  the  octahedron,  into  which  they  fall 
^cn  the  temperature  of  their  solvent  allows  them  to 
aggr^ate,  so  certainly  must  organic  molecules  of  each 

^  *  Appendix  to  Principles  of  Biology/  p.  487. 


1 1 2  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

kind,  no  matter  how  complex,  have  a  form  of  equi-» 
librium  in  which,  when  they  a^jegate,  their  complex 
forces  are  balanced, — a  form  far  less  rigid  and  definite^ 
for  the  reason  that  they  have  far  less  definite  polarities, 
are  far  more  unstable,  and  have  their  tendencies  more 
easily  modified  by  environing  conditions/  And  por- 
tions of  living  matter  which  separate  from  a  developed 
Fungus  go  along  a  similar  developmental  groove,  when 
they  lead  an  independent  existence  in  a  similar  me- 
dium for  the  same  reason  that  the  new-bom  living 
matter  assumed  this  particular  form.  They  grow  at 
once  into  the  form  of  the  parent,  because  this  parental 
form  has  been  the  result  of  the  harmonious  action  of 
the  same  series  of  actions  and  reactions  as  are  now 
about  to  be  passed  through.  Similar  causes  (intrinsic 
and  extrinsic)  should  lead  to  similar  results. 

If  it  is  true,  as  we  affirm,  that  Torula^  and  even 
Bacteria^  are  enabled  occasionally  to  develop  directly 
into  simple  forms  of  Fungi,  and  that  such  Bacteria  and 
TcfuU  are  merely  the  primary  forms  most  frequently 
assumed  by  certain  kinds  of  new-bom  living  matter, 
then  obviously  the  form  and  structure  of  the  Fungus 
would  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  matter  of 
which  it  is  composed  that  the  form  and  molecular 
structure  of  the  crystal  does  to  its  matter.  There 
would  be,  in  fact,  just  as  much  reason  why  the  new- 
born organism  should  develop  into  the  form  of  one 
already  in  existence,  as  there  would  be  that  the  crystal 
of  sulphate  of  soda  which  forms  to-day  in  a  solution 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  113 


of  that  substance^  should  resemble  that  which  formed 
Oder  similar  conditions  twelve  months  or  two  years 
previously.  He  who  believes  in  the  uniformity  of 
natural  phenomena  could  anticipate  no  other  result. 
Living  matter  which  is  now  produced  de  novo^  speedily 
shapes  itself  into  some  well-known  form ;  and  so  also 
new  crystalline  matter  which  may  have  been  produced 
synthetically  by  the  chemist  in  his  laboratory,  falls 
habitually  into  one  or  other  of  the  known  crystalline 
systems. 

it  seems,  again,  no  more  wonderful  that  the  oi^anism 
which  develops  de  novo  to-day  should  resemble  another 
which  develops  from  the  *  spore '  of  a  pre-existing 
organism^  than  that  a  crystal  which  forms  to-day  in 
a  saline  solution  should  resemble  another  which  is 
capable  of  arising  by  the  growth  of  a  portion  detached 
from  a  similar  pre-existing  crystal.  In  all  these  cases, 
there  is  a  similarity  of  product,  because  the  crystalline 
or  organic  form  produced  is  to  be  regarded  as  the 
phjrsical  expression  of  the  harmonious  actions  which 
have  led  to  their  production — because  the  forms  are 
the  results  of  a  physical  necessity,  and  not  of  a  mere 
blind  chance  K 

'  And  jet  an  objection  has  been  gravely  raised  by  an  eminent  biolo- 
6*^  to  reoehring  the  conclusion  which  I  was  inclined  to  draw  from  some 
^i' By  experiments,  on  account  of  the  extreme  difficulty  he  experienced  in 
Uiering  diat  fke  same  simple  Fungi  could  be  produced  from  new-bom 
Wag  matter  as  were  known  to  be  produced  in  other  ways — that  is,  by 
'^Ae  of  the  metliods  of  reproduction  to  which  we  have  just  been  alluding. 
^  it  be  supposed  that  such  organisms  have  been  reproducing  after  this 

VOU  11.  I 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


And  whilst  new-bora  crystalline  matter  is  capable  of 
developing   at   once   into  complex   but    perfect    geo- 


Fjo.44. 

Different  Forma  assumed  by  Crystals  of  Ammonuco-maeneuan 

Pbospbate.     (Dr.  Beale.) 

metrical  forms,  or  of  assuming  many  varied  and  beauti- 
ful shapes  which  are  common  in  the  vegetable  world, 

bshton  since  the  first  advent  of  Ijfe  upon  out  globe — tliat  those  at 
present  in  existence  are  the  direct  lineal  descendants  of  certain  archaic 
foims,  as  seems  to  be  lacill}'  intimated—there  might  be  more  difficulty 
in  explaining  the  coincidence.  But.  perhaps  it  would  have  been  better 
if  this  critic  had  realized  the  fact  that,  in  the  event  of  living  matter 
having  really  arisen  independently  in  the  experimental  flasks,  it  would 
entail  the  necessity  of  diminishing  almost  to  zero  the  accredited 
pedigree  of  these  low  kinds  of  Fungi.  Had  [his  been  thought  out  a 
little  more  fully,  such  an  eminent  biologist  would  perhaps  have  besi- 
taled  before  he  made  the  following  sensational  deckration  to  a  large 
audieoce  : — 'If  it  is  true  that  Torula  forms,  Bacteria  forms,  and  such 
things  which  are  commou  products  of  so-called  spontaneous  geoeiation 
— if  these  can  be  shown  to  be  terms  in  the  development  of  a  known 
form — the  probability  of  the  same  identical  form  turning  up  sponta- 
neously becomes  by  nelbemalical  coisidtralioia  infinitely  minute;  and 
for  my  pari,  I  could  as  soon  htlitvt  that  tbt  calf  I  tf 


bad  btm  ipoiuantoutly  gmraudfrom  iht  grots  and floa 
Jml.  of  Microsc.  Sc,'  Oct.  1S70,  p.  361.) 


tibtrt.'  CQtiart. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


"5 


some  would  have  us  believe  that  the  more  complex  and 
mobile  specks  of  new-born  living  matter,  with  all  their 
power  of  undei^ing  continuous  internal  change,  ought 
nevertheless  to  assume  no  specific  shapes  —  Bacteria 
ought  not  to  develop  into  Vthrtones  and  Leptothrix  fila- 
ments, and  none  of  these  ought  to  grow  into  mycelial 
filaments;  or  a  Torula  cell,  which  is  more  slowly 
evolved  in  the  same  fluids,  ought  not  to  bud  out  and 


O  o  o 


Fio.  45. 

Evolotion  of  a  primordial  speck  of  living  matter,  through  T'orw/a-forms, 
into  Fungus  filaments.     (Pouchet.) 

grow  into  similar  filaments,  so  as  to  give  rise  to  the 
ampler  forms  of  Mould.  These  seem  to  be  the  views 
of  many  who  have  been  pleased  to  criticise  my  experi- 
ments. Living  matter,  is  admitted  to  be  more  complex 
than  crystalline  matter,  and  to  be  endowed  with  the 
power  of  undergoing  continuous  internal  molecular 
changes  i  and  yet,  whilst  crystalline  matter  may  and 
<locs  develop  into  the  most  beautiful  and  complex 
oystalline  fbrms,  new-born  living  matter,  it  is  said, 
ought  not  to  evolve  at  once  into  the  simplest  kinds  of 
'^ganisms.   Ail  this  may  seem  true  to  some,  but  I  must 

I  % 


ir6  THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

confess  my  own  utter  inability  to  understand 
reasons  can  be  adduced  in  support  of  so  contradict 
doctrine.  Reason  alone  might  lead  to  its  rejec 
even  if  careful  and  repeated  experiments  had 
shown  it  to  be  erroneous. 

No  reproductive  elements  arc  cast  off  by  the  cr 
because  this  is  a  statical  a^r^ate  which  undei^o* 
ctrntimuMs  series  of  molecular  actions.  Its  consti 
units  always  tend  to  fall  into  a  condition  of 
equilibrium ;  and  when  occasional  changes  occur, 
are  always  due  to  extrinsic  agencies.  Reprodu 
elements  are,  however,  frequently  and  of  neci 
thrown  off  from  the  organism,  because  its  polaritit 
often  too  complex  to  admit  of  an  equilibrium  I 
established:  a  current  and  continuous  molecula 
arrangement  goes  on,  as  a  result  of  which,  whe 
approximate  equilibrium  is  otherwise  impossible,  ce 
portions  of  its  constituent  matter  tend  to  aggr 
round  new  centres,  which  become  independent 
ultimately  by  a  continuance  of  the  same  action  sep 
from  the  parent  organism — as  'conidia'  or  'spore; 

These  views,  which  flow  as  a  necessary  conseqt 
from  the  doctrines  of  evolution,  have  now,  by  the  n 
of  the  experiments  detailed  in  previous  chapten 
ceived  the  only  warrant  which  was  needed.  H; 
learned  that  new  living  matter  can  originate  Je 
after  the  same  fashion  as  new  crystalline  matter 
only  doctrine  which  at  present  seems  open  to 
that  which  has  just  been  explained.     Tlie  forms 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  1 1 7 

Structures  of  simple  organisms,  like  the  forms  and 
molecular  structures  of  crystals,  are  referrible  to  the 
action  of  universal  and  immutable  physical  laws. 

All  the  evidence  we  have  gathered  together  in  this 
and  preceding  chapters  alike  tends  to  show,  that  the 
differences  which  exist  between  various  kinds  of  matter 
depend    in  the   main   upon  differences   in   molecular 
structure  or  mode  of  aggregation.     This  conclusion  is 
forced  upon  us  by  the  phenomena  of  allotropism  and 
is(Hnerism,   by  the   consideration    that    thousands    of 
whoUy  different  substances  are  compounded  merely  of 
carbon,  hydrc^en,  and  oxygen  in  similar  or  different 
propcMrtions,  and  by  multitudes  of  other  facts  of  a  like 
nature.     Some  of  these  aggregates  are  stable,  whilst 
others  are  highly  unstable.    Slight  external  influences 
suffice  to  alter  the  crystalline  form  of  certain  bodies, 
some  of  which,  such  as  mercuric  iodide,  undergo  the 
niost  remarkable  changes.      Such  alterations  are  all 
passages  from  one   mode   of  statical   aggregation    to 
another  mode  of  statical  a^regation.     And  yet  crystal- 
line matter   is  often  capable   of  undergoing  a  very 
different  kind  of  rearrangement  by  which  it  is  con- 
certed into  a  colloid.    The  colloid  is  distinguished  by 
its  extreme  mutability — its  existence  is  a  continual 
OKtastasis.    It  is,  in  fact,  a  dynamical  state  of  matter. 
Farther  aggregations  and  rearrangements  may  take  place 
*Q»ngst  its  moleailes  and  give  rise  to  other  forms  of 
^tter  possessing  the  mutability  which  distinguishes 


ti8  THE  BEGINNmCS  OF  LIFE. 

colloids  even  in  a  more  eminent  degree,  and  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  enable  them  to  carry  on  a  coutimuont 
series  of  molecular  changes  in  response  to  the  inci- 
dence of  mere  ordinary  physical  forces.  This,  however, 
is  but  a  further  degree  of  complexity  in  a  direction 
already  indicated.  All  intermediate  degrees  of  mole- 
cular mobility  may  be  traced  (amongst  various  crystal- 
line and  colloidal  states  of  matter)  between  the  dis- 
tantly successive  changes  from  one  to  another  mode  of 
polar  equilibrium — which  is  alone  possible  with  the  ma- 
jority of  crystals — and  the  continuous  changes  of  living 
matter '.     The  lapse  from  one  mode  of  statical  equi- 

*  A  very  good  instance  of  such  aa  intermediale  product  is  to  be  fouod 

in  the  remarkable  substance  called  •myeline,'  which,  when  immcised  in 
water,  protrades  delicate  tubes  that  bend  in  all  directions  ^MontEO^ler)■, 
■On  the  ArtilidBl  Formation  of  so-called  Cells').  But,  as  Robin  has 
shown,  similar  or  even  more  remarkable  movements  and  changes  of 
form  (not  due  to  contractility  in  its  ordinary  sense)  are  to  be  seen  in  other 
fatty  extracts  derived  from  dead  animal  substances.  (See  ■  Mem.  de 
I'Acad.  dc  Midecine,"  iSjg,  p.  J48.)  This  is  especially  the  case  with 
fatty  eitiacts  obtained  from  the  blood,  when  Ihey  are  mixed  with  water 
or  albuminous  fluids  : — '  Des  amas  de  ccs  txiraiii.  on  voit  aussi  sorlir  ct 
s'allonger  sous  les  yeux  de  I'observateur  des  fibments  d'aspect  tubnieux, 
prenani  des  dispositions  rectilignes,  coud^es,  ondulcuses  ou  spiroldes, 
analogues  h  ccUes  de  divers  Aliments  anatooiiqucs ;  parfois  I'exlr^it^ 
de  certains  de  ces  tubes  se  resserre,  devieni  tnonolifomne.  et  les  reserre- 
ments  vont  jusqu'&  produiic  une  scission  avec  separation  compUte  d'un 
globe  creux,  commc  dans  le  cas  de  production  des  spores  k  I'exlrimito 

des  cellules  (ubuleusea  de  divers  cliampignons,  oidii^s,  etc Lorsquc 

ce  sent  des  gouttes  sphiriques  ou  k  contour  sinueui  qui  se  sont  roim^cs, 
on  peut  les  voir  sous  le  microscope  non  pas  s'inf1<'cbir  dans  un  sens  et 
dans  I'aulre,  comme  tes  lilanicDts  tubulcui  precedents,  mais  changer  de 
forme  incessamment,  par  suite  de  resserrements  et  de  dilalacions  alter- 
nalifs  de  certaines  de   leurs   parlies.    Ces  r 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  119 

librium  to  another  mode  of  statical  equilibrium,  if  it 
take  place  with  sufficient  rapidity  and  be  associated 
with  a  concurrent  process  of  growth,  will  give  rise  to 
that  continuous  series  of  molecular  changes  which  cha- 
racterize what  we  know  as  '  living '  matter.  And  yet 
the  molecular  aggregate  which  displays  this  continuous 
responsive  mobility  and  power  of  self-division — because 
it  has  been  called  a  '  living  *  thing,  and  because  theo- 
retical notions  have  been  formed  concerning  ^life' — has 
been  supposed  to  be  separated  from  other  closely-related 
kinds  of  matter  by  an  impassable  gulf. 

Irresistibly  the  thought  arises  which  may  prompt  us 
to  ask.  What  higher  modes  of  aggregation  exist  on  the 
surfece  of  other  planets  belonging  to  our  own  or 
diflferent  solar  systems  ?  Is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that 
the  higjiest  modes  of  molecular  aggregation  which  have 
appeared  upon  our  earth,  are  at  all  similar  to  those 
whidi  have  arisen  under  the  continued  influence  of 
roore  or  less  dissimilar  conditions  ?  May  we  not  rather 
suppose,  that  other  highest  modes  of  aggregation  may 
exist  totally  different  from  our  own,  each  of  which,  to 
whatsoever  planet  or  system  it  belongs,  may  possess 
qu^ities  so  subtle  as  to  make  it  comparable  only  with 
that  which  we  call  *  living '  matter  ? 

JB^*^  produire  ane  division  complbte  de  certains  globules  en  deux, 
<fc  U  vokcat.  mani^re  qu'on  voit  s'op^rer  la  scission  par  4tranglemcnt 
Sndnel  de  certaines  cellules  v^g^tales  et  animales.'  (Robin,  *  Traits  du 
Mkroscope/  187 1,  p.  563.) 


CHAPTER    XV. 

DEVXLOPHENT   OF  THE  PRIHORDIAL   FORMS   OF  LIFE: 
THEIR   RELATIONSHIP  TO   ONE   ANOTHER. 

Evolution.  Simple  and  Compound.  Stales  of  Muter  favonnible  to 
Compound  Evolution.  Living  Matter.  Its  Qualificatioiis  and  its 
Chimges.  Von  Baei's  Law.  Tendency  to  DifTerentiation.  This 
observed  to  be  a  Tendency  to  'Organisation.'  It  is  inherent  in 
'living'  Matter.  Present  Changes  likely  to  be  ^milar  (o  Ante- 
cedent Changes.  Rale  of  Variation.  DifTcrcnl  according  lo  Mode 
of  Nutrition.  Vegetal  and  Asimal  Forms.  Hints  concerning 
NntriliOD  of  AmcebiB. 

Nature  of  Bacteria.  Their  relationship  to  Fungi.  Relalioni  between 
Bacteria  and  Tomlz,  Causes  which  promote  their  'discontinuous' 
Growlh.  Development  of  Bacteria  into  Fqngi.  Many  diRerenI 
forms  of  Tomlte.  These  fonns  may  '  breed  true '  but  are  still 
Inlercbangeable.  M.  Tricul's  observations  on  Developmcni  of 
ToraltB.  Variability  at  all  Stages.  M.  Pouchel's  Observations. 
Interchangeability  of  Lower  Fungi.  New-born  Matter  may  assume 
the  forms  of  Amceba  or  Monads.  Mutual  relationship  between 
these  and  Fungi.  Green  Organisms.  Transitions  between  Fungi 
and  Algz,  Similar  transitions  between  Fungi  and  Lichens,  Rela- 
tions of  Desmids  to  Algm.  Fundamental  Kinship  of  all  these 
forms  actually  proved  by  Experiments.  More  Varied  Forms  which 
appear  in  Ponds.  Their  Transformations.  Dr.  Braiton  Hicks  on 
relationship  between  Algie,  Lichens,  and  Mosses.  Cohn's  Re- 
searches concerning  Transform alions  of  Protococcus.  They  tend  to 
abolish  Classificatory  Distinctions.  Views  previously  announced 
by  Professor  Grant. 

'  'T^HE  change  from  a  diffused  imperceptible  state 

i-     to  a  concentrated  perceptible  state  is  an  inte- 

gtation    of  matter    and    concomitant   dissipation    of 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  1 2 1 

motion;  and  the  change  from  a  concentrated  per- 
ceptible state  to  a  diffused  imperceptible  state  is 
an  absorption  of  motion  and  concomitant  disintegra- 
tion of  matter.  These  are  truisms.  Constituent  parts 
cannot  aggregate  without  losing  some  of  their  relative 
motion,  and  they  cannot  separate  without  more  relative 
motion  being  given  to  them'/  To  the  former  process 
Mr.  Spencer  applies  the  term  Evolution  ^^  and  to  the 
latter  Dissolution.  Both  processes  are  constantly  being 
carried  on,  either  separately  or  conjointly,  in  all  exist- 
ences whatsoever. 

But  there  are  two  modes  of  Evolution  which  we 
shall  do  well  to  distinguish  in  their  most  divergent 
aspects,  although  they  are  connected  with  one  another 
\ff  almost  insensible  gradations. 

When  the  forces  at  work  are  strong  and  tend  to 
pwduce  rapid  a^regation,  as  in  the  case  of  the  for- 
mation of  a  Crystal,  we  have  to  do  simply  with  an 
'integration  of  matter  and  concomitant  dissipation 
of  motion;'  but  when  integration  takes  place  more 
slowly,  <  either  because  the  quantity  of  motion  con- 
tained in  the  a^regate  is  relatively  great ;  or  because 
though  the  quantity  of  motion  which  each  part  pos- 
sesses is  not  relatively  great,  the   large   size  of  the 

*  *  First  Principles/  2nd  ed.  p.  284. 

'  This  use  of  the  word  *  Evolution/  although  arbitrary  and  open  to 
®*oy  Directions,  was  rendered  inevitable  by  previous  use  and  custom. 
As  Mr.  Spencer  says : — •  The  antithetical  word  Involution  would  much 
■WW  truly  express  the  nature  of  the  process '  (loc.  cit.,  p.  285). 


122  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

aggregate  prevents  easy  dissipation  of  the  motion ;  or 
because  though  motion  is  rapidly  lost  more  motion  is 
rapidly  received,  then  other  forces  will  cause  in  the 
aggregate  appreciable  modifications.  Along  with  the 
change  constituting  integration  there  will  take  place 
supplementary  changes.  The  Evolution  instead  of 
being  simple  will  be  compound  \' 

What  usually  occurs  in  the  latter  case  is  indicated 
by  the  following  definition  ^i — <  Evolution  is  an  inte- 
gration of  matter  and  concomitant  dissipation  of 
motion^  during  which  the  matter  passes  from  an 
indefinite  incoherent  homogeneity,  to  a  definite  cohe- 
rent heterogeneity  5  and  during  which  the  retained 
motion  undergoes  a  parallel  transformation.' 

The  presence  of  much  retained  internal  motion  in 
an  aggregate  undergoing  condensation,  is  the  pecu- 
liarity that,  above  all  others,  favours  the  occurrence 
of  the  internal  changes  and  re-arrangements  which 
characterize  compound  evolution.  Yet  whilst  matter 
still  exists  in  those  states  in  which  it  contains  the 
largest  amount  of  this  retained  motion — whilst  it  is 
still  in  the  gaseous  or  liquid  stages  —  the  secondary 
redistributions  which  undoubtedly  take  place  vanish 
almost  as  soon  as  they  occur — ^the  molecular  mobility 
being  such  as  to  negative  the  fixed  arrangement  of 
parts  we  call  structure '*.*  But  on  approaching  solidity 
^  we   arrive   at   a   condition  called   plastic,  in   which 

»  '  First  Principles,'  2nd  ed.  p.  287.  '  Loc.  dt.,  p.  396. 

'  Loc.  dt.,  p.  297. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  123 

redisthbutioQs  can  still  be  made,  though  much  less 
easily^  and  in  which,  being  changeable  less  easily, 
they  have  a  certain  persistence — a  persistence  which 
can,  however,  become  decided  only  where  further 
solidification  stops  further  redistribution/ 

Now  molecular  motion  is  locked  up  in  living  matter 
in  various  ways.     In  addition  to  the  fact  of  its  semi- 
fluid consistence,  it  contains  chemical  combinations 
which  even  surpass  those  of  the  colloid  molecule  in 
intrinsic  mobility.     Three  out  of  its  four  principal 
ultimate  constituents  are  mobile  gases;  whilst  it  is  a 
peculiarity  of  one  of  them,  nitrogen,  that  instead  of 
giving  out  heat  when  it  combines  with  other  elements, 
it  absorbs  heat,  so  that '  besides  carrying  with  it  into 
the  liquid  or  solid  compound   it  forms,  the  motion 
which  previously  constituted   it    a  gas,   it   takes   up 
additional  motion.* 

Thus  the  form  of  matter  which  above  all  others 
would  seem  to  possess  the  necessary  requisites  for  the 
abundant  occurrence  of  secondary  redistributions,  is 
Uving  matter — in  which  there  is  embodied  an  enor- 
nKxis  amount  of  potential  and  actual  motion,  whilst  it, 
at  the  same  time,  possesses  a  degree  of  cohesion  that 
pennits  temporary  fixity  of  arrangement. 

And  accordingly,  as  Mr.  Spencer  says,  ^  The  clearest, 
nwst  numerous,  and  most  varied  illustrations  of  the 
advance  in  multiformity  that  accompanies  the  advance 
^n  integration,  are  furnished  by  living  organic  bodies.' 
He  then  adds : — ^  Distinguished  as  we  found  these  to 


124  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

be  by  the  great  quantity  of  their  contained  motion,  they 
exhibit  in  an  extreme  degree  the  secondary  redistribu- 
tions which  contained  motion  facilitates.  The  history 
of  every  plant  and  every  animal,  while  it  is  a  history 
of  increasing  bulk,  is  also  a  history  of  simultaneously- 
increasing  differences  among  the  parts.  This  trans- 
formation has  several  aspects.  .  .  .  The  chemical 
composition  which  is  almost  uniform  throughout  the 
substance  of  a  germ^  vegetal  or  animal,  gradually 
ceases  to  be  uniform.  .  .  .  Simultaneously  there  arise 
contrasts  of  minute  structured'    These  contrasts  gra- 

^  Loc  cit,  p.  334.  But  these  gradually  increasing  complexities  of 
structure  which  are  observable  in  the  development  of  living  matter,  are 
only  very  typical  instances  of  changes  which  perpetually  tend  to  occur — 
although  less  obviously — in  all  other  forms  of  matter.  Masses  of  similar 
units,  constantly  acted  upon  by  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  forces,  ever  tend 
to  become  heterogeneous.  Homogeneity,  as  Mr.  Spencer  has  so  fully 
explained,  is  a  condition  of  unstable  equilibrium.  He  says  (loc.  cit., 
p.  429) : — *  But  all  finite  forms  of  the  homogeneous — all  forms  of  it 
which  we  can  know  or  conceive,  must  inevitably  lapse  into  heteroge- 
neity. In  three  several  ways  does  the  persistence  of  force  necessitate 
this.  Setting  external  agencies  aside,  each  unit  of  a  homogeneous 
whole  must  be  differently  affected  from  any  of  the  rest  by  the  aggregate 
action  of  the  rest  upon  it.  The  resultant  forces  exercised  by  the  aggre- 
gate on  each  unit,  being  in  no  two  cases  alike  in  both  amount  and 
direction,  and  usually  not  in  either,  any  incident  force,  even  if  uniform  in 
amount  and  direction,  cannot  produce  like  effects  on  the  units.  And 
the  various  positions  of  the  parts  in  relation  to  any  incident  force  pre- 
venting them  from  receiving  it  in  uniform  amounts  and  directions,  a 
further  difference  in  the  effects  wrought  on  them  is  inevitably  produced.' 
A  very  interesting  example  of  such  a  differentiation  of  a  homogeneous 
material  may  be  seen  by  pouring  a  small  quantity  of  varnish,  composed 
of  shell-lac  dissolved  in  naphtha,  upon  paper  (^loc.  cit.,  p.  404) — though 
the  effects  are  here  complicated  by  the  rapid  evaporation  of  the  solvent. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  1 25 

(taaUy  increase,  and  different  *  organs'  slowly  appear, 
varying  in  structure  and  arrangement  in  accordance 
with  the  nature  of  the  organism  whose  evolution  is 
being  watched;  so  that,  as  Von  Baer'  originally  pointed 
oat,  a  progress  from  the  more  general  to  the  more 
^Kdal  is  always  to  be  observed  during  the  development 
of  animals  and  plants. 

It  is,  therefore,  only  natural  to  suppose  that  homo- 
geneous specks  of  living  matter  as  they  increase  in 
size  diould  undergo  certain  differentiating  changes 
whereby  *  structure'  is  gradually  evolved  and  more  and 
more  complex  functions  are  generated  2.  We  should, 
however,  have  been  utterly  unable  to  predict  the  pro- 
bable nature  of  such  changes  if  we  knew  nothing  of 
present  lower  organisms,  and  of  the  microscopic  ana- 
tomy of  the  tissues  of  higher  animals  and  plants  during 
tte  different  phases  of  their  development.  But  our 
familiarity  with  these  subjects  has  instructed  us  as  to 

'  In  his  odebnted  work  entitled  '  Ueber  Entwickelongs-Geschichte/ 
iSaS.  The  application  of  this  law  was  subsequently  developed  by  Dr. 
Martin  Bany,  in  the  *£din.  Philos.  Journal'  for  1837,  and  also  quite 
iBdependently  by  M.  Milne* Edwards  in  '  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat/  S^r.  iii.  t.  i. 

'  Mr.  Spencer  says  (loc  dt.,  p.  387) : — *  In  Organisms  the  advance 
towards  a  more  integrated,  heterogeneous,  and  definite  distribution  of 
the  retained  mo/ibit.  which  accompanies  the  advance  towards  a  more 
integrated,  heterogeneous,  and  definite  distribution  of  the  component 
fltttter,  is  mainly  what  we  understand  as  the  development  of  functions. 
An  active  functions  are  either  sensible  movements,  as  those  produced 
by  contractile  organs;  or  such  insensible  movements  as  those  propa- 
ipted  thrcmgh  the  nerves;  or  such  insensible  movements  as  those  by 
in  secreting  organs,  molecular  rearrangements  are  effected,  and 
combinations  of  matter  produced.' 


126  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

the  forms  which  minute  specks  of  living  matter  tend 
to  assume^  just  as  the  study  of  crystallography  has 
taught  us  much  concerning  the  limits  of  variation 
observable  in  crystalline  forms. 

The  facts  which  are  known  concerning  oiganic 
development  in  general,  and  embryology  in  particular — 
revealing,  as  they  do,  the  before-mentioned  progress 
from  a  minute  homogeneous  germ  to  the  greater  and 
greater  complexity  of  structure  peculiar  to  the  various 
forms  of  life — are  so  many  indubitable  evidences  of  the 
tendency  to  develop  which  exists  in  living  matter.  As 
Mr.  Spencer  says^: — ^  Each  organism  exhibits,  within  a 
short  space  of  time,  a  series  of  changes  which,  when 
supposed  to  occupy  a  period  indefinitely  great,  and  to 
go  on  in  various  ways  instead  of  one  way,  give  us 
a  tolerably  clear  conception  of  organic  evolution  in 
general.'  Nay,  more,  in  the  development  of  the  indi- 
vidual we  have  a  condensed  embodiment  of  the  modi- 
fications which  have  slowly  appeared  in  one  or  other  of 
the  various  representatives  of  an  innumerable  series  of 
more  and  more  specialized  ancestors. 

All  Evolutionists,  therefore,  might  be  presumed  to 
believe  that  the  persistent  intrinsic  mutability  of 
living  matter,  subject  as  it  is  to  the  constant  incidence 
of  ever-varying  physical  forces,  would  cause  it  to 
manifest  a  continuous  tendency  to  undergo  a  further 
differentiation  of  structure 2.    Whilst  all  our  knowledge 

'  •  Principles  of  Biology,*  vol.  i.  p.  349: 

*  For  as  Mr.  Spencer  points  out  (*  First  Principles/  2nd  ed.  p.  548) ; 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  127 

of  the  multitudinous  forms  of  living  matter  in  exist- 
ence impels  us  to  believe  (however  difficult  it  may  be 
to  understand)  that  this   mere  inherent   tendency  to 
undergo  diflFerentiation,  whose  existence  we  are  able 
.to  affirm  a  frtort^  is  identical  with,  or  at  least  dis- 
plays itself  as,  what  we  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  an 
'organizing'  tendency. 

Such  is  the  conclusion  which  a  survey  of  the  facts 
seems  almost  to  force  upon  us.     And  as  it  appears  to 
me,  we  cannot  consistently  deny  that  living  matter 
possesses  an  inherent  tendency  to  develop,  unless  we 
are  prepared  at   the  same  time  to  deny  one  of  the 
first  principles  of  the  Evolution  philosophy,  by  which 
we  are  taught   that   a  homogeneous  aggregate   must 
inevitably  become  heterogeneous,  and  that  the  amount 
of  heterogeneity    must    continually    increase,    partly 
through    the    operation   of  intrinsic   attractions,   and 
partly  under  the  influence  of  externally  incident  forces. 
A  new-bom  specjc  of  living  matter  is  merely  a  specimen 
of  such  a  homogeneous  aggregate  which,  from  its  very 
nature,  is  especially  suited  to  undergo  secondary  differ- 
entiations.    That  such  differentiations  would  be  iden- 
tical with  'organizing'  changes  could  not  have  been  pre- 
dicated a  friori  ,•  although,  after  observation  has  taught 

'  Evoy  differentiated  part  is  not  simply  a  seat  of  further  differentia- 
*^  but  also  a  parent  of  further  differentiations ;  since  in  growing 
•"^  other  parts,  it  becomes  a  centre  of  unlike  reactions  on  incident 
^^foe,  and  by  so  adding  to  the  diversity  of  forces  at  work,  adds  to  the 
'Jj'ttsity  of  effects  produced.  This  multiplication  of  effects  is  proved  to 
be  similarly  traceable  throughout  Nature.' 


128  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


US  that  this  is  so,  we  become  entitled  to  affirm  that 
the  inherent  tendency  to  differentiation  possessed  by 
living  matter  is  an  inherent  tendency  to  become  *  or- 
ganized,' however  much  these  processes  of  organization 
may  be  influenced,  and  in  part  determined,  by  the . 
concurrent  operation  of  varying  extrinsic  forces^. 

Just  as  surely,  therefore,  as  the  form  of  any  particular 
Crystal  is  the  result  of  the  polarities  of  its  aggregating 
molecules  (inherent  tendencies)  under  the  influence  of 
the  conditions  amidst  which  a^regation  takes  place; 
so  is  the  more  slowly-evolved  form  and  structure  of 
the  Organism  attributable  to  the  inherent  tendencies 
(molecular  polarities)  of  its  component  matter  and 
the  forces  operative  upon  it  2.  Changes  in  the  ex- 
ternal forces  or  ^conditions'  may  in  each  case  pro- 
duce more  or  less  variation  in  the  form  which  presents 

^  This  affirmation  of  the  existence  of  an  inherent  tendenqr  in  living 
matter  to  become  organized  has  frequently  been  made,  by  De  Maillet, 
Dr.  Erasmus  Darwin,  Lamarck  and  others — although  different  writers 
have  varied  much  in  the  amount  of  influence  which  they  have  been 
inclined  to  attribute  to  it.  (See  Spencer's  *  Principles  of  Biology,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  402-410.^  Some,  indeed,  have  thought  that  the  tendency  had  a 
natural,  whilst  others  have  referred  it  to  a  supernatural  origin,  and  have 
considered  (like  Professor  Owen)  that  it  took  effect  under  the  super- 
vision or  predestination  of  an  intelligent  designer.  The  existence  of  the 
tendency  has,  however,  been  altogether  denied  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer 
(loc.  cit.,  p.  430),  although  we  venture  to  think  that  this  denial  is  incon* 
sistent  with  the  general  principles  of  Evolution  which  he  has  so  admi- 
rably enunciated. 

^  According  to  Miiller,  a  doctrine  somewhat  similar  to  this  seems  to 
have  been  put  forth  by  Reil  nearly  forty  years  ago,  in  the  *  Archiv  fur 
Physiologic/  Bd.  I. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  129 

itself;  but  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  assume  that  these 
effects  have   been   induced   by  such  mere   modifying 
influences.     Inherent  attractions  would  of  themselves 
tend  to  make  a  homogeneous  aggregate  become  hetero- 
geneous; and  ^inherent  tendencies'  are  not  annulled 
but  merely  modified  by  the  incidence  of  new  external 
forces,  which  produce  effects  only  when  they  are  capable 
of  inducing  some  alteration  in  the  molecular  arrange- 
ment  of  the  matter  itself.    Thus  it  is  that  the  persistent 
mutability  of  *  living '  matter  is  the  essential  cause  of 
the  marked  tendency  which  it  manifests  to  become 
more  and  more  differentiated  (or  organized);  though 
in  this  respect  ^living'  matter  only  displays,  in  a  highly 
marked  degree,  a  property  which  is  more  or  less  pos- 
sessed by  all  forms  of  matter — the  homogeneous  ever 
tending  to  become  heterogeneous*. 

New-born  living  matter  must,  therefore,  inevitably 
undergo  differentiation.  And  just  as  this  differen- 
tiation in  all  past  time  has  gone  along  those  grooves 
which  result  in  the  appearance  of  what  we  call  ^  organ- 
ization,' so  is  present  new-born  living  matter  likely 

'  As  long  as  Archebiosis  or  Heterogenesis  were  disbelieved  in  as 
fwsttt  or  recent  occurrences,  the  occurrence  of  the  very  simplest  forms 
of  life  in  the  present  day  seemed  quite  incompatible  with  the  existence 
io  living  matter  of  an  *  inherent  tendency '  to  develop.  Hence  it  may 
^  that  Mr.  Spencer  was  led  to  deny,  in  its  applicability  to  thb  particular 
c>se,  one  of  the  first  principles  of  the  Evolution  philosophy.  A  belief 
^  the  present  and  continual  occurrence  of  Archebiosis,  however,  would 
relieve  him  from  all  difficulties. 

^OU  11.  K 


130  THE  BEcmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

to  go  through  essentially  similar  changes.  Again, 
since  nobody  can  know  how  rapidly  the  various  lower 
*  specific'  forms  were  evolved  upon  the  surface  of  the 
earth  in  past  times — and  even  in  all  subsequent  periods 
preceding  our  own — the  experimental  evidence  and 
the  knowledge  derived  from  actual  observation  whidi 
we  now  possess  concerning  the  present  comparatively 
rapid  appearance  of  specific  forms,  must  be  regarded 
as  so  many  contributions  to  our  positive  knowledge 
upon  the  subject,  which  far  outweigh  in  value  all  the 
k  priori  deductions  of  even  the  profbundest  reasoners. 

Observation  and  experiment  combined  reveal  the 
fact  that  new-born  specks  of  living  matter,  after 
emerging  into  the  region  of  the  visible,  continue  to 
increase  in  size  and  soon  exhibit  signs  of  a  primary 
differentiation.  But  the  rapidity  with  which  any 
degree  of  complexity  of  organization  manifests  itself 
will  be  fisund  to  vary  very  much  with  the  mode  of 
nutrition  of  the  living  aggregate,  and  with  its  manner 
of  growth.  The  lower  Fungi,  Algae,  and  Lichens  are 
produced  in  great  part  by  a  mere  '  irrelative  repetition ' 
of  similar  parts — though  their  growth  may  be  cither 
continuous  or  discontinuous'.  But  the  nutrition  of 
all  these  lower  forms  of  life  is  effected  by  a  synthesis 
of  new  living  matter  from  not-living  elements,  and 
they  further  agree  amongst  themselves  in  manifesting 
a  comparatively  slow  rate  of  variation.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  Amoebx,  Flagellated  Monads,  Ciliated  Infii- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  131 

soria,  and  the  more  animal  forms  of  Protists — where 
actual  solid  organic  matter  is  variously  taken  into 
tiie  substance  of  the  body  and  assimilated  in  the 
fcmi  of  fbod^,  and  where  the  organism  constitutes 
more  of  an  individualized  whole — the  transformative 
(xganizing  changes  are  often  much  more  sudden  and 
striking. 


>  On  this  subject  Professor  Owen  says  ('  Anat.  of  the  Vertebrates/ 
voL  in.  1868,  p.  8t8) : — '  Amber  or  steel  when  magnetized  seem  to 
oerdse  **  selection  :**  they  do  not  attract  all  substances  alike.  To  the 
snitaUe  ones  at  due  distance  they  tend  to  move ;  but,  through  density 
of  ooostitixtion,  cannot  outstretch  thereto ;  so  they  draw  the  attracted 
sebclance  to  themselves.  If  the  amber  be  not  rubbed,  or  the  steel  bar 
othcnrise  magnetised,  they  are  **dead  "  to  such  power.  The  movement 
cf  a  free  body  to  a  magnet  has  always  excited  interest,  often  wonder, 
frooi  its  analogy  to  the  self-motion  so  common  and  apparently  peculiar 
to  "life."  ...  A  speck  of  protogenal  jelly  or  of  sarcode,  if  alive,  shows 
tudogoQs  relations  to  certain  substances:  but  the  soft-yielding  tissue 
allows  the  part  next  the  attractive  matter  to  move  thereto,  and  then  by 
retiactioo  to  draw  such  matter  into  the  sarcodal  mass,  which  over- 
ipicads,  ^ssolves,  and  assimilates  it.  We  say  that  the  Protogtnes  or 
Amaka  has  extended  a  **  pseudopod,"  has  seized  its  prey,  has  drawn  it 
IB,  swallowed,  and  digested  it.  No  "organs,"  however,  are  recog- 
nizaUe;  neither  muscle,  mouth,  nor  stomach.  ...  If  the  portion  of  iron 
attrutcd  by  the  magnet  became  blended  with  the  substance  of  its 
ittractor,  the  analogy  thereto  of  the  act  of  the  Amaba  would  be, 
peiliaps,  doser,  more  just,  than  that  other  analogy  which  is  expressed 
by  tenns  borrowed  from  the  procedure  of  higher  organisms. . .  .  From 
certain  knowledge  of  the  homogeneous,  by  some  termed  **  imorganized," 
(otaie  of  Frotogem*  and  Amoeba,  we  cannot  predicate  of  their  having 
Kssation  or  exercising  volition.  Given  "life"  and  suitable  organic 
MbstiDces  at  due  distances,  the  act  of  making  contact  seems  as  inevit- 
able, as  independent  of  any  volition  of  the  Anusba,  as  in  the  case  of 
tmba  or  steel,  given  "magnetisation,"  and  attractable  substances  at 
dae  distances.' 

K  2 


132  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

The  portions  of  oi^nic  matter  which  the  Amoeba 
or  the  Ciliated  Infiisoriiim  absorb,  slowly  undergo,  in 
the  body  of  the  oiganism,  a  process  of  molecular 
disintegration.  The  changes  which  the  matter  passes 
through  in  this  situatioD  and  under  such  influences 
are,  however,  quite  different  from  those  which  the 
same  matter  might  have  undergone  if  it  had  disinte- 
grated in  the  water  outside  the  organism.  The  fbr- 
mation  of  binary  and  ternary  combinations,  accom- 
panied by  the  emission  of  some  of  these  as  gaseous 
products,  does  not  occur  when  the  matter  disintegrates 
under  the  immediate  influence  of  the  molecular  move- 
ments of  the  living  matter  by  which  it  is  surrounded. 
Ordinary  molecular  or  chemical  tendencies  arc  con- 
quered by  more  potent  influences,  just  as  the  tendency 
of  heavy  masses  to  gravitate  may  be  annulled  by  the 
occurrence  of  rapid  axial  rotations — such  as  we  are 
familiar  with  in  the  case  of  the  gyroscope.  And  simi- 
larly, the  mode  in  which  the  movement  of  a  rotating 
body  of  this  kind  may  gradually  communicate  itself  to 
a  motionless  ring  with  which  its  poles  are  connected, 
afibrds  a  su^estive  illustration  of  the  coercive  nature 
or  tendency  of  pre-existing  molecular  movements,  by 
virtue  of  which  each  kind  of  living  matter  is  enabled 
to  grow  after  its  own  likeness '.     Facts  of  this  nature, 

•  Mr.  SptDcer  says :— '  Already,  when  uwiling  of  the  autrition  o( 
parts  is  64),  it  was  poiDted  out  that  we  are  obliged  to  rec0|i|;iuze  m 
power  possessed  b;  each  tissue  to  build  up  out  of  the  materials  btooehl 
to  it,  molecules,  of  the  some  type  as  those  of  which  it  is  formed.    This 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  133 


as  well  as  others,  have  been  lost  sight  of  by  persons  who 
believe  that  ordinary  chemical  processes  belong  to  a 
(fiflFerent  category  from  those  which  go  on  during  the 
growth  of  living  things.  The  difference  exists,  but  it 
is  merely  one  of  degree,  as  we  have  previously  endea- 
voured to  show^ 

After  having  made  these   general   preliminary   re- 
marks, we  must  now  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  nature 

boiklmg  up  of  like  molecules  seems  explicable  as  caused  by  the  tendency 
of  the  new  components  which  the  blood  supplies,  to  acquire  movements 
isodiroDoas  with  those  of  the  like  components  of  the  tissue ;  which  they 
on  do  only  by  uniting  into  like  compound  molecules.'  (*  Principles  of 
BWogy/  ToL  ii.  p.  349.) 

^  Many  of  the  older  physiologists,  including  Johannes  Miiller  (see 
*Riysiology/  translation  by  Baly,  1840,  p.  4),  taught  that  there  was 
not  only  an  antagonism  but  a  fundamental  difference  between  ordinary 
diemical  phenomena  and  those  which  go  on  in  living  things.      The 
Bitiuil  tendency  which  exists  for  some  forms  of  matter  to  fall  into 
more  and  more  complex  states  of  combination  was   not   sufficiently 
considered.    Mr.  Hinton  in  his  *  Life  in  Nature '  also  dwells  much  upon 
the  SDpposed  radical  difference.     He  constantly  speaks  of  *  vital  force ' 
as  bdng  *  opposed  to  chenucal  force,'  instead  of  being  merely  the  result 
of  another  order  of  chemical  affinities.    But  yet  his  views  concerning 
'vital  force'  were  in  other  respects  quite  in  accordance  with  those  pro- 
fessed in  this  work.     He  says  (loc.  cit,  p.  68) : — We  perceive  that  from 
ov  present  point  of  view  the  vital  force  exists  simply  in  a  peculiar 
anangement  of  elements,  involving  a  tension  of  a  special  kind.     By 
vbatsoever  means  this  arrangement  may  be  produced,  the  force  thus 
embodied  in  it  is  equally  called  vital.    The  characters  of  the  force  are 
due  to  that  anangement ;  they  flow  from  it  rather  than  are  concerned 
a  its  production ;  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  forces,  such  as  heat  or 
dectridty,  the  peculiar  properties  they  manifest  are  the  results  and  not 
^  cuses  of  the  states  of  matter  in  which  they  consist.'    Another 
statanent  to  the  same  effect  is  made  at  p.  155. 


134  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

of  the  early  developmental  forms  which  our  new 
specks  of  living  matter  have  been  found  to  asi 
and  also  seek  to  unravel  the  mutual  relations  that 
between  these  several  forms. 

Much  doubt  and  uncertainty  have  always  pre 
in  the  minds  of  naturalists  with  reference  to  the  i 
of  BacferUy  and  the  degree  and  kind  of  relatj< 
which  they  present  to  the  Mucedinea  and  othe 
forms  of  Fungi. 

By  some  naturalists  and  patholc^ists,  Bacttri. 
Vihiamts  are  regarded  as  distinct  and  indepc 
species,  having  no  developmental  outcome  in  ! 
forms,  and  no  connection  with  the  lifc-hlstc 
Fungi.  This  was  the  old  view,  and  strangely  e: 
such  a  notion  has  been  advocated  again,  even 
recently'.  Others  (not  believing  in  the  occurrei 
Archebiosis)  who  have  traced  some  of  the  ult 
developments  of  BaeltriM,  are  inclined  to  regard 
as  necessary  links  or  stages  in  the  life-history  of 
Fungi.  Whilst  a  third  party,  accepting  many  t 
facts  of  development  just  alluded  to,  and  betievini 
some  BacttrU  and  FiirioHei  do  develop  into  I 
maintain  that  these  primary  forms  may  arise  dt 
and  that  they  are  therefore  not  necessarily  derived 
pre-eiistlng  Fungi. 

When  we    find    Dr.  Sanderson'    adducing   a 

'  See  Dr.  StndeiKm's  memoir  in  '  Thirteenth  Report  of  tlie  I 
Offictr  ot  the  PciTj  CouDcil,'  pp.  48  and  68. 
»  Loc  dt,  p.  68. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  135 

'proofs'  that  ^fiingi  are  not  developed  from  micro- 

zymes'  {BMCteria)^  of  course  no  reference  is  made  to 

their  direct  development,  through  FiMo  and  Lefothrix 

fonns,  into  a  fungus  mycelium.    Yet  this  mode  of 

development  has  been  seen  by  Professor  Hallier  and 

odieis  as  well  as  by  myself.    Dr.  Sanderson*s  remarks 

have  reference  to  the  views  recently  put    forth    by 

Prcrfessor  Huxley  with  regard  to  the  relations  of  Bacteria 

tD  ToruU^.     The   observations  on   which  they   were 

ibanded  are,  however,  by  no  means  extensive  enough 

to  give  warrant   to  the   belief  that   'fungi   are   not 

developed  from  microzymes^*    and    such  a  view  is 

contra-indicated  by  the  observations  of  others^. 

We  agree,  however,  with  Professor  Hallier  in  many 
respects.     We  believe  with  him  that  mere  particles  of 

'  'Qoaiterly  Jonmal  of  Microscopical  Society/  Oct.  1870.  In  his 
■ODoir  Professor  Sanderson  more  especially  lays  stress  upon  the  foct 
that  Baeima  may  appear  in  liquids  without  the  presence  of  Toruhe ;  but 
I  hid  previously  (*  Modes  of  Origin  of  Lowest  Organisms/  1871,  p.  10), 
act  eoly  called  attention  to  this  fact,  but  to  the  still  stronger  one 
of  the  occurrence  of  Torula  in  fluids  in  which  not  a  single  Bacterium 
was  to  be  found.  Further  experience  has  only  served  to  strengthen  my 
opiaioQ  as  to  the  untenability  of  Professor  Huxley's  view ;  see  also 
vol  i  p.  g. 

*  Neither  does  Professor  Sanderson's  conclusion  as  to  the  probable 
^ointion  of  some  of  the  Torula  and  fungi  which  were  found  in  his 
aperiments  seem  to  me  satisfactory.  Unless  he  can  prove,  what  no  one 
<^  has  been  able  to  do,  and  what  is  directly  opposed  to  much  other 
endence— viz.  that  Torula  germs  are  not  destroyed  by  boiling  water — he 
has  no  sn£Bcient  warrant,  in  the  face  of  the  experiments  of  others,  for 
iQOfting  to  the  belief  that  such  organisms  have  been  derived  from  in- 
>*>Ur  genns  existing  either  in  air  or  water  (loc  dt.,  pp.  69  and  56). 


136  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

living  matter  (' micrococci  *)  may  develop  under  dif- 
ferent conditions — and  especially  in  different  media — 
either  into  ToruU  ('cryptococci'),  or  into  Bacteria 
('  arthrococci  *),  and  that  both  these  forms  may  subse- 
quently grow  into  perfect  Fungi.  We  do  not  agree 
with  him,  however,  in  his  view  that  '  micrococci  *  arc 
invariably  derived  from  fungi,  and  that  they  constitute 
some  of  the  normal  reproductive  units  of  these  organ- 
isms. We  believe,  and  we  think  we  have  proved, 
that  Bacteria  are  frequently  evolved  de  novos  and  we 
further  believe  that  when  they  do  arise  from  pre- 
existing fungi,  they  are  either  thrown  off  accidentally 
as  mere  living  particles,  or  on  the  other  hand  that  they 
result  from  the  heterogenetic  breaking  up  of  the  proto- 
plasmic contents  of  a  previously  normal  fungus-spore 
or  sporangium  ^  So  that  when  derived  from  pre- 
existing fungi  in  any  stage  of  development,  they  are 
accidental  and  occasional,  rather  than  normal  and  con- 
stant products. 

We  believe  that  Bacteria  and  Torula  merely  represent 
two  of  the  most  prevalent  forms  which  specks  of  new- 
born living  matter  are  prone  to  assume ;  and  in  confir- 
mation of  this  view,  we  may  state  that  all  intermediate 
shapes  are  frequently  to  be  seen  between  the  most 
typical  Bacteria  and  the  most  typical  Toruls  i  just  as  all 
intermediate  conditions  are  to  be  seen  between  the 
smallest  Bacteria  of  some  highly  fermentable  infusion, 

1  Just  as  Bacteria  may  result  from  retrogressive  changes  taking  place 
in  an  Atnctba  which  has  reached  the  term  of  its  existence  (see  p.  222). 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  137 

and  the  lai^er  yiMo-like  forms  which  are  frequently 

met  with  in  ahnost  similar  fluids. 
The  opinion  seems  to  be  pretty  common  that  ViMones 

are  higher  organisms  than  Bacteria^  and  that  ToruU  are 

hi^r  than  either.     Both  these  views,  however,  must 

be  received  with  certain  qualifications. 
It  is  well  known  that  the  more  slowly  crystalline 

matter  separates  from  a  solution,  the  smaller  is  the 
number  and  the  greater  the  size  and  perfection  of  the 
crystals  which  appear.  Mere  amorphous  granules  are 
deposited  in  many  cases  when  the  separation  takes 
place  instantaneously.  And,  similarly,  I  have  found 
(Ml  several  occasions  that  the  most  fermentable  solu- 
tions swarm  rapidly  with  inconceivable  numbers  of 
small  Bacteria  i  though  if  a  drop  of  acetic  acid  has  been 
added  to  another  portion  of  the  same  infusion,  it  does 
not  become  turbid  till  many  hours  later,  and  the  Bac^ 
teria  which  are  present  in  the  first  scum  may  be  much 
larger  and  such  as  are  generally  termed  ViMones.  In 
other  cases,  highly  fermentable  fluids  which  have  been 
subjected  to  the  influence  of  very  high  temperatures 
(270T  and  upwards)  will,  even  when  exposed  to  the 
air,  yield  neither  Bacteria  nor  ViMones — though  ToruU 
appear  after  a  time,  and  multiply  more  slowly. 

Now  with  reference  to  such  observations,  the  fol- 
lowing considerations  must  be  borne  in  mind.  A 
fcighly  fermentable  solution  is  in  one  respect  exactly 
comparable  with  a  supersaturated  saline  solution. 
Both  contain  chemical  elements  which  have  a  strong 


138  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

tendency  to  combine,  and  in  both  cases  the  products 
of  combination  are  insoluble — particles  of  crystalline 
matter  appear  in  the  one  case,  and  particles  of  living 
matter  in  the  other.  But  the  living  matter  differs 
essentially  from  the  crystalline  matter  by  reason  of 
the  complexity  of  its  constituent  molecules,  and  their 
constant  tendency  to  undergo  small  variations  in  com- 
position or  minute  relative  rearrangements.  This 
capacity  for  intestine  molecular  movement,  which  is 
one  of  the  most  distinctive  attributes  of  living  matter, 
might  well  be  most  marked  in  the  products  which 
separate  from  the  most  fermentable  solutions;  and  it 
is  precisely  this  attribute  which  is  the  principal  factor 
in  bringing  about  the  self-multiplication,  or  discon- 
tinuous growth,  of  living  units. 

Thus  it  is  that  rapid  growth  and  rapid  fission  fre- 
quently go  on  simultaneously;  so  that  although  the 
total  amount  of  living  matter  which  separates  from 
the  solution  may  be  large,  the  individual  living  units 
are  very  small.  'Discontinuous*  growth  is  in  excess, 
and  therefore  the  fact  of  the  growth  being  really  rapid 
is  apt  to  be  overlooked. 

All  the  differences  in  size  and  form  recognizable 
between  small  Bacteria  and  large  Bacteria  ^  between 
the  latter  and  ViMones^  whether  jointed  or  unjointed ; 
between  ViMones  and  Leftothrix  filaments,  plain  or 
segmented  in  various  ways;  and  between  Leptothrix 
and  mycelial  filaments  of  a  Fungus^  are  easily  explicable 
in  accordance  with  these  considerations.    The  several 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


forms,  many  of  wbidi  frequently  occur  together  in  the 
same  solution,  depend  upon  the  frequency  with  which 


Fid.  4fi. 

BMtia  f;mwmg  ialo  Vibrioiui,  Ltfltabri*,  toi  SpirUlum.    (X   1670.) 
I,  a.  Different  kinds  of  Bacltria  and  Vihriotttt. 
^.  h  ud  (.  Different  kinds  of  Ltplolbrai  liUniaits. 

i,  d.  Rodiinentary  SpiriUa,  some  of  which  were  ultimately  seen  to 

gnt  rise  to  Fungns-my cclia. 
•, :  roralo-like  Battma  develo[ung  into  Fongns-myceUa. 

s^mentation  tends  to  occur,  and  upon  the  degree  of 
cwnpietencss  of  the  process*.   Where  the  segmentation 

'  ^leaking  of  these  Tarious  forms,  M.  Ch.  Robin  says : — '  Les  obser- 
•almi  modemes  les  plus  experiment's  n'ont  pas  encore  pu  trouver  des 
candiics  spicifiqnes  et  dislinctifs  rjcis,  pennetlant  de  sipajet  o  plu- 
aesn  esptoes  les  coips  organMs  trbs-repondues  design^s  id,  bien  que 
da  TMt  lh&>riqiia  on  des  observations  trop  restreintes  aient  fait  croire 
IcBcmtniie.'   ('TraiU  du  MJcroscope,' 1S71,  p.  9)9.) 


140  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

is  incomplete  the  dissepimented  parts  have  a  tcndenqr 
to  grow  in  unison,  so  that  an  actual  increase  in  size 
of  the  several  parts  and  of  the  whole  organism  takes 
place.  But  where  the  segmentation  is  complete  and 
rapid,  no  increase  in  bulk  of  the  respective  units  is 
able  to  occur. 

As  growth  progresses  it  is  almost  invariably  found, 
on  examination  with  high  microscopic  powers,  that  the 
Bacteria^  which  at  first  appear  to  have  a  homogeneous 
consistence,  gradually  acquire  a  hollow  character.  They 
seem  to  undergo  the  first  differentiation,  which  results 
in  the  separation  of  an  outer  and  more  consistent  layer 
from  an  internal  and  more  fluid  contents.  The  same 
kind  of  thing  is  visible  in  Vlbriones  and  Leftethrsx  fila- 
ments— though  in  them,  and  also  in  Fungus-mycelium 
of  diflPerent  kinds,  the  extent  to  which  this  differentiation 
is  perceptible  is  very  various.  Some  specimens  of  each 
of  these  filaments  seem  more  or  less  semi-solid  through- 
out, and  present  no  distinct  bounding  wall — whilst  in 
others  the  bounding  wall  is  most  apparent,  and  no 
solid  contents  are  recognizable.  The  size  of  the  seg- 
ments, or  the  frequency  with  which  dissepiments  occur, 
is  as  variable  in  ViMones  and  Leftothrix  as  in  mycelial 
filaments. 

We  see  in  some  V/Mones  and  LeftotMx  filaments 
that  the  segments  are  short  and  deeply  divided,  so  as 
to  produce  necklace-like  chains,  each  unit  of  which 
more  closely  resembles  the  7V»/«-corpuscle  than  a 
Bactersum. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


141 


The  forms  of  Torula^  however,  are  almost  infinite  in 

variety  as  they  occur  in  diflPerent  situations,  and  they 

are  often  notably  different  even  in  the  same  solution. 

They  may  vary  in  size  from  the  minutest  visible  speck 

to  a  vesicle  Y^nnr'  ^^  more  in  diameter.   They  may  after 


Fig.  47. 

Diflfcrent  Fonns  of  Tonda,    (Turpin ». ) 

«.  Forms  from  beer,  growing  in  sugar  and  water  {J'orula  cerevistce). 
*.  Forms  from  beer-wort — early  stages  of  Myeoderma  cerevisea, 
('  Forms  from  filtered  apple- juice. 

a  time  become  spherical,  ovoidal,  ellipsoidal,  or  cylin- 
drical in  form.    They  may  be  motionless  or  mobile 2, 

'  Selected  fr-om  Plates  3,  4,  and  5  of  his  Paper  in  '  M^m.  de  I'Acad. 
Jf^y.  dc  France,'  1846. 

*  TcnUa  corpuscles  may  often  be  observed  to  exhibit  pretty  brisk 
oscillations  when  they  are  small,  though  the  movements  generally  cease 
after  the  corpuscles  have  attained  a  certain  size.  These  movements  are 
obrioasly  not  *  Brownian '  in  character. 


i 


141 


THE  BBGINmNGS  OF  UFB. 


colourless  or  coloured'.  They  may  be  almost  naked 
masses  of  protoplasm,  or  they  may  present  a  bounding 
membrane  of  various  degrees  of  thickness.  TTiey  may 
be  nucleolated  or  non-nucleolated ;  provided  with  vacu- 
oles or  devoid  of  vacuoles;  so  that  oftentimes  they 
exist  as  mere  minute  spherical  or  elongated  vesicles. 


Fia.  4S. 
Fonns  illastnling  inlercluuigeibility  of  Tomlix  and  Bacitria.  ( x 


670.) 


a.  Minute  Tonda  growiog  in  jelly  after  the  fashion  of 

hay  infusion. 

b.  Bacitria  with  Torvla-'SIa  foims,  fiom  beef  infusion. 

c.  Homogeneous  Bacitria,  more  or  less  l{ke  Tonila  in  form. 

d.  Fuagus-spotes  developing' in  a  homogeneous  film — many  of  them  in 

tlieir  early  stages  having  the  shape  of  BacUria— (torn  the  surface  of 
an  old  hay  infuiion. 

composed   of  a  minutely-granular  protoplasm   slightly 
condensed  at  the  surface.    In  this  condition  no  dif- 


'  Either  brown  or  green.  Alt  IransitionG  may  be  seen  from  the 
colourless  condition  to  the  brown  tint  which  is  so  frequently  assumed  by 
fiuigns-spores  (p.  333).  and  similarly  all  transitions  maybe  seen  from  the 
colourless  to  the  green  tint  (vol.  i.  pp.  364,  450).  The  new-bom  speckt 
of  matter  which  became  green  tend,  however,  to  develop  into  Alga 
rather  than  Fungi. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  143 

ficTcnce  can  be  detected  between  them  and  some  forms 
of  Bscteruiy  so  that  many  units  are  to  be  met  with  in 
various  infusions  to   which    either    name    might    be 
applied  with  equal  justice.     Tarula-forms  appear  and 
multiply,  moreover,  in  the  midst  of  homogeneous  gela- 
tinous films  or  in  the  midst  of  jelly  masses,  just  as 
obviously  (if  not  quite  so  frequently)  as  Bacteria-foxmSy 
irtich,  when  they  grow  in  the  latter  manner,  often 
constitute  masses  known  by  the  name  of  ZoogUa, 

It  is  impossible  for  us  to  assign  any  ultimate  reason 
why  one  rather  than  the  other  of  these  forms  should 
manifest  itsel£  We  can  only  observe  that  in  some 
solutions  Bacteria  most  frequently  present  themselves, 
whilst  in  others  TaruU  are  most  prone  to  occur.  It 
has  been  known,  for  instance,  since  the  time  of 
Dutrochet  that  the  organic  forms  met  with  in  acid 
^  alkaline  or  neutral  solutions  vary ;  and  it  has  been 
frequently  observed  by  others,  that  ToruU  are  most  apt 
to  present  themselves  in  slightly  acid  solutions.  Again, 
whilst  the  most  putrescible  solutions  almost  invariably 
Tick!  Bacteria^  the  same  fluids,  after  their  fermentability 
^  been  impaired  by  the  influence  of  heat,  may  en- 
gender  nothing   but    ToruU^.      ToruU  are    generally 

*  U.  Ponchet  frequenUy  insisted  upon  Uie  fact  that  exposure  of  the 
*■«  fluid  to  higher  atmospheric  temperatures  (by  increasing  the  fer- 
■MWflity  of  the  fluid)  rendered  it  most  prone  to  yield  Bacteria^ 
*lliM)ogfa  at  lower  temperatures  it  would  yield  Tortda  and  Fungi 
{'NouT.  Erp^r/  p.  179).  And,  simUarly,  when  Tondtt  are  in  the  habit 
of  vegetatiiig  into  Fungi  at  tower  temperatures,  *  si  la  temperature  est 


144  ^^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

more  frequent  in  saline  solutions  than  Bacteria^  and 
in  some  of  these  after  they  have  been  boiled  no  Bacteria 
ever  present  themselves.     This,  for  instance,  has  been 
found  to  be  the  case  with  ammonic  tartrate  and  sodlc 
phosphate   solutions;   although  when   the  former  salt 
has  been  replaced  by  ammonic  carbonate,  such  a  so- 
lution has  yielded  Bacteria  after  it  has  been  boiled*. 
Because  in  some  solutions  Bacteria  reproduce  Bacteria^ 
and  in  other  solutions  Tarulie  reproduce  Torula — because 
each  of  these  forms  '  breeds  true ' — they  have  been  re- 
garded by  many  as  distinct  'species/  This,  however,  is 
not  altogether  conclusive.     A  fragment  which  detaches 
itself  from  one  of  the  lowest  living  things   has  just 
as  much  tendency  to  grow  into  the  form  of  its  parent, 
as  the  fragment  detached  from  a  given  crystal  has  to 
reproduce  a  similar  crystalline  form.     In  each  case, 
however,  the  parent  form  is  reproduced  only  so  long 
as   the    conditions    remain  the  same.     Placed   under 
new  conditions  the  crystalline  fragment  may  grow  up 
with  a  modified  form,  and,  similarly,  a  change  may 
overtake  a  portion  of  matter  thrown  oiF  from  a  pre- 
existing living  form.     In  order  that  the  crystal  may 
lapse  into  another  form,  it  seems  necessary  that  the 
new  conditions  shall  be  capable  of  bringing  about  a 
new  molecular  arrangement  (or  allotropic  state)  of  the 

trop  ^levto,  la  germination  se  £ait  d'une  manibre  confuse  ou  ne  se  pro- 
duit  pas ;   les  spores  spontan^  s'alt^rent  avant  qu'elle  ait  lieu,  et  le 
liquide  se  remplit  de  Bacteriums,  de  Monades,  ou  de  Vibrions.'    (Loc 
cit,  p.  175,  note  i.) 
^  Compare  Expi»  n  and  x  with  ET^i,  y  and  z  (vol.  i.  p.  462). 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  145 

aystalline  matter.  And,  similarly,  new  conditions  pro- 
bably operate  upon  living  forms,  only  so  long  as  they 
are  capable  of  inducing  new  molecular  combinations 
and  modes  of  activity.  It  is  therefore  to  be  expected 
that  new-bom  organic  forms  should  remain  constant  so 
tong  as  we  have  to  do  with  the  same  fluids  under  un- 
altered conditions. 

Since  it  is  well  known  that  Bacteria  and  ToruU  may 
frequently  be  seen  to  grow  in  the  same  solution,  we 
are  compelled  to  believe  that  some  minute  diflFerence 
in  the  constitution  of  their  ultimate  units  does  exist, 
and  that  each  has  the  power  of  causing,  during  its  acts 
of  growth,  the  synthesis  of  similar  units  of  living  matter. 
The  occurrence  of  one  or  of  the  other  form  is,  there- 
fore, not  always  nor  wholly  attributable  to  mere  differ- 
ence of  'conditions* — it  must  be  mostly  due  to  an 
actual,  though  minute,  diflFerence  in  the  molecular  con- 
stitution of  the  initial  units  of  living  matter.     For 
although  the  same  crystalline  matter  under  the  influ- 
ence of  diflferent  conditions  may  assume  different  crys- 
talUnc  forms,  it  is  much  more  common  for  diflferent 
crystallizable   compounds  to  aggregate   into  diflFerent 
geometrical  forms. 

It  must,  moreover,  be  quite  familiar  to  all  who 
have  had  much  experience  in  this  particular  line  of 
research,  that  ToruU  frequently  exist  in  abundance  in 
certain  solutions,  and  yet  show  no  signs  of  developing 
into  Fungi.  Discontinuous  growth  goes  on  rather  than 
continuous  growth.  So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  it 
vou  II.  L 


146  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

was  not  until  1840  that  the  development  of  Terulit 
into  Fungi  was  traced'.  The  multiplication  of  BacreriMf 
however,  even  more  frequently  takes  place  without 
much  tendency  to  the  evolution  of  higher  forms;  and 
when  this  does  occur  it  is  not  quite  so  easily  recc^- 
nizable  as  the  development  of  Torul^.  And  yet  in 
those  cases  where  the  conditions  are,  as  we  must  sup- 
pose, favourable  to  such  continuous  modes  of  growth, 
certain  Bacteria  may  enlai^e  into  VHfio-fortaSy  these 
into  LeptothriXy  and  the  latter  into  larger  and  more 
definite  fungus-mycelia,  just  as  surely  and  just  as 
readily  as  the  Tcm/a  corpuscle  buds  out  into  a  growing 
fungus-mycelium '. 

The  stages   by  which  a  Tenia  corpuscle   develops 

'  It  was  believed  by  Kutiing  to  be  one  of  the  unicellular  AlgK,  and 
the  same  vitw  was  afferwnrds  adopted  hy  Robin,  in  spite  of  the  state- 
ments of  Turpin.  The  dei'elopment  of  Torula  Bt  once  info  (ungus- 
mycelia,  producing  the  molber  of  vinegar  {Mycodtrrna  aetia),  contrasts 
notably  with  the  discoatinuous  mode  of  growth  and  perpetuation  of 
the  Torula  form,  which  obtains  in  some  forms  of  the  vinous  fennen- 

'  I  have  found  the  former  development  take  place  very  readily  in 
certain  infusions  to  which  a  minute  fragment  of  cheese  hid  been  added, 
and  also  in  some  solutions  of  ammonic  tartrate  and  sodic  phosphate. 
(See  Appendix  D.  Exps.  xvii,  xix,  and  lii).  In  other  cases  Fibrio-forms 
may  assume  (he  Spirillum  mode  of  growth,  rather  than  that  of  Ltptollrra, 
before  giving  origin  lo  a  fungus-mycelium — as  I  have  seen  in  an  infusion 
containing  younj;  twigs  of  the  common  elder.  (Fig.  47  rf.)  Between 
LtplolhriK  again  and  some  of  the  colourless  Oxillaioria  there  seeros  to  be 
no  real  ascertainable  di!<tinction.  Moreover,  all  shades  of  increasing 
greenness  exist  amongst  the  representatives  of  this  latter  family,  which  by 
commoti  consent  is  included  amongst  the  Algz;  so  that  they  constitute 
s  between  the  simplest  Fungi  and  Algse. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


into  one  of  the  simpler  fiingi^  with  its  various  kinds  of 
reproductive  units — coaidia  or  spores — is  most  simple. 


Fra.49. 
DerdopmCDl  of  TonJa  found  in  Cider.   (Pouchet.) 


DlBOita  tbe  imgulaj  manni 
oam.  thdi  iiT^ularities 


n  which  Segroentatioa  of  Ihc  Filaments 
size,  and  the  separation  of '  conidia.' 


»od  has  been  well  described  by  M.  Trccul'.  The  means 
he  adopted  to  observe  the  development,  also  tend. to 
sibstantiate  what  I  have  already  said  with  reference  to 
the  cause  of  continuous  as  opposed  to  discontinuous 
growth,  and  the  association  of  the  latter  process  with 
higher  degrees  of  fermentability.     In  order  to  bring 

'  'Conidia'  is  the  name  applied  to  the  simplest  kind  of  spore — to 
(boie  wbidi  an  sepoistcd  from  any  portion  of  the  mycelium  by  a  atopic 
jncest  of  stnngQlAlion  (fission),  as  in  Fig.  49. 


148  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

about  the  development  of  the  Torula  which  multiply 
as  such  in  becr-wort,  M.  Trecul  has  been  in  the  habit 
of  pouring  away  the  supernatant  beer  from  some  of  the 
dregs,  and  replacing  it  with  water.  A  portion  of  this 
mixture  placed  on  a  slip  and  protected  by  a  covering 
glass,  may  then  be  kept  in  a  damp  chamber  and 
watched  from  time  to  time  under  the  microscope. 

Some  of  the  corpuscles  develop  lai^e  vacuoles  in 
their  interior,  whilst  in  others  in  which  the  plasma  is 
thin,  refractive  globules  of  various  sizes  are  produced 
within  the  cell'.  These  globules  on  the  rupture  of  the 
parent  cell  are  capable  of  enlarging  and  giving  rise  to 
new  Torula  corpuscles, 

The  corpuscles  always  vary  much  in  shape — some 
are  spherical  and  others  ellipsoidal,  whilst  others  again 
are  more  or  less  cylindrical.  In  their  growth  the  two 
former  Icinds  often  tend  to  pass  into  the  cylindrical 
variety,  and  then  they  segment  occasionally  after  the 
fashion  of  Bacteria^,  Other  spherical  or  ovoidal  cells 
may  protrude  a  process  from  one  extremity  which  is 
much  narrower  than  the  cell  itself;  and  this,  as  it  grows 
into  a  short  filament,  may  give  off  still  smaller  lateral 
filaments.  When  the  germinating  cells  are  only  a  little 
longer  than  they  are  broad,  a  iilament  often  grows 
out  from  one  side  (near  the  extremity),  whilst  another 

'  The  number  oT  these  globules  varies  -nrj  much.  AMiere  the  plasnu 
1*  Tcry  thin  they  are  scarce,  but  in  better  nourished  cells  they  mfty  be 
quite  t^tly  packed. 

•s^rii.,j. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  149 

may  issue  near  the  opposite  extremity,  either  from  the 
same  or  ftom  the  other  side.  Then  one  or  other  of 
various  modes  of  development  may  occur : — 

«.  The  filament  may  expand  into  a  long  or  short 
single  cell,  and  then  may  segment  into  conidia,  which, 
after  a  little  delay,  themselves  undergo  a  process  of 
germination. 

k  Or  the  filament  may  continue  to  grow,  forming 
dissepiments,  or  undergoing  a  partial  process  of  division 
at  intervals.  The  terminal  division  of  such  a  filament 
may  then  divide  (as  in  the  last  case)  into  globular  or 
ellipsoidal  conidia.  Many  of  the  filaments  may  in 
addition  send  out  lateral  prolongations,  and  some  of 
the  shorter  of  them  may  also  break  up  into  conidia. 

f.  The  changes  already  mentioned  are  to  be  seen  in 
those  corpuscles  which  germinate  beneath  the  covering 
glass,  but  where  the  process  occurs  outside  the  edge  of 
the  glass,  the  resulting  growth  is  much  more  luxuriant. 
The  la^er  filaments  develop  branches  of  the  second, 
third,  and  fi3urth  order — all  being  made  up  of  oblong 
cells  produced  by  partial  segmentation.  And  any  of  the 
tcmiinal  ramifications  may  break  up  in  various  ways 
into  reproductive  units  or  conidia.  Before  this  process 
occurs,  M.  Trecul  says :  '  The  extremities  of  the  fila- 
ments ordinarily  assume  an  indistinct  but  bright  and 
%hly  refractive  aspect,  similar  to  what  the  conidia 
themselves  preserve  after  the  process  of  segmentation.' 
Where  the  filaments  remain  in  the  recumbent  position, 
they  may  develop  either  one  or  two  series  of  conidia  ^ 


15©  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

whilstthose  which  grow  upwards  often  give  rise  to  several 
chaplct-hke  series  of  these  reproductive  corpuscles'. 

Thus  by  the  mere  repetition  of  similar  phenomena — 
in  which  a  process  of  partial  segmentation  is  lai^iy 
concerned — a  comparatively  complex  fungus-growth 
(Pm/nV/wm)  results^  differing  only  in  minor  respects 
from  those  which  have  been  found  in  some  of  my 
solutions  taken  from  closed  and  superheated  fiasks. 

The  particular  forms  assumed  by  the  outgrowths 
from  the  germinating  corpuscles,  seem  subject  to  much 
natural  variation  for  which  we  are  utterly  unable  to  ■ 
account.  M.  Trecul  found  that  on  exposure  to  the 
air  the  cells  of  beer  yeast  grew  partly  into  the  form-  of 
Mytodtrma  ctrevh!^,  and  partly  into  that  of  a  lai^ 
Penicillium.  He  has  become  convinced,  therefore,  that 
the  view  originally  advocated  by  Turpin  is  correct,  viz. 
that  Mytodtrma  and  Penkillium  are  simply  two  forms 
which  may  be  assumed  by  germinating  beer  TontUK 
Nay,  more,  the  Myaderma  itself  is  observed  to  be  most 
changeable  in  its  form,  as  the  qualities  of  the  fluid  in 
which  it  grows  alter ;  and  an  already  growing  MycedemiM 
is  said  to  be  capable  of  taking  on  the  mode  of  growth 
characteristic  oi  FenhiHiitm^. 

'  See  Fig.  jj.  This  mode  of  dex'clopment  into  Corros  resembling 
Ftmcittnm  glaucum.  was  observed  by  Turpb  in  1840,  by  the  Rev.  M.  J. 
Berkeley  in  185s  (from  porter  yeast),  and  subsequently,  by  M.  Poudiet, 
in  beer  yeast  and  in  that  from  cider. 

•  See  also  'Compt.  Rend.'  t.  67.  p.  116^ 

*  On  the  other  hand  the  relationship  existing  between  Myndtrtna  and 
Tonila  is  most  distinct.    When  beer-wort  is  exposed  to  the  open  (jr 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  15  X 

M.  Pouchet's  observations  on  the  development  of  the 

IVm/iT  which  appear  in  cider  had  previously  led  him 

to  express  almost  similar  opinions  with  regard  to  the 

convertibility  of  the  several  forms  of  the  Mucedtnea^ 

wfaidi  are   apt  to  appear   in   such   a   solution.     He 

says: — ^Le    cidre    que    nous    avons    si   longuement 

ctudie,  nous  offre  un  assez  grand  nombre  de  formes 

Tegetales.     Mais  presque  toutes  les  especes  appartien- 

ncnt  au  genre  FenicilUumi  d'autres,  en  moindre  nom- 

bres  aux  Aspergillus.^    There  are  two  principal  forms  of 

Pc«ia//rmv--the  submerged  and  the  aerial — the  former 

constituting  a  group  which  M.  Pouchet  was  the  first  to 

describe.  Several  varieties  exist,  both  of  the  submerged 

and  of  the  aerial  forms ;  and  when  the  temperature  is 

SBd  tt  not  distnrbed,  Myeoderma  begins  to  develop  in  about  forty-eight 
Itons— though  curiously  enough  its  appearance  may  be  delayed  for  a 
fcrtni^  or  more  by  agitating  the  liquid  two  or  three  times  daily.  It 
coDmcnces  in  the  form  of  the  minutest  specks,  which  gradually  enlarge 
into  dlipsoid  corpuscles ;  these  give  birth  after  a  time  to  a  little  bud  at 
Qoe  extremity,  and  this  grows  into  a  corpuscle  which  in  its  turn  produces 
■Bother.  Lateral  buds  are  also  produced,  and  after  a  time  this  mode  of 
growth  results  in  el^ant,  much-branched  tufts,  '  qui  se  modifient  dans 
^fonne  \  mesure  que  Talteration  du  liquide  avance.*  But  when  beer- 
vort  cootaining  the  Myeoderma  is  poured  into  a  bottle  (so  as  to  fill  it) 
•l>ich  is  then  tightly  stoppered,  the  plant  ceases  to  grow  in  this  form  and 
pTK  place  to  an  abundance  of  TorulcB — these  being  partly  derived  from 
POTtions  of  the  pre-existing  Myeoderma  and  partly  the  results  of  a  new 
fennation.  The  Torula  form,  and  •  discontinuous '  mode  of  growth,  is  that 
^iuch  seems  to  be  invariably  engendered  when  the  liquid  becomes  more 
« less  charged  with  CO,  and  alcohol,  and  when  the  pressure  increases 
(see  ToL  i.  p.  420).  Boiled  beer-wort  in  a  sealed  vessel  also  produces 
TtnU  where  there  has  been  no  pre-existing  Myeoderma ;  and,  accord- 
i^  to  M.  Tr^cul,  the  ToruUt,  thus  engendered,  after  exposure  to  the 
lir  will  also  gradually  assume  the  form  of  Myeoderma, 


Iga  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

low,  and  the  cider  weak,  a  growth  belonging  to  soother 
generic  type  is  very  apt  to  occur,  which  M.  Pouchet 
named  Asperpllut  folymorfhitt,  on  account  of  the  extreme 


Another  Fungus  {A.  polymorpbui)  found  in  Cider.     (Pouchet.) 

Showing  other  modes  by  which  Ihe  terminations  of  the  filaments  gire 

rise  to  spores  or  '  conidia.' 

diversity   in   the   form  of   its    terminal    reproductive 
aggregations  •. 

'  M.  Pouchet  says;— 'UnfaitexlrBroemenlremarquflblecheirjli/KrjiHiit 
du  ddre  c'est  que  les  spores  sponlan^es  d'ou  sortcnt  Ics  planles,  at 
ressemblenl  nullement  l  celles  qui  naisseni  snr  les  conceplacles.  Les 
spores  spontantes  sont  beaucoup  plus  voluinineuses,  el  tombenl  au  food 
de  la  liqueur ;  tandis  que  les  spores  des  coneeplacles,  consid^rablement 
plus  petiles,  plus  U^iires,  vicnnent  flotter  k  sa  surface.  Enfin  on  surprend 
en  germination  autant  de  spores  spoatanAes  qu'on  le  veul.  tandis  que 
jamais  je  n'ai  vu  genner  une  spore  pnivenmnl  de  la  plante.'  ('  Noavelln 
Experiences,'  p.  iSa.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  153 

We  have  thus  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  Bacte- 
and  the  Torula  corpuscle  are  only  diflFerent  modes 
of  growth  which  may  be  assumed  by  new-born  specks 
of  living  matter,  and  that  the  varieties  of  each  kind 
of  growth  are  both  numerous  and  transitional.     Each 
of  these  forms,  under  suitable  conditions,  may  grow  in 
a  continuous  rather  than  in  a  discontinuous  fashion ', 
producing  variously  branched  and  articulated  growths, 
whidi  at  intervals  are  apt  again  to  revert  to  the  dis- 
continuous mode  of  growth,  so  as  to  produce  repro- 
ductive units — either  in   single  file,  as   buds  from  a 
terminal  expansion^  or  by  fission  of  the  contents  of 
a  terminal  chamber.     These,  and  many  other  simple 
rariations  in  the   mode  of  production  of  the  repro- 
ductive units,  variously  combined  with  diflFerent  sizes, 
modes  of  branching,  articulation  and  segmentation  of 
the  filaments,   etc.,  go  to   produce  the   innumerable 
simpler  kinds  of  Fungi  which,  instead  of  being  lineal 
descendants  of  similar  mutable  organisms  that  lived 
in  a  pre-Adamite  world,  are  only  diflFerent  modes  of 
growth  which   may  be   assumed   by  new -bom  living 
matter*.    This  notion  was  to  a  certain  extent  fiavoured 
by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley  when,  after  alluding  to  some 
of  the  many  startling  metamorphoses  which  are  to  be 
observed  amongst  these  most  changeable  organic  fr)rms, 
he  says': — ^It  would  thus  seem  that  the  opinions  of 

*  For  the  reasons  already  stated  this  process  is  most  easily  watched 
during  the  development  of  Torula, 

«  Conceming  the  mutability  of  Fungi,  see  Appendix  D,  p.  Ixxvi. 
>  In  lindley's  *  Vegeuble  Kingdom/  3rd  ed.  1853,  p.  35. 


154  THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

those,  who  have  asserted  that  the  species  or  genus  of 
a  Fun^  depends  upon  the  matrix  by  which  it  is 
nourished,  arc  at  least  specious;  especially  if  we 
take  the  above  fact  in  connection  with  the  experi- 
ments of  Dutrochet,  who  obtained  difiFcrent  genera 
of  mouldiness  at  will,  by  employing  different  in- 
fiisions.* 

Representatives  of  various  kinds  of  simpler  Fungi  are 
produced  from  different  Torula  with  the  greatest  ease. 
Throughout  all  the  stages  of  their  development  there 
is  merely  a  modified  repetition  of  the  simple  processes 
which  are  ever  taking  place  amongst  'Bacteria  and  Torula 
during  their  more  familiar  'discontinuous'  growth. 
Experiment  and  observation  alike  compel  us  to  believe 
that  the  new-born  specks  of  living  matter  unfold  into 
these  various  organic  forms,  under  the  combined  influ- 
ence of  intrinsic  tendencies  and  extrinsic  agencies — 
just  as  the  forms  of  the  various  kinds  of  crystalline 
matter  are  due  to  the  particular  atomic  or  molecular 
combinations  of  which  they  are  composed,  subject  to 
the  influence  of  the  conditions  amidst  which  aggregation 
takes  place '. 

'  As  we  have  already  pointed  ont,  organic  matter  is  mudi  more 
ca^ty  destructible  than  saline  matter  by  exposure  to  very  high  lempem- 
tures;  ft  is  worthy  of  observalion,  therefore,  thai  the  saline  solutions 
used  in  my  eiperimenta  (270'' — 307°F)  have  proved  much  more  produc- 
tive than  the  simple  otEanic  infusions.  The  latter,  moreover,  have 
proved  less  and  less  productive  with  each  fresh  increment  of  beat. 
Omitting  Sup.  k,  in  which  no  carbon  was  present,  the  remaining 
twenty-four  experiments  may  be  thus  tabulated:— 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  155 

Our  experiments,  however,  aflFord  positive  evidence 
that  new-born  specks  of  living  matter  may  assume 
other  forms  than  those  akeady  referred  to.  In  £)&- 
periment  ^,  the  simplest  forms  of  Amcelne  were  found, 
and  also  flagellated  Monads  in  company  with  various 
kinds  of  Torula  corpuscles.  These,  then,  are  also  or- 
ganic forms  which  are  capable  of  resulting  from  the 
direct  unfolding  of  some  specks  of  new-bom  living 
matter.  The  acceptance  of  such  a  view  is  rendered 
much  more  easy  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been,  by 
the  following  considerations : — 

When  enumerating  the  modes  of  variation  obser- 
vable amongst  Tcrula^  we  might  almost  have  added 
that  some  were  flagellated  and  active,  whilst  others 
were  non-flagellated  and  inactive.  And,  however  fun- 
damental such  distinctions  may  seem  to  be,  their 
importance  must  be  diminished  in  the  minds  of  those 
who  know  that  two  forms  of  Fungi,  in  other  respects 
almost  indistinguishable  from  one  another,  may  have 
reproductive   units   which  are   dissimilar   in   this   re- 


Tcmp.  170^-2750  F  r  4  Organic  Infusions  {  \  ^^^p^^^'d'^^ive. 

for  10  minutes      \  ^  galine  Solutions     {  \  ^^^^ttfuL'' 

Temp.  .93'  F  for  5- f  ^  Organic  Infusions  {  \  ^^^^^,, 

20  minutes         |  ^  g^j.^^^  Solutions     j  5  Productive. 

e      n^      •    T  r    •         f  I  Productive. 

Temp.  igs'-SOT^Fj  4  Organic  Infusions  |  3  unproductive. 

^M  hours         I  6  Saline  Solutions     ^  '  Productive 


3  Unproductive. 


16*  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

spect.  As  previously  mentioned ',  L-eptamitut  pro- 
duces motionless  reproductive  corpuscles,  whilst  the 
protoplasm  in  the  almost  similar  terminal  chambers 
of  Achlya  produce  active  spores  ('zoospores'),  which 
after  a  time  become  stationary  and  develop  filaments 
similar  to  those  from  which  they  have  been  derived. 
The  reproductive  units  of  other  Fungi  [Mytttos^ 
appear  as  Amccbse,  which  after  a  time  themselves  take 
on  the  characters  and  mode  of  growth  characteristic  of 
a  fiingus.  And  finally,  each  of  these  forms  (Amoeba  and 
Monad)  which  is  thus  related  to  the  common  form 
(Fungus),  has  been  proved  by  many  observers  to  be 
easily  interchangeable  with  the  other.  Encysted  Amocbx 
as  we  have  learned  from  Haeckel,  and  others,  give 
birth  to  flagellated  Monads  or  'zoospores,'  and  these  in 
their  turn  lapse  easily  into  the  more  slowly-moving 
reptant  Ama:bx.  Similar  transitions,  moreover,  from 
the  active  flagellated  Monad,  to  the  slowly- moving 
vacuolated  Amceba,  I  have  seen  dozens  of  times,  whilst 
watching  these  forms  under  high  microscopic  powers,  in 
various  infusions.  I  have  also  seen  numbers  of  simple, 
motionless  corpuscles,  resembling  some  forms  of  Torula^ 
gradually  begin  to  take  on  amceboid  characters  and 
movements  ^. 

Facts  of  this   kind,  even   independently  of   those 
which  will  be  subsequently  adduced  ^,  tend  to  reveal 

■  See  vol.  i.  p.  iBi,  note  i. 
'  See  Fig.  55. 
•  In  Chap.  xvii. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  157 


such  an  amount  of  community  in  nature  between 
Amocbx,  Monads,  and  the  matter  of  a  Fungus,  as  to 
make  it  much  easier  for  us  to  believe  what  the  experi- 
ments indicate,  viz.  that  Torula  corpuscles,  the  simplest 
Aimth£^  and  tailed  Monads^  may  all  originate  by  a  pro- 
cess of  Archebiosis,  and  that  a  certain  interchange. 
aKlity  exists  between  them— so  that  a  corpuscle  of  a 
certain  size  may  slowly  expand  into  one  or  other  of 
these  organic  forms,  according  as  its  internal  mole- 
cular movements  gradually  assume  diflFerent  modes  of 
action. 

But  we  still  have  to  allude  to  other  primordial  forms 
which  have  been  met  with  in  our  experimental  flasks, — 
I  allude  to  the  green-coloured  Pediastreae,  and  bodies 
'esembling  the  simplest  Desmids,  which  have  been 
fiwnd  in  the  solutions  containing  iron  and  ammonic 
citrate.  In  many  respects  their  presence  is  a  matter 
^  the  highest  interest.  In  about  200  experiments 
with  heated  fluids  in  closed  vessels,  I  have  never 
found  even  a  fragment  of  green  protoplasm  except 
on  five  occasions.  Each  time  actual  organisms  were 
fowid  more  or  less  similar  to  one  another,  and  in  each 
case  a  salt  of  iron  existed  as  one  of  the  constituents  of 
the  solution  ^.  As  iron  is  one  of  the  constituents  of 
cW(»ophyll,  this  correspondence  is  as  much  in  accord- 
2nce  with  the  de  mfvo  origin  of  such  organisms,  as  it  is 

*  See  vol.  L  pp.  364,  365,  and  pp.  448-454. 


158  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  views  of  those  who  do 
not  accept  this  legitimate  interpretation. 

Some  of  the  bodies  found  were  partly  like  unicellular 
Algx,  and  partly  like  ordinary  TaruU.  They  exhibited 
only  the  faintest  green  tint,  and  yet  the  general  cha* 
racter  of  the  corpuscles  was  less  like  ToruU  than  that 
of  some  forms  of  Frotococcus.  Associated  with  them 
also  was  a  filament  of  an  algoid  character.  We  have 
already  pointed  out  the  very  gradual  nature  of  the 
transitions  which  exist  between  Fungi  and  Algae,  by 
means  of  the  various  forms  of  Leptotkrix  and  Oscilla-- 
toria  filaments,  to  say  nothing  of  other  intermediate 
forms,  such  as  Achlya^  Saprolegnsa^  and  similar  types. 
The  transitions  between  the  Mucedsnea  and  Leptothrix 
are  as  gradual  and  unbroken,  as  those  which  exist 
between  Leptothrtx  and  the  colourless  Oscillataria. 
The  latter  develop  a  green  colour  in  an  equally 
gradual  manner,  and  insensibly  take  on  characters 
which  affiliate  them  to  the  other  filamentous  Algae. 
And  now  our  experiments  tend  to  show,  definitely, 
that  there  is  no  radical  diflerence  between  Fungi 
and  Algae,  but  that  the  evolution  of  the  one  or  the 
other  is  regulated  in  part  by  the  mere  presence  or 
absence  of  certain  constituents.  Where  no  iron  is 
present  new-born  specks  of  living  matter  may  develop 
into  Bacteria  or  ToruU  and  gradually  unfold  into  fungus- 
forms;  but  if  iron  be  present  such  new-born  specks 
may  incorporate  this  element,  develop  green  proto- 
plasm, and  assume  the  form  of  Frotococcus^  with  ten- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  159 


dencies  which  may  enable  it  ultimately  to  unfold  into 
one  or  other  of  the  filamentous  Algse '. 

On  the  other  hand  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that 
however  close  the  alliance  may  be  between  Fungi  and 
Algae,  the  relationship  is  perhaps  even  closer  between 
Fungi  and  Lichens*.  This  is  the  opinion  of  the  Rev. 
M,  J.  Berkeley,  who  has  included  both  under  the  com- 
mon designation  ^Mycetales;*  and  Professor  Lindley 
also  said  that  Fungi  and  Lichens  are  '  so  closely  allied 
that  it  is  often  difficult  to  tell  to  which  division  some 
given  species  may  belong/  Dr.  Lauder  Lindsay,  more- 
over, states  3  that  '  there  is  a  large  group,  provision- 
ally termed  "  Fungo-Lichens,**  which  have  the  cha- 
racters equally  of  Fungi  and  Lichens,  and  which  it  is 
at  present  impossible  to  assign  preferentially  or  exclu- 
sively to  either  femily.'  Some  of  the  septate  and 
compound  spores  which  I  have  found  in  ammonic 
tartrate  and  sodic  phosphate  solutions  are  almost 
precisely  similar  to  some  spores  of  West  Greenland 
Lichens  which  are  depicted  in  Dr.  Lindsay's  very 
interesting  memoir '*.  But  the  relationship  between 
Algae  and  Lichens  is  just  as  close.  According  to  Fries, 
indeed,  Lichens  are  types  of  Algals  born  in  the  air, 


'  The  intcrchangeability  of  the  two  modes  of  growth  will  be  sub- 
stantiated by  further  evidence  in  subsequent  chapters. 

*  See  Appendix  D,  p.  bcxvL 

'  'Trans,  of  linn.  Soc*  vol.  xxvii.  (1871).  p.  308. 

*  Compare  also  his  Fig.  13-16  of  PL  51  with  my  Fig.  d,  of  Apptn" 
dkA, 


l6o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

and  interrupted  in  their  development  by  the  deficiency 
of  water  ^. 

In  Experiment  h  the  bodies  found  were  of  the  bright- 
est green  colour,  and  were  almost  precisely  like  repre- 
sentatives of  the  genus  Scenodesmus^  which  is  usually 
included  amongst  the  Pediastreae.  But  in  other  experi- 
ments the  organisms  seemed  more  closely  to  resemble 
the  simple  Desmids  belonging  to  the  type  known  as 
Arthrodesmus^  and  some  of  these  exhibited  tendencies  to 
grow  in  a  filiform  manner. 

The  conflicting  opinions  of  naturalists  concerning 
the  affinities  and  degree  of  relationship  existing 
between  Algae,  Pediastreae,  and  Desmids,  are  sufficient 
to  show  the  close  alliance  of  these  various  forms. 
Pritchard  says  in  his  *  History  of  Infusoria'  (p.  30) : — 
^  Mr.  Ralfe  followed  Ehrenberg,  Meneghini,  and  others 
in  placing  the  Pediastreac  among  Desmidix;  but 
Corda,  Nageli,  and  Braun  have  separated  the  two  as 
distinct  tribes.  Indeed  Mr.  Ralfs  has  modified  his 
views  since  the  publication  of  his  monograph,  and 
would   treat  the  Pediastreae  as  a  sub-family  of  Des- 


*  Professor  Lindley  writes : — *  Pulverulent  Lichens  are  the  first  plants 
that  clothe  the  bare  rocks  of  newly-formed  islands  in  the  midst  of  the 
ocean,  foliaceous  Lichens  follow  these,  and  then  Mosses  and  Liverworts. 
They  are  foimd  upon  trees,  rocks,  stones,  bricks,  pales,  and  similar 
places ;  and  the  same  species  seem  to  be  found  in  many  different  parts 
of  the  world — thus  the  Lichens  of  North  America  differ  little  from  those 
of  Europe.  They  are  met  with  in  one  place  or  other,  from  the  equator 
to  the  pole,  and  from  the  sea  shore  to  the  limits  of  eternal  snow.' 
(•  Vegetable  Kingdom,*  p.  47.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UI'E,  l6i 

midke.     Nageli  ("Einzell.  Alg.'*)  arranges  them  with 
the  P^dmelbe  as  a  distinct  group,  and  in  this  has  the 
support  of  Braun  ("Gen.  Nova,'*  p.  69)/    In  a  later 
portion  (p.  752)  of  the  work  he  says: — ^So  far  as  we 
can  judge,  it  is  not  yet  determined  whether  they  should 
remain  united  with  the  Palmellace«  to  which  they  have 
been  referred  by  Nageli,  or,  with  some  few  other  Algx, 
form  a  distinct  group  near  Palmellaceae,  and  perhaps 
Volvocinex.    They  cannot,  we  think,  continue  to  be 
considered  as  belonging  to  the  Desmidiacese/     All 
^icse  discrepancies  of  opinion    are    not  difficult  to 
understand  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  absence  of  any 
real  grounds  for  distinguishing  the  several  forms,  and 
at  the  same  time  consider  the  difficulties  of  the  old 
systematic  writers  who,  in  accordance  with  their  theo- 
retical notions,  felt  bound  to  conceive  that  specific, 
g^eric,  and  family  distinctions  existed — even  though 
obscnration  taught  them  that  the  several  forms  were 
related  to  one  another  in  much  the  same  way  as  the 
different  patterns  observable  in  a  kaleidoscope.     Now 
experiment  comes  in  to  demonstrate  the  fundamental 
kinship  which  exists  between  the  several  forms. 

Let  the  reader  compare  the  representations  of  the 
organisms  which  have  been  found  in  the  twenty-four 
experiments  in  which  the  flasks  were  heated  to  tempe- 
ratures ranging  from  290 — 307°F,  and  he  will  then 
perceive  that,  so  far  as  we  have  gone,  the  views  enun- 
ciated in  the  present  chapter  (founded  in  part  upon  the 

VOL.  n.  M 


i6a  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

microscopical  examinatioD,  and  study  of  the  develop- 
ment,  of  some  of  the  primordial  forms  of  life)  are 
substantiated  by  the  most  rigorous  experimeotatioa. 
No  other  conclusion  remains  for  us  but  that  the  several 
oi^anisms  are  products  of  the  direct  derelopnKOtal 
unfolding  of  new-born  specks  of  living  matter.  And 
yet  amongst  these  forms  we  see  Bxttrisj  VHri^meSy 
Leftethrix,  and  Tvultii  Fumgus  filaments  with  and 
without  fructification  J  PratMtmmhs  and  fia^Uated 
ManaJi ;  FeMastre*  and  Algoid  filaments.  All  these 
are  therefore  proved,  with  the  greatest  certainty,  to  be 
interchangeable  forms  which  may  be  assumed  on  different 
occasions  by  newly-evolved  specks  of  living  matter. 

But  if  all  this  may  take  place  within  our  superheated 
experimental  flasks,  what  wider  possibilities  are  opened 
up  concerning  the  evolutional  powers  of  the  unimpaired 
organic  solutions  which  exist  in  all  damp  places  upon 
the  surface  of  our  earth,  and  in  our  ponds,  lakes,  rivers, 
and  ocean  beds !  Here  imagination  alone  can  aid  us, 
and  yet  analc^  stands  with  her  ever-ready  though 
often  deceitful  torch. 

We  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  such  solutions  as 
we  have  employed  in  our  experiments  are  not  pro- 
ductive of  any  much  greater  variety  of  organisms  even 
when  exposed  to  the  air;  whilst  unhealed  infiisions  of 
v^etable  matter  (such  as  portions  of  aquatic  plants 
or  young  twigs  of  land  plants)  readily  teem  with  all 
that  endless  variety  of  organic  forms  wliich  proves  so 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  163 

encfaancing  to  those  who  examine  with  the  microscope 
the  motley  inhabitants  of  ponds  and  stagnant  waters. 

Again,  the  transitions  and  metamorphoses  which 
have  been  observed  and  carefully  recorded  by  innu- 
merable workers  as  occurring  amongst  many  of  these 
forms,  are  similar  in  kind  though  much  easier  to  sub- 
stantiate than  those  which  have  now  been  definitely 
proved  to  exist  between  Bacteria^  Torul^y  Fungs^  Ammb£^ 
Mmuidsy  and  various  kinds  of  Alga. 

The  admirably  complete  investigations  of  Dr.  Brax- 
ton Hicks  \  Itzigshon  and  others,  had  already  taught 
us  how  close  is  the  alliance  which  exists  between  such 
nx)des  of  growth  as  Frotococcus^  and  the  various  fila- 

*  See  Apptndix  D,  pp.  liii  et  seq. 

'  After  speaking  of  some  experiments  in  which  Protoeoecus  or  the 
»oJled  'green  matter '  of  Priestley  made  its  appearance,  Burdach  adds 
(fee  dt,  t  L  p.  25) : — •  Du  marbre  ayant  6t6  ^galement  renferme  dans 
n  fhcoD,  aTec  de  Veau  distills  et  de  I'air  atmosph^rique,  de  Toxyg^ne 
nde  lliydrog^ne.  puis  expos^  k  la  Imni^re  du  soleil  h  la  chaleur  du 
IiUHnarie,  il  ne  se  produisit  pas  de  mati^re  verte,  mais  une  substance 
■BciljgmeQse  avec  de  filaments  blancs,  dont  quelques  uns  ^taient  rami- 
^  Des  moroeaux  de  granite  qui  yenait  d'etre  d^tach^s  du  milieu  d'un 
Uoc,  et  que  j'enfermai  avec  de  Teau  distill^  et  du  gaz  oxygbne  ou  hydro- 
(be,  donnteent  an  soleil  de  la  matihrt  vtrtt,  avec  des  filaments  confer- 
v^oidcs,  et  an  bain-maiie  des  flocons  seulement.'  Retzius  also  observed, 
as  Holler  says,  that  a  '  peculiar  kind  of  Conferva  was  generated  in  a 
solution  of  muriate  of  baryta  in  distilled  water,  which  had  been  kept 
Wa  year  in  a  bottle  closed  with  a  glass  stopper.'  Protoeoecus  has  also 
been  observed  by  many  to  form  upon  the  sides  of  glass  vessels  containing 
dudUed  water  when  they  remain  undisturbed  for  some  time  in  warm 
veato,  and  are  exposed  to  sunlight.  Prof.  Schaffhausen,  indeed,  even 
»y»C  Cosmos,'  i860)  that  he  has  seen  green  Protocoeei  develop  within 
henneticaOy-sealed  vessels  containing  tolerably  pure  boiled  water  when 
the  flasb  have  been  exposed  to  sunlight.    These  various  fiicts  seem 

M  2 


1 64  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

mentary  and  ulva-like  Alg«  which  were,  and  are  s 
regarded  by  various  naturalists  as  so  many  distinct  i 
constant  species.  On  the  other  hand,  they  have  z 
taught  us  that  these  supposed  autonomous  forms 
derivable  either  from  Lichens  or  other  Algse,  that  tl 
are  capable  of  vegetating  for  months  in  one  or  othej 
these  algoid  states,  or  in  several  of  them  successiv< 
whilst  at  last  under  suitable  conditions  such  modes 
growth  may  lapse  again  into  those  characteristic 
Lichens  or  Mosses.  Green  corpuscles  (gonidia)  thro 
oflF  from  a  single  Lichen  have  been  seen  by  Dr.  Hi 
to  assume  the  forms  and  mode  of  growth  characterii 
of  no  less  than  twenty-three  supposed  species  of  Al 
On  the  other  hand,  gonidia  thrown  oflF  from  an  Alga 
from  a  Moss  are  capable  of  going  through  any  sim 
number  of  modes  of  growth,  according  as  the  conditio 
to  which  they  are  subjected  undergo  variations.  Spe 
ing  generally,  heat  and  drought  were  observed  to 
favourable  to  their  development  into  Lichens,  tho< 
in  damp  places  some  grow  and  multiply  prodigiot 
in  the  form  of  Algae,  whilst  others  seem  to  deve 
into  diflFerent  forms  of  Moss.  In  water  the  goni 
may  either   continue    to  grow    after  the    fashion 

to  indicate  that  green  protoplasm  manifests  itself  almost  as  res 
under  certain  circumstances,  as  colourless  protoplasm  does  under  oth 
and  the  same  may  be  said  concerning  the  red  protoplasmic  mi 
(PalmiUa)  which  in  the  form  of  so-called  *  blood  spots  *  have  at  vai 
times  been  known  to  make  their  appearance  upon  all  kinds  of  provisi 
(See  lindley's  '  Veget.  Kingdom/  p.  446 ;  and  Keeker's  *  Epidemic 
Middle  Ages/  pp.  205-207.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  165 


various  Algae,  or,  as  Cohn  ascertained  by  his  obser- 
vations upon  Frotococcus  flwmalis^  they  may  from  time 
to  time   give   birth  to  many  more  actively  moving, 
animalized  forms  belonging  to  the  group  Monadlnla. 
So  that  as  Cohn  remarks,  after  summarizing  the  re- 
sults  of  bis   observations   upon   the    actual  develop- 
mental forms  assumed  by  Vrotococcus^:^^ K  critical  and 
oomparative  consideration  of  the  foregoing  facts  would 
therefore  appear  to  render  untenable   almost   all  the 
principles  which   modern    systematists   have  hitherto 
adopted  as  the  basis  for  construction  of  their  Natural 
Kingdoms,  Families,  Genera,  and  Species/ 

Views  of  the  kind  hitherto  announced,  startling  as 
they  may  appear,  had  previously  found  favour  in  the 
eyes  of  many  philosophic  naturalists.     And  however 
much  such  doctrines  may  have   been  confirmed   and 
placed  upon  a  more  secure  basis  by  recent  researches 
and  observations,  we  may  admire  the  breadth  of  view 
and  scientific   prescience   which    revealed   themselves 
when  the  following  views  were  expressed  by  my  respected 
fiiend  and  colleague.  Professor  Grant,  in  ^  Lectures  on 
Comparative  Anatomy'  published  in  18332.     In  many, 
though  of  course  not  in  all  respects,  they  closely  repre- 
sent our  present  state  of  knowledge  on  the  subjects  to 
which  they  refer.    He  said : — 

'  For  an  enumeration  of  these  surprising  metamorphoses,  see  Ap- 

D,  p.  Ixurii. 
'  In  *  Ijuiodt^  Tol.  iL  p.  looi. 


1 66  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

*  All  foniis  of  matter  appear  to  have  a  tendency  and 
a  capability  to  become  organized,  as  all  oiganic  forms 
tend  to  higher  stages  of  development,  and  chemical 
analysis  shows  the  highest  as  well  as  the  lowest  forms 
of  organic  beings  to  consist  of  a  complicated  aggregate 
of  mineral  gases  and  li<]uids  and  solids.  These  organ- 
ized aggregates  once  fonned  from  their  elements,  all 
possess  alike  the  means  of  transmitting  their  forms 
by  generation,  which  is  effected  by  the  separation  of  a 
portion  of  their  substance,  when  their  own  development 
is  completed.  *  *  * 

'Although  no  animal  can  exactly  produce  its  like, 
the  progeny  are  so  nearly  such  that,  for  all  the  pur- 
poses of  science,  we  regard  their  forms  as  identical 
with  those  of  the  parent,  and  out  of  an  indefinite 
scries  of  such  generations,  and  of  individuals  as  nearly 
resembling  them,  we  frame  our  organic  species,  and 
ascribe  them  to  nature.  *  *  * 

•The  organs  of  nutrition  and  relation  which  we 
have  been  hitherto  considering,  enable  the  individuals 
of  species  for  a  limited  time  to  live,  to  grow,  and  to 
feel ;  but  while  myriads  of  individuals  appear  and  dis- 
appear, like  passing  shadows,  in  rapid  succession,  the 
species,  or  the  typical  forms  of  groups  of  animals,  are 
still  prolonged  on  the  earth.  The  species,  however, 
like  the  individuals  which  compose  them,  have  also 
their  limits  of  duration. 

'The  life  of  animals  exhibits  a  constant  series  of 
changes,  which  occupy  so  short  a  period,  that  we  can 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


167 


generallj  trace  their  entire  order  of  succession,  and 
perceive  the  whole  chain  of  their  metamorphoses.  But 
die  metamorphoses  of  species  proceed  so  slowly  with 
regard  to  us,  that  we  can  neither  perceive  their  origin, 
their  maturity,  nor  their  decay,  and  we  ascribe  to  them 
a  kind  of  perpetuity  on  the  earth/ 


HETEROGENESIS. 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

ANCIENT   AND  HODZRN  VIKWS  CONCERNING   HSTER06ENESIS. 

Orgaxdc  Morphology.  Meaning  of  Heterogenesis.  Views  of  Aristotle 
and  others.  Modified  in  more  Recent  Times.  Doctrines  of 
Necdham  and  Bnffon.  Inconsbtendes  of  the  latter.  Views  of 
O.  F.  Mailer,  Treviranns,  and  Tiedemann.  General  Doctrines  of 
M.  Ponchet 

DhrisioQ  of  the  Subject  Synthetic  and  Analytic  Heterogenesis.  Similar 
differences  amongst  Fermentations.  Origin  of  'vital'  Forces. 
Their  Mode  of  Expenditure.  Analytic  and  Synthetic  changes 
during  Growth.  Influence  of  pre-existing  Protoplasm.  Dependence 
of  life  upon  Decomposition.  Views  of  Liebig,  Freke,  and  Hinton. 
Many  'vital'  Processes  allied  to  Fermentations.  Natural  Ten- 
dencies to  the  Formation  of '  living '  Matter.  Peculiarities  of  Vital 
Processes.  Distinct  though  Related  Activities  in  Molecules,  Cells, 
znd  Organs.  Characteristics  of  Health  and  Disease.  Conditions 
favourable  to  the  Occurrence  of  Analytic  Heterogenesis. 


THE  problems  which  now  demand  our  attention 
are  somewhat  diflFerent  in  nature,  though  they 
are  not  less  replete  with  interest  than  those  which  have 
been  hitherto  considered. 

It  has  been  proved  in  the  only  way  in  which  such 
a  fact  could  be  established,  that  Miving'  matter  is 
fbrniable  from  its  elements,  and  that  the  highly  com- 


172  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

plex  molecules  of  which  it  is  composed  are  the  results 
of  chemical  combinations — brought  about  by  the  same 
physical  agencies  that  suffice  to  engender  other  less 
complex  compounds  from  similar  elements.  And  now 
we  have  to  follow  up  our  studies  concerning  the  nature 
of  the  forms  which  this  new-bom  living  matter  tends 
to  assume,  and  the  modifications  which  the  forms  are 
capable  of  undergoing — we  have,  in  fact,  to  build  up  that 
portion  of  the  subject  which,  if  it  applied  to  crystals 
instead  of  organisms,  would  come  under  the  head  of 
Crystallography.  Having  reference  to  living  things,  the 
inquiry  constitutes  the  empirical  basis  of  Organic  Mor- 
phology. 

As  we  have  already  pointed  out^,  under  the  old 
beliefs  in  ^spontaneous  generation,'  there  either  were 
or  ought  to  have  been  included,  two  entirely  distinct 
processes.  First,  although  less  talked  of  than  the  other, 
there  was  the  process  which  we  have  called  Archebiosis, 
whereby  living  matter  originates  ^spontaneously;*  and 
secondly,  there  were  the  processes  of  Heterogenesis, 
whereby  the  matter  of  already  existing  living  things 
gives  birth  to  other  living  units  wholly  diflFerent  from 
themselves,  and  having  no  tendency  to  assume  or 
revert  to  the  parental  type.  It  is  this  latter  aspect, 
therefore,  of  the  old  doctrines  concerning  ^  spontaneous 
generation '  which  we  have  now  to  consider. 

The  belief  in  the  fundamental  unity  of  Life,  under 
every  variety  of  organic  form,  is  one  of  most  ancient 

^  Vol.  L  pp.  344,  345. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  173 

origin.  The  nature  of  the  living  matter,  whether  animal 
or  v^etal,  was  regarded,  even  by  many  ancient  philo- 
sophers, as  an  accident  dependent  upon  the  influence 
of  particular  sets  of  conditions.    As  we  have  seen^, 
Aristotle  thought  that  plants  might  be  engendered  by 
the  tissues  of  animals,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
certain  lower  kinds  of  animals  might  take  their  origin 
from  and  within  the  substance  of  plants.     Ovid,  there- 
fore, was  but  reproducing  an  actual  belief  of  his  time 
when,  in  his  exposition  of  the  Pythagorean  philosophy, 
he  wrote : — 

*  Si  qua  fides  rebns  tamen  est  adhibenda  probatis ; 
Nonne  vides  quscunqne  mor&  fhiidove  calore 
Corpora  tabuerint,  in  parva  animalia  vertt? 
I  quoque,  delectos  mactatos  obme  tauros; 
Cognita  res  usa;  de  putri  viscere  passim 
Florilegse  nascuntnr  apes/ 

And,  under  the  particular  form  alluded  to  by  the  poet, 
the  doctrine  has  been  handed  down  by  some  even  to 
OUT  own  times.  The  higher  oi^anisms,  both  animal 
and  vegetal,  after  their  death,  and  during  the  process 
rf  putrefaction,  have  been  supposed  to  be  capable  of 
giving  rise  indiflferently — and  often  at  the  same  time — 
to  certain  of  the  lowest  animals  and  of  the  lowest 
plants. 

Before  inquiring  into  the  nature  of  the  more  recent 
and  exact  information  obtained  upon  this  subject, 
it  willj  we  think,  be  well  to  cite  the  opinions  of  a  few 

*  Sec  vol.  i.  p.  255. 


174  T'ff^  BECmmNGS  OF  UFE. 

of  the  older  naturalists  and  physiologists  who  have 
written  during  the  last  hundred  years.  We  shall  thus 
see  how  strong  the  belief  in  the  truth  of  this  doctrine 
has  been,  amongst  many  of  those  whose  opinions  car- 
ried great  weight  in  their  time. 

Commencing  with  Needham,  the  English  champion 
of  heterogeny  during  the  last  century,  we  find  him 
maintaining  a  belief  in  the  essential  oneness  of  the 
living  force  or  vital  principle  of  both  animals  and 
plants — ^ force  v/g(tat$ve*  as  he  called  it.  This,  he 
thought,  always  survived  after  the  death  of  the  par- 
ticular animals  and  plants  in  which  it  had  previously 
been  the  guiding  principle.  Restricted  in  its  operations 
during  the  life  of  the  individual  —  that  is,  acting 
in  a  determinate  way  in  each  given  organism  —  it 
assumes  more  freedom  of  action  after  the  death  of 
the  organism.  Still  residing,  however,  in  the  organic 
matter,  it  forces  the  complex  molecules  of  such  ma- 
terials to  enter  into  new  'living*  combinations — ^the 
actual  nature  of  these,  and,  consequently,  of  the  re- 
sulting living  things,  being  dependent  upon  the  con- 
ditions in  which  the  organic  matter  is  placed  and  the 
particular  sets  of  physical  influences  to  which  it  is 
subjected  ^. 

It  will  be  seen  that  this  is  an  essentially  spiritualistic 
conception.  We  shall  find,  however,  that  Bufibn,  who 
was  for  a  time  associated  with  Needham,  and  who  was 

'  See  Spallanzani's  *  Opuscules,'  Exposition  des  nouvelles  idte  de 
M.  de  Needham  sur  la  syst^me  de  la  g^n^ration,  t.  I'^  chap.  i^. 


w^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  175 

mocfa  influenced  by  his  views,  preferred  giving  them 
a  much  more  materialistic  acceptation.  Buflfbn's  ^  moU^ 
nks  9rg£mpes^  may  be  said  to  replace  the  ^  force  vege- 
tative '  of  Ncedham.  His  views  on  this  subject  are  so 
interesting  that  we  shall  quote  them  somewhat  fully. 
SMy  researches  and  experiments  upon  organic  mole- 
ales,'  he  says*,  ^demonstrate  that  there  are  no  pre- 
existing germs,  and  at  the  same  time  they  prove  that 
the  generation  of  animals  and  of  plants  does  not  take 
place  after  any  single  fashion.  There  are,  perhaps, 
as  many  beings,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  that  are 
produced  by  a  fortuitous  concourse  of  organic  molecules, 
as  there  are  animals  or  vegetables  which  can  reproduce 
themselves  by  a  constant  succession  of  generations. 

*  The  organic  molecules — always  active,  always  per- 
sistent— belong  as  much  to  plants  as  to  animals.  They 
penetrate  brute  (dead)  matter;  they  excite  changes 
within  it ;  they  influence  it  in  all  its  parts ;  they  make 
it  serve  as  the  basis  for  an  organized  tissue,  of  which 
these  living  molecules  are  the  only  active  principles. 
They  are  only  under  the  subjection  of  a  single  power, 
which,  though  passive,  directs  their  movement  and 
fees  their  position.  This  power  is  the  mould,  or  inti- 
mate pattern,  of  the  particular  organized  body.  The 
Bring  molecules  which  the  animal  or  the  plant  draws 
&om  its  nutritive  materials,  or  from  its  sap,  incorporate 
themselves  with  all  parts  of  the  material  mould ;  they 
carry  with  them  the  powers  of  growth  and  life ;  they 

'  Supplement,  *  Histoire  de  rHomme,'  1778,  t.  viii. 


-s 


176  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

make  this  mould  live  and  grow  in  all  its  parts.  The 
internal  and  intimate  form  of  the  mould,  in  all 
organized  beings,  alone  determines  their  movement 
and  their  relative  position  during  the  phenomena  of 
nutrition  and  development. 

^  And,  when  death  extinguishes  the  fire  of  organiza- 
tion—  that  is  to  say,  the  power  or  influence  of  the 
mould— -decomposition  follows;  whilst  the  organic  mole- 
cules, which  all  survive,  finding  themselves  at  liberty 
during  the  dissolution  and  putrefaction  of  the  body,  pass 
into  other  bodies  as  soon  as  they  are  brought  under  the 
influence  of  some  other  organic  mould.  Thus  they  are 
able  to  pass  from  animal  to  vegetable,  and  from  vege- 
table to  animal,  without  alteration,  and  with  the  con- 
stant and  ever-active  power  of  bearing  with  them 
nutritive  phenomena  and  life.  Only,  there  occurs  an 
infinity  of  ginirations  sftmtanies  in  the  interval  during 
which  the  power  of  the  organic  mould  is  in  abeyance — 
that  is  to  say,  in  that  interval  of  time  during  which  the 
organic  molecules  find  themselves  at  liberty  in  the  midst 
of  the  tissues  of  dead  and  decomposing  organisms,  and 
whilst  they  have  not  been  assimilated  by  the  moulding 
power  of  organisms  belonging  to  ordinary  species  of 
animals  and  plants.  Such  organic  molecules,  always 
active,  strive  to  affect  the  putrefying  matter;  they 
appropriate  some  inert  particles,  and  produce  by  their 
union  a  multitude  of  small  organisms,  some  of  which, 
such  as  earth-worms,  fiingi,  etc.,  appear  a?  tolerably 
large  animals  and  vegetables,  whilst   others,  almost 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


«77 


in  number^  are  only  visible  by  the  microscope. 
AU  these  bodies  only  come  into  existence  by  a  spon- 
tueous  generation,  and  they  fill  the  gap  that  nature  has 
left  between  the  simple  living  organic  molecule  and  the 
aoinial  cm-  the  vegetable.    Also,  there  are  to  be  found  all 
de|;rees,all  imaginable  shades,  in  this  series — this  chain, 
wldch  descends  from  the  most  highly-organized  animal 
to  tile  simple  organic  molecule.    Taken  by  itself,  this 
aokcule  is  far  enough  removed  from  the  nature  of  an 
aumal;  taken   in  combination,  these  organic  mole- 
odes  would  be  removed  quite  as  much  if  they  did  not 
qipropriate  inert  particles,  and  if  they  did  not  dispose  ^ 
tibese  after  a  certain  fashion  in  accordance  with  the 
otimate  pattern  of  some  animal  or  of  some  plant.   And 
as  this  fbrmrarrangement  ought  to  vary  infinitely,  in 
oooskkration  alike  of  the  varying  number  and  of  the 
iflbent  action  of  the  organic  molecules  upon  the  inert 
natter,  there  ought  to  result,  and  there  do  in  fact 
Rsult,  beings  of  all  degrees  of  animality.     And  this 
ipootaneous  generation  (to  which  all  these  beings  alike 
owe  their  existence)  comes  into  play,  and  reveals  itself 
whenever  organized  creatures  undergo  decomposition. 
It  comes  into  play  universally  after  their  death,  and 
Knetimes  also  during  their  life  when  there  are  certain 
Meets  in  the  organization  of  the  body,  such  as  hinder 
fc  inner  mould  [or  plastic  force]  from  absorbing  and 

*  pRfionsly,  the  ▼ery  reverse  of  this  was  said.    The  mould  or  pattern 
«i  fte  puave  (?)  power,  in  obedience  to  which  the  incorporeal '  mol^ 
visorguiiqiies'  arranged  themselves. 
VOL.  11.  N 


4- 


178  THE  BBGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

assimilating  all  the  oi^atilc  molecules  contained  in 
their  fbod.  These  superabundant  organic  molecules, 
which  are  unable  to  penetrate  into,  and  thus  nourish, 
the  animal  oi^nism,  strive  to  unite  themselves  with 
certain  particles  of  inert  alimentary  matter,  and  thus, 
as  during  the  process  of  putrefaction,  form  certain 
organized  bodies.  Such  is  the  mode  of  origin  of  Tape- 
worms, of  Ascarides,  of  Flukes.*  .  .  . 

Buflfbn,  not  always  logical  and  consistent,  was  noto- 
riaisly  a  bold  and  untrammelled  thinker,  though  be  held 
a  very  inferior  place  as  an  actual  observer.  Generaliza- 
tion was  more  to  his  taste  than  the  laborious  and  less 
inviting  occupation  of  acquiring  the  necessary  dataj 
and  he  did  not  always  restrict  himself  to  theories  which 
reposed  on  a  solid  basis  of  fact.  This  doctrine  of  his, 
which  we  have  just  quoted,  is  a  strange  mixture  of 
Platonic,  Leibnitzian,  and  materialistic  philosophy.  His 
*  moule  int^rieur '  is  represented  as  an  actual  power, 
corresponding  in  some  respects  with  the  Platonic 
*Idea;'  whilst  his  *  molecules  organiques  *  are  in 
other  respects  similar  to  the  *  Monads'  of  Leibnitz — 
though,  like  the  vav^  of  Anaxagoras,  they  are  repre- 
sented as  movers  of  matter,  rather  than  as  essential 
and  sole  constituents  of  a  self-moving  matter.  The 
notion  of  Needham,  however,  was  much  more  assimi- 
lable with  our  own  doctrines.  Believing  in  the  influ- 
ence of  *  external  conditions'  on  putrefying  organic 
matter,  as  Needham  did,  his  postulation  c^  a  single 
active  *  force  v^g^tative*  was  a  superfluity— a  remnant 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE:  tjg 

of  the  old  vitalistic  theories  which  may  now  be  lopped 
off  without  further  concern — leaving  us  no  other  life- 
factors  in  the  case  of  these  lowest  organisms  than  the 
organic  matter  and  the  external  conditions  or  incident 
physical  forces. 

But  let  us  glance  more  briefly  at  the  doctrines  of  two 
or  three  of  those  who  succeeded  Needham  and  Buffon. 

O.  F.  Miiller,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  natura- 
lists of  his  time,  was  also  a  believer  in  the  spontaneous 
pneration  of  the  lower  kinds  of  organisms.  On  the 
present  aspect  of  our  subject  he  expresses  himself  most 
<listinctly  thus^: — ^Animals  and  vegetables  decompose 
into  organic  particles,  endowed  with  a  certain  degree 
of  vitality,  and  constituting  the  simplest  animalcules, 
^Wdi  are  capable  of  developing,  either  after  the  fashion 
of  gienns,  by  union  with  other  particles,  or  by  themselves 
contributing  towards  the  development  of  some  other 
animal — only  to  become  free  again  after  its  death,  and 
to  recommence  eternally  a  similar  cycle  of  mutations/ 
At  the  commencement  of  the  present  century,  also, 
Treriianus  •  expressed  his  belief  in  the  existence  of  a 
primitive  amorphous  organic  matter — a  plastic  material 
rtich  was  ready  to  assume  all  the  forms  met  with  in 
living  things,  and  which  was  most  prone  to  alter  its 
P^sent  pattern  under  the  powerfully  modifying  in- 
loencc  of  a  change  in  the  conditions  of  its  existence. 

'  'Attinttlcola  infnsoria,  flnviatilia  et  marina,'  &c  Opus  posth.  Leipzig, 

'  'Btologie,'  Gdttbgen,  i8oa,  torn.  ii.  pp.  267, 403. 

N  2 


l8o  THE  BEGINmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

The  celebrated  Tiedemann  also  gave  most  definite 
expression  to  his  views  on  this  subject  when  he  said: — 
'Organized  beii^  are  produced  from  others  like  them- 
selves, or  else  they  owe  their  origin  to  organic  sub- 
stances in  a  state  of  decomposition."  Whilst,  farther 
on*,  he  adds: — 'The  plastic  power  of  the  nutter  is  not 
extinguished  after  death;  it  preserves  the  faculty  (rf 
clothing  itself  again  in  a  new  form,  and  of  displaying 
its  aptitude  to  manifest  life.  Death  falls  then  only 
upon  the  individual  organizations,  whilst  the  organic 
substances  entering  into  the  composition  of  these 
beings,  continue  able  to  assume  form  and  to  receive 
life.'  Respecting  the  conditions  leading  to,  or  prevent- 
ing, this  new  assumption  of  living  forms  and  properties, 
Tiedemann  says ' :— *  The  organic  materials  which  be- 
come separated  from  an  oi^anism  preserve — when  they 
are  not  reduced  to  their  elements,  or  converted  into 
binary  compounds  by  the  action  of  chemical  affinities — 
the  property  of  reappearing,  through  the  concurrence  of 
favourable  external  conditions  {of  heat,  of  water,  of 
air,  and  of  light)  under  more  simple  animal  and  vege- 
table forms  varying  always  by  reason  of  the  influences 
to  whose  action  they  are  submitted.' 

Brcmser  and  Burdach — other  German  physiolc^ists — 
were  also  firm  believers  in  the  doctrines  of  Hetero- 
genesis,  but  as  we  have  already  referred  to  them',  we 
will   now  pass  to  the  consideration  of  M.  Pouchcfs 

'  '  Fhyiiolocie  de  rHomme,'  Puis,  1831,  torn.  i.  p.  100. 
'  Loc  dt.,  p.  104.  *  Vol.  i.  pp.  146  tmd  161. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  l8l 

general  doctrine  cx>nceming  heterogeny.    He  says ' : — 
*It  may  be  considered  as  a  fundamental  law  that  pheno- 
mena of  fermentation,  or  of  catalytic  decomposition, 
precede  or  accompany  every  spontaneous  generation  .  .  • 
Organisms  are  only  produced  from  expiring  nature  itself, 
and  at  the  moment  when  the  elements  of  the  beings 
upon  which  they  are  engendered  enter  into  new  chemical 
combinations,  and  undergo  all  the  phenomena  of  fer- 
mentation and  putrefaction  ^  ....  It  thence  results  that 
primary  generations  are  only  manifested  after  the  bodies 
from  which   they  are   derived  begin   to  undergo   the 
initial  stages  of  decomposition  j  as  if  the  new  beings,  to 
become  organized,  awaited  the  disintegration  of  others, 
in  order  that   they   might    avail   themselves  of    the 
molecules  of  the  dying  organism  as  soon  as  these  were 
set  at  liberty.*     Thus,  then,  under  the  sway  of  fermen- 
tation or  of  putrefaction,  ^  the  organic   molecules  of 
organized  beings  are  decomposed  and  separated;  and, 
after  having  wandered  at  liberty  during  an  unlimited 
time,  whenever  les  cmonstances  flastiques  begin  to  mani- 
fest themselves,  these  molecules  group  themselves  afresh 
in  order  to  constitute  a  new  being  3.* 

« 

'  'H^drogfoie,'  Paris,  1859,  ?•  335* 

'Ibid.  p.  136. 

'  Bat  M.  Pouchet  did  not  range  himself  with  Lamarck  and  others, 
vlto  believed  that  physical  forces  alone  were  capable  of  bringing  about 
life  and  organization  in  dead  inorganic  matter ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
professed  his  belief  in  the  activity  of  *  une  force  plastique,'  or  special 
'fierce  vitale.'  He  says : — *  Si  dans  nos  experiences,  c'est  an  contact  de 
coijK  divers  qne  se  developpent  les  Proto-organismes,  il  ne  faut  pas 


1 89  TlfE  BECINNmCS  OF  LIFE. 

These  quotations  will  suffice  to  show  the  amount 
of  fiivour  with  which  doctrines  of  heterogeny  were 
regarded  by  many  of  our  predecessors,  and  also  to 
indicate  the  nature  of  some  of  the  problems  which 
remain  to  be  investigated. 

It  will  be  found,  however,  that  the  facts  which  we 
have  to  consider  may  be  ranged  under  two  distinct 
categories.     We  have  to  study  processes  that  may  be 
classed   under   the   head   of  Synthetic  Heterogenesis, 
and  others  belonging  to  what  may  be  called  Analytic 
Hetert^enesis.     The  latter  set  of  changes  may,  for  the 
sake  of  convenience,  be  studied  under  two  heads : — 
I.  Symthttie  Heteregenerit  refers  to  the  origin  of  laiger 
and  somewhat  more  complex  forms  of  life,  by  a 
process  of  fusion,  with  molecular  re-arrangement, 
taking  place  amongst  the  simplest  living  units, 
a.  Analytic  Heterogentiit  refers  to  the  origin  and  pre- 
sence of  some  of  the  simplest  forms  of  life  from 
and  within  the  bodies  of  other  organisms : 
a.  Within  the  bodies  of  higher  animals  and  plants. 
*.  Within  the  substance  of  lower  organisms,  both 
animal,  protisEic,  and  v^tal. 

croire  que  la  raisom  de  leur  apparitioii  est  absolnement  sous  rinfluence 
d«s  aiHinit^s;  ce  serai t  rabaisser  la  creation  aa  niveau  d'une  aUraction 
chimique.  Non,  la  cause  intinie  de  !a  vie,  cette  force  initialc  qui  (n 
gToupe  le  canevas  est  cet  esprit  que  Bremser  considfere  comme  le  r^- 
lateur  de  (ous  les  actes  biologiques.'  In  fact,  M.  Pouchet  ddioitdy  pro- 
fesses to  be  a  '  vitalist,'  and  says  (p.  498), '  I  have  always  thou^t  that 
organiied  beings  were  aminated  by  forcei  which  are  in  no  way  redndble 
to  phytical  and  diemical  forces.* 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE,  183 


Tliis  division  may  remind  the  reader  of  our  classifi- 

titfkm  of  fermentative  processes  ^.   The  analogy  existing 

betveen  them  is  very  close  ^  so  close,  indeed,  that  we 

liniU  have  been  quite  entitled  to  have  set  down  a 

third  dass  of  processes  under  the  name  of  Analytico- 

Sfnthedc  Heterogenesis.    We  wish,  however,  to  sim- 

fiify  our  statements  as  much  as  possible,  so  that  for  the 

present  we  make  no  further  comments  on  this  latter 

JQBible  division  of  the  subject.     The  analogy  which 

ciists  between  Synthetic  Fermentation  and  Synthetic 

Heterogenesis  will  be  much  more  fully  understood  after 

tbe  perusal  of  the  next  chapter^  meanwhile  it  may  be 

Bsefbl  fbr  us  to  make  a  few  remarks  with  the  view  of 

fbowing  light  upon  the  more  popular  aspect  of  the 

question — ^the  processes  of  Analytic  Heterogenesis. 

We  have  previously  endeavoured  to  show  that  all  the 
processes  or  functions  carried  on  in  animal  bodies  are 
effected  at  the  cost  of  organic  materials  which  are 
assimilated  in  the  form  of  Food  ^.  These  complex  pro- 
dDCts  are  decomposed,  so  that  ^  forces '  are  liberated  as 
mcdecular  movements ;  this  liberated  molecular  motion 
communicates  itself  to  the  elements  of  the  tissues  and 
(^ans,  and  supplies  the  motive  power  by  which  those 
fimctions  are  carried  on  which  go  to  constitute  vital 
activity.  It  may  reveal  itself,  for  instance,  in  a  display 
\  of  muscular  or  nervous  power,  whereby  the  organism 
ie^x>nds  to  impressions  made  upon  it  from  without  j  or 

^  See  ToL  i.  p.  423.  •  VoL  i.  pp.  23-49. 


184  THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

it  may  be  consumed  in  the  work  of  secretion.  But  it 
must  also  be  remembered  that  portions  of  such  liberated 
motion  may  be  consumed  in  carrying  on  the  work  of- 
nutrition  and  growth — that  is,  in  carrying  on  those  acts 
by  which  the  matter  of  the  organism  is  cither  renovated 
or  increased  in  quantity,  with  or  without  an  increase  in 
the  complexity  of  its  structure.  Similar  molecular  ener- 
gies are  also  to  a  less  extent  set  free  by  changes  in 
the  active  or  functioning  matter  itself — since  all  action 
implies  more  or  less  of  alteration  in  the  molecular 
structure  of  the  substance  which  manifests  it. 

Thus,  whilst  one  portion  of  the  assimilated  fbod  is 
being  decomposed,  another  is  being  simultaneously  ele- 
vated in  the  scale  of  complexity,  and  is  fashioned  into 
the  likeness  of  the  matter  to  whose  influence  it  is 
exposed.  Molecular  movements  of  a  special  kind  are 
constantly  taking  place  in  each  growing  tissue,  and  the 
molecules  of  adjacent  organic  matter  contained  in  the 
nutritive  fluids  with  which  they  are  brought  into  con- 
tact, seem  (whilst  obeying  an  inherent  tendency  to 
enter  into  *  living'  combinations)  to  be  coerced  to  fall 
into  living  matter  similar  to  that  of  the  tissue  itself'. 
That  is  to  say,  whilst  living  matter  is  formed  as  3 
result  of  an  inherent  tendency  of  the  food  molecules 
to  enter  into  such  modes  of  combination,  the  peculiar 
kind  of  living  matter  which  is  produced  is  attributable 
to  the  influence  of  that  with  which  it  comes  into 

'  See  mnarks  concenting  Che  >ssiinilitiii(;  processes  curled  on  in  an 
AnuAa,  p.  13]. 


THE  BEGINNmCS  OF  LIFE,  185 


ooDtac^-whcther  we  have  to  do  with  independent  or- 
gaiisin^  or  with  mere  subordinate  units  entering  into 
tie  composition  of  the  muscles,  nerves,  or  glands  of 
lome  iiigfaer  organism. 

Someof  these  views  have  been  previously  advocated 
I7 others.    Thus,  Liebig  has  pointed  out*  that  *the 
loimal  metamorphosis  is  itself  a  main  cause  of  the 
atteiatioQS  which  the  food  undergoes,  and  a  determining 
condition  of  the  nutritive  process/    And  the  depen- 
dnoe  of  the  i^enomena  of  Life  upon  decomposition 
bas  also  been  ably  argued  by  Dr.  Freke  and  Mr.  Hinton. 
The  decomposing  matter  is  supposed  by  them  to  render 
active  an  amount  of  force  which  helps  to  give  rise  to 
new  living  compounds  '.    Our  position,  that  during  the 
growth  of  danisms  living  matter  is  formed,  partly  in 
obedience  to  natural  tendencies  possessed  by  certain 
Idnck  of  molecules  to  enter  into  such  modes  of  com- 
bination, and  partly  under  the  immediately  fashioning 
influence   of  the  pre-existing  living  matter,  will   be 
better  understood  afler  some  additional  words  of  ex- 
planation. 
Liebig  has  frequently  called  attention  to  the   fact 

'  See  Tol.  i  p.  426. 

'  Mr.  Hinton  says  ('  life  in  Nature/  p.  238)  : — '  As  one  example,  let 
■I  take  the  gennination  of  the  seed.  Put  into  conditions  which  elicit 
cr  pennit  the  operation  of  the  chemical  affinities,  it  begins  to  decom- 
yOK.  The  downward  or  approximative  motion  thus  arising,  imparted 
to  other  elements  in  the  seed  which  are  so  constructed  as  to  admit  of 
most  readily  in  the  opposite  or  vital  direction,  becomes  in  these 
a  motion  of  life  or  growth.* 


'4 
t 


1 86  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

that  many  of  the  processes  which  habitually  take  place 
in  living  organisms  are  essentially  similar  to  processes 
of  fermentation.  It  is,  indeed,  commonly  recognized 
that  the  salivary  and  various  other  alimentary  secre^ 
tions  when  mixed  with  the  elements  of  the  food  during 
digestion,  incite  processes  essentially  fermentative 
in  nature.  The  transformation  of  starch  into  sugar, 
which  takes  place  during  the  germination  of  the  seeds 
of  cereals  and  other  plants,  may  be  considered  to  belong 
to  the  same  category.  Further,  Liebig  says  » : — ^  Many 
plants  with  woody  stems  are  found  to  contain,  in 
autumn,  a  matter  perfectly  like  the  starch  of  potatoes^ 
or  of  the  cereals,  deposited  in  the  substance  of  the 
wood,  which  in  the  spring,  when  the  plants  re-awaken 
to  life,  becomes  converted  into  sugar.  The  ascending 
juice  of  the  maple  is  so  rich  in  sugar,  that  in  regions 
where  this  tree  occurs  in  such  numbers  as  to  form 
forests,  its  juice  is  employed  in  the  manufecture  of 
sugar.'  And,  ^ain,  he  adds : — ^  The  maturation,  as  it 
is  called,  or  sweetening  of  winter  fruits,  when  stored 
up  for  their  preservation  in  straw,  is  the  result  of  a 
true  fermentation.  Unripe  apples  and  pears  contain 
a  considerable  amount  of  starch,  which  becomes  con- 
verted into  sugar  by  the  nitrogenous  constituent  of  the 
juice  passing  into  a  state  of  decomposition,  and  trans- 
mitting its  own  mutations  to  the  particles  of  starch  in 
contact  with  it.* 

There    are,    therefore,    undoubtedly   many  striking 

^  'Letters  on  Chemistry/  185 1,  p.  aoi. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


187 


nseznblances  between  the  changes  which  are  carried 
on  in  living  bodies  and  those  which  are  ordinarily 
classed  under  the  head  of  fermentations.    We  have 
shown  that,  in  the  commoner  kinds  of  fermentations, 
pnxesscs  of  analysis  and  processes  of  synthesis  go  on 
simultaneously  in  the  fluid;   and^  similarly,  we  have 
found  that  growth  of  pre-existing  protoplasm  is  inti- 
mately associated  with  simultaneous  processes  of  de- 
composition or  analysis  ^    We  have  proved  that  some 
of  the  products  of  this  process  of  synthesis  which  takes 
place  in  ordinary  fermentations  appear  in  the  form  of 
living  matter  (even  where  no  such  matter  pre-existed), 
90  that  we  are  compelled  to  believe  that  there  is  a 
natural  tendency  to  the  formation  of  the  compounds 
iriiidi  constitute  such  matter,  just  as  there  is  a  natural 
tendency  to  the  formation  of  simpler  chemical  com- 
binations.    We  are,  therefore,  entitled  to  believe  that 


^  There  is,  fherefore,  much  reason  for  the  belief  that  the  appearance 
of  IxTmg  matter,  whether  it  arises  independently  or  by  a  process  of 
growth,  b  due  in  part  to  the  existence  of  molecular  movenients  which 
ave  firitiatfld  by  chemical  decompositions.  Thb  state  of  movement,  as 
liebig  says,  is  capable  of  'being  communicated  to  other  atoms  in  contact 
vith  the  former,  so  as  to  cause  the  atoms  and  elements  of  these  latter 
ako,  in  consequence  of  the  resulting  disturbance  of  the  equilibrium  of 
chemical  attraction,  to  change  their  position,  and  to  arrange 
into  one  or  more  new  groups.'  Or,  as  Mr.  Hinton  puts 
One  body  is  ceasing  to  be  organic,  and  therein  is  giving  off  its 
and  in  immediate  connection  with  it  another  body  is  becoming 
wpffrr,  and  therefore  is  receiving  force  into  itself.  Can  wc  be  mis- 
iHapieting  these  facts  in  saying  that  the  former  process  is  the  cause  of 
tte  latter ;  and  that  the  decay  gives  out  the  force  which  produces  the 
fuvth.'  C  ^<K  >B  Nature,'  1861,  p.  43.) 


l88  THE  BEGINNINGS  OP  UFE, 

—  -  ■  - .  ^  ^^ 

where  new  living  matter  is  produced  during  the  growth 
of  organisms,  this  is  in  part  brought  about  because  there 
is  a  natural  tendency  amongst  the  food  molecules  to 
fall  into  such  states  of  combination — however  much  the 
particular  nature  and  form  of  the  new  matter  may  be 
determined  by  the  influence  of  that  which  already 
exists. 

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  although  many 
of  the  processes  whereby  food  is  assimilated  within  the 
bodies  of  living  things  are  strictly  comparable  in  nature 
to  processes  of  fermentation,  nevertheless,  the  precise 
changes  which  the  elements  of  the  food  undergo  in  the 
various  stages  of  the  process  are  quite  diflferent  from 
those  which  take  place  in  ordinary  fermentations.  And, 
moreover,  in  the  last  stage  of  the  process,  when  food 
has  been  reduced  to  the  condition  of  blood-plasma,  the 
latter  is  subjected  throughout  the  body  to  all  the  special 
activities  of  the  several  tissues,  and  is  formed  into 
as  many  kinds  of  living  matter,  which  subsequently, 
under  the  influence  of  'organic  polarities,*  fashion 
themselves  into  the  exact  likeness  of  these  several 
tissues  1. 

^  In  the  'Introduction'  of  his  celebrated  *R^gne  Animal'  (1816), 
Cuvier  made  the  following  notably  suggestive  remarks,  which  will  be 
found  to  be  very  much  in  accordance  with  our  present  argument  He 
says : — •  Life,  then,  is  a  vortex  {tourbilhn),  more  or  less  rapid,  more  or 
less  complicated,  the  direction  of  which  is  constant,  and  which  always 
tarries  along  molecules  of  the  same  kind,  but  into  which  individual 
molecules  are  continually  entering,  and  from  which  they  are  constantly 
departing ;  so  that  the  form  of  a  living  body  is  more  essential  to  it  th^n 
its  matter.  ...  As  long  as  this  movement  subsists,  the  body  in  which 


r 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  189 


Such  are  the  diverse  and  marvellously  complex  pro^ 
cesses  from  moment  to  moment  taking  place  within 
0%  and  which,  by  their  combined  e£Fects,  contribute  to 
make  us  such  creatures  as  we  are.  All  organisms  are 
mere  or  less  complex  wholes  made  up  of  multitudinous 
and  independent  units,  differing  in  nature  and  variously 
combined,  though  all  working  harmoniously,  and  tend- 
ing to  produce  the  characteristics  of  the  organism  of 
iHiich  they  form  part.  But  these  several  independent 
units  are  again  made  up  of  an  aggregation  of  living 
moleailes ;  and  the  molecules  of  the  cell  bear,  in  fact, 
to  its  activity,  just  the  same  relationship  that  the  cells 
bear  to  the  organ  which  they  help  to  compose,  and 
tiat  the  organs  bear  to  the  organism  of  which  they 
ferm  part.  This  whirl  within  whirl  of  activities  of  all 
kiods^  repeatedly  subordinated  in  the  most  complex 
manner,  goes  to  make  up  the  'Life'  of  all  higher 
animal  organisms ;  so  that,  although  the  phrase  may  not 
be  sufficiently  exclusive  to  constitute  a  definition  of 
life,  this  state  is  very  aptly  epitomized  by  speaking 
of  it  as  a  'coordination  of  actions'.'  So  long  as  all 
these  activities  manifest  themselves  in  an  appropriate 
manner,  so  long  as  there  is  a  perfect  coordination,  the 


takes  place  b  living — it  lives.  When  it  is  permanently  arrested,  the 
Mj  £t$.  After  death,  the  elements  which  compose  it,  abandoned  to 
fte  oidinaxy  chemical  affinities,  are  not  slow  to  separate;  from  which, 
■Me  or  less  quickly,  results  the  dissolution  of  the  body  that  had  been 
inng.  //  mn,  then,  by  the  vital  motion  that  its  dissolution  was  amsUd,  and 
^AttUmmts  0/^  body  wert  temporarily  combined' 
*  Hcrtx^  Speaca^s  *  Principles  of  Biology,'  vol.  i.  p.  60. 


\ 


1 90  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

organism  is  said  to  be  in  a  healthy  state,  and  its  'vital 
powers*  are  good.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  grows 
in  the  most  regular  manner,  with  a  constant  tendency 
to  follow  in  the  grooves  along  which  its  predecessors 
may  have  gone.  But  when  from  any  cause  the  central 
controlling  or  coordinating  apparatus  is  anywhere  weak- 
ened, morbid  or  unnatural  processes  may  begin  to  take 
place  within  and  amongst  the  tissue  elements  of  the 
liberated  r^ion.  These  previously  subordinate  units 
cast  o£F  their  subordination,  and  inflammatory  or  de- 
generative processes  may  occur.  On  the  other  hand, 
where  the  health  of  the  whole  organism  is  lowered, 
where  the  ^  vital  powers  *  are  on  the  wane,  and  all  co- 
ordinating activities  are  checked,  the  special  activities 
of  the  separate  units  are  similarly  diminished,  and  their 
elements  are  more  free  to  enter  into  such  less  specialized 
combinations  and  modes  of  activity  as  living  matter 
is  prone  to  assume  when  it  arises  independently  in  the 
midst  of  a  fermenting  infusion.  That  is  to  say,  as 
soon  as  the  multitudinous  maelstrom-like  activities — 
whirl  within  whirl — which  are  usually  so  potent  in  the 
tissues  of  a  healthy  organism  become  decidedly  dimi- 
nished in  intensity,  the  newest  and  least  specialized 
portions  of  living  matter  entering  into  the  composition 
of  these  tissues,  become  more  and  more  capable  of 
assuming  those  modes  of  growth  which  new-bom  living 
matter  tends  to  assume  when  uninfluenced  by  the  pro- 
cesses taking  place  in  the  matter  of  any  pre-existing 
living  unit  with  which  it  may  be  in  contact. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


191 


These  views  are  thoroughly  harmonious  with   the 

&cts;  since,  as  previous  quotations  may  have  indicated 

and  subsequent  details  will  show,  the  phenomena  of 

Analytic  Heterogenesis  are  manifested  in  an  increasing 

degree  when  the  higher  organisms  in  which  they  appear 

are  sickly,  dying,  or  actually  dead. 


CHATTIER    XVII. 

SYNTHETIC      »  V.  T  K  R  ( )  C.  IN  ISIS. 

The  *  Pellicle.*  Biocrasis.  Observations  of  Pineau  and  Pouchet. 
Author's  Obsen-ations.  Formation  of  Embrj'onal  Areas.  Origin 
of  Amoebae  and  of  Fungus-spores.  Mode  of  Origin  of  Embr^'onal 
Areas.  Direct  origin  of  Monads  and  Fungi  from  same  Elements. 
Development  of  Flagellum.  Indirect  Origin  of  Monads.  Their 
Transformation  into  Ama>bx.  Encystment.  Death  of  others  by 
Analjlic  Heterogenesis.  Origin  of  other  Amoebae  by  Archebiosis. 
Subsequently  break  up  into  Fungus-spores.  Similar  Fungus-sp>ores 
arising  by  Archebiosb.  Their  Germination.  Mutual  interchange* 
ability  between  Monads,  Amoebae,  and  Fungus-spores.  Further 
proof.  Fungus-spores,  or  Monads  and  Amcebae,  producible  at  will 
from  £mbr>'onal  Areas.  Embryos  of  Unknown  Organism.  Origin 
of  Enchelys  seen  by  Pineau.  Origin  of  Paramecium  described  by 
Pouchet.  Confirmation  by  Joly  and  Musset.  Essential  Conditions. 
Author's  Observations  on  Origin  of  Parameda.  Fission  of  Em- 
bryos.  Their  Minute  Structure.  Great  Simplicity.  Subsequent 
Modifications.     Origin  of  Vorticellse.    Pineau's  Observations. 

Theoretical  objections.  These  fostered  by  Novelty  of  the  Facts.  Similar 
Difficulties  concerning  Formation  of  Crystals  and  Development  of 
Higher  Organisms.  Diversity  of  *  Spontaneous  *  Products.  This 
natural  and  long  recognized.  Infusorial  'Species'  Convertible. 
Mutability  an  Essential  Characteristic.  Facts  recorded  easily  Veri- 
fiable. Synthetic  Heterogenesis  comparable  with  the  S3mthesis 
occurring  in  Archebiosis. 

THE  mode  of  formation  of  the  ^  primordial  mucus  * 
of  Burdach — the  ^proligerous  pellicle*  of  Pouchet — 
has  been  already  described ;  but  it  now  remains  for  us 


THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE,  193 


to  give  some  account  of  the  various  changes  that  are 
tf,  to  occur  in  this  aggr^ation  of  living  units  which 
10  soon  collects,  in  the  form  of  a  scum,  upon  the  surface 
of  flcarlj  all  infusions  of  organic  matter. 

Tbe  pellicle  is  composed  for  the  most  part  of  a 

ifase  aggregation  of  Bacteria  of  various    sizes    and 

iofts  imbedded  in  a  more  or  less  abundant,  pellucid, 

'  (datinous  material.     Very  frequently  there  are  also  a 

^nabk  number  of  intermixed  VUrsomes  and  more  or 

las  chaiactcristic  JoruU  \    The  Bacteria  in  this  layer 

w  mostly  placed  vertically  to  the  surface,  so   that 

liaamination  of  the  upper  surface  under  the  micro- 

sope  generally  presents  the  appearance  of  a  stratum 

faseij  studded  with  small,  though  tolerably  uniform 

ffumlcs.    On  attempting  to  remove  a  portion  of  this 

Feflide,  it  is  found  to  constitute  a  more  or  less  coherent 

■cmhrane. 

It  is  now  a  well-known  fact  that  when  two  or 
■ore  Amoebas  come  into  close  contact  with  one  an- 
ttcr,  they  may  fuse  so  as  to  constitute  a  larger 
ifividual  of  the  same  kind,  which  afterwards  creeps 
kont  and  seizes  food  as  its  component  parts  had 
feviously  done.  Such  a  process  must  be  classed  under 
b  head  of  Homogenetic  Biocrasis^;  for,  although 
fttate  living  units  fuse  to  form  a  new  individual, 
t  process  is  one  of  mere  fusion,  and  the  product 

'IW  difierent  kinds  of  'pellicles'  are  more  fully  described   by 
.llBadiet  in  his  *  H^t^rog^ie/  pp.  355-367. 
^teiroLi.  p.  333. 

VOL.  n.  o 


bY  ot^-  ^^:Sber,  and  ^     ^  .onsVde-^^e  .t^^^t 

from  tbc  °  ^^        accot<i^^  '^  Lerved  «^^, 

atd^ff^^'^l  Te  «^^^  ''    tt\Y  ^°  ^       Sieve '  ^^^^ 

■r^'  '"^^-c^  *tr^**'  Tt'^*''*"'^'! 

sat  \e  ^^      , .    Mote  ?»      poacbet,  ^^         ^  some 

^^  "^'La^sms  ^^^^  r^  of  some  d^ffe  ,^^ 

the  ot©'^'^^^,  as  ^eW  as  ja-  ?•  »**' 

1  See  ^^^ 


THE  BEGIftmifGS  OF  LIFH. 


195 


Aithougfa  some  of  these  observations  have  not  been 
[  ffcoRled  with  all  the  details  whidi  might  have  been 
dotred,  jet  I  have  satislkd  myself  that  the  statements 
mule  hf  Pincau  and  Poucbet  are  substantially  correct. 

Pineau  has  given  an  account  of  the  mode  of  origin 
cf  tiie  micrascopic  fungus  known  as  Pemairuim  glmiatmj 
and  also  of  Mwmss  /t»x,  in  addition  to  other  oi^anisms 
to  whidi  we  shall  subsequently  refer. 

M.  Fineau  watched  the  various  stages  in  the  evolution 
afFniai&am  g/oKMm  in  the  midst  of  a  granular  pellicle 
■fatdi  fcTOied  on  an  infiision  of  bread,  after  it  had 


Flo.  51. 

Uodc  or  Origin  of  i'CBctUtMK.    (Fintau.)    (x 

M.  GnnnUr  Pellicle. 
i.  Pint  ippcarance  of  Gernu. 
t^,  Ulnitratiiig  their  nbiequeat  development  in 

■degone  the  acid  fermentation.    Indistinct  networks 
g(  various  sizes,  with  roundish  or  slightly  polygonal 


196  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

meshes  ^-^''  in  diameter,  at  first  made  their  appear- 
ance, and  after  a  lapse  of  twelve  hours  the  individual 
units  became  more  distinct  and  began  to  assume  an 
oval  form.  Whilst  still  aggregated  together,  they  were 
noticed  slightly  to  increase  in  size.  After  a  time  they 
separated  from  one  another,  and  then  began  to  elongate 
into  filaments  which  gradually  displayed  the  characters 
of  Fentcillium  glaucum,  Pineau  pointed  out  that  the  re- 
semblance between  these  inferior  members  of  the  ani- 
mal and  of  the  vegetable  kingdoms  is  so  close,  ^  qu'il 
est  impossible  de  distinguer  une  monade  d'un  globule 
mycodermique  dans  les  premieres  phases  de  leur  de- 
veloppement.* 

The  specimens  of  Monas  lens  made  their  appearance 
in  a  pellicle  which  formed  on  an  infusion  of  veal. 
They  appeared  first  in  the  midst  of  it  ^  as  an  indistinct 
areolar  network,  the  meshes  of  which  were  about  -g-sW' 
in  diameter/  This  network  gradually  became  more 
distinct,  owing  to  the  contours  of  its  component  cells 
becoming  more  clearly  defined.  These  at  last  separated 
from  one  another,  and  then  each  revealed  a  fine  whip- 
like filament  proceeding  from  a  part  of  its  circumfer- 
ence. The  individual  corpuscles,  which  were  at  first 
quite  stationary  and  in  contact  with  one  another,  ex- 
hibited slow  oscillating  movements  as  they  separated '. 

^  He  says,  one  sees  first  'de  petits  amas  de  granulations  dont  les 
contours  commen^aient  par  £tre  diffus ;  peu  ^  peu  ces  amas  devenaient 
plus  nettement  circonscrit  et  ils  finissaient  par  acqu^rir  I'aspect  de 
v^tables  Monades,  d'abord  immobile,  puis  dou^  de  mouvement.' 


THE  BEGINNmCS  OF  UFB.  197 

Tbc  corpuscles  gradually  moved  more  briskly^  and  finally, 
dctadiing  themselves  altt^ether  frran  the  pellicle,  they 
became  free-swimmiiig  animalcules  each  of  which  had 
an^dly  vibrating  flagellum.  Their  development  fre- 
fiently  took  place  in  groups  of  various  sizes,  as  above 
desaibed ;  but  when  the  solution  contained  less  organic 
matter,  or  when  the  weather  was  colder,  single  isolated 
corpuscles  were  frequently  seen  developing  in  ditFerent 
paits  of  the  pellicle. 
The  description  given  by  M.  Pouchet  of  the  mode 


F».  51, 
Origin  of  Jlfawnimi.    (Pouchet.)    (k   1800.) 
•■  Fint  Stage.  t.  Corpuscles  with  motionless  taib. 

y  TtOlew  Corpuscles.  d.  FoUf-^Ieveloped  Monads. 

of  evolution  of  Mnas  lemt  is  essentially  similar.     He 
<*Berved  the  first  rudiments  of  them  in  the  pellicle  of 


198  Till:  /:i-:(;ix.\7X(;s  of  life. 


an  infusion  of  hay  on  the  fourth  day,  and  I  hey  were 
then  about  the  same  size  or  even  smaller  than  those 
mentioned  by  Pineau.  On  the  sixth  day  they  were 
somewhat  larger  (tj-jVtt ') — ^^^  displaying  a  tail  and 
well-marked  tremulous  movements,  whilst  it  exhibited 
in  its  interior,  besides  the  usual  small  granules,  a  trans- 
parent vesicle  about  innnr"  ^^  diameter.  On  the  seventh 
day  they  had  all  detached  themselves  from  one  another 
and  from  the  pellicle,  they  had  increased  somewhat  in 
size,  and  had  changed  their  spherical  for  a  more  or  less 
distinctly  ovoidal  form. 

These  observations,  so  far  as  they  go,  are  similar  in 
many  respects  to  my  own ;  but  before  dwelling  upon 
them  further,  I  will  again  describe  some  of  my  obser- 
vations which  were  published  in  1870'.  These  were 
made,  during  the  previous  winter  months,  upon  the 
*  proligerous  pellicles  *  that  formed  on  two  or  three  hay 
infusions  which  had  been  prepared  with  hot  water  ^. 

In  a  pellicle  which  previously  presented  a  uniform 
appearance,  certain  areas,  altogether  irregular  in  size 
and  shape,  but  always  presenting  outlines  bounded  by 
curved  lines,  gradually  made  their  appearance.  These 
were  at  first  distinguishable  from  the  general  ground- 
work of  the  pellicle  only  by  their  somewhat  lighter 
aspect.  On  careful  microscopical  examination  with 
high  powers,  it  was  seen  that  the  boundary  of  such  an 
area — measuring  perhaps  as  much,  or  more  than  -^^' 

*  In  •  Nature/  No.  35. 

•  At  a  temperature  of  140®— 160®  F. 


THE  BEGINNtNGS  OF  LIFE. 


in  diameter — ^was  pretty  sharply  defiiicd  from  the  sur 
Hjunding  unaltered  granular  stratum.  The  immediately 
omtiguous  granules  of  this  stratum  were  occasionally 
somewhat  more  tightly  packed,  though  at  other  times 
00  sudi  change  was  observable.  In  either  case  the 
unaltered  portion  of  the  pellicle  was  quite  different 
from  the  included  lighter  area,  because  in  this  an  in- 
crease had  apparently  taken  place  in  the  amount  of 
jelly-like  material  between  the  granules,  and,  as  well. 


Fm.  53. 

I'odapaieat  of  Corpnscutar  Orgajiisms :  three  sjreas  of  dtfiercDtiition 

showing  different  stages.    (  x  Soo.) 

there  was  a  certain  alteration  in  the  refractive  index, 
md  occasionally  in  the  size  of  the  granules  or  altered 
^ma.  The  next  change  observable  was  that  the 
incliided  area  showed  lines  crossing  it  here  and  there, 
wliich  at  first  tended  to  map  it  out  into  certain  larger 
divisions.    These  intersecting  lines  gradually  increased 


2PO  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

in  number,  till  at  last  the  mass  became  subdivided  inti 
an  aggregation  of  rounded  or  ovoid  bodies  each  abou 
-^■^'  in  diameter.  As  these  subdivisions  were  takiii| 
place,  the  mass  as  a  whole  also  separated  from  the  unal 
tered  pellicle  by  which  it  was  surrounded.  Occasionall] 
there  was  a  distinct  interval,  at  a  certain  stage,  be 
tween  the  parent  pellicle  and  this  difierentiating  mass 
whose  subdivisions  also  gradually  separated  irom  on< 
another.  These  subdivisions  then  appeared  as  inde 
pendent  corpuscular  organisms,  bounded  by  a  slightl 
condensed  outer  layer,  and  containing  from  four  to  eigh 
of  the  altered  Bacteria. 

Throughout  the  winter  months  such  areas  of  diflferer 
tiation,  and  such  resulting  corpuscular  organisms,  we: 
frequently  met  with.     The  organisms  seemed,  duri? 
such  weather,  to  persist  for  a  very  long  time  with( 
undergoing  any  notable  change  (merely,  perhaps, 
creasing  somewhat  in  size)^  and  most  of  them  i 
mately    became    disintegrated    without    showing 
further  development  ^     They  were  always  seen 

^  Areas  formed  in  the  same  direct  mamier,  and  also  without  any  r 
alteration  in  the  refractive  index  of  the  contained  matter,  have  r 
been  seen  to  appear  in  the  pellicle  on  a  filtered  maceration 
on  the  second  day — this  also  being  during  very  cold  weather. 
areas  were  mostly  small,  though  whilst  the  process  of  segm 
was  taking  place  they  began  to  assume  a  brown  colour.    This  t 
marked  in  some  cases,  where  one  end  of  the  area  was  colourlesf 
other  (the  furthest  advanced  in  segmentation)  was  quite  browi 
mediate  portions  exhibited  the  gradual  development  of  the  bro' 
The  final  products  of  segmentation,  after  several  processes 
appeared  in  the  form  of  small,  brown,  biloculated  fungus-ger 
resembling  those  of  Fig.  59,  t. 


^^^^^^^^mmt^tmrntm^^m 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  soi 

completely  motionless  condition,  and  presented  no 
tiace  of  a  dlium — so  that  they  were  quite  different 
fiom  the  specimens  of  Mtmms  lens.  In  one  infusion  of 
hay  in  which  such  organisms  had  been  present  for 
some  time,  several  of  them  were  found  to  have  become 
qiherical  and  to  have  undergone  a  considerable  in- 
crease in  size  after  a  few  days  of  warmer  weather. 
Some  were  as  much  as  roW  ^^  diameter,  and  the 
stages  in  the  actual  transition  of  one  of  these  uni- 
cellular organisms  into  an  Amoeba  was  seen  with  the 


F10.54. 

Rcpresentiiig  gradual  enlargement  of  Corpuscular  Organisms,  and 
con^rcfsion  of  one  of  them  into  an  Amoeba.    ( x  800.) 

most  perfect  distinctness.  One  half  of  the  organism 
was  obviously  amoeboid  in  character,  whilst  the  other 
half  was  almost  unchanged,  containing  large  granules 
like  those  in  the  unaltered  corpuscles.  Whilst  slow 
alterations  in  shape,  of  a  slug-like  character,  took  place 
in  the  anterior  diaphanous  protoplasmic  portion,  slow 
lolling  movements  occurred  amongst  the  granules  in 
the  posterior  cell-like  part,  whose  matrix  seemed  to 
have  been  rendered  more  fluid.  Having  watched  this 
organism  for  about  half  an  hour,  and  wishing  to  exa- 
mine other  portions  of  the  specimen  of  pellicle  in 
which  it  had  been  contained,  I  moved  the  glass,  and 
was  afterwards  unable  to  find  this  particular  specimen 


202  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

again.     No  other  Amoebae  or  transition  states  were 
discovered  on  this  occasion  >• 

Subsequently,  however,  I  saw  a  similar  transfbrmation 
of  motionless  corpuscles  into  ordinary  Amoebae  taking 
place  in  thousands  of  instances.  It  occurred  in  a  hay 
infusion  which  was  examined  during  one  of  the  summer 
months.  The  corpuscles  were  derived  from  the  pellicle 
in  the  same  way,  and  at  last  separated  as  colourless 
ovoid  bodies  about  t^^'  in  diameter.  They  had  a 
slightly  condensed  exterior  layer,  but  no  distinct  bound- 
ing wall,  and  seemed  to  be  merely  portions  of  living 
jelly,  in  which  5-10  altered  Bacteria  were  imbedded. 
They  gradually  increased  in  size,  and  very  shortly  a 
small  solid  nuclear  body  began  to  appear  in  the 
interior  of  each  of  them.  After  the  corpuscles  had 
attained  the  size  of  yits'  ^^  diameter,  their  internal 
substance  became  more  fluid :  the  previously  stationary 
particles  began  to  oscillate  slowly,  and  they  were  also 
smaller  and  more  numerous.  Corpuscles  which  were 
only  a  very  little  larger,  began  to  show  slowly-changing 
irregularities  of  outline,  whilst  a  vacuole  frequently 
appeared  within  their  substance,  lasted  about  a  minute, 
and  then  disappeared,  to  be  succeeded  by  another  in 
a  different  place.  In  others  the  amoeboid  changes  in 
shape  and  movements  were  now  quite  distinct,  whilst 
the  vacuoles  were  more  persistent,  and  the  nucleus  had 

^  Prof.  Hartig  has  also  described  a  similar  mode  of  origin  of 
Amcebs  from  unicellular  organisms,  in  his  observations  on  the  phytozoa 
of  Marchaniia.    See  '  Journal  of  the  Microscopic  Society/  1855,  p.  51. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  203 


asaimcd  a  ring-like  appearance.  On  the  following  day 
Aey  were  almost  all  in  active  movement  as  Ama?bae — 
scarcely  any  were  to  be  seen  in  the  spherical  stationary 
form.  After  a  few  days*  exposure  to  direct  sunlight, 
great  numbers  <rf  the  Amoebx  encysted  themselves, 
dxxigfa  others  became  filled  with  minute  granules,  and 
seemed  to  have  undei^one  a  process  of  degeneration  ^. 

In  other  cases  areas  of  differentiation,  commencing 
in  a  manner  somewhat  similar  to  what  I  have  already 
described^  were  seen  to  terminate  in  the  production  of 
Fungus-germs.  Their  mode  of  evolution  from  portions 
of  a  pellicle  found  upon  a  rather  old  infusion  of  hay, 
was  also  described  on  a  former  occasion*.  The 
development  of  a  brownish  tint  in  the  earlier  stages  of 
the  transformation  made  it  more  easy  to  detect  its  real 
nature.  TTie  areas  which  began  to  differentiate  were 
generally  not  very  large.  They  were  at  first  quite  colour- 
less, and  the  granules  were  separated  from  one  another 
by  a  notable  amount  of  transparent  jelly-like  material. 
The  granules  themselves  were  mostly  shaped  like  the 
figure  8,  and  each  half  was  about  goioo^"^  ^^  diameter. 
A  later  stage  was  apparently  seen  in  other  areas  which 
bad  assumed  a  very  faint  brownish  tint,  and  presented 
evidences  of  a  commencing  subdivision.  As  this  pro- 
cess of  segmentation  progressed,  the  brown  tint  became 
gradually  deeper.  Ovoid  masses  were  frequently  seen 
about  ^irhf"  or  xAtf"  ^^  diameter,  of  a  decidedly  brown 

^  See  p.  aaa. 

•  •  Nature,'  1870,  No.  35. 


204 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


colour,  and  composed  of  from  eight  to  twelve  or  more 
ovoid  subdivisions.  In  the  later  stages  of  the  process  of 
multiplication,  the  individual  segments  lost  all  trace 
of  their  original  granular  condition.  They  became 
quite  homogeneous  and  highly  refractive  masses  of  a 


r-':  ■•  .:^^ 


Fio.  55. 

Mode  of  Origin  of  Germs  of  Fungi  from  differentiating  portions 
a  Pellicle  formed  on  an  Infusion  of  Hay.    <  x  800.) 

a.  First  Stage. 

b.  Second  Stage— more  refractive,  brownish  matter  undergoing 

segmentation. 
c%  d,  #,/.  Further  Stages  of  s^mcntation. 

g.  Ultimate  Products  of  segmentation,  which  gradually  develop 
into  perfect  germs  (b). 

brown  colour,  and  looked  ahnost  like  large  brown  fat 
globules.  At  last,  multiplication  still  proceeding,  the 
mass  gradually  became  resolved,  leaving  only  an  ir- 
regular heap  of  spherical  or  ovoidal  bodies  of  various 
sizes.  The  individual  segments  then  increased  in  size, 
and  gradually  became  less  refractive  and  lighter  in 
colour.  A  slight  internal  mamellonated  aspect  also 
made  its  appearance,  as  they  assumed  the  form  of  ovoid 


"V 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  205 


aboat  T^"  i^  diameter.  Even  after  attaining 
this  stage  of  development,  some  of  them  occasionally 
underwent  a  process  of  division ;  and  though  the  ma- 
jority of  them  seemed  to  undergo  no  change,  others,  after 
a  time,  gave  origin  to  ordinary  mycelial  threads. 

After  relating  these  observations,  the  following  re- 
marks were  made : — 

^Tbe  changes  which  I  have  described  represent,  I 
thinly  only  two  ertreme  types  of  a  mode  of  metamor- 
phosis which  is  apt  to  take  place  in  portions  of  the 
pellicle.  In  the  one  case  a  certain  area  of  the  pellicle, 
after  undergoing  some  changes,  resolves  itself  into  a 
number  of  ovoid  bodies,  which  collectively  are  about 
equal  in  bulk  to  the  altered  area  itself;  whilst,  in  the 
other  case,  at  different  stages,  the  segments  of  the 
altered  area  undergo  a  process  of  growth  and  sub- 
division, so  that,  ultimately,  the  mass  of  spores  which 
results  far  exceeds  in  bulk  that  of  the  original  area 
when  it  began  to  undergo  change. 

*  At  other  times  intermediate  processes  are  met  with ; 
ind  then  fungus -spores  are  produced  after  a  fashion 
more  closely  resembling  that  which  leads  to  the  pro- 
duction of  the  unicellular  organisms  above  described. 
The  areas  of  change  are  then  larger  than  those  last 
described  and  colourless  throughout,  whilst  the  pro- 
cesses of  growth  and  multiplication  are  less  marked  at 
the  di£ferent  stages.    Where  fungus-spores  result  after 
this  £ishioa,  the  changes  in  the  refractive  index,  and 
the  honi€)geneous  appearance  previously  alluded  to,  still 


206  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

generally  manifest  themselves  at  the  ultimate  stage  of 
division,  though  nothing  of  this  kind  shows  itself  in 
the  more  simple  process  leading  to  the  production  of 
the  unicellular  organisms.' 

Subsequent  experience  has  abundantly  confirmed  the 
truth  of  the  views  then  expressed,  as  I  have  since 
seen  many  changes  in  the  pellicle  which  were  strictly 
intermediate  between  the  extreme  forms  just  described. 
The  characters  of  the  pellicles  that  form  on  diflFerent 
hay  infusions  of  the  same  strength,  differ  notably 
according  to  the  temperature  of  the  water  with  which 
the  infusions  have  been  made,  and,  to  a  less  extent, 
according  to  the  mean  atmospheric  temperature  to  which 
they  are  subsequently  exposed.  If  the  infusion  has 
been  prepared  with  very  hot  water  (140°?  and  upwards), 
only  a  thin  and  somewhat  tough  pellicle  will  form, 
secondary  changes  will  take  place  in  it  very  slowly, 
and  they  will  lead  only  to  the  evolution  of  products  of 
a  certain  kind.  When  prepared  with  moderately  hot 
water  (i2o°F)  or  with  cold  water  (60** — 70° F),  the 
pellicles  which  are  produced  become  thicker  and  thicker, 
and  continue  for  a  long  time  to  be  soft  and  pulpy. 
The  changes  that  may  take  place  in  a  pellicle  of  the 
latter  kind  are  very  varied,  so  that  it  may  give  rise  to 
a  multiplicity  of  organic  forms. 

For  a  long  time  my  observations  were  carried  on 
upon  infusions  made  with  hot  water,  and  they  were  also 
conducted  during  the  winter  months,  so  that  the  se- 
condary changes  which  I  was  able  to  observe  in  the 


^.> 


r. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  207 

pellicle  were  neither  varied  nor  numerous  ^  That  which 
is  to  follow  in  this  chapter  concerning  my  own  obser- 
TaticMis,  has  been  learned  from  an  investigation  of  the 
danges  in  pellicles  which  form  on  filtered  hay  infusions 
prepared  both  with  warm  and  with  cold  water. 

In  all  cases,  and  at  whatsoever  temperature  the  in- 
fusion may  have  been  prepared,  the  earliest  change 
lAich  takes  place  in  the  pellicle  is  such  as  I  have 
previously  described.  In  certain  portions  of  it — alto- 
g^er  irr^;ular  in  size,  shape,  and  distribution — the 
aggr^ted  Bacteria  begin  to  form  around  themselves 
a  certain  amount  of  pellucid,  gelatinous  matter  in 
vhidi  they  become  imbedded.  This  change  may  be 
well  seen  in  pellicles  made  with  hot  water,  because 
SDch  areas  continue  (more  especially  when  the  atmo- 
^jbtnc  temperature  is  low)  for  several  days  without 
undergoing  much  alteration.  The  Bacteria  in  them  are 
sligjitly  separated  from  one  another,  rather  larger  in 

1  Dumg  this  time  I  was  also  working  at  the  subject  of  Archebiosis» 

aid  I  bad  not  then  ascertained  that  even  in  this  part  of  the  investigation 

■fiwions  are  more  ef&cadous  if  prepared  with  moderately  hot  (120^ — 

i^T)  nther  than  with  very  hot  water.    They  answer  better  when 

with  hot  water  (at  the  temperature  above  named)  than  with  cold 

r,  because  they  can  thus  be  obtained  in  a  more  concentrated  state. 

And  seeing  that  in  this  kind  of  experiment  the  fluids  have  afterwards 

dtiber  to  be  boiled  or  otherwise  superheated  (before  or  after  closure  of 

fte  flasks),  the  slight  increase  in  temperature  during  the  preparation 

tf  Infusions  becomes  of  less  consequence.     But  in  studying  Hetero- 

fBKsis.  and  with  the  view  (/  untnesung  all  the  higher  ehangu  which 

wmj  take  place  in  a  pellide,  the  organic  infusions  or  maceratiotu  must 

wiib  cold  water,  and  subsequently  filtered. 


20S  /7//-,    /•/•^/.\"\7\7;.v   OF  LIFE. 

size,  and  irregularly  placed  with  regard  to  the  direct  inn 
of  their  long  axis.  Such  areas  are  freely  intermixed 
with  other  less  altered  portions  in  which  the  Bacteria  are 
densely  packed,  even  smaller  than  natural,  and  appa- 
rently not  separated  by  any  pellucid  material.  Any  of 
the  modified  areas  may  after  a  time  undergo  changes, 
very  similar  to  those  which  I  have  last  described  as 
resulting  in  the  production  of  fungus-germs. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  totally  different  fate  may  occa- 
sionally await  such  modified  areas.  Thus,  in  a  strong 
infusion  prepared  with  water  at  a  temperature  of  about 
lao^T,  the  pellicle  was  found  to  be  abundant  and  pulpy; 
and  on  the  second  day  areas  of  the  kind  above  described 
were  most  marked  and  numerous'.  The  contained 
Bacteria  very  soon  became  notably  larger  and  distinctly 
loculated — each  loculus  containing  two  or  three  granules ; 
whilst  the  jelly-like  material  was  so  abundant  that 
each  Bacterium '  was  distinctly  isolated  from  its  fellow^ 
These  particular  areas  were  watched  for  several  days, 
and  were  hot  found  to  have  any  tendency  to  undergo 
,  segmentation,  although  myriads  of  Monads  had  been 
formed  in  adjacent  portions  of  the  pellicle,  as  well  as 
Fungus-germs  which  had  vegetated  into  mycelial  fila- 
ments and  bore  numerous  heads  of  spores,  similar  to 
those  of  a  small  variety  of  Pemcillium  gloMcum.  The  B«r- 
teria  included  within  these  areas  seemed  to  possess  too 

'  The  daily  atmospheric  temperature  being  about  63^F. 
'  The  corpuscular  appearance  of  some  of  these  bodies  was  so  marfced 
that  they  might,  perhaps,  more  appropriately  be  sp(^en  of  as  Tonda. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  209 


ODcfa  inherent  vigour  to  lose  their  own  individuality 
supposition  which  was  confirmed  by  their  great  increase 
in  size  and  subsequent  development.  On  the  fourth 
and  fifth  days  many  were  seen  which  had  grown  out 
into  minute  filaments,  resembling  what  is  commonly 
regarded  as  Jjtftvthrix^  although  they  also  possessed  all 
de  diaracteristics  of  a  miniature  fungus-mycelium. 

Thus,  then,  we  may  have  modified  areas  in  which 
tfae  contained  units  flourish  and  grow,  whilst  still  pre- 
serving their  own  individuality;  or  we  may  have  pel- 
bdd  areas  persisting  as  such  for  a  certain  time,  whose 
tndts  at  last  undergo  a  process  of  molecular  fusion  and 
Rgieiieration,  leading  to  the  production  of  a  segmenting 
flnbryonal  area  from  which  brown  fungus-germs  are 
poduced '.  And,  lastly,  there  may  be  pellucid  areas 
vUch,  almost  as  soon  as  they  are  formed,  begin  to 
oadergo  those  changes  whereby  they  are  converted  into 
tnie  embryonal  areas. 

*  Daring  this  process  the  contained  Bacteria  disappear,  and  a  whitish 
RfiictiYe  and  homogeneous  protoplasm  is  produced  in  the  place  of  the 
jdlf  and  its  contained  granules.    If  we  turn  to  the  account  given  of  the 
aipa  of  the  '  germinal  membrane '  in  the  ova  of  higher  animals,  we 
■tj^  be  struck  by  the  similarity  of  the  phenomena.    Miillcr  says  (Baly's 
Tmrisrion,  voL  L  p.  9) : — *  It  appears,  indeed,  that  the  genninal  mem- 
kttM  is  formed  by  the  attraction  and  aggregation  of  the  globules  of  the 
loft;  hut  all  parts  developed  in  this  germinal  membrane  are  produced 
:  If  solution  of  these  globules,  and  conversion  of  them  into  a  matter  in 
F'vkidi  00  demcntary  particles  can  be  distinctly  recognised,  and  of  which 
Ae  solecules  must  at  any  rate  be  beyond  comparison  more  minute 
ftn  the  globules  of  the  yolk  and  germinal  membrane.*    The  subse- 
fMt  devdopmcnt  of  plastodermic  cells  from  this  mass  also  agrees  closely 
vtt  what  oocnn  in  our  embryonal  areas.    (See  voL  L  p.  iii.  note  a.) 

VOL.  II.  P 


EM 

■H 

■ 

•1 

THE  BEGINNIA'GS  OF  UFE. 


Many  variations  exist  in  the  character  of  these  areas 
in  different  cases,  some  of  which  I  will  now  attempt 
to  describe,  as  I  have  lately  had  an  opportunity  of 
watching  numerous  transitional  conditions. 

The  pellicle  which  formed  on  a  filtered  maceratioa 
of  bay  during  frosty  weather  (when  the  temperature  of 
the  room  in  which  the  infusion  was  kept  was  larcly 
above  55''F,  and  sometimes  rather  lower  than  this)  pre- 
sented changes  of  a  most  instructive  character.  On  the 
third  and  fourth  days  the  pellicle  was  still  thin,  although 
on  microscopical  examination  all  portions  of  it  were 
found  to  be  thickly  dotted  with  embryonal  areas. 
Nearly  all  of  them  were  very  small,  though  a  few  areas 
of  medium  size  were  intermixed  '.  The  smallest  were 
not  more  than  jAo"  of  ^n  'n^h  in  diameter,  and  these 
separated  themselves  from  the  pellicle  as  single  cor- 
puscles ;  slightly  larger  areas  broke  up  into  two  or  three 
corpuscles  ;  and  others,  larger  still,  into  4-1  o  corpuscles. 
In  most  of  these  small  areas,  the  corpuscles  were  formed 
with  scarcely  any  appreciable  alteration  in  the  refractive 
index  of  the  matter  of  which  they  were  composed:  this 
simply  became  individualized,  so  that  the  corpuscles 
separated  from  the  surrounding  pellicle  and  from  their 
fellows,  still  presenting  all  the  appearance  of  being  por- 
tions of  the  pellicle,  and  exhibiting  from  4-10  altered 
'Bacteria  in  their  substance.  In  some  cases  the  products 
of  segmentation  soon  developed  into  actual  flagellated 

'  In  these  medium-sized  rtcds  segmeotatioD  tru  accomptnicd  by  Uie 
production  of  liomc^eneous  »nd  highly  refractive  protophum. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIfE. 


Awads  in  a  manner  presently  to  be  described  ^  whilst 
I  (tbcrs  tbcy  seemed  to  remain  for  a  longer  period 


SBiplat  Mode  of  Development  of  Monads  and  Fun^  from  the 
Fellicle.    (X  1670.) 


of  separate  and  aggregated  corpuscles, 
le&active  coodition,  developing  into 


1  Monads  1 


*  a  Fint  itiee  of  difTerentinIi 
*,  k  Sddi  corpuscles  in  a  m 

Monads. 
1,1.  FttDrileTdoped  Monads, 

/  liigeraiea  b  lir^t  sta^e  ordifTeicntiation. 

<.  ReftactiTc  corpuscles  which  wilt  develop  either  ii 

■Jj-  Vore  refractive  corpuscles  which  give  birth  to  mycelial  filaments 
I  ti  in  f .  and  ultimately  expand  into  a  fonn  of  Pmicillium  (b). 

k  the  condition  of  simple  motionless  corpuscles, 
Olher  solitaiy  corpuscles  or  small  areas  began  to  form  in 
At  psllicle  in  predsely  the  same  manner,  though  they 


aia  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

speedily  assumed  a  highly  refractive  and  homogeneous 
appearance.  Why  some  should  undergo  such  a  change, 
and  not  others,  it  seems  quite  impossible  to  say.  One 
can  only  assert  the  feet,  and  add  that  these  highly  re- 
fractive ovoid  corpuscles  were,  for  the  most  part,  more 
prone  to  produce  Fungus-germs  than  Monads.  Many 
of  them  soon  grew  out  into  dissepimented  fungus  fila- 
ments, which  rapidly  assumed  the  Pmcillivm  mode  of 
growth.  The  spores  which  were  abundantly  produced  in 
terminal  chaplet-like  scries  were,  however,  small,  bomcv 
geneous,  spherical,  and  colourless. 

On  several  occasions  I  have  seen  Monads  produced 
in  this  way,  by  direct  and  immediate  separation  from 
the  pellicle  i  though,  as  M.  Pineau  had  stated,  on  other 
occasions  they  may  be  seen  to  arise  in  groups — in  which 
they  appear  at  first  as  aggregations  of  motionless  cor- 
puscles. The  solitary  mode  of  origin  is  that  which  has 
been  described  by  M.  Pouchet,  and  although  the  details 
given  by  him  are  not  very  full,  so  far  as  they  go  they  are 
in  accordance  with  my  own  observations.  M.  Pouchet, 
for  instance,  describes  the,fiagellum  as  being  closely 
applied  to  the  body,  and  motionless  for  a  time.  This 
I  have  also  found  to  be  the  case.  I  have,  moreover, 
on  one  or  two  occasions  been  able  to  watch  all  the 
transitions  from  the  mere  motionless  corpuscle  to  the 
flagellated  Monad;  just  as,  on  other  occasions,  I  have 
watched  almost  similar  corpuscles  develop  into  Fungus- 
germs. 

Sometimes  the  flagellum  is   seen   attached   to  cor- 


KSU 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  2 1 3 

pusdes   which  still   display  almost   unaltered   Bacteria 
imbedded  in  their  substance:  generally,  however,  the 
ooqniscles    which  separate  from  the  pellicle   in  this 
comparatively   unaltered    condition,    undergo    certain 
slow  changes  before  the  fiagellum  is  developed.     The 
contained  Bacteria  become  more  and  more  indistinct, 
whilst  the  substance  of  the  corpuscle  grows  rather  more 
rcftactive  and  assumes  the  appearance  of  ordinary  proto- 
plasm.   Corpuscles  about  tttW  ^^  diameter  are  often 
very  obscurely  granular  and  quite  motionless.     They 
grow,  however,  and  when  they  have  attained  the  size 
of  -jinnF"  ^  diameter  they  frequently  begin  to  exhibit 
stow  tudulating  alterations   in  outline,  and  tend  to 
assume  an  ellipsoidal  form.     One  specimen  ^^Vry"  in 
dLameter,  was  seen  without  a  flagellum,  but  slowly 
alternating  between  the  spherical  and  ellipsoidal  forms. 
Suddenly,  at  one  extremity  of  the  ellipsoid,  a  series 
of  rapid  contractions  and  protrusions  of  its  substance 
were  observed,  and  when  they  ceased,  a  motionless 
filament  was  seen  bent  around  one  side  of  the  body. 
Three  minutes  afterwards  a  vacuole  appeared  for  the 
first  time  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  the  ellipsoid. 
The  corpuscle  remained  almost  motionless  for  twenty- 
fire  minutes,  merely  exhibiting  very  slight  changes  in 
outline;  after  thirty  minutes  the  first  slow  bendings  of 
the  flagellum  were  seen ;  and  after  thirty-five  minutes 
the  whole  organism  began  to  exhibit  slow  semi-rotations 
at  intervals  of  a  minute  or  two.     After  forty  minutes 
the  movements  were   pronounced  and  of  a  startling 


314  THE  BECmmNGS  OF  UFE. 

character,  dependent  upon  sudden  contractions  of  por- 
tions of  the  body  of  the  organism  rather  than  upon 
movements  of  its  flagellum.  After  fifty-five  minutes 
the  corpuscle  unfortunately  became  hidden,  owing  to 
its  having  floated  underneath  a  portion  of  the  pellicle. 
How  far  the  rapidity  of  the  .evolution  of  the  flagellum, 
and  its  subsequent  movements,  were  impaired  by  the 
glare  of  artificial  light  to  which  the  oiganism  was  sub- 
jected, cannot  be  said.  Certainly,  however,  the  flageU 
lum  seems  to  be  thrown  out  much  more  rapidly  in  other 
cases.  Speaking  of  simple  organisms  of  this  kind, 
Dr.  T.  R.  Lewis  says ' ; — *  Frequently  a  succession  of 
pseudopodia  are  seen  projected  in  a  wave-like  manner, 
as  if  lashing  the  fluid.'  And  again  of  other  similarly 
active  animalcules  he  says: — 'Sometimes  one  flagellum 
is  seen,  a  posterior  one  \  at  others,  an  anterior  one  also, 
both  being  retractile  at  will;  and  another  may  be 
darted  forth  out  of  any  portion  of  its  body.'  Again, 
where  tailed 'zoospores' are  produced  from  Aigie, or  from 
such  Fungi  as  Athlya  and  Cjstofusj  they  are  also  evolved 
most  rapidly — two  hours  often  sufficing  for  the  entire 
production  of  a  brood  of  such  flagellated  Monads  from 
the  segmentation  of  a  mass  of  formless  protoplasm. 

Monads,  indeed,  are  frequently  produced  from  the 
'pellicle'  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  that  by 
which  they  arise  within  the  terminal  chambers  of  certain 

'  'E«port  on  Ihe  Microscopic  Objects  found  m  Cholera  Encuitioiis, 
&C.'    Calcutta,  1870,  pp.  33  aod  )6. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  215 

Algx  or  Fungi — that  is  to  say,  they  result  from  the  seg- 
mentation of  a  mass  of  homogeneous  protoplasm  ^  The 
steps  of  this  process  we  will  now  describe. 

An  infusion  of  hay  was  made  with  water  at  a  tem- 
perature of  I20®-I30*'F,  and  maintained  at  this  heat 
for  three  hours.     After  filtration,  about  five  ounces  of 
the  fluid  were  poured  into  a  wide-mouthed  bottle,  and 
placed  under  a  small   bell-jar.     When  the  fluid  was 
examined  at  the  expiration  of  three  days,  it  was  found 
to  be  quite  turbid,  and  covered  by  a  moderately  thick 
pellicle.  On  removing  portions  of  this  pellicle  and  sub- 
mitting it  to  microscopical  examination,  the  fluid  around 
was  found  to  contain  multitudes  of  very  active  speci- 
mens of  Monas  lens^  having  an  average  length  of  ^^jsjs", 
whilst  the  pellicle  itself  was  mostly  composed  of  medium- 
sized  Bacteria^  though  there  were  a  few  areas  of  different 
dimensions  in  which  the  units  had  more  the  appear- 
ance of  embryo  ToruW^.     But,  contrasting  with   the 
very  pale  fawn  colour  of  the  evenly  granular  pellicle, 
there  were    numerous    refractive,   and    more    or   less 
homogeneous  areas  of  a  whitish  colour.     These  areas 


'  In  both  cases,  also,  it  happens  that  the  products  of  segmentation  are 
*<">wtiincs  motionless  and  sometimes  active  units.  We  have  already 
(p.  311)  spoken  of  these  differences  as  they  are  met  with  amongst  deriva- 
tives of  the  pellicle.  And  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  previously  stated 
(▼oLlp.  183),  the  products  of  the  subdivision  of  the  encysted  Proto- 
■^Mi  or  of  the  terminal  dissepiments  of  Acbyla,  are  actively  moving 
hodies;  whilst  in  the  closely  allied  Saprolegnia,  in  Peziza^  and  in  other 
Fangi,  the  prodncts  of  segmentation  are  perfectly  motionless  spores. 

'  Such  as  are  represented  in  Fig.  48,  a. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


differed  very  much  in  shape  and  size — some  were  net 
more  than  nAnr"»  whilst  others  were  as  much  as  y^" 


Fw.  S7- 
SeEmentntion  of  EJnbryonal  Areas  in 


>  Monads.     [  x   1670.) 


a.  Fiist  stage  of  differentiatioii, 

*.  Second  sloge— area  almost  hom<^;eneous  and  re&actiTe. 

c.  Fir^t  liBces  of  segmcDtition. 

d.  Segmentation  more  complete — ^units  highly  reTracdve. 
I.  Units  less  refractive— fonninE  tailless  corpuscles. 

/.  Fulty-developcd  Monads  derived  from  sach  corpuscles. 

in  diameter.    Their  shape  was  wholly  irregular.     Care- 
ful examination  with  a  ■^"  and  a  ,y  immersion  ob- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  2 1 7 


jective  made  it  easy  to  recognise  such  transitions  as 
arc  depicted  in  Fig.  57.    As  in  the  instances  previously 
recorded,  the  first  appreciable  stage  in  the  formation 
of  an  embryonal  area  in  the  pellicle  was  a  local  in- 
crease in  the  amount  of  gelatinous  material  between 
Ac  units  of  this  portion  of  the  pellicle,  which  thus 
became  mxxt  distinctly  separated   from   one   another 
tiian  in  adjacent  parts.    Gradually  these  particles  be- 
came less  sharply  defined,  and  at  last  scarcely  visible, 
in  the  midst  of  a  highly  refractive  protoplasmic  mass 
vhicfa  began  to  exhibit  traces  of  segmentation. 

Masses  of  this  kind  were  seen,  which  had  been  re- 
solved by  such  a  process  of  segmentation  into  a  number 
rfsphericai  corpuscles  about  xitis"  ^^  diameter.    These 
were  at  first  highly  refractive,  though  they  gradually 
became  rather  less  so,  and  revealed  the  presence  of 
two  or  three  minute   granules   in   their  interior.     In 
other  adjacent    areas,   a  number   of   densely   packed, 
pliant,  and  slightly  larger  corpuscles  were  seen  actively 
pushing  against  one  another.     When  they  separated 
they  were  found  to  be  active  ovoid  specimens  of  Mmas 
Ins  about  •^^^'  in  length,  and  provided  with  a  vacu- 
ole and  a  rapidly-lashing  flagellum.       On  the  fourth 
day  the   number  of  embryonal   areas   throughout   the 
pellicle   had   increased,  and    the  specimens  of  Monas 
existed    in    myriads    in    the    infusion.      They    were 
tolerably  uniform  in  size,  though  some  were  notably 
mailer  than  the  average,  owing  to  the  fact  that  they 
products  of  a  recent  fission,  all  the  stages  of  which 


'"> 


2i8  TJ/£  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

were  watched  on  many  occasions  ^  On  the  sixth  day 
many  of  the  Monads  had  much  increased  in  size,  some 
of  the  larger  of  them  measuring  y^uts'  ^^  length. 
Others  had  lost  their  flagellum,  and  were  existing  in 
the  form  of  ovoid  or  rounded  corpuscles,  which  were 
motionless,  though  still  provided  with  a  vacuole,  and 
now  also  with  a  solid  nucleus  about  T^shsrs'  ^^  diameter 
(Fig.  58,  ^,  r,  d).  All  stages  were  seen,  between  the 
ovoid  corpuscle  -^-i^"  in  length  and  a  much  larger 
Amoeba  of  the  kind  just  described,  which  was  either 
motionless  or  else,  at  intervals,  exhibited  slowly-evolved 
and  blunt  protrusions  from  its  periphyry. 

In  other  specimens  the  most  easy  and  rapid  alter- 
nations were  seen  between  the  shape  and  mode  of  loco- 
motion which  pertains  to  Monads  and  those  which  are 
characteristic  of  Amoebae.  Monads  which  had  been 
previously  in  active  motion  would  at  times  come  to 
a  state  of  rest,  develop  two  or  three  vacuoles  in  their 
interior,  and  behave  in  all  respects  like  an  Amoeba, 
save  for  the  presence  of  the  now  languidly  moving 
flagellum.  After  remaining  in  this  state  for  a  variable 
time,  some  of  them  would  just  as  abruptly  cease  to 
display  the  amoeboid  movements,  the  extra  vacuoles 
would  disappear,  the  shape  of  the  Monad  would  be  re- 
sumed— and  with  it  the  lashing  movements  of  the 
flagellum  which  again  gives  rise  to  the  rapidly-darting 

^  It  took  place  mostly  in  a  longitudinal,  though  occasionally  in  a 
transverse  direction.  I  have  never  seen  the  whole  process  occupy  less 
than  twenty  minutes. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  219 

gyiatioQS  of  the  organism.  Whilst  in  the  amccboid 
state  the  changes  in  shape  were  moderately  rapid ;  though 
two  or  three  organisms  were  watched,  one  portion  of 
which  remained  rounded  and  apparently  attached  to  the 
giass^  whilst  the  opposite  extremity  threw  out  and  re- 
tracted comparatively  long  processes  with  lightning- 
like  rapidity — some  of  them  being  filiform,  like  the 
cniinary  persistent  ilagellum  ^ 

On  the  seventh  day  thousands  of  the   motionless 
qiberoidal  Amoebx  were  seen,  which  had  much  increased 
in  size.    They  were  now  as  much  as  tAu"  in  dia- 
meter, and  displayed  one  or  more  vacuoles  (Fig.  58,  i). 
Each  one  contained  a  distinct  nuclear  particle,  though 
there  was  an  almost  complete  absence  of  granules — the 
body  substance  being  quite  pellucid.     Some  organisms 
of  the  same  kind,  though  rather  smaller,  contained  the 
ordinary  granules  in  their  interior  and  also  exhibited 
skw  amodx)id  movements ;  whilst  many  Monads  of  the 
same  size  and  general  appearance  were  seen  exhibiting 
amceboid  changes  of  form,  though  they  had  not  yet 
lost  their  almost  motionless  flagellum. 

On  the  eighth  day  there  were  myriads  of  active 
Amod>se  around  every  portion  of  the  pellicle  which  was 
examined — ^they  were  in  fact,  at  this  period,  almost 
as  numerous  as  the  Monads.  Great  numbers  also  existed 
in  the  spherical  motionless  condition. 


*  The  rapidity  with  which  such  processes  were  emitted  was  similar  to 
vfaftt  was  noticed  at  p.  414. 


220 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


On  the  ninth  day  the  pellicle  began  to  assume  a 
brownish  colour  on  the  surface,  owing  to  the  enormous 


•■  •  •    ••:.•■  •"  1 


FiQ.  58. 
Phases  in  the  Life-history  of  Monads  and  Amoeboc.    (  x  1670.) 

a,  a.  Monads  in  different  stages  of  growth. 

6,  6.  Similar  Monads  which  have  lost  or  retracted  their  flagella. 
c,  c.  Monads  about  to  be  transformed  into  Amoebse. 

</,  d.  Resulting  Amoebs  in  active  and  motionless  stages. 
€9  /,  g^  b.  Stages  by  which  motionless  Amoebae  become  encysted. 
i\  k^  /,  m.  Stages  by  which  other  Amoebie  become  resolved  into  Bacteria. 

development  of  minute,  brown  fungus-germs '.  Portions 
of  the  pellicle  were  also  separating  and  beginning  to 
sink,  whilst  many  of  the  spherical  Amoebae  were  under- 
going changes  destined  to  result  in  encystment. 

*  Very  similar  to  those  represented  in  Fig.  59,  #. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  221 

On  the  tenth  day,  similar  though  more  advanced 
changes  were  seen.    Although    the   majority  of   the 
Amcebz  were  still  active  and  polymorphic,  hundreds  of 
them  were  becoming  encysted,  and  the  different  stages 
of  the  process  could  be  well  seen.     They  were  these : — 
The  previously  spherical  Amoebae  lost  their  vacuoles, 
the  granules  almost  wholly  disappeared,  and  the  body 
generally  became  slightly  refractive — the  nucleus  being 
still  visible.   After  a  time  the  nucleus  became  invisible, 
and  the  whole  substance  of  the  organism  assumed  a 
homogeneous  and  highly  refractive  appearance — so  that 
when  it  was  examined  a  little  beyond  the  focal  dis- 
tance it  looked  almost  like  an  oil  globule.     There  was 
a  decided   condensation,  also,  of  the   outer   layer  of 
protoplasm,  this  being  the  first  trace  of  the  cyst-wall. 
Subsequently  the   cyst-wall    became   more   and    more 
manifest,  whilst  the  size  of  the  sphere  slightly  dimi- 
nished, and  assumed  a  faintly  brownish  tinge.     From 
the  surface  of  the  developing  cyst  there  were  a  number 
(rfvery  short,  ray-like  projections  (Fig.  58,^).  In  the  last 
stage,  whilst  the  cyst-wall  became  more  developed  and 
the  projections  more  obvious,  the  whole  exterior  en- 
velope assumed  a  decidedly  brown  colour,  and  the  con- 
tained protoplasmic  mass,  which  had  again  become  less 
refractive,  distinctly  separated  from  the  cyst-wall  *. 

t  In  the  coarse  of  the  next  few  days  myriads  of  the  Amoebae  had 
■idergocie  this  kmd  of  change,  which  is  inevitable  as  soon  as  the  activity 
0f  their  yital  processes  becomes  diminished.  It  is  the  extraordinary 
acthity  and  constant  change  of  shape  of  the  Amoebae  which 
to  prevent  the  earlier  occurrence  of  this  primary  differentiation. 


222  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

As  the  virtues  of  this  infusion  seemed  to  be  getting 
exhausted,  on  the  same  (tenth)  day  I  transferred  a 
portion  of  the  pellicle  to  the  surface  of  a  new  weak 
infusion  of  hay,  which  had  been  previously  boiled.  On 
the  following  day  the  Monads  were  found  to  have  in- 
creased very  much  in  size,  and  so  also  had  many  of 
the  Amoebae.  Several  large  ovoid  Monads  on  measure- 
ment were  found  to  be  as  much  as  jxAn^"  in  length — 
they  had,  in  fact,  become  nearly  twice  as  long  as  the 
largest  of  those  which  had  existed  in  the  old  infusion. 

Five  days  afterwards  (sixteenth  day),  when  another 
portion  of  this  transferred  pellicle  was  examined,  all 
the  Monads  were  found  to  have  disappeared,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  which  were  in  a  motionless  state 
and  were  apparently  about  to  be  converted  into  Amcubse. 
These  latter  organisms  existed  in  teeming  myriads :  a 
portion  of  them  had  become  encysted,  whilst  of  the  rest 
about  one  half  were  active,  and  the  others,  though  not 
encysted,  were  almost  motionless  and  more  or  less 
granular.  On  further  examination,  it  was  found  that 
the  granular  Amoebx  (Fig.  58,  i-m)  were  organisms  in 
a  dying  state,  and  that  the  contained  particles  were 
new  living  units  which  gradually  developed  into  Bacteria. 
All  the  stages  of  this  development  were  to  be  seen. 
Thus  there  were  a  considerable  number  of  languid 
Amoebae  which  merely  displayed  a  slight  increase  in  the 
customary  number  of  minute  particles  situated  near  or 
around  the  nucleus.  There  were  others  in  which  these 
minute  granules  were  more  numerous  j  and  others  still. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  223 

quite  motionless  and   spherical,  which  were   densely 
packed  with  minute  particles  throughout  their  whole 
substance — these  particles  being  motionless  and  less  than 
nnjTRny"  iii  diameter.    In  many  of  such  Amcrbae  a  clear 
vacuole  was  still  to  be  seen.     In  other  organisms  the 
particles  were  of  a  slightly  larger  size,  and  owing  to  the 
protoplasmic  substance  in  which  they  had  been  produced 
having  become  fluid,  these  particles  were  to  be  seen 
in  active  movement  within  an  attenuated  film  which 
constituted  the  outer  layer  of  the  old  organism  whose 
nucleus  was  still  visible.     When  reduced  to  this  con- 
dition, trembling  movements  of  the  whole  mass  were 
seen,  owing  to  the  combined  agitations  produced  by  the 
contained  units.    Soon  the  attenuated  outer  membrane 
gave  way,  and  as  the  contained  units  were  liberated, 
they  at  once  exhibited  very  active  movements  of  pro- 
gression, after  the  fashion  of  minute  Bacteria,    The  sur- 
rounding fluid  was,  in  fact,  crowded  with  similarly  minute 
and  active  Bacteria^  and  with  others  slightly  larger,  which 
had  evidently  been  produced  in  this  manner. 

Such  was  the  fate  that  overtook  those  Amoebae  which 
Kved  latest  in  the  solution.  Changes  of  an  unhealthy 
'mature  seemed  to  have  been  so  suddenly  induced  that 
^  organisms  did  not  possess  sufficient  energy  even  to 
unde^  the  process  of  encystment.  Their  own  mole- 
^^  movements  (those  which  pertain  to  the  ordinary 
^^  of  the  Amoebae)  being  so  languid,  other  retrograde 
changes  were  initiated,  leading  to  the  birth  of  new 
P^cles  throughout  their  substance.     Bacteria^  in  fact. 


224  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

were  generated  by  a  most  typical  process  of  Hetcro- 
genetic  Bioparadosis  ^. 

The  changes  which  have  been  thus  observed  consti- 
tute a  very  remarkable  series.  The  simplest  living 
units  {Bacterid)  first  swarm  in  the  infusion ;  these  be- 
come aggregated  at  the  surface  so  as  to  form  a  ^pro- 
ligerous  pellicle/  in  which  embryonal  areas  gradually 
appear ;  as  a  result  of  segmentation  in  these  embryonal 
areas,  specimens  of  Monas  lens^ ^Atf"  i^  diameter,  more 
or  less  suddenly  make  their  appearance ;  they  increase 
in  size,  occasionally  assume  an  amoeboid  appearance 
for  a  time,  and  are  ultimately  transformed  into  real 
Amoebae.  The  transition  is  effected  by  the  loss  of  the 
flagellum,  the  appearance  of  vacuoles  in  their  interior, 
and  the  simultaneous  manifestation  of  polymorphism 
and  a  creeping  mode  of  progression ;  at  the  same  time 
a  nuclear  corpuscle  develops  in  the  interior,  and  the 
whole  animal  grows  considerably.  At  last  the  Amoebas 
gradually  cease  to  exhibit  their  characteristic  move- 
ments, whilst  they  become  more  or  less  spherical  and 
motionless.  Ultimately  a  firm  bounding  membrane  is 
produced,  and  they  pass  into  the  encysted  condition, 
in  which,  although  slightly  smaller  in  size,  they  consti- 
tute spherules  tAtt"  i^  diameter.  On  the  removal  of 
some  of  this  pellicle  to  the  surface  of  a  fresh  infusion, 
the  Monads  and  Amoebae  greatly  increased  in  size ;  all 
the  Monads  gradually  became  converted  into  Amoebsc, 
and  some  of  these  at  first  went  through  the  ordinaiy 

^  See  vol.  L  p.  334. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  225 

process  of  encystment,  though  at  last  (on  account  of 
some  more  sudden  change  in  the  fluid)  they  seemed 
suddenly  to  lapse  into  a  morbid  state.  They  were 
apparently  unable  to  encyst  themselves,  and  not  being 
callable  of  continuing  as  Amoebae,  there  sprang  up  m 
their  interior  a  teeming  progeny  of  new  units  {Bacterid)^ 
the  production  of  which  occasioned  the  final  dissolution 
of  the  organisms  in  which  they  were  evolved. 

Other  changes,  however,  took  place  in  this  same 
infusion  which  deserve  to  be  chronicled.  On  the  sixth 
day  there  were  seen  scattered  throughout  those  portions 
of  the  pellicle  intervening  between  the  embryonal  areas 
a  multitude  of  solitary  spherules,  varying  in  size 
from  mere  specks  -^jshr^'^  in  diameter,  or  less,  to  bodies 
i^"  in  diameter.  They  were  colourless,  quite  motion- 
less, and  appeared  to  be  solid  and  almost  homogeneous 
niasscs  of  plasma  rather  than  vesicular  bodies  (Fig.  59, 
4  There  were  merely  faint  indications  of  granules  in 
tkir  interior,  and  no  evidence  of  a  differentiated  outer 
nicmhranc.  None  of  them  seemed  to  be  undergoing 
processes  of  self-division,  and  each  appeared  to  have 
grown  up  in  the  situation  in  which  it  was  seen  ^ 
These  corpuscles  gradually  became  more  numerous  on 
to  the  tenth  day,  though  they  underwent  no  appreciable 

^  These  bodies  were  evidently  quite  different  from  Monas  and  its 
'Ottboid  derivatives,  all  of  which  shrivelled  very  much  when  mounted  in 
S^ycerinejelly,  though  the  corpuscles  which  I  have  just  been  describing 
^B^^owcDt  no  change  of  this  kind. 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


change    except    a    slight    increase    in   size.     On  the 
eleventh  day,  in  the  portion  of  the  pellicle  which  had 
been  transferred  to  the  fresh  hay  infusion,  many  of 
these  stationary  bodies,  like  the  Monads  and  active 
Amoebae,  were  found  to  have  increased  to  such  an  extent 
as  to  have  doubled  their  transverse  measurement.  They 
had  also  developed  a  distinct  nucleus  in  their  interior 
(of  a  ring-like  character) ;  vacuoles  appeared  and  dis- 
appeared at  intervals^  and  at  the  same  time  they  ex-* 
hibited  very  slow  and  slight  amoeboid  changes  in  outline 
(^5  ^j  0"     They  were,  in  fact,  now  obviously  converted 
into  sluggish  Amoebae.     On  the  seventeenth  day  many 
of   them   were   recognised    in    the   pellicle,  scattered 
amongst  the  already-described  encysted  Amoebae.   They 
had  again  become  motionless  and  slightly  contracted  in 
dimensions;   whilst  their  outer  layer  was  condensed, 
but  not  decidedly  cyst-like.    Many  of  the  smaller  sizes 
were  also  seen.     Seven  days  afterwards  (twenty-fifth 
day),  when  another  portion  of  the  transferred  pellicle 
was  examined,  it  was  found   to   be   densely  studded 
throughout  with  thousands  of  encysted  Amoebae,  the 
great  majority  of  which  were  of  the  first  variety  and 
were  pretty  uniform  in  size  and  appearance.   But  inter- 
spersed amongst  them  were  a  considerable  number  of 
the   imperfectly-encysted   Amoebae,  of  different  sizes* 
Here  and  there,  however,  some  of  them — now  mostly 
about  ttW  in  diameter — presented  an  unusual  appear- 
ance.   They  had  assumed  a  faint  brown  hue  throughout 
their  whole  mass,  and  segmentation  had  gone  on  within 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


2^7 


10  as  to  produce  a  number  of  units,  whose  shape  seemed 
iicgular  owing  to  their  being  so  densely  packed.   Other 


Fio.  59. 

Organisms  s^^menting  into  brown  Fungus-germs  or  growing 
into  Amoebae.    (  x  1670.) 

^  c  Motionless  corpusdes  of  various  sizes. 

i,  Smilar  corpuscles  much  increased  in  size. 
9, 4.  Segmentation  of  such  corpuscles  into  brown  Fungus-germs. 

i>  Appearance  of  germs  when  liberated. 
//  Development  of  the  almost  similar  germs  represented  in  Fig.  48,  </. 
).^^L  Gradual   conversion  of  other  corpuscles,  when  transferred  to 
aziother  fluid,  into  Amoebse. 


were  seen  in  which  considerable  growth  had 
HSAen  place — these  being  nearly  twice  the  size  and 
pb^ular  in  outline,  though  still  of  a  faint  brown 
',  and  composed  of  a  mass  of  densely  packed 
which  were  held  together  by  an  almost  invisible 
lOQiiding  membrane.  And,  lastly,  in  other  places 
IbbQ  aggr^ations  of  brownish  germs  were  seen,  which 
tttd  been  liberated  by  the  solution  of  this  very  attenu- 


228  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

ated  membrane — the  separate  germs  being  tolerab 
thick-walled,  bilocular  bodies  about  :nAnF'^'  i^  length  I 
TToinr''in  breadth.  An  examination  on  subsequent  da; 
showed  many  other  of  the  amoeboid  bodies  breaking  c 
in  a  similar  manner  into  these  brownish,  biloculatc 
Fungus-germs. 

But,  strange  to  say,  brown  Fungus-germs  of  an  alma 
similar  character  had  previously  presented  themselvi 
on  the  surface  of  the  original  infusion,  although  the 
had  arisen  in  quite  a  different  manner,  and  apparent 
by  a  process  of  Archebiosis. 

In  the  original  infusion,  when  the  Amoebae  con 
menced  encysting  themselves  (on  the  tenth  day),  po 
tions  of  the  pellicle  began  to  sink  to  the  bottom  • 
the  vessel.  Three  or  four  days  later  it  was  found  th 
the  portions  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  which  had  thi 
been  left  uncovered,  were  coated  by  a  delicate,  browni 
film,  which,  when  examined  microscopically,  displays 
appearances  similar  to  those  represented  in  Fig.  48, 
An  almost  invisible  and  thin  gelatinous  stratum  exist 
(a  kind  of  formative  membrane),  in  which  every  inte 
mediate  stage  could  be  detected,  between  the  mc 
minute  particle  and  a  brownish,  thick-walled,  biloc 
lated  fungus-germ.  The  smaller  bodies  were  colourle 
solid-looking,  and  highly  refractive  j  and  they  seem 
much  more  like  mere  dead  concretions^  than  livi 

^  Such  as  are  represented  in  Fig.  43;  or  such  as  appear  in  sc 
amnionic  tartrate  solutions,  and  which  are  so  closely  allied  to  Swn 
(See  Ajiptndix  A,  p.  iv.  Fig.  a.) 


d 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


2^9 


Ihiiig^  All  were  motionless.  Gradually,  however, 
tfccy  became  less  refractive,  grew  more  and  more 
icsicular,  and  at  last  assumed  a  faint  brown  tint. 
Aitha^  most  of  them  remained  as  bilocular  bodies, 
^Ae&  grew  and  underwent  further  segmentation,  so 
[isto  produce  tri-  and  quadrilocular  bodies,  or  'sL*ptatc 
Jforcs.'  During  all  stages  of  growth,  some  of  them 
■raicd  to  undergo  an  occasional  process  of  fission. 
Hicy  were  watched  for  many  days,  but  as  the  germs 
i^fcyed  no  tendency  to  develop  *,  some  of  them  were 
WHnciscd  in  a  little  syrup  upon  a  glass  slip,  protected 
kf  a  covering  glass,  and  then  set  aside  in  a  damp, 
w-tight,  developmental  chamber.  After  about  ten 
ip  the  germs  were  found  to  have  become  more 
oAttriess^  to  have  budded  and  multiplied,  and  in  many 
OSes  to  have  formed  elegant  mycelial  filaments,  such 
>*  arc  represented  in  Fig.  59,/,/. 

These  latter  observations  are  interesting  in  many 
*9ccts.  It  is  remarkable,  for  instance,  that  germs 
■^precisely  the  same  appearance  should  arise  after  such 
ttcrcnt  methods — ^by  origin  and  growth  in  a  formative 
•snbrane  in  one  case,  and  as  the  result  of  the  scg- 
[Itotation  of  a  partially  encysted  Amoeba  in  another 
Then,  again,  it  is  extremely  interesting  to  find 
these  parental  Amoebae  had,  to  all  appearance, 
■*n  by  a  process  of  Archebiosis,  although  at  one 

^  Tliis  has  been  yeiy  frequently  observed  on  other  occasions.    See 


r 


230  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Stage  of  their  development  they  were  ahnost  indis 
tingiiishable  from  other  Amoebae  seen  in  the  same  in 
fusion,  which  had  resulted  immediately  from  the  tram 
fDrmation  of  flagellated  Monads,  and  mediately  £ 
products  of  a  process  of  segmentation  occurring  in  ai 
embryonal  area.  So  that  whether  we  have  to  do  wil 
Fungus-germs  or  with  Amoebae,  their  forms  arc  occi 
sionally  so  intimately  associated  with  the  matter  fro 
which  they  have  been  derived,  that  similarity  may  ulk 
mately  be  met  with  between  organisms  whose  actiB 
modes  of  origin  have  been  most  diverse. 

These  amoeboid  corpuscles  which  grew  up  in  tl 
midst  of  the  pellicle  were  peculiar  in  many  respeci 
In  their  very  early  stages  it  was  quite  impossible  to  ss 
whether  they  were  going  to  develop  into  Fungus-gem 
or  into  Amoebae ;  ultimately,  however,  they  seemed  1 
lean  more  towards  the  latter  mode  of  developmen 
although  the  activity  which  they  displayed  in  this  phas 
of  their  existence  was  extremely  slight.  Finally,  we  fim 
them,  after  encystment,  undergoing  a  process  of  scg 
mentation,  by  which  they  give  rise  to  a  colony  of  browi 
Fungus-germs,  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  that  bj 
which  the  Protomyxa  of  Haeckel  gives  origin  to  flagel 
lated  Monads  which  subsequently  assume  the  charactei 
and  mode  of  locomotion  of  Amoebae  ^    This  evidena 

*  Just  as  Amcebse  may  arise  either  by  Archebiosis  or  by  segmaitati< 
of  pre-existing  living  matter  (in  embryonal  areas),  with  or  witfao 
passing  through  the  Monad  phase  of  existence,  so  may  Fungns-spoi 
arise  by  either  of  these  methods.  There  is  abo  much  evidence  lo  she 
that  Monads  may  arise  directly  by  a  process  of  Archebiosis.     I  ha 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  231 


OMDbioed  with  what  has  been  already  alluded  to  in 
Chapter  XV,  and  in  addition  to  other  facts  previously 
bown,  tends  to  show  that  the  transition  from  the 
Amoeha  to  the  Monad,  or  the  reverse,  may  be  paralleled 
If  a  similar  interchangeability  between  the  form  and 
■ode  of  growth  of  an  Amoiba  and  that  peculiar  to 
a  Fnogus— so  that  either  form  may  at  times  result 
fan  one  and  the  same  living  matter  when  it  under- 
goes internal  modifications,  with  or  without  being  sub- 
jected to  new  conditions.  This  position  is  still  further 
stogthcncd  by  the  facts  which  I  have  now  to  record. 

A  few  days  after  having   made  the  infusion,  the 

dangcs  in  which  have  just  been  described,  I  prepared 

■other  with  a  portion  of  the  same  sample  of  hay. 

iWs  second  infusion,  however,  was  made  with  water 

^  a  temperature  of  I58^F,  which  was  maintained  at 

Ai$  heat    for    two    hours.     After    filtration    it    was 

fbced  in  a  similar  vessel,  and  allowed  to  stand  side 

Jy  side  with  the  other  infusion.     On  the  third  day, 

embryonal  areas  of  various  shapes  and  sizes  were  seen 

in  the  firm  pellicle  which  had  formed  upon  the  surfaced 

■  ooe  or  two  occasions  seen  small  Monads  tolerably  abundant   in 

■%f*Tm  of  hay  which  had  only  been  prepared  twenty-four  hours,  and 

■fa  which  no  coherent  pellicle  had  yet  formed  in  which  they  could  have 

imak  by  the  secondary  process.     Moreover,  they  have  been  found  in 

'jaded  flasks  in  which  no  pellicle  was  present,  even  by  M.  Pasteur.    In 

i^own  Ej^erimerU  b  (vol.  i.  p.  443),  the  Monads  must  have  had  this 

mode  of  origin.    Here  some  of  the  new-born  specks  of  living 

Eeemed  to  have  grown  into  Fungus-germs,  some  into  minute 

,  and  others  into  Monads. 

t  Xhe  dUily  temperature  being  about  60°  F. 


232 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


These  areas  were  distinguished  by  their  whitish,  re- 
fractive appearance  from  the  slightly  fawn  colour  ot 
the  contiguous  unaltered  pellicle.  Particles  of  some 
kind  were  obscurely  seen  within  the  refractive  proto- 
plasm, and  on  the  following  day  many  of  the  areaj^ 
which  had  increased  in  number,  showed  signs  of  com- 
mencing segmentation.     This  process  went  on  com- 


Scgmcntalion  of  Emlirjonal  Aro 


□  Fun^s-geims,     (  x   1670.) 


a.  First  stage  of  diffcranlialion. 

b.  Area  almost  homogeneous  and  refractiix. 

c.  First  stage  of  segmetilalion. 

d.  Area  showing  more  complete  segmentation. 

'.  Area  in  which  hom<^coeous  refractive  products  are  bein 
verted  into  brownish  vesicular  Fungus-germs. 
/.  /".  One  form  of  germ  in  different  stages  of  development. 
8'  g'.  Another  form  of  genn  in  different  stages  of  development. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  233 


paiatiFcJy  slowly,  and  two  or  three  days  elapsed  before 
the  segmentation  was  completed.     But  at  last  some  of 
the  areas  were  wholly  resolved  into  a  number  of  colour- 
les,  homogeneous,  and  highly  refractive  spherules,  about 
xi^  ^  diameter.    Some  areas  seemed  to  remain  in 
tUs  condition  for  two  or  three  days  longer,  whilst  in 
others  the  products  of  segmentation  began  to  undergo 
dunge  almost  before  it  was  completed.     In  each  case, 
however,  the  modification  was  of  the  same  kind,  and 
consisted  in  a  gradual  diminution  in  the  refractivcness 
of  the  separated  elements,  and  their  assumption  of  a 
more  distinctly  vesicular  character,  whilst  they  simulta- 
neously acquired  a  feint  brown  colour.    They  were  thus 
converted  into  unmistakeable  fungus-germs,  although 
they  showed  very  little  tendency  to  germinate ;  and  it 
was  not  until  after  repeated  examination  that  a  few 
of  them  were  found  growing  out  into  filaments  such  as 
are  represented  in  the  figure.  Occasionally,  in  the  same 
pellicle,  the  embryonal  areas  broke  up  into  products  of 
a  somewhat  diflFerent  character.     The  segments  were 
slightly  larger,  whilst  they  gradually  assumed  a  deeper 
brown  colour  and  a  more  compound  character.     These 
elements  also  grew  at  this  stage,  and  underwent  pro- 
cesses of  division  after  the  fashion  of  Lichen  gonidia, 
and  in  a  manner  similar  to  what  I  had  observed  on  a 
previous  occasion'.     These  germs  also  exhibited  very 
little    tendency  to  develop,  though   on    one  ^  or  two 

'  Sec  p.  203,  Fig.  55. 


234  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

occasions  they  were  seen  to  have  grown  out  into  short, 
chain-like  filaments,  such  as  are  represented  in  Fig.  6o. 
During  all  the  period  in  which  the  embryonal  areas 
were  breaking  up  into  these  corpuscles,  which  soon  as- 
sumed the  form  of  brown  Fungus-germs,  not  a  single 
Monad  or  Amoeba  was  to  be  seen  in  the  solution — and 
yet  during  the  whole  time  it  had  been  standing  side 
by  side  with  the  other  infusion  which  was  prepared 
at  a  temperature  of  i2o**-i25°F.  Facts  of  this  kind 
have  been  observed  on  several  other  occasions  with 
great  constancy,  so  that  one  may  safely  state  that 
Fungus-germs  or  Monads  and  Amoebae  may  be  procured 
at  will,  by  simply  regulating  the  amount  of  heat  at  which 
the  infusion  is  prepared.  The  Monad  and  the  Amoeba 
represent  more  animalised  modes  of  existence,  which 
are  only  able  to  manifest  themselves  in  infusions  in 
which  the  organic  matter  has  not  been  too  much 
deteriorated  by  the  influence  of  heat.  Such  deterio- 
ration seems  to  manifest  itself  by  altering  the  develop- 
mental potentialities  of  the  primary  forms  of  living 
matter  evolved  in  the  infusion  \ 

*  Seeing  that  the  Monads  or  the  Fungus-spores  are  produced,  not 
from  invisible  germs  but  from  the  segmentation  of  large  embryonal 
areas,  every  stage  of  whose  formation  can  be  accurately  traced,  this 
seems  the  only  possible  explanation.  If  the  opponent  of  Evolution  con* 
tends,  in  answer  to  one  set  of  experiments  with  heated  fluids  and  dosed 
flasks,  that  Monads  are  met  with  because  their  germs  are  capable  of 
resisting  a  temperature  of  266°  F,  he  cannot  now  contradict  himself  by 
saying  that  embryonal  areas  formed  on  infusions  which  have  been  pre- 
pared at  a  temperature  of  158°  F  do  not  yield  Monads,  because  such  a  tem- 
perature is  destructive  to  their  germs.    Neither  is  it  open  to  him  to  say 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  235 

Experience  has  shown  me  that  if  an  infusion  has 
been  heated  for  a  time  to  2I2^F,  the  pellicle  which 
forms  on  its  surface  very  frequently  never  gives  rise  to 
onbryonal  areas;  if  the  infusion   has  been   prepared 
at  a  temperature  of  149°- 158°?,  the  embryonal  areas 
which  form  will  give  origin  to  Fungus-germs;  whilst  in 
a  similar  infusion  prepared  at  120°-I30°F,  the  embry- 
onal areas,  which  seem  at  first  to  be  in  all  respects 
similar,  break  up  into  actively-moving  Monads.     It 
remains  for  us  to  see  what  changes  may  take  place  in 
a  pellicle  which  forms  on  an  infusion  or  maceration 
prtpared  with  cold  water  (6o**-7o°F). 

Before  passing  to  a  description  of  these  phenomena, 
however,  I  will  describe  the  mode  of  origin  of  the 
embryos  of  some  organism  whose  real  nature  is  un- 
known— ^the  final  stages  of  its  development  not  having 
been  traced.  As  far  as  they  were  seen,  the  stages  were 
of  a  very  positive  character, 

I  have  observed  these  early  stages  in  two  different 
infusions;  but  in  each  case,  after  a  certain  stage  of 
development  had  been  achieved,  no  further  progress 
seemed  to  be  made  for  about  two  days,  and  then  the 
pellicle  unfortimately  broke  up  and  sank  to  the  bottom. 
The  arrest  of  development  may  therefore  have  been 

tkat  onbryonal  areas  yielding  Fungus-germs  do  not  appear  in  infusions 
prepared  at  3I2°F,  because  such  heat  is  destructive  to  them;  when  at 
tlie  same  time  he  yehemently  contends,  in  answer  to  other  experiments, 
ftat  similar  Fimgus*gerros  are  not  hindered  from  developing  after  expo- 
to  snch  a  temperature,  or  to  others  which  are  much  higher. 


236 


THE  BEGINNINGS  Ol'  LIl'E. 


due  in  each  case  to  some  morbid  quality  of  the  pellicle 
itself.  These  organisms  were  observed  in  the  middle 
of  the  month  of  April  (1869),  ^^  ^^  infusion  of  turnip 
leaves,  which  had  been  prepared  fourteen  days  pre- 
viously. All  stages  of  development  could  be  seen  in 
different  parts  of  the  pellicle.  The  new  organism  first 
manifested  itself  by  the  presence  (in  a  uniformly  granu- 
lar layer)  of  an  aggregation  of  8-20  larger  and  more 
refractive  particles,  which  gradually  became  marked 
off  from  the  surrounding  granules  by  a  thin  but  distinct 
bounding  membrane.     The  granules  continued  to  in- 


Fio.  61. 

Mode  of  Origin  and  Development  of  an  Embryo  of  uncertain 

nature.     ( x  800.) 

crease  in  size ;  and  at  a  later  stage  the  containing  sphere 
was  seen  to  have  grown  larger,  whilst  the  granules 
had  assumed  a  crescentic  arrangement  (r).  On  their 
concave  side  there  was  a  tolerably  large  refractive 
globule  about  -Yruisis"  ^^  diameter,  which  exhibited  the 
most  distinct  oscillations  and  more  or  less  extensive 
to  and  fro  movements  in  the  otherwise  clear  central 
space.  In  other  specimens  this  central  globule  had 
become  even  larger  and  the  granules  had  closed  round 


THE  BEGINNINGS  01  LIFE.  237 


it  more  equally,  so  as  to  leave  a  broad  space  between 
the  central  mass  and  the  thin  walls  of  the  containing 
qjhere.    The  measurements  in  this  stage  were  found  to 
be  as  follows: — containing  sphere  ^^jVir",  central  nuclear- 
like  body  TTj^iny",  and  surrounding  mass  of  granules 
j^"  in  diameter.    Afterwards  the  central  nuclear-like 
body  and  the  granular  mass  seemed  to  become  lighter  in 
colour — the  former  still  exhibiting  its  slow  oscillating 
movements,    whilst    the    latter    had    much    increased 
in  size  so  as  more  nearly  to  fill  the  delicate  cyst  in 
which  it  was  contained  (e).     Then  the  outlines  of  the 
embryo  gradually  became  more  defined;  three  or  four 
other  rather  large  granules  appeared  in  the  neighlxxii- 
hood   of  the   nucleus,  and  one  crescentic  portion  of 
the  embryo-mass  presented  a  smooth,  glistening,  and 
homc^eneous  appearance.   No  later  stages  were  traced ; 
and  though  no  movements  of  the  embryo  as  a  whole 
were  seen — only  movements  of  the  nucleus — there  could 
not  be  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  these  bodies  repre- 
sented organisms  of  some  kind,  which  were  developing, 
QOt  fix>m  ova,  but  as  a  result  of  changes  taking  place 
in  the  very  substance  of  the  pellicle  itself. 

The  intermediate  connecting  links  between  the 
Flagellated  Monads  on  the  one  hand,  and  such  Ciliated 
Infusoria  as  Paramecium  and  Kolfoda  on  the  other,  are 
undoubtedly  such  forms  as  those  which  were  included 
by  Dujardin  in  his  genus  Enckelys.  They  are  scarcely 
larger  than  many  Monads ;  they  possess  the  same  simple 


structure,  having  no  trace  of  an  oral  aperture,  thou.-'^V, 
like  the  Monads  they  display  an  internal  vacuole,  i>^^^^ 


rii).6i. 

CiUaled  Infusori*. 


'.  Group  of  Vcrlictlla. 
c.  Kolfoda. 


like  them  also  they  may  or  may  not  possess  a  simple 
nuclear  particle.  They  present  the  same  variations  in 
form  which  are  to  be  met  with  amongst  Monads,  and 
they  differ  from  them  only  by  the  possession  of  vibratile 
cilia  over  most  of  their  body,  instead  of  possessing 
one  much  longer  flagellum.  They  are,  moreover,  not 
unfrequcntly  met  with  in  large  numbers  in  situations 
in  which  Monads  abound. 

Pineau  says  he  has  watched  the  development  of 
ot^anisms  of  this  kind  in  a  pellicle  which  formed  on 
an  infusion  of  isinglass.  The  first  stage?  were  alto- 
gether similar  to  those  which  he  has  described  as  having 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  239 


faioi  place  in  the  evolution  of  Monas  lens  ^     Cor- 
pBclcs  were  seen  to  separate  from    the   embryonic 
aggregations  without  a  flagellum,  though  they  continued 
to  inacase  in  size,  and  soon  developed  a  vacuole  and 
flndcar  particle  in  their  interior.     As   they  enlarged 
they  gradually  assumed  an  oval  form,  though  still  re- 
auning  motionless  and  devoid  of  cilia.     At  last,  with 
loy  little  further   increase    in   size,   cilia   were  de- 
veloped*, and  the  organisms  gradually  displayed  the 
Vpcuance  and  kxomotory  powers  which  have  been 
attributed  by  Dujardin  to  the  form  which  he  named 

The  oiganisms  previously  mentioned  have  nearly  all 
been  minute,  and  it  has  therefore  been  somewhat  difficult 
^  trace  their  early  stages.  These  difficulties,  however, 
gradually  vanish  when  we  come  to  the  investigation  of 
the  mode  of  origin  of  such  larger  organisms  as  Vara^ 
•»«  and  Kolfoda.  Although  their  most  remarkable 
^w>dc  of  origin  was  folly  described  and  figured  by 
M.  Pouchet  more  than  twelve  years  ago,  yet,  unfortu- 
nately, many  of  our  leading  biologists  have  preferred 
to  repudiate  his  statements,  and  rely  upon  their  own 

*  See  jx  196. 

*  The  apparition  of  cilia  is  known  to  be  quite  sudden  in  the  dcve- 
%*ent  of  the  spore  of  Vaucberia,  and  also  to  be  sudden  during  the 
^Mopmoit  of  other  Infusoria,  such  as  Cienkowski  and  others  have 
AfcH^ed.    (Sec  Appendix  D,  p.  xciv.  note  3.) 

•To  another  similar  solution  of  isinglass  M.  Pineau,  mindful  of  the 
ndts  recorded  by  Dutrochet,  added  a  few  drops  of  vinegar,  and  he 
191:— 'H  nc  s*y  dcveloppa  un  seul  animalcule:  mais  en  revanche  elle 
■  CQBfrit,  comme  je  m'y  attendais;  d'un  foret  de  moisissures.' 


340  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

notions  concerning  credibility  and  the  mode  in  wbidi 
living  matter  ought  to  conduct  itself,  rather  than  ad^ 
quately  investigate  the  subject  for  themselves. 

According  to  Pnuchet,  the  stages  in  the  evolution  of 
Partmecium  vtrUe  were  as  follows: — The  pellicle  which 
was  at  first  uniform  and  evenly  granular,  after  a  short 


1   i.  #*?^. 


Mode  of  Origin  of  Paronucia  from  Ihe  '  Petlicle.'  aAer  Pouchct. 
(X  400.) 

time  changed  in  aspect  here  and  there,  owing  to  a 
concentration  of  its  granules  at  tolerably  equal  dis- 
tances into  small  more  or  less  rounded  aggregations 
which  s(x>n  became  surrounded  and  defined  by  a  clear 
border,  suggestive  of  a  resemblance  to  the  ztma  fel- 
Itteida  of  higher  animals.    The  next  change  which  took 


\ 


f 


Tff£  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  241 

place  was  that  the  granules,  which  had  been  at  first 
more  densely  aggregated  towards  the  centre,  dissemi- 
nated themselves  uniformly  through  the  ovum — whilst 
at  the  same  time  the  simple  clear  zone  thickened 
into  a  distinct  membrane.     At  this  stage  the  whole  egg 
appeared  somewhat  lighter  and  more  transparent  than 
the  surrounding  pellicle.    Soon  after  this — diflFerentia- 
tion  still  proceeding — the  mass  of  enclosed  granules 
gradually  became  converted  into  a  real  embryo,  which 
nunifested  its  existence  by  slow  movements — at  first  by 
simple  oscillations  in  the  mass  of  granules,  and  th^n  by 
Rgolar  uniform  movements  of  revolution  of  the  whole 
contents  within  its  enveloping  membrane,  similar  to 
those  of  many  other  embryos.     The  slightest  shock  at 
this  stage  immediately  arrested  the  gyration.    Then, 
after  a  time,  a  pale  spot  appeared  amongst  the  granules 
in  some  part  of  the  embryo,  the  alternate  contraction 
and  dilatation  of  which  soon  showed  that  it  was  the 
contractile  vesicle  of  the  infusorium.    After  a  time  the 
embryo  b^an  to  exhibit  movements  of  quite  a  different 
kind— sudden  and   irregular — no  longer  checked,  but 
rather  increased   by  slight  shocks  from  without.     In 
one  of  these  sudden  plunges  the  thin  enveloping  mem- 
brane was  ruptured,  and  there  entered  into  the  aquatic 
world  a  free-swimming  and  ciliated  infusorial  animal- 
cule having  the  characteristics  of  the  species  above 
mentioned. 

Such  is  the  marvellous  story,  and  the  description  of 
other  observers  is  substantially  similar.   In  the  particular 

VOL.  II.  R 


343  THE  BEGINNJNGS  OF  L/f-E. 

observation  of  which  M.  Pouchet  gives  the  detaik 
the  first  rudiments  of  the  eggs  began  to  make  their  ^ 
pearance  in  the  pellicle  of  an  infusion  of  hay  on  t 
second  day;  on  the  third  day  the  ovules  were  distini 
circumscribed,  spherical,  and  t^"  in  diameter  j  ontJ 
fburth  day  tliere  was  no  increase  of  size,  the  investii 
membrane  could  scarcely  be  recognised,  although  tha 
was  a  distinct  gyration  of  the  embryo  within  it, 
in  those  which  were  most  advanced  the  contractile 
vesicle  could  already  be  discovered;   on  the  fifth  day 
the  embryos  were  found  to  be  of  the  same  size,  though 
slightly  greenish  in  colour,  and  their  movements  were 
more  irregular  and  jerking.    At  this  stage  the  animalcule 
had  assumed  a  pyrifbrm  shape,  fine  cilia  could  be  seei> 
on  some  parts  of  its  surface,  and  the  contractile  vesidff 
was  most  obvious  in  the  midst  of  minute  and  densely 
packed  greenish  granules.     Afler  a  few  hours  more,  the 
buccal  cleft  fringed  with  longer  cilia  became  obvious, 
and  also  the  so-called  nucleus  in  the  centre  of  the 
body.     The  embryos  had  by  this  time  somewhat  in- 
creased in  size,  so  that  after  an  interval   of  a  few 
more    hours    fillly  developed  specimens  of  Faramgchm 
viride^  ttt"  '"^  diameter,  were  swimming  about  in  the 
solution. 

These  observations  of  M.  Pouchet  have  been  repeated 
by  him  over  and  over  again.  He  has  thus  seen  dif- 
ferent forms  of  ParamecU  arise  in  the  pellicle,  and  at 
other  times,  by  steps  essentially  similar,  Kolpod^e  have 

'  '  Hitirog^nie,'  p,  394. 


9' 


^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


243 


Bade  their  appearance.     The  diflFerencc  between  these 
^two  forms   is   indeed   quite   trivial   and   unimportant, 
^ttd  wholly  unworthy,  even  from  the  old  point  of  view, 
Q[ being  regarded  as  a  generic  mark  of  distinction^. 
These  observations  of  M.  Pouchet  have  been  confirmed 
bj  MM.  Joly  and  Musset,  M.  Pennetier  and  others. 
The  former  observers  declare '  that  they  have  watched 
4e  evolution  of  specimens  of  Kolpoda  cucullus  in  a  pel- 
Bdc  tiiat  formed  on  water  in  which  the  contents  of 
a  hen's  ^  were  allowed  to  macerate.     In  this  pellicle 
4crc  appeared,  as  they  say,  '  en  vertu  d'une  sorte  de 
cristallisation  vitale,'  the  spherical  masses  of  granules 
OJOstituting  *  les  oeufs  spontanes'  of  Pouchet  ^  and  these 
in  their  turn,  after  a  period  in  which  the  usual  rotation 
of  the  embryos  within  the  egg  membrane  was  observed, 
gave  origin  to  specimens  of  the  organism  above  men- 
tioned.   On  the  removal  of  the  first  pellicle  it  was 
sncceeded  by  another  in  which  similar  developmental 
phenomena  were  repeated. 


The  actual  disposition  of  the  ciliae  in  different  specimens  of  Infusoria 

*  wbject  to  considerable  variation.     And  yet  many  supposed  species  of 

^^*5*ttifl  were  distinguished  from  one  another  by  Ehrenberg  according 

to  the  nmnber  and  disposition  of  their  cili»,  though  M.  Plaime  says 

('AiBLdesScNat'  1853,  p.  117),*  la  disposition  de  ces  soies  est  sensible- 

■ittt  la  in£me  dans  les  diverses  esp^ces  du  genre  Oxytriche,  ou  du  moins 

«BB  les  diverses  formes  d^crites  comme  telles.*    Mr.  Carter  goes  still 

fcther.    He  says  (*  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.'   1859,  p.  249)  that   Hairae's 

^^^fricia,  as  well  as  Ehrenberg*s  O.  pellionella^  Kerona  polyporutn,  and 

Sfflomebia  $iltirus,  are  'only  states  of  the  extremely  variable  Kerona 

fmhdaia: 

'  See  *  Gnnpt  Rend.'  (i860),  t.  li.  p.  934. 

R  % 


344  ?"-"£  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

I  have  also  myself,  quite  recently,  watched  with  the 
greatest  interest  all  the  stages  of  this  process,  which 
terminated  in  the  evolution  of  fine  specimens  of 
Teramecia,  and  am  most  pleased  to  be  able  to  bear 
my  testimony  to  the  general  accuracy  of  M.  Pouchet's 
description.  Up  to  this  period  1  had  never  seen 
a  single  Paramec'nm  or  other  Specimen  of  the  larger 
ciliated  Infusoria  in  any  of  my  hay  iniijsions — these 
having  all  been  prepared  either  with  warm  or  with  hot 
water.  But  about  ten  days  previously,  on  re-reading 
M.  Pouchet's  description  of  the  mode  of  evolution  of 
these  oi^anisms,  it  struck  me  that  I  had  failed  to  sec 
these  phenomena  owing  to  my  never  having  made  any 
infusions  with  cold  water.  I  therefore  at  once  prepared 
such  a  maceration,  and  two  or  three  days  afterwards 
wrote  to  M.  Ptxjchet  on  the  subject.  In  the  reply  which 
he  was  kind  enough  to  address  to  me  he  said : — 
'Jamais,  jamais  vous  ne  rencontcrez  ««  seul  infusoire 

cili^  dans  unc  experience  faite  a  I'cau  chaude II 

faut  pour  cela  operer  sur  des  macerations  faites  k  froid ; 
alors  vous  obtiendrez  facilemcnt  la  phenomene  de 
devcloppement  des  onifs  spontan^  des  Paramecies,  dans 
Ics  membranes  proligeres  qui  se  seront  fbrmces  d'abord'.' 

On  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  I  received 
this  letter  I  again  examined  the  thick  pellicle  which 
had  formed  on  the  maceration  of  hay,  and  much  to  my 

'  M.  Fouchct  has  b««t]  in  the  habit  of  using  one  part  by  weight  o( 
oidinajy  dry  hny  lo  about  forty  puts  of  water,  and  of  letting  the  mace- 
iBtion  stand  for  two  or  three  hours  before  filtering  off  the  clear  liquid. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  245 


V 


i&^  I  found  it  studded  with  thousands  of  embryo 

FwoKOff,  whilst  others  were  free  and  active  in  the 

infusion.    It  was,  therefore,  a  most   significant   fact 

tbt  they  dxxild  have  been  met  with  on  the  very  first 

oaasion  that  a  cold  maceration  had  been  employed ' ; 

viiilst  not  a  single  Paramecium  had  ever  been  seen  before 

in  any  of  the  many  hay  infusions  kept  in  the  same 

pfaot',  although  several  of  them  had  even  been  made 

»itb  water  whose  temperature  was   not   more  than 

nj^-ijo^F,  and  which  therefore  was  not  high  enough 

to  have  killed  any  embryos  that  may  have  chanced  to 

pre-exist  in  the  infusion  previous  to  its  filtration. 

The  maceration  was  at  the  time  covered  by  a  thick 
peDidc,  which  had  become  brown  on  its  upper  surface. 
Its  under  layers,  however,  were  still  soft  and  pulpy. 
When  a  small  portion  of  it  was  transferred  to  a  micro- 
scope slip,  and  gently  compressed  by  the  covering  glass 
so  as  to  flatten  it  out  into  a  thinner  layer,  the  granular 
membrane  was  observed  to  be  pretty  thickly  studded 

'  Owing  to  the  coldness  of  the  weather  (the  daily  temperature  of  the 
non  beiz^  scarcely  above  60°  F)  they  did  not  make  their  appearance  in 
fte  peOicle  till  more  than  fourteen  days  ;  although  with  a  daily  tempera- 
toe  of  75°  F  they  are  said  by  M.  Pouchet  to  begin  to  make  their  appear- 
on  the  third  or  fourth  day.    I  had  examined  the  pellicle  of  my 
from  time  to  time  during  the  first  week,  but  did  not  look  at 
ft  absequcntly  for  several  days — not,  in  fact,  until  the  day  on  which  I 
M.  PoQchet's  letter.    During  the  first  week  the  pellicle  had 
very  thick  and  pulpy,  but  the  weather  being  rather  colder  at 
time,  it  was  principally  giving  birth  to  various  kinds  of  Fungus- 


'  Beneath  a  bell-jar  in  my  study. 


246  7HE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

with  the  most  distinct,  egg-like  bodies »,  varying  in 
size  from  ^"  to  y^"  in  diameter.  What  struck  me 
more  than  anything  was  the  extreme  distinctness  with 
which  almost  all  the  phenomena  described  by  M.  Pouchct 
were  to  be  seen.  There  could  be  little  room  for  doubt 
with  such  objects  before  one. 

The  only  difficulty  experienced  was  to  make  out  tiic 
exact  nature  of  the  first  change  by  which  the  ^g-Iike 
body  became  diflFerentiated  from  the  surrounding  sub- 
stance of  the  pellicle.  I  laboured  under  some  dis- 
advantages from  having  to  examine  an  old  and  some- 
what opaque  pellicle,  but  after  the  most  careful  and 
repeated  observations  with  reference  to  this  point,  I 
have  been  led  to  adopt  an  opinion  slightly  different 
from  that  of  M.  Pouchet.  Instead  of  small  concentra- 
tions of  granules  occurring — which  gradually  increased 
in  size  and  at  last  became  enclosed  by  a  bounding 
membrane — it  seemed  to  me  that  the  differentiation 
took  place  after  a  manner  essentially  similar  to  that 
by  which  an  ordinary  'embryonal  area*  is  formed*. 
The  small  embryos  did  not  appear  to  represent  the 
earlier  stages  of  large  embryos;  and  it  seemed  rather 
that  spherical  masses  of  the  pellicle  of  different  sizes 
began  to  undergo  molecular  changes,  which  terminated 

*  They  were  actually  embedded  in  the  very  substance  of  the  pel- 
licle. 

^  On  the  other  hand,  the  embryos  of  unknown  organisms  which  wete 
seen  to  form  in  the  infusion  of  turnip  leaves  (see  p.  236),  did  seem  to 
develop  in  a  manner  remarkably  similar  to  the  embryos  of  Panttiueit 
viride,  as  described  by  M.  Pouchet, 


THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 


a  the  p.-oduction  of  TmramHi»  of  a  correspondingly 
I  Matax.  bulk.     Just  as   in   the   previously   described 


'  ':\. 


*.  fint  fligc  of  difTerentution. 

k  later  i>ige  in  which  vacuole  has  appeared. 

t.  SimiUi  lUge  of  much  Urgcr  embryo. 

V.  Anolber  embryo  which  has  segmented  into  four  (only  three  parts 


:mbryo  filled  with  large  particles  and  revolving  within 
I  iBcysL 

;  4.  PtraMtavm  after  it  emerges  from  its  cyst. 
'    K  Xoasla-liLe  form  into  which  many  afterwards  p«ssed. 


'  embryonal  areas,  masses  of  different  size  began  to  ex- 
Ubit  signs  of  change^  so  also  here  spherical  portions  of 
the  pellicle,  differing  within  the  limits  above  mentioned. 


248  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

b^an  to  undergo  other  heterogenetic  changes.  1 
was  first  indicated  by  an  increased  refractiveness 
the  area  (especially  when  seen  a  little  beyond  the  ft 
distance),  and  almost  simultaneously  a  condensation 
its  outer  layer  seemed  to  take  place,  whereby  the  ( 
line  became  sharply  and  evenly  defined  ^.  At  this  st 
an  actual  membrane  is  scarcely  appreciable,  and 
substance  of  the  embryo  (when  examined  at  the  r 
ft)cal  distance)  scarcely  differs  in  appearance  from 
granular  pellicle  of  which  it  had  previously  ion 
part, 

So  far  as  it  could  be  ascertained,  the  indivi< 
embryos  did  not  increase  in  size,  although  they  v 
through  the  following  series  of  developmental  chan 
The  contained  matter  became  rather  more  refract 
and  the  number  of  granules  within  diminished  < 
siderably,  whilst  new  particles  after  a  time  see; 
gradually  to  appear  in  what  was  now  a  mass  of  < 
tractile  protoplasm.  These  new  particles  were  at 
sparingly  scattered,  though  as  they  were  evolved  1 
continued  to  grow  into  biscuit-shaped  particles,  w 
sometimes  attained  the  size  of  yrrJinr"*  All  sizes  \ 
distinguishable,  and  many  of  them  moved  sk 
amongst  one  another,  owing  to  the  irregular  cont 
tions  of  the  semi-fluid  protoplasm  in  which  they  y 

^  The  first  changes  seem  to  take  place  rather  rapidly,  judging 
the  great  difficulty  of  recognising  the  earlier  stages.  It  was  a 
impossible  to  find  an  area  which  was  not  already  bounded  by  a  d< 
outer  layer. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  249 

imbedded.     Gradually  the  number  of   homogeneous, 
biscuit-shaped  particles  increased,  and  at  last  a  large 
vacuole  slowly  appeared  in  some  portion  of  the  embryo. 
It  lasted  for  about  half  a  minute,  disappeared^  and 
then  after  a  similar  interval  slowly  reappeared.    Much 
insularity,  however,  was  observed    in  this  respect. 
The  next  change  that  occurred  was  the  complete  sepa- 
ration of  the  embryo  from  the  cyst  which  it  filled,  and 
the   commencement  of  slow  axial  rotations.    These 
rotations  gradually  became   more  rapid,  though  they 
were  not  always  in  one  direction.  The  embryo  became 
more  and  more  densely  filled  with  the  large  biscuit- 
shaped  particles,  and  at    last   the  presence   of  cilia 
could  be  distinctly  recognised  on  one  portion  of  the 
revohring  embryo.    Then,  as  M.  Pouchet  stated,  the 
movements  grew  more  and  more  irregular  and  impul- 
sive, so  as  at  last  to  lead  to  the  rupture  of  the  thin 
^^  of  the  cyst  —  when  the   embryo  emerged  as  a 
ciliated   and    somewhat    pear-shaped    sac,    provided 
with  a  large  contractile  vesicle  at  its  posterior  ex- 
tremity. 

Sometimes  the  embryo  mass  at  an  early  stage  of  its 

evolution  divided   into  two  or  four  bodies,  each  of 

which  developed  within  the  cyst  into  a  perfect  em- 

hfTO,  and  in  place  of  exhibiting  a  regular  rotation, 

tfaejr  rolled  and   tumbled   over   one   another   in    the 

most  irregular  manner.    On  one  occasion  I  saw  a 

cjst  containing  two  embryos  and  four  spherical  Monads 

about  tcArt''  ^n  diameter,  the  latter  having  apparently 


.^   -   r 


250  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

resulted  from  the  fission  of  some  smaller  portion  of 
the  embryo  mass.  Sometimes  it  was  the  largest  em- 
bryos which  were  observed  to  undergo  this  process 
of  fission,  though  it  was  by  no  means  confined  to 
them  *. 

On  emerging  from  the  cyst  all  the  embryos,  although 
diflFcring  somewhat  in  size,  were  of  the  same  shape. 
This  closely  corresponded  with  the  description  given  of 
Faramecium  colpoda  in  Pritchard^s  *  Infusoria,'  namely, 
^  Obovate,  slightly  compressed ;  ends  obtuse,  the  ante- 
rior attenuated  and  slightly  bent  like  a  hook/  Cilia 
existed  over  the  whole  body,  though  they  were  largest 
and  most  numerous  about  the  anterior  extremity.  No 
trace  of  an  actual  buccal  cleft  could  be  detected,  and 
(except  in  the  posterior  portion  of  the  body,  where  a 
large  and  very  persistent  vacuole  was  situated)  the 
organism  was  everywhere  densely  packed  with  the 
large,  homogeneous,  biscuit-shaped  particles.  For  many 
days  these  most  active  Infusoria  seemed  to  undeigo 
little  change,  though  afterwards  the  number  of  the  con- 
tained particles  gradually  began  to  diminish,  whilst  the 
body  became  more  and  more  regularly  ovoid,  and  a 
faint  appearance  of  longitudinal  striation  manifested 
itself— more  especially  over  its  anterior  half.     At  the 

^  Partial  desiccation  has  a  strong  tendency  to  induce  such  fission,  as  I 
found  by  the  frequency  with  which  it  occurred  when  the  water  had  in 
great  part  evaporated  from  specimens  placed  in  a  developmental  cham- 
ber. Fission  of  Penieillium  filaments  (into  conidia),  and  of  encysted 
Eugletue,  have  several  times  been  seen  under  similar  circumstances. 


THE  BEGhWNINGS  OF  LIFE.  251 

same  time  a  very  faint  and  almost  imperceptible  mass 
('nucleus')  began  to  reveal  itself  near  the  centre  of 
the  organism,  and  when  examined  with  a  magnifying 
power  of  1670  diameters,  a  lateral  aperture  (mouth) 
fiftnr"  in  diameter  was  seen  which  was  fringed  by  short 
active  cilia,  arranged  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel.  These 
peculiarities  correspond  very  closely  with  those  of  an 
embryo  NmstuU,  Very  many  were  seen  with  similar 
characters,  and  multitudes  existed  in  all  conditions 
intermediate  between  this  stage  and  that  of  the  simpler 
organism  which  first  emerged  from  the  cyst.  No 
farther  stages,  however,  could  be  watcheil,  as  at  this 
time  some  change  took  place  in  the  infusion  which 
proved  fatal  to  all  the  free  Infusoria  and  also  to  the 
multitudes  of  embryos  which  were  at  the  time  dcve- 
Iqring  in  the  pellicle.  These  became  more  minutely 
granular  and  opaque,  their  movements  ceased,  and  the 
cyst-wall  grew  thicker.  This  phase  of  development 
disappeared,  therefore,  almost  as  suddenly  and  myste- 
riously as  it  had  appeared.  The  cysts  were  examined 
from  time  to  time  for  many  weeks  afterwards,  but 
they  seemed  to  undergo  no  further  change '. 

*  In  a  maceration  which  was  subsequently  made  during  very  cold 
vesther,  when  the  temperature  of  the  room,  even  during  the  day,  was 
mdy  higher  than  53°  F,  very  large  Amccbsc,  some  of  which  were  •^]^"  in 
diuDeter,  and  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  were  produced  from  the  pulpy, 
■ider  portions  of  the  pellicle.  They  formed  great  masses  of  living, 
Cnmiilar  jelly  of  the  simplest  description — too  large  to  move  as  a  whole, 
tho«{^  fluxes  of  portions  of  their  semi-fluid  body-substance  were  con- 
timiUy  taking  place  in  different  directions. 


aSa  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  Ut-E. 

With  regard  to  the  origin  of  other  Infusoria,  we  may 
state  that  M.  Pouchet  speaks  of  the  appearance  of  Varii- 
cellit  in  difTcrent  infusions^,  though  be  does  not  give 
any  detailed  description  of  their  mode  of  origin.  He 
describes  the  cyst  as  being  thicker,  and  sometimes  of  a 
bluish  colour,  and  in  his  *Het^rt^nie'  he  represents 
some  of  the  stages  whereby  a  yortkelU  of  exceedingly 
simple  structure  is  developed.  M.  Pineau,  however,  had 
previously  described  the  mode  of  origin  of  organisms 
of  this  type.  He  saw  them  arise  by  a  method  that 
seems  more  closely  to  have  resembled  the  mode  by 
which  Monads  are  produced  than  that  by  which  the 
Parameeia  appear.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that 
VortkelU  may  be  evolved  after  different  methods,  just 
as  we  know  that  multiple  modes  of  origin  are  met 
with  in  the  case  of  Fungus-spores,  Monads,  and 
Amoebae. 

In  a  maceration  of  different  plants,  M.  Pineau  says, 
a  granular  pellicle  appeared  on  the  surface,  which  soon 
seemed  to  divide  into  spherical  masses  about  ^^ims"  •" 
diameter.  Some  of  the  larger  of  these,  after  a  time, 
exhibited  motionless,  ray-like  processes.  Elsewhere, 
globules  of  a  similar  character,  though  more  distinct, 
were  seen  to  have  separated  from  one  another.  They 
were  now  all  provided  with  processes,  which,  moreover, 
were  seen  to  exhibit  very  slow  movements,  so  that  in 
this  stage  they  resembled  some  varieties  of  the  .organ- 
isms usually  called  Aclmofhrys.  As  development  pro- 
'  '  Nouvelles  Exp^ences,'  p.  145. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


«53 


gressed,  one  of  the  previously  equal  rays  attached  itself 
to  some  neighbouring  body,  and  then  began  to  increase 


Fio.  65. 

Mode  of  Origin  and  Development  of  VortieellT,  after  Pineau. 

(X  200.) 

in  size  so  as  to  constitute  a  sort  of  pedicle.     In  this 
fiwin,  according  to  Pineau,  it   resembled  Acttnophrys 
te£cellata.     Other   pediculated   specimens   were   soon 
seen  which  had  assumed  a  pyriform  shape,  aad  then 
the  pedicle  was  no  longer  contractile,  though  the  other 
lays  still  exhibited  very  slow  movements.     Some   of 
these  oiganisms  presented  the  trace  of  a  circular  mouth 
at  their  free  extremity,  and  specimens  which  had  at- 
tained this  grade  of  development  seemed  to  increase  in 
size,  whilst  the  mouth  became  larger  and  was  at  last  pro- 
vided with  a  circle  of  vibratile  cilia.     As  the  organisms 
ttill  further  increased  in  size,  the  rays  gradually  disap- 
peared, and  the  previously  motionless  pedicle  also  began 


254  ^-^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

to  manifest  its  contractility^.  The  organisms  were 
then  true  VorticelU^  though  they  subsequently  still  fiir- 
ther  increased  in  size,  and  gradually  assumed  the  ordi- 
nary campanulate  form. 

Concerning  these  and  the  other  observations  recorded 
in  the  same  paper,  M.  Pineau  says: — ^^Tel  est  le  ri- 
sultat  auquel  je  suis  arrive  sur  un  des  points  le  plus 
dclicates  de  T^tude  des  etres  microscopiques,  et  sur 
lequel  j'appelle  Tattcntion  des  observateurs,  avec  d'au- 
tant  plus  de  confiance,  que  ce  n*est  qu'apres  de  nom- 
breuses  tentatives  et  des  observations  maintes  fois 
repetees,  que  je  suis  arrive  \  une  entiere  certitude 
k  ce  sujet.* 

How  is  it  that  such  specific  organisms  can  spring 
so  sharply  into  existence,  without  any  ordinary  parents 
from  whom  they  might  have  been  supposed  to  inherit 
their  specific  characters?  This  is  the  principal  diflB- 
culty  which  at  present  stares  the  evolutionist  in  the  face. 
But  let  us  not,  on  account  of  our  present  unfamiliarity 
with  such  possibilities,  suppose  the  difficulty  greater 
than  it  is.  Let  us  contrast  this  unfamiliar  problem 
with  that  with  which  we  are  more  familiar,  and 
whose  difficulties,  therefore,  we  are  only  too  apt  to 
gloss  over.  Is  there  not  a  somewhat  similar  difficulty 
with  regard  to  the  genesis  of  crystals  out  of  solutions 


^  The  originally  non-contractile  condition  of  the  pedicle  is  quite  in 
accordance  with  the  observations  of  Stein  and  others. 


THE  BEGINNIiVGS  OF  LIFE.  255 

in  which  their  ingredients  are  contained  ?     How  can 
we   imagine   that  such   specific   shapes  as   rhomboid 
dodecahedrons  or  octahedrons  are  enabled  to  appear 
if  nt^v  in   homogeneous   solutions?      Have  we  not 
here  facts  of  almost  the  same  order  ?     Familiarity  with 
such  occurrences,  as  actual  and  recognized  phenomena^ 
is  apt  to  dim  our  mental  vision,  so  that  we  pay  no 
heed  to  what  must  have  been  the  primary  difficulty 
of  the  conception.     Yet  the  fact  that  such  definite  and 
specific  forms  do  spring  up  in  solutions,  whenever  the 
suitable  conditions  exist,  is  doubted  by  none.     The 
chemist  explains  it  as  well  as  he  can.    And  if,  in  so 
doing,  he  is  allowed,  from  the  necessities  of  the  case, 
to  postulate  the  existence  of  inherent  tendencies  and 
molecular  affinities  to  account  for  the  particular  forms 
assumed  by  his  cohering  molecules,  why,  by  the  name 
of  all  that  is  fair  in  Science,  may  not  the  biologist 
be  aUowed  to  resort  to  similar  explanations  as  to  the 
rationale  of  a  process  which,  though  at  present  un- 
&niliar  to  many,  is  nevertheless  as  much  a  matter  of 
to  as  the  process  of  crystallization  itself?     Docs  not 
the  chemist  find  that  the  form  of  a  crystal,  of  any  given 
substance,  may  vary  according  to  the  particular  com- 
bination of  conditions  under  which  it  is  produced — and 
that  within   no  very  narrow  limits?     And  when  we 
have  to  do  with  matter  of  a  higher,  more  complex,  and 
more  unstable  character,  is  it  not  to  be  supposed  that 
the  limits  of  possible  variation  would  increase  in  a 
more  than  proportionate  ratio  ?    So  that  from  what  we 


256  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

know  of  the  process  of  crystallization,  we  ought  t 
only  to  be  more  easily  convinced  as  to  the  possibili 
of  the  evolution  of  even  specific  organisms  out  of  5 
lutions  containing  organic  matter,  we  might  even  ha 
been  prepared  for  the  occurrence  of  all  that  marvellc 
interchangeability  of  diverse  organic  forms  which  • 
actually  do  encounter. 

But  let  us  take  another  illustration,  showing  tl 
even  biological  phenomena  with  which  we  are  qu 
familiar  and  which  we  are  bound  to  accept,  are  nev 
theless  quite  incapable  of  being  understood. 

We  are  perfectly  familiar  with  the  fact  that  i 
ovum  of  every  animal  tends  to  go  through  a  unifb 
series  of  changes,  and  at  last  to  give  birth  to  i 
same  kind  of  animal  as  that  from  which  it  was  its 
derived.  But  if,  at  the  same  time,  we  could  pk 
under  the  microscope  a  human  ovum  and  others, 
a  similar  early  stage,  of  a  monkey,  a  pig,  and  a  spa: 
how  slight  would  be  the  diflFerences  presented.  X 
kind  of  structure  is  perfectly  similar  in  each  cs 
Each  has  been  formed  as  a  free  organic  element,  ^ 
though  they  may  diflFer  from  one  another  only  a  lil 
in  point  of  size,  yet  how  diflFerent  are  the  ultinx 
products!  The  seemingly  similar  masses  of  granu 
are  endowed  with  the  most  diverse  potentialities — ir^ 
the  changes  ensuing  in  one  a  reasoning  man  may 
produced,  whilst  from  those  in  another  a  man-like  a] 
a  grovelling  mammal,  or  an  insignificant  fish  in 
appear.     And  yet  such  changes  are  nothing  but  t 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


257 


flMccntrated  results  of  those  very  tendencies  to  assume 
spdfic  forms  modifiable  by  circumstances,  which  we 
ICC  manifested  by  the  organisms  met  with  in  infusions. 
lU  sud  tendencies  been  absent,  the  multitudinous 
fonns  of  living  matter  could  never  have  attained  their 
P^scnt  diversity  and  complexity.  So  that  a  belief  in 
°*  existence  of  inherent  tendencies  to  assume  specific 
wnns,  in  the  lowest  organisms,  is  as  necessary  for  the 
l«>Iogistas  a  belief  in  the « Law  of  Heredity '—whereby 
« potentiality  of  assuming  any  acquired  specific  form, 
«wc?er  complex,  is  bequeathed  to  the  germ  of  each 
oSUiisni 

In  the  case  of  the  evolution  of  the  ciliated  infusorial 
'""^'^e,  we  have  no  mysterious  inherited  poten- 
^'^fe  to  &11  back  upon.  The  different  nature  of 
™f  materials,  and  the  different  combinations  of  inci- 
*^  physical  forces  by  which  the  changes  are  brought 
"^  arc  the  only  factors  entering  into  the  problem. 
*^  ^  intimate  nature  of  the  living  matter  of  which 
^  Pellicle  is  composed,  may  be  understood  to  vary 
^^'^  U  infinitum  according  to  the  nature  and  quantity 
C^tivc  and  absolute)  of  the  organic  ingredients  en- 
^  into  the  composition  of  the  infusions,  and  the 
^6^  in  which  they  have  been  modified  by  the  action 
***^t  And  when  we  consider  how  these  varying 
*°^  combinations  may  have  been  acted  upon  by 
*^  different  combinations  of  physical  forces,  both 
*^  the  evolution  of  the  primary  organic  units  and 
**  during  the  secondary  or  derivative  origin  of  the 


agS  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

comparatively  higher  forms  of  life,  we  can,  at  all  evci 
sec  our  way  to  expect  that  such  diverse  comblnatii 
of  matter  and  motion  might  result  in  an  almost  cndl 
diversity  of  organic  form.  But  we  should  expect  t 
given  sets  of  conditions  acting  upon  essentially  sim 
organic  materials  would  give  rise,  on  different  occasic 
to  organisms  more  or  less  similar.  So  that  we 
only  conclude  that  constantly  recurring  forms  are 
be  looked  upon  as  the  result  of  certain  original  c< 
btoations  of  matter  and  motion,  and  subsequent  ini 
actions,  more  or  less  similar  in  kind,  between  s 
initial  combinations  and  their  environments.  '. 
forms  of  elementary  organisms  ought  to  have  a  gen< 
constancy  and  correspondence  with  the  conditi 
under  which  they  have  been  evolved,  similar  to  t 
which  we  find  in  the  case  of  crystals— though  of  coi 
with  a  much  wider  range  of  possible  variation,  t 
as  slight  variations  in  one  or  other  of  the  iad 
may  be  continually  anticipated,  rather  than  absol 
similarity,  we  should  be  led  to  expect  that  organi: 
so  evolved  would  be  liable  to  present  many  variati 
in  form — that,  though  exhibiting  characters  gener, 
similar,  they  should  nevertheless  be  found  to  di 
continually  in  matters  of  minor  detail. 

Animals  or  plants  that  have  been  derived  from  si 
iar  parents  which  multiply  sexually,  possess  an  inheri 
tendency  to  develop  in  given  directions,  and  thus 
type  or  pattern  is  more  likely  to  be  perpetuated. 
Infusoria  and  Fungus^rms  evolved  from  a  pellicl 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  259 

new  made,  and  boasting  of  no  line  of  ancestors — are 
4e  products  of  the  very  conditions  and  matter  in  and 
from  which  they  are  produced,  and  are  therefore  liable 
to  prtscnt  endless  minor  modifications  on  different 
occasions. 

We  can  confidently  appeal  to  those  who  have  care- 
fiilly  studied  the  organic  forms  which  teem  in  infusions, 
to  bear  us  out  in  the  assertion  that  they  do  exhibit 
all  this  diversity  which,  owing  to  their  nature  and 
mode  of  origin,  we  have  been  supposing  they  ought  to 
present  We  have  already  spoken  of  the  extreme 
diversity  amongst  the  primary  organic  forms — such  as 
BsctertMy  ToruU^  and  their  allies;  and  with  regard  to 
the  lowest  microscopic  Fungi  and  the  lowest  micro- 
scopic Algae,  their  inconstancy  of  specific  form  is  most 
proverbial*.  Similarly,  the  extreme  variability  of  the 
Ciliated  Infusoria  was  well  known  and  commonly  noted 
even  by  the  older  naturalists,  whether  they  were  be- 
lievers in  specific  identity  or  not. 

Both  Gruithuisen  *  and  Treviranus^  say  that  the  in- 
ftsoria  met  with  have  never  presented  similar  charac- 
ters when  they  have  been  encountered  in  diff^ercnt 
infusions;  nor  have  they  been  more  uniform  in  the 
same  infusion  when  different  portions  of  it  have  been 
exposed  to  the  incidence  of  different  conditions.  The 
slightest  variations  in  the  quantity  or  quality  of  the 

'  See  Appendix  £,  pp.  Ixix  and  Ixxvi. 

'  '  Organozoonomie,'  p.  164.    Manich,  181 1. 

*  See  Moller's  *Phyaology/  translated  by  Baly,  pp.  12  and  13. 

S  2 


26o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

materials  employed  was  invariably  accompanied  by 
appearance  of  different  organisms — ^these  being  of 
times  strange  and  peculiar,  and  unaccompanied  by 
of  the  familiar  forms.  Even  Ehrenberg  himself 
obliged  to  admit  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  sin 
infusoria  in  apparently  similar  infusions;  and  Bun 
also  records  the  fact  that  the  characters  of  these  anir 
vary  with  the  medium,  and  with  the  conditions  ui 
which  they  exist.  Dujardin,  too,  one  of  the  n 
recent  systematic  writers,  acknowledges  the  g 
difficulty  there  is  in  establishing  zoological  distinct: 
between  these  animals.  He  refers  to  the  Faramecia^  r 
especially,  as  forms  which  are  prone  to  undergo 
greatest  variation  under  the  influence  of  the  sma 
change  of  conditions.  M.  Pouchet,  moreover, 
he  has  continually  seen  new  forms  arise  in  soluti 
which  never  again  presented  themselves  to  his 
servation,  even  in  the  course  of  years.  The  ] 
phological  diversity  of  these  animals  is  so  great 
it  is  always  extremely  difficult,  and  often  quite 
possible,  to  determine  their  names.  ^Sometimes 
adds^,  'a  multitude  of  different  forms  appear  i 
in  a  single  experiment.  Thus  in  a  maceration  of  < 
fragments  of  human  bone,  which  I  had  brought 
the  catacombs  of  Thebes,  and  which  had  rema 
three  months  in  water,  I  saw  the  greater  numb< 
the  Vorticellse  of  our  French  fauna  present  thems 
at  once,  and  in  addition  a  great  number  of  other  f 

*  *  H^t^rog^nie/  p.  41a. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  26 1 


iiach  I  think  have  never  been  represented.  It  was 
^Hitc  a  new  world/  Ehrenberg  was  convinced  that 
Wtc  spedcs  described  by  O.  F.  Miiller  as  belonging 
to  the  genus  VertkelU^  were  only  different  modifications 
of  one  and  the  same  species.  And  yet  these  twelve 
fans  were  so  different  that  Lamarck  and  Bory  de 
tot-Vincent  ranged  them  under  several  different 
(coera. 

Again,  although  much  uncertainty  still  prevails  as  to 
ttc  extent  of  modification  which  the  Ciliated  Infu- 
nria  may  undergo,  and  as  to  the  reality  of  some  of 
fbe  marvellous  metamorphoses  that  have  been  alleged 
to  occur,  still  the  almost  innumerable  variations  in 
tkdr  modes  of  reproduction  *,  are  quite  in  accordance 
wth  such  allied  modifiability.  The  absence  in  them 
of  any  hereditary  tendency  to  develop  in  a  given  direc- 
tbo  or  after  a  definite  fashion,  should  render  such 
lEpnisms  extremely  liable  to  change  throughout  their 
iWc  life.  Having  no  constant  tendency  to  assume 
8f  given  form,  and  possessing  an  extremely  simple 
Ionization,  there  is  an  absence  of  the  usual  conserva- 
ft  influence  which  opposes  the  occurrence  of  internal 
l^es  and  resists  the  modifying  agency  of  altered 
(teoal  conditions.  The  forms,  therefore,  which  such 
jttiisms  may  assume  during  their  growth  may  be 
MCtcd  to  vary  in  a  most  marked  manner  from  time 
tiine.     And  this  also  is  a  well-known  and  thoroughly 

*  See  Appendix  E,  pp.  xcvii-cv. 


262  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


recognized  characteristic  of  Infusoria,  concerning  wl; 
we  shall  have  more  to  say  hereafter. 

It  will,  of  course,  be  seen  that  the  phenomena  wl 
we  have  described  as  taking  place  in  the  ^  proliger 
pellicle'  may  be  watched  by  all  who  are  convers 
with  such  methods  of  investigation.  We  do  not  reqi) 
to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  chemist,  we  need  exercise 
special  precautions^  the  changes  in  the  pellicle  are 
such  a  kind  that  they  can  be  readily  appreciated  by  < 
skilled  microscopist. 

Just  as  we  have  supposed  that  living  matter  it 
comes  into  being  by  virtue  of  combinations  and 
arrangements  taking  place  amongst  invisible  colloi 
molecules,  so  now  does  the  study  of  the  changes  in 
'pellicle'  absolutely  demonstrate  the  fact  that 
visible,  new-born  units  of  living  matter  behave  in 
manner  which  we  have  attributed  to  the  invis 
colloidal  molecules.  The  living  units  combine,  t 
undergo  molecular  rearrangements,  and  the  result 
such  a  process  of  Heterogenetic  Biocrasis  is  the  app 
ance  of  larger  and  more  complex  organisms ;  just  as 
result  of  the  combination  and  rearrangement  betw 
the  colloidal  molecules  was  the  appearance  of  primor 
aggregates  of  living  matter.  Living  matter  is  forn 
therefore,  after  a  process  which  is  essentially  simila 
the  mode  by  which  higher  organisms  are  derived  f 
lower  organisms  in  the  pellicle  on  an  organic  infus 
All  the  steps  in  the  latter  process  can  be  watched  j 


TBB  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


263 


Be  of  spthesis — a  merging  of  lower  individualities 
ito  a  hig^  individuality.  And  although  such  a  pro- 
ess  has  been  previously  almost  ignored  in  the  world  of 
Vl%  matter,  it  is  no  less  real  than  when  it  takes  place 
Dongst  the  simpler  elements  of  not-living  matter.  In 
]th  cases  the  phenomena  are  essentially  dependent 
»Q  the  *  properties*  or  ^inherent  tendencies'  of  the 
atter  which  displays  them. 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

THE     PANSPERMIC     HYPOTHESIS. 

Reasons  why  this  subject  has  been  deferred.  Has  more  to  do  with 
Heterogenesis  than  with  Archebiosb.  Why  *  Germs '  were  supposed 
to  be  necessary.  L'Emboitement  and  Panspermism — Bonnet  and 
Spallanzani.  Their  views  founded  on  Fancy  rather  than  Fact 
M.  Pasteur's  observations  as  to  presence  of  Germs  in  the  Air.  His 
so-called  'corpuscles  organises.'  His  modifications  of  Panspermic 
Theory.  M.  Pouchet's  observations  as  to  Nature  and  abundance 
of  Solid  Bodies  in  the  Atmosphere.  Work  of  other  Observers. 
Probabilities  of  the  case.  M.  Pasteur's  Assumptions.  Difficulty  of 
explaining  Facts  in  accordance  with  the  Panspermic  Doctrine. 
Mode  of  origin  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  not  affected  by  its  Truth  or 
Falsity.  Modes  of  Reproduction  of  Ciliated  Infusoria.  Fission. 
Development  of  Ova.  Comparative  Experiments  with  different 
Fluids  similarly  exposed.  Occurrence  or  non-occurrence  of  Infusoria 
'  dependent  upon  W^ill  of  Expeiimenter.  Influenced  by  thickness  of 
Pellicle.  Also  influenced  by  Nature  of  Infusion.  Presence  and 
kinds  of  Organisms  proved  to  be  more  dependent  upon  this  than 
upon  Germs  in  Air  or  Water.  Reasons  for  referring  especially  to 
Origin  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  rather  than  that  of  Fungi.  These 
proceed  from  large  and  easily  recognizable  Germs.  Utterly  un- 
tenable nature  of  Panspermic  Hypothesis. 

WE  have  already  shown  that  the  de  novo  origin 
of  living  matter  can  be  established  without 
reference  to  investigations  concerning  the  number  or 
nature  of  the  germs  contained  in  the  atmosphere. 
With  the  view  of  avoiding  all  chances  of  error,  we 


Za.  - 


Tff£  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


26: 


ait  bound,  in  such  an  enquiry,  to  act  on  the  suppo- 
sition that  germs  may  be  universally  distributed  through 
the  air,  water,  and  all  other  substances  employed. 
Accepting  such  possibilities,  and  acting  as  carefully  as 
if  they  had  been  established  truths,  we  have  neverthe- 
less been  able  to  show  that  living  matter  does  make 
its  appearance  within  sealed  vessels  in  which,  as  we 
are  fully  entitled  to  believe,  all  pre-existing  living 
matter  had  been  destroyed. 

Further,  ^e  have  pointed  out  that  the  microscope 
alooc  may  teach  us  how  little  all  that  has  been  pre- 
nously  written  concerning  the  universal  distribution 
of  germs  has  any  direct  bearing  upon  the  question  of 
the  mode  of  origin  of  the  primordial  forms  of  life  ^ 
It  is  useless  to  look  in  the  air  for  invisible  germs; 
Md  yet  the  careful  microscopical  examination  of  films 
of  fluid*  teaches  us  that  if  Bacteria  arise  from  pre- 
existing germs  at  all,  these  germs  must  have  pre-existed 
in  an  invisible  state  ^. 

In  the  present  stage  of  our  enquiries,  however, — now 
tint  we  are  engaged  in  tracing  the  organic  forms  suc- 
assively  assumed  by  new-born  living  matter  and  its 
<fcrivatives  in  infusions,  or  other  fluids,  exposed  to  the 
air— it  becomes  desirable  that  we  should  know  what 


*  See  ToL  L  p.  397 ;  and  *  Nature/  1870,  No.  47,  p.  410. 
■  See  Tol.  L  p.  295. 

'  It  has  been  shown,  not  only  that  Bacteria,  Torula,  and  other  forms 
cm  arise  dt  novo,  bnt  also  that  the  air  does  not  contain  any  appreciable 
iber  ciBaettria  germs,  whether  visible  or  invisible.  (See  pp.  5-7.) 


266  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

amount  of  truth  there  is  in  the  Panspermic  hypothesis '. 
Although  the  startling  revelations  made  to  us  by  the 
microscope  in  this  field  of  research  are  of  such  a  nature 
as  scarcely  to  admit  of  any  other  interpretation  than 
that  which  we  have  given,  still  it  is  now  desirable — 
partly  in  regard  to  these  investigations,  and  partly  with 
reference  to  subsequent  enquiries — ^that  we  should  know 
what  kinds  of  living  things  are  to  be  met  with  in  the 
atmosphere,  and  whether  or  not  they  are  abundantly 
represented.  ^ 

In  the  first  sentence  of  his  ^  Considerations  sur  les 
Corps  Organises/  the  celebrated  Charles  Bonnet  explains 
the  reasons  which  have  been  instrumental  in  bringing 
about  all  the  discussions  concerning  the  existence 
and  distribution  of  ^  Germs/  He  says  that  philosophy 
being  unable,  in  accordance  with  known  laws,  to  ex- 
plain the  mode  of  formation  of  organized  beings,  ^hap- 
pily conjectured  that  they  existed  already  in  miniature, 
under  the  form  of  Germs  or  Organic  Corpuscles,'  and 
then  goes  on  to  state  that  this  idea  gave  rise  to  two 
hypotheses  2.  He  adds :  ^  La  premiere  suppose  que  les 
Germes  de  tous  les  Corps  organises  d'un  mSme  espece, 
etoient  renfermds,  les  uns  dans  les  autres,  et  se  sont 

*  It  will,  of  course,  now  (after  all  the  evidence  we  have  adduced)  be  held 
probable  that  most  of  the  Bacteria  of  infusions  are  derived  from  others 
which  have  been  evolved  de  novo— even  in  solutions  exposed  to  the  air. 

'  Liebig  says: — *In  the  earliest  period  it  was  believed  that  metals 
were  developed  from  a  seed  or  germ ;  at  a  later  period  the  opinion  pre- 
vailed, that  the  chemical  process  generated  the  seed.'  ('Letters  on 
Chemistry/  3rd  ed.  p.  69.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


267 


iWoppcs  successivement  \  ...  La  seconde  hypothese 

liquid  ces  Geimes  partout,  et  suppose  qu'ils  ne  par- 

ttaocnt  \  sc  dcvelopper  lorsqu'ils    rencontrent    des 

lUttkis  coovenables,  ou  des   Corps  dc  mfime  especc, 

%asc  \  les  rctcnir,  k  les  fomenter,  ct  \  les  faire 

fltftrc'  The  first  hypothesis,  which  seeks  support  from 

oosiderations  regarding  the    infinite    divisibility  of 

■ate,  is  that  of  Bonnet  (De  rEmboitement),  whilst 

Ac  second  (Ptospermism)  is  that  with  which  the  name 

of^lanzani  is  more  especially  associated. 

Speaking  of  his  own  doctrine.  Bonnet  says: — ^La 
premiere  hypothese  est  un  des  grands  efforts  de  Tesprit 
sor  k  sens.  Les  di£ferens  ordres  d'infiniment  petits 
aMm^  les  uns  dans  les  autres,  que  cette  hypothese 
admet,  accablent  I'imagination  sans  efFrayer  la  raison  ^. 
Accoutumee  k  distinguer  ce  qui  est  du  ressort  de  Ten- 
tendement,  de  ce  qui  n'est  que  du  ressort  du  sens,  la 
raison  envisage  avec  plaisir  la  grainc  d'une  plante  ou 
FoHif  d*un  animal,  comme  une  petite  monde  peuplcc 

'  Boonet  describes  this  as  a  doctrine  of  Evolution ;  and  this  word  was 

CDonBoiilj  employed  during  the  latter  part  of  the  last  and  the  early 

put  of  this  century,  in  reference  to  such  a  process  of  unfolding  of  pre- 

OBtiDg  germs,  and  in  opposition  to  Harvey's  doctrine  of  Epigcnesis. 

Altfaongfa  the  word  *  Evolution '  now  carries  with  it  quite  a  different  sig- 

jrifiuuce  in  the  minds  of  those  who  have  studied  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's 

'Sjnrtem  of  Philosophy/  it  is  still  occasionally  used  in  its  old  sense. 

(fe  Prof.  Owen's  •  Anat.  of  the  Vertebrates,'  vol.  iii.  1868,  p.  809.)    The 

Joctiine  of  Epigenesis,  in  fact,  now  forms  part  of  the  modem  doctrine 

rfEfplctkti 

*  At  the  present  day,  most  people  would  be  disposed  to  think  that 
Ae  words  '  raison '  and  '  imagination '  ought  to  have  changed  places 
one  another  in  the  above  sentence. 


268  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

d*un  multitude  d'Etres  organises,  appeile's  a  se  succeder 
dans  toute  la  dur^e  de  siecles.  .  .  .  Le  Soleil  un  million 
de  fois  plus  grand  que  la  Terre  a  pour  extreme  un 
globule  de  lumiere,  dont  plusieurs  milliards  entrent 
\  la  fois  dans  Toeil  de  Tanimal  vingt-sept  millions  de 
fois  plus  petit  qu'un  Ciron.  ....  Mais  la  raison  perce 
encore  au  delk  de  ce  globule  de  lumiirc,  elle  voit 
sortir  un  autre  Univers  qui  a  son  soleil,  ses  planetes, 
ses  vegetaux,  ses  animaux,  et  parmi  ces  demiers  un 
animalcule  qui  est  \  ce  nouveau  monde  ce  que  celui 
dont  je  viens  de  parler,  est  au  monde  que  nous  habi- 
tons^'  Such  a  conception  as  this,  although  perfectly 
legitimate  as  a  mere  fancy,  will  appear  to  most  people 
who  calmly  reflect  upon  the  subject,  utterly  without 
claim  or  title  to  influence  their  judgment.  An  erroneous 
or  inadequate  notion  concerning  the  processes  of  de- 
velopment which  occur  in  the  higher  organisms  probably 
induced  Bonnet  to  originate  a  doctrine  which  he  would 
not  otherwise  have  countenanced  *• 

*  •  Considerations  sur  les  coq)s  organist.'     Amsterdam,  1772. 

*  On  this  subject  Mr.  G.  H.  Lewes  writes  with  his  usual  felicity: — 
*  Although  we  can  only  by  a  fallacy  maintain  the  oak  to  be  contained 
in  the  acorn,  or  the  animal  contained  in  the  ovum,  the  fallacy  is  so 
natural,  and,  indeed,  so  difficult  to  escape,  that  there  is  no  ground  for 
surprise  when  physiologists,  on  first  learning  something  of  development, 
are  found  maintaining  that  the  perfect  organism  existed  already  in  the 
ovum,  having  all  its  lineaments  in  miniature,  and  only  growing  into 
visible  dimensions  through  the  successive  stages  of  evolution  (**  Nulla 
in  corpore  animale  pars  ante  aliam  facta  est,  et  omnes  simul  creatie 
existunt."  Haller,  *  Elementa  Physiologiae,*  viii.  148.)  The  preformation 
of  the  organism  seemed  an  inevitable  deduction  from  the  opinions  once 
universal.   It  led  to  many  strange  and  some  absnrd  conclusions ;  among 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


269 


According  to  Spallanzani,  on   the  other  hand,  all 
thills — earth,  air,  and  water,  bodies  organic  and  bodies 
iflOfganic — were  saturated  with  ^  germs,'  or  pc;tential 
firing  things.    This  notion  was  not  quite  so  extrava- 
gant as  that  of  Bonnet,  though  it  was  equally  without 
lt|itimate  foundation  in  the  actual  knowledge  of  the 
time'.    It  was  put  forward  to  explain  certain  facts — 
and  the  theory  itself  was  then  supposed   to  be  sub- 
stantiated by  the  occurrence  of  these  same  facts.     This 
was  the  vicious  circle  by  means  of  which  the  hypo- 
thesis was  supported.     It  was   believed   in   only   too 
readily  by  the  majority,  because  it  enabled  them  to  stave 
of  for  a  period  the  acceptance  of  views  which  the  state 
of  science  and  philosophy  at  that  time  rendered  it  diffi- 
colt  for  them  to  accept.    Spallanzani  thought  that  the 
m  carried  with  it  everywhere  the  germs  of  myriads  of 
elementary  organisms  j  or,  at  all  events,  some  ^frincipes 
frSprgamis/s*  invisible  and  ideal,  which  we  can   only 
oxnpare  with  the  disembodied  spirits  whose  existence 
is  postulated  by  the  Pythagorean  philosophers. 

*  Morte  carent  animse :  semperque,  priore  rclicti 
Sede,  noTis  domibus  habitant,  vivuntquc  receptre.' 

^allanzani,  nevertheless,  was  not,  on  all  occasions. 


to  the  assertion  that  the  original  germ  of  every  species  contained 
it  aU  the  countless  individuals  which  in  process  of  time  might 

from  it ;  and  this  in  no  metaphysical  "  potential "  guise,  but  as 
Miaal  bozed-up  existences  {emboUis) ;  so  that  Adam  and  Eve  were  in 
tte  most  litend  sense  progenitors  of  the  whole  human  race,  and  con> 
toined  their  progeny  already  shaped  within  them,  awaiting  the  great 
acoondieiir.  Time/  (*  Fortnightly  Review,'  June,  1 868,  p.  593.) 


270  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

free  from  honest  doubts  as  to  the  real  nature  of  such 
intangible  wanderers,  and  on  one  of  these  occasions 
he  frankly  said^: — ^Les  infusoires  tirent  sans  doute 
leur  premiere  origine  de  principes  preorganis^s ;  mais 
ces  principes  sont  ils  des  oeufe,  des  germes  bu  d'autres 
semblable  corpuscles?  S'il  faut  ofFrir  des  faits  pour 
repondre  k  cette  question,  favaue  ingAtument  que  nmu 
fCavons  sur  ce  sujet  aucune  certitude*  So  far  then  we  meet 
with  nothing  but  the  wildest  hypothesis  K     This  seems 

^  *  Opuscules  de  physique  animale  et  v^g^tale/    Pavie,  1787*  torn.  L 

p.  330- 

'  These  doctrines  of  Bonnet  and  Spallanzani  are  perhaps  mostly 
due  to  the  influence  of  the  antecedent,  though  then  all-powerftl, 
teachings  of  Leibnitz.  The  *  Monads '  of  this  celebrated  philosopher 
may  be  said  to  have  replaced  the  *  atoms '  of  the  ancient  Greeks.  We 
have  no  longer,  however,  to  do  with  a  universe  composed  of  corporeal 
and  extended  units,  we  have  in  their  place  unextended  though  dis- 
similar centres  of  force,  mere  metaphysical  points;  yet,  nevertheless, 
they  are  supposed  to  be  living  things, — even  souls — endowed  with 
different  degrees  of  perceptive  power.  Everything  that  existed  wms, 
according  to  Leibnitz,  replete  with  life — nay,  actually  a  mass  of  living 
individualities :  the  whole  universe  was  spiritualized.  What  similarities 
there  were  between  the  conceptions  of  Bonnet,  to  which  we  have  re- 
ferred, and  those  of  Leibnitz  (which  probably  suggested  them),  may  be 
gathered  from  the  following  reference  to  the  doctrines  of  the  great 
German  philosopher: — ^*  As  it  is  with  the  human  soul,  which  sjrmpa- 
thizes  with  all  the  varying  states  of  nature,  which  mirrors  the  universe, 
so  it  is  with  the  monads  universally.  Each — and  they  are  infinitely 
numerous — is  also  a  mirror,  a  centre  of  the  universe,  a  microcosm: 
everything  that  is  or  happens  is  reflected  in  each,  but  by  its  own  spon- 
taneous power,  through  which  it  holds  ideally  in  itself,  as  if  in  germ, 
the  totality  of  things.  By  him,  then,  who  shall  look  near  enough,  all 
that  in  the  whole  huge  universe  happens,  has  happened,  or  will 
happen,  may,  in  each  individual  monad,  be,  as  it  were,  read.*— 
(*  Schwegler's  History  of  Philosophy,*  translated  by  Stirling,  p.  196.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  271 

to  be  generally  admitted ;  and,  indeed,  when  speaking 
of  the  position  of  the  germ  theory  anterior  to  the 
labours  of  M.  Pasteur,  one  of  its  warmest  adherents, 
M.  Milne-Edwards,  says': — *Jusqu*alors  Tcxistence  dc 
propagules  ou  de  germes  d'Infusoires  dans  i'atmosphere 
ctait  une  hypothese  plausible  pour  expliqucr  i'origine 
de  ces  ^es  d'une  mani^re  conforme  aux  lois  generates 
de  la  reproduction ;  mais  c'^tait  une  supposition  seule- 
ment,  et  Pon  n*avait  pu  ni  voir  ni  saisir  ces  corpuscles 
reproducteurs/ 

M.  Pasteur  was,  however,  not  the  first  who  had  en- 
deavoured to  obtain  experimental  evidence  as  to  the 
truth  of  the  panspermic  hypothesis.  As  M.  Pouchct 
pcnnts  out,  he  had  been  preceded  by  M.  Baudrimont 
and  by  M.  Gigot,  if  not  by  others.  The  former  shook 
up  large  quantities  of  air  with  small  quantities  of 
water,  and  afterwards  submitted  the  water  to  micro- 
scopical examination  without  finding  any  recognizable 
^gs  or  spores  *.  M.  Gigot  3,  on  the  other  hand,  made 
use  of  an  aspirator  in  order  to  draw  the  air  of  marshy 
districts  through  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  and  by  this  means 
he  filtered  out  a  certain  amount  of  organic  debris. 

M.  Pasteur  has,  however,  endeavoured  most  assidu- 
ously to  take  the  ^panspermic*  doctrine  out  of  the  re- 

'  •  Ajuit.  ct  Physiol.  Comp.'  t.  viii.  p.  264. 

'  See  '  Observations  des  Atres  Microscopiques  de  rAtmospb^re  Ter- 
RiCre.'  Com^,  Rend.  1855,  t.  xli.  p.  543.  His  observations  did  not  accord, 
therefore,  with  the  recent  marvellous  statements  of  Mr.  Dancer. 

*  'Recherdies  EKperifientales  snr  la  Nature  des  Emanations  Mar^ 
cigeiues/  Paris,  1859. 


272  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

- 

gions  of  mere  hypothesis.  He  has  striven  to  establish 
its  truth  by  observation  and  experiment,  and  has  given 
full  details  as  to  the  methods  which  he  adopted  in  his 
'  Memoire  sur  les  Corpuscles  Organises  qui  existent 
dans  TAtmosphere  * '.  At  first  he  entirely  adopted  the 
views  of  Spallanzani,  that  germs  existed  everywhere  in 
the  atmosphere  and  were  universally  diffused,  though 
he  afterwards  maintained  a  modified  form  of  this  doc- 
trine. The  results  of  his  experiments  forced  him  to 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  certain  parts  of  the  atmo- 
sphere contain  no  germs.  He  is  now,  therefore,  com- 
pelled to  surmise  that  they  probably  exist  in  veins  or 
areas,  variously  interblended  with  germless  portions  of 
the  atmosphere.  He  thus  expresses  himself: — *In  con- 
clusion, we  see  that  ordinary  air  contains  only  here 
and  there,  and  with  no  continuity,  the  necessary  con- 
dition for  the  initiation  of  the  so-called  spontaneous 
generation.  Here  there  are  germs,  whilst  in  imme- 
diately adjoining  portions  of  the  atmosphere  there  are 
none.  Further  on  there  are  other  kinds  of  germs,  and 
there  are  few  or  many  of  them  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  locality.'  In  addition  to  what  were  supposed 
to  be  organized  corpuscles,  other  fragments  and  foreign 
particles  of  the  most  varied  nature  were  met  with — 
though  the  kinds,  relative  proportions,  and  actual  abun- 
dance  of  the  different  solid  bodies,  varied  extremely 
with  the  nature  of  the  locality  in  which  the  air  was 
examined  and  also  with  the  state  of  the  atmosphere 

*  *  Ann.  dc  Chimie  ct  de  Physique/  torn.  Ixiv.  1861. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  273 

It  the  time.  In  air  obtained  from  the  Rue  d'UIm,  in 
ftuis,  M.  Pasteur  encountered,  in  addition  to  the  pat  ti- 
des which  he  supposed  to  be  of  an  organized  nature,  a 
hige  quantity  and  a  great  variety  of  foreign  ingredients. 
In  these  researches  M.  Pasteur  made  use,  as  M.  Gigot 
fad  dooe,  of  an  aspirator,  by  which  air  was  drawn  at  a 
definite  rate  (by  a  process  of  filtration)  through  a  glass 
tabe  containing  a  pledget  of  gun-cotton  sufficiently 
luge  to  arrest  all  solid  particles  amongst  its  fibres. 
After  a  known  quantity  of  air  had  been  filtered  in 
this  way,  the  gun-cotton  was  removed  and  dissolved  in 
1  mixture  of  xther  and  alcohol.  This  was  allowed  to 
stand,  so  that  all  the  solid  particles  which  had  been 
entangled  amongst  its  meshes,  having  been  liberated, 
might  gradually  sink  to  the  bottom  of  a  conical  glass. 
They  were  afterwards  washed  several  times  with  dis- 
tilled water;  and  an  interval  of  twelve  hours  was  left 
between  each  washing,  so  that  all  the  corpuscles  might 
have  time  to  subside  before  the  supernatant  fluid  was 
withdrawn.  After  five  or  six  washings  the  residuum 
was  poured  out  into  a  watch-glass,  whence  any  excess 
of  fluid  soon  evaporated.  The  particles  thus  obtained 
could  easily  be  pladed  upon  an  ordinary  slide,  and  ex- 
amined under  the  microscope  with  the  aid  of  various 
reagents.  These  examinations  convinced  M.  Pasteur 
tiiat  ordinary  air  contains  a  considerable  though  still  a 
variable  number  of  corpuscles,  whose  form  and  struc- 
ture made  him  think  they  were  organized.  The  cor- 
puscles varied  from  the  smallest  appreciable  size  up  to 
VOL.  n.  T 


^74 


THE  BEGINXIXGS  OF  LIFE. 


y 

■s-sW  ^"  diameter,  or  they  might  be  even  largcr.|| 
were  either  spherical  or  ovoid,  with  more  or  less 
defined  borders.    Some  were  quite  translucent, 
others  were  more  opaque,  owing  to  the  pn 
actual   granules,   or,   at    all    events,   to   a 
appearance  in  their  interior.     Those  which  were 
lucent  and  sharply  defined  had  the  closest  resei 
M.  Pasteur  says,  to  the  spores  of  fungi ;  whilst 
the  other  materials,  bcxlies  resembling  encysted 
soria  were  occasionally  found,  and  also  globules^ 
sembling  the  e^s  of  these  creatures.    ^  Mais  q\ 
affirmer,'  he  says,  ^que  ceci  est  un  spore,   bien 
la  spore  de  telle  espece  determince,  et  que  cela 
un  oeuf  et  Poeuf  de  tel  microzoaire,  je  crois  que 
n'est  pas  possible.'     M.  Pasteur  could,  in  fact, 
no  more  definite  statement  concerning  them — he 
only   announce   his  own   impression   that    they  wd 
organized  bodies  of  some  kind  \ 

We  must,  therefore,  bear  in  mind  that  even  the 
experiments  of  Pasteur  have  only  sufficed  to  bring 
light  certain  minute  particles,  having  a  general  resci 
blance  to  spores  of  fiingi  or  ova  of  Infusoria.  I 
found  nothing  which  he  could  state  was  the  prodi 
of  such  or  such  organism,  or  which  he  has  absolute 
proved  to  be  organized,  by  having  watched  its  develc 

*  Referring  to   the   figures  of  these  bodies  given  in   M.  Pastei 
Memoir.  Pi  of.  Owen  says  (•  Anat.  of  Vert.'  vol.  iii.  1868,  p.  814): — ^« 
the  various  well-marked  forms  of  o\*a  or  germs  of  lower  organism! 
know  not  any  recognizable  in  the  figures  above  cited/    See  also 
Robin's  'Traito  du  Microscope,'  187 1,  p.  821. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  275 

der  the  microscope,  into  any  fungus  or  variety 
»rial  animalcule.  Obviously,  this  is  the  only 
evidence  which  is  strictly  admissible — and  yet 
lence  M.Pasteur  has  not  attempted  to  adduce*. 
vidence  by  which  he  has  attempted  to  prove 

^corpuscles*  are  really  germs,  is  of  by  no 
>  satisfactory  a  nature,  or  so  free  from  chances 
inception  as  could  be  desired^.  B.'aring  in 
crefbre,  that  the  so-called  *  germs'  of  Pasteur 

been  proved  to  be  such,  we  feel  bound  to  say 
rriments  have  done  very  little  indeed,  even  in 
s  of  so  skilled  an  operator,  to  raise  the  pan- 
doctrine  out  of  the  region  of  mere  hypothesis. 
\  seen,  in  fact,  that  M.  Pasteur  himself  now 
:  doctrine  only  in  an  extremely  modified  form. 

his  researches  are  constantly  referred  to  in 
ns  as  to  lead  others  to  believe  that  they  had 
'  established   the   truth   of  the   ^panspermic' 

ichet  has  also  examined  the  air  of  the  most 
calities  with  the  greatest  care  by  several  dif- 

iCe  appended  (p.  34)  to  this  part  of  his  Memoir,  M.  Pasteur 
[■"il  y  aurait  de  micux  a  fairc  et  de  plus  direct  conslsterait 
microscope  le  d^veloppement  de  ces  germes.  Tel  ^tait  raon 
is  Tappareil  que  j'avais  fait  construire  pour  cct  objet  ne 
I  M  livr^  en  temps  opportun,  j'ai  etc  61oign6  de  cctte  <ilude 
I  travaux.' 

hdess,  M.  Pasteur  does  actually  claim  to  have  proved  the 
of  his  supposition.    (See  p.  1 7.) 

T  2 


276  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


ferent  methods.  At  first  he  made  use  of 
aspirator,  though  he  afterwards  worked  wit 
of  an  a&oscope — an  instrument  which  he  he 
devised  \  and  by  means  of  which  he  concentJ 
a  space  of  glass,  two  millimetres  square  and 
with  glycerine^  all  the  corpuscles  and  fbreigr 
disseminated  through  a  cubic  metre  or  mc 
atmosphere  2.  Such  examinations  soon  conv 
that  the  air  of  different  localities  varies  \ 
as  to  the  nature  of  the  particles  which  m 
tained  therefrom,  but  they  also  convinced  hi 
much  of  the  extreme  rarity  with  which  real 
ova  are  to  be  encountered. 

He  says : — ^  I  submit  to  the  aeroscope  the  a 
of  towns  and  of  marshes,  that  over  the  sea,  aj 
mountain  regions.  In  the  first-named  localil 
it  always  surcharged  with  an  infinite  variety  ( 
debris,  and  of  that  from  other  substances  mc 
in  our  daily  life.  In  that  of  the  marshes  a 
one  meets  with  an  enormous  quantity  of  fra{ 
vegetable  tissue.  On  the  contrary,  over  the  se 
shore,  and  on  the  mountains  above  the  zone 
habitation  and  of  vegetable  life,  corpuscles  of 
in  the  atmosphere  become  infinitely  rare  and 


*  Described  in  *  Compt.  Rend.*  1. 1.  p.  748. 

'  Dr.  Maddox  has  also  recently  described  a  somewhat  sir 
ratus  for  collecting  Atmospheric  Particles,'  which  seems 
portable  and  well  adapted  for  the  purpose.    (See  *  Monthly 
Journal/  June,  1870.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


277 


nalleren  in  a  volume  of  air  equal  to  ten  cubic  centi- 

tttres— which,  in  reference  to  such  experiments,  must 

be  considered   something  considerable.      In   such   a 

''iwDe  of  air  I  have  not  yet  met  with  anything  which 

<niid  be  supposed  to  be  either  starch-granules,  eggs 

flflnfiisoria,  or  spores  of  Mucedineae^* 

It  also  occurred  to  M.  Pouchet  that  the  nature  of  the 

^materials  floating  in  the  air  of  different  localities 

JSl^  be  tested  by  examining  the  respiratory  passages  of 

^Uorat  animals — and  more  especially  those  of  birds,  in 

'I'Jch  intercommunicating  air-sacs  ramify  extensively 

^Iwoghout  the  osseous  system.   He  examined,  therefore, 

^  the  greatest  care  those  bones  of  birds  which  were 

W pervious  to  air;  since  corpuscles  or  fragments  of 

^kind  when  once  they  had  been  introduced  into  such 

Qritics  would  be  likely  to  lodge,  on  account  of  the 

P'cttim^larities  of  their  surface  2.   He  says: — 'When 

*^  in  this  manner,  the  respiratory  apparatus  gives 

*afeithful  idea  as  to  the  life  of  these  animals.    It  not 

'CoiDpt.  Rend.'  torn.  li.  p.  534.  And  yet,  making  use  of  a  single 
**  dedmetre  of  this  very  air  taken  either  on  the  sea  between  Sar- 
"**  Mid  Sicily,  or  from  the  top  of  Mount  Etna,  M.  Pouchet  always 
^^^^^  immense  legions  of  Infusoria  in  his  solutions  after  a  very  short 

^Ponchet  says  ('Nouvelles  Experiences/ p.  79) :— *Pour  rccucillir 
*  corpuscles  a^riens  des  os  pneumatiques  des  oiscaux.  j'cnfonce  le  tube 
■■»  Mringue  dans  Touverture  par  laquelle  I'air  pcnetre  dans  Icur  ca\*ite, 
**  jc  coupe  I'os  vers  rextr^mit^  opposite.  L*cau  injcctec  d  abord  douce- 
*BU  pais  ensaite  trbs-violemment  pour  entrainer  jusqu*aux  moindres 
.  ^*'»  atmospherique  est  reyue  dans  des  verres  et  examinee.'  Every 
F**^«l«)n  was  also  taken  to  avoid  admixture  of  particles  from  the  atmo- 
^we  at  the  time  of  examination* 


278  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

only  reveals  what  habitats  they  prefer,  and  the  natit 
of  their  food,  but  even,  when  they  are  domestic,  tS 
trade  or  occupation  of  those  amongst  whom  they  ha^ 
lived/  He  found  that  the  Ipng  bones  of  birds  livi* 
in  towns  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  human  hat 
tations  contained  an  abundance  of  particles  of  cartx^ 
and  filaments  of  the  various  kinds  of  textile  fabric 
in  addition  to  different  sorts  of  starch  particles  \  85- 
the  more  the  animal  lived  in  regipns  remote  frcp 
human  habitations,  the  more  rare  did  such  materi 
become — so  that  in  those  continually  dwelfing  in  tT 
midst  of  forests  nothing  of  this  kind  was  to  be  m- 
with.  The  respiratory  cavities  of  such  birds,  on  tl 
contrary,  contained  an  abundance  of  vegetable  debris- 
of  epidermic  tissue  and  particles  of  chlorophyll.  '  Bu" 
M.  Pouchet  says  2,  ^in  all  our  observations,  whic 
without  exaggeration  one  might  reckon  by  hundred 
we  have  never  .encountered  either  a  single  spore, 
single  egg  of  an  Infusorial  animalcule,  or  a  single  or 
of  these  in  the  encysted  condition.*  ^And,'  he  add: 
*  if  in  all  these  minute  researches  we  have  succeede 
in  finding  starch  everywhere,  wherever  it  existed,  is  : 
possible  that  the  spores  and  the  atmospheric  eggs  coul 
alone  have  escaped  us  ?'  If  starch  particles  could  pen< 
trate  into  such  cavities,  ova  or  spores  nearly  similar  i 

^  Valuable  additional  information  on  this  part  of  the  subject  h 
been  furnished  by  Dr.  Sigerson  (*  Monthly  Microscop.  Journal,*  Ai: 
1870). 

'  •Compt.  Rend.'  torn.  1.  p.  iiaj. 


THE' BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  279 


aa  and  specific  gravity  ought  also  to  be  able  to  pene- 
trate, and  to  be  as  easily  recognizable. 

The  wide  distribution  of  starch  throughout  the  atmo- 
spkcre  and  in  the  respiratory  organs  of  animals  was 
fet  p(Miited  out   by  M.  Pouchet.     It   presents   itself 
"wicr  two  principal  modifications:  (1)  in  its  natural  con- 
ton,  and  (2)  as  it  exists  after  having  undergone  a  pro- 
cessof  cooking.   In  the  majority  of  cases  it  exists  in  the 
^^nner  state ;  but  it  is  also  often  met  with,  in  the  most 
'aricd  situations,  either  simply  swollen  or  quite  burst 
I7  the  action  of  heat '.    Such  swollen  or  burst  granules 
•fiidi  are  swept  about  in  the  atmosphere  are  probably 
'loived  from   microscopical  fragments  of  bread.     In 
^Wtitm  to  its  swollen  or  cracked  appearance,  this  form 
tf  starch  is  characterized  by  the  fact  that  it  is  not 
*>  strongly  coloured  by  iodine  as  that  which  is  in  its 
*wnal  condition.   The  particles  of  starch  are  met  with 
^almost  all  sizes  below  7^^"  of  an  inch  in  diameter — 
•to  is  about  the  magnitude  of  the  largest  granules. 
^  larger   ciliated    Infusoria,    however,    vary    from 
jj^'to  ytjt"  in  diameter;  whilst  their  eggs,  according 
to  Balbiani,  are  not  less  than  from  -tott'  ^^  ttW  ^^ 
^eter,  so  that  they  would  be  as  easily  appreciable 
'hcrcver  they  existed  as  the  starch  granules  themselves, 
rtich  seem  to   be  so  much   more   ubiquitous.    The 

'  M.  Ponchet  also  occasionally  found  starch  granules  of  a  bright  blue 
•Jonr.  The  cause  and  nature  of  this  colour-modification  is  very 
•'■care  (see  *  Compt  Rend.'  i860,  1. 1.  p.  572),  though  it  may  be  due  to 
w  presence  of  minute  quantities  of  iodine  in  the  atmosphere. 


28o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

spores  of  fungi  are  much  smaller,  but  very  many  of  them 
are  quite  large  enough  to  be  appreciable  wherever  they 
really  occur.  According  to  Pineau,  those  of  Femdllimm 
glaucum  vary  from  ^^nn)"  ^^  vinnr"  ^^  diameter,  and 
M.  Pasteur  himself  gives  the  dimensions  of  the  spores 
of  the  most  common  species  of  the  genus  Ascofhora 
as  from  xiVrr"  ^^  T^nr"  ^^  diameter.  All  such  spores 
or  ova  should  therefore  be  almost  as  easily  recognizable 
as  particles  of  starch.  But  whilst  the  latter  are  encoun- 
tered with  the  greatest  frequency,  the  former  are  only 
very  rarely  found. 

In  the  same  year,  it  occurred  to  M.  Pouchet  and  also, 
quite  independently,  to  MM.  Joly  and  Musset^,  that 
the  examination  of  snow  flakes  would  be  a  very  good 
means  of  obtaining  some  knowledge  as  to  the  nature  of 
the  particles  existing  in  the  atmosphere.  Their  anti- 
cipations were  fully  verified.  The  large  snow  flakes  did 
entangle  the  atmospheric  particles,  so  that — especially 
during  the  commencement  of  a  snow  storm — they  were 
found  to  contain  a  very  large  quantity  of  almost  all 
the  ordinary  varieties  of  atmospheric  particles  and 
fragments:  and  these  differed  in  nature  according  to 
the  localities  in  which  the  snow  fell.  But,  in  addition, 
M.  Pouchet  says  ^ :  — '  This  snow  contained  a  consi- 
derable number  of  Frotococcus  pluvialis^  of  a  beautiful 
green  colour.'  Rain,  collected  in  a  suitable  vessel  as 
it  fell,  has  also  been  examined  by  Mr.  James  Samuelson, 
who  was  one  of  the  earliest  of  those  who  paid  attention 

»  *  Compt.  Rend.'  i860, 1. 1.  p.  647.  *  *  Nouv.  Exp^r.'  p.  76, 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


281 


to  the  subject  in  this  country  ^  He  has  lately  made 
moTt  decisive  observations  by  an  examination  of  the 
rain  collected  in  one  of  the  low,  unhealthy  parts  of 
Urcrpool,  and  also  at  Everton  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
city.  He  says*: — *  On  examining  the  rain  which  had 
i^  in  both  these  localities,  I  found,  naturally 
(ftxigh,  no  animal  or  plant  germs  in  that  from  the 
kwcr  part  of  the  town,  although  it  was  highly  charged 
vithsoot  and  various  kinds  of  dirt.  But  in  that  which 
W  been  collected  near  my  house,  I  found  on  the  same 
4j  a  few  of  the  unicellular  organisms  as  before,  some 
singie, others  undergoing  subdivisions^  also  a  little  soot 
iodsilex.'  Subsequently  the  corpuscles  were  seen  to 
^lop  and  give  rise  to  a  fungus  mycelium.  Then, 
2pin,Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  states^  that  he  has  frequently 
fanid  bodies  resembling  the  gonidia  of  Lichens  in 
*otandrainj  whilst  Ehrenberg  has  described  many 
''DK  of  Diatoms  which  have  from  time  to  time  dc- 
**«lcd  in  atmospheric  showers^. 

*See'Coinpt.  Rend.*  1863.  t.  Ivii.  p.  87. 
*'<M.JniL  of  Sc.'  Oct.  1870.  p.  496. 
i/fci£9c  D,  p.  liv.  note  3. 

Stthis  'Passatstaub  und  Blutrcgen.*   Spcakin{;  of  *  red  snow,'  Hunlach 

^^^}7) cites  the  following  opinions  as  to  its  nature  and  mode  of  origin : — 

**>dp  rouge  qu'on  a  quelquefois  trouvee  dans  Ics  regions  arcli(iucs  ct 

**UBtes  montagnes,  est  suivant  Agardh.  Ic  Protococcus  kerme^inus^ 

*V8idiiplus  bas  degr^,  qui  se  compose  de  vesicules  plcincs  d'une  sub- 

*•*  nncilagineuse  et  grenue,  et  contenant  de  la  rdsine,  avec  d'autres 

■**»  y^g^tales.     Ceite  Algue  adhOre  aux  pierres  ou  a  la  ncigc,  de 

^•9>cleTent  nc  peut  point  I'entrainer.     Agardh  pense  que  le  Proto- 

^  engendr^  par  Taction  de  la  lumi^re  solaire  sur  la  ncige  fond- 

("KoT.  Act.  Nat.  Cur."  t.  xii.  p.  746).     Mais  les  obser\alions  de 


2^2  Tin:    I>LGL\XIXGS   OF  LIFE. 


It  seems  undoubtedly  true,  therefore,  that  livin 
organisms  do  descend  in  moderate  numbers  from  un  ^^ 
known  heights,  with  rain  and  snow  ^  though  it  seem^^ 
just  as  obvious  that  the  air  of  ordinary  localities,  near^ 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  only  contains  a  very  limited 
number  of  recognizable  spores  or  germs  of  living  things. 
On  this  subject  we  have,  in  addition^  the  valuable 
testimony  of  Prof.  Jeffries  Wyman,  who  says  * : — ^  We 
have  carefully  examined  the  dust  deposited  in  attics, 
also  that  floating  in  the  air,  collected  on  plates  of 
glass  covered  with  glycerine,  and  have  found  in  such 
dust,  in  addition  to  the  debris  of  animal  and  vegetable 
tissues,  which  last  were  by  far  in  the  greatest  abun- 
dance, the  spores  of  Cryptogams,  some  closely  resem- 
bling those  of  confervoid  plants;  and  with  them,  but 
much  less  frequently,  what  appeared  to  be  the  eggs  of 
some  of  the  invertebrate  animals,  though  we  were  un- 
able to  identify  them  with  those  of  any  particular 
species.  We  have  also  found  grains  of  starch  in  both 
kinds   of  dust   examined,   to   the   presence   of  which 

Nees  sur  la  grele  rouge  et  sur  une  esp^ce  de  pline  rouge  (loc.  cit ,  t.  i. 
P-  573)  rendent  plus  probable  que,  comme  Tadmettait  aussi  Wrangel 
(Ibid.  p.  35 1 ),  ceUe  Algue  se  forme  dans  Tatmosph^re,  que  c'est  pas  conse- 
quent un  a^rophyte  et  qu'elle  se  produit,  dans  les  temps  d'orages  et  de 
m^t^ores  ign^.*  And  elsewhere  (p.  14)  he  says : — *  Zimmermann  (•*  Archiv. 
fiir  die  gesam.  Naturlehre,"  t.  i.  p.  257)  a  trouv^  dans  de  I'eau  m^ttorique 
une  substance  organique  particuli^re  diffurente  du  mucus  et  de  rextraotif, 
et  qui  d^gageait  de  I'ammoniaque  en  se  d^composant ;  cette  substance, 
appeUe  par  lui  pyrrbine^  y  6tait  m§l^  avec  du  fer,  du  mangan^,  de  U 
chaux,  de  la  magnesie,  et  de  I'acide  hydrochlorique/ 
*  *  American  Journal  of  Science,*  July,  i86i. 


THE  BEGINXIXGS  OF  LIFE.  283 

ftudict  was  the  first  to  call  attention.     When  cc^m- 
prcd  with  the  whole  quantity  of  dust  examined,  or 
o^en  with  the  whole  quantity  of  organic  matter,  lx)th 
«ggs  and  spores  may  be  said  to  be  of  rare  occurrence. 
Hit  have  not  in  any  instance  detected  dried  animal- 
cufe,  which  were  resuscitated  by  moisture ;  and  when 
tie  dust  has  been  macerated  by  water,  none  have  ap- 
peared until  several  days  afterwards,  until  after  a  lapse 
of  time  when  they  would  ordinarily  appear  in  any  or- 
ganic solution.*     The  testimony  of  Dr.  Maddox  is  also 
rcry  much  to  the  same  effect — as  to  the  C(^mparative 
paudty  of  recognizable  living  germs,  even  when  large 
quantities  of  air  are  made  to   deposit   their   floating 
contents   on   a   limited   area   of  glass,   covered   by  a 
viscous  material  ^ 

It  will  be  perceived,  therefore,  that  in  all  these  at- 
tempts to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  solid  particles  in 
the  atmosphere,  even  large  quantities  of  air  constantly 
renewed  serve  only  to  yield  evidence  of  the  most 
sparing  distribution  of  spores  or  ova.  But,  if  we  limit 
ourselves  to  the  employment  of  means  which  are  more 
exactly  comparable  with  the  atmospheric  conditions  to 
which  our  infusions  are  exposed,  we  discover  a  far 
greater  paucity  of  reproductive  particles.     If  we  place 

*  •  Monthly  Microsc.  Journal/ June,  1870,  p.  290.  Other  contributions 
have  been  made  to  our  knowledge  of  this  subject  which  arc  too  numerous 
to  mention.  We  may,  however,  cite  valuable  papers  by  Dr.  Sigerson 
and  Dr.  Arthur  Ransome,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  same  volume  of 
the  '  Monthly  MiQr^^sc.  Journal.' 


284  >"///-"  yv:;,7.\Vv'A\'(;.v  or  i.ii-e. 


beneath  the  same  bell-jar  a  narrow  vessel  containin^^ 
an  organic  infusion,  and  on  a  level  with  the  surfac^^ 
of  this,  a  plate  of  glass  smeared  with  glycerine  covering^ 
an  equal  area,  we  have  two  surfaces  which  are  equally 
exposed  to  the  access  of  atmospheric  germs  \    Yet, 
in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  the  organic  infusion  will 
swarm  with  infusoria,  whilst  the  film  of  glycerine  will, 
in  the  majority  of  cases,  show  nothing  more  than  a  very 
minute  quantity  of  organic  and  inorganic  debris,  mixed 
with  a  few  particles  or  'corpuscles,*  which,  when  or- 
ganic, seem  for  the  most  part  to  be  nothing  more  than 
mere  dead  particles,  resulting  from  the  disintegration 
of  organic  matter. 

The  briefest  reflection  upon  the  probabilities  of  the 
case  seems  to  suggest  that  this  is  most  likely  to  be  the 
nature  of  the  majority  of  *  particles'  and  *  globules' 
which  are  encountered  by  all  observers  in  this  kind  of 

^  If  atmospheric  germs  are  to  fertilize  the  organic  infusion,  they  must 
be  brought  into  contact  with  its  surface  either  by  gravitation  or  moTe> 
ment  of  the  air.  The  surface  of  glycerine  would  therefore  be  the  very 
best  index  as  to  the  amount  and  nature  of  the  particles  which  drop  into 
the  infusion  from  the  atmosphere.  The  inorganic  particles  and  the 
heavier  organic  particles  have  the  greatest  tendency  to  subside.  Dnst 
which  has  been  deposited  from  the  atmosphere  has  been  ascertained  by 
Dr.  Percy  and  also  by  Mr.  Tichbome  (*  Chemical  News/  Oct.  1870)  to 
contain  only  from  one-half  to  one-third  per  cent,  of  organic  matter,  though 
amongst  the  finer  particles,  which  remain  longer  suspended  in  still  air, 
the  proportion  of  organic  matter  is  probably  much  larger.  We  are  all 
familiar  nnth  the  specks  and  motes  which  dance  in  the  sunbeam,  bat 
Prof  Tyndall  has  conclusively  shown  (*  Nature,*  No.  13,  1870)  that  the 
electric  light  is  a  far  more  potent  means  of  revealing  the  presence  of 
otherwise  invisible  impurities  both  in  air  and  in  water. 


THE  BEGIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE.  28^ 


'tscarch.    The  surface  of  the  earth   is   clothed  with 
//nng  things  of  all  kinds,  animal  and  vegetal,  which 
are  tl(A  only  continually  throwing  off  organic  particles 
anrf  ^ments  during  their  life  ^,  but  are  constantly 
tfodergoing  processes  of  decay  and  molecular  disinte- 
gntion  after  their  death.      The   actual    reproductive 
e/ements  of  these  living  things  are  extremely  small 
in  bulk  when  compared  with  other  parts  which  are 
not  reproductive.     When,  moreover,  it  is  considered 
that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  populous  cities  (the  air 
of  which   alone  exhibits   this  very  large   quantity  of 
impalpable,  mixed  with  palpable,  organic  dust),  there 
is  constantly  going  on  a  wear  and  tear  of  the  textile 
fabrics  and  of  the  organic  products  of  various  kinds 
subservient  to  the  wants  of  man;  and  that  the  chim- 
neys of  manufactories  and  dwelling-houses  are  con- 
tinually emitting  clouds  of  imperfectly  consumed  organic 
particles,  some  idea  may  be  gained  of  the  manifold 
sources  whence  the  organic  particles  and   fragments 
found  in  the  atmosphere  may  emanate,  and  also  as  to 
what  proportion  of  them  is  likely  to  be  composed  of 
living  or  dead  reproductive  elements. 

*  Epithelial  cells  and  the  dobris  of  such  bodies  are  generally  obtiinable 
from  the  air  of  ill-ventilated  dwelling-rooms,  when  it  is  passed  through 
the  aeroscope.  These  off-cast  units,  as  well  as  pus  corpuscles,  become 
much  more  abundant  in  hospital  wards — especially  when  they  arc  over- 
crowded and  contain  patients  with  open  wounds.  The  presence  of  such 
off-cast  elements  and  particles  in  the  atmosphere  is  one  important 
means  by  which  the  spread  of  contagious  diseases  amongst  men,  and 
also  smoDgst  the  lower  animals,  is  brought  about.  (^Scc  Appendix  E, 
p.  cxlir.) 


286  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

What,  then,  are  we  to  say  to  the  assumpt- 
M.  Pasteur,  that  certain  rounded  structureless  pi 
are  indeed  *  organized  corpuscles'  or  the  'germs 
which  the  panspermatists  talk  so  much  ?  To  say  r 
of  the  important  modifications  which  M.  Past< 
felt  himself  compelled  to  make  in  reference  to 
doctrines  of  Spallanzani ',  we  find  that  all  which 

vet  been  able  to  establish  as  a  matter  of  certain 

• 

as  a  result  of  actual  observation,  is,  that  the 
sphere  of  certain  regions  does  contain  a  very  a 
able  quantity  of  extremely  minute  more  or  less 
oidal  and  transparent  particles,  which  he  (M.  I 
assumes  to  be  the  much-talked-of  germs.  1 
direct  proof  of  this  has  •'ever  been  adduced, 
not  deceive  ourselves,  either,  as  to  the  amc 
similarity  between  the  germs  in  question  ai 
particles  actually  found — it  is  of  a  negative 
than  of  a  positive  description.  M.  Pasteur  is  n 
to  say  that  the  spore  of  a  fungus  has  such  ar 
structural  peculiarities,  and  that  the  bodies  wl: 
has  found  present  similar  definite  characters, 
evidence  would  be  cogent  in  direct  proportion 
number  and  variety  of  details  of  structure  in  res 
which  the  two  bodies  were  found  to  correspond, 
however,  the  case  is  quite  different,  and  the  v 
be  set  upon  the  similarity  presented  undergoes  a 
sponding  decrease.  The  spores  of  some  of  the 
scopic  fungi,  as  M.  Pasteur  says,  are  mere  little 

*  Sec  pp.  2/2  and  274. 


THE.  BEGIXNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


alaikiwnsliiccnt  particles  of  a  tolcrabSy  definite  siz: ; 

■   '^  "wn,  amongst  the  materials  filtered  from  the  atmo- 


Fio.  66. 
'^^  *ilh  minute  Spores,  found  in  it  Closed  Fhsk.    (Pouchet.) 
'  Ufcelial  filaments,  mflgtiifi«d.  h.  Unrnflgnilied  lufl. 

c.  Spore-case,  more  highly  magnilicd. 

^'K  similar  little  spherical  particles  exist,  also  de- 
"iii  of  specific  characters:  trgo,  it  is  ai^ued,  these 
*the  very  bodies  required,  these  are  in  fact  organ- 
"dgcnns!  So  far,  the  observations  and  reasonings  of 
4  Pasteur  have  no  other  cogency  than  this,  however 
■di  he  may  seem  to  have  verified  his  assumption  by 
fcr  experiments.  The  danger  of  mistaking  simi- 
tti^  for  identity,  when  dealing  with  buch  general 


288  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

characteristics,  can  never  be  kept  too  prominently  in 
view — especially  when  the  promulgation  of  all-important 
doctrines  is  to  hinge  upon  our  decision. 

It  should  be  clearly  understood,  however,  that  the 
question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  particles  contained  in 
the  atmosphere  is  quite  independent  of  the  other  en- 
quiry, whether  ciliated  Infusoria  or  Fungi  can  be  evolved 
in  organic  solutions  without  ordinary  parentage.  'Bac- 
teria and  some  Fungi  have  been  proved  by  the  only 
kind  of  evidence  which  can  ever  be  obtained,  to  arise 
de  novo  ,•  and  whilst  this  proof  is  possible  even  by  acting 
on  the  assumption  that  the  Panspermic  hypothesis  is 
true,  many  of  the  doctrines  of  Heterogeny  may  also  be 
established  quite  irrespectively  of  the  truth  or  falsity 
of  the  atmospheric  germ-theory.  It  has  never  been 
maintained  that  specimens  of  the  genera  Paramecium 
and  Kolpoda  are  capable  of  being  directly  evolved  out 
of  a  putrescible  organic  solution.  The  necessary  and 
invariable  preliminary  is  that  innumerable  Bacteria 
should  be  produced  in  the  infusion,  which,  by  their 
subsequent  aggregation,  may  fprm  a  material  out  of 
which  the  much  higher  ciliated  Infusorial  animalcules 
may  be  evolved  by  slow  and  definite  stages,  capable  of 
being  watched  by  all  skilled  microscopists.  It  would 
seem,  then,  even  worse  than  childish  to  be  looking 
about  in  the  air  for  germs  of  these  animals.  Why  did 
not  those  who  doubted  look  rather  more  diligently 
through  their  microscopes,  to  ascertain  whether  or  not 


TBE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  289 


«*  ptoofDcna  would  take  place,  as  Pineau,  Pouchet, 
^  othds  declared  they  had  seen  ?  If  it  did  not  occur, 
ttlotkcrs  could  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  this,  then 
neot  the  strong  points  in  support  of  the  doctrines  of 
"PTOiogcnists  would  have  been  at  once  swept  away. 
bJ  C7cn  if  ova  of  these  Infusoria  had  been  found  in 
**™Qn  with  other  matters  filtered  from  the  atmo- 
'•^  we  do  not  see  how  it  could  have  seriously 
^^  the  doctrines  of  the  heterogenists,  so  long  as 
3r  statements  concerning  the  mode  of  evolution  of 
« animals  was  capable  of  being  verified.  It  would 
D  have  appeared  probable  to  most  who  were  capable 
^'^  a  judgment  upon  the  question,  that  the  tecm- 
'nultitudes  of  ciliated  Infusoria,  which  so  rapidly 
ar  in  organic  solutions,  were  more  likely  to  have 
wted,  in  great  part,  after  this  established  mode 
wk^ent,  than  to  have  been  the  offspring — 
by  means  of  buds  or  fission — of  two  or  three 
7  animalcules  which  may  have  dropped  into  the 
m  in  a  dried  condition ;  or  of  two  or  three  ova 
ad  accidentally  obtained  access  to  the  infusion  *, 
bich,  after  developing  into  organisms,  may  also 
Hiltiplied  by  budding  or  fission. 
nxild,  undoubtedly,  be  altogether  inconsistent 
oiown  facts  if  we  were  to  assume  that  such 
2  myriads  of  ciliated  Infusoria  as  are  frequently 

fiw  known  ova  or  embryos  of  these  ciliated  Infusoria  are  much 
\  to  pass  through  the  pores  of  ordinary  blotting  paper.  So 
n^  the  flnid  ensures  its  freedom  from  such  organisms. 


290  THE  BEGIXXIXCS  OF  LIFE. 


met  with  in  infusions  after  tive  or  six  days,  could  ha*^'^ 
been  derived  from  the  multiplication  of  a  few  solitaX'^ 
individuals,  even  by  the  combined  methods  of  fissior^^ 
budding,  and  the  so-called  sexual  reproduction. 

It  is  often  stated  that  Ciliated  Infusoria  multipl^^ 
very  rapidly  by  means  of  fission.  But  even  toward^^ 
the  close  of  the  last  century  Gleichen^  declared  that^ 
during  the  fifteen  years  in  which  he  had  been  continually 
watching  these  animals,  he  had  only  observed  a  process 
of  fission  occur  three  times  j  and  it  was  only  after 
some  years  of  observation  that  De  Blainville*  was 
actually  able  to  satisfy  himself  that  such  a  mode  of 
division  might  take  place.  He  subsequently  saw  it 
occur  occasionally  in  certain  specimens  belonging  to 
the  genus  Kolpoda.  Of  late  years,  also,  similar  testi- 
mony has  been  given  on  this  subject.  Mantegazza  de- 
clares that  he  has  only  seen  ciliated  Infusoria  undergo 
such  a  process  of  division  two  or  three  times,  though 
millions  of  these  animals  of  different  species  had  passed 
under  his  observation  during  a  space  of  fourteen 
months ;  while  M.  Pouchet,  during  observations  extend- 
ing over  many  years,  says  he  has  never  once  seen  a 
Faramecium  divide.  Specimens  of  Kolpoda  he  has  how- 
ever more  frequently  found  presenting  appearances  sug- 
gestive of  fission.  But  with  regard  to  the  Vartkellit^ 
which,  since  the  times  of  Spallanzani,  have  been  de- 
scribed as  particularly  prone  to  undergo  such  a  division. 


'  *  Dissert,  sur  la  G^n^ration,  &c.' 
'  *  Diet,  des  Sc.  Nat.'  torn.  Ix.  p.  1^4. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  291 

5***^^  that  of  all  the  myriads  he  has  seen  he  has 
^^  "^  able  to  observe  an  actual  division  take 
■tt,  *od  onlj  four  or  five  times  has  he  found  two  in- 
■'™o  so  united  as  to  suggest  that  such  a  process 
»<^orlad  taken  place.  And  although  M.  Bal- 
"""  "^  of  late,  re^asserted  the  great  frequency  of 
>f flauficnce  of  fissiparous  division  amongst  P^rriiMrfr/ir, 
^  in  the  fece  of  so  many  statements  to  the  contrary, 
nnidbewell  that  his  observations  should  be  confirmed 
other  observers.  Quite  recently,  in  an  interesting 
T**Qn  tiie  Anatomy  of  Stentor,'  Dr.  Moxon  says 
as  watched  the  process  of  fission,  as  it  occurs  in 
wcjmkus.  It  does  not  take  place  longitudinally, 
itber  in  an  oblique  direction,  and  Dr.  Moxon  tells 

has  never  known  the  whole  process  occupy  less 
four  or  five  hours.     In  a  letter,  which  he  kindly 

in  reply  to  some  of  my  queries,  he  says  he  has 
everal  times  watched  the  process  of  division  in 
aens  belonging  to  the  genus  Stjlonyckia.     With 

to  these  individuals  Dr.  Moxon  says : — ^  As  to 
Dir  occupied  in  the  process  it  was  too  long  to 
of  my  watching  it  through.  I  tried  to  do  so, 
nnd  that  in  two  hours  very  little  progress  had 

opL  Rend.' torn.  I.  p.  119 1.  Although  the  evidence  brought 
fay  M.  Balbiani  is  very  strong,  it  is  by  no  means  of  such  a  nature 
Ac  it  free  from  doubt.  The  rapid  multiplication  did  not  take 
(der  the  eyes  of  the  observer.  And  more  than  that,  during  the 
ee  or  four  dap,  the  inc^casc  in  the  number  of  Infusoria  was 
ry  dow. 
m.  of  Anat.  and  Physiol.'  vol  iii.  p.  379.  ed.  1869. 

V  2 


2i)2  T[[F.  nr.cixxixGs  of  liff. 


l")ccn   nuuicj  so  that  1  was  obliged  t()  chcxisc  spjcin^c*x^ 
that  were  nearly  divided,  in  order  to  observe  the  fin-^ 
process  of  separation;    and  then  I  had  to  watch   it^^ 
individual  for  from  one  and  a  half  to  two  hours — ^^ 
which  I  assure  you  was  rather  trying  and  tedious,  as  tt^^ 
active  little  beings  were  trotting  about  continually,  aa^ 
I  had  to  preserve  them  in  a  rather  large  live-box,  since  ^ 
found  if  they  were  confined  too  closely  the  divisiot^ 
would  not  occur.      In  Vartkella  and  Efhtylis  I  hav^' 
seen  the  division  in  progress,  but  the  process  was  sc^ 
slow  that  I  never  saw  it  through,  and  several  time^ 
when  I  had  watched  long   they  disappointed  me,  by 
passing  into  the  "encysted"  state   instead  of  com- 
pleting the  division.    This  may  have  been  partly  due  to 
their  not  having  had  fresh  water  enough  to  suit  their 
health.*    Dr.  Moxon  adds :  ^  I  should  say  that,  as  far  as 
I  have  seen,  the  larger  and  more  perfect  Infusoria  do 
not  increase  very  rapidly  in  numbers,' — that  is,  by  the 
acknowledged  methods  of  reproduction,  fission,  gem- 
mation, and  internal  production  of  embryos.     My  own 
experience  is  very  similar  to  that  of  Dr.  Moxon.     I 
have  seen  the  process  taking  place  in  various  ciliated 
Infusoria,  though  by  no  means  frequently,  and  when  it 
does  occur,  it  has  generally  been  very  slowly  brought 
about  ^.    M.  Haime,  moreover,  in  speaking  of  the  pro- 

*  I  have  seen  it  much  more  frequently,  however,  in  the  smaller  flagel- 
lated Infusoria  {Monads).  With  them  the  fission  may  be  either  longitu- 
dinal or  transverse  in  its  direction,  and  I  have  found  the  process  occupy 
at  least  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes. 


THE  nEGIXXIXC.S  (//•    ///A.  j.^;, 

tts  of  fission  in  Oxytricha,  says'  that  ^somc  hours' 

ac required  for  its  completion  in  large  individuals. 

'^w^^b  the  development  of  *  ova '  in  the  Infusoria 

»y  ^  sexual  process  of  generation  seems  now  to  be 

Poallyaccqrted,  on  the  faith  of  the  recent  researches 

-  ai^  flf&lhiani  and  those  of  MM.  Claparede  and  Lach- 

**i  no  appeal  can  be  made  to  such  a  process  of  re- 

J'wbction  in  order  to  account  for  the  rapid  appearance 

rffflaltitudcs  of  Infusoria  in  organic  solutions.   Even 

toe  observers  whose  labours  have  tended  to  establish 

4p  reality  of  the  process,  do  not  pretend  that  it  is  an 

wfinary  nxxie  of  multiplication.   On  the  contrary,  they 

ountain  that  it  is  an  extraordinary  method  of  increase 

to  which  the  animal   resorts  occasionally  under  the 

pressure  of  adverse  circumstances  *.    The  rate  of  in- 

orasc,  also,  could   only  be   extremely  slow   by   this 

method,  since  the  animals  remain  in  contact  for  five 

or  six  days,  and  it  is  not  till  a  further  lapse  of  two  or 

three  days  that  the  ^ova'  obviously  begin  to  make  their 

sqjpearance^.     Balbiani*s  observations  were  principally 

*  *Aim.  des  Sc  Nat*  1853,  p.  laa. 

'  When  ipeaking  of  the  process  of  fissiparous  division,  M.  Balbiani 
vn  (loc  dt.  p.  1 194) : — '  Nous  avons  efTcctivement  constat6  que  ce  mode 
de  propagatioD  avait  des  limites  et  se  terminait  invariablemcnt  dc  Tune 
des  tnns  manifcres  snivantes :  ou  part  la  mort  naturelle  ct  presque  simul- 
^akt  de  toos  les  individus  appartenant  k  une  meme  cycle,  ou  par  le 
retuBr  de  la  gtetotion  sexuelle  indiquant  la  fermcture  d*un  de  ccs  c)'clcs 
ct  \t  commencement  d'un  cycle  nouveau,  ou  cnfin  par  le  ph^noml'ne  dc 
renkyitement' 

• '  Jonmal  de  Physiologie/  1858,  torn.  i.  p.  346.  The  process  is 
donbtfiil  in  aatnre ;  and  from  the  absence  of  all  sexual  organs  in  the  two 


294  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

conducted  upon  specimens  of  Paramecium  hiriariaj  in 
of  which  there  were  produced  by  this  process  five  01 
large  <  ova '  measuring  about  jjVd"  in  diameter.  T 
germs  underwent  the  first  stages  of  development  and  ■ 
converted  into  rudimentary  embryos  before  they  t 


FiQ.  67, 
Development  of  Embryos  in  Paranudum.    (Cohn.) 
their  exit  from  the  body  of  the  parent '.   M.  Pouche 
never  observed  germs  within  the  bodies  of  Farm 

^iimiU^  individuals,  it  would  seem  to  be  most  allied  to  >  pro< 
'  conjugation,'  It  seems  better  to  style  the  products  geims  than  c 
'  The  observations  of  Slein  uid  of  F.  Cohn  had  already  gi 
show  that  these  embryos  quit  the  body  of  the  mother  under  the  fi 
Acinila,  furnished  with  clavated  tentacles — true  suckers  by  whi 
a  lime  they  remained  in  contact  with  the  mother,  nourishing  then 
from  her  structure.  Their  observations  cease  here;  but  Balhia 
satisfied  himself  thai  the  embryos  soon  lose  these  appendages, 
are  replaced  by  cilia.  Tbey  soon  acquire  a  mouth,  hy  the  develo 
of  a  lonEitudinil  furrow,  and  thus  gradually  take  on  the  form 
parent,  whilst  they  dtvelop  within  themselves  the  characteristic 
gnuiules. 


\ 


THE  BEGIXXIXCsS  OF  I  U  F..  2():, 


*-5 


^h  be  has  occasionally  seen  large  hnxiies  of  this  kind 

OBtiflg  singly  within  representatives  of  the  genus  Kol- 

/i^  and  also  in  specimens  of  Kerama.    He  says* : — 

'Ifawohscrvcd  this  in  Kolpodas,  which,  judging  from 

Aa'r  great  size,  appeared  to  have  arrived  at  their  last 

s^gcs  of  life.'    He  states,  moreover,  that  two  or  three 

tUDcs  he  saw  such  ^  Kolpodas  with  their  bodies  half 

(fenedi  though  still  having  the  egg  in  the  midst  of 

the  disofganized  structure/    In  animals  about  y^^"  in 

length  the  germ  varied  in  size  from  ritis'  *o  tdW* 


Fio.  68. 
Devdopment  of  Embryos  in  dying  Ktrxma.    (Pouchet.) 

It  was  altogether  an  unmistakeable  sort  of  body,  situated 
near  the  middle  of  the  animal,  and  made  up  of  a  dense 
aggr^ation  of  fine  granules  bounded  by  a  transparent 
ntelline  membrane  or  zona  pellucida.  It  was  also  en- 
tirely free  within  the  substance  of  the  organism — in 
which  no  trace  of  an  ovarium  was  to  be  discovered. 
In  exceptional  cases  M.  Pouchet  has  seen  two  other 
smaller  though  otherwise  similar  bodies,  adjoining  the 
more  fully  developed  ovum.  He  has  never,  however, 
seen  more  than  three  within  any  single  animal,  and  has 

*  •  H^^rog^nic,'  p.  400. 


2g6  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

never  seen  a  preliminary  coupling  of  two  individual^ 
In  specimens  of  the  genus  Kerona  he  has  occasional^, 
observed  this  coupling,  though  he  has  never  seen  mof* 
than  a  single  germ.  The  nature  of  the  body  in  thes< 
animals  was  rendered  even  more  indubitable  by  the  faC 
that  it  became  converted  into  an  embryo  whilst  stil 
within  the  posterior  part  of  the  body  of  the  parent 
His  observations  were  principally  conducted  upon  spc 
cimens  of  Kerona  lefus  measuring  y|^"  in  diametei 
and  in  which  the  germ  (here  again  free  within  the  bodj 
was  about  rnnr"  ^^  diameter.  M.  Pouchet  saw  a  gyrs 
tion  of  the  embryo,  and  the  characteristic  contractu 
vesicle  make  its  appearance,  so  as  to  leave  no  dout 
that  the  process  of  development  was  still  advancing '. 
Multiplication  by  the  ordinary  processes  of  reprc 

'  This  production  of  embryos  in  the  substance  of  dying  Infusoria 
a  subject  of  much  interest.  To  me  it  was  a  matter  of  special  interest  1 
read  (in  1869)  M.  Pouchet*s  description  after  I  had  already,  as  a  resu 
of  frequent  careful  observation,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  nuclei 
of  the  white  blood  corpuscle  was  also  evolved  during  the  later  stagi 
of  its  life  within  its  very  substance ;  and  that  it  was  destined  to  come ) 
maturity  and  perhaps,  under  certain  circumstances,  take  the  form  of 
distinct  anatomical  element,  whilst  the  rest  of  the  parent  structure  w; 
about  to  undergo  a  process  of  disintegration  (see  vol.  i.  p.  227).  Th 
process  seems  to  be  most  comparable  with  that  by  which  the  embr^ 
is  evolved  within  the  body  of  the  Infusorial  animalcule.  Here  also  tl 
germ  (nucleus)  is  evolved  out  of  the  substance  of  the  parent  organis 
itself,  at  a  time  when  its  own  vitality  is  about  to  cease.  As  a  sort  • 
link  connecting  these  two  sets  of  phenomena,  we  may  perhaps  refer  to  tl 
development  of  the  moving  filaments  known  as  Spermatozoa  from  tl 
nucleus  of  the  sperm  cell.  The  old  element  dies  in  giving  birth  to  tl 
new  product ;  and  the  new  element  in  this  case  is  an  actively-movin 
independent  zooid. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  297 


fction,  therefore,  will  not  adequately  account  for  the 
*"Mni  of  ciliated  Infusoria  which  are  often  to  be 
ttt  with  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  in  many  organic 
"'°**>sj  and  moreover,  as  long  as  we  are  able  to 
'oiMstrate  that  Fungus-spores,  Monads,  Amocbx,  and 
Qliatcd  Infusoria  are  constantly  produced  by  changes 
^'^  place  in  a  pellicle,  or  living  stratum  formed  by 
W^^ions  of  Bacteria^  it  is  perfectly  immaterial 
•'^  the  air  does  or  does  not  contain  any  of  these 
*ite  organisms  or  their  germs. 

%iD,  in  the  face  of  what  we  know  concerning  the 

P^citj  with  which  ciliated  Infusoria  and  the  micro- 

scope  Fungi  of  infusions  are  represented  in  the  atmo- 

fljcrc,  concerning  the  extreme  rarity  of  the  sexual 

°^fthod  of  reproduction  amongst  Infusoria,  and  also  as 

to  the  comparative  infrequency  with  which  multipli- 

!  ^^^  by  fission  can  be  observed,  the  results  afforded 

7  comparisons  of  cases  in  which  there  has  been  free 

^posure  either  of  different  solutions  to  the  same  air,  or 

^portions  of  the  same  organic  solution  under  different 

^^tions,  are  also  strongly  opposed  to  the  notion  of 

"^  derivation  of  sJbh  organisms   from  pre-existing 

^^'^pheric  germs.     The   evidence   thus   obtainable, 

wwever,  tallies  remarkably  with  the  notions  of  hetero- 

P^ts  as  to  the  principal  mode  of  production  of  these 

^pnisms  being  from  the  very  substance  of  the  pellicle 
itself. 

^  the  higher  organisms  met  with  after  a  time  in 


298  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

filtered  infusions  exposed  to  the  air  beneath  a  bel^ 
had  been  derived  from  ova  or  from  dried  adult  fori 
which  (after  dropping  into  the  infusion)  had  subi 
quently  propagated  themselves  and  multiplied  there: 
then  such  ova  or  dried  adult  forms  ought  to  drop  ju 
as  freely  into  receptacles  of  distilled  water  presentii 
an  equal  area  and  similarly  exposed.  These  ova 
dried  animals  are  sufficiently  large  to  be  easily  d: 
coverable,  when  present;  and  by  placing  the  wat 
after  a  time  in  a  conical  vessel,  any  particles  which 
contains  may  be  allowed  to  sink  before  the  supernata 
fluid  is  slowly  drawn  off,  either  by  a  pipette,  or,  bet 
still,  by  a  siphon  of  small  bore.  The  microscopi( 
examination  of  the  small  quantity  of  fluid  which  ; 
mains  will  very  rarely  show  a  trace  of  a  ciliated  ] 
fiisorium,  either  adult  or  in  the  form  of  e^.  And  y 
if  the  weather  has  been  warm,  in  the  course  of  ft 
or  five  days  the  surface  of  the  organic  infusion  simila 
exposed  beneath  a  bell-jar  will  have  become  covei 
with  a  thick  pellicle,  and  the  infxision  itself,  if  i 
affording  an  acid  reaction,  may  be  found  to  contain 
incalculable  multitude  of  ciliated  Infusoria,  of  one  fo 
or  another.  * 

It  may  well  be  asked,  whence  come  these  swarmi 
myriads  of  animalcules  ?  Can  they  have  been  deri^ 
from  certain  germs  floating  in  the  limited  atmosph* 
to  which  the  infusion  has  been  exposed?  If  so,  c 
would  think  that  it  must  be  from  a  very  limil 
number,  seeing  that  none  are  to  be  found  in  1 


THE  r>]:Gix\i\i:s  oi-  /.//■/■.  >*," 


s:.Tiiiafijr  exposed  vessel  of  distilled  water.     But  on  the 

otfw  hand,  the  state  of  our  knowledge  concerning  the 

np&j  with  which  these  animals  multiply  by  fission 

Mi  by  the  still  more  exceptional  sexual  method  of 

npnoduction  is,  in  turn,  equally  opposed   to  such  a 

Moreover,  even  if  we  had  not  the  above-mentioned 
widmcc  of  the  test  vessel,  the  investigations  of 
Mi  Pasteur  as  well  as  those  of  M.  Pouchet  would  de- 
cidedly lead  us  to  reject  the  notion  that  any  small 
portion  of  air  contains  a  plurality  of  dried  Infusoria  or 
of  their  germs.  The  refractive  granules  and  supposed 
gcnns  (< corpuscles  organises')  are  of  much  smaller 
sizs^  and  are  presumed  by  M.  Pasteur  himself  to  rc- 
semUe  the  spores  of  fungi  rather  than  the  much  larger 
and  much  more  definitely  constituted  germs  or  dried 
bodies  of  Infusoria.  He  does  not  pretend  to  say  that 
these  are  abundant  in  the  atmosphere,  or  that  they  arc 
to  be  met  with  in  any  appreciable  number  in  a  limited 
▼olume  of  ordinary  air. 

Again,  the  evidence  above-cited  and  that  which  the 
nucroscopist  can  supply  is  supplemented  by  the  fact 
that  the  pellicle  must  always  be  of  an  appreciable 
thickness  in  order  that  ciliated  Infusoria  may  be  pro- 
duced. Unless  this  is  the  case^  such  organisms  are 
M  to  be  found  in  the  infusion  after  the  accustomed 
time;  or  perhaps  they  may  never  occur  at  all,  however 
long  a  period  has  elapsed.  This  has  been  clearly  enough 
ascertained  by  the  very  simple  but  ingenious  experi- 


300 


THE  BKGIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE. 


ments  of  M.  Pouchet.     He  divides  into  two  equa-*   * 
tions  a  filtered  organic  solution,  fevourable  for  tl^^    ^ 
pearance  of  ciliated  Infusoria,  placing  the  one  pc:^^^ 

in  a  tall  narrow  glass,  and  the  other  in  a  broach    ^ 

its 
receiver,  so  that  the  former  may  easily  stand  £^  * 


Fio.  69. 

Pouchet's  Apparatus  for  showing  that  Ciliated  Infusoria  are 

derived  from  the  Pellicle. 

centre  ^  He  then  encloses  them  both  under  a  bell-jar, 
dipping  into  water;  so  that  the  deep  solution  and  the 
shallow  solution  may  be  exposed  to  the  same  air 
under  the  one  bell-glass.  And  he  has  ascertained 
that,  at  the  end  of  four  or  five  days,  with  a  mean 
temperature  of  68"  F,  a  thick  proligerous  pellicle  is  to 

'  See  Pouchet's  *  Nouvelles  Experiences  sur  la  Generation  Spontanee,' 
1S64,  pp.  243-247. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  01'  LIFE.  30 1 

-^  kfnodinthe  tall  glass,  and  an  abundance  of  ciliated 
ufiisoria;  whilst  the  shallow  vessel  presents  only  an 
**cc«iingly  thin  and  scarcely  apparent  proligerous  mem- 
'"^w,  and  not  a  single  ciliated  Infusorium.  When  the 
flwditions  arc  reversed — when  the  quantity  of  fluid 
K  nodi  diminished  in  the  tall  glass,  and  very  much 

• 

**5tascd  in  the  shallower  one — ^so  as  to  reverse  the 
relative  depths  of  the  solutions  in  the  differently  shaped 
^''^Is,  then  the  ciliated  Infusoria  are  still  found  with 
&  deeper  solution  and  the  thicker  pellicle,  and  only 
ao  abundance  of  Bacteria  where  the  solution  is  shal- 
Waod  the  pellicle  scanty.    Remembering  that  the 
oistcncc  of  either  ciliated  Infusoria,  or  of  the  ova  of 
tiiese^  to  any  notable  extent,  in  the  atmosphere,  is  a  mere 
natter  of  hypothesis,  which  its  advocates  have  failed  to 
JDstily;  and  remembering,  on  the  other  hand,  the  now 
ficqoently  demonstrated  mode  of  evolution  of  the  cilia- 
ted Infusoria  in  the  pellicle  from  modified  aggregations 
of  motionless  Bacteriay — it  must  be  evident  to  all  that 
tbe  above-mentioned  experiments  seem  inexplicable  if 
we  attempt  to  explain  them  by  the  atmospheric  germ- 
theory,  though  they  are  quite  consistent  with  the  doc- 
trines of  heterogenists.     Both  solutions  are  exp6sed  to 
the  same  air,  and  therefore  to  the  same  possible  source 
af  ova;  yet  in  the  solution  of  the  one  vessel,  after 
it  lapse  of  a  few  days,  ciliated  Infusoria  are  found ; 
a  the  other,  there  are  none.     Let  the  conditions  of 
tplk  of  the  solutions  in  the  two  vessels  be  reversed, 
od  then  again  the  ciliated  Infusoria  are  met  with  in 


302  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

the  thick  pellicle  of  the  deep  solution,  whilst  not 
single  one  appears  in  that  which  is  shallow.     Only 
mode  of  interpreting  such  facts  seems  possible. 

Lastly,  it  was  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Treviraai/^ 
and  others,  as  we  have  before  stated,  that  the  kinds  or 
ciliated  Infusoria  met  with  in  solutions  varied  with 
the  nature  of  the  solutions  themselves.     This  has  since 
been  abundantly  confirmed.    M.  Pouchet  has  shown 
that  different  results  are  always  to  be  obtained  by 
varying  the  organic  substances,  even  when  these  are 
exposed  to  the  same  air  and  dissolved  in  portions  of 
the    same   waters      The  amount  of  organic  matter 
existing  in  the  solution  will  also  influence  not  only    . 
the  rapidity  of  appearance,  but  even  the  kind  of  or- 

*  M.  Pouchet  says  (*  Nouvellcs  Experiences/  p.  1 27) : — *  Bory  de  Saint 
Vincent,  Tr^viranus,  Gdrard,  et  B4rard  avaient  assure  d'aprfes  leurs  ex- 
p^nences,  que,  quand  on  m^lait  ensemble  deux  liqueurs  fermentesdbles 
differentes,  on  obtcnait  de  ce  melange  des  £trcs  organist  qui  differaient 
de  ceux  que  produisait  chacune  des  liqueurs  separdes/  Again,  he  says  • — 
*  Beaucoup  de  substances  organiques  que  nous  denaturons  pour  nos  be- 
soins,  donnent  frequemment  naissance  a  des  productions  sp^ciales  par- 
faitement  dt5finies  et  qui  ne  croissent  nulle  parte  aillcurs. .  . .  Les  Mveor 
pygm^pus  et  elegans  ne  se  developpent  que  sur  les  aliments  qui  corn- 
men*;  aient  k  se  putr6fier  et  sur  la  colle  seche ;  le  Sporendonema  etuei  ne 
vit  que  sur  Ic  fromage ;  le  Cbatomium  cbartarum  sur  les  vicux  papiers  qui 
s'altdrcnt ;  le  Sporotricbum  ruberrimum  envahit  le  drap  pourri ;  le  Tonda 
muralis  n*a  encore  ^td  observe  que  sur  les  murailles  recrepies.  Qui 
pounait  dire,  ainsi  que  s'^crie  M.  F^e  qui  a  rassemble  ces  faits,  oii  ^taient 
les  spores  de  ces  veg^taux  a\'ant,  que  I'industrie  humaine  n'eut  donne  lieu 
k  ces  produits?'  (p.  183.)  Hundreds  of  such  facts  might  be  cited,  so 
that,  as  M.  Trecul  suggests,  if  it  were  quite  true  that  all  these  organisms 
were  derived  from  spores  which  pre-existed  in  the  atmosphere,  our 
powers  of  locomotion  might  be  to  a  certain  extent  impaired  I 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


303 


6*^  which  reveal  themselves  ^  and,  similarly,  when 
solid  portions  of  organic  matter  are  immersed  in  solu- 
tions, different  results  are  produced  by  their  immersion 
2tTarious  depths'.     Abundant  evidence  of  such  facts 
fflajalso  be  gathered  from  what  has  been  stated  con- 
araingmyown  experiments.   Again,  the  boiling  or  not 
of  the  organic  solution,  as  we  have  seen,  has  a  very  great 
ioBucncc  over  the  kinds  of  organisms,  as  well  as  over 
the  rapidity  with  which  they  appear  -.     It  has,  morc- 
wrcr,  been  ascertained  that  differences  in  the  amount 
rfbcat  and  electricity,  and  in  the  kind  and  degree  of 
light,  which  are  allowed  to  operate  upon  the  various 
fluids, are  all  more  or  less  influential,  and  exercise  a  most 
undoubted  influence  over  the  kinds  of  organisms  that  are 
to  be  met  with  in  different  cases.    So  that  the  amount 
and  kind  of  modification  which  is  capable  of  being 
brought  about  in  the  living  forms  that  arc  to  appear 
in  diftrent  infusions  made  with  the  same  water  and 
Mposcd  to  the  influence  of  the  same  air,  are  of  such 
a  nature  as  strongly  to  encourage  the  belief  that  such 
living  forms  cannot  to  any  appreciable  extent  be  derived 
either  from  the  air  or  from  the  water. 


In  illustrating  this  part  of  the  argument  which  has 
Tefierence  to  the  development  of  organisms  in  solutions 
**posed  to  the  air,  we  have  purposely  laid  most  stress 
"•pon  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  ciliated  Infusoria  rather 

'  S€c  Pouchet's  •  H6t^rog^nie/  pp.  154-159. 
'  See  also  Pouchet,  loc.  cit,  pp.  148-150. 


304  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

than  upon  that  of  microscopic  Fungi  or  Algse.  ' 
done  this  for  several  reasons.  In  the  first  p 
germs  of  Fungi  are  very  minute.  Many 
are  merely  small,  spherical,  translucent,  but  s 
less  bodies,  so  that  it  is  often  a  matter  of  c 
on  microscopical  evidence,  to  decide  betwe< 
and  other  corpuscles  which,  though  they  may  ] 
similar  appearance  may  really  be  quite  difi 
nature.  Again,  the  origin  of  Fungi  and  of 
organic  and  other  infusions,  by  a  process  of  Arc 
had  already  been  established  *,  so  that  we  kn 
about  the  possible  modes  of  origin  of  these  t 
cerning  the  modes  of  origin  of  Ciliated  Inflisor 
lastly,  because  even  M.  Pasteur  himself  is  u 
say  that  he  has  found  amongst  his  particles 
from  the  atmosphere  many  dried  bodies  of  cil 
fusoria,  either  in  their  ordinary  or  in  their 
condition — or  even  the  ova  of  these  organis 
are  agreed  that  such  things  are  only  exceptioi 
with  amongst  the  debris  obtained  from  filtr 
the  atmosphere,  and  no  one  has  yet  haza: 
opinion  that  such  ciliated  Infusoria  are  ca 
originating  from  aught  else  derived  from  tl 
sphere  but  the  revived  though  previously  dric 
of  such  organisms,  or  from  their  ova.  No 
propounded  the  theory  that  ciliated  Infiisoric 
rived  from  invisible  germs,  or  from  ova  ot 
those  of  known  size  and  appearance. 

^  By  Experiments  recorded  in  Chaps,  ix.  and  xi.,  and  in  A^ 


THE  BEGLWIXCS  OF  1 11 1'..  \o 


.) 


Tlie  factSj  therefore,  stand  in  this  way.     On  the  one 
iaai  it  is  asserted  that  pre-existing  germs  are  omni- 
F'fscn^  and  that  they  are  the  precursors  of  all  the 
fiwDg  things  which    teem    in    infusions  and   on   all 
•^rfctfcs  of  organic  matter  in  a  state  of  decay.     Of 
^Jtte  living  things,  by  far  the  most  common  and  widely 
^^wscd  arc  Bi»f/mif  j  and  therefore  the  hypothesis  of 
ftoqxnnism  would  require  that  they  should  exist  most 
^IwDdantly  in  the  air.   But  experiments,  yielding  results 
rf  the  most  indubitable  nature,  have  been  performed 
lyl^.  Burden  Sanderson  and  also  by  myself,  showing 
tfat  living  Bacteria  or  their  germs,  whether  visible  or 
invisible,  do  not  exist  to  any  appreciable  extent  in  the 
too^re '.    On  the  other  hand,  evidence  just  as  con- 
vincing goes  to  show  that  Archebiosis  takes  place  at 
tk  present  day — that  Bacteria  are  constantly  arising 
A»iw.    And  although  a  recognizable  number  of  the 
reproductive  particles  of  common  Moulds  and  other 
nucroscopic  Fungi  do  exist  in  the  atmosphere,  testi- 
fl»oy  of  the  most  conclusive  nature  also  exists  con- 
ttraing  their  independent  origin.     Such  Moulds  have 
bcm  proved  to  be  capable  of  arising  de  novo  within 
dosed  flasks,  whilst  every  stage  of  their  heterogcnetic 
origin  from  the  constituents  of  the  'pellicle'  can  also 
be  easily  watched.    Similar  modes  of  origin  have  also 
been  established  for  Amoebae  and  Monads,  which  are, 
nioreover,  not  more  appreciably  represented  in  the  atmo- 
sphere than  the  protean  forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  2. 

*  See  pp.  5-7.  *  See  vol.  i.  p.  443. 

VOUII.  X 


3o6 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


And  whilst  collateral  evidence  of  all  kinds  points  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  presence  of  these  Ciliated  Infusoria 
in  various  infusions  is  explicable  only  on  the  supposi- 
tion that  they  have  been  derived  from  the  ^pellicles* 
which  form  upon  such  infusions,  every  stage  of  their 
heterogenetic  origin  may  also  be  watched  with  the 
greatest  ease  by  the  microscopist. 

Thus  although  evidence  of  the  most  varied  and 
conclusive  nature  concurs  in  attesting  the  frequency 
with  which  processes  of  Archebiosis  and  Heterogenesis 
occur,  no  facts  are  favourable  to  the  mere  assumptions 
of  the  PanspermatistSj  whilst  the  hypothesis  upon  which 
they  rely  is  cumbersome,  unwieldy,  and  now  utterly 
unnecessary. 


CHAPTER    XIX. 


?? 


i\ 


HETEROGENESIS  IN   HIGHER   ORGANISMS. 

**w  of  Life  in  Subordinate   Living  Units.     M.  Turpin   on   Milk 
^^^'Wtt.  Thdr  Conversion  into  Fungiis-germs.    Heterogenesis  in 
■V*' Hants.    M.  Trfcul's  observations.    Conversion  of  Crystal- 
■*  Masses  into  Living  Germs.     These  processes  free  from  un- 
**%.  •Muscardine'  of  Silk-worms.     Its  Nature  and  Mode 
«0r^    Views  of  M.  Gu^rin-Mene^ille.      Empusa  in   Flies. 
""iColm's  views  as  to  Mode  of  Origin  of.     Germ  Theory  of 
^'^**.    Different  Interpretations  of  Facts.      Development  of 
^•(terii  in  Blood  of  Man.    Their  Modes  of  Origin.     Vegetable 
^Jits.'    Views  of  older  Botanists.     Presence  of  Independent 
^''S^oians  within  interior  of  Plants.     Similar  Organisms  discover- 
*Me  withm  Animal  Cells.    Heterogenetic  Developments  of  their 
^es.    Mode  of  Origin  of  Bacteria  in  Epithelial  Cells.    Abun- 
^^  of  Organisms  upon  Mucous  Membranes.     Vegetal  Parasitic 
^^•scases  of  the  Skin.    Possible  Modes  of  Origin.    Presence  of 
'^  upon  and  within  internal  tissues  of  Animals.    'P^brine' 
*  Sflk-vorms.      Presence  of  Psorosperms.     Their  Nature  and 
*«ks  of  Origin.    Spread  of  the  Disease. 
***  in  which  Panspermists  explain   above-mentioned   Facts.      No 
*^epcndcnt  Evidence  in  favour  of  their  Views.    Theory  of  Con- 
^gion.      Similar  influence   of   living    and    not-living    Contagia. 
Cootact-action  versus  direct   Multiplication.    Evidence  in  favour 
of  Contact  Theory.     M.  Davaine's  Experiments.     Other  similar 
Erideoce.    Origin  and  Spread  of  Local  Parasitic  Diseases.    Inocu- 
lation Experiments.    Inconsistencies  of  Evolutionists  in  adopting  a 
Panspennic  Doctrine. 


W 


HEN  the  functional  processes  in  organs  have 
come  to  an  end  in  dead  animals  and  plants, 
gradually  supervenes  throughout  the  body  a  cessa- 


.-;os  rifi-:  /)V:"Gy\-.\7.\'/;.v  of  life. 


tic):i  of'  ail  tb.osc  complex  niolccuLir  nvAcnienls  whi  <^i'^ 
go  on  within,  and  essentially  constitute  the  life  of  the 
ultimate  constituents  of  their  several  tissues.  And  ^s 
the  essentially  vital  changes  (or  molecular  movemcats) 
diminish,  so  do  the  ultimate  molecules  of  the  living 
tissues  begin  to  undergo  rearrangements  and  decom- 
positions. 

We  have  already  endeavoured  to  show,  by  cogent 
experimental  evidence,  that  when  organic  matter  decays 
or  putrefies,  a  double  process  of  composition  and  decom-' 
position  invariably  occurs:   the  complex  organic  sub- 
stances partly  break  up  into  simpler  binary  compounds, 
during  which  the  previously  locked  up  forces  become 
instrumental  in  bringing  about  new  synthetic  changes 
among  other  constituents  of  the  organic  matter;  and 
the  new  products  appear  as  specks  of  living  matter, 
which  gradually  grow  into   Bacteria^  Torula^  or  other 
simplest  forms  of  life.  ^  Vital '  processes  thus  lapse  into 
ordinary  chemical  processes;  and  thus  in  turn  do  these 
chemical  processes  again  give  birth  to  'vital'  com- 
binations.    We  now  have  to  refer  to  this  and  other 
modes  by  which  independent  living  units  may  arise  in 
the  bodies  of  dead  or  living  organisms. 

Whilst  it  may  be  possible  for  heterogenetic  changes 
to  take  place  in  some  part  of  the  body,  even  of 
a  healthy  animal,  provided  the  intimate  vital  move- 
ments and  changes  in  that  particular  part  are  much 
altered,  either  accidentally  or  by  the  efFects  of  local 
disease  J    it   becomes  much  more  common  for   such 


THE  BEGIXXINGS  OF  LIFE.  309 


cfaflgcs  to  occur  in  various  parts  of  the  body  when  the 
||eanal ^Wtal  powers'  are  lowered  by  disease'.  And, 
|4r  a  similar  reason,  heterogenetic  changes  take  place 
more  freely  when  the  organism  itself  is  dead, 
ad  when  its  component  parts  are  left  to  struggle  on 
■fa  the  most  adverse  circumstances,  until  the  little- 
Roote  period  when  death  overtakes  them  also^. 
I  Hen  in  all  parts  of  the  dead  organism  there  is  a 
hrting-forth  into  new  life.  Myriads  of  Bacteria  and 
hgos-germs  are  born  from  their  parent  fluids, 
fcngfi  all  this  is  bidden  from  our  ordinary  view,  and 
h effects  only  become  manifest  when  the  ever- varying 
fans  of  ^ mould'  and  'mildew'  appear  and  flourish  on 
fc surface  of  the  previously  living  aggregated 

For  the  most  part  I  intend  to  confine  myself  to  the 
QQsideration  of  the  mode  of  origin  of  these  lowest 
<>pnisms  within  the  substance  of  higher  plants  and 
*unials.  I  do  not  propose  to  enter  into  the  question 
'f  the  possibility  of  the  independent  origin  of  any  of 
tte higher  parasitic  Entozoa.  The  occurrence  of  these 
pnsitcs  was  formerly  regarded  as  one  of  the  strongest 
points  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  of  Heterogeny.  But 
^  investigations  of  numerous  helminthologists  have 
^  much  to  remove  very  many  of  the  difficulties 
''^were  formerly  regarded  by  Miiller  and  others  as 
'taost  impossible  to  be  explained  on  the  supposition 

Seep.  190.  *  See  vol.  i.  p.  no. 

'  See  Prof.  Grant's  •Tabular  View,  &c.,  of  Recent  Zoology/  pp.  5 


3IO  ////•;  /a:G/x.\7X(;s  of  i iff. 


that  tlicsc  or'i.anisins  liad  been  derived  in  the  ordina 
way  from  ova.     The  migrations  and  transformations 
entozoa  in  the  bodies  of  diflFerent  animals,  and  o 
knowledge  of  the  mode  in  which  the  embryos  of  cyst 
and  nematoid  parasites  are  enabled  to  penetrate  thtf? 
tissues,  clear  away  many  of  these  old  difficulties.    It 
must  be  confessed,  however,  that  the  reality  of  such 
new  facts  does  not  veto  the  possibility  of  the  occasional 
independent   heterogenetic   origin   of   some   of  these 
organisms.     I  will  merely  state  that  such  a  mode  of 
origin  is  still  affirmed  by  Dr.  Gros  *  and  others,  but 
having  made  no  special  observations  on  the  subject, 
I  purpose  deferring  its  consideration  till  some  more 
suitable  period. 

It  might  be  deemed  probable  that,  if  heterogenetic 
changes  occurred  at  all  in  higher  animals,  they  would 
be  most  prone  to  take  place  in  some  of  the  fluid  or 
semi-fluid  secretions ;  or  else  in  some  of  those  tissue- 
elements  which  are  constantly  bathed  with  albuminoid 
fluids — either  on  the  external  surface  of  the  body,  or  on 
some  internal  surfaces.  And  this  is  found  to  be  the 
case.  No  better,  longer  known,  or  more  generally 
neglected  instance  can  be  alluded  to  than  the  trans- 
formation of  milk-globules,  under  certain  conditions, 
into  large  Fungus-germs,  which  speedily  vegetate  into 
a  kind  of  Fenici Ilium. 

This   remarkable  transformation   was  described   by 

>  *  Bullet,  de  la  Soc.  de  Nat.  de  Moscon/  1847. 


^  -    • 


THE  BEGIXXIXGS  OF  I.I  IK.  .-;  i  i 

M  ^^in^  thirty-four  years  ago,  in  a  paper  read  before 
tnc rrcndi  Academic  des  Sciences;  but  it  has  been  for 
Ike  most  part  disbelieved  or  unheeded  by  many  who 
•^«  to  iavc  satisfied  themselves  by  actual  observation 
«  to  the  truth  or  falsity  of  what  had  been  recorded. 
W«i  some  rare  exceptions,  this  seems  to  have  been 
*?fccto^  though  the  few  who  have  looked  for  them- 
Jfte  have  been  able,  in  all  important  respects,  to 
«nfrm  M.  Turpin's  statements. 
When  some  milk  is  placed  in  a  small  vessel,  to  the 
it^  of  about  two  inches,  the  larger  milk-globules  soon 
h?in  to  collect  on   the   surface  of  the   fluid.     After 
twmty-fbur  hours  or  more  (the  milk  being  protected  from 
<lBst  by  an  inverted  glass),  the  surface  is  found  to  be 
frilowish  and  smooth — constituting  the  most  superficial 
stratum  of  a  layer  of  cream,  the  under  poi  tions  of  which 
are  of  an  opaque  white  colour.     When  reflected,  this  is 
fcond  to  lie  on  the  surface  of  a  bluish-white  whey  con- 
taining soft  flakes,  which,  on  microscopical  examination, 
are  ascertained  to  be  composed  of  precipitated  casein 
in  a  finely  granular  condition,  mixed  with  small  milk- 
gbbules  and   multitudes   of  active  Bacteria.     In   this 
condition,  it  has  a  sour  odour  and  an  acid  reaction. 
The  white  stratum  of  cream,  immediately  above,  is 
composed  almost  wholly  of  aggregated  and  more  or  less 
unaltered  milk-globules,  mixed  with  myriads  of  Bac^ 
tma.    But  it  is  in  the  superficial  yellow  stratum  more 


1  < 


Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.'  1837  (Zoologie),  t.  viii.  p.  349. 


;,!_>  77//.  /;/■:c/x^7xcs  or  life. 


c'spjciali)'   r.iat   ib.L"   niilk-globulcs   arc  found   to  b.'  v  '  -^ 
riously  altered,  and   in  which  some  are   being  mec^-^^- 
morphoscd  into  Fungus-germs.    To  recognise  this  satis- 
factorily requires  great  care  and  patience,  and  it     i^ 
only  possible  by  making  an  examination  of  specimen^ 
in  which  the  transformation  is  in  its  earliest  stages^ 
After  even  a  few  hours,  owing  to  the  very  rapid  growth 
and  repeated  branching  of  the  P«f/V/V//«w-filaments,  the 
superficial  stratum  is  permeated  by  them  in  all  direc- 
tions ;  and  they  are  mixed  up  soon  afterwards  with  the 
large  conidia  which  the  filaments  are  constantly  throw- 
ing ofFj  and  which  germinate  in  their  turn. 

The  superficial  stratum  should  therefore  be  examined 
at  the  period  when  the  globules  are  just  beginning  to 
bud  into  filaments,  or,  better  still,  the  method  originally 
recommended  by  Turpin  may  be  adopted.  A  drop  of 
distilled  water  should  be  placed  upon  an  ordinary 
glass  microscope-slip,  and  a  small  quantity  of  the 
as  yet  unaltered  cream  should  be  added  so  as  to  dis- 
seminate its  globules  through  the  fluid.  A  covering 
glass  may  then  be  applied,  and  allowed  to  float  some- 
what freely  on  the  fluid.  After  a  microscopical  exami- 
nation of  the  specimen,  with  the  view  of  ascertaining 
the  state  of  the  globules  and  the  absence  of  all  apparent 
Fungus-germs,  the  specimen  should  be  carefully  trans- 
ferred to  a  damp  chamber  which  is  thoroughly  saturated 
with  moisture— so  as  to  prevent,  as  much  as  possible, 
the  evaporation  of  the  fluid  from  beneath  the  covering 
glass.     Or  else  the  drop  of  water  containing   milk- 


THE  BEGLVXINGS  OF  LIFE. 


P*""  "tty  be  Irft  without  a  covering  glass,  if  the 
Jliot  is  placed  in  a  small  chamber  thoroughly  saturated 


f.Q.  70. 

^""ooaof  MilL-globales  inlo  Fungus-geniis,    (Turpin.)  (x  450.) 


*•  ■■  Uajlttrri  MiUt-globulra. 
^  *■  "iHf-globules  which  have  become  granular,  ihrowini 


**■  'Winientirj'  mycelial  filaments  attached  lo  globules. 
•*-  FuuiicDii  in  more  adt'anced  condition. 
/■  PBfcd  fiianents  ol  Ptnitillium  less  highly  magnified. 


314  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

with  moisture  i.  The  specimen  may  then  be  examined 
from  time  to  time  with  a  xV  objective;  and  in  the 
course  of  from  twenty-four  to  seventy-two  hours,  ac- 
cording to  the  temperature,  such  changes  will  have 
occurred  in  many  of  the  milk-globules  (ranging  from 
loooo''  to  T^nnr"  in  diameter)  that  they  may  be  seen 
to  have  assumed  a  less  refractive  and  more  distinctly 
vesicular  appearance,  and  to  be  giving  birth  to  one, 
two,  or  even  three  buds,  from  their  periphery,  which 
speedily  grow  into  large  dissepimented  mycelial  fila- 
ments 2.  All  this  was  definitely  described  by  M.  Turpin. 
In  speaking  of  the  milk-globules,  he  said:  ^Lorsqu'ils 
sc  trouvent  livres  k  eux-memes  et  places  dans  les  cir- 
constanccs  favorable  \  la  continuitc  de  leur  existence, 
nc  tardent  pas  k  se  gonfler,  \  prendre  souvent  la  cir- 
forme  irrrguliere  d\m  petit  topinambour  microscopique, 
et  \  germer  par  plusieurs  cotes  k-la-fois,  de  la  meme 
manierc  que  germent  les  seminules  vesiculeuses  des 
Confcrvces ;  des  Mucedin^es  des  Champignons,  et  des 
vesicules  polliniques/  Or,  as  I  have  also  been  able  to 
ascertain,  other  globules,  ^au  lieu  de  c^ommencer  par 
prendre  un  dc  veloppement  irregulier  deviennent  ovoides, 
puis  allonges  comme  de  petits  bouts  de  cylindre,  et  dans 
ccs  divers  etats,  ou  plutot  sous  ces  formes  modifiees. 


^  In  a  small  wide-mouthed,  stoppered  bottle,  for  instance,  lying  on  its 
side,  and  containing  a  little  water. 

^  Other  globules  become  fused  together  so  as  to  form  large  irregular 
masses  of  various  kinds.  Multitudes  of  Bacteria  also  appear  amongst 
the  globules. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  315 


poussent  des  bourgeons  par  Tune  ou  par  les  deux  ex- 
tremitcs  k-la-fbis,  et  produisent  egalement  le  meme 
fmdllhm  glaucum  *  (loc.  cit.,  pp.  340,  342).  The  fact 
that  so  many  corpuscles  undergo  a  similar  change 
beneath  the  same  covering  glass,  that  these  changes 
take  place  in  corpuscles  which  are  so  large  as  to  be 
most  easily  observed,  and  that  all  stages  may  be  de- 
tected between  apparently  unaltered  milk-globules  and 
tiic  large  Fungus-germs  into  which  they  arc  transformed, 
naake  these  observations  absolutely  convincing  to  any 
one  who  has  once  witnessed  them  '.  They  therefore 
become  typical  of  many  other  changes  which  may  take 
0acc,  but  in  which  all  the  stages  of  the  transformation 
cannot  be  so  easily  watched  2. 

'  And  jet,  in  opposition  to  the  investigations  of  M.  Turpin,  extending, 
u  be  says,  over  more  than  six  weeks,  and  the  positive  statements  which 
"•  Wis  able  to  fonnd  upon  them,  one  of  our  most  influential  authorities 
^  SQcfa  subjects  is  content  to  offer  the  following  somewhat  loose 
^"tidsin : — *  Without  laying  too  much  stress  on  the  difficulty  of  fol- 
**•"¥  up  the  development  of  a  single  globule  amongst  a  multitude, 
^^  cui  be  no  reason  why  spores  of  Penicillium^  or  at  least  particles 
^blc  of  reproducing  it,  should  not  be  present  in  the  milk  as  well  as 
™«oWr«in  in  diabetic  urine.  And  though  the  true  spores  are  of  con- 
^^blc  size,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  many  moulds — as,  for 
***ttce,  such  as  grow  on  paste,  decaying  meat,  vegetables,  &c. — assume 
*  thdr  first  development  a  form  very  different  from  that  of  the  fuU- 
£">^  plant/  (•  Introd.  to  Crypt.  Bot./  Berkeley's,  p.  260.) 

Since  the  above  has  been  in  type,  I  have  ascertained  that  heteroge- 
^•^  IfUisformations  may  be  much  more  easily  seen  in  a  minute  portion  of 
Aeofchat^l  cream-cheese.  By  placing  a  portion,  about  the  size  of  a  pin's 
^*^  ^n  an  ordinary  glass  slip,  moistening  it  with  distilled  water,  and 
^*^*^  it  into  a  thin  film,  the  changes  which  it  undergoes  can  be 
^^y  watched.  "When  kept  in  this  moist  uncovered  state  in  a  damp 
^*"*^  at  a  temperature  of  65"  F,  I  have  found  that  at  the  expiration 


31 6  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

Left  to  itself,  the  whole  surface-layer  of  milk  . 
short  time  becomes  densely  interwoven  with  Fun 
filaments;  and  multitudes  of  the  conidia  which  1 
arc  continually  throwing  oflF  are  sown  amongst  th 
Soon  a  white  mildew  may  be  seen  even  with  the  na 
eye  sprouting  up  from  all  points  of  the  surface, 
after  a  time  it  becomes  covered  with  a  perfect  fores 
Fenici Ilium  glaucum '. 

It  seems  probable,  moreover,  that  somewhat  sin 
changes  may  occasionally  take  place  within  the  m 
mary  ducts  themselves  when,  owing  to  some  dise; 
condition  of  the  gland,  the  milk  is  long  retained, 
specimen  of  milk  was  sent  to  M.  Turpin  by  M.  ; 
saigne  which  had  been  taken  from  a  cow  whose  man 
were  somewhat  inflamed  and  engorged;  and  this 
found  to  contain  a  very  large  amount  of  fun 
mycelium.  It  is  said: — 'Ce  lait  sortait  des  mame 
ou  trayons  sous  la  forme  de  petits  flocons  d^une  1 
blanc  et  d'un  aspect  entierement  cotonneux.'  And 
microscopical  examination,  these  flakes  proved  t( 

of  forty-eight  hours,  nearly  one  half  of  the  fatty-looking  mas; 
actually  undergone  segmentation  into  Fungus-germs,  many  of  whic 
in  their  turn  grown  out  into  well  developed  filaments. 

^  In  view  of  the  observations  just  detailed,  it  becomes  a  most  s: 
cant  fact  that  precisely  the  same  kind  of  fungus  is  apt  to  spring  i 
all  sorts  of  organic  matter  when  it  begins  to  undergo  processes  of  c 
As  Turpin  says,  one  may  now  conceive  that  '  independemman 
moycns  reproducteurs  secondaircs,  tels  que  ceux  de  la  scminalc  ct 
bout  u  re,  le  PeniciUium  glaucum  peut  se  montrer  avec  une  ^ton 
profusion  partout  ou  se  rccontrent  les  globules  producteurs  de  la  m 
organiques.' 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  317 


flasscs  of  dense  interlaced  fungus-filaments,  and  of 
more  or  less  altered  and  agglutinated  milk-globules.  So 
tlat  one  can  only  conclude,  as  Turpin  *  suggests,  that 
*lfs  globules  laiteux,  arretes  et  accumuk's  dans  les  voies 
<ftMic  mamclle  surirritce  et  engorgce,  y  avaient  produit 
loraqirtls  vivaient  encore,  les  filaments  byssoides  et 
^DDCftlinecs  comme  cela  se  voit  chez  les  globules  laiteux 
^tandonnees  a  eux-memes  sous  Pinfluence  de  Tair  et  de 
Faxygcne  K 

This  metamorphosis  of  the  milk-globule  may  be  most 
suitably  compared  with  other  heterogenetic  changes 
'^hich  have  been  made  known  more  recently  by 
M-Tr&ul,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  botanists  in 
France,  as  occurring  within  the  tissues  of  many 
Bwfcring  plants  and  shrubs. 

It  may  easily  be  imagined  that  the  aerial  leaves  of 
ordinary  plants  and  trees  are  not  favourably  situated 
for  the  occurrence   of  evolutional   changes    in    their 

• 

*Dtcrior.  The  living  matter  of  which  they  are  com- 
posed is  exposed  too  much  to  the  drying  influence  of 
^  air,  and  to  other  adverse  conditions,  to  enable  it  to 
P^e  birth  to  anything  save  Fungus-germs,  or  similarly 
WW  organisms.  And  as  for  their  internal  tissues — the 
W  or  semi-fluid  portions  of  these  being  cut  off 
^'om  the  free  access  of  air,  and  also  distributed  for  the 

*Mto.  dc  TAcad.  des  Sciences/  1840,  t.  xvii.  p.  732. 

M.  Turpin,  moreover,  suggested  that  a  similar  germination  of  the 
™*"8lobules  might  take  place  occasionally  in  the  mammary  ducts  of 
^^'^'^  after  child-birth,  when  the  exit  of  the  milk  is  delayed  and 
*«l»east  is  irritated  and  inflamed. 


31.^  THE    }>EGIXXIXGS   OF  I. JFK. 


most  part  in  small  quantities  through  numeroif 
rate  and  more  or  less  closed  cellular  compartir^ 
they  are  little  prone  to  undergo  any  save  the 
modes  of  organic  evolution.     But,  as  we  have  \C^ 
from  the  investigations  of  M.  Trecul,  and  from 
observations  of  many  other  workers,  'Bacteria  majr 
produced  in  abundance  in  these  situations,  and  so 
may  low  fungoid  organisms. 

When   M.  Trecul   placed  some  fragments  of  A\ 
cynum  in  water,  in  order  by  maceration  to  isolate 
laticiferous  vessels,  the  fatex  within  the  latter  at 
underwent  its  accustomed   alterations  in  appearance 
The  small  globules  which  it  usually  contains  unite 
either  into  larger  globules,  or  else  into  masses  of 
more  or  less  homogeneous  character.     At  a  later  stag- 
all   this  latex  had  undergone  a  new  change;   it 
become  finely  granular,  and  there  only  remained  hen 
and  there,  as  relics  of  the  former  condition,  minut( 
portions  of  the  old  homogeneous  material.     M.  TrdcuH    ^ 
says ' : — ^  This  was    of   itself   a    sufficiently   singulai^ 
occurrence.     But   my  surprise  was  great   when,  after^ 
having  placed  these  laticiferous  vessels  in  contact  with  ^ 
iodine  and  sulphuric  acid,  I  saw  their  whole  contents^ 
become  of  a  deep  violet  colour,  whilst  the  little  masses    - 
of  latex  which  had  not  undergone  this  last  change,  and 
which  were  enveloped   by  portions  of  the  juice  that 
had  become  thus  finely  granular,  remained  uncoloured, 
or  else  had   assumed  the  yellow  colour  which  iodine-— 

>  'Compt  Rend.'  (1865),  t.  bd.  p.  158. 


IhE  BEGtNmNGS  OF  LtFE. 


hqufntJy  communicates  to  the  latex.  .  .  .   Having 

""i  directed  my  attention  to  the  fine  newly-formed 

^^^^f&,  I  perceived  that  they  were   more  extended 

"s  elenducs)  than  they  at  first  sight  appeared,  since 


Fig,  71. 
^^'t  t&  AiK/liAatta  within  cells  and  lattcifeious  vessels  of  Plants. 
(Trtcul.)    (X  530.) 
^^TlioD  ofa  Utidferous  vessel  ai Amsoma  lal^alia  whose  contents 
hwebecn  tnmsTonned  into  fusiform  Amylobacieri. 
Medillai)'  cell  of  Ficai  carica  iiltcd  with  granules   and  fuslfatm 
Aw^iAaeltn  {b),  and  having  othei  large  capilale  Amytc^aettn 
upon  its  internal  wall  (e). 
*■  rortioo  of  thick-walled  bark-cell  containing  different  forms  of  Amy- 
kiatltr. 
hi'  Other  forms  irr^iilarly  stained  by  iodine. 

^^  violet  spot  was,  in  certain  vessels,  only  the 
ttnnination  of  a  little  oblong  body  which  was  composed 
''f  two  or  several  celk,  and  was  either  colourless  or 
slightly  stained  yellow.    Elsewhere,  other  cells  of  this 


320  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


little  organism  were  more  feebly. tinted  viol 
they  were  all  alike  intensely-tinted/ 

A  closer  examination  of  these  bodies  has  st 
to  be  organisms  which  diflFer  considerably  ii 
shape  on  diflFerent  occasions.    They  present  i 
as  very  minute  globular  bodies;  in  the  fom 
cylinders,  either  single  or  capitate ;  as  large; 
corpuscles  which  may  elongate  into  fusiform 
about  Txnnr"  i^  length;  or,  lastly,  as  corpusc 
projecting  shoot.     Some   are   motionless,   z 
display  slightly  undulating  movements,     Th< 
from  becoming  variously  stained  by  iodine, 
a  starchy  matter  is  produced  during   their 
phcsis  and  growth.    Owing  to  this  fact,  and 
of  the  resemblance  of  many  of  them  to  f 
have  been  included  by  M.  Trecul  under 
Amylobacter, 

In  other  vessels  such  a  change,  inste 
been  effected  throughout  the  whole  ve? 
to  be  still  in  progress.     ^One  part  of 
latex  had  become  purple  from  the  actio 
and  sulphuric  acid,  whilst  another  had 
but  from  the  one  to  the  other  tint  eve' 
to  be  seen.  .  .  .   Some  other   unbroi 
very  instructive,  inasmuch  as  their 
modified  to  the  same  extent,  assumr 
under  the  influence  of  the  re-agent 
(cells)  of  a  violet  colour  were  dispe 
interior,  and   they  were   often   qu 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  32 1 

'flother.'    M.  Trecul  adds : — '  It  is  important  to  note 

I  £d  not  find  any  of  these  little  organisms  dispersed 

'gi  tie  liquid  which  surrounded  the  laticiferous  ves- 

To  account  for  the  presence  of  the  organisms 

^rsuch  circumstances,  only  two  suppositions  seem 

sibJe,    As  M.  Trecul  says : — '  Either  they  are  born 

m  germs  proceeding  from  without,  or  else  they  pro- 

-•d  from  a  modification  of  the  elements  of  the  latex. 

they  owe  their  origin  to  pre-existing  germs,  how 

c  these  germs  introduced  by  thousands  throughout  the 

hole   length  of  vessels  filled  with  a  dense   fluid   so 

Dnsistent  as  to  be  no  longer  able  to  flow,  and  to  such 

Q  extent  as  completely  to  substitute  themselves  in  the 

lace  of  the  juice  itself?    How  can  one  conceive,  whilst 

dmitting  such  an  invasion  of  germs,  that  small  islets 

f  latex  should  have  remained  intact  here  and  there, 

ad  shcxild  have  been  able  to  resist  this  invasion  which 

ressed  round  them  on  all  sides?     Is  it  not  at  least  as 

robable  that  these  organisms   may  have   been   born 

nom  a  transformation  of  the  latex?' 

In  a  subsequent  communication  made  in  Septem- 
cr,  1865,  M.  Trecul*  reported  that  he  had  con- 
rmed  the  results  previously  arrived  at  by  fresh  obser- 
ations  upon  similar  plants,  and  also  upon  others 
eloaging  to  diflR^rent  families.  In  one  of  these,  Ficus 
aicsy  he  had  even  discovered  similar  starch-bearing 
mgoid  organisms  within  the  completely  closed  cells  of 
tie  medullary  tissue, — a  fact  which  seemed  to  make 

>  « Compt  Rend.'  t  Ixi.  p.  433. 
▼OU  IX.  T 


:\2  2  TifE  bi-auxxixgs  of  life. 


their   mode   of  origin  even    more  certain  than  it    had 
been  before.     In  some  situations  they  were  something 
like   tadpoles   in    shape,   whilst   in   others   they  wer^ 
cylindrical,   or  only  very  slightly  attenuated   toward^ 
one  extremity.     But  M.  Trecul  tells  us — and  no  oc%^ 
is   more   competent    to    pass  an   opinion   on  such  ^ 
subject— that   'the   appearance  of  these   little  plant^ 
within   closed    cells,  occupying    their    natural    situa-*^ 
tion    in    the    very    middle    of   the    medullary  tissue^ 
negatives  all   ideas  as   to  the  introduction  of  germ^^ 
from  without.'     And  he  has  even  seen  similar  organ-^ 
isms  produced  within  fibre-cells  of  the  bark  which  had 
already  become  notably  thickened,  in  Asclepias  cornrnti 
and  also  in  MetapUxis  chinensis.   (See  Fig.  71,  if,  e.) 

But  M.  Trecul  is  able  to  add  another  proof  even  more 
striking  than  any  we  have  hitherto  mentioned.    He  has 
actually  seen  a  crystalline  mass  undergo  modifications, 
and  become  itself  converted  into  an  Amylohacter.  There 
exists,  he  says,  in   the   bark   of  the   common   Elder, 
and  in  that  of  plants  belonging  to  different  families, 
such  as  Solanacea  and   Crassulacea^  a  number  of  cells 
which  are  filled  with  little  tetrahedrons  having  slightly 
unequal  sides.     These  cells  may  be  isolated^  or  they 
may  be  grouped  in  contact  with  one  another,  and  in 
longitudinal  series.     The  cell-walls  sometimes  become 
partly  absorbed,  so  as  to  fi3rm   intercommunicating 
lacunas,    and   it    is   within   these    that    the   enclosed 
tetrahedrons  become  converted  into  starch-bearing  or- 
ganisms.     M.  Trecul  says : — ^  Since  my  observations 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  333 

in  1860,  I  had  become  aware  that  corpuscles,  which 
flrfourcd  violet  under  the  influence  of  iodine,  frequently 
"placed  the  tetrahedrons  after  putrefaction;  but,  at 
to  period,  I  had  not  seen  the  transition  from  the  one 
to  the  other.  I  was  more  fortunate  this  year.  I  have 
seen  the  tetrahedrons  themselves,  containing  amyla- 
ao«s  matter,  forming  columns,  tinted  with  the  most 
beautiful  violet  colour.  I  have  seen  the  tetrahedrons 
^me  elongated  at  one  of  their  angles,  and  pass 
iradually  into  these  curious  little  plants,  by  producing  a 
cylindrical  outgrowth*  In  this  case,  the  rounded  or  still 
Mgnlar  tetrahedron  represented  the  bulb,  but  the  tetra- 
hedron occasionally  became  completely  obliterated,  and 
left  in  its  place  only  a  little  fusiform  or  cylindrical 
^^i^ietal  oi^;anism.' 

This  is  indeed  an  example  which,  in  point  of  cer- 
tainty and  freedom  from  possible  sources  of  error  to 
a  skilled  observer,  seems  almost  unsurpassable.     If  a 
crystalline  mass  of  matter  is  seen  slowly  to  alter  its 
fcnn  and  become  bodily  converted  into  a  vegetating 
Ofganism,  one  could  not  have  evidence  of  a  more  con- 
vincing nature.     Only  one  explanation  of  such  a  fact 
is  possible — hence  M  Trecul  is  quite  entitled  to  say  ^ : 
— ^^De  tous  les  faits  qui  precedent,  il  r&ulte  que  U 
wkOihe  argamque  contenue  dans  c/rtames  cellules  peut  se 
trmtsformer^  peiuUmt  la  futrifaction^  en  corps  vhants    de 
matnre  trh-Mff&ente  de  I  espke  gMratrice! 

*  Loc  cit.,  p.  435. 


324  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

These  transformations  of  the  particles  in  the  latex 
of  plants,  and  the  somewhat  similar  transformation  of  ' 
milk-globules,  are  most  important  and  typical,  since 
the  change  takes  place  in  comparatively  large  masses 
of  matter  which  can  be  watched  with  ease.  It  takes 
place,  moreover,  in  inasses  which,  although  they  are  the 
products  of  living  bodies,  can  scarcely  themselves  be 
said  to  be  ^  living  V 

In  the  blood  of  animals  we  have  another  highly 
nutritive  fluid  which  might  be  supposed  to  be  capable 
of  giving  birth  to  independent  living  things  under 
certain  conditions.  It  seems,  however,  to  undei^o  such 
changes  more  frequently  in  the  lower  forms  of  life  than 
in  the  higher.  Amongst  insects,  several  instances  may 
be  mentioned  in  which  simple  organisms  appear  to  be 
born  from  the  fluid  constituents  of  the  blood,  or  else 
produced  by  modifications  of  some  of  its  already  exist- 
ing solid  elements. 

This  seems  to  be  the  case  with  'Muscardine/  the 
disease  which  formerly  committed  such  fearful  ravages 
amongst  the  silk-worms  of  France. 

*  There  is,  perhaps,  most  room  for  doubt,  in  the  latter  respect,  con- 
cerning the  particles  in  the  latex ;  and  these,  being  probably  poor  in 
nitrogenous  materials,  evolve  into  very  small  and  simple  organisms. 
The  milk-globules,  however,  have  a  highly  nitrogenous  composition, 
o^ing  to  an  admixture  of  albuminoid  constituents  with  their  fatty  ele- 
ments— a  combination  which  seems  especially  favourable  for  the  occur- 
rence of  evolutional  changes.  The  milk-globules  accordingly  are  seea 
to  produce  large  specimens  of  Penicillium  of  a  remarkably  vigoroas 
growth. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  325 

V'''*^  Ascertained  by  Bassi  in  1835,  that  one  of  the 
tDC^  r^^^tiinent  features  of  this  disease  was  the  presence 
^  %  ^^^i^gus  which  at  first  increased  and  multiplied 
wtt^  the  body  of  the  living  animal,  and,  after  the 
tow^  of  the  worm  or  moth,  made  its  appearance 
***^"^y— coming  through  the  skin  in  various  places 
»  a  whitish  powdery  growth.  It  was  afterwards  ascer- 
^^"^  l>y  M.  Audouin  and  others,  that  the  disease 
•2S  not  confined  to  the  silk-worm  and  its  moth,  since 
It  could  be  communicated  directly  by  inoculation  to 
"^  other  species  of  Lepidoptera ;  and  it  could  also 
k  engendered  quite  easily  in  these  and  in  the  silk- 
*wn  by  shutting  them  up  and  feeding  them  for  a  time 
0  dose  damp  bottles  or  boxes.  The  possibility  of 
^facing  a  'spontaneous'  outbreak  of  this  contagious 
*^*ase  was  always  within  reach  of  the  experimenter, 
*^  in  districts  which  were,  so  far  as  all  previous 
'"^owiedge  went,  wholly  untainted.  In  this  respect, 
^'^scardine  was  found  to  be  similar  to  typhus  fever  ^. 
**  question  arises,  however,  whether,  in  such  cases  of 
?prcntly  'spontaneous'  origin,  the  unhealthy  condi- 
^  merely  induce  a  state  of  the  blood  and  body  gene- 
^"l  in  which  omnipresent,  although  unknown,  spores 
^  enabled  to  develop ;  or  whether  the  state  of  the 

^tnscurdine,  however,  is  undoubtedly  associated  with  the  develop- 
■W  of  a  fimgus  in  the  blood ;  whilst  in  typhus  fever  no  lower  organisms 
***iHiwn  to  be  produced.  Their  non-existence  in  the  latter  disease  is 
*^  testified  by  the  large  number  of  recoveries.  On  the  other  hand, 
*■**&«  is  invariably  fatal  As  Audouin  says, '  dans  tons  les  cas  le 
"^^^  est  le  mtoie ;  aucan  de  ceux  qui  sont  attaqu^s  n'^appe/ 


326  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

blood  thus  initiated  does  (as  it  seems  to  do)  suffice  tc 
rise  to  the  germs  and  fungus-growths  which  aflen 
constitute  such  all-important  elements  of  the  dis( 
The  former  is  the  view  which  has  been  most  wi 
adopted :  and  yet  two  of  the  ablest  writers  on  mu< 
dine,  after  the  most  careful  investigations  with  refer 
to  this  very  point,  came  to  the  opposite  conclui 
These  observers,  who  adopted,  in  its  entirety,  the  b 
in  the  possibility  of  engendering  muscardine  de  ; 
were  M.  Gu^rin-Meneville  and  M.  Robinet. 
conclusions  of  the  former  especially  were  based  i 
positive  and  apparently  unambiguous  observations. 
The  blood-corpuscles  of  the  silk-worm  during  lift 
elliptic  or  more  or  less  elongated,  but  after  death 
are  always  found  to  be  spherical.  When  a  little  b 
is  abstracted  from  a  healthy  worm,  the  corpuscles 
elongated  at  first,  though  they  speedily  assume 
spherical  condition ;  and,  when  in  this  latter  state, 
begin  to  exhibit  amoeboid  protrusions,  although 
changes  of  shape  are  never  seen  in  healthy  bl 
corpuscles  immediately  after  they  have  been  drawn  : 
the  body.  M.  Guerin-Meneville  observed  that  in  • 
silk-worms,  and  also  in  the  cases  where  blood 
been  drawn  from  living  animals  during  the  very  < 
stages  of  the  disease,  the  spherical  ama*boid 
puscles  contained  much  larger  granulations  than  us 
and  that  some  of  them  tended  towards  the  perip 
of  the  corpuscles,  from  which  they  ultimately  n 
their  exit.    These  little  bodies  were  ovoid,  and  i 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


I  tiKi  ^n^'  in  length.     They  moved  about  id  the 
"  rf  the  blood  mote  actively  than  could  be  ac- 


Fu.  71. 
"*■•»£  fte  Derelopment  of  Bolrylii  Baiuiuui  in  Ihe  Blood  of  AnimiU 

■feingfrom  Miiscardine.    (Guirin-Minevtlle.)  (*  400,) 
^•ifiirualuidunaEboid  blood-corpuscles  coniaining  large  particles. 
^ ''  'Mi  puticlcs  in  the  free  state. 
*  *■  Cona  of  Boirylit  supposed  to  be  derived  from  such  corpuscles, 

<diidi  gndoolljt  grow  (if,  tf)  into  long  and  simple,  and  subse- 

fesdj  (r,  1)  into  branched.  Fungus-lilamcnis. 

""DtftJ  for  by  mere  Brownian  movements.  They 
P^iOilj  increased  in  sizej  and,  even  two  or  three 
■'P  before  the  death  of  the  sick  worms  or  moths,  many 
"aein  had  become  so  elongated  as  to  be  easily  recc^- 
"•Me  as  rudimentary  fungus-filaments '.     Along  with 

nnjcnggg  to  the  different  conditions  uoder  which  tbe  same  pheno- 
*^  'T  be  witneued,  it  ihoald  be  remarked  that  Ihe  fungus  can 


328  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

this  characteristic  feature  of  muscardine,  another  very 
significant  peculiarity  invariably  showed  itself,  /.  t.  a 
well-marked  acidity  of  the  blood,  instead  of  the  neutral 
condition  which  is  invariably  met  with  in  the  healthy 
worm  or  moth  ^ 

The  fungus,  continuing  to  grow  through  the  tissues 
of  the  animal  in  all  directions,  soon  causes  its  death ; 
and,  after  twenty-four  hours  or  less,  it  may  make  its 
appearance  externally  through  the  thinnest  portion  of 
the  dorsal  integument,  and  through  the  respiratory 
spiracles,  in  the  form  of  delicate  snow-white  tufts  of 
fungus-mycelium.  These  continue  to  grow  rapidly,  and 
50on  produce  multitudes  of  minute  spores,  by  means  of 

always  be  developed  in  dead  animals.  According  to  Robin,  thb  was 
shown  by  M.  Johannys  in  1 839 ;  for,  as  he  says, '  il  a  pa  faire  d^velopper 
ce  v^g^tal  sur  des  Vers  k  soie  morts,  places  dans  des  conditions  favorables 
k  la  fermentation  et  hor&  de  tovte  communication  avec  des  lieux  iitfectes  dt 
Muscardine.  La  moisissure  se  d^velcppe  aussi  bien  sur  Tanimal  mort 
que  sur  les  animaux  inocuUs  de  leur  vivant,  et  le  v^'g^tal  obtenu  par 
inoculation  est  identique  avec  celui,  que  se  d^veloppe  sans  cause 
directement  connue/  Whilst,  according  to  evidence  given  by  M. 
Gu^rin-Mdneville  in  1851,  *la  muscardine  sporadique  est  nne  ter- 
minaison  naturclle  de  I'existence  du  ver  k  soie,  maladie  qu'il  est 
impossible  de  pruvenir  d'une  mani^re  absolue.'  (Loc.  dt,  pp.  574 
and  603.) 

^  From  the  evidence  now  in  our  possession,  it  is  not  perhaps  possible 
to  say  whether  the  acidity  precedes  the  appearance  of  germs,  or  mm 
versa.  We  do  know,  however,  from  the  experiments  of  Dutrochet,  that 
a  mixture  of  egg-albumen  and  water  will  remain  unchanged  for  months, 
but  will  always  develop  fungi  within  a  few  days  after  it  has  been  slightly 
acidified.  (*  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.,'  1834  (Botan.),  p.  34.)  Again,  milk 
always  assumes  an  acid  reaction  before  its  globules  begin  to  undergo 
transformation  into  PfiuW/Ziiim-germs. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


3*9 


It  the  diiease  may  be  disseminated  amongst  those 
att-wonas  which,  owing  to  bad  hygienical  coaditions 
IT  otbo- ansss  that  may  have  lowered  their  vitality,  are 


Fw.  73. 

■M  dndq)ed  form  of  Bnlrjiit  Bauiana,  u  it  grows  through   (b« 
■Mn  of  Animals  suffering  from  Mascardine  (Audouin).  ( x  400.) 

*  *U  predisposed  to   initiate   tlie   particular   morbid 
**<?«  by  which  it  commences '. 

Itkidmitted  on  all  sides  that  such  a  predisposing  cause  is  neces- 
^  TlmKobiil  U171;— 'II  ne  suffil  pas  que  le«  spores  arrivent  k  la 
***4i  corps  des  larves  ou  mime  dans  la  inlirieur;  il  faut  encore, 
'"'Ti'dles  puiiseat  agir  sur  ranimal,  que  ses  humeurs  presentent  des 
^•'■i  bmnbles  k  lenr  genninalion.  Si  les  Vers  eiposfa  au  contact 
*tk  ploitntioD  des  spores  sont  places  dans  les  drconstances  d'ali- 
"■Wco  tits  fivombles,  il  se  pourra  probablement  que  les  humeurs 
Ml  Its  priocipes  se  renou»cllent  rapid  ement,  ne  pfisenlent  pas  ces  con- 
"wa.'Qndit  alors  que  I'animat  r^iste  par  son  jnergie  propre,  C'est 
hmniemcilt,  dil  Robinet,  la  ressource  la  plus  sQre  et  ta  plus  facile  & 
MB  pt  II  mignaniw.    C'est  atasi  que  dans  des  invasions  dfeastreuscs 


330  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

In  its  epidemic  form,  muscardine  is  most  prone  to 
occur  at  the  season  when  the  worms  are  just  about  to 
pass  into  the  chrysalis  condition.  At  this  critical 
period,  unknown  influences  are  apt  to  operate  upon 
them  which  produce  abnormal  and  specific  nutritional 
changes ;  and  then  the  disease  breaks  out  like  a  pesti- 
lence, attacking  almost  all  the  worms  of  a  given 
locality. 

Again,  it  is  well  known  that  the  growth  of  a  mould 
(Emfusa)  frequently  seems  to  prove  fatal  to  flies  in 
autumn  ^  This  subject  has  been  investigated  by 
Professor  Cohn,  who  came  to  the  opinion  that  the 
parasitic  growth  commenced  by  an  independent  de- 
velopment of  Fungus-germs  in  the  blood  of  the  sickly 
animal.  He  does  not  believe  that  the  disease  is  incited 
by  the  mysterious  introduction  of  Fungus-germs  into 
their  circulating  system  from  without.  He  sums  up  by 
saying  (^Hedwigia,'  1855,  p.  59)  that  'the  influence  of 
the  spores  of  Emfusa  in  the  appearance  of  this  fungus, 
and  of  the  disease  in  flies,  is  by  no  means  evident,  since 
the  genesis,  the  chemical  and  optical  characters  of  the 
numberless  free  cells  in  the  blood,  the  absence  of  a 
special  expanded  mycelium,  and,  above  all,  the  whole 

de  la  muscardine  line  foule  d'individns  ^chappent,  non  pas  k  transmissioii, 
alnsi  qu  on  le  dit,  mais  bien  au  d^veloppement  des  spores.    VoiU  poor- 
quoi  beaucoup  d'observateurs  ont  contests  la  tnmsmissibilit^  de  lai^ 
Muscardine  d'un  individu  &  un  autre.'    (*V^^taax  Parasites,'   1853^ 
p.  582.) 

^  This  mould  will  always  appear  on  a  dead  fly  which  is  allowed 
float  for  a  few  days  on  the  sorlaoe  of  water. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 


33« 


"^^tbc  development,  seem  to  concur  in  fiavour  of 
^  originatioQ  of  the  cells  of  the  Empusm  from  the 
iieased  Uood  1/ 

^'^Igh  much  has  been  written  of  late  years  with 
*™iccto  the  existence  of  germs  of  fungi  in  the  blood 
rfmaa,  and  as  to  their  production  of  many  of  the  most 
MOBS  diseases  to  which  he  is  liable,  I  have  elsewhere  * 
*tod  what  slight  support  there  is  for  these  various  state- 
fifflta^and  to  what  a  large  extent  different  kinds  of  cvi- 
ioa  tend  to  contradict  them.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  such 
K^poisms  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  blood  of  living 
asQos  except  in  certain  rare  affections;  and  doubt- 
s  many  of  the  alleged  cases  are  to  be  explained  by 
c  altogether  unwarranted  assumption  of  observers  that 
He  particles,  which  are  so  commonly  met  with  in  the 
od,  are  fungus-germs — specimens  of  the  so-called 
icrococci'  of  Hallier-^. 


Of  oomse  it  is  not  denied  that  such  a  disease  is  capable  of  being 
■d  by  contagion :  iax  from  it.     We  believe  that  this  does  occur. 

dtftblislmient  of  the  mode  by  which  contagion  is  communicated 
ot,  howerer,  as  some  have  appeared  to  think,  dispose  of  the  more 
lal  question.     (See  Prof.  Huxley's  Inaugural  Address  to  British 
cktioD,  'Nature/  1870,  No.  46,  p.  405.) 
loe  Apptmdi*  £,  pp.  cxix-cxxvii. 

ht  it  must  alwajrs  be  remembered  that  there  are  particles  and 
deii.  Those  which  are  potential  fungus-germs  cannot  be  dis- 
iDBted  by  the  microscope  from  normal  blood-particles ;  and  even  if 
'■  of  these  particles  were  seen  to  develop  into  rudimentary  fungi,  it 
i  Iqr  no  means  prove  (as  Prof.  Hallier  and  his  disciples  would  sup- 

tbat  they  came  from  fungi — in  the  face  of  what  we  now  know 
the  metamorphosis  of  milk-globules  and  other  organic 


viuiiiii;    LUC   lire   ot  the   inciividual. 
excretion   like  the  milk,  but  the  m 
<»i"  all   the   tin  ids  of  the  body,  and  :: 
chan^^cs  from  moment  to  moment 
so  that,  as  long  as  the  organism  live: 
cular  activities  of  the  various  tisst 
influencing  this  all-pervading  fluid 
maintain   its  ordinary  characters  \ 
is  approaching,  these  united  activiti 
and  weaker,  and   changes  may   be§ 
in    the    blood    more   closely   resemh 
occur  in  organic  fluids  out  of  the  b 
conceivable,  also,  that  the  changes  w 
blood  in  certain  febrile  diseases — moi 
they  are  associated  with  a  very  high  1 
be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  make  the 
usually  prone  to  undergo  rapid   put 
after  death.   And  the  occurrence  of  pu 
in  animal  fluids  implies  the  presence 


TBE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  333 


r^H  ilich  have  been  observed  soon  after  death  must  have 
z|  ^KD  produced  k  n^vo  in  the  organic  fluids  themselves. 
Qk  observation  of  this  kind  made  much  impression 
foo  ^  at  the  time,  and  tended  strongly  to  confirm 
•then growing  belief  in  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  con- 
*™flg  ^spontaneous  generation/    Having  made  an 
■topsy  (thirty-two  hours    after   death)    nearly  three 
fors  ago,  on  a  man  who  died  in  University  College 
Ho^tal  of  rheumatic  fever,  and   in  whom  an   ex- 
ocedingjy  high  temperature  had  existed  for  a  few  hours 
Ww  death,  I  immediately  proceeded  to  examine  por- 
tals of  the  brain  and  membranes  with  the  microscope. 
Ik  skull  had  been  opened  and  the  brain  had  been 
"BW^cd  in  my  presence  but  a  few  minutes  before ;  when 
4c  arachnoid  was  cut  through,  and  two  convolutions 
'^  carefully  separated  which  had  previously  been  in 
^contact,  in  order  to  cut  oflT  a  portion  of  the  delicate 
"^^twork  of  vessels  lying  between  them.  On  submitting 
^  to  the  microscope,  the  fluid  outside  the  vessels,  and 
«*)tbat  within,  was  seen  to  contain  a  large  number  of 
^  actively  moving  particles.     Many  of  these  were 
'^spherical  particles  of  various  sizes,  but  others  were 
*5tinct  and  large  Bacteria  made  up  of  two  almost  cellular 
*Wcnts;  and  every  portion  of  the  pia  mater  that  was 
***ouned  showed  similar  moving  particles  and  Bacteria, 
*»*  brain  was  then  covered  by  a  bell  glass,  and  when 
P*^ions  of  the  pia  mater — again  taken  from  between 
P'^ously  unseparated  convolutions  —  were  examined 
*^  ^  interval  of  twenty-four  hours,  the  large  Bacteria 


334  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

had  considerably  increased  in  number,  whilst  the  small 
spheroidal  particles  seemed  to  be  as  plentiful  as  before. 
When  portions  of  brain  substance  from  some  central 
parts  of  the  organ  were  also  examined  at  this  time, 
moving  particles  and  Bacteria  were  seen  to  exist  in  the 
greatest  abundance  amongst  the  disintegrated  nerve 
elements,  which  had  probably  been  poured  out  from  the 
blood-vessels. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  origin  of  those  Bacteria 
which  were  observed  in  the  vessels  a  few  minutes  after 
the  brain  had  been  removed  from  the  body,  it  is,  in  the 
first  place,  perfectly  obvious  that  they  must  have  existed 
in  the  blood  of  these  vessels  before  the  brain  had  been 
removed  and  before  the  skull  was  opened.     Bacteria  arc 
not  produced  in  any  fluids  under  two  or  three  hours. 
Their  origin  could  not,  therefore,  have  been  due  to 
Bijrf/fr/iaf-germs  derived  from  the  atmosphere,  which,  on 
removal  of  the  skull-cap,  had  in  some  mysterious  way 
insinuated   themselves  into  the  blood  vessels.      They 
must  either  have  existed  in  the  blood  during  life,  or  else 
they  must  have  been  produced  de  novo  in  this  fluid  after 
death.     There  is  strong  reason  for  disbelieving  that 
Bacteria  existed  in  the  blood  during  the  life  of  the  indi — 
vidual.     I  have  several  times  examined  the  blood  of^ 
individuals  who  were  similarly  aflFected  with  this  exag — - 
gerated  form  of  rheumatic  fever,  and  have  always  feiledJ 
to  discover  any  such  organisms  ^.     It  is,  therefore,  fan3 

*  Even  if  they  had  existed,  however,  during  life,  there  would  still 
weighty  reasons  inclining  as  to  believe  that  they  had  been  prodvoed 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


335 


more  likely  that  they  had  been  newly  evolved,  by  reason 

of  changes  taking  place  in  the  blood  after  death,  in  or 

near  the  situation  in  which  they  were  found.     It  would 

be  impossible  otherwise  to  account  for  their  distribution 

throughout  the  brain  at  a  time  when  the  circulation 

had  ceased  *•    This  organ  is  so  far,  comparatively,  from 

any  mucous  surface,  that  even  if  germs  had  been  able 

to  make  their  way  into  the  blood-vessels  ramifying  on 

tlicir  surface  (which  is  in  itself  altogether  a  gratuitous 

supposition),  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  imagine 

that,  in  such  a  short  space  of  time,  they  could  have 

^  able  to  penetrate  into  the  innermost  parts  of  the 

'^ain.  Their  unceasing  movements  are  extremely  slow 

'n  reality;  and  more  than  this,  they  are  never  con- 

unuously  progressive.      They  consist   either   of  slow 

^*^tions,  or  else  of  short  darting  movements  hither 

^  thither,  in  which  the  same  ground  is  frequently 

''^'accd.     And  again,  if  Bacteria  in  their  adult  or  in 

^^  rudimentary  state  could  make  their  way  from  the 

'^'^phere  through  the  superficial  layers  of  the  mucous 

^^'llbrane  so  as  to  penetrate  the  vessels,  why,  if  it  is 

^  assumed  that  they  do  this  after  the  death  of  an 

^^lividual,  does  not  the  same  thing  occur  during  his 

*^5  more  especially  when  the  mucous  membrane  of 


in  the  blood,  rather  than  that  they  had  been  developed  from  germs 
had  gained  access  to  the  blood  from  without 

In  ill  probability,  if  examination  had  been  made,  they  would  have 
^^&  foond  disseminated  throughout  all  other  parts  of  the  body,  just  as 
^^^vere  actually  found  in  different  parts  of  the  bndn.  (See  Appendm  £, 
^  cl,Dotei.) 


336  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

the  mouth  nearly  always  contains  myriads  of  i 
It  cannot  be  replied  that  Bacteria  are  unable  1 
in  the  blood  during   life,  since    the   observatic 
Davaine,  Vulpian  and  others  clearly  show  that  tb 
flourish  in  the  blood  of  man  and  also  in  that  of  J 
of  the  lower  animals  during  their  life.     There 
then  to  be  no  reasonable  alternative,  and  we  an 
pelled  to  fall  back  upon  the  assumption,  that  the  1 
met  with  in  our  observations  had  been  evolved 
the  blood  plasma  and  other  fluids  of  the  body, 
we  have   seen   that   they   arise   in   previously 
organic  infusions  2. 

During  life,  and  under  the  influence  of  all  the 
activities  of  the  living  body,  the  plasma  of  the 
rich  in  nutritive  materials,  is  probably  giving  birt 
stantly  to  living  particles  which  speedily  develo 
leucocytes.    These  amoeboid  corpuscles  are  the 
isms  into  which  such  new-born  living  matter  invj 
tends  to  develop  in  the  healthy  living  body  3.   But 
death  has  supervened,  then  all  is  changed;  the 
cular  composition  of  the  fluid  may  have  altered, 
the  activities  of  the  tissues  which  formerly  infli 
it  have  ceased  to  act.     It  is,  however,  a  fluid  stil 
in   albuminoid   materials;    and   when    released 

»  See  pp.  345.  346. 

*  More  especially  since  the  more  recent  investigations  of  Dr. 
son  have  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  blood  does  not  n; 
contain  either  visible  or  invisible  Bacteria.     ('Thirteenth  Re 
Medical  Officer  of  Privy  Council,'  1870,  p.  65.) 

'  See  vol.  L  p.  226, 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


337 


all  the  vital  influences  of  the  organism  of  which  it 
formed  part,  what  wonder  is  it  that  the  new-born  parti- 
cles which  are  still  evolved  should  assume  the  familiar 
shapes  of  such  units  {Bacterid)  as  appear  in  organic 
scriutions  outside  the  body  ^  or  that  some  of  the  minute 
prtides  which  existed  in  the  blood,  before  death  was 
dose  at  hand,  should  alter  their  destination  and  develop 
into  B4utmay  just  as  the  milk-globules  develop  into 
brge  Fungus-germs  ?    It  is  also  quite  possible  that  a 
hrtcrogcnetic  change  of  some  kind  may  overtake  red 
and  white  blood-corpuscles  when   they  are   liberated 
from  the  vital  influences  of  the  organism  in  which  they 
have  been  produced,  and  also  occasionally  within  the 
Kving  organism  itself.     On  this  subject,  however,  we 
have  at  present  very  little  evidence  i. 

^Hiite  blood-corpQsdes  are  practically  young  AmoebK,  and  there  is 

"0  nying  what  changes  they  may  not  occasionally  be  capable  of  under- 

8*»|-   Ortgarina,  which  are  so  very  abundant  in  the  bodies  of  lower 

■oottls,  and  which  are  closely  allied  to  Amoebae,  may  perhaps  in  many 

*•«  be  derived  from  the  transformations  of  such  corpuscles.    Again, 

^  blood'Corpascles  are  very  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  chlorophyll 

"cades  of  Alg€B  and  Cbaraee<Et  although  the  latter  are  probably  much 

^^Kdalised  in  composition.   But  it  will  appear  further  on  (Chap.  XX) 

uttt  the  transformations  of  such  chlorophyll  vesicles  are  often  of  the 

most  startling  description.    Quite  recently,  Mr.  Ray  Lankester  (•  Quar- 

teiy  Journal  of  Microscopical  Science,*  1871)  has  described  a  peculiar, 

tbongfa  small  and  simple,  ciliated  Infusorium  which  he  found  in  the 

Uood  of  certain  frogs;  whilst  Dr.  Boyd  Moss  ('Monthly  Microscopical 

Joaroal/  Oct.  1871)  has  described  a  similarly  simple  Infusorium  found 

m  the  blood  of  a  Ceylon  red  deer  on  several  occasions.    It  seems  to  me 

more  easy  to  suppose  that  such  organisms  should  have  arisen  by  a 

Acterogenetic  process,  than  from  '  germs '  of  delicate,  externally  existing 

oipmisms  of  this  kind,  which  had  not  only  made  their  way  into  the 

VOL.  II.  Z 


^y  v-v^/cii  ill   l'lclilL^  auu  cininii 

Myriads  of  microscopic  fun<;i  bch 
tc:in    types    included    under    Rust,  Si 
Mould  '5  arc  habitual  dwellers  in  and 
of  living  plants,  especially  when  the 
condition — although  others  are  often  : 
plants  which  present  no  other  sign  c 
particular  kinds  of  fungi  are  encouni 
situations,   and   they   recur  in   simil 
tolerably   constant    forms.     The  ravi 
them  are  matters  of  no  small  import 
on   account   of  the  very  serious   dar 
help  to  produce  in  our  food-supplies, 
mention   the   fatal   'blights'   which 
occasion  amongst  our  cereals,  and  t 
diseases  of  the  vine,  the  hop,  and  the 
fungi  of  this  kind  appear  as  the  most 
destruction.     The  original   mode   of 
various  growths  is  still  involved  in  dou 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


339 


'"Kwgh  most  positive  statements  have  from  time  to 
tmc  been  made  by  di£Ferent  observers  concerning  their 
fcterqgcnctic  origin,  by  changes  similar  to  those  which 
CDDFcrt  the  milk-globule  into  a  Fenicillium  and  the 
jUwIcsofmany  plants  into  Amjlohacters^.  Thus,  in 
^P^kiflg  of  one  of  the  commonest  blights,  that  pro- 
^K«d  by  JJrtio^  M.  Turpin  says^: — *I1  m*est  bien 
^^ttmW  par  un  grand  nombre  d'observations,  faites 
tt"  divcrscs  plantes  plus  ou  moins  attaquecs  de  l*Ur^- 
*>^  que  la  carie  n*est  qu'un  etat  morbide,  qu'un 
^oerescence  de  la  globuline  ou  fccule  du  tissu  ccllu- 
^  du  perisperme  du  graine  du  ble/  A  similar 
daoge^  however,  may  also  occur  in  the  globules  which 
■teally  exist  in  the  cells  of  the  stem  or  in  those  of 
fc  leaves;  so  that,  according  to  Turpin,  ^L'Uredinee 
at  one  maladie  qui  attaque  par  place,  Ics  globules 
''iiotenus  dans  les  vesicules  du  tissu  cellulaire  des 
Plmtcs,  qui  leur  donne  quelquefois  plus  de  volume  et 


*  ft  las  been  noticed  that  the  leaves  of  many  plants,  prior  to  the 
lipuance  of  fungi  within  them,  have  been  remarkable  for  their  'almost 
^>tiBil green  colour;'  and, according  to  Mr.  Cooke  (loc.  cit.,  p.  155), 
'^phenomenon  has  been  noticed  in  ears  of  com,  in  which  every  grain 
^  soQo  afterwards  filled  with  spores  of  bunt.'  This  fact  is  one  of 
^  interest  and  importance,  since  it  will  be  subsequently  shown  (in 
^^K>XX  and  XXI)  that  the  same  extremely  bright  green  colour  is 
'^  inirariably  to  be  observed  amongst  those  portions  of  Alg<t^  or 
^»B^  BugUtut  and  De&midi<B,  which  are  about  to  undergo  a  hetero- 
i^rtic  change ;  and  in  these  latter  cases  every  step  of  the  process  of 
^■■'fonnatioii  into  new  organi;»ms  may  be  watched  by  the  micro- 

'  Loc  dt,  p.  346. 

Z  Z 


'HI  p:ir  inoculation  altcrcr  tic  la  inOm 
\l   plant.'   ncuN'cilr.'     Thus  th?   mod 
!\i;:'rA  sccnu'ti  so  inuubit.iblc  to  Tu'p 
t )  suppose  the  products  were  mere  : 
fications  of  pre-existing  structures, 
independent  life  of  their  own.    Sever; 
botanists,  moreover, — amongst  who 
Fries,  Endlicher,  and  Unger — were  e 
these  and  many  other  Entophytes  a 
morbid  portions  of  the  tissues  of  pla 
recognised  the  fact  of  their  developing 
living  organisms  ^ 

1  first  became  convinced,  from  pers 
that  Bacteria  and  larger  Fungus-germs 
tered  within  the  closed  cells  of  livi 
three  years  ago,  during  the  examinatic 
mens  of  sugar-cane  in  a  sickly  cond 

'  We  quote  the  foIlo\rii)(r  note  from  M.  Pom 


^^.  ^  # 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  341 

brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Scientific  Committee  of 
the  Royal  Horticultural  Society  '•     I  found,  on  making 
thin  sections  of  the  central  tissue  even  of  young  shoots, 
diat  many  of  the  cells   contained  an  abundance   of 
Bscteria^  and  others  a  smaller  number  of  TarulaAike 
corpuscles,  whilst  some  of  the  surrounding  cells  were 
quite  free  from  either.    I  have  since  met  with  the  same 
kind   of  thing  when  examining  the   central  portions 
of  decaying  tubers  and  other  fleshy  parts  of  plants. 
Actual  mycelial  growths  are,  moreover,  to  be  found 
in  various  situations,  to  which  we  might  pretty  con- 
fidently suppose   that   no   external   germs   could    ever 
have  penetrated.     They  have  been  found,  for  instance, 
in  the  liquid  juice  taken  from  freshly  broken  cocoa- 
nuts*,  from  the  interior  of  walnuts  and  filberts  3,  and 
from  the  central  portions  of  stone-fruits,  such  as  plums 
and  peaches,  whilst  the  surrounding  and  external  fleshy 
portions  were  quite  uninjured  and  unaffected.  Speaking 
dlBotrjtis  Infest ans^  which  he  regards  as  ^  the  proximate 
cause  of  the  potato  murrain,'  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley 
says^r-^^The  walls  of  the  cavities  of  the  carpels  of 

An  account  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  *  Journal  of  Royal  Hortic. 
Soc'voLiiliSjj.p.  14. 

^.Sigerson  writes : — *  The  author  of  this  paper,  having  opened  the 
*°*  shell  of  a  cocoa-nut,  and  cut  through  its  oily  albumen,  both  per- 
"^7  intact  to  all  seeming,  found  in  the  milk  a  web-like  plant,  a  kind  of 
Adilya.'  ('Monthly  Microscopical  Journal,'  Aug.  1870,  p.  11.) 

^  so-called  Tricotbtcium  roseunit  for  instance.  I  have  seen  a 
**^Ptt"growth  in  the  very  centre  of  an  otherwise  healthy  filbert. 

'Introduction  to  Cryptogamic  Botany,'  1857,  p.  65. 


t.>'.i:i'^c   its.'lr'  h.ad   cxhiLMt.'d   iiv)  trace 

tads  thijir.sclws  arc.  I   bL^iicvc,  adni 
Lionel    Bcalc,  for  instance,  says : — 
germs  appear  in  closed  cavities  in 
dead  animal  and  vegetable  tissues, 
them  within  vegetable  cells  in  which 
be  discovered  when  the  tissue  was 
highest  powers/    And  again  he  says  :— 
them  in  the  interior  of  the  cells  of  ani 
very  centre  of  cells  with  walls  so  thick 
it  seems  almost  impossible  that  such 
have   made  their   way   through   the 
dium  ^* 

Again,  nothing  is   easier   for  us   t 
such  organisms  within  the  very  centr 
of  dead  animals,  whenever  the  parts 
signs  of  putrefaction.     They  are  oftc 
the  centre  of  a  mass  of  brain-tissue,  f 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  343 


boi  allowed  to  macerate  in  water  for  a  day  or  two. 

Wicn  a  section  is  made  through  such  a  mass,  the  cells 

in  the  very  central  portions  are  found  to  be*  swarming 

•ith  moving  particles  and  distinct  Bacteria^  although  very 

fc^i  tf  any,  are  to  be  seen  in  the  water  in  which  the 

portioD  of  liver  is  immersed.     M.  Estor  has,  moreover, 

fcwd  that  the  cells  of  the  liver  in  dogs,  rabbits,  mice, 

ad  various  kinds  of  birds,  even   immediately  after 

fath,  always  contain  a  number  of  actively  moving 

pWides  or  mere  granules  (microzymse),  which  both  he 

**l  M.  Becfaamp  believe  have  the  power  of  developing 

iato  definitely  formed  Bacteria. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  granulations  natu- 

'''"y  existing  in  the  cells  of  the  liver  and  other  organs, 

'^scmblc  those  which  increase   under  conditions    of 

^^ntation^  and  which,  under  a  more  prolonged  inflam- 

^tory  stimulus  are  apt  to  undergo  a  fatty  metamor- 

PlKKis  leading  to  the  disintegration  of  the  cell.     But 

•1^  these  are  the  changes  most  prone  to  occur  during 

"fe-cspecially  in  internal   parts  or  organs — I   fully 

l^ficve  (with  other  observers)  that  after  death,  or  when 

^  is  dose  at  hand,  such  particles  may  undergo  an 

I 

^"ternal  change  fitting  them  for  independent  life,  just  as 
Oiilk-globules  are  able  to  individualize  themselves,  and 
J^  into  embryo  Fenicillia,  The  union  of  two,  three, 
*  more  of  such  granules  in  linear  series  has  been 
•atchcd  by  MM.  B^champ  and  Estor  ^  At  first  the 
inumlcs  form  chaplet-like  series,  which  gradually  tend 

»  •  Compt.  Rend;  1868. 


^--._ c^L^ii^u   Liie  union  ot  vitcl 

saw    them   (gradually   fuse   into   bodic 
rcscnibiing    Vihrjo    hacillus^    which    in 
rise  to  distinct  Leptothrix  Hlaments. 
nature  were  subsequently  followed   ( 
observers  within  epithelial  cells  take 
of  the  tongue  of  a  diabetic  patient, 
granulations  of  the  epithelial  cells,  b 
linear  series,  fDrmed  the  rudiments  of 
pendent  organisms.     Moreover,  Prof, 
has  for  several  years  asserted  that  such  c 
take  place,  and  has  always  laid  much  s 
since  it  was  in  part  owing  to  the  occu: 
mena  of  this  kind  that  he  was  induced 
'  Molecular  Theory  of  Organization  2/ 

On  the  other  hand,  we  may  watch  a 
which  epithelial  cells  in  an  apparently  h 
become  filled  with  the  minutest  granu 
quently  develop  into  well-formed  Bacteti 
cles  similarlv  nrnHnr+iv*.  r^  »— ^-  • 


I 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  345 

bouts  a  multitude  of  isolated  and  motionless  specks 
make  their  appearance  and  speedily  develop,  within  the 
substance  of  the  cell,  into  well-formed  Bacteria.     This 
takes  place  when  no  notable  amount  of  Bacteria  exists 
in  the  surrounding  fluid  ^  and,  indeed,  from  the  mode  of 
appearance,  distribution,  and  development  of  the  parti- 
des within  the  cell,  it  is  obvious  that,  on  the  'germ- 
theory,'  we  should  have  to  believe  that  each  epithelial 
cdl  which  goes  through  this  transformation  is  saturated 
with  as  many  invisible  germs  of  Bacteria  as  would  cor- 
respcmd  to  the   motionless  and  scattered  oi^anisms 
which  are  subsequently  imbedded  in  its  substance.     In 
their  earliest  stage  these  units  do  not  multiply  ^  and 
before  the  contents  of  the  cell  become  fluid,  the  relative 
positions  of  the  individualizing  units  are  maintained 
and  may  be  well  observed. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  the  possibility  of  independent 
organisms  arising  within  unhealthy  or  dying  cells,  either 
''ynicans  of  a  heterogenetic  modification  of  some  al- 
ready existing  particles  or  globules,  or  by  a  process  of 
^^  birth  in  the  fluid  or  semi-fluid  matter  of  the  cell. 
%one  or  other  of  these  modes,  we  believe  that  the 
^ous  Fungi  and  other  allied  oi^anisms,  which  are  so 
'^uently  met  with  in  the  bodies  of  animals  as  well  as 
^plants,  are  capable  of  arising  de  novo. 

In  the  moister  mucous  membranes.  Bacteria^  Vlbrlones^ 
^  Leftothrtx  are  most  abundant ;  and,  more  rarely, 
^ger  Fungus-germs    occur,  which  soon  develop  an 


346  THE  BEGINmNGS  OF  UFE. 

abundant  mycelium,  as  where  Oidium  alUcans  is 
duced  in  the  aflFection  commonly  known  by  the  € 
of '  thrush.'  These  various  organisms  exist  abundc: 
enough  in  almost  all  the  mucous  membranes  of 
body,  more  especially  when  there  is  some  unhe^ 
mode  of  action  going  on  in  the  part ;  and  their  pi 
lence  in  these  situations  is  far  more  dependent  i 
the  presence  or  absence  of  such  conditions  than  i 
the  degree  of  exposure  of  the  part  to  the  possible 
taminating  influence  of  germs  derived  from  witl 
Some  of  those  which  are  least  exposed  are  most  p 
to  throw  oflF  the  organisms  already  mentioned,  as 
as  Monads  and  other  more  animalized  forms  i. 

Fungus-germs  and  rudimentary  mycelia  are  also 
quently  met  with  upon,  and  in,  the  superficial  laye 
the  skin  of  man  and  of  the  lower  animals,  where 
represent  the  best  known  characteristics  of  ce 
familiar  diseases. 

Here  again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  mucous  membi 
and  of  the  general  parasitic  diseases,  there  is  the  p 
bility  that  such  growths  may  be  occasioned  by  a 
contact  with  some  disseminated  and  all-perva 
Fungus-germs.  We  know,  indeed,  that  these  par? 
diseases  are  contagious;  that  persons  free  from 
maladies  may  become  aflFectcd,  provided  the  infei 

*  Sec  Dr.  Gros  on  Vaginal  Animalcules,  in  'Bull,  de  la  S< 
Nat.  de  Moscou/  1845,  p.  426;  and  Mr.  T.  R.  Lewis  in  his  prcv 
quoted  *  Report/  as  to  forms  which  may  be  met  with  in  the  inti 
canal. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  347 


pnns  fall  upon  suitable  situations  which  are  in  a 
cnoditioD  &vourable  to  their  growth.  Even  here,  how- 
wer,tbec6njoint  influence  of  predisposing  and  exciting 
causes  of  disease  must  come  into  play.  So  that  the 
T^stioniswliether,  in  certain  cases^  the  ^predisposing* 
QBSK  may  not  be  sufficiently  potent  to  generate  the 
^fisase,  without  the  aid  of  any  *  exciting '  cause  in  the 
fan  of  pre-existing  Fungus-germs.  Much  evidence  of 
agcnaal  character,  in  addition  to  the  many  facts  and 
*wvations  already  alluded  to,  tends  to  favour  this 

• 

'i^— more  especially  in  the  face  of  the  insuperable 
™illies  which  beset  those  who  are  exclusive  advocates 
^'a  *gcrm4heory.' 

Jo  reference  to  the  above-mentioned  skin-diseases  in 
ftelmman  subject.  Dr.  Tilbury  Fox^  calls  attention  to 
«f  &ct  of  the  extreme  frequency  with  which  the  hair- 
^''Jdcs  are  the  seats  of  the  first  manifestation  of  the 
'^id  product ;  and  says  that,  for  the  most  part,  *  the 
'^^fet  spot  at  which  any  perceptible  fungus  can  be 
*^ed  is  a  little  way  inside  the  follicles,  near  the 
*Wng  of  the  sebaceoas  glands.'  Thence  the  fungus- 
P"^  extends  in  various  directions — into  the  follicle 
'^If,  into  and  upon  the  hair,  and  into  the  imme- 
*^ly  adjacent  portions  of  skin.  In  other  cases,  as  in 
Qiloasma,'  it  is  the  substance  of  the  epithelial  cells 
*^  the  chest  or  abdomen  which  is  the  seat  of  the 
^^  spores  and  filaments. 

Certain  altered  states  of  secretion   from  the  hair- 

*  'Skin-Diseases  of  Parasitic  Origin/  1S63,  p.  43. 


348  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

follicles,  under  the  influence  of  derangement  or 
liarity  of  constitution,  seem  to  be  most  favoural 
the  occurrence  of  nearly  all  the  cutaneous  dL< 
which  are  attended  by  ^he  presence  of  vegetal 
sites.  In  the  case  of  chloasma  especially,  we  consi 
see  that  its  presence  is  associated  with  the  occur 
of  certain  favouring  conditions.  Thus  it  is  met 
most  frequently  in  persons  of  delicate  health,  who 
flannel  next  the  skin  and  do  not  have  recour 
sufficiently  frequent  ablutions.  The  increased  mo 
from  retained  secretion,  and  the  increased  heat, 
sufficient  in  certain  persons  to  engender  this  dise; 
the  skin.  It  is  one  of  those  affections  in  whic 
have  the  least  reason  for  supposing  contagion  nece 
and  in  which  we  least  frequently  find  any  evider 
it.  In  epithelial  cells  affected  in  this  manner  w 
quently  may  see  a  number  of  highly  refractive  par 
of  various  sizes,  having  a  close  resemblance  to 
globules  and  granules,  though  they  are  probably 
posed  of  a  combination  of  fatty  and  album 
matter^.  These  globules  and  particles  are  ofte 
distinguishable  from  precisely  similar-looking  b 

^  Such  particles  are  always  most  abundant  in  the  white  secreti* 
which  some  of  the  sebaceous  follicles  are  apt  to  become  fillec 
specimen  of  it  is  mounted  in  a  drop  of  distilled  water  and  flatte 
a  covering  glass,  and  then  enclosed  in  a  wide-mouthed  stopperec 
containing  a  little  water,  so  as  to  prevent  evaporation  of  the  c 
water  in  which  the  specimen  is  mounted,  fungus  filaments  will  o: 
found  to  develop  from  all  parts  of  the  sebaceous  mass  in  the  cc 
two  or  three  days. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


349 


«Wdj,  by  their  subsequent  growth,  prove  to  be  germs  of 
fcnp*  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  highly  probable  that, 
wider  certain  conditions,  it  is  these  oleo-albuminoid 
gbbules,  already  in  existence,  which  in  consequence 
of  some  internal  changes  are  impelled  to  develop,  like 
wJiMTjr  milk-globules,  into  Fungus-germs  ^ 

This  view  derives  additional  support  from  the  fact 
to,  on  other  occasions.  Fungus-growths  of  various  kinds 
la^c  been  found,  in  different  kinds  of  animals,  in  in- 
*^  cavities  of  the  body  which  are  wholly  closed — 
JHtasthcy  have  also  been  found  within  similar  cavi- 
"C  occurring  in  the  fruit  of  many  plants.  The 
^*  M.  ].  Berkeley  says  ^ : — *  The  strongest  case   I 


la  tcoordanoe  with  the  more  generally  received  hypothesis,  however, 
*'Ao«Id  be  required  to  believe  that  the  fiingi  in  the  different  diseases 
*Bei|iecifically  distinct,  and  that  spores  of  the  different  varieties  were 
*)VBifonn]y  diffused  through  the  atmosphere  as  to  be  always  ready  to 
■•ct  Qy  suitable  nidus.  The  difficulties  of  this  hypothesis  were  felt 
^™*Ref.  M.  J.  Berkeley,  who  accordingly  wrote  in  his  *  Introduction 
^^Tptogimic  Botany  *  the  following  passage : — ^*  It  is  true  that  in 
J^  o«$  the  fimgi  may  be  of  very  common  kinds,  or  under  disguised 
***;  but  this  is  what  might  readily  be  supposed,  for  it  is  very  rarely 
"•oietbat  such  peculiar  matrices  as  the  human  skin  or  mucous  mem- 
■**«ihonld  nourish  fungi  absolutely  peculiar  to  themselves.  It  is  in 
•«CMe$  fiu"  more  easy  to  believe  that  the  common  Penieillia  or  Asper- 
FWiVbid)  are  notoriously  indifferent  about  their  matrix,  pro\'ided  the 
JJ^ chemical  conditions  be  satisfied,  are  the  real  antagonists'  (p.  138). 
*^^  was  afterwards  ably  taken  up  by  Dr.  John  Lowe  and  Dr.  Til- 
J*y 'OX,  who  endeavoured,  with  considerable  success,  to  demonstrate 
■**uvertibility  of  the  several  forms  of  fungi  met  with  in  skin-diseases, 
•^fteir  rditionship  to  the  forms  above  mentioned.  This  was  decidedly 
*^in  the  right  direction. 

^  <at.  p.  260. 


350  7"//A   />.^(;/.\:\7.\'c7.9  OF  LIFE. 


have  met  with  is  the  development  of  a  yellow 
within  the  cerebral  cavity  of  golden  pheasants,  ^ 
soon  proved  fatal',  whilst  Dr.Murie^  has  found  fungj^^^ 
growths  within  the  abdomino-pleural  membrane  ^^^^ 
Kittiwake  gull,  of  a  great  white-crested  cockatoo,  a^^  ^ 
of  a  rough-legged  buzzard.     Weil  developed  fungi  ha> 
been  found,  moreover,  within  the  uninjured  eggs 
birds  and  serpents  by  Cantoni*,  Rayer,  Robin  ^,  aiw^^ 
others  ^  and  this  not  merely  just  within  the  shell  andT 
its  living  membrane,  but  growing  from  the  sur^e  of 
the  yolk  itself. 

Certain  insects,  moreover,  are  not  unfrequently  the 
seats  of  remarkable  parasitic  growths,  which,  although 
they  may  after  a  time  manifest  themselves  externally, 
either  take  origin  in,  or  at  all  events  start  in  their 
development  from,  some  internal  portion  of  the  body, 
and  are  unknown  to  exist  in  any  other  situations'.  This 
is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the  strange  Spbarta 
Rohertsi  which  grows  from  a  caterpillar  (Heptalus  vhe^ 
scens)  in  New  Zealand ;  with  Sfharea  entomorklxM  which 
appears  in  pairs  from  the  middle  line  of  the  back,  at 
the  junction  of  the  thorax  and  abdomen,  in  many  of  the 
West  Indian  beetles  j  and  with  many  other  anomalous 
growths  which  have  from  time  to  time  been  met  with 
upon  members  of  the  insect  world, 

^  See  abstract  of  his  communication  in  *  Report  of  British  Association/ 
1S71. 

2  '  Rendiconti  di  Lombardo/  Nov.  1867. 

^  See  his  *  Vdg^taux  Parasites,'  Plate  ii.  Figs.  5  and  6,  and  Plate  iv. 
Fig.  9. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  351 

Nay,  fungi  have  been  found  even  within  the  human 
eye.       Helmarecht  records  the  case  of  a  man  who, 
having  previously  suffered   from  an  inflammatory  af- 
fection of  the  eyes,  became  rather  suddenly  troubled 
with    images  of  a  constant  character  floating  before 
the  left  eye.     On  examination,  a  morbid  product  was 
found  suspended  in  the  posterior  chamber  just  in  front 
of  the   lens.    Soon  afterwards  the  lower  part  of  the 
cornea  was  punctured,  with  the  hope  that  the  sepa- 
rated  foreign   body  might    be  washed   out   with  the 
evacuating  aqueous  humour.    This  actually  occurred, 
and  it  was  then  found   to  be  a  minute   confervoid- 
looking  growth,  bearing  series  of  spores  arranged  in 
chaplet-like  fashion  \    We  will  merely  mention  the 
fact  of  the  existence  in  India  of  a  terrible   disease 
known  by  the  name  of '  Madura  foot,'  in  which  a  fungus, 
closely  allied  to  some  Mucors,  seems  to  extend  outwards 
from  the  bones  and  ligaments,  growing  destructively 
through  all  the  tissues  of  the  part.     In  exhibiting  a 
specimen   at  a  recent    meeting  of   the  Pathological 
Society,  Mr.  Jabez  Hogg  expressed  his  belief  that  this 
fungus  takes 'origin  from  some  altered  tissue-elements 

*  Sec  Robin's  •  V^getaux  Parasites/  1853,  p.  370.  He  adds  : — •  Apres 
roperation  le  malade  se.  trouva  bien,  ct  continua  ses  occupations  sans 
g^ne.'  Robin  also  mentions  a  case  fp.  364)  in  which  a  larger  though 
somewhat  similar  growth  was  met  with  by  M.  Gubler  growing  beneath 
the  skin  of  the  back  of  the  hand  of  a  young  man  suffering  from  a  gun- 
shot wound.  Several  white  bleb-like  elevations  of  the  skin  were  pro- 
duced, which  were  found  to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  growth  in 
question. 


352  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

in  the  foot  itself,  rather  than  from  externally 
germs. 

The  occurrence  of  such  growths  within  clos 
ties  not  exposed  to  the  incidence  of  external 
and  their  not  more  frequent  presence  in  the 
air-chambers  of  birds  (where  germs  might  so  wc 
and  grow),  is  just  as  much  against  the  suppos 
their  external  derivation,  as  the  comparativ 
presence  of  the  growths  in  these  cavities 
against  their  being  developments  of  some  of  tl 
minute  and  invisible  germs  with  which  the  ti 
higher  organisms  are  believed,  by  a  few  per 
be  permeated.  This  latter  view  is  only  count 
by  the  occurrence  of  facts  which  are  thought  b 
to  be  equally  capable  of  receiving  a  totally  c 
explanation. 

During  the  last  fifteen  or  twenty  years,  anoth 
important  disease,  *  P^brine,*  has  prevailed  amo 
silk-worms  of  France,  which,  while  of  the  utm 
sequence  commercially,  has  seemingly  been  du( 
ravages  produced  by  certain  extremely  minute  \ 
parasites  usually  known  as  Fsarosperma  —  or 
concerning  whose  real  nature  and  affinities  syst< 
are  not  agreed.  Some  place  them  amongst  the 
obscure  group  of  Gregarinidae  5  whilst  others, 
Robin  and  Balbiani,  consider  them  to  be  more  ; 
Diatoms  or  aberrant  forms  of  Algae.  Organisi 
similar  nature,  though  ratlier  more  complex  in  st 


TBE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


353 


■ere  first  discovered  about  thirty  years  ago  by  J.  Miiller, 
Fnading  the  spleen,  kidney,  and  almost  all  the  organs 
•J  tis8D€s  (with  the  exception  of  the  great  nerve- 
*nto  and  the  muscles  of  the  trunk)  of  certain  fresh- 
wto  fishes.  They  often  follow  the  line  of  the  blood- 
ic*d^  aod  are  occasionally  concentrated  in  such 
cwcDois  numbers  as  to  form  small  whitish  or  yellowish 
■BBCS  visible  to  the  naked  eye — although  individually 
tkofpmsins  are  only  a  very  little  larger  than  the 
lloixkorpuscles  of  the  fish.  Subsequent  investigations 
Iw  revealed  the  fact  that  these  rudimentary  organisms 
>c  to  be  met  with  habitually  in  the  tissues  of  higher 
••dl  as  of  lower  organisms,  where,  for  the  most  part, 
ttqrscem  to  exist  without  the  slightest  detriment  to 
^creatures  which  contain  them.  Six  years  ago,  when 
4e  cattle-plague  raged  with  great  virulence  in  this 
^*ntry,  some  observers  thought  for  a  time  that  they 
W  detected  its  cause,  when  they  found  myriads  of 
fcie  minute  corpuscles  imbedded  in  the  flesh  of  ani- 
^  which  had  succumbed  to  the  disease.  But  a 
*^*nguished  helmintholc^ist.  Dr.  Cobbold^  soon  made 
***nthc  feet  that  such  organisms  might  be  met  with 
**t  abundantly  in  the  healthiest  mutton  and  beef  5 
*l  that  they  were  always  to  be  found  in  astonishing 
•**crs  in  the  substance  of  the  heart  of  sheep,  oxen, 
^  other  animals.  They  had,  in  fact,  nothing  what- 
^  to  do  with  the  cause  of  the  cattle-plague.  Similar 
'"^tcs  have  been  found,  on   several  occasions,  in 

»  'Lancet/  1866,  vol.  i.  p.  88. 

^11.  A  a. 


Articulata;  whilst   B:ilbi:ini  '  has  a 
arrKMii^st  the  Arachnitia  and  in  mar 
rnostraca.     In   the   latter   animals, 
serpents,  as  Vlacovitch  ascertained, 
of  the  same  simple  characters  as  tl 
certain  diseased   silk-worms  j    alth( 
other  oi^nisms^  the  corpuscles  ar< 
plex.    They  are  then  composed  of  i 
protoplasm  enclosed  within  a  resist 
lope,  having  a  projecting  rim  at  tl 
valves,  and  two  internal  ovoidal  pr 
one  or  at  both  extremities.    They  r 
rapidity,  for  some  of  the  corpusch 
growing  to  fifty  or  one  hundred  tii 
size,  so  as  to  constitute  generative 
a  process  of  segmentation,  resolve  1 
new  progeny  of  Psorosperms — just  as  j 
produced  ftom  Gregarinse. 
These    organisms    being,    therefo 


THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 


355 


ceitua  that  in  this  affection — named  'pebrine'  on 
account  of  the  black  spots  which  are  produced  on  the 
din — Fsorosperms  of  the  simplest  description  abound 
in  almost  every  oipin  and  tissue  of  the  affected  worms 


Lfcs™(§  O 


/^" 


•>:^    O" 


(my 


\i  (heir  Moiic  or  Development.    {BallHaDi.) 


1.  B.  Pmrospenas  from  the  Silk-worro. 
M.«idc,*.  Rare  and  occasional  vnrieties  of  these. 

t,j,  Psoro^peims  in  an  earlier  stage  of  devclopniMl.  which  are 
found  intermixed  wiih  the  more  perfect  foncs.   (K  1700.) 

".i  Portion  of  Ihe  intestine  of  a  small  Caterpillar  (Goifro- 
pacba),  showing  masses  of  Psorospenns  in  different 
stages  of  development  beneath  the  serous  coat.  At 
first,  mere  homoecneons  masses  of  roaltcr  (r,  r)  appear, 
in  the  midst  of  which  Psorosperms  are  developed  after 
the  manner  of  nuclei.  (  x  950.) 

or  moths.  Whether  they  arc  causes  of  the  disease, 
""tvcr,  or  are  mere  concomitant  products,  really 
"fosioned  by  a  previoiis  blood-change  (and  therefore 
rompirable  with  the  fungi  in  muscardine),  it  is  im- 
possible for  us  to  say:  though  it  is  certain,  from  the 
A  a  2 


^    w.*.'^.-5   tuu    arrcctcd  eggs,  ac 

always  yield  a  slightly  acid  rcactior 
litnius-papcT,   whilst    healthy   eggs 
although  Psorosperms  arc  not  visibl 
fccted  eggs,  they  gradually  develop  i 
are  originally  quite  indistinguishabl 
granules  of  the  ovum.    These  facts  . 
consistent  with  the  possibility  of  tl 
mission  of  a  mere  morbid  quality  t 
presence,  whilst  already  attested  b] 
above  referred  to,  may  soon  display  ii 
the  occurrence  of  a  new  evolution  of 
On   this  theory   the   disease  mig 

^  According  to  M.  Robin,  Psorosperms  are  fre< 
midst  of  on  amorphous  and  homogeneous  *mf 
trice/  which  insinuates  itself  or  lies  between  the 
in  all  directions,  so  that  they  are  often  seen  iml 
substance.  Further  researches  concerning  the 
material  are  much  to  be  desired.  Professor  L 
*  It  appears  to  me  in  no  way  made  out  whethc 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  357 

*^  ^  the  corpuscles  acting  after  the  manner  of 
^  ferments.  They  might  incite  certain  changes 
li the fiaids  with  which  they  came  into  contact;  and 
dangcs  would  culminate  in  the  re-evolution  of 
•^  tod  independent  organisms  in  the  blood  and 
"SlOMially,  or  in  some  parts  of  them— just  as  the 
F^woos  organic  particle  from  the  skin  of  a  small-pox 
plKot  incites  spreading  changes  in  the  body  of  a 
Fwmwith  whom  it  comes  into  contact — changes  which 
to>matc  in  the  re-evolution  of  a  similar  poison  ^ 
ITic  q)posite  notion — viz.  that  the  communicated 
fase  is  caused  by  the  direct  multiplication  of  the 
>pnisms  which  act  as  contagious  agents — is  beset  with 
'feultics.  Seeing  how  exceedingly  common  Psoro- 
^pcnns  are  in  the  bodies  of  all  kinds  of  animals  even 
it  their  natural  or  healthy  condition,  why  should  they 
•Jt  multiply  to  an  undue  extent,  and  produce  disease 
*thcm?  Such  organisms  are  probably  swallowed  by 
W  of  us  during  each  meal  in  which  meat  is  taken, 
^i  fct  no  harm  ensues — ^they  are  probably  just  as 
■Wtious  as  the  meat  in  which  they  are  contained. 
Viking  of  their  almost  universal  prevalence,  Dr.  Cob- 
Udsays: — ^^ Altogether,  at  two  meals,  I  could  not  have 
Wlowed  less  than  eighteen  thousand  of  these  Psoro- 
^Btmix;*  and  he  adds  that  those  who  consume  *beef, 
^tton,  and  pork,  eat  these  bodies  every  day,  but  take 

Ikne  dsewhere  (Afpendix  £,  p.  cxv)  expressed  the  belief  that 
"*  (ems  of  existing  morbid  growths  also  operate  in  this  manner  when 
■9  tie  Uie  cuises  of '  secondary  growths/ 


358 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


no  harm.'  Again,  silk-worms  probably  contained  Psoro* 
spermix,  and  swallowed  them  at  times  with  their  food^ 
long  before  the  outbreak  of  p^brine,  and  yet  they  weft] 
not  affected  by  a  fatal  epidemic  disease.  At  last,  bow* 
ever,  a  particular  change  or  morbid  condition  of  their 
tissues  seems  to  have  been  initiated,  in  which  F^oro* 
spermi«  are  especially  prone  to  be  developed — these 
being,  moreover,  characterized  molecularly  by  some 
peculiar  properties,  so  that  they  are  capable  of  initiating 
similar  primary  changes  in  other  silk-worms  ^ 

Looking,  then,  broadly  at  the  various  facts  which 
have  been  detailed  in  this  chapter,  how  are  they  to  be 
explained  by  those  who  refuse  to  believe  in  Archebiosis 
and  Heterogenesis  ? 

The  only  attempt  at  an  answer  which  can  be  ad- 
duced may  be  given  in  the  words  of  Dn  Lionel  Beale, 
who  says  2; — <The  higher  life  is,  I  think,  interpene- 
trated, as  it  were,  by  the  lowest  life.  Probably  there 
is  not  a  tissue  in  which  these  germs  are  not ;  nor  is  the 
blood  of  man  free  from  them.  They  are  found  not 
only  in  the  interstices  of  tissues,  but  they  invade  the 


'  The  rational  conclusion  concerning  p4brine,  Uierefore,  comes  to  be 
very  similar  to  that  which  we  are  compelled  to  adopt  conoeming  the 

mode  of  origin  and  propagation  of  *flacherie'— another  disease  of  silk 

worms,  produced  by  feeding  upon  unhealthy  or  fermenting  mulberijr 

leaves,  and  characterized  by  the  presence  of  minute  7*orv/a>like  cor 

puscles  throughout  the  body.    (*Biit.  Med.  Journal/  March  9,  i87&^ 
p.  259.) 

*  *  Disease-Germs/  1870,  p.  64. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE,  359 


ckmenlarj  parts  thexxiselves.'  This  represents^  in  gene- 
ttl  terms^  the  doctrine  or  mere  assumption  which  is 
Mie  bjrmsuiyat  the  present  day,  who  cannot  otherwise 
SDOomt  bx  the  numerous  phenomena  to  which  we  have 
firtbeen  refenring.   It  is^  however,  in  direct  opposition 
tD  the  eiperiments  of  Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson,  and  is 
•iapmistic  to  the  theory  and  practice  of  those  who 
Ueie  in  antiseptic  surgery.     It  is  an  hypothesis  of 
ftu^Knnism  of  a  kind  very  similar  to  that  which  was 
!  Parted  by  Bonnet  more  than  a  century  ago.    But  this 
oidview  is  now  sought  to  be  maintained  under  the 
BQit  adverse  circumstances.    Originally  supported  by 
K)  independent  observations,  and  based  only  upon  the 
woirrcncc  of  phenomena  which  could   be  otherwise 
Qflained,  it  was  thought  to  derive  support  from  those 
▼Jews  concerning  development  which  were  at  the  time 
^kbocated  by  Haller  and  Bonnet.    But  these  old  theo- 
ries as  to  the  ^pre-existence  of  germs*  of  all  organs 
^  tissues  in  the  ovum  itself,  have  faded  away  like 
*cload  before  the  light-giving  doctrines  of  Harvey, 
Von  Bacr,  and  the  modern  evolutionists.    With  the 
<li&ppearance  of  the  old    theories    of   development, 
'anished  all  that  could  ever  have  been  said  to  give 
<*ttntcnance  to  this  doctrine  of  Panspermism  —  nay 
'^ttc,  it  now  stands  in  even  a  more  sorry  plight, 
*>**«  it  is  condemned  and  undermined   by  many  of 
^  recent  and  most  positive  testimonies  of  scientific 
^kersi. 

*  See  pp.  6  and  7. 


even  of  uncioubtcdly  parasitic  di>L':i! 
the  history  of  these  diseases  is  essei 
history   of   these    non-parasitic   but 
diseases  which  frequently  prove  S( 
human  race.     A  comparison  of  the 
mena  which  characterize  them,  tenc 
parasitic  and  non-parasitic  afFectic 
mately  allied  than  might   be  suppc 
diseases  are  due  to  the  occurrence  of 
of  a  general  character  throughout  th 
grave  alterations  in  the  constituti( 
fluids^.     These  changes  in  the  ordi 
are   not  such  as  to  lead  to  a  birt. 
organisms  within  the  blood  and  tis 
other  aflpections  they  do  entail  the  bi 
nous  progeny  of  independent  units,   i 
the  changes  which  lead  to  this  birth 
complete,  and  more  antagonistic  to 
processes — though  even  more  on  am 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


361 


invariable  fetality  of  the  general  parasitic  disease  is 
precisely  what  might  have  been  anticipated. 

It  would,  therefore,  follow  from  these  views,  (i)  that 
the  development  of  the  parasites  in  the  latter  aflFec- 
tions  is  altogether  secondary,  in  order  of  time,  to  the 
Nood-changes  by  which  they  are  produced;  and,  as  I 
tare  already  hinted,  it  would  seem  to  indicate  (2)  that 
efcn  in  cases  of  the  spread  of  such  diseases  by  con- 
bgron,  the  contagious  element,  whether  living  or  not 
living,  operates  by  its  power  of  initiating  certain  mole- 
cular changes — ^which,  gradually  extending  throughout 
the  body,  may  or  may  not  in  their  turn  cause  the 
solution  of  new  organisms.  That  is  to  say,  we  have, 
at  fost,  always  to  do  with  a  mere  contact-action,  and 
e^cn  in  the  case  of  general  parasitic  diseases,  the  direct 
nmltiplication  of  the  infecting  agent  itself  is  only  an 
unimportant  accessory  process  as  compared  with  the 
^P"wding  changes  initiated  by  its  contact-action. 

Already-existing  evidence  is  thoroughly  harmonious 
^th  such  views. 

">  the  first  place,  it  is  admitted  even  by  those  who 

^^  pure  contagionists,   that   a   blood-change   is   the 

P^^JJaryand  necessary  initiator  of  one  of  these  diseases. 

*°^  M.  Robin  says : — *  Les  circonstances  qui  parais- 

*^^  favorable  au  developpement  de  la  Muscardine  sont 

^'les  qui  ont  pour  premier  resultat  une  alteration  des 

'^UQlcurs  ou  des  organes  de  I'animal  vivant,  et  c'est  k  la 

^fe  de  certe  alteration  que  le  parasite  se  developpe. .  . 

^  developpement  du  Botryth  est  done  bien  plutdt  con* 


36:1  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

secutif  au  modifications  des  humeurs  que  cause  de 
celles-ci/  And  then  he  continues : — '  Les  feits  d*intro- 
duction  artificielle  des  spores  ne  sont  pas  en  contra- 
diction avec  ce  qui  prdcUe,  car  la  piquer  pratiqude 
pour  introduire  le  mycelium  et  les  spores  est  suffisant< 
pour  determiner  ces  modifications  des  humeurs,  d'abord 
localement,  puis  peu  \  peu  dans  toute  I'^conomie^. 
We  know,  moreover,  that  the  blood  invariably  yields 
an  acid  reaction  by  the  time  that  the  first  organisms 
appear  in  it. 

The  second  point  is  best  established  with  referena 
•  to  the  phenomena  of  that  fatal  epizootic  disease  amongsi 
cattle,  which  is  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  tin 
'  blood '  or  ^  sang  de  rate.'  The  researches  of  M.  Da- 
vaine  in  connection  with  this  subject  are  of  the  highesi 
value.  The  malady  is  characterized  by  the  presence 
of  multitudes  of  Vibrio-like  organisms  in  the  blood 
which,  however,  differ  from  the  Vibriones  of  ordinar; 
putrefactions.  Whilst  this  aflFection  is  always  capable  g 
being  reproduced  in  a  previously  healthy  animal  by  th_ 
inoculation  of  some  of  the  fresh  blood  of  an  anims 
which  has  recently  died  of  the  disease,  the  blood  of  sue 


*  *  V^^taux  Parasites,*  p.  585.    Mere  contact  of  the  spores  with 
skin,  when  the  animals  are  at  all  predisposed,  seems  to  suffice, 
blood-changes  are  soon  induced.     Thus,  M.  Gu^rin-M^neville  nibl>— 
bome  Botrytis  against  a  chrysalis ;  and,  on  examining  the  blood  of 
same  animal  on  its  first  appearance  as  an  imago,  he  found  multitudes 
the  characteristic  elongated  bodies  in  its  blood ;  and  on  its  death, 
days  afterwards,  these  were  observed  to  have  become  ramified  and  mo 
increased  in  size  (p.  580). 


THB  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  363 

an  animal  loses  its  powers  whenever  it  becomes  putrid  ^ 
This  has  beeo  established  by  multitudes  of  experiments. 
A  drop  of  the  diseased  blood  inserted  beneath  the  skin 
of  rabbits  was  found  to  be  always  sufficient  to  reproduce 
tbe  disease;  whilst  a  drop  of  ordinary  blood,  after  it 
U  become  putrefied  and  swarming  with  Bacteria^ 
when  similarly  introduced,  generally  produced  no  effect. 
Again,  rabbits  which  had  been  fed  upon  the  fresh 
oigans  of  some  animals  that  had  recently  died  of  the 
'Uood,'  almost  invariably  became  affected  by  the  same 
<lixase,  and  soon  showed  myriads  of  the  characteristic 
vgaoisms  in  their  blood.  Whilst  of  other  animals  which 
*nt  made  to  swallow  similar  quantities  of  liver,  after 
it  iiad  become  quite  foetid  (and  therefore  swarming 
with  BMtma)j  only  one  out  of  eight  died ;  and  even 
Aat  one,  whidi  was  found  to  have  suffered  from  an 
inhmed  lung,  did  not  reveal  any  trace  of  organisms 
in  its  blood. 

These  experiments  seem  only  explicable  on  the  as- 
•nnption  that,  in  the  cases  where  the  *  blood'  was 
®oimuiiicated  to  other  animals  by  inoculation  (either 
*hcataneously  or  by  the  stomach),  the  disease  was 
^^tvamunicated  not  so  much  by  the  direct  multiplication 
of  the  stock  of  inoculated  organisms  and  their  spread 
^l^wJugSiout  the  body,  as  because  some  of  the  inoculated 

M.  Dtvainc  says : — *  Dans  les  grandes  chaleurs  de  Vii^  lorsque  le 
^^''^^in^  mazquait  de  a8  k  32  degrds  centigrades,  j'ai  vu  disparaitre 
*  ^cnlti  dont  il  s'agit  en  quarante  ou  cinquante  heures,  une  fois  en 
**"*^<»roc  heurej.'  CCompt  Rend.'  1864.) 


364  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

matter  (either  fluids  or  organisms)  had  the 
setting  up  certain  changes  of  a  spreading  < 
which  soon  sufficed  to  produce  a  condition 
similar  to  that  usually  preceding  the  develo 
organisms  in  this  disease.  If  the  organisms  ; 
organisms,  and  not  as  ferments  or  producers  c 
ing  chemical  changes  in  the  fluids  of  the  body 
should  necessarily  expect  that  other  more  or  lei 
organisms  would  also  be  capable  of  multiplyi 
selves,  and  of  producing  general  parasitic 
This,  however,  is  notoriously  not  the  case.  Fe 
and  semi-putrid  articles  of  food,  teeming  w 
organisms,  are  constantly  eaten  with  impuni 
lower  animals,  and  are  in  many  instances  soi; 
by  man — nay,  such  articles  of  diet  are  occ 
administered  with  the  view  of  curing  rather  1 
the  prospect  of  causing  disease  ^.  We  can  < 
dude,  therefore,  that  in  *  the  Hood,'  in  *  flachi 
other  similar  affections,  the  contagious  elemei 
a  mere  dead  ferment  might  do  in  incitin 
changes;  and  that  the  organisms  which  aj 
quently  found  in  the  infected  animal  are,  for 
part,  the  products  of  a  new  birth  which  has  tai 
in  the  altered  fluids  2. 

^  Take  the  case  of  *  Kousso/  for  instance,  which  is  lauded 
an  excellent  remedy  for  Phthisis.     See  also  Appendix  £,  p.  c 

'  Other  instances  of  a  similar  nature  are  known.     Thus, 
ascertained  by  M.  Vulpian  ('Archives  de  Physiologie,*  vc 
that  the  insertion  of  a  small  portion  of  cyclamen-root  benea 
of  frogs  produces  local  irritation  and  a  putrefactive  process, 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  365 

Agsdn,  all  that  has  been  said  with  reference  to  these 
g^eral  diseases  is  abundantly  borne  out  by  what  we 
know   of  local   parasitic  affections.      Here,   too,   the 
general  or  predisposing  causes  represented  by  the  state 
of  the  parts  themselves,  seem  to  be  just  as  important 
as   the  action  of  the   special   contagion — indeed,  in 
multitudes  of  cases,  the  action  of  the  special  contagion 
is  assumed  rather  than  proved  to  exist.  Just  as  muscar- 
dinc  can,  apparently,  be  '  spontaneously '  engendered  in 
almost  any  caterpillars  which  are  placed  under  certain 
conditions,  so  does  the  Fungus-growth  which  is  charac- 
teristic of  *  thrush  *  manifest  itself  on  the  tongue  and 
adjacent  parts  of  children  under  certain  conditions,  or 
even  cm  that  of  adults  in  the  last  stages  of  lingering 
illnesses.    The  thoroughly  healthy  silk-worm  is,  more- 
over, almost  proof  against  contagion,  just  as  the  thor 

^  ^  days,  b  followed  by  signs  of  languor  and  great  debility  in  the 

™ttls  q)erated  upon,  and  b  succeeded  by  a  speedy  death.     Both 

dviog  life  and  after  death,  such  animals  possess  myriads  of  Bacteria  in 

"8f  blood.    And  yet  the  disease  is  not  produced  by  the  mere  presence 

^^ootria  in  the  local  seat  of  irritation.    I  have  several  times  injected 

***  or  two  drops  of  a  fluid  swarming  with  Bacteria  beneath  the  skin  of 

^^  without  producing  any  such  effects,  or  leading  to  the  subsequent 

I'^^'cnce  of  Baeteria  in  the  blood.    The  cyclamen  doubtless  sets  up 

P^°^  local  changes,  which  are  capable  of  spreading,  so  as  to  produce 

*  goeral  disease  in  which  the  blood  as  well  as  other  parts  of  the  body 

''^fccted;  and  so  far  there  is  an  agreement  between  such  a  process 

^  pyemia  in  the  human  subject  after  wounds  or  operations.    In  the 

'^^  case,  however,  the  blood-changes  are  not  such  as  to  lead  to  the 

cvolntion  of  Bacteria  during  the  life  of  the  individual ;  whilst,  in  the  case 

of  frogs  inoculated  with  cyclamen-root,  the  changes  in  the  blood  do 

Icid  to  the  erolation  of  organisms. 


366  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

roughly  healthy  child  or  man  is  proof  against^ 
attacks  of  Oidium  albicans.  When  from  lowered  he> 
however,  the  blood  of  the  silk-worm  tends  to  accj^ 
an  acid  reaction,  or  the  mucous  membranes  of 
infant  or  of  the  man  assume  such  a  condition,  tl 
the  respective  organisms  may  appear,  and  general 
local  morbid  conditions  may  be  established^. 

Again,   the   experiments  of  Dr.   Spring*,  in  m 
attempts  to  produce  a  direct  inoculation  of  hens*  q 
were  very  unsuccessful,  even  though  the  inoculation 
made  with  portions  of  a  fungus  which  had  been  ] 
duced  in  an  uninjured  egg.     Very  rarely,  indeed,  di 
growth  start  from  the  seat  of  inoculation,  though 
quently  an  entirely  different  form  sprang  up  at 
opposite  extremity  of  the  egg,  in  a  region  which ' 
apparently  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  contaminati 
And,  again,  such  facts  are  rendered  all  the  more  ! 
nificant    by   reason   of   the   interesting   researches 
Harless^,  showing  that  fimgi  may  be  made  to  app< 
almost  at  will,  in  eggs  which  are  exposed  for  a  \ 
days  in  the  chamber  of  an  incubator  saturated  v 

^  How  important  such  a  modification  may  be,  in  enabling  eroluti 
changes  to  occur  in  certain  fluids,  is  to  be  surmised,  as  we  have  previc 
hinted,  from  the  often  quoted  experiments  of  Dutrochet,  who  found 
white  of  egg  diluted  with  distilled  water  remained  for  more  than  a 
without  becoming  covered  by  mould ;  whilst,  by  rendering  it  sli{ 
acid,  a  crop  of  these  organisms  became  developed  in  less  than  • 
days. 

"  'Bullet,  de  TAcad.  Roy.  de  Belgique,*  1852,  t.  xix.  p.  573 
abstract  in  Robin*s  *  V^taux  Parasite/  pp.  545-54. 

•  Quoted  by  Robin,  loc.  cit.,  p.  559. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  367 


nwistarc  and  maintained  at  a  temperature  of  100- 

lO^'F.  Under  these  conditions,  the  customary  exhala- 

tioiis  and  eraporations  of  fluid  cannot  take  place  from 

*^%  so  tbat  the  embryo  dies  whilst  lower  organisms 
appear'. 

1*1^  6cts  narrated  in  this  communication,  and  mul- 

Wndes  of  others  of  a  similar  nature  that  might  have 

l*«  qooted,  constitute  a  body  of  evidence  thoroughly 

l^nnoniouswith  the  results  of  my  previous  observations 

'•Itipcrimcnts.  And  yet  this  interpretation  will  doubt- 

*8  b^  for  a  time,  rejected.     Many  of  those  who  have 

•WI7  cast  on  one  side  the  old  developmental  theories 

rfHaDcrand  Bonnet,  still  confidently  pin  their  faith 

^  a  derivative  doctrine.     And   when   we   find   this 

**ine  of  Panspermism  advocated  not  only  by  pro- 

**rf  vitalists,  but  by  some    leading    evolutionists, 

•**  inconsistency  is  notably  increased.      They  have 

^^  attempted  to  explain  why  those   natural   life- 

*''*ing  laws,  whose  original  existence  they  postulate, 

**H  have  ceased  to  operate  in  the  present  day.  They 

^"^  tile  omnipresence  of  germs ;  they  assume  that 

^  hypothetical   germs   can   exist   for  an   indefinite 

1*^  in  a  latent  state ;  that  they  can  resist  degrees 

*  heat  which  are  fatal  to  all  known  germs ;  and  that 

^Ahnoii  siiiiilar  facts  may  be  dted  concerning  plants.  Attempts  at 
*^  bocnlation  with  parasitic  fungi,  as  Dr.  Barry  found,  are  far  from 
•^  »o  ncoetsful  as  might  have  been  expected.  See  some  remarks  on 
■■m«ctia«BTit  Med.  Journal,*  April  20.  1872.  p.  419. 


368 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


they  possess  powers  of  penetration  such  as  know 
do  not  possess — they  will  make  all  these  assu: 
upon  assumptions  in  order  not  to  believe  ^ 
in  accordance  with  the  general  teachings  of 
and  with  their  own  doctrines  in  particulai 
is  testified  by  experiment,  and  also  that  which 
every  unbiassed  microscopist  may  learn  by  dii 
servation. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

HETEROGEKESIS  IN   LOWER   ORGANISMS. 

Higher  and  Lower  Organisms.    Their  Modes  of  Death.     Matter  of 
Aquatic  Lower  Organisms  most  prone  to  undergo  Heterogenetk 
Changes.    Dr.  Pringsheim's  Observations  on  \\gx.    Dr.  Braxton 
Hicks  on  production  of  Amoebae  in  Moss-radicles.    Development  of 
Amcebse  into  Ciliata.    Mr.  Carter's  observations  on  Nitella.     Pro- 
dnction  of  Monads.  M.  Nicolet  on  Mode  of  Origin  of  Amccbx  and 
Actinophrys.     Formation  of  Trichomonas.     Its  Conversion  into 
other   Forms.     Mr.  Carter  on   Development  of  Actinophrys  in 
Spirogyra.     Origin   of  Monads  and  Amoebae.     Development   of 
Pythium  in  *  resting-spores  *  of  Algae  and  in  Rotifers.    Appearance 
of  Astasias  within  Cells  of  Spirogjra .   Other  Heterogenctic  Changes 
in    Algae  and   Desmids.     Author's   Observations  on   Vaucheria. 
Mode   of  Origin  of  Amoebic   and  Actinophrj's.      Heterogenctic 
Changes  in  Nitella.    Embrjonal  Spheres.    Their  various  Trans- 
formations.   Origin  of  complex  egg-like  Bodies.     Transformations 
of  Chlorophyll  Coipusclcs.  Analogous  changes  pre\'iously  described. 
Dr.   Braxton'  Hicks  on  the  Heterogenctic  Origin  of  Gloeocapsa. 
Dr.  Gros  on  Origin  of  Diatoms  and  Desmids.    Confirmation  of  his 
Views.    Origin  of  Desmids  from  Chlorophyll  Corpuscles.    Other 
Modes  of  Development  of  Desmids  and  Diatoms.   Modes  of  Origin 
of  Euglenae.   Interesting  Nature  of  these  Organisms.   Their  various 
Transformations.    Reasons  why  Algae  and  allied  Organisms  give 
birth  to  such  varied  Products.     Bearing  of  Facts  recorded  upon 
Zoological  and  Botanical  Classifications. 

WE  pass  now  to  a  consideration  of  the  hetero- 
genctic processes  which  occur  in  much  lower 
forms  of  life.     And  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  when 
studying  the  changes  that  take  place   in   the  proto- 
VOL.  H.  B  b 


-j_, >  ^.       c«/      \.J'^       lliUM 


occurrence  of  transfbnnations   in 
thcv  oiisist.     The    livinir   matter 
exists    in  a  semiHuid  state,   and    i 
paratively  small  masses,  to   the    i 
physical  forces  acting  through  the  fli 
they  are  immersed.    When  units  o 
as  constituents  of  one  of  the  higher 
the  actions  of  all  the  different  pa 
nicely   balanced   and   subordinated 
actions  in  different  parts  induce,  ar 
the  maintenance  and  increase  of  th 
But   in  one  of  the  filamentous  fre 
meet  with  such  a  mere   aggregate 
vidualities — of  parts  potentially  se 
the  conditions  of  the  medium  in  wh 
in  any  way  unsuitable,  its  moleculai 
pressible  tissue  soon  begins  to  fee 
such  change :  modes  of  action  and 
up    between    tlie    oreanisni    an/4    ; 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


371 


lilcrly  impossible  that  the  matter  which  undergoes  such 
[ftanges  should  continue  to  exist  under  the  form  of  an 
*!p-  But,  although  changes  of  this  kind  have  been  set 
i^although  altered  modes  of  molecular  activity  have 
keen  induced  in  response  to  new  external  pulses  or  move- 
■orts— surely  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the 
■rtter  of  which  such  an  organism  is  composed  must 
■KcssariJy  'die/  simply  because  it  can  no  longer  exist 
■ir  its  old  form. 

As  wc  have  ah-eady  endeavoured  to  show  ^,  the  death 
'20  animal,  from  a  physical  point  of  view,  merely 
■ons  the  cessation  of  those  particular  actions  and  re- 
*tions  which  were  accustomed  to  go  on  in  its  body, 
*i  which  are  essential  to  its  existence  as  such  an 
*paism.  Its  organic  structure  had  been  produced 
••tettieir  influence,  and  its  form  could  not  be  main- 
Wncd  without  their  continuance.  Its  several  tissues 
W  been  built  up,  and  were  what  they  were,  solely 

*  account  of  their  relations  to  one  another  and  of 
fc  nmtual  performance  of  certain  functions  more  or 
*s  necessary  for  the  well-being  of  the  organism  as 

*  whole.  Let  the  throbbings  of  the  heart  cease  for 
^'kilc,  and  the  highly-organized  vertebrate  animal 
fcs.  P^ulum  is  no  longer  supplied  to  its  elementary 
y^  and,  as  minute  by  minute  passes  by,  changes 
"**  place  in  its  most  sensitive  tissues,  which  render 
*ftncwal  of  the  life-giving  conditions  more  and  more 
**Qilt.    At  last  it  becomes  impossible  again  to  set 

*  Sec  vol.  i.  pp.  108-112. 
Bb  2 


372  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

on  the  all-important  blood  current.  The  organism  ' 
which  but  a  minute  before  was  living,  is  now  dead, 
— dead  that  is  as  an  organism,  as  a  marvellous 
mechanism,  capable,  perhaps,  of  performing  the  highest 
functions  of  humanity;  but  the  matter  is  still  there, 
and  in  a  *  living*  state,  even  though  the  organism  as  a 
whole  is  dead  and- spiritless.  The  nerve  will  still  for  a 
time  transmit  a  stimulus,  the  muscle  will  still  contract — 
the  cilia  of  various  mucous  membranes  still  lash  on,  as 
though  no  change  had  taken  place.  But  in  descending 
step  by  step  from  highest  animal  to  lowest  animal, 
and — though  far  less  obviously — from  highest  plant  to 
lowest  plant,  we  find  the  organism  less  and  less  com- 
plex, and,  at  the  same  time,  we  find  the  nexus  less 
obvious  which  binds  their  several  parts  into  one  whole. 
And  at  last  we  meet  with  organisms  altogether  simple, 
or  else  made  up  of  mere  repetitions  of  similar  parts, 
so  that  the  individualizing  nexus  is  reduced  to  its 
lowest  terms,  and  the  separate  parts  live  and  die  more 
or  less  independently. 

The  great  difference  existing  between  a  layer  of 
ciliated  epithelium  on  the  human  trachea  \  and  an  ex- 
pansion of  more  or  less  similar  cellular  compartments 
constituting  one  of  the  ulva-like  Algae,  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  former  has  been  produced  in  a  situation 
and  under  the  influence  of  a  set  of  conditions  so  much 
more  complex  than  those  which  have  given  birth  to  the 
Alga,  that  its  structure  is,  to  a  corresponding  extent, 

*  See  vol.  i.  p   145,  Fig.  4. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LI  IE.  373 


■ore  ^ializcd  and  more  sensitive.  The  epithelial 
■:%cr  \&  dependent  for  its  life  upon  the  continuance  of 
«t  of  conditions  which  are  only  possible  so  long  as  it 
constitutes  an  intend  part  of  a  living  organism.  Soon 
sftcr  the  death  of  the  human  being  of  which  it  formed 
F^  the  interference  with,  and  ultimate  arrest  of,  the 
cooditions  under  which  the  epithelial  layer  was  fitted 
to  live,  entails  a  gradual  arrest  of  those  molecular 
•tions  which  made  up  the  life  of  its  several  parts.  The 
A(p,  however,  being  an  independent  organism,  is 
■DcnabJc  only  to  more  general  conditions,  and,  during 
to  periods  of  molecular  re-arrangement,  it  continues 
to  exist  in  the  fluid  medium  in  which  it  has  been  born. 
But,  for  the  morphological  units  of  each  alike — for 
^  epithelial  cell,  and  for  the  algoid  cell  or  compart- 
*nt— we  are  warranted  in  claiming  a  kind  of  organi- 
fltioo.  They,  as  simplest  morphological  units,  are 
*fenselves  organisms  compounded  of  living  molecules. 
^  just  as  we  have  seen  that  the  death  of  an  or- 
pnism,  as  a  whole,  does  not  entail  the  death  of  its 
^'^eral  parts,  unless  it  happens  that  such  death  of  the 
•Iwlc  organism  brings  about,  as  a  necessary  conse- 
'fKnce,  a  cessation  of  those  conditions  under  which 
iboc  the  several  parts  are  fitted  to  exist ;  so  does  it 
Mm  reasonable  for  us  to  imagine  that  the  conditions 
mder  which  certain  of  these  simpler  organisms  exist 
nay  be  such  as  to  enable  their  life  to  persist  under 
iCiier  forms,  when  a  continuance  of  the  form  previously 
B  exigence  becomes  no  longer  possible.    The  complex 


374  ^^-^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

molecules  of  such  simple  organisms  may  rearrange 
themselves,  and,  under  the  influence  of  disturbing  con- 
ditions,  may  fall  into  new,  simple  and  compound  noodes 
of  aggregation.  Thus  new  centres  of  attraction  may 
arise,  new  current  modes  of  activity  may  be  initiated, 
and  new  organic  forms  may  result.  So  that  the  con- 
stituent elements  of  the  previous  organism  may  be  still 
present,  living  and  mobile,  although  diflferently  com- 
bined, and  variously  reacting  upon  the  ethereal  pulses 
of  heat  and  light  to  which  they  are  subjected.  In 
some  such  manner  must  we  explain  the  occurrence  <rf 
the  various  metamorphoses  of  living  matter  of  which 
we  are  about  to  speak. 


Nearly  twenty  years  ago.  Professor  Pringsheim^ 
called  attention  to  the  production  of  what  he  believed^ 
to  be  a  peculiar  kind  of  propagative  spore,  in  the  cells^ 
of  young  filaments  of  Spsrogyra  jugalis^  and  also 
certain  conjugated  cells  of  the  same  Alga  before,  an< 
indeed  instead  of,  the  production  of  the  ordinary  rest-  - 
ing  spores.  He  says  he  frequently  found,  in  conju-^a 
gated  filaments,  'that  the  contents  of  one  or  mor^"* 
pairs  of  conjugated  cells  were  not  transformed  into*^- 
the  well-known  large  spore.'  They,  however,  *  became  - 
transformed  into  a  number  of  little  cells  of  regular:* 
definite,  and  unchangeable  form,'  whose  constant  ocn^ 
currence  led  Dr.  Pringsheim  to  conjecture  that  the  — 
were  *  more  than  mere  pseudo-forms  of  decaying  eel 

»  •  Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist.*  1853,  vol.  xi. 


7BE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  375 


flDOtents.'  He  first  obtained   an   insight  into  these 
*ortures  by  observation  of  their  production  in  the 
crOs  of  joung  SfmgyrMy  which  he  had  himself  developed 
fan  large  spores.    He  says :— *  In  the  cells  of  these 
]Wg  ^infffd  the   existing  spiral  bands  are   often 
Men  up,  and  from  their  substance  are  formed,  in  a 
annoer  unknown  to  me,  little  cells  in  which  a  mem- 
tone  can  be  clearly  detected  surrounding  green  con- 
tents. I  call  these  cells,  spore- mother-cells.    They  soon 
fflcrase  m  size,  their  membrane  separating  itself  from 
tk  contents  and  expanding  into  a  large  hollow  vesicle. 
Tbc  contents  at  the  same  time  acquire  a  yellowish  or 
jrilow-brown  colour,  and  separate  into  a  central,  denser, 
jdlow-biown  nucleus,  and  a  finely-granular  mucilage, 
vliicli  surrounds  the  nucleus  and  does  not  entirely  fill 
4c  space  between  it  and  the  membrane.     This  finely- 
granular  mucilage  then  becomes  balled  together,  in  the 
*pcc  between  the  yellow  nucleus  and  the  surrounding 
i^^cmhrane,  into  a  single  lai^e  corpuscle  exhibiting  a 
sisiply-dcfined  outline,  and  appearing  as  a  transparent 
'^side  with  finely- granular  contents.     The  new  cell 
tas  formed   pushes   the  brown   body,  as  the   figures 
*ow*,out  of  its  central  position,  against  the  wall  of  the 
Parent  cell  or  the  spore-mother-cell.     The  pressure  of 
*Kc  two  bodies  causes  the  rupture  of  the  membrane  of 
^  spore-mother-cell ;  the  transparent  cell  emerges  and 
i     ^DWcs  about  independently  and  freely  in  the  filament 
^  in  the  manner  of  the  zoospores.'    They  moved 

*  Dr.  Pringshdm's  paper  is  illustrated  by  several  figures. 


376  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

about  by  means  of  cilia  which  sometimes  existed  ^ 

and   sometimes   in  the   form  of  a  circlet,    Alth: 

Dr.  Pringsheim  was  disposed  to  look  upon  these  bC 

as  anomalous  propagative  spores  belonging  to  the  p 

itself,  and  destined  to  reproduce  it,  he  came  to  < 

a  view  principally  because  of  his  certainty  as  to  t 

mode  of  origin.     He  says: — *That  they  are  fon 

structures,  not  belonging  to  the  Sphogyrje^  would  be 

altogether  inadmissible  hypothesis,  since  tkey  are  fa 

in  the  interior  of  the  closed  filament  cells  of  the  Spirog; 

directly  from  their  contents^     Dr.  Pringsheim  had  i 

bodies  originating  after  a  similar  fashion  within 

resting  spore  of  (Edogonium  vesicatum^  and  within 

filament  cells  of  Cladophora  fracta  and  of  Nitella  syncA 

and  as  he  had  not  seen  the  further  developmental  m 

fications  of  these  newly-produced  organisms,  the  \ 

which  he  adopted  seemed  the  only  one  open  to  hin 

the  time.     Now,  however,  there  cannot  be  much  dc 

as  to  the  relationship  which  exists  between  these  bo 

and  the  organisms  whose  evolution  Mr.  H.  J.  Ca 

has  watched,  within  the  filament  cells  of  weeds 

longing  to  the  same  genera,  and  which  Dr.  Brai 

Hicks  ^  has  seen  originating  within  the  elongated  a 

like  cells  of  which  moss-radicles  are  composed. 

In  order  to  procure  such  alga-like  moss-roots  i 
suitable  condition,  it  is  only  necessary  to  float 
tions  of  any  of  the  common  mosses  on  a  glass  of  W2 
which  should  then  be  kept  in  the  shade.     Radicle: 
^  'Journal  of  Microsc  Sc.'  x86a,  p.  97. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  377 


coBSidcrablc  length  are  soon  pushed  out,  and  one  of 

ttcm  may  be  removed  for  microscopical  examination. 

Fxom  the  examination  of  such  filaments  Dr.  Braxton 

Hicfa  ascertained  that  the  chlorophyll  and  protoplasmic 

coDtCflts  not  unfrequently  detached   themscrlvcs  alto- 

pthcr  from  the  cell-wall,  and  collected  into  one  or 

more  ovoid  masses  of  different  sizes.    These  at  first 

possessed  all  the  optical  characters  of  living  healthy 

.  wgctable  protoplasm ;  but  they  soon  began  to  change 

ifl  colour  fiiom  green  to  red  or  reddish-brown,  and  then 

P*iBDy  became  so  colourless  that  no  trace  of  cither 

"^  or  green  remained,  except  in  the  form  of  a  few 

"^^^isli  granules  ^      Whilst   these   changes   were   ad- 

''odn^  the  several  masses  gradually  began  to  '  alter 

^fonn,  and  to  protrude  and  retract  processes  exactly 

^Ar^jf/    Dr.  Hicks  says: — *  They  travelled  up  and 

*^  the  interior  of  the  cells,  occasionally  elongating 

"^cniselvcs  into  a  linear  form.     The  movements  of 

^  contents  presented  the  same  phenomena  as  those 

J^trac  Amoebae.'   And  although  all  the  masses  of  green 

^^^bplast  generally  passed  through  these  changes  simul- 

^^Qcously,  this  was  not  always  the  case.     The  number 

^  amoeboid   bodies  to  be  found  within  each  cell   is 

^**pcndent  upon  the  number  of  masses  into  which  the 

^ril-contents  originally  divides,  and  also  upon  the  num- 

"^  of  s^mentations  which   these   may  subsequently 

^***^fcrgo.  Dr.  Hicks  has  seen  as  many  as  seven  Amoebx 

^**^ng  about  within  a  single  cell.   He  says : — ^  Anxious 

^  These  appearances  are  represented  in  Fl.  iv.,  loc.  cit. 


378  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

to  observe  what  became  of  these  bodies,  I  carefully 
watched  one  for  some  hours,  and  observed  the  follow- 
ing:—First,  the  movement  by  protrusion  became  gradu- 
ally restricted  till  it  was  extinguished,  the  mass  returning 
to  the  ovoid  form  it  possessed  originally.  The  exterior 
also  seemed  to  become  more  rigid,  although  I  do  not 
think  there  was  any  distinct  cell-wall.  Secondly,  the 
whole  exterior  became  covered  with  very  minute  cilia  in 
constant  vibration,  by  which  the  mass  was  kept  in  a 
state  of  agitation  within  the  containing  cell.  The  total 
motion  was  curtailed,  of  course ;  but  in  bodies  which  I 
noticed  moving  in  the  water  undistinguishable  from 
them,  the  motion  was  rapid  and  rolling.  Beyond  tKis 
point  I  was  unable  to  extend  my  observations  on  their 
life-history/  This  change  from  the  amoeboid  to  the 
ciliated  state  was  rapidly  effected,  since  Dr,  Hicks  had 
seen  it  brought  about  in  the  course  of  two  hours  '. 

We  will  now  refer  to  some  observations,  previously 
alluded,  to  and  made  by  Mr.  H.  J.  Carter,  which  also 
furnish  us  with  particulars  of  the  greatest  interest. 

At  pp.  187-190  of  vol.i.  we  described  the  early  changes 
diking  place  within  an  internode  of  a  Nitella  which  is 
about  to  die.  We  then  quoted  Mr.  Carter's  description 
of  the  mode  of  formation  of  the  ^gonidial'  cell,  as 
he  at  that  time  called  it,  and  have  now  to  follow  his 

*  Dr.  Gros  had,  however,  long  before — and  even  anterior  to  the  date  of 
Fringsheim's  observations — declared  that  the  nuclei  of  the  spiral  bands 
of  Spirogyra  might  individualize  themselves  and  become  converted  into 
Monads  which  subsequently  developed  into  different  forms  of  Ciliated 
Infusoria.    (See  '  Bullet,  de  la  Soc  de  Nat.  de  Moscou/  1851,  p.  477.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


379 


description  of  the  changes  tajcing  place  within  this 
cell,  and  of  the  ultimate  metamorphoses  undergone  by 
the  liberated  cell  contents. 

The  previously  green  contents  having  become  of  a 

brownish  colour,  and  the  transparent   cell-wall   fiilly 

fanned,  Mr.  Carter  says^: — ^A  new  substance,  con- 

sisting  of  a  bluish  semi-transparent   mucus,  more  or 


Fio.  75. 
***terogenctic  Origin  of  Monads  from  Nitella.    (Carter.)    ( x  350.) 

«•  Contents  of  new-formed  Cyst  separating  into  protoplasm  and  dark 
brown  refuse  matter. 

^«  '1  tnd  d.  Segmentation  of  the  protoplasm  into  Monads,  which  after- 
wards escape  from  the  ruptured  Cyst. 
'i/t  g'  Different  foims  of  the  Monads. 

^f^and^'.  Forms  of  Amceba   and  Actinophrys  which   the    Monads 
subsequently  assume. 

less  charged  with   minute  granules   (from  which  its 
colour  appears  to  be  derived),  and  refractive  globules  of 

■  'Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.'  vol.  xvi.  p.  5, 


38o  THE  BEGlNNiyCS  OF  LIFE. 

a  faint  yel!owish-green  and  sapphire  blue  colour,  m  . 
its  appearance  in  diflFerent  parts  of  the  brown  mas^ 
to  one  side  of  it,  and  afterwards,  becoming  botryo 
or  mulberry-shaped,  separates  into  gonidia.  The  brc 
chlorophyll  with  the  other  effete  contents  then  shri 
up  into  a  structureless,  homogeneous,  more  or  less 
fined,  circular  nucleus,  of  a  dark  brown  colour,  and 
cell  frequently  projecting  on  one  side  in  a  conical  fc 
bursts  at  the  ap^x  and  gives  exit  to  the  gonidia.  . 
The  gonidia  are  globular,  ovate  or  spindle-shaped,  ^ 
of  a  light  blue  colour.  They  average  xi^  ^^  diamet^ 
and  contain,  together  with  the  blue  substance  m« 
tioned,  more  or  less  also  of  the  refractive  globules,  2 
a  transparent  vesicle.  Each  gonidium  is  provided  v 
one  or  two  cilia,  according  to  its  form,  that  is  to  s 
the  globular  ones  present  one  and  the  spindle-shaf 

'  Although  this  is  the  average  size,  gonidia  may  be  met  with  varj 
much  in  bulk.  Mr.  Carter  says,  p.  lo: — *  I  have  already  described 
commonest  form  of  gonidium,  but  there  is  still  another  about  tQ 
the  size,  viz.  •^ytt!'  *^  diameter,  which,  although  not  so  frequ* 
is  nevertheless  sufficiently  so  to  show  that  there  arc  two  sizes  m 
common  than  the  rest ;  for  we  shall  presently  sec  that  the  gonit 
substance  may  occasionally  come  out  as  a  whole,  or  in  gonidia  of 
sizes  below  its  original  bulk.  This  large  gonidium  generally  prcse 
itself  under  a  circular  or  globular  form,  with  a  single  dlium,  but  it 
sometimes  seen  ovate  or  spindle-shaped  like  the  smaller  one.  It  m 
be  obvious  to  all,  that  a  polymorphic  cell,  such  as  the  gonidium  is,  c 
have  no  constant  figure  while  in  a  state  of  activity ;  hence  at  one  tim( 
may  be  of  one  shape  and  at  another  of  another,  but  when  under  po 
morphism  and  the  cilium  has  disappeared,  a  group  of  gonidia  will  • 
hibit  a  strong  tendency  to  exhibit  the  same  kind  of  figure  general 
whatever  that  may  be.*  But  just  after  they  become  stationary  the  fo 
of  Actino^brys  iol  seems  to  pre\'ail. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  381 

two,    which  may  be  perceived  whilst  they  are    yet 
grouped  or  separate  in  the  transparent  gonidial  cell, 
where  they  already  exhibit  a  certain  amount  of  poly- 
morphism.   Shortly  after  they  have  become  free  in  the 
internode,  the  wall  of  the  latter  gives  way  and  they 
pass  into  the  water,  where  for  a  certain  time  they  re- 
main so  active  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  describe 
their  form;  but  here  and  there,  that  which  I  have  stated 
nay  be  seen  in  those  which  are  less  active  in  their 
movements  than  the  rest.'    The  elongated  or  spindle- 
shaped  forms  are  generally  provided  with  two  cilia  of 
about  equal  length,  one  of  which,  usually  motionless,  is 
bent  backwards  underneath  the  body,  whilst  the  other 
Projects  anteriorly  and  exhibits  a  constant  whipping 
movement.     But,  '  After  a  while,  perhaps  some  hours, 
ttegonidia  become  stationary,  and  while  they  appear  to 
be  fixed  by  the  proboscis  mentioned,  the  long  cilium 
"O^ts  motionless,  or  presents  a  languid  kind  of  whip-like 
^ulation ;  the  latter  then  disappears,  and  a  day  or  two 
™rj  the  gonidia,  both  small  and  great  ...  arc  seen 
^eping  about  the  watch-glass  (into  which  they  were 
^nsferred  for  observation)  under  as  active  polymor- 
phism as  any  amocbous  cell  could  present ;  diffluent, 
"^Stated,  and  in  the  form  of  that  beautifully  radiated 
%ire  called  Actsnophrys  sol  (Ehr.).' 

Again,  we  are  told  by  M.  Nicolct  ^  that  in  vegetal 
substances  wliich  are  undergoing  decay  Amocbjc  are 

*  Sec  Thompson's  'Arcana  Naturic,'  Paris,  1859,  p.  31,  PL  iii.  figs, 
'sod  2. 


382  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


produced  by  the  formation  of  a  globule  of  glutinous 
matter  or  protoplasm,  which  first  isolates  itself,  and 
then,  leaving  the  substance  of  which  it  previously 
formed  part,  develops  fine  rays  on  its  surface,  which 
often  attain  a  considerable  length.  Nicolct  says: — 
*The  Amoeba  lives  under  this  form  for  several  days, 
and  takes  the  name  of  Actinophrys.  It  has  been 
called  Actinophrys  sol^  when  its  substance  is  purged 
from  the  colouring  matter,  which  it  almost  always 
swallows  soon  after  its  formation.' 

And  according  to  Nicolet,  the  changes  which  take 
place  in  some  of  the  lowest  aquatic  animals  aft:er  death, 
when  they  remain  immersed  in  their  medium,  are  very 
similar  to  those  which  occur  in  a  piece  of  decaying 
Spirogyra  or  other  fresh-water  Algae.  A  similar  pro- 
duction of  Amoebae  takes  place  from  altered  portions 
of  the  dead  organisms.  He  says ' : — *  As  soon  as 
the  internal  substance  of  the  body  of  the  animal 
becomes  modified  by  decomposition,  portions  of  the 
glutinous  matter  become  isolated,  and  form  globules  of 
different  sizes,  more  or  less  coloured  by  the  fixxi  parti- 
cles which  had  remained  in  suspension  in  the  liquid. 
These  globules  issue  slowly  from  the  dead  body,  draw- 
ing themselves  out,  and  sometimes  leaving  a  portion  of 
their  substance  behind;  they  then  follow  the  line  of 
development  I  have  previously  indicated.'     They  be- 

*  Loc.  cit.,  p.  31,  and  PI.  ii.  figs.  9-18,  in  which  M.  Nicolet  repre- 
sents the  origin  of  such  organisms  from  a  dead  Tardigrade,  and  also 
some  of  their  subsequent  changes. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  383 

come    more  or  less  encysted,  and  at  the  same  time 

develop  rays  from  their  exterior.       Nicolet   adds: — 

*Thc  different  phases  of  their  development  has  given 

rise  to  the  establishment  of  many  species.     I  will  cite, 

amongst  others,  under  the  Actinophrys  form,  Actmopkrys 

mi£s  (Ehr.),  Actinophrys  dsgitata  (Duj.),  and  Actinophrys 

Jiffmms  of  the  same  author;   and  under  the  Amcrba 

form— ^jmr^if   inflata    (Duj.),   Amctta    diffluens   (Ehr,), 

Awmha   hachiata    (Duj.),    Amteta  radiosa    (Ehr.),   and 

AmtU  frinceps  (Ehr.)j  species  considered  to  be  distinct 

by  all  authors,  but  which  disappear  and  appear  again 

^  one  and  the  same   individual  during  observations 

conducted  for  a  single  month.' 

Agdn,  according  to  Nicolet,  when  a  portion  of  an 
aquatic  plant  such  as  Chara  has  been  well  cleaned  with 
a  soft  brush — so  as  to  detach  all  foreign  matters  from 
Its  surface  —  and  is  placed  in  a  vessel  with  some 
P^  water,  a  variable  number  of  minute  transparent 
^cnts  may  be  seen  to  grow  from  fts  surface.  The 
"^c  at  which  these  appear  varies  in  different  cases ; 
^  rapidity  of  their  formation  being  in  direct  pro- 
P^on  to  the  lowness  of  vitality  of  the  plant,  and 
^  within  certain  limits,  to  the  daily  atmospheric 
^perature.  They  generally  make  their  appearance 
^  its  surface  as  little  transparent,  hemispherical 
Pojcctions  about  ^^W  ^^  diameter,  which  appear 
^  contain  an  extravasation  of  some  of  the  liquid 
contents  of  the  plant  itself.  These  projections  grow 
^cry  rapidly  into  transparent  filaments — even  in  the 


i34 


7 HE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


course  of  a  few  minutes— each  of  whidij 
attained  a  length  of  about  -^"^  graduall 
terminal,  spherical,  or  ovoidal  dilatation,  w 


^  ^     ^ 

^1^ 


Fio.  76. 

Mode  of  Oiigin  of  Trichomonas^  and  its  Transform 
nopbrys  and  Amaba.    (Reduced,  from  Ni 

a-e.  Different  stages  in  the  formation  of  a  germina 
/.  g.  Segmentation  of  its  contents  into  embr)o  s 
monas  (i,  1,^'). 
kf  /,  n.  Forms  subsequently  assumed  by  these  bod 
become  converted  into  Actinopbrys  (m 
latter  rapidly  increasing  in  size  ^J>), 

hlled  with  a  granular  mucilage,  poure 
the  tubular  portion  ^     Soon,  howev^ 

*  Mr.  Archer  describes  in  'Journal  of  Mic 
p.  3^7,  the  production  of  somewhat  similar 
a  large  Desmid,  through  which  ciliated  zoosp 
charged.     These  appear  to  be  produced  by  a 
chrome  of  the  fruslule  itself,  near  the  par 
When  discharged  the  zoospores  were  found  t 
provided  with  a  single  cilium.     They,  in  fac 
bodies  whose  production  Mr.  Carter  had  ' 


THE  BEGIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE.  385 

ascend,    and   the  tube  itself  gives  up  its  contents  to 
the    globule.      The    latter    is    often    about    ^^''    in 
diameter^    its  substance,  perfectly  homogeneous  and 
much  more  refractive  than  water,  remains  quite  mo- 
tionless.     But  this  stage  of  rest  is  one  of  short  du- 
ration,   and   scarcely  two   minutes   elapse   before   the 
difiFerent  refractive  powers  of  diflFerent  portions  of  the 
contents   show  that  a  change  is  taking  place.    Signs 
of  the  internal  diflFerentiation  of  globular  portions  of 
the  contents  soon  become  evident,  and  grow  more  and 
more  distinct.    At  last  movement  recommences — no 
mere  displacement  of  the  liquid,  but  an  actual  swarm- 
ing movement  of  the  spherical  portions  into  which  the 
contents  have  been  resolved.     The  movements  of  the 
bodies — about  fifteen  or  twenty  in  number— increase 
in  extent  and  rapidity,  till  at  last  the  envelope  bursts 
and  gives  exit  to  these  active  units  as  ciliated  or- 
ganisms, similar  to  those  which  were  included  in  the 
genus  Tricbamfmas  by  Dujardin  (^).    Their  bodies  after  a 
time  become  nodulated,  and  about  -^-ij^"  in  diameter. 
They  are  somewhat  irregular  in  shape,  and  are  pro- 
longed at  one  extremity  into  a  well-marked  flagellum, 
at  the  base  of  which  and  on  one  side  seven  or  eight 
cilix  are  situated.    At  the  opposite  extremity  of  the 
body  there  is  a  much  shorter  prolongation. 

'  gonidial-oelb '  of  Cham.     Mr.  Archer  believes  them  to  be  normal, 
though  ^ery  nniisual,  'zoospores'  of  the  Desmid  in  question.    Much 
donbt,  however,  still  hangs  over  the  subject.    It  seems  to  me  more  likely 
thmt  they  are  heterogenetic  products,  and  that  they  do  not  at  all  belon 
to  the  Datwil  developmental  cycle  of  the  plant. 

TOL.  II.  C  C 


386  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


M.  Nicolet  states  that  this  form,  resembling  I 

din's  Trichomonas  vapnatis^  speedily  passes   on  t 

development  of  an  Amoeba,  resembling  that  whic 

named  after  Gleichen  by  Bory  de  Saint  Vincent. 

its  escape  from  the  globule  in  which  it  was  form 

swims  about  for  a  time  with  the  aid  of  its  vib 

cilia,  then  fixes  itself  by  means  of  its  caudal  filai 

either  to  the  surface  of  the  plant  or  to  the  walk  c 

vessel  in  which  it  is  preserved,  where  it  continv 

oscillate,  owing  to  the  continuous  agitation  of  its 

It  soon  begins  to  project  amoeboid  expansions,  ^ 

are  generally  long  and  simple,  though  after  t^ 

three  days  it  detaches  itself  from  its  pedicle,  and  s 

about  for  a  time  before  again  coming  to  a  sta 

rest.     '  Its  body  then  becomes  quite  spherical,  whi 

loses  its  locomotory  cilia,  and  becomes  bristled 

straight  and  slender  rays,  which  give  it  the  appeal 

of  an  Actinophrys*    This  new  form  [m)  often  lasts 

than  a  day.     '  The  rays  then  disappear  by  retractioi 

body  flattens  itself,  becomes  discoid,  and  soon  prot 

new  expansions  on  all  sides,  though  these  are  larger 

regular,  and  resemble  those  of  Arcellm.     Shortly  i 

wards  the  disc  extends  itself  on  one  side  into  rou 

lobes,  and  an  Amoeba  is  formed.     For  a  time  the 

granular  substance,  in  which  the  vacuoles  form,  ren 

agglomerated   posteriorly  j    though   later,  the  graj 

diffuse  themselves  throughout  the  whole  mass,  and 

this  Amoeba,  named  after  Gleichen,  has  no  longer 

characters  by  which  to  distinguish  it  from  other  Amo 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  387 

The  interest  attaching  to  these  observations  of  M. 

fficolet  is  extremelj  great,  though  other  observations  of 

Mr.  H.  J.  Carter,  to  which  we  shall  now  allude,  are  just 

s  startling.    Nicolet  does  not  appear  to  have  been 

lararc  of  these,  though  they  were  made  known  more 

tei  two  years  bef(»«  his  own  were  published.    It  was 

ia  a  paper  communicated  to  the  Bombay  branch  of  the 

lofal  Asiatic  Society^  in  November,  1856,  entitled 

*Trandbrmation  of  the   V^etable   Protoplasm   into 

^f&mfkrjs*  that  Mr.  Carter  first  published  these  very 

• 

iBpoitant  observations.  The  transformations  had,  for 
fte  most  part,  been  witnessed  taking  place  within  the 
^  of  Sfin^a  erassa,  one  of  the  filamentous  fresh- 
*«&  Algx,  and  about  the  largest  representative  of  its 


He  says: — *  Under  certain  circumstances,  the  cell  of 
♦*»prj  apparently  dies,  the  chlorophyll  becomes  yellow, 
^  the  protoplasm  leaving  its  natural  position  divides 
■P  into  portions  of  diflFerent  sizes,  each  of  which  en- 
«*8  more  or  less  of  the  chlorophyll  ^  these  portions 
^d  about  the  cell  under  a  rhizopodous  form,  the 
^**ophyll  within  them  turns  brown,  the  portions  of 
Woplasm  then  become  actinophorous,  then  more 
''^'^  and  finally  assume  the  figure  of  Actinophrys, 

^  reported  in  'Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist*  1857,  yd.  xix. 

r^^  Concerning  the  &cts  themselves  Mr.  Carter  has  never  varied, 

'  **■•  ii  well  known  to  be  a  most  conscientious  and  trustworthy 

T*"*!.  At  different  times,  however,  he  has  been  inclined  to  explain 

**Kaad  other  obierTations  difierently  (see  '  Ann.  of  Nat  Hist'  1861, 

C  C  2 


388  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


The  radii  are  now  withdrawn,  while  the  pellicula  in 
which  they  were  encased  is  retracted  and  hardened  into 
setx,  with  the  rest  of  the  pellicula,  which  now  becomes 
a  lifeless  transparent  cyst,    A  more  delicate  cyst  is 
then  secreted  within  this,  and  the  remains  of  the  con- 
tained protoplasm,  having  separated  itself  from  the 
chlorophyll,  segments   into  a  group  of   monociliated 
Monads,  which  sooner  or  later  find  their  way  throu^ 
the  cysts  into  the  cell  of  the  Spirogyra—\3Mi  latter  by 
this  time  having  passed  hx  into  dissolution,  so  that 
the  Monads  afterwards  easily  escape  into  the  water  ^.* 
This  was  the  process  seen  by  Mr,  Carter  when  the  cells 
of  Spirogyra  were  not  (as  they  are  just  before  conju- 
gating) loaded  with  starch.    But  when  the  changes  tooL 
place  at  the  period  of  conjugation  they  were  somewhat^ 
diflFerent,    The  whole  of  the  contents  of  the  two  con — 
jugating  cells  became  united  into  one  mass^  and  havin^a 
assumed  a  globular  form,  remained  in  this  state  unti-^ 
the  chlorophyll  had  become  more  or  less  brown.     Afte-^ 
this  the  protoplasm  reappeared  at  the  circumference 
the  sphere  in  two  forms,  viz.  in  portions  which  leave 


mass  altogether  after  the  manner  of  Amcebse,  or  else  i 
the  form  of  tubular  outgrowths  which  continue 
maintain  their  connexion  with  the  sphere.  In  bot:^ 
instances  the  protoplasm  is  without  chlorophyll,  bu-« 
charged  with  oil  globules  ^  and  both  forms  make  the  i 

^  The  dissolution  of  the  filaments  is  a  slow  process  of  thinning,  no" 
putrefactive  in  nature ;  indeed  Mr.  Carter  says : — •  Patre&ctive  decompo- 
sition at  the  commencement  destroys  this  process  altogether.' 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFB. 


389 


\ 


way  towards  the  confines  of  the  Spirogyra  cell,  which 
they  pierce  before  any  further  elaboration  of  their 
contents  takes  place. 

On  reaching   the  cell  wall,  each  form  puts  forth  a 
minute    papillary    eminence,    which,    having    passed 
thiough  the  wall,  expands  into  a  ^  large  sac,  or  bursts  at 
its  apex.'    The  isolated  form  gradually  drags  four-fifths 
Of  more  of  its  bulk  through  the  opening,  and  some- 
times so  much  is  dragged  through  as  only  to  leave  a 
little  papillary  eminence  within — so  that  the  portion  of 
protoplasm  seems  as  if  it  were  entering  instead  of 
escaping  from  the  Sptrogyra  celL    Whereas  in  certain 
OSS  where  a  tubular  extension  is  formed,  it  expands 
*oto  a  delicate  cyst  of  a  flask-like  or  globular  shape, 
ootsidc  the  cell  wall,  and  retains  the  protoplasmic  con- 
^ts  here  until  they  are   ultimately  developed   into 
Monads.    These,  which  are    much    larger   than   the 
Gonads  developed   within  the  Nitella  filaments,  on 
^^^*^ing,  move  about  rapidly  for  a  time  by  the  aid  of  a 

*«"Oag  cilium  carried  in  front  like  that  of  Astasia^  and 

th 

^'i  become  stationary.    The  vesicula,  or  '  contracting 

^cle,'  which  does  not  appear  before  they  leave  the 

^^  now  becomes  very  active,  the  cilium  is  gradually 

^^inished  in  size  and  altogether  disappears,  and  the 

Monad  passes  into  a  rhizopodous  reptant  state,  which 

^erwards  becomes  actinophorous,  and  finally  assumes 

^  form  indistinguishable  from  that  oi  Actinophrys  soU 

^e  developmental  changes  taking  place  within  these 

^tgrowths,  and  the  subsequent  changes  which  the  pro- 


39© 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


ducts  undergo,  bear  therefore  a  close  resemblance  to  the 
metamorphoses  witnessed  by  M.  Nicolet  (pp.  383-386). 
Mr.  Carter  has  also  described  the  mode  of  origin  or 
appearance  of  certain  ^tubulating  germ  cells/  which 
seem  closely  to  resemble  the  peculiar  fungoid  growth 


Fia.  77. 

Formation  of  Pythium  and  of  Astasias  within  cells  of  Spirogyra. 

(Reduced  from  Carter). 

a.  Mode  in  which  Pythium  first  appears. 

h.  Corpuscles  with  tubes,  through  which  the  contained  granules  arc 

voided. 
e.  Empty  corpuscles  after  discharge  of  granules. 

d.  Formation  of  Astasias  within  a  contiguous  compartment  of  SpirogjTa. 

e,  A  spore  of  Spirogyra,  into  which  one  of  the  tubules  of  an  inosculating 

group  of  corpuscles  (/)  is  penetrating. 

described  by  Dr.  Pringsheim^  as  Pythium  entophytum.  This 
is  represented  as  a  colourless,  flask-shaped  or  pyriform 
organism,  with  a  more  or  less  elongated  neck ;  and  it  is 
stated  to  occur  in  both  animal  and  vegetal  tissues. 
Mr.  Carter  says  ^ : — ^  Just  after  the  conjugation  of  Sfha- 
gyra^  a  number  of  spherical  cells  filled  with  minute 

*  •  Ami.  des  Sc.  Nat.*  (Bot.),  4  S^r.  t.  xi.  pL  7,  fig.  x. 
■  *  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.'  vol.  xvii.  p.  113. 


BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  391 


icfracXvvc  P^nules  frequently  make  their  appearance 
^th'm^^^cus-layer  of  the  cell ;  and  when  the  former 
duinks  &oni  tijg  latter,  these  spherical  cells  become 
wiapP^  ^P  in  it/    Each  of  the  spherical  cells  usually 
develops  a  blind  tube,  which  sometimes  penetrates  the 
cell  wall  of  the  Spirogyra  for  the  exterior  liberation  of 
its  contained  germs,  though  others  of  them  may  commu- 
nicate with  adjacent  cells.  And  occasionally  one  of  these 
inosculating  spherical  cells  may  send  its  tube  *  through 
the  septum  of  the  cell  into  the  resting-spore  of  the 
not  cell,  which,  being  full  of  nutritious  matter,  im- 
iDcdiatcljr  furnishes  food  for  the  whole  brood/    Mr. 
Carter  sajrs  that  the  granules  of  the  tubulating  cells 
^fc of dificrent  sizes,  and  motionless  at  first;  though 
^  subsequently  ^  become  locomotive,  swarm  about 
*c  cell,  and  then  pass  out  of  the  tubular  prolonga- 
^^^  Celb  of  an  altogether  similar  character  were 

**>  seen  to  develop  within  the  dead  bodies  of  certain 
Kotifcrsi. 

Coocemmg  the  actual  origin  of  these  products  Mr.  Carter  has  exhi- 

^  modi  Tadllation  of  opinion.     Thus,  although  at  one  time  he 

^''^  tltej  were  formed  from  a  modification  of  the  substance  of  the 

^'Mm  in  which  thej  appeared,  he  afterwards  renounced  this  view  and 

f*Whii  fint  notion  that  they  were  parasites  whose  germs  had  been 

^^i^OBd  ('Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.*  1861,  pp.  285-288).    But  tubulating 

^  cjvtt  of  a  somewhat  similar  nature  have  been  seen  by  Stein  within 

•"••Bb  wderoftoma  and  Vortictlla  nehulifera  (see  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria,' 

^iS7)i*  and  they  were  thought  by  Stein  to  represent  one  of  the  modes 

*  leprodnction  of  these  Infusoria — which  seems  to  show  that  they 

fl'P^i^  to  htm  to  be  formed  from  the  very  substance  of  the  organism 

**ittdi  they  were  fouid.    Cienkowski  has  also  observed  a  similar 

^•"dopnent  of  brood  cells  within  encysted  specimens  of  Nassula  viridis 


392  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

In  addition  to  the  presence  of  these  pecuJ 
lating  cells  in  Spirogyra,  Mr.  Carter  frequen 
many  Astasia  either  in  the  same  or  in  diffc 
ments^  and  owing  to  the  supposed  absence 
means  of  accounting  for  the  presence  of  the 
isms,  he  hazarded  the  not  very  convincing  g 
they  may  have  been  derived  from  some  of  the 
germs  of  the  tubulating  cells.  The  important  pc 
ever,  is  Mr.  Carter's  statement  of  the  fact  thi 
Astasia  are  also  developed  within  the  cells  of 
to  a  great  extent.*  He  says  they  at  first  exhil 
as  much  polymorphism  as  an  Amoeba,  thoug 
time  they  assume  the  form  and  exhibit  the  m 
peculiar  to  Astasia. 

On  other  occasions  Mr.  Carter  has  seen 
filaments  appear  within  the  closed-  cells  of  S 
There  is,  he  says, '  frequently  a  development 
slender,  colourless  filaments,  which  have  a 
movement  like  that  of  an  injured  earth-wc 
some  of  the  filaments  present  a  faint  appej 
segmentation.  Mr.  Carter  also  states  that  su 
may  be  met  with  in  Desmids.  He  says : — ^  1 
kind  of  filaments  occasionally  appear  in  Clost 
Tosum  when  its  contents  are  passing  into  di; 
but  long  before  the  chlorophyll  has  changed 

(Pritchard,  pi.  xxviii.  figs.  65-71) ;  whilst  Clapar^e  and  Lac 
seen  the  same  kind  of  organisms  appear  within  certain  e 
Infusoria  (•  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.*  vol.  xix.  p.  238).  The  subset 
the  liberated  particles  (germs)  is  very  uncertain  and  m 
investigation. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  393 


pitR&ctJoo  has  commenced/  Mr.  Archer  has  also 
described  and  figured  *  a  mycelial  growth  found  within 
^CbstmmbmBUy  which  was  very  similar  to  the  organ- 
ims  just  referred  to  >. 

In  ^)ealdng  of  the  prevalence  of  one  or  other  of  the 

■ttte  of  development  already  described,  Mr.  Carter 

a/s  they  are  common  in  Chara  and  Nitella,  and  in 

Cbdophora  and  Spirogyra;  that  they  occur  occasionally 

ittHjfdrodictyon,  and  also  in  Closterium  and  Cosmarium 

UKiog  the  Desmidix,  though  never  in  the  Diatomacex. 

He  has  also   frequently  met  with   such   changes   in 

%leiu^  and  in  the  dead  bodies  of  Furcularian  Roti- 

fej  and  he  adds : — ^  The  same  or  similar  develop- 

^'ttts  probably  take  place  throughout  the  whole  of  the 

feh-water  Algse,  and  in  many  of  the  Infusoria.' 

Changes  very  similar  to,  though  not  precisely  the 

*^  as  those  already  described,  have  been  frequently 

*^Wicd  by  the  author  in  Nitella,  Vaucheria,  and  other 

^^    And  those  who  work  at  this  subject  must  not 

'Jtmrnal  of  Microsc.  Science/  i860,  pi.  xi.  fig.  6. 
I  bave  myself  very  frequently  seen  these  growths  within  large  speci- 
of  Closteria,  though  the  filaments  have  always  been  quite  motion- 
Tbey  seemed  to  be  formed  out  of  the  substance  of  the  Dcsmid,  and 
^^^^  first  manifested  themselves  near  the  clear  central  portion  at  a 
vben  no  alteration  of  colour  had  taken  place.     I  have  occasionally 
that  their  presence  could  be  determined  at  will  by  simply  keeping 
1^  JJctmids  for  a  time  beneath  a  covering  glass,  or  in  a  small  unvcn- 
^^^'i  chamber.  Under  these  conditions  also,  fungoid  growths  of  various 
>rill  make  their  appearance  within  the  filaments  of  Spirogyra, 
eria.  or  other  Algx;  whilst  other  heterogcnctic  cliangcs  which 
^  ^ve  been  previously  taking  place  become  arrested. 


394  THE  BEGIXXIXCS  OF  LIFE, 

necessarily  expect  to  be  able  exactly  to  confinn  the 
vat  ions  of  others.  They  will  soon  gain  an  insig^ 
the  rich  variety  of  possible  transformations,  an 
recc^ize  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  at  will  an 
repetition  of  many  of  those  which  they  have  then 
observed. 

Nothing  surprised  me  more,  on  the  very  first  oc 
on  which  I  examined  one  of  the  common  spec 
Vaucheria,  obtained  from  a  road-side  ditch,  than 
how  easily  many  of  the  phenomena  which  have  hi 
been  described  might  be  observed.  The  marv( 
how  so  many  of  the  naturalists  who  had  been 
tigating  these  Algae  could  have  failed  to  appreciz 
real  nature  of  the  changes  which  they  must  hav( 
so  often.  We  may  constantly  observe,  within  a 
filament  of  Vaucheria,  aggregations  of  protoplasi 
of  chlorophyll  vesicles,  of  various  sizes,  some  of 
are  quite  irregular  in  outline  whilst  others  are  spl 
and  with  or  without  an  enveloping  membrane  < 
wall.  ome  of  these  masses  are  as  much  as  yj 
diameter.  After  a  time,  the  chlorophyll  gra 
loses  its  colour,  and  all  intermediate  stages  m 
recognized  between  such  spherical  masses  and  otl 
which  the  central  region  is  stained  by  a  deep 
colour,  whilst  the  peripheral  portions  are  more  c 
less  and  homogeneous.  In  this  latter  stage  the  i 
seem  to  have  undergone  two  principal  modifia 
A  certain  number  of  them  have  become  enc 
the  cyst  wall  being  very  thick;  whilst  others  p 


THE  BEGIXyiXGS  OF  LIFE.  3 '.5 

no  trace  of  a  cyst  wall,  and  even  in  this  stage  their 

dear    peripheral   portion   is  seen  to  be  made   up  of 

▼eritable  protoplasm,  which  is  continually  undergoing 

slow   alterations  in  shape.     These  masses  are  already 

more   than    half-formed  Amoebae,  and  that  they  have 

been  produced  out  of  mere  fortuitous  aggregations  of 

chlorophyll  and  protoplasm  is  beyond  all  doubt.     All 

interxnediate  changes  may  be  seen  taking  place  even  in 

different  parts  of  a  small  portion  of  one  of  the  filaments, 

and  the  examples  are  so  numerous  as  to  make  this 

almost  simultaneous  observation  of  the  different  stages 

just  as  conclusive  as  if  we  were  to  attempt  to  follow 

out  all  the  developmental  phases  of  any  one  of  the 


The  filaments  of  diflFerent  specimens  of  Vaucheria  vary 
a  good  deal  as  regards  the  amount  of  protoplasmic  matter 
and  chlorophyll  which  they  contain;  and  some  speci- 
mens are  also  much  more  prone  than  others  to  exhibit 
the  changes  to  which  we  have  just  referred.     When 
3.  healthy  filament  is  cut  across  and  placed  on  a  slip, 
'^^'^th  a  covering  glass,   for    microscopical    cxami- 
^^^on,  its  contents  slowly  exude,  and  as  it  emerges 
It  separates  into  green  masses  of  different  sizes,  which 
^■niost  immediately  take  on  a  spheroidal  form.     When 
^^  masses  are  examined  by  a  magnifying  power  of 
'^  or  1700  diameters,  they  are  found  to  be  composed 
^  semi-fluid    protoplasm,    containing    granules    of 
'*^rent  sizes  and  also  a  number  of   bright   green 
^^^ophyll  vesicles.    Slight  contractile  amoeboid  move- 


396  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

ments  are  seen  to  take  place  in  the  masses,  c^ 
movements  to  and  fro  of  the  contained  granule^ 
vesicles,  and  also  producing  extremely  slight  and 
porary  irregularities  in  the  outline  of  the  sphere, 
have,  in  fact,  to  do  with  artificially  separated  m: 
of  the  algoid  protoplasm  which  are  already  more 
half  amoeboid  in  nature. 

The  changes  that  take  place  in  an  unhealthy 

ment  are  therefore  not  difficult  to  understand.     V 

the  conditions  are  unfavourable  for  the  continuanc 

the  life  of  the  Alga,  portions  of  its   protoplasr 

various  sizes  become   individualized  within   the 

ment ;  and  such  a  change  may  sinjultaneously  aflFec 

whole  of  the  protoplasmic  contents  of  a  certain  le 

of  filament,  so  that  on  microscopical  examinatic 

may  be  seen  to  have  become  arranged  into  sphei 

of  various  sizes,  from  ^uW'  to  ^irr"  i^  diameter  {a). 

this  stage  the  chlorophyll  vesicles  within  the  spl 

may  be  perhaps  of  a  brighter  green  than  usual,  w 

here  and  there,  in  some  of  the  spheres,  they  may  1 

begun  to  decolourize  by  assuming  various  tints  of  ol 

green.      In  this  stage  the  individualized  masses 

quite  motionless,  or  at  most  they  merely  exhibit  s 

very  slight  alterations  in  the  disposition  of  the 

phanous  protoplasm  existing  at  their  surface  (r ).    Ot 

of  them,  however,  whilst  their  contained  chloroj 

vesicles  are  still  unaltered,  protrude  a  few  pseudopc 

by  the  languid  contraction  and  extension  of  which 

masses  very  slowly  move  from  place  to  place  (A). 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


two  or  three  occasions  bodies  (about  T^nr   '^i  diameter) 
which    seemed  to  have  had  the  same  origin,  and   in 


Fio.  78. 

IVuufoniutions  of  the  subsbuice  of  Vaucberia.    (  X  600.) 
>■  Tartiou  of  small  filament  in  which  conlenta  are  individualizing  them' 

idm  mto  amtebcnd  masses  (diagrammalicV 
*•  t^  o(  masses   contming  green    chlorophyll   moving  slowly   by 

BKBDs  of  pseadopodia. 
'•  Alinoit  motionless  amceboid  mass — with  partly  decotooriied  chio- 

]^«M  mats  with  numerons  motionless  rays, 

^"'Qar  body  in  later  stage  as  an  active  and  wholly  decoloarized 
.         -AetiDopluT*. 
^"•^thet  niass  afler  retraction  of  its  ray  assumes  the  habit  and  movc- 
ounls  of  an  Amceba. 

^^  the  dilorophyll  was  still  unchanged,  were  seen 
"ng  about    pretty  actively   within    the    filament; 
I  it  was  not  ascertained  whether  these  move- 


398  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

ments  were  effected  by  the  aid  of  a  flagellum 
cilia. 

Gradually,  in  the  course  of  the  second  da 
chlorophyll  within  these  rudimentary  amoeboid  oj 
nophrys-like  masses  passes  through  various  sta 
transformation,  by  which  the  green  matter  become 
verted  into  colourless  protoplasm.  During  the  \ 
the  Actinophrys-like  bodies  become  more  and  m< 
tive,  and  the  number  of  rays  notably  increases  {d)^ 
the  substance  of  these  organisms  becomes  more  gr 
and  vacuoles  develop  in  their  interior.  On  the 
or  fourth  days  the  process  of  decolourization  n 
complete;  and  no  one,  looking  at  these  thoi* 
animalized  organisms  (e)  for  the  first  time,  woi 
inclined  to  believe  that  such  active,  many-rayed 
mens  of  Actinophrys  could,  but  four  or  five  days  I 
have  constituted  portions  of  the  green  matter  of  < 
the  filamentous  Algse.  Such  specimens  of  Actio* 
rapidly  increase  in  size,  though  after  a  few  days 
of  them  may  retract  their  rays  and  become  transf 
into  active  Amoebae  (/).  Certain  of  the  green  s 
may  also  pass  directly  into  Amoebx — the  substa] 
the  masses  becoming  more  and  more  animali; 
decolourization  advances.  Other  spheres  may  f 
condensed  outer  layer  or  cyst-like  envelope,  ' 
which  the  enclosed  masses  of  protoplasm  undergo 
various  final  stages  of  decolourization — ^terminat 
the  evolution  of  different  higher  forms  of  life  to 
we  shall  subsequently  refer,  since  they  may  also  p 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  399 


themselves    during  the  transformation  of  other  ma- 


Meanwhile,  I  will  pass  to  a  description  of  somewhat 
analogous  metamorphoses  which  have  been  frequently 
observed  to  take  place  within  the  closed  int^rnodes  of 
Nitella. 

A  few  filaments  of  NitelU  translucens  were  kept  in  a 
small  glass  vessel^  containing  about  a  quarter  of  a  pint 
of  water  from  the  pond  in  which  the  plant  had  been 
found  *.     It  was  protected  from  dust,  and  kept  upon  the 
mantelpiece  of  my  study  during  the  months  of  Sep- 
tember to  February  inclusive ;  and  the  changes  which 
were  from  time  to  time  observed  within  these  filam:;nts 
were  of  the  most  interesting  nature.    The  plant  lite- 
rally *died  by  inches* — internode  after  internode— and 
the  changes  which  took  place  within  them  were  found 
to  vary  considerably  according   to   the   temperature, 
the  brightness  of  the  weather,  and  other  undiscovered 
inftucnccs*.     The  initial  changes  were,  however,  very 
similar   in    all    cases,  although    they    progressed    at 
<iMwnt  rates. 

When  an  internode  just  beginning  to  grow  pale  was 
^^^^mined,  phenomena  very  similar  to  those  described 
'^Mr,  Carter  might  be  observed.  The  protoplasm  and 
^^Uorophyll  vesicles  were  seen  to  have  aggregated  into 
"^^asses  of  various  sizes,  from  tVif"  to  -sW  ^^  diameter. 

It  had  been  sent  to  me  from  Falmouth  by  Mr.  Howard  Fox. 
It  also  grew  by  inches,  since  new  intemodes  were  constantly 
frottiDg  out  as  the  old  ones  died. 


400  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

The  bright  green  vesicles  were  massed  together 
midst  of  a  clear  and  almost  motionless  proto] 
substance,  which  was  always  quite  evident  at  tli 
phery  (Fig.  79,  a).  The  included  chlorophyll  corpus 
the  course  of  a  few  hours,  began  to  decolourize, 
through  the  usual  shades  of  olive  green  and  br 
tints,  till  the  whole  mass  became  converted  into 
colourless  protoplasm.    During  this  process  it  ha 
in  some  cases  that  Actinophrys-like  rays  were 
out  from  the  clear  border,  by  means  of  which  the 
very  slowly  moved  from  place  to  place.     As  the 
of  decolourization  went  on  more  rays  were  ei 
and  the  creatures  became  more  and  more  active, 
vacuoles  developed   in  their   interior — so  as  t( 
(after  forty-eight  hours  or  less)  most  perfect  spe 
of  Actinophrys,  altogether  similar  to  those  whi 
formed  in  Vaucheria  filaments.     Their  subseque 
was  not  accurately  determined,  although  thous* 
them  were  sometimes  present  at  the  same  time 
a  single  dying  internode. 

More  frequently,  however,  another  change  wa 
During  the  process  of  decolourization  the  mas 
mained  spherical  and  almost  motionless,  and 
forth  no  rays.  They  soon  became  finely  granular 
having  a  yellowish  brown  colour  in  the  centra! 
though  the  edge  of  the  masses  (either  all  round  o 
round  their  circumference)  had  become  con: 
decolourized  and  more  refractive  in  appearar 
Sometimes  these  spheres  contained  a  blackish 


ft 


TkE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  40 1 

residual  granular  mass  near  the  centre ;  whilst  at  other 
times  the  process  of  conversion  had  been  more  effec- 
tual, and  had  left  no  remainders.  These  bodies  we 
may,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  henceforth  speak  of 
as  emirycnal  spheres. 

Once  formed,  such  spheres  may  undergo  very  various 
changes,  and  I  shall  begin  with  a  description  of  those 
which,  as  regards  temperature  and  season,  take  place 
under  the  most  unfavourable  conditions. 

1 .  The  internal  substance  of  the  embryonal  spheres 
may  after  a  time  gradually  become  fluidified,  so  that  the 
granules  and  other  particles  are  seen  in  active  move- 
ment in  their  interior.    The  moving  particles  gradually 
increase  in  number  and  in  size,  till  at  last  the  whole 
internal  contents  of  the  mass  has  been  resolved  into 
thousands  of  Bacteria,  held  together  only  by  the  thinnest 
superficial  bounding  layer — which,  however,  soon  gives 
way  and  discharges  its  swarm  of  simplest  living  units 
into  the  filament. 

2.  Some  of  the  spherules  may  become  perfectly  de- 
colourized and  finely  granular  in  their  interior,  and 
then  may  develop  a  blind  tube,  so  as  to  produce  large 
specimens  of  Pythium  C/,/').  In  other  bodies,  which 
^PP*ar  to  be  essentially  similar  duryig  their  early  stages, 
the  contained  granules  gradually  aggregate  into  large 
nuclear  masses,  each  of  which  subsequently  becomes 
^cfosed  within  one  of  the  segments  into  which  the 
*^tents  of  the  sphere  divides  {e).  These  segments  soon 
°^me  active  and  liberate  themselves  in  the  form  of 

VOL.  n.  Dd 


1.3. cnc-  .if  Siidi  at 


fonnrd  into  M^inics,  i'~ev  — -it  s-  si-;-  ;r.  TTetl 
moiiC.i:™:  before  tl-cy  KCOfec  in  -^^^rir^:  li 
cate  envc>iping  ine::il>rar.e.  I-  s>— -e  ;r^;inces 
rjf  b!ack:fh  broirn  granu'-ir  :r^tt;r  remiins  as 
product  (especially  ia  casts  »'he«  Oie  cliin^ 
gcme  on  %-cry  actively^,  though  in  other  jipbci 
whole  of  the  matter  undergoes  cooversian. 


THE  BEGINNmCS  OF  LIFE. 


be  superveatioa  of  less  favourable  conditions 
the  progress  of  the  last  mentiooed  change  will 


F10.79. 

■r  TnuufonoBtions  of  the  substance  of  Nit«lta.    (  x  600.) 
Anucboid  muses  of  diffcrcDt  sii«,  densely  packed  with  bright- 
green  dilorophjll  corpnsclei. 
A  umibi  maw  after  decolouriiation — constituting  an  'em- 

bryooal  sphere.' 
An  cmbtTonal  sphere  segmenting  into  Monads  (e').  but  leaving 

%.  dkric-coloBTcd  refuse-heap. 
Thice  interchangeable  developments  of  smaller  embryonal 
^heres:  d,  a  sporangium  giving  biilh  to  an  arlMrescent 
(ratgiDwth ;  «,  a  sporangium  which  subsequently  s^ments 
into  Monads ;  /,  a  large  kind  of  Pythium  which  subsequently 
develops  its  usual  blind  tnbe  {f^. 
Three  forms  of  Sporangia  which  are  occasionally  formed  from 
the  central  portions  of  ernbryonal  spheres. 

stop  to  it,  and  cause  change  No.  i  to  proceed, 
t  case,  whilst   the   peripheral   portions  of  the 
Mial  S[*erc  are  metamorphosed  into  Monads,  the 
Dd  2 


ci]iL)ry' >n.tl    ^plicrc    break    up 
BacU-ria,  tla-   e^MitiMi   p'Ttii^a 
:).C"nK>  uaiis.V'i'nvjd  iiito  a 
..,/„,/'  in  diameter,  SDmetim 
like  g  or  g\ 

6.  Very  rarely  it  happens 
colourization,  the  whole  ma* 
and  finely  granular,  and  cree 
a  large  vacuolated  Amoeba  (F 
A  goes   rapid   changes  of  shape 

J  assume  the  form  of  an  Actin* 

(  7.  Or  the  whole  mass  havinj 

highly  refractive,  it  assumes 
gradually  becomes  more  animal 
pushes  cilia  from  its  surface,  a; 
converted  into  an  embryo  of  oe 
forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  {c  c 
(as  in  the  case  of  the  transfi 
the  mass  may  undergo  change 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


Flo.  So. 
Si^  Transfoniutians  of  the  substaE)ce  of  Nitella.     (x  60a), 
*' «  b^  AnuEba  resullicg    rrom   Ihc   tiansfonnation   of  a   single 
anbtTonil  sphere, 
'^of  Actiuophrys  which  such  an  Amceba  may  subsequently  assume. 
"■  *«ll  embmuial  mass  which  has  assumed  an  ovoid  form,  ind  aub- 
Kqooitlj  becomes  concerted  into  a  liind  of  Paramecium  (c*). 
■Wnikl  miu,  rather  laigci,  which  becomes  flattened,  and  subse- 
(tMntly  develops  into  an  embryo  Chilcdon  (d"). 
■  *Wntplcx^g-lilcebody  into  which  individual  embFyonal  spheres  were 
Wy  jHone  to  develop;  thecenlml  mass  of  protoplasm  containii^ 
'■^  gmmles  and  a  vacuole. 
'■  '•te  itage  of  same  body — central  mass  of  btly-looking  globules, 
"liich  sobsequenlly  becomes  homogCDCOus  and  enclosed  within 
Wother  cyst,  as  in  |f. 
^^  stage  of  development  as  aeen  in  1  few  embryos,  which  may  or 
"ay  not  have  escaped  from  their  loose  outer  envelope. 

*  Oil  oth^r  occasions    nearly  all    the    embryonal 
^'Cs  within  a  given  internode  may,  almost  imme- 


406  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

diately  after  they  have  been  formed,  conv 
selves  into  complex  ^g-like  bodies,  whose  i 
not  yet  been  determined  (f,/).  These  bodi 
much  in  size  as  the  embryonal  spheres — whi 
natural,  seeing  that  they  are  but  modified 
such  spheres.  What  determines  their  conve 
this  form  is  just  as  mysterious  and  beyond  o 
are  the  causes  which  induce  arsenic  to  cryj 
the  form  of  beautiful  octahedra.  In  both  ca: 
thrown  back  upoti  the  actual  facts  which, 
real  they  may  be,  we  are  utterly  unable  t< 
We  can  only  say  that  both  sets  of  phenc 
dependent  upon  molecular  composition  and 
known  laws  of  polarity.  Hundreds  of  sud 
egg-like  bodies  may  occasionally  be  seen 
single  compartment  of  a  verticel,  whilst  the  < 
compartments  on  each  side  may  be  lined  by 
of  the  '  embryonal  spheres'  similarly  variabl 
which,  instead  of  becoming  converted  intc 
germ  of  some  higher  form,  are  undergoing  seg 
into  the  before-mentioned  Monads.  But  sc 
such  different  transformations  are  met  with 
influence  of  the  same  conditions,  the  difFere 
as  we  have  indicated,  depend  upon  the  prec 
and  vigour  of  the  molecular  movements  tal 
in  the  algoid  matter  of  the  respective  compar 
The  formation  of  these  complex  egg-Hi 
seems  to  represent  a  higher  transformation 
which  we  have  as  yet  recorded  in  this  serie 


^ 


THE  BECmNINGS  OF  LIFE,  407 

We  shall  subsequently  have  occasion  to  refer  to  other 

stries  of  changes  in  which — as  in  these  embryonal 

Inheres  and  in  the  embryonal  areas  of  the  pellicle — 

4e  portions  of  matter  undergoing  metamorphosis,  may 

other  segment   into  one  or  other  of  various  lower 

fcnns  of  life,  or  may  each  be  transformed  bodily  into 

a  single  large  organism. 

Some  remarkable  transfDrmations  have  also  been  ob- 
served taking  place  in  individual  chlorophyll  corpuscles 
wiiidi  still  remained  tn  situ  within  the  filament.  A 
cartfll  examination  of  these  chlorophyll  corpuscles  soon 
suffices  to  convince  the  observer  that  they  are  veritable 
independent  units.  They  grow,  in  fact,  and  frequently 
wjdergo  spontaneous  division  after  the  fashion  of  an 
%)id  corpuscle  or  gonidium,  as  Nageli  long  ago  ascer- 
^ned  It  is  not  at  all  uncommon  to  see  some  of 
^corpuscles  within  dying  filaments  of  Nitella  become 
of  a  bright  grass-green  colour  and  increase  very  much 
^  size,  growing  more  or  less  ovoid  or  irregular  in 
^pe,  and  exhibiting  certain  irregular  markings  in 
^hcir  interior.  The  later  modifications  which  cor- 
pJsdes  affected  in  this  particular  manner  undergo 
^ve  not  been  ascertained,  though  changes  of  a  dif- 
ferent nature  have  been  followed  out  much  more 
completely. 

An  uninjured  Nitella  internode,  two  and  a  half  inches 
^n  length,  had  been  placed  with  some  water  in  a  corked 
^•tube.     It  retained  its  vitality  for  a  long  time. 


4^8  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

and  on  examination  at  intervals,  many  cha 
observed  which  it  is  unnecessary  now  to  pai 
At  the  expiration  of  five  weeks  the  fila 
found  to  have  become  rather  suddenly  deco 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  patches  of  grcei 
there,  in  which  the  chlorophyll  corpuscles 
regularly  disposed  ^.  Within  the  filament  i 
small  colourless  Actinophrys-like  bodies  were 
a  careful  examination  of  some  of  the  patches 
phyll  corpuscles  revealed  all  intermediate  stagi 
individual  corpuscles  and  the  colourless  stelh 
bodies.  The  different  stages  were  seen  in  h 
corpuscles  lying  side  by  side  in  such  a  way  i 
the  order  of  change  just  as  obvious  as  if 
corpuscles  had  been  watched  through  the  seve 
The  corpuscles  in  the  patches  were  gent 
decidedly  paler  green  colour  than  natural,  tho 
which  were  about  to  undergo  the  animal  meta 
had  become  of  a  brighter  and  darker  green  th; 
and  soon  began  to  exhibit  a  slightly  granular 
of  their  contents  (Fig.  8i,  h)»  At  the  same 
dark  green  corpuscles  seemed  to  have  incrcc 
what  in  size.  They  moreover  continued  t 
larger  till  they  were  from  i^-sW  to  ^tjW  in 
They  also  became  more  ovoid  and  more  granu 
of  the  granules  being  green  and  others  cole 
At  this  stage  a  vacuole  appeared  in  their  int 

*  Three  or  four  days  previously  a  much  larger  quantity  c 
phyll  layer  had  been  present. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


409 


Actinophrys-like  rays  were  protruded — the  corpuscles 
still  remaining  quite  motionless,  and  a  few  of  the 
granules  being  still  green  (</).  The  latter  soon  became 
quite  colourless;  whilst  the  rays  grew  rather  longer  (e\ 
smd  at  the  same  time  began  to  exhibit  slow  and  sluggish 


V  /  •".■■-'  *■>  '.r: 
-v. *-'• .-  -  ■- 


Fio.  81. 
Transformations  of  Chlorophyll  Corpuscles.     (  x  600.) 

a.  Pale,  unaltered  Chlorophyll  Corpuscles  of  Nitella. 

6.  Others  lying  side  by  side  with  former,  but  larger,  of  a  darker  green, 
and  slightly  granular. 

e.   Decolourization  advancing — a  few  granules  still  green. 

d.  Similar  corpuscles  after  the  protrusion  of  motionless  rays,  and  forma- 
tion of  a  vacuole. 

*.  Similar  corpuscles  completely  decolourized  and  converted  into  slug- 
gish specimens  of  Actinophr>'s. 

/,  First  stage  in  transformation  of  Actinophrys,  some  of  which  are 
converted  into  Amccbx  (g),  and  others  into  Monads  {b)  with 
two  flagella. 

j.  Enchelys-like  organisms,  probably  derived  from  further  development 
of  some  of  Monads  and  Amcebre. 

movements.    Some  of  the  bodies  appeared  to  exist  in 
this  Actinophrys-form  for  some  time,  though  others 


410  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

very  quickly  passed  on  to  diflFerent  conditions, 
rays  became  shortened,  and  large  vacuoles  appearet 
disappeared  in  the  interior  of  corpuscles  which  wen 
almost  spherical  (/).  These  spherical  corpuscles  ] 
transformed  themselves  into  tolerably  active  Amori 
and  partly  into  rather  sluggish  Monads(A),  provided 
a  flagellum  at  each  extremity,  which,  at  the  tin 
observation,  were  mostly  vibrating  very  slowly. 

Five  days  afterwards  the  above-named  bodies  ha 
the  most  part  disappeared,  though  the  filament  then 
tained  myriads  of  ovoid  ciliated  Infusoria  about 
in  length,  and  of  the  simplest  description  (y)— cl 
resembling  Dujardin's  Enchelys  or  embryo  Paramei 

Observations  of  a   somewhat   similar   nature 
been  detailed   by  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  ^,  who  saw 
chlorophyll  corpuscles  of  certain  moss-radicles  no 
increase  in  size  and  become  cellular,  whilst  their 
tents  divided   into   three,   four,  or   more    motio 
segments.     The  modified  corpuscles  remained  for  \ 
months  in  this  condition  j  though  after  this  time,  ^ 
some  of  them  were  placed  in  the  sun,  the  cont* 
segments  seemed   to  be  rapidly  converted    into 
active,    feintly  -  green,    granular,    and    bi  -  flagel 
Monads.      The    testimony  of  Dr.   Gros,   given 
before,  is  also  to  the   same  effect.     He   says   he 
seen    the    chlorophyll    corpuscles    of   large     Eug 
individualize  themselves,  greatly  increase  in  size 
gradually    become   colourless    and    finely    granul 

'  See  Appendix  D,  p.  Ixxi. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  4 1 1 

thus   formed  ovoidal  bodies  which  speedily  de- 

|doped  dlia  over  their  whole  surface,  and  became  at 

e     converted    into    Enchelys-like    Ciliata^,    very 

in  appearance  to  those  above  referred  to,  which 

ed   to  have   been   ultimately  produced  from  the 

rphosed  corpuscles  of  Nitella. 

At  other  times,  according  to  Dr.  Gros,  the  individual 

diloK^hyll  corpuscles  of  Euglenx  become  the  parents 

tf  various  Confervae  and  Oscillatorix.     And,  strange  as 

H  may  appear  that  apparently  similar  products  should 

Ik  one  time  develop  into  animal  forms  and  at  another 

ghre  birth  to  unmistakeable  vegetal  products,   it   is 

iosperative  that  we  should  more  and  more  familiarize 

wreclves  with  the  notion  of  the  frequency  with  which 

these  interchanges  occur.    Many  such  cases  will  sub- 

iequently  be  mentioned,  in  addition  to  the  instance 

WW  about  to  be  cited,  which  we  owe  to  the  careful 

<tenrations  of  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks,  who,  having  already 

alUed  to  the  circumstance  that  the  chlorophyll  cor- 

Fosdcs  of  moss-radicles  had   been  seen  to  undergo 

^i^Qsformations  whereby  they  became  resolved  into  a 

W  tf  Monad-like  bodies  2,  tells  us  in  another  place  ^ 

^  he   has    frequently  seen    masses    of  Gleocapsa 

<'evclc^)ed  fix)m  the  older  leaves  at  the  base  of  the  sterti 

of  many  Mosses.    These   leaves  frequently  assume  a 

'"^'wnish  aspect  in  winter  and  spring,  owing  to  the  cell 

'^  taking  on  this  colour  whilst  their  contents  still 

*  Loc  cit..  pp.  330  and  487,  PI.  J,  figs.  1  and  3. 
*  Sec  Afptndin  D,  p.  Ixxi.      *  *  Trans,  of  Linn.  Soc*  x86a.  p.  581. 


4 1 2  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

remain  green.  But,  as  Dr.  Hicks  says,  '  Aft 
the  old  cell  wall  dissolves  away,  and  then  i1 
evident  that  the  contents  have  assumed  the 
or  rather,  have  become   a  Gleocapsa^  which 

undergoes  segmentation  freely I  have 

siderable  masses  of  Gleocapsa  produced  in  this 

But  we  have  not  yet  mentioned  all  th< 
which  chlorophyll  vesicles  or  the  ultimate 
of  Algae  may  undergo.  They  may  even  1 
modes  of  growth  whereby  Pediastreae,  De 
Diatoms  are  produced.  These  remarkable 
phoses  were  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Gn 
his  statements  on  this  subject  (in  common  v 
others  to  which  we  shall  subsequently  alli 
been  almost  universally  disregarded.  And 
paper  in  which  his  observations  are  record( 
bably  one  of  the  most  important  that  has  i 
published  on  a  biological  subject.  His  statem 
made,  however,  whilst  the  minds  of  the  n: 
naturalists  were  enthralled  and  whilst  their  a 
perverted  by  mere  theories — ^so  that  they  cou 
discover  the  truth  for  themselves  nor  give  ci 
the  positive  representations  of  one  who  had 
to  approach  the  subject  like  a  true  student  of 

Dr.  Gros*  own  words  on  the  subject  of  the 
Desmids  and  Diatoms  are  as  follows  ^ : — ^  En  i 

*  Loc.  dt.,  PI.  Iviii.  fig.  24. 

'  Loc.  cit.,  p.  339.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  Dr.  C 
a  period  when  so  much  precision  had  not  been  given  to  the  i 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  4 1 3. 

avions  dcjk  signale  Torigine  vegetalo-animale  des  Bac- 

cillaxiens  et  des  Navicules.    Pour  ces  dernieres,  elles 

reconnaissent  les  origincs  en  apparencc   Ics  plus  di- 

verses;    en  eflFct,  on  les  voit  sortir  de  divers  degres 

de  parifissure  euglenienne  en  prenant  des  formes  appro- 

priecs;  on  les  voir  sortir  dc  la  resolution  des  Conferves 

les  plus  diverses  qui  individualisent  leur  vcsiculines; 

des  Gromies  qui  resolvent  le  contenu  de  leur  coque; 

des  Mousses  et  autres  vegctaux  dont  les  cellules  pousscnt 

une  sorte  de  vegcftation  closterienne  (PL  P,  figs.  13, 16) ; 

des  internoeuds  de  conferves  vigoureuses  (fig.  18),  en 

prenant   les    formes    les    plus  artistiques,  etc.     Elles 

sortent  toujours  d'unc  vesicule   individualisee,  et  de- 

^lennent  libres  ou  restent  en  aigrettes  (fig.  16)  etc. 

QS^t  aux  Baccillariens,  (sans  pretcndre  jamais  que  dans 

^o  feit  se  resument  toutes  les  possibilites  evolutives) 

^'^  Voit  des  conferves  eugleniennes  ^  (PI.  L,  fig.  17), 

^^  ies  noeuds  [a)  se  scindent  en  formant  une  longue 

"^le  (^)j  qui  se  scinde  encore  (r),  en  se  decolorant 

^ttx^  \  Tordinaire,  en  s'aplatisent  a  prendre  plus  de 

*^^Ur  (d\  jusqu'k  ce  que  les  frustulcs  se  detachent  {e\ 

^^S    avoir  pris   plus  de  dimension En  these 

^  '^^alj  il  est  constant  qu:;  jamais   ni   Navicule,  ni 

^illaire,  ni  Clostcricn,  ou  Diatomien  n'a  reproduit 

semblable  ^^  que  ces  organisms  sont  un  effet  de  la 

of  tK 

,  ^  ^^»c  organisms ;    and  also,  as  he  tells  us  (p.  295),  in  a  region  in 

^  ^Vi  books  of  reference  were  not  accessible. 
_        *hat  b,  ConfervjE  which  have  taken  oriein  from  the  subdivisions  of 

^cept  by  a  process  of  fission. 


4  14  'I'J^I'^    J'KGIXMXCS   OF  LIFE. 

division  d'autrcs  organismes,  qu'ils  sont  une  impasse  » 
la  fin  d'une  scrie  vitale  et  rarement  unc  forme  de  trail, 
sition  (Micrasterias,  Arthrodesmus,  etc.)/ 

Amongst  the  many  special  instances  illustrating 
truth  of  his  views  which  are  mentioned  by  Dr. 
there  is  one  to  which  I  will  now  call  special  attentio 
as  I  have  quite  recently  observed  transformations  of  ^ 
almost  similar  nature. 

Green  cell-like  bodies  which  had  taken  origin  firo- 
a  Moss-leaf  were,  after  a  time,  seen  by  Dr.  Gros 
become  converted  into  colourless  specimens  of  Actini 
phrys.  These  increased  in  size,  and  ultimately  n 
their  rays  previous  to  developing  cilia  and  becomii 
converted  into  one  or  other  of  the  forms  of  Ciliatr"*'^ 
Infusoria  ^.  Other  specimens  of  the  same  cells  under""""'^ 
went  repeated  subdivision,  and  their  segments  assum< 
the  form  of  Arthrodesmus  (see  Fig.  85,  h).  Some 
these  four-segmented  bodies  were  afterwards  seen  t< 
separate  into  their  elemental  parts,  and  each  of  them 
divided  obliquely  {j)  so  as  to  form  two  ellipsoidal 
corpuscles,  which  speedily  developed  into  some  of  the 
endless  forms  of  Navicular  2. 

My  own   observations  were    as    follows: — ^Having 

^  Loc.  cit.,  pp.  452  and  501. 

*  On  the  oUier  hand,  Arthrodesmus,  Micrasterias,  and  other  Pediastres, 
whatever  may  have  been  their  origin,  arc  said  by  Dr.  Gros  to  lapse  into 
the  confervoid  mode  of  growth  whenever  they  are  placed  upon  a  damp 
soil  (loc.  cit.,  p.  453).  At  p.  311  Dr.  Gros  also  speaks  of  the  origin  of 
Arthrodesmus  from  the  6ssion-products  of  Euglense,  and  of  these  being 
converted  in  the  manner  above  stated  into  Navicuhe. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


4'5 


placed  a  few  filaments  of  Vaucheria  in  a  watch-glass 
protected  by  an  inverted  wine-glass,  I  found,  two  or 
three  days  afterwards,  that  a  thin  scum  had  formed  upon 
the  surface  of  the  fluid  ^   On  microscopical  examination, 
the  most  notable  constituents  of  the  scum  were  certain 
motionless^  green  corpuscles,  varying  from  -^n"  to  ^^'' 
in  diameter,  and  containing  ovoid  chlorophyll  vesicles 
(Fig.  82,/).     These  bodies  were  evidently  undergoing 
transformations  in  different  directions.     Many  of  the 
smaller  corpuscles  were   becoming  decolourized,  and 
were  protruding  rays    so    as   to  convert  themselves 
(as  the  Nitella  vesicles  had  done)  into  specimens  of 
Actinophrys,  which  subsequently  assumed  the  forms  of 
Monads  or  Amoebae.    Some  of  the  larger  corpuscles, 
however,  gradually  decolourized,  so  as  to  undergo  higher 
tonsfbrmations,  in  a   manner  which  will   be  subse- 
quently detailed^.      In  other  smaller  corpuscles  the 
vesicular  contents,   instead  of  fusing  and   becoming 
"^ourized,  underwent  an  extra  amoimt  of  indivi- 
Qualization.     The  chlorophyll  vesicles  increased  in  size 
^^^  became  of  a  slightly  brighter  green,  whilst  the  thin 
^^ing  membrane  seemed  gradually  to  dissolve  away, 
^'Og  bright  green,  rounded  or  ovoidal  corpuscles, 
*^^t   ^^'^  in    diameter  (^^,  which    subsequently 


V^^  *€iese  corposdes  seemed  to  grow  first  upon  the  surface  of  the 
%   ^^eria  filaments. 

'5^<tding  very  frequently  to  the  production  of  Vorticellje.  Cor- 
giyen  off  firom  other  Algse  have  been  observed  to  go  through 
transformations. 


4x6  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


passed  through  one  or  other  of  various  changes.  C 
sionally  two  or  three  of  them,  after  having  very  slij 
increased  in  size,  became  ovoid  and  rather  pale 
one  extremity,  before  protruding  a  flagellum 
moving  about  actively  as  green  Monads.  Other  of 
ovoidal  corpuscles  continued  to  increase  in  size,  a1 
same  time  becoming  more  and  more  fusiform,  w 
their  green  contents  became  granular  {g'-hT). 
most  elongated  of  these  were  subsequently  bisc 
by  a  delicate  partition;  they  also  developed  a  gree 
nuclear-like  body  in  each  segment,  and  soon  bega 
grow  into  unmistakeable  filamentous  Desmids,  of  w 
many  otherwise  similar  specimens  were  seen  in 
stages  of  growth  {y^k).  But  other  representatives  o: 
minute  ovoid  corpuscles  assumed  a  paler  colour, 
then  a  slightly  olive  tint,  whilst  their  colouring  m\ 
became  in  part  metamorphosed  into  two  comparati 
large,  rounded,  nuclear  corpuscles.  These  bodies 
creased  in  size,  and  it  soon  became  obvious 
they  were  young  Navicular  (/,/')  The  exact  pat 
assumed  in  the  early  stages  is  subject  to  much  vi 
tion,  and  several  different  kinds  of  Diatoms  see 
to  be  produced  corresponding  to  these  different  in 
forms  (w,  m).  At  first  no  striation  was  observa 
but  gradually  their  envelope  became  more  and  n 
differentiated — silica  appearing  to  be  assimilated  f 
the  water  in  which  they  were  immersed — and  som 
these  Diatoms  exhibited  a  well-marked  striation. 
Occasionally  the  individualizing  contents  of  OJ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


417 


Flo.  82. 

Modes  of  Origin  of  Dcsmids  and  Diatoms. 

*•  ^^''^ilgoid  corpuscles  contained  M-ithin  a  hyaline  envelope  which 
rods  from  a  Cladophora  Blament.     (  x  600.) 

^'•0»<firowth  of  Dcsmids  from  the  surface  ofNitcUa  filament— the 
**'^  bcinfj  surrounded  by  a  dark  brown  zone,  which  persists  (</) 
m^f^.  ^^  ^c  Desmid  has  disappeared.     (  x  600  ) 

f  "'amcntous  Desmids,  springing  from  a  green  thalamus  which 
^  ^rrounded  by  the  brown  zone.  Pediculated  Diatoms  were 
y^^    seen    budding    from    the    same    Cladophora    filament. 

e/S?*^  vcsidc  ( x  600)   budded   off  from  Vaucheria,   whose 

^•i^^Utcd  corpuscles  frequently  increased  in  size  and  became 

pj!?^^ted  from  their  envelope  (g)^  after  which  some  of  them 

^^^^   into  Desmids  (i,  b\J,  k).    Other  vesicles  {g")  gradually 

ifc'x  ^*^e  converted  into  different  kinds  of  Diatoms  (/,   T,  m, 

(  ac     ^^^  Desmids  from  chlorophyll  corpuscles  of  \  aucheria. 


/X. 


.) 


E  e 


4i8 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


the  green  vesicles  containing  eight  corpusdes  ranged 
themselves  in  one  plane  and  in  close  apposition,  so  as 
to  constitute  what  appeared  to  be  an  embryo  Mioa* 
sterias.  In  this,  as  in  other  respects,  the  transforma- 
tions of  these  vesicles  were  similar  to  those  which  have 
been  observed  to  take  place  amongst  Euglenx  (s:e 
Fig.  85,  /.) 

Individual  chlorophyll  vesicles  of  Vaucheria  and  Ni- 
tella  may  also  gradually  metamorphose  themselves  into 
Desmids.  I  have  seen  this  change  take  place  with  the 
greatest  distinctness  in  some  of  the  corpuscles  of  the 
Vaucheria.  They  enlarge  and  become  of  a  pale  green 
colour,  and  whilst  this  colouring  matter  limits  itself 
to  a  surface  layer,  a  few  colourless  granules  appear  in 
the  central  portion  of  the  vesicles  (Fig.  82,  », »'.) 
These  vesicles  gradually  elongate  so  as  to  form  rudi- 
mentary filaments,  which  after  a  time  give  oflF  lateral 
buds  and  develop  dissepiments  at  intervals  ^.  At  other 
times,  various  kinds  of  Desmids  originate  most  plen- 
tifully from  Algae  and  Characex  by  a  different  process. 
A  minute  tubular  bud  appears  at  some  portion  of  the 
surface  of  the  filament,  which  as  it  enlarges  acquires 
green  contents.  It  rapidly  grows  into  some  kind  of 
filamentous  Desmid  —  some  of  the  specimens  being 
very  narrow  and  others  broad,  and  of  a  very  bright 


*  Dr.  Gros  has  evidently  watched  the  same  mode  of  tzansformatioii  in 
vesicles  derived  from  Euglenae.  Speaking  of  these,  he  says ;— •  On  pent 
ajouter  encore  que  ccs  parceUes  v^culaires  continuent  4  s*OTganiser 
pour  devenir  des  Clostiriens  aigues.*    (Loc.  dt.,  p.  30a.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  419 


L  colour  {fy  b^  These  filaments  sometimes  appear 
ring  at  once  from  the  outer  layer  of  the  filament, 
sometimes  from  an  expanded  base,  also  having 
eenish  colour,  which  soon  becomes  surrounded  by 
axk  brown  decolourized  zone  (e,  /.)  The  zone 
Q  persists  long  after  the  Desmid  itself  has  dis- 
?ared»  At  other  times  I  have  seen  attached  to  the 
12  kind  of  base  (on  specimens  of  Cladophora)  a  large 
idal  and  perfectly  hyaline  envelope  containing  in  its 
itrc  an  aggregation  of  bright  green  algoid  spherules 
,  each  of  which  seems  to  be  capable  of  enlarging  and 
nsforming  itself  into  an  Astasia.  Diatoms  also  ap- 
vr  to  grow  from  the  surface  of  the  filamentous  Algae, 

which  they  are  afterwards  seen  to  be  attached  by  a 
aline  tubular  pedicle;  and  it  is  this  mode  of  origin, 
iparently,  to  which  Dr.  Gros  referred  when  he  said  ' : 
!3*cst  une  chose  soupgonnee  sinon  reconnue  par  tous 
5  observateurs  que  des  vtsicules  vertes  se  font  jour  \ 
avers  le  tube  des  Conferves,  et  se  convertissent  en 
Tavicules.'  Although  many  Algae  present  phenomena 
r  this  kind,  in  none  are  they  more  striking  than  in 
;rtain  specimens  of  Vaucheria.  Filaments  of  this 
eed  which  but  a  few  days  before — when  placed  for 
jservation  in  a  watch-glass — may  have  showed  neither 
diatoms  nor  Desmids  upon  their  surface  will  at  times 
xome  crowded,  both  inside  and  out,  with  a  rich  va- 
cty  of  both  of  these  modes  of  growth.     And  although 

is  quite  possible   that   in  all   such    instances   the 

*  Loc.  cit,  p.  316.  • 

E  e  a 


A 20  I'm-  lu-.cixxixos  or  LIFE. 


5 


Dcsmids,  Diatoms,  or  algoid  corpuscles  may  be  due  to 
the   growth   of  almost   invisible  germs   derived  from 
previously-existing  similar  organisms,  one  is  bound  to 
state  on  the  other  hand   that   such  germs  are  never 
recognizable  in   the   situations   upon  which  the  out- 
growths subsequently  appear,  and  that  the  postulatioa 
of  their  existence  is  an  assumption  based  upon  no  inde- 
pendent evidence. 

What  is  at  present  known  concerning  the  modes  c^ 
reproduction  of  Desmids  and  Diatoms^,  is  wholly  inad^s- 
quate  to  account  for  their  sudden  appearance  in  gre.^^^ 
numbers,  in  situations  where  they  did  not  previous- 3y 
exist.     And  in  the  face  of  the  actual  transformatioK^"^ 
which  have  now  been  witnessed  by  independent  o^t:^- 
servers,  whereby  algoid  or  euglenian  corpuscles  are  bodl      *y 
converted  into  Diatoms  or  Desmids,  it  is  rendered  ^^■•^* 
the  more  probable  that  the  bud-like  method  of  origin         ^^ 
as  independent  of  pre-existing  Desmid  or  Diatom  as         *^ 
seems  to  be.     But  concerning  the  transformations         ^^* 
pre-existing  corpuscles  of  a  different  nature  into  su^^^^* 
bodies,  we  shall  have  more  to  say  in  the  next  chapter 

On  other  occasions  certain  of  the  Protococcus-li—    J^^ 

corpuscles  which  are  so  frequently  given  oflF  from  ma n/ 

Algse  may,  instead  of  multiplying  after  the  fashion         <^ 
Confervae,  increase  in  size  and  gradually  exhibit       ^-^ 
animal-like  activity,  whilst  still  retaining  their  gr^^^n 
colour.     They  thus  become  converted  into  Astasias  ^x^d 

^  SA  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria,'  4th  ed.,  pp.  11  and  58. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


421 


Cj  bodies  which  may  also  have  other  and  quite 
t  modes  of  origin  ^.    Astasiae,  for  instance,  have 


Fio.  83. 

a  of  EngleiuB  from  the  Cell-contents  of  a  Conferva.    (Gros.) 

(X  250?). 

iltered  Cells  of  the  Alga. 

Uition  of  the  Cell-cbntents  and  first  stage  of  individualization. 

ividualized  masses  which  have  assumed  the  form  of  Euglense. 

Oar  organisms,  somewhat  increased  in  size,  and  contained 

ithin  a  dilated  chamber  formed  by  the  obliteration  of  several 

issepiments. 

«n  by  Mr.  Carter  to  originate  within  the  closed 
certain  filaments  of  Spirogyra  which  were  under- 

Dr.  Gros*  Memoir,  loc.  dt.,  p.  289.  The  difference  between 
•  forms  is  quite  unimportant,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
requently  develop  into  EuglensE.  Both  are  green  plastic  vesicles, 
lally  move  about  by  means  of  a  long  anterior  flagellum ;  and 
ma  differs  from  the  Astasia  principally  by  its  possession  of  a 
xl  pigment  near  the  origin  of  the  flagellum.  In  addition  to  the 
e  presence  of  chlorophyll  in  their  interior,  these  animal-like 
:  also  more  related  to  the  products  of  the  vegetal  kingdom  by 
'  their  mode  of  nutrition.  They  never  take  visible  portions  of 
their  interior. 


422  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


going  change ».  Whilst  Dr.  Gros  ^  has  seen  the  contents 
of  each  internode  of  an  unnamed  species  of  Conferva 
separate  from  the  walls  and  aggregate  into  a  singit 
mass,  which  gradually  assumed  the  form  and  charac- 
teristics of  a  Euglena  (Fig.  83).  These  somcwbal 
animalized  organisms  were  subsequently  liberated,  owinj 
to  the  hyaline  walls  of  the  algoid  compartments  be 
coming  thinner  and  thinner  and  ultimately  rupturing. 

I  have  also  seen  remarkable  changes  of  a  similar  kic 
taking  place  within  the  small  cells  composing  one  < 
the  submerged  leaves  of  a  species  of  Potamogcton 
All  the  chlorophyll  and  protoplasm,  in  some  of  the 
cells,  became  aggregated  into  a  spherical  mass ;  whil 
other  uninjured  cells  were  seen,  each  of  which  co: 
tained  a  large  bright-green  Euglena,  having  the  usu 
red  pigment  speck  at  one  end.«  The  bodies  of  the 
creatures  were  as  mobile  as  Amoebae,  and  they  wc 
continually  moving  around  within  their  narrow  prisoj 
They  were  also,  in  each  case,  the  sole  occupants  of  t 
cell — the  whole  of  the  chlorophyll  and  protoplasm 
which  had  evidently  been  newly  embodied  into  1 
form  of  an  Euglena. 

And  lastly.  Prof.  A.  M.  Edwards  is  so  certain  ab( 
the  derivation  of  Euglense  from  Confervse,  that  he  say 


*  See  p.  39a,  and  Fig.  77. 

'  Loc.  dt.,  p.  490,  description  of  PI.  K,  fig.  9. 

*  Heterogenetic  changes  take  place  quite  freely  within  the  cells 
almost  all  aquatic  plants  when  they  get  into  an  unhealthy  conditioQ. 

*  •  Proceed,  of  Lyceum  of  Nat.  Hist./  New  York,  voL  i  (1871).  p.  * 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  423 

am  convinced  it  will  be  at  some  future  day  shown 
at  all  the  green,  and  some  of  the  red  colored  forms 
imilar  to  Euglena,  and  which  have  had  several  names 
bestowed  upon  them,  are  but  transition  states  of  fresh- 
water or  marine  Confervoid  Algae.' 

Bat  seeing  that  metamorphic  changes  of  the  most 
nrprising  nature  occur  in  individual  masses  of  algoid 
protoplasm,  would  it  not  be  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
Astasut  or  Euglenx    may  also,  at    different  times, 
oodergo  a  number  of  heterogenetic  changes,  leading  to 
^  production  of  totally  different  forms,  both  animal 
*od  vegetal.   And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  phenomena 
^^  bog  ago  stated  to  occur.     The  accurate  obser- 
vations of  Dr.  Gros,  which  we  shall  have  to  quote  in 
tbc  next  chapter,  do  of  themselves  fully  suffice  to  show 
^  such  organisms  easily  pass,  at  different  times  or 
^""^  different    conditions,    into    the    most  diverse 
"^P'^ntativcs  now  of  the  Animal  and  now  of  the 
'^^^getal  Kingdoms. 


«ie 


Although  wc  may  be  astounded  by  the  changes  re- 
^J^^  in  this  chapter — at  the  very  high  forms,  and  at 
diversity  of  the  living  things  which  are  evolved, 
^^mpared  with  those  which  arise  in  the  pellicle  on 
-j/^K^nic  infusions — it  may  also  be  seen  that  these  dif- 
"^nccs  do  not  remain  wholly  unaccountable.   Whether 
^  liavc  to  do  with  one  of  the  lower  aquatic  animals, 
^ti  an  Alga,  or  with  any  other  submerged  cryptogam, 
portions  of  its  living  matter^  as  such,  undergo 


424 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


certain  metabolic  changes  constituting  the  first  steps 
towards  the  production  of  new  organisms.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  organic  matter  in  the  infusion  exists 
in  a  state  of  solution,  and  certain  primordial  living 
units  must  appear  in  it,  must  a^regate  and  fiise^ 
before  distinct  masses  of  living  matter  can  exist,  in 
which  secondary  metamorphic  changes  may  take  place 
leading  to  the  production  of  higher  organisms. 
Amongst  such  aggregates,  also,  it  would  seem  likely 
that  more  of  uniformity  would  exist  than  in  por- 
tions of  the  actual  tissue  of  a  plant  or  of  an  animal 
shortly  after  it  had  begun  to  die.  The  mere  size  or 
bulk  of  the  masses  which  are  submitted  to  this  simul- 
taneous change  has  been  shown,  in  both  cases,  to  have 
much  influence  over  the  kinds  of  organisms  that  are 
produced.  The  higher  forms  are  almost  always  evolved 
from  the  larger  masses,  unless,  from  some  unknown 
cause,  an  accidental  segmentation  of  the  mass  has 
been  initiated — though  tiien,  again,  the  same  law  is 
exemplified,  since,  instead  of  one  large  and  more  or 
less  complex  organism  being  produced,  many  small  and 
comparatively  simple  creatures  are  evolved.  It  would 
seem  that  in  the  larger  mass,  made  up  as  it  is  of  living 
matter  of  extreme  instability,  there  is  a  wider  field  for, 
as  well  as  an  increased  liability  to,  the  occurrence  of 
those  successive  molecular  differentiations  which  must 
occur  in  the  production  of  higher  organisms. 

There  is  still  another  cause,  to  which  we  have  not  yet 
adverted,  which  doubtless  strongly  favours  the  occurrence 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  425 

9f  some  of  the  more  striking  metamorphoses.    It  must 
be  recollected,  that  in  all  the  aquatic  plants  in  which 
changes  have  been  noticed,  the  chlorophyll  cor- 
become  incorporated  with  the  protoplasmic  sub- 
stances, and  so  help  to  constitute  the  spherical  masses 
out   of  ^which  the  new  organisms  are  to  be  evolved. 
But  €±ilorophyll  is  a  most  complex  and  unstable  body, 
^rell  calculated  to  excite  even  more  metabolic  changes 
amongst  the  protoplasm  than  would  otherwise  occur  ^ 
M.  Fr^my  describes  it  as  a  substance, '  d*une  excessive 
mobilite,'  so  that  its  mixture  in  diflPerent  proportions, 
leading  to  slight  differences  in  the  molecular  changes 
induced^  would  be  likely  to  give  rise  to  variable  results 
in  the  metamorphic  processes  taking  place  within  the 
same  vegetable  cell  or  algoid  filament,  or  within  similar 
filaments  on  different  occasions^. 


*  These  masses  of  matter  are  indeed  so  unstable  and  so  prone  to 
nudeigo  change  that  I  have  found  it4|lite  impossible  to  preserve  them 
unaltered  as  microscopical  specimen* — although  I  have  tried  almost 
evciy  known  means  of  mounting  them.  They  soon  lose  their  colour 
nod  all  their  characteristic  appearances;  and  yet  when  the  tissues  of 
hijj^ier  animals  are  moimted  in  some  of  the  same  fluids  they  will  remain 
comparatively  unaltered  for  years. 

■  *Compt.  Rend.'  1865,  p.  i88.  According  to  Fr^my,  chlorophyll  is 
a  peculiar  sort  of  coloured  fatty  substance  which  undergoes  a  kind  of 
saponification  imder  the  influence  of  bases ;  leading  to  the  production  of 
ptyOoxamtbine,  a  yellow  neutral  body,  and  a  bluish-green  fatty  acid, 
which  he  proposes  to  name  pbylloeyanic.  This  latter  substance,  insoluble 
in  water,  is  soluble  in  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids— producing 
liquids  which,  according  to  circumstances,  may  be  green,  reddish-violet, 
or  of  a  most  beautiful  blue  colour.  M.  Fnl-my  says : — •  Voici  done  un 
add  retir6  de  la  chlorophylle  et  qui  par  Taction  de  certains  rcactifs  peut 


426  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

Thus  several  reasons  are  discoverable  why  th 
taking  place  in  the  matter  of  aquatic  < 
should  give  rise  to  much  more  varied  and  als< 
higher  metamorphic  products  than  those  comi 
rived  from  the  *  pellicle.*  The  development 
here  encountered  are  indeed  very  compan 
some  of  those  which  have  been  already  des 
Appendix  D  as  definite  changes  in  the  li 
of  many  of  the  lower  forms  of  life.  And 
since  been  made  known  does  much  to  s 
the  supposition  then  advanced^.  Instead  o 
upon  many  of  these  sets  of  changes  as  defic 
which  were  always  likely  to  occur  in  the  ss 
when  similar  organisms  were  observed  at  differ 
it  was  suggested  that  the  existing  testimony 
observers,  not  only  pointed  to  the  conclu 
no  such  regularity  was  observable,  but  al 
tended  to  favour  the  supposition  that  we  \ 
merely  with  a  living  matter  which — far  out 
fabled  Proteus — was  capable  of  assuming  ; 
endless  diversity  of  living  forms,  under  the  in 
varying  changes  in  its  own  substance,  an 
modifications  in  the  nature  of  its  environmen* 

prendre  des  colorations  vertes,  violettes,  on  bleues.  . .  .  C* 
important  qui  me  parait  dominer  ce  travail,  et  qui  pourra  s 
quer  les  diffi^rentes  teintes  qu'offre  la  chlorophylle  dans  la  -v 

*  This  Appendix  was  written  two  years  ago,  when  I  was 
the  possible  occurrence  of  many  of  the  heterogenetic  tra 
which  have  now  been  recorded. 

'  See  Appendix  D,  pp.  xcvii.  and  Ixxxiii. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


427 


ttese  changes  all  early  botanical  and  zoological  dis- 
tiactions  seemed  to  vanish.  Our  notions  of  species^ 
iniera,  families,  orders,  and  even  other  more  general 
cbasificatoiy  distinctions,  appeared  to  be  swept  away, 
CDC  by  one^  in  the  face  of  the  successive  modifications 
lod  metamOTphoses  which  these  simple  organisms  were 
capable  of  undergoing. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 


TRANSFORMATIONS  OF   EVGLESM  AND   OTHER   0R< 
MODES  OF   ORIGIN   OF  CILIATED   INFUSORL 

Crystals  and  Organisms.  Variability  of  latter.  Derivativ- 
Observations  of  Dr.  Gros  and  of  Author  upon  £ug 
Resolution  into  Fungus-germs  and  Monads.  Resolu 
Euglense  into  Diatoms  and  Algoid  Corpuscles.  Tn 
of  entile  Euglense  into  Diatoms,  Desmids,  and  Pedia; 
formation  of  others  into  Confervx.  Interchangeabi 
and  Lichens.  Relations  of  Algae  to  Mosses.  Ob 
Dr.  Gros  and  M.  Br^bisson.  Community  of  Nat 
Algie,  Pediastreae,  Desmids,  and  Diatoms.  The  1 
Divergent  Series.  Transformations  of  Euglenx  into 
Actinophrys.  Their  subsequent  Development  into  ( 
soria.  Direct  Transformations  of  Euglenae  into  Cilia 
Variable  Nature  of  resulting  Forms. 

Other  Modes  of  Origin  of  Ciliated  Infusoria.  Transf 
Chlorococcus  Vesicles  into  Oxytricha  and  Plzescoi 
Mode  of  Origin  of  Vorticella.  Development  of  latl 
bud-like  outgrowths,  and  from  the  *  pellicle.*  Orij 
Ciliated  Infusoria  from  Monads  and  Amoebae.  1 
various  Observers.  Dependence  of  Forms  upon  the  s 
forming  Matrices.  Observations  of  M.  Nicolet  upon  ( 
of  Origin  of  Otostoma  within  NitcUa-filament.  Orig 
similar  forms  of  Infusoria  from  Animal  Matrices.  ] 
Rotifers.  Their  Resolution  into  Actinophr>'s,  Pera 
Arcellinic.    Tendency   of  these   Forms   to   give  ris< 


fc.  -J 


TUB  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


429 


OtHer  Modes  of  Origin  of  Arcellinse.  Origin  of  Ciliated  Infusoria 
frora  eggs  of  Gasteropods  and  Rotifers.  Other  Modes  of  Analytic 
Heterogenesis  in  Rotifer  'eggs.* 

THE  observations  we  have  already  recorded  afford 
abundant  evidence  as  to  the  readiness  with  which 
mere  formless  living  matter  takes  on  what  biologists 
bave  been  led  to  regard  as  quite  specific  living  shapes— 
shapes  of  a  kind  which  have  hitherto  been  considered 
as    the    accumulated   products   of  modifications  that 
have  been  going  on  in  one  ancestral  line  for  ages '. 
The  facts  are  so  new  and  strange  that,  even  now,  many 
of  them  would  seem  almost  incredible  to  ourselves,  if 
their  truth  and  reality  had  not  been  guaranteed  by  the 
testimony  of  our  own  senses.    As  it  is,  however,  all  we 
on  do  is  frankly  to  admit  their  occurrence,  although,  for 
the  present,  they  are  more  or  less  beyond  our  compre- 
^^ttision.    An  investigation  of  the  changes  which  took 
I^  in  the  ^proligerous  pellicle'  of  organic  solutions 
^^pcUed  us  to  assert  that  a  Paramecium  might  actually 
^^^'^  into  being  de  novo^  with  all  its  specific  characters, 
"^  *  few  days.    And  this  statement  has  since  received  the 

^  *tow  much  the  facts  are  opposed  to  what  has  been  anticipated  may 

J»»aged  by  comparing  them  with  the  comparatively  recently-published 

'^'^^t  of  the  most  distinguished  exponent  of  the  Evolution  philo- 

/^yi  who  says : — *  The  evolution  of  specific  shapes  must,  like  all  other 

wtuc  evolution,  have  resulted  from  the  actions  and  reactions  between 

7^^  iQdpient  types  and  their  environment.    To  reach  by  this  process 

^^  Comparatively  well-specialized  forms  of  ordinary  Infusoria  must,  I 

lp^^i^e,have  taken  an  enormous  period  of  time/  (See  Herbert  Spencer's 

^^plcs  of  Biology,'  Appendix,  pp.  480,  481). 


4,>o  TIIL    nEGlXXIXCS  OF  LIFE. 


Strongest  confirmation  by  other  investigations,  wl 
have  taught  us  that  similar  Ciliated  Infusoria,  of  vari 
kinds,  may  arise  just  as  rapidly  by  reason  of 
taking  place   in   a   formless    protoplasmic  sul 
which  but  a  few  days  previously  existed  as  an  inU 
portion  of  a  living  plant,  and  performed  all  the  fiupt-- 
tions  pertaining  to  its  vegetal  nature.    What  arc 
to  say  under  such  circumstances  ?    Is  it  possible  to 
upon  the  resulting  Infusorial  animalcule  as  au^t 
than  the  living  morphological  representative  (or 
ant)  of  the  conjoint  action  of  the  molecular  polariti* 
of  its  constituent  organic  atoms,  under  the  influence 
the  physical  forces  which  are  at  the  time  operative 
The  rationale  of  their  form  and  structure  cannot 
so  far  as  principle  is  concerned,  from  that  similar  ci- 
planation  which  alone  can  be  adduced  to  account  for 
appearance,  in  a  saline  solution,  of  any  complex 
talline  form,  such  as  a  doubly  oblique  rhombic  prism 
other  highly-specific  crystalline  type.    Both  the  Crystal^ 
and  the  Infusoria  must  be  regarded  as  the  direct  pro^^ 
ducts  of  the  series  of  actions  and  interactions  which 
have  taken  place  between  the  materials  of  which  they 
are  composed  and  the  medium  or  environment  in  which 
they  exists     How  such  different  products  may  arise 


^  Professor  Huxley  says : — '  It  is  not  probable  that  there  is  any  lol 
difference  in  the  nature  of  the  molecular  forces  which  compel  the  caibo- 
nate  of  lime  to  assume  and  retain  the  crystalline  form,  and  those  which 
cause  the  albuminoid  matter  to  move  and  grow,  select  and  form,  and 
maintain  its  particles  in  a  state  of  incessant  motion.    The  property  of 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  431 


in  sadise  soludoas  and  in  organic  infusions  respectively 
— poducts  endowed  with  such  totally  different  tcnden- 
cio— wemay  perhaps  dimly  see  our  way  to  comprehend, 
jf  we  take  into  consideration  the  fundamental  nature  of 
thedifeence  existing  between  ordinary  saline  materials 
and  the  diverse  big-atomed  colloids  of  which  living 
tbiBp  are  compounded. 

The  interchangeability  of  animal  and  vegetal  modes 
tf  povth — so  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  last  chapter — 
was  long  ago  recognized  by  a  few  eminent  naturalists  ', 
thoQgh  systematists  have  never  been  wanting  in  energy 
«r  will  to  denounce,  what  they  considered,  such  revo- 
hrtioaary  and  anarchical  doctrines.  The  additional 
widencc  now  about  to  be  adduced  will,  however, 
Wficc  to  set  the  final  stamp  of  truth  upon  the  views  of 
those  who  r^ard  Animals  and  Plants  as  mere  modes 
rf  growth  of  a  fundamentally  similar  living  matter — 
vhid,  though  at  first  it  may  assume  more  or  less 
neutral  forms,  is  ever  ready,  now  under  one  set  of 
infiueoces  to  go  along  the  higher  animal  modes  of 
development,  and  now  under  another  to  persist  in  the 
sm^er  vegetal  modes  of  nutrition. 

Several  naturalists,  however,   have    also   expressed 
^Jjcir  conviction  that  many  of  the  lower  forms  of  life — 

ci>»Ullizing  is  to  caystallizable  matter  what  the  vital  property  is  to 

tlPaBiinoid  matter  (protoplasm).    The  crystalline  form  corresponds  to 

Ibe  otjaiuc  form,  and  its  internal  structure  to  tissue  structure.  Crystalline 

"***  Dttag  J  property  of  matter,  vital  force  is  but  a  property  of  matter.' 

^f^^J^litly  Review,'  Feb.  1869.) 

^  Uodlcy's  •  Veget.  Kingdom,*  3rd  ed.  pp.  2  and  8. 


432  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

both  animal  and  vegetal — possess  or  are  endowed  with 
a  natural  tendency  to  develop  into  higher  forms.    Thus 
Kiitzing,  in  his  prize  essay  on  the  Transformations  of 
Plants,  asserts,  according  to  Mr.  Berkeley  \  *  that  from 
one  and  the  same  organic  material,  even  when  it  has 
acquired  form  and  colour,  diflerent  vegetable  [oi^an- 
isms]  may  be  developed,  which,  according  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the   surrounding  medium,  are  Algals, 
Fungi,  Lichens,  or  Mosses;  and  that  even  the  spcM^ 
of  these,  when  produced,  are  capable  of  generating 
plants  belonging  to   different   orders.*      Whilst   else- 
where*, after  stating  that  simple  Algae  under  certain 
circumstances  '  may  raise  themselves  to  vegetations  of 
a  higher  form,'   he   expressly  affirms  that  *the  same 
superior  formation  may  be  produced  by  primitive  for- 
mations of  altogether  different   kinds/     Again,  Prof* 
Reissek'  says  he  has  seen  Confervx  arising  from  the 
metamorphosed  chlorophyll  vesicles  of  ordinary  flower- 
ing plants,  and  that  he  has  ^Iso  observed  similar  forms^ 
produced  by  the  development,  under  unusual  conditions^ 
of  pollen-grains.    Similar  views  have  been  announced 
by  Meyen  ^  both  as  to  the  diverse  modes  of  origin  of 
the  same  kinds  of  Lichen,  and  as  to  the  convertibility 
of  different  forms.     Such  views   arc,  moreover,  con- 
firmed   by   the    observations   of   Dr.   Braxton   Hicks, 


*  *Introd.  to  Cryptogam.  Botany/  1857. 

*  'Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.*  n.  s.  vol.  ii.  p.  225. 
»  'Bot.  Zeit.' July  19.  1844. 

*  •  Ueber  die  Entwickdimg  &c  dcr  Flcchtcn.* 


Till:    AAf,/.\'.\7.\'';.V   'V-    ///.'  \\\ 


/tzigsohn,  and  many  others'.     And,  m;)rcr)vcr,   it    is 

titcd  by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley  that  the  common 

alibk  Mushroom  is  cultivated  by  gardeners  with  as 

faA.  certainty  as  any  other  vegetable,  althou3;h  no 

nds  are  ever  sown.     It  is  only  necessary  that  beds 

AoaU  be  prepared  in  a  certain  fashion,  and  then  this 

complex  Agaric  almost  infallibly  appears.   Mr.  Berkeley 

1^  the  process  is  *so  certain,  that  no  one  ever  saw  any 

other  kind  of  Agaricus  produced  in  mushroom-beds — ex- 

cqA  a  few  of  the  dunghill  tribe,  where  raw  dung  has  been 

placed  near  the  surface  of  the  bed ;'  and  he  adds,  *  this 

axild  not  happen  if  the  mushroom  sprang  from  seeds  or 

^porules  floating  in  the  air,  as  in  that  case  many  species 

would  necessarily  be  mixed  together  V    These  facts  are 

almost  inexplicable  unlefs  we  resort  to  the  belief  that 

the  lower  forms  of  Fungi  may  arise  by  heterogenesis  ^, 

'  See  Apptmdix  D,  pp.  liii  -lix. 

'  It  inll  afterwards  l)e  seen  that  almost  precisely  analogous  facts  have 
to  be  recorded  concerning  the  appearance  of  Nematoids  in  prepared 
(p.  537),  and  the  same  difficulty  as  that  which  Mr.  Berkeley 
with  regard  to  the  derivation  of  Mushrooms  from  atmo- 
ic  germs  is  applicable  to  the  origin  of  the  germs  of  the  Rotifers, 
and  Nematoids,  which  are  always  to  be  found  in  tufts  of 
Moss  sod  lichen. 

'  After  quoting  Fries's  objection  to  this  view,  on  the  score  that  the 
smaU  size  and  infinite  number  of  the  sporules  of  Fungi  permitted  of  their 
being  widely  disseminated  through  the  air,  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley  very 
Curly  remarks  (lindley's  *  Veget.  Kingdom,'  p.  34) :— *  I  give  his  words 
as  nearly  as  possible,  because  they  may  be  considered  the  sum  of  all  that 
bas  to  be  urged  against  the  doctrine  of  equivocal  generation  in  Fungi ; 
but  without  admitting,  by  any  means,  so  much  force  in  his  statement  as 
is  reqnired  to  set  the  question  at  rest.  In  short,  ii  is  no  answer  to  sucb 
orgMmmitM  at  tbotejvt!  advirttd io* 

VOL,  II.  F  f 


i 


434  THE  BEGIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE. 

— — —  —        -  — 

and  then  supplement  this  belief  by  the  notid 
complex  forms  may  afterwards  be  developed 

Whilst,  therefore,  many  observations  h 
been  made  tending  to  establish  the  existeni 
intimate  relationship  between  Fungi,  Alg 
and  Mosses,  and  to  show  that  many  of  tb 
push  on  to  higher  developmental  forms,  it  h 
positively  ascertained  that  very  many  of  th< 
stantly  giving  birth  to  animalized  organisr 
Astasias,  Euglenx,  Amoebae,  Monads,  and  G; 
soria.  It  now  remains  to  show  that  tl: 
derivative  organisms  exhibit  a  similar,  t 
more  strongly  marked,  tendency  to  develop 
forms — both  gradually  and  by  means  of 
startling  transformations. 

And  of  all  the  animalized  forms  given 
lower  vegetal  organisms,  none  are  so  ren 
possess  within  themselves  such  marvellous  p 
for  undergoing  change,  as  the  beautiful  green 
Euglenac  (Fig.  84,^1),  which  occur  so  abundant 
and  other  stagnant  waters.   More  than  twen 
these  changes  were  carefully  studied  by  Dr 
the  principal  results  of  his  investigations  wc 
the  world  in  the  highly  important  memoir 
I  have  already  quoted.     He  showed  that  the 
birth  to  the  most  varied  animal  and  veg< 
and  whilst  struck  by  the  apparent  caprice  wfc 
to  regulate  the  opposite  transformations  of 
lying  side  by  side,  and  of  other  specimens 


THE  BEGINNINGS  01*  LIFE.  435 

seasons  or  when  exposed  to  different  amounts  of  light 

and  heat,  he  was  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  the 

causes  of  these  differences  lay  wholly  beyond  our  powers 

of  observation.    However  much  such  facts  might  seem 

to    be     contradicted    by    generally- received    theories, 

I>r.  Gros,  like  a  true  student  of  Nature,  said : — ^  Les 

theories  peuvent  avoir  leur  valeur,  mais  elles  doivent 

servir  k  illuminer  la  s^rie  des  faits,  sans  nous  eblouir 

ni  nous  aveugler/    And  yet  Dr.  Gros  has,  for  the  most 

part,   been  referred  to  as  a  visionary  and  misguided 

investigator,  by  critics   who  have  immorally  thrown 

doubt  upon  the  truth  of  his  statements — they,  at  the 

time,  being  almost  wholly  swayed  by  mere  theoretical 

considerations. 

Although  my  own  observations  upon  Euglenx  have 
been  conducted  during  the  months  of  January,  February, 
and  March,  and  therefore  at  a  period  of  the  year  which 
is  not  very  favourable  either  for  obtaining  large  speci- 
mens or  for  the  occurrence  of  the  higher  kinds  of  trans- 
fbmiations,  these  observations  have  nevertheless,  as 
far  as  they  have  gone,  tended  in  almost  all  respects 
to  confirm  those  of  Dr.  Gros,  In  many  respects, 
also,  the  changes  which  the  Euglenx  pass  through  are 
analogous  to  the  transformations  already  described  as 
occurring  in  Nitella,  Vaucheria,  and  other  Algx. 

I  shall  commence  with  a  description  of  the  processes 
of  Analytic  Heterogenesis  which  have  been  observed 
to  take  place  in  Euglenae,  and  shall  subsequently  speak 

Ff  a 


436  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

of  the  transformation  of  entire  organisms  into  th( 
varied  vegetal  or  animal  forms  of  life. 

1.  Resolution  into  Fungus-germs.  Some  specim 
Euglense  having  been  placed  in  a  *  live-box'  v 
sufficient  ventilation,  after  twenty-four  hours  se\ 
them  were  seen  to  be  undergoing  decolourizati 
developing  Fungus-germs  in  their  interior.  Th 
all  assumed  a  spherical  form,  and  most  of  ther 
undergoing  the  same  kind  of  change.  Some  o 
contained  a  variable  amount  of  brownish  black  i 
derived  from  a  metamorphosis  of  a  portion  of  th 
rophyll;  though  intermixed  with  it  there  were 
seen  certain  unaltered  chlorophj^l  vesicles,  as  t 
a  number  of  colourless  corpuscles,  about  Yui 
diameter,  which,  judging  from  what  might  be  s 
contiguous  Euglen«,  were  evidently  Fungus- 
For  in  many  of  these  Euglenx  only  a  small  am< 
pale-green  matter  still  remained  distributed  ai 
the  colourless  spherules  with  which  they  were  no^ 
whilst  in  others,  several  of  the  Fungus-germs  hac 
birth  to  large  filaments,  which  grew  outwan 
flourished  externally  in  all  directions. 

2.  Externa/  Vesiculation^  'with  Resolution  into  . 
or  Fungi.  This  change  is  one  of  those  which 
most  frequently  observed  taking  place  amongst  El 
after  they  have  existed  for  some  time  in  a  mot 
state  as  constituents  of  a  Euglena-pellicle,  and 
the  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  conditions  are  not  suffi 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


437 


ferourablc  for  higher  changes.     The  contents  of  indivi- 
Joal  EtigicQx  lose  their  distinctly  corpuscular  character, 
and  at  last  become  obscured  by  a  brownish  granular 
matter  resulting  from  a  decomposition  of  the  chloro- 
pbylL    Meanwhile,  a  colourless  outgrowth  forms  from 
portion  of  the  surface  of  the  vesicle,  and  gradually 
1  in  size  (Fig.  84,  c).   This  outgrowth  varies  much 
in  shape.   It  may  be  spheroidal  or  irregularly  cylin- 
drical, and  is  often  more  capacious  than  the  Euglena 
from  which  it  is  derived.  The  matter  which  it  contains 
is  oolourless,  semi-fluid,  and  evidently  derived  from  the 
tensfcrmation  of  the  substance  of  the  Euglena — for  as 
the  ootgrowth  increases  in  size,  the  Euglena  gradually 
^iiisppears,  till  at  last  nothing  of  the  old  organism  re- 
gains except  the  thin  investing  membrane.    The  semi- 
Wd  contents  of  the  outgrowth  are  not  homogeneous : 
fioD  the  first  there  exists,  diffused  through  all  parts  of 
it,  a  Tariable  quantity  of  solid  refractive  matter,  which 
seems  to  be  derived  from  a  curdling  of  its  semi-fluid 
snktance  {i).    This  solid  matter  exists  in  the  form  of 
irregular  granules^  either  separate  or  arranged  in  serial 
aggregations  variously  uniting  with  one  another.     But 
such  irregularly  disposed   matter  gradually  aggregates 
found  definite  centres,  so  as  to  form  a  number  of  solid, 
refiactive,  nuclear  spherules,  pretty  uniformly  distri- 
buted throughout  the  whole  mass  {e\     After  a  time  the 
matter  itself  in  which  they  are  imbedded  begins  to 
undergo  segmentation,  in  such  a  way  that  each  one 
of  the  nuclear  masses  becomes  included  within  an  inde- 


THE  SECINNIKCS  OF  UFE. 


RcsoIulioQ  of  Eugtenx  into  smaller  OrganUiiis.    (  ■  670.) 
1.  Eiigleoa  in  hs  active  stale, 
ft.  EueUio  conlracted  and  abemt  to  encyst  itself. 

c.  Colourless  spherical  outgrowth  irom  transTonniiig  Englena. 

d.  Subsequent  stage— out  growth  elongated  and  containing  irregulirly 

disposed  soud  matler,  which  gradually  aggregates  itseU  into 
spherules  (i).  each  ai  these  aftemards  becoming  enclosed  within 
one  of  the  units  into  which  the  mass  segments.  These  subse- 
quently liberate  themselves  as  active  Monads  (f ).  which  giadnall; 
assume  the  forms  of  b.j,  and  k;  whilst  the  tatter  motionless  fom 
either  develops  dlia  (1),  or  else  becomes  fluent  and  moves  abou' 
as  an  Amieba  (m). 

n.  Another  form  of  outgrowth  from  transforming  Euglen 
a  brown,  tuberculatcd  Fungus-sporangium. 

0.  Resolution  of  Euglena  into  Monads,  partly  green. 

p   Resolution  of  Euglena  into  Algoid  Corpusctea  Euid  Bacteria. 

J.  Resolution  of  Euglena  into  Diatoms. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


439 


Fcudent  unit,  all  of  which  soon  begin  to  exhibit  slight 
•*6^  of  movement  (/).  The  united  movements  of  the 
^oiitained  units  soon  rupture  the  delicate  investing 
^iMubrane,  from  which  they  emerge  as  small  but  active 
feg^Uated  Monads  or  Zoospores.  They  appear  as  al- 
iw»t  transparent  spheres  about  ^^W'  ^^  diameter,  each 
rf^ch  contains  a  large  nuclear  mass  at  its  posterior 
wtrcmity,  and  swims  by  means  of  the  vibration  of  a 
^ngle  anterior  flagellum  \  Their  ultimate  fate  will  be 
»l»equently  referred  to  «. 

Under  less  favourable  conditions  these    nucleated 
^cles  are  not  liberated  as  flagellated  Monads,  but 

*  Motionless  corpuscles,  which  also  protrude  motion- 
*^  tay-like  prolongations,  capable  of  enlarging  into 
"'^'^  filaments  and  branching  in  various  directions. 
^f  grow,  in  fact,  after  the  fashion  of  a  Fungus-germ  ^ 

**  the  nuclear  mass  within  the  germinal  vesicle 
**^nies  subdivided  into  two  or  three  smaller  portions, 
^"^kt  the  vesicle  itself  enlarges.  Wherever  the  fila- 
n^Uts  issuing  from  these  bodies  come  into  close  con- 
*^^  with  £uglenas,  they  seem  to  penetrate;  and,  by 
^^tue  of  some  more  coercive  molecular  movements, 
^  vital  changes,  they  gradually  alter  the  constitution 
rf  the  Euglena  itself,  so  as  to  make  it  also  take  on 
ttc  fungoid  mode  of  growth. 

'  Dr.  Gros  has  evidently  seen  a  similar  change  take  place  (see  loc. 
a^  P-  3".  PI.  D,  figs.  13-16.  21).      And,   although   he   does   not 
txpnssXj  state  that  the  Monads  arise  in  an  outgrowth,  he  has  in 
other  parts  of  his  memoir  spoken  of  the  formation  of  such  outgrowths. 

•  See  p.  47a. 


colouri/atioii,  :ind  piociucc  :\  spli 
own  size,  wiiie'n  rapidly  bccoim 
over  iti>  wr.t)lc  surhicc  [n),     Th* 
regards    the    intensity  of   the   1 
degree  of  opacity.     They  gene 
time  without  undergoing  any  c 
sometimes   be   recognized   in   1 
several   occasions  I   have  seen 
filaments  issuing  from  them  as 
gium.     Bodies  of  a  similar  nat 
produced  from  large  Chlorococci 
in  diameter. 

4.  Direct  Resolution  into  scti 
This  change  has  only  been  obsei 
of  Euglenae,  though  amongst  on 
very  frequently.  The  organisms 
change  were  motionless  and  mor 
shape,  though  not  encysted.  Som 
whose  whole  contents  had  been  r 
of  minute  motionless  spherule 
Tuhn/'  ^^  diameter,  nartiv  of  *> 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


441 


normal  contents  of  the  Euglenx  had  disappeared,  whilst 
their  thin  investing  membrane  was  seen  to  be  densely 
ixrith  minute  and  now  actively-swarming  Monads, 
of  which  were  still  partly  green  in  colour.  On 
Ae  rupture  of  this  membrane  the  liberated  Monads 
were  observed  to  be  almost  spheroidal,  minutely  granu- 
lar, and  provided  with  a  single  fiagellum  ^ 

5.   Resolution  into  Diatoms,     I   have   only   distinctly 
observed  appearances  indicative  of  this  transformation 
OQ  one  occasion  j  but  in  this  case  the  whole  of  the  con- 
tents of  a  Euglena  seemed  to  have  been  resolved  into 
seven  distinctly-striated  Navicular  (^).  They  were  closely 
pcked  within  the  thickened  envelope  of  the  Euglena, 
^ch  possessed  no  other  contents  save  three  or  four 
*nttll  refuse  aggregations  of  reddish  brown  granules. 
In  dose  contact  with  this  transformed  Euglena  there 
was  another  of  the  same  size  in  its  natural  green 
*^— so  that  the  two  might  have  been  the  products 
^  a  previous  fission.     Although  the  earlier  stages  of 
^  transformation  were  not  seen,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
^  Diatoms  originated   in  this  way.     A  somewhat 
^'^lar  mode  of  origin  of  some  of  the  wedge-shaped 

.     *^r.  Gros  refers  (loc.  dt.,  p.  323,  PL  F,  fig.  19  a,  h)  to  a  somewhat 

^y^  change  which  took  place  in  specimens  of  Eoglenae  which  had 

/irT**  ^cpt  fo*"  some  time  under  the  microscope;  and  Mr.  H.  J.  Carter 

-t^*^-  of  Nat.  Hist.'  vol.  xvii.)  has  also  observed  somewhat  similar 

I/r'^C^s.    The  internal  contents  of  the  Euglcnae  became  resolved  into  a 

pl  ^^i^tnly  grvmlar  substance,  which  then  segmented  into  six  or  eight 

g^^^^Uar  masses;  but  on  the  rupture  of  the  investing  membrane,  *thc 

_r^^^]u'  masses,  being  liberated,  began  to  creep  about  under  the  forms 


•.      »  •  »^        S,   I  1   I  >    '  I 


mcrca^L'  in  size,  and  at  the  sao" 
!)riL:lU,   tiark-grc\-n    colour.      Anc 
dualization  ot  the  contents  of  th 
its  investing  membrane  gradually 
thinner,  so  as  at  last  to  liberat- 
bright-green  corpuscles.     They  a 
an   independent   existence.      So 
change  is  taking  place  and  when 
vesicle  is  still  intact,  a  number  c 
may  be  observed  distributed  amc 
corpuscles,   although   no  such    oi 
seen  in  the  fluid  outside.     They 
produced   from  a  retrograde  chai 
some   portion   of  the   matter  of 
had   not   been   absorbed    by  the 
corpuscles. 

The  subsequent  fate  of  such  co 
very  similar  to  that  of  others  wh 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  443 

ved.     Some  of  them  become  decolourized  and  con- 
id  into  Actinophrys,  Monads,  and  Amoebae,  after  the 
ie  manner  as  the  chlorophyll  corpuscles  of  Nitella  (p. 
8) ;  whilst  others  subsequently  grow  either  as  Algx, 
cdiastrex,  Desmids,  or  Diatoms — changes  which  we 
*^ve  also  followed   in    the    corpuscles  similarly   pro- 
*«^  from  vesicles  of  Vaucheria  origin  (p.  415).     My 
own  observations  on  this  subject  are  entirely  in  ac- 
cordance with  those  of  Dr.  Gros,  who  speaks  of  the 
^'pn  of  Monads,   Algae,   Pediastreae,  Desmids,   and 
*^toins  from  individualized  and  liberated  corpuscles 
^fuglcnxi. 

*^e  shall  now  turn  to  a  consideration  of  the  trans- 

^'^tions   which  an   entire   Euglena   may  undergo; 

"^Ou^  before  dwelling  upon  them,  certain  modifica- 

^s  of  a  less  radical  kind  should  also  be  alluded  to. 


minor  modifications,  so  far  as  I  have  observed 

^^^  are  of  three  principal  kinds.      First,  we  have 

^^^^<  well-known  changes  by  which  a  brownish  so-called 

*iiter  coat'  is  formed,  and  from  the  opening  in 

^e  also  states  that  similar  living  forms  may  be  derived  from  the 

^  ^^^^^Dcts  of  the  repeated  subdivision  of  Euglenx  as  well  as  of  Chlamy- 

P^^onas.     For  reference  to  such  a  mode  of  origin  of  Monads  from 

-^^5kM>,  see  Dr.  Gros'  Memoir,  p.  315;  for  Algae,  pp.  309,  322.  337; 

^^iastrese  and  Desmids.  pp.  303.  309.  318 ;  and  Diatoms,  pp.  30a.  309, 

^  ^  5*    Again,  with  reference  to  the  other  organisms.  Dr.  Gros  says, 

*^'  455: — *Lcs  Chlamidomonas  It  la  3*  parifissure.  convertissent  aussi 

^^t&i  8  divisions  en  Clost^ens  (PI.  O.  iig.  a>)  tr^  agiles.  .  .  .  Les 

^hlimidomonas  enfin  peuvent  se  diviser  dnorm^ment  (fig.  24)  et  donner 

^  Navicnles  et  des  Conferves.' 


444  7-^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

which  two  flagella  are  protruded  ^  Secondly,  other 
develop  a  brownish  and  slightly  indurated  envelope 
marked  by  dotted  lines  disposed  in  a  spiral  manner' 
these  forms  being  pointed  at  both  extremities,  motion- 
less, and  without  flagella.  And  thirdly,  others,  also 
motionless,  assume  a  spheroidal  or  beautifully  ovoidal 
form,  whilst  their  diaphanous  and  indurated  testa 
becomes  faintly  striated  after  the  fashion  of  a  Diatom 
The  chlorophyll  Corpuscles  contained  in  these  form 
also  fuse  into  two  or  three  large  central  masses  of 
very  bright  green  colour  *. 

7.  Transformation  into  Diatoms,  After  Euglenx  ha^ 
undergone  two  or  three  processes  of  fission — but  mc: 
frequently  after  the  third — some  of  them  are  apt  at  c^ 
tain  times  to  become  converted  into  large  Diatonr 
Dr.  Gros  states  that  similar  transformations  may  also  ^ 
observed  in  specimens  of  Chlamydomonas,  and  that, 
each  case,  the  precise  pattern  of  the  Diatom  varies  a- 
cording  to  the  size  and  the  nature  of  the  contents  of  t6 
vesicle  which  becomes  transformed.  He  adds  (p.  302) :— 
'Sr  les  vesicules  sont  fortes,  bien  v^siculcs,  nantie 
d'une  certaine  masse,  on  en  voit  dtriver  des  Naviculc 
strides.     Ailleurs,   on    en   voit    deriver    des    million 

*  See  Gros,  loc  cit.,  PI.  E,  figs.  2,  i a,  14,  15,  17. 

'  See  Gros,  loc.  c!t.,  PI.  D.  fig.  3.  The  actual  arrangement  of  the  spin 
lines  was  different  in  different  specimens.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  figui 
above  referred  to,  the  lines  were  equidistant,  but  at  other  times  they  wet 
arranged  in  sets  of  twos  or  threes,  with  broader  intervals  between  them 

'  Such  bodies  very  closely  resemble  fig.  6  of  PL  £  in  Dr.  Gn> 
Memoir. 


'^HE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  445 

fautics  \ru  L,  fig.   6)  dont   la  carapace  est   moins 

oig?ais&  ^  moins  min^rale  ^'    Respecting  the  mode 

in wbich the  conversion  of  the  recently-divided  Euglcnx 

takes  place,  Dr.  Gros  says  * : — ^  Les  vtsiculcs  dcrivces, 

par  dcs  circonstances  imprescriptiblcs,  de  vertcs   et 

oodeol^es  qu'clles  etaient,  devicnnent  jaunfttres  et  diri- 

moit  Icur  coatenu  en  huit  vesiculcs  (PL  F,  fig.  2)  sur 

hparoiint^rieure';  elles  s'allongent  par  des  nuances  dc 

fcnnes varices;  et  par  un  elaboration  dc  quclqucs  jours, 

cte  anrivent  (%.  3,  4,  5)  a  donner  ccs  physiognomies 

s  plies  dc  Navicules  striees  dont  on   a   fait    tant 

d'eqjeces  systematiques.    Encore  une  fois,  les  vcsicules 

irivfe  de  telle  forme  et  de  telle  division  cuglcnienne, 

<fcancront,  suivant  la  saison,  des  Navicules  difFc  rentes.' 

^  in  illustration  of  this,  he  affirms  that  one  set  of 

foglensB  produced  Navicu/a  fulva  and   another  allied 

fcnn;  whilst  a  diflFerent  set  became  transformed  into 

^»  Mgrggrifers  during  the  months  of  July,  August,  and 

September,  although  they  no  longer  underwent  such 

tnnsfbrniations    in    the    months    of   December    and 

^uary.     Whilst  I  have   not   myself  been   fortunate 

ciKM^  to  trace  the  actual  origin  of  any  of  these  large 

Diatoms,  I  have,  on  several   occasions,  been   struck 

whh  the  comparatively  sudden  appearance  of  very  large 

^ecimens  (about  -^^j/'  in  length)  of'Navicula  lihilh — 

'  He  also  mdds : — *  Vouloir  essayer  de  repr^senter  toutes  les  formes 
tmilffmloir  doziner  rimage  des  grains  de  sable  de  I'oc^an.  Ici  comme 
dkim,  important  est  de  donner  la  filiation  et  non  la  pittoresque  des 


'  Loe.  dt^  ]!•  3.)6.  *  See  Fig.  F5,  a,  b,  c. 


446  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Still  presenting  an  embryonic  appearance — in  vesse 
containing  Euglenx  and  Vaucheria. 

8.  Transformation  into  Desmids  and  Fe£astre£,  Tl 
only  Desmids  that  have  been  ascertained  to  be  produoi 
by  the  transformation  of  entire  Euglense,  are  those  larj 
specimens  belonging  to  the  genus  Closterium.  Althoi]| 
I  have  not  myself  had  the  satisfaction  of  witnessing  th 
transformation,  Dr.  Gros  states  that  he  has  observed 
on  several  occasions.  The  particular  modification  * 
the  Euglena  which  is  occasionally  apt  to  undergo  th 
change  is,  however,  quite  familiar  to  me.  Specimei 
are  frequently  to  be  observed  which,  having  lost  the 
flagellum,  are  prone  to  assume  an  elongated  worm-lik 
form, ,  They  crawl,  too,  in  a  slow  worm-like  manne 
rather  than  swim  y  and  are  always  noticeable  on  accoui 
of  the  extreme  brilliancy  of  the  well-formed  grc€ 
vesicles  which  they  contain,  and  of  the  bright  carmir 
colour  of  their  so-called  ^  eye-speck/  After  a  time,  the 
movements  grow  more  and  more  languid,  and  tl 
green  vesicles  separate  from  one  another  at  the  midd 
of  the  body  (^),  so  as  to  leave  a  clear  space  similar  ' 
that  which  also  exists  to  a  certain  extent  in  the  varioi 
forms  of  Closteria — into  one  or  other  of  which  the 
languid  and  elongated  Euglenae  may,  according  to  E 
Gros,  be  gradually  transformed.  The  transformatic 
sometimes  takes  place  in  a  few  days,  and  sometim 
only  after  two  or  three  weeks  ^  whilst  other  specime: 
of  the  same  kind  of  Euglenae  may  remain,  even  f 
months,  without  undergoing  any  noticeable  alteration 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


n  «[  Kalonu,  Dcsmids,  rcdtastrLir,  and  Alg'J.'  fioni  Luj^lunii!  and 
other  Vegelal  Matrices.     (Gios.) 

*  &(kni  in  e«rly  stage  of  Iraiisforcnalion  into  a  I^iatom. 
■^'•Tvofcicmsof  Diatoms  which  may  arise  (lom  transformed  Eu^lcn,!'. 

*"■  CMunidomonas  Riving  origin  lu  Diatoms. 

*  "M  o(  woTTO-like  Euglcna,  which  after  increasing  in  siie  may 

gndgally  become  convened  into  aCloittrium  (/j.  (^Koluccdj 
*'•' "  tliglena  undergoes  fisiion,  and  grows  after  the   manner  of 
Arthrodesmus. 

"Selal  vesicle  of  Moss  origin,  which  divides  and  devclups  into 
■Ootlier  form  of  Aithrodesmua. 
'■  ™*   of   its    separate    s^jmcnts,   dividing    obliquely    into    Iwi 
P<iiiions.   each   of  which  gradually  growa   and  assumes  the 
La    ***™"='so''"Navicultt(*.i'). 

^itniterias  produced  by  the  lission  of  a  tluglena  and  Ihc  ar- 

SL  ri   '^"'{t'Xentofthccoheruigsegmentsinasinglc  plane.  (Reduced.) 

■**iophof«.lilce  Alga  produced  from  a  Eugkiia  (original  x  600). 


4  4S  THE   I^KGIXXIXGS   OF  LIFE. 


Although  I  have  never  seen  the  final  stages  of 

transformation,  I  had,  even  before  becoming  aware 

Dr.  Gros'  views,  noticed  the  curious  fact   that  vc 

small  specimens  of  Closteria  were  never  to  be 

Wherever  they  are  encDuntered  one  may  see  specimc*^ 

of  different  sizes  and  of  different  patterns,  though — ^wi       ^ 

the  exception  of  those  which,  from  their  want  of  syi — ^ 

mctry,  are  obviously  the  products  of  a  recent  fission— — 

they  are  all  large  and  more  or  less  full-grown.    So  th^^** 

just  as  in  the  case  of  the  large  Diatoms  already  allud^^^ 

to,  their  origin  by  metamorphosis  is  much  more 

cilable  with  these  facts  than  with  the  notion  that  th 

are  derived  from  small  germs — more  especially  since 

one  has  ever  seen  or  knows  anything  about  the  mode 

production  of  such  germs  in  Closterium  ^.   Of  course 

are  far  from  implying  that  Closteria  are  only  product  ^ 

from  Euglenae;   since  what  is  known  concerning  th- 

diflFercnt  modes  of  origin  of  other  organisms  might 

us  to  expect  that  Closteria  would  also  be   derivabl^^ 

from  the  transformation  of  other  matrices,  more  or  Ics^^ 

analogous  to  Euglense. 

Again,  whilst  the  products  of  the  third  and  subsequent 
fissions  of  certain  Euglenx  occasionally  become  con- 
verted, in  the  manner  described,  into  Diatoms,  at  other 
times  such  products  may  be  transformed  into  Pediastrex 
belonging  to  the  genera  Micrasterias  or  Arthrodesmus. 
Concerning  the  first  kind  of  transformation  (/),  Dr.  Gros 
says: — ^  Lorsque  Tutricule   euglenien  conservant  ses 

^  See  Pritchard's  'Infusoria/  4th  Ed.,  p.  la. 


The  beginnings  of  life. 


449 


t 


j^KSioiks  f^rifissees  adhcrentes  entre  clles^  va  jusqu'a 
jk  y,  4%  ?>  6*  division  ccs  vjsicules  s'arrangent  sur 
m&nc  plan;  celles  du  contour  poussent  des  cornes 
fl  presentent  Ics   jolies    formes    dcs    Micrastcrias  */ 
tbc  transformation  into  one  or  other  of  the 
wirtics  of  Arthrodesmus  (^,  h)  seems  to  occur  still 
IBDit  fitquently.   Dr.  Gros  writes : — *  Les  Arthrodesmus 
•pi  nc  soot  que  Ic  3«  degrc  de  parifissurc  prenaient  des 
finKs  d'autant  plus  exigues  que  les  utricules,  d'ou  ils 
^KJwdait,  ^taient  plus  pctits^/     One  of  the  con- 
^"tois  under  which  Euglense   arc   prone   to   undergo 
taBfcrmation  into  Pediastreae  has  also  been  definitely 
■ttrtained.     Dr.  Gros  observed  that  when  Euglenac 
^^  sown  upon  a  small  patch  of  damp  earth  some  of 
^generally  underwent  this  kind  of  metamorphosis, 
*Wtt^gh  others  passed  through  different  changes,  so  as 
^become  converted  either  into  Diatoms  or  into  the 
^^Poians  of  which  we  are  now  about  to  speak  ^, 

9*  TrgMsformation  into  Conferva,  Not  only  may  the 
'"iniate  products  of  repeated  fissions  of  Euglcnae  be- 
•*oc converted  into  small  Confervas,  as  we  have  already 
^^  (p.  443,  ^^^^  ^)>  ^"^  occasionally  an  Euglena, 
'iftout  such  preliminary  processes  of  fission,  begins  to 
*^B^te  so  as  to  produce  a  much  larger  Algal  filament 


^loc.  cit,  p.  31  It  and  PI.  K,  fig.  25. 
-^/^  I*t  fig.  20-23.     These  transformations  of  Euglenx  into  different 
/"-*  ^  Pediastreae  arc  also  referred  to  by  Dr.  Gros  at  pp.  303, 309, 318, 

'  ^  P-  453. 

^^11.  eg 


450  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

of  the  Cladophora  or  Vaucheria  type.  This  I  have  seen 
myself  on  several  occasions,  and  especially  amongst  one 
set  of  Euglenae  which  were  left  partially  exposed  to  the 
air  on  some  dead  leaves.  Some  medium-sized  specimens 
assumed  a  spheroidal  shape,  whilst  their  corpuscles  be- 
came distinct  and  of  a  very  bright-green  colour.  At  the 
same  time  the  red  spot  disappeared  and  the  investing 
membrane  became  thickened.  Some  of  these  vesicles 
gradually  elongated  into  filaments  almost  as  broad  as 
their  matrices,  across  which  dissepiments  were  formed 
at  intervals  {m).  The  chlorophyll  corpuscles  in  the  fila- 
ments continued  to  be  of  the  same  bright-green  colour  as 
they  were  in  the  vesicle  from  which  they  had  proceeded ; 
and  for  a  short  distance  from  their  origin  some  of  the 
filaments  were  invested  by  a  thin  sheath-like  material^ 
similar  to  what  had  previously  constituted  a  kind  of  cyst 
for  the  metamorphosing  Euglena.  Other  specimens  of 
the  same  batch  of  Euglenae  were  placed  beneath  a 
covering  glass  and  kept  within  a!  damp  chamber  for  two 
or  three  days,  when  some  of  them  were  found  to  have 
assumed  the  appearance  and  languid  movements  of  the 
worm-like  Euglcnx  to  which  I  have  already  referred 
(Fig.  85,  e).  The  corpuscles  in  some  of  them  became 
much  elongated  and  the  red  speck  disappeared.  The 
organisms  then  became  motionless,  and,  instead  of 
transforming  into  Closteria,  grew  into  narrow  filaments 
of  uniform  diameter — in  which  the  corpuscles  were 
rather  sparsely  distributed,  although  they  continued  to 
have  the  same  elongated  appearance  as  they  had  in 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  451 

their  £uglenian  matrices.  The  filaments  themselves, 
bat  for  their  being  much  more  slender  than  usual,  re- 
sembled and  grew  after  the  fashion  of  V^aucheria'. 

Dr.  Gros  also  speaks  of  the  transformation  of  speci- 
mens   of    these  worm-like   Euglenae    into  Conferva:, 
Some  of  them  produced  Closteria  and  various  animal 
forms  in  the  months  of  August  and  September,  though 
others  did  not  become  transformed  till  November  and 
December.    Concerning  these  Dr.  Gros  says  ^ :  — *  Des 
grandes  Euglenes  done  (PI.  L,  fig.  11 -14)  ont  pris  dc 
la  nourriture  et  de  la  vesiculation  (fig.  12)  traincnt  une 
vie    languissante   et  se  transformant    en    une    tronc 
(fig.  11)   Confervien  qui   se    constitue  une  Confervc 
(fig.  13),  susceptible  de  se  dcvelopper  ultcrieuremcnt, 
comme   nous  Tavons  dej^  vu  pour  d^autres  cspeccs.' 
And  in  reference  to  another  stock  of  Euglense,  some 
of  which  had  also  given  origin  to  Desmids,  Dr.  Gios 
says-'': — 'D'autres  vcsicules  Euglcnienncs  prennent  une 
forme  vegetative  Confervienne  plus  claire,  et  ces  vege- 
tations deviennent  asscz  abondantes  pour  augmenter 
la  teinte  verte  de  I'cau.* 

We  have  elsewhere  *  given  an  abstract  of  the  evi- 

*  In  a  road-side  ditch  at  Hcndon,  from  which  1  frequently  procured 
supplies  of  Euglense.  I  found  on  several  occasions,  during  the  months  of 
January  and  February,  that  when  the  quantity  of  water  became  diminished 
so  as  to  leave  the  Euglensc  just  above  the  water-mark,  beautiful  patches 
of  Vaucheria  speedily  appeared  in  these  situations.  At  other  times  Oscil- 
latoris  have  been  seen  to  develop  in  abundance  under  similar  conditions. 

*  Loc.  cit.,  pp.  338  and  318. 

*  Loc.  cit,  p.  302.  '  Appendix  D,  pp.  lix-lxiii. 

Gg  2 


452  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


dence  adduced  by  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  as  to  the  extr«i 
modifiability  of  the  simplest  forms  of  Algae,  and  also  ; 
to  the  relationship  which  he,  Itzigsohn,  and  others  hai 
shown  to  exist  between  these  forms  of  life  and  Lichen 
This  and  much  other  information  tends  to  show  th; 
Lichens  and  Algae  are  mere  different  modes  of  grow" 
which  may  be  assumed  by  one  and  the  same  matt 
when  it  undergoes  internal  changes — either  *spo: 
taneously'  or  in  response  to  alterations  in  extenm 
conditions'.  It  was  also  ascertained  by  the  same  (> 
servers  that  green  elements  thrown  off  from  the  radicL' 
or  leaves  of  mosses  might  live  and  vegetate  for  2 
indefinite  period,  after  the  manner  of  one  or  other  of  tl 
Algae,  and  that  then,  after  a  time,  many  of  such  fom 
might  (under  suitable  conditions)  develop  ^  soridia,*  con 
stituting  the  commencement  of  a  new  phase  of  growtl 
which  gradually  unfolds  into  one  or  other  of  the  corr 
mon  Lichens  2.  But  whilst  it  has  been  long  know 
that  Mosses  were  constantly  developed  from  simila 
confervoid  modes  of  growth,  it  had  not  been  thoroughl 
established  that  they  might  arise  from  Confervx  whid 


'  See  p.  164.  Quite  recently  I  have  seen  in  a  vessel  containing  ai 
old  and  partly-decolourized  Euglena-pellicle,  the  whole  upper  snifao 
become,  almost  simultaneously,  covered  with  a  dry  pulverulent  growti 
of  Chlorococcus,  from  which  Lichens  afre  so  apt  to  develop.  Th 
pellicle  was  thick,  and  its  upper  surface  dry,  whilst  for  three  week 
before  the  appearance  of  the  Chlorococcus  the  vessel  containing  it  hai 
been  covered  with  a  bell-jar. 

*  These  views  are  also  supported  by  the  observations  of  Mr.  Metcall 
Johnson.    (See  •  Monthly  Microsc.  Joum.*  of  Nov.  187 1.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  453 

¥CTc  not  themselves  the  direct  descendants  of  Mosses. 
Many  facts,  however,  which  have  been  made  known, 
both  before  and  since  the  date  of  these  observations, 
Kern  to  favour  the  possibility  of  the  occurrence  of  such 
a  metamorphosis.  It  has  been  affirmed  to  take  place, 
fcrinstancc,  by  Prof.  SchaafFhausen^,  although  more  posi- 
tife  information  to  the  same  effect  had  long  previously 
been  supplied  by  Dr.  Gros.  The  latter  says  ^ : — <  D?s 
Gsais  fait  avec  soin  prouvent  que  Ton  peut  scmcr  dcs 
«uinaux  ct  recoiter  des  plantes.  En  cfFet,  de  la  marne, 
pwc  a  20  pieds  de  profondeur,  fut  ensemencee  d'Eu- 
ifeies  et  rccouverte  d'un  disque  de  verre.  Lcs  Euglcncs 
K  mircnt  a  sc  parifisser,  et  donnercnt  lcs  uncs  des 
soiinalcules  qui  mourirent,  les  autres  des  cellules  qui 
scconvertirent  en  Naviculcs,  les  troisicmcs  donncrent 
te  cellules  qui  se  mirent  \  vcgcter,  non  sculement 
^ttninc  lcs  Conferves  aquatiqucs,  mais  comme  des 
Mousses  aericoles  qui  atteignait  13  millimetres  de 
'wtcur  \  la  fin  des  experiences.  La  parifissure,  le 
^n^nicncement  de  vege'tation,  la  multiplication  des  ccl- 
^^  vegttales  avaient  etc'  constatt s  tous  lcs  jours  avec 
Icnucroscope.*  And  if  doubts  may  be  entertained  with 
"^nitothe  conclusiveness  of  these  observations,  owing 
tothc  possibility  of  the  chance  introduction  of  a  few  real 
™ss-germs,  which  during  their  germination  were  not 
«*scriminated  from  the  fissiparously-produccd  descend- 
*ob  of  Euglense — such  doubts  are  wholly  inadmissible 

*  •Cosmos,*  1863,  t.  xxii.  p.  631. 

•  'Aim.  des  Sc.  Nat/  1852  (Zool.),  p.  aoi. 


454  THE  BEGINXiyCS  OF  LIFE. 

with  regard  to  the  following  case,  cited  by  the  author; 
of  *  The  Vestiges  of  Creation/  He  says  * : — *  In  a  work 
upon  the  useful  Mosses,  M.  de  Brebisson  states  that  a 
pond  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Falain,  having  been  ren- 
dered dry  during  many  weeks  in  the  height  of  sununcr, 
the  ground  was  immediately  and  entirely  covered,  to 
the  extent  of  many  square  yards,  by  a  minute,  compact 
green   turf,   formed   of   an   imperceptible*   moss,  tibc 
Pkaseum  axillare^  the  stalks  of  which  were  so  close  to 
each  other  that  upon  a  square  inch  of  this  new  soil 
might  be  counted  more  than  five  thousand  individuak 
of  this  new  plant,  which  had  never  previously  been 
observed  in  the  country/     The  simultaneous  growth  in 
one  small  spot  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  specimens  of 
this  particular  Moss  might  be  easily  reconcilable  witii 
their   heterogenetic   origin   from  Confervx    or   algoid 
vesicles  of  some  kind^;  whilst  an  explanation  of  the 
phenomenon  on  any  other  hypothesis  would   seem  to 
be  absolutely  irreconcilable  with  all  known  facts  con- 
cerning the   growth   of  Mosses   and   concerning    the 
comparative  paucity  with  which  the  reproductive  ele- 

*  Tenth  edition,  1852.  p.  201. 

*  Not  actually  *  imperceptible/  of  course,  although  the  several  plants 
might  have  been  more  or  less  indistinguishable  from  one  ajiother  in  the 
green  turf  formed  by  their  aggregation. 

*  Dr.  Gros  says : — *  Les  Conferves  les  plus  divcrses  peuvent  descendre 
d'unc  m£me  semen ce,  selon  le  degre  de  division  et  les  circonstances  de 
d^veloppement.  Cette  semence  change  de  qualit^s,  par  un  trarail 
intcrieur  myst6rieux.  La  v^gj'lation  confcrvienne  qui  dans  les  eanx. 
en  reste  aux  formes  cellulaires  aboutces,  se  complique  et  se  cellulise,  et 
donnent  des  mousses  dans  un  milieu  a^rien.' 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  455 


;  ments,  even  of  the  commonest  of  such  Cryptogams, 
are  to  be  found  in  the  atmosphere. 

It  seems,  however,  to  be  quite  certain  that  a  com- 
munity  of  nature  exists  between   Algae,  Pediastrese, 
Desmids,  and  Diatoms^  since  similar  vegetal  cells  may, 
on  the  same  or  on  different  occasions,  grow  into  forms 
belonging  to  either  one  of  these  groups  ^  and,  moreover, 
tiic  forms  are  strictly  convertible  with  one  another  until 
they  chance  to  assume  the  forms  of  Diatoms.  This  latter 
step  in  molecular  composition,  when  once  it  has  been 
entered  upon,  cannot  be  retraced.     Diatoms  constitute 
the  terminal  forms  of  a  divergent  series.     The  middle 
terms  of  the  series,  however,  viz.  Pediast rex  and  Desmids, 
are  convertible  in  both  directions,  either  back  into  Con- 
fcrvae  or  onwards  into  the  less-vitalized  Diatoms.  Thus, 
after  having  spoken  of  the  latter  transformations,  to 
which  we  have  already  referred,  Dr.  Gros  says: — ^11 
peut  se  faire  aussi  que  les  frustulcs  d'Arthrodesmus  et 
de  Micrasterias,  en  tombant  sur  un  sol  humide  seule- 
ment,  tournent  k  la  vie  vegetale,  sois  qu'ils  de'rivent  de 
Mousses,  d'Eugl^nes,  ou  de  Chlamidomonas.'     Whilst 
elsewhere  the  same  observer  speaks  of  specimens  of 
Arthrodesmus  which  subsequently  gave  birth  to  unmis- 
takeable  Confervae  *. 

Having  considered  these  transformations  of  Euglensc 

*  Sec  loc.  dt.,  pp.  453  and  333.  Some  of  the  Pediastrea  found  in 
my  experimental  flasks  were  also  seen  to  grow  after  the  manner  of  a 
ConfervE  (see  voL  i.  p.  453}. 


456  THE  BECIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE, 


into  organisms  of  a  more  or  less  vegetal  type,  wc  kf  *=> 
now  to  refer  to  their  metamorphoses  into  decidt>i- 
animal  forms  of  various  grades  of  organization.  NotlL^<^ 
is  more  startling,  and  yet  nothing  more  common,  H* 
to  see  neighbouring  specimens  of  the  saine  stocif 
Euglenae,  without  any  appreciable  cause,  turning  al 
totally  different  lines  of  development.     As  Dr. 


:3 
pointed  out,  ^  suivant  des  circonstances  souvent  inx  *- 

pr^ciables,  on  voit  une  vesicule  suivre  un  developj^^^     " 

ment  animal,  tandis  que  sa  congenere  et  jumelle  & 

un  rhythme  vegetal.'     He  also  adds : — *  Les  circ^^^ 

stances  de  chaleur,  de  saison,  de  lumiere,  de  quanta 

et  de  qualite  de  mati^re,  le  plus  souvent  imponderabl 

donnent  lieu  \  des   caprices  de  reproduction,  si  IV*'* 

osait  appeller  caprices  ce  qui  ne  tient,  qu'k  Tinsuffican 

de  nos  moyens  d'observation/ 

lo.  Transformation  Into  Acttnofhrjs  or  Ammha^  nolniS 
subsequently  become  converted  Into  various  forms  of  CiBati 
Infusoria,   The  Actinophrys  and  the  Amoeba  are  regar 
by  Dr.  Gros  ^  as  mere  intermediate  modes  of  existencp-"^^ 
into  which  Euglenae  are  apt  to  lapse  when  the  conditions^ 
operating  upon  them  are  not  favourable  to  their 
direct  transformation  into  higher  forms. 

1  have  several  times  had  the  opportunity  of  watching 
the  different  stages  through  which  Euglense  pass  during 
their  transformation  into  Amocbse.  It  most  frequently 
occurred  in  this  manner : — The  Euglena  became  motion- 
less and  somewhat  irregular  in  shape,  whilst  its  chloro* 

^  See  loc.  dt.,  p.  330. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OP  LIFE.  457 

^yll  vesicles  enlarged  and  assumed  a  very  bright-green 
colour.    Its  outer  surface  underwent  no  condensation. 
.   Oft  the  contrary,  it  seemed  gradually  to  become  more 
|)lastic,  whilst  it  also  became  decolourized,  and  studded 
with  a  number  of  small  ovoid,  colourless,  and  refractive 
jarticlcs.    The  large  bright-green  chlorophyll  vesicles 
had  by  this  time  become  closely  aggregated  and  even 
partially  fused  into  one  mass,  which  slowly  underwent 
dccolourization  from  periphery  to  centre.     The  mole- 
cular changes  going  on   in  the  superficial   colourless 
portions  seemed  to  be  capable  of  effecting  the  direct 
tiansfbrmation  of  the  chlorophyll  vesicles  into  colour- 
less chlorophyll,  since  the  central  mass  gradually  became 
^nialler  and  smaller,  without  any  of  the  usual  inter- 
nicdiate  shades  of  colour  revealing  themselves.     And 
^  the  time  the  green  mass  had  half  disappeared,  the 
colourless  peripheral  portions  of  the  transforming  organ- 
'^  were  exhibiting  distinct  amoeboid  contractions  and 
iterations  in  shape.     The  ovoid  refractive  particles 
^  soon  began  to  disappear,  so  that  when  the  central 
P^ons  of  chlorophyll  had  been  completely  decolourized, 
the  inass  was  converted  into  a  rather  sluggish,  finely- 
P^ular  Amoeba,  which  developed  vacuoles  in  its  in- 
tcnor,  became  more  and  more  active,  and  at  the  same 
"'^c  began  to  take  food  into  its  substance  and  increase 
^size  in  the  ordinary  manner^. 

I^.  Gros  says : — •  Chaque  vdsicule,  id  comme  aillcurs  qui  est  dcs- 

^"*^  i  reproduire  un  Plsesconien  ou  Oxytriqu^,  ct  qui  n'a  pas  encore 

de  mati^  en  soi,  est  comme  mi  ceuf,  qui  passe  par  la  forme  amoe- 


458  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

At  other  times — and  in  Euglense  which  had  become   i 
spherical,  although  not  encysted — I  have  seen  the  tran^  ■ 
formation  take  place  after  a  diflFerent  fashion.    The 
chlorophyll  vesicles  broke  up  so  as  to  resolve  themselves 
into  green  granules — which  speedily  assumed  diflfercnt 
shades  of  colour  (such  as  olive,  brown,  and   yellow) 
before  complete  decolourization.     Some  highly  charac- 
teristic specimens  were  seen,  in  which  the   red  spot 
still  partly  remained,  and  in  which  the  majority  of  the 
granules   were   of  a   greenish   colour.      But    in  other 
contiguous    vesicles  of   the    same   size    nothing    but 
granules  were  to  be  seen,  partly  colourless  and  partly 
of  an   olive  and   brownish   yellow  colour.     Gradually 
all  the  granules  became  decolourized,  and  the  substance 
of  the  organism  having  become  more  fluent  exhibited 
slow  amoeboid  alterations  in  shape.     And  in  propor^ 
tion  as  the  large  granules  disappeared,  so  did  the  mas^ 
become  more  and  more  active,  till  at  last  it  was  cocx^ 
verted  into  an  ordinary  finely-granular  Amoeba. 

The  conversion  of  Euglense  into  Actinophrys  I  ha^^e 
not  seen,  though  it  seems  to  have  been  frequen'^ly 
observed  by  Dr.  Gros.  The  Euglena  whilst  still  in  its 
green  state  protrudes  ray-like  projections  from  its  svir- 
face,  and  gradually  undergoes  an  internal  elaboration 
and  molecular  transformation,  in  the  prepress  of  which 
it  becomes  decolourized,  and  at  the  same  time  more 

K'cnnc.  jusqu'^  cc  qu*elle  ait  sa  quote-part  de  substance  oecessaire  i  ses 
metamorphoses  uli^rieurcs/  (Loc.  cit.,  p.  311.  This  transfonDatioD  « 
alio  mentioEcd  on  pp.  305.  314.  and  318.) 


THE  /:/:;/x\/\\;:.  ■>/■  : .:■:  j^-) 

active  and  niorc  thoimighly  aniniali/L-d.  In  this  t'orni 
it  takes  tood  into  its  substance,  assimilatc-s  it,  and 
undergoes  a  certain  increase  in  size;  till  at  last  it 
again  becomes  sluggish,  assumes  a  spherical  or  ovoidal 
fonn,  and  retracts  its  pseudopodix  one  by  one  prepara- 
tory \Q  new  transformations  *. 

At  other  times,  according  to  Dr.  Gros,  a  decolourized 
*Bd  animalizcd  Euglcna  may  assume  ftjr  a  pericxl  the 
fcffliofa  Peranema  before  becoming  converted  into  an 
Affloha  or  an  Actinophrys  2,  and  these  latter  forms, 
■ten  they  have  acquired  a  certain  (though  unknown) 
stage  of  molecular  elalx)ration,  tend  to  become  con- 
verted into  different  forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria -^ 

11.  DiTtct  Transformation  into  one  or  other  of  tke  Ciliated 
Infusoria.     But  at  other  times   the   transformation   of 
the   Euglcna   takes  place   in   a  different  manner,  so 
that,  as  Dr.  Gros  pointed  out,  it  is  enabled  at  once 
to  acquire  the  requisite   molecular   composition,   and 
pass  to  the  form  of  a  Vorticella  or  an  Oxytricha  — 
without  previously  existing  in  either   of  the   above- 
mentioaed    intermediate  and    less   specialized   states. 
Speaking  of  some  Euglcnae  which  underwent  this  meta- 
morphosis, Dr.  Gros  says : — ^  Quand  elles  se  transforment 
de  toutcs  pieces  ou  aprcs  la  premiere  parifissure  elles 
suivent  une  rhythme   gcnerale,  que   nous  retrouvons 
ailleurs  sur  un  plus  grande  echclle.     Elles  prennent  unc 

'  See  loc.  cit,  pp.  318,  335,  and  336. 

•  See  loc.  cit.,  p.  336. 

»  See  loc  cit.,  pp.  305,  314.  318,  335,  336,  435. 


46o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

forme  plus  ou  moins  sphdrique,  et  oflrent  comstamm 
une  decoloration  de  leurs  vesicules  internes  qui  pass^ 
du  vert  au  jaune,  k  Torange,  au  rouge  plus  ou  mo 
fonce,  au  brun-noir&tre,  qui  palit  peu  k  peu  (PL 
fig.  5-9)  et  le  resultat  final  de  cet  metamorphose  est 
conversion  de  la  membrane  eugl^nienne  et  de  s 
contenu  en  une  membrane  de  Vorticelle,  de  PI 
sconien,  de  K^ronien^* 

These  transformations  of  Euglense  into  Ciliated  Inj 
soria,  take  place  either  immediately  or  only  after 
previous  period  of  encystment. 

I  have  seen  evidences  of  the  immediate  transf( 
mation  on  several  occasions  in  which  the  pbenomei 
were  of  such  a  character  as  to  preclude  all  possibili 
of  errors  of  interpretation.  Thus,  motionless  ovoid 
bodies  were  seen,  each  about  the  size  of  an  ordina 
Euglena,  and  in  a  state  of  partial  transformation,  b 
presenting  no  trace  of  the  existence  of  anything  like 
cyst.  More  than  half  the  mass  had  perhaps  been  d 
colourized,  though  a  small  portion  of  the  red  ^eye-spec 

'  Loc.  cit.,  p.  298.  Dr.  Gros  also  says: — *La  bizarrerie  de  ces  & 
s*affaiblira  dans  I'histoire  des  phases  elles-memes.  C'est  pourquoi  fl  1 
prudent  de  ne  pas  se  prononcer  trop  tCt  quand  on  a  sous  les  }'eiix  i 
exemples  de  transformations,  exemples  qui  n'excluent  pas  les  auti 
transformations  possibles  dans  d'autres  conditions.  Les  exp^enc 
faites  a  la  maison,  dans  quelques  vases,  livrent  bien  des  faits,  mais  ell 
n'^puisent  pas  la  latitude  de  la  loi.'  And  elsewhere  (p.  104),  speaki 
in  a  similar  strain,  he  says : — *  Or,  pour  avoir  observe  les  transformatio 
de  ces  petits  £tres  dans  un  direction  et  de  certains  drconstances,  on  n*< 
nuUement  autoris^  k  nier  ou  rejeter  la  possibilite  d'autres  Solutions.  , 
loi  c'est  Uvari^t^l' 


THR  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  461 


Bfht  still  remain,  and  also,  an  aggregation  of  partly 
jwnish  and  partly  brown  granular  matter  in  the  more 
ttntnil  parts  of  the  animalizing  mass,  representing  the 
»  yet  uometamorphosed  portion  of  the  green  contents 
oftijcEuglena  (Fig.  86,  d).  Cilia  are  not  usually  pro- 
tnided  at  such  an  early  stage  as  this,  although  on  one 
wasion  in  which  the  transformation  was  scarcely  so 
chanced,  almost  motionless  cilia  were  seen  to  exist, 
lluswas  in  an  ovoid  transforming  Euglena  which  still 
Wrtained  a  number  of  minute  green  corpuscles,  mixed 
^  granular  matter  in  different  stages  of  decoloriza- 
"00,  and  also  a  large  colourless  nuclear  corpuscle  at 
*c  extremity  {h\  The  whole  body  was  motionless, 
^^oogh  it  was  uniformly  fringed  with  short  and  very 
*npudly  moving  cilia,  which  had  all  the  appearance 
tf  laving  been  recently  protruded.  Cilia  first  appear, 
*  I  have  frequently  observed,  in  the  form  of  minute 
^**ionless  protrusions,  which  gradually  elongate  and 
**n  begin  to  exhibit  very  slow  vibrations.  In  the 
^*Rc  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes  they  may  be 
***rvcd  to  have  attained  a  medium  length,  whilst 
*^  exhibit  languid  but  regular  movements.  The  cilia 
*e  protruded  after  precisely  the  same  fashion  as  the 
'ays  of  an  Actinophrys,  and  these  latter  are  also,  like 
**  dlia,  almost  always  motionless  at  first  *. 
On  other  occasions  the  Euglena  undergoes  a  complete 

/"  U»c  ori^  of  the  Amceba  itself  the  same  sort  of  progression  is 
^^^  The  colourless  protoplasm,  when  it  begins  to  move,  moves 
^  '•'y  dowlj,  ind  it  very  gradually  acquires  an  increased  mobility. 


462  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

decolourization,  and  becomes  converted  into  a  6ne 
granular  spherical  or  ovoidal  mass  before  any  cilia  * 
protruded.  Such  bodies,  devoid  of  cilia,  may  occasic 
ally  be  seen  lying  side  by  side  with  others,  in  whi 
short  cilia  exist — cither  wholly  motionless  or  witbi 
few  of  them  exhibiting  slight  flickering  movemex 
(Fig.  86,  c).  Some  of  these  were  embryos  of  unknot 
forms  of  Ciliata;  though  others,  judging  from  the  d 
position  of  their  setae,  seemed  undoubtedly  to  be  embr 
forms  of  Oxytricha*.  On  another  occasion  the  decobt 
ized  spheres  became  hemispherical,  and  protruded  stc 
setse  from  the  under  surface,  which  soon  began  to  c 
hibit  slow  movements  after  the  fashion  of  Trichoc: 
Dr.  Gros  also  expressly  states  ^  that  he  has  seen  Eugler 
become  decolourized  without  previous  cncystmec 
develop  ciliae,  and  take  on  the  very  special  characte 
of  Coleps^  whilst  elsewhere  ^  he  seems  to  imply  th. 
V^orticella,  Nassula,  Oxytficha,  and  Enchelys  may  t 
produced  in  a  similarly  simple  manner  from  transfom 
ing  Euglenae.  And  yet,  with  reference  to  each  of  thcs 
forms,  he  is  also  careful  to  add  that  their  appearanc 
upon  the  scene  may  be  the  result  of  transformation 
taking  place  in  quite  different  matrices. 

So  far  as  I  have  at  present  observed,  the  majority  ( 
those  Euglenae  which  become  encysted  at  or  before  th 
period  of  transformation,  are  converted  into  spheric 

*  Very  similar  to  that  of  Fig.  90,/. 

'  Loc.  cit,  p.  314,  PI.  E,  fig.  27-0,  6,  e. 

*  Loc  cit„  pp.  306,  312,  336,  PI.  E,  fig.  23-36. 


Via.  S6. 
•Wo  tf  Origin  alwl  Dci-clopmcnl  orCiliatnl  Iiifiiboria.    (  x  (ioo.l 
•■  A  lm)<>roniiing  Eufjlcna.  wilh  rtO  '  Kyf-siiCL'k  '  ilill  vi>ililc. 
t- A  similar  body,  havirit;  mflny  of  its  clilnniiilijll  c<ir]msc'c->  >lil[ 

I^etD,  friiigeil  uiili  ilinust  mriliuiiliss  cilia. 
'' Aaunpleiely  decolnitii/cil  Aphcre  ik-tivctl  fnini  a  [mii'^fiirnicil 

Eoglena.  prondcd  wilh  a  fcvr  imrtly-miiliiiiilrKi  cilia. 
*"'••  More  advanced  forms  of  a  wmilar  c[il))rvo  (kvcloi.iiif;  itiln  a 

Kleptas  (7). 
/■  Votticella,  sonn  after  its  emergence  frtim  a  cy^t  df  l^iT^li'iia 

Dticin,     which     9Ub«;qucnIly     dovclupi:     into     n     ^[riali'il 

™r*ty  (g). 
'■  A  1«^  Chlorococcus-vesicic.  whose  conlfnts  Riailually  utiilcr- 

ffies  decoli>uriiation  (,»,  aiHl  il  liisl  Ivcmiit^  cuiivtTic.i1  inui 

w  animaliicd  ma**  (*),  which  Rrndually  shnjics  itself  inio 

>fae  form  of  an  Oxyliicha  (J).    Ttiis  after  a  liiiu:  ruptures  it« 

<?it  and  soon  takes  on  the  chatnj^tcHstics  shuwn  al  m. 
*'  A  hnn  of  PItcsconia  derived  from  an  embryo  produced  within 

other,  apparently  similar,  Chlorocuccus-vcsiiilei. 


464  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

V^orticella  embryos  \  The  change  generally  takes 
in  specimens  which  are  already  encysted,  and  ^ 
arc  lying  side  by  side  in  a  kind  of  tesselated  pe 
formed  by  closely-packed  Euglense.  The  early  s 
of  the  transformation  are  precisely  similar  to  1 
which  have  been  hitherto  described.  DecoIouriz< 
is  gradually  completed,  till  at  last  a  whitish  and 
finely-granular  mass  is  produced,  spherical  in  d 
and  enclosed  within  a  rather  thick  cyst-wall.  1 
bodies  vary  in  size  according  to  the  dimensions  01 
Euglenae  which  undergo  transformation,  and  those  tr 
I  have  mentioned  ranged  from  x^nnr"  to  -^^  in 
meter.  They  replace  the  Euglenae,  so  that  they  re 
as  integral  though  metamorphosed  parts  of  the  cohi 
tesselated  layer.  Very  soon  a  vacuole  makes  its  ap 
ance  near  the  centre  of  the  embryo,  which  subsequ 
remains — disappearing  only  at  short  intervals.  1 
embryos,  unlike  those  of  Paramecium,  do  not  r 
within  their  cysts,  and  do  not  seem  to  exhibit 
movements  until  they  are  about  to  become  free, 
what  precise  manner  they  eflFect  their  exit  I 
never  been  able  to  ascertain,  though  I  have  se 
times  seen  an  embryo  very  shortly  after  its  c 
gence  from  its  cyst  {g).  At  this  period  they 
ellipsoidal  masses  of  finely- granulated  protop 
generally  containing  one  large  vacuole,  and  presei 

*  Dr.  Gros  also  distinctly  states  (p.  312)  that  Vorticcllac  may  1 
this  manner — though  he  makes  no  express  statement  concerning  ! 
lar  origin  for  other  forms. 


I 


THE  B£CrXX/XGS  OF  LIFE.  465 

obscure  evidences  of  circular  striation — whilst  at  one 
ntremity  (posterior)  there  is  a  more  transparent  conical 
(rojection.  The  embryo  remains  almost  motionless, 
ncqit  that  about  every  half-minute  a  sudden  con- 
tnction,  with  invagination  of  the  posterior  part  of  the 
body,  takes  place.  In  the  course  of  a  few  minutes  an 
CTcrsion  of  the  anterior  portion  of  the  organism  occurs, 
8)  as  to  form  a  sort  of  collar-like  rim,  from  which  a 
nnr  of  about  8-12  stout  cilia  begin  to  protrude.  These 
dia  are  motionless  at  first,  but  they  have  been  seen  to 
liepn  to  play  in  from  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes, 
ftwious  to  this,  however,  the  sudden  telescopic  con- 
tactions  had  been  affecting  the  anterior  part  of  the 
^  as  well  as  the  posterior,  so  as  on  each  occasion 
to  produce  an  infolding  of  the  ciliary  wreath.  By  this 
^  also  slow  movements  of  the  contained  granules 
•ttc  seen,  whilst  two  or  three  vacuoles  frequently 
'PPOred  and  disappeared.  After  thirty  minutes  the 
*Binism  had  often  assumed  an  obovoid  form,  and 
*come  distinctly  striated,  whilst  its  ciliary  wreath 
'^tbe  seen  in  full  play.  It  soon  anchors  itself  also 
^^  posterior  sucker-like  extremity,  and  continues  to 
^bit  sudden  contractions  at  intervals  of  a  minute  or 
*ss.  The  continuance  of  these  sudden  contractions 
^l^ilst  the  organism  is  in  a  fixed  position,  very  soon 
offices  to  produce  a  pedicle,  which  pretty  rapidly  elon- 
Wcs.  A  specimen  in  which  the  pedicle  was  just  about 
^  form  was  kept  under  observation  for  thirty  minutes, 
^  in  this  time  it  was  found  to  have  attained  a  length 

VOL  II,  H  h 


466 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


of  rzW^'j  that  is  to  say,  it  had  grown  to  one-third  of 
the  length  of  the  body  of  the  organism*  Gradually  a 
lateral  extension  of  the  oral  cleft  forms,  and  beoomss 
lined  with  cilia  so  as  to  perfect  a  form  of  VortioeUa 
(Fig.  86,  ^  similar  to  that  which  I  have  generally  seen 
proceed  from  the  metamorphosis  of  an  Euglena. 

Other  transformations  of  Euglenas  have  been  de- 
scribed by  Dr.  Gros  of  a  still  more  startling  nature, 
the  consideration  of  which,  however,  it  will  be  better 
for  us  to  defer  for  the  present,  until  we  have  enquired 
more  fully  into  the  evidence  bearing  upon  the  modes  of 
origin  and  life-history  of  the  Ciliated  Infixsoria.  But  in 
order  to  complete  our  list  of  the  known  changes  whidi 
Euglenx  may  undergo,  it  will  be  desirable  simply  to 
name  the  metamorphoses  of  these  protean  forms  whidi 
still  remain  to  be  considered.     They  are : — 

12.  Transformation  into  Rotifers  i 

13.  Transformation  into  Tardigrades  i  and 

14.  Transformation  into  Nematoids. 


Remarks  upon  the  various  Modes  of  Origin  of  Ciliated 

Infusoria. 

It  has  already  been  stated  concerning  ahnost  all  the 
forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  which  I  have  had  occasion 
to  mention,  that  they  may  proceed,  on  different  occa- 
sions, from  apparently  dissimilar  matrices^  and  also 
that  their  mode  of  development   is  subject  to  much 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


467 


nriation^  It  will  be  well,  however,  to  show  a  little 
not  fiiUy  that  Ciliated  Infusoria  agree  in  both  these 
aspects  with  what  has  been  already  established*  for 
|.  hfiB-genns,  Monads,  Amocbse,  and  other  closely 
"dated  forms  of  life — of  which,  indeed,  the  former  are 
^  nxtfe  hi^y  developed  representatives. 

Much  evidence  exists  tending  to  show  that  green 

WgCtal  vesicles,  whether  derived  from  Mosses  or  from 

ttyof  the  multitudinous  forms  of  Algae^  may  at  times 

ttdcfgo  transformative  changes  closely  corresponding 

to  those  which  Euglenas  of  a  similar  size  are  apt  to 

Pstfarou^.    Thus,  although  I  have  never  seen  en- 

^W  specimens  of  the  latter  organisms  converted  into 

Oijftricha  or  Plxsconia,  I  have  many  times  seen  both 

*tee  forms  of  Ciliata  arise  from  large  vesicles  oF 

Q4)rococcus,    This  form  of  Alga  generally  consists  of 

^^^  small  corpuscles  (from  tuW"  to  ^^xl'  in  diameter) 

*kich  multiply  in  a  pellucid  jelly ;  but,  especially  when 

P^ing  near  the  surface  of  the  water,  some  of  its 

^^des  are  very  prone  to  continue  increasing  in  size, 

^ing  to  a  cessation  of  the  process  of  fission.    They 

***s  give  rise  to  separate  vesicles  varying  in  size  from 

^^^  to  ^\^  in  diameter,  and  composed  of  small, 

***6ht-green,  chlorophyll  corpuscles  densely  packed  within 


As  a  role,  it  may  be  said  that  those  which  arise  from  an  encysted 
7^  of  transforming  matter  begin  their  existence  with  more  pcrfe 
"""^  ^  those  which  proceed  from  the  molecular  transformatioas 
•^■^'^tcd  masses  of  protoplasm. 


^ps.  zvil  and  xx. 


Hh  % 


468  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE: 


a  colourless  but  thick  cyst-like  envelope  (Fig.  86,^ 
Very  many  of  these  bodies  seemed  to  remain  statiooar 
when  they  had  attained  the  size  ofx^^'^in  diameter 
and  some  of  them  might  be  seen  whose  contents  we* 
undergoing  various  stages  of  decolourization,  whilst  ii 
others,  lying  by  their  side,  all  the  colouring  matter  faK 
disappeared  and  was  replaced  by  a  mass  of  structursloi 
protoplasm  containing  a  few  granules  of  different  sittS 
(y,  k).  These  masses  of  protoplasm  gradually  underwend 
a  series  of  molecular  changes,  during  which  old  granula 
disappeared  and  new  granules,  of  a  rather  large  siflR 
took  their  place.    The  mass  then  began  to  shape  itsd^ 
whilst  cilia  developed  at  each  extremity,  by  means  d 
which  it  commenced  rotating  irregularly  within  itscjst, 
the  walls  of  which  had  now  become  much  thinner  (i). 
The  form  of  an  Oxytricha  was,  at  this  stage,  distinctfj 
recognizable  within  the  cyst,  which  after  a  time  gave  waj 
and  liberated  an  organism  i\^'  in  length,  contaimnf 
dirty-looking  granules  similar  to  those  of  the  speci- 
mens of  Oxytricha  already  existing  in  the  water  (») 
Although  organisms  of  this  kind  were  produced  fromtlw 
majority  of  the  vesicles,  in  others,  which  appeared  i^ 
every  way  similar,  the  embryo  mass,  owing  to  soiD 
unknown  cause,  was  seen  to  shape  itself  into  the  ft>^ 
of  a  Plaesconia  having  four  or  five  very  deep  and  loO' 
tudinal  dorsal  depressions.     These  embryos  ultimat' 
moved  about  with  extreme  activity  within  their  cfi 
Occasionally  also  another  form  of  Plxsconia  was  {^ 
duced  whose  dorsal  shield  was  slightly  convex  ^ 


The  beginnings  of  life. 


469 


[llmost  smooth,  whilst  its  under  surface  was  much  more 

^^Qomplex  (li).     Such  specimens  of  Oxytricha  and  Plse- 

joonia  were,  moreover,  the  only  forms  of  Ciliata  seen 

:1ft  the  solution  from  which  the  Chlorococcus  vesicles 

*cre  taken.      The  origin  of   Oxytricha  within   the 

lunents  of  Nitella  has  also   been  already   referred 

Facts  just  as  remarkable  can  be  stated  concerning 
lie  difierent  modes  of  origin  of  Vorticellx.  Thus, 
although  Vorticella-cysts  are  so  frequently  derived  from 
cocfsted  Euglenas,  I  have  seen  algoid  vesicles  budded 
tf&om  Vaucheria^(as  well  as  others  which  have  arisen 
fcffl  the  very  common  but  protean  Alga  named  Jjyngbja 
•irjfif3)  also  converted  into  V^orticella-cysts,  and  these 
poducing  organisms  in  almost  all  respects  similar  to 
tec  from  cysts  of  Euglena  origin.  According  to  Dr. 
Gros^j  moreover,  cellular  bodies  budded  off  from  Moss- 
9)r«uigia  may  also  undergo  transformative  changes  in 
>ll  respects  similar  to  those  of  Euglenae. 

In  many  other  cases,  however,  Vorticella:  seem  to 
»isc  in  an  altogether  different  manner.  Instead  of 
'^ing  produced  by  the  molecular  transformation  of 
Brasses  of  matter  which  are  at  once  converted  into 
^^l^sized  though  embryonic  individuals,  they  are  derived 
^vesicles  containing  an  animalized  matter,  which 
^  out  from,  or  are  protruded  by,  certain  vegetal  cells 


'See 


p.  404. 


*Sceii^j^BMK,D,p.  Ix. 


»  See  Fig.  8j./,  and  p.  415. 
*  Loc.  cit„  pp.  44S.  487. 


470 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


or   filaments^.     This   mode  of  origin   was  dis 
indicated  by  Dr.  Gros  in  reference  to  the  changes 
might  occur   in   the   leaves   of   aquatic   plants. 
said 2; — <  Les  cellules  dcs  feuilles  laisscnt  leur  v^culi 
chlorophylliennes  se  faner,  ou  bien  elles  poussent 
utricule  hile  qui   s'elabore   en  Vorticelles^  dc  fonnfj 
diverse,  selon  la  quantity  de  matiere  et  la  qualitc 
vdsicules.'  Repeated  observations  on  Vaucheria,  as 
as  other  Algae  and  aquatic  plants,  have  led  me  to  bdicic 
that  this  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  modes  of  oripl: 
of  the  Vorticellae  which  are  constantly  found  upon  thdf 
surface^  whilst,  according  to  M.  Nicolet%  Vorticdb 
may  be  produced  upon  the  filaments  of  Nitella  in  tf 
almost  similar  manner.     On  other  occasions  Vorticete 
have  been  seen  to  develop  from  an  internal  bud  (whidi 
appears  after  the  manner  of  a  nucleus)  within  the  deir 
anterior  extremity  of  Chlamydococcus  corpuscles.  This 
mode  of  origin  has  been  seen  by  Mr.  T.  C.  Hildgar^ 
who  says: — *This   parasite   is  a  perfectly  colourless 
globule,  apparent  in  the  clear  navel-point  of  the  cell, 
and  exhibits  a  faintly  opalescent  hue.     As  it  grows, the  • 
cell  which  harbours  the  "  incubus  "  loses  its  own  itw^* 
vidual   vitality.'      Its   external   coat  hardens,  but  "^ 
internal  contents  gradually  disappear,  as  the  emb^l® 
'  grows  and  occupies  more  space,  executing  trcmul^'*^ 


*  Just  as  in  other  cases  vesicles  are  produced  which  become  conTC^*^^ 
into  Desmids  or  Diatoms,  or  whose  contents  become  resolved  i^ 
algoid  elements  (see  pp.  418,  419). 

•  Loc.  citn  p.  448.  •  Sec  p.  478^ 


THE  BECmmi^GS  OF  LIFE,  47 1 

nd  vifaiatoqr  contractions.'  After  a  time  the  cyst  is 
and  then  the  granular  embryo  <  after  a  few 
wry  contractions,  at  once  widely  opens  a  large, 
pliate  mouth,  gaping  across  the  sphere*s  surface ;  and 
ing  or  displaying  a  girdle  of  cilia  round  the 
part  of  the  body,  it  immediately  represents  the 
fiee-roring  Vorticella  in  full  equipment  ^'  M.  Pouchet, 
Boreover,  depicts'  vesicles  gradually  increasing  in 
sise,  which  ultimately  became  converted  into  Vorti- 
cdfae;  and  lastly,  M.  Pineau  described  the  mode  of 
origin  of  Vorticelbe  from  vesicles  which  had  been 
developed  in  the  pellicle  by  a  process  of  synthetic 
betetogenesis,  similar  to  that  which  gives  birth  to 
Bttamecia  and  Kolpodae.  These  vesicles,  afler  increas- 
iog  in  size,  first  assumed  the  form  of  Actinophrys,  then 
tf  Adnetse,and  ultimately  became  converted  into  well- 
derebped  Vorticelte  ^ 

In  the  last-mentioned  mode  of  origin  of  Vorticella, 
die  fitaiting-points  were  certain  vesicles  or  corpuscles 
^eloped  from  the  pellicle,  by  a  process  similar  to  that 
^'hereby  Monads  and  Ama*hse  have  been  shown  to 
^  both  in  the  pellicle  and  in  other  organic  aggre- 
8*tes^     It  is  now,  therefore,  of  importance  to  be  able 

'  Sfie'Moiitiily  Journ.  of  Microsc.  Sc/  Nov.  1871.  p.  jjq;  and  Silli- 
F     •ttif I « Ameriom  Joum./  Aug.  1 8 7 1 . 
*  'H^t^regtoie,'  PL  I. 
I  Seep.  J5 J. 

^  bts,  moreorer,  been  fiilly  proved  that  such  mere  motionless  cor- 
■^'^Ci,  ts  wdl  as  Monads,  Amoebae,  and  Fungus-germs,  are  all  inter- 
^^'Ifieilde  and  convertible  forms  oi  living  matter.  (See  Chap,  zvii.) 


whiL-h  .ire  >i)  :ibuiidiunly  prodLiccd  williin  t 
of  a  liyiiip  Nilclla  may  s^'gnicnt  into 
MonadSj  or  that  they  may  be  wholly  transfe 
into  Amcebae  and  Actinophrys,  or  into  Si 
other  of  the  forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria 
however,  on  several  occasions  been  able  t 
stages  by  which  these  Flagellated  Monai 
creasing  in  size  become  converted  int 
whilst  the  latter,  after  undergoing  some 
bulk,  become  motionless  and  lapse  into  i 
ovoidal  forms.  The  motionless  bodies  th 
gradually  protrude  cilia  from  various  parts 
face,  and  arc  very  similar  to  the  smallej 
spheres  of  Nitclla,  which  also  develop  a 
various  forms  of  Ciliata '.  In  both  cases  t 
are  at  first  protruded  are  motionless,  and 
quently  move  in  a  slow  and  languid  ma; 
vibrating  with  sufficient  rapidity  to  pro 
movements    of  the   whole    organism.      T 


I'l 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


473 


vnaller  portions  (Fig.  84,  A,  j),  and  after  having  attained 
a  lei^th  of  -i^zTs'  they  become  almost  motionless,  lose 
tbcir  fiagellum,  and   then  develop   either   into   small 
farms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria,  or  else  become  converted 
into  active  Amoebx  {k^  /,  m).  The  latter,  after  increasing 
BwA  in  size,  may —  as  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  ^  and  Prof. 
SchaaEFhausen  ^  stated  several  years  ago,  and  as  Dr. 
Gtos  had  long  previously  announced — ultimately   be- 
come transformed,  with  or  without  previous  encystment, 
intosome  larger  forms  of  some  of  the  Ciliated  Infusorial 
Evidence  of  the  most  varied  nature,  indeed,  as  well 
^  the   independent    testimony   of   many   successive 
^servers,  all  concur  in  pointing  to  the  conclusion  that 
"^  precise  form  of  life  produced  in  cases  of  hetero- 
S^rtic  transformation  is  to  a  very  great  extent  de- 
P^ndent  upon  the  size  or  mass  of  the  matrix  which 
^''Wcigocs   transformative    changes.     This    notion    is 
^pressed  upon  us  by  Dr.  Gros  in  almost  every  page  of 
^  'JJemoir;  it  was  the  view  independently  adopted  by 
•Carter*^  and  again,  later  still,  in  1859,  it  was  the 
^^^ine  announced  by  M.  Nicolet — based  upon  obser- 

,  ''^^  p.  378.  '  Cosmos,  t.  xxii.  p.  635. 

n^^  f*^.  Metcalfe  Johnson  frequently  speaks  of  the  development  of  Para- 
^^^^^m  and  Kolpoda  from  Monad  forms  (see  *  Month.  Microsc.  Joum./ 
^^^-  186^.  Jan.  1870,  and  Nov.  1871.  PI.  CIII.  fig.  vii.);  whilst  Prof. 
"*^.  Edwards  of  New  York  has  recently  watched  the  conversion  of 


j^jT^^bae  into  Ciliated  Infusoria  of  the  same  kind  (*  Proceed,  of  Lyceum 
^at  Hist/  1871,  p.  216). 


^  *  Ann.  of  Nat  Hist./  vol.  xvi.  Although  subsequently,  as  we  have 
1^  ^^y  pointed  out,  Mr.  Carter  gav^  a  different  interpretation  to  the 
^^'^  (see  p.  391). 


474  ^^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

vations  which  apparently  were  made  whilst  he  was 
entire  ignorance  both  of  the  facts  and  of  the  vie 
announced  by  Dr.  Gros  and  Mr.  Carter  \ 

But  whilst  the  influence  of  actual  mass  is  nn 
important,  I  am  fully  convinced  that  the  existence 
a  certain  molecular  composition  has  really  more  to 
(as  a  determining  cause)  with  the  origin  of  higl 
forms  than  the  mere  bulk  of  the  mass  which  underg< 
transformation  K  It  is,  however,  quite  true  that,  un< 
the  same  conditions,  similar  matter  will  often  transfo 
itself  into  higher  and  higher  forms  (either  directly 
indirectly),  according  as  the  size  of  the  mass  wb 
undergoes  transformation  increases. 

This   is   well   exemplified   by  the   results  of  so 
observations  recorded   by  M.  Nicolet,   in  which 
protoplasmic   contents   of  one  of  the   intemodes 
Chara  may,  he  says,  be  seen  to  give  birth  to  a  teem, 
progeny  of  independent   living  things,  which  sub 

'  M.  Nicolet  says: — *In  organic  chemistry  the  proportion  of 
atoms  determines  the  substance,  here  the  proportion  of  the  gran. 
seems  to  determine  the  species.  This  will  explain  some  of  the  sing;' 
anomalies  which  are  observed  in  the  development  of  certain  Infbsc 
and  the  difference  in  the  final  form  assumed  according  to  the  moit 
less  abundant  supply  of  nutriment.' 

'  A  large  mass  of  matter,  under  the  influence  of  unsuitable  conditi 
which  sufBce  to  alter  its  molecular  constitution,  may  be  compeUe<i 
assume  the  comparatively  low  mode  of  existence  of  an  Actinophiy 
Amoeba ;  or  it  may  be  compelled  to  segment  into  Monads  or  Fimi 
germs  —  even  if,  under  still  worse  conditions,  it  does  not  become  resol 
into  a  swarm  of  Bacteria.  On  the  other  hand,  the  complex  egg- 
bodies  produced  within  an  intemode  of  Nitella  may,  as  we  have  i 
(p.  406),  be  either  large  or  small 


THE  BEG/XNnVGS  OF  LIFE, 


475 


fJCDtly  undergo  the  most  startling  series  of  develop- 
mental transformations. 

In  order  to  watch  these  changes^  all  that  is  necessary, 
according  to  M.  Nicolet,  is  to  prepare  one  of  the  inter- 
nodes  of  CSiara  in  the  following  manner : — Having 
Gripped  off  the  peripheral  cells  which  form  a  kind  of 
icafli  for  the  central  compartment,  a  fine  thread  is  to 
kticd  pretty  tightly  around  each  end,  just  within  the 
wdc;  the  nodes  themselves  should  then  be  cut  off,  and, 
after  all  foreign  material  has  been  removed  from  its 
■Ace  by  means  of  a  soft  brush,  the  portion  of  the 

• 

wtnnode  between  the  two  ligatures  should  be  immersed 

*fl  a  vessel  of  very  pure  water  and  maintained  there  in 

^nK)re  or  less  vertical  position.  Thus  prepared,  the  cell 

^t  to  be  quite  transparent,  and,  when  examined  with 

^  microscope,  the  circulation  of  the  cell   contents 

*ould  be  easily  observable.    This  circulation  continues 

^  a  variable  time— days,  or  even  weeks— according 

^  the  degree  of  vitality  of  the   plant  to  which    it 

'^^^erly   belonged.     After  a  time,   however,   certain 

^cr  changes  take  place,  which  are  thus  described  by 

^icolet: — *In  following  the  movements  of  the  liquid, 

*^  may  soon  be  noticed  that  it  deposits,  at  the  inferior 

^trcmity  of  the  cell,  a  material  which  is  more  dense 

*>ui  more  glutinous  than  that  of  the  liquid  in  move- 

'^^cnt,  and   which  soon   begins    to   become   rounded, 

^wrning  on  its  axis,  on  account  of  the  impulsion  it 

^f*cdvc8  from  the  movement  of  the  fluid  in  which  it  is 

"Versed,  though  it  remains  in  the  same  situation.  . .  . 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  U, 


Fio.  87. 

Deielopmeol  of  Infusoria  horn  ihe  Pratopli 

(Reduced  from  Nicolel.) 

Portions  of  two  inlemodes  of  Chora  prepared  in  th 

one  (slightly  magnitied}  as  il  appean  when  first  [ 

(more  highly  magnified)  repttsenting  a  later  stag 

spheres  of  various  sizes  an:  to  be  seen.    Other  m 

the  wall  of  the  inlernode,  and  are  already  develo] 

(0,  h,  t,  d),  from  which  various  forms  of  Infusori: 

— d  being  the  kind  of  matrii  which  becomes  transl 

At  the  expiration  of  a  day  or  two,  oin 
thie  matter  has  divided  in  order  to  : 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  477 

"^^^^ler  globules,  which,  in  their  turn,  subdivide  into 
^ers  sm^er  still.     This  division,  on  account  of  its 
^^^ccssarily  rendering  the  different  detached   portions 
»^ter,  leads  to  their  circulation.     Each  new  globule, 
^^cd  away  by  the  general  movement,  describes  an 
^ipse,  wlyse  length  is  inversely  proportionate  to  the 
^of  the  corpuscle.  But  whilst  the  different  corpuscles, 
^'ch  are  natural  to  the  liquid,  follow  the  current  with- 
^  turning  upon  their  axes,  the  others,  by  virtue  of  their 
P^niitive  rotation — a  movement  which  has  not  been 
*^troycd  by  the  process  of  segmentation — move  under 
*te  double  influence  of  rotation  and  of  circulation.  .  .  . 
^   the  process  of  segmentation  advances,  so  does  the 
^^^^re  of  the  matter  constituting  the  globules  seem  to 
^^1".    The  granulation,  which  was  at  first  superficial 
ao^   irregular,  becomes  internal  and  regular;  the  re- 
^^•^^ion,  which  at  the  commencement  was  inferior  to 
^^t  of  water,  becomes  equal  and  then  superior  to  it. 
*^    some  globules  this  matter  seems  to  isolate  itself 
^ni  the   surface,  and   to  form   centrally   a  kind   of 
^^cleus,  variable   and    irregular,   but    always    having 
^^nded  angles,  whilst  the   surface   remaining,   as   it 
^^e,  suspended,   takes  on  the  appearance  of  a  thin 
*^yer.  ...     If,  in  this  stage,  a  cell  is  emptied  upon 
^  slip  of  glass,  in  order  to  examine  its  contents,  it  may 
^  perceived  that  these  latter  corpuscles  have  become 
vesicles  full  of  a  glutinous  liquid,  colourless  and  very 
transparent,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a  mass  of  denser 
material  of  a  granulated  texture,  elastic,  whitish,  and 


48o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

the  microscope,  the  appearance  of  resting  spores;  t 
is  to  say,  they  consist  of  a  dark  green,  globular,  gnus 
mass,  invested  with  a  transparent  spherical  cclL  1 
green  mass,  in  all  that  I  have  examined,  has  been  in 
active  state  of  rotation,  first  one  way  and  then  the  oti 
by  means  of  short  cilia  which  covered  its  surface 
those  on  the  spores  of  Vauckersa  Ungeri.  .  •  .  Two.c 
after  I  had  collected  a  number  of  these  globular  bo 
and  placed  them  in  a  watch-glass  for  observation,  pa 
in  and  partly  out  of  their  respective  intemodes, 
green  mass  in  many  had  become  divided  up  into : 
or  more  sacs,  which  were  ciliated  like  the  parent  < 
and  enclosed  in  a  second  transparent  spherical  < 
These  also  rotated  individually  and  en  masse^  while 
division  appeared  to  have  enabled  them  to  throw 
the  greater  portion  of  the  dark  green  pellets,  now 
come  black,  and  lying  loosely  in  a  more  or  less  floe 
lent  state,  like  effete  matter,  in  the  inner  cell. . . . ' 
third  day  the  spherical  cells  had  burst,  and  the  cilia 
sacs,  which  averaged  xJxr"  ^^  diameter,  were  set  free 
the  water.  .  .  .  They  now  presented  different  apfx 
ances  according  to  their  contents,  shape,  and  motic 
All  were  filled  with  a  colourless,  granular  mucus,  charj 
with  small  vesicles,  and  each  presented  also  a  la 
'^  contracting  vesicle."  In  some  there  was  left  onl 
trace  of  the  dark  matter,  while  in  others  there  wa: 
considerable  quantity,  either  in  an  undefined  state, 
in  small  globules.  They  presented  both  an  undulati 
motion  of  the  cell-wall,  and  a  ciliary  motion  of 


THE  BECtNNINCS  OF  LIFE. 


I   Sometimes  the  cilia  were  motionless,  and  lay 
babatoof short  radii  round  its circumFerence, though 


"ode  of  Oiigin  (7)  and  Development  of  OlostoniJi,   (CitlCf.) 

(X     200.)     , 

"MMpheict.    Cilia  not  represented. 

™*lUr  body  of  s»me  kind  enclosed  within  a.  cyst,  which  nt  length 
'(Mmcs  triDsfonncd  into  two  ciliated  embryos  (c). 
"Otline  appearance  of  embtjo  Otostoma  soon  ajler  its  emergciici: 
frwi  the  cysL 
"on  developed  form  of  same— lateral  aspect, 
fwt  TOW  of  adult  Otostoma— showing  ear-shoped  buccal  orifice. 

1*°^  contracting  vesicle  with  radiating  canals. 
**  sac  was  otherwise   gradually  changing  its  shape; 
"''Ue  at  others  there  was  no  appearance  of  cilia  at  all. 
*^  the  other  hand,  sometimes  the   sac  was  rotating 
»«.  11.  I  i 


48o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

the  microscope,  the  appearance  of  resting  spores;  tiia 
is  to  say,  they  consist  of  a  dark  green,  globular,  gnimou! 
mass,  invested  with  a  transparent  spherical  celL    ITiis 
green  mass,  in  all  that  I  have  examined,  has  been  in  an 
active  state  of  rotation,  first  one  way  and  then  tbcotiierii 
by  means  of  short  cilia  which  covered  its  sur&ice  like 
those  on  the  spores  of  Vaucheria  Ungcri.  .  . .  Two.dajs 
after  I  had  collected  a  number  of  these  globular  bodies 
and  placed  them  in  a  watch-glass  for  observation,  partly 
in  and  partly  out  of  their  respective  intemodes,  the 
green  mass  in  many  had  become  divided  up  into  four 
or  more  sacs,  which  were  ciliated  like  the  parent  oae, 
and  enclosed  in  a  second   transparent  spherical  cclL 
These  also  rotated  individually  and  en  masse^  while  the 
division  appeared  to  have  enabled  them  to  throw  off 
the  greater  portion  of  the  dark  green  pellets,  now  be- 
come black,  and  lying  loosely  in  a  more  or  less  floccu- 
lent  state,  like  effete  matter,  in  the  inner  cell. . . .  T^^ 
third  day  the  spherical  cells  had  burst,  and  the  cilia^^ 
sacs,  which  averaged  x^/'  in  diameter,  were  set  frc^  "^ 
the  water.  .  .  .  They  now  presented  different  app^^ 
ances  according  to  their  contents,  shape,  and  moti^^^ 
All  were  filled  with  a  colourless,  granular  mucus,  chaT^ 
with  small  vesicles,  and  each  presented  also  a  1^^ 
''  contracting  vesicle/^     In  some  there  was  left  on! 
trace  of  the  dark  matter,  while  in  others  there  wa---- 
considerable  quantity,  either  in  an  undefined  state,^ 
in  small  globules.     They  presented  both  an  undulate 
motion  of  the  cell-wall,  and  a  ciliary  motion  of 


THE  BECINmNGS  OF  UFE. 


\    Sometimes  the  cilia  were  motionless,  and  lay 
halo  of  short  radii  round  itscircumferencc^  though 


A  of  Origin  (7)  anil  Development  of  Otoslonm.   (Carter.) 


C 


»■)  . 


bipheies.    Cilia  not  represented. 

Icr  body  of  same  kind  encloiicd  within  a  cyst,  which  at  Icnglli 
ODK*  tno^fonned  into  two  ciliated  embryos  <c). 
IM  appeaianw  of  embrjo  Otosloma  soon  after  its  emeigencc 
n  the  cysL 

developed  rorm  o(  same— lateral  aspect. 
:  ?iew  of  adult  Olostoma— showing  ear-shaped  buccal  oriiice, 
31  vesicle  with  radiating  canals. 


c  was  otherwise  gradually  changing  its  shape; 
it  others  there  was  no  appearance  of  cilia  at  all. 
e  other  hand,  sometimes  the   sac  was  rotating 


48a  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

rapidly  under  a  globular  form,  with  its  wall  undulatii 
and  cilia  playing  over  it  with  corresponding  activil 
•  •  .  Occasionally,  a  sac  might  be  seen  under  an  eloi 
gated,  oblong  form,  with  a  slow  undulatory  change  < 
shape  at  one  end,  and  a  languid  movement  of  the  dl 
on  its  surface  generally ;  again  it  might  be  seen  wit 
mucus-radii  spread  out  in  the  same  way  as  those  ( 
Actlnophrys sol*  Subsequently  Mr.  Carter  tells  us  tha 
the  almost  endless  modifications  assumed  by  the  sac 
were  dependent  upon  their  having  been  forced  firoB 
their  cysts  before  they  were  developed.  He  afterward! 
examined  specimens  very  carefully  which  had  been 
liberated  from  the  parent  cysts  in  the  natural  way,  and 
then  they  were  found  to  be  veritable  ciliated  Infosoria 
closely  allied  to  Paramecium,  to  which  Mr.  Carter  gave 
the  generic  name  Otostoma,  on  account  of  the  resem- 
blance between  the  shape  of  the  oral  orifice  and  that 
of  the  human  ear.  The  segmentation  of  the  protoplasm 
within  the  parent  sac  is  always  into  two,  four,  or  cigW 
embryos;  and  these,  when  first  liberated  from  the cjfst, 
present  only  one  contracting  vesicle.  Subsequently 
the  mouth  becomes  more  defined,  and  a  second  con- 
tracting vesicle  is  produced  ^ 

*  As  in  other  instances,  since  the  publication  of  these  obsert«W* 
Mr.  Carter  has  endeavoured  to  put  a  different  interpretation  up*  ** 
facts  (see  •  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.*  vol.  viii.  pp.  285  and  a88).  No  fcis»* 
explanations,  however,  are  offered  as  to  the  means  by  which  such  ^^ 
Infusoria  could  have  made  their  way  into  the  closed  chambenoi^ 
Nitella,  nor  is  it  easy  to  believe  that,  after  having  got  in,  they  woo*  ^ 
exhibit  a  gluttony  so  extreme  as  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  ^ 
ciliated  sacs  as  seen  by  Mr.  Carter.   Such  a  state  of  extreme  cngorgcB^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  483 

owever,  we  find  that  such  varied  organisms  as 
lentioned  by  Carter  and  Nicolet,  and  those  which 
previously  described ',  may  be  produced  by  trans- 
ions  of  different  portions  of  the  same  Nitella  or 
substance,  it  may  be  less  an  occasion  for  surprise 
we  ascertain  that  in  other  cases  many  similar 
of  Ciliated  Infusoria  may  proceed  from  what 
s  to  be  a  totally  different  sort  of  matrix — namely, 
L  mass  of  protoplasm  which  separates  directly 
some  animal  or  from  some  animal-product. 
d  Infiisoria  have,  indeed,  been  frequently  seen 
Gros  to  develop  from  individualized  portions  of 
Rotifers  or  Tardigrades,  as  well  as  from  portions 
embryos  of  the  common  earth-worm*  and  of  the 
f  Rotifers,  although  the  units  of  matter  which 
lualize  themselves  may,  in  the  first  instance, 
Q  the  form  either  of  an  Amoeba,  an  Actinophrys, 
oema,  or  an  Arcella. 

T  the  larger  Rotifers  have  laid  their  eggs  and 
roug^  their  ordinary  term  of  existence,  they  do 

d  I  have  never  seen — and  its  existence  to  any  notable  extent 
these  forms  of  life  is  somewhat  rare.  Mr.  Carter  very  kindly 
Mne  additional  facts  concerning  the  structure  of  these  organisms 
|X)sal,  which  I  regret  that  I  am  now  unable  to  mention  in  detail, 
perhaps,  enter  upon  them  in  some  future  communication. 
pp.  401-406. 

have  already  (p.  337,  note  i)  alluded  to  some  forms  of  Ciliated 
I  which  have  been  found  within  the  bodies  of  higher  organisms, 
di  tery  probably  have  been  derived  from  the  transformation  of 
■M&tal  portion  of  the  higher  organism.  And  again  we  may 
rt  it  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  Leucophrys  which  habitually  exists 
le  perivisceral  cavity  of  the  earth-worm  ? 

11% 


484  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


not   wholly  die.     According  to  Dr.  Gros,  they  ma 
resolve  themselves,  by  what  he  very  aptly  termed 
process  of  *  pangenesis/  into  different  lower  forms  < 
life  ^    Previously  to  undergoing  these  transformation 
they  contract  into  a  ball-like  form,  whilst  their  ali 
mentary  canal,  glands,  and  all  other  internal  part 
undergo  a  new  molecular  elaboration  and  rearrange 
ment,  followed  by  a  process  of  segmentation,  whereb] 
the  altered  and  rejuvenized  substance  is  converted  intc 
independent  masses  of  living  matter  capable  of  passin| 
on  to  new  and  varied  forms  of  life.     A«  a  result  of  thi: 
process,  according  to  Dr.  Gros^,  comparatively  large  aac: 
more  or  less  spheroidal  masses  of  protoplasm  (AmoeteJ 
may  be  seen  making  their  way  through  the  integument 
of  the  dead  Rotifer ;  though  at  other  times  the  masses 
assume  diflPerent  forms  whilst  still  within  the  old  in- 
tegument.    But  in  either  case  some  of  the  individual- 
ized and  amoeboid  bodies  assume  the  form  of  large 
specimens  of  Actinophrys,  whilst  others  may  become 
converted  into  specimens  of  Peranema.     The  Actino- 
phrys is  generally  represented  most  abundantly,  and 
sometimes  such  forms  exist  without  any  admixture  with 
Peranemata.     On  other  occasions,  though  much  nijorc 
rarely,  all  the  individualizing  masses  may  take  on  ^ 
form  of  Peranemata. 
The  Peranemata  are  colourless,   flagellated  org^' 

*  See  pp.  382  and  393,  for   observations  on  Uie  same  subj***  ^ 
M.  Nicolet  and  Mr.  Carter. 
'  Loc  cit.,  pp.  430-433 ;  PI.  M,  figs,  i,  a. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  485 

tsms^  (F^*89>^)  which  increase  in  size^  and  subse- 

qpently  make  their  way  through  the  integument  of  the 

lotifer  in  which  they  have  been  formed.     They  take 

an  varieties  of  food  lying  in  their  way,  after  the  manner 

of  an  kvcioixLy  and  thus  increase  considerably  in  size. 

Tbcf  then  assume  a  spheroidal  shape  and  protrude 

fsnidopodia,  so  as  to  become  converted  into  Actino- 

{kys^  which,  after  still  further  increasing  in  size,  retract 

Aeir  rays,  undergo  an  internal  elaboration,  and  then 

farctep  cilia  on  different  parts  of  their  surface.     They 

ttas  become  converted  into  specimens  of  the   higher 

Ciliated  Infusoria  belonging  to  the  families  Keronse  or 

Oiytrichse.     And,  similarly,  specimens  of  Actinophrys 

rtid  have  originated  more  directly  from  the  Rotifer 

"Byalso,  according  to  Dr.Gros,  pass  through  such  trans- 

ftnnations.     Other  specimens,  however,  attain  a  very 

^BC  size,  and  are  often  seen  to  detach  portions  of 

^ter  substance  which  have   the  power  of  developing 

« 

'oto  one  or  other  of  the  forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria, 
^though  the  larger  parent-masses  may  undergo  different 
^''teformations  2. 

But  other  Rotifers,  instead  of  giving  birth  to  speci- 
"^ns  of  Actinophrys  and  Perancma,  or  to  either  of 
^'^cse  forms  alone,  may  become  resolved  into  a  number 

*  And,  according  to  Dr.  Gros  (loc.  cit.,  p.  435).  they  may  arise  in 
^•Jiy  different  modes.    See  pp.  459  and  549. 

*  Dr.  Gros  says : — *  S'il  n*est  pas  toujours  possible  de  dire,  Si  premiere 
'^ceqne  doit  devenir  tel  Aclinophr^'s,  puisque  la  transformation  finale 
^Jila  taillc,  k  la  d^rivance,  ^  I'abondance  dc  nourriture,  etc,  un  trait 

,^ttt  gte^ral,  c'cst  qu'ils  tendent  tons  vers  les  utriculcux  dlics.*  (p.  436.) 


486 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


of  the  encysted  Amcdxe  known  as  ArceUina;  ■.  Ii 
case,  from  the  traasforming  substance  of  the 
Rotifer  portions  of  matter  (a,  i)  bud  out,  which, ' 
they  have  attained  a  certain  size  (t),  very  frcqi* 
divide  into  two  parts,  each  of  which  becomes  more 
more  condensed  externally,  so  as  to  produce  an  Ar 
with  the  characteristic  cyst-like  though  pcrfixated 
vclope  ((/,  t).     The  ibrms  of  Arcellsc  produced  in 


Arcellte  and  Peranems  derived  from  PangencMS  of  Rotifers,   (t 


a,  h.  Bud-like  outgrowths  from  the  substance  of  a  dying  Rotifer, 
increase  in  site  and  at  lut  form  a  nun  (<),  whldi  diiUi 
two  eqn*!  parts,  each  of  which  tpeediljr  talus  on  the  form 
Arcella  (<f). 

#,  More  completely  developed  form  of  Arcella. 

/.  An  Arcella  whose  animal  substance  has  contracted  will 
■hell  preparaioiy  to  further  traasfonnations. 

f .  A  Peranema  produced  from  an  indiridualized  portion  of  Ih 
stance  of  ■  djing  Rotifer. 

manner  are  of  the  most  varied  nature,  though  the 
protrude  portions  of  their  internal  substance  thr 

'  Tbey  fonn  a  gronp  of  organisms  which  intervene  between  on 
Amcebae  and  those  living  in  very  compla  diambered  celUi 
art  known  b/  the  n«nie  of  ForMiiaifen. 


THE  BEGiyXLVGS  OF  LIFE,  487 


jpeitures  in  their  shell-like  envelope.  After  they  have 
tttuned  a  certain  size,  and  after  their  internal  sub« 
itance  has  undergone  a  certain  molecular  elaboration 
(tf  the  nature  of  which  we  are  wholly  ignorant),  any 
one  of  them  may  quit  its  cyst  and  contract  into 
t  spheroidal  or  ovoidal  mass,  which  soon  protrudes 
ilia,  and  develops  into  one  or  other  of  the  numerous 
varieties  of  Plaesconia  or  Oxytricha.  Whilst,  if  of 
smaller  size  when  it  quits  its  cyst,  the  mass  may  live 
fcr  a  time  as  an  Amoeba,  during  which  it  grows  and 
gradually  acquires  a  sufficient  bulk  and  molecular  elabo- 
ntion  to  enable  it  to  become  transformed  into  one  of 
tte  above-mentioned  Ciliated  Infusoria. 

Arcellinx  of  a  similar  kind  were  also  seen  by 
Dt.  Gros  ^  to  be  produced  abundantly  from  the  sub- 
ifance  of  certain  young  embryo  earth-worms,  which  had 
ken  in  his  possession  (in  the  egg-state)  for  more  than 
^i^iteen  months.  These  Arcellinae,  like  those  produced 
fcan  the  substance  of  Rotifers,  also  subsequently  gave 
nie  to  Ciliated  Infusoria,  either  directly  or  after  a 
pcnous  amoeboid  phase  of  existence  *.  Whilst,  on  the 
<Aerhand,  the  observations  of  M.  Vogt  and  M.  Nord- 
oaaa  k>ng  ago  revealed  the  fact  that  bodies  resembling 
Ciliated  Infusoria  were  occasionally  budded  off  from 
^  early  embryonic  mass  of  certain  of  the  Gastero- 
poda*   In  referring  to  these  observations  Dr.  Carpenter 

|U»c.dt.,p.433. 
PRst  AgHiii  also  declares  that  he  has  seen  Ciliated  Infusoria 
wid  finom  eggi  of  PlasariflB  (see  ApftndiM  D,  p.  107). 


488  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

says  1 : — *  It  is  not  unfrequcntly  seen  that  some  c 

cells  of  the  vitelline  mass  detach  themselves  firon 

principal  cluster,  become  clothed  with  long  ciUa, 

continue  to  move  about  actively  within  the  ^g  unti 

escape  of  the  embryo.     It  is  even  affirmed  by  Nordu 

that  they  increase  by  partial  subdivision,  and  that 

from  a  single  detached  cell  may  be  produced  a  di 

having  a  very  definite  form,  and  furnished  with  long  c 

so  as  very  strongly  to  resemble  a  parasitic  animal/ 

The    independent   observations  of  Dn  Gros  h 

moreover,  established  the  fact  of  the  occurreno 

analogous  phenomena  amongst  the  Rotifera.    He 

he  has  seen  a  large  egg,  which  had  remained  wi 

the  envelopes  of  the  parent  for  about  three  moi 

after  its  death,  at  last  begin  to  produce  buds  on 

external  surface*.    These  buds  continued  to  increas 

size,  and  after  separating  became  converted  intoCilii 

Infusoria.    And  on  another  occasion,  having  in  his  j 

session  a  number  of  heterogenetic  Rotifer  germs*  wl 

had  been  corked  up  in  a  bottle  during  a  long  jour 

(and   thus   exposed  to  very  unfavourable   conditioi 

Dr.  Gros  found  by  subsequent  examinations  that  th 

matrices  did  not  go  on  to  the  development  of  Rotifi 

as  hundreds  of  them  had  previously  done.     He  says* 

*  Le  vitellus  du  fiitur  Rotatoire  elabora  bien  encore 

*  •  Principles  of  Comp.  Physiol./  4th  cd.,  p.  580. 

*  Loc.  cit.,  p.  451,  PI.  O,  figs.  6.  7,  8. 

That  is  to  say,  a  multitude  of  large  £uglense»  very  many  of  wl 
had  become  animalized  and  converted  into  embryo  masses,  sod» 
usually  develop,  and  formerly  had  developed,  into  Rotifers, 

*  Loc  dt.,  p.  ^a^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  489 

v^dcules;  Panimalisation  progressa^  mais  non  plus  en 
bveur  d'lin  organisme  individuel  superieur^  el  au  lieu 
de  voir  Ic  contenu  de  cclte  chrysalide  donner  un  Rota- 
toirc  comine  leurs  congdneres  anterieurcs,  on  vit  le 
litellus  se  resoudre  \  Tint^rieur  du  cocon  en  des  organ- 
ismes  infifrieurs^  ou  pousser  \  Texterieur  du  cocon  des 
vtricules  hiles^  qui  devenaient  la  source  d'une  nouvellc 
gfneration  d'Infusoires  utriculeux  ^' 

But  quite  recently  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  observe 
Rxnewhat  similar  phenomena.  The  substance  of  some 
of  the  large  thin-walled  *  e^ '  of  Hjdatma  tenia  was 
seen  to  have  undergone  s^mentation  into  about  sixteen 
fheres,  each  -rvVir  in  diameter.  The  external  layers 
of  these  soon  became  condensed  into  cyst-walls,  whilst 
the  internal  substance  of  each  of  them,  after  under- 
going a  scries  of  molecular  changes,  resolved  itself 
ioto  an  embryo  Oxytricha,  some  of  which  might  be 
Ken  revolving  within  their  cysts.  Some  of  this  batch 
rfRotifer  *  eggs'  were  seen  to  be  filled  with  such  sphe- 
noidal masses,  whilst  others  were  observed  in  which  a 
few  of  the  embryos  had  escaped  from  their  cysts,  and 
•ttt  swimming  about  as  well-marked  specimens  of 
Oxytricha  within  the  thin  investing  membrane  of  the 
Rotifer  egg*.     And  on  another  occasion,  when  some 

'  Similar  utricles  de\'eloping  into  Vorticcllsc  may,  moreover,  according 
^  1^.  Gros,  be  budded  out  even  from  Euglcnie  which  have  undergone 
^  decolourization,  and  which,  therefore,  have  no  actual  relation  to 
^^«tifers.    (Sccloccit.  p.475,  PLC,  fig.  10.) 

'  These  organiims  were  almost  precisely  similar  to  those  which  pro- 
•*^  from  the  Chlorococcus  vesicles  (see  p.  467). 


Ilk 


490  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Hydatina  ^  eggs'  had  been  kept  for  a  time  withic 
developmental  chamber  (in  which  they  had  been  < 
posed  to  unnatural  conditions),  their  substance  und 
went  segmentation  into  a  multitude  of  Mona 
Dr.  Gros  *  has,  moreover,  observed  that  Rotifers  a 
Rotifer-germs  occasionally  become  putrid  and  resol 
themselves  into  a  dense  swarm  composed  of  tbousac 
of  Bacteria. 

The  facts  just  mentioned  are  thoroughly  in  accor 
ancc  with  previous  observations,  from  which  we  ha 
learned  that  an  organic  matrix  capable  of  giving  bir 
to  a  higher  form  may,  when  subjected  to  the  influent 
of  more  and   more  unfavourable  circumstances,  gi 
birth  to  lower  and  lower  forms*.     But  although  ai 
logous  phenomena  have  been  already  recorded,  there 
room  for  surprise  when  we  find  that  the  egg  of  om 
the  largest  and  most  complex  of  the  Rotifers,  ins* 
of  undergoing  its  own  proper  phases  of  developn 
may,   under    one   set   of  comparatively  unfiavou 
conditions,  yield  a  dozen  or  more  Ciliated  Infii* 
whilst  under  still  less  propitious  influences  it  ma' 
duce  hundreds  of  active  Monads,  or  even  resolve 
into  a  swarming  brood  composed  of  thousands 
simplest  living  units. 

*  Loc.  cit,  pp.  440,  47a. 

*  An  'embryonal  sphere'  derived  from  Nitella  may  for  if 
transformed  into  a  Ciliated  Infusorium,  though  under  less 
conditions  it  either  segments  into  Monads  or  becomes  re 
%  iwmnn  of  Bacteria— to  say  nothing  of  other  possible  mod* 
fanatioii.    ^  pp.  401-406.) 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

tUlOrORXATIOlfS   OF  CILIATED   INFUSORIA*.    MODES  OF  ORIGIN 
OF  ROTIFIRS,   TARDIGRADES,   AND   NEMATOIDS. 

^■wotibility  of  Lower  Forms  of  Life.  Similar  Convertibility  of 
COiated  Infusoruu  Vorticella  into  Oxytricha.  Oxytricha  into 
Tridioda.  Mr.  Carter's  Observations.  Recent  Confirmation  of 
^bcM  neglected  views.  Other  Developmental  Metamorphoses. 
^>CDend  Conclusions  concerning  Ciliated  Infusoria.  Their  ultimate 
Tunsformations. 
^^  of  Rotifers.  Dr.  Gros*  Observations.  Confirmed  by  Trans- 
fcottition  of  Vorticella  into  Diglena.  Conversion  of  Aclinophrys 
■to  embryo  of  Rotifer.  Fate  of  other  large  specimens  of 
^•tinophiyi.  Direct  Origin  of  Rotifers  from  Vegetal  Vesicles, 
^^owttrioo  of  'winter-spore*  of  Volvox  into  Philodinian  Rotifer. 
S^Biltr  Transformations  of  Euglense  or  of  Moss-sporangia  into 
••^ Rotifers.  Author's  Observations  on  so-called  'winter-eggs*  of 
H]pilttina.  Their  Mode  of  Formation  fi"om  aggregations  of  Chloro- 
^^ccos  Vesicles  and  of  Euglenae.  Instances  of  Synthetic  Iletero- 
fP>f9$.  Reproduction  amongst  Rotifers.  Transformation  of  Acti- 
''^pl&Ts  mto  Planariole,  and  of  Planariole  into  Tardigrade.  Similar 
^^'igin  of  Ncmatoids.  Transformations  of  Small  Rotifers  into 
^CQuttoids.  Direct  Origin  of  Tardigrades  and  Nematoids  from 
^Iquc  Indubitable  Nature  of  these  Changes.  Author's  Obser- 
^tioas  on  Origin  of  Nematoids.  Conversion  of  *  rcsting-spore  *  of 
vtQcfaeria  into  an  embryo  Diplogaster.  Inexplicable  Facts. 
"**  Views  harmonious  with  previous  Observations.  Universal 
*^»Wbution  of  Rotifers,  Tardigrades,  and  Nematoids.  Failure 
^  tiie  Panspermic  Hypothesis.  Heterogenetic  Origin  of  other 
'^lier  Forms.    Unsolved  Problems. 

I^HE  facts  hitherto  recorded  concerning  the  modes 

"^    of  origin  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  are  of  such  a 

^^^  as  to  lead  us  to  expect  that  these  varied  forms 


492  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

might  be  to  a  certain   extent   mutually  convcrtil 
We  know  that  different  portions  of  the  same  mine 
substance  in  a  state  of  solution  may,  if  their  ultim 
molecular  arrangement  becomes  affected  by  crpos 
to  different  conditions,  aggregate  into  quite  differ 
crystalline  forms  j  and  that,  having  aggregated  uu 
one  of  these  forms,  they  are  often  capable,  under 
influence  of  further  changes,  of  lapsing  into  and 
and  entirely  different  crystalline  state ^.    And  simik 
it  has  also  been  ascertained  that  Monads,  Actinopl 
Peranemata,  Amoebae,  and  Fungus-germs  frequently 
ceed   from  contiguous  portions  of  the  same  ma 
whilst  these  several   forms  are,  moreover,  to  a 
notable    extent    interchangeable   with   one   anotl: 
Again,  we  have  ascertained  that  many  of  the  A 
Desmids,  Pediastrese,  and  Diatoms  (and  probably  < 
many  Lichens  and  Mosses)  may  proceed  from  diffe 
portions   of  the  same  kind  of  matter,  and  that 
modes  of  growth  are  also  to  a  certain  extent  muti 
interchangeable  3.   So  that,  after  having  discovered 
totally  different  forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria  may  J 
from  contiguous  and  similar  algoid  vesicles  or  c 
matrices,  we   have  a  right   to   expect   that  evid 
would  also  be  forthcoming  as  to  the  convertibilil 
some  of  these  forms. 

*  See  pp.  57  and  82.    We  have  also  endeavoured  to  show  t 
somewhat  similar  relationship  exists  between   the   primordial 
things  known  as  Bacteria,  Tonil«,  Vibriones,  &c  (pp.  136-143). 

'  In  Chaps,  xvii.  and  xx. 

•  Sec  pp.  412-433,  and  441-455. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  493 

And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  phenomena  of  this  kind 
:  banre  been  long  ago  and  quite  independently  recorded 
;  by  diftrent  investigators.  Hitherto  such  observations 
!  fcwt  been  almost  wholly  discredited — not  because  there 
'  was  any  reason  to  suppose  that  due  care  had  not  been 
onrised  by  those  who  made  them,  but  simply  because 
fc  fiicts  recorded  were  not  in  harmony  with  the  theo- 
Ktical  views  held  by  the  majority  of  biologists.  This 
RJectioQ  of  facts  which  do  not  accord  with  generally 
itorivcd  theories  is  unfortunately  only  too  common. 

Two  sets  of  observations  which  were  made  many 
}Qis  ago,  and  quite  independently  of  one  another,  are 
to  a  certain  extent  complementary.  The  metamor- 
ftasis  of  Vorticella  into  Oxytricha  was  described  by 
HPineau  in  1848;  whilst  the  metamorphosis  of  Oxy- 
Wdui  into  Trichoda  was  afterwards  watched  by  M.Jules 
Haimc  in  1 855. 

M  Pineau's  observations  *  were  made  upon  speci- 
DJCBs  of  Vorticellx  which  had  been  developed  in  great 
hunters  in  an  infusion  of  Aconttum  napellus.  Some  of 
fern  were  seen  to  undergo  longitudinal  fission  and 
Poduce  buds  in  the  usual  manner,  though  others  after 
*  time  passed  into  the  encysted  condition.  The  body 
^tracted,  assumed  a  spherical  form,  and  produced  a 
^crction  which  soon  solidified  into  a  tolerably  thick 
^•wall,  whilst  the  pedicle  shrivelled  and  gradually 
''^appeared  (Fig.  90,  tf,  h^.     These  encysted  Vorticellse 

*  *Aim.  des  Sc.  Nat*  1848  (Zool.).  p.  99- 
On  other  occasions  a  posterior  ciliary  wreath  is  developed,  and  the 
*!K««i8in  separates  from  its  pedicle  before  it  begins  to  cnc^sl  \l5ft\i. 


494  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

slowly  increased  in  size,  whilst  at  the  same  time  the 
cyst-wall  became  thinner  and  thinner;  and  the  coo- 
taincd  mass,  after  having  assumed  a   mameiloiiated 
appearance,  again  became  finely-granular  (r,  d).    After 
a  time  the  embryos  began  to  rotate  within  their  cysts^ 
although  at  this  stage  no  cilia  were  to  be  detected. 
Such   changes   were  frequently  observed,  but  it  was 
some  time  before  M.  Pineau  was  enabled  to  make  out 
any  further  alterations.    The  infusion  contained,  i& 
addition  to  the  multitudes  of  Vorticellsc,  a  crowd  <^ 
much  more  minute  organisms,  amongst  which  wcte 
included  Monads  and  small  Amoebae.     But  there  w^^ 
also  some  large  specimens  of  Oxytrichse,  whose  dim^^ 
sions  far  exceeded  that  of  any  of  these  other  organisf^ 
The  mode  of  origin  of  the  Oxytrichse  was  for  a  ti^ 
just  as  obscure  as  the  ultimate  changes  undergone     ' 
the  contents  of  the  Vorticella  cyst,  till  at  last  M.  Pinr^^ 
discovered  other  spherical  bodies  {e)  in  the  midst  o^ 
mass  of  the  oviform  cysts,  equal  in  size  to  the  largest 
them, '  mais  denue's  d*enveloppe,  et  munis  de  cils  gros 
rares,  qui  rapellaient  entierement  ceux  des  Oxytriqut^ 
si   ce   n'est   que    Icur   mouvements   etaient    lents,  ^ 
que  leur  consistance  paraissait  plus  moUe.*     M.  Pinea^ 
adds: — *Sur  d'autrcs  globules,  les  cils  formaient,  e^ 
outre,  une  bande  diagonale,  indice  de  celle  qui  acconu 
pagne  la  bouche  chez  les  Oxytriques  entierement  dcve- 

loppcs Enfin  on  en  voyait  qui  afFectaient  de£ 

formes  plus  ou  moins  ovalaires,  de  telle  sorte  qu'oa 
arrivait  par  dcs  transitions  insensibles  k  la  forme  de 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  495 

POiytriqurf  parfoit.*  After  these  observations  M.  Pineau 
Ht  ompelkd  to  believe  that  the  rotating  embryos  s::cn 


TiuMfornuitions  of  Ciliated  Inrusoria.   (Tini 


J  and  Haime.) 


•H.  Rcpresenting  itagei  by  ithich  Vorticellz  became  converted  into 
Oiytridia.    (FinoiD,  x   1G5.) 
'■IJ.  Ttidiodt,  Men  laterally  and  frum  its  under  lurfacc,  such  as  uai 
Men  to  lesnlt  from  the  Iransfarmnlion  of  other  specimens  of 
Oiytiicha.    (J.  Haime,  %   750.) 

'■ftio  the  Vorticella  cysts  had,  by  a  further  metamor- 
!**  process,  been  converted  into  these  embryo  Oxy- 
'"chac,  and  Mr.  T.  C.  Hildgard  has,  of  late,  apparently 
**n  some  of  the  stages  of  a  similar  transformation', 
"t  now  know,  moreover,  that  a  Vorticella  and  an 
«^cha  may  result  from  the  transformations  of  two 

'Sr  'MoDthly  Jannal  of  Microsc  Sc.'  Dec.  1S71,  p.  a8t,  and 
^"Mui's  ■  Americui  Joamal,'  August,  iS;i. 


ig6  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

contiguous  Euglenae  or  other  algoid  vesicles, 
previous  to  their  decolourization,  had  appearec 
respects  similar  to  one  another'.  Nay  more, 
we  are  told  by  Mr.  Metcalfe  Johnson  that  Pa 
very  frequently  become  transformed  into  V^ort 
Mr.  T.  C.  Hildgard  states  that  some  Paramecia  r 
give  rise  to  Oxytrichse  ^ 

Again,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  all  Oxytric 
to  become  transformed  into  specimens  of  Trich 
though  the  very  careful  observations  of  M.  Jules 
fiilly  entitle  us  to  believe  that  some  Oxytricl 
undergo  such  transformations-*.  He  has  sho^ 
one  of  these  organisms,  after  it  has  become  ei 
may  undergo  a  long  scries  of  changes,  during 
effete  matter  is  frequently  thrown  off,  and  th 
mately  a  specimen  of  Trkhoda  lynceus  (Fig.  90,  k^t) 

'  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  these  Oxytrichx  began  theu 
In  a  comparatively  embr>'onic  form,  whilst  those  which  arise 
transformation  of  Chlorococcus  vesicles,  emerge  from  their 
condition  more  closely  resembling  that  of  the  adult. 

•  *  Monthly  Microsc.  Joum./  May.  187 1,  p.  223. 
'  •  Monthly  Microsc.  Joum./  Dec..  1871,  p.  280. 

*  After  animadverting  very  justly  upon  the  strong  term 
iemnation  which  M.  Clapar^de  made  use  of  with  respect 
observations  of  M.  Haime  —  more  especially  when  Clapari 
Iemnation  was  not  based  upon  any  observations  of  his  own 
lim  to  explain  the  supposed  sources  of  error  into  which  M.  H 
alien— Quatrefages  (*  Metamorphoses.'  translated  by  Dr.  Law 
>.  188)  says :— •  The  conscientious  mannir  in  which  this  young 
•bomed  is  wdl  known,  and  I  am  personally  aware  that  the 
peition  occupied  a  very  considerable  portion  of  his  time,  an 
look  tiie  gicmtest  precautions  to  isolate  the  objects  under  ol 
nd  to  «TOid  all  possibility  of  mistake.' 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  499 

ApiJ^  simple  forms  like  Cyclidium,  Enchelys,  and 
^^^^  which  may  have  been  derived  from  Monads 
«  Amoebxj  are  also,  in  all  probability,  prone  to  assume 
'try  different  characters  when  they  exist  under  diverse 
^'W'itions,  so  long  as  these  conditions  are  not  un- 
ft^ooiablc  to  their  growth  ^ 

All  the  evidence  which  has  now  been  brought  forward 
concerning  the  Ciliated  Infusoria  entitles  us  to  believe 
4at  they  may  be  derived  cither  from  lower  forms  such 
^Monads,  Amoebae, and  Actinophrys;  or  that  they  may 
"isc  from  the  direct  transformation  of  masses  of 
'Qimal  or  vegetal  tissue  existing  in  a  separate  condition. 
If  else  firom  parts  of  larger  organisms  which  have  re- 
*iitly  individualized  themselves.  Whilst  these  trans- 
Qnnations  of  larger  animal  or  vegetal  masses  into 
Elated  Infusoria  may  take  place  immediately,  somc- 
Sfflcs  they  occur  only  after  previously-lower  meta- 
itophoses  into  Amoebae  or  Actinophrys.  The  different 
fcnns  ultimately  assumed  would  seem  to  depend  in  the 
•Bain  upon  the  intrinsic  molecular  properties  of  the 
'l^cr  of  which  they  are  composed;  whilst  the  extreme 
^J^riability  of  these  forms  tends  to  imply  that  the 
'liolccular  composition  of  such  matter  is  modifiable  to 
^extraordinary  extent. 

^Qs  Prof.  Schaaffhausen  speaks  of  Amoebce  developing  into  speci- 
**•  of  Cyclidium  and  Chilodon,  and  of  the  conversion  of  the  latter 
'"'^  into  Paramecia ;  though,  as  he  says,  the  metamorphoses  *  ne  se 
^  pis  toujonrs  de  la  meme  mani^re.*    ('  Cosmos,'  t.  xxii.  p.  635.) 

K  k  ^ 


498  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

PIsesconia  may  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  emerged  fion 
the  empty  cysts  \ 

And  again,  the  same  independent  reasons  which  tend 
to  countenance  the  observations  of  M.  Pineau  also  lend 
support  to  those  of  M.  Haime  and  Mr,  Carter.  Nd 
only  may  apparently  similar  vegetal  vesicles  be  trans- 
formed now  into  Vorticellae  and  now  into  Oxytridx, 
but,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  468),  others  of  them  may  be 
converted  into  the  characteristic  form  of  Plaesconia. 

Other  cases  of  such  transformations  will  doubtless  sooo 
be  made  out  by  subsequent  observers,  and  in  addition, the 
altogether  artificial  distinctions  now  supposed  to  exist 
between  many  of  the  forms  of  Ciliated  Infiisoriailfe 
likely  to  disappear  as  our  knowledge  increases  con- 
cerning their  more  habitual  developmental  phases. 
Systematic  writers  have  long  suspected  that  certain 
*  species/  usually  described  as  belonging  to  distinct 
genera,  are  really  only  transitional  states  of  other, 
forms,  which  may  pass  into  one  another  quite  gradually 
without  an  intervening  stage  of  encystment.  A  trans- 
formation of  Vorticellje  into  Oxytrichse  without  previous 
encystment,  has  been  described  by  Mr.  T.  C.  Hildgard*; 
whilst  I  have  also  seen  Paramecia  derived  from  the 
pellicle  gradually  assume  the  characters  of  Nassute'* 

• 

*  There  was  all  the  less  chance  of  a  mixture  of  the  two  Isfasfff* 
having  taken  place  originally,  because  the  vessel,  in  which  thousand* 
of  the  Kerona  existed  and  from  which  the  encysted  spedmens  w^ 
taken,  did  not  appear  to  contain  a  single  specimen  of  Plasconia  Chared 

•  •  Monthly  Microsc  Joum./  Nov.  1871,  p.  231. 
'  See  p.  350. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  499 

kgiin,  simple  forms  like  Cyclidium,  Enchelys,  and 
itiicrs,  which  may  have  been  derived  from  Monads 
or  Amod)de,  are  also,  in  all  probability,  prone  to  assume 
itry  different  characters  when  they  exist  under  diverse 
cxMiditions,  so  long  as  these  conditions  are  not  un- 
favourable to  their  growth  ^ 

All  the  evidence  which  has  now  been  brought  forward 
coocerning  the  Ciliated  Infusoria  entitles  us  to  believe 
tbt  they  may  be  derived  either  from  lower  forms  such 
«  Monads,  Amoebae,  and  Actinophrys;  or  that  they  may 
irisc  from  the  direct  transformation  of  masses  of 
^Qimal  or  vegetal  tissue  existing  in  a  separate  condition, 
Of  dsc  firom  parts  of  larger  organisms  which  have  re- 
cently individualized  themselves.  Whilst  these  trans- 
fcnnations  of  larger  animal  or  vegetal  masses  into 
Gliated  Infusoria  may  take  place  immediately,  some- 
tinjcs  they  occur  only  after  previously-lower  meta- 
oJor^oses  into  Amoebae  or  Actinophrys.  The  different 
fcnns  ultimately  assumed  would  seem  to  depend  in  the 
^^^  upon  the  intrinsic  molecular  properties  of  the 
'^Wer  of  which  they  are  composed ;  whilst  the  extreme 
lability  of  these  forms  tends  to  imply  that  the 
'Wecular  composition  of  such  matter  is  modifiable  to 
*i  extraordinary  extent. 

Tims  Prof.  Schaaffhausen  speaks  of  Amoebx  developing  into  speci- 
**•  of  Cyclidiom  and  Chilodon,  and  of  the  conversion  of  the  latter 
*•*  into  Paraxneda ;  though,  as  he  says,  the  metamorphoses  *  ne  se 
^  pti  toujouTS  de  la  meme  mani^re.'    ('  Cosmos,'  t.  xxii.  p.  635.) 

K  k  ^ 


SOO  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Remarks  upon  some  of  the  Develofmental  Tendtuacs  tf 
Ciliated  Infusoria  $  and  upon  the  different  Modes  if 
Origin  of  RotiferSy  Tardigrades^  and  Nematoids. 

But  just  as  the  Ciliated  Infusoria  are  often  only  higher  , 
developmental  states  of  portions  of  living  matter  whidi 
have  previously  existed  in  a  simpler  condition,  so  thqr 
themselves  very  frequently  become  transformed  into 
more  complex  living  types.  Dr.  Gros  pointed  out  these 
highly  important  facts  more  than  twenty  years  ap^ 
when,  after  speaking  of  Actinophrys,  he  said:— ^Les 
utriculeux  cilies,  Vorticelles,  Plaesconiens,  Oxytriqa's, 
Kerones,  Dileptus,  Coccudina,  Nassula,  etc.,  recofr 
naissent  aussi  une  origine  vcsiculaire  veg^to-animale. 
En  general,  ils  tendent  aussi  k  Tascendance  et  beau- 
coup  (pourquoi  pas  tous?)  se  convertissent  en  Rota* 
toires  minuscules,  qui  peuvent  continuer  Techelle  as- 
cendante  ou  rester  dans  le  cercle  des  Cilies.  Boo 
nombre  d'Utriculeux,  selon  leur  derivance,  s'en  tien- 
nent  i  tcurner  dans  leur  monde  proteen  et  tortuco^ 
Les  agents  exterieurs,  la  forme  et  la  grandeur  dcs  vases 
sont  tres-puissants  sur  leur  evolutions.* 

The  various  forms  of  Ciliated  Infusoria,  in  6^ 
whose  mode  of  origin  may  be  so  different  on  different 
occasions,  after  living  for  a  time  a  life  of  great  activity? 
during  which  they  may  give  birth  to  other  simile 
creatures  by  processes  of  fission  and  external  or  internal 
gemmation,  at  last  encyst  themselves  in  a  mannef 
which  has  been  so  often  described.     Within  this  cyst 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  50 1 

:ted  mass  of  living  protoplasm  undergoes 
r  molecular  rearrangement,  varying  in  nature 
times, but  generally  resulting  in  a  transfbrma- 
thcr  forms  ^  Thus  it  may  undergo  segmen- 
Monads  or  into  Pythium  corpuscles  \  it  may 
I  whole  in  the  lower  form  of  an  Amoeba  or 
s;  or  it  may  make  its  appearance  as  a  totally 
liated  Infusorium:  whilst  we  have  now  to 
on  other  occasions,  as  Dr.  Gros  long  ago 
:,  the  encysted  mass  may  undergo  a  totally 
t  of  molecular  changes — changes  of  a  higher 
lat  ultimately  it  becomes  converted  into  an 
one  or  other  of  the  small  Rotifers.  Such 
lation,  according  to  Dr.  Gros,  is  liable  to 
ionally  amongst  all  sorts  of  Ciliated  Infu- 
says*: — *I1  restera  prouv^  aussi  que  les 
les  Dileptiens,  les  Oxytriques,  les  Coccu- 
peuvent  coconner  (PI.  O,  figs.  13,  4,  5; 
-id),  et  donner  naissance  \  des  Rotatoires.' 
where  he  says^: — *Les  Utriculeux  derive's 
!8  passeront  souvent  les  uns  dans  les  autres. 
It  quelquefois  \  des  Rotatoires  stcriles  pour 

noreover,  long  been  known  that  the  ap- 
Rotifers  in  infusions  is  frequently  preceded 
lence  of  successive  forms  of  Ciliated  In- 

*  See  p.  467.  note  i. 

'  Loc.  cit.,  p.  456. 

'  Loc.  cit.»  p.  299 ;  see  also  p.  310. 


502  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

fusoria.  Thus,  speaking  of  Rotifers,  Pritchard  says 
'They  are  only  to  be  found  when  the  first  stag^ 
decomposition  has  passed  away,  and  they  usually  c 
appear  again  when  the  water  becomes  putrid  a 
offensive.  After  the  Monadinia,  Paramscia,  and  otk 
smaller  Infusoria  have  run  their  course  and  in  lar 
measure  disappeared,  the  Rotatoria  occupy  their  place 

I  have  myself  been  able  to  follow  all  the  stages 
one  of  the  transforjnations,  referred  to  by  Dr.  Gn 
since  I  have  seen  many  specimens  of  encysted  Vorticel 
become  converted  into  embryo  Rotifers.  The  sta; 
by  which  this  metamorphosis  was  effected  seemed 
be  very  simple,  though  their  real  nature  and  the  cai 
of  the  several  changes  was  wholly  inexplicable. 

The  phenomena  were  first  observed  under  thei 
lowing  circumstances.  A  small  portion  of  Vauche 
having  been  exposed  to  sunlight,  in  a  beaker,  for  sevc 
days  during  the  month  of  June,  was  afterwards  kept 
the  shade  and  at  a  slightly  lower  temperature  (ab 
75°  F)  for  two  days.  When  some  specimens  of  it  w 
examined  microscopically,  a  large  number  of  fine  Voi 
celiac  of  the  striated  variety  were  seen  attached  to 
filaments.  Other  specimens  of  encysted  Vorticellx  a 
existed  by  the  side  of  the  filaments.  Some  of  the  lat 
were  spherical  and  presented  the  usual  finely-grant 
appearance ;  whilst  others,  similar  in  size,  had  assun 

'  Infusoria,  4th  ed.,  p.  652. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  503 

»-  ^    

»  ovoidal  form  (Fig.  92,  a^  ky  The  largest  of  these 
**sured  abcxit  ^^^  in  long  diameter,  and  in  them 
*>  trace  of  a  nucleus  was  now  to  be  seen,  whilst 
« substance  generally  had  become  rather  more  coarsely- 
V^\^i  (r).  In  other  specimens  lying  side  by  side  with 
^fee  already  mentioned,  the  granular  mass  within 
ttc  now-thinner  envelope  began,  after  some  obscure 
^lecular  changes,  though  without  previous  segmenta- 
tion, to  shape  itself  into  an  embryo.  This  soon  displayed 
characteristic  traces  of  a  horny  pharynx  and  two  pinkish- 
td  pigment  spots  (as  in  y),  whilst  slow  movements  of 
Sie  mass  also  became  visible.  When  the  thin  cyst  was 
ihimately  ruptured  and  the  embryo  appeared,  it  was 
toi  to  be  a  Rotifer,  possessing  the  characteristics  as- 
signed by  Ehrenberg  to  Dlglena  catellina  (g).  Many 
specimens  of  this  form  of  Rotifer  were  seen  swimming 
iboot  amongst  the  filaments,  though  they  were  all  small, 
UkI  when  in  the  contracted  state  they  scarcely  exceeded 
in  point  of  size  the  encysted  Vorticellse  from  which 
Bicy  had  been  derived.  None  of  the  individuals  were 
observed  to  contain  distinct  ova,  and  in  this  respect 
fcey  differed  notably  from  specimens  of  the  same  kind 
of  Rotifer,  seen  on  another  occasion — which  were  not 
only  themselves  much  larger,  but  had  also  been  derived 
fcom  the  transformation  of  a  much  larger  matrix  ^ 
A  ^dmilar  transformation  of  striated  Vorticellse  into 

'  See  p.  510.  In  this  case,  too,  many  of  the  *  eggs '  produced  were 
•^^Jfy  larger  than  the  Vorticclla-cysts  and  the  embryos  into  which  they 
■*6uiie  coDTorted. 


504  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

small  Diglense  has  been  observed  on  two  or  tbee 
other  occasions,  when  the  Vorticelte  had  been  product 
from  the  transformation  of  Euglenae,  and  still  remainei  ] 
in  connection  with  an  old  Euglena  pellicle. 

Mr.  Metcalfe  Johnson  has  moreover  recently  ^ 
firmed  not  only  that  Paramecia  are  prone  to  h 
converted  into  Vorticellae,  but  that  he  has  frequently 
seen  specimens  of  each  of  these  forms  of  Ciliatabecow 
developed  into  Philodinian  Rotifers,  without  a  pre- 
liminary stage  of  encystment  \ 

Again,  evidence  has  already  been  adduced  sufficing  to 
establish  the   intimate  relationship  and   intercbanp- 
ability  existing  between  Actinophrys,  Peranemata,  aw 
Amocbje,  as  well  as  between  each  of  these  forms  and  the 
various  kinds  of  Ciliated  Infusoria.     Not  only  are  they 
freely  convertible  one  into  the  other,  but,  now  one  flO^ 
another  of  these  forms  may  be  assumed  by  contiguous 
portions  of  apparently  similar  matter — whether  we  have 
to  do  with  Euglense  or  with  individualizing  portions  ^ 
a  dead  Rotifer.     If  Ciliated  Infusoria  after  encystm^^ 
are  therefore  capable  of  being  converted  into  embry 
Rotifers,   it   is   only  to   be    expected   that  a  simile 
transformation  might  be  possible  in  the  case  of  tb 
Amoeba  and  of  the  Actinophrys.     And,  according  * 


*  See  *  Monthly  Microsc  Journal/  May  1871.  pp.  224  and  325.  T* 
same  writer  refers  to  this  subject  again  in  the  No.  for  Oct.  iSji.tt^  1 
187  ;  and  in  the  same  communication  he  also  gives  reason  for  his  bd'^ 
that  the  divisions  of  the  family  Philodiniie  ai^e  altogether  arti6ci>l«  ^ 
founded  upon  unimportant  distinctions. 


THE  BEGINmNGS  OF  LIFE,  505 

IS,  such  is  actually  the  case.  Although  as  a 
rule  the  Actinophrys  tends  to  become  converted 
e  or  other  of  the  Ciliated  Infusoria,  and  exists 
intermediate  state  for  a  time  before  assuming 
m  of  a  Rotifer  \  still  this  is  not  always  so. 
nally  a  large  Actinophrys  may  be  transformed 
into  a  Rotifer  or  some  other  higher  form, 
iltimate  fate  seems  to  depend  principally  upon 
•igin,  siz?,  and  general  vigour.  The  largest 
ns  may  give  off  buds  which  become  converted 
iated  Infusoria  *,  although  the  parent  mass  sub- 
ly  develops  into  one  or  other  of  the  more  com- 
Jtifers.  Dr.  Gros  says: — ^Quand  la  metamor- 
icendante  approche,  ils  retirent  successivement 
r  cils ;  diminutifs  etonnants  de  su^oirs  polypicns 
ig.  9)  et  se  transforment  directement  en  Rota- 
And  elsewhere*,  the  same  observer  also  speaks 
irect  conversion  of  large  Euglense  into  Amorbse 
jnophrys,  and  of  the  ultimate  transformation 
of  them  into  Rotifers. 

\  are,  however,  other  facts  not  yet  stated  which 
o  give  a  double  interest  to  the  transformations 
lophrys  and  of  Ciliated  Inftisoria  into  Rotifers. 

ing  of  the  large  specimens  of  Actinophrys,  Dr.  Gros  says  (loc. 
I): — ^"Un  trait  qui  est  gdndral,  cest  qu'ils  tendent  tous  vers  les 
dli^  et  oes  demi^res  pousseront  aux  Rotatoires  ovig^res  ou 
s  idon  la  d^rivance.'    (See  also  p.  451.) 

%,  p.  436.  PI.  J.  fig.  16. 
it,  ^.  331  and  335. 


5o6  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

We  have  found  that  the  former  organisms  may  eith 
produced  by  a  kind  of  ascending  development  t: 
place  in  forms  which  were  at  first  very  small,  or 
they  may  come  into  being  at  once  by  the  direct  t 
formation  of  vegetal  matrices  equal  to  themselvj 
bulk.  It  would,  therefore,  be  altogether  harmoi 
with  previously  established  facts  if  we  were  to  find 
similar  laws  applied  to  the  origin  of  Rotifers— th 
to  say,  if  we  found  that  they  might  not  only  aris 
means  of  an  ascending  development  through  Actino] 
and  Ciliated  Infusoria,  but  that  they  might  be  dir 
derived  from  masses  of  transforming  vegetal  matt 
the  most  various  origin. 

So  long  ago  as  1845  Dr.  Gros  observed  the  t 
formation  of  vesicles  of  the  third  order  of  V 
globator  into  a  Rotifer  belonging  to  the  Philod 
type  ^  ^  and  he  also. called  attention  to  the  all-impc 

*  See  *  Bullet,  de  la  Soc.  Imp.  de  Naturalistes  de  Moscou/ 
P"  3^3  (wiih*  figures).  The  masses  which  underwent  transfor 
seemed  to  correspond  to  the  so-called  *  winter-spores*  of  Voh 
described  by  Mr.  Busk  ('Trans,  of  the  Microscop.  Soc*  1853, 
And  according  to  Pritchard  (p.  446)  another  Rotifer  {Natommatapa 
is  occasionally  found  within  the  hollow  spheres  of  Voivox  globata 
it  is  almost  impossible  that  a  Rotifer  produced  from  a  large  *  egg 
be  found  in  such  a  situation,  unless  the  •  egg'  had  been  produced  by! 
genesis.  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  has,  moreover,  actually  seen  {App» 
p.  Ixxxvii.)  some  of  the  elements  of  the  Voivox  converted  int< 
AmoebflB.  So  that  these,  as  well  as  the  so-called  *  winter-spores,' 
subsequently  be  converted  into  heterogenetic  •  eggs.*  Again,  a  Rot 
been  found  by  Roeper  within  the  cells  of  the  aerial  leaves  of  Spl 
obtuiifoliumt  whilst  Morren  has  also  found  specimens  of  Rotifir  % 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


507 


fat  that  in  such  a  transformation  the  germ  is  almost 
•!ual  in  bulk  to  the  fully-developed  animal  to  which  it 
|iws  birth.    Again,  at  a  later  period  (1859),  in  the 
oanoir  to  which  I  have  so  oft?n  referred,  Dr.  Gros 
fcqucntljr  alludes  to  similar  direct  transformations  of 
^t  Euglenx  into  Rotifers  of  the  most  varied  nature 
*nd  size  \    He   says  that  the  Euglense  which  undergo 
tansformation  gradually  decolourize,  and  at  the  same 
ftne  the  matter  entering  into  their  composition  be- 
QWtts  more  and  more  animalizcd  2.    They  either  retain 
tkc  ^crical  form  or  else  become  slightly  oval,  whilst 
ftt  internal  substance  soon  begins  to  exhibit  contrac- 
tions with  traces  of  organization,  and  at  last  an  embryo 
Rotifiar  is  distinctly   visible  3.      Elsewhere   Dr.  Gros 
says*:— «  On   voit  done  PEuglene   prendre   la  forme 
^>^^alairc  (PL  H,  Fig.   1),  passer  par  la  decoloration 


^i^  dosed  fiUments  ofVauchcria — a  fact  which  had  been  partially 
■^Mtted  by  Ungcr  in  iSaS.  Speaking  of  the  filament  in  which  it 
***  contained,  Morren  says : — '  An  attentive  and  lengthened  observation 
^^'iivinced  me  that  in  this  there  was  no  solution  of  contihuity,  and  that 
^  *nivil  of  the  Rotifers  within  the  Vaucheria  was  not  at  all  to  be 
^*ltoed  in  this  way.  How  are  these  parasitic  animalcules  generated 
*«IA|  them  7  This  is  what  further  research  has  some  day  to  show.' 
'^  Pritdiard's  *  Infusoria/  4th  ed.  p.  468.)  Pritchard  (p.  464)  also 
"^  that  a  form  of  Notommata  has  been  found  by  Perty  within  the 
^•■Sttts  of  a  Vaucheria,  and  that  another  form  of  Rotifer  (Albertia 
^^'^icidaru)  is  commonly  found  within  the  intestines  of  earth-worms 
Wibgs. 

*  See  loc  dt,  pp.  333,  449 ;  PL  D,  figs.  37-40,  and  PI.  C,  figs.  1-12. 

I  Lot  dt,  p.  307. 
See  also  loc.  cit,  pp.  310,  314,  318. 

'  loc  dt,  p.  334. 


508  THE  BEGIKNTNGS  OF  LIFE. 

ordinaire,  et  elaborer  ses  v^cules  toternes  (F 
dcviennent  huileuscs,  qui  se  scindeot  (Fig. 
rev&iculisent,  jusqu'i  ce  que  Ic  degrc  d'anir 
conv^nable  soil  atteJnt,  et  proprc  ^  donner 
ciux  Rotatoires  les  plus  varies,  scion  la  taille  e 


Conversion  of  Encjsled  Euglena  iulo  a  Rotifer.   (Gtoi. 

a.  Encysted  Euglcna  of  an  oral  fom.  u)d  poinled  at  one  t: 

h.  Similar  body  after  its  content*  have  become  animalized  a 

into  *□  embryo  Rotirei.    The  whole  mass  U  now  lai 

investing  envelope  thinner,  though  it  still  remains  p 

posterior  extremity. 

de  I'ocuf.'  So  multitudinous  are  the  forms  ol 
which  he  has  seen  emei^e  from  these  trai 
Euglcnx  that  Dr.  Gros  says : — •  L'on  peut  se 
s'il  existc  une  forme  de  Rotatoire  qui  ne  puts 
des  Eugl^nes  directement  ou  par  d'autres  tr. 
tions'.'     Thus,  in  addition  to  the  numerous 


■  Scch  notions  are  certainly  in  harmony  with  facts  long 
ceming  the  habitats  oT  Rotifers.  Speaking  on  this  snbje 
sayi  ('  Infusoria,"  ^th  ed.  p.  653) : — '  Usually  they  must  be  ! 
a  systematic  way,  without  any  extemal  indications  whether 
pro»e  pradocllvc  or  bureti.  We  have,  howerer,  rarely  been 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


509 


toll  Rotifers,  ^^^  ^^  largest  forms — such  as  Brachion 
™  "ydatina — ^havc  frequently  been  seen  to  arise  from 
w  transfbraiation  of  large  specimens  of  Euglensc,  both 
"•Coloured  and  green.  Some  of  these  when  con- 
^"■^^  formed  spheres  as  much  as  ^J^"  in  diameter, 
™  the  transformation  took  place  either  with  or  without 
"*  previous  formation  of  an  enveloping  cyst — ^though 
P^^ljr  under  the  former  conditions'.  The  real 
^urcof  the  cyst  was,  moreover,  in  certain  cases  quite 
*^ious,  even  at  a  late  stage,  owing  to  its  containing 
^  uametamorphosed  portion  of  the  original  Euglena 
^'^'^stance,  in  contact  with  the  embiyo  Rotifer. 

The  next  reference  to  the  heterogenetic  origin  of 
Rotifers  occurs  in  the  writings  of  M.  Nicolet,  to  which 
^^  have  already  referred  *.  He  says  that  such  organisms 
^  often  met  with  amongst  the  multitudinous  forms 
^Infusoria  which  he  has  seen  budded  off  from  the 
^•osed  internodes  of  Chara ;  and  he  figures  the  kind 

^  Qumning  the  green  and  foul-looking  drainage  from  the  manure-heap 
**oefcnn-yard.  Amidst  its  swarms  of  Euglense  we  have  usually  found 
•'tt  wpply  of  Rotatoria.' 

%eaking  of  such  transformations  which  were  seen  in  Germany 
■•ojg  the  year  1852,  and  in  the  month  of  August,  Dr.  Gros  says : — *  En 
Wni\^  i  ceitc  ^poque  d'observation,  se  produisaient  surtout  les  grandes 
'^'^  de  S3rstolides,  ceux  derives  dcs  Euglbnes  cntitres  tn^nsform^es, 
^'Ni  les  Hydatines  jusqu'aux  plus  grand  Brachions.  Dans  quelques- 
*'^  Oct  indiYidns  n^es  sans  parents,  on  percevait  d^jk  les  oeufs  de  leur 
*««  figD^  et  en  txufi^  $mt  dam  U  eorpt  matemel^  soit  pondus^  ne  pou- 
*^  Iftv  etmfimdus  avtc  eeu»  risuUant  dn  transformations  EugUniennes^ 
P'^faOUttn  iti  tuiveet  non  sur  qudquis  individus,  mats  on  pnU  dirt  sur 
^^SSoiu,'  (See  also  loc  cit,  pp.  311,  324, 325,  and 333 ;  PI.  C.  figs. 
•«»4  l|.>  •  See  p.  478. 


510  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

of  bud  from  which  they  are  especially  prone  to  be 
developed  (see  Fig.  87,  i).  No  further  details  of  the 
process,  however,  are  given. 

I  have  seen  none  of  the  very  large  Euglenae  described 
by  Dr.  Gros,  and  consequently  have  not  been  able  to 
observe  the  direct  mode  of  origin  of  Rotifers  from 
this  particular  kind  of  matrix.  Such  transforma- 
tions are,  however,  by  no  means  confined  to  Euglenz. 
Similar  changes  were  seen  by  Dr.  Gros  taking  place 
in  large  vegetal  vesicles  thrown  o£F  from  Mosses  *,  and 
I  have  also  been  able  to  trace  two  distinct  modes  of 
origin  of  Rotifers  from  diflFerent  algoid  matrices. 

In  a  vessel  containing  an  abundance  of  Chlorococcus 
at  the  sides  and  on  the  surface  of  the  fluid  (to  which 
allusion  has  already  been  made),  there  were,  in  addition 
to  the  beautiful  vesicles  roW  in  diameter,  which  be- 
came transformed  into  Oxytricha  and  PJsesconia*,  a 
number  of  others  varying  between  -^'*  and  yj^"  in 
diameter — these  being  evidently  larger  specimens  of  the 
same  kind.  Many  of  them  were  composed  of  a  dense 
aggregation  of  the  brightest  green  corpuscles  packed 
within  a  thick,  colourless,  cyst-like  envelope  (e).  Amongst 
these  green  specimens,  however,  others  might  be  seen 
undergoing  various  stages  of  decolourization.  The  chlo- 
rophyll at  first  seemed  to  become  preternaturally  green, 
though  it  afterwards  gradually  assumed  a  bright  orange 
tint— whilst  the  contained  corpuscles  soon  gave  place  to 
granules,  and  the  whole  cyst  underwent  a  slight  increase 

*  Sec  loc  cit..  p.  449 ;  PI.  I,  figs.  4-7.  *  See  p.  467. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


Origin  of  similar  Rotifers,  from  Vorticelli,  and  from  the  direct  Trans- 
formation  of  Atgoid  Corpuscles,    (x  6oa.) 

0.  EncTEted  VorticclU,  which  subsequently  may  become  ovoid  and  more 
coarsely  granular,  as  in  h.  c.  preparatory  to  the  conversion  of  the 
encysted  mass  into  an  embryo  Diglena,  closely  rescmblingj. 

d.  Small  Chlorococcus  corpuscles. 

«.  A  very  large,  bright  green  Chlorococcus  vesicle,  ujn"  '"i  diameter. 
which  subsequently  becomes  decolouiized  into  a  mass  of  omngc- 
browa,  granular  protoplasm  (/),  whilst  this  subsequently  becomes 
converted  into  an  etnbryo  Digltna  caullina,  a  Utile  smaller  than  the 
adalt  form  represented  at  g.  This  adult  form  contains  a  developing 
'gemma,'  which  when  laid  resembles  b  both  in  slie  and  in 
appearance. 

j.  Represents  the  appearance  presented  by  otie  of  these  gemms  (having 
a  very  thin  investing  membrane)  after  it  has  been  directly  con- 
verted into  BD  embryo  Diglena,  in  which  pink  eye-specks  and  a 
rudimentary  pharynx  ate  ahready  viable. 


5 1 2  THE  BEGTNNmGS  OF  LIFE. 

in  size  (/).     Other  cysts  were  seen,  representing  later 
stages.     Each  of  these  was  densely  packed  with  rather 
coarse  yellowish-brown  granules ;  and,  after  a  time,  the 
whole  mass  began  to  shape  itself  into  an  animal  organ- 
ism, irregularly  folded,  but  presenting  all  the  appearance 
of  being  an  embryo  Rotifer  furnished  with  two  red 
pigment  spots.     The  body  had  by  this  time  still  further 
increased  in  size,  and  the  cyst-wall  had  become  pro- 
portionately thinner,  so  that,  after  the  usual  struggling 
movements  of  the  embryo,  the  cyst  was  at  last  ruptured, 
and  a  Rotifer  appeared — notably  larger,  though  otherwise 


similar  to  the  Diglena  ^  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,    | 
may  be  produced  from  an  encysted  Vorticelku    The    i 
vessel  contained  multitudes  of  these  Rotifeis;  only,un-    : 
like  the  small  forms  produced  from  Vorticellse,  many  ^ 
them  were  seen  to  contain  a  single  large  'egg'  or  gemrn^*^' 
These,  however,  had  the  usual  delicate  wall  and  mO^^ 

*  These  organisms  were  generally  about  y^"  long  by  -f^'  broads 
'  I  entirely  agree  with  Prof.  Cohn  concerning  the  nature  of  ib^^ 
bodies.  According  to  Pritchard  (loc.  cit.,  p.  656),  *  Dr.  Cohn  conteJ^ 
that  the  bodies  ordinarily  regarded  as  eggs  are  merely  gemmse  thro" 
off  from  the  organ  believed  to  be  an  ovary,  without  any  fertilization 
a  male  animal.'  Prof.  Huxley,  on  the  other  hand,  whilst  he  re| 
•these  bodies  as  eggs  (•  Trans,  of  Microsc.  Soc.*  1853,  p.  14),  consid^''^ 
some  of  the  so-called  *  winter-eggs*  to  be  real  gemmae  produced  by  tC^ 
individualization  of  a  portion  of  the  ovary.  In  the  face  of  the  obse-^ 
vations  of  Dr.  Gros,  however,  it  is  impoi  tant  to  note  that  the  *  winte^ 
eggs '  described  by  Prof.  Huxley  were  never  seen  by  him  to  give  birt^ 
to  a  Rotifer.  On  the  other  hand,  we  shall  subsequently  find  that  man^ 
specimens  of  the  so-called  *  winter-eggs '  (found  in  the  free  state)  haf^ 
been  produced  heterogenetically,  and  not  by  Rotifers,  although  they^ 
have  been  seen  to  give  birth  to  Rotifers. 


7 HE  lU'.'ilXXlXr.s  Or   ///■/:.  -,i  > 

cvenly-granular  appearancCjand  none  of  them  were  larger 

than  "5^"  l^"g  ^y  « Jn"  broad  {h).    They  differed,  there- 

iwc,  in  the  usual  manner  from  the  hetcrogenetic  matrices 

6001  which  their  parents  had  been  derived;  and  no 

mistake  could  have  occurred,  since  the  gemmae  were  seen 

and  measured  within  the  body  of  the  parent  as  well  as 

after  they  had  been  laid,  when  the  development  of  the 

embryo  within  them  was  also  watched  (j).  These  gcmmx 

gave  rise  to  organisms  about  the  same  size  as  those 

which  had  proceeded  from  the  encysted  Vorticellae  *. 

Other  observations  made  upon  the  contents  of  the 
same  vase  were,  however,  even  still  more  interesting, 
tincc  they  have  sufficed  to  reveal  the  hetcrogenetic 
origin  of  one  of  the  largest  and  best  known  of  the 
Rotifeis. 

*  With  reference  to  other  direct  heterogcnctic  motlcs  of  origin  of 

*otifai,  I  may  state  that  I  have  again  and  again  seen  small  Rotifers 

^>tliin  the  still-closed  though  dead  intemudes  of  Nitella.  which  I  have 

**oy  reason  to  believe  were  produced  by  the  direct  transformation  of 

***■«  of  the  larger  embr^-onal  spheres  that  had  been  formetl  within  the 

^^■aents  (see  p.  401).    The  form  of  Rotifer  most  frequently  seen  under 

^^'CK  conditions  was  one  with  a  shield-like  cai  apace  and  single  style, 

apparently  corresponding  to  the  so-called  Monostyla  cornuta.      Again. 

'Wte  recently,  whilst  engaged   in   the  investigation  of  certain  trans- 

^''^'Bations  taking  place   in  Vaucheria,   I   accidentally  encountered  a 

'*'**ber  (rf  young  germinating  spores,  nearly  every  one  of  which,  though 

'^  green  externally,  contained  a  moving  embr}'0  Rotifer  in  its  interior. 

*^  spines  were  of  the  kind  represented  in  Fig.  6.  *,  and  they  were  only 

^  liigfatly  more  advanced  in  development.    The  diameter  of  the  con- 

^**ri  embr)'0  was  about  equal  to  one  half  of  the  diameter  of  the  spore. 

I  ttv  more  than  a  dozen  of  these  bodies,  but  unfortunately,  owing  to 

"T  occnpation  with  another  series  of  transformations  at  the  lime,  I  did 

■ot  atoertain  anything  further  concerning  them. 

^l.  II.  L  1 


51 4  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

The  vessel  contained,  as  I  have  said,  an  abundani 
of  Chlorococcus  growing  in  jelly-like  masses  and  ab 
in  other  modes.  There  was,  for  instance,  a  very  larg 
quantity  of  small  green  vesicles — from  yjAnr"  to  j^^ 
in  diameter — which  did  not  exist  in  any  obvious  jelly 
like  matrix.  Some  of  these  vesicles  grew  out  into  elegasl 
Confervas,  whilst  others  progressively  increased  in  sia 
so  as  to  yield  the  much  larger  vesicles  from  which  the 
Ciliated  Infusoria  and  the  Rotifers  were  derived. 
Multitudes  of  these  small  vesicles,  however,  did  doI 
increase  in  size  at  all,  owing  to  the  continuance  of 
processes  of  fission,  though  they  remained  in  a  state  ol 
aggregation.  They  thus  formed  masses  which  increased 
in  size  till  more  or  less  spheroidal  heaps  were  produced 
about  7f^"  in  diameter,  partly  separate  and  partly  ifl 
apposition  with  one  another. 

A  pellicle  on  the  surface  of  the  fluid  was  in  the  main 
composed  of  these  various  elements ;  and  they  also  were 
the  principal  components  of  the  thin  layer  by  whiA 
the  glass  beaker  was  lined.  But,  thickly  interspersed 
amongst  some  of  the  heaps  of  minute  Chlorococcus- 
vesicles,  there  were  a  number  of  dark-brown  ovoidalj 
egg-like  bodies,  also  about  tto''  in  diameter.  I  soc^ 
satisfied  myself  that  these  were  the  so-called  <  winter 
eggs'  of  the  beautiful  and  highly  complex  Rotifer  kno^ 
by  the  name  of  Hydatina  sent  a  ^ .  Such  *  wi  nter-eggs*  wd 

*  These  observations  were  made  during  the  month  of  April  187a,  ^ 
the  fluid  in  which  the  Chlorococcus  had  developed  had  been  placed 
the  beaker  about  six  weeks  previously. 


THE  BEf TUNINGS  Of  LIFE.  515 

liginally  described  by  Ehrenberg,  who  recognized  that 

be  process  of  development  went  on  within  them  at  a 

Bndi  slower  rate  than  it  did  within  such  large  ova  or 

loinue  as  are  ordinarily  produced  within  the  adult 

ilnmaL    These  gemmx  also  possess  a  smooth  trans- 

.|Btnt  and  very  thin  envelope,  whilst  in  the  so-called 

■  ^lasting  or  winter-eggs  *  the  external  surface  is  *  hairy ' 

[  flr  villous^  and  the  envelopes  are  double,  in  addition  to 

:  kdng  much  thicker  and  more  opaque. 

i    After  some  careful  investigation,  I  ultimately  ascer- 

i'liiiKdthat  every  intermediate  stage  was  to  be  seen,  be- 

f  tnentbe  spherical  or  ovoidal  heapof  green  Chlorococcus- 

•  GOqusdes  (Fig.  93,  a)  and  the  fully-formed  winter-egg 

(DDtaining  an  embryo  Hydatina,  whose  ciliary  wreaths 

•ere  in  full  activity.    The  steps  of  the  transformation 

*«rc  as  follows : — ^The  mass  of  aggregated  algoid  vesi- 

dcs  assumed  a  preternaturally  bright-green  colour,  and 

ttne  of  the  corpuscles  seemed  to  fuse  with  one  another, 

oting  to  a  solution  of  their  thin  envelopes — so  that  the 

ttuses  after  a  time  presented  a  more  granular  appear- 

*ice,     Decolourization    then    seemed    to  commence 

•d  proceeded  rapidly  throughout  the  portion  of  algoid 

Wtcr  which  was  destined  to  form  the  future  *egg' 

*-«lways    involving    an    ovoid    mass   about   ^^^  in 

■ttJctcr.    The  external  limits  of  this  transformation 

^  always  sharply  defined,  and  I  have  seen  many 

taies  in  this  early  stage  in  which  the  future  egg  was 

presented  by  an  opaque  ovoidal  mass  of  rather  dark- 

l*Qvn  granular  matter,  to  which  no  bounding  membrane 

l1  2 


Bl6 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  tlFE. 


existed,  and  which  was  fringed  externally  by  adhermt 
and  unmetamorphosed  green  corpuscles  {ky,     Jo  other 


Transfo 


Fio,  91- 
K  of  ChloiQcoccas  Coipnscles  int 
'Winlet-^g'  of  Hydaltna  ursla.     (x  J50.) 
0.  Ovoid  mass  of  brighl-green  Chlorococciis  coqiusclcs.  about  pa  ' 
long  diameler.  I 

b.  Such  a,  mass  after  ils  traniformiitloa  into  n  bro«ii  giaoulu  tiW'  ' 

without  distinct  bounding  wall,    (Should  have  been  iatoiBtW 
in  tint  between  a  and  c.) 

c,  A  stmilai  body  at  a  later  stage,  when  a  limiting  envelope  hu  HMt 

its  appearance,  upon  which  villous  outgrowths  had  been  prodnoci- 
rf.  Later  stage,  constituting  the  so-called  '  winter-e^ '  of  Hydadna. 
t.  Hfdaiiaa  unia  which  is  produced  from  such  a  body — almost  adolL 

Specimens  the   first   traces  of  a  bounding   membraoc 
appeared,  though  such  bodies  were  still  more  or  less 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  517 

^^^i^^^^-^-^^— ^•^^^^^^a^^^^— ^^^^i^^^^^^i^i^— i^>_^^^^^>^^^a_>^— ^^_^^^^— ^^^^_i^>^^^B^^^^^i^^^aa^ 

itiounded  by  adherent  Cblorococcus-corpuscles  {c\  And 
Ae  membrane  having  been  once  formed,  minute  but 
densely-packed  villous  outgrowths  soon  appeared  upon 
Jbsirface.  This  membrane  gradually  thickened,  whilst 
ike  sobfitance  of  the  egg  became  a  little  less  opaque,  and 
ifter  a  time  the  internal  contents  separated  from  one 
aidyflO  as  to  leave  a  space  between  the  thick  outer  shell 
ladtiie  inner  membrane  by  which  the  evenly  granular 
smbiyo  masB  was  now  enclosed  {i).  Later  stilP  the 
mkyo  mass  becomes  lighter  and  more  refractive, 
vUit  it  is  seen  to  move  within  the  cyst,  and  the  play 
if  ib  ciliary  wreaths  may  also  be  distinguished — though 
^A  some  difficulty,  on  account  of  the  opaque  nature 
of  the  cyst  in  which  the  embryo  is  contained.  When 
Oic  cjfst  is  ultimately  ruptured,  a  well-organized  speci- 
^^^tUffUydattna  senu  makes  its  appearance. 

Concerning  the  reality  of  all  those  transformations, 
^stoonding  as  they  are,  I  now  entertain  not  the  slightest 
*Jabt  And,  in  addition  to  having  traced  all  the  stages 
'f  which  the  heap  of  Chlorococcus-corpuscles  becomes 
taasformed  into  an  embryo  Rotifer,  I  have  over  and 
^  again  ascertained,  from  an  examination  of  different 
portions  of  the  pellicle  on  the  surface  or  at  the  sides  of 
fte  ?essel,  that  the  number  of  the  green  heaps  and  of 
tte  brown  egg-like  bodies  in  different  stages  was  always 

'  Hie  dmatkm  of  which  is  uncertain,  since,  whenever  I  have  attempted 
li  Wale  spedmenf,  so  as  to  try  to  watch  their  individual  development, 
r  Itfe  liMmd  that  the  transformative  changes  were  arrested.  Similar 
ha^e  also  been  encountered  in  attempting  to  watch  the 
of  other  ibmis.    (See  also  Gros,  loc.  cit.,  pp.  334-337-) 


5l8  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

«^^— — —  ^— ^— — ^— ^^^^—  ^^-^— ^"^ 

inversely  proportionate  to  one  another.  In  portions 
that  were  green^  the  algoid  aggregations  were  numerous^ 
and  the  *  winter-eggs*  were  scarce;  whilst,  as  more 
and  more  decolourized  portions  of  the  previously  green 
pellicle  were  selected  for  examination,  the  *cggs* 
increased  in  number  and  the  green  Chlorococcus^heaps 
became  scarcer  and  scarcer. 

But  even  before  I  had  thoroughly  satisfied  myself 
concerning  this  mode  of  origin  of  Hydatina,  I  had  had 
evidence  almost  as  convincing — which  at  the  tina* 
I  could  scarcely  bring  myself  to  credit — ^that  theS* 
splendid    Rotifers  are  occasionally  produced,  in 
almost  similar  manner,  from  aggregations  of 
Euglense  ^  entering  into  the  composition  of  a  Euglei 
pellicle.       Brownish   egg-like  masses,  about  -^ 
length,   were    apt    to  appear  imbedded   in  the  v( 
midst  of  the  pellicle.    They  were  somewhat  variabl^ 
in  size,  and,  like  the  bodies  we  have  just  been  dc"^ 
scribing,  they  were  more  decidedly  brown  in  colour  that:^ 
those  which  are  produced  within  an  adult  Hydatina^- 
The  difference,  however,  was  not  nearly  so  marked^ 
between  the  ordinary  gemmse  and  the  so-called  *  winter-' 
eggs '  formed  from  the  substance  of  the  Euglena-pellicle, 
as  between  gemmse  and  the  similar  ^  eggs '  derived  fix)m 
Chlorococcus-heaps.      But  during  the  development  of 
such  bodies  in  the  Euglena-pellicle,  there  was  the  same 
absence  of  an  investing  membrane  in  the  early  stages 
as  had  been  noted  in  their  formation  from  Chlorococcus 

^  About  TsW"  ^  diameter. 


THE  BEGINXIXGS  OF  LIEE.  519 

corpuscles — although  the  sharp  limitation  of  the  trans- 
formative change  was  now  even  more  remarkable.  It 
extended  outwards  for  a  certain  distance  only,  so  that 
^hose  portions  of  the  Euglenae  which  came  within  the 
radius  of  the  future  *  egg  *  were  decolourized  and  con- 
^'crted  into  a  sort  of  fawn-coloured  substance,  whilst 
outlying  portions  of  the  same  Euglenae — of  whatsoever 

• 

size  they  might  chance  to  be — still  continued  green  and 
**^thy-Iooking*.  On  one  occasion  I  saw  two  large  'eggs' 

The  first  of  these  bodies  was  observed  on  January  5,  1872,  and  is 

^*^  in  my  possession  as  a  microscopical  specimen.    At  that  time,  and 

*^st  I  was  still  quite  unaware  of  its  nature,  the  following  rough  entry 

J***  made  concerning  it  in  my  note-book :— •  A  large,  brownish,  egg-like 

^^y,  spherical  and  j^"  in  diameter,  imbetldcd  in  the  midst  of  Euglencc 

r^^   of  a  brownish  granular  matter.    These  circumferential  Euglenae 

^*ldcd  into  the  egg-like  body,  so  that  several  were  seen,  one-half  of 

,   *^ich  was  colourless  and  the  other  still  green  1    On  focussing  through, 

Lthe  ^g-likc  mass]  seemed  to  have  the  appearance  of  being  made  up 

^  ^  dense  aggregation  of  decolourized  Euglenz  containing  colourless 

^'"'S^iiles.     Although  this  brownish  and  somewhat  refractive  mass  was 

*^^»fectly  spherical,  it  was  evident  that  no  cyst-wall  existed.*    And  tlien 

f^Jr  impressions  concerning  the  mass  were  thus  stated: — *Metamorphic 

^^ftienoes  seemed  to  extend  for  a  certain  distance  all  round  from  a 

that,  as  above  stated,  the  circumferential  portion  of  the  mass 

composed  (apparently)  of  Euglcn»  which  were  partly  decolourized, 

Whilst  those  parts  beyond  the  radius  of  the  sphere  were  still  coloured 

^reen.'    Again,  on  February  3oth,  after  I  had  become  aware  of  the 

^^orelopmental  destiny  of  such  a  body — from  having  observed  all  the 

stages  undergone  by  many  specimens — one  of  them  was  found  actually  in 

prooesB  of  formation,  concerning  which  the  following  notes  were  made ; — 

'light  portion  measuring  ^r^";  surrounding  EuglensB  obviously  meta- 

noipbostng,  and  fusing  with  central  granular  mass.*    The  situation  of 

the  body  was  carefully  marked,  and  the  portion  of  pellicle  of  which  it 

fonned  part  was  transferred  to  a  watch-glass.    When  examined  again 

after  twenty-four  hours,^  my  notes  say:— *  It  had  become  a  distinctly 


520  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


forming  in  close  proximity  to  one  another,  each  of  them 
being  still  without  any  trace  of  an  investing  membrane,' 
and  it  so  happened  that  a  Euglena,  lying  between  tfaem 
where  they  approached  each  other  most  closely,  bad  partly 
been  included  within  each  of  the  future  *eggs/  One-third 
was  decolourized  on  each  side,  so  that  this  Ei^lena  ac» 
tually  entered  into  the  formation  of  each  of  the  *cggs,' 
whilst  the  middle  third  of  its  substance,  including  the 
red  eye-speck,  remained  as  bright  as  it  had  ever  been! 
The  *  eggs'  of  Euglena  origin  differed  from  those 
produced  from  Chlorococcus  by  being  not  at  all  viltous, 
and  by  not  possessing  a  double  envelope ;  whilst  they 
differed  from  the  gemmae  of  almost  similar  size,  sub^ 
sequently  produced   by   the   Hydatina,  principally  b/ 
reason  of  their  more  opaque  appearance  and  browner 
colour.    The  ^  gemmae,'  in  fact,  not  only  have  a  lighter^ 
and  more  evenly  granular  appearance  when  examined 
by  the  microscope,  but  are  also  easily  distinguishable  by 
the  naked  eye,  owing  to  their  white  colour.    The  *  eggs' 
of  Euglena  origin  seemed  to  undergo  developmental 
changes  more  rapidly  than  those  derived  from  Chloro- 


ovoid  egg,  -^^  in  breadth  by  ^jlip''  in  length,  with  sharply  defined 
border  and  no  remains  of  £nglenaB  on  its  [upper]  surface.'  My  avoca> 
tions  during  the  day  have  generally  rendered  it  impossible  for  me  to 
carry  out  attempts  at  development  satisfactorily.  MoreoTcr,  the 
changes  '  in  conditions '  which  are  necessitated  by  any  such  attempts  have 
generally  been  found,  as  above  stated,  to  check  or  diange  the  direction 
of  future  development.  Even  in  this  case,  the  egg-Hke  body  produced 
was  much  smaller  than  usual.  The  first  body  observed — appearing  as 
a  spherical  mass— was  probably  a  very  larg^  '  egg.'  seen  cadvisc* 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  L/IE.  521 

OKcus,  though  not  quite  so  quickly  as  the  gemmz 
tbovra  off  by  adult  Hydatinx  \ 

No  mcn-e  beautiful  sight  can  be  seen  by  the  micro- 
xojnst  than  one  of  these  bright-green  Euglena  carpets, 
nifonnly  flecked  with  its  carmine  <  eye-specks,'  and 
inegttlarly  studded  with  the  mysterious  egg-like  masses, 
in  each  of  which  inscrutable  molecular  changes  are 
progressing,  destined  to  terminate  in  the  production  of 
2  beautiful  specimen  of  one  of  the  largest  and  most 
complex  of  the  Rotifers.  It  is  indeed  a  supreme 
though  utterly  inexplicable  process  of  Synthetic  Hetero- 
paesis,  which  almost  as  much  surpasses  in  marvellous- 
oess  the  origin  of  Qliated  Infusoria  from  aggregated 
Bacteria,  as  this  latter  process  transcends  that  of  the 
fcnnation  of  the  minutest  speck  of  living  matter  from 
coiloidal  molecules  ^ ! 

What  fate,  however,  awaits  the  various  kinds  of 
Jlotifers?    The  finer  specimens  of  Brachion,  Hydatina, 

'  In  a  few  days,  after  some  of  the  (lydatinae  produced  from  the 
P*2ide  have  been  hatched,  other  heterogcnetic  germs  developing  from 
^  pdlide  become  abundantly  intermixed  with  the  large  egg-like 
|B*Bue  thrown  off  from  adult  Hydatinae.  A  little  experience,  how- 
^t  win  soon  enable  the  observer  easily  to  distinguish  the  former 
■*  the  latter.  The  observations  which  revealed  this  mode  of  origin 
V  RydatuuB  were  made  during  the  months  of  February  and  March 
*^ present  jrear.  It  was,  however,  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Dujardin 
^  ipecimens  of  Hydatina  senta  were  almost  invariably  to  be  met 
^  in  association  with  Euglense,  more  especially  during  the  spring 


*8eep.26a. 


52  2  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

etc.  soon  produce  large  internal  gemmx  (or  so-called 
eggs),  by  means  of  which,  instead  of  by  fission,  they 
rapidly  multiply  their  kind.     These  internal  gemmae 
are,  indeed,  produced  so  soon  in  some  cases  that,  ac- 
cording toDr.Gros,'dans  quclques-uns  de  ces  individus 
nees  sans  parents,  on  percevait  d^k  les  oeufs  de  leur 
future  lignee.'    The  same  writer,  however,  affirms  that 
the  great  majority  of  the  small  Rotifers  do  not  reproduce 
their  kind '.    Scarcely  more  than  one  out  of  a  hundred 
is   ever  seen   to  contain  anything   like  an  ^egg*  or 
embryo  in  its  interior,  although  in  these  exceptional  in- 
dividuals gemmae,  capable  of  reproducing  the  individual, 
do  make  their  appearance  in  the  interior  of  what  seems 
to  be  the  first  rudiments  of  an  ovary.     This  process  ot 
internal  gemmation  as  it  occurs  in  some  of  the  sma*^ 
Rotifers    is,    indeed,  a    process    only    slightly   mor^' 
advanced  than  that  which  also  takes  place,  at  time^^ 
amongst  some  of  the  Ciliated  Infusoria.     In  feet,  likfl^' 
the  latter  organisms  (from  which  they  are  so  frequentlf^ 
derived),  small  Rotifers  are  generally  mere  transitory"^ 
forms,  which,  under  fevourable  circumstances,  have  a    " 
tendency    to    undergo    still    higher    transformations. 
Concerning  such  complete  transformations  Dr.  Gros 
says  2 : — <>  Dans  de   certain   circonstances,  on   voit   le 
contenu  de  petits  Rotatoires  Equivoques  se    resoudre 
dans  la  carapace  en  des    ovules  qui  peuvent  donner 

*  Dr.  Gros,  moreover,  says  that  they  lurely  live  more  than  eight  days 
(loc.  cit.,  pp.  308.  309). 

*  Loc.  cit.,  pp.  430,  451.  309,  PL  O,  figs.  7  and  8, 


77/I-:  BEC/XX/XC.'^    ('/    ////.. 


.>  -  .> 


naissance  a  dcs  Nematoides,  qui  chose;  curicusc,  nal- 
tront  dans  la  carapace  des  pctits  Rotatoircs  ccjiiscrvcs 
(ians  un  vase,  tandisque  dans  un  autre  vase  Ics  Rota- 
toircs donneront  d'autres  produits  infusoriels/ 

The  statement  of  the  occurrence  of  such  trans- 
formations will  doubtless  prove  most  surprising  to  the 
reader,  but  yet  it  can  be  capped  and  in  a  measure 
confirmed  by  others  equally  surprising  ^ 

Thus,  it  has  ah-eady  been  stated  that  the  smaller 
^tifers,  as  well  as  some   specimens  of  the  larger 
Pieties,  frequently  undergo  a  process  of  pangenesis 
'^hen  they  have  reached  the  term  of  their  existence, 
^hereby  portions  of  their  substance,  becoming  indivi- 
dualized, separate  in  the  form  of  Actinophrys  *.    Such 
^rms  arc  generally  very  vigorous  and  most  voracious, 
^  that  they  rapidly  increase  in  size,  until  they  have 
Acquired  considerable  dimensions.      Having  already^ 
^uded  to  the  fact,  ascertained  by  Dr.  Gros,  that  some 
V  these  organisms  after  a  time  retract  their  rays  and 
t^ccome  converted  into  specimens  of  the  larger  and 
^Jiore  complex  of  the   Rotifers,  it  now   remains  for 
Us  to  add,  that  other  apparently  similar  specimens  of 

'  I  have  seen  so  many  startling  transformations  myself,  and  have, 
moxeover,  been  able  to  confirm  Dr.  Gros*  observations  in  so  many 
itspects,  that  I  see  no  reason  for  doubting  these  particular  obserN-ations, 
more  especially  as  they  refer  to  masses  of  matter  of  a  comparatively 
large  sire. 

•  See  p.  484. 

*  See  p.  505, 


i 


524  7//^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


Actinophrys  may,  for  some  inexplicable  reason,  become 
converted  into  Nematoids  instead  of  Rotifers  *.  Najr, 
more,  other  specimens  of  Actinophrys,  similarly  derived 
from  the  pangenesis  of  a  Rotifer,  may,  by  a  slightly 
more  round-about  process,  also  give  rise  to  specimens 
of  the  arachnidal  Tardigrades  *. 

According  to  Dn  Gros,  this  latter  transformation 
takes  place  in  the  following  manner : — A  large  specifl^^ 
of  Actinophrys  gradually  becomes  spheroidal,  whilst  ^ 
retracts  all  its  rays  except  one,  by  means  of  whicb  t»* 
mass  continues  anchored  during  its  subsequent  st^^ 
A  succession  of  changes  then  takes  place  in  its  inte^^**^ 
substance,  accompanied  by  the  appearance  and  di^^'\ 
pearance  of  fatty-looking  vesicles,  whilst  during  ^'^ 
time  the  external  membrane  becomes  more  and  ^-^"""^ 


condensed  and  assumes  an  orange-brown  colour. 
internal  vesicular  mass  is  gradually  converted  into 
active  embryo,  which  in  from  fourteen  to  twenty-on^ 
days  ruptures  its  enveloping  membrane  and  appears 
a  large  ciliated  Planariole,  visible  by  the  naked  cycr 
This  organism,  after  increasing  in  size  and  leading  a ^^ 
very  active  life  for  about  ten  days,  gradually  contracts 
and  finally  becomes  encysted  ^,  and  the  mass  thus  formed 

'  If  a  Nematoid  and  a  Rotifer  may  come  from  two  apparently  similar 
matrices,  then  the  transformation  of  the  Rotifer  into  the  Nematoid,  to 
which  we  have  previously  alluded,  is  only  a  very  little  more  startling 
than  the  transformation  of  one  form  of  Ciliated  Infusorium  into  another, 
or  of  a  Ciliated  Infusorium  into  a  small  Rotifer. 

'  Loc.  cit.,  p.  438. 

•  See  loc.  dt.,  p.  439 ;  PI.  N,  figs.  1-6. 


77//;  r/u;/xx/.\';s  O/-  ////..  .-;:- 


in  its  turn,  becomes  transformed  into  an  embryo,  which 
"nmediately  develops  into  one  of  the  Tardigrades. 

These  facts  concerning  the  transformations  of  the 
^mens  of  Actinophrys  derived  from  Rotifers,  may 
^  paralleled  by  others  which  are  generally  in  accord- 
ance with  what  we  have  hitherto  been  led  to  expect 
^  the  history  of  previous  metamorphoses.     In  the  first 
place,  specimens  of  Actinophrys  derived  from  quite  a 
Cerent  source  are  also,  according  to  Dr.  Gros,  capable 
of  undergoing  similar  developments.     Thus,  some  spe- 
cimens directly  derived  from  Euglcnae  may,  as  we  have 
*l«>eady  mentioned^  be  directly  converted  into  Rotifers; 
'rtiilst  others,  apparently  similar,   may  be   converted 
either  into   Tardigrades  or   into   Ncmatoids^     And, 
^^condly,  these   statements  are   borne  out  by  others, 
^^^scd  upon  evidence  of  the  most  unmistakeable  character, 
^   the  effect  that  Nematoids,  Tardigrades,  and   the 
*^tgest  Rotifers  may  each  of  them  be  directly  produced 
"^y  the  heterogenetic  transformation  of  similar  vegetal 
^^icles*.    Dr.  Gros  says  he  has  seen  thousands  of  large 
""Ose-coloured  Euglenas  gradually  decolourize  and  become 
Converted  into  encysted  animal  embryos,  some  of  which 
P»X)duced  large  Rotifers,  others  Tardigrades,  and  others 
Nematoids.  And  the  latter,  though  sexless  at  first,  sub- 
sequently grew  into  well-developed  males  and  females. 

*  Loc  cit.,  pp.  300,  309. 

'  In  this  respect,  tliercfore,  they  arc  like  all  the  inferior  members  of 
^*  series — they  may  either  be  the  final  outcome  of  a  series  of  ascending 
'^•'elopments,  or  they  may  be  the  products  of  a  direct  metamorphosis. 


526  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

These  metamorphoses,  taking  place  as  they  do  in 
masses  of  matter  t^"  or  more  in  diameter,  can  be 
followed  with  the  greatest  ease ;  and,  moreover,  certain 
features  are  frequently  presented  which  preclude  all 
possibility  of  mistake  with  regard  to  the  identity  of  the 
bodies  undergoing  transformation.  Thus,  it  occasion- 
ally happens  that  one  or  two  portions  of  the  Euglense 
escape  transformation,  and  remain  within  the  cyst  by 
the  side  of  the  embryo — just  as  portions  of  the  em- 
bryonal spheres  of  Nitella  occasionally  escape  trans- 
formation when  these  segment  into  Monads  \  And  at 
other  times,  phenomena  have  been  observed  which  are 
still  more  capable  of  convincing  even  the  most  sceptical 
of  those  who  have  not  themselves  witnessed  such  trans- 
formations. Some  of  the  encysted  Euglenx  undergo 
a  process  of  fission,  and  whilst  still  enclosed  within  the 
common  cyst-like  envelope,  one  of  the  bodies  so  pro- 
duced may  become  rapidly  decolourized  and  converted 
into  an  embryo  Nematoid,  whilst  the  twin  product 
remains  by  its  side  as  a  still  green  or  only  very  slightly 
decolourized  Euglena  (Fig. 94,  a).  Though  at  other  times, 
as  Dr.  Gros  says  ^ : — « Une  certaine  serie  d'Euglfenes  se 
d^colourait  entieremeirt,  comme  \  I'ordinaire  et  donnait 

'  See  Fig.  79  c.  At  other  times,  however,  the  transformation  into  Monads 
takes  place  without  any  remainders ;  and  so  Dr.  Gros  says  concerning  these 
large  Euglenre  which  became  transformed  into  Rotifers,  Nematoids,  and 
Tardigrades : — •  Ce  rebus  de  substance  s'est  pr^scnt^  presque  constam- 
ment  cette  ann^,  tandis  que,  Tann^e  demibre,  TEugl^ne  se  transformait 
de  toutes  pieces/ 

^  Loc  dt.,  p.  475. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


S»7 


un  vigoureux  vcrmiculc'  And  he  adds: — 'Ces  choses 
incioyabics  peuvcnt  fit  re  r^voquc'cs  en  doute,  ma  is 
te  sceptiques  changeront  peut  etre  d'avis  apres  une 
observation  quotidienne  de  trois  mois.'  Every  one  who 
toolcs  must  not,  however,  necessarily  expect  to  see 


Flo.  94. 

Oiigla  of  Nema.toids  frum  Euglen 


(Got.) 


a.  A  large  Englena  which  after  encystment  has  undergone  fission,  whilst 
one  of  the  halves  has  become  decolourized. 

h.  A  Englcna  which  has  become  converted  into  a  decolourized  em- 
bryonic mass,  leaving  only  a  small  coloured  remainder. 

t.  Another  decolourized  mass,  wbicb.  after  undergoing  certain  changes, 
becomes  converted  into  a  young  Nematoid,  as  at  d. 

I.  A  female  specimen  of  the  developed  Nematoid  three  weeks  old,  in 
whose  ovaries  two  partially- developed  ova.  are  seen. 

these  particular  transformations.  Dr.  Gros  says ' : — 
•Cette  g^n^ration  dirccte  de  N^matoidcs  iie  s'etait 
pas  vuc  I'annee  derniere.  Les  derni^res  generations 
dc  Rotatoires  seulement  avaient  donne  des  vers.' 


Quite  r. 


ntly  I  have  myself  had  the  good  fortune  to 
'  Loc.  dl.,  p.  47r. 


:.:c-— 


\Mlnc.->  a  ciircLt  (origin  ot  Xcniat-nds  t"ri)m  <o:7u* --r' t;.i' 
thick-wallcd  rcsting-sporcs  of  Vaucheria.     A  specimen 
of  this  plant  had  been  growing  beneath  a  bell-glass 
outside  my  window  for  more  than  a  month,  and  por- 
tions of  it  had  been  repeatedly  examined,  tbou^  on 
none  of  these  occasions  had  a  single  Nematoid  been 
seen.     But,  wishing  to  observe  the  effects  of  a  sudden     f[f^.,^ 
alteration  of  conditions  upon  some  of  the  organisms      _  ^^-^ 
contained  in  the  saucer,  I  took  it  into  my  study,  an^      «r.'-' 
kept  it  (still  beneath  a  bell-jar)  in  a  part  of  the  roa^ 
away  from  the  window — so  that  it  was  simultaneous^ 
exposed  to  a  higher  temperature  and  to  a  diminution  ^^ 
light.     Four  days  afterwards  the  weed  in  many  pW"^^ 
was  found  to  be  shrivelled  and  undergoing  decoloariz^^*^ 
tion.     It  was  evidently  dying.    On  taking  up  a  minu^^^ 
portion  of  the   Vaucheria  thus  affected,  I  was  muc  — ^t 
surprised  to  see  three  or  four  active  Nematoids.    An^ 
each  minute  portion  subsequently  examined  was  always" 
found  to  yield  from  three  to  eight  of  these  animals*;^^^ 
which,  on  examination  with  higher  powers,  I  at  onc^^  ^ 
recognized  as  fo:ms  similar  to  those  to  which  Max:^^^ 
Schultze  had  previously  given  the  name  Diplogaster^,  ^^  ' 
and  of  which  I  had  described  two  or  three  new  varic- 
ties  2.     These   particular   Nematoids    now  existed  by 
thousands  in  the  small  saucer  containing  Vaucheria, 
in  which  not  a  single  specimen  had  been  seen  four 
days  before,  or  for  a  month  previously.     They  were, 

'  A  form  which  is  figured  in  Carus's  *  Iconcs  Zootomicz.*  Tab.  \'iii  fig.  i. 
'  •  Trans,  of  Linn.  Soc'  vol.  xxv.  p.  1 16. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  529 

Qottover,  all  young  immature  forms,  in  which  the 
lend  organs^  if  present,  at  all,  were  only  partially 
derdoped  AVhilst  not.  a  single  adult  female  was 
icen,  immature  females  and  males  were  abundantly 
(cpcsented,  and  especially  the  latter.  What  then  had 
iKea  their  mode  of  origin  ?  A  careful  microscopical 
aaminatioa  of  almost  any  minute  specimen  of  the. 
>ttd  soon  made  this  quite  obvious.  In  addition  to  the 
3CC  forms,  many  embryo  Ncmatoids  were  seen  coiled 
9  within  ovoid  cysts  and  lying  amongst  the  filaments, 
rfsts  were  also  seen  containing  a  mere  embryo  mass, 
vUcfa  either  had  or  had  not  begun  to  undergo  seg- 
mentation; whilst  other  cysts  existed  (of  the  same  size 
conly  a  trifle  smaller),  which  were  spherical  or  ovoidal, 
d  contained  either  green  chlorophyll  corpuscles  or 
'orophyll  corpuscles  in  a  state  of  decolourization  («)\ 
hfs  cysts  existed  in  which  the  decolourized  corpuscles 
1  fiised  and  become  converted  into  a  colourless  em* 
tmic  mass  containing  a  multitude  of  fatty-looking 
•HuIeSvand  globules,  of  different  sizes  (^)^. 

"Hie  process  of  decolourization,  too,  was  different  from  anything 
Ch  I  had  previously  seen.  The  green  corpuscles  gradually  assumed 
ler  and  fidnter  tints,  and  at  last  became  colourless,  without  haring 
tod  through  any  of  the  customary  intermediate  tints.  Similar  pro- 
Ci,  however,  seem  to  have  been  observed  by  Dr.  Gros,  since  the 
iibiiBed  vcsidesi  derived  from  Moss-sporangia,  represented  in  PI.  J. 
.  4r7,  Mem  to  be  remarkably  similar  to  the  Vaucheria  sporet,  akhough 
cud  of  producing  Nematoids  they  mostly  gave  rise  to  Rotifers. 
The  timnsibnnation  of  chlorophyll  into  fatty  products  is  easily 
KciUyle  (tee  note  2,  p.  4J5).  and  the  evolutional  tendencies  of  nitro- 
iMd  fatty  sabstances  has  been  before  referred  to  (vol.  i.  p.  a  1 2,  note  i). 

VOU  II.  Mm 


530  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

It  was,  indeed,  quite  obvious  that  the  green  bodies 
between  -^"  and  -^'  of  an  inch  in  diameter  were 
the  thick-walled  resting-spores  of  Vaucheria — some  rf 
them  being  still  attached  to  the  filament  from  which  thqr 
had  been  produced  ^     It  was  obvious  alsp  that  tfacf 
gradually  became  decolourized  and  at  th^  same  time 
animalized,  until  at  last  the  contained  matter  was 
resolved  into  a  somewhat  opaque  and  coarsely-granular, 
though  more  bulky,  embryo  mass.    This  mass  subse- 
quently contracted  upon  itself  so  as  to  leave  a  well- 
marked  space  between  its  outer  surfi3u:e  and  the  wall 
of  the  cyst  in  which  it  was  enclosed  (c)*.     It  afterwards 
underwent  the  well-known   process  of  segmentatioD, 
every  stage   of  which  was   to   be   seen   in  diflfereflt 
specimens  {d). 

Thousands  of  such  bodies  (about  ^^  long  by 
^'  broad)  existed,  and  in  addition  to  the  facts 
already  mentioned,  proving  the  parental  relationship 
existing  between  these  thick-walled  spores  of  Vaucheria 
and  the  embryo  Nematoids,  it  is  especially  worthy  ^ 
note  that  when  the  latter  were  first  seen,  not  a  siofc"^ 
adult  form  was  to  be  encountered.  Though  after  ab^** 
one  month,  those  of  the  previous  embryos  which  t^ 


^  These  thick -walled  'spores  are  occasionally  produced   in 
numbers  upon  the  sides  of  the  filaments  by  a  process  of  *■  conjugal 
occurring  between  the  contents  of  two  contiguous  tubular  outgrowtl^^ 

'  The  space,  however,  seemed  to  be  in  part  due  to  a  still  fiir^^ 
dilatation  of  the  cyst,  the  membrane  of  which  had  by  this  time  bec(^^ 
most  appreciably  thinner. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  53I 


ent  of  Nematoids  from  Spores  of  Vauchetia.     (  k  400.) 
alomiied   spore  with   portion   of  tube  attached — some  of 
tyll  corpnsclea  colanrless.  and  others  still  green, 
lody.  wholly  decolonrued  and  swollen,  resolved  inlo  ■  mass 
Ing  tatty-looking  particles  and  globules, 
lodf  in  which  animaliied  mass  has  become  finely  granular 
mewhat  smaller,    (This  and  last  surrounded  by  adherent 
rdAris.) 

eariy  stage  of  segmentation  of  embryonic  mass. 
(  nbaequently  becomes  resolved  into  a  worm-like  embryo, 
oon  exhibits  its  first  very  slow  movements. 
■Bwd  by  the  active  embryo  [Diplogatlir)  just  before  il 
I  iti  cyit. 

aqneotly  laid  (after  about  a  month}  by  the  adull  worm. 
M  m  3 


53« 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


survived  had  attained  the  adult  condition^,  and  At 
females  presented,  as  is  usual  with  the  free  Nematoids^a 
few  ova  of  relatively  large  size.    The  males  were  afxwt 
^"  long  by  xrAny"  broad,  and  the  females  A**  long 
by  jJq"  in  breadth;  whilst  the  largest  ^g  seen,  whidi 
was  at  the  vulva  and  about  to  be  expelled,  measured 
^^  long  by  j\js"  broad— so  that  the  ovum  of  this 
particular  form  of  Nematoid  was  very  much  smaller 
than  the  heterogenetic  matrix  from  which  the  parents 
had   been  derived  *.    The  heterogenetic  cysts  of  (te- 
velopment,  indeed,  were  so  large  that  they  could  not 
by  any  possibility  have  been  produced  within  such 
Nematoids  as  were  developed  from  them« 

This  mode  of  development  of  the  Nematoid  is  most 
interesting,  and  when  compared  with  that  of  the  Rotifa 
affords  certain  well-marked  contrasts.   In  the  first  place, 
the  process  of  decolourization  took  place  in  a  different 
manner — it  was  more  simple  and  not  attended  by  the  d^ 
velopment  of  all  those  intermediate  tints  which  usually 
appear  when   the   resulting   mass  is  about  to  shape 
itself  into  the  form  of  a  Rotifer.    And  in  the  second 
place,  the  well-known  process  of  segmentation  which 
occurs   in  the  embryo  mass  of  the  future  Nematoid 


'  Dr.  Gros  says  that  some  of  the  specimens  observed  by  him  attained 
the  adult  condition  in  about  three  weeks.  The  time  mentioned  above, 
however,  is  much  shorter  than  suffices  for  some  of  Uie  homogenetically- 
produced  free  Nematoids.     (See  •  Philos.  Trans.'  1866,  p.  61 1.) 

'  The  great  superiority  in  size  of  the  heterogenetic  germ  may  accoant 
for  the  greater  rapidity  with  which  the  large  embryos  so  derived  attain 
their  adult  condition  (s^  p.  551). 


THE  /:/:  ;/x.\7:.;-  .  /  ///.'  ^,3.^ 


is,  so  far  as  my  experience  goc-s,  wholly  unrepresented 
in  the  development  of  the  Rotifer — here  the  embryo 
oass  seems  to  shape  itself  more  or  less  directly  into 
tk  future  organism,  and  a  similar  direct  process  of 
development  without  any  antecedent   stiges  of  seg- 
mentation seems  to  obtain  amongst  the  Tardigrades 
and  the  various  forms  of  Mites.     For  although  the 
Tardigrades  represent  the  lowest  terms  of  the  Articu- 
lata,and  therefore  belong  to  a  higher  type — yet  their 
grade  of  development  is  veiy  low.     So  far  as  their 
njodc  of  reproduction  is  concerned,  they  seem  to  be 
^ery  closely  allied  to  the  large  Rotifera :  for  the  most 
paitno  distinct  sexual  forms  exist,  and  only  imperfect 
'^oales  are  met  with  containing  a  ludimentary  ovary 
(often  without  a  distinct  external  duct),  in  which  large 
E^Oinix  or  so-called  ^ eggs'  are  formed.     In  the  case 
^'thc  Nematoids,  however,  embryos  are  produced  from 
*hc  heterogenetic  matrices,  which,  though  sexless  at 
fifiRt,  subsequently  develop  into  what  we  arc  accustomed 
to  call  *  males'  and  *  females* — the  latter  possessing  a 
^fauble  tubular  ovary  with  a  distinct  external  duct,  in 
'^hich  a  few  large  ova  are  generally  to  be  seen  >. 

The  fact,  therefore,  that  animals  with  such  distinct 
^nd  specific  organs — and  of  different  'sexes'  too — 


'  The  typical  fonn  of  this  ovary  is  represented  in  Fig.  i  a.  lliere  is 
COod  reason  for  believing  that  in  many  of  the  Nematoids  reproduction 
^^lus  place  by  means  of  mere  gemmx,  though  in  other  cases  bodies 
*<Qularly  produced  are  fecundated,  i.e.  stimulated  by  contact  i^-ith  certain 
^cine&ts  secreted  by  the  male. 


534  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


should  arise  in  this  definite  manner  from  the  repro- 
ductive products  of  a  plant,  will  doubtless  seem  to 
many  to  flavour  more  of  fable  than  of  fact.    After  tit 
observations  which  have  been  detailed,  however,  wc 
must  accept  the  occurrence  of  such  phenomena  as 
established  facts — just  as  we  are  compelled,  and  are 
now  quite  accustomed,  unhesitatingly  to  believe  in  the 
reality  of  other  equally  inexplicable  phenomena.  When 
we  are  able  really  to  explain  the  reason  of  the  processes 
by  which  one  minute  vesicular  mass  of  fetty  and  albu- 
minoid particles  develops  into  a  man,  another  into  a 
fish,  and  another  into  an  insect,  we  may  then  with  a 
little  more  show  of  reason  think  of  rejecting  other  more 
or  less  similar  facts  because  they  are  incomprehensible- 

However  true  may  be  the  views  set  forth  in  this 
chapter,  it  might  reasonably  be  expected  that  others 
would  give  credence  to  them  all  the  more  readily  if  *^ 
could  be  shown  that  many  facts  long  known— tboup 
difficult  of  explanation — were  now  more  easily  to  ^ 
understood.  Let  us,  therefore,  briefly  glance  at  a  ^^ 
of  these  old  difficulties. 

We  have  already  alluded,  on  more  than  one  occasi^^ 
to  the  general  accordance  between  our  views  and  ^ 
facts  known  concerning  the  succession  of  higher  ^^ 
higher  organisms  which  gradually  replace  one  anot^ 
in  infusions  ^  And  yet,  on  the  old  hypothesis,  tl>^ 
is  the  greatest  difficulty  in  accounting  for  these  phe:^ 

*  Sec  p.  50a. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  535 

But  a  much  more  marked  discrepancy  between 
and  generally  received  theories  exists  in  refe- 

to  other  phenomena^  Thus,  when  speaking  of 
rrs,  Pritchard  says,  in  his  'Infusoria*  (p.  655), 

remarkable   circumstance    must    be    borne    in 

by  the  animalcule  hunter.  If  he  happens  to 
ober  a  pond  where  some  rare  species  abounded 
rear,  let  him  not  again  turn  thither  in  search 
I  as  the  chances  will  not  be  in  his  favour. 
:  creatures  rarely  exist  in  the  same  water  during 
successive  years.    The  reasons  for  this  are  not 

ascertainable.  The  remark  is  equally  applicable 
Ivox  and  the  Desmidias.  The  search  will  be  most 
ctive  if  prosecuted  on  new  ground.'  Now  this 
nlity  in  the  habitat  of  the  rarer  kinds  of  Infusoria, 
ipatible  as  it  is  with  received  notions  concerning 
:cr-eggs'  and  *  resting-spores,*  is  thoroughly  har- 
3us  with  all  that  we  have  said  concerning  the 
istory  of  many  of  these  forms  and  the  extreme 
rility  at  diflFerent  times  in  the  products  of  hetero- 
ic  transformation — peculiarities  which  were  long 
«relt  upon  by  Dr.  Gros. 

lin,  the  extreme  prevalence  and  almost  universal 
xition  of  certain  common  forms  of  Rotifers,  Tar- 
les,and  Nematoids^,  will  become  quite  inexplicable 
TBt  who  disbelieve  in  the  occurrence  of  hetero- 
ic  transformations— in  the   face  of  our  present 

di  of  these  Uiree  forms  of  life  having  the  peculiarity  that  they 
7  tbdr  kind  by  notably  large  gemms  or  eggs. 


536  THE  BEGmNINGS  OF  UFE. 

knowledge  concerning  the  distribution  of  laige  genns 
or  ova  throughout  the  atmosphere.  The  great  jh»- 
valence  of  such  forms  of  life  is,  however,  casiif 
explicable  in  accordance  with  the  possibility  of  their 
origin  by  more  or  less  rapid  series  of  ascending  deFC- 
lopments,  or  by  processes  of  direct  transformation  of 
vegetal  vesicles. 

Thus  it  is,  as  Pritchard  says  »,  a  well-known  fact  tliat 
some  Rotifers  *are  common  wherever  water  has.I^ 
mained    for    a    little    time  without   disturbance— in 
cisterns,  depressions  in  the  gutters  of  houses,  sauccis 
of  flower-pots,  and  similar  situations.'    And  again,  in 
a  memoir  published  in   1 865  '  On  the  Anatomy  and 
Physiology  of  Nematoids  V  I  stated  that  *an  examina- 
tion of  tufts  of  moss  from  the  roofs  of  houses  or  fi<*^ 
old  walls,  as  well  as  of  specimens  of  the  yellow  lid^ 
{Farmelia  parietina)  from  the  same  situations,  has  inV^' 
ably  revealed  to  me  three  principal  kinds  of  animal-o^^ 
pants — specimens  of  Rotifers,  of  peculiarly  slow-mo V  ^ 
arachnidal  Tardigrada,  and  two  or  three  different  k^  ^ 
of  Anguillulidae.    Precisely  the  same  varieties  of  ani  ^^ 
life  are  spoken  of  as  existing  in  the  tufts  of 


examined  by  Spallanzani,  and  also  in  those  which  n<^ 
experimented  upon  by  Andral  and  Gavarret    M< 
over,  I  have  found  specimens  of  lichen  brought  fr 
Sweden  tenanted  by  just  the  same  types.'    Now  tbc^ 
who  believe  that  such  forms  of  life  are  produced  oi 
from  pre-existing  eggs  of  similar  forms,  must  find 

1  *  Infusoria,'  p.  653.  *  *  Fhflos.  Traas.'  i86d,  p.  617. 


THE  BEGISmNGS  OF  LIFE.  637 


ttremely  difficult  to  understand  their  universal  dis- 
tribution and  co-existence  in  almost  every  tuft  of 
Boss  or  lichen  growing  in  all  sorts  of  remote  situa- 
tions, seeing  that  no  one  has  ever  recognized  amongst 
fitrations  or  depositions  from  the  atmosphere  any 
of  the  large  eggs  by  which  each  of  these  forms 
ttually  reproduce  their  like.  The  difficulty  is,  in- 
leed,  similar  in  kind,  though  very  much  greater 
l^an  that  to  which  we  have  already  referred  in  con- 
cction  with  the  development  of  the  common  edible 
Iiishrcom  in  suitably  prepared  beds.  The  very  small 
»c  of  the  fungus-germs  did  afford  a  sort  of  excuse, 
lOvgh  this  becomes  wholly  unavailable  when  we  have 
'  <k)  with  the  large  eggs  of  Rotifers,  Tardigradcs,  and 
ematoids^  Nobody  pretends  that  these  are  universally 

^  See  p.  43J).  It  is  also  most  important  to  note  that  Nematoids  may 
Cs  be  obtained  at  will — and  this  almost  as  readily  as  Mushrooms — by 
^voess  whidi  seems  to  be  just  as  independent  of  ordinary  eggs  as  the 
%«r  if  of  ordiiiary  spores.  I  first  learned  about  nine  years  ago  from 
tie  of  the  writings  of  Dr.  Schneider  (Muller's*Archiv/  1858  and  1860). 
^  a  form  of  free  Nematoid,  named  by  bim  Pelodytes^  was  generally  to 
fibtained  by  burymg  a  few  small  pieces  of  flesh  in  a  little  damp  earth. 
cto  afterwards,  whilst  living  at  Broadmoor  in  Berkshire,  I  tried  this 
t^oimerft  —  having  carefully  examined  the  beef  beforehand  to  see 
ictiier  it  contained  any  encysted  Nematoids  or  their  ova.  But  haxing 
taA  nooe,  small  portions  of  it  were  buried  in  a  small  quantity  of  earth 
iktained  in  a  gallipot  The  earth  had  been  frequently  examined 
tcre  without  rerealing  a  single  Nematoid.  After  three  weeks  this 
^  WIS  found  to  be  absolutely  swarming  with  two  kinds  of  Nema- 
i3i--qoite  difierent  from  any  forms  which  I  had  previously  seen. 
lioagh  I  had  been  seeking  them  for  more  than  two  years  previously 
^  sorts  of  situations.  1  am,  unfortunately,  unable  to  say  what  were 
6  precise  Mages  in  the  evolution  of  these  Nematoids,  since  the  mixture 


538  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

distributed   through  the  atmosphere,  and,  indeed,  he 
would  be  a  rash  man  who  would  promise  to  find  a  single 
one  of  such  easily  recognizable   bodies  amongst  the 
products  of  filtration  from  the  atmosphere,  obtained  bjr 
a  week's  work.     The  Panspermic  hypothesis,  indeed, 
breaks  down  even  more  utterly  with  regard  to  the  germs 
of  these  comparatively  high  organisms  than  it  does  with 
reference  to  the  distribution  of  Bacteria  (pp.  6, 7).   But 
although  the  almost  universal  distribution  of  Rotifeis, 
Tardigrades,  and  Nematoids  cannot  be  at  all  accounted 
for  by  those  who  rely  simply  upon  Homogenesis  awl 
the   supposed   universal  distribution  of  the  gcnns  of 
these  and  other  organisms,  all  the  facts  may  be  easily 
explained   by  an   acceptance   of  the   reality  of  sud 
heterogenetic  processes  as  we  have  already  described. 
Heterogenesis  is,  in  fact,  the  necessary  appanage  or 
Archebiosis — so   that   the  reality  of  the   one  process 
almost  necessitates  the  reality  of  the  other. 

The   importance  of  an  adequate   consideration  oi 

was  not  systematically  examined  at  the  time.  I  was  much  impress^ 
however,  by  the  facts  which  were  then  wholly  inexplicable  to  mc-"*** 
as  such  I  recollect  mentioning  them  soon  after  to  two  or  three  eininfl* 
biologists.  These  observations  were  made  very  shortly  before  I  *^ 
Broadmoor,  and  since  that  period  the  great  pressure  of  other  kio^ 
work  has  always  prevented  my  following  up  this  observation  by  ^^^J 
experiments.  These,  however,  had  been  contemplated,  *o^  ^  r*j 
intended  to  resort  to  comparative  trials  of  different  kinds  of  meat  flu**° 
with  similar  specimens  of  earth  and  water,  and  at  the  same  tun^ 
subject  these  mixtures  to  careful  and  daily  microscopical  examia**^ 
Experiments  and  observations  of  this  kind,  which  still  have  to  be  10*^ 
would,  I  have  no  doubt,  soon  lead  to  most  important  results. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  539 

processes  of  Heterogenesis  on  the  part  of  the 
;ist  is  enormous.  The  knowledge  obtained  from 
udy  of  such  phenomena  must  suffice  to  throw  far 
than  a  glimmer  of  light  upon  some  of  the  most 
re  of  zoological  and  botanical  problems.  The 
on,  however,  which  now  most  naturally  presses  for 
on  is — ^Where  do  such  processes  end?  At  what 
s  of  complexity  in  the  animal  and  the  vegetal 
will  Heterogenesis  cease  to  appear  as  an  occa- 
I  mode  of  origin  for  totally  distinct  specific  forms? 
hx  as  animals  are  concerned,  we  can  even  now 
bat  evidence  exists  tending  to  show  that  some 
)ers  of  every  one  of  the  groups  belonging  to  the 
Sooleoida  may  be  produced  by  a  process  of 
rogenesis.  Evidence  has  been  abundantly  brought 
ird  in  this  chapter  concerning  the  occurrence  of 
modes  of  origin  amongst  the  Rotifer  a  and  amongst 
)rder  Nematoidea.  Moreover,  observations  have 
ly  been  recorded  by  Dr.  Gros  in  other  memoirs 
those  to  which  we  have  alluded,  tending  to  show 
specimens  of  the  orders  AcantkocepkaU^  Taniaday 
Trematoda  may  also  be  produced  by  processes  of 
rogenesis^  whilst  I  have  myself  very  strong 
OS  for  believing  that  one  of  the  TurhelUria — the 
gc  but  hi^ly  interesting  Chsetonotus — may  also 
by  a  process  of  Heterogenesis  taking  place  within 
filaments  of  Nitella.  But  even  this  is  not  all. 
i  have  previously  stated,  there  are  the  positive 
nrations  of  Dr.  Gros  concerning  similar  modes  of 


540  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

origin  of  some  Tardigrades,  and  I  have  already  in  my 
possession  much  convincing  evidence,  derived  from  per- 
sonal observation,  that  some  water  Mites  or  Acari,  and 
also  the  ciliated  embryos  of  Naides,  may  be  produced 
by  a  direct  transformation  of  masses  composed  of 
the  protoplasm  and  chlorophyll  of  Nitella. 

Thus,  in  addition  to  representatives  di  each  of  the 
groups  belonging  to  the  class  Scoleciday  there  is  already 
reason  to  believe  that  we   may  at  once  attain,  by 
heterogenetic  transformations  of   the  most    startling 
character,  to  some  of  the  lowest  Annelidit  and  also 
to  some  of  the  lowest  of  the  Aithropoda.    And  whilst 
the  actual  origin  of  the  representatives  of  these  great 
groups  of  the  Animal  Kingdom  would  thus  be  laid  bare 
by  researches  conducted  upon  fresh-water  forms  of  life,   ^ 
marine  products  remain  as  yet  wholly  unexplored  from   j 
this  point  of  view — and  consequently  whole  mines  of^ 
wealth  are  probably  awaiting  the  diligent  student  in  m 
these  fields  of  research.     On  the  other  hand,  how  much    - 
remains   to   be  ascertained  concerning   some   of   the 
lower  representatives  of  the  Vegetable  Kingdom!     To 
what  extent,  if  at  all,  is  a  heterogenetic  mode  of  origin 
possible  amongst  Ferns  and  Club-mosses?     To  what 
extent  docs  it  prevail   amongst  Mosses,  Liverworts, 
and  other  allied  Cryptogams  ?     These  are  some  of  the 
numerous   problems  which  remain   to  be  decided   by 
future  workers. 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 


INDIVIDUALS,  EPHEMSROMORPHS,   AND  SPEaES. 

WWdnalhy,  Different  Tiews  concerning.  Modes  of  Origin  of  Indcpcn- 
<^t  Units.  Views  about  *  Spedes.'  Recent  Modifications.  Modes 
of  Reproduction.  Dawn  of  Sexual  Process  Blending  of  Sexual  and 
Aienal  Processes.  Views  of  Prof.  Huxley  and  Dr.  Carpenter. 
'Hick  not  in  accordance  with  doctrines  of  Evolution.  Other  objec- 
^>ou.  Natnre  of  Lowest  Forms  of  Life.  Their  correlation  with 
<^  another.  Ephemeromorphs.  Their  different  Modes  of  Origin. 
I^t  thrown  upon  *  Alternate  Generation.*  Principal  Varieties  of. 
^cuing  of  £scts  upon  Nature  of  Individuals  and  Species.  Expla- 
^>^6oa  of  apparent  Anomalies.  Transmutations  of  Species.  Mr. 
l^anrin  and  *  Natural  Selection.'  Two  meanings  of  Term.  These 
^  always  distinguished.  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  Views.  Influence 
of  Change  in  External  Conditions.  Direct  and  Indirect  actions  oU 
dances  dted  by  Mr.  Darwin.  Internal  Causes  of  Change.  Great 
^ificrence  of  Views  concerning.  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  Doctrines. 
Oppoibg  Nature  of,  on  this  Subject.  Undue  importance  attached 
^  External  Influences.  Mr.  Darwin  not  an  advocate  of  *  Progres- 
^ve  Derelopment.'  Slight  influence  of  External  Conditions  over 
hnrtx  Organisms.  Their  Forms  more  dependent  upon  Molecular 
Clarities.  Instances  of  *  Spontaneous '  Variation.  Convertibility 
of  flie  Nectarine  and  the  Peach.  Origin  of  black-shouldered 
huodk.  Importance  of  such  Transformations.  Influences  which 
pnxSuoe  and  modify  the  Forms  of  Organisms.  Author's  Views  as 
.  Compared  with  those  of  Mr.  Darwin  and  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer. 

WHILST  the  various  modes  of  origin  of  living 
things  and  their  subsequent  metamorphoses  are 
'^'Mccts  of  surpassing  interest,  the  true  meaning  or 


■J-  ■  r 


importance  of  the  processes  themselves  cannot  be  ade- 
quately  realized  unless  we  have  arrived  at  clear  con- 
ceptions as  to  the  respective  notions  which  should  he 
attached  to  the  words  ^  individual  *  and  ^  species.' 

It  might,  and  doubtless  will,  be  thought  by  many, 
that  whatever  conflicting  opinions  may  be  entertained 
of  the  precise  meaning  of  the  latter  term,  no  similar 
doubts  could  prevail  concerning  the  significance  of 
the  word  'individual.'  Such,  however,  is  not  tbc 
case.  Attempts,  based  upon  much  good  and  legitimate 
reasoning,  have  been  made  by  Dr.  Carpenter^  and 
Prof.  Huxley  2  to  distinguish  between  the  ordinary 
meaning  of  this  word  and  the  special  meaning  Id 
which  it  is  thought  desirable  that  it  should  be  under- 
stood by  biologists.  So  many  subsequent  writers  have, 
moreover,  accepted  the  views  and  phraseology  which 
they  proposed,  that  the  words  'phytoid*  and  'zooid'arc 
now  frequently  to  be  met  with  in  the  pages  of  botanical 
and  zoological  writers.  Hence  it  is  all  the  more  ifl" 
cumbent  that  we  should  enquire  into  the  propriety  <* 
continuing  to  maintain  the  distinctions  which  these 
words  were  intended  to  suggest — that  we  should  en- 
deavour, in  fact,  to  ascertain  whether  such  distinctions 
are  still  required,  or  whether  they  are  even  compatible 
with  our  present  state  of  knowledge. 

»  *  Brit,  and  For.  Med.  Chir.  Rev.'  vol,  i.  (1848)  p.  183,  and  vat*^' 
(1849)  p.  436. 

•  'Philos.  Trans.*  1851,  pp.  576-579;   and  'Ann.  of  Nat  I***^"' 
and  ser.,  vol.  ix.  p.  505. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  543 


:  be  recollected  that  difficulties  always  beset 
when  we  attempt  to  define  or  separate  by 
fast  lines,  things  which — being  evolved  from 
er — are  produced  by  a  gradual  process  of  modifi- 
:  most  frequently  happens  that  no  definition  can 
which  will  not  involve  some  contradictions, 
emains,  therefore,  in  such  a  case  is  to  strive 
iiat  meaning  for  any  word  in  question  which 
x>ngruous  with  its  usual  meaning,  and  the 
of  which   will   involve   the   fewest   contra- 

it  now  going  into  the  reasons  which  have  been 
both  sides— and  which  have  been  very  fairly 
by  Dr.  Carpenter^ — we  will  simply  state  that 
igree  with  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  ^  in  thinking 
Itions  above  mentioned  to  be  best  fulfilled 
lering  that  ^  a  biological  individual  is  any 
whole,  having  a  structure  which  enables  it, 
zi^  in  appropriate  conditions,  to  continually 
internal  relations  to  external  relations,  so 
aintain  the  equilibrium  of  its  functions.' 
1,  as  Mr.  Spencer  adds: — ^In  pursuance  of 
eption,  we  must  consider  as  individuals,  all 
)lly  or  partially  independent  organized  masses 
ise  by  multicentral  and  multiaxial  develop- 
lat  is  either  continuous  or  discontinuous, 
t  accord   the   title    to   each   separate   aphis, 

ndples  of  Comp.  Physiol.,*  4th  ed.,  1854,  pp.  523-539. 
ndples  of  Biology/  yoI.  L  p.  207. 


344  '^^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

each  polype  of  a  polypidom,  each  bud  or  shoot  q£  a 
flowering  plant^  whether  it  detadies  itself  as  a  bulbel 
or    remains    attached   as   a   branch.'     All    these   are 
^  capable  of  independently  carrying  on  that  continuous 
adjustment  of  inner  to  outer  relations  which  constitutes 
Life/  and  therefore  we  may  look  upon  them  as  bio 
logical  individuals — even  though  some  of  them  do  not 
actually  exist  as  concrete  wholes  which  are  entirely 
separate.    Individuals,  in  fact^  are  at  first  single  and 
separate,  though  they  may  give  origin  to  others  which 
either  remain  in  a  state  of  aggregation  or  which  may 
separate  from  one  another,  according  as  their  growth 
is  continuous  or  discontinuous.    This  mode  of  viewing 
the  question  seems  to  me  to  be  the  one  which  involves 
the  fewest  inconsistencies,  though  in  order  to  make  this 
position  clear  to  others,  we  must  enter  upon  certain 
preliminary  discussions. 

The  modes  by  which  separate  individuals  have  been, 
seen  to  arise  are  so  various  that  they  will  be  best  under* 
stood  in  relation  to  one  another  by  throwing  them  into 
a  tabular  form^  We  shall  thus  be  enabled  to  brin^ 
out  the  differences  and  resemblances  between  the* 
several  methods  more  clearly  and  briefly  than  we  could 
otherwise  do. 


*  The  Homogenetic  modes  of  origin  have  been  already  referred  tc^ 
(see  vol.  i.  pp.  232-235);  they  must  now  be  classified  with  the  Hetero- 
genetic  modes  of  origin. 


)y[oDKs  or  Obmw  or  larDimiDiirT  Linxo  Umn* 


f 


I 

P 


M 

< 

I 


o 
P 


lit 


2 
JT 


0 
O 

s* 


u 


^ '        'ouaNaoonoH 

N  n 


546  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Of  these  five  ultimate  methods,  two  or  more  art 
often  associated  in  giving  origin  to  a  single  new  indi- 
vidual, though  at  times  one  alone  may  be  instnunaitaL 
They  are  all  more  or  less  closely  related  to  one  another, 
and  are  immediately  dependent  upon  the  fundamental 
properties  of  living  matter.  Some  of  the  processes  arc, 
moreover,  quite  similar  to  those  which  go  on  in  not-living 
matter.  Elements  combine,  acids  and  bases  combine; 
and  similarly,  colloidal  molecules  may  unite  and  undergo 
rearrangements,  so  as  to  give  origin  to  units  (rf  living 
matter  (Archebiosis).  Again,  as  we  have  previously 
pointed  out,  Biocrasis  is  but  a  further  stage  of  the 
process  which  occurs  in  Archebiosis;  whilst  Bioparadosis 
(or  secondary  evolution)  is  also  most  closely  allic^  to  ] 
the  same  process.  The  occurrence  of  Biocxnosis  JS 
dependent  upon  the  inherent  complexity  and  mobility 
of  the  ultimate  molecules  of  living  matter;  whilst, in 
their  actual  nature,  such  processes  are  strictly  comparable 
with  the  phenomena  of  allotropism  and  isomerism  ^ 
they  occur  amongst  not-living  elements  and  compounds. 
Bickliaeresis  (or  discontinuous  growth)  is  essentially  ^ 
pendent  upon  a  higher  manifestation  of  the  sapc 
property — constituting  as  it  does  one  of  the  ©^ 
distinctive  characteristics  of  living  matter. 

The  simple  individuals  which  arise  by  any  of  thcs^ 
various  methods  may,  when  their  ^discontinuous  growth 
is  rapid — owing  to  the  occurrence  of  processes  of  fissio^ 
or  gemmation— give  rise  to  many  small  and  separate 
individuals.     Whilst  others,  when  they  do  not  undcrgC> 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  547 

recesses,  develop  into  more  complex  individualt- 
iiich  are  produced  by  the  gradual  differentiation 
f  individuals  as  growth  progresses^  and  the  con- 
cohesion  of  these  new  and  old  individuals  into 
le  mass,  assuming  the  form  of  this  or  that  or- 


wbat  meaning  are  we  to  attach  to  the  word 
»'?  An  ability  to  produce  their  like  displayed  by 
lividuals  of  successive  generations  of  similar  forms, 
led  with  a  changeability  not  going  beyond  certain 
'  limits,  were  the  two  fundamental  ideas  formerly 
ed  by  the  word.  An  original  representative  of 
pedes  was  for  a  long  time,  and  very  generally, 
ed  to  have  been  specially  created  with  the  power 
etuating  itself  by  reproduction.  Different  specific 
wrerc,  therefore,  not  supposed  to  be  derived  one 
mother  by  any  gradual  process  of  change,  but  to 
een  created  in  the  form  in  which  they  are  seen 
t.  Now,  however,  thanks  more  especially  to  the 
p  of  Mr.  Darwin,  this  hypothesis  is  no  longer 
id  as  an  established  truth  by  a  large  and  in- 
g  number  of  naturalists,  whilst  it  is  wholly 
1  by  very  many  of  the  most  eminent  biologists 
xresent  day.  The  old  ^special-creation-hypothesis* 

t  iadindiialized  portions  of  such  a  mass  may  from  time  to  time 
eitlier  as  agamic  buds  or  as  *  seeds '  and  *  ova ' — and  each  of 
anted  portions  of  the  organism  are  themselves  capable  of 
ag  more  or  less  similar  processes  of  development 

N  n  2 


548  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

is,  indeed,  now  looked  upon  as  a  well-n^  exploded 
notion — as  one  which,  whilst  favoured  by  no  valid 
evidence  whatsoever,  is  absolutely  opposed  to  mud 
general  and  special  knowledge  of  the  highest  worth  K 
Doctrines  of  Evolution  are,  therefore,  beconaing  more 
and  more  popular  amongst  biologists,  and  the  mutability 
of  species  is  now  very  generally  proclaimed. 

If,  then,  the  old  word  ^species'  is  to  be  retained, 
its  connotation  of  immutability  must  be  understood 
to  have  been  lopped  oft^  so  that  *  ability  to  rcpfo- 
duce  their  like  through  successive  generations'  would 
remain  as  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  those 
assemblages  of  similar  individuals  which  are  usually 
grouped  under  the  word  'species/  The  term  would 
seem,  then,  to  be  applicable  to  any  assemblage  of 
living  things,  the  members  of  which  were  capable, 
through  many  generations,  of  giving  rise  to  other 
similar  forms  by  a  process  of  reproduction. 

But,  it  may  be  asked,  is  it  or  is  it  not  of  conse- 
quence how  this  process  of  multiplication  is  brought 
about  ?  Processes  of  fission  or  of  gemmation,  variously 
combined,  constitute  the  sole  modes  of  reproductiofl 
occurring  amongst  all  that  vast  assemblage  of  organic 
forms  which  were  provisionally  included  by  Professor 
Haeckel  in  the  kingdom  Protista.  Amongst  the  vegetal 
forms,  it  is  true,  processes  of '  conjugation  *  are  also  met 
with—representing  the  first  dawnings  of  the  more  com- 

*  For  an  excellent  summary  of  the  evidence  on  this  subject,  see  Mr- 
Herbert  Spencer's  •  Principles  of  Biology,*  rol.  i.  pp.  333-364, 


mS  BECWNINGS  OF  LIFE.  549 

lex  *  sexual'  method  of  reproduction.  And,  on  the 
ther  hand,  amongst  the  more  distinctly  animalized 
^mens  of  the  Protista^  processes  of  fission  and  of 
eternal  gemmation  gradually  become  mingled  with 
ocesses  of  internal  gemmation  or  budding,  as  in  the 
iliated  Infusc»-ia. 

Whilst,  outside  the  pale  of  the  Protistic  kingdom,  we 
d  amongst  Rotifers  that  fission  and  external  gem- 
ation  for  a  time  disappear,  so  as  to  give  place  to 
more  frequent  reproduction  by  internal  buds  or 
^msast^  formed  within  a  rudimentary  ovarium.  And, 
milarly,  amongst  the  Tardigrades,  the  mode  of  repro- 
iction  seems  to  be  also  for  the  most  part  of  the 
texual. variety — ^^ gemmae'  resembling  ova  being  gene- 
illy  produced  within  an  ovarium,  a  little  more  distinct 
tan  that  which  is  met  with  amongst  Rotifers.  But 
lie  power  of  homogenetic  reproduction  in  these  re- 
oarkable  organisms  is  not  limited  to  the  rudimentary 
jeoerative  oiigaa.  Dr.  Gros  tells  us  that  the  dead  Tar- 
%radc  may  uRimately  be  resolved  into  specimens  of 
tainophrys,  Peranemata,  or  Arcellinae  by  processes  of 
^^agenesis  in  every  way  similar  to  those  occurring 
lOloogst  Rotifers  ^  And  whilst  such  heterogenetic  pro- 
factg  of  the  Tardigrade  may,  at  different  times,  be 
Sfter  all  of  one  kind  or  variously  intermixed,  it  occa- 
lonally  happens  that  two  or  three  of  the  spherical 
''ilKs  into  which  the  body-substance  becomes  resolved 
*»dop  into  young  Tardigrades^^ven  when  the  re- 

^  ^ftt  pp.  483-486. 


550 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


maining  portions  take  on  the  forms  of  Actinophrys, 
Peranemata,  or  Arcellinae.     In  other  cases  still,  where 
the  dying  Tardigrade  is  perhaps  placed  under  more 
fevourable  conditions,   its  whole   internal  substance, 
after  a  process  of  fusion  and  molecular  elabotaticus 
divides  into  large  germ-masses  (Fig.  96,  d)^  and  these 


Fro.  96. 

Homogenetic  Pangenesis  in  Tftrdigrades.    (Gros.) 
ff.  Seven  large  germs,  into  which  the  total  internal  substance  of 

parent  has  become  resolved — each  of  them  being  capable  of 

veloping  into  a  Tardigrade. 
h,  A  variety  of  the  same  process,  in  whidi  a  very  large  mass  rapi 

develops  into  a  very  large  embryo.    Other  embryos  seen  in  a  m«^^^ 

earlier  stage. 

directly  develop  into  young  Tardigrades,  which,  i^ 
about  ten  days,  show  their  first  independent  move- 
ments. The  number  of  young  thus  produced  is  very 
variable.  There  may  be  as  many  as  twelve  or  fourteen 
formed  within  the  same  parent,  though  at  other  times 
the  number  is  smaller,  and  one  or  two  of  the  embryos 


TjfE  PEcrxxixcs  OF  I.//-/:.  -- 


may  be  very  much  larger  than  the  rest.  For  it  some- 
times happens  that  a  mass  of  the  body-substance  which 
would  ordinarily  divide  into  three  or  four  germs  under- 
goes organization  as  a  whole,  so  as  to  produce  a  single 
Taidigrade  (4)  '•  Such  a  gigantic  specimen  is  generally 
remarkable  for  its  superior  vigour  and  for  the  greater 
rapidity  with  which  its  developmental  changes  are 
adiievcd.  In  this  respect  it  leaves  its  more  diminutive 
relatives  fer  behind.  Thus  it  is  seen  that  whilst  Tar- 
(iigrades  may  undergo  all  the  processes  of  heterogenetic 
Pangenesis  which  are  to  be  encountered  amongst  Roti- 
fers, they  also  stand,  so  far  as  we  know,  alone,  from  the 
^  that  they  are  capable  of  undergoing  this  remarkable 
process  of  homogenetic  Pangenesis,  and  because,  even 
ta  the  same  animal,  we  may  see  how  imperceptibly 
l^rterogencsis  may  give  place  to  homogenesis  ^.  It  is 
Dot,  however,  until  we  reach  other  animals,  such  as 
Acari  and  Nematoids,  that  well  attested  males  and 
feflialcs  are,  as  a  rule,  encountered.  Although  even 
*DK)ngst  some  of  them  it  would  seem  that  buds  capable 
rf  developing  into  young  Acari  or  young  Nematoids, 
*  the  case  may  be,  are  still  occasionally  produced 
^'ithin  the  reproductive  organs  of  the  female  quite 
^''tspectively  of  any  male  influence. 

'  Loc.  dt.,  p.  443. 

*  Although  dead  Rotifers  do  not  resolve  themselves  into  masses  of 
^*^  which  are  capable  of  developing  directly  into  similar  Rotifers, 
'''tts  Dr.  Gros  has  pointed  out,  the  specimens  of  Actinophrys  or  other 
****«  which  they  do  yield  by  Pangenesis,  very  frequently  develop  into 
^'^^kn  (though  often  of  a  different  kind)  after  a  previous  existence  in 
^  or  more  intennediate  states  (see  p.  505}. 


552  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFB. 

Thus  the  asexual  mcxles  of  reprcxluction  whidi  ex 
sively  prevail  amongst  the  multitudinous  groups 
lower  organisms  included  amongst  the  Protista,  p 
by  the  most  easy  gradations^  into  the  simplest  ki 
of  sexual  generation;  and  these  simpler  modes  c^ses 
reproduction  gradually  give  place  to  more  speciali 
processes  of  the  same  kind.  We  find,  moreover,  t 
individuals  which  have  been  produced  by  an  ases 
process  are  often  precisely  similar  to  others  that 
the  products  of  fertilized  germs.  We  find  tiiat 
asexual  methods  of  reproduction  predominate  amor 
some  creatures  which  are,  nevertheless,  occasion: 
capable  of  multiplication  by  the  hi^er  sexual  meth 
And,  lastly,  we  find  even  in  the  highest  organisms  wh 
habitually  multiply  themselves  by  the  sexual  process, 
asexual  mode  of  multiplication  occasionally  taking  pk 
We  have  examples  of  this  latter  class  of  cases  in 
^  Parthenogenesis '  which  occurs  in  some  of  the  Lc 
doptera  and  other  highest  types  of  insect  life ;  and  a 
in  the  fission  of  the  early  embryonic  mass  which  see 
occasionally  to  take  place  during  the  origin  of  any 
the  forms  of  the  vertebrate  series — not  excepting  M 
himself  ^ 

The  gradual  interblending  and  diflferentiation  of  t 
asexual  and  of  the  sexual  processes  may  be  seen  from  t 
following  synoptical  table,  in  which  an  attempt  has  be 
made  to  classify  the  best  known  modes  of  multiplicati* 
or  reproduction  which  occur  amongst  living  things  :- 

*  Dr.  Carpenter's  •  Comparative  Physiology/  4th  cd.,  pp.  480  and  5I 


ox 


j  OF   SEXUAL   DIFFERENTIATION.* 


\ 


Vcmbr>-onaI  areas'  of  I'ellicle. 


'Vrifjiyra. 

vinecUnK  tubule — Mesocarpus. 
II  of  one  of  fiiaxaKtiXA—Sfirogyra. 

\  larger  than  i^^K.n\s—Diatoma<eu. 

Which  develops  without  sef^nentatioD — Dtsmidue. 

^Vhich  sctfncnts  into  many  oihcn—Paimojj^iaa,  Grtgarina^  &c. 

I 

IR  single  embryo  mass  which  does  not  segment— /'arawMn'MM,  AV/- 

fr.  &c. 

ii;  embryo  mass  which  subsequently  segments  and  yields— AA'n.Ti/j. 

%a-ba,  or  Fuiigus-spores. 

J 

IST  single  embryo  mass  which  does  not  segment— .^(yi/<t/i>i<i  scuta. 

Lichens  and  Fungi. 

■Inia: '  of  individuals  which  possess  both  male  and  female  organs— 
YucHs  lanaltcMiatus,  and  many  Flowering  Plants  (bulbils). 

I.  Gemmation  not  taking  place  in  definite  organs— 
Fucus  vesicutosus,  Floridia,  Cilto^ratlt  Acaltpka, 
Actinia  lacertUa, 


yiranc'  where 
irgans  occur 

i 


3.  Gemmation  taking  place  within  female  sexual  organs 
— Rotifcra  (!),  Acari,  Dafknin^  Aphides,  Lepido- 
ptera,  &c.,  CoUbegy***  iuid  other  plants. 


)ls,  in  addition  to  a  process  of '  alternate  generation  '—Marchantiaceu 


jttnd  Marsiteacta, 

I 


:i 


9. 


Multiplication  by  'gemmation'  of  representatives  of  lower  meta- 
phoric  stages — Lycopadiacea,  Equisetacett,  Fiiices,  Tenia  eehiHc- 
coccus. 

Multiplication  by  'gemmation'  reoeated  through  several  dcriva- 
tive  generations— 7>^maAH/rf,  Hepatica,  and  nosses. 


I 


Vegetation  of  lower  me* 
tamorphic    stage   into  • 
an  associated  colony. 


a.  Units  remaining  aigmgaXcA—Bryo' 

»ca  and  Compound  Ascidians. 

b.  Units  separating  when  sexual  organs 

are  mature— Many  r«M(<r  and  some 
Annelids. 


No  multiplication  of  lower  metamorphic  stages  —  Hoiothuridir, 
Synapta,  Cirrhipedia,  solitary  Ascidia,  &c. 


ielopment— A/A/MXtf  and  Trematoda  (with  large  ova),  Lameliibranchiata, 

X.  Metamorphic    /Multiplication  by  'gemmation'  in  lower  stages- 
development.    \    Safpo!. 


I.  Uninterrupted 
development 


'z.  Metamorphic 
development. 


3.  Uninterrupted 
development. 


a.  Embryo  undergoes  process  of  fission— JE^/u. 

b.  Embryo   undergoes   no    process    of  fission— 

LumbricidtK,  Gasteropoda  (pulmoniferous), 
Ptervpoda,  &c 

.a.  Multiplication  by  '  gemmation '  in  lower  stages 
— Tubutarian  Hydrvida,  some  Gastercp^a 
and  some  Mosses. 

b.  No  multiplication  by  'gemmation'— fr A m^ 
dermata,  Crustacea,  itcrsibranckiaie  Mot' 
lusca  and  Tubicola,  Gasteropoda  (aquatic), 
Insecta  and  Amphibia. 

a,  'Fission'  In  one  of  parents  (wherebr  male  re- 

productive organs  are  separated)— ^'a/Zu- 
Mtria  and  Arfonaut. 

b.  'Fission'  may  or  mav  not  occur  in  earliest 

stages  of  embryo— Many  Flowering  Phmtit 
Helianthoid  and  Asteroid  Polypes,  Ctcar- 
cinus  and  Astacus  Jluviatilis,  Arachnidot 
Pisces,  ReptUia,  Avts,  hlammaliak. 


abow  the  gradual  rise  of  lesual  differtntialkm,  «Bd  V!te-<ii«|\&'«\&i:Yk 

tirOyhifth  in  the  scale  of  orsanlndcm,  u  \&  thft  entorviAoci  ^ 
unkm  of  note  and  female  Ib  Syngamus  trachteUi*^  aa  ^^  «a  «feB«x 

\.Ti» /tee  p.  SSP>* ''■^  ^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  553 

Now,  in  spite  of  such  facts  as  are  shown  in  the 
Tcceding  table,  Dr.  Carpenter '  and  Prof.  Huxley  have 
irgued  that  the  product  of  a  single  fertilized  germ 
should,  in  all  cases,  be  considered  to  constitute  a  single 
biological  *  individual ' — even  though  such  product  may, 
in  the  course  of  its  development,  have  given  rise  by 
fesion  or  gemmation  to  a  whole  multitude  of  separate 
individuals,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term.  They 
have  proposed,  moreover,  that  the  separate  constituents 
3f  this  biological  individual  should  be  designated  by 
*c  term  ^  phytoid '  or  *  zooid,'  according  as  we  have  to 
Jo  with  a  plant  or  with  an  animal  form. 

The  objections  to  this  view  of  the  case  now  appear  to 
^  many  and  insuperable.  Thus,  the  view  seems  based 
Pon  the  supposition  that  a  sexual  mode  of  generation 
^cessarily  exists  amongst  all  forms  of  life.  And  yet  the 
^ion  that  the  earliest  living  things  would  begin  to  mul- 
Ply  by  a  sexual  process  of  generation  is  certainly  not 
^plied  by  the  doctrine  of  Evolution.  We  can,  how- 
ler, much  more  easily  understand  how  such  a  notion 
ose  and  was  generally  accepted  whilst  the  'special- 
^tion-hypothesis '  was  still  unrejected,  and  when  our 
^Owledge  concerning  the  lower  forms  of  life  was  of 
^Horc  limited  nature.  TTien  older  naturalists  inva- 
^ly  looked  about  for  a  sexual  method  of  reproduction, 

a  process  essentially  necessary,  just  as  others  have 
^n  led  to  seek,  and  to  fancy  they  have  found,  even 

^  See  Dr.  Carpenter's  '  Comparative  Physiology/  p.  528. 


554  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

in  the  simplest  organisms,  all  those  various  spec 
parts  with  which  they  have  become  familiar  in 
organisms !  The  venerable  Ehrenberg  was  not  sj 
unless  he  could  find  in  a  ciliated  Infusorium,  a 
esophagus,  stomach,  and  anus ;  tc^ether  with  he 
circulatory  system,  as  well  as  male  and  female 
organs.  Whilst  we  may  smile  now  at  the  sin 
which  dictated  all  these  expectations,  it  must  I 
fessed  that  the  postulation  of  the  existence  of  a 
process  in  all  organisms,  and  the  distinction  b 
true  and  false  processes  of  generation  which  hai 
consequently  advanced,  are  founded  upon  simih 
solete  points  of  view.  So  that  if  a  sexual  pro 
multiplication  did  exist  from  the  first,  it  wo 
a  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  those  doctri 
Evolution  to  which,  in  other  respects.  Prof.  Hux 
Dr.  Carpenter  have  for  many  years  given  ii 
adhesion  ^. 

*  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  process  of  *  conjugation 
us  with  one  of  the  first  steps  which  gradually  lead  on  in  the  dii 
more  specialized  modes  of  sexual  reproduction.  But  why,  il 
asked,  should  the  matter  within  two  contiguous  cells  of  a  Spiro 
tend  to  fuse  in  this  manner  ?  One  can  only  suppose  that  tl 
within  such  cells  must  have  assumed  some  *  polar '  condition  in 
becomes  capable  of  exercising  an  attractive  influence  upon  othe 
less  similar  matter,  and  of  being  acted  upon  in  turn.  It  is, 
most  interestmg  to  find  that  undoubted  attractions  and  repu 
occur  amongst  higher  plants^^ven  although  in  them  such  m 
towards  or  from  one  another  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  j 
reproduction.  Thus  Mr.  A.  Henry  has  pointed  out  (*  Gardem 
nicle,'  Dec.  9,  1871)  that  certain  climbing  plants  display  a  par 
plants  of  some  other  species  by  stretching  out  their  tendrils  or 


THE  niAiixMXiis  ('/-■  ////■.  ->-.- 

%>  Kl 'I 


But,  as  our  table  indicates,  processes  of  agamic  gene- 
ration arc  alone  met  with  amongst  myriads  of  the 
lowest  forms  of  life,  which,  hitherto,  have  not  only 
been  regarded  as  distinct  'species,'  but  have  been 
ranged  under  different  kingdoms,  classes,  orders,  etc. 

And  the  table  also  shows  that  similar  agamic  processes 
of  fission  may  occasionally  take  place  in  the  embryos, 
even,  of  vertebrate  animals.     So  that  if  Prof.  Huxley's 
*nd  Dr.  Carpenter's  notions  were  to  be  adopted,  we 
'night  be  compelled  to  deny  the  attribute  of  indivi^ 
^fuality  to  each  of  the  products  of  a  twin  birth,  because 
^  two  may  have  originated  by  a  process  of  fission  in 
^e  early  embryo:  the  two  persons  would  in  such  a 
^^*se  be  ^  zooids,'  or  component  halves  of  one  indivi- 
^^1,  however  repugnant  such  a  conclusion  might  be 
^  our  ordirikry  conceptions.     For  if  all  the  products 
^  a  fertilized  germ  are  to  be  considered  as  one  '  indi- 
vidual/ it  would  of  course  make  no  difference  to  those 
^ho  thought  it  best  to  adopt  such  a  nomenclature, 
whether  the  gprm  or  embryo  divided  in  its  earliest 
®^*gcs,  or  whether  it  multiplied  by  a  process  of  budding 
^  some  later  period  of  its  development.     In  each  case 
^he    products,  however   numerous,  would   have  to  be 
'^Barded  as  constituting  only  one  bidogical  '  indivi- 
«Ual/    Fortunately,  however,  for  those  who  might  have 

^  ^  to  eome  into  contact  with  them ;  whilst  towards  other  species 
Ir^  same  climbing  plants  seem  to  display  just  as  marked  an  aversion. 
^^  avoid  one  another  and  never  touch,  whilst  running  up  the  same 
^*U  side  by  side. 


55^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


been  much  perturbed  by  this  aspect  of  the  question,  the 
view  is,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  undesirable  on 
other  grounds.     Whilst   it    is  not    adopted   by  Mr. 
Herbert  Spencer,  it  is  also  discountenanced  by  Prof- 
Allen  Thomson,  who  said  ^,  even    in   1855,  in  Ws 
valuable  article  on  the  ^  Ovum ' : — ^  It  seems  to  requU^ 
a  greater  departure  from  the  ordinary  signification  ^ 
a  common  term  than  is  warranted  by  our  present  i<^ 
perfect   knowledge  of  the  phenomena,  arbitrarily    ^ 
determine  to  regard  merely  as  one  individual  all  thc^ 
bodies  which  may  be  formed  by  a  non-sexual  proo^'^ 
from  the  product  of  a  single  ovum,  notwithstanding  t:-^^ 
great  variations  in  their  structure  and  mode  of  li^^^' 
and  the  complete  separation  and  apparent  independea-^^ 
to  which  they  may  attain/ 

It  should  not  be  forgotten,  in  fact,  that  the  wordM^^*' 
dividual '  is  a  general  name  of  the  widest  applicabilit:^  7> 
whilst  ^species'  is  an  abstract  name — correspondic^^^ 
to  no  external  reality — which  is,  therefore,  capable 
receiving  an  amended  signification,  without  much  i: 


convenience,  whenever   the  progress  of  science  xtn^^l 


demand  any  such  change.  The  connotation  of 
word  ^species'  has  indeed  already  been  unmistakcal^'y 
modified  in  the  minds  of  many  persons,  even  witb^^ 
this  generation;  and  we  think  it  will  be  found  ti^^ 
all  the  difficulties  experienced  by  those  naturali^"^^ 
who  thought  it  necessary  to  alter  the  meaning  of  ^^_ 
word  *  individual,'  will  be  cleared  away  at  less  c( 

*  •  Cyclop,  of  Anat.  and  Phys/  (Supplement),  voL  y.  p.  39. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE  557 

nd  also  much  more  eiFectually,  by  some  further  limita- 
ions  in  respect  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  'species,' 
och  as  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  now  renders 
bsolutely  necessary. 

Must  we  suppose  that  all  the  forms  of  Life  which 
e  capable  of  reproducing  their  like  or  of  'breeding 
ae'  through  successive  generations,  whether  by  a 
Kual  or  by  an  asexual  process,  are  to  be  considered 
belong  to  distinct  'species'?  Although  this  is  the 
?w  to  which  our  previous  remarks  seemed  to  tend, 
•  must  not  hastily  commit  ourselves  to  any  such 
Qception. 

We  find  living  matter  coming  into  existence  de  mav&y 
d  possessed  of  a  marvellous  plasticity,  so  that  dif- 
cnt  parts  of  it  may,  in  more  or  less  rapid  succession, 
sume  now  one  now  another  of  a  countless  series  of 
Sanic  forms.  During  each  of  these  periods  also  we 
d  the  several  forms  multiplying  themselves  by  pro- 
ises  of  fission  or  gemmation,  and  all  the  products 
such  multiplication  capable  c^  undergoing  similar 
S  of  changes — the  nature  of  which  always  vary  ac- 
ttling  to  the  precise,  though  unknown,  molecular 
cUities  of  the  di£Ferent  kinds  of  living  matter  and 
s  conditions  to  which  they  are  subjected.  The  pro- 
Cts  of  a  single  stock  may,  moreover,  display  a  con- 
lerable  amount  of  diversity,  because  the  precise 
Secular  composition  of  the  matter  is  so  readily 
^cred,  and  because  each  of  these  alterations  involves 


558 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


a  new  mode  of  moving  equilibrium   whidb  may  of 
necessity  entail  changes  in  form  and  structure. 

We  have,  therefore,  primordial  specks  of  living 
matter  assuming  the  forms  of  Bacteria,  of  Torute, 
and  of  the  simplest  corpuscular  Algx,  all  of  whid 
may  multiply  their  kind  indefioitely  j  we  have  these 
organisms  at  last  taking  on  more  continuous  nxxles 
of  growth,  and  thus  unfolding  into  the  most  varied 
forms  of  simple  Fungi,  and  also  into  filamentous  or 
thalloid  Algx  :  whilst  the  latter,  according  to  D^* 
Braxton  Hicks  and  others,  may,  in  their  turn,  undcip 
modifications  whereby  they  give  rise  to  simple  licbctJS 
or  Mosses — all  of  which  also  possess  the  power  of  s^S' 
multiplication.  At  other  times,  however,  instead  * 
witnessing  the  gradual  unfolding  of  simple  living  Mt^ 
into  higher  forms,  we  may  see  changes  take  place 
aggregations  of  the  simplest  units,  which,  in  difier^" 
cases,  may  terminate  in  the  evolution  of  large  Fungu-^" 
germs,  of  Amabae,  of  Monads,  of  Ciliated  Inftisor 
or  even  of  Rotifers  and  Nematoids.  These  vari 
animal  forms — each  of  which  is  capable,  by  one  orotl 
method,  of  multiplying  its  own  kind — are  also  to  a 
great  extent  mutually  convertible  into  one  another, 
in  addition,  the  several  forms  are  capable  of  bci^^Tg 
derived  more  or  less  directly  from  portions  of  vcg*^ 
matter  thrown  ofF  from  one  of  the  Algsc,  Lichens,  ^^ 
Mosses — although  other  portions  of  similar  matter  IT^  -^^ 
become  converted  into  Desmids  or  Diatoms. 

Thus  amongst  the  lower  forms  of  life  the  correlati 


foc: 


1* 


tt 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  559 

s  seen  to  be  so  intimate — the  transitions  are  so  rapid 
ukI  irregular  in  their  actual  course  on  different  occasions 
—that  we  cannot  now  look  upon  them  as  representing 
listinct  ^species':  although  each  of  them  may  be  per- 
Fcctly  capable  of  *  breeding  true  *  on  one  or  more  occa- 
sions. Neither  do  the  several  forms  occur  in  regularly 
recurring  groups,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  say  that  such 
ind  such  varieties  are  mere  developmental  stages  of 
^c  and  the  same  ultimate  form^.  It  is,  therefore, 
)n  this  account,  and  because  nothing  answering  to 
bose  regular  assemblages  of  definitely  recurring  forms 
rtiidi  we  include  under  the  word  *  species'  exists 
Qiongst  them,  that  I  propose,  henceforth,  to  speak  of 
teh  evanescent  and  transitory  organisms  as  ^Ephemero- 
»Orjrfis.'  In  the  main,  they  are  forms  of  Life  whose 
•otto  mig^t  fitly  enough  be  found  in  these  words  from 
vid_ 

'Corpora  vertuntur;  nee  quod  fuimusve,  somusve, 
Cras  erimus/ 

^nie  of  them,  however,  are  organisms  which  may  per- 
*t  in  the  same  condition  for  a  very  considerable  period. 
bisj  for  instance,  is  notably  the  case  with  certain 
*ictics  of  Lichen  which  often  live  for  a  very  long 
*iod*.     But  in  other  cases  the  forms  only  appear  to 

iUthougfa  this  is  the  case  occasionally  with  some  forms — as  when 
^  Sew  out  of  countless  multitudes  of  Bacteria  develop  through  Vibrio 
4  Leptothrix  forms  into  Fungi.  Here  it  stops,  however,  for  there  is  no 
1m1  prodnction  of  Bacteria  from  the  simple  Fungi. 
'  Tliui  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley  says :— •  Some  of  the  large  patches  of 
which  occur  on  rocks,  are  of  very  great  age.    Patches  of  such 


\^^ 


6^0 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


persist.  That  is  to  say,  whilst  they  are  individually 
shoft-lived,  and  are  most  prone  to  give  birth,  at  dif- 
ferent times,  to  other  organisms  of  the  most  varied 
nature,  they  are  also  exceedingly  apt  to  recur,  quite 
independently,  just  as  certain  crystalline  forms  arc  apt 
to  recur,  when  crystallizable  compounds  separate  ftoffl 
the  state  of  solution,  at  diflFerent  periods. 


Ephemeromorpks  and  ^  Alternate  Generatm! 

The  studies  which  have  revealed  some  of  the  ^ 
merous  and  complex  relationships  existing  bet«^^ 
the  multitudinous  varieties  of '  EphemeroBiorphs,'  \i^^ 
been  of  cardinal  importance  for  the  science  of  3^^ 
logy.  They  have  taught  us,  not  only  that  living  mat^'*^^ 
is  formable  de  novOy  but  that  it  possesses  inherent  t^^' 
dencies  of  such  a  nature  as  to  make  it  prone  to  unde^iP 
variations  in  constitution,  directly  leading  to  variati  ^^ 
in  external  form^  that  transitions  are  always  easy  ^ 
these  early  stages  from  the  simpler  vegetal  to 
more  complex  animal  modes  of  growth,  and  ^-^^^ 
versa  }  and  that,  in  the  main,  when  placed  unci^ 
favourable    conditions,    the    diflferent    forms   tend      ^^ 


rOS 


Lichens  as  Lecidea  geograpbica  probably  date  from   almost  fabol* 
periods,  and  even  small  patches  are  often  of  considerable  age.    I  ^' 
myself  watched  individuals  for  twenty-five  years,  which  are  now  ^^ 
in  the  same  condition  as  they  were  when  they  first  attracted  my  ^^^*^ 
Plants  which  endure  without  injury  such  extremes  of  temperature.  **" 
conditions  of  the  hygrometer,  would  seem,  a  priori^  to  be  likely  to  ** 
great  powers  of  longevity.'     (*  Introd.  to  Crypt.  Bot./  p.  418.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  561 

rome  more  and  more  complex.  But  in  conse- 
mce  of  those  laws  of  *  polarity/  upon  which  the 
m  of  the  simple  organism  depends,  almost  any 
rtions  of  such  organisms,  when  once  they  are  sepa- 
tcd  by  fission  or  gemmation,  grow  more  or  less 
mediately  into  similar  organic  forms  ^.  They  ^  breed 
e'in  all  their  stages — ^just  as  a  separated  fragment 
a  crystal,  when  it  remains  immersed  in  the  mother- 
Jor,  will  form  the  starting-point  of  another  similar 
stal.  So  that  where,  in  the  case  of  the  ephemero- 
rph,  the  parent  form  has  been  attained  by  a  con- 
nous  process  of  growth  and  development,  we  find 
t  the  spore  or  *  gemma*  which  is  ultimately  thrown 
tends  again  to  go  through  a  similar  series  of  changes. 
is  may  be  seen  in  the  development  of  a  Fungus- 
tidium  or  spore  into  a  form  similar  to  that  from 
ich  it  had  separated  But  where  a  succession  of 
Us   has   been   produced,    one    out  of  another,   by 

occurrence  of  several  successive,  though  *acci- 
ital,*  hetcrogenetic  transformations, — any  portion 
t  off  from  the  ultimate  form  is  apt  usually  at  once 
develop  into  an  organism  similar  to  that  ultimate 
51,  rather  than  to  reproduce  the  series  of  changes  by 
ich  it  may  have  arisen.  An  Oxytricha  or  a  Vorti- 
laj  for  instance,  which  may  have  been  produced  by 

transformation  of  a  Euglena  or  other  algoid  vesicle, 
Itiplies  its  own  form  by  fission  or  by  the  process 
gemmation ;  and  should  the  Vorticella  encyst  itself, 

*  Sec  p.  88. 
^CU  II.  o  o 


56  a  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

and  become  metamorphosed  into  a  Rotifer,  this  in 
turn,  when  it  multiplies,  whether  agamicallj  or  by 
true  eggs^  produces  other  Rotifers.    Again,  it  has  beefl 
ascertained   that   both   Rotifers    and   Nematoids  are 
capable  of  arising  directly  from  transforming  regetal 
vesicles  if  they  are  of  sufficient  size,  and  provided  they 
undergo  some  unknown  though  probably  distinct  pro- 
cesses of  total  molecular  change.    And  the  forms  wbidi 
have  been  thus  produced  also  multiply  their  own  kift^ 
without  exhibiting  the  least  tendency  to  reproduce  * 
vegetal  organism  similar  to  that  from  which  the  tra^ 
forming  vesicles  had  been  derived. 

As  soon  as  new  forms  arise  which  habitually  p^ 
duce  internal  buds  or  eggs,  such  organisms  may  be  se^ 
rated  in  an  important  manner  from  those  epheme^ 
morphs  from  which  they  have  been  produced.  Amon^ 
animals  and  plants  in  which  such  processes  occur, 
begin  to  find  those  definitely  recurring  forms  constituti 
'  species,'  to  which  we  have  above  alluded, 
homogenesis  has  now  become  the  rule,  and  the 
method  of  reproduction  has  more  or  less  definitc==^ 
commenced.  This  sexual  differentiation,  as  we  ha^ 
seen,  has  been  rapidly  attained  by  some  of  the  highc — 
representatives  of  heterogenetic  transformations,  aC^ 
some  of  these  forms,  such  as  Nematoids,  afterward 
continue  to  multiply  themselves  through  succcssi^^ 
generations  by  a  sexual  and  homogenetic  method. 

Seeing  that  the  product  of  transformation  in  each  of  tW 
above-mentioned  cases  subsequently  multiplies  (as  lo^ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  563 

IS  it  lasts)  after  the  homogenetic  method,  the  process 

itself  must,  in  each  of  such  cases,  have  been  one  of 

Heterogenesis.     These  transforming  molecular  changes 

most  have  been  total  and  complete, — since  all  organic 

memory  of  the  previous  phases  of  such  forms  seems 

to  have  been  effectually  blotted  out.     This,  however, 

appears  to  be  by  no  means  the  case  with  all  equally 

siinple  organisms.     In  some,  the  ascending  grades  of 

evolution  by  which  the  more  perfect  sexual  type  has 

l>ecn  achieved,  have  probably  been  much  more  gradual, 

*nd  where  this  is  the  case  some  of  these  grades  may 

^  preserved  in  the  developmental  changes  which  the 

'^cundated  germ  subsequently  goes  through.    The  germ 

*fces  not  tend  to  develop   immediately  into  a  form 

ttmilar  to  that  from  which  it  had  been  derived.     It 

'^cr  tends  to  grow  at  once  into  some  antecedent 

'^^iH,  and  to  attain  to  the   likeness  of  its   parent, 

"F  passing  through  developmental  changes  or  meta- 

''^Orphoses,   more  or   less   similar   to  certain  current 

^^rogenetic  changes  which  had  been  previously  apt 

*^  Occur. 

Whenever,  therefore,  a  given  series  of  develop- 
'^^^tal  changes  or  imperfect  transformations  has  ter- 
'^nated  in  the  production  of  a  sexual  form,  and  when 
^**csc  changes  have  not  involved  a  period  of  total 
'^Iccular  rearrangement,  the  germ,  by  a  power  of 
'^^Vcrsion'  (which  is  not  unfrequent  even  among  the 
^Rber  forms  of  life)  may  tend  to  reproduce  such  changes 
^'^ttisr  than  undergo  an  immediate  development  into 

002 


564  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


the  parent  form.  And  where  development  takes  place 
by  such  successive  stages — which,  as  it  were,  reproduce 
or  copy  previous  current  heterogenetic  changes-thc 
same  tendency  to  multiply  by  an  asexual  process  is 
manifested  by  the  several  forms  which  represent  the 
different  developmental  stages,  as  was  previously  dis- 
played by  the  several  heterogenetic  products. 

Heterc^enesis,  therefore,  would  thus  appear  to  be 
the  essential  underlying  cause  of  all  developmental 
transformations  or  metamorphoses;  and,  moreover, 
the  hitherto  unexplained  phenomena  of  *  alternate 
generation*  may,  perhaps,  be  deemed  to  receive  a 
rational  and  approximate  interpretation '. 

*  There  would  thus  be  three  distinct  modes  by  which  scxnal  repro- 
duction may  make  its  appearance  amongst  the  *  Ephemeromorphs  :— 

(a)  It  may  occur  as  it  were  •  accidentally/  at  long  and  altogew^ 
irregular  intervals,  during  some  of  the  later  stages  in  a  series  of  ep*** 
meromorphic  developments— and  then  in  a  very  rudimentary  minner- 
The  best  instances  of  this  are,  perhaps,  to  be  found  amongst  Fo^P- 
Thus  I  would  suggest  that  a  relationship  of  this  kind  probably  obU»* 
between  Uredo,  i^cidium,  and  Uromyces  as  a  possible  find  form  i" 
which  rudimentary  sexual  organs  may  become  differentiated. 

(6)  It  may  occur,  similarly,  in  one  of  the  later  stages  of  a  scries 
ephemeromorphic  transformations,  though   such   changes  may  sabs**^ 
quently  tend  to  recur  so  as  to  produce  a  case  of  cyclical  or  *  indirt^ 
homogenesis.     Portions  of  ephemeromorphic  life  are,  as  it  were,  tft 
nipped  off  and  preserved,  so  as  to  constitute  the  different  kin^ 
*  alternate  generation '  which  are  known  to  prevail  both  amongst  aniB** 
and  vegetal  forms  of  life. 

ic)  It  also  occurs  when  an  ephemeromorphic  series  ends  abnipur' 
i-  e.  when  by  some  final  process  of  heterogenesis  an  organism  w  » 
once   produced   which  subsequently  develops   sexual  characters,  ^ 
thenceforth  multiplies  by  the  homogenetic  method.     In  this  case  tbe 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  565 

n  ■ 

These  processes  of  *  alternate  generation'  formerly 
tracted  very  much  attention,  and  were  first  pro- 
inently  brought  under  the  notice  of  naturalists  by 
eeustrup,  in  1842 '.  Whether  occurring  amongst 
lima!  or  vegetal  forms,  the  processes  are  essentially 
laracterized  by  the  fact  that  a  fertilized  germ  goes 
ttoug^  two  or  more  metamorphic  stages  before  at- 
ining  the  perfect  form  in  which  similar  fertilized 
wns  arc  evolved  j  whilst  in  each  of  the  lower  stages 
ic  immature  forms  possess  the  power  of  multiplying 
;amically.  By  common  consent  such  a  succession  of 
nns  is  admitted  to  correspond  to  what  is  known  as 
I  organic  ^  species.'  The  fact  of  the  metamorphosis 
wld  of  course  have  no  eflFect  in  negativing  such  a 
cw,  seeing  that  it  has  hitherto  afforded  no  obstacle 
1  the  case  of  insects:  although  in  instances  of  ^alter- 
tte  generation/  a  further  complication,  it  is  true,  is 
troduced  by  the  fact  of  the  multiplication  which  takes 
to  amongst  the  lower  metamorphic  forms,  and  by  the 
ct  that  the  successive  stages  are  occasionally  mere 
Privative  forms  produced  by  a  process  of '  gemmation.' 
fce  fact  of  the  multiplication  of  the  transition  forms, 
'^cvcr,  cannot  introduce  any  real  difficulty,  since  a 

**Wgeiietic  germ  is  large,  the  organism  develops  without  melamor- 
i*^  tnd  subsequently  produces  large  germs  or  ova,  which  also  go 
'•Bjji  ft  similarly  *  direct '  process  of  development.  Instances  of  this 
^  amongst  Nematoids  and  Rotifers,  and  probably  also  amongst 
^Ifedusn,  Trematodes,  and  other  low  forms  of  life. 

Ib  his  *  Generations- Wechsel/  of  which  a  translation  was  published 
rtfcelUjSocieCyin  1845. 


566  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

process  of  fission  occurs  occasionally  even  in  the  very 
early  embryonic  stages   of  higher  animals — in  which 
the  mass  that  undergoes  the  process,  save  for  all  its 
inherited  potentialities,  differs  little  from  a  mass  of 
simplest  protoplasm.     And  again,  as  we  descend  in  the 
scale  of  organization,  the  lower  forms  of  life  are  found 
to  retain  more  and  more  of  those  tendencies  commoriy 
exhibited  by  the  lowest  forms  of  which  they  arc  the 
more  or  less  remote  descendants.      Thus  fission  ^ 
gemmation  exclusively  prevail  amongst  the  ephemc^^ 
morphs,  and  in  what  is  called  'alternate  generati^^ 
we  also  meet  with  such  processes  occirring  most  ab*^^' 
dantly  in  association  with  recurring  processes  of  m^ 
morphosis,  of  which  heterogenesis  supplies  the  origin^^ 

The  transition,  therefore,  from  the  fissi  parous  nt-- 
tiplication  of  the  germ  mass  which  may  take  pl2^ 
in  the  early  embryonic  stage  of  man  and  otl^ 
mammals,  to  the  multiplication  which  takes  place 
a  process  of  internal  gemmation  in  the  Aphides, 
to  those  other  processes  which  occur  amongst  the  low^" 
Invertebrata  and  Cryptogams— constituting  the  cas^ 
of  so-called  'alternate  generation' — is  most  gradu^ 
and  legitimate.  This  may  be  seen  from  the  fbUomt^ 
table,  in  which  some  of  the  principal  types  of  'alterna 
generation '  have  been  stated  in  the  simplest  mann 
with  the  view  of  facilitating  comparison,  and  thi 
leading  to  more  comprehensive  notions  concerning  tl 
real  nature  of  the  changes  which  take  place  and 
alliance  to  other  more  or  less  familiar  processes : — 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


667 


MOD8S  OF  DEVELOPMENT 

IN  KBLATION  TO 
CUAL  ICULTIPUCATXON  OCCURRING  DURING  ITS  PROGRESSL  • 


SipiUM  Internal  femaution. 
Signttes  fissioo  or  external  ifemntttloo. 
Budding,  without  separation. 

BttddloK  without  aeponulon  at  first.  tlxmKh  tubsequcatly 
separation  of  nm*  or  tUl  of  segmentAi 
M  Rtproduction  by  fertilised  {(emu. 


A.  Mmlt^  dtHvtMm /brmt—*  tiunaxit  generatioo.' 


(cd 


M 


ragatcd) 


8L  Moss  germ.  (^ 
AtKoaeai^  w) 
Protonema.  (r) 
Incipient  Moss.  (tO 
Mftturt  Moas.  (<) 


5.  MyriMnida  germ,  (r) 
Lanra.  (oO 
Mature  Myriankke.  (4 


f.  Sertulmria  germ. 
Ciliated  Embryo.  (<) 
Polypidom.  \di 
Capsules.  M 
Medusae,  (d 

n.  Flowering  Plant  germ.  \fid\ 
Immature  Plant  (r) 
Mature  Plant.  M 
(aggregated) 


>  r.  €ehino<0e€us  genn. 
Aodre  Embrya 
Hydated  Cvst  (oO 
Echinocoou.  (r) 
Mutura  Entoxoon.  (If 
Ploglottldes.  M 


&  T.  ttrrata  germ. 
Active  Emmra 

Srstlccrcus.  (<r) 
ature  Entozooo.  M 
Pirogloctidcs.  M 


9.  C9ryn*  g«f 

Ciliated  Embryo,  (r) 
Polypidom.  M 
Polypidom.  (cO 
Medusae.  (<) 

19  Aphit  germ. 

Immature  Aphis,  (at 
Immature  Aphis,  (a) 

&C. 

Mature  Aphis.  (<) 


r  ^UermedimMt  Ut-mttn  'buddittj['  and  tmtamorphosis—produd  qf  Lmrva  tingU. 


i>  AattHtu  germ. 
Blptonaria.  («) 
lanaature  Astcrias. 
Mature  Asterias.  k) 


14.  Echinus  germ. 
Pluteus.  (a) 
Iraroatura  Echinus 
Mature  Echinus,  (c) 


mi^dt  dtvetfpmtMt  ^ gtrm  $t»ck—imitk  rmuttiplicaiioH  and  ftutmmarfkosit. 


r«gttB(9 


16.  Atcidian  germ. 
Tadpole-like  larva. 
Ffaced  Asci^iaa.  <<f 
Mature  Asctdians.  {/) 
(aggregated) 


i7r«v«a0  germ. 
Ciliated  Embryo. 
Fixed  Bryoaoaa.  (c) 
Mature  Bryozoa. 
(aggregated) 


mHjr^ffii 


t^ gtriH'-viih  T  witkotU  m%tkiplicmiiOH,  htt  with  ma 
tnttamorf  hosts. 


B9.  E^lis  germ.  (^ 
Immature  Eolis. 
Mature  Eolis.  (c) 

ax.  Vertebrate  germ. 
Asexual  Vertebrattt. 
Mature  Vertebrate.  \A 


ao.  Vertebrate  germ.  {Vi 
Asexual  Vertebrate. 
Mature  Vertebrate.  (4 


■Oft  typical  modes  have  been  selected  and  stated  in  the  simplest  manner,  wHh 
*''*"'  cflaqtariacms  and  appreciation  id  real  relationships. 


568  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

From  what  has  been  hitherto  said,  it  would  ai^)carthat 
nothing  comparable  to  those  assemblages  which  have  pre- 
viously been  understood  to  constitute  a  ^species*  can  be 

• 

considered  to  exist  till  sexual  generation  begins  to  mani- 
fest itself  and  tends  to  recur.   Such  forms,  however, have 
been,  and  are  being,  gradually  evolved  in  ascending  series    , 
from  an  enormous  plexus  of  ephemeromorjAs,  which  ^ 
itself  being  constantly  reinforced  from  the  inoiganic 
world.     This  plexus  is  composed  of  untold  legions  ^ 
organisms — partly  animal  and  partly  vegetal,  and  o^  ^ 
inexpressibly  varied  size,  shape  and  hue — many  of  wl^ 
are  possessed  of  an  enormous  power  of  indepen3* 
self- multiplication,   and    of   adapting    themselves 
changed  conditions  by  taking  on  entirely  new  fbr'-^ 
We  have  now  seen,  moreover,  that  many  of  the  carl 
'species'  which  appear  are  represented  by  a  defi 
succession  of  varied  forms — such  as  we  meet  with 
the  cases  of  so-called  '  alternate  generation.' 

So  that  (referring  to  the  question  which  we  ha^ 
already  in  part  discussed  '),  as  distinct  'species'  are  ^ 
longer  found,  in  all  cases,  to  consist  of  only  one  set 
distinct  individuals,  and  as  no  such  assemblages 
similarly  recurring  forms  begin  to  exist  till  we  arri*^ 
at  plants  and  animals  which  have  attained  some  dcgr^* 
of  complexity,  it  is  our  notion  of  the  meaning  of  tic" 
word  'species'  which  ought  to  undergo  change,  rath^ 
than  our  notion  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  'in^ 
vidual.'    Individuality  in  every  sense  of  the  word  m^ 

'  Sec  pp.  553-557- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OP  LIFE.  569 

iccded  to  the  representatives  of  those  vast  multi- 
of  infusorial  and  cryptogamic  forms  which  col- 
rly  constitute  an  ever-changing  vital  plexus,  from 
rious  portions  of  which  well-marked  animals  and 

are  constantly  arising.  Biological  individuals, 
t,  exist  which  multiply  prodigiously  by  agamic 
ses  long  before  a  sexual  mode  of  reproduction 

to  manifest  itself,  and  therefore  long  before 

generative  acts'  are  performed,  and  before 
es'  begin  to  exist. 

iiat  instead  of  considering  the  total  product  of 
le  fecundated  germ  as  a  single  individual  (even 
it  comprises  what  others  would  call  hundreds 
ividuals),  an  alteration  in  our  conception  of  the 
^species' — which  is  now  actually  necessitated — 
\  to  clear  away  all  the  old  difficulties.  We 
[uite  easily  recognize  that,  just  as  individuals 
ther  simple,  or  complex  and  aggregated,  so 
es'  may  be  represented  either  by  definitely  re- 
5  series  of  different  individuals,  derived  one  from 
!r  by  agamic  processes — though  the  last  of  the 

develops  rudimentary  sexual  organs  in  which 
Kd  germs  are  produced,  constituting  the  first 
of  the  new  series ;  or  else  by  single  (hermaphro- 
>r  by  double  (male  and  female)  recurring  indi- 
%y  each  of  the  representatives  of  which  undergoes 
5  CJT  less  metamorphic  process  of  development. 

▼icws  which  we  have  hitherto  announced  also 


570                    THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 
1 ■ 

derive  additional  support  from   the    fact    that  e^ 
amongst  those  groups  of  animals  or  plants  in  wb 
'alternate  generation'  lai^cly  prevails^  some  sp» 
undergo  a  direct  process  of  development.    No  sor 
explanation  of  these  apparent  anomalies  has,  as  ; 
been  offered.    But  now  it  seems  that  they  are  i 
dered  in  some  degree  explicable  by  what  we  h 
learned  concerning  the  transformations  of  some  of 
ephemeromorphs.    We  may  find,  for  instance,  a  ] 
tifer  originating  directly  from  the  metamorj^osis  < 
large  Euglena,  or  of  a  large  mass  of  protoplasm 
chlorophyll  which  separates  from  the  wall  of  a  Nit< 
filament ;  whilst  if  a  small  Euglena,  or  a  small  r 
of  Nitella  protoplasm  and  chlorophyll  undergoes  tj 
formation,  a  more  or  less  similar  Rotifer  may  ultiro 
be  developed,  though  in  this  case  only  after  the  org? 
directly  produced  from  the  originally  smaller  r 
had    passed    through    certain    metamorphic    ch 
Such  a  product  of  transformation  may  appear  < 
sively  as  an  Actinophrys,  an  Amoeba,  and  a  C 
Infusiorum  (and  during  each  of  these  stages 
multiplication  may  take  place)  before  passin/ 
much  larger  mass,  into  that  final  state  of  enc 
from  which  it  is  to  emerge  in  the  form  of  a 
Such  double  sets  of  phenomena  are  very  prone 
amongst  the  ephemeromorphs,  and  are  remarkal 
gous  to  the  direct  development  of  some  few  eggs 
mata  or  Medusae  as  compared  with  the  cyclica 
ment  of  others  by  processes  of  *  alternate  gc 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  571 

The  analogy  is,  however,  rendered  all  the  more  striking, 
when  we  find  that  the  forms  of  Medusae  and  Disto- 
mata  which  undergo  the  exceptional  direct  process 
of  development  are  all  of  them  notable  for  the  very 
large  size  of  their  eggs,  whilst  all  those  which  develop 
indirectly,  through  intermediate  forms,  invariably  start 
from  much  smaller  eggs.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  these  previously  unexplained 
differences  in  the  modes  of  origin  of  Medusae  and 
other  organisms  amongst  which  *  alternate  generation ' 
prevails,  are  probably  referrible  to  some  such  dif- 
ferences as  are  now  seen  to  obtain  amongst  Rotifers 
and  other  forms  which  are  producible  by  a  direct  or 
*n  indirect  origin  from  a  transforming  vegetal  vesicle 
^cording  as  it  happens  to  be  large  or  small. 

Vtmations  and  Transmutations  of  Species. 

Facts  of  the  kind  to  which  we  have  just  been  referring, 
*^  well  as  multitudes  of  others,  seem  to  show  in  the 
^l^arest  manner  possible,  how  strictly  the  Ephemero- 
■'^c^pbs  are  comparable  with  Crystals.  Their  forms  and 
^^*ticturcs  seem  to  be  as  plainly  the  result  of  the  organic 
*'C>larities  of  the  molecules  entering  into  their  com- 
•^^tion,  as  the  forms  of  crystals  are  due  to  the 
•clarities  of  their  constituent  molecules.  There  is  an 
"^^finitely  greater  diversity  amongst  the  ephemero- 
'^Orphs,  it  is  true,  on  account  of  the  extreme  com- 
*Wxity  of  the  different  kinds  of  living  matter,  and  of 


572  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


their  readiness  to  fall  into  new  modes  of  combination 
— many  of  which  necessitate  new  modes  of  moving 
equilibrium,  which  can  only  be  brought  about  by  the 
production  of  new  organic  forms. 

The  facts  already  cited  suffice,  therefore,  to  show 
that  Natural  Selection  can  have  no  sort  of  influence, 
as  a  producer  of  change,  over  the  members  of  that  vast 
assemblage  of  Infusorial  and  Cryptogamic  organisms  of 
which  the  ephemeromorphic  world  is  composed— although 
Mr.  Darwin  appears  to  believe  that  the  form  and  struc- 
ture of  *  every  living  thing '  has  been  influenced  by  such 
a  set  of  agencies  '.     For  independently  of  the  feet  that 
laws  of  *  polarity '  alone  seem  to  prevail  in  determining 
the  form  and  structure  of  the  ephemeromorphs,  these 
comparatively  simple   animal   and   vegetal  forms  arc 
derived  one  out  of  another  in  a  manner  which  is  so 
irregular  and  variable  at  diflPerent  times,  that  no  ^la^^ 
of  heredity'  can  come  into  play.     And  this  being  the 
case.  Natural  Selection  cannot  operate  as  a  producer  ^ 
variation.     For,  in  briefly  epitomizing  his  doctrine  ^ 
Natural  Selection,  Mr.  Darwin  thus  expresses  it  - :-  ^  A^ 
many  more  individuals  of  each  species  are  bom  tb^^ 


*  Thus  Mr.  Darwin  says: — *  Every  detail  (/  structure  in  ev^ 
creature  (making  some  little  allowance  for  the  direct  action  of  physi^ 
conditions)  may  be  viewed   either  as  ha\ing  been  of  special  use 
some  ancestral  form,  or  as  being  now  of  special  use  to  some  of  ^-^ 
descendants   of  this   form — either  directly  or  indirectly  through  C^ 
complex  laws  of  growth.*    See  also  quotations  on  p.  5^,  and  p. 
note. 

'  *  Origin  of  Species/  5th  ed.,  Introduction. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  573 


>ibly  survive,  and  as,  consequently,  there  is  a  fre- 
recurring  struggle  for  existence,  it  follows  that 
ig,  if  it  vary,  however  slightly,  in  any  manner 
e  to  itself,  under  the  complex  and  sometimes 
conditions  of  life,  will  have  a  better  chance  of 
g,  and  thus  be  naturally  selected.  From  the 
principle  of  inheritance,  any  selected  variety 
d  to  propagate  its  new  and  modified  form,  .  .  . 
le  small  differences  distinguishing  varieties  of 
e  species  steadily  tend  to  increase,  till  they 
)  equal  the  greater  differences  between  species 
une  genus,  or  even  of  distinct  genera/ 
xisly  no  such  cause  of  modification  can  come 
y  until  homogenesis  becomes  the  rule,  and  the 
*d  influence  of  heredity  is  rendered  possible. 
Natural  Selection  can  have  nothing  to  do  with 
ifications  of  that  vast  assemblage  of  animal  and 
forms  which  we  have  proposed  to  include  under 
le  of  ^  ephemeromorphs.*  It  must,  indeed,  be 
to  ^species,'  such  as  we  now  define  them;  and 
ose  very  briefly  to  consider  to  what  extent  such 
\  operate  amongst  these  forms  as  producers  of 
Q,  and  to  what  extent  they  are  supplemented 
ction  of  other  modifying  influences. 

IS  pointed   out   by  Mr.  Herbert   Spencer^   in 
at  a  certain  amount  of  ambiguity  attached  to 

•  Principles  of  Biology/  vol.  i.  p.  445. 


•'^-'-* 


574  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

the  phrase  *  Natural  Selection/  although,  so  far 
know,  there  was  no  indication  that  the  two  meani] 
of  the  phrase  had  ever  been  thoroughly  distinguished 
Mr.  Darwin,   On  this  subject  Mr.  Spencer  wrote  as 
lows :  —  *  That  organisms  which  live  thereby  prove  thc- 
selves  fit  to  live,  in  so  far  as  they  have  been  trie— =^7 
while  organisms  which  die,  thereby  prove  thcmscl^&^^ 
in  some  respects  unfitted  for  living^  are  f^x^s  no  l^i^^ 
manifest  than  is  the  fact  that  this  self-acting  pun^Sfi- 
cation  of  a  species  must  tend  ever  to  insure  adaptati^ — -  ^^ 
between  it  and  its  environment.    This  adaptation  w^^^ 
be  either  so  maintained  or  so  produced.  . .  .  To  recc^::^^' 
nize  Natural  Selection  as  a  means  of  preserving  ^^  *^ 
already  established  balance  between  the  powers  of      ^  * 
species  and  the  forces  to  which  it  is  subject,  is  ""        ^^ 
recognize  it  only  in  its  simplest  and  most  general  mou^      ^ 
of  action.     It  is  the  more  special  mode  of  action  wipr  -^ 
which  we  are  here  concerned.     This  more  special  mocfc^^^ 
of  action  Mr.  Darwin  has  been  the  first  to  perceive     "^^ 
To  him  we  owe  the  discovery  that  Natural  Selection  ft 
capable  of  producing  fitness  between  organisms  and  the 
circumstances;  and  he,  too,  has  the  merit  of  a 
ciating   the   immensely   important  consequences 
follow  from   this.     He   has  worked  up  an  enormi 


*  It  is  now  very  generally  known  that  the  discovery  was  indcpendent^^^-^^"J 
made  and  almost  simultaneously  published  by  Mr.  A.  W.  Wall 
although  Mr.  Wallace  does  not  claim  to  have  elaborated  the 
with  anything  like  the  thoroughness  or  breadth  of  illustration  which 
characterized  Mr.  Darwin's  work.    (See  Wallace's  •  Contribution  to 
Theory  of  Natural  Selection,*  2nd  ed.  1872.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  575 

amount  of  evidence  into  an  elaborate  demonstration, 
hat  this  "  preservation  of  favoured  races  in  the  struggle 
br  life**  is  an  ever-acting  cause  of  divergence  amongst 
organic  forms.  He  has  traced  out  the  involved  results 
)f  the  process  with  marvellous  subtlety.  He  has  shown 
K>w  hosts  of  otherwise  inexplicable  fects  are  fully 
iccoimted  for  by  it.  In  brief,  he  has  proved  that  the 
ause  he  alleges  is  a  true  cause.' 

Bat  the  general  process,  which  is  universal  in  its 
peration,  must  be  distinguished  from  the  more  special 
vocess^  which  is  less  extensive  in  its  range  of  appli- 
^tioih  And  accordingly  Mr.  Spencer,  whilst  clearly  re- 
ognizing  the  immense  importance  of  Natural  Selection 
>r  *  survival  of  the  fittest/  as  he  aptly  renders  it)  as  a 
^Use  of  specific  transmutation,  nevertheless  recognizes 
^  as  only  one  of  the  causes  which  in  the  course  of 
mie  suffices  to  produce  new  species  out  of  pre-existing 
P^cics.  Thus  any  altered  form  or  structure  directly 
'Ought  about  by  a  change  in  the  external  conditions  to 
^cfa  certain  organisms  are  exposed  may  be  trans- 
mitted and  perpetuated  through  the  same  principle  of 
A^ritance^  and  so  also  may  functionally-produced 
*5Uiges  in  organisms  be  perpetuated  in  a  similar 
>%aner.  The  two  latter  processes  come  under  the 
5^  of  what  Mr.  Spencer  terms  ^direct  equilibration^* 
'Mist  Natural  Selection,  so  far  as  it  is  a  *  producer' 

change,  acts  by  a  process  of  ^indirect  equi/iSration* 
Adr.  Darwin,  on  the  contrary,  appears  not  to  recognize 
*  distinctions  above  indicated,  since  he  professes  to 


576  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


look  upon  all  causes  of  variability  as  being  mere  starting- 
points  for  the  action  of  Natural  Selection  ^    This  is 
quite  obvious  from  his  general  treatment  of  the  subject, 
and  such  a  view  is  also  very  distinctly  enunciated  in  the 
following  passage,  where  he  says  ^ : — ^  We  know,  how- 
ever, far  too  little  of  the  causes  and  laws  of  variation 
to  make  a  sound  classification.    The  direct  actions  of 
the  conditions  of  life,  whether  leading  to  definite  or  in- 
definite results,  is  a  totally  distinct  consideration  fro© 
the  effects  of  Natural  Selection;  for  Natural  Selects 
depends  on  the  survival  under  various  and  complex  of**" 
stances  of  the  hest  fitted  individuals^  hut  has  no  reU^ 
^whatever  to  the  primary  cause  of  any  modification  of  ^' 
ture.^     The  passage  we  have  italicized  seems  to  sbo^ 
most    unmistakeably    that    the    distinction    between 
Natural   Selection   as   a  maintainer   of  abeady  est^ 
lished  forms,  and  Natural  Selection  as  a  prodncef 
new  forms,  is  not  recognized  by  Mr.  Darwin ;  or, 
the  other  hand,  if  recc^nized,  it  must  have  been  cf  ^ 
berately  rejected.     Mr.  Darwin,  in  fact,  attaches 
great  an  importance  to  Natural  Selection  as  a  prodi^^ 
of  change,  and  so  little  to  the  influence  of  the  m-^ 

*  "^Tiich,  of  course,  is  perfectly  true,  if  we  simply  use  the  ph^'^^ 
in  its  more  general  sense,  although  it  is  somewhat  contradictoiy^ 
relation  to  the  more  special  and  more  essentially  Darwinian  mean  '^ 
of  the  term.  The  fact  that  these  two  meanings  of  the  term  are  ^^ 
clearly  distinguished  from  one  another  by  Mr.  Darwin,  has,  I  thi^ 
led  to  certain  misunderstandings  on  the  part  of  some  writers  respectt-^ 
the  real  nature  of  his  views. 

'  *  Animals  and  Plants,  &c/  vol.  ii.  p.  273,  186S. 


Till:   /:/■.' J. VX/X'iS  ni-   /!/■/•.  -77 


direct  agencies  recognized  by  others,  that  he  almost 
neglects  them  as  independent  producers  of  variation 
and  gives  to  the  special  agency  a  general  range  and 
applicability  ^ 

Influence  of  Ciang?  in  External  Conditions. 

If  we  take  the  three  modes  already  referred  to,  or 
Uy  others,  by  which  variations  in  the  form  or  structure 
^  animals  and  plants  are  initiated,  we  find  that  in 
^^  alike,  if  the  change  is  to  be  a  permanent  one, 
^  principle  of  inheritance  must  come  into  play.    It  is 
t^refore  only  amongst  the  ^  primary  causes '  of  varia- 
^ioq  that  any  room  for  difference  exists.     Thus  Wc* 
Qiay  have: — (i)  some  altered    incidence  of  external 
'i^^ces   directly    bringing    about    an   altered    internal 
^ion  in  the  complex  moving  equilibrium  which  the 
^^fganism   represents,   and   the   perpetuation   of   such 
alteration   by   inheritance,  under    the    persistence  of 
^iflular  conditions^  (2)  the  gradual  induction  of  some 
altered  structure  by  modifications  initiated  in  the  func- 
tional activity   (indirect    influence   of   conditions)  of 
^me  part  of  an  organism,  which  alteration  is  similarly 
Perpetuated;  and  (3)  the  perpetuation  and  intensifi- 
^^*tioa  by  inheritance,  through  several  generations,  of 
*^^nie  one  or  more  out  of  the  many  individual  differences 
^bich  are  always  manifesting  themselves  in  the  different 

Although  of  late  Mr.  Darwin  has  appeared  more  disposed  to  limit 
^^  supposed  influence  of  Natural  Selection.    (Sec  note  3  of  next  page.) 

VOU  11.  P  p 


578  THE  BEGINNINGS  OP  LIFE, 

representatives  of  a  species — the  ^  natural  selection'  of 
some  particular  difference  in  these  cases  being  deter- 
mined by  the  advantage  which  fitness  gives  in  the 
*  struggle  for  existence/ 

It  is  of  course  quite  true  that  the  first  two  causes 
of  variation,  like  the  more  minute  and  fortuitous  in- 
stances of  variability,  may  be  made  use  of  as  start- 
ing-points for  the  further  action  of  Natural  Selection 
where  the  struggle  for  existence  is  severe ;  and  so  for 
Mr.  Darwin's  view  would  be  thoroughly  in  accordance 
with  the  facts.     But  it  seems  equally  clear  from  '^ 
vast  amount  of  evidence,  general  and  particular,  whid^ 
Mr.  Spencer  has  adduced^,  that  the  direct  and  "^ 
direct  influence  of  the  conditions  of  life  are  re^T 
independent  producers  of  specific  variability  amot^ 
most  of  the  forms  of  life  outside  the  ephemeromorjr'^ 
world  2.      So  that  they  must  stand  side  by  side  \^ 
Natural  Selection,  if  not  as  co-equals,  yet  as  oc^ 
pying  marked  and  important  positions  3.    The  evidet:^ 
cited  by  Mr.  Spencer  concerning  the  direct  influence 
external  conditions  is  particularly  strong  in  many 

*  See  *  Principles  of  Biology/  vol.  i.  p.  184,  and  vol.  iL 

*  Many  of  which  are  *  adaptive  changes/ 

*  Mr.  Darwin  has  lately,  whilst  admitting  the  possibility  of  his  havi^ 
attached  rather  too  exclusive  an  importance  to  the  influence  of  Ntto^ 
Selection,  asserted  that  his  main  objects  in  the  '  Origin  of  Species' 
•firstly,  to  show  that  species  had  not  been  separately  created; 
secondly,  that  Natural  Selection  had  been  the  chief  agent  of  chjtn| 
though  largely  aided  by  the  inherited  effects  of  habit,  and  slightl) 
the  direct  action  of  the  surrounding  conditions.*  (*  Descent  of 
chap.  iv.  1870.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE,  679 


5  bearings  upon  the  shapes  and   modes  of  growth 

•  plants  of  diflFerent  kinds,  and  is  applicable  even 
»  their  most  minute  details  of  structure.  Amongst 
limals,  however,  the  indirect  influence  of  change  in 
eternal  conditions  (that  which  acts  by  inducing  modi* 
ed  function,  or  ^  use  and  disuse ')  is  also  frequently 
icognizable  ^ — this  mode  of  operation  being  favoured 
f  tiie  fact  that  the  functions  of  animals  are  more 
iffcientiated  than  those  of  plants.  As  Mr.  Spencer  says, 
I  order  that  ^a  new  external  action  may  be  met  by  a 
ew  internal  action,  it  is  needful  that  it  shall  either  con- 
noously  or  frequently  be  borne  by  the  individuals  of  the 
•ccics,  without  killing  or  injuring  them  2.'  If  the  new 
Auence  act  immediately  upon  the  nutrition  of  the 
Kanism  in  a  way  which  we  are  unable  to  explain  (as  is 
'  frequently  the  case  amongst  plants),  we  regard  it  as 
case  of  the  direct  influence  of  change  in  conditions; 
lUlst  if  the  change  acts  (as  is  frequently,  though  by 
^  means  invariably,  the  case  amongst  animals)  in 
Ore  slowly  bringing  about  some  obvious  difference 

•  function,  then  the  difference  of  function  is  gene- 
Uy  credited  with  bringing  about  the  variation,  and 
«  action  of  the  change  in  conditions  is  at  least  said 
►  be  *  indirect.*  Changes  brought  about  by  ^  use  and 
*U8e,*  in  reality,  therefore,  belong  to  the  same  eate- 
ry as   those   other   changes   which  are   said  to  be 

*  •  Principles  of  Biology/  vol.  i.  p.  439. 
'  Loc.  dt,  vol.  i.  p.  442. 

Pp  2 


58o  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

produced  by  the  infiucnce  of  altered  conditions, 
is  often  very  difiScuIt  to  make  any  distinction 
the  two  modes  of  change,  owing  to  tiae  almos 
ceptible  gradations  by  whidi  they  tend  to  ni< 
one  another. 

What  we  have  last  said  may  be  illosti 
quoting  a  few  of  the  examples  cited  by  Mr*  Da 
which  more  or  less  marked  changes  in  organis 
been  distinctly  determined  by  some  alteratioi 
^conditions'  to  which  they  bad  been  prevk 
posed.  Mr.  Darwin  says*: — 'With  respect 
common  oyster,  Mr.  F.  Buckland  informs  me 
can  generally  distinguish  the  shells  from  diffe 
trictsj  young  oysters  brought  from  Wales^  j 
down  in  beds  where  "natives*'  are  indigenou 
short  space  of  two  months  begin  to  assume  the  ^ 
character.  M.  Costa  has  recorded  a  muc 
remarkable  case  of  the  same  nature^  name 
young  shells  taken  from  the  shores  of  £n^ 
placed  in  the  Mediterranean,  at  once  alter 
manner  of  growth,  and  formed  prominent  d 
rays,  like  those  on  the  shells  of  the  proper  1 
ranean  oyster.  The  same  individual  shell 
ing  both  forms  of  growth,  was  exhibited  I 
Society  in  Paris/  Other  direct  effects  of  d 
external  conditions  are  pert^aps  brought  aboi 
slowly ;  thus,  amongst  many  other  examples,  Mr, 


1  « 


Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication,'  w)!.  ii.  p. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  581 

es  the  following: — ^The  wood  of  the  American 
nst-tree  (Roimia),  when  grown  in  England,  is  nearly 
MtbleaSy  as  is  that  of  the  oak-tree  when  grown  at  the 
pe  of  Good  Hope*  Hemp  and  flax,  as  I  hear  from 
•  Fakoner,  flourish  and  yield  plenty  of  seed  on  the 
lios  of  India,  but  their  fibres  are  brittle  and  useless. 
mpy  on  the  other  hand,  fails  to  produce  in  England 
It  resifious  matter  which  is  so  largely  used  in  India 
an  intoxicating  drug.  «  •  •  The  fruit  of  the  melon 
peatly  influenced  by  slight  difierences  in  culture  and 
Bate.  .  •  •  It  is  well  known  that  American  varieties 
the  apple  produce  in  their  native  land  magnificent 
1  bristly-coloured  fruit,  but  in  England  of  a  poor 
ilityand  a  dull  colour/  Again,  twenty-nine  kinds 
American  trees,  belonging  to  different  orders,  have 
m  compared  with  their  nearest  European  allies  by 
!*«  Meefaan  \  and  have  almost  invariably  been  found 
diflfer  from  the  latter  in  many  similar  respects,  e.g. 
At  leaves  being  less  deeply  serrated,  whilst  they  fall 
rfier  and  have  a  brighter  tint,  in  the  buds  and  seeds 
ii^  smaller,  and  in  the  trees  being  more  diffuse  in 
nrtfa«  Mr.  Darwin  agrees  with  Mr.  Meehan  in 
iBking  that  these  differences  must  almost  exclusively 
»e  been  *  caused  by  the  long-continued  action  of  the 
Ibtnt  climate  of  the  two  continents  on  the  trees/ 
icrent  climates  also  affect  in  a  most  marked 
toner,  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  generations, 

'  'Ptoc.  Acad.  Nat.  Soc.  of  Philadelphia,' Jan.  a8.  i86a. 


58a 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFA. 


in 


1^* 


2S 


the  hairy  coverings  of  sheep,  goats^  dogs,  ats,  horses, 
and  other  animals  ^. 

Many  of  such  instances  cited  by  Mr.  Darwin  and 
other    writers,    abundantly   testify    to   the   feet  that 
changes  are  frequently  induced,  both  amcx^  ammals 
and  plants,  by  alterations  in  the  conditions  of  life* 
And  these  changes  are  of  course  liable  to  t)ecoine 
intensified  in  the  course  oi  time.     On  the  other  hasd) 
we  know  quite  well  that  other  animals  and  plants, 
which  happen  to  have  a  less  impressionable  consU- 
tution,  may  range  over  large  portions  of.  the  iwrV^ 
without  undergoing  any  appreciable  modification  ^ 


Internal  Causes  of  Change  and  ^  Frogressive 

Development.* 

The  divergence  of  opinion  to  which  we  have  alrcad^p* 
referred  is,  however,  as  nothing  compared  to  thaj^' 
which  obtains  concerning  the  existence  or  non-exist-^^ 
ence  of  certain  'principles'  or  tendencies  inherent  in  ^ 
the  organism  itself,  and  leading,  in  the  niain^  to  an  - 
increasing  complexity  of  organization. 

The  existence  of  such  'principles'  or  tendencies 
has  been  frequently  affirmed,  though  even  more  fre- 
quently denied,  either  implicitly  or  explicitly. 

^  *  Animak  and  Plants  under  Domestication,'  vol.  ii.  p.  278. 

'  Similarly  we  find  that  the  majority  of  crystals  may  be  exposed  to  the 
incidence  of  a  considerable  change  in  conditions,  without  produdng  or 
necessitating  molecular  rearrangements,  though  others,  such  as  mercuric 
iodide,  are  most  sensitive  to  changing  influences,  under  which  they 
are  apt  to  assume  not  only  changes  of  form  but  also  complete  altera- 
tions of  colour.    (See  p.  8  a.) 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  583 

Amongst  those  who  do  believe  in  the  existence  of 
ptemal  causes  of  organization,  quite  different  opinions 
irc  expressed  by  different  writers  as  to  their  imme- 
liate  origin  or  nature.  Some,  amongst  whom  we  may 
name  Dr.  Erasmus*  Darwin  ^  and  the  author  of  the 
'Vestiges  of  Creation/  believed  that  such  a  principle 
had  been  specially  implanted  by  a  Great  First  Cause 
m  a  few  first  created  forms,  which,  by  virtue  of  this 
power,  have  sufficed  during  successive  generations,  and 
in  the  long  lapse  of  ages,  to  engender  all  the  forms  of 
iifc  that  have  ever  appeared  upon  the  surface  of  the 
earth.  Prof.  Owen*  and  Mr.  St.  George  Mivart^ 
have  expressed  the  belief  that  a  continuous  origina- 
tion of  living  matter  has  been  ever  taking  place,  and 
that  this  has  been  undergoing  development  in  obe- 
*ficncc  to  internal  tendencies,  which  work,  however, 
^  certain  preordained  modes,  with  the  view  (amongst 
oiany  others)  of  preparing  for  the  ultimate  appearance 
rf  Man  *.  But  whilst  Prof.  Owen  seems  to  think 
that  the  working  out  of  these  inherent  tendencies  may 

*  'Zoonomia/  vol.  i.  pp.  500-510.     1794. 

*  'Anatomy  of  the  Vertebrates/  vol.  iii.  1867. 
'  'Genesis  of  Species/  2nd  ed.,  1873. 

'  This  innate  capacity  or  power  of  undergoing  change,  whatever  forms 
t  nay  tend  to  evolve,  is  recognized  by  Prof.  Owen  as  being  part  of  a 
ddbed  and  pre-ordained  course/  And  he  says  (loc.  cit.,  p.  808) : — *  A 
■Mpoiive  route  of  develc^ment  and  change,  of  correlation  and  inter- 
s.  manifesting  intelligent  Will,  is  as  determinable  in  the  sue- 
of  imoes  as  in  the  development  and  organization  of  the  individual. 
do  not  vary  accidentally  in  any  and  every  direction,  but  in 
iMtfdained,  definite,  and  correlated  courses/ 


584  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

be  adequate  to  account  for  the  whole  nature  of  man, 
Mr.  Mivart  lays  less  stress  upon  the  miraculoasly- 
endowed  origin  of  the  internal  tendencies,  thoo^  he 
considers  that  some  supernatural  interposition  most 
have  been  needed  in  order  to  produce  man's  moral 
faculties. 

Lamarck^,  Professor  Grant*,  and  others,  howercr, 
whilst  holding  that  living  matter  was  and  is  constantly 
being  evolved  by  the  operation  of  those  laws  which 
reign  supreme   in   the   inorganic  world,  also  believe 
that  organization  increases  in  complexity,  in  obedience 
to  naturally  implanted  internal  tendencies — ^thesc  ^' 
ternal   tendencies   being   regarded    as   fuitiier  coD^^ 
quences  dependent  upon,  and  harmonious  with,  tbos^ 
all-pervading  natural  'laws'  which  continually  lead  ^ 
the  formation  of  the  living  matter.     Concerning  t»* 
cause  of  the  *  laws '  themselves,  they,  in  the  abseT^^ 
of  all  evidence,  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  expr* 
an  opinion  ^ 


'  In  the  Introduction  (o  his  *  Hbt.  Nat.  des  Animatix  sans  Vcrteb; 
1815. 

'  See  p.  165,  and  also  his  *  Outline  of  an  Elementary  Course  of 
Zoology/  1861.  pp.  1-9  and  91. 

*  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  on  other  subjects  Lamarck  did  not  exhil 
the  same  amount  of  caution.  It  is  now  quite  commonly  Imown  tlu-J 
he  endeavoured  to  support  his  *  progressionist '  views  by  advocating  i!0 
efficacy  of  modifying  causes,  which  were  most  crudely  conceived  an^ 
in  fact,  non-existent.  Both  he  and  Dr.  Erasmus  Darwin  supplement  tl^ 
action  of  their  respective  •  internal  tendencies'  by  the  s«]^>osed  actiMi  C? 
mysteriously  generated  desires,  appetites,  and  needs— and  they  intgiDec:: 
moreover,  that  by  the  action  of  these  postulated  interoil 


77//;  /7/y;7.\'.\7av;.v  of  ///■/■.. 


On  the  other  hand,  amongst  the  most  prominent  of 
those  writers  who  utterly  deny  the  existence  of  any 
internal  tendency  leading  to  increased  complexity  of 
organization,  we  are  compelled  to  mention  the  names 
of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  and  Mr.  Darwin. 

Mr.  Spencer's  position  in  this  respect  is,  as  we  have 
already  endeavoured  to  show,  somewhat  anomalous, 
inasmuch  as  it  seems  to  amount  to  a  practical  denial 
of  the  'instability  of  the  homogeneous,'  which  in  other 
P-aces  is  affirmed  to  be  inevitable  and  to  be  one  of  the 
'First  Principles'  of  that  Evolution  philosophy  which 
he  has  so  admirably  expounded.  Homogeneous  matter 
B^nerally  is  prone  to  undergo  internal  rearrangements, 
IWly  under  the  influence  of  incident  forces  and  partly 
°y  reason  of  internal  forces  or  polarities.  Homogeneous 
living  matter  is  of  all  forms  of  homogeneous  matter 
^nat  which  is  most  favourably  constituted  for  under- 
going such  internal  rearrangements.  Its  molecular 
'^ility  is  extreme,  and  it  must  always  be  exposed  to 
varying  external  influences  tending  to  produce  change — 
although  the  effective  action  of  these  forces  is  always 
^ntiniatcly  dependent   upon   the   conjoint   activity  of 

f^^'^gef  could  be  produced  which  such  volitional  agencies  were  wholly 
^■PtMc  of  bringing  about.  (See  Herbert  Spencer's  •  Principles  of 
T^l^By/  Tol.  i.  p.  405.)  Their  notions  as  to  the  way  in  which  *  adapt- 
V****  was  produced  were  therefore  quite  crude  and  unreal.  Both 
^■c  writers,  however,  also  appeal  to  the  modifying  influence  which 
^y  be  wrought  by  changed  external  conditions. 


586  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE: 


internal  polarities.    The  constant  co-operation  of  thesis 
causes  of  changes  must,  however,  tend  to  bring  aboit: 
an  increasing  complexity  of  structure — although  sucb 
increase  may  be  checked  and  limited  in  various  ways, 
and  by  causes  which  we,  as  yet,  very  imperfectly  un- 
derstand.   Granting,  however,  that  'living'  matter  li^^ 
all  other  forms  of  matter  does  tend  to  become  xoO'^^ 
heterogeneous — what  is  it  which,  in  the  main,  is  ^^ 
cause  of  this  tendency  ?  It  would  not  be  deemed  itxCO^' 
rect  if  we  were  to  state  that  the  form  of  any  parties* 
crystal  is  determined  by  the  polarities  of  its  molecul^ 
although  such  polarity  and  consequently  such  form  t^^^* 
be  modified  by  a  change  in  the  'conditions'  uO^^^ 
which  crystallization  takes  place;   and   similarly; 
would  seem  fair  to  say  (as,  in  fact,  Mr.  Spencer 
elsewhere  constantly  affirm)  that  the  form  of  an  otg^-^' 
ism  is  determined  by  the  polarities  of  its  moleom 
New  incident  external  forces  can,  in  feet,  only  ind«-^ 
changes  so  long  as  the  elements  of  the  living  mat^ 
upon  which  they  act  are  capable  of  being  diverted       "^^ 
such  forces  into  new  modes  of  motion — that  is,  only 
long  as  the  molecular  composition  of  the  matter 
capable  of  being  altered  by  them,  however  slightly, 
new  modes  of  motion  imply  new  modes  of  growth 
development,  which  again  could  not  be  initiated  unl 
internal  polarities  continued  to   exist  as  ever-acti 
causes  of  change.     It  is,  therefore,  in  every  way,  as 
seems  to  me,  a  contradiction  of  Mr.  Spencer's  oth 
arguments  when  he  both  denies  that  oiganisms 


THE  />/u;/\.v/\<;.\  (■/•  ///•/•.  -, 


any  internal  tendency  t(;  vary,  and  explicitly  states^ 
fi^at  the  environing  forces  are  ^  the  source  of  the  poijjer 
which  efiects  the  rearrangement'  under  the  influence  of 
changed  conditions,  and  that  the  polarities  of  the  mole- 
cules simply  determine  ^the  direction   in  which   that 
power  is  turned/     Starting  from  his  own  '  First  Prin- 
ciples'   it  would    seem    that    lower    organisms   must 
possess  an  internal  tendency  to  vary;  whilst  to  attri- 
^te  so  much   influence  to  external  rather  than  to 

m 

internal  causes  of  change  is  about  as  convincing  as 
*f  Mr,  Spencer  were  to  assert  that  the  heat  which 
^S^^ites  one  extremity  of  a  long  train  of  gunpowder 
IS  the  cause  of  the  effects  produced,  or  'the  source 
^  the  power'  unlocked,  by  the  explosion  along  the 
^hole  line*. 

Mr.  Spencer  has  been  led  to  adopt  these  doctrines, 

apparently,  in  order  to  account  for  the  fact  of  the 

^^^tence  of  multitudes  of  undifferentiated  organisms 

^U  the  present  day,  and  with  the  view  of  explaining  the 

apparent  persistence  of  multitudes  of  other  low  types  of 

^'^  through  long  geologic  ages.    As  he  did  not  believe, 

^hen  his  *  Principles  of  Biology'  was  written,  that 

^^y  new  evolution  of  living  matter  had  taken  place 

Within  recent  ages,  multitudes  of  known  facts  must  have 

*^^tJicd  quit^  irreconcilable  with  Mr.  Spencer's  general 

Appendix  to  *  Principles  of  Biolog)','  vol.  ii.  p.  488. 
Porther  arguments  in  support  of  the  importance  of  internal  ten- 
^^Qics  in  producing  an  increasing  complexity  of  organiution  are  to  be 
^'Uid  at  ipp.  123-129. 


588  THE  BECmmNGS  OF  LIFE. 

doctrines  of  Evolution.     The  ailments  in  favour 
these   general    doctrines  were,  however,  quite  o?ci 
whelming,  and  could  not  be  shaken.     The  difficolti 
therefore,  had  to  be  explained  in  some  manner;  hmjMt 
unfortunately  instead  of  facing  the  adverse  critidsir^s 
of  biologists  and  following  out  his  own  doctrioes 
their    logical    conclusions,  Mr.  Herbert   Spencer 
tempted  to  reconcile  the  apparent  discrepancies  by 
denying  that  there  existed  in  oi^nisms  any  intern^ 
tendency  to  progressive  difierentiation.      It  is  tni^? 
there  were  only  two  alternatives ;  and  not  being  satis- 
fied as  to  the  present  occurrence  of  the  evrfution  ^' 
living  matter,  he  had  no  choice  but  to  accept  the  oth^*' 
supposition,  and  with  it  all  the  contradictions  whiA  ** 
involved. 

So  long,  however,  as  there  occurs  a  changing  incidence 
of  external  forces,  Mr.  Spencer  is  quite  willing  to  co^' 
cede  that  an  increased  complexity  of  oi^nization  m^^ 
result;  because,  as  he  expresses  it,  'a  liability  to  *^ 
unfolded  arises  from  the  actions  and  reactions  betw^^^ 
organisms  and  their  fluctuating  environments  *.'    A.^ 
how  all-pervading  such  changes  are  may  be  imagii^^^ 
when  Mr.  Spencer  habitually  formulates  them  as  bei^^^ 
produced  by  *  astronomic,  geologic,  metcorologic,     ^^ 


b£ 


^ 


organic  agencies.'     That  the  long-continued  action 
such  agencies  tends  to  produce  cumulative  eflfects 
progressively  higher  organization  in  some  of  the  fbnrp-      ^ 
is  explicitly  taught  by  Mr.  Spencer,  since  he  speaks 

*  *  Principles  of  Biology/  vol.  L  p.  431. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  589 

s  average  result '  being,  ^  that  on  previous  complica- 
is  of  structure  wrought  by  previous  incident  forces 
^  complications  are  continually  superposed  by  new 
ident  forces.  And  hence  simultaneously  arises  in- 
asing  heterogeneity  in  the  structures  of  individuals, 
the  structures  of  species,  and  in  the  structures  of  the 
th's  FlcMU  and  Fauna ^'  But  with  this  constant  al- 
natioQ  of  changes  of  all  kinds,  to  which  every  single 
dronment  on  the  face  of  the  earth  must  have  been 
ijected,  is  it  to  be  deemed  possible  that  the  descend- 
:s  (^  simple  and  little  differentiated  organisms  could 
^e  reproduced  their  like,  without  any  considerable 
sration,  during  an  unbroken  lineal  descent  through 
•  nuUioas  and  millions  of  years  which  must  have 
psed  since  the  first  evolution  of  life  upon  our  planet  ? 
'»  Spencer  seems  to  think  this  is  possible,  owing  to 
'  hex  that  occasionally  *  new  influences  are  escaped 

the  survival  of  species  in  the  unchanged  parts  of 
ir  habitats,  or  by  their  spread  into  neighbouring 
4tats  which  the  change  has  rendered  like  their 
Sinai  habitats,  or  by  both.'     But,  independently  of 

impossibility  of  eluding  the  all-pervading  influence 

8ome  of  the  causes  of  change  above  cited,  it 
txis  to  me  absolutely  incredible  that,  through  this 
%  lapse  of  ages,  some  of  the  lineal  descendants  of 

many  specific    forms    should    have    succeeded    in 

This  was  also,  in  the  main,  the  view  advocated  by  Geoffroy  St.  Hi- 
^  in  his  'Etudes  progressives  d'un  Naturaliste/  p.  107.  See  also 
de  TAcad.  des  Sciences,'  1853. 


590 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


lodging'  all  changes  in  their  environment,  after  a 
given  form  had  been  attained. 


Mr.  Darwin,  however,  expressly  states  that  he  is 
an  advocate  of  ^  progressive  development.'  He  says^:— 
'On  our  theory  the  continued  existence  of  lowly  organ- 
isms offers  no  difficulty ;  for  Natural  Selection,  or  the 
survival  of  the  fittest,  does  not  necessarily  include  pro- 
gressive development — it  only  takes  advantage  of  such 
variations  as  arise,  and  are  beneficial  to  each  aeator^ 
under  its  complex  relations  of  life.     And  it  may  ^ 
asked.  What  advantage,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  would  ^^ 
be  to  an  infusorian  animalcule,  to  an  intestinal  wort*^ 
or  even  to  an  earth  worm,  to  be  highly  denized?    '* 
it  were  no  advantage,  thess  fi^rms  would  be  left  ^^J 
Natural  Selection  unimproved  or  but  little  improvedi 
and  might  remain  for  indefinite  ages  in  their  prese*^ 
little  advanced  condition.' 

In   certain   other  respects,   however,  Mr.  Darwi^ 


views  are  much  more  in  accordance  with  the  view^ 
those  who  believe  in  the  existence  of  an  internal  pr^ 
ciple  or  tendency  leading  to  progressive  complexity" 
development.    He  thinks,  for  instance,  in  oppositioi^ 


Mr.  Spencer,  that  where  change  is  brought  about  in 
organism  by  the  incidence  of  new  conditions,  the  nat 
of  the  organism  itself— that  is,  the  peculiar  qualit::^ 
or  modes  of  action  which  go  on  in  it — are  of  mi 
more  importance  in  determining  the  result  than 

*  *  Origin  of  Species,'  5th  ed.,  p.  145. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  59! 

ture  of  the  conditions  themselves^.  He  comes  to 
is  conclusion  because,  as  he  says,  *  instances  could  be 
^en  of  similar  varieties  being  produced  from  the  same 
^es  under  external  conditions  as  different  as  can 
il  be  conceived;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  dissimilar 
rictics  being  produced  under  apparently  the  same 
Vernal  conditions/ 

Nfumerous  iacts  and  reasons  might  be  cited  in  favour 
the  correctness  of  this  view.  It  has  long  been  fami- 
,  for  instance,  to  all  who  have  studied  the  lowest 
IIS  of  life,  that  the  organisms  which  appear  in  in- 
ons  of  diflpierent  organic  substances  are  often  quite 
erent  in  character;  whilst  each  particular  kind  of 
ftying  substance  is  characterized  by  its  own  peculiar 
n  of  Mould.    Then,  again,  we  know  that  alterations 

See  •  Origin  of  Species,'  5th  ed.,  pp.  8  and  166.  Prof.  Owen,  more- 
»  is  of  the  same  opinion.  The  influence  of  internal  tendencies,  he 
ii  displayed  by  the  fact  that  in  a  comparatively  defined  theatre  '  the 
*vis  polypes  of  the  coral  reef  display  their  diversities  of  colour,  size, 
^  and  structure,  independently  of  outward  influences.*  He  says 
*  of  (he  1 3o  kinds  of  coral  enumerated  by  Ehrenberg  in  the  Red 
loo  at  least  exist  under  the  same  conditions.'  ('  Anatomy  of  the 
^ntcs,'  vol.  iii.  p.  808.)  On  the  other  hand,  the  polypes  of  a  coral 
Qmst  r^knain  essentially  the  same  kinds  of  organisms  (however 
^4o  minor  changes)  during  the  many  thousands  of  years  in  which 
itef  has  been  forming,  and  this  fact  is  more  in  accordance  with 
%>cnber^s  notions  than  with  my  own,  unless — as  I  am  inclined  to 
K«»itiie  inherent  causes  of  change  whose  influence  is  at  first  manifest 
vodndng  differentiation,  become  more  and  more  diminished  in  in- 
t|r  after  even  a  rudimentary  organization  has  been  attained.  So 
«fter  a.  .time  that  change  of  conditions,  which  Mr.  Spencer  be- 
ft  to  be  so  all-essential,  may  become  necessary  in  order  to  induce 
^  Tsmtion.    (See  p.  608.) 


592  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

in    the   quality  of  an   infusion,  however   induced — -«^ 
whether  by  the  agenc7  of  heat  or  by  the  addition  of  s 
minute  quantity  of  some  chemical   ingredientr-wiT^S 
frequently  cause  entirely  diflFerent  organisms  to  appe^^ 
in  altered  and  unaltered  portions  which  are  similar.       /j 
exposed  ^.     And  yet  different  portions  of  the  same  u^d 
altered  solution,  when  it  is  highly  fermentable,  are  fouc^u/ 
at  first  to  yield  nothing  but  Bacteria,  under  the  wc^^t 
varied  conditions  of  exposure  to  air,  or  even  m  vj»#. 

The  above-mentioned  variations  in  the  oiganic  pr'^> 
ducts  obtainable  from  different  infusions,  or  from  th* 
same  infusion  after  its  organic  constituents  have  bccJ> 
slightly  modified,  are,  therefore,  now  best  explicaUc  o^ 
the  supposition  that  from  these  different  starting-points 
living  matter  comes  into  existence  with  initial,  th<w* 
probably  inconsiderable,  molecular  differences  of  c^^ 
stitution,  and  that  these  variations  lead  the  respeC^^ 
new-born  units  to  assume  different  modes  of  gFOwti>  * 

Again,  the  fact  that  lower  Infusoria  and  lower  C^^ 
t(^ams  are  to  be  met  with,  possessing  almost  sirr^- 
forms  and  characters  in  the  most  different  region^^ 
the  earth,  seems  to  show  pretty  conclusively  that 


'  See  p.  301. 

'  The  difiEierent  results,  as  regards  form  and  stiuctiire,  prodadble 
difference  in  the  compoation  of  the  aggregating  materiid,  ha:ve, 
been  beautifully  demonstrated  by  Mr.  Rainey  (pp.  60-65)  ^  ^ 
ments  on  the  aitificial  production  of  calculi— which  he  has  ^own  to 
modified  forms  of  crystals.    The  supposition  abofve  mentioned  W( 
harmonize  well  with  an  expansion  of  Mr.  Spencer's  hypothesis 
ceming  '  psycjiological  units.'    (See  p.  595,  note  1.) 


THE  BEC/XX/XGS  i>F  /.//•/;. 


r»ir) 


intrinsic  properties  of  the  more  or  less  similar  matter 

from  which  they  have  been  derived,  have  also  more  to  do 

with  their  forms  and  structures  than  any  differences  in 

the  conditions  under  which  they  have  been  born.    And 

yet  we  find  that  many  of  such  lower  organisms  are  quite 

unable  to  adjust  themselves  to  slight  changes  in  their 

*  conditions  of  life/    When  these  overtake  them,  they 

rithcr  die  or  become  converted  into  new  forms — lower  or 

^^er  as  the  case  may  be^   And  whether  any  particular 

change  of  conditions  can  or  can  not  produce  direct 

effects  upon  an  organism,  seems  to  depend   princi- 

P^ly  upon  the  nature  of  the  organism  itself.     This 

■ 

,  ^  undoubtedly  the  case  with  crystals;  and  since  it 
appears  also  to  hold  good  for  organisms,  it  ought  to 
inipress  us  with  a  conviction  of  the  immense  importance 
^  the  aggregate  polarities  of  the  organism  and  of  the 
exact  nature  of  the  complex  moving  equilibrium  which 
exists  in  each  case,  in  reference  to  the  possible  influence 
of  any  particular  change  in  external  conditions. 

Although,  therefore,  Mr.  Darwin  does  not  believe 

Tins  it  would  appear  that  an  essential  similarity  exists  amongst 
^*  fonnsencoantered  in  different  regions  iPrilchard's*  Infusoiia/  p.  375}, 
^^Me  the  elementary  forms  of  vegetal  matter  (from  which  so  many  of 
^  Infusoria  and  Cryptogams  are  derived)  have  an  essentially  similar 
*^*8rein  these  various  regions  (see  p.  613).  The  several  forms  unfold, 
^^itfbre,  more  or  less  immediately  into  such  and  such  organisms, 
^^'^^''ding  to  the  molecular  composition  of  the  matrices  from  which 
^^  start.  But  if  new  influences  impinge  upon  such  impressionable 
^K^nisms,  they,  for  the  most  part,  either  die,  or  else  the  matter  of  w  hich 

.*y*rc  composed  undergoes  some  marked  heterogcnelic  transfornia. 

*^i  by  which  higher  or  lower  organisms  may  be  produced. 

^OL.  11.  Q  q 


594 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


in  the  amt/nuous  operation  of  any  internal  tendency, 
whether  miraculously  or  naturally  impressed  upon  living 
matter,  which  may  lead  it  to  exhibit  a  tcndenq  to 
become  more  and  more  heterogeneous — he,  to  a  cer- 
tain extent,  verges  in  the  direction  of  those  who  (k) 
believe  in  the  existence  of  such  a  tendency.  He  ad- 
mits the  great  importance  of  the  actual  constitution  of 
the  organism  itself,  and  also  the  ease  with  whid  most 
important  differences  in  organic  form  and  structure 
occasionally  spring  up,  by  virtue  of  internal  molecular 
modifications  which  seem  to  occur  quite  indepen- 
dently of  any  external  causes  of  change. 

And  in  spite  of  all  that  Mr.  Darwin  has  said  con- 
cerning his  belief  in   the  all-important  influence  of 
Natural  Selection    in  bringing  about  specific  modifi- 
cations, we  think  that  many  of  the  very  interesting 
facts  which  he  has  recorded  in  that  treasury  of  bio- 
logical   knowledge,   his  *  Animals   and    Plants  under 
Domestication,*  afford  sufficient  evidence  to  prove  that 
Mr.  Darwin  did  not  assign   sufficient  importance  to 
other  causes,  as  producers  of  specific  variation  \    We 
have  already  alluded  to  the  comparatively  low  estimate 
which  he  attaches  to  the  influence  of  change  in  external 
conditions  *.     We  think,  moreover,  that  Mr.  Darwin 

»  In  this  respect,  therefore,  we  agree  with  Mr.  St.  Geoige  Mivwt 
(See  his  •  Genesis  of  Species/  chap,  iv.) 

•  The  question  whether  changes  are  often  initiated  in  this  manner 
(see  pp.  578-582)  is.  of  course,  quite  independent  of  the  one  more 
recently  discussed,  which  was  as  to  the  relative  importance  of  the  internal 
and  of  the  external  agencies  in  the  consideration  of  changes  so  induced. 


THE  BECmNINGS  OF  LIFE.  5  95 


\  attach  an  adequate  importance  to  such  instances 

ataneous'  variation  as  he  has  recordecL    These 

!S  seem  to  afford  very   interesting   examples 

operation    in  higher   organisms  of  those   in- 

which  suffice  to  produce  such  multitudes  of 
metic  changes  amongst  lower  organisms^  so 
7  supply  most  valuable  additional  testimony  as 
continued  influence  of  *  organic  polarity*  in 
ning  the  form  and  structure  of  higher  organ- 
This  organic  polarity  is  believed  by  Mr,  Spencer 
lers  to  regulate  the  forms  of  oi^nisms  through- 
thelr  developmental  stages  *;  and,  as  we  have 

endeavoured  to  show,  the  wonderful  powers 
ir  exhibited  by  Crustacea,  fish,  amphibia,  and 

ing  that  Ihring  organisms  are  ultimately  compounded  of  exceed- 
plex  molecules  or  *  physiological  units/  exhibiting  multitudes 
differences  amongst  themselves,  Mr.  Spencer  says  such '  specific 
,  having  the  immense  complexity  above  described,  and  having 
dently  complex  polarities  which  cannot  be  mutually  balanced 
aple  form  of  aggregation,  have  for  the  form  of  aggregation  in 
their  forces  are  equilibrated,  the  structure  of  the  adult  or- 
I  which  they  belong,  and  they  are  compelled  to  fall  into  this 
)7  tiie  co-operation  of  the  environing  forces  acting  on  them 
Hoes  they  exercise  on  one  another/  (Appendix  to  '  Principles 
r/  Tol.  ii.  p.  488.) 

v&L  to  '  Principles  of  Biology,'  vol.  ii.  p.  489.  Prof.  Grant 
%  in  the  same  strain  when  he  says: — *No  animal  can  be 
• . . .  without  its  passing  through  the  entire  long  series  of 
aital  diangea  peculiar  to  each.  Whether  the  product  of  the 
to  be  a  Monad  or  a  Whale,  tach  sveeeisive  stage  of  At  proetst  of 
hoB  wUlnn  itself  tht  sole  and  exclusive  potentiality  of  the  next  stage 
^  and  none  therefore  can  ever  be  overstepped  or  omitted.' 
Soology/  1861,  p.  89.) 

Qq2 


596  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

multitudes  of  other  less  complex  organisms,  seem  only 
explicable  in  accordance  with  such  a  notion  K 

If  looked  at  from  these  points  of  view,  we  shall  be 
more  ftiUy  able  to  appreciate  the  importance  of  many  of 
the  instances  cited  by  Mr.  Darwin.   One  of  the  simjdest 
and  yet  most  satisfactory  examples  is  that  recorded  con- 
cerning the  rare  and  occasional  production  of  nectarines 
upon  peach-trees,  and  the  reverse.    Speaking  of  the 
peach,  Mr.  Darwin  says 2:— 'This  tree  has  been  culti- 
vated by  the  million  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  has 
been  treated  differently,  grown  on  its  own  roots  and 
grafted  on  a  stock,  planted  as  a  standard,  against  a  wall, 
and  under  glass  ^  yet  each  bud  of  each  sub-variety  keeps 
true  to  its  kind.    But  occasionally,  at  long  intervals  of 
time,  a  tree  in  England,  or  under  the  widely  di£Ferent 
climate  of  Virginia,  produces  a  single  bud,  and  this 
yields  a  branch  which  ever  afterwards  yields  nectarines. 
Nectarines  differ,  as  every  one  knows,  from  peaches  in 
their  smoothness,  size,  and  flavour^  and  the  difference 
is  so  great  that  some  botanists  have  maintained  that 
they  are  specifically  distinct.    So  permanent  are  the 

^  In  addition  to  the  cases  of  repair  and  reprodttction  of  lost  ptrtt 
already  alluded  to  (p.  88),  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  refer  to  otben 
occurring  even  in  mammals.    Thus  it  has  been  ascertained  by  M.  Bey* 
raux  and  M.  Phillipeaux  that  the  spleen  is  restored  in  animals  after  ita^ 
extirpation,  provided  a  minute  portion  of  the  oi^gan   b  left  «  sit^ 
(*  Aim.  des  Sd.  Nat./  Zool.,  Jan.  1867);  and  Dr.  Carpenter  (*Comparati^^ 
Physiology/  4th  ed.  p.  480)  refers  to  interesting  cases  in  which  in 
human  subject  the  thumb  and  the  hunus  of  the  lower  jaw  were 
duced  after  removal. 

*  *  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication,*  vol.  i.  pp.  337, 339-i 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE.  597 

characteis  thus  suddenly  acquired,  that  a  nectarine  pro- 
duced by  bud-variation  has  propagated  itself  by  seed/ 

CSianges  of  this  kind — and  several  others  which  Mr. 
Darwin  records  * — are  doubtless  due  to  some  molecular 
modification,  brought  about  in  an  unknown  manner,  in 
the  tissues  of  the  bud  which  varies^  so  that  the  pro- 
duction of  tlie  nectarine  structure  is  the  result  of  the 
altered  balance  and  the  new  moving  equilibrium  which 
becomes  necessitated  in  the  tissues  of  the  growing  part. 
Such  an  explanation  of  these  apparently  '  spontaneous ' 
changes  in  plants   may  be  illustrated  by  alterations 
which  are  liable  to  occur  in  certain  parts  of  animals 
when  they  are  exposed  to  particular  influences.    Thus 
Mr.  Wallace  says  * :— ^  The  Indians  (of  South  America) 
have  a  curious  art  by  which  they  change  the  colours  of 
the  feathers  of  many  birds.    They  pluck  out  those  from 
the  part  which  they  wish  to  paint,  and  inoculate  the 
fresh  wound  with  the  milky  secretion  from  the  skin  of 
a  small  toad.    The  feathers  grow  of  a  brilliant  yellow 
cokxir,  and  on   being  plucked  out,  it   is  said,  grow 
again  of  the  same  colour  without  any  fresh  operation.' 
Although  this  change  seems  to  be  producible  at  will  by 
^  definite  agent,  we  really  know  no  more  concerning 
the  actual  steps  of  the  process  by  which  it  is  produced, 
^luui  we  know  concerning  the  intimate  nature  of  the 

Somewhat  analogous  changes,  for  instanoe,  occasionally  occur  in 
'^'^'^'tiees,  whereby  a  moss-rose  suddenly  appears  upon  a  tree  belonging 
*  totally  difierent  variety  (loc.  dt.,  pp.  379-381). 
*  TraTds  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro/  p.  394. 


-(^S  TIIL    ]>I'A;1XX[XGS  Of  LIFE. 

changes  by  which  the  peach-branch  is  metamorphosed 
into  a  nectarine-branch.     The  possibility  of  the  occur- 
rence of  the  molecular  change  which  occasions  this 
metamorphosis  is,  moreover,  by  no  means  limited  to 
the  buds  of  the  peach-tree.     For,  as  Mr.  Darwin  tells 
us,  '  nectarines  have  likewise  been  produced  from  the 
stone  of  the  peach,  and,  reversely,  peaches  from  the 
stone  of  the  nectarine.'    And  even  this  is  not  all,  since 
'the  same  flower- bud  has  yielded  a  fiuit  one  half  or  one 
quarter  a  nectarine,  and  the  other  half  or  three  quartcr^^ 
a  peach.* 

Again,  as  a  proof  that  at  rare  intervals,  what  aj 
to  be  totally  distinct  specific  forms  may  arise  from 
embryo  of  a  given  species  of  animal,  we  may  dt^ 
the  most  remarkable  instance^  of  the  appearance  of  tla^ 
'  black-shouldered  peacock '  (^avo  nigripennis)  among^* 
Sir  J.   Trevelyan*s   flock,    composed    entirely   of  tb^ 
common  species.    The  new  form  increased  *  to  the  cx-^ 
tinction  of  the  previously  existing  breed,*  and  it  is 
regarded  by  several  of  our  best  authorities  as  a  distinct 
'species*:  and  yet  this  black-shouldered  peacock  has 
been  known  to  have  had  a  similarly  independent  origin 
five   times,   in  England.      There  is   no  real  reason, 
therefore,  why  such  changes  should  not  also  at  times 
occur  with  plants  or  animals  living  in  the  wild  state. 
Mr.  Murphy  aptly  remarks*: — 'It  may  be  true  that 

^  Darwin's   '  Animals   and    Plants   under   Domestication/  \6L  i. 

p.  2^ 

'  *  Habit  and  Intdligence.'  vol.  k  p.  344. 


7 HE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  599 

^c  have  no  evidence  of  the  origin  of  wild  species  in 

^  way.     But  this  is  not  a  case  in  which  negative 

^idence  proves  anything.     We  have  never  witnessed 

ttc  origin  of  a  wild  species  by  any  process  whatever ; 

^  if  a  spedes  were  to  come  suddenly  into  being  in 

^  wild  state,  as  the  Ancon  sheep  did  under  domesti- 

GUJon,  how  could  you  ascertain  the  fact  ?     If  the  first 

<^a  newly-begotten  species  were  found,  the  fact  of  its 

fecovery  would  tell  nothing  about  its  origin.    Natu- 

''^lists  would  register  it  as  a  very  rare  species,  having 

^^^^n  only  once  met  with,   but  they  would  have  no 

n^^ajis  of  knowing  whether  it  were  the  first  or  the  last 

Pf  its  race/ 

How  is  it  possible,  therefore,  to  gauge  the  amount  of 

^is  kind  of  change  which  takes  place  amongst  higher 

^^^anisms,  whereby   new  species   may   more  or  less 

Aruptly  appear  upon  the  scene  ?    Indeed,  Mr.  I>arwin 

himself  says : — '  With  such  facts  before  us,  we  need  feel 

no  surprise  at  the  appearance  of  any  modification  in  any 

organic  being.'     Again,  it  must  be  almost  certain  that 

in  such  cases  we  have  to  do  with  changes  in  molecular 

constitution,  similar  in  kind  to  those  which  amongst 

simpler  organisms  sufficed  to  produce  many  of  the 

startling  metamorphoses  that  have  been  recorded  in 

this  work« 


Wc  have  endeavoured  briefly  to  embody  our  own 
riews  concerning  the    causes  which   determine  and 


6oo 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


which  subsequently  modify  the  forms  and  structures  of 
Organisms  in  the  following  table '. — 

CRYSTALS  •  •  •  PoUurity. 


O 

a 

o 
(I. 


ORGANISMS  •  •  •  Polarity* 

(Bphemeromorpht). 


I.  EsteitMl 
changes 
P9lmrity, 


J     /--.Dkwt 
;**"{*.  Indira 


Indirect  buincnce 
awldisuM') 

a.  Lcadiafftoiinpartaiit 
.but 


L: 


8.  Internal 

clmffcs<f 
Fotarify. 


k,  XjMding  to  Impoctant 

and  penbaaent  al- 

OS  which  be> 


r.  LcjMJfay  to  todivkJurf 

ivhkh  are  liitciHl> 
fted  and  nwdc  p«r- 
mancBt  by  A^aftMw/ 
StUcNtn  


S.  Changes  occaikmed  by  ' 
Mar, 


•  + 


mod  SpeelM. 


irity 


•  This  word  is  used  to  the  saase  to  which  It  Is  employed  by  Mr.  Spcncar. 
accept  the  word  fcUtrHy  as  a  name  for  the  force  by  which  taovsaak  tmlu  are 
a  form  peculiar  to  them,  we  may  apply  this  name  to  tl^e  analoffous  fiotre 
unks.    But  as  above  admitted,  powrtty  as  ascribed  to  atooasls  bat  a  w 
which  we  are  iffaorant  ...  we  simply  substitute  the  term  "polarity*  for  the 
"  the  power  which  certato  units  have  of  arranirinff  themselves  into  a  special  farM.' 
of  Bkdogy.*  1864.  voL  I.  p.  <ta4 


:'If 


•  r 


It  should  not  be  forgotten,  moreover,  that  Natural 
Selection  in  its  most  general  sense  has  reference  to  that 
co-ordinating  power  in  Nature  whereby  the  fittest  of 
all  organisms,  of  whatsoever  kind  and  howsoever  pro- 
duced, tend  to  be  perpetuated ;  whilst  Natural  Selcctiai    ^ 
in  its  more  special  sense  is  an  agency  whidi  Mr.  Darwin.^ 
has  shown  to  be  capable  of  *  producing  fitness  betwea^^ 
organisms  and  their  circumstances'  by  perpetuating^ 
and  intensifying  any  minute  variations  of  a  fevouraU^^' 
nature  ^   The  latter  is,  however,  only  one  amongst  other 
agencies  whidi  are  capable  of  giving  rise  to  specific 
transmutations,  although  Mr.  Darwin  often  speaks  of 

*  Seep.  573. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  6oi 


it  as  if  it  were  as  universal  in  its  operation  as  the 
g<^neral  co-ordinating  power  above  referred  to,  which 
docs  more  or  less  influence  all  forms  of  life.    Again, 

• 

instead  of  looking  upon  'organic  polarity*  as  an  ever 
potent,  co-ordinating  power,  which  must  infallibly 
^^o-opcrate  in  producing  the  results  that  happen  to 
*^  initiated  by  any  cause  of  change  whatsoever,  Mr. 
Oarwin  seems  to  regard  it  as  a  more  or  less  occa- 
siooal  cause  of  changes  otherwise  unaccountable — 
^^  'which  he  gives  many  highly  interesting  examples 
^«ider  the  head  of  « Correlated  Variability  i.' 

leaving  made  out  with  admirable  skill  one  of  the 
P'^iildpal  modes  by  which,  in  the  course  of  time,  higher 
^^K^nisms  are  made  to  vary,  Mr.  Darwin  seems  unwil- 
**^  to  admit  that  other  agencies  may  occasionally  be 
^^ch  more  potent — especially  amongst  lower  organ- 
*^*>is.  And  yet  internal  causes,  or  molecular  polarities, 
'>  as  we  have  seen,  almost  the  sole  regulators  of  form 
structure  amongst  those  multitudinous  hosts  of 
'^^'^er  organisms  now  included  under  the  name  of 
^Phemeromorphs  *.   These  internal  polarities,  operating 


^   *  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication/  chap.  xxr. 

*  As  we  have  ptevionsly  stated  (p.  594),  Mr.  St.  George  Mivart  is 
^^*o  itroDgly  impressed  with  the  inadequacy  of  Natural  Selection  for 
^^^cupjing  the  all-important  position  assigned  to  it  by  Mr.  Darwin.  He 
^^  expreised  his  belief  that  there  is  some  deep  underlying  and  in- 
^^nisl  cause  of  change  to  which  the  influence  of  Natural  Selection  is 
^^^^^^Httdinate.  Although  we  cannot  agree  with  Mr.  Mivart 's  teleological 
^^^WSi  we  do  agree  with  him  as  regards  the  importance  to  be  attached  to 
^^^^^  internal  causes  of  change.    In  one  of  the  most  interesting  chapters 


r,02  lllK  nEGIXNIXGS  OF  LIFE. 

(as  they  always  must)  amidst  a  frequently  varying  set 
of  external  agencies,  also  appear  as  the  principal  causes 
of  that  tendency  to  undergo  progressive  development 
which  has  now  been  so  fully  demonstrated  amongst 
lower  organisms,  but  in  whose  existence  Mr.  Darwin 
did  not  believe  ^ 

This  absence  of  a  belief  in  progressive  development, 
as  well  as  some  untenable  doctrines  concerning  the 
rate  of  change  in  lower  organisms,  seem  almost  wholly 
traceable  to  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Darwin  has 
approached  the  general  doctrine  of  Evolution.  In 
working  out  his  theory,  he  has  principally  directed  his 
attention  to  higher  organisms,  and  though  his  labours 
have  been  crowned  with  so  much  success — though  with 
the  intuition  of  genius  he  has  unravelled  one  of  the 
most  complex  problems  which  the  evolutionist  has  to 
face — still  it  is  in  this  sense  principally  that  he  can  ^ 
be  considered  an  evolutionist.    He  is  an  evolutionist      ^. 

of  his  book  ('  Genesis  of  Species ')  Mr.  Mivait  calls  attention  to  tbe 
various  resemblances  existing  in  nature  between  the  structures  of  oi 
or  parts  whose  presence  only  in  some  of  the  more  specialiicd  forau 
totally  distinct  types,  leads  us  to  believe  that  they  must  have 


4 


formed  in  a  wholly  independent  manner.  The  recurrence  of  simili^^^  C**^ 
structures  in  this  way  seems  to  show  an  inherent  fitness  in  them  for  ^^-:^^l/ 
performance  of  certain  functions  under  certain  conditions,  and  at  ^^=^^^^ 


same  time  to  demonstrate  the  ever-active  influence  of  two  great 
mining  causes  of  form  and  structure. 

^  In  the  main  the  tendency  is  one  towards  'progressive*  devil- 
ment, though  the  general  tendency  to  increase  in  complest^^  is 
frequently  interrupted  in  the  most  irregular  manner  by  retrogf^"^^**^ 
changes,  answering   to    processes  which    I  have  classed  under  '*^ 

head  of  Analytic  Heterogenesis. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  '  603 

only  in  part  ^  and  he  has  attempted  to  work  from  above 
doMrnwards,  whilst  in  this  philosophy  the  safest  and 
niost  trustworthy  route  is  certainly  to  be  found  by 
working  upwards  from  simpler  to  more  and  more  com- 
plex organisms.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that 
under  these  circumstances— amidst  the  conflict  of  new 
vie-ws  with  old  beliefs — some  inconsistencies  should 
^v-c  crept  into  his  writings.  And,  as  it  appears  to 
"^^3  nothing  could  be  more  thoroughly  opposed  to  the 
spirit  of  the  Evolution  philosophy  than  Mr.  Darwin's 
hypothesis  of  Pangenesis  ^ 

ASl  the   facts  which  this  contradictory   hypothesis 
W'as  destined  to  explain  can   be  much   more  simply 
interpreted   (so  far   as  they  arc   to   be   explained   at 
present)  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer^s  counter  hypothesis 
^^^^riceming  'physiological  units* — the  truth  of  which, 
*«i    an  enlarged  sense,  has  now,  I  think,  been  definitely 
^st^lished   by  the  results  of  numerous  experiments. 
-^0.<i  if  Mr.  Spencer  should  be  induced,  by  the  evidence 
^''l^ich  has  now  been  brought  forward,  to  believe  in  the 
^^Otinuous  independent  formation  of  living  matter  in 
^*^e  present  day,  he  will,  perhaps,  be  led  to  modify 
^^lic  of  his  statements  concerning    the  absence    in 
^'^ing    matter   of  internal   proclivities    to    organiza- 
tion j  and  would  thus  obliterate  the  chasm  which  at 
Present  separates  us,  and  prevents  my  more  complete 
^^Qordance  with  his  biological  views.     For  a  belief 
*^    the  continued  occurrence  of  Archebiosis  and  of 

*  See  p.  98. 


6o4 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE 


Hcterogcnesis  would  necessarily  carry  wii 
views  concerning  internal  tendencies,  a 
and  rapidity  of  origin  of  specific  cfaaract< 
I  venture  to  think,  is  the  kind  of  rectif 
biologists  will  soon  begin  to  demand  ft 
distinguished  exponent  of  the  Evolution  p 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 

OKNXRAL  considerations:    CONCLUSION. 

Test  of  True  Theory.  Explanation  of  present  existence  of  Low  Or- 
ganisms. Limits  of  Ephemeromorphism  onoertain.  Difficulties 
concerning  some  Lower  Organisms.  Comparative  fixity  of  Higher 
Types.  Nature  of  Foraminifera.  Apparent  Persistence  of  certain 
Forms  through  long  Ages.  Another  Explanation  of  same  Facts. 
Professor  Huxley  on  *  Persistent  Types.*  Different  Explanation 
of  Facts.  Similarity  of  independent  Forms  might  be  expected. 
Demands  upon  Time  required  by  Mr.  Darwin's  Hypothesis.  Sir 
Wm.  Thomson's  Views.  These  more  in  accordance  with  New 
Theories.  Interpretation  of  Pabeontological  Records.  Similarity 
amongst  Lower,  and  dissimilarity  amongst  Higher  Organisms  in 
different  Ages.  No  Continuous  Progression.  Imperfections  of  the 
Geological  Record.  Mode  of  Origin  of  Human  Race.  Questions 
concerning  Superiority  of  Type.  The  Insect  and  the  Fish.  Stress 
laid  upon  Complexity  of  Structure  rather  than  of  Function.  Sub- 
divisions of  Vertebrate  Type.  Evidences  of  Divergence  amongst 
them.  Many  of  them  not  necessary  Precursors  of  Man's  Appear- 
ance. Increase  in  Development  of  Brain.  First  Social  Habits. 
Mr.  Wallace  on  results  of  Comparative  Stability  of  Man's  External 
Form  with  Progressive  Development  of  Brain.  Prejudices  con- 
cerning Origin  of  Human  Race.  Their  Childish  Nature.  Future 
Prospects.    Conclusions. 

A  S  Mr.  Wallace  has  very  truly  said,  ^  There  is  no 
C\  more  convincing  proof  of  the  truth  of  a  com- 
)rehensive  theory  than  its  power  of  absorbing  new 
acts,  and  its  capability  of  interpreting  phenomena 


UoG  THE  BKGIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE. 


which  had  been  previously  looked  upon  as  unaccount- 
able anomalies ^'  We  have  already  pretty  fully  pointed 
out  to  what  an  extent  the  views  advocated  in  these 
volumes  are  confirmed  by  the  wide  application  of 
such  tests.  A  few  apparent  anomalies,  however,  still 
remain  for  further  consideration,  which,  although  quite 
irreconcilable  with  generally-received  doctrines,  may, 
perhaps,  be  cleared  up  by  the  light  derived  from  new 
views. 

How,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  possession  by  living 
things  of  an  internal  tendency  to  develop,  consistent 
with  the  existence  of  such  multitudes  of  low  organisms 
in  the  present  day  and  in  past  geologic  ages?  And 
how  is  it  consistent  with  what  we  know  concerning 
the  Persistence  of  Types  ? 

We  have  already^  pointed  out  the  almost  insuperable 
difficulties  in  accounting  for  the  present  existence 
lowest  organisms  in  accordance  with  the  old  hypothesis,^,,^. 
This,  as  expressed  by  Mr.  Darwin ',  is,  that  *  all  tb  ^ 
living  forms  of  life  are  the  lineal  descendants  of  tho^^s^ 
which  lived  long  before  the  Silurian  epoch.'  On  tfcr:ac 
other  hand,  what  has  been  made  known  in  this  wo  "^k 
now  relieves  us  from  all  difficulties  concerning 
existence  of  very  low  organisms  at  the  present  da^' 
our  Ephemeromorphs.  We  may  safely  discard  ^ 
notions   concerning  their   pre-Silurian    pedigree, 


»  '  Contrib.  to  the  Theory  of  Nat.  Selection;  1870,  p,  45. 
'  See  pp.  103-108. 

Origin  of  Species,*  5th  ed.,  p.  578. 


3  4 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  607 

to^y    regard  them  as  more  or  less  recent  products  of 

Atchebiosis  and  Heterogenesis. 

^^e   do  not  pretend  to  fix  the  limits  of  ephem^ro- 
morphism    and    to    say,    on    all    sides,    where    true 
species   begin — ^though    we    may    expect    that    much 
liglht  will  be  thrown  upon  this  subject  by  subsequent 
^^kers.     It    is  only    natural,   however,    to    suppose 
*^t   the    transitions   from    heterogenesis  and   meta- 
™^^*T)hism  to  homogenesis  and   sp2cific  fixity  should 
^     more  or  less  gradual  j  so  that  many  forms  will 
'^V'c  to  remain,  as   it  were,  upon  the  border-land, 
^^c^nding  development  amongst  the  ephemeromorphs 
^^ds  to  lead  to  the  production  of  more  complex  and 
IciS^  variable  forms.     But  even  long  after  the  first  rudi- 
'^^iits  of  a  sexual  generation  have  been  arrived  at,  and 
^^  origin  of  '  species  *  has  commenced,  we  might  ex- 
P^crt  that   the  comparatively  unspecialized   matter  of 
^Hich  such  organisms  are  composed,  and  the   com- 
parative weakness  of  the  internal  conservative  prin- 
^*ple  (essentially  based,  as   it  is,  upon  heredity  and 
Complexity  of  organization),  would  permit  of  their  under- 
going marked  variations  from  time  to  time,  either  under 
^^e  influence  of  changed  external  conditions  or  by  virtue 
^^  •spontaneously'  initiated  internal  changes  \ 

'  Mr.  Darwin's  view  is  directly  opposed  to  this ;  for  instance,  after 
^l***king  of  fresh-water  productions,  and  the  fact  that  many  of  them  arc 
^^■^^  in  the  scale  of  nature,  he  adds  (loc.  cit.,  p.  467) :-  •  We  have  reason 
^  l^elieve  that  such  low  bmngs  ehangt  or  become  modified  less  qvicily  than 
*^  Ugh:  And  to  show  that  this  is  no  mere  casual  expression  of 
^^itiion,  wc  find  Mr.  Darwin  saying  in  the  last  page  but  one  of  his 


V^i 


608  THE  BEGrNNINGS  OF  UFE. 

How  high  in  the  scale,  either  of  plant  or  of  animal 
life,  any  extreme  degree  of  variability  will  extend,  we 
cannot  at  present  say,  although  we  arc  entitled  to 
expect  that  it  will  gradually  diminish  in  extent  as  the 
complexity  of  organization  increases  ^  It  may  well 
be,  that  after  even  comparatively  rudimentary  degrees 
of  organization  have  been  evolved,  a  condition  of 
comparatively  stable  moving  equilibrium  is  attained, 
so  that-— 'the  conditions  of  life  remaining  the  same — the 
organism  may  no  longer  present  anything  more  than  a 
mere  dwarfed  tendency  to  further  differentiation  *.  Its 
internal  tendencies  may  have  more  or  less  satisfied 

work : — *  During  early  periods  of  the  earth's  history,  when  the  fonns  of 
life  were  probably  fewer  and  simpler,  the  rate  of  change  was  probably 
slower ;  and  at  the  first  dawn  of  life,  when  very  few  forms  of  the  simplest 
structure  existed,  the  rate  of  change  may  have  been  slow  in  an  extreme 
degree.'  Now,  although  such  views  are  quite  consistent  with  Mr.  Dar- 
win*s  exaggerated  belief  in  the  all-powerful  efhcacy  of  Natural  Selection 
as  a  producer  of  change,  they  are  wholly  opposed  to  the  almost  universal 
observation  of  naturalists,  and  just  as  antagonistic  to  the  legitimate 
d  priori  deductions  of  the  Evolution  philosophy. 
*  See  Herbert  Spencer's  *  Principles  of  Biology,'  voL  L  pp.  193-ioa 
^  Such  organisms  may,  however,  become  more  amenable  to  the  modi- 
fying  influence  of  changes  in  external  conditions  at  periods  when  their 
vitality  is  temporarily  lowered — ^just  as  a  top  may  be  made  to  totter  by 
a  slight  touch  when  its  axial  rotations  are  becoming  slow,  though  it 
would  have  been  apparently  unaffected  by  a  similar  touch  made  at  a 
time  when  it  was  spinning  rapidly.  Rapid  growth  indicates  rapid  mole- 
cular movements  in  the  things  which  grow.  In  the  more  putrescible 
infusions  the  molecular  movements  arc  probably  extremely  rapid ;  enor- 
mous quantities  of  Bacteria  are  quickly  produced,  which,  owing  to  their 
frequent  fission,  seem  never  to  grow  or  increase  in  size.  It  is  almost 
imppssible  to  modify  the  forms  which  appear  in  such  a  solution.  ^Sec 
pp.  137  and  502.) 


THE  REGINXIXGS  OF  LIFE.  609 

themselves  by  the  establishment  of  a  moving  equili- 
brium, just  as  the  internal  tendencies  of  crystallizable 
niattcr  are   satisfied  (though  here  to  a  much  greater 
extent)  as  soon   as   it   has  assumed    its    appropriate 
crystalline  form.     When  a  certain  complexity  of  struc- 
ture has  been  attained,  it  may  be  that  things  are  much 
3S    they  have  been  represented  to  be  by  Mr.  Darwin, 
"^r,  Herbert  Spencer,  and  others.     Many  organisms 
''^siy  not  be  prone  to  vary,  unless  under  the  influence 
^    ^spontaneously'  induced,  quasi-accidental   changes 
Within  their  own  economy,  or  unless  subjected  to  the 
^*sturbing  Influence  of  new  conditions,  or  to  the  more 
P^'^crful  and  certain  action  of  Natural  Selection,  aided 
"y   <use  and  disuse  '  and  other  agencies. 

IVlultitudes  of  facts  bearing  upon  the  apparent  per- 
^stience,  without  variation,  of  particular  species  through 
^^^rjiparatively  long  periods,  ought  to  impress  us  with 
*^^  possibility  of  the  existence  of  such  a  limitation 
^      the    internal    proclivities    towards  higher   organi- 
sation which  simpler  living  things  display.     Some  of 
^*^ese   facts  are   alluded   to  by  Mr.  Darwin  when   he 
's^ : — ^It  has  been  argued  that,  as  none  of  the  animals 
plants  of  Egypt  of  which  we  know  anything  have 
^*^a.nged  during  the  last  3000  years,  so  probably  none 
^^Ve  been  modified  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.   The 
^^ny  animals  which  have  remained  unchanged  since 
^*^e  commencement  of  the  glacial  period  would  have 
^cn  an  incomparably  stronger  case,  for  these  have 

'  •Origin  of  Species,*  5th  ed.,  p.  148. 

Vol,  II.  R  r 


.  'k 


6l0  THB  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

been  exposed  to  great  changes  of  climate  and  have 
migrated  over  great  distances';  whereas  in  Egypt  during 
the  last  3000  years  the  conditions  of  life,  as  far  as  we 
know,  have  remained  absolutely  uniform/  Mr.  Darwin 
then  adds: — 'The  fact  of  little  or  no  modification 
having  been  effected  since  the  glacial  period  would  be 
of  some  avail  against  those  who  believe  in  an  innate 
and  necessary  law  of  development,  but  is  powerless 
against  the  doctrine  of  Natural  Selection  or  survival  of 
the  fittest,  which  implies  only  that  variations  or  indi- 
vidual differences  of  a  favourable  nature  occasionally 
arise  in  a  few  species,  and  are  then  preserved,'  The 
facts  above  cited  are,  however,  not  at  all  inconsistent 
with  a  belief  in  progressive  development,  when  this 
belief  is  limited  in  the  way  I  have  mentioned.  And 
there  are,  moreover,  very  excellent  reasons  fior  be- 
lieving that  the  structures  of  higher  organisms  are  much 
less  easily  modified  than  those  of  lower  organisms.  Mr. 
Spencer  sums  up  the  results  of  his  interesting  specula- 
tions on  this  subject  in  the  following  words  2 : — <  With- 
out assuming  fixity  of  species,  we  find  good  reason  for 
anticipating  that  kind  and  degree  of  stability  which  is 
observed.  We  find  grounds  for  concluding  i  friori  that 
an  adaptive  change  of  structure  will  soon  reach  a  point 
beyond  which  further  adaptation  will  be  slow ;  for  con- 
cluding that  when  the  modifying  cause  has  been  but 

^  Mr.  Spencer  would  perhaps  suggest  that  their  migration  may  haTe 
been  one  of  the  means  of  protecting  them  from  such  changes  of  climate. 
'  *  Principles  of  Biology,*  vol.  i.  p.  199. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  6ll 


a  short  time  in  action,  the  modification  generated  will 
be  evanescent;  for  concluding  that  a  modifying  cause, 
acting  even  for  many  generations,  will  do  little  towards 
permanently  altering  the  organic  equilibrium  of  a  race; 
and  for  concluding  that,  on  the  cessation  of  such  cause, 
its  efiFects. will  become  unapparcnt  in  the  course  of  a  few 
generations.' 

The  question,  therefore,  as  to  the  mode  of  explana- 
tion of  the  existence  of  very  simple  organisms  at  the 
present  day,  merges  in  an  almost  insensible  manner 
into  that  concerning  the  explanation  of  the  existence  of 
so-called  Persistent  Types. 

The  Foraminifera,  for  instance,  are  organisms  which, 
from  the  absence  of  all  sexual  distinctions,  and  from 
the  extreme  simplicity  of  their  body-substance,  ought, 
in  spite  of  the  notable  complexity  of  the  shell-like 
structures  which  many  of  them  inhabit,  undoubtedly 
to  rank  amongst  the  ephemeromorphs.  The  ani- 
mal substance  of  these  organisms  differs  little  from 
that  of  Amoebae,  Arccllinjc,  and  other  simple  Rhizo- 
pods;  and,  moreover,  we  arc  distinctly  informed  by 
Dr.  Carpenter  that  any  such  definite  assemblages  of 
individuals   as   are   usually  included   under  the  word 

*  species*  do   not   exist  amongst   them.     He   says: — 

*  The  range  of  variation  is  so  great  amongst  Forami- 
niftrm  as  to  include,  not  merely  the  differential  charac- 
ters which  systematists,  proceeding  upon  the  ordinary 
methods,  have  accounted  specific^  but  also  those  upon 
which  the  greater  part  of  the  genera  of  this  group  have 

K  T  2 


._  'k     ^ 


61  a  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

been  founded,  and  even  in  some  instances  those  of  its 
orders,  .  .  .  The  ordinary  notion  of  spedtSy  as  assem- 
blages of  individuals  marked  out  from  each  other  by 
definite  characters  that  have  been  genetically  trans- 
mitted from  original  prototypes  similarly  distinguished, 
is  quite  inapplicable  to  this  group;  since,  even 
if  the  limits  of  such  assemblages  were  extended  so  as 
to  include  what  would  elsewhere  be  accounted  genera, 
they  would  still  be  found  so  intimately  connected  by 
gradational  links  that  definite  lines  of  demarcation 
could  not  be  drawn  between  them.  •  .  The  only  natu- 
ral classification  of  the  vast  aggregate  of  diversified 
forms  which  this  group  contains,  will  be  one  which 
ranges  them  according  to  their  direction  and  degree  of 
divergence  from  a  small  number  of  principal  family- 
types  ^' 

These  conclusions  to  which  Dr.  Carpenter  has  ar- 
rived, are  also  thoroughly  in  accordance  with  the  views 
of  his  coadjutors,  Messrs.  Parker  and  Rupert  Jones;  and 
they  are  strikingly  similar  to  the  conclusions  which 
Cohn  was  compelled  to  adopt  2  after  an  examination  of 
the  products  to  which  Protococcus  gave  rise — comprising 
as  they  did  the  most  widely  diflFering  forms  of  Phytozoa, 
which  were  actually  seen  by  him  to  be  derived  fix)m  one 
another  by  direct  processes  of  transformation.  If,  there- 
fore, the  mere  comparison  of  the  separate  forms  them- 

*  Carpenter's  *  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Foraminifera,'  1862, 
p.  X. 

'  See  Appendix  D,  p.  lxxxiii« 


THE  BECIXXLVCS  OF  LIFE,  613 

selves  has  led  Dr.  Carpenter  and  his  coadjutors  to  come 
to  such  conclusions,  it  seems  more  than  probable  that 
we  are  entitled  to  rank  these  organisms  amongst  the 
cphemeromorphs.  Dr.  Carpenter  finds,  moreover,  that 
similar  types  and  similar  varieties  from  these  types  are 
to  be  met  with  in  geological  formations  existing  as 
far  back  as  the  upper  Triassic  rocks ;  and  he  therefore 
comes  to  the  usual  conclusion  from  such  facts — viz. 
that  the  forms  of  Foraminifera  existing  at  the  bottom 
of  our  ocean  in  the  present  day,  are  the  lineal  de- 
scendants of  those  simpler  forms  which  lived,  ages  and 
ages  ago,  in  the  oceans  existing  when  the  Triassic 
rocks  were  being  formed. 

This  view,  however,  as  I  have  previously  stated*, 
seems  to  me  much  less  probable  than  the  supposition 
which  now  lies  open  to  us.  We  may  imagine,  for 
instance,  that  the  sum-total  of  conditions  at  the  bottom 
of  a  deep  ocean  have  probably  undergone  very  slight  vari- 
ations since  Triassic  times  2,  and  that  the  lower  forms  of 

>  See  p.  103. 

'  And,  as  before  stated  (p.  502),  many  facts  seem  to  show  that  in  the 
very  lowest  organisms  the  '  internal  forces '  are  so  powerful  as  to  make 
these  organisms  comparatively  imper\'ious  to  the  influence  of  any  ordinary 
mmount  of  difference  in  external  conditions.  How  else  are  we  to  account 
for  the  similarity  of  Bacteria  and  Torula  over  all  parts  of  the  world  and 
nzider  most  various  conditions;  and  for  the  fact  that  the  most  rudi- 
mcntaiy  Fungi,  Algae,  and  Lichens  arc  also  met  with  in  all  regions  of 
the  eorth^presenting  modifications,  it  is  true,  amongst  themselves  in 
each  separate  place,  though  it  seems  to  make  comparatively  little  differ- 
ence whether  this  place  be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  equator  or  of 
tl^epole? 


6 14  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

life  (including  the  Foraminifera)  which  were  to  be  found 
in  such  situations  at  that  time  had  been  produced  by 
Archebiosis  combined  with  Heterogenesis  ^  so  that  if 
the  conditions  have  been  always  so  similar  in  the 
regions  in  question,  we  might  expect  that  more  or  less 
similar  forms  would  have  been  constantly  arising  by 
Archebiosis  and  Heterogenesis,  and  that  these  woul« 
also  go  through  comparatively  similar  developmental  _j 
changes. 

The  theory  of  ^  lineal  descent '  is  most  unlikely  to 
truej   because,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  th 
improbability  is  extreme  that  such  low  and  uns 
ized  forms  should  have  existed  through  so  many 

without  undergoing  any  appreciable  advance  in  con 1- 

plexity  of  organization.    On  the  other  hand,  many  cm/ 
the   ordinary  forms  of  Foraminifera  may  have  be^=-i2 
produced  originally,  as  well  as  in  all  subsequent  period^ 
by  the  occurrence  of  comparatively  common  hetero- 
genetic  changes :  and  such  a  view  is  all  the  more  easj 
for  us  to  adopt  now  that  we  know  how  readily  Arccllina? 
are  still  engendered  from  the  substance  of  dying  Roti- 
fers and  other  low  organisms  ^. 

Almost  similar  modes  of  reasoning  are,  moreover, 
now  applicable  in  order  to  explain  the  existence 
through  successive  geological  epochs  of  many  other 
lower  forms  of -life.  Concerning  the  facts,  M* 
Huxley  says  2  :_c  Certain  well-marked  forms  of  living 
beings  have   existed    through   enormous   epochs,  sur- 

*  See  p.  486.  «  I  proc.  of  Roy.  Instit/  voL  iii.  p.  I5'* 


\ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  615 

▼iving  not  only  the  changes  erf  physical  conditions^, 
'^t    persisting  comparatively   unaltered,  while    other 
fenns  of  life  have  appeared  and  disappeared/     'Such 
^^xos>^  he  says,  '  may  be  termed  "  persistent  types  "  of 
life;  and  examples  of  them  are  abundant  enough  in 
"^th  the  animal  and  the  vegetable  worlds/     He  then 
^*tcs  the  following  examples :— '  Amongst  plants,  for  in- 
^^^nce,  ferns,  club-mosses,  and  coniferse,  some  of  them 
apparently  generically  identical  with  those  now  living, 
^^c  met  with  as  far  back  as  the  carboniferous  epoch; 
^He  cone  of  the  oolitic  Araucarta  is  hardly  distinguish- 
able from  that  of  existing  species;  a  species  of  Vunts 
*^^  been  discovered  in  the  Purbecks,  and  a  walnut 
^Jhgl^^s)  in  the  cretaceous  rocks.     All  these  are  types 
^f  vegetable  structure  abounding  at  the  present  day; 
^nd  surely  it  is  a  most  remarkable  fact  to  find  them 
persisting   with  so  little   change    through    such   vast 
Epochs.  .  .  .  Every  sub-kingdom  of  animals  yields  in- 
stances  of  the  same   kind.     The   Glohigerina  of  the 
Atlantic  soundings   is   identical   with  the   cretaceous 
Species  of  the  same  genus;    and  the  casts  of  lower 
Siliju-ian  Foramtnifera^  recently  described  by  Ehrenbcrg, 
assure  us  of  the  very  close  resemblance  between  the 
oldest  and  the  newest  forms  of  many  of  the  Frotozoa,  .  . 
Amongst  the  Calenterata^  the  tabulate  corals   of  the 

*■  Whick,  in  accordance  with  the  '  unformatarian  view  of  teluric  con- 
^jhions,  so  far  as  geological  time  is  concerned,'  he  believes  to  have  *  varied 
^irithin  but  narrow  limits :  so  that  even  in  Silurian  or  Cambrian  times 
the  aspect  of  physical  nature  must  have  been  much  what  it  is  now/ 


(,i6  Tin-:  PECIXMXGS  OF  LIFE. 


Silurian  epoch  are  wonderfully  like  the  millepores  of 
our  own  seas,  as  every  one  may  convince  himself  who 
compares  Vleliolitis  and  Helioparm.  .  .  .  Turning  to  the 
Mollusca^  the  genera  Crania^  Disauay  and  Umgmlm  have 
persisted  from  the  Silurian  epoch  to  the  present  day 
with  so  little  change  that  competent  malacologists  are 
sometimes  puzzled  to  distinguish  the  ancient  bom  the 
modern  species.     Nautili  have  a  like  range,  and  the 
shell  of  the   liassic  Loligo  is  similar  to  that  of  the 
^'  squid  ^'  of  our  own  seas.     Among  the  Anmuhssy  the 
carboniferous  insects  are  in  several  cases  referable  to 
existing  genera,  as  are  the  Arachnida^  the  highest  group 
of  which,  the  scorpions,  is  represented  in  the  coal  by  a 
gejius  diflFering  from  its  living  congeners  only  in  the 
disposition  of  its  eyes/     Now,  without  dwelling  at 
present  upon  the  almost  similar  persistence  of  various 
representatives  of  the  diflFerent  vertebrate  groups,  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  ^  persistence '  of  many  of  the  plants 
and  of  the  lower  invertebrate  types  is  much  more  ex- 
plicable on  the  assumption  of  successive  evolutions  of 
more  or  less  similar  forms  from  similar  starting-points 
under  the  influence  of  like  conditions,  than  on  the  as- 
sumption that  such  changeable  forms  should  have  repro- 
duced their  like  without  any  very  appreciable  alteration 
through  such  vast  and  unrealizable  epochs  of  time  * ! 

'  I  am  glad  to  find  that  more  or  less  similar  views  have  also  beeo 
expressed  by  my  colleague.  Dr.  Grant.  He  says : — *  The  existing  races, 
which  alone  concern  us  here,  are  not  descended  from  each  other, 
although  from  more  simple  common  ancestry,  and  they  do  not,  there- 


THE  BEGINXIXGS  OF  LIFE,  617 

^he  opposing  notion    that   all   the  forms  of  life 
^^ch  at  present  exist — including  the  structureless 
*>tticcba  and  the  insignificant  Mucor  which  now  springs 
^P  on  decaying  substances — are  direct  lineal  descendants 
rf organisms  which  lived,  ages  before  the  birth  of  man, 
in  far  distant  pre-Silurian  epochs,  seems  to  me  opposed 
to  all  reason,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  evolutionist*. 
But  that  a  great  amount   of  similarity  should  exist 
between  the  earliest  forms  of  organisms  which  have 
appeared  in  intervening  epochs  and  those  which  exist 
at  the  present  day — whether  amongst  Cryptogams,  Fora- 
minifera,  Mollusca,  or  other  animals — is  not  so  much 
to  be  wondered  at  when  we  recollect  that  the  starting- 
point  or  primordial  constitution  of  living  matter  has 
ever  been  generically  the  same,  that  the  internal  deter- 
mining causes  of  change  have  been  constant,  and  that 
the  sum-total  of  surrounding  conditions  have  probably 
not  been  more  various  than  we  might  be  warranted  in 

fore,  form  the  links  of  a  continuous  chain  from  the  monad  to  the  man. 
They  are  all  equally  co-existent,  independent,  and  unconnected  with 
each  other,  like  the  extreme  peripheral  buds  of  a  tree  of  life,  whose 
base  b  largely  concealed  or  consumed  in  the  earth,  but  whose  more 
recent  branches  can  be  readily  traced  through  all  the  sur\'iving  fossili- 
ferous  strata  of  the  globe.  Such  ramifying  trees  of  life,  however,  have 
never  ceased  to  originate  and  develop  de  novo  in  the  same  mode  as  the 
first,  since  the  first  found  a  suitable  habitat ;  and  it  is  neither  necessary 
nor  philosophical  to  assume  that  any  animal  type  had  a  different  mode 
of  origin  from  that  of  another— the  durability  of  a  type  being  the  best 
proof  of  its  natural  origin.*  (*  An  Outline  of  Recent  Zoology,'  1861, 
p.  9.)  See  also  an  allusion  to  the  more  recently  published  views  of  Mr. 
G.  H.  Lewes  on  the  same  subject,  at  p.  75. 
"  See  p.  589. 


6l8  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


believing,  from  the  differences  exhibited  amongst  the 
several  essentially  similar  types  which  have  presented 
themselves  through  a  countless  succession  of  geologic 
ages.  Looked  at  broadly,  it  is  not  contrary  to  what  we 
might  expect,  if  we  find  that  the  most  marked  and 
long-continued  similarity  exists  between  some  of  the 
lowest  forms  of  life  preserved  in  the  fossil  state,  which, 
being  tenants  of  deep  seas  and  oceans,  have  all  along 
been  exposed  to  almost  similar  conditions*.  The 
constitution  of  primordial  living  matter  in  the  Silurian 
epoch,  in  all  probability,  essentially  resembled  the 
primordial  living  matter  of  to-day;  and  if  the  con- 
ditions existing  at  the  bottom  of  oceans  are  also 
similar,  what  could  be  expected  but  that  forms  which 
are  comparatively  little  removed  from  the  primordial 
living  matter  of  those  ages,  should  be  similar  to  those 
which  are  removed  to  a  like  extent  in  the  present  day, 
and  to  those  which  have  been  similarly  removed  in  all 
intervening  epochs?  No  more  competent  authority 
exists  than  Dr.  Carpenter  concerning  the  structure  of 
Foraminifera,  and  we  have  his  deliberate  statement 
that '  '  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  fundamental  modi- 
fication or  advance  in  the  Foraminiferous  type  from 
the  palaeozoic  period  to  the  present  time.'     And  ftirther 


*  Mr.  Darwin  says  (*  Origin  of  Spedes,'  p.  409) : — *  Consider  the  pro- 
digious \'icissitudes  of  climate  during  the  pleistocene  period,  which  in- 
cludes the  whole  glacial  epoch,  and  note  how  little  the  specific  forms  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  have  been  affected.' 

*  'Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Foraminifera,'  1862,  p.  xi. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  619 

on  he  says: — ^'The  Foraminiferous  Fauna  of  our  own 
seas  probably  present  a  greater  range  of  variety  than 
existed  at  any  previous  period  j  but  there  is  no  indication 
of  any  tendency  to  elevation  towards  a  higher  type/ 

Again,  it  has  been  not  unreasonably  urged  by  some 
persons  that  if  the  organic  wc^rld  had  been  really 
evolved  by  the  agencies  which  Mr.  Darwin  seems  to 
believe  almost  exclusively  influential,  demands  would 
have  to  be  made  upon  time  of  so  exorbitant  a  nature  as 
to  frighten  even  the  most  liberally  disposed  geologists 
and  physicists.  And  this  is  believed  by  many  to  be  a 
matter  of  some  moment.  Sir  Wm.  Thomson*,  indeed, 
has  given  reasons  for  the  opinion  that  no  such  vast 
periods  of  time  can  have  elapsed  since  the  surface  of 
our  earth  became  sufficiently  cool  to  permit  of  the 
presence  of  living  things.  He  thinks  this  stage  of 
the  Earth's  history  cannot  have  been  attained  more 
than  400,000,000  of  years  ago.  The  subject  is,  perhaps, 
one  in  which  the  data  may  be  insufficiently  known  to 
permit  of  a  reliable  calculation  being  made,  though 
no  one  could  speak  with  higher  authority  on  such  a 
problem  than  Sir  Wm.  Thomson.  We  may,  how- 
ever, confidently  state  that  the  alarming  demands 
for  very  vast  periods  of  time  made  by  biological  evo- 
lutionists would  be  materially  diminished  if  views 
like  those  which  we  have  advanced  were  commonly 
entertained  ^. 

*  •  Trans,  of  Geolog.  Soc.  of  Glasgow/  vol.  iii. 
'  See  p.  429,  note. 


620  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Moreover,  we  firmly  believe  that  the  exceedingly 
imperfect  and  fragmentary  palxontological  record  may 
be  much  more  intelligibly  read  in  accordance  with  our 
views  than  with  those  which  are  at  the  present  time 
most  commonly  accepted.  The  task  itself,  however, 
we  must  leave  to  other  and  more  competent  persons. 
We  will  merely  state  that  the  continued  existence  of 
low  types  throughout  the  geologic  strata  from  the  Silu- 
rian system  upwards,  and,  amongst  higher  types,  the 
constant  admixture  of  previously  known  forms  with 
others  altogether  new,  will  be  found  quite  consistent 
with  the  notion  of  a  continual  surging  up  through  all 
geologic  time  of  freshly-evolved,  lower  forms  of  life — 
representatives  of  which,  as  they  become  more  and 
more  highly  organized,  mix,  in  successive  epochs,  with 
those  of  their  predecessors  which  still  remain.  Thus 
there  would  always  be  a  continual  striving  onwards 
of  old  and  new  alike,  towards  those  highest  goals 
which  the  direction  of  development  and  the  sum- 
total  of  surrounding  conditions  at  the  time  rendered 
possible. 

These  considerations  would,  moreover,  lead  us  to 
expect  that,  whilst  more  or  less  similarity  would  be 
likely  to  exist  between  the  lower  forms  of  life  which 
have  existed  at  different  periods  of  the  Earth's  history, 
more  and  more  divergence  might  be  encountered 
amongst  much  higher  aquatic  or  aerial  types  whose 
ancestors  may  have  lived  through  long  geologic  ages. 
Amongst  such  forms,  considerable  diversity  may  be 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  621 

induced  by  the  slow  accumulation  of  minute  diflfcr- 
^ces  ^.  So  that  if  the  descendants  of  similar  organisms 
(derived  perhaps  from  totally  independent  stocks)  have 
"^en  exposed  to  notably  different  external  conditions 

• 

'"^  diffbrent  ages;  or  if  in  any  of  them  modifications 
*^ve  otherwise  arisen,  the  forms  ultimately  produced 
^Ong  such  lines  of  development  may  be  widely  dif- 
^•^fent  from  one  another,  although  belonging  to  similar 

^ypcs. 

And  at  different  periods  in  the  earth's  history, 
specializations,  now  of  one  type  and  now  of  another, 
'^ve  been  more  and  more  manifest  or  dominant.  In 
*^ic  Silurian  epoch,  strange  crustacean  Trilobites 
^i>ounded  in  all  the  seas.  In  the  Devonian  epoch 
fishes  of  a  remarkable  structure  were  most  plentifully 
^^presented ;  whilst  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  cup- 
likc  Encrinites  in  the  earlier  Carboniferous  period, 
though  in  the  later  portions  of  this  epoch  they  were 
altogether  thrown  into  the  shade  by  that  vast  tropical 
Vegetation  from  which  we  now  derive  our  supplies  of 
^oal.  In  the  Oolitic  period,  or  so-called  ^  age  of  rep- 
^iles^' we  have  a  most  remarkable  abundance  of  Saurian 
*Orms,  and  the  Amphibian  type  reached  its  highest  de- 
"^elopment.  Huge  Ichthyosauri  and  Plesiosauri  swam 
in  the  lakes  and  rivers,  whilst  strange  and  gigantic 

•  As  Mr.  Darwin  remarks  (loc.  cii.,  p.  570):— *  The  mind  cannot 
Postibly  grasp  the  full  meaning  of  the  term  of  even  ten  million  years  : 
U  cannot  add  up  and  perceive  the  full  effects  of  slight  variations  accumu- 
lating during  an  almost  infinite  number  of  generations/ 


622  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

winged  Lizards  mounted  into  the  air.  Whilst  in 
the  later  Tertiary  period  we  find  the  Mammalian 
type  exhibiting  remarkable  divergences  from  previously- 
existing  forms;  first  by  the  appearance  of  innumerable, 
huge  Mastodons,  Megatheriums,  and  other  unwieldy 
denizens  of  the  ancient  forests  and  plains  5  and  subse- 
quently by  the  gradual  modification  of  one  of  the  rami- 
fications of  the  Quadrumanous  order,  into  those  beings 
from  whom  primeval  Man  himself  may  claim  to  have 
been  evolved. 

These  several  types  of  life,  however,  which  have 
from  time  to  time  become  more  and  more  specialized, 
do  not  in  any  sense  represent  the  members  of  one 
progressive  series.  They  are  rather  the  products  of 
different  evolutional  divergences,  taking  place  now  in 
one  direction  and  now  in  another. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  various  living  forms  which  have 
existed  in  past  ages  is,  indeed,  of  the  most  fragmentary 
character :  first,  on  account  of  the  unequal  or  imperfect 
manner  in  which  the  several  forms  may  be  represented 
in  the  strata  pertaining  to  the  period;  secondly,  on  ac- 
count of  the  extremely  limited  nature  of  the  explorations 
which  have  been  made  in  these  imperfectly  representative 
strata ;  and,  thirdly,  because  so  many  parts  of  the  record 
are  absolutely  inaccessible  to  us — nearly  all  beneath  the 
Silurian  system  having  been  blotted  out  by  time,  whilst 
those  two-thirds  of  the  earth's  surface  in  which  the 
remaining  strata  are  to  be  found  are  now  covered  over 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  623 


by  seas.  Mr,  Darwin  says  * : — '  For  my  part,  following 
out  Lycirs  metaphor,  I  look  at  the  geological  record  as 
a  history  of  the  world  imperfectly  kept,  and  written  in 
a  changing  dialect ;  of  this  history  we  possess  the  last 
volume  alone,  relating  only  to  two  or  three  countries. 
Of  this  volume,  only  here  and  there  a  short  chapter  has 
been  preserved ;  and  of  each  page  only  here  and  there 
a  few  lines/  Such  as  it  is,  however,  the  record  seems 
to  show  very  plainly  that  there  has  been  nothing  ap- 
proaching to  a  continuous  progression  terminating  in 
the  Mammalian  type.  Vertebrata  in  the  form  of  fishes 
as  h^h  as  any  existing  at  the  present  day^  have  been  in 
existence  since  the  time  when  the  upper  Silurian  rocks 
were  deposited.  Whilst  at  different  intervening  periods 
in  the  earth^s  history,  now  one,  now  another  of  the  in- 
vertebrate forms  of  life  have  been  in  the  ascendant, 
associated,  perhaps,  with  representatives  of  some  highly 
developed  and  divergent  branch  of  the  vertebrate  tree. 
Till  at  last — as  it  were  accidentally — on  the  top  of  one 
of  these  diverging  branches,  some  of  the  branchlets  per- 
taining to  the  quadrumanous  order  began  to  undergo 
modifications  which  terminated  in  the  evolution  of  the 
immediate  ancestors  of  the  primeval  representatives  of 
our  race. 

It  is,  therefore,  illegitimate  and  unscientific  to  regard 
ail  preceding  forms  of  life  as  belonging  to  types  lower 
than  our  own,  or  to  suppose  that  they  have  been  the 
necessary  precursors  of  our  advent. 

'  Loc.  cit.,  p.  384. 


624  ^^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Most  of  us  are  apt  complacently  to  regard  ourselves 
as  representatives  of  the  highest  type  of  life :  and  to  a 
certain  extent  this  is  true.    Although  it  is  often  exceed- 
ingly difficult,  and  in  some  cases  impossible,  to  decide 
which  is  the  higher  and  which  is  the  lower  of  two 
forms  of  life  whose  type  is  different.     Supposing,  for 
instance,  a  question   should  arise  as  to  the  relative 
superiority  of  the  fish  and  the  insect;  our  thoughts  may 
quite  legitimately  take  the  directions  recently  indicated 
by  an   able   writer   in   the  ^Quarterly  Review,*  who 
says^: — ^On  the  one  hand  we  may  ponder  over  the 
dreary  simplicity  of  a  fish's  life,  the  monotony  of  its 
daily  swim,  the  low  character  and  even  small  amount 
of  nervous  energy  required  to  move  its  uniform  masses 
of  muscle,  and  the  feeble  working  of  its  diminutive 
brain — limited  apparently  to  the  stirring  up,  through 
rough  and  gross  sensual  perceptions,  of  a  turbid  con- 
sciousness, which  the  accumulation  of  even  years  of 
experience  can  hardly  mould  into  anything  like  intel- 
ligence.    Even  in  performing  that  duty  which  gene- 
rally calls  forth  the  highest  cerebral  activity,  viz.  the 
care  of  the  young,  the  greatest  effort  of  the  fish   is 
perhaps  to  construct  a  nest  of  the  rudest  kind.'     But, 
'Turning  from  these  cold  and  flabby  creatures  to  the 
gifted  bee,  and  meditating  on  its  bright  and  varied 
life — on  those  wonderful  exhibitions  of  its  power  and 
skill   which    never   fail   to   excite    the   admiration  of 
mankind,    and    on    its    finely-wrought    and    compact 

'  Art.  on  *  Higher  and  Lower  Animals/  Oct.  1869,  p.  383. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  625 

organization  put  to  use  in  the  facile  accomplishments 
of  difficult  and  delicate  tasks,  we  begin  to  think  it  not 
unnatural  to  rank  so  full  a  life  above  that  of  the  plainer 
vertebrate. . .  Such  an  advocate  would,  moreover,  point 
to  the  fact  that  the  bee's  life  is  as  short  as  it  is  bright ; 
that  it  has  little  time  to  learn,  little  opportunity  of 
accumulating  experience  either  for  itself  or  for  its  oflF- 
^ing;  that  it  is,  so  to  speak,  a  baby-bee,  and  one  of 
a  long  line  of  baby-bees :  and  would  argue  that  were 
a  bee  long-lived,  and  the  race  to  continue  long-lived 
through  many  generations,  there  would  be  no  longer 
any  disputes  about  the  reason  and  instinct  of  bees/ 
Thus,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  functions  performed 
rather  than  of  structural  possibilities,  we  should  un- 
doubtedly be  led  to  regard  the  bee  as  a  much  higher 
animal  than  the  fish.  And  as  the  same  writer  continues : 
— *  If  we  were  to  put  ourselves  entirely  on  one  side,  and 
try  to  look  at  animal  life  as  a  thing  in  which  we  had 
neither  part  nor  lot,  we  should  of  course,  in  attempting 
to  fix  the  rank  of  any  being,  be  guided  almost  exclu- 
sively by  the  range  and  complexity  of  the  duties  the 
creature  was  enabled  to  fulfil.  We  should  use  function 
almost  by  itself  as  a  test  of  worth,  and  should  look 
upon  structure  as  simply  the  means  to  an  end.  .  .  .  Dig- 
nity of  function,  springing  as  it  docs  out  of  intricate 
and  finished  machinery,  must,  when  we  look  at  animals 
apart  from  ourselves,  form  the  standard  by  which  rank 
in  life  can  be  judged.' 
We  do  not,  however,  usually  put  ourselves  on  one 

VOL.  II.  S  S 


626  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


side  in  this  way,  so  that  the  question  is  generally  looked 
at  more  from  the  point  of  view  of  structure  than  of 
function.    And  we  are,  then,  for  the  most  part  content 
to  regard  the  vertebrate  type  as  the  highest  in  the 
whole  animal  creation,  although  as  the   same  writer 
says,  <Our  willingness   to  do  so  arises  simply  from 
the  fact  that  that  is  the  type  to  which  we  ourselves  be- 
long.  But,*  he  continues, '  we  have  bo  rig^t  to  reflect  out 
own  glory  on  to  the  type  according  to  which  we  happe 
to  be  framed.    Such  an  honour  to  the  mere  type  itse  "!^ 
is  altogether  an  arbitrary  assumption.     Admitting 
we  stand  at  the  head  of  creation,  that  we  are 


highest  product  of  organic  life,  we  can  rightfully  claiJL 
that  position  solely  by  virtue  of  our  many  powers 
resources,  solely  by  reason  of  our  mastery  over  tl 
circumstances  of  life.  . .  .  But  we  have  no  warrant 
the  assumption  that  there  is  any  absolute  neccssan^- 
causative  connection  between  the  scope  and  quality 
the  work  we  do,  and  the  broad  features,  either  vertebrati 
or  mammalian,  of  the  plan  upon  which  oiu*  bodies 
framed.  ...  It  so  happens  that  we,  and  with  ourselvc^^ 
many  other  vertebrate  animals,  do  exhibit  finer  qualities^ 
and  live  a  fuller  life  than  do  any  other  creatures ;  but 
proof  is  wanting  that  qualities  as  fine  or  even  finer, 
that  a  life  as  full  or  even  fuller,  might  not  have  been 
thrown  round  and  worked  into  some  rough  ground-plan 
other  than  ours.    The  mammal  does  not  differ  from  the 
fish  more  than  does  the  crafty  lobster  from  the  tiny, 
one-eyed  crustaceans   that   breed    in  our  fresh-water 


THE  BEGIXXINGS  07'   LIFE,  627 

pools  j  as  much  power  has  been  needed  to  raise  the  one 
as  the  other,  and  there  is  no  a  friorl  reason  why  the 
forces  which  have  grafted  on  the  insect  type  the 
features  and  powers  of  an  intelligent  bee  should  not 
go  on  to  work  the  same  type  into  something  possessing 
powers  and  qualities  as  full,  as  great,  and  as  varied  as 
those  which  we  ourselves  possess/ 

The  vertebrate  type  itself  is,  moreover,  subdivided 
into  many  subordinate  types,  each  of  which  goes  along 
its  own  lines  of  development  and  differentiation,  so 
that  there  is  no  trace  of  any  single  and  general  pro- 
gression towards  the  perfection  of  that  mammalian 
branch,  of  which  Man  forms  the  head  and  crown.  As 
we  have  already  stated.  Fishes,  Amphibia,  and  Reptiles 
of  the  most  divergent  forms  have  been  abundantly  pro- 
duced, departing  in  the  most  striking  manner  from 
one  another  and  from  the  general  vertebrate  plan.  Whilst 
amongst  Birds  also,  such  specializations  of  the  respi- 
ratory system,  of  the  organs  of  locomotion,  and  of  the 
integumentary  system  have  taken  place,  that  the  type 
on  which  Man's  body  has  been  evolved  has,  in  these 
respects,  been  left  far  behind.  Doubtless,  therefore,  if 
the  conditions  had  been  suitable,  the  progenitors  of  the 
quadrumanous  race  might  have  given  rise  to  all  that  has 
appeared  along  this  line  of  development  far  back  in  the 
depths  of  geologic  time — ^and  wholly  irrespective  of  the 
multitudes  of  aberrant  forms  of  vertebrate  life  which 
have  flourished  since  the  Silurian  epoch. 

There  is,  indeed,  no  small  amount  of  evidence  de- 

s  s  ^ 


628  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


ducible  from  the  history  of  the  life  of  the  globe  ante- 
cedent to  the  advent  of  Man,  tending  to  prove  that 
many  of  the  above-mentioned  developmental  divergences 
cannot  be  regarded  as  constituting  so  many  necessary 
preliminary  series.    The  palaeontological  records,  so  far 
as  they  have  been  discovered,  would  rather  encourage 
a  belief  that  we  happen  to  live  during  one  of  those 
great  phases  in  the  earth's  history  in  which  an  aberrant 
type,  having  within  itself  vast  and  altogether  peculiar 
capacities   for   improvement,  has,  on   account  of  the 
high  development  of  these  capacities,  overrun  the  earth. 
Those  mysterious  powers  and  natural  tendencies,  which 
formerly  sufficed  to  produce  the  great  fish-like  lizards 
and  crocodiles,  and  which,  amongst  birds,  have  ex- 
pended themselves  in  the  perfection  of  an  elaborate 
respiratory  system   and   in   the  production  of  related 
changes  in  their  integumentary  system  and  oi^ns  of 
locomotion,  seem,  in  the  case  of  Man  and  of  the  race 
from  which  he  has  been  developed,  to  have  been  ex- 
pended in  the  production  of  much  less  obvious  external 
changes,  although  these  have  been  accompanied  by  the 
most  important  internal  changes  leading  to  the  gradual 
elaboration  of  the  Brain,  or  principal  Organ  of  Mind. 

An  increased  development  of  the  Brain,  however 
initiated,  and  even  when  it  gave  to  primaeval  Man  mental 
powers  very  slightly  in  excess  of  those  of  the  man-like 
apes,  would, after  a  time,  as  Mr.  Wallace  has  ably  shown*. 


I  • 


Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection/  1870,  p.  319. 


THE  BEGINSINGS  OF  LIFE,  629 

almost  inevitably  tend  to  give  him  that  power  over 
natural  products  and  forces  which  in  the  course  of 
ages  has  enabled  him  to  make  these  forces  subservient 
to  his  own  wants  in  a  gradually  increasing  degree. 
The  altered  mode  of  life  also,  which  must  have  been  thus 
induced  at  a  very  remote  period,  is  conceived  by  many  to 
have  been  sufficient — when  acting  through  enormous 
periods  of  time,  and  when  supplemented  by  the  suc- 
cessively-acquired powers  of  speaking,  writing,  and 
printing — to  account  for  the  vast  pro^jress  that  has 
since  been  achieved  both  in  his  intellectual  and  in  his 
moral  nature  ^ 

But  for  such  a  continuous  development  of  brain 
to  have  taken  place,  with  co-ordinate  increase  in 
mental  and  moral  attainments,  we  must  naturally  have 
recourse  to  long  periods  of  time— though  not  longer 
perhaps  than  the  period  which  we  are  now  able  to 
claim.  Thus,  as  Mr.  Wallace  says  - : — *  We  can  with 
tolerable  certainty  affirm  that  man  must  have  inhabited 
the  earth  a  thousand  centuries  ago  ^  but  we  cannot  say 
that  he  positively  did  not  exist,  or  that  there  is  any  good 
evidence  against  his  having  existed,  for  a  period  of  ten 

*  Others,  however,  do  not  suppose  that  the  moral  nature  of  Man  can 
be  thus  naturally  accounted  for.  Mr.  Wallace,  as  well  as  Mr.  St.  George 
Mtrart  (chap,  ix),  believe  that  at  this  particular  stage  of  organic  evolu- 
tion some  supernatural  interposition  must  have  taken  place.  Mr.  Wallace. 
indeed,  cannot  believe  that  some  of  the  mere  bodily  peculiarities  of  Man 
have  been  produced  by  the  undisturbed  action  of  natural  agencies.  (See 
his  •  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection/  1870,  p.  333.) 

'  Loc.  dt.,  1870,  p.  303. 


630  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

thousand  centuries.  We  know  positively  that  he  was 
contemporaneous  with  many  now  extinct  animals,  and 
has  survived  changes  of  the  earth's  surface  fifty  or  a 
hundred  times  greater  than  any  that  have  occurred 
during  the  historical  period ;  but  we  cannot  place  any 
definite  limit  to  the  number  of  species  he  may  have 
outlived,  or  to  the  amount  of  terrestrial  change  he  may 
have  witnessed/ 

Mr.  Wallace  has,  moreover,  adduced  a  number  of 
very  cogent  reasons  for  believing  that  such  creatures 
as  the  ancestors  of  man  must  have  been,  would,  at  a 
certain  stage  in  their  history,  have  ceased  to  undergo  any 
notable  variations  in  external  conformation,  although 
a  steady  progress  might  continue  to  take  place  in  the 
developmental  organization  of  the   brain,   leading  to 
a  prc^ressive  increase  of  mental  power.      He  says*: 
— *  From  the  moment  when  the  first  skin  was  used  as 
a  covering,  when  the  first  rude  spear  was  formed  to 
assist  in  the  chase,  when  fire  was  firs^used  to  cook  his 
food,  when  the  first  seed  was  sown  or  shoot  planted, 
a  grand  revolution  was  effected  in  nature,  a  revolution 
which  in  all  the  previous  ages  of  the  ea  th's  history  had 
had  no  parallel;    for  a  being  had  arisen  who  was  no 
longer  necessarily  subject  to  change  with  the  changing 
universe — a  being  who  was  in  some  degree  superior  to 
nature,  inasmuch  as  he  knew  how  to  control  and  regu- 
late her  action,  and  could  keep  himself  in  harmony 
with  her,  not  by  a  change  in  body,  but  by  an  advance 

^  Loc.  cit,  pp.  335  and  317. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  63 1 

of  mind. .  . .  Every  slight  variation  in  his  mental  and 
moral  nature,  which  should  enable  him  better  to  guard 
against  adverse  circumstances  and  combine  for  mutual 
comfort  and  protection,  would  be  preserved  and  accu- 
mulated * ;  the  better  and  higher  specimens  of  our  race 
would  therefore  increase  and  spread,  the  lower  and 
more  bratal  would  successively  give  way  and  die  out ; 
and  that  rapid  advancement  in  mental  organization 
would  ocair,  which  has  raised  the  very  lowest  races  of 
man  so  hx  above  the  brutes  (although  differing  so  little 
from  some  of  them  in  physical  structure),  and,  in  con- 
junction with  scarcely  perceptible  modifications  of  form, 
has  developed  the  wonderful  intellect  of  the  European 
races,' 

Surely,  however,  we  are  called  upon  to  witness  a 
strange  perversity  of  human  reason  when  many  of  those 
who  have  become  the  heirs  of  such  higher  development 
attempt,  more  or  less  indignantly,  to  repudiate  its 
origin — when,  on  the  strength  of  the  high  elaboration 
of  those  faculties  which  they  have  inherited  from  sim- 
pler and  less  polished  predecessors,  they  are  now  eager 

'  Principally  from  the  inheritance  of  functionally-induced  changes ; 
lor,  as  Mr.  Spencer  says  ('Principles  of  Biology/  vol.  i.  p.  469), 
*  though  Natural  Selection  acts  freely  in  the  struggle  of  one  society 
with  another,  yet  among  the  units  of  each  society  its  action  is  so 
tnteriered  ¥dth  that  there  remains  no  adequate  cause  for  the  acquirement 
of  mental  superiority  by  one  race  over  another,  except  the  inheritance  of 
innctionally-prodnced  modifications.'  And,  as  Mr.  Spencer  subsequently 
points  out,  this  view  of  the  case  harmonizes  well  with  Mr.  Wallace  s  con- 
clusion, that  *  at  a  certain  stage  of  evolution  the  brain  begins  to  vary 
mudi  more  than  the  body.' 


632  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


to  disown   all  past  connection  with  that  great  tree 
of  life,  to   which  they  are  related   as   most  precious 
fruit.    Pitiful,  nay,  laughable  displays!     What  should 
we  think  of  the  man  who  stoutly  denied  his  intra- 
uterine existence,  who  preferred  to  believe  that  he  had 
descended  direct  from  the  clouds  (albeit  fashioned  after 
the  model  of  an  ape),  because  in  his  childhood  his  nurse 
had  told  him  such  a  story?     And  yet   a  person  so 
credulous — one  who  persisted  in  believing  the  story  he 
had  first    heard    and   in   disbelieving    all   those  who 
were  prepared  to  prove  its  untruth — ^would  appear  to 
many  dispassionate  onlookers  to  be  not  more  unrea- 
sonable than  are  those  who  try  to  disown  all  kinship 
with  the  products  of  surrounding  nature,  and  prefer  to 
regard   themselves  as   degenerated   representatives  of 
some  higher  modes  of  being. 

The  early  history  of  the  individual  infant  is  hidden 
from  ordinary  mortals,  just  as  completely  as  the  early 
history  of  the  race  is  buried  in  the  womb  of  time. 
But  those  who  know  the  history  of  this  intra-uterinc 
existence  cannot  but  feel  how  strongly  it  testifies  to 
the  real  origin  and  affiliation  of  the  race.  These 
stages  of  man's  existence  embody  a  condensed  record 
of  some  of  the  missing  pages  in  the  earth^s  history. 

So  that  to  mistrust  or  ignore  all  the  various  kinds  of 
evidence  which  so  plainly  appeal  to  our  regison,  would 
be  to  accustom  ourselves  to  look  upon  nature  as  a  living 
lie,  and  upon  reason  itself  as  a  faculty  destined  only 
to  deceive! 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE,  633 

We  must  hope  it  is  not  so;  and  in  spite  of  such 
demoralizing  beliefs  must  battle  on  along  the  path  of 
knowledge  and  of  duty,  trusting  in  that  natural  progress 
towards  a  far  distant  future  for  the  human  race,  such  as 
its  past  history  may  warrant  us  in  anticipating.  For, 
as  Mr,  Wallace  points  out,  those  natural  influences 
vdiich  have  hitherto  promoted  man's  progress,  *  still 
acting  on  his  mental  organization,  must  ever  lead  to 
the  more  perfect  adaptation  of  man's  higher  faculties 
to  the  conditions  of  surrounding  nature  and  to  the 
exigencies  of  the  social  state,'  so  that  *his  mental 
constitution  may  continue  to  advance  and  improve, 
till  the  world  is  again  inhabited  by  a  single,  nearly 
bomc^eneous  race,  no  individual  of  which  will  be  infe- 
rior to  the  noblest  specimens  of  existing  humanity/ 

Conclusion. 

From  what  has  been  recorded  in  this  work,  it  appears, 
therefore,  that  both  observation  and  experiment  unmis- 
takeably  testify  to  the  fact  that  *  living'  matter  is 
constantly  being  formed  do  novo^  in  obedience  to  the 
same  laws  and  tendencies  as  those  which  determine 
all  the  more  simple  chemical  combinations:  the 
qualities  which  we  summarize  under  the  word  'life' 
being  in  all  cases  due  to  the  combined  molecular  ac- 
tions and  properties  of  the  aggregate  which  displays 
them,  just  as  the  properties  which  we  include  under 
the  word  ^  magnetism '  are  due  to  particular  modes  of 


634  ^^^^  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


collocation  which  have  been  assumed  by  the  molecules 
of  iron. 

Living  matter  is  especially  characterized  by  the  com- 
plexity of  its  molecules  and  their  state  of  continual 
intestine  movement.    This  peculiarity,  as  well  as  other 
related  qualities,  make  the  simplest  aggregates  of  sud 
matter  especially  prone  to  undergo  those  secondary 
structural  rearrangements  which  all  plastic  and  homo- 
geneous masses  of  matter  are  liable  to  exhibit.    A^^ 
although  in  the  case  of  living  matter,  these  re-ananff* 
ments  manifest  themselves  by  producing  what  we     ^ 
^organization,'   still   the  forms  and   structures  'vf'^ 
many  of  the   lowest  organisms  tend  to  assume 
entirely  referrible  to  the  polarities  of  their  molccul^^^ 
just  as  the  forms  of  crystals  are  the  results  of  simi^^ 
though  simpler,  polarities. 

And,  speaking  generally,  the  complexity  of  ^orga,  -^^ 


zation '  attainable  by  the  lower  animal  forms  gradw      ^ 
tends  to  increase  as  the  masses  of  matter  from  whi^ 


new  forms  are  to  arise  increase  in  size — owing  z\ 
rently  to  the   multiplication  of  effects  that  may  \^^ 
induced  by  the  production  of  several  series  of  molecula.-^^ 
rearrangements  within  the  larger  a^regates.     Thes^^ 
rearrangements    (developmental    changes)    often  tak^^ 
place  rapidly  and  without  appreciable  increase  in  bulk 
of  the  mass  which  undergoes  them;  and  the  dissimilar 
changes  which  may  be  seen  to  take  place  in  different 
masses  are  attributable  to  the  existence  of  di£Ferent 
initial  states  of  molecular  composition.    The  changes 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  635 

progress,  however,  in  each  case,  till  a  condition  of 
moving  equilibrium  is  established  between  the  sum 
total  of  molecular  actions  taking  place  within  the 
living  aggregate  and  the  forces  of  its  environment. 

The  power  of  undergoing  spontaneous  division 
(fission  or  gemmation)  which  is  manifested  by  living 
matter,  and  upon  which  all  the  phenomena  of  *rep:o- 
duction '  depend,  is  apparently  one  of  its  most  funda- 
mental properties— though  it  is  itself  a  result  of  that 
molecular  mobility  and  complexity  to  which  we  have 
previously  referred. 

And  it  is  this  same  molecular  mobility  which  makes 

an  aggregate  of  living  matter,  in  the  form  of  a  simple 

organism,  very  prone  to  undergo  changes  in  its  inti- 

niate  constitution — either  *  spontaneously*  or  under  the 

incidence  of  new  external  forces.    Some  new  conditions 

niay  not  visibly  affect  it,  others  may  cause  its  ^  death,' 

Whilst  others  still  may  affect  it  only  to  such  an  extent 

as  to  bring  about  some  modification  of  its  molecular 

Constitution,  which,  by  reason  of  an  altered  ^  polarity,' 

Entails  a  more  or  less  marked  transformation  of  form 

^nd  structure  (Heterogenesis). 

Thus  the  marvellous  convertibility  of  lower  organ- 
isms, their  ability  to  undergo  self-multiplication,  and 
their  tendency  to  become  (under  favourable  conditions) 
txiore  complexly  organized,  are  all  necessary  conse- 
cjuences  of  those  physical  doctrines  concerning  *life* 
the  truth  of  which  has  been  established  by  such  experi- 
ments as  have  now  been  recorded. 


636  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


These  myriads  of  lowest  forms  of  life,  multiplying  only 
by  processes  of  fission  aad  gemmation,  constitute  an 
inextricably  tangled  plexus  of  more  or  less  convertible 
animal  and  vegetal  forms,  which — ^though  often  reap- 
pearing— are  for  the  most  part  evanescent  and  transi- 
tory states,  either  of  comparatively  new-bom  living 
matter,  or  of  portions  of  matter  which  have  become 
individualized  by  heterogenetic  processes  occurring  in 
the  substance  of  the  higher  forms  of  life.     But  how- 
soever derived,  they  constitute   a  vast  assemblage  of 
'  Ephemeromorphs,'  amongst  which  Heterogenesis  oc- 
curs almost  as  frequently  as  Homogenesis, 

Gradually,  however,  the  first  traces  of  those  processes 
of  '  conjugation '  and  of  internal  gemmation  begin  to 
manifest  themselves,  which  subsequently  become  per- 
fected into  '  sexual  *  modes  of  reprcxiuction. 

Connected  series  of  transformations  tend  to  occur, 
in  the  last  of  which  by  a  sexual  reproductive  act  a 
fecundated  germ  is  produced,  which  in  its  development 
goes  through  a  similar  series  of  transformations;  or 
else  animal  organisms  of  a  decidedly  sexual  type  are 
more  directly  formed  by  the  *  vital  crystallization '  of 
larger  and  more  specialized  egg-like  aggregates  of  living 
matter,  which  have  been  elaborated  during  the  life  of 
some  lower  vegetal  organism. 

But  when  animal  or  vegetal  organisms  manifesting 
that  cyclical  homogenesis  which  is  known  as  '  alternate 
generation,'  appear  upon  the  scene,  and  with  them 
those  simpler  allies  (formed  from  large  germs)  which 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  637 

undergo  a  direct  process  of  development,  we  first  begin 
to  obtain  such  regularly-recurring  and  definite  assem- 
blages of  animal  and  vegetal  forms  as  are  usually 
grouped  under  the  name  of  'species.' 

These  *  species'  are  represented  either  by  solitary 
heimaphrodite  individuals,  by  two  sexually- distinct 
individuals,  or  by  a  series  of  transitional  and  deri- 
vative individuals  of  which  all  the  earlier  forms  are 
sexless  and  still  retain  the  power  of  undergoing  pro- 
cesses of  asexual  multiplication,  although  in  the  last 
form  fecundated  germs  are  produced  by  a  true  sexual 
process. 

Such  organisms  have  gradually  become  more  highly 
organized  than  the  'ephemeromorphs,'  and  they  are  to  a 
corresponding  extent  less  immediately  capable  of  being 
influenced  by  changes  in  their  environment  or  other 
modifying  influences.  Moreover,  as  soon  as  sexual 
reproduction  is  initiated  and  homogenesis  becomes  the 
rule,  the  '  laws  of  heredity '  come  into  action,  and 
an  internal  conservative  principle  begins  more  and 
more  to  take  root. 

The  processes  comprehended  under  what  Mr.  Darwin 
has  termed  '  Natural  Selection,'  being  essentially  based 
upon  these  laws  of  heredity,  can  only  come  into  play 
as  an  originator  of  specific  transmutations  amongst 
such  forms  of  life  as  habitually  reproduce  by  a  process 
of  homogenesis.  It  can  only  begin  to  be  influential, 
therefore,  when  we  have  passed  beyond  the  limits  of 
that  vast  and   intricately  interrelated   assemblage  of 


638  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


Infusorial  and  Cryptogamic  Organisms  wliich  we  have 
classed  under  the  name  « cphem^romorphs.'     Natural 
Selection  as  a  producer  of  variation  is,  indeed,  wholly 
limited  to  ^  species/  such  as  we  now  define  them. 

But  amongst  specific  ft)rms  of  slight  comfdexity,  the 
influence  of  Natural  Selection  as  a  modifying  agent  is 
probably  much  less  important  than  it  is  amongst  more 
active  and  complex  animal  forms ;  and  in  all  cases  its 
action  in  producing  change  may  be  assisted  by  *  spon- 
taneous' internal  changes  in  the  molecular  activity  of 
certain  parts  of  the  organism,  or  by  other  internal 
changes  which  are  more  definitely  induced  by  modi- 
fications in  the  sum-total  of  'external  conditions' 
acting  upon  the  organism. 

Each  cause  of  specific  modification,  however,  whether 
acting  alone  or  in  concert  with  one  of  the  other  pro- 
ducers of  internal  change,  can  only  come  into  play  in 
subordination  to  the  ever-potent  laws  of  <  organic 
polarity,*  by  which  a  multiplication  of  eflFects  is  apt  to 
be  induced. 

An  elemental  origin  of  'living*  matter  similar  to 
that  which  takes  place  at  the  present  day,  and  in 
addition  all  the  related  hcterogenetic  phenomena,  have 
probably  been  taking  place  on  the  surface  of  our  globe 
since  the  far -remote  period  when  such  matter  was 
first  engendered. 

The  countless  myriads  of  living  units  which  have 
been  evolved  in  different  ages  of  the  world's  history 


THE  ni'.iUXXiWr,:;  OF  /.///■:.  r.;^9 

must,  in  each  period,  have  given  rise  to  innumerable 
multitudes  of  what  have  been  called  'trees  of  life,' branch- 
ing out  into  animal  and  vegetal  forms  of  almost  incDn- 
ceivable  variety.  Myriads  of  these  'trees,'  including 
all  their  branches  and  innumerable  ramifications,  may 
have  wholly  died  out  during  the  many  vicissitudes  of 
the  earth's  surface  and  the  long  lapse  of  ever-fruitful 
ages;  though  the  descendants  or  ultimate  ramifications 
of  some  of  such  trees — dating  back  to  quite  different 
and  perhaps  far-distant  epochs — may  still  survive 
upon  the  earth's  surface.  How  far,  however,  the 
roots  of  any  of  those  trees  from  which  the  existing 
higher  forms  of  life  are  derived,  may  have  extended 
back  into  the  depths  of  geologic  time,  we  are  utterly 
unable  to  estimate. 

Throughout  all  this  life-evolving  period  of  the 
history  of  our  globe,  the  progress  of  '  organization ' 
seems  to  have  been  essentially  similar.  And  that  this 
should  be  so,  seems  readily  explicable  by  the  con- 
sideration that  living  things,  both  as  regards  their 
origin  and  their  subsequent  differentiation  or  deve- 
lopment, are  the  immediate  products  of  ever-acting 
natural  laws  or  material  properties  which  are  probably 
the  same  now  as  they  have  ever  been. 

The  lower  the  forms  of  life — that  is  the  nearer  they 
are  to  their  source — the  greater  seems  to  have  been 
the  similarity  amongst  those  which  have  been  produced 
in  different  ages.  On  the  other  hand,  the  longer  any 
particular  tree  of  life  has  lived  (of  which  there  have  been 


:  :\  7/.V.\7.VSS    C'f  LIFE 


countless  multitudes  born  in  each  age),  the  wider  ma) 
be  the  divergence  of  form  presented  by  the  ultimate 
outgrowths  of  any  two  of  them,  or  of  outgrowths  oi 
similar  rank  produced  from  trees  which  have  developed! 
during  different  ages — especially  when  the  assemblage^: 
of  organisms,  constituting  one  of  these  ideal  trees,  h^ 
lived  under  the  influence  of  any  unusual  sets  of  tellur  v 
conditions. 

How  long  or  when  the  particular  '  tree  of  life,'  froni 
one  of  the  branches  of  which  man  was  developed 
appeared  upon  the  earth,  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  say. 
The  ^  vertebrate '  grade  of  organization  mmj  have  been 
many  times  attained  by  ultimate  branches  of  different 
^  trees  of  life.* 

But  physical,  chemical,  and  biological  phenomena  all 
compel  us  to  believe  that  law  and  order  universally 
prevail,  even  amidst  occurrences  which,  on  account  of 
the  complexity  of  their  relations,  may  seem  to  bavc 
been  the  result  of  chance  or  accident.     And  equally 
good  reasons  also   exist  for  the   conviction  that  the 
same   Forces  which  are   now   in  action    within  and 
around   us,  have   been   and   are   constantly  operative 
throughout  the  whole  universe — everywhere  producing 
the  most  beautiful  and  complex  results,  whose  mutual 
alliance  and  inter-relations  seem  to  combine  in  testi- 
fying to   the   existence  of  one  supreme  and  all-per- 
vading Power  of  which  these  results  are  the  phenomenal 
manifestations. 


APPENDIX    A. 

^^  some  Organisms,  and  other  products  of  uncertain  nature , 
met  with  in  boiled  solutions  of  Ammonic  TartrcUe,  and 
also  in  others  containing  Ammonic  Silicate, 

Many  observations  and  experiments  have  been  made  with 
solutions  containing  neutral  ammonic  tartrate  and  neutral 
sodic  phosphate,  both  in  distilled  and  in  tolerably  pure  undis- 
tifled  water  ^.  When  these  solutions  have  not  been  boiled,  and 
have  been  maintained  at  a  temperature  of  65^-75**  F.,  they 
have  become  more  or  less  turbid  in  from  forty -eight  to 
seventy-two  hours,  owing  to  the  development  and  multipli- 
cation of  myriads  of  Bacteria  and  Vibriones.  If  they  were 
previously  boiled,  however,  they  were  not  at  all  prone  to 
become  turbid,  and  might  then  be  kept  for  a  long  time,  even 
with  free  exposure  to  the  atmosphere  *,  without  any  trace  of 
the  presence  of  such  organisms ;  though  at  any  period  the 
solutions  may  be  shown  to  be  eminently  favourable  media  for 
the  development  and  multiplication  of  these  organisms,  since, 
ifter  they  have  been  purposely  brought  into  contact  with  a 
few  of  them,  the  solutions  speedily  become  turbid  and  swarm 
irith  Bacteria  and  Vibriones,  An  utter  absence  of  living 
things  of  this  kind  has,  however,  always  been  a  notable 

• 

^  In  the  proportion  of  ten  grains  of  the  former  and  three  grains  of  the 
ttter  to  one  fluid  ounce  of  water. 

'  This  freedom  from  turbidity  may  be  seen,  either  in  open  flasks,  in 
bsks  closed  with  or  without  ordinary  air,  or  in  other  sealed  flasks  to 
rhidi  only  air  which  has  been  filtered  through  cotton-wool  is  admitted. 

▼OL.  u.  a 


ii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

characteristic  of  those  boiled  solutions  which  have  been 
subsequently  kept  (without  such  addition)  in  aiikss  and 
hermetically-sealed  flasks. 

But,  although  the  boiled  fluids  in  hermetically-sealed  flasks 
(with  or  >%ithout  air)  have  never  been  known  to  become 
turbid,  or  to  yield  Bacteria  and  Vibn'oms,  they  have  never- 
theless very  frequendy  been  found  to  present  other  kinds  of 
organisms.     A  slight  deposit,  of  a  dirty  greyish-wWtc  or 
broA^Tiish  colour,  has  gradually  collected  at  the  bottom  of  the 
flask,  and  this  on  subsequent  microscopical  examination  has 
generally  been  found  to  contain  some  organisms,  and  occa- 
sionally  bodies   of  an   uncertain    nature,   intermixed  vidi 
peculiar  amorphous  fragments,  bro^n  or  colourless  granules, 
and  a  small  number  of  textile  fibres  of  various  kinds. 

The  organisms  have  been  either  fungus  filaments  and 
spores  similar  to  those  represented  in  Figs.  29  and  36,  Tomla 
such  as  have  been  sketched  in  Fig.  28,  various  kinds  of 
flagon-shaped  bodies  of  a  light  brown  colour  (apparently 
budding  out  into  filaments  and  containing  blocks  of  proto- 
plasm within),  or  else  roundish  spores  of  very  variable  shape 
and  size — some  being  smooth  externally,  others  rough,  and 
most  of  them  having  thick  walls. 

The  fermentability  of  these  solutions  seems  to  be  very 
notably  lowered  by  the  process  of  ebullition  to  which  they 
have  been  submitted,  and  the  fungus  spores  and  filaments 
which  subsequently  occur  appear  to  grow  with  extreme 
slowness  (see  vol.  i.  p.  281). 

In  addition  to  these  unmistakeable  organisms  (which  have 
in  some  cases  been  proved  to  be  really  living)  obtained  from 
the  saline  solutions,  other  bodies  have  been  encountered 
whose  real  nature  is  deemed  to  be  very  doubtful. 

The  first  of  these  is  the  product  called  Sarcina  (Fig.  21), 
which,  since  its  discovery  by  the  late  Professor  Goodsir^  has 

'  See  vol.  i.  p.  286. 


APPENDIX   A,  111 

"^  very  generally  regarded  as  a  real  living  organism.    It 

^  been  even  admitted  into  this  category  by  the  Rev.  M.  J. 

^keley,  who  looks  upon  it  as  an  unusual  form  of  some  one 

^^  our  common  mucors,  though  he  admits'  that  all  attempts  to 

^evelopc  it  into  the  mucor  which  it  represents  have  signally 

*«led.    This  itself  is  a  very  noteworthy  fact,  and  one  which 

^  Extremely  difficult  of  explanation  in  accordance  with  the 

'Opposition  that  Sarcina  is  really  a  living  organism.    Certain 

'*^^ts  observed  by  Lebert  *  are  also  well  worthy  of  note.     In 

"^Scribing  a  specimen  which  he  found  in  prodigious  quantities 

'^    the  fluids  vomited  by  a  woman  suffering  from  cancer  of 

^^   stomach,  he  says: — *En  comprimant  les  lames  de  verre 

^tre  lesquelles  nous  examinions  ces  preparations  nous  avons 

^^  frapp^  de  la  sensation  sablonneuse,  qui  ne  pouvait  aprbs 

^^r  examen,  tenir  qu'^  la  duretd  des  Sarcines  ce  qui  nous 

^5ait  supposer  qu'elles  avaient  une   enveloppc   min^rale, 

J^^Ht-fitre  silicieuse.'     Without  reference  to   Lebert's  more 

special  suggestion,  as  to  the  siliceous  constituents  of  Sarcina^ 

^e  fact  of  the  large  quantity  of  mineral  matter  entering  into 

^^  composition,  and  of  its  occurrence  in  this  and  in  other 

^ases  without  any  admixture  with  real  fungoid  organisms, 

'^hen  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  failure  of  all  attempts  to 

^duce  it  to  undergo  any  further  process  of  development, 

^Uflfice  to  suggest  the  possibility  of  its  being  riot  a  living 

Organism  at  all,  but  rather  a  statical  aggregate  which  grows 

after  the  manner  of  the  modified  crystalline  forms  described 

by  Mr.  Rainey. 

My  supposition  that  Sarcina  is  not  a  living  organism  has 
of  late  been  gradually  more  and  more  strengthened.  I  have 
been  influenced  by  the  following  considerations : — i.  Sarcina 
has  only  been  seen  to   undergo  a  process  of  growth  and 

*  'British  Fungology,*  i860,  p.  69. 

'  And  quoted  by  Robin  in  his  '  V^g^taux  Parasites/  1854,  p.  337. 


[PPENDIX  A. 


living  substance  ^     4.  Sarcina^  even  when  obtained  from  the 
liuman  stomach,  varies  considerably,  as  regards  its  ultimate 
pattern  or  arrangement,  as  may  be   seen  by  reference  to 
Robin's  figures  *. 

Some  of  the  forms  assumed  by  these  masses  allied  to 
Sarcina  are  represented  in  Fig.  a.  Many  other  intermediate 
conditions  have,  however,  been  observed;  and  the  careful 
comparison  of  one  with  the  other  has  made  me  strongly 
of  opinion  that  Sarcina  is  only  a  member  of  this  series  of 
peculiar,  not-living  formations. 

The  next  variety  of  doubtful  product  met  with  in  the 
ammonia  tartrate  solutions  is  an  intricately-tangled  spiral- 
fibre  (Fig.  3),  which  I  have  previously  described ',  and  which  I 
was  at  one  time  disposed  to  think  might  be  a  living  organism. 
I  am  now,  however,  more  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  a  very 
peculiar  formation,  which  should  be  placed  in  the  category  of 
lifeless  rather  than  of  living  things.  Here  also,  as  with 
Sarcina,  though  there  is  good  evidence  that  growth  and  de- 
velopment take  place,  there  is  no  satisfactory  evidence  of  the 
occurrence  of  reproduction  by  the  spontaneous  separation  of 
portions  of  its  own  substance.  In  default  of  this,  and  of  all 
other  signs  pertaining  to  living  aggregates,  it  cannot  be  con- 
fidently admitted  into  the  same  category  with  them,  though 
it  may  be  just  as  devoid  of  all  claims  to  be  considered  as 
a  crystalline  aggregate.  It  seems,  like  Sarcina,  to  be  an 
intermediate  product,  the  existence  of  which  is  very  far  from 
being  incompatible  with  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  of  evolution, 
or  irreconcileable  with  our  notions  as  to  the  nature  of  living 

^  Although  I  have  met  with  Sarcina  and  its  allies  ten  or  twelve  times 
in  the  solutions  above  named,  they  are  by  no  means  to  be  produced 
at  will.  In  thb  respec^t  thev  are  just  as  uncertain  as  organisms.  On 
many  occasions  I  have  utterly  failed  to  obtain  them,  although  the  solu- 
tions and  the  conditions  were,  so  far  as  I  could  make  them,  similar  to 
those  which  had  yielded  them  on  previous  occasions. 

*  Log.  cit,  PI.  XII.  Fig.  i.  »  'Nature,*  1870,  No.  36,  p.  197. 


vi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

matter'.  Both  products  have  been  seen  to  appeared 
increase  in  amount  within  closed  flasks,  as  minute  vtiiish 
masses  whose  existence  at  first  was,  to  say  the  kaS,  not 


recognizable.  Both  yield  no  colour  reactions  with  the  polar- 
iscope  (with  or  without  the  aid  of  a  selenite  plate) ;  whilst  b 
some  cases  bodies  of  the  modified  Sarcina  type  have  been 

'  It  has  been  suggested  hy  others  that  tbese  spiml-iibre  masses  ue 
accideotal  products,  which,  liaving  gained  access  to  the  solutions,  have 
been  more  or  less  modified  therein — portions  of  the  spiral  ducts  of 
plants,  for  instuice,  or  of  spider's  web.  After  repeated  careful  examini- 
tioDS  and  compnrisons,  I  am  still,  however,  quite  unable  to  adopt  either 
of  these  views.  These  particular  spiral  masses  differ  wholly  from  the 
spiral  fibres  of  plants  and  all  products  obtainable  from  them,  and  Ihey 
also  differ  in  many  important  respects  from  spider's  silk,  not  only  in 
microscopical  characters  and  in  the  absence  of  even  slight  colour  reactions 
with  the  polariscope.  but  also  in  [he  complete  absence  of  that  silky  lustre 
to  the  naked  eye  which  still  characterises  spider's  silk,  eveo  after  it  has 
been  boiled  in,  and  has  remained  immersed  in  an  ammonic  tartrate 
solution  for  two  or  more  weeks.  Like  Sarcina,  the  spiral  fibres  have 
been  obtained  only  from  slightly  acid  ammoDiacal  solutions,  in  which 
ft  phosphate  was  present. 


APPENDIX  A. 


vii 


encountered  in  ihe  same  solution  with  ihe  Sarcina  and  spiral 
fibres,  partly  free  and  partly  in  intimate  connection  with  the 
latter  (Fig.  t).  The  spiraJ-fibre  masses  have  been  seen  also 
in  different  stages  of  growth.  In  some  of  the  solutions  of 
aromonlc  tartrate  minute  masses  have  been  seen  which  were 
obviously  young  fibres,  the  ultimate  clement  of  some  of  these 


Embryonic  Spiral  Fibres  mel  with  in  a  solution  of  Amnionic 
Carbonate  and  .Sodic  Phosphale.    (x  6oa.) 
a.  Amorphous  firanulea  in  an  almost  transparent  matriji. 
b,  b.  Formation  of  embryonic  fibres  by  a  diflerentialiun  o(  a 
more  finely  granular  matrix. 
t.  Similar  fibres  more  fully  Ibrmed. 
d.  rmia-cclU  from  same  solution. 

being  excessively  minute  and  inextricably  twisted.  Verj' 
peculiar  embryonic-looking  hbres  closely  related  to  them 
have  also  been  found  in  an  ammonic  carboiute  solution '. 

>  In  four  or  five  subsequent  attempts  to  produce  similar  fibres  in 
carbonate  of  Ammonia  i>olutions,  1  have  met  wilh  no  success.  In  ibe 
fint  experiment  an  unknown  quantity  of  Ihe  saline  materials  was  dis- 
■olTCd  u  some  of  the  West  Middlesex  water.    Even  if  the  quantities 


viii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


These  spiral-fibre  masses  have  been  met  with  on  seven  ^ 
separate  occasions,  and  in  another  experiment  small  masses 
having  a  close  general  resemblance  were  found  where  the 
experimental  fluid  consisted  of  a  solution  of  potash  and 
ammonia  alum  containing  a  fragment  of  cheese.  The 
degree  of  spiral  twisting  and  the  character  of  the  fibre  itself 
varied  somewhat  in  different  specimens  and  even  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  same  fibre.  Some  portions  were  very 
fine  and  gradually  attenuated,  so  that  this  character,  in  con- 
junction with  their  spiral  disposition,  gave  them  a  very 
close  resemblance  to  miniature  vine  tendrils.  Some  parts 
of  the  fibre  seemed  solid  and  not  much  twisted,  whilst  in 
others  it  widened  out  into  fiat  expansions :  portions  directly 
continuous  with  them  occasionally  assumed  the  appear- 
ance of  very  minute  fungus  filaments.  Here  the  fibre 
seemed  hollow,  though  it  was  neither  marked  off  at  intervals 
by  dissepiments,  nor  did  it  contain  protoplasmic  masses 
or  granules  in  its  interior*.  In  one  of  the  solutions  of 
ammonic  tartrate  three  distinct  masses  of  the  tangled  fibre 
were  found,  and  intertwined  amongst  the  branches  of  one  of 
them  there  was  an  undoubted  mycelial  mass.  This  was  made 
up  of  very  delicate  filaments,  varying  much  in  size  even  at 
short  distances — not  distinctly  dissepimented,  but  showing 
constrictions  at  intervals.  These  filaments  were  not  hollow, 
but  seemed  to  be  filled  with  an  almost  homogeneous  and  very 
minutely  granular  protoplasm  mass.    The  wall  of  the  filament 

had  been  accurately  known,  however,  no  more  success  might  have 
attended  my  efforts  to  reproduce  these  fibres  than  has  been  met  with  on 
many  occasions  when  I  have  sought  to  reproduce  Sarcina. 

^  Five  times  in  solutions  containing  ammonic  tartrate  and  sodic 
phosphate,  once  where  the  tartrate  was  replaced  by  ammonic  carbonate, 
and  once  in  a  solution  of  sodic  silicate  and  ammonic  phosphate. 

'  In  this  condition  it  bore  a  very  close  resemblance  indeed  to  an  un- 
doubted mycelial  growth  often  obtainable  from  the  old,  brownish  pellicle 
which  forms  on  a  fluid  in  which  there  are  some  decaying  water  plants 
{Po/amogeton)  or  algx.  The  filaments  of  these  were  equally  delicate 
and  devoid  of  mtemsl  ^;c^nuLes  or  dissepiments. 


API  F.xnix  A. 


IX 


M  no  appreciable  thickness,  and  api)caretl  to  be  only  the 
slightly  condensed  outer  layer  of  the  protoplasm  of  which  it 
was  composed.     Here  and  there  it  appeared  that  the  spiral 
filament  gradually  merged  into  that  presenting  the  more  ordi- 
nary mycelial  character.     On  this  subject,  however,  I  unfor- 
tunately cannot  speak  with  absolute  certainty,  because  of  the 
difficulty  experienced  in  accurately  tracing  any  one  portion 
of  the  filament     On  two  occasions,  moreover,  sporangium- 
like bodies  have  been  found  emerging  from   amidst  the 
filaments,  and  apparently  in  connection  with  them.     The 
nature  of  these  bodies,  also,  must  still  be  considered   as 
very  doubtful.     They  may  be   mere   plate-like  expansions 


Fig.  d. 
Sporangium-like  body  amidst  mass  of  Spiral  Fibre.    (  X  600.) 

similar  to  those  represented  in  Figs,  a  and  e.  But  never- 
theless, their  existence,  the  alterations  in  appearance  of  the 
fibres  here  and  there,  and  the  apparent  continuity  of  these 
with  undoubted  mycelial  filaments,  makes  it  still  impossible  to 
come  to  a  final  and  satisfactory  decision  as  to  the  real  nature 
of  the  spiral  fibres  \ 


Another  subject  now  claims  our  consideration.  Living 
matter  being  the  result   of  a  chemical  combination  of  a 

'  In  connection  with  this  subject  the  observations  of  M.  Tr^cul 
(*  Comptes  Rendus/  t.  Ixi.  p.  435)  must  not  be  forgotten.  He  seems  to 
have  actually  observed  the  more  or  less  immediate  passage  of  a  statical 
into  a  dynamical  aggregate  (Amylobacttr).  The  statements  and  obser- 
vations of  such  an  observer  should  not  be  lightly  set  aside  or  \^oi«l. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


certain  kind,  there  is  no  absolute  improbability  in  the  suppo- 
sition that  the  carbon  usually  existing  in  the  living  compoond 
might  be  replaced  by  some  other  element     With  the  hope 
of  throwing  some  little  light  upon  this  very  diflScult  subject, 
I  made  several  tentative  experiments  with  saline  solutions 
containing — in  addition  to  nitrogen,  oxygen,  and  hydrogen- 
some  other  element  in  the  place  of  carbon.     The  element 
with  which  the  carbon  was  replaced  was  either  silicon,  boron, 
chromium,  aluminium,  or  iron^.     Except  in  those  in  which 
carbon  was  replaced  by  silicon,  no  living  things  have  been 
met  with  in  any  of  these  solutions  (after  they  had  been 
boiled  and  the  necks  of  the  flasks  had  been  sealed  during 
ebullition).     This  result — taking  it  merely   for  what  it  is 
worth  —  is    extremely    interesting    and    suggestive,    since 
silicon  is  certainly  the  element  which  most  closely  resembles 
carbon,  and  which  might  therefore  best  replace  it  in  com- 
pounds otherwise  similar  to  those  which  constitute  the  basis 
of  living  matter.     A  silicon  alcohol  and  ether  has  in  fact  been 
produced  by  Professor  Wiihler*,  in  which  the  carbon  of  the 
ordinary  compoimds  is  replaced  by  silicon.     It  is  therefore 
deemed  quite  possible  that  silicon  may  take  the  place  of 
carbon  in  certain  forms  of  li\dng  matter.     No  absolute  proof 
of  this,  however,  can  at  present  be  advanced.     What  follows 
must  be  taken  merely  as  an  indication  of  the  possibility  of 
such  an  occurrence. 

In  the  first  place  (though  it  is  a  fact  which  I  have  only 
quite  recently  observed),  minute  fungoid  organisms  have  been 
found  growing  at  the  surface  of  a  solution  of  silicate  of  soda 
in  a  tolerably  luxuriant  manner.  About  half  an  ounce  of  this 
fluid  was  contained  in  a  corked  i  oz.  phial,  which  had  not 

*  As  I  have  already  stated,  these  ejcperiments  were  merely  tentative. 
It  is  not  supposed  that  solutions  were  employed  free  from  all  trace  of 
carbon,  existing  as  an  impurity. 

*  •  Ann.  Ch.  Pharm.*  cxxvii.,  and  civ. 


APPENDIX  A,  xi 


>een  opened  or  disturbed  for  about  six  months.  When 
iccidentally  observed  a  short  time  ago,  it  was  found  to  exhibit 
t  flake-like  cloudy  mass  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  which 
[  at  first  supposed  to  be  some  insoluble  modification  of 
dlica.  On  taking  a  portion  of  it  out,  and  submitting  it  to 
examination  by  a  high  power  of  the  microscope,  it  was 
sbserved  that  the  cloudy  mass  was  wholly  composed  of  the 
iensely  interlaced  filaments  of  a  fungus  mycelium,  some  of 
lie  branches  seeming  to  originate  from  a  large  brownish- 
irellow  sporangium,  which  gave  issue  to  multitudes  of  filaments 
)n  all  sides,  whilst  others  bore  tufts  of  spores.  Concerning 
be  mode  of  origin  of  this  fungus  nothing  can  be  said — 
t  may,  of  course,  have  originated  from  a  spore  which  had 
gained  access  to  the  solution.  The  conditions  of  its  nutrition 
ind  growth  do,  however,  present  features  of  considerable 
Qterest.  It  was  growing  quite  close  to  the  surface,  and  may 
herefore  have  obtained  its  nitrogen  either  from  the  air  or 
rem  that  dissolved  in  the  surface-layers  of  the  fluid.  Did  it, 
lowever,  contain  carbon  (from  some  impurity  in  the  form  of 
L  carbonate),  or  was  this  replaced  in  the  structure  of  the 
ungus  by  silicon  from  the  silicate?  This  is  a  question 
vhich  cannot  at  present  be  answered.  At  all  events,  the 
imgus  thrived  in  this  solution,  and  seemed  to  grow  much  as 
t  would  have  done  in  a  solution  of  ammonic  tartrate  ^. 

In  an  experiment  in  which  about  ten  minims  of  the  weak 
solution  of  iron  pemitrate  and  seven  of  sodic  silicate  solution 
nrere  added  to  an  ounce  of  distilled  water,  the  fluid  was  boiled 
5m:  fifteen  minutes,  and  the  neck  of  the  flask  was  then  her- 
metically sealed  during  ebullition.  Some  semi-gelatinous, 
reddish-yellow  flakes  were  deposited  during  the  ebullition. 
The  vacuum  being  still  well  preserved,  the  flask  was  opened 

^  This  observation  naturally  recalls  those  made  by  Messrs.  Roberts 
■ad  Slack  concerning  the  growth  of  fon^  on  freshly-prepared  colloidal 
ifllca.    (*  Quarterly  Joum.  of  Microsc.  Saence,'  1868,  p^.  lo^-io^.^ 


xii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

on  the  35th  day,  when  the  reaction  of  the  fluid  was  also  found 
to  be  still  slighdy  acid.  On  one  of  the  above-mentioned 
flakes  there  was  found  a  minute  whitish  mass  about  the  sizie 
of  a  small  pin's  head,  which,  on  examination,  was  seen  to 
consist  of  a  mycelial  tuft,  having  small  but  perfect  filaments, 
though  without  any  trace  of  fructification.  The  filaments 
themselves  were  about  Yshj^"  ^^  diameter,  but  varied  sKghtly 
in  size,  and  contained  a  minutely  granular  protoplasm  with- 
out dissepiments.  The  numerous  branches  came  off  at 
right  angles,  and  the  whole  organism  had  all  the  appearance 
of  being  a  living  fungus. 

The  other  silicate  solutions  in  which  organisms  have  been 
encountered  were  quite  different  in  composition.  They  have 
been  prepared  by  adding  to  one  ounce  of  distilled  water 
three  grains  of  ammonic  phosphate  and  about  eight  minims 
of  sodic  silicate  solution.  Such  a  mixture  always  had  a 
slightly  alkaline  reaction,  and  it  was  sometimes  used  in  this 
condition  and  sometimes  after  it  had  been  rendered  neutral 
or  very  slightly  acid  by  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  dilute 
phosphoric  acid.  The  addition  of  the  phosphoric  acid 
seemed,  however,  to  modify  the  result  very  much,  since  four 
slightly  alkaline  solutions  with  which  experiments  have  been 
made  have  proved  entirely  barren,  whilst  three  out  of  five 
solutions  whose  alkalinity  had  been  neutralised  by  the  acid, 
either  contained  organisms  or  spiral  fibre  masses.  In  all 
cases  the  solutions  were  boiled*  for  from  three  to  five  minutes, 
and  the  necks  of  the  flasks  were  hermetically  sealed  during 
this  process,  and  after  the  expulsion  of  all  air.  One  flask, 
which  had  been  prepared  six  months  previously,  and  whose 
vacuum  was  ascertained  to  be  scarcely  if  at  all  impaired,  was 
found,  when  opened,  to  contain  a  fluid  which  still  had  a  very 

^  The  silicates  are  held  in  solution  very  feebly,  and,  unfortunately,  are 
in  part  precipitated,  by  the  process  of  ebullition,  in  the  form  of  bluish- 
white,  cloud-like  flakes,  which  show,  on  examination  with  high  powers 
of  the  microscope,  a  very  minutely  granular  composition. 


APPENDIX  A,  xiii 


slightly  acid  reaction.  The  numerous  bluish-white  flakes 
which  it  contained  presented  almost  the  same  appearance  as 
at  first.  Amongst  these  was  found  a  minute  whitish  mass, 
about  a  line  in  diameter,  made  up  of  very  delicate  mycelial 
filaments,  partly  twisted  around  a  cotton  fibre.  Near  the 
centre  of  the  mass  was  a  large,  brown,  flagon-like  body, 
about  ^^  in  diameter,  from  all  parts  of  the  surface  of 
which  issued  the  mycelial  filaments  whose  ramifications  went 
to  constitute  the  rest  of  the  mass.  One  or  two  smaller 
growths  were  also  found  attached  to  some  of  the  fiakes,  as 
well  as  several  distinct  spore-like  bodies  of  different  sizes — 
mostly  of  a  brownish  colour,  and  having  thick  walls  with 
granular  contents.  A  group  of  fine  spore-like  bodies  was 
also  found  ;  these  being  larger  (^^\^'  in  diameter)  and  colour- 
less, rather  than  brown.  Their  nature  was  altogether  un- 
certain. A  solution  with  an  alkaline  reaction  which  had 
been  prepared  at  the  same  time,  and  opened  after  a  similar 
interval,  revealed  no  trace  of  spore-like  bodies,  or  of 
organisms ;  and  two  other  solutions  containing  sodic  silicate 
and  ammonic  bichromate,  whose  periods  of  preparation  and 
examination  were  also  similar,  were  similarly  unproductive. 
All  four  solutions  had  been  prepared  with  distilled  water 
taken  from  the  same  bottle. 

In  another  of  the  boiled  silicate  solutions  which  had  been 
rendered  neutral  by  the  addition  of  a  little  dilute  phosphoric 
acid,  and  which  was  opened  after  six  weeks  (the  vacuum 
being  still  preserved),  two  small  white  masses  about  ^^^  in 
diameter  were  found  amongst  the  bluish-white  flakes,  which, 
on  microscopical  examination,  proved  to  be  masses  of 
tangled  and  spirally-coiled  fibre,  having  a  very  close  resem- 
blance to  those  which  had  been  found  in  the  ammonic 
tartrate  solutions.  As  was  the  case  with  some  of  these, 
also,  there  were,  on  certain  portions  of  this  fibre,  plate-like 
expansions,  some  of  which  were  irregular  in  outline  whilst 


xiv  THE  BEGWmNGS  OF  UFE. 

others  were  quadrilateral  bodies,  such  as  I  have  fotind  on 
other  occasions  existing  separately  (Fig.  a),  and  wfaidi  I 
believe  to  be  closely  related  to  Sarcina.      On  the  surface  of 


several  of  the  granular  flakes  there  were  found  veiy  small 
portions  of  a  similar  spiral  fibre,  which  might  have  repre- 
sented the  nuclei  or  siarting-poinis  of  other  future  masses. 

The  resemblance  of  these  spiral  fibre  masses,  and  of  the 
•S'lirrtffii-likc  bodies  and  fungi  found  in  the  siliceous  solutions, 
to  those  which  have  been  met  with  in  the  ammonic  tartrate 
solutions  is  very  striking,  more  especially  when  taken  in  con- 
junction with  the  fact  that  neither  spiral  fibre  masses,  Sarcina- 
like  bodiesi  nor  organisms,  have  been  met  with  in  the 
other  saline  solutions  (with  which  experiment  has  been 
made),  in  which  carbon  was  ostensibly  replaced  by  some 
other  element.  It  is,  moreover,  a  fact  of  much  signi6cance 
that  no  trace  of  anything  like  spiral  fibres  or  Saretna  has 
been  found  in  more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  other  flaskt 
similarly  prepared  with  organic  infusions  of  various  kinds. 


APPENDIX    B. 


On  the  iimng  Matter  and  Organisms  contained  within  Crystals 

of  Neutral  Amnionic  Tartrate, 

Althouoh  '  germs '  are  supposed  by  many  to  be  univer- 
sally diffused,  more  especially  in  the  air  and  within  organic 
substances,  it  seems  only  reasonable  for  all  to  suppose  that 
they  would  exist  much  less  abundantly  in  saline  materials  than 
within  organic  substances.  In  order  to  ascertain  whether 
any,  or  what,  visible  organisms  or  spores  were  to  be  found  in 
the  saline  materials  employed  in  my  experiments,  portions  of 
them  have  been  repeatedly  dissolved  by  distilled  water  in  a 
watch-glass,  and  the  fluid  has  afterwards  been  submitted  to 
the  most  careful  microscopical  examination.  Moreover,  after 
sufficient  time  has  been  allowed  for  subsidence,  the  bottom  of 
the  watch-glass  has  been  most  carefully  scrutinized  by  a 
powerful  immersion  lens.  The  saline  materials  employed  in 
these  experiments  have  been  potash-and-ammonia-alum, 
tartar  emetic,  neutral  sodic  phosphate,  neutral  ammonic 
phosphate,  ammonic  oxalate,  ammonic  acetate,  ammonic 
carbonate,  and  neutral  ammonic  tartrate.  The  result  of 
repeated  examinations  of  these  substances  in  the  manner 
above  stated  has  been,  that  not  a  trace  of  anything  like  an 
organism — no  fungus-spore,  germ,  or  Q^g  of  any  kind — has 
been  found  in  solutions  of  any  of  the  substances  employed, 
except  in  one.    The  one  in  which  such  bodies  have  been 


MM 


xvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

found  is  that  which  I  have  named  last — the  neutral  anunonic 
tartrate. 

Several  of  these  salts — the  oxalate,  the  acetate,  the  carbo- 
nate, and  the  tartrate  of  ammonia— contain  within  themselves 
all  the  elements  necessary  for  the  building  up  of  organic 
substances.  Nitrogen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen  are 
there,  and  they  only  require  to  fall  or  to  be  brought  into 
other  modes  of  cbllocation  in  order  to  give  birth  to  an 
organizable  compound.  The  crystals  of  the  oxalate  are  very 
small,  those  of  the  acetate  are  very  deliquescent,  and  caibo- 
nate  of  ammonia  exists  generally  in  the  form  of  non-crystal- 
line cakes  i.  The  neutral  tartrate,  however,  exists  in  the  form 
of  tolerably  large  prismatic  crystals,  and  it  was  within  these 
only  that  living  matter  and  organisms  were  found. 

Before  describing  these  organisms  more  particularly,  it 
will  be  well  to  glance  for  a  moment  at  the  origin  or  mode  of 
preparation  of  ammonic  tartrate.     The  tartaric  acid  entering 
into  its  composition  is  obtained  from  argoi,  the  crude  po- 
tassic  bitartrate  derived  from  the  grape.     And  although  this 
latter  salt  is  derived  from  the  tissues  of  a  living  plant,  the 
processes  to  which  it  is  submitted,  in  order  to  obtain  the 
tartaric  acid  in  an  uncombined  state,  would  most  certainly 
suffice  to  destroy  all  living  'germs'  which  it  might  have  con- 
tained.    After  a  solution  of  the  potassic  bitartrate  has  been 
boiled  for  a  time,  calcic  tartrate  is  gradually  precipitated  by 
the  addition  of  chalk  and  calcic  chloride.     The  insoluble 
calcic  tartrate,  after  having  been  washed  several  times,  is  then 
brought  into  contact  with  strong  sulphuric  actdy  diluted  with 
only  about  four  times  its  bulk  of  water,  and  this  mixture  is 
boiled  for  half  an  hour  *.  All  this  is  necessary  before  a  filtrate 

1    *  Obtained  by  a  process  of  sublimation  at  high  temperatures. 

*  The  boiling  point  of  such  a  solution  would  be  several  degrees  above 
1 00°  C.  Heat  and  acid  combined,  exercise  a  most  powerfully  destructive 
influence  upon  organic  nutter,  though  e^-en  very  dilute  sidphuiic  acid. 


APPENDIX  B.  xvii 

'Ui  be  obtained  from  which  the  first  crystals  of  tartaric  acid 
>%  procurable.  Ammonia,  the  other  constituent  of  the 
neutral  tartrate,  being  a  product  of  the  destructive  distillation 
^  coal  tar — and  itself  exercising  such  a  destructive  influence 
pern  organic  matter  when  existing  in  the  form  of  strong 
fimr  ammonict — would  not  seem  to  be  a  very  promising 
idns  for  living  '  germs/  The  neutral  tartrate  of  ammonia 
;  however,  prepared  by  mixing  a  solution  of  tartaric  acid, 
rocured  as  above  mentioned,  with  an  adequate  quantity  of 
}uor  ammoniae,  and  then  evaporating  the  mixture  at  a 
entle  heat  Thus  prepared,  the  crystals  contain  a  notable 
nantity  of  water  of  crystallization. 

In  the  stock  of  crystals  procured  from  Messrs.  Hopkin 
id  Williams*,  which  had  been  made  about  six  months  pre- 
onsly,  some  were  well  formed,  and  almost  perfectly  trans- 
irent,  whilst  others  were  less  regular  in  shape,  and  pre- 
!nted  an  opaque  appearance  with  more  or  less  of  striation 
ithin.  When  a  crystal  of  moderate  size  was  taken,  about 
'  in  diameter,  or  a  portion  of  a  larger  one,  and  placed  in 
large  watch-glass  with  some  distilled  water,  it  was  frequently 
and  that  at  first  a  certain  number  of  opaque-white 
ales,  having  a  granular  aspect  imder  a  high  magnifying 
)wer,  dropped  from  the  surface  of  the  crystal  to  the  bottom 

the  watch-glass.  This  material,  which  seemed  to  have  been 
oduced  by  some  superficial  alteration  (efilorescence)  of  the 
bstance  of  the  salt,  dissolved  with  much  more  difficulty 
an  the  unaltered  matter  of  the  crystal.  It  remained  for  a 
og  time  at  the  bottom  of  the  glass,  and  only  very  slowly 
sappeared.  As  the  substance  of  the  crystal  thus  dis- 
hred  away,  a  number  of  large  and  small  gaseous  bubbles 
adually  escaped  from  it     When  the  crystal  was  examined 

ordiHary  temperatures,  has  been  found  to  be  peculiarly  destructive  to 

I  living  things. 

«  Of  New  Csvendish  Street 

▼OL.  U. 


•  •• 

ZVIU 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


with  a  one-inch  object-glass  whilst  solution  was  taking  place, 
these  air  bubbles  could  be  seen  at  first  within  cavities,  from 
which  they  were  afterwards  liberated  by  a  solution  of  Acir 
walls.  Occasionally,  from  the  very  centre  of  a  crystal  from 
which  bubbles  of  gas  had  been  escaping,  a  very  small  and 
almost  invisible  filamentary  mass  floated  out,  which  vas  more 
or  less  thickly  studded  with  minute  air  bubbles.  Such  masses 
were  just  visible  with  an  ordinary  pocket-lens,  and  when 
transferred  on  the  point  of  a  needle  to  a  slip  of  glass,  and 
examined  with  a  magnifying  power  of  about  600  diameters, 
they  were  foimd  to  contain  more  or  less  of  the  following 
constituents:— I.  A  minute  fragment  of  cotton  or  paper 
fibre;  2.  A  variable  quantity  of  an  ahnost  transparent, in- 
soluble plate-like  substance,  homogeneous,  though  broken 
up  in  all  directions  by  intersecting  cracks ;  3.  More  rarely, 
a  small  quantity  of  a  tenacious  mucoid  matter  containing 
refractive  protein-looking  granules  of  various  sizes;  4*^ 
quantity  of  a  colourless,  confervoid-looking  mass,  some  of 
whose  smaller  filaments,  -rrrTTnr"  in  diameter,  looked  like  a 
mere  linear  aggregation  of  irregular  masses  of  protoplasm, 
though  it  became  obvious  that  in  certain  larger  filaments, 
continuous  with  these,  the  irregular  protoplasm  masses  were 


Fig./. 

Spores  and  Filaments  similar  to  those  found  within  Crystals  of 

Ammonic  Taitrate.    (  x  600.) 


contained  within  a  delicate  hyaline  cylinder,  across  which 
dissepiments  were  sometimes  to  be  seen,  as  in  veiy  minote 


APPENDIX  B.  xix 


fongus-filaments ;  5.  And  lastly,  certain  fungus-spores  in 
almost  all  respects  similar  to  those  which  have  been  met  with 
In  several  of  the  saline  experimental  fluids.  Although  four  or 
Cve  of  these  were  frequently  interspersed  amongst  the  con- 
Jervoid-iooking  filaments,  they  did  not  seem  to  be  in  organic 
connection  with  them. 

Repeated  examination  of  crystals  during  their  solution 
convinced  me  that  such  organic  bodies  invariably  came  from 
the  interior  of  the  crystal,  often  from  its  very  centre,  and 
'tiiat  they  were  not  to  be  met  with  on  its  surface.     Seeing, 
lowever,  that  minute  shreds  of  cotton  or  paper  fibre  also 
came  as  frequently  from  the  interior  of  the  crystal  \  it  was 
cbviously  possible  that  the  organisms  met  with  might  have 
l)een  engaged  mechanically  during  the  process  of  crystalliza- 
^on,  just  as  it  must  have  happened  with  the  shreds  above 
xientioned.    From  what  has  previously  been  stated  concern- 
ing the  mode  of  preparation  of  the  neutral  tartrate  of  am- 
monia and  the  origin  of  its  constituents,  it  may  be  considered 
afanost  certain  that  these  organisms  could  not  have  pre-ex- 
isted in  the  strong  liquor  ammonicB^  and  that  all  living  organ- 
isms which  might  by  chance  have  been  associated  with  the 
potassic  bitartrate  must  have  been  hopelessly  destroyed  by 
the  boiling  with  sulphuric  acid,  which  occurred  at  one  stage 
in  the  process  employed  for  the  separation  of  the  tartaric 
add  from  its  base. 

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  certain  spores  existing  in  the 
adjacent  atmosphere  might  have  dropped  into  the  fluid 
duing  the  subsequent  process  of  crystallization  of  the  tartaric 
add  from  its  mother-liquor,  and  that  these  spores  might  after- 

'  I  had  often  been  surprised  at  finding  such  shreds  when  I  submitted 
tome  of  my  experimental  fluids  to  microscopical  examination,  knowing 
duit  I  bad  frequently  used  freshly  prepared  distilled  water,  and  had 
taken  every  precaution  thoroughly  to  deanse  the  flasks  which  were 
cwploytd. 


XX  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

wards  have  become  mechanically  enclosed  within  the  crystals. 
A  similar  chance  of  contamination  by  spores  deriTcd  («ther 
mediately  or  immediately)  from  the  air  would  exist  during^ 
process  of  crystallization  of  the  ammonic  tartrate  itself. 

If  the  air,  however,  had  been  the  immediate  source  of  tbe 
fungus-spores  and  masses  of  confervoid-looking  filaments, 
then    such    bodies    might  be    found    in   freshly -prepared 
crystals  just  as  well  as  in  those  which  had  existed  for  six 
months.     I  therefore  asked  Messrs.  Hopkin  and  Williams  to 
prepare  for  me  a  fresh  batch  of  crystals  of  neutral  ammonic 
tartrate.      This  they  were  kind  enough  to  do;   obtaiiang 
them  in  the  same  place,  by  the  same  process,  and  exposing 
the  mother-liquor  in  a  precisely  similar  manner. 

An  examination  of  some  of  these  crystals,  whilst  they  iwie 
being  dissolved  in  a  watch-glass  by  distilled  water,  showed 
that  (unlike  the  older  crystals)  they  were  not  at  all  coated  on 
the  surface  by  the  comparatively  insoluble  granular  plates, 
and  that  only  a  few  very  small  air  bubbles  emerged  from 
their  interior.     No  trace  of  the  confervoid-looking  filaments 
or  of  the  fungus-spores  was  to  be  seen  at  the  bottom  of 
the  watch-glass,  either  during  solution  or  afterwards,  though 
minute  shreds  of  cotton  and  paper  fibres  were  met  with,  similar 
to  those  which  had  been  found  in  the  older  crystals.     The 
examination   of  a  large  number  of  the  new  crystals  was 
attended  with  results  similar  to  those  just  mentioned. 

This  absence  of  the  confervoid-looking  filaments  and  of  the 
large /ungus'spores  from  the  recently  prepared  crystals  must 
be  accounted  for  either  by  one  or  other  of  two  suppo- 
sitions : — 

(i).  It  may  be  supj)osed  that  in  the  case  of  the  older 
crystals,  the  sp)ores  and  filaments  had  dropped,  as  such,  into 
the  solutions  in  which  the  tartaric  acid  alone,  or  the  tartrate 
of  ammonia,  was  crystallizing ;  that  they  were  mechanicafly 
engaged  in  the  crystals  and  were  subsequently  liberated  un- 


APPLXniX   A.  XXI 


changed  (without  having  undcri^oiic  any  growth  or  develop- 
ment) on  the  solution  of  the  crystal  \  Whilst,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  the  case  of  the  recent  crystals,  it  may  have  hap|)ened 
that  no  such  filaments  or  spores  were  floating  in  the  atnio- 
^there,  or  were  present  in  the  water,  at  the  time  of  their 
formation,  so  that  none  coukl  have  dropped  into  the  solu- 
tiona,  or  could  have  been  enclosed  within  the  crystals. 

This  is,  I  think,  unlikely  to  be  the  real  explanation  of  the 
difTercnce  between  the  two  sets  of  crystals,  and  my  reasons 
for  this  opinion  will  appear  more  fully  during  tlie  discussion 
of  the  alternative  supposition. 

(s).  It  may  be  supposed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the 
confervoid-looking  filanunts  and  the  spores  are  living  imits 
which  have  assumed  their  existing  forms  and  dimensions  by 
a  process  of  growth  and  development  within  the  crystal,  and 
that  tiu  siariing'poini  0/ each  was  a  mere  speck  0/  living  matter. 

By  adopting  this  supposition,  the  panspermatists  derive 
^  fbn  benefit  of  our  microscopical  researches,  and  thus 
narrow  their  real  requirements  in  tlic  matter  of  pre-exist- 
ii^  spores*  It  becomes  a  much  simpler  case  for  them,  if 
instead  of  being  compelled  to  calculate  upon  the  pre-exist- 
ence  of  fully  formed  fungus-spores,  and  of  confervoid-look- 
ing  filaments,  they  need  only  presume  upon  the  pre-existence 
of  a  mere  speck  of  living  matter  less  than  ,-0  i ,  „"  in  diameter. 
I  most  candidly  confess,  however,  that  the  pre-existence  of 
such  specks  of  living  matter  is  all  that  is  really  necessary '. 

'  If  they  had  been  engaged  within  the  ciystals  of  tartaric  acid,  they 
iffost  have  been  liberated  from  them  during  the  preparation  of  the 
seutral  tartrate,  only  to  l)e  re^ntangled  whilst  the  crystals  of  this  salt 
were  forming. 

*  Althou^  this  supposition  is  so  far  favourable  to  the  \iews  of  the 
pintpennatists,  since  it  makes  their  real  requirements  much  more  simple, 
they  wili  find  it  a  most  troublesome  and  unpliant  supposition,  unlesa 
they  are  disposed  at  the  same  time  to  become  out-and-out  devclopmen- 
tilists.  Their  position  would,  doubtless,  be  a  much  more  easy  one  than 
it  is  at  present,  if  they  chose  to  maintain  that  such  s^cks  ol  \vnsi\^ 


I 


xxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


Most  of  those  who  have  worked  much  at  the  microscopic 
investigation  of  the  organisms  met  with  in  orgaiiic  infiiaons, 
must  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  break  in 
the  continuity  of  that  developmental  series  which  commences 
with  the  mere  speck  of  living  matter — the  primordial  plastide 
particle — and  thence  proceeds  through  such  forms  as  the 
Bacterium,  the  Vibrio,  the  Leptothrix  filament,  and  the  myce 
lial  filament  of  a  microscopic  fungus.     Not  that  this  is  an 
absolutely  necessary  order  of  development,  or  one  which  in- 
variably occurs — far  from  it     But  as  some  Bacteria  com- 
mence their  visible  existence  in  the  form  of  plastide  particles, 
so  some  Vihrioms  are  but  the  developed  representatives  of 
certain  Bacteria.     And   similarly  the  various  kinds  of  h^ 
tothrix  filaments  grow  from  certain  pre-existing  Vibrvm^ 
just  as  certain  of  these  Leptothrix  filaments  themselves  may 
perchance  become  modified  into  larger  segmented  fungus- 
filaments,  which,  under  favourable  conditions,  may  fructify 
and  produce  spores — each  of  which  is  capable  of  develop- 
ing into  an  organism,  like  the  parent  in  its  latest  phase  of 
evolution.     Originating,  then,  in  the  form  of  the  minutest 
visible  speck  of  living  matter,  it  seems  almost  certain  that 

matter — whatever  their  precise  origin  may  have  been — are  practically 
mere  specks  of  indifferent  living  matter,  having  no  inherent  tendencies, 
but  plastic  to  the  full,  and  capable  of  growing  into  such  forms  as  their 
environing  conditions  may  determine.    And,  unless  the  panspennatists 
do  adopt  some  such  extreme  developmental  views  as  these,  they  will 
gain  comparatively  little  from  the  concessions  which  microscopical  in- 
vestigation compels  us  to  make  to  them.    They  will  be  better  able  to 
reconcile  their  position  with  the  comparative  paucity  of  definite  spores 
and  germs  which  are  actually  detectable  in  the  atmosphere;  but,  if  they 
wish  to  retain  their  old  notions  concerning  the  distinct  and  uninterchange- 
able  nature  of  organic  species,  they  will  find  it  as  difficult  as  ever  to  ac^ 
count  for  the  fact  that  the  right  spores  or  germs  should  always  he  in  the 
right  place  at  the  right  time.     Very  little  short  of  a  belief  that  each  cubic 
inch  of  air  contains  the  germs  of  myriads  of  organisms  which  are  known, 
or  which  may  hereafter  be  found  under  previously  unknown  sets  of  con- 
ditions, would  be  adequate  to  account  for  all  the  observed  and  observ- 
able correspondences  between  the  organisms  found  and  the  precise 
nature  of  the  fluids  employed. 


APPEXniX  p.  xxiii 


an  organism  may  pass,  more  or  less  rapidly,  through  the 
Bacterium  and  the  Vibrio  phase  and  grow  into  a  Lcptothrix 
thread,  which,  in  its  turn — by  further  growth  and  develop- 
ment— ^may  give  rise  to  a  microscopic  fungus  producing 
kuge  and  definite  'spores/     These  fungus-spores,  under 
similar  influences,  are  capable  of  developing  at  once  into 
a  mycelium   similar  to  that  from  which  they  have  been 
produced.     They  do  not  again  go  through  the  lower  terms 
of  the  series,  but  are  veritable  spores,  serving  only  immedi- 
ately to  reproduce  a  fungus.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is  an 
undoubted  fact,  which,  although  often  stated,  is  not  generally 
known  or  admitted,  that   7br»/a-cells   and  other  fungus- 
genns  may  also  originate  as  minutest  visible  specks  of  living 
matter  which,  instead  of  passing  through  the  stages  of  Bac- 
ieriumy  Vibrio,  Leptothrix,  grow  and  develop  at  once  into 
fungus-spores,  previous  to  the  formation  of  a  fungus-mycelium. 
There  is,  indeed,  strong  reason  for   believing   that   the 
spores  and  confervoid-looking  filaments  in  question  have  not 
dropped  as  such  from  the  atmosphere,  but  that  tliey  are, 
rather,  living  imits  which  have  developed  within  the  crystals. 
It  is  almost  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the  impro- 
bability of  the  former  of  these  alternatives,  when  we  take 
into  account  the  number  of  such  large  spores  and  filaments 
which,  by  this    supposition,  would  require   to   have   been 
present  in  the  atmosphere  over  the  crystallizing  materials,  as 
compared  with  the  extremely  limited  number  of  such  large 
organisms,  which  have  ever  been  obtainable  when  experi- 
mental observations  have  been  made  upon  the  nature  of  the 
solid  particles  existing  in  the  air  of  all  ordinary  localities^. 
The  best  evidence  in  proof  of  the  view  that  they  are  pro- 
ducts of  a  development  which  has  taken  place  within  the 
crystal  would  be  obtained,  if  it  could  be  shown  that  in  a  given 

'  In  all  my  investigations  I   have  never  met  with  spores  exactly 
to  these,  except  in  one  or  other  of  the  ammouiacal  solM^iooSk. 


!&■ 


xxiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

batch  of  recently  prepared  crystab  no  such  organisms  were 
to  be  found,  whilst  in  many  other  crystals  belonging  to  tbe 
same  batch,  after  an  interval  of  weeks  or  months,  tbe  spores 
and  filaments  were  to  be  discovered.    Certain  of  the  crystals 
of  the  batch   prepared   for  me  by   Messrs.   Hopkin  and 
Williams,  when  examined  two  days  after  preparation,  were 
found  to  contain  scarcely  a  trace  of  air  within.    But  after  ^ 
interval  of  three  weeks,  through  which  they  had  been  kcp^ 
during  the  day-time  at  a  temperature  of  about  Sd''  FabJ" 
certain  other  of  these  crystals,  when  dissolved,  gave  exit  tP  ^ 
notable  quantity  of  air  bubbles.    Two  weeks  afterwards  thT^ 
other  specimens  from  the  recent  batch  of  crystals  ^^^^x 
examined.    The  quantity  of  gaseous  bubbles  which  cscap^^^ 
from  them  seemed  almost  equal  to  those  which  had  been  s^^ 
free  from  the  older  crystals.     One  or  two  small  fragments  <^^ 
cotton  also  emerged,  and  in  addition    several  very  sma^^ 
masses  of  a  transparent  mucoid  material,  containing  refrac^^ 
tive  protein-looking  granules  of  various  sizes  and  shapes.  ^ 
These  were  almost  precisely  similar  to  masses  which  had 
been  met  with  in  the  older  crystal.     Here  and  there  an  early 
stage  (short  portion)  of  a  filament  was  seen  amongst  the 
granules,  though  none  of  them  were  sufficiently  long  to  make 
me  certain  as  to  their  nature  and  affinities.     Although  nothing 
else  was  found,  the  increased  quantity  of  gas  and  the  occur- 
rence of  the  very  small  masses  of  mucoid  material  seemed  to 
represent  a  stage  in  advance  of  that  which  was  met  with  at  the 
last  examination.    They  seemed  to  show  pretty  clearly  that  a 
change  of  some  kind  had  been  taking  place  in  the  material  of 
the  crystal,  which  had  led  to  the  liberation  of  some  of  its 
constituents  in  a  gaseous  condition,  and  also,  perhaps,  to  a 
liberation  of  some  of  its  water  of  crystallization.      Whilst 
this  had  been  taking  place,  its  other  elements  may  have  been 
grouping  themselves  anew,  and  giving  rise  to  fresh  products. 
I  have  lately,  through  tbe  kindness  of  Mr.  Martihdale,  of 


APPExn/x  n.  XXV 


University  College  Hospital,  had  the  opportunity  of  examining 
some  old  Ctystals  of  amnionic  tartrate  (also  prepared  by  the 
same  chemists)  which  must  have  been  in  the  hospital-dis- 
pensary for  at  least  ten  years.     They  were  contained  in  a 
small  corked  bottle,  and  many  of  them  were  slightly  dis- 
coloured— having  a  somewhat  dirty  aspect.     On  solution  in 
a.  watch-glass  most  of  these  crystals  yielded  patches  of  fungus- 
filaments  and  spores,  bearing  a  very  close  resemblance  to 
those  which  had  been  previously  seen.     The  quantity,  how- 
ever, was  far  larger  than  that  met  with  in  the  more  recent 
crystals,  and  here  the  growths  existed  on  the  surface  of 
some  of  the  crystals  as  well  as  in  their  interior.     In  these 
I>atches,  whidi  had  apparendy  grown  through  the  crystal,  the 
filaments  were  also  more  developed. 

AU  the  evidence,  therefore,  tends  to  show  that  growth 
takes  place  within  the  crystal,  and  that  the  quantity  of  the 
filaments  and  spores  increases  with  the  age  of  the  saline 


Supposing,  however,  that  the  spores  and  filaments  have 

within  the  crystal,  and  that  they  are  the  developed 

^representatives  of  certain  specks  of  living  matter,  two  views 

xnay  still  be  taken  as  to  the  origin  of  such  specks.    Either  ( i ) 

they  are  some  of  the  pre-existing  '  germs'  of  the  pansper- 

xnadsts,  which  have  become  mechanically  enclosed  within  the 

ciystal,  or  (a)  these  specks  of  living  matter  have  been  evolved 

therein  by  virtue  of  certain  changes  and  re-arrangements 

"Which  have  taken  place  amongst  the  not-living  constituents 

of  the  crystalline  matter  and  the  dead  organic  particles  which 

it  endoses. 

Of  these  two  alternative  views  I  am,  after  reflection  on  the 
following  considerations  and  evidence,  inclined  to  believe 
that  the  latter  is  most  probably  the  true  one  : — 

(a).  It  must  be  remembered  that  however  strange  and  un- 
likely a  situation  the  interior  of  a  crystal  may  appear  for  the 


i 


xxvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

evolution  of  organisms,  there  is  every  reason  for  bcKeving 
that  cavities  occur  or  are  formed  within  crystals  of  amnionic 
tartrate  \  and  also  (as  I  have  just  attempted  to  show)  that 
the  confervoid-looking  filaments  and  the  fungus-spores  have 
undergone  a  process  of  growth  and  development  within  such 
cavities.     But  if  '  the  conditions'  are  favourable  enongfa  to 
permit,  or  even  to  stimulate,  the  molecular  activity  of  certain 
living  particles ;  and  if  such  molecular  activity,  whereby  the 
living  specks  grow  and  develop,  is  but  the  modified  mam- 
festation  of  incident  physical  forces,  I  see  no  theoretical 
reason  why  the  self-same  physical  forces  acting  upon  the 
self- same  materials  should   not   have  been   able,  in  die 
same  place,  to  initiate  a  molecular  collocation  similar  to 
that  which  they  now  help  to  build  up  from  moment  to 
moment.    We  have  been,  perhaps,  only  too  much  in  the 
habit  of  looking  upon  this  as  impossible.     But  ignoring,  as 
far  as  we  can,  this  habit  of  mind  for  the  moment,  let  us  look 
at  the  facts  as  they  are.     Will  it  be  at  all  easier  for  those  who 
believe  in  no  special  'vital  principle,'   to  understand  how 
from  moment  to  moment  not-living  matter  is  converted  into 
matter  which  lives  ?   This  process  is  continually  taking  place 
in  all  growing  representatives  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  but 
no  one  ever  thinks  of  doubting  its  occurrence  merely  because 
he  is  unable  to  understand  how  it  takes  place.      If  it  is 
conceded  that  a  de  novo  evolution  of  specks  of  living  matter 
is  possible,  then,  I  think,  most  physiologists  will  at  once 
admit,  that  where  specks  of  living  matter  are  able  to  grow 

^  The  gases  which  appear  in  bubbles  increase  in  Quantity  with  the 
age  of  the  crystal,  and  they  have  been  seen  lodging  in  cavities 
within  the  crystal.  These  cavities  are,  perhaps,  more  especially  liable 
to  form  in  those  crystals  which  are  not  perfect  in  shape,  and  which  pre- 
sent a  more  or  less  opaque  appearance  in  their  interior.  Such  less 
perfect  types  are  possibly,  on  account  of  this  defective  form,  more  prone 
to  undergo  molecular  changes  under  the  influence  of  incident  forces, 
especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  and  around  some  fibre-fragment 
which  has  been  enclosed. 


APPENDIX  B.  xxvii 


and  develop,  there  also  they  may  be  quite  capable  of  origi- 
nating. 

{b).  The  matter  of  the  crystals  of  amnionic  tartrate  is, 
by  a  re-arrangement  of  its  atoms,  quite  capable  of  giving 
origin  to  organizable  compoimds,  and  seems,  moreover,  to 
lapse  into  these  new  modes  of  combination,  with  especial 
facility — a  facility  far  superior  to  that  which  is  displayed  by 
many  other  ammoniacal  salts\  If  a  small  quantity  of  tartrate 
of  ammonia  is  dissolved  in  a  watch-glass  with  distilled  water, 
and  is  protected  as  much  as  possible  from  dust  and  evapora- 
tion by  being  covered  with  two  or  three  inverted  glasses,  it 
will  be  found,  during  warm  weather,  that  in  the  course  of  two 
or  three  days  the  bottom  of  the  watch-glass  is  covered  by  a 
number  of  minute  microscopic  crystals,  interspersed  amongst 
a  mixed  layer  composed  of  plastide  particles,  Bacteria^  and 
minute  Torula  cells '.  These  organisms  form,  in  fact,  almost 
as  freely  (though  not  so  quickly)  in  this  ammoniacal  solution, 
as  they  do  in  an  ordinary  infusion  containing  organic  matter. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  amount  of  ammonia  and 
of  tartaric  acid  actually  diminishes,  and  that  the  elements  of 
these  enter  more  or  less  directly  into  the  new  combinations 
of  which  living  matter  is  composed  ^ 

(r).  It  may  be  said  that  such  changes  do  not  take  place  by 
the  mere  action  of  physical  forces  upon  the  organic  fragments 
and  the  molecules  of  the  dissolved  tartrate  of  ammonia,  and 
that  the  presence  of  pre-existing  living  matter  is  necessary 
for  the  initiation  of  such  molecular  re-arrangements.     In 

*  Sec  Appendix  C.  pp.  xlvi-1. 

'  In  saline  solutions  I  have  generally  seen  the  organisms  first,  and 
have  found  them  accumulate  principally  at  the  bottom  of  the  watch- 
glass  or  other  vessel  in  which  the  solution  may  have  been  contained, 

'  Saline  solutions  in  which  spores  of  fungi  were  placed,  having  been 
analysed  previously  by  M.  Pasteur,  were  again  analysed  by  him  after  the 
plants  had  grown  for  a  time.  The  proportion  of  ammonia  and  of  other 
ingredients  was  found  to  have  undergone  a  diminution  correlative  with 
the  growth  of  the  plants. 


XXvUi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

answer  to  this,  I  can  only  call  attention  to  the  fiact,  thst 
changes  of  this  kind  must  have  taken  place  'spontaneonslj' 
in  the  fluids  within  the  experimental  tubes  which,  after  htmg 
been  submitted  to  temperatures  varjring  from  i33,**-i5J°  C. 
for  variable  periods,  were  nevertheless  subsequently  found  to 
contain  living  organisms.     We  are  compelled  to  come  to  this 
conclusion,  not  only  because  there  is  not  one  tittle  of  evidence 
at  present  existing  to  show  that  any  living  thing  could  ^ 
through  such  an  exposure,  but  because  there  are  very  strong 
reasons  indeed  which  should  suffice  to  convince  us,  that  bo 
living  thing  could  be  subjected  to  such  a  temperature  without 
its  life  being  certainly  destroyed.     Therefore^  in  these  cases^ 
the  particular  molecular  re-arrangements  must  have  beea 
initiated  without  the  intervention  of  living  ferments,  and  they 
are  thus  comparable  with  those  that  are  known  to  take  place 
in  a  solution  of  cyanate  of  ammonia.      Here  'spontaneously,' 
or  with  the  aid  of  a  little  heat  only,  a  molecular  re-arrange- 
ment occurs,  and  the  saline  cyanate  of  ammonia  is  re^daced 
by  a  totally  different,  though  isomeric  compound,  urea.    In 
order  to  effect  this  transformation,  no  living  agency  is  neces- 
sary— none  has  even  been  supp)osed  to  exist ;  and  there  is  no 
more  really  cogent  reason  why  we  should  imagine  such  an 
agency  to  be  necessary,  in  order  that  tartrate  of  ammonia 
may  undergo  a  more  or  less  similar  isomeric  transformation. 
(</).    We  find,  moreover,  different  kinds  of  living  things 
associated  with  different  sets  of  conditions.     In  none  of  the 
crystals  of  tartrate  of  ammonia  have  I  ever  found  a  single 
distinct  Bacterium^  and  there  has  been  the  same  complete 
absence  of  organisms  of  this  kind  in  all  my  experimental 
fluids  containing   ammonic   tartrate   and   sodic  phosphate, 
which  have  been  sealed  in  airless  flasks.     This  agreement  is 
very  striking,  seeing  that  whenever  a  similar  fluid,  or  a  solu- 
tion oi  tartrate  of  ammonia  alone,  is  exposed  to  the  air, 
BacUria  appear  in  abundance.     There  is  a  marked  accord- 


APrr.xnix  //.  xxix 


ance  then  between  the  organisms  which  woukl  appear  to 
have  been  produced  de  novo  within  the  previously-heated 
experimental  tubes,  and  those  which  come  from  the  cavities 
vrithin  the  crystals.  The  conditions  are  unfavourable  in 
lx>th  cases,  and  the  products  which  result  seem  to  be  very 
slowly  evolved. 

Because,  therefore,  of  the  close  resemblance  which  must 
obtain  between  the  mode  of  formation  of  the  first  and  of  subse- 
c|uent  particles  of  one  of  the  simplest  organisms;  because 
tartrate  of  ammonia  seems  especially  and  peculiarly  prone  to 
lapse  into  living  modes  of  combination  ;  because,  in  addition 
to  the  evidence  with  respect  to  this  particular  change,  isomeric 
Te-arrangements  of  other  complex  substances  are  imdoubtedly 
capable  of  taking  place  '  spontaneously'  without  the  agency 
of  pre-existing  living  matter;   and  because  the  organisms 
found  in  the  crystals  are  actually  similar  to  those  which  form 
de  novo  in  the  experimental  flasks, — for  all    these  reasons 
combined,  I  deem  it  to  be  more  probable  that  the  filaments 
and  spore-like  bodies  found  within  the  crystals  of  ammonic 
tartrate,  have  been  slowly  developed  from  specks  of  newly- 
evolved  living  matter,  than  that  they  have  had  any  other  mode 
of  origin.     If  it  had  not  been  proved  that  li\jng  matter  could 
form  de  novo,  there  would  not  be  sufficient  reason  for  believing 
that  it  had  occurred  in  this  particular  case;  so  that  those 
who  are  still  unconvinced  upon  the  general  question  will, 
of  course,  not  be  much  influenced  by  the   evidence  now 
adduced 


XXX  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


APPENDIX    C. 
Comparative  Experiments, 

In  the  following  experiments,  each  fluid  (unless  a  state- 
ment is  made  to  the  contrary)  was  boiled  continuously  for  ten 
minutes,  after  having  been  placed  in  its  flask.  Then,  with 
the  neck  either  open,  sealed,  or  plugged,  the  bulb  of  the 
flask  was  immersed  in  a  water-bath  maintained  at  a  tem- 
perature of  8o°-95°  Fahr.,  during  both  day  and  night  *. 

First  Set  of  Experiments  (I — XV). 
a.     Fluid  exposed  to  Air  in  a  Flask  with  a  short  Open  Neck. 

No.  I.  Urine  in  twenty-four  hours  was  still  clear  and 
free  from  deposit  In  forty-four  hours  the  fluid  was  very 
slightly  turbid,  and  on  microscopical  examination  Bacterid 
and  TorulcB  were  found,  though  not  in  very  great  abundance. 
In  sixty-eight  hours  the  fluid  was  decidedly  tiu-bid. 

No.  II.  Hay  Infusion  in  twenty-four  hours  was  still 
clear.  In  forty-four  hours  the  fluid  was  very  turbid,  and  a 
drop,  on  examination,  showed  multitudes  of  Bacteria  of 
different  kinds,  exhibiting  languid  movements.  In  sixty- 
eight  hours  the  turbidity  had  become  much  more  marked, 
and  there  was  also  a  certain  amount  of  sediment 

^  When  infusions  have  been  employed,  they  have  all  been  made  as 
strong  as  possible,  and  have  been  filtered  before  use.  Warm  water  has 
been  added  in  quantity  just  sufficient  to  cover  the  substance  which 
was  to  be  infused  (this  being  cut  into  very  small  pieces),  an  the 
mixture  has  then  been  kept  at  a  temperature  of  from  1 10^-130°  Fahr.  for 
ihxtt  or  four  hours. 


ArPKxnix  (\  XXXI 


No.  III.  Turnip  Infusion  in  twenty-four  hours  showed 
a  very  slight  degree  of  turbidity.  A  drop,  examined  micro- 
scopically, revealed  a  number  of  very  minute,  but  very  active, 
Bacteria.  In  forty-four  hours  the  turbidity  had  become  very 
well  marked. 

h.    Fluid  in  contact  with  Ordinary  Air  and  its  Particles; 
Neck  of  Flask  Sealed  after  the  Fluid  had  become  Cold, 

No.  IV.  Urine  remained  quite  bright  and  clear  during 
the  fifteen  days  in  which  it  was  kept  under  observation  in  the 
water-bath\ 

No.  V.  Hay  Inftision  after  forty-four  hours  showed  a 
well-marked  turbidity.  In  sixty-eight  hours  there  was  an 
increase  in  the  amount  of  turbidity,  and  also  some  sediment. 
During  the  next  forty-eight  hours  turbidity  and  sediment 
gradually  increased,  whilst  the  colour  of  the  fluid  (originally 
that  of  port  wine)  became  several  shades  lighter.  Except 
that  it  grew  still  lighter  in  colour,  and  that  the  amount  of 
Sediment  increased,  it  underwent  no  further  obvious  change 
during  the  fifteen  days  in  which  it  remained  in  the  bath  ^ 

No.  VI.  Turnip  Inftision  underwent  no  change  during 
the  fifteen  days  in  which  it  was  kept  in  the  bath  under 
observation^. 

c.     Fluid  in  a  Flask  with  a  Neck  two  feet  long,  and  having 

Eight  acute  Flexures, 

No.  Vn.  Urine  remained  quite  bright  and  clear  during 
the  fifteen  days  in  which  it  was  kept  under  observation  in 
the  water-bath  ^ 

No.  Vin.  Hay  Infusion  remained  bright  and  clear  for 
twelve  days.  On  the  thirteenth  day  a  very  slight  (almost 
inappreciable)  sediment  was  seen,  which  scarcely  underwent 
any  obvious  increase  during  the  next  eight  days,  though  on 

*  Flask  still  in  my  possession,  unopened. 


xxxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


the  two  following  days  (twenty-second  and  twenty-tbird)  the 
turbidity  became  most  obvious :  much  sediment  was  depo- 
sited, and  the  fluid  assumed  a  much  lighter  colour^.  (On 
the  twenty-second  day  the  temperature  of  the  bath  was  raised 
to  1 00°  Fahr.,  for  two  or  three  hours.) 

No.  IX.     Turnip  Infusion  remained  for  four  days  with- 
out undergoing  any  apparent  change.     Its  neck  was  then 
accidentally  broken  at  the  fourth  joint— a  certain  amount  of 
fluid  still  tilling  the  third  joint.     In  this  condition  the  flask 
was  allowed  to  remain  in  the  water-bath,  and  the  fluid  con-        ] 
tinued  quite  unchanged  in  appearance  for  five  days.    It  ^^ 
then  boiled*  for  three  minutes,  and  the  neck  of  the  flask  ^ 
hermetically  sealed  whilst  the  fluid  was  boiling.     The  fl^ 
being  re-immersed  in  a  water-bath,  the  fluid  continued  q*^  , 
clear  for  thirteen  days.     Its  neck  was  then  carefully  heat^ 
in  the  spirit-lamp  flame  till,  when  red  hot,  the  rapid  inbct^    . 
ing  of  the  glass  showed  that  the  vacuum  was  still  preserve 
This  being  ascertained,  the  flask  was,  after  a  few  minut 
replaced  in  the  bath.      The  next  day  the  temperature  of 
bath  was  allowed  to  go  up  to  loo''  F.  for  three  or  four  hour^^ 
and  in  the  evening  the  fluid  was  observed  to  be  very  slightl^^ 
turbid.    In  two  days  more  («>.,  after  sixteen  days  in  vacuo)  th^^ 
turbidity  was  well  marked,  and  when  the  fluid  was  examined^ 
microscopically  it  was  found  to  contain  an  abundance  of  very  ^ 
languid  Bacteria   and    Vibriones,       On   opening   the   flask 
there  was  an  outrush  of  very  foetid  gas,  and  the  reaction  of 
the  fluid  was  acid'. 


*  Flask  still  in  my  possession,  unopened. 

*  The  vapour  had  lost  all  odour  of  turnip.  Some  of  the  ^id  which 
splashed  orer  was  found  to  be  still  slightly  acid. 

"  This  experiment  is  very  intereslmg  in  two  or  three  respects.  A 
nedt  of  half  the  usual  length — ^with  only  four  bendings — sufficed  to  pre- 
serve Uie  fluid  for  several  days ;  and  when  this  fluid  ^which  had  been  in 
the  bent-nedc  apparatus  for  nine  days)  was  sealed  up  in  the  same  flask 
during  ebidlition,  it  remained  in  vacuo  for  thirteen  days  without  under- 


APPENDIX  C,  xxxiii 


^  Fluid  in  a  Flask  having  a  Neck  two  feet  long^  bent  at  right 
angles  shortly  above  the  bulk^  and  provided  with  a  firm 
Plug  of  Cotton-  Wool  twelve  inches  in  length. 

No.  X.  Urine  remained  quite  bright  and  clear  during 
ihe  fifteen  days  in  which  it  was  kept  under  observation  in  the 
Mrater-bath  ^ 

No.  XI.  Hay  Infusion  showed  a  ver>'  slight  amount  of 
sediment  after  forty-four  hours,  which  seemed  to  increase 
somewhat  during  the  next  three  days.  The  fluid  afterwards 
aippeared  to  undergo  no  further  change,  though  it  remained 
LB  the  warm  water- bath  for  fifteen  days  \ 

No.  XII.  Turnip  Infusion  in  four  days  showed  a  well- 
marked  turbidity,  and  also  very  many  flakes  of  a  broken 
pellicle  *. 

e.  Fluid  (in  vacuo)  in  a  Flask,  the  Neck  of  which  was  her- 
metically Sealed  by  means  of  the  Blowpipe  Flame  during 
Ebullition, 

No.  XIII.  Urine  in  forty-four  hours  showed  a  very 
slight  amount  of  sediment  During  the  next  two  days  the 
sediment  very  slightly  increased,  but  was  still  small  in  amount. 
At  the  expiration  of  fifteen  days,  no  further  increase  in  the 
turbidity  having  taken  place,  the  fluid  was  examined.  The 
^vacuum  was  still  partially  preserved,  as  evidenced  by  the 
rapid  inbending  of  a  portion  of  the  neck  of  the  flask  after  it 
had  been  carefully  made  red-hot.  When  opened,  the  odour 
of  the  fluid  was  stale,  but  not  foetid,  and  its  reaction  was  still 

faintly  acid.      On  microscopical  examination  Bacteria  and 

Torul(B  were  found  in  tolerable  abundance. 

ffoing  any  apparent  change,  and  then  only  became  turbid  under  the 
loifluence  of  a  higher  temperature.  Yet  some  of  the  same  fluid,  in  a 
flask  which  was  hermetically  sealed  during  the  first  ebullition  (No.  XV.) 
behaved  as  such  an  infusion  usually  does,  and  became  quite  turbid  in 
forty-eight  hours. 

^  Flask  still  in  my  possession,  imopened. 

roL.  n.  c 


xxxiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


No.  XIV.  Hay  Infusion  in  forty-four  hours  showed  a 
very  slight  amount  of  turbidity.  In  sixty-eight  hoars  the 
turbidity  was  roost  marked,  and  there  was  also  a  small 
amount  of  sediment.  In  another  twenty-four  hours  it  was 
noticed  that  the  colour  of  the  fluid  had  become  much  lighter, 
whilst  the  turbidity  and  sediment  had  increased.  It  suhse- 
quently  continued  in  much  the  same  state,  and  the  flask  was 
opened  on  the  sixteenth  day.  The  vacuum  was  found  to  be 
almost  wholly  impaired,  whilst  the  odour  of  the  fluid  was 
sour,  and  not  at  all  hay-like.  On  microscopical  examination 
Bacteria^  Vibriones^  LeptoihriXy  and  Tortda  were  found  in 
abundance,  and  the  former  were  very  active. 

No.  XV.    Turnip  Infusion  after  forty-eight  hours  showed 

a  well-marked  turbidity.     In  seventy-two  hours  the  turbidity 
was  more  marked,  and  there  was  a  slight  amount  of  sedunent 
The  turbidity  also  increased  during  the   next  twenty-four 
hours ;  though,  after  that,  the  infusion  seemed  to  undergo  no 
further  change.     The  flask  remained  in  the  warm  bath  for 
fifteen  days,  when  the  fluid  was  examined.    Its  odour  was  not 
foetid,  but  was  somewhat  like  that  of  baked  turnip.    Bacteria 
and  Vibnones  existed  in  abundance,  though  their  movements 
were  extremely  languid. 

Second  Set  of  Experiments  (XVI — XXI). 

b.  Fluid  in  contact  with  Ordinary  Air  and  its  Particles; 
Neck  0/ Flask  Sealed  after  the  Fluid  had  become  Cold, 

No.  XVI.  Simple  Turnip  Infusion  in  twenty-four 
hours  had  undergone  no  apparent  change.  In  thirty-six 
hours  there  was  slight  turbidity,  and  in  forty-eight  hours  this 
was  most  marked  and  uniform.  When  the  flask  was  opened^ 
after  seventy- two  hours,  there  was  an  outrush  of  very  foetid 
gas;  the  reaction  of  the  fluid  was  acid,  and,  when  examined 


1/V7:.y/>/.\'    (\  XXXV 


microscopically,  it  was  found  to  contain  multitudes  of  vcn' 
languid  Bacteria, 

No.  XVII.  Neutralized  Infusion  of  Turnip  4-  i  gr. 
<xf  Cheese  ^  in  thirty-six  hours  showed  a  well-marked 
pellicle  ^  When  the  flask  was  opened,  after  seventy-two 
liourSy  there  was  a  violent  outrush  of  gas,  though  the  fluid 
'vas  still  neutral.  Portions  of  the  thick  pellicle  were  found, 
on  microscopical  examination,  to  be  made  up  of  Bacteria, 
Vibricnes,  and  an  abundance  of  long,  interlaced  Leptothrix 
filaments.  Bacteria  also  existed  abundantly  in  the  fluid, 
though  their  movements  were  very  languid. 

f .  Fluid  in  a  Bent-neck  Flask,  having  Eight  acute  Flexures. 

No.  XVIII.  Simple  Turnip  Infusion  after  forty-eight 
liours  showed  no  change.  It  was  kept  in  the  warm-bath 
for  twelve  days,  and  during  the  whole  of  this  time  the  fluid 
remained  quite  clear.  The  tube  was  then  broken  i  \  inch 
above  the  bulb  (which  was  re-immersed  in  the  bath),  leaving 
Jhe  fluid  exposed  to  the  air  through  the  straight  open  tube. 
The  fluid  at  this  time  was  odourless,  and  its  re-action  was 
still  faintly  acid. 

The  infusion  remained  thus  exposed  for  six  days  without 
undergoing  any  apparent  change.  On  the  eighth  day  a  very 
slight  whitish  sediment  was  noticed,  which  had  increased  in 
quantity  by  the  tenth  day,  though  there  was  still  no  trace  of 
general  turbidity..  On  the  eleventh  day  some  of  the  sediment 
was  examined  in  a  drop  of  the  fluid,  and  it  was  found  to  be 
wholly  composed  of  rather  large  Torulce  cells — the  largest 
being  about  ^^Vrr^  in  diameter,  though  all  the  smaller  sizes 
were  abundantly  represented.     Not  a  single  Bacterium  or 

^  The  filtered  infusion  of  turnip  was  neutralized  by  liquor  potassa. 
The  cheese  (Cheddar)  was  new  and  not  in  the  least  mouldy. 

'  The  fluid  itself  being  somewhat  opaque,  the  first  stages  of  increased 
turbidity  from  presence  of  Bacttria  could  not  be  detected. 

C    2 


I 


xxxvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

Vibrio  could    be  detected,   and   the  fluid   was  still  quite 
odourless^ 

No.  XIX.  Neutral  Turnip  InAision  +  i  gr.  of  Cheese, 
showed  no  perceptible  change  in  twenty-four  hours,  though 
in  thirty-six  hours  there  was  a  well-marked  pellicle  on  the 
surface.  When  the  neck  of  the  flask  was  broken  after 
seventy- two  hours,  the  fluid  was  found  to  be  very  foetid, 
whilst  its  re-action  had  become  slightly  acid.  Portions  of  the 
pellicle  were  found  to  be  made  up  by  aggregations  of 
Bacteria^  Vibriotus,  and  an  abundance  ol  Leptothrix  filaments. 
The  Bacteria  all  exhibited  very  languid  movements. 

€.  Fluid  (in  vacuo)  in  a  Flask  which  had  been  Sealed  during 

Ebullition, 

No.   XX.     Simple    Turnip    Infusion    in    twenty-four 
hours  showed  a  very  slight  amount  of  turbidity  ;  in  thirty-ax 
hours  this  had  increased,  and  in  forty-eight  hours  there  were 
multitudes  of  curdy  flocculi  floating  in  a  tolerably  clear  fluid. 
The  flask  was  opened  after  seventy-two  hours,  when  there 
seemed  to  be  only  a  very  slight  inrush  of  air.     The  odour  of 
the  fluid  was  somewhat  foetid,  and  its  re-action  was  acid. 
There   were  multitudes  of  Bacteria  and    Vlbriones,  partly 
separate   and   partly   aggregated    (constituting  the   floccuh 
above  mentioned).      The  separate  Bacteria  exhibited  only 
very  languid  movements. 

^  This  again  is  a  most  instructive  experiment  when  compared  with 
Nos.  XVI.  and  XX.,  in  which  portions  of  the  same  infusion  were 
employed.  The  results  in  No.  IX.  would  lead  us  to  believe  that  a 
vegetable  infusion  which  does  not  ferment,  does,  nevertheless,  undergo 
some  changes  in  molecular  composition,  and  this  notion  seems  to  derive 
confirmation  from  the  present  experiment.  Some  of  the  same  solution 
which  has  been  kept  for  a  time  ^twelve  days)  from  contact  with  atmo- 
spheric particles,  subsequently,  even  when  fully  exposed  to  the  air, 
undergoes  no  apparent  change  for  six  days,  and  then,  instead  of  becom- 
ing filled  with  Bacteria^  swarms  only  with  Torultt,  Yet  the  infusion  in 
this  condition  was  perfectly  capable  of  nourishing  Bacteria^  as  I  subse- 

auently  proved  by  inoculatmg  it.     Why  then  was  it  not  inooilated  by 
le  Living  Bacttria^  with  which  the  air  is  thought  by  some  to  be  teeming  ? 


APPEXniX   C.  xxxvii 


No.  XXI.  Neutral  Turnip  Infusion  +  \  gr.  of 
Oheese,  showed  a  well-marked  pellicle  on  its  surface  in 
twenty-four  hours.  In  thirty-six  hours  the  first  pellicle  had, 
in  great  part,  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  flask,  though  its  place 
on  the  surface  was  already  taken  by  a  new,  though  thin, 
scum-like  layer.  After  seventy- two  hours,  the  flask  was 
opened ;  there  was  no  fatid  odour  of  the  fluid,  and  its  re- 
action was  still  neutral.  Examined  microscopically  the  fluid 
showed  an  abundance  of  Bacteria^  and  also  of  short  monilated 
filaments.  There  were,  however,  none  of  the  ordinary  kind 
of  Vibn'ones,  and  no  Leptothrix,  All  the  Bacteria  exhibited 
very  languid  movements. 

Third  Set  of  Experiments  (XXII — XXX). 
a.  Fluid  exposed  to  Air  in  a  Flask  with  a  short  Open  Neck, 

No.  XXII.  Urine  in  twenty-four  hours  showed  no 
change ;  though  in  forty-six  hours  the  turbidity  was  well 
marked '.  Examined  microscopically  it  was  found  to  con- 
tain an  abundance  of  Bacteria, 

h.  Fluid  in  contact  with  Ordinary  Air  and  its  Particles  ; 
Neck  of  Flask  Sealed  after  the  Fluid  had  become  Cold, 

No.  XXIII.  Urine  in  eighteen  hours  showed  a  distinct 
pellicle,,  though  there  was  not  much  general  turbidity. 
During  the  next  few  days  the  old  pellicle  fell  to  the  bottom, 
and  a  new  one  formed. 

c.  Fluid  in  a  Bent-neck  Flasky  having  Eight  acute  Flexures, 

No.  XXIV.  Urine  in  forty-eight  hours  showed  no 
change.  After  twelve  days  there  was  still  no  general  tur- 
bidity, though  there  was  a  slight  flocculent  deposit  of  an  un- 

*  Some  of  the  same  fluid,  exposed  in  a  similar  flask,  without  previous 
boiling,  became  turbid  in  eight  hours,  and  lighter  in  colour;  whilst, 
after  twenty  hours,  the  turbidity  was  extremely  well  marked. 


xxxviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

certain  nature.  Two  days  afterwards  die  flask  was  broken, 
when  the  odour  of  the  fluid  was  still  found  to  resemble  that 
of  fresh  urine,  and  its  re-action  was  acid.  The  flocoili  were 
made  of  granular  aggregations,  in  the  midst  of  which  were  a 
few  bodies  closely  resembling  TondcBy  though  they  were  sodk- 
what  doubtful  in  nature.  Neither  Bacteria  nor  Vikma 
could  be  found.  The  flask,  having  a  short  c^n  neck,  was 
then  replaced  in  the  warm-bath.  In  sixteen  hours  the  whole 
fluid  had  become  turbid ;  it  was  also  slightly  foetid ;  and,  on 
microscopical  examination,  it  was  found  to  be  swarming  with 
Bacteria^  Vibriones^  and  Leptothrix, 

No.  XXV.  Turnip  Infusion  +  }^  gr.  of  Cheese,  in  forty- 
eight  hours  showed  no  change,  though  in  seventy-two  hours 
there  was  a  well-marked  pellicle,  in  which  some  bubbles  of 
gas  were  engaged.  After  ninety-six  hours  the  neck  of  the 
flask  was  broken ;  the  fluid  was  found  to  be  foetid,  and  it  had 
an  acid  re- action.  On  microscopical  examination,  a  por- 
tion of  the  pellicle  was  seen  to  consist  of  multitudes  of  Bat- 
ieria^  Vtbriones,  and  jointed  Leptothrix  filaments. 

No.  XXVI.     Simple  Turnip  Infusion  remained  clear, 
and  showed  no  appreciable  change  for  seven  day^.    On  the 
eighth  day  a  slight  general  turbidity  of  the  fluid  was  noticed. 
On  the  ninth,  the  turbidity  was  rather  more  marked,  though 
there  was  no  trace  of  a  pellicle;  the  neck  of  the  flask  having 
been  broken,  the  fluid  was  found  to  be  odourless  and  very 
faintly  acid.     On  microscopical  examination,  multitudes  of 
languid  Bacteria  of  medium  size  were  found,  and  also  short 
monilated  chains  with  from  two  to  ten  segments.    There 
were  no  Vibr tones,  Leptothrix,  or  TorulcB  \ 

e.  Fluid  (in  vacuo)  in  a  Flask,  Sealed  during  Ebullition^ 
No.   XXVII.     Healthy  TJrine  after  twenty-four  hours 

'  The  condition  of  the  fluid,  and  the  nature  of  its  'contents,  was  very 
similar  to  that  met  with  in  No.  XXL 


APPENDIX  C,  XXXIX 


showed  no  change.  After  eleven  days  there  was  still  no 
S4)parent  change,  though  on  the  thirteenth  a  slight  amount 
of  flocculent  sediment  was  noticed.  This  deposit  increased 
in  amount,  very  slowly,  during  the  next  fortnight ;  though 
afterwards  the'  fluid  seemed  to  undergo  no  further  cjiange, 
and  did  not  become  generally  turbid  \ 

No.  XXVIII.  Healthy  Urine  (J)  and  Filtered  Turnip 
Inftifiion  (f),  after  forty- eight  hours  showed  a  very  slight 
turbidity,  which,  however,  became  quite  marked  in  another 
twenty-four  hours. 

No.  XXIX.  Albuminous  Urine  (.\)  and  Filtered  Turnip 
Inftiflion  (f ),  after  twenty-four  hours,  showed  a  slight  turbi- 
dity, which  became  much  more  marked  in  forty-eight  hours ; 
whilst  in  seventy-two  hours  there  was  a  considerable  deposit 
at  the  bottom  of  the  flask. 

No.  XXX.  Simple  Turnip  Infusion  showed  no  change 
in  forty-eight  hours,  though  in  seventy-two  hours  there  was 
well-marked  turbidity.  The  turbidity  and  sediment  con- 
tinued to  increase  for  several  days,  and  both  were  most 
marked  on  the  tenth  day,  when  the  flask  was  opened.  There 
was  an  outrush  of  gas,  having  an  extremely  foetid  odour. 
The  fluid  had  an  acid  re-action,  and  when  examined  micro- 
scopically, multitudes  of  Bacteria^  Vibrtones,  and  Leptothrix 
filaments  were  found — the  movements  of  the  Bacteria  being 
very  languid. 

Fourth  Set  of  Experiments  (XXXI — XXXVII). 

b.  Fluid  in  contact  with  ordinary  Air  and  its  Particles  ; 
Flask  Sealed  after  the  Fluid  had  become  Cold, 

No.  XXXI.  Healthy  Urine  remained  in  the  warm-bath 
for  twenty-eight  days  without  undergoing  the  least  change. 

*  Still  in  my  possession,  unopened.     In  all  probability  Ihe  flocculi 
which  formed  would  be  found  to  be  similar  in  their  microscopical,  as 


xl  Tllh   BECIXXIXCS  (V-    LIFE. 


No.  XXXII.    Simple  Turnip  Infusion  remained  in  the 
warm-bath  for  twenty-eight  days  without  undergoing  2iiy 
appreciable  change  ^    On  breaking  the  neck  of  the  flask,  the 
fluid  was  found  to  be  quite  odourless.  With  its  neck  quite  open, 
the  flask  was  replaced  in  the  water-bath.    During  the  first 
forty-eight  hours  it  underwent  no  apparent  change,  though  at 
the  end  of  seventy-two  hours  a  slight  general  turbidity  ^**       -        ^ 
noticeable,  and  an  examination  of  a  drop  of  the  fluid  (stiD        I  ^._ 
odoiu-less)    showed  a  number  of  minute  but  very  acti^ 
Bacteria  ^. 

c.  Fluid  in  a  Bent-neck  Flask,  having  Eight  aaUe  FUxUf^^^ 

No.  XXXIII.     Simple  Turnip  Inftision  showed   ^ 
change  after  immersion  for  eight  days  in  the  warm  t>^^ 
After  eleven  days,  the  fluid  being  still  clear,  the  tube         , 
broken  just  beyond  the  second  bending  from  the  bulb,   ^^^ 
then  the  flask  was  re-inunersed  in  the  bath.   After  three  ^^^^ 
exposure,  the  fluid  being  still  clear,  it  was  boiled  in  the  fl  '^'^j^, 
for  one  minute,  when  it  was  noticed  that  the  steam  was  q^^-''^^ 
odourless.     The  flask  was  then  replaced  in  the  water-ba^--^^^ 
where  it  remained  for  twenty-two  days  (still  with  the  nc  ^^^l^l 
open  and  broken  just  beyond  its  second  bending)  witho^^^^. 
showing  any  change '.     It  was  then  submitted  to  examine 


in 


they  certainly  were  in  their  naked-eye  characters,  to  those  met  with  \^ 
No.  XXXV. 

'  Experiment  No.  8,  recorded  in  'Nature/  1870,  No.  36,  p.  194,  ma^ 
be  compared  with  this  and  No.  XXXIII. 

'   This  experiment  should   be   compared  with    Nos.   XXIII. 
XXXIII.     It  seems  to  show  that  if  some  fermentable  fluids  can  be  k 
for  a  time  under  conditions  in  which  they  will  not  ferment,  the  consti- 
tution of  the  fluid,  instead  of  remaining  the  same,  undergoes  a  slow 
alteration  by  which  it  is  rendered  absolutely  less  fermentable,  even 
when  exposed  to  the  most  favouring  influences. 

^  After  this  experiment  had  been  completed,  a  fresh-filtered  infusion 
of  turnip  was  placed  in  the  same  flask  (having  the  nedc  open  just 
beyond  its  second  bending),  and  after  having  been  boiled  for  a  few 
minutes  it  was  immersed  in  the  same  water-lMth.    This  flnid  became 


APPENDIX  C,  xli 


tion ;  the  fluid  was  found  to  be  devoid  of  all  odour,  it  had  a 
slightly  bitter  taste,  and  its  re-action  was  very  faintly  acid. 
On  microscopical  examination  no  living  things  were  found ; 
there  were  no  Bacteria,  no  Vihriones,  and  no  TorulcB^  only 
some  mere  granules,  a  small  amount  of  amorphous  matter, 
and  a  few  fibres  \ 

No.  XXXIV.  Turnip  Infusion  Neutralized  by  Am- 
monio  Carbonate  in  forty-eight  hours  showed  a  slight  tur- 
bidity, which  slowly  increased  during  the  next  two  days.  In 
two  days  more  the  turbidity  was  very  great,  and  there  was 
also  a  considerable  amount  of  sediment.  The  fluid  was  then 
examined  microscopically,  and  found  to  contain  myriads  of 
large  but  very  languid  Bacteria, 

€,  Fluid  (in  vacuo)  in  a  Flask  which  had  been  Sealed  during 

Ebullition. 

No.  XXXV.  Healthy  Urine  underwent  no  apparent 
change  for  the  first  twelve  days,  then  (the  bulk  of  the  fluid 
still  remaining  clear  and  bright)  small  greyish- white  flocculi 
began  to  collect  at  the  bottom  of  th**  flask,  which  very 
slowly  increased  in  quantity  during  the  succeeding  twelve 
days.  At  the  expiration  of  this  time  the  flocculi  were  pretty 
numerous,   though   the   fluid   was  otherwise   bright.     The 


turbid  in  thirty-six  hours,  and  was  then  found  to  contain  multitudes  of 
Baettria ;  and  the  characteristic  odour  of  the  turnip  infusion  was  still 
appreciable. 

*  The  results  of  this  experiment  are  most  interesting,  especially  if 
compared  with  that  which  takes  place  when  some  of  the  same  fluid  is 
neutralized  by  ammonic  carbonate  (No.  XXXIV.),  or  when  a  similar 
fluid  (as  in  No.  XXX.)  is  contained  in  a  flask  sealed  during  the  ebulli- 
tion of  the  fluid,  or  with  what  occurred  in  Nos.  XIII.  and  XXXII. 
In  the  present  case  the  second  boiling  seems  to  have  destroyed  what 
small  amount  of  fermentability  there  was  still  remaining  in  the  solu- 
tion; but  in  No.  IX.  fermentation  did  take  place  after  the  second 
boiling— though  it  occurred  only  under  the  influence  of  diminished 
pressure  and  a  higher  temperature. 


xlii  THE  BEGIXNINGS  OF  UFE, 

vacuum  was  ascertained  to  be  still  good,  and  on  breaking 
the  flask,  the  fluid  was  found  to  have  a  slightly  add  re- 
action, though  no  appreciable  odour.  Wlien  examined  micro- 
scopically, the  flocculi  were  seen  to  be  ooade  up  for  the  most 
part  of  mere  granular  aggregations  (simple,  and  not  in  the 
form  of  Bacteria),  Small  Torula  cells,  however,  existed  in 
some  quantity ;  also  a  few  necklace-like  chains,  and  a  com- 
paratively small  number  of  Bacteria^  some  of  which  were 
tolerably  active. 

No.  XXXVI.  Simple  Turnip  Infusion  after  twent)- 
four  hours  showed  no  sign  of  change,  though  in  thirty-six 
hours  it  was  slightly  turbid.  On  the  fourth  day  the  turbidity 
was  well-marked  and  general,  though  there  were  no  flake-tte 
aggregations.  When  examined  microscopically,  the  fluid 
was  found  to  contain  multitudes  oi  Bacteria, 

No.  XXXV II.  Turnip  Inftision'  Neutraliaed  by  Am- 
nionic Carbonate  in  twenty-four  hours  was  decidedly  turbid. 
In  thirty- six  hours  the  turbidity  was  more  marked,  and  there 
was  a  slight  sediment.  By  the  end  of  forty-eight  hours  both 
turbidity  and  sediment  had  notably  increased.  On  the  fourth 
day,  there  was  a  moderately  clear  fluid,  containing  an  abund- 
ance of  curdy  or  flake-like  masses,  which  when  the  flask 
was  opened,  were  found  to  be  made  up  principally  of  ^ 
aggregation  of  myriads  of  Bacteria. 

Fifth  Set  of  Experiments  (XXXVIII— XLVIl). 

Fluids  not  boiled,  hut  half 'filling  hermetically  Sealed  Flasks, 

containing  Ordinary  Air, 

No.  XXXVIII.  Turnip  Infusion  in  ten  hours  showed  a 
slight  amount  of  turbidity.  After  forty-eight  hours  this  was 
very  well-marked :  there  was  a  thick  pellicle  on  the  surface, 

^  Some  of  tbe  same  as  that  which  was  tised  (unaltered)  in  last 
experiment. 


APPENDIX  C.  xlui 

,  in  addition,  a  small  amount  of  deposit.  On  examina- 
y  the  fluid  and  the  pellicle  were  found  to  contain  an 
adance  of  Bacteria^  Vibriones,  and  Leptothrix  filaments. 
To.  XXXIX.  Turnip  Inftision  +  ^V  of  Carbolio  Add, 
r  eight  days  showed  no  appreciable  alteration  in  appear- 
*  \  no  trace  of  pellicle  or  deposit.  When  examined 
roscopically,  however,  the  fluid  was  found  to  contain 
ic  very  minute  Bacieria,  though  they  were  by  no  means 
ndant 

To.  XL.  Hay  Inftision  had  become  quite  turbid  in 
Qty-four  hours,  and  several  shades  lighter  in  colour. 
,T  forty-eight  hours  the  colour  of  the  infusion  was  still 
ter ;  there  was  more  turbidity,  and  some  sediment.  On 
roscopical  examination,  the  fluid  was  found  to  contain 
abundance  of  Bacien'a^  Vtdn'ones,  and  short  Leptothrix 
nents. 

[o.  XLI.  Hay  Infosion  +  i,V  of  Carbolio  Acid, 
wed  no  apparent  change^  after  forty-eight  hours,  and 
n  examined  microscopically  it  revealed  no  trace  of 
teria^  or  other  organisms.  The  neck  of  the  flask  was 
1  again  closed.  On  the  twelfth  day  the  fluid  had  still 
ergone  no  change  in  appearance,  and  when  examined 
roscopically  it  still  showed  no  trace  of  organisms,  though 
fluid  was — as  it  had  been  at  the  time  of  the  first  exami- 
on — full  of  minute,  undissolved  particles  of  carbolic  acid. 

'fluids  boiled  for  five  minutes,  and  half -filling  hermetically 
Sealed  Flasks  containing  Ordinary  Air, 

Jo.  XLII.  Hay  Infusion,  after  forty-eight  hours,  showed 
change,  and  continued  to  remain  quite  clear  and  free 

It  had  been  rendered  turbid  from  the  first,  by  the  carbolic  acid. 
The  fluid  had  been  rendered  paler  and  turbid  from  the  first,  by  the 
tion  of  the  carbolic  acid. 


x:iv  Till-:  lU'.GlXXIXGS  OF  /J/-E. 


.e^ 


from  deposit  until  the   twelfth  day,  ^Yhen  it  was  examiC^ 
microscopically.     No  organisms  of  any  kind  could  be 
tected. 

No.  XLIII.  Hay  Infusion  -f-  7V  P*rt  of  Carbc:::^^ 
Acid,  showed  no  apparent  change^  for  the  first  five  d^^^^ 
though,  on  the  sixth  day,  a  slight  deposit  was  noticed  at  .. 

bottom  of  the  flask.  The  deposit  had  increased,  and  was  "^"^^^^^^ 
marked  by  the  twelfth  day,  when,  on  microscopical  examic  ^ 
tion,  there  were  found,  amongst  the  granular  flakes  o{  W 
deposit,  ToruloR  of  several  varieties  of  size  and  shape.   Ma.^^  '  ^^ 
were  spherical,  others  ovoid,  or  having  an  elongated  oat-lii^  '- ' 
shape;  some  were  of  the  ordinary  colour,  and  others  w^^^^ 
brownish  in  tint.     The  variety  was  most  striking.     No  B(^=^ 
teria  were  seen,  though  there  were  multitudes  of  active  par^'"'"'^ 
cles  which  seemed  to  differ  from  the  minute  spherules  ^ 
undissolved  carbolic  acid. 

Fluids  (in  vacuo)  boiled  for  five  minutes y  and  Flasks  SeaU 

during  Ehullition. 

No.  XLIV.  Turnip  Infusion,  in  seventy-two  bourse 
showed  a  slight  turbidity,  which  gradually  increased.  On  th<^ 
eighth  day  there  was  a  considerable  quantity  of  flake-like 
sediment,  and  some  amount  of  general  turbidity.  On  the 
thirteenth  day  the  vacuum  was  found  to  be  stiU  partly  pre- 
served. When  the  flask  was  opened  the  fluid  was  perceived 
to  have  a  foetid  odour,  and  an  acid  re-action ;  and,  on  micro- 
scopical examination,  multitudes  of  Bacteria  and  Vidriones 
were  seen.  In  the  flake-like  aggregations  (made  up  almost 
wholly  of  these  organisms)  there  were  also  a  number  of 
large  thick-walled  spores ;  some  already  formed,  and  others 
in  process  of  formation. 

'  The  alteration  in  colour  was  less  marked  than  in  the  similar  mii- 
ture  which  had  not  been  boiled,  though  the  turbidity  was  just  as 
obvious. 


.irrEXDix  c,  xlv 


No.  XLV.  Turnip  Infusion  ^  y}^  part  of  Carbolic 
Acid,  showed  no  increase  of  turbidity*  for  the  thirteen  days 
during  which  it  was  kept  under  observation.  Before  the 
fiask  was  opened  it  was  ascertained  that  the  vacuum  was  well 
preserved.  The  odour  of  the  fluid  was  unaltered,  and  on 
microscopical  examination  no  Bacteria^  or  other  living 
things,  were  found '. 

No.  XLVI.  Hay  Infusion,  after  forty-eight  hours, 
showed  no  change,  though,  in  seventy-two  hours,  there  was 
perceptible  a  very  small  amount  of  a  dirty  greyish  deposit. 
By  the  fifth  day  the  deposit  had  slightly  increased,  and  on  the 
seventh  day  there  was  a  trace  of  turbidity  in  the  fluid.  It 
did  not  undergo  much  further  change,  so  that,  on  the  twelfth 
day,  the  flask  was  opened.  The  vacuum  was  found  to  have 
been  very  slightly  impaired;  the  odour  of  the  fluid  was 
almost  natural,  and  its  re-action  was  slightly  acid.  On  micro- 
scopical examination  of  the  deposit,  Bacteria^  Vibrioms^  short 
Leptothrix  filaments,  and  ToruliXy  were  found,  though  not  in 
very  great  abundance. 

No.  XLVII.  Hay  Infusion  -f  -^  part  of  Carbolic 
Acid,  showed  no  apparent  change  for  the  first  four  days.  On 
the  fifth  day  there  was  a  small  quantity  of  powder-like 
sediment,  and  one  dirty  greyish-coloured  flake.  On  the 
seventh  day  there  were  more  small  flakes  at  the  bottom,  and  a 
slight  general  turbidity  of  the  fluid.  On  the  twelfth  day,  the 
turbidity  and  deposit  having  increased,  the  flask  was  opened 
— ^after  it  had  been  first  ascertained  that  the  vacuum  had  only 
been  slightly  impaired.  The  re- action  of  the  fluid  was  still 
strongly  acid.  On  microscopical  examination  of  some  of  the 
deposit,  there  was  found,  amongst  granular  flakes  and  aggre- 
gations, a  large  number  of  Toruloe  cells,  of  most  various 

^  This  fluid  was  whitish,  and  somewhat  opaque,  from  the  first. 
'  For  other  experiments  showing  a  similar  sterility,  induced  by  a  slight 
.acidification  with  acetic  acid,  see  '  Nature,'  1870,  No.  37,  pp.  aa6,  227. 


xlvi  THE  BEGINmNGS  OF  LIFE, 

shapes  and  sizes;   also  in  the  midst  of  the  granule  heaps 
many  large,  rounded  or  ovoidal,  densely  granular  nucleated 
bodies,  whose  average  size  was  yy^nr'  ^^  diameter,  thougb 
there  were  many  of  them  much  larger,  and  others  even  less 
than  half  this  size.     Intertwined  amongst  the  granular  matter 
also  were  a  large  number  of  algoid-looking  filaments,  j^^ 
in  diameter,  containing  segmented  protoplasmic  contents. 
There  were  also  in  the  fluid  itself  a  number  of  medium-siied, 
unsegmented  Bacteria^  whose  movements  were  somewbat 
languid  *. 

Sixth  Set  of  Experimekts  (XLVTII — LXVI). 

Ammoniacal  Solutions j  unboiled y  and  exposed  to  Ordinary  Air 
in  a  Corked  Bottle  \    (Temp,  eo'^-^s^  F.) 

No.  XLVIII.    Ammonic  Acetate   Solution. — On  the 

tenth  day   the   fluid  was  still  quite  clear,  and   free  from 
sediment. 

*  The  results  of  this  experiment  and  of  No.  LXIII.  are  decidedly 
opposed  to  the  reality  of  tJie  germ-killing  powers  with  which  carbolic 
acid  has  been  endowed  by  Professor  Lister  and  others.  I,  however,  had 
previously  found  that  specimens  of  Torula  and  Bacteria^  obtained  from 
freshly-opened  flasks  and  then  mounted  as  microscopical  specimens  in  a 
mixture  of  glycerine  and  carbolic  acid  (in  the  proportion  of  15 :  i),  not 
unfrequcntly  grew  and  multiplied  under  such  conditions  MM.  B^champ 
and  Estor  also  found  that  Bacteria  multiplied  in  carbolized  fluids,  and 
similar  facts  have  been  testified  to  by  some  Italian  observers.  But 
organic  fluids  differ  much  from  one  another,  so  that  the  influence  of 
carbolic  might  well  be  different  upon  different  fluids.  And,  accordingly, 
we  find  that  whilst  its  addition  to,  and  subsequent  boiling  with,  a  hay  in- 
fusion increases  the  fermen lability  of  the  latter,  precisely  the  opposite 
effects  are  produced  when  the  hay  is  replaced  by  a  turnip  infusion.  (See 
No.  XLV.)  Without  wishing  to  undervalue  in  the  least  the  system  of 
treatment  introduced,  and  so  admirably  carried  out  by  Professor  Lister, 
I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think  that  he  explains  his  results  by  theories 
which  are  almost  wholly  incorrect. 

*  All  the  simple  ammoniacal  solutions  were  in  the  proportion  of  ten 
grains  of  the  salt  to  the  fluid  ounce  of  distilled  water ;  and  to  those 
which  also  contained  sodic  phosphate,  three  grains  of  this  were  added. 
About  half  an  ounce  of  each  solution  was  put  into  a  one-ounce  wide- 
mouthed  bottle,  and  then  tightly  corked. 


APPEXDIX  C.  xlvii 


No.  XLIX.  Axnmonic  Oxalate  Solution. — On  the 
tenth  day  there  was  no  distinct  opalescence  of  the  fluid,  but 
a  well-marked  whitish  flocculent  deposit.  On  microscopical 
examination  no  Bacteria  were  found  in  the  fluid,  and  the 
deposit  was  made  up  of  an  aggregation  of  blackish  and 
colourless  granules,  mixed  with  a  few  crystals  and  a  very  few 
TorulcR  cells — all  being  held  together  by  a  sort  of  mucoid 
matrix.  In  the  midst  of  this  matter  were  found  two  or  three  very 
small,  much  branched,  mycelial  tufts  of  a  fungus  growth. 

No.  L.  Ammonio  Carbonate  Solution. — On  the  tenth 
day  the  fluid  showed  a  very  faint  opalescence,  with  a  small 
amount  of  deposit,  and  a  partial  non-coherent  scum  on  the 
surface,  which,  on  microscopical  examination,  was  found  to 
be  composed  partly  of  amorphous  granules,  and  partly  of 
minute  Bacteria^  mixed  with  small  necklace-like  aggregations. 
The  fluid  itself  contained,  in  suspension,  a  few  small  and 
sluggish  Bacierta,  with  a  minute  Torula  cell  here  and 
there. 

No.  LI.  Ammcmic  Tartrate  Solution  after  twenty- 
four  hours  showed  the  faintest  opalescence  of  the  fluid ;  in 
forty-eight  hours  there  was  a  bluish-white  turbidity,  and  in 
seventy-two  hours  the  turbidity  was  well  marked.  When 
examined  microscopically,  the  fluid  was  found  to  contain 
multitudes  of  very  active  Bacteria,  On  the  thirteenth  day 
the  turbidity  was  not  so  well  marked,  though  there  was  a 
very  thin  pellicle  on  the  surface,  and  also  the  dirty-looking 
crumpled  remains  of  another  pellicle  at  the  bottom,  which, 
on  examination,  was  found  to  be  composed  of.  an  aggregation 
of  Bacteria,  The  pellicle  on  the  surface  was  very  thin,  and 
composed  only  of  a  single  layer  of  Bacteria,  In  the  fluid 
itself  many  Bacteria  were  seen,  of  medium  size,  and  mostly 
sluggish  in  movement,  though  a  few  of  them  exhibited  very 
active  rotatory  movements.  No  Vibriones,  Leptothrix^  or 
TotuUb  were  found. 


xlviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

No.  LII.    Amnionic  Tartrate  and  Sodic  Phoephala 
Solution,  after  twenty-four  hours  showed  the  faintest  opales- 
cence ;  in  forty-eight  hours  there  was  a  bluish-white  turbidity, 
which,  in  seventy-two  hours,  had  become    more  marked. 
When    examined    microscopically    multitudes  of  Bacieria 
were  found  whose  movements  were  very  sluggish.    On  the 
thirteenth  day  there  was  a  well-marked  whitish  turbidity,  due 
to  Backria  and  Vibriones^  a  slight  amount  of  deposit,  and  a 
finn  pellicle  which  was  found  to  be  composed,  almost  wholly, 
of  long  unjointed  Vihriones  and  unsegmented  Lepiothrix  fila- 
ments,  all  of   which,  when   separate,   exhibited  the  most 
distinct  eel-like  movements,  accompanied  by  an  actual  pro- 
gression from  place  to  place. 

Ammoniacal  Solutions y  unboiled ^  and  exposed  to  Air  in  a 
Corked  Bottle ^  after  Inoculation  with  a  Drop  of  Fluid  cm- 
taining  living  Bacteria  and  ToRULiE.    (Temp.  6o''-65°F.) 

No.  LI  1 1.     Amnionic  Acetate  Solution,  after  twenty- 
four  hours  was  faintly  opalescent,  and  in  forty-eight  hours 
showed  a  very  slight  bluish  tint.      In  seventy-two  hours  it 
was  in  the  same  state,  and,  on  microscopical  examination, 
the  fluid  showed  no  distinct  Bacteria  or  other  living  things, 
though  there  were  a  number  of  very  minute  particles  dis- 
tributed, singly  or  in  small  groups,  throughout  the  fluid. 
On  the  thirteenth  day  there  was  no  change  in  appearance, 
except  that  the  sediment  had  somewhat  increased  in  amount 
Still,  no  Bacteria  could  be  found  in  the  fluid  or  the  sedi- 
ment,— only  the  above-mentioned  particles,  and  a  few  some- 
what larger,  which  resembled  very  minute  Torulcs,     Amongst 
the  sediment,  however,  there  were  two  or  three  very  small 
mycelial  tufts  of  a  developing  fungus. 

No.  LIV.  Amnionic  Oxalate  Solution.— On  the  eighth 
day  the  fluid  showed  a  very  faint  opalescence,  though  there 
wa<>  a  well-marked,  grevish,  flocculent  deposit,  which  was 


APPENDIX  C.  xlix 


found  to  be  composed  of  an  aggregation  of  colourless  and 
l>lackish  granules,  of  a  multitude  of  minute  crystalline  par- 
ticles, mostly  diamond-shaped,  and  some  rounded  or  ovoidal, 
thick-walled,  spore -like  bodies;  amongst  which,  and  en- 
veloped in  part  by  them,  were  several  mycelial  tufts  of  a 
fungus.  A  number  of  minute  Bacteria  were  found  distributed 
throughout  the  fluid,  and  also  a  quantity  of  minute  star-like 
bodies  (crystalline),  about  ^t^jhs^'  ^^  diameter. 

No.  LV.  Ammonio  Carbonate  Solution. — On  the 
eighth  day  the  fluid  showed  a  very  faint  opalescence,  and  a 
slight  deposit,  which  was  found  to  be  composed  principally 
of  amorphous  granules.  Distributed  through  the  fluid  were 
some  small  and  sluggish  Bacteria,  though  no  other  organisms 
were  seen. 

No.  LVI.  Ammonio  Tartrate  Solution. — After  twenty- 
four  hours  the  fluid  showed  the  faintest  opalescence,  and  in 
forty-eight  hours  there  was  a  slight  bluish-white  turbidity.  In 
seventy-two  hours  the  turbidity  was  well  marked,  and  there 
was  a  very  thin  pellicle  on  the  surface.  When  examined 
microscopically,  the  fluid  was  found  to  contain  multitudes  of 
yerj  active  Bacteria,  and  the  pellicle  was  also  composed  of 
an  aggregation  of  Bacteria,  On  the  thirteenth  day  the 
opacity  had  somewhat  increased;  there  was  also  a  well- 
marked  pellicle,  and  an  obvious  deposit.  The  pellicle  was 
found  to  be  composed  of  Bacteria,  and  in  the  fluid  there 
were  multitudes  of  medium-sized  Bacteria  and  Vibrioms,  with 
here  and  there  a  small  Torula  cell\ 

*  On  comparing  the  corresponding  experiments  of  Series  XLVIII — 
LI.  with  those  of  Series  LIII— LVI.  less  difference  is  found  than  might 
have  been  expected  by  many.  The  comparison  of  the  numbers  of  each 
series  with  one  another,  also  reveals  the  interesting  fact  that  the  mere 
presence  of  N,  C,  O,  and  H,  is  not  all  that  is  required  even  for  the  growth 
and  nutrition  of  the  lower  living  things.  These  elements  seem  to  lapse 
into  the  new  combinations  constituting  living  matter  of  various  kinds. 
more  easily  from  certain  pre-existing  states  of  combination  than  from 
others.      Solutions  of  ammonic  tartrate  are  much   more  favourable 

VOL.  n.  d 


1  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


Ammoniacal  Solutions  (in  vacuo)  in  Flasks  which  were  her- 
metically  sealed  during  Ebullition  of  their  Fluids  at  a 
Temperature  of  90'  F}  {Subsequently  exposed  in  water-hath 
to  a  Temperature  ofT^^'-S^''  F,) 

No.  LVII.  Axnmonio  Tartrate  Solution  after  sixty 
hours  showed  a  slight  sediment,  with  bluish  flakes  attached 
to  sides  of  flask.  In  eighty-four  hours  there  was  a  general 
bluish  opalescence,  and  on  microscopical  examination  the 
fluid  was  found  to  contain  multitudes  of  Bacteria, 

No.  LVIII.  Ammonic  Tartrate  and  Sodic  PhOB- 
phate  Solution. — After  sixty  hours  there  was  a  slight 
general  bluish  opalescence.  In  eighty-four  hours  the  general 
opalescence  was  not  more  marked,  but  there  were  many 
flake-like  aggregations  in  the  fluid,  which,  on  microscopical 
examination,  were  found  to  be  aggregations  o(  Bacteria, 

» 

starting  points  for  the  new  combinations  than  solutions  of  anunomc 
acetate.      The  compaiison  of  experiment  No.  LI.  with  No.  Lll.is'a* 
tremely  interesting  in  reference  to  the  dogma  that  phosphonis  is  4 
neccssajy  ingredient  in  living  matter.     Solutions  of  the  ammonic  ttitnte 
in  distilled  water  have  been  twice  analyzed  for  me  by  a  skilful  cbenust 
without  revealing  the  least  trace  either  of  phosphorus  or  sulphur.    1™^ 
result  is  very  remarkable  when  compared  with  the  amount  of  li^ 
matter  which  may  so  soon  appear  in  such  a  solution :  the  number  01  uw 
organisms  and  the  rapidity  of  their  evolution,  being  almost  equal  to  u^ 
which  occurs  in  a  similar  solution  to  which  a  phosphate  has  been  ad^e^ 
However    much,  therefore,  phosphorus    may  aid  the  devclopineo^ 
organisms  in  many  fluids,  there  is  still  an  important  difference  h^t^J^ 
many  and  all,  which,  if  more  frequently  borne  in  mind,  would  r^^' 
universal  propositions  more  scarce  (see  *  Journal  of  Chemical  SoC*^^ 
March,  187 1,  pp.  72-74).      The  truth  of  the  dictum  *  Obng  Pboa,fhf*f  *^ 
kein  Lehen^'  is,  1  venture  to  think,  far  from  being  proved.     If  it  h^-  \ 
cepted  because  evidence   (referring  only  to  particular  fluids)  whig^^, 
really  insufficient,  such  a  dictum  seems  to  testily  to  its  truth  ;  and  if  t*^ 
the  presence  of  organisms  in  any  fluid  is  to  be  taken  as  evidence  ^^^ 
existence  of  phosphorus  (even  though  this  cannot  be  otherwise  subsr*^^ 
tiated),  the  theoretical  relationship  of  phosphorus  to  Life  would  com^^ 
be  very  similar  to  the  old  views  concerning  germs  and  Life. 

Mutato  nomine  de  te 
Fabula  narratur. 
*  The  fluids  were  boiled  at  the  low  temperature,  with  the  aid 
an  air-pump,  simply  in  order   to  procure  a  more  perfect  Tacuum     ^ 
the  flasks;  these  expenments  being  desitined  to  snow  whether  f^ 


APPENDIX  C.  li 


Ammoniac al  Solutions  boiled  (at  212°/^.),  and  exposed  to 
Air  in  Flasks  whose  open  necks  were  only  loosely  covered  with 
Paper  Caps  :  subsequent  Inoculation.    {Temp,  75°- 85°  F,) 

No.  LIX.  Axnmonio  Tartrate  Solution. — The  fluid 
remained  quite  clear,  and  free  from  all  trace  of  turbidity  up 
to  the  ninth  day,  when  it  was  inoculated  with  some  living 
Bacteria,  In  fifty  hours  after  the  inoculation  there  was  a  ver}' 
faint  opalescence  of  the  fluid,  which,  in  another  twenty-four 
hours,  had  become  much  more  marked.  On  microscopical 
examination  it  was  found  to  contain  multitudes  oi  Bacteria, 

No.  LX.  Ammonic  Tartrate  and  Sodic  Phosphate 
Solution. — After  four  days  the  fluid  was  still  quite  clear. 
In  seven  days  no  trace  of  general  turbidity,  though  there 
was  a  minute  dirty-grey  aggregation,  about  -j^^"  in  diameter, 
at  the  bottom  of  the  flask.  On  the  sixteenth  day  the  grey 
aggregation  had  very  slightly  increased  in  size,  though  the 
fluid  above  was  still  perfectly  clear.  The  grey  mass  was  re- 
moved by  a  small  pipette,  and,  on  microscopical  examination, 
it  was  found  to  be  composed  of  an  aggregation  of  minute 
extraneous  fibres,  mixed  with  blackish  particles  and  amor- 
phous granular  matter,  in  which  were  growing  many  Torula- 
cells  in  all  stages  of  development,  and  also  a  minute  mycelium 
composed  of  branched  Leptothrix-X^^  fibres  \  The  clear 
fluid  was  then  inoculated  with  some  living  Bacteria^  and  the 
bulb  of  the  flask  was  replaced  in  the  warm-bath.  After  fifty 
hours  the  solution  showed  a  bluish  turbidity,  which,  in  thirty- 
six   hours  more,  had  increased  to  a  well-marked  whitish 


simple  (uninoculated')  solutions  would  become  turbid  in  vacuo — that  is  to 
say,  without  the  oxidizing  influences  of  the  air — ^when  they  had  not  been 
exposed  to  an  amount  of  heat  sufficient  to  destroy  any  living  or  dead 
ferments  which  they  might  contain. 

'  A  deposit  of  this  kind  is  almost  invariably  found  in  such  solutions 
alter  their  degree  of  fermentability  has  been  lowered  by  previous  boiling. 
Growth  takes  place  very  slowly  in  these  cases. 

d  2 


lii 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


opacity,  and  when  examined,  the  fluid  was  found  to  be 
swarming  with  active  Bacteria, 

Solutions  of  Amnionic  Tartrate  and  Sodic  Phosphate  were 
heatedy  in  their  respective  Flasks,  for  Fifteen  Minutes  to  the 
Temperatures  mentioned  below.  The  necks  of  the  Flasks  were 
afterwards  loosely  covered  with  Paper  Caps,  whilst  the  Bulbs 
were  immersed  in  a  Water-Bath  kept  at  a  Temperature  ^ 
75'-85«  F, 

No.  LXI.    Solution  heated  to  149''  F. 
No.  LXII.         „  „        „     158''  F. 

No.  LXIII.        „  „        „     158^  F. 

No.  LXIV.        „  „        „     167°  F. 

No.  LXV.         „  „        „     167°  F. 

An  these  solutions  remained  quite  clear  and  free  from  any 
trace  of  general  turbidity  for  ten  days.  Each  fluid  was  then 
inoculated  with  some  living  Bacteria,  and  in  the  space  of 
thirty-six  to  setenty-two  hours,  all  had  become  more  or  less 
obviously  turbid,  and  on  microscopical  examination  this 
turbidity  was  found  in  each  ca$e  to  be  almost  wholly  due  to 
the  presence  of  multitudes  o{  Bacteria, 


APPENDIX    D. 

On  the  Variahilify  of  the  Lower  Forms  of  Living  Matter, 

LiohenB.  Within  the  last  few  years  the  notion  has  been 
graduaUy  growing  up  that  many  of  the  so-called  unicellular 
Algae  and  their  allies  are  but  stages  in  the  growth  of  the 
gonidia  of  certain  Lichens.  This  view  was  originally  started 
by  the  valuable  observations  of  Itzigsohn  ^  With  regard  to 
Chlarococcus,  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  says*  he  has  thoroughly 
satisfied  himself  that  such  a  relationship  occurs  between  this 
so-called  Alga  and  the  Lichen  known  2l&  Parnulia  parietinus. 
After  describing  the  changes  that  take  place  in  the  vegetative 
multiplication  of  Chlorococcusj  and  comparing  them  with  those 
occurring  in  the  similar  growth  from  the  gonidia  of  Lichens, 
he  summarizes  the  results  of  his  observations  thus : — ^  I  think, 
then,  from  the  above  remarks,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  but 
that  what  has  been  called  "  Chlorococcus  "  is  nothing  more 
than  the  gonidia  of  some  Lichens,  which,  having  been  con- 
veyed by  the  movements  of  the  atmosphere,  had  been  de- 
posited on  a  favourable  surface,  where  they  soon  begin 
to  increase  by  various  modes  of  segmentation  which  con- 
tinue for  an  unlimited  period.  But  under  suitable  conditions, 
chiefly  drought  and  warmth,  the  gonidium  throws  out  from 


*  *  Botan.  Zdtung/  Jan.  5,  1855. 
'  *  Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science/  i860. 


liv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

its  external  envelope  a  small  fibre,  which  adhering  and 
branching,  ultimately  encases.it  and  forms  a  "soridium"^ 
At  this  stage  the  gonidium  may  continue  also  for  an  in- 
definite period  in  a  dormant  condition,  but,  circumstances 
favouring,  segmentation  of  the  gonidium  goes  on  within  the 
soridium,  while  the  branches  of  the  fibre  penetrate  within 
the  divisions,  till  at  last  a  young  thallus  is  formed*.  But  a 
check  may  occur  during  any  of  these  stages,  and  yet  vitaKty 
be  prolonged  for  a  period  oif  months  and  even  years.' 
Frequently  the  *  Chlorococcus '  stage  continues  for  a  very 
long  time,  and  the  products  resulting  from  it  constitute  a 
green  coating  on  walls,  trees,  and  other  external  objects,  on 
which  it  may  cover  large  surfaces.  The  continuance  of  this 
algoid  stage  seems  to  be  favoured  by  the  occurrence  of  cool 
moist  weather ;  and  its  tendency  to  persist  in  this  stage, 
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  almost  universal  presence  of 
the  gonidia  of  Lichens*  in  snow  and  rain  water,  may  help 
to  account  for  the  wide  diffusion  of  this  green  algoid 
coating. 

Although  the  Chlorococcus  -  %omdx\xai  and  the  lAckn- 
gonidium  usually  undergo  precisely  similar  segmentation- 
changes  till  soridia  appear  and  the  real  lichen-thallus  is  ulti- 
mately produced,  yet,  in  other  cases,  the  soridia  undergo 
another  remarkable  set  of  changes,  instead  of  passing  on 
directly  to  the  development  of  a  thallus.  The  changes  about 
to  be  described  have  been  observed  by  Dr.  Hicks  principally 


'  See  loc.  cit.,  PI.  X. 

*  Dr.  Hicks  says : — •  It  will  be  easily  perceived  that  the  soridium  con- 
tains all  the  elements  of  a  thallus  in  miniature ;  in  fact,  a  thallus  docs 
frequently  arise  from  one  alone,  yet,  generally,  the  fibres  of  ndgfabouring 
soridia  interlace,  and  thus  a  thallus  is  matured  more  rapidly.  This  is 
one  of  the  causes  of  the  variation  in  appearance  so  common  in  many 
species  of  Lichens.' 

*  After  a  series  of  observations  extending  over  many  years.  Dr.  Hicks 
is  enabled  to  say,  that  •  they  may  be  collected  in  comparatively  great 
numbers  from  snow  and  rain,  particukrly  Ae  former.* 


APPExnix  n.  \\ 


in  Cladonia  pyxidata^  thouu^h  similar  processes  liave  been 
watched  in  connection  witli  the  gonidia  of  other  Lichens 
belonging  to  the  same  and  to  different  genera. 

When  growing  in  a  dr}'  situation  (or  if  the  season  is  hot 
and  dry)  the  gonidia  of  Cladonia  pyxidata  behave  in  the 
same  manner  as  those  already  described  of  Parmelia  and 
Chlorococcus ;  but,  on  the  contrar}',  if  the  weather  becomes 
damp,  if  the  plant  grows  in  a  damp  situation,  or  even  if 
removed  to  one,  then  other  and  quite  different  changes 
ensue. 

Under  any  one  of  such  circumstances.  Dr.  Hicks  says : — 
'  The  first  change  observable  is  that  some  of  the  segments 
becx)me  enveloped  by  a  layer  of  mucus,  inside  of  which  sub- 
division still  further  proceeds,  the  portions  in  most  cases  pos- 
sessing, after  a  little  time,  each  a  separate  mucous  envelope  ^ 
Thus  we  have  all  the  elements  of  a  Ghocapsa  (Ktltzing) 
growth.     At  first,  commonly,  the  subdivision  is  continued  on 
the  binary  plan,  which  may  continue  for  some  time.'    Other 
modes  of  subdivision,  however,  may  follow.    The  early  seg- 
ments may  separate  from  one  another,  each  provided  with 
a  mucous  layer,  but  in  others  the  mucous  envelope  of  the 
original  cell  does  not  dissolve  away,  though  segmentation  pro- 
ceeds in  its  interior.    Thus  masses  result,  in  which  the  Gleo- 
capsiform  cells  have  from  one  to  three  common  envelopes, 
and  a  condition  is  produced,  as  Dr.  Hicks  points  out,  similar 
to  Hassal*s  Hematococcus  rupesiris.     But,  he  says  : — *  In  the 
same  mass — the   produce  of  the  Cladmia-?x>x'nX\z. — will  be 
found  every  variety  of  subdivision,  each  form  constituting 
a    mass  of   a  greater    or    smaller  extent,*   though    these 
various  products  were  not  always  indiscriminately  mingled, 
'  as  if  a  particular  kind  having  once  commenced,  it  would, 

^  All  the  changes  which  are  now  being  described  are  accurately 
represented  in  PI.  li.  of  the  *  Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science*  for  i860. 


Ivi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

circumstances  continuing  the  same,  proceed  in  the  same 
direction  for  an  unlimited  time.'     Dr.  Hicks  tells  us  still 
further  that — *  When  the  soridia,  undergoing  this  transfor- 
mation, are  placed  in  water,  the  mucous  envelope  becomes 
much  increased  in  diameter,  the  cells  become  more  numerous 
and  smaller,  and  assume  the  appearance  of  Hemaiomm 
alpestris.     It  proceeds  sometimes  to  such  extreme  division 
that  the  process   seems  almost  indefinite,  and  the  results 
resemble  Hemaiococcus  theriacus^  and   mnutissimtiSy  Hass.' 
Segmentation  goes  on,  in  fact,  in  various  ways,  and  the  pro- 
portion that  the  mucous  coat  bears  to  the  cell  is  exceedingly 
variable.     At  other  times  a  group  of  large  oval  cells  is  pro- 
duced, each  of  them  surrounded  by  a  mucous  layer,  predsdy 
similar  to  the  Palmoglea  of  Ktitzing  (Coccochhris^  Hassal). 
The  common  mucous  envelope  soon  disappears,  and  then 
the  contained  cells  rapidly  subdivide  and  form  an  indefinite 
mass  resembling  C  Brebissonii.    Dr.   Hicks  believes  that 
even  the  Gleocapsa  cells  may  and  do,  *  by  the  condensation  or 
desiccation  of  the  mucous  sheath  and  by  the  enlargement  of 
the  green  cell,  ultimately  revert  to  the  form  of  the  original 
gonidium  from  which  they  arose.'    He  is  disposed  to  believe 
that  the  changes  above  detailed  are  by  no  means  all  that  may 
occur.     Sometimes,  indeed,  the  whole  of  the  gonidial  layer 
of  the  lichen-thallus  becomes  converted  into  a  Pcdmoglaa- 
mass,  which,  after   a  time,  is  indistinguishable  from  other 
masses  produced  from  soridia.     Observations  of  a  somewhat 
similar  nature,  though  more  limited  in  extent,  had  also  been 
previously  made  by  J.  Sachs  *— of  which,  however,  Dr.  Hicks 
was  ignorant  till  at  a  late  stage  of  his  own  investigations. 
These  have  convinced  him  that  the  gonidium  of  a  single 
Lichen  may,  under  the   influence  of  suitable  but  varying 
conditions,  give  rise  to  products  absolutely  resembling  almost 


1  t 


Botan.  Zettung/  Jan.  5,  1855. 


.-f/V'AA7)/.\'    n.  Ivii 


every  form  of  Hematococcus  {Gleocapsa,  Kiitzing),  and  also 
almost  every  form  of  Coccochloris  (Palmogliee,  Kiitzing)  as 
well  as  that  of  Sorospora  virescens — that  is  to  say,  from  the 
gonidia  of  a  single  Lichen  there  may  be  produced,  by  slight 
variation  of  the  *  conditions '  under  which  they  grow,  no  less 
than  twenty-three  forms,  which  have  been  hitherto  regarded 
as  distinct  species  of  fresh-water  Algae. 

But  even  this  is  not  all ;  such  algoid  forms  may  have  other 
totally  different  modes  of  origin,  to  some  of  which  we  shall 
afterwards  allude  (see  pp.  Ixiii-lxviii,  Ixxiii,  Ixxv,  and  Ixxxviii). 
Itzigsohn '  and  J.  Sachs  ^  had  both  insisted  upon  the  fact 
that  another  group  of  algoid  forms,  known  as  Nostoc,  origi- 
nates from  a  Lichen  called  ColUma  ;  and  their  observations 
have  since  been  confirmed  and  extended  by  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks. 
They  had  observed  the  development  of  Nosioc  from  changes 
taking  place  in  a  small  ball  of  jelly-like  mucus  enclosing 
two  or  three  beaded  cells,  which  becomes  extended  from 
the  Coll€ma-i)\2l\\is,     Such  a  jelly-ball  may  undergo  one  or 
other  of  two  developmental  phases :   first,  it  may  produce 
continuous  colourless  threads,  and  may  thus  again  pass  into 
Collema  ;   or,  secondly,  it  may  develop  no  colourless  fibres, 
but  the  ball  may  grow  in  size  and  transparency,  whilst  the 
green-beaded  filaments  within  increase  by  subdivision,  and 
the   heterocysts,  common   to  the  NosiochacecBa,  appear  at 
intervals.     This  second  mode  of  development,  according  to 
Itzigsohn  and  Sachs,  may  continue  for  an  indefinite  period. 

Dr.  Hicks  describes  still  another  mode  by  which  Nosioc 
may  originate  from  Collema.  Within  the  thallus  of  this 
Lichen  certain  gonidia  appear,  which  are  larger  and  of  a 
lighter  g^een  than  the  others.  These,  when  liberated,  undergo 
segmentation  for  a  time,  so  as  to  produce  a  small  Chloro- 
coccus-mzss.      Soon,   however,  the  products  begin  to  take 

^  'Botan.  Zeitungt*  1854,  p.  sai.  ^  Loc.  dt. 


Iviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


on  the  Gleocapsa  mode  of  growth,  and  become  enclosed  in 
mucous  envelopes.   In  this  condition  the  masses  differ  some- 
what in  appearance  from  the  Gleocapsa  of  Cladama  origin, 
and   afterwards   the   differences   may  become  even  better 
marked.   They  may  branch  off  into  different  modes  of  develop- 
ment, and  in  one  of  ihem  *  the  whole  mass,  both  cell-con 
tents  and  the  mucous  layer,  are  of  a  dark  purple  colour; 
each  cell  undergoing  binary  division  is  surrounded  by  its 
own  mucous  layer,  the  whole  being  included  in  a  common 
one.     After  a  while,  the  purple  coating  becomes  colourless 
and  fused  into  one ;  while  the  cell-contents  become  green, 
and  the  divisions  separate.     As  segmentation  proceeds,  the 
resulting  cells  assume  a  linear  tendency,  till  at  last  a  number 
of  moniliferous  filaments  are  formed,  having  here  and  there 
the  vesicular  cells  [heterocysts)  found  in   the  Nostochactd- 
The  passage  of  CoUenia  into  Nostoc  may  also,  according  to 
Dr.  Hicks,  take  place  after  different  modes ;  and,  moreover, 
developmental  changes  of  a  precisely  similar  nature  may  be 
undergone   by  the   gonidia  of  Nostoc  itself.     He  has  also 
described  the  various  steps  by  which  masses  of  Nostoc  revert 
to,  or  are  changed  into,  Collema.     Thus  the  relation  between 
Nostoc  and  Collema  is  shown  to  be  indubitable.     But  as  a 
matter  of  direct  observation,  it  is  now  known  that  Nostoc 
may  also  originate  even  from  some  of  the  higher  Gymno- 
carpous  Lichens.     The  gonidia  of  one  of  these  has  been 
seen  by  Dr.  Hicks  developing  first  of  all  into  Gleocapsoid 
masses,  and  then  into  veritable  Nostoc-hdXh,  whilst  still  be- 
neath the  apothecia  and  within  the  crustaceous  thallus.     Dr. 
Hicks  is  also  fully  disposed  to  believe  that  subsequent  re- 
searches  will  tend   to   support   the   opinion   of  Itzigsohn, 
that  Nostoc  may  originate  from  other  Lichens ;  and  that, 
in   fact,   all   the   NostochacecR  may   have   such   a  mode   of 
origin. 

With  regard  to  the  variability  of  Lichens  themselves,  the 


1 /'/'/■  .V/)/\   />.  lix 


Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley  says  ^  : — '  No  vegetable  productions  are 
more  liable  to  variation  than  Lichens,  a  circumstance  which 
makes  their  study  xQvy  difficult ;  and,  without  a  knowledge 
of  the  fruit,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  distinguish  species 
accurately.     Not  only  is  the  crust  liable  to  put  on  various 
forms   by  the   over-production  of  some  of  its  constituent 
parts,  but  even  where  these  are  in  a  normal  condition,  the 
degree  of  division  of  its  lobes,  the  difference  of  colour,  the 
obliteration  of  the  margin  of  the  apothecia,  the  exposure  of 
those  which  have  a  true  excipulum  partially  covered  by  the 
crust,  the  greater  or  less  crowding  of  the  fruit,  the  reduction 
of  compound  forms  to  simple,  and  many  other  circumstances, 
induce  variations  which  can  only  be  appreciated  by  the  prac- 
tised student.     The   tropical   Verrttcan'cp^  for   instance,  as- 
sume forms  so  different,  that,  without  a  comparison  of  the 
fruit,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  come  to  any  correct  judg- 
ment, and  in  these  ihe  Lichenoid  character  is  sometimes  com- 
pUtely  obliterated  by  the  non-development  or  evanescence  of 
the  crust' 

Alg8B.  After  speaking  of  the  extreme  variability  of  the 
simpler  unicellular  Algse,  Mr.  Berkeley  also  says': — *  When 
we  come  to  the  articulated  Algae,  amongst  which  the  dis- 
tinctions of  species  are  often  slight,  an  increased  degree  of 
caution  is  requisite.  A  very  short  acquaintance  suffices  to 
show  the  immense  difference  of  diameter  which  may  exist  in 
threads  of  the  same  mass,  and  in  the  same  threads  the  pro- 
portion of  length  and  breadth  in  the  articulations,  are  quite 
as  variable.  Species,  therefore,  evidently  of  the  most  close 
affinity,  cannot  be  safely  separated  from  mere  consideration 
of  relative  proportion  without  any  other  characters.     Even 


^  Loc  cit.,  p.  1 66. 

*  Introd.  to  *  Cryptogam.  Bot/  1857,  p.  418. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


the  branching  of  the  thread  is  not  sufficient,  or  the  mode 
of  branching.  Cladophora  glomerata  assumes  a  multitude  of 
forms  which  it  would  be  rash  in  the  extreme  to  separate, 
and  it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that  of  published  species  of 
Cladophora  and  Conferva^  at  least  one-half  will  ultimately 
be  reduced.  Where  Con/ervce  are  exposed  to  drought,  they 
sometimes  throw  down  roots  from  their  joints  in  search  of 
moisture,  a  circiunstance  which  must  be  taken  into  account 
in  the  estimation  of  species.  In  Lyngbya  muralis  the  threads 
often  anastomose,  producing  a  very  curious  and  puzzling 
appearance.  ...  In  Anabatna  and  allied  genera,  the  number 
and  disposition  of  the  fertile  cells  will  not  afford  safe  cha- 
racters ;  nor  will  mere  microscopic  measurement,  which  is 
often  deceptive,  and  should  be  always  taken  with  consider- 
able latitude  amongst  OscillaioricB,  The  zoospores  even  of 
the  articulated  Algae  are  not  absolutely  constant.  Monstrous 
forms  occur  in  the  small  zoospores  of  Cladophora^  and  the 
large  ones  of  JEdogonium,  Characters  like  those  in  Hassal's 
Fresh  Water  Algae,  dependent  simply  on  comparative  size, 
are  altogether  inadmissible,  as  specific  distinctions/ 

From  a  study  of  some  of  the  OscillatoricBj  and  more 
especially  of  Lyngbya  muralis,  Dr.  Hicks*  has  not  only 
ascertained  that  these  plants  take  on  many  distinctly  diflfer- 
ent  modes  of  growth  from  time  to  time,  but  that  they  also 
frequently  throw  off  some  of  their  terminal  cells  in  the  form 
of  gonidia,  which  straightway  proceed  to  undergo  a  process 
of  segmentation  after  the  fashion  of  the  gonidia  of  Lichens, 
so  as  to  produce  a  palmelloid  growth,  which  frequently 
assumes  the  form  of  Protococcus  viridis.  Some  of  the  cells 
of  these,  after  a  time,  may  again  take  on  the  linear  mode 
of  growth,  and  so  revert  to  the  original  Lyngbya  type.  At 
other  times,  by  the  occurrence  of  a  lateral  mode  of  segmen- 


1  t 


]ouni.  of  Microsc.  Science,*  1861,  p.  157. 


APPENDIX  D,  bd 


Cation,  there  are  produced  from  the  Lyngiya  thread  broad 
wavy  fronds,  the  cells  of  which  are  held  together  by  colour- 
less intercellular  substance.  Such  fronds  may  also  throw 
off  gonidia,  and  these  may  go  through  all  the  changes  above 
described ;  or  some  of  its  peripheral  cells  may  take  on  the 
linear  mode  of  growth.  Dr.  Hicks  says : — *  The  whole  of 
these  changes  are  so  palpable,  can  be  observed  so  constantly, 
and  are,  at  the  same  time,  so  simple  in  their  relations  to 
one  another,  that  one  can  scarcely  imagine  how  they  can 
have  been  separated,  not  only  into  distinct  species,  but  into 
different  families  of  Algse.  Thus  the  linear  stage  is  called 
Jjynghya  ;  the  early  stage  of  collateral  segmentation,  Schizo^ 
gomum;  the  adult  stage  Prasiola  ^;  while  the  gonidial  growth 
has  been  classed  under  Palmellacea.  And  this  has  been 
done  by  most  algologists.  Meyer,  indeed,  had  pointed  out 
a  connection  between  them ;  but  his  opinions  were  denied 
by  Jesseu,  and  ignored  by  most  others.  It  is  a  striking 
instance  of  the  insuperable  tendency  of  some  to  look  upon 
every  distinct  form  as  a  separate  species.'  The  characters 
of  the  cells  or  segments  in  Lyngbya  are  subject  to  changes 
of  all  kinds,  not  only  as  regards  the  particular  characters 
of  the  green  colouring  matter  contained  in  them,  but  also  as 
regards  the  shape  and  size  of  the  segments.  They  may  be 
more  or  less  rounded,  so  as  to  resemble  those  of  Nos/oc, 
and  their  length  not  only  varies  much  in  adjacent  filaments, 
but  even  occasionally  in  different  portions  of  the  same  fila- 
ment. This  depends  altogether  *  upon  the  rapidity  of  the 
process  of  linear  subdivision,  compared  with  the  rapidity  of 
individual  cell-growth.  Sometimes  the  rate  of  the  former 
is  so  much  in  excess,  that  the  cells  are  no  thicker  than  the 
septa,  the  thread  appearing  to  consist  of  narrow  green  and 

*  The  two  latter  genera  have  always  been  located  in  the  family 


Ixii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

-  -    -  _  ^ 1 

colourless  boards ;  again,  sometimes  the  cells  are  three  or 
four  times  longer  than  broad/  Much  variation  occurs  also 
in  the  width  of  the  whole  thread  in  specimens  taken  from 
various  localities.  Having  thoroughly  ascertained,  therefore, 
the  extent  of  variation  which  may  undoubtedly  occur  inZj^- 
bya,  Dr.  Hicks  seems  fully  justified  when  he  comes  to  the 
conclusion  that  characters  of  this  kind  are  utterly  worthless 
upon  which  to  found  the  distinction  of  species.  And  yet  it 
is  upon  such  characters  only  that  the  so-called  species  of  the 
genus  Oscillatoria  are  separated  from  one  another. 

But,  it  may  well  be  asked,  what  is  the  most  perfect  form 
of  this  developmental  cycle,  in  which  are  included  the  Algae 
known  as  Lynghya^  Schizogonium^  Prasiola^  and  Protococcm} 
There  is  no  sexual  stage  of  reproduction  to  be  met  with  in 
either  of  them — one  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  higher  than 
another — they  are  in  fact,  as  it  appears,  distinct  modes  of  ex- 
istence, which  may  be  taken  on  under  the  influence  of  suit- 
able condition  by  one  and  the  same  living  matter.     But  can 
we  stop  even  here  ?  may  not  these  forms  themselves  be  but 
sub-cycles  of  a  still  larger  cycle  ?     The  gonidia  of  Lichens, 
as  we  have  seen,  undergo  a  process  of  segmentation  almost 
absolutely  similar  to  that  undergone  by  the  gonidial  cells  of 
Lyngbya  ;  we  may  well  ask,  therefore,  Is  it  possible  that  the 
products  of  the  segmentation  of  the  gonidia  of  certain  Lichens 
may  occasionally  assume   the  Lyngbya  mode  of  growth? 
Each  form  has  of  course  a  tendency  to  reproduce  or  con- 
tinue the  mode  of  growth  of  the  form  from  which  it  has  been 
immediately  derived  ;   it  may  therefore  continue  in  almost 
any  one  of  these  stages  either  for  a  very  long  or  a  very 
short  time,  such   tendency  being  extremely  weak  and  not 
to  be  compared  with  that  which  exists  in  higher   organ- 
isms, in  which  the  influence  of  the  *  law  of  heredity'  has  been 
gradually  built  up  by  the  production  of  similar  forms  through 
successive  generations.     Here  the  present  mode  of  growth 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixiii 


may  be  diverted  into  some  other  mode  under  the  influence 
of  various  conditions  at  present  unknown  to  us. 

But  is  it  possible  that  just  as  the  algoid  cycle  of  develop- 
ment may  merge  into  the  higher  Licheno-algoid  cycle,  so  this 
complex  cycle  may  merge  into  one  still  higher,  in  which 
the  various  forms  of  MoBses  must  be  concluded?  From 
what  we  already  know,  this  is  really  not  so  utterly  improbable 
as  it  might  at  first  appear.  Much  careful  observation  would 
be  required  to  establish  such  a  possibility  as  a  fact,  but  the 
observations  to  which  I  will  now  call  attention  give  a 
certain  warrant  to  the  assumption.  They  afford  indications, 
at  all  events,  which  should  be  sufficient  to  make  future 
inquirers  approach  the  subject  with  their  eyes  fully  open  to 
the  marvellous  possibilities  of  change  presented  by  the  pri- 
mordial forms  of  living  matter. 

Gonidia  are  produced  from  almost  any  part  of  the  thallus 
of  Lichens;  but  although,  in  exceptional  conditions,  they 
may  also  be  produced  from  the  most  different  parts  of 
Mosses,  they  are  thrown  off  principally,  and  as  a  rule,  from  the 
so-called  'confervoid  filaments'  or  *confervoid  radicles.'  The 
latter  are  generally  to  be  observed,  in  more  or  less  abundance, 
springing  more  especially  from  the  part  where  the  ascending 
axis  joins  the  true  roots  of  the  moss.  These  filaments, 
previous  to  the  investigations  of  KUtzing,  were  looked  upon 
as  true  Algae,  and  were  described  under  the  generic  names 
Protenema  and  Gangrostra,  Ktitzing^  however,  showed 
that  they  were  natural  products  of  bosses,  and  this  view 
of  their  nature  was  afterwards  taken  by  Schimper*,  who 
traced  more  fully  the  development  of  the  confervoid  filaments 
from  the  spore,  and  the  origin  of  the  leafy  axis  of  the  moss 
from  them.     The  investigations  of  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  have 

"  *  Phycolog.  Generalise  and  *  Linnsea,'  Bd.  viii.  1833. 
'  *  Rechercn.  sur  les  Mousses,'  1848. 


:^r«K. 


Ixiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFK 

enabled  him  to  confirm  Schimper's  observations  as  fiar  as 
they   went,   whilst  they   also   supply   us   with   much  new 
and  highly  interesting  information.     These  *  confervoid  fila- 
ments/ Dr.  Hicks  *  tells  us,  *  consist  of  a  single  series  of 
cells,  of  a  length  varying  according  to  outward  conditions', 
each  cell  possessing  the  property  of  producing  branches  like 
themselves.     They  are  in  the  first  instance  produced  by  the 
germination  of  a  spore,  as  has  been  pointed  out  by  the  ob- 
servers above  quoted;  and  although,  as  Schimper  has  beau- 
tifully shown,  the  ascending  axis  arises  from  them,  yet  this 
axis  and  the  leaves  in  their  turn  give  rise  to  the  filaments,  as 
Kiitzing  and  Schimper  also  have  pointed  out,  and  which  can 
be  readily  verified.  .  .  .  When  the  filament  springs  fio® 
either  the  axis  or  leaf,  or  from  a  single  unsegmented  gom- 
dium,  the  first  change  in  the  cell  (for  in  either  case  only  one 
cell  is  involved)  is  a  bulging-out  of  a  portion  of  its  wall, 
which,  after  growing  a  certain  length,  is  shut  oflf  from  the 
original  cell  by  a  septum  at  the  point  of  origin.    After  this 
cell  has  grown  a  certain  length,  a  binary  subdivision  of  its 
contents  takes  place.  ...  By  the  continuation  of  this  process, 
chiefly  in  the  terminal  cell,  and  by  the  growth  in  the  already 
formed  cells,  and  by  the  formation  of  branches  from  branches 
continuously,  the  length  of  the  filaments  and  the  area  they 
occupy  are  extended  indefinitely.'     The  character  of  the 
cell-contents  varies  very  much  in  different   cases,  and  the 
filaments  may  take  on  a  well-marked  arborescent  form,  or 
they  may  remain,  for  a  period,  almost  unbranched.  Dr.  Hicb 
tells  us : — *  In  these  forms  the  confervoid  radicles  continue  to 
grow  for  an  indefinite  time,  external  circumstances  remaining 
the  same ;  and  in  course  of  time  very  large  surfaces  can  be 

^  •  Trans,  of  Linnaean  Soc.,*  1863,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  570. 

■  Sometimes  their  length  scarcely  e<)uals  their* breadth;  but  at  other 
times,  *  under  much  moisture  and  heat,  it  is  very  much  increased,  so  that 
it  may  be  twenty  or  thirty  tunes  longer  than  wide.' 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixv 


covered  by  them  unless  usurped  by  other  plants.     They  are 

perfecdy  capable  of  independent  existence,  whether  they  have 

arisen  from  a  spore,  leaf,  stem,  or  root,  when  separated  from 

their  source;  and  hence  the  erroneous  impression  of  their 

Algal  origin.     This  is  the  less  to  be  wondered  at,  if  we 

notice  the  growth  of  one  when  placed  in  water.   Under  these 

circimistances,   the  activity  of  its   development  and  linear 

growth  is  wonderfully  increased,  if  not  exposed  to  too  much 

light;  so  that  in  a  week  it  can  multiply  itself  200  or  300 

times,  while  the  original  type  has  been  nearly  preserved,  the 

slight  alteration  being  in  the  elongations  of  the  cells  and  a 

decrease  of  their  breadth.'     Sometimes  the  filaments  which 

have  grown  in  water  are  branched  so  as  closely  to  resemble 

the   Alga    known    as   Draparnaldia   tenuis;    and  on   one 

occasion  Dr.  Hicks  actually  found  a  very   fine  growth  of 

D.  tenuis  in  a  glass  of  water  into  which  he  had  previously 

placed  a  Moss.     Upon  this  he  remarks : — *  This  is  a  very 

unusual  place  to  find  this  plant;  and  though  I  could  not 

absolutely  trace  it  to  a  Moss,  yet  coupled  with  the  fact  that 

similar  growths  can  be  so  originated,   and   also   that  the 

radicles^  produce   elongated   cilia-like'  cells,  it  seems  to 

be  a  point  worthy  of  further  research,  whether  or  not  that 

genus,  or  at  any  rate  the  above  species,  may  or  may  not 

have  its  origin  from  Moss  in  some  one  of  its  phases.     Nor 

should  this,  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge,  be  considered 

a  wild  speculation,  for  we   know  nothing   of  the   agamic 

growth  of  Draparnaldia  ;  we  have  nothing  to  militate  against 

its  being  one  mode  of  vegetative  growth  of  a  form  considered 

altogether  distinct ;  and  this  is  not  more  extravagant  than  the 

known  fact  that  these  confervoid  filaments  can  produce  and 

*  Every  transition  may  be  traced  between  the  true  radicles  of  the  Moss 
and  the  confervoid  filaments.  Each  is  capable  of  giving  rise  to  the 
other. 

'  Strongly  resembling  the  so-called  dlise  of  the  Draparnaldia. 

VOL.  IL  e 


Ixvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

spring  from  Mosses,  I  again  remark,  we  know  so  little  of 
the  whole  possible  life-history  of  these  simpler  plants,  that 
our  want  of  knowledge  of  a  precedent  cannot  be  quoted 
against  it' 

Whilst  such  are  the  changes  that  take  place  in  the 
shade  under  the  influence  of  warmth  and  moisture,  the 
growth  of  the  cells  is  much  checked  during  drought  (espe- 
cially in  the  sununer) ;  their  walls  become  thickened,  and  the 
chlorophyll  utricles  are  more  closely  packed  in  their  interior. 
Drought  also  tends  to  produce  a  red  or  reddish-brown 
colour  in  the  cellulose  wall  of  the  cell.  Filaments  are  often 
(though  not  necessarily)  in  this  condition  when  those  peculiar 
buds  arise  which  constitute  the  first  step  in  the  growth  of 
a  perfect  Moss.  This  is  one  of  the  many  modes  of  repro- 
duction recognizable  amongst  these  filaments. 

1.  It  takes  place  in  the  following  manner : — From 
some  one  cell  of  the  filament  a  branch  is  produced,  and 
after  one  or  two  dissepiments  have  been  formed  in  it, 
the  terminal  cell  increases  considerably  in  size.  'From 
this/  Dr.  Hicks*  writes,  'many  (three  or  four)  branches 
spring,  in  the  mode  of  branching  before  mentioned,  in  a  row 
or  vertical ;  the  cells  of  these  branches  are  delicate  and 
tapering,  and  have  the  property  of  curving  in  towards  the 
centre.  There  is  also  a  similar  row  of  smaller  branches 
springing  from  the  same  cell  within  the  former  row,  sur- 
rounding as  it  were  an  imaginary  axis.  From  this  springs, 
by  gradual  increment  in  the  number  of  the  cells,  the  stem 
of  the  Moss.  The  first  attempt  at  differentiation  on  the 
part  of  the  confervoid  filament  is  thus  shown  to  be  in  the 
cell  producing  the  rows  of  curving  in  branches.' 

2.  The  next  mode  of  reproduction  observable  amongst 
these  confervoid  filaments  is  also  most  prone  to  occur  during 

»  Loc.dt,p.  574. 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixvii 


periods  of  drought.  This  consists  in  the  formation  of  the 
so-called  *  peculiar  fruit'  of  the  Protonemece^  which  may  be 
produced  on  any  part  of  the  plant,  under  the  form  of  a 
brownish  ovoid  mass  made  up  of  four  or  more  cells.  These 
are  supposed  to  be  '  resting  gemmae/  the  production  of 
which  is  probably  *  one  of  the  means  by  which  the  life  of 
the  plant  is  preserved  during  severe  trials  of  drought  and 
cold.'  Each  one  of  them  seems  to  be  a  sort  of  compound 
gonidium,  and  from  any  one  or  more  of  its  constituent  cells 
confervoid  filaments  may  ultimately  sprout. 

3.  *But  this  is  not  the  only  method  by  which  the  con- 
fervoid filaments  are  reproduced:  any  one  of  the  cells  de- 
tached from  the  other  is  capable  of  continuing  the  growth 
of  the  filament  in  the  same  manner  as  each  is  capable  of 
doing  whilst  forming  part  of  the  filament,  by  branching  and 
division,  as  I  have  before  noticed.  And  there  is  a  great 
tendency  for  these  cells  to  separate  from  each  other,  more 
particularly  in  the  older  filaments ;  but  whether  old  or  young 
they  may  bulge-  out  on  any  side,  and  form  a  branch  which, 
segmenting,  becomes  a  true  filament.'  The  separated  cells 
may  be  somewhat  elongated,  though  more  frequently  they 
are  spherical,  having  dropped  off  from  the  ends  of  the  fila- 
ments where  three  or  four  others  have  assumed  nearly  the 
same  form  \  The  green  contents  of  these  separated  globular 
cells,  or  gonidia,  may  be  granular  or  homogeneous,  and 
they  may  or  may  not  contain  a  central  nucleus,  as  is  ob- 
served in  the  gonidia  of  Lichens.  Others  become  more  or 
less  altered  in  form  and  appearance,  and  exactly  resemble 
some  of  the  supposed  independent  forms  of  Confervae  de- 
scribed by  the  older  algologists — e.  g.  C  multicapsularis  and 
C.  umbrosa.  Under  the  influence  of  warmth  and  moisture 
these  globular  or  elongated  cells  (a)  give  rise  to  filaments ; 

^  These  cells  also  assume  a  deeper  and  brighter  green  c<A.Q^x. 

e  2 


Ixviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


but  in  other  cases  {b)  they  become  converted  into  mother- 
cells  by  their  contents  unckrgoing  a  process  of  quaternary 
subdivision,  which  repeats  itself  again  and  again.    This  pro- 
perty of  repeated  and  incessant  subdivision  is  thus  seen  to  be 
common  both  to  the  Lichen  and  to  the  Moss-gonidium,  and, 
as  Dr.  Hicks  points  out,  the  process  is  commenced  so  early 
in  the  cell  *  that  one  subdivision  is  hardly  fairly  perceptible 
before  the  next  can  be  recognized ;  indeed,  in  sonae  of  the 
cells  three  or  four  generations  are  included  in  one  parent.' 
The  result  of  this  process  in  either  case  may  be  the  produc- 
tion of  segmental  divisions,  *so  small  as  scarcely  to  show 
any  distinction    between    cell-wall  and  contents;'  which, 
however,  *  gradually  increase  in  size,  so  as  at  last  to  equal 
the  original  parent  cell.'     Not  only  were  the  products  of 
this   subdivision   incapable   of  being   discriminated  micro- 
scopically from  those  of  the  Lichen  gonidia,  but  they  even 
resembled  them  also  in  their  tendency  to  keep  on  for  an 
indefinite  time  in  that  particular  mode  of  growth  and  repro- 
duction with  which  they  had  commenced.     Dr.  Hicks  says  :— 
'  This   can  readily  be  observed  by  any  one  who  will  take 
the  trouble.    Large  areas  may  thus  be  covered  by  the  growth 
of  these  cells,  which  may  continue  for  a  long  period  of  time, 
certainly  over  a  year,  and  probably,  as  far  as  I  can  make 
out,  for  many  years.  ...  It  may  always  be  noticed  on  the 
face  of  any  wall  where  Mosses  grow,  that  underneath  each 
patch  a  large  stream  of  these  Chlorococcus-Hke  bodies  may 
be  seen,  running  downwards.' 

4.  Sometimes,  however,  instead  of  the  production  of  the 
globular  cells  from  the  ends  of  the  filaments,  the  whole  of 
the  cells  of  a  tapering  filament  may  undergo  this  quaternary 
form  of  segmentation  in  si/u.  The  cell-walls  become  thicker 
and  the  filament  broader,  whilst  segmentation  goes  on.  After 
a  time  the  parent  cell-walls  dissolve  away,  and  the  Chloro- 
coccus-like  bodies  are  liberated.     This  mode  of  growth  has 


^4 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixix 


been  seen  more  particularly  on  the  bark  of  trees,  and  by 
this  means  large  green  patches  may  be  formed. 

5.  *  But  in  some  filaments  there  is  a  still  more  unsuspected 
change,  namely,  in  the  production  of  cells  of  GUocapsa, 
The  segmentation  proceeds  within  the  filament,  as  in  the 
instance  just  quoted;  but  the  divisions  become  invested  in 
a  gelatinous  envelope,  while  the  parent  cell-wall  breaks  up. 
These  Gleocapsa-like  bodies  then  become  free,  and  continue 
the  segmentation  process  as  in  Gleocapsa,  This  I  have 
shown  in  PI.  LVIII.  fig.  19  a.  It  is  a  condition  by  no 
means  rare  in  the  winter  months;  considerable  masses  of 
these  bodies  are  to  be  found  so  produced  ...  I  have  fre- 
quently found  Gleocapsa  polydermica  (KUtzing)  formed,  as 
well  as  other  so-called  species.  After  frequent  segmentation, 
the  cells  are  imbedded  in  an  indefinite  mass  of  gelatinous 
substance.' 

The  merely  accidental  nature,  so  to  speak,  of  the  differ- 
ence between  the  Chlorococcus  product  and  the  Gleocapsa 
product  of  the  confervoid  filament  of  the  Moss  is  well  seen 
by  what  occurs  in  certain  filaments  where  there  may  be  a 
simultaneous  production  of  the  two  forms  side  by  side.  In 
reference  to  this,  Dr.  Hicks  writes : — *  The  cells  of  a  fila- 
ment in  one  or  in  every  part  at  once  begin  the  process  of 
quaternary  segmentation,  as  before  noticed,  at  first  regularly, 
but  shortly  after  irregularly ;  besides  this,  a  certain  amount 
of  free-cell  formation  goes  on  within  the  divisions  (mother- 
cells),  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  kind  of  cell  forma- 
tion predominates.  In  this  manner  large  irregular  masses 
of  segmentation  cells  are  produced,  like  some  of  those  re- 
sulting from  the  segmentation  of  the  so-called  Palmellaceae. 
The  cells  set  free  from  them  are  either  Chlorococcus-like 
cells  of  variable  size,  or  they  are  like  Gleocapsa^  undergoing 
segmentation  in  their  variable  manner.  .  .  .  These  changes 
can  be  readily  observed  in  the  colder  months.     They  fre- 


.-i  .:- 


Ixx  THE  BEGIXXIXGS  OF  LIFE. 


k 


quently  by  distortion  in  all  directions,  produce  a  mass  whose 
origin  might  be  very  difficult  to  determine,  were  it  not 
generally  possible  to  find  some  small  part  retaining  the 
original  filamentous  condition.' 

The  other  reproductive  (?)  changes  described  by  Dr. 
Braxton  Hicks  as  occurring  in  the  confervoid  filaments  of 
Mosses  are  of  a  most  remarkable  character,  and  are  perhaps 
more  intimately  connected  with  a  failing  vitality  of  the 
mother-cells  than  those  hitherto  described.  They  seem  to 
be  instances  of  true  heterogenesis. 

6.  The  whole  of  the  contents  of  one  of  the  cells  may 
gather  together  *  into  one  or  more  oval  masses,  which  be- 
come covered  by  a  cell-wall  thrown  around  each  portion.' 
Then  two  different  kinds  of  changes  may  ensue.  Either  (a) 
they  may  undergo  a  process  of  segmentation  whilst  still 
within  the  parent  cell,  the  products  being  ultimately  liberated 
by  the  solution  of  the  cell-walls,  containing  and  contained; 
or  {b)  the  cells  may  gradually  lose  their  green  colour,  and 
assume  a  colourless  appearance  save  for  the  presence  of  a 
few  reddish  granules.  As  these  changes  advance  the  units 
assume  the  appearance  of  veritable  Amccbce^  possessing  one  or 
two  contractile  vesicles,  and  exhibiting  the  usual  changes  of 
form  and  movements  characteristic  of  such  organisms*.  After 
they  have  moved  about  for  a  time  as  AmcebcB,  they  reassume 
an  ovoid  form,  and  become  covered  with  cilia,  which  vibrate 
actively.     Further  alterations  have  not  been  traced. 

7.  The  next  change  is  one  commencing  in  the  so-called 
*  chlorophyll  utricles,'  which  exist  not  only  in  the  stems 
and  leaves  of  Mosses,  but  also  in  their  closely-related  radicles 
and  confervoid  filaments.  They  are  minute  homogeneous 
granules,  or,  perhaps  more  correctly,  saccules.  Nageli* 
had  pointed   out   that   they  were   provided   with  an  outer 

^  For  details  concerning  this  metamorphosis,  see  *  Journ.  of  Microsa 
Science,'  April  1861.  *  Ray  Soc  1849,  PP-  176-178. 


'jl 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixxi 


membrane^  and  that  they  can  multiply  by  sub-division.  The 
presence  of  the  membrane  has  been  denied  by  Caspary,  Mohl, 
and  Gris,  and  also  by  the  author  of  the  article  on  *  Chloro- 
phyll' in  the  Micrographic  Dictionary^  though  the  latter 
admits  that  they  undergo  segmentation '.  With  reference 
to  these  points,  Dr.  Hicks  tells  us  that  in  some  moss  which 
he  cultivated  under  glass,  *  the  various  branches  threw  out 
numberless  confervoid  filaments,  some  of  which  approached 
the  radicular  rather  than  the  confervoid  type.'  In  both 
these  kinds  of  filaments,  however,  he  observed  that  their 
chlorophyll  granules  possessed  the  power  of  enlarging.  The 
granules  at  first  became  more  consistent  on  their  exterior,  at 
the  same  time  that  they  became  larger.  But  Dr.  Hicks 
says : — '  As  they  increased  they  showed  a  more  distinct  out- 
line, and  it  was  clear  that,  whatever  doubt  might  attach  itself 
to  the  existence  of  a  membrane  on  the  exterior  of  the 
chlorophyll  utricles  of  the  leaves  and  ordinary  confervoid 
filaments,  these  contents  were  enclosed  by  a  delicate  en- 
velope ;  and,  as  they  further  enlarged,  a  nucleus  appeared 
in  the  centre.  After  a  time,  the  parent  cell  broke  up,,  and 
these  once  chlorophyll  utricles,  but  now  distinct  cells,  be- 
came free.  ...  In  the  undisturbed  condition  in  which  they 
existed,  and  being  held  together  by  the  gum-like  character 
of  the  residue  of  the  parent-cell  wall,  they,  of  course,  did  not 
spread  far ;  and,  as  the  filaments  had  attached  themselves  to 
the  sides  of  the  glass,  I  had  an  excellent  opportunity  of 
watching  their  subsequent  progress.  .  .  .  After  increasing 
gradually  in  an  oval  form,  they  arrived  to  about  the  xrW  i^ 
size,  when  they  began  to  segment  into  two,  or  three,  or  four 
divisions,  or  even  into  more,  a  nucleus  appearing  in  each 
division.  ...  At  this  period  the  cell-wall  of  tlie  parent- 
cell  (once  chlorophyll  utricle)  was  very  marked.  .  .  .    After 


*  *  Linn.  Trans.'  vol.  xxii.  p.  580. 


Ixxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

they  had  remained  for  some  months  in  a  state  of  complete 
quiescence,  I  placed  some  of  these  segmenting  cells  into 
water  on  a  slide,  and,  covering  them  with  ordinary  thin 
glass,  I  put  them  in  the  sun  for  about  an  hour.  To  my 
great  surprise,  I  found  the  whole  water  alive  with  zoospores. 
There  were  thousands  in  the  square  inch,  in  a  most  active 
state.  Further  examination  showed  that  the  segments  had 
been  released  by  the  bursting  of  the  parent  cell-wall,  and 
had  now  become  these  zoospores.  After  a  time  they  came 
to  rest,  and  altogether  lost  their  activity.  I  preserved  the 
slide  for  some  time,  but  I  could  not  determine  an3^ing  very 
definite  as  to  their  after-life,  beyond  that  they  came  to  rest, 
lost  their  cilia^  and  again  subdivided.  .  .  .  These  zoo- 
spores were  of  a  light-green  colour,  they  differed  slightly  in 
size,  and  were  principally  oval ;  some,  however  (and  these 
were  the  larger),  were  round.  They  possessed  two  cilia, 
and  their  contents  were  granular.  The  smaller  measured 
T^  by  ^shris  o^  an  inch  \' 

So  far  we  have  been  speaking  of  the  reproductive  pro- 
cesses peculiar  to,  and  of  the  formation  of  gonidia  in,  the 
confervoid  filaments  of  Mosses;  but  the  power  of  producing 
gonidia  is  not  restricted  to  such  parts.  These  bodies  are 
occasionally  developed  from  the  leaves  of  Mosses,  just  as 
they  are  capable  of  being  produced  from  every  part  of  the 
thallus  of  a  Lichen. 

Dr.  Hicks  says  the  ascending  axis  may  spring  up  in  the 
usual  manner  from  a  confervoid  filament,  and  the  produc- 
tion of  leaves  may  commence;  but  occasionally  the  cells, 
*  which  should  in  the  ordinary  way  unite  to  form  their  lamina, 
in  this  case  do  not  cohere,  but  either  run  parallel  to  or  branch 
away  somewhat  from  each  other.'  The  terminal  cell  of  each 
of  these  pseudo-leaves  possesses,  like  the  terminal  cells  of 

^  Reissek  of  Vienna  has  also  described  peculiar  changes  which  are 
undergone  by  the  chlorophyll  of  ordinary  flowering  plants. 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixxiii 


the  filaments,  the  power  of  separating  from  the  others,  and 
frequently  it  might  be  noticed  that  the  cells  had  already 
begun  the  process  of  division  before  their  separation.  The 
production  here  of  gonidia  seems  to  result  from  a  kind  of 
arrest  of  development. 

But  Dr.  Hicks  speaks  of  still  another  mode  by  which  free 
cell  elements  may  originate,  when  he  says: — *I  have  fre- 
quently noticed  that  Gleocapsa-like  cells  are  produced  from 
the  contents  of  the  cells  of  the  older  leaves,  which,  situated 
at  the  base  of  the  stem,  towards  autumn  and  during  winter 
and  spring,  have  become  brown.  These  leaves  are  not 
wholly  dead.  .  .  .  After  a  time  the  old  cell-wall  dissolves 
away,  and  then  it  becomes  evident  that  the  contents  have 
assumed  the  form  of,  or  rather  have  become  a  Gleocapsa 
which  certainly  undergoes  segmentation  freely.'  He  has 
seen  considerable  masses  of  Gleocapsa  which  have  had  this 
mode  of  origin. 

Lastly,  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks  says': — *It  seems  to  me 
impossible  to  discriminate  between  the  cells  of  the  seg- 
menting gonidia  of  Algas,  of  Lichens,  and  of  Mosses ;  and 
hence  I  believe  we  shall  be  obliged  to  conclude  that  all  the 
cells  classed  as  Palmellaceae — Chiorococcus,  Gleocapsa ^  Soro- 
spora,  and  some  others,  with  their  so-called  species— are  but 
varieties  0/ one  mode  0/ simple  vegetative  cell-growth^  common  to 
most  of  the  Cryptogamia '.  What  is  the  value  of  the  differ- 
ences between  each  kind  it  seems  difficult  to  decide,  but  it 
may  possibly  be  less  than  hitherto  supposed.* 

The  transformations  of  the  gonidia  of  Mosses  are,  how- 
ever, far  outstripped  by  the  metamorphoses  of  the  antheridia 
of  Idverwoptfl,  if  we  are  to  rely  upon  the  observations 

'  Loc.  dt.,  p.  584. 

'  He  has  also  seen  growths  of  this  kind  originating  by  the  segmental 
multiplication  of  certain  spores  of  VfAvo*,    See  p.  Ixiocviii. 


iMMa 


k 


Ixxiv                   THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 
r 

of  Professor  Hartig  ^  The  spermatozoids  or  ph3rtozoa  from 
the  antherida  of  these  plants  first  assume  the  forms  of 
Ehrenberg's  genera,  Spirillum,  and  Vibrio,  They  do  not 
last  long,  since  after  forty-eight  hours  all  of  them  are  seen 
to  have  become  disarticulated.  The  whole  drop  of  water  in 
which  they  float  is  then  rendered  turbid  by  numberless 
actively-moving  globules,  similar  to  Monas  crepusculum, 
which,  according  to  Professor  Hartig,  are  always  de- 
veloped from  the  broken-up  fragments  of  the  Spirilla  and 
Vibriones.  But  after  forty -eight  hours  'groups  of  several 
hundred  may  frequently  be  seen  in  which  the  primary  active 
motion  has  ceased.  Shortly  afterwards,  a  sharply -defined 
hyaline  skin  is  formed  round  these  groups,  and  as  it  would 
seem,  by  the  amalgamation  or  conjunction  of  the  exterior 
molecules.  By  this  means  the  young  Amoeba  {Proleus)  is 
formed.  This  transformation  takes  place  pretty  regularly 
towards  the  end  of  the  third  day.  The  original  size  of  the 
Amoeba  is  jj^"  in  diameter.*  In  the  course  of  three  or  four 
days  it  increases  in  size,  and  its  movements  are  very  slow. 
It  possesses  a  vesicle  in  the  posterior  part  of  its  body,  and 
resembles  the  Amoeba  princeps  of  Ehrenberg.  The  further 
changes  are  thus  described  : — *  After  four  or  five  days  the 
Amoeba  assumes  a  spherical  shape,  and  becomes  motionless, 
the  vesicular  body  expanding  and  contracting  rapidly  as 
before,  in  a  manner  similar  to  what  takes  place  in  many 
VorlicellcE,  These  spherical  motionless  Amoeba  are  then, 
for  the  most  part,  united  by  a  mucilage  into  groups  of  from 
ten  to  twenty.  ...  In  about  a  fortnight  after  the  com- 
mencement of  the  experiment  a  green  point  appears  in  the 
interior  of  the  spherical  colourless  Amoeba;  this  j)oinl 
gradually  increases  in  size  till  it  fills  up  the  entire  hollow  of 
the  Amoeba^  and,  after  becoming  covered  with  a  cuticle,  it 

'  See  Translation  in  '  Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science/  1855,  p.  51. 


.-!■*. 


APPENDIX  D,  Ixxv 


escapes  in  the  form  of  an  elliptical  bright- green  cell,  innn^ '  ^"^ 
diameter,  resembling  a  Protococcus,  It  exhibits  a  round, 
transparent  cavity,  devoid  of  chlorophyll,  corresponding  in 
size  and  in  position  to  the  vesicular  body  of  the  Amaba^  and 
resembling,  at  its  colourless  apex,  the  motile  gonidia  of 
Cladophora,  A  few  days  later  the  elliptic  or  roundish  cell 
lengthens,  a  formation  of  transverse  septa  commences,  and 
the  unicellular  Alga  becomes  an  articulated  one.  ...  All 
these  transformations  of  Phytozoa  into  Spirilla,  Vibriones, 
Monads,  Amoeba,  unicellular  and  articulated  AlgcB  may  be 
observed,  not  only  in  the  detached  Phytozoa,  but  in  those 
which  remain  in  the  interior  of  the  sections  of  the  antheridia. 
In  those  antheridia,  of  which  the  phytozoa  are  not  fully  ripe, 
the  AmoebcB  are  seen  to  originate  in  the  middle  of  the 
internal  mass  of  phytozoary  cells :  some  of  them  make  their 
way  out  through  the  softened  mass  of  cellular  tissue ;  but 
others  remain  in  the  interior  of  the  antheridum  until  their 
development  into  an  articulated  Alga.  .  .  .  Contempora- 
neously with  AmabcE,  and  often  earlier,  there  may  be  seen, 
amidst  the  mass  of  Monads,  bodies  very  similar  in  form  and 
motion  to  the  genus  Bodo  (soct'alts),  and  which  increase  by 
transverse  division.  They  have  the  front  end  furnished  with 
a  long  whip-shaped  antenna  or  cilium  similar  to  that  of 
Euglena.  At  their  first  appearance,  their  motion,  their 
change  of  form,  and  their  whole  exterior  differ  so  little  from 
the  earliest  states  of  Amoeba,  that  at  this  period  they  cannot 
be  distinguished.  In  these  early  stages  they  both  resemble 
Chlamydomonas  destruens  of  Ehrenberg.  .  .  .  The  above 
forms  uniformly  make  their  appearance,  and  always  in  the 
succession  above  described.  It  is  true  that  other  forms  such 
as  Uvella,  and  even  LepiomilcB  and  Periconice,  are  sometimes 
met  with,  the  germs  of  which  may  have  been  imported  by  the 
atmosphere  during  the  observation;  but  these  organisms, 
which  always  appear  singly,  and  after  the  commencement  of 


kxvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

the  observation,  do  not  interfere  with  the  above  results, 
when  we  consider  the  immense  number  of  the  Ph3rtozoa 
and  their  uniform  and  contemporaneous  transformations.  If 
about  a  dozen  preparations  are  made,  if  they  are  carefully 
covered  with  a  bell-glass  after  each  observation,  and  if  care 
be  taken  not  to  extend  the  observations  for  too  long  a  time 
at  once,  at  least  half  of  the  preparations  will  be  free  from  all 
admixture  of  foreign  organisms.' 

Itzigsohn's  observations  on  the  developmental  changes 
undergone  by  certain  OscillataricE  have  also  made  known 
some  most  startling  transformations,  concerning  which  further 
particulars  are  given  under  another  section  (p.  Ixxxiii). 


Fungi.  We  have  hitherto  been  calling  attention  to  the 
variability  of  Algae  and  Lichens,  and  also  to  the  relations  exist- 
ing between  Lichens  and  Mosses  on  the  one  hand,  and 
certain  Algae  on  the  other.  Fungi  cannot,  however,  be  ex- 
cluded from  this  group  of  related  forms.  Different  opinions 
have  been  held  by  the  most  eminent  naturalists  as  to  whether 
Lichens  are  most  nearly  allied  to  Algae  or  to  Fungi — so  closely 
are  some  of  them  related  to  certain  forms  belonging  to  both 
of  these  families.  On  the  one  hand,  the  mode  of  fructification 
of  the  Lichens,  by  spore-bearing  asci,  approximates  them  to 
Fungi ;  whilst  on  the  other,  the  development  of  chorophyll — 
containing  gonidia  in  their  interior,  and  their  dependence  for 
nutriment  upon  the  medium  in  which  they  exist  rather  than 
upon  the  naere  matrix  on  which  they  are  situated,  are  thought 
to  affiliate  them  to  the  Algae.  The  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley 
believes  that  the  relationship  is  stronger  between  Lichens  and 
Fungi  than  between  Lichens  and  Algae.  He  says : — *  In 
Lichens,  the  very  simplest  display  perfect  fruit,  resembling 
altogether  that  of  Fungi,  insomuch  that,  of  many  species 
belonging  to  either  group,  it  is  ahnost  impossible,  in  the 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixxvii 


absence  of  crust,  to  say  whether  we  have  a  Lichen  or  a 
Fungus  before  us/ 

The  variability  of  Fungi  under  the  influence  of  different 
external  conditions  is  well  known,  though  the  full  extent  to 
which  this  occurs  is  only  gradually  being  ascertained  as  a  re- 
sult of  special  experimental  researches  on  their  development. 

The  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley,  speaking  of  the  Hymenomycetes 
proper,  says  ^ : — *  The  members,  however,  of  which  this  vast 
collection  of  plants  is  composed,  are  connected  so  intimately 
with  one  another,  and  the  whole  mass  is  so  natural,  that  it  is 
scarcely  possible  to  say  where  one  genus  ends  and  where  one 
begins.  Practice  alone,  and  tact,  can  do  this  in  the  more 
difficult  cases;  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  in  different 
states  the  same  species  is  often  positively  referable  to  three 
or  more  distinct  genera,  and  it  is  only  the  possession  of  in- 
termediate states  which  can  put  one  in  a  condition  to  say 
which  is  the  correct  nomenclature.'  With  regard  also  to  the 
different  forms  assumed  by  Fungi,  Dr.  Lindley  says  * : — *  If 
what  is  stated  above  respecting  the  true  nature  of  ergot  be 
correct,  the  Oidium  abortifaciens  must  be  a  second  form  of 
fruit,  in  accordance  with  many  facts  observed  lately  in  fungi. 
Fries  long  ago  announced  the  fact,  that  several  genera  sup- 
posed to  be  distinct  are  in  fact  merely  different  modes  of 
fructification,  as  Cyiispora  of  Sphceriay  Dacrymyces  urticce  of 
Peziza  fusarioidcsy  dCv. '     These  views  were,  however,  con- 

*  Introduction  to  '  Crypt.  Bot.'  p.  357. 

*  *  Vegetable  Kingdom/  (3rd  eait.)  1853.  p.  449. 

*  Speaking  on  thb  subject  previously.  Dr.  Lindley  said  (loc  dt. 
P*  J?f )  • — *  That  it  must  be  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty  to  form  any 
precise  opinion  concerning  Fungi,  without  long  experience,  will  be 
apparent  from  the  observations  of  Fries  upon  the  genns  Thelephora.* 
(Bienchus,  p.  158.)  He  asserts  that  out  of  mere  degenerations  or  im- 
perfect states  of  Th.  sulphurea,  the  following  genera,  all  of  which  he  has 
identified  by  means  of  unquestionable  evidence,  have  been  constructed, 
▼iz.,  Athelia  of  Persoon,  Omnium  of  Persoon,  Himantia  of  Persoon, 
Sporotrichum  of  Kunze,  Alytosporium  of  Link,  Xylostroma,  Racodium 
of  Persoon,  Ceratonema  of  Persoon,  and  some  others.  Th.  Fr.  Nees  Ton 


pSSM 


Ixxviii  THE  BEGIXNIXGS  OF  LIFE, 

sidered  problematical  till  the  matter  was  taken  up  by  Tulasne, 
who  has  collected  many  facts  connected  with  the  subject, 
while  Messrs.  Berkeley  and  Broome  have  in  more  than  one 
instance  detected  two  supposed  genera  growing  from  a 
common  stroma.  Sphctria  inqm'nans,  for  instance,  was  de- 
tected bearing  asci  internally,  and  naked  spores  (Stilbospora) 
on  the  outside  of  the  same  perithecium.  In  Tympanis  also, 
in  the  same  cup,  perfect  asci  were  found  by  the  side  of  naked 
didymous  spores.  The  mycelium  of  Sphagna  Desmazierii  was 
obser\'ed  to  have  distinct  spores  towards  the  tips  of  the  fila- 
ments, constituting  it  a  true  mould.  It  is  very  probable  that 
the  genera  of  fungi  will  be  greatly  reduced  by  the  continuance 
of  such  observations,'  and  that  double  fructification  \i-ill  be 
found  as  general  amongst  fungi  as  Tulasne  has  found  it  to 
be  amongst  lichens. 

Fungi  have  been  classified  into  genera  and  families  princi- 
pally on  the  ground  of  the  fructification  which  is  supposed  to 
be  peculiar  to  them  ;  fungologists  are  now,  however,  fast  dis- 
covering that  entirely  different  modes  of  fructification  may  be 
observed  in  the  same  species  of  fungi  at  different  times.  Mr. 
Berkeley  Mells  us  that  *  In  Erysiphe  there  are  no  less  than 
five  different  forms  of  fruit;  the  moniliform  threads  on  the 
mycelium  ;  the  asci  in  the  sporangia ;  the  larger  stylospores 
in  other  sporangia ;  the  smaller  stylospores  in  the  pycnidia ; 
and  the  separate  sporules  sometimes  formed  in  the  joints  of 


Esenbeck  also  assures  us  that  the  same  fungoid  matter  which  produces 
Sclerotium  mycetospora  in  the  winter,  develops  Agaricus  volvaceos  in 
the  summer.  It  would  thus  seem  that  the  opmions  of  those  who  have 
asserted  that  the  species  or  genus  of  a  Fungus  depends  not  upon  the 
seed  from  which  it  springs,  but  upon  the  matrix  by  whidi  it  is  nourished, 
are  at  least  specious ;  especially  if  we  take  the  above  fact  in  connectioo 
with  the  experiments  of  Dutrochet,  who  obtained  different  genera  of 
mouldiness  at  will  by  employing  different  infusions.  He  says  that 
certain  acid  fluids  constantly  yield  Monilias,  and  that  certain  alkaline 
mixtures  equally  produce  Botrytis. 
*  Introduction  to  *  Crypt  Bet.,*  p.  78. 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixxix 


the  necklaces.'  This  question  as  to  the  extreme  diversity 
of  the  forms  of  fructification,  which  may  be  assumed  by  one 
and  the  same  plant  under  the  influence  of  diverse  conditions, 
has  been  of  late  years  much  studied  by  the  brothers  Tulasne, 
who  have  embodied  their  most  important  observations  in 
a  magnificently  illustrated  quarto  work  entitled  *  Selecta 
Fungorum  Carpologia/ 

The  lower  Fungi  belonging  to  the  Myxogastric  family, 
which  include  forms  closely  allied  to  the  Saprolegnia,  are 
most  interesting  organisms,  more  than  one  half  of  whose 
life-history  is  passed  in  an  amoeboid  condition.  This  con- 
dition is  so  obvious,  that  De  Barry  has  argued  in  favour  of 
the  members  of  this  family  being  regarded  as  animals  rather 
than  as  fungi.  The  spore  cases  of  Ethalium  septicum  and 
other  Myxogasteres  are  formed  by  the  union  of  certain  large 
sarcode  or  protoplasmic  threads.  The  homogeneous  internal 
substance  of  this  spore  case  then  breaks  up  into  a  number 
of  distinct  nucleated  bodies,  each  of  which,  after  they  have 
been  liberated  in  water,  escapes  from  a  delicate  enclosing 
membrane,  *  in  the  form  of  a  cell,  clothed  only  by  a  very 
thin  primordial  utricle,  thus  resembling  the  reproductive 
cells  of  many  alga).  These  escaped  cells  undergo  changes 
of  form,  eventually  exhibiting  one  or  two  cilia,  and  two  or 
three  vacuoles,  of  which  one  at  least  pulsates.  They  have 
also  a  motion  of  progression  and  rotation,  as  in  the  case  of 
ordinary  zoospores  \'  They  afterwards  appear  to  develop 
and  to  attain  a  larger  size.  During  this  period  they  lose  their 
cilia  and  their  rotator)'  movements,  and  assume  the  creeping 
mode  of  progression  and  ever-varying  form  of  true  AmcebiB^, 
De  Barry  says : — *  If,  therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  the  develop- 
ment of  AmcebcB  from  the  products  of  the  germination  of  the 

'  Quoted  from  abstract  in  *  Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science,'  i860,  p.  ^9. 
^  In  this  condition  they  are  frequently  seen  enclosing  cells  of  algse  and 
other  articles  of  food,  like  ordinary  Amcebee. 


Ixxx  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


spores,  and  on  the  other,  the  production  of  the  sporangia 
from  the  sarcode  threads,  which  as  regards  structure  and 
movements  might  be  described  as  colossal  filamentary  AnuAa, 
be  established,  it  is  an  obvious  conclusion  that  the  latter  arise 
from  the  farther  development  of  these  AmahcB.  And  this  has 
been  confirmed  by  direct  observation  in  jEthalium  septicum, 
Zycogala,  and  Stemonitis  obtusaia,  .  .  .  Direct  development  of 
the  fructifying  threads  from  the  Amoebae  produced  by  the 
growth  of  the  Zoospores,  appears  to  me  beyond  a  doubt' 

According   to   De  Barry  ^  also,  one   of  the  white  rusts 
(Cystopus  Candidus)  found  on  the  cabbage,  shepherd's-purse, 
and   other  plants,    develops   'conidia*    abundantly,   which, 
when  placed  in  water,  yield  in  from  one  and  a  half  to  three 
hours  a  number  of  actively-moving,  biciliated  zoospores— pro- 
duced by  a  differentiation  of  the  contents  of  the  *  conidia.' 
After  about  two  hours  the  cilia  disappear,  whilst  the  zoo- 
spores come  to  a  state  of  rest  and  assume  a  spherical  fonn. 
They  have  never  been  seen  to  develop  into  fungi.     Similar 
active  zoospores  have  also  been  seen  by  De  Barry  to  be 
produced  from  the  *  acrospores'  of  the  potatoe  and  parsnip- 
moulds.     These  also  have  never  been  seen  to  assume  the 
form  of  fungi.     According  to  De  Barry,  the  production  of 
such  zoospores  from  the  acrospores  of  the  pjotatoe-mould 
is  favoured  by  the  absence  of  light. 

Referring  to  these  and  kindred  observations,  the  Rev,  M. 
J.  Berkeley  speaks  in  the  following  terms  * : — *  Few  points 
are  of  greater  significance  than  those  which  touch  upon  the 
intimate  connection  of  animal  and  vegetable  life.  Fresh 
matter  is  constandy  turning  up,  most  clearly  indicating  that 
there  are  organisms  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
distinguished  from  animals.    The  curious  observations  which 


*  *  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat  /  4  S^r.  t  xx.  (1865). 

•  *Journ.  of  Microsc.  Science,'  Oct.  1868,  p.  333. 


APPENDIX  D,  Ixxxi 


showed  that  the  protoplasm  of  the  spores  of  Botrytis  infestam 
(the  potatoe  mould)  is  at  times  differentiated,  and  ultimately 
resolved  into  active  flagelliferous  Zoospores,  quite  undistin- 
guishable  from  certain  infusoria,  have  met  their  parallel  in  a 
memoir  lately  published  by  MM.  Famintzin  and  Boranetzky\ 
respecting  a  similar  differentiation  in  the  gonidia  of  lichens 
belonging  to  the  genera  Physcia  and  Cladonia,  It  is,  however, 
only  certain  of  the  gonidia  which  are  so  circumstanced ;  the 
contents  of  others  simply  divide  into  motionless  globules/ 

Fhytosoa.  Concerning  the  organisms  belonging  to  this 
class  Dr.  Arlidge  writes*: — 'The  remarkable  phases  of 
existence  through  which  any  one  species  may  pass  upsets  all 
our  notions  based  on  presumed  constant  characters :  for,  as 
we  have  seen,  one  and  the  same  being  may  at  one  period  of 
its  existence  exhibit  in  a  preponderating  degree  the  vital 
phenomena  of  an  animal,  at  another  those  of  a  plant,  whence 
has  arisen  the  hypothesis  of  the  metamorphosis  of  plants 
into  animals,  and  vt'ce-versd!  In  another  place '  he  says : — 
'  In  point  of  fact  these  organisms  stand  on  the  confines  be- 
tween the  animal  and  the  vegetable  kingdoms, — some  genera 
distinctiy  belonging  to  the  latter,  others  doubtfully  to  the 
former,  whilst  many  pass  through  such  phases  of  existence 
that  at  one  time  they  assume  the  characters  of  animals,  at 
another  those  of  plants/ 

Cohn's  experiments  *  on  Stephanosphcera  are  very  valuable, 
because  they  show  the  direct  influence  of  external  conditions 
in  modifying  the  characters  of  such  organisms.  We  will 
quote  Dr.  Arlidge's  accoimt  of  these  experiments.  He 
says: — *0n  placing  specimens  of  this  organism,  some  in 


*  Translation  in  *  Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist.,*  Feb..  1869. 

*  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria,'  p.  1 28.  '  Loc.  dt.  p.  1 1 1. 

*  *  Nov.  Act  Acad.  Curios.,*  xxvi.  1857. 

VOL.  n.  / 


Ixxxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

transparent  glass  vessels,  others  in  semi-transparent  and 
green  ones,  others  in  porcelain,  and  others  again  in  perfectly 
opaque  cups,  the  modifications  in  size  and  figure  according 
to  the  intensity  of  light  they  received  were  altogether  in- 
credible. In  the  opaque  vessels  where  they  got  little  light, 
the  green  cells  remained  delicate,  small,  and  widely  dispersed, 
whilst  in  the  transparent  glasses,  under  sunlight,  they  became 
many  times  larger  and  crowded  together,  and  their  figure 
fusiform,  irregular,  and  produced  into  numerous  protoplasmic 
processes.  Indeed,  on  placing  two  portions  of  the  same  col- 
lection of  SUphanosphcera'^oht^  the  one  in  a  transparent, 
the  other  in  an  opaque  vessel,  the  swarming  individuals  in 
the  two  will  be  found  so  imlike  that  they  might  be  readily 
conceived  to  be  different  sj)ecies.' 

With  regard  to  the  range  of  variation  possible  in  any 
one  species,  the  researches  of  Cohn  *  on  the  development  of 
Protococcus  pluvialis  have  revealed  the  most  startling  facts. 
Summing  up  the  developmental  stages,  which  he  had  pre- 
viously given  in  detail,  he  says  (p.  559) : — '  Thus  we  see  that 
a  single  species,  owing  to  its  numerous  modes  of  propagation, 
can  pass  through  a  number  of  very  various  forms  of  develop- 
ment, which  have  been  either  erroneously  arranged  as  dis- 
tinct genera,  or  at  least  as  remaining  stationary  in  those 
genera,  although,  in  fact,,  only  transitionary  stages.  Thus 
the  still  Protococcus  cell  (Fig.  2)  corresponds  to  the  common 
Protococcus  coccoma  (Ktitz.).  When  the  border  becomes 
gelatinous  it  resembles  P,  pulcher  (Fig.  70) ;  and  the  small 
cells  P,  minor.  The  encysted  motile  Zoospore  is  the  genus 
Gyges  granulum  among  the  Infusoria,  resembling  also  on 
the  other  side  P,  iurgidus  (Ktitz.),  and  perhaps  P,  versaiUis 
(Braun).  The  Zoospores  divided  into  two  (Figs.  23,  30) 
must  be  regarded  as  a  form  of  Gygts  hipartitus^  or  of  P,  di- 

^  See  Translation  of  his  Memoir,  with  plates,  in  *  Botan.  and  Physiolog. 
Memoirs,*  Ray  Soc.,  1853. 


APPENDIX  D.  Lcxxiii 


midi'aius.  In  the  quadripartite  Zoospores,  with  the  secondary 
cells  arranged  in  one  plane,  we  have  a  Gonium  (Fig.  37). 
That  with  eight  segments  (Fig.  38)  corresponds  to  Pandor- 
ma  Morum,  and  that  with  sixteen  to  BotryocysHs  Volvox 
(Fig.  44).  When  the  Zoospore  is  divided  into  thirty-two 
segments,  it  is  a  Uvella  or  Syncrypta  (Fig.  40).  When 
this  form  enters  the  "  still "  stage,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a 
form  analogous  to  Microhalola  protogenita  ;  this  Algal  genus 
is  probably,  speaking  generally,  only  the  product  of  the 
Uvella  division  in  the  EugUruB  or  other  green  forms.  The 
naked  Zoospores  (Fig.  32),  finally,  would  represent  the  form 
of  a  Monad,  or  of  an  Astasia  ;  the  caudate  variety  ap- 
proaches that  of  a  Bodo.  ...  A  critical  and  comparative 
consideration  of  the  foregoing  facts  would  therefore  appear 
to  render  untenable  almost  all  the  principles  which  modem 
systematists  have  hitherto  adopted  as  the  basis  for  the 
construction  of  their  Natural  Kingdoms,  Families,  Genera, 
and  Species.' 

According  to  Itzigsohn  ^  Phytozoa  intervene  as  stages  in 
the  developmental  history  of  the  Oscillatorice,  The  trans- 
formations recorded  in  these  observations  are  of  a  most  re- 
markable character.  The  filaments  of  Oscillatoria  tenuis  are 
said  to  break  up  into  distinct  fragments  which  soon  assume 
a  spherical  shape.  These  bodies  (gonidia)  gradually  increase 
in  size,  become  motile,  and  present  in  all  respects  the  aspect 
of  individuals  belonging  to  the  genus  Chlamydomonas,  After 
these  have  attained  a  certain  size,  a  red  eye-point  becomes 
visible  in  them,  and  after  passing  through  a  great  many  inter- 
mediate forms  they  develop  into  perfect  Euglence.  These  in 
their  turn  become  encysted,  and  subsequently  by  a  minute 
self-division  of  their  contents  they  are  resolved  into  motile 
'  microgonidia'  which  are  soon  liberated,  and  then  swim  about 

^  *  Joum.  of  Microsc  Sdenoe,'  1854,  p.  189. 

/a 


Ixxxiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


freely.  But  Itzigsohn  says : — *  If  a  number  of  these  remain 
conjoined,  and  move  about  with  a  ro>*nng  kind  of  movement, 
their  locomotion  being  governed  by  a  common  spontaneity, 
they  represent  a  Volvox-^<^  colony,  which,  perhaps,  may 
even  have  been  described  as  Volvox  by  authors.  The  micro- 
gonidia  of  the  EuglencE^  like  those  of  all  the  Algae  hitherto 
examined  by  me,  are  the  motile  parent  cells  of  extraordinarily 
minute  spiral  filaments.  They  are  at  first  green,  gradually 
becoming  pellucid — exactly  like  the  "  Spermatospheres  "  of 
Spirogyra,  presenting  a  monadiform  aspect.  A  peculiar 
appearance  arises  when  many  microgonidia,  in  such  groups, 
remain  green  whilst  the  others  have  already  become  dear  as 
water ;  the  mass  then  presents,  in  fact,  the  aspect  of  being 
composed  of  two  kinds  of  animalcules.  Such  or  similar  con- 
ditions would  represent  several  species  of  the  supposed  genus 
Uvclla  (aiomusy  glaucoma^  Bodo,  &c.).  Each  ultimately  colour- 
less microgonidium,  then,  by  the  dissolution  of  its  minute 
gelatinous  envelope,  discharges  a  small  motile  spiral  filament 
.  .  .  These'  spiral  filaments  do  not  seem  to  be  destined  for 
the  purposes  of  impregnation  ;  for  they  gradually  increase  in 
length  and  thickness,  soon  exhibiting  numerous  spiral  turns.' 
They,  in  fact,  exchange  their  *S)^ir/7/a-like  for  a  Spirulina-ioTm- 
*  Finally,  when  their  motile  faculty  has  become  weakened, 
they  affix  themselves  by  one  extremity  to  any  larger  object 
near  (e.g.  Conferva  filaments,  &c.),  whilst  the  other  extremity 
continues  to  move  about  with  a  creeping  motion — the  pecu- 
liar Oscillatorian  movement,  in  performing  which  a  young 
filament  frequently  returns  to  the  spiral.  The  last  described 
condition  constitutes  the  Ltpiothrix  of  authors.  The  fila- 
ments now  gradually  become  thicker;  and  though  at  first 
of  the  lightest  emerald-green,  they  gradually  assume  a  deeper 
and  deeper  tint.  The  first  indications  of  articulation  are 
perceptible  in  them,  until  at  last  a  young  Oscillatona  is  again 
perfected.' 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixxxv 


According  to  Dr.  G.  Gros  \  Euglena  and  AstasicB  are  protean 
creatures  of  variable  size  which  undergo  the  most  remarkable 
metamorphoses.  They  are  capable  of  giving  birth  to  very 
varied  forms,  such  as  one  would  scarcely  be  able  to  refer  to 
their  real  origin,  if  the  various  transitional  stages  had 
escaped  observation.  These  organisms  are  almost  univer- 
sally distributed,  and  are  capable  of  giving  rise  both  to 
animals  and  plants,  under  the  influence  of  varying  sets  of 
external  conditions.  Of  specimens  obtained  from  the  same 
source,  though  placed  under  different  conditions,  one  half 
may  develop  into  animals,  and  another  half  into  plants. 
Dr.  Gros  says  : — '  When  millions  of  Euglenae  taken  on  the 
same  day  from  the  same  locality,  metamorphose  themselves 
after  a  certain  fashion  in  one  vessel,  and  after  a  different 
fashion  in  an  adjacent  vessel,  one  cannot  but  place  faith  in 
the  results,  even  though  one  has  not  actually  witnessed  [all 
the  steps  of]  these  unaccustomed,  though  obvious  changes — 
in  which  there  is  no  room  for  error,  since  the  transformations 
take  place  generally  within  cysts  into  the  midst  of  which 
one  could  not  suspect  the  introduction  of  foreign  organisms. 
.  .  .  Why  should  certain  specimens  of  EuglencB  follow  one 
mode  of  change  rather  than  another.^  Why,  at  the  firs: 
transformation,  do  they  sometimes  attain  a  degree  of  de- 
velopment to  which  others  arrive  only  after  successive  trans- 
formations ?  I  know  nothing  concerning  this  ;  but  that  such 
phenomena  do  occur,  I  am  certain.  . . .  Euglenw  may,  on  the 
one  hand,  chance  to  produce  Confervae  and  Mosses ;  on  the 
other,  they  may  give  origin  to  Rotifers,  Nematoids,  Tardi- 
grades,  &c.,  according  to  their  size,  and  to  the  circumstances 
in  which  they  are  placed — that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  quan- 
tity and  the  quality  of  the  substances  which  they  assimilate, 
...  In  the  course  of  their  metamorphoses,  they  sow,  as  side 

'  'Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat/  3  S^r.  t.  xvii.  185a,  p.  193. 


-1 


■auo: 


Ixxxvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

products,  Desmidiae,  DiatomaceiBy  Zygnemiae,  and  nearly  aD 
the  vesicular  Infusoria,  formerly  named  polygastric  ...  As  a 
general  rule,  the  smaller  EugUruB  are  unable  to  produce  such 
organisms  as  are  derived  from  the  larger  ones ;  but  the 
larger  species,  on  the  contrary,  can  give  birth  to  almost  all 
the  derivatives  of  the  smaller  forms.  ...  As  to  the  large 
species,  it  may  be  said,  with  mathematical  certainty,  that  they 
are  the  common  matrix  of  almost  all  the  known  forms  of 
Infusoria,  that  they  may  act  as  the  germs  of  certain  plants, 
that  they  produce,  as  side  products,  Closteriae,  Diatomacex, 
&c. ;  that  they  can  succeed  in  engendering  almost  all  the 
Rotifers  or  Systolides,  that  they  can  also  give  birth  to  Nema- 
toids,  Tardigrades,  &c.  .  . .  We  are  not  here  speaking  about 
theories,  more  or  less  logical,  but  only  concerning  facts 
which  every  skilled  observer  may  ascertain  for  himself,  if  he 
has  the  good  fortime  to  seize  the  Eugknce  at  the  time  when 
they  begin  to  encyst  themselves,  or  to  undergo  transforma- 
tions at  the  surface  of  the  water,  where  their  juxtaposed 
albuminous  cysts  form  a  very  picturesque  alveolar  network 
which  may  present  different  stages  of  metamorphosis, 
more  or  less  advanced.'  Dr.  Gros  also  believes  that  light 
exercises  a  most  important  influence  over  the  transforma- 
tions q{  EugUnce,  Where  it  is  absent  their  developmental 
modifications  rarely  go  on  to  the  production  of  plants ;  the 
offspring  under  such  conditions  are  rather  animals  of  one 
form  or  another.  He  has  also  come  to  the  conclusion,  after 
numerous  observations  frequently  repeated,  that  different 
organisms  spring  from  the  same  matrix  according  to  the 
mere  quantity  of  matter  entering  into  their  composition — 
though  of  course  these  variations  may  be  also  associated 
with  alterations  in  quality.  He  says: — *To  give  one  ex- 
ample of  this,  out  of  many  others,  the  substance  of  certain 
EuglmcB  becomes  converted  into  a  kind  of  ^%%i  which  has  a 
Striking  resembVaxic^  lo  the  e^gs  of  Nematoids.    A  certain 


4'i 


APPENDIX  D.  Ixxxvii 


number  of  these  eggs,  observed  for  several  days  in  succes- 
sion (their  identity  was  therefore  incontestable),  became 
transformed  bodily,  some  into  Rotifers,  others  into  Nema- 
toids.  Other  eggs  presented  an  individualization  of  their 
substance,  that  is  to  say,  that  which,  in  the  preceding  case, 
served  to  produce  a  superior  organism,  became  converted 
into  little  vesicles  which  moved  about  actively  within  the  wall 
of  the  ovum,  and  these  little  vesicles  became  as  many  Mona- 
dtfUEj  which  escaped  from  their  chamber  of  incubation.'  It  is 
imi>ossible  now  to  follow  Dr.  Gros  into  all  the  details  given 
in  his  longer  memoir  ^,  which  is  illustrated  by  fifteen  plates. 

In  the  life-history  of  Volvox  globaior^  according  to 
Dr.  Braxton  Hicks',  a  portion  of  its  contents,  such  as 
would  generally  be  devoted  to  the  production  of  ciliated 
gemmules,  may  occasionally  be  converted  into  a  large 
and  distinct  Amaba.  Some  of  the  masses,  named  Zoo- 
spores, at  an  advanced  age,  instead  of  undergoing  a- 
process  of  self-division  and  breaking  up  into  forty  or  fifty 
small  ciliated  bodies,  considerably  increase  in  size,  and 
g^radually  assume  an  irregular  outline.  These  altered 
bodies  present  one  or  two  nuclear-like  particles  in  their 
interior,  and,  like  AmabcB^  they  are  said  to  exhibit  the  most 
distinct  movements,  accompanied  by  changes  of  form. 
In  a  subsequent  communication^  Dr.  Hicks  writes: — 'In 
the  autumn  of  i860  I  had  an  excellent  opportunity  of 
verifying  my  notes,  and  of  tracing  the  change  apparently  a 
step  further.  Out  of  a  large  number  of  Volvox  collected  in 
the  south  of  England,  I  scarcely  found  one  in  which  the 
state  alluded  to  did  not  exist  In  many,  twenty  of  these 
amoeboid  bodies  could  be  counted  moving  about  immediately 
beneath    the    transparent   sphere.      That    they   could  not 

*  •  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Natural,  de  Moscou/  1847, 

*  *Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science/  i86o,  p.  loi. 

*  Ibid.  i86a,  p.  96. 


mi 


Ixxxviii  r//£  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

have  derived  their  origin  from  any  similar  or  dissimilar 
existences  outside  the  Volvox,  nor  could  have  themsdvcs 
entered  within  the  sphere  by  solution,  became  very  evident 
from  observing  the  different  stages  hy  which  the  ordinary 
zoospore  gradually  arrived  to  the  condition  new  under  Us- 
cussion*  After  the  altered  amoeboid  zoospore  had  begun 
to  travel,  *it  was  always  noticed  that  for  every  one  such 
moving  body  in  the  Volvox  there  was  the  empty  space  of  a 
missing  zoospore/  A  similar  amoeboid  change  may  also 
overtake  such  zoosi>ores  as  have  gone  on  to  the  first  stages 
of  gemmule  growth. 

In  other  cases  a  very  interesting  deviation  from  the 
ordinary  gemmule  growth  occurs,  which  has  also  been 
described  by  Dr.  Braxton  Hicks.  As  a  rule  the  zoospore 
divides  so  as  to  lead  to  the  formation  of  about  thirty- six 
cells  within  the  common  cell-wall.  *  These,'  Dr.  Hicks  says, 
*in  the  ordinary  way  would  pass  on  to  further  sub- division, 
producing  almost  from  this  point  ciliated  cells,  which,  again 
re-dividing,  would  produce  the  ultimate  zoospores  held  to- 
gether by  the  hollow,  spherical  membrane — or,  in  other 
terms,  the  ordinary  Volvox.  Instead,  then,  of  the  sub-division 
forming  the  ciliated  cells,  which  tend  towards  the  exterior  of 
the  mass,  motionless  spores  or  gonidia  are  produced,  which 
do  not  tend  outwardly,  but  which  retain  their  position, 
except  that  they  become  more  separated  from  each  other  by 
the  increase  of  the  intervening  mucus.  Watching  these 
throughout  the  period  above  mentioned,  I  found  that  the  seg- 
mentation continued  in  various  modes  till  the  masses  became 
one-eighlh  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  preserving  more  or  less  of 
a  globular  form,  but  indefinite  so  far  as  any  investing  mem- 
brane was  concerned.  ...  At  first  the  division  went  upon 
the  binary  plan  * ;    after  which  some  of  them  divided  into 

Dr.  Hicks  has  represented  these  various  changes  on  PI.  DC.  of 
Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science/  1861. 


APPENDIX  D,  Ixxxix 


three  or  four  segments — the  division  being  cruciate — while 
others  extended  themselves  in  a  linear  series,  with  their 
short  diameters  in  a  line.  .  .  .  Some  of  the  divisions,  instead 
of  sub-dividing,  increased  in  size,  producing  a  green  cell 

much  larger  than  the  rest The  mucus  which  formed. 

around  these  cells  was  at  first  more  or  less  definite  in  boun- 
dary, but  after  segmentation  had  advanced  to  some  degree 
its  oudine  was  irregular,  and  at  last  quite  indefinite.  The 
outer  edge  never  possessed  more  solidity  than  the  mucous 
envelope  of  Cladonia  gleocapsaJ  Dr.  Hicks  has  seen  this 
condition  commence  within  the  parent  Volvox,  He  points 
out  its  resemblance  to  that  which  occurs  occasionally  during 
the  growth  of  Pandorina  and  StephanosphcBra^  and  he 
adds : — '  There  is  also  a  striking  analogy  between  these  and 
the  segmenting  gonidia  of  lichens,  especially  of  Cladonia! 

Other  additional  modes  of  reproduction  in  Volvox  are 
described  in  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria.' 

Mr,  H.  J.  Carter  believes  that  EugltncB  and  Astasice  are 
closely  related  to  the  members  of  the  genus  AmoBba.  He 
has  seen  the  actual  transition  of  Astasia  into  Amcebce^  and 
says': — 'Young  Astasice  are  developed  within  the  cells  of 
Spirogyra  to  a  great  extent ;  and  although  they  at  first  have 
almost  as  much  polymorphism  as  an  Amoeba^  still  they  retain 
their  cilium,  and  after  a  while  assume  the  form  and  movements 
peculiar  to  Astasia.  I  might  here  mention  that  on  one  occasion 
I  saw  a  large  Amoeba  with  a  long  cilium,  at  one  time  assum- 
ing the  form  of  Astasia,  and  at  another  that  of  Amoeba,  which 
thus  gives  us  the  link  between  these  two  Infusoria*.     The 

*  •  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.,'  1856,  vol.  xvii.  p.  115. 

■  I  have  observed  this  modification  very  frequently.  Whenever  the 
Astasia  \s  hemmed  in  by  opposing  particles  or  fragments,  it  insinuates 
itself  between  them  and  moves  generally  after  the  fashion  of  an  Amoeba  ; 
but,  as  soon  as  it  has  freed  itself  from  the  obstacles,  it  resumes  its 
more  active  mode  of  locomotion. 


xc  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


cilium,  however,  had  not  the  power  of  the  filament  of 
Astasia,  though  it  occasionally  became  terminal/  But  Mr. 
Carter  has  also  seen  ordinary  Amoeba  actually  developed 
from  EugleruB,  He  says : — '  I  was  led  to  notice  this  de- 
velopment by  an  apparent  metamorphosis  of  the  cell  con- 
tents of  some  fixed  and  capsuled  Et^lena  into  granuliferous 
AmoebiB  of  a  pinkish  colour,  within  the  old  cell  of  Euglena 
itself;  and  the  presence  of  several  such  Amoeba  creeping 
about  the  watch-glass,  while  many  of  the  cells  of  the  Euglena 
{piridis  ?)  were  empty,  or  '  only  contained  a  little  effete 
matter,  left  no  doubt  in  my  mind  as  to  the  origin  of  both 
colour  and  infusorium.  It  was  also  observed  in  some  in- 
stances, where  the  contents  of  the  Euglence  had  passed  into 
an  amoebous  mass,  that  the  latter  underwent  a  kind  of 
segmentation,  so  that  several  (perhaps  eight)  small  Amceba 
were  developed  instead  of  one  large  one/ 

Speaking  of  Amaebce,  Nicolet  says*: — *The  substance 
which  forms  the  body  of  the  Amoeb®  may  be  regarded 
as  the  fundamental  matter,  the  constituent  substance,  of 
that  of  all  the  Infusoria.  In  short,  the  greater  number  of 
these  animalcules  reduce  themselves  into  Amoebse,  and  live 
under  this  form  when  the  conditions  of  their  mediimi,  and 
especially  the  temperature,  are  not  favourable  to  another 
mode  of  development;  and  if,  as  a  result  of  a  constant 
uniformity  in  the  most  essential  conditions  of  their  existence, 
an  infusorial  animalcule  happens  to  reproduce  itself  by 
germs,  it  is  always  in  the  state  of  a  Monad  (primitive  form 
of  the  Amoeba)  that  it  recommences  its  life  circle.'  Then, 
again,  with  reference  to  the  establishment  of  distinct  species 
of  Amcebce,  such  as  naturalists  have  hitherto  described,  he 
says : — *  The  different  forms  which  the  Amoeba  assumes  in 
order  to  effect  its  movements  have  been  used  as  specific 


I  « 


Arcana  Naturse,'  p.  24. 


APPENDIX  D.  xci 


characters  by  the  major  part  of  the  microscopists  who  have 
observed  them.  Nevertheless,  these  forms,  as  well  as  the 
particular  size,  which  is  often  dependent  upon  accidental 
circumstances,  have  no  specific  value.  We  shall  see  farther 
on,  that  if  a  division  into  species  can  be  established,  it  could 
only  have  for  its  basis  the  mode  of  development,  though 
even  this  is  found  to  be  subjected  to  so  many  variationsi 
attributable  to  the  modifications  of  the  medium  in  which  the 
animals  are  found,  that  it  would  be  more  natural  to  admit 
only  a  single  species,  and  to  consider  as  simple  varieties 
the  slight  differences  which  result  from  their  mode  of  de- 
velopment.' 

According  to  Lieberkiihn^  a  relationship  exists  between 
AmcebcB  and  Gregartnce  which  was  previously  unsuspected, 
though  similar  in  kind  to  the  relationship  described  by 
Carter  between  such  organisms  and  Astast'cB.  He  says*  he 
has  seen  the  conversion  of  pseudo-Navicellce,  that  have  been 
imdoubtedly  derived  from  Gregartnce,  into  Amcebce,  and  he 
states  that  he  has  also  met  with  every  transition  between 
such  Amabce  and  perfect  GregarincB.  The  transition  com- 
mences by  the  case  or  cyst-like  wall  of  each  pseudo-Navicella 
ruptiuing  and  giving  exit  to  the  soft  contained  matter,  which 
at  first  much  resembles  a  minute  Amoeba^  but  gradually 
assumes,  by  progressive  growth  and  the  formation  of  an 
investing  membrane  around  it,  the  characters  of  a  Gregartna. 

There  has  been  much  dispute  as  to  whether  the  Gregari- 
nida  are  to  be  considered  as  independent  organisms,  or 
merely  as  embryonic  phases  of  other  beings.  Kolliker  and 
Leydig*  have  advocated* the  notion  that  they  are  metamor- 
phic  stages  of  certain  nematoid  worms.  But  even  then  there 
is  a  further  dispute  as  to  whether  the  Gregarina  becomes 

*  *  M^m.  de  TAcad.  Roy.  dc  Bclgique/  1854,  t.  xxvi. 

*  In  *Journ.  of  Microsc.  Science/  vol.  i.  p.  ao8,  some  of  Leydig*s 
aigoments  are  given. 


xcii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


changed  into  a  Filan'a^  or  whether  /YAzna-like  wonns  arc 
converted  into  Gregarina.  Leydig  at  first  held  the  former 
view,  but  now,  in  common  with  Henle  and  Bruch,  he  inclines 
to  the  latter,  since  othenvise  it  would  seem  impossible  to 
account  for  the  undoubted  production  of  pseudo-Navicclla 
and  PsorospermicB  within  GregarnuB,  The  development  of 
the  Nematoid  from  the  Gregarina  would  seem  to  be  much 
more  possible  than  the  reverse  process.  And  if  it  chanced  to 
be  a  kind  of  metamorphosis  which  only  occasionally  happened 
(Dr.  Gros),  then  its  occurrence  would  be  quite  compatible 
with  the  production  of  pseudo-NavicelkB  in  other  cases. 

But  whether  the  developmental  cycle  of  the  GregarincB  is, 
in  all  cases,  such  as  has  been  indicated  by  Lieberklihn,  or 
whether  they  are  occasionally  related  to  the  Nematoids,  it  seems 
almost  certain  that  the  peculiar  bodies  known  as  Psorospermia 
are  more  or  less  analogous  to  \hQ pseudo-Navicella  progeny  of 
the  GreganmdcB.  Professor  Huxley  says': — 'The  Psoro- 
spermia are  pyriform  sacs,  frequently  provided  with  sm 
elongated,  filiform,  motionless  appendage,  and  containing 
two  or  four  clear  rounded  bodies,  attached  side  by  side, 
within  their  smaller  ends,  and  besides  these,  as  Lieberkiihn 
has  lately  pointed  out,  a  rounded  mass  of  plasma.  Under 
fitting  conditions  the  Psorospermia  bm-sts,  and  the  plasmatic 
mass  emerges  as  an  amoebiform  creature.  The  sacs  in 
which  the  Psorospermia  are  developed,  on  the  other  hand, 
can  be  traced  back  to  amoebiform  masses  ftiU  of  granules ; 
and  it  seems  a  legitimate  conclusion  that  the  Psorospermia 
are  the  pseudo-NavicelicB  of  an  Amoebiform  Gregarina,  or 
Gregarinoid  Amoeba.*  * 


The  naked  AmoebcB  are,  however,  closely  related  to 
cellinaD,   which   are   simply   AmcebcB  inhabiting    a    single- 
chambered  shell,  and  these  again  are  connected  by  almost 

'  •  Med.  Times/  1856,  xxxii.  p.  508. 


APPENDIX  D.  xciii 


insensible  gradations  with  the  Foraminifera,  in  which  the 
shells  have  many  chambers.  Speaking  of  these  creatures, 
Dr.  Carpenter  says*: — *The  range  of  variation  is  so  great 
among  Foraminifera^  as  to  include  not  merely  the  differential 
characters  which  systematists,  proceeding  upon  the  ordinary 
methods,  have  accounted  specific,  but  also  those  upon  which 
the  greater  part  of  the  genera  of  this  group  have  been  founded, 
and  even  in  some  instances  those  of  its  orders,  .  .  .  The 
ordinary  notion  of  species^  as  assemblages  of  individuals 
marked  out  from  each  other  by  definite  characters  that  have 
been  genetically  transmitted  from  original  prototypes  simi- 
larly distinguished,  is  quite  inapplicable  to  this  group ;  since 
even  if  the  limits  of  such  assemblages  were  extended  so  as 
to  include  what  would  elsewhere  be  accounted  genera,  they 
would  still  be  found  so  intimately  connected  by  grada- 
tional  links,  that  definite  lines  of  demarcation  could  not  be 
drawn  between  them.  .  .  .  The  only  natural  classification 
of  the  vast  aggregate  of  diversified  forms  which  this  group 
contains,  will  be  one  which  ranges  them  according  to  their 
direction  and  degree  of  divergence  from  a  small  number  of 
principal  family  types.' 

Between  AmctbcB  and  the  Actinophryna,  again,  there  are 
the  closest  affinities.  On  this  subject  Nicolet  says : — *  In  its 
different  modes  of  development  the  Amceba  often  assumes 
the  radiated  form  of  the  Actinophrys,  and  this  so  exactly, 
that  the  greatest  attention  is  needed  to  distinguish  the  one 
from  the  other;  also  all  the  authors  who  have  concerned 
themselves  with  the  classification  of  these  Microzoa,  and 
with  the  determination  of  their  generic  forms,  have  always 
confounded  the  radiated  Amoeba  with  the  Actinophrys  pro- 
perly  so   called.     It    will   suffice   to   mention    Actinophrys 

.   ^  Introduction  to  *  Study  of  Foraminifera'  (Ray  Society),  i86a,  p.  z. 


xciv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

discus^  digiiaki,  viridis,  and  even  the  AcHnopkrys  sol  of  some 
authors,  all  of  which  are  veritable  Amoebse,  to  make  it 
evident  that  the  rayed  aspect  does  not  suffice  to  characterize 
this  genus,  and  that  we  must  seek  for  its  determination 
characters  which  are  more  precise.' 

In  addition  to  this  resemblance  existing  between  Amaha 
in  their  encysted  condition,  and  Actinophrys,  it  seems  to  be 
quite  certain  that  many  Acinetce  so  closely  resemble  members 
of  the  family  Actinophryna  that  they  are  often  mistaken  for 
one  another.  All  the  contradictory  statements  made  by  some 
of  the  best  observers  as  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  an 
investing  membrane  in  Actinophrys  seem  only  explicable  on 
some  such  supposition  *;  though  it  seems  extremely  probable 
that  these  several  forms  are  separated  by  no  distinct  line, 
and  that  transitions  may  take  place  from  one  to  the  other 
type.  According  to  Stein,  indeed,  there  is  an  actual  and 
close  relationship  between  Acinetce  and  AciinophryncB^  since 
both  are  looked  upon  as  occasional  developmental  phases 
of  VorttcellincB,  Cienkowski,  moreover,  says*  that  the 
organism  described  as  Actinophrys  by  Ehrenberg  is  really  a 
non-pedunculate  Acineta,  and  he  also  remarks  that,  although 
numerous  points  of  relation  exist  between  certain  Acineta- 
forms  and  Podophrya  fixa,  he  is  unable  to  determine  whether 
they  should  be  regarded  as  identical,  or  as  extreme  links  in 
the  morphological  cycle  of  one  and  the  same  species '. 

^  See  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria/  4th  ed.  p.  244. 

•  *  Joum.  of  Microsc.  Science/  1857,  p.  loi. 

'  Cienkowski  witnessed  the  process  of  fission  taking  place  in  P^iiih 
fbrya.  It  was  completed  in  about  half  an  hour,  and  during  this  time 
he  states  that  he  distinctly  saw  a  temporary  formation  of  dlia — these 
making  their  appearance  and  then  disappearing  after  an  existence 
of  twenty  minutes.  He  says : — *  During  the  process  of  division  both 
segments  were  furnished  with  tentacles;  but  when  the  oscillations 
of  the  cylindrical  portion  commenced,  very  fine  and  short  dlia  mi^t 
be  seen,  though  widi  difficulty,  vibrating  on  the  free  end, — the  tentades 
at  the  same  time  being  retracted  and  remaining  visible  only  on  the 
posterior  segmenl.    1  ilo'w  loMovred  uninterruptMly  the  movements  of 


-*■ 


APPENDIX  D.  XCV 


Ciliated  Inftisoria. — Stein  declares  ^  that  within  the  body 
of  Actinophrys  soly  and  also  within  that  of  Podophrya  fixa,  a 
ciliated  germ  is  often  produced,  which  subsequently  develops 
into  a  Voriicella.  Cienkowski  believes  that  the  Actinophryna 
of  Stein  were  really  Actnettna^  though  he  also  declares  he 
has  seen  the  development  of  ciliated  embryos  within  the 
latter,  which  however  give  rise,  not  to  VorticellcB,  but  to 
organisms  similat  to  those  from  which  they  have  arisen. 
Stein  would  make  Acinetina  a  mere  developmental  phase  in 
the  life-history  of  Vorticellina,  whilst  the  observations  of  Cien- 
kowski would  tend  to  establish  them  as  a  distinct  and 
separate  family.  Mr.  Carter's  *  observations,  again,  are  partly 
in  accord  with  those  of  Stein,  since  he  says  he  has  frequendy 
seen  the  passage  of  Vorticella  into  Acineia;  though  they  are 
otherwise  in  agreement  with  those  of  Cienkowski,  since  he 
says  he  has  never  seen  the  young  of  Acineta  assume  any 
other  form  than  that  of  Acineta. 

Stein  believes  that  encysted  VorticellcB,  after  undergoing 
certain  metamorphoses  within  their  cyst-wall,  may  be  con- 
verted, according  to  the  influence  of  external  conditions, 
either  into  an  Actinophrys  or  into  a  Podophrya,  The  creatures 
so  produced  are  then  thought  to  give  birth  to  a  ciliated 
embryo,  which  is  at  first  lodged  within  a  definite  cavity  in 
the  substance  of  their  body.  The  embryo  is  pear-shaped, 
with  a  central  constriction,  and  it  is  provided  with  one  or 

the  liberated  segments.  .  .  .  Cilia  could  not  be  perceived  over  the 
whole  surface.  .  .  .  After  waiting  patiently  for  twenty  minutes,  I  saw 
the  motion  cease;  and,  at  the  same  time,  short  tentacles  made  their 
appearance,  which  were  protruded  more  and  more;  and  in  a  few 
minutes  afterwards  the  segment  regained  the  spherical  form:  thus, 
aiter  moving  about  freely  for  a  time,  it  was  again  transformed  into 
a  Podophrya*  This  was  viritnessed,  Cienkowski  tells  us,  by  other 
observers  as  well  as  himself,  and  the  phenomena  are  in  some  respects 
comparable  with  what  takes  place  in  the  formation  of  the  ciliated  spore 
of  Vaueberia.    (^See  vol.  i.  p.  1 75.) 

'  *  Die  Infusionsthiere  auf  ihre  Entwickelungsgeschichte,'  Leipzig,  1854. 

*  *  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.,'  1857,  roLxix.  p.  a6o. 


,.^at. 


xcvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


more  rows  of  cilia,  by  means  of  which,  before  effecting  its 
exit,  it  moves  about  in  the  cavity  in  which  it  is  contained. 
Its  body  is  made  up  of  a  finely-granulated  sarcode,  contain- 
ing a  band-like  nucleus  in  its  posterior  portion,  and  closely 
adjacent  to  this  there  is  a  distinct  contracting  vesicle.  No 
mouth  is  visible,  but  on  the  whole  it  presents  a  form  which 
would  seem  easily  convertible  into  a  Vorticella;  and  this 
Stein  believes  to  be  its  next  developmental  stage. 

A  more  or  less  similar  life-history  is,  he  believes,  the  rule 
with  very  many  of  the  Ciliated  Infusoria.  Cienkowski, 
Kolliker  and  others,  however,  believe  that  Stein  has  con- 
founded certain  Acineta  with  members  of  the  family  Actino- 
phryna,  and  although  they  fully  admit  that  Actneta  do  de- 
velop ciliated  embryos  in  their  interior  similar  to  those 
described  by  Stein,  Cienkowski  and  some  others  believe 
that  such  ciliated  embryos  are  reconverted  into  Aaniia-\\\t 
organisms,  and  that  they  do  not  give  rise  to  Vorticella  as 
alleged  by  Stein.  Cienkowski's  observations  *  on  one  occa- 
sion were  undoubtedly  sufficiently  positive  to  entitle  him  to 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  *  from  the  Acirula'tvabryo^  after 
a  prolonged  motile  stage,  another  Acintta  is  formed,'  but,  as 
he  himself  admits,  his  '  observations  do  not,  of  course,  show 
that  it  is  impossible  that  the  motile  -4r/>w/a-embryo  should 
be  transformed  into  a  Vorticella,  and  a  Vorticella'-cy^i  into 
an  Acineia.^ 

Cienkowski's  observations  would  only  really  militate 
against  those  of  Stein,  if  we  were  to  assume,  what  is  highly 
improbable,  viz.,  that  the  developmental  metamorphoses 
amongst  this  group  of  animals  are  in  all  cases  the  same. 
Much  evidence  exists,  pointing  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  is  the  greatest  variability  on  different  occasions,  and, 
consequently  under  the  influence  of  different  sets  of  con- 


1  t 


3ouxii.  q{  MicEOsc.  Science,'  1&57,  p.  96. 


APPENDIX  D.  xcv 


ditions,  in  the  precise  nature  of  the  developmental  changes 
or  transformations  observable  amongst  these  organisms.  In 
fact,  Stein  himself  has  described  a  second  mode  of  origin  of 
embryos  within  AcineicB  of  Vorticella  origin.  Such  AcineUB 
did  not  possess  the  ordinary  tentacles,  though  they  presented 
one  or  two  short,  closed,  tubular  processes  projecting 
anteriorly.  Within,  there  was  no  longer  the  usual  granular 
contents  with  a  nucleus  and  contractile  vesicle :  there  were 
instead,  six  oval,  cell-like  bodies,  about  -^'  in  length,  which 
seemed  to  have  been  developed  out  of  the  original  con- 
tents of  the  Acineta,  These  bodies  were  sharply  defined, 
and  contained  a  coarse  granular  substance  with  a  contractile 
vesicle.  In  one  of  them  a  ciliated  furrow  was  observed, 
owing  to  the  presence  of  which  it  more  closely  resembled 
the  usual  solitary  embryo  of  the  Acineta,  Such  a  multiple 
development  seems  to  be  only  an  occasional  modification 
of  the  reproductive  process. 

A  glance  at  the  other  modes  of  reproduction  which  have 
been  described  amongst  the  Ciliated  Infusoria  will  astonish 
the  reader  by  their  diversity,  and  will  almost  force  him  to 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  definite  method 
of  reproduction  for  any  one  species.  There  seem  to  be, 
rather,  diflferent  developmental  possibilities  by  any  one  of 
which  the  reproduction  of  individuals  may  be  brought  about, 
though  the  particular  mode  which  is  likely  to  occur  on  any 
given  occasion  appears  at  present  to  be  wholly  uncertain. 
But  the  actual  process  gone  through — although  oftentimes 
apparently  the  work  of  chance — would  doubtless  be  capable 
of  predication,  if  we  knew  what  were  the  molecular  forces  at 
work  in  organisms  of  different  kinds,  of  different  sizes,  and 
of  different  ages,  and  as  well  the  degree  and  nature  of  the 
modifying  influence  exercised  by  the  ever-varying  sets  of 
conditions  to  which  these  different  organisms  are  subjected, 
under  all  their  widely  differing  states  of  molecular  activity. 

VOL.  n.  g 


xcviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

I  will,  therefore,  classify,  as  well  as  possible,  the  \'ahoas 
methods  of  reproduction  that  have  been  recorded  as  occur- 
ring amongst  one  or  other  of  the  CUiaUd  Infusoria,  But  it 
should  be  understood  that  although  particular  modes  of 
reproduction  may  be  very  frequendy  met  with  in  individuals 
having  a  given  form,  on  the  other  hand  the  greatest  lati- 
tude is  possible.  Different  representatives  of  any  supposed 
species  may,  occasionally,  under  the  influence  of  different 
external  or  unusual  internal  conditions,  produce  organisms 
either  similar  or  dissimilar  to  themselves  by  five  or  six  dis- 
tinct methods. 

Modes  of  Beproduotion  amongst  Ciliated  Inftasoria. 

I.  Reproduction  by  means  of  Fission. 

A.  Animal  in  Xh&/ree  state. 

Fission  may  be  either  longitudinal,  transverse,  or 
oblique  in  its  direction ;  though  individuals  of  the 
same  species  may  occasionally  divide  in  different 
directions. 

a.  Animals  in  their  adult  or  mature  condition — 

this  being  most  frequendy  the  case. 

b.  It  may  occur  even  in  young  embryos  pro- 

duced from  fission  of  pre-existing  in- 
dividuals in  an  encysted  state ;  e.  g.,  in 
young  thus  produced,  of  Sfylonichia  pus- 
tulata,  which  closely  resemble  Trichoda 
lynceus  (Cienkowski),  The  creatures  so 
produced  occasionally  ^encyst  themselves 
before  undergoing  any  further  develop- 
ment. 

B.  Animal  in  the  encysted  state. 

a.  Production  of  embryos  which  are  more  or 
less  similar  to  the  parent 


APPENDIX  D,  xcix 


One  of  the  best  examples  of  this  mode  of 
reproduction  is   met  with  in  Colpada  cu- 
culluSy  which  seems  to  divide  only  when  in 
the  encysted  state.    As  a  general  rule,  the 
process  of  fission  only  occurs  once,  but 
it  may  be  repeated,  so  that  four,  eight, 
and  even  sixteen  segments  are  produced. 
There  is  also  the  further  peculiarity,  that 
such  segments  generally  encyst  themselves 
while  still  within  the  parent  cyst. 
Stein  also  speaks  of  the  development  of  em- 
bryos in  certain  ActnetcB,  after  an  excep- 
tional   method :    the    substance    of   the 
encysted  animal  appeared  to   give   rise, 
by  a  process  of  division,  to  six  or  more 
embryos^ . 
b.  Resolution  of  the/«/b«-segments  into  *  brood 
cells,'  containing  a  multitude  of  monadi- 
form  ciliated  germs  *. 
This  process  has  been  observed  by  Stein  in 
Voriicella   microstoma   and    V,  mbuli/era, 
and  by  Cienkowski  in  Nassula  virtdis. 
The  differences  between  the  cases  ranged  under  a  and 
B  respectively  are  rendered  much  less   absolute   by 
the   fact   that    Voriicellina  undergo   the   process   of 
fission  when  they  are  only  one  step  advanced  towards 
encystment — that  is  to  say,  after  they  have  withdrawn 
their  ciliary  apparatus   and   contracted  their  body 
into  a  more  or  less  rounded  or  oval  state,  though 
previously  to  the  production  of  a  cyst. 

*  Pritchard*s  *  Inftisoria/  4th  ed.,  p.  364.  This  is  the  process  referred 
to  at  p.  xcvii. 

•  See  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria/  pp.  357,  358.  There  are  good  reasons 
for  believing  that  some  of  these  tubulating  *  brood-cells,'  so  produced, 
derdop  into  fungi  belonging  to  the  genus  Pbytbium. 


g* 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


II.  Reproduction  by  means  of  Gtommatian,  is  a  process 
which  also  slides  by  the  most  insensible  gradations  into 
the  process  of  fission.  All  intermediate  grades  may  be 
traced  between  the  production  of  the  most  obvious  bad- 
like projection,  and  the  process  by  which  a  single  indi- 
vidual is  divided  into  two  equal  segments.  In  ordinary 
fission  the  '  bud'  is  equal  in  size  to  the  parent  organism 
(which  is  diminished  to  half  its  bulk),  and  each  seg- 
ment obtains  half  of  the  original  ^  nucleus.*  In  ordinary 
gemmation,  however,  the  new  individual  is  produced 
rather  by  a  growth  from,  than  by  a  division  of,  the 
parent  organism,  and  an  entirely  new  *■  nucleus '  is 
evolved  within  the  bud.  The  process  of  external  gem- 
mation, amongst  the  Ciliated  Infusoria,  is  much  rarer 
than  that  of  fission. 
The  buds  or  gemmae  behave  very  differently  according  to 
the  species  under  observation,  and  also,  to  a  minor  ex- 
tent, even  among  individuals  belonging  to  the  same  so- 
called  species.  Some  develop  a  posterior  circlet  of 
cilia  and  swim  about  for  a  time ;  they  may  then 
(a)  either  develop  a  stalk  or  sheath  and  resume  all  the 
characteristics  of  the  parent-stock,  or  {b),  becoming 
quiescent,  they  may  encyst  themselves  preparatory  to 
further  development.  The  young  gemmae  of  Spirochona 
differ  from  those  of  the  Vorticellina  generally,  by  the 
non-development  of  the  posterior  ciliary  wreath ;  whilst  a 
development  of  cilia  (lasting  only  for  a  time)  takes  place 
anteriorly,  before  the  gemma  assumes  the  parent  form. 
In  other  buds  of  this  species,  however,  according  to  Stein, 
a  process  of  encystment  at  first  takes  place,  during  which 
the  gemmae  are  converted  into  very  peculiar  Acinetiform 
beings,  usually  known  as  DendrocomeUs  paradoxus. 
The  process  of  budding  observed  by  Stein  in  Lagenophrys 
preseivl^  TCkan^  ^cidiarities,  and,  after  alluding  to  his 


.:\ 


APPENDIX  D.  ci 


description,  Dr.  Arlidge  says* : — '  If  this  account  be 
correct,  the  gemmation  of  Lagmophrys  is  actually  a 
compound  process  of  budding  and  fission,  whilst  the 
resultant  beings  differ  widely  from  those  of  other 
Vorticellina  in  all  details,  and  are  so  very  aberrant  in 
form  from  the  parent,  that  they  require  to  undergo  a 
metamorphosis  before  they  gain  it.' 
IIL  Reproduction  by  formation  of  Embryos  out  of  the 
substance  of  the  *  Nucleus.' 
A.  Such  development  occurring  during  and  after  conju- 
gaturn  of  two  individuals  only  (Balbiani). 

a.  Embryos  may  be  developed,  not  in  the  whole 

nucleus,  but  in  portions  of  this  body  which 
have  been  separated  by  previous  fission. 
These  generally  occur  in  small  numbers; 
and  in  Paramecium  bursaria^  only  one  of 
them  undergoes  development  at  the  same 
time*.  Such  an  embryo  makes  its  way 
out  of  the  parent  as  a  tentaculated  Acituta, 
devoid  of  cilia. 

b.  Or  the  whole  of  the  nucleus  may  break  up, 

preparatory  to  the  development  of  embryos 
throughout  its  substance. 
In  this  case,  the  embryos  may  be  either  few 
or  many.  According  to  Balbiani,  in  the 
geneT2iS(yloniMa  and  Urostyla  the  embryos 
are  always  four  in  number,  the  nucleus 
being  double  in  each  genus.  Each  nu- 
cleus divides,  and  each  half  of  it  is  meta- 
morphosed into  a  single  embryo.  In  the 
elongated  nucleus  of  Spirosiomum  amhi- 
guum,    however,     about    forty    or    fifty 

*  Pritchard's  •  Infusoria,*  4th  ed.,  p.  353. 
s  '  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.,'  1858,  voL  i.  p.  435. 


cii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE, 

embryos  become   developed   daring  the 

period  of  conjugation  ^. 
B.  Such  development  occurring  in  single  individuals, 
independently  of  conjugation. 
a,  Animals/r^^  and  active. 

I.  Development  of  embryos  out  of  portions 
of  nucleus,  separated  by  fission  or  gem- 
mation, has  been  seen  in  Nassula  and 
in  Paramecium,  Four  or  five  embryos 
are  often  produced  at  the  same  time  by 
this  method,  though  they  are  discharged 
singly.  Cohn  says  that,  instead  of  the 
ordinary  Acinetiform  embryos,  he  has 
frequently  witnessed  the  escape  of 
others,  having  a  globular  figure,  which, 
in  addition  to  the  tentacles,  are  pro- 
vided with  cilia  over  their  whole  surface. 
He  has,  on  one  or  two  occasions,  seen  a 
fission  of  the  parent  animal  take  place 
during  the  very  time  that  embryos  of 
this  kind  were  escaping. 

In  Nassula  elegans  Cohn  has  also  seen 
embryos  develoj)ed  in  a  cavity  within 
the  body,  which  was  adjacent  to 
the  nucleus,  and  communicated  by 
a  narrow  canal  with  the  exterior*. 
After  their  escape  the  embryos  were 
motionless  and  without  cilia,  though 
they  presented  a  few  knobbed  tenta- 
cular processes.  A  similar  mode  of 
development  of  embryos  has  been  ob- 
served  in  the  products  of  a  recent  fission 

'  '  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.,'  1858,  vol.  ii.  p.  439. 

'  *  ZevtsdmSl,'  ^^^l^  V*  ^^V  ^^d  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria,'  p.  356. 


APPENDIX  D.  ciii 


— when  the  parents  were  still  only  half 
their  natural  size. 
2.  The  whole  substance  of  the  nucleus 
may  undergo  successive  segmentations, 
so  as  to  be  entirely  converted  into 
embryos.  The  number  of  embryos  pro- 
duced is,  however,  very  variable,  not 
only  in  different  species,  but,  accord- 
ing to  Lachmann^  even  in  the  same 
species.  The  size  of  the  embryos  is 
always  inversely  proportionate  to  their 
number. 
b.  Animals  encysted  and  stationary. 

Single,  or  several  successive  embryos,  may 
be   produced  within  a  cavity  occupying 
the  situation  of  the  nucleus. 
This  mode  of  origin  of  embryos  has  been  de- 
scribed by  Stein  as  occurring  in  Chilodon 
cucullus.     The    embryo   differs   much   in 
appearance  from  its  parent,  and  is  precisely 
similar    to    Cyclidium    glaucoma.      Indi- 
viduals of  all  sizes  undergo  the  process  of 
encystment,  and  embryos  of  proportionate 
size  may  be  produced  in  any  of  them. 
After  having  given  birth  to  one   or  more 
embryos,   some   Chilodans,  according    to 
Stein,  pass  from  their  quiescent  into  an 
active  state. 
The  production  of  AcincicB,  as  one  of  the 
stages  in  the  developmental  history  of  the 
Voriicellina,  also  takes  place  by  the  pro- 
cess of  which  we  are  now  speaking.    This 

*  *  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist.,*  1857,  vol.  xix.  p.  333. 


dv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


evolutioii,  however,  occurs  in  these  crea- 
tures,  as  previoosly  explained,  at  a  more 
advanced   stage   of  their   developmental 
cycle. 
IV.  Reproduction  by  the  formalian  of  Genus,  in  the  sab- 
stance  of  the  organism,  which  have  no  genetic  relation- 
ship to  the  '  Nucleus.' 

a.  According  to  Perty,  ovules  are  produced  in 

large  numbers  in  certain  Infusoria.  He  sajs 
he  has  seen  a  specimen  of  AmphiUphu 
moniliger  distended  with  from  loo  to  150 
minute  germs.  Paramecium  versuium  has 
also  been  seen  by  the  same  observer  to 
contain  a  number  of  greenish  ovules.  (Mr. 
Carter,  and  a  few  others,  adopt  these  ob- 
servations of  Perty,  though  the  larger 
number  of  naturalists  seem  inclined  to 
throw  doubt  upon  them,  or  to  deny  that 
such  bodies  are  ovules.) 

b,  Eckhard  recorded  ^,  with  great  precision,  the 

mode  of  evolution  and  discharge  of  three 
ovules,  in  Stentor  cceruleus,  which  made 
their  appearance  as  minute  granular  glo- 
bules. He  described  the  mode  of  forma- 
tion of  the  mouth,  the  evolution  of 
cilia,  and  the  appearance  of  contractile 
vesicles.  These  observations  have  been 
confirmed  by  Oscar  Schmidt.  In  Skniar 
polymorphus,  Eckhard  has  also  seen 
similar  globules  within  the  body,  though 
he  has  not  watched  their  development  and 
exit. 

>  *  Ann.  of  Nat  Hist/  1846,  voL  xw. 


*k 


APPENDIX  D,  cv 


c.  One  or  more  germs  appear  to  form  occa- 
sionally in  animals  which  are  about  to 
conclude  their  existence.  Their  forma- 
tion seems  to  be  the  last  vital  act  on  the 
part  of  the  parent  organisms,  which  gra- 
dually perish  as  the  development  of  their 
oflfspring  progresses. 

1.  According  to  Nicolet*,  an  ovum  forms, 

under  these  circumstances,  by  the  ag- 
gregation of  previously  scattered  gran- 
ules, and  the  subsequent  development 
of  a  membrane  around  such  a  granule 
heap. 

2.  Pouchet  also  speaks "  of  the  presence  of 

ova,  under  such  circumstances,  in  spe- 
cimens of  the  genera  Kolpoda  and  Ke- 
rofua^  though  he  does  not  seem  to  have 
traced  their  mode  of  formation. 

3.  Lastly,  J.  Haime  states  that  he  has  seen  a 

body  of  this  kind  ap[>ear  shortly  before 
the  death  of  Paramecium  aureliay  which 
very  soon  broke  up  into  about  sixty 
minute  ovules  or  zoospores.     These  in- 
creased in  size,  burst  the  sac  in  which 
they  were  contained,   and    afterwards 
escaped  from  the  disintegrating  body  of 
the  parent  through  a  rupture  in  its  in- 
tegument. 
Thus  almost  every  conceivable  mode   of  reproduction 
seems  to  take  place  by  turn  in  these  creatures,  and  the 
developmental  modifications  which  they  have  been  seen  to 
undergo  are  so  many  and  so  various  as  to  make  it  almost 


1  4 


Arcana  Naturae/  p.  50.  '  '  H^t^ogdnie,'  p.  40a 


cvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

impossible  to  say  what  amount  of  metamorphosis  may  take 
place.  Analogical  evidence  appears  to  be  of  no  avail  when 
applied  to  such  utterly  variable  creatures  as  these.  We  are 
almost  at  the  mercy  of  individual  observers,  and  it  seems 
almost  impossible  for  any  of  their  statements  to  be  checked 
by  saying  that  such  or  such  a  developmental  cycle  is  an  im- 
possible one.  From  what  we  already  know  on  the  best 
evidence,  we  obtain  a  basis  of  so  shifting  a  natiure,  that  he 
would  be  a  bold  man  who  would  dare  to  say,  on  a  priori 
grounds,  that  any  particular,  alleged,  developmental  meta- 
morphosis could  not  take  place.  Almost  everything  must 
turn  upon  our  faith  in  the  accuracy  of  the  observer. 

Many  other  very  startling  modifications,  to  which  I  have 
not  alluded,  have  been  described  amongst  the  Infusoria,  in 
which,  more  especially  after  a  process  of  encystment,  one 
form  has  given  place  to  another,  belonging  even  to  what  has 
been  reputed  a  totally  different  genus  *. 

Such  statements  are,  moreover,  to  a  great  extent,  counte- 
nanced by  the  fact  that  in  organic  solutions  of  a  given  kind 
there  is  almost  always  a  definite  order  of  succession  observ- 
able amongst  the  Ciliated  Infusoria  which  it  contains.  This 
is  a  matter  of  notoriety,  and  most  of  the  other  explanations 
which  have  been  oflered  are  certainly  by  no  means  con- 
vincing. To  give  one  example  of  such  succession,  we 
may  quote  Dr.  Arlidge's  ^  account  of  Cohn's  observations. 
He  says : — *  In  a  vessel  containing  decomposing  Spirogyra^ 
at  first  appeared  countless  specimens  oi  Paramecium  aurelia; 
these  were  replaced  by  the  Proteus  of  Baker,  either  the 
Lachrymaria  proteus  or  the  Trachelocera  olor  (Ehr.) ;  these 
in  their  turn  were  followed  by  Chilodon  cucullus,  and  after 

*  Sec  the  observations  of  Pineau  in  •  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.,'  1848,  3  S^r. 
p.  99  ;  of  J.  Haime,  in  3  Ser.  vol.  xix. ;  and  of  Gros  in  *  Bullet,  de  la 
§oc.  de  Natural,  dc  Moscou.' 

*  Pritchard's  *  Infusoria/  4th  ed.  p.  372 ;  or  Cohn  in  Kolliker  und 
Siebold's  *  ZeiXschiiii;  i8fi>i,p.  258, 


APPENDIX  D,  evil 


a  few  days  by  a  Kolpoda  ;  afterwards  large  Euplotes  with 
prominent  green  globules,  probably  a  new  s[>ecies;  and 
lastly,  colourless  specimens  of  Euplotes  charon^  exhibited 
themselves, — all  the  species  following  each  other  in  suc- 
cession in  the  course  of  three  weeks,  a  new  form  appearing 
on  the  decline  of  a  preceding,  attaining  its  maximum  in 
number,  and  then  decreasing  in  its  turn  to  make  room  for 
the  next  in  the  series/ 

But  can  we  even  say  that  the  developmental  cycle  is  con- 
fined to  Amoeboid  and  Infusorial  forms  ?  Very  much  un- 
certainty undoubtedly  exists  on  this  subject,  and  the  state- 
ments of  Agassiz,  Gros,  and  others,  however  incredible  they 
may  appear,  should,  we  think,  be  kept  in  view  as  possibilities, 
rather  than  summarily  rejected  on  account  of  any  h  priori 
considerations.  Agassiz  maintains  that  the  Ciliated  Infusoria 
have  no  title  to  exist  as  a  distinct  class.  '  Most  of  them,'  he 
says  *,  *  far  from  being  perfect  animals,  are  only  germs  in  an 
early  stage  of  development  The  family  of  the  Voriicella 
exhibits  so  close  a  relation  with  Bryozoa,  and  especially  with 
the  genus  Pedicellina,  that  I  have  no  doubt,  that  wherever 
Bryozoa  should  be  placed,  Voriicella  should  follow  and 
be  ranked  in  the  same  division  with  them.  The  last 
group  of  7«/«j(?r/'a— BUrsaria,  Paramecium,  and  the  like — 
are^  as  I  have  satisfied  myself  by  direct  investigation^  germs  of 
fresh-water  worms,  some  of  which  I  have  seen  hatched  from 
eggs  of  Planaria  laid  under  my  eyes  *.' 

But  even  if  such  observations  are  perfectly  correct  and  true, 
the  evolution  of  a  Ciliated  Infusorium,  out  of  the  t^g  of  a 
Planaria,  would  by  no  means  necessarily  carry  with  it  the 
counter  proposition,  that  such  Ciliated  Infusoria  were  them- 

»  *  Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist,'  1850,  vol.  vi.  p.  156. 

*  Mr.  Girard  confirms  these  statements,  and  maintains  that  Kolpoda 
eucuUus  is  one  of  the  embryonic  stages  of  fresh-water  Planarite,^^ 
*  Proceed,  of  American  Associat.,'  1848,  p.  40a. 


CVUl 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


selves  capable,  after  one  or  several  developmental  stages,  of 
being  converted  into  Planarice.  There  might  possibly  be  a 
reversion  of  the  comparatively  undifferentiated  matter  of  the 
ovum,  after  it  had  undergone  certam  imusual  changes,  into 
an  organism  of  a  lower  type ;  but  though  such  an  outcome 
from  the  ^gg  of  a  Planaria  might  be,  as  it  were,  an  occa- 
sional and  accidental  occurrence,  it  could  not  on  this  account 
alone  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  regular  stages  in  the  life- 
history  of  PlanaricB. 


APPENDIX    E. 

On  the  *  Germ-theory '  in  relation  to  Epidemic  and  *  specific ' 

Contagious  Diseases^. 

In  medicine,  even  more  than  in  other  less  complex 
sciences,  it  is  well  that  imperfectly  established  general  doc- 
trines shoxild  be,  from  time  to  time,  tested  by  the  light  of 
more  recently  acquired  facts.  Practice  necessarily  follows 
along  the  paths  indicated  by  theory,  and  therefore  it  is  in 
many  cases  all-important,  even  from  a  practical  point  of 
view,  that  true  theories  should  be  arrived  at  The  wider  the 
applications  of  the  theory,  the  greater  is  the  necessity  that 
it  should  be  sound,  and  based  upon  the  best  knowledge  of 
the  time. 

I  have  determined  to  lay  before  you  some  considerations 
touching  the  nature  and  origin  of  epidemic  and  so-called 
*  specific'  contagious  diseases ;  and  you  will  be  impressed  with 
the  vast  importance  of  the  subject  when  you  learn  that  nearly 
one-fourth  of  the  total  number  of  deaths  occurring  in  Great 
Britain  are  due  to  these  affections.  As  the  Registrar-General 
has  aptly  pointed  out :  *  Diseases  of  this  class  distinguish  one 
country  from  another — one  year  from  another;  they  have 
formed  epochs  in  chronology ;  and,  as  Niebuhr  has  shown, 
have  influenced  not  only  the  fall  of  cities,  such  as  Athens 

'  Being  the  Inaugural  Address  in  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  of  University 
College,  which  was  delivered  on  October  ^nd,  1871.  The  first  and  last 
paragraphs  have  been  omitted,  whHst  explanatory  notes  hive  been  added. 


ex  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

and  Florence,  but  of  empires ;  they  decimate  annies,  disable 
fleets ;  they  take  the  lives  of  criminals  that  justice  has  not 
condemned;  they  redouble  the  dangers  of  crowded  hospi- 
tals ;  they  infest  the  habitations  of  the  poor,  and  strike  the 
artizan  in  his  strength  down  from  comfort  into  helpless 
poverty ;  they  carry  away  the  infant  from  the  mother's  breast, 
and  the  old  man  at  the  end  of  life ;  but  their  direst  eruptions 
are  excessively  fatal  to  men  in  their  prime  and  vigour  of  age. 
They  are  emphatically  the  morhi  popular ts^ 

No  labour  is  too  great,  then,  no  pains  should  be  spared, 
in  order  to  arrive  at  just  conceptions  concerning  the  origin, 
nature,  and  mode  of  distribution  of  these  scourges  of  huma- 
nity. Deeply  impressed  with  the  difficulties  surrounding 
these  great  problems,  and  with  the  enormous  importance  of 
strengthening  the  foundations  of  our  knowledge  in  respect 
to  them,  I  was  induced  rather  more  than  two  years  ago  to 
take  up  the  investigation  of  some  questions  which  lay  at  the 
root  of  the  whole  subject.  It  seemed  to  me  that  no  real 
advance  could  take  place  in  our  power  of  controlling  these 
diseases  until  certain  other  great  problems  had  been  settled. 
What  is  the  real  cause  of  fermentation  and  putrefaction? 
Can  the  organisms  which  are  associated  with  many  of  these 
processes  arise  de  novo?  These  were  questions  the  solution 
of  which  seemed  to  be  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
science  of  medicine,  as  well  as  to  the  cause  of  science  gene- 
rally. Thus  incited,  I  resolved  to  study  such  much-disputed 
subjects  for  myself,  with  the  view  of  arriving  at  some  inde- 
pendent opinion. 

As  the  results  of  this  work  have  tended  to  strengthen 
certain  views  concerning  the  epidemic  and  s[>ecific  diseases, 
and  to  make  plain  some  points  which  were  previously 
involved  in  obscurity,  I  think  I  cannot  do  better  than 
attempt  a  somewhat  hasty  review  of  facts,  which  seem  to 
point  conclusively  to  the  necessity  of  entertaming  opinions, 


.    •  J 


APPENDIX  E,  cxi 


with  respect  to  some  of  these  diseases,  which  have  been 
hitherto  almost  wholly  ignored. 

In  the  consideration  of  the  nature  and  causes  of  disease, 
we  have  always  to  keep  in  mind  two  principal  sets  of  factors. 
Each  person  exists  with  structural  characters  and  functional 
properties  which,  though  in  the  main  similar  to  those  of  his 
fellow-men,  have  nevertheless  individual  peculiarities  more 
or  less  marked.  These  may  be  inherent  or  acquired,  habi- 
tual or  occasional.  Amongst  these  individual  peculiarities 
are  ranged  what  time-honoured  custom  has  called  the  'pre- 
disposing causes '  of  disease.  On  the  other  hand,  man,  with 
his  individual  peculiarities,  lives  in  a  world  of  change,  exposed 
to  the  incidence  of  constantly  varying  external  conditions, 
which,  acting  upon  individual  peculiarities,  or  upon  the  aver- 
age human  nature,  become,  in  proportion  to  their  deviation 
from  the  usual  condition  of  things,  so  many  '  exciting  causes ' 
of  disease. 

These  two  sets  of  factors  must  never  be  lost  sight  of.  In 
the  majority  of  cases,  both  come  into  operation  in  the  pro- 
duction of  the  resultant  morbid  condition,  although  in  others 
one  or  other  of  them  alone  may  seem  to  be  so  potent  as  of 
itself  to  determine  the  morbid  manifestation.  The  person 
who  inherits  a  tendency  to  destructive  lung  disease  may  de- 
velop this  morbid  condition  under  the  influence  of  exciting 
causes  which  would  scarcely  affect  another  who  inherits  no 
similar  weakness  (predisposing  cause).  On  the  other  hand, 
just  as  contact  with  boiling  water,  owing  to  the  exceeding 
potency  of  the  '  exciting  cause,'  may  determine  a  lesion  of 
the  skin  in  any  individual  (quite  independently  of  the  exist- 
ence of  a  *  predisposition'),  so  may  a  person  who  is  bom  with  a 
weak  and  unstable  nervous  system  become  insane  or  epileptic, 
independendy  of  the  influence  of  any  obvious  exciting  causes. 

All  diseases  are,  in  fact,  due  to  altered  structure  or  mole- 
cular composition,  whether  visible  or  invisible,  ascertainable 


cxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


or  non-ascertainable.  They  are  no  longer  regarded  as  enti- 
ties. They  are  due  to  changes  of  state  in  some  portion  of 
the  body,  whereby  the  vital  movement  in  the  part  is  diverted 
from  a  normal  into  an  abnormal  mode  of  activity. 

The  complicated  structure  of  the  human  body,  and  the 
allocation  of  specific  functions  to  specific  parts,  necessitates, 
and  has  occasioned,  a  functional  correlation  and  interde- 
pendence. Any  disturbance  of  this  normal  balance  of  func- 
tions of  necessity  entails  a  definite  sequence  of  pathological 
states  and  actions.  A  morbid  change  in  an  important  organ, 
if  it  interferes  with  the  function  of  the  part,  rarely  exists 
alone.  It  sets  up  other  associated  efi*ects,  whereby  the  dis- 
turbed equilibrium  of  functions  is  more  or  less  replaced  by 
a  new  adjustment. 

The  effects  are  often  well  marked,  though  very  variable, 
when  the  disease  is  one  in  which  any  notable  alteration  in 
the  composition  of  the  blood  occurs.  Supplying  the  mate- 
rials of  growth  for  all  parts  of  the  body,  any  changes  in  the 
composition  of  the  blood  are  found,  now  to  affect  one  organ 
and  now  another  most  profoundly.  Before  entering,  how- 
ever, upon  the  consideration  of  those  diseases  in  which 
changes  in  the  nature  and  quality  of  the  blood  form  the 
most  important  condition  of  the  disease,  it  will  be  useful  to 
dwell  for  a  time  upon  some  of  the  more  local  pathological 
changes  that  occur  in  the  more  solid  tissues  of  the  body. 
The  t\vo  sets  of  phenomena  are  closely  related  to  one  an- 
other. Morbid  states  which  are  at  first  prnrely  local  may, 
after  a  time,  produce  general  diseases;  and  a  general  or 
constitutional  disease  frequently  entails  Umited  lesions  in 
special  parts.  A  wound  or  a  local  inflammatory  process 
may  lead  to  thrombosis,  gangrene,  and  blood-poisoning; 
just  as,  following  a  reverse  order,  various  febrile  conditions 
may  cause  local  lesions — now  in  one  organ  and  now  in  an- 
other. 


.  -« 


APPENDIX  E,  CXIU 


There  are  so-called  '  specific  growths,'  just  as  there  are 
'  specific  diseases '  of  a  more  general  or  constitutional  charac- 
ter. The  life-history  of  such  growths  as  cancer  and  tubercle 
is  a  subject  of  great  intrinsic  interest;  though  the  import- 
ance of  their  study  is  much  enhanced  by  the  fact,  which  I 
shall  strive  to  make  plain,  that  their  modes  of  origin  and 
distribution  within  the  body  are  capable  of  throwing  much 
light  upon  the  origin  and  distribution  of  epidemic  and  spe- 
cific infectious  diseases  amongst  the  community. 

The  term  '  specific,'  aa  applied  to  diseases,  is  confusing, 
and  apt  to  carry  with  it  a  crowd  of  erroneous  notions.  Doc- 
trines of  'specificity'  have,  however,  been  fashionable  in 
medicine,  though  they  are  now  growing  more  and  more  into 
disrepute.  Thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  amidst  all  the  jargon 
concerning  homoplastic  and  heteroplastic,  euplastic  and  caco- 
plastic  growths,  would  it  not  have  been  deemed  rank  heresy 
to  profess  a  disbelief  in  the  prevalent  notions  concerning  the 
unalterable  and  *  s[>ecific '  nature  of  cancer  and  of  tubercle  ? 
Here  were  products  altogether  peculiar,  and  not  derivable, 
as  it  was  thought,  from  the  normal  tissues  of  the  body — 
having  laws  of  growth  and  distribution  peculiar  to  themselves^ 
and  an  origin  which  was  shrouded  in  the  mystery  of  a  remote 
past.  In  view  of  this  doctrine  as  to  the  specific  and  alien 
nature  of  the  products,  how  natural  was  it  that  an  undue 
stress  should  have  been  laid  upon  the  fact  that  a  tendency  to 
the  occurrence  of  such  modes  of  growth  may  be  hereditarily 
transmitted ;  how  easily  explicable  is  the  facile  and  popular 
resort  to  the  notion  that,  where  multiple  cancerous  growths 
exist,  the  primary  new  formation  has  given  rise  to  a  seedling 
progeny  by  means  of  actual  cancer  *  germs/  Slowly  but 
steadily  these  views  have  been  undergoing  a  progressive 
modification.  The  anatomical  elements  of  cancer  and  tu- 
bercle are  now  known  to  have  no  special  and  peculiar  charac-i 
teristics,  and  they  are  believed  to  be  as  easily  derivable  from 

VOL.  It.  h  ^^ 


J*^  --:^ 


cxiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

pre-existing  tissues  as  are  other  non-specific  morbid  growths. 
A  mere  local  change  in  the  mode  and  intensity  of  pre-exist- 
ing tissue-changes  suffices  to  engender  them.  In  the  case  of 
tubercle,  this  has  been  conclusively  proved  by  such  experi- 
ments as  those  of  Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson  and  Dr.  Wilson 
Fox.  The  latter  says':  *M.  ViUemin's  position,  that  tu- 
bercle is  a  specific  disease,  producible  by  tubercle  alone, 
cannot,  I  think,  be  held  to  be  true ;  nor  can  the  method  of 
inoculation  be  used  as  a  test  of  the  tubercular  character  of 
any  pathological  product ;  for  the  four  guinea-pigs  in  whom 
the  vaccine  hmph  was  inoculated,  and  those  inoculated 
with  putrid  muscle,  and  even  one  beneath  whose  skin  I  sim- 
ply inserted  a  piece  of  cotton-thread,  and  also  one  of  the 
four  in  which,  following  Dr.  Sanderson's  example,  I  inserted 
a  seton,  presented  as  intense  and  typical  specimens  of  the 
disease  as  those  on  whom  inoculation  had  been  practised 
with  the  most  typical  grey  granulations  from  the  lungs  or  the 
meningeal  vessels.'  What  has  now  been  (even  experimen- 
tally) established  with  regard  to  tubercle,  seems  also  to  hold 
good  for  such  *  malignant '  gro^^ths  as  recurrent-fibroid,  epi- 
thelial, and  cancerous  tumours  or  infiltrations.  Statistics  to 
which  Virchow  has  drawn  prominent  attention  seem  most 
clearly  to  indicate  the  potency  of  *  exciting  causes '  in  giving 
birth  to  these  growths.  Are  they  not  found  primarily,  with 
by  far  the  greatest  frequency,  in  situations  which  are  exposed 
to  the  action  of  irritative  agencies,  either  external  or  inter- 
nal, normal  or  abnormal?  An  amount  of  irritation  which 
in  some  persons  may  lead  to  chronic  inflammation  or  a 
hyperplasic  overgrowth,  will  in  others  suffice  to  produce  one 
of  these  so-called  '  malignant'  growths,  even  without  the  aid 
of  any  ascertained  predisposition.  The  history  of  many 
cases  of  '  labial  cancer,'  and  of  that  form  to  which  chimney- 
sweeps are  liable,  explains  almost  as  cleariy  the  origin  of 

^  « On  the  Aiti&d&l  Production  of  Tubercle,'  .1868,  p.  33. 


APPENDIX  £.  CXV 


cancer,  as  the  results  of  experiments  on  the  rodent  animals 
explain  one  of  the  modes  of  origin  of  tubercle. 

Is  there  anything  specific  in  the  mode  of  growth  of  these 
products,  and  in  their  subsequent  distribution  within  the  body 
of  the  affected  person  ?  Just  as  an  erysipelatous  inflamma- 
tion spreads  by  gradually  inducing  a  similar  morbid  action 
in  adjacent  parts,  so  does  a  cancer  or  a  mass  of  tubercle 
grow  by  a  slower  extension  of  the  morbid  modes  of  growth. 
We  have  no  more  to  do  with  a  kind  of  implanted  something, 
increasing  by  a  multiplicative  reproduction,  in  the  one  case 
than  in  the  other.  In  both  alike  there  are  deviations  from 
the  ordinary  modes  of  growth,  which  gradually  extend  to 
adjacent  healthy  parts.  Neighbouring  lymphatic  glands  be- 
come affected  in  the  case  of  tubercle  and  cancer-growths, 
as  well  as  where  simple  inflammations  exist;  and  just  as 
the  change  in  the  gland  in  the  case  of  inflammation  must 
be  regarded  as  the  result  of  a  mere  induced  morbid  action, 
rather  than  as  the  product  of  the  multiplicative  reproduction 
of  a  transmitted  germ,  so  is  a  similar  explanation  open  in 
the  case  of  cancer  and  tubercle.  Modes  of  growth  which 
have  been  primarily  induced  may  be  also  secondarily  induced. 
The  kind  of  agency,  which  is  at  least  probably  potential 
where  the  lymphatic  system  is  concerned,  or  where  particles 
of  morbid  growths  come  into  contact  with  serous  ^  or  mucous 
surfaces,  seems  almost  certainly  operative  when  we  come  to 
consider  that  wider  distribution  which  is  occasionally  brought 
about  through  the  vascular  system.  The  potency  of  the 
•  exciting  causes '  are  here  weakened,  and  new  growths  can- 
not be  initiated  in  distant  parts  or  organs  by  contact  with 
disseminated  particles,  unless  the  *  predisposing  causes '  are 
favourable  and  there  is  an  ability  in  the  part  to  take  on  the 
morbid  mode  of  growth.    The  action  may  be  similar  in  kind 

^    >  Seb-  Dr.  Sanderson's  *  Report  on  the  Commnnicability  of  Tuberde  by 
Inoculation'  ('  Eleventh  Report  of  Med.  Officer  of  the  Privy  Cotttuoil'^. 


Cxvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

to  that  which  the  transplanted  fragment  of  epidermis  exerts 
upon  the  ulcerated  surface.  This  becomes  covered,  not  so 
much  by  an  actual  increase  of  the  imported  fragment  as  by 
the  formative  changes  which  its  presence  incites.  A  crystal 
thrown  into  a  mixed  solution  of  saline  substances  will  also 
determine,  by  its  mere  presence,  the  crystallisation  of  similar 
materials  from  the  solution ;  nay,  it  may  determine,  in  addi- 
tion, the  crystallisation  of  other  products  whose  modes  of 
aggregation  are  more  or  less  similar  (isomorphous  salts). 
The  contact  of  any  number  of  germinal  particles  with  the 
tissues  of  an  organ  will  not  produce  the  formation  of  a  new 
growth,  unless  the  molecular  actions  (or  modes  of  growth) 
existing  in  the  part  are  such  as  to  make  the  transition  an 
easy  one.  The  mere  presence  of  *  germs,'  therefore,  is  not 
all  that  is  necessary.  Cancerous  masses  may  grow  into  the 
vena  cava,  and  yet  no  cancer  may  spring  up  in  the  lungs :  the 
stomach  may  be  absolutely  infiltrated  with  cancer,  and  yet, 
as  I  have  recently  seen,  no  similar  growths  may  exist  in  the 
liver  \  Detail,  however,  is  needless  on  such  a  subject.  The 
distribution  of  morbid  growtlis  throughout  the  body,  as  is 
well  known,  takes  place,  if  at  all,  in  a  manner  so  irregular  in 
different  individuals,  as  to  make  the  result  wholly  beyond 
the  possibility  of  predication.  Having  to  do  with  a  case  of 
syphilis,  who  would  venture  to  fix  upon  the  internal  organs 
which  would  become  affected?  Who  can  account  for  all 
the  irregularities  observable  in  the  generalisation  of  tubercle 
either  in  man  or  in  the  rodent  animals  ?  When  cancer  exists, 
who  will  aflfirm  which  organ  shall  be  secondarily  affected, 
and  which  not? 

'  We  find,  therefore,  that  in  the  absence  of  any  apparent  *  predisposition,* 
exciting  causes,  when  potent,  are  sufficient  to  determine  the  occurrence 
of  secondary  growths,  just  as  other  exciting  causes  seem  capable  of  de- 
termining the  primary  growth.  As  the  exciting  causes  are  weakened,  the 
new  formations  occur  only  under  the  influence  of  a  predisposition  vhc- 
reditary  or  acquired),  or  of  a  natural  aptitude  on  the  part  of  the  tissue  to 
lapse  into  the  morbid  mode  of  growth^ 


APPENDIX  E.  cxvii 


The  old  notions  as  to  the  *  specific'  nature  of  cancerous 
and .  tubercular  products  are  supported,  therefore,  neither 
by  the  anatomical  characters  of  the  growths,  by  their  mode 
of  origin,  nor  by  their  mode  of  distribution ;  and  the 
known  facts  concerning  the  hereditary  transmission  of  a 
tendency  to  the  formation  of  such  products  are  certainly 
not  more  explicable  in  accordance  with  the  old  hypothesis 
than  they  are  by  the  more  modem  view.  Moreover,  the 
history  of  these  local  so-called  •  specific '  growths,  as  others 
have  in  part  indicated,  will  be  found  to  throw  much  light 
upon  the  history  of  general  so-called  *  specific '  affections, 
and  their  mode  of  distribution  through  communities,  or  from 
individual  to  individual  ^ 

Epidemic  and  acute  specific  diseases  have  many  cha- 
racters in  common ;  they  constitute  a  family  the  members 
of  which  are  united  by  a  certain  bond  of  unity,  though 
at  the  same  time  they  are,  in  other  respects,  strikingly  dif- 
ferent from  one  another.  The  *  general'  character  of  the 
symptoms  originally  gave  rise  to  the  notion  that  these 
affections  were  in  the  main  dependent  upon  changes  in 
the  nature  and  quality  of  the  blood.  This  view  is  still  the 
one  most  commonly  entertained,  and  the  one  which  seems 
most  likely  to  be  true.  But  seeing  that  particular  sets  of 
symptoms  recur  with  as  much  definiteness  as  individual 
differences  of  constitution  will  permit,  we  have  a  right  to 
believe  that  the  changes  in  the  blood — however  induced 
and  of  whatsoever  nature  they  may  be — are  definite  and 
peculiar  for  each  of  these  diseases.  The  successive  changes 
in  the  blood  which  are  the  immediate  causes  of  the  phe- 
nomena of  small-pox,  must  be  quite  different  from  those 
giving  rise  to  the  morbid  state  known  as  typhoid- fever. 
Variable  as  these  several  groups  of  symptoms  are  amongst 

^  See  Dr.  Morris,  *0n  Germinal  Matter  and  the  Contact-Theory/ 
1867. 


cxviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

themselves  in  individual  cases,  yet  there  is  a  general  re- 
semblance which  suffices  to  maintain  the  distinctive  nature 
of  each  affection.     In  this  broad  sense  they  are  undoubtedly 
entitled  to  rank  as  'specific'  diseases.     But  though  they 
may  be  presumed  to  be  associated  with  definite  changes  in 
the  blood,  we  have  no  right  to  infer  that  such  changes  of 
state  can  only  be  induced  in  one  way.     Many  well-known 
chemical  changes  are  capable  of  being  brought  about  by 
more  than  one   agency.     And  just  as   there   is   the  best 
reason  for  believing  that  cancer  or  tubercle  may  be  initiated 
de  novo  by  the  operation  of  irritants  upon  the  tissues  of 
certain  individuals,  and  that  such  growths  may  subsequendy 
be  multiplied  within  the    body  by  the    contact -influence 
exerted  by  some  of  their  disseminated  particles;   so  may 
wc  suppose,   not   only  that   specific   substances   (contagia) 
may  be  capable  of  initiating  specific  changes  in  the  blood, 
but  that  certain  combinations  of  circumstances  may,  by  their 
action  upon  the  human  body,  entail  similar  definite  changes 
and  states  of  blood.    Having  to  do  with  a  perverted  nutritive 
activity  and  mode  of  growth  in  a  limited  area  of  tissue, 
cancer  or  tubercle  may  make  their   appearance;    whilst, 
hftving   an   altered   nutritive   activity  and    set   of  changes 
tx\nuring  in  the  blood,  this  all-pervading  tissue  may  lapse 
into  the  successive  states  peculiar  to  one  or  other  of  the 
siHxnfic  diseases,  and  so  gi\*e  rise  to  the  symptoms  by  which 
ihcy  are   chanictorizod.      This  is   by  no   means  a  forced 
AnaU'^v.     Can  cancer  or  tubercle  arise   in  the  individual 
wiihiHil  any  prje-existing  *  hereditar>-  taint  *  ?    Can  the  states 
iMT  bUxxi  i^eculiar  to  the  several  specific  diseases  arise  de 
iK^cv,  w  inviependently  of  contagion?    These  are  questions 
w)K>$e  ini}XkTt  is  really  similar  *. 

^  l^tUiL  \K^M<  ttKxk  <»f  cavsattoQ  b  perfectlT  immiliar  to  the  chonist. 
l>IMk«Wt  \'lk««MOftl  dMuft^  OBAT  ocour  uiMkr  the  inflaence  of  certiin 
|l<llNi^\<3M^'^0NaH%,';!Q^  vhidi  at  other  times  lin  the  abscooe  of 


APPENDIX  £.  CXix> 


One  of  the  great  and  distinguishing  peculiarities  of  these 
specific  diseases  is  their  *  contagiousness.'  Although  very 
differently  marked  in  the  several  affections,  this  property 
is  as  interesting  as  it  is  important.  The  fact  of  its  existence 
seems  always  to  have  had  a  large  share  in  determining  the 
nature  of  the  general  views  which  have  been  held  concerning 
these  affections.  Even  in  remote  periods,  by  Hippocrates 
and  others,  they  were  commonly  compared  to  processes  of 
fermentation ;  whilst,  since  the  time  of  Linnaeus  more  espe- 
cially, attention  has  been  often  prominendy  directed  to  the 
many  apparent  similarities  existing  between  the  commence- 
ment and  spread  of  epidemic  diseases,  and  the  '  flight,  settle- 
ment, and  propagation  of  the  insect-swarms  which  inflict 
blight  upon  vegetable  life^'  These  analogies  were  seem- 
ingly strengthened  by  the  increased  knowledge  which 
gradually  arose  concerning  the  various  parasitic  maladies 
to  which  man  and  the  lower  animals  were  liable.  Writing 
in  1839,  Sir  Henry  Holland  says,  in  his  essay  *On  the 
Hypothesis  of  Insect-Life  as  a  cause  of  Disease,'  *The 
question  is,  what  weight  we  may  attach  to  the  opinion  that 


these  conditions)  may  be  even  more  easily  initiated  by  a  single  specific 
cause.  The  introduction  of  a  crystalline  fragment  into  a  saline  solution, 
and  its  determination  of  the  crystallisation  of  all  the  isomorphous  salts 
contained  in  the  solution,  seems  to  be  exactly  comparable  with  the 
•contagious'  origin  of  diseases.  But.  under  the  innuence  of  certain 
favouring  conditions,  crystallisation  may  occur  without  the  contact  of 
a  crystaUine  fragment — the  process  may  be  'spontaneous'  in  the  same 
sense  that  the  occurrence  of  the  blood-change  may  be  *  spontaneous.' 

*  Sir  H.  Holland's  *  Medical  Notes  and  Reflections.'  second  edition, 
1840,  p.  584.  On  the  following  page,  the  same  author  writes : — •  Con- 
nected with  these  facts  is  the  observation,  seemingly  well  attested,  that 
the  cholera  sometimes  spreads  in  face  of  a  prevailing  wind,  and  where 
no  obvious  human  communication  is  present — a  circumstance  difficult, 
if  indeed  possible,  to  be  explained,  without  recourse  to  animal  life  as 
the  cause  of  the  phenomenon.  No  mere  inorganic  matter  could  be  so 
transferred,  nor  is  vegetable  life  better  provided  with  means  for  over- 
coming this  obstacle.'  Whilst  on  the  preceding  page,,  the  'animal 
species'  had  been  admitted  to  be  '  minute,  beyona  me  readi  of  all 
sense/ 


CXX  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 


certain  diseases,  and  especiaOy  some  of  epidemic  and  con- 
tagious kind,  are  derived  from  minute  forms  of  animal  life, 
existing  in  the  atmosphere  under  particular  circumstances, 
and  capable  by  application  to  the  lining  membranes,  or  other 
parts,  of  acting  as  a  virus  on  the  human  bodj.'  Now,  the 
fact  of  the  multiplication  of  the  virus  within  the  body  was 
the  peculiarity  of  these  diseases  which,  above  all  others, 
caused  such  an  hypothesis  to  be  received  with  favour. 
Causes  which  are  specific  and  which  seem  capable  of  self- 
multiplication — what  can  such  agents  be  but  living  things 
of  some  kind,  plant  or  animal?  This  mode  of  argument 
was,  with  many,  all  powerful.  And  when,  after  the  discovery 
of  the  yeast-plant  by  Schwann,  in  1836,  new  doctrines  con- 
cerning fermentation  began  to  prevail,  the  views  of  those 
who  believed  in  the  living  nature  of  the  specific  causes  of 
epidemic  diseases  were  in  part  strengthened.  If  all  fer- 
mentations were  initiated  by  the  agency  of  living  organisms, 
and  the  specific  diseases  were  comparable  to  processes  of 
fermentation,  then,  how  natural  was  it  that  many  who  were 
moreover  influenced  by  the  other  analogies,  should  be  led 
to  imagine  that  the  actual  causes  of  these  diseases  were 
also  living  organisms  ?  Only  now,  attention  became  directed 
to  the  much  lower  organisms  which  are  so  frequendy  asso- 
ciated with  fermentative  and  putrefactive  changes,  instead  of 
to  insects  *  minute  beyond  the  reach  of  all  sense.' 

Here  then  is  the  origin  of  what  in  modem  times  has  been 
termed  *  The  Germ-Theory  of  Disease.'  Like  homoeopathy 
and  phrenology,  this  theory  carried  with  it  a  kind  of 
simplicity  and  attractiveness,  which  insured  its  acceptability 
to  the  minds  of  many.  Now,  however,  it  seems  to  rest  upon 
foundations  only  a  little  more  worthy  of  consideration  than 
those  upon  which  these  other  theories  are  based.  But, 
owing  to  its  influence,  in  combination  with  the  more  gene- 
rally received  doctrines  concerning  the  origin  of  life,  there 


.  w* 


APPENDIX  E.  cxxi 


has  gradually  grown  up  an  unwillingness  in  the  minds  of 
many  to  believe  that  these  contagious  diseases  can  arise  dt 
novo.  And,  this  being  one  of  those  beliefs  which  tends  to 
curb  inquiry,  and  to  check  the  possible  growth  of  sanitary 
knowledge  in  certain  highly  important  directions,  it  seems  to 
me  necessary  to  look  with  scrutinising  care  to  its  founda- 
tions— not  only  with  the  view  to  the  advancement  of 
medical  science,  but  with  the  direct  object  of  removing 
all  checks  which  may  exist  to  the  growth  of  sanitary 
precautions  against  the  origin  of  these  most  pestilential 
affections. 

Let  us  see,  then,  how  far  the  *  germ-theory'  fulfils  the  con- 
ditions which  all  good  theories  do  fulfil — how  far  it  explains 
a  great  number  of  the  phenomena  in  question,  without  being 
irreconcileable  with  others. 

The  advocates  of  the  *  germ-theory'  have  always  rested 
their  belief  in  it,  in  the  main,  because  they  considered  that  it 
offered  a  ready  explanation  of  the  increase  of  the  virus  of 
the  contagious  diseases  within  the  body  of  the  affected 
person.  This  increase,  they  suppose,  is  not  otherwise  to  be 
explained.  All  other  considerations  brought  forward  in 
support  of  the  theory  are  just  as  explicable  by  another 
supposition.  Fully  admitting  that  the  occurrence  of  a  pro- 
cess of  organic  self-reproduction  would  be  a  very  adequate 
way  of  accounting  for  the  increase  of  the  infecting  material, 
we  must  see  whether  this  mere  hypothesis  can  be  reconciled 
with  other  characteristics  of  these  affections.  In  the  first 
place,  it  may  be  asked,  whether  such  a  process  is  actually 
known  to  constitute  the  essence  of  any  general  diseases. 
Because,  if  so,  those  in  which  it  does  occur,  ought,  in  the 
event  of  the  hypothesis  being  true,  to  present  a  close 
similarity  to  the  diseases  in  which  such  a  process  is  supposed 
to  occur. 

Now  there  are  certain  general  diseases  which  do  im- 


cxxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

doubtedly  depend  upon  the  presence  and  multiplication  of 
organisms  in  the  blood  and  throughout  the  tissues  gene- 
rally. There  is  the  epidemic  and  highly  contagious  disease 
amongst  cattle — kno\«i  in  this  country  by  the  name  of 
the  '  blood ' — which  excites  in  man  that  most  dangerous 
morbid  condition  called  *  malignant  pustule/  The  re- 
searches of  M.  Davaine  \  and  others,  have  revealed  the  fact 
that  this  disease  is  essentially  def)fendent  upon  the  presence 
and  multiplication  of  living  organisms,  closely  allied  to 
Vibriones,  in  the  blood  of  the  animals  affected,  and  that 
similar  organisms  are  also  (locally)  most  abundant  in  the 
contagiously  incited  *  malignant  pustule'  of  man.  Unless  this 
latter  be  destroyed  in  its  early  stages,  the  contained  organisms 
spread  throughout  the  body,  and  the  disease  speedily  proves 
fatal.  Of  late,  moreover,  attention  has  also  been  called  *  to 
Pasteur's  researches  on  the  subject  of  the  very  fatal  epidemic 
which  raged  for  fifteen  years  amongst  the  silkworms  of 
France.  This  affection,  known  by  the  name  of  p/brint,  is 
dependent  upon  the  presence  and  multiplication  of  peculiar 
corpuscular  organisms,  called  PsorospermicB^  in  all  the  tissues 
of  the  body.  Both  these  general  parasitic  maladies  are 
highly  contagious ;  both  are  contagious  by  means  of  organ- 
isms ;  and  in  both  the  virus  does  increase  by  self-multiplica- 
tion within  the  body  of  the  animal  affected.  What  more 
suggestive  evidence  could  there  be  as  to  the  truth  of  the 
*  germ-theory,'  say  its  advocates,  than  is  supplied  by  the 
phenomena  of  these  two  diseases  ?  Undoubtedly  the  evidence 
is  irrefragable  as  to  its  applicability  to  these  particular  dis- 
eases ;  but  then  comes  the  question,  whether  they  are  com- 
parable with  the  other  affections  to  which  the  germ-theory  is 
sought  to  be  applied  ?     And  this  question  must  decidedly  be 

*  Sec  *  Comptus  Rendus,'  1864  and  1865. 

*  'l^atMTO,'  i8io,No.  56,  p  181. 


-  •* 


APPENDIX  E.  .     cxxiii 


answered  in  the  negative.  These  parasitic  diseases  are 
sharply  distinguished  from  the  others  by  the  fact  of  their 
almost  invariable  fatality.  Creatures  or  persons  once  affected 
in  this  way  are,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  thenceforth 
on  the  road  to  more  or  less  immediate  death.  Happily, 
however,  no  fatality  of  this  kind  is  characteristic  of  even  such 
highly  contagious  diseases  as  scarlet  fever  and  small-pox,  or 
any  other  of  the  maladies  with  which  parasitic  organisms 
cannot  be  shown  to  be  associated  ^  But  if  living  things  were 
really  present  as  causes  of  these  diseases,  then  most  assuredly 
ought  they  to  conform  to  that  fatal  type  which  is  almost 
inseparable  from  the  notion  of  a  general  parasitic  disease, 
and  which  we  find  exemplified  by  the  course  of  pibritUy  the 
*  blood,'  and  *  malignant  pustule  *.'  Thus,  the  fact  that  the 
general  tendency  in  the  acute  specific  diseases  is  undoubtedly 
towards  recovery  rather  than  towards  death,  speaks  strongly 
against  the  resemblance  supposed  to  exist  between  them  and 
the  parasitic  affections  alluded  to ;  and  also  against  the  hypo- 
thesis that  they  are  dependent  upon  the  presence  of  self- 
multiplying  germs  within  the  body.  Such  germs,  when  pre- 
sent and  able  to  multiply  in  its  blood,  would  be  almost  sure 
to  increase  until  they  brought  about  the  death  of  their  host. 

These  considerations  alone  should  suffice  to  inspire 
grave  doubts  as  to  the  truth  of  the  'germ-theory.'  And 
such  doubts  may  be  reinforced  by  many  others.  Thus,  the 
several  affections  being  distinct  from  one  another,  this 
theory  demands  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  about  twenty 
different  kinds  of  organisms  never  known  in  their  mature 

^  Doubtless  there  are  other  general  parasitic  diseases  amongst 
animals.  In  almost  all  the  specific  diseases  to  which  man  is  liable, 
however,  I  have  invariably  failed  to  discover  any  trace  of  organisms  in 
the  blood.  The  experience  of  many  other  observers  has  been  similar  to 
my  own  in  this  respect 

'  See  a  paper  by  Dr.  William  Budd,  in  *  British  Medical  Joomal,' 
1863. 


cxxiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

condition,  but  whose  presence  as  invisible,  non-developing 
germs  is  constantly  postulated,  solely  on  the  groiind  of  the 
occurrence  of  certain  effects  supposed  to  be  otherwise 
incapable  of  occurring.  That  if  existent,  they  are  no  mere 
ordinary  germs  of  known  organisms  is  obvious,  because 
their  presence  has  again  and  again  been  shown  to  be 
incapable  of  producing  the  diseases  in  question.  Mr. 
Forster  says,*  *  There  is  not  perhaps  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  a  human  creature  who  lives  on  coarser  fare,  or  to  a 
civilised  people  more  disgusting,  than  a  Kalmuck  Tartar. 
Raw  putrid  fish  or  the  flesh  of  carrion — ^horses,  oxen  and 
camels — is  the  ordinary  food  of  the  Kalmucks,  and  they  are 
more  active  and  less  susceptible  of  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather  than  any  race  of  men  I  have  ever  seen  *.'  It  has, 
moreover,  been  frequently  demonstrated,  that  the  organisms 
of  ordinary  putrefactions  may  be  introduced  even  into  the 
blood  of  man  and  animals  without  the  production  of  any  of 
these  specific  diseases'.     Yet  is  the  *  Antiseptic  System '  of 


'  See  *  Med.-Chirurg.  Rev./  1854,  vol.  xiii,  where  the  supposed  con- 
nection of  diseases  wim  processes  of  putrefaction  is  ably  considered  by 
the  late  Dr.  W.  Alison. 

'  The  Bacteria  which  are  sure  to  be  abundant  in  such  food  cannot, 
therefore,  be  the  much  talked-of  *  disease-germs/  Such  a  diet  is,  of  course, 
by  no  means  recommended,  and  could  probably  only  be  borne  in  certain 
climates  by  persons  who  lead  a  very  active  life.  Epidemic  diseases  are 
frequently  most  fatal  when  they  once  break  out  amongst  a  people  whose 
diet  is  of  this  kind.  (See  Dr.  Carpenter,  in  *  Med.-Chirurg.  Rev.,'  1853, 
voL  xi.  p.  1 73.) 

'  See,  amongst  others,  Davaine  in  '  Comptus  Rendus,'  Aug.  1864,  and 
£.  Semmer  in  Virchow's  *  Archives,'  1 870.  Dr.  Lionel  Beale  is  well  aware 
of  this  fact,  and  he,  accordingly,  whilst  adhering  to  the  *  germ-theory,' 
promulgates  it  under  a  new  form.  He  says  (*  Monthly  Microsc  Joum./ 
Oct.  1870,  p.  205): — 'Concerning  the  conditions  under  which  these 
.  germs  are  produced,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  the  rapidly  madtiplying 
matttr  acquires  its  new  and  marvellous  specific  powers,  we  have  much  to 
learn,  but  with  vegetable  organisms  the  germs  have  nothing  to  do.  They 
have  originated  in  man's  organism.  Man  himself  has  imposed  the  con- 
ditions favourable  to  their  development  Man  alone  b  reqxxnsiMe  for 
their  origin.  Human  intelligence,  energy,  and  self-sacrifice  may  sncoecd 
ia  cxtirpatiDg  t!bjeiix,aiuiinai.^  ^oscovcx  the  means  of  preventing  the  origin 


APPENDIX  E.  CXXV 


treatment  (good  as  it  may  be,  irrespective  of  the  germ-theory 
on  which  it  has  been  based)  pressed  upon  our  attention  on 
the  assumption  that  the  germs  of  putrefaction  and  the  germs 
of  disease  are  living  organisms  similar  in  nature.  The 
strange  persistency  with  which  this  view  is  advocated  is 
not  a  little  surprising  when  it  entails  the  obvious  contra- 
diction that  germs  which  do,  under  all  ordinary  circumstances, 
develop  into  well-known  organic  forms,  should,  when  con- 
cerned in  the  production  of  the  diseases  in  question,  induce  all 
the  effects  supposed  to  depend  upon  their  prodigious  growth 
and  multiplication,  and  yet  never  develop,  never  become  visible. 
And  whilst  Bacteria,  and  other  organisms  with  which  the 
unknown  disease-germs  are  compared,  flourish  and  reproduce 
in  the  much-vaunted  germ-killing  carbolised  lotions',  yet 
carbolic  acid  continues  to  be  recommended  solely  on  ac- 
count of  its  germ-killing  powers,  and  the  theory  On  which 
the  practice  is  based  is  thought  to  derive  support  from  the 
results  obtained  by  the  use  of  this  agent.  Surely  no  theory 
could  be  weaker  on  which  to  base  a  successful  method  of 
treatment ;  and  if,  as  its  distinguished  originator  says  ^  its 
general  acceptance  is  principally  hindered  by  the  *  doubt  of 
its  fundamental  principle,'  then  I  would  deliberately  say  that 

of  new  forms  not  now  in  existence.'  This  is  undoubtedly  a  very  much 
less  objectionable  form  of  the  *  germ-theory/  though  much  additional 
evidence  would  be  needed  before  we  could  accept  the  view  that  conta- 
gious diseases  are  due  to  the  rapid  multiplication  of  the  contagious 
particles  within  the  body  of  the  creature  affected.  The  non-contagious- 
ness of  the  blood  (see  next  page)  is  as  irreconcileable  with  this  as  with 
the  other  form  of  the  *  germ-theory.* 

*  See  Note  i.  p.  xlvi.  And  in  a  recently  published  paper  *  On  the  Rela;- 
tive  Powers  of  Various  Substances  in  Preventing  the  Generation  of  Ani- 
malcules or  the  Development  of  their  Germs/  Dr.  Dougall  says,  *  If«  as  is 
alleged,  germs  are  the  souice  of  putrefaction,  then  the  strongest  preven- 
tives muit  be  the  best  antiseptics,  and  vict  versa.  Now,  as  seen  in  the 
table,  carbolic  acid  occupies  a  very  mediocre  place  as  a  preventive, 
therefore  it  is  legitimate  to  conclude  that  it  stands  no  higher  as  an  anti- 
septic* (p.  13). 

*  *  British  Medical  Journal,'  August  16,  187 1,  p.  225. 


cxxvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

the  blame,  if  any,  cannot  fairly  be  said  to  lie  with  those  *  who 
have  opposed  the  germ-theory  of  putrefaction/  The  *  Anti- 
septic System'  of  treatment  needs  no  support  from  a  *  germ- 
theory';  it  can  be  surely  and  unassailably  based  upon  the 
broader  physico-chemical  doctrines  of  Liebig  \ 

The  last  blow,  however,  seems  given  to  the  *  germ-theory' 
of  disease,  when  we  are  told  that  the  blood  and  the  secretions 
in  sheep-pox  are  not  infective,  though  this  disease  is  most 
closely  allied  to,  and  even  more  virulently  contagious  than, 
human  small-pox.  If  germs  had  existed  in  this  general 
disease,  and  their  multiplication  was  the  cause  of  it,  then 
most  assuredly  would  they  have  existed  in  the  blood  and  in 
other  fluids  of  the  body ;  and  yet,  as  Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson 
tells  us ',  *  In  sheep-pox  all  the  diseased  parts  are  infecting, 
while  no  result  follows  from  the  inoculation  either  of  the 
blood  or  of  any  of  the  secretions ;  the  liquid  expressed  from 
the  pulmonary  nodules  has  been  found  by  M.  Chauveau  to 
be  extremely  virulent— certainly  not  less  so  than  the  juice 
obtained  from  the  pustules.'  Now,  although  in  other  of 
these  diseases  the  blood  does  undoubtedly  exhibit  infective 

*  These  doctrines  do  not  seem  to  have  been  adequately  grasped  by 
Prof.  Lister.  Fragments  of  organic  matter  are  believed  by  Liebig  to  be 
capable  of  acting  as  ferments  ;  he,  however,  holds  that  their  potency  is 
deteroriated  by  heat  almost  as  much  as  are  the  qualities  of  living  fer- 
ments. The  experiments  with  boiled  fluids  in  bent-neck  flasks,  there- 
fore, upon  which  Prof.  Lister  so  strongly  relies  in  proof  of  the  germ-theory, 
prove  absolutely  nothing  as  between  the  two  theories  of  fermentation  of 
Liebig  and  of  Pasteur.  Amongst  the  atmospheric  particles  there  are 
sure  to  be  dead  ferments,  in  the  form  of  mere  organic  fragments.  Now 
the  doubt  that  previously  existed  was,  as  to  whether  they  could  initiate 
fermentation  and  putrefaction,  or  whether  the  presence  of  living  germs 
was  absolutely  essential.  In  the  experiments  with  bent-neck  fl&^s,  both 
fragments  and  germs  must  be  simultaneously  excluded  or  admitted  to 
the  fluids.  Professor  Lister's  readers  might  suppose  that  Liebig  had  no 
objection  to  his  ferments  being  boiled,  and  that  the  issue  lay  between 
the  relative  efliciency  of  oxygen  and  living  germs.  (Sec  also  Gcrhardt's 
'  Chimie  Organique,'  t.  iv.  p.  545.) 

■Report  'On  the  Intimate  Pathology  of  Contagion,*  in  'Twelf^ 
Report  of  the  Medical  Ofljcer  of  Privy  Council.* 


>4 


APPENDIX  E.  cxxvii 


properties,  still  the  ascertained  existence  of  even  one  ex- 
ceptional case  amongst  maladies  so  contagious  as  sheep- 
pox,  seems  to  me  absolutely  irreconcileable  with  the  truth  of 
the  *  germ-theory/  more  especially  when  this  theory  was 
started  principally  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  such  highly 
contagious  diseases  ^ 

In  rejecting  the  *  germ-theory/  then,  must  we  confess  our 
absolute  ignorance  on  the  subject  (a  course  always  better 
than  the  adoption  of  an  untenable  theory),  or  are  there  facts 
to  guide  us  to  another  view  as  to  the  nature  and  origin  of 
the  poisons  of  these  infectious  diseases  ? 

It  surely  is  a  vice  in  argiunent  to  suppose  that  the  increase 
of  the  virus  within  the  body  in  these  affections  is  only  to  be 
accounted  for  by  a  process  of  organic  reproduction.  The 
power  of  self-multiplication  by  division  is  peculiar  to  living 
things,  but  an  actual  increase  of  any  substance  may  occur  by  a 
process  of  growth  alone,  without  the  aid  of  self-multiplication. 
Growth,  however,  takes  place  in  not- living  as  well  as  in 
living  matter ;  and,  fundamentally  considered,  it  only  means 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  the  substance  which  grows, 
whether  we  have  to  do  with  the  substance  of  a  muscle,  with 
a  crystal,  or  with  a  complex  organic  poison.  Liebig  says : 
'  A  substance  in  the  act  of  decomposition,  added  to  a  mixed 
fluid  in  which  its  constituents  are  contained,  can  reproduce 
itself  in  that  fluid.'  And  in  illustration  Sir  Thomas  Watson 
writes :  *  Thus  the  virus  of  small-pox  (which  virus  is  formed 
out  of  the  blood)  causes  such  a  change  within  the  blood  as 
gives  rise  to  the  reproduction  of  the  poison  from  certain 
constituents  of  that  fluid :  and  whilst  the  process  is  going  on 

*  Inoculation  with  the  blood  of  a  person  suffering  from  measles  has 
in  several  cases  failed  to  reproduce  the  disease.  The  different  severity  of 
small-pox  taken  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  that  induced  by  'inoculaUom' 
of  the  matter  of  a  small-pox  pustule,  is  also  quite  inexplicable  in  accord* 
ance  with  the  '  fi^rm-theory/  although  both  4cts  are  quite  recondleable 
with  the  view  about  to  be  mentioned. 


cxxviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


ihe  natural  working  of  the  animal  economy  is  disturbed ;  the 
person  is  ill.  The  transformation  is  not  arrested  until  the 
whole  of  that  ingredient  in  the  blood  which  is  susceptible  of 
the  decomposition  has  undergone  the  metamorphosis  ^' 
The  specific  poison  (contagium)  does  not,  however,  seem  to 
be  immediately  reproduced  in  the  blood  of  the  person 
affected:  rather,  a  set  of  changes  are  set  up  in  the  Uood 
which  ultimately  lead  to  the  evolution  of  such  a  poison  in 
some  part  or  parts  of  the  body;  so  that,  as  Mr.  Simon 
says^,  ^  Bowels,  skin,  kidney,  tonsils,  are  the  favourite  resorts 
of  the  several  fever-poisons  just  as  they  are  the  surfaces  by 
which  naturally  the  organic  waste  of  the  several  tissues  is 
eliminated '.' 

There  are  many  organic  poisons  which  undoubtedly  pro- 
duce spreading  changes  in  the  blood.  Writing  from  Australia, 
Prof.  Halford  says  * : — *  In  fatal  cases  of  snake-poisoning, 
whether  in  this  colony,  India,  America,  or  Africa,  it  may  be 
stated  as  a  rule,  with  few  exceptions^  that  the  blood  loses  its 


*  Ch.  Robin  says,  in  his  *  V^itaux  Parasites,'  1853,  p.  376:— 'On  a 
confondu  un  ph^om^ne  grossier  et  physique,  de  transport  de  vi^tal 
d'un  sol  sur  un  autre,  plus  ou  moins  favorable,  avec  la  question  de  con- 
tagion. Celle-ci  est  au  contraire  caractcris^  par  une  modification 
moUculaire  lente  des  substances  organiques  se  propageant  de  proche  en 
proche,  sous  Tinfluence  du  contact  d'autres  substances  or^ganiques  pr^ 
sentant  d^jlt  elles-memes  une  modification  analogue.  S'il  y  a  quelque 
chose  de  contagieux  dans  cette  transplantation,  c'est  la  putrefaction  des 
substances  azotes  qu'on  transporte,  et  elles  d^terminent  dans  les  mucus 
sains  un  alteration  analogue  k  celle  qu*eUes  ont  ^prouv^.  Mais  il  n'y  a 
rien  \k  qui  appartiennc  en  propre  au  T^g^tal  el  doive  lui  ^tre  attribue.' 
See  abo  pp.  307-300. 

*  Lectures  on  Pathology. 

'  A  similar  view  has  been  advocated  on  more  than  one  occasion  by 
Dr.  B.  W.  Richardson.  He  says  (*  Medical  Times  and  Gaxette,' 
November  5th,  1870,  p.  539) : — •  A  person  suffering  from  a  conmiunicable 
disease  is  poisonous  precisely  as  a  cobra  di  capello  is  poisonous  —  that  is 
to  say,  he  is  producing  by  secretion  an  organic  poison,  which,  if  it  comes 
into  contact  in  the  right  way  with  a  healthy  person,  will  reproduce 
disease.'  See  also  the  '  Transactions  of  the  Epidemiological  Sodetj/ 
voL  i. 

*  On  the  Treatment  of  Snake-bite.     187a 


APPENDIX  E.  cxxix 


power  of  coagulation  and  becomes  thinner  and  poorer/ 
After  the  death  of  the  person  *  it  greedily  absorbs  oxygen 
when  exposed  to  the  air,  and  it  absorbs  it  more  than 
unpoisoned  blood/  Though  the  precise  changes  are  quite 
unknown,  its  constitution  is  obviously  profoundly  modified  *. 
The  rapidity  with  which  the  symptoms  are  produced  in  the 
case  of  snake-bite  do  not  in  the  least  prevent  our  comparing 
the  effects  of  snake-poison'  with  those  of  the  contagious 
zymotic  diseases.  In  some  of  these  the  effects  have  been 
even  more  rapidly  produced.  Speaking  of  *  the  Black 
Death,'  which  raged  in  the  fifteenth  century,  Hecker  tells  us 
that,  '  Many  were  struck  as  if  by-  lightning,  and  died  upon 
the  spot,  and  this  more  frequently  among  the  young  and 
strong  than  the  old.'  Again,  Dr.  Aitken  says :  *  When  the 
cholera  reached  Muscat,  instances  are  given  in  which  only 
ten  minutes  elapsed  from  the  first  apparent  seizure  before 
Ufe  was  extinct' ;  whilst  instances  of  death  taking  place  from 
cholera-poison  in  two,  three,  or  more  hours,  are  well  known 
to  be  extremely  common. 

•lu  effect 
Holds  such  an  enmity  with  blood  of  man 
That,  swift  as  quicksilver,  it  courses  through 
The  natural  gates  and  alleys  of  the  body.* 

The  action  of  known  poisons,  whether  animal  or  other, 

*  Dr.  Richardson  has  ascertained  that,  unlike  vaccine  lymph,  the 
snake-poison  becomes  weakened  by  dilution;  and  similar  observations 
have  been  made  by  others.  The  '  particulate '  nature  of  the  poison  in 
vaccine  lymph,  which  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  skilful  experiments 
of  Chauveau  and  Sanderson,  is  a  condition  in  which  it  very  probably 
exists  in  many  other  contagia. 

'  That  such  effects  are  in  no  way  necessarily  dependent  upon  the 
fact  that  this  poison  contains  living  elements,  we  may  imagine  from 
the  influence  of  prussic  acid,  morphia,  etc.  Nay,  more ;  I  have  had 
frequent  personal  experience  of  the  fact  that  a  spasmodic  and  catarrhal 
affection  somewhat  resembling  hay-fever  maybe  produced  by  emanations 
from  certain  Nematoid  worms,  even  after  they  nad  been  preserved  for 
two  or  three  years  in  spirits  of  wine,  and  macerated  for  a  time  in  calcic 

VOL.  n.  f 


CXXX  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

upon  the  blood  and  system  generally,  may  therefore  be  com- 
pared with  those  unknown  poisons  of  the  zymotic  diseases. 
The  great  difference  is  this.  The  changes  in  the  blood 
induced  by  snake-poison  are  not  such  as  to  terminate  in  the 
elaboration  of  a  similar  poison  in  any  part  of  the  body  of  the 
person  bitten,  whilst  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog  does  lead  to 
changes  which  culminate  in  the  reproduction  of  the  hydro- 
phobic poison ;  and  similarly  with  those  of  scarlet-fever  or 
small-pox — contact  with  these  poisons  entails  changes  which 
result  in  an  enormous  production  of  similar  poisons.  There 
is  probably  no  fundamental  difference  between  the  two  sets 
of  cases.  The  malarial  miasm  of  intermittent  fever,  and  the 
poisonous  state  of  the  blood  which  leads  to  the  production 
of  rheumatic  fever  \  as  a  rule  produce  effects  which  are  more 
strictly  comparable  with  those  of  snake-poison,  though  there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  these  diseases  may  merge  into  other 
affections  which  are  admitted  to  be  contagious — as  when 
intermittent  or  remittent  fevers  develop  in  warm  climates 
under  the  aggravated  form  of  contagious  yellow  fever.  In 
this  way  may  the  gulf  be  bridged  which  seems  to  separate 
the  effects  of  snake-bite  from  those  of  hydrophobia.  As 
Liebig  pointed  out,  what  occurs  in  the  former  case  may  be 
compared  to  the  action  of  yeast  upon  a  simple  solution  of 
sugar,  and  in  the  latter  to  the  action  of  the  same  ferment 
upon  a  solution  of  sugar  which  also  contains  nitrogenous 


chloride  (see  *Philosoph.  Transact/  1866,  p.  583).  Elffects  somewhat 
similar,  though  not  so  lasting,  are  produced  upon  some  persons  by  the 
smell  of  powdered  ipecacuanha. 

^  I  agree  with  Dr.  Richardson  in  thinking  that  this  affection  really 
belongs  to  the  zymotic  class  of  diseases.  Dengue  seems  to  be  a  slightly 
contagious  affection  somewhat  intermediate  between  rheumatic  and 
scarlet  fever.  The  *  sweating  sickness '  of  the  middle  ages  was  con- 
sidered to  be  an  aggravated  epidemic  form  of  rheumatic  fever,  and 
so  also  with  the  various  forms  of  *  miliary  fever.*  The  contagiousness 
of  these  diseases,  according  to  Hecker,  seemed  to  vary  in  different 
epidemics. 


APPENDIX  E,  cxxxi 


materials — at  the  expense  of  which  the  ferment  is  enabled 
to  grow.  Thus,  then,  just  as  the  presence  of  a  crystalline 
fragment  may  determine  the  synthesis  of  its  elements  from 
a  solution  in  which  they  are  contained  \  and  as  the  living 
ferment  may  bring  about  that  much  more  complex  synthesis  . 
which  occurs  during  its  growth,  so  may  an  organic  poison 
(having  an  intermediate  molecular  complexity)  by  its  contact 
with  the  fluids  or  mucous  siu'faces  of  the  body,  be  enabled 
to  determine  a  series  of  changes  leading  to  the  synthesis  of 
a  similar  poison '. 

If  we  find  that  amongst  this  class  of  general  or  specific 
diseases  some  are  not  at  all,  and  others  only  slightly,  con- 
tagious, whilst  the  remainder  present  increasing  degrees  of 
contagiousness;  that  diseases,  which  sometimes  or  under 
some  conditions  are  non-contagious,  under  others  become 
contagious ;  and  lastly,  if  we  find  that  even  the  virulently 
contagious  poisons  of  some  diseases  are  undoubtedly 
capable  of  arising  de  novo^  then  have  we  certain  reasons 
for  the  supposition,  that  the  contagiousness  or  non-con- 
tagiousness of  particular  general  diseases  is  a  quasi-acci- 


^  These  elements,  as  Prof.  Graham  showed,  really  exist  separately  in 
the  solution,  since  they  are  separable  by  dialysis. 

^  Sir  Thomas  Watson  says,  in  explanation  of  Liebig's  doctrine,  '  In 
order,  then,  that  a  specific  animal  poison  should  effect  its  own  repro- 
duction in  the  blocxl,  and  excite  that  commotion  in  the  system  which 
results  from  the  formation  and  expulsion  of  the  new  Tims,  it  is  requisite 
that  a  certain  ingredient  (analogous  to  the  gluten  in  the  brewer's  wort) 
should  be  present  in  the  blood,  and  this  ingredient  must  have  a  definite 
relation  to  the  given  poison.'  And  he  subsequently  adds  (*  Principles 
and  Practice  of  Physic,'  vol.  ii.  p.  700) : — *  This  theory  of  Liebig's  offers, 
then,  an  intelligible  explanation  of  the  curious  facts  that  certain  con- 
tagious disorders  furnish  a  protection,  temporary  or  permanent,  against 
their  own  return ;  that  they  have  a  tolerably  definite  period  of  incuba- 
tion, and  run,  for  the  most  part,  a  definite  course ;  that  some  persons 
are  less  susceptible  than  others  of  the  influence  of  these  animal  poisons, 
or  not  susceptible  at  all ;  and  that  the  same  individual  may  be  capable 
of  taking  a  contagious  disease  at  one  time,  and  not  at  another.'  The 
same  facts,  it  may  be  observed,  are  almost  inexplicable  in  accordance 
with  any  rational  rendering  of  the  *  germ-theory.* 

f  2 


cxxxii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

dental  feature,  and  that  there  is  no  real  difference  in  kind 
between  the  poison  of  a  serpent  which  does  not  occasion 
the  production  of  a  similar  venom,  and  the  poison  of  a 
mad  dog  which  does  lead,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  re- 
evolution  of  a  similar  virus  ^ 

Let  us  take  a  brief  survey  of  some  of  the  facts  which  are 
known  concerning  these  specific  infective  diseases. 

Glanders  is  an  affection  which  is  in  many  respects 
analogous  to  syphilis,  and  is  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  highly 
contagious  a  malady.  Both  these  diseases,  too,  form  ex- 
tremely interesting  links  between  such  specific  tissue  affections 
as  cancer  and  tubercle,  and  such  infective  blood-diseases  as 
small-pox  and  scarlet-fever.  Like  the  former,  they  are  apt 
to  involve  the  presence  of  morbid  growths  scattered  in 
different  parts  of  the  body,  though,  like  the  latter,  they  are 
commonly  spread  by  contagion  from  individual  to  individual. 
However  little  we  may  know  concerning  the  actual  origin  of 
syphilis,  no  doubt  seems  to  remain  in  the  minds  of  most  of 
those  who  have  studied  the  question,  as  to  the  possibility 
of  producing  glanders  in  the  horse.  After  referring  to  the 
highly  contagious  nature  of  the  affection.  Dr.  Gavin  Milroy 

'  In  snake-hite  the  symptoms  are  due  to  the  effects  of  an  habitually 
poisonous  secretion  which  has  a  most  rapid  and  deadly  action ;  whikt 
hydrophobia  is  due  to  the  effects  of  an  occasional  quality  of  the  salivary 
secretion.  This  occasional  quality,  characteristic  of  rabies,  is  generally 
admitted  to  arise  independently  in  the  dog,  and  yet  the  poisonous 
salivary  secretion  sets  up  a  similar  disease  in  other  dogs  whioi  may  be 
bitten.  Nay,  more,  this  affection  at  times  prevails  in  an  epidemic 
fashion.  Dr.  Gavin  Milroy  says  ^*  Transactions  of  the  Epidemiological 
Society,'  vol.  i.  p.  173):  *  Hillary,  in  his  work  on  Barbadoes,  described 
rabies  as  common  in  the  West  Indies.  Moseley,  having  never  seen  a 
case  of  it  for  a  series  of  years,  doubted  the  correctness  of  the  statement ; 
but,  in  1783,  it  unexpectedly  broke  out  with  violence  at  Hispaniola,  and 
also  in  Jamaica,  where  it  prevailed  from  June  to  the  following  March. 
Dogs  were  seized  with  it  that  had  no  communication  with  others,  and 
some  dogs  not  brought  on  shore  went  mad  in  the  harbours  of  the  island. 
•*  On  Tropical  Diseases,"  1803.*  There  are  those,  however,  who  still 
doubt  whether  rabies  is  capable  of  arising  de  movo,  {Set  Art  in 
Reynolds's  *  System  of  Medicme.'  vol.  i.) 


.     r* 


•  •* 


APPENDIX  E.  cxxxiii 


says,  on  this  subject:  *It  is  also  very  generally  admitted 
that  glanders  is  a  generable  as  well  as  a  propagable  disease ; 
and  that  it  is  extremely  apt,  especially  in  some  seasons,  to 
develop  itself  in  foul,  unventilated  stables,  or  (as  was  often 
the  case  during  the  continental  war)  in  the  filthy  between- 
decks  of  crowded  transports  ^' 

Here  too  may  be  mentioned  such  affections  as  purulent 
ophthalmia,  gonorrhoea,  croup,  and  diphtheria  —  the  two 
former  at  least  yielding  local  secretions  which  are  virulently 
contagious,  although  assuredly  they  are  not  necessarily  pro- 
duced by  specific  infecting  agents.  The  secretions  of  croup 
are  only  slightly  contagious,  though  those  of  diphtheria  often 
exhibit  this  quality  to  a  more  marked  degree.  Yet,  even  this 
last  is  generally  regarded  as  an  aggravated  form  of  angina, 
which  is  apt  to  prevail  occasionally  as  an  epidemic  affec- 
tion *. 

Turning  now  to  the  infective  diseases  of  a  more  general 

*  •  Transactions  of  the  Epidemiological  Sodetv.'  vol.  i.  p.  1 75.  The 
same  author  adds,  however :  *  The  converse  of  tne  proposition  is  hap- 
pily no  less  true;  experience  having  abundantly  shown  that  its  de- 
velopment may  be  controlled  even  to  absolute  prevention  by  the 
same  simple  sanitary  niles»  the  observance  of  which  has  banished 
from  our  jails  and  workhouses  the  disease  to  which  I  shall  next  refer, 
viz.  typhus.* 

'  After  referring  to  the  exaggerated  notions  which  were  at  one  time 
entertained  with  regard  to  the  contagiousness  of  diphtheria,  Mr.  J. 
Netten  Radcliffe  ('Trans,  of  the  Epidem.  Soc..'  vol.  i.  p.  332)  says: — 
'Subsequent  observation  has  shown,  moreover,  that  contagion  plays 
but  a  very  limited  part  in  the  epidemic  extension  of  diphtheria.  .  .  . 
The  times  of  occurrence  of  the  forerunners  of  the  epidemic,  the  scattered 
and  disconnected  centres  of  manifestation,  and  tne  slow  growth,  ex- 
tending over  a  period  of  several  years,  would  seem  to  point  to  de- 
veloping causes,  slowly  originating  over  the  whole  or  the  greater 
portion  of  the  surface  of  the  kingdom,  and  culminating  more  rapidly 
m  the  southern  than  in  the  norSiem  districts.'  Mr  Radcliffe  adds, 
*  If  we  would  successfully  study  the  etiology  of  the  epidemic,  we  cannot 
disconnect  that  study  from  the  observation  of  allied  affections  prevailing 
contemporaneously^  An  examination  of  the  statistics  relating  to  the 
prevalence,  during  the  same  period  of  scarlet  fever,  croup,  thrush, 
quinsey,  and  laryngitis  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  *  all  the  affections 
allied  to  dipbtbtria  pretKuUd  epidemically  contemporaneously  with  diphtheria* 


cxxxiv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

character,  we  find  a  group  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
surgeon  and  to  the  obstetrician — between  the  members  of 
which  there  is  the  closest  alliance  and  even  interchange- 
ability — and  concerning  the  possibility  of  whose  de  novo 
origin  no  surgeon  or  physician  can  entertain  any  reason- 
able doubt.  These  are  erysipelas,  puerperal  fever,  ppemia, 
and  hospital  gangrene— fearful  affections,  and  all  only  too 
easily  producible^.  Not  to  mention  idiopathic  erysipelas, 
which  is  also  a  contagious  affection  ^  how  frequently  does 
an  ordinary  inflammation  assume  an  erysipelatous  character 
in  certain  individuals — more  especially  in  those  who  are  the 
subjects  of  renal  disease :  and  yex  hospital  gangrene,  pyemia, 
and  puerperal  fever,  are  but  different  modes  in  which  this 
morbid  process  repeats  itself  in  certain  constitutions  and 
under  certain  conditions.  How  easily  erysipelas  is  set  up 
in  some  persons  by  the  mere  contact  of  a  wounded  surface 
with  the  fluids  of  a  dead  body,  is  well  known ;  and  how  fatal 
and  frequent  may  be  the  attacks  of  puerperal  fever  due  to 
the  same  cause  has  been  fully  established  by  melancholy 
experience  at  the  Vienna  Lying-in  Hospital.  Yet  that  such 
effects  are  in  no  way  attributable  to,  or  comparable  with, 
ordinary  processes  of  putrefaction  is  also  a  matter  of  ab- 
solute certainty.  Again,  in  certain  cases  where  symptoms 
of  poisoning  result  from  eating  mackerel  or  some  shell- 
fish, we  know  that  these  effects  are  not  due  to  the  putres- 
cence of  such  articles  of  food.  And  similarly,  in  reference 
to  the  many  cases  in  which  symptoms  of  poisoning  have 
been  produced  in  Germany  by  sausages,  we  leam  from 
Liebig  that  *  the  sausages  are  only  poisonous  at  a  particular 

*  Sir  William  Jenner  says  (•  Practical  Medicine  of  To-Day/  1869, 
p.  56) :— •  We  know  that  the  zymotic  element  which  produces  contagions 
pyaemia  may  be  generated  in  the  frame  of  man  dt  novo.  A  most  im- 
portant problem  to  be  solved  is  that  of  the  spontaneous  origin  of  other 
z3rmotic  diseases.' 

*  Sir  Thomas  Watson's  •  Practice  of  Physic,'  vol.  ii.  p.  91 7. 


APPENDIX  E.  cxxxv 


stage  of  decay ^  and  cease  to  be  so  when  putrefaction  is 
advanced  so  far  that  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  evolved; 
the  central  part  being  often  poisonous  whilst  the  surface 
is  wholesome.'  There  seems  every  reason  to  believe  that 
in  the  changes  (short  of  actual  putrefaction)  which  may  take 
place  in  these  substances,  a  'peculiar  poisonous  principle 
is  evolved/  And  so  in  certain  cases  where  an  unhealthy 
process  of  suppuration  occurs,  poisonous  products  may  be 
generated  in  a  wound,  whose  absorption  into  the  system 
is  capable  of  bringing  about  those  general  symptoms  of 
blood-poisoning  which  are  characteristic  of  puerperal  fever 
or  of  pyaemia  ^ 

If  we  refer  now  to  the  diseases  which  are  most  frequently 
endemic  or  epidemic  in  nature,  we  find  them  presenting  very 
different  degrees  of  contagiousness.  The  communicability 
of  some  of  these  affections  seems  to  vary  in  different  epi- 
demics, and  also,  even  during  the  same  epidemic,  in  different 
places.  Independently  of  this  individual  variability,  however, 
the  diseases,  looked  at  as  a  series,  present  remarkably  different 
degrees  of  contagiousness.  In  some  this  property  seems  to 
be  absent,  whilst  in  others  it  presents  a  most  sure  and  deadly 
virulence. 

Ordinary  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers  are,  like  rheu- 
matic fever,  endemic  rather  than  epidemic,  and  may,  as  we 
know  only  too  well,  be  developed  in  almost  any  individual  (and 
especially  in  a  new  comer)  when  he  ventures  into  a  malarious 
district.     All  attempts  to  connect  malaria  with  the  presence 

^  Just  as  contact  with  particular  compounds  (e.g.  cadaveric  poison) 
seems  to  favour  the  production  of  such  poisonous  compounds  in  a  wound, 
so  may  the  presence  of  carbolic  acid  tend  to  hinder  those  poison-gene- 
rating changes  which  are  otherwise  apt  to  occur  in  some  wounds.  The 
success  which  attends  the  use  of  carbolic  acid  may,  therefore,  be  quite 
independent  of  its  germ-killing  powers,  or  even  of  its  ability  to  arrest 
putrefactive  processes  in  general.  It  has  been  shown,  indeed,  to  act 
quite  differently  with  different  fermentable  fluids.  (*  Modes  of  Origin  of 
Lowest  Organisms,'  1871,  pp.  81-85,  and  Dr.  Dougal's  pamphlet,  p.  6.) 


CZXXvi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UpE. 

of  organisms  have  signally  failed ;  these  fevers,  indeed,  pre- 
vail in  the  most  variable  sites,  and  are  by  no  means  restricted 
to  marshy  districts.  Dr.  Fergusson  says :  '  The  first  time  I 
saw  intermittent  and  remittent  fever  become  epidemic  in  an 
army  was  in  1794,  when,  after  a  very  dry  and  hot  summer, 
our  troops,  in  the  month  of  August,  took  up  an  encampment 
at  Roosendaal  in  South  Holland.  The  soil  was  a  level  plain 
of  sand  with  perfectly  dry  surface,  where  no  vegetation 
existed  or  could  exist,  but  stunted  heath-plants.  On  digging, 
it  was  universally  found  percolated  with  water  to  within  a 
few  inches  of  the  surface,  which,  so  far  from  being  at  all 
putrid,  was  perfectly  potable  in  all  the  wells  of  the  camp.' 
These  diseases,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  are  most 
certainly  not  contagious,  and  yet  all  the  best  authorities  on 
the  subject  are  agreed  that  yellow  fever,  which  is  capable  of 
being  propagated  by  contagion  under  circumslances  favourable 
to  its  extension^  is  but  an  aggravated  form  of  remittent  fever, 
as  it  occurs  in  warm  countries  ^.  This  gradual  conversion 
of  a  non-contagious  into  a  contagious  form  of  disease,  com- 
bined with  the  limitations  as  to  the  nature  and  degree  of  its 
contagiousness,  which  the  widest  experience  compels  us  to 
accept,  are  facts  of  the  utmost  importance  for  those  who  seek 
to  learn  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  contagious  influence. 
And,  as  almost  similar  limitations  have  to  be  accepted  with 
regard  to  the  contagiousness  of  cholera  and  dysentery,  it  is 
of  the  greatest  importance  to  ascertain  the  natiu-e  of  these 


'  •  On  Marsh  Fever/  in  •  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Transactions,'  vol. 
ix.  p.  274.  And  yet,  concerning  this  disease.  Dr.  Milroy  says : — *  That 
yellow  fever  is  constantly  making  its  appearance,  at  intervals  more  or 
less  distant,  in  various  tropical  coimtnes,  quite  independently  of  any 
suspicion  of  antecedent  importation,  just  as  malignant  cholera  does  in 
Hindostan,  does  not  admit  of  doubt.  In  some  seasons,  from  causes 
which  we  have  hitherto  failed  to  discover,  it  exhibits  a  much  greater 
difiusion  and  migratory  power  than  in  other  seasons.  .  .  .  Malignant 
cholera  is  much  more  dimisible  and  migratory  than  yellow  fever ;  few 
regions  of  the  world  have  escaped  its  assault' 


APPENDIX  E.  cxixvii 


limitations.  Facts  abound,  and  speak  most  plainly  to  those 
who  will  read  them  dispassionately.  Referring  to  the  pre- 
valence of  yellow  fever  on  the  coast  of  Branl,  Dr.  McKinlay' 
wrote :— '  Almost  every  person  who  joined  the  Vntal  during 
the  prevalence  of  fever  was  affected  by  it;  but  no  person 
leaving  her,  under  the  disease,  communicated  it  to  another, 
in  another  place.'  That  is,  as  he  afterwards  explained,  so 
long  as  the  affected  persons  went  to  a  healthy  place  in  which 
the  disease  was  not  prevailing. 

Occurrences  of  this  kind  are  most  notorious ;  and,  when 
an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever  occurs  on  land,  it  has  often  been 
found  that  there  are  boundaries  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
tainted  district  where  the  disease  has  not,  and  to  which  it 
will  not,  spread*.  The  value  of  migration  from  the  affected 
region  is  a  matter  of  history,  and  the  circumstances  which 
have  revealed  it  have  all  the  value  of  experiments  conducted 
upon  a  large  scale.  '  During  the  epidemic  of  1 800,  at  Cadiz, 
14,000  persons  left  that  city  when  the  disease  became  sus- 
pected. These  people  fled  to  the  country,  where  they  re- 
mained free  from  the  epidemic;  while  of  the  57,499  who 
remained,  48,520  were  attacked,  of  whom  6,884  lost  their 
lives.'  And  again  we  read ' : — '  It  was  calculated  that  from 
Barcelona,  in  1821,  about  80,000  persons  fled  ;  and,  except 
some  who  departed  with  the  disease  already  upon  them, 
or  who  were  on  the  eve  of  being  attacked,  all  remained 
exempt  from  the  reigning  malady.'  But  when  individuals 
from  an  infected  district  pass  into  a  region  where  conditions 
prevail  which  are  favourable  to  its  spread,  or  which  are  them- 
selves capable  of  engendering  typhus  or  other  fevers,  then 
yellow  fever  appears  to  be  a  contagious  disease.     A  good 


'  '  Monthly  Journal  of  Medical  Scieac«,'  November,  1853,  p.  415. 
•  Sec  ■  Med.-Chir.  Rev..'  183*,  vol.  wiL  p.  338. 
'  '  Second  Report  on  Qtuu-autine,'  etc.,  p.  loi. 


CXXXviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

illustration  of  this  is  supplied  by  Sir  Gilbert  Blane  ^  He 
says: — *0n  the  i6th  of  May,  1795,  the  Thetis  and  Hussar 
frigates  captured  two  French  armed  ships  from  Guadaloupe, 
on  the  coast  of  America.  One  of  these  had  the  yellow  fever 
on  board ;  and  out  of  fourteen  men  sent  from  the  Hussar  to 
take  care  of  her,  nine  died  of  this  fever  before  she  reached 
Halifax,  on  the  28th  of  the  same  month,  and  the  five  others 
were  sent  to  the  hospital  sick  of  the  same  distemper.'  So 
far,  there  is  nothing  whatever  unusual ;  but  what  follows  is  a 
good  example  of  the  kind  of  testimony  which  exists  as  to  the 
occasional  contagiousness  of  the  disease.  '  Part  of  the 
prisoners,'  we  are  told,  *  were  removed  on  board  the  Hussar, 
and,  though  care  was  taken  to  select  those  seemingly  in 
perfect  health,  the  disease  spread  rapidly  in  thai  ship  (formerly 
healthy)  *,  so  that  near  one-third  of  the  whole  crew  was  more 
or  less  affected  by  it.'  Now,  these  facts  which  are  recorded 
concerning  yellow  fever,  are  very  comparable  with  what 
would  have  to  be  stated  concerning  dysentery.  This  also  is 
•  a  disease  liable  to  be  engendered  at  any  time  by  foul,  damp 
air,  and  the  use  of  bad  food  and  drink,  and  which,  at  first, 
shows  little,  if  any,  power  of  communicability,  but  which,  as 
cases  multiply,  and  when  the  sick  and  the  well  are  congre- 
gated together,  unquestionably  acquires  contagious  pro- 
perties '.'  The  same  power  of  arising  de  novo,  and  the  same 
absence  of  contagiousness,  except  under  the  influence  of 
favouring  circumstances,  seem  to  distinguish  the  direst  of 
our  modem  epidemics — cholera.  As  Dr.  Gavin  Milroy  says : 
'The  whole  history  of  the  disease  proves  that  contagion  plays 
a  very  small  and  subordinate  part  in  its  diffusion ;  and  no- 
where has  the  attempt  to  exclude  it  by  barring  intercourse 


APPENDIX  E.  exxiux 

with  places  already  affected  succeeded  in  protecting  a  country 
from  its  invasion.'  Out  of  the  area  in  which  it  habitually 
exists  as  an  endemic  disease,  malignant  cholera  does  not 
seem  to  be  directly  generable  'by  any  known  or  appreciable 
conditions  of  local  insalubrity,  however  much  these  conditions 
may  favour  its  development  or  aggravate  its  intensity  when 
it  is  once  present,  or  is  close  at  hand.'  The  spread  of  the 
disease  from  its  endemic  site  seems  undoubtedly  to  be  in- 
fluenced by  obscure  atmospheric  or  other  unknown  conditions, 
comprised  under  the  term  '  epidemic  influence.'  Sir  William 
Jenner  asks:  'What  is  the  specific  cause-relation  between 
cholera  and  choleraic  diarrhoea,  and  between  severe  summer 
diarrhoea  and  choleraic  diarrhoea?  Is  cholera,  in  the  form 
of  choleraic  diarrhoea,  always  amongst  us  ? '  And  Mr.  Mac- 
namara,  in  part,  replies  from  Calcutta  that  'cholerine  is 
simply  a  modified  form  of  Asiatic  cholera,  and  is  capable  of 
engendering  this  more  deadly  form  of  the  disease  in  other 
people  by  means  of  the  dejecta.'  He  says,  also :  '  I  know 
that  several  of  the  leading  practitioners  in  this  part  of  India 
are  of  opinion  that  cholera  is  "  a  something  generated  in  the 
bodies  of  those  attacked  by  it,  quite  independently  of  all 
external  influences'."' 

Turning  now  to  such  affections  as  influenza  and  mumps, 
these  also  are  diseases  which  present  various  degrees  of 
contagiousness,  and  are  frequently  epidemic  in  their  mode  of 
onset.     Both  are  believed  to  be  capable  of  arising  dt  novo*, 

'  'A  Treatise  on  Asiatic  Cholera,"  1870,  p.  317.  It  is  only  fair  to 
add.  IiovfTfr,  that  Mr.  Macnamara  doesnot  give  his  aisenl  to  IliiEview. 
He  is  a  firm  believer  in  the  communicability  of  cholera.  H<  admits 
that  *  sporadic  cholera  '  is  easily  generable  di  itovo.  and  that  '  cholerine,' 
from  which  il  is  often  quite  indistinguishable,  is  capable  of  ^ving  rise 
in  others  to  malignant  cholera  ;  and  yet  he  wishes  to  maintain  the  dis- 
tinctiveness of  the  latter  form  of  the  disease.   Bnt  other  affections  also 


Cxl  THE  BEGWNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

although  the  spread  of  influenza  is  undoubtedly  promoted 
by  unknown  'epidemic  influences.'  Sir  Thomas  Watson 
says :  '  The  visitation  is  a  great  deal  too  sudden  and  too 
widely  spread  to  be  capable  of  explanation '  by  mere  con- 
tagion. He  adds:  *  It  has  been  obsen^ed  to  occur  also  at  the 
same  time  on  land,  and  on  board  different  ships,  which  have 
had  no  communication  with  the  shore  nor  with  each  other  \' 
If,  however,  we  direct  our  attention  to  such  affections  as 
typhoid  fever,  relapsing  fever,  typhus,  the  plague,  and  cerebro- 
spinal meningitis,  we  meet  with  a  group  in  which  different 
degrees  of  contagiousness  are  presented,  but  concerning  the 
origin  of  which  de  rurvo^  or  independently  of  contagion,  there 
can  now  be  litde  doubt.  Although  this  is  a  doctrine  which 
has  long  been  supported  by  many  who  have  paid  most  atten- 
tion to  these  diseases,  it  has  been  much  enforced  and  strength- 
ened, of  late  years,  by  the  investigations  of  Dr.  Murchison. 
The  contagiousness  of  typhoid  or  enteric  fever  is  very  low ; 
and,  as  Dr.  Murchison  says,  *  although  enteric  fever  is,  under 
certain  circumstances,  communicable,  a  large  number  of  cases 
commence  under  circumstances  which  appear  to  exclude 
every  possible  source  of  contagion.  The  truth  of  this  obser- 
vation is  almost  universally  admitted ;  and  it  is,  therefore, 
necessary  to  search  for  some  other  cause  of  the  disease  than 
contagion.'    An  enormous  amount  of  evidence  tends  to  show 

p.  70) : — *  A  curious  contagious  disease  is  recorded  by  Huxley  to  have 
arisen  on  board  the  surveying  vessel  Rattlesnake,  characterised  by  glan- 
dular and  diffuse  cellular  innammation,  by  common  and  phlegmonous 
erysipelas,  and  by  mumps.* 

^  *  Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic,'  vol.  ii.  p  43 ;  where  examples  are 
given.  On  this  subject,  also.  Dr.  Gavin  Milroy  says :  *  It  has  been  confi- 
dently stated  that  every  known  visitation  of  the  epidemic  in  the  Faroe 
Islands  has  been  preceded  by  the  arrival  of  a  vessel  or  vessels  from 
Denmark,  when  it  was  prevailing  there.  But  such  a  statement  must 
not  be  too  readily  received;  as  it  is  well  known  that  other  islands, 
equally  distant  (totci  ^x^n  coiiVmcxvl^  have  been  visited,  quite  indepen- 
dently of  amva\s  VYicititotQ.! — ^«ft  ^^^  ^^  «:(l^t;\<&  tsa.  *  influcnia  by 
Dr.  Parkcs  in  KeyuoVds'^  *  ^^\.«xel  oIll^fi^Miafc;  n^.\^ 


APPENDIX  B.  cxli 

that  emanations  from  sewage  and  from  some  forms  of  putre- 
fying matter  are  capable  of  exciting  the  disease  in  those  who 
are  favourably  predisposed,  although,  in  Other  cases,  it  seems 
to  be  more  directly  communicated  by  means  of  drinking 
water  contaminated  by  sewage  containing  the  dejections 
from  a  typhoid  patient '. 

Relapsing  fever  and  typhus  present  many  points  of  resem- 
blance: both  are  essentially  epidemic  diseases;  both  are 
undoubtedly  contagious.  They  generally  occur  during 
seasons  of  great  scarcity,  and  they  prevail  most  widely 
amongst  the  poorest  class  of  the  population.  Overcrowding 
an<I  defective  ventilation,  especially  when  associated  with  bad 
and  insufficient  food,  'not  only  favour  the  propagation  of 
typhus,  by  concentrating  the  emanations  from  the  sick,  but 

*  Referring  lo  the  views  of  Dr.  W.  Budd  and  others  as  to  the  disease 
beine  propa^tcd  only  by  sewage  which  is  contaminated  by  tj'phoid 
sloofi.  Dr.  Murchison  ssys:— ■  Admiltinc  fully  that  this  view  offers  the 
best  explanation  of  those  coses  where  the  fever  is  propagated  by  the 
sick,  many,  if  not  most,  of  the  lacts  adduced  in  its  snppoil  are  explicable 
on  the  theory  of  spontaneous  generation,  while  in  the  others  the  mode 
of  tiansmission  is  less  clearly  established  than  might  be  desired.  On  the 
one  hand,  lacts  are  adduced  to  bhow  (hot  the  disease  is  contagious ;  and, 
on  the  other,  cases  are  mentioned  lo  demonstrate  the  intimate  connection 
between  its  origin  and  bad  drainage.  The  evidence,  however,  is  still 
insuflicient  to  prove  that  the  stools  of  the  sick  have  conalituted  the 
medium  of  commnnication.  This  conclusion,  it  seems  to  me,  has  been 
jumped  at  from  (he  unwillingness  to  admit  that  a  commonicable  disease 
can  ever  have  a  spontaneous  origin.  Bui,  in  the  second  place,  there  are 
many  facts  which  show  that  enteric  fever  often  arises  from  bad  dtoinage, 


independently  of  any  transmission  from  the  sidt.  As  long  ai 
flows  freely  through  a  dram,  there  is  little  danger  of  the  emanations  from 
it  giving  rise  to  enteric  fever.  The  danger  arises  when  the  drain  becomes 
eb^ttd  tip.  when  the  sewage  stagnates  and  ferments.'  The  dejections 
from  a  typhoid  patient  being  remarkably  prone  to  undergo  decomposition. 
Dr.  Murchison  odds :  *  It  is  possible  that  the  stools  of  enteric  fever  are 
more  prone  than  ordinary  sewage  to  undergo  the  ^fuiior  fermentation  by 
which  Che  poison  is  produced,  and  that  even  in  certain  cases  the  fermenta- 
tion may  havecommencedbefoie  their  discharge  from  the  bowels.  In  this 
way.  enteric  fever  may  occasionally  be  propagated  by  the  stools,  but 
even  then  it  seems  more  probable  that  the  poison  is  always  the  result  of 
dicom/ioBiioii,  than  that  it  is  denvable  from  a  specific  eniption  like  ttwl 
of  smidl-poR.'  ('On  the  Canses  ol  ContittncA  5«iic»",  va'Vnwi.."*'^ 
Rrv..- 1863). 


CxKi  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 

appear  to  be  capable  of  generating  the  poison  de  ruwoJ 
After  alluding  to  the  mode  in  which  epidemics  commence, 
Dr.  Murchison  adds :    '  I  would  allude  in  particular  to  an 
epidemic  of  true  typhus  which  occurred  in  1843,  at  Broulhac, 
an    elevated   village    in    the   Canton   de  Puy,  in   France. 
Most  of  the  inhabitants  were  in  a  state  bordering  on  starva- 
tion ;  and  the  first  cases  were  traced  to  a  house  where  there 
was  overcrowding  and  no  ventilation.     It  is  impossible  to 
conceive  that  the  disease  was  imported,  inasmuch  as  true 
t3rphus  was  not  prevalent  at  the  time  in  any  other  part  of 
France  \'      With  regard  to  relapsing  fever,  on   the  other 
hand,  it  has  been  shown '  that  this  (which  is  essentially  the 
famine  fever)  is  more  dependent  upon  extreme  starvation 
than  upon  overcrowding.     Although  it  is  not  always  easy  to 
separate  these  two  causes,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  in 
mixed  epidemics  of  typhus  and  relapsing  fever,  relapsing 
fever  is  most  prevalent  towards  the  commencement,  and 
typhus  towards  the  close,  of  the  outbreak.     Then,  again,  we 
know  that  relapsing  fever  is  not  confined  to  large  towns,  but 
that  it  also  decimates  the  starving  inhabitants  of  coimtry 
places. 

»  Dr.  Murchison  very  aptly  remarks : — *  It  has  been  the  custom  with 
many  writers  to  refer  epidemics  of  typhus  to  some  subtle  "  epidemic  in- 
fluence ;'*  and  thus  when  a  failure  of  the  crops  has  been  followed  by 
typhus,  both  of  these  disasters  have  been  ascribed  to  a  common  atmo- 
spheric cause.  But  of  such  atmospheric  influences,  capable  of  producing 
typhus,  we  know  nothing;  their  very  existence  is  doubtful,  and  the 
employment  of  the  term  has  too  often  had  the  effect  of  cloaking  human 
ignorance,  or  of  stifling  the  search  after  truth.  K  typhus  be  due  to  any 
"epidemic  influence,**  why  does  this  influence  select  large  towns  and 
spare  the  country  districts  ?  Why  does  it  fall  upon  large  towns  in  exact 
proportion  to  the  degree  of  privation  and  overcrowding  among  the  poor  ?' 
(loc.  cit.)  Still,  although  the  prevalence  of  typhus  fever  may  be  in  great 
part  accounted  for  without  resorting  to  unknown  *  epidemic  influoices,' 
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  there  are  no  unknown  cosmical  influences 
which  have  to  do  with  the  outbreak  and  spread  of  various  epidemic 
diseases.  Let  us  rather  admit  that  which  seems  so  probable,  and  live 
in  the  hope  t\vat  'weinAN  one  ^^  «s^:«(\:^TL\EkJQit^  ^s^RsisutT^v^their  nature. 


APPENDIX  E.  cxliii 

Cerebro- spinal  menin^tis  is  believed  by  many  to  be  only 
a  modified  form  of  typhus',  though  this  is  more  certainly 
the  case  with  the  plague,  in  which  the  typhus  poison  is 
evolved  in  its  severest  fonn.  Undoubtedly  contagious, 
though  formerly  believed  to  be  infectious,  in  the  very  highest 
degree.  Dr.  Gavin  Milroy  says :  '  The  whole  history  of 
medical  opinion  on  the  subject  of  the  plague  affords  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  instances  on  record  of  fanciful  specula- 
tion taking  the  place  of  sober  and  careful  inquiry.'  And 
then  he  adds :  '  That  the  plague  has  frequently  become 
developed  de  novo,  and  quite  independently  of  any  antecedent 
infection,  cannot  be  doubted.  The  recent  outbreak  at  Ben- 
gazi,  on  the  Barbary  coast,  only  confirms  previous  testimony ; 
and  as  this  outbreak  occurred  after  many  years'  disappear- 
ance of  the  pestilence  in  that  place,  as  well  as  throughout 
Egypt  and  Turkey  gcneraUy,  no  other  interpretation  is 
possible.  Then,  as  on  many  other  occasions,  the  disease 
sprung  up  amongst  want,  wretchedness,  and  squalor,  and  its 
true  nature  was  not  recognised  for  many  weeks,  in  con- 
sequence of  its  close  resemblance  to  ordinary  typhus,  to 
which  it  seems  to  be  nearly  allied '.' 

Now  the  remaining  members  of  the  group  of  specific  in- 
fective diseases  are  varicella,  hooping-cough,  measles,  scarlet 
fever,  and  small-pox.  The  knowledge  which  we  possess 
concerning  the  mode  of  origin  of  these  otherwise  tlian  by 
infection,  is  almost  nit.  They  differ  amongst  themselves,  it 
is  true,  as  regards  their  degree  of  infectiousness;  but,  as 


'  Doubts,  however,  are  entertained  on  this  subject.  (See  Mr.  Rad- 
clifTe's  Bjlicle  in  Reynolds's  ■  Sjrstem  of  Medicine,'  vol.  ii.) 

'  ■  Transaclions  of  the  Epidemiological  Society,' vol,  v.  p.  174.  This  U 
generally  the  rule  with  regard  to  epidemics.  They  occur  mostly  at 
limes  when  other  ordinary  or  non-specific  affections,  to  which  they  are 
roost  closely  related,  are  prevalent.  And  duiine  the  period  of  tbeir 
decline,  the  more  virulent  epidemic  forms  of  the  mcoimv  «;^a  vsOkVo 
Upst  into  man  onliiuuy  and  non-conlagwos  fonca  tA  diaetat. 


cxliv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  UFE. 

Others  have  suggested,  they  are  probably  more  strictly  de- 
pendent upon    individual  states  than  upon   external  con- 
ditions) and  consequently  are  more  baffling  to  those  who 
attempt  to  fathom  their  causes.     Measles,  scarlet  fever,  and 
small-pox,  are  undoubtedly  amongst  the  most  contagious 
of  diseases,  and  therefore  the  chances  are  always  strongly 
in  favour  of  their  contagious  origin  in  any  given  case.     But 
should  this  satisfy  us  ?    Should  we  be  content  to  say  that 
even  measles,  scarlet  fever,  and  small-pox,  are  propagable 
only  by  means  of  contagion,  and  cannot   arise  de  ncvo'^} 
Are  they  not  strictly  comparable  with  many  other  general 
infectious  diseases  which  undoubtedly  arise  *  spontaneously  *  ? 
Do  we  not  see  amongst  those  which  may  so   arise  that 
the  degree  of  contagiousness  is  altogether  variable  ?     Does 
not  this  seem  to  increase  gradually  in  each  affection,  as 
the  off-cast  particles  tend  to  undergo  molecular  changes, 
which  are  more  and  more  capable  of  initiating  chemical 
actions  of  a  spreading  character  in  the  blood,  or  mucous 


*  It  seems  to  me  that  at  present  the  iacts  are  looked  at  much  too 
exclusively  from  one  point  of  view.     It  is  fullv  admitted  by  many  per- 
sons that  during  epidemics,  more  especially,  a  large  number  of  cases  of 
small-pox  occur,  even  in  isolated  situations,  in  which  it  is  quite  impos- 
sible to  obtain  any  evidence  of  contagion.     When  we  consider  further 
that  the  disease  is  epidemic  at  times,  and  then  almost  dies  out,  although 
multitudes  remain  who  might  be  infected, we  must  admit  that  something 
besides  contagion  is  undoubtedly  operative  in  facilitating  its  spread 
during  these  times,  and  therefore  we  may  assume  it  to  be  possible  that 
this  *  epidemic  influence '  of  itself  might,  in  certain  persons,  suffice  to 
engender  the  disease  without  contagion.    Dr.  Gavin  Milroy  (loc  cit.) 
says :  '  This  most  interesting  subject  has  not  been  investigated  with  that 
patient  and  searching  care  which  all  physical  problems  demand.    The 
prevailing  negative  belief  rests  on  merely  presumptive  grounds,  rather 
than  on  sifting  inquiry.    That  outbreaks  of  measles,  hooping-cough,  etc.. 
have  been  observ«i  in  various  remote  islands,  and  at  distant  intervals  of 
time,  without  any  traceable  connexion  with  previous  cases,  either  in  the 
country  itself  or  amongst   recent  arrivals,  can   scarcely  be  doubted. 
Hillary  particularly  alludes  to  his  having  noticed  sudi  occurrences  in 
Barbadoes ;  and  the  medical  historv  of  other  West  India  islands  would 
afford,  I  believe,  sAXEa\ax  e.Nvi<tTvcs!:     ^^«&  ti^s^  ^^cker's  *  Epidemics*' 
pp.  ai5-ai».) 


APPENDIX  E.  cxlv 

surfaces  of  ordinaiy  individuals  ?  And  does  not  the  diminish- 
ing contagiousness  of  different  diseases  seem  to  be  due  to 
the  fact  that  off-cast  particles  in  these  affections  are  less  and 
less  capable  of  acting  upon  the  healthy  fluids  and  mucous 
surfaces  of  the  body,  but  require  them  to  be  altered,  now  by 
one  set  of  agencies  affecting  the  general  health  and  now 
by  another,  before  any  of  such  particles  can  initiate  those 
changes  which  lead  to  the  evolution  of  similar  specific 
poisons  within  the  body  ?  Hooping-cough,  measles,  scarlet 
fever,  and  small-pox,  would,  in  this  case,  be  merely  the  last 
terms  of  a  series,  differing  from  the  other  members  simply 
in  degree,  but  not  in  kind — and  therefore  as  capable  of  being 
generated  de  novo  as  either  of  the  others,  although  much 
more  capable  than  they  are  of  being  disseminated  by  means 
of  contagion. 

If  we  reject  this  notion,  what  remains  for  us  ?  The  germ- 
theory  is  quite  untenable — the  analogy  which  has  been 
thought  to  exist  between'  the  causes  and  nature  of  certain 
diseases  and  the  specific  and  unalterable  characters  of  living 
organisms  is  erroneous  in  both  its  aspects.  And  even  if  the 
diseases  are  now  only  propagable  by  contagion — ^just  as  the 
higher  living  things  are  propagable  by  reproduction — they 
must  nevertheless  have  originated  once ;  and,  if  once,  why 
not  now  ?  Or,  declining  to  admit  even  so  much,  shall  we 
refuse  to  bear  our  own  burdens  ?  Shall  we  shift  the  difficulty, 
and  suppose  that  the  poisons  of  syphilis,  measles,  scarlet 
fever,  small-pox,  and  other  diseases,  have  been  evolved 
amidst  the  unknown  conditions  obtaining  upon  the  surface 
of  an  unknown  world,  whose  disruption  has  scattered  them 
broadcast,  and  conveyed  them  to  us,  with  other  never-dying 
germs,  upon  the  verdant  surface  of  a  '  moss-grown  fr^- 
ment '  i  With  such  alternatives,  surely  our  choice  cannot  be 
doubtful. 

If  wc  tun]  to  a  sober  survey  ol  ftie  ^acx.^ '*i\i\'Jti  Xv&^ci*»'^^ 

VOL.  D.  k 


cxlvi 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 


US  concerning  the  infective  diseases  as  a  class,  our  difficulties 
will  be  much  diminished :  simple  and  obvious  conclusions 
will  appear. 


/     Many  ^than 
cm^kihU  of 
artttng  de 
nova 


Parasitic  Diseases  affecting— 

f  External  (cutaneous)  surface. 
Internal  (mucous)  surfaces. 
Closed  (serous)  cavities. 
Tissues  of  orrans  or  parts.    {PsorMpermut, 
Cysticerd  Nematcias,  etc.) 
Blood.    {BmOfridia  in  '  MalifH^nt  Pustule. 
Psoro^fermue  ia  '  pebrine,'  etc.)  '* 


Apparently 
caused  and 
pro^ragated  by  the 

presence  and 

self-muUipUcation 

of  Uring  unit&. 


TISSUE  Diseases 

A.  Diseaset  <if  Internal  Formed  Tissues  and 
of  Mucous  Membranes, 


AU  inoeutabU 

and  ca/abU  o/ 

arising  de 

novo. 


Fibro>plastic  growths. 
Cancerous  groirths. 
Tubercular  growths. 
Glanders. 
SyphUis. 
Gonorrhora. 
Purulent  ophthalmia. 
Diphtheria  and  Croup. 


R.  Diseases  of  the  Blood  (principaltys. 


All  contagious 

and  capable  of 

arising  de 

novo. 


Contagiousness 

either  absent, 

little  marked, 

or  mare  or  less 

virulent;  all 

Probably  capable 

^arising  de 

nova 


Erysipelas. 
Puerperal  fever. 
Surgical  fever. 
Pvaemia. 

fiospital  gangrene. 
Rabies.  * 

Rhetunatic  fever. 

a.  Dengue. 

b.  Sweating  Sickness. 
Intermittent  fever. 

a.  Remittent  fever. 
*.  Yellow  fever. 
Summer  diarrhoea. 

a.  Choleraic  diarrhopa. 

b.  Cholera. 
Dysentery. 
Iiinucnza. 
Mumps. 

Relapsing  fever. 
Typhoidiever. 
Typhus  fever. 

a.  Cerebro-spinal  me- 

ningitisT 

b.  Plague 
Varicella. 
Hooping-cough. 
Measles. 
Scarlet  fever. 
Small-pox. 


Principally 
sporadic. 


Principally 
endetnic. 


> 


Often 
epidentie. 


Caused  and 

propagated  by 

cnemko-pbysical 

agencio.  and 

not  by  the 

amitipUcation  of 

tmng  nnits. 


In  the  first  place,  we  find  a  group  of  diseases  due  to  the 
presence  upon  or  within  the  body  of  parasitic  organisms. 
These  are  partly  local  and  partly  general  affections,  the  latter 
being  intensely  contagious,  and  on  that  account  frequently 
confounded  with  other  general  infectious  diseases  in  which 
living  orgamstn!&  Ao  ivov  occox.  TKese  general  parasitic 
diseases  are  ptopaL^aXeA  \>^  ^^  ^^^^xu^^  ^xA  Tw^cscsJsiKiia^^ 


APPENDIX  E.  cilvii 

of  living  units,  whilst  those  of  the  nest  great  class  are  not '. 
The  tendency  in  the  fonner  is  towards  death ;  the  tendency 
in  the  latter  towards  recovery.  The  non-parasitic  infective 
or  specific  diseases  are  also  partly  local  and  partly  general 
affections.  The  local  affections  are  closely  allied  to  other 
morbid  states,  such  as  cancer  and  tubercle,  with  which  they 
are  not  usually  classed.  Many  of  these  local  diseases  tend 
to  become  general  diseases.  Similar  morbid  growths  spring 
up  in  various  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  blood  itself  becomes 
afTccted.  They  are  also  more  or  less  apt  to  spread  from 
individual  to  individual.  All  are  capable  of  being  generated 
dt  novo.  Such  local  affections  are  united  by  the  closest 
bonds  of  similarity  to  the  more  general  zymotic  diseases, 
amongst  which  all  degrees  of  contagiousness  are  manifested. 
The  members  of  the  whole  series,  however,  are  intimately 
related  to  one  another;  and  their  mode  of  propagation  is 
essentially  similar,  even  though  the  readiness  with  which 
contagion  occurs  is  variable.  Very  many  of  them  are  im- 
doubtedly  generable  de  novo;  and  the  others  are  probably 
also  capable  of  arising  '  spontaneously,'  though  the  proof  of 
this,  on  account  of  their  highly  contagious  nature,  is  difficult 
to  establish. 

All  these  latter  diseases,  therefore,  are  dependent  upon 
local  perverted  modes  of  growth,  or  upon  chemical  changes 
of  a  definite,  though  unknown,  character  taking  place  in  the 
blood — partly  under  the  influence  of  general  causes,  and 
partly  owing  to  the  initiation  of  chemical  changes  induced 
by  contact -action  of  contagious  particles  or  fluids.  As  with 
diseases  in  general,  so  with  these,  two  sets  of  factors  are 


'  A  more  complete  invesligatioii  (since  the  delivery  of  this  lecture) 
of  the  hell  known  conctming  para»lic  diseases  bas  led  me  to  make 
certain  important  modifications  in  the  liew  above  expressed  as  lo  the 
rih  or  (he  parasites  in  these  alTection&,una.i^wicn\>'^  i^sxtnox-Vi 
Chap,  ax. 


.  •  c 


cxiviii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

frequently  concerned  in  their  production.  There  are  the 
'predisposing  causes'  pertaining  to  the  condition  and  ten- 
dencies (either  inherited  or  acquired)  of  the  individual,  and 
there  are  the  *  exciting  causes '  or  external  influences  (usual 
or  unusual)  at  the  time  operative  upon  this  individual.  The 
combined  influence  of  these  causes  of  disease  are  often 
called  into  play  in  the  production  of  the  infective  malady, 
just  as  much  as  they  are  influential  in  the  origination  of 
non-infective  diseases.  But  predisposing  causes  may,  in 
conjunction  with  ordinary  external  agencies,  suffice  in  some 
cases ;  just  as,  in  other  cases,  the  exciting  cause  or  causes 
may  be  capable  of  initiating  the  affections  in  the  average 
healthy  individual,  without  the  aid  of  any  predisposition. 

Unless  we  entertain  opinions  of  this  kind,  facts,  which  are 
admitted  by  all,  seem  quite  incapable  of  being  explained — 
whether  having  reference  to  the  '  generalisation'  of  morbid 
growths  within  the  body,  or  to  the  spread  of  infectious  dis- 
eases amongst  the  community.  Cancerous  particles  in  the 
circulation  are  wholly  inoperative  in  certain  individuals  in 
inducing  the  growth  of  cancer  in  distant  parts,  whilst  they  are 
only  partially  operative  in  many  other  individuals,  however 
numerously  they  may  exist.  Contact  with  the  contagia  of 
ophthalmia  or  diphtheria  will  excite  the  disease  in  some  per- 
sons and  not  in  others.  Yellow  fever  and  cholera  are  *  conta- 
gious '  only  when  certain  favouring  conditions  are  present  to 
facilitate  the  operation  of  the  specific  poisons  of  these  diseases. 
Rabies  cannot  be  communicated  to  certain  dogs.  Professor 
Gamgee  ^  mentions  a  case  in  which  a  pointer  did  not  con- 
tract the  disease  although  it  was  bitten  seventeen  times  by 
mad  dogs.  And  even  the  most  contagious  afi*ections — 
those  in  which  the  poison  is  usually  sufficiently  potent  to 
act  upon  the  average  individual — do  not  seem  capable 
of  being  commMavcaX.^^  \o  ^om^  ^^I's^orcys*,    Do  we  not  see 


APPENDIX  E,  cxlix 


individuals  fully  exposed  to  the  contagion  of  measles,  scarlet 
fever,  and  small-pox,  who  yet  fail  to  contract  the  disease  ? 
Facts  of  this  kind  are  familiar  to  all  medical  men.  Sir 
Thomas  Watson  has  referred  to  the  case  of  '  an  old  woman 
who  for  years  had  been  in  the  habit  of  going  from  village  to 
village  as  a  nurse ;  and  of  nursing  a  great  number  of  persons 
labouring  imder  small-pox,  which  she  had  never  had,  and 
against  which  she  (naturally  enough)  believed  herself  proof:' 
but,  he  adds, '  at  length  she  was  taken  ill,  and  died  of  small- 
pox in  the  eighty-fourth  year  of  her  age.'  Again,  he  says : 
'In  1845,  a  lady  with  whom  I  am  acquainted  went  through 
an  attack  of  measles,  that  disease  being  prevalent  in  the 
village  where  she  was  then  residing.  She  had  never  had 
the  measles  previously ;  yet  she  had  long  before  personally 
tended  eleven  of  her  twelve  children  when  ill  of  the  same 
complaint  \' 

Such  facts  are  quite  inexplicable  in  accordance  with  the 
vital  or  *  germ-theory'  of  causation  of  these  diseases,  but 
they  become  much  more  easy  to  understand  in  accordance 
with  the  views  which  have  just  been  enunciated.  They  are, 
further,  thoroughly  harmonious  with  the  results  of  experi- 
ments made  by  myself  and  others  with  reference  to  the  causes 
of  fermentation.  These  results  have  led  me  to  reject,  as 
too  narrow  and  exclusive,  the  *  vital  theory '  of  Pasteur,  and 
to  adopt  the  broader  physico-chemical  doctrines  of  Liebig, 
which  appear  to  be  harmonious  with  all  the  facts.  In  en- 
deavouring to  explain  the  initiation  of  fermentation  in  any 
particular  fluid  which  has  been  boiled,  we  have  also  to 
consider  the  influence  of  intrinsic  tendencies  in  the  fluid, 
in  combination  with  the  exciting  or  external  agencies  to 
which  it  is  subjected.  In  some  cases  the  intrinsic  ten- 
dencies may  of  themselves  be  potent  enough  to  initiate 
the  process;  whilst  in  other  instances  the  mere  contact- 
'  *  Principles  and  Practioe  oi  P\rpic^  ^oV  vk.  v«  i^^« 

*3 


cl  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

action  of  an  unhealed  organic  fragment  combines  with 
weaker  inherent  tendencies  to  incite  the  fermentative  jffo- 
cess.  Fermentations  may  be  associated  with  the  presence 
of  organisms,  or  they  may  occur  independently.  The 
ordinary  zjnnotic  diseases  are  comparable  with  fermenta- 
tions of  the  latter  class  ^ ;  and  their  sevend  contagia  act 
after  the  fashion  of  the  mere  dead  organic  fragment  upon 
the  fermentable  fluid  *. 

^  It  is,  however,  quite  conceivable  that,  in  certain  cases,  the  changes 
in  the  blood  might,  in  the  last  stages  of  the  disease,  assume  such  a 
character  as  to  lead  to  the  evolution  of  Bacteria  in  this  fhiid.  Such  a 
change,  which  may  occasionally  occur  during  life,  does  undoubtedly 
occur  very  soon  after  death,  in  some  diseases.  In  two  cases,  one  of 
rheumatic  fever  and  one  of  typhoid  fever,  in  which  the  temperatiu^ 
had  gone  up  to  ]o8-iio''Fahr.  a  few  hours  before  death,  I  found 
the  vessels  of  the  brain  and  of  other  parts  of  the  body  containing 
myriads  of  Bacteria  even  within  forty  hours  after  death,  and  whilst  the 
temperature  of  the  air  had  not  becii  over  65*'Fahr.  The  blood  was 
blackish  and  fluid,  the  organs  were  much  blood-stained,  and,  in  addition 
to  other  marks  of  putreuiction,  bubbles  of  gas  were  abundant  in  the 
meshes  of  the  pia  mater.  The  blood  of  such,  and  of  other  similar 
patients  examined  during  life,  has  never  revealed  to  me  the  least  trace 
of  Bacteria,  Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson,  moreover,  has  ascertained  that  the 
blood  and  other  fluids  of  the  body  do  not  generally  exhibit  any  zymotic 
tendencies  (see  *  Thirteenth  Report  of  Medical  Officer  of  Privy  Council*). 
Some  of  the  Bacteria  which  were  fouind  after  death,  I  behcve  to  have 
been  evolved  dc  novo,  whilst  others  were  descendants  of  those  which  had 
so  arisen  in  the  putrescent  blood.  No  other  view  seems  to  me  to  be  so 
tenable  as  this.  The  fluids  in  a  pysemic  abscess  may  occasionally  be  on 
the  road  towards  similar  results,  and,  even  if  no  Bacteria  exist,  such 
fluids  might  exhibit  '  zymotic'  properties. 

*  Look,  again,  at  the  great  moral  epidemics  which  were  so  prevalent 
in  the  middle  ages,  and  which  in  their  most  marked  form  have  extended 
almost  to  our  own  times.  Here,  also,  we  have  a  changed  mode  of 
action  in  certain  parts  of  the  body,  brought  about  partly  by  *  predis- 
posing,' and  partly  by  *  exciting*  causes.  We  may  read  in  Hecker 
(*  Epidemics  of  the  Middle  Ages,'  p.  142)  as  follows  : — '  In  a  Methodist 
chapel  in  Redruth,  a  man,  during  divine  service,  cried  out  with  a  loud 
voice,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  **  ?  at  the  same  time  manifesting 
the  greatest  uneasiness  and  solicitude  respecting  the  condition  of  his 
soul.  Some  other  members  of  the  congregation  followed  his  example, 
cried  out  in  the  same  form  of  words,  and  seemed  shortly  after  to  simer 
the  most  excruciating  bodily  pain.  This  strange  occurrence  was  soon 
publicly  known ;  and  hundreds  of  people  who  had  come  thither,  either 
Attracted  bv  curiosity  or  by  a  desire,  from  other  motives,  to  see  the 
sufiferers,  feu  into  the  same  state.    The  chapel  remained  open  for  some 


APPENDIX  E.  cli 

Some  boiltd  fluids  are  quite  incapable  by  themselves  of 
initiating  a  fermentative  process;  but  this  tells  no  more 
against  the  positive  abilities  of  other  fluids,  than  the  fact 
that  certain  diseases  are  unable  to  spring  up  amongst  a 
particular  community,  tells  against  the  circumstance  that  they 
do  so  arise  amongst  other  communities  where  a  number  of 
unhygienic  suiroundings,  previously  absent,  are  also  opera- 
tive in  producing  the  result'. 

Amongst  the  '  exciting '  causes  of  disease,  there  must  be 
many  which  are  to  us  at  present  utterly  obscure.  More 
espcciaUy  is  this  the  case  with  epidemic  diseases.  There  are, 
undoubtedly,  '  epidemic  influences '  concerning  which  we 
know  scarcely  anything,  but  whose  existence  is  only  too 
surely  attested  by  the  history  of  the  great  epidemic  and  epi- 
zootic affecdons.    As  Fleming  says,  in  his  '  Animal  Plagues,' 

days  and  nights,  and  from  thai  point  the  new  disorder  spread  itself,  with 
the  rapidity  of  lightning,  over  the  neighl>ouring  towns  of  Cunbome, 
Helston,  Tniro.  Peniya,  and  Falmouth,  as  well  as  over  the  villages 
in  (he  vicinity.  Whilst  thus  advancing,  it  decreased  iu  some  measure 
at  the  place  where  it  had  first  appeared,  and  il  coH^iud  ilstif  ibrougbom 
to  Ibt  Milkodiil  cbaptl.  It  was  only  by  the  vxrdt  wbicb  bmr  ban  mm- 
lionrd  [conlagia]  thai  it  was  cuciled,  and  it  seized  none  but  pmplt  of  tbt 
lowtit  tdvcaiion.  Those  who  were  attacked  betrayed  the  greatest  anguish, 
and  fell  into  convulsions.  .  , .  According  to  a  moderate  computation 
4,000  people  were  within  a  very  short  lime  affected  with  this  conmlMve 
malady.'  The  various  signs  and  symptoms  of  the  malady  ate  then 
described. 

'  There  is,  however,  a  great  tendency  to  draw  such  conclusions ;  just 
as  there  is  a  tendency  will  others  to  conclude  that  Baeltria  do  not  arise 
di  novo,  because  there  is  no  evidence  of  such  an  occurrence  when  deahng 
with  I^steur's  solution  or  a  few  other  Quids,  diflerenl  from  those  in 
which  the  process  is  staled  to  occur.  Let  any  person,  for  instance, 
repeal  Dr.  Sanderson's  thirteenth  experiment  (' Thirteenth  Report  of  the 
Medical  Officer  of  the  Privy  Council ")  with  a  strong  infusion  of  hay  of 
turnip,  rather  than  with  Pasteur's  fluid,  and  then  sudi  results  will  occur 
that,  from  Dr.  Sanderson's  data,  he  will  have  no  option  hut  to  admit 
that  Saearia  do  arise  dt  Hon>.  It  is  surprising  that  such  an  CKperiment 
'n  the  face  of  all  that  has  been  said  concerning  the  produc- 


clii  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE, 


*  It  has  been  a  matter  of  common  observation  from  the  earliest 
times,  and  our  history  will  testify  to  its  accuracy,  that  wide- 
spread pestilence  in  plants,  and  murrain  in  animals,  have 
frequently  either  preceded,  accompanied,  or  followed  closely 
on  those  visitations  which  caused  mortality  and  mourning  in 
the  habitations  of  men ;  showing  an  identity  of  causation  or 
affinity  which  strongly  tempts  the  inquirer  to  solve  the  secret 
of  their  joint  production  *.'     *  Causes '  of  this  kind,  however 
obscure,  are  imdoubtedly  none  the  less  real.     Whilst  we 
may  hope,  therefore,  that  increasing  knowledge  will  ultimately 
enable  us  to  throw  more  light  upon  their  nature,  we  may  at 
least  feel  assured  that  the  efficacy  of  these  '  causes '  may  be 
increased  or  diminished  by  us  at  will.     '  Exciting '  causes  of 
all  ordinary  severity  require  to  be  supplemented  by  the  action 
of  'predisposing'  causes  existing  in  the  individual  himself 
before  disease  can  be  generated.    It  is  true  that  we  are  com- 
paratively powerless  to  rectify  mere  individual  idiosyncrasies, 
of  the  very  nature  and  existence  of  which  we  may  be  ignorant, 
but  they  constitute  a  mere  fractional  part  of  the  predisposing 
causes  which  favour  the  spread  of  epidemic    affections. 
These  are,  in   the   main,  produced   in  the  individual  by 
the    operation   of  the  more    general    exciting   causes   of 
disease,  such  as  bad  or  insufficient  food,  bad  water,  and  im- 
pure air;  or  they  are  dependent  upon  more  special  causes, 
such  as  depressing  emotions,  excessive  muscular  exercise, 
or  the  occurrence  of  any  unusual  amount  of  degenerative 


^  If  additional  reasons  were  needed  to  enforce  the  vast  importance  of 
the  fullest  knowledge  concerning  these  diseases,  they  are  not  wanting. 
The  same  author  writes : — '  The  losses  from  only  two  exotic  bovine 
maladies  (**  contagious  pleuropneumonia/'  and  the  so-called  *'foot-and> 
mouth  disease  **)  have  been  estimated  to  amount,  during  the  thirty 
years  that  have  elapsed  since  our  ports  were  thrown  open  to  foreign 
cattle,  to  5,549,780  head,  roughly  valued  at  £^3,616,834.  The  late  in- 
vasion of  **  cattle  plague,"  which  was  suppressed  within  two  years  of  its 
introduction,  has  '\:)e£ii  oBXoAaXfi^  \a  >dan^  ^A^sftd  a  money  loss  c^  from 
Bye  to  eight  millions  ol  ^\knd&! 


APPENDIX  E.  cliii 

changes  within  the  body.  As  Dr.  Carpenter  pointed  out, 
nearly  twenty  years  ago,  in  a  very  able  article  on  the  '  Pre- 
disposing Causes  of  Epidemics  ','  these  causes  are  reducible 
to  one  or  other  of  three  categories : — '  (i)  those  which  tend 
to  introduce  into  the  system  decomposing  matter  that  has 
been  generated  in  some  external  source ;  (i)  those  which 
occasion  an  increased  production  of  decomposing  matter  in 
the  system  itself;  and  (3)  those  which  obstruct  the  elimination 
of  the  decomposing  matter,  normally  or  excessively  generated 
within  the  system,  or  abnormally  introduced  into  it  from 
without'  Now  the  common  characteristic  here  is  that '  any 
one  of  these  causes  wiU  tend  to  produce  <m  acatmulation  of 
disinUgraling  azotised  compounds,  in  a  slate  of  changt,  in  the 
circulaling  current';  and  observation  seems  to  tell  US  that 
either  of  the  causes  leading  to  such  a  result  may,  when 
potent,  sufBce  to  assist  the  spread  of  epidemic  diseases, 
though  two  or  more  in  combination  lead  to  much  more  cer- 
tain results.  Much  has  been  done  to  diminish  the  prevalence 
of  these  conditions — which  act  only  too  surely  upon  the 
individual  in  giving  rise  to  '  predisposing'  causes  of  disease — 
though  far  more  still  remains  to  be  done.  Happily,  however, 
public  attention  is  now  becoming  (though  slowly)  aroused  to 
the  importance  of  pure  air,  pure  water,  efficient  drainage,  and 
wholesome  food,  as  instruments  for  maintaining  the  health  of 
the  community. 

But  let  us  not  be  blinded  by  any  narrow  or  exclusive 
theories  which  would  teach  us  that  epidemic  and  infective 
diseases  cannot  arise  de  novo.  Let  us,  instructed  by  a  broader 
survey  of  the  facts,  assign  no  such  limits  to  natural  possi- 
bilities, and  not  lighdy  accept  theories  which  lead  to  supjne- 
ness  when  we  ought  to  be  stimulated  to  exertion.    Whilst 

'  '  Bhtiiih  and  Foreign  Mcdico-Cbimrgioil   Review,'  1853,  vol.  u. 


Cliv  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE. 

accepting  to  the  full  all  doctrines  which  inculcate  the  necessity^ 
of  diminishing  the  chances  of  contagion  by  every  available 
means,  let  us,  full  of  hope,  diligently  seek  also  for  the  causes 
which  engender  even  the  most  contagious  of  diseases.  Pre- 
vention of  disease  is  the  grand  end  and  aim  of  medicine ;  if, 
then,  we  have  learned  from  the  sad  lessons  of  experience 
that  scarlet  fever  and  small-pox  are  virulently  contagious  dis- 
eases ;  if,  even  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,  or  even 
in  a  still  larger  ratio,  both  of  these  diseases  are  acquired  by 
contagion,  then  is  it  all  the  more  important  that  we  should 
strive  to  ascertain  what  are  the  invariable  and  immediately 
antecedent  sets  of  conditions,  or  states  of  system,  which 
suffice  actually  to  engender  these  maladies.  In  such  cases 
knowledge  and  power  are  most  frequently  convertible  terms. 
Next  to  typhus  fever,  the  most  fatal  of  the  infective  diseases 
which  occur  in  this  country  are  scarlet  fever  ^  small-pox, 
measles,  and  hooping-cough.  The  ravages  of  typhus  in  our 
crowded  cities  and  in  our  jails  have  been  enormously  curtailed 
— not  so  much  because  of  its  diminished  spread  by  contagion, 
but  rather  because  we  have  learned  what  are  the  causes 
which  engender  it,  and  are  therefore  better  able  to  prevent 

'  Mr.  J.  Netten  Radcliffe  says  (Ranking's  •  Abstract,'  vol.  xli.  1865), 
*  The  Registrar-General's  returns  of  scarlet  lever  for  the  whole  of  England, 
include  two  periods  of  five  and  sixteen  years  respectively.  The  first 
period  extends  from  1838  to  1842,  and  the  second  from  1847  to  186a 
inclusive.  The  total  number  of  deaths  roistered  from  the  disease  in 
the  twenty-one  years  was  310,720 ;  the  annual  average  mortality  for  the 

whole  series  of  years  was  14,7^6 The  history  of  the  progress  of 

scarlet  fever  in  the  metropolis  differs  from  that  of  the  entire  kingdom  in 
this,  that  it  shows  a  great  augmentation  of  the  mortality  from  the  dis- 
ease in  the  last  quarter  of  a  century.  The  annual  average  mortality 
from  the  malady  in  London  during  the  past  twenty-six  years  was  83  per 
ico,ooo  population.  The  average  varied  from  3a  in  1841  to  no  less 
than  174  in  1863.  In  the  quinquennium  1839-43  the  annual  average 
was  78 ;  in  the  quinquennium  1844-48  it  increasied  to  88  ;  in  the  quin- 
quennium 1859-03  it  advanced  to  115.  The  death-rate  of  1863  (174) 
was  more  than  double  the  annual  average  of  the  twenty-six  years. 
1338-64.' 


APPENDIX  £, 


clv 


its  occurrence.  Let  us  strive,  then,  to  acquire  a  similar 
knowledge  concerning  scarlet  fever,  small-pox,  measles, 
hooping-cough,  and  other  contagious  affections,  and  thus 
endeavour,  in  the  most  efficient  manner  possible,  to  check 
the  ravages  of  these  wide-spread  and  persistently  pestilential 
diseases,  which  are  at  all  times  and  seasons  undermining 
the  health  and  cutting  short  the  lives  of  so  large  a  propor- 
tion of  the  human  race. 


The  Index  will  be  found  at  page  xxi  of  vol.  i. 


By  the  same  Author. 


(Preparing,) 

A  MANUAL  OF  THE  DISEASES  OF  THE  BRAIN, 
SPINAL  CORD,  AND  NERVES,    Crown  8vo. 


THE  MODES  OF  ORIGIN  OF  LOWEST  ORGAN- 
ISMS: including  a  Discussion  of  the  Experiments 
of  M.  Pasteur,  and  a  Reply  to  some  Statements  by 
Professors  Huxley  and  Tyndall.  Crown  8vo. 
187 1.    4J.  6d, 


*  .  .-
