Mendel's Principles of Heredity (William Bateson, 1909)
==========================================================
The book that sold Mendelism to the English world; coined 'genetics'. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (mendelsprincip00bate).

RSITY  OF 


9424 


00406  7432 


ts?«?:'X    - 


^ 


'i^ 


'--■  1? 


SlUKAGb     ilfci^ 


^^1 


5U 


LPl-Al4b 

U.B.C.  LIBRARY 


Division  of 
PLANT     SCIENCE 


OF  AGi?ci7j,Ti.mi: 


VANCOUVER 

BRITISH   col:         .;iA 


■ 


f.  *^f^ *: .'■","'*^^.-:^—  -r^^""  !!r;7'y  ■■^.i'^i 


DEC  30  1924 


A^  ^  ,^. 


o/ 


THE  LIBRARY 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF 
BRITISH  COLUMBIA 


MENDEL'S 

PRINCIPLES    OF    HEREDITY 


CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY   PRESS 

Hontion:    FETTER  LANE,  E.G. 

C.  F.  GLAY,  Manager 


M 

■*■. 
'i  i 

M 

■f  ♦  i. 

M 

^ 

i.  i 

..  ■*.•. 

^ 

ALSO 
ILontion:    H.   K.  LEWIS,  136,  GOWER  STREET,  W.C. 

(EUinbursb:   10°.  PRINCES  STREET 

JSerlm:  A.  ASHER  AND  CO. 

ILcipjig:   F.  A.  BROCKHAUS 

i^cbJlork:  G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 

Bombag  anl3  Calcutta:   MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


A /I  rights  reserved 


GREGOR    MENDEL,   1866 

Enl(iri!;ed  from  a  i^roup  of  the  brethren  of  the  Konigskloster 


MENDEL'S 


PRINCIPLES  OF  HEREDITY 


BY 


W.   BATESON,  M.A.,   F.R.S.,  V.M.H, 

FELLOW    OF    ST    JOHn's    COLLEGE, 
PROFESSOR    OF    BIOLOGY    IN    THE    UNIVERSITY    OF    CAMBRIDGE 


Cambridge  : 

at  the  University   Press 

1909 


Published  March  1909 
Reprinted  August  1909 


PREFACE 

THE  object  of  this  book  Is  to  give  a  succinct  account 
of  discoveries  in  regard  to  Heredity  made  by  the 
application  of  Mendel's  method  of  research.  Following  the 
clue  which  his  long  lost  papers  provided  we  have  reached  a 
point  from  which  classes  of  phenomena  hitherto  proverbial 
for  their  seeming  irregularity  can  be  recognized  as  parts  of 
a  consistent  whole.  The  study  of  Heredity  thus  becomes 
an  organised  branch  of  physiological  science,  already  abun- 
dant in  results,  and  in  promise  unsurpassed. 

A  translation  of  Mendel's  two  papers,  together  with 
a  biographical  note,  is  appended.  The  translation  of  the 
first,  based  on  a  draft  prepared  for  the  Society  by  Mr  C.  T. 
Druery,  was  printed  in  the  Royal  Horticultural  Society's 
Journal,  1901.  With  modifications  I  published  it  separately 
in  1902,  giving  a  brief  summary  of  Mendelism  as  then 
developed,  under  the  title  Menders  Principles  of  He7'edity  : 
A  Defence.  The  object  of  that  publication  was  to  put 
Mendel's  work  before  the  English  speaking  peoples  and  to 
repel  the  attack  which  the  late  Professor  Weldon  had 
recently  made  on  Mendelian  methods  and  the  conclusions 
drawn  from  them.  The  edition  was  at  once  sold  out,  but 
I  did  not  reprint  the  book.  As  a  defence  it  had  served 
its  purpose.  Moreover  the  progress  of  experiment  with 
the  extension  of  Mendelian  conceptions  was  rapid,  and  the 
account  of  those  conceptions  there  given  was  In  some 
Important  respects  soon  out  of  date.  In  particular  my 
view  of  the  nature  of  compound  factors  was  shown  to  be 
unnecessarily    complex    and    largely    incorrect.      Though 


vi  Preface 

obviously  in  a  subject  fast  extending  under  the  influence 
of  many  workers  there  can  be  no  finahty,  yet  at  the  present 
time  our  knowledge  of  the  main  facts  has  reached  a 
definite  stage,  and  a  useful  and  relatively  permanent  pre- 
sentation of  the  phenomena  can  be  attempted. 

The  range  and  diversity  of  facts,  zoological  and  botani- 
cal, from  which  the  material  is  drawn  are  so  wide  that  it 
has  been  difficult  to  present  them  adequately  within  a 
moderate  compass.  Many  of  the  types  studied  might 
singly  provide  the  subject  of  a  treatise,  and  the  temptation 
to  annotative  excursion  has  been  very  great ;  but  the  course 
which  seemed  most  useful  was  to  admit  only  such  detail  as 
had  a  clear  significance  in  the  exposition  of  principle,  or  as 
a  suggestion  for  further  inquiry.  The  reader  therefore  will 
understand  that  if  he  turns  to  the  original  records  specified 
he  will  almost  always  find  information,  perhaps  important, 
which  is  omitted  here. 

In  the  original  plan  of  the  book  it  was  intended  to 
discuss  somewhat  fully  the  bearing  of  the  new  facts  on  the 
great  problems  of  Biology,  but  it  is  perhaps  more  fitting 
that  these  theoretical  considerations  should  be  detached 
from  a  presentation  of  the  concrete  phenomena.  In  1907 
I  had  the  honour  of  delivering  the  Silliman  Lectures  in 
Yale  University,  and  I  then  took  these  wider  aspects  of 
Genetics  as  my  theme,  showing  the  bearing  of  the  new 
knowledge  on  current  theory,  especially  on  that  of  Evolu- 
tion, and  the  nature  of  Variation.  The  substance  of  these 
lectures  I  propose  to  publish  separately  with  amplifications, 
and  on  the  present  occasion  allusion  to  these  matters  has 
been  restricted  to  the  briefest  possible  indication  of  the  lines 
of  thought  which  Mendelism  inevitably  suggests. 

A  chapter  dealing  with  practical  applications  of  Mendelian 
principles  has  been  introduced.  Such  applications  will 
probably  far  exceed  any  limits  we  can  yet  perceive.  Among 
them  we  must  foresee  not  merely  advances  in  the  art  of 


Preface  vii 

breeding  animals  and  plants,  but  a  control  over  the  destiny 
of  our  own  species.      These  things  are  spoken  of  in  their 
place.      To  prevent  disappointment,  however,  it  must  be  at 
once  admitted  that  for  fanciers  Mendelism  can   as  yet  do 
comparatively  little.    "Fancying"  provides  the  chief  interest 
in  life  for  thousands  of  persons  in  this  country.      It  is  an 
occupation  with  which  the  scientific  naturalist  should  have 
more  sympathy  than   he   has   commonly   evinced.      If   the 
scientific  world  had  kept  in  touch  with  the  operations  of  the 
''fancy"  much   nonsense  which   has  passed   into   scientific 
orthodoxy  would  never  have  been  written.     The  study  of 
Mendelian  phenomena  will  do  something  to  bring  about  a 
fruitful  interchange  of   experience.      But   for   the   "  fancy " 
our  work  can   as   yet  do   two  things   only.      First,  in   the 
study  of  the   w^orkings   of   the    Mendelian    system    it  will 
provide  a  most  fascinating  pursuit,  which  If  followed  with 
assiduous  care  may  at  any  moment  lead  to  some  consider- 
able advance  in  scientific  knowledge.     Secondly,  the  prin- 
ciples already  ascertained  will  be  found  of  practical  assistance 
in  the  formation  of  new  breeds  and  may  save  many  mistakes 
and  waste  of  time.     But  applied  to  the  business  of  breeding 
winners  In  established  breeds  they  cannot  materially  help, 
for  almost  always  the  points  which  tell  are  too  fine  to  be 
dealt  with  In  our  analysis. 

In  a  work  of  this  kind  an  author  must  necessarily  speak 
of  various  subjects  on  which  his  knowledge  can  be  super- 
ficial only,  and  I  trust  that  If  Inaccuracies  have  been  Intro- 
duced, readers  will  be  good  enough  to  send  me  corrections. 

Much  and  varied  assistance  has  been  given  me  by 
many  persons.  Such  help  on  special  points  has  been 
acknowledged  in  the  text,  but  a  fuller  and  more  prominent 
acknowledgment  is  due  to  my  colleagues.  Without  their 
cooperation  there  would  have  been,  so  far  as  Cambridge  Is 
concerned,  but  meagre  contributions  to  record.  In  the 
early  days  of  Mendelism,  and  before,  Miss  E.  R.  Saunders 


viii  Preface 

collaborated  with  me.  A  beautiful  series  of  results,  especially 
relating  to  the  heredity  of  Stocks  [Matthiold),  has  been  the 
fruit  of  her  labours  exclusively.  Not  only  have  these 
results  greatly  advanced  our  knowledge  of  genetic  pheno- 
mena, but  I  think  that  at  a  time  when  Mendelism  was,  in 
England  at  least,  regarded  with  suspicion,  the  obvious 
precision  of  her  work  and  the  persistence  of  her  advocacy 
did  much  to  convince  the  scientific  world  of  the  reality  of 
our  assertions. 

In  1904  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  gain  Mr  R.  C.  Punnett 
as  a  partner.  Since  that  date  we  have  worked  in  close 
collaboration,  and  the  work  that  we  have  thus  done  has 
been  in  every  sense  a  joint  product,  both  as  regards  design, 
execution,  and  interpretation  of  results.  Though  for  the 
presentation  of  the  views  contained  in  this  book  I  am  solely 
responsible,  those  that  apply  to  the  subjects  of  our  own 
work  are  often  his,  or  have  been  arrived  at  in  consequence 
of  interchange  of  ideas  with  him. 

On  some  points  of  general  physiology  I  have  received 
useful  suggestions  and  criticism  from  Mr  F.  F.  Blackman, 
and  in  this  respect  I  am  also  especially  beholden  to 
Miss  F.   M.   Durham. 

The  Plates  of  Sweet  Peas  and  Mice  are  photographic 
reproductions,  on  the  whole  very  accurate,  of  coloured 
drawings  most  kindly  made  for  me  by  Miss  Wheldale. 
The  Plate  of  Primula  flowers  is  taken  from  an  excellent 
coloured  photograph  by  Mr  Walthanv^  For  Fig.  9  I  am 
obliged  to  the  New  Phytologist. 

For  several  years  past  I  have  had  an  exceptional 
opportunity  of  seeing  breeding  conducted  on  a  large  scale 

*  Since  the  word  "magenta,"  often  used  in  English  for  the  description 
of  a  colour,  is  not  understood  on  the  Continent,  I  may  say  that  it  means  a 
purplish  or  hhiish  red,  as  distinguished  from  a  crimson  or  pink  red.  On 
IMate  VI,  Fi.^s.  8,  9,  14,  15,  20,  21  represent  shades  of  magenta,  while 
I'igs.   2,   7,    13,   iQ  are  true  reds. 


Preface  ix 

through  the  great  kindness  of  Messrs  Sutton  of  Reading, 
who  have  given  me  the  privilege  of  watching  such  parts  of 
their  work  in  raising  varieties  as  seemed  especially  in- 
structive, with  unrestricted  access  to  their  pedigree  books. 
From  this  I  have  derived  much  profit,  and  many  hints 
which  have  formed  the  starting  point  for  fuller  experiment. 
My  hearty  thanks  are  due  to  them  for  this  Important 
assistance. 

W.  BATESON. 

Grantchester,  Cambridge. 
February^   1909. 


Note  to  the  second  impression. 

The  publication  of  a  reprint  gives  an  opportunity  of 
correcting  mistakes  which  correspondents  have  been  good 
enough  to  point  out.  These  concern  chiefly  the  exceptional 
case  In  regard  to  web-foot  in  Pigeons  (p.  36),  the  dominance 
of  colour  in  Helix  (p.  45),  and  the  age  of  the  subject  of 
Fig.  25.  For  correction  In  the  formula  (p.  60)  see 
Corrigenda. 

A  serious  error  respecting  the  heredity  of  Colour-blind- 
ness, which  through  Mr  Nettleshlp's  courtesy  I  was  able  to 
withdraw  by  means  of  a  printed  slip  inserted  at  p.  260  of 
the  original  Issue,  has  now  been  excised.  In  a  note  added 
at  p.  195  I  have  indicated  the  probable  bearing  of  the  special 
features  observed  In  the  case  of  Colour-blindness  upon  the 
theory  of  Sex,  and  at  p.  231  a  diagram  Is  inserted  showing 
the  probable  course  of  descent  followed  by  that  condition. 
This  scheme  Is  in  part  unverified  and  must  be  considered  as 
tentative  onlv.  I  shall  be  most  crrateful  for  accurate  In- 
formation  as  to  families  containing  colour-blind  members. 

W.  B. 

August^   1909. 


CORRIGENDA 

p.   59,  last  paragraph.     For  is  given  read  are  given, 
p.  60,  line  5.     For  \n  read  \n. 


ADDENDUM  to  p.  48 

In  Naturalist^  1906,  p.  113,  C.  T.  Trechmann  records  an  observation 
that  several  sinistral  Limtiaea  peregra  placed  in  an  aquarium  produced 
young  both  sinistral  and  dextral,  the  former  slightly  preponderating  in 
number. 


CONTENTS 


PART   I. 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.        Introductory.     Mendel's  Discovery       .         .         .         .         i 

Introductory — Some  pre-Mendelian  Writings — Mendel's  Discovery — 
Dominant  and  Recessive — Segregation.  Allelomorphism — Homo- 
zygote  and  Heterozygote.     Purify  of  Type. 

II.  The  Material  Investigated    .         .         .         .         .         .18 

List  of  Structural  Characters  in  Plants  and  Animals — List  of  Types  in 
which  the  inheritance  of  Colour  has  been  studied — Preliminary 
Deductions  —  Dominance  and  heterozygous  characters — Mendel's 
system  distinguished  from  that  of  Galton. 

III.  Numerical  Consequences  and  Recombinations      .        .       57 

Representations  of  the  Fg  Generation  and  Novelties  due  to  Re-combina- 
tion of  Factors — Compound  Characters — Combs  of  P'owls — Hetero- 
stylism — White  Flowers  from  Red  x  Cream. 

IV.  Heredity  of  Colour        .......       74 

Factors  determining  Colours  :  the  Ratio  9:3:  4 — The  "  Presence  and 
Absence  "  Hypothesis.  Epistatic  and  Hypostatic  Factors — Colours 
of  Mice — Pied  Types — A  Dominant  Piebald. 

V.  Heredity  of  Colour  {continued)       .....       88 

Albinos  giving  Coloured  Offspring  ;  Reversion  on  Crossing — Various 
Kinds  of  Whites — Stocks— Orchids — Pigeons— Fowls — Primula. 

VI.  Heredity  of  Colour  {contmued)      .         .         .         .         .107 

Eye-Colours.  Variations  in  Colour  of  the  Iris— Deficiency  of  Eye- 
Pigments  in  some  Coloured  Types. 

VII.  Heredity  of  Colour  {continued)       .         .         .         •         -     ^^5 

The  Genetics  of  Yellow  Pigments  in  certain  Animals.  Yellow  Mice  not 
breeding  true — The  Case  of  Basset  Hounds  and  the  "  Law  of  An- 
cestral Heredity."     Relation  of  this  Principle  to  Mendelian  Rules. 

VIII.  Heredity  of  Colour  {continued) 132 

Various  Specific  Phenomena  in  Colour-Inheritance.  Relation  of  Colour 
to  Hoariness  in  Stocks.  Miscellaneous  Cases.  Colour  of  a  Special 
Part  controlling  that  of  other  Parts— Summary  and  Discussion— 
Subtraction-Stages. 


Xll 


Contents 


CHAPTER 

IX.      Gametic  Coupling  and  Spurious  Allelomorphism 


PAGE 

148 


Pollen-Shape  and  Flower-Colour.  Axil-Colour  and  Sterile  Anthers- 
Hooded  Standard  and  Flower-Colour  in  Sweet  Peas. 

X.  Heredity  and  Sex ^^4 

Evidence  from  Breeding  Experiments.  ^;j^«w— Sex-limited  Heredity. 
The  Horns  of  Sheep— Colour-Blindness— Sex  and  Spurious  Allelo- 
morphism. The  Currant  Moth— The  Cinnamon  Canary— The  Silky 
Fowl — Aglia  tau — Cytological  Evidence— Summary. 

XI.  Double  Flowers iQ^ 

Miscellaneous  Cases.  Recessive  and  Dominant  Doubling— "  Hose-in- 
Hose  "  Flowers— The  Special  Case  of  Double  Stocks. 

XII.  Evidence  as  to  Mendelian  Inheritance  in  Man  .     205 

Normal  Characters— Diseases  and  Malformations.  Dominants— Sex- 
limited  Dominants— Recessives— Notes  on  collecting  Evidence. 

XIII.  Intermediates    between    Varieties    and    the    "Pure 

Lines"  of  Johannsen 235 

Intermediates  as  Heterozygous  Forms— Subtraction-Stages  of  Dominants 
— Interfering  Factors — Fluctuational  Forms — "Pure  Lines." 

XIV.  Miscellaneous  Exceptional  and  Unconformable  Phe- 

nomena   245 

Crosses  breeding  true  without  Segregation.  Parthenogenetic  or  Apo- 
ganiic  Forms.  Hieracitun — Sexual  Forms — Numerical  Aberrations 
— Irregularities  of  Dominance — Alternation  of  Generations — Mater- 
nal Characters  in  certain  Seeds. 

XV.  Biological   Conceptions   in   the  Light  of  Mendelian 

Discoveries   ......•••     266 

Nature  of  Units — Nature  of  Segregation — Moment  of  Segregation — 
Differentiation  of  Parts  compared  with  Segregation — Reversion  and 
Variation.  "  Bush  "  and  "  Cupid  "  Sweet  Peas — Mendelian  Segre- 
gation and  Species — Discontinuity  in  Variation — Mendelism  and 
Natural  Selection. 

XVI.  Practical  Application  of  Mendelian  Principles  .     291 

Meaning  of  Pure-bred — Rogueing — Raising  Novelties — A  Practical  Ex- 
ample— Unfixable  Types — Technical  Methods — Sociological  Appli- 
cation. 


PART    II. 

1.  Biographical  Notice  of  Mendel 

2.  Translation  of  the  Paper  on  Hybridisation 

3.  Translation  of  the  Paper  on  Hieraciwn    . 

Bibliography 

Supplementary  List 

Index  of  Subjects 

Index  of  Authors        


309 
317 
362 

369 

385 
386 

394 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


PORTRAITS   OF   MENDEL. 


In   1866 
About  1862 
About  1880 


Frontispiece 
to  face  p.  309 
to  face  p.   317 


COLOURED   PLATES. 

Plate    I.  Lepidoptera  ..... 

11.  Mice 

III.  Reversion  in  Sweet  Peas 

IV.  Fowls 

V.  Spurious  Allelomorphism  in  Sweet  Peas 

VI.  Heredity  of  Colour  in  Primula  Sinensis 


to  face  p.  44 

between  pp.  80-81 

between  pp.  93-94 

to  face  p.   1 03 

between  pp.  154-155 

between  pp.  294-295 


FIGURES. 

FIGURE 

1.  Tall  and  "Cupid"  dwarf  Sweet  Peas 

2.  Diagram  showing  consequences  of  Segregation  . 

3.  Inheritance  of  seed-characters  in  Pea 

4.  Branched  and  unbranched  forms  in  Stocks  {Mafthiola) 

5.  Hooded  and  normal  Barley         ..... 

6.  Heredity  in  Wheat      ....... 

7.  Fern-leaf  and  palm-leaf  in  Primula  Sinensis 

8.  Two-row  and  six-row  Barley 

9.  Starch-grains  in  Peas  .... 

10.  Round  and  wrinkled  seed  in  Maize  . 

11.  Down-colour  in  Chickens    . 

12.  Types  of  combs  in  Fowls  . 

13.  Combs  of  newly-hatched  Chickens 

14.  Descent  of  "homostyle"  character  in  Primula 


PAGE 

9 
12 

15 

20 

21 

23 
24 

27 

29 

30 

51 
61 

62 

69 


XIV 


List  of  Ilhistratio7ts 


FIGURE 

15.  Diagram  of  Fo  showing  ratio  9:3:4 

1 6.  Diagram  of  F2  showing  ratio  9:7. 

17.  Diagram  of  Fo  in  Sweet  Pea  showing  ratio  27  :  9  :  28 

18.  Pedigrees  of  eye-colour  in  Man  .... 

19.  Pollen  grains  of  Sweet  Peas        ..... 

20.  Heredity  of  horns  in  Sheep        ..... 

21.  Heredity  of  a  peculiar  form  of  curly  hair 

22.  Descent  of  congenital  lock  of  white  hair    . 

23.  Brachydactylous  hands        ...... 

24.  Skiagram  of  hands      ....... 

25.  Hands  of  brachydactylous  child  .... 

26.  Pedigree  of  brachydactylous  family     .... 

27.  Descent  from  brachydactylous  members 

28.  Drinkwater's  pedigree  of  brachydactyly 

29.  Descent  of  prae-senile  cataract   ..... 

30.  Another  cataractous  family  ..... 

31.  Descent  of  stationary  night-blindness  .        between  pp. 

32.  Descent  of  Colour-blindness        ..... 

33.  Ideal  Scheme  of  descent  of  simple  sex-limited  condition 

e.g.  horns  of  Sheep         ...... 

34.  Tentative  representation  of  descent  of  Colour-blindness 

35.  Polish  X  Rivet  Wheat ....... 

36.  Seeds  of  Polish  x  Eivet  Wheat  ..... 

37.  Reversion  in  height  of  Sweet  Peas     .... 

38.  Two  types  of  dwarf  Sweet  Peas  .... 


PAGE 

77 
89 

91 

108 

150 
171 
207 
207 
211 
212 
213 
214 
214 

215 
216 

217 

220-221 
223 

230 
231 

259 
260 

282 

283 


PART   I 


CHAPTER    I 


INTRODUCTORY.      MENDEL'S    DISCOVERY. 

Introductory — Some  pre-Mendelian  Writings — MendeVs 
Discovejy  —  Dominant  and  Recessive  —  Segregation. 
Allelomorphism  —  Homozygote  and  Heterozygote. 
Purity  of  Type, 

Among  the  biological  sciences  the  study  of  heredity 
occupies  a  central  position.  Whether  we  be  zoologists, 
botanists,  or  physiologists,  the  facts  of  heredity  concern 
^t  us.  Upon  this  physiological  function  all  the  rest  in  some 
degree  depend.  Every  advance  in  knowledge  of  that 
central  function  must  affect  the  course  of  thought  along 
each  several  line  of  biological  inquiry. 

Moreover  though,  as  naturalists,  we  are  not  directly 
concerned  with  the  applications  of  science,  we  must  perceive 
that  in  no'  region  of  knowledge  is  research  more  likely  to 
increase  man's  power  over  nature.  The  science  of  sociology, 
and  in  many  of  its  developments  the  science  of  medicine 
•  also,  must  of  necessity  form  working  hypotheses  respecting 
the  course  of  heredity,  and  we  cannot  doubt  that  a  percep- 
tion of  the  truth  in  reeard  to  the  function  of  transmission 
will  greatly  contribute  to  the  progress  of  these  sciences. 
Lastly,  to  the  industrial  arts  of  the  breeder  of  plants  or 
animals,  the  knowledge  we  are  attempting  to  provide  is  of 
such  direct  importance  that  upon  this  consideration  no 
special  emphasis  is  required.  In  studying  heredity,  there- 
fore, we  are  examining  a  vital  problem  of  no  mean 
consequence,  and  those  who  engage  in  that  work  are 
happy  in  the  thought  that  they  are  assisting  one  of  the 
main  advances  in  natural  knowledge. 

But  though  we  may  approach  this  study  of  genetics — 
to  use  the  modern  designation — from  so  many  different 
sides,   it  is  especially  in  their  bearing  on   the   problem  of 

E.   H.  I 


2  Introductory  [ch. 

the  evolution  of  species  that  the  facts  have  hitherto  been 
most  profitably  investigated.  It  was  in  the  attempt  to 
ascertain  the  interrelationships  between  species  that  experi- 
ments in  genetics  were  first  made.  The  words  ''  evolution  " 
and  *'  origin  of  species  "  are  now  so  intimately  associated 
with  the  name  of  Darwin  that  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  the 
idea  of  a  common  descent  had  been  prominent  in  the  minds 
of  naturalists  before  he  wrote,  and  that,  for  more  than  half 
a  century,  zealous  investigators  had  been  devoting  them- 
selves to  the  experimental  study  of  that  possibility.  Promi- 
nent among  this  group  of  experimenters  may  be  mentioned 
Koelreuter,  John  Hunter,  Herbert,  Knight,  Gaertner,  Jordan, 
Naudin,  Godron,  Lecoq,  Wichura — men  whose  names  are 
familiar  to  every  reader  of  Animals  and  Plants  under 
Domestication.  If  we  could  ask  those  men  to  define  the 
object  of  their  experiments,  their  answer  would  be  that  they 
were  seeking  to  determine  the  laws  of  hereditary  trans- 
mission with  the  purpose  of  discovering  the  interrelationships 
of  species.  In  addition  to  the  observation  of  the  visible 
structures  and  habits  of  plants  and  animals  they  attempted 
by  experiment  to  ascertain  those  hidden  properties  of  living 
things  which  we  may  speak  of  as  genetic,  properties  which 
breeding  tests  can  alone  reveal.  The  vast  mass  of 
observation  thus  accumulated  contains  much  that  is  of 
permanent  value,  hints  that  if  followed  might  have  saved 
their  successors  years  of  wasted  effort,  and  not  a  few 
indications  which  in  the  light  of  later  discovery  will  greatly 
accelerate  our  own  progress. 

Yet  in  surveying  the  work  of  this  school  we  are 
conscious  of  a  feeling  of  disappointment  at  the  outcome. 
There  are  signs  that  the  workers  themselves  shared  this 
disappointment.  As  we  now  know,  they  missed  the  clue 
without  which  the  evidence  so  laboriously  collected  remained 
an  inscrutable  medley  of  contradictions. 

While  the  experimental  study  of  the  species  problem 
was  in  full  activity  the  Darwinian  writings  appeared. 
Evolution,  from  being  an  unsupported  hypothesis,  was  at 
length  shown  to  be  so  plainly  deducible  from  ordinary 
experience  that  the  reality  of  the  process  was  no  longer 
doubtful.  With  the  triumph  of  the  evolutionary  idea, 
curiosity  as  to  the  significance  of  specific  differences  was 


i]  Introchtctory  3 

satisfied.  The  Origin  was  published  In  1859.  During 
the  following  decade,  while  the  new  views  were  on  trial, 
the  experimental  breeders  continued  their  work,  but  before 
1870  the  field  was  practically  abandoned. 

In  all  that  concerns  the  problem  of  species  the  next 
thirty  years  are  marked  by  the  apathy  characteristic  of  an 
age  of  faith.  Evolution  became  the  exerclslng-ground  of 
essayists.  The  number  Indeed  of  naturalists  Increased  ten- 
fold, but  their  activities  were  directed  elsewhere.  Darwin's 
achievement  so  far  exceeded  anything  that  was  thought 
possible  before,  that  what  should  have  been  hailed  as  a 
long-expected  beginning  was  taken  for  the  completed  work. 
I  well  remember  receiving  from  one  of  the  most  earnest 
of  my  seniors  the  friendly  warning  that  It  was  waste  of 
time  to  study  variation,  for  "  Darwin  had  swept  the  field." 

Parenthetically  we  may  notice  that  though  scientific 
opinion  in  general  became  rapidly  converted  to  the  doctrine 
of  pure  selection,  there  was  one  remarkable  exception. 
Systematlsts  for  the  most  part  kept  aloof.  Everyone  was 
convinced  that  natural  selection  operating  In  a  continuously 
varying  population  was  a  sufficient  account  of  the  origin  of 
species  except  the  one  class  of  scientific  workers  whose 
labours  familiarised  them  with  the  phenomenon  of  specific 
difference.  From  that  time  the  systematlsts  became,  as 
they  still  in  great  measure  remain,  a  class  apart. 

A  separation  has  thus  been  effected  between  those  who 
lead  theoretical  opinion  and  those  who  by  taste  or  necessity 
have  retained  an  acquaintance  with  the  facts.  The  con- 
sequences of  that  separation  have  been  many  and  grievous. 
To  it  are  to  be  traced  the  extraordinary  misapprehensions 
as  to  the  fundamental  phenomena  of  specific  difference 
which  are  now  prevalent. 

If  species  had  really  arisen  by  the  natural  selection  for 
impalpable  differences,  Intermediate  forms  should  abound, 
and  the  limits  between  species  should  be  on  the  whole 
indefinite.  As  this  conclusion  follows  necessarily  from  the 
premisses,  the  selectionists  believe  and  declare  that  it 
represents  the  facts  of  nature.  Differences  between  species 
being  by  axiom  Indefinite,  the  differences  between  varieties 
must  be  supposed  to  be  still  less  definite.  Consequently 
the  conclusion  that  evolution  must  proceed  by  insensible 


4  Introductory  [ch. 

transformation  of  masses  of  Individuals  has  become  an 
established  dogma.  Systematlsts,  entomologists  or  botan- 
ists for  example,  are  dally  witnesses  to  variation  occurring 
as  an  Individual  and  discontinuous  phenomenon,  but  they 
stand  aside  from  the  debate  ;  and  whoever  In  a  discussion 
of  evolutionary  theory  appeals  to  the  defmiteness  of  varietal 
distinctions  In  colour  for  Instance,  or  In  form,  as  recognizable 
by  common  observation  without  mechanical  aid,  must  be 
prepared  to  meet  a  charge  of  want  of  Intelligence  or  candour. 
This  is  no  doubt  a  passing  phase  and  will  end  so  soon  as 
interest  In  the  problems  of  evolution  is  combined  with  some 
knowledge  of  variation  and  heredity. 

Genetic  experiment  was  first  undertaken,  as  we  have 
seen,  in  the  hope  that  It  would  elucidate  the  problem  of 
species.  The  time  has  now  come  when  appeals  for  the 
vigorous  prosecution  of  this  method  should  rather  be  based 
on  other  grounds.  It  is  as  directly  contributing  to  the 
advancement  of  pure  physiological  science  that  genetics 
can  present  the  strongest  claim.  We  have  an  eye  always 
on  the  evolution-problem.  We  know  that  the  facts  we  are 
collecting  will  help  in  its  solution ;  but  for  a  period  we  shall 
perhaps  do  well  to  direct  our  search  more  especially  to  the 
immediate  problems  of  genetic  physiology,  the  laws  of 
heredity,  the  nature  of  variation,  the  significance  of  sex  and 
of  other  manifestations  of  dimorphism,  willing  to  postpone 
the  application  of  the  results  to  wider  problems  as  a  task 
more  suited  to  a  maturer  stage.  When  the  magnitude 
and  definlteness  of  the  advances  already  made  In  genetics 
come  to  be  more  generally  known,  it  Is  to  be  anticipated 
that  workers  in  various  departments  of  biology  will  realise 
that  here  at  last  is  common  ground.  As  we  now  know,  the 
conceptions  on  which  both  the  systematlsts  and  the  specula- 
tive biologists  have  based  their  methods  need  complete 
revision  in  the  light  of  the  new  facts,  and  till  the  possibilities 
of  genetic  research  are  more  fully  explored  the  task  of 
reconstruction  can  hardly  be  begun.  In  that  work  of 
exploration  all  classes  of  naturalists  will  alike  find  interest. 
The  methods  are  definite  and  exact,  so  we  need  not  fear 
the  alienation  of  those  systematlsts  to  whom  all  theoretical 
inquiry  is  repulsive.  They  are  also  wide  in  their  scope, 
and  those  who  would  turn  from  the  details  of  classification 


I]  Pre-Mendelian  IVritings  5 

as  offering  matter  too  trivial  for  their  attention  may  engage 
in  genetic  Inquiries  with  great  confidence  that  every  frag- 
ment of  soHd  evidence  thus  discovered  will  quickly  take 
its  place  in  the  development  of  a  coordinated  structure. 

Some  pre-Mendeliaji    IVritings. 

Of  the  contributions  made  during  the  essayist  period 
three  call  for  notice  :  Welsmann  deserves  mention  for  his 
useful  work  in  asking  for  the  proof  that  "  acquired 
characters " — or,  to  speak  more  precisely,  parental  ex- 
perience— can  really  be  transmitted  to  the  offspring.  The 
occurrence  of  progressive  adaptation  by  transmission  of  the 
effects  of  use  had  seemed  so  natural  to  Darwin  and  his 
contemporaries  that  no  proof  of  the  physiological  reality 
of  the  phenomenon  was  thought  necessary.  Weismann's 
challenge  revealed  the  utter  Inadequacy  of  the  evidence 
on  which  these  beliefs  were  based.  There  are  doubtless 
isolated  observations  which  may  be  Interpreted  as  favouring 
the  belief  In  these  transmissions,  but  such  meagre  indications 
as  exist  are  by  general  consent  admitted  to  be  too  slight  to 
be  of  much  assistance  in  the  attempt  to  understand  how  the 
more  complex  adaptatlve  mechanisms  arose.  Nevertheless 
it  was  for  the  purpose  of  elucidating  them  that  the  appeal 
to  Inherited  experience  was  made.  Weismann's  contribution, 
though  negative,  has  greatly  simplified  the  practical  investi- 
gation of  genetic  problems. 

Though  it  attracted  little  attention  at  the  time  of  its 
appearance,  an  honourable  place  in  the  history  of  our 
science  must  be  accorded  to  the  paper  published  by 
de  Vrles  (1889)  under  the  title  Intracelitdare  Pangenesis. 
This  essay  is  remarkable  as  a  clear  foreshadow^Ing  of  that 
conception  of  unit-characters  which  is  destined  to  play  so 
large  a  part  in  the  development  of  genetics. 

The  supreme  Importance  of  an  exact  knowledge  of 
heredity  was  urged  by  Galton  in  various  writings  published 
during  the  period  of  which  I  am  speaking.  He  pointed 
out  that  the  phenomena  manifested  regularity,  and  he  made 
the  first  comprehensive  attempt  to  determine  the  rules  they 
obey.  It  was  through  his  work  and  influence  that  the 
existence  of  some  order  pervading  the  facts  became  generally 


6  Pre-Mendelian  Writings  [ch. 

recognized.  In  1897  he  definitely  enunciated  his  now 
famous  "  Law  "  of  heredity,  which  declared  that  to  the  total 
heritage  of  the  offspring  the  parents  on  an  average  contribute 
\,  the  grandparents  ^,  and  the  great-grandparents  \,  and  so 
on,  the  total  heritage  being  taken  as  unity.  To  this 
conclusion  he  had  been  led  by  several  series  of  data,  but 
the  evidence  upon  which  he  especially  relied  was  that  of 
the  pedigrees  of  Basset  Hounds  furnished  him  by  the  late 
Sir  Everett  Millais.  In  that  instance  the  character  con- 
sidered was  the  presence  or  absence  of  black  in  addition  to 
yellow  and  white.  The  colours  were  spoken  of  as  tri-colour 
and  non-tri-colour,  and  the  truth  of  the  law  was  tested  by 
the  average  numbers  of  the  respective  colours  which  resulted 
from  the  various  matings  of  dogs  of  known  ancestral 
composition.  These  numbers  corresponded  so  well  with 
the  expectations  given  by  the  law  as  to  leave  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  the  results  of  calculation  were  in  general  har- 
mony with  natural  fact. 

There  are  features  in  this  important  case  which  need 
special  consideration,  and  to  these  I  will  return.  Meanwhile 
we  may  note  that  though  there  was  admittedly  a  statistical 
accord  between  Galton's  theory  and  some  facts  of  heredity, 
yet  no  one  familiar  with  breeding  or  even  with  the  literature 
of  breeding  could  possibly  accept  that  theory  as  a  literal  or 
adequate  presentation  of  the  facts.  Galton  himself  in  pro- 
mulgating it  made  some  reservations  ;  but  in  the  practice  of 
breeding,  so  many  classes  of  unconformable  phenomena 
were  already  known,  that  while  recognizing  the  value  of  his 
achievement,  we  could  not  from  the  first  regard  it  as  more 
than  an  adumbration  of  the  truth.  As  we  now  know, 
Galton's  method  failed  for  want  of  analysis.  His  formula 
should  in  all  probability  be  looked  upon  rather,  as  an 
occasional  consequence  of  the  actual  laws  of  heredity  than 
in  any  proper  sense  one  of  those  laws. 

Of  the  so-called  investigations  of  heredity  pursued  by 
extensions  of  Galton's  non-analytical  method  and  promoted 
by^  Professor  Pearson  and  the  English  Biometrical  school 
it  is  now  scarcely  necessary  to  speak.  That  such  work 
may  ultimat(;ly  contribute  to  the  development  of  statistical 
theory  cannot  be  denied,  but  as  applied  to  the  problems  of 
heredity  the  effort  has  resulted  only  in  the  concealment  of 


I]  Rediscovery  of  Mendel  7 

that  order  which  it  was  ostensibly  undertaken  to  reveal. 
A  preliminary  acquaintance  with  the  natural  history  of 
heredity  and  variation  was  sufficient  to  throw  doubt  on  the 
foundations  of  these  elaborate  researches.  To  those  who 
hereafter  may  study  this  episode  in  the  history  of  biological 
science  it  will  appear  inexplicable  that  work  so  unsound  in 
construction  should  have  been  respectfully  received  by  the 
scientific  world.  With  the  discovery  of  segregation  it 
became  obvious  that  methods  dispensing  with  individual 
analysis  of  the  material  are  useless.  The  only  alternatives 
open  to  the  inventors  of  those  methods  were  either  to 
abandon  their  delusion  or  to  deny  the  truth  of  Mendelian 
facts.  In  choosing  the  latter  course  they  have  certainly 
succeeded  in  delaying  recognition  of  the  value  of  Mendelism, 
but  with  the  lapse  of  time  the  number  of  persons  who  have 
themselves  witnessed  the  phenomena  has  increased  so  much 
that  these  denials  have  lost  their  dangerous  character  and 
may  be  regarded  as  merely  formal. 

Rediscovery  of  Mendel :   his  Method. 

With  the  year  1900  a  new  era  begins.  In  the  spring 
of  that  year  there  appeared,  within  a  few  weeks  of  each 
other,  the  three  papers  of  de  Vries,  Correns,  and  Tschermak, 
giving  the  substance  of  Mendel's  long-forgotten  treatise. 
Each  of  these  three  writers  was  able  from  his  own  ex- 
perience to  confirm  Mendel's  conclusions,  and  to  extend 
them  to  other  cases.  There  could  therefore,  from  the  first, 
be  no  question  as  to  the  truth  of  the  facts.  To  appreciate 
what  Mendel  did  the  reader  should  refer  to  the  original 
paper"^,  which  is  a  model  of  lucidity  and  expository  skill. 
His  success  is  due  to  the  clearness  with  which  he  thought 
out  the  problem.  Being  familiar  with  the  works  of  Gaertner 
and  the  other  experimental  breeders  he  surmised  that 
their  failure  to  reach  definite  and  consistent  conclusions 
was  due  to  a  want  of  precise  and  continued  analysis.  In 
order  to  obtain  a  clear  result  he  saw  that  it  was  absolutely 
necessary  to  start  with  pure-breeding,  homogeneous  materials, 
to  consider  each  character  separately,  and  on  no  account  to 
confuse  the  different  generations  together.    Lastly  he  realised 

*  See  Part  II. 


8  MejideFs  Method  [ch. 

that  the  progeny  from  distinct  individuals  must  be  separately 
recorded.  All  these  ideas  were  entirely  new  in  his  day. 
When  such  precautions  had  been  observed  he  anticipated 
that  a  regular  result  would  be  attainable  if  the  experiments 
were  carried  out  on  a  sufficient  scale. 

After  several  preliminary  trials  he  chose  the  edible  Pea 
[Pisttm  sativum)  for  his  subject.  Varieties  in  cultivation 
are  distinguished  by  striking  characters  recognizable  with- 
out trouble.  The  plants  are  habitually  self-fertilised,  a 
feature  which  obviates  numerous  difficulties. 

Following  his  idea  that  the  heredity  of  each  character 
must  be  separately  investigated,  he  chose  a  number  oi pairs 
of  characters,  and  made  crosses  between  varieties  differing 
markedly  in  respect  of  one  pair  of  characters.  The  case 
which  illustrates  Mendelian  methods  in  the  simplest  way 
is  that  in  which  heredity  in  respect  of  height  w^as  studied. 
Mendel  took  a  pair  of  varieties  of  which  one  was  tall,  being 
6 — 7  feet  high,  and  the  other  was  dwarf,  f  to  \\  feet. 
These  two  were  then  crossed  together.  In  peas  this  is 
an  easy  operation.  The  unbroken  anthers  can  be  picked 
out  of  a  bud  with  a  pair  of  fine  forceps  and  the  pollen  of 
the  plant  chosen  for  the  father  may  be  at  once  applied  to 
the  stigma  of  the  emasculated  flower.  The  cross-bred  seeds 
thus  produced  grew  into  plants  which  were  always  tall, 
having  a  height  not  sensibly  different  from  that  of  the  pure 
tall  variety.  In  our  modern  terminology  such  a  cross-bred, 
the  first  filial  generation,  is  called  F^.  From  the  fact  that 
the  character,  tallness,  appears  in  the  cross-bred  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  opposite  character,  Mendel  called  it  a 
dominant  character ;  dwarfness,  which  disappears  in  the  F^ 
plant,   he  called  recessive. 

The  tall  cross-bred,  so  produced,  in  its  turn  bore  seeds 
by  self-fertilisation.  These  are  the  next  generation,  F.^ 
When  grown  up  they  prove  to  be  mixed,  many  being 
tall,  some  being  short,  like  the  tall  and  the  short  grand- 
parents respectively.  Fig.  i  shows  such  an  F^  family  in 
the  Sweet  Pea.  Upon  counting  the  members  of  this  F^ 
generation  it  was  discovered  that  the  proportion  of  tails  to 
shorts  exhibited  a  certain  constancy,  averaging  about  three 
tails  to  one  short,  or  in  other  words,  75  per  cent,  dominants 
to  25  per  cent,  recessives. 


I] 


Mendel s  Method 


These  F^  plants  were  again  allowed  to  fertilise  them- 
selves and  the  offspring  of  each  plant  was  separately  sown. 
It  was  then  found  that  the  offspring,  F,,  of  the  recessives 


consisted  entirely  of  recessives.  Further  generations  bred 
from  these  recessives  again  produced  recessives  only,  and 
therefore  the  recessives  which  appeared  in  /^,  are  seen  to 


lO 


Segregation  [ch. 


be  pure  to  the  recessive  character,  namely,  In  the  case  we 
are  considering,  to  dwarfness. 

But  the  tall  F,^  dominants  when  tested  by  a  study  of 
their  offspring  {F}),  instead  of  being  all  alike  (as  the  dwarfs 
or  recessives  were),  proved  to  be  of  two  kinds,  viz. 

(a)  Plants  which  gave  a  mixed  F^  consisting  of  both 
tails  and  dwarfs,  the  proportion  showing  again  an  average 
of  three  tails  to  one  dwarf 

(b)  Plants  which  gave  tails  only  and  are  thus  pure  to 
tallness. 

The  ratio  of  the  impure  {a)  plants  to  the  pure  {b)  plants 
was  as  2  to  i. 

The  whole  F^  generation  therefore,  formed  by  self- 
fertilisation  of  'the  original  hybrid  consists  of  three  kinds 
of  plants : 


25%  50 7„  25   ._ 

pure  dominants      impure  dominants      pure  recessives 
or  3  dominants  :  i  recessive. 


Segregation.     Allelomorphism. 

The  conclusion  which  Mendel  drew  from  these  observa- 
tions is  one  which  will  suggest  itself  to  any  one  who  reflects 
on  the  facts.  The  result  is  exactly  what  would  be  expected 
if  both  male  and  female  germ-cells  of  the  cross-bred  F^  were 
in  equal  numbers  bearers  of  either  the  dominant  {D)  or 
recessive  {R)  character,  but  not  both.  If  this  were  so,  and 
if  the  union  of  the  male  and  female  germ-cells  occurs  at 
random,  the  result  would  be  an  F^  family  made  up  of 

2c^DD  :  2^DR  :   2^RD  :  2^RR. 
^  ^^  :      iR. 

But,  as  the  first  cross  showed,  when  D  meets  R  in 
fertilisation  the  resulting  individual  is  in  appearance  D  ; 
therefore  F,,  appears  as  3Z)  :  \R.     The  results  of  the  F^ 


I]  and  its  Conseqttences  1 1 

generation  are  in  exact  agreement  with  this  suggestion  : 
for  the  R  plants  give  R  only  ;  and  of  the  D  plants  one- 
third  give  D  only,  while  two-thirds  give  the  same  mixture, 
'^D  :  \R,  which  was  produced  by  F^  (Fig.  2.  I). 

The    descent    may    be    represented    diagrammatically 
thus  : 

Parents  Tall  ( TT)  x  Short  (//) 

F,  -  Tall(i7) 


F,         Tall  Tall  Tall  Short 

TT  Tt  tT  tt 

pure  tall  \  \  pure  short 

F,         TT    tt    t^      It       TY~Tt      ~tt     U 

Now  since  the  fertilised  ovum  or  zygote,  formed  by  the 
original  cross,  was  made  by  the  union  of  two  germ-cells  or 
gametes  bearing  respectively  tallness  and  dwarfness,  both 
these  elements  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  original 
F^  zygote ;  but  if  the  germ-cells  which  that  zygote  eventually 
forms  are  bearers  of  either  tallness  or  dwarfness,  there 
must  at  some  stage  in  the  process  of  germ-formation  be  a 
separation  of  the  two  characters,  or  rather  of  the  ultimate 
factors  which  cause  those  characters  to  be  developed  in  the 
plants.  This  phenomenon,  the  dissociation  of  characters 
from  each  other  in  the  course  of  the  formation  of  the 
germs,  we  speak  of  as  segregation,  and  the  characters  which 
segregate  from  each  other  are  described  as  allelofuorphtc, 
i.e.  alternative  to  each  other  in  the  constitution  of  the 
gametes  (Fig.  2). 

That  this  is  the  true  account  was  proved  by  further 
experiments  which  Mendel  made  by  crossing  the  F^  with 
pure  dominants  and  with  pure  recessives.  For  DR  x  DD 
gave  an  offspring  all  dominant  in  appearance,  though  in 
reality  consisting  of  both  BR  plants  and  DD  plants,  on  an 
average  in  equal  numbers.  On  the  other  hand  DR  x  RR 
gives  an  equal  number  of  dominants  and  recessives,  of 
which  the  dominants  are  all  DR  plants,  and  the  recessives 
are  all  pure  recessives.  These  various  experiments  illus- 
trate the  composition  of  the  four  simple  types  of  Mendelian 
families,  which  may  be  set  out  thus  : 


12 


Segregation 


[CH. 


DD  X  RR  gives  all  DR 

DR  X  RR  gives  iZ^^T?  :  i7?y? 

DR  X  Z>i;>  gives  iZ^i:>  :  \DR 
DRxDR  gives  iZ^Z;>  :  2DR  :  ii?7? 

appearing  as  3  dominants  :  i  recessive. 


X 


ID 
LP 


X 


»2    F 

Raiio 


RR 


;^: 


Medio  ID  : 

II 


iR 


X 


aU  D 
III 


Fig.  2.      Diagrams  showing  numerical  consequences  of  segregation. 

I.    The  mating  DD  x  RR^  and  Z>i?  x  DR.     II.    The  mating  DR  x  ^i?. 

III.    The  mating  DR  x  Z>Z>. 

The  way  in  which  these  ratios  are  produced  may  be 
easily  represented  by  means  of  a  number  of  draught-men. 
Pairs  of  draughts  then  represent  zygotes  ;  single  draughts 
represent  germ-cells.  That  there  is  a  propriety  in  repre- 
senting zygotic  or  somatic  cells  as  double  structures  and 
germ-cells  as  single  structures  will  be  evident  to  biologists  ; 
for  we  know  that  each  somatic  nucleus  in  plants  and 
animals  is  a  double  structure,  containing  twice  the  number 
of  chromosomes  present  in  each  mature  germ-cell.  Two 
black  draughts  may  then  be  taken  to  represent  a  pure  black 
individual,  two  white  draughts  a  white  individual.  When 
they  are  crossed  together   F^    is    represented   by   a   black 


I]  and  its  Conseqtterices  13 

draught  and  a  white  one  (Fig.  2.  I).  Supposing  the  black 
to  be  a  dominant  the  fact  may  be  represented  by  putting  it 
on  the  top.  When  segregation  of  the  allelomorphs,  black- 
ness and  whiteness,  takes  place  in  gameto-genesis,  the 
germ-cells  of  the  cross-bred  are  again  bearers  of  blackness 
or  of  whiteness,  and  it  may  readily  be  shown  experimentally 
that  the  results  of  their  various  random  combinations  give 
rise  to  the  ratios  stated  above. 

The  fact  of  segregation  was  the  essential  discovery 
which  Mendel  made.  As  we  now  know,  such  segregation  is 
one  of  the  normal  phenomena  of  nature.  It  is  segregation 
which  determines  the  regularity  perceptible  in  the  here- 
ditary transmission  of  differences,  and  the  definiteness  or 
discontinuity  so  often  conspicuous  in  the  variation  of  animals 
and  plants  is  a  consequence  of  the  same  phenomenon. 
Segregation  thus  defines  the  units  concerned  in  the  consti- 
tution of  organisms  and  provides  the  clue  by  which  an 
analysis  of  the  complex  heterogeneity  of  living  forms  may 
be  begun. 

There  are  doubtless  limits  beyond  which  such  analysis 
cannot  be  pursued,  but  a  vast  field  of  research  must  be 
explored  before  they  are  reached  or  determined.  It  is  likely 
also  that  in  certain  cases  the  units  are  so  small  that  no 
sensible  segregation  can  be  proved  to  exist.  As  yet,  how- 
ever, no  such  example  has  been  adequately  investigated  ; 
nor,  until  the  properties  and  laws  of  interaction  of  the 
segregable  units  have  been  much  more  thoroughly  examined, 
can  this  class  of  negative  observations  be  considered  with 
great  prospect  of  success. 

The  dominance  of  certain  characters  is  often  an  impor- 
tant but  never  an  essential  feature  of  Mendelian  heredity. 
Those  who  first  treated  of  Mendel's  work  most  unfortu- 
nately fell  into  the  error  of  enunciating  a  ''  Law  of  Domi- 
nance" as  a  proposition  comparable  with  the  discovery  of 
segregation.  Mendel  himself  enunciates  no  such  law. 
Dominance  of  course  frequently  exists.  The  consequences 
of  its  occurrence  and  the  complications  it  introduces  must 
be  understood  as  a  preliminary  to  the  practical  investigation 
of  the  phenomena  of  heredity,  but  it  is  only  a  subordinate 
incident  of  special  cases,  and  Mendel's  principles  of  inherit- 
ance apply  equally  to  cases  where  there  is  no  dominance 


14  Segregation  [ch. 

and  the  heterozygous  type  is  intermediate  in  character 
between  the  two  pure  types. 

To  the  detection  of  the  genetic  system  of  any  given  case 
it  is  however  necessary  that  the  results  of  combinations 
should  be  sensibly  regular.  When,  as  occasionally  happens, 
a  character  may  sometimes  behave  as  a  dominant  and 
sometimes  not,  we  have  as  yet  no  satisfactory  means  of 
further  analysis.  These  irregularities  in  dominance  may 
confidently  be  attributed  to  the  disturbing  effects  of  other 
factors  or  of  conditions,  but  the  detection  of  such  unknown 
factors  must  be  a  long  and  perhaps  impossible  task. 

Mendel  applied  his  method  to  the  following  seven 
distinct  pairs  of  characters  in  peas,  and  found  that  in  each 
the  inheritance  was  similar.  The  dominant  character  is 
put  first. 

1.  Height :  whether  tall  or  short. 

2.  Distribution    of    flowers    on    the    stem :     whether 

arranged  along  the  axis  of  the  plant,  6»r  bunched 
together  at  the  top  so  as  to  form  a  false  umbel  *, 

3.  Colour  of  unripe  pod  :    whether  a  shade   of  green 

or  bright  yellow. 

4.  Shape  of  pod :  whether  simply  inflated,   or  deeply 

constricted  between  the  seeds,  i.e.  as  in  ''  sugar- 
peas "  or  ''  Pois  sans  parchemin." 

5.  Colour    of  seed-skin :    whether    various    shades    of 

grey  or  brown,  with  or  without  violet  spotting, 
or  white.  The  "grey"  skins  are  always  asso- 
ciated with  coloured  flowers  and  almost  always 
with  a  purple  or  red  mark  in  the  axils. 

6.  Colour  of  cotyledons  :   whether  yellow  or  green. 

7.  Shape  of  seeds  :  whether  rounded  or  wrinkled. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  first  five  are  plant-characters. 
In  order  to  see  the  result  of  crossing,  the  seeds  must  be 
sown  and  allowed  to  grow  into  plants.  The  last  two 
characters  belong  to  the  seeds  themselves.  The  seeds  of 
course  are  members  of  a  generation  later  than  that  of  the 
plant  which  bears  them.      Thus  when  a  cross  is  made  the 

*  This  is  a  fasciated  and  semi-monstrous  form. 


I]  and  its  Conseqtieitces  15 

resultant  seeds  are  F^,  showing  the  dominant  character 
yellowness  or  roundness,  but  the  seed-skins  are  maternal 
tissue.  Such  F^  seeds  grow  into  F^  plants  and  bear  /% 
seeds  which  show  the  typical  mixture  of  dominants  and 
recessives   in  the  pods  (Fig.  3).      In  each  case  Mendel's 


J  M  1  II  ill) 


VR  Yv^'        (JR  Y^  YR 


CiR         c^vv 


9  S  i  y  i   > 


Fr 


(JR        7W        Y(?  YW         YR 


rR 


Fig.  3.  Inheritance  of  seed-characters  in  Pea.  The  seed  of  a  green 
round  variety  fertiUsed  by  pollen  of  a  yellow  wrinkled  variety  are 
yellow  and  round  (J\).  The  reciprocal  cross  would  give  the  same 
result.  Two  pods  of  A  seed  borne  by  the  J^^  plant  are  shown.  There 
were  6  yellow  round,  3  green  round,  3  yellow  wrinkled,  i  green 
wrinkled. 

observations  have  been  substantially  confirmed  by  later 
observers,  and  the  operation  of  similar  processes  has  now 
been  recognized  in  a  long  series  of  most  diverse  characters 
in  both  animals  and  plants. 

Consequences  of  Segregation :  Homozygote  and 

Heterozygote. 

Before  considering  the  various  extensions  of  Men- 
delian  research,  it  may  be  well  to  indicate  in  general  terms 
the  chief  significance  of  the  facts.  The  first  conception 
to  which  we  are  led  is  that  of  tmit-characters,  units 
because  they  may  be  treated  as  such  in  the  cell-divisions 
of  gametogenesis.      It  is   evidently  upon  some  process   of 


1 6  Purity  of  Type  [ch. 

qualitative  segregation  occurring  in  one  or  more  of  these 
cell-divisions  that  allelomorphism  depends.  The  opposite 
members  of  each  pair  of  characters  being  allelomorphic  to 
each  other,  every  zygote"^,  or  individual  produced  in  ferti- 
lisation, must,  in  respect  of  any  such  pair,  be  either  a 
koiuozygote,  that  is  to  say,  a  zygote  formed  by  the  union  of 
two  gametes  each  bearing  the  same  allelomorph,  as  AA 
and  aa,  or  a  heterozygote  formed  by  the  union  of  two  germs 
bearing  different  allelomorphs,  as  Aa.  Therefore  in  respect 
of  any  pair  of  allelomorphic  characters,  the  individuals 
composing  the  whole  population  are  of  three  kinds  only  : 

1.  Homozygotes  of  the  form  A  A, 

2.  Homozygotes  of  the  form  aa, 

3.  Heterozygotes  of  the  form  Aa. 

The  gametes  are  of  two  kinds  only,  A  and  a.  Each 
kind  of  homozygote  is  pure  to  the  character  of  the  gametes 
which  compose  it. 

Purity  of  Type. 

Purity  of  type  thus  acquires  a  precise  meaning.  It  is 
dependent  on  gametic  segregation,  and  has  nothing  to  do 
with  a  prolonged  course  of  selection,  natural  or  artificial. 

All  this  is  of  course  consonant  with  the  visible  facts 
that  have  been  discovered  by  the  cytologists,  in  so  far  as 
the  nucleus  of  each  somatic  cell  is  a  double  structure,  while 
the  nucleus  of  each  gametic  cell  is  a  single  structure.  It  is, 
in  my  judgment,  Impossible  as  yet  to  form  definite  views 
as  to  the  relations  of  the  various  parts  of  the  cell  to  the 
function  of  heredity.  The  details  of  cytology  and  their 
interpretation  are  beyond  our  present  province,  but  this 
much  is  certain :  that  when  in  these  discussions  we  idealize 
the  characters  as  borne  by  the  gamete  in  an  unpaired  state 
and  by  the  zygote  in  a  paired  state,  we  make  no  assumption 
which  is  not  in  full  accord  with  histological  appearances. 

From  the  fact  that  the  development  of  characters  in 
animals  or  plants  depends  on  the  presence  of  definite  units 

*  In  botany  the  term  zygote  is  usually  restricted  to  the  single  cell 
which  results  from  the  process  of  fertilisation,  but  by  a  natural  extension 
the  word  may  be  used  for  the  individual  which  develops  by  somatic 
divisions  from  that  cell. 


I]  Pttrity  of  Type  17 

or  factors  in  their  germ-cells,  the  paradox  at  once  follows 
that  an  organism  may  be  pure-bred  in  respect  of  a  given 
character  though  its  parents  were  cross-bred  in  the  same 
respect.  Purity  depends  on  the  meeting  of  two  gametes 
bearing  similar  factors,  and  when  two  similarly-constituted 
gametes  do  thus  meet  in  fertilisation,  the  product  of  their 
union  is  pure.  The  belief,  so  long  prevalent,  that  purity 
of  type  depends  essentially  on  continued  selection  is  thus 
shown  to  have  no  physiological  foundation. 

Similarly  it  is  evident  that  an  individual  may  be  pure  in 
respect  of  one  character  and  cross-bred  or  impure  in  respect 
of  others. 

As  a  consequence  of  the  application  of  Mendel's  prin- 
ciples, that  vast  medley  of  seemingly  capricious  facts  which 
have  been  recorded  as  to  heredity  and  variation  is  rapidly 
being  shaped  into  an  orderly  and  consistent  whole.  A  new 
world  of  intricate  order  previously  undreamt  of  is  disclosed. 
We  are  thus  endowed  with  an  instrument  of  peculiar 
range  and  precision,  and  we  reach  to  certainty  in  problems 
of  physiology  which  we  might  have  supposed  destined  to 
continue  for  ages  inscrutable. 

After  such  a  discovery  it  is  obvious  that  old  ideas  must 
be  revised.  Systematists  debating  the  limits  of  ''  specific 
rank  "  or  the  range  of  variability,  morphologists  seeking  to 
reconstruct  phylogenetic  history,  physiologists  unravelling 
the  interaction  of  bodily  functions,  cytologists  attempting 
to  interpret  the  processes  of  cell-division — each  of  these 
classes  of  naturalists  must  now  examine  the  current  con- 
ceptions of  his  study  in  the  light  of  the  new  knowledge. 
The  practical  breeder  of  animals  or  plants,  basing  his 
methods  on  a  determination  of  the  Mendelian  units  and 
their  properties,  will  in  many  of  his  operations  be  able  to 
proceed  with  confidence  and  rapidity.  Lastly,  those  who 
as  evolutionists  or  sociologists  are  striving  for  wider  views 
of  the  past  or  of  the  future  of  living  things  may  by  the  use 
of  Mendelian  analysis  attain  to  a  new  and  as  yet  limitless 
horizon. 


B.  H. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE   MATERIAL   INVESTIGATED. 

List  of  Structural  Character's  in  Plants  and  Animals — 
List  of  Types  iri  which  the  inheritance  of  Colour  has 
been  studied — Preliminary  Deductions — Dominance 
and  heterozygotis  characters — Mendel's  system  distin- 
guished from  that  of  Gallon. 

Heredity  following  the  general  rules  described  in  the 
last  chapter  has  been  witnessed  in  a  great  diversity  of 
animals  and  plants.  The  characters  already  proved  to 
follow  such  rules  show  an  equal  diversity.  The  following 
is  a  list  of  some  of  them.  Adequately  to  represent  the  facts 
respecting  each  of  these  cases  lengthy  description  would  be 
needed.  In  regard  to  several  of  them  occurrences  which 
do  not  readily  fall  into  line  have  been  recorded.  Of  these 
some  are  probably  due  to  errors  of  observation  or  mistakes 
of  various  kinds,  but  a  few  will  doubtless  prove  to  be 
genuine  exceptions  to  rule  and  may  constitute  points  ot 
departure  for  fresh  and  more  extended  research.  In  the 
outline  of  the  phenomena,  which  is  all  that  this  book  can 
profess  to  offer,  it  seemed  best  to  restrict  as  far  as  possible 
the  enumeration  of  these  details,  which  can  only  be 
thoroughly  appreciated  by  reference  to  the  original  papers  ; 
but  such  annotations  as  appeared  necessary  either  in  elucida- 
tion of  the  phenomena  or  by  way  of  incentive  to  further 
work  are  briefly  given  with  references  to  the  original 
sources.  These  annotations  will  be  better  understood  after 
the  later  chapters  have  been  read. 

In  the  following  list  when  one  character  is  conspicuously 
dominant  it  is  put  first,  but  in  several  cases  the  dominance 
is  imperfect. 

Plants. 

I.  Tallness  and  dwarfness.  Peas  [Pisiwt)  and  Sweet 
Peas  [Lathyrzcs  odoratus).  Runner  and  French  Beans 
[Phaseolus). 

As  regards  Peas  the  facts  have  been  recorded  by  Mendel  (195), 
Tschermak   (269,    270,    &c.),    R.E.C. *    (20).      When   varieties    differing 

*  R.E.C.  stands  throughout  for  Reports  to  the  Evolution  Committee  of 
the  Royal  Society,  giving  an  account  of  the  experiments  of  W.  Bateson, 
E.  R.  Saunders  and  R.  C.  Punnett.  Other  contributors  to  these  Reports 
are  mentioned  by  name. 


CH.  II]         Stritctitral  Characters :   Plants  19 

greatly  In  height  are  used,  dominance  is  complete,  and  the  two  parent  forms 
are  represented  as  three  to  one  in  Fc,.  No  clear  exception  has  yet  been 
observed.  Peas  {Ptsum)  exist  in  a  vast  number  of  distinct  horticultural 
varieties  which  can  roughly  be  classified  as  tall  (about  5 — 6  ft.),  half-dwarfs 
(about  4  ft),  dwarfs  (about  9  ins.  to  3  ft.).  The  genetic  relations  of  the 
half-dwarfs  to  the  others  are  not  fully  explored,  and  further  investigation 
will  probably  lead  to  the  discovery  of  important  facts.  The  cross  half- 
dwarf  X  tall  giving  tall  as  dominant  has  produced  some  extreme  dwarfs  in 
F2,  doubtless  by  recombination  {q-v.),  R.E.C.  20,  p.  69.  The  cross 
half-dwarf  X  dwarf  has  given  intermediates  in  F^  {ibid.). 

The  cross  between  tall  and  dwarf  *'  Cupid  "  Sweet  Peas  gives  complete 
dominance  of  tallness  and  simple  segregation  in  F^.,  "Cupids"  indis- 
tinguishable from  the  original  "Cupid"  parent  reappearing  (Fig.  i). 

Phaseolus  has  been  investigated  especially  by  Tschermak  (278)  who 
records  some  apparently  anomalous  results,  de  Vries  (298,  11.  p.  76) 
states  that  he  found  that  extracted  F.j  dwarf  Antirrhinum  did  not  breed 
true,  but  threw  plants  of  various  heights.  The  experiment  should  be 
repeated. 

2.  Branching  habit  and  the  unbranched  habit.  Sun- 
flower {^HeliantJucs,  Shull,  241)  and  Cotton  (Balls,  6).  The 
branched  form  of  Stock  {Matthiola  incana)  is  dominant  to 
the  unbranched  Brompton  type.  \n  F^  the  unbranched 
type  reappears,  but  the  ratio  has  not  been  determined 
(Fig.   4).      E.    R.   Saunders  (unpublished). 

3.  The  straggling  habit  of  both  the  tall  and  dwarf 
"  Cupid  "  Sweet  Peas,  and  the  much-branched  erect  habit  of 
the  ''  Bush"  Sweet  Peas  (R.E.C.  22). 

The  relation  of  these  two  types  to  each  other  is  not  altogether  simple. 
As  described  (q.v.)  F^  from  Cupid  x  Bush  is  a  reversio7iary  form  exactly 
like  the  normal  tall  variety.  Neither  the  tall  varieties  nor  the  Cupids  show 
the  profuse  branching  of  the  Bush  Sweet  Peas  which  gives  them  their 
peculiar  appearance.  This  is  evidently  recessive  to  the  unbranched 
condition,  and  the  fact  thus  stands  out  in  contrast  to  those  observed  in 
the  case  of  Sunflower  and  Cotton.  But  in  the  Sweet  Pea  we  have  the 
additional  complication  that  the  factor  which  represses  the  excessive 
branching  by  its  presence  gives  increase  of  height.  The  tall  and  the  Bush 
differ  from  each  other  in  respect  of  this  factor  only.  It  is  present  in  the 
tall  but  absent  from  the  Bush.  In  the  cross  between  Bush  and  Cupid  two 
pairs  of  factors  are  concerned  as  explained  in  the  passage  referred  to. 

4.  Hairiness  and  glabrousness.  Lychnis.  MattJiiola 
(Stocks).     Wheat. 

The  case  of  Lych?iis  has  been  studied  by  de  Vries  (288)  and  R.E.C. 
(19).  In  crosses  between  fully  hairy  and  glabrous  strains  the  discon- 
tinuity Is  complete.  Various  forms  intermediate  in  hairiness  may 
nevertheless  be  found  wild  and  are  by  no  means  rare.     Silene  inflata 


20 


Struchiral  Characters :  Plants 


[CH. 


often  exists  in  two  forms,  hairy  and  glabrous,  growing  side  by  side,  and 
doubtless  their  genetic  relations  are  the  same  as  those  found  for  the 
corresponding  varieties  of  Lychnis.  In  this  species  a  third  form  is  found 
with  hairs  on  the  edges  only  (12). 

The  case  of  Matthiola  is  important  and  presents  features  of  special 
interest,  R.E.C  (19,  20,  21,  see  also  Correns,  61).  Between  thoroughly 
hoary  and  glabrous  strains  the  discontinuity  is  absolute,  and  the  glabrous 


Fig.  4.  Matthiola.  Branched  and  unbranched  forms  in  F^.  A  photo- 
graph of  Miss  Saunders'  plants,  the  leaves  removed.  (Supplied  by 
Miss  Killby.) 

are  entirely  destitute  of  hairs.  The  dominance  is  complete  and  homo- 
zygotes  cannot  be  distinguished  from  heterozygotes.  A  third,  or  "  half 
hoary "  form  exists,  which  is  glabrous  or  nearly  so  on  the  upper  surface 
only.     Its  behaviour  has  not  been  fully  investigated  (19,  p.  33.) 

The  genetics  of  hairiness  in  wheat  have  been  studied  by  Spillman  (247), 
Tschermak  (270),  Biffen  (27).  The  heterozygotes  are  sometimes  inter- 
mediate in  hairiness. 

The  Peach  and  the  Nectarine  are  probably  related  to  each  other  as 
hairy  dominant  and  glabrous  recessive. 

Peculiar  results  are  recorded  in  Cotton  (Balls,  6). 


n] 


Structural  Characters :  Plants 


21 


5.  Prickliness  and  smoothness  of  fruits.  Dattira, 
(R.E.C.  19,  20.)     Ranunculus  arvensis  (20). 

The  case  of  Datura  is  interesting  from  the  fact  that  it  sometimes  has 
mosaic  fruits,  one  quarter  or  one  half  being  prickly  and  the  rest  smooth. 
This  is  perhaps  to  be  regarded  as  indicative  of  segregation  occurring 
among  zygotic  cells  (see  Chap.  xv.). 

Ranunculus  arvensis  has  three  types,  spiny,  tuberculated,  and  smooth. 
The  first  is  a  simple  dominant.  Tuberculated  x  smooth  gave  ^1  partially 
spiny  (21,  p.  55). 

6.  Absence  of  glands  iyMatthiola  incana)  on  leaves  was 
dominant  to  presence  of  glands  {M.  smuata)  (R.E.C.  20, 
p.  40). 


Fig. 


5.  Cross  between  a  normally  awned  Barley  and  a  variety  with 
"  hooded  "  awns.  P,  F,  the  parents.  F^  shows  partial  dominance  of 
hoods.  The  increase  in  length  of  ear  is  noticeable.  The  case  also 
illustrates  the  result  of  crossing  a  2-row  type  with  a  6-row  type, 
showing  dominance  of  the  former. 


(From  Professor  Bififen's  specimens.) 


22  Structural  Characters :  Plants  [ch. 

7.  Rough  and  smooth  foliage.     Wheat.      Biffen  (27). 

8.  Keeled  glumes  and  rounded  glumes.    Wheat.    Ibid. 

9.  Beardless  and  bearded  ears.  Wheat.  Ibid.  Also 
Spillman  (247)  and  Tschermak  (270). 

Most,  if  not  all,  of  the  "beardless"  varieties  exhibit  a  slight  and  variable 
amount  of  awn  especially  on  the  uppermost  spikelets  (Fig.  4). 

10.  The  "hoods"  or  '' Kapuzen''  characteristic  of 
certain  Barleys  show  a  partial  dominance  over  the  normal 
type.  These  hoods,  Professor  Biffen  states,  are,  structurally, 
aborted  florets  (Fig.  5).     Tschermak  (270),  Biffen  (30). 

11.  Hollow  and  solid  straw.     Wheat.     Biffen  (27). 

This  is  a  structural  character  of  an  interesting  kind,  and  one  upon 
which  the  commercial  value  of  straw  very  largely  depends.  It  was  shown 
that  many  factors  were  concerned  in  the  production  of  the  stem-characters; 
and  in  Fc^  by  the  recombination  of  these  factors  a  great  variety  of  straws 
appeared. 

12.  Blunt  and  pointed  pods.  Pisttm.  Tschermak 
(271),   R.E.C.  (20).     Phaseolus.     Tschermak  (272). 

The  dominance  in  this  case  is  complete.  Some  varieties  exist  in  both 
a  blunt  and  a  pointed  type  {e.g.  Sutton's  Continuity).  The  nature  of  these 
cases  is  discussed  later. 

13.  Lax  and  dense  ears  of  Wheat  and  Barley  give 
different  results  according  to  the  varieties  used.  Sometimes 
F^  is  lax,  sometimes  it  is  intermediate  (Spillman,  247; 
Biffen,  27,  28).  See  Fig.  6.  In  Barley  an  increase  in  ear- 
length  has  been  observed  (Fig.  5). 

14.  Development  of  fibrous  parchment-like  lining  to 
pods,  and  the  absence  of  the  same  which  constitutes  the 
''sugar  peas."  Pisum.  In  Phaseolus  (kidney-beans),  where 
similar  types  occur,  the  evidence  is  that  the  dominance  is 
reversed  (Emerson,  120,  121). 

This  is  one  of  the  features  originally  investigated  by 
Mendel.  He  regarded  the  parchmented  type  as  a  dominant. 
In  our  experiments  F ^  has  always  had  some  parchment  but 
the  quantity  is  so  much  reduced  as  to  cause  the  heterozygote 
to  have  a  very  distinct  appearance  (R.E.C.  20). 

15.  Much  serrated  and  little  serrated  edges  of  leaves. 
Urtica  (cp.  Pkyteuma,  Correns,   70,  p.    197).     This  cross 


n] 


Structural  Characters :   Plants 


23 


was  described  by  Correns  {^^)  who  gives  a  striking  diagram 
representing  his  results.  The  cross  was  made  between 
two  forms  known  as  Dodartii  and  Hltdifera,  which  were 

•4-* 

»-. 

>N     O 

-4-> 

tn 

a>  ex, 
is  >^ 

J^  'wi  ''*^ 


<^  !.:  2 

<u  t*   *-■ 

"  O  ^ 

+j  (U     Oh 

OJ  -     D 

'^  .5    ^ 

^  OJ     ^ 

rt  <u  -7^ 

•V  S   a> 

rt  ^      CA) 

ii  c  ^ 

03  «^.    c« 

n  1^    '- 

^  ^    O 

=  ^-C 


S 


<u 

to  .    •*-» 

t^  t/5    aj 

O  -^    O 

J-i  c  -^ 

U  (U  73 

bb 


regarded  by  Linnaeus  as 
entire-leaved  Dodartii  has 
as  a  variety  oi pilulifera. 


distinct    species, 
been   treated  by 


The    almost 
later  authors 


24  structural  Characters :  Plants  [ch. 

1 6.  Palmatifid  or  ''palm-leaf"  and  pinnatlfid  or 
"fern-leaf."     Primula  Smensis  (Fig.    7). 

The  fern-leaved  form  arose  in  English  horticulture  about 
i860  as  a  variation  from  the  normal  type.  I  have  had 
opportunities  of  seeing  its  genetic  behaviour  on  a  large 
scale  at  Messrs  Sutton's,  and  many  experiments  have  been 
made  with  it  by  Mr  R.  P.  Gregory  in  conjunction  with  me. 
Dominance  is  usually  complete,  but  at  Messrs  Sutton's  I 
have  seen  on  two  occasions  strains  containing  plants  of 
intermediate  leaf-shape,  which  were  presumably  hetero- 
zygous, for  the  two  types  occurred  on  sister-plants.  The 
leaf-shape  is  entirely  independent  of  the  colours  and  other 
features  of  the  plant,  and  can  be  transferred  bodily  from 
one  colour-type  to  another.  Messrs  Sutton's  varieties 
"•  Mont  Blanc"  and  "Sirdar,"  for  example,  are  sold  both  in 
the  palm-leaved  and  in  the  fern-leaved  forms. 


Fern-leaf  {R)  Palm-leaf  {D) 

Fig.   7.     The  two  types  of  leaf  found  in  Primula  Sinensis. 

17.      Leaves   and  petals  normal  or  laciniated.      Cheli- 
donium  majus.     de  Vries  (290)  and  (298),  i.  p.  134. 

This  case  is  interesting  in  comparison  with  No.  15.  In  the  Nettle, 
serraiio7i  is  a  dominant,  while  here  laciniation  is  a  recessive.  A  careful 
study  of  the  physiological  distinction  between  the  two  processes  would 
probably  lead  to  important  results  (cp.  Leake,  170,  on  leaves  of  Cotton). 


II]  Strttctitral  Characters :   Plants  25 

18.  Certain  leaf  characters  in  Capsella  bursa-pastoris. 
Shepherd's  Purse.  (Unpublished  work  of  Shull  ;  about  to 
appear  as  a  publication  of  the  Carnegie  Institution.) 

19.  Various  characters  in  the  seed  of  Cotton.    Balls  (6). 

Many  of  these  are  of  great  commercial  importance.  Balls  (6)  gives  the 
following  list : 

Domiiia7it.  Recessive. 

Long  staple.  Short  staple. 

Regular  distribution.  Irregular  distribution. 

Coloured  lint.  White  lint. 

Silky  lint.  Harsh  lint. 

More  fuzz.  Less  fuzz. 

He  says  that  all  the  desirable  characters  are  dominant,  and  that  hence 
the  chances  of  picking  out  a  stable  form  by  common  selection  are  very 
small.     Individual  selection  must  be  adopted. 

20.  Biennial  habit  and  annual  habit.  Hyoscyamus, 
Correns  {j'^. 

More  research  on  the  relations  of  annuals  to  biennials  is  greatly  to  be 
desired.  Points  of  the  highest  physiological  interest  are  involved.  In 
connection  with  root  crops  also  some  questions  of  commercial  importance 
are  raised.  In  R.E.C.  (19,  p.  135)  I  ventured  to  suggest  that  the  persist- 
ence of  "  runners  "  which  go  to  seed  in  such  plants  as  Beet  and  Mangel 
may  be  due  to  want  of  individual  selection  of  pure  dominants,  and  in  view 
of  Correns'  observation  the  probability  of  this  suggestion  is  increased. 

2  1.  Normal  stem  and  fasciated  stem  associated  with 
peculiar  distribution  of  inflorescences.  Peas  [Pistcm). 
Mendel  (195),  R.E.C.  (20).  In  our  experience  various 
intermediates  occur  In  /%. 

22.  Susceptibility  to  rust-disease  [Ptucinia  glumaruiii) 
and  resistance  to  the  same.     Wheat.      BIffen  (27,  29). 

This  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  important  instances  to  which 
Mendelian  method  has  yet  been  applied.  Using  a  variety  very  susceptible 
to  rust  and  another  practically  immune  to  its  attacks  Biffen  found  that  F-^ 
was  not  perceptibly  less  attacked  than  the  rusty  type.  F<,  showed  ordinary 
segregation,  and  the  green,  resistant  plants,  standing  among  the  yellow 
rusty  ones,  formed  a  very  striking  spectacle.  The  recessives  bred  true  and 
their  progeny  has  remained  rust-proof.  It  has  not  yet  been  shown  to  what 
the  resistance  is  due.  Working  with  Professor  Biffen,  Miss  Marryat  (193) 
found  that  the  rust-hyphae  are  checked  after  entering  the  stomata  of  the 
resistant  plants.  If,  as  may  be  suspected,  the  resistance  is  due  to  the 
presence  of  some  anti-toxin,  the  dominance  of  "susceptibility"  must  be 
taken  to  indicate  that  the  formation  of  the  anti-toxin  is  prevented  by  the 
prese?ice  of  a  factor  in  the  dominant  forms,  a  conclusion  which  may  lead  to 
definite  progress  in  the  physiology  of  disease-resistance. 


26  structural  Characters :  Plants  [ch. 

23.  Flat  standard  and  hooded  standard  in  the  flower  of 
Sweet  Pea.  R.E.C.  (22).  See  Plate  V.  Some  very  curious 
phenomena  have  been  observed  in  this  case,  which  are 
described  in  Chap.  ix.  The  type  known  as  "Snapdragon," 
perhaps  an  extreme  form  of  hood,  is  also  a  recessive  to  the 
flat  type.     R.E.C.  (20,  p.  ^'^). 

24.  Imbricated  petals  and  stellate  or  '' star  "-type. 
Primula  Sinensis.  Observations  made  at  Messrs  Sutton's 
and  experiments  of  R.  P.  Gregory  with  W.  Bateson.  (See 
Fig.  14.) 

25.  The  monstrous  condition  of  the  calyx  in  which  it 
resembles  the  corolla,  seen  in  "  hose-in-hose  "  Cainpanula  is 
an  imperfect  dominant  to  the  normal.  Associated  with  this 
homoeotic  variation,  the  female  organs  are  more  or  less 
completely  sterile  in  certain  strains.  Correns  (76).  This 
subject  is  discussed  in  Chap.  xi. 

26.  Abortion  of  the  female  organs  in  the  lateral  florets 
of  Barley,  as  found  in  the  2 -rowed  types,  and  the  complete 
or  hermaphrodite  development  of  the  florets,  as  in  the 
6-rowed  types  (Fig.  8).  Tschermak  (270)  and  (275),  p.  1 1. 
Biffen  (30). 

This  case  is  somewhat  complex.  There  are  three  types,  (i)  Six-row, 
in  which  3  perfect  hermaphrodite  florets  are  developed  in  each  spikelet. 
All  set  seed  and  the  result  is  that  the  ear  has  6  rows  of  seeds.  (2)  Types 
in  which  the  lateral  florets  have  anthers  but  no  female  organs.  (3)  The 
"  Abyssinian "  type  in  which  the  lateral  florets  contain  neither  male  nor 
female  organs.  The  types  (2)  and  (3),  being  able  to  make  seeds  only  in 
the  central  florets  of  each  spikelet,  alike  develop  two  rows  of  seeds. 
When  (i)  is  crossed  with  (3),  F^  is  Hke  (2) ;  and  (2)  crossed  with  (3)  gives 
Fx  also  like  (2).  Some  further  complexities  have  been  observed,  but  in 
general  it  appears  that  the  dominant  factor  has  the  power  of  partially 
preventing  the  formation  of  the  reproductive  organs  in  the  lateral  florets. 
The  facts  may  perhaps  be  interpreted  as  bearing  on  the  phenomenon  of 
Sex. 

Tschermak  (275)  describes  crosses  between  a  2-row  and  a  "4-row" 
type.  From  Professor  Biffen  I  understand  that  the  latter  is  in  reality  a 
lax-eared  6-row  type.  F^  is  2-row,  and  in  7^2  the  ratio  is  12  2-row : 
3  "4-row"  :  I  6-row.  This  is  a  special  case  of  the  ratio  9:3:3:1,  lax- 
ear  and  2-row  being  dominants.  Tschermak  and  ShuU  (242)  regard  it  as 
an  illustration  of  the  effects  of  a  latent  factor. 


n] 


Structural  Characters :   Plants 


27 


27.      The   two-celled   type   of  fruit   is  dominant  to  the 
many-celled  type  in  Tomato.     Price  and  Drinkard  (221). 

The  case  is  one  of  the  few  in  which  the  genetic  behaviour  of  a  meristic 
or  divisional  feature  has  been  investigated  apart  from  any  complexity 
introduced  by  differentiation. 


Fig.  8.  Cross  between  Abyssinian  2-row  Barley  and  a  club-headed  6-row 
type.  The  middle  figure  shows  F^.  The  length  of  ear  is  increased. 
(From  Professor  Biffen's  specimens.) 

28.  Style  short,  associated  with  large  pollen  grains, 
constituting  the  ''thrum"  type,  and  style  long,  associated 
with  small  pollen  grains  constituting  the  "pin-eyed"  type. 
Prhnula  Sinensis  and  acaulis.      Bateson  and  Gregory  (17). 

The  short  styled  type  has  been  found  in  the  homozygous  condition  in 
P.  Sinensis  but  not  yet  in  P.  acaulis.  For  the  relations  of  these  types  to 
the  "  homostyled  "  form,  see  p.  68.     Dominance  is  complete. 


28  Strudztral  Characters :  Plants  [ch. 

29.  Long  style  and  short  style  In  Oenothera.  (This 
difference  is  probably  quite  distinct  in  nature  from  ordinary 
heterostylism  as  seen  in  Prhmtla,  &c.)  de  Vries  (290). 
The  same  fact  has  been  observed  by  Balls  (6)  in  Cotton. 

30.  Normal  long  pollen  grains  with  three  pores,  and 
rounded  pollen  grains  usually  with  two  pores.  Sweet  Pea 
{Lathyrus  odorahis).     R.E.C.  (20,  21,  22).     See  Fig.  18. 

31.  Normal  anthers  and  sterile  anthers.  Sweet  Pea. 
R.E.C.  (20,  21,  22). 

With  regard  to  these  two  last  features  numerous  complications  occur, 
which  are  described  in  later  chapters. 

32.  Roundness  of  seed  connected  with  the  presence  of 
starch  in  large  elongated  simple  grains,  and  wrinkledness 
of  seed  connected  with  the  presence  of  peculiar  compound 
starch-grains.     Pisum. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  familiar  of  Mendel's  original 
examples  (see  Fig.  3).  It  has  been  re-investigated  by 
many  observers.  Correns  (60)  ;  Tschermak  (269,  &c.)  ; 
R.E.C.  (20);  Hurst  (155);  Lock  (172,  173).  The  F^  seeds 
made  by  fertilising  an  emasculated  flower  of  a  wrinkled 
variety  with  pollen  from  a  round  variety,  or  vice  versa,  are 
generally  ordinary  round  seeds,  and  F^^  shows  the  common 
ratio  3  round  :  i  wrinkled,  the  two  types  being  mixed  in 
the  pods  of  the  F^  plants. 

Among  the  multitude  of  varieties  of  peas  now  cultivated  there  is  a  great 
diversity  both  of  rounds  and  of  wrinkleds.  The  interrelations  of  these 
several  types,  even  as  regards  seed-shape,  have  as  yet  been  imperfectly 
explored.  The  degree  to  which  the  wrinkles  are  formed  is  fairly  uniform 
for  any  one  type,  but  the  various  types  show  different  degrees  of  wrinkling. 
The  differences  obviously  depend  chiefly  on  the  chemical  and  physical 
properties  of  the  reserve-materials  in  the  cotyledons,  and  an  analysis  of 
these  peculiarities  might  lead  to  further  discoveries. 

Gregory  (134)  found  that  the  starch  in  round  peas  occurs  chiefly  as 
large  elongated  simple  grains,  whereas  in  wrinkled  peas  it  is  in  the  form  of 
small  grains  of  irregular  shape  which  are  often  coinpou?ided  together  (Fig.  9). 
Darbishire  (94)  added  the  interesting  fact  that  in  F^  the  grains  are 
intermediate,  many  being  large  and  simple,  but  round  instead  of  elongated, 
with  an  admixture  of  compound  grains.  He  confirmed  also  Denaiffe's 
observation*  that  wrinkled  take  up  more  water  than  round,  but  he  found 
that  Fy  is  intermediate  in  this  respect,  and  he  suggests  that  the  size,  the 

*  Denaiffe,  Les  Fois  potagers,  p.  9. 


"] 


structural  Characters :  Plants 


29 


shape  of  the  grains,  and  their  simple  or  compound  nature,  may  be 
governed  by  distinct  factors.  He  regards  the  absorptive  power  as  again 
separable  from  these  features. 


^O'O^ 


(7   n^-O 


?^o 


o 


0 


O       O 


Round  and  Indent. 


Wrinkled. 


Fig.  9.     Outlines  of  starch  grains  in  the  different  types  of  peas.     The 
wrinkled  contains  many  compound  grains.     (From  Gregory.)     Magni- 
fication the  same  in  both  figures. 

A  third  type  of  pea,  of  which  the  purple  sugar-peas  (sa/is  parche7nin) 
are  a  good  instance,  may  be  described  as  "indent."  These  also  have 
large,  simple  starch  grains.  Such  seeds  are  of  irregular  flattened  shape  and 
may  be  confounded  with  true  wrinkled  peas.  Their  properties  are  entirely 
different,  and  the  two  sorts  must  be  carefully  distinguished.  One  of  their 
special  properties  w411  be  discussed  in  a  later  chapter,  but  here  it  must 
suffice  to  say  that  their  genetic  properties  are  essentially  those  of  round 
peas.  Much  confusion  has  been  introduced  by  want  of  care  in  distinguish- 
ing these  types. 

Intermediates,  which  on  casual  sorting,  cannot  be  classed  either  as 
round  or  wrinkled,  sometimes  occur.  Some  of  the  round  types  {e.g. 
Victoria  Marrow)  contain  a  large  proportion  of  such  seeds.  Their 
peculiarity  is  almost  certainly  due  to  environmental  influence,  though 
obviously  the  liability  to  this  affection  may  be  transmitted.  When  such 
seeds  are  found  in  F^_  from  a  cross  between  thoroughly  round  and  wrinkled 
varieties,  the  pitting,  when  it  exists,  generally  affects  all  the  round  seeds  of 
\}i\Q.  pods  in  which  it  occurs.  With  experience  such  pitting  can  immediately 
be  recognized  as  distinct  from  the  true  genetic  wrinkling,  and  in  our 
experiments  the  results  of  a  further  sowing  have  repeatedly  confirmed  the 
judgment  made  by  inspection  of  the  seeds. 

A  complete  account  of  all  the  phenomena  would  run  to  great  length. 
The  interrelations  of  round  and  wrinkled  seeds  are  to  be  recommended  as 
offering  perhaps  the  most  favourable  example  for  an  investigation  of  the 
chemical  nature  of  a  genetic  factor.  The  wrinkling  is  evidently  the 
consequence  of  a  particular  method  of  drying,  and  this  must  depend  on  the 
nature  of  the  reserve-materials.  A  first  step  would  be  to  determine  the 
relative  amounts  of  sugar  and  starch  in  the  two  chief  types.     It  is  natural 


30 


Stntctitral  Characters :   Plants 


[CH. 


to  suppose  that  the  wrinkled  peas  are  those  in  which  the  transformation  of 
sugar  into  starch  has  gone  less  far  than  in  the  round  peas ;  but,  as  much 
starch  is  formed  in  the  wrinkleds,  one  ferment  having  this  transformative 
power  must  be  present  in  them.  Hence  we  are  led  to  suppose  that  in  the 
round  pea  a  semid  ferment  is  present  which  can  carry  the  process  further. 
As  offering  an  attractive  problem  in  physiological  chemistry  the  phenomena 
are  recommended  to  those  who  have  the  requisite  skill  to  investigate  them. 

2i^.  Starchy  endosperm  giving  a  full,  rounded  seed, 
and  sugary  endosperm  giving  a  shrivelled  and  wrinkled 
seed.    Maize.    Fig.  lo.    de  Vries  (290);  Correns  (63);  Lock 

(172,  174)- 


Fig.  10.  A  cob  of  Maize  (Zm  mays)  borne  by  an  F^  plant  from  the  cross 
round  x  wrinkled,  fertilised  with  its  own  pollen,  showing  the  mixture  of 
round  (dominant)  and  wrinkled  (recessive)  seeds.  (From  a  specimen 
given  by  Dr  Webber.) 

Of  the  various  Mendelian  experiments  this  is  one  of  the  most  demon- 
strative. Dominance  is  perfect  so  far  as  external  observation  goes.  Correns 
records  a  remarkable  excess  of  round  seeds  as  recurring  with  great 
constancy  in  certain  families  when  F^  is  self-fertilised  (see  later). 

It  often  happens  that  pollen  from  one  variety  of  maize  is  blown  by  the 
wind  to  the  stigmas  of  another  variety.  If  this  pollen  possesses  a  dominant 
factor  capable  of  affecting  the  seed,  seeds  exhibiting  it  are  formed.  If  for 
instance  pollen  from  a  round  maize  is  blown  on  to  a  wrinkled  or  sugar-corn, 
round  seeds  will  be  formed  among  the  normally  wrinkled  seeds.  When 
formerly  it  was  supposed  that  the  endosperm,  which  contains  the  reserve- 
materials,  was  a  maternal  structure,  the  change  in  the  seed  was  regarded  as 
an  influence  exerted  by  the  embryo  on  the  maternal  tissues.  The  effects 
of  such  influences  were  called  by  Focke  ^'' Xenia.'''  There  are  a  few 
examples  of  such  influence  which  may  with  probability  be  regarded  as 
genuine*;  but  since  the  discovery  of  the  fact  that  the  endosperm  of  maize 
results  from  a  double  fertilisation  effected  by  the  second  nucleus  of  the 

*  The  phenomena  are  discussed  by  Darwin,  An,  a?td  Fits.,  ed.  n.  1885, 
I.  pp.  428-433.  It  seems  likely  that  in  some  of  these  instances  the  factor 
introduced  by  the  pollen-grain  can  influence  or  infect  tissues  in  contact 
with  the  embryo. 


ii]  Stnichtral  Characters :   Plants  31 

pollen-tube,  cases  like  that  of  maize  are  not  strictly  to  be  classed  as  Xenia 
(see  Correns,  58). 

34.  Glutenous  and  starchy  endosperms.   Wheat.    Biffen 

(27). 

Professor  Biffen's  researches  respecting  these  important  features  are 
not  yet  completed.  The  glutenous,  translucent,  hard  type  has  definite 
dominance  over  the  opaque,  soft,  starchy  type. 

35.  Single  flowers  usually  behave  as  dominants  to 
doubles,  as  in  Stocks,  Primula,  &c.  In  Carnations  the 
doubleness  dominates. 

The  most  extensive  researches  on  the  genetics  of  double- 
ness are  those  of  Miss  Saunders  in  the  case  of  Stocks 
{Matt/nola),  R.E.C.  (20-23).  The  peculiar  phenomena 
discovered  are  discussed  in  a  separate  chapter  {q.v.). 

36.  In  Phaseolits  hypo-geal  cotyledons  are  dominant 
to  epi-geal.  Various  intermediates  in  P..  Tschermak 
(278,  p.   54). 


This  list  and  that  which  follows  make  no  pretension  to 
completeness.  Those  features  are  enumerated  which  either 
seem  of  special  interest,  or  have  been  studied  with  some 
thoroughness.  Indications  respecting  many  more  are  to  be 
found  in  the  original  papers  (see  especially  for  Peas  and 
PJiaseobts  the  writings  of  Tschermak  and  Lock  ;  for 
Cotton,  Balls;  for  Oenothera,  &c.,  de  Vries,  and  Macdougal 
(186);  for  Wheat  and  Barley,  Biffen,  and  Tschermak;  for 
Maize,  Correns,  and  Lock;  for  various  plants,  Correns,  and 
de  Vries). 

In  the  genus  Brassica  numerous  crosses  have  been 
studied  by  Sutton  (262).  In  his  experiments  it  was  found, 
among  other  important  results,  that  the  bidbing  of  the 
Swede,  Turnip,  and  Kohl  Rabi  disappeared  completely  in 
crosses  with  non-bulbing  Kales,  and  that  in  P,  imperfect 
bulbing  reappeared.  Professor  Biffen,  who  is  continuing 
work  on  the  same  lines,  tells  me  that  in  regard  to  these 
and  similar  characters  cultural  conditions  play  a  great  part, 
and  lead  to  curious  and  conflicting  results. 


32  Struchtral  Characters :  Animals  [ch. 

Animals.     Structural  Characters. 

Man. 

A  considerable  number  of  diseases  and  malformations 
have  been  shown  to  behave  usually  as  dominants.  A  few 
conditions  may  be  said,  more  doubtfully,  to  behave  as 
recessives.  The  subject  of  human  inheritance  is  discussed 
in  Chap.  xii.  Of  normal  characteristics,  eye-colour  is  the 
only  one  yet  studied  (Hurst,  161)'^  sufficiently  to  justify  a 
positive  statement  as  to  the  existence  of  a  Mendelian  system 
of  descent. 

Cattle. 

'^'] .  Absence  of  horns  in  polled  breeds  of  Cattle  is 
dominant  to  the  presence  of  horns  (R.E.C.  19;   Spillman, 

In  sheep  the  inheritance  of  horns  is  sex-limited  (^.2^.), 
and  from  evidence  given  me  by  Mr  E.  P.  Boys-Smith  I 
suspect  that  this  is  true  in  the  case  of  Goats  also. 

Horse. 

38.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  gait  known  as 
** pacing"  is  recessive  to  the  ordinary  trotting  gait  in  the 
American  trotters.  Trotters  bred  together  may  produce 
pacers,  but  hitherto  I  have  found  no  authentic  instance  of 
genuine  natural  pacers,  when  mated  together,  producing 
trotters.  Correspondents  have  sent  me  word  of  several 
apparent  exceptions  to  this  rule,  but  all  on  inquiry  have 
proved  to  be  erroneous.  In  the  pacing  gait  the  two  legs  of 
the  same  side  of  the  body  are  moved  together  or  nearly  so, 
while  in  trotting  the  foreleg  of  one  side  moves  almost  with 
the  hind  leg  of  the  other.  Horses  may  be  trained  with 
more  or  less  success  to  adopt  either  gait,  but  the  distinction 
between  natural  pacers  and  natural  trotters  is  a  fairly  sharp 
one  (16).  The  physiological  nature  of  the  difference  is 
quite  obscure,  but  presumably  it  is  of  nervous  origin. 

Mouse. 

39.  From  time  to  time  mice  are  found  hairless,  with  the 
skin  thrown  up  into  corrugated  folds.  Experimenting  with 
such  mice  Mr  Archibald  Campbell  found  the  condition  to 

*  See  also  Davenport  (107). 


II]  structural  Characters :   Animals  33 

be  a  recessive,  the  presence  of  normal  fur  being  a  dominant. 
The  fur  grows  at  first  normally  and  falls  off  as  maturity  is 
reached.  Of  12  /^„  mice  3  lost  their  hair.  I  am  indebted 
to  Mr  Campbell  for  information  respecting  this  interesting 
case,  and  for  living  specimens.  The  attempt  to  breed  the 
recessives  together  failed,  but  in  Gaskoin's  case"^  naked 
parents  produced  young  like  themselves.  From  his  account 
it  appears  that  the  young  which  he  observed  never  grew 
their  hair,  but  the  fact  is  not  absolutely  certain  from  the 
description. 

40.  The  normal  condition  and  the  ''waltzing"  habit  in 
Japanese  mice.  The  waltzers  exhibit  a  peculiar  vertiginous 
movement  of  the  head  when  they  come  out  into  the  light, 
and  spin  often  with  extreme  rapidity,  running  after  their 
tails  till  apparently  exhausted. 

Our  knowledge  of  this  case  is  derived  from  Von  Guaita 
(135)  and  Darbishire  (90).  The  dominance  of  the  normal 
type  is  complete,  and  in  F .,  waltzers  reappear.  The  F ^ 
numbers  obtained  by  Darbishire  were  458  normals,  97 
waltzers,  where  the  expectation  is  386  normals,  139  waltzers. 
The  deficiency  may  perhaps  indicate  a  complication,  but 
more  probably  it  is  due  to  the  greater  delicacy  of  the 
abnormal  mice,  which  was  so  great  that  all  attempts  to 
breed  them  together  were  unsuccessful. 

Rabbit,  Guinea-pig. 

41.  Normal  short  hair  and  the  long  "Angora"  hair 
Rabbit,  Guinea-pig,  and  doubtless  Cat  (see  Hurst,  157; 
Castle,  45  and  48  ;  Sollas,  itnpublished ;  Castle  and 
Forbes,   55). 

Castle  (48),  p.  64,  gives  important  details  as  to  the  physiological  nature 
of  the  distinction  between  the  normal  and  "Angora''  hair,  which  he  regards 
as  resulting  from  a  special  method  of  growth. 

42.  The  rough  or  rosetted  condition  of  the  coat  in  the 
Guinea-pig  dominates  over  the  normally  smooth  condition 
(Castle,  48  ;  Sollas,  itnpiiblished). 

Castle  found  occasionally  that  duxiva\d\%  partially  rosetted  occurred  in  F... 

*  For  references  see  Bateson,  Materials  for  Study  of  Variation,  1894, 
p.  56.     A  good  figure  is  given  by  Gaskoin,  Proc.  ZooL  Soc.  1856. 

B.  H.  3 


34  Stritcttiral  Characters :  Animals  [ch. 

43.  Polydactylism  occurred  in  a  Guinea-pig,  the  off- 
spring of  normal  parents,  and  ran  an  irregular  course  in 
its  subsequent  descent  (Castle,  49). 

Cat. 

44.  The  abbreviated  tail  of  the  Manx  Cat  is  a  dominant 
(more  or  less  imperfect)  to  the  normal  tail  (see  Anthony,  2  ; 
Hind,  151;    Davenport,  98;   Kennel,  166,  «^). 

45.  Polydactylism  is  almost  certainly  dominant;  but, 
as  in  other  types,  irregularities  doubtless  occur. 

Fowls. 

For  the  study  of  heredity  Fowls  are  especially  well 
suited.  In  addition  to  their  many  colour-characteristics  the 
various  breeds  present  a  great  range  and  variety  of  struc- 
tural features. 

Among  the  long  series  of  offspring  which  hens  of  the 
more  fertile  breeds  produce,  the  descent  of  these  charac- 
teristics can  be  watched  in  families  of  ample  length.  The 
chief  papers  dealing  with  Fowls  are  R.E.C.  (19-22);  Hurst 
(156);  Davenport  (loi).  The  following  is  a  list  of  the 
principal  facts  already  elicited  as  to  the  behaviour  of  these 
structural  features  but  much  remains  to  be  done. 

46.  Various  shapes  of  comb,  for  example  the  rose  comb 
and  the  pea  comb,  are  both  dominant  to  the  single  comb. 
The  double  or  longitudinally  split  condition  is  also  dominant 
to  the  unsplit. 

See  pp.  61-7.  Many  of  the  finer  details  in  regard  to  the  heredity 
of  comb-shapes  are  not  yet  clear.  The  classification  of  the  comb-types  in 
the  newly-hatched  chickens  is  generally  very  easy,  but  in  occasional  strains 
forms  intermediate  between  the  pea  and  the  single  occur  in  F^,  which  may 
probably  be  due  to  subtraction-stages  of  the  pea  factor  {q.v,\  Some  of  the 
singles  extracted  in  F^  from  various  crosses  have  lateral  "  sprigs " — as 
fanciers  say.  It  is  not  impossible  that  these  irregular  processes  are  due  to 
additional  minor  factors,  but  they  are  subject  to  so  much  fluctuation  that 
their  descent  would  be  very  difficult  to  trace.  The  comb  of  the  Silky  fowl 
is  a  rose,  +  a  trifid  element  which  causes  its  posterior  end  to  be  divided  into 
three  irregular  points.  In  F^  from  Silky  x  Single,  regular  rose  combs  are 
produced  in  those  individuals  which  have  the  rose  factor  without  this  trifid 
element. 

Attention  may  be  called  to  the  dominance  of  the  median  splitting  of 
the  comb  found  in  certain  breeds,  for  the  facts  may  have  a  bearing  on  the 
genetics  of  meristic  characters.     Splitting  of  the  comb  may  occur  in  one  of 


ii]  Striictttral  Characters :   A7iimals  35 

several  distinct  ways.  It  may  affect  mainly  the  anterior  portion,  or  the 
posterior.  The  split  combs  of  established  breeds  have  possessed  ordinary 
dominance;  but  a  form  of  posterior  splitting  somewhat  like  that  of  the  F^ 
from  Breda  x  Single  occurred  apparently  as  a  mutation  among  extracted 
singles,  and  exhibited  a  curious  genetic  behaviour  suggesting  irregularity  of 
dominance  (20,  pp.  108  and  113). 

47.  The  normally  webbed  feathers  are  dominant  to 
the  peculiar  feathers  of  the  Silky  fowl. 

48.  Extra  toe  Is  usually  dominant  to  the  normal  four- 
toed  condition,  but  exceptions  occur. 

This  irregularity  of  dominance  is  exhibited  by  all  cases  of  polydactylism 
yet  studied  in  birds  or  mammals.  It  seems  to  be  a  property  of  certain 
strains.  Some  families  run  a  perfectly  regular  Mendelian  course,  others 
contain  members  with  only  the  normal  four  toes,  which  are  yet  capable  of 
transmitting  the  extra  toe.  The  numbers  in  such  families  are  not  favour- 
able to  the  suggestion  that  the  irregularity  is  caused  by  a  definite  disturbing 
factor. 

49.  Crest  is  dominant  to  no  crest. 

F2  may  contain  individuals  with  crests  far  larger  than  those  of  the 
parent  crested  breed,  a  fact  which  suggests  that  in  breeds  with  small  crests 
\e.g.  Silky)  the  full  development  of  the  crest  is  kept  in  check  by  some  other 
factor. 

50.  Feathered  leg  partially  dominates  over  clean  leg. 

Both  Hurst  (156)  and  Davenport  found  dominance  very  irregular.  F ^ 
is  intermediate,  and  traces  of  leg-feathering  are  occasionally  seen  in  the 
offspring  of  clean-legged  birds. 

51.  "Frizzling,"  or  turning  back  of  the  feathers,  Is 
dominant  to  the  plain  straight  feathers  of  the  normal. 

52.  Normal  size  of  feathers  on  the  hocks,  or  tibio-tarsal 
region.  Is  dominant  to  elongation  of  these  feathers  to  form 
quills — the  ''  Vulture-hock  "  of  fanciers. 

53.  Muff,  or  tuft  of  feathers  at  sides  of  the  bill  and 
throat,  as  in  Faverolles,  is  dominant  to  no  muff,  as  in  ordinary 
breeds. 

54.  Imperfect  development  of  coccyx  and  tail-feathers 
with  absence  of  tail,  as  in  ''  Rumpless  "  fowls,  Is  dominant 
to  the  normal  development  of  those  parts. 

This  interesting  case  was  investigated  by  Davenport  (loi).  It  is 
exactly  comparable  with  that  of  the  Manx  Cat. 


36  Strtictztral  Characters :  Animals  [ch. 

55.  Certain  breeds  (Houdan,  Polish,  Breda)  have  an 
extraordinary  development  of  the  nostril,  which  is  patulous, 
with  alae  horizontal  instead  of  curving  downwards.  This 
peculiarity  is  recessive  to  the  normal  (Davenport,  10 1). 
Hurst  has  observed  the  same  thing  and  Mr  Punnett  and  I 
have  similar  evidence  from  the  Breda.  Davenport  states 
that  in  his  experience  the  ''high"  nostril  is  never  combined 
with  a  fully  developed  comb. 

56.  The  tendency  to  go  broody  and  sit  on  eggs 
dominates  over  the  absence  of  this  instinct,  characteristic 
of  several  Mediterranean  breeds.  There  is  probably  segre- 
gation in  regard  to  these  two  dispositions,  but  this  cannot 
yet  be  asserted  positively. 

In  regard  to  fertility  as  measured  by  egg-production  there  is  as  yet  no 
clear  evidence. 

57.  The  loud  and  penetrating  shrieks  which  the  cocks 
(and  to  a  less  degree  the  hens)  of  an  Egyptian  breed  give 
out  when  caught,  were  reproduced  almost  exactly  by  the 
F^  generation  from  a  cross  with  a  non-shrieking  breed. 
Though  numerical  data  in  regard  to  such  a  character  are 
scarcely  attainable,  there  is  little  doubt  of  the  segregation 
as  evidenced  by  /%. 

Pigeons. 

58.  The  normal  foot  is  dominant  to  the  webbed  con- 
dition of  the  toes  which  sometimes  occurs  as  an  abnormality 
(Staples-Browne,  254). 

Mr  J.  L.  Bonhote  tells  me  that  in  his  experiments  webbed  birds  have 
produced  normal  offspring.  He  is  making  further  experiments  with  this 
family. 

59.  The  ''shell,"  or  turning-back  of  the  head-feathers 
of  the  Nun  is  dominant  to  the  normal  plain  head  {ibid.). 

60.  Birds  with  normal,  12-feathered  tails  crossed  with 
the  many-feathered  Fantail  give  intermediate  numbers  in 
F ^.  In  F .,  12-feathered  tails  reappear,  but,  so  far,  no  real 
Fan  has  come  from  the  cross-breds.  Mr  Staples- Browne,  to 
whom  I  am  indebted  for  this  information,  will  publish  a 
complete  account  of  his  evidence.  He  tells  me  that  the 
extracted  12-feathered  birds  do  not  breed  true,  but  may 
throw  birds  with  13  or  14  feathers. 


II]  structural  Characters :   Animals  37 

Canaries. 

61.  Crest  Is  dominant  to  plain-head,  as  the  non-crested 
condition  is  called  by  fanciers  (R.E.C.  19,  p.  131  ;  Daven- 
port, 105). 

The  type  of  crest  which  fanciers  admire  consists  of  feathers  neatly 
laid  down  over  the  head.  To  produce  such  birds  crested  individuals  are 
bred  with  plain-heads^  and  it  is  clear  that  the  exhibition  type  of  crest  is 
a  heterozygous  form.  When  crested  birds  are  bred  together  it  is  said 
that  an  ugly,  standing  crest  frequently  is  produced,  and  presumably  this 
is  the  homozygous  type  of  crest.  The  mating  of  two  crested  parents  is 
by  several  authors  said  to  give  rise  to  some  bald  birds.  Other  writers 
{e.g.  Blakston)  have  ridiculed  this  statement,  and  formerly  I  was  inclined 
to  regard  it  as  a  mere  exaggeration,  but  Davenport  in  his  recent  paper 
mentions  bald  heads  as  sometimes  occurring  among  his  crested  birds. 
He  has  kindly  supplemented  his  published  account  with  the  statement 
that  the  bald  patch  is  an  area  "on  the  back  of  the  head  varying  from  four 
to  six  millimetres  in  diameter  practically  without  feathers  and  remaining 
featherless  throughout  life.  The  crest,  however,  on  top  of  the  skull  remains 
perfectly  evident,  and  often  baldness  can  only  be  detected  by  blowing  the 
feathers."     In  no  case  was  such  a  bald  patch  found  in  a  plain-head. 

The  bald  patch  on  the  occiput  is  recognized  by  Blakston  {Cage  Birds, 
p.  104)  as  a  property  of  crested  birds,  and  presumably  the  "balds"  alleged 
to  come  from  the  mating  of  two  crests  are  birds  homozygous  for  crest- 
factor,  in  which  the  crest  stands  up  and  allows  the  bald  patch  to  be  seen. 
Davenport  had  a  crested  bird  without  any  bare  patch,  and  he  found  that 
the  feathering  in  this  region  was  due  to  a  separate  dominant  factor. 


Animals  and  Plants  in  which  Colonr-Characters  have  been 
shown  to  have  a  Mendelian  Inheritance. 

The  phenomena  of  colour-inheritance  are  complicated 
in  several  ways.  Some  of  these  complications  which  are 
of  great  importance  and  interest  will  be  considered  in 
subsequent  chapters.  It  is,  however,  convenient  to  enu- 
merate the  genera  in  which  Mendelian  heredity  has  been 
observed  In  order  to  illustrate  the  scope  of  the  principle. 
The  following  list  of  genera  contains  the  chief  of  those  in 
which  heredity  according  to  a  Mendelian  system  has 
been  shown  to  occur.  In  some  of  them  as  the  result  of 
extensive  research  many  Mendelian  features  of  colour  have 
been  discovered,  and  the  existence  of  numerous  colour- 
factors  is  demonstrated.  In  others  only  one  such  factor 
for  colour  has  been  detected. 


38  Colours  of  Plants  [ch. 

Plants. 

Antirrhinum  (Snapdragon).  Orchids  (several  genera). 

Atropa.  Papaver. 

Brassica  (Turnips  and  Swedes).  Phaseolus. 

Clarkia.  Phyteuma. 

Coreopsis.  Pisum. 

Datura.  Polemonium. 

Gossypium  (Cotton).  Primula. 

Helianthus  (Sunflower).  Salvia. 

Hordeum  (Barley).  Solanum  (Tomato). 

Hyoscyamus  (Henbane).  Triticum  (Wheat). 

Lathyrus  (Sweet  Pea).  Verbascum  (Mullein). 

Lychnis.  Viola. 

Matthiola  (Stocks).  Zea  (Maize,  Indian  Corn). 

Mirabilis. 

Animals. 

Man.                                         .  Fowls. 

Mice.  Pigeons. 

Rats.  Canaries. 

Rabbits.  Axolotl. 

Guinea-pigs.  Lepidoptera,  various  (Silkworm  ;  A- 

Horse.  braxas   grossulariata ;    Anger ona 

Pigs.  prunaria,  &c.). 

Sheep.  Coleoptera     {Lina ;     Leptinotarsa ; 

Cattle.  Crioceris). 

Cats.  Helix. 

For  the  convenience  of  readers  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  in 
outline  and  desirous  of  pursuing  the  subject  further  the  following  brief 
annotations  are  placed  here.  Until  the  chemistry  of  pigmentation  is 
better  understood,  a  comparison  between  the  behaviour  and  properties  of 
the  several  types  cannot  be  instituted  with  much  confidence. 

Antirrhinum.  Wheldale  (303)  has  shown  that  the  lowest  or  hypostatic 
factor  dominant  to  albino  gives  yellow  in  the  "lips"  of  the  flower;  the 
addition  of  various  other  factors  produces  anthocyan  reds  which  superposed 
on  the  yellow  give  deep  crimson  red  colour.  A  second  series  of  reds,  more 
purplish  or  magenta  in  tint  (colour  of  wild  A.  majus)^  results  from  addition 
of  a  factor  which  in  absence  of  anthocyans  gives  an  ivory  colour.  This 
ivory  is  epistatic  to  yellow.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  lowest  anthocyan 
factor  gives  red  in  the  tube  with  a  tinge  in  the  lips,  while  the  addition  of 
the  next  above  it  gives  the  self-coloured  flower. 

There  is  also  a  'whiteA.v\^^A  type  of  each  colour-combination  ("Delila" 
of  de  Vries,  298). 

All  the  factors  except  those  for  yellow  and  ivory  can  be  carried  by  the 
albino.  Among  the  reds  several  heterozygous  combinations  can  be  recog- 
nized.    The  heredity  of  striping  is  still  under  investigation. 

Atropa  Belladonna.  The  normal  dark-fruited  type  is  dominant  to 
yellow-fruited  (de  Vries,  290;  Saunders,  19). 


II]  Colours  of  Plants  39 

Brassica.  White  chromoplasts  dominant  to  yellow  in  Swedes  and 
Turnips  (Sutton,  262). 

Clarkia  elegans.  Common  magenta-red  dominant  to  salmon  pink 
(Bateson  and  Punnett). 

Coreopsis  tmctoria.  Ordinary  yellow  type  dominant  to  var.  bruimea 
with  brown  flowers  (de  Vries,  290).  The  brown  flowers  like  those  of 
Cheira7ithus  (Wall-flower)  are  no  doubt  due  to  presence  of  much  dark 
anthocyan,  and  the  case  is  probably  one  in  which  the  development  of  little 
anthocyan  dominates  over  the  development  of  much  anthocyan  (cp. 
Lathyrus,  Pri??iula^  &c.). 

Datura.  Purple  in  flower  or  stem  dominant  to  white  flower  and  green 
stem  (de  Vries,  290;  Saunders,  19). 

Gossypiu7n  (Cotton).  Dominance  of  many  colour-characters  in  plant, 
flower,  and  seed  (Balls,  6).     F.2  details  not  yet  published. 

HeliantJms.     Purple  disk  dominant  to  yellow  disk  (Shull,  241). 

Hordeum  (Barley).  Black  pigment  in  paleae  dominant  to  its  absence 
(Tschermak,  270;  Biff'en,  30). 

Hyoscyaimis  fiiger  a?i?iuus  x  H.  niger pallidtis  were  found  by  Correns  (69) 
to  give  F^  flowers  of  intermediate  tint. 

Lathyrus  (Sweet  Pea).  Anthocyan  colours  dominant.  Purples  dominant 
to  reds.  Colour  depends  on  two  complementary  factors.  Yellow  chromo- 
plasts recessive  to  colourless.  Facts  fully  described  in  later  chapters. 
Plants  with  coloured  flowers  have  dark  seed-coats.  Whites  have  seed-coats 
colourless. 

Lychfiis.  F^  between  L.  diurua  and  L.  vespertina  has  flowers  of  inter- 
mediate tint  ranging  through  many  grades  (see  de  Vries,  290 ;  Correns,  69; 
R.E.C.  19).     Segregation  imperfectly  studied. 

Matthiola  (Stocks).  Colours  as  in  Sweet  Pea  (R.E.C.  19-21; 
Tschermak,   278;    Correns,  61).     For  colours  of  seeds  see  R.E.C.   19. 

Mirabilis.  Colours  consist  of  a  complex  series  of  reds  and  yellows,  the 
interrelations  of  which  are  not  yet  clear  (see  Correns,  67,  74,  77).  Miss 
Marryat's  experiments  (unpublished)  prove  the  existence  of  a  number  of 
heterozygous  forms. 

Orchids.  Dominance  of  anthocyan  colour  in  Cypripedium  is  clear. 
In  that  genus  it  results  from  union  of  two  complementary  factors  (Hurst, 
Gard.  Chron.  1908,  i.  p.  173).  As  regards  distribution  of  colour  the  facts 
are  complex,  but  several  indications  of  Mendelian  distribution  have  been 
recognized  (Hurst,  153,  160).     See  p.  96. 

Papaver.  Presence  of  dark  purple  spot  at  base  of  petals  dominant  to 
the  absence  of  such  colour  (de  Vries,  290). 

Phaseolus.  The  elaborate  researches  of  Tschermak  (271-3,  275,  278) 
have  demonstrated  the  existence  of  numerous  factors  controlling  the  colour 
of  the  flowers  and  seed-coats  in  P.  vulgaris^  P.  multiflorus  and  their  hybrids. 
The  flower-colours  are  purples,  reds,  and  white,  with  a  bicolour  form  of  the 
red  ("Painted  Lady").     Colour  has  not  yet  been  produced  by  union  of 


40  Colours  of  Plants  [ch. 

two  whites,  but  on  the  analogy  of  the  Sweet  Pea  such  a  result  may  be 
attainable.  Otherwise  the  same  rules  apply  generally.  At  least  two  sets  of 
pigments  take  part  in  coloration  of  seed-coats :  (i)  brown,  (2)  purple.  White- 
flowered  plants  have  seed-coats  unpigmented,  and  the  bicolour  flowers  go 
with  parti-coloured  half-white  seeds.  The  development  of  purple  in  the 
coats  and  the  pattern  in  which  it  is  deposited  depend  on  various  factors 
which  can  be  carried  by  the  albino.  Various  complications  were  met  with 
(see  originals).  The  cross  between  the  two  species  showed  some  degree  of 
sterility. 

Similar  results  were  obtained  by  Emerson  (120,  121).  The  seed-coats 
of  heterozygous  plants  in  some  cases  were  distinguishable.  He  also  found 
green  pods  dominant  to  yellow  pods  (cp.  Pisum). 

Further  facts^  with  a  scheme  elucidating  some  of  the  curious  ratios 
which  the  seed-colours  may  exhibit  {e.g.  18  :  t8  :  6  :  6  :  16)  in  F2,  are 
given  by  Shull  (242). 

Phyteiima  Halleri  (dark  violet)  x  P.  spicatum  (white)  gave  two  types  in 
F^,  5  plants  being  bright  blue  with  violet  tinge,  4  violet  (Correns,  70). 

Pisum  (Edible  Peas).  Flower-colours  of  three  types,  (i)  Purple. 
Standard  a  pale  purplish  white ;  wings  deep  chocolate  purple.  (2)  Pink. 
Standards  pinkish  white ;  wings  a  fine  salmon-pink.  (3)  White.  F^ 
containing  all  three  types  is  the  usual  9  : 3  : 4  in  order  named.  Mark  in 
axils  of  leaves,  if  present,  is  purple  in  (i),  red  in  (2),  absent  in  whites. 
Tschermak  experimented  with  a  purple  strain  without  the  axil-mark,  and 
found  that,  as  in  Sweet  Peas,  the  factor  for  that  character  can  be  carried  by 
the  albino. 

Seed-coats  colourless  or  greenish  in  white-flowered  plants.  In  plants 
with  coloured  flowers  one  or  more  of  three  distinct  kinds  of  pigments  always 
present:  (i)  a  purple,  occurring  in  spots,  (2)  a  brown,  distributed  either 
generally  over  the  surface,  or  in  bands  (as  in  Maple  peas),  (3)  an  insoluble 
greenish  grey,  distributed  over  the  whole  testa.  Neither  (i)  nor  (2)  can  be 
developed  in  the  absence  of  (3),  but  traces  of  (2)  may  sometimes  be  seen 
in  white-flowered  plants.  There  are  separate  factors  for  (i),  (2),  and  (3), 
of  which  (i)  and  (2)  may  be  carried  by  the  whites  (Lock,  176). 

Cotyledon-colours  are  yellow,  and  green.  Yellow  is  a  dominant,  and 
heterozygotes  are  indistinguishable  from  homozygous  dominants.  In  rare 
cases  green  has  been  seen  as  exceptions  in  F^^  but  these  are  probably 
due  to  abnormal  conditions.  Many  modern  varieties  have  cotyledons 
patched  with  green  and  yellow.  Genetically  these  are  greens  which,  show 
a  special  liability  to  bleaching.  If  protected  while  ripening  they  remain 
green. 

Colours  of  Pisum  have  been  chiefly  studied  by  Mendel  (195) ;  Tscher- 
mak (269,  271-3)  >  Correns  (60);  R.E.C.  (20);  Lock  (172,  173,  175-6); 
Hurst  (155). 

Polemonium.  Correns  (70)  found  the  white  var.  of  P.  coeruleum 
dominant  to  the  yellow  of  P.  flavu7n  ;  and  the  blue  type  oi  coeruleum  xjlavum 
gave  F^  blue.  It  may  be  inferred  that  the  yellow  of  flavmn  is  a  chromo- 
plast  colour,  and  that  the  blue  anthocyan  dominated  as  usual.  Hybrids 
sterile. 

Pri7nula.  P.  Sinensis  exists  in  a  long  series  of  colour-types  the 
relations  of  which  are  still  being  investigated  by  R.   P.  Gregory  in  con- 


II]  Colours  of  Plants  4 1 

junction  with  me.  Some  of  the  more  striking  facts  are  referred  to  in 
later  chapters.  White  flowers  with  green  stem  constitute  an  albino, 
recessive  to  all  colours.  The  magenta  shades  have  a  factor  epistatic 
to  crimson  and  pink.  Blue  is  hypostatic  to  all  the  red  shades.  The 
whites  which  have  red  or  reddish  stej?is  are  dominant  whites,  showing  only  a 
pale  shade  or  tinge  of  colour  in  F^.  Deep  colours  cannot  appear  on 
stems  that  are  not  red  except  in  the  white-edged  "Sirdar"  {g.v.). 

Salvia  Horniinum.  Purple,  red,  white,  related  as  in  Fisum^  &c. 
Saunders,  R.E.C.  (20). 

Triticum  (Wheat).  Red  chaff  is  dominant  to  white  chaff.  Grey  chaff 
is  epistatic  to  red  and  dominant  to  white.  Tschermak  (270) ;  Biffen  (27) ; 
Spillman  (247). 

Verbascum  blattaria.  Yellow  (a  sap-colour)  dominant  to  white.  ShuU 
(241). 

Viola.  White  is  recessive  to  colour  (de  Vries,  290)  in  V.  cornuta. 
The  brown  seed-colour  of  V.  papilionacea  is  dominant  to  buff  of  V. 
hirsutula,  and  the  purple  of  the  capsule  of  hirsutiila  to  the  absence  of 
purple  vc\  papilionacea-  (Brainerd,  41). 

Z^a  (Maize).  Yellow  endosperm  dominant  to  white.  Blue  in  aleurone 
layer  an  irregular  dominant  to  absence  of  blue.  (Definite  exceptions  are 
frequent.)  Red  pericarp,  a  plant-character,  dominant  to  absence  of  red. 
The  relations  of  the  striped  types  have  not  been  clearly  determined. 
Correns  {(i'^\   Lock  (172,    174). 

Colours  of  Ani77tals. 
Man. 

Eye-colour  {q.v.),  Hurst  (161),  Davenport  (107). 

Albinism  {q.v.)  is  doubtless  recessive,  but  in  man  its  descent  is  complex 
and  has  not  yet  been  elucidated. 

Red  hair  is  recessive  to  dark  hair  and  perhaps  to  ordinary  brown  (see 
Hurst,  162). 

Cattle. 

Red-roan  is  a  heterozygote  of  red  and  white  (Wilson,  311) ;  and  blue- 
roan  is  similarly  related  to  black  and  white.  Spillman  (249)  suggests  that 
black  is  dominant  to  red. 

Cats. 

Red  is  dominant  to  black  in  males.  Tortoiseshell  is  the  corresponding 
form  of  the  heterozygote  in  females.  Doncaster  (109).  Dilution-types, 
blue,  and  cream,  recessive  to  saturated  colours. 

As  to  eye-colour  see  Przibram  (224). 

Mice,  Fats,  Fabbits,  Guinea-pigs. 

Colours  fully  discussed  in  later  chapters.  Chief  papers  by  Allen  (i); 
Bateson  (10);  Castle  (48,  53);  Crampe  (83,  «);  Cuenot  (84-9);  Darbishire 
(90);  Durham  (116);  Hurst  (157);  Mudge  (204).  Albino  recessive  in  all 
cases.  A  piebald  type  dominant  to  self-colour  exists  in  mice  (Durham, 
116). 


42  Colours  of  Animals  [ch. 

Horse. 

Chestnut  recessive  to  bays  and  browns.  Relations  of  these  two  domi- 
nants to  each  other  not  clear.     Hurst  (158). 

Pigs. 

Several  notes  published  by  Spillman  (249,  251-2).  White  is  usually  a 
dominant  to  colour  in  domesticated  races*  but  piebalds  are  frequent  in  F^. 
The  relation  of  black  to  red  is  not  yet  clear.  The  white  belt,  characteristic 
of  certain  breeds;  is,  according  to  Spillman,  due  to  a  complementary  pair  of 
factors  which  may  be  separately  carried  by  self-blacks.  He  makes  the 
interesting  suggestion  that  the  appearance  of  the  belt  may  be  a  "reversion" 
to  a  condition  like  that  of  the  Indian  Tapir  (251). 

The  colour  of  the  wild  boar  is  dominant  to  the  red  of  Tamworth  and 
segregates  normally  from  it  (252).  The  wild  colour  is  presumably  due  to 
an  "  agouti  "  factor  like  that  of  the  rodents. 

Sheep. 

From  such  fragments  of  evidence  as  I  can  find  it  seems  that  the  white 
of  ordinary  sheep  is  not,  as  in  the  pig,  a  dominant  to  colour,  but  a 
recessive.  From  Darwin's  record  {An.  and  Fits.  11.  p.  4)  of  the  appearance 
of  all  black  sheep  from  a  cross  between  white  Southdown  ewes  and  a 
Spanish  ram  with  two  black  spots,  it  may  perhaps  be  inferred  that  the 
black  colour  is  due  to  complementary  factors. 

Black  face  and  white  face  give  a  speckled  face  in  the  heterozygote. 
The  dark  ring  round  the  eyes  depends  on  a  separable  factor  (Wood,  312). 

Fowis. 

Colours  very  complicated  and  genetics  imperfectly  understood.  Whites 
are  of  various  kinds,  one  being  dominant  and  at  least  two  recessive. 
Colour  depends  on  complementary  factors  which  may  be  borne  by  whites. 
Black  is  an  imperfect  dominant  to  black-red.  Brown-red  a  dominant  to 
black-red  (Fig.  11). .  Blue  is  a  heterozygous  colour  of  black  and  a  splashed 
white.  The  red  and  yellow  pigments  of  the  black-red  cock  may  be  replaced 
by  white,  thus  giving  the  Silver  Duckwing,  but  in  the  hen  the  red  of  the 
breast  is  not  thus  replaced,  and  the  Duckwing  hen  differs  from  the  black- 
red  in  having  the  yellow  of  hackle  and  mantle  replaced  by  white.  These 
replacements  may  occur  as  consequence  of  recombination  in  F^  from 
crosses  between  white  and  coloured  breeds,  whence  it  is  to  be  inferred  that 
the  replaced  reds  and  yellows  depend  on  a  special  factor.  Pencilling  is  a 
dominant  to  its  absence,  and  various  mottlings  are  also  dominant.  The 
descent  of  colour  is  influenced  in  some  cases  by  sex  in  ways  not  yet  clear, 
and  in  both  sexes  heterozygous  types  occur. 

The  relations  of  the  buff  of  Cochin  (and  of  other  breeds  derived  from 
it)  to  other  colours  are  not  yet  known. 

As  regards  colour  of  the  down,  the  brown  striped  condition  is  dominant 
to  the  pale  brown  down  associated,  for  example,  with  Wheaten.  Both 
types  of  down  may  occur  in  the  same  breed  (^.i^.  Indian  Game),  and  the 
fact  seems  to  have  no  relation  to  the  adult  plumage.     R.E.C.  (21,  22). 

*  Mr  Staples-Browne  has  given  me  confirmatory  evidence. 


II]  Colours  of  Animals  43 

The  black  body-pigmentation  of  the  Silky  is  a  dominant,  but  may  be 
inhibited  by  another  factor,  the  descent  of  which  is  sex-limited.   See  Chap.  x. 

Another  sex-limited  descent  is  to  be  found  in  the  relations  of  Cuckoo 
to  black,  but  the  details  have  not  been  ascertained  (Spillman,  249,  253,  a). 

The  daw-eye  is  recessive  to  red.  The  dark  iris  is  usually  a  dominant 
to  red. 

Red  ear-lobe  is  an  imperfect  dominant  to  white.     R.E.C.  (19). 

Principal  papers  dealing  with  these  features  are  R.E.C.  (19-22), 
Hurst  (156);  Davenport  (loi). 

Pigeons. 

Black  is  dominant  to  blue.  Relations  of  red  and  yellow  not  clear. 
Black  and  blue  are  dominant  to  white  of  Fantail ;  heterozygotes  generally, 
if  not  always,  having  some  white.  Chequering  dominant  to  its  absence. 
The  white  rump  of  the  Rock-pigeon  is  dominant  to  blue  rump  (Staples- 
Browne,  255). 

Canaries. 

Presence  of  black,  as  in  green  and  pied  types,  dominant  to  absence  of 
black  as  in  the  various  yellows  and  cinnamons.  The  pink  eye  of  cinnamons 
is  recessive  to  black  eye,  with  a  sex-limited  inheritance.  There  are  probably 
several  heterozygous  colours,  but  in  order  to  determine  these  the  genetic 
interrelationships  of  the  various  Yellows,  Jonque,  Mealy,  must  be  worked 
out.  The  "  cap  "  and  lacing  of  the  Lizard  are  dominants.  (Noorduijn, 
213-5;    Davenport,   105;    F.   M.   Durham,   unpublished.) 

Axolotl. 

Crosses  between  normal  and  albino  gave  dominance  of  pigmentation. 
Subsequent  generations  showed  remarkable  and  as  yet  unique  features.  In 
F2  dark  larvae  to  white  larvae  were  3:1;  but  the  white  F.^  larvae,  though 
remaining  red-eyed,  acquired  a  certain  amount  of  pigment,  sometimes 
distributed  as  a  metameric  chequering.  No  thorough  albino  occurred  in  JF^- 
When  however  these  chequered  albinos  w^ere  bred  with  a  true  albino,  the 
latter  was  found  dominant  and  true  albinos  were  produced  (Hacker, 
143-4).  Hacker  compares  this  case  with  the  phenomena  seen  in  Mice, 
&c.,  but  there  is  an  essential  distinction  in  the  fact  that  in  all  other 
instances  true  albinos  come  in  Fo  and  in  the  dominance  of  the  true 
albinism  over  the  chequered  character.  It  would  be  interesting  to  see 
whether  the  development  of  pigment  in  the  Fc,  whites  is  in  any  way 
dependent  on  conditions. 

Lepidoptera. 

Bombyx  mori  (Silkworm).  Brown  colour  seen  in  a  dark  variety  of  the 
moth  was  proved  to  be  an  imperfect  dominant  (Coutagne,  '^2)1  P-  122). 

The  larvae  have  many  colour-types.  Coutagne  used  a  dark  ^'"inoricaiaV 
variety,  a  variety  with  transverse  stripes,  and  ordinary  white  larvae.  Both 
the  coloured  types  are  dominant  to  white,  but  when  the  dark  self-colour 
factor  and  the  stripe-factor  are  present  in  the  same  larva  the  stripes  show 
on  the  dark  ground-colour  {ibid.  p.  142).  Toyama  (268)  also  made  many 
experiments  with  the  colours  of  the  larvae.  He  found  striping  a  dominant 
over  plain  white.     In  certain  F .^  families  from  striped  x  white  a  new  pale 


44  Colours  of  Ajiiinals  [ch. 

form  was  produced  (p.  349).  The  ratio  of  striped :  common  marked 
white  :  pale  unmarked  white  is  as  ShuU  points  out  (242)  12:3:1  (actually 
1463,  363,  126).  I  incline  to  interpret  this  as  signifying  that  the  12  striped 
were  in  reality  of  two  kinds,  in  the  ratio  9  :  3,  but  that  the  distinction 
between  the  common  and  the  pale  was  not  easy  to  detect  in  the  striped 
class.  On  this  view  the  striped  parent  was  a  "pale."  Shull  regards  the 
paleness  as  "  latent "  in  both  parents. 

As  regards  the  colour  of  silk  there  is  a  complication.  In  Toyama's 
experiments  yellow  was  always  a  dominant  to  white.  Coutagne  sometimes 
obtained  this  result,  but  (/.  c.  p.  123)  the  white  of  a  race  called  "  Blanc  des 
Alpes  "  proved  to  be  dominant  to  yellow. 

Abraxas  grossulariata  (Currant  Moth).  The  type  is  dominant  to  var. 
lacticolor  (q.v.),  Doncaster  (iii,  114).  See  Plate  I,  figs,  i,  2.  The  pecu- 
liarities of  this  case  are  discussed  in  connection  with  Sex. 

Mr  L.  W.  Newman  has  been  good  enough  to  send  me  information  as 
to  a  cross  between  A.  grossulariata  and  the  var.  varleyata.  This  is  a  nearly 
black  suffused  form  (see  Porritt,  Eiit.  Rec.  xv.  p.  10).  F^  was  typical 
grossulariata,  and  in  7^2  there  were  24  typical  and  7  varleyata  (4  d",  3  ?  )• 

Angerona  priuiaria.  The  dark-banded  var.  sordiata  dominant  to  the 
normal,  reticulated  type.  In  the  heterozygotes  the  lighter  bands  are 
more  or  less  reticulated.     Doncaster  (m).     See  Plate  I,  figs.  7-10. 

Xa7ithorhoe  ferriigata.  The  form  with  purplish  band  is  dominant  to  that 
with  black  band.     Prout,  L.  B.  (223). 

Hemerophila  abruptaria :  the  dark  var.  may  be  inferred  to  be  a  dominant 
to  the  type,  from  the  experiments  of  Harris  (147).     Plate  I,  figs.  5,  6. 

Amphidasys  betularia  (Peppered  Moth).  The  normal  is  almost 
certainly  recessive  to  the  black,  or  doubledayaria  form  (see,  for  example,  the 
records  of  Main  and  Harrison,  192).     Plate  I,  figs.  3,  4. 

Triphaena  comes :  the  reddish  form  is  recessive  to  the  melanic  (see 
Bacot,  3,  and  Prout,  222). 

Callimorpha  doi7iinula  :  red  of  the  hind  wings  is  dominant  to  yellow. 
Standfuss  (253,  /;,  p.  222).  Mr  L.  W.  Newman  has  kindly  given  me  in- 
formation that  he  bred  34  reds  and  10  yellows  in  7^2- 

Aglia  tau:  type  is  recessive  to  the  dark  form  lugens.  Standfuss  (253,  b^ 
p.  311),  (see  Chap,  x,  for  the  sex-distribution  of  these  varieties). 

Lasiocampa  quercus  (Oak-egger).  The  heredity  of  colours  of  the  hairs 
of  the  larvae  has  been  investigated  by  Bacot  (4)  and  Warburg  (302). 
Several  varieties  were  studied  and  their  genetic  interrelationships  are  not 
altogether  certain,  but  it  appeared  that  red  fur  of  var.  sicula  was  dominant 
to  the  white  of  the  var.  meridionalis.  When  English  and  French  races  were 
crossed,  various  blend-forms  were  produced  in  F-^. 

COLEOPTERA. 

Most  of  the  observations  thus  far  made  relate  to  Phytophaga.  Com- 
plications were  met  with  in  all  the  cases  investigated  by  Miss  McCracken. 
I  have  not  been  able  clearly  to  understand  the  exact  procedure  followed  in 
the  matings  and  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  original  papers. 


Plate 


w¥'0 


:  -^  > 


-  "^-.*    ^ 


',  ^ 


•  •• 


*%.• 


I 


^^^^^ 


m' 


<'^  W  ■^'■'■■■"' 


w^» 


10 


I 


I.  Abraxas  grossulariata.  2.    Ditto  var.  lacticolor.  3.   The  var.  Doubledayaria 

of    4.    Amphidasys   betiilaria.  5.     Dark    var.    of    6.    Hemerophila   abriiptaria. 

7.  and  8.  Male  and  female  var.  sordiata  of  9.  and   10.  Angerona  prunaria^  male  and 
female. 


n]  Colours  of  Animals  45 

Lina  lapponica.  Two  forms  occur,  one  having  elytra  spotted  with 
black  on  a  brown  ground,  while  in  the  other  the  elytra  are  entirely  black. 
The  latter  is  recessive,  and  the  formation  of  the  brown  pigment  in  the 
ground  is  thus  due  to  a  dominant  factor.     McCracken  (189,  199). 

Melasoma  {Lina)  scripta.  A  totally  black  form  was  found  to  be  re- 
cessive to  the  spotted  type.  Two  intermediate  conditions  may  occur,  one 
of  which  may  be  a  homozygous  type  (see  original).     McCracken  (191). 

Gastroidea  dissimilis.  Two  forms,  either  deep  blue-black,  or  shiny 
bright  green.  The  latter  is  recessive.  Curious  complication  as  regards 
numerical  results.     McCracken  (190). 

Leptinotarsa  dece77ilineata  (Colorado  potato  beetle).  Evidence  obtained 
by  Tower  (266,  pp.  275-9)  indicates  that  a  variety  called  by  him  pallida 
behaves  as  a  recessive.  The  var.  melaiiothorax  of  the  species  Z.  multi- 
tae?iiata  also  proved  to  be  a  recessive  to  its  type  {ilnd.  pp.  284,  292,  293). 
Various  other  more  complex  phenomena  are  recorded  {q.  v.). 

Crioceris  asparagt  (Asparagus  beetle).  Each  elytron  has  three  yellow 
areas  or  spots  on  a  blue-black  ground.  The  upper  spot  is  sometimes 
united  to  the  middle  one.  This  condition  proved  to  be  recessive  to  that 
in  which  the  spots  are  separate,  but  all  intermediate  conditions  occur 
[being  presumably  heterozygous].     Lutz  (182). 

MOLLUSCA. 

Helix  horte?isis  and  H.  7ie7?ioralis.  The  U7iba7ided  variety  is  dominant 
to  the  banded  types  in  both  the  species,  sometimes  completely,  some- 
times partially.  Generally  also  red  ground-colour  is  dominant  to  yellow  or 
brown,  but  this  effect  may  diminish  with  age  of  the  hybrid  individual. 
Lang  (167-9).  For  details  as  to  hybrids  between  the  two  species  see 
(169). 

As  regards  dominance  of  colours  very  little  In  the  way 
of  general  rule  can  yet  be  predicated,  nor  till  the  chemistry 
of  pigments  is  much  better  understood  is  It  likely  that  such 
general  rules  will  be  discovered.  It  may,  however,  be 
remarked  that  actual  albinism,  the  total  absence  of  pig- 
mentation, is  always,  so  far  as  we  know,  a  recessive 
character  in  both  animals  and  plants.  Curious  cases  never- 
theless are  known  both  in  animals  and  plants  where  a 
partial  whiteness,  which  we  should  a  priori  Imagine  to  be 
a  kind  of  albinism,  behaves  as  a  dominant"^'.  Another  fact 
of  a  somewhat  paradoxical  nature  is  to  be  seen  in  the 
behaviour  of  some  of  the  very  deep  colours,  red  and  purples, 
characteristic  of  the  flowers  and  other  parts  of  some  garden 
strains.  These  more  intense  colours  both  In  Primula 
Sinensis,  in  the  Stock,  and  in  the  Sweet  Pea  (and  doubtless 

*  See  Chap.  v. 


46  Preliminary  Deductions  [ch. 

Cyclaine7i)  are  recessive  to  the  paler  and  more  commonplace 
tints  ^. 

Though  in  the  case  of  colours  in  plants  which  are  due 
to  the  development  of  pigmented  sap,  albinos  are  recessive 
to  the  coloured  types,  the  yellow  or  cream  colour  due  to 
the  presence  of  yellow  chronioplasts  is  recessive  to  the 
colourless  condition  of  the  chromoplasts.  Hence  we  find, 
what  at  first  seems  paradoxical,  that  white  flowers  are 
dominant  over  cream-coloured  flowers.  Yellow  dependent 
on  sap-zo\oMX  is  dominant  to  the  corresponding  white. 

With  regard  to  the  behaviour  of  black  pigment,  which 
might  naturally  be  supposed  to  have  similar  genetic  pro- 
perties in  the  various  animals,  no  quite  satisfactory  general 
rule  can  be  laid  down.  The  presence  of  black  pigment  is 
commonly  dominant  to  the  absence  of  black,  as  in  the  race- 
horse, where  chestnut,  namely  the  absence  of  black  "points" 
is  recessive  to  the  presence  of  such  "  points  "  as  in  bays  and 
browns.  Most  cases,  however,  such  as  that  of  the  mouse, 
and  other  animals  in  which  black  pigment  exists  intimately 
mixed  with  other  pigments  are  not  so  simple  as  this  and 
involve  special  problems.  In  so  far  as  the  features  of  those 
cases  can  be  expressed  in  the  simple  terminology  hitherto 
used,  these  blacks  must  be  classed  as  recessive  to  the  normal 
colours.  Further  particulars  will  be  given  in  the  chapters  on 
Colour. 

Prelhninary  Dediictio7is  from  Mendelian  Phe^iomena. 

It  will  be  observed  that  animals  and  plants,  as  such, 
do  not  show  any  difference  in  their  manner  of  heredity. 
Inheritance  on  simple  Mendelian  lines  may  be  followed 
by  characters  of  very  diverse  kinds,  such  as  height,  shape, 
chemical  constitution,  colour,  and  several  structural  features. 
In  view  of  such  a  list  the  important  question  arises  whether 
there  is  any  distinct  category  or  class  of  characters  to  which 
the  Mendelian  system  does  not  apply.  Various  possible 
limitations  may  be  discovered  when  the  phenomena  have 
been  more  fully  examined,  but  it  may  be  stated  at  once 
that  no  such  class  of  characters  has  hitherto  been  identified. 

■*^  In  Antirrhinum  Miss  Wheldale  finds  that  the  deeper  magentas  are 
recessive  to  the  ordinary  magentas,  but  in  the  crimso7i-red  series  the  paler 
are  recessive  to  the  deeper  tints. 


ii]  Meristic  Cases  47 

As  yet  only  one  example  of  a  character  which  can  at 
all  readily  be  interpreted  as  meinstic  in  nature  has  been 
shown  to  have  a  Mendelian  inheritance.  This  is  the  case 
of  the  reduction  in  number  of  the  human  phalanges  in 
brachydactyly.  We  speak  of  a  character  as  ''  meristic " 
when  it  manifests  itself  in  respect  of  the  number  of  parts 
into  which  the  body  or  one  of  its  organs  is  divided.  Meristic 
characters  are  in  several  ways  distinguishable  from  other 
features  of  bodily  organisation.  The  physiological  occur- 
rences which  result  in  meristic  variations  are  in  all  likelihood 
distinct  from  those  which  produce  substantive  changes,  and 
exceptional  interest  would  attach  to  any  investigation  of 
the  genetic  properties  of  such  variations.  Polydactylism  is 
of  course  a  meristic  feature,  but  it  may  involve  something 
more  than  a  divisional  change,  pure  and  simple,  since 
change  in  the  number  of  digits  is  usually  accompanied  by 
change  in  the  distribution  of  differentiation.  A  case  in 
which  the  disturbance  of  differentiation  is  not  so  evident  is 
provided  by  the  cross  between  Oxalis  tetraphylla^  much 
cultivated  in  Germany  as  Glilcksklee,  and  one  of  the  forms 
with  three  leaflets.  This  cross  was  partially  investigated 
by  Hildebrand"^,  who  used  O.  latifolia.  He  found  that 
the  3-fold  character  was  an  imperfect  dominant,  the  leaves 
being  3-fold  with  the  exception  of  occasional  4-fold  leaves 
which  appeared  for  the  most  part  at  the  flowering  period. 
The  hybrids  were  fully  fertile,  but  their  progeny  has  not 
been  studied.  Satisfactory  meristic  cases  from  which  all 
confusing  elements  are  eliminated  must  be  rare,  but  it  is 
greatly  to  be  hoped  that  they  will  now  be  searched  for.  It 
is  most  desirable  that  cases  of  difference  in  the  ground- 
plan  numbers  of  some  radial  type  will  be  found  amenable 
to  experimental  tests.  Here  the  problem  may  be  seen  in 
a  somewhat  simplified  form  on  account  of  the  elimination 
of  serial  differentiation f. 

■**■  Y{\\^t\yc2Ji^^  Jenaische  Ztsch.  f.  Naturiv.  1889,  xxni.  N.  F.  xvi.  p.  56. 

t  Since  this  paragraph  was  set  up  Price  and  Drinkard's  (221)  evidence 
has  been  published  showing  the  dominance  of  tivo  chambers  in  the  fruit  of 
the  tomato  over  the  many-chambered  condition.  More  evidence  as  to 
such  cases  would  be  welcome. 

Drinkwater's  recent  discovery  as  to  the  bones  of  the  brachydactylous 
fingers,  showing  that  the  middle  phalanx  is  actually  formed  as  a  distinct 
bone  which  afterwards  unites  with  the  distal  phalanx,  raises  considerable 
doubt  whether  the  variation  in  that  case  is  meristic  after  all. 


48  Rights  and  Lefts  [ch. 

Respecting  the  genetics  of  one  most  interesting  class 
of  variations  evidence  is  scanty.  This  is  right-  and  left- 
handedness.  From  Mayers'^  observations  on  Partula 
(Gastropod)  we  learn  that  parents  of  either  twist  may  bear 
young  of  either  twist.  The  numbers  in  the  uteri  were  so 
small  that  the  absolute  numbers  are  insignificant,  and  it 
may  be  an  accident  that  no  mixture  of  types  was  found  in 
any  one  uterus.  Langf  bred  numerous  left-handed  Helix- 
pomatia  with  each  other  and  obtained  thousands  of  young, 
all  right-handed,  which  in  their  turn  again  produced  ex- 
clusively right-handed  offspring.  Direction  of  twist  is  a 
fundamental  meristic  phenomenon,  being  as  Crampton  and 
Conklin  have  proved,  determined  as  early  as  the  first 
cleavage-plane  in  the  ^<g^  ;  and  great  light  on  the  problems 
of  cell-division  might  perhaps  be  obtained  if  the  inheritance 
of  these  differences  could  be  determined.  The  only  case 
we  have  attempted  to  study,  that  of  Medicago,  in  which  the 
fruits  are  right-  or  left-handed  spirals  according  to  species, 
proved  unworkable,  perhaps  on  account  of  the  minute  size 
of  the  fiower  and  the  roughness  of  the  manipulations. 

Lutz  (i8i)  has  collected  facts  as  to  the  inheritance  of 
the  mode  in  which  the  hands  are  clasped,  whether  the  right 
or  left  thumb  is  placed  uppermost.  No  definite  result  was 
obtained,  but  effects  of  heredity  were  somewhat  marked, 
though  neither  condition  bred  true.  A  fuller  analysis 
should  be  attempted,   taking  families  separately. 

When  the  Mendelian  principles  were  first  rediscovered 
the  suggestion  was  made  that  though  the  system  might 
apply  to  the  unions  of  pure  races,  there  was  no  certainty 
that  such  rules  apply  to  the  uncontrolled  matings  of  natural 
forms.  The  objection  was  not  one  which  was  likely  to 
have  weight  with  those  who  had  an  acquaintance  with 
genetic  phenomena,  but  it  had  undoubtedly  an  effect  in  post- 
poning general  recognition  of  the  importance  of  Mendel's 
discovery.  Categorical  proof  of  the  invalidity  of  this  ob- 
jection is  now  provided  by  one  of  the  cases  referred  to 
above — that  which  concerns  the  heterostylism  of  Primula. 
It  is  scarcely  doubtful  that  In  the  Primrose  nearly  every 
plant  arises  by  the  "legitimate"  union  of  long-  and  short- 

*  Mayer,  A.  G.,  Mem.  Mus.  Camp.  Zool.  Harvard,  xxvi.  No.  2,  1902. 
t   Lang,  A.,    Vierieljahrs.  d.  nat.   Ges.  Zurich,    1896,  and   168,   p.  42, 
together  with  informgition  kindly  sent  in  a  letter. 


"]  Cases  in  Wild  Types  49 

styled  Individuals.  Yet  the  long-styled  are  always  pure. 
Moreover,  all  the  short-styled  plants  hitherto  tested  have 
proved  to  be  simple  heterozygotes,  giving  equality  of  longs 
and  shorts  when  bred  with  longs.  Hitherto  no  pure  DD, 
viz.  short-styled  plant,  has  been  found  in  the  case  of  the 
Primrose,  but  no  difficulty  has  been  met  with  in  raising 
pure  short-styled  plants  of  Primula  Sinensis.  Besides  this 
example  of  Mendelian  heredity  manifested  by  a  wild  type 
several  of  the  examples  of  colour-inheritance  in  insects 
relate  to  wild  species. 

The  circumstance  that  a  character  has  not  been  pre- 
viously bred  pure  does  not,  so  far  as  is  known,  in  any  way 
influence  the  mode  of  transmission  of  that  character.  For 
instance,  in  the  breeding  of  thoroughbred  race-horses  the 
heredity  of  chestnut  colour  is  that  of  an  ordinary  recessive"^, 
though  the  various  colours,  bay,  brown,  and  chestnut  have 
been  indiscriminately  united  together  in  the  breed.  No 
difference  is  manifested  between  colour-inheritance  of  chest- 
nuts which  have  had  many  chestnut  ancestors  in  recent 
generations,  and  those  that  have  no  chestnut  progenitor  in 
the  nearer  degrees.  The  same  is  true  for  some  of  the 
colour-cases  seen  in  Lepidoptera  which  had  not  been  the 
subject  of  any  previous  selection.  A  remarkable  example 
of  an  obviously  Mendelian  inheritance  in  a  wholly  wild 
form  is  that  of  the  eye-colour  of  the  Owl — Athene 
nocttia\. 

Abundant  examples  of  characters  breeding  true,  though 
newly-constituted,  will  be  provided  by  those  cases  in  which 
a  novelty  of  structure  is  brought  suddenly  into  existence  by 
the  occurrence  of  fresh  combinations.  In  spite  of  their 
recent  origin,  such  new  combinations  have  just  the  same 
genetic  properties  and  powers  of  transmission  that  are 
possessed  by  the  types  of  long-selected  breeds. 

The  suggestion  hazarded  by  several  writers  that  a  dis- 
tinction may  be  drawn  between  inter-racial  and  intra-racial 
heredity  has  no  foundation  in  fact. 

*  Mr  Hurst,  who  first  elucidated  the  colour-inheritance  of  race-horses, 
found  that  according  to  the  records,  chestnuts  of  various  ancestries  have 
exclusively  chestnut  offspring  with  about  i  7o  ^^  exceptions,  which  are 
very  possibly  due  to  error  in  the  returns  (see  later). 

t  Giglioli,  Ibis^  1903)  P-  i-     (See  later,  p.  iio.) 
B.    H.  4 


50  Nature  of  Dominance  [ch. 

Do^ninance :   the  Heterozygote  Character, 

The  character  of  the  heterozygote,  the  "hybrid  character" 
of  Mendel,  gives  no  indication  as  to  the  system  by  which 
the  parental  characters  are  transmitted.  The  expressions, 
'* blended"  inheritance,  ''particulate"  inheritance  and  so  on, 
terms  formerly  devised  by  Galton  for  describing  the  zygotic 
appearances,  are  now  seen  to  be  descriptive  not  so  much  of 
the  mode  of  transmission  as  of  the  consequences  of  certain 
groupings  of  special  allelomorphs  ;  and  as  it  is  obviously 
preferable  in  all  possible  cases  to  use  the  ultimate  descrip- 
tions reduced  to  terms  of  gametic  composition,  such  terms 
are  now  seldom  requisite.  Dominance  must  be  discussed 
more  fully  when  other  facts  have  been  set  forth,  and  in  this 
preliminary  notice  of  the  more  salient  features  of  the 
phenomena  it  will  be  enough  to  point  out  that  dominance 
is  no  inseparable  attribute  of  Mendelian  inheritance.  The 
essential  phenomenon  is  segregation. 

The  occurrence  of  dominance  is  often  an  assistance  to 
the  investigator  and  may  greatly  simplify  the  analysis  of 
the  various  generations.  Seldom  however  is  dominance 
uniformly  complete,  and  in  certain  cases,  as  those  of  the 
combs  in  poultry,  where  dominance  is  quite  definite,  it  is 
still  possible  for  an  observer  thoroughly  familiar  with  the 
material  to  distinguish  the  homozygous  dominants  from  the 
heterozygous  with  fair  certainty.  Provided  the  recessives 
as  a  class  can  be  identified  the  application  of  Mendelian 
analysis  is  almost  equally  easy  whether  the  heterozygotes 
show  definite  dominance  or  some  intermediate  condition. 

The  statement  made  by  de  Vries  that  dominance  is  an 
attribute  of  the  phylogenetically  older  character  has  not  been 
borne  out  by  more  extended  investigation.  In  the  lists 
given  above  many  examples  to  the  contrary  occur.  No  one, 
for  instance,  can  doubt  that  the  various  types  of  dominant 
comb  (rose,  pea,  &c.)  in  fowls  and  the  colour  called  "Brown- 
breasted  "  have  arisen  since  domestication.  This  colour- 
example  is  illustrated  by  Fig.  ii,  where  the  distinction 
between  the  striped  Black-red  type  and  the  almost  uni- 
colorous  Brown-red,  or  "Brown-breasted"  type  is  shown. 
The  striped  type  is  practically  that  of  the  wild  Gallus 
bankiva,  but  the  unicolorous  type  of  down-colour  is  a  com- 


II] 


Nature  of  Dominance 


51 


plete  dominant.  Males  raised  as  F^  between  the  two  pure 
breeds  are  in  their  adult  plumage  almost  intermediate,  but 
the  F^  hens  are  indistinguishable  from  the  pure  Brown-red 
hens. 


A  B 

Fig.  II.  Two  newly-hatched  chickens  in  ^2  generation  from  the  cross 
Brown-red  Game  Bantam  x  Black-red.  A  is  the  Black-red  type 
having  dark  stripes  on  a  light  ground.  B  is  the  Brown-red  (or 
'*  Brown-breasted  ")  type,  a  dark,  almost  unicolorous,  blackish  brown. 
A  is  the  recessive  and  B  is  the  dominant.  The  whole  ^2  family 
consisted  of  58  like  B  and  18  like  A. 

As  an  example  in  which  the  heterozygotes  are  inter- 
mediate the  inheritance  of  colour  in  the  Andalusian  fowl 
may  be  taken.  Andalusians  are  in  general  colour  what 
fanciers  call  blue — namely  a  diluted  black.  In  the  cocks 
the  hackles  and  saddle-feathers  are  full  black,  and  the 
feathers  of  the  breast  are  edged  or  '' laced"  with  black. 
The  hens  are  blue,  laced  with  black  more  or  less,  all  over. 
This  breed  is  recognized  by  the  fanciers  as  never  breeding 
true  to  colour.  When  blue  is  bred  with  blue  three  colours 
are  produced,  blacks,  blues,  and  a  peculiar  white "^  splashed 
with  grey.     Experimenting  with  this  breed  we  have  found 

*  These  splashed  whites  are  quite  distinct  from  actual  whites.  They 
are  in  reahty  coloured  birds  as  regards  composition,  and  their  down-colour 
is  a  faint  bluish,  very  like  that  of  the  White  Rosecomb  bantam. 

4—2 


52 


Andalusian  Fowl 


[CH. 


that  the  numbers  from  blue  x  blue  average  about  i  black  : 
2  blues  :  i  splashed  white.  Both  the  blacks  and  the  whites 
extracted  from  blues  breed  true  to  their  respective  types, 
black  X  black  giving  all  blacks ;  white  x  white  giving 
all  whites  again.  When  however  black  is  bred  with  one  of 
these  whites  the  offspring  are  all  blues.  There  is  thus  no 
doubt  that  the  blue  is  the  heterozygous  form,  while  the 
gametes  bear  either  the  blackness,  or  the  whiteness.  Ob- 
viously in  such  a  case,  continued  selection  of  blues  will  not 
make  them  breed  true.  This  can  only  come  to  pass  if  it 
shall  be  found  possible  to  get  a  blue  bird  in  the  gametes 
of  w^hich  the  blue  or  intermediate  character  is  carried  as 
a  definite  factor.  These  results  may  be  represented  in 
tabular  form  thus  : 


Blue  X  Blue 

1 

n  Bh 

icks 
only 

2n  Blues 

n  Splashe 

d  whites 

Blacks 

n  Blacks 

2n  Blues 

n  Whites     Splashed  whites 
only 

Blacks  only, 
&c. 

Splashed  whites 
only,  &c. 

Black  X  Splashed 

1 

white 

1 
Blues  only 

n 

Blacks 

2n  Blues 

71  Splashed  whites 

Such  a  case  as  this  shows  well  what  Mendel  meant  by 
the  "  hybrid-character."  It  is  that  character,  or  appearance, 
or  quality,  which  is  produced  by  the  meeting  of  the  opposite 
allelomorphs  of  the  same  pair  in  one  zygote  or  individual. 
The  hybrid-character  is  a  thing  apart,  which  must  always 
be  separately  determined  by  experiment.  Sometimes  it  is 
indistinguishable  from  the  dominant,  sometimes,  as  here, 
it  is  an  appearance  recognizably  distinct  from  that  of  either 
dominant  or  recessive. 

Prof.  J.  Wilson  (311)  has  shown  that  a  similar  rule  pro- 
bably holds  in  the  case  of  shorthorn  colours,   where  red- 


n]  Imperfect  Dofninance  53 

roan  is  a  heterozygous  character,  caused  by  the  meeting  of 
the  factors  for  red  and  white '^.  The  blue-roan  so  often 
seen  In  the  cross  between  black  Aberdeen-Angus  cattle  and 
white  shorthorns  Is  presumably  the  corresponding  hetero- 
zygote  form  for  black  and  white. 

With  further  knowledge  of  the  details  and  closer  exami- 
nation of  material  probably  many  such  cases  will  be  found. 
Darblshire,  for  example,  has  lately  shown  that  though  it  is 
usually  Impossible  in  the  case  of  peas  to  tell  pure  round 
seed  from  the  heterozygous  rounds,  by  external  appearances, 
yet  on  microscopical  examination  the  two  classes  can  be 
distinguished  at  once  by  the  different  structure  of  the  starch 
grains  (94). 

Many  such  cases  where  dominance  Is  Imperfect  are  now 
known.  This  phenomenon  has  no  bearing  on  the  more 
important  question  of  the  degree  of  perfection  with  which 
segregation  is  accomplished.  The  supposition  that  domi- 
nance w^as  an  essential  phenomenon  of  Mendelism  was  of 
course  a  delusion.  Imperfection  of  dominance  does  not 
even  obscure  the  application  of  Mendelian  analysis.  The 
cases  In  which  difficulty  does  arise  are  those  in  which 
dominance  Is  irregular  and  the  recessive  class  cannot  be 
distinguished  with  certainty.  In  the  fowl,  for  instance,  the 
extra  toe  Is  usually  a  dominant,  but  in  some  strains  there  Is 
irregularity,  and  birds  without  the  extra  toe  may  neverthe- 
less transmit  it.  So  also  the  blue  colour  of  maize  seeds, 
though  usually  a  dominant,  may  sometimes  be  carried  on 
by  seeds  which  appear  white  (Lock,  174).  Even  in  these 
examples,  however,  there  Is  no  reason  to  think  that  such 
irregularities  are  indications  of  imperfect  segregation. 
It  is  not  impossible  that  they  may  be  ascribed  to  inter- 
ference caused  by  the  presence  of  other  factors  in  various 
combinations,  and  sometimes,  no  doubt,  to  disturbance  by 
external  conditions. 

All  observations  point  to  a  conclusion  of  great  import- 
ance,  namely  that  a   dominant  character   is  the   condition 

*  Further  information  based  on  a  long  series  of  observations  of  the 
Sittytown  herd  of  Shorthorns  has  since  been  piibHshed  by  Mr  Robert  Bruce 
in  Breeder's  Gazette,  25  Nov.  1908.  Full  statistics  are  given,  affording  with 
rare  exceptions  evidence  strongly  confirmatory  of  Prof.  Wilson's  views.  I 
am  obliged  to  Mr  Alexander  Bruce  for  a  copy  of  this  paper. 


54  Presejtce  and  Absence  [ch. 

due  to  the  presence  of  a  definite  factor,  while  the  corre- 
sponding recessive  owes  its  condition  to  the  absence  of  the 
same  factor.  This  generaHsatlon,  which  so  far  as  we  yet 
see,  is  appHcable  throughout  the  whole  range  of  Mendelian 
phenomena,  renders  invaluable  assistance  in  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  phenomena  of  Heredity.  The  green  pea,  for 
instance,  owes  its  recessive  greenness  to  the  absence  of  the 
factor  which,  if  present,  would  turn  the  colouring  matter 
yellow,  and  so  forth.  With  the  examination  of  further 
evidence  the  significance  of  this  principle  will  become 
readily  apparent. 

Mendel's  System  distingztished  fro7n  that  of  Galton. 

From  the  outline  of  the  evidence  now  set  forth  the 
essential  aims  and  methods  of  Mendelian  inquiry  will  have 
been  understood.  By  this  method  we  reach  reality  and 
concrete  fact  among  phenomena  that  had  become  almost 
proverbial  for  their  irregularity.  The  key  to  the  problems 
of  genetics  and,  as  w^e  confidently  believe,  to  that  of  Species 
also,  lies  in  the  recognition  of  the  character-units,  or  factors 
as  we  often  call  them.  Their  allelomorphism  is  a  pheno- 
menon of  gametogenesis,  and  is  a  consequence  of  those 
attractions  and  repulsions  by  which  the  germinal  cell- 
divisions  are  effected.  Discontinuity  in  variation — to  use 
the  word  variation  in  its  old,  comprehensive  sense — results 
from  the  existence  of  these  units.  We  recognize  therefore 
that  this  discontinuity — Galton's  "Organic  Stability" — is 
ultimately  dependent  on  the  physiology  of  gametogenesis, 
and  not  as  we  formerly  supposed  on  some  feature  in  the 
physiology  of  zygotes.  How  this  simple  conclusion  was 
missed  we  may  in  vain  surmise.  The  discovery  at  one 
stroke  replaces  all  previous  disquisitions  regarding  the  laws 
of  inheritance.  The  magnitude  of  the  discovery  and  the 
novelty  of  its  consequences  have  indeed  delayed  general 
recognition  of  its  truth.  To  this  may  have  been  due  the 
curious  fact  that  the  famous  Nageli  failed  altogether  to 
realise  the  importance  of  Mendel's  work.  Nageli  was  of 
course  especially  devoted  to  the  study  of  heredity,  and  even 
made  it  the  subject  of  elaborate  mathematical  treatment. 
As  we  now  know,  he  was  in  correspondence  with  Mendel, 


ii]  Gallon's  System  compared  55 

from  whom  he  received  a  considerable  series  of  letters  and 
Illustrative  specimens  (197).  These  must  have  utterly  failed 
to  arouse  his  Interest,  for  when  In  1884,  the  year  of  Mendel's 
death,  he  published  his  great  treatise  on  heredity,  no  refer- 
ence was  made  to  Mendel  or  his  work.  That  this  neglect 
was  due  to  want  of  comprehension  Is  evident  from  a  passage 
where  he  describes  an  experiment  or  observation  on  cats, 
which  as  It  happens,  gave  a  simple  Mendellan  result.  The 
Angora  character  (recessive)  disappeared  In  a  cross  with  a 
certain  common  cat  whose  hair-character  is,  as  we  now 
know,  dominant.  The  cross-breds  were  mated  together 
and  the  Angora  character  reappeared  In  one  Individual 
among  a  litter  of  common  cats"^.  This  typically  Mendellan 
fact  was  thus  actually  under  Nageli's  own  observation,  but 
from  the  discussion  which  he  devotes  to  the  occurrence  It 
Is  clear  that  Mendel's  work  must  have  wholly  passed  from 
his  memory,  having  probably  been  dismissed  as  something 
too  fanciful  for  serious  consideration. 

It  may  be  useful  to  specify  the  distinctive  features  of 
Mendellan  inheritance  which  differentiate  the  cases  ex- 
hibiting it  from  those  to  which  Galton's  system  of  calculation 
— or  any  other  systems  based  on  ancestral  composition — 
can  apply. 

(i)  In  Mendellan  cases.  In  which  the  characters  behave 
as  units,  the  types  of  Individuals  considered  with  respect  to 
any  pair  of  allelomorphic  characters  are  three  only,  two 
being  homozygous  and  one  heterozygous  ;  while  according 
to  such  a  system  as  Galton's  the  number  of  possible  types 
is  regarded  as  indefinite. 

(2)  The  Mendellan  system  recognizes  that  purity  of 
type  may  be  absolute,  and  that  it  may  arise  In  individuals 
of  the  /%  or  any  later  generation  bred  from  heterozygotes. 
The  views  based  on  ancestry  regard  purity  of  type  as 
relative,  and  arising  by  the  continued  selection  of  numbers 
of  individuals. 

(3)  In  Galton's  system  no  account  Is  taken  of  domi- 
nance, a  phenomenon  which  plays  so  large  a  part  In  the 
practical  application  of  any  true  scheme  of  heredity. 

These  distinctions  are  so  definite  and  striking  that  at 
first  sight  it  seemed  likely  that  the  two  methods  might  be 

*  C.  Nageli,  Mechanisch-physiologische  Theorie  der  Adstafn?nungslehre, 
1884,  p.   199. 


56  Zygotes  are  Double  Structures         [ch.  ii 

applicable  to  two  physiologically  distinct  classes  of  pheno- 
mena. It  was  anticipated  that  some  characters,  or  possibly 
even  some  forms  of  life,  might  follow  the  one  system  and 
others  the  other. 

The  results  of  further  researches  make  this  supposition 
increasingly  Improbable ;  and  though  undoubtedly  there 
are  cases  which  cannot  yet  be  subjected  to  Mendellan 
analysis,  it  is  fairly  certain  that  there  is  no  large  group  of 
facts  in  heredity  to  which  the  Galtonian  system  or  any 
modification  of  it  exclusively  applies. 

There  are  however  numerous  examples  where  the  arith- 
metical results  predlcable  by  either  system  are  nearly  or 
quite  the  same,  though  further  breeding  would  of  course 
reveal  that  even  in  these  cases  the  applicability  of  the 
Galtonian  method  was  only  superficial. 

The  first  aim  of  genetics  must  now  be  to  determine  the 
magnitude,  number  and  ultimately  the  nature  of  those  units 
which  together  make  up  the  visible  fact  we  call  heredity; 
and  so  to  discover  the  consequences  of  their  several  com- 
binations In  zygosis  or  fertilisation.  For  the  power  thus  to 
formulate  our  purpose  and  for  the  development  of  a  method 
by  which  it  may  be  successfully  pursued  we  are  beholden 
to  Mendel's  genius. 

The  difficulty  which  some  feel  in  realising  the  signifi- 
cance of  Mendelism  arises  from  the  habit  of  looking  on  the 
bodies  of  animals  and  plants  as  single  structures.  So  soon 
as  the  mind  becomes  thoroughly  accustomed  to  the  fact 
that  all  individuals,  at  least  those  of  the  higher  and  more 
familiar  types,  are  double,  It  becomes  easy  to  think  in 
Mendellan  terms,  and  the  world  of  gametes,  whose  pairings 
have  brought  into  existence  the  individuals  we  see,  comes 
naturally  and  persistently  before  the  mind.  Henceforth  we 
have  to  penetrate  behind  the  visible  appearances  of  the 
individual,  and  endeavour  to  reconstruct  first  those  pro- 
cesses of  cell-division  which  produced  the  germ-cells  or 
gametes,  distributing  the  characters  or  factors  among  them 
according  to  definite  systems ;  and  then  the  subsequent 
process  of  union  of  those  gametes  pair  by  pair,  in  fertilisa- 
tion to  form  zygotes,  each  developing  and  manifesting  in 
its  development  those  properties  of  structure.  Instinct  and 
conduct  conferred  upon  it  by  that  particular  complement 
of  factors  which  Its  two  original  gametes  contained. 


CHAPTER   III 


NUMERICAL   CONSEQUENCES   AND   RECOMBINATIONS. 

Representations  of  the  F^  Generation  and  Novelties  due 
to  Re- combination  of  Factors — Compound  Characters — 
Combs  of  Fowls — Heterostylism — White  Flowers  from 
Red  X  Ci^eam, 

The  unity  of  characters  being  recognized,  we  may  next 
examine  some  of  the  statistical  consequences  of  this  pheno- 
menon. In  order  to  determine  the  number  of  units  and 
allelomorphic  pairs  which  are  concerned  in  any  practical 
case,  we  have  to  be  guided  first  by  the  visible  statistical 
composition  of  F^ ;  and  next  by  such  tests  of  the  gametic 
constitution  of  the  several  /%  individuals  as  can  be  made  by 
breeding  from  them. 

To  those  who  are  familiar  with  algebraical  methods,  the 
employment  of  /%  numbers  to  discover  the  number  of  terms 
in  the  gametic  series  may  present  small  difficulty,  but  to 
others  the  following  graphic  method  of  demonstration 
may  be  of  service.  For  the  Introduction  of  this  system, 
which  greatly  simplifies  difficult  cases,  I  am  indebted  to 
Mr  Punnett. 

Take  the  simplest  example,  of  one  pair  of  allelomorphs, 
say  Tall  {T)  and  Dwarf  (t).  The  parent  zygotes  of  the 
pure  strains  are  then  TT  and  tt.  Their  gametes  are  7",  Z", 
and  t,  t,  respectively.  The  F^  heterozygote  is  77,  and  Its 
gametes  are  all  either  T  or  t  in  equal  numbers.  As  this 
is  true  both  of  the  female  germs  and  the  male  germs,  there 
are   four   possible    combinations.        Make    therefore   four 


58  *  Represent atioit  of  Z^.  Generation  [ch. 

squares,    representing    the  female   gametes   or   germ-cells, 
similar  cells  being  placed  vertically,  thus  : 


r? 

/? 

r? 

t9. 

Similarly  the  male  germs  may  be  represented  by  four 
squares  : 


T$ 

T$ 

tS 

t6 

Here  the  similar  germs  are  placed  horizontally  instead 
of  vertically.  If  therefore  the  first  set  of  squares  be 
superposed  on  the  second,  all  the  four  possible  zygotic 
combinations  are  represented,  thus  : 


Thus  there  are  iTT+2Tt-\- iU\  and  since  T  \s  domi- 
nant, the  visible  appearance  of  /%  is 

We  may  next  deal  similarly  with  the  case  of  two  allelo- 
morphic  pairs,  A  a  and  Bd.  We  shall  now  require  i6 
squares.  Writing  each  set  of  four  similar  female  germs  in 
vertical  rows  and  the  corresponding  sets  of  male  germs  in 
horizontal  rows,  keeping  to  the  same  order,  the  sixteen 
possible  combinations  are  represented.     In  each  square  the 


Ill] 


Representation  of  F^  Generation 


59 


upper  expression  indicates  the  nature  of  the  female  gamete, 
the  lower  one  that  of  the  male  oramete  : 


AB 
AB 

Ab 
AB 

aB 
AB 

ab 
AB 

AB 

Ab 

Ab 
Ab 

aB 

Ab 

ab 
Ab 

AB 

aB 

Ab 
aB 

aB 
aB 

ab 
aB 

1 

AB 
ab 

Ab 
ab 

aB 

ab 

ab 
ab 

The  constitution  of  each  of  the  sixteen  types  which  are 
produced  in  7%  is  thus  displayed,  and  since  A  is  dominant 
over  a,  and  B  over  b,  the  visible  appearance  of  F.,  is 

<^AB  :  ^Ab  :  ^y^^B  :  \ab. 

Similarly  when  three  pairs  of  factors  are  concerned, 
Aa,  Bb,  Cc,  the  F^  type  will  exhibit  them  all,  and  be  in 
appearance  ABC.  In  /%  there  must  then  be  eight  visibly 
distinct  types,  and  the  ratios  in  which  they  severally  appear 
will  be  as  follows  : 

27 ABC ^  gaBC+  ^ABc  +  ^AbC-V  zAbc  +  laBc 

+  ^abC-\-  labc. 

I  am  obliged  to  a  mathematical  friend  for  the  following 
scheme  by  which  the  number  of  types  and  the  ratios  in 
which  each  will  appear  is  given  for  any  number  of  pairs  of 
factors,  one  factor  of  each  pair  being  dominant  and  the 
other  recessive. 

4  =  3  +  1 

i6  =  (3  4-i)-^  =  3'  +  3  +  3+ I  =9  +  3  +  3  +  1 

64  =  (3  4-i)^  =  3'  +  3-3'  +  3.  3  +  1  =27  +  27  +  9+ I 

256  =  (3  +  0'=3'  +  4-3'  +  6.3'  +  4-3  +  i 
=  81  +  274-27  +  27  +  27 

+9+9+9+9+9+9 
+  I. 


6o  Compound  Characters  [ch. 

So  in  general 

4'^  =  i' 

+  i'^'^  +  f^  + ^  times 

+  3"''+3""'+ \n  (n-\)  times 

+  3""'  +  3"''+ \n  {n-  i)  (;e-2)  times 

+  &c. 


Compound  Characters  and  Novel  Types  produced  by 

Re-combinations. 

Thus  far  we  have  dealt  only  with  cases  in  which  the 
characters  of  each  allelomorphic  pair  have  independent 
effects  on  the  visible  appearance  of  the  zygotes.  In  peas, 
for  instance,  we  have  seen  a  pair  of  characters,  tallness  and 
dwarfness,  producing  their  effects  quite  independently  of 
other  pairs  of  characters,  such  as  those  which  determine 
the  flower  colour  or  the  seed-shapes.  Each  can  be 
separately  perceived  by  its  effects,  and  the  presence  of  the 
one  in  no  way  influences  the  development  of  the  other. 
Such  are  the  imaginary  characters  A^  a,  and  B,  b,  whose 
distribution  is  represented  above,  and  the  four  types  pro- 
duced by  their  several  combinations  are  each  distinguished 
without  difficulty,  as  AB,  aB,  Ab,  ab. 

We  now  pass  to  a  class  of  cases  manifesting  greater 
complexity.  The  essential  phenomenon  in  these  cases  is 
that  definite  characters  are  produced  by  the  mutual  inter- 
action of  factors  belonging  to  distinct  allelomorphic  systems. 
Such  interactions,  as  we  now  know,  are  of  the  greatest 
importance  in  heredity,  and  the  progress  of  genetics  will 
consist  largely  in  disentangling  the  elements  to  which  these 
combination-effects  are  due. 

We  may  speak  of  characters  thus  produced  as  compound 
characters.  The  nature  of  such  compound  characters  is 
well  exemplified  by  phenomena  which  have  been  observed 
respecting  the  inheritance  of  several  types  of  combs  seen 
in  various  breeds  of  poultry,  and  as  these  cases  are  illustra- 
tive of  many  others  I  propose  to  consider  them  in  some 
detail. 


in] 


Compotmd  Characters 


6i 


The  Combs  of  Foivls. 

In  the  first  place  we  are  concerned  with  the  following 
types : 

Single  co77ib.  The  high,  serrated  comb  which  is  familiar 
to  everybody  is  called  by  fanciers  a  single  comb  (Fig.  1 2  A). 
It  is  the  type  found  in  Galhis  bankiva  and  I  believe  all  the 
wild  species,  and  we  are  fairly  safe  in  regarding  it  as  the 
primitive  or  original  form  from  which  all  the  others  have 
been  derived.  It  is  the  characteristic  comb  of  Leghorns, 
Minorcas,  and  many  other  breeds. 


Fig.  12.     Various  types  of  combs  in  Fowls. 

A.  Single  Comb  :  cock. 

B.  Pea  Comb  ;  cock. 

C.  Pea  Comb  :  hen. 

D.  Rose  Comb  :  (Bantam)  cock. 

E.  Walnut  comb  in  a  young  cock.     This  is  the  type  in  Malays,  and 

can  be  produced  by  crossing  Rose  x  Pea. 

Pea  Comb.  This  comb  (Fig.  \2  B,  C)  differs  from  the 
single  in  being  much  lower  and  closer  to  the  head.  It  has 
no  spike-shaped  serrations,  but  merely  rounded  lumpy  pro- 
jections along  the  middle  line.  In  addition  to  these  there 
is  a  characteristic  development  of  similar  lumps  or  tubercles 
on  each  side  usually  uniting  to  form  a  more  or  less  definite 


62 


Combs  of  Fowls 


[CH. 


lateral  ridge.  These  two  lateral  ridges  together  with  the 
median  one  constitute  the  three  ridges  commonly  spoken  of 
as  the  essential  feature  of  the  pea  comb.  The  size  and 
details  of  development  of  these  combs  differ  a  good  deal 
with  individuals  and  with  strains.  Pea  comb  is  especially 
characteristic  of  Indian  Game,  Aseel,  and  the  Brahma 
breeds. 

The  F^  from  pea  x  single  is  pea,  that  character  mani- 
festing a  definite  dominance.  The  heterozygous  pea  combs 
are  generally  higher  than  the  pure  pea  and  may  usually, 
though  not  always,  be  distinguished  from  them.  Sometimes 
the  heterozygous  pea  comb  is  so  large  and  has  the  ridges 
so  ill-defined  that  it  approaches  the  single  type,  but  combs 
which  cannot  at  once  be  referred  to  one  class  or  the  other 
are  extremely  rare.  The  distinction  is  especially  sharp  in 
the  case  of  the  newly  hatched  chicks,  becoming  somewhat 
less  marked  with  later  development.  F^  from  this  cross  is 
of  the  usual  form,  3  pea  :  i  single. 


Fig.  13.     The  combs  as  they  appear  in  newly  hatched  chickens. 

In  the  top  row  from  left  to  right : — Walnut  comb  in  a  light- 
coloured  bird,  showing  the  peculiar  band  of  hairs  ;  ditto  in  a  dark- 
coloured  bird ;  Rose  comb. 

In  lower  row  from  left  to  right : — Pea  comb ;  ditto ;  Single  comb  ', 
ditto. 


iiij  Combs  of  Fowls  63 

Rose  Comb,  The  next  type  to  be  taken  into  account  is 
the  rose  comb,  which  consists  of  a  triangular  mass  of  small 
spikes  or  papillae.  The  apex  of  the  triangle,  called  the 
peak  or  pike,  points  backwards  and  is  free  from  the  head. 
Such  a  comb  is  characteristic  of  Hamburghs,  Rose-combed 
Dorkings  and  many  other  breeds.  A  particular  form  of  rose 
comb  with  the  pike  curved  downwards  is  a  peculiarity  of 
Wyandottes. 

F^  from  rose  x  single  is  rgse.  The  dominance  of  the 
rose  comb  is  very  definite,  and  it  is  frequently  quite  im- 
possible to  distinguish  pure  rose  from  the  heterozygous 
type  containing  single.  7%  consists  of  the  usual  3  rose  : 
I  single. 

Rose  X  Pea.  When  a  pure  rose-combed  bird  is  crossed 
with  a  pure  pea  the  resulting  comb  is  very  different  from 
either.  It  has  no  distinct  papillae  like  the  rose,  or  ridges 
like  the  pea.  In  the  newly  hatched  chick  the  region  of  the 
comb  is  covered  with  a  nearly  flat  or  somewhat  warty- 
looking  skin.  At  the  beginning  of  the  posterior  third  there 
is  generally  a  most  curious  band  of  bristles  or  hairs  crossing 
the  comb.  Some  F^  birds  have  hairs  scattered  over  the 
posterior  part  of  the  comb,  either  with  or  without  a  definite 
transverse  band.  The  hairs  usually  increase  in  quantity 
and  definiteness  as  maturity  approaches.  It  seldom  happens 
that  a  rose-pea  ("walnut")  bird  has  none  of  these  hairs, 
though  with  age  they  may  get  worn  off  As  the  chicken 
grows,  the  skin  of  the  comb  itself  increases  in  size  and 
becomes  more  or  less  corrugated.  Such  corrugations  may 
become  very  large  in  males  and  are  especially  developed 
anteriorly.  In  this  region  the  comb  is  often  widened  so  as 
to  form  a  lobe  on  each  side,  but  the  part  behind  the  band 
remains  single,  so  that  the  whole  comb  has  a  3-lobed  appear- 
ance when  seen  from  above.  One  of  the  corrugations  very 
often  appears  as  a  furrow  separating  the  flatter  posterior  lobe 
from  the  anterior  and  more  elevated  part  of  the  comb.  It 
is  from  the  corrugated  surface  of  this  comb  that  it  is  called 
by  fanciers  a  "  walnut "  comb.  The  only  pure  breed  in 
which  such  a  comb  occurs  is  the  Malay.  In  Fig.  13  the 
hairs  can  be  seen  fairly  well  in  the  top  left-hand  bird,  which 
has  light  plumage.  In  the  bird  next  to  it  the  plumage  is  dark 
and  the  band  of  hairs  is  not  so  distinct  in  the  photograph. 


64  The  Walnut  Comb  [ch. 

It  was  not  a  little  surprising  to  see  so  striking  and 
characteristic  a  structure  as  the  walnut  or  Malay  comb 
appear  with  strict  regularity  as  the  product  of  two  such 
dissimilar  parents  as  the  rose  and  the  pea.  Not  only  is 
the  general  appearance  of  the  walnut  quite  distinct  from 
these,  but  the  presence  of  the  hairs  constitutes  a  feature  of 
absolute  difference,  for  no  hairs  are  found  on  combs  of  the 
usual  types.  Were  the  walnut,  rose,  pea,  and  single  combs 
found  as  characteristics  of  wild  birds  no  naturalist  would 
hesitate  to  regard  them  as  four  distinct  specific  characters  ; 
and  even  as  the  special  properties  of  domesticated  birds  I 
suppose  they  would  by  many  be  regarded  as  evidence  of 
long-continued  selection.  Nevertheless,  as  will  be  seen, 
these  four  forms  stand  to  each  other  in  a  simple  genetic 
relation  and  the  fact  suggests  wide  possibilities  in  regard 
to  many  hitherto  unexceptionable  differences  ''of  specific 
value "  recognized  among  animals  and  plants. 

The  interpretation  of  the  facts  was  at  first  by  no  means 
easy,  and  I  am  sorry  to  have  been  responsible  for  the 
promulgation  of  a  quite  erroneous  suggestion  regarding 
them.  Further  knowledge  of  kindred  phenomena  has, 
however,  made  the  elucidation  of  this  case  now  perfectly 
clear  and  simple. 

To  return  to  the  experimental  results.  Having  found 
that  rose  x  pea  gives  walnut,  the  next  thing  to  be  done 
was  to  test  the  genetic  properties  of  birds  thus  produced. 
This  was  done  in  two  ways  (i)  by  breeding  the  walnuts 
together,  (2)  by  breeding  them  with  singles.  In  what 
follows,  the  names  may  be  abbreviated  thus :  i?,  rose  ; 
P,  pea ;    RP,   walnut ;    and  S,  single. 

Experiment  showed  that  RP  x  RP  gave  an  /%  family 
RP,  R,  Py  and  S.  The  appearance  of  S,  which  was  not 
known  to  have  been  put  in,  is  not  at  first  sight  intelligible. 
Repeated  trials  proved  that  the  ratio  in  which  these  combs 
appeared  was 

<^RP  :  zR  :  zP  :  iS. 

It  was  further  proved  by  experiment  that  the  R  birds 
were  either  pure  R  or  contained  the  recessive  S,  but  gave 
no  more  P  or  RP ;  that  the  P  birds  similarly  could  only 
give  P,  or  P  and  5 ;  while  the  5  were  all  pure  to  that 
character. 


Ill] 


The  Walnut  Comb 


65 


Consistent  with  this  result  were  the  offspring  obtained 
from  first-cross  RP  x  S,  for  this  mating  gave  the  ratio 

iRP  \  \R  :   iP  :   iS. 

As  it  was  already  established  that  R  and  P  were  each 
dominant  to  S,  the  inference  was  certain  that  the  gametes 
produced  by  the  F^  {RP)  birds  were  RP,  R,  P,  and  5"  in 
equal  numbers. 

The  whole  series  of  phenomena  may  be  represented  as 
due  to  the  combinations  of  two  pairs  of  allelomorphic 
characters  or  factors,   namely 

1.  Rose  (domt)  R,  absence  of  rose  (rec.)  r. 

2.  Pea  (domt)  P,  absence  of  pea  (rec.)/. 


RP 

RP 

RP 

RP 

RP 

Rp 

rP 

rp 

walnut 

walnut 

walnut 

walnut 

pure 

giving  rose 

giving  pea 

giving  all  4 

Rp 
RP 

Rp 
Rp 

Rp 
rP 

Rp 
rp 

walnut 

rose 

walnut 

rose 

giving  rose 

pure 

giving  all  4 

giving  single 

rP 

rP 

rP 

rP 

RP 

Rp 

rP 

rp 

walnut 

walnut 

pea 

pea 

giving  pea 

giving  all  4 

pure 

giving  single 

rp 
RP 

rp 
Rp 

rp 
rP 

rp 
rp 

walnut 

rose 

pea 

single 

giving  all  4 

giving  single 

giving  single 

pure 

Reference  to  the  diagram  of  combinations  shows  that 
the  two  "  absences  "  of  rose  and  pea  respectively  will  meet 
once  on  an  average  in  16  times,  and  to  such  a  meeting 
without  doubt  the  appearance  of  the  single  combs  as  a 
novelty,   in  /%,   is  to  be  ascribed. 

In   the  early  years  of  this  experiment,  knowing  that^i? 


B.    H. 


66  The  Breda  Comb  [ch. 

and  P  were  allelomorphic  to  5,  I  came  to  regard  them  as 
also  allelomorphic  to  each  other.  This  idea  led  to  con- 
fusion, but  we  know  now  that  no  case  justifies  such  an 
application  of  the  principle  of  allelomorphism.  A  rose 
comb  is  not  due  to  an  elemental  factor  which  can  segregate 
from  the  pea  comb  factor.  The  two  factors  belong  to 
distinct  allelomorphic  pairs  and  each  in  the  gametogenesis 
of  the  heterozygote  segregates  from  its  own  allelomorph, 
which  is  simply  the  absence  of  the  factor  in  question.  The 
single  comb  contains  neither  R  nor  P,  The  rose  comb  is 
a  single  comb  modified  by  the  presence  of  R,  while  the  pea 
comb  is  produced  by  the  presence  of  P.  We  may  therefore 
describe  the  rose  as  R  no  P,  and  the  pea  diS  P  no  R.  It  is 
convenient  to  use  capital  letters  for  dominants  and  small 
letters  for  recessives,  the  rose  being  thus  written  Rp,  and 
the  Pea,  rP.  The  walnut  comb  is  the  RP,  while  rp  gives 
the  single. 

The  allelomorphism  of  the  elements  which  go  to  the 
constitution  of  the  shapes  of  combs  in  fowls  may  without 
doubt  be  carried  very  much  further.  For  example  there 
are  indications  that  the  size  of  the  comb  depends  to  some 
extent  at  least  on  other  pairs  of  factors.  Another  curious 
set  of  phenomena,  perhaps  worth  investigating  further,  may 
be  studied  in  a  cross  between  a  single  comb  breed  and  the 
''  Breda "  fowl.  The  Breda  is  usually  said  to  have  "  no 
comb."  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  has  two  very  minute 
tubercles  which  represent  the  comb.  When  this  breed  is 
crossed  with  the  single  comb,  F^  has  what  may  be  called  a 
*' double  "  single  comb.  It  consists  of  two  large  lobes  or 
leaves  diverging  outwards  from  a  common  base^.  Such  a 
comb  is  evidently  due  to  the  introduction  by  the  Breda  of  a 
factor  which  may  be  called  "  bifidity."  This  factor  acts  on 
the  large  comb  brought  in  by  the  single-combed  parent  and 
the  result  of  the  combination  is  a  large,  double  comb.  F., 
from  this  cross  has  not  yet  been  raised,  but  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  it  will  contain  members  having  the  ''  no  comb  " 
of  the  Breda  and  the  ''absence  of  bifidity"  of  the  single- 
combed  breed.  Such  birds  probably  have  only  a  minute 
tubercle  at  the  posterior  end  of  the  comb  region. 

*  The  two  lobes  sometimes  unite  anteriorly  to  a  greater  or  less  extent. 


Ill]  The  Breda  Comb  67 

Mr  Hurst  suggested  to  us  that  an  excellent  confirmation 
of  the  truth  of  the  analytical  method  by  which  the  composi- 
tion of  the  rose  and  pea  combs  has  been  represented  could 
be  obtained  by  a  cross  between  the  rose  comb  and  the 
Breda,  which,  as  has  been  stated,  has  the  bifidity-factor  but 
practically  no  comb  at  all.     The  elements  involved  are 

Rose,  R,  No  rose,  r. 

Comb  present,  C.  Comb  absent,  c. 

Bifidity,  B.  No  bifidity,  b. 

The  7\  generation  has  the  composition  Rr,  Cc,  Bb, 
namely  a  dottble  rose  comb.  /%  generation  contains  a  great 
variety  of  forms,  of  which  those  having  B  and  C,  but  no  R, 
have  the  high  bifid  comb  like  that  of  the  F^  raised  in  the 
cross  Breda  x  Single,  and  those  which  contain  only  r  and  b 
in  combination  with  C  have  single  combs  of  the  ordinary 
high  type  (Fig.  12).  Both  these  kinds  occurred  in  /%,  and 
their  appearance  is  entirely  confirmatory  of  the  scheme  of 
representation  adopted.  Since  neither  the  rose  nor  the 
Breda  have  outwardly  any  suggestion  of  single  comb  in 
their  appearance,  were  it  not  for  a  knowledge  of  Mendelian 
analysis  such  a  result  must  have  seemed  utterly  unaccount- 
able. 

When  therefore  we  look  at  such  an  organ  as  the  comb 
of  a  fowl  and  attempt  to  conceive  its  genetic  properties,  we 
have  to  remember  that  the  structure  as  a  whole  may  be 
composite  in  origin,  and  that  the  visible  appearances  and 
properties  may  result  from  the  interaction  of  a  number  of 
distinct  elements  each  transmitted  independently  in  gameto- 
genesis. 

Everything  however  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
number  of  these  elements  is  finite,  and  that  their  properties 
are  not  beyond  the  reach  of  orderly  analysis. 

In  the  example  of  the  walnut  combs  the  interaction  of 
two  dominant  factors  is  such  that  the  9  members  of  the  /% 
series  of  16  have  a  feature,  the  walnut  comb,  distinct  from 
those  of  the  original  parents,  while  the  i  member  of  the 
series  which  contains  neither  dominant  factor,  also  has  a 
feature,   the    single    comb,   distinct    from    anything    visibly 

5—2 


68  Heterostylism  [ch. 

introduced.  The  next  case  also  illustrates  the  appearance 
of  a  novelty  in  /^,,  but,  as  will  be  seen,  it  is  one  of  the 
groups  of  3  members  which  manifests  it. 

Heterostylism  in  Primula. 

The  dimorphic,  heterostyled  condition  of  Primula  plants 
is  well  known  and  need  not  be  described  in  detail.  The 
two  types  are  distinguished  thus  : 

A.  Thrum,  or  Short-styled  type. 

1.  Style    short,    the    stigma  standing  at   the   level   of 

constriction  of  the  tube. 

2.  Anthers  at  the  mouth  of  the  tube. 

3.  Pollen  grains  large. 

B.  Pi7t,  or  Long-styled  type. 

1.  Style  long,  the  stigma  usually  standing  in  the  mouth 

of  the  tube. 

2.  Anthers  at  the  level  of  constriction. 

3.  Pollen  grains  small. 

Experiments  made  by  Mr  R.  P.  Gregory  In  conjunction 
with  me  showed  that  the  Inheritance  of  these  two  types 
is  Mendellan^,  the  short-styled  or  thrum  behaving  as 
dominant.  The  long-styled,  being  recessive,  always  breed 
true  to  that  type  on  self-fertilisation  or  when  bred  inter  se. 

In  connection  with  this  fact  it  Is  Interesting  to  observe 

*  I  know  no  authentic  case  of  the  presence  of  both  long-  and  short- 
styled  flowers  on  the  same  plant.  Such  occurrences  are  frequently- 
announced,  but  so  far  as  I  can  discover  the  records  are  based  on 
mistakes.  In  occasional  flowers  on  long-styled  plants,  especially  in  the 
beginning  of  the  flowering  period,  the  style  does  not  attain  its  proper  length. 
Such  flowers  are  through  carelessness  sometimes  misdescribed  as  short- 
styled.  The  anthers  however  are  at  the  lower  level,  and  the  pollen-grains 
are  small,  so  the  essentially  long-styled  nature  of  these  plants  is  quite  clear. 

The  statement  is  also  sometimes  made  that  pin  plants  have  produced 
thrum-eyed  offspring  without  the  intervention  of  a  cross.  This  mistake  is 
due  to  the  appearance  of  a  type  with  "exsert"  anthers.  Such  anthers 
project  from  the  mouth  of  the  tube  and  give  a  thrum-like  look  to  the 
flower.  But  careful  examination  shows  that  the  anther-filaments  are 
inserted  at  the  lower  level,  and  the  pollen-grains  are  small.  Such  plants 
are  therefore  long-styled. 


Ill]  Heterostylism  69 

that  Primula  Sinensis,  which  is  preferred  by  fanciers  in  the 
pin  form,  was  easily  bred  true  to  that  type,  and  is  always  so 
maintained  in  good  strains.  For  our  experiments  it  was 
with  considerable  difficulty  that  we  procured  any  thrum 
plants.  On  the  other  hand  it  was  decided  long  ago  that 
the  Auricula  and  the  Polyanthus  for  exhibition  purposes 
must  always  be  thrums,  but  though  thrums  have  thus  been 
largely  selected  for  breeding,  pin-eyed  plants  are  continu- 
ally reproduced,  as  must  be  expected,  for  the  thrum  is  a 
dominant,  and  therefore  liable  to  contain  the  recessive  type. 
The  facts  about  to  be  described  relate  to  an  experiment 
made  with  a  peculiar  race  of  P.  Sinensis  grown  by  Messrs 


Fig.   14.     Some  of  the  types  of  flowers  in  F^_  from  the  cross  short-style 
(thrum) ;  small  eye  x  liomostyle  ;  large  eye. 

A.  The  long-styled  flower  :  with  small  eye. 

B.  The  homost)  led  :  large  eye. 

C.  The  short-styled  :  small  eye. 

D.  The  short-styled  :  large  eye. 

In  the  two  upper  flowers  the  corolla  is  of  the  "star"  type.  D  is 
the  ordinary,  imbricated  type  of  Sine?isis.  C  is  more  or  less  inter- 
mediate in  corolla-shape.  This  shape  is  the  usual  heterozygote  formed 
between  star  type  and  Sinensis  type.  The  corolla -shapes  are  of  course 
quite  independent  of  the  style  and  "  eye  "  characters. 


70  Heterostylism  [ch. 

Sutton  under  the  name  ''  Primrose  Queen."  To  the  casual 
observer  this  race  differs  from  an  ordinary  Primula  in  the 
fact  that  the  yellow  ''  eye,"  instead  of  forming  a  small  and 
well-defined  pentagon,  is  continued  as  a  yellow  flush  ex- 
tending far  over  the  limb  of  the  corolla.  The  anthers  of 
these  flowers  stand  at  the  lower  level  and  the  pollen-grains 
are  small  ;  but  the  style  instead  of  projecting  into  the  mouth 
of  the  tube  stops  at  the  anther-level,  being  thus  practically 
the  same  length  as  in  the  short-styled  type.  Such  a  form 
of  flower  was  called  by  Darwin  komostyled. 

Crosses  were  made  betw^een  this  homostyle  race  with 
the  yellow  flush  and  an  ordinary  thrum  with  the  pentagonal 
or  small  eye.  /\  is  thrum  with  the  small  eye,  showing  that 
the  yellow  flush  is  recessive.     /%  gave  the  following  series  : 

9  thrum  or  short-style  with  small  eye, 

3       ,,  ,,  with  the  large  eye, 

3  ordinary  ^//^  07^  long-style  with  small  eye, 

I  homostyle  with  the  large  eye  like  Primrose  Queen. 

The  long-styled  or  pin  type,  which  apparently  was  not 
put  in,  is  evidently  due  to  the  re-combination  of  the  charac- 
ters.    The  two  pairs  of  characters  are 

Thrum  type  (domt).  Pin  type  (rec). 

Small  eye  (domt).  Large  eye  (rec). 

The  homostyle  is  the  form  which  the  pin  type  assumes 
when  the  large  eye  is  developed  ;  but  when  in  7%  the  pin 
type  meets  the  small  eye,  the  ordinary  pin  or  long-styled 
form  is  produced. 

/%  gave  a  simple  and  confirmatory  result  ;  for  of  the 
7^2  long-styled  plants,  some  proved  pure  to  the  long-styled 
character,  while  others  threw  the  recessive  homostyle. 

White  Flowers  in  F.,  from  Redx  Cream. 

Exactly  comparable  with  the  foregoing  case  is  the 
paradoxical  appearance  of  wkite-^o-w^r^d  individuals  in  the 
/%  from  the  cross  of  a  sap-coloured  variety  with  a  variety 
having  cream-coloured  flowers.  For  example,  in  Sweet 
Peas  or  Stocks  [Matthiola)  when  a  red-flowered  type  is 
crossed  with  a  cream,  F^  is  red,  without  any  cream-colour. 


Ill] 


Novelties  by  Re-combination 


71 


7%  consists  of  9  reds  without  cream,  3   reds  with  cream, 
3  whites,  I  cream. 

When  the  allelomorphs  are  correctly  distinguished  the 
significance  of  this  series  is  obvious.  The  operations  may 
be  shown  in  a  tabular  form,  thus  : 


Parents  Red  variety  x  Cream  variety 

Allelomori?hs  [        ^^^  '^P  ^^^  Colourless  sap  {R) 

■^      [Colourless  corps.  (Z?)     Yellow  corpuscles  {R) 
{  Red  sap 


F^ 


[Colourless  corpuscles 


I 

P  (       Red  sap 

^  [Colourless  corps. 


Red  sap 
Yellow  corps. 


Appearance  9  Red         3  Red  Cream 


Colourless  sap 
Colourless  corps. 

3  White 


Colourless  sap 
Yellow  corps. 

I  Cream 


These  cases  of  novelties  resulting  through  a  re-combi- 
nation of  the  factors  brought  in  by  the  original  pure  types 
are  striking  because  it  is  not  at  first  sight  evident  how  the 
novelty  has  been  produced.  Generally  speaking,  however, 
the  re-combinations  form  in  /%  a  series  of  types  many  of 
which  are  obviously  new  combinations  of  features  which 
could  be  recognized  on  inspection  as  present  in  the  pure 
parents.  Thus  the  cross  between  a  bearded,  rough  chaff, 
red  w^heat,  and  a  beardless,  smooth  chaff,  white  wheat  give 
in  F^  a  beardless,  rough  chaff,  red.  But  in  /%  all  the 
different  possible  combinations  occur,  such  as  bearded, 
smooth,  red ;  beardless,  rough,  white ;  bearded,  rough, 
white,  &c.,  each  in  their  appropriate  numerical  proportions. 
In  the  Guinea-pig,  starting  from  albino,  smooth  coat,  long 
hair,  and  crossing  it  with  coloured,  rough  coat,  short  hair, 
F^  is  coloured,  rough  coat,  short  hair.  But  7%  contains  the 
various  re-combinations  of  these  three  pairs  of  characters, 
such  as  albino,  rough  coat,  short  hair  ;  coloured,  smooth  coat, 
long  hair,  &c.  Thus  by  selecting  any  desired  type  in  i% 
any  of  these  new  combinations  can  be  fixed  and  perpetuated. 
Basing  his  procedure  on  a  knowledge  of  the  dominance  or 
recessiveness  of  each  character  the  breeder  may  thus  guide 
his  operations  with  certainty. 

That  this  has  been  the  mode  by  which  most  of  the  new 
breeds  of  domesticated  plants  and  animals  have  been  created 
is  obvious.     The  traces  of  it  remain  in  many  cases.     For 


72  Practical  Examples  [ch. 

instance,  Sutton's  ''  Nonpareil,"  one  of  the  marrow  peas, 
consists  in  about  equal  numbers  of  yellow-cotyledon  seeds 
and  green-cotyledon  seeds.  Like  all  the  new  peas  it  must 
have  arisen  at  some  definite  moment  by  the  selection  of 
an  individual  yellow-seeded  plant  which  was  true  for  the 
various  good  qualities  of  Nonpareil — being  homozygous  for 
them  in  other  words — but  in  cotyledon-colour  it  was 
heterozygous.  As  the  diversity  of  colour  was  not  thought 
objectionable  it  persists.  If  any  one  wishes  to  make  an 
exclusively  green-seeded  Nonpareil,  all  he  has  to  do  is  to 
take  green  seeds  from  a  sack  of  that  variety  and  sow  them, 
saving  the  seeds  they  bear.  If  he  desires  the  yellow  type 
pure,  he  may  similarly  sow  yellow  seeds  from  the  same  sack. 
Most  of  these  by  now  will  presumably  be  pure  to  yellow, 
but  some  may  not.  By  keeping  the  seeds  of  any  plant 
which  gives  only  yellow  seeds  a  pure  yellow  Nonpareil  will 
be  constituted. 

Similarly  Sutton's  ''Continuity"  is  a  pea  which  is 
allowed  to  be  either  pointed  in  pod  or  blunt.  The  variety 
is  true  in  other  respects  and  it  is  clear  that  its  original 
progenitor  was  a  plant  homozygous  for  the  peculiarities  of 
Continuity  but  heterozygous  in  respect  of  the  pod-shape. 
The  pointed-pod  plants  would  be  found  true  for  that 
character,  since  it  is  recessive,  while  the  blunt-pod  plants 
might  or  might  not  be  true  for  it. 

So  in  the  Chinese  Primrose,  several  varieties,  e.g, 
Sutton's  Mont  Blanc,  Sirdar,  &c.,  distinguished  by  peculi- 
arities of  colour  have  been  fixed  both  in  a  palm-leaved  and 
in  a  fern-leaved  form,  these  having  of  course  been  saved 
in  F^  or  later  generations  from  a  heterozygote  in  which  the 
palm  and  fern-leaved  characters  were  combined.  In  Sweet 
Peas,  after  the  original  dwarf  ''  Cupid  "  was  found — accord- 
ing to  tradition  a  chance  seedling  among  tall  plants — it  was 
easy  to  transfer  the  characteristic  colour  of  the  various  tall 
types  on  to  a  Cupid  foundation,  and  now  any  colour  almost 
can  be  had  either  as  a  tall  or  as  a  Cupid. 

Possible  Limits  to  Re-combination. 

These  illustrations  might  be  extended  indefinitely.  It 
will  probably  occur  to  many  that  there  are  limits  to  these 
possibilities  of  transference,  and  so  undoubtedly  there  are. 


Ill]  Limits  to  Interchangeability  73 

The  detection  of  these  limits  is  one  of  the  more  important 
tasks  still  awaiting  us.  Though  on  this  head  little  can  yet 
be  asserted  with  confidence  it  is  likely  that  such  limitations 
are  constituted  in  two  distinct  ways  :  First,  from  all  we 
know  of  the  capacities  of  animals  and  plants  we  must 
anticipate  that  some  characters  are  incompatible  in  the 
same  individual.  For  example  in  cattle  the  highest  milk- 
production  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  breeds  which  make  the 
best  beef.  Meat-production  and  milk-production  are  to  some 
extent  alternative  and  can  only  be  combined  by  compro- 
mising one  quality  or  both.  That  such  an  alternative 
distribution  is  merely  a  result  of  allelomorphism  seems  on 
the  whole  unlikely,  though  certainly  not  impossible. 

Then  again  we  must  surely  expect  that  these  transferable 
characters  are  attached  to  or  implanted  upon  some  basal 
organisation,  and  the  attributes  or  powers  which  collectively 
form  that  residue  may  perhaps  be  distinguishable  from  the 
transferable  qualities.  The  detection  of  the  limits  thus  set 
upon  the  interchangeability  of  characters  would  be  a  dis- 
covery of  high  importance  and  would  have  a  most  direct 
bearing  on  the  problem  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  Species. 


CHAPTER   IV 

HEREDITY   OF   COLOUR. 

Factoids  deter^niniitg  Colours :  the  Ratio  9:3:  4. —  The 
''Presence  and  Absence^'  Hypothesis.  Epistatic  and 
Hypostatic  Factors — Colours  of  Mice — Pied  Types — 
A  Dominant  Piebald, 

With  regard  to  the  application  of  the  Mendelian  system 
to  problems  of  colour  inheritance  the  evidence  is  now 
considerable.  The  fact  that  in  both  animals  and  plants 
albinism  behaved  as  a  recessive  to  colours  was  soon  dis- 
covered. Several  examples  among  plants  are  mentioned  by 
de  Vries  in  his  first  paper  on  this  subject,  and  shortly  after 
similar  facts  were  recorded  in  regard  to  animals.  Since  in 
the  course  of  a  large  range  of  experiments  with  many  species 
of  animals  and  plants  no  case  to  the  contrary  has  been  met 
with,  it  may  perhaps  be  asserted  as  a  general  truth  that 
pigmentation  is  always  dominant  to  total  absence  of  pig- 
ment"^. When  however  we  proceed  to  the  investigation  of 
the  genetic  properties  of  varieties  which  are  so  far  deficient 
in  pigment  as  to  be  called  sometimes  partial  albinos,  we 
find  that  various  specific  rules  are  followed  and  no  uni- 
formity of  behaviour  has  yet  been  discovered.  White  fowls 
for  instance  are  thus  commonly  spoken  of  as  partial  albinos, 
but  the  pigmentation  of  their  eyes  sharply  distinguishes 
them  from  albinos  which  are  destitute  of  pigment,  and 
many  of  their  genetic  properties  are  found  experimentally 
to  be  quite  distinct  from  those  of  real  albinos.  The  same 
is  true  of  certain  varieties  of  plants,  which  though  varying 
from  the  specific  type  by  possessing  white  flowers  have 
yet  some  red  or  purple  sap  in  the  stem  or  elsewhere.     With- 

*  The  Axolotl  is  perhaps  an  exception.  See  p.  43.  The  fact  that  in 
plants  colourless  chromoplasts  are  dominant  to  yellow  chromoplasts  scarcely 
constitutes  an  exception,  for  the  yellow  of  the  chromoplasts  is  not  pigment 
in  the  usual  acceptation  of  that  term. 


CH.  IV]  The  Ratio  9:3:4  75 

out  experiment  no  prediction  can  be  made  with  confidence 
as  to  the  behaviour  of  such  types  in  their  crosses. 

Albinism  being  recessive  in  all  ordinary  cases,  7%  from  the 
cross  colour  x  albino  contains  i  albino  to  3  coloured  members. 
As  regards  the  characters  of  the  dominant  or  coloured  mem- 
bers various  complications  have  to  be  considered. 

In  the  simplest  cases  the  coloured  F,  individuals  are  all 
of  the  same  colour.  For  example  on  crossing  a  grey  rabbit 
with  an  albino,  F^  is  grey  and  F^^  may  be  3  greys  :  i  albino. 
But  frequently  it  is  found  that  in  addition  to  the  greys  and 
albinos  blacks  appear  in  /%.  Repeated  experiments,  for 
example  those  of  Hurst,  have  shown  that  in  such  families 
the  /%  ratio  is 

9  greys    :    3  blacks   :  4  albinos 

' , ' 

12  -4 

3  •   I 

The  relation  of  this  ratio  to  the  ordinary  9:3:3:1 
was  first  pointed  out  by  Cuenot  (86)^.  As  represented  by 
him  two  pairs  of  allelomorphs  are  concerned,  namely  : 

Donii7iant.  Recessive. 

1.  Colour  (C).  Albinism  [A). 

2.  Grey  determiner  (G).  Black  determiner  {B). 

The  presence  of  one  or  other  of  the  determiners  G  or  B 
is  only  perceptible  w^hen  it  exists  in  combination  with  the 
colour-factor.  If  6^  is  present  together  with  C,  the  colour 
is  grey ;  if  ^5*  is  present  with  C  but  without  G,  the  colour  is 
black.  If  a  coloured  individual  contain  both  G  and  B, 
being  thus  heterozygous  in  the  second  pair  of  factors,  the 
colour  is  grey,  for  the  effects  of  grey  dominate.  But  since 
in  the  absence  of  colour  (C)  neither  determiner  produces  a 
perceptible  effect,  albinos  may  exist  of  the  forms  AAGG, 
AAGB,  or  A  ABB,  and  without  breeding  tests  it  will  not 
be  possible  to  distinguish  between  these  several  forms.  On 
crossing  with  a  black  of  course  each  albino  can  be  known 
by  its  effects.  For  GG  will  then  give  greys  only,  GB  will 
give  equal  numbers  of  greys  and  blacks,  while  BB  albinos 
will  give  only  blacks. 

*  Shortly  before  the  publication  of  Cuenot's  paper  Mr  R.  H.  Lock 
wrote  to  me  from  Ceylon  with  the  same  suggestion. 


76  Presence  and  Absence  [ch. 


The  ''Presence  and  Absence''  Hypothesis  applied  to  the 

Case  of  Colour, 

So  long  as  attention  Is  restricted  to  crosses  like  these 
involving  only  two  sorts  of  colours  besides  the  albinos,  the 
system  suggested  by  Cuenot  is  adequate,  but  when  a  third 
colour  has  to  be  considered,  as  In  the  case  of  mice,  some 
modification  is  required.  The  simplest  notation  by  which 
these  and  other  complex  Mendelian  phenomena  can  be 
expressed  is  provided  by  what  is  spoken  of  as  the  Presence 
and  Absence  hypothesis  already  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the 
combs  of  fowls. 

Mendel  himself  probably  conceived  of  allelomorphism 
as  depending  on  the  separation  of  a  definite  something 
responsible  for  the  dominant  character  from  another  some- 
thing responsible  for  the  production  of  the  recessive 
character.  It  Is  however  evidently  simpler  to  imagine 
that  the  dominant  character  is  due  to  the  presence  of 
something  which  in  the  case  of  the  recessive  is  absent. 
As  yet  there  is  no  absolute  proof  that  this  mode  of  de- 
scribing the  facts  is  correct,  but  everything  points  that 
way,  and  no  phenomena  have  yet  been  encountered  which 
cannot  be  thus  formulated  when  their  nature  is  understood. 
In  cases  where  the  pure  dominants  are  recognizably  distinct 
from  the  heterozygous  dominants,  it  must  naturally  be  sup- 
posed that  two  "  doses  "  of  the  active  factor  are  required,  one 
from  the  paternal,  and  another  from  the  maternal  side,  in 
order  to  produce  the  full  effect. 

Applying  the  presence  and  absence  system  to  the  case 
of  the  colours  of  rabbits,  the  first  pair  of  allelomorphs  can 
obviously  be  represented  as 

Do7nina7tt.  Recessive, 

I.      Presence  of  Colour  (C).         Absence  of  Colour  {c). 

The  second  pair  we  have  so  far  spoken  of  as  the  grey 
determiner  and  the  black  determiner,  regarding  these  two 
as  allelomorphic  to  each  other.  But  it  is  equally  possible 
to  describe  them  thus 

2.     Grey  determiner  [G),  Absence  of  ditto  {g). 


IV] 


Presence  and  Absence 


77 


'    

Then  in  the  case  where  grey  x  albino  gives  in  F^ 
9  g^^y  •  3  black   :  4  albino, 

we  simply  have  to  regard  B,  the  black  determiner,  as 
common  to  both  parents,  and  the  same  numerical  result 
is  produced.  Such  a  case  may  usefully  be  represented  in 
a  tabular  form,  thus  : 


Parents  Grey     x     Albino 

Gametic  Composition...  CGB 


CgB 


F, 


Grey 


CcGgBB 


F^ 9  Grey 


12 
3 


3  Black 


4  Albino 

4 
I 


CGB 
CGB 

grey 

cGB 
CGB 

grey 

CgB 
CGB 

grey 

CgB 
CGB 

grey 

CGB 
cGB 

grey 

cGB 
cGB 

albino 

CgB 
cGB 

grey 

CgB 
cGB 

albino 

CGB 
CgB 

grey 

cGB 
CgB 

grey 

CgB 
CgB 

black 

CgB 
CgB 

black 

CGB 

CgB 

grey 

cGB 
CgB 

albino 

CgB 
CgB 

black 

CgB 
CgB 

albino 

Fig.  15.  Distribution  of  grey,  black,  and  albino  individuals  in  ^2  from 
the  cross  grey,  CGB,  with  albino  cgB,  showing  the  meaning  of  the 
ratio  9  grey  :  3  black  :  4  albino. 


yS  Presence  and  Absence  [ch. 

In  this  diagram  the  9  squares  containing  C,  G,  B,  are 
the  9  greys,  the  3  squares  containing  C  and  B  only  are  the 

3  blacks  and  the  4  squares  containing  no  C  at  all  are  the 

4  albinos. 

Proceeding  to  the  case  of  mice  we  write  the  composition 
as  follows : 

Grey  C,  G,  B,  Ch. 

Black         C,  g,  B,  Ch. 

Chocolate  C,  g,  b,  Ch. 

We  thus  regard  the  black  mouse  as  one  from  which  the 
grey  determiner,  G,  has  been  removed.  In  the  chocolate 
mouse  the  process  of  removal  has  been  carried  further  and 
the  black  determiner,  B,  is  also  gone. 

A  proof  that  this  system  of  representation  is  so  far 
correct  is  obtained  by  crossing  the  grey  mouse  with  the 
chocolate.  Such  a  cross,  if  G  is  not  allelomorphic  to  B,  must 
give  blacks  in  /%.  This  experiment  has  been  lately  carried 
out  by  Miss  F.  M.  Durham,  to  whose  work  our  knowledge 
of  the  genetics  of  mice  is  largely  due.  The  result  is  that, 
as  expected,  /%  does  contain  blacks,  and  though  the  num- 
bers as  yet  obtained  are  small,  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  F^  ratio  is 

12  grey  :  3  black  :  i  chocolate. 

Some  interesting  questions  arise  in  regard  to  the  greys. 
Obviously  we  should  expect  9  greys  containing  G  and  B 
4-  3  greys  without  B.  Now  fanciers  are  well  aware  of  a  dis- 
tinction between  two  kinds  of  greys  or  ''agoutis"  as  they  are 
called.  These  are  known  as  "golden  agoutis"  and  "cinna- 
mon agoutis,"  the  former  containing  black  pigment,  the 
latter  being  without  it.  In  the  /%  from  grey  x  chocolate 
both  these  kinds  of  agoutis  appear,  and  evidently  the 
cinnamon  agoutis  are  the  expected  greys  wanting  In  the 
determiner  B. 

Thus  far  all  is  clear.  Certain  difficulties  however 
remain  unexplained.  These  will  be  described  later.  At 
this  stage  in  the  discussion  it  is  convenient  to  notice  that 
in  view  of  the  facts  now  stated  the  use  of  the  term  domi- 
nance must  be  more  carefully  restricted  than  has  hitherto 
been  necessary.  When  we  speak  of  the  colour  as  being 
dominant  over  the  absence  of  colour  we  mean  that  if  the 
colour  is  present  it  will  appear,  and  that  If  the  factor  for 


IV]  Epistatic  mid  Hypostatic  79 

colour  Is  absent  the  Individual  will  be  devoid  of  colour. 
The  term  Is  thus  used  correctly  to  denote  the  relation 
between  allelomorphic  features  belonging  to  the  same  pair. 
But  confusion  will  be  Introduced  If  we  extend  the  same 
term  to  the  relationship  between  various  determining  factors 
which  belong  to  distinct  allelomorphic  pairs. 

Hitherto  we  have  spoken  of  the  determiner  for  such  a 
colour  as  grey  In  rabbits  and  mice  as  "  dominant "  over 
the  colours  lower  In  the  scale,  such  as  black  or  chocolate. 
Nevertheless  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  relationship  quite 
different  In  order  from  that  subsisting  between  the  coloured 
and  the  albino.  Pending  a  more  precise  knowledge  of  the 
nature  of  this  relationship  It  will  be  enough  to  regard  those 
factors  which  prevent  others  from  manifesting  their  effects 
as  higher,  and  the  concealed  factors  as  lower.  In  accord- 
ance with  this  suggestion  the  terms  epistatic  and  hypostatic 
may  conveniently  be  Introduced.  We  shall  then  speak  of 
the  determiner  for  grey  as  epistatic  to  that  for  black  ;  that 
for  black  as  epistatic  to  the  determiner  for  chocolate,  and 
so  on. 

When  the  facts  are  thus  clearly  represented  we  perceive 
that  the  variation  by  which,  for  example,  a  black  mouse  came 
originally  Into  existence,  consisted  In  the  omission  of  the  de- 
terminer for  grey .  The  chocolate  mouse  similarly  owed  Its 
origin  to  the  successive  omission  of  the  determiner  for  black. 

The  Important  question  what  the  effect  of  the  grey 
determiner,  for  example,  actually  Is,  remains  undecided. 
A  further  serious  difficulty  also  arises  In  regard  to  the 
relation  of  the  colour  ji/^//^z£/  to  the  other  colours.  Neither 
of  these  points  Is  yet  satisfactorily  understood  In  the  case 
of  mice.  The  recent  papers  of  Castle  {^^  and  of  Hurst "^ 
have  made  the  phenomena  In  rabbits  comparatively  clear, 
though  even  there,  however,  an  unexplained  difficulty 
remains.  The  special  problems  raised  by  the  behaviour  of 
yellow  pigment  In  these  animals  will  be  discussed  In  a  sub- 
sequent section!  (see  Chap.  vii). 

*  Read  at  the  Internat.  Congr.  Zool.  Boston,  1907  :  not  yet  published. 

t  According  to  the  number  of  factors  involved  and  to  the  definiteness 
with  which  their  several  combinations  can  be  distinguished,  an  indefinite 
variety  of  ratios  may  of  course  be  produced  in  F<,  families.  Some  of  the 
most  interesting  are  those  in  which  some  of  the  heterozygous  combinations 
can  be  distinguished  from  the  homozygous  dominants.  (See  for  examples 
Shall,  242.) 


8o  Sattirated  and  Dihtte  Colours  [ch. 

The  F^  ratio  9:3:4,  the  significance  of  which  we 
have  been  considering,  is  one  which  very  frequently  recurs 
in  MendeHan  analysis.  For  example,  as  Tschermak  found, 
when  a  pink-and-white  flowered  eating  pea  {Pisttm  sativum) 
is  crossed  with  a  white  flowered  type,  F^  is  often  of  the 
original  purple  flowered  type.     Then  F^  will  be 

9  purple  :  3  pink-and-white  :  4  white. 

Similarly  pink  Salvia  HorminuTn  x  white  may  give  F^ 
purple,  and  /%  9  purple  :  3  pink  :  4  white.  In  these  cases 
the  factor  for  the  purpleness  is  of  course  brought  in  by  the 
albino,  but  exactly  the  same  /%  may  result  from  a  cross 
between  the  ptirple  type  and  an  albino  not  carrying  the 
factor  for  purpleness.  All  that  is  essential  for  the  produc- 
tion of  this  ratio  in  /%  is  that  /^,  should  be  heterozygous 
for  two  factors,  of  which  one  is  perceptible  whenever 
present,  while  the  other  needs  the  presence  of  the  first  in 
order  that  its  own  effects  may  be  manifested.  Such  cases 
are  very  numerous  and  in  practical  breeding  are  to  be 
looked  out  for  continually.  Care  must  be  taken  to  distin- 
guish them  from  families  like  those  of  the  Andalusian  fowl 
(p.  52)  in  which  the  commonest  term  in  the  F^  series  is  a 
heterozygous  type.  There  the  numbers  will  be  1:2:1, 
which  in  a  practical  example  may  give  results  not  obviously 
distinguishable  from  3  :  9  :  4.  To  decide  between  the  two 
possibilities  it  is  necessary  to  breed  the  7%  types  again.  If 
neither  of  the  scarcer  types  when  bred  inter  se  can  throw 
the  other,  and  the  commoner  type  cannot  be  bred  pure,  the 
latter  is  a  heterozygous  type;  but  if  one  of  the  scarcer  types 
can  throw  the  other,  then  the  ratio  is  presumably  9:3:4, 
and  in  such  a  case  it  will  be  possible  to  raise  a  breed  true 
to  the  type  occurring  as  9. 


Saturation  and  Dilution  of  Colours. 

Omitting  yellow  from  our  consideration,  we  thus  re- 
cognize that  in  the  mouse  the  colours,  grey  (agouti),  black, 
chocolate,  which  the  fur  visibly  presents,  result  from  the 
interaction  of  several  factors,  and  that  these  factors  can  in 
great  measure  be  shown  to  be  distributed  in  gametogenesis 
according  to    Mendelian   allelomorphic  systems.     The  ex- 


I.     Agouti. 


2.     Black. 


3.     Chocolate. 


Plate  II 


Sc 


4.     Cinnamon  Agouti,  viz.  Agouti  without  black. 


5.     Blue  :  =  dilute  black. 


6.     Silver  fawn  :  =  dilute  chocolate. 


IV]  Colottrs  of  Mice  8i 

periments  of  Miss  Durham  (ii6)  have  shown  that  not 
only  the  particular  pigment  is  thus  constituted,  but  also 
that  the  intensity  or  degree  of  saturation  in  which  it  is 
formed  can  be  represented  as  determined  by  similar  factors. 

For  example  the  black  colour  may  exist  in  the  saturated 
condition,  when  the  mouse  is  called  black,  or  in  a  more 
dilute  form,  when  it  gives  the  "blue"  appearance.  Similarly 
the  chocolate  colour  when  diluted  gives  what  fanciers  call 
"silver-fawn."  Experiment  shows  that  the  cross  black  x 
silver  fawm  gives  exactly  the  same  result  (in  F^  and  /%)  as 
blue   X   chocolate.      (See  Plate  II.) 

The  following  are  experimental  results  illustrating  these 
points. 

The  allelomorphs  concerned  may  be  represented  as  B, 
the  black  determiner,  b  the  absence  of  B,  leaving  the 
colour  chocolate.  D  the  dense  or  saturated  condition  of 
the  colour,  d,  the  absence  of  D,  leaving  the  colour  dilute. 
(In  the  case  of  the  introduction  of  the  albino  we  should 
have  also  to  take  cognizance  of  C,  the  presence  of  colour,  c, 
its  absence.) 

The  actual  results  may  then  be  expressed  in  a  tabular 
form. 

Blue  X  Chocolate 

{Bd)   !    {bD) 

F^ Black 

(yBbDd) 

I ^ 1 

7^2  •••Black  Blue  Chocolate  Silver-fawn 

{BD)  {Bd)  {bD)  {bd) 

Observed    44  17  17  8 

Calculated  ^i*-^  16' i  16' i  ^'4 

Black   X  Silver-fawn 

{BD)    \         {bd) 

i?i Black 

{BbDd) 

I ^ n 

7^2...  Black  Blue  Chocolate  Silver-fawn 

{BD)  {Bd)  {bD)  {bd) 

Observed     67  21  20  5 

Calculated  <5j-<5  21-2  21-2  yi 

It  is  thus  immaterial  whether  the  factor  for  saturation 
is  brought  in  together  with  the  black  determiner  or  with 

B.  H.  6 


82  Colours  of  Mice  [ch. 

the  chocolate  (more  strictly,  with  the  ''absence  of  the  black 
determiner").  So  long  as  the  same  factors  are  introduced, 
the  consequences  in  F^  and  the  results  of  re-combination  in 
7%  are  the  same.  But  when  the  dilution  is  introduced  from 
each  side,  /%  is  of  course  the  usual  3  dominants  :  i  recessive, 
thus  : 

Blue  X  Silver-fawn 
{Bd)   I         {bd) 
F, Blue 

{Bbdd) 

J- ^ 


i^2...Blue  {Bd)  Silver-fawn  (bd) 

Observed      46  17 

Calculated    47'2^  i5'75 

It  is  evident  that  an  extracted  albino  cannot  be  carrying 
a  determiner  for  a  colour  higher  in  the  scale  than  that  of 
its  coloured  parents.  Moreover  if  the  parents  from  which 
an  albino  is  extracted  are  alike,  and  if  they  throw  no 
offspring  with  colours  other  than  their  own  (besides  the 
albinos),  then  the  albinos  so  extracted  must  be  all  bearers 
of  the  determiner  for  their  parental  colour.  If  such  albinos 
are  crossed  with  forms  of  a  colour  lower  in  the  scale  than 
that  borne  by  the  albinos,  F^  must  be  of  the  colour  deter- 
mined by  the  albinos.  For  example.  Miss  Durham  obtained 
the  following  : 

Silver-fawn   x  Albino  (extracted  from  chocolates) 
{Cbd)        I     {cbD) 

F^ Chocolate 

{CcbbDd) 


I \ 1 

7^2  •••Chocolate  Silver- fawn  Albino 

{CbD)  {Cbd)  (various) 

Observed       19  4  6 

Calculated    i6'3  ^'4  7'2 


Black  X  Albino  (extracted  from  chocolates) 
{CBD)  I     {cbD) 

A Black 

{CcBbDD) 

r -^ n 

F2...  Black  Chocolate  Albino 

Observed     76  24  27 

Calculated  77"^  2j-8  ji-y 


IV]  Colours  of  Mice  83 


A. 

Blue  X  Albino 
{CBd)  1    {cbD) 
Black 

{CcBbDd) 

1 

(extracted  j 

from  chocolates) 

A. 

..Black 

Blue 

Chocolate 

Silver-fawn 

Albino 

Obs. 

{CBD) 
3?> 

{CBd) 
10 

{CbD) 
8 

{Cbd) 
2 

(various) 
12 

Calc. 

27-4 

pz 

g-i 

3'o 

l6'2 

On  microscopical  examination  the  dilution  of  the  pig- 
ment seems  to  consist  in  a  diminution  in  the  number  of 
the  pigment  granules,  and  not  In  a  reduction  of  their  size. 
It  Is  interesting  to  notice  that  many  different  animals  have 
varieties  In  which  the  dilution  has  proceeded  to  the  same 
extent.  For  example  the  particular  dilution  of  black  which 
we  call  blue  is  known  as  characterizing  definite  varieties  in 
both  rabbits,  cats  and  mice,  not  to  mention  other  cases  less 
certainly  comparable. 

As  was  mentioned  in  the  description  of  the  Andalusian 
fowl  and  its  genetic  features  the  blue  colour  of  that  breed  is 
not  comparable  with  the  blues  we  have  been  discussing. 
In  the  mouse  the  blue  is  gametic,  being  a  condition  which 
can  be  carried  by  the  germ  cells,  while  in  the  Andalusian 
the  blue  is  zygotic  and  depends  on  the  collocation  In  one 
individual  of  one  germ-cell  bearing  black  with  another 
which  does  not  bear  black.  It  is  interesting,  as  exemplify- 
ing the  danger  of  reasoning  from  analogy  where  genetic 
phenomena  are  concerned,  that  the  blue-roan  of  cattle  should 
not  follow  the  same  rules  as  the  other  mammalian  blue 
varieties,  but  should  conform  rather  to  the  Andalusian 
system.  Of  course  blue  roan  is,  even  to  the  eye,  not  the 
homogeneous  blue  of  the  blue  cat  or  mouse,  but  a  mixture 
of  white  or  whitish  hairs  among  blue  and  black  ones.  Still 
on  analogy  we  might  have  expected  the  blue  of  cattle  to 
be  capable  of  representation  In  the  germ-cells,  but  the 
facts,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  afford  no  support  to  that 
supposition"^. 

*  From  such  meagre  evidence  as  I  have  obtained  it  is  likely  that  the 
blue,  or  blue  dapple,  of  Dachshunds  and  other  hounds  is  also  a  heterozygous 
combination.  As  to  the  blue  of  Greyhounds  and  Great  Danes  I  have  no 
information,  but  I  suspect  it  to  be  a  dilute  black  capable  of  being  bred 
true. 

6—2 


84  Colours  of  Mice  [ch. 

Wholly  Coloured  and  Pied  Varieties, 

In  the  analysis  of  the  relationship  between  the  whole 
or  self-coloured  forms  and  the  varieties  which  differ  from 
them  in  having  an  admixture  of  white  many  curious  and 
specific  phenomena  are  met  with.  It  is  probably  true  to 
say  that  generally  the  whole-colour  is  dominant  to  the  pied, 
but  several  examples  to  the  contrary  are  already  known. 
In  all  the  cases  yet  studied  the  genetic  properties  of  the 
pied  types  can  be  represented  factorially  by  regarding  the 
pattern  or  distribution  of  the  colour  as  due  to  a  distinct 
factor  or  to  its  absence.  Where  the  whole-colour  is  a 
dominant,  the  presence  of  the  factor  must  be  taken  as 
causing  that  distribution,  so  that  in  the  absence  of  that 
factor  the  individual  is  pied.  Conversely  if  the  pied  type  is 
dominant  the  presence  of  the  pattern-factor  acts  by  re- 
straining the  distribution  of  the  colour,  and  in  the  absence 
of  the  restraining  factor  the  whole-colour  prevails. 

One  of  the  clearest  cases  is  that  studied  by  Hurst  in 
the  rabbit,  where  the  pattern  known  as  "Dutch-marked" 
was  proved  to  be  a  recessive.  In  the  Dutch  rabbit  the 
hind  quarters  are  coloured,  for  example  with  grey  or  black, 
while  the  front  half  of  the  body  is  white  except  for  a  patch 
of  colour— grey  or  black  as  the  case  may  be — surrounding 
the  eyes  and  covering  the  ears.  This  pattern  though 
fluctuating  in  minor  respects  is  fairly  definite  and  is  at  once 
distinguishable  both  from  the  self-colours  and  from  the 
various  other  pied  forms.  The  cross  between  a  pure  self- 
colour  and  a  Dutch  gives  F^  nearly  self-colour  with  /% 
consisting  of  3  selfs  :  i  Dutch  in  the  ordinary  way.  An 
interesting  feature  is  however  to  be  observed  in  the  fact 
that  the  heterozygotes  between  self  and  Dutch  generally 
(?  always)  have  some  small  amount  of  white  collar,  marked 
especially  on  the  back  behind  the  head.  Apart  from 
Mendelian  experiment  it  might  have  been  supposed  that 
such  a  white  mark  showed  that  the  animal  contained  some 
albino  blood.  Experiment  shows  on  the  contrary  that  the 
actual  self-colours  may  be  carrying  albino  as  a  recessive, 
while  the  small  white  mark  is  an  indication  of  heterozygosis 
with  Dutch  pattern  only. 

The  behaviour  is  in  all  respects  as  if  the  whole-colour 


IV]  Pied  Varieties  85 

pattern  depended  on  the  existence  of  a  dominant.  So  also, 
exactly  as  in  the  case  of  dilution  and  saturation,  an  albino 
may  carry  either  the  whole-colour  factor,  or  its  absence. 
Consequently  when  a  Dutch  rabbit  is  crossed  with  an 
albino  bearing  self-colour,  F^  is  self-colour  and  /%  gives 
9  self-colour  :  3  Dutch  :  4  albinos. 

In  rats  there  is  a  type  of  colouring  w^hich  rather  closely 
corresponds  to  the  Dutch  of  rabbits.  This  has  a  "hood" 
of  colour  over  the  back  of  the  head  and  shoulders  continued 
down  the  back  in  a  stripe  which  may  either  be  entire  or 
broken  into  spots.  This  behaves  towards  the  self-colour 
just  as  does  the  Dutch  in  the  rabbit  ;  and  just  as  in  the 
rabbit  the  heterozygote  between  the  self-pattern  and  this 
hooded  type  always  has  some  white.  Crampe  i^-^,  a) 
observed  this  fact  before  the  days  of  Mendelian  analysis. 
He  noticed  that  when  a  wild  grey  rat  was  crossed  with  an 
albino,  F^,  as  we  call  it,  might  be  a  real  self-colour,  or  might 
have  some  white;  but  that  subsequently  hooded  rats  only 
occurred  as  offspring  of  those  which  had  some  white.  Such 
rats,  which  are  nearly  whole-colour  but  have  a  little  white, 
are  know^n  in  the  fancy  as  the  "Irish"  type.  Experiments 
made  by  Doncaster  and  also  by  Mudge  indicate  that  these 
may  be  again  divided  into  two  subordinate  classes,  distin- 
guished by  the  amount  and  distribution  of  the  white,  and 
there  is  some  evidence  to  show  that  these  two  types  of 
Irish  rats  have  distinct  gametic  compositions. 

Though  the  Dutch  rabbit  and  the  hooded  rat  are  each 
such  clearly  recognizable  types,  yet  within  these  types  there 
is  great  fluctuation,  and  it  is  practically  certain  that  the 
fancier's  ideal  Dutch-pattern  rabbit,  with  the  demarcation 
between  the  colour  and  the  white  passing  in  a  sharp  trans- 
verse line  across  the  middle  of  the  animal,  does  not  exist  as 
a  gametic  entity.  Such  individuals  of  course  come  into 
existence  from  time  to  time,  but  selection  will  not  fix  their 
type.  As  Castle  and  MacCurdy  (183)  have  shown  In  the 
case  of  rats,  selection  may  nevertheless  to  a  considerable 
extent  be  effective  In  producing  hooded  types  with  more 
colour,  and  with  less  colour,  which  are  evidently  gametic 
possibilities. 

In  mice  no  pied  type  exists  which  Is  quite  so  definite 
as  the  Dutch  pattern  of  rabbits  or  the  hooded  type  of  rats, 


86  Pied  Varieties  [ch. 

and  by  taking  pains  every  gradation  In  amount  of  white 
could  be  found  represented  among  fancy  mice.  Experience, 
however,  soon  shows  that  some  at  least  of  these  are  gametic 
types,  while  presumably  others  are  the  consequence  of 
various  heterozygous  combinations.  Cuenot's  work  with 
mice  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  in  mice  the  several 
degrees  of  piedness  are  recessive  to  each  other  In  the  order 
of  the  amount  of  white,  those  with  more  white  being  re- 
cessive to  those  with  less.  In  general  terms  this  is  a  true 
account,  but  we  have  not  found  the  rule  to  apply  quite 
strictly  even  in  mice,  perhaps  through  the  existence  of  the 
complication  next  to  be  considered.  It  should  be  remarked 
also  that  no  general  statement  can  be  made  as  to  dominance 
of  self-colours  over  pied  which  is  applicable  to  animals  In 
general,  and  on  a  wide  survey  of  the  results  of  breeding 
many  paradoxical  occurrences  are  met  with.  Especially 
curious  are  the  cases,  by  no  means  very  rare,  in  which  a 
cross  between  a  domesticated  and  a  wild  animal,  e.g.  dog 
and  wolf — has  produced  a  partially  pied  offspring. 


Dominant  Pied  Pypes. 

So  far  we  have  been  considering  the  behaviour  of 
pied  patterns  recessive  to  the  whole-coloured  types. 
Though  several  points  remain  for  Investigation  the  genetic 
relations  of  these  patterns  are  fairly  clear.  A  remarkable 
complication  has  next  to  be  mentioned.  Both  In  the  rabbit 
and  the  mouse  it  is  now  known  that  in  addition  to  the  pied 
types  which  are  recessive  there  are  others  which  are  domi- 
nant to  the  whole-coloured  form.  Hurst  has  proved  this 
for  the  variety  of  rabbit  called  "  English  pattern."  This 
animal  Is  white  with  spots  of  colour  (black,  grey,  or  other- 
wise) generally  of  small  size  on  the  sides  of  the  body,  a 
patch  over  the  eyes,  and  a  "  chain "  of  spots  sometimes 
nearly  continuous  down  the  middle  of  the  back.  In  ideal 
specimens  the  spots  should  be  of  a  special  form  and  have  a 
definite  distribution,  but  neither  of  these  features  seems  to 
be  gametic.  The  English  type  Is  not  now  much  in  fashion 
and  looks  uncommon  to  those  used  to  modern  rabbits,  but 
formerly  it  was  very  abundant. 


IV]  A  Dominant  Piebald  Type  87 

Hurst's  experiments  (160)  showed  that  this  pattern  is 
an  ordinary  dominant  to  self-colour — a  definite  but  most 
unexpected  result. 

More  lately  Miss  Durham  (116)  has  found  a  dominant, 
and  doubtless  analogous,  pied  type  in  mice.  So  far  no 
criterion  has  been  discovered  which  distinguishes  this 
dominant  pied  pattern  externally  from  the  recessive  ones, 
but  in  breeding  the  distinction  is  perfectly  sharp.  It  is 
likely  that  the  factor  for  this  new  dominant  was  brought 
into  Miss  Durham's  strains  by  the  introduction  of  the  type 
called  ''black-eyed  white,"  but  the  evidence  is  not  perfectly 
clear  on  this  point.  As  may  be  supposed,  the  combination 
of  the  dominant  pied  with  the  recessive  pied  in  the  same 
strain  gave  results  which  it  was  impossible  to  disentangle, 
though  when  each  of  these  types  was  isolated  the  course  of 
descent  was  perfectly  clear.  The  case  is  interesting  not 
merely  as  exemplifying  a  new^  kind  of  factor,  but  as  illus- 
trating a  type  of  complication  that  may  very  possibly  have 
to  be  reckoned  with  in  other  difficult  and  as  yet  incom- 
prehensible sets  of  phenomena. 

Another  example  of  a  pied  condition  dominant  to  self- 
colour  has  been  seen  in  our  poultry  experiments  (22);  but 
since  in  fowls  some  of  the  wholly  white  breeds  are  prac- 
tically dominant  in  whiteness,  it  is  only  to  be  expected  that 
some  of  the  partial  whites  should  also  show  dominance. 

In  plants,  as  in  animals,  no  general  rule  can  be  laid 
down  as  to  the  dominance  of  self-coloured  or  parti-coloured 
flowers.  In  the  Sweet  Pea,  for  example,  the  old-fashioned 
"  Painted  Lady"  (see  Plate  V)  has  a  red  standard  and 
wings  nearly  white.  It  is  thus  a  bi-colour  type,  but  it  is 
dominant  to  the  self-coloured  reds  and  pinks.  On  the 
other  hand  in  Antirrhinum  the  self-coloured  types  are 
always  dominant  to  the  "Delilah"  forms  which  have  the 
lips  coloured  and  the  tube  or  throat  white,  as  was  first 
shown  by  de  Vries.  Miss  Wheldale  who  has  since  worked 
on  a  large  scale  with  Antirrhimun  (303)  found  that  for 
each  shade  of  flower  which  exists  as  a  self-colour,  a  corre- 
sponding Delilah  or  white-tubed  type  can  be  made  which 
behaves  to  the  corresponding  self-colour  as  a  simple  reces- 
sive. 


CHAPTER  V 

HEREDITY    OF    COLOUR— continued. 

Albinos  giving  Coloured  Offspring ;  Reversion  on  Crossing — 
Various  Kinds  of  Whites — Stocks — Orchids — Pigeons — 
Fowls — Primula. 

We  have  seen  that  albinos,  both  animal  and  vegetable, 
though  devoid  of  pigments,  may  yet  bear  factors  which  are 
capable  of  determining  the  quality  and  distribution  of  colour 
when  they  meet  with  colour  in  the  zygote.  Particular 
colours  may  thus  be  due  to  the  co-existence  of  several 
distinct  determining  factors,  each  with  an  independent 
distribution  among  the  germ-cells.  The  grey  of  the  rabbit 
for  instance  is  caused  by  the  presence  (i)  of  a  colour- 
element  or  elements  ;  (2)  of  a  factor  which  determines  them 
to  be  the  mixture  we  call  grey,  and  not  for  instance,  black 
or  yellow.  In  the  case  of  certain  plants  this  analysis  can 
be  carried  a  step  further,  and  the  formation  of  colour  at  all 
in  the  flowers  can  be  proved  to  depend  on  the  co-existence 
of  two  complementary  factors  in  the  individual. 

The  first  indication  of  this  phenomenon  was  found  in  the 
fact  that  two  plants  each  totally  devoid  of  colour  in  the 
flowers  and  stems,  and  each  breeding  true  to  albinism,  may 
when  crossed  together  give  purple  flowers  in  F^.  The  two 
white  parents  each  contain  a  factor  which,  alone,  is  incap- 
able of  forming  colour.  Each  of  these  factors  is  indepen- 
dently transmitted  in  gametogenesis,  and  thus  in  7%  the 
ratio  of  coloured  individuals  to  whites  is  9  :  7.  This  pro- 
portion depends  on  the  fact  that  a  series  of  16  individuals 
is  necessary  to  exhibit  all  the  possible  combinations  of 
germ-cells,  for,  as  in  any  example  of  hybridisation  involving 
two  pairs  of  allelomorphs,  there  will  be  four  types  of  female 
cell  and  four  types  of  male  cell  produced  by  F^.     Of  these 


CH.  V] 


Reversion  in  Colour 


89 


sixteen  individuals  9  will  contain  both  the  dominant  or 
present  factors,  while  of  the  remaining  7  individuals,  3  will 
contain  the  one  dominant,  3  will  contain  the  other,  and  i 
will  contain  neither.  There  will  therefore  be  9  which  are 
coloured  and  7  which  are  albino.  In  the  diagrammatic 
scheme  C  and  R  are  the  symbols  representing  the  two 
complementary  factors,  c  and  r  being  their  respective  allelo- 
morphic  absences. 


Fig.  16.  Composition  of  the  9  coloured  and  7  albino  offspring  in  F.2 
from  the  cross  between  albino  Cr  with  albino  cR,  showing  the  ratio 
9  coloured  :  7  albinos. 


Two  examples  of  this  phenomenon  have  been  studied 
in  detail.  The  first  is  that  provided  by  the  Sweet  Pea 
[Lathy 7^zis  odorahts)  which  has  formed  the  subject  of  ex- 
periments carried  on  jointly  by  Mr  Punnett  and  myself  for 
some  years. 

The  work  was  begun  by  crossing  two  white  sweet  peas 
belonging  to  the  variety  Emily  Henderson.  These  plants 
were  alike  in  every  respect  so  far  as  could  be  perceived, 
excepting  that  the  shapes  of  their  pollen  grains  differed, 
the  one  having  the  normal  long  pollen  grains  of  the  species, 
while  the  other  had  roundish  grains.  The  object  of  the 
experiment  was  to  trace  the  descent  of  the  pollen-character 
and  at  the  beginning  no  question  of  colour  was  entertained. 
When  F^  was  grown  however  it  was  clear  that  here  was  a 


90  Reversion  in  Colour  [ch. 

remarkable  opportunity  of  studying  a  reversion  in  colour 
due  to  crossing,  for  these  plants  instead  of  being  white 
were  purple  like  the  wild  Sicilian  plant  from  which  our 
cultivated  sweet  peas  are  descended. 

The  facts  respecting  the  colour  inheritance  will  now  be 
given.  With  regard  to  the  pollen-shape  it  must  suffice  at 
present  to  state  that  the  long  shape  is  a  dominant  and  the 
round  a  recessive.  The  details  as  to  the  distribution  of 
these  tw^o  shapes  among  the  /%  individuals,  which  are 
interesting  and  have  greatly  aided  the  development  of 
genetic  theory,  are  given  in  the  chapter  dealing  with  the 
phenomenon  of  "gametic  coupling."  The  present  section 
is  concerned  with  colour  only. 

When  the  reversionary  F^  generation  was  first  seen  its 
nature  was  entirely  mysterious.  When  7%  was  raised  from 
these  F^  plants  the  series  consisted  of  a  mixture  of  plants, 
some  coloured  and  some  white.  In  some  cases  the  series 
of  coloured  plants  consisted  of  two  kinds  only,  purples  like 
F^,  and  a  red  bicolour  type,  the  w^ell-known  old  variety 
called  ''  Painted  Lady." 

In  other  cases  F^  contained  besides  those  mentioned, 
two  quite  distinct  additional  types  of  purples  and  two 
corresponding  additional  types  of  reds. 

The  phenomena,  though,  as  will  be  shown,  in  reality 
very  simple,  presented  superficially  an  appearance  of  great 
complexity.  Further  difficulties  were  met  with  in  the  fact 
which  was  soon  discovered,  that  the  cross  between  long- 
pollened  whites  and  round-pollened  whites  does  not  always 
give  the  coloured  types,  but  may  result  in  ordinary  whites 
only. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  go  through  the  long  series  of  steps 
by  which  the  analysis  of  the  phenomena  was  carried  out. 
The  meaning  of  the  facts  is  now  perfectly  clear  and  they 
can  all  be  arranged  in  one  consistent  scheme. 

Of  the  two  white  parents  originally  used  the  one 
possessed  one  of  the  two  factors  we  have  called  C  and  R, 
the  other  introducing  the  other  complementary  factor.  The 
meeting  of  these  two  elements  produces  colour  in  the  flower. 
If  no  other  epistatic  factor  is  present  their  colour  is  red.  As 
a  matter  of  experiment  however  one  of  the  parents,  proved 
afterwards  to  be  that  which  had  the  long  pollen,  did  carry 


V] 


Colours  of  Sweet  Peas 


91 


such  an  epistatic  factor  whose  property  is  to  make  the 
colour  purple,  just  as  the  factor  B,  in  the  mouse,  makes  the 
coat  colour  black.  F^  was  therefore  purple,  and  7%  con- 
sisted of  27  purples  :  9  reds  :  28  whites,  as  shown  below. 
The  factor  w^hich  determines  the  colour  to  be  purple  is 
represented  as  B,  the  blue  factor. 

The  diagram  (Fig.    17)  exhibits  in  a  tabular  form  the 
composition  of  the  various  /%  plants.    The  distribution  of  the 


J]Rb9S^ 

(3R-b\5X 

CR:^y9< 

CRV/V 

CReW< 

crbVSX 

CRb'/Z 

^   Til  /  /  / 

'CrB\XX 
CRWS^ 

^CrBW< 

fCrbXXX 

.Crb/// 

^cRb// 

^RbxSo 

^rb>99< 

-Crb^X/ 

;cRbV% 

crbsSc 

CRBxx) 

CRbV/ 
tlrb^XA 

CRT^vKX 

CRB^XX 

cRVX3\X 

CRbVV 
/crbV% 

CrB 
CrB 

CrB 

Crb 

Crb 
CrB 

Crb 
Crb 

CrB 
crB 

CrB 

crb 

Crb 
crB 

Crb 
crb 

^rbW 

gRB9So 

^'RB<<5X 
gRl^^g 

^RbV>X 
CR^S^ 

/^Rb%/ 
€Rb//^ 

cRB 
cRB 

cRB 

cRb 

cRb 
cRb 

cRb 
cRB 

XcrB<x5< 

gR:^v< 

.  crl/xX/s 
CRWg< 

/crb/^/ 

crB 
cRB 

crB 
cRb 

crb 
cRB 

crb 
cRb 

kRBSXX 

B 

jRbW< 

cRB 
crB 

cRB 
crb 

cRb 
crB 

cRb 
crb 

crB 
CrB 

crB 
Crb 

crb 
CrB 

crb 
Crb 

crB 
crB 

crB 
crb 

crb 
crB 

crb 
crb 

63  :  1 


57:7 


57:  7 


15:49       63:1 


57:7 


57;  7 


15:  49 


Fig.  17.  The  F^  family  from  the  cross  white  Emily  Henderson  Sweet 
Pea,  long  poilen  X  white  ditto,  round  pollen.  The  27  cross-hatched 
squares  represent  purple  plants,  all  containing  B.  The  9  single- 
hatched  squares  without  B  are  the  reds.  The  27  squares  lacking 
either  C,  or  R,  or  both,  are  all  whites  of  various  compositions.  The 
numbers  at  the  foot  show  the  ratio  of  long  to  round  pollens  in  the 
types  of  individuals  represented  in  the  columns  above. 


92  Extracted  Whites  [ch. 

pollen-shapes  among  them  will    be  the  subject  of  further 
consideration  (Chap.  ix). 

White  (long-pollened)  x  White  (round-pollened) 
CrB  cRb 

F^ Purple 

CcRrBb 
i^2  •  •  •  2  7  purple     :     9  red     :     28  whites 

CRB  CRb  of  various  compositions,  but 

none  containing  both  Candi? 


36  :  28 

9  '-  7 

When  these  facts  are  made  out  we  have  no  longer  any 
difficulty  in  understanding  how  it  can  be  that  various  results 
may  follow  the  union  of  two  white  plants  which  would 
breed  true  to  whiteness  in  perpetuity  if  left  to  self-fertili- 
sation. For  example,  white  x  white  will  always  give  only 
whites  unless  one  of  the  complementary  factors  C  and  R  is 
present  in  each  parent.  Whites  of  the  form  Crb  and  cRb 
when  crossed  together  will  give  reds  only,  with  9  reds  to 
7  whites  in  /%.  Whites  of  the  form  CrB  and  cRB  crossed 
together  will  give  purple  in  F^,  and  in  /%  9  purples  : 
7  whites,  no  reds  being  present  in  such  a  family  because 
the  blue  factor  B  occurs  on  each  side  of  the  parentage. 

Extracted   Whites, 

We  have  so  far  represented  each  type  of  white  used  for 
a  parent  as  if  it  were  homozygous  for  those  factors,  but  of 
course  it  may  be  heterozygous  for  one  or  more  of  them,  in 
which  case  F^  will  contain  a  mixture  of  types.  For  example, 
CCrrBb  x  ccRRbb  will  give  in  F^  purples  and  reds  in  equal 
numbers.  Ccrrbb  x  ccRrbb  will  give  in  F^  a  family  consist- 
ing of  3  whites  :  i  red.  Various  other  combinations  are 
possible  and  most  of  them  have  now  been  met  with  in  the 
course  of  experiment. 

The  fact  that  the  extracted  whites,  that  is  to  say,  those 
which  appear  in  /%,  have  not  in  all  cases  the  same  pro- 
perties as  the  original  parental  types  is  readily  intelligible. 
In  the  early  stages  of  the  research  it  seemed  strange  that 
whereas  the  original  long-pollened  white  crossed  with  the 
round-pollened  white  gave  a  coloured  result,  it  was  possible 
and  indeed  more  usual  to  find  whites  exclusively  produced 
by    the    cross    of  two   extracted   7%    whites,    long-pollened 


o 

^   2 


i^ 


o 
a, 


^/     ^—"^^^iK 


'1t»' 


^ 


\ 


^"5    2 

-Q    bJO  " 

^  ^  s 

•j;:  ^  CO 

o  3  ,,, 
„  Cl  t/5 
'^  rt 

CX  -^    o 
a 

!N       (U         !-l 

I/)     —    "^ 


> 


'^^SSSSte*^* 


J' 


MO 


o 


T3 


O 

o 


c  ^  "-^    t^ 


Q-  — 


u 

'3, 
;-> 

3 
CU 

<L> 

J3 


-J    ^  ■£    c 


/ . 


'^ 

d\ 

> 

X 

, 

>> 

,    "■ 

Cu 

P-U 

*-< 

t/5 

's 

bJO 

0) 

w 

t/i 

n: 

-:3 

c 

r^ 

o 

t/5 

r" 

^ 

ci 

"oJ 

. 

o 

1-4 

trt 

00 

a 

V]  Colours  of  Sweet  Peas  93 

and  round-pollened  respectively,  which  outwardly  were 
indistinguishable  from  the  two  original  parents.  As  we 
now  know,  by  the  redistribution  of  factors  a  great  variety 
of  whites  is  in  reality  produced  in  /%,  and  only  those  pairs 
which  bear  the  complementary  factors  C  and  R  can  give 
coloured  offspring.  This  apparent  dissimilarity  between 
the  behaviour  of  the  extracted  forms  and  that  of  the  pure 
types  from  which  they  are  derived  has  been  adduced  as 
being  inconsistent  with  Mendelian  principles.  When  how- 
ever the  factorial  composition  of  the  various  individuals  is 
correctly  represented  it  is  evident  that  this  multiplicity  of 
composition  in  /%  is  what  must  be  expected,  and  there  is 
abundant  evidence  that  such  complications  exist  in  all  the 
plants  and  animals  that  have  been  experimentally  studied 
on  an  adequate  scale ^. 

Subordinate   Types  in  F^. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  meaning  of  the  appearance 
of  subordinate  types  in  the  purple  and  in  the  red  classes 
which  is  a  feature  of  some  F.,  families.  Of  these  there 
are  frequently  two.  The  first  is  characterized  by  having 
the  wing-petals  much  more  fully  coloured  than  those  of  the 
F^  purple,  or  of  the  Painted  Lady.  These  distinctions  are 
due  to  the  operation  of  an  epistatic  factor  for  the  lighter 
wing-colour.  When  this  factor  is  absent  the  wings  are 
dark,  and  the  flower,  if  a  purple,  has  the  wings  deep  purple 

*  Factors  which  may  thus  exist  without  making  their  presence  visible 
have  been  named  by  Tschermak  "  Cryptomeres."  The  term  is  open  to 
the  objection  which  zoologists  especially  will  feel,  that  it  may  cause  con- 
fusion owing  to  the  fact  that  the  series  of  words  containing  "mere "are 
now  universally  understood  to  refer  to  phenomena  of  division — or  Meristic 
features.  When  the  study  of  that  part  of  genetics  which  is  concerned  with 
meristic  variation  is  more  fully  developed  this  confusion  will  be  aggravated. 
For  the  present  moreover  the  expression  "factor,"  qualified,  if  necessary, 
as  unseen,  seems  sufficiently  precise. 

The  words  "latent"  and  "latency"  must  be  applied  in  these  cases 
with  great  care,  if  at  all.  Various  writers  have,  for  instance,  spoken  of  the 
purple  colour  as  "  latent "  in  a  white  flower.  This  description  is  quite 
misleading,  for  the  colour  need  not  be  present  in  such  plants.  The  term 
"latent"  is  only  admissible  in  application  to  X\\q factors  (as  here,  to  the 
factor  which  can  turn  the  colouring  matters  purple)  not  to  the  characters^ 
except  loosely  to  those  which  are  actually  present  but  hidden  owing  to  the 
operation  of  some  epistatic  factor. 


94  Colottrs  of  Sweet  Peas  [ch. 

Instead  of  a  light  purplish  blue.  Similarly  reds  having  the 
factor  for  light-wing  are  Painted  Lady,  If  without  It  are  of 
the  type  called  Miss  Hunt,  with  wings  of  a  full  pink. 

Another  pair  of  subordinate  classes  is  due  to  the 
absence  of  a  factor  for  whole-colour.  When  this  factor  is 
absent  the  purples  become  purple  picotees,  with  an 
edging  of  colour  on  a  white  ground,  and  the  reds  become 
w^hat  we  have  called  "tinged  whites"  ;  a  type  with  a  little 
pink  in  the  standard  only.  The  purple  picotees,  when 
the  bud  Is  just  opening,  have  a  purple  edge  to  the 
standard  and  a  blue  edge  to  the  wings,  these  edges  being 
all  that  remains  of  the  colours  proper  to  these  parts 
In  whole-coloured  purple.  The  "tinged  w^hite,"  which  is 
really  a  red  picotee,  has  the  red  of  the  Painted  Lady 
standard  reduced  to  a  few  pink  lines  in  the  centre  of  the 
standard.  Both  these  picotee  forms,  like  the  picotees  of 
tulips  and  most  other  flowers,  acquire  a  more  general  flush 
of  colour  as  the  flower  ages.  These  various  types  are 
Illustrated  in  the  coloured  plate  (Plate  III),  from  which  their 
peculiarities  will  be  easily  appreciated.  Among  the  picotees 
of  course  there  are  two  types  of  purples  and  two  types  of 
reds,  diflering  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  factor  for 
light  wing,  but  In  forms  so  nearly  w^hlte  these  differences 
are  evasive,  and  we  have  not  found  it  possible  to  classify 
the  picotee  class  In  respect  of  these  distinctions. 

It  Is  to  be  observed  that  the  simultaneous  appearance 
of  the  subordinate  types  In  each  of  the  classes  is  a  charac- 
teristic and  necessary  feature  of  the  normal  Mendelian 
processes.  It  would  be  impossible,  for  instance,  to  make  a 
plant  which  could  throw  purple  picotees  In  F^  without 
red  picotees.  If  the  family  contain  both  purples  and  reds. 
Conversely,  If  the  plants  throw  purples  and  reds,  and  also 
whole-colours  and  picotees,  then  both  kinds  must  be  repre- 
sented In  both  classes.  In  any  examination  of  7%  families, 
so  soon  as  one  pair  of  large  classes  can  be  recognized  and 
one  subordinate  type  perceived  In  one  of  them,  search 
should  be  made  In  the  other  class  In  order  to  find  the 
corresponding  subordinate  type  in  It  also.  If  In  one  class 
a  type  exists  which  is  never  to  be  found  In  the  other  class 
though  a  long  series  has  been  examined,  some  complication 
is  to  be  suspected,  but  whether  the  phenomenon  is  due  to 


V]  Colours  of  Stocks  95 

coupling  or  to  some  other  cause  can  only  be  decided  by  the 
circumstances  of  the  special  case  (see,  for  example,  the  case 
of  Stocks,  in  which  plants  with  hoary  leaves  are  wanting  in 
the  classes  w^ithout  sap-colour  in  the  flower  (Chap,  viii), 
and  the  distribution  of  the  hooded  standard  among  Sweet 
Peas  (Chap.  ix)). 

Coloicrs  of  Stocks  [Mattkiola). 

The  experiments  of  Miss  E.  R.  Saunders  have  revealed 
a  closely  similar  inter-relationship  between  the  various 
colour-types  in  Stocks.  There  also  coloured  F^  is  produced 
by  crossing  two  types  both  destitute  of  sap-colour.  The 
tw^o  types  giving  this  result  are  white  and  cream.  The 
pale  yellow  of  the  cream  is  due  not  to  sap-colour  but  to 
chromoplasts,  and  thus  the  two  types  are  as  regards  sap- 
colour  both  albinos.  In  this  case  also  F^  has  the  common 
purple  flower  which  we  may  regard  as  reversionary '^,  and  in 
/%  there  appear  both  purples  and  reds.  These  results  can 
be  represented  exactly  like  those  in  the  Sweet  Pea  case. 
The  sap-colour  is  due  to  the  meeting  of  complementary 
factors,  C  and  R,  derived  from  the  two  parents  respectively. 
In  the  absence  of  the  "blue"  factor  B,  the  colour  produced 
by  CR  is  red,  but  when  B  is  present  the  colour  is  purple. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  it  can  easily  be  proved  that  B  is  intro- 
duced by  the  original  white  parent ;  for  when  a  red  is 
crossed  with  the  white,  F^  is  purple,  but  when  a  red  is 
crossed  with  a  cream,  F^  is  red,  showing  that  the  cream  is 
devoid  of  B,  but  that  the  white  possesses  it. 

The  numbers  in  F^^  are  also  on  the  plan  described  for 
the  Sweet  Pea.  The  total  of  sap-coloured  plants  to  the 
total  of  non-sap-coloured  (whites -f  creams)  averages  9  :  7, 
and  w^hen  the  proportion  of  purples  to  reds  is  also  repre- 
sented the  ratio  is 

27  purples  :  9  reds  :  28  whites  and  creams. 

Just  as  in  the  Sweet  Pea  again  there  is  a  series  of 
subordinate  types  among  the  purples  in  /%»  ^"^d  a  corre- 
sponding series  of  types  among  the  reds.  For  example, 
there  is  a  dilute  form  of  purple  which   the  horticulturists 

*  As  will  be   described   later,  in   this   case   when   both   parents  have 
glabrous  leaves,  F^  reverts  to  the  hoary  leaves  of  the  original  type. 


96  Reversion  in  Orchids  [ch. 

call  ''plum,"  and  a  dilute  form  of  red  which  is  known  as 
"  copper,"  &c.  Any  of  these  colours  may  be  on  a  white 
ground,  or  on  a  cream  ground"^. 


Albino   Orchids  giving  Coloured  F^, 

In  Orchids  a  series  of  facts  has  been  observed  which 
are  exactly  comparable  with  those  described  in  the  Sweet 
Peas  and  Stocks.  There  are  several  albino  orchids  in  the 
genus  Cypripedium.  Of  these  some  when  crossed  together 
give  coloured  offspring,  and  others  crossed  together  give 
albinos  only.  Mr  Hurst t  most  kindly  furnished  me  with  a 
complete  list  of  the  results  of  crossing  albino  Orchids  so  far 
as  they  have  been  published.  This  list  covers  a  very  wide 
range  of  cases  to  which  no  reference  can  be  made  here.  As 
regards  Cypripedium  most  of  the  experiments  were  made 
by  Mr  N.  C.  Cookson  of  Wylam.  I  am  much  Indebted  to 
him  and  to  his  gardener  Mr  H.  J.  Chapman  for  Information 
about  them.      For  example  : 

C  callosum  Sanderae  x  C  bellatuhtm  albmn  gives  all 
offspring  coloured  (25  plants  bred  by  Mr  Cookson). 

C  Lawrenceanum  Hyeanum  x  C  bellatulum  album,  all 
offspring  coloured  (Cookson). 

On  the  other  hand 

C  Lawrenceanum  Hyeanurn  x  C  callostim  Sanderae 
gives  offspring  all  albinos  (viz.  C  ''  Maudiae'')  (raised 
by  Messrs  Charlesworth  and  independently  by  Baron 
Schroder). 

If  therefore  we  suppose  that  bellatulum  album  is  carrying 
one  of  the  complementary  factors,  say  C,  and  that  the  other 
factor  R  is  present  in  callositm.  Sanderae  and  In  Lawrence- 
anum Hyeanum,  the  results  are  correctly  and  consistently 
represented. 

As  regards  the  behaviour  of  the  pure  types  however  there 
is  one  occurrence  to  be  recorded  which  cannot  be  explained. 
Of  the  albinos  named  above,  one,  callosum  Sanderae  has 

■^  Though  all  the  various  combinations  occur  it  is  probable  that  the 
distribution  of  white  and  cream  is  by  no  means  a  simple  one,  but  the 
analysis  of  the  inter-relationship  between  white  and  cream  has  not  yet 
been  worked  out  completely. 

t  See  also  Hurst,  Gard.  Chron.  Feb.  6,  1909,  p.  81. 


v]  Reversion  in  Orchids  97 

been  self-fertilised  and  gave  albinos  only,  as  must  be  ex- 
pected. Lawrenceanum  Hyeanum  when  selfed,  gave  14 
albinos,  but  in  addition,  one  coloii7^ed plmit,  which  Mr  Cook- 
son  tells  me  cannot  be  thought  to  have  resulted  from  error. 
Such  an  occurrence  is  as  yet  unaccountable,  but  otherwise 
all  is  clear. 

In  addition  to  the  cases  given  above  there  are  many  in 
which  C.  insigjie  Sajideriantim  and  insigne  Sa7iderae  were 
used,  but  Mr  Hurst  tells  me  that  of  these  the  latter  is 
certainly  a  tinged  type,  while  the  former  has  some  dark 
hairs  on  its  petals  which  may  contain  sap-colour.  Some  of 
the  crosses  with  these  types  gave  reversionary  offspring, 
and  others  gave  various  whites. 

The  genus  Cattleya  provides  another  list  of  comparable 
cases.     For  instance 

C.  Mossiae  Wagenerix  C.  Gaskelliana  alba  gave  4  albinos 

(Hye). 

,,  „         X  C  intermedia  alba  gave  14  albinos 

(Holford). 

C.  Schrdderae  alba      x  C.    intermedia  alba   gave   coloured 

offspring  (Cookson). 

C.  Gaskelliana  alba     x  C .  Ha7^7'iso7t2ana  alba g^iv^/^coXovw^d 

plants  (Thwaites). 

,,  „  X  C  War7ieri  alba  gave  5  albinos  and 

2  coloured  plants  (Peeters). 

From  these  statements  it  may  with  great  probability  be 
inferred  that  the  albinism  of  Mossiae  Wagene7H,  Gaskelliana 
alba  and  i7ite7'77tedia  alba  is  due  to  the  absence  of  one  factor 
(say  C)  ;  that  in  Ha7^7dso7iia7ia  alba  and  Schrdde7^ae  alba  it 
is  the  other  complementary  factor  which  is  wanting  (say  R) ; 
and  that  Wa7'7ie7''i  alba  is  heterozygous  for  the  presence  of 
one  of  them  (being  Rr,  on  this  scheme).  It  is  to  be  hoped 
that  some  Orchid  grower  will  make  the  various  unknown 
combinations  and  extend  the  series. 

There  are,  besides  the  cases  enumerated,  many  instances 
in  Cyp7'ipediu77i,  Cattleya,  and  other  genera,  of  various 
tinged  types  breeding  true  when  self-fertilised  and  giving 
reversionary  coloured  offspring  when  crossed. 

B.  H.  7 


98  Comparison  between  [ch. 

The  Case  of  Antirrhinum  {Snapdragon^ 

The  experiments  of  Miss  Wheldale  (303)  on  Antir- 
rhinmn  show  that  in  that  plant  the  appearance  of  the  red 
and  magenta  flower-colours  is  similarly  dependent  on  the 
presence  of  two  complementary  factors.  In  one  respect, 
however,  this  case  differs  from  those  which  we  have  been 
considering  ;  for  whereas  in  them  either  of  the  two  colour- 
factors,  spoken  of  as  C  and  R,  might  be  present  in  a  truly 
white-flowered  plant,  it  appears  that  in  Antirrhinum  one  of 
the  two  factors  produces  either  a  bright  yellow  or  a  very  pale 
''  ivory  "  yellow  in  the  flowers.  The  other  complementary 
factor  may  be  present  in  actual  whites.  Hence  magentas 
or  reds  may  be  produced  by  the  cross  between  white  and 
yellowy  or  white  and  ivory,  but  hitherto  crosses  between 
actual  whites  have  not  given  coloured  offspring.  If  in  the 
Sweet  Pea  for  instance  the  presence  of  C  caused  the  flowers 
to  be  ivory  instead  of  white  the  case  would  be  like  that  of 
Antirrhinum.  At  first  sight  it  might  be  supposed  that  the 
phenomenon  seen  mMatthioia  (Stocks),  where  white  x  cream 
gives  F^  with  anthocyan  colours,  was  more  strictly  parallel, 
but  in  the  Stock  the  cream  is  a  plastid-colour,  whereas  in 
Antirrhinum  the  ivory  is  a  true  sap -colour. 

It  is  a  noticeable  and  rather  unexpected  feature  in  the 
case  of  Antirrhinum  that  the  pale  ivory  is  due  to  a  factor 
epistatic  on  the  bright  yellow.  The  ivory  is  so  pale  that  it 
might  on  casual  examination  be  described  as  white  ;  never- 
theless it  is  definitely  and  completely  dominant  to  the  bright 
yellow  type. 

Ivory  crossed  with  white  gives  F-^  magenta-red  but 
yellow  crossed  with  the  same  white  gives  F^  crimson-red. 
The  distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of  red  is  due  to  the 
factor  which  turns  bright  yellow  into  ivory. 

A  comparison  between  the  Sweet  Peas  or  Stocks  on  the 
one  hand  and  Antirrhimtm  on  the  other,  may  be  represented 
in  tabular  form.  Using  a  terminology  applicable  to  both 
cases  let  us  designate  the  factors  thus^  : 

Presence  and  absence  of  the  "ferment."     F,  f. 

"Chromogen."     C,  c. 
„  ,,  ,,  ,,        Epistatic  factor.     E,  e. 

*  In  the  previous  discussion  of  the  Sweet  Pea  the  factors  /^and  E  are 
designated  R  and  B  respectively. 


Sweet  Pea 

Fee 

white 

fCe 

white 

fcE 

white 

fCE 

white 

FCe 

red 

FCE 

purple 

V]  Antirrhintim  and  Sweet  Peas  99 

The  following  appearances  will  then  be  produced  in  the 
flowers  by  the  various  combinations. 

Antirrhmum 

white 

yellow 

white 

ivory 

crimson-red 

magenta-red. 

As  regards  the  distribution  of  the  pigments  over  the 
parts  of  the  flower,  many  facts  of  importance  have  been 
discovered  (see  original  papers).  Several  distinct  factors 
are  involved,  and  by  careful  analysis  Miss  Wheldale  has 
been  able  to  show  that  almost  all  the  heterozygotes  can  be 
recognized  and  distinguished  from  the  corresponding  homo- 
zygotes.  The  degree  to  which  it  has  been  found  possible 
to  effect  the  genetic  analysis  of  the  types  m  Antirrhinum  is 
very  remarkable.  At  first  sight  the  series  of  forms  appears 
to  consist  of  numberless  intergrading  tints,  but  by  continued 
experiment  Miss  Wheldale  has  succeeded  in  disentangling 
the  various  genetic  combinations  and  showing  the  factorial 
composition  of  almost  all.  Even  as  regards  the  inheritance 
of  striping  an  approximate  factorial  representation  has  been 
worked  out,  though  from  the  fact  that  striped  types  may 
occasionally  have  self-coloured  offspring  this  part  of  the 
analysis  must  still  remain  incomplete. 

Needless  to  say  there  is  as  yet  no  system  of  colour- 
reproduction,  whether  by  lithography  or  photography,  which 
can  be  applied  with  accuracy  sufficient  to  represent  the 
various  tones  of  colour,  and  for  the  most  part  the  work 
is  unpublished. 

Reversion  on   €7^0 s sing :  the  Nature  of  Variation. 

From  the  facts  now  before  us  a  clear  conception  may  be 
formed  of  the  meaning  of  reversion  occurring  in  conse- 
quence of  a  cross.  This  phenomenon  is  due  to  the  meeting 
together  of  factors  which  are  complementary  to  each  other, 
and  must  be  together  present  in  order  that  the  original  or 
reversionary  type  may  reappear.  We  have  seen  how  in 
the  mouse  or  rabbit  the  wild  grey  type  is  reproduced  when 

7—2 


loo  Reversion  in  Pigeons  [ch. 

a  black  is  crossed  with  an  albino  bearing  the  factor  G, 
greyness.  Here  the  reversion  is  due  to  the  meeting  of 
this  factor  with  the  colour-element  present  in  the  black 
animal.  The  case  of  the  Sweet  Pea  or  the  Stock,  when 
two  colourless  types  crossed  together  produce  coloured  F^ 
is  of  exactly  the  same  nature,  except  in  so  far  as  both  of 
the  complementary  factors  are  in  this  case  imperceptible 
until  they  meet  each  other.  The  occurrence  of  the  ratio  9 
coloured  viz.  reversionary  :  7  uncoloured  is  a  proof  of  the 
correctness  of  this  mode  of  representing  the  facts. 

When  reversion  is  correctly  represented  we  are  led  on 
to  form  some  mental  picture  of  the  essential  nature  of  a 
variation.  It  must  occur  by  the  omission  or  by  the  intro- 
duction of  a  factor. 

Reversion  in  Pigeons. 

In  connection  with  the  reversion  produced  by  crossing 
two  white  individuals  the  famous  case  of  pigeons  may  be 
considered,  though  in  that  example  one  parent  was  coloured. 

Darwin  was  the  first  to  draw  attention  prominently  to 
such  phenomena,  and  the  experiments  which  he  made 
consequent  on  a  hint  given  by  Boitard  and  Corbie  have 
long  been  classical.  In  these  experiments  the  blue  colour 
with  black  bars  resembling  the  colour  of  the  wild  rock 
pigeon  {Columba  livid)  was  reproduced  as  a  result  of  cross- 
ing birds  quite  free  from  such  characteristics.  Darwin's 
experiments  were  very  complicated"^.  He  was  concerned 
only  with  the  question  of  origin,  and  to  provide  a  qualitative 
demonstration  that  the  peculiarities  of  the  blue  rock  pigeon 
could  be  reproduced  from  modern  varieties  which  had 
ostensibly  lost  them. 

Mr  Staples-Browne  (255)  has  recently  investigated  the 
matter  afresh  in  a  simpler  case.  He  crossed  a  Black  Barb 
with  a  White  F'antail,  producing  F^  black  with  some  white 
feathers.  From  such  F^  birds  /%  was  produced,  consisting 
of 

Blacks.  Blacks  Blues.  Blues  Whites, 

with  white  with  white 

feathers.  feathers. 

*  Animals  and  Plants,  ed.  2,  1885,  i.  p.  207. 


v]  Doininant  and  Recessive  IVhites  loi 

The  numbers  were  not  sufficient  to  give  the  ratio 
definitely,  but  it  was  estabhshed  by  subsequent  breeding 
that  the  whites  bred  true  ;  that  the  blues  did  not  throw 
blacks  ;  but  some  at  least  of  the  blacks  could  throw  blues. 
The  blues  breed  true  except  in  so  far  as  they  may  throw 
whites'^. 

We  have  then  the  fact  that  a  reversionary  type  was 
produced,  but  that  it  did  not  appear  till  F^.  The  meaning 
of  this  is  obviously  that  the  blue  cannot  appear  in  F^ 
because  black  is  epistatic  to  it.  The  elements  necessary  to 
produce  blue  are  all  present  in  F^,  but  in  it  black  also  is 
present  which  conceals  the  blue.  After  the  re-combinations, 
some  F.^  forms  contain  the  blue  group  of  elements  without 
black,  and  these  are  therefore  blue.  We  do  not  know  in 
this  case  that  the  Black  Barb  itself  did  not  contain  all  that 
is  necessary  to  the  production  of  blue,  and  it  is  thus  possible 
that  the  reversion  on  crossing  may  here  be  only  a  pheno- 
menon of  re-combination.  This  could  only  be  decided  by  a 
long  statistical  analysis. 

Genetic  Prope^^ties  of  White  Types  which  are  not  Albinos 
{Fowls  and  Primtcla).     Do77tinant  and  Recessive  Whites. 

Albinism,  namely  total  deficiency  of  colour,  as  we  have 
seen,  is  always  recessive  to  the  presence  of  colour f.  In 
contrast  with  real  albinos,  the  white  forms  which  contain 
pigment  in  some  part  of  their  organisation  show  various 
phenomena  of  colour-inheritance.  Among  both  animals 
and  plants  such  types  are  known.  For  example,  races  of 
pigs,  cats,  mice,  cattle,  dogs  and  fowls  exist  in  which  the 
skin,  hair  or  feathers  are  white,  or  nearly  so,  though  the 
eye  is  pigmented.  The  ''white"  races  of  mankind  perhaps 
belong  to  the  same  category  in  some  respects.  Our  know- 
ledge of  the  genetic  behaviour  of  most  of  these  types  as 
regards  pigmentation  is  still  fragmentary,  but  what  little  is 
known  points  to  the  existence  of  considerable  complications. 

Respecting  white  poultry,  however,  several  features  have 
been  ascertained  w^hich  are  interesting.      In  them  we  meet 

■*■  Apparently  only  those  blacks  and  blues  which  had  some  white 
feathers  were  capable  of  throwing  whites. 

t  In  Axolotl  (see  p.  43)  an  alleged  exception  is  recorded. 


I02  White  Foiiuls  [ch. 

a  series  of  facts  which  perhaps,  better  than  any  other, 
illustrate  the  impossibility  of  understanding  the  significance 
of  genetic  phenomena  without  minute  individual  analysis. 

In  poultry  we  know  at  least  four  different  sorts  of  white 
plumage,  each  with  its  own  special  properties.  As  far  as 
external  appearances  of  the  adults  go  there  is  little  or 
nothing  which  would  lead  an  observer  to  suspect  that  the 
genetic  powers  or  capabilities  of  these  four  types  were 
entirely  distinct  in  respect  of  colour. 

In  the  first  type  the  white  acts  as  a  dominant.  Generally 
speaking  when  a  purely  white  variety  such  as  White  Leg- 
horn is  crossed  with  a  coloured  variety,  such  as  Indian 
Game  or  Brown  Leghorn,  F^  is,  in  the  newly  hatched 
condition,  white  with  a  few  specks  of  black.  The  black 
then  present  may  be  confined  to  a  single  hair,  but  we  have 
met  very  few  instances  of  total  absence  of  such  a  speck  or 
"tick"  as  it  is  called.  As  the  dov/n  is  replaced  by  feathers 
similar  ticks  of  black  and  brown  appear  in  them.  The 
position  and  amount  of  the  ticks  in  the  feathers  bear  no 
obvious  relation  to  the  down-ticks.  These  F^  birds,  however, 
at  all  ages  are  substantially  white  birds,  the  amount  of 
colour  though  definite,  being  almost  always  insignificant. 
Exceptions  occur  in  the  case  of  cocks,  which  sometimes 
have  enough  red  in  the  wings  to  bring  them  into  the 
category  called  by  fanciers  ''pile,"  though  they  are  of  the 
usual  white  in  the  downy  stage. 

We  may  thus  speak  of  White  Leghorn  as  a  dominant 
white.  /%  from  such  an  F^  generation  consists  of  a  great 
variety  of  colours,  the  relations  of  which  have  not  been 
worked  out. 

But  among  the  derivatives  from  various  matings^  which 
Mr  Punnett  and  I  have  carried  out  white  birds  have  been 
produced  which  are,  so  far  as  their  whiteness  is  concerned, 
simple  recessives  to  colour.  Sometimes,  but  not  always,  they 
have  ticks  of  grey  colour.  These  recessive  whites  breed 
true  to  whiteness  as  the  White  Leghorns  do,  and  no  one 
looking  at  them  would  doubt  for  a  moment  that  they  were 
moderate  specimens  of  that  breed. 

In   addition   to    these   the  white    of   White    Rosecomb 

*  These  birds  arose  from  a  mixture  of  Brown  Leghorn,  White  Dorking 
and  Indian  Game.     See  Rep.  Evol.  Ctee,  in.  p.  19. 


Plate  IV 


4    % 


1.  Hen  of  Recessive  White  strain. 

2.  Hen  of  Silky  breed. 

3  and  4.     Cock  and  hen,  Fi  from  the  cross  between  Recessive  V^hitt^ 
hen  X  Silky  cock. 


V]  White  Fowls  103 

Bantams  is  also  a  recessive.  Strictly  speaking  perhaps 
this  breed  should  not  be  called  white.  Though  appearing 
white  on  casual  inspection,  more  careful  examination  always, 
I  believe,  reveals  the  presence  of  one  or  more  ticks  of  grey 
colour.  These  flecks  of  grey  colour  may  be  extremely 
minute,  but  in  our  experience  are  never  absent.  The  down, 
too,  of  the  breed  is  of  a  faint  bluish  or  smoky  colour,  though 
there  is  no  such  smokiness  in  the  adult  plumage. 

Lastly  we  have  to  consider  the  white  of  White  Silky 
fowls,  which  is  again  a  recessive  to  colour.  The  adult 
Silky  is  pure  w^hite  as  a  rule,  but  like  the  White  Rosecomb, 
the  down  of  the  chickens  has  some  colour  usually  (though 
perhaps  not  always).  The  colour  in  this  case  however  is 
btoff,  not  blue  or  black,  and  it  occurs  on  the  sides  of  the 
head,  in  the  region  of  the  pale  stripes  of  striped  chickens, 
and  on  the  rump. 

To  resume:  there  are  four  kinds  of  whites. 

(i)  Dominant  white  of  White  Leghorns.  A  pure 
white. 

(2)  Recessive  white  of  our  own  derivative  strain. 

(3)  Recessive  white  of  Rosecomb  Bantams. 

(4)  Recessive  white  of  Silky  fowls. 

Crossed  with  coloured  breeds  such  as  Brown  Leghorn 

(i)  gives  white  birds  with  a  little  colour. 

(2),  (3)  and  (4)  give  wholly  coloured  birds  with  the 
pigmentation  of  the  plumage  as  fully  de- 
veloped as  in  any  coloured  breeds. 

The  next  point  concerns  the  relations  of  the  various 
Recessive  whites  with  each  other,  and  is  of  considerable 
,  interest.  Our  experiments  have  shown  that  the  cross 
between  Recessive  whites  (2)  or  (4)  and  the  Silky  gives 
exclusively  whole-coloured  birds  \xi  F^.  In  /%  such  birds 
give  9  whole-coloured  to  7  whites.  Of  the  7  whites  some 
have  white  down  like  the  Recessive  white  (2),  while  others 
have  buff  in  the  down  like  the  Silky  (4)^.  The  appearance 
of  coloured  F^  from  two  whites,  with  9  coloured  :  7  white  in 
/^2,  is  obviously  a  phenomenon  comparable  with  that  which 
has  been  described  in  the  Sweet  Peas  and  Stocks.  The 
two  white  types  (2  and  4)  evidendy  contain  complementary 

*  The  numerical  relations  of  these  two  forms  are  not  yet  clear. 


I04  IVhite  Fowls  [ch. 

factors  which  must  be  together  present  in  the  zygote  in 
order  that  colour  should  be  produced.  The  colour  of  the 
F^  birds  is  practically  Black-red,  approaching  closely  to  the 
plumage  of  Gallus  bankiva  (see  Plate  IV). 

It  might  a  priori  be  expected  that  since  the  White 
Rosecomb  (3)  has  very  distinct  though  light  pigmentation 
in  its  down,  a  cross  between  this  and  the  Silky  (4)  would 
be  more  likely  to  give  a  coloured  F^.  This,  nevertheless, 
is  not  the  case.  The  cross  between  these  two  breeds  is  an 
ordinary  white,  showing  that  no  reliance  whatever  can  be 
placed  on  such  considerations,  and  that  experiment  alone 
can  decide  what  properties  the  several  types  possess. 

The  whiteness  of  the  recessive  whites  is  thus  due  to 
the  absentee  of  one  of  the  elements  needed  for  the  de- 
velopment of  colour.  Analytical  experiments  show  on  the 
contrary  that  the  white  of  the  dominant  white  ( 1 )  is  not 
due  essentially  to  the  absence  of  an  element  but  to  the 
preseitce  of  a  factor  which  prevents  the  development  of 
colour.  Thus,  if  X  and  Y  are  the  two  complementary 
factors  which  produce  colour,  the  one  recessive  white  is 
Xy  and  the  other  is  xY.  The  dominant  white  (i)  has  the 
suppressing  factor  5,  and  as  the  result  of  many  experiments 
it  appears  that  the  individuals  of  that  breed  have  various 
compositions  in  respect  of  X  and  K,  though  always 
homozygous  for  5". 

Hence    it    follows    that    when    Dominant   white   (i)   is 

crossed  with  Recessive  white  (2),  F^  is  white;  but  /%  may, 

and   in   our  experience  always    does,    give  some   coloured 

birds.      The   proportion    in    which    the    coloured    F^  birds 

appear  must  of  course  depend  on  the  composition  of  the 

individual  dominant  white  which  was  originally  introduced, 

and   various  ratios    occur.      The    numbers   obtained  show 

that  of  the  dominant  whites  some  are  Xx  Yy  SS,  another 

contained  only  one  of   the  colour-factors  and  so   may   be 

written  Xxyy  SS.      Probably  all  the  possible  combinations 

occur,  but  the  experiment  has  not  been  carried  far  enough 

to  prove  that  they  do"^. 

*  The  difference  in  size  between  Recessive  white  (2)  and  the  White 
Rosecomb  is  so  considerable  that  the  direct  cross  between  these  two 
cannot  be  made.  But  F^  from  White  Rosecomb  x  Silky  has  been  crossed 
with  (2)  and  the  offspring  were  in  about  equal  numbers  whites  and  browns. 
There  is  therefore  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  factor  carried  by  the 
Silky  and  by  the  Rosecomb  is  the  same.     Either  both  have  X,  or  both  V. 


V]  Dominant  IVhites  105 

The  facts  thus  take  their  places  in  a  consistent  scheme, 
and  when  the  factors  are  correctly  determined,  all  the 
observed  properties  of  the  several  types  can  be  represented. 
Some  curious  consequences  follow  which  would  have  ap- 
peared very  surprising  both  to  evolutionists  and  to  fanciers 
a  few  years  ago.  For  example,  if  a  pair  of  coloured  birds 
throw  very  few  whites  the  chances  are  large  that  these 
whites  if  mated  together  will  breed  true.  On  the  other 
hand  if  a  pair  of  coloured  birds  throw  many  whites,  the 
chances  are  that  such  whites  if  bred  together  will  have 
some  coloured  offspring,  and  it  is  not  very  unlikely  that  all 
their  offspring  will  be  coloured !  For  in  the  first  case  where 
the  whites  are  few,  they  are  probably  i  in  4,  indicating 
that  both  parents  are  homozygous  in  either  X  or  Y,  say  X, 
and  heterozygous  in  respect  of  the  other  factor  Y.  There- 
fore all  the  whites  which  come  will  be  carrying  X  and  none 
will  have  K.  Therefore  they  will  breed  true  to  whiteness 
if  mated  together. 

In  the  second  case  however,  where  the  whites  are 
many,  they  are  probably  7  whites  :  9  coloured.  In  such 
a  case  the  parents  must  be  heterozygous  both  in  X  and  in 
Y.  Consequently  some  of  the  whites  will  be  bearing  X 
and  others  Y,  and  there  will  be  a  good  chance  that  if  such 
whites  are  bred  together  these  two  complementary  factors 
will  again  come  into  combination  and  coloured  offspring  be 
produced. 

Among  plants  only  one  example  of  dominance  of  white 
flower-colour  over  the  ordinary  sap-colours  has  yet  been 
investigated.  This  occurs  in  Prwiula  Sinensis.  In  this 
species  colour  may  be  present  either  in  the  flowers,  or  in 
the  stems  and  leaves,  or  in  both.  When  white  flowers 
occur  on  stems  green  and  devoid  of  pigment,  the  white  is 
recessive  as  in  any  other  case  of  total  albinism.  There  are 
however  white  varieties  which  have  more  or  less  red  in 
the  stems,  and  these  when  crossed  with  varieties  having 
coloured  flowers  give  F^  with  flowers  white  or  nearly  so. 
There  is  almost  but  not  quite  always  a  slight  tinge  of 
magenta-red  in  the  petals  of  such  F^  plants,  and  the  in- 
tensity of  this  colour  increases  with  low  temperatures  but 
diminishes  if  the  house  be  kept  warm. 

Such  dominant   whites,   when  crossed   with  the  green- 


io6  Dominant  Whites  [ch.  v 

stemmed  recessive  whites,  give  a  white-flowered  F^  with  a 
reddish  stem.  The  /%  generation  from  this  cross  has 
contained  a  small  number  of  plants  with  coloured  flowers, 
but  the  ratio  has  not  yet  been  determined.  There  is  an 
obvious  general  agreement  between  this  case  and  that 
described  in  fowls,  and  we  may  feel  fairly  sure  that  the 
Primula  colours  similarly  depend  on  two  colour-factors,  and 
that  the  absence  of  colour  in  the  dominant  whites  is  due  to 
the  super-imposition  of  a  third  factor"^. 

*  The  white-flowered  variety  of  Matthiola  incana  (Stock)  is  as  regards 
its  genetic  behaviour,  a  coloured  form.  Moreover  its  flowers  tinge  on 
fading  and  its  embryos  have  the  deep  green  colour  characteristic  of  purple- 
flowered  types.  Crossed  with  a  self-coloured  type  it  gives  F^  with  purple 
flowers.  Clearly  therefore  it  is  not,  as  some  of  the  tinged  forms  of  Pritnula 
Sinensis*  2irt,  a  dominant  white.  Miss  Wheldale  has  suggested  with  some 
plausibility  that  the  white  M.  incana  is  comparable  with  the  picotee  types 
of  Sweet  Peas. 


CHAPTER   VI 

HEREDITY   OF   COLOUR— continued. 

Eye-Colours.     Variations  in  Colour  of  the  Iris — Deficieficy 
of  Eye-Pigments  in  some  Coloured  Types. 

The  colours  of  eyes  present  some  special  genetic  pro- 
blems which  are  worth  examining  in  detail. 

Pigments  are  formed  in  several  parts  of  the  vertebrate 
eye,  but  chiefly  in  the  choroid  and  the  iris.  In  all  normal 
eyes  the  choroid  contains  much  deep  black  pigment,  and  to 
this  fact  the  blackness  of  the  pupil  is  of  course  due.  The 
common  differences  in  eye-colour  with  which  we  are  familiar 
in  man  are  not  caused  by  changes  in  the  colour  of  the  pupil 
but  by  variations  in  the  structure  and  pigmentation  of  the 
iris  alone.  Such  differences,  being  conspicuous  factors  in 
individual  and  racial  differentiation,  have  long  attracted  the 
attention  of  anthropologists.  With  the  object  of  elucidating 
the  heredity  of  eye-colours  extensive  pedigrees  were 
collected  by  Galton,  and  biometrical  studies  of  a  similar 
kind  have  been  published  by  Professor  Pearson  and  his 
assistants.  Various  conclusions  of  a  statistical  nature  have 
been  based  on  these  data,  but  as  no  critical  analysis  was 
attempted,  such  results  are  devoid  of  genetic  importance. 
As  we  now  know,  moreover,  the  method  of  classification 
employed  in  collection  was  unfortunately  defective.  The 
categories  were  not  sufficiently  precise,  and  the  material 
would  give  no  reliable  indications  if  analysis  were  attempted. 

As  the  result  of  comprehensive  investigation  carried 
out  in  a  single  district  on  Mendelian  lines,  Hurst  has 
succeeded  in  making  an  important  advance"^.  Recognizing 
that  such  descriptions  as  "light,"  "dark,"  and  so  forth  are 

*  Similar  evidence  has  also  been  published  by  Davenport  (107). 


io8 


Eye-Colours 


[CH. 


too  vague  he  instituted  a  more  critical  classification,  which 
led  to  the  discovery  that  th.^  presence  of  brown  pigment  on 
the  anterior  surface  of  the  iris  behaves  as  a  dominant  to  the 
absence  of  such  pigment,  which  is  a  recessive  character. 

Parents  without  the  pigment  in  question  have  exclusively 
children  who  are  similarly  without  it,  whereas  persons 
possessing  the  brown  pigment  may  be  either  homozygous 
or  heterozygous  in  that  respect,  and  their  offspring  follow 
the  numerical  rules  with  fair  exactitude. 


i9 


GfxQ 


9 


n 


Q^C   c 


o"  cf  c  c/  9  C 


9  Gfcr  OS  ^  OS  a  (^ 


9 


Q^ 


Cf) 


|9 


9 


cT 


gT 


9  9  9  9  9  9  9 


DomzTLCLnta 


^  Duplecd      Self- colour 

(£)  Dupleoc     Rzrt^eob 

O  Slmpleoc  Rjec>essixre. 

Fig.  1 8.     Two  pedigrees  showing  the  descent  of  eye-colour  (after  Hurst). 

''Brown"  eyes  are  no  doubt  all  dominants,  and  "blue" 
eyes  are  very  often  recessives  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  many 
eyes   which   would    be    called    ''light"    have   some   of   the 


VI]  Eye-Colottrs  109 

pigment,  and  many  eyes  which  would  be  called  "dark" 
are  without  it.  The  differences  between  the  non-pigmented 
''dark"  iris  and  the  non-pigmented  "light"  iris  are  caused 
by  structural  differences  in  the  iris  itself. 

Apart  from  its  scientific  importance  it  will  be  evident 
that  this  discovery  is  of  considerable  practical  interest  as  a 
contribution  to  human  genetics.  Much  nevertheless  remains 
to  be  done  in  the  application  of  precise  methods  to  the 
problem  of  human  eye-colours.  For  example,  amongst  the 
dominants  examined  by  him  Hurst  recognized  two  distinct 
types:  (i)  self -coloured  \x\A^^  in  which  the  pigment  is  distri- 
buted over  the  whole  surface  of  the  iris,  (2)  ringed  irides 
in  which  the  pigment  was  absent  from  the  periphery  but 
existed  as  a  ring  round  the  pupil.  The  relations  between 
these  two  types  could  not  be  satisfactorily  determined.  All 
that  the  evidence  showed  was  that  the  "self"  behaves  as  a 
dominant  to  the  "ringed."  But  on  analogy  with  other  such 
cases  we  of  course  should  expect  that  these  distinctions 
were  caused  by  distinct  determining  factors,  either  of  which 
might  be  borne  by  the  non-pigmented  recessive  without 
revealing  its  presence.  If  this  were  so,  some  of  the  non- 
pigmented  should,  on  breeding  with  the  ringed,  have  off- 
spring with  self -coloured  xxxA^s,  just  as  some  albino  rabbits 
on  breeding  with  Dutch-marked  rabbits  may  have  self- 
coloured  offspring.  Curiously  enough,  however,  in  an 
ample  series  of  observations,  Hurst  met  with  no  such 
occurrence,  though  examples  of  self  parents  producing  the 
three  kinds  of  offspring,  self,  ringed,  and  non-pigmented, 
were  not  rare.      Here,  at  present,  the  matter  rests ^. 

Hurst's  observations  relate  entirely  to  the  population 
of  a  small  English  village  where  naturally  only  a  limited 
range  of  types  would  be  met  with.  The  inter-relations  of 
the  eye-colours  of  strongly  marked  racial  types  doubtless 
will  provide  an  excellent  field  for  the  application  of  a  similar 
analysis.  It  is  likely  too  that  such  work  would  result  in  the 
discovery  of  the  principles  governing  the  association  of 
certain  eye-colours  with  particular  colours  of  the  hair,  and 

"^  Hurst  has  suggested  with  some  plausibihty  that  the  absence  of  any 
self-coloured  irides  among  the  offspring  of  ringed  x  non-pigmented  may  be 
attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  offspring  examined  were  mostly  school- 
children. He  thinks  it  not  improbable  thai  some  of  the  ringed  may 
subsequently  develop  into  self-coloured  irides. 


no  Eye-Colours  [ch. 

other  characteristics.  In  all  such  inquiries  the  first  step  is 
to  distinguish  the  critical  differences  which  are  treated  as 
units  in  the  constitution  of  the  germ-cells. 

In  addition  to  these  observations  on  man  we  have  a 
few  indications  as  to  the  heredity  of  iris-colours  in  birds. 

The  iris  of  the  domestic  breeds  of  fowls  presents  at  least 
three  types  of  coloration.  The  common  colour  in  the  full 
grown  birds  is  a  bright  red,  apparently  due  to  the  formation 
of  a  red  pigment  when  the  period  of  adult  life  is  approached, 
the  colour  in  earlier  stages  being  a  dull  blackish  green. 

Malay  fowls  are  peculiar  in  having  a  pale,  yellowish 
white  iris — the  "daw-eye"  of  fanciers^ — which  behaves  as  a 
recessive  to  the  red  iris.  This  eye  may  be  found  in  birds 
of  various  colours  and  probably  it  always  indicates  an 
admixture  of  Malay  blood '^.  I  have  seen,  for  instance,  a 
daw-eye  in  a  White  Leghorn  of  a  good  strain.  Here  it 
undoubtedly  cropped  out  as  a  recessive  character  among  the 
normal  red-eyed  birds,  and  I  happen  to  know  that  White 
Malays  were  used  by  a  prominent  White  Leghorn  breeder 
to  increase  the  size  of  his  strain. 

Another  peculiar  type  is  seen  in  the  nearly  black  iris 
of  Andalusians  and  Silkies.  In  /\ndalusians  we  have  found 
this  eye  imperfectly  dominant  to  the  red.  The  case  of  the 
Silkies  is  much  more  complex  and  the  inheritance  is  dis- 
turbed by  sex  in  the  manner  hereafter  to  be  described. 

In  the  Little  Owl  (^Athene  nochtd),  Giglioli  has  described 
the  occurrence  of  a  remarkable  variation  in  eye-colour  which 
is  evidently  an  example  of  the  appearance  of  a  recessive  in 
the  wild  state.  The  irides  of  the  normal  birds  are  yellow, 
but  in  the  variety,  of  which  several  specimens  were  found 
in  one  district,  the  irides  were  black.  The  circumstances 
of  the  discovery  which  are  related  by  Giglioli  in  detail! 
leave  little  doubt  that  the  condition  was  recessive.  It  is  a 
curious  fact  that,  in  all  the  aberrant  individuals  found,  the 
distribution  of  the  brown  markings  on  the  feathers  also 
differed  from  that  of  the  type.  So  distinct  was  the  variety 
from  the  ordinary  A.  noctua  that  a  new  specific  name  was 
suggested  for  it  until  the  fact  that  it  could  be  bred  from  the 
type  was  established. 

*  Sir  J.  Bowring  {Philippi?ie  Islands^  1859,  p.  151)  says  that  "white  eyes" 
are  preferred  in  fighting  cocks.  Probably  these  are  the  origin  of  our  Malays 
and  Aseels.  t  Giglioli,  Ibis,  1903,  p.  i. 


VI]  Pink  Eyes  in  Coloured  Types  1 1 1 


Deficiency  of  Eye-Pigment  in  soine  Coloured  Types. 

In  the  eyes  of  actual  albinos,  destitute  of  pigment,  the 
eye  has  the  well-known  pink  appearance.  This  Is  due  to 
the  admission  of  light  through  the  partially  transparent 
iris.  Generally  speaking  such  great  deficiency  of  ocular 
pigments  occurs  only  In  total  albinos,  but  to  this  rule  there 
are  a  few  remarkable  and  Interesting  exceptions. 

The  best  known  example  Is  the  so-called  Himalayan 
Rabbit"^.  In  it  the  eyes  look  like  those  of  the  pure  albino 
though  having  a  trace  of  pigment.  At  birth  Himalayans 
are  white  or  nearly  so,  but  soon  the  muzzle,  ears,  tail,  and 
feet  assume  a  deep  chocolate-black.  This  type  behaves  as 
a  recessive  to  the  normal  grey,  and  to  black,  and  it  is  a 
normal  dominant  to  the  pure  albino.  Hurst  however  found 
that  Himalayans,  though  obviously  pigmented,  may  carry 
the  factors  for  greyness  and  for  self-colour,  without  any 
indication  of  such  factors  being  manifested  In  their  own 
colour  or  In  its  distribution.  Recent  experiments  made 
by  Punnett  have  given  the  same  result. 

The  next  example  of  the  pink  eye  present  in  an  animal 
not  devoid  of  colour  Is  seen  in  certain  "  Japanese  Waltzing" 
mice. 

The  "waltzing"  is  a  peculiar  vertiginous  spinning  to 
which  those  animals  are  subject.  I  understand  that  the 
exact  physiological  nature  of  this  movement  has  never  been 
fully  elucidated,  but  the  condition  has  been  shown  to  be 
often,  if  not  always,  associated  with  malformation  of  the 
auditory  labyrinth.  As  already  mentioned,  the  waltzing 
character  behaves  as  a  Mendelian  recessive  to  the  normal 
habit. 

Such  waltzing  mice  exist  in  various  colours,  some  having 
ordinary  black  eyes,  others  pink  eyes.  Various  colours  also 
may   occur    in    the    coats   and   we   have    not   yet  complete 

*  Darwin  gives  {Animals  and  Plants,  ed.  2,  1885,  i.  p.  113)  facts  as  to 
the  production  of  Himalayans  by  crossing  Silver-greys.  In  the  light  of 
present  knowledge  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  accept  these  experiments  as 
evidence  of  an  original  production  of  the  variety.  Presumably  the  case 
was  only  one  of  the  reappearance  of  a  recessive  form,  and  indeed  Darwin 
adds  the  remark  that  he  had  "  recently  been  assured  the  pure  Silver-sjreys 
of  any  such  breed  occasionally  produce  Himalayans." 


1 1 2  Eye-Colours  of  Mice  [ch. 

knowledge  as  to  which  of  these  colours  are  compatible  with 
the  pink  eye  and  which  are  not. 

Elaborate  experiments  were  made  by  Darbishire  (90) 
to  test  the  inheritance  of  these  mice.  The  waltzers  used 
were  all  pink-eyed  and  bred  true  to  that  character.  In 
general  terms  the  coat-colour  was  fawn-and-white,  but  no 
detailed  account  of  the  pigments  present  has  been  published. 

Crosses  were  made  between  these  waltzers  and  ordinary 
albinos.  The  F^  generation  so  produced  were  usually,  as 
regards  coat-colour,  grey  like  wild  mice,  the  shade  being 
sometimes  darker,  sometimes  lighter,  together  with  more  or 
less  white.  In  a  few  families  the  colour  was  black.  The 
albino  parents  being  of  miscellaneous  origin,  such  diversity 
in  F^  colour  is  what  we  should  now  expect. 

In  respect  of  eye-colour  the  remarkable  fact  was  ob- 
served that  the  F^  mice  were  always  black-eyed.  \n  F^ 
various  coat-colours  occurred,  including  a  peculiar  new  type 
with  exceedingly  dilute  pigment  in  the  hair,  spoken  of  as 
"  lilac."  Among  these  coat-colours  the  eye-colours  were 
distributed  according  to  systems  not  yet  ascertained.  All 
that  can  be  clearly  perceived  is  that  the  mice  with  agouti 
or  full  black  in  the  coat-colour  (whether  pied  with  white 
or  not)  always  had  black  eyes  ;  the  completely  white  indi- 
viduals always  had  pink  eyes  ;  and  lastly,  the  eyes  of  the 
''lilac"  mice  were  always  pink^.  The  facts  were  un- 
fortunately presented  by  Darbishire  in  a  form  which  makes 
further  analysis  impossible.  A  proper  investigation  of  this 
series  of  phenomena  would  have  greatly  increased  our 
knowledge  of  the  genetics  of  pigmentation. 

The  important  conclusion  may  nevertheless  be  con- 
fidendy  drawn  that  at  least  two  factors  are  concerned  in 
producing  the  black  colour  of  the  eye.  Cuenot  (88,  p.  11), 
as  the  result  of  his  own  experiments,  identifies  these  with 
(i)  colour  in  the  coat;  (2)  a  factor  determining  the  black- 
ness of  the  eye,  which  needs  the  coat-colour  factor  as  its 
complement.     This   is  no    doubt  a  part   of  the  truth,   but 

*  Miss  Durham  (116)  has  shown  that  the  pink  eyes  of  these  "lilac" 
mice  and  of  the  original  pink-eyed  waltzers  are  not  wholly  devoid  of 
pigment,  but  contain  traces  both  in  the  iris  and  choroid  visible  in 
microscopic  sections.  The  eyes  of  the  albino  mice  are  absolutely  without 
pigment. 


VI]  Eye-Colours  113 

there  are  suggestions  that  it  is  not  the  whole,  and  that 
further  compHcations  have  to  be  met.  To  discuss  these  in 
detail  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work,  but  it  seems  likely 
that  the  degree  of  saturation  or  dilution  of  the  coat-colour 
has  to  be  considered. 

There  is  evidently  some  intimate  relation  between  the 
colour  of  the  eye  and  the  colour  of  the  coat  ;  for  no  mice 
have  the  coat-colour  wild-grey  ("agouti"  of  fanciers), 
black,  or  even  blue,  unless  the  eyes  are  black.  The 
interesting  fact  has  also  been  discovered  that  the  actual 
nature  of  the  pigment  of  the  choroid  differs  in  the  different 
varieties^.  Miss  Durham  finds  that  the  chocolate  mice 
always  have  chocolate  eyes,  not  black,  no  black  pigment 
being  present  in  either  iris  or  choroid.  The  same  fact  has 
been  published  by  Castle  (53)  for  the  guinea-pig  and  was 
also  noticed  independently  by  Miss  Sollas  in  guinea-pigs. 
From  these  observations  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  either  the 
coat-colour  controls  the  eye-colour,  or  the  colour  of  the  eye 
controls  that  of  the  coat,  but  for  various  reasons  it  is  not 
possible  yet  to  declare  positively  which  account  is  the  right 
one. 

Guinea-pigs  differ  from  other  animals  in  that  their 
albino  strains  generally  have  small  "smudges"  of  blackish 
pigment  on  some  of  the  extremities,  especially  the  tips  of 
the  ears,  though  the  eyes  are  entirely  w^ithout  pigment.  It 
is  said  that  albino  guinea-pigs  occur  without  these  smudges, 
but  I  have  not  seen  one. 

The  Cinnamon  Canary  must  also  be  noticed  here. 
This  variety  on  hatching  has  pink  eyes,  though  as  develop- 
ment proceeds,  pigmentation  supervenes.  Many  fanciers 
believe  that  they  can  recognize  a  difference  between  the 
eyes  of  Cinnamons  and  those  of  other  varieties,  but  the 
distinction  is  not  readily  obvious.  In  plumage  Cinnamons 
differ  from  other  breeds  in  that  the  black  pigment  is 
absent  and  the  feathers  consequently  have  a  brownish  tint. 
Miss  Durham,  from  her  observations,  concludes  that  the 
pigment  which  is  developed  in  both  eyes  and  feathers  is 
chocolate,   and  that  the    Cinnamon  is  in   fact  a  chocolate 

'*'  John  Hunter  has  an  important  paper  on  this  subject :  "  On  the 
Colour  of  the  Pigmentum  of  the  Eye  in  different  Animals"  {Obs.  on 
certain  Parts  of  the  Animal  Econo?Tiy,  1786,  p.   199). 

B.  H.  8 


114  Eye-Colours  [ch.  vi 

variety  of  the  Canary.  The  heredity  of  these  characters 
has  not  yet  been  investigated  by  precise  methods.  Fanciers 
however  are  agreed  that  some  very  remarkable  phenomena 
of  sex-Hmitation  occur,  which  will  be  described  in  con- 
nection with  other  instances  of  the  same  kind. 

The  only  other  example  I  know  of  a  race  which  com- 
bines an  albino  eye  with  external  colour  is  the  breed  of 
cats  called  "  Siamese."  These  animals,  which  breed  per- 
fectly true,  were  introduced  from  Siam,  where  they  have 
been  kept  for  an  indefinite  period  as  pets  of  the  royal 
household.  Like  the  Himalayan  rabbit,  Siamese  cats  are 
born  almost  white,  but  the  fur  becomes  a  curious  fawn  with 
darker  chocolate  points  on  the  ears  and  extremities.  The 
eyes  are  more  or  less  deficient  in  pigment  throughout  life. 
Some  pigment  however  is  formed  in  the  eye,  as  is 
evidenced  by  the  fact  that  the  iris  has  a  blue  colour  and  is 
partially  opaque. 

From  the  little  that  is  known  respecting  this  group  of 
cases  it  is  clear  that  the  genetics  of  eye-pigments  offer 
many  features  of  interest.  We  have  seen  first  that  varia- 
tions in  the  colour  of  the  iris  may  exhibit  simple  Mendelian 
heredity.  Secondly  when  the  general  pigmentation  of  the 
eye  is  considered,  it  appears  that  the  presence  or  absence 
of  such  pigment  may  follow  Mendelian  rules  ;  but  there  is 
an  inter-dependence  between  the  factor  or  factors  which 
produce  the  pigmentation  of  the  eye  and  those  which 
govern  the  pigmentation  of  the  fur  or  feathers,  such  that 
the  eye-colour  must  be  regarded  in  certain  cases  {e.g.  mice) 
as  determined  by  two,  or  perhaps  more,  complementary 
factors.  The  actual  nature  of  the  pigment  in  the  eye  is 
also  variable,  black  being  replaced  by  chocolate  in  several 
types  destitute  of  black  in  their  hair.  Lastly,  there  is  a 
noticeable  association  of  chocolate  pigment,  in  hair  or 
feathers,  with  the  more  or  less  non-pigmented  eye,  as  in  the 
Himalayan  rabbit,  the  Siamese  cat,  and  the  Cinnamon 
canary. 

The  peculiar  phenomena  connected  with  Albinism  in 
Man  are  mentioned  later  in  connection  with  human  heredity 
in  general. 


CHAPTER    VII 


HEREDITY   OF   COLOUR— continued. 

The  Genetics  of  Yellow  Pigments  in  certain  Animals. 
Yellow  Mice  not  breeding  true — The  Case  of  Basset 
Hounds  and  the  ^' Law  of  Ajtcestral  Heredity ^ 
Relation  of  this  Principle  to  Mendelian  Rtdes. 

The  genetic  relations  of  yellow  and  black  pigments 
present  so  many  difficulties  that  a  separate  chapter  is 
needed  for  their  consideration.  There  is  one  comparatively 
simple  case,  that  of  the  thorough-bred  or  race  horse,  In 
which  the  presence  of  black  behaves  as  a  simple  dominant 
to  the  colour  known  as  chestnut.  In  practically  all  the 
other  forms  that  have  been  investigated  there  is  some 
complication.  One  of  these  is  the  celebrated  example  of 
the  Basset  Hounds,  which  played  so  prominent  a  part  in 
connection  with  Galton's  enunciation  of  the  ''  Law  of 
Ancestral  Heredity." 

In  examining  this  section  of  the  evidence  which  Mende- 
lian analysis  has  provided  we  meet  three  facts  of  surprising 
novelty.  First,  that  the  relations  of  yellow  to  black  and 
other  colours  may  be  entirely  different  in  animals  so  nearly 
related  as  the  rabbit  and  the  mouse.  Secondly,  that  in  mice 
yellows  never  breed  true,  though  In  the  rabbit,  for  instance, 
no  such  difficulty  occurs.  Thirdly,  that  in  rabbits  the  pre- 
sence of  the  factor  for  the  grey  or  agouti  type  of  coloration 
alters  the  appearance  of  the  yellow  animal,  giving  It  a  white 
belly  and  tail,  whereas  yellows  destitute  of  this  factor  have 
these  parts  of  a  bluish  colour.  Such  facts  cannot  of  course 
be  properly  interpreted  until  the  chemistry  of  pigmentation 
is  more  fully  understood,  but  taken  together  they  Illustrate 
the  extraordinary  multiplicity  of  specific  rules  which  genetic 
research  reveals. 

8—2 


ii6  Yellow  Rabbits  [ch. 

When  the  hair  of  the  wild  house-mouse,  for  Instance,  is 
examined  microscopically  three  kinds  of  pigment-granules 
can  be  distinguished,  black,  chocolate,  and  yellow.  As 
Miss  Durham  pointed  out  (lo,  p.  72),  in  a  solution  of  potash 
the  yellow  granules  dissolve  at  once  ;  the  chocolate  dissolve, 
but  more  slowly  ;  the  black  not  at  all.  The  pigments  may 
co-exist  in  the  same  parts  of  a  hair,  but  in  the  wild  "grey" 
or  agouti  colour  there  are  bands  in  the  individual  hairs, 
where  only  yellow  pigment  can  be  seen. 

The  black  mouse  has  black  and  also  chocolate  pigment, 
but  no  yellow.      The  chocolate  has  chocolate  alone. 

The  yellow  mouse  may  have  exclusively  yellow  pig- 
ment, but  in  some  yellows  heterozygous  with  black,  granules 
of  the  other  pigments  may  be  mixed  with  the  more  abundant 
yellow  ones. 

In  the  blue,  the  silver-fawn  and  the  cream,  the  pigments 
are  as  in  the  black,  the  chocolate,  or  the  yellow,  respec- 
tively, but  the  number  of  granules  is  fewer,  giving  the  well- 
known  appearance  of  dilution  in  colour. 

The  colours  of  rats,  rabbits,  guinea-pigs  and  horses, 
appear  to  be  similarly  made  up  of  three  presumably  com- 
parable sets  of  pigments.  There  are  differences  however 
both  in  the  number  of  distinct  pigmented  types  which  exist, 
and  in  their  genetic  behaviour. 

Rats. 

In  rats  the  only  colours  known  are  agouti,  and  black. 
Both  types  contain  chocolate  pigment  as  well  as  black,  and 
agouti  also  contains  yellow  pigment  ;  but  no  distinct  choco- 
late or  yellow  varieties  are  known,  and  none  of  the  dilute 
forms  (blue,  &c.)  have  been  recorded. 

Rabbits. 

Of  the  cases  in  rodents  where  yellow  exists  as  a  separable 
variety  that  of  the  rabbit  is  the  simplest.  Numerous 
colour-types  of  the  rabbit  are  known,  but  in  our  present 
inquiry  we  are  immediately  concerned  with  the  following  : 
I.  Agouti,  or  wild  grey,  2.  Black,  3.  Yellow.  The  question 
whether  a  chocolate  rabbit  can  be  formed  is  important.  It 
appears  that  no  such  type  is  known  to  fanciers  but  Mr 
Punnett  saw,  in  the  possession  of  a  French  breeder,  rabbits 


VII]  Yellow  Rabbits  1 1 7 

which  seemed  to  him  to  be  chocolate.  No  examination  of 
the  pigments  of  these  rabbits  has  been  made. 

Agouti,  as  we  know  from  the  experiments  of  Hurst  and 
others,  is  epistatic  to  black.  Next,  Castle  (53)  has  shown  and 
Hurst  independently  discovered^  the  fact  that  the  yellows 
are  of  two  distinct  types.  A.  Yellows  with  zvhite  bellies  and 
tails,  which  always  bear  the  agouti  factor,  G.  B.  Yellows 
with  blue  bellies  and  tails,  which  do  not  contain  G.  The 
latter  have  been  spoken  of  as  sooty  yellows,  and  to  English 
fanciers  they  are  known  as  tortoise-shells.  Respecting  the 
pigments  of  these  types  full  information  is  wanting.  Miss 
Durham  found  that  agouti  certainly  contains  black,  choco- 
late and  yellow ;  that  black  contains  black  and  chocolate  ; 
but  hitherto  the  yellows  have  not  been  studied  on  a  com- 
prehensive scale,  and  all  that  we  know  is  that  yellows  may 
contain  both  black  and  chocolate  granules  in  addition  to 
yellow.      None  have  yet  been  seen  to  contain  yellow  only. 

Following  Castle,  the  genetic  composition  and  behaviour 
of  the  several  types  may  be  represented  thus  : 

Agouti  (wild  grey)  GBY. 

Black  gBY. 

Yellow  A,  white  belly  GbY. 

Yellow  B,  blue  belly  gbY. 

This  scheme  is  so  far  satisfactory,  but  two  difficulties 
arise  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  compare  the  phenomena 
seen  in  the  rabbit  with  those  observed  in  mice  and  guinea- 
pigs  ;  for  first  the  scheme  takes  no  account  of  chocolate  ; 
and  secondly,  in  the  mouse  yellow  is  dominant  to  black, 
not  recessive  as  in  the  rabbit.  There  is  however  no  doubt 
as  to  the  essential  facts,  that  yellow  A  crossed  with  black 
gives  agouti,  while  yellow  B  crossed  with  black  gives 
simply  black  dominant.  A  further  confirmation  of  this 
symbolic  representation  is  found  in  the  fact  observed  by 
Castle  that  agouti  x  yellow  B  gives  blacks  in  F^  as  the 
scheme  demands  f.  The  nature  of  the  factor  G  is  obscure. 
Castle  regards  it  as  a  pattern-factor  governing  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  colours ;  but  a  grey  rabbit  differs  from  a  black 

*  Communicated  to  the  Internat.   Congress  Zool.   1907  :   as  yet  un- 
published. 

t  Compare  the  similar  phenomena  in  mice,  p.  78. 


1 1 8  Red  Guinea-pigs  [ch. 

in  more  than  pattern,  for  actual  bands  of  yellow  pigment 
are  formed  in  the  hairs.  G  therefore  is  a  factor  which  can 
make  pigment  yellow  that  would  have  been  black  in  the 
absence  of  G,  so  that  in  a  restricted  sense  it  is  a  dominant 
yellow  factor,  but  the  relation  of  this  yellow  of  agoutis  to 
the  yellow  pigment  of  yellow  varieties  is  quite  uncertain. 

There  is  no  suggestion  that  yellows  of  both  types 
cannot  be  bred  pure  (cp.   Mice). 

Guinea-pigs. 

In  guinea-pigs  no  true  yellow  exists,  but  It  is  apparently 
represented  by  red.  The  work  of  Castle  (53)  and  the 
experiments  of  Miss  Sollas,  as  yet  unpublished,  show  that 
when  red  is  crossed  with  black  the  offspring  are  either 
(i)  black-reds,  viz.  patched  with  black  and  red;  or  (2) 
agoutis.  In  which  the  black  and  the  red  are  intimately  mixed 
In  the  banded  hairs.  Families  of  three  kinds  may  thus  be 
produced.      Red  bred  with  black  may  give 

(A)  all  agoutis, 

(B)  all  black-reds, 

(C)  agoutis  and  also  black-reds. 

It  seems  practically  certain  that  the  agouti-factor,  G,  as 
we  have  called  it,  may  be  carried  by  the  red,  not  by  the 
black.  Consequently  case  (A)  is  that  in  which  the  red 
is  homozygous  for  this  factor.  In  case  (B)  the  red  is  homo- 
zygous for  its  absence,  and  in  case  (C)  the  red  is  hetero- 
zygous for  the  same  factor.  There  Is  no  difficulty  In 
breeding  reds  as  a  true  strain,  and  the  peculiar  phenomenon 
about  to  be  described  in  yellow  mice  does  not  occur  In 
guinea-pigs. 

In  guinea-pigs  a  distinct  chocolate  type  exists,  but  such 
animals  according  to  Miss  Sollas  always  have  some  red 
hairs.  The  relation  of  these  to  the  other  types  is  not  yet 
fully  understood. 

Mice. 

The  facts  seen  in  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  are  in  fair 
agreement  with  each  other,  but  when  these  are  compared 
with  the  phenomena  now  well  ascertained  in  the  case  of 
mice,  fundamental  differences  are  perceived  which  make  it 


viT]  Yellow  Mice  119 

impossible  to  bring  the  whole  series  of  observations  into 
one  consistent  scheme.  For  first,  Cuenot  [^-j)  has  shown 
that  in  the  mouse  yellow^  is  dominant  to  black,  instead  of 
being  recessive  to  it  as  in  the  rabbit.  The  dominance  is  so 
far  incomplete  that  yellows  heterozygous  with  black  have 
often — perhaps  always — more  or  less  black  pigment  in  their 
hairs,  but  in  general  appearance  they  are  obviously  yellow. 

Next  according  to  Cuenot's  experience  none  of  the 
yellow  individuals  in  /%  from  a  cross  of  yellow  x  black  or 
yellow  X  agouti  are  pure  to  yellow^.  All  such  extracted 
yellows  when  bred  together  throw  agoutis  or  blacks  respec- 
tively. This  fact  has  led  him  to  suggest  that  there  may 
be  some  incompatibility  which  prevents  two  yellow-bearing 
gametes  from  uniting  in  fertilisation.  These  "  impure " 
yellows  bred  together  gave  232  yellows  and  86  agoutis,  a 
fairly  close  approximation  to  3  :  i.  The  expectation  on 
that  ratio  is  228*5  •  79'5-  Cuenot,  commenting  on  the 
numbers  produced,  remarks  that  since  pure  yellows  are  not 
formed,  he  would  anticipate  a  diminution  in  the  relative 
numbers  of  yellows,  and  that  such  a  diminution  actually 
occurs.  But,  as  Mr  Punnett  has  pointed  out  to  me,  there 
seems  to  be  no  valid  reason  for  expecting  a  departure  from 
the  ratio  3:1;  for  the  spermatozoa  may  be  regarded  as 
unlimited  in  number.  Of  the  ''non-yellow"  ova  half  would 
be  fertilised  by  *' non-yellow"  sperm,  producing  agoutis,  the 
other  half  being  fertilised  by  "yellow"  sperm  and  pro- 
ducing yellow^s.  The  "yellow"  ova  would  all,  on  Cuenot's 
hypothesis,  be  fertilised  by  "non-yellow"  sperm,  and  give 
rise  to  yellows.  The  nett  result  would  then  be  still 
3  yellows  :  i  agouti. 

Of  81  /%  yellows  tested  by  Cuenot,  all  proved  to  be 
heterozygous,  so  that  the  reality  of  the  abnormal  pheno- 
menon must  be  regarded  as  established.    Observations  made 

*  A  fact  of  a  different  order,  though  perhaps  having  a  bearing  on  the 
problem,  was  observed  by  Hurst  in  crosses  between  Belgian  Hares 
(Rabbits)  and  Angoras.  The  Belgian  is  in  colour  an  "agouti,"  or  grey, 
but  it  is  much  yellower  than  the  wild  rabbit  of  the  warrens.  Hurst  found 
that  F^  from  such  Belgians  and  Angoras  (bearing  G)  was  of  the  wild  or 
warren  type  of  grey,  and  that  in  A  no  rabbit  quite  of  the  Belgian  colour 
ever  came.  The  greys  in  F.^  varied  a  little  in  the  amount  of  yellow,  and  it 
is  possible  that,  as  in  other  cases  in  which  a  parental  type  fails  to  recur  in 
7s,  the  absence  may  be  ascribed  to  the  rarity  of  a  particular  combination. 


I20  Pile  Fowls  [CH. 

by  Miss  Durham  agree  entirely  with  those  of  Cuenot.  She 
finds  it  impossible  to  obtain  any  mice  pure  to  yellow.  The 
experience  of  fanciers  seems  to  be  universal  that  yellows 
cannot  be  bred  in  a  pure  strain.  Those  with  which  she 
has  experimented  always  throw  either  agoutis,  blacks,  or 
chocolates,  and  we  may  take  it  that  yellows  of  both  sexes 
are  always  heterozygotes  formed  by  the  meeting  of  a 
yellow  and  a  non-yellow  gamete"^.  In  spite  of  their  genetic 
composition  the  yellows  which  throw  chocolates  have  only 
yellow  pigment  in  their  hairs,  and  no  chocolate. 

Cats. 

In  cats  we  meet  a  new  complication  in  the  inheritance 
of  yellow,  namely  that  it  is  disturbed  by  sexual  dimorphism. 
The  rarity  of  tortoise-shell  males  is  well  known,  and  Don- 
caster  (109)  has  produced  evidence  which  makes  it  prac- 
tically certain  that  in  the  immense  majority  of  instances 
the  female  heterozygote  of  orange  x  black  is  tortoise-shell, 
namely,  patched  with  orange  and  black  (like  the  guinea-pig), 
but  that  the  male  heterozygote  similarly  produced  is  orange 
(see  Chap,  x,  dealing  with  the  heredity  of  Sex).  The 
dilute  types  cream  and  blue  are  similarly  related  to  blue 
tortoise-shell. 

Fowls. 

There  are  further  indications  of  peculiarity  in  the  genetics 
of  yellow  pigments  in  the  case  of  birds.  The  coloration 
known  as  "Pile"  in  fowls  is  seldom  bred  for  exhibition 
from  two  pile  birds.  The  colour  consists,  in  cocks,  of 
orange-yellow  or  red  in  the  hackles  and  wing-coverts  com- 
bined with  a  white  ground.  The  hens  are  white,  with  a 
chestnut  or  reddish  yellow  breast.  In  the  down  the  chickens 
of  both  sexes  have  longitudinal  stripes  of  light  chestnut. 
In  the  adults,  and  generally  in  the  chickens  too,  there 
is  a  small  and  variable  amount  of  blackish  grey  ticking, 
which  is  of  course  considered  a  fault.  Pile  is  a  colour 
known   in   several  breeds,   but  especially  in  Game,   Game 

*  Besides  this  curious  peculiarity,  yellows  show  another  remarkable 
feature  in  their  frequent  tendency  to  become  excessively  fat.  Miss  Durham 
has  met  with  several  such  specimens  and  the  fact  is  well  known  to  fanciers. 
In  her  experience  also  yellows  are  more  liable  to  sterility  than  other  mice. 


VII]  Peculiarities  of  Yellow   Types  121 

Bantams,  and  Leghorns.  It  is  said  never  to  breed  true, 
throwing  ordinary  black-reds  in  unascertained  proportions. 
Presumably  pile  Is  a  heterozygous  combination,  black-red 
being  one  of  the  constituents,  but  what  the  other  pure  form 
(or  forms)  Involved  may  be,  is  quite  uncertain.  The  whole 
question  is  still  very  obscure,  and  from  preliminary  experi- 
ments made  by  Mr  C.  Fryer  It  seems  probable  that  two 
pairs  of  factors  are  concerned  in  addition  to  black-red. 

For  exhibition  purposes  piles  are  often  crossed  with 
black-reds,  fanciers  being  under  the  impression  that  a 
brighter  pile  results  from  this  mating.  The  fact  suggests 
that  there  may  be  piles  of  several  different  compositions. 
Taking  the  known  facts  together  the  one  clear  deduction 
Is  that  pile,  or  yellow  if  we  may  so  call  it,  is  dominant  to 
black-red*. 


Recapitulation  and  Discussion  of  the  Foregoing 

Facts. 

The  outstanding  peculiarities  of  this  group  of  pheno- 
mena are  as  follows  : 

I.  The  difference  between  the  genetics  of  similar 
colours  in  allied  forms. 

In  rabbits  black  Is  epistatic  to  yellow,  giving  (In  the 
absence  of  G,  the  agouti  factor)  simply  a  black  heterozygote. 
In  guinea-pigs  (where  red  represents  yellow),  the  hetero- 
zygote of  black  and  red  is  a  patch-work,  viz.  tortoise-shell. 
In  both  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  when  G  is  present  this 
heterozygote  is  agouti,  the  factor  G  being  Introduced  by 
the  yellow  parent. 

In  mice  yellow  is  epistatic  to  black,  giving,  in  the 
absence  of  G,  a  yellow  heterozygote.  We  can  form  no 
surmise  as  to  the  nature  and  causation  of  this  discrepancy 
between  these  types.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  recessive 
yellow  of  the  rabbit,  viz.  the  blue-bellied  type  lacking  both 
G  and  B,  nevertheless  has  some  black  pigment  in  its  blue 
fur,  while  the  yellow  mouse  does  not  necessarily  have  any. 

*  The  whole-coloured  buff  of  Cochins  and  some  other  breeds  derived 
from  them  is  quite  distinct  from  pile.  The  genetics  of  this  pigmentation 
are  complex  and  little  known  as  yet. 


122  Peculiarities  of  Yellow   Types  [ch. 

2.  The  fact  that  in  mice  no  yellow  homozygote  exists. 
It  is  certainly  a  most  surprising  fact  that  mice  cannot  be 

bred  true  to  yellow — the  more  so  since  there  is  no  difficulty 
in  producing  pure  yellow  rabbits  and  pure  red  strains  of 
guinea-pigs.  Among  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  heredity 
no  quite  parallel  case  is  known,  though  it  is  possible  that 
pile  (yellow  and  white)  fowls  are  in  the  same  condition^. 
Cuenot's  suggestion  of  the  incompatibility  between  yellow- 
bearing  gametes  female  and  male,  is  the  only  one  yet 
offered  in  elucidation  of  the  phenomenon.  While  admitting 
that  this  account  has  great  plausibility,  I  think  that  we 
must  not  place  complete  reliance  on  a  hypothesis  to  which 
no  adequate  or  thorough  test  can  as  yet  be  applied.  The 
idea  of  incompatibility  between  gametes  has  more  than  once 
been  introduced  to  deal  with  the  genetic  phenomena  of 
Sex  {q.v.)  and  in  that  connection  the  case  of  yellow  mice 
should  be  remembered. 

3.  The  behaviour  of  the  agouti  factor  G. 

The  operation  of  this  factor  varies  to  some  extent  in 
the  different  types.  In  all  it  can  be  carried  by  the  yellow 
variety,  but  in  the  rabbit  alone  are  yellows  which  bear  G 
obviously  different  (having  white  bellies)  from  those  which 
do  not  (having  blue  bellies).  It  seems  difficult  to  suppose 
that  this  factor  actually  causes  the  appearance  of  white  on 
the  belly  and  tail,  yet  the  fact  is  well-established  that  such 
yellow  rabbits  are  really  agoutis,  or  wild  greys,  wanting  in 
black. 

The  relation  of  the  yellow,  due  to  the  presence  of  the 
yellow  factor  K,  to  the  yellow  in  the  bands,  caused  by  the 
agouti  factor  G,  is  at  present  quite  problematical,  but  micro- 
scopically these  yellows  are  indistinguishable. 

Until  the  relations  of  chocolate  to  the  other  pigments  in 
the  rabbit  and  guinea-pig  have  been  more  fully  explored  it 
is  scarcely  possible  to  draw  up  a  scheme  of  symbolic  notation 
representing  the  comparative  compositions  of  the  different 
animals  ;  but  adopting  the  gametic  formulae  given  (p.  ']'S) 
for  the  various  colours  in  mice  we  may  tentatively  suppose 
that  yellows  exist  of  all  compositions  which  would  be  pro- 
duced by  adding   Y  to  each  of  those  groups  of  symbols. 

*  See  also  Basset  Hounds  (p.  128). 


VII]  Colours  of  Thorough-bred  Horses  123 

Thus  the  gametes  for  each  of  the  four  non-yellow  colours 
are  as  follows : 

Agouti  (with  black)  G .  B .  Ch. 

Cinnamon  agouti  (w^ithout  black)  G .  d  .  Ch. 

Black  g.B.C/i. 

Chocolate  g  -  ^  -  Ch. 

Yellows  being  always  heterozygous,  all  zygotes  con- 
taining yellow^  are  to  be  represented  by  adding  Yy  to  the 
zygotic  formula  produced  by  compounding  two  of  the  above 
gametic  formulae.  Thus  the  yellows  which  throw  chocolate 
only  are 

Yy  .gg  ,bb  .  ChCh, 

The  yellows  throwing  black  only  are 

Yy  .gg .  BE  ,  ChCh, 

and  so  on.  This  representation  must  in  any  case  approxi- 
mate to  the  truth,  but  there  is  still  some  doubt  whether  the 
relation  of  yellow  to  non-yellow  is  quite  so  simple  as  here 
suggested"^. 

We  now  pass  to  two  cases  w^hich  are  of  some  interest 
on  account  of  the  somewhat  conspicuous  part  that  they 
have  played  in  general  discussions  of  heredity.  The  first 
is  that  of  Race  horses,  where  the  phenomena,  in  so  far  as 
they  have  been  adequately  studied,  are  remarkably  simple. 
The  second  example,  that  of  the  Basset  Hounds,  presents  a 
feature  of  complexity. 

Race  Horses. 

In  "  thorough-bred  "  or  race  horses  the  behaviour  of  the 
yellow  and  black  pigments  in  descent  is  comparatively 
simple  and  the  facts  thus  form  a  remarkable  contrast  with 

*  Attention  should  be  called  to  the  fact  that  if  the  two  kinds  of  agoutis 
in  the  mouse  might  be  supposed  to  represent  the  two  kinds  of  yellow  in 
the  rabbit  then  yellow  of  the  rabbit  might  be  supposed  to  correspond  with 
chocolate  of  the  mouse.  This  natural  suggestion  is  however  negatived  by 
the  fact  that  a  definite  chocolate  pigment  can  be  seen  in  the  hairs  of 
rabbits.  In  the  pink-eyed  Himalayan  rabbit  the  pigment  according  to 
Miss  Durham  is  exclusively  chocolate. 


124         Colours  of  Thorottgh-bred  Horses  [cii. 

the  complicated  phenomena  elsewhere  observed  in  regard 
to  pigments  ostensibly  the  same.  The  colours  of  race 
horses  are  recorded  with  great  accuracy  in  Weatherby's 
General  Stud  Book.  By  a  careful  analysis  of  these  returns 
Hurst  was  able  to  show  that  chestnut  on  the  one  hand  is 
recessive  to  bays  and  browns,  w^hich  are  dominant.  Chest- 
nuts are  distinguished  from  bays  and  browns  by  the  fact 
that  in  their  hair  no  black  pigment  is  developed.  Bays 
always  have  black  in  the  mane,  tail  and  fetlocks.  Browns 
have  more  or  less  black  in  the  same  parts,  and  generally 
black  pigment  is  distributed  to  some  extent  over  the  whole 
coat. 

As  the  records  show,  there  are  only  about  i  per  cent, 
of  alleged  exceptions  to  the  rule  that  chestnut  x  chestnut 
produces  chestnut  exclusively.  Of  the  dominants  some 
are  pure  dominants  and  give — again  with  about  i  per  cent, 
of  exceptions — bays  and  browns  only,  whether  the  other 
parent  is  chestnut,  or  bay  or  brown.  Other  dominants  are 
shown  also  to  be  DR  in  constitution,  giving,  when  bred 
with  chestnuts,  equal  numbers  of  dominants  and  recessives. 

With  regard  to  the  few  exceptions  of  both  kinds  ap- 
pearing in  the  Stud  Book  records  some  are  demonstrably 
mistakes,  and  the  actual  frequency  of  exceptions  must  be 
considerably  less  than  i  per  cent.,  if  indeed  there  are  any 
genuine  exceptions  at  all.  The  relation  of  bays  to  browns 
has  not  yet  been  made  out,  and  as  the  two  classes  grade 
into  each  other  somewhat,  the  detection  of  their  relation- 
ship would  demand  observations  of  a  sort  somewhat  more 
critical  than  those  which  the  Stud  Book  provides.  So  far 
however  as  the  segregation  of  black  from  the  absence  of 
black  is  concerned,  the  case  is  simple  and  regular"^'. 

*  The  inheritance  of  coat-colour  in  horses  was  the  subject  of  an  extensive 
investigation  by  Professor  K.  Pearson  and  his  assistants  (219).  The  records 
of  the  Stud  Books  were  tabulated  and  investigated  by  the  application  of  bio- 
metrical  methods.  Various  propositions  have  been  enunciated  as  the  result 
of  this  inquiry,  amongst  others  the  statement  that  nothing  corresponding  to 
Mendel's  principles  appears  in  the  case  of  horse-colours.  The  key  to  the 
phenomena  was  of  course  the  fact  that  chestnuts  mated  with  chestnuts 
breed  true — with  rare  and  dubious  exceptions.  It  would  seem  at  first 
sight  impossible  to  devise  a  system  of  tabulation  which  could  fail  to 
disclose  so  prominent  a  feature.  Nevertheless  Professor  Pearson's  correla- 
tion-tables, which  were  compiled  from  the  records  of  more  than  6000 
horses,  were  made  in  such  a  way  that  the  colours  of  sire  and  dam  could 


VII]  Colours  of  Thorough-bred  Horses         125 

The  time  has  not  arrived  for  any  attempt  to  analyse 
the  relations  of  horse-colours  In  general.  By  microscopical 
methods  Miss  Durham  has  found  In  horses  the  three  pig- 
ments, black,  chocolate,  and  yellow  seen  In  other  types. 
The  term  chestnut  Is  used  somewhat  loosely  In  describing 
colours,  and  though  usually  a  chestnut  Is  a  horse  possessing 
yellow  pigment  only,  there  Is  a  dark  type  of  chestnut, 
sometimes  spoken  of  as  liver-ckestnut,  w^hlch  Is  actually 
chocolate^.  Nothing  Is  known  of  the  genetic  relation  of 
this  to  the  yellow  chestnut,  or  of  the  respective  properties 
of  those  various  chestnuts  distinguished  by  the  colour  of 
their  manes  and  other  subordinate  differences. 

Among  thorough-bred  or  race  horses,  types  Intermediate 
between  chestnut  and  the  dominant  bavs  and  browns  must 
be  exceedingly  rare,  for  though  entries  indicating  doubt 
betw^een  bay  and  brown  are  rather  common  in  the  Stud 
Books,  alternative  designations  are  scarcely  ever  given  In 
regard  to  chestnuts. 

Among  common  horses  and  hackneys  such  animals 
though  exceptional  can  be  found  by  looking  out  for  them, 
and  one  or  two  may  usually  be  seen  In  a  day's  walk  through 
London  streets.  I  have  no  information  as  to  their  genetic 
capacities,  but  presumably  they  are  due  to  dilution-stages 
of  the  black  pigment,  corresponding  to  those  which  In  the 
mouse  &c.  constitute  the  blue  varieties.  They  may  also  be 
cases  of  imperfect  dominance. 

not  be  taken  into  account  together.  The  tables  thus  provide  answers  to 
questions  as  to  the  probable  colour  of  a  foal  by  a  chestnut  sire,  the  dam's 
colour  being  taken  as  unknown ;  as  to  the  probable  colour  of  the  brother 
or  half-brother  of  a  chestnut  foal,  when  the  colours  of  both  sire  and  dam 
are  taken  as  unknown ;  with  solutions  of  other  problems  of  equal  signifi- 
cance. Since  however  the  colours  of  both  sire  and  dam  are  recorded,  and 
must  indeed  have  been  actually  extracted  from  the  Stud  Book  for  the 
purposes  of  the  tabulations,  the  investigators,  by  refraining  from  an 
inspection  of  these  data  till  they  had  been  separated,  placed  themselves  at 
a  gratuitous  disadvantage.  The  true  nature  of  the  inheritance  was  therefore 
not  discovered. 

The  failure  was  due  to  want  of  analysis.  The  similar  failure  of  bio- 
metrical  methods  to  find  the  plain  rule  of  inheritance  in  the  case  of  human 
eye-colour  was  due  to  the  same  defect  of  method,  though  in  that  case 
further  obscurity  arose  from  the  use  of  faulty  and  uncritical  observations. 

*  When  very  dense  this  type  of  colour  might  carelessly  be  mistaken 
for  black. 


126  Basset  Hottnds  [ch. 

'^Tricolour''  and  '' No7t-tricolour''  in  Basset  Hounds: 
The  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity. 

The  question  of  the  relation  of  the  yellow  and  black 
pigments  is  raised  in  the  celebrated  case  of  the  colours  of 
Basset  Hounds.  The  importance  of  that  subject  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  it  was  from  a  study  of  the  evidence  in  regard 
to  Bassets  that  Mr  F.  Galton  was  led  to  enunciate  his 
"Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity"  with  confidence  as  one  which 
"appears  to  be  universally  applicable  to  bi-sexual  descent." 
The  publication  of  that  paper  played  a  considerable  part  in 
the  history  of  modern  genetic  research  and  it  is  necessary 
that  we  should  consider  the  facts  in  some  detail. 

The  colours  of  Bassets  are  two,  the  first  spoken  of  as 
tricolour,  consisting  of  black  and  yellow  marks  on  a  white 
ground  ;  the  second,  non-tricolour,  which  differs  from  the 
first  in  having  no  black.  It  is  said  that  dogs  which  cannot 
be  easily  referred  to  one  or  other  of  these  two  types  do  not 
occur,  and  they  must  certainly  be  very  rare  if  they  exist  at  all. 

Mr  Galton's  investigation  was  based  on  data  supplied  to 
him  by  the  late  Sir  Everett  Millais,  a  keen  fancier  of  the 
breed.  .  This  evidence  consisted  in  records  giving  the 
number  of  offspring  of  each  type  which  had  occurred  in 
families  of  various  compositions.  It  was  thus  possible  to 
compare  the  number  of  tricolour  and  non-tricolour  dogs 
produced  in  the  families  with  the  number  of  the  respective 
types  distributed  among  their  pedigrees.  Galton's  figures 
indicated  that  there  was  a  close  correspondence  between 
these  two  numbers,  so  that  it  was  possible,  given  the 
ancestral  composition  of  the  families,  to  predict  with  "con- 
siderable accuracy  the  numerical  proportions  in  which  the 
respective  types  would  appear.  According  to  Galton's  system 
the  family  was  regarded  as  the  production  of  all  the  ancestors. 
Each  ancestor  was  supposed  to  contribute  in  his  or  her 
degree  to  this  total  heritage,  the  more  immediate  progenitors 
contributing  more,  and  the  remoterprogenitors  less,  according 
to  a  definite  arithmetical  rule.  This  rule  was  that  the  average 
contribution  of  each  ancestor  was  to  be  reckoned 

for  each  parent  1/4 

for  each  grandparent  1/16 

for  each  great-grandparent     1/64 


VII]  Basset  Hoimds  127 

and  so  on,  the  total  heritage  being  thus  reckoned  as  unity. 
It  will  be  observed  that  this  scheme  differs  entirely  from 
those  based  on  Mendelian  principles,  inasmuch  as  every 
ancestor  is,  according  to  the  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity, 
supposed  to  have  some  effect  on  the  composition  of  each 
family  in  its  posterity,  and  each  recent  progenitor  is  re- 
garded as  having  a  very  sensible  influence  on  these 
numbers. 

Though  no  one  with  a  knowledge  of  practical  breeding 
could  entertain  the  supposition  that  Galton's  Law  had  the 
universality  of  application  claimed  for  it,  there  was  on  the 
other  hand  no  doubt  that  the  Law  had  successfully  expressed 
a  variety  of  facts  in  which  no  order  at  all  had  been  pre- 
viously detected. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  meaning  of  this  evidence 
in  the  light  of  modern  know^ledge.  At  the  time  that 
Galton's  views  were  promulgated  nothing  w^as  known  of 
segregation.  The  supposition  that  any  individual,  whatever 
its  own  characters,  was  capable  of  carrying  on  and  trans- 
mitting to  its  posterity  any  of  the  characters  exhibited  by 
its  immediate  progenitors,  at  all  events,  was  generally 
received  without  question  by  biologists.  According  to  that 
idea  the  number  of  classes  of  individuals  differing  in  respect 
of  their  ancestral  composition  and  transmitting  powers  is  to 
be  regarded  as  indefinitely  large,  whereas  in  all  cases  of 
sensible  allelomorphism  the  number  of  classes  of  individuals 
is  three  only,  two  being  homozygous  and  one  heterozygous. 
The  difference  between  the  two  schemes  is  thus  absolute 
and  irreconcileable. 

When  Mendelian  phenomena  were  first  recognized  it 
w^as  naturally  supposed  that  some  classes  of  cases  would  be 
found  to  conform  to  the  Mendelian  scheme  and  others  to 
the  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity.  W^ith  the  progress  of 
research  however  almost  all  the  cases  to  which  precise 
analytical  methods  have  been  applied  have  proved  to  be 
reducible  to  terms  of  Mendelian  segregation  ;  and  of  those 
which  have  not  already  been  so  elucidated  some,  we  may 
feel  confident,  if  not  all,  will  be  eventually  shown  to  be 
governed  by  similar  rules.  In  discussing  aberrant  pheno- 
mena like  those  alleged  in  regard  to  the  Bassets  the  first 
question   to   be   settled  is  whether  the  facts  are   correctly 


128  Basset  Hounds  [ch. 

reported.  If  either  type  is  recessive  we  should  naturally 
expect  this  to  be  the  non-tricolour,  which  is  without  black. 
Unfortunately  as  the  non-tricolours  are  not  fashionable  there 
were  comparatively  few  matings  between  two  parents  of 
that  colour.  Nevertheless  41  dogs,  offspring  of  such  matings, 
are  given,  of  these  20  being  tricolour.  Though  the  records 
were  not  made  by  scientific  men  or  with  a  scientific  purpose 
directly  in  view  it  is  almost  impossible  to  imagine  that  all 
these  cases  can  depend  on  mistakes,  and  pending  the  pro- 
duction of  new  and  direct  evidence  we  must  take  the  records 
as  correct. 

In  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Ratio7ial  Breeding 
(London,  1889),  pp.  26  and  27,  Sir  Everett  Millais  gives  one 
or  two  more  notes  bearing  on  this  question.  He  says  that 
in  England  there  w^ere  then  two  strains  of  Bassets,  the 
Couteulx  and  the  Lane.  "The  Couteulx  is  as  a  rule  a  very 
perfectly  marked  tricolour,  with  the  tan  and  black  markings 
deeply  accentuated.  The  Lane  hounds,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  very  weak  in  markings  if  they  happen  to  be  tricolour, 
but  as  a  fact  they  are  far  more  generally  found  to  be  lemon 
and  white."  In  another  place  he  mentions  that  "in  nearly 
every  litter  of  pure  Couteulx  there  is  generally  a  lemon  and 
white  puppy." 

If  it  were  not  that  the  genetic  relations  of  yellow  and 
black  pigments  are,  as  we  have  seen,  so  complicated  and 
uncertain  in  other  types,  we  might  be  inclined  to  attribute 
the  alleged  production  of  tricolours  by  non-tricolours  to 
imperfect  classification  of  "weak"  tricolours,  but  in  dealing 
with  this  group  of  phenomena  no  such  suggestion  can  be 
hazarded  with  any  confidence. 

The  strange  fact  that  yellow  mice  are  never  pure  natur- 
ally occurs  to  the  mind  in  connection  with  the  evidence  as  to 
Bassets.  A  comparison  between  the  two  cases  cannot 
nevertheless  be  instituted  at  all  easily  ;  for  in  the  Bassets 
yellow  is  evidently  not  usually  a  dominant,  which  it  should 
be  if  the  impurity  of  the  non-tricolour  is  to  be  attributed  to 
a  state  of  things  comparable  with  that  existing  in  mice. 
At  present  the  Basset  phenomena  must  be  regarded  as 
definitely  unconformable.  Perhaps  the  most  probable  view 
of  their  nature  is  that  they  are  an  illustration  of  irregular 
dominance,  but  this  cannot  be  asserted  with  much  confidence. 


VII]  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity  129 

It  is  curious  that  the  one  example  to  which  a  partially  correct 
system  of  analysis  was  applied  before  Mendelian  methods 
w^ere  rediscovered,  should  have  been  of  this  remarkably 
exceptional  order. 

There  is  little  reason  to  anticipate,  as  we  once  did,  that  a 
distinct  group  of  cases  obeying  a  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity 
will  have  to  be  recognized.  That  principle  in  certain  cases 
gives  an  epitome  of  the  consequences  of  the  Mendelian 
process,  and  in  all  likelihood  its  applicability  to  any  pheno- 
mena of  natural  inheritance  is  due  to  this  fact.  The  Law 
of  Ancestral  Heredity  takes  of  course  no  account  of  domi- 
nance, or  of  segregation  with  all  the  consequences  it  entails  ; 
but  as  describing  the  results  to  be  witnessed  among  a 
population  interbreeding  at  random,  its  predictions  would 
frequently  approximate  to  the  truth.  In  particular  it  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  arithmetical  results  of  DR  x  R  and  of 
DR  X  DR  are  correctly  predicted  by  the  Law  of  Ancestral 
Heredity.  Some  of  the  phenomena  of  blending  are  also  ex- 
pressed with  accuracy.  Besides  this,  inasmuch  as  dominant 
individuals  which  have  both  parents  dominants  will  in  a 
mixed  population  frequently  be  pure  dominants,  statistical 
phenomena  which  could  be  mistaken  for  an  effect  of 
ancestral  composition  will  often  occur '^. 

For  instance  if  purple  Sweet  Peas  in  /%  were  bred  from 
promiscuously,  /%  would  consist  of  purples  and  other  colours, 
and  the  excess  of  purples  in  the  mass  would  be  greater  than 
it  was  in  F^.  If  the  F^  purples  were  again  separately  saved, 
the  proportion  of  purples  in  F^  would  be  still  greater,  and 
so  on.  This  gradual  increase  in  the  proportion  of  purples 
might  carelessly  be  mistaken  for  a  consequence  of  the  fact 
that  each  generation  had  more  purples  in  its  ancestry.  As 
we  now  know,  that  conclusion  would  be  quite  incorrect. 
The  increase  is  in  reality  due  to  the  appearance  of  actually 
pure  purples  in  /%  and  in  subsequent  generations,  and  to 
the  effect  which  their  presence  has  on  the  composition  of 
the  population.      The  impure   purples   in   each   generation 

*  Darbishire's  conclusions  in  regard  to  mice  {Biometrika,  1904,  in. 
pp.  23-5)  were  obviously  based  on  a  mistake  of  this  kind,  as  he  has 
himself  since  admitted.  (See  Mem.  Manchester  Lit.  Phil.  Soc.  1905, 
No.   6,  p.   7.) 

B.  H.  9 


130  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity  [ch. 

remain  exactly  in  the  same  condition  as  at  their  first  appear- 
ance, and  the  selection  has  merely  resulted  in  a  reduction  of 
their  number.  If  the  purples  were  saved  individually  and 
their  seeds  separately  sown,  it  would  immediately  be  seen 
that  some  were  pure,  giving  purples  only,  and  that  others 
were  impure,  the  latter  consisting  of  the  various  gametic 
types  with  which  we  are  now  familiar. 

Since  then  we  know  that  ancestral  composition  does  not 
decide  the  constitution  of  such  a  population,  and  since 
individuals  of  identical  parentage  may  have  most  divergent 
genetic  properties,  it  is  absurd  to  attempt  to  trace  the 
workings  of  any  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity  among  these 
phenomena. 

The  suggestion  that  methods  based  on  unanalysed 
statistics  have  scientific  value  in  the  study  of  heredity  can 
scarcely  mislead  those  who  have  examined  the  facts. 
Professor  Pearson  and  others  committed  to  these  methods 
have  of  late  defended  their  position  by  arguing  that  there  is 
no  fundamental  incompatibility  between  Laws  of  Ancestral 
Heredity  and  the  conclusions  of  Mendelian  analysis.  The 
matter  w^ould  not  be  worth  notice  were  it  not  that  the  same 
proposition  is  being  freely  repeated  by  several  writers  seek- 
ing some  convenient  shelter  of  neutrality"^.  It  is  to  be 
observed  however  that  the  supposition  of  an  underlying 
harmony  between  Mendelian  and  biometrical  results  was 
not  put  forward  by  the  biometricians  until  every  possible 
means  of  discrediting  the  truth  of  Mendelian  facts  had  been 
exhausted.  Those  attacks  having  failed,  we  are  asked  to 
observe  that  the  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity  was  meant  as 
a  statement  of  a  statistical  consequence,  and  is  not  concerned 
with  physiological  processes.  Mr  Galton's  views  on  this 
point  are  well  shown  in  the  following  passage  in  which  he 
explicitly  appeals  to  the  physiological  process  of  gameto- 
genesis  as  apparently  occurring  in  the  way  which  his  Law 
requires.  For  in  introducing  the  Law  as  applicable  to 
Bassets  (125,   p.  403)  he  wrote: 

"It  should  be  noted  that  nothing  in  this  statistical  law 
contradicts  the  generally  accepted  view  that  the  chief,  if  not 

*  See  for  example  Darbishire,  Mem.  Ma?2chester  Lit.  and  Phil.  Soc. 
1905,  No.  6  and  1906,  No.  11;  and  Professor  J.  A.  Thomson,  Heredity., 
i()0'j,pa5si?n. 


VII]  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity  131 

the  sole,  line  of  descent  runs  from  germ  to  germ  and  not 
from  person  to  person.  The  person  may  be  accepted  on 
the  whole  as  a  fair  representative  of  the  germ,  and  being  so, 
the  statistical  laws  which  apply  to  the  persons  w^ould  apply 
to  the  germs  also,  though  with  less  precision  In  individual 
cases.  Now  this  law  Is  strictly  consonant  with  the  observed 
binary  subdivisions  of  the  germ  cells,  and  the  concomitant 
extrusion  and  loss  of  one-half  of  the  several  contributions 
from  each  of  the  two  parents  to  the  germ-cell  of  the  off- 
spring. The  apparent  artificiality  of  the  law  ceases  on  these 
grounds  to  afford  cause  for  doubt ;  its  close  agreement  with 
physiological  phenomena  ought  to  give  a  prejudice  va  favour 
of  Its  truth  rather  than  the  contrary." 

Had  segregation  been  known  to  Mr  Galton  the  Law  of 
Ancestral  Heredity  would  not  have  been  promulgated. 
It  Is  obvious  that  so  soon  as  that  phenomenon  Is  recog- 
nized and  appreciated,  all  question  of  useful  or  direct 
applicability  of  the  Law  of  Ancestral  Heredity  is  at  an  end. 
That  method  of  representing  the  phenomena  of  Heredity 
and  all  modifications  of  It  are  based  on  the  false  assumption 
that  any  individual  can  transmit  the  characteristics  of  any 
ancestor,  and  especially  of  any  recent  ancestor.  When  this 
conception  was  shown  to  be  untrue,  the  structure  which  the 
biometrlclans  have  offered  to  the  world  as  a  scientific  study 
of  Heredity  ceased  to  have  meaning  or  value.  Statistical 
examination  of  ancestral  composition  may,  as  we  have  seen, 
occasionally  give  a  prediction  in  good  correspondence  with 
fact,  but  this  Is  due  to  coincidence  and  not  to  any  elements 
of  truth  In  the  ratiocination  by  which  the  prediction  was 
reached. 

As  an  attempt  to  compass  the  solution  of  an  intricate 
problem  by  labour  and  ingenuity  without  proper  data  or 
equipment  Mr  Galton's  work  deserves  long  to  be  remem- 
bered. It  stands  out  as  a  significant  and  stimulating  event 
In  the  history  of  biology. 


9—2 


CHAPTER   VIII 

HEREDITY   OF   COLOUR— continued. 

Various  Specific  Phenomena    in   Colour- Inheritance.     Re- 
lation of  Colour  to  Hoariness  in  Stocks.    Miscellaneous 
Cases.      Colour  of  a  Special  Part  controlling  that  of 
other  Parts. — Summary  and  Discussiojt. — Subtraction- 
Stages. 

Again  and  again  in  tracing  the  genetic  properties  of 
colours  in  animals  and  plants  we  encounter  the  phenomenon 
of  a  specific  connection  between  certain  colours  and  their 
modes  of  hereditary  transmission  on  the  one  hand,  and 
various  apparently  distinct  physiological  properties  on  the 
other.  Colour,  which  systematists  have  often  spoken  of  as 
one  of  the  superficial  or  impermanent  properties  of  organ- 
isms, seems  thus  to  be  bound  up  with  fundamental  pheno- 
mena of  chemical  economy.  To  treat  this  part  of  genetics 
with  any  fulness  is  not  yet  possible.  As  an  illustration  may 
be  mentioned  the  curious  result  discovered  by  Miss  Saunders 
in  Mat thio la, using  the  varieties  known  as  ''ten-week  Stocks." 
These  may  be  either  "hoary,"  viz.  covered  with  branching 
hairs  forming  a  tomentum,  or  glabrous  and  destitute  of 
hairs.  When  the  hoary  are  crossed  with  the  glabrous, 
hoariness  is  an  ordinary  dominant,  giving  3  hoary  :  i 
glabrous  in  /%. 

But  when  certain  glabrous  strains  are  crossed  together 
the  F^  form  is  hoary,  reverting  to  the  primitive  type.  This 
reversion  never  occurs  when  any  of  the  many  red  or  purple 
varieties  are  crossed  together,  but  is  universal  when  any  of 
them  are  crossed  with  either  the  white  or  the  cream-coloured 
glabrous  strains.  The  purples  and  reds  owe  their  colours 
to  the  presence  of  coloured  sap.  This  coloured  sap  is  not 
present  in  the  whites,  nor  in  the  creams,  whose  colour  is 
due  to  the  existence  of  yellow  plastids  in  the  cells  of  their 
petals. 


CH.  VIII]       Colour  and  Hoariness  in  Stocks  1 33 

F„  from  the  cross,  for  instance,  of  purple  x  white  con- 
tains sap-coloured  and  non-sap-coloured  plants,  and  of  these 
some  are  hoary  and  some  glabrous.  But  no7ie  of  the  plants 
which  come  without  coloured  sap  have  a7iy  hairs  on  their 
leaves.  A  consideration  of  the  case  shows  that  the  factor 
for  hoariness  is  really  introduced  by  the  W^^V^-flowered 
glabrous  plant,  and  that  the  glabrousness  is  due  to  the 
inability  of  the  hoariness-factor  to  make  the  hairs  grow  in 
the  absence  of  the  factors  for  sap-colour.  The  facts  may  be 
represented  thus,  C  and  R  representing,  as  before,  the  factors 
for  sap-colour,  and  H  the  factor  for  hoariness. 

Purple  glabrous  x  White  glabrous 
CRh  I  cRH 

F^ Purple  hoary 

CcRRHh 

r ^ n 

A... 9  Purple  hoary        3  Purple  glai)rous  4  White  glabrous 

all  containing  all  containing  all  containing 

C,  R,  H  C,  R,  h  c,  R,  and  H,  or  A 

If  cream  glabrous  be  substituted  for  white  glabrous  the 
result  is  the  same  so  far  as  sap-colour  and  hoariness  are 
concerned,  and  in  /%  ^^^Y  those  plants  can  be  hoary  which 
also  have  coloured  sap. 

Finally  when  cream  and  white  glabrous  types  are  crossed 
together,  /^^  is  purple  and  hoary,  thus  showing  reversion  in 
colour,  owing  to  the  meeting  of  the  two  complementary 
factors  C  and  R,  one  coming  in  from  the  cream  and  one 
from  the  white  ;  and  also  reversion  to  hoariness  because  the 
hoariness-factor  was  really  present  all  the  while  in  both  the 
cream  and  the  white  types,  but  was  unable  to  show  itself 
because  one  of  the  sap-colour  elements  was  absent  in  each 
type.  The  heterozygosis  of  the  two  types  brings  together 
all  the  three  elements  C,  R,  and  H,  so  the  F^  plants  are 
both  coloured  and  hoary. 

The  reason  why  hoary-leaved  plants  are  never  produced 
by  crossing  two  types  possessing  coloured  sap  is  at  once 
apparent.  For  if  the  factor  for  hoariness  were  present  in 
these  types,  they  would  be  hoary. 

As  may  well  be  supposed  the  disentangling  of  these 
results  was  a  long  and  tedious  process.  The  occurrences 
seemed  at  first  contradictory,  but  after  it  had  been  ascer- 


134  Swedes  and  Turnips  [ch. 

talned  that  each  kind  of  family  was  produced  with  regularity 
as  the  consequence  of  a  particular  kind  of  union,  the  work 
of  bringing  all  these  into  one  analytical  scheme  was  only  a 
matter  of  time.  Much  still  remains  to  be  done  before  the 
analysis  will  be  complete  for  Stocks  in  general.  For 
example,  among  the  Brompton  Stocks  races  occur  which  are 
hoary  though  devoid  of  sap- colour,  and  as  yet  we  are  not 
aware  what  condition  or  factor  exists  which  there  enables 
the  hoariness-factor  to  assert  itself. 

In  cases  like  these  we  get  glimpses  of  the  strict  specific 
rules  which  govern  the  genetics  of  pigmentation.  In  the 
Sweet  Pea  again  we  have  found  that  both  variation  in  the 
pollen-shape  and  in  the  structure  of  the  standard  petal  are 
closely  related  with  the  distribution  of  the  factor  which 
turns  the  colouring  matter  purple.  There  is  every  hope 
that  in  our  further  analyses  these  apparently  trivial 
phenomena  will  serve  as  indications  of  the  underlying 
processes. 

Apart  however  from  these  curious  inter-relations  be- 
tween colours  and  structural  peculiarities,  there  are  several 
remarkable  specific  phenomena  to  be  seen  in  the  genetic 
behaviour  of  colours.  Of  these  some  examples  may  be 
given  as  incentives  to  future  experiment.  General  rules 
regarding  colour-inheritance  are  scarcely  to  be  expected  as 
yet,  for  very  little  is  known  of  the  pigments  of  either 
animals  or  plants.  Beyond  the  fact  that  albinism  has  always 
been  found  to  be  recessive  to  colour  in  both  animals  and 
plants  no  general  proposition  can  be  put  forward  with 
confidence.  We  believe  also  that  yellow  chromoplast-colour 
is  always  recessive  to  white  or  colourless  chromoplast-colour, 
though  the  cases  studied  are  not  numerous  enough  to  justify 
a  general  assertion.  Stocks,  Sweet  Peas,  Swedes  and 
Turnips,  Verbascum,  may  be  cited  as  plants  following  this 
rule  and  no  clear  exception  is  yet  known. 

Mr  Arthur  Sutton  tells  me  it  is  well  known  that  when 
Swedes  are  being  grown  for  seed,  Turnips  must  not  be 
allowed  to  flower  near  them,  but  that  in  growing  turnip- 
seed,  no  injury  is  done  by  the  presence  of  flowering  Swedes. 
The  meaning  of  this  is  now  clear.  The  Swedes  are  in 
general  yellow-fleshed,  their  colour  being  due  to  yellow 
plastids.     Turnips  as  a   rule  are  white.      If  therefore  the 


viit]  Black  Fruits  135 

pollen  of  Turnips  Is  carried  by  Insects  to  the  Swedes,  the 
hybrid  thus  produced  will  be  whIte-fleshed,  and  consequently 
attract  attention,  spoiling  the  uniformity  of  the  crop.  But 
as  the  white  of  the  Turnip  is  a  dominant,  no  visible  effect 
is  produced  even  though  Swede  pollen  Is  brought  by  the 
insects  to  the  Turnip  flowers,  for  F^  is  white.  In  /%  of 
course  yellow  Turnips  would  appear"^,  but  as  the  roots  are 
almost  alw^ays  eaten  off,  this  result  is  scarcely  ever  reached 
by  the  farmer. 

It  might  be  expected  perhaps  that  the  blue  and  purple 
colours  In  flowers  would  always  be  dominant  to  the  reds, 
but  this  is  not  so.  In  Stocks,  Sweet  Peas,  Peas,  and  Salvia 
the  purples  are  dominant.  Probably  the  same  is  true  for 
the  blues  of  De/phinitan,  Cmeraria  and  a  good  many  more, 
but  when  we  come  to  Primula  Sinensis  we  find  blue  a 
recessive  to  the  reds  and  magentas.  Doubtless  the  chemistry 
of  the  blue  pigment  Is  there  quite  different. 

In  Solamirn  and  Atropa  black  fruit  is  dominant  to  the 
yellow  fruit,  but  in  Bryonia  the  red  fruit  of  B.  dioica  Is 
dominant  to  the  black  fruit  of  B.  alba.  This  paradox  has 
been  elucidated  satisfactorily  by  Miss  Wheldale.  She  tells 
me  that  the  nature  of  the  distinction  between  the  two  types 
is  quite  clear.  In  Atropa  the  black  colour  is  due  to  the 
presence  of  a  dark  purple  anthocyanin  which  like  other 
pigments  of  the  same  kind  Is  dominant  to  its  absence.  In 
Bryonia  alba  the  black  colour  Is  caused  by  the  presence  of 
a  little  carotin  in  plastlds,  together  with  green  chlorophyll 
undecomposed.  In  the  red-berried  Bryonia  dioica  the 
chlorophyll  is  decomposed  (just  as  it  Is  In  the  cotyledons  of 
yellow-seeded  Peas)  and  much  carotin  is  present.  Conse- 
quently, as  may  be  expected,  the  presence  of  the  decomposer 
of  the  chlorophyll  is  a  dominant,  as  also  Is  the  abundant 
development  of  the  carotin,  and  thus  the  black  colour  of  the 
fruits  Is  recessive  to  red. 

In  Rabbits,  as  has  been  stated  above,  yellow  Is  a  reces- 
sive to  black,  while  In  Mice  it  Is  a  dominant. 

The  yellow  varieties  of  many  red  Lepldoptera  [Zygaena, 
Arctia,   &c.)  are  presumably  recessive t,  and  the  same  Is 

*  From  Mr  Sutton's  experiments  (262)  it   seems  however  that  F^  is 
sterile. 

t  Proved  for  Callimorpha  dottiinula.     See  p.  44. 


136  Melanic  Types  [ch. 

apparently  true  of  the  yellow  fruits,  as  compared  with  the 
red  fruits  of  their  corresponding  types,  and  of  the  yellow 
flowers  of  some  Composites  {e.g.  Gerbera)  ^. 

In  many  types  of  flowers,  e.g.  Stocks,  Primula,  Sweet 
Pea,  the  very  dark  and  more  fully-coloured  varieties  are 
regularly  recessive  to  the  less  dark  types,  whether  purple  or 
red.  The  same  will  almost  certainly  be  proved  for  Cycla- 
men, Rose,  Hollyhock,  Dahlia,  Carnation,  Sweet  William, 
and  many  more.  In  Antirrhinum  Miss  Wheldale  finds  that 
among  magentas  the  darker  are  recessive  to  the  common 
colours,  but  among  the  crimsons  or  reds  the  darker  are 
dominant  to  the  lighter. 

The  difficulties  which  preclude  general  statements  in 
regard  to  the  genetic  relations  of  melanic  types  among 
animals  have  been  illustrated  in  much  that  has  gone  before. 
The  loose  description  "  melanic  varieties,"  common  in  the 
writings  of  systematists,  covers  a  number  of  phenomena 
essentially  distinct.  For  example  there  are  melanic  forms 
which  owe  their  greater  blackness  to  the  presence  of  some 
dominant  factor  responsible  for  a  greater  deposit  of  black,  or 
at  least  dark,  pigment.  In  Fowls,  for  instance,  black  is  at 
least  partially  dominant  over  the  bankiva  colour  which 
fanciers  call  ''  Black-red."  The  dark  brown  variety  called 
"  Brown-breasted"  is  similarly  a  dominant.  In  Pigeons,  as 
Staples-Browne  has  proved,  black  is  dominant  to  the  blue 
of  the  wild  type.  In  the  Horse  the  presence  of  black,  as  in 
bays  and  browns,  is  dominant  over  the  absence  of  blacks  as 
in  chestnutst. 

On  the  contrary  in  Rabbits,  Rats,  Mice,  &c.  the  black 
variety  is  produced  by  the  o?nission  of  the  agouti-factor,  G, 
from  the  wild  type,  and  black  thus  is  apparently  a  recessive. 
Even  here  however  the  presence  of  black  pigment  is 
dominant  to  its  own  absence.  It  would  be  interesting  to 
know  to  which  group  the  Cat  belongs. 

In    Insects    again   no    rule   of  universal   application    to 

•*  That  in  Tomato  yellow  fruit  is  recessive  to  red  was  established  by 
Hurst  (160,  p.  115).  The  case  of  Gerbera  is  given  on  the  evidence  of 
crosses  made  by  Mr  R.  I.  Lynch  between  red  Gerbera  /a??iesont  and  the 
yellow-flowered  variety  "  Sir  Michael." 

t  The  genetic  relation  of  the  totally  or  self-coloured  black  to  the  other 
horse-colours  is  not  yet  known. 


VIII]  Silkworms  137 

melanic  varieties  can  be  given.  Of  the  melanic  varieties  of 
Moths  which  have  been  tested  several  are  apparently 
dominant,  more  or  less,  to  the  normal  or  non-melanic  types ; 
but  in  the  black  Chrysomelid  Beetle,  Lina  lapp07iica,  inves- 
tigated by  Miss  McCracken,  the  evidence  shows  plainly 
that  the  uniformly  black  type  was  recessive"^  to  the  normal 
which  has  black  only  in  the  form  of  spots.  The  common 
melanic  varieties  of  the  2 -spot  Lady  bird  {CoccinelLa  bipunc- 
tata)  are  probably  also  recessive  to  the  ordinary  red  type. 

The  experiments  of  Standfuss  interpreted  according  to 
the  Mendelian  system  show  that  the  dark  variety  lugens  is 
dominant  to  the  ordinary  fulvous  yellow  type  of  Aglia  tau 
(a  Saturniid  Moth).  This  case  comes  up  for  consideration 
in  some  detail  with  reference  to  the  heredity  of  Sex  {q.v-). 

In  Silkworms  a  melanic  variety  of  the  moth  is  an  im- 
perfect dominant  to  the  normal,  pale-coloured  moth,  giving 
a  blend-form  in  F^  (Coutagne,  ^2>)' 

As  regards  the  colour  of  the  silk  some  interesting  results 
have  been  obtained.  Yellow  silk  was  always  found  by 
Toyama  (268)  to  be  dominant  to  white,  and  this  result  was 
obtained  by  Coutagne  in  certain  cases  t.  For  example  the 
yellow  race  called  ''  Var  "  was  dominant  in  silk-colour  to  the 
white  Japanese  race  used  by  Toyama  and  to  the  white 
''Bagdad"  used  by  Coutagne;  but  Coutagne  found  the  same 
yellow  to  be  recessive  to  the  white  of  two  French  races  with 
which  he  experimented.  Presumably  this  distinction  is  due 
to  some  idiosyncrasy  on  the  part  of  the  whites,  analogous  to 
what  has  been  seen  in  fowls  and  Primula,  but  as  to  this 
nothing  is  known. 

In  crossing  a  yellow  Siamese  race  with  a  white  Japanese 
race,  Toyama  obtained  a  resolution-effect  in  /%.  Yellow 
X  white  generally  gives  yellow  F^  with  3  yellow  :  i  white  in 
i%  ;  but  in  this  special  case  there  were  two  new  forms  in  /%, 
a  pale  pinkish  yellow,  and  a  greenish  white.  This  latter 
white  could  not  always  be  satisfactorily  distinguished  from 
the  pure  w^hites,  so  the  /%  family  has  to  be  taken  as  9  : 3  : 4. 

*  There  is  a  possible  complication  in  this  case. 

+  Toyama  states  that  the  colour  of  the  silk  always  corresponds  to  that 
of  the  abdominal  legs  of  the  larvae,  and  consequently  it  is  not  necessary 
to  rear  all  the  larvae  up  to  the  spinning  stage  in  order  to  ascertain  the 
colour  of  their  cocoons. 


138  Colours  in  Critical  Parts  [ch. 

Observation,  for  example,  gave  70:21  :  36,  the  expectation 
being  72:24:32.  In  certain  other  cases  this  resolution- 
effect  did  not  occur,  though  from  analogy  it  might  have 
been  expected.  Toyama  regards  the  distinction  as  due  to 
differences  in  the  whites  used,  but  it  seems  not  impossible 
that  it  was  really  the  yellows  which  possessed  individual 
differences  in  this  case.  In  either  event  there  are  difficulties 
to  be  faced,  and  on  the  evidence  it  is  not  clear  which  account 
is  actually  the  more  probable. 

There  are  some  illustrations  of  a  principle  by  which  the 
colour  of  one  part  of  the  organism  may  limit  or  control  the 
possible  colours  of  other  parts. 

In  animals  it  is  fairly  certain  that  the  eye-colour  may  act 
in  this  way,  certain  coat-colours  being  produced  only  if  the 
eye  be  black,  and  others  only  if  the  eye  be  chocolate,  but 
the  facts  are  still  somewhat  obscure. 

If  the  stem  of  the  Chinese  Primula  be  green  and  not  red 
the  deeper  flower-colours  cannot  be  developed  in  self-coloured 
types.  A  cross  with  a  red-stemmed  type,  however  pale  in 
flower-colour,  at  once  reveals  the  presence  of  the  factors  for 
the  deep  colours  if  they  are  there. 

On  the  contrary,  the  white-edged  types,  such  as  Sutton's 
"Sirdar,"  though  their  flowers  may  be  of  a  deep  shade  of 
purple  or  red,  appear  exclusively  on  stems  which  are  green 
throughout  except  for  a  development  of  red  colour  at  the 
collar  or  extreme  base  of  the  petioles.  Such  "Sirdars" 
cannot  exist  on  a  wholly-coloured  stem.  The  stem  may  be 
parti-coloured  in  Primulas  though  the  flower  is  whole- 
coloured,  but  these  special  types  of  parti-coloured  flower 
can  only  occur  on  a  parti-coloured  stem.  In  the  /%  series 
it  is  curious  to  see  these  deeply  coloured,  white-edged, 
flowers  on  stems  apparently  green,  while  none  of  their 
green-stemmed  sisters  with  self-coloured  flowers  can  bear  a 
flower  darker  than  pale  salmon-pink. 

Another  striking  example  of  the  same  phenomenon  is  to 
be  seen  in  these  Primulas,  with  the  difference  that  there  the 
want  of  a  particular  colour  in  the  critical  or  "controlling" 
position  is  due  to  the  dominance  of  a  negative  character,  not 
to  the  absence  of  a  complementary  one.  Certain  deep  red 
spots  occur  in  some  varieties,  e.g.  Sutton's  "Crimson  King" 


VIII]  Discussion  of  Coloitr-Evidejtce  139 

(a  fine  dark  red),  on  the  petals  just  external  to  the  yellow 
eye  (see  Plate  VI).  These  spots  are  never  formed  tinless 
the  stigma  is  red.  When  such  a  type  is  crossed  with  one 
having  a  green  stigma,  F^  has  a  green  stigma  and  no  spots 
on  the  petals.  In  /%  there  are  of  course  some  with  green 
stigmas  and  some  with  red,  some  with  spots  and  some  with 
no  spots.  But  the  distribution  of  these  two  characters 
shows  that  the  combination  green  stigma  +  spot  on  petals 
does  not  occur.  The  stigma  may  be  red  though  no  spot  be 
formed,  but  if  the  stigma  be  green,  the  spot  is  absent,  though 
the  factor  for  it  may  exist  in  the  individual. 

Formerly  such  cases  might  have  been  regarded  as 
examples  of  ''correlation,"  but  that  term  is  only  applicable 
to  them  in  a  loose  and  quite  incorrect  sense. 

Nothing  so  fully  demonstrates  the  fundamental  signifi- 
cance of  colour  in  the  economy  of  plants  and  animals  as  the 
strange  series  of  phenomena  that  have  been  discovered  in 
regard  to  the  complex  inter-relations  between  the  genetic 
behaviour  of  certain  kinds  of  pigmentation  on  the  one  hand 
and  certain  structural  features  on  the  other.  In  the  chapters 
dealing  with  gametic  coupling  and  with  the  heredity  of  Sex 
it  will  be  shown  that  not  only  the  factors  governing  structure, 
but  also  the  factors  which  are  the  ultimate  cause  of  sexual 
differentiation,  may  be  distributed  among  the  germ-cells 
according  to  systems  which  are  modified  and  ordered  in 
inter-dependence  on  the  distribution  of  the  factors  for  colour. 


Summary  and  Disctission  of  the  Evidence  as  to  the 
Genetics  of  Colour  and  Colour-Patter^is. 

Since  we  have  abundant  proof  that  the  development  of 
colour  and  even  of  particular  colours  may  be  bound  up  with 
other  features  of  morphological  or  physiological  importance, 
it  is  clearly  impossible  to  regard  the  genetics  of  colour- 
characters  as  apart  from  the  rest.  A  summary  of  the 
chapters  dealing  with  that  subject  will  nevertheless  be  useful 
at  this  point,  and  with  this  may  be  combined  a  brief  dis- 
cussion of  essential  points. 

In  many  animals  and  plants  colour  has  been  shown 
experimentally  to  behave  as  if  due  to  a  single  allelomorphic 


140  Discussion  of  Colour-Evidence  [ch. 

factor.  In  three  cases  among  plants  (Sweet  Pea,  Stock, 
Orchids)  however  we  already  know  that  the  production  of 
colour  {sc.  sap-colour)  requires  the  fortuitous  concourse  of 
two  complementary  factors  which  have  independent  distribu- 
tions in  gametogenesis,  and  individuals  lacking  either  of 
these  factors  are  completely  devoid  of  colour. 

In  the  light  of  this  discovery  we  naturally  ask  whether 
it  is  not  probable  that  the  sap-colours  of  plants  in  general 
may  not  in  reality  be  produced  by  pairs  of  complementary 
factors.  It  is  tempting  also  to  speculate  on  the  possibility 
that  the  colours  of  animals  may  have  a  similar  nature.  At 
present  however  the  objection  holds  that  in  no  species  of 
animal  have  two  pure  albinos  been  found  to  produce  coloured 
offspring  when  mated  together,  and  the  F^  ratio  from  the 
cross  albino  x  coloured  is  always  3  coloured  :  i  albino,  never 
9  :  7.  But  it  may  be  suggested  with  great  plausibility  that 
this  simply  indicates  that  every  individual,  coloured  or 
albino,  contains  one  of  the  two  factors,  and  the  question 
whether  colour  is  a  single — or  a  double — factor  character 
remains  undecided.  If  a  variation  were  to  occur  by  which  the 
supposed  common  factor  was  omitted  from  the  composition 
of  an  albino,  albinos  bearing  respectively  each  of  the  two 
factors  could  be  raised,  and  nothing  would  then  preclude  the 
production  of  coloured  individuals  by  crossing  the  two  sorts 
of  albinos  together. 

At  first  sight  some  of  the  facts  related  in  regard  to  fowls 
seem  to  supply  evidence  of  this  kind.  White  Silky  x  a 
recessive  white  strain  produces  F^  fully  coloured.  But 
neither  parent  is  an  albino  in  any  strict  sense,  for  both  have 
eyes  fully  pigmented.  As  a  matter  of  fact  also  the  Silky 
breed,  though  quite  white  in  plumage  when  adult,  often — 
perhaps  always — has  some  buff  colour  in  its  down.  The 
resemblance  is  therefore  far  from  being  complete. 

Another  case  which  suggests  a  similar  interpretation  is 
that  of  eye-colour  in  the  mouse,  for  there  black  eyes  result 
in  F^  from  crossing  certain  pink-eyed  mice  having  coloured 
coats  with  certain  albinos.  But  there  again  one  of  the 
parents  is  obviously  not  albino,  and  as  we  now  know  from 
Miss  Durham's  observations,  the  eye  of  the  coloured  parent 
though  ostensibly  pink,  really  contains  a  small  but  definite 
amount  of  pigment. 


VIII]  Discussion  of  Colour-Evidence  141 

Animals  and  plants  are  alike  in  the  fact  that  their  colours, 
however  produced,  may  be  modified  by  the  presence  of 
additional  factors.  In  each  case  therefore  we  must  conceive 
of  one  lowest  or  hypostatic  colour,  and  of  epistatic  factors 
superimposed  on  this  which  produce  their  several  effects. 
In  the  Sw^eet  Pea  the  lowest  colour  is  red,  which  is  turned 
to  purple  or  blue  if  the  factor  having  this  power  is  present. 
Similarly  in  the  mouse  the  lowest  colour  is  chocolate,  which 
becomes  black  if  the  black  factor  is  added,  and  so  on.  The 
intensity  and  also  the  distribution  or  pattern  of  colours 
behave  in  descent  as  if  they  also  were  governed  by  such 
superimposed  factors,  though  as  will  presently  appear,  it  is 
not  certain  that  this  mode  of  representation  is  strictly 
correct.  However  this  may  be,  we  are  safe  in  regarding 
the  pigmentation  of  animals  and  plants  as  a  character  usually 
resulting  from  the  combined  operations  of  several  distinct 
factors,  transmitted  separately  in  heredity. 

Applying  conceptions  which  have  lately  become  current 
in  physiology  Cuenot  suggested  that  the  determiners  which 
modify  colour  in  the  mouse,  for  instance,  may  be  distinct 
diastases  acting  on  a  single  chro^nogen  substance.  In  the 
present  state  of  physiological  chemistry  it  is,  I  suppose, 
impossible  to  speak  with  confidence  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
bodies  concerned  and  we  must  keep  an  open  mind.  Nothing 
yet  precludes  the  possibility  that  there  may  be  one  diastase 
responsible  for  the  production  of  colour,  and  another  set  of 
bodies  which,  acting  in  the  presence  of  the  diastase  and  of 
the  chromogen,  determine  the  quality  or  shade  of  the 
colour '^. 

So  in  the  mouse,  the  wild  grey  colour  results  from  the 
joint  action  of  at  least  three  factors:  (i)  the  colour,  which,  if 
no  epistatic  factor  is  present,  would  be  chocolate;  (2)  a  black 
determiner,  which  causes  black  pigment  to  appear  ;  (3)  the 
agouti-factor,  G,  which  gives  the  hairs  their  banded  appear- 
ance and  also  causes  some  yellow  pigment  to  be  formed  in 
them.  In  rats  a  black  variety  exists  because  the  factor  G 
may  be  absent,  but  no  chocolate  variety  has  been  recorded 
because  the  factor  for  blackness  has  not  yet  fallen  out.      If 

■^  As  pointed  out  above,  Cuenot's  suggestion  that  in  the  case  of  mice 
the  agouti-factor,  (9,  is  allelomorphic  to  the  factor  for  blackness,  B^  is  not 
an  adequate  representation  of  the  phenomena.     (See  p.  76.) 


142  Patterns  of  Colour  [ch. 

a  chocolate  rat  were  to  be  produced,  then  by  crossing  it  with 
the  wild  grey  type,  blacks  must  occur  in  /%,  just  as  they  are 
known  to  do  in  the  case  of  the  same  mating  in. mice. 

The  facts  compel  the  recognition  of  such  a  series  of 
determining  elements,  and  it  is  perhaps  simpler  to  imagine 
these  elements  as  distinct  from  the  exciting  cause,  and 
additional  to  it,  while  rem.embering  the  possibility  that  they 
may  in  reality  be  only  modifications  of  it. 

Similarly  in  attempting  to  express  the  genetic  inter- 
relations of  the  several  patterns  of  a  colour  as  depending  on 
the  existence  of  definite  factors,  we  have  to  bear  in  mind 
that  w^e  are  only  using  a  convenient  symbolism.  It  is  not 
incumbent  on  us  to  believe  that  there  are  any  physiological 
substances  which  have  the  power  of  governing  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  colour.  Experiment  shows  that  the  power  to 
cause  the  colour  to  be  uniformly  distributed  as  in  the 
"self"  type,  or  to  be  restricted  to  special  regions  of  the 
body  as  in  the  Dutch  rabbit,  for  instance,  can  be  carried  by 
the  gametes,  and  that  when  these  two  possibilities  are  com- 
bined in  heterozygosis,  they  segregate  in  gametogenesis. 

This  being  so,  the  two  possibilities  may  thus  be  repre- 
sented symbolically  as  two  factors,  having  regard  to  their 
effects  on  the  configuration  of  the  resulting  zygote  ;  but  if 
we  must  attempt  to  imagine  an  answer  to  the  question, 
wherein  does  the  distinction  between  self  pattern  and  Dutch 
pattern  physiologically  consist,  we  should,  I  suppose,  refer 
it  rather  to  differences  in  the  distribution  of  one  of  the 
chromogenic  factors  than  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  an 
additional  element.  In  the  self-coloured  rabbit  the  two 
colour-producing  elements  are  generally  distributed  over  the 
skin,  while  in  the  Dutch  rabbit  either  the  chromogen  or  the 
diastase — if  these  be  the  critical  substances — is  restricted  to 
certain  areas.  The  colours  in  the  pied  animal  thus  come 
out  in  certain  patches  just  as  do  lithographic  colours  upon 
the  prepared  parts  of  the  stone  when  the  ink  is  applied  to 
the  whole  surface. 

As  the  black  rabbit  or  mouse  is  an  animal  from  which 
the  grey  determiner,  G,  is  absent,  so  the  pied  animal  is  one 
from  which  the  self-coloured  distribution  is  absent.  Never- 
theless the  essential  distinction  between  the  two  forms  must 
surely  be  quantitative.     In  the  self-coloured  type  one  of  the 


VIII]  Stibtraction-Stages  1 43 

substances,  say  the  chromogen,  is  distributed  over  the  whole 
surface,  but  in  the  Dutch-marked,  for  example,  it  is  reduced 
in  quantity.  The  reduction  however  occurs  in  a  fairly 
definite  way,  leading  to  the  formation  of  a  type  having  a 
recognizably  distinct  pattern.  It  does  not  seem  an  un- 
reasonable speculation  to  suppose  that  we  have  here  to  deal 
with  a  condition  in  which  the  amount  of  the  substance  is 
insufficient  to  cover  the  whole  region  which  it  occupies  in 
the  self-coloured  type,  though  why  it  should  be  restricted 
to  one  special  region  more  than  another  it  is  impossible 
to   say. 

If  the  definite  pied  phases  are  to  be  thus  regarded  as 
representing  quantitative  diminution  in  the  development  of 
one  of  the  determining  substances,  we  may  make  a  similar 
supposition  in  regard  to  the  diluted  colorations  already 
mentioned  in  the  case  of  mice.  In  the  diluted  colours  the 
reduction  in  quantity,  instead  of  diminishing  the  coloured 
area  while  keeping  the  intensity  of  the  colour,  is  effected  by 
diminishing  the  intensity  of  the  colour  while  the  totality  of 
the  distribution  is  retained.  The  black  Dutch-marked 
mouse  may  thus  be  imagined  to  be  a  mouse  in  which  one 
of  the  colour-factors  exists  in  its  full  intensity,  though  there 
is  not  enough  of  it  to  cover  the  skin,  while  in  the  blue  mouse 
the  factor  is  generally  distributed  over  the  skin  but  in  a 
dilute  condition.  In  both  cases  alike  the  subtraction-stage 
as  we  may  call  it  is  a  fairly  definite  stage  in  the  reduction  of 
the  amount  of  pigment. 

A  physical  analogy — doubtless  imperfect,  but  neverthe- 
less instructive — may  be  drawn  from  the  way  in  which 
various  oils  distribute  themselves  over  the  surface  of  a 
liquid  with  which  they  do  not  mix,  some  forming  large 
circumscribed  patches  of  greater  thickness,  which  may  be 
compared  with  the  patches  on  the  Dutch  rabbit,  others 
spreading  in  a  thin  layer  over  the  whole  surface,  like  the 
dilute  colours  spread  over  the  whole.  The  analogy  breaks 
down  at  the  fact  that  in  the  oils  the  physical  distinctions  to 
which  the  different  behaviours  are  due  cannot  be  transferred 
from  one  oil  to  the  other,  whereas  in  the  rabbit  this  is 
accomplished — a  fact  which  entitles  us  to  represent  the 
several  properties  as  distinct  and  transferable  factors.  Thus 
the  results  of  the  cross  between  a  black-and-white  Dutch- 


144  Pattern  showing  in  Albino  [ch. 

marked  mouse  and  a  self-coloured  blue  may  be  represented 
as  due  to  the  re-comblnations  of  the  two  pairs  of  factors. 

1.  6",  self  colour.         s,  its  absence,  viz.  Dutch-marked. 

2.  Z>,  dense  colour.         d^  its  absence,  viz.  dilute  colour. 

Black  is  common  to  both  parents,  and  so  need  not  be  represented. 

Dutch-marked  black  x  Blue 

sD  Sd 

Fx Black  self  colour 

SsDd 
7^2 •••Black  self  colour        Black  Dutch         Blue  self  colour        Blue  Dutch 
^  SD  ^sD  I  Sd  1  sd 

The  recognition  of  these  subtraction-stages  becomes 
important  when  we  attempt  to  estimate  the  minimum 
number  of  factors  necessary  to  produce  the  results  we  per- 
ceive. Symbolically  the  various  subtraction-stages  may  be 
represented  as  depending  on  the  removal  of  distinct  factors, 
but  physiologically  they  may  be  caused  by  special  quantita- 
tive subtractions  from  one  of  the  factors  causing  the  produc- 
tion of  colour,  and  consequently  an  economy  of  hypothesis 
may  be  made. 

In  exceptional  cases  the  pattern  which  an  albino  form  is 
carrying,  if  the  expression  be  permitted,  can  be  actually 
recognized  by  inspection  though  no  real  colour  is  developed. 
For  example  Lock  noticed  the  following  case  in  edible  peas 
(Pisu7n  sativufit).  Certain  varieties  of  peas  have  brown 
anastomosing  lines  on  the  coats  of  the  seeds.  These  peas 
are  called  maples  in  England  (pots per drix  of  French  seeds- 
men). The  maple  skin  occurs  only  in  the  seeds  of  strains 
which  have  coloured  flowers.  Such  plants  crossed  with  an 
ordinary  white-flowered  type  having  a  plain  seed-coat  gave 
this  result  : 

Parents Flowers  coloured  x  Flowers  white 

coats  maple  coats  plain 

jF^ Flowers  coloured 

coats  maple 
7^2 Flowers  coloured  Flowers  white 

9  coats  maple        3  coats  plain  4  coats  plain:  some  showing 

traces  of  mapling 

Among  the  white-flowered  group  In  /%  were  some  plants 
which  bore  seeds  showing  traces  of  the  maple  marking,  not 
as  brown  lines,  for  no  actual  pigment  seemed  to  exist,  but  as 
a  damasked  pattern  showing  where  the  mapling  would  have 


VIII]  ' '  Latency  "  1 45 

been  if  the  plant  had  been  a  coloured  one.  Lock  (176)  has 
spoken  of  this  faint  pattern  as  the  "ghost"  of  the  mapling. 

Mudge  (204)  has  observed  a  very  similar  phenomenon  in 
young  albino  rats.  When  the  hair  is  short  the  coat  may  be 
seen  to  be  similarly  damasked,  those  parts  which  would  be 
pigmented  if  the  animal  had  pigment  looking  different  in 
consistency  from  the  rest. 

What  the  exact  difference  between  the  hairs  in  these 
areas  and  the  rest  may  be  has  not  been  ascertained,  but 
evidently  it  must  be  a  modification  due  to  the  existence  of 
one  of  the  factors  for  colour  in  those  hairs.  They  are  the 
parts  prepared  to  develop  colour  if  the  other  element  were 
present  in  them.  In  black  leopards  and  black  kittens  a 
similar  damask  effect  can  often  be  seen,  the  parts  which  in 
the  spotted  leopard  or  tabby  cat  would  be  light  being  dis- 
tinguishable on  careful  examination.  As  it  is  not  yet  known 
whether  black  is  dominant  or  recessive  in  these  cases  the 
exact  meaning  of  these  marks  is  uncertain. 

Both  in  animals  and  plants  there  is  satisfactory  proof 
that  whiteness,  the  absence  of  colour,  may  be  due  to  partial 
or  complete  suppression  of  the  pigment-factors  and  not 
merely,  as  in  the  albino,  to  their  absence.  This  suppression 
is  caused  by  a  dominant,  epistatic  factor.  White  individuals 
containing  such  a  factor  are  more  or  less  totally  dominant 
whites,  whereas  whites  due  to  the  absence  of  one  or  more 
pigmentation-factors  are  recessive  whites.  A  cross  between 
a  dominant  and  a  recessive  white  may  obviously  cause 
coloured  individuals  to  appear  in  F^,  if  the  factors  for  pig- 
mentation were  introduced  by  the  parental  types  ;  for  in  /% 
there  will  be  individuals  lacking  the  suppressing  factor. 

Confusion  has  been  introduced  into  these  analyses  by 
the  use  of  the  term  "latency"  in  application  to  those  factors 
which  cannot  be  perceived  without  breeding  tests.  This 
difficulty  has  occurred  especially  in  regard  to  albinos,  though 
it  pervades  the  whole  system  of  factorial  analysis.  Albinos, 
for  instance,  in  any  species  may  have  the  most  diverse 
factorial  composition.  All  that  is  common  to  them  is  the 
absence  of  colour,  i.e.,  if  we  adopt  Cuenot's  suggestion,  of 
the  chromogenic  substance.  The  composition  of  each  albino 
may  be  ascertained  by  crossing  it  with  a  coloured  type  and 
raising  the  /%  generation.     If  the  coloured  type  chosen  be 

B.  H.  10 


1 46  ''  Latejtcy  "  [ch. 

in  all  its  characters  hypostatic — or  recessive,  to  use  the 
simpler  if  less  accurate  term — to  all  the  factors  of  the  albino, 
the  composition  of  the  albino  may  be  seen  even  from  F^. 
For  instance,  when  bred  to  a  pure  black,  a  GG  albino  will 
give  greys  only  ;  a  GB  albino  will  give  equal  numbers  of 
greys  and  blacks  ;  while  a  BB  albino  will  give  blacks  only. 
Conversely  it  is  possible  to  manufacture  by  suitable  matings 
albinos  of  each  composition.  For  example,  albinos  extracted 
from  chocolates  can  only  bear  the  chocolate  determiner. 
Those  from  black  mice  must  all  bear  the  black  determiner 
if  the  families  have  been  large  and  no  chocolate  has  occurred. 
So,  those  from  greys  must  all  bear  the  determiner  G,  if  in 
sufficient  numbers  no  blacks  or  chocolates  have  been  pro- 
duced. With  regard  to  pattern  and  saturation  or  dilution 
of  colour  the  case  is  exactly  the  same.  An  albino  from 
Dutch-marked  parents  cannot  bear  the  self-colour  factor, 
and  one  from  blues  cannot  bear  the  saturation-factor. 

It  is  this  fact,  that  in  most  cases  the  albino  will  be 
bearing  the  determiner  proper  to  the  colour  of  the  last 
coloured  parent  from  which  it  was  extracted,  which  has  led 
several  writers  to  speak  of  these  colours  or  patterns  as 
"latent"  in  the  albino.  This  mode  of  expression  is  much 
to  be  regretted.  There  is  no  "latency"  of  black,  or  grey, 
or  self-colour,  as  a  whole  in  the  albino.  Certain  factors 
which  are  essential  to  the  production  of  those  features  may 
be  present  in  any  albino  of  unknown  origin,  but  this  fact 
does  not  in  any  way  touch  the  question  of  the  purity  of  the 
germ-cells,  as  has  been  quite  erroneously  suggested.  Sul- 
phate of  copper  is  blue  and  chloride  of  copper  is  green,  but 
it  would  be  incorrect  to  speak  of  blue  as  latent  in  sulphuric 
acid,  or  of  green  as  latent  in  hydrochloric  acid  ;  nor  has  the 
acid  obtained  from  chloride  of  copper  more  of  "greenness" 
in  it  than  has  the  same  acid  obtained  from  sodium  chloride. 

Taking  the  evidence  respecting  the  genetics  of  colour  as 
a  whole,  though  much  remains  which  is  obscure,  as  has 
been  stated,  especially  in  the  discussion  of  yellow  in  the 
Rodents,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  with  rare 
exceptions  it  will  be  found  possible  to  express  the  whole 
series  of  phenomena  as  due  to  the  combination  and  re-com- 
bination of  a  limited  number  of  recognizable  factors  which 
are  treated  by  the  cell-divisions  of  gametogenesis  as  units. 


VIII]  The  Nature  of  Variation  147 

As  the  nature  and  properties  of  each  of  these  units  are 
successively  determined,  we  cannot  doubt  that  additions  will 
be  made  to  the  number  of  examples,  already  not  inconsider- 
able, in  which  a  fixed  interrelation  can  be  proved  to  exist 
between  the  units  which  govern  colour  and  those  responsible 
for  form  and  other  physiological  attributes. 

In  any  attempt  to  picture  the  process  of  Evolution  the 
group  of  genetic  phenomena  discovered  in  regard  to  colour 
has  extreme  value  and  interest.  We  thus  are  at  once  pro- 
vided with  clear  illustrations  which  enable  us  to  see  the 
nature,  if  not  as  yet  the  causation,  of  Variation,  and  the 
significance  of  those  particular  Variations  which  we  call 
reversionary.  Such  illustrations  may  well  serve  as  test- 
cases,  by  which  the  truth  of  evolutionary  systems  may  be 
gauged.  Though  the  result  of  these  trials  may  largely  prove 
destructive,  the  facts  are  not  without  a  constructive  bearing. 
One  positive  deduction  cannot  be  overlooked :  that  the 
organism  is  so  built  up  that  definite  additions  to,  or  sub- 
tractions from  its  totality  may  readily  be  made  by  Variation, 
and  that  the  consequence  of  such  alteration  of  the  ingredients 
may  be  recognizably  definite,  or  to  use  another  term, 
specific. 


10- 


CHAPTER   IX 

GAMETIC    COUPLING   AND    SPURIOUS    ALLELOMORPHISM. 

Polle^i- Shape  and  Flower- Co  lour.  Axil- Colour  and  Sterile 
Anthers — Hooded  Standard  and  Flower-Colour  in 
Sweet  Peas. 

We  have  now  to  consider  one  of  the  most  curious  and 
interesting  developments  of  MendeHan  research.  In  all 
the  examples  hitherto  described  the  F^  numbers  have  shown 
that  when  allelomorphs  belonging  to  various  pairs  are  simul- 
taneously distributed  among  the  gametes  in  the  process  of 
gametogenesis,  the  distribution  is  random,  so  that  all  possible 
combinations  are  represented  by  equal  numbers  of  gametes. 
For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  double  heterozygote  formed 
by  crossing  a  yellow,  round  pea  with  a  green,  wrinkled 
variety,  the  gametes  produced  by  the  F^  plant  are  in  equal 
numbers  bearers  of 

(i)  yellow,  round, 

(2)  yellow,  wrinkled, 

(3)  green,   round, 

(4)  green,  wrinkled. 

This  fact  is  proved  by  the  numbers  9:3:3:1  in 
which  the  several  types  of  zygotes  appear  in  F^.  The 
phenomena  now  to  be  described  indicate  a  system  of  segre- 
gation taking  place  in  such  a  way  that  gametes  presenting 
certain  such  combinations  occur  with  greater  frequency  than 
the  others. 

The  example  in  which  this  state  of  things  was  first 
detected  is  that  of  the  pollen-shapes  of  the  Sweet  Pea 
[Lathyrus  odoratus).  The  experiments  in  that  case  were 
begun,  as  has  already  been  described  (p.  89),  by  crossing 
a  white  Emily  Henderson  having  long  pollen,  with  a  white 


CH.  IX]  Gametic  Coupling  1 49 

Emily  Henderson  having  round  i^oVi^n.  The  F^  generation 
was  a  reversionary  purple  bicolor,  with  long  pollen — for 
the  long  pollen-shape  is  dominant — and  from  this  the  F^ 
generation  was  raised  which  consisted  of 

27  purples   :  9  reds   :   28  whites. 

36  :  28 

9  7 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  interrelations  of  these  several 
types  proved  that  the  colour  in  both  purples  and  reds 
is  due  to  the  simultaneous  presence  in  the  zygote  of  two 
factors  which  we  have  called  C  and  R,  and  that  the  white- 
flowered  plants  are  those  in  which  one  or  both  of  these 
factors  are  absent.  The  point,  however,  which  now  con- 
cerns us  more  immediately  is  the  distinction  between  the 
purples  and  the  reds.  This,  we  have  seen,  is  due  to  the 
presence  or  absence  of  a  factor  B,  blue.  Those  coloured 
plants  which  have  the  factor  B  are  purple,  those  devoid 
of  this  factor  B  are  red-flowered. 

We  saw  also  that  there  were  various  subordinate  classes 
among  the  purples  with  corresponding  subordinate  classes 
among  the  reds,  each  due  to  the  possession  or  to  the  want 
of  some  special  factor.  These  differences  are  similarly 
distributed  among  the  purples  and  among  the  reds.  For 
example  if  the  family  is  one  which  contains  picotee  types, 
there  are  picotees  among  the  purples  and  corresponding 
types  among  the  reds,  and  in  each  colour-group  the  pro- 
portions are  the  same,  averaging  3  fully-coloured  to  i 
picotee  in  the  case  of  the  purples  and  the  same  in  the  case 
of  the  reds. 

When  however  the  distribution  of  the  pollen-characters, 
long  and  round,  in  a  family  containing  purple,  red,  and  white 
members  is  examined,  it  is  found  that  taking  the  family  as 
a  whole  the  long-pollened  plants  are  to  the  round-pollened 
as  3  to  I  in  the  usual  way.  Among  the  white-flowered 
also  there  are  3  longs  to  i  round.  But  when  the  purples  and 
the  reds  are  separately  studied,  the  numbers  3  long  :  i  round 
are  not  found.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  purples  there  is  a 
great  excess  of  longs,  which  are  to  the  rounds  as  about 
12  to  I ,  while  among  the  reds  there  is  an  excess  of  roimds, 
which  are  to  the  longs  as  about  3*2  to  i. 


I50 


Gametic  Coupling 


[CH. 


The  result  of  extensive  counting  shows  that  an  approxi- 
mation to  the  observed  numbers  would  be  produced  by  a 
gametic  system  of  such  a  kind  that  the  combinations  of  long 
pollen  with  blue  factor,  and  round  pollen  with  no  blue  factor 


n 


111 


IV 


Fig.  19.  Pollen-grains  of  Sweet  Pea. 
The  normal  long  (dominant)  type  is  shown  in  II  and  IV :  the 
peculiar  round  type  (recessive)  in  I  and  III.  The  upper  figures 
represent  the  dry  condition.  The  lower  figures  show  the  appearance 
in  sulphuric  acid,  which  makes  the  pores  visible.  Three-pored  and 
one-pored  grains  sometimes  occur  among  the  rounds,  but  they  are 
usually  two-pored.  In  IV  one  of  the  grains  is  seen  end-on,  and  in  I 
three  of  the  disc-like  grains  are  seen  edge-wise. 


IX]  Gametic  Coupling  151 

occur  seven  times  as  often  as  the  other  two  possible  combi- 
nations.    We  speak  of  this  phenomenon  as  Gametic  Coupling. 

The  term  "  coupHng  "  is  strictly  applicable,  because  the 
association  is  between  two  dominant  or  "  present "  factors, 
here  those  for  blue  colour  and  long  pollen.  Abnormal 
distributions  due  to  such  coupling  are  to  be  carefully  dis- 
tinguished from  those  described  later  under  the  name 
''Spurious  Allelomorphism,"  to  which  the  term  "coupling" 
should  not  be  applied. 

I  f  the  two  pairs  of  factors  are  expressed  thus  : 

Domt?iant  Recessive 

Blue  colour  B  Red  colour      b 

Long  pollen  L  Round  pollen  / 

the  gametic  series  is  not 

I  BL+i  Bl^  ibL+i  bl, 
but  7  BL  +  I  Bl^  I  bL  +  j  bl, 

or  very  nearly  so. 

Such  a  gametic  series  would  give  an  /%  family  com- 
posed thus  : 

177  blue-long  :  15  blue-round  :   15  red-long  :  49  red-round. 

Reference  to  Fig.  17  will  show  how  these  numbers  are 
arrived  at. 

These  ratios  agree  very  nearly  with  those  observed  in 
actual  experiments.  For  example  the  following  series  has 
been  produced. 

Purple  Red  White 

Long         Round         Long         Round  Long         Round 

Observed       1528  106  117  381  1199  394 

Calculated     1448*5         1227  1227  401*5  1220-5  407*4 

The  correspondence  between  calculation  and  observa- 
tion is  very  close,  and  in  the  case  of  the  one  figure  which 
departs  sensibly  from  expectation  it  may  be  suggested  with 
great  probability  that  the  observed  excess  of  purple  longs  is 
due  to  some  amount  of  cross-fertilisation  effected  by  the 
leaf-cutter  bee,  Megachile,  Such  crossing  would  obviously 
tend  to  increase  this  class  at  the  expense  of  the  rest. 

Study  of  the  F.^  families  has  proved  conclusively  that 
the  abnormal  distribution  occurs  only  among  the  gametes 
of  plants  which  are  heterozygous  both  in  the  pollen  characters 


152  Gametic  Cotiplmg  [ch. 

and  also  as  regards  the  factor  B.  Plants  that  are  homozy- 
gous In  either  of  these  allelomorphs  have  the  normal  distri- 
bution of  characters  among  their  gametes,  and  they  may 
be  heterozygous  in  C,  R,  or  in  any  of  the  other  factors 
recognized  in  the  Sweet  Pea  without  any  departure  from 
the  ordinary  ratios  being  produced. 

The  gametic  series  has  been  spoken  of  as  7  :  i  :  i  :  7 
and  these  are  the  numbers  which  fit  the  observed  result  most 
closely,  but  attention  should  at  once  be  called  to  the  possi- 
bility that  the  series  may  in  reality  be  8  :  i  :  i  :  8.  The 
observed  numbers  are  too  small  to  enable  us  as  yet  to  dis- 
criminate between  these  two  possibilities,  though,  as  will  be 
seen  when  the  nature  of  coupling  is  discussed,  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  two  series  must  be  entirely  different.  It  is 
however  to  be  noticed  that  the  series  of  gametes  necessary 
to  complete  the  whole  system  is  thus  either  16,  or  164-2. 

In  the  next  two  examples  of  such  partial  coupling  the 
association  is  in  groups  of  32,  or  32  +  2.  Both  these  also 
occur  in  the  Sweet  Pea.  The  first  concerns  the  peculiar 
sterility  or  contabescence  of  the  anthers  which  has  already 
been  mentioned  as  a  recessive  character.  The  second  factor 
is  again  a  colour-factor.  Among  the  various  factors  which 
control  colour  in  the  Sweet  Pea  is  one  which  causes  the 
appearance  of  a  reddish  purple  spot  in  the  axils  of  the 
leaves,  referred  to  already  as  the  dark-axil  factor.  When 
this  factor  is  present  (and  the  fiowers  are  coloured)  the 
axils  are  dark  ;  when  it  is  absent  the  axils  are  simply  green 
as  they  always  are  in  o;/^/^^- flowered  plants^.  At  an  early 
stage  in  the  Sweet  Pea  investigation  it  was  noticed  that 
when  a  family  contained  plants  differing  in  respect  of  sterility 
and  fertility  of  anthers  as  well  as  in  respect  of  dark  and 
light  axils,  the  plants  with  sterility  in  the  anthers  (having 
coloured  flowers)  were  almost  always  light-axilled,  and 
conversely  the  dark-axilled  plants  were  almost  always  fertile 
in  the  anthers.     In  such  families,  among  the  white-fiowered 

■**■  Dark  axils  sometimes  exist  in  plants  which  have  the  flowers  so 
nearly  white  as  to  pass  for  real  whites.  Probably  in  all  such  flowers  a 
trace  of  colour  is  developed,  and  certainly  in  them  the  seed-coat  is  always 
black  as  it  is  in  all  the  Sweet  Peas  with  coloured  flowers. 

Plants  raised  from  wild  Sicilian  seed  were  all  purple  bicolour  in  flower- 
colour,  and  nearly  all  had  dark  axils,  but  a  few  had  light  axils. 


IX]  spurious  Allelomorphism  153 

plants,  the  sterile  to  the  fertile  were  3  to   i    without  com- 
plication. 

Statistical  examination  of  these  families  on  a  large  scale 
has  shown  that  among  the  plants  with  coloured  flowers 
the  ratio  of  fertile  with  dark  axil  :  fertile  with  light  axil  : 
sterile  with  dark  axil  :  sterile  with  light  axil,  approaches 
closely  to  that  which  would  be  produced  if  the  series  of 
gametes  bearing  these  four  respective  combinations  were 

15   :    I    :    I    :    15. 

The  actual  numbers  observed  were 

Dark  axil  Light  axil 

Fertile  Sterile  Fertile  Sterile 

627  27  17  214 

Expectation    637  27  27  194 

Spurious  Allelomorphism. 

A  third  example  of  partial  gametic  coupling  relates  again 
primarily  to  the  blue  factor  {B)  and  the  pollen-shapes, 
but  in  order  to  make  clear  the  circumstances  in  which  it 
occurs,  another  set  of  phenomena  must  first  be  described. 

In  the  old  types  of  Sweet  Pea  the  standard  is  erect  and 
has  a  small  notch  in  the  middle  of  its  upper  border.  This 
is  the  natural  shape  of  the  wild  flower.  Of  the  modern 
types  many  are  what  is  called  ''hooded."  The  standard  in 
hooded  forms  turns  forward  and  downward  in  various  de- 
grees, the  amount  varying  with  the  type  and  also  to  some 
extent  with  the  weather  and  the  condition  of  the  flower. 
The  hooded  standard  differs  also  from  the  erect  one  in 
having  little  or  no  trace  of  the  central  notch.  This  differ- 
ence causes  the  buds  of  the  two  types  to  be  recognizably 
distinct  before  the  flower  opens,  for  in  the  hooded  type  the 
point  of  the  folded  standard  projects  sharply  forward  in 
front  of  the  wings,  while  in  the  erect  type  this  tip  is  rounded 
off  by  reason  of  the  notch.     (Plate  V.) 

The  hooded  standard  also  is  sometimes  distinguished  by 
the  existence  of  a  sinus  of  variable  size  on  each  side  of  the 
standard,  which  thus  has  lateral  lobes  more  or  less  well 
developed.  These  differences  obviously  point  to  a  different 
distribution  of  the  strains  produced  by  the  growth  in  the 
two  types.  The  lateral  sinus  is  not  represented  in  the 
hooded  flowers  shown  in  Plate  V. 


154  Sp^irio^ts  A lleloinorphis^n  [ch. 

The  hooded  types  may  have  a  great  diversity  of  colours, 
and  fixed  hooded  varieties  now  exist  in  the  purple,  blue, 
red,  pink,  cream  and  other  classes.  It  is  nevertheless  a 
remarkable  fact  that,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  none  of  the 
regular  bicolour  varieties  ever  have  a  really  hooded  standard. 
There  is  for  instance  no  hooded  type  having  the  colour  of 
the  original  purple,  with  its  chocolate-purple  standard  and 
blue  wings,  nor  can  Painted  Lady  with  standard  red  and 
wings  nearly  white  be  produced  in  a  hooded  shape.  On 
the  contrary  the  hooded  types  always  have  the  standard  and 
wings  more  nearly  alike  in  colour,  and  there  is  the  clearest 
evidence  that  in  families  {F.,  and  later  generations)  which 
contain  original  bicolour  purples  as  well  as  hooded  types, 
the  hooded  types  corresponding  to  them  are  of  the  uni- 
colorous  kind  know^n  as  "  Duke  of  Westminster"^." 

From  these  facts  it  is  evident  that  there  is  here  some 
interdependence  between  the  colour  of  the  flower  and  its 
form.  This  interdependence  is  of  course  somatic,  but  as 
will  be  seen  there  is  also  a  gametic  connection  between  the 
phenomena  of  shape  and  colour. 

The  experiments  bearing  on  these  questions  originated 
in  a  cross  between  the  white,  round-pollened  Emily  Hen- 
derson and  a  white,  long-pollened  hooded  type  known  as 
Blanche  Burpee.  The  Emily  Henderson  has  an  ordinary 
erect  standard  with  the  central  notch. 

F^  produced  from  these  two  is  a  bicolour  purple,  with 
erect  standard  and  long  pollen,  indistinguishable  from  the 
reversionary  F^  previously  described  as  the  offspring  of  the 
long  and  round  whites.  7%  from  such  plants  consists  of 
the  following  types  : 

Purple  Red  White 


bicolour      unicolorous  bicolour              erect          hooded 

erect             hooded  erect 

8i                    27  36                    84                 28 

108  112 

27  9 


36  28 

9  7 

*  Similarly  if  the  bicolour  purples  with  dark  wings  are  present  in  the 
class  with  an  erect  standard,  they  are  represented  by  "Duke  of  Sutherland" 
in  the  hooded  class,  viz.  a  deep  unicolorous  purple. 


■fx 


a 
-a 

c 


43 


N^  biO 
t^  bc.S 


in 

>.  -c 

Q- 

X3 

rj 

J3 

n 

5 

U- 

X! 

j= 

OJ 

•«-> 

(/) 

■4_> 

3 

D 

C 

LO 

.2 

'rt 

O 

> 

<V 

a 

vd 

K/; 

3 

p^ 

^^ 

J 

T 

'fi 

CO 

-^ 

r^ 

(— 

'6 

4_j 

• 

(U 

t/5 

trt 

;-i 

, 

<U 

bX3 

tT 

^ 

c 

s 

'% 

^ 

^ 

<*- 

<5) 

(U 

o 

<5> 

s 

0) 

►^ 

'u 

^ 

l-l 

o 

c 

2 

3 

c 

*> 

Q 

(-1 

tn 

• 

■J—* 

4) 

(U 

u-i 

■^ 

0-) 

o 

JS 

4-> 

3 

<u 

Ch 

'Cu 

^ 

^m 

^ 

^ 

1-1 

r\ 

•i^ 

CO 

rt; 

1— < 

u 

(U 

c 

o 

"> 

K. 

■4-> 

o 

(U 

r^ 

^ 

a> 

Q. 

i- 

u5 

p;^ 

a, 

OJ 

>, 

4= 

■i-> 

^ 

'^ 

'd 

^ 

— 

a.) 

rJ5 

- 

C 

ri 

" 

NH 

hX^ 

^ 

u 

-d 

tn 

rt 

c 

.2 

-c 

rt 

d 

'oo 

tiO 

O 

o 

C/) 

■p 

c 

vs 

nr; 

vJL 

c 

^ 

c 

1' 

C/2 

K 

o 

3 

>. 

o 

^ 
u, 

33 

>. 

o 

771 

-d 

U 

P 

<u 

ri     On 


rv.  ON 


IX]  spurious  Allelomorphism  155 

From  these  results  it  appears  that  the  erect  standard  is 
dominant  to  the  hooded.  Next  we  have  the  remarkable 
feature  that  whereas  the  purples  and  the  whites  are  both 
represented  in  the  two  classes  erect  and  hooded,  the  reds 
are  all  erect.  This  fact  indicates  that  those  gametes  which 
bear  the  factor  for  erect  standard  do  not  bear  the  factor 
B  which  causes  the  purple  or  blue  colour ;  and  conversely 
the  gametes  which  do  not  bear  E,  the  erectness-factor,  bear 
B.  The  gametes  in  respect  of  these  two  allelomorphic 
pairs  have  thus  the  composition  Be,  or  bE^  and  as  regards 
transmission  of  characters  the  effect  is  that  which  would  be 
produced  if  B  were  allelomorphic  to  ^.  In  view  of  this 
curious  fact  it  seems  not  impossible  that  we  may  be  obliged 
hereafter  to  extend  the  conception  of  allelomorphism,  and 
to  recognize  that  factors  concerned  with  features  of  organisa- 
tion which  seem  to  have  no  special  physiological  association, 
may  be  allelomorphic  to  each  other. 

Another  curious  result  follows  from  the  existence  of 
this  unexpected  or  spurious  allelomorphism.  If  the  hooded 
purples  in  /%  be  bred  from,  the  /%  families  will  be  either 
all  hooded  purples  again  or  they  will  be  such  plants  together 
with  hooded  whites.  Similarly  the  red  bicolours  will  give 
F^  consisting  either  of  red  bicolours,  or  of  red  bicolours  and 
erect  whites.  But  the  purple  bicolours,  must  all  by  their 
constitution  be  heterozygous  in  both  the  factor  for  erectness 
and  for  blueness,  and  consequently  their  ^^3  families  contain 
hooded  purples,  erect  bicolour  purples,  and  erect  bicolour 
reds  in  the  ratio  1:2:1  (together  with  whites  if  the  par- 
ticular 7%  happens  to  be  heterozygous  in  either  C  or  R,  the 
fundamental  colour-factors). 

Such  bicolour  purples  thus  present  the  anomaly  of  being 
permanent  heterozygotes,  though  in  appearance  they  are 
actually  the  original  type  of  Sweet  Pea.  Families  may  thus 
consist  entirely  of 


Hooded 

Erect 

Erect 

unicolorous  purples 

bicolour  purples 

bicolour  reds 

I                     : 

2                   : 

I 

and  the  bicolour  purples  in  such  families  will  give  similar 
families  again   indefinitely. 

On  determining  the  pollen-characters  of  those  families 


156  Discussion  of  Coup  ling  [ch 

which  contain  erect  and  hooded,  coloured  and  white,  long 
and  round  pollens,  it  was  found  that  in  F,  the  distribution 
followed  the  system  derived  from  the  gametic  series 
7:1:1:7,  but  among  the  F^  families  derived  from  them 
several  were  found  to  exhibit  coupling  between  the  blue 
factor  and  long  pollen  according  to  the  system  15:1:1:15. 
For  instance,  to  take  the  group  of  plants  in  which  this  was 
most  evident,  a  certain  /%  plant  with  purple  flower  and 
erect  standard  together  with  eight  similar  plants  (Its  offspring, 
In  F^  gave  collectively 

Purple  Red 

long           round  long           round 

expectation  on                    583               26  24              170 

15  :  I  :  I  :  15  basis        578               24  24               177 

Here  it  is  practically  certain  that  the  15  :  i  formula 
correctly  expresses  the  gametic  distribution.  Nevertheless, 
though  some  of  the  offspring  of  /%  gave  such  definite 
indications  of  the  15  :  i  system  others  no  less  definitely 
followed  the  7  :  i  plan,  and  others  again  gave  results  so 
uncertain  that  It  was  Impossible  to  assign  them  to  either 
group  with  any  confidence. 

The  facts  are  thus  exceedingly  complex,  and  all  that  can 
be  stated  Is  that  coupling  between  the  blue  factor  and  the 
long  pollen  does  certainly  exist  in  certain  families  derived 
from  a  cross  which  Involved  the  factors  for  erect  and  hooded 
standard  ;  but  that  inasmuch  as  the  F^  distribution  followed 
the  7  :  I  plan^,  the  heterozygosis  between  erectness  and 
hood  cannot  be  the  direct  cause  of  this  change  In  the 
coupling.  Pending  further  analysis  the  distinction  which 
decides  whether  the  coupling  shall  follow  the  7  :  i  system 
or  the  15:1  system  must  be  regarded  as  quite  unknown, 
for  examination  of  the  various  families  has  not  revealed  any 
consistent  difference  between  them  (see  22,  pp.  10-13). 

Since  the  B  factor  is  alternative  to  E,  the  erect  standard, 
in  the  gametic  composition,  it  follows  that  the  zygotic  com- 

*  F^  here  was 

Purple  Red 

long  round  long  round 

expectation  on  296  19  27  85 

7:1:1:7   basis  295  25  25  82 


IX]  and  Spurious  Allelomorphism  157 

binatlon  of  hooded  standard  with  round  pollen  must  be 
exceedingly  rare  in  any  of  these  families.  If  the  gametic 
coupling  is 

7  Blue  long+  i  Blue  round  +  i  Red  long+  7  Red  round, 

the  zygotic  expectation  is,  in  the  simpler  case  where  all  the 
standards  are  erect, 

177  Blue  long  +  1 5  Blue  round  +  1 5  Red  long  +  49  Red  round. 

But  when  the  standards  may  be  either  erect  or  hooded, 
all  the  hooded  plants  are  homozygous  in  B,  and  the  expecta- 
tion of  a  round-pollened  plant  occurring  among  the  BB  class 
is  only  i  in  64.  Observation  agreed  with  this  expectation, 
for  in  the  F.,  families  which  certainly  all  followed  the  7  :  i 
system,  there  were  83  hooded  purple  plants  and  of  them 
one  was  round-pollened.  The  same  expectation  holds  in 
regard  to  the  hooded  plants  w4th  white  flowers,  which  also 
must  all  be  BB.  Unfortunately  most  of  these  were  recorded 
before  the  importance  of  the  question  was  appreciated, 
and  in  them  the  hoods  were  not  noted.  Of  17  plants 
of  this  class  which  were  examined  16  were  long  and 
I    was  round. 

Similarly,  w^hen  the  coupling  is  on  the  15  :  i  :  i  :  15 
system  the  hooded  purples  will  be  still  rarer,  and  should 
occur  only  as  i  in  256  of  their  class.  Among  the  9 
families  which  definitely  followed  the  15:1  plan,  one 
hooded  round  occurred  among  209  plants  of  the  hooded 
class. 


Discussion  of  the  Physiological  Significance  of  Gametic 
Coupling  and  Spurious  A  llelomorphistn. 

The  significance  of  the  phenomena  just  described  lies  in 
the  fact  that  they  dem.onstrate  the  existence  of  a  complex 
interrelation  between  the  factorial  units.  This  interrelation 
is  such  that  certain  combinations  between  factors  may  be 
more  frequent  than  others.  The  circumstances  in  which 
this  interrelation  is  developed  and  takes  effect  we  cannot 
as  yet  distinguish  ;  still  less  can  we  offer  with  confidence 
any  positive  conception  as  to  the  mode  in  which  it  is 
exerted. 


158  Discussion  of  Coupling  [ch. 

The  time  has  not  yet  come  for  such  an  analysis  to  be 
attempted.  Nevertheless  we  can  scarcely  forbear  from  con- 
sidering some  of  the  possibilities  which  suggest  themselves. 

In  spurious  allelomorphism  the  outward  facts  are  com- 
paratively simple.  Two  dominant,  or  "present"  factors, 
behave  as  if  in  the  cell-divisions  of  gametogenesis  they 
repelled  each  other,  and  we  must  suppose  that  this  repulsion 
is  exerted  at  some  definite  cell-division,  such  that  one  factor 
passes  into  one  daughter-cell  and  the  other  factor  into  the 
other.  The  dividing  cell  being  AaBb,  the  daughter-cells 
are  respectively  Ab  and  aB.  Though  as  yet  only  one  case 
has  been  definitely  proved  to  follow  this  system,  the 
evidence  in  that  case  is  very  positive.  Moreover  when  the 
facts  of  sexual  inheritance  come  to  be  related,  a  group  of 
cases  will  be  described  which  conform  so  precisely  with  this 
type-example  of  spurious  allelomorphism  that  it  is  practically 
certain  that  this  case  is  not  a  solitary  example,  but  one 
which  typifies  a  category  of  genetic  phenomena.  It  may 
therefore  be  taken  that  repulsion — or,  more  strictly,  a 
relation  which  can  be  represented  as  repulsion — may  exist 
between  factors  belonging  to  distinct  allelomorphic  pairs. 

The  state  of  things  which  results  in  gametic  coupling 
is  much  more  obscure.  The  association  of  characters  here 
is  quite  distinct  from  the  association  of  characters  produced 
by  spurious  allelomorphism.  In  gametic  coupling  the 
dominant  factors  are  associated  together,  while  in  spurious 
allelomorphism  the  dominant  factors  are  dissociated  from 
each  other.  If  the  coupling  were  total,  so  that  all  the 
gametes  were  either  AB  or  ab,  just  as  in  spurious  allelo- 
morphism they  are  all  either  Ab  or  aB,  we  might  naturally 
suppose  the  one  phenomenon  to  be  the  converse  of  the 
other.  The  one  might  then  be  represented  as  an  effect  of 
attraction  just  as  the  other  may  be  represented  as  the 
result  of  repulsion  between  the  two  dominant  factors.  So 
far,  however,  as  experiment  has  yet  gone,  we  have  no 
certain  case  in  which  the  coupling  is  complete.  There  are 
no  doubt  instances  of  features  apparently  distinct  which 
are  nevertheless  transmitted  in  collocation.  In  the  Sweet 
Pea,  for  instance,  the  deep  brown  or  blackish  pigmentation 
of  the  seed-coat  occurs  only  in  plants  with  some  colour  in 
the  flower,  but  these  two  features  may  thus  be  supposed  to 


IX]  and  Spitrioits  A lleloniorphis7n  159 

depend  on  one  allelomorph,  not  on  two.  To  prove  the 
existence  of  complete  coupling  it  would  be  necessary  to 
show  that  features  elsewhere  known  to  depend  on  separate 
allelomorphs,  could  on  occasion  be  linked  in  a  complete 
union.  Whether  such  a  state  of  things  is  possible  we  do 
not  know.  There  is  no  a  prio^n  reason  for  supposing  that 
it  is  impossible. 

The  arithmetical  series  in  which  the  numbers  occur  is 
the  only  guide  as  to  the  nature  of  the  process,  and  obviously 
this  is  quite  insufficient.  The  existence  of  the  7  :  i  systems 
and  of  the  15:1  systems  naturally  suggests  the  possibility 
that  a  system  based  on  3  :  i  may  exist.  We  might  then 
arrange  the  systems  in  a  series  thus^  : 


Gaj?ietes 

Total  m  Series 

No  coupling 

lAB 

lAb 

laB 

lab             4 

3  :  I 

ZAB 

\Ab 

\aB 

T,ab              8 

7  :  I 

TAB 

\Ab 

\aB 

']ab            16 

15  •  I 

iSAB 

lAb 

laB 

ic^ab           32 

Hitherto,  though  some  dubious  indications  of  such 
a  series  have  been  seen,  there  is  no  clear  case  of  coupling 
on  the  system  3:1. 

It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  any  probable  system  of 
symmetrical  cell-divisions  or  dichotomies  which  would 
produce  the  series  7  :  i  and  15  :  i.  If  the  segregation 
of  characters  were  not  all  completed  at  one  cell-division 
we  might  of  course  imagine  a  scheme  which  would  give 
the  system  84-1  +  1+8,   thus  : 

AaBb 

/        \ 
ABb  aBb 

/\         /\ 
AB      Ab     aB      ab 

after  which,  if  the  cells  AB  and  ad  each   divided   again 

■*  The  F.2  numbers  resulting  from  these  couplings  are  as  follows : 

AB.Ab.aB.ab. 

3:1:1:3  41  :     7  :     7  :       9 

7:1:1:7  177  :  15  :  15  :     49 

15  :  I  :  I  :  15  737  :  3i  ^  3^  •  225. 

If  n  be  half  the  number  of  gametes  needed  to  express  the  whole  series  of 

couplings   in  a  given  case,   then  the  four  F^  numbers  are  given  by  the 

formula 

3«^  -  (2«  —  i)  :  2//  —  I  :  2n—  1  '.n-  —  {zn  —  i). 


i6o  Discussion  of  Coupling  [ch. 

three  times,  the  series  "^AB  +  \Ab  +  laB  +  ^ab  would 
result.  We  cannot,  on  the  observed  numbers,  assert 
quite  positively  that  the  system  is  not  8  :  i,  but  as  obser- 
vations accumulate,  this  supposition  becomes  increasingly 
improbable,  for  the  numbers  all  point  rather  to  7  :  i 
than  8:1. 

If,  as  many  suppose,  the  whole  process  of  segregation 
is  completed  in  the  reduction-division,  it  is  obvious  that 
any  suggestion  involving  successive  segregations  fails.  Still 
it  is  worth  noting  that  nothing  yet  limits  us  to  the  con- 
ception of  segregation  as  occurring  all  at  once.  We  know 
very  little  yet  as  to  the  cytological  processes  antecedent  to 
the  reduction-division.  Moreover  it  cannot  yet  be  asserted 
that  all  the  gametes,  or  even  all  the  gametes  of  one  sex 
(in  hermaphrodite  forms)  are  in  the  same  cell-generation, 
counting  from  the  first  cleavage-plane  of  the  zygote. 

It  is  to  be  noted  also  that  where  the  germ-cells  are 
many,  as  in  the  testes  of  animals  and  the  anthers  of  most 
plants,  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the  formation  of  even  very 
long  series  of  couplings.  The  egg-cells,  on  the  contrary, 
are  few,  and  in  plants  they  are  very  often  definitely  grouped 
in  special  organs  which  again  are  arranged  on  a  definite 
geometrical  plan  relatively  to  the  gross  anatomy  of  the 
plant.  Even  if  the  various  accessory  cells  of  the  plant 
ovary  are  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  gametic  series,  the 
number  still  seems  insufficient  to  allow  for  the  development 
of  a  coupling  which  demands  a  long  series  for  its  expression. 
The  question  may  naturally  be  asked  whether  there  is  any 
organised  system  of  differentiation  connecting  the  several 
ovaries  into  a  common  plan.  The  differentiation  among  the 
egg-cells  might  conceivably  be  distributed  on  a  geometrical 
plan  like  the  differentiation  among  the  somatic  organs  of  the 
plant.  All  the  available  evidence  is  however  against  this 
suggestion,  for  in  maize  and  peas,  where  indications  of  this 
system  might  be  found  if  they  existed,  all  the  evidence 
is  entirely  negative. 

There  is  still  another  direction  in  which  we  may  look  for 
an  elucidation  of  the  nature  of  gametic  coupling.  If  the 
factors  can  act  upon  each  other  in  such  a  way  that  certain 
combinations  do  not  occur,  as  we  have  already  seen  actually 
happening  in  the  case  of  Spurious  Allelomorphism,  it  seems 


IX]  and  Spttriotis  A llelomorphis^n  i6i 

possible  that  such  a  system  as  the  7:1:1:7  may  be  the 
result  of  a  complex  series  of  repulsions  exerted  among  a 
number  of  factors.  At  present  this  suggestion  is  quite 
unfounded.  It  could  however  be  tested  if  breeding  on  a 
really  large  scale  could  be  undertaken,  and  supposing  it  to 
be  true,  the  evidence  for  its  truth  would  appear  in  the 
relative  infrequency  with  which  some  types  appeared.  From 
that  evidence  the  missing  gametic  combinations  could  be 
identified.  As  yet  however  it  is  quite  premature  to  pursue 
such  an  analysis,  and  we  must  be  content  to  note  that 
when,  as  in  these  Sweet  Peas,  there  is  heterozygosis  be- 
tween a  number  of  distinct  allelomorphic  pairs,  the  numerical 
proportions  in  which  the  various  combinations  occur  may 
certainly  be  affected  by  the  interactions  exerted  by  allelo- 
morphs of  different  pairs  upon  each  other. 


The  Possibility  of  Selective  Mating  between  Gametes. 

It  has  naturally  occurred  to  many  minds  that  as  gametes 
are  now  known  to  possess  differentiating  qualities,  these 
differentiations  may  affect  the  readiness  with  which  various 
classes  of  gametes  may  unite.  We  recognize  that  the  simple 
Mendelian  numbers  are  produced  when  every  kind  of  female 
gamete  has  an  equal  probability  of  uniting  with  every  kind 
of  gamete  produced  by  the  male.  Conversely,  when  irregular 
and  unexpected  numbers  appear  as  the  result  of  experi- 
ment, the  question  may  have  to  be  considered  whether  the 
irregularity  is  not  due  to  a  selective  assortment  taking 
place  among  the  gametes,  such  that  certain  types  of  unions 
occur  in  fertilisation  with  greater  readiness  than  others. 
Hitherto  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  instance  has  been  dis- 
covered in  which  abnormal  numbers  can  be  proved  to 
occur  with  such  regularity  as  to  w^arrant  a  recourse  to  this 
hypothesis.  Correns  observed  several  families  of  maize 
where  F^  from  F^  round  seed  x  wrinkled  seed,  self-fertilised, 
contained  a  great  excess  of  round  seeds.  The  totals  were 
8975  round  :  171 1  wrinkled  where  the  expectation  is  8014 
round  :  2671  wrinkled.  Thirty-five  F^  plants  contributed 
to  this  total  and  the  discrepancy  between  observed  result 
and  expectation  was  fairly  constant  throughout. 

B.   H.  II 


1 62  Possibility  of  Selective  [ch. 

To  test  whether  the  numerical  output  of  gametes  was 
abnormal,  reciprocal  crosses  were  made  between  F^  plants 
of  the  same  breeding  and  recessives.  In  both  cases  the 
normal  equality  between  round  and  wrinkled  seeds  was 
produced.  Correns  therefore  concludes  that  some  process 
of  selective  mating  was  responsible  for  the  aberrant  /% 
numbers  (65). 

So  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  case  altogether  similar  to  this 
one  has  been  observed,  certainly  none  in  which  the  numbers 
available  are  so  large.  The  proportions  for  maize  seeds 
are  usually  very  regular  in  regard  to  the  round  and  wrinkled 
characters,  as  the  records  of  both  Correns  and  Lock  testify. 

Pending  further  acquaintance  with  phenomena  of  this 
class  there  is  no  more  to  be  said.  The  possibility  of  dis- 
turbance by  selective  attraction  between  particular  kinds 
of  gametes  must  be  recognized,  though  without  much  more 
definite  evidence  its  occurrence  can  scarcely  be  regarded 
as  demonstrated. 

In  another  instance  of  a  different  kind  the  same  sug- 
gestion was  made  by  Cuenot.  Of  this  case  I  have  already 
spoken "^  in  describing  the  inheritance  of  yellow  colour  in 
animals.  Experimenting  with  mice  he  found  it  impossible 
to  find  a  yellow  mouse  pure  to  yellowness.  Among  mice 
yellow  behaves  as  a  dominant,  in  the  sense  that  agoutis  or 
blacks  may  be  bred  from  two  yellows.  If  the  case  were 
an  ordinary  one,  some  of  the  yellows  produced  by  the 
mating  of  two  yellows  should  be  pure,  and  on  breeding  to 
blacks  or  agoutis  they  would  be  expected  to  give  all  yellows. 
Cuenot's  experience  is  that  this  is  never  realized,  and  all 
the  yellows  he  has  ever  tested,  amounting  to  8 1  individuals, 
also  show,  in  such  matings,  some  colours  other  than  yellow 
(cp.  Basset  Hounds,  p.  128).  Miss  Durham  has  made 
similar  experiments  with  the  same  result.  Yellows  were 
always  found  to  give  ofT  either  agoutis,  or  blacks,  or 
chocolates. 

Cuenot  interprets  the  peculiar  result  as  meaning  that 
two  gametes  both  bearing  the  determiner  for  yellow  are 
incapable   of   uniting   in   fertilisation.      The   numbers  were 

*  The  discussion  of  this  remarkable  case  was  given  in  another  con- 
nection at  p.  119,  but  in  view  of  its  special  importance  the  facts  and 
argument  are  repeated  here. 


IX]  Unions  between  Gametes  163 

232  yellows  and  '^6  agoutis,  which  is  a  near  approach  to 
the  normal  3  :  i  (228*5  •  79*5)-  Cuenot  comments  on  this 
as  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  his  view,  saying  that  he  would 
have  expected  the  ratio  2:1;  but  as  Mr  Punnett  pointed 
out  to  me,  if  all  the  ova  bearing  the  yellow  factor  w^ere 
fertilised  by  agouti  spermatozoa,  the  number  of  these  being 
indefinite,  the  chances  of  the  non-yellow  ova  being  fertilised 
by  a  spermatozoon  bearing  yellow  or  non-yellow  would 
remain  sensibly  equal.  Thus  the  ratio  3  yellow  :  i  agouti 
would  result. 

Nevertheless  the  impression  left  on  my  mind  by  these 
observations,  and  indeed  by  other  strange  phenomena  which 
yellows  exhibit,  is  that  the  genetics  of  yellow  mice  are  very 
imperfectly  investigated  and  that  it  is  premature  to  formu- 
late definite  views  as  to  their  behaviour. 

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  yellow  mice,  well  known 
to  fanciers,  is  their  frequent  tendency  to  excessive  fatness. 
Miss  Durham,  who  has  had  considerable  experience  with 
yellows,  finds  that  this  condition  is  not  universal  among 
them,  but  shows  itself  in  frequent  individuals.  She  has 
also  found  the  genetic  investigation  of  yellows  very  difficult 
on  account  of  the  fact  that  they  are  often  sterile,  and  the 
suggestion  is  perhaps  worth  considering  that  this  sterility 
may  be  responsible  for  some  of  the  complications. 


II 


CHAPTER   X 

HEREDITY   AND    SEX. 

Evidence  from  Breeding  Experiments.  Bryonia — Sex- 
limited  Heredity.  The  Horns  of  Sheep — Colour- 
Blindness — Sex  and  Spurious  Allelomorphism.  The 
Cttrrant  Moth — The  Cinnamon  Canary — The  Silky 
Fowl — Aglia  tatt —  Cytological  Evidence — Summary. 

The  facts  of  sexual  dimorphism  have  to  be  considered 
In  any  exposition  of  the  laws  of  Inheritance.  There  are  two 
aspects  In  which  the  phenomena  of  sex  concern  us:  (i)  the 
nature  and  transmission  of  sex  Itself,  (2)  the  Influence  which 
sex  has  in  deciding  the  development  or  suppression 
of  characters  Introduced  into  the  zygote.  The  evidence 
relating  to  these  two  questions  Is  so  closely  interwoven 
that  they  must  be  In  practice  treated  together ;  for  the 
facts  concerning  the  Influence  of  sex  on  the  distribution  of 
characters  constitute,  as  will  be  seen,  a  most  Important 
means  of  indirectly  investigating  the  problem  of  the  actual 
nature  of  sex,  and  have  provided  already  several  clues  which 
will  probably  lead  to  the  unravelling  of  that  baffling  mystery. 
It  need  scarcely  be  said  that  in  view  of  the  great  obscurity 
still  surrounding  the  genetics  of  sex  any  conclusions  of  a 
positive  kind  can  only  be  made  tentatively.  The  phenomena 
however  are  among  the  most  Interesting  and  Important  with 
which  the  student  of  genetics  Is  concerned,  and  every  frag- 
ment of  evidence  regarding  them  is  at  present  worthy  of 
record. 

Numerous  essays  dealing  with  the  subject  of  the  de- 
termination of  sex^  have  recently  appeared,  and  the  belief 
is  extending  that  sex  will  probably  be  found  to  be  a  result 
of  gametic  differentiation.     This  conclusion  rests  partly  on 

*  This  chapter  naturally  makes  no  pretence  to  cover  the  whole  ground, 
I  can  treat  only  of  those  parts  of  the  subject  which  come  more  immediately 
within  the  scope  of  Mendel's  principles. 


CH.  x]  Nature  of  Sex  165 

analogy.  Mendelian  experiments  have  shown  that  in  all 
cases  which  can  be  adequately  investigated,  a  mixture  of 
distinct  zygotic  types  occurring  in  one  family  is  due  to 
gametic  differentiation.  Sex  is  a  case  of  such  mixture 
of  zygotes  and  the  presumption  is  thus  created  that  the 
case  is  comparable  in  causation  w^ith  those  amenable  to  more 
direct  analysis.  This  suggestion  was  made  in  1902  i^Rep. 
Evol.  Ctee,  i.  p.  138),  as  a  natural  deduction  from  Mendelian 
discoveries  and  it  is  interesting  to  know  that  the  same 
possibility  occurred  to  Mendel  himself  (197,  p.  241). 

The  argument  from  analogy  may  perhaps  be  carried 
a  step  further.  If  the  distinction  between  the  sexes  is  the 
result  of  gametic  differentiation,  the  fact  that  in  ordinary 
cases  the  two  sexes  are  produced  in  equal  numbers  must 
be  taken  as  a  strong  indication  that  one  sex  is  heterozygous 
in  respect  of  sex-character,  and  the  other  homozygous.  That, 
as  we  now  w^ell  know,  is  the  simplest  way  by  which  numerical 
equality  in  the  production  of  two  types  is  brought  about. 

In  his  important  paper  on  this  subject  Castle  argued 
that  both  sexes  are  to  be  regarded  as  heterozygous  in  sex. 
But  in  order  to  apply  this  suggestion  two  serious  assump- 
tions are  required.  First,  since  male  and  female  are  each 
regarded  as  heterozygous  in  sex,  unions  between  ova  and 
male  cells  bearing  similar  sex-factors  must  be  assumed  to 
be  impossible.  At  the  present  time  no  fact  can  be  adduced 
which  negatives  this  assumption,  and  there  are  indeed 
general  considerations  which  may  be  appealed  to  as  render- 
ing it  somewhat  probable. 

The  second  assumption  involved  is  more  serious.  As 
both  sexes  are  regarded  as  heterozygotes  containing  the 
same  factors,  the  nature  of  their  dissimilarity  is  still  so  far 
unrepresented.  In  view  of  this  difficulty  Castle  regards 
dominance  as  a  matter  of  chance.  Doncaster,  in  respect 
of  a  case  to  be  discussed  below,  suggested  that  dominance 
may  belong  exclusively  to  the  cells  coming  from  one  parent, 
say,  for  example,  those  of  the  mother.  These  postulates 
seem  unsatisfactory  and  do  not  accord  well  with  anything 
that  we  know  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  dominance  else- 
where observed  ;  for  the  applicability  of  all  schemes  hitherto 
discovered  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  has  been  found  possible  to 
represent  zygotic  composition  and  structure  as  determined 


1 66  Sex  in  Bryony  [ch. 

by  the  composition  of  the  gametes  of  which  the  zygotes  are 
formed. 

Naturally  therefore  we  look  for  a  simpler  solution  of 
the  problem  of  sex-determination.  As  was  stated  above,  it 
would  a  priori  seem  most  probable  that  one  sex  is  hetero- 
zygous in  sex  and  the  other  homozygous.  I  now  propose 
to  consider  the  applicability  of  this  simpler  account. 

Two  lines  of  work  have  been  followed,  that  of  experi- 
mental breeding,  and  that  of  cytological  study  of  the  germ- 
cells.  Both  have  led  to  very  positive  conclusions,  but  these 
conclusions  are  diametrically  opposed,  as  will  be  immediately 
seen.  From  experimental  breeding  we  are  on  the  whole  led 
to  conclude  that  the  types  used  have  females  heterozygous 
in  sex  (female  being  dominant)  and  males  homozygous 
recessives,  while  in  all  cases  in  which  cytological  evidence 
is  forthcoming  It  appears  that  the  females  are  homozygous 
and  the  males  heterozygous.  The  meaning  of  this  curious 
discrepancy  will  be  considered  when  the  facts  have  been 
related. 

Evidence  from  Breeding  Experiments. 

The  Case  of  Bryonia, 

By  the  nature  of  the  case,  direct  Mendelian  experiment 
cannot  be  applied.  There  are  however  certain  indirect 
lines  by  which  the  problem  can  be  approached.  The  first 
is  that  followed  by  Correns  in  cross-breeding  monoecious 
or  hermaphrodite  types  with  dioecious  or  bisexual  types. 
In  this  connection  the  most  striking  experiment  is  that 
which  he  made  by  crossing  Bryonia  dioica  with  B.  alba 
which  is  monoecious.  The  reciprocal  crosses  gave  with 
much  consistency  a  surprising  difference  in  results.  B, 
dioica,  female,  fertilised  with  the  pollen  of  B.  alba  gave  F^ 
females,  with  or  (usually)  without  occasional  male  flowers. 
The  observed  numbers  from  this  mating  were  589  females, 
with  2  males  which  must  be  regarded  as  exceptional.  In 
the  reciprocal  cross,  alba  (monoecious)  used  as  female 
X  dioica  $  gave  F^  consisting  of  males  and  females  in 
approximately  equal  numbers.  In  Cambridge  we  have 
repeated  both  experiments  and  obtained  the  same  results. 
Unfortunately  the  hybrids,  however  produced,  are  absolutely 


x]  Sex  171  Bryony  167 

sterile,    forming    no  good   pollen  and  failing    to    set    seed 
when  fertilised  with  pollen  of  the  types. 

Correns  (81,  p.  27)  interprets  these  facts  as  meaning 
that  the  germ-cells  of  dioica  t  are  differentiated  in  regard 
to  sex,  and  respectively  bear  either  maleness  or  femaleness. 
The  male  is  thus  heterozygous  in  sex,  maleness  being 
dominant.  The  female  dioica  is  consequently  taken  to  be 
homozygous  in  femaleness.  The  condition  of  the  sexual 
cells  of  the  monoecious  alba  is  not  quite  so  readily  repre- 
sented. Since  dioica  %  x  alba  $  gives  plants  all  $  or  with 
only  traces  of  maleness,  the  male  cells  of  alba  are  regarded 
as  all  alike  undifferentiated  in  respect  of  sex,  bearing,  that 
is  to  say,  the  monoecious  character,  and  presumably  the 
female  cells  of  alba  are  in  the  same  condition. 

The  facts  would  then  be  represented  thus  : 

dioica  ?  is  taken  to  be  $  $. 

dioica  $         ,,  ,,       $  ^,  male  being  dominant. 

alba     ?  ,,  ,,5 

alba     $         ,,  ,,       ^ 

Thus  as  the  results  of  breeding  we  have  : 

A.  dioica  %  x  dioica  $  giving  females  $  $  and  males  $  $. 

B.  alba     ?  x  dioica  $  giving  females  $   $  and  males  $  ^  . 

C.  dioica  $  x  alba  $  giving  all  females  of  the  form  $    ^  . 

The  difficulty  in  this  scheme  is  that,  if  maleness  were 
dominant,  it  is  not  clear  why  the  plants  produced  in  case 
C  should  be  almost  entirely  females ;  for  it  seems  natural  to 
expect  that  some  of  the  dominance  of  maleness  would 
attach  to  the  gametes  of  monoecious  character  produced  by 
alba,  and  hence  that  male  flowers  should  be  produced  with 
frequency  by  the  female  hybrids.  This  nevertheless  is  not 
the  case.  In  our  experiments,  out  of  ^^y  plants  thus  bred, 
34  were  purely  female  and  only  3  showed  any  male  flowers. 
These  were  in  all  cases  at  the  lowest  flowering  nodes.  In 
one  plant  4  male  flowers  occurred  in  this  position,  and  in 
each  of  the  other  two  plants  a  single  male  flower  appeared. 
The  reciprocal  cross,  alba  $  x  dioica  $  gave  6  pure  females, 
I  female  with  a  single  male  flower,  and  9  pure  males. 

Correns  observed  a  similar  occurrence  of  male  flowers 
in  the  same  position  on  the  otherwise  female  hybrids  raised 


1 68  Sex  ill  Bryony  [ch. 

by  him,  but  the  occurrence  was  quite  exceptional.  One 
plant  alone  showed  a  distinct  tendency  to  the  monoecious 
condition,  almost  resembling  alba.  If  maleness  were  domi- 
nant this  prevailing  absence  of  indications  of  the  monoecious 
condition  Is  not  easily  accounted  for. 

In  view  of  this  difficulty  It  Is  worth  considering  whether 
other  schemes  are  not  equally  possible,  and  It  seems  to  me 
that  there  Is  another  method  of  Interpreting  the  facts  which 
Is  certainly  not  yet  excluded.  In  Correns'  scheme  male- 
ness Is  taken  to  be  dominant,  but  if  femaleness  Is  taken  to 
be  dominant  we  can  then  represent  the  appearances  thus  : 

dioica  %  has  egg-cells  %  and  ^. 

dioica  $  has  pollen  all  $. 

alba  5  has  egg-cells  ?  and  $  ;  and  pollen  all  $. 

The  matings  will  then  stand  as  follows  : 

A.  dioica  ?  x  dioica  $  gives  females  ?  $  and  males  $  $. 

B.  dioica  ?  x  alba  $  gives  pure  females  ?  $  and  hetero- 

zygous females  ?  $. 

C.  alba  $  X  dioica  $  gives  females  $  $  and  males  $  $. 

D.  It  follows  that  alba  self- fertilised  should  give  pure 
females  as  well  as  the  ordinary  monoecious  plants.     Whether 

this  Is  the  case  or  not  I  do  not  know.  Only  three  plants 
were  raised  from  seed  here,  and  these  were  monoecious,  but 
there  would  be  of  course  nothing  unusual  in  a  species,  often 
monoecious,  producing  female  plants,  for  many  such  examples 
are  known. 

The  view  that  It  Is  th.^  female  and  not  the  male  which  is 
heterozygous  In  sex  Is  not  Improbable  because,  as  will  soon 
be  shown,  there  is  a  remarkable  group  of  cases  among  animals 
In  which  that  Interpretation  Is  almost  forced  upon  us. 

Lastly,  for  the  apparently  anomalous  representation  of 
the  pollen-cells  of  alba  as  of  a  constitution  dissimilar  to  that 
of  the  egg-cells  of  the  same  plant,  we  can  quote  (Chap,  xi) 
a  somewhat  parallel  case  which  Is  well  established  in  regard 
to  Stocks  [Mallhiola),  where  certain  strains  have  the  egg- 
cells  of  two  types  and  pollen-cells  of  one  type.  In  that 
case  however  the  pollen-grains  bear  the  recessive  character, 
not  the  dominant  as  they  must  be  supposed  to  do   here. 


X]  Heredity  and  Sex  169 

Admittedly  there  are  difficulties  in  the  way  of  this  method 
of  representation  but  they  seem  to  be  no  greater  than  those 
besetting  the  hypothesis  that  maleness  is  dominant"^. 

Correns  (81,  72,  75)  has  observed  another  group  of  facts, 
doubtless  important  though  equally  difficult  of  interpretation, 
in  regard  to  the  results  of  breeding  from  species  which 
have  female,  and  hermaphrodite  or  gyno-monoecious  indi- 
viduals. His  experience  is  that  when  the  females  are  used 
as  mothers  and  are  fertilised  with  pollen  from  the  her- 
maphrodites, the  offspring  are  almost  exclusively  female. 
When  however  the  hermaphrodites  are  used  as  mothers 
the  offspring  are  mostly,  though  not  so  exclusively,  her- 
maphrodites. From  experiments  of  this  kind  it  is  likely 
that  a  good  deal  of  light  will  be  obtained  w^hen  statistics 
on  an  ample  scale  are  available.  Those  who  may  under- 
take such  work  will  of  course  remember  that  as  the  consti- 
tution of  the  individuals  may  be  dissimilar,  each  must  be 
separately  tested. 

The  relation  of  dioecious  to  hermaphrodite  and  monoe- 
cious forms  will  not  in  all  probability  be  satisfactorily  or 
rapidly  elucidated  until  some  case  can  be  found  in  which 
the  two  types  can  be  crossed  together  with  a  fertile  result. 
No  evidence  from  such  a  case  as  that  of  Bryonia  is  free 
from  the  suspicion  that  the  sterility  of  F^  may  itself  be 
introducing  a  complexity. 

Heredity  limited  by  Sex:   the  Ho^^ns  of  Sheep. 

I  now  pass  to  the  consideration  of  evidence  as  to 
the  part  which  sex  plays  in  determining  or  limiting  the 
descent  of  certain  characters  in  heredity.  The  manner  in 
which  these  effects  are  shown  is  well  illustrated  by  the 
following  example  investigated  by  Professor  T.  B.  Wood 
(312,  313)  in  the  case  of  horned  and  hornless  sheepf.  As 
a  horned  breed  he  chose  the  Dorset  Horned,  in  which  the 

*  A  fragment  of  evidence  bearing  on  these  problems  is  that  contributed 
by  Gartner's  experiment  with  Lychnis  diurfta  $  crossed  with  pollen  from 
Z.  flos-aiadi  ^  .  This  gave  4  males  and  2  females ;  but  of  these,  one 
only,  a  female  which  was  totally  sterile,  gave  any  certain  indication  of 
having  resulted  from  the  cross.  Pending  a  repetition  of  the  experiment  no 
conclusion  can  be  drawn  with  much  confidence  from  this  account. 

t  As  was  stated  before,  hornlessness  is  a  dominant  in  both  sexes  so  far 


1 70  Heredity  of  Horns  [ch,  x 

horns  are  well  developed  in  both  sexes.  These  he  crossed 
reciprocally  with  Suffolks,  a  breed  without  horns  in  either 
rams  or  ewes.  The  F^  male  lambs  all  developed  horns  of 
fair  size,  but  the  F^  ewes  remained  hornless.  The  horned 
character  may  therefore  be  described  as  dominant  in  males 
and  recessive  in  females  (Fig.  20). 

The  7%  generation  bred  from  these  consisted  of  all  the 
four  types,  horned  and  hornless  males,  horned  and  hornless 
females.  The  experiment  was  not  carried  out  on  a  scale 
sufficient  to  justify  a  statement  that  the  numbers  are  simply 

Males  Females 

3  horned  :  i  hornless  i  horned  :  3  hornless 

but  so  far  as  the  evidence  went  these  simple  ratios  seem  to 
be  followed.      (For  diagram  of  such  a  descent  see  Fig.  33.) 

Subsequent  experiment  has  confirmed  the  conclusion 
indicated  by  these  facts,  namely  that  horned  ewes  in  /%  3-i'e 
pure  for  the  presence  of  horns,  and  that  hornless  rams  in  F^ 
are  pure  for  the  absence  of  horns. 

In  order  therefore  that  the  female  may  possess  horns, 
she  must  be  homozygous  in  that  character.  The  factor  for 
hornedness  must  come  in  from  both  sides  of  the  parentage. 
Conversely,  in  order  that  the  male  should  be  hornless,  he 
must  receive  the  deficiency  from  both  sides  of  his  parent- 
age. A  case  that  may  be  compared  with  this  has  been 
observed  in  regard  to  the  descent  of  wing-development  in 
a  cross  between  two  species  of  moths  of  which  the  one 
Boarmia  [Bislon)  hirtaria  has  a  winged  female,  while  the 
other,  Boarmia  {Biston)  pomonaria,  has  a  wingless  female. 
Oberthiir"^  crossed  these  two  species  and  obtained  F^  males 
all  with  fully  developed  wings  and  four  females  with  wings 
only  half-formed,  in  a  condition  thus  intermediate  between 

as  horned  cattle  are  concerned.  The  heterozygote  is  either  quite  hornless, 
or  has  only  small  loose  horny  lumps — "  scurs  "  as  they  are  called  in  the  north. 

As  to  the  descent  in  goats  I  have  no  thoroughly  adequate  evidence. 
The  Rev.  E.  P.  Boys-Smith  has  kindly  given  me  particulars  of  many 
matings  which  he  has  made,  but  the  details  are  complex  and  I  have  not 
been  able  to  extract  a  consistent  scheme  from  them.  There  is  probably 
some  intricacy  due  to  gametic  coupling  comparable  with  that  described  in 
the  next  section,  or  perhaps  to  sex-limitation. 

■**■  Bull.  Soc.  Ent.  France^  1897,  p.  256. 


^•' 


■^i 


w5  '^ 

C/3      1 

OJ 

<U     ; 

r^ 

^■^ 

>.d 

4= 

<u 

-^ 

(L»   w 

.^-^ 

(U 

c 

^"^ 

S-i 

4 

O 

^ 

Vi-i 

-O 

O 

a> 

0) 

c 

u 

L> 

c 

o 

(U 

_  1—^ 

p" 

rt 

5 

^" 

r2 

P,' 

'-S 

CO 

c: 

<u 

bX) 

, 

^ 

O 

^ 

4-1 

■<-> 

o 

cj 

cu 

m 

to 

tf3 

5^   • 

^ 

5:  ' 

X3 

<2 

o 

O 

^ 

o 

^ 

tn 

^ 

^H 

a> 

•  1-^ 

s 

o 

73 

C 

o 

£^ 

o 

<u 

tfi 

^ 

^ 

^ 

c 

^^ 

^ 

c 

(U 

oS 

^ 

c/5 

4^ 

dJ 

<u 

c 

"^-^ 

^ 

a> 

<i— > 

D 

t/3 

OJ 

(U 

v: 

<!> 

Vh 

^ 

;-• 

Q_, 

O 

cJ 

(U 

Q 

00 

NO 

73 

M 

^ 

VO 

w5 

m 

CJ 

s 

rt 

t/5 

X 

axD 

in 

r" 

o 

^ 

o 

rt 

en 

^ 

O 

_c 

nj 

O 

C  ^ 

yj 

w 

u_ 

C/3 

loO 

o 

< 

o 

C/3 

^^  c 

OJ 

"^^  ^^ 

Ui 

c: 

r^ . 

C 

t/j 

1— < 

c5 

QJ 

(i> 

^ 

^ 

■4-J 

>^ 

1 

o 

.2 

D 

v^ 

<U 

C/2 

(U 

1-4 

3 

^ 

JH^ 

. 

H 

(U 

i-i 

00 

5 

d 

1 

^ 

w 

1  in  ^ 

tb 

*^ 

1 

172  Tortoise-Shell  Cats  [ch. 

those  of  the  two  parent  species.  Unfortunately  the  hybrids 
were  completely  sterile  and  the  experiment  went  no  further. 
Here  we  see  that  the  one  "dose"  of  wingedness — as  we 
may  call  it — sufficed  only  to  bring  the  wings  to  half  the  full 
size,  and  two  ''  doses  "  are  needed  to  develop  them  properly. 

Doncaster  has  collected  evidence  about  the  inheritance 
of  tortoise-shell  colour  in  cats  which  illustrates  the  same 
phenomenon.  It  has  long  been  known  that  tortoise-shells 
are  almost  always  females.  The  suggestion  which  Don- 
caster  made  (109)  is  that  this  is  the  female  form  of  the 
heterozygote  between  the  colours  orange  and  black.  The 
facts,  as  he  pointed  out,  show  fairly  clearly  that  the  corre- 
sponding heterozygote  in  the  male  is  orange.  Orange 
colour  is  thus  dominant  in  males,  but  in  females  the  domi- 
nance is  imperfect  and  the  patch-work  form,  tortoise-shell, 
results.  The  same  is  true  for  cream  and  blue,  which  are 
only  the  dilute  forms  of  the  colours  orange  and  black  re- 
spectively"^. It  is  true  that  the  exceptional  tortoise-shell 
males  do  occasionally  exist,  but  they  are  exceedingly  rare 
and  nothing  as  yet  is  known  respecting  their  breeding. 

More  complex  systems  of  sex-limited  descent  are  fol- 
lowed by  certain  abnormal  conditions  met  with  in  Man. 
Of  these  the  most  familiar  is  colour-blindness. 

The  ordinary  form  of  that  affection  may  roughly  be 
described  as  the  inability  to  distinguish  red  from  green. 
Colour-blind  persons  are  commonly  male,  and  in  European 
countries  it  appears  that  at  least  4  per  cent,  of  the  male 
population  are  colour-blind  (of  females  less  than  0*5  per 
cent.).  The  children  of  colour-blind  fathers  are  usually  not 
colour-blind,  whether  they  be  sons  or  daughters.  The 
daughters  however  frequently  transmit  colour-blindness  to 
their  sons  again.  The  tutaffected  males  in  these  families  do 
not  transmit  the  condition,  and  their  posterity  are  exempt 
unless  the  colour-blindness  be  introduced  afresh.  Until 
the  facts  were  examined  in  the  light  of  Mendelian  dis- 
coveries nothing  could  be  more  puzzling.  The  statement 
however  that  colour-blindness  is  a  condition  dominant  in 
males  but  recessive  in  females  will  express  a  great  part  of 

*  The  idea  is  sometimes  met  with  that  it  is  only  tortoise-shells  without 
white  which  are  almost  exclusively  female ;  but  there  is  no  truth  in  this 
supposition. 


x]  Heredity  of  Colonr-Blindness  173 

the  facts  respecting  the  genetics  of  colour-blindness.  The 
daughters  of  colour-blind  fathers  are  evidently  heterozygotes 
in  whom  the  affection  is,  like  the  horned  character  in  the 
F^  ewes,  recessive  ;  but  in  the  fact  that  both  the  sons  and 
their  offspring  are  free  from  the  affection  (unless  of  course 
it  be  introduced  by  the  mother)  we  meet  a  fresh  compli- 
cation the  meaning  of  which  is  considered  later  (p.  195,  note). 
Here  it  must  suffice  to  say  that  the  most  obvious  test  of 
the  nature  of  the  inheritance  is  provided  by  the  families  of 
colour-blind  women.  According  to  the  scheme  the  simplest 
expectation  is  that  all  sons  of  such  women  should  be  colour- 
blind. Up  to  the  present  time  we  have  records  of  seven 
colour-blind  women  only  who  had  sons.  In  all  they  had 
17  sons  who  lived  to  be  tested,  and  all  were  found  to  be 
colour-blind.  We  may  therefore  rest  assured  that  the  scheme 
provides  at  least  a  substantial  part  of  the  truth,  and  that 
colour-blindness  is  a  condition  produced  by  the  addition 
of  a  dominant  factor. 

In  the  examples  just  considered  sex  itself  acts  as  a 
specific  interference,  stopping  or  inhibiting  the  effects  of  a 
dominant  factor,  and  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  the 
inhibition  occurs  always,  so  far  as  we  know,  in  the  female, 
never  in  the  male.  When  the  effects  of  a  factor  fail  to 
appear  in  a  zygote  the  failure  is  due  to  one  of  two  causes. 
Either  some  complementary  element  is  absent  which  is 
needed  to  produce  the  effect,  or  some  other  element  is 
present  which  inhibits  it.  The  facts  scarcely  enable  us  to 
distinguish  between  these  two  possibilities  but  we  may  feel 
some  confidence  that  our  cases  belong  not  to  the  first 
group  but  to  the  second.  For  since  the  condition  can  be 
developed  in  females,  it  is  evident  that  maleness  itself  is 
not  a  necessary  complement ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  suppose 
that  there  is  some  other  factor  regularly  coupled  with  male- 
ness which  has  this  property,  though  that  possibility  cannot 
be  absolutely  excluded.  The  suggestion  however  that  the 
female  contains  something  which  suppresses  the  effect  of  the 
otherwise  dominant  factor  is  consistent  with  the  observation 
that  when  these  sex-limited  conditions,  as  they  are  called, 
do  appear  in  females,  they  are  developed  to  a  somewhat 
less  degree  than  in  males,  just  as  in  horned  breeds  of  sheep 
the  ewes  have  horns  smaller  than  those  of  the  rams.     The 


1 74  The  Case  of  the  Currant  Moth  [ch. 

inhibiting  factor  may  be  thought  of  as  able  to  suppress 
completely  the  development  of  the  character  when  that 
character  is  heterozygous — introduced,  to  use  that  ex- 
pression, as  one  ''dose"  only — but  unable  to  suppress  it 
when  it  is  homozygous,  represented  by  a  double  "dose." 
On  the  view  that  femaleness  itself  is  the  suppressing 
factor  one  difficulty  has  to  be  considered.  Just  as  disease 
or  removal  of  the  ovaries  may  lead  to  the  appearance  of 
male  characters  we  should  expect  that  such  disease  might 
lead  to  the  occasional  appearance  of  colour-blindness  in 
females.  I  do  not  however  know  of  such  a  case.  It  must 
nevertheless  be  remembered  that  even  the  appearance  of 
male  characters  is  itself  by  no  means  a  regular  consequence 
of  these  lesions,  and  perhaps  w^e  need  not  regard  the 
difficulty  specified  as  a  serious  one  in  the  case  of  colour- 
blindness. 


Sex  and  Sptmons  AUeloviorphism:    the  Ctirrant  Moth. 

The  next  case  of  w^hich  I  shall  speak  is  one  which  has 
been  worked  out  in  considerable  detail,  and  I  anticipate 
that  for  a  long  time  to  come  it  must  rank  as  a  classical 
experiment  in  all  discussions  as  to  the  nature  of  sex.  The 
work  in  question  was  done  by  Doncaster  and  Raynor  and 
it  relates  to  crosses  made  between  the  Geometrid  moth 
Abraxas  grossidariata  and  its   variety  lacticolor  (in). 

Lacticolor  was  originally  known  as  an  exclusively  female 
form  (see  Plate  I).  The  experimental  crossings  gave  the 
following  curious  series  of  results: 

1.  Lacticolor  %  x grossulariata  $  produced  F^  $s  and 
$s  all  grossulariata. 

2.  F^  grossulariata  $  x  F ^  grossulariata  $  gave  grossu- 
lariata $s  and  $s  and  lacticolor  $s  ;  no  ^s  of  lacticolor  being 
formed. 

3.  Lacticolor  %  x  F ^grossulariata  t  gave  all  four  possible 
forms,  namely  grossulariata  ^s  and  ^s,  and  lacticolor  ^s 
and  $s.  The  lacticolor  males  were  the  first  that  had  ever 
been  seen. 


x]  Sex  and  Spurious  Allelomorphism         175 

4.  F^  gi^ossulariata  %  x  lacticolor  $  gave  all  the  ^s 
grossulariata  and  all  the  ?s  lacticolor. 

Adopting  Castle's  view  that  both  sexes  are  heterozygous 
in  sex,  Doncaster  showed  that  a  consistent  scheme  could 
be  devised  which  represented  the  foregoing  experimental 
results.  According  to  this  scheme  the  following  supposi- 
tions are  made 

(i)  Each  sex  is  regarded  as  giving  off  ^-bearing 
gametes  and  ^-bearing  gametes. 

(2)  In  females  heterozygous  {or  g7^ossular lata  and  lacti- 
color there  is  gametic  coupling  such  that  each  gamete 
bearing  the  gros  sit  lariat  a  factor  bears  maleness,  and  con- 
versely each  gamete  bearing  lacticolor  bears  femaleness 
also. 

(3)  In  the  heterozygous  male  there  is  no  coupling. 

(4)  There  is  selective  mating  between  the  gametes, 
such  that  union  can  take  place  only  between  gametes  of 
opposite  sex,  namely  such  as  bear  maleness  and  femaleness 
respectively. 

(5)  Dominance  attaches  to  the  sex  which  is  brought 
into  the  zygote  by  the  egg. 

On  these  assumptions  the  observed  facts  would  be 
produced.  Inspection  however  shows  that  there  is  a  sim- 
pler solution,  which  avoids  the  need  for  assumption  (4)  that 
selective  mating  occurs.  On  this  scheme  two  assumptions 
only  are  made. 

( 1 )  That  the  female  is  heterozygous  in  sex,  femaleness 
being  dominant,  and  the  male  a  homozygous  recessive. 

(2)  That  when  in  F^  the  two  dominant  characters 
femaleness  and  the  orosstilariata  factor  co-exist,  there  is 
spurious  allelomorphism  or  repulsion  between  them,  such 
that  each  gamete  takes  one  or  other  of  these  factors,  not 
both. 


176         Sex  and  Spttrioits  Allelomorphism         [ch. 

The  whole  series  of  facts  is  then  consistently  represented 
as  follows  : 

I.  lact.    $  X  gross.   $ 


I\         gross.   $  gross.  ? 

2.  J^i  gross.  ^  X  R'l  gross.   ,$ 

composition  DR^  $  DR  ^  $ 

{R9  \R6 


gametes 


F2         2  gross.   $  I  g?'oss.   9  I  lact.   $ 

nR$ $  DR^  6  RR^ 6 


DD$  S 


lact.    ?  X  /^i  gross.    $ 

RR^  S  \  nR6  6 


I  gross.   S  I  gross.   $  i  lact.   $  1  lact.   $ 

BRSS  I)R9  6  RR6  6  RR^  6 


R\  gross.   $  X  lact.   $ 
DR9  6  \  RRS  S 


gross.   S  lact.   $ 

jDR6  6  RR9  ^ 

In  Doncaster's  first  series  of  experiments  the  numbers 
observed  were  very  wild  and  irregular,  but  more  recently 
he  has  repeated  the  matings  and  got  numbers  according 
sufficiently  well  with  those  predicted  by  the  scheme.  The 
spurious  allelomorphism  supposed  to  exist  between  female- 
ness  and  the  grossula^nata  factor  would  be  a  phenomenon 
similar  to  that  described  already  (p.  153)  in  the  Sweet  Pea, 
where  the  factor  for  blueness  and  that  for  the  erect  standard 
were  shown  to  behave  as  if  mutually  repellent,  and  alterna- 
tive to  each  other  in  the  formation  of  the  germ-cells.  The 
facts  as  to  the  limitations  which  sex  introduces  into  the 
descent  of  a  varietal  character  are  thus  consistent  with  the 
possibility  that  sex  is  a  Mendelian  character  and  that 
femaleness  is  a  dominant,  depending  for  its  development  on 
the  presence  of  some  definite  factor,  and  that  this  factor  has 


x]  Sex-limited  Inheritance  177 

properties  like  those  elsewhere  proved  to  attach  to  other 
dominants. 

One  very  curious  observation  made  in  the  case  of 
grossiUai'-iata  is  that  which  remains  to  be  stated.  It  was 
communicated  by  Doncaster  to  the  Dublin  Meeting  of  the 
British  Association  (Sept.  1908).  The  experiments  enu- 
merated were,  it  will  be  observed,  incomplete  in  so  far  as 
the  mating  wild  gross.  %  x  lad.  $  had  not  been  made.  The 
results  of  this  mating  are  now  known.  Families  thus  bred 
consist  of  males  grossii/arta^a,  and  females  lacticolor\  In 
other  words,  the  ordinary  wild  grossidariata  even  in  districts 
where  lacticolor  is  unknown,  are  in  reality  a  race  of  which 
the  males  are  ^uve  g7^osstilariata,  though  the  females  are  hi 
reality  hybrids  of  lacticolor,  and  so  continue  from  generation 
to  generation.  The  normal  female  grossidariata  and  the 
F^%  grosstdariata  bred  from  lact.  %  y. gross.  $  are  thus  seen 
to  be  identical  in  composition.  Whether  a  gross.  %  has  a 
gross.  $  for  a  mother,  or  a  lact.  $  for  a  mother  makes  no 
difference  to  its  composition  and  properties.  This  fact  is 
one  of  the  most  striking  to  which  genetic  research  has  yet 
led.  It  affords  strong  confirmation  of  the  interpretation  of 
the  series  of  phenomena  given  in  the  text,  and  enables  us 
to  see  in  the  evidence  both  as  to  the  grossidariata  case 
and  as  to  the  other  cases  which  follow,  a  consistent  mass  of 
testimony  all  pointing  in  the  same  direction.  In  a  recent 
paper  (114)  Doncaster  accepts  the  view  here  suggested. 
It  must  of  course  still  be  remembered  that  attractive  though 
the  present  suggestion  is,  by  reason  of  its  simplicity,  we  have 
no  proof  that  the  natural  scheme  may  not  be  more  complex. 

The  two  cases  next  to  be  considered  resemble  that 
of  grossidariata  in  the  fact  that  reciprocal  crosses  be- 
tween pure  types  give  dissimilar  results.  Though  both 
examples  to  be  discussed  are  only  imperfectly  explored,  the 
facts  elicited  are  so  curious  that  some  preliminary  notice  of 
them  is  called  for.  We  may  confidently  anticipate  that 
further  search  will  discover  other  comparable  instances.  It 
will  be  seen  that  these  phenomena  point  very  plainly  in  the 
same  direction  as  those  previously  described,  to  the  con- 
clusion, namely,  that,  in  the  types  used,  femaleness  depends 
on  the  presence  of  a  definite  dominant  factor. 

B.  H.  12 


lyS  Sex-limited  Inheritaitce  [ch. 

The  Cinnamon  Canary. 

The  first  case  of  a  sex-limited  distinction  between 
reciprocal  crosses  is  provided  by  the  evidence  as  to  the 
descent  of  what  is  called  "Cinnamon"  in  Canaries.  The 
characteristic  of  these  canaries  when  adult  is  the  presence 
of  the  pale  drab  colour  known  as  Cinnamon  in  the  feathers, 
evidently  replacing  the  black  pigment  characteristic  of 
*'  green  "  canaries.  The  green  is  of  course  due  to  the  black 
pigment  showing  through  the  yellow.  According  to  Miss 
Durham's  observations  the  cinnamon  pigment  is  of  the 
same  nature  as  the  "chocolate,"  of  which  we  have  spoken 
in  discussing  the  pigmentation  of  mammals,  and  it  is 
probable  that  the  various  aberrational  forms  of  mammals 
and  birds  so  often  recorded  by  systematists  as  "  isabelline  " 
are  all  similar  cases  of  the  replacement  of  black  by 
chocolate. 

When  newly  hatched.  Cinnamons  differ  very  strikingly 
from  ordinary  canaries  in  the  fact  that  they  have  pink  or 
tinpigmented  eyes,  like  the  albinos  of  many  animals.  As 
they  grow  up  this  distinction  is  scarcely,  if  at  all,  per- 
ceptible on  ordinary  examination.  The  eyes  become  pig- 
mented and  come  to  look  about  as  dark  as  those  of  ordinary 
canaries.  Some  fanciers  allege  that  they  can  distinguish 
the  eyes  of  Cinnamons  throughout  life,  but  the  difference  is 
evasive  and  these  determinations  are  unreliable.  Micro- 
scopically, however,  Miss  Durham  finds  that  there  is  a  real 
difference  in  the  fact  that  the  pigment  of  the  Cinnamon  eye 
is  chocolate,  like  that  of  the  chocolate  mouse.  Apparently 
the  cinnamon  feathers  are  never  developed  in  birds  that 
have  black  eyes,  but  the  pink  eyes  can  be  transferred  to 
birds  which  are  pure  yellow  and  without  any  trace  of 
cinnamon  in  their  feathers. 

The  inheritance  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  that  of 
the  pink  eyes.  It  has  long  been  declared  by  fanciers  that 
when  Cinnamon  hens,  viz.  pink-eyed,  are  bred  with  green, 
viz.  black-eyed,  cocks  the  offspring  of  both  sexes  all  come 
black-eyed.  When  however  green  (black-eyed)  hens  are 
bred  to  Cinnamon  (pink-eyed)  cocks,  both  greens  and 
Cinnamons  may  be  bred,  but  these  Cinnamo7ts  are 
always  hens.  The  F^  black-eyed  cocks  are  said  to  have 
again   the    power  of  producing    pink-eyed    offspring    from 


x]  The  Cinnamon  Canary  179 

black-eyed  hens,  but  again  all  these  pink-eyed  birds  are 
hens.  Statements  to  this  effect  are  to  be  found  in  many  of 
the  fanciers'  books,  but  a  particularly  good  and  lucid  account 
of  the  phenomena  was  given  by  Mr  Noorduijn  (213),  of 
Groningen,  who  has  been  good  enough  to  answer  many 
questions  on  the  subject. 

Miss  Durham  has  begun  a  series  of  experiments 
designed  to  investigate  the  problem  constituted  by  these 
facts,  but  the  work  has  not  yet  gone  far  enough  to  provide 
a  complete  solution.     She  finds  (118)  that,  as  stated, 

(i)  Cinnamon  %  x  pure  green  $  gives  all  offspring  of 
both  sexes  black-eyed. 

(2)  Green  %  x  Cinnamon  $  gives  in  general  F^  cocks 
black-eyed,  and  F^  hens  pink-eyed.  Two  black-eyed  hens 
of  unknown  breeding  mated  to  Cinnamon  cocks  have  also 
given,  in  addition,  black-eyed  hens  as  well  as  pink-eyed  hens. 
This  result  is  exceptional. 

(3)  Cinnamon  ^  x  F^  black-eyed  $  gives  all  four  types, 
black-eyed  cocks  and  hens,  and  pink-eyed  cocks  and  hens. 

(4)  Green  ^  x  F^  black-eyed  $  gives  cocks  all  black- 
eyed,  and  hens  of  both  types,  black-eyed  and  pink-eyed. 

The  mating  of  F^  black-eyed  hens  (from  Cinnamon  $  x 
black-eyed  ^)  x  Cinnamon  $  has  not  yet  been  made,  but 
there  is  little  doubt  that  such  a  pair  of  birds  will  give  the 
same  results  that  are  obtained  in  mating  (2). 

As  regards  the  descent  of  the  pink-eye  there  seems  to 
be  no  difference  in  result  whether  green  or  yellow  black- 
eyed  birds  are  used. 

The  general  run  of  these  experiments  is  now  intelligible. 
The  case  is  evidently  comparable  with  that  of  Abraxas 
grossitlariata  and  lacticolor.  \\^ere  it  not  for  the  occasional 
production  of  black-eyed  hens  from  green  %  x  Cinnamon  i 
the  whole  series  of  results  could  be  represented  in  one 
simple  scheme.  That  exceptional  occurrence  proves  of 
course  that  there  is  some  further  element  to  be  considered, 
but  neglecting  that  for  the  present,  the  scheme  of  descent  is 
as  follows.  As  before,  we  take  female  as  heterozygous, 
femaleness  beinof  dominant,  and  we  assume  that  there  is 
spurious  allelomorphism  between  femaleness  and  the  black- 
eye  factor. 


12- 


i8o  Sex-liinited  Inheritance  [ch. 

The  allelomorphs  are 

$,  ^,  presence  and  absence  of  femaleness. 

B,  b,  presence  and  absence  of  the  factor  for  black  eye. 

The  ''pure"  green  hen  is  thus  %$Bb,  being,  as  experi- 
ment proves,  achially  heterozygotts  for  the  black-eye-factor. 
The  gametes  are  BZ  and  b%. 

The  pure  black-eyed  green  male  is  pure  in  maleness 
(recessive)  and  in  the  dominant  black-eye-factor,  and  his 
composition  is  represented  thus  $$BB. 

The  Cinnamon  hen  is  %$bb  and  the  Cinnamon  cock  is 
i^bb. 

The  matings  are  then  as  follows. 

1.  Cinnamon  pink-eyed  $  x  black-eyed  c^ 

composition     bb^  $  x  BB  ^  $ 

B[  black-eyed  hens  black-eyed  cocks 

Bb^  $  Bb$  S 

2.  Black-eyed  $  x  Cinnamon  pink-eyed  $ 
composition     Bb^  ^  bb  $  $ 

gametes         L^ 

Bi  pink-eyed  hens  black-eyed  cocks 

bb^  6  BbS  6 

3.  Pink-eyed  9  ^  black-eyed  Bi  S 
composition     bb9  6  Bb  ^  ^ 

'black-eyed  hens  black-eyed  cocks 

result  ^^5<?  BbS$ 

\pink-eyed  hens  pink-eyed  cocks 

\bb^  $  bb$S 

4.  Black-eyed  9  ^  black-eyed  B^  $ 
composition     Bb  ^  $  Bb  $  $ 

[B$  B$ 

1^?  b$ 

'black-eyed  hens  black-eyed  cocks 

_Bb^  $,  BB$^ 

\pink-eyed  hens  and  also 

\bb^  $  Bb^S 

This  representation  is  therefore  complete  except  in  so 
far  as  it  takes  no  account  of  the  production  of  black-eyed 
hens  together  with  pink-eyed,  which  Miss  Durham  has 
twice  seen  in  mating  (2).  These  create  a  definite  difficulty 
which  as  yet  there  is  no  means  of  overcoming.  The  con- 
jecture may  be  hazarded  that  they  owe  their  origin  to  the 


gametes 


result 


X]  The  Silky  Fowl  i8i 

disturbing  effects  of  some  other  dominant  factor  unde- 
termined, which  alters  the  normal  distribution  of  the  factors 
B  and  %  in  the  gametogenesis  of  certain  black-eyed  hens, 
but  that  is  mere  conjecture. 

Attention  must  be  drawn  to  the  paradoxical  conclusion 
that  black-eyed  hen  Canaries,  zuhether  green  or  yellow,  are 
7ior7nally  heterozygotts  in  respect  of  the  black-eye  character^, 
being  thus  in  common  parlance  "hybrids"  of  Cinnamon! 
The  males,  on  the  contrary,  are  in  general  homozygous  or 
pure  in  the  black-eye  character.  This  discovery  gives  rise 
to  many  reflections,  some  of  which  will  be  spoken  of  after 
the  facts  of  the  next  case  are  described. 


The  Silky  Foiul. 

The  example  of  heredity  limited  by  sex  that  we  are 
about  to  consider  exhibits  a  complication  which  at  first 
sight  suggests  that  the  phenomena  are  the  converse  of 
those  last  detailed.  In  the  Canaries  when  the  two  sexes 
raised  from  a  cross  differed  from  each  other  it  was  the 
females  which  presented  the  recessive  feature  and  the  males 
which  showed  the  dominant.  We  shall  here  see  that  when 
the  sexes  differ  it  is  the  female  which  ostensibly  shows  the 
dominant.  Nevertheless  the  difference  is  apparent,  not 
real.  In  the  case  of  the  Cinnamon  Canary  the  observed 
results  were  due  to  the  combinations  of  two  pairs  of  factors, 
while  those  about  to  be  described  are  due  to  the  combina- 
tions of  three  pairs.  The  presence  of  the  third  dominant 
cannot  however  be  told  by  inspection.  Breeding  tests  alone 
reveal  its  existence. 

Mr  Punnett  and  I  have  been  engaged  for  some  years  in 
experiments  with  Silky  fowls.  The  most  interesting  results 
were  obtained  in  crosses  between  Silkies  and  certain  ordin- 
ary fowls  with  unpigmented  shanks. 

Silkies  are  remarkable  in  many  ways,  but  the  peculiarity 
with  which  we  are  here  concerned  is  the  intense  black 
pigmentation  of  the  mesoblastic  membranes.  The  perios- 
teum, pia  mater,  somatopleure,  parts  of  the  splanchnopleure, 
the  sheaths  of  some  blood-vessels,  and  the  connective  tissue 

*  Miss  Durham  has  so  far  tested  7  yellow  hens  and  6  green  hens,  and 
all  of  these  have  thrown  pink-eyed  hens  when  mated  to  pink-eyed  cocks, 
thus  proving  their  heterozygous  nature. 


1 82  Sex-limited  Inheritance  [ch. 

beneath  the  skin,  are  deeply  pigmented  with  black^.  The 
skin  of  the  bird  has  thus  a  deep  purple  or  blue  colour,  due 
to  the  black  pigment  showing  through  the  uncoloured 
epithelium  of  the  skint.  Ordinary  fowls.  Brown  Leghorns 
for  instance,  the  breed  chiefly  used  in  our  work,  have  no 
pigment  in  these  parts  beyond  dubious  traces  in  rare 
exceptions.  Such  fowls  we  may  call  by  contrast  non- 
pigmented,  and  the  phenomena  to  be  described  occur  as  the 
results  of  crossing  them  with  SilkiesJ. 

The  essential  facts  are  as  follows.  When  the  Silky  hen 
is  bred  with  Brown  Leghorn  cock  all  the  F^  offspring,  both 
male  and  female,  are  either  destitute  of  the  pigmentation,  or 
only  show  a  small  amount  of  it  in  certain  parts,  especially 
in  the  ribs,  on  the  vertex  of  the  skull,  and  on  the  iris.  In 
the  case  of  the  iris  it  shows  in  adult  birds  as  minute  dots 
of  black  on  the  red  ground.  The  skin  of  such  F^  birds  is 
scarcely  different  from  that  of  unpigmented  breeds.  Both 
the  skin  and  the  periosteum  sometimes  have  well-defined 
patches  of  pigment. 

When  however  the  Brown  Leofhorn  hens  are  bred  with 
the  Silky  cock,  the  F^  males  are  indistinguishable  from 
those  bred  in  the  reciprocal  mating,  but  the  F^  hens  a7'e 
almost  as  ^mtich  pigmented  as  the  ptire  Silky  hens. 

Of  the  many  possible  matings  into  which  the  F^  birds, 
male  or  female,  can  be  introduced,  few  have  yet  been  made 
on  a  scale  sufficient  to  justify  very  confident  statements.  In 
most  of  the  derivative  families  thus  produced  there  is  also  a 
good  deal  of  grading,  and  the  analysis  and  classification  of 
these  intermediate  types  have  not  yet  been  adequately 
carried  out. 

The  main  facts  however  are 

(i)  That  when  the  F^  hens,  whether  of  the  deeply 
pigmented  sort  or  of  the  slightly  pigmented  kind  formed  in 
the  reciprocal  mating,  are  bred  with  Brown  Leghorn  cocks, 

*  The  liver  and  the  lungs  are  little  if  at  all  invaded  by  the  pigmentation, 
and  curiously  enough,  tlie  allantois  is  entirely  unpigmented. 

t  When  the  pigmentation  occurs  in  birds  having  a  yellow  skin  the 
general  appearance  is  greenish.  White  skin  is  dominant  to  yellow  skin, 
but  the  transmission  of  these  characters  is  independent  of  that  of  the 
peculiar  pigmentation  of  the  Silky. 

X  The  silkiness  of  the  feathers  is  an  ordinary  recessive  to  the  hard 
plumage  of  common  fowls.  This  character  seems  to  be  distributed  inde- 
pendently of  the  rest. 


x]  The  Silky  Fowl  183 

their  offspring,  whether  male  or  female,  are  never  more 
than  moderately  pigmented.  Just  as  In  the  making  of  F^ 
therefore,  the  pigmentation  must  come  In  from  the  male 
side  In  order  that  it  may  appear  to  any  full  degree  in  the 
offspring. 

(2)  The  F^  males  from  both  kinds  of  mating  are 
identical  in  composition  so  far  as  pigmentation  and  their 
powers  of  transmitting  it  are  concerned.  When  they  are 
bred  with  Brown  Leghorn  hens  they  produce  one  bird  in 
eight,  on  an  average,  deeply  pigmented^  and  these  are  always 
females. 

This  result  was  exceedingly  definite  and  regular.  \ 
long  series  of  matings  between  F^  ^s  from  Brown  Leghorn 
hen  X  Silky  cock  as  fathers  and  unplgmented  hens  gave 
205  birds  with  various  degrees  of  pigmentation  from 
moderate  to  nil,  and  31  fully  pigmented  hens.  Using  F^  t^ 
from  Silky  %  x  Brown  Leghorn  ^  the  numbers  of  these  two 
classes  were  170  and  23,  the  23  fully  pigmented  birds  being 
again  all  hens.     The  total,  375  to  54,  Is  7  to  i. 

(3)  The  F^  cock  has  only  been  tried  once  with  a  Silky 
hen,  and  the  offspring  consisted  of  7  males  and  8  females, 
showing  all  the  different  degrees  of  pigmentation,  but  from 
so  few  no  quantitative  conclusions  can  be  drawn. 

(4)  When  the  deeply  pigmented  F^  hens  are  bred  with 
the  pure  Silky  cock,  all  the  offspring  of  both  sexes  are 
deeply  pigmented. 

(5)  From  a  slightly  pigmented  F^  hen  (offspring 
namely  of  Silky  %  x  Brown  Leghorn  t)  bred  with  a  pure 
Silky  cock  only  a  few  birds  have  yet  been  bred. 

As  a  test  of  the  distribution  of  the  factors  among  the 
gametes  of  the  hen  this  mating  is  one  of  the  most  important 
and  many  critical  questions  can  be  answered  by  It.  The 
numbers  are  as  yet  too  small  to  be  of  much  significance. 
They  are  8  hens  all  deeply  pigmented,  and  5  cocks  ranging 
from  deeply  pigmented  to  intermediate. 

The  F.._  results  are  so  complicated  that  until  they  have 
been  obtained  on  a  very  large  scale  it  would  be  premature 
and  useless  to  describe  them  in  any  detail.  In  general 
terms  the  F.  families  contain  both  males  and  females  of 
the    deeply-plgmented,    the    sllghdy    pigmented,    and    the 


184  Sex-limited  Inheritance  [ch. 

non-pigmented  kinds,  with  many  puzzling  intergradations 
between  them. 

Leaving  aside  all  that  is  obscure  in  this  experiment  for 
future  consideration  one  fact  stands  out  clearly  as  an  almost 
inevitable  conclusion  from  the  data,  namely  that  In  addition 
to  the  sexual  differentiation  into  male  and  female,  and  the 
racial  differentiation  into  pigmented  and  non-pigmented,  the 
operation  and  interference  of  some  unknown  third  kind  of 
differentiation  has  to  be  reckoned  with.  In  no  other  way 
can  the  results  from  the  reciprocal  crosses  between  the  pure 
types,  and  those  from  the  non-pigmented  hens  bred  to  the 
7^1  male,  be  brought  into  harmony.  It  is  the  appearance  of 
the  07te  deeply -pigmented  female  in  eight  birds  which  gives 
the  clue. 

Since  half  the  gametes  of  the  F^  male  must  be  bearing 
pigmentation,  and  since  from  results  of  the  mating  Brown 
Leghorn  x  Silky  male  we  know  that  a  pigment-bearing 
gamete  from  the  male  may  dominate  in  the  female,  it  would 
be  expected  that  half  the  female  offspring  would  be  deeply 
pigmented  ;  for  certainly  half  of  them  contain  the  necessary 
element.  But  as  only  a  quarter  of  the  female  offspring  are 
of  the  deeply-pigmented  class  there  must  be  some  other 
element  present  which  obliterates  the  pigmentation,  or  holds 
it  in  check  in  the  missing  quarter.  In  several  cases  we  are 
well  aware  of  the  existence  of  such  inhibiting  factors,  for 
example  that  which  causes  the  flower  of  a  Chinese  Primula 
to  be  white  though  the  factors  for  colour  are  present  in  it 
(see  Chap,  v,  p.  105). 

This  factor  may  be  spoken  of  as  Z^.  In  the  Silky  it  is 
evidently  not  present  and  therefore  it  must  come  from  the 
Leghorn.  Since  Silky  %  x  Brown  Leghorn  ^  gives  no 
deeply-pigmented  offspring  we  must  consider  the  Brown 
Leghorn  cock  to  be  homozygous  in  D .  But  as  the  Brown 
Leghorn  %  x  Silky  ^  gives  the  female  offspring  deeply 
pigmented,  the  Brown  Leghorn  hen  must  be  heterozygous 
in  D,  and  there  must  be  some  system  or  mechanism  by 
which  this  factor  D  descends  to  her  male  offspring  and  not 
to  her  female  offspring"^. 

*  A  priori  it  might  be  thought  possible  that  the  dominance  of  the 
pigmentation-element  in  the  F^  $  was  due  to  some  special  differentiation 
of  half  the  gametes  of  the  male.  On  the  hypothesis  that  each  sex  is 
heterozygous  for  sex  such  a  system  might  without  improbability  be  con- 


X] 


The  Silky  Fowl 


185 


Now  if  femaleness  be  a  dominant  factor  and  can  repel 
D,  forming  a  spurious  allelomorphism  with  it  in  the  way 
suggested  for  the  case  of  Abraxas  grossulariata  x  lacticolor 
and  the  Canaries,  a  system  would  be  provided  which  would 
fulfil  all  the  chief  conditions  marked  out  by  the  experimental 
data. 

Taking  then  the  following  allelomorphs,  the  occurrences 
in  the  three  matings  which  have  given  clear  results  may  be 
represented  in  a  tabular  form. 

$,  ^,  presence  and  absence  of  femaleness,  a  dominant 
factor  without  which  the  zygote  developes  into  a 
male. 

P,  p,  presence  and  absence  of  the  black  pigmentation. 

D,  d,  presence  and  absence  of  a  factor  which  can  sup- 
press or  mask  the  development  of  P. 

I.  Silky  $  X  Brown  Leghorn  $ 


composition 

PPdd^  s 

ppDD^  $ 

gametes 

\Pd$ 

pD$ 

fr 

females  slightly 
pigmented 

males  slightly 
pigmented 

composition 

PpDd^  $ 

PpDd$  S 

2. 

Brown  Leghorn 

9  X  Silky  S 

composition 

ppDd^  S 

PPdd$  $ 

gametes 

[PD$ 
\pd^ 

Pd^ 

^1 

females  deeply 

pigmented 
Ppdd^  S 

males  slightly 

pigmented 
PpDd$  $ 

3- 

Brown  Leghorn  ^  x  p^  (^ 

composition 

ppDd^  S 

PpDd$  3 

gametes 

\pd^ 

[PD$,Pd$ 

\pD$  pd$ 

Females 

Males 

offspring 

pd^.PD$ 
"^pd^.Pd^ 
pd^.pDS 
pd^.pdS 

pD$.PD$ 

pDS.PdS 
pD$.pD$ 

pDS.pdS 

According 

to  this  analysis  one  bird  in  eight,  namely  the 

female  marked 

^,  will  be  of  the 

deeply-pigmented  type. 

ceived.  It  would,  however,  fail  to  represent  the  i  deeply-pigmented  $  in 
8  birds  from  Brown  Leghorn  9  xp^^ ,  and  would  increase  the  expectation 
to  2  $  in  8  birds,  and  this  is  negatived  by  the  results  of  experiment. 


1 86  Sex-limited  Inheritance  [ch. 

The  above  tabulation  represents  so  well  the  main  outline 
of  the  results  of  experiment  that  it  is  probably  a  close 
approximation  to  the  truth.  With  regard  to  the  somewhat 
meagre  results  of  the  other  matlngs  it  may  be  said  that,  as 
far  as  they  go,  they  are  fairly  consistent  with  the  schematic 
representation,  though  some  discrepancies  occur,  and  un- 
questionably much  remains  still  to  be  cleared  up  in  this 
remarkable  case.  The  distribution  of  the  several  factors 
among  the  gametes  of  the  two  types  of  F^  females  cannot 
yet  be  satisfactorily  represented,  and  there  Is  some  evidence 
that  the  repulsion  between  femaleness  and  D  Is  not  always 
so  complete  as  the  scheme  demands. 

In  introducing  the  evidence  as  to  Silkies  attention  was 
called  to  the  fact  that  the  difference  between  reciprocal 
matlngs  occurred  when  the  non-plgmented  parent  was  of  a 
breed  which  had  unpigmented  shanks.  There  are  of  course 
many  breeds  which  though  they  have  nothing  corresponding 
to  the  general  pigmentation  of  the  Silky,  are  black  or  bluish 
in  the  shanks  from  a  deposition  of  black  pigment  In  the  skin 
of  that  part^'.  When  such  hens  are  crossed  with  the  Silky 
cock  the  pigmentation  is  developed  not  only  In  the  female 
offspring,  but  also  in  the  males.  Davenport  made  crosses 
between  Silkies  and  Spanish  (black-shanked)  and  Frizzles 
(slaty  shanks),  and  found  no  distinction  between  reciprocal 
matlngs,  both  sexes  of  the  offspring  being  deeply  pigmented. 
We  crossed  white  rose-combed  Bantam  hens  with  a  Silky 
cock  with  the  result  that  the  F^  males  and  females  were 
both  deeply  pigmented  on  hatching,  though  as  they  became 
adult  the  males  lost  much  of  their  pigmentation.  The  white 
rose-comb  Is  slightly  bluish  In  down-colour  and  the  shanks 
are  slightly  pigmented  In  varying  degrees. 

From  many  signs  we  know  that  there  exists  some  com- 
plex relation  between  the  colour  of  the  shanks  in  fowls 
generally,  and  sexual  differentiation.  Some  years  ago  we 
described  (19,  p.  95)  a  case  of  this  kind  In  which  Indian 
Game  ?  x  White  Leghorn  ^  always  gave  F^  yellow-shanked 
like  both  the  parent  breeds.  But  White  Leghorn  %  x  Indian 
Game  ^  gave  cocks  yellow-shanked  like  the  parents,  while 

*  This  pigment  is  confined  to  the  skin.  There  is  none  in  the 
periosteum.  When  the  general  skin-colour  is  yellow  these  pigmented 
shanks  have  a  greenish  tinge,  the  "willow"  of  fanciers. 


x]  The  Moth,  Aglia  tan  187 

the  hens  came  with  a  good  deal  of  pigment  in  the  shanks 
ranging  to  nearly  a  full  black. 

Another  case  illustrating  this  relationship  between  sex 
and  shank-colour  is  to  be  seen  in  the  new^ly  made  breed 
called  Black  Leghorn.  According  to  the  fanciers'  ideal  both 
sexes  should  have  full  yellow  shanks.  There  is  no  difficulty 
in  getting  this  quality  in  the  cocks,  but  hitherto  clear 
yellow-shanked  hens  have  been  very  rare,  and  the  same 
difficulty  is  encountered  in  breeding  Black  Wyandottes. 

Lastly,  though  the  D  factor  seems  to  be  always  present 
in  Brow^n  Leghorns,  the  cocks  of  which  are  homozygous 
and  the  hens  heterozygous  in  respect  of  it,  there  is  evidence 
that  in  an  Egyptian  breed  of  various  nondescript  brown 
colours,  with  which  we  have  worked,  the  D  factor  may  be 
absent  from  both  sexes,  though  the  shanks  are  not  dark  in 
colour.  Search  among  the  breeds  of  our  own  country  will 
probably  lead  to  the  discovery  of  other  such  material. 

The  Case  of  the  Moth  Aglia  tau  and 
its    Variety  Ittgens. 

There  is  one  very  remarkable  group  of  facts  which 
cannot,  so  far  as  I  see,  be  brought  into  harmony  with  the 
system  proposed  for  the  three  cases  already  considered. 
These  are  the  results  recorded  by  Standfuss  (253,  b)  as  the 
outcome  of  experiments  with  the  Moth  Aglia  tau  and  its 
dark  variety  lugens.  These  experiments  were  brought 
into  prominence  by  the  discussion  which  Castle  devoted  to 
them  in  his  important  paper  on  sex  (46). 

The  facts  w^ere  briefly  these.  We  have  no  explicit  state- 
ment of  a  comprehensive  kind  as  to  the  results  of  the  cross 
betw^een  pure  lugens  and  pure  tau,  but  from  subsequent 
results  it  is  clear  that,  as  usual  in  moths,  the  dark  form  lugens 
is  dominant  over  the  light  form  tau.     With  heterozygous 

lugens  ^w^  matings  were  made  as  follows  : 

Result 

6  9 


lug.       tau        lug.        tau 


tau  (RR)  ?  X  lugens  (DR)  S 
lugetis  (DR)  9  X  tau  (RR)  S 
lugens  (DR)  9  x  lugens  {DR)  $ 


Total  of  DR  X  DR 


31 

14 

13 

2» 

26 

13 

II 

25 

34 

10 

21 

21 

49 

3 

42 

8 

46 

3 

3' 

7 

129 

16 

94 

36 

1 88  Cytological  Evidence  as  to  Sex  [ch. 

In  his  discussion  of  these  curious  numbers  Castle  calls 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  results  of  DR  x  RR  are  very 
nearly  2D^  :  \R^  :  \D%  :  2R%,  and  developing  his  view  that 
each  sex  is  heterozygous  in  sex,  he  suggests  that  the 
gametes  of  DR  females  and  males  may  bear  the  sex- 
characters  and  the  colour-characters  coupled  in  this  way, 
forming  a  series  24-1  +  1+2.  Assuming  also  that  in 
fertilisation  union  can  onl}^  take  place  between  gametes  of 
opposite  sex,  the  F^  numbers  would  be  ZD^  :  \R'$ \6D%\^R%, 
a  series  which,  as  he  points  out,  fits  the  total  of  the  observed 
numbers  extraordinarily  well. 

Recognizing  the  great  interest  of  the  case  I  feel,  never- 
theless, that  so  long  as  it  stands  entirely  alone,  we  are 
justified  in  treating  it  as  of  somewhat  doubtful  significance. 
We  know  from  divers  sources  that  the  sex-ratios  of  the 
Lepidoptera  are  liable  to  astonishing  fluctuations.  Very 
large  families  consisting  of  all,  or  nearly  all,  females,  or 
males,  as  the  case  may  be,  having  been  not  rarely  witnessed, 
and  until  experiments  with  taic  and  lugens  are  repeated  with 
a  full  understanding  of  the  importance  that  may  attach  to 
them,  we  may  postpone  positive  conclusions. 

The  Cytological  Evidence. 

We  have  now  to  mention  a  group  of  facts  which,  though 
agreeing  with  the  general  conclusion  that  one  sex  is  hetero- 
zygous and  the  other  homozygous,  suggests  that  in  the 
types  concerned,   the  roles  are  reversed. 

From  the  cytological  side  a  remarkable  advance  in  the 
problem  of  sex  has  been  made  in  the  discovery  of  the 
accessory  chromosome  in  the  spermatogenesis  of  certain 
Insects.  McClung,  studying  this  structure,  originally  ob- 
served by  Henking,  was  the  first  to  insist  on  its  importance. 
He  showed  that  in  certain  Insects  half  the  sperms  have 
it  and  half  are  without  it.  This  fact  led  him  to  make 
the  natural  suggestion  that  the  structure  might  be  con- 
cerned in  the  differentiation  of  sex.  This  suggestion  has 
been  shown  by  E.  B.  Wilson  to  be  correct,  but  the  accessory 
body  proves  to  be  the  peculiarity  of  the  sperms  which  are 
destined  to  form  females,  not  of  those  which  will  form 
males,  as  had  been  previously  supposed.  The  evidence  for 
this  is  the  fact  that  while  the  number  of  chromosomes  in 
the  male  cells  of  the  species  concerned  is  either  n,  or  n—\, 


X]  Cytologic  a  I  Evidence  as  to  Sex  189 

the  number  in  the  female  cells  Is  n.  The  male  cells  there- 
fore which  have  n  chromosomes  on  uniting  with  an  ovum 
in  fertilisation  make  up  the  zygotic  number  to  211 ;  but  the 
n—\  spermatozoa  can  only  make  up  the  zygotic  number  to 
211—1,  forming  thus  a  male.  The  germ-cells  of  the  male 
again  divide  in  gametogenesis  to  form  cells  w4th  n,  and 
cells  with  11  —  I    chromosomes  as  before. 

In  such  cases  it  can  scarcely  be  stated  yet  that  the 
accessory  chromosome  is  the  cause  of  femaleness,  for  con- 
ceivably it  may  be  a  feature  associated  with  that  cause  ;  but 
the  evidence  must  be  taken  with  confidence  as  the  lone- 
expected  proof  that  sex  is  determined,  in  this  case  at  least, 
by  gametic  differentiation.  The  female  in  these  Insects 
must  then  be  regarded  as  homozygous  in  sex,  and  may 
be  represented  as  I?D,  while  the  male  is  heterozygous  and 
may  be  represented  as  DJ^.  Such  a  result  accords  well 
with  the  general  conclusions  to  which  breeding  experiments, 
on  the  whole,  point.  For  though  great  disparities  between 
the  numerical  proportions  of  the  sexes  occur  in  certain 
matings,  these  disparities  seem  to  be  obliterated  in  suc- 
ceeding generations.  If  the  one  sex  were  homozygous  and 
the  other  heterozygous  such  impermanence  of  the  numerical 
divergences  is  what  we  might  naturally  expect.  Neverthe- 
less the  extraordinary  fact  remains  that  while  the  cytological 
evidence  suggests  that  the  ma/e  is  heterozygous,  equally 
cogent  evidence — from  breeding  in  other  types — indicates 
ihQ  /erna/e  as  the  heterozygous  sex. 

T.  H.  Morgan  (202)"^  has  lately  carried  the  discussion  a 
stage  further.  It  is  well  known  that  in  the  case  of  animals 
having  a  series  of  parthenogenetic  female  generations,  such 
as  Aphis,  Daphnia,  &c.,  when  fertilisation  does  take  place, 
the  result  of  such  fertilisation  is  always  a  female.  In  a 
Phylloxera  Morgan  has  found  that  the  spermatids  are  of 
two  kinds,  those  which  contain  an  accessory  chromosome, 
and  those  which  do  not.  The  spermatids  lacking  the  acces- 
sory body  degenerate,  and  consequently  only  those  provided 
with  it  take  part  in  fertilisation.  The  fact  that  the  results 
of  fertilisation  are  all  females,  taken  in  connection  with  the 
degeneration  of  half  the  sperms,  points  evidently  to  the 
view  that  the  accessory  chromosome  is  here  responsible  for 

*  Since  confirmed  by  von  Baehr  (7)  for  Aphidae. 


I  go         Summary  of  Evide^tce  as  to  Sex  [ch. 

the  femaleness.  It  is  of  especial  interest  to  know  that  in 
this  case  the  accessory  chromosome  goes  through  a  stage 
in  which  it  is  partially  divided  into  two,  though  after  this 
partial  division  the  two  parts  reunite  and  then  the  whole 
passes  into  one  of  the  daughter-cells.  The  point  that 
remains  obscure  is  the  nature  of  the  cell-division  by  which 
the  males  are  produced.  For  at  one  stage  in  the  cycle 
males  are  of  course  born  parthenogenetically  from  the 
females,  and  it  would  be  of  the  greatest  importance  to 
know  something  of  the  cytological  process  by  which  the  ova 
are  destined  to  become  males — or  male-bearing  females 
if  there  are  two  lines  (as  in  the  Aphides  studied  by  Miss 
Stevens,  256,  260)"^.  Many  other  very  interesting  ques- 
tions arise  in  connection  with  this  part  of  the  evidence,  but 
further  discussion  must  be  postponed  pending  the  accumu- 
lation of  further  evidence. 

Summary  of  Experimental  Evidence  as  to  the  Heredity 

of  Sex. 

In  a  full  discussion  of  the  problem  of  sex-inheritance 
many  other  kinds  of  fact  would  need  to  be  considered.  To 
these  no  reference  can  now  be  made.  All  that  I  have 
attempted  is  to  provide  a  sketch  of  the  new  evidence  on  the 
problem  which  Mendelian  experiments  contribute.  The 
main  conclusion  to  which  several  quite  distinct  lines  of 
inquiry  unmistakably  point,  is  that  in  the  two  Vertebrates 
and  in  the  Currant  moth  the  female  is  a  sex-heterozygote, 
with  femaleness  dominant.  The  female  is  a  hybrid,  "female- 
male,"  while  the  male  is  pure  male,  or  ''male-male."  The 
eggs  of  the  female  are  thus  females  and  males  respectively!, 
while  the  spermatozoa  are  all  male.  In  other  words,  the 
female  contains  a  factor  which  makes  her  female,  but  the 
male  is  male  because  he  is  without  this  factor.  The 
phenomena  can,  as  has  been  shown,  with  certain  exceptions, 
be  represented  symbolically  by  a  system  based  on  this 
conclusion.  The  exceptions  are  real,  but  they  are  manifestly 
exceptional,  and  for  the  present  we  may  be  content  to  deal 
with  the  main  course  of  the  descent.      It  may  conceivably 

*  These  papers  contain  an  account  of  the  beginning  of  a  very  valuable 
experiment  on  the  descent  of  colour  in  Aphis  and  its  relation  to  sex. 
t  As  those  of  Duwphilus  apatris  are. 


X]  Stumnary  of  Evidence  as  to  Sex  191 

be  through  some  extraordinary  coincidence  that  the  facts 
fall  into  a  system  which  can  be  represented  by  this  sym- 
bolism, but  the  convergence  of  the  several  sets  of  facts 
strongly  supports  the  belief  that  the  symbolical  system  gives 
a  true  representation  of  the  physiological  basis  of  sex  in 
those  forms  at  least  to  which  the  system  applies. 

The  evidence  from  the  descent  of  the  dominant  sex- 
limited  diseases,  such  as  colour-blindness,  and  of  the  horns 
in  Sheep  is  also  consistent  with  the  same  view,  namely  that 
femaleness  is  due  to  the  presence  of  a  dominant  factor.  For 
in  these  examples  there  is  evidently  some  additional  element 
present  in  the  female  which  inhibits  or  suppresses  the  opera- 
tions of  the  sex-limited  dominant,  and  that  additional  element 
may  not  improbably  be  the  factor  for  femaleness. 

At  the  same  time  we  should  be  wrong  in  supposing  that 
the  recognition  of  femaleness  as  a  definite,  allelomorphic 
factor  is  more  than  a  first  step  towards  an  understanding  of 
the  phenomenon  of  sexual  dimorphism.  There  are  abundant 
signs  that  this  representation  expresses  only  a  part  of  the 
truth.  There  seems  to  be  no  reason,  a  p^dori,  why  the 
gametic  constitution  of  the  two  sexes  should  be  the  same  in 
all  types.  In  the  various  forms  on  which  our  conclusion  is 
founded,  the  arrangement,  we  have  seen,  is  probably  for  the 
females  DR,  and  for  the  males  RR.  In  the  Insects  studied  by 
E.  B.  Wilson  and  Morgan  the  cytological  evidence  suggests 
DD  for  the  females  and  DR  for  the  males.  All  that  can  be 
claimed  is  that  Mendelian  analysis  provides  a  hint  of  the 
way  in  which  we  may  proceed  in  the  attempt  to  unravel 
these  intricacies. 

It  is,  I  think,  on  the  lines  indicated  in  the  last  paragraph 
that  we  must  look  for  a  reconciliation  between  the  cytological 
and  the  experimental  evidence.  On  the  one  hand  the 
cytologists  show  that  in  most  orders  of  Insects  proof  that 
the  male  is  heterozygous  can  be  obtained.  From  breeding 
experiments  we  find  that  in  Vertebrates  and  in  one  Lepi- 
dopteran  the  female  must  almost  certainly  be  regarded  as 
heterozygous.  The  cytological  evidence  shows  extraordinary 
differences  even  in  nearly  allied  forms,  some  having  a 
distinct  unpaired  chromosome,  while  in  others  this  body  is 
either  fully  or  imperfectly  paired.  In  Lepidoptera,  as  it 
happens,  the  accessory  chromosome  has   not   been   found. 


192  Summary  of  Evidence  as  to  Sex  [ch. 

Improbable  as  at  first  sight  it  may  appear,  the  view  that 
most  commends  itself  to  me  is  that  in  different  types  Sex 
may  be  differently  constituted.  From  the  results  of  castra- 
tion-experiments we  are  led  to  a  similar  view  ;  for  castration 
of  the  male  Vertebrate  on  the  whole  leads  merely  to  the 
non-appearance  of  male  features,  while  injury  or  disease  of 
the  ovaries  may  lead  to  the  assumption  of  male  characters  by 
the  female.  In  Crustacea  the  evidence  of  Geoffrey  Smith "^ 
and  Potts  show^s  that  these  consequences  are  there  reversed. 
The  great  diversity  of  cytological  features  in  allied  Insects 
is  also  consistent  with  the  expectation  that  the  phenomena 
are  specific  rather  than  universal 

Then  again  we  may  feel  fairly  sure  that  the  allelo- 
morphism between  the  sex-characters  must  be  a  relation  of 
no  common  order.  The  curious  numbers  that  so  often 
occur  in  collections  of  sex-ratios  are  evidence  of  this.  The 
records  given  in  the  case  Aglia  tait  and  lugens  bring  us  at 
once  to  difficulties  with  which  as  yet  we  cannot  deal. 

From  time  to  time  evidence  has  been  advanced  to  show 
that  the  production  of  the  sexes  can  be  influenced  by  special 
modes  of  nutrition  or  other  environmental  influences.  An 
adequate  discussion  of  this  evidence  would  run  to  great 
length.  Some  of  the  evidence  has  been  found  faulty  in 
various  respectst,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  any  example  has 
been  confirmed  by  successive  observers  in  such  a  way  as  to 
warrant  definite  belief  in  its  validity  J.      It  is  not  impossible, 

*  My  attention  has  been  called  to  the  fact  that  in  his  monograph  of 
Rhizocephala  [Fau?ia  u.  Flora  d.  Golf.  Neapel,  xxix.  1906,  p.  89)  Geoffrey 
Smith  explicitly  suggested,  probably  for  the  first  time,  the  view  here  adopted, 
that  one  sex,  sometimes  the  female,  sometimes  the  male,  is  heterozygous 
in  sex. 

t  See  for  instance  Punnett  (227)  on  sex-determination  in  Hydatina 
with  a  criticism  of  the  evidence  of  Nussbaum  on  the  positive  effects  of 
nutrition. 

%  The  most  striking  case  in  which  positive  results  are  said  to  have 
been  attained  is  that  lately  published  by  Russo  (236).  This  observer 
claims  to  have  demonstrated  in  the  rabbit  the  difference  between  the  ova 
destined  to  become  females  and  those  destined  to  become  males.  His 
conclusion  is  so  far  in  harmony  with  that  to  which  genetic  experiments 
have  led  us,  that  the  female  is  heterozygous  in  sex.  Heape,  however,  has 
described  {Froc.  Roy.  Sac.  vol.  76,  B,  1905)  in  the  rabbit  processes  by 
which  ovarian  ova  frequently  degenerate,  apparently  as  a  normal  occurrence. 
Mr  Heape  very  kindly  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  examining  his  prepara- 
tions, and  it  was  impossible  to  avoid   being  impressed  with  the  general 


X]  Certain  Females  noruially  Hybrid         193 

nevertheless,  to  imagine  that  the  output  of  gametes  repre- 
senting respectively  one  or  other  of  a  pair  of  allelomorphs 
may  be  influenced  by  circumstances.  We  have  not  yet  any 
proof  that  such  a  phenomenon  may  occur;  but  the  long  runs 
of  unexpected  numbers  which  we  from  time  to  time  witness 
in  the  course  of  Mendelian  experiments  are  suggestive  of 
some  definite  disturbance  of  the  normal  equality  in  the  out- 
put of  the  two  kinds  of  gametes.  Data  for  an  adequate 
statistical  examination  of  this  question  scarcely  exist  as  yet, 
but  If  it  be  found  that  the  long  runs  are  too  frequent  to  be 
accepted  at  all  readily  as  chance  aberrations,  the  search  for 
environmental  causes  of  disturbance  will  have  to  be  under- 
taken. 

The  second  conclusion  that  we  have  reached  Is  one 
which  no  previous  experience  of  nature  could  have  led  us  to 
anticipate.  Naturalists  are  so  accustomed  to  considering  the 
males  and  females  of  a  true-breeding  strain  as  of  identical 
composition,  except  in  so  far  as  their  sex  Is  concerned,  that 
those  who  have  no  practical  acquaintance  with  genetic 
phenomena  may  find  a  difficulty  In  realizing  that  the  females 
of  a  breed  can  be  hybrid  in  some  important  respect  though 
the  males  are  not.  The  evidence  however  leaves  no  doubt 
of  the  reality  of  this  conclusion.  The  consequences  of  such 
a  discovery  are  not  easy  to  foresee,  but  as  In  our  very 
limited  range  of  experimental  study  three  such  cases  have 
already  been  encountered,  we  may  feel  fairly  sure  that  this 

resemblance  which  such  degenerating  ova  bore  to  those  which  Russo 
regards  as  destined  to  become  males.  Consequently  before  that  view  of 
their  nature  is  adopted,  the  relation  of  the  so-called  "male"  ova  to  the 
degenerating  ova  will  need  very  careful  study  ;  for  it  seems  as  yet  not 
unlikely  that  those  differences  which  Russo  has  taken  to  indicate  maleness 
may  prove  to  be  due  to  incipient  degeneration. 

In  addition  to  the  detection  of  the  distinction  between  male  and 
female  ova  Russo  states  that  he  has,  by  administration  of  lecithin, 
succeeded  in  greatly  increasing  the  proportion  of  female  births.  He 
gives  figures  to  show  that  in  rabbits,  normally  bred,  male  births  are  largely 
in  excess  of  female  births,  and  another  series  of  figures  showing  a  great 
excess  of  female  births  from  females  treated  with  lecithin.  Both  lists  of 
figures  are  however  declared  to  be  selected  from  a  larger  number  in  order 
to  illustrate  the  author's  thesis.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  full  lists  will 
soon  be  published.  Meanwhile  I  may  mention  that  Mr  Hurst  in  his  very 
considerable  experience  of  breeding  rabbits  under  normal  conditions  has 
found  the  male  and  female  births  to  be  sensibly  equal  in  number. 

B.   H.  13 


194        Certain  Females  normally  Hybrid         [ch. 

special  heterozygosis  of  females  is  no  rarity '^.  Bred  with 
their  own  corresponding  male  type  these  females  would  in 
the  ordinary  course  never  reveal  that  they  were  hetero- 
zygous ;  for  the  spurious  allelomorphism  subsisting  between 
the  femaleness  and  the  dominant  factor  which  it  repels 
would  preserve  the  males  homozygous  and  the  females 
heterozygous,  and  so  the  impurity  would  be  hidden  in 
perpetuity.  The  real  condition  could  only  be  brought  to 
light  either  by  a  cross  with  a  distinct  race;  or  by  a  variation 
which  through  the  introduction  of  some  new  factor  or  the 
omission  of  one  previously  existing,  upsets  the  equilibrium 
hitherto  maintained  among  the  several  elements  through 
the  cell-divisions  of  gametogenesis. 

The  recognition  of  these  facts  brings  us  a  step,  if  a  small 
one,  nearer  to  the  discovery  of  the  nature  of  variation.  In 
such  a  case  as  that  of  the  Canary,  since  the  ordinary  green 
hens  are  "hybrids  "  of  Cinnamon,  the  Cinnamon  variety  is 
perceived  to  have  been  already  in  existence,  ready  to  appear 
if  the  critical  event  which  could  release  the  variety  should 
occurf.  What  that  critical  event  may  have  been  we  still 
cannot  suggest. 

The  minute  analysis  of  such  cases  as  these  will  almost 
certainly  disclose  systems  of  interrelationship  between  the 
factors  more  complex  than  that  we  have  been  considering. 
In  particular,  it  will  be  well  to  keep  in  view  the  obvious 
possibility  that  sexual  dimorphism  may  be,  sometimes  at 
least,  a  phenomenon  in  which  a  compound  character  plays 
a  part,  so  that  for  the  production  of  femaleness,  for  instance, 
it  may  be  necessary  that  two  factors  should  coincide  in  the 
same  zygote. 

Finally,  in  a  preliminary  survey  of  the  subject,  the 
attractiveness  of  Castle's  suggestion  is  not  to  be  denied. 
It  may  well  be  that  the  unions  of  spermatozoa  with  ova 

*  Amongst  much  evidence  which  Professor  C.  O.  Whitman  most 
kindly  gave  me  in  1907  concerning  the  resuUs  of  his  long-continued 
experiments  in  crossing  the  species  of  Pigeons,  was  an  example  which 
is  strongly  suggestive  of  the  same  heterozygosis  of  the  female.  When 
Tiirtur  hiiviilis  ?  is  crossed  with  a  ivhite  T.  risorius  $ ,  white  young  may 
come  in  F-^  and  are  then  always  females. 

t  The  same  remarks  apply  of  course  also  to  the  moth  Abraxas  grossu- 
lariata  of  which  the  males  are  pure  to  the  type,  while  the  females  are 
hybrids  of  I  act  i  color. 


x]  Gametes  in  Groups  of  Four  195 

are  not  all  equally  possible,  and  that  fertilisation  can  only 
take  place  between  gametes  dissimilar  In  respect  of  sex- 
factors'".  A  fact  perhaps  favourable  to  this  conception  Is  the 
almost  universal  arrangement  of  gametic  systems  In  groups 
oi  foiL7\  The  maturation-processes  of  male  cells,  and,  with 
very  rare  exceptions,  those  of  ova  which  are  to  undergo 
fertilisation,  take  place  in  such  a  way  that  a  group  oi  fo2tr, 
not  two,  reduced  nuclei  results.  Both  pollen-grains  and 
spermatozoa  are  arranged  in  tetrads.  The  ovum  prepared 
for  fertilisation  by  the  maturation-processes  has  ejected, 
except  in  a  few  special  cases,  three  nuclei  comparable  with 
itself  (though  very  often  two  of  these  may  by  an  equation- 
division  be  extruded  In  combination).  Such  differentiation 
by  groups  of  four  Is  strongly  suggestive  of  the  possibility 
that  the  four  parts  are  not  all  comparable.  It  may  be  that 
the  simple  allelomorphism  we  so  often  find  is  really  a 
phenomenon  of  simple  cases  only,  and  that  the  fundamental 
differentiation  Is  in  reality  dimorphic  for  each  sex.  The 
gametic  series  for  the  heterozygote  may  not  be  A,  a,  A,  a, 
but  A,  a,  A',  a'  both  on  the  female  and  male  sides;  and  this 
may  be  the  meaning  of  the  grouping  into  sets  of  four,  not 
sets  of  two.  Naturally  however  very  cogent  evidence  must 
be  produced  In  order  to  establish  such  a  proposition  as  this. 

■^  There  is  one  piece  of  direct  evidence  strongly  suggestive  of  di- 
morphism among  spermatozoa.  It  was  mentioned  (p.  172)  that  the 
daughters  of  colour-bUnd  men  can  transmit  the  affection,  while  the  sojis 
of  these  same  fathers  are  free  from  it  and  cannot  transmit  it.  Until 
proper  statistics  are  forthcoming  it  is  not  possible  to  build  with  complete 
confidence  on  this  fact,  but  it  is  a  clear  indication  of  dimorphism  among 
the  sperms,  such  that  those  destined  to  take  part  in  the  production  of 
females  bear  the  colour-blindness  factor,  while  those  destined  to  fertilise 
the  male  ova  are  free  from  this  factor.  We  do  not  yet  know  that  all  the 
daughters  of  colour-blind  men  can  transmit,  but  the  records  are  I  think 
consistent  with  the  belief  that  they  may.  While  holding  to  the  view 
expressed  in  the  text  that  the  female  is  heterozygous  in  femaleness  {F)  we 
may  perhaps  suppose  that  the  male  is  heterozygous  for  maleness  i^M).  We 
thus  avoid  the  difficulties  entailed  by  the  theory  that  both  sexes  are  hetero- 
zygous in  "sex"  (see  p.  165),  for  two  allelomorpJiic pairs  are  now  involved, 
-Fand  its  absence,  J/ and  its  absence.  The  eggs  may  be  represented  as 
(J)  and  O^  the  sperms  as  (^  and  0»  so  that  in  fertilisation  the  union 
is  always  between  /^and  a  blank  sperm  or  between  J/ and  a  blank  ovum. 
The  spurious  allelomorphisms  described  in  the  canary.  Abraxas  grossu- 
lariata  and  the  silky  fowl  are  cases  in  which  7^ repels  certain  factors,  while 
in  colour-blindness  there  may  be  an  exactly  similiar  spurious  allelomorphism 
between  M  and  the  factor  for  colour-blindness. 

13—2 


CHAPTER   XI 

DOUBLE   FLOWERS. 

Miscellaneous  Cases,  Recessive  and  Dominant  Doubling — 
^' Hose-in-Hose''  Flowers — The  Special  Case  of  Dotible 
Stocks. 

Tpje  inheritance  of  doubling  in  flowers  has  been  only 
studied  with  success  in  a  few  instances.  In  one  of  these, 
however,  that  of  Stocks  [Matthiola),  a  feature  of  such  great 
physiological  significance  has  been  discovered  that  we  may 
be  sure  the  subject  will  before  long  assume  considerable 
importance.  A  special  chapter,  though  a  brief  one,  must 
be  devoted  to  it. 

Doubling,  the  multiplication,  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
conspicuous  parts  of  flowers,  especially  the  petals,  may 
occur  as  the  result  of  a  number  of  various  and  apparently 
quite  distinct  physiological  processes.  The  different  sorts 
of  doubling  have  been  often  described  in  the  treatises  on 
plant  teratology '^^.  In  the  commonest  kind  the  stamens 
are  bodily  transformed  into  petals,  as  a  manifestation  of 
that  phenomenon  which  I  have  called  Homoeoticf  variation, 
viz.  the  transformation  of  a  part  into  the  likeness  of 
another  with  which  it  stands  in  a  series.  This  is  the  kind 
of  doubling  which  occurs  so  conspicuously  in  the  Rose, 
Ranunculus,    Godetia,    &c.      In    other  cases   doubleness   is 

*  A  good  general  account  of  the  phenomena  will  be  found  in  Masters' 
Teratology,  1869.  For  a  more  minute  description  see  K.  Goebel, 
"  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  gefiillter  Bliithen," /V///^^//^/>;/V  Jahrbiicher,  xvii. 
1886. 

t  Materials  for  the  Study  of  Variatioti,  1894,  p.  85. 


CH.  XI]  Double  Flowers  197 

attained  by  an  actual  multiplication  or  division  of  the 
petals,  the  stamens  and  other  parts  remaining  apparently 
unchanged.  Of  this  some  of  the  double  Fuchsias,  Hya- 
cinths and  several  Liliaceae  afford  very  clear  examples. 
These  two  processes,  however,  very  often,  in  fact  most 
usually,  occur  in  combination  with  each  other,  and  it  is  not 
generally  possible  to  distinguish  how  much  of  the  change  in 
number  is  due  to  the  one  process  and  how  much  to  the 
other. 

In  some  flowers,  especially  those  with  gamopetalous 
corollas,  the  reduplication  can  occur  in  such  a  way  that  the 
corolla  Is  simply  repeated,  two  or  more  corollas  standing 
in  the  place  of  one,  but  sometimes  when  two  corollas 
are  thus  formed  it  may  be  seen  that  the  outermost  is  in 
reality  formed  by  a  homoeotic  variation  of  the  sepals  into 
the  likeness  of  the  petals.  The  most  familiar  examples  of 
this  "  hose-in-hose "  arrangement  are  known  in  Priimila, 
Campanula  and  Mimulus.  Another  kind  of  doubling  is 
due  to  what  is  termed  proliferation  or  prollfication  (Masters) 
of  the  floral  envelopes.  The  best  illustration  of  this  Is  the 
common  double  Arabis  albida,  in  which  the  corolla  and 
calyx  are  repeated  tier  above  tier  on  an  elongation  of  the 
axis.  The  different  forms  of  increase  in  the  number  of 
the  petals  may  commonly  occur  in  varying  degrees  of 
perfection,  and  many  grades  of  doubling  are  often  to  be 
seen  on  the  same  individual  plant.  There  is  also  evidence 
that,  In  certain  cases  at  least,  high  feeding  and  generous 
cultivation  greatly  promote  the  doubling.  In  some  forms 
too  it  is  known  that  the  amount  of  doubling  undergoes  a 
change  with  the  age  of  the  plant,  showing  what  has  been 
called  "  Periodicity^,"  the  most  extensively  doubled  flowers 
appearing  on  the  strongest  stems  and  at  the  height  of  the 
flowering  period. 

To  students  of  genetics  the  interest  of  the  doubling  o\ 
flowers  arises  partly  from  the  fact  that  It  is  a  character  the 
heredity  of  which  can  be  readily  Investigated,  but  especially 
from  the  obvious  suggestion  that  the  phenomenon  Is  or  at 
least  may  be  associated  with  disturbance  in  the  sexuality  of 
the  plants. 

*  See  Correns,   yB.    Wiss.  Bot.    xli.    1905,   p.   465,   de  Vries,  Ber. 
Deut.  bot,   Ges.  xvii.   1899,  p.  45. 


198  Double  Flowers  [ch. 

In  many  fully  double  flowers  fertility  is  obviously  im- 
paired through  the  conversion  of  the  reproductive  organs 
into  vegetative  parts.  It  must  not  however  be  assumed  that 
the  sterility  so  often  accompanying  doubling  is  solely  due  to 
this  comparatively  definite  circumstance.  I  n  the  hose-in-hose 
Ca7npamcla,  which  has  the  sepals  petaloid,  the  well-formed 
anthers  contain  plenty  of  pollen  (some  may  be  petalodic), 
but  the  female  organs  are  in  some  way  Influenced  by  the 
variation  of  the  sepals  so  that  they  are  in  some  strains 
sterile.  In  the  double  Arabis  albida  mentioned  above 
there  are  neither  male  nor  female  organs,  but  the  tier- 
upon-tler  structure,  which  is  here  the  form  the  doubleness 
assumes,  plainly  shows  that  something  more  than  a  simple 
homoeosis  of  the  stamens  and  carpels  has  occurred. 

In  the  Stock  two  kinds  of  doubling  occur  which  are  of 
quite  distinct  nature.  The  ordinary  double  Stocks  much 
used  in  gardens  are  fully  double,  possessing  an  immense 
number  of  petals  but  no  sexual  organs,  male  or  female^. 
Such  doubles  must  therefore,  as  we  shall  see,  always  be 
bred  from  singles,  a  phenomenon  which  furnishes  one  of 
the  most  curious  problems  that  the  study  of  heredity  has 
to  elucidate.  Besides  these  real  doubles,  plants  are  occasion- 
ally seen  with  one  or  two  extra  petals,  but  the  experience 
of  breeders  makes  it  probable  that  these  plants  are  not  more 
prone  than  ordinary  singles  to  produce  the  real  doubles. 

In  Petunia  another  problem  Is  presented.  The  doubles 
have  an  immense  mass  of  petals,  apparently  formed  at  the 
expense  of  the  stamens.  A  few  anthers  are  nevertheless 
formed  which  contain  good  pollen.  The  fe7nale  organs  on 
the  contrary  are    abortive    and  the  double  flowers  set  no 

seedt- 

The  case  of  Begonia  offers  some  points  of  interest.  The 
plants  are  of  course  monoecious  and  It  is  only  the  male 
flowers  which  are  double  as  a  rule.  When  the  plants  flower 
for  their  first  season  the  doubleness  is  frequently  extreme, 
no  anthers  being  formed.  But  In  their  second  season 
such  plants  bear  male  flowers  which  contain  good  anthers, 
especially,  according  to  the  experience  of  practical  breeders, 

*  Goebel  states  that  rudiments  of  anthers  are  very  rarely  produced, 
t  See  Vilmorin,  Fleurs  de  pleine   Terre,    1886,   p.    669,   and   various 
horticultural  authorities. 


XI]  Double  Primitla  199 

if  the  plants  are  starved'^.  The  female  flowers  are  generally 
normal,  but  sometimes  extra  petals  are  formed  in  them  also. 
Such  female  flowers  have  singular  malformations  which  have 
been  often  described,  the  most  noticeable  being  an  opening 
of  the  ovary  which  causes  the  ovules  to  lie  freely  exposed. 

Of  the  hereditary  descent  of  doubleness  we  know  little, 
but  from  what  is  known  it  appears  that  several  distinct 
systems  are  followed. 

In  Primula  Sinensis  doubleness  is  an  ordinary  recessive, 
singleness  being  completely  dominant.  The  doubleness  of 
Primula  Is  of  a  very  unusual  kind.  It  may  be  primarily  a 
petalody  of  the  anthers,  but  I  have  never  fully  satisfied  my- 
self of  this,  nor  do  I  know  any  critical  observations  on  the 
subject.  When  a  large  collection  of  Primulas  is  examined, 
strains  can  usually  be  found,  the  members  of  which  exhibit 
the  lower  degrees  of  petalody  in  some  or  all  of  their  flowers. 
In  the  fully  double  flowers  there  is  a  complete  series  of 
petals  Inside  the  normal  ones  and  arising  from  them.  These 
are  formed  as  images  of  the  outer  petals,  so  placed  that 
their  ijiner  surfaces  correspond  with  the  outer  surfaces  of 
the  normal  petals,  and  the  two  adjacent  surfaces  are  struc- 
turally both  alike  inner  surfaces.  The  bizarre  colour  of 
double  Primulas  is  due  to  this  circumstance.  Inside  the 
corolla  the  stamens  stand  properly  formed,  and  In  their 
normal  relations.  The  appearance  of  these  fully  double 
flowers  Is  strongly  suggestive  of  a  delaminatlon  In  the  petals 
themselves  ;  but  as  in  those  partially  double  flowers  which 
have  one  or  two  extra  petals  Imperfectly  formed  and  showing 
their  stamlnal  origin,  the  petaloid  tissue  similarly  faces  out- 
wards. It  becomes  impossible  to  distinguish  any  boundary 
between  the  two  phenomena.  The  morphological  problems 
which  these  facts  create  must  be  left  to  the  expert  botanist. 

The  segregation  of  the  single  character  from  the  fully 
double  is,  in  some  families,  clearly  quite  sharp,  and  doubles 
always  breed  true  when  fertilised  inter  se.  The  inherit- 
ance of  the  partial  or  petalodic  doubles  has  been  investigated 
by  Mr  R.  P.  Gregory,  and  his  experiments  show  that  when 
such  a  strain  is  crossed  with  a  pure  single,  F^^  is  single, 
and   in  F^^  singles,   partial    petalodlcs,    and    some    doubles 

*  For  information  on  this  point  I  am  obliged  to  Mr  Leonard  Sutton 
and  to  Mr  Wootten. 


200  Hose-iii-Hose  Flowers  [ch. 

appear,  but  owing  to  the  great  fluctuation  in  the  degree  of 
doubleness  exact  counts  are  impossible. 

In  Carnation,  where  the  doubling  is  of  the  ordinary 
kind,  due  to  petalody  combined  with  sub-division  of  parts, 
there  is  some  reason  for  suspecting  doubleness  to  be  a 
dominant.  Everyone  who  has  grown  Carnations  from  seed 
is  aware  that  a  proportion,  often  considerable,  of  the  seed- 
lings come  single.  It  is  most  improbable  that  any  large 
number  of  these  can  owe  their  singleness  to  cross-fertilisa- 
tion with  single  plants,  for  breeders  would  not  keep  such 
plants  wittingly.  Till  critical  experiments  are  made,  how- 
ever, the  point  cannot  be  regarded  as  certain  beyond 
question. 

In  Poppies,  on  the  contrary,  the  dominance  of  the  single 
type  appears  to  be  quite  complete.  In  the  annual  Larkspur 
[Delphi7tiu7n  consolida)  also,  from  the  fact  that  pink  doubles 
exposed  to  the  pollen  of  blue  singles  produce  among  their 
seedlings  some  blue  singles'^,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
single  type  is  dominant.  Instances  of  this  sort  could 
probably  be  multiplied  without  difficulty,  and  from  what  we 
know  of  plant-breeding  in  general,  there  is  no  practical 
doubt  that  doubling  of  the  ordinary  type  is  usually  recessive 
to  singleness. 

The  Hose-m-Hose  or  Calycanthenwics  Cavtpanula  and 

Mimtilus. 

The  inheritance  of  this  well-known  variation  or  mon- 
strosity was  studied  by  Correns  (76).  The  calyx,  as 
described  above,  is  petaloid  in  many  degrees,  varying  from 
a  condition  in  which  the  sepals  are  still  partially  green  up 
to  the  full  development  of  a  second  corolla.  In  Correns' 
experience  this  variation  in  the  calyx  is  accompanied  by  a 
marked  diminution  in  the  fertility  of  the  female  organs. 
This  in  Ca7npannla  persicifolia  amounted  to  total  sterility, 
though  in  C.  7nedia  a  few  seeds  were  set. 

The  abnormal  character  proved  to  be  a  partial  and 
somewhat  irregular  dominant,  considerable  fluctuation  occur- 
ring on  the  individual  plants.  Owing  to  complete  failure  of 
F^  to  set  seed  F,  could  not  be  raised,  but  when  the  normal 
type  was  fertilised  with  pollen  from  F^  a  mixture  of  the  two 

*  I  have  observed  this  in  my  own  garden. 


XI]  Double  Stocks  201 

forms  resulted"^.  The  Campanulas  are  plants  well  suited 
for  this  kind  of  experiment  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  their 
genetic  properties  may  be  fully  explored.  Interesting 
experiments,  for  example,  could  be  made  with  the  white 
double  form  of  persicifolia  known  in  horticulture  as  C. 
Moerheimii.  In  it  there  is  extreme  doubling,  apparently 
of  the  ordinary  kind,  due  to  petalody  of  stamens  and  split- 
ting of  the  parts. 

In  the  hose-in-hose  Miinidus  Correns  found  also  that 
that  variety  is  an  irregular  dominant.  Here  however  there 
was  no  sign  of  sterility  in  the  female  organs. 

Double  Stocks  [Matthiola). 

Elaborate  experiments  on  the  heredity  of  doubleness  in 
Stocks  have  been  made  by  Miss  E.  R.  Saunders,  and  though 
the  research  must  still  be  regarded  as  in  an  incipient  stage, 
some  facts  of  quite  unusual  interest  have  been  discovered. 

Single  Stocks  in  general  breed  true  to  singleness.  As  a 
rarity  an  extra  petal  may  appear,  but  there  is  no  evidence 
to  connect  such  an  appearance  with  the  extreme  and  most 
definite  kind  of  doubling  characteristic  of  the  ordinary 
double  Stocks  of  horticulture.  In  double  Stocks  both  carpels 
and  stamens  are  wholly  absent  so  far  as  our  observations 
have  gone,  though,  according  to  Goebel,  rudimentary  anthers 
are  sometimes  formed.  From  time  immemorial  these 
doubles  have  been  bred  entirely  as  the  offspring  of  special 
strains  of  single  Stocks  which  are  maintained  for  that 
purpose.  Since  all  doubles  are  absolutely  sterile  the 
succession  is  represented  thus  : — 

singles 


singles         doubles 


singles         doubles 


singles         doubles 

*  Correns  states  that  seed  sold  for  "  hose-in-hose  "  or  "  cup-and-saucer  " 
Campanula  gives  a  majority  of  plants  showing  the  variation.  The  sterility 
of  the  ovules  is  perhaps  an  accompaniment  of  the  petalody  when  strongly 
pronounced.  Campanula  media,  with  considerable  though  not  complete 
calycanthemy,  that  I  have  examined  had  no  obvious  reduction  in  fertility. 


202  Double  Stocks  [ch. 

The  numerical  proportion  in  which  the  doubles  appear 
cannot  be  confidently  stated,  but  it  is  certain  that  this  pro- 
portion differs  greatly  in  different  strains.  There  is  some 
reason  for  supposing  the  ratio  9  doubles  :  7  singles  to  be 
the  common  one  in  some  families,  but  the  experience  of 
breeders  points  clearly  to  the  fact  that  the  proportion  of 
doubles  may  be  much  higher  than  this  in  specially  good 
strains,  while  in  others  the  proportion  again  may  be  much 
lower.  Generally  speaking,  however,  we  have  the  certain 
fact  that  plenty  of  strains  consist  of  singles  which  throw  a 
great  excess  of  doubles. 

Many  writers  have  recommended  special  cultural  devices 
for  increasing  the  output  of  doubles.  Starvation,  drying  the 
plants  off,  keeping  the  seeds  from  the  lower  ends  of  the 
pods,  are  among  the  expedients  advised.  I  do  not  know 
that  any  of  these  suggestions  have  been  properly  tested, 
and  it  would  be  rash  to  deny  that  they  may  have  some 
effect.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  practically  certain  that 
horticultural  bad  treatment  will  not  cause  a  double  Stock  to 
produce  stamens  or  carpels.  Even  in  the  weakest  flowers 
on  the  doubles,  which  often  may  be  so  reduced  as  to  have 
only  4  or  5  petals,  no  sexual  organs  are  formed. 

The  morphological  nature  of  the  doubleness  of  Stocks  is 
by  no  means  clear.  When  such  flowers  are  examined  it  is 
seen  that  the  4  sepals  are  normal.  Above  them  the  floral 
axis  is  continued  for  some  length,  and  on  it  are  set  the 
crowded  petals  in  imbricated  fashion.  There  is  no  repetition 
of  the  sepals  as  in  the  case  of  Arabis  albida,  and  the 
variation  cannot  readily  be  described  as  a  strobilisation. 

Since  the  doubles  are  totally  sterile,  the  problem  of  the 
hereditary  transmission  of  the  condition  must  be  investigated 
by  making  crosses  with  the  single-flowered  parents  which 
produce  these  doubles.  As  the  doubleness  appears  in  the 
offspring  of  these  singles  the  condition  is  evidently  present 
either  in  the  male  cells  of  such  flowers  or  in  the  female  cells, 
or  is  produced  by  the  combination  (in  fertilisation)  of  the 
factors  with  which  these  cells  are  endowed. 

Miss  Saunders  has  made  many  crosses  between  different 
strains  of  double-throwing  singles,  and  as  was  to  be  expected, 
such  crosses  have  given  a  mixture  of  doubles  and  singles 
just  as   either   parent   would    have    done   if  self-fertilised. 


XI]  Double  Stocks  203 

The  numbers  are  Irregular  and  obviously  need  a  further 
analysis. 

The  crosses  which  are  instructive  are  those  which  were 
made  between  the  double-throwers  and  the  pure  single 
strains.  Whichever  way  the  cross  is  made,  F^  is  always 
single.  When  F^  is  raised  from  these  plants  the  curious 
fact  appears  that  the  result  differs  according  to  the  way  in 
which  the  original  cross  luas  made.  When  the  cross  is  in 
the  form  pure  single  %  x  double-throwing  ^,  all^  the  F^ 
plants  give  a  mixture  of  doubles  and  singles  in  F._ ;  but 
when  the  reciprocal  cross  Is  made,  namely  double-thrower 
used  as  ?  X  pure  single  used  as  J,  it  is  found  that  the  F^ 
plants  are  of  two  kinds,  (i)  those  which  throw  doubles 
mixed  with  singles  in  F,,  and  (2)  those  which  throw  only 
singles  in  F^_. 

The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  evidently  that  the  pollen- 
cells  of  the  double-throwers  are  all  (perhaps  nearly  all) 
bearing  the  double  character,  but  that  the  egg-cells  of  these 
same  plants  are  of  two  kinds,  those  which  bear  singleness 
and  those  which  bear  doubleness  (see  22,  pp.  5  and  36). 

For  the  first  time  therefore  we  have  a  proof  that,  in  a 
hermaphrodite  form,  there  may  be  a  substantial  difference 
between  the  factors  borne  by  the  male  and  female  cells  of 
the  same  plant.  It  is  the  existence  of  this  instance  which 
leads  me  to  hazard  the  suggestion  introduced  in  the  discus- 
sion of  the  facts  of  sex-inheritance  in  Bryony,  that  the 
female  cells  of  Bryonia  alba  may  be  of  two  kinds  and  male 
cells  of  one  kind  (see  p.  168). 

This  discovery,  though  it  may  prove  to  be  the  clue  to 
the  problem  of  the  double  Stocks,  leaves  the  main  difficulty 
still  unsolved.  We  have  to  find  the  scheme  whereby  it 
comes  to  pass  that  the  doubles,  though  bred  from  singles, 
are  nevertheless  as  a  rule  in  the  majority,  and  the  difticulty 
of  offering  a  plausible  suggestion  is  not  diminished  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the  male  cells  may  be  all  double, 
for  this  fact  implies  that  a  majority  of  the  egg-cells  must 
also  be  bearing  doubleness,  and  ultimately  that  part  of  the 
singleness  must  have,  as  it  were,  disappeared  in  gameto- 
genesis.      We  are   at    present    quite    unable    to    offer    any 

*  No   exception  has   yet  been  met  with.      There  are  however  some 
reasons  for  anticipating  that  exceptions  may  exist. 


204  Double  Stocks  [ch.  xi 

symmetrical  or  probable  scheme  of  character-distribution  by 
which  such  a  phenomenon  can  be  represented. 

The  various  difficulties  of  the  case  culminate  in  the  fact 
which  seems  well  established,  that  thouofh  the  double- 
throwers  generally  give  7  singles  :  9  doubles — with  certain 
departures  from  this  ratio  which  are  probably  not  fortuitous — 
yet  F^  raised  from  single  x  double-thrower,  and  from  the 
reciprocal  cross,  always  on  self-fertilisation  gives  3  singles  : 
I  double^. 

*  The  relation  of  white  to  cream-colour  in  the  strain  known  as  '"Sulphur" 
is  approximately  the  same  as  that  of  single  to  double  described  above. 
"  Sulphurs  "  are  single  whites  throwing  singles  all  white,  and  doubles  which 
are  usually  ^rd'^;;^j- with  whites  as  exceptions.  The  pollen-grains  of  "Sulphur" 
all  bear  cream,  while  of  the  ovules  some  are  creams  and  some  whites. 


CHAPTER   XII 

EVIDENCE   AS   TO    MENDELIAN   INHERITANCE   IN    MAN. 

Normal  Characters — Diseases  and  Malfonnafions.  Domi- 
nants — Sex-lwiited  Do77tinants — Recessives — Note  on 
Collecting  Evidence, 

Of  Mendelian  inheritance  of  normal  characteristics  in 
man  there  is  as  yet  but  httle  evidence.  Only  a  single  case 
has  been  established  with  any  clearness,  namely  that  of 
eye-colour.  The  deficiency  of  evidence  is  probably  due  to 
the  special  difficulties  attending  the  study  of  human  heredity. 
Human  families  are  small  compared  with  those  of  our 
experimental  animals  and  plants,  and  the  period  covered  by 
each  generation  is  so  long  that  no  observer  can  examine 
many.  Now  that  the  critical  methods  of  study  are  under- 
stood we  may  have  every  confidence  that  progress  will  be 
made. 

In  human  inheritance  there  Is  however  one  somewhat 
peculiar  feature,  the  complexity  of  the  transmission  of  the 
various  colour-characters'^.  In  our  experimental  studies  of 
animals  and  plants  we  have  rarely  met  with  examples  of  a 
descent  so  complex  as  that  which  the  colour  of  hair  and 
complexion  in  the  mixed  populations  of  western  Europe 
certainly  presents.  If  the  colours  that  we  see  in  our  own 
population  followed  in  their  descent  rules  so  simple  as  those 
traced  In  the  mouse,  or  the  sweet  pea,  or  even  as  those 
which  a  little  study  would  undoubtedly  detect  In  regard  to 
the  colour  of  cats,  the  essential  facts  of  Mendelism  must 
have  long  ago  been  part  of  the  common  stock  of  human 
knowledge. 

The  case  of  eye-colour  is  comparatively  simple.  As 
Hurst  has  shown  by  examining  the  children  in  a  Lelcester- 

*  See  also  later  with  regard  to  albinism  in  man. 


2o6  Mendelian  Heredity  in  Man  [ch. 

shire  village  and  comparing  them  with  their  parents,  the 
type  in  which  pigment  is  present  on  the  front  of  the  iris  is 
a  dominant,  the  absence  of  such  pigment  being  recessive. 
When  the  pigment  is  present  in  some  quantity  the  eye  is 
called  brown  or  black,  while  when  it  is  absent  the  eye  is 
called  blue  or  grey.  In  general  terms  therefore  it  may  be 
said  that  brown  eyes  are  dominant  to  blue  eyes.  Careful 
examination  however  shows  that  many  eyes  which  might 
on  a  hasty  glance  be  called  blue  really  have  some  of  the 
characteristic  pigment.  Casual  descriptions  therefore  made 
by  use  of  the  popular  names  for  the  colours  are  quite 
unreliable,  and  the  propositions  based  on  them  can  only  be 
received  with  great  caution.  Some  further  details  and 
pedigrees  are  given  in  the  Chapter  on  Eye-Colour  (see 
p.    io8). 

With  respect  to  hair-colour  in  our  own  population 
nothing  can  yet  be  said  with  much  confidence.  The  segre- 
gation of  red  hair  from  black  hair  may  be  seen  in  many 
families  and  this  red  is  presumably  a  recessive,  but  to  work 
out  the  interrelations  of  hair-colours  in  general  would  be 
a  very  difficult  undertaking"^.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  eye- 
colours,  so  here,  the  attempt  to  force  the  various  colours 
into  a  continuous  colour-scale  and  to  classify  the  material 
by  reference  to  that  scale  is  useless  ;  for  though  probably 
intermediates  could  be  found  existing  in  such  gradations  as 
to  bridge  the  gaps  between  the  more  distinct  types,  there 
cannot  be  the  least  doubt  that  so  soon  as  a  strict  method  of 
analysis  is  instituted  the  various  intermediates  will  be  shown 
to  be  caused  by  the  interactions  of  a  limited  number  of 
definite  factors.  (See  Intermediates,  Chap,  xiii.)  In  the 
analysis  of  such  phenomena  research  must  proceed  by  the 
detection  of  the  pairs  of  factors,  beginning  with  the  more 
obvious,  and  when  their  behaviour  and  powers  are  thoroughly 
understood,  a  search  for  the  remainder  may  be  attempted. 

The  fact  of  continuous  descent  through  many  genera- 
tions creates  a  probability  that  several  notorious  family 
characteristics,  such  as  the  Hapsburg  lip  and  many  more 
which  could  be  cited,  would  prove  on  examination  to  be 
dominants,  but  the  evidence  for  a  proper  analysis  has  not 

^  Cp.  Hurst  (162). 


XII] 


Meitdelian  Heredity  in  Man 


207 


hitherto  been  compiled.  Two  such  cases  may  be  given. 
The  first  is  that  of  a  pecuHar  form  of  short  woolly  hair, 
resembling   that    of    the    negro    (Gossage    (132),    on    the 


(^ 


cf  X  f 


o 


I" 
o 


o 


^      Q 


o 


O 


o 


n 
o 


o 


o 


Fig. 


21.  Descent  of  a  peculiar  form  of  curly  hair  recorded  by  Dr  Walter 
Bell.  (After  Gossage,  132.)  The  black  symbols  are  the  affected 
members. 


authority  of  Dr  Walter  Bell).  Family  tradition  attributed 
this  peculiarity  to  a  ''Mexican"  ancestor  several  generations 
back.  The  peculiarity  was  transmitted  directly  through 
those  who  exhibited  it,  as  shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  21). 

The  second  is  a  similar  inheritance  of  a  lock  of  congeni- 
tally  white  hair  recorded  by  RIzzolI,  which  clearly  behaved 
as  an  ordinary  dominant  (see  Fig.  22). 


I 


r 
? 


o" 


«r   • 


9^ 


^ 


«r   • 


"•■ 


rm      I   I  I  I  I 
o«o  ••c#oo o($) (3) 


(g)0( 


(  1  I  I  1 
o»o« 


9 


c    o 


o 


Fig.  22.     Descent  of  a  congenital  lock  of  white  hair,  recorded  by 
Rizzoli.     (After  Gossage,  132.) 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  If  pains  were  taken  to 
record  the  descents  of  striking  features  many  such  pedigrees 
could  be  compiled.      It  Is  of  course  necessary,  if  oral  testi- 


2o8  Mtilattos  [CH. 

mony  and  tradition  have  to  be  appealed  to,  that  the 
characteristic  should  be  a  definite  one  about  which  mistakes 
could  scarcely  occur.  It  is  necessary  also  that  the  feature 
should  not  be  dependent  on  external  influences.  For 
example,  in  many  families  a  crooked  little  finger  is  common. 
This  peculiarity  may  descend  both  through  the  affected  and 
through  the  unaffected,  but  the  affection,  I  believe,  is  like 
that  seen  in  chickens  whose  feet  may  be  deformed  through 
weakness.  In  some  families  such  chickens  occur  commonly, 
but  with  much  greater  frequency  when  the  incubators  have 
been  working  badly,  a  fact  which  suggests  that  it  is  the 
disposition  to  the  peculiarity  which  is  transmitted,  not  the 
peculiarity  itself  Probably  the  crooking  of  the  little  finger 
is  an  expression  of  a  certain  weakness,  which  if  circum- 
stances are  favourable  need  not  become  apparent.  Pedigrees 
of  such  peculiarities  cannot  be  expected  to  give  results  of 
much  positive  value. 

As  to  the  results  of  inter-crossing  between  distinct  races 
of  mankind  there  exist,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  records  of 
that  critical  and  minute  sort  which  are  alone  of  value  for  the 
adequate  study  of  Mendelian  inheritance.  For  example, 
the  statement  has  been  repeatedly  made  that  the  mulatto 
formed  between  the  European  and  the  Negro  breeds  true 
to  an  intermediate  type,  but  we  still  await  precise  data  in 
support  of  this  statement.  It  may  well  be  that  there  is  no 
sensible  segregation  in  regard  to  colour  in  that  case,  and 
certainly  many  intergrading  colours  exist,  but  there  is  no 
material  yet  upon  which  a  definite  pronouncement  can  be 
made.  As  regards  length  and  curliness  of  hair,  indeed,  I 
anticipate  from  casual  observation  that  the  consequences  of 
segregation  could  be  made  evident  without  very  much 
difficulty.  With  regard  to  skin-colour  the  general  trend  of 
evidence  is  in  favour  of  the  conclusion  that  If  definite 
determining  factors  are  responsible  for  the  colour  seen,  the 
number  of  such  factors  or  of  their  subtraction-stages  must 
be  considerable.  A  point  not  to  be  forgotten  is  the  diversity 
not  only  of  the  negro  races,  but  of  the  white  population, 
from  which  the  mulattos  arise. 

From  such  information  as  I  have  been  able  to  glean 
from  travellers  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  in  the  crosses 
between  white  races  and  the  inhabitants  of  India  there  are 


XII]  Htmian  Stature  209 

signs  of  a  segregation  more  complete  than  exists  among 
mulattos'^. 

Mr  Mudge  has  pubHshed  also  reports  of  the  existence  of 
segregation  in  regard  to  several  characteristics  in  the  cross- 
bred offspring  of  Canadian  Red  Indians  and  Europeans 
{Nature,  Nov.  7,  1907). 

Pending  further  research  we  must  take  it  that  the 
mulatto  is  probably  a  genuine  exception,  in  so  far  at  least 
as  no  obvious  segregation  normally  occurs. 

Respecting  the  genetics  of  other  normal  characteristics 
in  man,  such  as  stature,  little  progress  has  been  made.  The 
case  of  human  stature  is  interesting  as  it  furnished  material 
for  Galton's  original  determination  t  of  the  Law  of  Ancestral 
Heredity  spoken  of  above  (p.  6).  We  may  feel  assured 
that  this  deduction  is  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the 
number  of  factors  involved  in  deciding  human  stature  is 
large — which  indeed  is  evident,  if  it  be  remembered  how 
many  kinds  of  physiological  difference  must  contribute  to 
the  determination  of  the  length  of  the  body.  Something 
must  be  decided  by  the  number  of  cells  in  the  leg-bones, 
vertebrae  and  various  cartilages,  by  the  size  of  these  cells, 
by  the  amount  and  density  of  the  bony  substance  secreted, 
by  the  shape  of  the  skull,  by  the  obliquity  of  the  neck  of  the 
femur,  by  the  curvature  of  the  spine,  and  by  many  elements 
of  bodily  proportions,  some  easily  influenced  by  conditions, 
which  interact  with  each  other  to  produce  the  single 
"character"  we  call  height.  Such  a  character  could  only 
show  segregation  if  it  were  studied  in  families  made  by  the 
inter-crossing  of  extreme  forms  each  breeding  sensibly  true 
to  type.  It  is  perhaps  a  little  remarkable  that  in  the  pea 
and  the  sweet  pea  segregation  in  height  should  be  so 
marked,  but  the  reason  is  evidently  to  be  found  partly  in 
the  immense  differences  there  available  for  study,  and  in 
the  existence  of  one  predominant  contributing  factor,  the 
internodal  length. 

■^  There  is  a  good  deal  of  scattered  information  which  tends  to  show- 
that  even  among  negro-mulattos  segregation  sometimes  occurs.  See,  for 
instance,  W.  Lawrence,  Lectures  on  Fhysiol.^  1823,  p.  259. 

t  Natural  Inheritance^    1889. 


B.  H.  14 


2IO  Htimaii  Heredity  [ch. 


Dominant  Hereditary  Diseases  and  Malformations. 

Though  knowledge  of  genetics  of  normal  characters  in 
man  has  advanced  so  little,  we  have  now  clear  evidence  as 
to  the  laws  of  descent  followed  by  many  striking  peculiarities 
which  are  of  the  nature  of  deformity  or  disease.  It  is 
somewhat  singular  that  nearly  all  the  abnormal  features 
(except  those  which  are  sex-limited)  that  have  been  yet 
positively  shown  to  follow  Mendelian  rules  in  man  are 
dominant  to  the  normal.  There  are  Indications  that 
certain  abnormal  conditions  are  recessive,  but  in  two  of 
these  only  is  there  much  evidence.  Dominants  are  of  course 
much  easier  to  trace,  as  the  peculiarity  then  descends 
directly  from  parent  to  offspring,  and  so  a  continuous 
history  Is  provided.  Probably  it  is  to  this  circumstance 
that  the  comparative  plenty  of  evidence  respecting  the 
dominants  is  due. 


Brachydactyly. 

A  good  example  of  these  dominants,  which  indeed  was 
the  first  Mendelian  case  to  be  demonstrated  in  man,  is  that 
described  by  Farabee.     The  peculiarity  consists  in  a  short- 
ening of  the  fingers  and  toes,  which  had  only  one  phalangeal 
articulation  like  the  thumbs  Instead  of  two  (Figs.   23  and 
25).     The  condition  Is  said  to  have  been  the  same  in  all 
the  fingers  and  toes  of  the  affected  members  of  the  family. 
The  descent  is  represented  in  the  diagram.     As  there  indi- 
cated, the  peculiarity  descended  solely  through  the  affected, 
and  the  children   of  the  unaffected  did   not  in  any   single 
instance  reproduce  it,   for  they  were  evidently  pure  reces- 
sives.     The    offspring   of    the    affected,    on    the    contrary, 
consist  of  affected  and  unaffected,  in  approximately  equal 
numbers   (36   :   33).      The    affected    parents    in    each    case 
married  with  normal  persons,  so  these  unions  are  all  of  the 
form  DJ^  X  jRJ^,  and  the  equality  of  affected  and  unaffected 
is  in  accordance  with  Mendelian  expectation. 

Farabee's  families  are  American,  being  centred  in  Penn- 
sylvania, and  the  diagram  shows  records  referring  to  five 
generations.     Recently  Drinkwater  has  published  a  full  and 


XII] 


Brachydactyly 


211 


excellent  account  of  the  same  peculiarity  as  manifested  in 
an  English  family  extending  over  seven  generations.  In 
his  cases  also  the  same  law  of  inheritance  is  strictly  fol- 
lowed, the  normal  offspring  of  abnormals  being  always  free 
of  the  abnormality ;  while  the  abnormals  marrying  with 
normal  persons  produce  on  an  average  equal  numbers  of 
affected  and  unaffected  children  (39  :  32,  counting  those  only 
whose  condition  is  definitely  known). 

There  are  several  physiological  questions  of  importance 
arising  out  of  this  case.      First,  as  to  the  exact  nature  of 


Fig.  23.     Brachydactylous  hands.     (After  Farabee,  122.) 


the  malformation,  It  seems  to  be  clear  that  in  all  abnormal 
Individuals  examined  the  fingers  and  toes  are  all  alike  in 
being  short  and  in  having  only  one  phalangeal  articulation. 
Farabee  from  his  radiographs  concluded  that  a  phalanx  was 
definitely  absent  In  all  cases, but  DrInkwater  in  the  extensive 
series  studied  by  him  proved  that  in  some  individuals  there 
Is  In  digits  III  and  IV  a  distinct  representation  of  the 
middle  phalanx  as  well  as  the  proximal  and  terminal.  His 
view  is  that  the  basal  epiphysis  of  phalanx  1 1  is  absent,  and 
that    this   absence    constitutes    the    essential   malformation. 

14 — 2 


212 


Brachydactyly 


[CH. 


Perhaps  the  epiphysis  of  phalanx  III  is  sometimes  also 
unrepresented  and  it  may  be  that  phalanges  1 1  and  III  are 
sometimes  originally  one  cartilage,  but  there  is  not  always 
complete  union  between  these  phalanges  even  in  adult  life 
(compare   Figs.   24  and  25). 

Another  point  of  exceptional  interest  Is  the  fact  that 
all  the  abnormal  persons  were  unusually  short  in  stature 
as  well  as  short  In  the  fingers  and  toes.  This  association 
of  characters  was  equally  pronounced  in  Farabee's  and  in 


A  B 

Fig.  24.     Skiagrams  of  normal  {A)  and  brachydactylous  {B)  members 
of  Drinkwater's  family.     Both  are  adult.     (From  his  photographs.) 

Drinkwater's  families.  The  latter  author  gives  many  details 
of  measurement  from  which  it  appears  that  the  average 
height  of  the  normals  exceeds  that  of  the  abnormals  in 
males  by  ^\  inches  and  in  females  by  4.f  inches.  The  dis- 
proportion between  the  head-lengths  was  relatively  much 
larger.  Upon  what  structural  peculiarity  the  reduction  in 
stature  depended  was  not  discovered.  There  was  no  indi- 
cation that  the  length  of  the  limb-bones  was  out  of  pro- 
portion to  that  of  the  trunk.     The  whole  series  of  facts  has 


XII]  Brachydactyly  213 

obviously  a  close  bearing  on  the  nature  of  meristic  varia- 
tion, but  a  discussion  of  that  problem  is  beyond  my  present 
scope"^. 

If  we  were  dealing  with  natural  species  or  varieties  a 
debate  might  arise  on  the  question  whether  it  is  readily 
to  be  imagined  that  so  definite  a  variation  could  have  arisen 
independently  in  the  two  sets  of  families,  in  America  and 
England  respectively.  To  those  who  have  experience  of 
variation  and  who  know  how  large  and  well  defined  discon- 
tinuous variations  may  frequently  be,  it  will  not  seem  much 
more  difficult  to  conceive  of  the  repetition  of  the  variation 


Fig.  25.  Hands  of  brachydactylous  woman,  age  32.  A  separate  ossification 
can  be  seen  in  digit  III  between  the  ist  and  3rd  phalanges.  In  the 
other  digits  union  of  this  element  with  the  3rd  phalanx  has  already 
taken  place.     (From  Drink  water's  unpublished  photograph.) 

than  of  its  first  occurrence.  There  is  however  some  plausi- 
bility in  the  suggestion  that  these  two  families  may  in 
reality  be  one  in  origin,  for  it  is  known  that  a  male  abnormal 
of  the  4th  generation  in  Drinkwater's  strain  did  emigrate 
to  America.  On  the  other  hand  the  abnormal  first  recorded 
in  Farabee's  strain  was  a  female  in  the  5th  generation  from 

■^  It  must  be  observed  that  in  view  of  Drinkwater's  facts  the  variation 
is  not  simply  meristic  in  the  sense  that  the  digit  divides  into  two  joints 
instead  of  three.  As  he  himself  is  inclined  to  suppose,  the  case  is  more 
probably  to  be  regarded  as  a  homoeotic  variation  of  the  digits  into  the 
likeness  of  the  hallux  and  poUex. 


214 


Brachydadyly 


[CH.  XII 


the  youngest.  There  is  consequently  no  very  probable 
correspondence  between  the  two,  but  their  connection  is  not 
impossible  on  our  present  evidence. 


Fig.  26.     The  pedigree  of  Farabee's  brachydactylous  family. 
N,  normal.     A^  abnormal. 

Another  type  of  brachydactyly  has  also  been  recorded  by 
Walker  ^.  In  it  there  was  an  imperfect  union  of  the  phalanges 
affecting  especially  the  first  and  second  phalanges  of  the 
middle  and  ring  fingers.    The  degree  of  the  affection  varied 


cT    /    (^    cf    cT    T   ?   t 


9  ^       It 


7   ? 


?       /    ?     t    T  c^   ?      / 
T     t  ??  T2T  ?  f  ?  ?T 


^?T^;?TT^t?JcfT<?(J?<J^cJ?T  ?^^?o^J  c^ 


T  cT     ^ 


Fig.  27.     Pedigree  of  affected  members  of  Farabee's  brachydactylous 
family.     Black  symbols  are  affected  persons. 


"^  Walker,  G.,  Johns  Hopkins  Hosp.  Bull.,  xn.  1901. 
author  2  unaffected  in  family  of  John  B.  are  deleted. 


In  copy  sent  by 


0__©_0 


i 

3 


hO 

-^ 

hO 

-^ 

-0+ 


■■*^l 


•■-'• 


r"0 


■V. 


0_@-_O     p 


_©i@-©-© 


L—^t— •f-O 


2l6 


split  Hand 


[CH. 


in  different  individuals.  The  pedigree  shows  that  this  con- 
dition descended  through  the  affected  in  four  generations, 
but  the  descendants  of  the  unaffected  are  not  recorded. 
According  to  this  table  the  families  of  the  affected  add  up  to 
Affected  8  ;   Unaffected  15  ;  not  known  2. 

A  correspondent  has  sent  me  a  pedigree  of  a  family  in 
which  the  fingers  were  almost  entirely  aborted.  The  descent 
was  that  of  an  ordinary  dominant.  The  families  of  the 
affected  add  up  to  19  affected  and  16  unaffected.  The 
children  of  the  unaffected  were  normal  in  all  cases. 

The  condition  known  as  "split  hand"  and  "split  foot," 
in  which    these    extremities    have   a    monstrous,   claw-like 


\^kk\    H 


?  '^    f? 


Fig.  29.     Descent  of  prae-senile  cataract.     (Condensed  from  Nettleship's 

chart.) 

appearance  also  descends  as  a  dominant '^.  Partial  suppres- 
sion of  the  digits  is  one  of  the  features  of  this  abnormality. 
The  degree  of  malformation  varies  greatly  among  the 
affected  individuals  of  the  same  family,  and  though  there  is 
generally  a  rough  correspondence  between  the  two  hands 
and  the  two  feet  of  the  same  person  the  symmetry  is  only 
partial. 

A  considerable  list  of  abnormalities  following  a  course 
of  heredity  similar  to  that  of  the  short  digits  can  now  be 
given.      Of  these  a  few  only  are  mentioned  here. 

*  For  full  collection  of  evidence  see  Lewis,  T.,  and  Embleton,  D.  (170). 


xii]  Cataract 


217 


Cataract.  A  study  of  the  extensive  collection  of 
evidence  made  by  Nettleship  shows  that  several  forms  of 
cataract  are  usually  transmitted  as  dominants,  the  descent 
passing  through  the  affected  persons.  This  Is  shown  most 
clearly  In  regard  to  the  congenital  varieties.  In  these  the 
cataract  Is  present  and  generally  recognized  very  early  in 
life.  Some  of  the  family  records  exemplifying  descents  of 
this  kind  are  very  extensive.     Occasionally  there  Is  descent 

9' 


HJ^ 


Fig.  30.  Descent  of  prae-senile  cataract.  The  condition  was  here 
transmitted,  exceptionally,  through  one  individual  who  was  probably 
unaffected.     (Condensed  from  Nettleship's  chart.) 

of  the  cataract  through  a  parent  recorded  as  unaffected,  but 
the  course  of  the  transmission  is  usually  normal.  Whether 
in  the  exceptional  cases  the  apparently  normal  persons  who 
transmitted  were  in  reality  slightly  affected  cannot  yet  be 
said,  but  it  is  noticeable  that  several  of  these  alleged  excep- 
tions occur  in  the  case  of  progenitors  whose  state  is  only 
known  by  tradition  (Fig.  30). 

Cataracts  acquired  later  In  life,  and  even  the  senile  forms, 
seem,  so  far  as  the  evidence  goes,  to  follow  the  same  rule  In 


2 1 8  Cataract  [ch. 

their  descent.  But  in  dealing  with  this  evidence  difficulty 
arises  from  the  fact  that  the  age  at  which  the  cataract 
appears  is  liable  to  great  variation  and  consequently  the 
negative  record,  that  a  person  was  not  affected,  is  of  doubt- 
ful value,  for  the  affection  might  have  been  due  to  appear 
later  in  life.  As  we  should  expect,  however,  it  is  in  respect 
of  cataracts  of  this  kind  that  transmission  through  the 
unaffected  is  recorded  with  considerable  frequency"^. 

There  are  several  examples  of  families  showing  even 
congenital  cataract  in  several  members  where  the  affection 
seems  to  have  arisen  de  novo,  no  history  of  cataract  being 
discoverable  in  the  parentage.  With  regard  to  the  sub- 
sequent transmission  of  such  cataracts  no  very  definite 
information  at  present  exists. 

As  there  Is  obvious  doubt  of  the  completeness  of  the 
records  In  many  instances  it  is  not  possible  to  give  numeri- 
cal data  with  exactitude.  A  fair  Idea  of  the  general  run  of 
the  numbers  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  list  of  the 
more  complete  families.  These  are  somewhat  arbitrarily 
selected  from  Nettleshlp's  collection,  but  all  the  more 
extensive  families  are  Included f.  Some  of  the  more 
aberrant  numbers  even  in  these  more  perfect  records  are 
almost  certainly  due  to  the  sources  of  error  named  above. 

Recorder       Nettleshif  s  case-number     Affected 

Berry  27 

Fakala  46 

Nettleship  58 

Bandon  83 

Froebelius  90 

Gjersing  97 

Fisher  108 

Zirm  112 
Nettleship  and 
Ogilvie  [212] 


*  It  should  nevertheless  be  remarked  that  the  appearance  of  the 
cataract  at  earlier  ages  in  successive  generations — "anticipation,"  as 
Nettleship  calls  it — has  been  observed  with  some  frequency. 

t  Except  No.  98,  Green's  family,  where  the  cataract  appeared  at 
various  ages,  sometimes  not  till  advanced  life.  The  numbers  in  it  are 
1 8  affected,  and  37  unaffected.  Transmission  here  occurred  twice  through 
the  unaffected.  Since  this  table  was  made  Nettleship  has  published  some 
new  and  important  pedigrees  (210).  One  of  these  gives  a  {d,vc\\\y  from  two 
DR  parents  with  senile  cataract.  Up  to  time  of  writing  their  children 
were  7  affected,  2  unaffected,  and  i  died  at  45  with  sight  good. 


4ffected 

Unaffected 

Not  known 

20 

20 

19 

22 

29 

25  + 

II 

5 

13 

26 

17 

4 

8 

13 

14 

15 

17 

25 

17 

148 

155  + 

17 

XII]  Tylosis  219 

A  valuable  collection  of  pedigrees  illustrating  Mendellan 
descent  chiefly  of  several  affections  of  the  skin  and  hair  has 
been  published  by  Gossage.  All  the  conditions  there  con- 
sidered behave  as  dominants,  and  respecting  several  of  these 
the  evidence  is  fairly  adequate  (132). 

Respecting  tylosis  palviaris  et  plantar  is  the  records  are 
especially  clear.  There  is  a  condition  In  which  the  skin  of 
the  palms  and  soles  Is  abnormally  thick  In  varying  degrees'^. 
From  a  study  of  over  thirty  family  groups  affected  with 
this  peculiar  thickening  of  the  skin  It  appears  that  trans- 
mission was  always  through  affected  members  except  In  the 
case  of  one  family  history t.  Adding  together  all  the 
available  recorded  numbers  of  children  born  to  affected 
parents  there  were  220  affected  and  184  unaffected.  Since 
from  the  nature  of  such  records  It  is  practically  certain  that 
affected  members  of  families  would  be  less  likely  to  be 
missed  or  forgotten  than  the  unaffected,  we  may  regard 
these  numbers  as  not  an  Impossible  representation  of  an 
actual  equality.  In  view  of  the  complete  escape  of  the 
offspring  of  the  unaffected  except  In  one  family  tree  the  fact 
that  tylosis  (called  also  keratosis)  almost  always  behaves 
as  a  simple  dominant  may  be  regarded  as  established. 

One  family  group  was  unique  In  the  fact  that  the 
ancestor  first  showing  the  disease  came  from  parents 
believed  not  to  have  had  It.  This  person  had  a  family  of 
12,  all  affected.  In  general  we  know  nothing  definite  as  to 
the    origin    of   such   variations,    and   whether    the   uniform 

■^  Compare  the  famous  family  of  "  porcupine-men  "  often  alluded  to  by 
the  earlier  anthropologists.  A  good  account  of  this  family  is  given  by  Sir 
W.  Lawrence  {Lectures,  1823, p.  385),  who  remarks  : — "Let  us  suppose  that 
the  porcupine  family  had  been  exiled  from  human  society,  and  had  been 
obliged  to  take  up  their  residence  in  some  solitary  spot  or  desert  island.  By 
matching  with  each  other,  a  race  would  have  been  produced,  more  widely 
different  from  us  in  external  appearance  than  the  Negro.  If  they  had  been 
discovered  at  some  remote  period,  our  philosophers  would  have  explained  to 
us  how  the  soil,  air,  or  climate,  had  produced  so  strange  an  organization  ; 
or  would  have  demonstrated  that  they  must  have  sprung  from  an  originally 
different  race  ;  for  who  would  acknowledge  such  bristly  beings  for  brothers?" 

t  This  is  the  family  recorded  by  Ballantyne,  Pediatrics,  1896,  i.  p.  337. 
This  family  was  peculiar  not  only  inasmuch  as  transmission  occurred 
through  the  unaffected,  but  also  in  the  fact  that  the  condition  appeared 
in  females  only.  This  sex-limitation  suggests  that  the  etiology  of  the 
condition  was  in  this  family  distinct  from  that  of  the  ordinary  tylosis. 


220  Various  Httman  Diseases  [ch. 

affection  of  all  the  family  of  the  first  case  is  in  any  way 
connected  with  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  condition 
cannot  of  course  be  said. 

The  other  conditions  which  Gossage  finds  to  be  domi- 
nants as  a  rule  are  : 

Epidermolysis  btdlosa  :  in  which  the  skin  is  liable  to 
blister  for  trifling  causes. 

Xanthoma  :  the  presence  of  yellow  patches  on  the  skin. 

Multiple  Teleangiectasis :  small  naevus-like  spots. 

Hypotrichosis  congenita  familiaris  :  the  loss  of  hair  at 
or  soon  after  birth. 

Monilithrix  :  a  nodose  condition  of  the  hair. 

Porokeratosis  :  a  curious  disease  in  which  a  raised  horny 
ridge  appears  on  the  skin,  spreading  centrifugally,  leaving 
behind  it  a  patch  in  which  the  constituents  of  the  skin 
undergo  partial  atrophy. 

The  spontaneous  origin  of  porokeratosis  has  several 
times  been  observed.  In  epidermolysis  transmission  through 
unaffected  persons  occurred  in  some  of  the  strains  but  was 
exceptional. 

Besides  these  skin-diseases  Gossage  suggests  that  en- 
larged spleen  is  generally  transmitted  as  a  dominant. 
There  are  also  four  pedigrees  showing  the  same  pheno- 
menon in  the  case  of  the  condition  called  diabetes  insipidtcs 
or  polyuria. 

To  these  may  be  added  with  some  probability  certain 
forms  of  inherited  oedema  and  some  of  the  kinds  of  hare- 

The  most  extensive  pedigree  that  has  yet  been  compiled 
for  any  disease  in  man  is  that  for  congenital  stationary 
night-blindness,  of  which  the  first  part  was  published  by 
Cunier  in  1838^.  Working  on  this  foundation  Nettleship 
succeeded  in  obtaining  material  for  a  most  elaborate 
genealogy  including  21 16  persons  (Fig.  31).  The  affection 
consists  in  a  marked  inability  to  see  in  a  dim  light.  In  this 
family   the   transmission    is   through   the    affected,  and   no 

■*^  Annales  Soc.  Med.  de  Gafid,  1838,  p.  383.     [Not  seen  :  quoted  from 
Nettleship.] 


4*113       4^2        i^i^2         5  5  ^^jS  ^|J6i^6l22 


Fig.  31.  Descent  of  a  form  of  stationary  night-blindness.  (Condensed  from 
Only  those  families  which  contain  affected  members  are  here  set  out  in  dt 
by  the  16'^'  black  symbol  from  the  left  in  generation  vii. 

Black  symbols  show  the  night-blind  individuals.  The  descent  is  a 
According  to  the  records  there  is  a  great  excess  of  normals  over  the  affecl 
theless  the  table  gives  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  permanence  and  m 


<»     OO 


t? 


d 


zm    i  i    i  m  imxi 


^^SJSi^6j44      3^>^378     46324    <|34 


4  8      25  22  3 


Sil 


3  3  516      58  3 


5     2  5  7  4i 


I 

n 
in 

lY 


*\^  ^y  W  <!  5<364|8  ^i^J  7       V 


^4^2^P^i3     7  10. 


;a 


3         4     46*266  6       47       5        65    o 


63666  <^  3  19  3  5 


2^$$ 


chart  published  by  Nettleship  based  on  Cunier's  records  with  later  additions.) 
The  affected  man  (Z>i?)  who  married  the  affected  woman  {£>J^)  is  represented 

through  the  affected,  showing  that  the  condition  is  due  to  a  dominant  factor. 
It  cannot  be  said  that  the  responsible  factor  is  a  simple  allelomorph.  Never- 
f  descent  of  a  dominant  variety. 


XII]  Diseases  of  the  Eye  221 

departure  from  this  rule  has  occurred  In  the  ten  generations 
that  have  elapsed  since  the  birth  of  the  earliest  known  case 
(born  1637).  The  people  are  peasants  living  in  a  group  of 
somewhat  isolated  villages  in  the  south  of  France.  Adding 
together  all  the  families  which  can  be  reofarded  as  the  off- 
spring  of  affected  and  presumably  heterozygous  {^DR) 
individuals  mated  with  normals  the  numbers  are  130  affected 
and  242  unaffected"^.  These  figures  depart  very  widely  from 
the  expected  equality.  Nettleship  thinks  there  are  reasons 
for  supposing  the  number  of  affecteds  somewhat  understated, 
through  a  disposition  to  conceal  the  infirmity.  This  cannot 
however  account  for  the  whole  discrepancy,  since  error 
introduced  from  this  cause  would  lead  to  the  production  of 
affecteds  from  alleged  normals  w^hich  has  never  occurred. 
It  is  of  course  possible  that  several  who  died  before  their 
condition  was  ascertained  mav  have  been  counted  as  normals 
in  past  generations. 

Qualitatively  the  descent  is  evidently  that  of  a  dominant, 
and  though  perhaps  these  aberrant  numbers  point  to  a 
genuine  complication  such  a  conclusion  can  scarcely  be 
drawn  positively  from  materials  of  this  kind. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  stationary  night-blindness 
usually  follows  a  sex-limited  descent,  and  the  absence  of  any 
sex-limitation  in  the  genealogy  just  spoken  of,  suggests  that 
the  physiological  nature  of  the  affection  in  this  family  may 
be  distinct.  There  is,  I  understand,  nothing  which  yet 
differentiates  the  one  condition  from  the  other  unless  it 
be  that  the  sex-limited  kind  is  usually  associated  with 
myopia  which  was  not  conspicuous  here. 

In  the  recorded  pedigrees  there  are  indications  that,  in 
addition  to  those  already  mentioned,  the  following  ophthalmic 
diseases  or  malformations  may  be  transmitted  as  dominants 
sometimes,  though  the  evidence  does  not  justify  a  compre- 
hensive general  statement  and  many  exceptional  cases  are 
known. 

DisticJiiasis :  development  of  eye-lashes  in  place  of 
glands  on  inside  of  eye-lids  (perhaps  a  homoeotic  variation). 

*  In  one  case  an  affected  pair  married  and  their  two  daughters  were 
affected.  Of  these  one  (who  may  have  been  DD)  had  two  affected 
children.  The  totals  given  above  are  arrived  at  after  deduction  for  tins 
family. 


222  Sex-limited  Diseases  [ch. 

Ptosis  :  droop  of  the  upper  lid. 

CoMoma  or  Irideremia :  a  congenital  defect  In  or 
absence  of  the  Iris. 

Ectopia  lentis  :  dislocation  of  the  lens. 

Glaticoina  Is  a  condition  arising  from  various  distinct 
pathological  causes.  From  the  pedigrees  I  have  examined 
It  Is  likely  that  In  some  of  Its  forms  the  dominance  rule  Is 
followed^. 

The  heredity  of  these  various  conditions  could  only  be 
discussed  adequately  at  great  length.  To  do  this  the  time 
is  scarcely  ripe.  Owing  to  the  interest  now  taken  in  the 
problems  of  genetics  evidence  is  being  rapidly  accumulated 
and  detailed  analysis  Is  best  postponed  till  this  new  informa- 
tion becomes  available. 

Do7ninant  Diseases  or   Variations  in  Man  following  a 

Sex-lifnited  Descent. 

In  discussing  the  phenomenon  of  Sex  allusion  was 
made  to  the  sex-limited  diseases  (p.  172).  The  best  known 
of  these  are  : 

Hae7nophilia  :  the  liability  to  bleed  profusely  from  trifling 
cuts  or  abrasions. 

Colour-blindness  :  In  its  commonest  form  an  Inability  to 
distinguish  certain  reds  and  greens. 

Psetido- hyper  trophic  muscular  paralysis,  or  Gowers 
disease. 

Night-bli7idness  of  certain  kinds. 

The  peculiarities  In  the  descent  of  these  conditions  are 
that : 

(i)  They  affect  males  much  more  commonly  than 
females. 

(2)  They  may  be  transmitted  by  the  affected  males t, 
but  are  not — save  in  very  rare  exceptions  (haemophilia) — 
transmitted  by  unaffected  males. 

*  See  for  instance  Howe,  Arch,  of  Ophth.,  xvi.  p.  72. 
t  Patients  suffering  from  Gowers'  disease  rarely  survive  to  adult  life 
and  practically  nothing  is  known  of  their  powers  of  transmission. 


XIl] 


Coloiir-Blindness 


223 


(3)  They  are  nevertheless  transmitted  by  the  unaffected 
females.  Apparently  normal  women,  daughters  or  sisters 
of  the  affected  males,  thus  may  transmit  the  condition  to 
some  of  their  sons  (Fig.  32). 

Such  a  system  of  heredity  has  long  been  a  physiological 
paradox,  and  one  of  the  most  curious  and  interesting  de- 
ductions from  Mendelian  research  is  the  clue  which  it  has 
provided  to  the  solution  of  this  problem  of  sex-limited 
descents  (cp.  p.  173). 

The  experiment  dealing  with  the  inheritance  of  horns 

in  sheep  showed  very  clearly  the  probable  lines  on  which 

an  explanation  was  to  be  found.     Just  as  in  the  sheep  the 

horned    character    is   dominant    in  males    and    recessive  in 

females,  so  with  these  sex-limited  conditions.      If  the  males 


f 


^ 


i. 


V^  n 


71 


Fig.  32.  Pedigree  illustrating  descent  of  colour-blindness.  This  family- 
was  found  by  Dr  W.  H.  R.  Rivers  among  the  Todas,  a  hill-tribe  of 
Southern  India. 

contain  the  factor  for  the  condition,  they  exhibit  it ;  conse- 
quently the  affected  males  can  transmit,  while  the  unaffected 
males  cannot.  In  the  females,  on  the  contrary,  something — 
almost  certainly  the  presence  of  some  other  factor — prevents 
or  inhibits  the  development  of  the  condition,  and  then  they 
may  possess  the  factor  without  its  making  Itself  apparent. 
Such  females  may  then  transmit  It  to  their  offspring,  but 
it  will  only  be  visible  in  the  males,  except  in  the  rare  case 
of  a  union  between  a  heterozygous  female  and  an  affected 
male.  Then  the  female  children  also  mav  be  affected, 
because  they  may  be  homozygous  to  the  factor,  receiving 
two  ''  doses "  of  It,  one  from  their  father  and  one  from 
their  mother. 


224  Colour-Blindness  [ch. 

According  to  the  simple  plan  thus  sketched,  all  the  sons 
of  the  affected  females  will  have  the  affection  and  exhibit  it. 

The  only  one  of  the  notoriously  sex-limited  conditions 
which  is  available  for  testing  this  rule  is  Colour-blindness. 
Haemophilia  and  Gowers'  disease  are  too  fatal,  and  night- 
blindness  is  too  rare  and  too  little  known.  Regarding  Colour- 
blindness even,  the  evidence  is  not  enough  yet  to  provide  a 
statement  as  to  the  quantitative  results.  A  search  undertaken 
by  Mr  Nettleship  has  however  been  successful  in  so  far  that 
he  has  obtained  evidence  of  five  colour-blind  women  with 
sons,  in  all  eleven,  who  are  all  colour-blind.  In  three  cases 
also  there  is,  in  addition,  evidence  that  the  women's  fathers 
were  colour-blind,  as  required  by  the  scheme  ;  and  in  one 
case  also  there  is  a  record  that  the  woman  came  from  a 
strain  having  colour-blind  members.  Besides  these  there 
are  two  published  accounts  of  families  of  two  colour-blind 
women,  each  with  three  sons,  all  colour-blind.  In  all  there- 
fore the  seven  colour-blind  women  had  1 7  sons,  all  colour- 
blind. We  can  I  think  feel  no  further  doubt  that  the 
scheme  must  so  far  present  an  approximation  to  the 
actual  facts.  In  dealing  with  such  phenomena  exceptional 
cases  must  be  expected,  but  hitherto  they  have  not  been 
found. 

Colour-blindness  is  not,  therefore,  as  might  have  been 
imagined,  a  condition  due  to  the  omission  of  something 
from  the  total  ingredients  of  the  body,  but  is  plainly  the 
consequence  of  the  addition  of  some  factor  absent  from 
the  normal.  We  can  scarcely  avoid  the  surmise  that  this 
added  element  has  the  power  of  paralysing  the  colour-sense, 
somewhat  as  nicotin-poisoning  may  do. 

The  other  sex-limited  diseases  in  all  probability  follow 
similar  rules,  but  in  regard  to  haemophilia  there  are 
various  difficulties.  The  records  are  too  heterogeneous 
for  satisfactory  tabulation  as  yet,  and  it  is  to  be  suspected 
that  more  than  one  condition  may  pass  by  the  same  name. 
One  remarkable  feature  must  be  mentioned,  namely  that 
the  records  show  with  great  constancy  that  too  many  males 
are  affected  and  too  many  females  transmit,  the  excess  being 
far  greater  than  any  which  could  readily  be  ascribed  to 
recorders'  errors.  This  excess  is  also  strongly  exemplified 
in    the    case    of    another    sex-limited    disease — a    peculiar 


XII]  Recessive s  in  Man  225 

paralysis  of  a  ''peroneal"  type,  studied  by  Herringham^. 
Some  definite  disturbing  complication  must  be  looked  for 
in  these  phenomena,  and  the  statement  that  the  factor  is 
dominant  in  males,  and  recessive  in  females,  can  only  be 
taken  as  giving  a  qualitative  description  of  its  behaviour. 

In  Gowers'  disease  we  have  perhaps  also  to  deal  with 
more  than  one  condition,  and  the  evidence  suggests  that 
the  recessiveness  in  females  is  not  universal. 

Tabular  representations  of  the  most  probable  expecta- 
tions in  the  case  of  a  sex-limited  condition  are  given  in 
Figs.  II  and  34. 

Recessive  Variations  in  Man, 

As  so  many  abnormalities  are  known  to  behave  as  domi- 
nants with  some  consistency  it  is  perhaps  surprising  that 
we  have  no  quite  positive  case  of  pathological  conditions 
behaving  as  recessives  in  man.  The  evidence  regarding 
the  normal  light  eye-colour  has  already  been  given,  but  this 
as  yet  stands  practically  alone.  Hurst  (162)  has  given 
some  further  facts  suggesting  that  the  musical  sense  is  a 
recessive,  but  great  and  obvious  difficulties  make  it  very 
hard  to  obtain  convincing  proofs  in  that  case. 

In  regard  to  diseases  that  may  be  recessive,  there 
are  several  records  which  are  suggestive,  but  little  that 
amounts  to  proof.  Naturally,  as  evidence  of  direct  trans- 
mission is  not  to  be  expected,  the  likeliest  place  to  look 
for  recessives  will  be  among  those  conditions  which  have 
been  noticed  as  coming  with  special  frequency  in  families 
resulting  from  consanguineous  matings.  In  such  matings, 
and  particularly  in  those  of  first  cousins,  bearers  of  similar 
recessive  characters  may  come  together,  and  thus  by  the 
meeting  of  two  similar  germs  in  fertilisation  offspring 
exhibiting  the  recessive  character  may  be  formed.  The 
comparatively  frequent  appearance  of  a  variation  among 
the  children  of  such  unions  is  thus  prima  facie  a  suggestion 
that  it  is  a  recessive  to  the  normal.  This  has  been  observed 
very  noticeably  in  regard  to  retinitis  pigmentosa,  a  degenera- 
tive disease  of  the  retina.      In    Herrlinger'st  collection  of 

*  Herringham,  W.  P.,  Brain,  xi.  1889,  p.  230. 

+  Herrlinger,  "  Ueb.  d.  Aetiologie  d.  Retinitis  Pigmentosa,"  Inaug. 
Diss.,  Tubingen,    1899. 

B.  H.  15 


226  Hitman  Albinism  [ch. 

records  among  761  cases,  228  are  said  to  have  been  offspring 
of  consanguineous  marriages.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the 
condition  may  be  produced  by  various  specific  causes  also, 
but  the  heredity  through  consanguineous  marriages  creates 
a  presumption  that  a  group  of  cases  may  be  of  a  recessive 
nature. 

It  should  perhaps  be  pointed  out  categorically  that 
nothing  in  our  present  knowledge  can  be  taken  with  any 
confidence  as  a  reason  for  regarding  consanguineous  mar- 
riages as  improper  or  specially  dangerous.  All  that  can 
be  said  is  that  such  marriages  give  extra  chances  of  the 
appearance  of  recessive  characteristics  among  the  offspring. 
Some  of  these  are  doubtless  bad  qualities,  but  we  do  not 
yet  know  that  among  the  recessives  there  may  not  be 
valuable  qualities  also. 

From  what  is  known  of  the  genetics  of  albinism  in  other 
types  we  should  on  analogy  expect  it  to  be  recessive  in 
man.  There  is  no  reasonable  doubt  that  this  description 
is  true  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  obvious  complications  are 
met  with.  No  union  of  two  albinos  is  on  record  so  far 
as  I  know,  but  the  frequency  with  which  the  albinos  have 
proved  to  be  offspring  of  related  parents,  especially  of  first 
cousins,  justifies  us  in  definitely  inclining  to  the  view  that 
albinism  is  in  man  a  recessive  character.  The  families 
available  for  numerical  comparison  are  scarcely  well  enough 
reported  for  a  proper  analysis  to  be  made,  but  it  is  clear 
that  they  exhibit  again  the  difficulty  met  with  before  in 
human  pedigrees,  namely,  that  the  affected  are  far  in  excess 
of  expectation  (on  the  hypothesis  that  they  are  ordinary 
recessives).  For  example,  from  a  set  of  figures  derived 
from  various  sources'^  I  get  the  numbers  115  albinos  and 
174  normals,  where  the  expectation  is  only  72  to  216. 
There  are  reasons  for  thinking  these  records  of  albinos  too 
high,  and  those  of  normals  too  low,  but  the  discrepancy  is 
too  large  to  be  accounted  for  thus. 

Human  albinism  differs  from  that  of  our  domestic 
animals  in  the  fact  that  it  shows  many  gradational  forms 
which  connect  it  with  the  normal.     There  are  also  several 

■^  I  am  especially  grateful  to  I)r  V.  Magnus  of  Christiania  for  a  series 
of  10  albino  pedigrees.  One  of  these  contains  an  extraordinary  family  of 
which  seven  are  stated  to  be  albinos  and  only  one  pigmented. 


XII]  Hitman  Albinism  227 

records  of  congenital  albinos  acquiring  pigmentation  more 
or  less  complete.  Lastly,  albinism  in  man  differs  greatly 
from  that  in  other  forms  in  the  fact  that  it  is  very  often 
associated  with  disease,  especially  of  the  nervous  system. 
Even  nystagmus,  the  oscillating  movement  of  the  eyes  so 
generally  associated  with  human  albinism,  is  not,  so  far  as 
I  know,  met  with  in  the  pink-eyed  rabbits,  guinea-pigs, 
rats  or  mice.  In  the  cat  however  somethino^  more  like 
human  albinism  is  to  be  seen,  for  in  that  animal  we  find 
the  association  of  certain  types  of  albinism  with  deafness, 
and  in  it  also  several  degrees  of  pigmentation  in  the  iris 
occur.  Careful  pedigrees  of  crosses  with  albino  cats  might 
help  to  a  solution  of  this  problem.  But  in  studying  the 
subject  of  human  albinism  and  also  that  of  retinitis  pigmen- 
tosa one  meets  not  infrequently  features  indicative  of  a 
widespread  and  multiform  degeneration  in  the  affected  family 
not  at  all  resembling  the  simple  course  of  Mendelian  in- 
heritance where  natural  variations  are  concerned.  It  is  at 
least  doubtful  whether  there  may  not  be  some  distinction 
between  albinism  thus  appearing  and  that  less  definitely 
associated  with  disease. 

An  interesting  observation  is  recorded  by  Stedman 
{Szmnani,  1806,  11.  p.  260)  to  the  effect  that  an  albino 
negress  married  to  a  European  had  children  all  mulattos. 
Hence  we  may  infer  that  the  factor  determining  the  black- 
ness of  the  negro  may  be  carried  by  the  albino.  The  great 
frequency  of  albinos  among  several  coloured  races  of  men 
has  often  been  remarked  on  by  anthropologists. 

A  rare  condition  known  as  Alkaptonuria  in  which  the 
urine  is  red  from  the  presence  of  the  substance  alkapton 
must  surely  be  a  recessive.  The  facts  published  by  Garrod"^ 
make  it  likely  that  the  disease  follows  recessive  lines,  for 
of  17  families  in  which  cases  have  been  seen,  8  were 
offspring  of  first  cousins.     On  the  other  hand  Garrod  gives 

*  Garrod,  A.  E.,  Lancet^  1902,  Dec.  13,  and  Arch.  f.  Ges.  Physiologie, 
Bd.  97,  1903,  p.  410.  The  inheritance  of  cystinuria  would  be  equally 
interesting ;  see  Garrod,  ilnd.  and  Abderhalden,  Ztsch.  f.  Physiol.  Cheniie, 
1903,  XXXVIII.  p.  557.  For  a  valuable  discussion  of  the  evidence  see  also 
Garrod  (127).  Since  that  paper  was  published  he  has  called  my  attention 
to  a  fresh  family  discovered  by  Fromherz,  Inaug.  Diss.,  Strassburg,  1908, 
containing  3  alkaptonurics  and  8  or  9  normals. 


228  Irregtilar  Phenomena  [ch. 

one  case  of  direct  transmission  from  an  alkaptonurlc 
parent,  and  It  Is  of  course  Improbable  that  this  extremely 
rare  condition  should  have  existed  on  the  other  side  of 
the  parentage.  Though  the  evidence  Is  scarce,  It  Is  very- 
Important,  since  the  question  of  the  actual  mode  of 
descent  followed  by  such  a  "chemical  sport,"  as  Garrod 
has  called  It,  Is  of  absorbing  Interest.  Anyone  who  has 
an  opportunity  should  not  fall  to  use  every  effort  to  trace 
the  descent  of  alkaptonuria. 


Miscellaneous  irregular  Phenomena  of  Inhe7'itance 

in  Man. 

There  remain  great  numbers  of  pedigrees  of  malforma- 
tions and  diseases  which  In  our  present  Ignorance  seem 
altogether  Irregular.  Of  these  some,  for  example,  poly- 
dactyllsm,  are  perhaps  to  be  regarded  as  due  to  dominant 
factors  which  can  be  Inhibited  or  suppressed  as  a  result  of 
the  presence  of  other  factors.  In  poultry  we  know  by 
experiment  that  the  presence  of  extra  toe  may  behave  as  a 
dominant,  following  the  simple  rule  with  fair  regularity,  but 
In  other  families  the  number  of  dominants  produced  Is  too 
small  and  transmission  may  occur  through  normals  destitute 
of  extra  toes.  Such  facts  point  to  the  existence  of  some 
unknown  complication  In  those  families. 

Several  pedigrees  of  ectrodactylism,  the  deformity  of 
hands  or  feet  by  the  absence  of  digits,  are  recorded  In 
medical  literature.  Transmission  In  these  cases  usually 
occurs  through  the  affected  members,  but  the  degree  of 
malformation  Is  exceedingly  Irregular,  and  the  number  of 
affected  persons  Is  higher  than  expectation.  On  the 
evidence  It  Is  Improbable  that  any  simple  Mendellan  scheme 
will  express  all  these  descents'^.  In  Fotherby's  "split-hand" 
family  a  case  of  polydactylism  also  occurred,  and  the  con- 
dition Is  not  very  rarely  recorded  as  associated  with  the 
more  extreme  forms  of  human  monstrosity. 

A  vast  literature  exists  relating  to  the  heredity  of  various 

*  See  for  instance  Fotherby,  Brit.  Med.  Jour.,  1886  (i),  p.  975 ;  Tubby, 
Lancet,  1894  (i),  p.  396  ;  for  a  full  and  more  recent  collection,  also  Lewis 
and  Embleton  (171). 


xii]  Nervous  Disease  229 

forms  of  paralysis,  of  deaf- mutism,  and  of  mental  disease. 
From  the  analysis  of  considerable  collections  of  such  evidence 
it  is  clear  that  in  the  present  state  of  knowledege  any 
reduction  of  the  phenomena  into  a  simple  scheme  Is  im- 
possible. The  first  difficulty  Is  that  the  pathology  of  these 
diseases  is  obscure  and  their  diagnosis  often  imperfect, 
various  dissimilar  affections  passing  by  one  name. 

Deaf-mutism,  for  instance,  though  at  first  sight  a  very 
definite  phenomenon,  may  obviously  be  due  to  congenital 
deafness  arising  from  many  distinct  causes,  and  hence  the 
genealogies  of  deaf-mutism  cannot  be  treated  as  though 
they  all  related  to  a  single  physiological  condition^. 

Next  in  dealing  with  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  it 
must  be  remembered  that  many  of  them  depend  for  their 
appearance  on  the  presence  of  external  stimuli.  Forms  of 
insanity  which  appear  when  the  individual  Is  subjected  to 
various  strains  and  excitements  may  not  appear  at  all  if 
these  causes  be  absent.  The  element  transmitted  is  evi- 
dently the  liability,  not  necessarily  the  developed  condition. 
The  descent  of  such  peculiarities  is  therefore  beyond  the 
range  of  our  analysis. 

The  peculiar  form  of  Insanity  known  as  Hereditary 
Chorea  Is  exceptional,  In  that  It  very  clearly  follows  the 
course  of  an  ordinary  dominant  with  few  complications. 
Adding  all  the  families  apparently  from  heterozygous  (DR) 
parents  recorded  as  mating  with  unaffected  persons  I  get 
the  totals  1 1 7  affected,  99  unaffected,  as  nearly  approaching 
the  normal  equality  as  we  can  expect  when  the  nature  of 
the  evidence  is  remembered. 


N^ote  on  Collecting  Evidence  as  to  Hiima^i  Descent. 

As  some  persons  may  read  this  chapter  who  have  not 
leisure  for  study  of  the  more  elaborate  phenomena  of 
Mendelism  a  few  words  as  to  the  collection  of  evidence  may 
usefully  be  introduced  here.  The  one  essential  point  in 
such    collections   Is  that   the   norinal  members   of  families 

■^  Dr  C.  J.  Bond,  Brit.  Med.  Jour..,  Oct.  28,  1905,  calls  attention  to 
evidence  suggesting  sex-limitation  in  certain  deaf-mute  families,  sometimes 
the  male,  sometimes  the  female  being  the  affected  sex. 


"D 


-Ot- 


o 

X— 

A3 
-Of 

X — 


-3^^^ 

H^    ^ 


X  - 

-0+ 


l-o 

(SH- 


■-0 


o 
o 


-®4- 


•(i>f  I 


h(«>f| 


u 


73 
o 


=5  ^ 


X- 


OJ 


o 

bo 

SI 

O 

s 


73 

U 


(V 


73 
o 


4=;       o 


(L) 


3 

o 

>^ 

N 
O 


S 

o 

c 

S-l 

(U 

o 

s 

c 

CO 

o 


73 


*:'        t: 


o 

SI 

o 


o 
£ 


'-'  2 

^  o 

C/2 


o 

in 


73 
U 


<1> 

C 

73 

o  -^ 

PQ 

2  o  "^ 


c/:    O 
O     rt     crt 

3      U      G 


t/2 

o  ^ 


^    •-=: 


73 

(L) 

U 

OS 


73 
O  -^ 

73   ^  *" 

.t:;   oj  bD 

A,    (U  o 

r?    >-i  n 


O        i:: 


o 
^ 


o 

>^ 

SI 

O 

£ 

o 


HO      O  04-  ♦f^  ^ 


TO 

o  ^ 

>.^ 

73 
'^    O    ^ 

O  "^ 

Oh 

£  £ 
2  8 


bb 


£ 

CO      (J 

73    ^ 


O   rt 


CH.  XIl] 


Collecting  Evidence 


231 


should  be  recorded  with  as  much  care  as  the  abnormals. 
In  all  cases,  where  possible,  inquiry  should  be  made  re- 
specting the  children  of  the  normals.  The  sex  and  age  as 
far  as  possible  of  each  individual  should  be  noted.  If  the 
condition  studied  be  not  a  congenital  one,  the  age  at  which 
it  appeared  in  each  individual  should  be  entered. 

Do77tinant  characters  will  in  greneral  be  recogfnized  as 
such  from  the  fact  that  they  are  transmitted  through  affected 
persons  only.  The  dominants  will  as  a  rule  have  had  one 
parent  affected  with  the  peculiarity  and  one  parent  free 
from  it.  It  is  then  to  be  expected  that  the  children  of  such 
dominants,  resulting  from  their  marriages  with  unaffected 
persons,  will  be  in  equal  numbers  affected  and  normal. 

Sex- limited  dominant  characters  such  as  colour-blindness 
and  haemophilia  affect  one  sex,  generally  the  male,  most 
often. 


9 


X 


cTx  ^  ^  ®  o   (/  cT 


^     9    cf    O^x  ® 


^  ^  ^  0^  oT  oT 


Fig.  34.  Tentative  representation  of  the  descent  of  colour-blindness, 
drawn  up  on  the  hypothesis  stated  p.  195,  note.  Symbols  as  in 
Fig-  33-  On  this  scheme  a  homozygous  colour-blind  male  could  be 
produced  only  by  the  union  of  two  colour-blind  parents.  This  mating 
is  not  represented  in  the  diagram. 


232  Heredity  a7td  Pathology  [ch. 

The  simplest  kind  of  sex-limitation  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  33.  No  example  is  yet  known  in  man  which  exactly 
follows  this  system,  though  perhaps  haemophilia  and  night- 
blindness  may  approximate  to  it.  Colour- Blindness,  as 
stated  above  (pp.  172  and  J 95),  shows  remarkable  com- 
plications in  the  fact  that  not  merely  the  development  of 
the  peculiarity  but  also  the  actual  transmission  of  the 
responsible  factor  is  affected  by  sex.  Fig.  34  gives  a  ten- 
tative representation  of  the  system  which  is  perhaps  followed 
by  such  a  condition,  but  it  is  given  rather  as  a  hint  to 
collectors  of  evidence  than  as  a  positive  statement  of  as- 
certained fact. 

Recessive  characters  will  be  recognized  by  the  fact  that 
they  may  appear  in  the  children  of  parents  not  exhibiting 
such  characters,  and  especially  among  children  born  of 
consanguineous  marriages.  Complete  proof  of  the  recessive 
nature  of  a  characteristic  will  only  be  obtained  by  evidence 
that  all  the  children  of  affected  parents  exhibit  the  charac- 
teristic. 

In  all  these  descents  occasional  exceptions  are  to  be 
expected,  which  in  the  light  of  present  knowledge  cannot 
be  interpreted;  but  when  the  habitual  course  of  the  in- 
heritance has  been  determined,  an  inquiry  into  the  nature 
of  these  exceptions  may  perhaps  be  undertaken  with 
success. 

A  correct  knowledge  of  the  system  which  a  hereditary 
disease  follows  in  the  course  of  its  descent  will,  it  may  be 
anticipated,  contribute  to  a  proper  understanding  of  the 
pathology  of  these  affections,  and  thus  make  a  definite 
advance  in  the  general  study  of  the  physiology  of  disease. 
If,  for  example,  a  disease  descends  through  the  affected 
persons,  as  a  dominant,  we  may  feel  every  confidence  that 
the  condition  is  caused  by  the  operation  of  a  factor  or 
element  added  to  the  usual  ingredients  of  the  body.  In 
such  cases  there  is  something  p7^esent,  probably  a  definite 
chemical  substance,  which  has  the  power  of  producing  the 
affection.  Thus  the  abortion  of  the  digits,  or  the  inability 
to  distinguish  certain  colours,  must  be  due  to  such  added 
factors.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  disease  is  recessive  we 
recognize  that  its  appearance  is  due  to  the  absence  of  some 
ingredient  which  is  present  in  the  normal  body.     So,  for 


XII]  Heredity  and  Pathology  233 

example,  albinism  is  almost  certainly  due  to  the  absence 
of  at  least  one  of  the  factors,  probably  a  ferment,  which  is 
needed  to  cause  the  excretion  of  pigment  ;  and,  as  Garrod 
has  shown,  alkaptonuria  must  be  regarded  as  due  to  the 
absence  of  a  certain  ferment  which  has  the  power  of  de- 
composing the  substance  alkapton.  In  the  normal  body 
that  substance  is  not  present  in  the  urine,  because  it  has 
been  broken  up  by  the  responsible  ferment ;  but  when  the 
organism  is  deficient  in  the  power  to  produce  that  ferment, 
then  the  alkapton  is  excreted  undecomposed  and  the  urine 
is  coloured  by  it. 

Similarly  when  we  find  that  a  condition  such  as  retinitis 
pigmentosa  sometimes  descends  in  one  way  and  sometimes 
in  another,  we  may  perhaps  expect  that  a  fuller  knowledge 
of  the  facts  would  show  that  more  than  one  pathological 
state  may  be  included  under  the  same  name. 

It  need  scarcely  be  remarked  that  when  a  disease,  such 
as  tuberculosis,  which  is  due  to  a  pathogenic  organism, 
affects  certain  families  or  strains  with  special  frequency,  the 
hereditary  or  transmitted  property  is  either  the  presence  of 
something  which  renders  the  organism  specially  liable,  or 
the  absence  of  something  which  confers  a  higher  degree 
of  resistance.  From  the  nature  of  the  case  pedigrees  are 
not  of  much  service  in  the  analysis  of  these  examples,  for  it 
cannot  be  asserted  that  an  individual  who  escapes  under- 
went the  same  risk  of  infection  as  those  who  took  the 
disease.  Though  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  study  of 
the  descent  of  disease-resistance  is  of  the  highest  import- 
ance, both  theoretical  and  practical,  progress  must  here 
be  made  by  careful  breeding  experiments  with  animals  and 
plants  which  can  be  tested  by  uniform  methods  of  infection. 
As  yet  we  know  only  one  clear  example  in  which  such  a 
rule  of  descent  has  been  ascertained,  namely  that  discovered 
by  Biffen  (29),  who  proved  that,  in  wheat,  resistance  to 
Rust-disease  is  a  recessive.  In  that  classical  example  there- 
fore we  may  suppose  that  this  resistance  is  due  to  the  absence 
of  some  ingredient  which  is  present  in  common  wheats 
and  enables  the  rust-fungus  to  attack  them  successfully. 
Varieties  in  several  degrees  possessing  the  property  of  re- 
sisting disease  are  known  in  many  orders  of  plants,  and 
though   regarding  animals  less  is  known,   there   are  some 


234  Heredity  and  Pathology  [ch.  xii 

indications  of  a  similar  character.  An  attractive  field  of 
research  is  thus  provided.  We  may  surmise  that  various 
types  of  resistance  will  be  found,  some  dominant  as  well  as 
others  like  that  of  wheat,  which  are  recessive.  Whatever 
answers  are  obtained  in  regard  to  these  critical  distinctions 
and  their  physiological  nature,  the  evidence  must  in  no 
ordinary  measure  contribute  to  the  advance  of  general 
pathology. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

INTERMEDIATES   BETWEEN   VARIETIES   AND   THE 
"PURE   LINES"   OF   JOHANNSEN. 

Misunderstanding  in  regard  to  the  physiological  sig- 
nificance of  intermediates  has  been  a  fertile  source  of  error, 
and  more  than  any  other  perhaps  has  tended  to  obscure  the 
true  interpretation  of  genetic  phenomena.  The  existence 
of  intermediates  has  been  often  alleged  as  a  proof  that 
segregation  does  not  occur  in  regard  to  the  particular 
variations  towards  which  the  gradational  forms  seem  to 
lead,  and  the  misuse  of  statistical  method  so  frequent  in 
biometrical  attempts  to  investigate  heredity  has  come  about 
chiefly  through  misinterpretation  of  the  nature  of  such 
gradational  forms. 

These  errors  are  of  course  a  legacy  from  the  period  of 
the  essayists,  when  evolution  at  large  was  the  chief  object 
of  study,  and  an  examination  of  variation  in  detail  as 
occurring   in   specific  instances  had   not   been  undertaken. 

Biologists  committed  to  the  proposition  that  varieties 
arise  through  the  transformation  of  masses  of  individuals 
by  the  selective  accumulation  of  minute  differences  saw  that 
with  each  new  case  in  which  discontinuous  variation  could 
be  proved  to  occur,  the  scope  for  their  views  was  reduced, 
and  the  existence  of  intermediates  constituted  the  most 
promising  line  of  defence.  When  intermediate  and  gra- 
dational forms  could  be  found,  the  contention  might  always 
be  hazarded  that  the  definite  and  extreme  forms  had  been 
reached  by  transition  through  them. 

Now    the    application    of  analytical    methods  to   those 


236  httermediates  [ch. 

cases  where  much  gradation  occurs  is  usually  troublesome, 
but  it  is  becoming  clear  that  the  difficulty  is  often  a  practical 
one  only.  To  analyse  the  intermediates  and  to  determine 
the  various  elements  that  have  taken  part  in  their  pro- 
duction may  be  a  very  laborious  process,  still  it  can  be 
shown  in  many  examples  that  the  intermediate  character  is 
only  a  superficial  or  nett  result  of  the  interaction  of  factors 
which  are  transmitted  as  units.  The  several  classes  under 
which  such  intermediate  types  present  themselves  are  worth 
enumerating. 

I.  Intermediates  as  heterozygous  forms.  Sometimes, 
as  is  the  case  of  the  blue  Andalusian  fowl,  the  whole  group 
of  heterozygotes  forms  a  recognizable,  distinct  class  which 
might  nevertheless  be  regarded  as  intermediate  between 
the  two  pure  types  black  and  white,  with  splashes  of  grey 
and  black.  Similar  intermediates  occurring  as  heterozygous 
forms  have  now  been  often  seen  and  described.  In  the 
case  of  Prim^ula  Sinensis  the  heterozygote  between  the 
star-shaped  flower  of  the  modern  stellata  varieties  and  the 
common  type  with  imbricated  petals  is  always  an  inter- 
mediate^. 

In  fowls  though  no  perfectly  distinct  heterozygous  type 
of  comb  exists,  yet  with  experience  it  is  usually  possible  to 
distinguish  the  pure  {DD)  pea  combs  from  the  DR  group, 
and,  though  with  much  less  confidence,  the  same  distinction 
can  sometimes  be  made  among  the  rose-combs. 

In  Lychnis  the  crosses  between  white  vespertina  and 
red  dioica  are,  so  far  as  I  know,  always  of  an  intermediate 
shade  of  pink.  In  Pisum  the  crosses  between  the  races  I 
have  called  "half-dwarf,"  standing  about  3  to  4  feet  high, 
and  actual  dwarfs,  about  i  foot  high,  are  usually  intermediate 
in  height.  The  researches  of  Miss  Wheldale  on  A^itirrhi- 
num  have  shown  that  in  that  species  numerous  intergrading 
forms  are  definite  heterozygotes,  and  Miss  Marryat  has 
proved  that  the  same  is  true  for  Mirabilis. 

Such  instances  may  be  multiplied  indefinitely.  Domi- 
nance indeed   is   not  often  so  pronounced  that  a  practised 

*  Whether  any  such  intermediate  flower  shape  exists  as  a  gametic  form 
which  can  be  bred  true  I  do  not  know  for  certain.  Mr  Gregory  and  I  have 
not  met  one  among  our  derivatives  from  various  crosses  between  stellata 
and  Sinensis. 


xiii]  Intermediates  237 

observer  cannot  distinguish  the  DD  types  from  the  DRs> 
with  fair  certainty  by  a  thorough  and  minute  examination. 
As  examples  in  which  heterozygotes  are  indistinguishable 
from  pure  dominants,  may  be  mentioned  tall  and  dwarf  in 
Peas  and  Sweet  Peas,  coloured  flowers  and  white  flowers 
in  Sweet  Peas  and  Stocks,  hoary  and  glabrous  in  Stocks. 
In  all  these  the  one  "  dose  "  of  a  dominant  factor  is  sufficient 
to  produce  the  full  effect. 

2.  Intermediates  due  to  subtraction-stages  of  dominant 
factors.  This  is  also  a  large  and  important  class,  one,  too, 
which  has  been  perhaps  more  especially  a  source  of  the 
confusion  alluded  to  in  the  introduction  to  this  section. 
Of  such  intermediates  the  colour  of  the  Dutch  rabbit  may 
be  taken  as  a  type.  The  Dutch  rabbit  has  the  posterior 
half  of  the  body  coloured,  while  the  anterior  half  is  white 
except  for  patches  including  the  eyes  and  ears.  Such  a 
rabbit  may  be  described  as  in  a  sense  intermediate  between 
the  self-coloured  rabbit  and  the  albino.  Its  particoloured 
nature  is  due  to  the  restriction  of  one  (or  conceivably  more) 
of  its  pigment-factors  to  certain  areas.  In  the  self-coloured 
animal  this  factor  has  a  more  extended  distribution.  But 
in  speaking  of  the  Dutch  pattern  as  an  intermediate,  an 
essential  point,  the  definiteness  of  the  Dutch  pattern,  is 
missed.  It  is  intermediate  only  in  a  strictly  limited  sense. 
It  is  not  a  transition-stage  between  a  self-colour  and  an 
albino,  nor  would  there  be  any  better  chance  of  breeding 
albinos  from  genetically  pure  Dutch  than  there  would  be 
from  genetically  pure  self-coloured  rabbits.  The  Dutch 
pattern  in  fact  constitutes  a  definite  type  and  depends  for 
its  appearance  on  the  presence  of  a  certain  factor  in  a 
fairly  definite  stage,  and  it  does  not  appear  when  self- 
colours  are  crossed  with  albinos  unless  the  particular 
necessary  factor  in  its  appropriate  stage  is  introduced  in 
one  of  the  parents. 

Within  the  Dutch  class  there  are  subordinate  types 
again,  the  interrelations  of  which  have  not  yet  been  worked 
out.  Some  of  these  are  very  probably  gametic  types  which 
could  be  bred  pure,  while  others  are  probably  caused  by 
fluctuations  of  an  irregular  kind  or  by  the  interactions 
between  the  factors.      It  will  need  very  elaborate  research 


238  Intermediates  [ch. 

to  determine  the  interrelations  of  these  finer  differences. 
As  one  of  the  few  points  that  are  clear  may  be  mentioned 
the  impossibility  of  fixing  a  form  with  the  sharply-cut 
division  between  the  white  and  the  colour  which  is  the 
fancier's  ideal  for  Dutch.  From  this  negative  evidence  it 
may  be  inferred  that  that  particular  distribution  is  not  one 
of  those  represented  as  a  gametic  type. 

Intermediates  of  this  sort  are  commonly  met  with  in 
breeding.  The  "half-dwarf"  peas  are  an  instance.  In 
Stocks  Miss  Saunders  has  described  a  '*  half-hoary "  race 
(^9'  P-  Z'h)  i^  which  the  lower  surfaces  of  the  leaves  were 
hoary  while  the  upper  surfaces  were  glabrous  or  nearly 
so.  No  such  "intermediates"  have  occurred  among  the 
thousands  of  plants  raised  by  Miss  Saunders  except  when 
the  definite  "  half-hoary  "  type  was  originally  introduced  as 
a  parent.  In  the  Sweet  Pea  one  of  the  most  definite  and 
unchanging  types  is  the  nearly  white  fiower  with  a  pink 
streak,  that  comes  next  to  the  pure  white  if  judged  by  the 
criterion  of  amount  of  deficiency  of  colour.  In  the  absence 
of  breeding  experiments  an  ignorant  person  having  raised 
such  a  plant  as  offspring  of  a  purple  or  a  red  might  consider 
that  he  had  made  an  advance  towards  pure  white.  Never- 
theless he  would  be  no  more  likely  to  raise  true  whites  from 
such  a  tinged  white  than  if  he  began  with  a  wild  Sicilian 
purple  pea.  Indeed  if  I  required  to  raise  a  white  Sweet 
Pea  de  novo,  I  should  think  the  chance  of  getting  it  from 
the  wild  pea  much  better  than  from  the  tinged  white,  for 
again  and  again  wild  types  have  been  found  to  throw  off 
albinos  soon  after  their  introduction  into  cultivation — by  the 
occurrence,  of  course,  of  a  new  genetic  variation. 

3.  I nt 67^716 dial es  produced  by  the  inte7^fe7^e7ice  of  other 
facto7^s.  There  are  many  intermediates  of  this  kind  also. 
In  both  animals  (Fowl,  Rabbit,  Mouse)  and  plants  [Pri77tMla) 
we  have  seen  that  a  dominant  factor  may  exist  which  has 
the  power,  for  example,  of  suppressing  the  development  of 
colour,  leaving  those  parts  white  which  in  the  absence  of 
that  factor  would  otherwise  be  coloured.  This  suppressing 
or  inhibiting  effect  may  be  total,  but  when  it  is  not  total 
some  puzzling  intermediate  types  may  be  constituted.  Only 
most    careful    breeding    experiments    can    reveal    the    true 


XIII]  Intermediates  2.2f) 

nature  of  these  cases.  To  the  ordinary  observer  the 
"  Painted  Lady"  Sweet  Pea  with  Its  whitish  wings  and  red 
standard  might  appear  Intermediate  between  a  white  and  a 
totally  red  type.  But  as  experiment  shows,  the  bicolour 
type  with  Its  whitish  wings  Is  dominant  to  the  self-coloured 
forms,  and  its  wings  are  white,  not  as  the  Dutch  rabbit  Is, 
owlnor  to  the  omission  of  something,  but  on  account  of  the 
addition  of  another  distinct  element  which  suppresses  the 
pink  colour  In  that  particular  part  more  or  less  completely. 
The  real  white  Is  of  course  due  to  the  absence  of  one  or 
more  of  the  colour-factors,  an  altogether  different  cause,  and 
It  Is  therefore  evident  that  to  speak  of  the  bicolour  form  as 
In  any  way  Intermediate  between  self-colour  and  white 
would  be  a  complete  misrepresentation  of  the  facts. 

Similarly  In  the  Rabbit,  Hurst  has  shown  that  the 
curious  type  known  as  "  English"  pattern — something  like 
a  Dalmatian  dog  but  for  the  more  or  less  regular  disposition 
of  the  spots — Is  a  dominant  to  self-colour,  though  a  careless 
observer  might  guess  It  to  be  a  transition-stage  towards 
albinism. 

In  such  cases  again  there  Is  every  likelihood  that  careful 
selection  might  succeed  In  Isolating  subordinate  types  In 
which  the  suppression  attains  particular  degrees  of  com- 
pleteness ranging  within  well  defined  limits,  but  the  evidence 
distinctly  negatives  any  attempt  to  treat  these  several  forms 
as  a  continuous  series  In  which  any  member  Is  capable  of 
reproducing  any  other  among  Its  offspring. 

4.  hitermediates  as  JiticttLational  forms.  Lastly  there 
are  Intermediates  due  to  the  disturbing  effects  of  many 
small  causes  not  of  genetic  but  presumably  of  environmental 
origin.  Such  are  the  fluctuations  in  the  weight  of  individual 
seeds  which  Johannsen  has  studied  with  success  In  beans 
(^Phaseolus). 

When  the  w^elghts  of  the  seeds  of  a  single  variety  of 
bean  are  marshalled  statistically  they  arrange  themselves  In 
a  normal  curve  round  the  weight  of  greatest  frequency. 
Similarly  when  the  seeds  are  sown  and  the  seeds  from  the 
self-fertilised  individual  plants  which  grow  from  them  are 
harvested  separately,  the  crops  from  each  individual  again 
can  be  grouped  according  to  their  weights  In  normal  curves 


240  Fluctuation 

round  the  most  frequent  or  modal  weight  charac 

each  individual.      There  will  then  be  seen  that  sc 

correspondence  exists  between  the  modes  for  the 

plants  and  the  weight  of  the  individual  seeds  fr 

they  sprang.      The  heavier  families  on  the  whole  > 

the  heavier  seeds,  and  the  lio;"hter  from  the  lio-h 

Such  correspondence  is  nevertheless  very  imperfe 

weioht  of  the  seed  chosen  from  the  orio^inal  mass 

^  .      .  . 

a  vague  indication  of  what  the  modal  weight  of 

will  be. 

But  when  any  one  lamily  raised  from  a  singl( 
taken,  and  the  heavier  and  the  lighter  of  its  se] 
seeds  chosen  and  separately  sown,  Johannsen  f 
the  modal  weights  were  approximately  the  sar 
produce  of  both  the  heavier  and  the  lighter  seeds. 
inside  tJie  fajuily  raised  from  a  single  seed  did  no 
modal  lijeiglit,  zuhich  zvent  back  or  regressed  to  t 
individiia I  common  parent.  Such  a  family  thus  r 
the  single  seed  constitutes  what  Johannsen  ha 
pure  line.  Within  the  genetically  pure  line 
fluctuations  in  weight,  but  these  fluctuations  a 
interference  which  is  external,  or  environmen 
wide  sense,  and  selection  of  those  extremes  whi 
to  such  interference  produces  no  eft'ect  on  the  res 
difterences  in  the  weights  of  the  seeds  of  a  pur 
not  indicate  differences  between  the  germ-cells  ■ 
duced  them  (164). 

It  is  to  variation  of  this  type  that  the  name  _ 
is  given. 

Johannsen  has  made  a  similar  series  of  exp( 
regard    to   the   proportion    of   defective   grains 
certain  barleys  and  has  reached  a  similar  conclus 

Whether  the  distinctions  characteristic  of  the 


XIII]  Shirley  Poppies 

case  segregation  does  not  occur.  Even  a  sens 
tinulty  between  varieties  is  no  proof  that  there  is  r 
gation  which  with  careful  work  could  be  demonstr 
take  for  instance  the  case  of  piebald  mice,  it  ^ 
possible  with  industry  to  collect  from  the  results  c 
laneous  breeding  specimens  ranging  from  a  self-c( 
black-eyed  white.  From  such  series  any  numbe 
conclusions  could  be  drawn  respecting  the  c( 
variation  of  mice.  By  appealing  to  the  "ruby' 
certain  chocolates  an  uncritical  observer  might  ev 
that  a  series  of  intermediates  connected  the  black 
pink  eyes. 

Analytical   breeding   immediately  shows  the  : 
such  deductions.      For  it  would  be  found  that  the 
intermediates  consisted  of  numbers  of  oreneticalb 
types    with    distinct   genetic  properties   depending 
factors   which    constituted    them.      Some   would    ( 
colour-factors  for  the  Dutch  pattern,  others  those 
complete  or  less  complete  pigmentation,  while  oth( 
owe  their  partial  whiteness  to  the  presence  of  the  < 
factor  which  can  suppress  pigmentation  in  several 
completeness. 

In  o^eneral  it  is  to  be  concluded  that  when  t 
breeding  of  recognizably  distinct  types  produces  o 
types  again  without  intermediates  or  with  only 
viduals  that  can  be  so  regarded,  the  fact  points  st 
the  existence  of  gametic  segregation  ;  but  on  the  ot 
the  appearance  of  even  a  complete  series  of  inte 
forms  is  not  to  be  accepted  as  proof  that  gametic  se$ 
does  not  occur. 

Misconception  of  the  nature  and  significance 
mediates  has  deprived  the  work  of  the  biometric 
of  scientific  value  as  a  contribution  to  the  study  of 
This   is  well   seen   in  the  case   of  the    colours  of 


242  Shirley  Poppies  [ch. 

Mendelian  method  would  be  to  Institute  breeding  experi- 
ments  with    individual    plants,  self-fertilising   and   crossing 
these    individuals    together,    and    recording    the    offspring 
produced   by  each  plant  and  by  each  combination.      True 
that  by  sufficient  search  flowers  can  be  found  which  when 
arranged  in  order  provide  a  series  of  intergrades  from  the 
darkest  red  to  the  whites  so  nearly  complete  as  to  persuade 
an  observer  of  moderate  experience  that  there  is  full  con- 
tinuity.     Nevertheless,  from  what  we  know  of  every  such 
case    to    which    Mendelian    analysis   has   been   extensively 
applied,   there   cannot    be   the    smallest    doubt   that,    as  in 
Antirrhinum,   the   Mouse,   and  many  other  examples,   the 
apparent  continuity  is  misleading.      It  will,  when  analysis 
is    undertaken,    unquestionably    be    shown    that   there   are 
definite,  pure  homozygous  types,  containing  factors  which 
display  the  usual  phenomena  of  dominance,  and  segregate 
in  an   orderly  fashion  ;    and   that   though,    between  these, 
intermediates  may  occur,   yet  they  again  will  be  found  for 
the  most  part  to  be  various  consequences  of  heterozygosis. 
There  may,  not  improbably,  be  a  residuum  of  intermediates 
which  cannot  be  thus  represented,  but  it  will  be  surprising 
if  these  are  more  than  insignificant  fractions  of  the  whole, 
owing   their   peculiarities  to  various  fluctuating  influences. 
The  ground  will  then  be  approximately  mapped,  and  the 
laws  of  colour-inheritance  approximately  established  for  the 
Shirley  Poppy. 

The  method  of  Professor  Pearson  and  his  assistants 
dispenses  with  all  analysis.  No  attempt  is  made  to  discover 
the  factors  concerned,  to  distinguish  the  pure  types,  or 
the  properties  of  dominance  which  they  possess.  No 
artificial  crosses  are  undertaken^.  The  flowers  are  left 
uncovered,  open  to  the  insects  which  may  introduce  the 
pollen  of  any  other  flower  which  they  happen  to  be  carrying. 
The  records  show — probably  with  much  accuracy — the 
colours  of  the  offspring  derived  from  mothers  of  recorded 
colours,  and  no  more.  In  this  attempt  to  study  the  laws 
of  heredity  of  colour,  the  fathers  of  the  progeny  examined 
are  in  every  case  unknown. 

*  Self-fertilisation  was  subsequently  tried,  but,  owing  to  self-sterility, 
gave  no  results. 


xiii]  Particoloured  Peas  243 

According  to  the  biometrical  system,  if  the  characters  of 
one  parent  and  of  the  offspring  are  known,  the  material  can, 
after  mathematical  treatment  by  means  of  the  correlation- 
table,  be  used  to  deduce  a  law  of  inheritance.  The  theoretical 
conceptions  upon  which  this  method  is  based  were  formed 
and  elaborated  first  in  ignorance  and  subsequently  in  dis- 
regard of  Mendelian  facts  ;  but  improbable  as  their  validity 
w^as  in  pre-Mendelian  times,  it  must  now  be  obvious  that 
these  methods  can  merely  obscure  the  essential  phenomena 
they  were  devised  to  discover. 

There  are  moreover  abundant  examples  of  other  fluctua- 
tions more  obviously  depending  on  environmental  influences. 
In  studying  the  inheritance  of  the  cotyledon-colours  in  the 
seeds  of  peas  such  cases  are  met  with.  The  cotyledons  of 
many  varieties  are  in  all  ripe  seeds  a  full  yellow,  while  those 
of  many  others  are  a  full  green.  The  contrast  between  the 
yellow  and  the  green  seeds  in  /%  after  segregation  may  be 
perfectly  sharp  and  clear.  Some  varieties,  especially  the 
more  modern  sorts,  have  many  seeds  which  are  in  various 
degrees  partly  yellow  and  partly  green,  and  occasionally 
such  particoloured  seeds  are  the  commonest  type  of  the 
variety.  In  his  criticism  of  Mendel's  work  the  late  Professor 
Weldon  called  attention  to  these  particoloured  seeds,  con- 
tending that  they  showed  failure  of  segregation.  Before 
looking  into  the  facts  I  was  disposed  to  admit  the  justice 
of  this  contention.  After  experimenting  with  such  kinds 
however  I  found  that  the  particoloured  appearance  was 
not  caused  by  any  admixture  of  the  yellow  character,  but 
by  exposure  to  sun  and  weather.  All  those  seeds  which 
tinge  are  by  nature ^r^^;^  and  breed  true  to  greenness.  If 
in  a  pod  several  are  found  yellowed,  this  bleaching  affects 
those  sides  of  the  seeds  which  face  the  same  way  and  is 
obviously  due  to  effects  of  light  just  like  the  reddening  of 
the  exposed  sides  of  many  apples. 

The  hereditary  property  characteristic  of  these  tinging 
sorts  is  the  power  ot  bleaching  readily  if  exposed,  but  the 
bleaching  is  checked  and  can  generally  be  prevented  if  the 
pods  are  gathered  as  soon  as  they  are  ripe.  It  may  be 
thought  that  the  power  of  bleaching  to  which  the  ordinary 
yellow  varieties  owe  their  colour  is  the  same  faculty  inten- 
sified.     It  may  be  so,  but  there  are  very  marked  distinctions  ; 

16 — 2 


244  Particoloured  Peas  [ch.  xiii 

for  seeds  of  yellow  varieties  turn  yellow  before  they  harden, 
while  the  particoloured  sorts  bleach  after  they  have  become 

ripe. 

In  some  yellow  varieties  greenish  seeds  occur.  This 
phenomenon,  the  converse  of  the  last,  occurs  in  wet 
years  with   many   kinds,   some    of   course    being    specially 

liable. 

The  fact  that  such  differences  are  fluctuational  and  not 
genetic  appears  at  once  when  breeding  is  begun  ;  for  if  in 
a  green  which  bleaches  (e.g.  American  Wonder)  the  yel- 
lowest and  the  greenest  are  taken  fro77i  the  same  plant  and 
sown,  there  will  be  no  corresponding  difference  between 
their  respective  produce.  By  selecting  the  greenest  and 
yellowest  from  a  large  mass  of  commercial  seeds  of  a  variety, 
not  harvested  plant  by  plant,  some  correspondence  may  be 
obtained  occasionally  \e.g.  Telephone) — but  the  occurrence 
merely  means  that  the  mass,  though  called  one  variety,  had 
not  really  been  selected  down  to  a  "  pure  line,"  but  was  in 
fact  a  mixture  of  sorts.  In  such  a  type  as  "Nonpareil,"  for 
instance,  where  the  difference  between  yellows  and  greens 
is  actually  genetic,  the  yellows  and  the  greens  will  give  dis- 
tinct results.  "Nonpareil,"  in  fact,  is  a  form  which  consists 
of  true  yellows  and  true  greens  in  about  equal  numbers,  and 
it  is  simply  a  mixture  of  two  varieties  not  sensibly  different 
except  in  seed-colour.  No  doubt  it  arose  from  a  plant 
saved  in  one  of  the  later  generations  derived  from  a  cross, 
which  plant  was  homozygous  in  other  respects  but  hetero- 
zygous in  seed-colour. 


CHAPTER    XIV 

MISCELLANEOUS   EXCEPTIONAL   AND   UNCONFORMABLE 

PHENOMENA. 

Crosses  breeding  true  without  Segregation.  Parthenogenetic 
or  Apogamic  Forins.  Hieraciiun — Sexital  Forms — 
Numerical  Aberrations — Irregitlarities  of  Do77tinance 
— Alternation  of  Generations — Maternal  Characters 
in  certain  Seeds. 

Of  the  various  cases  alleged  as  exceptional,  or  declared 
to  be  incompatible  with  Mendelian  principles,  few  have 
any  authenticity.  Several  rest  on  errors  of  observation  or 
of  interpretation  and  some  have  even  been  created  by  a 
mistranslation  or  a  misprint.  With  this  class  of  exception 
I  have  dealt  on  previous  occasions.  At  a  time  when  the 
Mendelian  idea  was  novel  it  was  perhaps  natural  that  a 
doctrine  so  utterly  at  variance  with  received  opinions  should 
have  been  regarded  as  suspect,  and  that  from  the  conven- 
tional standpoint  the  mere  fact  that  a  record  was  incom- 
patible with  Mendelism  should  have  raised  a  presumption 
in  favour  of  its  genuineness.  That  stage  of  the  debate  is 
over,  and  we  have  now  learnt  that  phenomena  consistently 
departing  from  Mendelian  rules  are  so  rare  that  announce- 
ments of  discoveries  irreconcileable  with  the  principle  of 
factorial  composition  may  be  safely  disregarded,  unless  they 
are  made  by  observers  experienced  in  this  class  of  investi- 
gation, or  supported  by  evidence  of  exceptional  strength. 

The  progress  of  research  has  gone  steadily  to  show  that 
facts  of  heredity  which  at  first  seemed  hopelessly  compli- 
cated can  be  represented  in  terms  of  a  strict  Mendelian 
system.  This  simplification  of  the  problem  has  far  exceeded 
our  earlier  anticipations,  and  I  have  to  regret  that  in 
dealing  with  several    sets    of  phenomena  I   countenanced 


246  Parthenogenesis  in  Hieracinm  [ch. 

non-Mendelian  interpretations  which  in  almost  every  case  it 
has  been  found  possible  to  replace  by  simple  Mendelian 
formulae.  Where  this  reduction  to  a  common  plan  has 
not  been  yet  effected,  the  difficulty,  we  feel  fairly  confident, 
is  generally  created  rather  by  the  disturbance  of  environ- 
mental causes  or  by  the  influence  of  undetermined  factors 
than  by  any  more  profound  aberration  in  physiology. 

It  is  the  object  of  the  present  chapter  to  discuss  some 
of  the  more  prominent  of  the  phenomena  which  are  really 
or  apparently  unconformable.  As  will  be  seen,  they  are  of 
a  miscellaneous  nature. 

I.      Crosses  breeding  true  without  Segregation. 

A.     Parthenogenetic  Cases, 

Of  crosses  breeding  true  there  are  two  types  quite 
distinct  in  nature  and  significance.  In  the  first  we  now 
know  that  the  absence  of  segregation  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  reproduction  is  parthenogenetic,  or  apogamic,  as  it  is 
more  often  called  by  botanists.  The  famous  example  of 
this  kind  of  reproduction  is  provided  by  Hie^^acium  (Hawk- 
weeds).  Mendel  himself  investigated  the  inheritance  of 
HieraciMm  experimentally,  and  his  paper  is  given  in  trans- 
lation at  the  end  of  this  book.  This  genus  being  one  of 
the  most  strikingly  polymorphic,  he  chose  it  after  his 
discovery  regarding  the  inheritance  of  peas,  as  the  subject 
of  further  research.  We  may  surmise  that  he  expected  to 
find  in  it  illustrations  of  the  new  principles.  The  technical 
difficulties  were  extreme.  The  minuteness  and  the  delicacy 
of  the  flowers  made  the  operation  of  castration  almost 
impossible  to  carry  out  on  a  large  scale.  It  is  recorded 
that  in  the  course  of  this  work  he  injured  his  eyesight ; 
and  after  all  precautions  were  taken  he  was  mortified  by 
what  seemed  to  be  frequent  failures.  Seeds  that  were 
supposed  to  be  hybrid  gave  plants  of  pure  maternal  type, 
which  he  could,  in  those  days,  only  attribute  to  accidental 
pollination  from  anthers  of  the  mother-plant,  caused  by 
imperfect  emasculation.  In  a  few  cases  however  he  did 
succeed  in  raising  genuine  and  obvious  hybrids.  These 
hybrids  were  partially  sterile,  but  the  seeds  which  they  did 
give  reproduced  the  hybrid  for  tn  again. 


XIV]  Parthenoge7tesis  in  Hieracmm  247 

In  the  earlier  discussions  which  followed  the  rediscovery 
of  these  papers  we  all  were  inclined  to  follow  Mendel  in 
supposing  that  Hieracium  illustrated  a  distinct  kind  of 
sexual  inheritance  in  which  segregation  was  absent,  and  it 
seemed  natural  to  suspect  that  the  association  of  this  pheno- 
menon with  partial  sterility  was  not  accidental.  As  we 
now  know,  there  is  a  distinction  between  the  inheritance 
exemplified  by  these  true  breeding  hybrids,  but  it  is  not  a 
speciality  of  Hieracium,  or  in  any  sense  to  be  regarded  as 
an  exception  to  the  general-  rule  that  in  sexual  heredity 
seorreQ^ation  of  characters  occurs.  The  meaninor  of  the  facts 
was  first  discovered  by  Ostenfeld  (219)  following  up  an 
experiment  of  Raunkiaer  (228).  These  two  observers 
found  that  both  Taraxacum  and  many  Hieracia  have  the 
power  of  setting  seeds  parthenogenetically  without  any 
fertilisation.  Such  plants  may  set  seed  profusely  when  all 
the  anthers  and  stigmas  are  cut  off  in  an  unopened  bud. 
The  cytology  has  been  investigated  by  Rosenberg  (233), 
and  he  has  shown  that  in  the  ovules  which  are  capable  of 
parthenogenesis  no  reduction-process  occurs.  In  the  strict 
sense  therefore  this  method  of  reproduction  is  not  sexual, 
but  asexual,  being  comparable  with  the  reproduction  from 
buds  or  cuttings  in  which,  as  is  well  known,  the  parent  type 
almost  always  reappears  without  modification. 

This  fact  explains  not  only  why  Mendel's  hybrid 
Hieracia  bred  true,  but  also  why  he  so  often  failed  to 
produce  a  hybrid  w^hen  all  precautions  were  taken  to  avoid 
self-fertilisation.  The  plants  which  were  supposed  to  be 
due  to  accidental  self-fertilisation  were  in  reality  partheno- 
genetic.  From  Ostenfeld's  experiments  it  was  shown  that 
some  only  of  the  ovules  are  capable  of  fertilisation  ;  and  it 
is  practically  certain  that  the  ovules  with  unreduced  nuclei, 
though  they  may  give  rise  to  plants  by  parthenogenesis  or 
apogamy,  are  incapable  of  being  fertilised.  The  evidence 
that  the  unreduced  egg-cells  merely  reproduce  the  maternal 
type  is  of  course  a  strong  support  to  the  view  that  it  is 
in  the  reduction-division  that  the  segregation  of  factors  is 
effected. 

It  is  by  no  means  alone  in  the  Compositae  that  partheno- 
genesis has  been  observed.  Fresh  cases  are  continually 
being    discovered    among    flowering    plants,    and    in    any 


248  Mo7iolepsis  in  Orchids  [ch. 

discussion  of  unexpected  genetic  phenomena  this  possibiUty 
must  be  taken  into  account"^. 

There  is  a  further  difficulty  to  be  considered  in  this 
connection.  The  fact  that  no  seed  is  set  when  fertiHsation 
is  excluded  is  in  itself  no  proof  that  the  inheritance  is  not 
of  a  parthenogenetic  type.  A  small  but  very  definite  and 
well-ascertained  group  of  cases  occurs  among  Orchids  in 
which,  though  no  seed  is  set  unless  the  flowers  are  pollinated, 
yet  the  offspring  exhibit  no  trace  of  the  paternal  characters. 
The  facts  are  well  known  to  orchid-growers,  but  they  were 
first  made  known  to  students  of  genetics  by  Hurst  (152, 
p.  104).  The  most  notorious  example  is  that  of  Zygopetalum 
Mackayi,  which  when  fertilised  with  pollen  of  various  other 
orchids  has  given  nothing  but  Zygopetalum  Mackayi.  Four 
species  of  Odontoglossum,  a  Lycasta,  and  an  Oncidiitm,  used 
as  father  all  gave  this  curious  result.  Hurst  quotes  other 
records  showing  that  several  other  orchids  may  behave  in 
the  same  way  as  Z.  Mackayi,  giving  purely  maternal  plants 
when  fertilised  with  pollen  of  other  types.  In  some  of  these 
cases  it  has  also  been  shown  that  self-fertilisation  of  the 
supposed  cross-bred  again  gives  nothing  but  the  same  type. 

Pending  cytological  investigation  it  is  not  possible  to 
form  a  satisfactory  rationale  of  these  cases,  but  we  cannot 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  fertilisation  has  acted  as  a  stimulus 
to  development  without  any  admixture  of  paternal  character. 
The  result  is,  as  Hurst  has  pointed  out,  exactly  as  if 
parthenogenesis  had  in  reality  occurred,  although  pollination 
had  taken  place  and  is  indeed  necessary  to  effect  production 
of  seed.  I  have  proposed  to  distinguish  this  phenomenon 
as  Monolepsis,  in  which  characters  are  taken  from  one 
parent  only,  in  contrast  to  Ampkilepsis,  in  which  they  are 
brought  in  from  both  sides. 

In  the  earlier  stages  of  these  discussions  we  were  dis- 
posed to  attach  much  importance  to  an  observation  of 
Millardet  (198),  to  the  effect  that  in  certain  crosses  among 
strawberries  the  supposed  hybrid  was  of  purely  paternal 
type,  showing  no  maternal  features,  and  breeding  true. 
The  term  "false  hybrids"  was  suggested  by  him  as  descrip- 
tive of  such  plants.      No  exactly  similar  example  has  been 

'''   For  important  summary  of  new  evidence  see  Rosen!)erg,  Sve?isk  Bot. 
Tidsk.,  1909,  HI.  p.  159. 


XIV]  Hybrids  breeding  true  249 

found  In  the  course  of  contemporary  experiments.  It  is  to 
be  hoped  that  the  original  experiment  may  be  repeated,  for 
Millardet's  note  is  very  brief,  and  we  have  no  means  of 
judging  whether  the  various  possibiUties  of  error  were 
excluded  {e.g.  heterozygosis  of  the  mother-plant). 

Whatever  the  future  may  reveal  as  to  the  significance  of 
these  ambiguous  occurrences  it  is  certain  that  in  all  cases 
where  irregular  results  are  observed  we  may  have  to  reckon 
with  two  possibilities:  (i)  actual  parthenogenesis,  or  the 
development  of  unfertilised  ova  without  fertilisation  ;  (2)  a 
phenomenon  tantamount — as  regards  heredity — to  partheno- 
eenesis,  occurrine  after  fertilisation^.      In  both  events  the 

n  1  •  (^  1 

offspring  are  purely  maternal.  The  latter  exemplifies  the 
conception  of  Strasburger  and  Boveri,  that  fertilisation  may 
consist  of  two  distinct  processes,  the  stimulus  to  develop- 
ment, and  the  union  of  characters  in  the  zygote. 

B.     Sexual  Types. 

The  literature  of  hybridisation  and  heredity  abounds 
with  examples  of  hybrids  or  cross-breds  which  are  said 
to  have  bred  true  without  splitting  up,  or  as  we  should 
now  say,  without  segregation.  Some  of  these,  so  far  as 
they  refer  to  plants  at  least,  are  open  to  the  criticism 
made  in  the  last  section,  that  either  actual  parthenogenesis 
or  monolepsis  may  be  occurring.  But  an  even  simpler  and 
more  probable  account  is  hardly  ever  excluded,  for  we  have 
rarely  if  ever  any  means  of  knowing  that  the  plants  studied 
were  in  reality  first  crosses  and  not  members  of  derivative 
generations.  Moreover  even  in  cases  such  as  the  famous 
series  of  Salix  hybrids  made  by  Wichura  (304),  where  this 
objection  does  not  apply,  we  know  almost  nothing  as  to  the 
numbers  of  individuals  raised.  These  remarks  probably 
apply  to  all  the  illustrations  given  by  Focke  (123)  so  far  as 
I  have  been  able  to  ascertain.    In  Mtttationstheorie,  ii.  p.  66, 

^  On  a  former  occasion  (i8,  p.  156)  I  suggested  that  in  mosaic  forms 
the  presence  of  the  recessive  character  in  patches  might  be  thought  of  as 
due  to  failure  of  fertilisation  in  those  areas.  More  accurate  knowledge  of 
the  facts  has  practically  disposed  of  this  suggestion.  It  was  chiefly  based 
on  evidence  relating  to  the  mosaic  seeds  of  Peas,  patched  with  green  and 
yellow  in  the  cotyledons,  but  we  may  now  feel  fairly  sure  that  the 
abnormalities  seen  in  their  behaviour  are  due  to  disturbance  caused  by 
external  influences. 


250  Hybrids  breeding  true  [ch. 

de  Vries  mentions  some  cases  which  he  accepts  as  satis- 
factory, the  most  definite  being  that  of  Oenothera  muricata 
X  bie7t7iis  raised  by  himself.  The  hybrids  were  partially 
sterile  in  a  high  degree,  but  the  subsequent  generations 
raised  from  them  showed  no  definite  departure  from  the  F^ 
type.  The  evidence,  as  it  stands,  must  be  taken  as  consti- 
tuting a  definite  exception.  Nevertheless  in  view  of  the 
great  sterility  exhibited  by  the  hybrids,  and  the  fact  that 
all  that  we  know  of  the  Oenothera  crosses  points  to  the 
existence  of  very  unusual  features  in  their  genetic  physio- 
logy, the  significance  of  this  curious  observation  is  still 
somewhat  problematical. 

Another  case  given  by  de  Vries  is  that  of  Anemone 
silvestris  xmagellanica  on  the  authority  of  Janczewski"^. 
As  this  case  well  illustrates  the  anomalous  and  uncertain 
behaviour  of  partially  sterile  hybrids,  the  facts  are  worth 
giving  in  some  detail.  In  the  first  account  the  hybrids  are 
said  to  have  been  either  totally  sterile,  or  fertile  in  a  very 
slight  degree.  The  pollen  is  said  to  have  been  all  bad, 
and  in  flowers  containing  about  100  pistils,  one  or  rarely 
two  good  akenes  formed.  Janczewski  thinks  that  these 
were  fertilised  from  one  of  the  parents.  But  the  hybrid 
sometimes  gave  rise  by  an  adventitious  bud,  from  the  root, 
to  a  plant  having  the  female  parts  perfectly  fertile,  pro- 
ducing akenes  of  intermediate  shape.  The  pollen  of  these 
flowers  was  not  examined,  and  it  was  supposed  that  fertilisa- 
tion was  effected  by  pollen  of  A.  sylvestris  growing  near  by. 

In  the  later  account  it  is  recalled  that  the  hybrids  some- 
times produced  good  akenes  among  a  multitude  of  abortive 
ones,  and  it  is  said  that  the  pollen,  though  very  bad,  contained 
occasional  good  grains  which  could  effect  fertilisation  without 
foreign  pollen.  Some  stems  of  this  hybrid — not  the  whole 
plant — gave  rise  suddenly  to  flowers  perfectly  fertile,  with 
all  the  akenes  good.  These  flowers  had  mixed  pollen-grains, 
of  which  about  three-fourths  were  good  and  effected  self- 
fertilisation.  The  second  and  also  the  third  generations 
raised  from  the  hybrid,  whether  from  the  sterile  or  from  the 
fertile  flowers,  reproduced  precisely  the  characters  of  the 
original  hybrid,  exhibiting  the  complete  fertility  of  the  female 

*  Bull.  Ac.  Cracovie,  1889,  June,  No.  6,  p.  xxiv.,  and  ibid.  1892,  p.  228. 


XIV]  Absence  of  Segregation  251 

organs  of  the  fertile  stems,  and  the  mixed  pollen  of  those 
stems.  Janczewski  concludes  that  in  this  way  a  new  specific 
type  could  arise  which,  but  for  its  mixed  pollen-grains, 
would  be  indistinguishable  from  a  natural  and  original 
species. 

This  extreme  irregularity  and  sportiveness  in  the  degree 
of  fertility  manifested  is  a  frequent  concomitant  of  partial 
sterility  in  hybrids.  The  fact  that  the  sterility  once  lost 
does  not  return,  obviously  suggests  that  it  is  due  to  the 
presence  of  some  dominant  factor  or  factors,  and  that  they, 
or  the  compound  they  make,  can  be  eliminated  by  bud- 
variation.  Other  reflections  will  occur  to  the  reader  which 
we  cannot  now  consider,  but  I  feel  it  difficult  to  accept 
such  an  example  without  further  comment  as  a  proof  that 
in  ordinary  sexual  reproduction  segregation  may  fail  as  a 
normal  event. 

It  is  most  desirable  that  search  should  be  made  for 
genuine  cases  of  failure  of  segregation  amongst  animals. 
The  example  of  the  human  mulatto  is  as  yet  one  of  the 
best  which  ordinary  experience  suggests '^.  In  experimental 
breeding  perhaps  the  single  clear  instance  is  provided  by 
Castle's  experiment  (48)  on  the  lengths  of  ears  in  rabbits. 
He  crossed  the  long-eared  lop  rabbit  with  ordinary  short- 
eared  individuals.  F^  had  ears  of  intermediate  length,  and 
the  subsequent  generations  retained  this  character  very 
definitely.  The  later  details  have  not  yet  been  published, 
but  Professor  Castle  very  kindly  showed  me  many  of  his 
records  which  plainly  established  the  fact  that  no  return  to 
the  parental  types  took  place. 

In  some  experiments  made  with  the  butterfly  Pararge 
egeria  I  obtained  a  comparable  result.  In  Spain  and  the 
plains  of  Southern  France  egeria  has  a  bright  fulvous  brown 
colour  (intersected  with  darker  brown),  while  in  England 
our  representative  form  egeriades  has  the  bright  brown  re- 
placed by  primrose  yellow.  In  the  Loire  valley  and  in 
Brittany  a  race  almost  exacdy  intermediate  between  egeria 
and  egeriades  is  found.  By  crossing  the  two  extremes  the 
intermediate  type  was  produced  with  great  exactitude.  /% 
was   not  raised   in  any  adequate  numbers,   but  those  that 

■**■  See  p.  208. 


252  Absence  of  Segregation  [ch. 

were  bred  showed  only  dubious  traces  of  segregation.  On 
the  other  hand  F^  was  crossed  with  both  parent  types  and 
some  large  families  raised.  The  general  aspect  of  these 
families  might  be  described  by  the  statement  that  they 
came  on  the  whole  intermediate  between  F^  and  the  pure 
parents  respectively.  Pending  a  repetition  of  the  experi- 
ment, and  especially  before  F.,  has  been  properly  investi- 
gated, the  negative  cannot  be  asserted  with  complete 
confidence,  but  I  am  disposed  to  regard  the  case  as  one  in 
which  segregation  is  really  absent. 

Experiments  made  by  Bacot  and  Prout  with  Acidalia 
virgularia  (Geometrid  moth)  and  a  light  variety  from 
Hyeres  called  canteneneraria  showed  that  F^  was  always 
intermediate.  In  subsequent  generations  no  segregation 
could  be  detected.  A  good  deal  of  fluctuation  occurred, 
but  the  evidence  went  to  show  that  either  extreme  could 
produce  the  other.  The  facts  were  described  by  Mr  Bacot 
in  a  lecture  at  the  London  Hospital  in  1908,  and  I  am 
indebted  to  him  for  further  information.  A  full  account  is 
shortly  to  appear. 


2. 


Depa7HiLres  from  Numerical  Expectation. 


The  material  for  a  proper  investigation  of  this  important 
question  is  still  quite  insufficient.  It  is  the  experience  of 
all  who  have  made  breeding  experiments  that  from  time  to 
time  individual  families  show  great  aberration  from  the 
numbers  which  are  predicable  by  the  simple  rules.  Not 
till  a  large  mass  of  otherwise  homogeneous  statistics  are 
available  will  it  be  possible  to  ascertain  whether  any  of 
these  aberrations  are  really  indicative  of  the  effects  of 
special  causes  of  disturbance  or  are  to  be  accepted  as 
random  departures  from  normality.  From  the  point  of 
view  of  the  statistician  it  may  seem  a  comparatively  simple 
matter  to  procure  such  material,  but  in  practice  there  are 
many  difficulties  to  be  overcome.  The  impression  formed 
on  my  own  mind  is  that  the  output  of  allelomorphic  gametes, 
where  equality  is  expected,  does  in  certain  types  show  in- 
dividual departures  which  are  not  purely  fortuitous,  but  in 
any  collection  of  statistics  large  enough  to  give  reliable 
conclusions  these  individual  aberrations  would  be  completely 


XIV]  Numerical  Aberrations  253 

masked  ;  for  though  they  may  be  really  Indicative  of 
physiological  disturbance,  these  disturbances  must  be  rather 
of  the  nature  of  sporadic  events  than  the  consequence 
of  predominating  large  causes  affecting  long  series  of 
records. 

Occasionally  however  the  effects  of  such  definite  causes 
can  be  traced  In  our  numbers.  One  excellent  example  Is 
provided  by  the  work  of  E.  Baur  (24),  who  Investigated 
the  Inheritance  of  variegation  of  the  leaves  In  AntirrhiuMin. 
He  found  that  the  green  type  breeds  true,  but  that  the 
variegated,  or  '' azirea''  form  gives,  on  self- fertilisation,  a 
mixture  of  varlegateds  and  greens.  The  resulting  numbers 
were  573  variegated  and  286  green,  showing  very  clearly 
the  proportion  2:1,  variegated  being  a  majority.  The 
question  why  are  the  variegated  not  3  to  i  of  the  o-reens 
is,  as  he  points  out,  readily  answered.  The  missing  varie- 
gated plants  are  those  which  would  have  been  pure  to 
the  yellow  character.  Such  plants  would  contain  no  chloro- 
phyll and  consequently  would  perish.  A  study  of  the 
germinating  seeds  subsequently  proved  that  this  was  the 
true  account,  for  such  an  examination  gave  jj  green,  160 
variegated,  51  almost  or  quite  without  green.  The  last 
group  all  died.  Such  an  observation  throws  a  clear  light 
on  the  meaning  of  some  at  least  of  those  '*  ever-sportino- " 
types  to  which  de  Vrles  drew  attention '^.  He  mentioned 
in  particular  the  fact  that  so  many  variegated  types  had 
never  been  bred  true  In  horticulture.  This  fact,  as  Baur 
indicates,  has  now  found  an  easy  explanation  on  Mendelian 
principles,  for  the  homozygous  form  of  the  variegated  Is 
a  non-viable  type,  and  the  variegated  themselves  are  per- 
manently heterozygous. 

In  the  light  of  this  experiment,  and  Indeed  from  a pi^iori 
consideration,  it  Is  clear  that  the  non-viability  of  zygotes  or 
even  of  gametes  bearing  special  combinations  of  factors 
may  play  a  large  part  in  genetic  phenomena.  Nevertheless 
with  the  exception  of  the  case  of  yellow  mice  (p.  162)  and  the 
peculiar  phenomenon  recorded  in  regard  to  maize  (p.  161) 
1  know  no  large  series  of  numbers  which  show  a  consistent 
departure  from  expectation.     There  are  however  suggestions 

■^  Miitationstheorie^  i.  p.  597. 


254  Numerical  Aberrations  [ch. 

that  in  some  types  of  animals  and  plants  the  amplitude  of 
the  fluctuations  about  normality  is  greater  than  in  others. 
This  is  of  course  a  point  well  adapted  to  statistical  study 
which  sooner  or  later  must  be  undertaken.  Similarly  there 
are  indications  that  in  cases  where  the  point  can  be  tested, 
the  seeds  of  individual  pods  may  give  strangely  aberrant 
numbers  though  the  plants  as  a  whole  may  give  regular 
results.  Miss  Saunders  has  often  been  struck  with  this 
peculiarity  in  studying  the  genetics  of  Stocks,  but  as  yet 
the  figures  have  not  been  examined  by  statistical  methods. 
Knowing  what  we  do  as  to  the  capacity  of  individual  flowers 
to  sport,  the  suggestion  obviously  arises  that  such  indi- 
viduality may  be  manifested  by  the  collective  offspring 
of  one  ovary  even  though  the  flower  in  which  it  was 
formed  may  show  no  peculiarity. 

The  very  wide  departures  from  expectation  shown  in 
many  pedigrees  of  human  diseases  and  defects  are  certainly 
in  part  attributable  to  the  imperfections  of  the  records,  but 
I  cannot  doubt  that  the  discrepancies  are  in  part  due  to 
genuine  physiological  causes.  In  regard  to  some  of  these 
it  is  I  think  still  open  to  question  whether  the  transmission 
is  a  process  comparable  with  that  which  we  ordinarily 
designate  as  Heredity.  Some  element  is  obviously  handed 
on  from  individual  to  individual,  but  it  seems  to  me  possible 
that  this  element  or  poison  is  distributed  irregularly  among 
the  germ-cells,  spreading  among  them  by  a  process  which 
is  mechanical,  like  the  spread  of  an  oil-stain  in  a  heap  of 
paper,  or  of  a  fungus  in  a  heap  of  seeds.  In  the  present 
state  of  pathological  knowledge  it  is  premature  to  make  any 
suggestion  as  to  the  possible  nature  of  such  poisons.  I  am 
told  by  competent  authorities  that  in  the  cases,  for  example, 
of  the  various  polymorphic  hereditary  paralyses  it  is  very 
improbable  that  pathogenic  organisms  can  be  the  exciting 
cause  ;  nevertheless,  from  a  study  of  the  inheritance  in  an 
ample  series  of  families,  I  am  inclined  to  suppose  that  the 
element  transmitted  is  something  apart  from  the  normal 
organism,  and  that  it  is  handed  on  by  a  process  independent 
of  the  gametic  cell-divisions.  In  such  cases  I  do  not  an- 
ticipate that  any  "law"  of  inheritance  can  be  discovered,  for 
if  my  view  is  correct,  the  process  is  not  heredity  in  the 
naturalist's  sense  at  all. 


XIV]  Irregular  Dominance  255 

3.     Irregularities  of  Dominance. 

It  must  be  anticipated  that  irregularity  or  fluctuation 
in  dominance  will  prove  a  frequent  source  of  exceptions. 
Neither  among  animals  nor  plants  is  material  often  to  be 
found  so  homogeneous  that  the  heterozygotes  formed  from 
various  individual  pairs  are  quite  identical,  and  the  domi- 
nant factors  thus  produce  their  effects  in  varying  degrees. 
Reference  has  already  been  made  (p.  236)  to  the  fact  that 
dominance  may  sometimes  be  so  complete  that  the  hetero- 
zygote  may  pass  for  the  pure  homozygous  type,  while  in 
other  individuals  the  distinction  can  be  recognized.  Such 
cases  present  no  real  difficulty  in  analysis,  for  the  two 
classes  can  be  taken  as  one  in  the  counts  of  /%.  Serious 
difficulty  is  caused  however  in  a  few  examples  by  the  fact 
that  a  dominant  factor  may  be  present  without  producing 
any  effect  by  which  its  presence  can  be  perceived.  Such 
dominant  individuals  are  indistinTOishable  from  recessives, 
and  analysis  thus  becomes  difficult  or  impossible.  Con- 
spicuous examples  of  this  ambiguous  phenomenon  have 
occurred  in  two  of  the  subjects  investigated  on  a  consider- 
able scale.  The  first  is  the  heredity  of  the  extra  toe  in 
fowls.  In  our  work  we  have  found  the  extra  toe  usually  to 
be  a  dominant.  Such  a  5-toed  breed  as  Dorking  or  Houdan 
crossed  with  a  normal  4-toed  breed  commonly  gives  F^  birds 
with  extra  toes  developed  to  an  extent  somewhat  less  than 
that  found  in  the  normal  5-toed  type,  and  /%  from  such  birds 
is  of  the  usual  composition,  averaging  3  birds  with  extra 
toes  more  or  less  developed,  to  i  normally  4-toed.  But 
it  is  by  no  means  rare  to  meet  with  birds  of  the  4-toed  type 
which  when  crossed  with  an  extra-toed  breed  will  throw 
many  F^  with  4-toed  feet,  or  with  traces  only  of  the  extra 
digit.  The  two  feet  of  the  same  bird  may  also  differ,  pre- 
senting every  combination.  Such  birds  have  in  several 
instances  been  proved  by  their  progeny  to  be  ordinary 
heterozygotes.  At  first  one  might  be  disposed  to  attribute 
the  peculiarity  to  interference  caused  by  some  epistatic 
factor  repressing  the  development  of  the  dominant  charac- 
teristic ;  but  this  account  cannot  very  readily  be  reconciled 
with  the  actual  numbers,  for  there  is  no  consistent  diminution 
in  the  number  of  the  dominant  offspring  of  such  birds.     The 


256  Irregular  Dominance  [ch. 

nature  of  these  unconformable  families  must  be  regarded 
at  present  as  altogether  obscure.  The  records  of  human 
polydactylism  indicate  that  very  similar  disturbances  of  the 
usual  course  of  descent  operate  in  regard  to  man. 

Another  example  almost  exactly  similar  has  been  en- 
countered both  by  Correns  and  by  Lock  in  the  heredity  of 
the  blue  or  black  colour  of  the  aleurone  layer  of  the  seeds 
of  maize.  The  blue  is  generally  a  dominant  appearing  in 
various  degree,  but  some  white  F^  seeds  proved  able  to 
carry  on  the  blue  character.  The  problem  raised  by  this 
defect  of  dominance  is  discussed  at  length  by  Lock  (174), 
but  no  altogether  satisfactory  elucidation  has  been  found. 

It  may  be  pointed  out  that  when,  as  in  these  examples, 
the  abnormal  result  is  clearly  perceptible  in  F^,  no  question 
arises  as  to  the  occurrence  of  an  imperfect  segregation. 
The  peculiarity  is  evidently  zygotic,  and  Is  caused  either  by 
some  feature  of  zygotic  organisation,  or  by  the  influence  of 
external  circumstances.  This  conclusion,  so  plainly  dedu- 
cible  from  results  obtained  in  experimental  crosses  between 
pure  races,  may  be  appealed  to  when,  as  in  the  descent  of 
some  human  characteristics,  we  witness  as  an  exception 
the  handing  down  of  a  normally  dominant  factor  through  an 
unaffected  member  of  the  family.  In  view  of  such  occur- 
rences the  reality  of  the  segregation  may  be  doubted.  No 
experiment  with  pure  types  is  possible  In  dealing  with  those 
phenomena  but  the  analogy  of  the  genetics  of  extra  toe  in 
fowls  supports  the  view  that  the  peculiarity  of  these  cases  Is 
zygotic  and  not  due  to  failure  of  segregation. 

4.     A  Iter  station  of  Generations  :    an  outstanding 

difficttlty. 

The  question  may  be  asked  whether,  on  a  general 
survey  of  the  facts  of  Natural  History,  any  large  classes 
of  phenomena  are  encountered  which  are  altogether  Incon- 
sistent with  the  Mendelian  system  to  such  a  degree  as  to 
suggest  that  they  are  quite  Incompatible  with  any  scheme 
of  factorial  analysis.  Various  exceptional  cases  have  been 
enumerated  and  considered.  It  Is  not  In  dispute  that,  for 
example,  In  the  phenomena  of  hybridisation  between  the 
races  of  mankind,  the  facts  (fairly  well  authenticated)  must 


XIV]  Alternation  of  Generations  257 

be  taken  as  pointing  at  all  events  to  the  existence  of  special 
features    in    them.      In   most  of  these,    however,  there   is 
nothing    that    can    be    construed    as    indicative    of   some 
wholly  different   system  of  genetic   physiology.     There  is 
nevertheless  one  phenomenon,   alternation  of  generations, 
which  stands  out  as  at  present  incapable  of  factorial  repre- 
sentation.    This  Is  best  exemplified  by  the  case  of  seasonal 
dimorphism   so   frequently  met   with   in  insects,   especially 
Lepldoptera.     For  example  many  species  exist  in  two  types 
of  which  one  emerges  after  the  winter  as  a  spring  form. 
This  breeds  and  lays  Its  eggs.     The  larvae  feed  up  rapidly 
and  emerofe  in  summer  as  the  second  or  summer  form.      In 
their  turn  Individuals  of  the  summer  type  give  rise  to  the 
larvae  which  are  destined  to  become  the  spring  type  again. 
A  similar  sequence  of  distinct  types  Is  a  common  feature  of 
many  tropical  species  in    which    the   wet  and   dry  season 
forms    correspond    to    the    winter    and    summer    forms    of 
temperate  countries.      The  cycle  may  be  complicated  in  a 
variety  of  ways,  by  the  intercalation  of  additional  genera- 
tions and  otherwise.     Of  these  more  complex  cycles  the 
Aphldae  and  Coccidae   afford    many  striking  illustrations. 
In  none  of  these  examples  can  we  conceive  that  the  distinc- 
tions between  the  recurring  types  are  due  to  addition   or 
removal  of  factors.      The  only  other  suggestion  which  can 
be  made  is  that  these  distinctions  are  ultimately  referable 
to  the  effects  of  external  conditions.     As  yet  very  little  if 
any  evidence  can  be  adduced  in  support  of  this  suggestion. 
The    experiments    of  Standfuss,   Fischer,    Merrifield,    and 
others    have   shown   that   the    form    which    the    individual 
assumes  can  within  rather  narrow  limits  be  determined  by 
altering   the  temperature    to    which  it  is  exposed,    but  in 
order  to  obtain  a  satisfactory  elucidation  of  the  phenomena 
I  am  here  considering  this  evidence  is  insufficient.     In  the 
known  examples  the  experimental  influences  were  brought 
to  bear  on  the  Individuals  themselves.      It  Is   not   impos- 
sible that  something  might  be  accomplished  by  changing 
the  conditions  to  which  the  parents  are  exposed.      It  is,  for 
example,  a  familiar  experience  of  lepidopterists  that  when  a 
one-brooded  type   is   bred  in  captivity  a   second  brood  is 
very  commonly  produced  in  the  autumn,  and  it  is  natural 
to  refer  this  variation  to  some  Influence  of  the  abnormal 
B.  H.  17 


258  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  [ch. 

conditions.  But  we  here  meet  the  old  difficulty  that  the 
distinction  between  the  living  types  is  often  sharp,  whereas 
that  between  the  environments  is  one  of  degree.  We  know 
also  that  from  the  same  parents  a  brood  of  larvae  may  be 
raised  some  of  which  will  feed  up  fast  and  emerge  as  the 
autumn  form  while  others  will  feed  up  slowly  and  emerge 
with  all  the  characteristics  of  the  spring  form  after  the 
winter,  and  we  can  form  no  idea  as  to  the  circumstance 
which  determines  the  distinction.  Though  I  can  give  no 
hint  as  to  the  rationale  of  these  occurrences  which  in 
the  cases  of  the  sex  of  Aphidae  &c.  have  an  extreme  im- 
portance to  the  progress  of  genetics,  I  call  attention  to 
them  as  constituting  what  must  be  regarded  as  the  group 
of  phenomena  least  in  accord  with  the  conception  that  the 
characteristics  of  living  things  are  an  expression  of  their 
factorial  composition"^. 

5.     Maternal  Characters  in  Embryos. 

A.     Seeds  of  Wheat, 

In  certain  plants  a  curious  and  at  present  quite  unin- 
telligible phenomenon  has  been  met  with.  Of  this  four 
examples  are  known.  The  simplest  is  that  seen  when  a 
wheat  having  long  glumes  and  seeds  is  crossed  with  a 
variety  having  short  seeds  in  short  glumes.  This  case  has 
been  studied  by  Biffen.  The  F^  seed,  resulting  from  the 
cross-fertilisation,  is  unchanged,  and  resembles  the  normal 
seeds  of  the  mother-plant.  When  this  F^  seed  is  sown  the 
plant  in  due  course  flowers.  Its  glumes  are  of  intermediate 
length  (Fig.  35)  and  the  seeds  they  contain  (/%)  are  all 
alike  of  intermediate  length  (Fig.  36).  Apparently  there- 
fore segregation  has  not  taken  place.  But  when  these 
/%  seeds  are  sown,  the  plants  which  they  become  are 
respectively  longs,  intermediates  (like  F^,  and  shorts,  as 
regards  their  glumes  and  seeds.  Hence  it  is  clear  that 
segregation  had  occurred  among  the  gametes  produced  by 
/^j,  but  owing  to  some  control  exercised  by  the  mother- 
plant,  all  the  seeds  have  a  similar  length  and  appearance. 

*  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  difficulties  which  have  been  met  with 
in  the  attempt  to  pui*sue  Mendelian  analysis  in  the  double-brooded 
Lepidoptera  may  be  connected  with  the  phenomena  spoken  of  above. 


xiv] 


Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds 


259 


This  case  at  first  sight  does  not  seem  altogether  para- 
doxical, for  it  may  appear  natural  that  the  size  of  the 
seeds  should — at  all  events  as  regards  the  upper  limit — be 
governed  by  the  size  of  the  maternal  envelopes.  The  next 
group  of  cases  however,  though  showing  that  the  peculiarity 
is  in  some  way  caused  by  the  maternal  tissues,  suggests  that 
the  influence  may  be  of  a  more  recondite  nature. 


^ig-  35-  Polish  wheat,  with  long  glumes,  crossed  with  a  short-glumed 
Rivet  wheat.  F^  has  glumes  intermediate  in  length.  (Biffen's 
specimens.) 


B.      The  Indent  Peas. 

This  example  is  that  of  the  Peas  [Piszim)  known  as 
''  Indent."  The  crosses  of  this  type  of  pea  give  rise  to  an 
intricate  series  of  results.  For  our  knowledge  of  these 
facts  we  are  indebted  in  the  first  place  to  Tschermak*  :  and 

*  Tschermak's  account  is  sometimes  difficult  to  follow,  because  his 
terminology  does  not  always  show  whether  he  is  referring  to  indent  or  to 
wrinkled  peas.. 

17 — 2 


26o  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  [ch. 

several  experiments  have  also  been  carried  out  both  by 
Lock,  and  by  myself  assisted  by  Miss  Killby.  In  the 
following  account  only  the  essential  features  are  related. 

As  the  type  of  an  ''  indent "  pea  I  take  the  French 
Purple  Sugar  pea^  (Graiie  Rieseii  of  German  seedsmen).  Its 
flowers  are  purple.  The  seeds  have  deep,  irregular  inden- 
tations, but  with  experience  of  peas  It  Is  fairly  easy  to 
distinguish  these  ''  indents  "  from  all  wrinkled  types.  As 
always  on  plants  with  coloured  flowers,  the  seed-coats  are 
coloured,  being  here  a  grey  brown  (with  some  purple  spots). 
In  connection  with  the  colour  of  the  seed-coats  we  meet  the 
first  complication.  So  far  as  is  known,  the  thoroughly 
Indent  type  of  seed  never  appears  except  in  coloured  coats, 
but  round  or  wrinkled  seeds  may  exist  In  coats  of  all  sorts, 


b 

« 

1  ■» 

w^ 

*) 

<)t  1 

P 

« 

ri 

Fig.  36.  Upper  row :  Seeds  of  Rivet.  Lower  row :  Seeds  of  Polish 
wheat.  Middle  row :  F^  seeds  borne  by  F^  plant,  all  similar  and 
of  intermediate  length,  though  segregation  has  occurred.  (Biffen's 
specimens.) 

whether  coloured  or  uncoloured.  As  regards  the  nature 
of  the  reserve-materials  In  these  peas  Gregory  found  that 
the  starch  grains  of  Indents  are  like  those  of  round  peas 
(see  Fig.  9),  being  large  and  simple. 

For  simplicity's  sake  I  take  first  the  results  of  crossing 

*  This  pea  has  soft  '•''sans  parchemin''''  pods,  but  the  characters  of  the 
pods  are  not  involved  in  the  problem  discussed  in  the  text. 


XIV]  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  261 

Indent  with  wrinkled  (e.g.  Satisfaction,  Laxton's  Alpha), 
for  the  consequences  are  there  comparatively  regular.  In- 
dent fertilised  by  wrinkled  gives  the  F^  seed  Indent  and 
unchanged.  Wrinkled  fertilised  by  Indent  gives  the  F^ 
seed  round.  This  Is  evidently  In  consequence  of  the  fact 
that  the  wrinkled  variety  used  was  a  white-flowered  plant, 
with  of  course  uncoloured  seed-coats,  In  which  the  Indenta- 
tion cannot  develop.  Such  an  F^  seed  becomes  an  F^  plant 
with  coloured  flowers  and  coats,  and  the  F.,  seeds  It  bears 
show  normal  segregation,  being  Indents  and  wrlnkleds^  in 
the  usual  proportion  3:1.  The  wrinkled  seeds  If  sown  give 
normal  results,  viz.  3  wrinkled  with  coloured  flowers  :  i 
wrinkled  with  white  flowers.  The  indents  If  sown  also  give 
3  coloured-flowered  :  i  white-flowered,  but  all  seeds  of 
''round"  nature  on  the  coloured  plants  are  of  course  indents 
(whether  all  Indents,  or  3  indents  :  i  wrinkled  as  before), 
while  all  the  corresponding  seeds  on  the  white-flowered 
plants  are  true  rounds  (being  either  all  rounds,  or  3  rounds  :  i 
wTlnkled). 

Thus  far  all  is  Intelligible,  but  when  we  proceed  to  the 
next  combination,  Indent  crossed  with  round,  the  real  diffi- 
culties are  reached.  Indent  fertilised  by  a  round  gives  of 
course  the  F^  seed  Indent;  and  reciprocally,  the  round  ferti- 
lised by  Indent  gives  the  F ^  seed  round.  When  these  seeds 
are  sown,  the  F^  plants  grow  up  (with  coloured  flowers), 
but  the  condition  of  their  F.,  seeds  differs  according  to  the 
round  variety  used  as  original  parent.  I  take  first  the 
result  which  has  been  most  commonlv  observed.  Tschermak 
observed  It  In  many  crosses  made  with  ''Victoria,"  a  white- 
flowered  varietv,  of  which  more  will  be  said  later.  Lock 
saw  the  same  thing  with  a  round-seeded  native  Ceylon  pea 
having  coloured  flowers.  I  have  similar  results  from  Fill- 
basket,  Express  and  Blue  Peter,  all  white-flowered  types. 
In  all  these  cases  the  F,  seeds,  borne  by  F^  plants,  are  all 
alike  indent,  none  being  round. 

On  Inspection  of  such  seeds  It  seems  Impossible  to  sup- 
pose that  segregation  has  occurred.  On  sowing  it  is  never- 
theless found  that  the  resulting  /%  plants  are  respectively 

*  In  such  a  case  the  sorting  of  living  seeds  can  only  be  approximate, 
for  to  the  eye  the  distinction  is  not  quite  sharp.  They  can  be  sorted 
immediately  by  microscopical  examination  of  the  starch. 


262  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  [ch. 

coloured  and  uncoloured  in  the  proportion  3:1,  the  coloured 
all  have  indent  seeds  and  the  white-flowered  all  have  round 
seeds.  Segregation  is  therefore  normal,  and  the  fact  that 
all  the  /^2  seeds  are  indent  is  in  some  way  brought  about  by 
the  nature  of  the  maternal  envelopes  in  which  the  seeds 
develop.  How  this  influence  is  exerted  we  cannot  suggest, 
but  perhaps  there  is  some  quality  in  these  seed-coats  which 
causes  the  loss  of  water  on  ripening  to  take  place  irregularly 
and  so  induces  an  irregular  shrinking  of  the  cotyledons. 
Such  an  account  is  difficult  to  apply,  for  the  seed-coats  seem 
uniform  and  homogeneous,  and  as  the  next  case  proves,  the 
influence  of  the  seed-coat,  whatever  it  be,  operates  in  an 
extraordinarily  capricious  and  specific  manner. 

Until  recently  the  account  given  above  was  supposed  to 
apply  to  all  crosses  of  round  with  indent.  Going  over 
seeds  which  were  harvested  in  1904  and  1905  without 
examination  at  the  time  I  find  that  one  case  is  altogether 
different  from  the  rest.  In  this  the  round  parent  was 
Nain  de  Bretagne,  a  small,  very  round,  white-flowered 
variety.  Indent  fertilised  by  this  variety  gave  F^  seeds 
indent.  These  when  sown  became  coloured  F^  plants,  but 
their  /%  seeds,  instead  of  being  all  indent  as  in  the  examples 
described,  are  quite  definitely  indents  and  rounds^  in  the 
usual  3  :  I  ratio '^.  Moreover  among  the  few  /%  plants  of 
which  the  seeds  were  harvested,  was  one  which  had  only 
round  seeds  (in  coloured  coats)  and  it  is  evident  that  this 
plant  came  from  a  round  F^  seed  which  was  sown  without 
note  being  taken  of  its  character. 

We  are  thus  presented  with  the  exceedingly  definite  and 
specific  fact  that  one  round-seeded  variety,  by  virtue  of  its 
intrinsic  nature,  behaves  quite  differently  from  the  others 
that  have  been  tried.  Presumably  its  reserve-materials 
(and  by  inference  the  ferments  which  lead  to  their  formation) 
have  some  distinctive  property  such  that  though  ripening 
in  a  seed-coat  which  would  make  the  other  round  peas 
shrink  as  indents,  they  are  still  able  to  retain  their  own 
characteristics.  Such  a  fact  may  well  be  remembered  in 
any  discussion  of  the  nature  of  specificity. 

*  Several  were  intermediate  in  appearance,  as  in  such  cases  must  be 
expected.  Three  plants,  for  instance,  had  339  indent,  119  round,  and 
39  uncertain. 


XIV]  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  263 

One  further  phenomenon  of  importance  has  been  dis- 
covered respecting  indent  peas.  It  was  said  above  that 
the  true  indents  are  in  coloured  coats,  but  it  is  obvious  that 
a  coloured  coat,  as  such,  is  not  sufficient  to  make  peas 
indent,  for  there  are  many  round  varieties  with  coloured 
coats.  It  is  clear  from  the  experiments  of  Tschermak  (273) 
and  Lock  (173,  175),  as  they  point  out,  and  from  results  of 
my  own,  that  the  properties  of  the  indenting  coats  depend  on 
two  factors,  viz.  (i)  the  indenting  factor  proper,  (2)  a  requisite 
pigmentation.  For  crossing  coloured,  round  varieties  with 
"Victoria,"  a  white  variety  commonly  round,  F^  bore  F.^ 
seeds  indent.  Lock  had  a  similar  result  from  a  round, 
coloured,  native  Ceylon  pea  crossed  with  Satisfaction 
(white,  wrinkled),  but  as  wrinkledness  was  introduced,  F., 
seeds  were  indent  and  wrinkled.  I  also  by  crossing  Maple 
(round,  purple  flowers)  with  Victoria  Marrow,  found  all  F„ 
seeds  indent. 

In  these  cases  it  is  evident  that  the  indenting  factor 
was  introduced  in  the  white-flowered  plant,  and  this,  meeting 
its  complementary  pigmentation-factor  from  the  coloured 
side,  was  able  to  indent  the  /%  seeds.  It  is  worth  noting 
that  ''Victoria,"  which  I  take  to  be  our  "Victoria  Marrow," 
though  generally  a  round  type,  produces  sporadically  a  good 
many  seeds  with  some  degree  of  indentation  or  pitting"^. 
These  (and  William  I)  come  nearer  to  the  true  indent  than 
those  of  any  white-flowered  variety  known  to  me.  Probably 
this  is  due  to  an  imperfect  and  occasional  manifestation  of 
the  powers  of  the  indenting  factor,  which  cannot  produce  its 
full  effect  as  the  pigment-element  is  missing  ;  but  when  that 
element  is  brought  in  by  the  cross  the  compound  factor  is 
complete  and  the  seeds  are  indented. 

An  experiment  of  Tschermak's  (273,  p.  30,  Case  9) 
contributes  one  more  important  and  instructive  fact,  which 
gives  a  clear  indication  as  to  the  identity  of  this  pigmen- 
tation-factor. He  crossed  two  round-seeded  varieties  both 
having  coloured  floiuers,  and  the  F.,  seeds  were  indented. 
Now  one  of  these  was  an  ordinary  purple  type,  but  the 
other  was  of  the  pink  (salmon-pink)  colour  well  known  for 

*  I  found  by  sowing  that  the  most  indented  and  the  roundest  give 
identical  results  in  the  next  generation.  The  distinction  is  fluctuational, 
and  is  unaffected  by  selection. 


264  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  [ch. 

instance  In  the  ''  Mummy-pea"  of  our  gardens.  The 
difference  between  these  two  is  that  the  purple  has  the 
blueing  factor  which  In  discussing  Sweet  Peas  &c.  we  have 
called  B,  and  there  can  thus  scarcely  be  a  doubt  that  this 
B  factor  is  the  complement  of  the  indenting  factor  which 
here  came  In  from  the  pink  side. 

Analogous  observations  have  been  made  In  regard  to 
Maize,  especially  by  Lock.  According  as  the  seeds  are 
opaque  or  semi-transparent,  the  varieties  are  distinguished 
as  "Dent"  or  "Flint."  These  distinctions  are  also  maternal 
characters,  and  though  segregation  Is  normal,  Its  effects 
cannot  be  seen  by  examining  the  cob  of  F^  seeds.  Con- 
ditions however,  in  particular  the  degree  of  ripeness,  cause 
a  complication  in  this  case,  for  the  seeds,  at  the  top  and 
bottom  especially,  may  remain  comparatively  flinty  after  the 
rest  have  assumed  the  dent  character. 

In  Wheat  the  relation  between  hard  and  soft  endo- 
sperms Is  probably  similar,  but  Professor  Biffen  tells  me 
that  in  that  case  also  complications  occur. 

This  group  of  cases  introduces  us  to  several  points  of 
interest.  We  have  first  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  mother- 
plant  can  impress  varietal  characters  on  her  offspring  by 
Influences  which  are  not  heredity  in  the  ordinary  sense. 
Seeds  are  in  botany  what  larvae  are  in  zoology,  and  no 
example  Is  yet  known  In  which  the  maternal  impress  extends 
beyond  the  seed-stage.  But  without  any  serious  stretch  of 
imagination  we  may  suppose  that  a  maternal  impress  may 
be  such  as  to  produce  an  effect  lasting  at  least  for  the  life- 
time of  the  Immediate  offspring ;  and  it  would  not  be 
altogether  surprising  If  such  results  were  actually  detected 
In  the  cases  enumerated;  for  the  difference  In  food-materials 
between  those  provided  by  a  dent  seed  and  a  flint,  a 
glutenous  and  a  starchy,  may,  for  aught  we  know.  Influence 
the  later  life  of  the  plant,  just  as  the  nature  of  the  milk 
supplied  to  the  human  Infant  is  believed  to  do.  Such 
influences  may  probably  enough  be  limited  and  perhaps 
trifling  In  comparison  with  those  that  are  in  the  strict 
sense  genetic,  but  we  do  not  yet  know  that  they  are  neg- 
ligible. 


XIV]  Maternal  Characters  in  Seeds  265 

The  next  feature  of  interest  Is  the  specific  behaviour  of 
the  round  pea  Nain  de  Bretagne,  which  distinguishes  it 
from  the  other  round  peas,  creating  a  problem  in  the 
chemistry  of  the  reserve-materials  well  worth  investigating. 

Lastly  we  have  one  more  illustration  of  the  special 
properties  of  the  '' B  factor."  This  factor,  it  will  be 
remembered,  was  concerned  both  in  producing  some  of  the 
phenomena  of  coupling,  and  spurious  allelomorphism  in  the 
Sweet  Pea,  and  we  may  anticipate  that  its  presence  will 
be  shown  to  have  profound  effects  on  the  constitution  of 
plants'^. 

*  The  seed-shapes  of  Sweet  Peas  have  not  been  studied.  There  is  a 
great  diversity  in  size.  Some  also  are  quite  spherical,  others  being  some- 
what elongated.  The  self-coloured  zw/^Aflowered  kinds  alone  (Countess 
Radnor,  &c.)  have  shrivelled  seeds.  In  A  seeds  from  these  crossed 
with  common  round  sorts  no  mixture  of  shapes  occurs,  and  the  shape 
is  evidently  a  plant-character. 


CHAPTER   XV 

BIOLOGICAL   CONCEPTIONS    IN   THE   LIGHT   OF 
MENDELIAN   DISCOVERIES. 

Nature  of  U^iits — Nattcre  of  Segregation — Moinent  of 
Segregation — Differentiation  of  Parts  compared  with 
Segregation — Reversion  and  Variation.  "  Bush  "  and 
"  Cttpid''  Sweet  Peas — Mendelian  Segregation  and 
Species — Discontinuity  in  Variation — Mendelism  and 
Natural  Selection, 

Thp:  purpose  of  the  preceding  chapters  has  been  to 
show  the  method  of  MendeHan  analysis  in  appHcatlon  to  a 
variety  of  problems,  and  to  describe  the  concrete  discoveries . 
to  which  that  method  has  already  led.  To  discuss  the 
bearing  of  the  new  facts  on  biological  science  Is  now  a 
considerable  undertaking  and  all  that  will  be  attempted 
within  the  limits  of  this  volume  Is  a  slight  sketch  of  the 
possibilities  which  these  facts  suggest. 

Nature  of  the   Units. 

With  the  recognition  of  unit-characters  our  general 
conceptions  of  the  structure  and  properties  of  living  things 
Inevitably  undergo  a  change.  We  begin  to  perceive  outlines 
where  previously  all  was  vague,  nor  can  we  doubt  that 
those  outlines  will  very  soon  become  clearer.  What  the 
physical  nature  of  the  units  may  be  we  cannot  yet  tell,  but 
the  consequences  of  their  presence  Is  in  so  many  Instances 
comparable  with  the  effects  produced  by  ferments,  that  with 
some  confidence  we  suspect  that  the  operations  of  some 
units  are  In  an  essential  way  carried  out  by  the  formation 
of  definite  substances  acting  as  ferments. 


CH.  XV]  Nature  of  Units  267 

The  conception  of  dominant  characters  as  each  due 
to  th.^  presence  of  something  which  is  absent  from  the  corre- 
sponding recessive  may  prove  of  use  as  assisting  towards 
the  identification  of  these  problematical  bodies.  To  most 
of  the  cases  of  allelomorphism  between  characters  yet 
detected,  this  method  of  representation  may  be  very  readily 
applied.  The  round  seed  of  peas,  or  of  maize,  is  one  which 
contains  something  possessing  the  power  of  turning  most  of 
the  reserve-materials  into  starch.  If  the  dominant  factor 
endowed  with  this  power  is  absent,  much  of  the  sugar 
remains  sugar,  and  the  seed  wrinkles  on  ripening.  The 
actual  physiological  processes  involved  are  doubtless  more 
complex  than  this,  but  there  is  no  mistaking  the  essential 
nature  of  the  distinction  between  the  round  and  the  wrinkled 
seed.  So  also  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  an  albino  is  an 
organism  from  which  a  ferment  responsible  for  the  pro- 
duction of  colour  has  been  omitted.  No  great  strain  is  put 
on  this  hypothesis  of  dominance  even  by  the  suggestion 
that  the  production  of  hairs  on  the  leaves  of  a  Stock,  or  of 
the  disposition  to  go  broody  in  a  hen,  may  be  directly 
caused  by  specific  substances,  for  It  would  not  be  difficult  to 
adduce  pathological  parallels  for  the  production  of  bodily 
and  mental  changes  such  as  these  In  cases  where  the  change 
is  plainly  the  work  of  a  specific  poison.  Again  It  is  easy  to 
imagine  that  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  ferment  can  confer 
a  greater  power  of  resistance  to  the  attack  of  a  fungus.  I 
suppose  also  that  the  dominant  whites  met  with  in  some 
animals  and  plants  may  reasonably  be  represented  as 
organisms  possessing  a  substance  which  has  the  power  of 
suppressing  the  development  of  pigment,  whether  by  pre- 
venting its  excretion  or  by  destroying  It  when  formed. 

On  the  other  hand  it  must  be  admitted  that  In  appli- 
cation to  those  examples  in  w^hich  the  dominant  factor 
operates  by  inducing  or  suppressing  the  division  of  a  certain 
organ,  the  analogy  with  ferment-action  is  more  difficult  to 
maintain.  The  double  comb  of  fowls  is  nevertheless  a 
single  comb  made  bifid  by  the  addition  of  a  dominant 
factor.  To  suppose  also  that  the  suppression  of  a  phalanx 
in  the  digits  of  a  brachydactylous  man,  or  the  development 
of  a  rabbit's  fur  in  the  normal  and  not  In  the  Angora  manner 
is  thus  decided  by  a  specific  substance,  is  to  contemplate  a 


268  Nature  of  Segregation  [ch. 

serious  extension  of  the  powers  of  specific  substances  as 
usually  imagined. 

But  disregarding  for  the  present  these  more  obscure 
cases  in  which  meristic  phenomena  play  the  chief  part,  we 
may  draw  from  Mendelian  observations  the  conclusion  that 
in  at  least  a  large  group  of  cases  the  heredity  of  characters 
consists  in  the  transmission  of  the  power  to  produce  some- 
thing with  properties  resembling  those  of  ferments.  It  is 
scarcely  necessary  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  the  ferment 
itself  must  not  be  declared  to  be  the  factor  or  thing  trans- 
mitted, but  rather,  the  power  to  produce  that  ferment,  or 
ferment-like  body. 

NattL7'e  of  Segregation. 

Next  we  have  to  recognize  that  this  antecedent  power 
must  be  of  such  a  nature  that  in  the  cell-divisions  of  gameto- 
genesis  it  can  be  treated  as  a  unit,  being  included  In  one 
daughter-cell  and  excluded  from  the  other  at  some  definite 
cell-division.  As  w^e  have  no  knowledge  as  to  the  actual 
nature  of  the  factor — and  only  a  conjecture  as  to  whether  It 
is  a  material  substance,  or  a  phenomenon  of  arrangement — 
we  are  not  In  a  position  to  hazard  so  much  as  a  guess  re- 
specting the  physical  process  of  segregation.  We  may  be 
fairly  confident  that  segregation  is  not  a  process  of  chemical 
separation.  Its  features  point  rather  to  mechanical  analogies. 
If  some  mental  picture  be  demanded,  I  would  for  the  purpose 
of  Illustration  suggest  a  comparison  with  the  separation  of 
a  fairly  heavy  precipitate  from  a  filtrate  by  decanting.  The 
precipitate  is  to  represent  the  factor,  and  the  filtrate  the 
recessive  product  of  division,  lacking  the  factor.  The 
analogy  Is  probably  quite  erroneous,  and  small  purpose 
would  be  served  by  developing  it  further. 
■  '  Whatever  that  process  may  be,  It  must  be  one  which  is 
applicable  to  an  extraordinary  variety  of  factors.  No  con- 
clusion to  which  genetic  research  has  led  Is  so  surprising 
as  the  fact  that  the  same  system  of  transmission  should  be 
followed  by  characters  which,  by  whatever  test  they  are 
judged,  must  be  supposed  to  be  most  diverse  in  physio- 
logical causation.  Even  if  it  were  fairly  easy  to  conceive 
of  all  the  dominant  characters  of  animals  and  plants  as  due 


XV]  Moment  oj  Segregation  269 

to  the  operation  of  ferments  their  diversity  must  be  anyhow 
very  great,  and  It  seems  strange  that  all  these  multifarious 
potentialities  should  exhibit  gametic  allelomorphism.  Let 
us  take  an  Illustration.  Colour,  as  we  can  prove  In  regard 
to  several  plants  and  as  we  suspect  In  the  case  of  animals, 
Is  due  to  the  meeting  of  two  complementary  factors.  One 
Is  presumably  a  ferment.  Recent  research  strongly  suggests 
that  it  may  be  a  tyrosinase^.  The  other  is  referred  to 
sometimes  as  "  chromogen."  But  whatever  they  are,  the 
two  bodies — and  surely  the  factors  which  produce  them — 
must  be  of  utterly  different  nature,  and  yet  genetically  the 
two  potentialities  are  treated  similarly.  Each  Is  allelo- 
morphlc  to  the  absence  of  such  a  power. 

Similarly  In  regard  to  the  anthocyanin  colours  of 
Antirrhinti7n  Miss  Wheldale  has  given  reasons  for  the 
belief  that  they  are  formed  by  the  meeting  of  a  tannin- 
like  body  with  a  ferment,  perhaps  an  oxydase.  Both  these 
factors,  whatever  be  their  nature,  are  allelomprphic  to  their 
absences. 

How  much  more  astounding  is  it,  that  when  we  pass 
to  qualities  such  as  length  of  stalk,  and  shape  of  flow^er,  the 
shape  of  a  cock's  comb,  or  the  development  of  interlocking 
barbules  on  the  webs  of  its  featherst,  we  still  find  the  same 
rules  in  undeviating  operation ! 

Moment  of  Segregation. 

At  what  particular  cell-division  of  the  many  by  which 
the  germinal  cells  are  brought  to  their  maturity  does  this 
process  of  segregation  happen  ?  The  question  is  of  extreme 
Interest,  but  no  positive  answer  can  yet  be  made.  Natu- 
rally the  common  expectation  we  all  share  is  that  the 
reduction-division  Is  the  critical  moment.  At  that  division 
the  number  of  chromosome-elements,  of  which  the  nucleus 
is  formed,  can  be  seen  to  be  halved.  Up  to  this  point  the 
nucleus  of  each  daughter-cell  seems  to  be  simply  a  repe- 
tition of  the  nuclei  of  the  body  and  may  be  supposed  to 
contain  all  the  elements  which  they  contain.  But  when 
the    number   of  these    elements    Is   halved,    the   germ-cell 

■^  See  F.  M.  Durham,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  1904,  vol.  74,  p.  311. 
t  Distinguishing  them  from  the  loose,  non-cohering  webs  of  the  feathers 
in  the  Silky  breed. 


270  Moment  of  Segregation  [ch. 

begins  to  acquire  Its  own  special  features,  and  we  may 
without  much  difficulty  Imagine  that  if  two  daughter-cells 
are  to  be  differentiated  allelomorphically  from  each  other, 
the  differentiation  will  come  about  at  this  reduction,  or 
melotic  division,  as  it  is  called.  When  however  we  seek  for 
proof,  there  is  as  yet  none  which  Is  quite  convincing.  The 
one  observation  bearing  immediately  on  the  problem  is 
that  to  which  Correns  has  appealed"^.  In  the  maize  we 
know  that  those  F^  seeds  which  have  wrinkled  or  sugary 
endosperms  will  give  rise  to  plants  with  similar  sugary 
seeds.  But  the  seed  of  maize  is  formed  by  a  double  fertiti- 
sation.  It  consists  of  two  parts,  an  embryo,  and  an  endo- 
sperm, and  It  Is  the  sugary  condition  of  the  reserve-material 
in  the  endosperm  which  causes  the  wrinkled  appearance  of 
the  seed.  From  the  fact  that  wrinkled  seeds  always  give 
rise  to  plants  bearing  wrinkled  seeds,  it  is  clear  that  the 
same  elements  have  entered  into  the  composition  of  both 
the  embryo  and  the  endosperm  of  the  same  seed.  But  the 
embryo  is  formed  by  the  union  of  one  nucleus  of  the  egg- 
cell  with  one  from  the  pollen-tube,  and  the  endosperm  is 
similarly  formed  by  the  union  of  the  united  polar  nuclei 
with  another  from  the  pollen-tube.  Hence  we  may  infer 
that  the  two  nuclei  brought  in  from  the  pollen-grain  bear 
similar  allelomorphs,  and  that  all  the  nuclei  of  the  egg- 
cell  must  also  be  similar  in  composition.  Therefore  the 
segregation  of  characters  cannot  in  the  maize  take  place 
after  the  division  by  which  the  pollen-grain  was  formed, 
for  both  nuclei  to  which  It  gives  rise  are  of  the  same 
composition  ;  and  the  same  argument  applies  to  the  egg-cell. 

Chromosomes  as  the  possible  Bearers  of  Factors. 

These  are,  I  believe,  at  present,  the  only  facts  which 
positively  limit  the  inquiry.  It  has  been  pointed  out  by  the 
cytologists  that  the  details  of  the  processes  by  which  nuclear 
reduction  is  accomplished  may  be  readily  construed  as 
effecting  the  operation  of  segregation,  but  while  admitting 
this  as  a  fair  and  even  probable  interpretation,  nothing 
in  my  judgment  yet   compels  us   to   accept  it   as  proved. 

■^  The  same  conclusion  is  strongly  supported  by  the  evidence  from 
Hieracium  (see  p.  247). 


XV]  Chromosomes  and  Heredity  271 

Much  that  is  known  of  chromosomes  seems  inconsistent 
with  the  view  that  they  are  the  sole  effective  instruments 
in  heredity. 

Without  presuming  to  a  definite  opinion  on  this  question, 
I  venture  to  state  what  seem  to  me  formidable  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  this  expectation.  If  the  chromosomes  were 
directly  responsible  as  chief  agents  in  the  production  of 
the  physical  characteristics,  surely  w^e  should  expect  to  find 
some  degree  of  correspondence  between  the  differences 
distinguishing  the  types,  and  the  visible  differences  of 
number  or  shape  distinguishing  the  chromosomes.  So  far 
as  I  can  learn,  no  indication  whatever  of  such  a  corre- 
spondence has  ever  been  found.  Besides  this,  although  no 
very  thorough  investigation  of  the  chromosomes  of  somatic 
structures  has  yet  been  made  on  an  extensive  scale,  I 
believe  that  consistent  cytologlcal  distinctions  between  the 
nuclei  of  the  various  tissues  of  the  same  body  have  not  been 
detected.  If  chromosomes  were  the  chief  governors  of 
structure,  surely  we  should  find  great  differences  between 
the  chromosomes  of  the  various  epithella,  which  differ 
greatly  in  their  structure  and  properties.  As  these  cyto- 
loglcal differences  have  not  been  found  consistently  there, 
the  prospect  of  successfully  tracing  them  among  the  specific 
types  does  not  look  very  hopeful. 

Again,  no  correspondence  between  the  chromosome 
numbers  and  complexity  of  structure  has  ever  been  asserted 
to  exist.  Low  forms  may  have  many  ;  highly  complex  types 
may  have  few. 

Then,  on  the  contrary,  very  closely  allied  types  may 
show  great  differences  in  these  respects.  As  Is  well  known, 
Rosenberg  has  shown  that  one  species  of  Drosei^a  has  20, 
while  another  has  10.  Again,  Miss  Lutz,  and,  independ- 
ently. Gates,  have  found  remarkable  diversities  in  Oenothera, 
especially  that  ^2^^i"  has  28,  while  lata  has  14^.  Obviously 
this  doubling  means  something  definite,  but  It  Is  not  sug- 
gestive of  the  determination  of  specific  difference. 

In  Aphis  Miss  Stevens,  on  the  other  hand,  has  shown 
how  wide  a  diversity  may  be  presented  by  the  chromosomes 
of  forms  so  alike  as  to  have  passed  for  one  species.     These 

*  Important  evidence  as  to  variations  in  chromosome  numbers  has 
been  published  by  R.  R.  Gates,  Botanical  Gazette^  July,  1908. 


272  Bud-Sports  [CH. 

differences  prove  both  too  little  and  too  much.  I  cannot 
but  believe  that  all  this  evidence  points  to  the  conclusion 
that  we  are  about  to  find  among  the  chromosomes  one  more 
illustration  of  the  paradoxical  incidence  of  specific  difference, 
not  the  fundamental  phenomena  on  which  that  difference 
depends.  Among  coleopterists  punctulation  is  sometimes 
a  feature  of  great  systematic  importance.  To  dipterists 
neuration  and  chaetotaxy  sometimes  give  useful  critical 
data.  In  certain  orders  of  Lepidoptera,  the  Hesperidae,  for 
example,  the  structure  of  the  gonapophyses  sharply  dis- 
tinguishes the  species  where  all  outward  tests  fail.  But 
proceeding  farther  w^ith  each  of  these  criteria,  we  are  sure 
to  come  upon  other  groups  where  for  a  long  series  of 
diverse  types  the  critical  feature,  so  important  elsewhere, 
may  show  no  differences,  or,  on  the  contrary,  may  show 
marked  instability. 

There  remains  the  suggestive  fact  that  all  that  has  been 
witnessed  regarding  the  behaviour  of  the  chromosomes  is 
in  fair  harmony  with  the  expectations  which  our  Mendelian 
experience  would  lead  us  to  form  respecting  the  hypothetical 
"  bearers  "  of  varietal  differences^.  On  the  other  hand,  with 
one  striking  exception,  nobody  has  been  able  to  connect 
a  cytological  difference  with  a  character-difference  in  any 
instance.  The  exception,  of  course,  is  the  case  of  the 
accessory  chromosome  which  the  researches,  especially  of 
Wilson  and  Morgan,  have  proved  to  be  definitely  connected 
with  the  development  of  femaleness  (see  p.  188). 

The  Case  of  Bud-sports. 

There  is  another  circumstance  which  must  be  taken 
into  account  in  any  attempt  to  see  the  facts  of  segregation 
in  proper  relation  to  other  biological  phenomena.  This  is 
the  obvious  fact  that  when  a  bud-sport  occurs  on  a  plant, 
the  difference  between  the  sport  and  the  plant  which  pro- 
duced it  may  be  exactly  that  which  in  the  case  of  a  seminal 
variety  is  proved  to  depend  on  allelomorphism.  This  subject 
may  best  be  discussed  in  reference  to  a  practical  illustration. 
All  naturalists  remember  the  passage  in  A^timals  and  Plants 

■'^  The  recent  work  of  Godlewski  gives  however  strong  reason  to  believe 
that  heredity  in  Echini  may  be  governed  by  the  cytoplasm  of  the  egg. 


XV]  Biid-sports  273 

tender  Domestication^  in  which  Darwin  collected  the  evi- 
dence about  the  relation  between  peaches  and  nectarines. 
The  records  proved  abundantly,  (i)  that  the  seeds  of 
peaches  may  come  up  nectarines  ;  (2)  that  conversely  the 
seeds  of  nectarines  may  give  rise  to  peaches ;  (3)  that 
peach-trees  may  by  bud-sports  produce  nectarines,  the  sport 
either  involving  a  part  so  large  that  a  definite  nectarine- 
bearing  branch  is  formed,  or  so  small  that  only  a  segment 
of  a  fruit  is  affected,  part  of  the  fruit  being  peach  and  part 
nectarine  ;  (4)  in  one  instance,  the  (Carclew)  nectarine  is 
said  to  have  produced  a  branch  which  bore  peaches. 

With  the  exception  of  the  last  fact  (4)  the  significance 
of  this  series  of  observations  is  now  clear.  The  nectarine 
is  essentially  a  glabrous  variety  of  the  peach,  and  on  the 
analogy  of  other  cases,  the  hoariness  of  the  peach  is  pre- 
sumably a  dominant  character.  Thus,  when  from  the  seeds 
of  peaches,  nectarines  spring,  we  perceive  that  this  is  the 
ordinary  phenomenon  of  a  recessive  variety  arising  from  a 
dominant  hybrid.  When,  on  the  contrary,  peaches  are 
produced  from  the  seeds  of  nectarines,  the  fact  plainly 
suggests  that  the  nectarine  has  been  pollinated  from  a 
peach.  To  come  next  to  the  cases  of  the  bud-sports,  that 
in  which  nectarines  appear  on  peaches  must  be  interpreted 
as  meaning-  that  in  the  formation  of  that  bud  or  cell  from 
which  the  branch,  or  fruit,  or  part  of  a  fruit,  derived  its 
separate  existence,  the  element  or  factor  for  the  peach- 
character  was  omitted.  Therefore  at  some  cell-division, 
evidently  a  somatic  division,  segregation  of  the  allelomorph 
for  hoariness  must  have  taken  place,  and  we  are  thus  obliged 
to  admit  that  it  is  not  solely  the  reduction-divisions  which 
have  the  power  of  effecting  segregation. 

Case  (4)  remains  unelucidated.  The  record  is  most 
circumstantial,  and  its  truth  can  scarcely  be  called  in  question. 
Nevertheless  it  stands,  so  far  as  I  know,  as  an  isolated 
instance.  Whether  the  case  is,  as  we  might  perhaps  be 
tempted  to  suppose,  one  of  actual,  de  7tovo  origin  of  a 
dominant  feature  ;  or  whether,  as  seems  more  probable, 
this  particular  tree  was  in  reality  a  monstrosity  due  to 
imperfect  segregation  of  that  character  in   the  germ  of  a 

*  Vol.  I.  p.  362. 

B.  H.  18 


274         Heredity  and  Repetition  of  Parts  [ch. 

heterozygous  parent"^,  we  cannot  say  with  any  confidence  ; 
but  in  considering  the  significance  of  the  phenomenon  of 
bud-sporting  that  special  problem  is  of  subordinate  conse- 
quence, for  in  either  event  there  must  have  been  a  process 
of  allelomorphic  segregation  at  some  somatic  division. 

In  our  Sweet  Pea  cultivations  a  phenomenon  precisely 
comparable  occurred  in  two  individuals  of  similar  breeding. 
The  plants  were  purples  of  the  dark  type  with  purple 
wings  (Plate  III,  hg.  7),  and  were  heterozygous  for  the 
blue  factor,  B.  After  a  few  hot  days  they  stopped  flowering. 
Then  wet  weather  succeeded  and  much  secondary  growth 
was  made,  young  flowering  shoots  springing  in  the  axils  of 
the  older  stems.  On  two  individuals  one  of  these  young 
shoots  bore  a  flower  of  the  red,  or  Miss  Hunt  type 
(Plate  III,  fig.  8),  showing  that  the  factor  B  had  been 
omitted  In  one  of  the  cell-divisions  by  which  they  were 
formed. 

The  Differentiation  of  Repeated  Parts  compared 
with  Segregation. 

Such  facts  raise  a  theoretical  question  of  fundamental 
importance.  If  upon  the  same  individual,  parts  may  as  an 
abnormal  occurrence  present  the  same  differentiation  which 
is  known  to  be  characteristic  of  dominant  and  recessive, 
may  not  the  differentiation  no7nnally  existing  between  re- 
peated parts  of  the  same  individual  be  a  phenomenon  of 
segregation  ?  Why,  for  instance,  may  not  the  differentiation 
normally  existing  between  petal  and  leaf,  or  between  the 
appendages  of  arthropods,  or  any  other  meristically  repeated 
parts,  be  due  to  a  segregation  acting  amongst  somatic  parts 
as  amongst  gametes  ?  Evidently,  as  morphologists  have 
often  argued,  the  relationship  between  individuals  Is  com- 
parable to  that  existing  between  repeated  parts.  By  tracing 
the  comparison  in  one  direction  we  reach  the  fact  that 
hereditary  7^esenibla7ice  is  the  same  phenomenon  as  that 
which  we  elsewhere  know  as  syimnetiy :  for  if  a  cell  divides 
into   two  similar   halves,  and   each   half  undergoes  similar 

■^  Comparable,  for  instance,  with  gynandromorphous  insects,  half  male, 
half  female ;  or  with  white  flowers  showing  a  well-defined  patch  of  some 
coloured  variety. 


XV]  Heredity  mid  Repetition  of  Parts         275 

changes  and  developments,  while  remaining  attached  to 
the  other  half,  we  call  the  resemblance  between  the  two 
halves  Symmetry  ;  but  If  the  division  Is  one  by  which  two 
new  Individuals  are  formed,  and  the  two  halves  separate 
and  lead  Independent  lives,  then  we  ascribe  the  resemblance 
between  the  two  individuals  to  heredity.  On  a  previous 
occasion  (11)  I  pointed  out  that  when  the  comparison  is 
followed  in  the  other  direction  it  appears  that  If 

I.     Symmetrical   Repetition  of  Parts  Is  comparable 
with   Heredity, 

then      2.      Differentiation  between  Parts  Is  comparable  with 
Variation. 

That  there  must  be  limits  beyond  which  the  comparison 
fails,  Is  clear  enough,  but  I  do  not  think  they  have  been 
yet  satisfactorily  defined.  The  discovery  of  a  true  delimi- 
tation of  the  properties  and  attributes  of  individuals,  which 
distinguish  them  from  parts,  would  constitute  a  great  advance 
in  biological  theory.  Perhaps  the  nearest  we  can  get  to 
such  a  distinction  Is  a  recognition  of  the  fact  that  ordinary 
somatic  differentiation  is  2/^2/^//^  distributed  in  a  symmetrical 
manner  about  one  or  more  axes,  while  among  gametic 
tissues  such  axes  are  not  tis2tally  perceptible  ;  but  to  both 
statements  there  are  some  notable  exceptions.  Bud-sports, 
however,  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  are  distributed  symmetri- 
cally about  the  axis  of  the  Individual  producing  them,  and 
thus  are  distinguishable  from  ordinary  somatic  differentia- 
tions. Dr  S.  F.  Harmer  in  his  Presidential  Address  to 
Sect.  D  of  the  British  Association  (Dublin,  1908),  describing 
the  various  forms  of  avlcularla"^  found  on  the  same  colony 
of  certain  Polyzoa,  made  the  Interesting  suggestion  that 
there  may  be  an  allelomorphic  relationship  between  these 
parts.  Sometimes  one  special  type  of  avicularia  characterises 
a  species,  sometimes  another  type  ;  while  again  both  types 
may  occur  together  on  the  same  colony.  Now  this  is  a 
case  to  which  such  a  suggestion  is  especially  applicable  ; 
for  the  different  types  of  avicularia  are  not  distributed  in 
a  symmetrical   pattern,   but   apparently  at  random  on   the 

■*  These  structures  are  prehensile  organs  of  various  patterns,  somewhat 
resembhng  minute  crab's  claws  or  tlie  heads  of  birds.  Morphologically 
they  are  regarded  as  much  modified  *'  individuals." 

18—2 


276  Symmetry  [ch. 

colony  just  as  bud-sports  are  on  plants,  and  hence  it  is  by- 
no  means  unlikely  that  the  differences  between  the  avicularia 
may  be  due  to  allelomorphic  segregation. 

Asymmetry  and  Variation, 

Stripped  of  all  that  is  superfluous  and  of  all  that  is 
special  to  particular  cases,  genetics  stand  out  as  the  study 
of  the  process  of  cell-division.  If  we  had  any  real  know- 
ledge of  the  actual  nature  of  the  processes  by  which  a  cell 
divides,  the  rest  would  be  largely  application  and  extension. 
It  is  in  cell-division  that  almost  all  the  phenomena  of 
heredity  and  variation  are  accomplished. 

Heredity  being  a  special  case  of  symmetrical  division, 
genetic  variation  is  the  consequence  of  asymmetrical  division. 
The  cause  of  the  asymm.etry  may  lie  far  back  in  the  history 
of  the  tissue  or  of  the  germs.  The  germ-series  may  for 
instance  be  represented  as 

1.  A 

/  \ 

2.  A  A 

Z'        A        a  A       A 

where  the  division  in  which  the  variant,  a,  first  appears  is 
actually  an  asymmetrical  one ;  or  we  may  imagine  the 
process  occurring  in  such  a  way  that  the  first  appearance  of 
a  is  produced  by  the  division  of  an  A  cell  into  a  and  a 
thus  : 

1.  A 

/\ 

2.  A  A 

/\      /\ 

3.  a         a  A         A 

In  the  latter  case  the  asymmetry  was  introduced  into 
the  series  at  some  division  antecedent  to  that  at  which  the 
a  form  actually  appeared.  The  question  whether  one  of 
these  schemes  is  correct  as  a  representation  of  the  natural 
processes,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other,  is  a  not  unimportant 
one,  but  there  is  no  adequate  ground  for  a  positive  answer 
as  yet. 

In  comparing  the  somatic  differentiations  with  genetic 


XV]  Symmetry  2^^ 

variations  It  may  perhaps  be  found  hereafter  of  use  to  bear 
in  mind  that  just  as  the  divisions  of  germ-cells  are  of  two 
kinds, 

(i)     Symmetrical,  producing  the  resemblance   called 
Heredity, 

(2)    Asymmetrical,    producing   the    difference   called 
Variation, 

so  are  somatic  cell-divisions  recognizably  of  two  kinds.  For 
there  also  we  meet  divisions  by  which  similar  parts  are 
divided  from  each  other,  and  differentiating  divisions  by 
which  parts  with  distinct  characters  and  properties  are 
separated.  It  is  evident  that  when  the  conception  of 
symmetry  is  applied  to  such  phenomena  it  must  be  under- 
stood to  Include  the  case  of  production  of  like  parts  by 
division  which  result  in  the  formation  of  a  successive  series. 

In  this  connection  reference  should  be  made  to  a  work 
of  more  than  ordinary  suggestiveness  lately  published  by 
Jennings  (163).  Speaking  of  the  fission  of  Paramoecium 
which  results  in  the  formation  of  two  individuals  by  a 
transverse  division,  he  truly  says  that  "  it  is  evident  that 
even  in  Protozoa  heredity  is  not  a  mere  result  of  sub- 
division," for  in  the  new  individuals  the  head -end  produces 
— regenerates,  perhaps  we  might  say — a  tail,  and  the  new 
tail-end  growls  a  head. 

That  there  must  be  a  real  difference  between  the 
mechanical  processes  by  which  this  repetition  comes  about, 
and  that  in  which  two  halves  are  formed  as  optical  Images 
Is  clear.  The  latter  is  the  obvious  case  of  real  geometrical 
symmetry.  But  when  two  similar  individuals  are  formed, 
so  that  one  is  placed  in  succession  to  the  other,  this  result 
may  be  described  as  symmetrical  in  so  far  as  the  two  pro- 
ducts are  similar,  but  the  homologous  parts  instead  of  being 
adjacent  to  each  other,  are  arranged  in  altei^nating  series. 

Jennings'  observations  relate  to  a  remarkable  case.  He 
found  a  Paramoecium  with  a  monstrous  outgrowth,  or  spine 
of  protoplasm,  and  as  the  animal  successively  divided,  this 
spine  was  handed  on  to  one  not  both  of  the  products  of 
division.  Obviously  there  is  here  something  which  may  be 
interpreted  as  providing  a  rough  model  of  the  process  ot 


278  Reversion  and  [ch. 

segregation.  The  spine  may  be  taken  as  a  thing  added 
and  "present,"  or  in  our  terms,  a  dominant  character.  In 
each  division  there  is  found  a  dominant  half  which  has  the 
spine,  and  a  recessive  half  without  it.  If  only  we  could 
know  what  would  happen  as  the  result  of  conjugation 
between  two  Paramoecia  possessing  similar  "  spines,"  it  is 
possible  that  the  manner  in  which  segregation  occurs  in  the 
gametogenesis  of  the  Metazoa  would  be  elucidated.  In 
them,  as  mentioned  above  (p.  195),  the  gametes  are  almost 
always  formed  in  sets  oi  four,  and  a  presumption  is  thus 
created  that  the  members  of  each  set  of  four  are  not  all 
equivalent  to  each  other.  If  they  were  equivalent  we  could 
represent  the  set  as  A  AAA,  supposing  the  zygote  which 
produced  them  were  homozygous.  If  the  organism  were 
heterozygous  we  should  then  imagine  the  series  to  be 
AaAa.  But  if  the  differentiation  is  not  by  pairs  but  by 
fours,  the  series  must  be  represented  by  AaA'a'  (or 
AA'aa')  for  the  heterozygote,  and  as  AA'AA'  for  the 
homozygote. 

Reversion  and  Variation. 

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  of  allelomorphism 
that  variation  must  now  be  regarded  in  the  main  as  a 
phenomenon  due  to  the  addition  or  omission  of  one  or  more 
definite  elements.  When,  as  in  the  case  of  the  combs  of 
fowls,  the  types  which  have  obviously  arisen  later  in  the 
evolution  of  the  species,  for  example,  rose,  pea,  and  walnut, 
dominate  over  the  primitive  type,  in  this  case  the  single, 
the  variation  by  which  those  dominant  varieties  came  into 
existence  must  have  consisted  in  the  addition  of  an  element 
(or  in  the  case  of  the  walnut-comb,  two  elements)  to  the 
original  stock  of  the  species.  When,  on  the  contrary,  the 
new  variety  is  recessive,  it  is  clear  that  the  variety  occurs  in 
consequence  of  the  omission  of  an  element.  (The  suggestion 
made  by  de  Vries,  that  the  dominant  is  always  the  phylo- 
genetically  older  form,  has  not  been  substantiated  by  further 
investigation.)  The  problem  of  the  causation  of  variation 
is  thus  to  some  extent  narrowed  down.  The  "cause"  of  a 
variation  is  the  event  which  brings  about  the  addition  or 
omission  of  a  factor. 


XV]  Variation  279 

In  reply  to  the  question  so  often  asked,  Has  modern 
investigation  given  evidence  as  to  the  nature  of  these 
causes?  the  answer  must  still  be,  Almost  nothing.  Signs 
there  are  however  that  the  search  for  such  evidence  is 
beginning  at  last  to  be  not  altogether  unfruitful,  but  the 
detailed  consideration  of  this  part  of  the  subject  must  be 
postponed  to  another  occasion. 

Reversion  occurs  when  the  sum  total  of  the  factors 
returns  to  that  which  it  has  been  in  some  original  type. 
Such  a  return  may  be  brought  about  by  the  omission  of  an 
element  or  elements,  as  when  the  rose-comb  fowl  for  any 
reason  has  a  single-combed  offspring.  Conversely,  the 
return  may  occur  by  the  addition  of  some  missing  element 
needed  to  complete  the  original  type.  As  yet  no  means  are 
known  by  which  the  omission  or  addition  of  elements  can 
be  made  at  will,  except  by  crossing.  Reversion  on  crossing 
is  thus  the  particular  case  in  which  one  or  more  missing 
factors  are  brought  in  by  the  parents  of  the  cross-bred. 
The  most  striking  cases  of  such  reversion  on  crossing  are 
those  in  which  neither  parent  seems  to  the  observer  to 
contain  anything  specially  reminiscent  of  the  original  type, 
and  yet  the  offspring  of  the  cross  are  all  of  that  type.  Such 
cases  are  those  of  the  tw^o  white  Sweet  Peas  which,  though 
each  severally  breeding  quite  true  to  whiteness,  when 
crossed  together  have  a  reversionary  offspring  ;  or  of  the 
two  breeds  of  Pigeon,  which  though  neither  has  the  blue- 
barred  plumage  of  the  Rock  Pigeon,  yet  contain  materials 
from  which  blue-barred  birds  may  be  compounded. 

Not  often  can  we  hope  to  be  able  to  specify  the  comple- 
mentary elements  which  must  meet  each  other  in  order  that 
a  certain  compound  character  may  be  produced.  Neverthe- 
less, by  the  co-operation  of  physiological  chemistry  with 
genetics  there  is  every  hope  that  in  favourable  cases  of  a 
simple  order  actual  demonstrations  of  these  elements  may 
be  carried  out.  Perhaps  the  nearest  approach  to  such  an 
achievement  is  that  made  by  Miss  Wheldale  in  her  experi- 
ments on  Antirrhimivi  (Snapdragon).  Crossing  the  very 
pale  yellow,  known  as  "  Ivory,"  with  a  white  variety,  she 
obtained  the  F^  generation  all  of  the  dull  red  of  common 
Snapdragons  (303)"^.  The  work  of  Overton  and  others  had 
*  F.2  was  of  the  normal  kind  expected  in  such  cases. 


28o  Reversion  mid  [ch. 

indicated,  as  she  points  out,  that  the  red  anthocyan  is 
probably  a  glucoside  formed  by  a  combination  of  tannic 
acid  with  a  sugar.  Now  in  this  case  Miss  Wheldale  found 
that  the  "ivory"  flowers  do  contain  a  glucoside  and  that 
this  body  is  absent  from  the  white  flowers.  The  breeding 
experiment  proves  that  the  white  variety  introduces  a  red- 
dening factor  which  is  absent  from  the  "ivories."  According 
to  her  view  the  contribution  which  the  "ivory"  makes  is 
the  glucoside,  and  the  complementary  contribution  made  by 
the  white  is  an  oxidase  which  acts  upon  the  glucoside  to 
make  anthocyan. 

With  the  development  of  the  inquiry  it  has  become  clear 
that  variation,  in  so  far  as  it  consists  in  the  omission  of 
elementary  factors,  is  the  consequence  of  a  process  of 
"unpacking."  The  white  Sweet  Pea  was  created  in  the 
variation  by  which  one  of  the  colour-factors  was  dropped  out. 
Such  variation  is  not,  as  it  was  formerly  supposed  that  all 
variation  must  be,  a  progress  from  a  lower  degree  of  com- 
plexity to  a  higher,  but  the  converse.  When  from  a  single 
wild  type,  man  succeeds  in  producing  a  multitude  of  new 
varieties,  we  may  speak  of  the  result  as  a  progress  in 
differentiation:  but  we  must  recognize  that  the  term  is  only 
applicable  loosely,  and  that  the  obvious  appearance  of 
increased  complexity  may  in  reality  be  the  outcome  of  a 
process  of  simplification.  The  facts  nevertheless  preclude 
the  suggestion  that  all  variation  even  under  domestica- 
tion is  of  this  nature,  nor  till  experimental  research  has 
developed  far  beyond  its  present  limits,  can  we  make  any 
confident  estimate  whether  it  is  the  one  process  or  the  other 
which  has  played  the  larger  part  in  the  formation  of  the 
diversity  of  living  forms. 

It  is  legitimate  to  conclude  from  what  is  known  of 
reversionary  cases  that  when  reversion  in  characteristics 
other  than  colour  results  from  crossing,  similar  processes 
are  operating.  One  such  instance  was  described  in  con- 
nection with  the  peculiar  properties  of  colour-factors  (p.  133), 
a  reversion  to  the  hoary  leaf  resulting  from  the  cross  of  two 
glabrous  types  of  Stock  {Matthiola).  As  yet  however  the 
only  other  example  of  reversion  in  a  structural  character  Is 
that  furnished  by  the  crosses  between  two  varieties  of  Sweet 
Peas    known    as   Bush  and    Cupid.     The   Cupids   are   the 


XV]  Variation  281 

little  prostrate  plants  shown  in  Fig.  i.  Crossed  with 
ordinary  tall  plants  they  give  a  normal  Mendelian  result, 
the  tall  being  dominant.  The  Bush  Is  a  distinct  type.  It 
is  only  half  or  two-thirds  the  height  of  the  taller,  and  Its 
habit  of  growth  Is  peculiar.  The  stems  are  erect,  thin  and 
wiry,  branching  profusely,  whence  the  description  Bitsh  Is 
derived.  Bush  again  is  an  ordinary  recessive  to  tall.  But 
Mr  Punnett  and  I  found,  a  good  deal  to  our  surprise,  that 
the  cross  Bush  x  Cupid  gives  F^  tail,  i.e.  reversionary 
(Fig.  ^^).  Though  we  cannot  venture  on  any  surmise  as  to 
the  chemical  causation  of  this  phenomenon  it  is  obvious 
that  once  again  the  reversionary  character,  here  the  tallness, 
is  a  compound  character  due  to  the  meeting  of  comple- 
mentary elements.     The  allelomorphs  are 

Dominant.  Recessive. 

1.  Tallness  (7").  Dwarfness  (/). 

2.  Prostrate  habit :  Erect  :  branching  (/). 

non-branching  (/^). 

In  7^0  therefore  a  new  type  occurs,  namely  an  erect  or 
Bush-like  Cupid  (Fig.  38),  and  the  F.,  series  is 

9  Tall  ( TP)  :  3  Bush  ( Tp)  :  3  prostrate  Cupid  (tP)  :  i  erect 

Cupid  (tp). 

The  ''  height "  of  Sweet  Peas  Is  evidently  therefore  a 
compound  character  and  in  part  depends  on  the  existence 
of  a  factor  which  suppresses  or  Inhibits  that  stimulus  which 
otherwise  would  compel  It  to  branch.  A  successful  analysis 
of  the  physiological  processes  concerned  In  this  series  of 
phenomena  would  be  a  significant  addition  to  plant 
physiology. 

The  analysis  of  compound  structural  characters  may 
confidently  be  expected  to  lead  to  the  recognition  of 
numerous  examples  comparable  with  these  two. 

With  the  progress  of  such  analysis  other  examples  will 
certainly  be  encountered  Illustrating  those  curious  Inter- 
relations between  the  factors  spoken  of  under  the  names 
Coupling  and  Spurious  Allelomorphism.  In  the  existence 
of  such  phenomena  we  meet  evidence  that  the  central 
problem  of  genetics  Is  in  part  a  geometrical  one.      Perhaps 


;V/ 


.-^■L.-  .'y/:,v    '^.t 


CH.  XV]  Segregation  and  Species  283 

the  greatest  advance  that  can  be  foreseen  in  this  department 
of  physiology  will  be  made  when  the  nature  of  the  inter- 
action between  the  chemical  and  the  geometrical  phenomena 
of  heredity  is  ascertained. 

Bearing  ox  the  Theory  of  Evolutiox. 

The  consequences  of  these  discoveries  to  the  general 
theorv  of  Evolution  must  be  examined  in  reference  to 
concrete  examples  in  order  that  the  extent  to  which  they 
reach,  and  the  limitations  by  which  they  are  beset,  may 
rightly  be  apprehended.  It  is  only  by  the  detailed  study 
of  actual  cases  of  interrelation  between  kindred  species  that 
the  scope  of  Mendelism  in  this  region  of  inquiry  can  be 
measured  and  illustrated.  I  hope  subsequently  to  publish 
a  separate  volume"^  in  w^hich  this  part  of  the  subject  will 
be  considered.  Two  features  which  emerge  salient  on  such 
a  survey  may  be  named  at  once. 


^x. 


""'Til 


Fig.  38.     The  two  "Cupid"  types  in  Fo  from  Cupid  x  Bush  (Sweet  Peas). 
I.   The  ordinary,  prostrate  Cupid.     II.   The  erect  Cupid. 

I.     Mendelian  Segregation  and  Species. 

First  it  is  certain  that  setrrecration  in  countless  instances 
plays  a  part  in  the  constitution  and  maintenance  of  charac- 
teristics held  by  systematists  to  be  diagnostic  of  species. 
One    has    only   to    glance   over   trays   of  birds'   skins,    the 

*  This  volume  which  is  designed  to  be  in  some  respects  a  continuation 
of  the  present  book  will  be  based  on  lectures  given  as  Silliman  Lecturer  to 
Yale  University  in  1907,  under  the  title  "The  Problems  of  Genetics.' 


284  Segregation  and  Species  [ch. 

portfolios  of  a  herbarium,  or  drawers  of  butterflies  and 
moths  to  discover  abundant  ''species"  which  are  analytical 
varieties  of  others.  The  principles  of  heredity  we  trace  in 
our  experimental  breeding-  are  operating  throughout  the 
natural  world  of  species.  They  may  apply  to  the  inter- 
relations of  allied  forms  which  are  species  in  the  strictest 
acceptance  of  that  term.  Remarkably  clear  and  un- 
controvertible evidence  of  this  fact  has  been  obtained  by 
Dr  Ezra  Brainerd  in  his  studies  of  the  American  Violets. 
The  whole  series  of  observations  is  full  of  sienificant  details 
which  I  must  be  content  to  omit  from  this  summary.  The 
essential  facts  are  as  follows.  Finding  wild  in  nature  plants 
which  from  his  knowledge  of  the  orenus  Viola  he  determined 
as  accidental  hybrids  between  certain  species,  he  removed 
these  plants  to  a  garden  and  kept  them  under  observation. 
They  proved  to  be  very  nearly,  but  not  quite  completely, 
sterile,  thus  manifestino-  one  of  the  attributes  of  crosses 
between  genuine  species  in  the  strictest  sense.  Some  small 
quantity  of  seed  was  however  produced  in  the  cleistogamic 
capsules,  and  therefore  may  be  taken  as  certainly  the  result 
of  self-fertilisation.  This  seed  gave  rise  to  plants  showing 
obvious  segregation  in  regard  to  many  features — the  colour 
of  the  stems,  the  fruits,  and  the  seeds,  and  also,  though  not 
quite  so  palpably,  in  the  shapes  of  the  leaves.  In  some  at 
least  of  these  derivative  plants  there  was — as  Herbert  and 
others  have  found  in  similar  studies  of  the  offspring  of  sterile 
hybrids — some  return  of  fertility.  Such  an  experiment  raises 
the  hope  that  successful  investigation  of  the  nature  even  of 
the  sterility  consequent  on  crossing,  the  most  obscure  of  all 
genetic  phenomena,  may  become  one  of  the  possibilities  of 
Mendelian  research. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  insist  that  plenty  of  the 
characters  which  are  now  known  to  segregate  would  be  far 
more  than  sufficient  to  constitute  specific  differences  in  the 
eyes  of  most  systematists,  were  the  plants  or  animals  in 
question  brought  home  by  collectors.  We  may  even  be 
certain  that  numbers  of  excellent  species  universally  recog- 
nized by  entomologists  or  ornithologists,  for  example,  would 
if  subjected  to  breeding  tests  be  immediately  proved  to  be 
analytical  varieties,  differing  from  each  other  merely  in  the 
presence  or  absence  of  definite  factors. 


XV]  Segregation  and  Species  285 

But  this  is  not  enough.  We  must  eventually  go  further; 
and,  supposing  such  tests  to  be  applicable  on  a  compre- 
hensive scale  to  great  numbers  of  natural  forms,  we  must 
ask  whether  the  result  of  such  an  investigation  will  show 
first  that  certain  kinds  of  differences  segregate  and  that  certain 
other  kinds  do  not  segregate ;  and  secondly  whether  we  shall 
then  recognize  that  it  is  to  the  non-segregating  that  the 
conception  of  species  attaches  with  the  greater  propriety. 
Since  of  the  non-segregating  characters  we  know  as  yet 
almost  nothing,  I  am  loth  to  attempt  an  answer,  but  I 
cannot  imagine  upon  what  evidence  anyone  would  rely 
who  should  maintain  that  the  answer  must  be  affirmative. 
De  Vries  has,  as  it  seems  to  me,  incautiously,  defined  with 
some  strictness  the  differences  between  varietal  and  specific 
distinctions,  declaring  that  it  is  the  property  of  varietal 
characters  alone  to  exhibit  Mendelian  heredity  (295,  &c.). 
Though  I  agree  with  him  in  perceiving  that  genetic  research 
may  ultimately  provide  some  approach  to  a  valid  distinction 
between  species  and  variety,  I  am  reluctant  to  accept  any 
evidence  yet  attained  as  an  adequate  basis  for  so  vast  a 
generalisation.  Of  the  consequences  of  specific  crosses — 
in  the  stricter  sense — little  is  known,  and  no  case  has  been 
fully  explored.  Even  as  to  the  results  of  crosses  between 
i>etites  especes  differing  in  several  characters,  present 
information  is  most  imperfect.  Such  cases  as  that  of  the 
Violets,  mentioned  above,  must  be  thoroughly  investigated 
by  critical  methods;  and  when  a  good  number  of  these 
examples  taken  from  an  ample  range  of  types  have  been 
submitted  to  factorial  analysis  it  will  perhaps  be  possible  to 
come  to  a  more  confident  decision.  But  before  any  decision 
at  all  is  pronounced  or  even  contemplated,  the  laws  which 
govern  the  incidence  of  sterility  must  be  most  carefully 
determined. 

Feeling  thus  the  impossibility  of  now  defining  the 
segregating  from  the  non-segregating,  I  am  unable  to 
follow  de  Vries  in  the  further  step  which  he  has  taken  (299) 
in  assigning  a  definite  physiological  reason  for  the  difference 
between  these  classes.  His  suggestion  is  that  in  Mendelian 
heredity  there  is  a  process,  spoken  of  as  "bisexual,"  in 
which  each  determining  factor  [Anlage)  meets  a  corre- 
sponding opponent;  while  in  the  other,  or  ''unisexual"  case, 


286  Discontimdty  [ch. 

the  factor  In  question  remains  unpaired  in  the  hybrid.  The 
latter  description,  "unisexual,"  is  applied  to  characters  which 
breed  true  in  the  cross-bred.  This  suggestion  is  the  out- 
come of  an  attempt  to  incorporate  the  facts  of  Mendelian 
inheritance  with  the  conclusions  previously  drawn  from  the 
mutations  studied  in  Oenothera.  But  as  knowledge  of 
Mendelian  cases  has  increased,  the  applicability  of  what  is 
here  spoken  of  as  the  "presence  and  absence"  hypothesis 
becomes  more  and  more  clear.  We  now,  in  fact,  feel  fairly 
sure  that  a  heterozygote  is  properly  represented  as  one 
which  contains  an  unpaired  factor.  Hence  the  doubt  may 
be  expressed  whether  if  de  Vries'  terminology  is  to  be 
maintained,   its  application  should  not  be  reversed. 

2.     Discontimiity  in    Variatiojt. 

When  some  years  ago  I  published  a  collection  of  facts 
illustrating  the  phenomenon  of  Variation  in  animals'^,  I 
pointed  out  that  variation  is  frequently  definite,  or  Discon- 
tinuous.  That  conclusion  is  one  which  cannot  fail  to  strike 
an  observer  who  makes  a  study  of  this  part  of  physiology. 
Inasmuch  as  the  discontinuity  of  variation  is  manifested 
again  and  again  in  respect  of  exactly  those  differences 
which  we  are  accustomed  to  recoraize  as  distino-uishino^ 
Specific  forms  from  each  other,  the  further  conclusion 
followed  that  the  diversity  of  species  may  be  regarded  as 
having  come  about  very  largely  by  the  occurrence  of  these 
discontinuous  variations. 

The  materials  then  put  forward  related  almost  entirely 
to  a  restricted  group  of  phenomena  in  animals,  those  which 
are  known  as  meristic,  exemplifying  the  processes  of  change 
in  the  number  of  parts  and  the  relation  of  repeated  parts 
to  each  other.  Had  the  field  of  inquiry  been  widened  by 
the  inclusion  of  variations  in  other  characteristics  of  animals, 
or  in  those  of  plantsf,  a  body  of  evidence  more  clearly 
demonstrating  the  truth  of  this  thesis  could  have  been 
presented.     There  were,  however,  reasons  which  led  to  the 

■^  Materials  for  the  Study  of  Variation^  1894. 

t  A  useful  collection  of  facts  of  this  nature  in  plants  has  been  published 
by  Korschinsky,  under  the  title  "Heterogenesis  und  Evolution,"  Flora^  89, 
1 90 1. 


XV]  Mutation  287 

preference  of  the  one  special  group  of  facts — the  merlstlc — 
as  being-  in  their  nature  more  fundamental  and  homogeneous, 
and  my  object  was  rather  to  map  out  the  ground  than  to 
erect  a  definite  proposition  upon  it.  The  book  was  to  have 
been  followed  by  similar  collections  dealing  with  the  other 
manifestations  of  variation  ;  but  with  the  development  which 
genetics  almost  Immediately  underwent,  it  became  clear  that 
the  method  of  miscellaneous  collection  was  no  longer  the 
most  direct,  and  that  by  experimental  investigation  of  special 
cases  progress  of  a  far  more  valuable  order  was  possible. 

Views  somewhat  similar  to  those  that  I  had  formed  from 
a  general  survey  of  the  facts  of  variation  were  shortly 
afterwards  published  by  de  Vries  In  his  famous  book  Die 
Mtctationstheorie,  1 901-3.  Having  at  command  a  mass  of 
evidence  far  larger  and  more  coherent  than  mine  he  was 
at  last  successful  in  bringing  workers  of  many  schools  to 
give  these  suggestions  a  serious  consideration.  For  the 
first  time  he  pointed  out  the  clear  distinction  between  the 
Impermanent  and  non-transmissible  variations  which  he 
speaks  oi'^'s^fluctuatiojis,  and  the  permanent  and  transmissible 
variations  which  he  calls  mutations.  Of  his  proofs,  the 
most  striking,  to  many  the  most  convincing,  Is  that  provided 
by  his  study  of  Oenothera,  In  which  he  witnessed  the  actual 
occurrence  of  sudden  departures  from  type — not  one  but 
several — by  which  at  one  step  In  descent  distinct  and 
frequently  pure-breeding  types  were  produced.  Whatever 
be  the  true  Interpretation  of  these  particular  observations, 
they  manifestly  provide  examples  of  something  so  like  the 
generation  of  new  species  that  In  any  future  discussion  of 
Evolution  they  cannot  possibly  be  passed  over. 

We  may  be  doubtful  of  the  validity  of  the  superstructure 
which  de  Vries  has  created,  and  yet  in  full  agreement  with 
him  in  recognizing  the  fundamental  truth,  that  there  Is  a 
natural  distinction  between  fiuctuatlonal  variations  and  actual 
genetic  variations  ;  that  the  latter  are  those  alone  by  which 
permanent  evolutionary  change  of  type  can  be  effected  ;  and 
that  commonly,  though,  as  It  seems  to  me,  not  always,  the 
steps  by  which  such  changes  occur  are  so  discontinuous  as 
to  merit  the  name   Mutations. 

It  Is  at  this  point  that  Mendellan  discovery  aids. 
Whereas  formerly,  though  the  fact  of  Discontinuity  was  not 


288  Natural  Selection  [ch. 

doubtful,  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  how  or  when  it  was 
determined.  We  now  see  that  the  discontinuous  variations 
are  in  the  main  the  outward  manifestations  of  the  presence 
or  absence  of  corresponding  MendeHan  factors,  and  we 
recognize  that  the  unity  of  those  factors  is  a  consequence 
of  the  mode  in  which  they  are  treated  by  the  cell-divisions 
of  gametogenesis.  With  the  discovery  of  these  factors 
precise  analytical  treatment  can  at  length  be  applied  to  the 
problem  of  Evolution. 

3.     Mendelism  and  Natter al  Selection, 

Knowledge  of  the  physiology  of  heredity  thus  abolishes 
an  old  difficulty  often  admitted  to  be  an  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  any  affirmation  of  Evolution  by  the  process  of  natural 
variation.  The  notion  that  a  character  once  appearing  in 
an  individual  is  In  danger  of  obliteration  by  the  intercrossing 
of  that  individual  with  others  lacking  that  character  proves 
to  be  unreal ;  because  in  so  far  as  the  character  depends 
on  factors  which  segregate,  no  obliteration  takes  place. 
The  factors  are  permanent  by  virtue  of  their  own  properties, 
and  their  permanence  is  not  affected  by  crossing. 

If  the  acquisition  of  a  new  factor  or  the  loss  of  an  old 
one  is  so  damaging  as  sensibly  to  impair  the  chances  of 
life  of  the  variety  thus  constituted,  that  variety  must  surely 
be  extinguished.  On  the  contrary,  the  addition  of  a  new 
factor  contributing  sensibly  to  the  success  of  its  possessor, 
or  the  omission  of  a  detrimental  element,  will  aid  in  the 
preservation  of  those  which  exhibit  that  variation. 

Mendelism,  though  aiding  us  greatly  in  showing  how 
the  diversity  of  species  and  varieties  may  arise  and  be 
maintained,  provides  no  fresh  clue  to  the  problem  of  Adapta- 
tion ;  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  easier  to  believe  that  a 
definite,  integral  change  in  attributes  can  make  a  per- 
ceptible difference  to  the  prospect  of  success  than  that  an 
indefinite  and  impalpable  change  should  entail  such  conse- 
quences. Definite  variational  changes  are  being  continually 
offered,  each  giving  an  opportunity  to  natural  or  to  artificial 
selection,  and  we  need  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  of  such 
materials  the  diversity  of  nature  has  been  compiled.  If 
anywhere  in  such  a  province  as  evolutionary  science  certainty 


XV]  ■  Natural  Selection  289 

may  be  reached,  It  Is  here.  The  conception  of  Evolution  as 
proceeding  through  the  gradual  transformation  of  masses 
of  individuals  by  the  accumulation  of  impalpable  changes 
is  one  that  the  studv  of  orenetics  shows  Immediatelv  to  be 
false.  Once  for  all,  that  burden  so  gratuitously  undertaken 
in  ignorance  of  genetic  physiology  by  the  evolutionists  of 
the  last  century  may  be  cast  into  oblivion.  For  the  facts 
of  heredity  and  variation  unite  to  prove  that  genetic  varia- 
tion Is  a  phenomenon  of  individuals.  Each  new  character 
Is  formed  in  some  germ-cell  of  some  particular  individual, 
at  some  point  of  time.  More  we  cannot  assert.  That  the 
variations  are  controlled  by  physiological  law,  we  have  now 
experimental  proof;  but  that  this  control  is  guided  ever  so 
little  in  response  to  the  needs  of  Adaptation  there  is  not 
the  smallest  sign.  If  chance  variation  was  an  improbable 
source  of  the  adapted  diversity  which  living  things  exhibit, 
the  Improbability  remains,  undiminished  perhaps,  but  cer- 
tainly not  increased,  by  the  recognition  of  that  control. 

There  is  also  nothing  in  Mendelian  discovery  which 
runs  counter  to  the  cardinal  doctrine  that  species  have 
arisen  "by  means  of  Natural  Selection,  or  the  preservation 
of  favoured  races  In  the  struggle  for  life,"  to  use  the  defini- 
tion of  that  doctrine  inscribed  on  the  title  of  the  Orimi. 
By  the  arbitrament  of  Natural  Selection  all  must  succeed 
or  fail.  Nevertheless  the  result  of  modern  inquiry  has 
unquestionably  been  to  deprive  that  principle  of  those 
supernatural  attributes  with  which  It  has  sometimes  been 
invested.  The  scope  of  Natural  Selection  Is  closely  limited 
by  the  laws  of  variation.  How  precise  and  specific  are 
those  laws  we  are  only  beginning  to  perceive.  In  the  light 
ot  the  new  knowledge  various  plausible,  but  frequently 
unsatisfying,  suggestions  put  forward,  especially  by  Wallace, 
Weismann,  and  their  followers,  as  probable  accounts  of 
evolutionary  progress,  must  be  finally  abandoned.  It 
cannot  In  candour  be  denied  that  there  are  passages  In  the 
works  of  Darwin  which  in  some  measure  give  countenance 
to  these  abuses  of  the  principle  of  Natural  Selection,  but 
I  rest  easy  in  the  certainty  that  had  Mendel's  paper  come 
into  his  hands,  those  passages  would  have  been  Immediately 
revised. 

For  Darwin,  indeed,   Mendelism  would  have  provided 
B.  H.  19 


290  Nahtral  Selection  [ch.  xv 

sound  reasons  for  a  return  to  his  own  earlier  views.  In 
abandoning  his  belief  in  the  importance  of  individual  varia- 
tions, which  previously  he  had  held  in  a  form  not  incompatible 
with  that  now  demonstrated  to  be  right,  he  took  a  step  in  the 
wrong  direction.  The  criticism  before  which  he  then  gave 
way  has  proved  invalid"^.  To  him,  most  of  all  men,  would 
the  knowledge  have  come  as  a  delight,  that  progress,  even 
if  in  a  direction  unexpected  by  himself,  had  been  made 
with  that  problem  the  solubility  of  which  he  was  the  first 
to  make  apparent  to  the  world. 


■^  As  to  this  change  of  opinion  see  Darwin's  letters  to  A.  R.  Wallace 
{Life  and  Letters,  1888,  in.  p.  108). 


CHAPTER   XVI 

PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  OF  MENDELIAN  PRINCIPLES. 

Meaning  of  Pttre-bred — Rogneing — Raising  Novelties — 
A  Pj^actical  Example — Unfixable  Types — Technical 
Methods — Sociological  Application. 

No  one  who  is  acquainted  with  Mendelian  method  will 
doubt  that  by  its  use  practical  breeders  of  animals  and 
plants  may  benefit.  In  so  far  as  they  are  concerned  with 
the  fixation  of  desirable  varieties,  or  with  the  creation  of  new 
types  by  re-combination  of  pre-existing  characters,  their 
operations  may  now  be  greatly  accelerated. 

' '  Pure-bred ' '  and  ' '  Cross-bred, 

But  apart  from  these  obvious  advantages  which  it  may 
confer,  the  new  knowledo-e  of  hereditv  will  react  most 
profoundly  on  the  art  and  practice  of  the  breeder  by 
introducing  a  new  standard  of  precision.  We  at  length 
understand  the  physiological  meaning  of  *' pure-bred"  and 
"  cross-bred."  We  know  that  these  ideas  must  be  applied 
to  the  several  characters  of  the  animal  or  the  plant,  rather 
than  to  the  individual  as  a  whole.  For  the  individual  to 
be  altogether  pure-bred  it  must  be  homozygous  in  all 
respects.  In  current  parlance,  dogs,  for  example,  derived 
from  a  cross  a  few  generations  back  have  been  spoken  of 
as  \  Bulldog,  or  -^  Pointer  blood,  and  so  forth.  Such 
expressions  are  quite  uncritical,  for  they  neglect  the  fact 
that  the  characters  may  be  transmitted  separately,  and  that 
an  animal  may  have  only  ^  of  the  ''  blood  "  of  some  pro- 
genitor, and  yet  be  pure  in  one  or  more  of  his  traits. 

19 — 2 


292  Practical  Hints  [ch. 

Rogueing. 

The  Introduction  of  these  ideas  will  help  much  by  showing 
what  Is  to  be  expected  of  a  pure  variety.  I  may  give  an 
example.  Hitherto,  when  In  growing  seed-crops,  unde- 
sirable "rogues"  recur  continually  through  long  periods  of 
years,  the  fact  has  been  accepted  as  part  of  the  natural 
perversity  of  the  variety.  The  grower  devotes  much  time 
and  expense  In  keeping  the  rogues  down,  but  the  Idea  that 
they  can  be  got  rid  of  altogether  does  not  generally  occur 
to  his  mind.  Nevertheless  In  many  such  cases  Mendellan 
observation  at  once  provides  the  means  of  carrying  out 
this  radical  treatment  with  success.  I  cannot  here  discuss 
the  intricate  question  of  the  reality  and  signification  of  that 
degeneration  of  cultivated  varieties  which  is  believed  to 
occur  generally  and  certainly  occurs  sometimes  when  selec- 
tion is  suspended.  All  that  we  can  insist  on  at  this  stage 
of  the  inquiry  is  the  fact  that  much  of  the  Irregularity  of 
crops  which  passes  for  such  natural  degeneration  Is  readily 
preventible. 

The  rogue-plants  may  be  of  various  kinds,  and  their 
nature  must  be  separately  determined  In  each  case.  For 
example,  they  may  be  recessives  merely,  and  If  so  they  can 
be  eliminated  by  breeding  from  pure  dominant  Individuals, 
according  to  the  system  now  well  understood.  It  is  possible 
also  that  they  may  owe  their  existence — if  the  plants  are 
fertilised  by  insects — to  special  combinations  of  comple- 
mentary characters.  In  that  case,  to  exclude  the  possibility 
of  their  production  must  be  a  more  difficult,  though  not 
necessarily  a  hopeless  task.  But  in  the  light  of  present 
knowledge  one  definite  and  conspicuous  conclusion  has 
been  attained,  that  for  the  appearance  of  each  type  in  a 
crop  there  must  be  some  specific  and  usually  ascertainable 
cause  ;  and  an  aim  of  practical  seed-growers  should  in  future 
be  to  search  carefully  for  such  causes.  When  this  search 
is  made,  the  guess  may  even  be  hazarded  with  some  con- 
fidence that  in  numerous  examples  the  cause  of  impurity  in 
seed-crops  will  often  be  found  to  be  nothing  more  recondite 
than  an  unsuspected  admixture  of  another  variety,  the  seeds 
of  which  are  overlooked  as  apparently  belonging  to  the 
selected   type.      In   a  certain  strain  of  eating  peas  I   have 


XVI]  Practical  Hints  293 

seen  a  case  of  this  kind.  The  true  variety  has  a  wrinkled 
seed.  The  "rogues"  had  round  seed.  Every  year  the 
variety  was  picked  over  by  hand  and  the  round  seed  rejected. 
Nevertheless  a  pretty  constant  proportion  of  the  rogues 
persisted.  Knowing  that  It  was  in  the  highest  degree 
unlikely  that  a  wriftkled po.^,  being  recessive  in  that  respect, 
could  give  off  a  rozmd-s^^d^d  form,  I  examined  the  seed 
with  care  and  found  that  the  seeds  at  the  ends  of  the  pods 
of  the  rogues  w^ere  liable  to  be  shrivelled  so  much  as  to 
pass  for  the  true  wrinkled  type,  and  being  thus  admitted 
into  the  selected  seed,  perpetuated  the  "  rogues."  This  Is 
only  one  of  many  sources  of  error.  Hitherto,  through  the 
prevalence  of  incorrect  views  of  the  nature  of  variation  and 
heredity  It  has  been  thought  more  natural  and  likely  that 
plants  should  throw  rogues  than  that  they  should  not. 
With  the  attainment  of  exact  knowledo-e  we  see  that  the 
opposite  expectation  is  more  probable,  and  in  that  hope  all 
operations  of  this  sort  should  now  be  guided. 

Raising  Novelties, 

When  crossings  between  varieties  are  made,  either  with 
the  definite  purpose  of  producing  a  combination  of  two 
desirable  qualities,  or  in  the  general  expectation  that  some 
novelty  will  turn  up,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  nowadays 
to  Insist  that  the  appearance  and  attributes  of  F^,  the 
first  cross,  give  no  Indication  as  to  the  failure  or  success 
of  the  attempt.  That  outstanding  fact  is  at  length  very 
generally  known  and  appreciated,  with  the  result  that  first 
crosses  are  now  preserved  which  a  few  years  ago  would 
have  been  rejected.  More  Important  Is  It  to  lay  stress 
on  the  necessity  for  sowing  a  really  large  sample  of  the 
seed  from  which  F..  Is  to  be  raised,  for  there  must  be 
enough  to  give  a  chance  of  seeing  the  rarer  combinations. 
Since  by  the  nature  of  the  case  most  of  the  obvious  crosses 
between  the  familiar  varieties  of  cultivated  plants  have  been 
tried  In  horticultural  practice,  the  novelties  are  likely  to  be 
found  more  often  among  these  less  frequent  combinations. 

A  Practical  Example. 

As   a   good  example    of   an  F.^   family  consisting  of  a 
long  series  of  types,  that  derived  from  one  of  the  crosses 


294  Practical  Hints  [ch. 

between  a  white  and  a  coloured  Priimtla  Sinensis  is  figured 
in  Plate  VI.  The  results  of  this  mating  have  for  several 
years  been  studied  by  Mr  R.  P.  Gregory  in  collaboration 
with  me.  Though  the  quantitative  relations  between  the 
types,  and  their  factorial  composition  are  still  not  completely 
worked  out,  the  case  forms  a  good  illustrative  example  of 
the  operation  of  Mendelian  processes.  The  coloured  parent 
is  Sutton's  Crimson  King,  a  well-known  very  dark  red  sort, 
with  red  stigma,  red  spots  round  the  eye  and  full  red  stalks. 
The  white  parent  used  was  Primrose  Queen,  a  stellate  or 
Star  Primula,  with  a  white  flower  and  reddish  stem.  This 
white  type  has  the  large  yellow  eye  spoken  of  in  connection 
with  the  inheritance  of  heterostylism  (p.  70),  and  as  there 
described,  the  style  does  not  reach  above  the  level  of  the 
anthers,  this  being  the  condition  known  as  homostyle. 
Both  types  breed  absolutely  true  to  their  respective 
characters. 

The  plants,  F^,  produced  by  crossing  these  two  types 
are  quite  uniform.  In  habit  they  are  intermediate  between 
the  star  type  and  the  compacter  shape  of  Crimson  King. 
The  flower  shape  is  also  intermediate.  The  petals  are 
whitish,  with  a  slight  tinge  of  magenta,  especially  on  the 
lateral  edges.  When  kept  warm  they  lose  the  colour 
almost  entirely,  but  when  they  are  kept  cool,  the  colour 
increases  somewhat  in  amount. 

By  the  self-fertilisation  of  such  F^  plants  a  very  complex 
F^  series  is  produced.  Plate  VI  gives  a  fair  idea  of  some 
of  the  more  conspicuous  types  which  appear,  though  it  will 
be  understood  that  only  the  colour  and  the  shapes  of  the 
individual  flowers  can  be  represented  there.  In  the  mode 
of  growth,  the  shapes  of  the  inflorescence  and  many  other 
features  there  is  an  equal  diversity,  so  that  an  observer  not 
accustomed  to  the  results  of  crossing  may  well  find  it 
difficult  to  believe  that  this  heterogeneous  assemblage  of 
plants  can  all  be  the  offspring  of  a  single  individual.  A 
systematist  might  make  ten  or  even  twenty  species  out  of 
such  a  family,  were  the  several  types  found  isolated  in 
nature,  and  no  one  could  accuse  him  of  excessive  ''splitting." 
■  The  magenta  colours  are  evidently  due  to  a  factor 
epistatic  to  the  crimson  or  claret-coloured  reds,  and  this 
factor  was  obviously  introduced  by  the  white  parent.      In 


> 

CL 


csi 


05 


00 


CD 


in 


^ 


C/2 

o 

c/5 

4-> 

•  ^- 

.  p-i 

^ 

ci 

> 

'i 

be 

'rt 

"O 

s 

, 

0 

<p 

ta^ 

bJO 

M 

2 

1; 

5 

1 

■(-> 

Oh 

„ 

-Tt- 

(/5 

3 

M 

0 

1— 1 

^ 

'J^ 

»^ 

rd 

c/5 

►^^ 

<u 

K> 

CJ 

Q, 

>. 

>-n 

'd 

r^ 

'"' 

a 

o 

^^ 

•V 

;-i 

5: 

^ 

0 

V3 

"'"' 

,_, 

0 

a 

(/5 

LO 

B 

XI 

_hp 

•4-> 

t/5 

■i-> 

b/D 

-i-> 

■n 

c 

c 

OJ 

.<^ 

"c75 

a 

>-) 

0 

bJO 

"" 

^ 

0 

C« 

^ 

c/2 

•  ^ 

CJ 

a 

^ 

>% 

0 

r^ 

'c 

d 

3 

-13 

.0 

5 

00 

c3 

cx 
0 

c 

r^ 

-^ 

S 

>% 

ro 

'/5 

WU 

-i— > 

^3 

U 

'5 

1) 

2^ 

>_ 

<v 

bb 

^ 

X 

c 

C^ 

> 

S 

^ 

^ 

(/I. 

G 
0 

bJO 

u 

c 

r^ 

0 

1^ 

en 

3 

0 

-!-> 

,i4 

r^ 

;^ 

:- 

•— ^ 

.aj 

<:i 

ri 

<*> 
'4; 

t/5 
■4^ 

0 

a 

CO 

C 

^ 

0 

(U 

■4—' 

<i; 

>. 

bo 

0) 

^ 

03 

B 

> 

<L> 

4-> 

X 

*-> 

^^) 

'rt 

biO 

0 

0 

B 

-4-> 

J 

^    0 

0  J3 

0 

0 

u 

. 

g 

C/5 

06 

Ln 

> 

'C 

cx 

&H 

■»-> 

rT 

fO 

tT 

1— t 

^H 

<u 

1^ 

■M 

vo" 

rC 

XVI]  Practical  Hints  295 

/%  those  whites  which  are  quite  devoid  of  colour,  are  pure 
to  whiteness.  The  crimson-reds  are  pure  to  redness.  The 
magenta  types  may  be  pure  to  magenta,  or  may  throw  the 
hypostatic  reds.  The  darker  colours  are  recessive  to  the 
lighter,  in  the  magenta  classes,  though  the  mutual  relations 
of  the  light  to  the  dark  among  the  reds  are  not  so  certain. 

The  large  eye,  combined  w^ith  a  homostyle  structure,  is 
recessive  to  the  small  or  long-styled  type.  As  mentioned 
(p.  139)  the  dark  blotches  round  the  eye  can  appear  only 
in  those  plants  which  have  coloured  stigmas.  Another 
curious  point  is  to  be  noticed  in  this  respect  :  that  when  the 
dark  blotches  are  developed  in  a  large-eyed  type,  the  blotch 
extends  over  the  whole  area  included  in  the  ''eye."  If  the 
stigma  be  green  the  eye  is  therefore  yellow  (Plate  VI,  fig.  20). 
The  stigma  may  be  coloured,  though  the  eye  is  yellow  ; 
but  if  the  stigma  be  coloured  and  the  factor  for  the  blotches 
is  present,  then  the  appearance  of  the  deep  red  and  deep 
magenta  flowers  figured  in  the  bottom  row  (Plate  VI ^  figs.  19 
and  21)  is  produced.  Such  types  are  exceedingly  distinct, 
and  might  most  naturally  pass  for  different  species.  More- 
over, of  these  singular  varieties  the  red  would  always  breed 
true  in  both  shape  and  colour,  so  that  the  illusion  in  that 
case  would  be  complete.  The  deep  magenta  type  might  also 
be  homozygous  and  breed  true,  but  some  individuals  would 
throw  the  red  variety  also.  All  the  offspring  of  these 
dark-eyed  types  would  of  course  have  the  large  dark  eye. 

As  regards  the  relations  of  the  various  types  all  that 
can  be  positively  asserted  is  that  the  chief  classes  are 
(i)  pure  white,  (2)  tinged  white,  (3)  crimson-reds,  and 
(4)  magenta-reds.  Jhere  is  some  grading  between  the  two 
red  classes,  and  between  the  pure  and  the  tinged  whites. 
The  distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of  red  also  cannot 
be  followed  among  the  tinged  whites.  The  numerical  pro- 
portions are  therefore  not  quite  certain,  but  presumably 
the  various  whites  collectively  are  i  2,  magenta-reds  3,  and 
the  crimson-reds  i. 

In  the  plate  no  attempt  is  made  to  indicate  these  numerical 
proportions  and  the  flowers  there  shown  are  simply  chosen 
as  representing  the  most  distinct  types  which  occur.  The 
polymorphism  of  such  an  /%  family  is  greatly  increased  by 
the   existence   of  extreme   diversity  in   the  shapes  of  the 


296  Practical  Application  [ch. 

umbels,  the  size  of  the  calyx,  of  the  involucre  of  bracts, 
and  many  other  structural  features  the  inheritance  of  which 
has  not  been  studied  in  detail. 

Such  a  series  will  illustrate  the  ordinary  practice  of  the 
horticulturist  who  is  engaged  in  the  production  of  novelties. 
He  crosses  together  two  types  and  picks  out  those  novelties 
which  are  produced  in  /%  by  the  re-combination  of  pre-ex- 
isting factors.  This  has  been  the  method  which  has  led  to 
the  creation  of  nearly  all  our  modern  varieties  of  vegetables 
and  flowers.  From  Mendelian  discovery  the  practical 
breeder  learns  two  lessons,  both  of  importance.  The  first  is 
that  he  must  not  discard  the  F^  generation  merely  because 
it  does  not  give  him  anything  he  wants.  This  generation 
may  be  uniform,  and  indeed  must  always  be  uniform  if  both 
parental  types  were  homozygous  in  all  their  several  factors. 
It  may  also  be  quite  uninteresting  from  the  horticultural 
standpoint,  exhibiting  some  old-fashioned  or  reversionary 
type  which  is  reproduced  because  all  the  factors  which 
constitute  it  happen  to  have  been  brought  together  into 
one  individual.  But  from  the  appearance  and  properties  of 
F^  no  guess  can  be  made  as  to  the  possibilities  of  /%.  A 
vast  amount  of  valuable  material  has  again  and  again  been 
discarded  by  practical  horticulturists  through  ignorance  of 
Mendelian  principles.  The  uninteresting  types  produced 
by  crossing,  though  no  improvement  on  the  old  and  familiar 
varieties  would,  if  their  seed  had  been  saved,  have  given 
abundant  novelties  in  the  next  generation. 

Fixing  the   Type. 

The  second  practical  lesson  is  mor^  important.  If  the 
plant  is  of  a  kind  which  is  habitually  propagated  by  budding 
grafting,  cuttings,  or  other  asexual  mode  of  division,  no 
doubt  the  object  of  the  breeder  is  attained  at  once  with  the 
appearance  of  his  novelty.  All  that  he  has  to  do  is  to 
multiply  it.  But  if,  as  is  generally  the  case  with  vegetables, 
and  very  often  nowadays  with  flowers  also,  he  requires  to 
work  up  a  strain  true  from  seed,  Mendelian  analysis  shows 
him  how  to  accomplish  this  in  the  shortest  time.  He  must 
breed  from  each  individual  separately.  Take  this  case  of 
Primula.  Suppose  he  wishes  to  get  a  pure  strain  of  the 
dark  magenta  {e.g.  Plate  VI,  figs.  9,  15,  21).    If  he  saves  all 


XVI]  Practical  Application  297 

these  together,  some  will  be  impure  and  throw  the  reds 
(Plate  VI,  figs.  7,  13,  19),  and  he  may  go  on  for  some 
years  saving  collectively  from  the  dark  magentas  but  still 
find  a  proportion  of  reds  produced.  The  first  time  he  saves 
from  each  individual  separately  he  will  find  that  S07ne  only 
are  impure  and  others  pure.  Then  by  saving  from  the  pure 
plants,  his  pure  strain  is  immediately  established. 

When  the  desired  combination  has  appeared,  the  readiest 
way  to  perpetuate  it  is  by  self-fertilisation.  But  if,  as 
happens  more  often  than  is  commonly  supposed,  there  is 
any  considerable  degree  of  self-sterility,  the  plant  must  be 
fertilised  by  some  other  individual  of  the  same  type  if  that 
can  be  obtained,  or  by  one  which  is  suspected  of  being  a 
heterozygous  form  containing  the  selected  variety. 

The  advice  to  attend  very  carefully  to  this  matter  of 
self-fertilisation  may  seem  superfluous,  but  I  know  actual 
cases  where  practical  men  have  attempted  for  several  years 
to  fix  a  new  variety  of  a  plant  growing  in  the  open  ground 
by  merely  leaving  the  individuals  uncovered,  exposed  to  the 
visits  of  insects,  though  in  an  adjacent  bed  were  plants  of 
the  original  type  from  which  the  novelty  had  been  derived. 
Year  by  year  the  proportion  of  plants  which  came  true  to 
the  new  variety  continued  very  small,  and  the  fact  was 
accepted  as  a  symptom  of  especial  difficulty  in  fixing  that 
particular  variety.  A  few  yards  of  muslin  arranged  as  a 
cage  over  the  plants  and  a  few  minutes  spent  in  pollinating 
the  covered  flowers  would  have  saved  much  further  trouble, 
and  the  variety  could  have  been  raised  true  or  "fixed"  in 
one  season.  In  reality,  of  course,  the  supposed  "tendency 
to  throw  back  "  to  the  parent  type  was  due  simply  to  the 
pollination  of  the  variety  by  insects  which  had  visited  the 
adjacent  dominants. 

The  animal  breeder,  as  he  cannot  self-fertilise  his  pro- 
ductions, must  follow  a  rather  more  complicated  procedure, 
but  by  the  use  of  Mendelian  methods  he  also  can  work  with 
certainty.  He  must  take  his  birds  or  other  animals  and 
test  them  for  purity  individually,  usually  by  breeding  each 
first  with  a  recessive,  and  then  having  found  a  pure 
individual  of  each  sex,  he  can  by  breeding  these  two  together 
create  material  for  building  up  a  pure  strain. 


298  Practical  Application  [ch. 

Mendelian  discovery  at  once  abolishes  the  old  delusion 
that  time  and  continued  selection  are  needed  in  order  to 
make  a  variety  breed  true  ;  for  the  homozygous  individuals, 
which  are  the  only  ones  that  will  breed  true,  may  appear 
in  i%.  It  is  the  business  of  the  breeder  to  find  such  indi- 
viduals. By  continued  selection  he  may  perhaps  succeed 
ultimatelv,  for  at  each  selection  he  somewhat  increases 
his  chance  of  finding  them,  but  by  following  Mendelian 
method  he  can  go  straight  to  the  desired  end,  obviating 
many  years'  work. 

Unfixable   Types. 

There  are  of  course  certain  types  which  cannot  be  fixed 
at  all,  for  the  reason  that  their  special  character  is  not 
represented  in  their  gametes,  but  is  a  special  consequence 
of  the  meetinp-  of  dissimilar  o-ametes.  In  animals  the  Anda- 
lusian  fowl  is  a  case  in  point. 

The  colours  of  Canaries  are  mostly  of  this  class,  and 
in  order  to  obtain  the  requisite  shades  of  yellow  various 
crosses  between  pure  coloured  varieties  are  made,  scarcely 
any  being  bred  pure  for  exhibition.  The  "  Golden  Duck- 
wing  "  of  Game  fowls  is  another  heterozygous  colour,  and 
can  be  produced  by  crossing  Silver  Duckwing  with  Black- 
red.  The  only  structural  feature  of  this  kind  that  I  can  name 
is  the  crest  of  the  crested  Canaries,  which  is  always  bred 
for  shows  by  mating  cresteds  with  plain-headed  birds (R.E.C., 
19  ;  Davenport,  105).  The  admired  crest  consists  of  long, 
drooping  feathers  radiating  symmetrically  from  the  top  of 
the  head  in  one  of  several  approved  patterns.  This  neatly- 
laid  appearance  is  only  produced  when  the  bird  is  hetero- 
zygous for  the  crest-factor. 

Among  plants  there  are  doubtless  many  examples^.  For 
instance,  among  their  pedigree  strains  of  Primttla  Sinensis 
Messrs  Sutton  have  met  with  two  which  are  clearly  of  this 
nature.  One  is  a  large-flowered  type  known  as  "  Giant 
Lavender,"  having  a  pale  magenta  flower.  This  never 
comes  true  from  seed,  throwing  always  a  number  of  bright 
magenta-reds,  and  a  corresponding  number  of  whites  more 

'*'  Compare  Baur's  case  of  Antirrhinum  (p.  253),  which  like  many  other 
variegated  plants  proved  unfixable  because  it  is  a  heterozygous  type. 


XVI]  Practical  Application  299 

or  less  tinged  with  magenta,  which  evidently  exhibit  the 
two  gametic  elements  that  must  be  combined  in  one  zygote 
in   order  to  produce  the   Lavender. 

In  this  case  the  bright  magenta- reds  immediately  breed 
true  when  self-fertilised.  In  reo-ard  to  the  tino-ed  whites 
there  is  a  complication  which  might  repay  further  study ^. 

There  is  another  colour  in  Prirmda  Sinensis  which 
apparently  cannot  exist  in  a  pure  form.  This  is  a  peculiar 
shade  of  ''crushed  strawberry,"  and  the  two  pure  forms  by 
the  union  of  w^hich  it  is  formed  are  the  deep  crimson  of 
"Crimson  King,"  and  the  white  with  a  bright  pink  eye 
brought  out  by  Messrs  Sutton  under  the  name  "  Duchess." 
By  crossing  these  two  together,  the  peculiar  heterozygous 
colour  can  at  once  be  produced. 

But  though  such  examples  are  not  rare,  they  are  in  a 
minority,  and  speaking  generally  we  may  feel  fairly  con- 
fident that  a  given  type  can  be  made  to  breed  true,  and 
to  perpetuate  its  good  qualities  indefinitely.  A  doubt 
should  perhaps  be  expressed  as  to  the  possibility  of  fixing 
permanently  such  a  property  as  a  high  degree  of  fertility. 
Respecting  the  transmission  of  that  character  and  the  con- 
ditions governing  its  existence  little  is  positively  know^n,  and 
to  discuss  the  various  indications  properly  is  not  possible 
within  present  limits  ;  the  remark  must  suffice  that  the 
evidence  on  the  whole  suggests  that  hopes  of  fixing  per- 
manently   such  a   quality  as    excessive    egg-production    of 

■^  When  such  tinged  whites  are  self-fertihsed,  most  of  them  are  found 
to  breed  true.  Some,  however,  in  addition  to  their  own  type  throw  some 
lavenders,  and  occasionally  even  a  magenta-red.  This  result  has  occurred 
both  at  Messrs  Sutton's  and  also  in  the  sowings  which  Mr  R.  P.  Gregory 
and  I  have  made.  The  fact  is  probably  due  to  imperfect  classification  of 
the  lavenders  and  tinged  whites.  These  shades  of  colour  are  liable  to  vary 
somewhat,  especially  with  temperature,  colder  temperatures  causing  more, 
higher  temperatures  less  colour  in  the  flowers.  From  our  general  experience 
of  Primula  colours  we  mav  feel  assured  that  the  white  of  the  tins;ed  whites 
in  this  case  is  due  to  the  presence  of  some  dominant  inhibiting  factor, 
which  we  may  call  D.  The  factor  for  colour,  C,  is  conmion  to  all  these 
plants.  The  bright  magentas  are  CCdd,  the  lavenders  are  CCDd,  and 
the  tinged  whites  are  CCDD.  In  all  probability  there  is  an  irregularity  in 
the  dominance  of  D,  for  which  we  cannot  at  present  account,  such  that  a 
lavender  may  occasionally  be  so  pale  in  tint  as  to  pass  for  a  tinged  white. 
Further  analysis  would  doubtless  show  that  the  number  of  these  dubious 
plants  is  in  fact  definite,  and  possibly  that  their  abnormal  behaviour  is  due 
to  the  possession  of  some  distinct  element. 


300  Practical  A pplicatiort  [ch. 

fowls  or  excessive  fertility  in  pigs  should  not  be  entertained 
with  great  confidence. 

To  avoid  raising  false  expectations  it  should  also  be 
said  that  many  of  the  small  fancy  points  which  distinguish 
individuals  of  the  same  breed  from  each  other  are  rather  of 
the  nature  of  fluctuations  than  definite  transmissible  at- 
tributes. In  the  reo^ulation  of  these  finer  details  it  is 
improbable  that  heredity  plays  any  very  prominent  or  at 
least  assignable  part.  A  Dutch  rabbit,  for  instance,  having 
the  transverse  division  between  the  coloured  and  the  white 
parts  of  the  trunk  exactly  disposed  as  the  fancier  desires  is 
scarcely  if  at  all  more  likely  to  have  offspring  correctly 
marked  than  an  average  specimen  of  the  same  stram.  In 
such  cases  all  the  fancier  can  do  is  to  use  strains  otherwise 
good.  A  knowledge  of  genetic  physiology  will  only  help 
him  here  in  so  far  as  it  may  warn  him  not  to  pay  ex- 
travagant prices  for  animals  whose  qualities  are  not  genetic 
or  transmissible. 

The  domesticated  animals  and  plants  of  European 
countries  have  already  been  brought  to  such  perfection 
that  in  them  the  scope  for  new  combination  is  reduced. 
Nevertheless  the  line  of  progress  which  Professor  BifTen 
has  inaugurated,  by  combining  the  resistance  to  rust-disease 
of  one  variety  of  wheat,  with  productiveness  and  other 
qualities  derived  from  another  variety,  is  one  which  should 
be  capable  of  indefinite  extension.  It  may  be  that  resistance 
to  disease  is  incompatible  with  some  of  the  valuable  qualities 
of  animals  and  plants,  but  the  attempt  to  produce  these 
combinations  should  be  made  on  the  largest  possible  scale. 
The  search  for  disease-resisting  strains  of  animals  and  plants 
is  hardly  begun. 

In  its  application  to  the  improvement  of  the  domesticated 
animals  and  plants  of  tropical  regions  the  aid  of  Mendelian 
method  may  be  expected  to  be  more  immediate  and  direct. 
Apart  from  the  actual  creation  of  new  types  by  re-combina- 
tion much  can  undoubtedly  be  accomplished,  as  Mr  W.  L. 
Balls  has  indicated  in  the  case  of  the  Egyptian  Cotton  crop, 
by  purification  of  the  cultivated  sorts.  According  to  the 
traditional  practice  the  *' variety"  used  consists  in  reality  of 
an  immense  number  of  distinct  strains  which  under  ordinary 


XVI]  Practical  Applicatioji  301 

conditions  are  continually  being-  crossed  together  by  insect 
agency.  To  purify  such  crops  by  "  rogueing "  is  an  in- 
terminable and  hopeless  task.  The  proper  course  is  to 
identify  the  factors  o-overnino-  the  various  characters,  and 
having  ascertained  their  relations  to  each  other,  to  build  up 
a  desirable  strain  by  individual  selection.  In  former  times 
the  confusion  of  types  in  the  crop  would  have  passed  for 
''  variability."  Mendelian  analysis  shows  that  representation 
of  the  facts  to  be  entirely  mistaken. 

Technical  Methods. 

The  technique  of  Mendelian  experimentation  is  usually 
very  simple.  In  crossing  plants  together  the  anthers  of  the 
plant  to  be  used  as  female  must  of  course  be  picked  out 
with  forceps  before  they  dehisce.  The  other  parts  should 
be  injured  as  little  as  possible.  The  flower  is  then  covered 
to  exclude  insects.  Muslin  bags  may  be  used  for  this 
purpose,  but  they  are  neither  so  convenient  nor  so  safe 
as  rain-proof  bags  made  of  parchment-paper,  w^hich  most 
manufacturing  stationers  can  now  supply  in  any  required 
size.  The  bag  is  put  over  the  flower,  the  mouth  being 
crushed  up  so  as  to  fit  to  the  stem,  and  it  is  fixed  in  place 
with  a  small  bent  piece  of  copper  wire.  If  the  stem  be 
delicate  a  thin  bamboo  stuck  in  the  ground  must  be  also 
held  in  the  copper  clip.  The  use  of  the  clip  obviates 
all  tying  and  untying.  Muslin  bags  are  objectionable  for 
various  reasons,  especially  because  unless  they  are  con- 
tinually readjusted,  flowers  are  sure  to  touch  the  sides  and 
there  is  the  risk  of  fertilisation  by  insects.  Bees  will  often 
visit  flowers  covered  by  muslin,  and  I  suspect  that  nocturnal 
moths  may  do  the  same.  If  it  is  desired  to  give  ventilation, 
holes  may  be  punched  in  the  top  of  the  paper  bags,  above 
the  flowers.  The  flower  from  which  pollen  is  to  be  taken 
must  also  be  covered  before  it  opens,  in  order  to  keep  its 
pollen  from  pollution.  There  are  indications  that  some  of 
the  results  obtained  by  the  older  hybridists  were  confused 
by  neglect  of  this  precaution. 

In  transferring  pollen  the  use  of  brushes  is  to  be 
deprecated,  as  tending  to  the  introduction  of  errors.  The 
best  plan  is  to  pick  out  with  fine  forceps  an  anther  from 


302  .         Practical  Application  [ch. 

the  flower  to  be  used  as  male,  and  with  it  to  touch  the 
stioma  of  the  female  flower.      The  anther  is  then  thrown 

o 

away,  unless  the  supply  of  pollen  is  very  limited.  Absolute 
cleanliness  is  of  course  most  essential.  The  fingers  and 
forceps  should  be  continually  cleaned  with  spirit  in  order  to 
kill  any  pollen-grains  adhering  to  them  before  proceeding 
to  the  next  fertilisation.  In  operating  on  plants  with  much 
pollen  like  Oenothei^a,  Poppies,  &c.,  care  should  be  taken 
to  avoid  including  in  the  bag  leaves  on  which  pollen  has 
already  fallen,  and  many  other  small  precautions  of  this  kind 
will  occur  to  the  experimenter  in  practice.  For  example, 
if  muslin  bags  are  used,  they  should  not  be  laid  on  the 
greenhouse  stage  where  the  plants  have  been  standing,  for 
obviously  the  fallen  pollen  may  adhere  to  them  and  be 
passed  on  to  the  stigmas. 

In  sowing  fine  or  light  seed  in  pans  the  presser  with 
which  the  soil  is  patted  down  must  be  cleaned  as  each  pan 
is  finished.  Otherwise  it  is  liable  to  carry  on  seed  to  the 
next  pan  sown. 

In  recording  results  the  capsule  of  seed  resulting  from  a 
cross  should  have  a  register-number  under  which  it  is  sown. 
Each  plant  which  comes  up  must  then  be  numbered  sepa- 
rately, and  its  number  is  written  as  an  index-number  to  the 
original  number  of  the  capsule.  Thus,  a  pod  of  Emily 
Henderson  Sweet  Pea  %  x  Blanche  Burpee  ^  may,  when 
sown  in  1904,  have  the  number  20.  If  seven  plants  come 
up,  they  are  numbered  20^~'.  In  1905  each  of  these  is 
sown  under  a  fresh  number.  20^  may  for  instance  become 
115,  20'"  becomes  116,  &c.  The  families  115,  116,  &c.,  will 
each  contain  a  great  number  of  individual  plants,  and  each 
of  these  from  which  the  breeder  intends  to  save  seed  must 
then  receive  an  index-number  115^  11 5-,  &c.,  under  which 
its  characters  are  recorded  in  the  register.  In  1906  the 
offspring  of  each  of  these  plants  receives  a  fresh  number  for 
the  year.  The  family  of  115"  may  become  305,  and  so  on. 
Reference  is  thus  made  easy,  and  the  history  of  any  in- 
dividual plant  can  be  rapidly  traced.  The  same  system  can 
of  course  be  easily  modified  so  as  to  adapt  it  to  the  case  of 
animals  where  the  mating  must  be  bi-parental. 


XVI]  Practical  Application  303 

Sociological  Application. 

It  may  be  anticipated  that  a  general  recognition  of 
the  chief  results  of  Mendelian  analysis  will  bring  about  a 
profound  change  in  man's  conceptions  of  his  own  nature 
and  in  his  outlook  on  the  world.  Many  have  in  all  ages 
held  the  belief  that  our  powers  and  characteristics  are 
directly  dependent  on  physical  composition  ;  but  when  it 
becomes  known  that  the  dependence  is  so  close  that  the 
hereditary  descent  of  certain  attributes  can  be  proved  to 
follow  definite  predicable  formulae,  these  ideas  acquire  a 
solidity  they  never  possessed  before,  and  it  is  likely  that 
the  science  of  sociology  will  pass  into  a  new  phase.  The 
evidence  at  our  disposal  already  proves  that  in  many  simple 
cases  of  defects  and  abnormalities  the  descent  is  of  this 
definite  order,  and  it  is  scarcelv  doubtful  that  future  search 
will  reveal  comparable  examples  in  abundance.  As  regards 
more  complex  phenomena  of  human  inheritance,  the  descent 
of  characters  involving  the  coincidence  of  several  factors, 
and  effects  due  to  interference  between  factors,  a  complete 
analysis  may  be  unattainable  ;  but  even  in  some  of  these 
more  obscure  examples  a  close  scrutiny  will  probably  discover 
positive  traces  of  regularity  in  descent  of  such  a  kind  as  to 
indicate  in  them  also  that  the  bodily  or  mental  characteristic 
considered  is  a  consequence  of  definite  factorial  composition. 
It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  appearance  or  non-appearance 
of  a  characteristic  may  be  in  part  decided  by  environmental 
influences.  Opportunity  given  may  decide  that  a  character 
manifests  itself  which  without  opportunity  must  have  lain 
dormant.  The  question  of  opportunity  and  of  the  degree 
to  which  the  conditions  of  life  are  operative  in  controlling 
or  developing  characters  will  some  day  demand  attention, 
but  in  order  to  answer  such  questions  successfully  it  is  the 
first  necessity  that  a  knowledge  of  the  genetic  behaviour  of 
the  factors  should  be  obtained.  They  are  the  fundamental 
elements,  and  the  consequences  of  environmental  inter- 
ferences are  subordinate  to  them.  The  previous  attempts, 
experimental  and  statistical,  to  determine  the  results  of 
changed  conditions  have  led  to  quite  inconclusive  results 
because  no  pains  were  taken  to  ascertain  that  the  material 
subjected  to  these  various  influences  was  genetically  similar. 


304  Practical  Application  [ch. 

In  the  pre-Mendelian  period,  indeed,  such  an  expression 
had  no  definite  meaning.  From  a  knowledge  of  the 
physiology  of  descent  under  uniform  conditions  it  may  be 
possible  to  proceed  to  a  determination  of  the  consequences 
following  a  change  in  those  conditions.  We  cannot  in- 
vestigate both  unknowns  at  once.  In  the  analysis  of  these 
wider  problems  we  must  begin  with  the  more  tractable  of 
the  two,  and  it  has  become  obvious  that  this  is  to  be  found 
in  the  genetic  aspect  of  the  phenomena. 

The  outcome  of  genetic  research  is  to  show  that  human 
society  can,  if  it  so  please,  control  its  composition  more 
easily  than  was  previously  supposed  possible"^.  Whether 
such  control  should  be  exercised,  or  the  form  which  it  is  to 
take,  scarcely  falls  within  the  province  of  this  text-book  to 
discuss.  Nevertheless,  as  many  are  already  becoming  urgent 
in  advocating  the  practical  application  of  genetic  science  to 
human  affairs,  some  few  words  on  that  subject  may  be 
appropriate.  W^hatever  course  civilisations  like  those  of 
Western  Europe  may  be  disposed  to  pursue,  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  before  long  we  shall  find  that  communities 
more  fully  emancipated  from  tradition  will  make  a  practical 
application  of  genetic  principles  to  their  own  population. 

The  power  is  in  their  hand  and  they  will  use  that 
power  like  any  other  with  which  science  can  endow  them. 
The  consequence  of  such  action  will  be  immediate  and 
decisive.      For  this  revolution  we  do  well  to  prepare. 

Interference    may    take   one    or   both    of   two   courses. 

*  Mr  F.  Galton's  long-continued  efforts  have  at  length  been  successful 
in  directing  public  attention  in  some  degree  to  the  overwhelming  im- 
portance of  Eugenics.  Some  of  the  earlier  attempts  in  the  same  direction 
are  worth  remembering.  For  example,  Sir  W.  Lawrence  frequently  adverts 
to  the  subject  in  language  almost  identical  with  that  now  current.  "The 
hereditary  transmission  of  physical  and  moral  qualities,  so  well  understood 
and  familiarly  acted  on  in  the  domestic  animals,  is  equally  true  of  man. 
A  superior  breed  of  human  beings  could  only  be  produced  by  selections 
and  exclusions  similar  to  those  so  successfully  employed  in  rearing  our 
more  valuable  animals.  Yet  in  the  human  species,  where  the  object  is  of 
such  consequence,  the  principle  is  almost  entirely  overlooked.  Hence  all 
the  native  deformities  of  mind  and  body,  which  spring  up  so  plentifully  in 
our  artificial  mode  of  life,  are  handed  down  to  jiosterity,  and  tend,  by  their 
multii)lication  and  extension,  to  degrade  the  race."  (VV.  Lawrence,  Lectures 
on  Fhysiology\  Zoology,  and  the  Natural  History  of  Man,  London,  3rd  Ed., 
1823,  p.  393.     See  also  ibid.  pp.  260  and  389.) 


XVI]  Sociological  Application  305 

Measures  may  be  taken  to  eliminate  strains  regarded  as 
unfit  and  undesirable  elements  In  the  population,  or  to 
encourage  the  persistence  of  elements  regarded  as  desirable. 
From  the  standpoint  of  the  sociologist  these  two  kinds  of 
interference  may  seem  merely  complementary  to  each  other, 
but  In  the  light  of  genetic  physiology  they  are  entirely 
different. 

To  the  naturalist  It  Is  evident  that  while  the  elimination 
of  the  hopelessly  unfit  Is  a  reasonable  and  prudent  policy 
for  society  to  adopt,  any  attempt  to  distinguish  certain 
strains  as  superior,  and  to  give  special  encouragement  to 
them  would  probably  fail  to  accomplish  the  object  proposed, 
and  must  certainly  be  unsafe. 

Comprehensive  discussion  of  these  questions  would  be 
quite  out  of  place  here.  It  must  suffice  to  point  out  that 
the  distinction  is  created  partly  by  the  fact  that,  whereas 
our  experience  of  what  constitutes  the  extremes  of  unfitness 
is  fairly  reliable  and  definite,  we  have  little  to  guide  us  in 
estimating  the  qualities  for  which  society  has  or  may  have 
a  use,  or  the  numerical  proportions  In  which  they  may  be 
required.  But  specially  important  are  the  indications  that 
in  the  extreme  cases,  unfitness  Is  comparatively  definite  in 
its  genetic  causation,  and  can,  not  unfrequently,  be  recognized 
as  due  to  the  presence  of  a  simple  genetic  factor.  There  is 
as  yet  nothing  In  the  descent  of  the  higher  mental  qualities 
to  suggest  that  they  follow  any  simple  system  of  trans- 
mission. It  is  likely  that  both  they,  and  the  more  marked 
developments  of  physical  powers,  result  rather  from  the 
coincidence  of  numerous  factors  than  from  the  possession 
of  any  one  genetic  element. 

Some  serious  physical  and  mental  defects,  almost  certainly 
also  some  morbid  diatheses,  and  some  of  the  forms  of  vice 
and  criminality  could  be  eradicated  If  society  so  determined. 
That  however  is  the  utmost  length  to  which  the  authority 
of  physiological  science  can  In  the  present  state  of  know- 
ledge be  claimed  for  Interference.  More  extensive  schemes 
are  already  being  advocated  by  writers  who  are  neither 
Utopians  nor  visionaries.  Their  proposals  are  directed  in 
the  belief  that  society  is  more  likely  to  accept  a  positive 
plan  for  the  encouragement  of  the  fit  than  negative  inter- 
ference for  the  restraint  of  the  unfit.     Genetic  science,  as  I 

B.  H.  20 


3o6  Sociological  Applicatio7i  [ch.  xvi 

have  said,  gives  no  clear  sanction  to  these  proposals.  It 
may  also  be  doubted  whether  the  guiding  estimate  of  popular 
sentiment  is  well-founded.  Society  has  never  shown  itself 
averse  to  adopt  measures  of  the  most  stringent  and  even 
brutal  kind  for  the  control  of  those  whom  it  regards  as  its 
enemies. 

Genetic  knowledge  must  certainly  lead  to  new  concep- 
tions of  justice,  and  it  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  in 
the  light  of  such  knowledge  public  opinion  will  welcome 
measures  likely  to  do  more  for  the  extinction  of  the  criminal 
and  degenerate  than  has  been  accomplished  by  ages  of  penal 
enactment. 


PART    II 


T.     BIOGRAPHICAL   NOTICE    OF   MENDEL 

2.  TRANSLATION    OF   THE    PAPER    ON   HYBRIDISA- 

TION 

3.  TRANSLATION    OF   THE   PAPER   ON   HIERACIUM 


20 — 2 


GREGOR    MENDEL 

About  tJie  year  1862 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE    OF    MENDEL^. 

Gregor  Johann  Mendel  was  born  on  July  22,  1822, 
at  Helnzendorf  bei  Odrau,  in  the  "  Kuhland "  district  of 
Austrian  Silesia.  His  father  was  a  small  peasant  proprietor, 
being  the  first  of  the  family  to  raise  himself  to  that  degree, 
and  he  held  his  land  by  a  kind  of  socage,  performing 
"Robot"  (agricultural  labour)  for  the  lord. 

The  name  Mendel  suggests  a  Jewish  origin,  but  it  is 
practically  certain  that  the  suggestion  is  incorrect.  The 
family  appears  in  the  Church  Register  of  the  seventeenth 
century — the  earlier  ones  were  burnt  by  the  Hussites — 
usually  under  the  name  Mendel,  whereas  it  was  not  till  the 
reign  of  Joseph  H  (1765-1790)  that  the  Jews  in  Austria 
assumed  definite  surnames.  At  the  time  of  the  Thirty 
Years'  War  Kuhland  was  a  protestant  district,  and  several 
of  Mendel's  ancestors  w^ere  of  that  persuasion.  His  four 
grandparents  were  all  of  the  local  Heinzendorf  stock,  which 
may  be   described  as  a  German   colony   surrounded   by  a 

■^  I  regret  that  the  short  paragraph  which  I  pubHshed  in  1902  respecting 
Mendel's  career  contained  several  inaccuracies.  The  materials  supplied  to 
me  were  meagre  and  in  many  respects  incorrect.  Somewhat  fuller  sources 
of  information  are  before  me  now.  Of  these  the  chief  is  an  annotated 
report  of  the  oration  delivered  by  Mendel's  nephew,  Dr  Alois  Schindler,  in 
July,  1902,  at  the  unveiling  of  a  memorial  tablet  at  Heinzendorf.  Other 
facts  are  to  be  gathered  from  Mendel's  letters  to  Nageli  dated  1 866-1 873 
(Bibliography,  197);  an  article  by  Dr  E.  von  Proskowetz  in  Neue  Freie 
Presse^  24  July,  1902  ;  a  similar  notice  by  Dr  Wiesner  in  the  Wte?ier 
Abendpost^  November,  1901  ;  and  from  a  somewhat  fuller  account  published 
by  Dr  H.  von  litis  in  Tagesbote  aus  Mdhreti,  1906.  I  have  to  thank 
Dr  Janetschek  and  Dr  von  Niessl  for  assistance  given  in  the  course  of 
inquiries  which  I  made  in  Briinn,  and  both  Dr  Ferdinand  Schindler  and  his 
brother,  Dr  Alois  Schindler,  for  letters  giving  many  interesting  particulars 
respecting  their  uncle.  I  understand  that  Dr  von  litis  has  a  fuller  biography 
in  hand.  My  most  serious  misstatement  was  to  the  effect  that  in  his  later 
years  Mendel  devoted  himself  to  the  Ultramontane  Controversy.  This  was 
a  complete  mistake.  The  dispute  in  which  he  engaged  was,  as  is  described 
above,  of  a  totally  different  nature. 


3IO  Biographical  Notice 

Slavonic  population.  It  Is  recorded  of  his  father  that  he  took 
special  Interest  in  fruit-culture,  initiating  his  son  at  an 
early  age  into  the  methods  of  grafting.  Mendel's  maternal 
uncle,  Anton  Schwirtlich,  was  evidently  a  man  of  intellectual 
tastes,  which  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  he  started  private 
classes  for  the  children  of  Heinzendorf  who  could  not  walk 
so  far  as  the  neighbouring  village,  for  in  Heinzendorf  itself 
there  was  at  that  time  no  regular  school.  Mendel  was  thus 
able  to  say  with  some  pride  that  he  came  from  an  educa- 
tional family. 

On  the  death  of  Schwirtlich  a  government-school  was 
established  which  Mendel  attended  as  a  young  boy.  His 
talent  was  noticed  and  encouraged  by  the  master.  At  this 
time  also  two  older  boys  who  had  gone  away  to  the  school 
at  Leipnik  fell  in  with  Mendel  during  their  holidays,  and 
excited  his  ambition,  with  the  result  that  he  asked  his 
parents  to  let  him  study,  and  eventually  he  too  was  sent  to 
Leipnik  at  1 1  years  old,  though  this  involved  considerable 
sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  family.  Here  he  distinguished 
himself  so  much  that  it  was  decided  to  continue  his  educa- 
tion at  the  gymnasium  at  Troppau,  a  course  which  finished 
with  a  year  at  Olmiitz.  The  parental  resources  were 
severely  taxed  by  such  expenses,  and  Mendel  was  only 
enabled  to  complete  his  course  through  the  generosity  of  a 
younger  sister,  who  voluntarily  contributed  a  part  of  her 
dowry  for  this  purpose.  In  after  years  he  repaid  her 
advance  many  times  over,  himself  providing  the  education 
of  her  three  sons,  his  nephews. 

At  Troppau  one  of  the  teachers  was  an  Augustlnlan, 
and  it  is  surmised  that  perhaps  his  description  of  the  scho- 
larly tranquillity  of  the  cloister  may  have  turned  Mendel's 
thoughts  towards  a  monastic  life.  However  that  may  have 
been,  when  his  time  at  the  gymnasium  was  ended  he 
became  a  candidate  for  admission  to  the  Augustlnlan  house 
of  St  Thomas  in  Brunn,  an  institution  generally  spoken 
of  as  the  Konlgskloster.  His  application  was  successful, 
and  he  was  elected  with  a  view  to  his  taking  part  in  the 
educational  work  which  then  devolved  on  the  Institution. 
On  admission  he  took  the  name  of  Gregor  "  in  religion," 
Johann  being  his  baptismal  name.  In  1847  he  was  ordained 
a  priest. 


Biographical  Notice  3 1 1 

At  the  expense  of  the  cloister  he  was  sent  in  1851  to 
the  University  of  Vienna,  where  he  remained  till  1853, 
studying  mathematics,  physics,  and  natural  sciences'^. 
Returning  to  Briinn  he  became  a  teacher,  especially  of 
physics,  in  the  Realschule.  He  appears  to  have  taken 
great  pleasure  in  teaching  and  to  have  been  extraordinarily 
successful  in  interesting  his  pupils  in  their  work.  He 
continued  this  occupation  till  1868,  when  he  was  elected 
Abbot,  or  more  strictly,  Pralat  of  the  Konigskloster. 

The  experiments  which  have  made  his  name  famous 
throughout  the  world  were  carried  on  in  the  large  garden 
of  the  cloister.  From  the  time  of  his  novitiate  he  began 
experimental  work,  introducing  various  plants  into  the 
garden  and  watching  their  behaviour  under  treatment.  He 
was  fond  of  showing  these  cultures  to  his  friends.  Dr  von 
Niessl  relates  how  on  one  occasion  he  was  taken  to  see 
Ficaria  calthaefolia  and  Ficaria  ramtnculoides  (two  forms 
now  regarded  as  varieties  of  RauMuculus  Ficaria)  which 
had  for  some  years  been  cultivated  side  by  side  without 
manifesting  any  noticeable  change.  Mendel  jokingly  said: 
"This  much  I  do  see,  that  nature  cannot  get  on  further 
with  species-making  in  this  way.  There  must  be  something 
more  behind." 

With  the  views  of  Darwin  which  at  that  time  were 
coming  into  prominence  Mendel  did  not  find  himself  in  full 
agreement,  and  he  embarked  on  his  experiments  with  peas, 
which  as  we  know  he  continued  for  eight  years.  The 
results  were  communicated  to  the  Briinn  Society  in  1865 
and  published  In  1866,  but  they  passed  unheeded.  The 
subsequent  paper  on  Hieracium  appeared  in  1869,  meeting 
a  similar  fate. 

During  his  period  of  scientific  work  Mendel,  as  we  now 
know,  was  engaged  on  a  great  variety  of  cognate  researches. 
In  his  letters  to  Nageli  (197)  there  are  allusions  to  some  of 
these  subjects,  but  unhappily  few  statements  of  results. 
His  largest  undertaking  besides  the  work  on  Pistcni  was  an 
investigation  of  the  heredity  of  bees.      He  had   50  hives 

*  To  this  period  belong  two  notes  which  he  pubHshed  in  the  Verh.  zool. 
bot.  Verein,  Wie?i,  on  Scopolia  7?iargaritalis  (1853,  in.  p.  116)  and  Bruchus 
pisi  {ibid.  1854,  iv.  p.  27).  In  these  papers  he  speaks  of  bim^lf^  q,  pupil 
of  Kollar. 


312  Biographical  Notice 

under  observation.  He  collected  queens  of  all  attainable 
races,  European,  Egyptian,  and  American,  and  effected 
numerous  crosses  between  these  races,  though  it  is  known 
that  he  had  many  failures.  Attempts  were  made  to  induce 
the  queens  to  mate  in  his  room,  which  he  netted  in  with 
gauze  for  the  purpose,  but  it  was  too  small  or  too  dark,  and 
these  efforts  were  unsuccessful.  We  would  give  much  to 
know  what  results  he  obtained.  In  view  of  their  genetic 
peculiarities  a  knowledge  of  heredity  in  bees  would  mani- 
festly be  of  great  value.  The  notes  which  he  is  known  to 
have  made  on  these  experiments  cannot  be  found,  and  it  is 
supposed  by  some  that  in  the  depression  which  he  suffered 
before  his  death  they  were  destroyed. 

In  1905  I  had  the  pleasure  of  visiting  the  Konigs- 
kloster,  hoping  that  some  trace  of  the  missing  books  might 
be  discovered.  I  was  most  courteously  received  by  the 
present  Pralat  and  the  brethren  of  the  cloister.  My  thanks 
are  due  in  particular  to  Dr  Janetschek  for  the  assistance  he 
gave  me.  It  is  to  him  that  I  owe  the  photographs  of 
Mendel  given  in  this  volume.  I  saw  the  hives  which  had 
been  used  standing  in  their  places,  but  the  note  books  are 
gone"^.  A  rich  harvest  of  discovery  awaits  those  who  may 
successfully  repeat  the  work. 

With  his  appointment  as  Pralat  his  researches  may  be 
said  to  have  ended.  To  Nageli  he  wTote  that  he  hoped 
that  after  an  interval  his  elevation  might  enable  him  to  find 
better  opportunities  for  study,  but  it  was  not  to  be.  In 
1872  the  Government  passed  a  law  imposing  special  taxes 
on  the  property  of  religious  houses.  This  enactment 
Mendel  conceived  to  be  unjust  and  he  decided  to  resist, 
claiming  that  all  citizens  should  be  equal  in  law,  and  that 
if  these  taxes  were  imposed  on  one  class  of  institution  they 
should  be  imposed  on  all.  He  thus  took  up  a  position  which 
in  Encrland  we  should  call  that  of  a  "  Passive  Resister."  At 
first  several  monasteries  stood  out  with  the  Konigskloster, 
but  gradually  they  conformed,  Mendel  alone  remaining  firm. 
The  quarrel  involved  him  in  protracted  trouble  and  litiga- 
tion.     High  emissaries  are  said  to  have  visited  him  pro- 

*  On  chance  of  finding  something  I  obtained  a  file  of  the  local  bee- 
journal  of  Briinn,  but  beyond  the  fact  that  Mendel  was  a  Vice-President  of 
the  Verein^  whose  organ  it  is,  I  could  discover  in  it  nothing  relating  to  him. 


Biographical  Notice  313 

posing  a  compromise,  and  even  offering  honours  in  case  of 
submission.  Old  friends  and  acquaintances  tried  to  influ- 
ence him,  but  it  was  all  in  vain.  He  attended  neither  to 
cajolement  nor  menace.  The  property  of  the  house  was 
eventually  distrained  upon,  but  he  did  not  give  in.  He 
became  also  involved  in  the  racial  controversies  which  are 
often  rife  in  this  part  of  Austria,  and  it  is  only  too  certain 
that  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  were  passed  in  disappoint- 
ment and  bitterness.  From  being  a  cheerful,  friendly  man 
he  became  suspicious  and  misanthropic.  During  this  period 
he  fell  into  ill-heath,  contracting  a  chronic  nephritis,  of 
which  he  died  January  6,  1884. 

As  to  the  propriety  of  his  action  in  the  great  quarrel 
with  the  Government  I  have  no  means  of  forming  an 
opinion.  It  is  nevertheless  interesting  to  know  that  a  few 
years  after  his  death  the  tax  was  removed  without  debate 
or  dispute. 

For  many  years  he  attended  closely  to  meteorology  and 
published  his  records  annually  in  the  Briinn  AbJiandhmgen, 
He  also  took  a  great  interest  in  sunspots,  making  such 
observations  on  them  as  he  could  by  simple  means'^,  drawing 
them  and  recording  the  frequency  of  their  occurrence.  He 
was  among  those  who  incline  to  the  view  that  there  is  a 
connection  between  the  appearance  of  spots  on  the  sun  and 
meteorological  events  on  the  earth.  His  notes  on  this 
subject  are  also  lost.  He  served  a  term  as  President  of 
the  Naturforscher  Verein  in  Briinn.  That  he  was  credited 
with  good  faculties  for  business  is  shown  by  the  fact  that 
he  was  chosen  to  be  Chairman  of  the  Moravian  Hypo- 
theken-Bank  in  that  city.  He  is  said  also  to  have  attained 
considerable  skill  as  a  chess-player,  and  he  composed  a 
good  many  problems  which  however  were  not  published. 
This  faculty  reappears  in  one  of  his  nephews. 

His  handwriting  is  remarkable  for  its  extreme  neatness, 
every  letter  being  formed  with  meticulous  precision. 

In  Heinzendorf,  his  native  village,  he  is  remembered 
as  having  been  the  organiser  of  a  fire-brigade.  When  he 
eventually  became  famous,  the  erection  of  a  new  fire-station 
was  used  as  an  opportunity  of  commemorating  him,  and  a 
memorial  tablet  was  placed  over  the  building  in  his  honour. 
*  He  used  one  of  Fritsch's  '' brachytelescopes." 


314  Biographical  Notice 

The  types  of  the  great  discoverers  are  most  various. 
To  the  naturahst  the  fact  is  full  of  meaning.  The  wild, 
uncertain,  rapid  flash  of  genius,  the  scattered,  half-focussed 
daylight  of  generalisation,  the  steady,  slowly-perfected  ray 
of  penetrative  analysis,  are  all  lights  in  which  truth  may  be 
seen.  Mendel's  faculty  was  of  the  latter  order.  From  the 
fragmentary  evidence  before  us  we  can  in  all  probability 
form  a  fairly  true  notion  of  the  man,  with  his  clear  head, 
strong  interest  in  practical  affairs,  obstinate  determination, 
and  power  of  pursuing  an  abstract  idea. 

The  total  neglect  of  his  work  is  known  to  have  been  a 
serious  disappointment  to  him,  as  well  it  might.  He  is 
reported  to  have  had  confidence  that  sooner  or  later  it  would 
be  noticed,  and  to  have  been  in  the  habit  of  saying  ''  Meine 
Zeit  wird  schon  kommen  ! "  This  episode  in  the  history  of 
science  is  not  a  very  pleasant  one  to  contemplate.  There 
are  of  course  many  similar  examples,  but  there  must  be  few 
in  which  the  discovery  so  long  neglected  was  at  once  so 
significant,  so  simple,  and  withal  so  easy  to  verify.  The 
scientific  world  may  comfort  itself  with  the  thought  that 
in  this  case  it  sinned  through  inadvertence.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  Nageli^  perhaps  none  of  the  leading  naturalists 
ever  saw  the  paper  on  peas.  We  would  like  to  know 
whether  Mendel  made  any  other  attempt  to  interest  his 
contemporaries  in  his  discovery.  Probably  having  tried 
Nageli  and  failed,   he  gave  up  further  efforts. 

So  far  as  I  have  discovered  there  was,  up  to  1900,  only 
one  reference  to  Mendel's  observations  in  scientific  litera- 
ture t,  namely  that  of  Focke,  Pflanzenjnischlinge,  1881, 
p.  109,  where  it  is  simply  stated  that  Mendel's  numerous 
experiments  onPisum  gave  results  similar  to  those  obtained 
by  Knight,  but  that  he  believed  he  had  found  constant 
numerical  ratios  among  the  types  produced  by  hybridisation. 
In  the  same  work  a  similar  brief  reference  is  made  to  the 
paper  on  Hieracium.  For  these  references  we  may  now 
be  grateful  since  it  was  through  them  that  the  papers  were 
rediscovered. 

The  fact  that  the  Briinn  journal  is  rather  scarce  does 

*  See  p.  54. 

+  The  Hieracium  paper  is  referred  to  by  Peter,  Bugler's  hot.  Jahrb. 
Bde.  V  and  vi,  1884,  but  only  in  its  systematic  bearings. 


Biographical  Notice  315 

not  in  Itself  explain  why  the  work  was  not  noticed.  Such 
a  circumstance  has  seldom  long  delayed  general  recognition. 
The  cause  is  unquestionably  to  be  found  in  that  neglect  of 
the  experimental  study  of  the  problem  of  Species  which 
supervened  on  the  general  acceptance  of  the  Darwinian 
doctrines.  The  problem  of  Species,  as  Kolreuter,  Gartner, 
Naudin,  Wichura,  and  the  other  hybridists  conceived  it, 
attracted  thenceforth  no  workers.  The  question,  It  was 
imagined,  had  been  answered  and  the  debate  ended.  No 
one  felt  much  interest  In  the  matter.  A  host  of  other  lines 
of  work  were  suddenly  opened  up,  and  In  1865  the  more 
original  investigators  naturally  found  those  new  methods  of 
research  more  attractive  than  the  tedious  observations  of 
the  hybridisers,  whose  inquiries  were  supposed,  moreover, 
to  have  led  to  no  definite  result. 

Nevertheless  the  total  neglect  of  such  a  discovery  is  not 
easy  to  account  for.  Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
literature  of  this  branch  of  inquiry  will  know  that  the  French 
Academy  offered  a  prize  in  1861  to  be  awarded  in  1862  on 
the  subject  ''  hhidier  les  Hy brides  vdgdtaitx  au  point  de  vue 
de  lettr  fdconditd  et  de  la  perpdtttit^  de  lettrs  ca7^acteresr 
This  subject  was  doubtless  chosen  with  reference  to  the 
experiments  of  Godron  of  Nancy  and  Naudin,  then  of  Paris. 
Both  these  naturalists  competed,  and  the  accounts  of  the 
work  of  Godron  on  Daticra  and  of  Naudin  on  a  number 
of  species  were  published  in  the  years  1864  and  1865 
respectively.  Both,  especially  the  latter,  are  works  of  high 
consequence  in  the  history  of  the  science  of  heredity.  In 
the  latter  paper  Naudin  clearly  enunciated  what  we  shall 
henceforth  know  as  the  Mendelian  conception  of  the  disso- 
ciation of  characters  of  cross-breds  in  the  formation  of  the 
germ-cells,  though  apparently  he  never  developed  this  con- 
ception. 

In  the  year  1864,  George  Bentham,  then  President  of 
the  LInnean  Society,  took  these  treatises  as  the  subject  of 
his  address  to  the  Anniversary  meeting  on  the  24th  May, 
Naudln's  work  being  known  to  him  from  an  abstract,  the 
full  paper  having  not  yet  appeared.  Referring  to  the 
hypothesis  of  dissociation  which  he  fully  described,  he  said 
that  it  appeared  to  be  new  and  well  supported,  but  required 
much  more  confirmation  before  it  could  be  held  as  proven, 
(y.  Linn.  Soc.  Bot.  viii.  Proc.  p.  xiv.) 


3i6  Biographical  Notice 

In  1865.  the  year  of  Mendel's  communication  to  the 
Briinn  Society,  appeared  Wichura's  famous  treatise  on  his 
experiments  with  Salix  to  which  Mendel  refers.  There  are 
passages  in  this  memoir  which  come  very  near  Mendel's 
principles,  but  it  is  evident  from  the  plan  of  his  experiments 
that  Mendel  had  conceived  the  whole  of  his  ideas  before 
that  date. 

In  1868  appeared  the  first  edition  of  Darwin's  Animals 
and  Plants,  marking  the  very  zenith  of  these  studies,  and 
thenceforth  the  decline  in  the  experimental  investigation 
of  Evolution  and  the  problem  of  Species  has  been  steady. 
With  the  rediscovery  and  confirmation  of  Mendel's  work 
by  de  Vries,  Correns  and  Tschermak  in  1900  a  new  era 
begins. 

That  Mendel's  work,  appearing  as  it  did  at  a  moment 
when  several  naturalists  of  the  first  rank  were  still  occupied 
with  these  problems,  should  have  passed  wholly  unnoticed, 
will  always  remain  inexplicable,  the  more  so  as  the  Briinn 
Society  exchanged  its  publications  with  most  of  the  Acade- 
mies of  Europe,  including  both  the  Royal  and  Linnean 
Societies. 

Naudin's  views  were  well  known  to  Darwin  and  are 
discussed  in  Animals  and  Plants  (ed.  1885,  11.  p.  23);  but, 
put  forward  as  they  were  without  full  proof,  they  could  not 
command  universal  credence.  Darwin  took  the  objection 
that  Naudin's  ideas  were  not  compatible  with  cases  of 
reversion,  though  as  we  now  know,  such  cases  are  perfectly 
consistent  with  the  phenomenon  of  segregation.  Gartner, 
too,  had  adopted  opposite  views  ;  and  Wichura,  working 
with  cases  of  another  order,  had  proved  the  fact  that  some 
hybrids  breed  true.  Consequently  it  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  Darwin  was  sceptical.  Moreover,  the  Mendelian 
idea  of  the  ''  hybrid-character,"  or  heterozygous  form,  was 
unknown  to  him,  a  conception  without  which  the  hypothesis 
of  dissociation  of  characters  is  quite  imperfect. 

Had  Mendel's  work  come  into  the  hands  of  Darwin,  it 
is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  history  of  the  development 
of  evolutionary  philosophy  would  have  been  very  different 
from  that  which  we  have  witnessed. 


GREGOR    MENDEL    AS    PRALAT 

Taken  about  the  year  1880 


EXPERIMENTS    IN    PLANT- 
HYBRIDISATIONS 

By  Gregor  Mendel. 

{Read  at  the  Meetifigs  of  the  Zth  February  and  Zth  March,   1865.) 

Introductory  Remarks. 

Experience  of  artificial  fertilisation,  such  as  is  effected 
with  ornamental  plants  in  order  to  obtain  new  variations 
in  colour,  has  led  to  the  experiments  which  will  here  be 
discussed.  The  striking  regularity  with  which  the  same 
hybrid  forms  always  reappeared  whenever  fertilisation  took 
place  between  the  same  species  induced  further  experiments 
to  be  undertaken,  the  object  of  which  was  to  follow  up  the 
developments  of  the  hybrids  in  their  progeny. 

To  this  object  numerous  careful  observers,  such  as 
Kolreuter,  Gartner,  Herbert,  Lecoq,  Wichura  and  others, 
have  devoted  a  part  of  their  lives  with  inexhaustible  per- 
severance. Gartner  especially,  in  his  work  "  Die  Bastard- 
erzeugung  im  Pflanzenreiche  "  (The  Production  of  Hybrids 
in  the  Vegetable  Kingdom),  has  recorded  very  valuable 
observations  ;  and  quite  recently  Wichura  published  the 
results  of  some  profound  investigations  into  the  hybrids 
of  the  Willow.  That,  so  far,  no  generally  applicable  law 
governing  the  formation  and  development  of  hybrids  has 
been  successfully  formulated  can  hardly  be  wondered  at  by 
anyone  who  is  acquainted  with  the  extent  of  the  task,  and 
can   appreciate   the  difficulties  with  which   experiments   of 

*  [This  translation  was  made  by  the  Royal  Horticultural  Society,  and 
is  reprinted  with  modifications  and  corrections,  by  permission.  The  original 
paper  was  published  in  the  Verh.  naturf.  Ver.  in  Brun?i,  Abhandliingen, 
IV.  1865,  which  appeared  in  1866.] 


3i8  Mendel's  Experiments 

this  class  have  to  contend.  A  final  decision  can  only  be 
arrived  at  when  we  shall  have  before  us  the  results  of 
detailed  experiments  made  on  plants  belonging  to  the  most 
diverse  orders. 

Those  who  survey  the  work  done  in  this  department 
will  arrive  at  the  conviction  that  among  all  the  numerous 
experiments  made,  not  one  has  been  carried  out  to  such  an 
extent  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  possible  to  determine 
the  number  of  different  forms  under  which  the  offspring  of 
hybrids  appear,  or  to  arrange  these  forms  with  certainty 
according  to  their  separate  generations,  or  definitely  to 
ascertain  their  statistical  relations'^. 

It  requires  indeed  some  courage  to  undertake  a  labour 
of  such  far-reaching  extent ;  this  appears,  however,  to  be 
the  only  right  way  by  which  we  can  finally  reach  the  solu- 
tion of  a  question  the  importance  of  which  cannot  be  over- 
estimated in  connection  with  the  history  of  the  evolution 
of  organic  forms. 

The  paper  now  presented  records  the  results  of  such 
a  detailed  experiment.  This  experiment  was  practically 
confined  to  a  small  plant  group,  and  is  now,  after  eight 
years'  pursuit,  concluded  in  all  essentials.  Whether  the 
plan  upon  which  the  separate  experiments  were  conducted 
and  carried  out  was  the  best  suited  to  attain  the  desired 
end  is  left  to  the  friendly  decision  of  the  reader. 


Selection  of  the  Experimental  Plants. 

The  value  and  utility  of  any  experiment  are  determined 
by  the  fitness  of  the  material  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  Is 
used,  and  thus  in  the  case  before  us  it  cannot  be  immaterial 
what  plants  are  subjected  to  experiment  and  in  what  manner 
such  experiments  are  conducted. 

The  selection  of  the  plant  group  which  shall  serve  for 
experiments  of  this  kind  must  be  made  with  all  possible 
care  if  it  be  desired  to  avoid  from  the  outset  every  risk 
of  questionable  results. 

*  [It  is  to  the  clear  conception  of  these  three  primary  necessities 
that  the  whole  success  of  Mendel's  work  is  due.  So  far  as  I  know  this 
conception  was  absolutely  new  in  his  day.] 


in  Hybridisation  319 

The  experimental  plants  must  necessarily — 

1.  Possess  constant  differentiating  characters. 

2.  The  hybrids  of  such  plants  must,  during  the  flower- 
ing period,  be  protected  from  the  Influence  of  all  foreign 
pollen,   or  be  easily  capable  of  such  protection. 

The  hybrids  and  their  offspring  should  suffer  no  marked 
disturbance  in  their  fertility  In  the  successive  generations. 

Accidental  Impregnation  by  foreign  pollen,  If  it  occurred 
during  the  experiments  and  were  not  recognized,  w^ould 
lead  to  entirely  erroneous  conclusions.  Reduced  fertility 
or  entire  sterility  of  certain  forms,  such  as  occurs  In  the 
offspring  of  many  hybrids,  would  render  the  experiments 
very  difficult  or  entirely  frustrate  them.  In  order  to  dis- 
cover the  relations  in  which  the  hybrid  forms  stand  towards 
each  other  and  also  towards  their  progenitors  It  appears  to 
be  necessary  that  all  members  of  the  series  developed  In 
each  successive  generation  should  be,  witJiout  exception, 
subjected  to  observation. 

At  the  very  outset  special  attention  was  devoted  to  the 
Leguminosae  on  account  of  their  peculiar  floral  structure. 
Experiments  which  were  made  with  several  members  of 
this  family  led  to  the  result  that  the  genus  Pisum  was 
found  to  possess  the  necessary  qualifications. 

Some  thoroughly  distinct  forms  of  this  genus  possess 
characters  which  are  constant,  and  easily  and  certainly 
recognizable,  and  when  their  hybrids  are  mutually  crossed 
they  yield  perfectly  fertile  progeny.  Furthermore,  a  dis- 
turbance through  foreign  pollen  cannot  easily  occur,  since 
the  fertilising  organs  are  closely  packed  Inside  the  keel 
and  the  anther  bursts  within  the  bud,  so  that  the  stigma 
becomes  covered  with  pollen  even  before  the  flower  opens. 
This  circumstance  is  of  especial  Importance.  As  additional 
advantages  worth  mentioning,  there  may  be  cited  the  easy 
culture  of  these  plants  In  the  open  ground  and  In  pots, 
and  also  their  relatively  short  period  of  growth.  Artificial 
fertilisation  is  certainly  a  somewhat  elaborate  process,  but 
nearly  always  succeeds.  For  this  purpose  the  bud  Is 
opened  before  it  is  perfectly  developed,  the  keel  is  removed, 
and  each  stamen  carefully  extracted  by  means  of  forceps, 
after  which  the  stigma  can  at  once  be  dusted  over  with 
the  foreign  pollen. 


320  Mender s  Experiments 

In  all,  thirty-four  more  or  less  distinct  varieties  of  Peas 
were  obtained  from  several  seedsmen  and  subjected  to  a 
two  years'  trial.  In  the  case  of  one  variety  there  were 
noticed,  among  a  larger  number  of  plants  all  alike,  a  few 
forms  which  were  markedly  different.  These,  however, 
did  not  vary  in  the  following  year,  and  agreed  entirely 
with  another  variety  obtained  from  the  same  seedsman  ; 
the  seeds  were  therefore  doubtless  merely  accidentally 
mixed.  All  the  other  varieties  yielded  perfectly  constant 
and  similar  offspring  ;  at  any  rate,  no  essential  difference 
was  observed  during  two  trial  years.  For  fertilisation 
twenty-two  of  these  were  selected  and  cultivated  during 
the  whole  period  of  the  experiments.  They  remained 
constant  without  any  exception. 

Their  systematic  classification  is  difficult  and  uncertain. 
If  we  adopt  the  strictest  definition  of  a  species,  according 
to  which  only  those  individuals  belong  to  a  species  which 
under  precisely  the  same  circumstances  display  precisely 
similar  characters,  no  two  of  these  varieties  could  be  re- 
ferred to  one  species.  According  to  the  opinion  of  experts, 
however,  the  majority  belong  to  the  species  Pistun  sativum  ; 
while  the  rest  are  regarded  and  classed,  some  as  sub-species 
of  P.  sativM7n,  and  some  as  independent  species,  such  as 
P.  quad7^atum,  P.  saccharatum,  and  P.  umbeilatum.  The 
positions,  however,  which  may  be  assigned  to  them  in  a 
classificatory  system  are  quite  immaterial  for  the  purposes 
of  the  experiments  in  question.  It  has  so  far  been  found 
to  be  just  as  impossible  to  draw  a  sharp  line  between  the 
hybrids  of  species  and  varieties  as  between  species  and 
varieties  themselves. 


Division  and  Arrangement  of  the  Experiments. 

If  two  plants  which  differ  constantly  in  one  or  several 
characters  be  crossed,  numerous  experiments  have  demon- 
strated that  the  common  characters  are  transmitted  un- 
changed to  the  hybrids  and  their  progeny  ;  but  each  pair  of 
differentiating  characters,  on  the  other  hand,  unite  in  the 
hybrid  to  form  a  new  character,  which  in  the  progeny  of  the 
hybrid  is  usually  variable.  The  object  of  the  experiment 
was  to  observe  these  variations  in  the  case  of  each  pair  of 


in  Hybridisation  321 

differentiating  characters,  and  to  deduce  the  law  according 
to  which  they  appear  in  the  successive  generations.  The 
experiment  resolves  itself  therefore  into  just  as  many 
separate  experiments  as  there  are  constantly  differentiat- 
ing characters  presented  in  the  experimental  plants. 

The  various  forms  of  Peas  selected  for  crossing  showed 
differences  in  the  length  and  colour  of  the  stem  ;  in  the 
size  and  form  of  the  leaves  ;  in  the  position,  colour,  and 
size  of  the  flowers  ;  in  the  length  of  the  flower  stalk  ;  in  the 
colour,  form,  and  size  of  the  pods  ;  in  the  form  and  size  of 
the  seeds  ;  and  in  the  colour  of  the  seed-coats  and  of  the 
albumen  [cotyledons].  Some  of  the  characters  noted  do 
not  permit  of  a  sharp  and  certain  separation,  since  the 
difference  is  of  a  "more  or  less"  nature,  which  is  often 
difficult  to  define.  Such  characters  could  not  be  utilised 
for  the  separate  experiments  ;  these  could  only  be  applied 
to  characters  which  stand  out  clearly  and  definitely  in  the 
plants.  Lastly,  the  result  must  show  whether  they,  in 
their  entirety,  observe  a  regular  behaviour  in  their  hybrid 
unions,  and  whether  from  these  facts  any  conclusion  can 
be  come  to  regarding  those  characters  which  possess  a 
subordinate  significance  in  the  type. 

The  characters  which  were  selected  for  experiment 
relate  : 

1.  To  the  difference  in  tJie  form  of  the  ripe  seeds. 
These  are  either  round  or  roundish,  the  depressions,  if  any, 
occur  on  the  surface,  being  always  only  shallow  ;  or  they  are 
irregularly  angular  and  deeply  WTinkled  (/^.  quadratztin), 

2.  To  the  difference  in  the  colour  of  the  seed  albu7ne7i 
(endosperm)^.  The  albumen  of  the  ripe  seeds  is  either 
pale  yellow,  bright  yellow  and  orange  coloured,  or  it  pos- 
sesses a  more  or  less  intense  orreen  tint.  This  difference 
of  colour  is  easily  seen  in  the  seeds  as  [  =  if]  their  coats 
are  transparent. 

3.  To  \he  difference  in  the  colour  of  the  seed-coat. 
This  is  either  white,  with  which  character  white  flowers 
are  constantly  correlated  ;  or  it  is  grey,  grey-brown,  leather- 
brown,  with  or  without  violet  spotting,  in  which  case  the 
colour  of  the  standards  is  violet,  that  of  the  wings  purple, 

*  [xMendel  uses  the  terms  "albumen"  and  "endosperm"  somewhat 
loosely  to  denote  the  cotyledons,  containing  food-material,  within  the  seed.] 

B.   H.  21 


322  MendePs  Experiments 

and  the  stem  In  the  axils  of  the  leaves  is  of  a  reddish  tint. 
The  grey  seed-coats  become  dark  brown  in  boiling  water. 

4.  To  the  difference  in  the  form  of  the  ripe  pods. 
These  are  either  simply  inflated,  not  contracted  in  places  ; 
or  they  are  deeply  constricted  between  the  seeds  and  more 
or  less  wrinkled  {P.  sacchai^atiim). 

5.  To  the  difference  in  the  colour  of  the  tinripe  pods. 
They  are  either  light  to  dark  green,  or  vividly  yellow,  in 
which  colouring  the  stalks,  leaf-veins,  and  calyx  participate '^. 

6.  To  the  diffe7'ence  in  the  position  of  the  flowers. 
They  are  either  axial,  that  is,  distributed  along  the  main 
stem  ;  or  they  are  terminal,  that  is,  bunched  at  the  top  of 
the  stem  and  arranged  almost  in  a  false  umbel ;  in  this 
case  the  upper  part  of  the  stem  is  more  or  less  widened  in 
section  [P.  nmbellattmt)\. 

7.  To  the  difference  in  the  length  of  the  stem.  The 
length  of  the  stem;];  is  very  various  in  some  forms  ;  it  is, 
however,  a  constant  character  for  each,  in  so  far  that 
healthy  plants,  grown  in  the  same  soil,  are  only  subject 
to  unimportant  variations  in  this  character. 

In  experiments  with  this  character,  in  order  to  be  able 
to  discriminate  with  certainty,  the  long  axis  of  6  to  7  ft.  was 
always  crossed  with  the  short  one  of  f  ft.  to  i^  ft. 

Each  two  of  the  differentiating  characters  enumerated 
above  were  united  by  cross-fertilisation.      There  were  made 

for  the 

I  St  trial  60  fertilisations  on   15  plants. 
2nd    „     58  ,,  „    10       ,, 

Sfd  „  35  n  »)  J:o  '» 

4th  „  40  ,,  „  10  „ 

5th  „  23  ,,  ,,  5  „ 

6th  ,,  34  ,,  ,,  10  „ 

7th  „  37  „  .»  10  j» 

*  One  species  possesses  a  beautifully  brownish-red  coloured  pod, 
which  when  ripening  turns  to  violet  and  blue.  Trials  with  this  character 
were  only  begun  last  year.  [Of  these  further  experimen-ts  it  seems  no 
account  was  published.     Correns  has  since  worked  with  such  a  variety.] 

t  [This  is  often  called  the  Mummy  Pea.  It  shows  slight  fasciation. 
The  form  I  know  has  white  standard  and  salmon-red  wings.] 

+  [In  my  account  of  these  experiments  {R.B.S.  Journal,  vol.  xxv. 
p.  54)  I  misunderstood  this  paragraph  and  took  "axis"  to  mean  \\\q  floral 
axis,  instead  of  the  main  axis  of  the  plant.  The  unit  of  measurement, 
being  indicated  in  the  original  by  a  dash  ( ' ),  I  carelessly  took  to  have 
been  an  iiich,  but  the  translation  here  given  is  evidently  correct.] 


in  Hybridisation  323 

From  a  larger  number  of  plants  of  the  same  variety  only 
the  most  vigorous  were  chosen  for  fertilisation.  Weakly 
plants  always  afford  uncertain  results,  because  even  In  the 
first  generation  of  hybrids,  and  still  more  so  in  the  sub- 
sequent ones,  many  of  the  offspring  either  entirely  fail  to 
flower  or  only  form  a  few  and  inferior  seeds. 

Furthermore,  in  all  the  experiments  reciprocal  crossings 
were  effected  in  such  a  way  that  each  of  the  two  varieties 
which  in  one  set  of  fertilisations  served  as  seed-bearer  in 
the  other  set  was  used  as  the  pollen  plant. 

The  plants  were  grown  in  garden  beds,  a  few  also 
in  pots,  and  were  maintained  in  their  naturally  upright 
position  by  means  of  sticks,  branches  of  trees,  and  strings 
stretched  between.  For  each  experiment  a  number  of  pot 
plants  were  placed  during  the  blooming  period  in  a  green- 
house, to  serve  as  control  plants  for  the  main  experiment 
in  the  open  as  regards  possible  disturbance  by  Insects. 
Among  the  insects^  which  visit  Peas  the  beetle  Bi^itchits 
pisi  might  be  detrimental  to  the  experiments  should  It 
appear  in  numbers.  The  female  of  this  species  Is  known 
to  lay  the  eggs  in  the  flower,  and  in  so  doing  opens  the 
keel  ;  upon  the  tarsi  of  one  specimen,  which  was  caught  in 
a  flower,  some  pollen  grains  could  clearly  be  seen  under  a 
lens.  Mention  must  also  be  made  of  a  circumstance  which 
possibly  might  lead  to  the  introduction  of  foreign  pollen. 
It  occurs,  for  Instance,  in  some  rare  cases  that  certain  parts 
of  an  otherwise  quite  normally  developed  flower  wither, 
resulting  in  a  partial  exposure  of  the  fertilising  organs.  A 
defective  development  of  the  keel  has  also  been  observed, 
owing  to  which  the  stigma  and  anthers  remained  partially 
uncovered^.  It  also  sometimes  happens  that  the  pollen 
does  not  reach  full  perfection.  In  this  event  there  occurs 
a  gradual  lengthening  of  the  pistil  during  the  blooming 
period,  until  the  stigmatic  tip  protrudes  at  the  point  of  the 
keel.  This  remarkable  appearance  has  also  been  observed 
in  hybrids  of  Phaseohis  and  Lathyrits. 

The   risk   of   false   impregnation   by  foreign   pollen    is, 

*  [It  is  somewhat  surprising  that  no  mention  is  made  of  Thrips,  which 
swarm  in  Pea  flowers.  I  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  this  is  a  real 
source  of  error  and  I  see  Laxton  held  the  same  opinion.] 

t  [This  also  happens  in  Sweet  Peas.] 

21 — 2 


324  Menders  Experiments 

however,  a  very  slight  one  with  Pistim,  and  is  quite 
incapable  of  disturbing  the  general  result.  Among  more 
than  10,000  plants  which  were  carefully  examined  there 
were  only  a  very  few  cases  where  an  indubitable  false 
impregnation  had  occurred.  Since  in  the  greenhouse  such 
a  case  was  never  remarked,  it  may  well  be  supposed  that 
Bruchus  pisi,  and  possibly  also  the  described  abnormalities 
in  the  floral  structure,  were  to  blame. 


[T^J  The  Forms  of  the  Hybrids^. 

Experiments  which  in  previous  years  were  made  with 
ornamental  plants  have  already  afforded  evidence  that  the 
hybrids,  as  a  rule,  are  not  exactly  intermediate  between 
the  parental  species.  With  some  of  the  more  striking 
characters,  those,  for  instance,  which  relate  to  the  form 
and  size  of  the  leaves,  the  pubescence  of  the  several  parts, 
&c.,  the  intermediate,  indeed,  is  nearly  always  to  be  seen  ; 
in  other  cases,  however,  one  of  the  two  parental  characters 
is  so  preponderant  that  it  is  difficult,  or  quite  impossible, 
to  detect  the  other  in  the  hybrid. 

This  is  precisely  the  case  with  the  Pea  hybrids.  In 
the  case  of  each  of  the  seven  crosses  the  hybrid-character 
resembles  f  that  of  one  of  the  parental  forms  so  closely  that 
the  other  either  escapes  observation  completely  or  cannot 
be  detected  with  certainty.  This  circumstance  is  of  great 
importance  in  the  determination  and  classification  of  the 
forms  under  which  the  oft'spring  of  the  hybrids  appear. 
Henceforth  in  this  paper  those  characters  which  are  trans- 
mitted entire,  or  almost  unchanged  in  the  hybridisation, 
and  therefore  in  themselves  constitute  the  characters  of 
the  hybrid,  are  termed  the  dominant,  and  those  which 
become  latent  in  the  process  recessive.  The  expression 
"recessive"  has  been  chosen  because  the  characters  thereby 
designated  withdraw  or  entirely  disappear  in  the  hybrids, 

*  [Mendel  throughout  speaks  of  his  cross-bred  Peas  as  "  hybrids," 
a  term  which  many  restrict  to  the  offspring  of  two  distinct  species.  He,  as 
he  explains,  held  ihis  to  be  only  a  question  of  degree.] 

t  [Note  that  Mendel,  with  true  penetration,  avoids  speaking  of  the 
hybrid-character  as  "transmitted"  by  either  parent,  thus  escaping  the  error 
pervading  the  older  views  of  heredity.] 


in  Hybridisation  325 

but  nevertheless  reappear  unchanged  in  their  progeny,  as 
will  be  demonstrated  later  on. 

It  was  furthermore  shown  by  the  whole  of  the  experi- 
ments that  it  is  perfectly  immaterial  w^hether  the  dominant 
character  belong  to  the  seed-bearer  or  to  the  pollen-parent ; 
the  form  of  the  hybrid  remains  identical  in  both  cases. 
This  interesting  fact  was  also  emphasised  by  Gartner,  with 
the  remark  that  even  the  most  practised  expert  is  not  in  a 
position  to  determine  in  a  hybrid  which  of  the  two  parental 
species  was  the  seed  or  the  pollen  plant '^. 

Of  the  differentiating  characters  which  were  used  in  the 
experiments  the  following  are  dominant  : 

1.  The  round  or  roundish  form  of  the  seed  with  or 
without  shallow  depressions. 

2.  The  yellow  colouring  of  the  seed  albumen  [coty- 
ledons]. 

3.  The  grey,  grey-brown,  or  leather-brown  colour  of 
the  seed-coat,  in  association  with  violet-red  blossoms  and 
reddish  spots  in  the  leaf  axils. 

4.  The  simply  inflated  form  of  the  pod. 

5.  The  green  colouring  of  the  unripe  pod  in  association 
with  the  same  colour  in  the  stems,  the  leaf-veins  and  the 
calyx. 

6.  The  distribution  of  the  flowers  along  the  stem. 

7.  The  greater  length  of  stem. 

With  regard  to  this  last  character  it  must  be  stated 
that  the  longer  of  the  two  parental  stems  is  usually  exceeded 
by  the  hybrid,  a  fact  which  is  possibly  only  attributable  to 
the  greater  luxuriance  which  appears  in  all  parts  of  plants 
when  stems  of  very  different  length  are  crossed.  Thus, 
for  instance,  in  repeated  experiments,  stems  of  i  ft.  and 
6  ft.  in  length  yielded  without  exception  hybrids  which 
varied  in  length  between   6  ft.   and   7^  ft. 

The  hybrid  seeds  in  the  experiments  with  seed-coat  are 
often  more  spotted,  and  the  spots  sometimes  coalesce  into 
small  bluish-violet  patches.  The  spotting  also  frequently 
appears  even  when  it  is  absent  as  a  parental  characterf. 

The  hybrid  forms  of  the  seed-shape  and  of  the  albumen 
[colour]  are  developed  immediately  after  the  artificial  ferti- 

*  [Gartner,  p.  223.] 

t  [This  refers  to  the  coats  of  the  seeds  borne  by  F^  plants.] 


326  Menders  Experiments 

llsation  by  the  mere  influence  of  the  foreign  pollen.  They 
can,  therefore,  be  observed  even  in  the  first  year  of  experi- 
ment, whilst  all  the  other  characters  naturally  only  appear 
in  the  following  year  in  such  plants  as  have  been  raised 
from  the  crossed  seed. 


[/^-,]  The  First  Generation  [bred]  from  the   Hybrids. 

In  this  generation  there  reappear,  together  with  the 
dominant  characters,  also  the  recessive  ones  with  their 
peculiarities  fully  developed,  and  this  occurs  in  the  definitely 
expressed  average  proportion  of  three  to  one,  so  that 
among  each  four  plants  of  this  generation  three  display  the 
dominant  character  and  one  the  recessive.  This  relates 
without  exception  to  all  the  characters  which  were  investi- 
gated in  the  experiments.  The  angular  wrinkled  form  of 
the  seed,  the  green  colour  of  the  albumen,  the  white  colour 
of  the  seed-coats  and  the  flowers,  the  constrictions  of  the 
pods,  the  yellow  colour  of  the  unripe  pod,  of  the  stalk,  of 
the  calyx,  and  of  the  leaf  venation,  the  umbel-like  form  of 
the  inflorescence,  and  the  dwarfed  stem,  all  reappear  in  the 
numerical  proportion  given,  without  any  essential  alteration. 
Transitional  forms  weix  not  observed  in  any  experiment. 

Since  the  hybrids  resulting  from  reciprocal  crosses  are 
formed  alike  and  present  no  appreciable  difference  in  their 
subsequent  development,  consequently  the  results  [of  the 
reciprocal  crosses]  can  be  reckoned  together  in  each  experi- 
ment. The  relative  numbers  which  were  obtained  for  each 
pair  of  differentiating  characters  are  as  follows  : 

Expt.  I.  Form  of  seed. — From  253  hybrids  7,324  seeds 
were  obtained  in  the  second  trial  year.  Among  them  were 
5,474  round  or  roundish  ones  and  1,850  angular  wrinkled 
ones.      Therefrom  the  ratio  2 '96  to  i  Is  deduced. 

Expt.  2.  Colour  of  albumen. — 258  plants  yielded  8,023 
seeds,  6,022  yellow,  and  2,001  green  ;  their  ratio,  therefore, 
is  as  3'oi  to  I. 

In  these  two  experiments  each  pod  yielded  usually  both 
kinds  of  seed.  In  well-developed  pods  which  contained  on 
the  average  six  to  nine  seeds,  it  often  happened  that  all  the 


in  Hybridisation  327 

seeds  were  round  (Expt.  i)  or  all  yellow  (Expt.  2)  ;  on  the 
other  hand  there  w^ere  never  observed  more  than  five 
wrinkled  or  five  green  ones  in  one  pod.  It  appears  to 
make  no  difference  whether  the  pods  are  developed  early  or 
later  In  the  hybrid  or  whether  they  spring  from  the  main 
axis  or  from  a  lateral  one.  In  some  few  plants  only  a 
few  seeds  developed  in  the  first  formed  pods,  and  these 
possessed  exclusively  one  of  the  two  characters,  but  in  the 
subsequently  developed  pods  the  normal  proportions  were 
maintained  nevertheless. 

As  In  separate  pods,  so  did  the  distribution  of  the 
characters  vary  in  separate  plants.  By  way  of  illustration 
the  first  ten  individuals  from  both  series  of  experiments 
may  serve. 


Experiment  i. 

Experiment 

2. 

Form  of  Seed. 

Colour 

of 

Albi 

umen, 

Plants 

Round 

Angular 

Yellow 

( 

Green 

I 

45 

12 

25 

II 

2 

27 

8 

32 

7 

3 

24 

7 

14 

5 

4 

19 

10 

70 

27 

5 

32 

II 

24 

13 

6 

26 

6 

20 

6 

7 

88 

24 

32 

13 

8 

22 

10 

44 

9 

9 

28 

6 

50 

14 

10 

^':> 

7 

44 

18 

As  extremes  in  the  distribution  of  the  two  seed  characters 
in  one  plant,  there  were  observed  in  Expt.  i  an  Instance  of 
43  round 'and  only  2  angular,  and  another  of  14  round  and 
15  angular  seeds.  In  Expt.  2  there  was  a  case  of  32 
yellow  and  only  i  green  seed,  but  also  one  of  20  yellow 
and  19  green. 

These  two  experiments  are  important  for  the  determina- 
tion of  the  average  ratios,  because  with  a  smaller  number 
of  experimental  plants  they  show  that  very  consider- 
able fluctuations  may  occur.  In  counting  the  seeds,  also, 
especially  In  Expt.  2,  some  care  Is  requisite,  since  In  some 
of  the  seeds  of  many  plants  the  green  colour  of  the  albumen 
is  less  developed,  and  at  first  may  be  easily  overlooked. 
The  cause  of  this  partial  disappearance  of  the  green  colour- 
ing  has   no   connection    with   the   hybrid-character   of   the 


328  Mender s  Experiments 

plants,  as  it  likewise  occurs  in  the  parental  variety.  This 
peculiarity  [bleaching]  is  also  confined  to  the  individual  and 
is  not  inherited  by  the  offspring.  In  luxuriant  plants  this 
appearance  was  frequently  noted.  Seeds  which  are  damaged 
by  insects  during  their  development  often  vary  in  colour  and 
form,  but,  with  a  little  practice  in  sorting,  errors  are  easily 
avoided.  It  is  almost  superfluous  to  mention  that  the  pods 
must  remain  on  the  plants  until  they  are  thoroughly  ripened 
and  have  become  dried,  since  it  is  only  then  that  the  shape 
and  colour  of  the  seed  are  fully  developed. 

Expt.  3.  Colour  of  the  seed-coats. — Among  929  plants 
705  bore  violet-red  flowers  and  grey-brown  seed-coats  ;  224 
had  white  flowers  and  white  seed-coats,  giving  the  propor- 
tion 3*15  to  I. 

Expt.  4.  Form  of  pods. — Of  1,181  plants  882  had 
them  simply  inflated,  and  in  299  they  were  constricted. 
Resulting  ratio,   2*95  to   i. 

Expt.  5.  Colour  of  the  unripe  pods. — The  number  of 
trial  plants  was  580,  of  which  428  had  green  pods  and 
152  yellow  ones.  Consequently  these  stand  in  the  ratio 
2*82   to    I. 

Expt.  6.  Position  of  flowers. — Among  858  cases  651 
had  inflorescences  axial  and  207  terminal.    Ratio,  3 '14  to  i. 

Expt.  7.  Length  of  stem. — Out  of  1,064  plants,  in  787 
cases  the  stem  was  long,  and  in  277  short.  Hence  a  mutual 
ratio  of  2*84  to  I.  In  this  experiment  the  dwarfed  plants 
were  carefully  lifted  and  transferred  to  a  special  bed.  This 
precaution  was  necessary,  as  otherwise  they  would  have 
perished  through  being  overgrown  by  their  tall  relatives. 
Even  in  their  quite  young  state  they  can  be  easily  picked 
out  by  their  compact  growth  and  thick  dark-green  foliage"^. 

If  now  the  results  of  the  whole  of  the  experiments  be 
brought  together,  there  is  found,  as  between  the  number 
of  forms  with  the  dominant  and  recessive  characters,  an 
average  ratio  of  2*98  to   i,   or  3  to   i. 

*  [This  is  true  also  of  the  dwarf  or  "Cupid  "  Sweet  Peas.] 


in  Hybridisation  329 

The  dominant  character  can  have  here  a  double  sizni- 
fication — viz.  that  of  a  parental  character,  or  a  hybrid- 
character^.  In  which  of  the  two  significations  it  appears  in 
each  separate  case  can  only  be  determined  by  the  following 
generation.  As  a  parental  character  it  must  pass  over 
unchanged  to  the  w^hole  of  the  offspring ;  as  a  hybrid- 
character,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  maintain  the  same 
behaviour  as  in  the  first  generation  [/%]• 


[/%]  The  Second  Generation  [bred]  from 
THE  Hybrids. 

Those  forms  which  in  the  first  generation  [/%]  exhibit 
the  recessive  character  do  not  further  vary  in  the  second 
generation  [7%]  as  regards  this  character ;  they  remain 
constant  in  their  offspring. 

It  is  otherwise  with  those  which  possess  the  dominant 
character  in  the  first  generation  [bred  from  the  hybrids]. 
Of  these  ^'zf6>-thirds  yield  offspring  which  display  the  domi- 
nant and  recessive  characters  in  the  proportion  of  3  to  i, 
and  thereby  show  exactly  the  same  ratio  as  the  hybrid 
forms,  while  only  07te-thlrd  remains  with  the  dominant 
character  constant. 

The  separate  experiments  yielded  the  following  results: 

Expt.  I.  Among  565  plants  w^hich  were  raised  from 
round  seeds  of  the  first  generation,  193  yielded  round  seeds 
only,  and  remained  therefore  constant  In  this  character ; 
372,  however,  gave  both  round  and  wrinkled  seeds,  In  the 
proportion  of  3  to  i.  The  number  of  the  hybrids,  therefore, 
as  compared  with  the  constants  Is  1*93  to  i. 

Expt.  2.  Of  519  plants  which  were  raised  from  seeds 
whose  albumen  was  of  yellow  colour  in  the  first  generation, 
166  yielded  exclusively  yellow,  while  353  yielded  yellow 
and  green  seeds  In  the  proportion  of  3  to  i.  There  resulted, 
therefore,  a  division  Into  hybrid  and  constant  forms  in  the 
proportion  of  2*13  to  i. 

*  [This  paragraph  presents  the  view  of  the  hybrid-character  as  some- 
thing incidental  to  the  hybrid,  and  not  "transmitted"  to  it— a  true  and 
fundamental  conception  here  expressed  probably  for  the  first  time.] 


330  MendePs  Experiments 

For  each  separate  trial  in  the  following  experiments 
lOO  plants  were  selected  which  displayed  the  dominant 
character  in  the  first  generation,  and  in  order  to  ascertain 
the  significance  of  this,  ten  seeds  of  each  were  cultivated. 

Expt.  3.  The  offspring  of  36  plants  yielded  exclusively 
grey-brown  seed-coats,  while  of  the  offspring  of  64  plants 
some  had  grey-brown  and  some  had  white. 

Expt.  4.  The  offspring  of  29  plants  had  only  simply 
inflated  pods;  of  the  offspring  of  71,  on  the  other  hand, 
some  had  inflated  and  some  constricted. 

Expt.  5.  The  offspring  of  40  plants  had  only  green 
pods  ;  of  the  offspring  of  60  plants  some  had  green,  some 
yellow  ones. 

Expt.  6.  The  offspring  of  33  plants  had  only  axial 
flowers  ;  of  the  offspring  of  67,  on  the  other  hand,  some 
had  axial  and  some  terminal  fiowers. 

Expt.  7.  The  offspring  of  28  plants  inherited  the  long 
axis,  and  those  of  72  plants  some  the  long  and  some  the 
short  axis. 

In  each  of  these  experiments  a  certain  num.ber  of  the 
plants  came  constant  with  the  dominant  character.  For 
the  determination  of  the  proportion  in  which  the  separation 
of  the  forms  with  the  constantly  persistent  character  results, 
the  tw^o  first  experiments  are  of  especial  importance,  since 
in  these  a  larger  number  of  plants  can  be  compared.  The 
ratios  1*93  to  i  and  2-13  to  i  gave  together  almost  exactly 
the  average  ratio  of  2  to'  i.  The  sixth  experiment  gave  a 
quite  concordant  result ;  in  the  others  the  ratio  varies  more 
or  less,  as  was  only  to  be  expected  in  view  of  the  smaller 
number  of  100  trial  plants.  Experiment  5,  which  shows 
the  greatest  departure,  was  repeated,  and  then,  in  lieu  of 
the  ratio  of  60  and  40,  that  of  65  and  35  resulted.  The 
average  ratio  of  2  to  \  appears,  therefore,  as  fixed  with 
certainty.  It  is  therefore  demonstrated  that,  of  those  forms 
which  possess  the  dominant  character  in  the  first  genera- 
tion, two-thirds  have  the  hybrid-character,  while  one-third 
remains  constant  with  the  dominant  character. 

The    ratio   of   3    to    i,   in   accordance   with   which    the 


in  Hybridisation  331 

distribution  of  the  dominant  and  recessive  characters  results 
In  the  first  generation,  resolves  Itself  therefore  In  all  experi- 
ments Into  the  ratio  of  2  :  i  :  i  If  the  dominant  character 
be  differentiated  according  to  Its  significance  as  a  hybrid- 
character  or  as  a  parental  one.  Since  the  members  of  the 
first  generation  [/%]  spring  directly  from  the  seed  of  the 
hybrids  [/^],  it  is  now  clear  that  the  hybinds  foinii  seeds 
having  one  or  other  of  the  two  diffe7^entiating  characters,  and 
of  these  one-half  develop  again  the  hybrid  form,  while  the 
other  half  yield  plants  which  remain  co7istant  and  receive 
the  dominant  or  the  recessive  characters  Sj^cspectively^  in 
eqnal  mmibers. 


The  Subsequent  Generations  [bred]  from  the  Hybrids. 

The  proportions  In  which  the  descendants  of  the  hybrids 
develop  and  split  up  In  the  first  and  second  generations 
presumably  hold  good  for  all  subsequent  progeny.  Experi- 
ments I  and  2  have  already  been  carried  through  six 
generations,  3  and  7  through  five,  and  4,  5,  and  6  through 
four,  these  experiments  being  continued  from  the  third 
generation  with  a  small  number  of  plants,  and  no  departure 
from  the  rule  has  been  perceptible.  The  offspring  of  the 
hybrids  separated  In  each  generation  In  the  ratio  of  2  :  i  :  i 
Into  hybrids  and  constant  forms. 

If  A  be  taken  as  denoting  one  of  the  two  constant 
characters,  for  instance  the  dominant,  a,  the  recessive,  and 
Aa  the  hybrid  form  in  which  both  are  conjoined,  the  ex- 
pression 

A^2Aa^a 

shows  the  terms  in  the  series  for  the  progeny  of  the  hybrids 
of  two  differentiating  characters. 

The  observation  made  by  Gartner,  Kolreuter,  and  others, 
that  hybrids  are  Inclined  to  revert  to  the  parental  forms.  Is 
also  confirmed  by  the  experiments  described.  It  is  seen 
that  the  number  of  the  hvbrlds  which  arise  from  one 
fertilisation,  as  compared  with  the  number  of  forms  which 
become  constant,  and  their  progeny  from  generation  to 
generation,  is  continually  diminishing,  but  that  never- 
theless they  could  not  entirely  disappear.      If  an  average 


332  Mender s  Experiments 

equality  of  fertility  in  all  plants  in  all  generations  be 
assumed,  and  if,  furthermore,  each  hybrid  forms  seed  of 
which  one-half  yields  hybrids  again,  while  the  other  half 
is  constant  to  both  characters  in  equal  proportions,  the 
ratio  of  numbers  for  the  offspring  in  each  generation  is 
seen  by  the  following  summary,  in  which  A  and  a  denote 
again  the  two  parental  characters,  and  Aa  the  hybrid 
forms.  For  brevity's  sake  it  may  be  assumed  that  each 
plant  in   each  generation  furnishes  only  4  seeds. 


Ratios 

• 

Generation 

A 

Aa 

a 

A 

Aa 

a 

I 

I 

2 

I 

I 

2 

I 

2 

6 

4 

6 

3 

2 

3 

3 

28 

8 

28 

7 

2 

7 

4 

120 

16 

120 

15 

2     : 

15 

5 

496 

Z^ 

496 

31 

2 

31 

n 

2" 

-  I 

2 

:     2"  -  I 

In 

the 

tenth 

generation,    for 

instance. 

2'- 

-  I  =  1023 

There  result,  therefore,  in  each  2,048  plants  which  arise  in 
this  generation  1,023  with  the  constant  dominant  character, 
1,023  with  the  recessive  character,  and  only  two  hybrids. 


The  Offspring  of  Hybrids  in  which  several 
Differentiating  Characters  are  associated. 

In  the  experiments  above  described  plants  were  used 
which  differed  only  in  one  essential  character"^.  The  next 
task  consisted  in  ascertaining  whether  the  law  of  develop- 
ment discovered  in  these  applied  to  each  pair  of  differen- 
tiating characters  when  several  diverse  characters  are  united 
in  the  hybrid  by  crossing.  As  regards  the  form  of  the 
hybrids  in  these  cases,  the  experiments  showed  throughout 
that  this  invariably  more  nearly  approaches  to  that  one  of 
the  two  parental  plants  which  possesses  the  greater  number 
of  dominant  characters.      If,  for  instance,  the  seed  plant  has 

*  [This  statement  of  Mendel's  in  the  hght  of  present  knowledge  is 
open  to  some  misconception.  Though  his  work  makes  it  evident  that 
such  varieties  may  exist,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  Mendel  could  have  had 
seven  ])airs  of  varieties  such  that  the  members  of  each  pair  differed  from 
each  other  in  on/y  one  considerable  character  {weseiitliches  Merkmal).  The 
point  is  probably  of  little  theoretical  or  practical  consequence,  but  a  rather 
heavy  stress  is  thrown  on  ^^  wesent/ich.''\ 


in  Hybridisation  333 

a  short  stem,  terminal  white  flowers,  and  simply  Inflated 
pods  ;  the  pollen  plant,  on  the  other  hand,  a  long  stem, 
violet-red  flowers  distributed  along  the  stem,  and  con- 
stricted pods  ;  the  hybrid  resembles  the  seed  parent  only  In 
the  form  of  the  pod  ;  in  the  other  characters  it  agrees  with 
the  pollen  parent.  Should  one  of  the  two  parental  types 
possess  only  dominant  characters,  then  the  hybrid  Is  scarcely 
or  not  at  all  distinguishable  from  It. 

Two  experiments  were  made  with  a  considerable  number 
of  plants.  In  the  first  experiment  the  parental  plants  diflered 
in  the  form  of  the  seed  and  In  the  colour  of  the  albumen ;  in 
the  second  in  the  form  of  the  seed,  in  the  colour  of  the 
albumen,  and  In  the  colour  of  the  seed-coats.  Experiments 
with  seed  characters  give  the  result  In  the  simplest  and 
most  certain  way. 

In  order  to  facilitate  study  of  the  data  in  these  experi- 
ments, the  different  characters  of  the  seed  plant  will  be 
indicated  by  A,  B,  C,  those  of  the  pollen  plant  by  a,  b,  c, 
and  the  hybrid  forms  of  the  characters  by  Aa,  Bb,  and  Cc. 

Expt.  I. — AB,  seed  parents;  ab,  pollen  parents; 

A,  form  round  ;  a,  form  wrinkled  ; 

B,  albumen  yellow.       b,  albumen  green. 

The  fertilised  seeds  appeared  round  and  yellow  like  those 
of  the  seed  parents.  The  plants  raised  therefrom  yielded 
seeds  of  four  sorts,  which  frequently  presented  themselves 
In  one  pod.  In  all,  556  seeds  were  yielded  by  15  plants, 
and  of  these  there  were  : 

;i  i^      315  round  and  yellow, 

loi  wrinkled  and  yellow, 
108  round  and  green, 
.•    '^       32  wrinkled  and  green.  I 

All  were  sown  the  following  year.  Eleven  of  the  round 
yellow  seeds  did  not  yield  plants,  and  three  plants  did  not 
form  seeds.     Among  the  rest: 

38  had  round  yellow  seeds  .  .  .  AB 

65  round  yellow  and  green  seeds  .  .  ABb 

60  round  yellow  and  wrinkled  yellow  seeds  AaB 
138  round  yellow  and  green,  wrinkled  yellow 

and  green  seeds  ....  AaBb. 


334  Menders  Experiments 

From  the  wrinkled  yellow  seeds  96  resulting  plants  bore 

seed,   of  which  : 

28  had  only  wrinkled  yellow  seeds  aB 

68  wrinkled  yellow  and  green  seeds         aBb. 

From   108  round  green  seeds   102  resulting  plants  fruited, 

of  which  : 

35  had  only  round  green  seeds  Ab 

67  round  and  wrinkled  green  seeds         Aab. 

The   wrinkled   green   seeds  yielded    30  plants  which  bore 
seeds  all  of  like  character  ;  they  remained  constant  ab. 

The  offspring  of  the  hybrids  appeared  therefore  under 
nine  different  forms,  some  of  them  in  very  unequal  numbers. 
When  these  are  collected  and  co-ordinated  we  find  : 

38  plants  with  the  sign  AB 

35       5'         "  "  ^'^ 

28       „         „  ,,  aB 

30  »j  »  J'  ^^ 

65  „  „  n  ^Bb 

68  ,,  „  „  aBb 

60  ,,  ,,  ,,  AaB 

67  „  „  „  Aab 

138  „  „  „  AaBb. 

The  whole  of  the  forms  may  be  classed  into  three 
essentially  different  groups.  The  first  includes  those  with 
the  signs  AB,  Ab,  aB,  and  ab  :  they  possess  only  constant 
characters  and  do  not  vary  again  in  the  next  generation. 
Each  of  these  forms  is  represented  on  the  average  thirty- 
three  times.  The  second  group  includes  the  signs  ABb, 
aBb,  AaB,  Aab  :  these  are  constant  in  one  character  and 
hybrid  in  another,  and  vary  in  the  next  generation  only 
as  regards  the  hybrid-character.  Each  of  these  appears  on 
an  average  sixty-five  times.  The  form  AaBb  occurs  138 
times  :  it  is  hybrid  in  both  characters,  and  behaves  exactly 
as  do  the  hybrids  from  which  it  is  derived. 

If  the  numbers  in  which  the  forms  belonging  to  these 
classes  appear  be  compared,  the  ratios  of  i,  2,  4  are  un- 
mistakably evident.  The  numbers  32,  65,  138  present  very 
fair  approximations  to  the  ratio  numbers  of  2iZ^  66,  132. 

The  developmental  series  consists,  therefore,  of  nine 
classes,  of  which  four  appear  therein  always  once  and  are 
constant  in   both  characters;  the  forms  AB,  ab,  resemble 


in  Hybridisation 


335 


the  parental  forms,  the  two  others  present  combinations 
between  the  conjoined  characters  A,  a,  B,  d,  which  com- 
binations are  Hkewise  possibly  constant.  Four  classes 
appear  always  twice,  and  are  constant  in  one  character  and 
hybrid  in  the  other.  One  class  appears  four  times,  and 
is  hybrid  in  both  characters.  Consequently  the  offspring 
of  the  hybrids,  if  two  kinds  of  differentiating  characters  are 
combined  therein,  are  represented  by  the  expression 

AB  ^Ab  +  aB  +  ab^-  lABb  +  2aBb  +  lAaB 

+  2Aab  +  ^AaBb. 

This  expression  is  indisputably  a  combination  series  in 
which  the  two  expressions  for  the  characters  A  and  a,  B 
and  b  are  combined.  We  arrive  at  the  full  number  of  the 
classes  of  the  series  by  the  combination  of  the  expressions  : 

A  +  2Aa-\-a 
B+2Bb  +  b. 
Expt.  2. 

ABC,  seed  parents  ;  abc,  pollen  parents  ; 

A,  form  round  ;  a,  form  wrinkled  ; 

B,  albumen  yellow  ;  b,  albumen  green  ; 

C,  seed-coat  grey-brown.         c,  seed-coat  white. 

This  experiment  was  made  in  precisely  the  same  way  as 
the  previous  one.  Among  all  the  experiments  it  demanded 
the  most  time  and  trouble.  From  24  hybrids  687  seeds 
were  obtained  in  all :  these  were  all  either  spotted,  grey- 
brown  or  grey-green,  round  or  wrinkled"^.  From  these  in 
the  following  year  639  plants  fruited,  and,  as  further 
investigation  showed,   there  were  among  them  : 


8  plants 

ABC* 

22 

plants 

ABCe 

45 

plants 

ABbCe* 

14 

A  Be 

17 

35 

AbCcr- 

36 

aBbCe 

9       n 

AbC 

25 

J) 

aBC'e- 

38 

AaBCe  * 

II        ,, 

Abe 

20 

)5 

abCe 

40 

AabCe  - 

8       „ 

aBC 

15 

J> 

ABbC 

49 

AaBbC 

10       „ 

aBe 

18 

■)1 

ABbe 

48 

AaBbe  - 

10       ,, 

abC 

19 

>) 

aBbC 

7 

abe 

24 

J? 

aBbe 

14 

5! 

AaBC 

78 

33 

AaBbCe 

18 

)J 

AaBe 

20 

35 

AabC 

16 

33 

A  abe  - 

*  [Note  that  Mendel  does  not  state  the  cotyledon-colour  of  the  first 
crosses  in  this  case;  for  as  the  coats  were  thick,  it  could  not  have  been 
seen  without  opening  or  peeling  the  seeds.] 


336  Me^ideVs  Experiments 

The  whole  expression  contains  27  terms.  Of  these  8 
are  constant  in  all  characters,  and  each  appears  on  the 
average  10  times;  12  are  constant  in  two  characters,  and 
hybrid  in  the  third  ;  each  appears  on  the  average  19  times  ; 
6  are  constant  in  one  character  and  hybrid  in  the  other 
two ;  each  appears  on  the  average  43  times.  One  form 
appears  ^"^  times  and  is  hybrid  in  all  of  the  characters. 
The  ratios  10,  19,  43,  78  agree  so  closely  with  the  ratios 
10,  20,  40,  80,  or  I,  2,  4,  8,  that  this  last  undoubtedly 
represents  the  true  value. 

The  development  of  the  hybrids  when  the  original 
parents  differ  in  three  characters  results  therefore  according 
to  the  following  expression  : 

ABC  +  ABc  +  AbC  +  Abe  +  aBC  +  aBc  +  abC  +  abc  + 
2  ABCc  +  2  AbCc  +  2  aBCcA-  2  abCc-^  2  ABbC+  2  ABbc-\- 
2aBbC  -\-  2  aBbc  -\-  2  AaBC  -^  2  AaBc-{-2  AabC+ 2  Aabc  + 
4  ABbCc  +  4  aBbCc  +  4  AaBCc  +  4  AabCc  +  4  AaBbC  + 
4  AaBbc^^  AaBbCc. 

Here  also  is  involved  a  combination  series  in  which  the 
expressions  for  the  characters  A  and  a,  B  and  by  C  and  c, 
are  united.     The  expressions 

A  +  2y4<3;  +  ^ 
^  +  2^^  +  ^ 
C  -\-  2Cc-\-c 

give  all  the  classes  of  the  series.  The  constant  combinations 
which  occur  therein  agree  with  all  combinations  which  are 
possible  between  the  characters  A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c\  two  thereof, 
ABC  and  abc,  resemble  the  two  original  parental  stocks. 

In  addition,  further  experiments  were  made  with  a 
smaller  number  of  experimental  plants  in  which  the  re- 
maining characters  by  twos  and  threes  were  united  as 
hybrids:  all  yielded  approximately  the  same  results.  There 
is  therefore  no  doubt  that  for  the  whole  of  the  characters 
involved  in  the  experiments  the  principle  applies  that  the 
offspring  of  the  hybrids  in  which  several  essentially  different 
characters  are  combined  exhibit  the  terms  of  a  series  of 
co7nbinations,  in  which  the  developmental  series  for  each  pair 
of  differentiating  characters  are  tmited.  It  is  demon- 
strated at  the  same  time  that  the  relation  of  each  pair  of 


in  Hybridisation  337 

different  characters  in  hybrid  union  is  independent  of  the 
other  differences  in  the  two  original  parental  stocks. 

If  n  represent  the  number  of  the  differentiating  characters 
in  the  two  original  stocks,  3""  gives  the  number  of  terms  of 
the  combination  series,  4'^  the  number  of  individuals  which 
belong  to  the  series,  and  2^  the  number  of  unions  which 
remain  constant.  The  series  therefore  contains,  if  the 
original  stocks  differ  in  four  characters,  3^*  =  8 1  classes, 
4"*  =  256  individuals,  and  2"*=  16  constant  forms;  or,  which 
is  the  same,  among  each  256  offspring  of  the  hybrids  there 
are  81  different  combinations,  16  of  which  are  constant. 

All  constant  combinations  which  in  Peas  are  possible  by 
the  combination  of  the  said  seven  differentiating  characters 
were  actually  obtained  by  repeated  crossing.  Their  number 
is  given  by  2^=  128.  Thereby  is  simultaneously  given  the 
practical  proof  that  the  constant  characters  which  appear  in 
the  several  varieties  of  a  groicp  of  plajtts  7nay  be  obtained  in 
all  the  associations  which  are  possible  according  to  the 
\_mathe77zatical^  laws  of  combination,  by  7neans  of  repeated 
artificial  fertilisatio7t . 

As  regards  the  flowering  time  of  the  hybrids,  the  ex- 
periments are  not  yet  concluded.  It  can,  however,  already 
be  stated  that  the  time  stands  almost  exactly  between  those 
of  the  seed  and  pollen  parents,  and  that  the  constitution  of 
the  hybrids  with  respect  to  this  character  probably  follows 
the  rule  ascertained  in  the  case  of  the  other  characters. 
The  forms  which  are  selected  for  experiments  of  this  class 
must  have  a  difference  of  at  least  twenty  days  from  the 
middle  flowering  period  of  one  to  that  of  the  other;  further- 
more, the  seeds  when  sown  must  all  be  placed  at  the  same 
depth  in  the  earth,  so  that  they  may  germinate  simul- 
taneously. Also,  during  the  whole  flowering  period,  the 
more  important  variations  in  temperature  must  be  taken 
into  account,  and  the  partial  hastening  or  delaying  of  the 
flowering  which  may  result  therefrom.  It  is  clear  that  this 
experiment  presents  many  difficulties  to  be  overcome  and 
necessitates  great  attention. 

If  we  endeavour  to  collate  in  a  brief  form  the  results 
arrived  at,  we  find  that  those  differentiating  characters, 
which  admit  of  easy  and  certain  recognition  in  the  experi- 
mental   plants,    all    behave    exactly    alike    in    their    hybrid 

B.  H.  22 


338  Menders  Experiments 

associations.  The  offspring  of  the  hybrids  of  each  pair  of 
differentiating  characters  are,  one-haff,  hybrid  again,  while 
the  other  half  are  constant  in  equal  proportions  having  the 
characters  of  the  seed  and  pollen  parents  respectively. 
If  several  differentiating  characters  are  combined  by  cross- 
fertilisation  in  a  hybrid,  the  resulting  offspring  form  the 
terms  of  a  combination  series  in  which  the  combination 
series  for  each  pair  of  differentiating  characters  are  united. 
The  uniformity  of  behaviour  shown  by  the  whole  of 
the  characters  submitted  to  experiment  permits,  and  fully 
justifies,  the  acceptance  of  the  principle  that  a  similar 
relation  exists  in  the  other  characters  which  appear  less 
sharply  defined  in  plants,  and  therefore  could  not  be  in- 
cluded in  the  separate  experiments.  An  experiment  w^ith 
peduncles  of  different  lengths  gave  on  the  w^hole  a  fairly 
satisfactory  result,  although  the  differentiation  and  serial 
arrangement  of  the  forms  could  not  be  effected  with  that 
certainty  which  Is  indispensable  for  correct  experiment. 


The  Reproductive  Cells  of  the  Hybrids. 

The  results  of  the  previously  described  experiments 
led  to  further  experiments,  the  results  of  which  appear 
fitted  to  afford  some  conclusions  as  regards  the  composition 
of  the  ^^^  and  pollen  cells  of  hybrids.  An  important  clue 
is  afforded  in  Pisttm  by  the  circumstance  that  among  the 
progeny  of  the  hybrids  constant  forms  appear,  and  that 
this  occurs,  too.  In  respect  of  all  combinations  of  the 
associated  characters.  So  far  as  experience  goes,  we  find 
it  In  every  case  confirmed  that  constant  progeny  can  only 
be  formed  when  the  ^<g^  cells  and  the  fertilising  pollen  are 
of  like  character,  so  that  both  are  provided  with  the  material 
for  creating  quite  similar  individuals,  as  Is  the  case  with  the 
normal  fertilisation  of  pure  species.  We  must  therefore 
regard  It  as  certain  that  exactly  similar  factors  must  be  at 
work  also  in  the  production  of  the  constant  forms  In  the 
hybrid  plants.  Since  the  various  constant  forms  are  pro- 
duced In  one  plant,  or  even  In  one  flower  of  a  plant,  the 
conclusion  appears  logical  that  In  the  ovaries  of  the  hybrids 
there  are  formed  as  many  sorts  of  ^^^  cells,   and   in   the 


in  Hybridisation  339 

anthers  as  many  sorts  of  pollen  cells,  as  there  are  possible 
constant  combination  forms,  and  that  these  ^<gg  and  pollen 
cells  agree  in  their  internal  composition  with  those  of  the 
separate  forms. 

In  point  of  fact  it  is  possible  to  demonstrate  theoretically 
that  this  hypothesis  would  fully  suffice  to  account  for  the 
development  of  the  hybrids  in  the  separate  generations,  if 
we  might  at  the  same  time  assume  that  the  various  kinds 
of  ^'g^  and  pollen  cells  were  formed  in  the  hybrids  on  the 
average  in  equal  numbers^. 

In  order  to  bring  these  assumptions  to  an  experimental 
proof,  the  following  experiments  were  designed.  Two  forms 
which  were  constantly  different  in  the  form  of  the  seed  and 
the  colour  of  the  albumen  were  united  by  fertilisation. 

If  the  differentiating  characters  are  again  indicated  as 
A,  B,  a,  d,  we  have  : 

AB,  seed  parent ;  ab,  pollen  parent ; 

A,  form  round  ;  a,  form  wrinkled  ; 

B,  albumen  yellow.  b,  albumen  green. 

The  artificially  fertilised  seeds  were  sown  together  with 
several  seeds  of  both  original  stocks,  and  the  most  vigorous 
examples  were  chosen  for  the  reciprocal  crossing.  There 
were  fertilised  : 

1.  The  hybrids  with  the  pollen  oi  AB. 

2.  The  hybrids  ,,  „  ab. 

3.  AB  ,,  „  the  hybrids. 

4.  ab  ,,  „  the  hybrids. 

For  each  of  these  four  experiments  the  whole  of  the 
flowers  on  three  plants  were  fertilised.  If  the  above  theory 
be  correct,  there  must  be  developed  on  the  hybrids  ^gg  and 
pollen  cells  of  the  forms  AB,  Ab,  aB,  ab,  and  there  would 
be  combined  : 

1.  The  itgg  cells  AB,  Ab,  aB,  ab  with  the  pollen 
cells  AB. 

2.  The  ^gg  cells  AB,  Ab,  aB,  ab  with  the  pollen 
cells  ab. 

*  [This   and    the   preceding   paragraph   contain    the    essence   of  the 
MendeHan  principles  of  heredity.] 


22- 


340  Menders  Experiments 

3.  The  ^<g^  cells  AB  with  the  pollen  cells  AB,  Ab, 
aB,  ab. 

4.  The  ^^g  cells  ab  with  the  pollen  cells  AB,  Ab, 
aB,  ab. 

From  each  of  these  experiments  there  could  then  result 
only  the  following  forms  : 

1.  AB,  ABb,  AaB,  AaBb, 

2.  AaBb,  Aab,  aBb,  ab, 

3.  AB,  ABb,  AaB,  AaBb. 

4.  AaBb,  Aab,  aBb,  ab. 

If,  furthermore,  the  several  forms  of  the  ^^^  and  pollen 
cells  of  the  hybrids  were  produced  on  an  average  in  equal 
numbers,  then  in  each  experiment  the  said  four  combinations 
should  stand  in  the  same  ratio  to  each  other.  A  perfect 
agreement  in  the  numerical  relations  was,  however,  not  to 
be  expected,  since  in  each  fertilisation,  even  in  normal 
cases,  some  ^^^  cells  remain  undeveloped  or  subsequently 
die,  and  many  even  of  the  well-formed  seeds  fail  to  ger- 
minate when  sown.  The  above  assumption  is  also  limited 
in  so  far  that,  while  it  demands  the  formation  of  an  equal 
number  of  the  various  sorts  of  ^^^  and  pollen  cells,  it  does 
not  require  that  this  should  apply  to  each  separate  hybrid 
with  mathematical  exactness. 

The  first  and  second  experiments  had  primarily  the 
object  of  proving  the  composition  of  the  hybrid  ^g^  cells, 
while  the  third  and  fourth  experiments  were  to  decide  that  of 
the  pollen  cells^.  As  is  shown  by  the  above  demonstration 
the  first  and  third  experiments  and  the  second  and  fourth 
experiments  should  produce  precisely  the  same  combinations, 
and  even  in  the  second  year  the  result  should  be  partially 
visible  in  the  form  and  colour  of  the  artificially  fertilised 
seed.  In  the  first  and  third  experiments  the  dominant 
characters  of  form  and  colour,  A  and  B,  appear  in  each 
union,  and  are  also  partly  constant  and  partly  in  hybrid 
union  with  the  recessive  characters  a  and  b,  for  which 
reason  they  must  impress  their  peculiarity  upon  the  whole 

*  [To  prove,  namely,  that  both  were  similarly  differentiated,  and  not 
one  or  other  only.] 


m  Hybridisation  341 

of  the  seeds.  All  seeds  should  therefore  appear  round  and 
yellow,  if  the  theory  be  justified.  In  the  second  and  fourth 
experiments,  on  the  other  hand,  one  union  is  hybrid  in 
form  and  in  colour,  and  consequently  the  seeds  are  round 
and  yellow  ;  another  is  hybrid  in  form,  but  constant  in  the 
recessive  character  of  colour,  whence  the  seeds  are  round 
and  green  ;  the  third  is  constant  in  the  recessive  character 
of  form  but  hybrid  in  colour,  consequently  the  seeds  are 
wrinkled  and  yellow  ;  the  fourth  is  constant  in  both  recessive 
characters,  so  that  the  seeds  are  wrinkled  and  green.  In 
both  these  experiments  there  were  consequently  four  sorts 
of  seed  to  be  expected — viz.  round  and  yellow,  round  and 
green,  wrinkled  and  yellow,  wrinkled  and  green. 

The  crop  fulfilled  these  expectations  perfectly.  There 
were  obtained  in  the 

I  St  Experiment,  98  exclusively  round  yellow  seeds  ; 
3i*d  „  94 

In  the  2nd  Experiment,  31  round  and  yellow,  26  round 
and  green,  27  wrinkled  and  yellow,  26  wrinkled  and  green 
seeds. 

In  the  4th  Experiment,  24  round  and  yellow,  25  round 
and  green,  22  wrinkled  and  yellow,  27  wrinkled  and  green 
seeds. 

There  could  scarcely  be  now  any  doubt  of  the  success 
of  the  experiment ;  the  next  generation  must  afford  the 
final  proof.  From  the  seed  sown  there  resulted  for  the 
first  experiment  90  plants,  and  for  the  third  %']  plants 
which  fruited :    these  yielded  for  the 

ist  Exp.  3rd  Exp. 

20  25     round  yellow  seeds     .....  AB 

23  19     round  yellow  and  green  seeds     .         .         .  ABb 

25  22     round  and  wrinkled  yellow  seeds         .         .  AaB 

22  21     round  and  wrinkled  green  and  yellow  seeds  AaBb 

In  the  second  and  fourth  experiments  the  round  and 
yellow  seeds  yielded  plants  with  round  and  wrinkled  yellow 
and  green  seeds,  AaBb, 

From  the  round  green  seeds  plants  resulted  with  round 
and  wrinkled  green  seeds,  Aab. 

The  wrinkled  yellow  seeds  gave  plants  with  wrinkled 
yellow  and  green  seeds,  aBb. 


342  Menders  Experiments 

From  the  wrinkled  green  seeds  plants  were  raised  which 
yielded  again  only  wrinkled  and  green  seeds,  ab. 

Although  in  these  two  experiments  likewise  some  seeds 
did  not  germinate,  the  figures  arrived  at  already  in  the 
previous  year  were  not  affected  thereby,  since  each  kind  of 
seed  gave  plants  which,  as  regards  their  seed,  were  like 
each  other  and  different  from  the  others.  There  resulted 
therefore  from  the 


2nd  Exp. 

4th  Exp. 

31 

24 

plants  of  the  form  AaBb 

26 

25 

„                  „         Aab 

27 

22 

„                  „         aBb 

26 

27 

„                  „         ab 

In  all  the  experiments,  therefore,  there  appeared  all  the 
forms  which  the  proposed  theory  demands,  and  they  came 
in  nearly  equal  numbers. 

In  a  further  experiment  the  characters  of  flower-colour 
and  length  of  stem  were  experimented  upon,  and  selection 
was  so  made  that  in  the  third  year  of  the  experiment  each 
character  ought  to  appear  in  half  of  all  the  plants  if  the 
above  theory  were  correct.  A,  B,  a,  b  serve  again  as 
indicating  the  various  characters. 

A,  violet-red  flowers.  a,  white  flowers. 

B,  axis  long.  b,  axis  short. 

The  form  Ab  was  fertilised  with  ab,  which  produced  the 
hybrid  Aab.  Furthermore,  aB  was  also  fertilised  with  ab, 
whence  the  hybrid  aBb,  In  the  second  year,  for  further 
fertilisation,  the  hybrid  Aab  was  used  as  seed  parent,  and 
hybrid  aBb  as  pollen  parent. 

Seed  parent,  Aab,  Pollen  parent,  aBb, 

Possible  ^^^  cells,  Abab,  Pollen  cells,  aBab. 

From  the  fertilisation  between  the  possible  ^g^  and 
pollen  cells  four  combinations  should  result,  viz.  : 

AaBb  +  aBb  +  Aab  +  ab. 

From  this  it  is  perceived  that,  according  to  the  above 
theory,  in  the  third  year  of  the  experiment  out  of  all  the 
plants 


in  Hybridisation  343 

Half  should  have  violet-red  flowers  {Aa\  Classes  i,   3 

,,         „  „      white  flowers  (a)  ,,  2,  4 

.,      a  long  axis  {Bb)  „  1,2 

„  „  „       a  short  axis  {b)  „  3,   4 

From  45  fertilisations  of  the  second  year  187  seeds 
resulted,  of  which  only  166  reached  the  flowering  stage  in 
the  third  year.  Among  these  the  separate  classes  appeared 
in  the  numbers  following  : 


Class 

Colour  of  flower 

Stem 

I 

violet-red 

long 

47  times 

2 

white 

long 

40        n 

3 

violet-red 

short 

38        „ 

4 

white 

short 

41        » 

There  subsequently  appeared 

The  violet-red  flower-colour  {Aa)  in  85  plants. 
,,      white  „  ,,       {a)      in  81 

,,      long  stem  \Bb)  in  %^       ,, 

„      short    „  (b)      in  79       ,, 

The  theory  adduced  is  therefore  satisfactorily  confirmed  in 
this  experiment  also. 

For  the  characters  of  form  of  pod,  colour  of  pod,  and 
position  of  flowers  experiments  were  also  made  on  a  small 
scale,  and  results  obtained  in  perfect  agreement.  All 
combinations  which  were  possible  through  the  union  of 
the  differentiating  characters  duly  appeared,  and  in  nearly 
equal  numbers. 

Experimentally,  therefore,  the  theory  is  confirmed  that 
the  pea  hybi^ids  form  egg  and  pollen  cells  which,  in  their 
constitzttion,  represent  in  equal  nu7nbers  all  constant  fortJis 
which  resnlt  from  the  combination  of  the  characters  united 
in  fertilisation. 

The  difference  of  the  forms  among  the  progeny  of  the 
hybrids,  as  well  as  the  respective  ratios  of  the  numbers  in 
which  they  are  observed,  find  a  sufficient  explanation  in  the 
principle  above  deduced.  The  simplest  case  is  afforded 
by  the  developmental  series  of  each  pair  of  differentiating 
characters.  This  series  is  represented  by  the  expression 
A-\-2Aa-^a,  in  which  A  and  a  signify  the  forms  with 
constant  differentiatmg  characters,  and  Aa  the  hybrid  form 


344  Menders  Experimejtts 

of  both.  It  includes  in  three  different  classes  four  indi- 
viduals. In  ihe  formation  oi  these,  pollen  and  ^^^  cells 
of  the  form  A  and  a  t^ike  part  on  the  average  equally  in 
the  fertilisation  ;  hence  each  form  [occurs]  twice,  since  four 
individuals  are  formed.  There  participate  consequently  in 
the  fertilisation 

The  pollen  cells  A -{■  A  -\- a -^r  a 
The  ^gg  cells  A -\-  A  -\- a  ■\- a. 

It  remains,  therefore,  purely  a  matter  of  chance  which 
of  the  two  sorts  of  pollen  will  become  united  with  each 
separate  ^gg  cell.  According,  however,  to  the  law  of 
probability,  it  will  always  happen,  on  the  average  of  many 
cases,  that  each  pollen  form  A  and  a  will  unite  equally 
often  with  each  ^g<g  cell  form  A  and  a,  consequently  one 
of  the  two  pollen  cells  A  in  the  fertilisation  will  meet  with 
the  ^gg  cell  A  and  the  other  with  an  ^gg  cell  a,  and  so 
likewise  one  pollen  cell  a  will  unite  with  an  ^gg  cell  A, 
and  the  other  with  ^gg  cell  a. 

Pollen  cells  A  A      a  a 

1     X     I 

Egg  cells  A  A      a  a 

The  result  of  the  fertilisation  may  be  made  clear  by 
putting  the  signs  for  the  conjoined  ^gg  and  pollen  cells  in 
the  form  of  fractions,  those  for  the  pollen  cells  above  and 
those  for  the  ^gg  cells  below  the  line.     We  then  have 

A      A       a      a 
A       a       A      a 

In  the  first  and  fourth  term  the  ^gg  and  pollen  cells  are  of 
like  kind,  consequently  the  product  of  their  union  must  be 
constant,  viz.  A  and  a  ;  in  the  second  and  third,  on  the 
other  hand,  there  again  results  a  union  of  the  two  differen- 
tiating characters  of  the  stocks,  consequently  the  forms 
resulting  from  these  fertilisations  are  identical  with  those 
of  the  hybrid  from  which  they  sprang.  There  occurs 
accordingly  a  repeated  hybridisation.  This  explains  the 
striking  fact  that  the  hybrids  are  able  to  produce,  besides 


i7i  Hybridisation  345 

the  two  parental  forms,  offspring  which  are  Hke  themselves  ; 

A  a 

—  and  —.  both  give  the  same  union  Aa,  since,  as  already 

remarked  above,  It  makes  no  difference  In  the  result  of 
fertilisation  to  which  of  the  two  characters  the  pollen  or 
^'g'g  cells  belong.     We  may  write  then 

A      A       a      a       .  . 

-7  +  —  +  -7  +  -  =  ^  +  2Aa  +  a. 

A       a      A      a 

This  represents  the  average  result  of  the  self-fertilisation 
of  the  hybrids  when  two  differentiating  characters  are  united 
In  them.  In  Individual  flowers  and  in  individual  plants, 
however,  the  ratios  in  which  the  forms  of  the  series  are  pro- 
duced may  suffer  not  inconsiderable  fluctuations^.  Apart 
from  the  fact  that  the  numbers  in  w^hich  both  sorts  of  ^^^ 
cells  occur  In  the  seed  vessels  can  only  be  regarded  as  equal 
on  the  average,  It  remains  purely  a  matter  of  chance  which 
of  the  two  sorts  of  pollen  may  fertilise  each  separate  ^^^'g 
cell.  For  this  reason  the  separate  values  must  necessarily 
be  subject  to  fluctuations,  and  there  are  even  extreme  cases 
possible,  as  were  described  earlier  In  connection  with  the 
experiments  on  the  form  of  the  seed  and  the  colour  of  the 
albumen.  The  true  ratios  of  the  numbers  can  only  be 
ascertained  by  an  average  deduced  from  the  sum  of  as 
many  single  values  as  possible  ;  the  greater  the  number 
the  more  are  merely  chance  effects  eliminated. 

The  developmental  series  for  hybrids  In  which  two 
kinds  of  differentiating  characters  are  united  contains  among 
sixteen  Individuals  nine  different  forms,  viz. : 

AB  ^-Ab  +  aB-\-ab  +  lABb  +  2aBb  +  lAaB  -f  lAab  + 

^AaBb, 

Between  the  differentiating  characters  of  the  original  stocks 
Aa  and  Bb  four  constant  combinations  are  possible,  and 
consequently  the  hybrids  produce  the  corresponding  four 
forms  of  ^gg  and  pollen  cells  AB,  Ab,  aB,  ab,  and  each 
of   these    will    on    the   averaore    fiorure    four    times    in    the 

o  o 

*  [Whether  segregation  by  such  units  is  more  than  purely  fortuitous 
may  perhaps  be  determined  by  seriation.] 


346  Mender s  Experiments 

fertilisation,  since  sixteen  individuals  are  included  in  the 
series.     Therefore  the  participators  in  the  fertilisation  are 

Pollen  cells  AB  ■\- AB  ^  AB -\- AB -^  Ab-\- Ab^  Ab^  Ab^ 
aB  +  aB  +  aB  +  aB  +  ab -\- ab -\- ab -{•  ab. 

Egg  cells     AB  +  AB  +  AB  +  AB  +  Ab  +  Ab  +  Ab  +  Ab  + 
aB  +  aB  +  aB  4-  aB  -\- ab -\- ab -^  ab  ■\-  ab. 

In  the  process  of  fertilisation  each  pollen  form  unites  on  an 
average  equally  often  with  each  (t^^  cell  form,  so  that  each 
of  the  four  pollen  cells  AB  unites  once  with  one  of  the 
forms  of  ^^g  cell  AB,  Ab,  aB,  ab.  In  precisely  the  same 
way  the  rest  of  the  pollen  cells  of  the  forms  Ab,  aB,  ab 
unite  with  all  the  other  ^^^  cells.      We  obtain  therefore 

AB_     AB^     AB^     AB_      Ab_     Ab     Ab^     4^ 
AB^  Ab  '^  aB'^  ~ab^  AB^  Ab^  aB      ab 

aB      aB      aB      aB       ab        ab       ab      ab 
'AB'^AJ?^~aB^'^'^AB^~Ab^'^'^'^b' 

or 

AB  +  ABb  +  AaB  +  AaBb  +  ABb  -^Ab+  AaBb  +  Aab  + 
AaB  +  AaBb  ■\-aB-\-  aBb  +  AaBb  +  Aab  +  aBb  -\-ab  =  AB  + 
Ab^-aB^ab-\-  2 ABb  +  2aBb  +  2 AaB  +  2 Aab  +  ^AaBb^. 

In  precisely  similar  fashion  is  the  developmental  series 
of  hybrids  exhibited  when  three  kinds  of  differentiating 
characters  are  conjoined  in  them.  The  hybrids  form  eight 
various  kinds  of  ^gg  and  pollen  cells — ABC,  ABc,  AbC, 
Abe,  aBC,  aBc,  abC,  abc — and  each  pollen  form  unites 
itself  again  on  the  average  once  with  each  form  of  ^gg  cell. 

The  law  of  combination  of  different  characters  which 
governs  the  development  of  the  hybrids  finds  therefore  its 
foundation  and  explanation  in  the  principle  enunciated, 
that  the  hybrids  produce  ^gg  cells  and  pollen  cells  which 
in  equal  numbers  represent  all  constant  forms  which  result 
from  the  combinations  of  the  characters  brought  together 
in  fertilisation. 

*  [In  the  original  the  sign  of  equality  {■=■)  is  here  represented  by  +, 
evidently  a  misprint.] 


in  Hybridisation 


347 


Experiments  with  Hybrids  of  other  Species  of  Plants. 

It  must  be  the  object  of  further  experiments  to  ascertain 
whether  the  law  of  development  discovered  for  Pisiiin 
applies  also  to  the  hybrids  of  other  plants.  To  this  end 
several  experiments  were  recently  commenced.  Two  minor 
experiments  with  species  of  Pliaseolus  have  been  completed, 
and  may  be  here  mentioned. 

An  experiment  with  Phaseoliis  vulgaris  and  Phaseohis 
nanus  gave  results  in  perfect  agreement.  Ph.  nanus  had 
together  with  the  dwarf  axis,  simply  inflated,  green  pods. 
Ph.  vulgaris  had,  on  the  other  hand,  an  axis  lo  feet  to 
12  feet  high,  and  yellow-coloured  pods,  constricted  when 
ripe.  The  ratios  of  the  numbers  in  which  the  different 
forms  appeared  in  the  separate  generations  were  the  same 
as  with  Pisurn.  Also  the  development  of  the  constant 
combinations  resulted  according  to  the  law  of  simple  com- 
bination of  characters,  exactly  as  in  the  case  of  Pisum. 
There  were  obtained 


Constant 

Axis 

Colour  of 

Form  of 

combinations 

the  unripe  pods 

the  ripe  pods 

I 

long 

green 

inflated 

2 

5) 

51 

constricted 

3 

>» 

yellow 

inflated 

4 

») 

5) 

constricted 

5 

short 

green 

inflated 

6 

» 

11 

constricted 

7 

» 

yellow 

inflated 

8 

>j 

>> 

constricted 

The  green  colour  of  the  pod,  the  inflated  forms,  and  the 
long  axis  were,   as  in  Pisicm,  dominant  characters. 

Another  experiment  with  two  very  different  species  of 
Phaseolus  had  only  a  partial  result.  Phaseolus  nanus,  L., 
served  as  seed  parent,  a  perfectly  constant  species,  with 
white  flowers  in  short  racemes  and  small  white  seeds  in 
straight,  inflated,  smooth  pods  ;  as  pollen  parent  was  used 
Ph.  multiflortcs,  W.,  with  tall  winding  stem,  purple-red 
flowers  in  very  long  racemes,  rough,  sickle-shaped  crooked 
pods,  and  large  seeds  which  bore  black  flecks  and  splashes 
on  a  peach-blood-red  ground. 


348  Mendel s  Experiments 

The  hybrids  had  the  greatest  similarity  to  the  pollen 
parent,  but  the  flowers  appeared  less  intensely  coloured. 
Their  fertility  was  very  limited ;  from  seventeen  plants, 
which  together  developed  many  hundreds  of  flowers,  only 
forty-nine  seeds  in  all  were  obtained.  These  were  of 
medium  size,  and  were  flecked  and  splashed  similarly  to 
those  of  Ph.  inultifioTMS,  while  the  ground  colour  was  not 
materially  different.  The  next  year  forty-four  plants  were 
raised  from  these  seeds,  of  which  only  thirty-one  reached 
the  flowering  stage.  The  characters  of  Ph.  nanus.,  which 
had  been  altogether  latent  in  the  hybrids,  reappeared  in 
various  combinations ;  their  ratio,  however,  with  relation 
to  the  dominant  plants  was  necessarily  very  fluctuating 
owing  to  the  small  number  of  trial  plants.  With  certain 
characters,  as  in  those  of  the  axis  and  the  form  of  pod,  it 
was,  however,  as  in  the  case  oi  Pisum,  almost  exactly  i  :  3. 

Insignificant  as  the  results  of  this  experiment  may  be  as 
regards  the  determination  of  the  relative  numbers  in  which 
the  various  forms  appeared,  it  presents,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  phenomenon  of  a  remarkable  change  of  colour  in  the 
flowers  and  seed  of  the  hybrids.  In  Pzsum  it  is  known 
that  the  characters  of  the  flower-  and  seed-colour  present 
themselves  unchanged  in  the  first  and  further  generations, 
and  that  the  offspring  of  the  hybrids  display  exclusively  the 
one  or  the  other  of  the  characters  of  the  original  stocks. 
It  is  otherwise  in  the  experiment  we  are  considering.  The 
white  flowers  and  the  seed-colour  of  Ph.  nanus  appeared,  it 
is  true,  at  once  in  the  first  generation  \^fro7n  the  hybrids] 
in  one  fairly  fertile  example,  but  the  remaining  thirty 
plants  developed  flower-colours  which  were  of  various 
grades  of  purple-red  to  pale  violet.  The  colouring  of  the 
seed-coat  was  no  less  varied  than  that  of  the  flowers.  No 
plant  could  rank  as  fully  fertile  ;  many  produced  no  fruit 
at  all  ;  others  only  yielded  fruits  from  the  flowers  last  pro- 
duced, which  did  not  ripen.  From  fifteen  plants  only  were 
well-developed  seeds  obtained.  The  greatest  disposition 
to  infertility  was  seen  in  the  forms  with  preponderantly 
red  flowers,  since  out  of  sixteen  of  these  only  four  yielded 
ripe  seed.  Three  of  these  had  a  similar  seed  pattern  to 
Ph.  multiflorus,  but  with  a  more  or  less  pale  ground  colour; 
the  fourth  plant  yielded  only  one  seed  of  plain  brown  tint. 


in  Hybridisation  349 

The  forms  with  preponderantly  violet-coloured  flowers  had 
dark  brown,  black-brown,  and  quite  black  seeds. 

The  experiment  was  continued  through  two  more  genera- 
tions under  similar  unfavourable  circumstances,  since  even 
among  the  offspring  of  fairly  fertile  plants  there  came  again 
some  which  were  less  fertile  or  even  quite  sterile.  Other 
flower-  and  seed-colours  than  those  cited  did  not  sub- 
sequently present  themselves.  The  forms  which  in  the 
first  generation  [bred  from  the  hybrids]  contained  one  or 
more  of  the  recessive  characters  remained,  as  regards  these, 
constant  without  exception.  Also  of  those  plants  which 
possessed  violet  flowers  and  brown  or  black  seed,  some  did 
not  vary  again  in  these  respects  in  the  next  generation  ; 
the  majority,  however,  yielded,  together  with  offspring 
exactly  like  themselves,  some  which  displayed  white  flowers 
and  white  seed-coats.  The  red  flowering  plants  remained 
so  slightly  fertile  that  nothing  can  be  said  with  certainty 
as  regards  their  further  development. 

Despite  the  many  disturbing  factors  with  which  the 
observations  had  to  contend,  it  is  nevertheless  seen  by  this 
experiment  that  the  development  of  the  hybrids,  with 
regard  to  those  characters  which  concern  the  form  of  the 
plants,  follows  the  same  laws  as  in  Pisitrn.  With  regard 
to  the  colour  characters,  it  certainly  appears  difficult  to 
perceive  a  substantial  agreement.  Apart  from  the  fact 
that  from  the  union  of  a  white  and  a  purple-red  colouring 
a  whole  series  of  colours  results  [in  /%],  from  purple  to  pale 
violet  and  white,  the  circumstance  is  a  striking  one  that 
among  thirty-one  flowering  plants  only  one  received  the 
recessive  character  of  the  white  colour,  while  in  Pisum  this 
occurs  on  the  average  in  every  fourth  plant. 

Even  these  enigmatical  results,  however,  might  probably 
be  explained  by  the  law  governing  Pisum  if  we  might 
assume  that  the  colour  of  the  flowers  and  seeds  of  Ph. 
multifloriis  is  a  combination  of  two  or  more  entirely  in- 
dependent colours,  which  individually  act  like  any  other 
constant  character  in  the  plant.  If  the  flower-colour  A 
were  a  combination  of  the  individual  characters  A^  +  A,-{- ... 
which  produce  the  total  impression  of  a  purple  colora- 
tion, then  by  fertilisation  with  the  differentiating  character, 
white  colour,  a,  there  would  be  produced  the  hybrid  unions 


350  Mender s  Experiments 

A^a-\- A^_a-\- ...  and  so  would  it  be  with  the  corresponding 
colouring  of  the  seed-coats^.  According  to  the  above 
assumption,  each  of  these  hybrid  colour  unions  would 
be  independent,  and  would  consequently  develop  quite 
independently  from  the  others.  It  is  then  easily  seen 
that  from  the  combination  of  the  separate  developmental 
series  a  complete  colour-series  must  result.  If,  for  instance, 
A=A^-\- A^_,  then  the  hybrids  A^a  and  A.^a  form  the 
developmental  series — 

A^-\-  2A^a-^a 

A  2+  2A^a-{-a. 

The  members  of  this  series  can  enter  into  nine  different 
combinations,  and  each  of  these  denotes  another  colour — 

1  A^A„  2  A^aA^       .       I  A^a 

2  A^A^a  4  A^aA^a  2  A^aa 
I   A^a               2  A^aa  i   aa. 

The  figures  prescribed  for  the  separate  combinations 
also  indicate  how  many  plants  with  the  corresponding 
colouring  belong  to  the  series.  Since  the  total  is  sixteen, 
the  whole  of  the  colours  are  on  the  average  distributed 
over  each  sixteen  plants,  but,  as  the  series  itself  indicates, 
in  unequal  proportions. 

Should  the  colour  development  really  happen  in  this 
way,  we  could  offer  an  explanation  of  the  case  above 
described,  viz.  that  the  white  flowers  and  seed-coat  colour 
only  appeared  once  among  thirty-one  plants  of  the  first 
generation.  This  colouring  appears  only  once  in  the  series, 
and  could  therefore  also  only  be  developed  once  in  the 
average  in  each  sixteen,  and  with  three  colour  characters 
only  once  even  in  sixty-four  plants. 

It  must,  nevertheless,  not  be  forgotten  that  the  explana- 
tion here  attempted  is  based  on  a  mere  hypothesis,  only 
supported  by  the  very  imperfect  result  of  the  experiment 
just  described.  It  would,  however,  be  well  worth  while  to 
follow  up  the  development  of  colour  in  hybrids  by  similar 

*  [As  it  fails  to  take  account  of  factors  introduced  by  the  albino  this 
representation  is  imperfect.  It  is  however  interesting  to  know  that  Mendel 
realized  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  compound  characters,  and  that  the 
rarity  of  the  white  recessives  was  a  consequence  of  this  resolution.] 


hi  Hybridisation  351 

experiments,  since  it  is  probable  that  in  this  way  we  might 
learn  the  significance  of  the  extraordinary  variety  in  the 
colouring  of  our  ornamental  flowers. 

So  far,  little  at  present  is  known  with  certainty  beyond 
the  fact  that  the  colour  of  the  flowers  in  most  ornamental 
plants  is  an  extremely  variable  character.  The  opinion 
has  often  been  expressed  that  the  stability  of  the  species 
is  greatly  disturbed  or  entirely  upset  by  cultivation,  and 
consequently  there  is  an  inclination  to  regard  the  develop- 
ment of  cultivated  forms  as  a  matter  of  chance  devoid  of 
rules  ;  the  colouring  of  ornamental  plants  is  indeed  usually 
cited  as  an  example  of  great  instability.  It  is,  however, 
not  clear  why  the  simple  transference  into  garden  soil 
should  result  in  such  a  thorough  and  persistent  revolution 
in  the  plant  organism.  No  one  will  seriously  maintain 
that  in  the  open  country  the  development  of  plants  is  ruled 
by  other  laws  than  in  the  garden  bed.  Here,  as  there, 
changes  of  type  must  take  place  if  the  conditions  of  life  be 
altered,  and  the  species  possesses  the  capacity  of  fitting 
itself  to  its  new  environment.  It  is  willingly  granted  that 
by  cultivation  the  origination  of  new  varieties  is  favoured, 
and  that  by  man's  labour  many  varieties  are  acquired 
which,  under  natural  conditions,  would  be  lost ;  but  nothing 
justifies  the  assumption  that  the  tendency  to  the  formation 
of  varieties  is  so  extraordinarily  increased  that  the  species 
speedily  lose  all  stability,  and  their  offspring  diverge  into 
an  endless  series  of  extremely  variable  forms.  Were  the 
change  in  the  conditions  the  sole  cause  of  variability  we 
might  expect  that  those  cultivated  plants  which  are  grown 
for  centuries  under  almost  identical  conditions  would  again 
attain  constancy.  That,  as  is  well  known,  is  not  the  case, 
since  it  is  precisely  under  such  circumstances  that  not  only 
the  most  varied  but  also  the  most  variable  forms  are  found. 
It  is  only  the  Leguminosae,  like  Pisum,  Pkaseolus^,  Lens, 
whose  organs  of  fertilisation  are  protected  by  the  keel, 
which  constitute  a  noteworthy  exception.  Even  here  there 
have  arisen  numerous  varieties  during  a  cultural  period  of 
more  than  1000  years  under  most  various  conditions;  these 
maintain,  however,  under  unchanging  environments  a  sta- 
bility as  great  as  that  of  species  growing  wild. 
*  \Phaseolus  nevertheless  is  insect-fertilised.] 


352  Menders  Experiments 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  as  regards  the  variabiHty 
of  cultivated  plants  there  exists  a  factor  which  so  far  has 
received  little  attention.  Various  experiments  force  us 
to  the  conclusion  that  our  cultivated  plants,  with  few 
exceptions,  are  7nembers  of  various  hybrid  series,  whose 
further  development  in  conformity  with  law  is  varied  and 
interrupted  by  frequent  crossings  inter  se.  The  circumstance 
must  not  be  overlooked  that  cultivated  plants  are  mostly 
grown  in  great  numbers  and  close  together,  affording  the 
most  favourable  conditions  for  reciprocal  fertilisation  between 
the  varieties  present  and  the  species  itself.  The  probability 
of  this  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  among  the  great  array 
of  variable  forms  solitary  examples  are  always  found,  which 
in  one  character  or  another  remain  constant,  if  only  foreign 
influence  be  carefully  excluded.  These  forms  behave  pre- 
cisely as  do  those  which  are  known  to  be  members  of  the 
compound  hybrid  series.  Also  with  the  most  susceptible 
of  all  characters,  that  of  colour,  it  cannot  escape  the  careful 
observer  that  in  the  separate  forms  the  inclination  to  vary 
is  displayed  in  very  different  degrees.  Among  plants  which 
arise  from  one  spontaneous  fertilisation  there  are  often  some 
whose  offspring  vary  widely  in  the  constitution  and  arrange- 
ment of  the  colours,  while  that  of  others  shows  little 
deviation,  and  among  a  greater  number  solitary  examples 
occur  which  transmit  the  colour  of  the  flowers  unchanged 
to  their  offspring.  The  cultivated  species  of  Dianthus 
afford  an  instructive  example  of  this.  A  white-flowered 
example  of  Dianthus  caryophy/his,  which  itself  was  derived 
from  a  white-flowered  variety,  was  shut  up  during  its 
blooming  period  in  a  greenhouse ;  the  numerous  seeds 
obtained  therefrom  yielded  plants  entirely  white-flowered 
like  itself.  A  similar  result  was  obtained  from  a  sub-species, 
with  red  flowers  somewhat  flushed  with  violet,  and  one 
with  flowers  white,  striped  with  red.  Many  others,  on  the 
other  hand,  which  were  similarly  protected,  yielded  progeny 
which  were  more  or  less  variously  coloured  and  marked. 

Whoever  studies  the  coloration  which  results  in  orna- 
mental plants  from  similar  fertilisation  can  hardly  escape 
the  conviction  that  here  also  the  development  follows  a 
definite  law  which  possibly  finds  its  expression  in  the 
combination  of  several  independent  colour  characters. 


in  Hybridisatioji  353 


Co^xLUDING  Remarks. 

It  can  hardly  fail  to  be  of  interest  to  compare  the 
observations  made  regarding  PisiLin  with  the  results  arrived 
at  by  the  two  authorities  in  this  branch  of  knowledge, 
Kolreuter  and  Gartner,  in  their  investigations.  According 
to  the  opinion  of  both,  the  hybrids  in  outward  appearance 
present  either  a  form  intermediate  between  the  original 
species,  or  they  closely  resemble  either  the  one  or  the  other 
type,  and  sometimes  can  hardly  be  discriminated  from  it. 
From  their  seeds  usually  arise,  if  the  fertilisation  was 
effected  by  their  own  pollen,  various  forms  which  differ 
from  the  normal  type.  As  a  rule,  the  majority  of  individuals 
obtained  by  one  fertilisation  maintain  the  hybrid  form, 
while  some  few  others  come  more  like  the  seed  parent, 
and  one  or  other  individual  approaches  the  pollen  parent. 
This,  however,  is  not  the  case  with  all  hybrids  without 
exception.  Sometimes  the  offspring  have  more  nearly 
approached,  some  the  one  and  some  the  other  of  the  two 
original  stocks,  or  they  all  incline  more  to  one  or  the  other 
side  ;  while  in  other  cases  they  remain  pei^fectly  like  the 
hydrid^ind  continue  constant  in  their  offspring.  The  hybrids 
of  varieties  behave  like  hybrids  of  species,  but  they  possess 
greater  variability  of  form  and  a  more  pronounced  tendency 
to  revert  to  the  original  types. 

With  regard  to  the  form  of  the  hybrids  and  their 
development,  as  a  rule  an  agreement  with  the  observations 
made  in  Pisurn  is  unmistakable.  It  is  otherwise  with  the 
exceptional  cases  cited.  Gartner  confesses  even  that  the 
exact  determination  whether  a  form  bears  a  greater  resem- 
blance to  one  or  to  the  other  of  the  two  original  species 
often  involved  great  difficulty,  so  much  depending  upon 
the  subjective  point  of  view  of  the  observer.  Another  cir- 
cumstance could,  however,  contribute  to  render  the  results 
fluctuating  and  uncertain,  despite  the  most  careful  observa- 
tion and  differentiation.  For  the  experiments  plants  were 
mostly  used  which  rank  as  good  species  and  are  differ- 
entiated bv  a  larofe  number  of  characters.  In  addition  to 
the  sharply  defined  characters,  where  it  is  a  question  of 
greater  or   less   similarity,    those   characters   must   also   be 

B.  H.  21 


354  Menders  Experimeiits 

taken  into  account  which  are  often  difficult  to  define  in 
words,  but  yet  suffice,  as  every  plant  specialist  knows,  to 
give  the  forms  a  peculiar  appearance.  If  it  be  accepted 
that  the  development  of  hybrids  follows  the  law  which  is 
valid  for  Pisu7n,  the  series  in  each  separate  experiment 
must  contain  very  many  forms,  since  the  number  of  the 
terms,  as  is  known,  increases  with  the  number  of  the 
differentiating  characters  as  the  powers  of  three.  With  a 
relatively  small  number  of  experimental  plants  the  result 
therefore  could  only  be  approximately  right,  and  in  single 
cases  might  fluctuate  considerably.  If,  for  instance,  the 
two  original  stocks  differ  in  seven  characters,  and  loo  and 
200  plants  were  raised  from  the  seeds  of  their  hybrids  to 
determine  the  grade  of  relationship  of  the  offspring,  we  can 
easily  see  how  uncertain  the  decision  must  become,  since 
for  seven  differentiating  characters  the  combination  series 
contains  16,384  individuals  under  2187  various  forms; 
now  one  and  then  another  relationship  could  assert  its 
predominance,  just  according  as  chance  presented  this  or 
that  form  to  the  observer  in  a  majority  of  cases. 

If,  furthermore,  there  appear  among  the  differentiating 
characters  at  the  same  time  dominant  characters,  which 
are  transmitted  entire  or  nearly  unchanged  to  the  hybrids, 
then  in  the  terms  of  the  developmental  series  that  one  of 
the  two  original  parents  which  possesses  the  majority  of 
dominant  characters  must  always  be  predominant.  In  the 
experiment  described  relative  to  Pisum,  in  which  three 
kinds  of  differentiating  characters  were  concerned,  all  the 
dominant  characters  belonged  to  the  seed  parent.  Although 
the  terms  of  the  series  in  their  internal  composition  approach 
both  original  parents  equally,  yet  in  this  experiment  the 
type  of  the  seed  parent  obtained  so  great  a  preponderance 
that  out  of  each  sixty-four  plants  of  the  first  generation 
fifty-four  exactly  resembled  it,  or  only  differed  in  one 
character.  It  is  seen  how  rash  it  must  be  under  such 
circumstances  to  draw  from  the  external  resemblances  of 
hybrids  conclusions  as  to  their  internal  nature. 

Gartner  mentions  that  in  those  cases  where  the  develop- 
ment was  regular,  among  the  offspring  of  the  hybrids  the 
two  original  species  were  not  reproduced,  but  only  a  few 
individuals  which  approached  them.     With  very  extended 


m  Hybridisation  355 

developmental  series  it  could  not  In  fact  be  otherwise. 
For  seven  differentiating  characters,  for  instance,  among 
more  than  16,000  Individuals — offspring  of  the  hybrids — 
each  of  the  two  original  species  would  occur  only  once.  It 
is  therefore  hardly  possible  that  these  should  appear  at  all 
among  a  small  number  of  experimental  plants  ;  with  some 
probability,  however,  we  might  reckon  upon  the  appearance 
in  the  series  of  a  few  forms  which  approach  them. 

We  meet  with  an  essential  difference  in  those  hybrids 
which  remain  constant  In  their  progeny  and  propagate 
themselves  as  truly  as  the  pure  species.  According  to 
Gartner,  to  this  class  belong  the  remarkably  fertile  hybrids 
Aqitilegia  atropurpnrea  ca7iadensis,  Lavaterapsendolbia  thzc- 
ringiaca,  GeM7n  zcrbano-rivale,  and  some  Dianthus  hybrids; 
and,  according  to  WIchura,  the  hybrids  of  the  Willow 
family.  For  the  history  of  the  evolution  of  plants  this 
circumstance  Is  of  special  Importance,  since  constant  hybrids 
acquire  the  status  of  new  species.  The  correctness  of  the 
facts  is  guaranteed  by  eminent  observers,  and  cannot  be 
doubted.  Gartner  had  an  opportunity  of  following  up 
Dianthus  A7'nieria  deltoides  to  the  tenth  generation,  since 
it  regularly  propagated  itself  In  the  garden. 

With  Pisum  it  was  shown  by  experiment  that  the 
hybrids  form  ^^<g  and  pollen  cells  of  different  kinds,  and  that 
herein  lies  the  reason  of  the  variability  of  their  offspring. 
In  other  hybrids,  likewise,  whose  offspring  behave  similarly 
we  may  assume  a  like  cause  ;  for  those,  on  the  other  hand, 
which  remain  constant  the  assumption  appears  justifiable 
that  their  reproductive  cells  are  all  alike  and  agree  with  the 
foundation-cell  [fertilised  ovum]  of  the  hybrid.  In  the 
opinion  of  renowned  physiologists,  for  the  purpose  of 
propagation  one  pollen  cell  and  one  ^^^  cell  unite  in 
Phanerogams'^    into    a    single    cell,    which    is    capable    by 

*  In  Pisum  it  is  placed  beyond  doubt  that  for  the  formation  of  the 
new  embryo  a  perfect  union  of  the  elements  of  both  reproductive  cells  must 
take  place.  How  could  we  otherwise  explain  that  among  the  offspring  of 
the  hybrids  both  original  types  reappear  in  equal  numbers  and  with  all 
their  peculiarities?  If  the  influence  of  the  egg  cell  upon  the  pollen  cell 
were  only  external,  if  it  fulfilled  the  role  of  a  nurse  only,  then  the  result 
of  each  artificial  fertilisation  could  be  no  other  than  that  the  developed 
hybrid  should  exactly  resemble  the  pollen  parent,  or  at  any  rate  do  so  very 
closely.     This   the  experiments   so  far  have  in  no  wise  confirmed.     An 

23—2 


356  Menders  Experiments  . 

assimilation  and  formation  of  new  cells  to  become  an  in- 
dependent organism.  This  development  follows  a  constant 
law,  which  is  founded  on  the  material  composition  and 
arrangement  of  the  elements  w^hich  meet  in  the  cell  in  a 
vivifying  union.  If  the  reproductive  cells  be  of  the  same 
kind  and  agree  with  the  foundation  cell  [fertilised  ovum]  of 
the  mother  plant,  then  the  development  of  the  new  indi- 
i/idual  will  follow  the  same  law  which  rules  the  mother 
plant.  If  it  chance  that  an  ^'g^  cell  unites  with  a  dissimilar 
pollen  cell,  we  must  then  assume  that  between  those 
elements  of  both  cells,  which  determine  opposite  characters 
some  sort  of  compromise  is  effected.  The  resulting 
compound  cell  becomes  the  foundation  of  the  hybrid 
organism,  the  development  of  which  necessarily  follows 
a  different  scheme  from  that  obtaining  in  each  of  the  two 
original  species.  If  the  compromise  be  taken  to  be  a 
complete  one,  in  the  sense,  namely,  that  the  hybrid  embryo 
is  formed  from  two  similar  cells,  in  which  the  differences 
are  entirely  and  permanently  accommodated  together,  the 
further  result  follows  that  the  hybrids,  like  any  other  stable 
plant  species,  reproduce  themselves  truly  in  their  offspring. 
The  reproductive  cells  which  are  formed  in  their  seed 
vessels  and  anthers  are  of  one  kind,  and  agree  with  the 
fundamental  compound  cell  [fertilised  ovum]. 

With  regard  to  those  hybrids  whose  progeny  is  variable 
we  may  perhaps  assume  that  between  the  differentiating 
elements  of  the  ^gg  and  pollen  cells  there  also  occurs  a 
compromise,  in  so  far  that  the  formation  of  a  cell  as 
foundation  of  the  hybrid  becomes  possible ;  but,  never- 
theless, the  arrangement  between  the  conflicting  elements 
is  only  temporary  and  does  not  endure  throughout  the  life 
of  the  hybrid  plant.  Since  in  the  habit  of  the  plant  no 
changes  are  perceptible  during  the  whole  period  of  vege- 
tation, we  must  further  assume  that  it  is  only  possible  for 
the  differentiating  elements  to  liberate  themselves  from  the 
enforced  union  when  the  fertilising  cells  are  developed.  In 
the  formation  of  these  cells  all  existing  elements  participate 

evident  proof  of  the  complete  union  of  the  contents  of  both  cells  is  afforded 
by  the  experience  gained  on  all  sides  that  it  is  immaterial,  as  regards  the 
form  of  the  hybrid,  which  of  the  original  species  is  the  seed  parent  or 
which  the  pollen  parent. 


in  Hybridisation  357 

in  an  entirely  free  and  equal  arrangement,  by  which  it 
is  only  the  differentiating  ones  which  mutually  separate 
themselves.  In  this  way  the  production  would  be  rendered 
possible  of  as  many  sorts  of  ^^^  and  pollen  cells  as  there 
are  combinations  possible  of  the  formative  elements. 

The  attribution  attempted  here  of  the  essential  difference 
in  the  development  of  hybrids  to  a  perina7ie7it  or  temporary 
union  of  the  differing  cell  elements  can,  of  course,  only 
claim  the  value  of  an  hypothesis  for  which  the  lack  of 
definite  data  offers  a  wide  scope.  Some  justification  of  the 
opinion  expressed  lies  in  the  evidence  afforded  by  Pisttm 
that  the  behaviour  of  each  pair  of  differentiating  characters 
in  hybrid  union  is  independent  of  the  other  differences 
between  the  two  original  plants,  and,  further,  that  the 
hybrid  produces  just  so  many  kinds  of  ^g^  and  pollen 
cells  as  there  are  possible  constant  combination  forms. 
The  differentiating  characters  of  two  plants  can  finally, 
however,  only  depend  upon  differences  in  the  composition 
and  grouping  of  the  elements  which  exist  in  the  foundation- 
cells  [fertilised  ova]  of  the  same  in  vital  interaction"^. 

Even  the  validity  of  the  law  formulated  for  Pistcm 
requires  still  to  be  confirmed,  and  a  repetition  of  the  more 
important  experiments  is  consequently  much  to  be  desired, 
that,  for  instance,  relating  to  the  composition  of  the  hybrid 
fertilising  cells.  A  differential  [element]  may  easily  escape 
the  single  observerf,  which  although  at  the  outset  may 
appear  to  be  unimportant,  may  yet  accumulate  to  such 
an  extent  that  it  must  not  be  ignored  in  the  total  result. 
Whether  the  variable  hybrids  of  other  plant  species  observe 
an  entire  agreement  must  also  be  first  decided  experiment- 
ally. In  the  meantime  we  may  assume  that  in  material 
points  an  essential  difference  can  scarcely  occur,  since  the 
unity  in  the  developmental  plan  of  organic  life  is  beyond 
question. 

In  conclusion,  the  experiments  carried  out  by  Kolreuter, 
Gartner,  and  others  with  respect  to  the  transformation  of 
one   species    into    another   by    artificial  fertilisation    merit 
special  mention.      Particular  importance  has  been  attached 

*  "  Welche  in  de?i  Grinidzellen  derselbe?i  in  lebendiger  WechselwirkiDig 
stehen."" 

t  ^^De?n  einzel}ie7i  Beobachter  kann  leicht  ein  Differe7iziale  entgehen.^^ 


35^  Menders  Experime^tts 

to  these  experiments,  and  Gartner  reckons  them  among 
''  the  most  difficult  of  all  in  hybridisation." 

If  a  species  A  is  to  be  transformed  into  a  species  B, 
both  must  be  united  by  fertilisation  and  the  resulting 
h^^brids  then  be  fertilised  with  the  pollen  of  B  ;  then,  out 
of  the  various  offspring  resulting,  that  form  would  be 
selected  which  stood  in  nearest  relation  to  B  and  once 
more  be  fertilised  with  B  pollen,  and  so  continuously  until 
finally  a  form  is  arrived  at  which  is  like  B  and  constant  in 
its  progeny.  By  this  process  the  species  A  would  change 
into  the  species  B.  Gartner  alone  has  effected  thirty  such 
experiments  with  plants  of  genera  Aqitilegia,  Dianthus, 
Geum,  Lavatera,  Lychnis,  Malva,  Nicotimia,  and  Oenothera. 
The  period  of  transformation  was  not  alike  for  all  species. 
While  with  some  a  triple  fertilisation  sufficed,  with  others 
this  had  to  be  repeated  ^v^  or  six  times,  and  even  in  the 
same  species  fluctuations  were  observed  in  various  experi- 
ments. Gartner  ascribes  this  difference  to  the  circumstance 
that  "the  specific  [typische']  power  by  which  a  species,  during 
reproduction,  effects  the  change  and  transformation  of  the 
maternal  type  varies  considerably  in  different  plants,  and 
that,  consequently,  the  periods  within  which  the  one  species 
is  changed  into  the  other  must  also  vary,  as  also  the  number 
of  generations,  so  that  the  transformation  in  some  species 
is  perfected  in  more,  and  in  others  in  fewer  generations." 
Further,  the  same  observer  remarks  "that  in  these  trans- 
formation experiments  a  good  deal  depends  upon  which  type 
and  which  individual  be  chosen  for  further  transformation." 

If  it  may  be  assumed  that  in  these  experiments  the 
constitution  of  the  forms  resulted  in  a  similar  way  to  that  of 
Pisum,  the  entire  process  of  transformation  would  find  a 
fairly  simple  explanation.  The  hybrid  forms  as  many  kinds 
of  Ggg  cells  as  there  are  constant  combinations  possible 
of  the  characters  conjoined  therein,  and  one  of  these  is 
always  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  fertilising  pollen 
cells.  Consequently  there  always  exists  the  possibility  with 
all  such  experiments  that  even  from  the  second  fertilisation 
there  may  result  a  constant  form  identical  with  that  of  the 
pollen  parent.  Whether  this  really  be  obtained  depends  in 
each  separate  case  upon  the  number  of  the  experimental 
plants,    as    well    as    upon    the    number    of    differentiating 


in  Hybridisatio7t  359 

characters  which  are  united  by  the  fertiHsation.  Let  us, 
for  instance,  assume  that  the  plants  selected  for  experiment 
differed  in  three  characters,  and  the  species  ABC  is  to 
be  transformed  into  the  other  species  abc  by  repeated 
fertilisation  with  the  pollen  of  the  latter ;  the  hybrids 
resulting  from  the  first  cross  form  eight  different  kinds 
of  ^g^  cells,   viz.  : 

ABC,  A  Be,  AbC,  aBC,  Abc,  aBc,  abC,  abc. 

These  in  the  second  year  of  experiment  are  united  again 
with  the  pollen  cells  abc,  and  we  obtain  the  series 

AaBbCc  +  AaBbc  +  AabCc  +  aBbCc 

+  Aabc  +  aBbc  +  abCc  +  abc. 

Since  the  form  abc  occurs  once  in  the  series  of  eight 
terms,  it  is  consequently  little  likely  that  it  would  be 
missing  among  the  experimental  plants,  even  were  these 
raised  in  a  smaller  number,  and  the  transformation  would 
be  perfected  already  by  a  second  fertilisation.  If  by  chance 
it  did  not  appear,  then  the  fertilisation  must  be  repeated 
with  one  of  those  forms  nearest  akin,  Aabc,  aBbc,  abCc. 
It  is  perceived  that  such  an  experiment  must  extend  the 
farther  the  smaller  the  number  of  experimental  plajits  and 
the  larger  the  jiitmber  of  differentiating  cha7^acters  in  the 
two  original  species  ;  and  that,  furthermore,  in  the  same 
species  there  can  easily  occur  a  delay  of  one  or  even  of  two 
generations  such  as  Gartner  observed.  The  transforma- 
tion of  widely  divergent  species  could  generally  only  be 
completed  in  five  or  six  years  of  experiment,  since  the 
number  of  different  &gg  cells  which  are  formed  in  the  hybrid 
increases  as  the  powers  of  two  with  the  number  of  differen- 
tiating characters. 

Gartner  found  by  repeated  experiments  that  the  respec- 
tive period  of  transformation  varies  in  many  species,  so  that 
frequently  a  species  A  can  be  transformed  into  a  species  B 
a  generation  sooner  than  can  species  B  into  species  A.  He 
deduces  therefrom  that  Kolreuter's  opinion  can  hardly  be 
maintained  that  "the  two  natures  in  hybrids  are  perfectly 
in  equilibrium."  It  appears,  however,  that  Kolreuter  does 
not  merit  this  criticism,  but  that  Gartner  rather  has  over- 
looked  a   material    point,    to   which    he   himself   elsewhere 


360  Menders  Experiments 

draws  attention,  viz.  that  "  it  depends  which  individual  is 
chosen  for  further  transformation."  Experiments  which  in 
this  connection  were  carried  out  with  two  species  of  Pisttm 
demonstrated  that  as  regards  the  choice  of  the  fittest 
individuals  for  the  purpose  of  further  fertilisation  it  may 
make  a  great  difference  which  of  two  species  is  transformed 
into  the  other.  The  two  experimental  plants  differed  in 
five  characters,  while  at  the  same  time  those  of  species  A 
were  all  dominant  and  those  of  species  B  all  recessive. 
For  mutual  transformation  A  was  fertilised  with  pollen  of 
B,  and  B  with  pollen  of  A,  and  this  was  repeated  with 
both  hybrids  the  following  year.     With  the  first  experiment 

-2   there   were   eighty-seven   plants   available   in   the  third 

year    of   experiment    for    selection    of   the    individuals    for 

further  crossing,  and  these  were  of  the  possible  thirty-two 

A 
forms  ;  with  the  second  experiment  -^  seventy-three  plants 

resulted,  which  agreed  throughout  perfectly  in  habit  with 
the  pollen  parent ;  in  their  internal  composition,  however, 
they  must  have  been  just  as  varied  as  the  forms  in  the 
other  experiment.  A  definite  selection  was  consequently 
only  possible  with  the  first  experiment  ;  with  the  second 
the  selection  had  to  be  made  at  random,  merely.  Of  the 
latter  only  a  portion  of  the  flowers  were  crossed  with 
the  A  pollen,  the  others  were  left  to  fertilise  themselves. 
Among  each  five  plants  which  were  selected  in  both 
experiments  for  fertilisation  there  agreed,  as  the  following 
year's  culture  showed,  with  the  pollen  parent : 

I  St  Experiment         2nd  Experiment 

2  plants  —  in  all  characters 

3  j>  >j    4  J) 

—  2  plants  „    3 

—  I  plant  ,,     I  character 

In  the  first  experiment,  therefore,  the  transformation 
was  completed ;  in  the  second,  which  was  not  continued 
further,  two  more  fertilisations  would  probably  have  been 
required. 

Although   the  case  may  not  frequently  occur  in  which 


/;/  Hybridisation  361 

the  dominant  characters  belong  exclusively  to  one  or  the 
other  of  the  original  parent  plants,  it  will  always  make 
a  difference  which  of  the  two  possesses  the  majority  of 
dominants.  If  the  pollen  parent  has  the  majority,  then 
the  selection  of  forms  for  further  crossing  will  afford  a  less 
degree  of  certainty  than  in  the  reverse  case,  which  must 
imply  a  delay  in  the  period  of  transformation,  provided 
that  the  experiment  is  only  considered  as  completed  when 
a  form  is  arrived  at  which  not  only  exactly  resembles  the 
pollen  plant  in  form,  but  also  remains  as  constant  in  its 
progeny. 

Gartner,  by  the  results  of  these  transformation  experi- 
ments, was  led  to  oppose  the  opinion  of  those  naturalists 
who  dispute  the  stability  of  plant  species  and  believe  in  a 
continuous  evolution  of  vegetation.  He  perceives"^  in  the 
complete  transformation  of  one  species  into  another  an 
indubitable  proof  that  species  are  fixed  within  limits  beyond 
which  they  cannot  change.  Although  this  opinion  cannot 
be  unconditionally  accepted  we  find  on  the  other  hand  in 
Gartner's  experiments  a  noteworthy  confirmation  of  that 
supposition  regarding  variability  of  cultivated  plants  which 
has  already  been  expressed. 

Among  the  experimental  species  there  were  cultivated 
plants,  such  as  Aqttilegia  atroptorpitrea  and  canadensis, 
Dianthiis  caryophyllus,  chinensis^  and  japonicns,  Nicotiana 
rustica  and  paniatlata,  and  hybrids  between  these  species 
lost  none  of  their  stabilitv  after  four  or  five  o-enerations. 

*  ["  Es  sieht  "  in  the  original  is  clearly  a  misprint  for  "  Er  sieht."] 


ON    HIERACIUM-HYBRIDS   OBTAINED 
BY   ARTIFICIAL   FERTILISATION 

By  G.   Mendel. 

{Communicated  to  the  Meeting  9  June^   1869*.) 

Although  I  have  already  undertaken  many  experiments 
in  fertilisation  between  species  of  Hieracium,  I  have  only 
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  following  6  hybrids,  and  only 
from  one  to  three  specimens  of  them  : 

H.  Aurictda  %  x  H.  atirajitiacMTn  $ 

H.  AiiricMla  %  x  H.  Pilose lla  $ 

H.  Attricula  %  x  H.  pratense  $ 

H,  echioides\  %  x  H.  aurantiacum  $ 

H.  praealtuin  %  x  H.  flagellare  Rchb.  t 

H.  praealtuin  %  x  H.  aurantiacum  $ 

The  difficulty  of  obtaining  a  larger  number  of  hybrids 
is  due  to  the  minuteness  of  the  flowers  and  their  peculiar 
structure.  On  account  of  this  circumstance  it  was  seldom 
possible  to  remove  the  anthers  from  the  flowers  chosen  for 
fertilisation  without  either  letting  pollen  get  on  to  the 
stigma  or  injuring  the  pistil  so  that  it  withered  away. 
As  is  well  known,  the  anthers  are  united  to  form  a  tube, 

*  [Published  in  Verh.  ?taturf.  Ver.  Briinn,  Abhandlungen,  viii.  1869, 
p.  26,  which  appeared  in  1870.] 

t  The  plant  used  in  this  experiment  is  not  exactly  the  typical  H. 
echioides.  It  appears  to  belong  to  the  series  transitional  to  H.  praealtmn, 
but  approaches  more  nearly  to  H.  echioides  and  for  this  reason  was 
reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  latter. 


Mender s  Experiments  with  Hieraciiini    363 

which  closely  embraces  the  pistil.  As  soon  as  the  flower 
opens,  the  stigma,  already  covered  with  pollen,  protrudes. 
In  order  to  prevent  self- fertilisation  the  anther-tube  must 
be  taken  out  before  the  flower  opens,  and  for  this  purpose 
the  bud  must  be  slit  up  with  a  fine  needle.  If  this 
operation  is  attempted  at  a  time  when  the  pollen  is  mature, 
which  is  the  case  two  or  three  days  before  the  flower  opens, 
it  is  seldom  possible  to  prevent  self-fertilisation  ;  for  with 
every  care  it  is  not  easily  possible  to  prevent  a  few  pollen 
o-rains  crettinQr  scattered  and  communicated  to  the  stio-ma. 
No  better  result  has  been  obtained  hitherto  by  removing 
the  anthers  at  an  earlier  stage  of  development.  Before 
the  approach  of  maturity  the  tender  pistil  and  stigma  are 
exceedingly  sensitive  to  injury,  and  even  if  they  are  not 
actually  injured,  they  generally  wither  and  dry  up  after  a 
little  time  if  deprived  of  their  protecting  investments.  I  hope 
to  obviate  this  last  misfortune  by  placing  the  plants  after 
the  operation  for  two  or  three  days  in  the  damp  atmosphere 
of  a  greenhouse.  An  experiment  lately  made  with  H. 
Auricula  treated  in  this  way  gave  a  good  result. 

To  indicate  the  object  with  which  these  fertilisation 
experiments  were  undertaken,  I  venture  to  make  some 
preliminary  remarks  respecting  the  genus  Hieracitmt.  This 
genus  possesses  such  an  extraordinary  profusion  of  distinct 
forms  that  no  other  genus  of  plants  can  compare  with  it. 
Some  of  these  forms  are  distinguished  by  special  peculiarities 
and  may  be  taken  as  type-forms  of  species,  while  all  the 
rest  represent  intermediate  and  transitional  forms  by  w^hich 
the  type-forms  are  connected  together.  The  difficulty  in 
the  separation  and  delimitation  of  these  forms  has  demanded 
the  close  attention  of  the  experts.  Regarding  no  other 
genus  has  so  much  been  written  or  have  so  many  and  such 
fierce  controversies  arisen,  without  as  yet  coming  to  a 
definite  conclusion.  It  is  obvious  that  no  general  under- 
standing can  be  arrived  at,  so  long  as  the  value  and 
significance  of  the  intermediate  and  transitional  forms  are 
unknown. 

Regarding  the  question  w^hether  and  to  what  extent 
hybridisation  plays  a  part  in  the  production  of  this  wealth 
of  forms,  we  find  very  various  and  conflicting  views  held 
by  leading  botanists.     While  some  of  them  maintain  that 


364  Mender s  Experiments 

this  phenomenon  has  a  far-reaching  influence,  others,  for 
example,  Fries,  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  hybrids  in 
Hiei^acia.  Others  take  up  an  intermediate  position  ;  and 
while  granting  that  hybrids  are  not  rarely  formed  between 
the  species  in  a  wild  state,  still  maintain  that  no  great 
importance  is  to  be  attached  to  the  fact,  on  the  ground 
that  they  are  only  of  short  duration.  The  [suggested] 
causes  of  this  are  partly  their  restricted  fertility  or  complete 
sterility ;  partly  also  the  knowledge,  obtained  by  experiment, 
that  in  hybrids  self-fertilisation  is  always  prevented  if  pollen 
of  one  of  the  parent-forms  reaches  the  stigma.  On  these 
grounds  it  is  regarded  as  inconceivable  that  Hieracium 
hybrids  can  constitute  and  maintain  themselves  as  fully 
fertile  and  constant  forms  when  growing  near  their  pro- 
genitors. 

The  question  of  the  origin  of  the  numerous  and  constant 
intermediate  forms  has  recently  acquired  no  small  interest 
since  a  famous  Hieracmm  specialist  has,  in  the  spirit  of 
the  Darwinian  teaching,  defended  the  view  that  these 
forms  are  to  be  regarded  as  [arising]  from  the  trans- 
mutation of  lost  or  still  existing  species. 

From  the  nature  of  the  subject  it  is  clear  that  without 
an  exact  knowledge  of  the  structure  and  fertility  of  the 
hybrids  and  the  condition  of  their  offspring  through  several 
generations  no  one  can  undertake  to  determine  the  possible 
influence  exercised  by  hybridisation  over  the  multiplicity 
of  intermediate  forms  in  Hieracium.  The  condition  of 
the  Hieracium  hybrids  in  the  range  we  are  concerned  with 
must  necessarily  be  determined  by  experiments  ;  for  we  do 
not  possess  a  complete  theory  of  hybridisation,  and  we  may 
be  led  into  erroneous  conclusions  if  we  take  rules  deduced 
from  observation  of  certain  other  hybrids  to  be  Laws  of 
hybridisation,  and  try  to  apply  them  to  Hieracium  without 
further  consideration.  If  by  the  experimental  method  w^e 
can  obtain  a  sufficient  insight  into  the  phenomenon  of 
hybridisation  in  Hieracium,  then  by  the  help  of  the  ex- 
perience which  has  been  collected  respecting  the  structural 
relations  of  the  wild  forms,  a  satisfactory  judgment  in 
regard  to  this  question  may  become  possible. 

Thus  we  may  express  the  object  which  was  sought  after 
in   these  experiments.      I   venture  now   to  relate  the  very 


with  Hieraciuni  365 

slight  results  which  I  have  as  yet  obtained  with  reference 
to  this  object. 

I.  Respecting  the  structure  of  the  hybrids,  we  have 
to  record  the  striking  phenomenon  that  the  forms  hitherto 
obtained  by  similar  fertilisation  are  not  identical.  The 
hybrids  H.  praealhtvi  %  x  H.  aurantiacttni  $  and  H.  Auri- 
ctUa  %  X  H.  azcraiitiacttm  $  are  each  represented  by  two, 
and  //.  AMricitla  %  x  H.  pratense  $  by  three  individuals, 
while  as  to  the  remainder  only  one  of  each  has  been 
obtained. 

If  we  compare  the  individual  characters  of  the  hybrids 
with  the  corresponding  characters  of  the  two  parent  types, 
we  find  that  they  sometimes  present  an  intermediate  structure, 
but  are  sometimes  so  near  to  one  of  the  parent  characters 
that  the  [corresponding]  character  of  the  other  has  receded 
considerably  or  almost  evades  observation.  So,  for  instance, 
we  see  in  one  of  the  two  forms  of  //.  Attricttla  %  x  H. 
aurantiacurn  $  pure  yellow  disc-florets ;  only  the  petals 
of  the  marginal  florets  are  on  the  outside  tino-ed  with  red 
to  a  scarcely  noticeable  degree  :  in  the  other  on  the  contrary 
the  colour  of  these  florets  comes  very  near  to  H.  aurantiaaim, 
only  in  the  centre  of  the  disc  the  orange  red  passes  into  a 
deep  golden-yellow.  This  difference  is  noteworthy,  for  the 
flower-colour  in  Hieraciuni  has  the  value  of  a  constant 
character.  Other  similar  cases  are  to  be  found  in  the 
leaves,  the  peduncles,  &c. 

If  the  hybrids  are  compared  with  the  parent  types  as 
regards  the  sum  total  of  their  characters,  then  the  two 
forms  of  H.  praealhcnt  %  x  H.  aiirantiacum  ^  constitute 
approximately  intermediate  forms  which  do  not  agree  in 
certain  characters.  On  the  contrary  in  H.  Auricula  %  x  H. 
aurantiacuni  $  and  in  //.  Au7Hcula  %  x  H.  pratense  $  we 
see  the  forms  widely  divergent,  so  that  one  of  them  is 
nearer  to  the  one  and  the  other  to  the  other  parental  type, 
while  in  the  case  of  the  last-named  hybrid  there  is  still  a 
third  w^hich  is  almost  precisely  intermediate  between  them. 

The  conviction  is  then  forced  on  us  that  we  have  here 
only  single  terms  in  an  unknown  series  which  may  be 
formed  by  the  direct  action  of  the  pollen  of  one  species  on 
the  egg-cells  of  another. 


366  Menders  Experiments 

2.  With  a  single  exception  the  hybrids  in  question 
form  seeds  capable  of  germination.  H.  echioides  %  x  H. 
aurantiacufyi  $  may  be  described  as  fully  fertile  ;  H.  prae- 
altum  %v.  H.  flagellare  t  as  fertile  ;  H.  praealhun  $  x  //. 
aurantiacu7n  $  and  //.  Auricula  %  x  H.  pratense  $  as 
partially  fertile  ;  H.  Atiricttla  %  x  H.  Pilosella  $  as  slightly 
fertile,  and  I/.  Auricula  %  x  H.  aura^itiacum  $  as  infertile. 
Of  the  two  forms  of  the  last-named  hybrid,  the  red-flowered 
one  was  completely  sterile,  but  from  the  yellow-flowered 
one  a  single  well-formed  seed  was  obtained.  Moreover  it 
must  not  pass  unmentioned  that  among  the  seedlings  of  the 
partially  fertile  hybrid  //.  pi^aealtum  %  x  H.  aiira^itiacuin  $ 
there  was  one  plant  which  possessed  full  fertility. 

[3.]  As  yet  the  offspring  produced  by  self- fertilisation 
of  the  hybrids  have  not  varied,  but  agree  in  their  characters 
both  with  each  other  and  with  the  hybrid  plant  from  which 
they  were  derived. 

From  H.  praealtum  %  x  H.  flagellare  $  two  generations 
have  flowered;  from  H.  echioides  %y.H.  ati7'antiacum  $, 
H.  praealhtm  %  xH.  aui^antiactim  $,  H.  Attrictda  %  x  H. 
Pilosella  $  one  generation  in  each  case  has  flowered. 

4.  The  fact  must  be  declared  that  in  the  case  of  the 
fully  fertile  hybrid  H.  echioides  %  x  H.  aurantiacum  $  the 
pollen  of  the  parent  types  was  not  able  to  prevent  self- 
fertilisation,  though  it  was  applied  in  great  quantity  to  the 
stigmas  protruding  through  the  anther-tubes  when  the 
flowers  opened. 

From  two  flower-heads  treated  in  this  way  seedlings 
were  produced  resembling  this  hybrid  plant.  A  very 
similar  experiment,  carried  out  this  summer  with  the  par- 
tially fertile  H.  praealtum  %x  H.  aurantiacttm  $  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  those  flower-heads  in  which  pollen  of  the 
parent  type  or  of  some  other  species  had  been  applied  to 
the  stigmas,  developed  a  notably  larger  number  of  seeds 
than  those  which  had  been  left  to  self-fertilisation  alone. 
The  explanation  of  this  result  must  only  be  sought  in 
the  circumstance  that  as  a  large  part  of  the  pollen-grains 
of  the  hybrid,  examined  microscopically,  show  a  defective 
structure,  a  number  of  egg-cells  capable  of  fertilisation  do 


with  Hierachim  367 

not  become  fertilised  by  their  own  pollen  In  the  ordinary 
course  of  self-fertlllsatlon. 

It  not  rarely  happens  that  in  fully  fertile  species  In  the 
wild  state  the  formation  of  the  pollen  fails,  and  In  many 
anthers  not  a  single  good  grain  is  developed.  If  in  these 
cases  seeds  are  nevertheless  formed,  such  fertilisation  must 
have  been  effected  by  foreign  pollen.  In  this  way  hybrids 
may  easily  arise  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  many  forms 
of  insects,  notably  the  Industrial  Hymenoptera,  visit  the 
flowers  of  Hieracia  with  great  zeal  and  are  responsible  for 
the  pollen  which  easily  sticks  to  their  hairy  bodies  reaching 
the  stigmas  of  neighbouring  plants. 

From  the  few  facts  that  I  am  able  to  contribute  it 
will  be  evident  the  work  scarcely  extends  beyond  Its  first 
inception.  I  must  express  some  scruple  In  describing  in 
this  place  an  account  of  experiments  just  begun.  But  the 
conviction  that  the  prosecution  of  the  proposed  experiments 
will  demand  a  whole  series  of  years,  and  the  uncertainty 
whether  It  will  be  granted  to  me  to  bring  the  same  to  a 
conclusion  have  determined  me  to  make  the  present  com- 
munication. By  the  kindness  of  Dr  Nagell,  the  Munich 
Director,  who  was  good  enough  to  send  me  species  which 
were  wanting,  especially  from  the  Alps,  I  am  In  a  position 
to  include  a  larger  number  of  forms  In  my  experiments. 
I  venture  to  hope  even  next  year  to  be  able  to  contribute 
something  more  by  way  of  extension  and  confirmation  of 
the  present  account. 

If  finally  we  compare  the  described  result,  still  very 
uncertain,  with  those  obtained  by  crosses  made  between 
forms  of  Pistwt,  which  I  had  the  honour  of  communicating 
in  the  year  1865,  we  find  a  very  real  distinction.  In  Pisitm 
the  hybrids,  obtained  from  the  immediate  crossing  of  two 
forms,  have  in  all  cases  the  same  type,  but  their  posterity, 
on  the  contrary,  are  variable  and  follow  a  definite  law  in 
their  variations.  In  Hieracium  according  to  the  present 
experiments  the  exactly  opposite  phenomenon  seems  to  be 
exhibited.  Already  in  describing  the  Pistuji  experiments 
it  was  remarked  that  there  are  also  hybrids  whose  posterity 
do  not  vary,  and  that,  for  example,  according  to  Wichura 
the  hybrids  of  Salix  reproduce  themselves  like  pure  species. 
In  HieraciM7n  we   may  take    it  we  have  a  similar  case. 


368    Moidcfs  Expcrijuents  -c^it/i  Hien 

Whether  from  this  circumstance  we  may  veni 
the  conclusion  that  the  polymorphism  of  the  i 
and  Hieraciiini  is  connected  with  the  special 
their  hybrids  is  still  an  open  question,  which 
raised  but  not  as  yet  answered. 

[The  discovery  of  Ostenfeld  and  Raunkiaer 
ciu7)i  is  frequently  parthenogenetic,  or  apogamc 
puts  an  entirely  new  construction  on  the  res 
experiments.     See  p.   247.] 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1.  Allen,  G.  M.     The  heredity  of  coat  colour  in  mice. 
Acad.  Arts  and  Sci.,  Vol.  XL.  No.  2.      1904.     [See  also  C 

2.  Anthony,    R.     Bull.   Soc.    Anthr.,    1899,   p.    303.     [ 
Manx  Cat.] 

3.  Bacot,  A.     Experiments  with  Triphaena  comes  and  m 
Proc.  Ent.  Soc.  Lond.  1905,  p.  Ixvii. 

4.     .     Larvae  of  Lasiocampa  querais  and   its  vars.  an 

pairings  between  these  races.     Ent.  Rec.  xiii.  p.  114. 

5.  Balls,    W.    L.     The    wheat    problem    in    Egypt.     Y 
Khedivial  Agric.  Soc.     Cairo,  1907. 

6.     .     Studies  in  Egyptian  Cotton.     Ibid.      1907. 

7.  von    Baehr.     Ub.    d.   Bildung   der  Sexualzellen    bei 
Zool.  Anz.  XXXIII.  1908,  p.  507. 

8.  Bateson,  W.     Mendel's  Principles  of  Heredity.  Caml: 

9.     .     Note  on  the  Resolution  of  Compound  Characte 

breeding.     Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc,  Vol.  xii.  Nr.  vi.  p.  50. 

10.     .     The  present  state  of  knowledge  of  colour-herec 

and  rats.     Proc.  Zool.  Soc.   1903,  Vol.  11.  p-  71.     [On  p. 
of  the  terms  "Cinnamon  Agouti"  and  Golden  Agouti  is 
reversed.] 

1 1.     .     Variation  and  Differentiation  in  Parts  and  Brethr 

for  the  author.     Cambridge  1903. 

12.     .     Presidential  address  to  Section  D.     Brit.  Ass.  E 

bridge.     1904. 

13.     .     An  address  on  Mendelian  Heredity  and  its  ap 

Man.     Brain,  xxix.  1906,  p.  157. 


370  Bibliography 


i8.  Bateson,  W.  and  Punnett,  R.  C.  A  suggestion  as  to  the 
nature  of  the  walnut  Comb  in  Fowls.  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  xiii. 
1905,  p.  165. 

19.     and  Saunders,  E.  R.    Reports  to  the  Evolution  Committee 

of  the  Royal  Society,     i.      1902. 

20. and  Punnett,  R.  C.     Ibid.     11.     1905. 

21. .     Ibid.     III.     1906. 

22. .     Ibid.     IV.      1908. 

23.     and  Punnett,   R.   C.     The  Heredity  of  Sex.      Ibid.  N.  S. 

XXVII.  1908,  p.  785. 

24.  Baur,  E.  Unters.  lib.  d.  Erblichkeitsverhaltnisse  einer  nur  in 
Bastardform  lebensfahigen  Sippe  von  Aiitiri'hiimm  majus.  Ber.  Deut. 
Bot.  Ges.,  XXV.  1907,  p.  442.  See  also  Zt.  f.  indukt.  Abstammungs- 
und  Vererbungslehre,  i.  1908,  p.  124. 

25.     Einige     Ergebnisse    d.     experimentellen    Vererbungslehre. 

Beihefte  z.   Med.   Klinik.      1908,  iv.  p.   265, 

26.  Bell,  A.  Graham.  On  the  development  by  Selection  of  Super- 
numerary Mammae  in  Sheep.  Science,  ix.  1899,  p.  637;  ibid.  xix. 
1904,  p.  767;  also  Multi-nippled  Sheep,  privately  printed.  Wash- 
ington, 1904. 

27.  Biffen,  R.  H.  Mendel's  laws  of  Inheritance  and  Wheat  breeding. 
Journ.  Agric.  Sci.  i.  i.     Cambridge,  1905. 

28.     .     The  Inheritance  of  Sterility  in  the  Barleys.     Ibid.  Vol.  i., 

pt.  2,  1905,  p.  250. 

29.     .     Studies  in  the  Inheritance  of  Disease-resistance.     Ibid.  11. 

1907,  p.  109. 

30.     .     The  Hybridisation  of  Barleys.     Ibid.  11.  1907,  p.  183. 

31.  Blakeslee,  A.  F.  Zygospore  Germinations  in  the  Mucorineae. 
Ann.  Mycol.  iv.  1906. 

32.     .     Differentiation  of  Sex  in  Thallus  Gametophyte  and  Sporo- 

phyte.     Bot.  Gaz.  42,  1906,  p.  161. 

33.     .     The  Biological  Significance  and  Control  of  Sex.     Sci.,  N.  S., 

XXV.  1907,  p.  366. 

34.  Boveri,  T.  Zellenstudien.  Uber  die  Abhangigkeit  der  Kerngrosse 
und  Zellenzahl  der  Seeigellarven  von  der  Chromosomenzahl  der 
Ausgangszellen.     Jena  1905. 

35.     .     Zellen-Studien.     6.     Jena  (Fischer),  1907. 

36.  Brainerd,  E.  The  behaviour  of  the  seedlings  of  certain  violet 
hybrids.     Science,  N.  S.,  xxv.  1907,  p.  940. 

37.     .     Hybridism   of  the  genus   Viola.     Rhodora,  Vol.  vi.   1904, 

p.  213. 

38.     .     Pt.  II.     Ibid.  Vol.  VIII.  1906,  p.  6. 

39.     .     Pt.  III.     Ibid.  Vol.  VIII.  1906,  p.  49. 


Bibliography  3  7 1 


40.  Brainerd,  E.    Older  types  of  N.  American  Violets.    Ibid.  Vol.  ix. 
1907,  P-  93- 

41.     .     Mendel's  Law  of  Dominance  in  Viola.     Ibid.  Vol.  ix.  1907, 

p.  211. 

42.  Braun,    H.     Uber  die   specifischen   Chromosomenzahlen  in   der 
Gattung  Cyclops.     Zool.  Anz.  xxxii.  1907,  p.  407. 

43.  Burckhardt,   F.     Uber  Farbenblindheit.     Verb.   d.  Naturf.  Ges. 
Basel,  V.  1873,  p.  566. 

44.  Cannon,  W.  A.    Studies  in  Plant-Hybrids  :  The  Spermatogenesis 
of  Hybrid  Cotton.     Bull.  Torrey  Bot.  Club,  xxx.  1903,  p.  133. 

45.  Castle,    W.   E.     The   heredity  of  "Angora"  Coat  in  Mammals. 
Science,  N.  S.,  Vol.  xviii.  No.  467,  p.  760.     1903. 

46.     .     The  Heredity  of  Sex.     Bull.   Mus.   Comp.  Zool.   Harvard^ 

1903,  Vol.  XL.  No.  4. 

47.     .     The   Laws  of  Heredity  of   Galton  and  Mendel  and  some 

laws  governing  race-improvement  by  Selection.  Proc.  Amer.  Acad. 
Arts  and  Sci.,  xxxix.  1903,  p.  223. 

48.     .     Heredity  of  Coat   Characters  in  Guinea-pigs  and  Rabbits. 

Carnegie  Instit.  of  Washington.      1905. 

49.     .      The    Origin    of    a    Polydactylous   Race    of    Guinea-pigs. 

Carnegie  Instit.  of  Washington.      1906. 

50.     .     Mendel's  Law  of  Heredity.     Science,  N.  S.,   xviii.    1903, 

p.  396. 

51.     .     Yellow   Mice  and  Gametic  Purity.     Science,  N.  S.,  xxiv. 

1906,  p.  275. 

52.     .     On  a  Case  of  Reversion  induced  by  Cross-Breeding  and  its 

Fixation.     Ibid.  xxv.  1907,  p.  151. 

53.     .     Colour-varieties  of  the  Rabbit  and  of  other  Rodents.     Ibid. 

xxvi.  1907,  p.  287. 

54.     .     The  production  and  fixation  of  new  Breeds.     Proc.  Am. 

Breeders'  Ass.  in.  1907,  p.  34. 

55.     and    Forbes,  A.     Heredity  of  Hair-length  in  Guinea-pigs 

and  its  bearing  on  the  theory  of  pure  Gametes.     Ibid.     1906. 

56.     and  Allen,  G.  M.     The  Heredity  of  Albinism.     Proc.  Am. 

Ac.  Arts  and  Sci.,  Vol.  xxxviii.  1903,  No.  21,  p.  603. 

57.     with  Carpenter,  Clark,  Mast  and  Barrows.     The  effects 

of  inbreeding,  cross-breeding  and  selection  upon  the  fertility  and 
variability  of  Drosophila.  Proc.  Am.  Acad,  of  Arts  and  Sci.,  Vol.  xli. 
No.  2)Z'      1906. 

58.     [and  MacCurdy.     See  MacCurdy.] 

58^.     Correns,  C.     Untersuchungen  liber  die  Xenien  bei  Zea  Mays. 
Ber.  Ueutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1899,  xvii.  No.  10,  p.  410. 

59.     .     Uber  den  Einfluss,   welchen  die  Zahl  der  zur  Bestiiubung 

verwendeten  PoUenkorner  auf  die  Nachkommenschaft  hat.  Ber. 
Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1900,  xviii.  p.  422. 

24 — 2 


372  Bibliography 

60.  Correns,  C.  G.  Mendel's  Regel  liber  das  Verhalten  der  Nach- 
kommenschaft  der  Rassenbastarde.  Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch., 
XVII.  Heft  4,  p.  158.     1900. 

61.     .     Uber   Levkoyenbastarde.     Zur   Kenntnis    der  Grenzen  der 

Mendel'schen  Regeln.     Bot.  Centr.-Bl.,  Bd.  lxxxiv.  p.  97.      1900. 

62.     .     Gregor    Mendel's   "Versuche   liber   Pflanzenhybriden"  und 

die  Bestatigung  ihrer  Ergebnisse  durch  die  neuesten  Untersuchungen. 
Bot.  Ztg.,  1900,  Lviii.  No.  15,  p.  230. 

63.     .     Bastarde  zwischen  Maisrassen,  mit  besonderer  Berlicksichti- 

gung  der  Xenien.     Bibl.  Bot.  Original-Abh.  a.  d.  Gesamtgebiete  d. 
Bot.,  Heft  53.     1901. 

64.     .     Die   Ergebnisse   der   neuesten    Bastardforschungen    flir    die 

Vererbungslehre.     Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1901,  xix.  p.  (71). 

65.     .     Scheinbare  Ausnahmen  von  der  Mendels'schen  Spaltungs- 

regel  fur  Bastarde.     Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1902,  xx.  p.  159. 

66.     .     Uber  den  Modus  und  den  Zeitpunkt  der  Spaltung  der  An- 

lagen   bei  den  Bastarden  vom  Erbsen-Typus.     Bot.  Ztg.,   1902,  lx. 
No.  5/6,  p.  66. 

67.     .     Uber    Bastardierungsversuche   mit   Mirabilis-Sippen.     Erste 

Mitteilung.     Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1902,  Bd.  xx.  10,  p.  594. 

68.     .     Neue  Untersuchung  auf  dem   Gebiet   der  Bastardierungs- 

lehre.     Bot.  Ztg.,  1903,  lxi.  p.  113. 

69.     .     ilber    die    dominierenden    Merkmale    der    Bastarde.      Ber. 

Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1903,  xxi.  p.  133. 

70.  .  Weitere  Beitrage  zur  Kenntnis  der  dominierenden  Merk- 
male und  der  Mosaikbildung  der  Bastarde.     Ibid.  p.  195. 

71.     .     Die    Merkmalspaare   beim   Studium    der   Bastarde.      Ibid. 

p.  202. 

72.     .     Experimentelle    Untersuchungen    liber    die     Gynodioecie. 

Ibid.   1904,  XXII.  p.  506. 

73.     .     Ein  typisch  spaltender  Bastard  zwischen  einer  einjahrigen 

und  einer  zvveijahrigen  Sippe  des  Hyoscyavius  7iiger.     Ibid.  p.  517. 

74.     .     Zur  Kenntnis  der  scheinbar  neuen  Merkmale  der  Bastarde. 

Zweite  Mitteilung  liber  Bastardierungsversuche  mit  Mirabilis-Sippen. 
Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1905,  Bd.  xxiii.  p.  70. 

75.     .      Weitere    Untersuchungen    liber     die    Gynodioecie.      Ber. 

Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.,  xxiii.  1905,  p.  452. 

76.     .     Einige   Bastardierungsversuche   mit    normalen    Sippen   und 

ihre  allgemeinen  Ergebnisse.     Jahrb.  f.  vvissensch.  Bot.,  xli.  Heft  3, 
p.  458.     1905. 

77.     .     Uber   Vererbungsgesetze.     Vortrag.      Sept.    1905.      Berlin. 

Borntraeger. 

78.     .     Gregor  Mendel's    Briefe  an    Carl   Nageli.     Abh.   d.   K.   S. 

Gesellsch.   d.  Wissensch.,   math.-phys.    Kl.,   xxix.    in.   Leipzig  1905, 
p.  189. 


Bibliography  373 

79.  Correns,  C.  YAnNQXQ.ih\irio^\QX's>\iz\\vi\\\.Dimorphathecapluvialis. 
Das  Keimen  der  beiderlei  Friichte  der  D.  pliivialis.  Ber.  d.  Deut. 
Bot.  Ges.  1906,  XXIV.  p.  162. 

80.     .     Zur    Kenntniss    d.    Geschlechtsformen    polygamer   Bliiten- 

pflanzen   u.   ihrer  Beeinflassbarkeit.     Jahrb.   Wiss.   Bot,   xliv.   1907, 
p.  124. 

81.     .     Bestimmung  u.  Vererbung  des  Geschlechtes.    Leipzig ;  Born- 

traeger,  1907. 

82.     .     Die  Vererbung  der    Geschlechtsformen    bei    den    gynodio- 

cischen    Pflanzen,     Ber.   Deut.  Bot.   Gesell.  Jahrg.    1906,   Bd.   xxiv. 

P-  459- 

83.  Coutagne,  G.  Recherches  Experimentales  sur  I'Heredite' chez  les 
vers  a  soie.     Bull.  sci.  de  la  France  et  Belgique,  xxxvi.      1902. 

^'^a.  Crampe.  Zucht-Versuche  mit  zahmen  Wanderratten.  Landwirths. 
Jahrb.,  xii.  1883,  p.  389;  and  xiii.  1884,  p.  699. 

84.  Cuenot,  L.  La  loi  de  ]\Iendel  et  I'heredite  de  la  pigmentation 
chez  les  souris.     Arch.  Zool.  exp.  et  gen.  Notes  et  Revue.      1902. 

85.     ■.     2'^^  note.     Ibid.     1903. 

86.     .     3"^^  note.     Ibid.      1904. 

87.     .     4"^^  note.     Ibid.     1905. 

1907. 

Un  paradoxe  he'reditaire  chez  les  Souris.     Bull.  Mens,  de  la 


^9    ,  . 

Re'union  Biol,  de  Nancy,  1904,  p.  1050. 

90.  Darbishire,  A.  D.  Note  on  the  Results  of  Crossing  Japanese 
Waltzing  Mice  with  European  Albino  Races.  Biometrika,  11.  1902, 
loi;  continued,  ibid.  p.  165;  ibid.  p.  282;  ibid.  iii.  p.  i. 

91.     .     On   the   supposed   Antagonism  of   Mendelian  to  Biometric 

Theories  of  Heredity.     Manchester  Mem.^  xlix.  (1905),  No.  6. 

92.     .     On  the  Difference  between  Physiological  and  Statistical  Laws 

of  Heredity.     Ibid.,  Vol.  l.  No.  ii. 

93.     .     Professor  Lang's  breeding  experiments  with  Helix  hortensis 

and  H.  nemoralis.     The  Journ.  Conchol.,  Vol.  xi.  No.  7,  p.  193. 

94. .     On  the  result  of  Crossing  Round  with  Wrinkled  Peas,  with 

especial  Reference  to  their  Starch  Grains.     Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  Vol.  80, 
B.,  1908,  p.  122. 

95.  Davenport,  C.  B.  Review  of  von  Guaita's  Experiments  in 
breeding  Mice.     Biol.  Bull.  11.  1900,  p.  121. 

96.     .     Mendel's  Law  of  Dichotomy  in  Hybrids.     Ibid.  p.  307. 

97.     .     Colour  inheritance  in  Mice.     Wonderhorsesand  Mendelism. 

Science,  N.S.,  Vol.  xix.  No.  472,  p.  no,  1904;  No.  473,  p.  151,  1904. 

98.     .     Report  on  the  work  of  the   Station  for  Exp.  Evol.,  Cold 

Spring  Harbour.      1905.     [Details  in  regard  to  Cats.]     Fourth  Year- 
book Carnegie  Inst. 

99. .     Report  for  1906.     Ibid.  1907. 


374  Bibliography 

100.  Davenport,  C.  B.     Origin  of  black  Sheep  in  the  Flock.    Science, 
N.  S.  XXII.  1905,  p.  674. 

1 01.     .     Inheritance  in  Poultry.     Publ.  Carnegie  Inst.,  No.  52,  1907. 

102.     .     Dominance  of  Characteristics  in   Poultry.     R.   Hort.  Soc. 

Conference  on  Genetics.     1907. 

103.     .     Heredity  and  Mendel's  Law.    Proc.  Wash.  Ac.  Sci.  ix.  1907, 

p.  179. 

104.     .     Determination    of   Dominance    in    Mendelian    Inheritance. 

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  xlvii.   1908,  p.   59. 

105.     .     Inheritance  in  Canaries.    Publ.  Carnegie  Instit.  Washington, 

No.  95,  1908. 

106.     .     Degeneration,  Albinism  and  Inbreeding.    Sci.,  N.  S.  xxviii. 

1908,  p.  454. 

107. and  Davenport,  G.   C.     Heredity  of  Eye-Colour  in  Man. 

Sci.,  N.  S.  XXVI.  1907,  p,  589. 

108.     .     Heredity  of  Hair-form  in  Man.     Amer.  Nat.,  xlii. 

1908,  p.  341. 

109.  Doncaster,  L.     On  the  Inheritance  of  Tortoiseshell  and  Related 
Colours  in  Cats.     Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  xiii.  pt.  i,  p.  35.      1904. 

no.     .     On  the  Inheritance  of  Coat  Colour  in  Rats.     Proc.  Camb. 

Phil.  Soc,  Vol.  XIII.  pt.  IV.  p.  215.      1905. 

111.     and  Raynor,  G.  H.    Breeding  Experiments  with  Lepidoptera. 

Proc  Zool.  Soc.  London,  1906,  Vol.  i.  p.  125.    See  also  Nature,  1907, 
76,  p.  248. 

112.     .     On  the  Maturation  of  the  unfertilized  egg,  and  the  fate  of 

the  polar  bodies  in   the  Tenthredinidae   (Saw-flies).     Quart.  Journ. 
Micros.  Sci.,  xlix.  pt.  iv.  1906,  p.  561. 

113-     •     Collective  Inquiry  as  to  Progressive  Melanism  in  Lepidoptera. 

Entom.  Rec  xviii. 

114-     •     Sex  Inheritance  in  the  moth  A draxas  grossulariata  and  its 

var.  lacticolor.     Rep.  Evol.  Ctee.  iv.  1908. 

Drinkard,  A.  W.     [See  Price,  H.  L.] 

Drink  water,    H.       An    account   of  a    Brachydactylous    Family. 
Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinburgh,  xxviii.  1908,  p.  35. 

Durham,    F.   M.     A  Preliminary  Account  of  the  Inheritance  of 
Coat-colour  in  Mice.     Rep.  Evol.  Ctee.  iv.  p.  41,  1908. 

117.     .     Note  on  Melanins.     Jour.  Physiol,  xxxv.  1907. 

118.     and  Marryat,  D.  C.   E.     Inheritance  of  Sex  in  Canaries. 

Rep.  Evol.  Ctee.  iv.  1908. 

East,   E.   M.     The  Relation  of  Certain  Biological  Principles  to 
Plant-breeding.    Bull.  158  Connecticut  Agric  Exp.  Station,  Nov.  1907. 

Emerson,    R.   A.      Preliminary   Account  of  Variation   in    Bean 
Hybrids.      15th  Ann.  Rep.  Nebraska  Agric.  Exp.  station,  1902,  p.  30. 

Heredity  in   Bean   Hybrids.      T7th  Ann.   Rep.   Agric   Exp. 


II 


116 


119 


120 


121 


station  of  Nebraska,  1904,  p.  33. 


Bibliography  3-75 

122.  Farabee,  W.  C.  Inheritance  of  Digital  Malformations  in  Man. 
Papers  of  Peabody  Mus.  of  Am.  Arch,  and  Ethn.  Harvard  Univ.  in.  3, 
1905,  p.  69. 

123.  Focke,  W.  O.     Die  Pflanzenmischlinge.     Berlin,  1881. 

124.  Foot,  K.  and  Strobell,  E.  C.  Study  of  Chromosomes  in  the 
spermatogenesis  of  A?iasa  tristis.  Am.  Journ.  Anatomy,  vii.  1907, 
p.  279. 

125.  Galton,  F.  The  average  contribution  of  each  several  ancestor  to 
the  total  heritage  of  the  offspring.  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  Vol.  61,  1897, 
p.  401. 

126.  Garrod,  A.  E.  The  Incidence  of  Alkaptonuria,  a  study  in  chemical 
Individuality.     Lancet,  Dec.  13,  1902. 

127.     .      The    Inborn    Errors   of   Metabolism    (Croonian    Lectures). 

Lancet,  Jan.  4,  11,  18,  25,  1908. 

128.  Gates,  R.  R.  Pollen  Development  in  Hybrids  of  Oenothera  lata 
and  O.  Lamarckiana  and  its  relation  to  ?^Iutation.  Bot.  Gaz.  43, 
1907,  p.  81. 

129.     .     Hybridization  and  germ-cells  of  Oenothera  mutants.     Ibid. 

44,  1907,  P-  I- 

130.     .     A  study  of  Reduction  in  Oen.  rubri?iervis.     Ibid.  46,   1908, 

p.  I. 

131.     .     Chromosomes  of  Oenothera.     Science,  N.  S.,  xxvii.  p.  193. 

132.  Gossage,  A.  M.  The  inheritance  of  certain  human  abnormalities. 
Quart.  Journ.  Med.  1908,  p.  331. 

133.  Gregory,  R.  P.  The  abortive  development  of  the  Pollen  in 
certain  Sweet  Peas.     Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  1905,  xiii.  p.  148. 

134.      .    The  seed  characters  of  j^/jz^w  Jrt//z;2^;«.    The  New  Phytologist, 

II.  10,  1903,  p.  226. 

[See  also  Bateson.] 

135.  Guaita,  G.  von.  Versuche  mit  Kreuzungen  von  verschiedenen 
Rassen  der  Hausmaus.    Ber.  Naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  x.,  xi.  1898,  1900. 

13 6.  Guyer,  M.  F.  Spermatogenesis  of  Normal  and  Hybrid  Pigeons. 
Chicago,  1900.     Diss. 

137.     .     Hybridism  and  the  Germ-Cell.     Bull.   No.   21   of  Univ.  of 

Cincinnati,  1902. 

138.  Haacke,  W.  Die  Gesetze  der  Rassenmischung  und  die  Konsti- 
tution  des  Keimplasmas.  Arch.  f.  Entwicklungsmech.  d.  Org.  xxi. 
No.  I,  1906.  [This  remarkable  paper  gives  details  of  Mendelian 
experiments  made  on  a  large  scale  with  Mice,  prior  to  the  rediscovery 
of  Mendel] 

139.  Hacker,  V.  Uberdas  Schicksal  der  elterlichen  und  grosselterlichen 
Kernanteile.     Jen.  Ztsch.  f.  Naturwissens.  xxxvii.  1902,  p.  297. 

140.     .     Bastardierung  und  Geschlechtszellenbildung.      Zool.  Jahrb., 

Sup.  VII.  1904,  p.  161. 


37^  Bibliography 

141.  Hacker,  V.  Bastardierung  und  Geschlechtszellenbildung :  Ein 
kritisches  Referat.     Zool.  Jahrb.  1904,  p.  161. 

142.     .       Die    Chromosomen    als    angenommene    Vererbungstrager. 

Ergeb.  u.  Fortschritte  Zool.  i.     Jena  (Fischer),  1907. 

143-     •      Uber    Mendelsche  Vererbung   bei    Axolotln.       Zool.   Anz. 

XXXI.  1907,  p.  99. 

144-     •     Ub.  Axolotlkreuzungen.    Verb.  d.  Deutsch.  Zool.  Ges.  1908, 

p.  194. 

145.  Hagedoorn,  A.  L.  Origin  of  two  new  retrogressive  varieties  by 
one  Mutation  in  Mice.  Univ.  California  Publications  in  Physiol,  iii. 
p.  87,  1908. 

146.  Hardy,  G.  H.  Statistical  Results  of  MendeHan  Heredity.  Sci., 
N.  S.  xxviii.  p.  49. 

147.  Harris.  Experiments  with  Hemerophila  abruptaria.  Proc.  Ent. 
Soc.  Lond.  1904,  p.  Ixxii.  and  1905,  p.  Ixiii. 

Harrison,  A.     [See  Main,  H.] 

148.  Heider,  K.  Vererbung  und  Chromosomen.  Vortrag.  Versamml. 
d.  Naturforscher  u.  Arzte.     Jena,  1906. 

149.  Henking,  H.  Unters.  lib.  d.  ersten  Entwickelungsvorgange  in  d. 
Eiern  der  Insekten.     Z.  wiss.  Zool.  1890. 

150.  Hildebrand,  F.  Uber  einige  Pflanzenbastardierungen.  Jen.  Ztg. 
f.  Naturw.  1889,  xxiii. 

151.  Hind,  W.  Taillessness  in  Manx  Cat.  Ann.  Rep.  N.  Staffs.  Field 
Club,  1889,  p.  81. 

152.  Hurst,  C.  C.  Notes  on  some  experiments  in  Hybridisation  and 
Cross-Breeding.     Journ.  R.  Hort.  Soc.  xxiv.  1900,  p.  90. 

153-     •     Mendel's  "Law"  applied  to  Orchid  Hybrids.     Ibid.  xxvi. 

pt.  4  and  xxvii.  1902,  pts.  2  and  3. 

154-     •     Mendel's  Principles  applied  to  Wheat  Hybrids.     Ibid,  xxvii. 

1903,  pt.  4. 

155-     •     Experiments  in  the  Heredity  of  Peas.     Ibid.  1904,  xxviii. 

p.  483. 

156.     .     Experiments  with  Poultry.     Rep.  Evol.  Committee  Roy.  Soc. 

1905,  II.  p.  131. 

157-     •     Experimental  Studies  on  Heredity  in  Rabbits.     Linn.  Soc. 

Journ.  Zool.  1905,  xxix.  p.  283. 

158.     .     On  the  Inheritance  of  Coat-Colour  in  Horses.     Proc.  Roy. 

Soc,  Vol.  77,  B.,  1906,  p.  388. 

159-     •     Mendel's  Principles  applied  to  Orchid  Hybrids.     Journ.  R. 

Hort.  Soc.  xxvii.  1902. 

160.     .     Mendelian  Characters  in  Plants  and  Animals.     Report  Conf. 

on  Genetics,  R.  Hortic.  Soc.  London,  1906,  p.  114. 

161.     .     On  the  Inheritance  of  Eye-colour  in  Man.     Proc.  Roy.  Soc, 

Vol.  80,  B.,  1908,  p.  85. 


Bibliography  3yy 

162.  Hurst,  C.  C.  Mendel's  Law  of  Heredity  and  its  application  to  Man. 
Leicester  Lit.  Phil.  See.  Trans.,  xii.  1908,  p.  35. 

163.  Jennings,  H.  S.  Heredity,  Variation,  and  Evolution  in  Protozoa. 
Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  V.  1908,  p.  577. 

164.  Johannsen,  W.  Uber  Erblichkeit  in  Populationen  und  in  reinen 
Linien.     Jena,  1903.     Fischer. 

165.     .     Ub.   Knospenmutation  bei  Phaseohis.     Zt.  f.  Ind.  Abstam- 

mungs-  u.  Vererbungslehre,  i.  1908,  p.  i. 

166.  Kammerer,  P.  Vererbung  erzwungener  Fortpflanzungsanpassun- 
gen.  Die  Nachkommen  der  spatgeborenen  Salamand7'a  maculosa  und 
der  {xv^^g€QoxQrv^Xi  Salamandra  atra.    Arch.  f.  Entwm.  xxv.  1907,  p.  7. 

i66«.  Kennel,  J.  Ub.  eine  stummelschwanzige  Hauskatze  u.  ihre 
Nachkonimenschaft.     Zool.  JB.,  Syst.,  xv.  1901,  219. 

167.  Lang,  A.  Uber  Vorversuche  zu  Untersuchungen  liber  die  Varie- 
tatenbildung  von  Helix  hortc7isis  Miiller  und  Helix  Jievioralis  L. 
Festschr.  z.  70.  Geburtstage  E.  Haeckels,  p.  439.     Jena,  1904. 

168.     .     Uber  die  Mendelschen  Gesetze,  Art-  und  Varietatenbildung, 

Mutation  und  Variation,  insbesondere  bei  unseren  Hain-  und  Garten- 
schnecken.  Vortrag.  Schweiz.  Naturf.  Gesellsch.  Luzern,  1905. 
H.  Keller. 

169.     ,     Uber  d.   Bastarde  von  Helix  hoTtensis  u.  Helix  iiemoralis. 

Jena  (Fischer),  1908. 

170.  Leake,  H.  Martin.  Studies  in  Experimental  Breeding  of  Indian 
Cottons.     J.  R.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  X.  S.,  iv.  1908,  p.  13. 

171.  Lewis,  T.,  and  Embleton,  D.  Split-Hand  and  Split-Foot 
Deformities,  their  types,  origin,  and  transmission.  Biometrika,  vi. 
1908,  p.  26. 

172.  Lock,  R.  H.  Studies  in  Plant-Breeding  in  the  Tropics,  L  Ann. 
R.  Bot.  Gard.  Peradeniya,  1904,  Vol.  11.  p.  301. 

173.     .     Continued,  H.     Ibid.  Vol.  11.  p.  357. 

174.     .     III.     Experiments  with  Maize.     Ibid.  Vol.  iii.  1906,  p.  95. 

175.     .     The    present    state    of  knowledge    of   Heredity    in    Pisum. 

Ibid.  IV.  1908,  p.  93. 

176.     .     On  the  inheritance  of  certain  invisible  characters  in  Peas. 

Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  Vol.  79,  B.,  1907,  p.  28. 

177.     .     Recent  progress  in  the  study  of  Variation,  Heredity,  and 

Evolution.     London,  Murray,  1906. 

178.  Lotsy,  J.  P.  Vorlesungen  liber  Deszendenztheorien  mit  beson- 
derer  Berucksichtigung  der  botanischen  Seite  der  Frage.  Jena,  1906. 
Fischer. 

179.  Lutz,  A.  M.  Prelim.  Note  on  Chromosomes  of  Oenothera 
Laffiarckiana  and  one  of  its  Mutants  O.  gigas.  Science,  N.  S.  xxvi., 
p.  151. 

180.  Lutz,  F.  E.  The  tegminal  position  in  Gryllus.  Canad.  Ent., 
June   1906,  p.   207. 


378  Bibliography 

i8i.  Lutz,  F.  E.  Inheritance  of  the  manner  of  clasping  the  Hands. 
Amer.  Nat.  1908,  p.  195. 

182.     .     Note    on    Inheritance    of    Variations     in    Color-pattern    of 

Crioceris  asparagi.     Psyche,  June,    1908,  p.   50. 

183.  MacCurdy,  H.  and  Castle,  W.  E.  Selection  and  Cross- 
Breeding  in  relation  to  the  Inheritance  of  Coat-pigments  and  Coat- 
patterns  in  Rats  and  Guinea-pigs.    Publ.  Carnegie  Inst.,  No.  70,  1907. 

184.  Macdougal,  D.  T.  Mutation  in  Plants.  Contrib.  N.  Y.  Bot. 
Garden,  No.  48,  1903. 

185. .     Heredity  and  the  Origin  of  Species.     Chicago,  1905. 

186.     .     Mutants  and  Hybrids  of  the  Oenotheras.     Publ.  Carnegie 

Inst.,  No.  24,  1905. 

187.     .     Discontinuous   variation   in    Pedigree-Cultures.      Pop.   Sci. 

Monthly,  1906,  Sept. 

187^;.     .     Mutations,    Variations   and    Relationships   of    Oenothera. 

Carn.  Publ.,  No.  81. 

188.  McClung,  C.  E.  The  Accessory  Chromosome — sex  determinant? 
Biol.  Bull.  III.  1902,  p.  43. 

189.  McCracken,  Isabel.  A  Study  of  the  Inheritance  of  Dichro- 
matism  in  Lina  Lapponica.     J.  of  Exp.  Zool.  1905,  11.  p.  117. 

190.     .     Inheritance  of  Dichromatism  in  Lina  and  Gastroidea.     Ibid. 

1936,  III.  p.  321. 

191.     .     Occurrence  of  a  Sport  in  Melasoma  {Lina)  scripta  and  its 

behaviour  in  Heredity.     Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  1907,  iv.  p.  221. 

192.  Main,  H.  and  Harrison,  A.  Experiments  with  Amphidasys 
betularia.     Proc.  Ent.  Soc.  Lond.  1905,  p.  vi. 

193.  Marryat,  D.  C.  E.  Notes  on  the  Infection  and  Histology  of  two 
Wheats  immune  to  the  attacks  of  Puccinia  glu??iarum,  yellow  rust. 
Journ.  Agric.  Sci.  11.  1907,  p.  129. 

[See  also  Durham.] 

194.  Mayer,  A.  G.  Some  species  of  Fartida  from  Tahiti.  Memoirs 
Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Cambridge  U.S.A.  1902,  p.  117. 

195.  Mendel,  Gregor  Johann.  Versuche  liber  Pflanzen-Hybriden. 
Verh.  Naturf.  Ver.  in  Briinn,  Bd.  10,  1865,  x\bh.  p.  i  ;  reprinted  in 
Flora,  1 90 1,  and  in  Ostwalds  Klassiker  d.  exakten  Wissensch.  English 
Trans,  in  Journ.  R.  Hort.  Soc.  1901,  xxvi. 

196.     .     iJber  einige  aus  kiinstlicher  Befruchtung  gewonnene  Hiera- 

cium-Bastarde.     Ibid.  viii.  1869,  Abh.  p.  26. 

197.     .     Briefe  an  Carl  Niigeli.     [See  Correns  (78).] 

198.  Millardet,  A.  Note  sur  I'hybridation  sans  croisement  ou  fausse 
hyl)ridation.  Mem.  Soc.  des  Sci.  phys.  et  nat.  de  Bordeaux,  iv.  4"^^ 
Serie,  1894. 

199.  Morgan,  T.  H.  The  Assumed  Purity  of  the  Germ-Cells  in 
Mendelian  Results.     Science,  1905,  xxii.  p.  877. 


Bibliograpliy  379 

200.  Morgan,  T.  H.  Are  the  Germ-Cells  of  Mendelian  Hybrids 
"Pure"'?     Biol.  Cblt.    1906,  xxvi.   p.    289. 

201.     .     The  cause  of  Gynandromorphism  in   Insects.     Amer.  Nat. 

XLi.  1907,  p.  715. 

202.     .     Production  of  two  kinds  of  Spermatozoa  in  Phylloxerans — 

Functional  "  Female-producing  and  Rudimentary  Spermatozoa."    Proc. 
Soc.  Exp.  Biol,  and  Med.  v.  1908,  p.  56. 

203.     .     Some   Experiments  in   Heredity  in  Mice.     Science,   N.  S. 

XXVII.  1908,  p.  493. 

204.  Mudge,  G.  P.  On  some  features  in  the  Hereditary  Transmission 
of  the  Self-black  and  the  "  Irish "  Coat  Characters  in  Rats.  Proc. 
Roy.  Soc.  B.,  Vol.  80,  1908,  p.  97.     Also  Ibid.  p.  388. 

205.     ,     On  Intravascular  Coagulation  in  Albinoes,  &c.    Ibid.  Vol.  79, 

1907,  p.  103. 

206.  Nettleship,  E.  On  heredity  in  the  various  forms  of  Cataract. 
Rep.  Roy.  Lond.  Ophth.  Hosp.  xvi.  1905,  p.  i. 

207.     .     Additional  cases  of  Hereditary  Cataract.     Ibid.  xvi. 

208.     .     On  Rethiitis  pigmentosa   and   allied  diseases.     Ibid.   xvii. 

Pts.  I,  II,  and  III. 

209.     .     Cases  of  colour-blindness  in  women.     Ophth.  Soc.  Trans. 

xxvi.  1905. 

210.     .     Three  new  Pedigrees  of  Eye  Disease.     Ophth.  Soc.  Trans. 

XXVIII.  1908,  p.  220. 

211.     .     A  history  of  congenital  stationary  night-blindness   in   nine 

consecutive  generations.     Ibid,  xxvii.  1907. 

212.  and  Ogilvie,  F.  M.  A  peculiar  form  of  hereditary  con- 
genital cataract.     Ibid.  xxvi.  1906. 

213.  Noorduyn,  C.  L.  W.  lets  over  Kleuren,  Kleurverandering  der 
Vogels  en  paring  van  varieteiten.  Album  der  Natuur,  Dec.  1903, 
p.  71. 

214.     .     Een  Tegenspraak  van  ^lendel's  Wet  der  Erfelijkheid.     Ibid. 

1906.     [Wild  male  Canaries  bred  with  some  domestic  varieties  gave 
some  offspring  more  or  less  pied  with  white  or  yellow.] 

215.     .      Die   Erblichkeit  der    Farben    bei    Kanarienvogeln.      Arch. 

Rassen  u.  Gesell.  Biol,  5  Jahrg.  1908,  p.  161. 

[Ogilvie,  F.  M.,  see  Nettleship,  E.] 

216.  Orton,  W.  A.  The  Wilt  disease  of  Cotton  and  its  control.  U.S. 
Dep.  Agric.  Bull.  27,  1900. 

217.  Ostenfeld,  C.  H.  Zur  Kenntnis  der  Apogamie  in  der  Gattung 
Hieracium.     Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1904,  xxii.  7. 

218.     .    Castration  and  Hybridisation  Experiments  with  some  species 

of  Hieracia.     Bot.  Tidsk.  xxvii.  3.     Kjobenhavn,  1906,  p.  225. 


380  Bibliography 

219.  Pearson,  K.  On  the  Inheritance  of  Characters  not  capable  of 
exact  Quantitative  Measurement.  Part  II.  On  the  Inheritance  of 
Coat-Colour  in  Horses.  Part  III.  On  the  Inheritance  of  Eye-Colour 
in  Man.     Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc,  Vol.  195,  A.,  1900,  p.  79. 

220.     .     On  a   generalised  Theory  of  Alternative  Inheritance,  with 

special  reference  to  Mendel's  Laws.     Ibid.,  Vol.  203,  A.,  1904,  p.  53. 

221.  Price,  H.  L.  and  Drinkard,  A.  W.  Inheritance  in  Tomato 
Hybrids.     Virginia  Agric.  Exp.  Sta.  Bull.  177,  1908,  p.  18. 

222.  Prout,  L.  B.  On  two  variable  broods  of  Triphaeiia  comes  from 
Forres.     Ent.  Rec.  xv.  p.  217  and  xvi.  p.  i. 

^'^'h-     •    -^'^^^^'/^^^^/^^^/^/'rz/o-^/^  and  the  Mendelian  hypothesis.    Trans. 

Ent.  Soc.  Lond.  1906,  p.  525.  [The  experiments  proved  that  purple 
var.  is  dominant,  black  is  recessive.  Author's  conclusion  erroneous 
through  mistake  as  to  meaning  of  terms,  as  pointed  out  by  Doncaster. 
Ibid.,  Proc.  1907,  p.  xx.] 

224.  Przibram,  H.  Vererbungsversuche  iib.  asymmetrische  Augen- 
farbung  bei  Angorakatzen.     Arch.  f.  Entwm.  xxv.  1907,  p.  260. 

225.  Punnett,  R.  C.  Mendelism.  Macmillan  and  Bowes,  Cambridge, 
1905. 

226.     .     Mendelism  in  relation  to  disease.     Proc.   Roy.  Soc.   Med. 

1908. 

227.     .     Sex- determination    in     Hydatina    with    some    remarks    on 

Parthenogenesis.     Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  Vol.  78,  B.,  1906,  p.  223. 

[See  also  Bateson.] 
[See  also  Wood.] 

228.  Raunkiaer.  Kimdannelse  uden  Befrugtning  hos  Maelkeb^tte 
{Taraxacum).  Kjobenh.  Bot.  Tidsskr.  xxv.  1903,  p.  109.  Abstr.  in 
Bot.  Cblt.  xciii.  1903,  p.  81. 

[Raynor,  G.  H.,  see  Doncaster.] 

229.  Rosenberg,  O.  Das  Verhalten  der  Chromosomen  in  einer 
hybriden  Pflanze.     Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  1903,  xxi.  p.  10. 

230- •     Uber   die  Tetradenteilung    eines   Drosera-Bastardes.     Ibid. 

1904,  XXII.  p.  47. 

231-  •  Uber  die  Reduktionsteilung  in  Drosera.  Meddel.  f.  Stock- 
holms  Hogsk.  Bot.  Inst.  1904. 

232-  — ^ — .  Zur  Kenntnis  der  Reduktionsstellung  in  Pflanzen.  Bot. 
Notiser.     1905. 

233-     •     Uber  die  Embryobildung  in  der  Gattung  Hieracium.     Ber. 

Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  xxiv.  3.     1906. 

234-     •     Erblichkeitsgesetze      und     Chromosomen.       Bot.    Studier. 

Uppsala,  1906,  p.  237. 

235-  ; •     Cytological  Studies  on  the  Apogamy  in  Hieracium.     Bot. 

Tidsskrift,  28.     Copenhagen,  1907. 

236.  Russo,  A.  Modificazioni  Sperimentali  dell'  Elemento  epetheliale 
deir  Ovaia  dei  Mammiferi.     Reale  Accad.  Lincei,  1907,  vi.  p.  313. 


239 

240 

241 
242 

243 

244 

245 
246 

247 


Bibliography  38 1 

Saunders,  E.  R.     [See  Bateson.] 

237.  Schuster,  E.  H.  J.     Results  of  crossing  Grey  (House)  Mice  with 
Albinos.     Biometrika,  iv.      1906. 

238.  Shull,    G.    H.     The   Composition   of  a  Field    of  Maize.     Proc. 
American  Breeders'  Ass.,  Vol.  iv. 

.     The  Pedigree  Culture.     The  Plant  World,  11.  p.  21,  1908. 

.     Importance  of  the  Mutation  Theory  in  practical  Breeding. 

Proc.  American  Breeders'  Ass.  iii.  p.  60,  1907. 

.     Some  new  cases  of  Mendelian  Inheritance.     Bot.  Gaz.  45, 

1908,  p.  103. 

.     A   new    Mendelian    Ratio    and    several    types    of    latency. 

American  Naturalist,  xlii.  p.  433,  1908. 

.     Elementary  Species  and  Hybrids  of  Bursa.     Science,  N.  S., 

XXV.  1907. 

.     The  Significance  of  Latent  Characters.     Ibid.  p.  792. 

.     Some  Latent  Characters  of  a  White  Bean.     Ibid.  p.  828. 

Spillmann,  W.J.     A  Mendelian  character  in  Cattle.     Science, 
1906,  N.  S.,  XXIII.  549. 

.     Quantitative     Studies    on    the    Transmission    of    parental 

characters  to  Hybrid  offspring.     Proc.    15th  Ann.  Con.  of  Ass.  Am. 
Agri.  Coll.  and  Exp.  Stations,  p.  88. 

248.     .     Exceptions  to  Mendel's  Law.     Science,   1902,  N.  S.,  xvi., 

No.  411,  p.  794. 

249.     .     Standardizing  Breed  Characteristics.    Soc.  Prom.  Agric.  Sci. 

1907. 

250.     .     An  interpretation  of  elementary  species.     Sci.,  N.  S.,  xxvii. 

1908,  p.  896. 

251.     .     Inheritance  of  the  Belt  in  Hampshire  Swine.     Ibid.  1907, 

p.  541. 

252.     .     Inheritance  of  Coat-Colour  in  Swine.     Ibid.,  N.  S.,  xxiv. 

p.  614,  1906. 

253.     .     Origin  of  Varieties  in  Domesticated  Species.     Ibid.,  N.  S., 

xxviii.  1908,  p.  252. 

253^-     •     Spurious  Allelomorphism.     Amer.  Nat.  XLii.  1908,  p.  612. 

253^.     Standfuss,  M.     Handb.  d.  pal.  Gross-Schmetterl.     Jena,  1896. 

254.  Staples-Browne,    R.     Note   on    Heredity   in    Pigeons.      Proc. 
Zool.  Soc.  of  London,  1905,  Vol.  11.  p.  550. 

255.     .     On   the   Inheritance  of   Colour  in   Domestic  Pigeons,  with 

special  reference  to  reversion.     Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  London,  p.  67,  1908. 

256.  Stevens,    N.   M.     Study  of  the   Germ-cells   of  Aphis  rosac  and 
Aphis  oenotherae.     Journ.  Exp.  Zool.  1905. 

257.     .     Studies  in  Spermatogenesis  with  especial  reference   to   the 

accessory  chromosome.     Carnegie  Inst.  Washington,  1905,  No.  36. 


382  Bibliography 

258.  Stevens,  N.  M.     Ditto,  Part  11.  with  reference  to  Sex  Determina- 
tion.    Ibid.  1906,  No.  36,  II. 

259.     .     Studies  on  the  Germ-cells  of  Aphids.     Ibid.  1906,  No.  51. 

260.     .     Colour-inheritance   and   sex-inheritance   in   certain   Aphids. 

Sci.,  N.  S.,  XXVI.  1907,  p.  216. 

261.     .     A  Study  of  the  Germ-cells  of  certain  Diptera.    J.  Exp.  Zool. 

1908,  V.  p.  359. 

Strobell,  E.  C.     [See  Foot,  K.] 

262.  Sutton,   A.   W.     Brassica   Crosses.     Jour.    Linn.    Soc,    Botany, 
XXXVIII.  1908,  p.  337. 

263.  Sutton,  W.  S.     On  the  Morphology  of  the  Chromosome  group 
in  Brachystola  magna.     Biol.  Bull.  iv.  i,  1902,  p.  24. 

264.  Tannreuther,    G.   W.      History   of  the   Germ-cells   and    early 
Embryology  of  certain  Aphids.     Zool.  Jahrb.  xxiv.  1907,  p.  610. 

265.  Tischler,  G.     Zellstudien  an  sterilen  Bastardpflanzen.    Arch.  Zell- 
forschung,  i.  1908,  p.  35. 

266.  Tower,  W.   L.     An  Investigation  of  Evolution  in  Chrysomelid 
Beetles  of  the  Genus  Leptinotaisa.    Publ.  Carnegie  Inst.  No.  48,  1906. 

267.  Toyama,    K.     On    the    hybridology    of  the    Silk-worm.     Report 
Sericult.  Ass.  Japan.     May,  1906. 

268.     .     On  some  Silk-worm  crosses  with  special  reference  to  Mendel's 

Law  of  Heredity.     Bull.  Coll.  Agric.  Tokyo  Imp.  Univ.  1906,  vii. 

269.  Tschermak,  E.     Uber  kiinstliche  Kreuzung  bei  Pisum  sativum. 
Zts.  f.  d.  landw.  Versuchsw.  in  Osterr.  1900,  iii.  Jahrgang,  Heft  5. 

270.     .     Uber   Ziichtung   neuer   Getreiderassen    mhtels    kiinstlicher 

Kreuzung.     Ibid.  190T,  iv.  Jahrgang,  Heft  2. 

271.     .     Weitere  Beitrage  iiber  Verschiedenwertigkeit  der  Merkmale 

bei  Kreuzung  von  Erbsen  und  Bohnen.    Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch. 
1901,  XIX.  Heft  2. 

272. .     Weitere  Beitrage  iiber  Verschiedenwertigkeit  der  Merkmale 

bei  Kreuzung  von  Erbsen  und  Bohnen.     Zts.  f.  d.  landw.  Versuchsw. 
in  Osterr.  1901,  iv.  Jahrgang,  Heft  6. 

273.     .     Uber  die  gesetzmiissige  Gestaltungsweise   der   Mischlinge. 

(Fortgesetzte    Studien    an    Erbsen    und    Bohnen.)     Zts.  f.  d.  landw. 
Versuchsw.  in  Osterr.      1902. 

274-     •     I^er  gegenwartige   Stand  der   Mendel'schen    Lehre.     Ibid. 

1902. 

275.     .     Die  Theorie  der  Kryptomerie  und  des  Kryptohybridismus. 

Beihefte  z.  Bot.  Centralbl.  1903,  Bd.  xvi.  Heft  i. 

276.     .     Uber  kiinstliche  Auslosung  des  Bliihens  beim  Roggen.    Ber. 

Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  xxii.     1904. 

278.     .     Weitere  Kreuzungsstudien  an  Erbsen,  Levkojen  und  Bohnen. 

Zts.  f.  d.  landw.  Versuchsw.  in  Osterr.      1904. 


Bibliography  383 

279.  Tschermak.  E.  Uber  Ziichtung  neuer  Getreiderassen  mittels 
kiinstlicher  Kreuzung.  ii.  Kreuzungsstudien  am  Roggen.  Ibid. 
1906. 

280.  • .     Die  Bliih-  und  Fruchtbarkeitsverhaltnisse  bei  Roggen  und 

Gerste   und  das  Auftreten   von  Mutterkorn.     Fiihlings  Landw.  Ztg. 
Lv.  1906,  Heft  6,  p.  194. 

281.     .      Der    moderne    Stand    des    Vererbungsproblems.       Arch. 

Rassen-  u.  Gesell.-Biol.,  5.  Jahrgang,  1908,  p.  305. 

282.     .     Uber  Bildung  neuer  Formen   durch   Kreuzung.     Resultats 

sci.  du  Congres  intern.  Bot.,  Wien,  1906,  p.  323. 

283. .     Die    Mendelsche   Lehre   u.    die    Galtonsche    Theorie  vom 

Ahnenerbe.     Arch.  Rass.-  u.  Gesell.-Biol.,  2.  Jahrgang,  1905,  p.  663. 

284. .     Die    Kreuzung    im    Dienste    der  Pflanzenziichtung.     Deut. 

Landw.  Gesell.,  Bd.  20,  1905,  p.  325. 

285.     .     Die    Lehre     von    den    formbildenden     Faktoren    u.    ihre 

Bedeutung  f.  die  rationelle  Pflanzenziichtung.     Jahrbuch  fiir  Pfl.  u. 
Tierziichtung.      1903. 

Die  Kreuzungsziichtung  des  Getreides  und  die  Frage  nach 


286 

287 
288 

289 

290 
291 
292 

293 
294 

295 
296 

297 

298 

299 


den  Ursachen  der  Mutation.     Monatshefte  f.  Landw.      1908. 
de  Vries,  H.    Intracellulare  Pangenesis.    Jena,  1889.    G.  Fischer. 

.     Monstruosite's  Hereditaires  offertes  en  echange  aux  Jardins 

Botaniques.     Eot.  Jaarboek,  ix.  1897,  pp.  62 — 93. 

.     Sur  la  loi  de  disjonction  des  hybrides.     C.  R.  1900,  cxxx. 

26.  mars. 

.     Das   Spaltungsgesetz    der    Bastarde.      Ber.    Deutsch.    Bot. 

Gesellsch.  xviii.  1900,  p.  83. 

.       Uber    erbungleiche    Kreuzungen.       Ber.     Deutsch.     Bot. 

Gesellsch.  xviii.   1900,  p.  435. 

.     Sur  la  fe'condation  hybride  de  I'endosperme  chez  le  mais. 

Rev.  Gen.  de  Bot.  1900,  xii.  p.  129.     1900. 

.     Sur  les  unites  des  caracteres  spe'cifiques  et  leur  application 

a  I'etude  des  hybrides.     Rev.  Gen.  de  Bot.  xii.  1900,  p.  257. 

.     Die  Mutationen  und  die  Mutationsperioden  bei  der  Entste- 

hung  der  Arten.     Vortrag.     Hamburg,  1901. 

.     Anwendung   der   Mutationslehre  auf  die  Bastardierungsge- 

setze.     Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesellsch.  xxi.  1903,  p.  45. 

.     Befruchtung  und  Bastardierung.    Vortrag  in  d.  151.  J. -Vers. 

d.  Hoi.  Gesellsch.  d.  Wissensch.     Leipzig,  1903.     Veit  &  Co. 

.     La  loi  de  Mendel  et  les  caracteres  constants  des  hybrides. 

C.  R.      1903-     2.  fevrier. 

.     Die    Mutationstheorie.      2    vols.      Leipzig,    190 1-3.      Veit 

&  Co. 

.     Species  and  Varieties,  their  Origin  by  Mutation.     Chicago, 

Open  Court  Publishing  Co.     1905. 


384  Bibliography 

300.  de  Vries,  H.    On  Twin  Hybrids.    Bot.  Gaz.,  Vol.  44,  1907,  p.  401. 

301.     .     Die  Svalofer  Methode  zur  Veredelung  landwirthschaftlicher 

Kulturgewachse  u.  ihrer  Bedeutung   f.   d.    Selektionstheorie.     Arch. 
Rass.-  u.  Gesells.-Biol.  iii.  1906,  p.  325. 

3oi<7.  Walker,  G.  Remarkable  cases  of  hereditary  Anchyloses,  or 
absence  of  various  phalangeal  joints  with  defects  of  the  little  and 
ring  fingers.     Johns  Hopkins  Hosp.  Bull.,   xii.   1901. 

302.  Warburg,  J.  C.  On  some  races  of  Lasiocainpa  quercus.  Ent. 
Rec.  XIII.  1901,  p.  237. 

303.  Wheldale,  M.  Inheritance  of  Flower  Colour  in  Antirrhinum 
majiis.     Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  79,  B.,  1907,  p.  288. 

304.  Wichura,  M.  Die  Bastardbefruchtung  im  Pflanzenreich.  Breslau, 
1865. 

305.  Wilson,  E.  B.  Mendel's  Principles  of  Heredity  and  the  Matu- 
ration of  the  Germ-cells.     Science,  Dec.  1902,  p.  991. 

306.     .     Studies  on  Chromosomes.     I.  The  Behaviour  of  the  Idio- 

chromosomes  in  Hemiptera.     Journ.  Exp.  Zool.  11.  3,  p.  371.     Balti- 
more, 1905. 

307.  .  Studies  on  Chromosomes.  II.  The  paired  Microchromo- 
somes, Idiochromosomes  and  Heterotropic  chromosomes  in  Hemi- 
ptera.    Ibid.,  Vol.  II.  4.      1905. 

308.     .     Studies  on  Chromosomes.     III.  The  sexual  differences  of 

the  Chromosome-groups  in  Hemiptera,  with  some  considerations  on 
the  determination  and  inheritance  of  sex.     Ibid.  iii.  1906.     No.  i. 

309.     .     Note  on  the  Chromosome-groups  of  Metapodius  and  Banasa. 

Biol.  Bull.  xii.  1907,  p.  303. 

310.     .     The   Case  of  A?iasa  Tristis.     Science,   N.  S.,   xxv.   1907, 

p.  191. 

311.  Wilson,  J.  Mendelian  Characters  among  Short-horn  Cattle. 
Sci.  Proc.  Roy.  Dublin  Soc.  xi.  (N.  S.)  1908  (see  also  Nature,  Apr.  2, 
1908,  p.  509). 

312.  Wood,  T.  B.  Note  on  the  inheritance  of  horns  and  face-colour 
in  sheep.     Journ.  Agri.  Sci.,  Vol.  i.  pt.  3,  p.  364. 

313.     and   Punnett,    R.    C.     Heredity   in    Plants    and    Animals. 

Trans.   Highland  Agric.  Soc.  Scotland,   1908. 

314.  Woods,  F.  A.  Mendel's  Law  and  some  records  in  Rabbit 
breeding.     Biometrika,  11.  1903,  p.  299. 

315.     .     Non-inheritance    of    Sex   in    Man.      Biometrika,    v.    1906, 

P-   73- 

316.  Yule,  G.  Udny.  Mendel's  Laws  and  their  probable  relations  to 
intra-racial  Heredity.     New  Phytologist,  i.  1902,  Nos.  9  and  10. 


SUPPLEMENTARY    LIST 

{Papers  ??iaki?ii:^  inipO}'ta7it  contributions  received  too  late  for  iiiclusion 

iti  the  Bibliography.) 

Baur,  E.  Das  Wesen  u.  die  Erblichkeitsverhaltnisse  der  "Varietates 
albomarginatae  hort."  von  Pelai-goniiim  zo?tale,  Zts.  f.  Indukt.  Abstam. 
Li.  Vererbungslehre,  1909,  i.  p.  330. 

Biffen,  R.  H.  On  the  inheritance  of  strength  in  Wheat.  Jour.  Agric. 
Sci.,   1909,  HI.  p.  86. 

Correns,  C.  Die  Rolle  der  mannhchen  Keimzellen  bei  der  Geschlechts- 
bestimmung  der  gynodioecischen  Pflanzen.  Ber.  d.  Deut.  Bot.  Ges., 
XXVI «,   1908,  p.   686. 

.     VVeitere  Unters.  lib.  d.  Geschlechtsformen  polygamer  Bliitenpflanzen 

u.  ihre  Beeinflussbarkeit.     Jahrb.  f.  wiss.  Bot.  xlv.  1908,  p.  661. 

.     Vererbungsversuche  mit  blassgelbgriinen  und  buntblattrigen  Sippen 

bei  Mirabilis  Jalapa^    Urtica  pilidifera.,  und  Luna?'ia  annua,  Zts.  f. 
Indukt.  Abstam.  u.  Vererbungslehre,  1909,  i.  p.  291. 

Nilsson-Ehle,  H.  Kreuzungsuntersuchungen  an  Hafer  und  Weizen. 
Lund,  1909. 

Toyama,  K.  A  Sport  of  the  Silkworm  and  its  Hereditary  Behaviour. 
Zts.  f.   indukt.  Abstam.-  u.  Vererbungslehre,   i.   1909,  p.    179. 

de  Vries,  H.  Ub.  d.  Zwillingsbastarde  von  Oenothera  nanella.  Ber. 
Deut.  Bot.  Ges.,   1908,  xxvi(2,  p.  667. 

.     Bastarde  von   Oenothera  gigas.     Ibid.  p.   754. 

.     On  Triple   Hybrids.     Bot.   Gaz.,    1909,  Vol.  47,  p.    i. 

Wheldale,  M.  The  Colours  and  Pigments  of  Flowers  with  Special 
Reference  to  Genetics.     Proc.   Roy.  Soc,   B.,  Vol.   81,  p.  44. 

Wilson,  E.  B.      Recent  Researches  on  the  Determination  and  Heredity 

of  Sex.     Science,  N.S.,  xxix.  1909,  p.  53, 

Wilson,  J.  The  Origin  of  the  Dexter-Kerry  breed  of  Cattle.  Sci.  Proc. 
Roy.  Dublin  Soc,  xii.  N.S.,  1909,  p.  i. 

(See  also  Report  of  a  Discussion  on  tiie  Influence  of  Heredity  in  Disease  : 
P?'oc.  Roy.  Soc.  Mediciiie.,  Jan.  1909,  Vol.  11.  No.  3.) 


p.    H.  25 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS 


Abraxas  grossulaj-iata 

colours     44 

relations  to  var.   lacticolor     1 74 
Acidalia  viriiiilaria     252 
Acquired  characters     5 
Adaptation     288 
Aglia  tan     44 

sex-limited  descent     187 
Agouti  colour     80,   117,    119 
ALBINOS 

axolotl,  exceptional     43 

cats     227 

giving  reversionary  offspring     88,  96 

guinea-pigs,  smudged     113 

man     41,  226 

orchids     96 

rabbit     75 

recessive     45 
Alkaptonuria     227,  233 
Allelomorphism      10,    11,    16 

spurious     151,   153,    160,    195 
Alternation  of  generations     257 
Amphidasys  bet  id  aria     44 
Amphilepsis     248 

Ancestry,    theory    of    heredity    based    on, 
contrasted     with     Mendelian     system 

55,    130 

applied  to  Basset  hounds     126 
Ane?)ione,  hybrid     250 
Angerona  prunaria     44 
Annual  and  biennial  habit     25 
Anthers     28 
Anthocyan     98,  280 
Anticipation,     in    age    at    which     disease 

appears     218 
Antirrhinu77i 

colours     19,  38,   269 

"Delilah"  types     87 

dwarf     19 

heredity   compared   with   that    of  sweet 
pea     98 

intermediate  colours     236 

variegation     253 
Aphis 

alternation     257 

chr«)mosomes     271 

colour     190 

sex     189,  258 
Apogamy     246 


Aquilegia,  hybrid  said  to  breed  true     355 

Arabis  albida,  double     197 

Asymmetry  compared  with  variation    276 

Athene  noctua     49,   iio 

Atropa  Belladonna     38,   135 

Axils  of  sweet  peas     152 

Axolotl  albino     43 

BARLEY 

abortion  of  florets     26 

colour     39 

ears     22,  27 

hoods     2 1 
Basset  hounds     6,    126 
Bean,   see  Phaseolns 
Bees,   Mendel's  experiments  with     311 
Beet,   "runners"     25 
Begonia^  doubling     198 
Biennial  and  annual  habit     25 
Biometry     6 

misuse  of  statistics  235 
"  Bisexual  "  heredity  285 
Black 

fowls      136 

pigeons     100 

insects     137 
Blue  colour 

in  animals     83 

in  plants,   dominant  and  recessive      135 

in  maize     256 
Boarjnia,   wings     170 
Bouibyx  mori,  see  Silkworm 
Brachydactyly     210,   214 
Br  as  sic  a     31,   39 
Bryonia  dioica  and  alba 

colour  of  fruits     135 

sex  166,  203 
Bud -sports  272 
Bulbing,  of  turnip     31 

Calli?norpha  domimda     44,    135 
Camjianula  hose-in-hose     26,   200 
CANARY 

baldness     37 

cinnamon      113,    178 

colours     43 

crest     37 

lizard     43 

sex-limited  inheritance  of     178 


Index  of  Subjects 


387 


Capsetla  bursa  pasloi  is     25 
Carnation     31 

double     200 
Carotin     155 
CAT 

albino     227 

Angora     33,  55 

Manx     34 

polydactylism     34,  41 

Siamese     114 

tortoiseshell      120,      172 
Cataract 

prae-senije     216 

senile     217 
CATTLE 

Aberdeen-Angus     53 

colours     41 

horns     3  2 

roan     53 
Cat  I  ley  a     97 
Chelidonhini  majus     24 
Chorea,  hereditary     229 
Chromogen     98,    14 1,  269,   280 
Chromoplasts,   see  Plastids 
Chromosomes     270 

accessory     188 
Cineraria     135 

Cinnamon  canary,  heredity  of     177 
Clarkia  elegans     39 
Coleoptera     44 
Coloboma     222 
Colorado  beetle     45 
Colour-blindness     172,    195,    223,   231 

diagram  of  descent      231 

a  dominant      173,   222 

expectation  in  offspring     231 
COLOURS 

Antirrhinum     98 

Aphis     190 

canaries     43 

dark  and  light  in  flowers     136 

fowls     43,   102 

from  complementary  factors     88,    103 

discussion  of     139 

heredity     74-163 

horse     42 

interrelation  of  colours  in  mice     78 

interrelation    of  colours    in    sweet    peas 
91,   98 

list  of  cases     37 

of  one  part  controlling   colour  of  other 
parts     138 

pigeons     43 

plastids     98 

saturated  and  dilute     82,    143 

stocks     95 

various  specific  phenomena     132 
Combs  of  fowls     34,  61 

Breda     67 

walnut     63 
Complementary  factors     88 
Compound  characters     60 

Mendel's  view  of     350,   352 


Consanguineous  matings     225 
Coreopsis  tine  tor  ia     39 
Corn,   see  Maize 
Cotton 

branching  habit      19,   20 

colour     39 

various  characters     25 
Cotyledon 

colour  of,  peas     14 
,,  stocks     39 

hypo-geal     31 
Coupling,  gametic     151,   159 
Cousins,  marriages  of     225 
Crest 

canary     37 

fowls     34 
Crioceris  as  para gi     45 
Cross-bred,  meaning  of     291 
Cryptomeres     93 
Cypripeditim     96 
('ystinuria     227 
Cytology 

evidence  as  to  Sex     188 

diversity  of     192 

Dachshund     83 
Daphnia,  sex     189 
Datura     39 

prickliness  of  fruit     21 
Deaf-mutes     229 
Delphinium     135,   200 
Diabetes  insipidus     220 
Diagrams  of  /^,  generation     58,  59,  89,  91 
Dianthus,  colour-heredity     352 

Armeria-deltoides,    said    to    breed    true 

355 
Diastases     141 
Differentiation    compared    with    variation 

274 
Dilution  of  colours     80,   143 
Dinophilus,  eggs  of     190 
Discontinuity  in  variation     286 
Diseases 

hereditary     210 

resistance  to     233,  300 
Distichiasis     221 
Dogs 

Basset  hounds     126 

colour     6,  83 
Domestication,  effects  of     311,  351 
Dominance     8,  324 

of  epistatic  factors     79 

imperfect     53 

incident  of  special  cases     13,  50 

irregularities  of     255 

and  phylogeny     278 

recognition  of     231 

in  sex      165 
Dominant     malformations     and     diseases 
210 

sex-limited     222 
Dominant  whites      10 1,    104 

in  plants     105,  299 


388 


Index  of  Subjects 


DOUBLE   FLOWERS     31,   196 

Arab  is     197 

carnation     200 

Petunia     1 98 

PrijHiila     199 

stocks     201 
Drosera,  chromosomes     271 
Dutch  pattern     84,  85,    142 
Dwarfness     8,    18,  258,    281 

fLctopia  lentis     222 
Ectrodactyhsm     228 
Environmental  disturbance     246 
Epidermolysis     220 
Epistatic  factors     79,   98,    101 
Eugenics     304 
"Ever-sporting"  types     253 
Evolution     283 
Exceptional  cases     245 

in  pigeon     36 
Extracted  types     92 
EYE-COLOUR 

heredity,  general  account  of     107 

canaries     113 

cats     41 

fowls     43 

guinea-pig     113 

man     41,    106 

mice     III 

owl     49 

Siamese  cats     1 14 
Eye-lashes,  reduplication  of     221 

F^  and  F^  generations  defined     8,   57 
FACTORS 

carried  by  albino     77 

for  colour     75 

complementary     88 

epistatic  and  hypostatic     79 

latent     93,   146 
"False-hybrids"     248 
Fancy  points,  often  fructuational     300 
Fasciation     j  4 

Fat,  excessive  in  yellow  mice     163 
Ferments     98,   233 
Fertilisation 

double     270 

nature  of     249 
Ficaria     3 1 1 
Fingers 

crooked     208 

short     210 

abortion  of     216 
Fixing  types     296 
I'^lucluational  variation     239,   287 
FOWLS     34 

Andalusians     51 

,,  eye-colour     1 10 

Aseel     102 

Brahma     102 

IJreda     35,  36 

br<K>diness     36 

brown-breasted  dcjminanl      136 


¥O^N\.^— continued 

buft"     121 

colours     42 

comb  shapes     34,  61 

crest     35 

Dorking     63,  255 

down  colour     42,   51 

duck  wing     42 

Egyptian     187,  360 

eye-colour     43,    iio 

Faverolles     35 

feathered  leg    35 

fertility     36 

frizzling     35 

Hamburgh     63 

Houdan     36,  255 

Indian  game     62,    186 

Leghorn,  black     187 

,,         brown     102,   182 

,,         white     102,    186 

,,  ,,      eye-colour     no 

lobe     43 

Malay     63 
,,       eye-colour     no 

muff     35 

pile     120 

Polish     36 

polydactylism     35,   228,   255 

reversion  in      103 

rose-comb,  white     51,    103 

rumpless     35 

sex-limited  descent     43 

shrieking     36 

silky     345   35.  43-   ^©3 

,,       eye-colour     no 

,,       heredity  of  pigmentation     181 
skin  yellow  or  white     182 
Spanish      186 
"vulture-hock"     35 
white    types    dominant     and     recessive 

102 
Wyandottes,  black     187 

Gallus  bankiva 

colour     104 

comb     61 
Galton's  theory  of  heredity  compared  with 

Mendelism     55,   129 
Gametes     n,   16 

compared  with  zygotes     56 

in  groups  of  four  195 
Gaslroidea  dissiniilis  45 
Genetics 

geometrical  aspect     281 

study  of     I 
Gerbcra  Janiesoni,   red  and   yellow      136 
Geuvi    tcrbano-rivale,    said    to    breed    true 

355 
"Ghost  "-markings  in  peas     145 
(ilands,  Matthiola     21 
Glaucoma     222 
Gossypium,  see  Cotton 
Gowers'  disease     222,   225 


Index  of  Subjects 


389 


Gradational  forms     235 
GUINEA-PIG 

albino     1 1 3 
Angora  hair     33 
chocolate     118 
colour     41 
eye-colour     1 1 3 
polydactylism     34 
re- combinations  in     71 
rosetted     33 

Haemophilia     222,   224 
Hair 

curly     207 

white  lock     207 
Hands 

malformations  of    211,   216 

mode  of  clasping     48 
Hapsburg  lip,  probably  dominant     206 
Hare-lip     220 
Hawk  weeds     246 
Height 

Ajitirrhiman      19 

man     209 

peas     8 

sweet  peas     9 
Helianthiis 

colour     39 

branching  habit     19 
Helix  hortensis  and  nemoralis     45 
Hemerophila  abrtiptaria     44 
Heterostylism     27,  48,   68 
Heterozygote     15,   16 

permanent     51,    155,   i8r,   253,   298 

in  sex     190 
Heterozygous  forms     37,   52,   299 
Hieraciuni     246 

Mendel's  experiments  with     362 
Homoeosis     196,  213,   221 
Homozygote     15,   16 
Hooded  standard   in   sweet    pea,   genetics 

of     153 
Hordeiim,  see  Barley 
Horns 

cattle     32 

goats     1 70 

sheep     169 
Horse,  race- 
chestnut,  a  recessive      124 

colour    42 

trotters  and  pacers     32 
Hose-in-hose  flowers     26,    197,  200 
"  Hybrid-character  "     329 
Hybrids 

breeding  true     246,  249,   355 

some  females  permanently     193 

sterility  of     251 
Hydatina     192 
Hyostyanms 

annual     25 

colour     39 
Hypo-geal  cotyledons,  Phaseoius     31 
Hypostatic  factors     79 


Incompatibility  of  characters  .  73 

Insanity     229 

Intermediates 

misunderstanding  in  regard  to    235,  241 

various  kinds  of     236-239 
Inter-racial    heredity    not    different    from 

intra-racial     49 
Irideremia     222 
Iris,  colours  of     108 

Lasiocavipa  qiierais     44 

"Latency"     93,   145 

Lathyrus  odoratus,  see  S\Aeet  Pea 

Lava  t  era     355 

Leaf-characters     22,  24,  25,   72 

Lecithin,  alleged  effects  of     193 

Leopard,  black,  damask  marks  in     145 

Lepidoptera  colours     43 

Leptinotarsa     45 

Lina  lapponica     45 

Lychnis 

colour     39 

hairiness     19 

sex     169 

Maize 

colour     41,  256 

dent  and  flint     264 

maternal  characters     264 

starchy  endosperm     30 
MAN     32,  41,  204 

eye-colour     106,   206 

hair-colour     206 

interracial  crossing     208 

irregular  numbers     254 

mulatto     208 

musical  sense     225 

recessive  variations     225 

stature     209 

various  dominants     207 
Mangel,   "runners"     25 
Maternal  characters  in  seeds     258 
Matthiola^  see  Stocks 
,,  simiata     21 

Aledicago,  twist  of  fruits     48 
Alegachilc,  crosses  sweet  peas     15 1 
Melanic  moths     44,    137,    187 
Mela  soma  script  a     45 
Mendelian  system  contrasted  with  Galton's 

55,  129 
Meristic  characters     47 
MICE 

black-eyed  white     87 

colour     41 

dominant  pied     87 

eye-colour     1 1 1 

excessive  fatness     1 1 3 

hairless     32 

interrelation  of  colours     78 

reversion     1 1 2 

sterility  of     120 

waltzing  habit     33,    1 1 1 

yellow     79,    118 


25—3 


390 


Index  of  Subjects 


Mimulus,  hose-in-hose     201 
MiJ-abilis 

colours     39 

intermediate  colours  in     236 
Mollusca     45,  48 
Monilithrix     220 
JNIonolepsis     248 
Mosaic  seeds     249 
Mulatto     208 
Musical  sense     225 
Mutation     287 
Myopia     221 

Nectarine     20,  273 
Negro     208 
Nicotiana  hybrids     361 
Night-blindness 

sex-limited     222 

stationary     221 
Novelties 

made  by  re-combinations     60 

raising     293 
Numbers,  aberrant     252,   327 
Nystagmus     227 

Oak-egger     44 
Oedema,  nervous     220 
Oenothera     28,  31,   250,    286 

chromosomes     271 
Orchids 

reversion  in     39 

monolepsis     248 
Owl,  eye-colour     49,    no 
Ox  alls     47 

Pap  aver     39 
double     200 
colour     241 
Paralysis 

familiar     229 
peroneal     225 
Paramoeciwn     277 
Pararge  egeria     251 
Parthenogenesis     246 
Parhila     48 
PEA,  edible 

"American  Wonder"     244 
blunt  pods     22,  72 
colour  of  cotyledon     14,  40,   72,  326 
particoloured     243 
l)leaching     328 
colour  of  flower     40 
,,       of  pod     14,   328 
,,       of  seed-coat     14,   40,    144,   262, 

325 
"continuity"     72 
dwarfness     18,   236 
fasciation     14 
fasciated  stem     25 
height     [4,   236 
indent     29,   259 
maple     144,  263 
Mendel's  experiment     8,  319 


P  E  A — contin  tied 

"mummy"     263 

"Nain  de  Bretagne"     262 

"Nonpareil"     72,  244 

pod 

colour  of     14 
parchment     22 
pointed     22 
shape  of     14 
soft     2  2 

seed 

particoloured     243 
shape     14,   2S,   260,   267 

starch  in  seed     28 

sugar  peas     22,  260 

tallness     18 

"Victoria"     263 
Peach     20,  273 
Periodicity     197 
Petalody     197 
Petals 

laciniated     24 

imbricated     26 
Petunia,  doubling     198 
Phaseolus 

colours     39 

cotyledons     3 1 

pods     22 

tall  and  dwarf     18 

weight  of  seeds     239 

Mendel's  experiments  with     347 

sterility  in  hybrids     348 
Phylloxera     189 
Phyteiima  Halleri     40 
Phytophaga     44 
Pied  varieties 

dominant  pied  in  mice  and  fowls     86 

relation  to  whole-coloured     84 
Pigs,  colour     42 
PIGEONS 

colour     43 

fantail     36 

nun     36 

reversion     100 

shell     36 

sex-limited  descent     194 

webbed  foot     36 
Pigments 

of  mice     ir6 

of  horses     125 
Pisiivi  sativum,  see  Peas,  edible 
Plant-characters     14 
Plastid  colours     95,  98,  204 

white  dominant  to  yellow     134 
Polenioniiwi     40 
Pollen  grains  of  sweet  pea     28,  91,    150 

figured     I  ^o 
POLYDACTYLISM 

cat     34 

fowls     35,  228,   255 

guinea-pig     34 

man     228 

imperfect  dominance  of,  53 


Index  of  Subjects 


391 


Polyzoa     275 
Poppies     39,   200,   241 
"Porcupine  men'"     219 
Porokeratosis     220 
Practical  hints     231,   291 
Pre-Mendelian  writings     5 
Presence  and  absence,  hypothesis  of    54, 
65,    76 
bearing  on  pathology     232 
Prickliness     21 
PRIMULA     40 


colour  in  F.-, 


294 


colour  in  F<^  from  two  whites     105 

crossing     294 

dominant  and  recessive  whites     105 

double     31,   199 

heterostylism     27,  68,   295 

"lavender,''     299 

palm-leaf  and  fern-leaf     24 

special  phenomena  of  colour  in     138 

stellate     and      imbricate      petals        26, 
236 

white-edged  flowers     138 
Pseudo-hypertrophic     muscular      paralysis 

222,   225 
Ptosis     222 

Piiccinia  glufiiaru?)i     25,    233 
"Pure  lines"  of  Johannsen     239 
Purity  of  type 

critical  meaning  of     17,    291 

how  produced  by  Selection     129 

of  germ-cells     146 

RABBIT 

Angora  hair     33 

Belgian  hare     119 

colour     41 

a  dominant  pied  form     86 

Dutch-marked     84,  85,   142,   237 

"English"  pattern     86,  239 

Himalayan     iii,    123 

interrelations  of  colours     75 

lop-eared     251 

sex  statistics     193 

tortoiseshell     1 1 7 

yellow     116 
Ramincuhis  ai-vensis,  fruits     21 

, ,  ficaria     3 1 1 

RATS 

colours     4 1 

"ghost "-markings  in  albino     145 

hooded     85 

Irish  colour     85 

no  yellow  known     1 1 6 
Ratios  in  F^ 

9:3:4  explained    77,   80;  12:3:1,  78; 

9:7,      89;      18  :  18  :  6  :  6  :  16,      40  ; 

27  :  9  :  28,    91 

aberrant     252 

various     79 
Recessive  characters     8,   324 

recognition  of     232 

in  man     225 


Reciprocal  crosses  giving  difterent  results 

167,   174,    [86,   203 
Re-combination 

novelties  through     60 

source  of  new  breeds     71 
Red  Indians     209 

Repetition  of  Parts  and  Heredity     275 
Retinitis  pigmentosa     225 
REVERSION 

nature  of     99,    278 

fowls     103 

mice     99,   1 1 1 

orchids     96 

pigeons     100 

stocks     95 

sweet  peas     89 
Right-  and  Left-handedness     48 
Rogueing  crops     292 
Round  seed     28 
Rust  disease     25,  233 

Salix     249,   367 

Salvia     4 1 

Sap-colour     98 

Saturation  of  colours     80,   143 

Seasonal  forms     257 

Seed  shape  peas     14 

character     15 

maize     30 
Seed  skin,  Pisicni,  colour  of     14 
Segregation     7,   10,   11,   13 

absence  of     246,  256,  355 

consequences  of     15,   338 

nature  of    268 

time  of    269 

somatic     273 

and  species     283 
Selection     240 

natural     288 
Selective  mating  between   gametes      119, 

161,   195 
Serrated  leaf,   Urtica,  Phyteiana     22 
SEX 

determination  of     164 

and  chromosomes     188 

and  horns  in  sheep     169 

and  Spurious  Allelomorphism     174,  195 

and  double  flowers     197 

and  wings     170 

summary  of  evidence     190 

of  Bjyonia     166 

Lychnis     169 

of  rabbits     192 
Sex-limited  descent     169,   221,   222 

in  deaf-mutism     229 

in  tylosis     219 

dominants      231 
Sheep 

colour     42 

horns     169 
Shirley  poppy     241 
Silene  injiata     19 
Silk,  colours     137 


392 


Index  of  Subjects 


Silkworm  colours     43,   137 
Silky  fowl 

comb     34 

feathers     35 

white  colour  of     103 

inheritance  of  pigmentation     185 
Single  flowers     31 
Smooth  foliage     22 
Snapdragon,  see  AntirrhijiiiDi 
Sociological  application     303 
Species 

problem  of    4,   283 

basal    organisation    perhaps    not    trans- 
ferable    73 

segregation  between     284 

hybrids  of     283,  353 
Spleen,   enlarged     220 
Sports,   bud     272 
Standard 

erect  and  hooded     26,   153-157 

shape  of,  in  sweet  pea     153 
Stature 

peas     8,   281 

man     209 
Stem,  colour  of,  in  Primula     138 
Sterility 

of  anthers  in  sweet  pea      28,  152 

affecting  descent     169 

of  Boarniia  hybrids      172 

of  double  flowers     198,   201 

of  hybrids     251,  348 

of  yellow  mice     163 

self-sterility     242 
Stigmas,  colour  of,  in  Primula     130 
STOCKS 

branching     19,  20 

"  Brompton,"  peculiarities  of     134 

colours     95,  98 

cream     204 

double     201 

glands     21 

"half-hoary"     238 

hoariness     19,  95,  238 

,,  relation  to  colours     133 

ovules  and  pollen  dissimilar  in  doubles 
166 

pods,  individuality  of    254 

reversion     95,   133 

"sulphur"     204 

white,  peculiarity  of     106 
Straw     22 
Strawberry     248 
Striping,  in  Antirrhinum     99 
Structural  characters  in  animals     32 

),  ,,  in  plants     18 

Style 

Primula     27 

Oenothera     28 
Subtraction-stages  of  factors     143,  237 
Swedes,  colour     135 
SWEET   PEA  '  8,  9,  39 

bicolours  dominant     87 

bud-sj)ort     274 


SWEET    'P'E.K—contimied 

"bush  "  variety     19 

crossed  with   "  cupid  "     281 

colour  in  axils     152 

colours,  relation  of     91 

"cupid"     19,  281 

gametic  coupling  in     140 

height     18,  281 

heredity  compared  with  that  of   Antir- 
rhinum    98 

pollen  grains     28,  89,  91,   150,   156 

reversion  in     89,  281 

seed-shape     265 

"snapdragon"     26 

spurious  allelomorphism     153,   155 
Symmetry  and  heredity     274 

Tallness     8,   18 

Taraxacum     247 

Technique  301 

Teleangiectasis  220 

Terms  in  F^,  number  of,  59 

Todas,  colour-blindness  in,  223 

Tomato     26 

Tortoiseshell 

cats     120 

rabbits     117 
Transformation,   Gartner's  views  on     358 
Triphaena  conies     44 
Tritictim,  see  Wheat 
Turnip 

bulbing  of     31 

colour  of     135 
Tiirtur,  sex-limited  descent     194 
Tylosis     219 

Unfixable  types     298 
"Unisexual"  heredity     285 
Unit-characters     5,    15 

nature  of    266 
Urtica     22 

Variation 

nature  of     100,    147,   280 

confusion  as  to     301 
Variegation     253 
Verbasciim,  colour     41,    134 
Viola     41,  284 

Waltzing  mice     33,    1 1 1 
Weight  of  seed     239 
WHEAT 

beard     2  2 

colour     4 1 

ears     2  2 

foliage     22 

glutenous     31,   258 

keel     22 

maternal  characters  in  seed     258 

Polish     259 

re-combination  of  characters     71 

rust     25,   233 
White  flowers  in  F^  from  cream  x  red    71 


Index  of  Subjects 


393 


White  types,  not  albinos 

properties  of     loi 

dominant     loi,    104,    145 

in  poultry,  various  types     102 

recessive     145 
Wild    species,    Mendelian    phenomena    in 

49 
Wrinkled  seed     28 


Xanthoma     220 
Xanthorhoe  ferrugata 
Xenia     30 


44 


YELLOW 

in  certain  animals     1 1 5 
mice,  peculiar  phenomena  in 
in  fowls     120 
discussion  of     121 
varieties  of  red  moths     155 
silk     137 


Zea,  see  Maize 
Zygopetaluni     248 
Zygote     ir,    16 
a  double  structure 


56 


INDEX    OF    AUTHORS 


Abderhaklen     227 
Allen,   mice,   rats     41 
Anthony,   Manx  cat     34 

Bacot 

Triphaoia  conies     44 

Lasiocampa  quercus     44 

Acidalia  virgiilaria     252 
Baehr,  von,  sex  of  Aphidae      189 
Ballantyne     219 

Balls,  cotton     19,   20,  25,  28,  39,  300 
Baur,   E.     253 
Bell,  W.     207 
Bentham     315 
Biffen 

barley     22,    26,  39 

Brassica     31,   233 

gluten  31 

wheat     20,  22,   41 

rust  in     25 

maternal  character  in     258 

straw     22 
Blakston,  canary     37 
Bond,  C.  J.      229 
Bonhote,  pigeons     36 
Boveri     249 

Boys-Smith,  goats     32,    170 
Brainerd,    Viola     41,  284 
Bruce,   R.     53 


Cam[)bell,   A.,   hairless  mice 
Castle 

guinea-pig     33,   34,    118 

mice     41 

rabbit     33,   79,    117 

lop-eared     251 

rats     85 

sex     165,    187 
Chapman,   II.  J.     96 
Charlesworth,   Messrs     96 
Conklin     48 

Cookson,  N.  C,  orchids     96 
Correns 

Bryonia      166 

Campanula     26,    200 

Jlyoscyatnus     25,   39 

Lychnis     39 

Mat  thiol  a     20,  39 

maize     30,   41,    162,   256 

Mendel     7 

Mi/nuliis     200 

Phyteuma     23,  40 


3^ 


Correns — continued 

Pisuvi     28,  40 

Polemonium     40 

segregation     270 

sex     167,    169 
Coutagne,   silkworm     43,    137 
Crampe,  rats     41,  85 
Crampton     48 
Cuenot 

mice     41,   76,  86,    112 

yellow  mice     119 
Cunier,  night-blindness     220 

Darbishire     1 29 

mice     33,  41,    112 

starch  in  peas     28,  53 
Darwin,   C.     2,   70,  289 

reversion  in  pigeons     100 

Himalayan  rabbits     1 1 1 

peaches  and  nectarines     273 

on  segregation     316 
Davenport 

canary     37,   43 

eye-colour     41,   to6 

fowls     34,  35,  36,  43 

Manx  cat     34 
Denaiffe,   Pisuni     28 
Doncaster 

cats     41 

Abraxas  grossulariata     44,   174 

Angerona  prunaria     44 

tortoiseshell  cats     120,   172 

rats     85 
Drinkard,  tomato     26,  47 
Drinkwater,  brachydactyly     210 
Durham 

mice     41,  78,   87 
,,      eye-colour     113 

canaries     43,   177 

,,         eye- colour     113 

pigments,   identification  of     116,   125 

yellow  mice     120 

action  of  tyrosinase     269 

Embleton,  D.     216,  228 
Emerson,  Phascolus     22,  40 

Farabee,  brachydactyly     210 
F'ischer,  E.     257 
Focke     249,  314 

Xenia     30 
Forbes,    rabbit  and  guinea-pig     33 


Index  of  Authors 


395 


Fotherby  228 
Fromherz  227 
Fryer,   C.      r2i 

Gaertner     7,   331,   353 

on  Lychnis     169 
Galton     5 

law  of  heredity     6,   54,  55 

eye-colour  106 

Basset  hounds     126 

stature     209 

eugenics     304 
Garrod,  A.  E.     227,  233 
Gaskoin     33 
Gates     271 
Giglioli     49,    no 
Godron     2,  315 

Goebel,  double  flowei's     196,   201 
Gossage,    heredity    of  disease      207,    219, 

220 
Gregory 

Primula     24,   26,   27,  40 

starch  in  Pea  seed     28,  68 

doubles     1 99 
Guaita,  von     33 

Hacker,  axolotl     43 

Harmer,  S.  F-     275 

Harris     44 

Harrison,  Aviphidasys  betttlaria     44 

Heape     192 

Henking     188 

Herringham     225 

Herrlinger     225 

Hildebrand     47 

Hind,  Manx  cat     34 

Hunter,  J.     113 

Hurst 

Himalayan  rabbit      in 

yellow  rabbit      n  7,    119 

rabbit     33,   75,   79,  84,  86 
sex  of     193 

eye-colour     41,   106 

fowls     34,  43 

horse     42,   124 

mice     4 1 

musical  sense,  225 

orchids     39,  96,  248 

Pisiim     28,  40 

Janczewski     250 

Jennings     277 

Johannsen,  pure  lines     239 

Killby,  E.     260 
Kolreuter     331 
Korschinsky     286 

Lang,  A.,  Helix     45 

Lawrence,   Sir  W.     209,  219,   304 

Lewis,  T.     216,  228 

Lock 

maize     30,   41,   53,  256,   264 


Lock — con  tin  tied 

Pisum     28,  40,  260 

"ghost "-markings  on  seed-coats     144 
Lutz,   A.   ?yL     271 
Lutz,  F.  E. 

Crioceris     45 

rights  and  lefts     48 

McClung     188 

McCracken,  Coleoptera     44,  45,    137 

MacCurdy     85 

Magnus,  V.     226 

Main  Aviphidasys     44 

Marryat 

rust  in  wheat     25 

Mi7'ahilis     236 
Masters,  double  flowers     196 
Mayer,  A.  G.     48 
Mendel 

biography     309 

experiments     10,    ir,  317 

fasciation     25 

Hieraciiini     362 

Pis  Jim     18,  40,   321 

rediscovery  of  method     7 

round  seed     28 

segregation     1 3 

sugar-pea     22,  330 
Merrifield     257 

Millais,  Sir  E.,  Basset  hounds     6,   126 
Millardet     248 

Morgan,  T.   H.,   sex  of  Aphis   189,    191 
Mudge     41,  85,  209 

Nageli     54,  314 
Naudin     315 
Nettleship,  E. 

cataract     217 

night-blindness     220 

colour-blindness     224 
Newman 

Abraxas  grosstdariata     44 

Callimorpha     44 
Noorduijn,  canaries     43 
NussVjaum     192 

Oberthiir,  Boartnia  hybrids     170 
Ogilvie     218 
Ostenfeld     247 
Overton     279 

Pearson,   K. 

biometry     6 

eye  colour     106 

horse-colours     124 

colours  of  poppies     242 
Porritt     44 
Potts,  F.  A.      192 
Price,  tomato     26,     47 
Prout     44,   252 

Pr/.ibram,   eye  colour  in  cats     41 
Punnelt 

fowls     36,    102 


396 


Index  of  Attthors 


Punnett — continued 
Clarkia  elegans     39 
sweet  pea     89 
Himalayan  rabbit     1 1 1 
chocolate  rabbit     1 16 
yellow  mice     119 
silky  fowls     181 
Hydntina     192 

Raunkiaer     247 
Raynor,   G.   H.      174 
Rivers,  W.   H.  R.     223 
Rizzoli     207 
Rosenberg     247,   271 
Russo,  sex  of  rabbits     192 

Saunders 

Atropa  belladonna     38 

Dattira     39 

stocks  {Ma(thiold)     19,   31,   132,   254 
double     201 

Ranunculus     2 1 

Salvia     4  r 
Schroder,  Baron     96 
Shull     79 

Cap  sella     25 

Helta  nth  us     19,  39 

Phaseolus     40 

ratios     79 

Verbascum     4 1 
Smith,  Geoffrey     192 
Sollas 

guinea-pig     33 

,,         ,,     coat-colours  of     118 
, ,         , ,     eye-colour  of     1 1 3 
Spillman 

cattle     41 

pigs     42 

wheat     20,  22,  41 
Standfuss     257 

Aglia  tau     44,    137,    187 

Callimorpha     44 
Staples- Browne 

pigeons     36,  43,    100 

pigs     42 
Stedman      227 
Stevens     27 r 

sex  f)f  Aphis     190 


Strasburger     249 

Sutton,  A.   W.,   Brassica     31,   39,    134 
„       L.     199 

Thomson,  J.  A.     130 
Toyama,  silkworm     43,   137 
Tschermak 

barley     22,   26,   39 

cryptomeres     93 

Matthiola     39 

Mendel     7 

Phaseolus     22,   31,  39 

Pistwi     18,  22,   28,   259 

wheat     20,  22,  41 

de  Vries 

Antii'7'hinuni     38,  87 

Atropa  belladonna     38 

Chelidoniuni     24 

Coreopsis     39 

Datura     39 

dominance     278 

hybrids  breeding  true     249 

Lychnis     19,  34 

maize     30 

Mendel     7 

mutation  and  fluctuation     287 

Oenothera     28,   249 

Papaver     39 

species  and  variety     285 

unit  characters     5 

Viola     4 1 

Walker,  G.,  brachydactyly     214 
Wallace,  A.  R.     289 
Warburg,  Lasiocampa  quercus     44 
Weismann     5,   289 
Weldon     243 

Wheldale,     Antirrhinum       38,     87,      98, 
280 
colour  of  fruits     135 
Whitman,   C.  O.,  pigeons     194 
Wichura     249,   317 

Wilson,  E.  B.,  sex  and  accessory   chromo- 
some    187,   191 
Wilson,  J.,  cattle     41,   53 
Wood,  sheep     42,    169 
Wootten,    199 


CAMiJkiDr.K :    i'rintf:!)  hv  john  clay,   m.a.  at  tiik   (JNIVKKSITY  prkss. 


University  of  British  Columbia  Library 

DUE  DATE 


•      REC'O 


ff 


r- 


—  f 

O 


AGRICULTURE 
^    FORESTRY 
LIBRARY 


11.. 


•Lt: 

0... 

\ 
J 

C'i  I 


Qoua  tst 


\ I 


<<\ 


This  book  is  donated  to 
THE  DIVISION  OF  PUNT   SCIENCE 
A^  m^^mnrv  of  the  following  men 


^i^:^Ti 


,,!.■ 


1^? 


■^i^';:^ 


hp-^' 


^Si;?l 


!« 


•r^'^'^r^ 


