

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY


ANTIQUARIAN  BOOK   SELLERS'
TRUST   FUNDS


/v  -  /-/  z^/^  /^t€&?s&M.  ^i/CeZ^9^0U  9  Z  -  .A'  /  g^  •


1  THE

CERTAINTY

OF    THE

Worlds  of  Spirits,

And  Confequently,

Of  the  Immortality  of  Souls.

Of  the  Malice  and  Mifery  of  the  Devils,
and  the  Damned.

And  of  the  Bleflednefs  of  the  Juftified.

Fully  evinced  by  the  upqueftionable  Hirtories  of  Ap-
paritions, Operations,  Witchcrafts,  Voices,  &c.

Written  as  an  Addition  to  many  other  Treatifes,
for  the  Conviction  of  Sadduces  and  Infidels.

By    RICHARD    BAXTER.


fcph  6.  12.  We  wr title  not  again{i  F U\b  aid  Stood,  but

againft  Principalities,  again(l  Powers,   againjl  the.

Rulersof  the  Dar  faffs  of  this  World,  again ft  jpiritual

Wic^edntffes  in  high  Placesfm  Celefhals )
Matth  8.  3»»32   Tm  Devils  be  fought  him,  f tying  f  If

thou  ca(t  m  out,  fujfer  m  to  go  away  toto  the  Herd  of

Swine.    And  he  faid,  Go.
Luk.  io.  1 8,  20.  I  beheld  Satan  ,  as  Lightning,  fall

from  Heaven :  But  in  this  rtjoyce  not,  that  the  Spirits

arefuhjecl  to  you :  But  rather  rejoyct  becaufe  your  Names

are  written  in  Heaven.
Heb.J2.  1 4.  Are  they  not  all  ( the  Angels )  miniftring

Spirits,  fent  forth  to  minifier  for  them  who  jhall  be

Heirs  of  Salvation  ?

LOND  0  N,  Printed  for  7.  Parfyurft  at  the  Bible  and
toree  Crowns  in  Cheap  fide,  and  f.Salufdury  at  the  Ri-  !
jing  Sun  near  the  Royal  Exchange  in  Cornhili,  1*91,  f


#&  i&m&m£H


T  H  E


PREFACE


Si


IT  feemethhard  to  unduly  Minds ,
;  that  God  (hould  keep  Jntelie&ual
couls;  fo  -itrange  tovthe  unfeen
World; of  Spi; its ;  that ^e  know
fo  ]itt  e  of  tftem ,  and  that  our  Know-
ledge of  them,  is  no  more  by  the  way
of  :enfe :  But  there  is  in  ir,  mucn  of
Gods  arbitrary  Soveraign  Power,  and
much  of  his  Wildom ,  and  much  of
his  Juftice,  ancialfoof  his  Love.

u  It  pleafed  hini  to  make.  Variety  of
Creatures :  What  harmony  would  there
be  without  Variety? u  ere  there  nothing
but  linity,  there  would  be  nothing  but
God.  And  various  Creatures  ,  muft
have  a  various  Situation,  Reception
and  Operations ;  The  Kfh.es  muft  aot
A  2  '  dwell


The  Preface.

dwell  in  our  Cities,  nor  be  acquainted
with  our  Affairs.

2.  We  here  dwell  in  Flefh,  in  Bodies
organized  for  the  Souls  Receptions  and
Perceptions,  and  Operations :  And  the
Wifdom  of  God  doth  fuitably  difpofe
of  his  Communications,  and  give  us
that  meafureof  Light,  which  is  agree-
able to  our  State :  The  Sun  muft  not
fliine  on  the  Infant  in  the  Womb  ,  nor
muft  he  there  fee  our  Buildings  and
Tradings,  and  Bufinefs  in  the  World,

3.  We  have  Light  here,  that  is  pro-
portionable to  our  work  and  intereft  ;
So  much  as  is  neceffary  to  our  knowing
of  ourfelves,  and  our  God  and  Gover-
Tiour,  and  our  Duty,  and  all  thofe  hopes
that  are  our  neceffary  Motives  thereto.

-  Men  that  will  but  obterve  the  Operations
of  their  Souls,  may  competently  know
what  a  Soul  or  Spirit  is :  And  Men  that

6  will  but  open  their  Eyes,  and  confide-
rately  look  about  them,  may  as  certain-
ly know  that  there  is  a  God,  as  they  can
know  that  there  is  any  Being:  And  Men
that  cannot  but  difference  Moral  Good
and  Evil,  and  that  know  the  Duty  of

Children


The  Preface.

Children  to- Parents,  Subje&s  to  Rulers?
and  Neighbours  to  Neighbours ,  may
know  their  Duty  to  God,  snd  that  the
performance  of  it  fhall  not  be  in  vain  :
And  if  Men  will  not  know  all  this
which  they  may  know  ,  it  is  juft  with
God  to  leave  them  to  their  chofen  dark-
nefs,  and  not  to  know  that  which  further
might  be  known.  It  is  a  difmal  cafe  to
have  a  Soul  that  will  not  knowitfelf,
to  be  what  it  is ,  till  utter  Mifery  con*
vince  him.

4.  And  the  God  of  Lovemaketh  Ad-
vantage of  our  nofrfeeing  the  World  of
Spirits,  for  ourExercife  of  our  higher
Intellectual  Faculties,by  a  Life  of  Faith  5
And4 Intuition  (a  Nobler  fort  than  our
prefent  Eye-fight )  will  be  feafonable  ,
and  foon  enough  when  ripenefs  hath
made  us  ready  for  it.  We  (hall  not  need
all  the  Organ ical  parts  of  the  Eye,which
Galen  admiringly  defcribeth ,  for  our
Glorious  fight  And  to  fee  Devils  and
other  Spirits  ordinariy  ,  would  not  be
enough  to  bring  our  Atheifts  to  the  fa-
ving  Knowledge  of  God?without  which
all    other  Knowledge  is   vain,    They

A  3  that


The  Preface.

that  doubt  of  a  God  ( the  moft  perfeft,
eternal,  infinite  Being  )  while  they  fee
the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  6tars,  the  Sea
andLand,wbuldriot  KnoWhimby  feeing
Created  Spir  ts.

As  to  the  Originals  of  this  r'olle<fHoii ,
it  had  its  rife  from  my  own,  and  other
Mens  need.  When  God  fir  ft  au  akened
me,  to  think  with  preparing?  ferioufnefs
of  my  Condition  after  Death,  I  had  not
any  obferved  Doubts  of  the  Reality  of
Spirits  ,  or  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul3
erof  theTruth  of  the  Gqfpel  :But  all  my
doubts  were  about  my  own  Renovation
and  Title  to  that  BleiFed  Life.  But  when
God  had  given  me  peace  of  Gonfcience,
Satan  Aflaulted  me  with  thofe  worfe
Temptations :  Yet  through  Gods  Grace,
they  never  prevailed  agairift  my  Faith  :
Nor  did  he  ever  raife  in  me  the  lead
doubt  of  the  Being,  and  Teyfe&ion  of
God  3  nor  of  my  Duty  to  hove,  Honour \
0%,and  Trufi  him :  For  I  ftill  faw  that
to  be  an  Atheift  was  to  be  mad.

But  I  found  that  my  Fai  h  of  Surer-
mtjral  Revela  ion,  muft  be  more  than
%  Believing  Man ,  and  th&t  if  it  ha:!  rot

a  firm


The  Preface.

a  firm  Foundation,and  rooting,eveii  y*re
Evidence  of  Verity,  Surely  Apprehended  9
it  was  not  like  to  clo  thqfe  great  works
thatFaith  had  to  do,and  to  overcome  the
World,  the  Flefh  and  the  Devil,and  to
make  my  Death  to  be  fafeand  comforta-
ble. Therefore!  found  that  all  confirm-
ing helps  were  ureful  7  and  among  thole
of  the  lower  fort ,  Apparitions,  and  o-
ther  fenfible  Manifeftations  of  the  cer-
tain exiftence  oi  Spit  its  .of  themfelves
Invifible,  was  a  means  that  might  do
much  with  fuch  as  are  prone  to  judge
by  Senfe.  The  ufes  hereof  I  mention
before  the  Book,  that  the  Reader  may
know  that  I  write  it  for  Tra£ticeyand  not
to  pleafe  Men  with  the  Strangenefs  and
Novelty  of  ufelefs  Stories.
It  is  nofmall  number  of  Writers  on  fuch
Subjects  that  I  have  reaa,it\$  near  three-
fcore  years  time  from  the  firft  occafion  :
And  finding  that  almoft  all  the  Athcifts,
Sadduces  and  Infidels,  did  feem  to  pro*
fefs,  that  wer-3  they  butfure  of  the  Re-
ality of  the  Apparitions  and  Operations
of  Spirits,  it  would  cure  them,  I  thought
this  the  moft  fuitable  help  for  them  ,

A  4  that


The  Preface.

that  have  finned  themfelves  into  an  in-
capacity of  more  Rational  and  Excel-
lent Arguments.  And  I  have  long  fear-
ed, leit  fecr  t  unoT  ferved  defe&ivenefs
in  their  Belief  of  the  Immortality  of
the  Soul,  nd  the  truth  of  the  Scripture,
is  the  great  caufe  of  all  Mens  other  de-
feds  :  There  lieth  ufually  the  unfound-
nefs  of  Worldly  Hypocrites,  where  it  is
prevailing ;  and  thence  is  the  weakaefs
of  Grace  in  the  bed,  though  it  prevail
not  againft  their  Sincerity.

By  which  Motives  I  did  ( though  it
difpleafed  fome  )  make  it  the  Second
Tart  of  my  Book,  called  the  Saints  Reft  :
And  afterward  provoked  by  clement
Writer,  I  rid  itmu  h  more  fully  in  a
Book  called  the  Unnafonablenefs  of  Infi-
delity :  And  after  'hat,  provo^d  by  the
Copy  of  a  pape-  ciifperfed  in  Oxford  \
(  faid  to  i  e  Dr.  Walkers  )  queftioning
the  certainty  of  our  Religion,  and  fee-
ing no  anfwer  to  it  come  from  the
Univerfity  Men,  I  wrote  yet  more  Me-
thodically of  all,  in  a  Book  called  the
Heafons  qP  .he  Chriftian  Religion  :  And
after  added  a  fmallDifcourfe  called  Mare

Reafom


The  Preface.

Reafons  for  it ,  provoked  by  one  that
called  himfelf  Herbert,  in  which  alfo
I  anfwered  the  Lord  Herbert^  de  veri-
tate  :  And  fince  then,  a  namele  s  Sad-
duce  hath  draun  me  to  publifh  an  An*
fwer  to  him :  And  in  my  Life  of  Faith,
aod  other  Books,I  have  handled  the  fame
Subject ;  All  which  I  tell  the  Reader,
that  he  may  fee  why  I  have  taken  this
Subject  as  io  neceffary,  why  I  am  end-
ing my  Life  with  the  publication  of
thefe  Hiftorical  Letters  and  Collections;
Which  I  dare  fay  have  fuch  Evidence,
as  will  leave  every  vadduce  that  read-
eth  them,  either  convinced,  or  utterly
without  excufe.

Surely  the  certainty  of  fo  great  a
change  of  our  place  ,  State,  Company
and  Works,  as  Death  will  certainly  and
quickly  make,  (liquid  poflefs  every  Man
that  hath  the  ufe  of  Reafon,  with  fuch
ferious  Thoughts,  Affe&ions  and  Dili-
gence ,  as  is  quite  contrary  to  a  Diver-
ted, Carelefs,  Sloathful,  Worldly,  Sen-
fualand  itupid  Mind  and  Life.

How  fpeedily  (hall  I  fee  the  WorkJ
that  I  have  read  of,  and  Preached,  and

talk'd


The  Preface

talfct  and  written  of  ?  O  !  What  a  dif-
ference will  there  be  between  my  now
hearing  of  frightfol  Apparitions,  and
prodigious  A&s  of  Spirits,andthat  fight
or  knowledge  of  all  their  State  and  Af-
fairs 5  which  I  fhallhave  ,  and  now  am
going  to.  The  fight  of  Devils  and  Dam-
ned Divefes,  and  unholy  Souls  ,  will
hereafter  be  no  Rarity  5  and  if  my
Soul  muft  pafs  through  the  airy  infe-
rior Region,  where  thefeMiferable  Spi-
rits now  inhabit,  it  will  not  be  as
dangeroufly  AfTaulted  by  them,  but  in
Triumph :  For  I  know  whom  I  have
trufted  ,  and  into  the  hands  of  him  do
I  commit  my  Spirit ,  who  hath  con-
querred  Death  and  Devils  ,  and  is  now
the  Glorified  Lord  of  all ,  and  can  ufe
them  at  his  pleafure.  Ad  thole  An-
gels that  rejoice  at  the  Repentance  of
of  a  Lazaru* ,  and  now  are  Miniflxing
Spirits  for  his  fafety ,  will  be  ready  in
Obedience  to  our  Lord,  to  convey
his  Soul  to  Abrahams  bofom :  Yea,
to  be  that  day  with  Chrift  in  Para-
jdife.


He


The  Preface.

He  that  chaineth  up  thefe  Devils ,
that  they  moleft  us  no  more  as  their
Malice  dothdefire,  will  make  ourpaf-
fage  fafe  through  all  their  envy  and
defiled  Regions.

But  feeing  it  is  the  free  will  of  Man
that  giveth  the  Devils  their  hurting
power,  and  they  can  do  us  no  harm ,
nor  make  us  fin,  without  our  own
confent  or  yielding  :  O !  With  how
careful  and  conftantand  refolved  watch-
fulnefs  fhould  we  live  ?  And  how  de-
fervedly  may  every  prayerlefs  ungod-
ly Family  and  perfon  ,  be  left  for  a
prey  to  this  devourer.  And  indeed
he  hath  already  hurt  them  more  by
blind  ng  and  hardening  their  Hearts,
than  a  thoufand  haunting  Appariti-
ons could  of  themfelves  have  done.

And  when  Excellent  Zancby  hath
faid  fo  much  to  prove,  that  it  is  by
h s  very  contiguous  vubftance  ,  that
the  Devil  doth  work  on  Sou!  and
Body,  how  dreadful  fhould  Tempta-
tions and  Sin  be  to  us ,  if  we  would
not  have  the  very  fubftance  of  Devils
dwell  in  us  ?  And  why  do  any  think

it


The  Preface.

it  firange  to  read  fo  much  of  Poffeili-
ons  and  DifpofTeflions  in  the  Gof-
pel.

Lord  Jefus  let  me  Finifli  my  Courfe
with  joy :  And  then  receive  my  Spi-
rit.   Amen.


**&£*  Richard  Baxter.


The


The  CONTENTS.

'Cfaap.I  /^\P  the  great  and  weighty  Vfesof
V>J  the  Hiftories  of  Spirit /,  and  their
umtfual  apparitions  and  Actions.

Ch.  II.  §  i.  lnftance  i.  The  Devil  of  Mafcon.1
X.  Colloml  Bowen'j  Story,  in  divers  Letters^
5.  My  Friend  and  Neighbour  CoUonel  John
Bridget  Story.

4.  One  iVLondon,  yet  living.

5.  One  at  BelMt.

6.  One  at  Ilchefteiv

7.  Mr.  Mompeflbrfr  Story.

8.  At  Lutterworth.

9.  MaryEllinso/Evefham.

10.  One  in  Dorfetfhire.

11.  Nathan  Crab  of  Exeter.

12.  The  fir ange  Story  of  the  Devil  ofGetl-
luce,  in  Dr.  Sindare.

13 .  The  Witches  hanged  in  Suffolk  and  Efifex.

14.  The  Brightling  Story.

1 5 .  Lord  Br eghill' s  Story  of  one  at  St.  JamesV,

16.  Simon  Jones  of  Kiderminfter.

17.  Richard  White  of  Wilden-Hall.  ".

18.  Mr.  Hopkins  o/Bewdley.

1 9.  ^f»  In  fiance  now  in  London.
2.0.  Another  as  ftrange.

2 1 .  Mr.  White  at  Lambeth.

22.  One  from  Cambridge.

23.  One  at  Hunniton.

24.  Another  there.

25.  Mr,  Ch.  HattV  Story.

cfa.ni.


I


The  Contents.

Oitfll.  The  firange  Story  of  Mr.  May  Hill,
AHmfier  of  Beckington  in  Somerfetfliire.
Mr.  Increafe  md  Mr.  Cotton  Mather  s  ln~

fiances.
The  Story  of  Mr.  Vzcfs  Daughters  at  LeftO.
Ch.IV*  Many    Hifiories  few    me    by    Dukf

Lauderdale,  and  one  that  taught  a  Minifter

to  fpeak  true  Latin,  and  his  Detection  of  fome

Poptjh  Frauds.

Cb.  V.  Of  Witchcraft.    Inft.  i.'  Alexander

Benedidus,
2.  Benevenius.
5.  Langius.

4.  Cornelius  Gemma.^

5.  Sidelicus,  *'#Skenkuis*
6-  Wolphius.
7.  Sebaftian  Brand-

$.  Fabricius  Hildanus.  \%

9.  Fa?lix  Platerus.
jo.  Hollerius.

11.  Petrus  Foreftus-

12.  Scribonius, — Many  Inft ances of  the  Con-
cubitus  of  Damons  mth  Womtn.

13.  Many  [truck  h  Damons:  Scribonius.

14.  Witches  raifing  Storms.

15.  Erafmus'/  Story;  of  an  Apparvion  that
burnt  the  Town.

16.  TheSelling  ofMnds  ^Lapland  and  Ifeland .

17.  The  Bleeding  of  wurde*  d  bodies.

18.  ScvlhomUSSJtrarje  Stpry.

igm  Mr.  Farmworch  0/ ^  MiizQ  Sacrifice  to

the  Devil.  "'\  ^

20,  JLu-


The  Contents.

so*  Ludovicus  Vives  Teftimony.
%l.  Zanchy's  Teftimony.
22.  Melancthon'*  Teftimony.

%$9  A  wonder f History  of  .Dr.Henric.ab  Heer&

24.  Merik  Caufabone  of  &VTheqdMeyerne.

25.  Divers  Inftances  from  Fernelius.

26.  Sir  Theod.  Meyerne's  -prudent  Judgment*

27.  Gerh.  Voflms'/  Teftimony.

28.  Lavater.

29.  Bijhop  JoC  Hall.

30.  Cyprian,  and  aftrange  Story  \n  him  from
Firmilianus.

3 1.  The  New  England  hftances  on  Mrs.  Hut-
chinfon  and  Mrs.  Dyer*  published  by  Mr*

-  Thomas,  Weld- ■  J

32.  Zanchy5/  Opinion  that  the  Devil's  Subftame
is  in  them  that  they  move,

33.  Luther9/  Teftimony*

34.  More  e/Melancthon'/.

Ch.  VI.  Mr.  John  Lewis  and  Mr.  John  Da»
Vis'/  Multitudes  of  Inftances  of  Apparitions
in  Cardiganshire  5  and  near  it,  of  Knockers
and  Death- Lights.

Ch.  VII.  toft.  I.  Mr.TxKons Narrative &om

Rochefter.
2,  ^fr.  Woodcock'/  Letter,  and  four  ftrange

Stones:  One  of  Mr.Mutl'y  and  one  of  Dr.

Lamb  and  Mr.  Barber ;  and  one  of  Mr. Her-
r*  imr  V*^*5  *»d  °f  the  Oundte-mn.
Ui.  VIIL  Of  good  Angels,  and  fome  doubtful

Spmts.    Inft.  1.  Mr.Tzt€s  Cafe.
I.  The  JBolton  Inftance.

fr  The


*  The  Contents,

3 .  The  Afric Bijhops.whofe  Tongues  were  cut  outl
4»  Somewhat  from  De  la  Cerda.
%  Mr.  Ketilby  Woodhoufe^  Teftimony  of
fame  faved  from  Sir  Richard  Greenvile.

6.  Of  the  Books  of  Prodigies,  l66z*

7.  Of  Lightnings  tearing  Churches.

8.  Of  Whirlwinds  and  Hurricanes.
$<  Of  Mrs.  Britton V  Apparition.

io-  More  from  De  la  Cerda.

II.  Hildanus^  ftrange  Story  of  Lightning.

Ch.  IX.  Inft.  i .  Of  melancholy  Perfons  Cafe.

2 .  Of  Enthufiafts :  Inflames  named,of  divers  forts.

Ch  X  5  Other  ftrange  Providences  obfervablepn
wyfetf*  on  ^f  C.  on  Tho.  Giles,  on  J.  D.

Of  Death  fore-told :  Jnftance  of  Mr*  Tiro,  Co-
lonel  Rich  and  his  Ladys  Letters  of  it.

Of  the  GMtonbury -Thorn,  divers  Letters.

Of  the  Kings  of  England  and  France  Touching
for  the  Struma.

Ch.XI.  A  ftrange  Story  from  Belfaft  in  Ire-
land, fully  attefted  in  a  Letter  from  M^.Tho.
Emlin,  a  worthy  Preacher,  now  in  Dublin.

Ch.  XII-  A  Dublin- Infiance,  attefted  by  Mr,
Daniel  Williams,  now  in  London.

Th£  Conclufion,  Concerning  Angels,  and  how
to  know  bad  spirits  from  Good;  by  the  Mat-
ter, and  their  Method :  And  what  Inftm-
tnents  Christ  and  Devils  ufe  in  their  greatejt
pMick  Warfare \  %

am


CHAP.    I

Of  the  great  and  weighty  Vfes  of
thefe  Hiftories  of  Sprits,  and
their  unufual  Appearances  and
Wor^s.


i


§.  I.  "  "  Have  written  this  Colle&ion  only
as  an  /Addition  to  fuflkient  Proofs
of  invifible  Powers  or  Spirits,
and  their  A&ions  towards  Men,
which  many  in  full  Treatifes  have  already
given  the  World  ;  becaufe  how  convincing
foever  thofe  Difcouriesbe,  Multitudes  bred
up  in  Idlenefs  and  Senfuality,  and  thereby
drowned  in  Sadduceifm  and  Beitiality,  ne-
ver fee  thofe  Books  5  nor  will  the  Devil
confenc  that  they  i'hall  have  fo  much  Wit
and  Care  of  their  future  State,  as  to  make
that  diligent  Enquiry  after  fuch  Things  as
the  Importance  of  the  Matter  doth  require;
Nor  will  they  read  them,  if  they  have  them  5
nor  believe  the  fulled  Evidence,  though
they  aad  it ;  pretending  that  of  Perfons  and
Things  fo  long  ago,  and  far  orT,  they  can
have  no  AfTurance,  not  knowing  what  Fal-
lacies raay  intervene.

B  There-


i  An  HiftcYtcdl  Difceurfe  of

Therefore  I  have  chofen  many  near  to
them,  both  for  Time  and  Place  5  of  which,
if  they  think  their  Souls  worth  fo  much
Labour,  they  may  enquire  to  Satisfaction.

§  2,  Though  I  have  taken  many  out  of
foreign  moft  credible  Fhyficians,  and  fome
from  other  Hiftorians,  yet,  that  I  may  not
tranfcri^e  too  much,  I  defire  them  that  need
yet  fuller  Information,  to  read  efpecially
Bodln  and  RemigiM,  two  Judges  who  con-
demned Multitudes  of  Witches  themfelves,
and  Fad.  Griliandtts,  and  Spr  anger  us,  and  the
M.alk'%  Maleficomni)  and  Zanchy  de  Angelis  &
Damon,  and   Datr&tt,  Jofeph    Glanvile   with

Dr.  Moreh  Notes,  efpecially  the  Story  in  the
Wed  of  Scotland,  near  like  that  mod  con-
vincing one  of  the  Devil  of  Mafcon  $  and
Dr,  More  of  Atheifm  }  2nd  Mr.  Increafe  Ma-
ther,  and  his  Son  Mr.  Cotton  Mather  of  New
England,  their  two  Books  of  Witches,  of
which,  the  latter  hath  moil  convincing  Evi-
dence 3  and  Dr.  S'wcUres a  Scot.

§3-1  confefs3  it  is  "very  difficult  to  ex-
pound the  Caufes  of  all  mentioned  in  thefe

Hiitories:  hut  provec  Matters  of  fact  mud
not  be  denied,  bur  improved  as  well  as  we
can.  And"!  cpnfefs,  very  many  Cheats  of
pretended  Pcflefficns  have  been  difcovered,-
which  hath  made  ton\e  weak,  injudicious
Men  think  that  all  are  fuch*    Two  ions  of

Perkins


^Apparitions  and  Witches.  %

Perfons  have  oft  been  found  Deceivers  %
x.  Perfons  prepared  and  trained  up  pur-
pofely  by  Papifls  Priefts,  to  honour  their
Exorcifms.  You  may  find  in  print  the  Sto-
ry of  the  Boy  ofBilfon  ( Vetrius,  who  after-
wards I  heard  turned  Quaker  at  Bri&ol)
dete&ed  and  fhamed  by  Bp.  Morton  himfelfc
Many  fuch  abroad  are  recorded,  i.  Luft-
ful,Rank,  Girls  and  young  Widows,  that
plot  for  fome  amorous,  procacious  Defign*
or  have  Imaginations  conquered  by  Luft :
Though,  I  think,  when  they  come  to  a  F«-
ror  Htenmsy  Satan  oft  fets  in.

But  he  forfeiteth  the  Benefit  of  his  own
Eye-fight,  who  thinks  that  none  fee,  be-
caufe  fome  Beggars  counterfeit  Blindnefi.

§4.  Thelnftances  tell  us,  1.  That  the
State,  Converfe,  Policy,  Laws  of  the  Ae-
rial World,  or  Regions,  are  much  though
not  wholly)  unknown  to  us  here.  2.  And
'  fo  is  the  Natural  State  of  the  departed  Souls
of  wicked  Men,  as  to  their  having  Bodies,  or
no  Bodies,  their  Power,  their  Wits,their  Mo-
tions, and  Pafficns.  g.Andaifo  whether  they
be  proper  Devils  when  joyned  with  them,  or
of  another  Species.  4.  And  'tis  hard  to  know
by  their  Words  or  Signs,  when  it  is  a  De-
vil, and  when  it  is  a  Humane  Soul  that  ap-
peared. 5.  Yea,  it  is  oft  hard  to  know
whether  it  be  the  Soul  of  a  good  Perfon,
or  a  bad.  6.  And  confequently,  what  di-
B  %  ftance


4  'An  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

fiance  there  is  in  their  Habitations.  7.  Yea,
and  oft  whether  it  be  a  good  Angel,  or  a
bad,  feeing  bad  ones  may  do  good  deceit-
fully, or  by  Conftraint.  8.  And  "'tis  un*
fearchable  to  us,  how  far  God  leaveth  Invi-
fible,  Intelle&ual  Powers  to  Free  Will  a-
bout  inferiour  things ;  fufpending  his  pre-
determining Motion,  though  not  his  gene-
ral Motion  and  Concourfe.  9.  Yea,  we  are
not  fully  certain  whether  thefe  Aerial  Re-
gions have  not  a  third  fort  of  Wights,  that
are  neither  Angels,  (Good  or  Fallen, )  nor
Souls  of  Men,  but  fuch  as  have  been  there
placed  as  Fifhes  in  the  Sea,  and  Men  on
Earth:  And  whether  thofe  called  Fairies
and  Goblins  are  not  fuch.

But  as  all  thefe,  and  more  fuch,  are  un-
known to  us,  fo  God  feeth  it  meet  for  us
that  it  fjhould  be  fo,  and  we  ihould  not  fo
much  as  deilre  or  endeavour  that  it  might
be  other  wife.

§  $ .  But  we  may  know,  (which  mud
fuffice  us,)  1.  That  no  Spirits  can  do  any
thing,  but  by  God's  Will  or  Permiffion.
2.  And  that  God  will  never  permit  them
eventually  to  fruftrace  his  Love  and  Mercy
to  his  People,  nor  to  break  any  one  of  his
Promifes  to  them.  3  And  that  good  Spi-
rits are  Servants,  and  evil  Ones  Slaves  to
Jefus  thrift,  our  Redeemer,  and  (hall  not
frustrate  his  Grace  and  Undertaking.    4-  Is

is


apparitions  and  Witches,  j

is  furely  a  wicked  fort  of  Spirits  that  de-
light to  do  Mifchief,  and  that  Jye  and  de-
ceive Men,  and  that  are  ambitious  to  be
woffhipped,  and  to  have  Men's  Souls  and
Bodies  in  their  power,  and  make  killing
and  damning  Men  their  Work :  '  Fis  evi-
dent that  their  Knowledge  and  Mifery  hath
not  yet  changed  them  by  Repentance,  and
made  them  better.  5.  TEH  evident  that
they  are  Enemies  to  God,  and  to  Jefus
Chrift ;  for  their  whole  Defign  is  againft
them<  and  againft  fanetifying,  faving  Work.
6.  It  is  plain  that  they  know  that  Man  hath
another  Life  to  live:  Their  Works  atteft
the  Immortality  of  our  Souls,  and  the  ^ruth
of  ChriiHanity,  in  that  they  malicioufly  do
fo  much  againft  them :  They  urge  Men  to
renounce  God  and  Ohrift,  and  his  Com-
mandments and  Worfhip,  their  Baprifm,
and  all  true  Service  of  God '  They  urgg
Perfons  to  fell  their  Souls  to  them,  and  to
foriake  all  that  tends  to  fave  them,  Their
Importunity  to  deftroy  us,  ihould  teach  us
the  Need  of  the  greateft  Care  and  Dili-
gence for  our  Salvation.  7.  It  feemech
plain  that  they  are  now  of  a  low  and  bafe
Condition  of  Nature,  in  that  th.ey  (etk  !uch
fordid  Employments  about  Graves  and
Corps,  and  multitudes  of  fordid,  trivial
things.  8.  And  it  fcems  that  they  dwell
near  us,  in  the  Air,  Earth  and  Sea,  and  not
in  the  higher  glorious  Regions.  9.  And  it
Bj  is


6  An  Hiftorical  Difeourfe  of

is  apparent  that  they  have  a  natural  Strength,
and  Ways  of  working,  unknown  to  us,  by  the
Wonders  that  they  do-  10  It  is  very  like  that
the  howls  of  wicked  Men  now  dwell  with
them  as  they  muft  do  for  ever,  and  are  like
them.  1 1.  I  think  it  mod  likely,  that  when
Witches,  Men  and  Women,  confefs  their  fil-'
thy  Lying  with  Devils,  that  it  is  done  more
to  exercife  the  Lutt  of  the  Witch  than  of  the
Devil:  And  that  fometimes  he  doth  it  by  a
Body  of  grofs  Air,  and  fometimes  may  grati-
fie  the  Lull  of  one  Witch  on  another,  or  on  a
tempted  ignorant  Wretch.  Me  that  can  bring
a  Witch  in  without  opening  the  Door,  can
bring  (uch  an  one  (Male  or  Female)  into
another's  Bed.  1 2.  It  is  not  impoilible  that
wicked  Souls  may  carry  wiih  them  hence
their  filthy  Inclinations,  and  Defire  to  ufe
them-  13.  It  is  plain  that  Devils  and  wic-
'ked  Souls  are  not  yet  in  the  utmoft  of  their
Mifery,  but  are  referved  in  Chains  to  the
Judgment  of  the  great  Day  of  Chrift :  Such
joking,  and  dallying,  and  whittling,  as  the
Devil  of  Mafcon,  and  many  other  ufed,
fhew  this.  14.  It  is  clear,  that  whether
you  call  it  [in  State,  or  Place,"]  (I  think
both,)  the  bleffed  Souls  and  Angels  are  far
above  thefe,  in  a  higher  World  or  Region,
and  no  wonder  if  they  appear  more  rarely
to  Men  00  Earth'  15.  Yet  Angels  can  be
here,  and  do  their  Office  for  us,  without
fueh  Defcest  as  (hall  abate  their  Joy  and

Glory  1


Jpparkiom  and  Witches.,  7

Glory;  and  why  not  blefled  Souls  too,  if
they  (hall  be  equal  with  Angels  ?  The  Sun
can  enlighten  every  Eye  here,  without  lo
fingits  higher  Refidence.  16.  When  re-
vengeful things  are  done,  (as  on  Murderers,
Defrauders,  &c.)  it  feems  to  be  from  the
revengeful  Wrath  of  fome  bad  Soul,  efpe-
ciallywhen  it  is.  about  Money  or  Lands,  it
feemeth  to  fay.our  of  the  Worldly  Mind :
Yet  it  is  uncertain  whether  it  may  not  be
from  the  Juftice  of  God,  and  governing  An-
gels, fending  the  Evil  Spirits  on  fuch  Er-
rands. A  Hawk  and-  a  Hound  are  fitter
Meffengers  to  deftroy,'  than  a  Dove  or  a
Lamb.  17.  When  a  Genius  flieweth  fome
Kindnefs  to  the  Soul,  (as  his  that  I  men-
tioned, that  knocketh  at  his  Bed's  Head,
and  about  him,  after  every  time  that  he  is
drunk ;  and  one  that  Bodln  mentioneth,  that
was  ftricken  when  he  faid  or  did  amifs?J  it
is  uncertain  to  us,  whether  it  be  a  good  An-
gel, or  the  Soul  of  fome  former  dear  Friend,
that  procureth  this  Leave,  to  try  to  turn
and  fave  the  Sinner :  Or  whether  Chrift  and
Angels  force  Satan  to  doit  againft  his  Will.
18.  Though  the  unquenchable  Fire  which
Is  to  follow  will  fhew  the  utmoft  Severity
of  God's  Juftiee,  there  is  fome  figmfication
of  his  Mercy  to  the  Wicked,  in  fufpending
it  fo  far,  as  to  allow  them  fuch  a  Condition
as  many  of  thefe  Apparitions  fignifie  by  their.
Words  and  Deeds.  19  Yet  here  is  no-
B  4  thing


8  An  Hifiorical  Dtfcourfe  of

thing  to  encourage  their  Opinion,  thatsthink
fuch  Souls  or  Demons  are  but  in  via,  and
have  Another  Day  of  Hope,  and  Means  to
ufe,  ij  in  poftbility  of  Salvation :  And  though
many  arefaid  to  have  begged  of  the  Living
for  MaiTes  and  Prayers,  it  is  liker  to  prove
a  Diabolical  Cheat,  to  promote  Superfti-
tion,-<;than  that  there  is  a  Purgatory-State  of
Hopfe!  20.  Thofe  that  ar6  tempted  to  think
thar, -Souls  are  all  one,  .and  that  Individua-
tion is  only  by  Corporeal  Matter,  and  that
Individuation  ceafetfo*  at'  Death,  are  by  all
thefe  Examples  fully  confuted :  Devils  and
wicked  Souls  have  their  Numerical  Indivi-
duation, and  therefore  no  Godly  Perfon
need  to  fear  the  Lois  of  it<  Either  it  is
gOoii  or  bad  for  us :  If  good,  {hall  the  Wic-
ked and  Devils  have  it,  and  not  the  Godly  ?
If  bad,  why.fliould  it  bedefired?  Angels
Sre  Individuals;  and  (hall  not  our  Souls  ?

§  6.  Thefe  great  Benefits  we  may  get  by
the  right  Ufe  of  thefe  Hiiiories,  and  fuch
others.

i.  We  may  learn  to  admire  that  Frame
of  Divine  Government,  that  hath  Crea-
tures fo  various  to  rule  and  order,  and  ma-
ke th  one  beautiful  Frame  of  all.  As  Toads
and  Serpents  on  Earth  are  not  ufelefs,  nor
devouring  Fifties.,  Birds  and  Beafts  3  fo  nei-
ther are  Devils,  nor  damned  Souls,  no  nor
their  Sins,  which  God  will  ufe5  though  he
will  not  caufe<  ?  %>  We


apparitions  and  Witches.  g

2I  We  may  gather  that  in  Heaven  itfelf,
there  will  be  an  orderly  ©economy  and
difference  of  degrees  of  Superiority  and  of
Glory ,  when  there  is  fo  great  difference
through  all  the  World.  All  (hall  not  be
equal  to  them  that  (hall  fit  on  twelve
Thrones,  Judging  the  twelve  Tribes :  There
are  many  Maniions  in  that  Houfe,  even  to
them  that  be  all  with  Chrili.

3.  We  have  great  Caufe  to  be  very
thankful  to  God  ,  that  doth  not  let  loofe
wicked  Spirits  againft  us,  that  they  are  not
here  our  Terror  and  Tormentors.

4.  How  great  a  Mercy  is  it,  that  we
have  a  Saviour  that  hath  power  over  them,
and  hath  Redeemed  us  from  their  Power  ,
and  from  everlafting  Damnation.

5.  We  may  fee  that  the  Angels  of  God
are  not  ufelefs  to  us  5  but  their  Miniftry  is
one  of  Gods  Means  for  our  Prefervition,
and  we  owe  them,  Love  and  Thanks  for
all  their  Love  and  Service:  And  it  is  not,
through  Pride  or  Infenfibility  of  this  bene-
fit, that  we  do  not  worfhip  them,  whom
we  fee  not.

6.  If  the  Devils  poflefling  and  torment-
ing Mens  Bodies,  be  (o  heavy  a  Plague ,
how  much  worfe  is  it  to  have  him  the  Ma-
iler of  their  Souls?  OJ  How  carefully
fhould  we  refift  his  Temptations  ?  Every
Sin  that  we  commit,  through  Love  to  it,  or
by  Wilfulnefs  or  Sloth,  is  worfe  to  us  and

more


io  An  Hijiorkal  Difcourfe  of

more  pleafing  to  the  Devil,than  to  be  Tor-
mented fo  long  by  him.  He  mift  of  his
aim  at  Job  ,  when  he  could  not  by  all  his
Sufferings  draw  him  to  Sin  :  Oi  howT  much
more  miferable  isa  Worldly,  Proud,  Glut-
tonous, Dives,  Lord,  Knight  or  Gentle-
man, and  ienfual  Youth  diilra&ed  with
Vain  Mirth  and  Lufl  ,  than  one  Bewitcht,
t>r  Bodily  only  pofleft  by  Devils  :  And
how  much  (hould  the  moft  godly  be  afraid
of  Sin ,  and  of  Temptations?

7.  It  isa  fenlible  help,  as  to  Convince
Brutifts  and  A  thrifts  and  Infidels,  fo  to  con-
firm the  heft  Believers  againft  all  Tempta-
tions, to  doubt  of  the  Life  to  come,  and
the  Immortality  of  Souls ,  and  the  future
lodgment  and  Retribution :  And  though  it
be  our  flume  to  need  fuch  helps ,  it  is  a
Mercy  to  have  them.  If  a  Sadducee  will
fay  ?  if  one  did  come  from  the  Dead,  or  I
hw  fuch  things ,  I  would  believe,  fbould
not  our  Faith  be  paft  wavering ,  that  have
thefe  added  to  the  greater  Gofpel  proofs.

8.  It's  matter  of  Comfort  to  departing
faithful  Souls,  that  thefe  evil  Spirits  that
are  chained  up  now ,  and  not  fuffered  to
difturb  us,  ftiall  not  hinder  our  pailage  to
Glory :  If  we  muft  pafs  through  the  Air
inhabited  by  Devils  and  Wicked  Souls.,
Angels  will  Convey  us ,  and  Chrift  re-
ceive us  ,  and  it  (ball  not  be  to  our  hurt  or
jbfs.

p.  It


JfpaYition  and  Witches.  i  x

p.  It  fhould  always  keep  the  Souls  of
the  Faithful  in  joyful  gratitude  ,  for  the
work  of  Regeneration,  Grace,  Juftificati-
on  and  Salvation ,  which  was  our  great
Deliverance  from  Devils :  And  teach  us
to  live  as  the  faved  of  the  Lord.

10.  It  Ihould  warn  all  to  take  heed,  that
they  be  not  helpers  and  Servants  to  Devils,
in  Tempting  and  Deftroying  Souls;  O!
how  many  do  his  work,  that  defie  his
Name?  All  that  by  wicked  example  and
fcandal,  harden  Men  in  Sin,  they  that  Tempt
People  to  Pride  and  Luft,  and  flefihly  plea-
fures.  They  that  draw  them  into  the  Com-
pany of  Vain  5  Lafcivious ,  Luftful ,  Ry-
otous  and  Ungodly  perfons  :  They  that
madly  contradict  Gods  Word  ,  and  Cavil
and  Argue  againfi  Faith  and  Holinefs :
They  that  deride  and  mock  at  the  Obedi-
ence of  Gods  Commands ,  and  Reproach
the  mod  Religious  by  fcornful  Nicknames.
They  that  feduce  them  by  falfe  Dodrine ,
,  and  that  draw  them  from  Gods  Woriliip  ,
and  they  that  filence  neceflary  Faithful
Preachers ,  and  they  that  diffuade  Men
from  hearing  or  regarding  them.  Oi  what
an  Army  hath  Satan,  for  his  work  of  de-
ftroying Souls.

Thefe  Men  fhould  think ,  that  it's  great-
er Cruelty  to  deftroy  Souls ,  than  to  Rob
or  Murder  Bodies  :  h  is  fighting  againil
the  Office  and  Work  of  Chrift  that  came

to


i  a         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

to  fave  them  ,  and  againft  all  the  Ordinan-
nances  and  Word  of  God ,  and  all  the
Coqrfe  of  his  faving  Mercies ,  and  all  the
Defires  and  Endeavours  of  the  Godly,  that
Long  and  Labour  for  Mens  Salvation:  It  is
to  be  like  Devils,  and  do  the  Devils  work,
and  by  hurting  others,they- more  him  them-
fdvGs.  And  if  Gods  Mercy  fhould  Con-
vert and  Save  fuch  wretches ,  they  cannot
Convert  and  Save  thofethat  they  have  de-
ceived and  drawn  to  Sin.-  And  God  only
knoweth  what  thoughts  they  would  have,
if  they  come  to  Heaven  ,  to  fee  or  know
of  Souls  in  Hell,  that  they  brought  thither.
But  if  they  die  Unconverted,  and  go  to
them  ,  their  Prefence  and  Torment  will  be
the  increafe  of  their o^n.

ii.  Thefe  thoughts  fhould  ftir  up  all  be-
lievers to  labour  to  fave  Souls  from  the
Snares  and  lowers  of  Devils.  O  J  do  not
fey  as  Caw  ,  Am  »■  my  Brothers  Keeper  ,
fay  not,  that  it  is  only  the  Work  of  Mini-
fters :  They  are  Guides  in  Chrifts  Army  ,
but  you  are  Soldiers:  You  are  Vowed  to
fight  againft  the  Devil ,  the  World  and
Fleib,and  that  for  others,  as  well  as  for  your
fclves:  Societies  are  for  Mutual  Helps.  A
Minifter  is  but  one  Man  ,  and  not  an  Ar-
my ,  and  can  be  but  in  one  place  at  once  :
You  live  among  and  near  your  Family,
Neighbours  and  fuch  as  you  Converfe  with,
and  may  often  fpeak  to  them:  All  in  your

places


"Apparitions  and  Witches.  1 3

places  muft  be  Lights  and  Salt ,  to  Enlight-
en a  Dark,  and  lea  fori  a  Corrupt  Gene-
ration. O!  You  that  believe  the  Life  to
come  ,  make  hafte  to  help  poor  Miferable
Souls ,  before  Death  put  therr  pail  Reine-
dv  ,  or  Sin  hath  utterly  kneered  their
Hearts :  Do  you  love  your  Neighbours  as
your  felves ,  and  will  fee  them  continue
in  Ignorance,  World! iriefs  and  ^rofane-
nefs,  and  do  nothing  or  little  to  fave  them  ?
If  you  faw  but  their  Bodies  in  need  ,  and
fliut  up  the  Bowels  of  Companion  againft
them,  w hat  leve  have  you  to  God  ,  to
Chrift  or  them  ?  If  Chrift  in  Judgment
will  Condemn  Men  for  not  relieving  Po~
dies  Math  25.  will  it  prove  ieis  (inful  to
afford  no  help  to  Souls.  If  you  are  not
for  Chrift,  and  his  Works  ,  you  are  a-
gainfthim:  If  you  law  therm  fall  dc\\~n  In
aSwound,  you  would  heir  them  up*.  And
if  their  Houies  were  on  Fire,  you  would
help  and  hafte  to  quench  it ;  yea,  if  your
Enemies  Beaft  fall  into  a  Pit ,  you  muft
help  him  out:  And  do  you  believe  a  Hell,
and  not  help  Sinners  ?  The  Devil,  their
Adveriary  and  yours,  as  a  Roaring  Lyon  ,
feeketh  Night  and  Day  to  Devour  3  A*nd
will  you  do  nothing  to  fave  Men.

If  you  cannot  do  what  you  would,  do
what  you  can*.  Do  but  take  it  for  your  Du-
ty and  Works,  for  which  you  mull  give
account  to  God ,  and  keep  you  an  account

how


14         An  Hiflorical  Difcowfe  of

how  you  perform  it :  Ask  your  felves  what
have  I  done  for  Souls  this  Week,  or  this
day  .?  Begin  at  home,  and  give  to  all  an  Ex-
ample of  Holinefs,  Heavenly  meeknefs,
and  Self-denial :  Then  look  to  your  Families:
O I  betray  not  the  Souls  of  your  Children  and
Servants,  with  a.  few  flight  good  words  or
forms ;  but  with  Love  and  Diligence,  La-
bour to  make  them  underftand  Gods  Word,
and  the  things  of  their  Salvation ,  Cate-
chize them  ,  and  help  them  to  underftand
and  apply  it.  Keep  them  from  ill  Compa-
ny ,  Labour  to  render  Gods  Service  %o
them  as  it  is5Necefiary, Honourable  andPlea-
fint :  Time  is  fliort ,  Souls  are  precious ,
Hell  is  dreadful :  Heaven  is  joyful,  Devils
and  their  wicked  Servants  are  bufie.  While
you  have  opportunity,  labour  to  do  good
to  all :  Your  Labour,  if  fincere,  (hall  not
be  in  i7ain.  If  you  want  Ability,  labour
to  increafe  it,  and  get  the  help  of  fuch  as
can  do  better,  get  them  to  able  Minifters :.
Put  fuitable  Books  into  their  Hands :  Do  not
as  thole  Sectaries,  that  to  fliew  their  Gifts
are  ready  to  intrude  as  publick  Preachers  9
but  inftead  of  Patient  and  Companionate
Diligence  with  the  Ignorant  and  Ungodly
about  them,  do  but  exafperate  them  by  Re-
proaches and  Difgrace,  Condefcend  to  the
lea  ft  and  lo.weft :  Do  all  with  Humility,  and
Winning  Love.

Alas,


Apparitions  and  Witcher.  t  y

Alas,  Satan  hath  a  greater  and  more  dan-
gerous Army,  to  fight  againft  Chrift  and
Holinefs,  and  Mens  Salvation,  among  the
Great,  and  Rich,  and  Proud,  and  Carelefe
Voluptuous  Sinners,  than  among  Witches
and  poflefled  Bodies.  He  wins  and  undoes
molt  by  pleafing  them  :  If  he  can  get  them
to  prefer  Earth  before  Heaven,  and  Wealth
and  Honour  before^  Holinefs ,  and  to  be
lovers  of  fleihly  Pleafures  more  than  of  God#
and  keep  them  from  any  ferious  Minifter,or
Means  that  would  waken' them  and  bring
them  to  their  Wits,  and  keep  them  from  fe-
rious Conlideration,  and  from  thinking  whi-
ther they  are  going,  and  how  all  their  Care-*
lefnefs,  Eafe  and  Sin  will  end  5  this  is  k
that  anf  \  ereth  his  Soul-  murdering  defires*

1  ^.  But  efpecially  thefe  Inftances  of  Satans
Diligence  and  Malice,  fhould  teach  Minifters
how  to  preach,on  what  Subje<Ss,in  and  whac
manner,  and  how  to  converfe  perfonally  with
thofe  of  their  charge :  Shall  the  Captains  in
Chrili's  Army  fee  the  Devourer  go  away
with  the  Prey,  and  do  little  for  their  re*
fcue?  Is  ignorant,  cold,  jingling,  conten-
tious Preaching ,  meet  for  them  that  are
fo  greatly  obliged  to  militate  under  Chrift
againft  the  Deftroyer,  and  for  the  ever-
lading  faving  of  Mens  Souls  ?  The  Lord
heal  and  pardon  our  Unbelief,  and  cruel
want  of  Fitty ,  and  our  Sloth  and  Luke-
warmnefs?  for  it   is  great  and  ferious

Work


1 6         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

Work  which  we  undertake.  But  of  this
I  refer  thole  that  will  read  it  to  my  Re-
formed Taftor.

O  Lord  give  to  the  Chriftian  World,  a
greater  number  of  Wife,  Humble,  Holy,
experienced  Teachers,  and  fave  them  from
thofe  that  hate  or  believe  not  the  Do-
drine,  which  for  worldly  Ends  they  preach  5
and  that  ferve  the  Devil  in  the  name  of
Chrift,  and  calling  themfelves  the  church,
and  their  Conceits  its  Canon  or  Rule,  do
Preach  and  Rule  for  themfelves,  their  Ho-
nour, Will  and  Wealth,  on  pretence  of  the
Welfare  and  Unity  of  the  Church,  and
become  the  Trumpeters  of  Malignity,  Per-
fection and  Schifm,  and  have  not  known
the  way  of  Mercy,


CHAR


Apparitions  and  Witches.  H,

CHAP.    II.

Several  Hiflorical  Inftdnces  of Ap-
paritions^ Witches •>  and  marvel-
lous convincing  Works  of  God's
Providence.

§.  i.  /b"jpHere  are  in  this  City  of  Lok-
JL  dou>  many  Ferfons  that  profefe
their  great  unbelief,  or  doubt  of  the  Life
to  come,  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  and
therefore  much  more  of  the  truth  of  the
Gofpel,  and  Chriftian  Faith,  and  Superna-
tural Revelations.  But  they  fay  *  that
could  they  be  certain  of  Spirits,  Appariti-
ons, Witchcraft  and  Miracles,  it  would  do
more  to  convince  them  than  the  Aflernons
of  the  Scriptures :  But  they  take  all  fuch
Reports  to  be  but  the  effe&s  of  Error,  De-
ceit, and  eafie  Credulity :  For  the  fake  of
fuch,  I  have  recited  many  Credible  Inftan-
ces  in  this  Book,  and  my  Saints  Heft,  and
in  my  Vnreafonabknefs  of  Infidelity,  and  I
fhall  here  add  fome  more.  I  doubt  not
but  abundance  of  Reports  of  fuch  matters
have  no  better  caufes  than  are  here  men-
tioned, even  the  mittake  of  the  Ignorant  i
but  that  there  are  trm  as  well  as  falfe  Re-

C  $at$


1 8         An  Hiftoricdl  Difcourfe  of

ports  of  fuch  things,  is  paft  all  reafonable
caufe  of  doubting.

i.  I  will  begin  with  that  moft  convincing
Inftance,  which  you  may  read  in  a  Book,

Called,  The  Devil  of  Mafcon.

Above  twenty  Years  ago,  the  now  Earl
Orery,  then  Lord  Broghii,  a  Perfon  of  well
known  Underftanding,  and  not  inclined  to
weak  Credulity,  told  me  much  of  what  is
written  in  that  Book,  and  more ;  and  faid,
That  he  was  familiar  with  Mr.  Perreaud,  a
Reverend  Worthy  Proteftant  Minifter,  in
whofe  Houfe  all  was  done,  and  had  his
Son  for  his  Servant  in  his  Chamber  many
years  5  and  from  Mr.  Perreaud  had  the  Nar-
rative. Not  long  after,  Dr.  Peter  Moulin,
Prebend  of  Canterbury,  and  Son  to  the  fa-
mous Peter  Moulin  Printed  the  Book,  as  ha-
ving it  from  his  Father,  who  had  it  of
Mr.  Perreaud:  And  Mr.  Robert  Boyle >  Bro-
ther to  the  Earl  of  Orery,  a  \Man  famous
for  Learning,  Honefty  and  Charity,  and
far  alfo  from  weak  Credulity,  prefixeth  an
Epiftle  to  it,  owning  it  as  undoubted  Truth,
being  acquainted  with  the  Author,  Mr.  Per-
reaud,  as  his  Brother  was.  All  thefe  three
worthy  Perfons  ( the  E.  of  Orery,  Mr.  Boyle,
and  Dr.  Pet.  Moulin)  through  God's  Mercy
are  yet  living.

I  hear  fome  report?  that  this  Hiftory  of
Mafcon  is  denyed  by  foiiie,  that  fay,  they

have


rJpparbions  ahdWhchesl  ip

have  fpoken  with  Come  that  have  been  at
Mafcon,  and  knew  nothing  of  it  And
what  wonder  if  fuch  things  that  are  talkc
of  but  a  few  days,  be  forgotten  after  fifty,
or  fixty  Years  :  They  that  will  not  be-
lieve the  Narrative  from  fuch  Men  as  the
Famous  Peter  Monltn  Senior  v  and  Dr.  Pe-
ter Moulin  Junior,  that  Printed  it,  and  from
the  Earl  of  Orery ,  that  told  me  he  was
Familiar  with  Mr.  Perreand ,  and  had  his
Son  many  years  his  Chamber-Servants
and  his  Brother  Mr.  Robert  Boyle -yet  living,
that  hath  attefied  it  by  a  Preface,  may  read
all  the  Hiftory  (.  with  many  more  of  Witch-
craft printed  in  French,  and^  Publifhed  by
Mr  Perreand  himfelf  •*  And  if  they  cannot
get  it,  they  may  go  to  my  Kinfman,  Willi-
am Baxter ,  now  Schoolmafter  at  Newing-
ton  ,  where  they  may  fee  it.

Could  it  be  Counterfeit,  and  never  Con-
tradi&ed  in  fifty  or  fixty  years  ( I  remem-
ber not  juft  the  year )  that  in  a  City,  (o
many  of  both  Religions  for  fo  many  Months
together  ,  might  croud  at  a  certain  hour  in-
to the  Room ,  and  hear  a  Voice  anfwering
their  queftions ,  and  telling  them  things
far  off,  and  to  them  unknown  5  and  Dis-
puting with  a  Papift  Officer  of  the  City ,
and  the  Whirling  him  oft  about,  and  cart-
ing him  on  the  ground  ,  and  fending  him
home  Diftra&ed ,  I  fay,  if  this ,  and  all
the  reft  there  written,  fo  atteited,  be  noc


so  An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

Efficient  Evidence,  I  know  not  what
is.

The  faidEarlof  Orery,  told  me  of  many
effe&s  of  Witchcraft  or  Deyils  ( Men  car-
ried about )  near  him  in  Ireland,  which  I
ftall  not  particularly  recite ,  though  many
Witaefles  were  named.

This  was  written  while  they  lived :  Now
only  Mr.  Boyle  Surviveth.

II.  My  next  Hiftory  ( (hall  be  that  of
Lieutenant  Colonel  Bomn,  which  I  will
give  only  in  the  words  of  others,  as  I  re-
ceived it.    Only  telling  you  what  they  are.

i.  Mr.  Samuel  J  ones,  is  a  Man  of  known
Learning ,  Piety  and  Honefly ,  though  a
Silenced  MinUter ,  now  living  rn  GUmw-
ganjhire ,  by  whofe  Mediation  I  had  the
other.

2.  Mr.  Bedwell  was  alfo  a  Credible  Faith-
ful Minifter.

3.  Mrs.  Bowen  her  felf ,  either  is ,  or
lately  was  living  ,  a  Woman  very  much
p^aifed  for  True  Piety  and  Courage,  Sifter
to  Colonel  Philip  Jones,  once  one  of  Crom-
mtts  Council.

4.  Here  is  a  Letter  alfo  from  Colonel
Wroth  Rogers :,  late  Governour  of  Hereford,
I  think  yet  living,  and  a  Credible  perfon  ,
though  then  not  willing  the  Story  fhould
be  published?  I  fuppofe  his  Reafons  are  now
met*

5.1


Apparitions  and  Witches.  2  i

5.  I  fent  into  Ireland  in  his  Life-time  *

to  enquire  what  effedt  it  had  upon  him  ,
of  which  I  had  the  Letter  of  Mr.  Samuel
Foley ,  and  Credible  Perfons  yet  living.

6*  And  Colonel  John  Bridges  then  in
Ireland,  purpofely  enquired,  and  could  learn
no  more  ,  but  that  he  immured  himfelf  pri-
vately with  one  Servant  in  a  Caftle,  who
reported  that  he  ufed  to  rife  in  the  Night,
and  walk  about  the  Room  p  talking  as  to
fome  one  with  him ,  and  more  I  could  not
hear.

7.  I  defired  lately  a  Worthy  Minifter
in  Swanfey  ,  to  enquire  whether  ever  fince
any  thing  had  abated  ,/the  Belief  of  the
Fad: ,  who  tells  me  (as  others  do )  thai  it
is  as  fully  believed  by  thofc  that  were  in
the  Houle ,  and  others  as  ever.


C  3  $4


32


rAn Hiftcr'tcal  Difcourfe  of


Several  Letters  to  Mr.  Richard
Baxter,  in  relation  to  an  Ap-
parition in  the  Houfe  of  Lieu-
tenant Colonel  Bowen,  in  Gla-
morganjhire,  in  Waks}  in  the
Year  1655.


Colonel  Rogers,  the  Governor  of
Hereford,/?/*  Letter :  Together
with  an  enclosed  Relation  of  an
Apparition,  &c

Dear  Sir,

Y  the  Enclofed  you  will  find  fome-
tbiog  of  the  Bunnefs  you  expected
from  me  :  {h  is  certain  and  true,  I
have  received  it  from  very  good  Hands.)
More  there  was,  hot  they  did  not  think  it
c  vnvenient  to  put  it  in  Paper.  _  My  Requeft
i>,  that  you  will  not  expofe  it  to  publick
View  5  it  may  rather  do  harm  than  good.
I  know  that  God  hath  given  you  Wiidomj,
:  and


Apparitions  and  Witches.  2  j

and  you  will  make  good  ufe  of  fuch  things :
It  may  harden  others.  This,  with  the  En-
clofed,  is  all  at  prefent  from

Tour  Cordial  FrienU

and  Servant

Wf*r*  W.Rogers.


The  enclofed  Relation  of the  late  fir ange  Ap~
parition  in  the  County  of  Glamorgan.

IN  the  beginning  of  the  late  War,  a  Gen-
•tleman  of  that  County  being  oppreifed
by  the  King's  Party,  took  Arms  under  the
Earl  of  Effexy  and  by  his  Valour  obtained  a
good  Repute  in  the  Army,  fo  that  in  a
fhort  time  he  got  the  Command  of  Lieute-
nant Colonel.  But  as  foon  as  the  heat  of
the  War  was  abated,  his  Eafe  and  Prefer-
ment led  him  to  a  carelefs  and  fenfual  Life ;
inforriuch  that  the  godly  Commanders  judg-
ed him  unfit  to  continue  in  England,  and
thereupon  fent  him  to  Inland,  where  he
grew  fo  vain  and  notional,  that  he  was  ca-
fhiered  the  Army  5  and  being  then  at  liber-
ty to  fin  without  any  Reftraint,  he  became
an  abfolute  Atheift,  denying  Heaven  or  Hell,
C  4  fiod


34         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

God  or  Devil,  (acknowledging  only  a
Power,  as  the  ancient  Heathens  did  Fate,)
accounting  Temporal  Pleafures  all  his  ex-

Ee£ied  Heaven :  So  that  at  laft  he  became
atefiil,  and  hating  all  civil  Society,  and  his
sieareft  Relations.

About  December  laft,  he  being  in  Ireland^
and  his  Wife  (a  Godly  Gentlewoman,  of  a
good  Family,  and  concluded  by  all  the  God-
ly People  that  knew  her,  to  be  one  of  the
xnoft  fincere  and  upright  Chriftians  in  thofe
Parts,  as  being  for  many  Years  under  great
Afflictions,  and  always  bearing  them  with
Cfariftian-like  Patience)  living  in  his  Houfe
in  Glamorgan,  was  very  much  troubled  one
Night  with  a  great  Noife,  much  like  the
found  of  Whirl- wind,  and  a  violent  bear-
ing of  the  Doors  or  Walls,  as  if  the  whole
Houfe  were  falling  in  pieces :  And  being
la  her  Chamber,  with  moft  of  her  Family,
after  praying  to  the  Lord,  (accounting  it
(Infill  Incredulity  to  yield  to  Fear,)   ftie
went  to  bed 5  andfuddenly  after,  there  ap-
peared unto  her  (bmething  like  her  Hu(-
band,   and  asked  her  whether  he  ihouki
come  to  Bed.    She  fitting  up,  and  praymg
to  the  Lord,  told  him,  he  was  not  her  Hut
band,  and  that  he  ihould  not.    He  urged
more  earneftly :  What!  Not  the  Husband  of
thy  Bofom  ?     What !  Not  the  Husband  of  thy
JBofcm  9  ( Yet  had  no  power  to  hurt  her.)
And  (he,  together  with  feme  Godly  People*

fpenc


Apparitions  and  Witches.  25

fpent  that  Night  in  Prayer,  being  very  of
ten  interrupted  by  this  Apparition.

The  next  Night,  Mr. MUcs,  (a  Godly
Minifter,)  with  four  other  Godly  Men,
came  to  watch  and  pray  in  the  Houfe  for
that  Night  >  and  fo  continued  in  Prayer,
and  other  Duties  of  Religion,  without  any
interruption  or  noife  at  all  that  Night.
But  the  Night  following,  the  Gentlewo-
man, with  feveral  other  Godly  Women,
being  in  the  Houfe,  the  noife  of  Whirl-
wind began  again,  with  more  violence  than
formerly,  and  the  Apparition  walked  in  the
Chamber,  having  an  unfufferable  Stench,
like  that  of  a  putrified  Carcafe,  filling  the
Room  with  a  thick  Smoak,  fmelling  like
Sulphur,  darkening  the  Light  of  the  Fire
and  Candle^  but  not  quite  extinguilhing  it ;
fometimes  going  down  the  Stairs,  and  com-
ing up  again  with  a  fearful  noife,  difturbing
them  in  their  Prayers,  one  while  with  the
found  of  Words  which  they  could  notdif-
cern,  other  while  ftriking  them  fo  that  the
next  Morning  their  Faces  were  black  with
the  Smoak,  and  their  Bodies  fwollen  with
Bruifes.

Thereupon  they  left  the  Houfe,  left  they
fliould  tempt  the  Lord  by  their  over-bold
flaying  infuch  Danger,  and  fent  this  Atheifl;
the  fad  News  of  this  Apparition ;  who  com-
ing to  England  about  May  laft,  exprefled
more  Love  and&efpe£t  to  his  Wife  than

formerly  3


26         An  Htftorkal  Difeourfe  of

formerly  -7  yet  telling  her,  that  he  could
not  believe  her  Relation  of  what  (he  had
feen,  as  having  not  a  power  to  believe  any
thingbut  what  himfelf  (aw,  and  yet  would
ikk  hitherto  go  cp  his  Houfe  to  make  trial,
bar  probably  will  e  er  long,  for  that  he  is
naturally  of  an  exceeding  rafli  and  defperate
Spirit.

Jmkft,


Mr.


[Apparitions  and  Witches.  1 7

Mr.  Samuel  Jones's  Letter  in  re-
lation to  Lieutenant  Col.  Bowen,
together,  with  an  inclofed  Let-
ter from  Mr,  Maur.  Bedwell ,
on  the  fame  Subjeff.

Worthy  and  much  Honoured,

■^ST  T*OU  may  be  pleafed  to  remember,
\f  that  when  I  waited  upon  you  ac
JL  the  Sheriff's  Houfe,  in  Sat/op,  in
dugyfl  laft >  amongft  your  other  Enquiries
touching  the  State  of  that  poor  Country
where  the  Lord  hath  caft  my  Lot  for  the
prefent:  you  defired  me  then  to  impart
what  I  had  received  by  Relation,  concern-
ing the  Apparitions  in  one  Col.  Bowens
Houfe,  and  upon  my  return  to  procure  you
fome  further  Intelligence  touching  that  Tre-
mendous Providence.  Whether  it  be  by.
Time,  or  Familiarity  with  the  noife  here-
of, or  rather,  the  (no  lefs  to  be  admired)
Blockiihnefs  of  the  Spirits  of  Men ,  that
the  Horror  of  that  terrible  Difpenfation  be
allay'd,  I  know  not,  but  furely  the  thing  it
felf  was  very  Stupendous,  and  the  remem-
brance of  it  carries  much  Amazement  with
it  ftill,  to  them  that  have  any  thing  of  Ten-
darnels  or  Undemanding  left  them.    By

the


2  8         An  Hifloricdl  Difcourfe  of

the  inclofed,  from  an  Honeft  and  Godly
Hand,  not  far  from  the  Stage  where  thefe
things  were  adled :  You  may  underftand
the  Subftance  of  that  matter,  the*  Party  (be-
ing a  Minifter  of  the  Gofpel)  perfedly
knew  Colonel  Bswen,  and  hath  often  con-
verfed  with  him,  both  before  and  fince  his
Houfe  was  haunted.  If  you  are  pleafed  .to
command  any  further  Satisfaction  herein,  I
fliall  take  a  Journey  my  felf  into  the  place,
and  endeavour  to  gratifie  your  defire,  as  to
any  further  particular  that  you  defire  the
knowledge  of.  If  any  publick  ufe  be  made
hereof  you  may  conceal  my  Friends  name
and  mine  own,  left  any  offence  fbould  be-
taken by  fome  of  the  Parties  Relations  in
Parliament  and  Council.  Of  the  receipt  of
this  Paper  I  defire  to  hear  with  all  conve-
nient fpeed-  At  the  Throne  of  Grace
vouchfafe  to  remember  your  weak  and
wretched  Brother,  who  yet  defires  to  be
found  in  the  number  of  them  that  are,
*      Sir,

Tours  in  the  furefi  Bonds

to  Honour  and  Serve  you?

Coedrekm,  Samuel  Jones.

TheReafons  why  forbearing  Names  was
defired,  being  now  over  (yet  Mr. 5.  Jones
(till  living)  I  think  my  felf  difobliged  as  to
that  Reftrainc.    R  B*


'Apparitions  and  Witches.  29

Mr.  Maur.  Bedwell/  inclosd Letter.

Dear  Sir,

GLad  I  am  of  your  fafe  return ,  and
gladder  fhould  I  be  to  be  inftrumen-
tali  according  to  my  weak  Capacity,  of
nayling  you  to  thefe  parts.  I  hope,  if  my
defires  are  agreeable  to  the  Lord,  you  will
meet  with  feme  directing  Providences  from
him,  which  will  anfwer  all  Objections.

As  to  Col.  Bowens  Houfe,  I  can  give  you
fome  brief  Particulars,  which  you  may  cre-
dit, as  coming  from  fuch,  who  were  not  fo
foolifli  as  to  be  deluded,  nor  fo  difhoneft
as  to  report  an  untruth :  What  I  (hall  write.,
if  neea  were,  would  be  made  good  both
by  Eye  and  Ear  Witnefles.  The  Gentle-
man, Col  Bom*j  whofe  Houfe  is  called
LaticUin  in  GowersUnd,  formerly  was  famous
for  Profeffion  of  Religion,  but  this  Day  is
the  faddeft  Man  in  his  Principles  I  know-
living.  To  me,  iq  particular,  he  hath  de-
layed the  Being  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  :
His  Argument  thus,  Either  'tis  fomething
or  nothing;  if  fomething,  fliew  me,  tcil
me  what  it  is,  &c  and  I  believe  he  gives  as
little  credit  to  other  Spirits  as  the  S adduces.
At  his  Houfe,  aforementioned,  he  being
then  in  Inland,  making  Proviiion  for
removing  thither,  thefe  things  happened.
About  December^  laft3his  Wife  being  in  Bed,
a  Gracious  Underflanding  Woman,  and

one


jo         An  Hiflorical  Difcourfe  of

one  whom  little  things  will  not  affright  5
one  in  the  likenefs  of  her  Husband ,  and
juft  in  his  Pofture,  prefented  himfelf  to  her
Bed  fide,  proffering  to  come  to  Bed  to  her,
which  (he  refufing,  he  gave  this  anfwer,
What  refufe  the  Husband  of  thy  Bofom ;
and  after  fome  time,  (he  alledging,  Chrift
was  her  Husband,  it  difappeared :  Strange
miferable  Howlings  and  Cries  were  heard
about  the  Houfe,  his  Tread,  his  Pofture,
Sighing,  Humming,were  heard  frequently  in
the  Parlour  i  in  the  Day  time  often  the  Shad-
dowof  one  walking  would  appear  upon  the
Wall.  One  Night  was  very  remarkable,  and
had  not  the  Lord  flood  by  the  poor  Gentle-
woman and  her  two  Maids ,  that  Night
they  had  been  undone  *  as  (lie  was  going
to  Bed,  (lie  perceived  by  the  impreffion  on
the  Bed,  as  if  fome  Body  had  been  lying
there,  and  opening  the  Bed  (lie  fmelt  the
fmell  of  a  Carcafe  fome- while  dead ;  and
being  in  Bed  ( for  the  Gentlewoman  was
fome  what  Courageous)  upon  the  Tefter,
which  was  of  Cloth,  (lie  perceived  fame-
thing  rolling  from  fide  to  fide,  and  by  and
by,  being  forc'd  out  of  her  Bed,  (he  had
not  time  to  drefs  her  felf,  fuch  Cries  and
other  things  almoit  amazing  her,  but  (he
(hardly  any  of  her  Cloths  being  on )  with
with  her  two  Maids,  got  upon  their  Knees
by  the  Bedfide  to  feek  the  Lord,  but  ex-
treamly  affaulced,  oftentimes  (he  would,  by

fome:


'Apparitions  and  Witches.  Jt

fbmewhac  which  felt  like  a  Dog  under
her  Knees,  be  lifted  a  Foot  or  more  high
from  the  Ground ;  fome  were  heard  to  talk
on  the  other  fide  of  the  Bed,  which  one  of
the  Maids  hearkening  to,  flie  had  a  blow
upon  the  Back :  Divers  affaults  would  be
made  by  fits ;  it  would  come  with  a  cold
breath  of  Wind,  the  Candles  burn  Blew
and  almoft  out  *  horrible  Screekings,  Yel-
lings,  and  Roarings,  within  and  without  the
Houfe  fad  fmellsof  Brimftone  and  Powder,
and  this  continued  from  fome  nine  at  Night
to  fome  three  the  next  Morning,  fo  that
the  poor  Gentlewoman  and  her  Servants
were  in  a  fad  cafe 5    the  next  Morning,
fmelling  of  Brimftone  and  Powder,  and  as
I  remember,  Black  with  it,  but  the  Lord
was  good :  Fires  have  been  feen  upon  the
Houfe,  and  in  the  Fields  5  his  Voice  hath
been  heard  luring  his  Haukes,  a  Game  he
delights  in,  as  alfo  the  Bills  of  the  Hauks.
Thefe  are  the  chief  things  which  I  dare  re-
commend upon  Credit,  and  I  could  wiih,
that  they,  who  queftion  the  Exiftency  of
Spirits  had  been  but  one  Night  at  Lannd'm
to  receive  Satisfaction  to  their  Obje&ions;
This  continued  fo  violent,  that  the  Gentle-
woman was  fain  to  withdraw  to  her  Mo-
thers Houfe ;  but  her  Husband  coming  over
about  iome  four  Months  fince.  his  Confi-
dence did  not  ferve  him  to  lodge  at  Lm-
wlin7  although  we  have  heard  nothing  of

trouble


'3  z         An  Riftcrical  Difcourfe  of

trouble  to  the  Houfe  fince  his  coming  overi
Sir,  the  Difpenfatton,  as  it  was  exceeding
terrible,  {o  very  remarkable 5  and  what
the  Voice  of  God  might  be  in  fuch  a  thing
'tis  not  known  clearly  yet :  He  is  as  Athe-
iftical  as  ever,  all  his  Religion,  if  I  may
call  it  fo,  being  comprifed  in  the  acknow-
ledging a  Power,  which  we,  as  he  faith  *
may  call  God,  and  waiting  for  fome  infal-
lible miraculous  Bufinefs  toverifie  to  him
all  the  reft  we  own  as  our  Religion.  Sure*
Sir,  if  ever  a  Blafphemer  was  unworthy  to
live,  this  is  the  Man ;  and  certainly  his  Sin
will  find  him  out :  He  is  now  gone  to  Ire-
land ;  let  thefe  things  be  divulged  only  as
to  the  matter  without  names.  Affitre  the
Gentleman,  your  Friend,  they  are  very
Truths  5  I  have  fomewhat  more  than  ordi-
nary for  what  I  fay.  At  the  firft  we  con-
cluded, the  Wretch  had  been  dead ,  but
'twas  otherwife,  and  therefore  the  more  re-
markable.

Tottr  affectionate  Brother,

to  Love  and  Serve  yot<9

~J)8tk  Maur.  Bedwell.


Mtl


Apparitions  and  Witches.         3  3

Mr.  Daniel  Higgs  his  Letter,  con-
cerning the  Apparition  in  Lieu-
tenant Colonel  Bowen  s  Houfe.

Dear  Sirx    ,  .

AS  to  the  Concern  you  commit  to  me
about  Collonel  Boweh,  accept  of  this
Account.

I  have  difcourfed  with  Brother  Samel
Jones,  who  gave  you  the  fir  ft  Narrative,
which  if  you  have  loft,  he  hopes  he  may
find  the  Copy  of  the  Letter,  and  I  ftall
fend  it.  'Twas  one  Mr.  Miles,  an  Anabap-
tift  Minifter,  that  wrote  the  Letter  to  one
Mr.  Bedwett,  Minifter  of  Swanfey,  who  fenc
it  Mr.  Samuel  Jones.  This  Miles  (who  fpent
a  Night  in  Prayer  in  Colonel  Bowens  Houfe,
in  the  time  of  the  difturbance)  is  gone  for
New  England.  Two  Minifters  more,  with
my  felf,  went  to  fpend  another  Night  in
the  Houfe,  but  Mrs.  Bowen  was  gone  with
her  Family,  and  we  ftayed  not,  but  went
togive  her  a  Vifit,  who  related  ftrange
thlitfgs,  but  I  cannot  remember  Cireum-
ftance^s.  The  two  Minifters  are  alfo  gone  :
But  fince  I  received  lours,  I  have  dilcoqr-
fed  Mr.  Bowen's  Maid,  wfio  was  in  the
Houfe,  and  I  judge  her  throughly  Godly,,
who  doth  ateeft  the  Truth  of  thefe  Appari-
D  ■  mm4


34         An  Hijhrkal  Difcourfe  of

lions,  Noifes,  &c  which  I  fuppofe  you  had
fully  in  your  Narrative  *,  but  Time  hath
fomewhat  obliterated  CiraimOances  with
hen  I  know  not  well  (Sir)  how  to  get
greater  light  -9  and  I  muft  allure  you,  I  find
not  any  thing  out  to  invalidate  that  Report
you  have  had,  but  much  that  confirms  it.
I  {hall  proceed  according  to  your  further  Di-
redion  in  this,or  any  other  Concern  of  yours,
and  that  with  much  Chearfulneis  and  Com-
placency. I  commit  you,  and  your  huge  La-
bours to  our  mighty  and  merciful  Lord,  by
Prayer  and  all  well  Wiibes.  And  if  you
can  think  of  any  thing  farther  for  me,  o?
gather  any  thing  by  Difcourfe  with  learned
Men,  vouchfafe  to  impart  it ;  and  imprint
me  (poor  Worm)  on  your  Soul  before  our
Father.  I  have  fomewhat  treipafled  by
Prolixity,  which  becomes  me  not  to  fuch
a  Perfon,  in  fuch  a  Sphere :  But  excufe  him
who  is

Tour  afflifted

poor  Brother,

Daniel  Higgs.


Captain


'Apparitions  and  Witches]         jj7

Captain  Samuel  Foley's  Letter
concerning  Lieutenant  Colonel
Bowen.

Worthy  Sir,

TH  E  bed  Account  I  can  get  of  Colo-
nel Bowen  is  this,  viz*  That  he  is  little
fenfible  of  his  fad  Condition.  He  lives  in
the  County  of  Corky  in  a  beggarly  way,
though  he  hath  a  fair  Mate.  Some  Months
fince,  he  turned  his  Wife  and  Children
from  him,  in  that  fad  unkind  manner,  that
they  were  forced  to  feek  Relief  from  feme
Friends  in  Tough  all,  to  help  them  in  their
Return  to  Wales,  where  they  continue.
Not  long  fince,  in  Difcourfe  with  Baronec
Ingolsby,  and  Mr.  Gilbert,  Minifter  of  Urn-
rickj  from  whom  I  have  the  moft  part  of
this  Relation,  he  faid,  he  would  give  Ten
Thoufand  Pounds  to  know  the  Truth  about
God.  Tis  reported  he  is  haunted  with
ghaftly  Ghofts  and  Apparitions,  which  fre-
quent him.  I  have  written  to  the  neigh-
bouring Minifters.  and  Gentlemen  of  my
Acquaintance  as  effe&ually  as  I  could,  en-
doting  a  Copy  of  your  Letter  5  and  from
them  1  hope  to  have  a  more  full  Account
concerning  this  poor  Man.  Your  Letter
indeed  came  fafe,  but  not  till  August,
D  s  though


%6  An  Hijiorical  Difcourfe  of

though  dated  in  May*  Sir,  in  any  thing
wherein  I  may  ferve  you,  you  may  freely
command  me :  But  wherein  I  may  ferve
the  Church  of  God,  the  beft  and  utmoft  of
my  Endeavours ,  through  the  Lord's  AC
fiftance,  fhall  not  be  wanting.  What  far-
ther fhall  come  to  my  Hands,  fhall  careful-
ly be  reported  to  you,  by  him  who  begs
your  Prayers,  and  fubfcribes,

SI*,.

Tour  very  Affectionate
Servant,

CUmeU,Oftoh6:  „  ,  ^  t

!  6  f  g.  Samuel  Foley,


After  this,  Collonel  John  Bridges  wrote
tome  owt  o£  Ireland,  that  Bowen  immured
liimfelf  in  afinall  Caftle,  with  one  Boy  3
who  faid,  he  oft  rofe  in  the  Night,  and
talked  as  if  feme  were  talking  with  him.

R.B.
III.  Col-


Apparitions  andWitches.  3  7

III.  Colonel  John  Bridges  before  named,
wasGovernourof^mwfe  Caftlefthe  Lord
Brooks )  almoft  all  the  time  of  the  Warsj
Afterwards  he  lived  with  us  near  Kedermin~
fter,  being  Patron  of  the  Church,  a  Juftice
of  Peace  ,  a  Parliament  Man  -,  And  after
lived  in  Ireland ,  where  he  furprized  (  with
others )  DMin  Caftle  ,  and  Sir  Hardrefs
Waller  for  the  King ,  before  he  was  called
home.  He  was  an  llnderftanding  Prudent
Man  ,  of  Sound  Judgment  in  Religion  ,
Juft3and  Honeft?and  Credible.

He  and  his  Pious  Wife  have  oft  told  me
as  followeth.

They  formerly  lived  in  Edfon  Hall  near
AlceBer ,  where  Warwickjlrire  and  Worcefter-
Jhire  joyns ;  a  Houfe  famed  to  be  haunted  :
And  being  ufed  to  go  into  a  Parlour  alone
for  Meditation,  Prayer,  and  to  play  on  his
Lute,  once  as  he  went  in  at  the  Portal,  he
was  (topt  and  held  by  fomewhat  invisible,
till  he  refolved  under  Gods  Protection,  to
rulh  through  it ,  and  go  on.

Another  time  in  a  clear  Moon-fliineNight,
their  Maftiff  Dog  made  fucha  howling,  as
raifed  up  the  Houfe  :  He  looked  out  at  the
Window  ,  and  beyond  a  pale  that  compaf
fed  the  Court ,  there  flood  fomething  like
a  headlels  Man ,  but  taller :  He  long  ga-
zed on  it ,  and  trufting  God ,  returned  to
Bed  3  And  prefently  the  Hall  Door  ( fail
D  3  lock


38         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

lockt  and  Barr'd )  ufing  to  make  a  great
noife  in  the  opening ,  having  much  Iron  ,
feemed  to  them  all  to  open  as  it  ufed,  and
foroewhat  came  in,  and  gave  three  great
flams ,  as  with  a  Staff  upon  the  Hall  Ta-
ble, and  departed.  They  went  down  to
fee ,  and  found  the  Door  lockt,  and  faft
as  they  left  it.  Mr.  Sommerfield,  who  fince
lived  in  the  fame  Houfe ,  laid ,  that  he
favv  nothing  there.

IV.  A  Pious  Credible  Woman,  yet  liv-
ing in  London.^  lately  told  me  oftimes,
being  fometime  under  Temptation  by  fome
Difcontent  of  Mind ,  one  day  as  (he  pafled
through7  a  Room  at  Mid- day,  the  Devil
flood  before  her  in  the  fliape  of  a  Big,  Black,
Man ,  and  pointed  to  the  top  of  the  Door  ,
Tempting  her  there  to  hang  her  felf ;  and  fo
flood  near  a  quarter  of  an  hour,and  then  Va-
mihed  away  :  Which  was  fo  far  from  dis-
maying her ,  that  it  much  confirmed  her
againlt  Unbelief,  and  her  Temptations :
Any  one  that  will  go  to  her  here  in  London ,
may  hear  her  Credible  and  Confident  Re-
port of  it.

V.  The  Elder  Countefs  of  Domgal,  a
Lady  Pious,  Difcreet  and  Credible,  told
me,thatone  of  her  Husbands  Tenants  (  near
Bdfaft  or •  Carkkfergm,  where  he  was  Lord)
agreed  with  him  for  to. 'put  his  Sons  Life

with


apparitions  and  Witches.  59

with  his  own  in  a  renewed  Leafe  of  a  Farm*
and  he  paid  part  of  the  Money ,  and  dyed'
before  the  Leafe  was  made  and  Sealed.*
His  Wife  Marryed  another  Man  ,  and  paid
the  reft  of  the  Money  out  of  her  fecond
Husbands  Purfe , ,  and  therefore  put  in  his
Sons  Life,  in  (lead  of  her  Son  by  the  for-
mer Husband  into  the  Leafe.  The'Earl  of
D'onagall  going  into  England^  and  being  then
in  the  Weft,  a  Servant  of  his  in  Ireland,  his
Porter,a  flout  lufty  Man  5 was  haunted  with
the  Apparition  of  the  Woman's  fir  ft  Hus-
band,tellinghim,that  he  muft  goto  his  Wife,
and  tell  her  that  (he  Ihould  have  no  reft
till  his  Sons  Life  were  put  in  the  altered
Leafe  :  He  askt  why  he  fpake  to  him,  and
what  he  had  to  do  to  meddle  in  it  ?  It  An-
fwered  him,  thou  art  a  Man  fit  for  it,  and
thou  (halt  have  no  reft  till  thou  do  it.  The
Man  delayed,  and  was  ftill  Haunted  with
this  Apparition:  He  went  to  the  Minifter
of  the  Town  ,  and  told  him  of  it  \  who
Counfelled  him  to  tell  the  Woman.  She
iCpld  him,  that  (he  took  it  to  be  juft,  that
her  Husband  that  paid  mod  of  the  Money,
ihould  have  the  benefit  of  the  Leafe  \  and,
perhaps  not  believing  the  Man  *  delayed.
This  Apparition  came  to  the  porter  again  ,
and  (aid ,  that  (he  may  believe  thee  3  go
tell  _  her  of  fuch  and  filch  Difcourle  and
Actions,  that  were  between  her  and  me  in
fecret ,  which  none  elfe  knoweth  of:  The
D  4  Man


49         An  Miflorkal  Difcouvfe  of

Man  went  and  told  her  all  that  he  was  bid.
She  confeflfed  that  it  was  all  true  ,  and  Se-
cret between  them  5  but  ftill  delayed ,  till
fome  trouble  ( I  remember  not  what)  mo-
lefted  her  felf :  In  fliort,  the  Porter  and
fhe  had  no  reft,  till  fhe  had  drawn  a  new
JLeafe  with  the  Name  of  the  firft  Husbands
Son  ,  and  fent  it  into  England?  to  the  Earl
of  Donagal,  who  Sealed  it;  and  fo  altered
accordingly.

VI  An  Ancient  underftanding  Pious  and

Credible  Man  of  llchefter   in  Somerfetjkire  ,

is  now  in  London,  who  the  laft  week  told
me ,  that  he  was  heretofore  in  Melancho-
ly Doubts  and  Trouble  of  Mind ,  and  in
that  Condition,  had  divers  fenfible  Mo-
Inflations  by  the  Devil,  as  he  lay  awake  in
his  Bed ,  his  feet  have  bin  lifted  higher
than  his  Head.  I  told  him,  that  a  Melan-
choly fancy  might  make  him  think  fo  :  He
added  to  the  confident  Aflertion  of  it,  that
he  hath  in  the  open  day-time,  as  he  hath
gone  about  his  Hoofe ,  had  a  blow  ftruck
on  his  face ,  as  hard  and  plain,  as  any  Mans
hand  could  (kike,  and  once  fo  hard,  that
where  his  Nofe  and  Cheek  joyn,  it  left
the  place  black  and  blew  (  as  they  call  it)
to  the  fight  of  all ,  in  the  fame  manner  ,  as
any  other  would  have  done  ( with  much
more  J   .

VII.  The


Apparitions  and  Witches.  41

VII.  The  Story  of  the  Haunting  of  Mr^
Mompeffons  Houfe  in  Wihjhirh,  is  Famous ,
and  printed  in  part  by  Mv.-Jofepb  GUnvil :
Mr. Mompejfon is  yet  living,  no  Melancho-
ly nor  Conceited  Man  :  The  truth  not  doubt-
ed of  by  his  Neighbours  5  within  this
Month,  I  fpake  with  one  of  them  an  At-
torney ,  who  faid ,  that  the  noifes  heard,
the  vifible  moving  about  of  the  Boards  be-
fore their  faces,  and  fuch  like,  were  all  un-
doubtedly true  :  And  the  thing  unqueftio-
ned  by  Mr.  Mompejfon  (who  to  his  great  Coft
and  trouble ,  was  long  molefted  by  itj  and
his  Neighbours ,  and  thofe  that  purpofely
went  thither  to  fee  it:  Notvvithftanding,
that  when  fome  unbelievers  went  from  Lon-
don to  be  fatisfied  nothing  was  done  when
they  were  there.  For  as  God  oweth  not
fuch  Remedies  to  Unbelievers ,  fo  Satan
hath  no  defire  to  cure  them :  And  it*  is
iikely ,  doth  more  in  Apparitions  by  Di-
vine Conftraint ,  than  he  is  willing  to  do  ;
becaufe  he  is  moft  fuccefsful,  when  he  is
leaft  known.  Any  one  that  doubts  of  the
truth  of  this  Story ,  may  yet  have  full  fe-
tisfa&ion,  the  Witnefs  being  alive:  But
this  partly  belongeth  to  the  instances  of
Witchcrafts,  being  Credibly  fuppofed  to  be
done  by  Witchcraft  of  a  Drummer,  as  you
may  fee  defcribed  in  the  printed  Story.  I
knew  Jofeph  GUnvik  to  be  far  enough  from

Fa-


4i         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

Fanatick  Credulity,  who  himfelf  faw  much
of  it,  and  puhlifht  it.

VIII.  In  February,  1646.  falling  into  great
Debility  by  Bleeding ,  at  the  Lady  Cook^s
Hoofe  at  Milboume  in  Darby  (hire  $  I  re-
moved to  Mr.  Noels  Houfe  at  Kirtyy  Ma-
hry  in  Lekefter-ftrire ,  where  I  lay  weak
three  weeks  in  March,  in  which  tin^  the
Neighbours  went  to  fee  a  Houfe  in  Latter-
wonby  reported  to  be  haunted  :  Multitudes
ilockt  to  fee  it ,  and  affirmed  ,  that  at  a
certain  hcur  of  the  day ,  (tones  were
thrown  at  thofe  that  were  prefent  ,
which  hit  them  ,  but  hurt  them  not :  And
that  what  ever  time  any  one  would  whittle,
it  was  anfwered  by  a  whittle  in  the  Room ;
And  no  fearch  could  difcover  any  Fraud :
What  became  of  it  after,  I  heard  not ;  but
it  continued  believed  commonly  by  the
hearers  ,  thofe  three  weeks  that  I  ftaid  in
that  County.  v

N %IX.  But  the  certaineft  and  fullett  Inftance
oF  Witchcraft  that  ever  I  knew,  I  fhall
here  give  you  in  the  words  of  others :  Oi-
ly adding,  that  about  twenty  years  ago,
the  tlmewhemit  was  doing,  my  worthy
and  dear  Friend  Mr.  George  Hopkins ,  the
then  Faithful  Minifter  of  the  Gofpel  at
JEvejham,  told  it  me  himfelf ,  and  told  r^e
of  their  Care  and  Watchfulnels,  to  fee  that

there


apparitions  and  Witches.         43

riiere  were  no  Fraud  committed  in  it.  And
the  Witch  was  hanged  at  WorceFker,  and  the
Woman  her  felf  is  yet  living  in  Evejham,
and  the  thing  never  there  doubted  of:  But
having  occafion  lately  to  inftance  the  fad
againft  fome  Unbelievers ,  I  fent  to  Eve-
Jham,  to  a  Godly,  Credible,  Friend,  to  fend
me  word  ,  whether  any  doubt  had  in  thefe
years  pad  rifen  concerning  it,  and  to  fend
me  fome  of  the  Flint  Stones  which  were
voided  by  the  Girl:  Who  fent  me  word,
that  there  wrere  no  doubt  of  the  thing,  and
procured  the  now  Minister  of  the  place,  to
write  me  theNarrative  which  Iherefubjoin.
And  he  fent  me  Oneftone,  about  the  breadth
of  a  fmall  Groat ,  and  the  thicknefs  of  a
Half-crown  ,  which  he  faid,  was  all  that  is
there  kept  of  them  ,  taken  by  the  Majors
Wife  her  felf,  and  kept  by  her,  and  there-
fore I  muft  fend  it  back  again  :  Many  had
fent  for  the  Stones ,  and  fo  many  troubled
the  Houfe  about  them,  that  they  threw
away,  or  buried  the  reft :  And  Mr.  Boyle
told  me ,  that  the  Earl  of  South- Hampton  *
Lord  Treafurer  ,  for  his  Satisfaction ,  had
got  a  great  number  of  them.    I  carryed
this  about  me  a  quarter  of  a  year ,  and
then  fent  it  home.    But  that  which  I  chief-
ly inform  the  Reader  of,  is,  that  the  thing
was  fo  long  in  doing ,  and  fo  Famous,  and
fomany  Pious,Underftanding  Perfons  mind-
ed it ,  that  fufpition  of  Fraud  was  by  their
Diligence  avoided.  The


44         -An  Hiftoyical  Difcourfe  of

The  Narrative  as  lately  fent  me
from  moft  Credible  Perfons  in
Evefham,  is  as  followeth.

A  Bant  the  Month  of  -dpril,  1652.  Mary
the  Daughter  of  Edward  EUinsy  of  the
Burrongh  of  Evejham ,  in  the  County  of
Worcefier  Gardner ,  then  about  nine  or  ten
years  old ,  went  in  the  fields  on  a  Saturday
with  fome  other  Children  to  gather  Cow-
flips ,  and  finding  in  a  Ditch  by  the  way
fidc,-.at  thefaid  Towns  end,  one  Catherine
Huxky ',  a  fingle  Woman ,  aged  then  about
forty  years  (  as  is  fuppofed  eafing  nature  )
the  Children  called  her  Witch  ,  and  took
up  ftones  to  throw  at  her ,  the  faid  Mary
alfo  called  her  Witch ,  and  took  up  a  ftone,
but  was  fo  affrighted ,  that  ihe  could  not
throw  it  at  her  •-,  then  they  all  run  away
from  her ,  and  the  faid  Mary  being  hind-
ttioft  >  this  Huxley  faid  to  her  [  E!lwsy  you
fhall  have  ftones  enough  in  your —  D  where-
upon Mary  fell  that  day  very  ill,  and  conti-
nued fo  weak  and  Languishing    that  her
Friends  feared  (he  would    not,  recovers
but  about  a  Month  after,  the  began  to  void
ftones  by  the  urinary  paflages ,  and  fome
little  urine  came  away  from  her  \  alfo.  when
fhe  voided  any  ftone .,'  and  the  ftone  fhe

voided.


apparitions  and  Witches,          45

voided ,  was  heard  by  thofe  that  were  by
her,  to  drop  into  the  Pot  or  Bafon,  and
(he  had  moft  grievous  pains  in  her  Back  and
Reins ,  like  the  pricking  of  Pins,  the  num-
ber of  the  ftones  (he  voided,  was  about
eighty,  fome  plain  pebbles,  fome  plain  flints,
fomevery  fmall ,  and  fome  about  an  ounce
weight ;  this  ihe  did  for  fome  fpace  ,
(  a  month  or  two,  or  there  abouts )  until
upon  fome  ftrong  fufpitions  of  Witchcraft,
the  forenamed  Huxley  was  Apprehended,
Examined  and  Searched  (  at  whofe  Beds
Head  there  was  found  feveral  ftones,  fuch
as  thefaid  Mary  voided)  and  was  fent  to
Worcefter ,  where  at  the  Summer  Affiz.es  in
the  faid  year  165 2. (then at  hand) (he was
upon  the  Profecution  of  the  Friends  of  the
faid  Mary,  Condemned  and  Executed  5  upon
whofe  Apprehenfion  and  Commitment,
Mary  ceafed  to  void  any  more  ftones  5  but
for  a  while ,  voided  much  blackifh  and
muddy  Sand,and  alfo,in  (hort  time  perfect-
ly recovered,  and  is  yet  living  in  the  Town,
in  good  and  honeft  Repute,  and  hath  been
many  years  Marryed  ,  and  hath  had  feven
Children  3  but  never  voided  any  ftones
fince ,  nor  been  troubled  with  the  pain  fore-
mentioned,  Abundance  of  people  yet  living,
know  the  Subftance  of  this  to  be  true,  and
herMother  inLaw((ince  dead)kept  the  ftones
till  (he  was  tired  with  the  frequent  Refort
of  people  to  fee  them,  and  the  faid  M#y  $

and


^6         An  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

and  to  hear  the  Relation  of  the  matter,  and
beg  the  (tones  (  for  though  many  offered
Money  for  them ,  yet  (he  always  refufed  it,
nor  did  they  ever  take  any,  but  it  coft  them
much  upon  the  Girl,  and  the  Profecution
of  the  faid  Huxley )  and  then  fhe  buried
them  in  her  Garden  ,  Edward  Ellins,  the  Fa-
ther of  the  faid  Mary  ,  is  alfo  yet  living  ,
and  a  Man  of  honeft  Repute ,  and  utterly
free  ( as  alfo  is  the  faid  Mary  ,  and  all  the
reft  of  her  Friends)  from  the  leaft  Sufpition
of  any  Fraud  or  Cheat  in  the  whole  bufi-
nefs :  This  was  known  to  hundreds  of  Peo-
ple in  the  faid  Town,  and  parts  Adjacent,
and  many  of  them  yet  living,  are  ready  to
atteft  the  truth  of  it.

X.  Tn  1645,  in  Dorfet-fiirey  I  lodged  at  a
Village  on  a  Hill,  called  ( I  think)  Everjhot,
in  the  Houfe  of  the  Minifter,  a  grave
Man ,  who  had  with  him  a  Son ,  alfo  a
Learned  Minifter,  that  had  been  Chaplain
to  Sir  Tho.  Adams  in  London :  They  both
told  me,  that  they  had  a  Neighbour  that
had  long  lain  Bed-rid,  that  told  all  the  oc-
caiion  *  That  for  a  long  time,  being  a  poor
Labouring  Man,  every  Morning  when  he
went  out  of  his  Door,  he  found  a  Shilling
under  his  Door,  of  which  he  told  no  one,
fo  that  in  a  long  time,  he  buying  fome
Sheep  or  Swine ,  and  feeming  Rich,  his
Neighbours  marvelled  how  he  came  by  it:

At


"Apparitions  and  Witches.  $f

At  laft  he  told  them ,  and  was  fuddenly
ftruck  Lame  and  Bed-rid.  They  would
have  had  me  fpeak  with  the  Man  3  but  the
Snow  covering  the  Ground ,  and  I  being
ill,  and  the  Witrieffes  fully  Credible,  I  for-
bore.

XII.  I  had  the  laft  Week  this  following
Letter  fent  me,  from,  and  by  moft  Credi-
ble Wife  and  Pious  Perfons  of  Devon  five,
from  Exeter.

Nathan  the   Son   of  Mr.   Zachens   Craby
Dyer,  without  Weft^ate,   had  Convulfion
and  Falling-Fits  about  nine  Years   fince :
He  was  a  Youth  well  kno**n  to  the  late
Mr.  Robert  Atkins  the  Minifter,  who  thought
him  one  very  hopeful  for  Religion     Going
from  one  of  his  Meeting  this  Youth  was
firil  taken,  having  three  Fits  before  he
came  to  his  Mafters  Houfe :  His  Legs  fail-
ed him,  he  feemed  to  be  pufh'd  as  if  fome
body  tript  up  his  Heels,  and  fell  forth  upon
his  Hands,  but  rofe  agaia  prefently.   Some
weeks  after  he  had  Falling-fits,  with  foam-
ing at  Mouth  j  thus  he  continued  a  Year  and
half  before  any  means  were  uied  fofpeded
,  for  Witchcraft.    After  this,  hearing  of  one
1  Gibs,  Mr.  Crab,  the  Father  of  this  Youth,
and  his  Daughter,  the  Youth's  Sifter,  went
together  to  Mr.  Gibs  for  help  for  the  Youth,
They  went  once  every  Week  for  a  Month
with  the  Youth's  Water  5  the  laft  Week  of
the  Month  the  Sifter  ask'd,  what  Mr.  oibs

thought


w  8         An  Rifiorical  Difcdurfe  of

thought  now  of  the  Cure?  (they  went  td
him  in  the  beginning  of  the  Week  )  he
Faid,  that  weeks  Papers  of  Powder  would
make  a  perfect  Cure,  but  there  would  be
an  alteration,  that  he  would  have  two  or
three  panging  fits  different  from  the  former*
which  things  fell  out  as  he  faid.  When
this  laft  Week  of  the  Month  was  over,  they
had  a  Debate,  whether  they  fhould  go  td
Mr.  Gibs  again,  at  length  they  concluded  to
go,  and  went  on  the  beginning  of  the  fifth
Week  with  his  Water.  Gibs  then  told
them,  Since  you  are  come  to  me  again,  I
will  give  you  that  (hall  make  a  perfedt  Cure*
that  you  (hall  need  come  to  me  no  more  :
then  he  gave  them  a  Bag  to  hang  about  the
Youth's  Neck,  and  Powder  to  take  in
White* wine  for  one  weeks  time:  Order
was  given  by  him,  when  the  Youth  had
worn  the  Collar  about  his  Neck  for  a
while,  the  Youth  fhould  take  it  off  himfelf,
and  burn  it :  but  Mr.  Eifon^  the  Boy's  Ma-
iler, took  off  the  Collar  after  it  had  been
on  two  Days  and  a  Night,  and  ihewed  it  iG
feme,  to  inquire ,  Whether  it  were  not  a
charm  ?  there  being  nothing  in  the  Collar
but  a  Paper  with  this  writing,

Ca/kn  Dan  Dane,

Dan  Dant  Callen^

Dan  Calkn  Dant.

Mr.  Elfon  kept  the  Paper  by  him  after
'cwas  taken  from  the  Boy's  Neck ,  about'4

eigh-


Apparitions  and  Witches.  4^

eighteen Weeks,not  fuffering  it  to  be  applied
again,  being  told  that  it  feemed  to  be  a
meer  Charm;  and  the  Boy  being  ask'd,  if
he  were  content  to  have  his  Fits  again  ra-
ther than  have  a  Cure  from  the  Devil,  who
would  not  cure  his  Body  without  greater
prejudice  to  his  Soul,  than  his  Bodily  Dif-
temper  could  be  reckoned  ?  he  very  readi-
ly anfwered,  he  would  rather  choole  to
have  his  Fits  again,  and  would  leave  him-
felf  to  the  Hands  of  God,  for  his  Difeafe
Or  Cure.

When  this  Diftemper  left  him  for  the
Eighteen  Weeks,  he  returned  confiderably
to  his  Senfes  and  Memory,  beyond  what  he
had  before,  particularly  to  be  able  to  fort
Wooll  at  his  Trade,  which  he  had  not  been
able  to  do  in  a  Year  and  quarter  before;
About  the  Sixth  Week  of  thefe  Eighteen*
the  Father  weat  to  Mr.  Gibs  again,  android
him  how  the  Note  was  taken  off,  and  tbac
feveral  had  the  fight  of  it  3  Gibs  then  faid*
If  the  Fits  do  return  again,  he  will  be
worfe  than  ever,  and  at  their  return  he
ihould  be  able  to  do  him  no  good.  His
Fits  at  the  return  were  indeed  far  more  ter-
rible than  before,  and  much  of  another
kind  than  thofe  of  other  Perfons  in  the  Fal-
len-ficknefs :  And  thefe  Fits  did  return  td
him  about  18  or  x<>  VVeeks  $£ter  they
^eafed,  upon  a  Shrove-TuejAay  i  Mr, -ElfoM
inquiring  into  the  time  when  they  returned?


5  o         rln  Hijlorica!  Difcourfe  of

(axdyit  was  when  he  threw  the  Paper  that  had
been  about  the  YouthVNeck,  into  the  Fire
and  burnt  it,  unwilling  to  keep  fuch  a  thing
any  longer     This  Gibs  hath  the  general  re-

Eute  of  a  Wizard,  and  his  Father  before
an.  The  Youth  hath  a  long  time  been  ut-
terly deprived  of  the  ufe  of  his  Reafon,  and
is  clothed,  and  otherwife  ufed  as  a  meer
Natural  j  and  his  Fits  fo  dreadful,  that  Per-
sons are  afraid  to  behold  him.

After  the  return  of  his  Fits?  he  was  put
to  one  Toe's  in  St.  Thomas  % ,  -  where  he
wrought  at  his  Trade  of  VVorfted-comb-
ing,  and  feme  means  were  ufed  for  his  Fits,
which  he  pretended  to  have  fome  Skill  in
curing,  whofe  Means  were  ufed  about  a
Month  without  any  fuccefs  3  then  and  there
being  at  his  Work,  and  fome  figns  appear-
ing of  an  approaching  Fit,  they  fet  him  on
a  Stool,  thence  he  fell  in  a  Fit,  and  brake
his  Leg,  the  main  Bone,  in  two  pieces,  a-
Botber  Bone  in  many  pieces.  Then  he  was
brought  home  to  his  Father's  Houfe  j  and
the  Bones  being  fet,  the  Chyrurgion  laid,  if
he  ihould  have  another  Fit  his  Cure  would
be  impoffible  \  he  lay  about  a  Month  or
five  Weeks  very  free  from  Fits,  till  his
Bones  were  fo  well  knit,  that  he  could
walk  abroad  with  Crutches,  which  he  did
for  a  while,  and  then  his  Fits  returned  in
the  fame  manner  as  before  his  Bone  was
broken-
After


"Apparitions  and  Witchesl  5 1

After  his  Leg  was  well  recovered,  he
Was  carried  to  Mr.  Pridham  of  Morchard^
he  prefcribed  Means,  which  he  hop'd  would
do  him  good,  if  there  were  any  alteration
by  theufe  of  his  Pills  which  he  then  gave
him  to  carry  with  him,  and  take  when  he
came  home  :  but  before  the  Pills,  he  had
ordered  a  Vomit  to  be  taken,  in  the  work-
ing of  which,  they  thought  he  would  die.
Then  they  gave  him  the  Pills,  which,  after
they  had  ftay'd  above  an  Hour  in  his  Sto-
mach, he  vomited  them  up  as  they  were
taken  $  which  were  put  up  again  in  the  Box,
and  fbewed  to  Mr.  Pridham ,  who  faid,  If
they  had  been  given  to  a  Child  of  two
Months  old,  they  would  have  been  digeft-
ed  in  half  an  Hour.  Upon  hearing  the
whole,  he  faid,  certainly  there  is  fomething
extraordinary  in  the  cafe-  Being  asked  if
he  could  do  him  no  good,  he  faid,  he  did
not  queftion  but  he  could,  but  being  a  Mi-
nifter  he  feared  he  Ihould  lofe  his  Benefice
by  Peoples  faying  he  was  a  VVhite-VVitch.

The  Youth's  Mother  apprehended,  that
Mr.  Staddon  drop'd  fome  fuch  words  that
her  Son  was  bewitch'd  or  poffefs'd,or  fome-
what  to  that  purpofe,  who  went  through  a
Courfe  of  Phyfick  with  the  You th*. and
found  nothing  did  anfwer£xpe<5tation.

For  fome  Years  the  Youth  hath  been

much  prejudiced  in  his  Speech  5  fometimes

she  cannot  fpeak  at  all,  but  is  as  one  dumb

E  z  for


/


t  J  2.  4s  Hiftorie&l  Difcourfe  of

for  a  Week  or  Fortnight  together  :  He
fpeaks  plain  enough  between,  but  when  he
hath  the.  Dumb  Fits  he  can  hardly  move  his
Tongue  in  his  Mouth;  and  he  is  generally
fo  deprived  of  Reafon,  that  he  is  clad,  and
otherwife  ufed  as  a  rneer  Idiot.

This  Narrative  was  taken  in  the  beginning
of  April  1688.

Memorandum,  The  Youth  continues  in
the  fame  condition  till  this  27th  of  Septem-
'  far9  l6&$.    £

.  XIII.  Tho'  I  colled  much  written  hereto-
fore, I  muft  not  tranfcribe  other  Mens
Books ;  I  here  deftre  the  Reader  to  read  in
:'Dr.  Smctare's  Book,  called  [Satan's  Invifibls
Yforid\  among  36  Hiftories^  the  X.  called  The
Devil  of  Genluce,  where  he  will  find  fuch
mother  Cafe  as  that  of  the  Devil  of  Maf-
■con  j  where  the  Spirit,  befides  other  A<St$  of
Moleftadon  and  Violence,  for  a  long  time
continued  familiar  talking  to  Men,  before
fo  many  Wimeffe,  as  leaveth  the  truth  of
the  Hiiiory  unqueftionable.

XIV.  The  Hanging  of  a  great  number  of"
Witches  in  Suffolk  and  EJftx,  by  the  diico-
very  of  one  Hopkins,  in  1645-  and  1646  is
faiBoufly  known.  Mr.  Calamy  went  along
with  the  Judges  in  the  Circuit,  to  hear
their  CoafeiTiQiiS,  and  fee  that  there  were

no


'Apparitions  and  Witches.  53

no  Fraud  or  Wrong  done  them-  I  fpak^
with  many  Underftanding,  Pious  and  Cre-
dible Perfons  that  lived  in  the  Countries*
and  fome  that  went  to  them  to  the  Prifons,
and  heard  their  fad  Confeffions-  Among
the  reft,  an  old  Reading  Parfon,  named
Lowis,  not  far  from  Franlingham,  was  one
that  was  Hanged ;  who  confefied,that  hehad
two  Imps,  and  that  one  of  them  was  always

Eutting  him  on  doing  Mifchief ;  and  (  he
eing  near  the  Sea,  as  he  faw  a  Ship  un-
der Sail,  it  moved  him  to  fend  him  to  fink
{he  Ship,  and  he  confented,  and  faw  the
Ship  fink  before  him.  One  Penitent  Wo-
man confefled,  that  her  Mother  lying  fick,
and  (he  looking  to  her,fomewhat  like  a  Mole
ran  in  to  the  Bed  to  her,  which  (he  being
fiartled  at,  her  Mother  bid  her  not  fear  ic,
but  gave  it  her,  faying.  Keep  this  in  a  Foe
by  the  Eire,  &c.  and  thou  (halt  never  want:
She  did  as  (he  was  bid,  fhortly  after  a  poor
Boy  (feemingly)  came  in,  and  askt  leave  to
fit  and  warm  him  at  the  Fire,  and  when  he
was  gone,  (he  found  Money  under  the  Stool ;
and  afterwards  oft  did  fo  again,  and  at  laft
laid  hold  of  her,  and  drew  Blood  of  her,.
and  (he  made  no  other  Compact  with  the
Devil,  but  that  her  Imps  fuck'd  her  Blood £3
and  as  I  heard,  (lie  was  delivered.  Abun-
dance of  fad  Confeflions  were  made  by
them,  by  which  fome  certified,  that  there
arp  certain  Puniihments  that  they  were  to
E  3  under-


54          An  Hiftorkal  Bifcourfe  of

undergo,  if  they  did  not  fome  hurt  as  was
appointed  them.

And  in  Lancajhire,  long  ago,  many
^Witches  were  Gonvift.

That  publifhed  by  Edmond  Bower  near  5^-
lUbury,  is  remarkable :  I  refer  the  Reader
to  the  printed  Narrative,

XV.  I  will  next  infert  a  late  Fa&
not  far  off,  which  when  a  Pious  Credible
Perfon  related  to  me  ,  I  defired  him  •  to
fend  me  the  true  Narrative  in  Writing
when  he  came  Home,  and  fully  enquired
into  the  matter :  And  he  fent  me  this  Nar-
rative here  following.

At  Brightling  in  Suflex.

As  touching  the  Relation  of  the  Bright-
ling  Story,  which  is  in  the  Subftance  un-
doubtedly true,  however  fome  Circum-
flances  of  it  may  vary,  be  pleafed  to  take
the  following  Account.

On  Munday  was  three  Weeks,  at,  or
near  the  Houfe  of  Jofeph  Cruttendm  of
jBrightlingfixi  old  Woman  about  Noon  came
to  a  Servant  Girl  of  the  (aid  Cmttendens  tells
her,  fad  Calamities  were  coming  upon  her
Mafter  and  Dame,  their  Houfe  fhould  be
Fired,  and  many  other  troubles  befaithem$
but  tells  this  Girl  withal,  TKat  if  fhefpake
of  what  (lie  had  told  her,  the  Devil  would
tear  her  to  pieces,  other  wife  fhe.  need  not
fear3  for  no  hurt  fhould  come  to  her :  The

fame


\Apparitions  and  Witches*  5  5

fame  Night,  as  the  Man  and  Woman  lay
in  Bed,  Dire  and  Duft?  &c  was  thrown  at
them,  but  they  could  not  tell  whence  it-
came:  They  rife  and  Pray,  during  which
that  Difturbance  ceafes^  fome  fay  they  went
to  Bed  again,  but  finding  the  fame  trouble
they  are  forced  to  rife  Tuefday  about
Noon,  Duft,  Dirt,  and  feveral  things  are
thrown  at  them  again;  before  Night,  a
part  of  one  end  of  their  Houfe  Fired ;  they
rake  it  down,  it  flafhes  fomewhat  like
Gunpowder  5  as  they  ftop'd  it  there,  it  be-
gan in  another  place,  and  thence  to  another,
till  the  whole  Houfe  was  burnt  down.
Some  fay  fome  thing  like  a  Black  Bull  was
feen  tumbling  about  s  the  certainty  of  that  I
aver  not.  The  Houfe,  tho'  it  burnt  down  to
the  Ground  it  flamed  not :  The  Night  was
fpent  in  carrying  Goods,or  one  thing  or  other
from  one  place  to  anothe  3  they,  I  think5  re-
maining moftly  without  Doors.  Thurfday  CoJ.
Bmbndge  (whofe  Houfe  the  former  was)  be-
ing acquainted  with  the  Man's  fad  Accident,
bid  them  go  into  another  of  his  Houfes  in
the  Parilh,  whither,  when  the  Goods  were
brought,  fuch  like  Difturbances  were  there
aifo  3  the  Houfe  Fireth,  endeavours  are
made  by  many  to  quench  it,  but  in  vain,-
till  the  Goods'  are  thrown  out,  when  it
ceafed  with  little  or  no  help.  In  this  con-
dition none  durft  let  them  into  their  Doors  5
they  abide  under  a  Huts  the  Goods  are
E  4  thrown


56          An  MijtOYtcal  IJiJcotirJe  of

thrown  upfide  down,  Peuter-difhes,  Knives,
Brickbrats  ftrike  them,  but  hurt  them  not;
Mr.  Bennet  and  Mr.  Brad/haw ,  Minifters,
came  to  Pray  with  them,  when  a  Knife
glanced  by  the  Breaft  of  Mr.  Bennet ,  a
Bowl  or  Difh  thrown  at  his  Back,  but
while  at  Prayers  quiet  3  they  wrere  without
Doors,  there  being  very  many  prefeot,  a
Wooden  Tut  came  flying  out  of  the  Air,
by  many,  and  came  aod  (truck  the  Man ;  as
likewife  a  Horfe-ftioe,^which  was  by  fom£
laid  away,  and  it  was  obferv'd  of  its  own
accord  to  rife  again  and  fly  to  the  Man,  and
ilrook  him  in  the  midft  of  a  hundred  Peo-
ple: Upon  ftri<9:  Examination  the  Man
tonfeffeth,  that  he  had  been  a  Thief,  an^
did  it  under  the  colour  of  Religion*  Sab*
bath-day  the  Girl  toldlier  Dame  the  former
Story  of  the  Womans  Difcourfej  fhe  is
fent  for,  and  Examined  before  Captain  Col-
lins, Mr.  BmbrUge^  and  (lie  is  fearched  and
watched  24  Hours:  the  Girl  faith,  fhe  is
like  the  Woman,  but  I  think  will  not  fwear
it  is  the  fame.  This  Woman  was  formerly
fufpe<3ed  to  be  a  Witch,  had  to  Maidftone
about  it,  but  got  away,  and  hath  lived  about
Barwafi  fome  time  fince ;  her  Name  I  know
not :  Tuefday  Four  Minifters  kept  a  Faft,
Mr.  Bennet^  Welter ',  Bradfiaw  and  &  olden  $  fince
I  hear  not  of  any  trouble.  Tis  faid  they
are  in  a  Barn  or  Ale-houfe  s  while  they  lay
without  Doors*  the  Woman  fending  fome

Meal


"Apparitions  and  Witches.  $7

Meal  to  a  Neighbours  to  make  Bread,  they
could  not  make  it  up  into  Loaves,  but  it
was  like  Butter,  and  fo  they  put  it  into  the
Oven,  but  it  would  not  bake,  but  came  out
as  it  wept  in.  This  Relation  came  from
Mr.  Collins?  who  was  an  Eye-witnefs  of
much  of  it.

XVI.  About  twenty  Years  paft,  when  I
was  in  the  Lord  Broghilh  (now  Earl  of  Ore-
r/s)  Lodgings  in  London ,  one  Night  he
brought  me  the  Report*  that  one  of  Crom-
welfs  Soldiers  being  on  his  Watch,  near  the
Chappel  of  St:  James  s  Houfe,  fomething
came  towards  him  in  an  affrightening  fhape,
and  he  calling  out,  Stand,  ftand,  or  I  will
(hoot  you,  at  laft  difcharging,  it  ran  upon
him,  and  threw  him  over  the  way  far  off;
and  that  it  had  been  that  day  Examined,
and  affirmed  confidently;  and  what  became
of  the  Report  of  it  afterward,  I  know  not,
fave  that  it  was  faid  to  happen  oft.    But  on
this  occafion  the  Earl  of  Orery  { yet  living)
told  me,  as  followeth,  That  Colonel  V&*
nabks  (then  going  for  Hifpaniola,  with  the
Soldiers  that  were  there  Repulfed  and  took
Jamaica)  had  a  Soldier  in  his  Army  that
came  out  of  Inland,  and  was  under  Colo-
nel Hill,  who  was  then  in  London,  and  would
atteft  this  folio  wing,  viz*  That  this  Soldier
looked  pale  and  lad,  and  pined,  and  the
caufe  was  unknown:  At  laft  he  cam§  to

Colonel


5  8         An  Hifiovical  Difcourfe  of

Colonel  Hill  with  his  Confeflion ,  that  he
had  bin  a  Servant  in  England,  (  as  I  remem-
ber ,to  one  that  carried  Stockins  and  fuch
ware  about  to  felljand  for  his  Money,  he
had  Murdered  his  Mafter  ,  and  buried  him
in  fuch  a  place  :  And  flying  into  Ireland ,
lifted  himfelf  his  5ouldier,and  that  of  a  long
time,  when  ever  he  lay  alone,  fomewhat
like  a  headlefs  Manhood  by  his  Bed,  faying
to  him,  {Wilt  thou  yet  confefs  i  3  And  in  this
cafe  of  fear  he  had  continued,till  lately  it  ap-
peared to  him  when  he  had  a  Bed-fellow
(  which  it  never  did  before  )  and  {aid  as  be-
fore {Wilt  thou  yet  confefs"}  and  now  teeing
no  hope  of  longer  Concealing  it ,  he  Con-
feffed:  And  as  I  remember,  his  going  to
Hifpaniola  was  his  punifhment,  in  ftead  of
Death,  where  vengeance  followed  him.  )
This  he  offered  then  to  bring  Colonel  Hill
to  me  to  atteft,  ( fince  the  Writing  of  this  f
the  Earl  of  Orery  is  dead.  )

XVX*  Simon  Jones,  a  Strong  and  healthful
Man  of  Kederminfler  ( no  way  inclined  to
Melancholy  or  any  Fancies )  hath  oft  told
me ,  that  being  a  Souldier  for  the  King  in
the  War  agaiott  the  Parliament ,  in  a  clear
Moon-ihine  Night,  as  he  flood  Sentinel  in
the  Colledge  Green  at  Worcesler,  fomething
like  a  headlefs  Bear,  appeared  to  him  5  and
fo  affrighted  him ,  that  he  laid  down  his
Arms  foon  after,  and  returned  home  to  his

Trade


apparitions  and  Witches.  jp

Trade  ,  and  while  I  was  there  afterward  ,
which  was  fourteen  years,  lived  Honeftly ,
Religiouflv,  and  without  blame,  and  I  think
is  yet  living  ,  which  mindeth  me  of  that
which  followed! ,  though  to  me  not  known.

XVII.  When  I  was  young,  moft  credible
and  religious  perfons  born  \nWMm~Hallneiz
Wolver-hampton  in  Staffordshire^  oft  told  me
(dwelling  with  me  in  the  fame  Hoafe)  that
oneRkhard  White  a  Smith  o{Wilden*Haflyw&$
a  prophaneAtheifticalMan,  and  believing
that  there  was  no  Devils ,  in  his  Cups
would  wifh  he  could  once  fee  the  Devil,
if  there  were  fuchathing;  and  that  fud-
denly  he  changed  his  Life ,  and  became  a
profeflbrof  zeal,  and  ftri&nefs  in  Religi-
on ,  and  told  them  ,  that  in  a  clear  Moon*
fhine  Night ,  the  Devil  in  the  fliape  of  a
great  ugly  Man  ,  flood  by  his  Bed  fide ,
opening  the  Curtains ,  and  looking  him  in
the  Face ,  and  at  laft  took  up  the  Blanket,
and  fometime  fmiled  on  him,  and  then  was
more  ugly  ,  and  after  a  while  ( in  which  he
lay  in  great  Terror)  the  Apparition  Vanish-
ed, and  he  was  affrighted  into  the  aforefaid
change  of  Life  (as  Bruno  is  faid  to  be  the
Founder  of  the  Order  of  Carthufian  Fryers.

XVIIL  My  dear  Friend  Mr.  Hopkins  (Far-
ther to  my  Faithful  BrotherMr.GeorgeHopkins
Minifter  ajt  Everjham^  till  eje&ed,  Aug.  24.

1662.


6  °  An  Hiftorkal  Di&owfe  of

1662.  and  Grandfather  to  Dr.  Hopkins,  late-
ly Preacher  at  Laurences )  a  chief  Magi-
ftrate  of  Bewdky,  and  fince  a  Member  of
the  Long  Parliament ,  oft  pained  as  he
thought  with  the  Spleen  ,  but  not  at  all
Meclancholy,cam§  to  me  at  Mr.  Hanbnryesy
the  laft  time  before  I  was  driven  out  of
the  County ,and  as  a  great  fecrettold  me,  that
he  was  pofleiK  meaning,I  think  BewitchtJ :
J  chid  him,as  Fanciful  and  Melancholy :  But
he  without  any  (hew  of  Melancholy,affirmed,
that  it  was  certainly  true:I  could  not  ftay  with
him,  and  never  faw  him  more.  But  he  Jong
continued  ijj  pain  and  that  Conceit,  and  be-
fore he  dyed  ,  a  piece  of  Wood  came
down  into  the  reBttmmeJliwm>  which  they
were  fain  to  pull  out  with  their  Fingers
His  good  Wife  told  me,it  was  of  the  length
of  ones  finger  ;  And  that  he  and  they  were
ftre  that  he  never  fwallowed  any  fuch  thing.
The  beft  Men  It  feems  may  be  thus  Affii<ft-
ed,as;M  by  Satan,

XVIIL  There  is  now  in  London  an  un-
derftanding,  fober,  pious  Man,  oft  one  of
my  Hearers,  who  hath  an  elder  Brother,  a
Gentleman  of  considerable  Rank,  who  ha-
ving formerly  feemed  pious,  of  late  Years
doth  oft  fall  into  the  Sin  of  Drunkennefs :
He  oft  lodgeth  Jong  together  here,  in  this
his  Brother's  Ho'ufe ;  And  whenever  he  is
drunken,  and  hath  flept  himfelf  fober,  fome-

thlng


Jpparitions  and  Witches.         6 1

thing  knocks  at  his  Bed's  Head,  as  if  one
knocked  on  a  Wainfcot*  when  they  re-
move his  Bed,  it  followeth  him :  Befides
lowd  Noifes  on  other  Parts  where  he  is*
that  all  the  Houfe  heareth.  They  have  oft
watch'd,  and  kept  his  Hands,  left  heftiould
do  it  himfelf.  His  Brother  hath  oft  told  it
me,  and  brought  his  Wife  (a  difcreet  Wo-
man) to  atteft  it;  who  averreth  moreover,
that  as  (he  watched  him,  (he  hath  feen  his
Shooes  under  the  Bed  taken  up,  and  no-
thing vifible  touch  them.  They  brought  to
me  the  Man  himfelf,  and  when  we  ask  him
how  he  dare  fo  fin  again,  after  fuch  a
Warning,  he  hath  no  Excufe.  But  being
Perfons  of  Quality,  for  fome  fpedal  Rea-
fon  of  Worldly  Intereft,  I  mult  flot  name
him.

Two  things  are  remarkable  in  this  In-
ftance.  i.  What  a  powerful  thing  Tempta-
tion and  Fleflily  Concupifcence  is,  and  what
a  hardned  Heart  Sin  brings  Men  to:  If  one
rofe  from  the  Dead  to  warn  fuch  Sinners,
it  would  not  of  it  felf  perfuade  them.

2.  It  pofeth  me  to  think  what  kind  of
Spirit  this  is,  that  hath  fuch  a  Care  of  this
Man's  Soul,  ( which  maketh  me  hope  he
will  recover.)  Do  good  Spirits  dwell  fo
near  us  ?  Or  are  they  lent  on  fuch  Meflages?
Or  is  it  his  Guardian  Angel  ?  Or  is  it  the
Soul  of  fome  dead  Friend,  that  fuffereth,
and  yet,  retaining  Love  to  him,  as  Dives  to

his


0  i         rAn  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

his  Brethren,  would  have  him  faved  ?  God
yet  keepeth  fuch  things  from  us,  in  the
dark.

XIX.  There  is  now  in  London  a  Youth,  (the
Son  of  a  very  Godly  Conforming  Minifter,)
vyho  reading  a  Book  of  that  called  Conjura-
tion, coming  to  the  Words  and  Anions  which
the  Book  faid  would  caufe  the  Devil  to  ap-
pear, was  prefently  very  defirous  to  try,  and
defirous  that  the  Apparition  might  be  accor-
dingly. He  came  to  me  in  Terrour,  ha-
ving before  opened  his  Cafe  to  a  Parifh-Mi-
nifler,  and  affirmed  to  me,  that  the  Devil
hath  appeared  to  him,  and  follicited  him
with  a  Knife  to  cut  his  Throat,  and  told
him,  hemuftdoit  fuddenly,  for  he  would
flay  no  longer.  I  told  him  how  fafe  he
was,  if  he  truly  repented,  and  begged  Par-
don through  Chrift,  and  would  refolvedly
renew  his  Baptifmal  Covenant,  and  re-
nounce the  Devil,  and  live  as  truly  devoted
to  God  and  our  Redeemer:  And  I  have
heard  from  him  no  more,  but  muft  not
name  him.

This  (hews  what  Power  Satan  gets,  if
Men  do  but  confent :  For  I  had  a  very
Godly  Friend,  that  a  Week  ago  told  me,
that  he  read  Cornelim  Agrip\>d%  Occult  a
Fhilofophia ,.  and  read  the  fame  Words
that  he  faith  will  raife  Devils,  but  with
oo  Defire,  but  a  Detection  of  Succefs,

and


[Apparitions  and  Witches1.  6  j

and  of  the  Book,  and  nothing  appeared  t©
him.

XX.  Mr.  Samuel  dark  hath  publifhed  the
Apparition  to  Mr.  White  of  Dorchefter,  Af-
feflor  to  the  TFefiminft.er-Afkmbly,  at  Lam-
beth.  The  Devil,  in  a  light  Night,  flood
by  hisBed-fide:  He  looked  a  while  whe*
ther  he  would  (ay  or  do  any  thing,  and  then
laid,  If  thou  haft  nothing  elfe  to  do,  I  have  %
and  fo  turned  himfelf  to  deep.  Many  fay  it
from  Mr.  White,  himfelf.

XXL  This  following  I  had  from  one  of
unqueftionable  Credit.

Amongft  other  things,  I  called  to  Mind
a  Story  fent  me  in  a  Letter  from  Cambridge,
that  Week  it  was  done,  in  i66i>  or  1662.
and  I  did  verily  believe,  and  do  ftill,  that
Mr.  Illingwrth  fent  it  me,  but  he  could  not
refled  its  however,  Mr.- Cooper  hearing  it
told  it  was  a  great  Truth,  he  heard  Mr.
Franklin,  a  Minifter  of  Wood-Rifwg,  in  this
County,  twelve  Miles  from  this  City,  Fa-
ther to  the  Child,  tell  it  to  Sir  Philip  Wood-
houfe.  Mr.  Franklin  (his  Character,  farther
than  that  of  a  Minifter  of  the  Church  of
England,  I  cannot  give  you)  was  then  Mi-
nifter of  a  Town  (whofe  Name  I  know  not)
in  the  Ifle  of  £/j,  and  upon  this  Account
which  I  fhall  tell  you,  removed  to  Wood*
Rifmg  in  this  County.

This


64         An  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

This  Man  had  a  Child,  to  which  a  Spirit
often  appeared  at  his  Father's  Houfe  5  and
grew  fo  bold  and  free,  as  very  ordinarily
to  come  in  whilft  Company  was  in  thd
Houfe,  and  Franklin  }n  the  Room,  and  fit
down  by  the  Boy.  At  due  Years,  about
the  Year  1661,  or  1662.  he  Was  bound  an
Apprentice  to  a  Barber  in  Cambridge,  (or  at
leaft  with  him  as  a  Probationer. )  One
Night  the  Spirit  appeared  to  him  in  the
ufuai  Habit  of  a  Gentlewoman,  and  would
have  perfuaded  him  to  go  home  again,asking
him  what  he  did  there  ?  &c  The  Boy,  af-
ter fome  Treaty,  replied,  He  would  not  go.
Upon  which,  he  received  a  great  Blow  oil
the  Ear,  and  grew  very  ill,  but  rofe.  Be-
ing and  continuing  ill,  his  Matter  prefently
horfeth,  and  rides  to  acquaint  his  Father,
In  the  Forenoon  of  that  Day,  the  Boy  fit-
ting by  the  Kitchin-fire,  his  Miftrefs  being
by,  fuddenly  cries  out,  O  Miftrefs !  Loo^
Then  s  the  Gentlewoman.  The  Woman  turns
to  look,  fees  nothing ;  but  while  her  Head
was  turned,  hears  a  Noife  as  of  a  great  Bok
on  the  Ear;  turns,  fees  the  Boy^ bending
down  his  Neck,  and  he  prefently  died.  A-
bout  the  fame  Hour,  fo  near  as  they  could
guefs,  the  Mafter  was  fitting  at  Dinner  in
the  Ifle  of  Ely*  with  the  Father:  Thev Ap-
pearance of  a  Gentlewoman  comes  in,  look-
ing angrily  ?  taking  a  Turn  or  two,  difap-
peared*

Thus


ilpparzttons  and  Witches.         &5

I  Thus  I  remember  the  Story  came,  ia
three  Days  after  it  was  done,  to  me.  \

Mr -Cooper  this  Afternoon  confirms  it,  as
heard  by  him  from  Mr.  Franklin  himfelf :
Adding,  the  poor  Man  was  fo  affe&ed,
that  he  feemed  almoft  ftupid.

XXIII.  From  a  credible  Perfon  I  had
this  following  Account.

In  the  Year  1665.  Elizabeth  Brook§r9  Ser-
vant to  Mrs.  Huron  olHonyton,  in  the  Coun-
ty of  Devon,  as  fhe  was  ferving  in  Dinner
one  Lord's  Day,  fuddenly  felt  a  pricking,  as
of  a  Pin,  in  her  Thigh,  but  did  not  think
there  could  be  any  fuch  thing  5  yet  looking,
fhe  found  indeed  that  a  Pin  was  there,  got
within  her  Skin,  but  without  drawing  any
Blood,  or  breaking  the  Skin,  or  making
any  hole  or  fign  at  all  *  and  it  was  got  fo
far  within  her  Fle(h,  that  (he  could  hardly
feel  the  Head  of  it  writh  her  Finger,  but
yet  fhe  did  plainly  enough  perceive  that  it
was  a  Pin  5  fo  it  continued  the  remaining
part  of  that  Day.    The  next  Day  (lie  felt
but  little  pain :  The  Tuefday  fhe  was  much
pained,  and  the  Pin  wrought  fo  far  into  her
Fle(h,that  (lie  could  no  longer  feel  k  with
her  Fingers.    The  WUntfday  (he  went  to
Exeter,  that  fhe  might  have  the  Advice  of
Mr.  Anthony  Smith,  a  Chirurgeon  thete,  of
great  Reputation.    He,  upon  examining  the
place;  would  oot  believe  that  4ny  Pin  was
F  there,


'66         rAn  Hiftorical  Vifcourfe  of

there,  there  being  no  Skin  broken*  no  Swel-
ling, nor  any  other  thing  by  which  he  might
perceive  the  leaft  Token  of  any  fuch  mat-
ter. However,  upon  her  confident*  and
conftant  affirming  there  was  a  Pin,  he  made
an  Incifion  •,  and  fearching  with  an  Inftru-
meni,  at  length  found  the  Pin,  and  took  it
out :  It  was  a  little  crooked,  and  of  the
larger  fort  of  fmall  Pins-  He  prefently
made  Applications  for  the  Cure  of  the
Wound,  which  in  about  three  Weeks  time
was  erTe&ed.

The  Day  before  this  happened,  the  Wq-
man  had  an  unknown  Perfon  asked  a  Pin  of
her,  which  the  denied  her,  but  did  not  fuf-
pe&her.  And  another  Woman,  Agnes  Ri-
chardfon,  who  was  fufpe&ed,  was  angry  with
her,  for  blaming  her  about  Mifcarriage  in
an  Errand  that  (he  fent  her  on.


A  true  Relation  from  Honyton,
in  the  County  of  Devon,  com
cerning  Witchcraft*

Hsjngfion  upon  Tomes,  Sept.  6,  16B1I

A  Bout  nine  or  ten  Years  fince,  in  the
Hcufe  of  Mrs.  Hieron,   of  BonytM,

Widow,  there  happened  this  ftrange  In-
iaoce  of  Witchcraft  following-

Thi?


[Apparitions  and  Wit  chef.         6j

This  Widow  Huron,  aPerfon  of  good
Quality,  kept  a  Mercer's  Shop,  and  (I
think)  doth  to  this  day,  in  Honyton.  She
had  a  Maid-Servant,  Elizabeth  Brooker  by
Name,  who  fold  Small  Wares  in^a  Stall
before  her  Miftreffes  Door.  On  Saturday^
which  was  their  Market-day*  a  certain  Wo-
man of  Honyton  Town  came  to  the  faid  Eli-
zabeth Brooker,  (felling  Wares  at  the  Stall
aforefaid5)  and  asked  her  for  a  Pin.  The
Maid  readily  gave  her  a  Pin  from  her
Sleeves  but  this  Pin  did  not  fatisfie,  fhe
would  have  a  Pin  of  a  bigger  fort,  out  of  a
Paper  which  hung  up  to  fell.  The  Maid
told  her,  thofe  Pins  were  not  hers  to  give,
fhe  mult  ask  her  Miftrefs ;  and  when  fhe
had  Orders,  (he  would  give  her  her  Defire.
The  Woman  asked  her  again,  and  again  j
and  Elizabeth  did  as  often  deny.  The
Woman  went  away  in  a  great  Fume  and
Rage,  and  told  die  Maid,  fhe  fhould  heat
farther  from  her*  fhe  would  eer  long  wiih
fhe  had  given  her  the  Pin  fhe  defireds  with
many  threatning  Speeches,  which  the  Maid
took  little  notice  of,  (though  the  Woman
was  of  an  ill  Report)  Now,  the  next  Day
being  the  Lord's  Day.  while  her  Miftrefs
and  the  Family  were  at  Dinner,  and  Eliza-
beth Brooker  waiting  at  the  Table,  on  a  fud-
den  the  Maid  gave  a  very  great  Cry,  and  told
them,  fhe  had  a  Pin  thruft  into  her  Thigh*
which  few  of  the  Family  did  believe,  know-
F  z  ing


6  8  An  Hifmkal  Difiourfe  of

ing  there  was  no  Perfon  in  jhe  Room  Be-
fide  her  felf,  and  the  Family,  who  all  fate
at  Meat,  (lie  only  (landing  to  attend  them.
Her  Miftrefs  arofe  from  Table,  and  Mr.  Sa-
muel Bier  on  s  Wife,  (who  was  then  living.)
She  was  forced  to  go  to  Bed  ^  they  fen  t
for  a  Midwife  of  the  Town,  who  had  skill
in  Sores  and  Wounds :  She  faw  there  had
been  fome  fmall  Hurt  in  the  Skin,  but  the
Pin  was  out  of  fight  ^  and  feeling  fo  as  to*
underhand  what  it  was,  or  exaftly  where,
the  Midwife  applied  her  rare  Plaifter  of  Ve-
#/Ve-Turpentine  all  that  Night,  and  many
other  things  the  next  Day,  but  the  Pain
was  ftill  the  fame.  On  the  Tuefday  they  ad-
vifed  with  Mr.  Salter,  a  skilful  Apotheca-
ry in  the  Town*  who  advifed  them  well,
whofe  Couniel  they  followed,  bur  all  in
vain.  On  Wedxefday,  the  fame  Week,
they,  with  great  Trouble  and  Fain,  brought
her  to  Exeter,  and  lodged  her  at  Mr.  John
jfifoppws,  a  worthy  Minifter  of  the  Gofpel,
Who  lived  in  Gaudies- Lane.  They  called
me  to  her,  to  advife  what  to  do  to  eafe  her
Paim  Idefigned  a  Suppurative  Cataplafm,
but^nbthing  would  fatishe  the  Maid,  but
cutting  of  it  out ^  which  was  (omewhat  dif-
ficult? becauie  it  was  hard  to  find  the  place
exadtly,  where  to  make  the  Incifion ,  but
the  Courage  of  the  Patient  did  greatly  pro-
mote the  Operarion.  i  made  a  large  jaci-
fion,  according  to  the  leogch  of  the  Mufcks ■;

and


Apparitions  andWitches.  69

and  though  I  could  find  no  fign  of  the  Pin
upon  the  firft  Incifion,  yet  by  putting  my
Incifion-knife  obliquely,  I  felt  the  Pin,  and
brought  it  out,  near  an  Inch  within  the  C#-
tk$  and  upon  that  there  was  great  Eafe,
and  in  fifteen  Days  the  Sore  was  whole-
This  Operation  was  performed  in  the  pre-
fence  of  Mrs.  Hoppw,  Mrs.  Gold,  Mrs-  Ford,
and  many  worthy  Perfons,  of  good  Repu-
tation- And  I  dare  prefume,  If  this  Paper
be  fent  to  Hokypon,  to  Mr.  Samuel  Hieron,
Minifter  of  the  Gofpel,  he  will  have  it  fuf-
ficiently  attefted  concerning  the  firft  part  of
the  Story,  and  none  can  tell  the  fecond  pare
better  than  my  felf,  who  performed  the
Operation  :  And  the  Truth  of  that  I  give
under  my  Hand  this  6th  Day  of  September,
Anno  Dom,   1 68 1.

Anthony  Smith,

Chyrurgus  Kingston*


XXIV.  One  born  in  the  fame  Town,
now  living  in  London^  in  a  Journey,  Anm
166^  lodged  at  an  Inn  in  Culmfiock*  in  the
fame  County.  He  went  to  Bed  between
Ten  and  Eleven  of  the  Clock,  and  foon
F  3  fell


70         An  Hiftorkal  Difcowfe  of

fell  afleep,  not  having  any  Apprehenfions
concerning  the  Houfe  or  Chamber.  When
he  awaked,  he  found  himfelf  laid  out  in
the  Floor,  at  fome  diftance  from  the  Bed,
by  the  fide  of  a  Table,  the  Bed-Cloaths,
&nd  his  own  Wearing  Cloaths,  all  upon
him,  juft  in  the  fame  manner  as  he  laid
them  when  going  to  Bed  $  having  nothing
at  all  under  him,  by  which  he  got  an  ex-
tream  Cold  5  and  befides,  his  Leg  and  Arm
next  the  Table  were  forely  bruifed.  Being
awake,  he  be^m  to  think  where  he  was,
but  foon  recolleded  himfelf,  and  by  the
Light  of  the  Moon,  which  then  lhone  ve-
ry bright,  he  difcerned  the  Bed;  and
putting  on  the  Cloaths  upon  the  Bed,  laid
him  down  again,  and  flept  the  remaining
part  of  the  Night  very  quietly.  Soon  af-
ter his  being  in  Bed  this  fecond  time,  the
Town-Clock  ftruck  Twelve.  He  never
was  out  of  his  Bed  in  his  Sleep  before  or
fince;  and  foon  after  he  came  to  under-
hand that  the  Chamber  was  reputed  to  be
haunted.


Mn


apparitions  and  Witchesl         yi

Mr.  Charles  Hatt's  Letter,  con-
cerning an  [fouje  being  haunted
at  Kinton,  in  Wotccfterlhire,
in  the  Tear  \66j.

Worthy  Sir,

According  to  your  Defire,  and  iby  Pro-
mife  when  I  was  with  you  about  a
Fortnight  fince,  with  Mrs.  WUfon,  concern-
ing a  Man's  Houfe  in  Kimon  (fix  Miles  from
Worcefter )  being  forely  troubled,  about  the
latter  end  of  the  Year  1667.  to  the  beft  of
my  Remembrance,  viz..

I  living  at  Benington,  near  -4»fter>  itt
Warwickshire ■,  Workmen  come  from  Kin*
ton,  acquainted  me  of  an  Houfe  forely
haunted,  naming  the  Perfen  to  me,  (which
I  have  now  forgot.)  I  being  defirous  to  fee
or  hear  fuch  things ,  went  to  the  faid
Houfe-,  but  finding  only  a  Maid  there  a
fpinning,  I  asked  for  her  Mafter.  She  told
me,  the  Spirit  ( to  the  beft  of  my  remem-
brance (he  called  it  fo )  had  boxed  him  a-
bout  the  Ears,  as  he  fate  by  the  Fire,  over
againfther*  upon  which,  he  cried  out,  and
went  away  to  a  Son's  of  his  in  the  faid
Town,  a  little  before  I  came.  I  coming
to  the  faid  Man,  defired  him  ta  come  home.
F  4  He


J  %         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

He  feemed  unwilling,  telling  me  how  he
was  abufed  by  it,  and  that  in  the  Night  ic
Would  often  pull  him  out  of  the  Bed,  and
did  fo  torment  him,  that  he  was  a  wea-
ry of  his  Life.  But  getting  him  home*
he  fate  him  down  about  the  fame  place,
neat  the  Fire ,  and  I  fate  over  againft
him ,  difcourfing  how  he  was  troubled.
He  told  me,  feveral  had  been  with  him?
as  the  Minifter  of  the  placd,  (to  mybeft
remembrance.)  They  bid  him  pray,  pray :
But  he  found  no  Relief  I  told  him  ,  I
knew  no  other  way  than  by  feeking  to
the  Lord,  and  not  to  fpeak  (lightly  of
Prayer.  He  told  me,  I  might  hear  it  be-
fore I  went.  I  had  not  been  long  ,  but
there  was  a  great  Noife  in  the  faid  Room;5!
of  Groaning,  or  rather  Gruntling,  like  a
Hog,  and  then  gave  a  lowd  Shriek-  Here
it  is ,  faith  the  Man.  I  was  much  con-
cerned upon  the  bearing  of  it  $  fo  recall-
ing my  felf,  I  defired  to  go  to  Prayer  in
the  next  Room,  where  the  Man  ufed  to
lie.  By  this  time  many  of  the  Towns-
People  came  in,  and  were  at  Duty.  A-
bout  the  middle  of  Duty  *  the  aforefaid
Noife  came,  as  I  thought,  lowder,  and
juft  by  me  *  however ,  I  then  was  not
concerned.  Afterward,  having  fome  Dit
courfe  with  the  Man  about  a  Month  af-
ter ,  I  heard  from  him ,  that  it  did  no
more  trouble  'him,''  nor  to  his  Death.

He


'Apparitions  and  Witches.  73

He  lived,  as  I  remember,  two  Years  af-
ter. This  is  the  beft  and  trueft  Account
I  can  give.    I  reft,

SIR,

Tour  Qhriftian  Friend
to  command^

Oinf.m^  Charles  HattV.


POSTSCRIPT.

SlR,

I  Spake  to  my  Lady  Rich,  concerning  a
Voice  that  Mr.  Tiro  heard,  acquainting
him  of  hi$  Death.  If  you  remember,  I
told  you  of  him,  and  you  defired  an  Ac-
count of  it.  He  was  a  Nonconformist  Mr-
nifter,  of  Vnger,  in  Effhx:  My  Lady  will
fend  you  the  Account  of  it.  This  Mr.  Tiro
had  an  extraordinary  Love  for  you.

rale,  GH.


CHAP.


74         An  ffiftorkal  Difcourfe  of


CHAP.    III.

MR.  John  Humphreys,  brought  Mr.  May
Hill to  me  5  with  a  Bag  of  Irons  ,
Nails  and  Brafs ,  vomited  by  the  Girl.  I
keep  fome  of  them  to  fhew :  Nails  about
three  or  four  inches  long ,  doubled  crooked
at  the  end j  and  pieces  of  old  Brafs  doubled,
about  an  Inch  broad,  and  two  or  three
Inches  long,  with  crooked  edges :  I  defi-
red  him  to  give  me  the  Cafe  in  Writing,
which  he  hath  done  as  followeth :  Any  one
that  is  incredulous ,  may  now  at  Becking-
ton  receive  Satisfaction  from  him,  and  from
the  Maid  her  felf.

In  the  Town  of  Bectyngton^  by  Froome  itl
Somerfet-Shire ,  liveth  Mary  Hill ,  a  Maid  of
about  Eighteen  years  of  Age,  who  ha-
ving lived  very  much  in  the  Negled  of
her  Duty  to  God ,  was  fome  time  before
Michaelmas  laii  paft  was  Twelve-Month  ,
taken  very  ill ,  and  being  feized  with  vi-
olent Fits ,  began  to  Vomit  up  about  two
hundred  crooked  Pins.  This  fo  Stupendous
an  Accident ,  drew  a  numerous  Concourfe
of  People  to  fee  her :  To  whom  when  in  her
Fits,  foe  did  conftantlyaffirm,that  ftefaw  a-
gainft  the  Wall  of  the  Room  *  Wherein


[Apparitions  and  Witches.         75

flie  lay ,  an  old  Woman  named  Elizabeth
Carrier  ,  who  thereupon  being  Apprehend-
ed by  a  Warrant  from  a  Juftice  of  Peace,
and  Convi&ed  by  the  Oaths  of  two  Per-
fons  ,  was  committed  to  the  County
Goal.

About  a  Fortnight  after  ,  flie  began  to
Vomit  up  Nails,  Pieces  of  Nails,  Pieces  of
Brafs,  Handles  of  Spoons,  and  fo  continu-
ed to  do  for  the  fpace  of  fix  Months  and
upwards :  And  in  her  fits,  flie  faid  there  did
appear  to  her  an  old  Woman,  Named  Mm?*

gery  Coombes  ,  and  One  Ann  More  5  who  alfo

by  ?  Warrant  from  two  Juftices  of  the
Peace ,  were  Apprehended  and  brought  to
the  Seflions  held  at  Brewton  for  the  County,
and  by  the  Bench  committed  to  the  Coun-
ty Goal :  The  former  of  thefe  dyed  as  foon
as  flie  came  into  Prifon ,  the  other  two
were  Tryed  at  Taunton  Alfizes,  by  my  Lord
Chief  Juftice  Holt ,  and  for  want  of  Evi-
dence, were  acquitted  by  the  Jury.  The
Perfons  bound  over  to  give  Evidence,  were

SufannaBelton,  and  Ann  Holland ,  who  Upon
their  Oaths  Depofited ,  that  they  hookt  out
of  the  Navel  of  the  faid  Mary  Hill,  as  flie
lay  in  a  dead  fit,  crooked  Pins,  fmall  Nails,
and  fmall  pieces  of  Brafs ,  which  were  pro-
duced in  Court  before  the  Judge,  and  from
him  handed  to  the  Jury  to  look  upon  them.
Whereupon  Mr.  Francis  Jejjk,  and  Mr. chri-
ftopher  Bnwer  declared ,  that  'they  had  feen

the


j6         An  HifloYtcal  Difcourfe  of

the  faid  Mary  Hill  to  Vomit  up  at  feveral
times  Crooked  Pins ,  Nails,  and  Pieces  of
Brafe,  which  they  alfo  produced  in  open
Court,  and  to  the  end,  they  might  be  at
certakied  it  was  no  Inrpofture,  they  decla-
red, they  had  fearched  her  Mouth  with
their  Fingers  before  flie  did  Vomit.

Upon  which  the  Court  thought  fit  to  call
for  me,  who  am  the  Minifter  of  the  Parifh,
to  teftiffe  the  Knowledge  of  the  matter  ,
which  I  did  to  this  EfFed,  that  I  had  ken
her  at  feveral  times ,  after  having  given
her  alktle  fmall  Beer,  Vomit  up  Crooked
Pins,  Nails,  and  Pieces  of  Brafs.  Tnat
to  prevent  the  Suppoiition  of  a  Cheat,  I
hadcaufed  her  to  be  brought  to  a  Window,
and  having  lookt  into  her  Mouth,  I  fearcht
it  with  my  Finger,  as  I  did  the  Beer  before
ihe  drank  it.  This  I  did,  that  I  might  not
be  wanting  in  Circumftantial  Anfwers,  to
what  my  Lord  and  Court  might  pro-
pofe.

I  well  remember,  a  Gentleman  on  a  Sa-
turday came  to  my  Houfe  ( Incognito  )  to
kaow  of  me  the  truth  of  the  Country  Re-
port about  this  Maid,  haying  feen  fomeof
the  Nails,  &c  (he  had  Vomited  up.  I  told
him  it  was  very  true,  and  if  he  would  ftay
in  Town  till  the  Morning,  he  might
fee  it  himfelf,  for  his  own  Satisfaction.
Which  hs  did ,  and  early  in  the  Morning,
was  called  to  fee  her.  But  becaufe  Beer  was

not


'Apparitions  and  Witches^  77

not  given  her  when  (he  wanted  it,  (he  lay
in  a  very  Deplorable  Condition,  till  paft
two  in  the  Afternoon  5  when  with  much
Difficulty,  /he  brought  up  apieceofBrafi,
which  the  laid  Gentleman  took  away  with
him.  Though  before  the  faid  Piece  of  Brafs
came  up,  he  told  me  hewasfatisfied  of  the
Truth  of  the  thing  ,  becaufe  it  was  impof-
fible  for  any  Mortal  to  Counterfeit  her  mife-
rable  Condition  She  fometimes  lying  in  a
dead  Fit,with  her  Tongue  fwelled  out  of  her
Head,  and  then  reviving,  ihe  would  fall
to  Vomiting ,  but  nothing  came  up  till  a-
bout  two  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon.  Nay,
fo  curious  was  he  to  Anticipate  any  Cheat,
that  he  fearcht  her  Mouth  himfelf  s  give
her  the  Bear ,  held  her  up  in  his  hand,  and
likewife  the  Bafon,into  which  (he  Vomited,
and  continued  with  her  all  this  time,  with-
out eating  and  drinking  ,  which  was  about
eight  hours,  that  he  might  be  an  Eye- Wit-
nefs  of  the  Truth  of  it.  Nay,  further,  he
found  the  Maid  Hying  only  with  a  Brother ,
and  three  poor  Sillers,  all  young  Perfons,
and  very  honert,  and  the  Maid  kept  at  the
Charge  of  the  Fariih,  were  fufficient  Teffi-
monies  they  were  uncapable  of  making  a
Cheat  of  it.  The  Gentleman  I  now  men-
tioned, was,  ( as  I  afterward  learnt )  Efquire

Player  of  Caftle-Cary.

I  have  often  wondred  how  it  was  poffible
for  all  that  Trumpery  to  be  conveyed  into

her


78         rAn  Hiftorical  Dtfcourfe  of

her  Body ,  which  at  Intervals,  fhe  caft  up*
I  therefore  made  all  theObfervationl  could
to  fatisfie  my  felf  and  others.  I  found  that
thole  things  which  fhe  brought  up  in  the
Morning  J  were  conveyed  into  her  Body
by  fome  Diabolical  Power,  when  /fhe  was
in  Bed  at  Night.  What  induced  me  eafily
to  believe  this ,  was,  by  confidering  thefe
following  Circumftances.

i.  That  it  was  only  in  the  Morning,  that
ihe  Vomited  up  Nails,  &c.  and  fcarce  did
any  thing  in  the  Afternoon.

2.  I  found  by  Enquiry,  that  fhe  always
flept  with  her  Mouth  open ,  and  could  not
help  it,  and  when  afleep,  fhe  could  not  be
awaken'd  either  by  calling,  jogging  or
pulling  of  her,  for  fome  confiderable  time  i
though  at  the  fame  time ,  fhe  fetcht  fuch
deep  and  painful  Groans ,  as  if  fhe  were
awaked,  and  fenfible  of  her  fad  Conditi-
on.

3.  For  my  Farther  Satisfa&ion  ,  I  got
fome  at  my  own  Charge  to  fit  up  at  Nights
with  her  ,  and  watch  her  Mouth,  and  to  fee
it  was  kept  clofe  fhut.  Whilft  this  was
3one,the  Vomiting  of  Nails  ceafed,and  that
for  thirteen  Nights  Succeffively  -7  but  when
it  was  neglected,  flie  would  be  fure  to  bring
up  fomething  of  Nails,  or  fome  fuch  ftuft.
I  then  had  her  lodged  at  a  Neighbours
Houfe  3  to  fee  whether  her  Vomiting  of

Nails


'Apparitions  and  WitcheT.  79

Nails  would  totally  ceafe,but  it  did  not.  For
coming  one  day  to  my  Houfe,  to  refrefli  her
felf ,  (he  had  not  bin  there  two  Hours,  be-
fore (he  began  to  be  itl ,  we  immediately
gave  her  iome  Beer ,  and  (he  Vomited  up
a  great  board  Nail.  Some  time  after  this,
flie  threw  up  a  great  piece  of  Brafs,  which
I  faw  followed  with  much  Blood,  and  (he
being  extreamly  weakened  with  driving*
and  falling  into  a  Fit,  I  caufed  a  Wo-
man to  open  her  Mouth ,  who  took  out  as
much  Blood,  as  (he  could  hold  in  the  hol-
low of  her  hand.

After  the  Affizes  afore-mentioned  was
ended,  and  (he  was  turned  home ,  (he  grew
worfe  than  ever,by  Vomiting  of  Nails,Pi£ces
of  GlSfs,  &c.  And  falling  one  day  into  a
Violent  Fit ,  (he  was  fwelled  to  an  extraor-
dinary bignefs,  fomeBeer  being  given  her*
fhe  throws  up  feveral  Pieces  of  Bread  and
Butter,  befmeared  with  aPoyfonous  matter,
which  I  judged  to  be  white  Mercury.  This
fo  much  affrighted  the  Neighbours,  that
they  would  come  no  more  near  her.  So  that
one  day,  (he  being  taken  defperate  ill,  I  was
fent  for  to  pray  with  her  ,  and  Compaffio-
nating  the  Deplorablenefs  of  her  Conditi-
on ,  I  at  laft  refolved  to  take  her  into  my
own  Houfe ,  where  in  fome  (hort  time,  the
Vomiting  ceafed  5  though  for  fome  fpace,
her  Diftorting  Fits  followed  her.  But,  blef-

fed


go         An  Hifiorkal  Difcourfe  bf

fed  be  God,  is  now,  and  has  been  for  a
confiderable  time  laft  paft  in  very  good
health,  and  fit  for  a  Service,;

April  4.  May  Hill  Mmifter  of  Beckington,
1691.  In  the  County  of  Somerfet.


II.  They  that  will  read  Mr.  Incruf*
Mathers Book ,  and  efpecially  his  Sons,
Mr.  Cotton  Mathers  Book  of  the  Witch-
crafts in  New-England ,  may  fee  enough  to
Silence  any  Incredulity  that  pretendeth  to
be  Rational.

Mr.  Emlin  a  Preacher  now  in  DubHnitoli
me  the  Story  of  the  Bewitching  of  two
Gentlewoman  ,  Sifters  to  Mr.  Pacy,  now
a  Pious  Juftice  in  Left  oft  in  Suffolk^.  He
and  his  Sifters  now  Married,  are  all  yet
living :  They  were  ufed  much  like  thofe  in
New- En glandy  mentioned  by  Mr.  Cotton  Ma*
thery~  being  Children  then  about  nine  and
eleven  years  old  :  But  Iunderftand  that  the
Story  is  in  Print ,  and  it  is  alfo  in  M.  5.
from  Judge  Hale  himfelf ,  who  Condemn-
ed the  Witch  ,  (  which  no  Man  was  more
backward  to  do,  without  full  Evidence. )  A
Lady  of  my  Acquaintance,  hath  it  under
his  Hmd*  Therefore  I  forbear  the  par-
ticulars: Only  one  odd  paffage  that  Mr.
Emlin  told  me  I  (hall  recite.  A  Godly
Minilrer  yet  living?  fitting  by  to  fee  one

of


'Apparitions  and  Witches:         8 1

of  the  Girls  in  her  fits ,  fuddenly  felt  a
force  pull  one  of  the  Hooks  from  his
Breeches.*  And  while  he  looked,  with
wonder  what  was  become  of'  it  >  the  Tor-
mented Girl,  Vomited  it  up  out  of  her
Mouth:  Any  that  doubteth  of  this  Story,
may  be  fatisfied  of  Mr.  Facy,  and  both  his
Sifters  yet  living ,  and  may  know  all  the
Evidences  and  Orcumftances  which  I  pafs
over.


char


S  z         rAn  Wftorkal  Difcourfe  of


:


C  H  A  P.    IV.

Inflames  fentme  from  the  tyu^e  of
Lauderdale;  {More  in  other
Letters  #f  his  I  gave  away^  and
fqme  Books  of  Forreign  Wonders
he  fent  me)

SIR,

IT  Is  Fad  that  the  Saddncean,  or  rather  A-
theiftical  denying  of  Spirits ,  or  their
Apparitions  fhould  fo  far  prevail ;  and  fad-
der,  that  the  clear  Teftimonies  of  fo  many
Ancient  and  Modern  Authors  fhould  not
convince  them*  But  why  fbould  I  wonder,
if  thofe  who  believe  not  Mofu  and  the
Prophets,  will  not  believe  though  one
fbould  rife  from  the  Dead  ?  One  great  caufe
of  the  hardening  of  thofe  Infidels,  is,  the  fre-
quent Impoftures  which  the  Romamfls  ob-
trude on  the  World  in  their  Exorcifmsand
pretended  Miracles.  Another  is  the  too
great  Credulity  of  fome  who  make  every
thing  Witchcraft  which  they  do  not  under-
ftand :  And  a  third  may  be  the  Ignorance
of  fome  Jodges  and  Juries,  who  condemn
Silly  Melancholy  People  upon  their  owo
Cohfeffion,  and  perhaps,  (lender  Proofs.

None


'Apparitions  dndWitchesl  8j

None  of  thefe  three  can  be  deny'd,  but  it
is  impertinent  arguing  to  conclude,  that  be-
caufe there  have  been  Cheats  in  the  World,
becaufe  there  are  fome  too  credulous,  and
fome  have  been  put  to  Death  for  Witches,
and  were  not,  therefore  all  Men  are  de-
ceived.   There  is  fo  much  written,  both
at  home  and  abroad,  fo  convincingly,  and  by,
fo  unqueftionable  Authors,  that  I  have  not
the  Vanity  to  add  any  thing,  efpecially  to
you :  But  becaufe  you  have  defired  me  to
tell  you  the  Story  of  the  Nuns  at  Loudutt
and  fome  others,  I  (hall  firft  tell  you  of  a
real  PofTefflon  near  the  place  I  was  born  in  5
next  of  difquietings  by  Spirits  (both  which
I  had  from  unqueftionable  Teftimonies)  and
then  I  ihall  tell  you  what  I  faw  at  Loudnn7
concerning  that  which  I  do  not  doubt  to
call  a  Pretended  Pofleifion,  fure  I  am  a
Cheat.    About  30  Years  ago,  when  I  was
a  Boy  at  School,  there  was  a  poor  Woman
generally  believed  to  be  really  pofleiled.
She  lived  near  the  Town  of  Duns  in  the
Mers ;  and  Mr.  John  Weems  then  Minifter  of
Buns  (a  Man  known  by  his  Works  to  be  a
Learned  Man,  and  I  knew  him  to  be  a
Godly Honeft  Man)  was  perfwaded  fhe  was
poffeifcU  I  have  heard  him  many  times
fpeak  with  my  Father  about  it,  and  both  of
them  concluded  it  a  real  Poffeffion.    Mr.
Weems  vifited  her  often,  and  being  convinced
of  the  truth  of  the  thing,  he,  with  fome
G  %  Neigh*


84         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

Neighbour  Minifiers,  applied  themfelves  to
the  King's  Privy  Council  for  a  Warrant  to
keep  Days  of  Humiliation  for  her.  But  the
Biihops  being  then  in  Power  (would  not  al-
low any  Fafts  to  be  kept.  I  will  not  trouble
you  with  many  Circumftances,  one  I  iliall  on-
ly tell  you,  which  I  think  will  evince  a  real
Pofleffion.  The  Report  being  fpread  in  the
Countrey,  a  Knight  of  the  Name  of  Forbes,
who  lived  in  the  North  of  Scotland,  being
come  to  Edenborough,  meeting  there  with  a
Minifter  of  the  North  ^md  both  of  them  de-
iirous  to  fee  the  Woman,the  Northern  Mini-
fter invited  the  Knight  to  my  Father's  Houfe
(which  was  within  Ten  or  Twelve  Miles  of
the  Woman)  whither  they  came,  and  next
Morning  went  to  fee  the  Woman.  They
Found  her  a  poor  Ignorant  Creature,  and
feeing  nothing  extraordinary,  the  Minifler
fays  in  Latin  to  the  Knight,  Nondum  audi-
*vimm  Spiritum  loquentem^  prefently  a  Voice

comes  out  of  the  Womans  Mouth,  Andis

loquemen?^  aitdis  loquentem  :  This  put  the  Mi-
nifter into  fome  amazement  ( which  I  think
made  him  not  mind  his  own  Latin)  he  took
off  his  Hat,  and  (aid,  b%iferj6*tur  Bern  pec-
catoris:  the  Voice  prefently  out  of  the
VVomans  Mouth  (aid,  Dk  peccatrkis^  die  pec-
catrkis ;  whereupon  both  of  them  came  out
of  the  Houfe  fully  fatisfied  ,  took  Horfe
immediately  and  returned  to  my  Father  s
Houfe   at  Thrrlefiane  Caftle  in  Lauderdale,

where


Apparitions  and  Witches.  8  %

where  they  related  this  paffige.    This  I  do
exa&ly  remember.    Many  more  Particulars
might  be  got  in  that  Countrey,  but  this
Latin  Criticifm  in  a  moft  Illiterate  Igno-
rant Woman ,  where  there  was  no  pre-
tence to  difpoffeffing,  is  Evidence  enough,  I
think-
Within  thefe  50  or  40  Years  there  was
an  unqueftionable  Poffeffion  in  the  United
Provinces,  a  Wench  that  fpoke  all  Lan-
guages, of  which  I  have  heard  many  Parti-
culars when  I  lived   in  the  Low-Countries,
but  that  being  Forreign  I  will  not  infift  on  it.
:    As  to  Houfes  difquieted  with  Noifes,  I
fliall  tell  you  one  that  happened  fince  I  was
a  Married  Man*  and  hint  at  more,  which
if  you  pleafe,  I  can  get  you  authentically  at-
tefted.

Within  four  Miles  of  Edenborough,  there
lived  an  Aged  Godly  Minifter,  one  that
was  efteemed  a  Puritan  5  his  Son  now
Minifter  of  the  fame  place,  and  then  or-
dained his  Affiftant.  Their  Houfe  was  ex-
traordinarily troubled  with  noifes,  which
they,  and  their  Family ,  and  many  Neigh-
bours (who  for  divers  Weeks  ufed  to  go
watch  with  them)  did  ordinarily  hear.  Ie
troubled  them  moft  on  the  Saturday  Night,
and  the  Night  before  their  weekly  Ledure-
day.  Sometimes  they  would  hear  all  the
Locks  of  the  Houfe,  on  Doors  and  Chefts
to  fly  open-,  yea,  their  Cloaths  which  were
G  3  an


6%         r$n  Hifiorkal  Difirourfe  of

at  Night  lock'd  up  into  Trunks  and  Chefls,
they  found  in  the  Morning  all  hanging  a~
bout  the  Walls.  Once  they  found  their
bed  Linnen  taken  out,  the  Table  covered
with  it,  Napkins,  as  if  they  had  been  ufed,
yea  and  Liquor  in  their  Cups,as  if  Company
had  been  there  at  Meat.  The  rumbling
was  extraordinary :  The  good  old  Man  com-
monly called  his  Family  to  Prayer  when  it
was  moft  troublefome  5  and  immediately  it
was  converted  into  gentle  knocking,  like
the  modeft  knock  of  a  Finger  :  But  as  foon
as  Prayer  was  done,  they  fhould  hear  ex*
ceflive  knocking,  as  if  a  Beam  had  been
heaved  by  ftrengthof  many  Men  againft  the
Floor.  Never  was  there  Voice  nor  Appa-
rition »  but  one  thing  was  remarkable  ;
(You  rnuft  know,  that  it  is  ordinary  in  Scot-
land to  have  a  half  Cannon  Bullet  in  the
Chimney-corner,  on  which  they  break  their
great  Coals.)  A  merry  Maid  in  the  Houfe,
being  accuftoraed  to  the  Rumblings,  and  fo
her  Fear  gone,  told  her  fellow  Maid- Ser-
vant, That  if  the  Deil  troubled  them  that
Night,  (he  would  brain  him  ;  fo  Ihe  took
the  Half-Cannon  Bullet  into  Bed :  The*
Noife  did  not  fail  to  awake  her,  nor  did
file  fail  in  her  defign,  but  took  up  the  great :
Bullet,  and  with  a  rhreatning,  threw  it  as
ihe  thought,  on  the  Floor ,but  the  Bullet  was
pever  morefeen;  the  Minifter  turned  her  a<
way  for  meddling  and  calking  to  it.  All  thefe.

Particulars


'Apparitions  and  Wfichesl  87

Particulars  I  have  had  from  the  Mouth  of
the  Minifter  now  living,  he  is  an  Honeft
Man  ,  of  good  Natural  Parts ,  well  bred
both  in  Learning  arid  by  Travel  into  For-
reign  Parts  in  his  Youth.  I  was  not  in  the
Countrey  my  felf  daring  the  time,  but  I
have  it  from  many  other  Witness,  and  my
Father's  Steward  lived  then  in  a  Houfe  of
mine  within  a  Mile  of  rhe  place,  and  feat
his  Servants  conftantly  thither ;  his  Son  now
ferves  me,  who  knows  it.

I  could  tell  you  an  ancienter  Story  before
my  tigie,  in  the  Houfe  of  one  Burnet,  in  the
North  of  Scotland  >  where  ftrange  things
were  feen,  which  I  can  get  fufficiemiy  at-
tefted.  Alfo  in  the  Southweft  Border  of
Scotland,  in  Annandak  there  is  a  Houfe  cal-
led Powdim,  belonging  to  a  Gentleman  cal-
led Johnfton,  that  Houfe  hath  been  haunted
thefe  50  or  60  Years.  At  my  coming  to
Worcefier  165 1  I  fpoke  with  the  Gentleman
(being  my  felf  quartered  within  two  Miles
of  the  Houfe)  he  told  me  many  extraordina-
ry Relations  confifiing  in  his  own  Know-
ledge :  And  I  carried  him  to  my  Mailer,
to  whom  he  made  the  fame  Relations:
Noifes  and  Apparitions,  Drums  and  Trum-
pets heard  before  the  laft  War;  yea,  he
(aid,  {omeEngliJh  Soldiers  quartering  in  his
Houfe,  were  foundly  beaten  by  that  then
irrefiftible  Inhabitant :  (This  laft  I  wonderM
at,  for  I  rather  expe&ed  he  ihould  have
G  4  beeq


SS         An  Hiftovkal  Dtfcourfe  of

been  a  Remonftrator,  and  oppofed  the  Re-
finance : )  And  within  this  Fortnight  Mr.
James  Sharp  was  with  me  (him  you  know*
and  he  is  now  at  London)  he  tells  me,  that
Spirit  now  (peaks,  and  appears  frequently
in  the  fhape  of  a  Naked  Arm  5  But  other
Difcourfe  took  me  off  from  further  inqui-
ry. Thefe  things  I  tell  you  in  obedience  to
your  defire,  but  as  I  faid  before,  I  defire
them  not  to  be  Printed.  Atheifts  are  not
to  be  convinced  by  Stories:  Their  own
Sences  will  no  more  convert  them  than
Sence  will  convert  a  Papift  from  Tranfub-
fiantiation;  and  Scottifh  Stories  would  make
the  difaffe&ed  jeer  Scotland^  which  is  the
objed  of  Scorn  enough  already.

When  I  was  in  JDorfetftire  Prifoner,  one
Mr.  Jo.  Hodder,  Minifter  of  Hauke-Church
in  that  County,  told  me  of  ftrange  Appari-
tions, and  unqueftionable  Evidences  of  the
a&ingsof  Spirits  in  a  Houfe,  yea,  a  Religi-
ous Houfe  of  that  Country,  of  which  he  was
himfelf  an  Ear  and  Eye  Witnefs.

In  Dorchefter  alfo,  the  Son  of  Reverend
Mr.  Jo.  White  (who  was  Afleffor  to  the  Af-
fembly  at  Weftminfiet)  told  me  many  Parti-
culars of  that  Houfe  in  Lambeth  where  his
Father  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Aflembly,
which  then  was  unquefiionably  haunted
with  Spirits.  I  do  wrell  remember,  I  dined
with  old  Mr.  White  then  one  day,  and  at
Dinner  he  told  us  much  of  it,  and  that  that
i  Morning


"Apparitions  and  Witches.  gp

Morning  the  Spirit  called  up  the  Maid  to  lay
the  Beef  to  the  Fire.  Of  the  tvvolaft  you  may
be  fatisfied  when  you  pleafe  $  and  at  this  pre-
sent, I  am  told,  there  is  a  Houfe  at  Folie-
John-Park  not'  three  miles  from  the  place
haunted  with  Spirits.

But  I  muft  leave  room  for  my  Loudun
Nuns,  and  not  write  a  Book  5  In  the  Year
1637,  being  at  Paris  in  the  Spring,  the  City
was  fo  full  of  the  pofleffion'  of  a  whole
Cloyfter  of  Nuns,  and  fome  Laick  Wenches
at  Loudun^  Books  Printed,  and  flrange  Sto-
ries told,  that  few  doubted  it  5- and  /,  who
was  perfwaded  fuel)  2^ thing  might  be,  and
that  it  was  not  impoffible  the  Devil  could
poflefs  a  Nun  as  well  as  anorher,  doubted
it  as  little  as  any  body.  So  coming  into  that
Country,  I  went  a  days  Journey  out  of  my
way  to  fatisfie  my  Curiofity.  Into  the
Cbappel  I  came  in  the  Morning  of  a  Holy
Day*  "and  with  as  little  prejudice  as  any
could  have,  for  I  believed  verily  to  have
feen  fome  ftrange  fights  3  but  when  I  had
feen  Exorcifing  enough  of  three  or  four  of
them  in  the  Chappei,  and  could  hear  no-
thing but  wanton  Wenches  finging  baudy
Songs  in  French,  I  begun  to  fufpect  a  Four  be,
and  in  great  Gravity  went  to  a  Jefuite,  and
told  him,  I  had  come  a  great  way  in  hope
to  fee  fome  flrange  thing,  and  was  forry  to
be  difappointed.  He  commended  my  Ho-
ly Cpriofity,.and  after  he  had  thought  a

while,


90  An  Hiflorkal  Difcourfe  of

while,  he  defired  me  to  go  to  the  CaftJe^
and  from  thence,  at  fuch  am.  Hour,  to  the
Parifh  Church,  and  I  fhould  be  fatisfied-  I
wonder'd  at  his  Correfpondence,  yet  grave-
ly went  where  he  directed  me,  In  the
Caftle  I  faw  little,  but  in  the  Pariili  Church
I  faw  a  great  many  people  gazing,  and  a
Wench  pretty  well  taught  to  play  Tricks,
yet  nothing  fo  much  as  I  have  feen  twenty
Tumblers  and  Rope-cancers  do.  Back  I
came  to  the  NunsChappel,  where  I  faw
the  J  e frits  ftill  hard  at  work  at  feveral  Al-
tars, and  one  poor  Capuchin,  who  was  an
Obje<5fc  of  Pity,  for  he  was  pofleffed  in-
deed with  a  Melancholy  Fancy,  that  De-
vils were  running  about  his  Plead,  and  con-
ilantly  was  applying  Relicks.  I  faw  the
Mother  Superior  exorcifed.  and  faw  that
Hand  on  which  they  would  have  made  us
believe,  The  names  L  H*  S.  MARl  A,
J  OS  E  PHy  were  written  by  Miracles  5
<but  it  was  apparent  to  me  it  was  done
with  Aqua  Forth)  then  my  Patience  was
quite  fpenc,  and  I  went  to  z'Jefmt  and  told
him  my  Mind  freely.  He  dill  maintained
a  real  Poffellion,  and  I  defired  for  a  tryal
10  fpeak  a  ftrange  Language:  He  asked
what  Language  ?  i  told  him  I  would  not
■.sell*  but  neither  he  nor  all  thofe  Devils
'iliouid  underftand  me.  He  asked  if  I  would
be  converted  upon  the  Tryal,  (for  I  had
:difcovered  I  was  no  PapifU  I  told  him  that

was


apparitions  and  Witches.  g  i

was  riot  the  Queftion,  nor  could  all  the  De-
vils in  Hell  pervert  me  5  but  the  Queftion
was,  If  that  was  a  real  Pofleffion,  and  if
arty  could  underftand  me  I  (hall  confefs  it
under  my  Hand  :  His  anfwer  was,  Thefe
Devils  have  not  travelled  \  and  this  I  re-
plyed  to  with  a  loud  Laughter,  Nor  could
I  get  any  more  Satisfa&ion.  Only  in  the
Town  I  heard  enough  that  it  was  a  Cheat
invented  to  burn  a  Curate  (his  name,  as  I
take  it,  was  Cupf)  and  the  Man  had  been
really  burnt  to  Allies,  as  a  Witch,  but  the
People  laid  it  was  for  his  Converfion  from
them.  At  my  coming  to  Sanmur  next  day,
my  Country-man ,  Dr.  Duncan,  Principal
of  the  Colledge  at  Saumur,  told  me  how
he  had  made  a  clearer  Difcovery  of  the
Cheat  in  prefence  of  the  Bifhop  of  Vomers,
and  of  all  the  Country,  how  he  had  held
faft  one  of  the  pretended  poflefled  Nuns
Arms  in  fpite  of  all  she  Power  of  their
Exorcifms,  and  challenged  all  the  Devils  in
Hell  to  take  it  out  of  his  Hand-  This,  with
many  more  Circumftances,  he  told  me,  and
he  printed  them  to  the  World  3  but  this  is
already  too  tedious.  One^ore  Journey  I
made  to  fee  Poflefled  Women  exor-
cifed  near  Antwerp,  ^nno  1649.  but  faw
only  fome  great  Holland  Wenches  hear  Ex-
orcifm  patiently ,  and  belch  mod  abomi-
nably. So  if  thofe  were  Devils,  they  were
windy  Devils  5  but  I  thought  they  were

only


£  2  An  Hifiorkal  Difcourfe  of

only  pofleffed  with  a  Mornings  Draught  of
too  new  Beer.  Some  of  the  Loudun  Nuns,
after  great  Refiftance  and  Sqaeeking ,  did
on  great  importunity  adore  their  Hoft,  and
the  Jefrites  did  delire  us  to  fee  the  power  of
Church,  where,  all  I  wondered  at,  was  his
Blafphemy,in  faying  to  the  pretended  Devil,
Troflratum  adorabis  creator  em  tunm  quern  digitis
teneo.  But  my  Paper,  as  well  as  my  Di-
fcretion  calls  for  an  End'  Your  Defire  and
my  Obedience  is  all  I  can  plead  for  your
receiving  fo  long  a  Rabble  from,

Sir j

Tour  mofi  faithful  Friend

and  Servant,

SStS  Lauderdaile.


CHAP.


apparitions  and  Witches.         93

tip-**'--.

CHAP.    V.

More  Examples.

I,  \  Lexander  BenediUm  ,  lib.  7.  PraB*
JLJL  cap.  25.  recited  bySkenkjus,  Lib.j.
Obf.33.  faith,  that  he  faw  two  Women,
Neighbours  and  Companions,  bewitched,
that  were  both  taken  with  Vomiting  the
fame  Day  *•  One  vomited  a  Head-Bodkin,
crooked  like  a  Hook,  and  a  deal  of  Wo-
man's Hair,  and  Parings  of  Nails,  and  died
the  next  Night.  The  other  vomited  much
Woman's  Hair,  and  pieces  of  Nitre,  and
three  Lumps  of  Dog's  Hair  dried,  the  quan-
tity of  a  Dog's  TaiJ.

II.  Benivenim^  cap.  8.  faith,  he  faw  and
had  in  Cure  a  Woman  tormented  with  a
fwolen  Belly,  tolled  up  and  down,  who  he
thought  had  been  hyfierical.  But  at  laft
{he  vomited  long,  crooked  Nails,  and  brafs
Needles,  and  Wax,  and  Lumps  of  Hair,
and  bigger  Lumps  of  Meat  than  any  one
can  fwallow ;  and  ihe  dored,  and  prophe-
fied5  and  did  other  things  above  natural
Power.

III.  Langiui)Lib.i.  Epift.38.  nameth  W~
rictts  Neufeffbr9  a  Husbandman,  who  was

tor-


94         An  HifloYical  Difcourfe  of

tormented  in  one  of  his  Sides,  and  at  laft
felt  a  Nail  of  Iron  under  the  whole  Skin,
which  the  Chirurgeon  cut  out,  but  his  Pain
ftill  increafed,  (o  that  in  Impatience  he  cut
his  Throat ;  and  died.  He  nameth  the
Perfons  who  were  prefent  when  he  was
opened,  and  they  found  in  his  Stomach  j
long,  round  piece  of  Wood,  and  four  Knives
of  Steel,  partly  (harp,  and  partly  toothed
like  Saws,  and  two  fharp  pieces  of  Iron,
every  one  above  a  Span  long,  and  a  Ball  of
Hair.

IV.  Cornelius  Gemma \  of  Lovain,  De  Na-
tur.  CharaEh.  Div.  lib.  2.  cap.  4.  hath  a  long
and  marvellous  Story  of  a  Girl  of  Fifteen
Years  old,  called  Catherine  Gkalter,  fufpe<3>
ed  to  be  bewitched  5  who  fell  ill,  Jan.  1571,
and  after  divers  Months  Pain,  and  Fevers
and  Qmvulfions  like  the  Hyfterical,  and
three  or  four  Men  could  hardly  hold  her.
He  and  Bernard  a  Phyfician  were  fent  for  in
-dugnfi :  She  avoided  a  living  Eel  by  Stool ;
it  lay  as  dQ^d  in  the  Excrements  at  firft,
but  put  into  Water,  revived :  When  it  was
dead,  and  kid  up  to  keep,  it  vaniihed  away.
Then  the  Maid  began  to  vomit  watery  Hu-
mour, (which  he  faw,)  like  Urine:  For
fourteen  Days  fhe  vomited  the  quantity  of
four  and  twenty  Pound  in  a  Day  5  which
he  faw  himfelf,  and  handled  5  and  yet  (he
had  never  die  lefs  paflage  of  Urine,  and  (he

had


■Jpparitiom  and  Witches1.  ^

had  no  Swelling,  and  drunk  fcarce  one  Cup
of  Beer  or  Wine.  Afterward  (he  vomited
abundance  of  Hair,  fome  longer,  and  fome
fhort,  like  Dog's  Hair,  and  this  with  great
difficulty  and  pain.  Strong  Jadations,  Con-
vulsions, and  beating  her  felf  continued  dai-
ly many  Hours  s.  fometimes  laughing,  fome-
times  weeping,  as^  Hyfierical :  Then  fhe
vomited  great  flocks  of  Hair,  with  filthy
Matter,  fuch  as  is  in  Ulcers,  and  fome-
times like  the  Dung  of  Doves  and  Geefe,
and  in  them  pieces  of  Wood,  and  thofe  like
new  Chips  lately  cut  off  an  old  Tree,  and
abundance  of  Skin*  like  Parchment-Sha-
vings :  And  afterwards ,  two  or  three
Pounds  a  D&y,  like  Ink  and  Coals  toge-
ther, with  long,  white,  hard  Hair  miVd,
For  a  Week  together :  Afterwards  fhort
black  and  red  Hair,  and  a  virulent  Humour
like  Dirt.  In  September  (he  vomited  Mem-
branes, like  pieces  of  her  Stomach,  of  a
fle(hy  thick  Coat,  with  the  marks  of  Veins,
afterwards  thin  black  ones ;  and  after  thar?
various  Membranes  of  two  hands  breadth,,
like  a  Viper's  Sloughy  (in  the  defcription  of
which,  he  is  too  large  for  me  to  repeat,  as
in  various  fliapes  and  figures.^  After  this,
foe  vomited  innumerable  Stones,  fome  like
Walnuts,  like  pieces  broken  out  of  old
Walls,  with  fome  of  the  Lime  on  them  i
In  his  prefence  fhe  vomited  one  as  big  as
two  Chefnuts ,  which  firfl:  fluck  in  her

Throat


p6  'An  liiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

Throat,  and  fwelPd  a  quarter  of  an  Hour,
fo  that  (he  feemed  dead,  without  Breath
andPulfe;  and  after  that,  a  piece  of  Wood
of  the  length  and  thicknefs  of  his  Finger,
and  Hair ;  after  that  (he  vomited  a  triangu-
lar Bone,  whole  without,  and  hollow  with-
in *  arid  after  that,  many  Joint- Bones ;  and
laft  of  all,  Hair,  with  pieces  of  Glafs  and
Brafs.  Recited  by  Mar.  Don.  Hifi.  Mir.
Lib.  2.  Cap.  i.  zxidSkenkim^Lih.'j.  Obf.48.
That  foe  was  cured  by  the  Priefts'  Means,
doth  not  render  the  Story  incredible,  though
there  be  many  Deceits.

More  fuch  you  may  read  in  Skenkins,  and
of  two  Whelps  vomited  up,  ibid,  obf  42,
41, 40, 43.  And  Sideliw  by  Scholtzjus  fent
him  the  Narrative  of  a  Girl  of  Eleven  Years
old,  that  vomited  Chefnuts,  lumps  of  Hair,
and  of  raw  Flelh,  and  a  Hen's  Bone  of  the
Leg,  after  long,  terrible  Fits  5  between
which,  fhe  played,  and  was  well :  And  by
publick  and  private  Prayer  was  cured.

VI.  Wolphius  wrote  to  Shenkius,  that  near
Zurickjht  Devil  vexed  a  melancholy  Wo-
man, and  (ollicited  her  to  drown  her  felf :
She  went  and  fate  long  on  the  Flood-gate
of  a  Pond;  at  laft,  by  his  importunity,  fhe
yielded,  faying,  [If  itmuft  be  fo,  on  God's
Name  let  it  befof\  and  caft  her  felf  into  the
Water,  where  (he  lay  three  Hours  on  her

Back>


dpparithns  and  Witches.         91

Back,  and  could  not  fink  5  and  being  found,
and  brought  home,  her  Body  was  as  light  as
Straw,  and  (he  recovered  her  Health-

VII.  Sebaftian  Br and 'J. C.wrote to &kenkiusr

the  Narrative  of  one,  that  after  horrid  Tor-
ments, vomited  in  one  Year  four  hundred
Earthen  Chamber-pots  full  of  Bloody  be-
fides  vjhn  went  by  Stool,  and  fifty  times
let  blood  that  Year  5  lb  that  jhe  loft  a  thou-
fand  Pounds  of  Blood,  as  this  Man  (a  Coun-
cillor of  State)  profefled  he  knew  by  true
Report,  and  his  own  Eye-fight.  And  the
Blood  burfl:  through  the  Skin,  and  with  it
fhe  vomited  a  thoufand  and  two  hundred
Worms,  fome  as  long  as  ones  Finger,  and
fome  longer.

I  have  elfewhere  cited  out  of  Tzmtluisy
the  Narrative  of  fuch  as  had  the  like  fym-
ptoms  as  fome  of  thefe,  and  fpoke  Latin,
Greek  and  Hebrew  ,  which  they  never
learnt.

VIII.  llon^Fabrnipts  Hildanus,  1. 1.  Ohfl

43.  p.  202.  tells  us  of  a  young  Man  that  none
of  the  Phyficiaas  could  cure,  or  find  out  his
Difeafe  5  and  his  Parents  going-co  a  Conjurer,
he  gave  him  a  Vomit,  which  brought  up  Pins,
Nails,  Points  of  Knives,  and  many  other  pie-
ces of  Iron,  which  H/7^»/whimfelf  faw  with
Admiratioo3and  the  young  Man  prefeatly  re-
covered :  (Jnpagpqttodamprope  Urbtm  Mecim.)
H  1      1a  >


9§  An  tliftorkal  Difcourfe  of

IX.  Fcelix  Flat  ems,  an  excellent  pious
Proteftant-  Do&or  at  Bafil,  in  bis  Obferva-
tJOOS^  lib.  * .  p.  20.  faith,  \_A  certain  Exorcifi
Prieft,  1 56o.got  wealth  by  exorcifmg,by  con-
juring the  Pojfejfedy  in  a  City  of  Helvetia  ;  in-
to whofe  Hottfe  coming  on  fome  Bufinefs,  I  was
de fired  by  a  Parent^  that  was  his  Country-man,
to  turn  him  from  this  ungodly  praUice  ?  And  e-
ven  then  one  was  brought  in,  a  robufi  Man,
with  torn  Hofe,  who  they  faid  was  poflefled
of  a  Devil,  and  carried  on  their  Shoulders  5
they  caft  him  down  on  the  Pavement  of  the
Chamber,  who  profrrate  on  the  Ground,
his  Feet  drawn  together,  his  Hands  con-
torted, and,  which  is  Orangey  his  Neck
turned  abdut,  fo  that  his  Face  look'd  to  his
back,  he  lay  dumb  and  deaf  like  a  Block.
They  told  me  that  he  had  remained  in  this
pcfiure  and  form,  without  Meat,  Drink,  or
any  Excretion  many  Days*  I  being  ftruck
with  this  terribly ,  wrent  my  ways.  But
this  {atlne  Exorcifi  (Prieft)  that  fame  Year
was  brought  to  me,  to  Bafil,  to  be  cured,
having  a  pain  in  his  Hip ,  that  he  could  not
walk ,  and  he  lodged  with  us-  But  when
many  things  were  ufed  in  Vain ,  at  laft  he
confeft  to  me ,  that  this  befell  him  by  the
Devil :  Whom  when  he  by  his  Exorcifms,
would  have  caft  out  of  one  poffeft  ,  the
Devil  then,  as  he  had  done  oft  before  ,
threatned  him  ia  thefe  words,  in  the  Ger-

manf


Apparitions  and  Witches.         9$

man  Tongue  |[  Pfajf  ich  will  dir  noch  den  thou
geben  dafe  du  mich  alfes  verit  eifl.  2  And  at
once ,  thruft  him  fo  violently  up  to  the
Chimney ,  that  his  Hip  hurt,  hath  been  in
this  Cafe  everfince.

It  would  be  tedious  to  cite  Learned  Cre-
dible Phyfitians ,  that  have  written  with
full  Evidence,  Demoniacal  effects  on  their
Patients.

X.  The  Cafe  elfe  where  mentioned,
which  convinced  Hoilerins,  an  extraordina-
ry Phyfitian,  who  before,  derided  it  as  Me-
lancholy ,  is  undeniable:  Of  a  Girl,  that
while  People  looked  on ,  would  by  fom-
what  invifible,  be  iuddenly  bound  to  a
Poft  or  Bed-iiead  ,  or  her  Hands  tyed  to-
gether with  Cords,  Hemp,  or  Horfe-hair:
Which  Holkrm  feeing,  and  that  the  band
couldnot  be  untyed  ,  but  muft  be  cut ,  he
confefled  it  was  by  an  invifible  or  fuperna-
tural  Power.  One  can  fcarce  name  a  Man  un~
likelier  to  be  deceived,  than  Holkrm.

XI.  The  Hiftories  that  Pet.  Forefim  giv-
eth  us ,  of  his  own  Patients  and  Know-
ledge ,  having  mentioned  elfewhere,  I  here
forbear  to  recite,  and  many  others  mentio-
ned in  the  fecond  part  of  my  Saints  Reft.

XII.  ScribomtiSj  a  Learned  Pious  Mar-
ptrg  Do&or  of  Phyfick,  faith  in  PhyfioL

H  %  Sagarttm9


i  oo         An  Hifiorical  Difcotirfe  of

Sagarum,p.  53,  &c.  One  of  the  Witches
burnt  at  Lemgovia,  confefled,  that  (he  made
Lame  one  of  the  Citizens ,  (  whom  I  will
not  name,  being  well  known. )  And  ano-
ther, with  her  own  Mouth  witnefled,  thas
(he  killed  the  Confuls  firft  Wife,  by  put-
ting Poyfonous  things  under  the  Door,  on
which  (he  fell  Sick  the  next  day,  and  dyed.

I  will  add  (  faith  Scribonim  )  an  Exam-
ple which  I  faw  myfelf,  and  obferved.
For  we  muft  believefthat  which  Experi-
ence by  Example  (heweth  us.  In  this  pre-
fent  year  15%.  in  the  Summer,  a  Witch
was  apprehended  at  Wattecia  ,  who  is  in  a
Town  of  the  Illuftrious  Princefs  Barbara,
Councefs  of  Waldecia ,  &c.  to  a  Servant
Maid  to  one  of  her  Neighbours,  for  whom
(he  was  to  prepare  a  Coat  ( or  Gown  )  in
one  of  the  doubles  of  it ,  fowed  a  certain
Root,  which  caafed  as  foon  as  (he  put  it  on,
that  in  her  Loins,  which  the  extremities  of
the  Coat  touched,foe  was  prefently  the  (ame
hour  greatly  troubled,  and  ftraightway  tor-
mented grievoufly  in  all  her  Body.  And  a
few  days  after,  (he  Vomited  Bones  like  the
great  Teeth  of  a  Horfe,  and  fmall  Cockle-
ihells.1  faw  all  theBones,!  faw  aCockle-fhelJ,
and  with  my  Knife  I  cot  them,  and  I  brake
themjfo  that  I  (hall  never  be  made  believe,
that  this  was  any  Deception  of  the  fight.

Another  Teftimony  I  will  add,  which  by
a  Credible  Man3  was  feat  me.  Anno  1575.

Nov*


Apparitions  andWitches.  10 1

Afctf.14.  from  the  Town  of  Hallenftedm  the
Dutchy  of  Brwfwick,  Stephen  Ralen  accufed
of  Witchcraft,  by  two  of  his  Kindred ,
freely,  and  without  Bonds  confefled,  that
from  his  firft  Wife  that  was  burnt  with
other  Witches  in  the  City  of  Ratelburg ,
he  learned  the  Art  of  killing  Men  by  Poy-
fon  5  And  that  after  being  Angry  with  his
fecond  Wife,  for  the  Sufpition  of  Adulte-
ry in  her  Child-Bed ,  he  had  given  her
thofe  Poyfons.  And  that  by  the  help  of
his  firft  Wife  ,  be  had  given  one  Rhetobbs
Poyfon,  which  killed  him  in  eight  days,
having  fallen  out  with  him  in  his  Drinking
Frolicks.  And  another  he  killed  with  a
Poyfon  drawn  from  three  named  Aaimals :
And  he  freely  confefled,  that  to  another  ,
he^  laid  the  faid  Poyfon  under  the  Door ,
and  as  he  went  out  over  them  ,  he  prefent-
ly  had  a  pain  in  his  right  Arm  ,  and  after
in  the  reft  of  his  Body,  with  which,  he
was  grievoufly  Tortured,  And  he  after
told  them ,  that  once  his  Hat  falling,  and
loft  in  the  Water,  being  angry  with  God
Almighty ,  and  Renouncing  him  ( like  our
Bammee  Tories )  he  gave  himfelf  to  the  De-
vil,  and  called  him  to  him,  to  come  to
him  -■>  and  faid,  I'll  be  thine,  and  commit
my  felf  to  thee:  Come  to  me  Satan,  who
prefently  came.  He  was  burnt,  November
the  20th.

H  3  XIII


102       An  Hiflorical  Difcourfe  of

XIII.  The  Concubitm  of  rhe  Devils  with

Witches  ( Males  and  Females)  hath  fo  full
Teftimonies,  as  is  not  to  be  denied.  St.  -du~
ftin  faith,  DeCivit.  Dei,  lib.  15.  cap.  23.  &
Sup. Gen.  lib.  i.  q.%.  It  is  a  moft  common
Report,  and  many  whofe  Credit  is  not  to
be  doubted  of,  fay  and  confirm,  that  by  their
own,  or  other  fuch,  they  have  heard  it,  that
Sylvani  and  IE  ami  have  been  naught  with
Women.  And  that  many  Devils  which
the  French  call  Duciu  do  daily  attempt  this
Uncleannefs,  and  effe&  it,  is  reported  by
fo  many,  that  'tis  Impudence  to  deny  it.
Yea,  fome  Women,  counted  honeft,  defend
the  pra&ice.  Near  Witeberg,  a  Merchant's
Wife,  that  pafs'd  for  an  honeft  Woman,
was  ufed  to  admit  one  peculiar  Concubine:
And  once,  her  Husband  being  from  home,
her  Lover  came^  to  her  in  the  Night ;  and
having  pleafed  his  Luft,  in  the  Morning  he
arofe,  and  fate  on  the  top  of  the  Door,  in
the  ihapeof  aMagpye,  and  faid  to  her  this
Farewell  3  Hitherto  this  hath  been  thy  Sweet-
heart,  and  vaniilied  with  the  Words.]  Sen-
bon.pag-79.

I  rather  think  that  this  was  a  Man- Witch,
than  a  Devil.

The  Story  of  Magdakna  Crucia  (cited
elfewhere  by  me,  and  by  Dr.  H.  More)  was,
faith  Bodin,  famous  through  the  World,  ci-
ted by  many  3  who  being  fufpe&ed,  tofave

her


apparitions  and  Witches.        i  03

her  Life,  went  to  the  Pope  himfelf  (/Will.)
asa  Penitent,  and  confefled  her  Sin,  that  at
Twelve  Years  old  the  Devil  iollicked  her,
and  lay  with  her,  and  that  he  had  layen  with
her  thirty  Years ;  yet  ihe  was  made  the  Ab-
befs  of  a  Monaftery,  and  counted  a  Saint*
And  fbe  confefled  that  the  Devil,  among
all  the  People,  brought  ChrifFs  Body  (the
Wafer)  to  her  Mouth,  none  feeing  what
carried  it ;  whereby  (he  was  taken  for  a
Saint,  as  done  by  fbme  good  Spirit,

And  faith  Scribonius;  St.  Bernards  Hiflo-

ry  teftifieth,  that  there  was  a  Witch,  with
whom  the  Devil  oft  was  naught,  and  her
Husband  never  perceived  it.

And,  faith  he,  many  Witches  in  thefe
Countries  have  of  late  Years  confefled  the
fame.

And,  ibid.  Bodin  faith  of  Men,  [One  Be-
net>  a  Witch  at  Berne,  a  Prieft  of  Eighty
Years  old,  faid,  that  for  Forty  Years  he
had  been  unclean  with  the  Devil  in  the
fhape  of  a  Woman,  and  that  unfeen  fhc
was  his  Companion,  and  named  her  Her-
mione  5  and  fo  he  was  burnt.

And  another  Prieft  of  Seventy  Years  old
confefled,  that  he  had  ufed  Venery  with
the  Devil  in  the  (hape  of  a  Woman  Fifty
Years,  and  fo  he  was  burnt.

And,  Anno  1573-   Novemb.  14.    in  our

Neighbourhood,  the  Dutchy  of  Bmnfmc^

Stephen  Men  (before-mentioned)  confefled,

H  4  that


i  c4         An  Hifiorkal  Difcourfe  of

that  be  haci  for  Seven  Years  been  unclean
with  the  Devil,  whom  he  took  for  his  Mifc5

named  Rdlfirnchfe.  • .     -

XIV.  Abundance  of  credible  Hiftories
tell  us  of  Men  and  Women  ftruck  and  hurt
by  the  Devil,  faith  Scribonms^  pagt  82, 83.
I  will  add  one  Example :  At  Marpurg^
(where  he  dwelt,)  Anno\6q%.  a  young  Ru-
#ick  that  had  a  Devil,  was  by  the  Council
of  Divines  brought  into  the  Temple  at  the
time  of  publick  Prayers,  that  they  might
try  whether  they  could  caft  out  the  Devil
And  when  Prayers  were  ended,  and  he  was
brought  again  into  the  Hofpital,  (their  Bed-
lam,) a  certain  Citizen,  well  known  to  me,
{landing  alone  by  his  own  Chimney-fire*
and  feeing  the  Demoniack  Man  pafs  by  in
the  Streer,  by  the  noife  of  the  company;
he  eanreftly  prayed  to  God  for  him  :  In  the
very  Moment  of  his  praying,  by  feme  invifi-
ble  Genius,  he  had  ftddenly  fuch  a  Stroke  on
his  Neck,  as  caft  him  down  on  his  Face,  on
the  Ground  \  I  think,  becaufe  that  malignant
Spirit  would  not  that  Men  fhould  pray  for
him  that  he  had  poffefs'd.  He  profefs'd  that
he  did  feniibiy  perceive  fcrnething  like  the
Hand  of  a  ftrong  Man  ftrike  him,  his  Face
being  toward  the  Fire.  The  Man  revealed
It  to  me  the  fame  Day.,  but  fecredy,  left  it
fhould  caft  his  Wife  or  Children  into  a
Bright  Q    SmbonW)  -ibid,  pag  83 .

:      -  -  ; .  -.  xv:


Afflaritions  and  Witches.         1 05

XV.  The  raifing  of  Storms  by  Witches
is  attefled  by  fo  many,  that  I  think  it  need-
lefs  to  recite  them.  Varacelfm  faith,  That
Devils  can  do  it  by  meer  Natural  Caufes  j
and  faith,  that  if  much  Aluminom  Matter
and  Salt  Peter  (not  throughly  prepared)  be
mixt,  they  will  fend  up  a  Cloud  of  Smoak,
even  to  the  middle  Region  of  the  Air,
which  will  come  down  as  Rain  in  Drops.

XVI.  Erafmus  and  others  tell  us  of  a
Witch  at  a  Town  near  them,  (or  rather,
as  Devil,  that  appeared  and  threatned  to
burn  their  Houfes,  and  on  the  top  of  a
Chimney,  holding  a  Pot  of  Afhes,  Matte-
red them  abroad,  and  prefencly  the  Town
was  burnt.

XVII.  The  felling  of  Winds  in  the
Northern  Seas  towards  Lapland  and  Ifeland,
is  fo  commonly  afierted  by  Mariners  and
Hiflorians,  that  I  fhall  omit  particular  In-
fiances;  OUus  Magtius,  and  others,  will  tell
the  Reader  of  that,  and  more,  in  thofe  cold
parts.

XVIII.  What  fhall  we  fay  to  the  many
certain  Hiftories  of  the  frefh  bleeding  of
Murdered  Bodies,  when  the  Murderer  is
brought  to  it,  or  at  leaft,  when  he  toucheth
it  5  whether  it  be  by  the  Soul  of  the  Dead*

or


i  06       rAn  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

or  by  a  good  Spirit  that  hateth  Murther,  0?
by  the  Devil  appointed  for  Revenge  \  it
feems  plainly  to  be  by  an  inviiible  Spirit's
Operation.  I  have  heard  perfons  fo  Credi-
ble give  Inftances  of  it,  feen  by  themfelyes,
that  (though  it  he  not  a  conftaat  Event)  it
is  furely  Credible.

The  aforefaid  Scribomm  ubi  fupra,  p.  123.
&c.  faith,  [This  is  done  fo  manifeftly,  and
in  To  many  places,  that  to  deny  it  is  but  o-
pen  Lies.]  And  he  anfwers  them  that  re-
fer it  to  other  Caufes  only ;  and  faith,  [  I'll
teftifie  what  I  have  feen,  when  James  ab  A-
quaria,  Patricius  of  Aries  was  dead  3  Va-
lerioU  ,  a  Phyfician  of  great  Experience  ,
citing  fome  Verfes  of  Lucretius ,  of  mad
Love  faith,  In  this  Verfe  Lucretius  thinks
that  the  Blood  of  a  Man  affected  and  wound-
ed by  a  Beam  from  the  Eyes,  doth  pafs  into
wounded,  as  the  Blood  of  one  (lain  by  a-
a  Man's  Sword,  falleth  into  him  that  falleth.
But  faith  Scriboniasy  I  had  rather  Vdenola
had  faid,  It  is  done  by  the  Secret  Judgment
of  God.

XIX.  ScriboMHs,p.u6..  Fortheftrangenefs
of  the  thing  (faith  he)  I  will  bring  but  one
Example :  In  the  County  ofLippta  21V f tenia,
a  Woman  that  had  killed  her  Child,  caft  it
into  the  next  River  Secretly ;  the  Child  after
3  weeks  was  found  there  by  2  Maids,  and
by  the  Command  of  the  Magiftrates  it  was

put


apparitions  and  Witches.        i 07

put  into  the  Lap  or  Bofom  of  the  Mother,
being  inPrifon,  to  try  whether  the  Carkafs
would  fweat  Blood:  Hereupon  the  dead
Infant  prefendy  opened  the  left  Eye,  and
weeping  much,  look'd  on  the  Mother ;  and
that  Eye  being  (hut,  Blood  flowed  out  of  it :
This  Example  is  certainly  a  ftupendous
fign  of  God's  Judgment :  It  was  feen  of  ve-
ry many  mod  Grave  Men,  and  is  not  doubt-
ed of  by  the  Inhabitants  of  that  place.

XX.  A  Godly  Minifter,  Mr.  Famworth,
that  came  hither  from  New  England  (being
a  Nonconformist,  and  extream  poor,  dyed,
as  all  about  him  faid,  of  meer  Poverty,  for
want  of  warm  Cloaths,  Fire,  and  Food,
when  the  Ad  of  Uniformity  had  begger'd
many  into  extream  neceflity)  he  teftify'd,
that  in  America,  hearing  of  a  Sacrifice  to
the  Devil  that  the  Savages  ufed  to  keep,
by  offering  a  Man  to  him,  he  went  to  fee
them  perform  it  5  and  he  foGnd  a  great
number  about  a  dry  Pit,  and  they  brought
an  old  Man  bound,  and  by  many  ugly  Cere-
monies devoted  him :  And  he  faw  the  Man
carried  up  into  the  Air,  and  quickly  thrown
down  again  dead  among  them.

XXL  Lfidov.  rives  de  Vtrit.  fidei,  lib.  I,
faith ,  That  in  America ,  it  is  a  common
thing  to  fee  Spirits  appear  to  Men  in  various
Shapes  day  and  night.

So


i  o8        An  Hiftorical  Difcouvfe  of
So  OIohs  Magnus  faith  of  the  Ifelanderi.

XXII.   I  know  none  that  hath  written

better  de  Angelis  &  de  Potemia  D&mo-
num,  than  Zcmchy^  who,  Tom,  3 .  e.  4  de  Pot.
Bem.  iaith,  [  He  wonders  that  any  fhould
deny,  that  there  are  fuch  Spirits  as  are  cal-
led Hags  or  Fairies*  as  exercife  Familiarity
with  Men,  and  without  hurting  them,  come
to  them,  and  trouble  them,  as  playing  with
them.  I  could  (faith  he)  bring  many  Ex-
amples of  perfons  yet  living,  that  have  had
Experience  of  them  on  themfelves ;  But
hence  it  appeared],  that  there  are  fii<:h  Spi-
rits in  the  Air,  and  that  when  God  permits
them,  they  ufe  their  Power  on  us,  for  fport
or  hurt,]    Read  him  there  further.

XXIII.  I  have  elfewhere  cited  the  moft
Credible  Mtlamkthon^  faying  he  had  feen
fome,  and  that  many  perfons  of  his  Ac-
quaintance, had  feen  and  talk'd  with  them  5;
anci  that  the  Devil  appeared  to  his  own
Aunt  in  the  likenefs  of  her  dead  Husband,
with  a  Francifcan  Fryar,  and  told  her,  (be
muft  hire  fome  Mafles  to  be  faid  for  him  5
and  took  her  by  the  Hand,  faying,  he
would  not  hurt  hers  but  it  fo  burnt  her
Hand,  that  it  remained  black  ever  after.

See  Fermlius  de  abditis  rerum  Caufis^  lib.  2.
c*  16.  of  many  things  that  he  faw  himfelf,
that  are  convincing.

XXIV.  Dr,


'Apparitions  and  Witches,         ioj?

XXIV.    Dr.  Henricm  ah  Heer,  Obferv.  vliu
A  little  Girl  in  the  ninth  year  of  her  Age,
for  Beauty,  Education ,  or  Birth  inferior
to  none  where  flie  lived  ,  having  innocent-
ly put  into  her  Mouth  a  Sorrel  Leaf,  which
was  given  her  by  a  Witch  that  begged  as
the  Door,  to  whom  flie  had  firft  given  a
piece  of  Bread,  and  then  fome  Beer,  it  was
fcarce  fwallowed  by  her  ,  when  fhe  began
to  be  Tortured  in  her  Bowels,  to  Tremble
all  over ,  and  then  to  be  convulft,  and  in
fine,  to  fwoon  away ,  and  fall  as  one  dead»
The  Do&or  and  Do&xefs  being  called  (  for
at  Vnechty  where  this  thing  happen'd  in
May,  1625.  it  is  Cuftomary  for  both  Sexes
to  pra&ife  Pbyfick  )  though  they  for  many
days  Experimented  the  Remedies  ufual  in
this  cafe,  the  Child  found  no  Relfef,  but
was  ftili  Affli&ed  with  very  frequent  and
moft  terrible  paroxyfms.    Whereupon,  as
the  Cuftom  of  the  Country  is ,  they  Con-
fult  the  Exorcifts.  The  Prieft  appointed
for  that  work,  a  Capuchin  had  fcarce  laid
his  hand  on  the  Ritual ,  when  the  Child
was  Transformed  by  the  Demon  into  fuch
Shapes ,  as  a  Man  that  hath  not  beheld  it
with  his  Eyes  3  will  hardly  be  brought  to
imagine.    It  began  firft  to  rowl  it  felf  a-
bout,  and  next  to  Vomit  Horfe-dung,  Nee-
dles   Pins ,  Hairs ,  Feathers ,  Bottoms  of
Thread,  Pieces  of  glafs  Windows,  Nails

drawn


II  o       An  Hiflorical  Difcourfe  of

drawn  out  of  Cart  or  Coach  Wheels ,  an
Iron  Knife  above  a  Span  long  r  Egg  and
Fifli  Shells.  In  th£  mean  while,  her  Parents
and  thofe  of  the  Neighbourhood ,  obferve
that  whenever  the  Witch  came  near  the
Houfe ,  or  fo  much  as  turned  her  Eye  to-
wards it  ,  even  at  the  Diftance  of  two  hun-
dred paces ,  the  poor  Child  was  in  much
greater  Torment  than  before,  infomuch,
that  (he  could  by  no  means  be  eafed  of  her
Fit ,  or  (hew  one  fign  of  Life ,  until  (he
was  at  a  very  great  Diftance  from  her.  This
Witch  was  foon  after  apprehended,and  con-
feft  both  this,  and  infinite  other  the  like
Feats,  for  which  (he  was  Strangled  and
Burnt.  Being  defired  by  a  Father  Jefuit,  who
Affifted  her  in  her  laft  Agony,  and  at  that
Moment,  on  which  depends  Eternity,  when
the  Executioner  had  now  fitted  the  Rope
to  her  Neck,  that  (he  would  diilblve  the
the  Spell ,  and  eafe  the  Child  ,  (he  faid  ,
it  was  not  in  her  Power?  Becaufe  the  Em-
ber Weeks  were  part ,  fince  (he  had  Be-
withtced  her  5  adding ,  that  (hould  (he  un-
do the  Villanies  (he  had  perpetrated  ,  the
Child  would  not  fo  quickly  recover :  For
the  two<other  Witches,  whom  (he  named,
had  alfo  given  her  their  Mortal  Infections ,
from  the  EffeSs  whereof,  (he  could  not
without  Difficulty,  and  much  time,  be  de-
livered- The  Mother  then,  as  in  a  Defpe-
rate  cafe  ,  brought  her  Daughter  to  me  a-

bout


"Apparitions  and  Witches.        I 1 1

bout  the  middle  of  September ,  and  I  had
her  with  roe  for  fomejveeks.    What  I  then
fiw,  heard  and  handled,  becaufe  I  know
manyPhyfitians,  thofe  efpecially  that  are
Averfe  to  the  Roman  Perfwafion,will  hard-
ly believe  it  upon  my  Narrative,  fo  may
God  help  me ,  as  I  (hall  moft  truly  Relate
what  I  faw.    The  day  after  this  Unfortu-
nate Child  came  into  my  Houfe ,  I  took
care  to  fend  for  Modefim  a  Capuchin,  who
(till  lives  at  Liege :  While  he  was  yet  fifty
paces  from   my  Chamber,  the  Girl  fell
down,  as  one  deprived  of  Life;  I  took  her
for  Dead  :  For  (he  had  not  fo  much  as  the
leaft  Breath.  Her  Fingers  and  Toes,  which
if  I  had  not  feen  it  my  felf,  I  could  not
have  believ'd  it,  were  fo  Writhen  and
Convulft  ,  that  the  Exterior  or  third  joint
ftuck  (o  hard  '  unto  the  fecond,  a  thing
which  is  fcarce   poifible  Naturally ,  that
they  might  feem  to  have  been  fattened  to-
gether with  the  ftiffeft  Glue.    I  endeavour-
ed tothruft  a  Golden  Bodkin  betwixt  them  7
and  after  an  Iron  Nail,  a  wooden  Spindle  3
&c.  but  all  in  Vain.    The  Mother  feeing
the  Childs  fall ,  for  (he  would  never  go  one
fiep  from  her ,  faid  the  Capuchines  were
coming.    She  had  no  fooner  faid  this;  but
they  knocked  at  the  Door :  When  they
were  come  in ,  and  had  lighted  the  Confe-
crated  Taper ,  and  the  Exorcift  had  put  en
his  Habit ,  as  foon  as  ever  he  had  read  the

firft


i  1 2        An  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

firft  words  of  the  Exorcifm  taken  out  of
the  Gofpels ,  the  Girl  which  hitherto  had
lain  more  immoveable  than  ariy  dead  Corps,
fell  a  (haking  all  over ,  her  Fingers  and
Toes  continuing  as  they  were,  with  that
Violence  ,  that  (he  could  not  be  held  ftill
by  fix  of  us,  by  no  means  we  could  Ufe.
Myfelf,  who  with  all  my  Strength,  effayed
to  hold  her  Head,  obferved  it  both  by  my
fight  and  feeling,  to  be  Writhen,  as  by  an*
Opifthotonick  Convulfion,  together  with
her  Neck  towards  her  Shoulders-  In  the
mean  time,  her  Belly  wasraifed  up  to  a
prodigious  bignefs,  and  was  nearer  her
Throat,  than  her  Thighs ,  and  that  with
fo  great  a  Noife ,  and  grumbling  of  hep
Bowels,  that  all  prefent  could  hear  it  at
above  ten  paces  diftance.  The  found  was
the  nearefi  to  that  which  is  caufed  by  Terap-
eftuous  waves  under  the  prow  of  a  Ship.
All  this  while,  the  Child  Vomited  feve-
ral  of  the  above  mentioned  things.  I  beg-
ged the  Exorcift,  out  of  Compaffion  to  her,
to  forbear  his  Reading:  Hehadfcarce  pro-
nounced the  laft  Syllable ,  when  in  an  in-
ftant,  (he  lay  as  quiet  as  poffible.  And  af-
ter he  had  quitted  the  Houfe  ,  and  was  ac
a  confiderable  Diftance  off ,  (he  undid  her
Fingers  and  Toes ,  and  opened  her  Eyes  >
and  ftraighcway  flood  up.  And  when  (he
had  wept  a  little,  and  chid  her  Mother
for  fending  for  the  Capuchines,  though  ,

ihe


Apparitions  and  Witches.        i  i  3

flie  never  faw  them,  nor  as  fte  hid?  heard
them ,  (he  prefently  began  to  eat,  drink,
and  play    with  her  equals ,  juft  as  if  no-
thing ail  d  her,  until,  upon  the  Capuchines
returning  to  do  his  Office ,  fhe  was  as  for-
merly.   I  faw  her  this  while  caft  up  Fea-
thers, Bundles  of  Straw,  above  the  bignefs
of  my  Thumb ,  with  Pins    ftuck  acrote
the  Straws,  Points  wove  of  Thread  of  fe-
veral  Colours,  and  a  Row  of  Pins  fiuxk
in  a  blew  Paper  ,  as  frefh  and  new,  as  any
are  fold  on  the  Pedlars  Stall :  In  fine,  every
thing  as  the   Innocent  Child  Affirmed*
which  fhe  had  feen  in  the  Witches  basket,
when  (he  beged,  which  favours  plainly  of
Devilifm  ,  and  which  all  the  Philofophers
in  the  World,  are  not  able  to  folve.  For
by  what  Operation,  could  every  thing  (he
had  feen  in  the  basket ,  be  Conveyed  in
the  fame  kind  and  tale ,  into  the  Bowels
of  the  Child,  except  the  Devil  hirnfelf  was
aflifting*  But  when  I  faw  allftiehad  caft
ap,  was  perfe&ly  dry,  and  without  the
leaft  wet ,  I  told  the  Capuchines,  and  fe-
deral Philofophers  prefent  (  for  I  had  cal-
led many  out  of  a  defire  of  being  the  bet-
ter informed )  that  furely  our  Eyes  were
inchanted :  For  that  thefe  things  could  nof
pofliblycome  out  of  her  Body,  For  how
could  it  be  ,  that  the  pricking  of  fo  many
Pins ,  flhould  bring  up  no   Blood  ?  How
could  a  ijbarp  knife  come  up  the  narrow
I  Jkm


>i4  ^  Hijhrical  Difcourfe  of

Throat  of  a  young  Child,  Without  cutting
the  paffage  ?  I  added,  that  it  was  my Opi-
nion ,  that  thofe  things  muft  be  conveyed
privately  feme  how,  from  fome  other  place,
and  then  by  the  Malicious  Demon ,  that
took  pleafore  to  deceive  us,  dropt  from  the
Childs  Lips  5  into  our  Hands ,  and  that  I
was  brought  to  mind  of  a  Verfe  in  Ovid,
which  I  never  underftood ,  but  now  lefs
than  ever  :  It  is  this.

jbevovet  abfentes  fimulacraq^  cerea  fingit,  .
Et  miferumtenues  in  jectir  fir  get  acus.

Curfes  the  abfent,then  forms  waxen  fhapes
Runs  into  th'   Liver  needles.

The  words  are  fpoken  of  Medea  a  Witch.
But  the  Child  her  felf  being  immixt  with
us  in  our  Debates,  and  of  a  Capacity  above
her  years,  foon  refolved  this  Difficulty  for
me.  Doubt  not,  faidflie  ,  but  that  thefe
things  come  out  of  me ,  and  w7ith  that  (he,
caught  my  Hand,  and  put  it  to  her  Throat.

Feel*  Sir,  faidflie ,  a  Pin  without  a  Head
a  coming  up ,  and  which  will  come  out
prefently.  I  felt,  and  immediately  when  *
I  thought  verily  I  held  it  faft  betwixt  the !
fingers  of  my  left  Hand  within  her  Throat,
I  perceived  it  to  be  fore  t  Violently  from
me,  and  prefently  feeing  the  Child  a  bow-
ing to  fpit,  I  received  it  in  my  right  Hand  ;
md  1  have  flawed  it  fince  to  feyeral  iacre-

dus


[Apparitions  and  Witchesl  x 1  $

dulous  Perfons ,  andftill  keep  it  by  me,  to
ihew  to  the  Curious,  with  Points,  Feathers^
Thread ,  Straw,  and  other  like  Materials.
In  like  manner,  I  have  frequently  at  other
s  times,  felt£,the  ends  of  Points,  while  they
were  yet  in  the  very  Orifice  of  her  Sto-
mach ,  and  while  they  were  coming  up;  and
ready  to  come  out  of  her  Mouth,  all  who
were  Curious  to  make  Experiments,  ima-
gined they  could  hold  the  end  of  the  point
in  the  middle  of  her  Throat  3  but  the  craf-
ty Demon,Defeated  all  their  Attempts.  Af-
ter flie  had  been  exorcifed  at  Liege  for  fome
weeks  to  no  purpofe  ,  her  Mother  had  a
great  defire  to  carry  her  to  Jm%  to  a  Chap-
pel  newly  Built  and  Confecrated  to  the  Ho-
nour of  the  Blefled  Virgin  ,  and  believed
by  the  vulgar ,  to  be  very  Famous  for  Mi-
racles.   While  her   Mother  and  Friends
which  Accompanied  her  ,  employed  their
time  at  the  ufual  Solemnities  there,daily  con-
feffing,  and  receiving  the  Blefled  Sacrament  2
bat  with  no  effe&jthey  bring  theChild  back
to  my  Houfe  ,  not  one  jot  the  better,  but
the  worfeby  a \  Hydrophobia ,  or  as  I  would
I  rather  call  it ,  a  Stygrophobia,  or  fearfulnefk
|  of  moid  things,  fo  called ,  very  fad  and
Difconfolate,  and  Defpairing  of  her  Life,
yea,  praying  for  her  Death.  She  came  back
to  me,  about  the  midft  of  Autumn^  refufing
not  only  Wine,  Beer,  Mead,  and  all  Wa-
ter \  butalfo  boil'd  Meat,  and  Bread  fteepi
I  %  m


i  1 6      An  Hifiovical  Difccurfe  of

in  Broth  or  Wine ,  and  at  laft,  411  White
and  Wheaten  Bread  :  I  believe,  becaufethe
one  was  made  with  Milk ,  and  the  other
with  Water,  as  is  ufual  with  us.  For  which
Reafon,  for  forty  days  time,  fhe  lived  on
nothing  but  Apples,  Raifins,  Nuts,  Al-
monds ,  and  other  Fruits  proper  to  the  Sea-
fon ,  yet  for  all  this,  the  rofie  blu(h  in  her
Cheeks  was  not  Diminifhed ,  nor  the  Mil-
ky fnow  of  her  Forehead.  At  laft  for  fif-
teen Days  and  Nights  together ,  fhe  took
neither  Meat  n6r  Drink.  How  flie  could
pafs  fo  many  Days  without  either  Meat  or
jDrink :  I  confefs  my  felf  ignorant ;  but
that  fo  it  was ,  I  do  avow ,  and  all  my  Fa-
mily are  ready  with  me ,  moft  Solemnly
to  Depofe  upon  Oath.  On  the  fixteenth
day,  when  (he  had  of  her  own  accord,  askt
for  fome  Drink ,  and  taken  it ,  fhe  no  lon-
ger refufed  Food.  I  thought  it  then  feafo-
nable  to  have  Recourfe  to  Natural  Means,
not  Omitting  Divine  Exorcifms,  and  I  pre-
pared the  Deco6tion.  Ex  fttga  Damonum  of
Southern  Wood,  Mugworty  Vtrvene,  &c.  and
after  I  had  ufed  her  a  while  to  that  Drink,
I  fent  her  Home.  In  the  interim,  tumbling
over  all  the  Books,  I  could  find  at  laft  I
light  on  Bartholomew  Carrkhters,  Secrets  ,
who  in  the  twelfth  Chapter  of  his  fecond
Book  5  Defcribes  a  Certain  Medicine,  pro-
per to  this  Malady.  Finding  this  mightily
Recommended  in  Horftitu  his  Medicinal

.  *  Epiftks,


Apparitions  and  Witches.        nj

Epiftles,£j>i#.  i.  Sett.  vij.  in  He&or  Schlmds
Letter  to  Gregory  Horjlws,  dated  in  the  year
161%,  I  Write  both  to  him,  and  to  the
Francfo?d  Apothecary ,  in  vvhofe  Shops  he
faith  it  is  fold,  promising  any  Pvate  for  the
unguent  and  prefcription.  But  receiving  no
Advice  frbm  them,andbeing  Day  and  Night
Sollicitous  for  the  Childs  Recovery,  I  topk
Carricbter  again  into  my  Hand,  and  having
much  ado  to  underftand  him,  by  reafon  of
a  miftake  of  the  Printers ,  who  had  Printed
in  one  word ,  Holtz.  bktter  beer,  which  fhould
have  been  in  three  f  I  at  laft ,  almoft  a
Twelve- Month  after,  for  want  of  neceflary
Materials,  caufed  the  following  Unguent
to  be  made :  Take  of  Dogs  Greafe  well
Diflblved  and  Cleanfed,  four  Ounces  $  of
Bears  Greafe,  eight  Ounces 5  of  Capons
Greafe ,  four  and  twenty  Ounces  j  three
Trunks  of  Mifletoe  of  the  Hafle  while
Green ,  cut  it  into  pieces ,  and  pound  it
fmall ;  till  they  become  moift  5  bruife  to-
gether the  Wood ,  Leavesand  Berries,  mix
all  in  a  Vial ,  after  you  have  expofed  it  to
the  Sun,  for  nine  Weeks,  you  fhall  extraft
a  green  Balfam ,  wherewith,  if  youanpinc
the  Bodies  of  the  Bewitcht ,  efpecially  the
parts  moft  affe&ed,  and  the  Joints  i  they
will  certainly  be  Cured,  as  hath  been  pro-
ved by  this  Child ,  who  hath  been  now
three  years  perfectly  well ,  only  on  the
days  of  the  Ember-weeks  ,  do  what  Ihe

I  3  can*


1 1 8        rJn  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

can ,  ihe  is  feized  with  a  certain  Tranfien£
Melancholy.  And  this  is  the  Reafon  why
I  have  ingenuofly  Communicated  to  the
World  in  the  Latin  Tongue,  the  above-
mentioned  prefcription,concealed  by  others*
!  and  publifhed  in  Dutch,  by  Carfichter  faul-
tily.

XXV.  Mer.  Cafaubon  in  Credulity  and
Incredulity  in  things  Natural,

It  cannot  be  deny'd,  becaufe  I  fee  Learn-
ed Phyficians  are  of  that  Opinion,  and  vi-
sible Effects  do  evince  it,  but  that  the  De-
vil doth  immifcere  fe  in  feveral  Difeafes  3
whereof  Sir  Theod.  Mayem  (whom  I  think,
for  ftrangeand  even  miraculous  Cures,  I
may  call  the  <u&fculapm  of  his  time  3  and
to  do  nobody  wrong,  he  gave  me  a  notable
Inftance  concerning  a  Maid  in  his  Houfe,
that  had  been  bitten  by  a  Mad  Dog,  which
alfo  dy'd  of  it  3  to  whom,  when  he  came
in  a  Morning  with  a  Looking-Glafs  ( to
make  a  Tryal  of  what  he  had  read,  but
not  yet  experienced  himfelf )  under  his
Gown,  before  he  was  in  the  Room,  /he  be-
gan to  cry  out,  and  told  him  what  it  was  he
had  about  him.

XXV  I.  Ternelius  de  Abdit.  rerum  caufii,
lag.  65.  faith,  I  faw  one  that  by  certain
words  would  make  Shapes  (Spe&res)  appear
In  a  Looking-Glafs,  which,  whatever  he

com-


[Apparitions  and  Witches]         H§

commanded  them ,  would  prefently  by
Writing  or  by  true  Images  fo  clearly  expreis,
that  all  might  be  quickly  and  eafily  under-
ftood  by  thofe  that  fat  by.  .  They  heard  a
few  Sacred  words,  but  filthily  contamina-
ted by  obfcure  names,  fuch  as  the  power  of
the  Elements,  the  horrid  and  unheard  of
names  of  certain  Princes  of  the  Eafi  9
Weft,  &c.

And  P.  124, 12  5.  he  tells  you  how  many
ways,  by  Chara&ers,Spells,Ceremonies  they
work  ( too  long  to  recite  )  and  tells  you
how  the  Bewitched  are  Diftorted,Torment-
ed,  fpeak  unlearnt  Languages,  tell  the  by-
ftanders  their  Secrets,  &c:  and  faith,  [A  hw
Years  ago,  a  young  Man,  a  Knights  Son,  la-
bour'd  of  a  Concuffion  and  a  Convulfion  of
his  Body  by  Fits,which  did  ibexagitate  fome-
time  the  Left- Arm,  fometime  the  Right  j
fometimes  one  Finger,  fometimes  one  L^g,
fometimes  the  other,  fometimes  both  5
fometimes  the  whole  Trunk  of  his  Body
that  four  Servant-men  could  fcarcely  hold
him,  but  his  Head  remained  unthaken,  his
Tongue  and  Speech  free,  his  Mind  found*,
and  all  his  Senfes  entire,  even  in  the  fierce-
nefs  of  his  Convulfions:  He  was  taken  at
lead  ten  times  a  Day,  found  in  die  inter-
vals, but  broken  with  Labour.  Had  he  not
had  his  Underftanding  and  Senfes  found,  it
would  have  been  taken  for  an  EpilepJie.
The  molt  skilful  Phyficians  judged  it  a  Con-

I  4  yulfion


i2o       An  Hiftffiical  Difcourfe  of

vulfion  kin  to  an  Epilepfie,  from  a  maiig:
nant  venemousVapor  impadi  in  the  Marrow
of  the  Back,  &c.  They  ufed  all  Reme-
dies— but  we  were  all  miftaken  in  Igno-
rance of  the  true  Caufe ;  for  in  the  third
Month  a  Demon  was  found  to  be  the  Au-
thor of  all,  (hewing  himfelf  by  Voice  and
unufual  Words  and  Sentences,  Latine  and
Greek,  though  he  was  ignorant  of  the  Greek
Tongue.  He  detected  many  of  the  Secrets
of  the  by-fitters,  and  efpecially  of  thePhy-
ficians,  deriding  them,  that  he  had  by  great
Peril  cheated  them,  and  that  by  their  vain
Medicines  they  had  almoft  killed  the  Man.
If  his  Father  (a  Knight  of  the  Order  of  St*
Michael,  that  wore  that  Image  in  a  Gold
Chain)  was  coming  to  fee  him,  he  would
far  off,  bid  them*  Let  him  not  in,  or  take
off  his  Chain.  If  Divine  and  Sacred  words
were  read,  he  would  tofs  him  and  ihake  him
nioft  fiercely.]  See  the  reft.

And  Pag.  127.  £1  faw  one  that  would
#bp  Blood  flowing  from  any  part  of  the
Eody,  by  touching  the  part,  and  muttering
a  few  words]  So  far  the  great  Femelm:
He  next  nameth  many  Difeafes  that  they
kk  Spells  to  Qure.

XX VI I.  The  greateft  Pbyfidan  of
England  to  divers  Kings  (and  the  chief  that
I  have  my  felf  ufed,  and  knew  him  to  be
an  Honeft  Credible  Man. )    Sir  Theodore

Mayerne}


"Apparitions  and  Witches.        \  %  i

Meyerne,  confirmeth  the  thing  in  queftion,
but  goeth  the  true  middle  way  between  Ig-
norant Credulity  and  Incredulity,  in  his  late
Eubliftied  Praxis,  Pag.  57.  in  a  Letter  to
)r.Caftle,  abput  one  feeming  poflefi'd,
feyin&  C  That  Melancholy  is  the  Seat,  the

*  Bath,and  the  Kingdom  of  the  Devil,I  well
c  know  5  and  that  that  Prince  of  Darfcnefs
c  lurking  under  the  thick  Cloudinefsof  that

*  black  Humour,  immixeth  himfelf  in  di-
c  vers  Difeafes,  and  that  he  exciteth  cruel
1  Troubles  (or  Storms)  in  divers  Subje&s,
<  /  HAVE  BT  MANIFOLD  EXPERT
'  ENCE  FOVND  5   but  I  am  not  of  fo

*  facile  a  Mind,  as  to  be  (truck  at  the  meet-

*  ing  of  every  Phantafm,  though  portentous  %
c  nor  is  my  Reafon  like  Wax  to  receive

*  every  Impreflion.    By  two

\  fig,nS    •  °i?  kn°rW  Dem0[li-        *  m  night

acks.  *  If  aperlon  untaught,    l&vtn&tidmm.
c  and    without    Philofophy ,
c  fpeak  in  divers  and  ftrange  Tongues,  and

*  nervoufly  and  folidly  difpute  of  Sciences
c  and  Arts  never  ftudied  :  And  if  a  weighey
■  Body  rapt  up  on  high,  hang

*  long  in  the  Air,  *  and  fall  *  Wmb  k
c  not  with  their  weight.  Black  %*?"*  °f  mw
'  Choler  in  the  Spleen,  Brain,    Wltches'

\  Womb,  may  move  a  thoufand  Symptoms,
6  which  by  the  Ignorant,  pafs  for  Miracles.]
There  liveth  in  this  City ,  an  Iriflh-man,
who  with  unmoved  Lips  maketh  a  long  G-

ration.


s  2  2.       jfo  Hiftmcal  Difcourfe  of

ration*  and  deceiveth  thofe  near  him,  as  i*
onefpoketo  them  far  of.]

I  my  felf  difcovered  a  notable  Cheat  in
a  Servant  in  my  own  Houfe  ,  and  many
fiich  are  dete&ed,  by  which  the  Ignorant,
Undifceraing  and  Incredulous,  are  drawn
to  disbelieve  thofe  that  are  moft  fully  pro-
ved. Read  of  Cheats,  De  Loier,  a  French-
man

XXVI I I.  The  Learned  and  Judicious

Cerh.  Fojfius  faith,  de  Samuele  in  Beverovicii

Epifi.  Pdg,  203.  [I  know  there  were  many
fabulous  ftories,  and  of  Fraud,  &c  but  by
Men  both  Learned,  and  Quick-fighted,  and
Crave,  and  Honeft,  in  many  Ages  paft,  there
are  reported,  and  at  this  Day  remembred
and  told  innumerable  Inftances,  in  which  it
is  not  poflible  but  that  with  the  endeavour
of  man  there  concurred ,  the  Ulufion  or
Force  of  the  Devil,  a  malignant  Spirit  Ap-
plying that  which  was  beyond  the  power
of  Man.

XXIX.  Lavater  deSpeBris^  is  a  Book  fo
common  and  well  known,  (by  him  a  Learn-
ed Godly  Proteftaor  Divines)  that  I  will
fuppofe  the  Learned  Reader  to  have  read  it?
and  will  not  recite  what  is  therein.

XXX.  Pious  and  Peaceable  Bifliop  J  of.  Haft
liuth,  Soliloq.  15.  P.  £3,  54.  [Sataq's  Preva-

lency


Jfpparkions  and  Witches.  "123

iency  in  this  Age  is  moft  clear  in  the  mar-
velous number  of  Witches  abounding  in  all
places.  Now  hundreds  are  dif-
covered  in  one  Shire  5  *  and  if  *  £##
Fame. deceive  us  not,  in  a  Vil-  and  £//**•
lage  of  14  Houfes  in  the  North,  are  found
fo  many  of  this  Damned  brood.  Hereto-
fore only  barbarous  deierts  had  them,  but
now  the  Civileft  and  Religious  Parts  are
frequently  peftered  with  them :  Heretofore
fome  filly  ignorant  old  Women,  &c.  now
we  have  known  thofe  of  both  Sexes>  who
profeffed  much  Knowledge,  Holinefs  and
Devotion  drawn  into  this  damnable  Pra&ice.

XXXI.  I  have  elfewhere  cited  divers
Paflages  to  this  ufe  out  of  Holy  Cyprian ;
but  that  in  the  Epiftle  of  Finmliamu  to  Cy-
prian, Ep.  75.  Pag.  238.  feemeth  ftrange
(like  that  of  Magdakna  Crucia  and  others  a-
ijiong  the  Papifts.)  A  Woman  pretending
to  have  the  Holy  Ghoft,  proved  a  Witch,
and  did5 many  Wonders :  She  had  a  Gift  of
Prayer,  and  did  Baptize,  and  Adminifter
the  Lords  Supper  in  the  ordinary  way,  &c.

XXXII.  This  is  fo  like  to  the  well  known
Cafe  of  Mrs.  HutMnfon,  and  Mrs.  Dyer  in
New  England,  with  Mr.  Wheeler,  and  the  reft,
in  the  time  of  Sir  Henry  Vmes  Govern-
ment, dete&ed  by  the  Wondrous  Mon-
fters,  that  I  intyeat  the  Reader  to  get  the

Ijiftary,


i  24         An  Hi  ft  meal  Difemrfe  6f

Hlftory  of  all,  In  Mr.  Tho.  Weld's  Book  (one
of  their  MiniftersJ  called,  The  rife  and  fail
of  Antinomianifm  and  Fdmilifm  in  New  Eng-
land. ^  Though  I  find  no  proof  of  Witch-
craft in  their  Cafe,  there  is  much  of  Satani*
cal  Delufion,  joined  with  Humane  Self-con-
ceit and  Pride.

XXXTIL  I  have  before  mentioned  Z-»-
ehys  Judgment,  and  his  excellent  Books,
de  Deo,  de  Angells ,  &  de  potentia  Damo-
■nmi  than  whom  no  Man  hath  given  us  a
more  full  Teftimony  in  general,of  Diabolical
Operations :  I  (hall  here  only  repeat  his  Opi-
nion of  the  Manner  of  Satan's  Working.  He
thinketh  {Tom,  3.  /.  4.  c  10.  p.  188  J  that  it
is  the  very  Subftance  of  the  Devil  that  en-
tereth  into  Men,  and  that  they  have  Bodies
qiore  Subtile  than  the  Air.

The  doubt  is,  1.  Whether  it  be  only  o~
ther  Caufes  that  enter  by  this  moving  of
them  by  Devils:  2.  Or  whether  they  Ope-
rate and  enter  only  Vinme,  by  fome  force
fent  from  their  Subftance ;  5.  Or  Operate
by  Contiguity  of  their  Subftance  it  felf  in
Men.

1.  The  firft  way,  no  doubt  they  work  as
by  moving  Winds,  and  Fire,  and  Water,
and  our  Blood  and  Humours ,  and  our
Tempters  and  Enemies^  &c.  but  not  that
way  alone.

2.  What


Apparitions  and  Witches.        125

&  What  Energy  or  Forte  he  can  fend*,
that  is  neither  his  own  Subftance  nor  any
other  Subftance,  I  cannot  conceive.

3.  That  his  very  Subltance  enteresh  into
the  PoflHTed,  I  fee  no  caufe  to  doubt  -,  for
he  can  penetrate  any  part  of  our  Bodies,  as
he  is  a  Spirit :  And  if  we  knew  that  he  O
perate  only  in  fome  Body  or  Vehicle,  Air*
or  Air  and  Fire  mixt  •,  yet  what  part  of  our
Bodies  cannot  Air  and  Fire  penetrate:
(And  this  Suppofition  would  countenance
Dr.  Mores  Opinion,  that  all  Spirits  are  the
the  Souls  of  fome  Bodies).  And  Scripmre
faith  fo  much  of  Devils  entring  into  Men>and
being  in  them,  and  being  caft  out  of  them*
that  I  fee  not  how  we  can  deny  it  to  be  their
Subftance.

And  how  elfe  ihould  they  move  us  (  be-
fides  by  Inftruments)  Is  it  any  more  wonder
that  Devils  (permitted)  can  enter,  than
Air:  Or  how  elfe  work  they  on  Mens
Souls.  I  muft  fay  it  to  humble  us,  that  I
fear,  that  in  moft  Temptations  that  follicic
our  Thoughts,  and  our  Wills,  and  Affedi*
ons  and  Pailions »  if  not  fometimes  our
Tongues  and  Hands,  it  is  the  very  prefent
Subftance  of  Evil  Spirits,  that  by  Conti-
guity move  us,  even  true  Chriftians  when
they  Sin:  And  that  it  is  no  unfeemly  thing
to  pray  God  to  call  Satan  out  of  our
Thoughts  and  Hearts*  Oh  that  we  better
knew  what  caufe  we  have  to  fear  leering

him


1 16        rJn  Hifiorical  Difcowfe  of

him  in,  and  by  yielding  and  cuftom  togivi
him  advantages  to  tempt  and  rule  us.

But  yet  his  Subftantial  Prefence,  and  his
Operations  are  to  be  diftinguifhed.  He
hurteth  not  all  that  he  is  prefent  with j  but
thofe  that  he  hath  Power  to  work  upon,  and
that  are  prepared  to  receive  his  Operations.
God  himfelf  doth  not  work  Life  or  Grace
on  all  that  he  is  prefent  with  $  and  thae
what  he  doth,  he  doth  it  by  his  Subftantial  I
Prefence*  orfaisEflence.

XXXIV.  I  have  elfe where  cited  Luther  s
Teftimony,  and  how  the  Devil  appeared  to
himfelf  at  Cob  urge :  And  Mdantihorii  and
Feter  Martyr's  I  have  cited  here  and  elfe-
where.  See  Pet.  Martyr  Loc.  Com.  Claf.  I0
c  p.  and  cap.  8.  §.  8.  pag*  39,  40.

XXXV.  The  moft  Judicious  Credible
' Melanchthon.j  in  his  Epiftle  to  Hubert  Langue-
tm  (the  Author  of  Junius  Brutes  Vlnd.  con.  \
Tyran.)  Epiftolar.,  I.  2.  p.  550,  551.    faith,

C  Though  there  be  fometimes  Natural
c  Caufes  of  Madnefs,  yet  it  is  moft  certain,
6  that  Devils  enter  into  the  Bodies  of  fome,
4  and  caufe  Madnefi  and  Torments  to  them,
€  either  with  Natural  Caufes  or  without
c  them ;  for  it  is  manifeft,  that  fuch  perfons
c  are  oft  delivered  without  Natural  Reme-
*  dies.  And  thefe.Diabolical  Spe&acles  are
I  oft  Prodigies  and  Significations  of  future

!  things ;


apparitions  and  Witches:        117

*  things :  Twelve  Years  ago  there  was  a
1  Woman  in  Saxony ,  that  never  learnt  Let-
c  ters,  and  yet  when  (he.  was  a&ed  by  the
'  Devil,  after  Torment  fhe  fpake  Greek  and
!  Latin  of  the  future  Saxon  War.

c  Sixteen  Years  ago  there  was  in  the
\Marke,  a  Girl,  that  when  fhe  pulPd  Hairs
cfrom  Cloaths,  they  were  turned  into
€  Mark-Money,  which  the  Girl  devoured
cwith'  long  and  loud  gnafhing  of  Teeth  5
c  and  thofe  Figures  (or  Shapes)  of  Money
'  fometimes  fuddenly  fnatcht  out  of  her
5  Hands,  were  true  Money,  which  are  yet:
c  kept  by  fome  5  and  after  the  Girl  felt
€  great  Torment :  But  fhe  was  delivered
« from  all  that  Difeafe  after  fome  Months,
«and  yet  liveth  in  Health:  But  frequent
<  Prayers  of  Godly  Perfons  were  made  for
« her,  and  other  Ceremonies  were  purpofel^
« omitted.]     Thus  Mdanchthon.


CHAP>


ii8       An  HiftoyicalDifcourfe  of

C  H  A  P.    V  L

Mr.  Jo.  LcwiS)  a  Learned  Jttftice
of  {feace  in  Cardigatri-ftrire ,
with  the  Teftimony  of  Dr.  Ellis,
and Mr.  John  Davis,  about  the
Dead  Mens  Lights,  the  Knocks
ers  and  Apparitions.

MR.  J.  Lewi*  being  a  Jiiffice  of  Peace,
and  a  Man  of  Learning,  at  the  time,
when  under  Cronrwell  and  Harrifon  the
Reading  and  weak  Parfons  were  cafi
out,  and  Itinerant  Preachers  fet  up,  that
turned  four  or  five  Parishes  into  one  of
their  Circuits,  and  did  little  but  Preach,
and  fhut  up  the  Doors  where  they  came  not,
and  by  ignorant  decrying  Superftition,
Forms  and  Ceremonies,  fet  up  Error,  Ana-
baptiftry  and  unjufi:  Separations^  He  being
greatly  grieved  for  thefe  Confufions  wrote
largely  to  me  about  them,  whereupon,  and
on  more  fuch  Inftances  I  wrote  my  five  Dik
putations  of  Church  Government,  Liturgy,
and  Ceremonies.  And  Mr.  Lewis  joined
with  me  in  a  defign  to  have  begg'd  Money
in  Pity  to  W*kt%  to  have  fee  up  a  Welph

Coliedge


'Apparitions  and  Witches.         i  ^9

Colledge  at  Shrewsbury  5  and  his  Notices  a-
bout  Apparitions  came  in  but  on  the  by,
at  my  requeft :  But  tho'  I  difmember  his
Letters  with  regret,  by  cafting  away  the
main  part  that  was  well  worth  the  read-
ing, ( and  all  my  Anfwers  to  them)  yet  k
would  be  fb  unfuitable  to  infert  fuch  Me-
ters in  aHiftory  of  Spirits,  that  if  any  of
his  acquaintance  blame  me  for  it,  they  muft
accept  of  this  Excufe:  He  is  known  by
publifhed  Books  of  his  own*


Pari  of  Mr.  John  Lewis's  Firft
Letter  >  relating  to  Sprits  and
Witches.

Moft  Worthy  Sir  1

I  Have  now  another  Motion  to  you,  as  to
that  paflage  in  your  VHreafonnblemfs
of  Infidelity^  where  you  fhew  the  meaning
of  the  Spirit,  as  to  Humane  Learning,  &&t
and  thofe  29  Confiderations  ( for  the  page
I  cannot  cite,  becaufe  I  have  not  the  Book
at  this  very  inftantj  becaufe  it  is  in  the
midft  of  the  Book,  and  not  fo  difcemable
to  all  Readers  •,  I  could  humbly  beg  of  you*
to  get  your  Printer  and  Stationer  to  print
them  apart  in  a  few  fmall  Leaves,  for  there
is  nothing  generally  that  is  more  miftakea

K  among


1 30       An  Hlftorical  Dlfcourfe  of

among  us  than  that,  and  I  fee  the  publishing
here  but  fo  much  of  them  in  this  kind  would
do  infinite  good  here  3  and  I  would  my  felf
be  at  charge  of  buying  and  difperfing  many
fcores  of  them.  And  becaufe  of  that  Co-
pious Satisfadionyou  give  of  Spirits,  than
which  there  cannot  be  greater  convinee-
nients  againft  Infidelity  and  Atheifm,!  could
afford  you  feveral  ftrange  Inftances  from
thefe  parts,  but  I  (hall  trouble  you  only
with  two.  Since  the  time  I  received  your
Letter,  there  happened  in  my  Neighbour-
hood this  following ;  A  Man  and  his  Fami-
ly being  all  in  Bed,  about  after  Midnight*
awake  in  Bed,  he  could  perceive  a  Light
entring  a  little  Room,  where  he  lay,  and
one  after  another,  of  fome  a  Dozen  in  the
fliape  of  Men3and  two  or  three  Women  with
fmall  Children  in  their  Arms  entring  in,  and
they  feemed  to  Dance,  and  the  Room  to
be  far  lighter  and  wader  than  formerly;
they  did  feem  to  eat  Bread  and  Cheefe  all  a-
bout  a  kind  of  a  Tick  upon  the  Ground  y
they  offered  him  Meat,  and  would  fmile
upon  him ;  he  could  perceive  no  Voice,
but  he  once  calling  to  God  to  blefs  him,
he  could  perceive  the  whifper  of  a  Voice  in
Welch,  bidding  him  hold  his  peace,  being
about  four  Hours  thus ,  he  did  what  he
could  to  awake  his  Wife,  and  could  not  5
they  went  out  into  another  Room,  and  af-
ter fome  Dancing  departed,  and  then  he  a-

rofe,


Apparitions  and  Witch? i,       131"

rofe$  yet  being  but  a  very  flnaU  Room -he
coald  not  find  the  Door<  nor  tae  way  to
Bed,  until  crying  out,  his  Wife  and  Fami-
ly awaked.  Being  within  about  two  Miles
of  me?  I  fent  for  the  Man.  who  is  an  ho-
ned poor  Husbandman,aad  of  good  Report:
And  I  made  him  believe  I  would  put  him  to
his  Oath  for  the  truth  of  chis  Relation^  who
was  very  ready  to  take  it.

2*  The  Second  ( if  you  have  not  for-
merly heard )  the  ftrange  and  ufual  ap-
pearance of  Lights  (called  in  Welch,  Dead
Mens  Candles)  before  Mortality:  This  is
ordinary  in  mofi  of  our  Counties,  that  I
never  fcarce  heard  of  any  fort,  Young  or
Old,  but  this  is  feen  before  Death,  and  of-
ten obferved  to  part  from  the  very  Bodies
of  the  per  Ions  all  along  the  way  to  the
place  of  Burial,  and  infallibly  Death  will
enfue.  Now,  Sir,  it  is  worth  your  Refo-
lution,  whether  this  may  proceed  from
God  or  no  -,  it  is  commonly  imputed  to  the
Igneous  Air  of  the  Counties :  But  that  Evil
Spirits  can  come  by  fo  much  Knowledge,  as
to  be  always  fo  Infallible  (though  herein
I  confefs  them  very  va(t)  and  be  fo  favou-
rable and  officious  unto  Man,  as  to  be
fuch  feafonable  Monitors  of  his  Diflbluti-
on,  and  to  give  fo  much  difcovery  of  Spiri-
tual Eflences>  and  the  Immortality  ,  I  doubt
whether  they  mind  us  fo  much  good  as
this :  Some  Wiles  I  confefs  they  may  have


1 3  %         An  Hijiorical  Difcourfe  of

by  fuch  Appearances,  bat  it  carries  the  Be^
nefits  mentioned  with  it ,  whereas  their
Difappeafance  makes  more  for  Infidelity
and  Atheifm :  But  this  I  leave  to  your  Judg-
ment, begging  Pardon  for  this  Boldnefs  in
diverting  you  from  your  far  better
Thoughts ;  and  feeing  it  is  my  Happinefs
to  have  this  little  Invifible  Acquaintance
with  you,  I  fliall  omit  nd  Opportunity  of
troubling  you  with  fuch  poor  Thoughts  as
the  Lord  (hall  give  unto  me  of  the  beft
Things,  humbly  wifhing  (as  for  the  making
up  the  fad  Differences  of  Religion  among
us )  the  Lord  Would  give  thofe  in  Au-
thority to  weigh  that  Pious  and  Wife
Courfeyou  have  propofed,  as  to  thofe  four
great  Parties  in  the  Dedication  of  your
Saints  Rtfl-,  with  my  unfeigned  Prayers  for
your  Health  and  Happinefs,


Sky


GUs\mgg  near
LUubadarnevour  or
Jberfjiwith  in  Car~
diganjbire>  Qftob.  20.
■1*1*.


Tour  wry  thankful  Friend

and  Servant  in  Chrifi$

John  Lewis.


Mn


Apparitions  andWitches.  j  3  j

Mr.  John  Lewis's  Second  Letter.

AS  for  Apparitions,  lam  ftored  with
fo  many  Inftances ,   that  require  ra-
ther a  Volume ;  There  is  that  Evidence  for
the  Candles ,  that  fcarce  I  know  any  of
Age,  but  hath  feen  them,  and  will  depofe
it :  There  is  here  a  talk ,  whereof  yet  I
have  not  certainty,  that  a  Daughter  of  the
Man  mentioned  in  the  laft,  fetching  Wa-
ter at  a  Well,  had  a  blow  given  her,  and
a  Boy  coming  towards  her,  flie  charged
him  with  the  blow,  who  denyedhe  was
fo  near  her  3  but  bid  her  look  upon  her  Fa-
ther ,  that  flood  not  far  off,  and  with  that,
he  could  fee  her  Father  fling  a  Stone  at  her,
which  pafled  with  a  mighty  Violence  by
her  Face ,  and  the  Stone  was  found  with
prints  of  Fingers  in  it  3  but  no  fuch  thing
as  the  Father  there ,  neither  was  he  at  home
fince  the  Night  before  5  but  certain  it  is  ,
that  Living  Men's  Ghofts,  are  Ordinarily
feen  in  thefe  parts ,  and  unawares  to  the
parties.  We  have  in  this  County,  feveral
Silver  and  Leaden  Mines,  and  nothing  more
ordinary  than  fome  Subterranean  Spirits  3
called  Knockers  (  where  a  good  Vein  is  )
both  heard  ,  and  after  feen,  little  Statured,
about  half  a  yard  long  3  this  very  inftant,
there  are  Miners  upon  a  Difcovery  of  a
K  3  Vein


1^4       dn  Hiflorical  Vifeourfe  of

Vein  upon  my  own  Lands,  upon  this  fcore,
and  two  offered  Oath,  they  heard  them  in
the  Day-time.  Lieutenant  CJolohel  Boiven
I  hear  5  is  upon  Difcovery ,  that  what  you
heard,  was  Witchcraft  5  but  he  holds  cant-
ing Tenents,  all  which  minds  us<  the  more
to  admire  the  King  of  Spirits ,  our  Lord
God  Almighty ,  and  that  our  Eyes  behold
hnt  the  leaft  part  of  his  Secrets ,  and  Mar-
vels; to  whofe  Arms  and  Bleffingf,  I  com*
mit  and  leave  you*

Sir,  /  pray  far  don  this  Trouble  of

,-;'.,p  . ■■

Tour  very  Thankful  Servant ■,

Sfefe  John  Lewi^


M;.


apparitions  and  Witches,         135

Mr.  John Lewis  Third  Letter.

AS  for  the  -Candles*  all  the  parts  I  know
of  Wales  1  a$  otir  Neighbouring  Coun-
ties (  as  I  hear )  have  Experience  of  them  5
fcat  whether  fo  frequently  as  here,  I  will
learn.    I  fcsrce  know  any  Gentleman  or
Mimfter  of  any  ftaftding  \  tat  hath   feea
them,  and  a  Neighbour  of  mine,  will
thortly  beat  Worcefier  abiding  f  who fiath
feen  them  often,  and  I  will  dire*54 .feme
to  acquaint  you,  and  upon  Oath ,  -if  need
be)  a  very  Credible  Aged  perfenr  For
my  part,  I  never  faw  the C&hdles ;  but
thofe  of  my  Houfe  have,  and  6na  Time^
fome  years  part,  it  was  told  me  by  them  %
that  two  Candles  was  feen ,  one  little,  and
a  great  one  pafling  the  Church  way,  under
my  Houfe  ,  my  Wife  was  then  great  with
Child,  and  near  her  time,  and  (he  feared
Sfk,  and  it  begot  fome  fear  in  u^  abdut
her  h  but  juft  about  a  week  after,  fifcr"  felf
firft  came  to  me  (  as  fomething  joyed  tliat
the  fear  might    be  over)  and  (aid  (as
true  it  was )  an  old  Man,  and  a  Child  of
the  Neighbour-hood  paflfed  that  fame  way
tohe  Buried.-  This  fhe  and  I  can  depdfe  ■>
and  truly  my  felf  efpecially ,  heard  fome
uncouth  warning,  before  my  firfi:  Childs
Deaths  new  Born ,  which  is  too  large  to
'  K  4  relates


1 3  6         rAn  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

relate :  Such  warnings  and  noifes,  are  alfo
here  very  common,  and  I  do  think  there  is
fcarce  any  (  and  I  know  it  by  my  felf  )  but
before  fome  Remarkable  Occurrences  of
Life  ,  will  have  fome  warnings ,  at  leaft
by  Dreams;  of  which  there  is  a  kind  that
may  be  ranked  with  thefe  Apparitions,  and
it  was  not  for  nought,  that  the  Stpicksof
old  held  Sleep  ,  familiar  e  &  domefkkunt  om-
entum :  You  fhall  learn  more  of  me  hereaf-
ter about  the  certainty  of  Candles  and
the  Knockers.

Sir,  I  put  you  to  your  Penance,  by  thefe
under  Lines,  they  (hew  I  can  hardly  part
with  you  ,  I  pray  God  continue,  aqd  grant
you  Health  and  Happinefs  anfwerableto
the  ufe  you  are  of,  for  his  Glory  among

Siry

Tom-  wry  Thankful  Servant.

W&>  John  Lewis;


Mr.


[Apparitions  and  Witches;.         1 37

Mr.  Davis's  Letter,  co?icerning  the
Corps-Candles  in  Wales.

Venerable  Sir,

FOr  your  Worth,  hath  purchafed  you  that
Stile.  With  all  due  Refpe&s,  you  (ball
hereby  underftand  that  I  am  one,  who  fin-
cerely  bleflfeth  himfelf,  to  have  been  much
Edified  by  you,  as  being  Confirm'd  in  fome
points ,  and  informed  in  others,  by  a  piece
of  your  Learned  and  Judicious  Works,
Termed  by  your  felf  a  Supplement,  which
proved  to  me  a  Complement ,  and  which
was  Communicated  to  be  by  my  Worthy
Friend,  and  fpccial  Encourager,  John  Lewis
Efq; ,  at  whofe  Requeft  ,  I  am  to  give  you
the  beft  Satisfaction  I  can  ,  touching  thofe
fiery  Apparitions,  which  do  as  it  were,  mark
out  the  way  for  Corpfes  to  their  wpmel*  ,
and  that  fometimes  before  the  parties  them-
felves  fall  fick ,  and  fometimes  in  their
ficknefs  of  thefe ,  I  could  never  hear  in
England ,  they  are  common  in  thefe  thre^

Counties,  Cardigan,  Carmarthen  and  Vem-

brook,  and  as  I  hear,  in  fome  other  part  of
Wales.

Thefe  **tTi*u*i*  in  our  Language,  we  call
Canhxvyllau,  Cyrth  ( i )  Corps-Candles  h  and
Candles  we  call  them ,  not  that  we  do  fee
^ny  thing  elfc  befides  the.  Light :  But  be*

caufe


i^3        An  Htftorical  Difcomfe  of

canfe  that  Light  doth  as  much  Refemble  a
Material  Candle-light,  as  Eggs  do  Eggs,
laving ,  that  in  their  Journey,  thefe  Can-
dles be  modo  dppdrentes]  mb'So  difparentes ,
efpecially,  when  one  comes  near  them  5
and  if  one  come  on  the  way  againft  them ,
unto  him  they  vanish  5  but  prefently  appear
behind  him ,  and  hold  on  their  Courfe.  If
it  bea little  Candle,  pale  or  blewifh,  then,
follows  the  Corps  either  of  an  Abortive,  or
fome  Infant ,  if  a  big  one,  then  the  Corps
of  fome  one  come  to  Age ,  if  there  be
feen  two  or  three,  or  more,  fome  big,  fome
final!  together,  then  fo  many,  and  fuch
Corpfes  together.  If  two  Candles  come
from  Diverfe  places,  and  be  feen  to  meet3
the  Corpfes  will  the  like,  if  any  of  thefe
'Candles  be  feen  to  turn  fometimes  a  little
oiitof  the  way  \  or  Path,  that  leadeth  unto
the  Church ,  the  following  Corps  will  be
found'. to  turn  in  that  very  place ,  for  the
avoiding  of  fome  dirty  Lane,  or  Pla%ehr.
Now  let  us  fall  to  Evidence  ,  Being  about
the  Age  of  fifteen,  dwelling  at  Ltinytdr,  late
at  'Nights  fcm£  Neighbours  few  one  of  thefe
Candles  hovering  up  and  down  along  the  Ri-
ver bank,  until  they  were  weary  in  behold-
ing,, at  laft  they  left  it  fo,  and  went  to  Bed,
a  few  Weeks  aftef '  came  a  proper  Damfel
f torn  Mem gomsry'  SBre'^  to  fee  her  Friends  5
who  dwelleth  on  the  other  fide  of  thatRiver
Jjfwyth,  and  thought  to  Ford  the  Hitter  at

that


Apparitions  and  Witches.        1 3  £

that  very  place,  where  the  Light  was  feen  5
but  being  diff#adedJ>y  fome  lookers  on,
Ofbme  it's  mod  like  of  thofe  that  faw  the
Light )  to  adventure  on  the  Water,  which
was  high ,  by  reafon  of  a  Flood  :  She
walked  up  and  down  along  the  River  Banls,
even  where,  and  even  as  the  fore&id  Can-
dle did,  waiting  for  the  falling  of  the  Wa-
ter, which  at  laftfhe  took-,  but  too  foon
for  her  ,  for  fhe  was  drown  d  therein.

Of  late,  my  Sextons  Wife,  an  Aged  Un-
demanding Woman ,  faw  from  her  Bed,
a  little  blewifh  Candle  upon  her  Tables
end  :  Within  two  or  three  days  after » comes
a  fellow  in ,  enquiring  for  her  Husband  ,
and  taking  fomething  from  under  his  Cloak,
claps  it  down  directly  upon  the  Tables  end,
where  flie had  feen  the  Candle,  and  what
was  it,  but  a  Dead-born  Child  f  Another
time ,  the  fame  Woman ,  faw  fuch  a-
nother  Candle  upon  the  other  end  of  the
felf  fame  Table ,  within  few  days  after,  a
weak  Child  by  my  felf,  newly  Chrifined,
was  brought  into  the  Sextons  Houfe,  where
prefently  he  died  :  And  when  the  Sextons
Wife  ,  who  was  then  abroad,  came  home,
fhe  found  the  Woman  fhrouding  of  the
Child ,  on  that  other  end  of  the  Table ,
where  fhe  had  feen  the  Candle.  On  a
time  my  felf,  and  a  Kinfman  coming  from
our  School  in  England ,  and  being  three  or
four  hours  benighted*  ere  we  could  reach

home,


140        -An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

home ,  were  firft  of  all  Saluted  by  fuch  a
Light,  or  Candle,  which  coming  from  a
Houfe  5  which  we  well  knew,  held  his
Courfe  ( but  not  diredJy  )  the  High-way  to
Church-,  ftiortly  after,  the  Eldeft  Son  in
that  Houfe  Deceafed,  arid  Steered  the  fame
Courfe-    My  felf,  and  my  Wife  in  an  Even-
ing ,  ftw  fuch  a  Light ,  or  Candle  coming
to  the  Church,  from  her  Mid- Wifes  Houfe,
and  within  a  Month  ,  flie  her  felf  did  fol-
low :  At  which  time,  my  Wife  did  tell
me  a  Story  of  her  own  Mother ,  Mrs.  Ca-
tharint  Wyat ,  an  Eminent  Woman  in  the
Town  of  Tenby ,  that  in  an  Evening,  being
In  her  Bed-Chamber ,  ihe  faw  two  little
Lights  juft  upon  her  Belly,  which  ihe  a£
fayed  to  ftrike  off  with  her  Hand,  but
could  not  5  within  a  while  they  vaniftied  of
themfelves.    Not  long  after,  (he  was  Deli-
vered of  two  Dead-born  Children:  Long
fithence  there  happened,  the  like  in  mine
own  Houfe  5  but  to  a  Neighbours  Wife ,
whom  my  Wife  did  fometimes  call  for,  to
do  fome  work  or  other  and  ( as  I  credibly
heard  within  thefe  three  days)  to  fome
good  Gentlewoman  alfo  in  this  very  Pa-
ri(h  h  where  alfo  not  long  fince,  a  Neigh-
bours Wife  of  mine  ,  being  great  with
Child  *  and  coming  in  at  her  own  Door ,
met  two  Candles,  a  little,  and  a  bigg  one ,
and  within  a  little  after,  falling  in  Labour,
she  and  her  Child  both  dyed*

Some


'Apparitions  and  Witches.         14*

Somethirty  four,  or  thirty  five  years  by-
gone ,  one  Jane  Wyat  my  Wifes  Sifter  *
being  Nurfe  to  Baronet  Rudds  three  Eldeft
Children ,  and  ( the  Lady  Mifirh  being
Deceafed  )  the  Lady  Controuler  of  that
Hcufe,  going  late  into  a  Chamber  where
the  Maid-Servants  lay ,  faw  there  no  lefs
then  five  of  thefe  Lights  together.  It  hap-
pened awhile  after,  the  Chamber  being
newly  Plaiftered,  and  a  great  grate  of  Coal-
fire  therein ,  kindled  to  haften  the  drying
up  of  the  Plaiftering :  That  five  of  the
Maid-Servants  went  there  to  Red,  as  they
were  wont  5  but  ( as  it  fell  out )  too  foon ,
for  in  the  Morning,  they  were  all  dead ,
being  Suffocated  (  I  conceive )  in  their
Sleep  with  the  Steem  of  the  New-temper-
ed Lime  and  Coal.  This  was  at  Llangathen
in  Carmarthenshire.

Some  thirty  three,  or  thirty  four  years
ago,  upon  a  Tuefday  coming  towards  home
from  Cardigan ,  where  I  had  been  injoynd
to  Preach  the  Seffion  Sermon:  Incipient e
adhnc  creptifcdo,  and  as  Light  as  Noon,  and
having  as  yet,  nine  long  Miles  to  Ride,
there  feemd  twice  or  thrice  from  behind  me,
on  my  Right  fide ,  and  between  my  Shoul-
der and  my  Hat,  to  fly  a  little  whiti/h
thing ,  about  the  bignefs  of  a  Walnut,  and
that  per  intervalla ,  once  in  feventy  or  eighty
Paces :  At  firft  I  took  no  notice  of  it ,
thinking  it  had  been  but  the  glimpfing  of  my

little


i^i       An  HiftoricaUDifcowfe  of

little  Ruff  3  for  fuch  then  I  wore,  by  Degrees
it  waxed  reddifli,  and  as  the  Night  drew
on ,  redder  and  redder ,  at  laft  not  ignis
fatuus^  (  for  that  I  partly  knew  )  but  pwus
futus  ignis  5  both  for  Light  and  Colour.
At  length  I  turned  my  Horfe  twice  or
thrice  ,  to  fee  from  whence  it  came,  and
whether  it  would  flafh  into  my  Face,  then
nothing  I  could  fee  5  but  when  I  turned
homewards ,  it  flafhed  as  before ,  until  I
came  to  a  Village  called  Llwriflid,  where
as  yet  I  did  not  intend  to  Lodge ,  though
there  were  four  Lodgings,  and  one  of  them
(  five  one )  the  next  Houfe  in  my  way  ,
which,  when  I  pafled  by  clofe ,  being  juft
againft  the  Door ,  my  Fire  did  flafh  again
upon ,  or  very  near  the  Threshold ,  and
there  I  think  it  lodged  3  for  I  few  it  no
more.  Home  ftill  I  would  go,  but  be-
thinking my  felf,  that  fo  I  might  tempt
God,  and  meet  a  worfe  Companion  than
my  former :  I  turned  to  the  furtheii  Lodg-
ing in  the  Town,  and  there  after  a  little
Reft,  in  a  brown  Study  (  becaufe  mine  Hoft
was  an  understanding  Man ,  and  Literate,
and  -fuchas  could,  and  had  but  lately  read
his  Neck- Verfe  in  pure  Roman  Language  )
I  could  not  contain ,  but  needs  muft  tell
him  of  the  Vifion,  he  the  next  day  tofome
going  to  the  Selfions ,  they  to  others  there,
at  lad  it  came  to  the  Judges  Ears ,  info-
much  ,  that  the  greateft  News,  and  won-
der


'Apparitions  and  Witches.        14}

der  at  the  then  Affifes  was  the  Preachers
Vifion.  To  come  at  length  unto  the  Pitch,
or  Kernel ,  ( for  I  have  been  too  long  abo&t
the  Husk  and  Shell )  at  that  very  Seffions,
one  John  William ^  U^,  a  Gentleman  ,  who
dwelt,  and  whofeSon  yet  dwells  within  a
Mile  of  Glaslerig?  fell  Sick,  and  in  his  com-
ing homewards ,  was  taken  with  fuch  a  vio-
lent Paroxifm ,  that  he  could  Ride  no  fur-
ther than  the  Houfe ,  where  I  left  my  Fire
to  entertain  him,  and  there  he  lighted  and
Lodged,  died  about  four  Days  after.  Ex-
Abundant i  ,•  you  (hail  underftand  that  fome
Candles  have  been^  feep  to  come  to  my
Church,  within  thefe  three  weeks*  and  the
Gorpfes  not  long  after.  Rutierms  de  Csvdez
lis  noftm.

Another  kind  of  Apparition  we  have  ,-
which  commonly  we  call  T^n-nc?  or  Tan-
wed> becaufe  it  feemeth  ?;.;;>>    This  ap--
peareth  to  our  fceming  in  the  lower  Re-
gion of  the  Air,ftraight  and  long,  not  much
unlike   a  Glaive,  Mours  or  Shoots  direct-
ly, and  level  (  as  who  % *ouId  fay  I'll  hit)  but
far  more  fliowly,  than  Stella  cadentes,or  Star
{hot  lighteneth  all  the  Air ,  and  Ground
where  it  pafleth,  lafteth  three  or  four  Miles*
and  more  for  ought  is  known  $  becaufe  no
Man  feeth  the  Rifing  or  Beginning  of  it  5
when  it  falls  to  Ground,  it  fparkleth  ,  and
lightneth  all  about.   Thefe  before  their  De-.
ceafe ,  do  fall  upon  Free-Holders  Lands  ,

and


f  44       An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

and  you  fliall  fcarce  bury  any  fuch  with  m*
be  he  but  a  Lord  of  a  Houfe  and  Garden,
but  you  (hall  find  fome  one  at  his  Burial  *
at  leaft  Wife  in  his  Neighbour- hood,  that
hath  feen  this  Fire  to  fall  on  fome  part  of
his  Lands.  Two  of  thefe  at  feveral  times
I  have  feen  my  feif,  fince  I  Studied  Me-
teors, and  fince  I  wasaMinifter,  andnar*
rowly  obferved  ,  even  till  they  were  in  the
*ty*,  and  began  to  fall;  butthelnterpofi-
tion  of  Grounds,  marred  the  Conclufion  j
for  where  ,  and  how  they  fell,  I  faw  not  5
but  where  I  did  guefs,  they  fell,  there
died  in  the  one  place  an  aged  Gentle-
man ,  in  the  other,  a  Free-Holder  too ,
though  of  a  Meaner  Rank-  To  come  near-
er home,

My  Mothers  firft  Husband  (for  my  Fa-
ther Marryed  her  a  Widdow  J  walking
about  hi3  Ground  ,  faw  one  of  thefe  Darts,
or  Piles  aloft ,  which  fell  down  hard  by
him ,  fhone  far  ,  and  fparkled  round  about
his  Body ,  he  took  it  for  a  Warning-Piece,
made  his  Will ,  and  having  jived  in  good
Health,  fome.  four  or  five  Months  after ,
dyed.

A  little  before  the  Deceafe  of  mine  own
Father,  Aged  Ninety  fix ,  a  Son  in  Law  of
his ,  who  dwelled  two  Miles  off,  (  but  up-
on  higher  Ground  )  faw  fuch  another  fall
in  a  Clofe  behind  the  old  Mans  Houfe,
which  gave  fuch  a  Light  3  chat  by  it,  he  did

clearly


apparitions  andWitcheil  14  j

clearly  fee  the  Houfe  ,  the  Hedges ,  and
the  Oaks  in  the  Wood  adjoyning*

Sir,  So  many  of  thefe  Evidences,  as  I  faw
not  my  felf ,  I  received  from  Underftand-
ing  and  Credible  Ferfons,  and  fuch  as  would
not  lye  ,  no,  not  for  a  Benefice  5  and  your
felf  may  receive  the  fame  from  me,  as  from
one  that  was  never  too  Credulous,  nothing
Supperftitious,  and  as  little  Ceremonious.
Thefe  Secrets,  I   dare  not  Father  upon
Satan ,  I  will  not  Honour  him  fo  much  ,
fo  much  as  to  Afcribe  to  him  the  Know*
ledge  of  Contingent  Futures.    I  prefume
that  of  himfelf ,  he  cannot  certainly  know,
whether,  or  when  a  Healthy  Man  fliall
Sicken,  nor  whether,  or  when  he  fliall
dye  of  his  Sicknefs ,  nor  whether  he  fliall
dye  by  Sicknefs,  or  by  Fire  or  Water,  &c.
nor  ( in  an  open  Country  efpecially  )  which
way  of  two,  three,  or  more,  the  Corps
fliall  be  brought  to  Church,  whether  it  fliall
meet  another  Corps  in  the  way,  whether  it
fliall  pafs  a  River  by  the  Ford ,  or  Bridg  ,
how  many  flops ,  turnings,  and  windings
it  /hall  make,  Satan  can  have  no  certain
fore- knowledge  of  all  fuch  Circumftances ,
and  more ,  but  this  Candlemaker  and  Di-
rector of  them  too  forefees,  and  foreknows
them  all  5  and  therefore  muft  needs  be  the
Creator,  who ,  as  according  to  the  good
pleafure  of  his  Will  >  he  hath  Determined;
aad  allotted  to  feveral  Nations,  the^r  feve-

L  r^


146       An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

ral  Habitations,  Difpofitions  and  Conditi-
ons, even  (o(  as  I  fuppoie  )  bath  he  vouch-
fafed  to  each  of  them  forne  peculiar  figns
and  tokens ,  if  none  to  fome ,  which  I
cannot  believe,  and  if  to  fome  more,  and
more  wonderful  than  to  other  fome,  for  my
part ,  I  can  give  no  other  Reafon  for  it,  but
his  Will.  This  with  ray  hearty  Prayers  for
your  felf,  your  Pious  and  Learned  Bre-
thren of  the  Aflbciation.

I  Reft,

Tour  Friend  in  aU  kind  Offices

that  lye  in  my  Power.

^ffi5'  John  Davis.


CHAP^


Apparitions  and  Witches':        x  47

CHAP.    VII.

Containing  feveral  other  Letters
and  Relations  concerning  Appa-
ritions and  Witchcrafts.


Mr.  Thomas  Tilfon,  Minifter  of
Aylefworth  in  Kent,  his  Let-
ter concerning  an  Apparition  in
Rochefter,  this  prefent  Tear,
1691.

Reverend  S/Vy

BEing  informed  that  you  are  writing  £-
bout  Witchcraft  and  Apparitions,  I
take  the  freedom,  though  a  Stranger,  to
fend  you  this  following  Relation.

Mary,  the  Wife  of  John  Gofe  of  Ro-
chefter, being  affli&ed  with  a  long  Illnefs,
removed  to  her  Father's  Houfe  at  Weft-
Mulling,  which  is  about  nine  Miles  diftant
from  her  own :.  There  ffie  died,  June  the
4th   this  prefent  Year,  1691,  ,

L  %  the


148        'An  Hijhrical  Difcourfe  of

The  Day  before  her  departure ,  fhe]
grew  very  impatiently  defirous  to  fee  her
two  Children  ,  whom  fhe  had  left  at
home ,  to  the  Care  of  a  Nurfe.  She
prayed  her  Husband  to  hire  a  Horfe,  for
(lie  muft  go  home,  and  die  with  the  Chil-
dren. When  they  perfuaded  her  to  the
contrary ,  telling  her  fhe  was  tiot  fit  to
be  taken  out  of  her  Bed,  nor  able  to  fit
on  Horfe  back,  fhe  intreated  them  how-
ever to  try :  //  /  cannot  fit,  faid  fhe,  I
will  lie  all  along  upon  the  Horfe,  for  1  muft
go  to  fee  my  poor  Babes.

A  Minifier  who  lives  in  the  Town  was  i
with  her  at  Ten-a- Clock  that  Nighr,  to
whom  fhe  exprefsd  good  Hopes  in  the
Mercies  of  God  ,  and  a  Willingnefs  to
die :  But,  faid  fhe,  it  is  my  Mfery  that  1
cannot  fee  my  Children.

Between  One  and  Two-a  Clock  in  the
Morning  (he  fell  into  a  Trance.  One
Widow  Turner,  who  watched  with  her
that  Night,  fays,  that  her  Eyes  were  o-
pen,  and  fixed,  and  her  Jaw  fallen :  She
put  her  Hand  upon  her  Mouth  and  No-
flrils,  but  could  perceive  no  Breath  \  fhe
thought  her  to  be  in  a  Fit,  and  doubted
whether  fhe  were  alive  or  dead.

The  next  Day  this  dying  Woman  told
her  Mother,  that  fhe  had  been  at  home
with  her  Children.  That  is  impoffible,  faid
the  Mother,  for  yon  have  been  here  in  Bed

■    all


Apparitions  and  Witches,         149

all' the  while.  Tes>  replied  the  other,  but
I  was  with  them  laft  Night,  when  I  was  a-
fleep.

The  Nurfe  at  Rochefier,  Widow  Ale-
xander by  Name,  affirms,  and  fays,  (he
will  take  her  Oath  on't  before  a  Magi-
ftrate,  and  receive. the  Sacrament  upon
it,  that  a  little  before  Two  a*Clock  that
Morning  (he  faw  the  Likenefs  of  thefaid
Mary  G of e  come  out  of  the  next  Chamber,
( where  the  elder  Child  lay  in  a  Bed  by
it  felf,  the  Door  being  left  open,  and
flood  by  her  Bed-fide  for  about  a  quar-
ter of  an  Hour  3  the  younger  Child  was
there  lying  by  her  •,  her  Eyes  moved,  and
her  Mouth  went,  but  (he  faid  nothing.
The  Nurfe  moreover  fays,  that  (he  was
perfectly  awake;  it  was  then  Day-light,
being  one  of  the  longeft  Days  in  the
Year.  She  fate  up  in  her  Bed,  and  look-
ed ftedfaftly  upon  the  Apparition :  In
that  time  (he  heard  the  Bridge- Clock
ftrike  Two,  and  a  while  after  faid,  In
the  Name  of  the  Father ,  Son  and  Holy
Ghoft,  what  art  thou  ?  Thereupon  the  Ap-
pearance removed,  and  went  away  5  (he
ilipp'd  on  her  Cloaths  and  followed,  but
what  became  on't  (he  cannot  tell.  Then,
and  not  before,  (he  began  to  be  grievouf-
ly  affrighted ,  and  went  out  of  Doors ,
and  walked  upon  the  Wharf  ( the  Houfe
is  juft  by  the  River  fide)  for  fome  Hours,
L  3  only


ifo        An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

only  going  in  now  and  then  to  look  to
the  Children.  At  Five-a-Clock  flie  wens
to  a  Neighbour's  Houfe,  and  knocked  at
the  Door,  but  they  would  not  rife  :  At
Six  flie  went  again,  then  they  arofe  and
let  h£r  in.  She  related  to  them  all  that
had  pafs'd  :  They  would  perfuade  Eer  (he
Was  miftaken,  or  dreamt  :*  But  (he  'confi-
dently affirmed,  If  ever  1  f aw  her  in  all  my
'Life,  I  faw  her  ~thu  Night.

Ont  of  thofe  to  whom  (he   made  the

Relation  (Mary,  the  Wife  of  '■  John  Sweet)  •
had  a'Meflenger  came  fc am  MuRing  that
Forenoon  ,  to  let  her  know  her  ,Neigh*
hour-Gaffe  was  dying,  and'  defired  to  fpeak
with  her  5  fite  went  over  the  fame  day,  and
found  her  juft  departing.  The  Mother,  a>
tnongft  other  Difcourfe,R  elated  to  her  how
much -her  Daughter  had  long'd  to  fe§
the  Children  3  and  faid  flie  had  feen  them.
This  brought  to  Mrs.  Sweet's  niind,  what
the  Nurfe  had  told  her  that  Morning  3
for  till  then  ,  /lie  had  not  though c  to
mention  it ,  but  difguifed  it ,  rather  as  the
Woman's  difturbed  Imagination.

The  Subflance  of  this ,  I  had  Related
to  me  by  John  Carpenter  ,  the  Father  of
the  Deceafed,  next  day  after  her  Burial :
Jtily  the  Second:!  fully  Dil'courfed  the
Matter  with  the  Nurfe,  and  two  Neigh-
bours ,  to  whole  Houfe  fhe  went  that
Morning,

Two


'Apparitions  and  Witches.        i  y  I

Two  days  after,  I  had  it  from  the
Mother,  the  Minifter  that  was  with  her
in  the  Evening ,  and  the  Woman  who
fat  up  with  her  that  laft  Night:  They
all  agree  in  the  fame  Story ,  and  every
one  helps  to  flrehgthen  the  others  Tefti-
mbny  :

They  appear  to  be  Sober  Intelligent  Per-
fons ,  far  enough  off  from  Defigning  to  im-
pofe  a  Cheat  upon  the  World,  or  to  ma-
nage a  lye ,  and  what  Temptation  they
fhould  lye  under  for  fo  doing,  I  cannot  con-
ceive.

Sir,  that  God  would  blefs  your  pious
Endeavours  for  the  Convi&ion  of  Atheifjs
arid  Sadduces,  and  the  promoting  of  true
Religion  and  Godlinefs  3  and  that  this  Nar-
rative may  conduce  fomewhat  towards  the
farthering  of  that  great  Work,  is  the  hear-
ty Defire  and  Prayer  of

Tour  mofi  faithful  Friend^

and  humble  Servant^

\

Jylesfordy  /         f Miniftsr  of  Aylef-

$uly6.  Th0.  Tilfon,-<  ford,  iwgfc  Haid-

er. L  ftoneiuKcnt.


Mr.


I    "


1 5  %       rAn  Hijiorical  Difcourfe  of

Mr.  Thomas  Woodcocke'j  Let-
ter in  relation  to  Witches  and
Apparitions  5  together,  with
four  Stories  inclosed  therein ,
all  relating  to  the  fame  Sub-
je8.

SIR,

T  Have  herein  fent  you  thofe  four  Stories
JL  I  had  the  remembrance  off,  when  I  was
ttdthyoulaft,  which  I  have  fubfcribed  my
Name  to.  But  who  can  prove  any  thing
Rationally  to  them  who  have  not  fo  much
Reafcn  as  to  know  their  own  Souls  ?  AH
of  this  Tribe  are  of  that  mind,  to  believe
siothing but  what  they  fee  themfelves.  But
as  Rsligio  Medki  fays5  The  Devil  hath  them
In  too  faft  a  Noofe,  for  to  appear  to  them
would  be  to  convert  them  from  their  Error.
He  rather  delights  to  be  their  God  than  to
prove  himfelf  a  Devil,  and  fo  torment
their  Thoughts  too  foon.  They  aflert  and
admire  the  Omnipotency  of  Matter,  but  in
the  mean  time  are  infenfible  of  the  fpring
of  Motions  they  are  fo  full  of  Seconds
they  will  not  own  a  Firft  Mover;  'Tis
grange  Arithmetick,  that  two  ihould  not
iuppofe  one,  and  as  bad  Geometry  to  have

Grcum-


jrffparkions  and  Witches.  1 5  3

.Circumference  without  a  Center.  But  I
fear  you  will  but  fpend  Arguments  on  them
who  are  refolved  not  to  yield  to  any  Evi-
dence; for  it  is  the  Intereft  of  their  Lufls
neither  to  believe  God  nor  a  Devil.  Yet
I  remember  a  ftory  of  one  at  Cokhefler  t
who  in  a  Bravado,  and  Defiance  of  the
Devil,  would  walk  in  the  Night  to  the
Church- Yard ,  where  it  was  reported  he
appeared  and  walked,  and  he  met  him  in
the  flbape  of  a  Black  Dog  with  terrible
Eyes,  which  brought  him  by  Terrors  in-
to fuch  a  mind,  that  he  was  never  quiet  in
his  Mind  till  he  got  into  good  Society.
Coming  to  Mr  Shepheard's  at  Coin,  Mr.
Harhkenden  ftay'd  him,  though  Mr.  Shep-
heard  was  gone:  He  lodged  there,  and
when  at  Prayer,  the  Black  Dog  was  feen
by  the  Manas  if  he  would  have  torn  Mr.
NarUkendens  Throat  out,  but  lie  was  in
his  Hoiife  and  Duty,  and  neither  faw  nor
feared  s  And  this  Man  continued  long  in  this
condition,  proved  a  moft  ferious  Chriftian,
always  had  fome  appearance  of  this  Dog,
as  a  Fly  or  a  Flea,  and  various  fiiages ;  and
even  at  his  Death,  lying  long  tick,  had

freat  Peace  and  Vi&ory  over  the  fear  of
)eath,  and  was  fo  joyful  and  defirous  to  be
diflblved,  that  this  Dog  or  Flea  made  no
impreffion  upon  him  j  when  had  it  been  a
Melancholick  Fancy  it  would  have  been
worft  at  fo  dark  an  Hour,  when  the  Hu-
mours


i >4         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe of

irours  are.  up  and  the  Spirits  down.  This
Story  I  had  alfo  from  Mr.  Harlakenden,  but
it  is  not  to  be  caft  before  fuch  Swine  as
this  Epicurean  Age  abounds  with,  who,  if
Chrifthimfelf  was  on  Earth,  with  the.Ga-
darens,  would  rather  get  rid  of  him,  than
k)fe  their  Herd  of  Hogs.  But  I  tire
you?  the  Lord  fupport  you,  and  give  you
the  Joy  of  Faith,  the  Blefled  profped  of
Hope,  and  that  Cordial  of  Love  which  is
Granger  than  Death  $

I  am

Tour  worthkfs  Brother

and  Servant  injhe  Lord,

IS?***  T.  Woodcocke.


Here


"Apparitions  and  Witches.         \  5  5

Here  follow  the  four  Stories,,  men-
tioned in  the  fore- going  Letter.

I.  Mr.  Mun,  Rector  of  Stockerfon  in  Ld-
cefterjhire,  had  a  Daughter  married  to  one
^Av*Beecham^  Re&or  of  Br  an  ft  on  in  Rutland;
In  whofe  Houfe  it  was  frequently  obferved,
that  a  Tobacco-pipe  would  move  it  fe!f
from  off  a  Shelf  at  one  end  of  the  Room3
to  another  Shelf  at  the  other  end  of  the
Room,  without  any  Hand.  Mr. Man  viiir-
ing  his  Son-in  Law,  took  a  Pipe  of  Tobacco
in  that  Room,  and  looked  for  feme  fuch
Motion  5  but  a  great  Bible,  inftead  of  a
Pipe,  movejLit  telf  off  from  a  Desk  at  the
lower  end  of  the  Roots,  and  cart  it  felf  in-
to  his  Lap.  Whereuppn  he  opened  the  Bi~
ble  at  Gen,  3.  15.  faying,  Come,  Satan;  III
jherv  thee  thy  Doom  :  The  Seed  of  the  Woman
pall  breast  he  Serpent's  Head.  Avoid  Satan.

This  Mr.  Mud  himielf  told  me,  when  in
the  Sicknefs  Year,  1665.  I  lived  in  Stocker-
fon-Hall.  I  have  noreafon  to'fufped.  the
Veracity  of  a  fober  Man,  a  conilant  Preach-
er, and  a  good  Scholar.

II.  Dr.  Lamb  >  who  was  killed  by  the
Mob,  for  a  Conjurer,  about  1640.  met  one

Morning  Sir  Miles  Sands  and  Mr.  Barber  in

fihe  Street,  and  invited  them  to  go  and  drink

their


if 6       An  HiftoYical  Difcourfe  of

their  Mornings  Draught  at  his  Houfe :  Di£
courfing  about  his  Art,  he  told  them,  if
they  would  hold  their  Tongues,  and  their
Hands  from  medling  with  any  thing,  he
would  fhew  them  fome  Sport.  So  falling
to  his  Practice,  in  the  middle  of  the  Room
fprings  up  a  Tree  5  foon  after  appeared
three  little  Fellows,  with  Axes  on  their
Shoulders,  and  Baskets  in  their  Hands,  who
prefently  fell  to  work,  cut  down  the  Tree,
and  carried  all  away.  But  Mr.  B arbor  ob-
ferving  one  Chip  to  fall  on  his  Velvet  Coat,
be  flips  it  into  his  Pocket.  That  Night,
when  he  and  his  Family  were  in  Bed,  and
afleep,  all  the  Doors  and  Windows  in  the
Houfe  opened  and  clattered,  fo  as  to  awa-
ken and  affright  them  all.  His  Wife  faid,
Husband,  you  told  me  you  was  at  Dr,  Lamb'*
this  Day,  and  I  fear  yon  medled  with  fome-
thing.  He  replied,  Iput  a  Chip  into  my  Poc
\k§t.  I  pray  you,  faid  (lie,  fling  it  out,  or  we
fhatl  have  no  Quiet.  He  did  fo,  and  all  the
Windows  and  Doors  were  prefently  fhuf,
and  all  quiet,  fo  they  went  to  fleep.

Dr.  Barbor  and  Major  John  Barbor,  who

married  my  only  Sifter,  told  me  this  Rela-
tion, who  had  it  again  and  again  from  their
JFather  and  Mother ;  and  I  know  no  reafon
to  doubt  of  the  truth  of  it.  This  Mr.  Bar-
fw  laid  the  firft  Stone  in  building  of  Covent-
tijorden*

III.


'Apparitions  and  Witchesh       157
III  When  I  was  a  School-Boy  at  Gunik

in  Northamptonftire-j  about  the  Scots  coming
'  into  England,  1  heard  a  Well,  in  one  Dohs\
Yard,  drum  like  any  Drum  bearing  a  March.
I  heard  it  at  a  diftance :  Then  I  went  and
put  my  Head  into  the  Mouth  of  the  Well,
and  heard  it  diftincftly,  and  no  Body  in  the
Well.  It  lafted  federal  Days  and  Nights,
fo  as  all  the  Country-People  came  to  hear
it.  And  fo  it  drumm'd  on  feveral  Changes
of  Times.

When  King  Charles  the  Second  died,  I
went  to  the  0 W/e-Carrier,  at  the  Ram-lna
in  Smithfield ;  who  told  me  their  Well  had
drummed,  and  many  People  came  to  hear  k.
And  I  heard,  it  drumm'd  once  fince-

IV.  Mr.  Harlakenden,  who  lived  at  Coht-
Priory  in  Effkx,  (where  I  often  was,  his  on-
ly Son  being  my  Pupil,)  formerly  the  Houfe
of  the  Earls  of  Oxford :  Off  from  the  Houfe
was  a  Tomb  Houfe,  with  a  Chamber  over
it;  his  Butler,  Robert  Crow,  and  William,  his
Coach  man,  ufed  to  lie  in  that  Room,  Ac
Two  of  the  Clock  in  the  Morning  there  was
always  the  found  of  a  great  Bell  tolling :
*They  affirming  it  fo,  Mr-  Harlakgnden  flepc
in  the  Evening,  fo  as  to  be  awaked  at  One
of  the  Clock,  and  lay  betwixt  his  two  Ser-
vants to  fatisfie  himfelf.  At  Two  df  the
Clock  comes  the  ufual  Sound  of  a  great  Bell

tolling,


158       lAn  Hiftorical  Dtfcourfe  of

tolling,  which  put  him  into  a  Fright  and
Sweat,  fo  as  he  jogg'd  his  Servants ;  who
awaking,  feid,  Hark^  Tom  is  at  his  Sport.
It  revived  him  to  hear  them  fpeak.    Upon

a  particular  Occafion,  Mr.  Thomas  Shepheard,
(who  after  went  to  New  England,)  with
fome  other  Minifters,  and  good  People,
fpent  a  Night  in  Prayer,  and  had  fome  re-
fpedi  to  the  place*  ferving  God,  to  caft  out
the  Devil ;  And  from  that  time,  never  was
any  fuch  noife  heard  in  the  Chamber.

This  I  had  from  Mr.  Harlakenden's  own
Mouth,  and  his  Servants,  Ear-witneflTes*
when  I  was  upon  the  place.

It  a  Teftatur

Tho.  Woodcocke.


CHAP,


Jpparitions  and  Witches*        159

CHAP.    VIII.

Of  good  Angels,  and  fome  doubt-
ful Spirit s,  and  their  notable
Anions.

THis  fort  of  Operations  is  of  more  plea-
fant  Confideration  than  the  Diaboli-
cal, and  as  convincing  of  the  Agency  of  Su-
perior Spirits  on  things  below ;  but  fo  m#-
ny  have  written  of  it,  as  maketh  my  farther
Labour  needlefi.  Let  them  that  would  fee
more,  read  Mr.  Ifaac  Ambrofe  of  our  Com-
munion with  Angels,  the  Lord  Lawrence^
Mr.  Samuel  Claris  Mirrour,  Zanchy  de  An-
gelt*)  &c.

Bodin  tells  us  of  one  of  his  Acquaintance.,
that  had  a  good  Genius  that  would  always
give  him  notice  when  he  did  ill,  by  a  ftroke  5
and  what  he  fhould  do  when  he  omitted  it*
I  pafs  by  old  Writers.

I  will  mention  now  but  thefe  few.

i  That  of  Mr.  Tate  in  Ireland,  mention-
ed by  Mr.  Clark,  and  Mr.  Ambrofe,  and  con-
firmed to  me  by  his  near  Relations  that
knew  of  it.  Dr.  Tate,  with  his  Wife  and
Children,  being  flripp'd,  and  forced  to  flee
for  their  Lives,  by  the  Irijk,  when  they  were

raur-*


1 66       An  Hifiorical  DifcQwfe  of

murdering  Thoufands  in  their  Rebellion  iff
1641.  They  were  wandering  in  unknown
places,  upon  Commons  covered  with  Snow  §
and  having  no  Food,  and  fhe  carrying  a
Sucking  Child,  and  having  no  Milk,  foe
went  to  lay  down  the  Child  to  die  \  and  on
the  Brow  of  a  Bank  (he  found  a  Suck-bottle
with  fweet  Milk  in  it,  no  Foot-fteps  ap-
pearing in  the  Snow  of  any  that  fhould  bring
it  thither,  and  far  from  any  Habitation  1
which  prefer ved  the  Child's  Life,  who  after
became  a  Bleffing  to  the  Church.

II.  When  Prince  Rupert  march'd  with  his
Army  through  Lancashire,    to   York-Fight,
where  he  was  overthrown,  the  Town  of
Bolton  made  fome  Refiftance  in  his  Paflage,
and  he  gave  them  no  Quarter,  but  killed
Men  and  Women.    When  he  was  gone,
thofe  that  efcaped  came  out  from  the  places
where  they  lurked,  and  an  old  Woman
found  in  the  Streets  a  Woman  killed,  and
a  Child  by  her  not  dead :  The  old  Woman
took  up  the  Child,  and  to  ftill  its  crying,
put  her  own  Breaft  to  the  Child,  which  had
not  given  Suck*  as  I  remember,  of  above
twenty  Years:  The  Child  being  quieted,
flie  prefently  perceived  Milk  to  come  ;  and
continued  to  give  the  Child  fufficient  Milk,
till  it  was  provided  for.    I  had  the  full  Af-
furance  of  this  from  my  worthy  Friend,
Mrs.  Hmt%  Wife  to  Mr.  Rowland  Hunt,  of

Harrow


T Apparitions  and  Witches ;         1 6 1

Harrow  on  the  Hill,;,  who  told  me ,  that
l(he  her  felf.was  one  that  was  appointed
by  the  Commitfee  to  make  Trial  of  the
Cafe,  ancl  foe  found  k  true,  and  the  old
-VVoman's  Breafts  to  give  the  Child  Milk,
as  was  reported."  "And  (lie  told  me  in  1665,
that  the  laid  Child  was  at  that  time  alive,  a
Servant- woman  in  London.

.:  III.  Though  J  lay  no  great:firefs  on  the
jKeports  of  thofe  Papifts  'who  corrupt
Church-Hiftory by  Fabulous' fixtures,  yet
many  Hiftories  of  the  Miniilry  of  Angels,
cited  by  them  out  of  the  Fathers,  are  cre-
dible. Thofe.  that  have  purged  their  Le-
gends, retain  a  great  number,  Baronms,
and  De  UCerdxy  and  many  others,  are  worth
the  reading  by  the ■  Judicious;,  .that  can  dif-
cern  the  different  Probabilities.  But  to  de-
ny all  the  Eje&ing  of  Devils,  and  the  V  Ven-
ders mentioned  by  Tertiiliian,ghgen,  Cyprian,
Chryfoftora,  Augu[line,Sidpitms,  Sever  us,  thofe
of  Gregory  Thaumaturgus,  Martin,  &c,  (tho*

Tome  may  be^  over-aggravated  •■> )  befides
thofe  in  Hiftorians,  Eufebws,  Socrates,  Soz.o-
men,  fittor  Vtlcenfis,  Procopins,  Nicephor^
Theodoret,  &c.  would  be  unreafonable,  and
unchriftian  Incredulity.  I  have  formerly
mentioned  the  African  Biihops  or  Preach-
ers, who  all  fpake  well  when  their  Tongues
were  cut  out  by  the  Command  of  the  Ar-
rian  King :  And  Kiclor,  *Ainaas  Gaz^ans  and
M  Procopim


I

\6z       An  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

Trocopius  (as  I  remember,  all  three)  faid,  :
they  faw  them,  and  heard  them  fpeak  af-
ter. But  one  of  them  faith,  that  one  of
the  Bifhops  was  after  drawn  into  the  Sin  of
Fornication,'  and  his  Speech  went  away
again.

Tis  ftrange  if  all  the  Stories  in  C  a  farm
ftiould  be  falfe.

IV- De  la  Cerda  {d.\th>thzt4lbertine  a '  Jeftit
told  him,  that  a  young  Man  came  haftily  to
him  toconfefsjandtoldhim'O  5/>,faith  he,/
could  not  ft  ay,  fo  ftrange  a  thing  hath  befallen
me  I  I  and  my  Companion  were  refolved,  in  Re-
venge again  ft  one  that  had  wronged-  me,  to  go
after  him,  into  the  Fields,  and  kill  him  :  And
while  I  was  Jetting  my  Piftol  in  order,  that  I
m'ght  not  mtfs,  a  beautiful  young  Man  flood  by
rae,  and  asked  me  what  1  was  about  ?  Andwhen
1  denied  to  tell  him',  he  told  me,  that  he  knew
my  purpofe,  and  dijfuaded  me ;  and,  in  Jhort,
didfo  open  the  Sufferings  ofChrift  for  his  Bne-
mies%  and  what  Sins  he  had  forgiven  us,  and
bound  us  to  forgive  one  another,  that  1  was
melted  into  Tears 3  and  my  Mind  changed ;  and
the  young  Man  vanifhed  away.     (An  Angel,

if  true.;

V.  HI  make  no  Application  of  it  to  the
Omfe  Jn  our  late  VVars  but  I  knew  of
many  ftrange  Preservations.  One  credible
Perfon-  had  a  Bullet  (hot  through  the  felt

of


Apparitions  and  Witches.       x  6$

of  his  Hat,  and  ftopp'd  at  the  Lining,  and
hurt  him  not.  Another  had  a  fmali  Bible
in  his  Pocket,  and  a  Musket-Bullet  (hot  in-
to his  Bible,  which  faved  his  Life.

The  Story  of  Sir  Richard  Grecnviles  Exe-
cutions is  printed  already  ^  by  Mr.  Clark;
and  others.  To  confirm  it,  Mr.  Kettleby
Woodhoufe,  (Siller's  Son  to  Juftice  Kettleby  i
and  to  Walter  Kettleby  the  Bookfeller's  Fa*
ther,)  a  fober,  credible  Man,  then  living
in  Bewdeley,  oft  told  me,  that  he  was  one  of
the  Five  (or  Seven)  whofe  Lives  were  fa-
ved :  Being  Soldiers  for  the  Parliament
and  taken  Prifoners,  Sir  Richard  Greenvile
commanded  them  all  to  be  hanged.  The
firft  Man  being  turned  off  the  Ladder,  $
new  Hempen  Rope  brake :  They  fent  for
another,  and  hang'd  him  again*  and  that:
brake ;  and,  as  I  remember,  a  third.  Where-
upon Sir  R.  G.  faved  them  all.  And  Mr.
Woodhoufe  all  the  while  flood  by  the  Gal-
lows, expecting  his  Turn,  and  by  this  efcap'd,
'Tis  like  it  was  by  an  invifible  Power.

VI.  In  i<5(52.  came  out  divers  Books  of
new  Prodigies,  moil  of  them  as  Executions
on  notorious  Sinners,  and  fome  as  Delive-
rances of  better  Men-  I  read  them,  and
enquired  after  the  Matter  of  Fad  3  and  I
found  by  what  Policy  Satan  hath  perverted
Hiftory,  and  obfcured  the  Honour  of  God's'
Works.,  by  cauiiog  weak-headed>  factious
M  i  Per.fo.os'


i  &%         'An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

Ferfons  to  over  do.  I  found  many  of  the
Strange,  things  there  mentioned,  had  fuffici-
ent  Proof:  But  the  Writers  dropp'd  in  many
Circumftances  and  Stories,  by  partial  Cre-
dibility, that  were  not  true.  And  thisfru-
ftrated  the  Books,  and  the  Prodigies,  by
fpoiling  the  Credit  of  all  the  reft.

•  VII.  I  know  not  what  to  impute  it  to,
that  Lightnings  and  Thunderbolts  fall  more
upon  Churches,  than  upon  Caftles  and  Ci-
ty Stone  Walls,or  any  fuch  Buildings.  Jerfey-
Caitle  indeed  was  torn  with  the  Gun-pow-
der, kt  on  fire  by  "Lightning,  (as  Heydelberg
had  terribly  been  as' a  Prefage  of  the  greater
Evil  following : )  And  what  was  it  but  an
invifible  Power ,  that  there  caufed  the
Lord's  Child,  that  was  Governor,  to  be
blown  up,  and  caftdown  again  on  the  Leads,
without  Hurt  ?  Angels  have  a  fpecial  Care
of  Infants.

The  Church  that  my  Grandmother  was
born  near,  had  a  Ball  of  Fire,  by  Light-
ning, came  in  at  the  Belfrey-window,  and
turn  d  up  the  Grave-iiones,  and  went  out  at
the  Chancel- window .

The  Church  that  I  was  baptized  in  (High
ErcsM,  clofe  to  the  Lord  Newport's  Houfe)
had,  in  fuch  a  Storm,  thfe  Leads  rolled  up,
and  caft  on  the  back-lide  of  the  Church ;
C and  in  the  War,  was  levelled  with  the
Ground.)  -^

The


r Apparitions  aniWitches.  \  6%

The  Church  of  Anthony  in  Comma!!,  near
Mmomh,  was  torn  by  Lightning  at  the  time
Of  Worlllip,  on  Whit-Sunday,  1640.  and
People  hurt,  and  ones  Brains  (truck  up  to  a
Pillar.    (It  is  in  Print)  '

So  was  ufed  much  like,  the  Church  of  Wi-
thkombe  in  Devonshire*  near  the  fame  time.

The  Church  where  the  prefent  Lord
Chamberlain,  Earl  of  Dorfet  and  Mddkfex,
his  Anceftors  Monuments  were,  was  torn
by  Lightning  that  came  in  at  the  Steeple,
melted  the  Bells,  and  went  up  to  the  Chan-
cel, and  there  tore  the  Monuments  in  pie-
ces. I  faw  pieces  of  the  Monuments,  that
had  fome  of  the  Golden  Letters,  which  a
truly  worthy  Lady  brought  home,  that
went  from  Tunbridge-  Waters,  to  fee  the
Church-

Many  and  many  Churches  have  been  thus
torn,  proportionably  fo  much  beyond  all
other  Buildings,  efpecially  of  Stone,  that  I
cannot  but  think  there  is  fome  knowing
Agent  that  maketh  the  Choice,  though  I
know  not  who,  nor  why.

Except  a  few  Hay-Ricks,  I  remember
not  that  till  this  Seventy  (ixth  Year  of  my
Age,  I  have  "known  Lightening  to  have
had  Hurting  Power  on  any  Buildings  but
Churches,  favevery  rarely,  and  {mall,  <  as
this  laft  Year,  at  Islington,  it  entred  a  Houfe,
and  kill'd  a  Woman  and  Child:)  Nor  to
M  3  have


1 66       An  Hiflmcal  Difccurfe  of   -

have  torn  any  Wood  but  Oak,  (which  m
Trees  and  Buildings  1  have  feen  torn
where  I  dwelt.)  But  divers  perfcns  have
been  killed  and  fcorch'd  by  it.  An  E-
rainent  Knight,  that  I  knew,  is  common-
ly faid  to  have  been  ftruck  dead  by  it  in  his
Garden.

VIII.  Though  Hurricanes  and  Whirl-'
winds  have  Natural  Caufes,  yet  I  havq
great  caufe  to  think,  that  they  are  managed
by  fome  Spirits  (as  I  faid  before  of  Storms)
Gunpowder  worketh  in  Guns  according
to  its  nature  ?  but  if  fome  Rational  Agent
did  not  invent,  make,  and  manage  it,  all  its
Power,  would  be  of  little  ufe.  I  have
marvelled  to  fee  my  own  fmall  Linnen
fpred  out  by  Servants  to  dry,  to  be  fudden-
ly  catcht  up,  and  carried  over  the  Town
and  Steeple  away,  and  never  more  heard
of.  Near  the  time  when  fome  Reapers  in
the  Vale  bf'Evefi&m  were  hurt,  writhen,
and  one  killed  with  a  Whirlwind,  I  was
walking  in  a  Gravelly  Way  in  a  Corn-field,
there  being  a  Lane  befides  me,  between
two  Hedges  ?  fuddenly  a  Whirlwind  came
up  the  Cart- way/  cafting  up  the  Gravelly
Sand  directly  to  meet*  me  ;  when  it  came
within  Ten  or  Twelve  Yards  of  me,  I  was
about  ftepplng  out  of  the  way  into  the
Corn3  to"efcape  it,  but  it  fuddenly  turned
1    '  ;  out


apparitions  and  Witches.        \6j

out  of  the  way  to  the  Right-hand,  into  the
Lane  from  me,  fo  as  perfwaded  me,  that
it  was  a  voluntary  Motion,  dire&ed  by  a
friendly  Power  ?  for  it  went  ftraight  on  up
the  Lane,  and  tore  the  Hedges  and  Branch-;
es  of  the  Trees  on  the  fide  of  the  Lane^
But  thefe  are  fmajl  eifa&s  to  what  other
fee,  efpecially  of  the  great  Hurricanes  at
Sea  in  the  Weft-Indies.  The  Spirits  that
Rule  in  the  Air  have  great  Power  of  the
Airy  Motions.

IX.  Though  Porphyry,  and  Proclusy  and
Jamblkw,  tell  us,  that  bad  Demons  wiU  oft
(peak  for  good  Anions  and  againft  bad,  in
Pride  and  Subtilty  to  be  thought  good  3  yet
it  is  hard  to  think  that  it  is  not  rather  a  good
Spirit,  that  fpeaks  for  fome  notable  good
Work,  where  no  by-End  is  difcernable.
As  that  mentioned  by  Mr-  Glanvil  and  Dr.
More  of  Dr.  Brit tons  Wife,  whofe  likenefs
appeared  after  Death  to  her  Servant-Maid,
and  fhewed  her  a  parcel  of  Land  that  was  as
part  of  her  Brothers,and  told  her,it  belonged
to  the  Poor,  and  was  unjuftly  alienated
from  them  5  and  bid  her  tell  the  PofTeflbr,
that  he  muft  reftore  it ;  and  gave  her  a  Se-
cret to  tell  him  if  he  refuted  :  And  upon
the  angry  refufal,  when  he  heard  the  Se-
cret, he  yielded  arid  reftored  the  Land  to
the  Poos,  who  now  poflefs  it.

M  4  X.  The


i58         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

X.  The  faid  Heathen  Rhiiofophers  &y9
that  they  are  all  bad  Spirksjthat  ieek  to  be  i
worftiiped ,  and  that  to  procure  it,  they
will  feem  to  be  Religions,  but  will  tell
many  Lies  for  one  Truth,  and  that  lying  is
a  chief  mark  to  know  them  by.  By  this  I
fufped  that  there  are  bad  Spirits  that  come
to  fpeak  for  the  getting  fo  many  Maffes  to
be  faid  for  them  to  deliver  them  from
Purgatory,  and  fuch  Pilgrimages  to  be  per-
formed :  And  thofe  that  tempt  the  People
to  Pray  to  them  and  to  Honour  them  5  for
their  Services  and  Prayers  for  them ,  of
which  their  Legends  abound  with  Instan-
ces :  De  la  Cerda  concludeth  his  Book  of
Angels  with  JBormsof  fuch  Prayers :  And
what  Office  hath  not  fuch  ?  De  la  Cerda,
lib.  2g.  citeth  Miraculous  Appearances  of
the  Crofs,  and  fo  do  many  others,  which  I
leave  to  the  Readers  Judgment.  As  alfo
the  Lady  of  Laurettas  Miracles,  and  others
inch,  which  many  write  of.

XL  I  think  fome  Rational  Spirit  was
probably  the  Agent  of  what  was  written
by  our  great  Pious  Credible  Surgeon  and
Phyfician,  Fabricim  HildannSyQbfer.  Cent. 3,
obf.  26.  [A  Noble  and  Virtuous  Lord,  -Job.
a  Rojle,  going  for  his  Studies  to  FHburg^
with  two  Servants,  on  the  way,  rofe  a

great


Apparitions  and  Witches.         1 69

great  Storm ,  with  Thunder,  Lightening,
and  Rain  \  His  Servant  perfwaded  him  to
let  him  ride  clofe  to  him,  and  cover  him
with  his  Cloaks  fo  joining  their  Horfes
they  rode  under  one  Cloak :  A  great  ftroke
of  a  Thunderbolt  ftruck  down  the  Matter,*
the  Servant,  and  both  the  Horfes ;  the  Ser-
vant and  two  Horfes  immediately  were
dead  :  The  Nobleman,  by  God's  keeping,
fcaped  fafe  and  found,  yet  no  hurt  was  feen
on  the  Horfes,  nor  on  the  Servant,  fave  on
his  Hat,  which  had  a  great  Hole ;  and  the
Head  after  fwelled  and  turned  black:  But
on  the  Nobleman  himfelf  were  all  thefe
Marvels  5  1.  The  Thunderbolt  ftruck  him
about  the  Left- Arm,  and  there  made  a
hole  through  the  Sleeve  of  his  Doublet
and  Shirr,  and  made  a  black  mark  on  the
Skin  which  remained,  but  without  hurt-
The  hole  in  the  Sleeve  was  fmall  without
and  great  within.    2.  Thence  it  defcend-
ed,  and  broke  in  pieces  fome  Coral  Beads
of  a  Bracelet  which  he  wore  on  his  Arm,
but  broke  not  the  String.    3.  Then  on  his
Left-fide,  his  Sword  Sheath  being  tyed,  it
melted  the  point  of  his  Sword  as  if  it  had
been  Leads  and  by  melting  the  gilded  I-
ron,  it  made  a  hole  in  the  Band  for  its  paf-
fage  out.    4,  And  on  both  his  Ancles  were
black  fpots  like  Pitch  3  and  are  yet  vi-
sible.

Another


1 70       An  Hifiorical  Difcourfe  of

Another  riding  a  Stones  caft  before
him,  his  Horfe  and  he  were  caft  down,  but
without  hurt,  fave  the  lofs  of  his  Hearing.]
Hildanm  faw  the  Cloaths ,  Boots ,  and
Sword,  and  had  all  from  the  Man  him-
fclf.


CHAR


Apparitions  and  Witche*.       1 7 1

CHAP.    IX.

IN  my  Vnreafonabknefs  of  Infidelity^hzvmg
many  other  Teftimonies  of  Satan's  War
againft  Chrift  and  his  Kingdom,  I  will  here
mention  one,  which  elfewhere  alfo  I  have
mentioned;  and  that  is  the  Cafe  of
melancholy ,  diftra&ed  and  Enthufiaftick
Perfons,  which  clearly  prove  a  Diabolical
War.

I.  As  to  melancholy  Perfons :  I  think,
few  Men  in  England  have  had  more  advan-
tage to  know  their  Cafe,  than  I  have  had.
I  know  not  how  it  cometh  to  pafs,  but  in
the  Country,  and  in  London,  multitudes  that
are  melancholy  are  fent  by  their  Friends,
or  of  themfelves  come  to  me,  imagining
that  I  can  counfel  them  for  Soul  and  Body  5
fo  that  they  have  taken  up  a  great  part  of
my  time.  And  in  almoft  all  I  perceive,
befides  their  Difeafe,  that  a  malignant  Spi-
rit, by  advantage  of  it,  doth  agitate  them
inceflantly  againft  God  and  Jefus  Chrift,
and  againft  themfelves,  as  he  adeth  Witch-
es to  do  mifchief  to  others.  I  know  that
the  Difeafe  it  felf  is,  to  the  Imagination,
as  difquieting  as  a  Dislocation  or  Lamenefs
is  to  ajoint:  But  there  is  fome  malignant  Spi-
rit that  driveth  it  fo  importunately  toMif-

chief*


jj%         An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

chief.  They  are  conftantly  tempted  to  felf-
tormenting  Thoughts,  to  defpair  and  cry,
TJndone  ,  undone-?  and  to  think  that  the
Day  of  Grace  is  part,  and  that  they  have
committed  the  unpardonable  Sin ;  and  any
thing  that  may  keep  their  Minds  on  a  tor-
menting Rack.

And  they  are  flrongly  at  laft  tempted  to
deftroy  themfelves:  If  they  fee  a  Knife,
they  feel  as  if  one  within  them  laid,  Now
cut  thy  Throaty  or  ftab  thy  felf :  Do  it,  do  it.

If  they  go  by  a  Water,  they  feel  as  if  one
urged  them  prefently  to  leap  in.  And  often
a^e  they  urged  vehemently  to  hang  them-
felves, or  to  caft  themfelves  headlong  from
fome  high  place.  And,  alas  i  many  do  it.
And  it  is  fo  in  other  Lands,  as  well  as  here.
How  many  doth  Tlaterm,  in  his  Obferva-
tions,  tell  us  of,  that  near  him,  in  Helvetia,
deflroyed  themfelves.

And  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  unlefs  it  be
God's  Judgment  for  fome  heinous  Crime,
it  is  few  of  the  ungodly  Rabble  that  have
any  fuch  Trouble  and  Temptation  $  for  Sa-
tan holds  them  fafler  by  prefumptuous  Un-
belief, and  Carelefnefs,  and  worldly  Love,
and  Pleafure  :  But  thofe  that  will  not  be  fo
deceived,  that  he  cannot  torment  hereafter,
he  would  torment  here.  Alas  I  divers  Per-
fcnshavel  known  thus  deflroy  themfelves,
who  I  have  great  reafon  to  believe  were  as
really  Godly  as  any  that  I  have  known.

.     But


'Apparitions  and  Witches.         173

But  Satan's  Advantage  was  in  their  Di£
eafe  and  Temper :  As  he  can  tempt  a
Phlegmatick  Man  to  Sloth,  and  a  i.  hole-
rick  Man  to  Anger,  and  a  Sanguine  Man  to
Luft,  or  (inful  Pleafure*  fo  can  he  a  Me-
lancholy Man  to  Defpair  and  Self-deftru-
dion,  and  againft  God.

2.  And  they  are  impetuoufly  tempted  a-
gainft God  and  Jefus  thrift :  They  are  fo
haunted  with  blaiphemous  Thoughts,  to
think  ill  of  God,  or  to  deny  Chrilt  or  the
Scripture,  that  they  have  no  reft:  And
thefe  come  in  at  Prayer,  at  Sermon,  at  Sa-
crament 3  and  they  have  no  more  power  to
keep  them  out\  or  turn  their  Thoughts  ano-
ther way,  almoft,  than  they  have  of  the
Thoughts  of  another.  Yea,  fomewhaturg-
eth  them  from  Day  to  Day,  to  fpeak  fome
ill,  blafphemous  word  of  God,  or  of
Chrift  5  and  if  they  yield  to  the  Importunk
ty,  it  prefently,  as  it  were,  faith  within
him,  Now  thou  art  damned  :  There  is  now  no
Hope.  And  it  is  much  to  be  noted,  that  lee
the  Perfon  be  Religious,  or  not,they  ulualiy
are  all  thus  tempted  alike :  For  worldly
Crofles  and  Difcontents  do  make  bad  Peo-
ple fometimes  melancholy ;  and  they  alio
have  much  of  the  fame  Solicitations.  So
that  the  manner  of  their  Trouble  plainly
tellech  us,  that  it  is  of  the  Devil-

And  yet  Phyfick  may  do  much  to  cure  if,
becaufe  it  taketh  from  the  Devil  that  In-

ftrumenty


174       An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

ftrument,  or  bodily  Difpofition,   without
which  he  cannot  do  his  Work.

Add  it  is  not  for  nothing,  that  in  the  Go-
fpel  the  Diftradted  and  Epileptick  are  faid
to  be  poflefled  of  Devils  3  for  he  may  caufe
the  Difeafe,  and  work  by  it  accordingly
when  he  hath  done  it.

I  have  oft  marvelled  that  the  Worft  are
not  as  commonly  diftrafted  by  Sadnefs,  as
better  People :  But  befides  the  Reafon  be-
fore given,  there  is  a  peculiar  Sin  that  bring-
eth  this  of  its  Nature,  and  fo  lets  the  Devil
in;  and  that  is,  Overvaluing  fome  worldly
thing  ,  and  then  falling  into  Difcontent  and  Im-
patience at  the  lofs  or  want  of  it.  He  that
breaks  down  his  own  Hedge  or  Wall,  lets
in  the  Trefpafler  or  Thief.  He  that  cannot
take  God  and  Heaven  as  enough  to  content
him,  is  better  without  his  Idol,  than  to
find  Content  in  it.  'Tis  meet  that  Child
be  left  to  cry,  that  will  cry  if  he  may  not
have  his  Will  3  and  that  will  hurt  him
worfe  than  crying.  He  that  will  add  to
God's  Corre<5iions ,  the  Self  Torment  of
finful  Impatience,  (hall  find  Satan  ready  to
farther  his  Work.  God  is  difobliged ,
when  he  is  not  trufted :  And  if  we  con-
fent  not  that  he  do  with  us  what  he  will,
he  will  not  do  what  we  impofe  upon  him  :
His  Wifdom,  and  not  cur  Fleih  and  Fol-
ly, muft  determine  of  all  his  Way  and
Work.    •

II.  And


apparitions  and  Witches.        i  7  5

II.  And  there  have  been  many  Enthufi-
afticks  that  Satan  hath  notorioufly  deluded*
by  pretended  Angelical  Revelation,  for
fome  great  increafe  of  Knowledge :  You
may  find  many  fad  Inftances  in  Epiphanius,
and  other  Hiftortes  of  the  old  Hereticks.
And  few  Ages  fince  have  been  without
fome  fuch.

The  Madnefs  of  John  of  Ley  dens  Munfler
Rebels  fhewed  it ;  what  Zeal  and  feeming
Fortitude  did  their  deceiving  Spirit  infpire
them  with,  while  by  Murders  they  cryed  up
theif  ntwSion?  Leojnda  witneffeth,  that
when  the  Flefh  was  pull'd  orf  Clipper  dotting
with  hot  Pincers,  he  fcarce  uttered  a  Com-
plaint or  great  regard  of  the  pain.

Satan's  Hand  was  notorious  in  the  delufi-
ons  of  David  George  in  Holland ,  and  of
Hacket,  Coppinger ,  and  Arthington  here.

The  horrid  Wickednefs  of  the  Ranters
here,  proclaimed  him  to  be  their  Teacher*

When  the  Quakers  firft  rofe  here,  their
Societies  began  like  Witehes,  with  Qua-
king, and  Vomiting,  and  Infe$ing  others,
with  breathing  on  them,  and  tying  Ribbons
on  their  Hands- And  their  Anions  as  well  as
their  Do&rine  fhewed  their  Matter.  When
fome,  as  propefying,  walked  through  the
Streets  of  Cities  naked ;  and  fome  vainly
undertook  to  raife  the  Dead  (as  Sufan  Pkr-
[on  &  Worcefter  :)  And  ufually  they  difturb*

ed


1 7  6       An  Riftorical  Difcourfe  of

ed  and  publickly  reviled  the  moft  Godly
Minifters  worfe  than  the  rngft  debauched
of  the  Rabble  did.

He  that  would  know  how  manifeftly  Sa-
tan ruled  fuch  Enthufiafts  in  Germany,  may

read  it  at  large  in  Beck*nan\  Exercltations^
and  in  the  Life  of  Paracelfm,  teftify'd  by
Opporinm,  that  lived  with  him  .as  his  Ser-
vant, and  others  that  were  affrighted  with
his  Drunken  Rage  and  Satanical  Con-
verfe.

And  how  dangerous  it  is  to  defire  fucfi
Converfe  with  Angels  and  Spirits,  as  God
bath  not  judged  fuitable  to  our  Condition
herein  the  Flelh ,  the  cafe  of  Jacob  Beh-
mn  and  Dr.  Pordage  here,  and  his  Society
may  tell  us.  His  chief  Profelyte,  Compa-
nion and  SuccefTor  (whofe  name  I  sriention
not  for  the  fake  of  his  Worthy  Kindred  )
condefcended  to  open  fecretiy  to  me  in
Writing,  his  Judgment,  by  which  I  foon
fawthat  their  Guide  differed  much  from
the  Scripture.  One  of  extraordinary  Learn-
ing and  Reputation*  was  a  while  diftra&ed
by  going  to  them,  to  try  their  Way.
Some  of  my  very  much  efteemed  Friends
have  been  diftra&ed,  and  overcome  with
Melancholy,  by  ftudying  Behmen  and  that
way.  What  Dr.  Pordage  his  Do&rine  was,
you  may  fee  partly  in  his  PofihnmG^  Myftu
cat  Theology,  publilhed  by  his  Friend  Dr.
Hooker >   Mr.  Fowler  of  Reading  aCCUfed  him

as


r Apparitions  and  Witches';        ijj

as  a  Conjurer,  and  he  bath  publifhed  his
Defence  in  Folio,  (which  I  may  the  rather
mention,  becaufe  in  it  he  hath  made  ufe  of
friy  name  againft  Mr  Fowler ,  as  fpeakinga-
gainft  me,  for  our  difference  in  explaining
the  Do6trine  of  Imputed  Righteoufn£fs>)
In  this  Defence  the  Dr.  confefleth,  that
the  Devil  was  too  familiar  in  his  Houfe
(where  a  Society  lived  with  him  that  kept
their  Exercifes  and  Hours  of  finging  Night
and  Day.)  He  (and  his  Friends)  pretended
that  he  knew  when  good  Spirits  and  when
bad  ones  were  about  him,  by  Smells  and
Gufts,  and  the  temper  of  their  Senfe  and
Spirits.  And  he  confefleth,  that  in. his
great  Room,  the  Devil  appeared  to  him  by
Night  in  the  likenefs  of  a  Fiery  Dragon
that  almoft  filled  the  Room,  and  long  con-
Aided  with  him.  And  that  once  he  made
on  the  Brick- Wall,  over  his  Chimney,
the  likenefs  of  a  Coach  drawn  by  Tygers,  h
deeply  imprefled,  that  they  were  fein  to
ufe  a  Pick- Ax  to  cut  it  out  of  the  Bricks:
And  that  the  like  Impreflion  was  on  the
Glafs  of  his  Windows,,  which  they  could
not  wafh  out.  But  all  this  he  imputed  p
Everard  that  intruded  into  his  Society,  ta-
king him  to  be  the  Conjurer  i  And  he  faith,
that  when  he  was  gone,  he  appeared  to
him  in  the  Night,  walking  in  his  Chamber
in  Boots  and  Spurs,


1 7 S        rAn  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

So  that  Diabolical  Apparitions,  and  open
Efife&s  were  confefled  by  him,  as  his  Book
declareth.

Among  others,  I  think  meet  to  add  this
Hiftory  of  fome  Enthufiafticks  that  I  have
known,  not  as  a  Condemnation  of  their  O-
pinions,  but  of  the  way  of  receiving
them.

A  Country  Man  of  inkburrough  Parifli
(as  he  faid)  in  Worcefcerjhire,  came  to  me
to  A&on  near  LonJon,  to  tell  me,  that  God
had  revealed  to  him  the  truth  of  that  thou-
fand  Years  Reign  of  Chrift  on  Earth  5  and
he  was  poffeflfed  with  a  ftrong  Zeal  to  propa-  j
gate  it,  and  I  rnuft  needs  promote  the  pub-
lication of  his  Papers.  I  examined  him
how  he  came  to  his  knowledge  of  it,  and  I
found  it  was  not  by  any  hard  Study,  nor
Zeal  in  Religion,  nor  by  Reading  any  Book
for  it,  nor  by  Converfe  with  any  of  that
Opinion ,  for  he  had  been  no  fuch  Man,
nor  had  come  among  fuch :  But  it  was  by
feeming  Revelation,  finding  him  Ignorant
and  Enthufiaftical,  I  difpleaied  him,  by  ad-
vifing  him  to  fupprefs  his  Papers  3  and  I
after  heard  that  he  turned  diftraded.
:.  At  Coventry  there  dwell  with  me  in  the
Governours  Houfe,  Major  Wilkje,  a  Scot-
tifh  Soldier,  and  a  Scholar  of  confiderable
Learning  3  he  was  Engineer  for  Fortificati-
on. He  would  drink  too  much,  and  had
t^figns  of  a  heated  Brain,  bqt  no  failing

of


Apparitions  andWitchesl  1 79

of  his  Reafon  perceivable.  He  confident-
ly affirmed  his  conftant  notice  of  Spirits
good  and  bad  about  him  5  that  he  had  a
good  Genius  and  in  Enemy:  That  one
Night  his  Enemy  faid,  /  have  torn  his  Li-
ver y  and  that  he  made  a  Chamber- Pot  full
of  Blood  in  the  Morning:  He  was  confi-
dent, that  Thunder  and  Lightning  was  the
Wars  of  Spirits,  foretelling  and  refpecting
fuch  things  below :  He  pretended  to  know
by  the  Thunder  and  Lightning  which  ficie
in  the  Wars  (liould  have  the  Vi&ory :  In
1643  or  1644,  about  a  Year  and  half  after
the  Wars  begun,  he  faid,  That  it  was  re-
vealed to  him,  that  the  War  fliouid  endure
three  Years  and  an  half,  and  the  Parliament
fhould  Conquer ;  but  their  own  Divifions
fhould  after  keep  them  long  unfetled.  He
faid,  that  being  in  Paris,  in  a  clear  Moon-
fhine  Night  (  many  Years  before )  being
walking  in  his  Chamber,  and  repeating  £/*-
ir^  WsVerfion  of  the  fecond  Pfalm^  ^nare
fremuemnt  gentes,&c.  fudden/y  a  great  noife
made  him  look  out,  and  he  faw  a  Conftel-
lation  in  the  fliape  of  a  Lion  Rampant  a-
gainft  the  Moon,  and  while  he  long  gazed
on  it,  one  Leg  broke  off,  and  turned  to  the
fimilitude  of  a  Cock,  and  after  the  three
other  Legs  broke  off  And  when  he  was
in  Bed  his  good  Spirit  expounded  it  to  him,
and  told  him ,  that  the  Moon  was  the
Church  here,  and  the  Aflaulting  Lion  was
N  Z  England^


1 8o       An  Hiftorical  Difcomfe  of

England^  Wales,  and  Ireland,  by  the  KingJ
turned  againft  the  Church:  that  the  Foot
firft  broken  off,  was  Scotland,  as  a  Cock,
by  crowing  awakened  the  other  three,  and
that  all  fliould  end  in  Conqueft  of  the  Af-
failantS.

And  his  Genius  taught  him  the  Millena-
ry Reign  of  Chrift,  and  taught  him  how
to  Expound  many  Texts  for  it  3  as  drink-
ing with  them  the  Fruit  of  the  Vine  new,
that  is,  in  its  renewed  Paradife  ftate?  and
the  time  of  Reftitution  of  all  things,  &e.
And  he  Expounded  to*  him  many  other
Scriptures,  as  that  the  Devils  Contending  a-
bout  the  Body  of  Mofes,  was,  that  it  might
be  drowned  in  the  Basket  of  Bulrufhes  to
prevent  what  he  was  to  do,  &c.

How  much  of  this  was  true  or  falfe,  I
know  not ;  but  I  heard  credibly,  that  after
fome  time  he  was  quite  diftra<aed,  partly
through  want,  and  partly  by  a  hot  Brain,
over-heated  too  oft  with  drinking.

What  but  Diabolical  Delufion  and  Infti-
gation5could  make  tenner  and  his  Followers
that  were  for  the  Millenary  Fifth  Monar-
chy, to  arife  fo  madly  as  two  days  xo  come
into  fuch  a  City,  and  think  by  Arms  to
conquer  all  Oppofers,  at  King  Charles  II.
his  beginning  of  the  new  Prelatical  way  of
Church  Government :  Men  in  their  Wits
would  not  have  fo  hafied  to  the  Gallows.

k


"Apparitions  and  Witches.        1 8 1

A  little  &fter  the  K.  Ch.  II.  Parliament
and  Bi/hops  began  the  overthrowing,  di-
viding Works,  which'  Bartholomew  day,
Aug.  24.  1662.  did  bring  to  open  Birth,  a
Gentlewoman  of  London  came  to  me  fecret-
ly  with  her  Sifter  as  Witnefs,  ( Perfons  as
commonly  called  of  Quality  and  Moderati-
on) to  be  refolved  how  to  Expound  a
ftrange  thing  that  had  befallen  her,  which
was.  That  £'  asjhe  wot  praying  in  Stent ,  fhe
€  begg  d  for  Deliverance  of  the  Church
cand  Religion*  and  Minifters  from  the
f-  dreaded  Sufferings  that  were  determined,

*  and  the  fad  effe&s  of  Perfection,  Divifi-
'  on  and  publick  dangers  5  and  it  was  fud-
c  denly  given  her,  as  an  Anfwer,  that  there

*  fliould  be  a  fpeedy  Deliverance,  even  in  a

*  very  fhort  time.  She  defired  to  know
'  which  wray  j  and  k  was  by  fomewhat  on
'  the  King,  which  I  refufed  to  hear  out,

*  whether  it  was  Change  or  Death  5  it  be-
'  ing  fet  ftrongly  on  her  as  a  Revelation,

*  fhe  earneftly  prayed,  that  if  this  were  a

*  true  Divine  Impulfe  and  Revelation,  God

*  would  certify  her  by  feme  vifible  fign ;

*  and  fhe  ventured  to  choofe  the  Sign  her
'  felf,  and  laid  her  Hand  on  the  outfide  of
1  the  upper  part  of  her  Leg,  and  begg'd  of
c  God,that  if  it  were  a  true  Anfwer,he  would
'  make  on  that  place  fome  vifible  mark  5
fi  and  there  was  prefently  the  mark  of  black
'  fpots,like  as  if  a  Hand  had  burnt  it  5  which

Nj  'her


i  8  i       'Jn  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

c  her  Sifter  witneffed,(he  faw  prefently,  and
f  after,  there  being  no  fuch  thing  before.

I  told  her,  that  fhe  had  finfully  tempt-
ed God,  and  gone  out  of  his  way  into  a
way  of  her  own,  and  God  might  juftly  for
it,  give  Satan  power  to  deceive  her:  But
■yet,  whether  it  would  prove  a  Truth  or  a
Falfhood,  it  was  not  I,  but  the  Event  that
mult  tell  her,,  and  therefore  that  fhe  mud
wait  in  Patience  and  Innocency,  and  lay  no
ftrefsonfuchafign.

But  the  Womans  ftmnge  Impulfe  and
Mark  proved  but  a  Delufiofr

The  Rofie-Crucians,  and  fuch  as  addid
themfelves  to  find  the  Philofopher's  Stone,
have  fomeof  them  feemed  to  be  deluded
by  feme  Evil  Spirit ;  by  the  violence  of
their  Defires,  and  the  blind  confidence  of
their  Expectations ,  and  the  ill  Means  that
ibme have  ufed:  Hiftories of  fuch  are  too
many  to  be  recited.  Fdix  PLterm,  in  his
vbftrvat.  L  i.  tells  us  of  one  of  his  Famili-
ars, a  Perfon  of  Honour  and  Wealth ,  a
Baron,  and  Religious,  and  addi&ed  to  good
Works,  that  was  fo  fet  upon  it,  that  he
not  only  fo"  fpent  his  Time  and  Study,  but
his  Eftate,  reducing  himfelf  and  his  Fami-
ly to  great  Poverty  $  and  yet  would  never
abate  his  Confidence,  that  he  was  near  at-
taining it :  And  though  (till  fruftrate,  he
was  dill  near  It :  Infomuch  that  he  labour-
ed with  the  Magistrates  for  their  Grant  and

-  -    Powers


Apparitions  and  Witches.         i 8  j

Power,  that  with  the  Gold  he  made  he
might  build  anew  Bridge  over  the  River,and
I  might  build  a  Colledge  for  the  Univerfity,
&c  and  though  he  died  a  poor  Man,  and
i  left  his  Children  Poor,  he  believed  to  the
I  laft,  that  he  was  near  finding  out  what  he
I  fought,  had  he  had  longer  life.

to  fuch  deluded  by  Spirits,  I  think  I
may  add  the  Comforts  of  many  Perfons
that  I  have  known,  that#long  lived  in  doubt
of  their  Salvation,  next  Defpair:  And
when  a  Deceiver  hath  but  drawn  them  to
change  their  Religion  from  Sound  Do&rine
to  fome  Error,  they  have  prefently  beea
delivered  from  their  Troubles,  "and  lived
in  Peace  and  Confidence-  It  cannot  be  from
the  Nature  cf  the  New  Do&rines  received  %
for  it  befals  divers  that  turn  to  contrary
Doftrines  from  each  other :  Some  that  turn
Papifts,  fome  that  turn  Quakers,  fome  A-
nabaptifts,  fome  Antinomians,  fome  Mil-
lenaries, and  are  againft  each  other,  yes
have  fudden  Peace  upon  their  change.  I
confefs,  that  the  conceit  of  having  found
out  a  better  way  may  do  much  $  and  the
diverfion  of  their  thoughts  to  difpute  may
do  much :  As  Pet .  Foreftm  tells  us  of  a  Me-
lancholy Papift,  that  after  other  means  ufed
in  vain,  was  at  laft  cured  by  eager  difpu-
ting  againft  the  Proteftants :  But  when  the
Perfons  before  had  no  doubt  of  the  Do»
brines  of  Religion,  but  only  of  the  ftate

N  4  cf


1 84       An  Hifiorical  Difcourfe  of

of  their  own  Souls ,  and  when  they  had
no  fuch  Difputes  to  bring  them  to  it,  but
fcdden  hearing  a  Seducer,  and  when  it  is
only  Falfe  Doftrine  that  comforteth  them,
when  found  Dofirine  profefled,  could  not,
it  feemeth  to  be  done  by  a  lying  Spirit  that
corpforteth  Men  with  Evil,  as  God's  Spirit
doth  with  Good.

Bodin  tells  us  of  a  French  Baron  that  con-
feft,  that  he  wor(hiped  the  Devil,  and  pray-
ed to  him,  and  had  Sacrificed  nine  Children
to  him,  and  intended  to  have  Sacrificed  one
of  his  own  5  and  he  ask'd  ,him  for  what  he
did  this?  And  he  faid,  That  he  promifedto
make  him  Great,  and  yet  that  he  never  gave,
him  any  thing,  and  to  make  him  k&ow  what  he,
de fired  to  k&ow,  and  yet  told  him  more  Lies
than  Truths:  This  promife  of  Knowledge  Wd.$
the  old  Temptation  to  Eve:  And  yet  Know-
ledge is  the  great  Gift  of  our  great  Comfor-
ter, the  Holy  Ghoft  $  fo  that  there  is  a
true  Comforting  Knowledge  which  God
giveth,  and  deceitful  fhadow  of  it '5  and  a
yfeleft  hurtful  Knowledge  by  which  Satan
comforteth  the  deluded :  Its  true,  Needful
Saving  Knowledge  that  is  of  God  :  Many
Conjurers  have  by  the  defire  of  knowing
what  vain  Curiofity  is  pleafed  with,  become
the  Devil's  slaves-

To  what  fort  fliall  we  rank  thofe  Men
that  tell  Men  of  things  flolen  and  loft,  and
that  ftew  Men  the  Face  of  the  Thief  in  a-

Glafsi


"Apparitions  and  Witches.        1 8  J

Glafs,  and  caufe  the  Goods  to  be  brought
back,  who  are  commonly  called  Whit*
Witches :  We  have  had  fo  many  Credible
Reports  of  fuch,  as  alloweth  not  Reafon  to
doubt  of  it.  When  I  lived  at  Dudley,
Hodg&s  at  Sedgky  ,  two  Miles  off  ( even
where  famous  William  Fenner  preacht)  was
long  and  commonly  accounted  fuch  a  one :
And  when  I  lived  at  Kedermwfiery  one  of
my  Neighbours  affirmed,  that  having  his
Yarn  ftolen,  he  went  to  Hodges  (ten  Miles
off)  and  he  told  him,  that  at  fuch  an  Hour
he  fliould  have  it  brought  home  again,  and
put  in  at  the  Window,  andfb  it  was;  and
as  I  remember,  he  (hewed  him  the  Per-
fons  Face  in  a  Glafs  3  yet  I  do  not  think
that  Hodges  made  any  known  Contra^
with  the  Devil,  but  thought  it  was  an  effed
of  Art.


CHAR


i 86       An  HiftoYtcal  Difcourfe  of

CHAP.    X.

Other  Strange  Providences  observ-
able.

IHave,  in  other  Treatifes,  named  fome
Inftances  of  fuch  Succefs  of  Prayer,  as
hath  not  been  unprofitable  tome:  I  will
bere  mention  fome  of  them,  and  add  fome
more.

Only  I  will  premife  this  Caution  to  the
Reader,  i.  That  it  is  no  certain  fign  of
the  Innocency  or  San&ity  of  the  Perfon  de-
livered, that  it  was  done  by  a  wonderful
manner  upon  Prayer.  Nay,  it  is  not  un-
afiial,  for  the  Guilt  of  fome  great  Sin,  to
bring  the  Suffering,  from  which  by  Prayer
they  are  delivered ;  and  God  may  hear  o-
tfaers,  for  the  deliverance  of  fuch  Sinners.

2*  Nor  is  it  any  certain  fign  of  the  San-
ffity  of  thofe  whofe  Prayers  are  fo  heard,
(though  it  be  a  very  encouraging  Mercy  to
them,)  any  more  than  P/*ophefying9  and
Cafting  out  Devils,  and  doing  wonderful
Works  in  the  Name  of  Chrift,  Matrj*  was
a  Proof  that  the  Agents  were  not  rejected
Workers  of  Iniquity.  It  is  the  Honour  of
God,  and  the  Regard  which  he  hath  to  the
Faith  and  Prayers  of  the  DiftrefTed,  or  o-
thers,  and  of  the  Souls  that  he  would  con-
vince 5


apparitions  and  Witthes.  i 87

vince ;  which  thefe,  and  fueh  likelnftances
do  declare.

3.  And  I  will  omit  many  Inftances  of
Perfons  recovered  from  the  Jaws  of  Death,
juft  at  the  Hour  while  we  have  been  pray-
ing for  them  5  for,  though  this  be  much  to
me5  it  will  not  be  fo  to  the  Unbeliever,
who  will  fay,  that  it  was  not  from  that
Caufe,  but  would  have  been  if  you  had  not
prayed.  And  I  muft  confefs  that  I  have
prayed  for  the  Life  of  many  a  dear  Friend,
whom  God  hath  not  recovered,  but  taken
away.

4.  Nor  will  I  mention  any  one  Inftance
of  theSuccefs  of  my  own  Prayers,  or  any
others,  when  I  joined  with  them  5  but  on-
ly of  fome  plain,  poor,  humble,  Godly  Per-
fons, who  ufed  that  fort  of  fervent  Prayer
which  fome  deride.  For  I  am  a  very  un-
worthy Perfon  my  felf,  in  comparifon  of
many  of  thofe  poor,  humble,  blamelefs  Per-
fons, whom  I  then  had  the  Overfight  of.

1  In  general,  I  may  fay,  that  I  have  di-
vers times,  after  long  disabling  Weaknefs
and  Pain,  been  enabled  within  a  Day  or
two  to  come  to  Church  again,  and  go  on  in
my  Work,  when  my  poor  Neighbours  have
fpent  a  Day  in  Fafting  and  Prayer  for  me.

II.  When  ZtMlbome  in  Darby  [hire  I  was

given  up  for  dead,  by  bleeding  about  an

hundred


i$$        An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

hundred  and  twenty  Ounces  at  the  Nofe,
after  other  Weaknefles  and  Bleedings  ma-
ny Years,  my  Father  and  Mocher-in-Law
dwelling  in  Shrewsbury,  the  Report  came  to
them  there  that  I  was  dead.    My  Mother-
In-Law  was,  by  the  Governor,  and  other
Friends,  exhorted  to  bear  it  patiently;    She
prefently  retired  to  fecret  Prayer  5  where
flie  profeffeth,  that  a  Trembling  and  Con-
daffionpf  her  Body  furprizing  her, 'foe  felt
that  which  conftrained  her  to  fay  what  foe
did  when  foe  came  forth,  (to  her  Friends,)
viz.*  Z£fe  if  not  dead ,  but  Jh all  live  for  far-
tb'er  Serviced    And  hereupon  they  fenc  a
MeflTenger  from  Shrewsbury  to  fee;   who
found  me  alive  J  and  brought  them  the  Ti-
dings.    This  Was  in  February,  1646.     My
Mother-in-Law  is  yet  living,  about  Ninety
two  Years  of  Age  ?  the  Daughter  of  Sir  Tho-
mas Hunkes,  Two  of  her  Brothers*  Sir  Foulk§
Hunkes,  and  Sir  Henry  Hunkes,  were  known
Soldiers  for  the  King  5  the  one  Governor  of

Shrewsbury  >  and  the  Other  of  Banbury-CcL-

ftleawhile.  She  is  one  that -hath  (pent  a
great  part  of  her  Life  in  fecret  Rrayer*  with
great  Negleft  of  the  Flefo  and  World,  and
longing  to  dk,  and  be  with  Chrift,  which
flie  hath  not  yet  obtained,  but  will  ere
long.  (Since  the  Writing  of  this,  dead,  at
Ninety  fix,  in  full  Underftanding,  and  great
Holinefs.)

III.  After


dpparittons  and  Witcfas.        xSy

III.  After  long  Pain  and  Weaknefs,  read-
ing a- Latin  Book  of  one  Gerhard,  a  Foreign
Phyfician,  I  found  in  him,  that  his  own  Fa-
ther had  been  cured  of  force  of  my  Diftetxr-
pers  (as  I  then  thought)  by  daily  fwallowing
a  Ballet  of  pureft  Gold  :  I  got  one  of  the
weight  of  a  Twenty-Shilling-pkce-*  and
fwallowed  it,  but  it  remained  in  me  5  and
hearing  of  a  Gentleman  within  twelve  Miles
of  me,  that  lately  did  the  like,  and  it  ne-
ver pafsrd  from  him,  but  he  quickly  died,
made  me  take  Clyfters  and  Purges ,  but
none  of  them  ftirred  it.  My  poor  praying
Neighbours  (not  then  fearing  the  Canon,
which  ftri&ly  forbiddeth  it)  fet  apart  a
Day,  to  faft  and  pray  for  my  Deliverance  5
and  that  Morning  it  came  away,  after  many
Weeks  abode,  (three  or  four;)  and  they
{pent  the  reft  of  the  Day  in  Thankfgiving.

^  IV.  In  my  Weakneft,  being  under  Phy-
lick  with  Dr.  Wright,  then  living  in  Shrewf
bnryi  there  fuddenly  rofe  upon  one  of  the
Tonfils  of  my  Throat  a  round  Tumour,
fceming  to  me  as  hard  asca  Bone,  and  about
as  big  as  a  great  Peafe>  or  fmali  Button,  half
out  of  the  Flefh,  and  half  in.  I  feared  left
it  would  prove  a  Cancer ;  but  the  Dofior
told  me,  he  did  not  think  fo,  but  what  ic
was  he  knew  not  •,  but  perfuaded  {having
iirft  tried  diflblying  and*  diflipating  Means

in


ipo        rAn  Hiflorical  Difcourfe  of

in  vain)  to  quiet  it  only  with  Gargar ifms  of
hot  Milk:  It  increafed  but  little,  but  no
Means  altered  it,  till  (as  I  remember)  a-
bout  a  quarter  of  a  Year  after,  my  Con-
fidence reproved  me,  that  having  had  fo  ma-
ny great  Mercies  upon  Prayer,  I  never  gave
God  the  Honour  or  Thanks  of  publick  men-
tioning them,  for  fear  of  feeming  to  feek
fome  Glory  to  my  felf?  being  the  next
Morning  to  preach  my  Le&ure,  I  obeyed
my  Confcience,  and  mentioned  them  in  the
Words  fince  printed  and  published  in  the
Second  Part  of  my  Saints  Everlafting  Reft,
being  then  upon  tht  proof  of  the  Truth  of
the  Scriptures :  I  had  before  conflantly  felt
it,  (and  too  oft  looked  at  in  the  Glafs.)
*As  fbon  as  I  had  preached  and  fpoken  thofe
Words,  I  felt  no  more  of  it.  As  I  came
out  of  the  Pulpit,  I  put  my  Finger  in  my
Mouth  to  feel  it,  but  could  feel  nothing  :
I  hafted  home  to  the  Glafs,  and  faw  that
there  was  neither  VoU,  vel  Veftigiumy  vel
Cicatrix  r}  no  Cavity,  Tumour,  Difcolour-
ing,  nor  any  fign  where- ever  it  was;  and  I
am  fure  I  neither  fpit  it  out,  nor  fwallowed
it ;  and  to  the  laft  Hour  it  feemed  as  hard
as  a  Bone.

V.  Richard  Cooke,  a  Mercer  in  Kniver9
was  long  a  Man  of  a  pious,  unblameable
Life,  and  one  of  the  chief  of  good  old
Mr.  John  Crofs  (fince  Minifter  here  in  Fri-
day-


"Apparitions  and  Witches:        ipi

day-ftreet)  his  Congregation :  When  I  came
to  Kederminfter,  he  removed  thither,  and
took  a  Houfe  the  next  Door  to  me;  which
proved  old,  dangerous,  and  fo  ill  a  Bargain,
as  caft  him  into  melancholy _Doubts  that  he
did  not  well  to  leave  his  Habitation-  His
Father  before  him  had  long  lived,  and  ac
laft  died  in  Diftra&ion.  Taking  too  much
hot  Waters,  to  comfort  him  in  his  Sadneis*
Nature,  Trouble,  and  thofe  together,  pre-
vailed to  his  utter  Diftra&ion.  He  fo  con-
tinued, from  1642.  to  1646.  The  be&
Means,  by  fuch  as  were  moft  noted  for  cu-
ring that  Difeafe,  were  ufed,  and  all  ia
vain.  My  Neighbours  of  Kedermwfter  re-
folved  not  eafily  to  give  over  Fafting  and
Praying  with  and  for  him,  till  he  was  re-
covered :  Divers  Days  all  feemed  in  vaiii,
but  at  laft  he  amended,  and  bath  been  re-
covered (without  any  other  Remedy)  now
from  1646,  to  this  prefent  time,  i6j89
though  not  altogether  of  fo  perfed  ftrengtfa
of  Brain  as  before,  yet  of  competent  Un-
derftanding.  About  a  Year  or  two  ago  I
faw  him  in  London,  and  I  hear  he  is  yet  alive
and  well,  16 78.

VI.  Thomas  Giles,  the  Son  of  Mr.  Giks
of  Aftky,  one  of  the  then  Committee  in
Worcefierfoire,  was  fent  to  be  an  Apprentice
mWorcefter.  After  a  Fever,  (as  they  told
me,)  he  fell  into  a  violent  Epilepfie:  After

much


1 9  %       An  Hiftorical  Vifcourfe  of

much  Phyfick  in  Worcefier,  and  opening  his
Head,  and  all  in  vain,  his  Mother  took  him
home  to  her  in  Kederminfter  5  where,  being
a  Widow,  (he  came  to  fojourn,  purpofely
for  the  Company  of  Godly  People  there.
Mr.  Jackson,  the  Phyfician  of  the  Town,  (my
dear  and  faithful  Friend,  now,  1678.  a  Phy-
fician in  Shrewsbury <y)  and  I  consulting,  we
ufed  in  vain  what  Means  we  cduld.  His
Fits  were  foirietimes  twice  or  thrice  a  Day  :
We  were  fain  to  put  a  Key  into  his  Mouth,
left  he  (hould  bite  off  his  Tongue  At  laft,
the  forefaid  praying  Perfoiis  refolved  to  try
the  old  Remedy  of  Faftifig  and  Praying,  till
he  was  recovered.  The  firft  Day  they  found
no  Succefs :  As  I  retiiember,it  was  the  fecond
Day,  while  they  were  together,  praying,  he
was  fuddenly  cured ;  and  as  his  Mother  and
they  that  dwelt  with  him,  told  me,  had  ne-
ver one  Fit  fince.  Hereupon  his  Mother
bound  him  Apprentice  to  Mr-  John  Alkn<>
an  honeft  Apothecary  in  Kederminfter^  whom
he  ferved  feven  Years,  and  is  now  an  Apo-
thecary in  St  afford^  fince  dead ;  Mr.  Allen -
the  Phyfician,  and  almoft  all  that  prayed  for
him,being  yet  alive.  I  was  prefent  at  none  of
all  thefe  Days  my  felf.  If  you  ask  me,  Why  ?
1.  My  Weaknefs,  and  my  publick  Work
much  hindred  me.  2. 1  was  worfe  than  they,
and  had  not  their  Faith,  and  Fervency,  and
Patience  •,  and  becaufe  we  have  no  abfoJute
Promife  of  fuch  Deliverances,  I  was  afraid*

left


Apparitions  and  Witches,       19$

left  if  we  failed  and  prayed  fo  long  as  they
refolved  to  do,  it  would  have  turned  to
fome  Reproach  or  Difcouragement  if  we
did  not  prevail.  3.  But  I  have  joyned  with
them  more  than  once,  when  we  have,  to
our  great  Encouragement,  prevailed.  Bu&
thofe  Inftances  I  prornifed  to  pretermit.

In  fumm,  I  verily  believe  that  I  have
been  kept  alive  thefe  forty  Years,  but  no-
tably thefe  thirty  eight,  by  the  Prayers  of
many  better  than  my  felf,  prevailing  with
God,  through  the  Intercemoa  of  our  great
Mediator.

VII.  I  will  add  one  fad  Story ,  leaving
all  to  the  Readers  Judgment,  to  warn  the
befl:  to  avoid  Temptation  ,  and  to  tell  them
that  Satan  hath  his  wiles  by  Mens  Sin,  to
blalt  the  Glory  and  Comfort  of  Delive-
rances.

In  Bewdky,  a  Sanguine  ftrong  Maid,  fell
into  ftrange  Hifterical  Fits :  It  began  by
Stoppage  of  the  Menftmay  I  gave  her  Caftory
and  Rad.  QBrmii,  and  Sem*  Dauci  on  Fo-
refim  Commendation ,  and  (lie  began  to  be
better :  But  I  being  driven  out  of  the
Country  by  War  3  and  Mr.  Robert  Morton
(  Dr.  Mortons  Father )  their  Paftor  and  Phy-v
fitian  driven  after  me  to  Coventry ,  ihe  was
left  without  help,  and  grew  worfe  than
ever .-  Till  at  laft  I  think  by  a  furor  uteri*
nm  ex  corruptions  Seminti ,  me  feemed  pof-

O  fell


1 9%         'An  Hiftorkal  Vifcoutfe  of

(eft  by  a  Devil :  In  her  Fits,  many  cotild  not
hold  her,  fhe  would  be  caftoffher  Bed,
and  upon  it  again ,  by  a  force  far  above
her  ftrength ,  as  the   Beholders  Judged  :
They  (hewed  Needles  and  Pins,  and  Cords
brought  to  her,  none  knew  how  ,  to  kill
her  felf :  A  Papift  coming  to  Cure  her  their
way  ,  fhe  told  them  of  his  coming  far  off,
and  laught  at  his  Holy  Water.    In  her  fits
fhe  would  Swear,  Curfe,  and  Rage  againft
any  that  were  Religious ,  and  Hugg  thofe
that  were  Vicious ,  and    be  merry  with
them  :  Thus  (he  continued  from  1542.  till ,
1646.  or  1647.  When  I  returned  home,  I
went  to  fee  her,  and  Prayed  once  by  her,
and  came  to  her  no  more.    At  laft  my  pray-
ing Neighbours  encouraged  by  their  Succefs, ,
for  others  refolved  to  joyn  with  fome  Koi
Bewdky^  to  Faft  and  Pray  by  her  ,  till  fhe
was  recovered :  While  they  were  Praying,
fhe  was  ufually  in  violent  Rage ,  and  af-
ter thankt  them  $  after  many  days,  in  the
mid/1  of  the  Day  ,  while  Mr.  The-.  Ware  of
Kederminfter  was  Praying ,  fhe  fell  on  the
Floor  like  a  Block ,  and  having  lain  fo  a
while  ,  cryed  out ,  He  is  gone ,  He  is  gone ;
The  Black.  Dog  is  gone:  And  fhe  never  had
a  Fit  after.

But  coming  to  our  Lecture,  two  Miles, --
(he  was  as  uncomfortable  as  ever ;  crying  to
me,  Oh,  Ton  know  not  how  bad  I  ami  And  I

Ignoraatiy  told  her,  what  Comfort  her  De-  k

liverance


apparitions  and  WMhes .  i 9  S

Ilverance  might  give  her:  But  (he  con-
tinued her  Self-Accufing.  But  hear  the
worft.

-  She  being  poor,  many  good  People  in
Charity  look'd  to  her  in  her  Fits :  But,  a-
bove  all,  one  young  Man,  as  far  from  be-
ingYafpefted  of  any  Hypocrifie,  Errour,  or
Vice,  as  any  in  Bewdeky^  was  more  with
her  than  the  reft :  And  feeing  her,  in  her
Fits,  tofs  her  naked  Body  about,  (he  being
ftrong  and  comely,  his  Luft  was  provoked,
which  he  exercifed  on  her  5  but  praterjki-
endofemn^  which  eafing  her  for  the  time,
enticed  him  the  more  to  do  it  oft,  as  an  Ad:
of  (Wicked)  Compaffion  3   which  did  but
more  Enrage  her  Difeafe :  When  frequen-
cy had  hardened  him  ,  at  laft  after  her  De-
liverance, it  was  made  known:  AndOtha
Advantage  that  Satan  got  by  it  i  The  fad-
nefs  of  thofe  that  Prayed  for  her :  So  that
we  durft  not  name  it  as  an  Anfwer  of  Pray-
er ,  left  the  mention    fliould    ferve  to  &
Reproach.    For  my  part ,  I  think  that  &
Real  pofleflion  was  added  to  the  furor  ute<-
rinus^  in  punifhment  of  their  Sin.    He  Mar-
ryed  her ,  and  profefled  deep  Repentance  i
but  I  advifed  them  for  all  that ,  not  to  re-
ceive him  to  Church-Communion.

I  have  read  and  heard  of  feveral  Perfbns

that  have  had    notices   by   Revelation  *

When  they  fliould  die:  I  will  give  here

O  %  bm


jtf6       An Mftorkal  Difconrfe  of

but  one  Inftance,  of  an  excellent  young
Man,  Mr.  Tyro ;  but  I  mult  confefs,  that
one  of  his  Acquaintance  affirmed  to  me,
that  having  been  formerly  of  a  jocund
Merry  Temper,  he  became  fo  very  ferious
in  Religion,  and  fo  fervent  a  Preacher  in
fUngar,  and  fo  Zealous  for  his  own  and  other
Mens  Salvation,  that#  he  thought  Melan-
choly might  deceive  his  Imagination,  as  to
the  Voice  he  was  confident  he  heard.  I
lay  no  great  ftreis  on  the  Inftance  %  but  he
profeffed  the  contrary  himfelf  \  and  Mr.
Brand  extols  him,  and  Colonel  Rich  and
his  lady,  (well  known  by  Mr  Strongs
Books  which  fhe  publilhed,  taking  them  in
fhort  Characters,  then  called  the  Lady  E#-
z.abeth  Carre )  did  both  believe  him ;  as
^ou  may  lee  by  the  two  following  Letters.
And  Mr.  Lewis  in  the  foregoing  Letters*
and  Mr.  Davis  telling  me  how  common  the
forwarnings  of  Death,  are  in  their  Coun-
trey,  maketh  it  the  eafier  to  me  to  believe
the  words  of  fo  good  and  fober  a  Man  as
Mr.  Tyro.


Cot.


'Apparitions  and  Witches]       ipj

Colonel  Rich  of  Stondon~HaII
intffcx  his  Letter  in  relation
to  Mr.  Tyro  5  together,  with
his  Ladies  relating  to  the  fame
perfon.

j

SIR,

OUR  Neighbour,  Mr.  H*tt>  informing
your  detire  to  know  from  my  felf
and  Wife,  the  Relation  of  a  Providence
more  than  ordinary,  with  which  Mr.  Tyr®
was  exercifed  before  he  came  a  Sick-Reft-
dent  under  my  Roof,  I  muft  therefore  refer
you  to  the  Account,  which  my  Wife  here-
with gives  you,  the  Truth  whereof  I  am
folly  fatisfied,  which  was  from  Mr.  Tyros
own  Mouth  to  her  only,  when  I  was  at
London,  the  Narrative  of  which,  (lie  gave
me  at  large  the  fame  Night  I  returned
Home,  though  I  was  confirmed  in  my  Be-
lief of  it  by  forne  Difcourfe  I  had  with
him  afterwards,  during  his  sickneis?  before
which  he  and  I  perufed  feveral  of  your
Tra&ates  madepublick,  with  a  joynt-plea-
fing  Approbation  •,  efpecially,  that  which  is
intituled,  The  dying  Thoughts ;  alfo  another,

viz,.  The  Crucifying  the  World  by  the  Crofe

©f  chrifti  we  having  a  mutual  fatisfa&ion
O  3  in


ip 8         An  Hiftorical  Difcpurfe  of

in  each  others  Converfe^  his  Natural
Parts,  Gifts  and  Grace  together,  with  his
Holy  Life,  conftrained  my  defire  and  en-
deavours to  accommodate  him  to  his  iaft
Breath,  for  r  found  him  a  true  Difcipleof
Chriftour  Lord  and  Mafter,  in  whom  I
would  alfo  be  found,


$  1  R,

Tour  ajfeBionate  Servant?


Jl°uZ?i  Nath.  Rich.

near  Ungar  in
Ejfex,  May  16*

2tf£  I.


The


apparitions  andWitches.  igg

The  Lady  Rich's  Letter*

s  i  r7

IN  Obedience  to  your  defire  by  Mr.  Han,
to  have  it  under  my  Hand ,  what  he
told  you  of  Mr.  Tyro,  who  was  fent  by

Mr.  Brand  at  Biflops-Hall  near  London,  XQ

Preach  at  Vngar  in  Ejfex  5  and  to  prevent
miftakes,  I  think  fit,  in  order  to  your  Sa-
tisfa&ion,  to  give  you  this  Account  of  him?
and  therein  take  occaiion  to  let  you  know,
how  great  an  Honour  and  Efteem  he  had
for  you.    Sir,  I  believe,  had  you  known
him,  you  would  have  rank'd  him  among
rhofe  Worthies  that  you  have  helpM  to
Heaven,  for  he  followed  you  as  you  follow
Chrift.    About  feven  Weeks  before  his
Death,  when  there  was  hope  of  recovery,
he  told  me,  he  had  fomething  to  tell  me,
that  he  had  not  imparted  to  any  Body,  and
exprefled  it  thus,  When  I  was  one  Evening
returning  to  my  Lodging,  then  at  Vngar  ^
from  this  Houfe,  being  then  in  a  good  de-
gree^  of  Health,  and  in  a  ferious  frame,
meditating  by  the  way,  I  heard  a  voice
fay,  You  (hall  die,  and  not  pafs  your  five
and  thirtieth  Year  of  Age,  which  Voice  z-
ftoniihed  me  greatly,  and  looking  round
about  me,  feeing  no  body ,   put  me  into
great  Confteniation  and  Swmt  all  oyer  me,
O  4  fach


200       An  HifioYtcal  Difcowfe  of

inch  as  I  never  |elc  ( though  I  dare  not
compare  it  to  drops  of  BloodJ  yet  I  cannot
exprefs  how  dreadful  it  was.  You  know,
Madam,  my  Principles,  and  that  I  am  no
Enthufiaft,  and  how  cautious  I  am  as  to  Re-
velations But  I  am  fure  this  was  no  Melan-
choly Fancy,  but  an  auricular  Voice.  After
Ihad^a  little  recovered  my  felf;  I  begg'dof
God  to  difcover  to  me,  if  this  were  from
him,  or  a  Delufion  from  Satan,  but  ftill  the
Impreffion  remained,  though  I  fought  God
by  Prayer  moil  part  of  that  Nightj  and  you
may  remember,  in  my  next  Viiit,  I  told
you,  I  fhould  die  Shortly,  but  I  did  not  tell
you  of  theVoicel  heard.  And  then  he  added,
This  is  my  five  and  thirtieth  Year  of  Age  5
in  July  next  I  {hall  be  fo  old.  And  many
other  Expreffions  he  added,  which  is  too
much  for  a  Letter  5  but  he  died  in  Janu-
ary 1630.  I  cannot  omit,  Sir,  to  let  yoa
know,  how  much  he  defired  the  happinefs
of  a  perfonal  Converle  with  you  3  though
he  did  wrrite  to  you  formerly,  when  he  was
under  great  trouble  of  Confcience,  and
yoa  were  pleafed  to  write  to  him  again,
though  his  Name  was  unknown  to  you,
and  God  made  you  instrumental  to  his  Re-
lief and  Comfort :  He  told  me,  whenever
he  heard  you  preach,  there  was  fuch  a  Pre-
fenceof  God  accompanied  your  Miniftry,
that  he  felt  both  Fear,  and  Trembling*  and
Joy  po&6  him  at   once.    He  reading

Com©


rA{*  "'"w '      and  Witcl  :1       20 i

fome  Book  of  yours,  daily,  whilft  he  was
in  my  Houfe,efpecially  your  DyingThoaghts,
•which  on  his  Death-Bed,  he  fent,  as  the
beft  token  of  his  Love,  to  his  School  matter
at  Hackney >,  Mr.  Odely  ?  and  fhed  many
Tears  upon  it,  calling  it,  The  jweet  and
dear  Companion  of  his  Life,    charging   the

Meffenger  to  bid  his  Mailer  read  it,  and
prepare  to  follow  him  fhortly.

I  beg  your  Pardon  for  this  long  trouble,
I  could  do  no  lefs  than  exprefs  this  Kind-
nefs  to  the  Dead,  who  yet  fpeaks  out  your
great  Worth  to  me,  defiring  your  Prayers,
that  his  lofs  to  fo  dark  a  Corner  as  ours  is,
may  be  San&ified :  And  that  your  Life  may
be  prolong'd  in  time,  and  you  may  have  a
fullPveward  in  Eternity,  is  thePi^y^rof,

S  IB*

Tour  obliged  and
affettknate  Servant]

near  Ungar  in    ,  ^U&*  JUUl*

Ejfex,  MtJ  I.J..

tffl.


But


%ot         An  llifiorkal  Difcourfe  of

But  it  is  not  my  Bufinefs  to  mention  all
things  that  are  ftrange  and  unufual,  but  fuch
as  prove  the  Operations  of  Spirits.  Lycof-
thenes  de  Frodigw  vet  Mirabilibmy  will  tell
you  in  Folio  of  Wonders.

The  Falling  or  Raining  of  a  Grain  at
Widgenonh,  like  a  dried  Rye-Corn,  in  a
thin,  whiriih  Husk,  about  1639.  And  of
a  Grain  at  Shrewsbury,  almoft  like  a  faiall
Parfnip-Seed,  about  three  or  four  Years
ago,  feem  ftrange.  But  Exhalations  might
raife  them  from  Sea  or  Land,  though  the
Marvel  lieth  in  the  ftrangenefs  of  the
Grains,  neither  of  them  being  fuch  as  are
here  known  by  any  that  I  (hewed  them  to,
I  had  the  laft  from  Dr.  Jackson,  a,  Phyfician
in  Shrewsbury,  ( my  dear  Friend,  now  with
Chrift3)  who  told  me  tmt  it  fell  there  in
many  places  1  efpecially  about  St.  Marys
Church.  The  former  (coming  to  live  at
Bndgerjonhy  1 640.)  I  had  of  Mr.  Madflard
the  Minifter,  and  old  Mrs.  Grey  of  Envile,
a  Godly  Woman  5  who  aflured  me  that
much  of  it  fell  in  the  Church-yard,  and  on
the  Leads  of  the  Steeple.  I  kepc  both
long.

The  former  I  once  before  mentioned;
whence  the  Author  of  the  Second  Part  of
The  Ml/chiefs  of  Separation,  feconding  Dr.
SHIUngfleet's  Firft  Part,  (famed  commonly
to  be  Mr.  Long  of  Exeter,  a  Member  of  the

Con-


apparitions  and  Witches.         20  j

Convocation,)  took  occafion  to  feign  me
to  lay,  that  it  rained  Mama  at  Bridgmorth
when  I  came  thither.]  Men  and  Books  of
fuch  Veracity  are  they,  that  poor  EngUnd
and  the  Chriftiap  World  fuffers  by  5  and,  I
fear,  is  yet  like  to  fuffer  more  by,  while
Demons  are  fo  powerful.

There  are  many  things  that  Ignorance
caufeth  Multitudes  to  take  for  Prodigies.
I  have  had  many  difcreet  Friends  that  have
been  affrighted  with  the  Noife  called  a
Death- Watch,  whereas  I  have  fince,  near  .
threefcore  Years  ago,  oft  found  by  trial,
that  it  is  a  Noife  made  upon  Paper,  by  a
little,  nimble,  running  Worm,  juft  like  a
Loufe,  but  whiter  and  quicker  :  And  it  is
moft  ufually  behind  a  Paper  pafted  to  a
Wall,  efpecially  to  Wainfcot ;  and  is  rare-
ly, if  ever  heard,  but  in  the  Heat  of  Sum-
mer.

But  who  can  deny  it  to  be  a  Prodigy,
which  is  recorded  by  Melch.  Adamm^  of  a  /
great  and  good  Man,  who  had  a  Clocks
Watch  that  had  layen  in  a  Cbeft  many
Years  unufed  5  and  when  he  lay  dying,  at
Eleven  a-Clock,  of  it  felf,  in  that  Cheft^
it  ftruck  Eleven,,  in  the  hearing  of  many.

Becaufe  many  have  fpoken  and  written

of  a  Thorn  at  Glaftenbary  in  Sommerfetfhire^
that    flowreth  juft    on  Chrifirnafs-Uay ,    I

thought


204        An  Hiftorical  Bifcourfe  of

thought  it  a  thing  worthy  my  beft  Enqui-
ries :  And  left  Men  proceed  to  think  that
there  is  more  in  it  than  there  is,  I  annex
thefe  following  Letters,  firm  credible  Per-
fons  that  were  well  known  in  that  Country;

Mr.  William  Thomas's  Letter  con-
cerning the  Glafton  Thorn  ;  To-
gether with  two  other  EnclofeJ
Letters  to  the  fame  purpofe:

SIR,

UNdcr ftanding  by  my  Son,  your  Defire
to  enquire  about  Glafton  Thorn,  I  did
immediately  { being  not  able  to  travel  my
felf  in  fuch  a  Seafon)  fend  to  fuch  as  I
thought  might  beft  inform  me  5  whofe  Infor-
mation you  have  in  the  two  inclofcd  Letters ;
the  one  from  the  Minifter  of  Glafton,  the
other  from  Mr.  Chenvwd,  Paftor  at  Wells  5
both  of  them  underftanding  and  Godly  Men.
I  was  not  fatisfied  with  Mr.  Winners  Let-
ter, becaafe  he  wrote  not  of  the  Graff  ta-
ken from  this  Thorn5  now  growing,  (when
the  old  Thorn  is  gone.)  Something  it  feems
there  was  in  the  nature  of  the  Plant,  for  that
Graff  (hoots  forth  much  fooner  than  any  o-
ther  Thorn,  and  about  that  time,  though  it

do


Apparitions  and  Witches.        soy

do  not  the  Feat  in  bloflbming  juft  on  the
Day,  but  after  it;  which  may  be  becaufe
the  Soil  is  not  fo  iuitable  to  it,  as  that  was
to  the  other. —  I  ftsould  have  thought  this
had  been  all  the  Wonder,  vi&  the  natural,
rare  and  rath  Bloflbming  of  that  Thorn,
got  perhaps  from  Foreign  Parts,)  made  (by
Fame)  to  cry  chrifimafs  §  but  that  the  In-
formation in  the  firft  Letter  (and  Teftimo-
ny)  is  fo  pundual,  that  it  feems  to  evince
more.    But  (howfoever)  that  which  we  call
Chriflmafs-Day  is  not  to  gain  its  Eftimation
from  fuch  a  Providence^  but  from  Scripture,
from  Reafon,  at  leaft,  from  a  due  Demofl-
ftration  that  that  was  (indeed)  the  Day  of
Chrift's  Birth  •,  which  (perhaps)  nothing  will
prove,  unlefs  it  be  the  Thorn.    I  fpeak  not
againft  tht  Cuftom  of  the  Church,  in  re-
membring  the  Birth  of  Chrift,  though  I  con-
ceive Chrift's  own  Day  is  better  for  it  than
any  other ;  I  mean,  the  Lord's  Day  -,  unto
which,  when  Men's  Days  be  added,  the
Lords  Day,  and  the  Lord  of  that  Day,  fuf-
fer  by  their  juftling  with  it.    A  Subordina-
tion wall  not  ferve,  butitarifeth  to  a  Co-
ordination and  Competition  5  yea,  a  Pre-
lation.

But  that  I  fpeak  of  is,  the  Nobilitatingef
an  uncertain  Day,  upon  inefficient  Evi-
dence.—  If  I  fliould  fay,  the  Thorn  mighc
fo  bloflom  (by  Providence)  as  a  juft  Harden-
ing of  the  wilfully  fuperftitious,  (a  great  pare

of


to6  -     An  tliftorical  Dlfcouvfe  of

of  whofe  Religion  it  is,  to  put  a  Crown  upT
on  Chrifiwdfc  Day,  caring  litde  for  Chrift3)
or  as  a  Trial  of  the  truly  Confciencious,  to
fee  whether  they  will  build  their  Religion
upon  a  famous  Thorn,  and  be  fo  tamed  by  it,
as  to  clofe  with  the  Superftition  and  Pro-
fanenefs  of  that  time- —  I  (ay,  if  I  fhould
fpeak  thus,  it  might  be  thought  a  Paradox,
(and  jet  I  remember  your  Lights  in  Wales,
which  (hew  (I  think)  what  God  gives  the
Devil  leave  to  do)  I fhall  content  my  felf
therefore  with  fending  you  the  Relation,  and
leave  you  and  others  ( better  able  than  my
felf)  to  consider  of  it.—  Only  this  I  may  fay>
that  fuch  a  Providential  Rarity  is  too  low  a
•thing  to  put  a  Divinity  upon  that  Day :  And
yet,  to  make  It  a  Divine  Xeffimony  is  ( I
think)  the  meaning  of  thofe  that  are  willing
,to  make  the  moft  of  it ;  I  do  not  fay,-  the
fceftofit.

£  Sir5  I  am' much  engaged  to  you,  for  your
great  Pains  with  my  Son  5  having  lately  re-
ceived from  him  your  good  Anfwers  ro  his
AfTembly- Queries,  with  his  Replies:  For
Reafon  is  reft  left  5  and  it  is  the  Mifery  of
thofe  who  fet  it  up  too  high,  that  it  can  fo
far  (I  do  not  fay  fo  well,  for  'tis  all  naught
as  far  as  Scripture  and  it  jarr)  fhift  for  it  felf;
and  they  are  apt  to  thins  they  are  found,  if
they  be  not  filenced  >  when  Errour  in  Pra-
ctice hath  much  to  fay  for  it  felf,  and  Er-
rour in  Opinion  much  more.

Having


Apparitions  arid  Witches.         zoj

Having  betaken  himfelf  to  Dr.  Hammond,,
I  drd  not  command  him  thence,  thinking
(Jbe  being  a  learned  Man)  he  might  get  feme-
thing  from  him,  efpecially  in  rhe  matter  of
Original  Sin  3  about  which,  the  Dodtor  bath
given  him  good  Animadverfions,  (though
jfomething  in  them  hath  not  fo  good  an  A-
fpe&,)  and  he  anfwers  them  alfo  5  and  fo
there  is  no  End,  till  God  humble  the  Heart,
'Tis  one  Symptom  of  the  Hereditary  Dif-
eafe  of  Original  Sin,  that  that  Sin  is  no  more
acknowledged,  and  lamented-

God  that  raifeth  fuch  Alterations  in  Na-
tions, and  hath  done  fo  flrange  things  of  late,
can  alter  our  Relations,  and  make  them  con-
trary to  themfelves,  that  they  may  be  con-
formable  to  him  :  And  upon  that  Ground
alone  I  can  build,  that  To  Cod  all  things  an
poffible.


With  all  loving'  and  thankful  Refpects-

I  Reft,

Tour  obliged  Friend

and  Brother,

Ohley,
Feb.  %y,  i6$£

Will  Thomas,

Mr*


5oS       rAn  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

Mr.  John   Chctwind^   encloject
Letter.

Reverend  and  much  Honoured  Sir,

IN  anfwer  to  your  Letter,  thefe  are  to
inform  you,  That  the  old  Thorn  in  the
times  of  the  War,  was  rooted  up,  and  is
utterly  gone  $  and  as  for  Mr-  Gallop's  Graff,
I  have  enquired  of  a  Gentleman3  that  was
his  Patient,  and  lived  divers  Years  in  Mr*
Gallop's  Houfe,  and  obferved  the  Budding
and  bioflbming  of  it,  who  informed  me,
that  it  doth  iiioot  forth  and  Bud  and  Blof-
fom  near  about  that  time,  but  not  upon
the  day,  but  in  fome  fpace  after  it,  much
rather  than  other  Thorns  ufually  do.  This
is  all  the  Account  I  can  give  you  of  it.
I  have  no  more  to  add,  but  mine  and  my
Wife's  kindeft  Relpects  to  your  felf  ana
good  Wife,  and  that  I  am


Tour  mofi  refpeUful  Friend,

mXf"  **'         J°hn  Chetwind.

Mr.


[Apparitions  and  Witches.       2  09

Mr.  Wmncy's   Inclose/  Letter
concerning  the  GlaftonThorn.

Worthy  Sir y

REal  Love  and  Thanks  prefcribed ,  &c*
Thefe  are  to  acquaint  you,  that  I
Received  a  Letter  from  you,  wherein  Mr.
XW^'s  Requeft  to  you,  is*  chat  the  exaft-
eft  and  mod  pun^iua!  Account,  of  the  ufu*
al  Story  of  the  Bloflbming  of  Glafionbury-
Thorn  on  Chrifima4-day,  might  be  found
out}  I  have  upon  your  Requeft  fearched
more  of  it,than  ever  I  thought  to  trouble  my
felf  to  do,and  have  convened  with  the  moft
Ancient  that  I  knew,  and  was  dire&ed  to,
and  think  thofe  that  are  Credible,  they
offer  to  aver  it  upon  Oath,  what  they  tell
me :  Thus  one  Ancient  Man  tells  me,  that
he  hath  gone  on  the  Eve  to  it,  and  he  hath
found  it  like  another  dead  Thorn,  without
any  Bloflbm,  or  likelihood  to  have  afud-
den  forwardaefs  to  it,  only  fome  Evidence
of  the  Appearance  of  the  breaking  out
the  Buds,  and  but  an  Appearance  per^
ceivable,  and  he  hath  gone  on  Chrifimas'd^yf
and  found  the  Bloflbms.  as  though  it  was
the  midft  of  May,  and  gathered  them,  and
fent  them  many  Miles,  and  had  good  Re-
wards ,  this  the  Man  will  depofe  upon  his
Oath.    Ac  the  fame  time  this  Man  Was  at

P  my


a  l©        An  H-iftoriidl  Difcowfe  of

my  Houfe,there  came  oecafionally,an  ancient
Woman,  a  Neighbour,  whofe  Teftimony
I  believe  fit  to  be  received,  who  earneftly
affirmed  this,  that  in  the  time  of  Queen
Ann,  the  lived  with  one  Sir  Tho.  Hughes^
in  WeRsy  a  Juftice  of  Peace,  who  purpofely
feet  his  men  (two  of  them)  to  know  the
Truth,  that  he  might  fatisfie  any  that  might
make  enquiry,  and  on  the  Eve,  towards
Night,  they  found  it  as  another  Thorn,  on-
ly the  breaking  out  of  the  beginning  of
Buds,  and  flaying  in  GUftonbwy  all  Night,
toobferve,  as  near  as  might  be,  the  time
when  they  began  to  fprout  forth  into  a  per-
fect BlofTom,  they  have  gone  again  toward
the  turn  of  the  Night,  and  have  found  the
perfed  Blcflbm  about  two  or  three  of  the
Clock,  fo  that  at  Morning  they  have  re-
turned to  their  Mafter  with  them,  which
(he  told  me,  ihe  faw  when  they  brought  it
home :  And  another  Man  tells  me  the  fame
Story  as  the  firft,  only  with  this  variation,
His  Father  (and  Godfather  living  at  Bath)
Went  the  Eve's  Eve,  and  found  nothing  but
Buds,  and  on  Chrifimasday'm  the  Morning,
found  the  Bloffbms,  and  his  Father  fent
them  to  Bath  to  his  Godfather,  becaufe  he
went  thither  home  to  keep  his  Chriftmas :
And  a  Woman  at  the  fame  time  told  me,
fomething  much  like  the  Second,  that  fhe
hath  gone  the  Eve,  late  at  Night,  and  with
a  Lanthorn  and  Candle  with  her  Company,

flayed


'Apparitions  andWitcheZ  lit

flayed  four  Hours,  to  fee,  if  it  might  be*
the  manner  of  the  fprouting  out  of  it ;  and
in  that  fpace  faw  that  it  Bloflomed,  the
Green-boughs,  the  length  of  half  the  Fore-
finger to  the  middle  Joint  $  what  Mr.  Gallons
Graft  of  this  old  Tree  doth,  I  fhall  leave
you  to  him  to  be  certified.  Both  our
Loves  to  your  felf  and  good  Wife.  Mr.
Stnks  and  his  Wife,  defiring  one  Favour
in  the  Clofe,  that  you  would  be  pleafed
to  take  pains,  to  begin  our  Le&ure  the  next
Tiiefday.  I  have  not  had  but  one  Affiftant
I  think,  this  feven  or  eight  Weeks  :  I
/hall  be  abfent  my  felf-,  I  intend,  if  pleafe
God,  to  be  at  Briflol  Fair,  where  I  have
fome  Bufinefs,  andjpray  fend  me  word  of
it,  that  I  may  be  allured,

In  ft,

Yours,

In  all  Bonds  of  Love,

GUflon,  Sam.  Winney:

Jan.  2i.  16^.


P  *  Ihave


IBa^e^ft  -wpnfe'd  at  the  coimmoalybe-'
Sieved  -Gift  of  the  Kings  <tf  England  aad
Stance,  to  heal  the  Struma.?  All  my  doubt
feafh  ftilJ  been  of  the  Matter  of  Fa<5^  whe-
ther It  be  feci?  a  real  Gift  of  Healing,  or
mot :  For  if  it  be,  I  will  -not  be  fo  bold  as
to  ask  God  .a  Reafon  of  it ;  Or  why  he  giv-
cth  k  to  chefe  Kings,  rather  than  to  others:
Nor  will  I  (Hlfeofiour  his  Gift,  as  if  it  were
not  his,  becaufe  I  know  not  his  Reafon  5
bo  more  than  Chrift  did  the  Miracle  done
at  the  Pool  in  J&rufaleM9  upon  the  Angel  's
moving- the  Water ;  or9  with  Naa/nm,  fey,
Are  .not  Abanah  and  tharphar  as  good  Waur
as  Jordan  >    I  have  long  enquired  of  all  the
Phyficians,  and  others3  that  1  could,  of  the
Reality  of  the  Succefs  5  whether  it  be  not
die  Gold*  the  Change  of  Air,  or  the  Con-
ceit: And  I  never  heard  fo  much,  as  to  put
roe  paft  ail  doubt.    Bet  many  credible  Phy-
fidans  fay,  as  Mt.Wifeman'iz  Chirurgeoa
chat  had.  much  Opportunity  of  knowing)
doth  in  his  Book  of  Chirurgery,  £  That
dvQMgh  4&  a/je  not  mred^  yet  mort  am  curbed  by
if,  than  by  all  the  Pkyfaians  in  England I\

I  know,  the  cite  Original  of  it  alfo,  and
its  Occafion  is  much  in  die  dark  §  but  I  leave
chis  toother  Merfs  Enquiry  :  Only  I  fey,  if
she  Matter  of  Fad  prove  certain,  there  can
be  no  great  doubt,  but  it  proverb  the  Go-
verning Agency  of  Invifible,  Intellectual
Ifcwers.  If


jffparMons  m$Wiichek.        $££

IfitBemiraculbusy  ftfeemetfr  to-been*-
tailed  on.  the  Kingdoms  of  England  m£
¥mme9  rather  than  to  be- any  Approbation
rf  the  Religion  or-  Piety  of  the  Kings  %  be*-
caofe  if  any  have  this  Gift-,  Kings-  of  contra
tf  Religions  have  k  r  and  tbe-worfk,  as  welE
asthe-bfcft?  andUfiirpers,  asweiias-R'igte-
foi Kings,  And  I  hear  of  ®o  other  ilteeftas^
tend. km*,  but' the  kings  of  Engmdt  and?'
Francs  i:  And  will  the  King  of  !>*#«■  t-afce-'
It  for  his  Glory,  to -heal  a  few  Perfons  of  a
Sore>,  and;  to  kill:  many  thoa-fend  Innocents

die  Sword  and!  barm  thdr  Cities^


fe.


Fa;'        CH&E


%  1 4       M  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

CHAP.    XL

MR.  Emlm>  (before  mentioned  about
Mr.  Pacys  Sifters,)  now  a  worthy
Preacher  in  Dublin,  having  told  me  this  by
Word  of  Mouth,  I  defired  him  to  fend  it
fufficiently  attefted  5  which  he  doth,  as
followeth.


Mr.  EmliiYs  Letter  concerning
an  apparition  at  Bclfaft  in  Ire-
land.

..Reverend  Sir,

I  Have  been  very  uneafie  to  think  that  I
fhould  (0  long  delay  the  Anfwer  of  your
JDefire  about  the  Affair  related  underneath  :
The  diftance  of  the  Place  in  which  it  was
tranfafted,  with  the  jlownefs  of  my  Corre-
fpondent  in  Replies,  hath  made  me  unca-
pable  of  giving  you  fo  full  and  quick  Satit
fa&ion,  as  might  elfe  have  been.  All  that
I  cm  relate  at  prefent  is  briefly  this,  4jk.

There  having  been  a  long  Conteft  be-
tween Lemud  Matthews,  Archdeacon  in  the

County


Apparitions  and  Witches.         2 1 5

County  of  Down,  and  Claudius  Gilbert,  Mi-
nifter  of  Belfast  ,   about  their  Right   to
Drumbeg,  a  (mail  Parifti  within  four  Miles
of  Belfast,  it  proved  very  troublefome  to
the  Parishioners,  who  generally  paid  their
I  Dues  to  Mr.  Gilbert  the  Incumbent  in  Pot
feflion  7  but  the  Arch-deacon  claimed  the
fame  to  be  paid  to  him  alfo,  for  which  he
!  procured  a  Warrant  3  and  in  the  Execution
of  it  by  his  Servants,  at  the  Houfe  of  one
Charles  Loftin ,   one  of  the  Pari(hioners,
they  offered,  fome  Violence  to  his  Wife,
;  who  refufed  Entrance  to  them,  who  died
j  within  a  few  Weeks  after  the  Injury  re-
ceived ;  but  (be  being  otherwife  an  infirm
Woman,  little  notice  was  taken  of  her
Death,  till  that  fome  time  after,  by  her
;  ftrange  Appearance  to  one  Thomas  Dwelfon,
\  ( a  Spe&ator  of  the  Violence  done  to  her,)
(Tie  affrighted  him  into  a  Profecution  of  Ro-
bert Ecclefon,  the  Criminal.    She  appeared
divers  times,  but  chiefly  upon  one  Lord's
Day-Evening,  when  fhefetch'dhim,  with
a  ftrange  Force,  out  of  his  Houfe,  into  the
Yard,  and  Fields  adjacent.    Before  her  laft
Coming,  (for  (he  did  fo  three  times  that
Day,)  ieveral  Neighbours  were  called  in*
to  whom  he  gave  notice  that  (lie  was  agaia
coming,   and  becken*d  to  him  to  come
out  3  upon  which,  they  went  to  (hue  the
Door,  but  he  forbad  it,  faying,  that  (he
looked  with  a  terrible  Afpe$  upon  him,
P  4  when


2 1 6       An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

when  they  offered  it :  But  his  Friends  laid
hold  on  him,  and  embraced  him,  that  he
might  not  again1  go  out  5  notwithftanding
which,  (a  plain  Evidence  of  fome  invifible
Power,)  he  was  drawn  out  of  their  Hands
in  a  furprizing  manner,  and  curled  abroad
into  the  Field  and  Yard,  as  before,  foe
charging  him  to  profecute  Juftice-,  which
Voice,  as  alfp  Donelfons Reply,  the  People
heard,  though  they  faw  f»o  iliape.  There
are  many  Witnefles  of  all  this  yet  alive,

particularly  Sarah ,    the   Wife   of  Charles

Loftln,  Son  to  the  deceafed  Woman  %■.  and
one  William  Holy  day  and  his  Wife,,c^c.

Upon  this,  the  faid  Domlfon  depofed  what /
he  knew  of  the  aforefaid  Violence,  before
Mr.  Randal  Brice?  a  Neighbour-  juftice,  and'
confirmed  all  at  the  Afftzes  at  Down,  in  the
Year  1685.  (as  I  remember; )  where  the
feveral  Witnefles  were  heard  and  fworn,
and  their  Examinations,  were  entred  into
the  Records  of  that  Aflizes,  to  the  Arpaze-
itient  and  'Satisfa&iori  of  all  the  Country,
and  of  the  Judges,  whom  I  "have  heard
i'peak  of  it  at  that  time  with  much  Won-
der ;  infomuch  that  the  faid  Ecckfon  hard-
ly efcaped  with  his  Life,  but  was  Burnt  in
the  Hand.

The  faid  Donelfon  is  yet  living  in  the  fame
place,  with  the  other  Witnefles.

I  could  learn  many  more  Circumftances,
but  that  you  are  in  faafies  and  all  this  I

heard


Apparitions  and  Wttches.       217

heard  fpoken  of  my  felf,  with  univerfal
Amazement,  at  the  time  when  tranfa&ed,
living  in  Belfaftzt  that  time  >  and  I  iliould
not  have  been  beholden  to  any  to  have  be-
lieved this  Relation,  thaf  had  been  there,
and  at  the  Trial  at  Down,

T,  Em.

With  Mr.  Jew's  Refpefts,

I  remain,

A  Reverencer  of  you]

Tho.  Emlin*


CHAR


2i B       An  HiftoYtcal  Difcourfe  of

CHAP.    XIL

A  Uuhlm-Inftance ;  attefteJ  hy
Mr.  Daniel  Williams,  now  in
London


A  Bout  the  Year  1678.  I  knew  a  young
Woman  who  was  Niece  to  Alder-
IBara  Arundel^  in  Dublin*

In  her  faid  Uncle's  Houfe  (he  \gras  pur-
iifd '  with  very  terrible  Noifes  3  as  by  vio-
lent Scroaks  on  the  Wainfcots  and  CheftSj
in  what  Chambers  (he  frequented.

The  Blows  were  heard  throughout  the
Houfe,  and  were  fo  troublefome,  as  to
csccafion  the  Removal  of  the  young  Wo-
man to  an  Houfe  near  Smithfield  in  Dub-
imr  not  without  Hopes  that  the  Diftiir-
basice  might  thereby  ceafe :  But  the  Noife
]purfued  her  thither,  and  was  no  more  heard
in  h&r  former  Dwelling.

Here  fhe  continued  as;  long  as  the  Own-
er of  that  Houfe  would  bear  the  Refort  of
People,  and  Terrour  of  thofe  fudden  and
frequent  Claps-

From  this  place,  Ihe  was  removed  to  a
little  Houfe  in  Patrkk-ftreet,  near  the  Gate.
Here  flie  met  with  the  fame  Exercife ,

and


jfppariiions  and  Witches.         2  j  9

and  the  Noife  was  generally  about  Two-
a-Clock  in  the  Morning  greater  than  at
oth^r  Times.

Several  Nights  were  fpent  in  Prayer
with  her,  by  Minifiers;  as,  Mr.  Cox,  Dr.
Roles,    Mr.  Chambers,  Mr.  Keys,  &c.    who

all,  with  many  others,  aflured  me,  they
heard  the  faid  Blows  in  the  Room  where
they  prayed,  fometimes  on  a  great  Cheft
there;,  fometimes  on  the  Wall,  &c.

Mr.  Chambers  and  Mr.  Keys  were  em-
ployed there  the  Night  before  I  had  pro-
mised to  be  with  her.

The  next  Night,  Mr.  Cox,  having  oft
heard  the  faid  Noiies,  and  ofc  prayed  with
the  Woman ,  was  defirous  to  accompany
me.  There  were  many  People  (as  ufual)
fat  up  with  us :  I  preached  from  Heb.  2. 18.
and  contrived  to  be  at  Prayer  at  that  Time
when  the  Noife  ufed  to  be  greateft.

When  I  was  at  Prayer,  the  Woman,
kneeling  by  me,  catched  violently  at  my
Arm,  and  afterwards  told  us,  /he  faw  a
terrible  Sight :  But  it  pleafed  God,  there
■was  no  Noife  at  all.  And  from  that  Time,
God  gracioufly  freed  her  from  all  that  Di-
fturbance.

I  examined  this  Perfon,  and  could  find
nothing  in  her  Circumftances,  fit  to  in-
duce one  to  any  fatisfactory  Judgment  of
her  Cafe.

Thefe


Ttefe  Naifefaffel  about  tFrree  Mbntftfc,
mi-  fee  was  muebcnfeebfed  -in'  Body>  and
almofl  cEftra&d  thereby  ;  bat'.-£boa-sec®K.
lerei  upon  the  Removal'  thereoE


Xteniel  Wilam^


THE


The    COHCLUSIOM:
tmmningAngek.  .    .

*\  7\  FHifc  I  confider  theft  unqneifionch

V  V  Me  Evidences  of  the  cartaint?
of  Spiric^and  how  much  they  have  to  do
with  Men :  I  cannot  but  chink  chat  we  have
aifo  much  to  do  with  them  5  with  the  bad,
«o  refiftthemasour  Enemies,  and  the  Ene-
amies  of  the  GofpeLand  the'QiurcfaofGcd,
againft  whom  we  nraft  continually  Watch
and  Pray  \  left  we  fell  into  the  Snares  of
their  Temptations :  And  with  the  good  ,
that  we  may  be  mt€t  for  their  Prefervinji
and  Comforting  Minifiry.

But  in  all  our  Hiftories  it  is  obfervabfe^
that  bad  Spirits  Apparitions  and  Adions  ,
are  far  more  frequent,  and  more  Seriible
than  good  ones;  which  may  perhaps  to  feme
feern  ftrange.  Concerning  which  i  coofideri

1.  That  Corporeal  Crailk-ode  is  an  abafe-r
ment, -and  therefore  fitteft  for  the  more
Ignoble  fort  of  Spirits:  We  chat,  dwell
here  in  Bodies.,  are  of  aiowerOrder5  than
thofeof  the  more  high  and  invifible  Regi-
ons.

2-  And  the  bad  Spirits  as  they  have  a;
bafer  Confidence^  ha?e  alfe'a  m&fc  bafeand

Ter-


22£        An  Historical  Difcourfe  of

Terrene  Inclination*  And  therefore  it  is
the  lefs  wonder ,  that  they  mind  matters  of
Money  and  Lands :  And  no  doubt  but  the
Souls  of  \\  icked  Men.carry  with  them  much
of  the  Vicious  Habits,  in  which  they  lived
here :  That  is,  of  Covetoufnefs  and  Re-
venge ;  And  they  that  tell  us,  that  fiich  as
Dhes  retain  no  Love  to  their  Brethren  OH
Earth  ,  fpeak  more  than  they  can  prove  ;
and  are  not  fo  Credible  as  Chrifl^atfeem-
eth  to  fay  the  contrary.  Some  make  a  ftate
of  departed  Souls ,  Good  andBad,  out  of
their  own  Inventions,  which  it's  very  likely
Death  will  Confute.

%  And  it  is  far  greater  things  than  Vifi-
ble  Appearances,  that  we  conftantly  receive
from  Angels ,  more  futable  to  their  Nature
and  Dignity,  and  to  our  good.  Some  Mert
have  long  Laboured  to  attain  a  Vifible  or
Senfible  Communion  with  them,  and  think
they  have  attained  it :  But  while  they  pre-
fumptuoufly  defire  to  pervert  the  Order  of
Gods  Houfliold  and  Government ,  it  is  no
wonder  if  in  ftead  of  Angels,  they  Con-
terfewith  Devils  that  are  Transformed  into
feeming  Angels  of  Light,  that  by  Delufion,
they  may  Transform  fuch  Men  into  Mini-
fies of  Righteoufnefs.

It  is  a  doleful  Inftance,  of  the  effeft  of  a
perverfe  kind  of  oppofition  to  Popery,  and
running  from  one  Extream  to  another,  to
note  how  little  Sence  moft  Protectants  ihew

of


Apparitions  and  Witches.        123

of  the  great  Benefits  that  we  receive  by
Angels :  How  feldom  we  hear  them  ia
publickor  private,  give  thanks  to  God  for
their  Miniftry  and  Helps  ?  And  more  fel-
dom pray  for  it  ?  When  hear  we  any  Mini-
fters  if  each  Believers,  what  Love  and  what
Thanks  they  owe  to  Angels ,  whereas  the
Excellency  and  Holinefs  of  their  Natures
obligeth  us  to  love  them  ,  and  their  Love
and  Care  of  us,  befpeaketh  Thankfulness  :
Yea ,  we  have  Teachers  that  would  per-
fwade  Men  that  this  Savoureth  of  Popery  ,
and  doth  Derogate  from  Chrift :  And  yet
if  the  People  Love  and  Honour  and  main-
tain them ,  they  take  this  to  be  no  Deroga-
tion from  Chrift.  As  if  they  were  more
Amiable  then  Angels ,  or  Chrift  may  not
life  the  Miniftry  of  Angels  as  well  as  thtifs*
The  Lord  pitty  the  diftra&ed  divided  Soci-
eties of  Chriftians,  who  in  all  Countries  are
fallen  into  Uncharitable  Sefls,  that  on  pre-
tenceof  favingthe  Truth,  and  the  Church
from  the  Errours  of  each  other,  do  corrupt
both  by  the  Addition  of  Contrary  Errours  5
fo  that  it's  bard  to  find  out  many  Errours
of  Popery  or  Ancient  Herefie*  which  hath
not  been  avoided  by  contrary  faults,  in  the
Corruption  of  Do&rine,  Charity  or  Con-
cord.

Devils  have  a  greater  Game  to  play  invl-
fibly,  than  by  Apparitions.  O  happy  World,
if  they  did  not  do  a  hundred  thoufand  times

more


224       'Ati  Hiflorical  Difcourfe  of

more  hurt ,  by  the  Baits  of  Pleafure,  Luft
and  Honour,  and  by  Pride,  and  love  of
Money  and  Senfuality ,  than  they  do  by
Witches!  O!  that  they  did  not  moredan-
geroufly  Hant  the  Houfes  and  Souls  of
Lords ,  Knights,  Gentlemen,  and  Luftful
Youths .'  Who  can  Conjure  them  out  of
Univerfities  and  Pulpits ,  out  of  a  Malig-
nant Sclanderous  CJergy  and  Laity  ,  out  of
Worldly  felf-feeking  Carnal  Men?  I  have
before  told  you  of  the  Witch  Magdalen
Cruria ,  who  got  the  Reputation  of  a  Saint,
by  having  the  Sacramental  Bread  brought
to  her  Mouth  in  the  fight  of  all  the  People*
by  an  Invilible  Carryer  -7  Bodin,  and  many
others  Record  the  Story ,  and  how  to  get
Pardon ,  (lie  went  to  the  Pope  himfelf,  and
confefledhow  from  twelve  years  old  the
Devil  had  lain  with  her  thirty  years,  and
made  her  the  Abbefs  of  a  Monaftery :  I
fear  left  the  vifible  Hand  of  fome  Priefl:
do  play  this  Devils  part ,  and  give  the  Sa-
crament to  fuch  as  more  openly  ferve  the
Devil  all  the  week  ,  and  are  forced  to  re-
ceive it  toefcapea  jail ,  or  do  it  as  a  Sacri-
fice to  expiate  the  guilt  of  an  Ungodly
Life.

If  the  Devil  can  get  People  (  perhaps
Lords  and  Ladies)  tofpendthe  Day(  their
precious  Hours )  in  Cards  and  Dice,  and
Feaftings ,  and  Stage-plays,  and  Masks  and
Mufick,  and  perhaps  filthy  Luft,  he  will  let

you


"Apparitions  and  Witches.       22  J

you  fay  your  Prayers  at  Night,  and  cry  God
.Mercy,  and  perhaps  tell  him  that  you  Re-
pent, that  you  may  Sin  on  tl  bdldlV
the  next  da?  :  ^nd  it's  like  he  will  provide
you  a  Ghoftly  Father,  as  bad  as  your  fefvcs,
that  ihall  give  you  the  Sacrament  as  2  feared
Pardon,  and  pronounce  you  abfolved,  and
that  as  in  the  name  of  Chriil.

All  thefeeffe&s  of  Devils,  the  World
abounds  with  5  but  the  effects  of  Angels
are  obferved ,  but  by  very  few.  Becaufe
even  as  the  Sadduces ,  think  that  all  thefe
Vices  and  Confuaons  are  only  the  effects
of  Mens  own  pravity ,  and  not  of  Devils ,
not  knowing  that  all  fuch  Birtus  have  a  Fa-
ther and  a  Mother  (the  Devil  and  Mens
own  Hearts )  fo  mod  good  people  look  fo
much  to  God  and  to  Minifters,  in  ail  that
is  done  on  them  ,  that  they  take  little  no-
tice of  Angels  that  are  Gods  greater  Mini-
flers,  as  if  they  had  little  to  do  with  us.

By  this,  1.  We  give  not  to  God  the  due
Honour  of  the  Order  of  his  Works :  2.  We
are  guilty  of  Unrighteoufnefs,  in  denying
their  Due  Love  and  Gratitude  to  fuch  No-
ble Agents.  3.  We  lofe  the  Comfortable
Remembrance  of  our  own  Communion
with  them.  4.  We  lofe  fome  helps  to  a
Heavenly  Mind  and  Converfation,  when  as
it  would  make  the  thoughts  of  Heaven
more  Familiar  and  Pleafant  to  us,  to  think
of  fuch  a  Holy  and  Amiable  Society,  and
CL  would


2  a  6        'An  Hifiovkal  Difcourfe  of

would  make    us  the    willinger  to   die.

As  to  them  that  fay,  that  it  is  enough  to
know  that  Chriit  is  all  to  us ,  and  we  muft
take  heed  of  afcribing  any  thing  to  Crea-
tures 5  I  Anfwer ,  is  Chrift  the  le£s  all  to
us ,  for  giving  us  his  Mercies  ?  For  giving
us  the  Minifiry  of  Angels?  Is  he  the  Ms
All  to  us  5  for  giving  Gifts  to  Men  ,  for
giving  Comforters  and  Merciful  Relievers
to  the  poor  ?  For  giving  to  Children  the
Love  and  Care  of  Parents  ?  Or  for  giving
Men  good  Princes  and  Magiftratesto  Rule
them?  Or  for  giving  iHem  Soldiers  to
fight  for  them  ?  Or  for  giving  you  Mini-
fies to  Teach  you  ?  Who  more  praifeth
their  Teachers,  than  fuch  Obje&ors?  Will
you  be  unthankful  to  your  Benefactors,  for
fear  of  afcribing  to  Creatures?  Will  you
not  praife  a  Godly  &fea  above  a  Wicked  ?
Will  you  not  praife  and  admire  the  Glory
of  the  Sun  and  Stars ,  and  the  Frame  of
Heavefo  and  Earth,  for  fear  of  afcribing  to
Creatures  ?  Is  the  praifing  of  a  Work  ,  a
wrong  to  the  Workman  ?

Indeed  this  agreeth  with  their  Dodrine •, ,
who  becaufe  "-'ohI  counted  all  his  Mofaical
Legal  Ri&hteoufnefs  as  lofs  and  Dung,
in  Companion  of  the  Righteoufnefs  that
God  gave  him  in  and  by  -hrift,  do  there-
fore fay  ,  Aat  we  iia)  -  count  all  thatRigh-
teoiifneis .as  Ding,  vhich  chriit  hxmielf
worketh  in  us  by  his  SpirUaevcH  -Faith  it  felf

which


Apparitions  andWitchesi  227

which  is  imputed  or  reckoned  to  us  for
Righteoufneis<  This  enticeth  Men  to  be
out  of  Love  with  Chriftian  Righteoufnefs,
when  Chrift  hath  made  it  ow  own  ,  if  it  be
no  better  than  Dung  ?  And  to  fear  that  fome
fuch  Men  have  no  better.  But  they  fay  *
they  account  Faith  and  Love  to  Chrift  to
be  Bmg^  only  as  to  Juftification :  As  if  God
did  not  make  all  Men  ju^  whom  he  juftifeth
by  Efteem  and  Sentence :  Or,  as  if  that  were
■&ghteou/nefs  that  doth  in  no  part  or  degree
make  a  Man  Righteom  :  Or,  as  if  any  but
Chriftians,  as  fuch,  are  juftified  :  Or  any
Man  were  a  chriftian  before  he  accepteth
Chrift  by  a  Loving  and  Thankful  Confent
or  Truft  ,  as  his  Saviour  and  his  Teacher,
knd  his  Lord  and  Ruler :  But  this  is  a  Di-
greffion,  which  Mens  talk  againft  afcribing
to  Angels  led  me  to.

We  are  not  for  afcribing  to  ^ngels(nor  to
Faith  and  Love  and  Holinefs )  the  leaft  part
of  the  Honour  proper  to  God  ,  or  to  Jefus
Chrift :  They  do  none  of  the  Work  of
oar  Redeemer  for  us  (  nor  can  we  do  the
leaft  of  it  for  our  felves)  unlefs  as  the  Work
of  his  Inftruments  and  Agents,  may  be
called  Chrifts  Work :  They  fave  us  indeed,
but  it  is  but  as  Timothy  was  taught  by  P^«/,
bow  to  fave  himfelf ,  and  thofe  that  heard
him;  and  we  are  bid  to  fave  our  felves.
Chrift  teacheth  us ,  andMinifters  teach  us.
Chrift  Eeedeth  us ,  and  we  Feed  pur  felves  5
Q,  2  yea,


%  1 8       An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

tea,  he  faith  that  we  feed  him  .•  And  that
he  will  for  Jo  doing,  fay,  Come  ye  Blejfed ,
inherit  the  Kingdom,  Angels  and  Men  do
Chrifts  Commanded  Work^i  But  no  Creature
doth  tbx  lealt  part  of  Chrifts  own  proper

undertaken  Work.

■  Objedion.  Bat  thefe  high  Thoughts  of  An-
gels  have  drawn  the  Papifls  to  Idolatry  ,  in
Praying  to  them,  and  Worfhipfwg  them.

Anfwer,  It  is  your  denying  them  the  Ho-
nour that  is  due  to  them,  which  is  a  Temp-
tation thathardneth  Papifts  in  their  Excefs.

Muft  we, not  Love  and  Honour  Kings ,
Minifters  and  Saints,  though  fome  herein
run  into  Extreams.  We  have  many  Rea-
fons  againft  Praying  to  Angels ,  or  offering
them  Vifible  Corporeal  Worfliip ;  Becaufe
we  know  not  }uft  when  they  are  prefent :
And  becaufe  it  may  Countenance  the  Hea-
thens Demon  Worfliip  and  Idolatry  5  And
becaufe  God  hath  appointed  us  no  fuch
fort  of  ■Worfliip.  But  God  having  largely
told  us  of  their  Love  to  us ,  and  their  con-
ftant  eminent  Service  for  us ,  he  thereby/
obligecffus  toanfwerahle  Regard,  Aflfe&K-
onsand  Acknowledgment.

I  have  faid  fo  muchinafmall  Difcourfee
ih  Mr.  Ifaack.  Ambroje  his  Book  of  Comma- ^
nion  with  AngeU  ( at  his  requeft,  who  is  now
with  Angels  )  that  I  will  not  here  Recite
very  many  particular  Texts  of  Scripture  a-
bont  this  Subject :  But  if  you  will  but  look

m


apparitions  and  Witches'.        %zg

in  your  Concordance,  you  may  feewba£
abundant  mention  of  Angels  there  is
throughout  all  the  Scripture  y  while  we
hear  fo  little  of  them  in  our  Books  or  Pul-
pits. It's  true,  that  in  the  Old  Teftamenc
time,  they  ofter  Vifibly  appeared,  than  they
do  now  :  But  that  is  no  Derogation  to  our
Gofpel  State  5  As  it  is  more  Spiritual  than
theirs ,  that  needed  more  Vifible  means  9
fo  our  Spiritual  Benefits  by  them  before
named ,  are  greater  than  theirs  were

1.  How  Familiar  were  Angels  with  A-
braham ,  who  entertained  them  as  Meti3  till
they  mace  themselves  better  known  to-huns
They  were  the  Mefler.gers  of  the  ^rearpro-
mife  to  him  of  the  Numerous  and  the  Ho-
ly Seed*  They  Reproved  Sarah  for  her
Unbeiief;  th  ifrthey  might  comfort  her  by
the  proniiied  Sr

How  Familiar  were  they  with  Lot,  when-
they  came  into  his  Houfe,  and  took  him  in,
and  blinded  his  £nemies,and  told  him  their
Milage  concerning  Sadom^  and  when  they
carried  him  while  lie  delayed  to  depart?
And  when  they  laved  Zmrxo?  his  take?

How  Familiar  were  they,  with  Ja^ob^  m
his  Travels, and  his  Return  5 -when  he     .y
them  as  by  a  Ladder,afcendingand  defcend-'
ing^  And  when  one  of  them  wreflled  with,
him,  and  Bieifed  him,  though  he  made  him
halt?

I  know  that  many  excellent  Divines  do


230        An  Hifiorical  Difcourfe  of

that  one  of  thefe  called  Angels,was  Chrifh
To  which  I  fay,  1.  If  it  were  fo,  that
doth  not  deny  ,but  confirm  what  lam  plead-
ing for :  If  Chrift  appearing ,  made  Angels
his  Companions ,  it  was  the  n:  ore  for  their
Honour.

2.  But  if  this  be  true  ;  either  Chrift  had
a  Body,  yea ,  many  Bodies  before  his  incar-
nation by  Mary,  or  not.  If  not,  what  were
all  thefe  Similitudes  of  Men  that  did  eat
and  drink,  and  talk,  and  act?  Were  they
mere  shadows  and  Deluiions  ?  How  then
could  tbey  fpeak ,  and  ad  fo  Potently  ?  If
yea,  then  was  the  pure  Godhead  Hypofta-
tically  united  to  thefe  many  appearing  Bo-
dies ;  Or  not :  Who  can  prove  a  difference
fave  as  to  the  Matter  and  Duration,  between
his  union  w  ith  thefe ,  and  with  his  laft  at
fumed  Flefh.  And  yet  the  Scripture  appro-
priated Chrifts  Incarnation,  and  coming  in
the  Body  to  xh.QFu.nefs  of  Tme^nd  to  thefe
lafi  days ,  I  am  loth  to  fay  without  proof,
that  Chrift  had  many  Bodies,  left  any  ihoukT
inrer  that  there  have  been  many  Chrifts :
But  if  this  muft  be  held ,  it  will  introduce
Peter  Sterrys  Do6trine  as  mod  probable ,
that  Chrift  as  the  Eternal  Word  effentially,
God  firft  caufed  the  Nobleft  Created  Na-
ture above  Angels  (or  as  Dr.  M^ecalleth
it,  an  Eternal  Flefh,-  or  as  he  and  7^  Tuti
ner  a  prime  Created  Life  in  the  prime  Mat-
ter )  and  did  unite  it  {elf  to  this  Superange-

lical


Apparitions  and  Witches.         231

lical  Nature,  and  by  it  caufe  all  the  red  1
And  that  this  fecond  Nature  appeared  to  the
Fathers  by  fuch  Temporary   aflumed  Bo-
dies,and  at  laft  affumed  the  Body  of  a  Man:
bemg,  fay  forne,  it  felf  a  Soul  to  it  3  but  sm-
others ,  afluming  both  a  Human  Soul  and
Body  :  And  fo,  that  Chrift  hath  three  Na-
tures, a  Divine,  a  Super  angelic  at,  and  a  Hu~
mane :  But  of  this  oft  elfewhere.  This  opi-
nion is  reconciling  as  to  the^ri  *;w,who  have
affirmed  Chrift  to  be  a  Creature  above  An-
gels :  And  if  God  made  fuch  a  Creature,
methinks  it  fliould  be  eafie  to  perfwade
them,  that  he  that  is  as  the  Center,  and  more.
than  a  Soul,  maketh  all  the  World  to  be
One  ( though  of  unlike  parts  J  doth  primari-
ly unite  hirnfclf  with  the  firil  and  Nobleft
of  his  productions.

Objection    But  Scripture  faith,  that  Abra-
ham called  one  of  thefe  Lord

Anfveer.  That  Name  both  Adonai  and  -
Ehkim,  are  oft  given  to  Creatures.  And  if
the  Name  of  Jehovah  be  fometimesufedas
to  Angels ,  it  is  only  meant  to  God,  fpeak-
fag  by  thzm,\vhomdbraham  knew  to  be  pre-
feat,  though  Invifible,  and  to  know  all  that
was  faid

Yet  further,  it  was  an  Angel  that  appear-
ed to  Mfes  in  the  burning  Bu(h,  and  fo
that  fent  him  on  his  work  to  deliver  the  If-
raelites  from  Egypt,  and  Fortified  him  with
power  of  MkacleSj  and  made  him  his  great
Q.4  pn>


2  3  2       An  Hiftorical  Vifcourife  of

promifes  of  SiiceefstAnd  yet  no  doubt  it  was
God  h  and  the  Text  is  true,  that  affirmeth
both :  Therefore  it  mult  be  God  fpeaking
and  ading  by  the  Miniftry  of  an  Angel ,
Commiffioned  ro  ufe  his  Name.

It  was  Angels  that  gave  Mnfa  the  Law
in  theMount  S^z:  For  io  faith  the  Scripture,
Bur  it  was  God  by  them,  who  were  his
Voi-'e  and  Finger  that  made  and  wrote
the  Tables,  and  (pake  all  the  words^  thefe
were  all  Great  and  Wonderful  Mimftra-
tions.

God  promlfed  Mofes ,  that  his  Angels
fhould  go  before  the  Israelites,  to  conquer
their  Enemies ,  and  bring  them  into  the
promifed  Land :  Andhechargeth  them  not
to  provoke  him,  for  Gods  Name  was  upon
him  j  and  lie  would  not  forgive  their  Iniqui-
ties. What  greater  things  could  be  faid  ,
than  that  an  Angel  (hall  bear  Gods  Name ,
and  be  tLcir  €  aptain,  and  Conquer  their
Enemies  ,  ;:nd  be  their  Governour,  and  not
forgive  their  v^  ilful  Slns*

In  jofwahs  War  at  Jericho,  an  Angel
appeareth  ,  arid  profefleth  himfelf  the  Cap-
tain of  the  Lords  Hofts ,  Jofll.  5.  14,  i^.and
JolLua  fell  on  bis  Face  io  the  Earth,  and  Wor-
fhippedhtm^  and  prayed  to  him  to  tell  him  his
Meilage.  If  Angek  be  not  the  Generals'
or  Captains  of  our  ■\>aux.$,  we  are  unlike
to  Conquer.

It  was  by  m  Angel,  that'  God  brought

the


apparitions  and  Witches.       233

the  Israelites-  out  of  Egypt ,  Numb.  20.  16.
It  was  an  Angel  that  chofe  a  Wife  for
Ifaack,  Gw*  24.  7.  40.  The  Angel  of  Gods
Prefence  faved  thq  Ifraelites ,  Ifa.  63.  9.
An  Angel  delivered  the  three  Men,  Dan.j,
from  the  Fire,  and  Daniel  from  the  Lions  :
Dm.  6.  Angels  Preached  Chrift  to  the  Shep-
herds, ad  Angel  made  the  pool  in  Jernfa-
lem  healing.  Jo.  5.  4.  An  Angel  Preachethto-
Cormlim.  An  Angel  delivereth  Peter,AEl.i2.
The  Angel  of  the  Lord  Encampeth  round
about  them  that  fear  him ,  and  delivereth
thern,  Pf  34.  7-  God  giveth  his  Angels
charge  over  us  5  to  keep  us  in  all  our  ways  :
They  bear  us  up  in  their  Hands ,  left  we
dafboijr  Foot againft a  Stone .  Pfal.gi-  11,
12.  Rev.  r.  Tells  us,  that  God  firftReveal-
eth  his  Will  to  Chrift,  and  Chrift  to  Angels,
and  Angels  to  Jvhn,  and  John  to  the  Church-
es ,  and  the  Churches  to'Pofterity.  Yea  ,
Angels  Miniftred  to  Chrift  himfelf ,  when
he  was  hungry,  Mat.%.  11.  And  appeared
in  his  Agony,  (lengthening  him.  Luke  22.
43.  Legions  of  Angels  are  at  his  Service  :
And  all  theHoly  Angels  will  come  with  him
at  Judgment  5  and  they  will  be  the  Reapers
at  the  end  of  the  World.

Above  260  times  are  Angels  mentioned
in  Scripture,  and  yet  how  little  notice  do
we  take  of  their  help  ?

But  is  it  only  our  Bodies  that  they
help?  Can. they  reach  or  help  our  Souls?


2.  j  4       An  Htjimcal  Difcourfe  of

Arfw.  If  Devils  can  touch  our  Souls  with
their  Temptations*  are  Angels  farther  from
us,  or  lefs  able  to  move  us  to  our  Duty  ?

But  are  they  ordinarily  prefent,  or  know
our  Cafe  ?  Anfw.  They  rejoice  in  our  Con-
verfion,  and  therefore  know  it :  They  are
prefent  in  our  Afiernblies,  as  Figml  inrima-
teth,  i  Cor.  ii.  i o.  Say  not  before  the  An-
gel, that  it  was  an  Errour,  Eccl.  5. 6.  which
intimateth  the  Angels  Prefence.  Every  Be-
liever hath  his  Angel  beholding  the  Face  of
our  Father  in  Heaven,  Matth.13.10.  and
they  are  not  Strangers  to  their  Charge.  We
Jtd  that  the  Devil  is  prefent  with  us,  by
his  Temptations  continually,  in  ail  oor  Da-
lies molefiing  or  hindering  us  s  And  are
Angels  lefs  intent  upon  their  Work  ?  It  is
Michael  and  his  Angels,  that  fight  againft.
the  Dragon  and  his  Angels,  to  fave  the
Church,

While  fuch  Texts  make  the  Paptfts  think
that  Angels  are  always,  or  ordinarily  pre-
fent, if  they  give  them  not  Divine  Wor-
ship, but  fuch  as  we  would  do  a  Prince,
though  I  have  faid  before  why  I  approve
not  of  their  Doings,  I  dare  not,  as  (one
late  Expofitors  of  the  Revzldtm,  j.jdge  the
Cathoiick  Church  co  have  become  Anti-
chriftian  Idolaters,  as  foon  is  they  gave  too
much  Worfhip  to  Angeis  and  to  Saints.
We  are  come  to  the  N^w  jemffJem,  to  the
Innumerable  Angels,  Heb.iz.  and  mud  ho-

now


Apparitions  and  Witches.  2  j  j

now  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  Tfal.  1 5*.  And
we  k*iow  that  we  are  translated  from  Death  to
Life,  bee  an  e  we  love  the  Brethren  :'  And  is  It
fo  damnable  Idolatry  to  love  and  honour
Angels  and  Saints  a  lit  le  too  much,  while
they  i  ive  them  nothing  proper  to  God  ?  I
blame  their  Irregularities,  but  I  dare  not
judge  fo  hardly  of  them,  and  the  ancient
Church,  for  this,  as  fome  do;  nor  think
them  much  better,  that  love  and  honour
Angels  and  Saints  as  much  too  little.

Some  now  would  call  a  N4an  an  Idolater,
that  fhould  fay  as  Jacob,  Gen.  48  16.  The
Angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  Evil  blefs
the  Lads.  They  fay/  This  Angel  was  ChriB.
Anfw.  Scripture  faith,  it  was  an  Angel  :
Hof.  12  4.  faith,  He  had  power  over  the  An-
gel. I  dare  not  call  God  an  Angel,  though
Angels  may  be  called  Gods,  as  Princes  be.
If  Chrift  had  then  no  Nature  but  the  Di-
vine, I  fhould  fufpeel  it  is  Arianifm  to  call
him  an  Angel,  or  Meffenger  of  God.  If
he  had  a  Body,  then  '  was  it  Ubiquitary :
Or  had  he  infinite  numbers  of  Bodies  ?  Or
could  he  be  but  with  one  in  the  World  at
©nee  ?

For  my  part,  I  have  had  many  Delive-
rances fo  marvellous,  as  convinceth  me  of
the  Miniftry  of  Angels  in  them,  (not  here
to  be  recited  J  But  I  am  fatisfied,  that
there  is  no  lefs  of  the  Prefence  and  Efficacy
of  the  Father,  L'on,  and  Holy  Spirit,  when

he


i%6        An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

he  ufeth  ami  honoureth  any  Instruments,
Angels,  or  Men,  than  i*  he  ufed  no  Means
at  ail    As  I  will  not  defire  fo  to  alter  the-
Hated  Government  and  Order  of  God,  as
to  expect  here  vifible  Communion  with
Angels,  nor  will  offer  them  any  unrequired
WbrMfyi  fo  I  would  not  unthankfully  for-
get we  receive  by  them,  from
how  much  we  are  behoideri  to
md  to  God  and  our  Redeemer  for
I  hope  they  will  (hortly  be  a
ivoy  to  the  Soul  of  this  poor  Latarw,
to              :■£  Bofem;  or  to  the  Parage
v\  tee I  hope  CO  fare  with  Chrift,  j£mtk

One  rh:ng  more  I  think  meet  to  mind
t£e  Reader  of;  thar  he  may  not  h(e  the  Be-
nefit of  thefc-Hi(tories?_Thac  is  How  to
diicern  a  good. Spirit  from  a  ted.  The
Scripture  telling  us  that  three  things  are
the  Characters  of  Devils,  lying,  Malignity
and  Hurtftf&efs,  (JobMJ  vhich  include  all
Uncharitablenefs,  Revere  and  Diviiion,
we  may  certainb1  gather,  that  it  is  a  Diabo-
lical Spirit  that  promoteth  thefe,  whatever
the  Pretences  are.

i.  The  Ant'ichriftian  Errour,  called -^«-
tlnomim ,  that  would  fet  Chrift  againft
Chrift,  and  make  Men  believe  that  his
Death  hath  made  all  our  Obedience  to  his.
Government  a  thing  that  (tell  never  do  us
my  good,  .(being  called  -Works,)  and  all

our


1  Apparitions  and  Witches.        237

our  Sins  againft  his  Grace  to  be  fo  harmlefs,
that  we  ought  not  to  think  that  we  [hall  be
ever  the  worie  for  them  3  and  that  the  fi-
led: that  live  in  Perjury,  and  Murder,  and
Adultery,  or  any  other  Sin,  are  not  perju-
red, Murderers,  Adulterers,  became  now
they  are  Chrift's  Sins,  and  not  theirs,  (with
many  fuch  Reproaches  of  Chrift,  called  by
the  Crifpians,  the  Exalting  of  him.)  Thefe
certainly  are  from  Devils,  and  God  doth
notably  difown  them,  as  the  fere  mentioned
Inftances  of  the  Ranters,  and  thole  ;a  iSfew
England,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Wetd-,  do  {hew.
And  the  doleful  Form  of  Mr.  Davks  Con-
gregation, about  R':'$d  \i\  Nor-,  iawptonjkir&
of  the  Nfadriefs,  Bhfphen  ies,  larki  igs  ;?nd
Beaftility  there,  Heave  to  the  Enquiry  of
fober  Perfom :  Though  I  an  no  v^V  -pels
dfit,  thcRtJor  sare  fuch  \ isiare  act  me£t
to  be  fiienced..

Mr.  Samuel  Crifpe  hath  publifihe
Week  a  Book,  as  againft  me,  in
of  his  Father  ;  telling  the  World,  that  he
underftands  pot  what  he  writeth  of,  and
ignorantly  defending  what  I  affirm,  and.
confuting  his  Father,  thinking  it  a  Defence
of  him.

I  deny  not  but  a  CrifpHn  may  be  %  Chri-
flian,  while,  throogh  Ignorance,  hebeliev-
eth  not  his  own  Words.  But  he  that  will
but  read  the  Scripture,  and  particularly,  the
Texts  cited  by  me  in  my  Confejfwn  of  Faith,

Ml


sg8        An  Hifiorical  Difcourfe  of    "

fhall  fee  how  fully  Chrift  hath  confuted
Cnfpe,  and  vindicated  his  Mediatorial  Of-
fice

II.  And  all  thofe  Principles,  Paffions  and
^radices  that  are  againft  the  Love  and
Concord  of  Chrift ians,  whatever  pretence
of  an  Angel  of  Light,  or  other  Ministers  of
Righteoufuefs,  may  be  their  Cloak,  are  un-
doubtedly from  the  dividing  Devil.

III.  And  more  evident  is  it  that  it  is  no
better  Spirit  that  infpireth  all  the  Slander-
ers, Silencers  and  Perfecuters  of  the  faith-
ful Minifters-  of  Chrift;  and  thofe  that
make  and  execute  the  Laws  for  the  impd-
foning  and  ruining  of  the  mod  confcionable
Chriftians,  for  their  avoiding  notorious  Sin,
or,  at  leaft,  for  doubtful  Infirmities,  incom-
parably lets  than  thefe  Perfecuters  (Clergy
or  Laity )  are  guilty  of.  By  their  Fruits
you  may  know  what  Spirit  aduateth  thefe
Men.  Wolves,  Thorns  and  Thirties  are
known  by  Hurtfulnefs-  Chrift  s  Miracles
were,  Doing  Good,  and  Healing  :  But  De-
vil's Work  is  Hurting,  and  Deflroying.

And  let  thofe  Men  and  Women  think  of
it,  that  cannot  forgive,  but  are  fet  upon
Revenge.  Mark  whether  Revenge  be  not
the  moii  ordinary  Bufinefs  of  Witches,  and
of  Devilized  Sou's  \  moft  of  thele  Hiitories
tell  it  you :  Therefore  Chrift  relleth  us,
that  if  we  forgive  not,  we  fhall  not  be  for-
given ?  ih  contrary  is  he  to  the  Diabolical

Spirit


Apparitions  and  Witches.         259

Spirit  of  Revenge,  though  yet  he  hath  juft
and  punlihing  Governours.

Were  but  the  Hiftories  of  Witches  and
Apparitions  well  considered,  it  would  help
Men  to  underftand,  that  Devils  make  no
fmall  number  of  the  Laws  and  Rulers  that
are  made  in  the  World  and  have  no  fmall
number  of  honoured  Servants,  and  are  the
Authors  of  moft  of  the  Wars  in  the  World :
So  that  the  Phrafe,£w.  £  E  The  Devil  (hall
cajv  fame  of  you  into  Prifon^]  fliould  not  feem
ftrange.  And  I  would  I  had  no  Caufe  to
lay,  that  this  Mark  of  Lying,  Malignity  and
Hunfulnefs  tells  us,  that  many  Sermons  are
made  by  Devils,  and  too  many  of  the  Books
written  by  them,  that  adorn  the  Libraries
of  many  learned  Men.

And  though  Demons  do  good  in  order
to  do  hurt,  yet,  by  this  Rule  of  Judging  of
Spirits  by  their  Fruits,  I  cannot  but  think
that  (though  there  was  a  Mixture  of  Good
and  Bad)  there  was  more  of  the  good  Spi-
rit, than  of  the  Bad,  in  moft  of  the  ancient
Monks  and  Hermites,  that  lived  fo  Arid
and  mortified  Lives.  And,  as  I  find,  not
only  by  Erafmus,  but  by  the  Complaint  of
Proteftant  Divines,  that  it  was  a  Deiire  of
Liberty  from  the  Papifts  Aufterities,  thac
prevailed  with  moil:  of  the  Vulgar  to  caft
off  Popery  3  fo  the  Cafe  of  many  Monaste-
ries, their  Mortification  and  Devotion,
(though  ignorant,)  doth  make  me  hope  thac

in


240        An  Hiftorical  Difcourfe  of

in  many  fuch  Monafteries  there  is  more  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  than  among  the  com-
mon worldly,  fenfual  fort  of  Proteftants.
I  that  muft  lay  lb  of  our  well-meaning  Se-
paratifis  here,  muft  fay  fo  of  fuch  Papifts:
For  I  (ind  by  the  multitude  of  Inftances  in
Cafyrim  and  others,  that  juft  as  deep  Re-
pentance for  former  Sin,  doth  now  bring
many  to  think  it  fafeft  to  joyn  with  the
Congregations,  which  they  think  are  moft(
ftri6t :  So  before  Luther  $  time,  it  was  or-
dinary, when  God  humbled  any  deeply  for
their  Sin,  to  think  that  they  muft  prelently
joyn  with  fuch  as  renounced  the  World  and
fleihly  Pleafures,  and  minded  nothing  but
Religion  and  Salvation.  And  thence  it
came  to  pats,  that  among  the  Papifts,  the
Monafticks  were  called  Religious,  in  diftin-
dion  from  Secular,  and  other  forts  of  Men.
And  as  our  feparating^  religious  Proteftants
do  now  demand  of  fuch  as  they  admit  to
their  Communion,  an  Account  of  fome
fpecial  Experiences  of  God's  Work  on  their
Hearts,  in  their  Converdon:  So  did  the
Monafteries  by  fuch  as  they  received.  The
aforefaid  Author  Cafarius  will  tell  you  of
inuitirudes  of  Inftances  how  God  converted
Sinners,  and  brought  them  into  their  Reli-
gious Houfes.

What  can  one  think  of  all  this,  but  that,
as  all  that  we  here  do  is  imperfed:  and  faul-
ty, and  yet  pardoned  through  Chrift,  to

the


Apparitions  and  Witchesi        24 1

the  Sincere  ;  fo  among  "Papiils,  and  honeft
Sectaries,  there  is  much  chat  is  of  God,
and  (lull  be  accepted,,  though  Satan,  by
their  Ignorance  and  his  Subtilty ,  do.  obfcure
and  maculate  the  Luftre  of  it,  and  turn  it
into  Scandal.  For  fuch  is  his  Warfare  a-
gainft  Chrift  and  his  Kingdom  in  this
World.

God  is  good,  and  doth  good  5  and,  will
hive  Mercy,  Jand  not  Sacrifice  :  And  his  Ju-
ftice  doth  hurt,  for  a  greater  Good.

The  Devil  is  a  Do- Evil:  And  if  he  do
Good  it  is  to  greater  Hurt.

And  Oh  that  1  could  get  my  own,  and
all  Readers  Hearts  fufficiently  affected  with
this  Qbfervatioa  J  That  is  all  our  Life  is
carried  on  in  a  Warfare,  and  Satan's  Ma-,
lice  is  both  agaiaft  Chrift  and  us  3  fo  his
great  Work  is,  to  draw  us  into  fome  Sins  p
Which  fliall  cloud  the  Glory  both  of  th£'
Grace  and  the  Miracles  of  Chrift,  and  damp
the  Comfort  which  we  might  have  receiv-
ed by  all  his  Mercies.

If  he  fee  an  honeft  Chriftian  zealoufly
affected,  draw  him  by  Temptation  of  the
fleihinto  fome  Scandal,  or  by  Ignorance
into  fome  falfe  Opinions,  and  that  Glory
of  all  his  Zeal  is  prefently  turned  into  Re-
proach. If  he  do  but  fall  out  with  fome
of  his  Neighbours^  and  by  Paffion,  or  for
Wprldly  Intereft,  offend  therm  all  his  Pie-
ty goeth  not  only  for  Hypocrite*  but  for  2
R  Reproach


iqi       Anffifidncal  Difcourfe  of

Reproach  to  Piejty  it  felf.  Yea,  if  they  fall
but  into  Melancholy,  and  Impatience,  and
Difcontent,  -the  Devil  fets them  to  affright
Men  from  Religion,  as  we  kt  yp  Maw-
kios  m  our  Corn  and  Orchards/  to  affright
the  Birds.

The  fad  J?&r/#e>Story,  before  related,
is  an  Inftance  that  .was  fad  to  me.  The  4-
frican  Story,  before- mentioned,  is  more  tre-
jmrendous  \  of  the  Bifliops  whofe  Tongues
W^re  cut  OUt  by  Hunnmchus  the  Arr'tAtt
King's  Command,  and  they  fpake  well
when  their  Tongues  were  cut  oqt:  Vi&ar
Vncenfis,  G^PLmu  and  Procopiw,.  that  all  then
lived,  witritfs  it  ;j  and  fome,,  if  not  all  of
them,  I  remember,  fay,  that  they  favv  and
heard  them:.  And  yet  (fay  fome  of  them)
the  Devil  after  overcame  fome  of .  theft*
fame  Bifliops  to  commit  Fornication  with
Women,  and  then  the  Miracle  ceafed^  and
fliey  could  fpeak  no  more.

Oh,  how  amiable  would  a  holy  and  hea-
venly Life  appear,  were  it  not  confpurcated
with  the  Mixture  of  its  Contraries  ?  How
beautiful  would  the  Wifdom  of  a  Saint  ap-
pear, were  it  not  difhonoured  by  the  Mix-
ture of  Ignorance  and  Erfour?  How  joy-
fuHy  and  thankfully  could  I  review  all  the
Wonders  of  Mercy  that  have  filled  up  my
Life,  to  this  prefent  Hour,  had  I  not  mix-
ed tliofe  many  Tranfgreffions  that  muft  not
be  remcmbred  without  Grief  aird  Shame,

though


Apparitions  and  Witches.         2  4  3

though  through  Chrift  they  be  forgiven  ?
Though  I  can  fay  that  Pride,  Ambition,  and
Covetonfnefs,  and  Worldly  Preferment  s>  have
not  been  ftrong  enough  to  cloud  my  Com-
forts, yet,  alas  J  what  a  multitude  of  Faults,
byCarelefnefs,  locogitancy,  Rafhnefs,  Pa£
fion,  and  Want  of  due  Watchfulnefs  and
Tendernefs  of  Confidence,  have  done  it  i
Oh,  with  what  joyful  Praife  toGod  could
I  perufe  all  the  Hiftory  of  my  Pilgrimage,
did  not  this  woful  Mixture  of  my  Sins  damp
and  allay  my  Comforts ;  and  by  Indignation
againft  my  (elf,  abate  my  Peace  J  I  believe
Forgivenefs  apd  Safety  from  Hell :  But  if
(befides  my  near  fixty  Years  Caftigatory
Pains)  I  did  fufped,  with  jfuguftinex  that
there  were  a  Purgatory  hereafter,  I  fliould
fear  it  3  not  out  of  any  Doubt  of  the  Suffi-
ciency of  Chrift's  Satisfa&ion,  Righteouf-
nefs  and  Merits  to  their  proper  Ends,  but
*becaufe  I  believe  that  he  is  my  Governour,
though  by  a  Law  of  Grace  and  Faith,  and
that  he  is  a  Judge,  and  that  he  is  not  indif-
ferent whether  we  obey  him,  or  difobey
him.  If  I  believe  not  Chrift,  I  ani  no  Chru
fiUn :  And  if  I  believe  Chrift's  conftaot  Do-
tirine,  particularly,  Mattk  5.  and  6.  and
7«  and  2  j.  I  can  no  eafier  be  mace  a  CHRI-
SPIAN^  than  I  can  believe  the  groffefc
Contradi&ion.  And  I  now  think  this  dif-
tinguifhing  Name  as  ufeful  as  was  the  Name
of  Nicolaitans.  Rev.  2.  &  $.

R  2  Oiie


244       AnHifioYtcal  Difcourfe  of

One  thing  more  I  defire  to  be  obferved,
about  the  warfare  between  Chrift  and  De-
vils 5  That  both  fides  make  great  ufe  of
Human  In ftruments,  efpeciallyof  Princes  and
Paftors  or   Teachers  i  and    Parents,     Thefe
are  the  three  great  Orgmes{  under  Angels )
appointed  by  God,  for  the  Moral,  Free
Agency  in  promoting  the  Kingdom  of  Chrift
on  Earth:  And  where  thefe  three  are  Faith-
ful,  O  /  How  great  a  Blefling  are  they  ?
1  herefore  it  is  the  grand  defign  of  Devils,to
Corrupt  thefe  three,  and  to  make  them
Traytorsto  Chrift,  that  is  their  Rightful
Lord  ,  and  Enemies  to  his  Work,  and  him
whom  they  fhould  Reprefent.  No  deadlyer
Enemies  to  Children  ,  then  ungodly  Parents,
No  deadlyer  Enemies  to  the  Worfhippers
-of  Chrift ,  than  Malignant,  Proud,   Igno-
rant, Worldly  Clergy-men  ?  No  fuch  Pow-
erful Enemies  to  Kingdoms,  as  Ungodly  ,
Ignorant  Kings  and  Magiftrates.    Oi  How
much  Good,  or  Mifchkf '-may  One  King,  or
Supream  Power  do ,  by  the  great  Advantage
that  God  the  Inftitutor  of  Government  hath
given    them  ?  A  pa,  -Africa  ,  America  and!
■Europe,  are  doleful  Monuments  of  the  $uc-
cefs  of  Devils ,  by  making  Princes>  Friefts^
and  Parents  their  -Jnftruments,  corrupting7
them  by  Ignorance ,  and  by  worldly  flelhly/
Baits!  Mr.  Cotton  Mather  in   the  Life  of!
Mr.  Eliot  the  New-England  Evangelift  ,  Re-
citeth  this  Account  of  his  (m>3.  }  why  .the


Apparitions  and  Witches,         a  4  j

Lyn  Indians  were  all  naught,  fave  one  ,  Be~
caufe  their  Sachim  (or  King)  was  naught;

For  they  and  the  Powvowes  or  (wizards)  like
Priefts ,  did  with  Malice ,  Threatning  and
Perfecution,,  drive  the  People  from  receiv-
ing the  Gofpel,  and  praying  to  God.  What
a  dangerous  cafe  through  Mutual  Hoftility,
and  cruel  Perfecution,  hath  fometimes  one
Law,Political  orEcclefiaftical,brought  aNa-
tion  into  ,  by  locking  the  Church  Doors  a-
gainfc  Unity,  Concord,  and  Mutual  Love,
and  by  Stoning  the  Diflenters  from  fuch  di-
viding Snares?  And  what  a  Blefling  hath
one  good  Prince  ;  yea ,  one  Reforming  or
Healing  Law  or  Proclamation  been  to  a
Land?

^  What  a  Blefling  to  the  Church,  were  fucH
Bifhops  as  Ignatius,  Cyprian,  Ba(lly  the  three
Or  four '  Gregories,  Chryfoftom,  Froclus,  Atti-
cus,  Auguftine,  and  fuch  as  they:  And  what
Scandals  and  tearers  were  the  contrary  min-
ded :  Who  by  their  Ignorance  and  Pride
on  pretence  of  Uniting ,  cut  the  Church
and  Empire  into  the  Shreds,  that  yet  con-
tinue ,  and  were  a  grief  u>  Conft  amine,  and
more  to  Theodofius  ;  2.  To  Anaftafiusy  and
to  many  a  Worthy  Emperour  ?  And  when
they  grew  ftronger,  depofed  their  true  Ru-
lers the  Eaftern  Emperors ,  and  fuch  as
Ludovicus  Tius,  and  kept  up  bloody  Warrs
ag2inft  Emperors  in  the  Weft  s  till  they  de-
prived moft  Kings  of  half  their  Govern-
ment. The


%  q&        An  Hiftmcal  Difcourfe  of

The  God  that  fixeth  the  Ccurfe  of  Na-
ture ,  fo  as  that  he  will  not  for  the  Prayers
of  any  make  the  Sun  alter  a  Minute  of  its
rifing  and  fetting  time ,  nor  alter  the  Spring
and  Fall,  Summer  and  Winter,  &c  Hath
fetled  alfo  a  Subordinate  order  of  Free-agents
for  Moral  Government,  and  though  he
difpofe  of  the  Events  of  all  Mens  A<fts,
without  caufing  their  Sin,  yet  will  he  not
ufually  violate  that  free  order.  It's  Marvel-
lous the  Devils  have  fo  much  power  over
Children  and  Men  ,  as  I  have  here  proved  ,
if  but  a  filly  wretched  Witch  confent ;  And
how  much  more  mifchief  may  he  do  to
Church  and  Kingdom,  if  he  can  but  get
Biftops,  Priefts  and  Princes,  and  Law-ma-
kers to  confent.

Therefore  above  all  other  Refiftance  of
Devils  :  OI  Tray  hard  f5r  Wife  and  Godly
Kings  and  Magiftrates ,  and  for  Wife  and
Humble  and  Faithful  Teachers,  and  next
for  Family  Piety.  And  if  ever  the  King-
doms, Churches  and  People  be  reduced  to
Wifdom,  Unity  and  Sobriety,  this  muft  be
the  means  according  to  Gods  Eftabliilied
way.


FINIS.


Books  Trwtedfory  and  fold  by  Tho.  Parkhurft,
at  the  Bible  and  Three  Crowns  at  the  lower
End  o/Cheapfide,  near  Mercers  Chapel.

TH  E  Englifh  Nonconformity, as  under  K-Cbar  its  II.
and  K.  James  II.  truly  fta*ed  and  argued.    In

A  Treatife  of  Knowledge  and  Love  compared  :  In  two
Parts:  I.  Of  fairly  .pretended  Knowledge,  a.  Of  true
laving  Knowledge  and  Love     In  Quarto.

The  Glorious 'Kingdom  of  Chriftdefcribed,  and  clear-
ly vindicated,  againftrhe  boId'Aflerters  of  a  future  Cal-
ling and  Reign  of  the  Jews,  and  a  thoufand  Years  before
the  Conflagration,  and  the  Mertors  of  (Che  thoufand
Years  Kingdom  after  the  Conflagration.  Being  an.Au-
fvver  to  Mr.  tho.  'Btvtflq.     In  Quarto.

A  Reply  to  Mr.  Tho.  Beverley's  Anfwer  to  my  Reafons  a-
gainft  his  Doctrine  of  a  Thoufand  Years  Middle  Kingdom,
and  of  the  Converfion  of  the  Jews.    In  Quarto,

Of  National  Churches:  Their  Defcripcion,  Inftitution,
life,  Prefervation,  Danger,  Maladies  and  Cure :  Partly
applied  to  England.    In  Quarto,.

Church  Concord :  Containing,  i.  A  Diflusfive  from
unneceflary  Divifion  and  Separation,  and  the  real  Con-
cord of  the  moderate  Independents  with  the  Presbyteri-.
ans,  inflanced  in  ten  feeming  Differences,  z.  The  Terms
neceflary  for  Concord  among  all  Churches  andChrifUa.ES-
In  Quarto.

Againft  the  Revolt  to  a  Foreigp  JurifdiftioD,  which
would  be  to  England.ks  Perjury,  Church-Ruin  and  Sla-
very.   In  two  Parts.    In  Oftava.

Mr.  Richard  Baxter's  penitent  Confeffion,  and  his  ne-
ceflary Vindication.  In  Anfwer  to  a  Book  called,  The  Se-
cond Part  of  the  Mifchitfs  of  Separation:  Written  by  m  un-
earned Author.  With  a  Preface  to  Mr.  Cantiarm  de  Mi*
nimu,  &c.    In  Quarto.

The  Scripture- Gofpel  defended,.,  and  Chrift,  Grace
and  free  Juftification  vindicated,  againft  the  Libertines,
&c.    In  two  Books,  &c.    In  Qftavo.

Cain  and  ^/-Malignity ',  that  is,  Enmity  to  ferious
Godlinefs -y  that  is,  to  an  holy  and  heavenly  fhie  of  Heart
asd  Life,  &q%       All  by  Mr,  ^chard  Baxter*   '


Books  Printed  for,  and  Sold  by  John  Sat  J*
bnry>  at  the  Rifing  Sun  over  againft  the

*     Royal  Exchange  in  CornhilL  %

*  i

A  N  End  of  Dpannal  Cbntroverfies,  which  have,
J^\  lately  troubled  the  Churches,  by  Reconciling  Ex-
plication,, without  much  Difputing.  By  Richard  Baxter*
In  Oftdvo.

A  Rational  Defence  of  Nonconformity  :  Wherein  the
Prance  of  Nonconformifts  is  vindicated  from  promo-
ting Popery,  and  ruining  the  Church  *,  imputed  to  them
by  Dr.  Sp illing fleet  ,  in  ImV  nreafonablmefi  of  Separation,
Alfo  his  Arguments  from  the  Principles  and  Way  of  the
Reformers,  and  firft  Diffenters,  are  anfwered  $  and  the
Cafe  of  the  prefent  Separation  truly  fiated,  and  the
Blame  of  it  laid  where  it  ought  to  be;  And  the  Way  to
Union  among  Proteftarits  is  pointed  at.  By  Gilbert  Rule,
Minifter  of  the  Gofpel.    In  Quarto.

The  Harmony  of  the  Divine  Attributes,  in  the  Contri-
vance  and  Acccmplifhmem  of  Mm's  Redemption  by  the
Lord  Jefus  Chfift,  &c.    By  W.  Bates,  D.D.

The  Duty  and  Blefling  of  a  Tender  Confcience  plain-
ly  ftated,  and  earneftly  recommended  to  all  that  regard
Acceptance  with  God,  and  the  Profperity  of  their  Souls.
Whereunto  is  added  two  Sermons,  opening  the  Nature
of  Participation  with,  and  demonflraticg  the  Nectfficy  of
Purification  by  Chrift.    By  T.  Crufo.    In  Twelves*


[Apparitions  and  Witcheil  24^


POSTSCRIPT.


z


§  I.  T  T  Aving  fince  received  from  Mr.
I"~~y  Gilbert,  the  reverend  Minifter
A  JL  of  the  Place,  a  fuller  Narrative
of  the  ftrange  Story  near  BelfaH,  I  will  in-
fat  his  Letter.


Mr.  Gilbert'.?  Letter  concerning  the
Apparition  near  Belfaft,  in  Ire-
land.

Dear  Sir  j

YOurLaft,  of  July  the 6th,  I  received;,
and  fince  that,  I  have  again  and  again
enquired  farther  into  that  Bufinefs  of  the
Apparition  of  Magdalen  Loftw,  which  died
about  N&uenA.-i.  1685.  of  the  Hurt  ihe
had  received  a  Month  before.  And  fhe  ap-
peared to  Thoma*  Domlfon,  a  Neighbour^
four  Weeks  after  her  Death,  in  the  (Houfe
of  WiUim  Holiday  near  her  own  Houfe.
S  There


$4-8  An  Hifiorical  Difcourfe  of

There  were  then  prefent  in  the  faid

"Houfe,  WiRiam  Holiday  ,  and  Helen  his
Wife  $  as  alfo  Sarah  Lofnam,  Daughter  in
Law  to  the  faid  Defund  -,  and  fome  Ser-
vants and  Children  in  the  Houfe*  befides
Charles  Loftin  and  Helen  Lofiin,  Children
to  the  faid  Defunft;  which  are  now  all
alive :  And  moft  of  them  were  fummon-
ed  to  the  following  Affixes  at  Downe  Pa-
trick* and  there  deppfed  foleninly  before
the  Bench,  the  feveral  Circumftantials  of
the  (aid  Apparition.  Which  Apparition
was  thrive  repeated,  in  the  fame  Evening,
to  the  faid  Thomas  Donelfon:  And  how
he  was  horrihly„frighted  thereby,  and  vio-
lently drawn  out  of  the  faid  Houfe,  before
their  Eyes,,  .though  they  flruggled  hard  to
detain  him ;  And  that  he  was  carried  up
and  down,  bveir  Neighbouring  Hedges  and
Ditches  :  And  that  her  laft  Words  to  him
were,  "That  (he  would  trouble  him  no
"  more,  if  he  did  faithfully  profecute  the
"  Caufe  of  her  Death  i  which  (he  ftill
"  afcribed  to  the  Blows  which  (he  receiv-
'*  ed  from  the  &dX  Ecdeftw  and  K.  Hig-
"'gifon.

The  faid  Thomas  Doqelfon  did  ,  according-
ly repair  to  his  Landlord,  the  next  juftice,
3Vhv  Randal  Brke\  who  brought  their  fe
vera!  Examinations  to  Sir  William  Frank;
lin,'m  i?<?//*?#-Caftle,;  where  was  alfo  pre-
fent  the  Earl  of  Lmgford:    Which  faid

Depo-


'Apparitions  and  Witches.  249

Depofitions  were  carried  to  DuGlin,  and
there  recommended  to  the  fpecial  Care
of  Judge  John  Lindonr  who  was  to  come  \
down  the  next  Affizes  of  Downe :  And
die  faid  Trial,  and  Examination  of  the
Witnefles,  were  then  mannaged  at  the  faid
Affizes,  by  Mr.  James  Macartnyy  Counfel-
lor,  in  the  behalf  of  Charles  Loflin,  the
Plaintiff,  to  the  Admiration  or  all  the
Bench,  and  of  the  Company  there,  in  my
Sight  and  Audience.  So  that  the  Matter
was  moft  notorioufly  known,  and  believ-
ed,  through  the  whole  Country.  Nor  was
there  any  Caufe  of  fufpe&ing  any  Fraud
therein,  they  being  all  plain,  honeft  Neigh-
bours, weE  known  to  me,  and  my  Pa-
rifliioners,  in  the  Parifli  of  Drmnbeg^  in
the  County  of  Downe,  and  in  the  Province
Of  Vlfier.

When  you  fend  to  Mr.  Baxter,  pray^
fend  my  bed  Refpe&s,  defiring  both  his
Prayers  and  yours,  as  we  moft  heartily  re-
commend his  continual  Labours,  and  yours,
to  the  Bleffing  of  the  Moft  High :  In  whom

I  Reft,

Tour  Cordially  jifeEtionate^

*£&,»  Cl.  Gilbert

s  2  §n.


i$o         An  Hiftorkal  Difcourfe  of

§.  II.  Whereas  many  wonder  that  the
Devil  can  get  down  and  up  Chifdrens
Throats ,  fuch  great  things  as  the  Nails  and
pieces  of  Iron  and  Brafs  (as  I  have  to  (hew,)
a  rude  Story  of  that  Pious  and  Excellent
Rrifition,  Fcelix  PUtertu,  makes  me  think
it  poffible.  Two  rude  fellows  had  at  meat
a  Cuftard  before  them ,  he  that  firft  tafted
it,  found  it  Scalding  hot ,.  and  diflembled
it,  to  draw  the  other  to  it ,  who  prefently
fo  fcalded  his  Mouth  with  it ,  that  in
Wrath  arid  Revenge ,  the  next  Spoonful
thar  the  other  did  eat ,  he  forced  the  Spoon
down  his  Throat :  Which  being  in  his  Sto-
mach, caft  him  iato  fear:  But  they  both
being  (hortly  after  again  together,  eating  ,
he  felt,  a  great  pain  in  the  rettum  inteftimm  %
and  put  his  Hand  to  his  Fundament .,  and
pulled  out  the  Spoon,,  and  put  it  into  his
Companions  Di(h.  The  paffage  of  this  Spoon
through  all  the  inteftines ,.  feems  har-
der than  mod  of  the  Witchcrafts  mend-
tioried.

This  confirmeth  my  Sufpicion,  that  my
Dear  Friend  Mr.  William  Hopkins  cafe  be-
fore mentioned,  was  but  a  Miftake,  and
not  a  Witchcrafts  and  that  he  might  have
f wallowed  in  his  Meat  a  piece  of  a
Fleih- prick,  and  think  it  was  a  Bene,  and
forgot  it  5  though  I  could  not  perfuade
his  Wife  and  Neighbours  to  believe  it-


apparitions  and  Witches.  251

I  rather  think  the  conceit,  than  Witchcraft,
fhortned  the  good  Mans  Life,

§.  HI.  And  I  will  not  fpare  my  fell ,
while  I  mention  my  Friend ,  though  fome
will  deride  it,  it  may  profit  others,  to  tell
you  a  fmall  Story  of  the  Devils  power  on
my  felf.  When  I  lived  in  LuMow-CzQkat
16  and  17  years  of  Age  (the  Chaplain  to
the  Council ,  being  my  Tutor  )  I  that  had
been  enfnared  before  in  the  pleafure  of  old
Romances,  was  ftrongly  tempted  to  the
Love  of  Cards  and  Dice.  The  firft  over-
came me  a  few  Months:  Having  no  skill
at  Tables ,  1  agreed  with  thebeft  Gamefter
in  the  HoufeC  Mr.  Richard  Harrifon,  Clerk
of  the  Kitchin  ,  who  died  old, -4 not  many
years  ago  in  Barbican,  at  the  Earl  t>f  Bridg-
water s  )  to  teach  me  for  a  price :  When  I
did  but  know  when  the  Game  was  loft  by
the  lofs  of  all  my  Men ,  after  a  Game  or
two,  they  told  me  my  Game  was  loft;
And  laught  at  me  for  not  giving  it  up  (other
Skilful  Gamefters  looking  on )  I  told  them
I  would  fee  the  end  firft :  They  derided  me,
and  Mr.  Harrifon  laid ,  /  will  lay  yott  ten
Shillings  to  Six- Pence  ;  I  laid  down  mySix-
Pence;  and  he  his  ten  Shillings :  When  I
hadcaft  the  Dice  ten  times,  I  hadwone
the  Game.  They  flood  amazed,  and  told
me ,  that  if  I  had  not  had  the  fame  caft  of
the  Dice  all  the  ten  times  that  I  had ,  no

other


»}  %        An  Uifiorical  Difcdurfe  of

other  could  have  got  my  Game.  An  Atheift
will  laugh  it  this  as '  Fortuitous:  But  I  per-
ceived that  it  was  the  Devils  Temptation  to
draw  me  to  be  a  Gamefter :  And  I  gave  Mr.
HarHfon  his  Ten  Shillings  again ,  and  never
plaid  more.

I  mention  this,  to  tell  fome  Ladies  and
others  of  great  Note,  that  are  Enfnared  in
the  Love  of  that  vile  Time-wafting  Sin  of
Cards  and  Dice  ( and  Stage- plays* )  that  the
Devil  hath  great  power  in  ruling  that  which
they  call  Chance :  And  that  it  is  a  greater  Sin
fo  to  wafte  precious  Time  than  tljey  are
aware  of;  Befides  the  vile  corrupting  of
their  Mentions.

-     a


Books


Books  Vrintedfor,  and  fold  by  Tho.  Parkhurff,'
at  the  Bible  and  Three  Crown'  at  tk  Imer
End  of  Cheapfide,  near  Mercers  C)   \  el

TH  E  Englifh  Nonconformity,  as  under  K.  Charles  lh
and  K.  fames  II.  truly  ftated  and  argued.    In
Sbarto,

A'Treatife  of  Knowledge  and  Love  compared  :  Ir-  mo
Parts:  I.  Of  falfly  pretended  Knowledge,  a.  Of  (rue
faving  Knowledge  and  Love     In  Quarto*

The  Glorious  Kingdom  of  Chrirl  dtferibed.  and  clear-
ly vindicated,  againft  the  bold  Aflerters  of  a  fuure  Tai-
ling and  Reign  of  the  Jews*  and  a  t!  oufanrf  Y  a  i  before
the  Conflagration,  and  the  Alienors  of  t  e  ti.oofapd
Years  Kingdom  after  the  Conflagration.  Being  an  An-
fwer  to  Mr.  tho.  Beverly      In  Quarto,

A  Rep'v  to  Mr.Th/.Btverley\  A  f  ver  to  my  Re  afons  a-
gainft  his  Do&rineofaThoufind  Years  Middle  Kingdom,
and  of  the  Conmfion  of  the  Jews.     In  Qutrto.

Of  National  Churches:  Their  Defcripcion.  In^itutiotv
life,  Prefervatioa,  Danger.  Maladies  and  Cure :   partly
applied  to  England     Io  Quarto.

Church  Concord :  Containing,  I.  A  Difluarfive  frnm
unnecelTary  Divifion  and  Separation  and  thereaj  Con-
cord of  the  moderate  Independents  wirh  tnr  £^sby  <.ri«
ans,  inftanced  in  ten  feeming  Differences.  2,  The  Terms
neceflary  for  Concord  among  all  Churches  and  Chri^wns.
In  Quarto,

Againft  the  Revolt  to  a  Foreign  JurifdicYion,  which
would  be  to  England  its  Perjury,  Church-Ruin  and  Sla-
very.    Tn  two  Parts.     laOkam.

Mr. RicharaBaxter's  penitent  Ccnfeffim.  ?nd  his  ne-
ceflary  Vindication.  In  Anfwe r  to  a  Book  csi.U  d;  The  St"
cond  Part  of  the  Mj chiefs  of  Serration:  Writte  by  m  un-
aamed  Auchor.  With  a  Preface  to  Mr.  Cantimm  de  Mi-
nimi*, &c.    In  Qyarto.

The  Scripturc-Gofpel  defended,  and  Chrift  Grace
and'free  Juftification  vindicated,  againft  the  Libertines,
&c»    In  two  Books,  &c.    In  Oftavo.

Cain  and  ^/-Malignity  *,  that  is,  Enmity  to  fen  jus
Godlinefs  j  that  is,  to  an  holy  and  heavenly  ftate  of  Heart
and  Life,  &q^       All  by  Mr.  %j>cbard  Baxters


Books  Printed  for,  and  Sold  by  John  Satuf-
bury,  at  the  Rifittg  Sun  bveragainft  the
Royal  Exchange  in  CornhiM.

AN  End  of  Doftrinal  Controverfies,  which  have
lately  troubled  the  Churches,  by  Reconciling  Ex-
plication, without  much  Difputing.  By  Richard  Baxter*
In  O&avo*

A  Rational  Defence  of  Nonconformity :  Wherein  the
Practice  of  Nonconformifts  is  vindicated  from  promo-
ting Popery,  and  ruining  the  Church  ;  imputed  to  them
by  Dr.  StiUingflett ,  in  his  Vnuafonablemfs  of  Separation.
Alfo  his  Arguments  from  the  Principles  and  Way  of  the
Reformers,  and  firft  Diflenters,  are  anfwered  j  and  the
Cafe  of  the  prefent  Separation  truly  ftated,  and  the
Blame  of  it  laid  where  it  ought  to  be:  And  the  Way  to
Union  among  Proteftants  is  pointed  at.  By  Gilkrt  Rule,
ftjmfter  of  the  Gofpel.    In  Qgarto.

The  Harmpgy  of  the  Divine  Attribute*,  in  the  Contri-
vance and  Accomplifhment  of  ManYRedemption  by  the
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  &c.    By  TV.  Bates,  D.  D.

The  Duty  and  Blefling  of  a  Tender  Confcience  plain-
ly dated,  and  earneftly  recommended  to  all  that  regard
Acceptance  with  God,  and  the  Profperity  of  their  Souls,
Whereunto  is  added  two  Sermons,  opening  the  Nature
of  Participation  with,  and  demonftrating  the  Neceffity  of
Purification  by  Chrift.    By  T.Crufi.    In  Twelves,


