MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS, OCCASION'D BY THE COMET WHICH APPEAR'D IN DECEMBER 1680 (Vol. II)
London: Printed for J. Morphew, 1708. By Pierre Bayle. Translated from the French. To which is added, The Author's Life.
Public domain.
Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_miscellaneous-reflection_bayle-pierre_1708_2).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Miſcellancom Refletions,
Occaſionꝰd by the Fs

a Which appear'd
In December 1680.

Chiefly tending to explode Popular


Superſtitions.


Written to 4 Doctor of the Sorbon,
3 Mr. BAYIL E.


Tranſlated from the . French.


*


To which 15 added,
The Authors LIP E.


I U,ͤU½ _H_A_o©ſ{l___l.


VOL. IE 3

_ — A
Snag 4
LONDON, J
Printed in the Year 1708. 4


wt __—


aw; ah


ö
'


| u * p 174. Examples ſhe wing that Arbeift 1 not


e ; > That your Ae: Pleaſure don't create
5 359
i A That Man e ud his on 7


958 his Opinions.
; 1 Rin 177 be Reaſon of © r imagining. Arbei
—0 extraordinary dinary Mi | 303
* 22 Se
4 |


goon 161, ConjeZturs on the Manners of a Society


The, Contents of the Second Voluni "0


Atheifts, 329
. That Human Laws are for the moſt part
the Baſe. of _— Ver ertus. Impurity an


Argument of th 326
163. That Men have 6 gene Joſe of ls
than Women, © 330


164. What general ſpeaking are the _—
| Cauſes of Chabtiry'in Nomen. |
165. What an Injuy the Impurity of di |
Tian do i the. Chriftian Religion. 334
166. Mart for knowing when an Action
proceeds from the Love f Gol. 336
167. The true 3 one Sin bring more þ
cuſtomary than another. 338 9
4 —— an the Habits of Tying nd

tis.

5 169 Whether Men bak Reaſon | ro think js |

. purity aleſs Sin than Murder. 341

10. Reflections on the Malice of Evil -ſpeak-

ing in ſome Caſe. 3343

1759 Why Rebenge and Avarice are fo com-


{$1 72. z. Whether a Society of Athriſts ws 157

| themſelves under "Rules 1 Honor and Ci-

_ oily; 349

. 173. atithe Opinianaf thy l the

Soul do's not extinguiſh the defire of im-
 mortalizing the Name. 352


been u lden by C ee of _
2 ers. ö


their Heads about religious Matters.


= The Contents ©
1 Sect. 178. Whether, one may have Notions of Moral Ver
15 tue without the Belief of a God. 365
TE 279, That an Atheiſt may thirſt after Praiſe 2
688 ory. Ae 3
1 180. The Example of Lucretia, and ſuch as ſhe,
=. an evident Proof that Religion was not the Ground
1 of the Pagans Notion of Honor. 370
5 181. A nem Obſervation, ſhewing that Men don't
= wall according to their Principles. 373
$ 195982. Atheiſmsbaving its Martyrs, is an infallible
' Seien it -da'$ not exclude the Ideas of Glory and Ho-
ji nor. A Reflettion on the Conduct of Vannini. 376
13983. A Review of the Objection drawn from the Dif-
1 | +. ficulty- of convert ing an Atheiſt. 379
| 184. Whence ariſes the difficulty of believing. 381
| 185. Reflections on the Conduct of Jeſus Chriſt to-
wards the Phariſees and Sadduces. 3284
1386. Of the Jews Auerſion to Idolatry. 385
1287. Whether there be any other Cauſe;of Incredulity
| beſide an Tuclination to Vice. 380
1 13288. Hew the Pagan Religion tended to make Men
| 1) of Red dh no nn ho, 397
E -
þ


- :
4 , — IE
—_ *


189. Tho Man is extreme corrupt, he can't endure
21 © Reltgion's commanding a Crime. 392
: 190. The Reaſon of this. "vr 394
| 1591. Whether the outivard»Profeſſion of Religion can


1 : "$4 LI ve be any bene ſit to em. 55 7 2's 43 n 1 395 :


*


Q
I
8
:
F
D
"=
OY
8.
T
DU
2
D
wW.
S
LY
*


— —-—


E | Se


of the ſecond Volume.


8. 198. A Reflettion on what ha ned occ
E "Sis 65 2 ne ＋ . 1


by the Pope. 47
199. Reflections on the different manner of procee


ing againſt Vices and Errors, 409
200. That there are ſome Errors not criminal. 413
AY 201. What makes one Error more ſinful than another.


202. Had G od work J Miracles to declare his God.
neſs to the Pagans, he had workt for the falſe Gods.
16

203. 2d Objection: Comets are produc d des a
Miracle, God might work Miracles among Infi-
dels. God deſign 7 to make himſelf known by the
means of Comets. All Acts of Idolatry, occaſion d
by Comets, will render Men more inexcuſable. 417
204. I. Anſwer : If Comets were Signs of what ay
pens after their Appearance, tis neceſſary they


ou d be miraculouſly form d. 418
205. A Lift of ſeveral Hypotheſes which may be Full
low'd in reaſoning on Comets. 418


206. That neither of theſe Hypotheſes diſcovers any
natural Connexion between the Comets, and what
. happens upon Earth after their Appearauce. 420
207. When there's a Subordination of ſecond Cauſes,
and when not. | 5
208. Ap E-xplication of this Doctrine.
209. A further Explication on the Syftem of O e . o-
nul Cauſes. 426
"th 210. A Confirmation of this Doctrine, from what
+, *.-» happens when Miracles are wrought. 428
| 21 I: An Application of what has been ſaid on the
firſt Hypotheſis, to three more of the Five, ibid.
21 2. That the fourth Hypotheſis won't admit the Con-
niexion we ſpeak of. 429
213. A Confirmation of theſe Remarks from the _
tingency of Human Aft ions.
214. It depends on the leaſt Nicety, that the +
Events happen not quite contrary. 435
215. A way of concerving Comets to bs Preſages wit hi-
out being Miracles. Ann


8
* ; i A Set.


Se. 216. A Confutation of this w. 437 eq


"OTIS ANT»
0 —


.
8 2 5 —

— — eK 5 2
2 7


9
24
.
1
8
#
;
* of


4

5

x

7 #1

4 7

47

f
£

*

,
K.
iP

1 *
4
#
v3
V4
Ys
j | |
4q 1
th
4
$
%
7
£ *

,

14


r
— —
%


The Contents


217. Second Anſwer : That if Comets were Mira.
| =» cles, they d be of ſuch a kind as God never vouch-
ſafes to Infidels, | 439

218. What kind of Miracles God works among 1n-

fidels. | 40
219. Third Anſwer : That God's propoſing to male
himſelf known for the true God by the means of Co-
met s., is 4 falſe Notion, | | 443 1
20. The Sight of a Comet renders us not more capa- |
ble of knowing the Nature of God. 445
221. Some of the Pagan Nations admitted no ſtrange

222, A ſhort Repreſentation of the Inferences from *

the preceding Remarks, =

223, Whether we may ſafely deny God's doing a thing,

when we can't perceive its of any uſe. 449 |

224. A Reflection on the Maxim of the Pretor

Caſſius, cui bono. TID 451
225. A Reflection 0 the Manny of accounting / :


tte hardneſs of Pharaoli's Heart. 452 AX
226, Fourth Anſwer : *Tis falſe that the Gentiles 1 24
were render d inexcuſable, in not being converted 24.
to the true God by the ſight of Comets. 454 SY
227. Comets incapable of bringing Men to the Know- Wl 24:
ledg of the true God, 2-08
228. 3d Objection: Comets are a natural E 5 244
and the natural Cauſe of the Calamitys which at- F
tend em. e Ne $7 243
229. Anſwer : That tis impoſible Comets howd be 1


the efficient Cauſe of the Calamitys they are 12 :

pos d to preſage. 3 ibid.
230. Nothing is more worthy the Greatneſs of God,
than maintaining the general Laws. 58
231. A Reflettion on the Unreaſonableneſs of or
who murmur at the Proſperity of the Wicked. 459
232. The Difference between Miracles and Natural

Effects, with reſpect to us. 684 4
233. That the Characters of true Miracles belong |
not to Comets, 1 kn a8 f


Seck,


* : N
——ü—— — —— 1 *
8 * „ g * * XV
2 0 hd : C7 . 1
* : 0 WW.” Ws. -
*
12


—— —


of the Second Volume.


F.. 234. Whether God diſpens'd Good and Evil to the
| agans, with a Deſign of converting em. 464
235. New Remarks drawn from the fortuituus Vi-
ciffitude of human Affairs, to prove that Co-
met are not the Cauſe of ſucceeding Evils, 468
236. How ſmall are the Cauſes of ſome of the great-
9 eſt Events.

2237. That Comets have no part in exciting the Paſ-
4 ions which cauſe the Diverſity of Events. 473
238. That Man needs no Foreign Aſiſtance to be agi-
4 tated by all ſorts of Paſſions. Inſtances of the Jewiſh
= Superflitin. 475
239. Remarks fiewing, that to make a Judgment of
what ſhall happen after the Appearance of Comets,

there's no need of confidering theſe Stars; and that
tis ſufficient to have an Eye to the Situation of
general Affairs, to the Inclinations and Intereſts
of Princes, An Eſſay of this Method on the Co-


met of 1618. and that of 1681, 477
* Examples of ſome Politicians who have ag
vents. 1 xv |


; „
241. A Confu tation of Paſquier's Preſage. 481
242. * eaſy to foreſee a mighty War in ons
\ - "ODS. | | 5 BY

243. The Slomneſs and Bigotry in the Conduct of
the Houſe of Auſtria. EE 486

244. That Conquerors have avoided the Odium of
Perſecutors. | 487
245-. How much the Houſe of Auſtria has weaken'd |
it ſelf by Perſecutions for Religion, 490 ö
246. What are the Preſages moſt in vogue at preſent. |
Favorable Diſpoſitions for France's extending its |
Congqueſts. — 92 7
247. A. Detail of the Circumſtances in favor of |
248 4 Th be on the preſent Stat T E = |
5 ght on eſent State of Europe. 497
249. How Republicks in antient Times mortiſy d the


250. The Advantages of the Peace of Nimeguen to |
France. 1 502


e 3 Sec;


The Contents.


Sed. 251. A Reflection on the Form of Government 3 in


Germany. %
252. The Inclination of the Jeſuits to the "abr 9
France. ee ee


253. Of certain Renee which promiſe the Xin MM. b
great Conqueſis. OIL
254. Pretences which the King might raiſe, to 15


hold of the favorable Diſpoſ tions which Fortune 0
offers him. ob
255. Reaſons for not laying hold on theſe fuel. C
Diſpoſitions,  - $10
256. 1 Reflection on what has been obſerv d of cer- |
tain Prophecys in favour of France. * ' 516


257. Whether Europe has more Reaſon to enter into
a general Confederacy now than heretefore. 3523 —


258. Whether Leagues are to be fear d. 52571
259. Overſights of the Allies during the lat Ma. S EC


260. Conf derable Effetts of ſome Leagues,” 528
261. Ve ought not to reckon too much on the preſen


Sͤtate of Affairs. 2143353 © "oy
262. The Concluſion of the Work. © 5 34]


263. An Abridgment of the whole Works" - -*.- $35
264. An Appeal to all the Univerſi 175 7 ee Sal


Kite


Miſcellaneous Reflections,
on occaſron of the Comet which


appear'd in December 1680.


' Written to a Doctor of the Sorbon.


i —


*
1


Ja. E C T. CLXI. Conjectures on the Manners of
= a Society of Atheiſts. |


; ' FTER all theſe Reaſonings, I make no
: ſcruple to declare, wou'd you know


—


my Thoughts of a Commonwealth of
Atheiſts, That as to Manners and Civil
Life *twou'd exactly reſemble a Commonwealth of
| 4 85. *twill indeed require very ſevere Laws,
Band very well executed. But do's not every State

require the ſame? And dare we ſtir out of our
WHouſes, were Robbery, Murder, and other ways
of Violence - publickly conniv'd at? Isn't it ow-
ang purely to the Vigor the King has newly given
the Laws againſt Bullys and Pickpockets, that we
are not inſulted in the Streets of Paris night and
day? Were it not for this weſhou'd be expos'd to
the ſame Violence as in former Reigns, tho the
Freachers and Confeſſors diſcharge their Duty

much better than heretofore. In ſpite of the


(ce


*


334 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


Wheel, and Rigor of the Magiſtrate, and Vigi-
lance of the Civil Officers, how many Violences
and Felonys are committed on the very Spot, and
the very hour Criminals are executed? It may be
ſaid, without invective, that Human Juſtice is for
the moſt part the Baſe of Human Vertue : The
Moment ſhe ſlacks the Reins, few are cautious
how they offend. - | ©


8 ECT. CLXIL That Human Laws are for
the moſt part the Baſe of Human Vertue.
Impurity an Argument of this.
TE IS is evident from the Example of Un-
cleanneſs. Chriſtians are all agreed, this Sin's


ſtrictly prohibited by the Laws of God; the


Church continually preaches againſt it: Yet I
21 0 whether one Man in a hundred is free
rom the Stain. For the Womens part, we muſt
do em this Juſtice, that much a greater number
of them abſtain from this Sin; not that they have
naturally a greater ſtock of Vertue than the Men,
or that their Love of God gives em more ſtrength
to reſiſt the Temptation. What then? that they
are reſtrain'd by the hard Laws of Honor, ex-
poſing em to Infamy, whenever they yield to


the Inclinations of Nature. Certain it is, did


not Men, annex Honor and Reputation to Wo-


mens Chaſtity, the Sex wou'd be as generally diſ-


F


ſolute as they, and in all probabill


as they, and in y give them -
{elves a greater looſe, becauſe tis LE


probable


£


8 , = Mg FO 19 COILS IST FR r l -
this Paſſion is more violent in Wymen chan Men.
14.3 Y LS  APLILISTL * CAFIILLITIFL v_. T3 EE of 1:


3
%
%


*


— * 1 7 : \ 1 * [1

b r en „ ** +. , , , f , Fe
* 1 8 . 4 1 4 ; , " ” a a 4 - 1 þ : : 4 * *
5 49141. 94 * Ls WT — * ft 75 44
„ n IC 2
1 4 d ?P * 1 1 1 k s £ * 14 1 ay £ ue of | =o — 1 4 1

: R os * 2 4 „ 2: AS - 715
4 1 4 0 9
9 2 1 53 „„ ad


SEC


N.
1 He
bable,
Houſe
dice.
a pro!
Dange
has be
who h
nicety
kill'd c
Law 1
Chaſtit
Infamy
ſcandal]
of Cou
more I
ontine
dice.
dutdo t
ithon!
gain a |
lions th
it ſtake
aving :
en, at
mpreſſi
this!
duquer
han M
lolente


occafion'd by 4 Comet. 331


Sz c Tr. CLXIII. That Men have a greater
ſenſe of Honor than Women.


1 effect, did living chaſtly concern a Man's


Honor as it do's a Woman's, 'tis very pro-
bable, as few Gentlemen wou'd venture to leud
Houſes, as now betray their Poſt out of Cowar-


dice. Few Gentlemen do this, very few who in


a proſpect of Glory won't deſpiſe the greateſt


Dangers, and look Death in the Face. The time


has been you cou'd ſcarce find a Man in France,
who had not fought a Duel or two on the leaſt
nicety of Honor, tho he ran the hazard of being
kill'd on the Spot, and the utmoſt danger of the
Law if he eſcap'd. ' *Tis probable then, were
Chaſtity the way to Glory, and Leudneſs that to
Infamy, Gentlemen wou'd be as ſeldom ingag'd in
ſcandalous Gallantrys, as now diſgrac'd for want
of Courage. In the mean time we ſee abundance


more Ladys of noble Blood, defam'd for their In-


ontinence, than Gentlemen degraded for Cowar-
lice. A violent Preſumption, the Women wou'd
dutdo the Men, might they gratify their Deſires

ithout hazarding a Reputation; and the Men
gain a greater Conqueſt. o'er their amorous Paſ-
lions than the Women, were their Honor as much
at ſtake. Say, this proceeds from Womens not
aving ſuch a Command o'er their Appetites as

en, and that a fear of Contempt makes deeper
mpreſſions on one Sex than the other. Prove it


y this Inſtance, that there are fewer Women O


han Men who conquer the fear of


wlenteſt of all Human Paſſions, by that of In-


332 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
famy: Or rather ſay, Nature has given Women


a more rebellious Conſtitution than Men; 'tis a-


like to me. Stall the true reaſon of Womens fly-
ing Incontinence infinitely more than Men, is the
Mens placing the Glory of that Sex in, Chaſtity ;
whereas they are fo far from placing their own
Glory in this Vertue, that a Man who dare boaſt
of ſuch a Gift, muſt expoſe himſelf to a deal of
_ Laughter. 4 3 WT -.


SECT. CLXIV. What, generally ſpeaking, are
the true Cauſes of Chaſtity in Women.


J ET don't imagine it's my Opinion, that eve-
ry Woman's Vertue is owing to a fear of In-
famy. God forbid I ſnhou'd paſs a Judgment ſo in-
jurious to the Grace of the Holy Spirit. I have
already declar'd, and declare once more, I except
a good Number out of the general Rule, ſuch as
are govern'd by the true Spirit of Chriſtianity,
and whom God preſerves in the moſt Epidemical
Contagions, as appears by this Scripture z * Re-
liqui mihi ſeptem millia virorum qui non Curvaverunt
genua ante Baal. But after this Declaration, !
don't ſee the ſtrangeneſs of my taxing moſt Hu-
man Vertues of Falſhood, eſpecially the Chaſtity
of Women. If they who have carry'd this Duty
to the rigor, examine themſelves, they'l find, or
Pm much miſtaken, that the thought of what wil
the World ſay; has conduc'd to it more than any


other Motive. How many of em are the true


Copys of Amarillis in Paſtor Fido, and ſay in


—
A 2 T7 Ti —
5 4 a 1 ; , 6#
, 7 7 "Rs 2
. « - : "I" ” '
5 es. 2 8 6 . , oy
= — n a A Wor. 4 * : wy 4 . .
— — . wi +, * - . g 3 &- » f : , * 96 4 ; * 7
2 E 3 4 : þ , , : N 11
* „ 5 f * * =>. 9 % # . El , N FF | 4
bY — * > 4 * - - * - i
8 2 a
o . p L \, #4
1 * 4.


the Secret of their Soul, or a tender Tete a Tete;


no ve
cenſu


to th


mo 70
ducat
all t.
Favo
time;
an ur
ing
band
e


T6


occaſian d by a Comet. 333


Happy ye Savage Rangers of the Plains !
Whom bounteous Nature to no Rule reſtrains :
Bleſt with Deſires, and of no Guilt afraid,
Your Laws of Love by Love alane are. made.
But O] Inhuman human Laws decree,
That Death a Penalty for Love muſt be!
et weak's the Lover's Flame which Death can am!
O were that all the Sanction of the Law!
But holy, Honour! Thou alone canſt bing
Inviolably faſt each noble Mind!
Thee, Goddeſs, J adore, to Thee I how,
And conſecrate a Virgin's tender Vow ;
Tho bard's the Sentence, at thy cruel Call,
A Satrifice to Thee my bleeding Love muſt fall.


The Law, you ſee; which puniſhes Love with
the loſs of Life, is not the cauſe of their paſſio-
nate Murmurs. Loſs of Honor is all they
dread. They're perſuaded God can pardon all, but
Man ne'er do's ; ſo that the whole Myſtery lies
in blinding. the World, which let me tell 'em is
no very eaſy matter: therefore, when ſecure from
cenſure, they ſtand not on much Ceremony. If


to this you add the old Maxim, 115 eſt quam ne-
P


mo rogavit; that Modeſty which ſprings from E-
ducation, and prevents the moſt amorous making
all the Advances; à deſign of enhancing their
Fayors, and quickning by delays, which yet ſome-
times deſtroy. the Lover's Appetite; the pridg of
an unblemith'd Reputation; the thought of gain-
ing the Eſteem of thoſe they reſiſt, and a Huſ-


band perhaps into the Bargain; a certain Great-


neſs of mind, which won't bear a ſingle witneſs of
„FF.... their


334 | Miſcellaneous Refleftions,
their weakneſs z * the diſagreeable ways of a Lo-
ver, his ill-timing things, his Indiſcretion: Add,
I fay, all this together, you'l find the true Prinei-
ple of the Sexes Continence, without having re-
courſe to the Power of Religion. ;


SECT. CLXV. What an Injury the Imparity
ene


| Ts . Remark on the Impurity of Chriſtians,

brings a paſſage to my Mind out of Sir Paul
Rycaut's State of the Ottoman Empire: That rhe
Turks laugh at our ſpeaking" of the ſtrictneſi of the
Chriſtian Religion in allowing only one Wife, and ma-
| king a familiarity with any other Woman unlawful.
*Tis true, adds he, to our exceeding Confuſion, the
Diſſoluteneſs of our Lives and Manners gives theſe
Infidels too juſt Occaſion off Reproach and Raillery,
and of telling us, our Practice deftroys our Principles.
They are ſcandaliz'd, not only at the Numbers, who


violate the holy Rules of Criſtianity by an impure and
abominable Life, but at the municipal Laws and known
Privileges authorizing Fornioation. This they prove


from the publick Stews in Italy. They know Impurity


is 4 kind of Merchandixe and Traffick at Venice and


Naples; That rhe Courtizans at Rome, and Can-
tonera's in Spain, compoſe u Body in the State, and


are under a legal Tax and Impoſt. They can't com-


prehend the Reaſons on which this Policy is founded,
nor what the Italians can ſay in defence of ſuch a
Prattice. This Author Thow'd have carry'd his


oc


A — — i
1 5 6


14 89


Eſto, ægram nulli quondam flexere mariti, .. '_. _ ©,
Non Lybiz non ante Tyro deſpectus Iarbas,


+» +++ «+ Placitone etiam pugnabis amori. Virg. Ar. 4.
e Sincerity


o a... > ou


ww FL* IJ


ts 4þ Se 0 RR DV So


wm ae w


7


occaſiand by a Comet. 335
Sincerity a little farther, and ingenuouſly own'd,
that Spaniards and Italians are not the only Nati-
ons anſwerable. For, bating the Tax and Impoſts,
the Courtizans of London don't come behind thoſe
of Spain or Italy either in Numbers, Impudence, |
or Impunity. Such a Relation as Mr. Sr. Didier's
were very uſeful to convince the World in this
Point; and Sir Paul Rycaut ſhou'd not have forgot
Old England, and fo cheaply give up the Honor
of other Nations to the Raillerys of Infidels.
In the mean time, this Reaſon of the Jralians,
which he ſays the Turks can't comprehend, affords
a cogent Argument. Tis well known, the Rea-
ſon of their tolerating leud Houſes, is to pre-
vent a worſe Evil; an Impurity, of a more exe-
crable Kind, and to provide for the ſafety of Wo-
men of Honor. & About two hundred and fifty years
ago, Venice being in want of Courtizans, the Repub-
lick was oblig d to procure à great Number from Fo-
reign Parts. Doglioni, who. has written the Memo-
rable Affairs of Venice, highly extols the Wiſdom. of
the Republick in this Point, which ſecur d the Cha-
ſtity of Women.of Honor, daily eæpù A to puplick Vio-
lences,. the Churches and conſecnatad Places not being
a ſufficient Azylum for their Chaſtity. Time was
when the Monks and Prieſts of Germany | were
allow'd Concubines, on paying a certain yearly
Duty to their Prelat. It's generally believ'd Ava-
rice was the Cauſe of this ſhameful Indulgence.
But tis more probable the deſign was to prevent
their tempting modeſt Women, and to quiet the


n


»


4 — — .
1 — —— — — —


* Mr. de St. Didier Relation de Veniſe, chap. de Courrizancs,


1 See the Centum Gravamina apud Wolfium, Lett. Memor,
vol. 2. P. 223, 226. a V1 DH: | |


i LY


8


336 Miſcellaneous Reflection,

Vneaſineſs of Husbands, whoſe Reſentments the
Clergy do well to avoid. This, I ſay, furniſhes
a ſtrong Argument, becauſe it manifeſtly appears
I had reaſon to affirm Religion is not a ſufficient
Curb to our Paſſions, In effect, you ſee the Chriſ-
tian Religion ſo incapable of reſtraining In-
continence, that there's a neceſſity of ſacrificing
one part of Woman-kind to preſerve the other,
and prevent a worſe Evil, which notwithſtanding
is become very common. To which I add this
Obſervation by the way, That Men are ſo con-


vinc'd the ſolemneſt Oaths are no Barrier to the |


Ambition of Princes; that tho they take ſpecial
care to make *em ſwear the obſervation of Trea-
tys, yet they are in continual Alarms from the mo-
ment a neighbouring Prince puts his Troops in mo-
tion, Of this we ſee daily Examples. Now fince
Religion is incapable of ſubduing the Inclinations
of Nature, there muſt be ſome other Principle of
the Chaſtity of Women, and the fair dealings of
Men, beſide Conſtietice. 7 bo


SecT. CLXVI. 4 Mark for knowing when
an Action proceeds from the Love of God.

roſtitute her ſelf and yet poiſons her Huſ-
band, plead her Innocence in the firſt caſe, as an
inſtance of Obedience to God? She impoſes on
her ſelf, if ſhe fancys any Action of- hers can
proceed from the Love of God, ſo long as ſhe's
capable of poiſoning her Husband. For had this
Love any power over her, cou'd ſhe reſolye on ſo
execrable a Murder? And if ſhe accompliſhes it,
aud yet do's not proſtitute her Body, muſt- got


-
a N kj cd We
a * a


1 E LL me, pray, Can a Woman who won't |
P


' occaſion d "by 4 Comet. 1


this proceed from ſome particular Conſiderations


of no force in any other Caſe? Isn't it evident


ſhe wou'd run into all the Exceſſes of Impurity as
well as greater Crimes, were ſhe prompted by
Paſſions equally violent, and were the gratifying
'em not attended with fome outward Circum-
ſtances likelier to reſtrain her? The reaſon then
of her committing one of theſe Crimes and not
another, ſprings intirely from her being able to
accompliſh one without a Witneſs, but not the
other,” without the danger of diſhonouring her
ſelf the longeſt day of her Life: ſo that Reli-
gion's not the Cauſe of her Chaſtity. If Men ex-
amine themſelves by this Rule, they*l appear to
do little or nothing for the Love of God: and if
they give an Alms, while taken up with an adul-
terous Gallantry, tis becauſe they don't value Mo-
ny, or are naturally apt to be mov'd at the ſight
of a miſerable Object, or wou'd gain the Reputa-
tion of being kind to the Poor; or that they hope


hereby to purchaſe a Right of ſinning with Im-


*
.


punity. ATT EOEED 8 { aan 99 \ 8
How do Men deceive themſelves! If they fan-
cy, whatever is praiſe-worthy in 'em proceeds


from a love of God, wou'd they not abſtain from


things the deareſt to em, when found to be for-
bidden by him? One who loves Women, who
gratifys his Paſſion for 'em as long as he's able,


but is otherwiſe ſober, keeps regular Hours, cant
take a Bottle without a Headach, is beſides a Pol-


tron, and can handle neither Sword nor Piſtol ;


wou'd not he be very modeſt in pretending any


Merit before-God, becauſe he's no Drunkard, nor


everigo's on the Highway? Let him renounce the
| Luſt: to which he's inclin'd, let him exerciſe this


*


40 o 0 y Violence


338 Miſcellauecas Reflections,
Violence on himſelf on account of God's injoining
it, and then every thing commendable in him
ſhall paſs for current; otherwiſe hel allow us to
believe his averſion to Drunkenneſs and Robbery,
is a Vertue in which Religion has no concern, and


in which he might perſevere, tho he renounc'd =


Chriſtianity. N 12 1122111

Yet this is the real ſtate of moſt of your ver-
tuous Men, they have one favorite Paſſion: this
they indulge to the utmoſt, and never offer it the
leaſt Violence. The reſt of their Life is regular
enough; they applaud themſelves upon it, and
imagine they make a great Sacrifice herein to Al-
mighty God. Blind Wretches ! were they capable
of offering a worthy Sacrifice to God, they might
eaſily conceive the darling Paſſion alone muſt be
{lain, and that we can't be ſaid to ſacrifice thoſe


to which our natural Conſtitution do's not in-


cline.


being more cuſtomary than another.


T Don't know whether all the World has had the
ſame Reflection I have often made, upon ſee-
ing ſome. Sins much more cuſtomary than others:
I much doubt it; for in all probability, moſt Peo-
pule imagine this proceeds from a Notion of ſome
Sins being ſo ſmall and venial, that they are no-
thing in compariſon of crying Iniquitys. But for
my part, I can't aſſign this as the Reaſon; and |
maintain on the contrary, it proceeds from ſome
Sins giving univerſally a more ſenſihle Pleaſure than
others, and at leſs Expence, For in ſhort, Plea-
ſare's the Life of all human Affairs; and ſay what
Ons


you v
ſure 1


that k
He ge
Pleaſt
thro

Pleaſi
many
torio
to A


8


n
0
75
d
"=


1 ey & ot (0 þj joe my


r rr


occaſiow'd by a Comet. 339
you will, it's certain, Man's Inclination for Plea-
ſure is ſtronger than his Averſion to Pain, and
that he's much more affected with Good than Evil.
He goes cheerfully to Pain and Sorrow, provided
Pleaſure's the way which leads to em; and paſſes
thro Sorrow and Pain, provided they lead to
Pleaſure. This is evident from the Conduct of ſo
many young Women, who, born down by the vic-
torious weight of preſent Pleaſure, run headlong
to Actions, which they are ſure will be attended
with a long train of bitter Sorrowis; and by the
Example of ſo many Men, who having a thouſand
times experienc'd the ſad Diſorders of hard-drink-
ing, yet follow the bent of their Appetites when
the next occaſion offers. Some of the Italian or
Spaniſh Corſi, after an Affront given, ſhall lurk in
a- Hedg a Fortnight together waiting for their
Enemy, content to browſe upon Herbs or Roots
for that time, ſo they have the Pleaſure of ſeeing
the Ambuſn ſucceed: The force of Pleaſure muſt
needs be ſtrong; ſeeing in the ſmall number of Ra-


man Veſtals we find ſo many Examples of Puniſh-


ment; a Puniſhment ſo terrible, ſo infamous, ſo
doleful, fo fraught with Exectation, that the Wit
of Man cou'd not contrive any thing beyond it for


| reſtraining the Sallys of Incontinence.


This being the Caſe, if you ask me, why Im-
purity is abundantly more common than Murder
| anſwer, not becauſe Murder is ſuppos'd much the
more heinous Crime, but becauſe there's infinite-
ly a greater number govern'd” by the Pleaſure
of Debauchery than that of Bloodſhed, LoWw-ẽn,
the temporal Laws againſt Murder contribute to
the difference ;: but you allow me, if you; weigh:
the matter rightly; that the Reaſon alledg con-
tributes much more. SECT.


340 Miſcellaneous Reflectious,


Sgr. CLXVIII. Reflections on the Habits
A of Lying and Backbiting.


\ LL I mention Vices ſtill more prevailing
than Uncleanneſs, to wit, Lying and Back-
biting ? Is it not plain, what renders theſe Vices

ſo univerſal, is their being a never-failing ſource
of Pleaſure? They are Vices highly gratifying
our Vanity, our Envy, our Avarice, our Hatred,
and conſequently muſt needs be very delightful.
Your Merchants and Tradeſmen, by dint of Ly-
ing, and ſwearing ſuch a thing is worth ſo much,
get ſomething continully above the Value: Lying
then is their continual Pleaſure, and fo they lye on
eternally. They wholye out of Vain-glory, find
an exceeding Pleaſure, imagining - they paſs for
Men of Importance on their bare word. Flatte-
rers have a particular Satisfaction in Lying; they
make em Friends, who pay ſometimes in ready
Mony, ſometimes in Services as Occaſions preſent,
ſometimes in Praiſe for Praiſe. Let the worſt
come to the worſt, they have a ſecret Pleaſure
in finding the blind fide of the flatter' d; and
avoiding his Diſpleaſure; for there be thoſe who
never pardon one that's a Niggard of his In-
cenſe. As to your Backbiters, they have a-Satiſ-
faction in leſſening their Neighbor's Merit, which
gives Jealouſy, and placing themſelves above him
as far as lies in them; beſides its being a Talent
for recommending em to the Femalę Sex, who
are a conſiderable Party in the World
This renders'em agreeable Converſation among
the Ladys, who, generally ſpeaking, are very vain
and very envious ſo that to win their Nea .
ie | Storm tore _Tuayys


occaſion'd by a Comet, 341
tually, they muſt not only lye and ſwear in their own
Praiſes, but have the knack of running down the
reſt of their Sex, thoſe eſpecially who are Rivals
in Beauty, Wit, or Rank. *Tis wrong to make a
Viſit without ſome odd Story of theſe Concur-
rents, or thoſe who frequent em. If they have
heard none, why let *em invent. He renounces
the Character of a Galant, who ſticks at Slander.
Hence *tis obſerv'd, Detraction reigns no where
ſo abſolutely as in Cabals of both Sexes ; not only
as this Familiarity begets a thouſand Incidents to
talk of, but as the Men learn in ſuch a School all
the Refinements of this Art.

This only en paſſant. My chief Deſign is to
ſhew, that the Cauſe why thoſe Vices are ſo com-
mon, is, that they pleaſe, and not that they paſs


for innocent. You ſhall quickly ſee what uſe 1
make on't. FR


SEC T. CLXIX. Whether Men have Reaſon to
think Imparity a leſs Sin than Murder. oy


TS it not true, that there's no Revelation nor
ſound Theological Reaſon, which informs us,


that Impurity is a Sin leſs diſpleaſing to God than


Murder or Perjury ? *Tis indeed more favorable to
publick Society than the other two. But this is
not the Rule for determining the Quality of a Sin,
it being a conſtant Maxim in ſound Divinity, that
the Wickedneſs of an Action conſiſts in its being
forbidden by God, without regard to the Diſtinc-


tion of natural and poſitive Laws. In conſequence”


whereof, the Circumſtances of the Sinner's ſtate,
of his Knowledg and Intention, vary its Tur-
pitude, according to the Degrees of more or leſs.
VB £4 ee i 8 : | [


342 Mifeellaneous Reflections,
I much doubt, whether the Weight of Pleaſure lead-


ing us captive be capable of diminiſhing the Guilt,


becauſe habitual Sins in this Caſe, tho much more
deteſtable than others, muſt yet be conſtrued more
venial z the Power of acquir'd Habits being a kind
of Determination which empairs the Liberty of
our Will. Nor.can I think, that Conſequences
pernicious to Civil Society, aggravate the Sin be-


fore God, unleſs directly in the Sinner's Inten-


tion: for example, a Banditti, who murders a
Man in the Corner of a Wood, not knowing who
he is, or deſigning any more than juſt to get rid
of him, and go off quietly with his Prey, is not


more or leſs criminal in the fight of God, for that


a great many Miſerys, or a great deal of Good


follows upon his Death. Perhaps he has kill'd a


Man with a great Charge of Children, who muſt
fall into extreme want by the loſs of their Father ;
a Man who was the Support of the poor and op-


preſt, one who made up all Differences in his
Neighborhood; or perhaps a Man without Houſe


or Home, ready himſelf for any Adventure. Theſe
Cafes. are of no account in the fight of God, be-
ing only accidental to the Murder. Two Perſons
fire a Piſtol each at his Enemy; one kills his Man,


the other miſſes, or perhaps hits him ſo luckily,


that; breaking an Impoſtume, which muſt other-
wiſe have ended his Life in a few Days, puts him
in a Condition to live out fifty Years in perfect
Health, as we have ſome memorable * Examples


in Story. Human Juſtice may make what Diſtinc-
tion it pleaſes, condemn one to Death, and let


n.


*


75 ?
— *


3 + | | — N — \

| : 1 n 55 f Om 7 12 bes 4 pps" a
emen, Medien Vilkr ag f ch 5, te
| : E


che 0
jury!
are b
In lik
purit


low,


the (


| bidd(
| Gul


Sin


deri
tion
cent
judic


Crea


aban


nenc


| black


his \


Mur
Reaſ
forbi


punt
quen
than


in th


8k


wv


oof


<4


.
0


rere eee dee err eee reer er pa ww, = 35 6


r


occaſion d by a Comet. 343
che other paſs, becauſe the Action of one is an In-
jury to the Publick, but not the other; ſtill they
are both equally guilty at the Divine Tribunal.
In like manner, tho the Publick is a Gainer by Im-
purity, and loſes by Murder, it does not fol-


low, that one is a leſs Sin than the other, becauſe


the Conſcience of any thing's being expreſly for-


| bidden by God is ſufficient to communicate all the
| Guilt which belongs to the Nature of Sin. The


Sin of Adam, puniſh'd in fo terrible a manner,


deriv'd its whole Enormity from the bare Prohibi-
tion: for nothing in it ſelf cou'd be more inno-
cent than eating of any Fruit; there was no pre-
| judice in't to human Society, or to the reſt of the
| Creation. Let's agree then, that Chriſtians, who


abandon themſelves to the Exceſſes of Inconti-
nence, who lye perpetually, either to deceive or -


| blacken their Neighbor's Reputation, or flatter


his Vanity, are as guilty in the Sight of God as


{ Murderers; ſince there's no Revelation, nor ſolid
| Reaſon informing em, that God has not equally
forbid all theſe Crimes, or that he promiſes Im-
punity to one more than the other: And conſe-


quently, . what renders ſome Sins more frequent
than others, is not their being conſtder'd as {mall
in the Sight of God. 1 |


| SE r. CEXX. Refleitions on the Malice of


THEN Preachers lay it out againſt Unclean-
neſs or Evil-ſpeaking, they never fail to


repreſent *em as Sins of the blackeſt Dye, I don't


except thoſt who are reckonꝰd commode Caſu-
| iſts ; for I Rave heard ſome, eyen of this ſort, talk
: 8 —4


—


444 Miſcellancous Reflections,
very roundly on theſe Heads. If you take their the
word, they are the very Extremity of Wicked- One
neſs. Next time they preach, perhaps another der,
Sin's the greateſt; like the Panegyriſts on the Goo
Saints, who always give the Preference to the Miſt
Saint they preach for. But be that how it will, N upoz
we can by no means pretend Ignorance as to the Zeal
extreme Malice of Slander and Incontinence, they Þ tion
are painted out to us daily in the livelieſt Colors. reall
In reality, there are Slanders no leſs criminal than The:
Murder, ſpringing from ſuch envenom'd Malice, to a
that they fly like ſo many chew'd Bullets, rather Þ Elog


than bare Words. When J ſee a Churchman take Þ foml
ſuch Revenge of his Enemys, either by defamatory Þ Let x
Libels, or fly under-hand Calumnys, I r who
bear ſaying, he offends God much more than he, come
who breaks a Fellow's Head or Arm with an oaken Þ and !
Cudgel : That Choler and Gall which flows freer ting,
in every Page, than his very Words or Ink, betray Þ the &
a Diſpoſition more void of Chriſtian Charity, than Þ in thi
the Violences of a Man who kicks his Landlord 1
down Stairs, and flings his Goods out of the


Windows. But the Author ſtrikes no body, he
breaks no Bones. No; *tis not his way of fight-
ing, but the Arms he's train'd to he wields with a
Vengeance. This is as if the * Wolf ſhou'd plead
good Nature, becauſe he does not kick. But the
Author is prompted by Zeal, Vice-ſhag't go un-
puniſh'd. Stuff] A Prelate ſticks on his Skirts,
or attacks bis Order. Here's the bottom of this
mighty Zeal againſt the Prelate”


1


—


rere


, *
*
"
— 7 -
"_ IE 1 4


| 75 ˖ TY 9; PR. %
Py = % & * — — pl 1 1 *\ * here MP 2 Y EY h 1
im,
2 ry


4 '1
0 »
—_
n
*


ur neque calce Lupus quenquam, neque denck petit bo


Py


—


5


occaſion'd by 4 Comet. 345


r | the true Reaſon of trumping up antient Canons.
One ſure Sign of this, is another Eccleſiaſtical Or-
r | der, which receives daily Marks of this Prelate's
je Goodneſs and Credit, ſuffering him to enjoy his
e | Miſtreſſes Favors quietly ; and, far from crying out
, upon his Court-Spirit, extolling his indefatigable
ie Zeal for the Honor of the Church, and the Salva-


y tion of his Flock; which they'd ne'er allow, tho
s. really ſo, did the Prelate thwart 'em in the leaſt.


n | Theſe very Libellers, who read ſuch fine Lectures
e, to a Biſhop who teaſes em, ſhall write you the
er Elogy of another Prelate, their Patron, very hand-


de ſomly, tho the gallanteſt Perſon in the Kingdom.
'y © Let me aſſure you, Sir, you have thoſe among you,


r- Þ who without any other Weapon than a Pen, be-


e, come as guilty as they who revenge with Sword


en and Piſtol; their injurious virulent way of wri-
er ting, diſcoyering a Spirit in them as oppoſite to


ay | the Goſpel, and as full of Rancour, as in any Men


in inthe World.


he are ſo common.

- 3 . TEE ITE | 3 oy
2. ND now I think on't, let's examine a little
ad what makes Revenge ſo common among


ts, No; few Goſpel Truths are fo clearly expreſt as
nis thoſe which concern Charity towards our Neigh-
nd bor, and the Obligation we are under of forgiving
.* [| Injurys. There's no point of Morality Preachers


inſiſt on more pathetically; and from the Cradle


3 —


obliging


he 8B Cr. CLXXI. Why Revenge and Avarice


| Chriſtians. Is it that we are ignorant the Scrip-
ture forbids it as one of the ſinfulleſt Actions?


"© : 94


ve are all taught a Prayer compos'd by Jzs vs
eee eee ee


546 DMieellaneous Reflections,
obliging us in expreſs Terms nat. to hope for the
Pardon of our Sins, longer than we forbear Re-
venge. So that they who're only acquainted with
the firſt Elements of the Chriftian Religion, can
have no doubt of its being a heinous Sin. We maſt
conclude then, the Reaſan of its being ſo univerſal,
is its having univerſal Charms. The Fallans find fo
many in it, that they ſay, in a horrible profane
Raillery, God has reſerv'd the delicious Morſel to
himſelf. Other Nations don't run to fuch Ex-
tremes. But, generally ſpeaking, all find a Plea-
ſure in Revenge; Self- love, che inſeparable Faffi-
on, ſtill endeavoring to thruſt as many. below us
as poſſible, and if this wan't do, 2 at leaſt
not to be below them. Now as the Offences we
are about to revenge, repreſent us in our own
Eyes inferior to the Offen er, we find our Spirits
eas d of a great Burden, and tranſported with a
Tpritely ſenſe of Joy, as oft as by revenging our

elves we recover Ground, and get the Sapertori-
ty of our Enemy. Here undoubtedly lies the
ſweet of Revenge, and the true reaſon at the
ſame time why ſo many are of a vindiQive Spirit.
Aud if with this it be conſider'd there are a thau-
ſand ways of Revenge, which coſt little, and
don't expoſe to Actions at Law, we ſhall find the
rk Reaſon why ſo many in Fact revenge them-
PPP
Tho the paſſons of Uacleaaneſs and Laſciviouf-
neſs are very general, yet 755 2157 allow em
much leſs fa than that we are peaking of: There
are ſome Stages of Life whally free from em;
Children have. no xclih of em; old Peoplte for
the moſt part loſing theſe Appetites, unaccuſtom
themſelves by degrees, But no Age delivers fem


the


_ ..-


J ͤ K K


tte Revenue and Army.
1 Buildings, their Entertainments for the Ladys,


hn e ee e


| di
alone, that inſeparable Paſſion: of our Nature:


__ OY Jus hd 0 ge OY han 4


occaſtam d by 4 Comet. 347
the Luſt of Revenge; it reigns over Infants in
the Cradle, and attends old Age to the Grave.
Yet for all this I queſtion whether Covetouſneſs is
not a more general Paſſion than Revenge. By Co-
vetouſneſs] underſtand; not only a Miſer's ſordid
love of Mony, but a Paſſion in general for Riches;
whether the Perſon hoards, or whether he la-
viſhes as faſt as they come in. People generally


imagine there's a mighty difference between the


Prodigal and Covetous, but tis a miſtake; none


are more griping than your greateſt Spendthrifts,
as Herden Ken the Conduct of our Officers in
Their Feaſts, their
are made with the utmoſt Profuſion ; but their
Exactions on the People diſcover the utmoſt Ava-
rice: So that one may juſtly apply to em the
Character of Cain, Alieni appetens ſui profuſus.
Taking Avarice then in this ſenfe, I find it altoge-
ther as general as the Faſſion of Revenge; and in-
quiring into the Cauſe of this, F find Pris not that
we doubt its being a heinous Sim: for how ſhou'd
ſuch a Doubt ariſe in Chriſtian Minds, after the
expreſs Prohibitions of the Decalogue, and con-
nt Sermons grounded on the incouteſtable Au-


| thority-of St. Part, repreſenting it as a degree of


idolatry, and a ſpiritual Monſter of the moſt hi-
us Kind ? ſo that ix muſt ſpring from Self- love


/


For this carfed/ Paſſion! giving aceliſlv for what-


ever flatters' our Vanity, for whatever diſtin


guiſhes from other Men, whatever procures the


| gratifying of our Euſts, whatever is thought

| 1 Bulwark againſt Diſtreſe, carrys us to pant ar-

dently after Riches, as the Source of alf theſe
| * R B 2


Advan-


348 Miſcellaneous. Reflections,
Advantages. Something there is in the frame of
Man, and the inward conſtruction of the Machine,
hat eyery thought of his being rich, makes the
Heart ſpring for joy. You may read us what
fine Lectures you pleaſe on the Cares of the Co-
vetous; it's certain they reſent a ſweeter Plea-
ſure in the poſſeſſion of their Hoards, than pain
in the thoughts of loſing em. The ſight of their
broad Gold gives 'em a high Opinion; of. their
own parts, and inſpires a ſecret Eſteem, which
makes amends “ for Applauſes the World . ak
times denys. Now as nothing diverts a Man's


Fancy like being the Object of his own Admira- |


tion, and having it in his power to taſt all the
Pleaſures to be had for Mony; it follows, the poſ-
ſeſſion of Riches is a Fund of Delights, at-leaſt
he promiſes himſelf it will be. If you ask me,
why almoſt all the World thirſt after Revenge
and Riches, both which the Goſpel condemns,
and only a few love Hunting, Dice, Sciences, &c.
things permitted, or Vertue the only thing in-
join'd: I anſwer, Becauſe according to the Mecha-
niſm of Man, or the union of his Soul and Body,
there reſults a Pleaſure from Riches and Revenge,
renuring em agreeable to all the World, whereas. only
particular Fancys are taken with Hunting, Dice,

Sciences, and Vertue. ry pe Bs

From this laſt ſet of Remarks I draw this
Concluſion; That the Pleaſure, and the cheap-

neſs of the Pleaſure, is what makes ſame Vices

more common than others, and not our Opi-


—


} £ * tt a —_ 1


— —


* Populus me ſibilat, at mihi plau(oo
AI uſe domi finml ac nummos-conremplar in arc.
CCC . | non


 occaſiond by a Comet. 349
nion upon the Turpitude of em in the degrees of
more and leſs; and conſequently, that Religion
in this reſpe& (for here's my main drift) Þ ſerves
only to furniſh Matter of fine Declamation from
the Pulpit, or Explications of Duty, after which


| every one is abſolutely govern'd by the impulſe


of his Taſte for Pleaſure. Whence it follows,


that Atheiſts who only at by the ſame impulſe,
are not neceſſarily more corrupt than Idolaters,
tho differing from Idolaters in the notion of Sin
and Puniſhment, and wholly deſtitute of all Be-
lief concerning theſe Points.


src. CLXXII. Whether 4 Society of Atheiſts


wou d lay themſelves under Rules of Honoy
and Civility, ' (4


Xf OW we ſee how probable it is A Society of
Atheiſts wou'd obſerve all Civil and Moral


Dutys, as other Societys do, provided Crimes
| were ſeverely puniſh'd, and Honor and Infamy an-


nex'd to certain Points. As the Ignorance of a


| firſt Being, the Creator and Preſerver of the
World, wow'd not bereave the Members of this
| Society of a ſenſe of Glory and Contempt, Re-


ward and Puniſhment, or of all the Paſſions which


| reign in the reſt of Men, nor wholly extinguiſh


the Light of Reaſon ; one ſhou'd find Perſons a-
mong *em of Integrity in common dealing, ſome
who reliev'd the Poor, oppos'd Violence, were


faithful to their Friends, deſpis'd Iujurys, re-
nounc'd ſenſual Pleaſures, did no wrong; promp-


. 12
— CC. _—_
hd


Lan of 52 4 .


7 This and all other Places of the ſame import, are to be un-


| 4rrfleod with the limitation given before at Set, 136, 164, |


b 3 ted


350 Miſcellanebun Refleckions,
ted to theſe wor Actions, either by a love of
Praiſe inſeparable from em, or a deſign of gain-


ing Friends and Welwiſhers in cafe of a turn in


their own Fortune. The Women wou'd fet up
for Vertue, as an infallible Pledg of the mens Love
and Eſteem. Crimes indeed of all kinds muſt
happen in ſuch a Society; but not frequenter than
in a Society of Idolaters, becauſe all the Principles
which prompted the Pagans to Good or Evil, Re-
wards and Puniſhments, Glory and Diſgrace, Com-
plexion and Cuftom, take place in a Society of
Atheiſts. And as to that ſanctifying Grace which


fills with the Love of God, and gives the Victory


deſtitute as they. e

Io be fully convinc'd that a People void of the
Knowledg of God, might lay themſelves under
Rules of Honor, and obſerve em to the greateſt
Nicety, we need only conſider there's a certain


over evil Habits and Inclinations, Pagans were as


worldly Honor eſtabliſhd among Chriſtians di-


rectly oppoſite to the Spirit of the Goſpel. I'd
fain know whence this Notion of Honor. is bor-
row'd, which the World fo jdolizes as to ſacri-
fice all to it. Is it becauſe they know there's a
God, a Goſpel, a Reſurrection, a Heaven and a
Hell; that Chriſtians think *rwou'd derogate
from their Honor, to let an Aﬀront go unre-
veng'd, give the Wall, or have leſs Spirit and


Ambition than their Equals ? I ſuppoſe not. Run


over all the Notions then of Civil Life among
Chriſtians, you ſhall hardly find two borrow'd
from Religion; and when Actions once thought
unſeemly become genteel, tis not 1, aſſure you
Sir, that we have better conſulted the Morality
of the Goſpel, The Ladys have bethought


© EE In ts WOES > Were e > IIS AD cs I *


_ oecefian'd by 4 Comet. 351
'em of late days, that *twas more an Air of
Quality to dreſs in Publick and before Company,
to ride abroad in Hat and Feather, and gallop
ten Miles a ſtretch in a Fox-chaſe, & c. and have
ſo prevaiPd, that *tis no longer accounted a
breach of Modeſty. Is it Religion has chang'd
our Ideas in this Point ? Compare the Manners of
ſeveral Nations profeſling the ſame Chriſtian Re-
ligion; you ſhall find what's thought very inde-
cent in one Country, is by no means ſo in ano-
ther. The Ideas then of Decency and Civil Life
among Chriſtians, don't ariſe from Religion,
Some I confeſs are univerſal, for there's no Chri-
ſtian Nation where Chaſtity in Women is thought
ſcandalous. But to deal ſincerely, it muſt be
own'd, this Idea is earlier than either the Law or
the Goſpel, *tis an Impreſſion old as Human Na-
ture; and FI ſoon ſhew the Pagans did not borrow
| it from their Religion. Let's agree then, there are
, | Notions of Honor in Mankind, which are the
| | pure Work of Nature, that is, of a general Pro-
, FF vidence. Let's own this particularly with re-
gard to that Honor of which our Swords-men
are ſo jealous, tho ſo oppoſite to the Law of God.
And how can we afterwards doubt, but Nature
may produce among Atheiſts, where the Know-
ledg of God do's not obſtruct, the ſame Rules of
Honor it produces among Chriſtians ? Gy.


= 3 _- RT
— : — — .
— 5 — — ———— .

— — — — —— . 7


"PIG ͤ ˙


ö 1
be
[A x
5
*
* .
187
4
2
je.
2
TA
RJ
15
.
Fr
4
ro
+.
.
19
4s
*
=, j
„„
2
„
N
N.
15
* A4
*
Tx
Pe
£4.
5 7
1-0
752
1
XL
2
# 1 0
5
vs
.
|
©
*
i
=
ve"
8
.
1
11
x
3
1
8 -
*%
Wo
oh
*


*


.


=


k : 4 6 4 5 3 0 i X -
| * «4
8 \ — , p F | . b 7 K
*
7 5 ' F 4 4% 5 1 11 G 4 . f h
* + + ; « 41 P n
* * + 5 5 ke * : cs 5 a 0 2 2 7 4
p i $5 atk: * \ . 1 „
" „ : 2 . „ 441. 5 1 F
. - , -
1 * 1 0 * of N ©
p 1 | | ; bs ; m *


1
py 7
—
4 — ? 7 N . —
£ * 8 0 3 $, 44 £.4 +


te i OS TI
dd IE 3 2 *
2 Ie 5 TS
2 8


2


— — — * 2
.


352 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,


mortalizing his Name, which is ſo ſtrong a Mo-


Age, who run upon ſo many Dangers, and under-


gine, that the Monuments rais'd to their Memory


be equally inſignificant ? The belief then of the
Immortality of the-Soul is not the only incentive


once he ſhifts this Scene for Eternity, he has


Sz cT. CLXXII. That rbe Opinion of the
Mortality of the Soul do's not extinguiſh the
deſire of immortalizing the Name,


OME perhaps may imagine that an Atheiſt,
perſuaded his Soul dies. with the Body, is in-
capable of worthy Actions, from a deſire of im-


tive with other Minds. But this is a groſs Miſ-
take; becauſe it's certain they who have done the
greateſt things to be applauded by Poſterity, ne'er
flatter'd themſelves with the hopes of knowing in
another World what ſhou'd be ſaid of em in
death. Beſides, do our Hero's of the preſent


go ſuch Fatigues to be mention'd in Story, ima-


here, tranſmitting to lateſt Poſterity their great
and glorious Actions, ſhall give *em the leaſt plea-
ſure in another State? Do they depend on a com-
munication with this World in a future Life?
And are not they rather perſuaded, whether they
injoy the Felicitys of Heaven, or ſuffer the Flames
of Hell, all accounts of Mens admiring em wou'd


to Glory; and conſequently Atheiſts are capable
of deſiring eternal Renown. All that's ſolid in
a love of Glory, is only the Perſon's pleaſing Ima-
gination in this Life, of his becoming an Object
of Wonder for a long Series of Ages. When


ſomething to think on beſide his Reputation in
ES er 8 5
; . Id


occaſſon d hy 4 Comet. 1 353


„l cineres & manes credis curare Sepultos?
I ſuppoſe you have heard how Mr. de Caſtelnau,
being preſented with the Marechal's Staff a little
before he expir'd of his Wounds at the Siege of
Dunkirk 1658. told his Friends, *Twas a very pret-
ty thing in France, but he was bound to a Country
where *rwou'd be of no manner of uſe to him.


DES I BH oy og,
33ͤ on DeCs


a 4 S EGT. CLXXIV. Examples ſbewing that
'* Atheiſts bave not been di inguiſb'd by a Cor-


ruption of Manners.


UT ſtill they'l ſay, this is a Paradox indeed;
. A Vertuous Atheiſt! Why it's a Monſter ſur-
paſſing the utmoſt ſtrain of Nature. I anſwer,
y an Atheiſt who lives ſoberly, is not more ſtrange,
t than a Chriſtian hurry'd to all manner of Exceſs.
fl we daily ſee Monſters of the laſt kind, why ſhou'd
vue think the others impoſſible ?. Eee
hut to offer ſomething more ſolid, and put what
y | Thaveadvanc'd about the Manners of a Society of
es Atheiſts beyond a bare Conjecture, J obſerve, that
d thoſe few among the Antients who made open Pro-
e feſſion of Atheiſm, as Diagoras, Theodorus, Eve-
re merus, and ſome others, did not live in a ſtate of
je Libertiniſm, to make the World cry out upon'em.
in I don't find they are accus'd of being as ſingular
a- | forthe Diſorders of their Life, as for the fright-
& ful Extravagances of their Underſtanding. On
n the contrary, I obſerve, their Sobriety appear'd
as ſo admirable to * Clemens Alexandrinus, that he


T In Protreptic.
"IE: FS Do
„ . ;


thought |


Miſcellaneous Reflections,


354
thought himſelf oblig'd to demur to the Charge
of Atheiſm againſt *em. He pretends, their Pe-
netration in diſcovering all the Errors of the -


gan Theology, was the whole ground of the Ac-
cuſation, and that they were branded for Atheiſts,
only becauſe they deſpis'd the falſe Gods. He's
miſtaken; and I admire a Perſon of his Erudition
ſhou'd be ignorant, that the Pagans carefully diſ-
tinguiſnh'd - thoſe who affirm'd the Exiſtence of

a God, thoſe who doubted, thoſe who deny'd it,
thoſe who aſcrib'd the Government of the World
to a Divine Providence, and thoſe who thought fit

to aſſign the Gods a Beatitude free from Care.
The Opinion of thoſe who deny'd the Exiſtence
of a God, was never confounded with the reſt ; the
Name of Atheiſt was always appropriated to theſe;
and they whom Clemens Alexandrinus wou'd vindi-
cate, are conſtantly reckon'd of this Number.
Cicero*, Plutarch +, Diogenes Laertius ||, and ma-
ny more, are too exprels in this point, to leave
any room for evading their Teſtimony. Socrates
was of that ſet of Philoſophers who maintain'd
the Unity of the Godhead, and therefore is never
rank'd among the Atheiſts with Theodorus and
Diagoras. Others pretended, that all the Pagan
Divinitys were reducible to one. Lattantins **
maintains, that the Unity of the Godhead' was


known to ſeveral Pagans, to Orpheus, Virgil, Tha-


les, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Antifthenes, Cleanthes,
Anaximenes, Cicero; and proves it from ſeveral


++ Cicero 1. 1. de narura Deorum. * L. 1. de Nat. Deor.
De Placit. Philoſ, || In vita Ariſtippi. ** Lib. x, de fall. re-
* : „„
5 7 authen⸗


to all
illuſtri
Epic
Immor
any of
ceſs of
certain
Honor
it by th
They v
lution,
filthy!
one of
and im
a right


—

* Var
moderate
vide !


occaſſon d by 4 Comet. 355
authentick Paſſages in their Writings : yet theſe
were never reproach'd -with Atheiſm. Clemens


| Alexandrinus had no Reaſon then to doubt their
being guilty of this Impiety, who are expreſly
and by name accus'd of it by the Pagans. And


tis ſtrange * Muret with all bis fine Learning


ſnou'd fall into the ſame Error. Tis certain,
| Diagoras, Theodorus, Nicanor, Hippon, Evemerus,


believ'd no God; yet they were Men of ſo much


'Vertue ||, that a Father of the Church challenges
em as his own, and magnifys the Excellency of
true Religion by their Vertue.


It appears from ſome Paſlages of Plim, that he


did not believe a God; yet he was no voluptuous
Liver, and never any one apply'd + himſelf more
to all honeſt Occupations, or more becoming an


illuſtrious Roman. UN

Epicurus, who deny'd a Providence, and the
Immortality of the Soul, liv'd as exemplarily as
any of the antient Philoſophers: And tho in pro-
ceſs of time, his Set loſt its Reputation, yet tis


certain, it always conſiſted of many Perſons of


Honor and Probity; and that they who diſhonor'd
it by their Vices, were not corrupted in his School.
They were Perſons wicked in Nature and Conſti-
tution, glad they cou'd ſay, in defence of their
ilthy Paſſions, that they follow'd the Maxims of
one of the greateſt Philoſophers in the-World ;
and imagining the Cloke of Philoſophy gave 'em
aright to laugh at the Scandals taken by the World.


pO II


e


4
ag hs 4 w * — TOES” OI F u Cr rn


+ Var iar. left. I. 10. c. 17. I Eopporas EEG T a6, qui
moderate & continenter vixerunt. Clem, Alex. in Protrept.


They


356 Miſcellaneous Reflectious,
They were not therefore rendred diſſolute by em-
bracing Epicurws's Doctrine, but embrac'd his
miſrepreſented Doctrine becauſe they were diſ-
ſolute. Thus Seneca * ſpeaks, tho of a Sed
full of Animoſity againſt the Name of Epicurus;
and freely declares, he's perſuaded this Philoſo-
pher's Pleaſures were very ſober, and very dry.
St. Ferom | ſpeaks advantageouſly of his Fruga-
lity, and confounds the Irregularitys of Chriſtians
by his Example. ff i
The Fews had a Se& among *em which openly
deny'd the Immortality of theSoul,I mean the Sad.
duces. Yet it does not appear, that with ſo de-
teſtable an Opinion they led wickeder Lives than
the other Jews; on the contrary, it's very proba-
ble they were more righteous than the Phariſees,
who boaſted ſo much of their obſerving the Law.
Mr. Balzac, in his Chriſtian Socrates, relates
the laſt Words of a Prince who liv'd and dy'd an
Atheiſt, and gives him this Character: That he
was not void of moral Vertue, that his Communication
was yea and nay, his Diet Tiſan; and that he was
perfectly regular as to the outward Appearance.
The deteſtable Vannini, who was burnt for Athe-
iſm at Tholouſe in 1619. was all along exact enough
in his Conduct; and whoever had brought an Acti-
on againſt him for any other Crime except his
Doctrine, had run a great risk of being convicted
of Slander. 2 1


»»


Non ab Epicuro impulſi luxuriantur, ſed vitiis dediti, luxu-
riam ſuam in Philoſophiz ſinu abſcondunt. De vita beat. c. 12.

1 1. 2. contra Jovinian, c. 8. n
| In


occaſion d by 4 Comet, 357

1- In the || Reign of Charles IX. An. 1573. a Perſon
is was burnt at Paris for privately inſtilling atheiſtical
Doctrines. He taught that preſerving the Purity
t of one's Body was the only Divinity, and there-
fore was ſuppos'd never to have defil'd himſelf
>- Þ with Women. He had as many Shirts as Days in
J. the Year, and ſent *em continually to Flanders, to
a- Þ be waſh'd in ſome Fountain, famous for the clear-
ns neſs of its Water, and Virtue in whitening Linen.
He had an Averſion to all Obſcenity, whether of
Words or Actions; and tho he perſiſted in his Blaſ-
a- © phemys with an extreme Obſtinacy, yet he deli-
e- ver'd himſelf at the Stake with a compos'd Air,
in and as little concern in his Looks, as one jeſting
a- with his Friends. Lge} £36
„ The Relation of Mr. Rycaur, * Secretary to the
Earl of Minchelſey, the Engliſh Embaſſador at Con-
es ſtantinople, has made too much noiſe. not to reach
an your Ears: fo that I ſhan't ſtand to entertain you
he with the Praiſes of this Author's Diligence in in-
on forming himſelf aged of what he delivers, but
145 only take notice, that after his mentioning, that the

| Atheiſts in Turhy have form'd a regular Society,
de- compos'd for the moſt part of Cadis, and Perſons.
gh deeply read in the Arabick Books; he adds, the
| Members of this Sect have an extraordinary Friend-
his ſhip for one another, mutually performing all kind
ed Offices, are civil, hoſpitable, and extreme oblig-
| ing to all Strangers of their own Sentiment.
_ Their Civilitys are carry'd a little too far indeed,
| ſeeing they provide their Gueſts with an Enter-
_ tainment at night very unſeemly, but no more

than all the other Turks are guilty of. So that if


. Wi * 1 + 7 44 4 5 17 F 7 77 by . 1 — T 9 122 — a —
| . 6 SS N 4 * 3. > a
IE. Dot, 2. ſet. 6. J I. 2, c. 12.
; — Wines — — » wn vt, - — . 3 x ; 6. hh > 8 —
J 454 a «4

_ —-_


i * as wy 4 |


358 Miſcellantons | Reflet#ions,
one compare the Lives of theſe Atheiſts with thoſe ¶ gainſt
of the Mahometans in every Article, we ſhall find cou'd
either no difference at all, or the Advantage on the ¶ ſtitute
ſide of the former. 9003 exe AT 7 2110

I ſhall not preſume to rank the Chancellor 8
de P Hopital in the number of Atheiſts; I | 4


don't doubt he was a good Chriſtian, but J
may ſay, he was ſhreudly ſuſpected of Irre-
ligion, tho nothing was more auſtere, nothing
graver or more compos'd than his outward Ap-
pearance, nothing more exemplary than his Life.
Mr. de Beaucaire de Peguillun, * Biſhop of Aers,
charges him openly with Atheiſm. His Teſtimo- |
ny is ſomewhat ſuſpicious indeed, on the account
of his Dependance on the Cardinal of TZorain,
whoſe Preceptor he was. But'this however ſhews,
that Men forget themſelves, when they pronounce
Atheiſm inſeparable fram'a'Depravation of Man-
ners; ſince we find a Chancellor of Fance charg d
with Atheiſm, tho his Sobriety was conſpicuous
to all the World. Tis very ſtrange, and extreme
ſcandalous, that not only he, but all others diſ-
tinguiſh'd” by an Auſterity of Life in the laſt Age,
were look'd on as bad Catholicks, while they,
who cou'd make proof of their ſticking at no
Debauchery, were ſufficiently acquitted of ny In-
clination for the new Opinions; as in Rome of old,
they + who were impeacl'd of a Conſpiracy a-


——— KY
** _— OO — 7 — —


—— — — 2 1


* gomo quidem doctus, ſed nullius Religionis aut ut verè di ·

hes. Comment. rerum Gallic. I. 28 . 57. 7 Duos ſo-

los è notioribus veniã donatos conſtat, qui ſe. quo facilius ex ·

pertes culpæ oſtenderent impudicos probaverant. Suet. in Do-

mit. c. 10. Ceſoninus viriis protectus eſt n in illo ſœ-

difſimo cœtu paſſus mulicbriae Taciti unn N 1a vidi Shack,
in Nerone, c. 29. 1


occaſion'd by a Comet. 359
ſe eainſt the State, were immediately diſchargd,
d cou'd they prove themſelves Pathicks and Pro-
ne ſtitutes. f


jr (Sz £7. CIXXV. That your Men of Plus-
11 are don't trouble their Heads about religious
1Maters.


8 [ Don't know whether we mayn t juſtly apply to
1 Religion what Julius Ceſar anſwer d thoſe who
>, advis'd him to beware of Anthony and Dol abella;
, Iser ſifpett thoſe plump jolly Beaux, I much more
1. [© dread the pale meagey Faces, meaning Brutus and
it I Caſſine. 1 hoſe Enemys.of Religion, the Wits, I
„ © mean, who believe nothing; who give themſelves
„tte Title of Bold Thinkers 3 who find flaws in all |
e © Demonſtrations of the Exiſtence of a God, and
improve every Difficulty againft a Providence, are
d not, generally ſpeaking, the moſt Voluptuous part
'« of the World: He who ſpends the Day over a
je Bottle, and the Night at a Ball; dies for the Fair,
and for the Brown; ſpreads every Snare for the
e, Chaſtity of Women; endeavors to drown his
„ Thoughts by Revelling, and prevent a diſreliſn
of Pleaſure by a v tiety of Objects; ne er troubles
his Head to examine whether Mr. Deſcartes's De-
monſtration of a God, and immaterial Subſtances,
de valid, or his Anſwers to all the Objections a-
_ E clint him ſatisfactory. He neꝰer examines Mr. Hu-
er's Demonſt ratio Evangelica, ſo full of Eloquence
i- {Rand Erudition, nor labors. to elude any Arguments
>, {for the Truth of the Chriſtian Religion. He breaks
„dot his Brain with, Spinaſz's crabbed. Dodrines, to
prove the Univerſe a imple undivided Being, and
s fo many Modifications of the Divinity. He
A I even


360 Miſcellaneous Reflect ions,
even laughs at a Natural Philoſopher, who applys
himſelf to find the Cauſes of Phenomena.


* Let Rohault vainly break his Reſt to prove
How, when the Whole was full, the Whole cou d move.
He has not leiſure for ſo many things; nor if he
had, wou'd he employ it on abſtracted RefleQi-
ons, inſipid and incomprehenſible to the Senſual.
He truſts his good Fortune; holds to his Cate-
chiſe; and perhaps has a ſecret Perſuaſion, that
doubting nothing makes amends for a wicked
Life, Faith being not only conducive to a pre-
ſent Peace of Mind, but profitable to Salvation:
in the mean time he takes his ſwing. On the


7 * * 2 Der . 7 4 1
5 * 8 of 44 ln, 1 Comm | ON
o o | * "uh —


|


Comm
never
ſenſua]
or Ath
Relig
many


| Crime


are no


| be juſt]


Fact o:
who, n
we ms
Cauſe
by Ac
tion ol
for Ev


S EC-


1 N
lie
lead a


though
who, v
Princip


ces in


Epicur
Friend
ſquar'd
but by
bitter t.


—


:


occaſion d by a Comet. 361
Commonwealth. He was miſtaken 3 but we can
never be, in judging that a perſon drown'd in


| ſenſual Pleaſure, ſhall &er broil or burn for Hereſy


or Atheiſm. Not that I ſuppoſe all, who are void of
Religion, to be of an orderly Life: On the contrary,
many of *em are, no doubt, guilty of the fouleſt


| Crimes. But my meaning is, that all of this kind


are not diſtinguiſh'd by their Vices; and this can't


be juſtly deny'd me, becauſe I have Experience and


Fact of my fide. Now from there being Atheiſts,
who, morally ſpeaking, have vertuous Inclinations,
we may ſafely conclude Atheiſm 1s no neceſſary
Cauſe of a wicked Life; and therefore is only ſo
by Accident, or rather is the Cauſe of a Corrup-
tion of Manners, in thoſe only whoſe Diſpoſitions
for Evil will render em corrupt without it.


SECT. CLXXVI. That Man do's not regu-
late his Life by his Opinions,


5 ſenſible it's ſomewhat ſtrange, a Man be-
lieving neither a Heaven nor Hell, ſnou'd yet
lead a good moral Life. But ſtill Pm led to the
thought of Man's being that kind of Creature,
who, with all his boaſted Reaſon, never acts by the
Principles of his Belief. Chriſtians furniſh Inſtan-


ces in abundance. Cicero has obſerv'd * of the


Epicureans, that ſome of *em were capable of
Friendſhip, Men of Worth, whoſe Actions were
(quar'd, not by Rules of Luſt or Voluptuouſneſs,
but by Principles of Reaſon. They live, ſays he,
better than they tall; whereas others talk better than


| EIT U * 4 ——


1


* De Fin. I. 2, | |
Cc 15 they


362 Miſcellaneous Reſlections, |
they live. The ſame Remark has been made on
the Conduct of the Stoick Philoſophers. Their
Principle was unavoidable Fate, from which God
himſelf neither is, nor ever was exempt. This
{hou'd naturally prevent all means of exciting 'em
to Action, put an end to Exhortation, Cenſure,
Threats and Promiſes. Yet no Philoſophers em-
ploy'd theſe means more than they; and their
whole Conduct is an Argument they believ'd them-
ſelves Maſters of their own Deſtiny. The Turks
hold ſomething of this Doctrine of the Stoicks,
and ftretch the Point of Predeſtination farther |
than any. Yet we ſee 'em fly from Danger like
other Men; and I queſtion whether they*l mount
a Breach with as much intrepidity as the French,
who believe no Predeſtination. What we are told
of the Security of theſe Infidels, on an opinion of
the Unchangeableneſs of their Fate, is all fable.
They take prudential. Meaſures like us, and pu-
niſh particular Faults more ſeverely. We ſe
fome Chriſtians who deny Predeſtination 5 ve ti
ſee others who hold it. Some pretend, one ma) |
be afſur'd of Salvation; that one never falls from
Grace; that we are not ſav'd by good Works;
that there's no need of confeſſing our Sins fave to
God alone; that there's no ſuch place as Purgatory. We
Others maintain quite the contrary. But not-
withſtanding this Oppoſition in their Tenet,
both Partys govern themſelves alike with regard
to Manners. If there be any difference, it ariſes
from the particular Genius of each Nation, and
not from that of the Sect.
?Twere endleſs tracing Man in all his odd Va-
riety and Caprice, which ſhews him not only the
moſt ridiculous Animal in Nature, as we: Dc: i
| reaux


occaſtin'd by a Conn. 363


| Preaux has prov'd in one of his Satyrs, but a


Monſter more extravagant than the Centaurs, or
the Chimera of the Poets. Which, by the way, is


| a convincing Argument, as Mr. Paſcal obſerves,
of the Truth of the Scripture-account concerning
the Fall of Man; it being certain, that here alone
ue are to expect a full Reaſon of all the Contra-
dictions which occur in our Kind. Yet this hinders
not, but the Principle I have laid down may un-
fold the Riddle in part. For if it be true, that
general Perſuaſions are not the Spring of our
Actions: and that Temper, Cuſtom, or ſome par-
ticular Paſſion determines, there may well happen
& 2 vaſt difference between Belief and Practice. Then
tis as poſſible an Atheiſt may ſtint himſelf in ſome
@ Pleaſures for the ſake of another, as an Idolater
# ſwear a falſe Oath. And conſequently, that Vo-
E luptuouſneſs, and all kind of Crimes, are not the
* © inſeparable Effects of Irreligion. Thoſe only are,
for which the Conſtitution or Fancy give a par-
ticular reliſh, provided the Dread of human Ju-
ſtice, Detriment, or Cenſure, interfere not with
the Enjoyment. Whereby it's plain, a Pagan,
with regard to Manners, is not a jot a better Man
than an Atheiſt, |


Scr. CLXXVII. The Neaſon of our ima-


in Nature, Men of Blood, Enemys to all Order
and Diſtinction, and Invaders of Civil Right?
From hence, That they falſly imagine Man always
acts by Principle; that is, aceording to his Per-


gining Atheiſts extraordinary Wicked,


UT how then, you'l ſay, comes the World
to fancy Atheiſts the moſt profligate Villains


6 ſuaſions


364 Miſcellaneous Re floct ions,
ſuaſions in Religion: That they have known Men
of no Religion, ſuch as Mahomet II. for example,
commit the horribleſt Crimes; not conſidering
they had done the ſame, tho under the general ſenſe
of a Deity, as is evident in Nero, whom I inſtanc'd
before, and Bajazer as outrageouſly wicked, as bar-
barous and cruel as the former Sultan: That they
don't diſtinguiſh thoſe Atheiſts who begin, from
thoſe who end in the disbelief of a God. Thoſe,
for the moſt part, are your falſe learn'd, who
wou'd diſtinguiſh themſelves by an inſolent Rea-
ſon, and the contempt of ſenſual Pleaſure. Theſe
are Souls ſank in Voluptuouſneſs, and guilty of
the blackeſt Crimes; who perceiving the Thoughts
of Hell intrude ſometimes on their Peace, and
imagining *twere their Intereſt there ſhou'd be
no God, endeavor to perſuade themſelves there
is none. One of our moſt 1lluſtrious Prelates
ſeems to be of opinion, that only this laſt ſort


ever arrive at a thorow Atheiſm. We, ſays he,


may affirm quite the contrary, of what an impious de-
bauch'd Philoſopher advanc d, more from a vanity of
being the Author of a witty Saying, than any real
Conviction, That Fear had made the Deity; and main-
tain, That Fear alone, tempts Men to disbelieve 4
God. I don't think all our Atheiſts are of this
Stamp; I only ſay, there are ſome who take pains
to make themſelves ſo. Whether they gain their
Point, or whether they are balk'd, they are un-
doubtedly the worſt of Men: Vet not the worſt
merely as Atheiſts, but become Atheiſts by being
the worſt; or if they can't arrive at Atheiſm,
ſtill they live as tho they did. When a Man's
come to that paſs, as to wiſh himſelf an Atheilt,
and make the laſt Efforts on Conſcience, he's at the

1 very


very
dent
racles
o th:
from
: and b
who
© to ex


occaſian d by a Comet. 365
very Criſis of Malice; a higher degree is not inci-
dent to the human Soul: and unleſs God work Mi-
7 racles to convert him, he ſticks at no kind of Ini-

quity, altho poſſibly he mayn't obtain his full Wiſh.
& So that ſuch a one is incomparably farther remov'd
from the way of Salvation, than an Atheiſt bred
: and born, or a ſimple Unbeliever. Now as they
ho from mere Malice extinguiſh, or endeavor


| oo FRO . PEST 2)


„to extinguiſh the Knowledg of God, are the moſt
) 7 { notorious Monſters, and moſt reſolv d Sinners in
; 5 the World, People fancy all Atheiſts indifferently
- | | the moſt flagitious Part of Mankind.

5 s ECT. CLXXVIII. Whether one may have
1 Notions of Moral Vertue withour the Belief
: of a God,

8 H A T confirms 'em in this Perſuaſion, is
t the difficulty of comprehending how a
* Man, who believes no God, can have any Notion


of moral Honeſty, inſomuch that they look on
him as one ripe for every Miſchief which human
Juſtice can't revenge. They are notoriouſly miſ-
taken; for it's well known the Epicureans per-


a Form 'd many fair and worthy Actions, which
is might be omitted without the danger of Puniſh-
ns ment, and ſacrific'd Pleaſure and Profit to pure
ir {WVertue. The antient Sages underſtood by the
a- Picates of mere 3 that * we : ought to do
v1 = 1 85

a5 WW * Satis enim nobis (ſi modo in Philoſophia aliquid profe:
My kimus) perſuaſum eſſe debet, ſi omnes Deos, homineſque ce-
nus ke poſſemus, nihil tamen avare, nihil injuſtè, nihil libidinosè,
iſt, Nil inconcinenter eſſe faciendum, Hinc ile Gyges, &c. cic.


che * de Offic, vide Hor. J. Is Ep. 17.
= Cc e 3 Good


— PIES


1
0
|
|
|
4;
|
' .


366 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
Good for the ſake of doing Good; that Vertue
was its own Reward; and that *twas the Cha-
racer of a wicked Man to forbear doing Ill from
the Fear of Puniſhment.

Our Hiſtorians relate, that an Embaſſador from
St. Louis to the Sultan of Damaſcus, asking a Wo-
man in the Streets what ſhe meant by carrying Fire
about 1n one hand, and Water in another, was an-
ſwer'd, She deſign'd to ſet Fire to Heaven, and
extinguiſh the Flames of Hell, that Men might
no longer worſhip the Divinity from mercenary
Views, but purely for the Excellency of its Na-
ture. To ſay nothing of the Sadduces, who made


open Profeſſion of God's Worſhip, tho they only |


expected a Reward in this life; don't we read
that Epicurus, who deny'd a Providence, and the
Immortality of the Soul, conſtantly honor'd the
Gods? He compos'd Books of Devotion X, in
which he ſpake with ſo much Fervor of Holineſs
and Piety, that one wou'd have thought 'em the
Work of ſome Sovereign Pontiff. When 'twas
objected, he might very well diſpenſe with Wor-
ſhip, who believ'd the Gods did us neither Good
nor Harm; he anſwer'd, The Excellency of their
Nature was a ſufficient 'Ground of Adoration +:
and *twas a miſtaken Notion to think we ought
not to pay em Honors, unleſs mov'd by a ſenſe
of Fear. || Deliver'd from the Dread, and ſet fret


—


* Cic. de Nat. Deorum, I. 1. Þ Haber venerationem juſtan
guicquid excellit. Cicer. de Nat. Deor. J. 1. | His terroribus


ab Epicuro ſoluti, & in libertatem vendicati, nec metuimus £05
quos intelligimus, nec ſibi fingere ullam moleſtiam, nec alter!
quzrere, & pie ſanctèque colimus naturam excellentem atque


7


præſtantem. Cic. ibid.


occaſion'd by a Comet. 367
by Epicurus, we are in no pain from the Divinity;
becauſe we know it's provok'd at nothing, it aefigns
us no miſchief; yet we render a pious and holy Mor-


ſhip to this Being full of Majeſty and Excellence.


Whether there were more Sincerity or Prudence


in theſe fine Maxims, is what I won't undertake


to decide. But it can't be deny'd, a Man who


ſpeaks thus, has an Idea of moral Honeſty, and
| concelves that a diſintereſted Veneration for things


excellent in themſelves, is the Duty of a reaſon-
able Nature: This Inference * Seneca draws from
theſe Doctrines of Epicurus. It's plain then, Rea-
ſon, without the aſliſtance of Religion, conceives
an Idea of that Piety ſo much boaſted of in the
Fathers; by which one loves God, and obeys his
Will, purely on the account of his infinite Per-
fection. This convinces me, that Reaſon, with-


out the Knowledg of God, may ſometimes diſtin-


guiſh things intrinſecally honeſt ; the practice of
which 1s right and praiſe-worthy, not only on ac-
count of its Profitableneſs, but Conformity to
right Reaſon.

Some may poſlibly be brutiſh enough not to ſee
that a grateful Senſe of Benefits is honeſter than
Ingratitude ; but I ſee no indiſpenſable Neceſſity,
that thoſe who know no God, ſhou'd not know


| there's an intrinſecal Honeſty in Gratitude. For


tho God reveals not himſelf fully to an Atheiſt,
yet he do's not ceaſe acting on his Spirit, and up-


—


* Cur colis? propter Majeſtatem inquis ejus eximiam, ſin-
gularemque Naturam. Ur concedam tibi, namque hoc tacts, nulla
ſpe, nullo pretio inductus. Eft aliquid per ſe expetendum, cu-


- te pla dignitas ducit. Id eſt honeſtum. De Benef. lib. 4,
Mp. IS, f


Cc 4 bolding


268 NMiſcellaneous Reflections,
holding that Reaſon and Underſtanding by which
all Men comprehend the Truth of the firſt Princi-
ples of Morality and Metaphyſicks.


SEC. CLXXIX. That an Atheiſt may thirſt
after Praiſe and Glory.


'T's certain withal, that a Man wholly deſtitute
of Religion, may be deeply touch'd with a Senſe


of Honor, and thirſt after worldly Praiſe and


Glory. If then ſach a one happen to live in a
Country where Knavery and Ingratitude expoſe
to contempt, and where Vertue and a generous
Temper are admir'd; neꝰ er queſtion his profeſſing
himſelf a Man of Honor, and even capable of
diſcharging a Truſt, tho not to be comperd to
it by Courſe of Law. The Fear of paſſing for a
Cheat and a Villain, will prevail o'er his Love of
Mony : and as there are Men who run thro abun-
dance of Trouble and Hazard to revenge an Af-
front receiv'd in the preſence of a few, and which
they'd put up with all their hearts, but for fear
of incurring the contempt of their Acquaintance;
ſo in ſpite of the Temptation, I believe a Man
void of Religion may be capable of reſtoring a
thing committed to his Truſt, tho *twere impoſ-
ſible to convict him legally of a Fraud, becauſe
he knows his Honeſty will gain him the good
Word of the Town, and his Breach of Truſt be
thrown in his diſh, at leaſt bring him under a
ſuſpicion, which ſhall effectually prevent his paſ-
fing for an honeſt Man in Peoples Thoughts. For
itis the inward Eſteem of Men we aſpire er

MOILs


moſt.
preſſin
as the.
A Mac
Rever
ment,
as kne
Opini«
may {1
he on
Truſt.
might
betray
Fever
cretius
void


| Juſtice


I pz
believ.
ciple I
is mor
rers,


occaſion'd by a Comet. 369
moſt. The Words and outward Behavior ex-
preſſing this Eſteem, are no farther valuable than
as they are taken for real Indications of the Heart.
A Machine's approaching us with the profoundeſt
Reverence, and pronouncing the fineſt Compli-
ment, cou'd give no good Opinion of our ſelves,
as known not to proceed from another's inward
Opinion of our Merit. Therefore, I ſay, a Man
may ſacrifice his Avarice to his Vanity, where
he only apprehends a ſuſpicion of his Breach of _
Truſt. And tho intirely above ſuſpicion, yet
might he reſolve to quit his Prize, for fear of
betraying himſelf in his Sleep, or in a raving
Fever; for ſuch Examples have been: And Lu-
cretius & uſes it as a Motive to perſuade Men,

"_ of Religion, to the practice of Vertue and

uſt ice. ;

I paſs over Cardan's Remark, That they who

believe the Soul dies with the Body, are by Prin-

ciple honeſter than others; becauſe a good Name
is more their Intereſt : He compares em to Uſu-

rers, who to give a credit to their. Calling, are
the punQualleſt Men alive to what they promiſe,

and to the Letter of the Promiſe.


„ .


Fr! F © be es


* Quippe ubi ſe multi per ſomnia ſxpe loquentes,
Aut morbo delirantes, protraxe ferantur,
Et celata diu in medium peccata dediſſe.


SBCT.


1
|
ö
1
1
|
l
y


370 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


SzcT. CLXXX. The Example of Lucretia,
and ſach as ſhe, an evident Proof that Reli.
gion was not the Ground of the Pagans No-


tion of Honor,


UT what wou'd you ſay, Sir, ſhou'd 1 prove
that the Love of Glory, which ſo ſtrongly
poſleſs'd the Pagans, very often depended not in
the leaſt on the Ideas borrow'd from Religion?
If I prove this Point, you muſt allow, This deſire
of Glory proceeded from a Principle altogether di-
ftin& from Religion, and conſequently might ob-
tain in the World, tho there were no Religion
at all: Mark how I prove it. 5
_ *Tis inconteſtable, that for the three or four firſt |
Ages of Rome, the Modeſty, Frugality, and Chaſtity Þ
of the Women, were much more conſpicuous than
thoſe Virtues have been among Chriſtians for a
thouſand years paſt. Theſe were accounted the
chief Ornaments of the Sex; the Women, who
excel'd in theſe Qualitys, were ador'd ; thoſe void
of em were deſpis'd. The firſt “ Magiſtrate of
Rome, whoſe Authority came little ſhort of abſo-
Jute Power,cmploy'd his Vows and Promiſes in vain
to ſatisfy his Paſſion for the Daughter of an or-
dinary Citizen. He found her Proof againſt all
Temptation; and when he betook himſelf to in-
direct Ways, and the Authority his high Station
gave him , the Virgin's Father choſe to cut her


—


——— — —


* Appius Claudius Decemvir, An. Rom. 304. f Appius
amore ardens pretio ac ſpe pellicere adortus, poſtquam omnia
pudore ſepta animadverterat, ad crudelem ſuperbamque vim
animum convertit. Liv. Dec. 1. J. 3. 5

In


occaſion d by a Comet. 371
rin pieces, rather than ſee her raviſh'd by the Ty-
rant. You'l allow the Senſe of Honor muſt run
very high to carry People to ſuch Extremitys
and that Lucretia, who'd neither yield to the diſ-
Z honeſt Embraces of a Prince, her Sovereign's Son,
nor ſurvive the Affront, muſt have an inconceiva-
ble Paſſion for the Character of a' vertuous Wo-
man. 45 N
| | This being premis'd, I affirm, The Roman Wo-
* 9 . . . .
men cou'd not be inſpir'd with this exceeding


Nicety of Honor by the Religion in vogue; be-
- © cauſe to produce ſuch an Effect, it ought to incul-


cate, that Impurity was diſpleaſing to the Gods.
1 But far from this, it taught quite the contrary,
that the Gods themſelves were extremely de-
| | bauch'd. So that had the Roman Men and Women
/ © follow'd the Inſt incts of their Religion, they had
i | reaſon'd like him * in the Play, who ſeeing a
Picture of Jupiter chang'd into a Golden Shower
co enjoy his Miſtreſs, crys out, As little a Fellow
2 I am, I ſhou'd make a ſcruple of doing what the
i | greateſt of our Gods is not aſham'd of. Who for
fd the future can doubt that Men form Ideas of Ho-
- | nor and Glory independent of Religion; ſince,
i | as we have ſeen already, they on one hand judg
- © ſome things honeſt, which are in reality other-


| © wiſe, and which Religion condemns; and on the
> other hand, judg certain things diſhoneſt, which
are fo in effect, tho their Religion tend to repre-
ſent 'em otherwiſe ?

If this Reflection mayn't be thought convincing,
| here's another to my purpoſe that's inconteſtable.
Had Lucretia valu'd Chaſtity from a Principle of


2
5
Ge
*
—
v2
1 * r
x
*


" > _do# |


r pot IR LA In,
tate LISTS: 7 CR: Sx —_—
V


? TersKunuch. Act. 3. Sc. 5. 5 4
1 | Religion, g


372 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
Religion, or, which is much the ſame, had valu'd
it in Obedience to God, ſhe ne'er had yielded to
the Importunitys of Sexes, but choſe to ſacrifice
her Reputation, rather than defile her ſelf by
Adultery. But this was not her choice. She
bravely held out againſt all the Prince's Attacks,
even when he threaten'd her Life. But when he
threaten'd her Reputation with eternal Infamy,
ſhe fairly ſurrendred, and then ſlew her ſelf. An
evident Argument, ſhe valu'd nothing in the
Vertue but the Glory which attends it, without
the leaſt regard to any Obedience due to the
Gods; for they who a& from Religion, are con-
tent to ſubmit to the Reproach of the World
rather than the Guilt of a Crime.
therefore allow, Lucretia's Religion had no part
in her Chaſtity, and that ſhe had been exactly
what ſhe was in this reſpect, tho ſhe ne'er had
heard there was a God.

Vou'l tell me, perhaps, I take a deal of needleſs
pains, by indavouring to eſtabliſh what none con-
teſts, that Atheiſm deſtroys not the deſire of


Praiſe. What will you have me do? Will you have


me prove that Atheiſm wou'd not prevent mens
annexing the Idea of Seemly, to what's really Un-
ſeemly ? that in a Society of Atheiſts, for exam-
ple, the Glory of Woman-kind wou'd ne'er be
plac'd in Chaſtity ? If this be all, there's no occa-
ſion for new Arguments; it ſuffices, that in Rome
a Woman's Honor was made to conſiſt in Chaſti-


ty, tho the Religion of the Place did naturally


lead to conſider Inceſt and Adultery as Practices
Divine. If then, contrary to the Inſtincts of Re-
ligion, it became a ſtanding Maxim among the Pa-
gans, that Chaſtity and Modeſty were honorable
| Il


We muſt ö


occaſion'd by a Comet. 373
in Women, by a much ſtronger reaſon they'l be
thought ſo among thoſe who have no Religion at
all. And it being as natural for Men to ſet a Va-
lue on things in proportion to what they coſt,
as to be pleas'd when they think themſelves
| diſtinguiſh'd, People had ſoon diſcover'd by
a bare inſtin& of Nature, that *tis the Intereſt and
| Glory of Womankind not to laviſh their Favors;
| which alone naturally and inſenſibly brings things
about to that uniform ſtate in which we find 'em
FF throu _—_ almoſt all the Commonwealths of the

World.


| Src. CLXXXI. A neviObſervation, ſbeing
that Mer don't walk according to their Prin-
ciples.


N what ſide ſoever we turn our Thoughts, it
f can't be deny'd that Man acts continually
againſt Principle: For if it's pretended, the an-
tient Idolaters had fix'd Notions of their Divini-
tys rewarding Vertue and puniſhing Vice; I ask,
| How came theſe Idolaters to be ſo very wicked?
| If it be ſaid, they were wicked becauſe their de-
| teſtable Theology repreſented their Gods as guil-
ty of a thouſand Crimes; I ask, How come there
| ſo many Vertuous among the Pagans, and ſo many
| Profligates among Chriſtians, with whom this
| Reaſon do's not hold? There's no other Anſwer,
| than owning that the true Spring of Human Ac-
tions is ſomething very diſtin& from Religion.
Which yet hinders not Religion's falling frequent-
| ly into the Scale, and caſting it powerfully o' that
| fide to which Conſtitution inclines. For exam-
| ple, a Cholerick Chriſtian is on a ſudden red =
| | | with


374 Miſcellaneoms Reflections,
with Zeal againſt thoſe of a different Sect. Reli-
gion, ſay they, is what moves the Man: No, ſay
rather, it's natural Emulation, and the pleaſure
we all take in out-doing our Concurrents, and re-
. our ſelves on thoſe who arraign our Con-
Ws
The Author of 4 Treatiſe againſt Atheiſts, Deiſts,
and Modern Pyrrhoni ans, printed in 1677. has ſaid a
thouſand fine things, and with a world of Elo-
quence: he has not forgot this Thought among the
reſt, * That had Atheiſm, or Deiſm prevail'd in the


firſt Ages, the World, far from ſubſiſting a whole Eter- f


nity under ſuch an Opinion, had been deſtroy'd long ago.
To prove this he introduces a feign'd Dialogue
between two Atheiſts, in which we ſee that Rea-
fon, Laws Natural and Civil, Juſtice and Vertue
are ſo many words without a meaning. This hc
proves very judiciouſly ; but not having confider'd
one material Point, which I pretend to have de-
monſtrated, to wit, That Men ne'er act by Prin-
ciple, we may with good ground alledg he has
prov'd nothing in this place. What he makes one
of the Partys to the Dialogue ſay, can ne'er be
call'd in queſtion by ſound Divines; That || the Pa-
gans had all idolix d the predominant Paſſion of their
Soul, and form'd all their Vertues and Felicitys by
this Standard: That the Phantom of Glory ſuppor-
ted em under the ſharpeſt Sufferings, and urg d
'em to Efforts, which put their Example above


imitation: That the Horrors they gave Spectators,


were an unſpeakable Pleaſure, which made em amends


for all their Anguiſh: That Manlius Torquatus,


4 = _—_—


* Che 11. p. 23% f Ch. 12. || P. 264.
| that


coccaſion d by a Comet, 375


that idolatrous worſhipper of Glory and Country, ſa-


cific'd his Son to theſe Idols.


The love of Country, and the love of Praiſe, |


Their Trophys over vanquiſn'd Nature raiſe.


| That Alexander had naturally the.higheſt Ferment in
| his Blood and Spirits, an open Heart, a large and dif-


fuſive Soul; which meeting in one Perſon, becomes the


; Foundation of what we call G eneroſity. That Titus
had a natural Horror to Blood and Cruelty, found


the greateſt Charms in the love of the People, and


form d his Merit and Goodneſs on this principle of Sel f
love: That Epicurus was a Slave to the Pleaſures of
* Senſe, and plac d his Felicity in em: That Seneca was
perhaps leſs affected with theſe Pleaſures, and judg d
* Vertue conſiſted in governing Nature: That Cato
was cold and phlegmatick, and extratted his Wiſdom


from this Phleom. Isn't this what I have fo often


aid, That the Pagans only follow'd the biaſs of
natural Temper, and their taſt for one particular
kind of Glory? And ſince in driving with this
Wind, they ſometimes kept the true courſe of
Vertue, what ground is there to imagine Atheiſts
mayn't make the ſame Port?


Becauſe, perhaps, they aſpire but faintly to Glo-


ry? But what cou'd outdo * Spinoſa's Vanity a
little before his Death? The Account is of a
» freſh date, and I have it from a good hand. He
was the rankeſt Atheiſt that cer liv'd, and ſo be-
witch'd to certain Principles of Philoſophy, that
to meditate on 'em with greater ſucceſs, he be-
took himſelf to a profound Retreat, renouncing


13


F Hedy'd at the Hague, Feb. 21. 1677. 1


376 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
all the Pleaſures and Vanitys of the World, and
intirely occupy'd in his abſtruſe Reaſonings.
When he found himſelf near his end, he ſent for
his Landlady, and beg'd her to let no Clergy-
man come near him in that condition. The rea-
ſon of this Caution, as we are inform'd by his
Friends, was, leſt any Expreſſions ſhow'd drop from
him in the heat of Diſpute, or decays of his Un-
derſtanding, which might be made uſe of againſt
his Principles; that is, leſt it ſhou'd be reported,


his Conſcience awakening at the ſight of Death,


had made him renounce his Principles, and bely
his former Conduct. Is it poſſible to conceive a
more ridiculous and extravagant Vanity, or a
more ſenſleſs Paſſion for the falſe Idea one forms
of Conſtancy ? We ſhall ſee more Examples of
this kind. |


SECT. CLXXXII. Atheiſin's having its Mar-


zyrs, is an infallible Sign it do's not exclude the
Ideas of Glory and Honor. A Reflection on
the Conduct of Vannint.


HEN I conſider Atheiſm has had its Mar-

tyrs, I can no longer doubt that Atheiſts

have an Idea of what's Honeſt, which has more
power over 'em than the Profitable or Pleaſant.
What elſe ſhou'd bewitch Vannini ſo undiſcreetly to
broach his Doctrines before thoſe who might drag
him to Juſtice ? Had he only ſtudy'd his private In-
tereſt, he'd have injoy'd his own Thoughts quiet-
ly, without troubling himſelf to make Proſelites.
*Tis plain therefore he was very ambitious, and
this either to make himſelf the Head of a Party,
or to deliver Men from a Yoke, which in his Opi-
nion


from


98ccaſion d by a Comet. 377
nion hinder'd their taking a full ſwing of Pleaſure.
If he deſign'd to make himſelf the Head of a
Party, tis an Argument he look'd not on bodily
Pleaſure, or Riches, as his chief Good, but aim'd


intirely at Glory. If he meant to deliver Men


from the fears of Hell, with which he believ'd
they vainly diſquieted themſelves, tis a ſign he
thought himſelf oblig'd to ſeek his Neighhor's
Good, and judg'd it an honeſt part to be ſer-
viceable to Human- kind, not to his prejudice only,


but even to the hazard of his Life: For Vannini


cou'd not be ignorant that an Atheiſt who ſeeks
his Profit, may find his Account much better a-


mong honeſt Devotes, than among Sharpers and


Villains; the former ſupplants no body by Cabal
and Intrigue, and far from over- reaching, or
coveting his Neighbor's Goods, will rather part
with his Right than contend with one he ſees re-
ſolv'd to forſwear himſelf; whereas the latter 1s


generally the Aggreſſor in Fraud and Perjury, and


all the villanous Ways of blaſting his Competitor's
Projects. So that it's the Intereſt of an Atheiſt,


who deſigns to make his Fortune, there were


none but good Men in the World; and Vannini
miſtook his Meaſures, if he propos'd by the eſta-
bliſhing Atheiſm to begin a Scramble. He ought
rather to have contributed to make all Mankind
Devotes. Beſides, he knew *twas Death to pro-
pagate Atheiſm : ſo that by indeavoring to infuſe
his Impiety, he risk'd all the Advantages to be made
of a good Conſcience in others, and his Life into
the bargain. A falſe Idea therefore of Genero-
ſity muſt induce him to ſacrifice all to his Neigh-
bor's Good. |


— ä—N!ü—mLI———— — —— ᷑ — — —— —


| D d But


378 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
But how comes it he did not deceive his
Judges, and chuſe to die in the ſharpeſt Tor-
ments, rather than make a Recantation, which on
his Principles wou'd do no prejudice in another
World? Why did he not pretend his Eyes were
open d, and renounce his Impiety, ſeeing he be-
liev'd not Hypocriſy forbad by any Supreme
Power? We muſt allow on the whole, that ei-
ther he d do ſomething extraordinary merely to
be talk d of, like that obſcure Wretch who burnt
Dianas Temple; or conceiv'd ſuch Notions, of
Honor, as made him judg it a meanneſs unworthy
of Human- kind, to diſſemble his Sentiments out
of a fear of Death. It can't be deny'd then,
that Reaſon, without the expreſs Knowledg of
a God, may carry Men to notions of Honeſty,
ſometimes juſt; and.. ſometimes miſunderſtood:
And in either caſe the Example of Yamin is an
inconteſtable Argument of What I have ſo often
advanc'd, that Men never act according to their
Opinions. For had this Fool for one aQed thus,
he had left every one to his own Belief; or rather
wiſh'd all the World, except himſelf, a parcel of
Devotes, as being the fitteſt Tools for a Hypo-
crite to work by. What was't to him, if the true
Chriſtian deny'd himſelf the Pleaſures of this
Life? If touch'd with pity for him, he forſakes


his Principles, which oblige to no concern for a-


nother : Beſides his being groſly miſtaken here, for
No Pleaſures of Sin are comparable-to-the Raviſh-
ments a devout Soul injoys even in this Life. And
for the common ſort of Chriſtians, his Pity was
needleſs, becauſe they divert themſelves as much
as if they had no Religion at all. After having
prepoſterouſly diſcover'd his wicked Heart, he


ſhou's


SECT. c N


orccaſiqy d by 4 Comet. 379
en d at leaſt have ſworn dine off, renounc 'd
Errors, . 6 to Wo all the. Articles of


Faith with Inſtead of this he ſtands
it out, from a ziclenld Point of HO, and ſtif-
fens under the Torments.. 9975 ſhews he was
1 70 „ with the Tame degree of Obſtinacy, to


lay down his Life for Atheiſm, tho firmly per-


ſuaded of the Being of a God.

To. this Example of Vannini we may join that
of one * Mahomet Effendi, executed at Conſt anti-
nople not long ago for having advanc'd ſome No-
tions againſt the Exiſtence of àa God. He might
have ſav d his Life by ar e is Error, and fe-


nouncing it for the future; but choſe to perſiſt in
his ode ſay ing, T he had no Reward to
2 e love of Truth conſtrain d him to ſuffer


Martyrdom in its deſence. A Man muſt needs have


an Idea of Honeſty 1 talks at this rate; and if


he carry his Obſtinacy ſo far as to die for Athe-
iſm, his Faſſion for Martyrdom ſhall be capable of


expoſing him to Jhe pe Tee tho in reali-


ty no Atheiſt.


X an; A Review of. the Objedt
on drawn from the Diffculs 7 of converting an
Atheiſt, nit


L ears no other SEL to thoſe who ſay, As
theiſm being the moſt incorrigible diſpoſition


| of Mind, is neceſſarily. worſe than Idolatry. An


dolater, ſay they, whom you indeavour to
bring over to the true Religion, is agreed in a
great b Beine 120 loſe no time irn him


1 *
«x ae - OR WO CO * . — r — anda: —


* Sr Paul n f 2. 2 12.
Dd 2 : ia


380 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,
in proying a God; whereas the Atheiſt ſets out
here, and ſuch is his Obſtinacy, that one grows
old in wrangling with him cer. this ſingle Ar-
ticle is clear d. For which reaſon, Origen labor-
ing in the Converſion of two Pagan young Gen-
tlemen, one of em afterwards St. Greg
Thaumaturgus, Þ allow d em to read all the Philoſo-
phers and Poets except thoſe tending to Atheiſm
judging it infinitely more dangerous, ; Bo accuſtom'd
to hear there was no God, than to be acquainted with
the different Opinions of the Philoſophers concerning the
Gods, whoſe Worſhip, the more extravagant it was,
the likelier to render Men ſuſceptible of the true Re-
3 intreat thoſe who reaſon at this rate to con-
I. That for one Atheiſt who perſiſts to Death
in his 1mpiety, there are a million of Idolaters in
the ſame Bond of Obſtinay g.

II. That the Perverſeneſs of this ſmall Number
of Atheiſts proceeds not from their Atheiſm; for
according to the Remark I have already made, they
ought by their Principles to comply with the Re-
ligion of the Country: And not doing this, we
muſt conclude, they are obſlinate from natural

Temper, and poſſeſt with a furious ambition of

diſtinguiſhing themſelves by ways extraordinary;

a Diſpoſition which may make one, perſuaded of

Religion, ſtand Fire and Fagot in defence even of

Atheiſm. This being the Caſe, had Vannini been

an Idolater, a Jew, or Mahometan, he had been

at leaſt as ill diſpog'd for the reception of the true

Religion, as the moſt obſtinate Atheiſt.

T See the Life of Tertullian and that of Origen, by Mr. de la

Motte, p. 543. C | |


SECT:


{-%s


that we take it for granted not


381


occaſion d by a C ont.


SECT. CLXXXIV. Whence ariſes the difficulty
of believing. _


III. V EsID ES, Pd have people attentively con-


ſider whence the Difficulty of converting
Men to the Goſpel proceeds. Thoſe for the
moſt part who reaſon on this Subject, ſeem per-
ſuaded, that the Difficulty ariſes not from Mens
being requir'd to believe incomprehenſible Myſte-
rys, but from being injoin'd to renounce their
Luſts and Paſſions. Thus People generally ſpeak
of this Matter. | 5

Were no more requir'd to the being a Chriſt i-

an, than ſaying in one's Heart, I believe what's told
me of the Myſtery of the Trinity, the Incarnation,
and all other Articles the Church will have me believe,
without obliging me to comprehend ; the Profeſſion of


the Goſpel cou'd deter none: every one wou'd


undertake to believe whate'er was propos'd, pro-
vided he were not requir'd to crack his Brain, or
live by any other Rule than Fancy. Not that Be-
lieving is ſo eaſy as ſome ice to imagine ; but

ing's eaſier, ne'er
reflecting on the Nature of the thing. Some im-
poſe on the World, * and wou'd be thought to believe
what they really don't; but much the greater number
impoſe on themſelves, not conſidering nor thorowly ap-
prehending what it is to believe. Be it how it will,
every one judges himſelf capable of profeſſing Chriſ-
tianity, when he imagines that to be a Believer, tis
ſufficient in a careleſs way to ſignify he's poſſeſt of


| that ſpeculative Þ Faith concerning the Myſterys which


* Montagne's Eſſays, I. 2. c. 12.
7 Rapin Foi de dern. Siecles. p. 115,


Dd 3 coſts


revolt in Conſort, :


382 Miſceſuneous Reflections,


coſts" nothing, aud that ſuperficial. Faith which reſts
in the bare Underſtanding. . But when told, that
to believe the Goſpel as he ought, tis neceſſa-
ry. to mortify his Luſts, to love his Enemys,
to bear Injurys. and Contempt with chear-
fulneſs; in a word, to ſtrive againſt the Torrent
of ſenſual Inclination: then Nature and Reaſon
) he Man will hear no more of
the Chriſtian Religion. ela cap

Reaſon, which juſt before was ready to take the


Veil of implicit Faith, accuſtom'd as ſhe was to be


reſerv'd even as to the Credulity of Idolaters,
acquieſcing in Doctriues not only more incompre-
henſible than our Myſterys, bur alſo fraught with
Abſurditys, Farce, and ſtaring Contradictions:

Reaſon, I ſay, will no longer hear of helieving
things ſhe can't comprehend. This is downright
induſtrious Illuſion, or a ſtudy'd Pretence to con-
ceal the true Cauſe of our Unbelief. We dare
not avow, that the Reaſon why the Goſpel do's
not ſit eaſy, is, becauſe it injoins us to live ver-
tuouſly; we dare not, I ſay, avow this, tho this is
all the Grievance. So ſome blind Excuſe 1s tramp'd
up, and we ſet our ſelves to diſpute againſt


- the ſpeculative Articles. The Heart, determin'd


ne'er to yield, makes the Underſtanding, its old
Bubble, take up Arms in its defence. * St.


Chryſeſtom's inimitable on this Point, and *tis from


him we take this Maxim, That the Reaſon why we
believe not a Divine Revelation, is our unwillingneſs to


live up to it. If this Reflection be right, it fol-


—
8 4. 2 ——_


* InI ad Corinth. c. 3. T To amgev mals Y NN c


Te ee w eννα Se ατ - EM iνꝗ, mu Idem


ad Demetrium.
5 lows,


occafion'd by a Comet. 383
lows, that Idolaters, however inur'd to the be-
lief of things incomprehenſible, are no better diſ-
pos d for Converſion than Atheiſts ; becauſe that
W Reſiſtance, which the Heart makes againſt the
Holy Spirit, ſprings intirely from the Corruption
of natural Temper, the Unrulineſs of the Paſſions,
an Inclination to. Senſuality, Qualitys all prevail-
ing no leſs in Idolaters than Atheiſts. *Tis a Mif-
take then to fancy the worſt is over, when thoſe
we'd convert to the Goſpel are previouſly perfaaded
of the Exiſtence of a God; for all the great Ob-
ſtacles are ſtill in the way. 1
As to the alledg'd Authority of Origen, V1 pre-
ſume to ſay, his Reaſoning at beſt can paſs only
for probable. It can't be deny'd there's ſome-
thing plauſible in't, when conſider'd in one Im-
port: but take it by another handle, it loſes much
of its Force. In effect, Mr. de Condom, who has
ſo much juſtneſs of Thought, and ſo much
Soundneſs of judgment, makes no ſcruple of
reaſoning in direct oppoſition to Origen, ſeeing
he ſuppoſes Idolatry hard to be deftroy'd, merely
becauſe extravagant. Idolatry, ſays he, * appears as
Weakneſs it ſelf, we can ſcarce conceive the Neceſſity of
ſuch powerful Means to deſtroy it. But quite contrary,
its Extravagance ſhews the difficulty of the Conqueſt ;,
and its Contradittion to good Senſe, how much this
Principle was depravy'd. I don't ſuppoſe this Prelate

| deſigu d a Parallel between Idolatry and Atheiſm;
but 'tis plain, his Argument to prove Idolatry hard
E to bedeſtroy'd, proves it harder than deſtroying
Atheiſm. All the Senſes, fays he, I all the Paſſions,
every Intereſt ſtruggled for Idalatry. "Twas  Rel:-


PP
Disc. ſur f fliſt. univ erſ· 2 Fart. ch. 12. F Ibid.
D | D d 4 gion


384  Miſcelaneow Reflections,

gion contriv'd for Pleaſure; the Diverſions, Games,
Spectacles, and Licentiouſneſs it ſelf, made a part in the
Divine Worſhip. Their Feaſts were ſo many Amuſe-


ments; nor was native Modeſty laid aſide in any In-


terval of human Life, ſo much as inthe Celebration
of their religious Myſterys. How ſhoud Minds ſo
deprav'd be reconcil'd to a Religion, holy, chaſt, ſe-
vere, oppoſite toSenſe,and intirely rl fork to things

inviſible? Then he ſhews how powerfully Intereſt,
that is, the Profits and Pomp of the Pagan Religi-
on, the exceſſive prejudice for Antiquity, and Rea-
ſons of State, conſpir'd to the Support of Idolatry.

Now who ſees not that theſe mighty Springs have

no room to play in a Society of Atheiſts ?

We ſhall ſee anon whether any other Cauſe may
be aſſign'd for the Difficulty of converting Men
to God, beſide that mention'd in the Entrance of

this Article. i


SECT. CLXXXV. Reflections os the Conduit


of JESUS CHRIST towards the Phariſees


and Sadduces.


T looks as if our Lord ]Jzsus CHRIST wou'd


ſignify by his Behavior towards the Phariſees
and Sadduces, that the main Obſtacle to our Con-
verſion lies in an ill Diſpoſition of Heart. The
Phariſees were much more Orthodox than the
Sadduces. They believ'd all the Scriptures of
the Old Teſtament. They ſhew'd an extraordi-
nary Zeal for the Law of God; nor did they think
its Obſervation ſufficient without the Obſervance
of ſeveral Traditions, and Cuſtoms, and un-
written Ceremonys. The Sadduces made much


ſhorter work, retrench'd a thouſand gh} |


judge


the fin
Being


| neith


nor |
trine
Prieſt
Saddi
of tl


done


SEC


I:


prin!
ſcarc


| fierct


to b
rant
Gate
long
Day
at t
Pilat
Ima;
the


| hum


oc aſion d by a Comet. 385
judg'd ſuperfluous, and confin'd their Faith to
the five Books of Moſes, and the believing God a

| Being of infinite Perfection; but farther, believ'd
neither Spirits, nor the Immortality of the Soul,
nor Reſurrection of the Body. Theſe are Doc-
trines of the laſt Impiety; yet the Jewiſh High
Prieſt and Sanhedrim never proceeded againſt the
Sadduces, nor cut *em off from the Communion
of the Fewiſh Church; which they had infallibly
done, had this Sect been guilty of Idolatry.


SET. CLXXXVI. Of the Jens Averſion to
. Idolatry.


IN effect, the dreadful Puniſhments God had in-
| flicted on the Fews for their Idolatrys, had im-
printed ſo ſtrong a horror for this Sin, that they
ſcarce cou'd forbear riſing in Arms againſt the
| fierce Tyrant Herod, on his ordering a Temple
to be built to Auguſtus in Judea. The ſame Ty-
rant having ſet up a Golden Eagle on the preat
Gate of the Temple, had the Mortification, not
long before his Death, to ſee it cut down in open
Day by a Body of the young Men * of Jeruſalem,
at the Inſtigation of ſome Doctors of the Law.
Pilate having ſoon after order'd the Emperor's
Images to be brought into the City by Night,
the Fews ran immediately in a Tumult to Ceſarea,
| humbly beſeeching him to take em away; which
at laſt they obtain'd, after waiting five Days and
hve Nights ſucceſſively at his Palace-Gate, in the
Poſture of Supplicants, offering their Throats to
the Soldiers naked Swords, to whom Pilate threat-


IT


: Joſeph, Ant. Jud. lib. 1). cap. 8. J. 18, c. 4. & 11.


—


ned


286 Miſcellaneous Reflectiaus,


ned to deliver dem, unleſs they conſented to admit
the Emperor's Images. They acted the ſame part
not long after, proteſting to the Pretor Petroniu; |
with incredible Conſtancy, they'd ſooner. be cut
in pieces than ſuffer Caligula's Statue to be ſet up
in the Temple. They had before prevail'd by
their Prayers, not, as an illuſtrious Prelate * re-
lates, that: the Troops under the Command of
Vitellins ſhou'd march thro Fudea without their
Enſigns, but that they ſhou'd take another Rout,
for fear of ſhocking the Jewiſh Religion, which I
ſufferꝰd no Object of Idolatry within the Borders
of the holy Land. 1
They thought the Preſence of an Idolater pro-
fan'd the Holineſs of their Myſterys, and cou'd
not bear a Pagan's appearing at their Divine Ser-
vice. Their Scruples went ſo far, that they made
it a Sin to fit down in the ſhade of a Tree where
any Idol had ever ſtood, or paſs under it when they
cou'd take another way; and if there was no a-
voiding it, they were to paſs running. This the
learned + Maimonides informs us, with many more
Particulars of like Force. It's evident from
_ theſe Remarks, that the Fews, who had once the
true Religion, and were Depoſitarys of the Wil
of God, accounted Idolatry a Crime more abo-
minable than that Hereſy which denys a future
State. However, this is not what I chiefly aim at;
my Deſign is to ſhew, our Saviour expreſt a greater
Indignation againſt the Phariſees than againſt the
Sadduces. Tis the Phariſee he attacks on ever)
Quarter; at theſe he points his ſharpeſt Cen-


*


* Mr, de Condom, Diſcourſ. ſur l' Hiſt. ex Joſepho l. 18. c.)
T Lib. de Idolol. c. 7. Sect. 16. 1 2008
| ſures,


ſures, '
becauſe


| Quire 1
he per
tobeli
evider
the $9


© + dreaſion'd by a Comet, 387
ſures, theſe he endeavors to diſcredit 5 and why?
becaufe tho their Principles were more Orthodox,
their Heart was more leven'd with Pride and Hy-


pocriſy, which indiſpos'd 'em more than others


jor the Reception of the Goſpel.


src T. CLXXXVI. Whether there be any
other Cauſe of Incredality beſide an Inclina-
tion to Vice. ee ee |


UT all who reaſon on the Cauſes of the
Difficultys in converting Men to the Goſpel,
don't univerſally affirm, they ariſe from an ill
Diſpoſition of Heart only. They think it poſſible
the Difficulty may ſometimes proceed from an in-


voluntary Darkneſs of the Soul; and that as there


are Objects we can't perceive with the naked ſight,
tho deſir'd ever ſo much, fo there are Truths
which ne'er appear ſuch to our Underſtanding,
even where there's a good Will and Endeavor to
apprehend em. Let People ſay what they pleaſe,
our Facultys never act, unleſs the Object bear a
jaſt proportion to em. If the Object of Sight be
too minute, or too diſtant, or in the dark, we may


| pray long enough to ſee 'em, but reſt ſatisfy'd we


never ſhall, and yet have good Eyes too. On the


other hand, if one's born purblind, we may hold


him an Object at a juſt diſtance for a good Organ,
and yet hene'er diſcern it. And who has inform'd
us, that the Objects of the Underſtanding don't re-
quire the ſame proportion to its Facultys, in order to
de perceivd? Where is'treveal'd, that a good Will
tobelieveꝰem true, is ſufficient to make their Truth
evident? Who has told us, that the interior Light of
the Soul is always clear enough to perceive all pre-


ſenting


388 Miſcellaneous Reflections,

ſenting Objects at any diſtance, or under any kind
of Veil ? For my part, without denying that many
wilfully blind themſelves, I ſtand by what I ſaid be-
fore *, that *tis an incommunicable Divine Prero-
gative to know who are. maliciouſly blind to the
Myſterys of Faith. And as there are Under. |
ſtandings which ſee more Force in an Objection
than in the Anſwer, tho the latter is more ſolid,
and tho they are no way prejudic'd to either fide;
fo others may give into Reaſons of leſler Force,
without being led by the Motions of any inordi-

nate Paſſion. I MO
The Philoſophy of this Age proves in a moſt
convincing manner, that the Soul's diſtin& from
the Body, and conſequently immortal; yet how
many are there who can't comprehend the force of
its Demonſtrations ? Don't tell me, they are Per-
ſons who wiſh the Soul extinguiſt'd with the Body,
For, quite contrary, they are ſuch as ardently de-
fire its Eternity. I appeal to Cicero Þ, who aſ-
ſures us, he wiſhes in the firſt place, that the Soul
were immortal; and in the next place, if not ſo,
that he were however perſuaded it was. He adds,
while he's reading over Plato's Diſcourſe on the
Soul, he thinks himſelf convinced by his Argu-
ments; but as ſoon as he lays the Book by, and
reflects a little, all his fine Perſuaſion vaniſhes.
Next I appeal to Seneca ||, who tells us, He took 4


—


——


* Sef. 160. f Me vero id delectat, idque primum
ita efle, deinde etiamſi non fir, mihi tamen perſuaderi velim.
Tyſcul. 1. Juvabat de æternitate animarum quzrere, imo
mehercule credere. Credebam enim facile opinionibus magno-
rum virorum, rem gratiſſimam promittentium magis quam pro-
bantium. Dabam me ſpei tantæ. Epiſt. 102.

- | Pleaſure


occaſiowd by a Comet, 389


| Pleaſure in reaſoning on the Immortality of the Soul,
i rather in believing it; be readily entertain d the


Opinions of ſeveral great Men, who promis'd rather


| than prov'd this agreeable Point. I gave, ſays he, in-
| to the mighty Hopes. .


Here are two of the fineſt Wits of Antiquity


doing their utmoſt to believe the Immortality of
the Soul, and yet far from being thorowly con-
vinc'd. Some on the other hand, according to
the Remark from Minutius Felix cited * before,
| wiſh the Soul extinguiſh'd with the Body, but
can't bring themſelves to believe it. We ſee
| thouſands daily in Diſtraction, that they can't

doubt of a hundred things they wiſh they had
| never known, and vainly ſtriving to ſhut their
| Eyes to the Merits of an Enemy. Tis not true


then, that our Paſſions are always the Rule of


| our Opinions. And' tis falſe, that whenever we


don't clearly perceive an important religious
Truth, we are under the Power of ſome ſecret


Paſſion, whoſe Interelt it is to keep us in the dark.


But tis of no great Conſequence to my preſent
Argument, whether Men reſiſt the Goſpel, be-
cauſe their Underſtandings are cover'd with Clouds


riſing from a corrupt Heart, or becauſe bury'd in
| an Abyſs of involuntary Prejudices ; for which


way ſoever we explain it, ſtill I have a right to
maintain, that Atheiſts are not harder to be con-
verted than Idolaters. Will you have it, that
Men reſiſt the Goſpel, becauſe it enjoins the ſub-


duing their Paſſions? I aſſert, and think I have


prov'd, that Idolaters are as great Slaves to their
Paſſions as Atheiſts. Or will you have it, that


1


1m
— il. —


x Sea, 277.


they


they reſiſt the Goſpel, becauſe it requires em to
believe things incomprehenſible? I aſſert, and
think I have prov'd, that Idolaters have their
Underſtanding as much darken'd, and ſtuff d with
as many ridiculous and extravagant Prejudices, as


SEC T. CLXXXVIII. How the Pagan Reli.
SZSion teuded to male Men Atheiſts.


T THEN L attentively reflect on't, it appears,
VV that Arheiſts were not indeed of the beſt
Mold to make bigotted Votarys to Paganiſm; but
I don't find why their Converſion to the true God
ſhou'd be more difficult than that of Idolaters.
The Pagan Religion taught things ſo ridiculous
concerning the Divinity, that any Man of good
Senſe, who had grown up in Atheiſm, wou'd
chuſe to continue in his Principles, rather than
acknowledg ſuch a ſet of Gods as thoſe of the
Heathens. *Twas beſides a Religion authorizing
the moſt ahominable-Crimes ; and this it was made
the Atheiſts ſcorn and deteſt it as a piece of State-
Policy, equally cruel and * illuſive: This occaſion'd
their ſaying, Were Religion given by the Gods,
etwas rather a Mark of their Wrath than Good-
will towards Men: This, in ſhort, prevaiPd with
many to renounce it, and betake themſelves to
Atheiſm. Hear what F Plutarch delivers.


x
8
—


We —— ö W ——


1


* Religio peperit ſceleroſa atque impia facta,

Aulide quid padde, Be.

Tantum Religio potuit ſitadere malorum. Lucret. I. 1.
+ Traite de ſuperſtit. traduit par Mr. Le Fevre.


.


"Tis


and 7 {


adefena

Colour
brac d
| obſer


the Ye.
makes
Inequ,


8 Anim
No, S,


Beha


rue,


Hand


its Dy


baron


flf i


are w


better
pr O0VE |


the le,
there
the E.
cepted


'Tis. Superſtition, ſays he, gave Birth to Atheiſm ;
and tis this daily gives a handle for its juſtifying and
L efending it ſelf, if not with Juſtices at leaſt with
Colour and plauſible Pretence. For they who firſt em-
| rac'd Atheiſm, were nat mov'd by any Flaws they
ohſerv'd in the Heavens or the Stars, inthe Seaſons of
| the Tear, or Revolutions of-the Sun, whichby its Motion
„ales the Night and the Day 3, nor yet by any Defett ar
aquality in the Prouiſion made for the ſeveral Species
Auimals, or the Production of the Fruits of the Earth :
. No,Superſtition alone was the original Cauſe; its ſtrange
Behavior, its ridiculous Paſſions, its Speech and Geſ-
| cure, its Sarcerys and Enchantments, its Mares and
1 Wandrings1. 'vts lthy aud abominable Purifications,
its Drums, its ſhameful beaſtly Incontinence, its har-
barous Mortifications, the Crueltys exercis'd on it
ſelf in the open Temples}, theſe fine Things all together
are what gave ſome Perſons occaſion to ſay, twere
better Men bad no Gods at all, than ſuch as cou'd ap-
prove theſe Practices, cou'd take Pleaſure in Services


body knows: why, and difturb'd about Trifles. In ef-
felt, had not the Gauls and Scythians been much
| happier in never hearing of Gods, in never having had


1 the leaſt Thought or Idea of em, than in believing
4 there were ſuch Beings, yet ſuch as took Pleaſure in


the Effuſion of human Blood on their Altars, and ac-
cepted theſe barbarous Saerifices as the thing in the
World moſt agrecable to their Nature, and moſt worth
| ther Majeſty? And how much better for Carthage,
— d Critias or Diagoras been its Legiſlator, Men
abo belief d neither a God nor Spirit, than offer Sa-
turn his uſual Sacrifices ? 2
„The Religion of Idolaters being ſuch as we ſee,
there's no Probability an Atheiſt wou'd 272
. es,


ſo ftrange, ubuſe their ſtricteſt Votarys, be angry no


— —— — — — ai — —


—


392 Miſcellaneow Reflections,
ſides, or bear a part in their comical and criminal
Worſhip. But were the Chriſtian Religion fairly
propos'd, which teaches concerning God, only al
things great, and holy, and ſublime 5 which en-
joins the practice of the pureſt Vertues, and the


moſt conformable to right Reaſon, he cou'd not
have the ſame Difficultys to alledg : So that unlek |


the reigning Paſſion of his Soul, or ſome prodi-
gious Stupidity obſtruct, he muſt ſee that embra-


cing the Goſpel-Profeſſion is infinitely a more rea-
Ionable choice than the way he is in.


SECT. CLXXXIX. Tho Man is extreme


corrupt, he can't endure Religions command ·


ing 4 Crime.


Can't forbear making a ſhort Reflection in this
place on a Caprice of the Human Mind; That
tho a dear Friend to Vice, yet it won't approve
its being authoriz'd by the Precepts of Religion.


The ſame Men who reje& the Goſpel on the ac-
count of its auſtere Morality, wou'd with greater


Horror reject a Religion, enjoining infamous Riots
and Debaucherys, were ſuch a Doctrine propos
to em, while in a capacity of Reaſoning, and be-
fore they were loſt in the Prejudices of Education.
There's not a Debauchee nor Miſs in Paris, that


wou d not lift Stones at a Preacher, who ſhou'd


have the Front to tell 'em God approv'd their
criminal Pleaſures. How looſe ſoever the Lives
of moſt Chriſtians be, tis probable, did a Here.
tick ariſe, who taught openly and without dil-
guiſe, that the Goſpel indulg?d Men in ever)
Thought of their Heart; he'd make no progres
at all, or make much leſs than if affecting au


ſters


either


It free
which


oc ion d by a Comet. | 393
ſtere Ways, and railing with extreme Liberty at


0 the Manners of eminent Men. People were cau-
0 tious of ſcandalizing the very Gentiles, by broach-


ing Doctrines which were an Inlet to Licentiouſ-
1, neſs; and therefore Lucretius in his Proem, open.
ing his deſign of reaſoning on the Principles of
ofc | Epicurus, that glorious Religion-Tamer, adds very
ſily, for fear of ſtartling the World, “ No body


ra. i [eou'd thence infer he deſgnd to favor Crimes,
ea. ſace twas Religion which often committed the


blac keſt .


lt ſeems ſtrange we ſhou'd be oblig'd to ſuch


mM caution with Mankind; but this is another of
the Contradictions in his Frame. Conſidering the


to run after thoſe who preach a general Indul-
gence: and yet we abhor em. Since a looſe Mo-
rality looks ſo abominable in our Eyes, we ſhou'd
ceave to that which is ſtrict: and yet we are


ion. ſar'd at it. Is it that we'd have a juſt Medium,
> ac- which allows part, but won't grant all? But
ater eren this, if well examin'd, won't fit us: For


either we take all, tho we'd by no means have
it freely permitted; or exceed the Point at leaſt,
which was fix'd by thoſe who indulge in part.
Politicians have remark'd a like Contradiction
I the Minds of Men, with regard to their deſire


— 8 ; S. ——_——


ee ee —— —— ——


1 —— vereor ne forte rearis
Impia te rationis inire elementa, viamque
Indugredi ſceleris.——


25 Lucret. lib. Id 2
Ee Slavery ?


general Inclination to ſatisfy our deſires, we ought


of Liberty. Tis a Jewel they're mighty fond of,
and yet they cannot bear it. Then they can bear


21% 9 = IE


2


294 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
Slavery? No, * they can neither bear a thorow Li-
bert y, nor a thorow Slavery. EY


Temper, nor long abide in't.


Þ To frame a ſtubborn People to your Will,


Tis beſt not treat em over-well,nor treat em over- il.


Then they do beſt | in a Temper between Li-


berty and Slavery? No, they can never find this
'Tis the Nature
of the Multitude, either to crouch like Slaves, or lord


it like Tyrants. That Liberty which lies between both,


they know not how to part with, nor how to preſerve.
sk r. CXC. The Reaſon of this. |


v


T OU'D you know the Reaſon why Men
won't away with a Religion which indul-


ges nothing, nor a Religion which permits all!


II tell yon, becauſe of one hand their carnal Lults
are craving for a Good-natur'd Religion; and
common Senſe tells *em on the other, That to be


true, and worthy our Obedience, a Religion ought
to come from God, and God can never authorize


Sin. For which Reaſon, he who fits down to
chuſe a Religion, and deals honeſtly with his own
Heart, will ne'er chuſe one which teaches the
practice of Vice; becauſe this very thing ſhews it's
not from God, and that 'tis a pure Invention of


—


— e N 5


* Nec totam ſervitutem pati poſſunt, nec totam libertatem.
Tacit. Hiſt. Il. 1. f Solon apud Plutarch. in Parall. Solon.
& Poplicolæ. Haæc natura multitudinis eſt, aut ſervit humi-
liter, aut ſuperbè dominatur. Libertatem quæ media eſt nec
ſpernere modice, nec habere ſciunt. Liu. Dec, 3. J. 1.


Men,


cbecraſſo d by 4 Comet. 396


Men, which no body is bound in Conſcience to
obey. But if he ſees a Religion which enjoins the


practice of all Vertues in the higheſt degree, what


will he ſay then? He muſt acknowledg it has
the Characters of Divine, if he examine it care-
fully, and muſt reſolve to embrace it, unleſs the
Love of Vice with-holds. Which ſhews, tho an
Atheiſt expreſſes a Contempt and Horror for the
| falſe Religions, we can't conclude he'l expreſs a
| like for the true, more than an Idolater. On the
| contrary, he ſeems to be in a better ſtate for


diſcovering its Divinity, than a Pagan; becauſe
the Pagan .is not now to think of chuſing a Re-


gion. He had one put upon him long before
| he came to the Uſe of Reaſon ;, he's highly pleas'd
| with it, and won't ſo much as examine whether


'tis poſſible any thing in't ſhow'd be amiſs. _
Be that how it will, we'l allow the reclaiming


| Atheiſts and Idolaters equally difficult, if conſi-


der'd by their Diſpoſition of Heart, equally bad
in both, and equally capable of being mended or
mar'd by the Impreſſions of Cuſtom, Education,
Acquaintance, or that particular Taſt which grows
up with us. But as *tis certain, a Mind wedded


| to a falſe Religion, is harder ſet right than one


without any Religion at all; we muff allow, that
Atheiſts, take all Circumſtances together, are eaſier
converted to the true God than Idolaters.


SECT. CXCL. Whether the outward Profeſ:
| ſion of Religion can be any benefit to em.


NE might add, That Atheiſts making no
Scruple of outwardly profeſſing the Chri-


ſtian Religion, are likelier to be charm'd by it


Ee 2 than


396 Miſcellaneous © Reflettions,

than Idolaters; who from the falſe Principles they
have imbib'd, abhor the very Name and outward
Profeſſion. But to this Reaſon may be oppos'd
the Experience of the * and Portuguexe In-
quiſitions, which daily diſcover intire Familys of
Fews, Jews even to Fire and Faggot, who from
time immemorial have made profeſſion. of Chri-
ſtianity; and the better to impoſe on the Neigh-
borhood, been very regular in the outward Ex-
erciſes of the Catholick Religion : Beſides, that


Atheiſts, generally ſpeaking, make profeſſion of


the Court-Religion. Whence it follows, that for
one who bears the outward Form of a Chriſtian,
there are a hundred do not. I faid, generally
ſpeaking, becauſe it's known, ſome Men utterly
void of a Senſe of Religion, continue as to the
outward Profeſſion in the Sec they were bred, tho
it has not worldly Advantages on its ſide; either
that they are void of Ambition, or that the Ap-
pearances are kept with leſs trouble in their own
way ; or that they have a vanity of being thought
conſtant, or won't diſoblige their Friends or Pa-
rents, or not be thought to change out of Intereſt,


or for any other Reaſon.


Scr. Cxcll. Why he has enlarg'd ſo ©


much on this Matter.


TT Sir, are ſome of the Reaſons, by which
Þ I not long ſince heard a Perſon, as illuſtri-
ous for his Piety as Learning, prove Idolatry to
be worſe than Atheiſm. I fear I have drawn em
out to too great a length, and inſiſted too long
on an Incident which carry'd me off from my

firſt Deſign. But as his Diſcourſe touch'd me ver}
OOTY. 3 ſenſibly,


3 —  "Fy 6


r , d ð²·˙—⁊ ⅛ . 8


3


1
-
N
g
5
5
1


| occaſian d by 4 Comet. 397
ſenſtbly, and made me enter into my ſelf more
perhaps than any Sermon, and even apprehend that
the little Good which may be in me, is exceeding
imperfect, becauſe of the human Motives which
mix but too often; 1 had a mind to know your
Thoughts of this Doctrine, and for this Reaſon
explain'd it at large: beſide its being highly
agreeable to the account of the Fall of Adam,
and very oppoſite to the Pelagians *. It ſeems
at firſt ſight to extenuate the Atrocity of Athe-
iſm : but ſcan his Deſign ever ſo little, you'l ſee
he's. agreed, that Atheiſm in it ſelf is a State of
ſuch Malediction, and in which Men are ſo aban-


:
1


don'd, as ſtrikes a horror; tho he do's not believe


it the higheſt Degree of Reprobation, when com-
par'd with the Infamys of Paganiſm. _ |


SE cr. CXCIII. 4 Reflection on Plutarch's
Treatiſe of Superſtition.


FF you compare this Diſcourſe with that of Plu-
tarch on a like Subject, I perſuade my ſelf you'l
find, the Antient has no way the advantage, whe-
ther you conſider the Matter, or the Manner of
treating this Point. I may be allow'd to praiſe
what I have no great part in, and ſhew wherein
he excels one of the greateſt Men of Antiquity.
Plutareb's deſign is to prove, that Superſtition
is worſe than Atheiſm. Now as Idolatry is infi-
nitely more abominable than Superſtition, *tis
plain this Author has work'd on Matter much leſs
odious, leſs ſhocking and extravagant than that


of the Diſſertation I have given you. As for the


* See before Seel. 160. 4
NO es EE 3 | manner


398 Miſcellaneous Reflections, 3
manner of handling it, tis evident there's a greater
Compaſs and Force in the Reaſonings here, than
in Plutarch's Treatiſe; and an infinite variety of
Ideas, which there's not the leaſt appearance he
e' er thought of. The Reaſon he urges moſt, and
which he lays a mighty ſtreſs on, is the weakeſt
in the World. He compares the Inquietudes of
a ſuperſtitious Soul, with the Security of an A-
theiſt ; and pretends, becauſe Atheiſm lets Men
enjoy a profound Peace, and Superſtition throws
*em into continual Alarms, one is much worſe
than t'other. With ſubmiſſion to this Great Man,
he neither underſtood the Queſtion, nor reaſons
aright : For our buſineſs is not to compare Athe-
iſm and Superſtition in their Phyſical Good, but
only with relation to their Moral Effects. Now

it's certain, there are ſome things morally better
than others, which yet don't afford fo much In-
dolence and carnal Security. Who doubts but
ſome People's Reſt 1s broke a nights by their me-
ditating on the Importance of Salvation, whilſt
thoſe who reel to Bed dead-drunk, fleep moſt
profoundly ? Muſt we therefore ſay, it's better
drown one's Senſes with Drink, than meditate on
the Four laſt Things? By Plutarch's way of Rea-
ſoning we ſhou'd prove, tis better lie in the downy
Bed of Pleaſure, free from Care, than work Night
and Day, as an honeſt Lawyer may do for an op-

preſs'd Client; and that perſecuted Vertue is
worſe than proſperous Vice. He reaſon'd then
ſomewhat amiſs in this place. ED Ie


ry


Yet I own this Treatiſe of Plutarch is not un-
worthy of the Praiſes beſtow'd on't by Mr. Le
Fevre, Father to the Illuſtrious Madamoiſelle le
Fevre, who has enrich'd the Publick with ſo many

80 learned


learnec
due Pr


conter
nume r
nullus
pari, «
& cri:
bus ce
negat.
audac
accon
Gente


occaſion d by a Comet. 399


learned Pieces: (Pray permit me to give her her
due Praiſes, tha a Hugonot ; and don't be of the
humor of thoſe moroſe intractable Catholicks, who
think it a Crime in Men.of the moſt Worth, in
a * De Thou, a Paſquiers, a Servins, that they
expreſs an Eſteem — ſome Hereticks of Re-
nown.) I own further, that where Plutarch takes


the principal Abominations of antient Idolatry to


task, he ſolidly proves it worſe than Irreligion:
And the Author of the Summary prefix'd to
this Work in Amiot's Verſion, is of the ſame opi-
nion. He openly defends Plutarch againſt all who
condemn this Doctrine: herein of Arnobizs's mind,
who has left us the following Paſſage, which to
me ſeems very judicious. I have often admir'd,


ſays he to the Pagans, when reflecting on your mon-


ſtrous Theology, with what Impudence you can call thoſe
Atheiſts, and Impious, and Sacrilegious, who abſolutely
deny the Gods, or doubt their Exiſtence, or maintain
they were Men deify'd on the account of ſome uncom-


* See Poſſevin. Judic. de 4 Scriptor. Obſerv. de Richeome.
ſur le Plaidoy. de Servins, &c.

f Jamdudum me fateor reputantem mecum in animo rerum
hujuſcemodi monſtra, ſolitum eſſe mirari, audere vos dicere
quenquam ex his Atheum, irreligioſum, ſacrilegum, qui Deos
eſſe animo aut negent, aut dubitent, aut qui eos homines fuiſſe
contendant, & poteſtatis alicujus aut meriti cauca in Deorum
numerum relatos, cum ſi rerum fiat atque habeatur examen,
nullus quam vos mag1s ejuſmodi par fit appellationibus nuncn-
pari, qui ſub ſpecie cultionis plus in eos ingeratis maledictionum
& criminum, quam ſi apertè hoc facere confeſſis maledictioni-
bus combibiſſetis. Deos eſſe qui dubitat, aut eſſe omninò qui
negat, quamvis ſequi ſententias immanes opinionum videatur
audacia, fine ullius tamen inſectatione perſonæ fidem rebus non
— involutts-------- Vos vero, &c. Arnob. lib. 5. adverſ.
ente So TL


E e 4 | mon


— —


—


— - —
* - +
— „ r ee
o f—_- » ”


}

+

h

1 1

*
a

.
10


———— ——— I on 2 — Mar d
* — — Y - - rm —» = 2 — > —_
p - — 22 * a+." 7
A EP, 6 — — —
> a 1 nf —
4 - = Rn ——


—
n
—_ _ r


=o


400 Miſcellaneous Reflectionc,


mon Gift, or tranſcendent Merit. When if we rightly
conſider things, none ſo juſtly deſerve theſe Cenſures
as you, who on a pretence of honoring, bring em
under a greater Guilt and Reproach, than it's poſſible
| by open Reviling and Contradittion. Hie who doubts
the Exiſtence of a God, or denys it point-blank, is
guilty of a very bold and monſtrous Opinion, but wounds
no Perſon's Honor or Reputation: Hoe only refuſes to
believe what he can't comprehend But you, &c.
Remember, Sir, you can't condemn my Doctor,
without condemning one of the Fathers.
If this great Man's Reaſoning hold, there's no
more to be ſaid. We muſt indiſpenſably own
Comets are not Signs of God's Wrath, ſince like-
ly to fix Men in the moſt wicked State *twas poſ-
{ible for *em to arrive at. Suffer me now to take
breath awhile after this Excurſion, tho I have not
vet given in my full Anſwer to the Objection.
You ſhall have what remains in a ſhort time.


Auguſt 2. 1681.


SrcrT. IV. V Anſwer: That there's


0 Example proving, God has miraculoaſy
form'd Prodigys for the pretended Converſion
of any one to Idolatry. |


ro finiſh my Anſwer to the firſt Objection, I
* ſay, Sir, the alledg'd Example of Horace is
of no force againſt me. For firſt, it's not certain
there ever was any Thunder or Lightning in a
ſerene Sky, as mention'd in the antient Catalogue
of Prodigys. Had this been frequent, Lucretius
had ne'er preſum'd to maintain the contrary in


a publick Work, but rather endeayor'd to *
5 the


8a

M.
Sacrif
rende
nys ej
wiſe,
overſt


| few v


no me
clear
other
race M
52

tis un
from
moy'd


hw — wy, 00 = Ho v2 PAN


occaſion'd by a Comet. 401


the natural Cauſe by the Doctrine of his Atoms.


Beſide, that our Relaters of Prodigys, with all
their exactneſs, don't mention this as I remember.


| Farther, were it true that there really had been


Prodigys of this kind, twou'd prove nothing
concerning Comets, becauſe it wou'd not prove


| that God had caus'd. this Thunder miraculouſly
| to convince Men of a Providence, as *tis pretended


he forms Comets miraculouſly to warn 'em of the
Evils to come. I defire to know the reaſon for


| believing that God work'd Miracles, fo needleſs


on one hand, and ſo favorable to Idolatry on the


other, as thoſe Peals, for example, of Thunder ia
a clear Sky. 1


SEC T. CXCV. How unprofitable Miracles


had been among the Pagans in one reſpect,
and how favorable to Idolatry in another.


Say, they favor'd Idolatry, becauſe they led

Men to believe, that the Gods requir'd more
Sacrifices and new Honors, and by their Fears
render'd em ingenious at inventing new Ceremo-
nys either Superſtitions or Idolatrous. I ſay like-
wiſe, they were uſeleſs, becauſe the World was
overſtock'd with Temples and Religions; and the


few who follow'd the Doctrine of Epicurus, were


no more to be mov'd by a Clap of Thunder in a
clear Sky, than by ordinary Thunder, and all the
other wonderful Works of Nature. And if Ho-
race was unconverted till he heard ſuch a Clap,
tis undoubtedly: becauſe he was a Convert only
from Caprice, or Chance like the Few, who un-
moy'd by all the Paſſages of Scripture which mos

a Tri-


Ee


*
i . 2 er, 832 . 1 8
2. — * = 9 — 2 2 2 = hs 8 - 3
1 1 T = P tt eo u — p 2 A
= ; — * « 3 — — _ 4 — 2 — 6a nn. SS * * I — "OY — - — 2
: Eo — 2 — — er n 2 n — _— — — — words > = 1 — — 2 =
* * * pr NN Gs 3 8 << "_— > * 7 VE = <= —_— p 2 — — a — 2 5 — 5 = - T 4
go ty 2 5 tO —P 5 * (ond 2 : — 1 5 * — * * — Þ —— — — m — 7 _— > : e „ >
Py — e * _—_ l wy Good. 2 4 - * bo fie ons 1 i ates 4 ft C28 egy _ — — en — — — 5 a S > —> :
— 6 — — - 4 . " = = 2
ORE +- — < -1 8 5 WR FA 7 I 4 K 0 —— — 7 =,» — Nur —— —
7 z . p LY <a _— — e 2 . *
a „ - 4 S a r — * ——
—— = — — Re.
Was <. -- —_


P —
3 1 > * . Ky RR 3 1 ä — - 8
2 - — + . 5 on - — * c M8 W NI ©, n a W
— — 18 renn e * * © ah r 2 W Fe - — | bas * . &
"I OE Pc RS A _e 4 2 S 0 .
: — 7 I. = » S 1


EN -:


WORE” WET. Ev
—————— = Y 2
— D 2. oY wn
n


> —_
r nn
8 * P vere


Wr 4 n £ 97 2 x
2. — 1 5 7 oY 8 1 a
— "I — CEL ** S — ary = — - .
— . xe: ues © res Ca 2 = ; — 2
— * 7 2 be .
2 222 2 8 . r 2 ES SESS —
_


402 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


a Trinity, fancy'd he lit on a Demonſtration at


laſt in ſome myſterious Combination of the Let-
ters in a certain Text, which no body alive but
himſelf cou'd perceive. 510% 750


Sz cT. CXCVI. The Voprofttableneſi of con-
dDerting an Epicurean to Idolatry.


” A Fter all, Horace's Converſion was really ſo
{mall a matter, *twas hardly worth a Mi-
racle. He had been an Epicurean all his life, and
now became an Idolater. Do you think, Sir, he
was a hair's breadth the nearer to the Kingdom
of Heaven? Can you ſay this was a fair Step to-
wards coming into the Boſom of the Church?
Po you think *twas a Miracle well beſtow'd, which
converted a Soul to Idolatry ? For don't miſtake,
Horace broke not with one of his Miſtreſſes, nor
retrench'd in any Article of ſenſual Pleaſure. His
Converſion amounted to no more than believing
the Gods govern'd the World, inſtead of belie-
ving, as he did before, that they led a Life of
Bliſs free from all care; and paying his Adorati-
ons to Jupiter, and all the Divinitys of Rome, in the
publick Aſſemblys of the Roman Idolaters. For
any thing further, he diverted himſelf in his old
Way, and thereby paſs'd to a Belief as erroneous
and injurious to the Gods as that he abjur'd ; be-
cauſe he ſuppos'd it as lawful to gratify his Paſ-
ſions under Gods which govern the World, as
under thoſe which do not; and conſequently, that
the Gods require of us no Purity of Heart ; or if
they do, one ought not however to quit his old
Track : which is much more ſhocking, than be-
lieving they have no inſpection over human Affairs.


80


So th:
from
came
fon o
ignora
taken
the gr
[ own
Princt
are m.


SEC


rc
LCT
81
ordain
of the
Juno;
Ke.
City «
whom
Rhea S)
Godde
Genea]
Godde
God h:
Was CC
wou'd
Crimes
tion.
Gods v
than th
of the


„ So: vows 7 SY.


—


occaſſon d by a Comet. 403


| So that, all things conſider'd, Horace, converted


from Epicuriſm by the pretended Miracle, be-
came much a worſe Man than before (the perſua-
fon of a Providence enhancing the Sin) and more
ignorant of the Divine Nature: for he's much miſ-
taken who fancys the disbelief of a Providence is
the groſſeſt Error concerning the Divine Nature.
| own it's a very groſs one, and oppoſite to all
principles of good ſenſe; but affirm, other Errors

are more abſur ec. ao | 50


SECT. CXCVII. That there are groſſer Er-
rors than the disbelief of a Providence.


. C UCH Errors, for example, as thoſe of the
) Greeks and Romans, who built Temples, and
ordain'd Feafts and Sacrifices to Cybele, as Mother
of the Gods; to Jupiter, as Husband to his Siſter
Juno; to Phebus and Diana, as Children of Jupiter,
&. To ſay nothing of Romulus, Founder of the
City of Rome, and one of its principal Gods,
whom they believ'd the Son of the God Mars, and
Rhea Sylvia,ſprung from the unchaſt Amours of the
Goddeſs Venus: So that they cou'd not trace the
Genealogy of Romulus without diſcovering that a
Goddeſs had debauch'd the good Anchiſes, and a
God had raviſh'd a tender Maid, whoſe Virginity
was conſecrated to the Goddeſs Veſta; an Act
wou'd have coſt any mere Man his Life, when
Crimes of Incontinence had the higheſt Tolera-
tion. Who ſees not that this is conceiving the
Gods under a meaner and more unworthy Idea,
than that which deprives em of the Government
of the World ?


Il. Such


|
|;
|
|
|
|
|


404. Miſcel aneous Reflettions,

II. Such likewiſe were the wild Opinions of
thoſe, who, as I have already obſerv'd, ras'd the
Temples of the Gods, when they thought them-
ſelves ill us'd; and of all in general, who tho
perſuaded: of a Providence, deny'd nothing to


_ their Luſts and Paſſions. For either they muſt
ſuppoſe the Gods approv'd theſe ways, or elſe


that one need not trouble himſelf whether they
did or no. Deteſtable Thought! and infinitely
more injurious to the Deity, than believing with
Epicurus, he led a life of Eaſe and Bliſs, without
perplexing himſelf with other Peoples Affairs: be-
cauſe it's infinitely more diſhonourable to be con-
cern'd in the Government of a City, and ſuffer all
kind of Diſorder, than not to meddle in't at all.
By this one may perceive the Enormity of that
Judgment which Chriſtians form, when they com-
mit a Sin upon mature deliberation : and con-
clude, that without taking in the Malice of their
Heart, they are under a blindneſs of Underſtand-
ing no leſs monſtrous than that of a Heretick.
III. Such are the Extravagances of the Talmud


and Alcoran, ſome of which the Learned Grotius,


and the Marquis de Pianezz4 mention in their
Treatiſes of the Truth of the Chriſtian Religion.
IV. Such, the Opinions of the Modern Jews,


who, as ſome ſay, believe it a good Work, and


highly meritorious in the ſight of -God, to cheat
the Chriſtians, ' not only by frequenting Maſs with
great appearance of Zeal, to elude the Inquiſition,
but ruining'em by knaviſh Bargains, exceſſive U-
ſury, and breach of Truſt. Of which Leo of Mo-


dena, a Rabbi of Venice, indeavors to clear em, in


his Book of the Ceremonys and Cuſtoms of the Jes,


- whereof the Learned Mr. Simon has lately given a


ſecond


ſeconc
who ſ
by Oa
Life,


| lumny


Comp
Maxin
But it
deteſt:
pher.
lieving
the co
lama!
France
they p
preſſin
demoli
ſter, o
ſue; 0
into t!
better
Chriſti
impiou
V.
the En
Gods |]


OCC 4 # d by « Comet, | 405
ſecond Verſion. The Rabbi aſſures us, that they
who ſay or write that the Jews bind themſelves
by Oath to cheat a Chriſtian every day of their
Life, and count it a good Work, invent the Ca-

| lumny only to render em more odious. If his

Complaint be wrong, the Jews are bound by
Maxims much worſe than the Error of Epicurus.
But if right, their Accuſers are led by a more
deteſtable Principle than any of this Philoſo-
pher. For nothing's more heretical, than be-
lieving God can be pleas'd with the Violation of
the common Notions of Equity: And therefore
am amaz'd to ſee either ſo many Miſſionarys in
France, blind enough to perſuade the Magiſtrates
they perform a pleaſing Service to God, by op-
preſſing the Innocence of Hugonots, where the
demoliſhing a Church, the expulſion of a Mini-
ſer, or converſion of ſome Religionarys may in-
ſue; or ſo many Magiſtrates weak enough to give
iato theſe. unhappy Maxims. *Twere infinitely
better they were indifferent to all Sects of the
Chriſtian Religion, than be carry'd away with ſo
impious a Zeal in favor of the True.

V. Of this ſtamp likewiſe was the Thought of
the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who imagin'd the
„ Gods had a Body which took its Nouriſhment
1d Ml from the Exhalations, as the Stoicks taught the
at Sun was fed by Vapors ariſing from the Ocean,
and therefore always ply'd within the Zodiack,
n, for fear of moving too far from its & Suſtenance.


—


Re —


12 * Ne longius diſcederer a cibo. Cicer. de Nat. Deor. lib. 3.
ue omnis latitudo, qui fol cum quinque vagis, & luna ultro
5) Wl citroque aiſcurrunt, hubear ſubjecti humoris alimoniam, Aacrob.
a enn. Scip. * | -


The


306 | Miſcellaneous' Reflections,

The Emperor Julian, who mentions this Thought
of M. Aurelius, do's not ſay by what particular
kind of Exhalations the Gods were refreſh'd.
But I think it probable he means the Perfumes. and
Smoke of the Sacrifices: for the antient Pagans
not only believ'd that the departed Souls came to
drench in the Liquors pour'd out on their Sepul-
chres during their Sacrifices; but it appears from
ſome Paſſages of the Fathers, that the Heathen
Gods were very liquoriſk, and ran after the Odors
of the Victims with extreme greedineſs. If
M. Aurelius thought the Gods had need of ſuch
Nouriſhment, he muſt conſequently believe their
Worſhippers might put: *em out of Commons as
oft as they pleas'd. E
VI. Such likewiſe are the odd Conceits of thoſe
Superſtitious, who repreſent the Divinity as im-


placable, unleſs a hundred little Nicetys are ob-


ſerv'd, or Crimes committed to its Honor; after
the example of the Carthaginians, already men-
tion'd, who ſacrific'd their innocent Children.
Whereupon a certain Author crys out very per-
tinently, * Alas, miſerable Mortals ! your igno-
rance of the Divine Nature is the original Clu], of
your Crimes. CRP Sh 516

VII. Such, in the laſt place, are thoſe Doctrines
maintain'd by great Names among Chriſtians :
That we muſt not keep Faith with Hereticks : That dy-


W


* Mos fuit in populis quos condidit advena Dido, |
Poſcere cæde Deos veniam ac flagrantibus aris,

Infandum dictu parvos imponere naſos. Sil. Ital. I. 4.
Heu primæ ſcelerum cauſæ mortalibus ægris
Naturam neſcire Deum. I. ib.


5 7 11


ing


ing in

degree
nemy,
Aborti⸗
to love
turns, i
tireſor
owniny
than t
former
ter, ei
rightec
the Lan
his In
ſhockir
to Cha


SEC"
ned
dem


Und

EXC.
mov'd!
ſolicits
demn'd
pear'd
mainta!
nation,
lame ti
the Pa!
Order ;
fell it.
believe
newly


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 407
ing in 4 Conſpiracy againſt a Heretick Prince, is 4
degree of Martyrdom : That it's lawful to kill an E-
nemy, rejoice at the Death of a Father, and force
Abortion to prevent Scandal: That one is not oblig d
| to love God, nor reſtore what one has ſtole at ſeveral
turns, if only a little at a time; with many more too
tireſom to enumerate. One can't deny that diſ-
owning a Providence is a leſs Error in a Heathen,
than theſe Doctrines in a Catholick Divine. The
former imagines, God has given no Laws; the lat-
ter, either that he has given Laws abſurd and un-
righteous, or that *tis in Man's Power to annul
the Laws of God, and pervert their Holineſs by
his Interpretations; which is infinitely more
ſhocking'than believing that God leaves the World
to Chance. 3 ;


Sz Cr. CKCVIIL 4 Reflection on what hap-
ned upon occaſion of the 65 Propoſitions con-
demn d by the Pope. 5


Underſtood about two years ſince, not without
exceeding Conſolation, That his Holineſs,
mov*d by his great Zeal for the Glory of God, and
ſolicited by certain Orthodox Divines, had con-
demn'd 65 execrable Propoſitions which had ap-
: Wl pear'd in ſeveral Books, or Theſes publickly
- W maintain'd. My deſire to ſee the Act of Condem-

nation, made me apply to ſeveral Friends at the
lame time for a Copy. But they wrote me word,
the Parliament of Paris had ifſu'd ſo ſtrict an
Order againſt this good Decree, that no body dare
ſell it. This ſurpriz d me mightily, I cou'd ſcarce
believe it true. Some days after a Gentleman
newly come from Paris, makes me a viſit, and
HIOU'S | main-


f N
7"
18 8
YE FH
1
2 '
1 WS |
t : .
2 1
FA «0
o 4
: .
+ 3 * 4 .
1
TE
i ith
1 7 Eh
+ TE 18
k 11
1
1 9 *
\ |
ö
i .
82 BM
7 2
F q
: ;
1
+ at ;
| i;
'
: 1
1
9
1
$5
TAS
1
1
: 1
I ;
"T5
4 7
N 1
9 =
;
17S Þ%
Up
ry ' ;
i Li
: 7
+ ST y
0
114
9 1
: 1
” 1
*
: ? 1 p
* .
q 7
iT
5 2
+ K
| i
iT K
* 1 N
74 7 1
j! 1
on *
f 1
{ | \
1 T3
: 48
| N
1 11
1 *
* 1
| c
F i
1
/ 2
f
:


— —


408 Miſcellaneous Refleckiuns,


maintain'd, before five or ſix of us then in Com-


pany, That the Condemnation of this Decree was


very juſt, or at leaſt excuſable; becauſe twas of
great importance, ſays he, that a famous Society,


one of the chief Supports of the Catholick Reli-
gion, ſhou'd not have a Slur put upon it, at leaſt
indirectly, by the condemnation of the 65 Pro-
Poſitions : and this was what Meſſrs. of the Par-
liament wou'd provide againſt, by blaſting the Ad
of Inquiſition, which tended to diſcredit the R.
Society of Jeſus. Ina word, that the Society was
grown ſo formidable, that the Members of the
Parliament thought themſelves oblig'd to this
Complaiſance, for fear of drawing their Reſent-
ments, and the Effects of their Credit, upon their
_ own back. Here I ſtop'd my Gentleman, and told
him, his Ambition of being thought a true French-
man, put him upon advancing things injurious in
the main to Religion, and to the Nation; and
he ought not to inſinuate at this rate, that things
were come to ſuch a paſs, that a Society of Reli-
gious Men inſtituted within this laſt Century
purely to dedicate themſelves to whatever con-
cern'd the Glory of God, - ſhou'd become ſo formi-
dable 1n the State, that the moſt auguſt Sovereign
Court of Judicature in the Kingdom, which here-
tofore had ſo bravely exerted it ſelf to bring this
very Society within the bounds of Duty, ſhou d
now be oblig'd to ſcandalous Compliances for fear
of incurring their diſpleaſure. No, Sir, fays J,
we can ne'er believe this; and perhaps you talk at
this rate, only to expoſe an Illuſtrious Body,
which might have done you ſome ill Office, to the
publick Hatred and Contempt. To revenge
your ſelf, you'd lily make us believe, it pak taken

BE: abomina-


y
diſorde
Man Cl
Duel, 2
If a No
Noble!


ocean d by 4 Comet. 409
i= WW abominable Doctrines, condemn'd by our Holy
iS Father the Pope, into its Sovereign Protection.
of And without giving him time to reply, I turn'd
„the Diſcourſe on a Subject, with which I remem-
1. der 1 had formerly entertain'd you. 2


> © SECT.CXCIX, Refletions on the different
„anner of proceeding againſt Vices and Errors.
8 * 1


I Say, I ever thought it ſtrange there ſhou'd be
$ ſuch a difference made between Error and Vice;
and that the Spirit. of the Catholick Church ſhou'
be ſo much more bent againſt Tenets which don't
exactly fall in with its Deciſions, than againſt a
diſorderly Life. We make no ſcruple to give a
Man Chriſtian Burial who has loſt his Life in a
Duel, and was notoriouſly guilty of all Exceſſes.
lf a Noble Lord ſealing by Owl-lght into another
Noble Lord's Houſe to lie a Night with his Lady,
happens to be Kill d in cold Blood by the Servants,
te-han't be hard lying ia a ſtately Chappel, with
lis Epitapl and Inſcriptions about him. But if a
or of Divinity, of irre roachable Manners,
las the misfortune to refule | Confeſſion on his
Death bed, alledging it's ſuffclent to repent and
a hi Sent de mention d
and c conſecrated
Jenſeniut, whoſe Morality was fo rigid,
who made the neceſſary Submiſſions to the
hurch, , cou'd not injoy the Elogys of his Epi-
aph in peace, upon a pretence he was Heterodox
the Poctrine of Predeſtination. If a Man at
dufeſſion declare has a Scruple concerning
le lawfulneſs of invoking the Saints, he runs 3


CRM to ,} 7 2 4 LY


.


MES: his Sins to God, he ſhall be
"1th Horror, and deny'd a Grave in


water risk of being ſent away without Abſolu-
Y ES | tion,


PP ³˙ mA —— —


410 Miſcellaneous Refeftions, =
tion, than if he confeſs'd a Murder, or Theft, or


Galicia, that the Bleſſed Virgin is not Queen of


— — — — — _ * =
— - w—_ 2 9 —— T ”
*


- 3 — — a
— _ — - ————
— = oo


Adultery. Abundantly greater : The Errors
which have no relation to a good Life, are darted injo)
back with much fiercer Wrath, than thoſe which City
have. Shou'd a Doctor of the Sorbon have the Fra)
| boldneſs to raiſe a Doubt concerning the Myſtery form
of the Incarnation; Idon't mean as to the ſub- a litt
ſtance of the Article, but the manner of explain- MW ;mor
ing it: Shou'd he, for example, affirm, That the crept
Human Nature of JESUS Cnr1sr is a Perſon, allow
in Li


without deſigning to derogate in the leaſt from
the Merit of his Sollerings 5 or advance, that the W the n
Human Nature was ſo united to the Divine, that WW + gf :
the Will of one became the Will of the other; ¶ well a
they'd immediately proclaim him a Neſtorian, à M © anc
 Monothelite, his Benefices be beg'd, and himſelf WM ever f
run the risk of being ſton'd to Death. But plexin
ſhou'd he think fit to broach ſome Maxims only of I preher
looſe Morality, like the famous Eſcobar, the is grar
World's content to ſay he has done amiſs; and af. That i
ter ſeveral Negotiations, perhaps, obtains a Cen-: à Huge
ſure of his Doctrines. Sure J am that in Spa, able in
where infinite ſcandalous Propoſitions, and di- Hereſy
realy oppoſite to the Spirit of the Goſpel, are Stram]
advanc'd with Impunity 3 ſhou'd a Man lay down
in his Theſis, that the Body of St. James is not 1


the World, and that ſhe was not tranſlated vil
bly into Heaven, he'd be drag'd without Merc)
to the Priſons of the Holy Office, and never i
The Sun more. ER ds Canal:
Shou'd a Parcel of Hugonots be found aſſem
bling in Rome, and worſhipping God in their wa}
there's no kind of Severity which wou'd not b
exercis'd azainſt them, and againſt the *
3


.
.
—


5 otcaſion d by 4 Comet. 411
their Aſſembly : Yet not a word is ſpoke againſt
the Courtizanes, who for ſo many Ages have
injoy'd a full Liberty: of Conſcience in this firſt
City of the Univerſe. The Congregation of Car-
dinals and Biſhops, who drew upa Project of Re-
formation by the Appointment of Pope Paul III.
à little before the Council of Trem, * propoſes,
among other Particulars, the reforming an Abuſe
crept into Rome, by which the Courtizanes were
allow'd to go about the Streets, either a Foot or
in Litters, magnificently attended; and lodg'd in
the nobleſt Honſes: But after ſeveral Debates
| + of the Cardinals in a full Conſiſtory, on this as

well as other Articles, *twas reſolv'd to adjourn
to another Opportunity, and ſo the Matter reſted
ever ſince. Which expoſes us to two very per-
plexing Objections: Firſt, That People can't com-
prehend by what Authority a greater Indulgence
is granted to Immorality than Hereſy. Secondly,
That it appears not why Hereſy, if puniſhable in
a Hugonot Citizen of Rome, ſhou'd not be puniſh-
able in a Courtizane of the ſame Place: I ſay,
Hereſy in a Courtizane, becauſe it's certain a
Strampet who goes on in her Iniquity for twenty
or thirty Years together, whatever compliance
or regard ſhe may bear to the Doctrine of the
Church in her general Judgment, forms a. pri-
vate Judgment every day of her Life, by which


PORTA
LY * om


* *
— 1 e


In hac urbe Meretrices ut Matronz inced unt per urbemy
ſen Mula vehuntur, quas aſſectantur de media Die nobiles, fa-
miliares Cardinalium, Clericique . . . habitant etiam inſig -
des zdes. Corrigendus etiam hic turpis abuſus. eg BY

f Fra. Paolo Hiſtory of the Council of Trent, Lib, 1. ad


1. 1537.
1537. rf 2 *


[
ö


1 P a rr rn VE CER 2 2 —
N


412 Miſcellaneous Reflections, |
ſhe reſolves in her own Breaſt, that tis better diſ-
obey the Laws of God than obey em. Who dare
deny that theſe Judgments, ſo often reiterated,
on't render a Soul exceeding heretical? _ Why
then if the Courtizane be far inquality of a Pro-
ſtitute, is ſhe not puniſh'd in quality of a Heretick?
Lou ſay,becauſe ſhedoes not dogmatize againſt the
ecifions of Councils. What, is it not dogmati-
Zing againſt the Deciſions of Councils, to keep open
School for propagating Impurity ? Does not one
make more Diſciples by preaching from* Example
on any point, than by mere ary Theological Lec-
tures ? 51 8 a Burgher of Wh.
went to Maſs, but perform'd his Devotions at home


*
*


Rome, who never


in the Proteſtant way, cou'd he be ſaid to dogma ·
tize? No; wou'd they tolerate him tho?


I vow, Sir, theſe things have always appear'd
ſtrange to me; and you can't forget how the late


| Mr. Abbe de Villars, Author of The Count de Gabalis,


preſt you one Day in my preſence on this very
point. I remember he told you very agreeably,
Hie did not wonder the bulk of Divines treated Vice


an thoſe of the Paſſions ..
K — 0 3 — — — n 3 . TY A
See the Dialogue between Socrates and the Courmxane Caliſto,
& Elan, „

1. 1 5 a of


er


Sz cT, CC. That there are ſome Errors not
| 14 | N criminal. | | 717 |


FE reaſon'd on theſe points with that Free-
dom ſo dear to all genteel- ſpirited Men,


| which is often taken when none of the common


People, nor bigotted Doctors are by; two ſorts
of Men one muſt have a ſpecial Reverence fox,
the firſt for fear of ſtaggering their Faith, the
latter for fear of becoming the Obje& of their


| fiery Perſecutions. If ever you and I meet, I may
perhaps communicate our Reflections that Day in


my Garden, and *tis probable ſhall find you gueſs
at a good part of em; for one need not be a
Conjurer to know, that they who reaſon on this
Head with that Diſpoſition of which I have given
you a Specimen already, go upon this Principle,
that Man is never allow'd to give into Vice, where-
as there be infinite Errors which he may hug him-
ſelf in with Impunity. I mean not any Errors in
Philoſophy which make a noiſe in the Schools,
whilſt Orders of Council are procur'd to ſilence
the moſt rational Philoſophers ; for it's plain no-
thing's more innocent in the fight of God than
blundering with the Ariſtotelians about the Nature
of Univerſale a parte rei, ſubſtantial Forms, &c.


I ſpeak of Theological Errors, and maintain we


all form a thouſand falſe Judgmeats concerning the
Nature of God and his Decrees : I affirm, all our
People are Anthropamorphites and Neſtorians, and
that thereis not a Peaſant, who after learning by
rote that God is a Spirit, and that IES US CHRIS 7
is God and Man in the unity of Perſon, does not
form Ideas directly * to the Words Wait

| FI 3 1 e


r


'
=
| 414 Miſcellantous Reflettions,
ö he ebene like a Parrot. So that all Error than
reſting in the Underſtanding, a Man may be as ſon, +
Orthodox in his Words as he pleaſe ; ſtill he's a that
Neſtorian, if he believes IE SUS CHRIS r, as Man, out 7
is a Perfon as properly and perfectly as himſelf. into
New thus every Peaſant living conceives him, very the le
far from taking the right Diſtinction in this Caſe. and a
What a Variety of Errors are there concerning comn
the Nature of Angels and human Souls! ſome of She
the Fathers have not ſtuck to rank em among cor- ¶ guels
poreal Beings, and ſay human Souls are propa-
ated by Generation. Cardinal Cæjetan in theſe man,
ſatter Ages makes no ſcruple of teaching, that that!
Angels are material Subſtances, little valuing the lieve
Authority of the Council of Lateran under Inno- us by
cent III. where ſeveral eminent * Theologiſts tell MW bed e
us, the Spirituality of Angels was aſſerted. Some © Charl
have gone farther, and even taught, that God is lileo,
- corporeal. Theſe are Errors of ſo groſs a nature, MW right,
that were there Puniſhments for falſe Philoſophy ble, it
as well as for falſe Syntax, a Scholar who enter- low'd
tain'd' ſuch Opinions wou'd deſerve a great many MW .
more Laſhes than he who broke the Rule, Mobile 8E.
cum fixo. But all this while, Sir, our common


People, who are Anthropomerphites or Neſtorians,
and they who believe Spirits extended, and Philo- O
fophers who form ſuch unworthy Conceptions of W 4 ©


the Divinity, and Theologiſts who diſtinguiſh { ing the
many kinds of Wills in God, ſo many Knowledges, thing!
and fo many Decrees; all theſe, I ſay, err with- Ihave
out Lee God: and there's no Calumny, how one Er
ſmall ſoever, which is not a more heinous Offence I l. Tha


— — — — — [ barage
e YE ant Mon ark OE Oe Joy
regor. de Valent. in 1 Diſput. 4. Quzſt. 2. Vaſque in this

Fi 2 F ; * , | # "04 1 oF RT Fi 1 nr


than


Tip. 78. cap. 3.


occaſſon d by 4 Comes. 415
| than all theſe Errors put together. For this rea-
ſon, that theſe Errors are wholly involuntary, and
that Men form theſe blind Judgments as well with-
out Malice as without Liberty; whereas we run
into moral Vice of all kind, from the higheſt to
the loweſt, with the full Exerciſe of our Liberty,
and a clear Knowledg of the Evil we are about to
| commit.

Shou'd you gneſs we made this Reflection, you
gueſs right, for it's true we carry'd it as far as
twou'd go: Yet without convincing our Gentle-
man, who ſtill inſiſted, and others beſides him,
that Man becomes criminal only by refuſing to be-
lieye as the Church believes; he only confuted
us by ſaying, Were he 4 Priſoner in the Inquiſition,
he'd chuſe to have as many Baſtards to anſwer for as
Charlemagn eer got, rather than have taught, as Ga-
lileo, that the Earth turn'd round the Sim. He was
right, for Galileo had ne' er been brought to trou-
ble, if inſtead of following Copernicus he had fol-
low'd a Whore. d .

SECT, CCI. What makes one Error more

; ſinful than another. Es


? ths return to my Subject, I ſay, the Blindneſs
1 of Epicurus, which obſtructed not his honor-
ing the Gods, or living a very regular Life, is no-
thing near ſo damnable, as thoſe Errors of which
| have given you a ſmall Sample. For how comes
one Error to be worſe than another? From hence,
|. That one is more wide of the Truth, and diſ-
_. & parages its Object more than the other. II. That
one leads to greater Crimes than the other, and
„n this laſt Circumſtance principally conſiſts the
all Ff 4 _ ſing


. Ge er nn TO Or TE
i


416 Miſcellantows Reflettions,


ſting of Error. Now I maintain, theſe Errors


which I have inſtanc'd are as wide of the Truth, SEC
and asinjurious to God as the Doctrine of Epicurus, A
and attended with more abominable Iniquitys. M
So, Sir, you'l allow me to believe, that Horace,
converted from Epicuruss Principles, might have =
been in greater Errors than he was before. A.
res


SECT. CCI. Had God world Miracles to de-
clare his Goodneſs to the Pagans, he had works
for the falſe Gods,


W HAT is't. to me, if Horace entertain'd
V V reaſonable Notions of the Nature of Ju-
piter, if he admir'd, if he ador'd his Patience and
Juſtice, if he became à Votary? For ſince God
is not to be glority:d by any Honor paid to falſe
Divinitys; ſince on the contrary all Sentiments of
Fear and Love for theſe, are Acts of Idolatry;
it's evident the Prodigy which converted this
Epicurean cou'd produce nothing agreeable to Al-
mighty God: Whence it follows, That God ne-
ver produc'd this Prodigy miraculouſly, nor any
Comet to convince the Pagans of his Gagdnefs,
Patience, or juſtice; becauſe this were working
for Jupiter, and for the other falſe Gods, and not
for himſelf. And here, in Concluſion, is my full
Anſwer; to the Difficulty which I ſtarted, |


F . 11


6 ; a
14


Sꝛcr.


* orcafiowd by 4 Comet, 417


| 5: c 7: CCIIT. ad Objection: Comets are pro.


duc d without a Miracle. God might work
Miracles among Infidels, God deſign'd to
make himſelf known by the means of Comets.
All As of Idol atry, occaſion'd by Comets, will
render Men more inexcuſable.


Don't doubt, a World of Difficultys will ſpring
up in your Mind as you read over my Anſwers;


| but I conceive they may be all reduc'd to theſe four:
| I. That the whole Force of my Reaſoning ariſes from
a ſuppoſition, that Comets are miraculouſly form'd;

and this you'l perhaps deny. II. That it follows from


my Reaſons, God cou'd never work Miracles among
Infidels; becauſe if I am tobe believ'd, theſe Mi-
racles muſt only prompt Infidels to redouble the
Exerciſes of their falſe Worſhip. III. That I
ſuppoſe, the Intention of God in forming Comets
cou'd only be giving new Life to the falſe Devo-
tions of Idolaters; which is a wrong Suppoſition,
becauſe God, on the contrary, propoſes only to
manifeſt himſelf. IV. And laſtly, that all theſe
Conſequences of the Appearancesof Comets, with
which I have made ſo much noiſe, are only Abyſes


of the Grace of God, which will ſerve to render


Men more inexcuſable.


In CT. |


40 Miſcellaneous Refletkious,


S xc T. CCIV. I. Anſwer : If Comets were
Signs of | what happens after their Appea-

 rance, tis neceſſary they ſhou'd be miraculouſ)

Ferm d. FS Can NE


* anſwer to the firſt Difficulty, 1 ſay, it's im-
poſſible Comets ſhou'd be Indications of the E-
vents which happen in the World, unleſs mira-
culouſly form'd. Thus I demonſtrate it: Since


Comets are not the natural Cauſe of thoſe Events


which follow, as I have already prov'd, and as
will further appear by what remains; tis neceſſary
towards their being ſtated Signs of theſe Events,
there ſhou'd be ſome indiſpenſable Connexion be-
tween the Comets and them. Now this Connec-
tion is abſolutely impoſſible, if Comets be purely
the work of Nature. Conſequently either they
don't preſage what follows, or they are MIracte
.


—


louſſy produc'd.


Scr. CCV. 4 Liſt of ſeveral Hypotheſes
which may be follow'd in reaſoning on Comets.


+ © O prove this Connection impoſſible, I muſt

I. deſire you to run over with me, the ſeveral
Hypotheſes of Philoſophers for explaining the
Nature of Comets. I. Some ſuppoſe 'em a vaſt
pile of dry and inflammable Exhalations, which
being once ſet a fire, muſt appear to our view fo
long as there remains any ſtock of Fuel to feed on.
This is the Opinion of Ariſtotle. They who won't
be wholly beat out of it, ſince *tis diſcover'd by
the Parallax that the Comets are above the Moon,
have vary'd from this Opinion, as to the ſource «

| 1 the


the!


gines


on th
of e
| Pence
it, tl
| Stars
| Jarge
and:
Porti
| hard-
| towa
= as thi
| but |
| Wor]


never
thoſe
Univ
each
ſome!
is abſ
the 8
over 1
a cert
form?
ture,


| lation


Force
come
is dra
to Ou!


occafiond by a Comet. 419


| the Exhalations only: For whereas Ariſtotle ima-


gines em intirely ſupply'd from the Earth; theſe


on the contrary ſay, the Earth contributes no part
of 'em, but that the Planets are at the whole Ex-


pence. II. Another ſet of Philoſophers will have


it, that the Comets are a cluſter of ſeveral ſmall
Stars, which in Conjunction are able to form ſo


large and luminous a Body, tho each of 'em ſingly


| and apart is inviſible. III. Others believe *em a
Portion of the Celeſtial Matter, which becoming
| hard and condens'd, reflects the Light of the Sun
| towards us. IV. Many believe *emStars asantient
zs the World, and moving as regularly as the Sun;
| but becauſe the Line they deſcribe touches our
World on ſome of the out Skirts only, we can
| never ſee em but while they take their courſe by


thoſe parts. V. The Carteſians ſuppoſe, that the
Univerſe being divided into ſeveral Vortex's,
each of which has a Sun in its own Centre, it
ſometimes happens, that one of theſe Vortex's
is abſorb'd into thoſe which ſurround it; becauſe
the Sun which poſſeſt its Centre, being cover'd
over with a thick Cruſt, loſes that Force of moving
a certain Portion of Matter round it ſelf, which
form'd its Vortex. Now as nothing's loſt in Na-
ture, the ſurrounding Vortex's gain by the Diſſo-
lution 'of this, each according to its degree of
Force. ' The Sun of the ruin'd Vortex, now be-
come an Opaque Body, follows the ſame Fate, and
is drawn into one of the adjacent Vortex's ; if in-
to ours, it forms a Comet during its ſtay.


Szex.


420 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


SEC T. CCVI. That neither of theſe Hypothe.
ſes diſcovers any natural Connexion between the
Comets, and what happens upon Earth after
their Appearance, ©

ACH of theſe Hypotheſes has inexplicable

Difficultys. But as this is not the Buſineſs in


hand, I only obſerve, that whatever opinion we
go by, it is equally impoſſible to aſſign any natural
Connexion between the Appearance of a Comet
and the Events which follow. For towards ſucha
fuppos'd Connexion, *twere neceſſary, that when-.
ever, for example, the Powers of ſecond Cauſes


had gather'd the dry combuſtible Exhalations
of the Planets into a Body, and ſet fire to em;
our Earth at that critical Juncture ſhou'd be pro-
vided to ſupply matter of Peſtilence, Dearth, ſub-
terraneous Fires, Hurricanes, &c. and Men be
diſpos'd to revolt from their Allegiance, burn Ci-
tys, conſpire againſt their Prince's Life, form
Plots for the Subverſion of the eſtabliſh'd Reli-


gion, breed Seas and Schiſms, ſeize their Neigh-


bor's Eſtates, draw on themſelves the juſt Indigna-
tion of a potent Prince, refuſe, . againſt all Equity


and good Conſcience, to give up Provinces un-


juſtly acquir'd. In effect, ſince all allow Comets
are the Cauſes of thoſe ſad Diſaſters they are
ſuppos'd to preſage, we ſhou'd look no higher
than the Earth, and the Diſpoſitions of the Heart


of Man for a Cauſe. Now tis impoſſible to con-
ceive, how theſe Diſpoſitions in the Earth and
in the Heart of Man, ſhou'd concur preciſely at
the time when a great Pile of combuſtible Exhala-
It's therefore

Im-


tions is got ready in the Heavens.


impoſſ
nexion
I a


Earth


in ſucl
Effect

ration:
ferent
the He
on on-
which


certain
In the [
Jupiter,
concert


bellion


times
from h.
ſpring 1
which c
of all
Wars;
this kir
Saturn.
in Natu


te Apr


occaſion'd by 4 Comet. 421
impoſſible to comprehend this pretended Con-
nexXlON. . V x *

I fay, it's impoſſible to conceive, how this
Earth and the Heart of Man ſhou'd be diſpos'd
in ſuch a manner, as is requiſite for obtaining the

Effect in queſtion ; becauſe the Changes and Alte-

rations in the Earth depend on ſeveral Cauſes dif-

ferent from thoſe which produce the Alterations in
the Heavens: Nor is the Action of our Elements
on one another, regulated by that Action above,
which inflames or tempers the Planets. For ex-
ample, a South Wind, which in ſome Provinces

i babs the Farmer's Hopes, does not hold in its

Breath till Saturn has diſcharg'd a great quantity
of fuliginous Vapors; whether this Planet be in

a hot or cold fit; whether its Pores be ſhut cloſe,

or whether they emit Plenty of Vapor; the South

Wind blows, if Sun or any inward Heat rarefy

certain Corners of the Earth, which depends not

in the leaſt on the Circumſtances which Saturn, or

Jupiter, or any other Planet is in. As for what

concerns Men, they are ſometimes ſtir'd up to Re-

| bellion by the Ambition of a great Man: ſome-

times the Rabble riſe to reſcue a Darling Brute
trom-his juſt Puniſhment. Wars between Princes
ſpring from various Reaſons of State, or Paſſions
which change fora Trifle. A Detail were endleſs,
of all. the Reaſons which beget civil and foreign

Wars; but one may ſafely affirm, that nothing of

this kind is concerted in the Region of Jupiter or

Saturn. It's evident then, there's no Connexion

in nature between what paſſes here below after

tie Appearance of Comets, and this Appearance.


| SEC


42 — Miſcehancom Reftftions, _
SxcT. CCVII. Muhen there's a Subordination


7 of ſe con a Cauſe 5, and when not, b | 1 4 /


Ion that all ſecond Cauſes, as well thoſe which
compound and which inflame the Exhalations
in the Heavens, as thoſe which temper the Air,
and which bring Rain and dry Weather, are ſubject
to one general Cauſe,” which puts*em into Action
with a marvelous Harmony. Yet, I ſay, the Ef.
fects produC'd on Earth vary not with reſpect to
any change in the Order of Effects in the Heavens,
becauſe the firſt and general Cauſe, which puts
all the reſt into Action, applys by the Powers of
each in particular, without recurring, for the
Effects of one Cauſe, to the Powers of another,
For example, to produce Fire in Wood, the
general Cauſe conſiders only the Virtue of the
Fire apply*d. Be all the other Cauſes in Nature
diſpos'd as you will, be the Sun eclips'd, Rivers
froze over by a' North Wind, be there Rain, or
Snow, or Battels fought : the Fire burns on, and
burns neither more nor leſs for all this; the firſt
Cauſe exerts the full Virtue of the Fire, as tho
there were no Eclipſe, c. I except thoſe Cauſes
only which may immediately affect the Wood, as
Water pour'd on't; for in this Caſe the Fire ope-
rates not with equal Succeſs, nay extinguiſhes,
if the Force of the Water be ſuperior. In all
other Caſes, its Virtue is in no Subordination to
the Virtues of any other Bodys; and conſequently
the Effects produc'd on Earth don't go hand in
hand with thoſe in the Heavens. So that nothing


is more unreaſonable than imagining the ſubluna


ry Bodys are conſpiring to ſtarve and _ i
Wen-


anothe
its be
neer |


3 Is exp
directl
can it


ven an
which
dance
of the


8 with ſ.


up ſix
take un
forwar
ip too
believe

Tak.
cur no
happen
force o
veral C
who he
rating
do or d
attainit
ple, w.


occaſion d by a Comet, 42
whenever a great many Exhalations, diſcharg'd
from the As nets, are got to the general Rendez-
vous; and there take fre.

This appears the more abſurd, as we know by
Experience, that the very Bodys which hover over
the Earth, are not regulated by one another's
Steps: But when it's fair Weather in one Country,


it may or may not be ſo in the next. We fome-


times ſee a Plague of Rain in one Province, while
another 1s afflicted with a Drought, yet without
its being a conſtant Rule: For perhaps it fhall
ne er happen again, that one of thefe Provinces


is expos'd at the ſame time to an Inconvenience
directly contrary to that of the other. How then
| can it be conceiv'd, that Cauſes ſo diſtant as Hea-


yen and Earth, whoſe Qualitys are very different,
which act without any Subordination or Depen-
dance on one another, tho all under the Direction
of the ſame General ' Cauſe, ſhou'd yet operate
with ſo exact a harmony, that if one kind take
up ſix Years to produce its Effect, the other ſhall
take up but juſt as many; if one be diſturb'd or
forwarded in its Operations, the other muſt be
ſo too? He renounces common Senſe, who can
believe ſuch Improbabilitys. |

Take notice, Sir, I always ſuppoſe Comets con-
cur not as Phyſical Cauſes of the Events which
happen on Earth ; for on this depends the whole
force of my Reaſoning. I well know, where ſe-
veral Cauſes are employ'd to the ſame Action, he
who has the direQing Part, ſo adjuſts their ope-
rating Powers by one another, that they either
do or do not advance, according as ſeems beſt for
attaining tie propos'd End. A King, for exam-
ple, who brings five or fix Armys into the os

Pry an


wh i om mw
— „% TEE IIS en


424 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,
and without communicating the Occaſion to one
of his Generals, makes em all concur to the ſame
Deſign, ſo regulates the Movements of one of


| theſe Armys by the Circumſtances of the other,


that either may properly be accounted the Cauſe
of the other's acting as they do. But the Caſe
is different with regard to the Earth and Planets:
For we go on this Suppoſition, That God do's not
apply 'em to the producing of any certain Effect by
a Correſpondence and Union of Virtues, ſo as the
Planets ſhou'd perfect and finiſh what they were
to contribute, preciſely at the time the Earth


cou'd furniſh its Quota. On the contrary, we ſup- |


poſe the Planets produce a Comet without the
concurrence of the Earth, and the Earth in its
turn produces a great many Calamitys without
the Phyſical concurrence of Planets or Comets.
In which Caſe it's evident, there can be-no neceſlary
Correſpondence of Effects on which to ground a
Judgment, that when the Planets have produc'd
theirs, the Earth muſt forthwith: produce its
own. And conſequently, if Comets be Signs of


impending Calamitys, God muſt produce em on
- Purpoſe, when he ſees the Earth is brooding theſe


Calamitys; for perhaps it may ne'er happen by the
Courſe of Nature, that when the Earth is in ſucha
diſpoſition, an inflammable Matter ſnou dat that cri-
tical time be ready in the Heavens to form a Comet.


SECT. CCvIII An Eaplicution of this Doliriu:


I. Enemy to the Opiaion of one of the


Banks.


tions 2
one de
appear
{hinders
Whirl]
is not l
a fire,

pool's
low in
particu]
others

have gr
df Mot!
now do


oſe at e


dodys in


occafion'd by 4 Comet. 425
general, and uniform Laws; ſo that there's only
| one and the ſame Law for the Motion of Flame
here on Earth, and for the Motion of all Matter,
at what diſtanec ſoever tis ſuppos'd. Yet I fay
the Alterations which happen on Earth, depend
not on the Diſpoſitions of Bodys in any other
part of the Univerſe. Let's ſuppoſe a Column
| of Water, determin'd by the Oppoſition of ſur-
| rounding Bodys, and in virtue of the general
Laws, move circalarly in the midſt of the Rhine,
| while the ſame Cauſes overturn a Houſe on its
Banks. We clearly conceive, tho theſe two Mo-
[tions are the Conſequence of the ſame Law, yet
one depends not on the other: which manifeſtly
appears from hence, that the Ceſſation of one,
hinders not the Continuance of the other. The
Whirlpool in the River continues, tho the Houſe
is not in being. Let all the Foreſts round be ſet
a fire, all the Vineyards deſtroy'd, the Whirl-
} {pools no way affected. An alteration may fol-
ow in the Temperature of the Climate; ſeveral
particular things be vary'd and diverſify'd; yet
n others remain conſtantly the ſame. Hence we
ſe {Wave ground to conclude, That the general Laws
of Motion might produce the ſame Effects they
now do, with regard to one particular Body,
ren tho the Diſpoſitions of Matter were intirely
different from what they are in a hundred other
places beſides. And therefore the Earth mayn't
neceſſarily receive one Diſpoſition rather than
another, becauſe the General Laws cauſe one. Mo-


WS d OI... CRE a IE cape


he lincation rather than another in the Sphere of Sa-
Pn. Elſe we muſt ſay, that becauſe ſuch a Man
le, Nroſe at eight this Morning, and not at fix, all the


dedys in a hundred Leagues round, receive Modi-
| GY fications


426 Miſcellaneous Reflections, =
fications different from what they might haye
had, if he had got up at ſix. And this being ab-
ſurd, we muſt allow, tho the ſame general Laws
which form Comets where we ſee *em, produce
all the Alterations which happen on Earth ; yet
theſe Alterations are not, by the Appearance of a
Comet, become different from what they wou'd
have been, had no Comet at all appear'd : And
conſequently inſiſt, there's no reaſon the Earth
ſhou'd be diſpos d to ſuch a ꝓarticular Alteration,
to a Peſtilence ſuppoſe, or Famine ; becauſe the

Regions of the Planets have ſuffer*d ſuch a par-
ticular Alteration. e


SEC. CCIX. A further Explication on the
| Syſtem of Occaſional Cauſes,


HE true Reaſon of this is, That the gene-
1 ral Laws of Motion, how ſimple ſoever an
uniform, are yet executed by the Concurrence o
infinite Occaſional Cauſes, whoſe vaſt Variety ſplits
as *twere the general into an infinite Number of
particular Cauſes, which don't appear to have
any dependance on one another. For example;
If the Author of Nature has fix d this General Lan,
That Motion ſhall be communicated to the ſeveral
Parts of Matter, according as they ſtrike on one aue.
ther; and that the Quantity of Motion which each
receives, ſhall be proportion d to the Dimenſions of the
Bodys which hit: This Law, ſimple and uniform
as it is, muſt inevitably vary in the er
into infinite particular Principles; one of whic
ſhall here produce one Effe&, another a quite con-
trary Effect in another Place. 1 at


1
der
plyi
. =
muff
ther
And


each
Bulk
or Bu
depei
other
| hot, |


which
to th


with


ſingle
of Ma


| theſe 1


Stone,
every
ticular
elves.
Virtue |
And we


of Nat
another
Cauſe, þ
the fall
dred di
all ſo in
top fey
attly ;


-oceaſion'd by 4 Comet, 427
don't mean that the Cauſe of Motion, conſi-
der'd in it ſelf, loſes its Simplicity; but that com-


E plying in one place with one Occaſional Cauſe,


and in another place with another, its Effects
muſt be as different and independent of one ano-


ther, as if produc'd by two different Principles.
And, in a word, ſeeing the Occaſional Cauſe of
each particular Motion, is only the Situation and
Bulk of the Body mov'd; and that the Situation
or Bulk of à Stone pitch'd on the Roof of a Houſe,
| depends not, either on the Situation or Size of
other Stones in the Street, nor on its being
bot, or wet Weather, &c. tis evident the Force
| which moves all Bodys in general, when apply'd


to the Stone on the Houſe-top, operates only


| with regard to the Situation and Bulk of that


ſingle Stone. It moves indeed many other Parts
of Matter at the ſame time; but its Action on


| theſe is not regulated by any thing reſpecting the


Stone. The General Cauſe finds ſomething in
every Inſtance, which determines it after a par-
ticular manner; and conſequently, the Stone re-
ceives no one Affection more than another, by
virtue of the ſeveral Motions produc'd elſewhere.
And we muſt not think it ſtrange, that the Effects
of Nature ſhou'd be thus independent of one


another, tho proceeding from one and the ſame


Cauſe, by one and the ſame Action; becauſe we ſee
the falling of Water on a Wheel produces a hun-
ied different Figures in a Machine, which are
all ſo independent of one another, that tho you
op ſeveral of em, the reſt ſhall keep playing
cractly as they did before.


Gg 2 SECT.


„
* - — - * — 429, 000 #249 RE ooo - —.—
= 2 5 > ” - - A £< a I —— —-— — © Ig LIES n — - —_—_— wat — T |
_ N 2 0 ˙˙pWA ̃] . Ce DI EX A — — — — — == : — —

— 77 — — : — En OT — 2 — = : 2 - —_ s .

4 * - - wy - of - - — = — — - © — — £

— A
- 44s 0


OP —
* - — — » _—_ OD — eps >. — 2 2 8 — — — S 1 N e ” >.
. v c 0


— bl : - * 2 woke : — as COLNE OR.
R n T SET


—— —


— —


VEE


428  Miſcelantout Reſins


SET. ccx. 40 onfirmation of this Doc: Plan
trine, * what W when Miracles are in tl


wrouglt. ; 3 8
of tl
T HS is further confirms W. a "Cpiideration one
| of the Miracles recorded in | Scripture. One
' muſt renounce common Senſe, to imagine, becauſe 8 E.
God gave a Motion to Matter within the Borders w


of Egypt, by a Law different from the General
law; therefore Matter in all other Parts, receiy'd
A different Modification. Far from it: All things
bapned, even in this Country, exactly as they
wou'd, had God done nothing extraordinary for gredi
his People; the ſame Harveſts, the ſame Cold, the ſ⸗
Rain, Winds, &c. The Changes then produc'd in of th
one portion of Matter, occaſion no new Change Come
in all the reſt. And conſequently tis not poſſible for fi
to conceive, that the Alterations 1 in our Elements, Revo
which cauſe Plagues and Famines in the Earth, keep more
pace perpetually with the Alterations which pro- WW here's


duce a Comet in the Heavens. | 3
were needleſs enlarging ſo much on this Mat- ſent,
ter, had I only to deal with the common Princi- WW fame.
ples, which don't ſuppoſe ſo cloſe a Connexion BY 2 Rey
and Chain of Events, as thoſe of Mr. nnd bony
©


Sx cT. CCXI. An Application of what bo bear
been [aid on the firſt Popothefis. to three more Accou
1 the Five.


HE Application is obvious to the ſecond, |
third, and fifth Hypotheſes, and ſhews the
Difficulty alike in all; becauſe a Conjunction of Pe.
ſeveral ſmall Stars, the condenſing ſome Parts 0 92


„ / ⁵ d Sr PR ef


occaſian d by a Comet. 429
the Ether, and the converting of a Sun into a
Planet on the Diſſolution of an intire Vortex, can't
in the common Courſe, or by the Laws of Nature,
be ſo exactly concerted and tim'd with the Action


| of thoſe Bodys which produce our Calamitys, that
one muſt conſtantly keep pace with the other.


| SzoT. COXIT. That the fourth Hypotheſis


won't admit the Connexion we ſpeak of.


| (Eu the fourth Hypotheſis, I have * al-


ready ſhewn, it's Nonſenſe that the Bodys


which alter our Elements, ſhou'd finiſh their In-
| gredients for a Peſtilence, Famine, &c. exactly at


the ſame time that Comets return to'any one Point


of the Line which they deſcribe. For either the
| Comets always take up the ſame Space of Time
| for finiſhing their Courſe, or ſometimes fulfil their
| Revolutions with more diſpatch, ſometimes with
more delay. Chuſe which Suppoſition you pleaſe,
| here's work enough cut out for you.


The firſt Suppoſition is moſt in vogue at pre-
ſent, for we talk now only of the Return of the
ſame Comets at ſtated Times. Some aſſign em


a Revolution of forty ſix Years. Others pre-


tend, that the Comet which lately appear'd, is
the ſame which appear'd in 1577. and ſhall ap-
pear again in 1784. Others think to find their
Account better by another Calculation. All ſup-
port their Opinions by the Teſtimony of Diodo-
rs of Sicily , who relates, that the antient A-


OS


l Before, Seck. 33. ÞF Mr. Petit, Intendant of the Fortifi-
ctims,” ¶ Mr, Caffini, Il Bibliorheq, Univerſ. I. 1, 2,& 15.


Gg 3 ſtronomers


LY
* *
— . ˙ . —— : ——— W n wy — Ol
. 0 > — rn — —— — - — — "I ; |
. 2 my — = W — — — — — . p . * " — - . l .
7 or - In ng ES. Tana a 2 5 * * 4 b — — — — —
Loc 1 KK er —. X. RY EF 21 3 2 . 3 x 9 ** * Hens Oe? =. 2 $ 2
Ot 6 a 3 8 : — NEL W _ et ts. 3
7


——


FAS og ——— — Re — _
Sos _— __ — BA : be ”
— — 1 has 7 1 Ye - —


—_
,- -—I>,


rene —
a —V— — ——


I ww py P20 F x ras 2


get oe — GR.
— =
—


430 Miſcellaneous Reflection,
ſtronomers of Egypt and Chaldea foretold the Re-
turn of Comets. Let em do their beſt, they ſhall
find a hard matter to reconcile their Notions to
the Phenomena; and the Authority of Diodorus
will ſtand 'em in little ſtead, becauſe we're in-
form'd by other hands *, that Eudoxus, who firſt
taught the Greeks what he had learnt in E gyſpt con-
cerning the Motions of the Stars, made no men-


tion of Comets. Whence we may reaſonably


conclude, the Egyptians had then made no Obſer-
vations upon em. We may conclude the ſame
from Conon his Succeſſor's learning nothing among
the Egyptians touching the Motions of Comets,
how diligent ſoever in collecting the Obſervations
made by *em on the Eclipſes of the Sun. As for
the Chaldeans, it's true, Apollo Myndius, who boaſt-
ed of his ſtudying among 'em, is poſitive they
reckon'd Comets among the wandring Stars, and
underſtood their Motions. But Epigenes, who
likewiſe pretends he ſtudy'd among 'em, and was
no way inferior to the other, affirm'd, they de-
termin'd nothing concerning Comets, but believ'd
they were ſet a fire by a Whirlwind.
But put the Caſe this Suppoſition were true;
I fay, there's no probability that Comets, and the
Bodys which, by altering our Elements, produce
Peſtilence, Famines, Tempeſts and Earthquakes,
ſhou'd act ſeveral times ſucceſſively by exactly the
fame Advances; becauſe the Diſpoſitions which
muſt concur to theſe great Diſorders in the Earth,
are in a perpetual Change. We ſee Citys, where
Flocks and Herds graz'd heretofore; we ſee on-


iy Ruins and Rubbiſh, where once ſtood flou- |


— ——


* Sen. Quaſt, Nat. I. 6. C. Zo {ki
in riſaing


occaſion'd by a Comet. 431
riſhing Towns. Marſhes are drain'd in one part,
| while the fruitfulleſt Plains lie waſte in another.
Foreſts are cut down; the Earth opens in ſome
| places, and ſwallows up Mountains which once
| cool'd all the Country round. Whole Rivers are
ſuck'd into the Bowels of the Earth, or turn'd
| into new Channels. The Sea drowns ſome Coun-
| trys, and throws up others, as we learn from
| * Pliny, Þ Seneca, || Pythagoras, and many Natura-
liſts more. I know not, whether we may believe
| what Ovid makes Pythagoras ſay, That Rivers have
been known to turn Salt; but don't doubt ſome
| have loſt the Qualitys for which they were famous
in antient Times; and that therefore our Travel-
lers are wrong in crying out a Cheat, or a Liar,
when their own Experience agrees not with the
Teſtimonys of the Antients: And cou'd wiſh
Mr. Guillet had added this Reflection to his Apo-
logy for Pauſanias written againſt Mr. Spon, who
did not find the River Hales ſo cold as the antient
| Naturaliſts wou'd perſuade. *Twere no leſs juſt
| perhaps to make the ſame Anſwer to thoſe who
pretend they found Egypt more favor'd with Rain,
than *tis repreſented in former Days. But this
is to be underſtood without prejudice to thoſe


> WI vo maintain, the Antients did not always form
, Wl their Accounts on the exacteſt Memoirs.
> Be it how it will, it can't be deny'd that the


Changes I ſpeak of cauſe a great difference in the
„ Seaſons. And did not this ſufficiently convince
e us, cou'd we perſiſt againſt general Experience,
which never ſhews, during the longelt Life, two
- — —
* Lib. 2. c. 85,87. f Lib. 2. Natur. Quæſt. c. 26.
Apud Ovid. Metam. 15. | :
g 8 Gg 4 Winters


—


432 Miſcelaveout Refleitions,


Winters or two Summers, two Springs or Falls


exactly alike ?. Is there a Man alive who can pre-


tend he ever ſaw two Solſtices or Equinoxes with


the ſame Wind, the ſame Temperature of Air,
and the ſame Diſpoſitions in all other reſpects ?
Can one reaſonably diſpute what * Solon affirm'd
to Creſus, that in the ſpace of ſeventy Years he


neer had obſery'd two Days perfectly alike? 1


don't believe, ſince the World was made, there
ever were two Days which reſembl'd in every
thing, not only with regard to the whole Earth,


but with regard to ſo ſmall a part of it as Fance.


How then ſhou'd it be poſſible, that the Cauſes


which miglit have taken up forty Years to prepare


a Peſtilence, or a Drought in the Days of Moſes,
ſhou'd prepare it in forty Years, neither more nor
Jeſs, at this time of day, when the Earth is fo
chang'd from what it then was, that of a hun-
dred particular Cauſes which concur'd in Maoſes's


Days to infe& a Kingdom, perhaps not ten con-


tinue the ſame in theſe ? Which muſt neceſſarily
produce a diverſity in Effects, and put 'em be-
yond all Rule; conſequently deprive Comets of
their indicative Virtue as to the future, on the
firſt Suppoſition. „

I paſs over the ſecond Suppoſition, as liable to
the ſame Difficultys which occur in the other four
Hypotheſes.


— *


* Apud Herodot. J. I. c. 32.


Sxen; |


oecaſionꝰd by a Comet. | 433
SE cT. CCxIII. A Confirmation of theſe Re-


marks from the Contingency of Human Ac«


7 ions o |


T O give theſe Reaſons a greater weight, I muſt
intreat you, Sir, to obſerve, that tis ſtill


more impoſſible, the Miſchiefs Men do one ano-


ther, which in King * David's Judgment are even


worſe than Peſtilence or Famine, ſhou'd happen


preciſely at the time when the courſe of Nature


has furniſh'd Comets, than that the other Evils


of Scarcity and Mortality ſhou'd happen with the
ſame Regularity ; becauſe the Diſorders of a War
depend on a thouſand fortuitons Occaſions, and


on the Human Will, liable to Paſſions which
change ten times a day; whereby no State nor O-


peration of neceſſary Cauſes can keep a regular
pace with what depends on the Will of Man.
How for example wou'd you, by the Laws of
Nature, have any relation between the. Comet
which appear'd in the firſt Year of Alexander's
Reign, and the Miſchiefs this Prince's Ambition
caus'd in the World? Is it not plain, if Comets
ben't miraculouſly form'd, That among the reſt
muſt be form'd by a neceſſary Conſequence of the
Aftion of the Heavenly Bodys? And do's it not
from hence follow it had appear'd, tho it had
been Alexander's Fate to fall {tick and die, or tho
he had been kill'd (which was not impoſlible)
in the firſt Engagement, or that Darius had been
as brave as Cyrus? Yet had either of the three
hapned, much Miſchief might have been preven-


— od


—


* 2 Kings 24. | 1
8 - | ted;


" 2)
5
i il
2 i
9
AVE
J 10
1
| 1
| 3
}
vl
N $.
f
Wo
.
7 10
5.
5
E {0 ;
i 4


. ———


war Ir
8 » —
— 88


434 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


ted; and conſequently this Comet have appear'd,
tho the World had ſuffer'd no extraordinary Ra-
vage. There was therefore no neceſſary connec-
tion between that Comet and the Evils which
enſu d. 1
No body but ſees, had Alexander fall'n dange-


rouſly ill on the 4th day of his march, his Army had


ne'er paſs d the Helleſpont; ſo that *tis only ſup-
poſing his Sikneſs turning to a Palſy, to put an
end to his Enterprize as ſoon as begun. Had he
been kill'd in paſſing the River Granicus, there the


War had likewiſe ended; his Generals had


thought of nothing more than getting back ſafe


to their own Homes. Had the King of Perſia


been a Man of Gruss Form, Alexander might
have grown grey before he cou'd pierce twenty
Leagues into his Country: The Paſſage of the
Helleſpont had coſt him twenty Attacks which
wou'd have ruin'd his Army, and put him out of
conceit with the Enterprize. So dying without
his Conqueſts, he had not left a ſet of Succeſſors
to fill the World with Violence, Bloodſhed and
Deſolation. You can't but obſerve in Hiſtory,
that when two Princes of almoſt equal Power,
Courage and Conduct, ingage in a War, they fight
ſome ſmart Battels, take and retake Places, wea-
ken their Armys, ruin each in his turn his Enemy's
Country. And what follows? why they both
ow weary of the War, exhauſt their Trea-

ures, and ſtrike up a Peace at laſt without any
great Advantages of either ſide. This had pro-
bably been the Caſe, if Alexander and Cyrus had
tiv'd at the ſame time; and what hapned between
our Francis I. and Charles V. When either fide
keeps any thing by the Treaty of Peace, he aa?

5 ON | We


tenti eſſ
dinia ſa
tot tame


—


occaſion d by a Comet. 435
well be ſaid to buy it too dear, as Hanni bal
| jaſtly obſerves in his Interview with Scipio:
Happy had it been if the Gods had inſpir d our
Anceſtors with ſuch a Heart, that you might have ſat
down content with the Empire of Italy, and we with
that of Aﬀfrick. For even you who had the advantage
in the War, did not find Sicily and Sardinia an E-
quivalent for the loſs of ſo many Fleets and Armys,
and the Lives of ſo many great Men.


SEC. CCXIV. It depends on the leaſt Nicety,


that the greateſt Events happen not quite con-


Els all together is the ground of my ſaying,
that the greateſt Events which confound the
World, depend on Circumſtances ſo caſual, that
'tis not poſſible the courſe of Nature ſhou'd fur-
niſh any regular Preſages of em. So that if the
Comet which appear'd in the beginning of Alex-
ander's Reign, preſag'd all the Miſchief he did, ei-
ther by himſelf or by his Succeſſors, God muſt
have form'd it miraculouſly for this end; for
once again to elude the Preſages of this Comet,
'twere ſufficient, that Bucephalus had rear'd, which
he was naturally apt to do, and fall'n over with
| his Maſter. One flounce of a Horſe, which in
other Circumſtances ſignify'd nothing, might
have prevented infinite Miſerys brought on the


6


8 —


*


Optimum quidem fuerat eam patribus noſtris mentem da-
tam ab Diis eſſe, ut & vos Italiæ & nos Africæ imperio con-
tenti eſſemus. Neque enim ne vobis Pen Sicilia atque Sar-
dinia ſatis digna precia ſunt pro tot claſſibus, tot exercitibus,
tot tamque egregiis amiſſis ducibus. Liv. Dec. 3. J. 10.

| 1 5 World


436 Miſcellantous Refletions,
World by this Prince's Ambition. For to him
we muſt reckon all that's Violent and Tragical in


the Story of Lyſimachus, Ptolomy, Antigonus, De-


metrius, Seleucus, Caſſander, and the reſt of his
Succeſſors; becauſe, were it not for him they
cou'd have liv'd happily all their Lives on four or
five thouſand Pound a Year, and ſome Imploy-
ments in Macedon : whereas when once they got a
taſt of Dominion, by lording it over the Provin-


ces, which fell to each by the Partition, they


threw the World into confuſion by turns, in
hopes of inlarging their Bounds. To the end
then that this Comet ſhou'd preſage all theſe Ca-
lamitys, it muſt be ſuppos'd form'd by a Cauſe


which foreſaw Alexander's prodigious Ambition,


knew he ſhou'd have to deal with an Enemy be-


low him, that no Sickneſs nor Wound ſhou'd ſtop


him, &'c. Beſides, as there needs only one Per-


ſon plac'd in proper Circumſtances to turn the
World upſide down; and that the ſecond Cauſes .
which produce Comets are incapable of chuſing


their time, 'or walting to produce one, till a Cy-
rus, a Ceſar, a Mahomet, an Alexander is ready to
come into the World ; it's evident, either that
Comets preſage nothing, or that they are not pro-
duc'd by ſecond Cauſes, but by God himſelf, who
without any regard to the diſpoſitions of Matter,


or the activity of ſurrounding Bodys, claps the


form of a Comet to a certain portion of Matter
(that's for you, Sir, who are a Peripatetick) or
gives the ſame Matter ſuch a configuration of Parts,
Situation, Conſiſtence and Motion, as are requi-
fite to denominate a Comet, without applying
the Motion already impreſt on Matter, or follow-


Motion:


ing the eſtabliſfd Laws of the communication of


|
7
5
f


occafion'd by 4 Comet. _

Motion : (this according to the Principles of Mr.

Deſcartes) Which ſoever of the two ways God

ads, tis ſtill a Miracle, properly ſpeaking.

8 EC T.CCXV. A way of conceiving Comets
to be Preſages without being Miracles,

EST you ſhou'd accuſe me of ſparing my ſelf


in the Argument, 1 freely acknowledg I can
conceive one way of Comets being evil Preſages,


| without being miraculouſly form'd. Thus : By


ſuppoſing, that whenever ſecond Cauſes produce


a Comet, God ſhou'd determine to viſit Mankind.


It being once ſuppos'd that God has agreed on ſuch

a Signal, it follows, there's a neceſſary Relation
between Comets and the Inſtruments of Divine
Juſfice, and canſequently that Comets are Pre-
ſages of Calamitys. If I had not a clear Anſwer
at my fingers ends, your firſt Difficulty might be


*


a victorious Objection.
SzcT. CCXVI. A Confatation of this way,


ID UT I anſwer, that God in this Caſe muſt be

ſuppos'd miraculouſly to produce a Plague, a
War, a Famine, and what follows; becauſe *tis
not poſſible, as I have already prov'd, that at
every time the Celeſtial Bodys produce a Comer,
the Terreſtrial ſhou'd be ripe for producing a
Mortality, Death, deſtructive War, &c. This
may ſometimes happen, as it ſometimes happens
to hail when a Queea lies in of a Prince. But
we can form no genera] Rule, if we allow ſecond
Cauſes to take their Courſe. So that God might


not find Diſpoſitions here below for a Peſtilence,


a


438 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
a War or Famine, as oft as Nature ſhow'd produce
a Comet in the Heavens. He mult therefore ſend
Infections miraculouſly, deſtroy the Harveſts, kin-
dle a Spirit of mercileſs War in the Minds of Men,
inſpire Sedition and Schiſm, blow up Fires in the
Bowels of the Barth, which ſhattering its nether-
moſt Foundations, open a Grave for intire Provin-
ces; or diſcharging by dreadful Eruptions, ſpread
Deſtruction and black Deſpair far and wide.
But who ſees not how much all this is unworthy
the Wiſdom of the Almighty?
Tdefire to know in the firſt place, what we gain
by denying that God forms Comets in the way of
Miracle ; fince by denying this we are conſtrain'd
to own, he miraculouſly produces the Evils which
follow? Beſides, is it not an Impiety and horri-
ble Blaſphemy, to ſay, God urges, Men to Wars
and Diviſions, when not diſpos'd enough of them-
ſelves to commit all the Ravages he's pleas'd ſhou'd
be annex'd to the Formation of Comets, Farther
ſtill, is not this taking out of the Hands of God
the Choice of the times, in which the Revolutions
of Empires are brought about, and the Puniſh-
ment of national Sins? For *twere no longer the
Wickedneſs of Men, and their Abuſe of the Graces
of Heaven, which moy'd God to viſit the Nations
of the Earth; but the Conjunction of certain
Cauſes, which keeping the ordinary courſe of Na-
ture, preſent Comets on our Horizon. *Tis well
known theſe Cauſes always a& in the full Extent
of their Virtue, and don't proportion their ope-
rative Power to the Progreſs of human Iniquitys.
And therefore Comets may as well come out of
their hands, when Men begin to repent, as when
they are moſt hardned in their Sins; in which ber
| Go


- occaſion'd by 4 Comet. 439
God muſt be oblig*d to puniſh, not as his Wiſdom
| ſhou'd judg expedient, but as the courſe of Nature
| had form'd Comets: for on ſight of theſe Stars,
| Men, in what ſtate ſoever of moral Life, muſt be
overwhelm'd with Calamitys, either by Miracle or
| otherwiſe. Who ſees not that this is ſubjecting
| God to prepoſterous Methods, and taking the Mo-
ments and Occaſions, which he has peculiarly re-
| ſerv'd to himſelf *, out of the hands of his Provi-
dence ? Who ſees not that this is going directly
| againſt the Declaration God himſelf -+ makes to
Abraham, That he won't, as yet, deliver him the
Country of the Amorites, becauſe their Iniquity is
not come to the height? So, Sir, your ſhorteſt way,
if you perſiſt in your Opinion, is to ſay, God
forms Comets miraculouſſy when he has a purpoſe
| of puniſhing Mankind, and ſees their Paſſions are
| likely to make 'em confound the Peace of the
| World by infinite wicked Courſes. I had reaſon
then to maintain, that Comets, if they be Pre-
ages, are miraculouſly form'd.


Sec T.CCXVII. Second Anſwer : That if
Comets were Miracles, they'd be of ſuch 4
kind as God never vouchſafes to Infidels.


Ib Anſwer to the ſecond Difficulty, which is,
that my Reaſons prove God can never work

Miracles in an Infidel Land ; I diſtinguiſh two ſorts
| of Miracles. One, I may ſay, are ſpeaking Mi-
racles, and expreſly diſtinguiſh the true God from
the falſe. The others only ſhew, that there's


3 — —


8 e ——
*


1 * Add c. 1. v. 7. f Gen. c. 13.
. ſome


440 Miyſcellaneoas Refledtions,

ſome Being above Man of tranſcendent Power. I
ſee no ill Conſequence in maintaining, that God
never works Miracles of this laſt kind among In-


fidels, becauſe they have no Characters on 'em fit


to undeceive an Idolater, or likely to infpire him
with any other Thoughts than thoſe of the Power
and Awfulneſs of his own Gods, which engages him
to adore em with greater Ardor. If they have
not this Effect, he expreſſes a more ſignal Contempt
of what he takes to be the true God than he did
before: ſince having new Arguments of his Power
or Diſpleaſure, he yet changes nothing in his Con-


duct. Take him either way, and he aggravates f


his Sin: for if he improves his falſe Devotion, he
multiplys the Number of his idolatrous Tranſ-
greſſions; if he continues unmov'd and indevout,
he's impious in a higher degree. This kind of
Miracles therefore ſerving only to render Infidels
more wicked, I don't think it conſiſtent with the
Goodneſs of God to afford 'em any ſuch, and
they ſhou'd rather ſeem to me ſo many Snares:
to which I add my former Reaſons. In this kind
of MircalesI reckon Comets, Hurricanes, 'Earth-
_ Meteors, and fearful Prodigys form'd by
od alone againſt the Order. of Nature.


God works among Infidels.


H E other kind of Miracles comprehends all
_ thoſe which God works by Perſons fill'd with
his Holy Spirit, whom he ſends forth to preach his
reveard Will to Infidels, and convince em of the
Error of their waysby Notices diſtinct and intelli-


gible. It's agreeable ta the Wiſdom and Goodael


tentec
raiſin


leaſt
him 0


occaſion d by a Comet. 441


of God to work ſuch Miracles as theſe among Infi-
dels, when he wou'd call 'em to his Knowledg.
Accordingly he ſends his Servants at theſe times,
to declare to em what's fit to be known concern-
ing the Divine Nature, to ſet before *em the Va-
nity of their falſe Worſhip, and teach 'em the
manner of ſerving God according to his own Will.
But as preaching without Miracles wou'd be of no
effect, God endues his Servants with a Power of
performing many wonderful Things. At their
word the Fire loſes its Virtue z Rivers open to the
- right hand and to the left; the dead came forth
s from their Graves; the moſt incurable Diſeaſes
e are head. Theſe 1 call ſpeaking Miracles, be-
{. WW cauſe they confirm the preaching of an Apoſtle,
t, and are a moſt diſtin& Teſtimony of the Truth of
f MW his Doctrines. They leave no color of Excuſe
Is for continuing longer in the Worſhip of falſe
e Gods, becauſe they, who expreſly declare, that
d Jupiter's no God, that the God of the Chriſtians is
Þ the only true God, confirm by ſignal Miracles the
d Truth of what they preach. There's no room
h- for imagining, that the Gods, whom the Pagans
y I adore, are Authors of theſe Miracles, becauſe
they who. work *em, declare in expreſs Terms,
they are falſe Gods, whoſe Temples and Altars
les are to be immediately deſtroy'd. Theſe, Sir, are
FF the Miracles which God works among unbelieving
Nations; I know no others which are proporti-
on'd to the Facultys of an Idolatrous People.
Won't you allow me, that had the Apoſtles con-
tented themſelves with curing the blind and lame,
raiſing the dead, & c. no one cou'd have given the
| leaſt gueſs at their Miniſtry, no one e' er bethought
him of examining the TR of his own Religion,
| or


4 folks i CD put 3 — (7 = pur ray


15
Hz
219


conſider'd as Gods come down from Heaven,


that the cruel Arts by which he oppreſs'd the


working Miracles which were aſtoniſhing,and tranſ-


Words, and Words with Miracles, when there's


PRES COUNTER II re 0
— F whARTt rg - - 4. Me MS


442 Miſcellaneous Reflections,

or believing IBSS Curisr to be God? Al
theſe Miracles had ended in procuring the Apo.
tles a place among the Gods, or making em


as happer'd to Paul and Barnabas * in a City of
Lycaonia. "Twas neceſſary then they ſhou'd ſpeak
out, and declare plainly and intelligibly, by whoſe
Power theſe Miracles were wrought. I fay the
ſame of Moſes; Had he only wrought Miracles in
the Preſence of Pharaoh, or afflicted his Land with
divers Plagues, this King had ne'er underſtood


Iſraelites, were diſpleaſing to the Sovereign Lord
of the World, or that there was no other God
beſides the God of the Hebrews. Therefore we
find the Almighty commanding AMoſes to open his
Meſſage to Pharaoh in his own Name, and charge
him on the part of God to let the Iſraelites go. To
confirm his Miſſion, he gives Moſes the Power of


cending all the Illuſions of Pharaoh's Magicians;
and conſtrains this Prince to confeſs there was no
God like the God of the Hebrews.

This ſhews Miracles ſhou'd be accompany'd with


a Deſign of declaring the true God to Infidels:
And therefore God employs only Miracles of the |
firſt kind in Idolatrous Nations. If they don't
produce the defir'd Effect, ſo much the worſe for
thoſe who harden themſelves like Pharaoh; not
only as they miſs the Benefit of their Converſion,
but as they reſiſt a Vocation thorowly propor-
tion'd to their Facultys, and which therefore
leaves em without excuſe. They ſee, they hear


_— *** — a
4 * *


— o—_
— 0


diſtindiy


ccc ain d by 4 Comet. 443
diſtingly what God requires at their Hands;
whereas they may ſay of a Comet miraculouſly
form'd, that it did not declare to them whether
FPuiter, Diet aaa, or the God of the Hebrews
bent ir; nor diſtinguiſh which of all theſe was the
e only true God. 155


e888 Ne 997 : 2 God's
propofing to make himſelf known for the true
: Gad by the means of Comets, is 4 falſe No-


d 1 anſwer to the third Difficulty, I can't, I aſ-
ſure you, Sir, comprehend, how God, by ſettin

Comets a blaze over an Idolatrous People, ſhou'd
propaſe to convince em of his being the only true
fo Sed; and that Jugirer and the other Divinitys
rare only Wood and Stone. For let's ſuppoſe one
al. a thorow Idalater, tho otherwiſe a Man of Senſe
and Learning, and ſound judgment: Make him
no reaſon as long as you pleaſe on the appearance of

a Comet; lead him thro all the Reflections which


ich WM may probably ariſe in his Thoughts on the ſight of
res ſuch a Star: ] defy you to find a Train of Con-
1;: WM £quences, which ſhall enable him to diſeover that
the the God of Vrael, or the God of the Chriſtians,
nt is the only true God, and that the Gods whom he
for adores are all falſe.


I own, if his Thoughts on the Comet led him
to conſider the Works of Creation, he might
arrive at the Knowledg of a Being infinitely Wiſe


JOT-
for and Powerful, ſuppoſing he makes a right uſe of
gear bis Facultys. Pm perſuaded there's no ſuch thing


as an invincible Ignorance of a firſt Cauſe, which
governs the World. I join with the Pſalmiſt,
AA 2 | that


— — —— — — —— — —


444 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
* that the Heavens, dumb as they are, ſet forth
the Glory of God from one end of the Earth to
the other, by the wonderful Symmetry of their
Parts, and Regularity of their Motions. I ac-
knowledg with St. Paul r, that the inviſible
Things of God are made viſible in the Creation of
the World, to thoſe who contemplate his Works.


But I ſay at the ſame time, that this Idolater, did


he raiſe himſelf by this means to the knowledg of
God, wou'd not owe the Obligation to the Co-
met; becauſe not mov'd to aſcribe more Power
and Majeſty to his Jupiter on account of the Co-
met, but on account of the Beauty of the whole


Creation. Every other Object may furniſh him an


occaſion of reaſoning on the Structure of the


World, as well as the Comet. He need only con-


ſider the Sun, or one of thoſe Phenomena, which
as being more uncommon awaken the Attention
more, to make as great a progreſs in this Know-
ledg, as he might by conſidering a Comet. I ſay
then, that a Comet not being in its own nature
qualify'd to lead us to the knowledg of the true
God ; being not peculiarly adapted to convey this


Secret to the human Mind; being infinitely leſs


Proper for this purpoſe than the Frame of Na-
ture at large, there's no ground to think God
ſhou'd propoſe to reveal himſelf this way, and


work Miracles of ſuch a nature with ſuch a De-


ſign.


— 1 *


—
——


RE ———————_—_ —


L Plal. 19) + Rom. 12


er.


occaſſon d by a Comet. 445


Sr. CCxx. The febt of « Comet rew-
ders us not more capable of knowing the Na-
ture of God,


E T's do our ſelves right, Sir: Do we per-
Ly ceive any particular Talent in the Facultys of
our Soul, by which we find our ſelves enabl'd to
make new Diſcoverys of the Divine Nature, on
the firſt appearance of a Comet? Let's ſpeak ſin-
cerely, and own as to that Point, we are juſt
where we were before ; it's truly a Phenomenon


which perplexesall the World. The Philoſophers


can't exactly tell us how *tis form'd ; the Aſtrono-
mers admire its Motion and Magnitude, much more
than they can account for either ; the reſt of Man-
kind dread it as a Preſage of their ruin: But do's
this make *em underſtand the Divine Nature a jot
the more ? No. The Philoſopher 1s fully per-
ſuaded without this Example, that the Works of


God are wonderful, ſurpaſſing all the Powers of our


Underſtanding. There's no occaſion of Mira-
cles, to form his Facultys for the perception of
this Truth. He needs only apply his Inquirys
to the nature of the leaſt Fly, or the leaſt blade of
Graſs, to perceive there's more Myſtery in theſe
than Natural Philoſophy ſhall ever unfold. The
Aſtronomer was alſo convinc'd without the aſ-


ſiſtance of the Comet, that the Motions of the


Heavens are wonderful. They who are alarm'd
at Comets, knew perfectly well before, that God
abhors Sin, and brings Offenders to Judgment.
So that after ſeeing a Comet every night for
months together, it happens we all know the Di-


Tine Nature neither more nor leſs than before,


Hh 3 and


— — — — _
— — —


. IL LI i GEE Cov rt ⁵C—— IRE eat. > — — — |»
— — =
— »


ad
'
4
4
W.
4-2
a0
1

&

| ;

* 7
1
$ 0
a.
1

.


— . . CE . . — —— — — — 2
— — wal — — ee CE — 3 - pans
AS AN _— — — — —„—-— —
— 9 p _ 1 . — — 7 — - _
n D 2 b . Jy IVE bv *
* * — 6728 = 2 . .


nf - i - — — 5
RES, FEISS AS


—— —


— entn mon


446 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,

and yet don't therefore think our felyes a jot the
more blamable. If our Conſcience reproaches on
any account, *tis only that we had not reform'd
our Ways. Now if Chriſtians learn nothing new
touching the Nature of God by the ſight of Co-
mets; Why wou'd you, Sir, have the Pagans ob-
lig'd to learn more than they? If we who are


Chriſtians may with Impunity keep at a ſtand as


to Knowledg, provided we continually improve
in the Divine Love; how can you imagine God
ſhou'd exact degrees of Knowledg from the Pagans,
after the appearance of a Comet, greater than
they were poſſeſt of before? LT


SEC T. CCXXI. Some of the Pagan Na-


tions admitted no ſtrange Religion.


OR my part, I vow I can't conceive it. I can't


J fee that a Pagan Philoſopher, who apply'd
himſelf to the ſtudy of Nature, without having
ever call'd the Divinity of Jupiter or Mars in
queſtion, was in ſuch a fair way of being con-
verted by the fight of a Comet: For how ſhou'd


This Phenomenon put him in mind of looking out


for a new God, ſeeing he had not been led into
this ſearch by a contemplation of. the whok


World? If Jupiter is Lord of the Univerſe, it |
he reigns in Heaven, if the Stars depend on him;


why ſhou'd not a Comet likewiſe depend on him!
Bat the Comet threatens the Divine Vengeance.
Be it ſo: Do's it therefore follow, Jupiter and Sa-
turn muſt be depos d? Quite contrary ; it follows,
a Pagan who keeps to his Principles, ſnou'd honor
theſe Gods with greater Zeal than he did before.
The light of the Comet leads him to this by a un

| tural


 w_ — — 2


f
[


orcafion'd by a Comet. 447
tural Conſequence. Each Nation looks on it as a
Preſage of its own Calamity : Each believes,
that Good and Evil is diſpens'd by their Gods
that to prevent impending Calamitys, they
muſt appeaſe their own - Gods, and not thoſe
of other Nations : Conſequently, Comets promp-
ted every Nation and People to pay Honors to
their own Gods; and far from ſuggeſting a


Thought of changing 'em, rather put certain Na-
tions on aboliſhing whatever ſtrange Ceremonys


might have crept into the publick Worſhip ; for
ſome Idolatrous Nations abhor'd Mixtures of this
ſort as a kind of Sacrilege. * Anacharſis on his
return to Scythia, was ſlain by his own Brother


| the King of the Scythians, for preſuming to ſacri-
hce after the manner of the Greets: Some Þ will
have it that Anacharſis himſelf was the Zea-


| bot, and that he flew another Scythian, who at-


| tempted on his return from Greece to introduce
| the Myſterys of the Mother of the Gods after


the Greek Form; which is probably a miſtake of


| Clemens Alexandrinu. The Romans, who often


adopted and added new Divinitys to their old,


eſpecially in publick Calamitys, were much fall'n


| 1n this Point from their antient Diſcipline, which


forbid all ſtrange Worſhips z as appears from the
_—- of a Paſſage || already cited from Livy 3
and by another Paſlage ** in the ninth Book of
his 4th Decad.

| Ha: SECT


1—„—l


_= —_—


3


4a —_—_— —


* Herodot. I. 4. Diog. Laert. in'Anach. + Clem, Alex. in
Protrep. ad Grzcos. || Before, Secf. 209. * Quoties hoc Pa-
| rum Avorumque ætate Negotium eſt Magiſtratibus datum, ut
lacra externa fieri verarent? Sacrificulos, vateſque foro, ore,

| *


\


6p. 5 — ——
A


8 > 3

823 — 2 mt)
—— — — 2

„


. — he r — = — => — — =
— — . . K DS AAA 2 == _ 4 — — — —
g - A be rh ens — 2 — erm * a i» 2 — ho — — — — P — bs
— — EEE Reo N SE nn > _ "OE TEL — — — — -
r FE = x, 3 er. 1 — — — 7 ———_— —
R ns n St 8 83 r — — — n _
— : — IS 8 DE”


2
1
{ha
vi
F345
.
1


443 Miſcellaneous Refleitions,
Sz ©T. CCxXII. A ſbore Repreſentation of | Sx:
the Inferences from the preceding Remarks. | 0


AKE it by which handle you will, I don't

1 fee how the appearance of a Comet ſhou'd
be able to change a People's Belief concerning
the Gods, or the Ceremonys of the Eſtabliſh'd
Religion, in any other reſpect, than perhaps
the addition of ſome new Superſtitions 1n
certain Countrys: Therefore I {till come to
this, that Comets had been on one hand ve-
ry uſeleſs Miracles, and on another very ta-
vorable to Idolatry; and on the whole, that
*twere inconſiſtent with the Wiſdom of God to
make uſe of Means for the converſion of Pa-
gans, which not only never did convert 'em, but
were even improper for this end. Whence it fol-
lows, tis falſe that God had a particular and more
formal Deſign of making himſelf known for the
true God by the means of Comets, than by his
other Works of Creation. And this being the
Caſe, my Poſition is ſtill true, That had God mi-
raculouſly form'd Comets in the days when Paga-
niſm over-ſpread the World, his Purpoſe had
been to reinflame the Zeal of Idolatrous Nations,
each for its own Religion, all the World over.
Now as this can't be offer'd without Implety, it
remains, that Comets are Works purely natural,
and which preſage nothing.


© ot —


—


urbe prohiberent? Vaticinos libros conquirerent, comburerent-
que ?Omnem diſciplinam Sacrificandi pra terquam more Romano
abolerent? Judicabant enim prudentiſſimi viri omnis Divini hu-
manique nihil zque diſſolvendæ Religionis eſſe, quam ubi non
patrio ſed externo ritu ſacrificaretur.


| DECT:


_ occaſiowd by a Comet. 449
SkCr. cCXXIII. Whether we may ſafely deny


God's doing a thing, when we can't perceive
it's of any uſe.


ER E methinks you ſtop me ſhort, to tell
me, it's a Temerity highly puniſhable in ſuch


* — —— ho — — "oe = -
2 5 - — HEN Wah toons ' 4s " "Wap: PER 4 * * 2 — —
. p — e r 3 - — — — : — :
— 5 S 5 n 2 * — — —— — 5 N PR _—
— . —— Apa: 2s = Rt — TORY SIN et YES Me D — TIT” —— 2
— 4 a — 22 4


aone as I, to deny God's doing any thing, becauſe

te ſhort Line of my Reaſon can't diſcover all its

| [W wholeſom Uſes, but ſees on the contrary ſeveral
grand Abuſes ſpringing from it. On this occaſion

tl think proper to declare, that I'm intirely con-
vinc'd God do's nothing which is not agreeable to

- WW infinite Wiſdom. To know God do's any thing,

0 is a ſufficient ground to prevent all my Doubts of
its being done on the perfecteſt right Reaſon. I 3
it inquire no farther; and whether my Lights diſco- i
N ver its Uſefulneſs or no, it's all one, ſtill I believe i


—
—


e the Work moſt worthy of the Infinite Majeſty of
5 God. So that cou'd it be demonſtrated by neceſ-
1 ſary Reaſons, or by any infallible Authority, that
he Cod forms Comets miraculonſly as Signs of his
| Diſpleaſure, I ſnou'd reſt intirely ſatisfy'd ; tho
nothing in my judgment cou'd appear more con-
trary to the Intereſts of the true God, or more
favorable to thoſe of the Falſe, than Miracles of
this nature. 8

But we're not on ſuch a foot. The Queſtion
| between us is, whether Comets be Signs vouch-

ſaf' d by God or no. We have no Authority aſ-
luring us they are; it's our part then to ſettle an
Opinion from the Inquirys of right Reaſon : and
nothing hinders, but among other Arguments on
this Head, we may employ thoſe drawn from the

Wiſdom, Juſtice and Holineſs of God, to make
 :- h | the


rd.
— Vere Yu
Bug _—


A
a nn
—


4 ere
— — 3
— — Ron es
Fe CE r


8 — —
— he cod — — — n a
ens


$I EL Oo — Ye
— Cnr I >
CE EET et apes
rr op” AB


:

qo
4
\
*
.
{

-. >
1
1
1
l;

:

:
4
i
'Y

-

1
*
f
:

F

W
1
|
x
{8
1
it
{
.
„
1
1
1
1
;
19


350 Miſcelluneous Reflections,
the Negative take place, if we find the Affir ma-
tive inconſiſtent with theſe Divine Attributes.
Our Schools of Theology, as well. as thoſe of
Philoſophy, teach us not to multiply Beings or
Miracles without a Neceſlity ; and thereby autho-
rize us to reject all needleſs Suppoſitions, even
tho attended with no ill Conſequences. On this
Maxim we mult never have recourſe to Miracle,
when we may explain by natural Reaſons; nor
fy that God interpoſes in an extraordinary
manner to the production of an Effect, if his In-
terpoſition appear abſolutely unneceſſary, or even
repugnant to his Holineſs. The Poets are juſtly
ridicul'd; Homer in the firſt place, for bringing
in the Gods at every turn, and imploying em, a-
gainſt all Rules of good Senſe, to unravel their
little Plots l. Much more might we be in fault,
if without a juſt occaſion we refer'd things to the
extraordinary Power of God, which we ſee may
be produc'd by the ordinary courſe of Nature.
When tis a Matter well atteſted that a Miracle's
wrought any where, *tis ridiculous cavilling, on
pretence we can't ſee the uſefulneſs of the Mira-
cle, or on the contrary may ſee Abuſes likely to
ariſe from it: but the Cavil ceaſes, where there
are only ill-grounded Surmiſes of the truth of thc
Miracle. | |


"7 © 2 _
ww p . 88 * n


Nec Deus interſit niſi digu us vindice nodus.
| 1 55 Mrat. Art. Poet.


-SECT:


Blaſph
Reaſor
the Me
dow o'
miracu


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 451


SEC T. CCXxxIV. A Reflection on the Maxim
of the Pretor Caſſius, cui bono.


ICE RO ſpeaks honorably of a Pretor call'd

4 Caſſius, who in criminal Actions us'd to ask

the Accuſer when his Proofs were lame, What

Motive of Intereſt had induc'd the Accus'd to com-

mit the Crimein queſtion; ſuppoſing very rational-
ly, that Men won't commit Crimes for nothin

and that a Jadg ought not, except on a full Evi-


dence, to condemn a Man who is charg'd with
Crimes of no profit to him. But *twere ridicu-


lous, on this Maxim, to require the cui bono of
an Accuſer, who had fully prov'd his Charge;
this ought to take place only in doubtful Caſes.
Shou'd I ſee a Man commit a Murder before m


face, People might tell me as long as they pleas d,


the Murderer muſt ruin his Intereſt by ſuch an
Action, and muſt ſee he ſhou'd ruin himſelf;
| ſhou'd not disbelieve my Senſes for all this, but
rather believe Men aQed ſometimes. againſt their
own Intereſt, than think him innocent whom 1
{aw commit the Murder. In like manner, when
we are certain God do's ſuch or ſucha thing, *tis
Blaſphemy to fay it's uſeleſs; God has his own
Reaſons. But on the other hand, let's take up
the Maxim, cui bono, when Men, without a ſha-
dow of Reaſon, wou'd perſuade us to believe any
miraculous Fact.


SECT-


4
*
4
1. of
1 1
| IS | Al
#
4 ih
gf *
14 45
T1
TT Th
: cn
1 a F
1
it
4. C 1
9 5
4 1
A
1 1
1 o -
1 4
10 il
: 4+] :
1
4:4
1985
is \
11 1
— 4 1
i
|
1 15
158
1907 {
F238 1
x 1 {xy
N 2 1
: 7 4 4
of
4 il
1 * in
'F
3:3:
y \
1 4
v2 ;
1 1
155
jd I
. 4
- .
19 l
. 1
13 1
i? 3
1
1 5
i"
% .
1 f
* *
N [3 5
& rf
1 w
0 Ft
153 15
N q
44 *
1
"AE j
= 0
AN 9
N $26
1 10
EB
/ 11
1
2
15
$75 1
=—_— =
1 1
=— 2
' a a4
1
=
5 fo,
4: |
. 1 ">
as Vi
8
338” Ki
4 _
N 3 14
12 75
„
1 : j
£ 51 bi
8% l
The | \
ib & ; © is *
SS
5 2 2 *
21
|
1
1
=
2s 4
4.
16
1 8
1
1
ol
* 78.
16 *
i wt I
1 1
91
TH
1 |
*. 4
1
I


452 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
SecT.CCXXV. A Reflection on the manner


of accounting for the hardneſs of Pharaoh's |


Heart.


1 2 juſtify my ſelf, by ſomething of more
weight with you, Sir, who are a Divine, !


deſire you to remember, that the Fathers and


Councils have given theſe words of Scripture, /
will harden Pharaoh's Heart, an Interpretation
vaſtly different from the literal; and this, be-
cauſe it's manifeſt the literal Senſe 1s repugnant
to the Divine Perfections. For who ſees not, that


had Almighty God, after ſending Pharaoh an ex- |


| preſs Command by his Servant Moſes, to let the

Children of 1/-ae! depart; and after having by
inconteſtable Proofs demonſtrated himſelf the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, by a po-
ſitive Act harden'd this Prince's Heart, on pur-
poſe to hinder his obeying Moſes's Meſſage, and
to find an occaſion of manifeſting his Power over
an obſtinate King; ſuch a Conduct were highly


inconſiſtent with the Notions of Sincerity, Jul- |


tice, and Holineſs ? Yet had we an expreſs Re-
velation aſſerting, *twas the Intention of the Holy
Spirit theſe words ſhou'd be underſtood in the
ſtrickneſs of the Letter, the Church wou'd not
fail paying it a due Deference, by ſilencing the
Voice of Reaſon, and by repreſenting, that ſince
God, who is the Rule and Fountain of Juſtice,
declares, he has in the ſtricteſt ſenſe harden'd the
Heart of Pharaoh; this Obduration is an Act
which wounds neither his Juſtice, nor Holinels,


nor Sincerity.


To


To
ſince t
inform
be Sig.
oblig'd
Reaſon
not onl
to his 8

For 1
ter pret:
to God
perfecti
by ſayi
thing 0!
perfecti
ple as t
ſtricteſt
ſafely in
to our I,
without
the Fact.
Prerogat
gation t

ſtrangeſt

So, Si
Comets
duare ſp
ſhall con
em mira


occaſion'd by 4 Comet, 453


To apply this to the preſent Diſpute ; I ſay,
fince there's no evident Reaſon, nor Revelation
informing us that God has produc'd Comets to
be Signs of his Judgments in the World, we are
oblig d to reject the Opinion as falſe, for this
Reaſon, That God works no ſuch Miracles as are
not only uſeleſs in themſelyes, but even repugnant
to his Sincerity, Holineſs, and Juſtice. ;

For if in the Judgment of the Church, all In-
terpretation of Scripture, which aſcribes Actions
to God manifeſtly repugnant to our Ideas of his
perfections, be falſe; if it's not to be ſlur'd on us


thing of, and which are reconcilable to his other


perfections, tho we can't tell how, ſuch for exam-


ple as that of hardning Pharaoh's Heart in the
ſtricteſt ſenſe: If, I ſay, the Caſe be ſo, we may


ſafely inſiſt that all Miracles manifeſtly repugnant


to our Ideas of the Divine Perfections, are falſe,
without regard, ſo long as we are unconvinc'd of
the Fact, to any ſecret Ends or incomprehenſible
Prerogatives of the Divine Being: For an Obli-
cation to ſuch Reſerves wou'd reduce Men to the
ſtrangeſt ſtate of Pyrrhoniſm that ever was.

So, Sir, till ſuch time as you convince me that
Comets have been no occaſion of Idolatry, nor a


ſhall continue to believe that God did not form
em miraculouſly to denounce his Anger.


0 1658 e Sien


by ſaying, God has Prerogatives we know no-


Snare ſpread for Sinners all the World over, 1


—
—
WEIL


—


9 — — Xx = -, —_— 2 5

7 — E VOY -
m — PIG — — — 2

= — * x = ——— — a
— — SR. — re —— 8 — . ů ů —— —
=» 2 : . — —
- 33x 2 — — — 8 —
5 « Swi — ds — — - 5 - —— " 8
NEVIS coroner Ig __ ne — — — _ > e
. n : — — ——ͤ—
2 . — — — — — — — — — —
— — — —
ä ec. 1» 5


-
1
— 8 " L — . _ 5
— N 2 —
: PIE; S — —— 7 — 4 — —— ec -
: 12288 py — PPP ⁵˙· ore ner rm erat OSS ne * <
= — 5 - RR ro
. KK _—_———_—_———————_—
— Ih — ; l
be — « 3 » wt y .
3 3 — ht 2 * x * 3 ——— *
5 * - z . ”
ö 8 8 — — : ROM 0 4 4
nan Rot = > "4 Sx0 - - * 2
of N bs 7 fp ts 1 i ? — b — 2 Wr
— 5 A . e — RS wt : T


454 Miſcellaneous Refledtions,


S ECT. CCXXVI. Fourth Anſwer : Tie
falſe that the Gentiles were render d inexcu-
fable, in not being converted to the true God

y the ſight of Comets. 4


1 Come now to the fourth Difficulty, which is
nothing, after what 1 have offer'd in anſwer
to the third. For fince I have ſhewn that Idola-
ters cou'd ne'er, by the help of Comets, diſcover
any new Perfection in the Divine Nature, nor any
thing more than that the Gods declaring them-
ſelves affronted, threaten d Mankind; *tis plain,
the Sacrifices, Prayers, and other Honors paid
to their falſe Divinitys, with new redoub}d Zeal,
cou'd not be conſtru'd an Abuſe of that particular
Grace, which *tis pretended God afforded 'em by
theſe Significations of his Anger. I have fully
ſhewn, Comets were not Miracles proportion'd
to the reaſonable Facultys of Pagans, or ſufficient
to explode their Prejudices. The Scriptures con-
ſtantly inform us, that whenever God deſign,
the Nations which border'd on his People, ſhou'd
underſtand that the God of Jſrael was the only
true God, he made uſe of Miracles, which clearly
reveal'd this, and diſtinguiſn'd him from all other


Gods: Whereas Comets at beſt import only the


Wrath of Heaven, which each Nation muſt rea-
ſonably refer to the Gods they ador'd.

We know, beſides, that when the time was
come in which God thought fit to manifeſt him-
ſelf to thoſe who were Strangers to his Name, he
took care to have his Word declar'd among em


by Perſons carrying the moſt viſible Charaucry


of a L
the br
none hi
TANCE.

how n
{troy Ic
to be c
finite 1
born dt
of three
is there
all the f
of a Co
done it.
convert


nilited fo
Funiſhme
ir this be
Who ſtir
lishting 1
de mann
heſt Knoy
tipected f
ices their
Wnys the


cCgcꝓꝗaſion d Comet. 455
of a Divine Miſſion, in the Gift of Miracles, and
the bright ſhining of the higheſt Vertues ; fo as
none but the wilfully blind cou'd remain in Igno-


rance. Yet how many Ages were found neceſſary,


how many Martyrs, how many Miracles to de-
{troy Idolatry ? If the Blindneſs of Men was not
to be cyr'd without Revelation, ſupported by in-
finite Miracles; and if Paganiſm was not to be


of three or four hundred Years ; what probability
is there, that God ſhou'd think to frighten away
all the falſe Gods of the Heathens with the blaze
of a Comet? Had he only will'd this, he had
done it. But the purpoſe of Providence was to
convert the Gentiles by the preaching of the
Goſpel, and not by a dumb Fire, which naturally
cou'd inſpire only a Senſe of Fear. 6b


ST. CCXXVII. Comets incapable of bring-
ing Men to the Rnomledg of the true God.


OW if God deſign'd not to accompliſh the
Converſion of Infidels by the means of Co-


vet, it follows, he only deſign'd they ſnou'd un-
lerſtand that Mankind was in a fair way of being

riſted for their Sins, unleſs they prevented their

' Wl Puniſhment by the Exerciſes of Religion. And


if this be the caſe, how can you accuſe the Pagans,
who ſtir'd up their Zeal on all theſe Signals, of
lighting the Warnings of Heaven in an inexcuſa-
de manner? Did not they act according to their
belt Knowledg, and do all cou'd be reaſonably
tpected from em? Did not they offer the Sacri-
ices their Religion enjoin'd, with all the Cere-
wnys they judg'd moſt proper for aſſuaging ue

| _ Wrath


born down by ſuch a Power without a ſtruggle


—
8 —— ”
. 4 br — — —
* nes — ——
—
* 1 TIE ca - — *
— — 2 — _ — — 0 dn: — — __
— — — — — — - - teen en - i L-
5 u : — 5 22 — « — — — — O —
— ao 3 — * — ape} a water - * — 8
. - Sn — 2 2 bs
— c - — — _ ET EL; 5 — — =;
. 2 lt I —— > * 2 2 — — -
=> =; ACA es nr " F ²— ra IE Eon 2 20” ED EY Zn od — 4
— Bn Ren . * — — , jor > — EEE . — outgHH
— — 8 0 —
=" Te; GRE 22 „ — 5 — niet —
E 5 — 2 : ——
L * 2 og. WE — =


5 —: ... 1 *
2


= — —
—
or : — 2 W n ”
” + — — < — a
— — 2 * *
— erg at — 3 — - — —
— N 1 5 — 1
os — eo h > iz
_ r
XY * 8 £ 2 n — <4 =


Parts of China, for example, twas neceſſary to


| Magnificence of a Prince, upon ſeeing only one


88 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
Wrath of Heaven? Cou'd they read in the Coun-
tenance of a Comet, that this was not the way


of appeaſing God; and that from the farthermoſt


poſt away to Jeruſalem, turn Jem, and offer pro- SEC


pitiatory Sacrifices according to the Law of M.. are
fes, to prevent their ruin? This therefore is not

what will render 'em inexcuſable, but the not A
making a right uſe of their Reaſon tow'rds a diſ- Fo!
covery of the true God, from the Beauty, and ra


Order, and mighty Power, ſo conſpicuous in all W God, \


the Parts of the Univerſe. Their not diſcerning MW Miracle


the Finger of God in a Comet, is nothing in WM ſhip, v
compariſon of their overlooking it in the whole are nit
Machine of the World. And as one ſhou'd never
call a Man ſtupid for not acknowledging the


of his Pages, if he was not ſtruck with the ſight
of his whole Court, his Treaſures, his Furniture,
and Palaces : So Idolaters ſhall ne'er be charg'l
with Folly, for continuing ignorant of the true
God, on the appearance of a Comet, but for not
acknowledging him in the Contemplation of all
his Works together, which render him fo conſpi-
cuous &. I don't deprive Comets of their due
Rank, among the things which ſhew forth the
Greatneſs and Glory of God, as Showers and
fruitful Seaſons, Meteors and Planets: Yet I can't
believe a ſpecial Proceſs will iſſue againſt Idolaters,
for judging Comets a mark of the Wrath of their
own Gods, rather than that of the God of the
Jews; and leſs can I perſuade my ſelf, that God
in the State wherein he ſaw the Gentiles, gave


—


T Tantis operibus notitiam ſuam armavit. Tertull.


Sigus


occaſion'd by a Comet.


Signs and Miracles, ſignifying only the Wrath of


Heaven in general, and driving em in conſe-


| quence hereof to all kind of Abomination.


Sz cT. CCXXVII. zd Objection: Comets
are 4 natural Effect, and the natural Cauſe
of the Calamitys which attend em.


Foreſee, Sir, that your Zeal for the inſepa-
rable Rights of Holineſs and Goodneſs in
God, which allow not his contributing by ſignal


Miracles to rivet Men in an Idolatrous Wor-
| ſhip, will put you upon maintaining, that Comets


are natural Cauſes of the Calamitys which at-
tend *em 3 and that *tis in virtue of an Original
Law, that Comets are ſometimes form'd, which
0 courſe occaſion a thouſand Miſchiefs; as tis by
an Order purely natural, that Tempeſts are ſome-


times rais'd at Sea, which cauſe as many Ship-


Wracks.


SECT. CCXXIX. Anſwer: That tis impoſſi-


lle Comets ſbou d be the efficient Cauſe of the
Calamitys they are ſuppos d to preſage.,


HUS I own you'l clear the Divine. Provi-
dence, becauſe whatever ill uſe Men may
make of the Effects of Nature, God is never the
more oblig'd to change the Courſe of ſecond Cau-
ſes: And if they are ſtartled at ſeeing a Whelp
with two Heads, if on ſuch an occaſion they ſa-
crifce to Diana or Proſerpina, the blame lies wholly
at their own door; God, who varys not herein
from the Laws for producing the true Species,
quires nothing particular at their hands.


Ii SECT,


453 Miſcellancous Refrcrinm,


S ECT. CCXXX. Nothing is more worthy the
Greatneſs of God, than maintaining the gene.
ral Laws,


HIS Circumſtance, That Monſters are purely

the Effects of à general Providence, deprives

thoſe of all ſhadow of Excuſe, who commit Ads
of Idolatry on the fight of a monſtrous Production,
For *twere impertinent and extreme filly to ſay,
that God, who foreſaw that the Birth of Mon-
ſters might prompt Men to Idolatry, ſhou'd have
prevented it; becauſe nothing were more unwor-
thy of a general Cauſe, which puts all others in
action by a ſimple and uniform Law, than viola-
ting this Law at every turn, to prevent the Sur-
mizes and Superſtitions which weak and ignorant
Men may run into. Nothing gives a higher Idea
of a Prince than ſeeing him, when once he has
enacted wholeſom Laws, maintain *em with vigor
towards all and againſt all, without allowing the
| leaſt Reſtriction on the intereſted Recommendati-


to EX]


ons of a Favorite, or out of regard to any par- Statuts
ticular Perſon. And of all the things apt to throw ;
a State into utter Confuſion, that which compaſſes SEC"
the Point moſt effeQually, is undoubtedly the diſ- real,
penſing with eſtabliſh'd Laws, changing, clipping, Pro


ſtretching and cramping 'em, according as the
private Views of Perſons or Partys find their ac-
count in ſuch Alterations. You muſt needs have
read how the * Congregation of Cardinals and
Biſhops, which drew up the Proje& of Reforma-


n


8


* See Father Paul's Hiſt, Coun, Trent, I. 1. ad An. 1337.
tion


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 459
tion a little before the Council of Trent, repre-
ſented to Paul III. That the Facility of the Popes
his Predeceſſors, in hearkning to the Counſels of

Flattery, and departing from the Canons, was the
great Source from which, as from the Trojan Horſe,
all thoſe Abuſes ſprung which laid the Church


waſt. A Remonſtrance was giv'n in to Pope


Imocent V. ſome Ages before, That the Non ob-
ſtantibus by which all the Laws were diſpens'd
with, was a Deluge of Inconſtancy, a Breach of
Faith, and an Obftacle to the Tranquillity of
Chriſtendom. Tis manifeſt beſides, that the ne-


ceſſity a Legiſlature is under of mending its Laws


by Explanations, Interpretations, Inſertions of
Clauſes, and ſometimes a downright Repeal, ſup-
poſes a narrowneſs of Underſtanding, incapable of
foreſeeing the Inconveniences which muſt ariſe
in the Execution of theſe Laws. The longer a
Law fubſiſts without Alteration, the more it diſ-


covers the great Capacity, and diſtant Views of


the Legiſlator ; whence that Saying of the Iralians
to expreſs a conſummate Prudence, Capo da far
St atuti. | |


SECT, CCXXXI. 4 Reflection on the Un-


reaſonableneſs of thoſe who murmar at the


Proſperity of the Wicked.


they- who are ſtagger'd at the Proſperity of
the Wicked, have very little meditated on the
Nature of God, and that they contract the Ad-
miniſtration of a Cauſe which governs the Uni-
verſe, to the Size of a Providence purely Subal-
tern; which betrays a Littleneſs of Mind. What!

| 1 wou'd


PEreopon I ſhall make no ſcruple to ſay, that


abo Miſcellaneous Reflections,
wou'd they have Almighty God, after he has crea-


ted ſome Cauſes free, and others neceſſary, by an


Intermixture admirably fitted for manifeſting the
Wonders of his infinite Wiſdom, eſtabliſh Laws
agreeable to the Nature of thoſe free Cauſes; yet
ſo little fix'd, that the firſt Fit of Spleen or ill
Humor in any one, might intirely ſubvert em
to the deſtruction of human Liberty in general?
The Governor of a ſmall Town muſt expoſe him-
ſelf to contempt, if he chang'd his Rules and Or-
ders, as often as any of the Corporation thought
fit to grumble: And ſhall God, whoſe Laws are
calculated for ſo general a Deſign, that perhaps
what we ſee of the Univerſe is only an Under-
plot in the great Action, be oblig'd to derogate
from theſe Laws, becauſe they don't hit one Man's
fancy to day, and another's to morrow ; becauſe
at one time a ſuperſtitious Votary, falſly imagining
that a. Monſter preſages a Reverſe in human At-
fairs, paſſes from his erroneous Opinion to the
offering a wicked Sacrifice; at another time, a
good Soul perhaps, but which do's not prize Ver-
tue ſo much as to think the want of it its own
Puniſhment, is offended to ſee a wicked Man grow
Rich, and enjoy a good State of Health? Is it
poſſible to form a falſer Idea of a general Provi-
dence ? And ſince all are agreed, this Law of
Nature, The Strong ſhall prevail o'er the Weak, is
wiſely ordain'd, and that *twere ridiculous to ex-
pect when a Stone hits and breaks a Looking-
glaſs, which was the Owner's delight, God ſhou'd
diſpenſe with his Laws to ſpare the Man ſuch an
Affliction; mult not we allow it's equally ridicu-
lous to expect God ſhou'd diſpenſe with the ſame
Law, to prevent a Villain's enriching himſelf 10
| 555 the


occaſian d by a Comet. 461
the Spoils of an honeſt Man? The more a Vil-
lain ſets himſelf above the Rules of Honor and
Conſcience, the more he ſurpaſſes an honeſt Man
in Power; ſo that if he takes this good Man in
hand, he muſt by the Courſe of Nature ruin him:
And if both be employ'd in the Cuſtoms or Ex-
ciſe, the wicked Man muſt by the ſame Courſe
of Nature grow much richer than the Man of
Conſcience, as ſurely as a fierce Fire ſhall conſume
more Fuel than dying Embers. They who wou'd
have the wicked Man always ſickly, are ſometimes
as unreaſonable as they who wou'd have a Stone
hit a Glaſs without breaking it; for as his Organs
are form'd, neither the Nouriſhment he takes in,
nor the Air he breathes, are capable of doing the
leaſt prejudice to his Health. So that they who
murmur at his good Complexion, find fault with
God's not violating eſtabliſn'd Laws: Wherein
they are ſo much the more unreaſonable, that
by a Combination and Chain of Effects, which
only infinite Wiſdom is capable: of ordering, it
often happens that the ordinary Courſe of Nature
brings on the Chaſtiſement of Sinners.


SECT. CCXXXII. The Difference between
Miracles and Natural Effects, with reſpect


F0 u.


H E Deſign of all this is only, Sir, to ſhew

you, that tho Men abuſe the Bleſſings of Na-
ture to wicked Purpoſes, either thro Weakneſs or
Malice, yet God may, without derogating in the
leaſt from his Wiſdom, Juſtice or Goodneſs, in-
violably maintain the Courſe of natural Laws.


If he ſometime ſuſpend 'em in favor of Man, tis


I13 pure


„


462 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
pure Grace, pure Mercy. But the Caſe is not the
ſame with reſpe& to Miracles; for as theſe are
an interruption of the Order which God has eſta-
bliſh'd in Nature, our Reaſon conceives not how
he ſnou'd work Miracles, when he foreſees they
are likely to draw Men into the Snare of Idolatry.
Common Senſe leads to this Thought; that God
do's no Violence to ſecond Cauſes, unleſs to ma-
nifeſt his Glory in the Salvation of thoſe who are
converted, and the juſt Puniſhment of thoſe who
reje& ſuch Marks of his extraordinary Grace. It
looks as if he never had recourſe to Miracles,
but from an Exceſs of Love for us, moving him
to the uſe of Means, much more affecting with re-
gard to Men than all his Works of Nature, or
all his ordinary Providences; and only when he


| Tees that theſe are not of ſufficient Efficacy to up-


hold their Faith, and reſcue em from Perdition.
Beſides, tis God alone who works every Miracle,
without regard to the Demand or Diſpoſition of
ſecond Cauſes : Nothing determines him here, as
in natural Effects, to produce thoſe of one kind
rather than another. It ſeems then, I. That his
Goodneſs ſhou'd ever move him to chuſe ſuch as
are fitteſt to confirm the Truth, and confound
Falſhood ; that Men who are not converted by
theſe means, might only blame the hardneſs of
their own Heart. II. That his Holineſs ſhou'd
never ſuffer him to make choice of ſuch Miracles
as are infinitely more likely to favor Idolatry than
the true Religion; to excuſe Sinners, than render


%


'em inexcuſable.


Sk CT»


SEC


1 F.
4
and t
obſer
mets,
ordin
be en
the L
Worl
Worſ
for 01
a thou
that 1


ing P:


I inſiſ
Mirac'
in the
hend ;
ple ad
to ap
Cerem
ſome 1

As 1
eviden


occaſion'd by a Comet. 463


SE CT. CcxXXIII. That the Charatters of
true Miracles belong not to Comets.


Find the firſt character in the Miracles of


Moſes, of CHRIS, and his Apoſtles, &c.
and the ſecond in Comets; becauſe, as has been
obſery'd, the natural and rightful Effect of Co-
mets, ſuppoſing God had form'd em by an extra-


ordinary Power to intimidate the Earth, muſt


be engaging the Fews to a ſtricter Obedience of


the Law of Moſes, and all the Nations of the


World beſide to more Zeal in the abominable
Worſhip of their falſe Gods: So that a Comet,
for one A& of true Piety, muſt always produce
a thouſand Accs of Idolatry. Let no one pretend
that the Comet's proper Effect was, the convert-


ing Pagans to the true Religion; for once more


I inſiſt, this was the buſineſs of another ſort of
Miracles: The Comet was to.introduce no change
in the ordinary Religion, nor make Men compre-
hend any more, than juſt that the God each Peo-
ple ador'd was diſpleas'd; and that *twas neceſſary
to appeaſe by the vigorous Practice of all the
Ceremonys in vogue, . or by eſtabliſhing perhaps
ſome new Feaſt in honor of the Divinity.

As to the Plea of Excuſe herein, *tis notoriouſly


evident. For if God miraculouſly produces Co-


mets to warn Men, that unleſs they appeaſe his
Wrath, he purpoſes to afflict em with dreadful
| Calamitys; all thoſe Nations, who at the ſight
of Comets have redoubled their Devotions, have


profirated themſelves at the Feet of the Altars,


ve ſhed the Blood of infinite Victims, have rais'd


and dedicated new Temp:
| 14


| Y
: i
1
|
4
i
i
=
4 ro
*)
*
"i
f.
4


es : All theſe, 1 fay,
_ have


464 Miſcelaneows Reflect ions,

have anſwer'd the Intention of God as much as
cou'd be expected at their hands. And when the
Queſtion ſhall be ask d 'em, Why this profuſion
of Sacrifices ? they may anſwer, Becauſe Hea-
ven ſignify'd by extraordinary Blazes, *twas ex-
pected we ſhou'd be more Devout than ordinary.


'SzcT. CcXXXIv. Whether God diſpens'
Good and Evil to the Pagans, with a Deſgn
of converting em.


: Muſt deſire you, Sir, to have a ſpecial regard


to the Diſtincion I make between Effects of


Nature, and the miraculous Works of God; for
on this depends the Solution of a Difficulty, which
naturally preſents, againſt the Doctrine I have ad-
vanc'd. There's no one who is not capable of
/ objecting, It follows from my Doctrine, that God
cou'd never awaken Idolaters by the Scourges of
. his Wrath, nor afford em any Marks of his Boun-
ty: becauſe if they'l believe me, the Bleſſings and
Curſes of God were only capable of rendring In-
fidels more impious, or more ſuperſtitious ; more
- Impious if they quickned not their Zeal for the
falſe Gods; and more ſuperſtitious if they did.
*Tis notwithſtanding moſt true, that God has in
all Ages made Idolaters feel the Effects of his In-
dignation, and often expos'd 'em to Peſtilence,


War and Famine, as the juſt Puniſnments of their


Sins. It farther appears from the expreſs Decla-
ration of St. Paul &, That He left not himſelf mith-
out witneſs, in that he did good, and gave us Rait
from Heaven and fruitful Seaſons, filling our heart!
with food and gladneſs; and that Men ought to have


conli-


confi


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 465


conſider*d, * That the Goodneſs of God leadeth them
to Re pentance.

Here's undoubtedly an Objection which opens
a large Field for Reaſoning: I freely quit it to
thoſe who have a mind to ſhew themſelves, and
expect you'l not loſe ſuch an opportunity of ſig-
nalizing your profound Skill in Theology. Mean
time I content my ſelf with laying down this
Poſition, That all the Good or Evil which God
diſpens'd to the Pagans, was in the Order of his
General Providence, and an uninterrupted Conſe-
quence of the Laws of the Communication of Mo-
tion. If you've read P. Malebranche's late Trea-
tiſe of Nature and Grace, you muſt have ſeen that
the Events which ſpring from the Execution of
the general Laws of Nature, are not the Object
of any particular Will in God. Whence it fol-
lows, that God afflicted not the antient Pagans
with War or Peſtilence by a particular Diſpenſa-
tion, but only as they offer'd from a Conſequence
of the general Laws. I'm aware, that when one
wills a thing, he wills alſo whatever is neceſſa-
rily annex'd to it; and conſequently, that God
cou'd not will the general Laws, without willing
every particular Effect which muſt neceſſarily
{ſpring from 'em. This I know, Sir; but I know
too there are ſome things which we will, not for
their own ſake, but purely becauſe annex'd to
| ſome others; in which Caſe it may juſtly be ſaid,
we don't will 'em by a direct and particular Will.
If it be lawful to make a Judgment of the Ways
of God, we may aſſert, he do's not will all Events
on the account of their own intrinſick Perfection,


—


—ͤ—ͤ-—


but


. Rom. 2. 4.


466 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
but as they depend on the general Laws which
he has choſen for the Rule of his Operations.
No queſtion, when God determin'd to act from
without, he made choice of a Rule to act by,


worthy a Being of abſolute Perfection; that's to


ſay, a Rule infinitely ſimple and uniform, yet in-
finitely copious. One may even ſuppoſe, that the


Simplicity and Uniformity of one manner of Ad-


ing, joyn'd to an infinite Fecundity, appear'd
preferable in his ſight (tho ſome ſuperfluous E-
vents might reſult from it) to a more compound-
ed and regular manner of acting. Nothing's more
uſeful than this Suppoſition, for reſolving a thou-


ſand Difficultys rais'd againſt a Divine Providence; }


for which reaſon we ſhou'd not preſume to con-
demn, without profoundly examining it all toge-
ther. Now from this Principle it follows, that
God wilPd not each Event in particular, only as
comprehended in the general Plan he had laid
down; and ' conſequently form'd no particular
Decree for the deſolating an Idolatrous People by
Peſtilence or Famine. And therefore it's wrong
to ask why God was the Author of Events, which
render'd Men more ſinful : becauſe this is asking
why God purſu'd his general Plan ( which muſt


needs be infinitely beautiful) by Methods the moſt
ſimple and uniform; and why by a Complication
of Decrees, which muſt continually thwart and
claſh with one another, he did not prevent the
But this Queſtion
takes place, on a ſuppoſition, that the Peſtilence


ill uſe of Man's free Will.


and Famine are produc'd by a Miracle, becauſe in


Miracles God manifeſts a particular Will. One
may reaſonably ask, how it's poſſible God ſhou'd
have a particular Will? the reſult of which cou'd


only


only be
even m
crees o.
racles b
have an
lay, ou
Knowle
no roon
per Aut
ven anc
vaſt dit
prizes I
ſay he ſi
Action
Write a;
give a.
which, |
Purpoſes
As to
that all
Ages, ſh
[ fay, nc
tho excec
ſo fruitfu
and ever”


rerelgnly


ondemn
heir Rea


true God,
dcripture:


eiv'd not
heſe Star:


nary Sig


occaſian d by a Comet. 467
only be the rendring Men more guilty; and may


even maintain, tis impoſſible he ſhou'd form De-
crees of this nature. Vou ſee then, Sir, that Mi-


racles being particular Volitions in God, ought to


have an End worthy the Divine Nature; that's to
ſay, ought to lead ſo clearly and diſtinctly to the


Knowledg of the true God, that there ſhou'd be


no room to doubt whether Jupiter were the pro-
per Author of 'em, or the great Creator of Hea-


ven and Earth. Whence it appears, there's a


vaſt difference between thoſe who ſay God ſur-
prizes Men by miraculous Signs, and thoſe who


ay he ſurprizes and chaſtizes em by the natural


Aion of Bodys. One or other will certainly
write againſt P. Malebranche, and oblige him to
five a farther Explication of his new Syſtem,
which, in my Opinion, may anſwer very uſeful
r 0
4s to thoſe Paſſages in St. Paul which import,


Ages, ſhar'd in the Effects of God's Bounty, &c.
ay, nothing's more true; the Laws of Nature,
tho exceeding, ſimple, as I juſt obſerv'd, being yet
J fruitful, that they produce a thouſand Bleſſings,
- and every where leave Footſteps of a Cauſe ſo-


rereignly Perfect. So that there's juſt ground to
ondemn thoſe who made not a thorow uſe of
heir Reaſon for coming to the Knowledg of the
true God, from the viſible Creation. But as the
(criptures never charge thoſe with Folly who per-


nary Significations of the Divine Will.


Scr.


that all the Nations of the World, and in all


ty'd not God in a Comet, tis idle inſiſting on
heſe Stars in particular, or making 'em extraor-


463 | Miſcellaneow Reflections,


SEC. CCxxxv. New Remarks dim
from the fortuitoas Viciſſitude of hama


Aﬀairs, to prove that Comets are not the
Cauſe of ſucceeding Evlls. i


Ou'l do well then, Sir, to maintain that Co-
mets preſage in quality of Cauſes : But if
by this means you clear the Methods of Provi.
dence, you'l not ſo eaſily get your ſelf out of the
Briars. |
For not to repeat all I have ſaid already con-
cerning the Liberty of Man's Will, and which
alone 1s ſufficient to decide the Queſtion between
us, how 1s't poſſible a Comet ſhou'd be the Cauſe
of thoſe Wars ſtir'd up in the World a Year or
two after its diſappearance? How wou'd you have
Comets the Cauſe of that prodigious diverſity


of Events which offer in the Courſe of a long


War? Don't we know the intercepting of a
Letter ſometimes breaks the Meaſures of a whole
Campagn; That the Execution of a ſingle Order
an hour too late, deſtroys a hundred Deſigns

form'd on one another; That the Death of on:

Man changes the whole Face of Affairs; and that

it's ſometimes owing to the moſt fortuitous Ni


the loſs of which is attended with infinite Diſ-
' aſters? How wou'd you have the Atoms of 4
Comet dancing about in the Air, perform fuci
Wonders? Muſt not each of em have a part!
cular Intelligence to guide it, and each Intelligence
act in concert with the reſt; to the end, for exam.
ple, that on advice of Cardinal Richelieu's Death,


0!


] or the I
of Auſt
in the!
they dic
Do's it
| being 1
ral oth
fully ſo
make P
terveni
Partys,
the Int
liges e
good e
of a Ce
the At
Empire
| which |
| routed,


whole


0. 18


Comet:


Man?


of Eve


acting


| SECT
cety in the World, that a Battel was not gain |


1


| more j


gr eate!


is fom


an An


|


occaſion d by a Comet. 469
or the Duke of Bavaria's diſaffection to the Houſe


lof Auſtria, Orders be diſtributed to all the Atoms
in the North Quarter, to act quite otherwiſe than
they did before on the Bodys and Minds of Men?
| Do's it not often happen, that two great Princes
being in War, each ſupported by his Allys, ſeve-
ral other Princes who ſtand neuter, tho power-
fully ſollicited to come into the Quarrel, at laſt
| make Preparations to declare? But a Battel in-
| tervening to the ruin of one of the contending
Partys, breaks all their Meaſures ; and changing
the Intereſts of ſeveral neighboring Powers, ob-
| liges em to enter into a new Confederacy. In


good earneſt, can one pretend this is the work


| of a Comet, at leaſt without maintaining that
the Atoms which acted in Germany, to bring the
Empire into one Scale, are advis'd by the Atoms


A


| which got the Battel fought, that one fide is
| routed, and on this Incident are to apply their


whole Influence a different way ? And if this be


| ſo, is it not beſtowing on the Exhalations of


Comets, the Liberty we take from the Will of


| Man? Is it not making 'em the principal Cauſe
of Events, leaving Man the bare Drudgery of
acting by their direction and impulſe ?


| SECT. CCXXXVI. How ſmall are the Cauſes


| of ſome of the greateſt Events.


T*Heſe Difficultys, which confound Judicial A-
. Rrology to all intents and purpoſes, are the


more inexplicable, as it's certain the Cauſe of the


greateſt Armaments, and moſt important Wars,


is ſometimes no more than a Caprice, a Pique,
dn Amourette, a Nothing; whereas the World


imagines


470 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


imagines that Univerſal Nature has been in tra-


vail, for years together, to give the firſt Move-
ment. They who liken the Actions of Princes to
great Rivers, whoſe Springs are ſeen by few, but
their Courſe and Progreſs 1s viſible to all, don't
carry the Parallel far enough. They might add,
That as theſe great Rivers, which roll their Cur-
rents with ſo much Majeſty in ſpacious and deep
Canals, and whoſe Inundations ſometimes lay
whole Provinces waſt, are perhaps the ſmalleſt
Rills in their Source; ſo theſe famous Expediti-
ons, which hold a great part of the World in


ſuſpence, and change the Deſtiny of Nations, are


no more than a Trifle in their firſt Cauſe.

What do you think, Sir, was the firſt Spring of
the War of Xerxes * againſt Greece, the moſt pro-
digious Armament that Hiſtory mentions ?

A Greek Phyſician, one of the Queen's Do-
meſticks, who, touch'd with a deſire to fee his
native Country, perſuaded his Royal Miſtreſs to
this Expedition, and the King by her means.
What made all the States of Greece arm for the
Deſtruction of the flouriſhing Kingdom of Priam?
A Coquet, who falling in League with a beautiful
young Prince, got him to run away with her ; and
the Credulity of a tender Husband, believing, as
thoſe of his Stamp commonly do, that his dear
Wife was raviſt'd from him by downright Force.
Was not a certain King of Macedon like to fink
under a Civil War, by the latrigues of a Lady,
not brooking, after he knew ſhe was far from
Cruel, that he wou'd not lay hold of her Favors!
Is it not generally believꝰd, that the Deſcent of


_—


» FO JOY e N — 1


* Sec the Ariſtippus of Mr. Balzac.


the


the Engl
of Policy
animatec
of all th
land? V
founded
Favorite
the firſt
A Daugt
it civil 1
Prince,
fection 1
after ware
back and
'twas firr
In 726,
Frodigior
tome, to
the Come
Et terris
Moors hat
Hrences,
was nat
extending
try in th
Comet.
there you
than was
three Sy1l,
Men their
Which the

ttom of
lle and m
— —


le P.!


 occaſion'd by a C wg ' 471
the Engliſh on the Iſle of Re, was an Expedition
of Policy, mingled with a Zeal for Religion, and


animated by an Ambition of effacing the Glory


of all the Cruſades of the antient Kings of Eng-
and? Yet 'twas an Invaſion of pure Gallantry,


founded on the amorous Dreams of a Court- |
Favorite *. What pray, Sir, do you think was


the firſt Cauſe of the Saracens Invaſion of Spain?
A Daughter of Count Julian, who not thinking
it civil to ſhut her Ears to the Vows of her
Prince, gave him as many Marks of mutual Af-
fegion as he deſir'd. The Saracens pouring in

ifterwards into the very Heart of France, till beat


'twas firmly believ'd the Comet, which appear'd
in 726, was the Cauſe of all theſe Calamitys.
Prodigious Folly ! They ſhou'd have look*d nearer
home, to the young Spaniſh Lady's Airs; ſhe was
the Comet, deſcrib'd in thoſe words of Lucan,
Et terris mutantem regna Cometen. When the
Moors had puſh'd their Conqueſts as far as the
Hrenees, by the Handle which ſhe reach'd 'em,
was natural that Conquerors ſhow'd think of
ectending themſelves into the beautifulleſt Coun-
ry in the World, without the inſtigation of a
; WComet. Read the 21ſt Dialogue of Mr. Balzac,
there you'l find a Letter ſomewhat leſs reſpectful
han was expected; and the Omiſſion of two or
uree Syllables, coſt above two hundred thouſand
„len their Lives. 7 ery humble and moſt affettionate,
n Which the Count Duke of Olivarex found at the
bottom of a Prince's Letter, inſtead of Moſt hum-
lie and moſt obedient, which he judg'd his due,


— Aa...


| * Le P. Moine diſc. de L'Hiſt.


_


threw


back and expel'd by the brave Charles Martel,


— — i —.—
——— - a Fi
— 8
— <p <->


472 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


threw him into ſuch a Paſſion, that tearing it to
pieces, he ſwore the Diſreſpect ſhou'd coſt that
Prince the Ruin of his Dominions:.

Did it ſute your Gravity to read ſuch a Man
as * Brantome, you might probably have re-
mark'd this Paſſage in him, where he tells us,
Francis I. was prevaiPd upon by the ſingle Ad-


vice of Admiral Bonnivet to paſs the Mountains,


« Not for any Intereſt or Service of his Maſter,
« but purely to pay a Viſit to a certain great Lady
« of Milan, the beautifulleſt of her time, with
« whom he had an old Affair, and who gave him
< ſuch delight, that he long'd for one taſt more
« of her. I had this account, continues he, from
« another great Lady of thoſe times, the very
« Perſon who firſt. mention'd this Beauty to the
« King (her name was Signora Clerice, eſteem'd
« one of the fineſt Women of Italy) and gave
« him the Curioſity of making her a Viſit,
« and lying with her. And here's the prin-
« cipal Cauſe of this mighty Expedition, which
« has been ſo long a Secret to moſt People. Thus
« one half of the World knows not how the o-
« ther half lives, for we take a thing by one han-
« dle, when we ſhou'd take it by uite the con-
« trary; ſo God, who knows all things, mocks
cc at our Folly. Isn't this a horrible thing, that
an Expedition which brought France to the very
brink of Ruin, by the taking of its King Priſoner,
ſhou'd have for the principal Motive only an amo-
rous Caprice, eaſily ſatisfy d without going ſo far
about ? |


——
—_—_—


* Mem, Tour. 2. Diſcourſ. de I Amiral. de Bonniv.


| Jealouſ


are ſuc
Specula
thoſe w
on ſom!
vy, Int
hon. #/
| ſhou'd «
and our
moſt ap
done the
and thaj
Foot of
binet) e
But who
don't th!


SECT.
part |
Dzve


W
of which
excite all
leſs we a;
Bodys W]
that a Co
duc'd th
that ſom!


Commiſſi


faming


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 473
What you fay is very right, will probably be
my Anſwer. I he greateſt Enterprizes have ſome-
times no higher a Cauſe than a Woman's Spite or
| Jealouſy, Moſt great Events, good or bad; which
are ſuch a Theme of reaſoning to your Men of
Speculation, and gain ſo much Praiſe or Blame to
thoſe who are the viſible Actors, turn often enough
on ſome ſmall and hidden Springs, mov'd by En-
vy, Intereſt, Love, or ſome other conceal'd Paſ-
fion. And did we know the naked Truth, we
| ſhou'd quickly change our Cenſure into Apology,
and our Praiſes into Scorn : we ſhou'd know the
moſt applauded Succeſſes are owing to ill Offices
done the General of an Enemy's Army under hand,
and that Cardinal Richelieu had reaſon to ſay, Siæ
Foot of Ground (meaning the Intrigues of the Ca-
| binet) embaraſsd him more than all Europe beſides.
But who has told you all this while, that Comets
don't thruſt in by the by? .


SEC T. CCXXXVII. That Comets have no
part in exciting the Paſſions which cauſe the
Diverſity of Events.

\ H O told me ſo ? That little good Senſe

which Nature has afforded me, by the help
ot which I perſuade my ſelf, I. That Comets can't
excite all the Paſſions which diverſify Events, un-
leſs we aſcribe a Gift of Knowledg to all the little


Bodys which float in the Air. For if we ſuppoſe
that a Comet form'd all the. Paſſions which pro-
lcd the War of Toy, we ouſt allo fippoſe,
that ſome of theſe Atoms were charg'd with a
Commiſſion, none of the hardeſt it's true, of in-
flaming Paris with the Love of Helen, and Helen

ER. Ss with


474 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,


with the Love of Paris; that other Atoms took |


on them the Care of animating the good Monolaus,
and perſuading him, tho nothing in't, that his
dear Wife pin'd exceedingly ever fince ſhe was


bereft of the ſight of him, and perſiſted in an


inexorable Cruelty to her Lover; that another Set
had Orders to repreſent to Agamenmon, that he
ought not to ſuffer ſuch a blot on his Family, and
fatter him with the Hopes of the chief Command;
while other Atoms innumerable ſtrol'd about the
Villages, and Boroughs, and Citys of Greece, to
ſtir up the common People to Arms: That others
took a Progreſs to the Court of King Priam, to
make the Council o' that fide reſolve on not re-
ſtoring Helen, and fo on. I ask then, whether,
to the end the Atoms which were to operate on
the Husband of Helen, might play their part a-
right, it were not neceſſary they ſhou'd be ap-
priz'd, with what Succefs their Comrades had
play'd their Game with Helen; and if it be poſlible
an Armament, which was fo often ſhifted and
chang'd in its Meafures, one Party of the Princes
governing themſelves by the ſteps of another, and
altering their Reſolutions as the Conduct of the
reſt pleas'd or diſpleas'd 'em, as it ever happens
in ſuch Confederacys, cou'd be produc'd by Atoms
not mutually communicating the Succeſs of their
Influences, and changing their Batterys according
to the Circumſtances of Time and Place? Now as
t were ridiculous to aſcribe the leaſt Knowledg to
the Atoms of a Comet, ſo *twere ridiculous to
ſay, they thruſt themſelves into the Intrigues and
Paſſions from which Events take their Riſe; be-
cauſe theſe Paſſions ſpring one from tother, and
are of this kind rather than of that, .


| ſtock «
on me,
Heavei
a deal
| Loye, .
| as long
to love
| on't, a
| forwar
in the!


| SEC 1


the Cit
penine


| depenc
| fib A
any Ir


J. 1


vou ha
than th
rit of
Vanity,
thing u
have P.
Care.


Fore
Paſſ
firic
* Shall
perſ


led, M.
| Natural
ever Al


the Circumſtances of Time and Place, and the O-


penings of Affairs. Certain it is, the more Affairs


depend on Caprice and Paſſion, the more impoſ-
| ſible it is they ſhou'd be ſubject to the Influence of
amy blind and neceſſary Cauſe, ſuch as Comets be.


I. I perſuade h by the help of that ſmall


| ſtock of good Senſe which Nature has beſtow'd
on me, that tho no Comet ever blaz'd in the
| Heavens, yet the Earth wou'd never be without


| a deal of Coquetry, Jealouſy, Ambition, Envy,


| Loye, Hatred. Let the Lady of Intrigue ſay then
| as long as ſhe pleaſe, that *tis her Stars decree her
to love, Pm firmly reſolv'd not to believe a word
| on't, and firmly perfuaded, that Buſineſs wou'd go
forward neither more nor leſs, tho all the Stars


in the Firmament were extinguiſh'd. So, Sir, if


you have no other Imployment for your Comets


| than that of inſpiring the tender Paſſions, a Spi-


| rit of Intrigue, Flights of Gallantry, Jealouſy,
| Vanity, it is not worth while; once more, no-


thing were more needleſs than Comets, we ſhou'd


have Plenty enough of this kind without their
care. b


SEC TT. CCXXXVIII. That Man needs no
| Foreign Aſſiſtance to be agitated by all ſorts of
Paſſrons. Inſtances * the Jewiſh Super-
ſtitian.


| | Shall repeat what 1 ſaid before touching Su-
1 perſtition, That tho the Devil had ne er med-
led, Men had nevertheleſs fallen into this Vice, ſo
naturally are they inclin'd to it. The Jews, if
| Ever any Nation, ought to be exempt from this


C mw RN wm & 12 ws | ww YE wW TT


occaſion'd by a Comet. 475


k 2 failing,


a... Miſcelanzous Refleftions,


failing, to whom God reveal'd his Will by infalli- |


ble Oracles, by Prophets, and continual Miracles,
Yet they grew * ſo ridiculouſly ſimple as to be-
lieve, if the Prieſt in putting on the Sacerdotal
Veſtments did not take up each in its Order, the
Expiation cou'd have no eſſect; and that *twas fo
eſſential to the Sacrifice, the officiating Prieſt


ſhou'd ſet his bare Foot immediately to the ground,
and have no other Habits on than thoſe ordain'd


by God, that if he hapned to ſet his Foot on the
Skin of the Victim, or on the Foot of a Stander
by, or on any other thing beſides, the Expiation
was fruſtrated; and if the Prieſt had Wound
with Plaiſters on 'em, the Sacrifice was null and
void by a Nullity of Veſtment. .
What I ſay of Superſtition, is to be underſtood
of all other Vices; there's a Seed of Corruption
in the Soul of Man, which may juſtly be liken'd
to a Coal apply'd to combuſtible Matter. If this
Coal be blown by a violent Wind, *twill cauſe a
fearful Ravage; but won't fail doing a deal of
Miſchief, tho aſſiſted by no Wind at all. All the
difference lies here, that its Action ſpreads farther
and ſwifter when driven by the Wind than when
not. The Devil is like a Wind blowing up the
Coal of our. Concupiſcence, and the Cauſe in-
deed of its bringing forth evil Fruits ſooner and
in a larger crop; which yet wou'd thrive and
grow apace, purely from the rankneſs of the Soil.
Whence appears the Error ef thoſe who imagine,
no wicked Thought ever enters into their Heart
unleſs ſuggeſted by the Devil, not conſidering


r — IF "TO —
6 L PEN


vide Braunium de veſtib, Sacerd.


| | Begi!
Thad al


theres


there


Apoſt]


| ders n.


Howe


| the Ca
toms (
| with a
| that 1
| from n


Aug


without


prehenc
what T't
| you laſt


Ther
the ſour
Luſt, at


ſuch .


vp————


T Ch. 1


, occaflowd: by a Comet, 477
| there's a principle of Malice within 'em, as the
Apoſtle Þ St. James juſtly remarks. This hin-
| ders not the Devil's actually tempting us to Evil.
However we muſt inſiſt, the Stars are in no wiſe
| the Cauſe of our Paſſions. Theſe are only Fan-
| toms on which Men endeavor to lay their Faults,
| with as little ground as they aſcribe to Fortune
| that ill Succeſs in their Affairs which proceeds
from mere Imprudence.


Aug. 31. 1681.


| SECT. CC XXXIX. Remarks ſhewing, that
| to make a Judgment of what ſhall happen af-
ter the Appearance of Comets, there's no need
| of conſidering theſe Stars; and that "tis ſuf-
fictent to have an Eye to the Situation of ge-
neral Affairs, to the Inclinations and Intereſts
of Princes, An Eſſay of this Method on the
Comet of 1618. and that of 1681. |


| ] Begin to be weary, Sir, and believe I ſhall ſoon
| & have done imparting my Reflections to you.
had almoſt forgot whereabouts I was; and not
without recollecting my ſelf a little, have com-
| prehended, that to keep a Connexion between
| what l'm about to deliver, and what I wrote to
| you laſt, it behoves me to ſet out in this manner.

There's no need of taking it ſo high, to find
the ſource of that Vanity, Pride, Envy, Avarice,
Luſt, and the other inordinate Paſſions which do
ſuch a deal of Miſchief to human Society. If


— —


—
— —


f Ch. 1. 4.


KE k 3 there


478 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,


there muſt be Stars to cauſe em, they are undoubt-


edly thoſe on Earth which the Poets ſing ſo much


of, and not thoſe Stars which ſparkle in the Hea-
vens. However it be, tis certain none are ſo ca-
nee of foretelling Revolutions of State, as they
who are acquainted with the Diſpoſition and
Genius of Princes, their Intereſts, Councils, and


Forces. A Man of good Senſe, who carrys his


Obſervations backward, who from Hiſtory, and
his acquaintance with the World, diſcovers the
Springs on which general Affairs do turn, and is
beſides thorowly inſtructed in the Maxims and


Spirit which govern particular Countrys, ſhall of-


ten make ſo juſt a Judgment without the help of
the Judicial Art, that all the Aſtrologers on Earth
laying theit Heads together to diſcover what the
Stars prognoſticate, ſhall ſay nothing to the pur-
poſe in compariſon of him. Which ſhews it's
abſolutely uſeleſs conſulting the Stars, to know
future Eyents, and that one ſhall give a much


nearer gueſs, by conſulting the Humor and Incli-
nations of the People. |


StcT. CCXL. Examples of ſome Politician
| who have foretold Events,


T WAS undoubtedly by this method Cicero
1 foretold the Overthrow of the Common-
wealth of Rome, and Du Yair Keeper of the
Seals, the Misfortunes which befel the State of
France. Mark how theſe two Great Men exprels
themſelves; *I comfort my ſelf, ſays the firf,
© with the Teſtimony of a good Conſcience, when
I reflect on my having done the greateſt Ser-


4 yices to my Country, while *twas in my Po.


er;


© lick
© hav!
© Cor
© ned


1


cap
© trea
© lya
Tru


| © Eſta


Skat
© whit
row'd
Þ+ Me


| bourg


Greek
But
we bel


are ful


* Pra
Republic
quam ni


occaſion'd by a Comet. 479


© er; and on my judging conſtantly of the Pub-
© lick * Affairs as if I had a Gift of Prophecy,
© having foreſeen the Storm which overthrew the
© Commonwealth fourteen Years before it hap-
© ned. Let's hear Mr. d' Yair: ] was ever of
© acrazy Conſtitution, neither my Body nor Mind
capable of much fatigue, my Memory extreme
© treacherous, having ofall the Gifts of Nature, on-
ly a Sagacity ſo extraordinary for perceiving the
Truth, that I don't think, ſince I came to Man's
© Eſtate, any thing of importance ever befel the
« State, or the Publick, or my ſelf in particular,
© which I had not exactly foreſeen. I have bor-
row'd theſe two Paſlages from the Learned Mr,
+ Menage, the Varro of our Age, as P. Maim-
| bourg juſtly entitles him in his Hiſtory of the

Greek Schiſm. 3300

But *tis not on Cicero's ſingle Teſtimony, that
we believe he had ſuch a Talent of Prophecy; we
are further aſſur'd of it by the Account of a fa-
mous Roman Hiſtorian, who ſays; © If one read
© over the Epiſtles of Cicero to Pomponius Atticus,
© he may very well diſpenſe with the Hiſtorys of
© thoſe Times, becauſe he finds in *em the Paſ-
© ſions of the Great ſo faithfully deſcrib'd, the
© Failings of the leading Men, and Declen-
ſion of the Commonwealth, tbat all the reſt is
© only a natural Conſequence, and this Concluſion


dc. Mi. 4 2s. __
re ae,
—


* Przchrk Igitur Conſcientia ſuſtentor, cam cogito me de
Republica aut meruiſſe oprime, cum pornerim ; aut certe nun-
quam niſi divine cogitaſſe: eaque ipsà tempeſtate everſam eſſe
= N quam ego 14 annis ante proſpexeram. Ad At-
Vic. L. 10. Ep. 4. 2

7 Obſervar, fur la Lange l 2 Part. p. 110.


*


480 = ifcellaneoms Reflections, ;


© [| obyious on the whole, That Prudence is a kind |


© of Divination; ſince Cicero did not only foretel
© the Events which happen'd in his own Time,
© but alſo thoſe which follow'd for a long time af-
© ter. This Teſtimony confirms another Paſſage
of Cicero, where he aſſures us the Gift of Prophe-


cy, which he had acquir'd by deep Thought, and


the Adminiſtration of Publick Affairs, had never
fail'd him ; which he cou'd eaſily prove by
Examples, but for fear of being ſuſpected of forg-
ing Predictions on paſt Events, tho he did not want
Witneſſes enough: I don't divine, ſays he, ei-


< ther by the flight, or by the chirping of Birds,


or by any obſervations contain'd in the Augu-
ral Art; I make uſe of other Signs, which
tho perhaps not more infallible, are yet much
clearer, and leſs ſubject to Illuſion: I conſider
Ceſar's Humor and Genius on one hand, and
the Nature and Tendency of Civil Wars on the


r |


K W & a & 2 8


By much the ſame Rule the famous Stephen Paſ-


quier foretold great Tumults in France, when ob-
ſerving at the opening of the Parliament of St.
Martin in 1587. that the Prieſt who celebrated


— —


4
s. 0


[| Facile exiſtimari poſſit, prudentiam quodammodd eſſe
Divinationem: non enim Cicero ea ſolum quæ vivo ſe accide-
runt, futura prædixit, ſed etiam quæ nunc uſu veniunt præ-
dixit ut vates. Corn. Nep. invita Attic.
-  ** Ne nos quidem noſtra Divinatio fallet, quam tum ſapien-
tiſſimorum virorum monumentis, atque Præceptis, plurimoque,
ut ſcis, Poctrinæ ſtudio, tam magno etiam uſu traftandz Rei pub-
licæ, magnaque etiam noſtrorum temporum Varietate conſecuti

umus, cui quidem Divinationi hoc plus confidimus, quod ea
nos nihil in his tam obſcuris. rebus tanquam perturbatis un-
quam, omgino ſefellit, &c. Cicero Epiſt. Famil. J. 6. Epift. . 8
| ary e 10


Maſs be.
Scarlet
the Pa:
tom to
one of |
the [
not f


Parlia
it. 8
matte!
For b.
of an
France


l ke


decaſion'd by a Comet. 481


Maſs before the Preſidents and Counſellors in their
Scarlet Gowns and Formalitys, did not preſent
the Pax to be kiſs'd by 'em, as was ever the cuſ-
tom to do. Did || not you take notice, ſays he to
one of his Friends, the Pax was not preſented to
the Members? T1 forfeit my Life, if this do's
© not forebode ſome extraordinary Evil to Fance;
© ſo he ſaid, and ſoit came to paſs the ſame Year.
For in the Month of May following happen'd the
Barricade of Paris, which ſoon after brought on
the Death of Mr. de Guiſe, and a Civil War,
which prov'd fatal to the Kingdom. |


SECT. CCXLI. A Confutation of Paſ-
quier's Preſage.


CEE be no great Conjurer to deliver


ſuch a Prediction as this of the Author of
the Review of France. All things were ſo diſpos'd
for a mighty Rupture, that *twas morally impoſ-
ſible the Kingdom ſhou'd get off at a cheap rate.
So the Prieſt's miſtake was the ground of Paſ-
quier's Conjecture, only as falling in with his for-
mer judgment on the preſent State of Affairs:
And I dare ſay, were he alive at this time, and
ſhou'd ſee ſuch another Miſtake the day of the


Parliament's meeting, he'd draw no Preſage from


it. So true is it, that the Prieſt's Conduct was a
matter purely caſual, and without any meaning :
For by what Virtue wou'd you have the omiſſion
of an antient Ceremony preſage the Calamitys of
France? *Twere neceſſary for this end that God


— 5 4


| Recherchesde la France, L 5. ch. 45+


ſhou'd


482 Miſcellaneous Refletions, +
ſhou'd ſtrike the Prieſt with a Spirit of Blunder;
to give Paſquier a Revelation of the Dangers of
France; which *twere very abſurd to maintain,
as well becauſe Paſquier was not ignorant that the
Affairs of France had an ill Aſpect, as becauſe his
foreſeeing the approaching Storm was abſolutely
unprofitable to France. For of what uſe was it
to the Kingdom, that Paſquier diſcern'd a Preſage
in the Prieſt's Blunder ? Of what uſe to Paſquier's
Friends, who were the Depoſitarys of his Con-
ieures ? Of what uſe to himſelf? He was
highly pleas'd at his own Prediction, he hug'd
himſelf in it; he put his Friends a hundred times
in mind, after the Evils came to paſs, that he had
fairly foretold 'em; he has entertain'd the Repub-
lick of Letters with it in a Chapter of his Book :
And here's all. A mighty piece of Buſineſs, and
well worth the pains of interrupting the Courſe
of Nature, and giving the Prieſt a wandring Spi-
rit, quite different from what he might have had,
if not diverted by an extraordinary Providence
from thinking of all the Ceremonys of the Day.
Yet this is what we muſt come to: for if the
Prieſt omitted this Ceremony, either becauſe he
did not underſtand his Buſineſs, or becauſe he
wou'd not conform, or becauſe his Mind was diſ-
tracted, the natural Succeſſion of Objects carry-
ing him from one Thought to another, ſo that
he had not time to think of preſenting the Pax
to be kiſs'd by Meſſieurs of the Parliament; tis
plain his Omiſſion was not a Preſage in any re-
5 t, becauſe God only acting from a direct Pur-
poſe, is able to change any Action into a Pre-
ſage, which in its own Nature is not fo. age
common Senſe tells us, that were the Finger 0


God


God ir
more «
rendrir
This
who in
prophe
with 7
of his
the bri
the eno
theiſm,
craft, ]
So far
Founda
adds, J


| Spectre


might 4
was, di
kind is1
for Pre
mark*d
rick Pe
contriv
our Kin
mon bu
ble La
he had


view, v


of Supe
Shou?
Paſſages
Matter
bare Me


—— un Rae near eh nin


*laN


oecaſton d by 4 Comet. 483

God in't, the Preſage had been much clearer and
more diſtinct, and attended with Circumſtances
rend ing it of ſome real Advantage.
This brings another * Author to my mind,
who in his Political Eſſays on War and Government,
propheſy'd a Calamity much about the ſame time
with Paſquier. The Deſign of the firſt Chapter
of his Book is to ſet forth, that France was on
the brink of a dreadful Revolution, by reaſon of
the enormous Sins which reign'd all over it; A-
theiſm, Irreligion, Blaſphemy, Magick, Witch-
craft, Luxury, Drunkenneſs, Impurity, Violence.
80 far he's right; a Prediction built on ſuch a
Foundation, may well come to paſs. What he
adds, That Comets were already ſeen, Eclipſes,
Spectres; dreadful Voices heard in the Air, &c.
might ſeem ſurprizing in a military Man as he


was, did we not know that no Dominion Man-


kind is under, is ſo univerſal as that of Credulity
for Preſage. But what he ſays of its being re-
mark'd by many, that the State was in a Climate-


rick Period, and that all the Niches and Spaces


contriv'd in the Palace of Paris for the Statues of
our Kings were full; this, I ſay, is indeed a com-
mon but very childiſh Superſtition. *Tis proba-
ble La Noue had ne'er ſet up for a Prophet, if
he had not ſome of theſe political Preſages in
view, which are much better founded than thoſe
of: fperſtition. s. :

Shou'd you have the curioſity to conſult the
Paſſages I cite, you may find perhaps I take this
Matter wrong, for I own I refer to it on my
bare Memory. But ſure Iam, my Miſtake can't


8


22 te. „


2


be


* La Noue.


_ —— — —
chiral * mod *
= 8


484 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


be ſo conſiderable as that of Mr. Naude, the


Man of the moſt reading in France, who
charges La Noue with foretelling great Cala-
mitys, becauſe all the Niches for the Statues of
our Kings were obſerv'd to be full. Which is
charging him with alledging as a Reaſon, what
he only mentions at the latter end of the Chapter
as a common Remark, and with ſome ſort of Con-
tempt. All Authors abound with Faults of this
kind; and ſince I began to write theſe Thoughts
to you, I have a hundred times had the mortifica-
tion to drop ſeveral Paſſages, which anſwer'd my
Deſign the beſt in the World as they ſtand in mo-
dern Authors ; but conſulting the Originals, ap-
pear'd to be nothing to the purpoſe.


Sz c T. CCXLII. T eaſy to foreſee 4 migh-
ty War in Europe in 1618.


Y theſe Political Preſages, *twas no hard mat-

ter to foreſee in 1618. that Europe ſhou'd
ſoon be terribly ſhaken- The Comet which ap-
pear'd this Year, was the only thing which
paſs'd for a plain Preſage; yet this was not the
thing which Men ſhou'd turn their Eyes to.
*Twere as eaſy to prove from the miſerable Rules
of Aſtrology, of which I have given a ſhort ac-
count * already, that this Comet might portend
Bleſſings to Europe as well as Calamitys. What
then muſt they have an eye to? To the Steps the
Houſe of Auſtria was taking to Univerſal Monar-
chy, to that inſupportable Inſolence with which


7


——


I TuftruGt, ſur les Freres de la Roſe-croix ch. s. Sect. 1
the


5 6 2 * * 9 — ond ds 9 — CLEAN RORs
a AGE vs Wt Ge S * ret A Seb ant; N ere Fe, WS C RP; . ey
Re — 5 Oo N 5 n, r ö n ks he
7 3 %% ⁵¼ d ̃ ̃ K ̃ . IEG;
+ LK eG 2 0 SS — ** . * * K ** *


I n n
JVC
FX JVC Ot IE 5


the Mi
Spain,
Europe
ſo unſ
the ne
extrao
neight
all Pat
ing tl
aim'd
only «
of Me
Peopl
to the
ſtill x
the V
weak
good
of th
dax.
5
Fw,
for
rouſl
blood


occaſion'd by 4 Comet. 485
the Miniſters of the Emperor, and the King of 1
| Spain, carry'd themſelves in all the Courts of 1
Europe; and the furious Zeal which this Houſe =
| ſo unſeaſonably betray'd for the Extirpation of 1
the new Religions. There was no need of any i
extraordinary deep Foreſight to ſee, that te Mi
neighboring States and Princes wou'd at laſt loſe 8 |
all Patience, and form powerful Leagues for check- 0
ing the ambitious Deſigns of a Family, which | Wi
aim'd at extending a Tyrannical Dominion, not 1
only over the Perſons, but over the Conſciences 1
of Men. What room was there to doubt that 1
people wou'd openly oppoſe Enterprizes ſo fatal ||
to the publick Liberty? But as this Houſe was
ſtill powerful, tho its Infatuation in oppreſſing
the World on the ſcore of Religion, had 7
weaken'd it; and as they had good Troops and
good Generals, capable of executing the Orders 10
of the Courts, while the Princes themſelves, ſur- 10
rounded by Crouds of bigotted Monks, ne'er "I
budg'd from their Palaces ; twas eaſy to fore- 14
ſee, that the Efforts of the Powers of Europe 1
for preſerving their Liberty, might be vigo- 1
rouſly repel'd, and conſequently a long and 1
bloody War enſue.


y
" *
3
iz
*1
Pt
3
Ke.
Wo
5
[a 2
5 8
© 4
| +>
ge 4
PL
2 51 JI
"—_-
&+
"=;


$4
38.
£2
e
$254
8825
7
8
.
7 7
EH
E
144
F
8
| OF
ty ö
ET
3
8
A
9
5
Ire
1 * Y
SN
7
450
9 55
BIN
ae
4
PR
3
TB 1
FLA
5
XC
S
3:5
EY MW
N
3 :
5
E


8
3
23
Le
7
13
3 5
3
E
KF
9
Ts.
= *
x7
Wit,
8 5
2


486. Miſcellaneons Reftedions,
SzcT, CCXLIII. The Slowneſs and Bigotry


in the Condatt of the Houſe of Auſtria.


N one hand *twas evident the Emperor and
King of Spain wou'd employ their utmoſt
Power to oppreſs Chriſtendom : but *twas plain
on the other, they cou'd ne'er enſlave it; becauſe
Delays *, and long Deliberations, which have often
perform'd a friendly Part on the ſide of Liberty,
loſt *em too many favorable Occaſions. You know
Malherbe 's thought on this Subject: Fit be true,
ſays he in one of his Letters, that Spain aſpires
to the Univerſal Monarchy, I'd adviſe em to pray
God that he'd be pleas'd to put off the End of the
World to a longer Day. In effect, conſidering the
way they went about it, weighing and re-weigh-
ing the ſame thing a thouſand times over, *twas
impoſlible they ſhou'd accompliſh thoſe Conqueſts
which they were accus'd of aſpiring after. Your
great Conquerors have always ſucceeded better by
truſting to Fortune,than by pondering their Enter-
prizes with the exacteſt circumſpection. For which
reaſon | Macchiavel compares Fortune to a Wo-
man; and Charles V. obſerv'd, on the Succeſſes of
Henry II. ſhe was of the humor of the Female
Sex, with whom the youngeſt Galant is firſt in
favor. The Florentiz Politician aſſigns this Rea-
ſon for*t, That the young are more enterprizing,
and void of that awful Reſpect, which is good
for nothing in the way of Gallantry. But what-


—_. —
rr —


* Cethegus ſemper querebatur de ignavia ſociorum: illos
dubitando & dies prolatando magnas opportunitates corrum-
pere. Salluſt. Bell, Catil, In Tract. de Principe, cap. 25.


ever


| like Li
{ Religic
| lawtul.


SEC.


the Cl


occaſion'd by 4 Comet. —
erer becomes of the Compariſon, certain it is,
that one never makes a mighty Conqueror with-
| out a degree of Raſhneſs; and that nothing pro-
motes the Deſigns of an ambitious Prince * like
Diligence and Activity. So that the too ſcrupu-
lous and cautious Slow neſs of the Council of Spain,
| ought to convince all Europe, that ber deſign of
| Univerſal Monarchy might laſt a long while,

{ Befides, the two great Branches of the Houſe
of Auſtria are ſo drawn in by the Promoters of
| the Inquiſition, that *twas impoſſible they ſhow'd
| cer have conquer'd Ewrepe. This were an Endea-
vor of joining two Things incompatible in Na-
ture, the being a Conqueror, and a Perſecutor;
| becauſe the People they wou'd fain ſubdue, fight
| like Lions, when they find they are to have a
; 1 1 2 forc d upon em which they judg un-
| lawful. |


SECT. CCXLIV. That Conquerors have
avoided the Odium of Perſecutors,


HIS undoubtedly is the Reaſon why Maho-
1 met, reſolving to found a new Empire and
a new Religion at the ſame time, affected a great
I Appearance of Clemency for the Chriſtians; and
| publiſh'd, wherever he mov'd his Arms, a Tole-
ration for all ſorts of Religions, and particularly
the Chriſtian. He inſerted this Principle in his
{ Alcoran in very comprehenſive Terms: 0 Inſi-
| dels, ſays he, I adore not what you adore, neither do


—


Natura ferox, vehemens, manu promptus erat, maximum
bonum in celeritate putabat. Salluſt. ubi ſupra. |
T Sir P. Rycauc's State of the Ottoman Emp. I. 2. c. 2.


you


488 Miſcellaneous Reflefions,

you adore what I adore. Obſerve you your Law, and
PII obſerve mine. *Tis pretended he made a Treaty
with the Chriſtians, by which he engag'd for him-
ſelf and his Succeſſors, in the moſt authentick man-
ner, to protect, and grant *em conſiderable Privi-
leges. *Tis pretended the * Original Contract
was found in a Monaſtery of Mount Carmel.
Mr. de Saumaiſe Þ thinks the Piece not ſuppoſiri-
tious, grounding his Opinion on a Paſſage of El-
Marin in the Life of Mahomet, which mentions
his Indulgence for the Chriſtian Religion. But
tho we ſhou'd, with Grotius, ſuſpe& it a pious
Fraud of the Chriſtians, we have proof || enough
beſides, that this falſe Prophet granted Chriſtia-
nity a Toleration : And the Chapter of the Sword
in the Alcoran, whatever Violence it allows to be
exercis'd on thoſe who won't ſubmit to the Yoke,
ordains notwithſtanding a Toleration for all who
lay down their Arms. And this was obſerv'd with


Humanity enough by the firſt Succeſſors of Ma-


homet, as P. Maimbourg is fore d to own in his
Hiſtory of the Jconoclaſts; where he tells us, the
Caliphs not only allow'd the Chriſtians the free


Exerciſe of their Religion, but alſo train'd 'em


up to the greateſt Employments. They made no
ſcruple of conferring the higheſt Truſts of their
Empire on the Father of St. John Damaſcene, and
granting'em to his Son after his death, who was be-
ſides made Preſident of the Council, and Governor
of the Capital City. Even at this day the Chri-
ſtians are tolerated in Turky, and dread the Ar-


v The Contents of this Treaty is to be met with in the 2d Book,
of Sir P. Rycaut's Hift, Epiſt. 20. I. 2. Vid. Hotting.
Hiſt, Orient. 1,2. c. 2. I L. 2. ad An. 731. 5


his juſt


tifice
dels.
of A.
Turks,
choice
a Chr.
Age 0
nity...
and C
from
'em o
fall; 1
Churct
the G1
pleaſe
fice th
themſe
can't t
Accuſe
cute Ct
Mahom
particu
of Reli
The
farther
be. 1
or Ceſa
Nation
differen
an Offic
they ne
Religio


c Ryeg


decaſſond by a Comet. 489
tifice much more than the Violences of the Infi-
dels. For * if they ſpeak againſt the Religion
of Mahomet, or when drunk promiſe to turn
Turks, or debauch a Turkiſh Woman, there's no
choice left 'em between Death and Apoſtacy. If
a Chriſtian turn Turk, all his Family, under the
Age of Fourteen, are oblig'd to abjure Chriſtia-
nity. They are allow'd to keep up the Roofs
and Cieling of the Churches they have enjoy'd
from time immemorial; but not to enlarge
'em or build new, or rebuild thoſe whi
fall; much as we confine the Hugonots to the
Churches they enjoy*'d under the Reign of Harry
the Great. You may call this Perſecution if you
pleaſe 35 ſtill it's plain, there's more of Arti-
fice than Violence in it: and they who beſtir
themſelves in the Extirpation of Calviniſm,
can't term it ſo, without turning their own
Accuſers. After all, whether the Turks perſes-
cute Chriſtianity or no, it's nevertheleſs true, that
Mahomet deſigning to extend his Conqueſts, took
particular care not to ſcare People on the Article
of Religion. 3 3 1

The Conquerors who went before him, were
farther ſtill from this Spirit of Perſecution than
he. Twas ne'er ſeen that Cyrus, or Alexander,
or Ceſar, inquir'd concerning the Religion of the
Nations they ſubdu'd, or forc'd 'em to abjure, if
different from that of their new Lords. When
an Officer's Services intitled him to a Promotion,
they ne'er examin'd whether he wasdf the Prince's
Religion; they ne'er had a thought of ſtopping
his juſt Rewards, till ſuch time as he confotm'd:

E Rycauts © |

5 | L1 | Ard


490 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


And when. pray ſhou'd they, have accompliſt'd


the Conqueſt of the World, if amus'd' with
ſuch little Concerns ? You ſee too how. very
near the Houſe of Auſtria is now arriy'd at Uni-
verſal Monarchy. Its great Catholicity makes it,
as you ſee, advance apace. © In Germam it can
ſcarce defend it ſelf againſt a handful of Rebels.
In Spain, as already obſery'd &, it has not Autho-
rity enough to hinder the few Soldiers it, has left,
from taking their Arrears out of the Travel-
A , ons


.


SEC. CCXLV. How, much the Hauſe of


k ”


* Auftria has weakew'd it ſelf by Perſecution


*


Jor Religion.


I it be trug, as Story tells us, that the Elera-


tion of this Houſe has been the Reward of
the wonderful Piety of the Emperor Rodolphu,
who one day meeting a Prieſt as he carried the
Holy Sacrament a foot, made him mount his own
Horſe, and walk'd after him with great Devotion;
one may venture to ſay, his Poſterity have not
had the ſame Returns from that invincible Ardor
they have conſtantly expreſs'd for the Extirpation
of Hereſy by Fire and Sword. And no wonder:
the Action of Rodolphus proceeded from a Heart
ſenſibly affected with Religious Zeal; but Per ſecu-
tions, Gallys, Gibbets, and generally all the ways
of Violence employ'd in favor of the good Reli-
gion, are the Effects of an intemperate Heat, to
which God thinks not fit to give a Bleſſing.

Fallit te incautum pietas tua, may juſtly be apply d


2


— —ͤ—


Dm ——
— N


* Sell. 40. 5


Hou:


rem.
ad vi
Exti
Zeal
it's p


it has
l don
E that”:
high

| ſeſſion
ample
| ſuffer
| tires;
| clpally


and 0;


1 foot, |


and c⸗
of the
eſtabli


the In


join'd
well m
bet wee


the Co


*
——U—U—U— —̃ — — 4
N A
Ek
1
| l
z 1


occaſſond by a Comet. 491
to all poſſeſs'd with a Zeal ſo monſtrous, and ſo
fit to confirm thoſe in their Atheiſm, who run
down all Religion with their |


Tantum Religio potuit ſuadere malorum. Lucr. 1. *


1 ſhou'd not declare my ſelf ſo freely, did I not
remember to have heard you condemn thoſe who
adviſe Princes to ſuch wicked Methods for the
Extirpation of Hereſy. However it be, if the
Houſe. of . Auſtria has been recompens'd for its
Zeal againſt the falſe Religions, the Recompence, .
it's plain, has not been in Temporal Bleſlings, for
it has coſt *em the brighteſt Jewel in their Crowns,

I don't mean the Countrys loſt by theſe Method
that's a Trifle; but the Credit, the Glory, an
high Renown, of which they were once in poſ-
ſeſſion. Their preſent low Ebb makes Europe an
ampler Reparation of Honor for all the Inſults
ſuffer d from 'em heretofore, than it really de-
ſires; and *tis to the Victorys of France it prin-
cipally owes the ſatisfaction of being reveng'd,
and of ſeeing the Spaniſh Pride trampled under
foot, Calco Platonis faſtum— the reſt you know,
| and can't diſown, that the boundleſs Ambition
of the Houſe of Auſtria, added to its Zeal for AF
| eſtabliſhing the inhuman oppreſlive Tribunal of [1
| the Inquiſition in all its Dominions; its Power =
join'd to the ſlowneſs of its Deliberations, might
| well make People foreſee a long and bloody War
between the Princes of Europe about the time of
the Comet's appearance in 1618.


1 . SECT,


492 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


St cT. CCXLVI. What are the Preſages
moſt in vogue at preſent, Favorable Diſ-
poſitions for France's extending its Con-


queſts.


W AT J advance touching the Year 1618,
is confirm'd by the general Talk in the
preſent juncture. They who have the leaſt In-
ſight into publick Affairs, believe they know e-
nough, to foretel what will happen ſoon after
this Comet of ours: And J obſerve, that to form
their Predictions, they ne'er trouble themſelves
to examine by what Signs it moves. They conſi-
der only the Poſture of the general Affairs of
Europe. And on theſe in reality we are to form
our prophetick Views. And from theſe, tho no
Prodigy or Comet offer'd, one might reaſonably
conclude, that Europe is come to a Period of ter-
rible Revolutions, and' that never was a more
favorable Conjuncture for mighty Conqueſts.
I. On one hand we ſee France govern'd by a
Prince, all whoſe Actions are perform'd with equal
Degrees of Conduct and Courage, with an Aſcen-
daut fo fortunate, and a World fo highly prepoſ-
ſeſs'd in his Favor, that *tis taken for granted he
attempts nothing without having concerted all
the Meaſures which muſt render the Enterprize
infallible; and hence it is that his Neighbors ſcarce


think of defending themſelves. The Name of the


King is a Meduſa's Head, which turns all his Ene-
mys into Statues: He overcomes by depriving 'em
of the Courage to reſiſt. I ſhall ſay more on this
Head anon. TT,

SECT»


occaſion d by 45 Comet. 493


SE 87. CCXLVII. 4 Detail of the Circum-
ſtances in favor of France. |


II. TD Eſide this mighty Prepoſſeſſion, which alone
is equal to an Army of a hundred thon-

ſand Men, the King has a great many Troops ex-
tremely well diſciplin'd, and accuſtom'd to Victo-
ry; many excellent Generals, equally zealous of
their Maſter's Glory, and capable of the greateſt
Enterprizes. He has a vaſt Number of able Ma-
nagers, who have the knack of getting Intelli-
gence from all Parts; fine, dextrous, diligent, ca-
refling, menacing, pliable to Occaſions, skilful in
ſowing Diviſions, Suſpicions, Jealouſys on the
Right-hand and on the Left, in giving the beſt
Turn to things; in a word, in lulling Princes to
a profound Sleep. Wou'd you know 'em better
by their Practice? read the Contrivance of Sybella
in Virgil. The Paſſage is ſomewhat of the longeſt,
but very bright. One wou'd think Virgil, when
he wrote it, had our Triple Alliance in view, as
it ſtands Centry to the Spaniſh Dominions.


*— — In his Den they found
The triple Porter of the Stygian Sound,
Grim Cerberus; who ſoon began to rear
His creſted Snakes, and arm'd his briſtling Hair.


bk di


Cerberus hxc ingens latrata regna trifauci
Perſonat, adverto recubans immanis in Antro.
Cui vates horrere videns jam colla col ubris,
Melle ſoparatam atque objectis frugibus offamg
Objicit. Ille fame rabida tria guttura pandens,
Corripit objectam, atque immania terga reſolvit
Fuſus humi, totoque ingens extenditur Antto.
Occupat Æueas aditum Cuſtode ſepulto. AEneid. J. 6.


E But


494 Miſcellaneous Refletions,

But prudent Sybil had before prepar'd
A Sop, in Hony fteep'd, to charm the Guard;
Which mix*d with pow'rful Progr, foe caſt before
Hu greedy grinning Jams juſt op'd to roar :
With three enormous Mouths he gapes; and ſtraight,
With Hunger preſs'd, devours the pleaſing Bait.

Long Draughts of Sleep his monſtrous Limbs enſlave ;
He reels, and falling fills the ſpacious Cave.

| The Keeper charm' d, the Chief without delay

| Paſs'd on, CD —


Dryd. Vir. P- 429.


III. As for Mony, that Sinew of War which


compaſſes every Point, and finds no Fortreſs im-
pregnable, his Majeſty has more to ſpare than
all his Neighbors together, without reckoning in
the Felicity of having Miniſters inexhauſtible in
new Ways and Means, and Subjects of inexhau-
ſtible Patience.


IV. Not to forget our French Ladys in all the


Courts of Europe, which is no inconſiderable ad-
vantage: for what can't they bring about, having
naturally a World of Charms, inſinuating with
great Addreſs into the deepeſt Receſſes of the
Soul, eſteeming it a Glory to be ſerviceable to
their Country, train'd early to the Arts of
Intrigue, and e with the Miniſters
of France at pleaſure? They who know Mr. Me-
zeray's Remark in the Life of Harry IV. That the
Intrigues between the Ladys and Lords of the
French Court, * had brought about the greateſt Events
in the Court of France ever ſince the Reign of Fran-


—_—


——


. Abrege Chronol. ad An, 1605. 81
| Ts | OE Tn ry CIS Ls


French Ladys Politicks. This perhaps is the ground


of ſome Peoples ſaying, It's more the Intereſt of


our Kings to have Daughters than Sons; becauſe
by marrying the Princeſſes out of the Kingdom,


we make advantageous Alliances, and are ſure of


Creatures in high Credit among our Neighbors.
Whence they are often call'd Victims of State,
facrific'd againſt their real Inclinations: but they
ſoon forget this ſmall Violence, and toil for their
Country's Good. : |
V. Add to this the many Advantages which
concur in the King's own Perſon. He's at an
Age in which the Powers of Body and Mind,
Courage and Prudence, are 1n a juſt Equilibrium.
A Prince whoſe Character comprehends all the
Qualitys of Alexander and Philip, temper'd and
corrected one by t'other. Inſtead of the falſe
Bravery of Alexander, he's poſſeſt of that Spirit


of Negotiation peculiar to Philip; and to the My-


ſterys of the Cabinet, in which Philip excel'd, adds
all that can be counted true Courage in Alexan-
der. For as to that Delicacy which allow'd him
not to ſurprize an Enemy, *tis an Exceſs a Hero
may well depart from without tarniſhing the Lu-
ſtre of his Glory. *Tis ſtretching the Notion of
Bravery too far, not to refuſe the advantage of
a dark Night for gaining a deciſive Victory. Tis
pure Vanity to imagine, that not giving an Enemy
time to make a vigorous Defence, diminiſhes the
Merit of a Triumph. Our Hero 1s above theſe
airy Refinements. When he deſigns to beſiege a
Town in Flanders, he marches towards Lorain ;
and wou'd be very ſorry if his Enemys penetra-
ting the deſign, ſhou'd grow ſaucy on their be-

Lt 4: ing


occaſiom d by a Comet. 495
cis I. muſt needs have a high Opinion of our


_ 2
nn“, CRE r r
. 05 0 1
= — —


496 Miſcellaneous Reflettions,
ing ſufficiently provided. This ſhews, Men ſteer to
Glory by quite contrary Paths. A Conqueror, who
gave his Enemy timely notice that he deſign'd to
beſiege ſach a Fortreſs, and yet ſhou'd take it,
wou'd be prodigiouſly prais'd. Alexander's * {6
much admir'd Anſwer to Polypercon, ſhews this.
When our King takes a Town, after he has done
his utmoſt Endeavors 'to conceal the intended
Siege, he's prodigiouſly prais'd too. He's daily
| extoPd for his Skill in concealing a premedita-
ted War under the appearance of Diverſions or
Progreſſes; That the Review of Vincennes was a
Preparation for the War of Flanders, and that the
Enterprize on the Franche-Comte had only the Air
of a Progreſs to Burgundy. Every one knows the
Device on this occaſion, A Sun hid in the Clouds,
with theſe Words : SUE |


Tegiturque parat dum fulmina.


This laſt is much the ſureſt way to Victory. Let's
agree then, that the King joining to the Cha-
racter of Philip all that's ſolid in Alexander's Cou-
rage, is moſt capable of making great Conqueſts,
and moſt incapable of deſtroying the Advantages
of Fortune by Acts of Temerity. I add theſe
laſt Words, becauſe I remember my ſaying in
another place, That Conquerors ought to throw
themſelves upon Fortune, without conſulting the
Rules of Prudence. I own, moſt Conquerors
have done ſo; but as much greater Numbers have


1


* Q. Curt. I. 4. c. 13. FT Eutret. Ariſte, & Eugene.
e V


miſ- |


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 497
miſcarry'd by running on madly : the ſafeſt way


is to join the Maxims of Prudence to a Spirit of


Bravery... : 4 |

This however is not ſufficient ground to con-
clude, the Period for great Conqueſts is yet at hand.
Twere farther neceſſary, that Europe be in no
Condition to reſiſt the King's mighty Power: For,


asI already obſerv'd, Cyrus and Alexander might
have ſtruggled many a year in one Province. Great
Conqueſts are then made, when a mighty War-
rior, provided with all neceſſary Advantages,


meets with no one who gives him conſiderable
oppoſition. When he's to diſpute the ground


lach by Inch, and after taking one Town, muſt fit


down before another within a League of it, he
makes little progreſs in twenty years War.” Tis do-
ing buſineſs, when after ſtriking a Conſternation far
and near, People come poſting three or four days


Journey with the Keys of their Citys.


SE cr. CCXLVIIN. 4 Thought on the pre-
ent State of Europe.


E T's conſider Europe then as it ſtands at pre-

ſent, under an infinite Number of Sovereigns,
or ſuch as wou'd be thought ſo. We ſhall find
ſome of em, who not having ſufficient means to
ſupport their Dignity, dare not reſolve on any
vigorous Meaſures, for fear of loſing their Pen-
lion. We ſhall find others ſunk in ſenſual Plea-


| ſures, and who place their whole Glory in the ſoft


Embraces of a Miſtreſs : Some who ſell off Bran-
ches of their Revenues to go paſs a Carnaval at
Venice, void of every Thought of what's truly


Great, and dead to a Senſe of Glory : Others


bow'd


498 Miſcellaneous Reflictious, |
bow'd down by the Yoke of ſenfleſs Superſtition,
and Slaves to ſome ignorant Monk or Friar;
whilſt others are reſtrain'd by the Danger of being
the firſt devour'd, if they ſhou'd offer to ſtir. They
who have Capacity and Courage 'enough to make
aStand, have not the Forces at command which
they cou'd wiſh for. |
VII. I meet with Frenchmen, who to all I have
ſaid, add further, That our Neighbors admiring the


great Qualitys of our Monarch, aſpire to the Ho-


nor of being in the Number of his Subjects; and
I have read fo much, in I don't know how many
Pamphlets publiſh'd by Authority. I have paſs'd
thro the Places which will be the firſt conquer'd,
and obſerv'd in 'em all a horrible Dread of the
French Domination, which they look on as a
_ diſmal Proſpe& opening upon 'em for the Cha-
ſtiſement of their Sins. Nothing's more agreeable,
ſay they in thoſe places, than the French Nation,
when you only travel among em; but tis a dreadful
thing to fall into their hands when they come among
you as Conquerors. They inſult, they pillage; they are
the Terror of Mothers and Husbands; they full all Pla-


ces with Offices and Taxes as vexations as the very


Dragoons, &c. I anſwer'd *em, They 1doliz'd their
Imaginary Liberty; and that taking one thing
with another, they were greater Slaves than we:
but they'd not hear a word on't. So let's not
reckon the Ambition of becoming French Subjects,
in the number of the favorable Diſpoſitions we
are ſearching after.


SECT


Sy
.
-
**
X4
1
2
3
85
38g
4 $ 2
3
WE
k 5
*
.
.
3
72
E gi
*
*
.
=
a
wy


orcafion'd by a Comet. 499


SEC * CCXILIX. How Repablicks in antient


Times mortify'd the Monarchys.


dag Kos s who ſay the King will only have


to deal with Republicks, are partly in
the right; for properly ſpeaking, I know no
Kingly form of Government about us except Spain,
from whence undoubtedly no Oppoſition will be
made. But they're miſtaken in imagining Kings
have nothing to apprehend from a Republican
State. For who knows not that the Common-
wealth of Rome was the Scourge of Monarchs,
and that crown'd Heads were never ſo mortify'd


as by this Republick, expoſing 'em for a May-


game to the People during the Ceremonys of their
Triumphs; caſting em in Chains and in Priſons;
and pretending a private Citizen of Rome, cloth'd
with the Conſular Dignity, ought to take place of
the greateſt Monarchs; and that *twas doing 'em
a very great * Honor to confer onꝰ em the Title of


Friends of the Roman People? Can there be a greater


inſtance of Haughtineſs than the Conduct of Popi-


| live, Chief of the Embaſſy which the Roman Senate


ſent to King Antiochus the Great, enjoining him


to make Peace with Prolomy King of Egypt?


This Monarch, one of the powerfulleſt Princes of
Aſia, reacht the Embaſlador his hand in the moſt


| obliging manner imaginable; the Embaſſador only


— — — . C——_—
——_—S_
—


— ——_——— — —


* Pacem illi prius petendam a Pop. Rom. eſſe quam ut Rex


ſociuſque & amicus appelletur; nominis ejus honorem pro


magnis erga ſe Regum meritis dare Pop. Rom. conſueſſe.
Liv. I. 1. dec. 4. |


reacht


50 Miſcellaneous Reflections,

reacht him the Letters of the Senate. Antiochm
having read 'em over, promis'd to conſider of
the matter: Popilius admitting no delay, drew a
Circle with his Ring about the Monarch, and
demanded a poſitive Anſwer before he ſtir'd
from the ſpot. The Prince finding himſelf hard
preſt, agreed to the Senate's Propoſals ; and
then the Embaſſador offer'd his Hand. *“ Some
time after Antiochus ſent his Embaſſadors to Rome,
to acquaint the Senate he had executed their
Orders with as much Exactneſs as tho 'twere
an Order of his Gods. What do you think of
Greece, tho not one intire Republick like Rome,
but a knot of ſeveral ſmall Commonwealths, jea-
lous of one another, and torn to pieces by a
thouſand Factions? Yet Greece in this condition
foiPd the mighty Empire of the Perſians, and
cover'd it with Shame and Infamy; and after
having deſtroy'd their vaſt Armys, tranſported in-
to Europe to ſubdue its State, carry'd the War into
 Aſia,and made great Conqueſts on em. The pow-
erful King Darius, after the Misfortune of hearing
the Athenians had burnt the Capital City of Lydia,
where his Royal Brother kept his Reſidence, and
ordering his Page to put him every Morning 1n
mind of this Affront, had not he the Mortifica-
tion not only to die unreveng'd, but even much
worſe treated in the Plains of Marathon? France
therefore is not ſecure of finding little Oppoſition


on the account of its being ſurrounded only by |


Republicks, but rather becauſe the neighboring


— —


—


* —


V Valer. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 4. Velleius Patercul. lib. 1.
Liv. I. 45. .
States


States
They
ment,
will. h.
cratic⸗


Eve


quitte


| Grief
= again!
but B
Murm
to be
break
made,
= Engla
put tc
= Oppo
their
At la
and ti
into i
midal
Arbit
7 of en
the e
conce
to th

4 ty of
and 1
do pa


occaſion'd by a Comet, 50
| States are neither Monarchys nor Republicks.

| They live under certain mix'd Forms of Govern-

| ment, extremely favorable to the King's Deſigns ; -
| becauſe when that part in em which is Monarchical
will have things one way, the part which is Demo- |
cratical will have 'em another. | |
| Every. one knows, that the King of England i
E quitted the Triple Alliance in 1672. to the great
© Grief of his Subjects; and after two Campagas ||
© againſt Holland, in which the Evgl:;ſb got nothing
but Blows, ſaw himſelf forc'd to a Peace by tze
= Murmurs of his People. What did this King do |
to be reveng'd of his Parliament? He ne'er wou'd

break with France, whatever Inſtances his Subjects

© made, repreſenting the Kingdom and Church of

England in apparent danger, unleſs a check were

put to the Growth of France, by a more vigorous

= Oppoſition than that of the Allys. He laugh'd at

their Remonſtrances, and diſſolv'd 'em in anger.

At laſt he ſeem'd reſolv'd on a Rupture in 1678.

and then the Republican Party wou'd not come

into it, apprehending that under color of a for-
midable Preparation for the War againſt France, |
be might attempt the eſtabliſhing Popery and =
E Arbitrary Power in the three Kingdoms. This |
2 Diviſion, which in all appearance will be a ſource _ |
of endleſs Conſpiracy and Cabal, ſince Religion, {1
the great Engine for moving the Populace, is | |
= concern'd, will be exceeding favorable at long run 1
to the Deſigns which France may form; and has |
not been unſerviceable to the concluding the Trea-
ty of Nimeguen, ſo ſhameful to the Confederates,


and fo glorious to our Nation, that *twere hard
do parallel it in Story.


SECT.


3 as et NE E 9 8 3 8
2 5 7 <A [5 4 +2. 3 . . $ 3 8 4
3 3 3 : e UP OPEerT 2! AR


502 Miſcellaneoas Reflections, *


Sy CT: CCL. The Advantages of the Peace of


Nimeguen fo France.


T HE King gave the Peace there without re-
ceding from one Article of the Project he
had order'd to be printed ſeveral Months before;
whereas the uſual way was inſiſting on a thouſand
points in hopes of obtaining one. He took care
to have every Foot reſtorꝰd to the Swede which he
had loſt in the Scuffle, and left Germany the regret
of not being able to mortify a Prince, who had
ſuſtain'd our Intereſts with ſo high a hand. By


this he let thoſe Princes of the Empire under-


ſtand, who might one day have an Inclination to
enter into his Alliance, that they might with


Impunity. What the Elector of Brandenburg had


conquer'd in Pomerania, he wreſted out of his


hands with ſo much ſcorn, as let all Europe per-


ceive the Glory of this Ele&or was no way agrea-
ble to the principal crown'd Heads of Germany,
which, if well improv'd, might anſwer ſeveral


good Purpoſes. In ſhort, he forc'd the Allys to


conclude each a ſeparate Peace, which ſo imbit-
ter'd *em againſt one another, that they mutually
wiſh'd each other at the Devil. To this day ſome
of 'em han't forgot their Reſentments, but are
more inclin'd to ſide with France than againſt it;
Spleen carrying it manifeſtly againſt their true In-
tereſt. By this one ſees how much it's for the
King's Advantage to have Neighbors which are
neither Republicks, nor Monarchys, tho ſome a-
mong 'em give themſelves a more Monarchical Air
than that of King.


SECT:


SEC


8
15


Paſſic

as a]
never
F--"F'18
| tutio!
plain
and v
long:
| vere;
| Prece
| Impoy
| the p
Affair
| long |
- Ratisb
not a


orraford by « Comet. ez


$zcT, CCH. 4 Refteition on the Form of
” Government in German).


Shall never forget the Humor of a Lawyer of
|| your Acquaintance, who fell into a ſtrange
| Paſſion one day at the Abuſe of the word Empire,
as apply'd to Germany; and certain it is, that
| never Word was more unfortunately. coupled.
| *Tis apparently the moſt monſtrous Conſti-

tution now on Earth, as Mr. Puffendorf has
| plainly prov'd under the Name of Monz ambanus:
and when J conſider it has for all this ſubſiſted a
| long time under an innumerable Multitude of So-
| vereign Princes, not yet agreed. about Place and
| Precedence, and who poſtpone Debates of greateſt
| Importance to the publick Welfare, to fraction
| the part which each Deputy is to have in each
Affair; when I reflect on their Diſputes, and the
long and immortal Deliberations of the Diet of
| Ratisbon, Pm. convinc'd Pope * Urban VIII. was
| not altogether wrong in ſaying, That the World
| in a great meaſure govern'd it ſelf. I mean, in
| ſpite of all that Men can do to ruin their Affairs,
there's notwithſtanding a ſuperior Providence
which F'direqts em. Have you never heard this
| Quibble, Sir, That while the Kench are making


„


—


. 0 £ i bp \ » P
| N


mm


* A dominare non biſogna altr imente tanto ingegno,
berche il Mondo fi governa in cierta maniera da fe ſteſſo,
| Mr. Le Vayer lettre 140. | | ww


T- Scilicet eſt aliquid quod nos cogatque regatque
Majus, & in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
| Manil. Aſtron. I. 4.


good


——
— — on — — — . —— — 9 poo er.
— -— —_— _ ——


— -
— —U— p —ñäõ ——— — ——ꝓ——ʒẽä—ẽ — — a
5


$64 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


good chear on the Rhine, and the Turks in Hungary,


the Germans are at their Diet at Ratisbon? The
meaning's very juſt, and ſad was the Experi-
ence on't during the laſt War between the Empe-
ror and Turk. Newhauſe! was taken in the firſt
Pre the Infidels had ravag'd. ſeveral Provinces;
is Imperial Majeſty had quitted the City of 7;-
enna, to ſave himſelf at Lints with all his moſt
valuable Effects and the. publick Regiſters: All
this, I ſay, was already over and paſt, while no-
thing paſt at Ratisbon but Diſputes of no moment,
Umbrages, Jealouſys, and mere Formalitys, with-
out any other Fruits of their many Deliberations,
than their departing from the Diet, more divided
and more unreſolv'd than when they met.


src. CCIII. The Indlination of the Teſuits


to the Intereſts of France.


IX. en many Advantages on the
I fide of Fance, we likewiſe reckon that
Devotion which the Jeſuits expreſs for its Inte-
reſts. While Spain was the moſt renown'd Power
of Europe, the Jeſuits were all Spaniards, thoſe
born at Paris or at Rome, as well as thoſe born in
Old Caſtile. Ever ſince the Declenſion of the
Houſe of Auſtria, and the Proſperitys of Lews
the Great, they are all French; at Rome, at Vien-
na, at Madrid, as well as in the College of Cler-
mont. In thoſe Days the Libertys of the Gallican
Church appear'd not to them well founded : they
never left writing for the Rights of the Pope


_ againſt thoſe of our Kings. One might fill a Li-


brary with the Defences compos'd by the Society,


_ againſt which the Parliament of Paris, and the


Sorbon


r


—


occaſiowd by a Comet. 50g
Sorbon pabliſh'd Sentences of Condemnation. At
preſent his Majeſty has not truſtier Pens than theirs
in his Differences with the Pope. *Tis now the
Court of Rome's turn to cenſure the Books of the
Reverend Fathers. It ſeems the King's Proſpe-
ritys have afforded *em new Lights, whichall their
Librarys were unable to do before ; and, like thoſe
Edits which P. Maimbourg * ſays, pour into the
Souls of Hugonots a Conviction of the true Re-
ligion, have clear'd their Underſtandings to per-
ceive Truths which they once judg'd incompre-
henſible. Yet *twere wrong to accuſe *em of
Inconſtancy on this ſcore, for *tis not the Society
which changes its Mind, but Fortune which chan-
ges its Favorite : And after all, who ſees not that
this is conforming to the Scriptures Þ, which al-
low not our having a continuing City on Earth?
Now the King's having gain'd the Jeſuits to his
ſide all over Europe, is no inconſiderable Advantage.
Their Credit runs high in more Courts than one,
and by their good Addreſs they may contribute
mightily to lay aſide all Deliberations oppoſite to


his Majeſty's Deſigns. The Ambition of Lording
it in thoſe Places which ſhall be conquer'd by the


French Arms, and having a Protector ſo power=
ful, and fo affectionate as the King, who may,
make their Order flouriſh in ſpite of Enemys,


In ſpite of Jealouſys, and maintain it in more


Luſtre than the Princes who govern at preſent :
This Ambition, I fay, is enough to drive 'em in-


toall Intrigues which may be favorable to our


Affairs. If we believe the Chronique Scandaleuſe,


n
— >


* Epiſt, Dedicat, of bis Hiſt. Lucher, f Heb. 1. 14.
Mm they


po OR ONE . TEE — — —


— — —


— —
— ——
Let. — FRY — — ——— — ᷓꝓ a — — AO
—


—— — —


— — —ů—


—— —


- CEE ALLE WEBS EG ˖— oa uk x


fam


— —— — —


and perhaps contributed to our Vicorys no leſs


 funo ſappia, come ſi fa. Poſſibly tho, what's ſaid


—
—— — — —


nnn. ....


5s Miscellaneous Refleftions,
They han't been unſerviceable in this laſt War,


than the A ivity of our Generals. The World
ſays, they are profound Politicians; and one of
the three famous Sermons preach'd on the Beati-
fication of St. Ignatius in 1609. gives this Blogy
to the Society, That it reckons above ten
ce thouſand five hundred and eighty Religious,
% ſo skill'd in the Art of Government, that even
ce among their Lay Brothers ſome may be cho-
« ſen fit to read Lectures to the Chancellors
ce of Grenada at Vailladolid, ay marry and to
& the whole Privy- Council. And' tis ſaid, their
General diſcourſing one day at Rome with a cer-
tain French Nobleman told him, * Look ye, Sir,
From this Chamber, From this Chamber, tepeat-
ing it twice over, I govern not only Paris, but
China; zoe only China, but the whole World; tho
no body living can imagine how, or which way.
Veda ul Signor D. di queſta Camera, di 3
Camera, io governo non dica Parigi, ma la China;
aan gia la China, ma tutto il mondo, ſenza che niſ-


+ 8-H 1 de


= T Re 7 7 1 » q
; "— . 8
>; * ( 2 r 2 5 1 EIT TPO , 4 N * 8 » N
2 4 TR nt ooo es. E nee pong a e
Ab . A nemme nt; CO NI ORE Ty" DENY DIETS A
n . . bn AY ab: bart 1 1 . ö N » 3; SN * 2 . .
55 8 . n 2 222. 19 n p 2327 ⁵ũdd e ß ĩ , ͤ ß AL ae Ad *
e 8 9 8 FCC J et r ot EEC at POLY Cree , . 3 „
FFP 2 * FV EIT So” th, err 8 . A FTF... S 5 .
. — . 2 N 2 c oY eee AIR S Pa" 7 IIS 2 Lab gs S RA Eee > I W ˖˖ IT 4 -
\ £ - - 22 — » * 5 - - + 9204 * Nr. n 70 aan wn Bn gs IS F . 3 I ” -


of their Abilitys and mighty Credit, mayn't be all
true. There are few things which are not exag-
gerated. | 223 15


+ LET]


8 8
n
NR 1
* 222 1 2 FR
.


1 _— — —
——— —— — * —EU——é — *. A
. * * — * * = 7 *


* See the Morale P
1659. p. 30, 31.


ratique des Jeſuites, printed at Cologne,


occafion'd by a Comet. 507


S: cT, CCLII.: Of certain. Prophecys which
"© promiſe the King great Conqueſs,


* MONG the favorable Diſpoſitions which
open the King a way to Univerfal Mo-

narchy, are reckon'd, in the laſt place, feveral Pro-
phecys, which promiſe the King of France the
Empire of the World. One of theſe Prophecys
is to be met with in the ninth Tome of the Works
of St. Auſtin, in the Treatiſe of Antichriſt, ſup»
pos'd to be written by St. Auſtin himſelf, or by


= KRabanus Maurns Arch-biſhop of Ments. We find


another in a Commentary on the Revelations,
compos'd by David Pareus a Proteſtant Divine,
which he ſays he found in the Houſe of the Pre-
ſident of a Collegiate Church in Germany. Tis
an old Tradition -among us, that there's an old
Tradition among the Twrks, which threatens the
Deſtruction of their Empire by the French. The
great Qualitys of our Monarch perſnade ſo
ſtrongly, theſe Prophecys relate to him, that
even the * Mathematicians are come into the No-
tion. Many believe it a kind of Sin to doubt it
after the Revelations of the famous Drabicius,
who has propheſy*d ſo many ſtrange things againſt
the Emperor, and in favor of France. Now great
Enterprizes can't poſſibly be begun under Preſa-
ges more favorable than Revelation and Pro-

== rifes from on high. Thus every thing ſeems
to invite the King to a new War.


— n
* 3 2 4 4 8


hu * r — —


* Mr. Comiers in hir new Doctrine of Comets, printed in 1665.


Mm 2 SECT.


go8 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


SR. CCLIV. Pretentes which the Ring
might raiſe, to lay hold of the favorable Diſ-
_ Poſitions which Fortune offers him,


1 Had one with me t'other Day, who refle&ing
on all theſe happy Diſpoſitions, ſtood ama?'d
that the King wou'd not lay hold of em. What
hinders, ſays he, his taking in the reſt of the
Spaniſh Low Countrys, and poſleſſing himſelf with-
out more Ceremony of what lies convenient to him
in Germany? Is it that his Majeſty wou'd not give the
leaſt cauſe of complaint? But how comes the Block-
ade then, and the taking of ſome Places whoſe Situ-
ation render'd *em the moſt advantageous for in-
commoding us in a new War? Whence ſo many
ſtale Pretenſions, on which his Majeſty founds a
legal Right, firſt by his Judges, andafterwards by
his Soldiers? This they complain of all over
Europe; and ſince they will be complaining for
complaining ſake, better give em a good ſubſtan-
tial Reaſon all at once, than ſo many trifling ones.
If the King has no mind they ſhow'd complain,
perhaps he does too much; if he does not value
their Complaints, he does too little. Is it that he
wou'd not be the firſt in breaking the Peace of
| Nimeguen, but expects the Spaniards ſhou'd begin!
If that be the matter, we ſhall have the longeſt
Peace that ever was: for the Spaniards will
'- ſwallow a thouſand Affronts rather than declare
War; well knowing, that the Hoſtilitys of one
Campagn wou'd be more fatal than a hundred
Decrees of the Chamber of Reunion, or all the
Inſults by which we endeavor to tire their Pati-
ence, and proyoke *em to a Rupture. Is it *
VORS em e


occaſion'd by 4 Comet. 50g
his Majeſty wants a plauſible Pretence to declare
War againſt his Neighbors ? But here, Sir's,
one ready to his hand, and the moſt ſpecious Pre-
tence in the World. The Spaniards make their
Complaints in all the Courts of Europe, and even
publiſh in their Pamphlets, that France has com-
mitted ſeveral Infractions of the Treaty of Nime-
guen. This is the moſt outragious Injury in Na-
ture, A private Gentleman who's charg'd with
violating his Oath, waits not for a critical time to
right himſelf ; and all the World commends his
ſeeking Reparation for ſuch an Outrage. By
much a ſtronger Reaſon, a Prince accus'd of in-
fringing a Peace which he has ſolemnly ſworn, has
a right of taking his Revenge by the way of
Arms, the only way which Sovereigns can make
uſe of. So that if his Majeſty waits only for a
reaſonable pretence to renew the War, here's one
you ſee at his Service: and as little a Man as I am,
Il engage in two days time to draw up the fineſt
Manifeſto in the World, at leaſt much a finer than
that in 1672. founded only on the Ingratitude of
the Hollanders; ſince it's certain the ungratefu
don't wound our Honor near ſo much as thoſe
who give us the Lye. Ingratitude 1s no doubt an
execrable Vice: Vet no Laws, as Il remember. have
ever declar'd a Puniſhment for it, except thoſe of
the * Medes. And to what purpoſe ſhou'd there
be Laws againſt the ungrateful, ſince no one dare
take his Remedy without forfeiting the Merit of
his Benefit? „ He makes himſelf odious who re-
* proaches kind Offices, of which the Receiver


— . —
2 „


2—


* r | —_ . ES


* denc W 11 d 1 e an”
nme Fn al


51ů0 Miſcellaneow Refleltions, |


e ſhou'd never be unmindful, tho the Benefactor


& ſhou'd neer make * mention of em. + The
& only Puniſhment of Ingratitude is, its being
„ condemn'd by all the World; the Crime is not
ce acquitted : but as *twere difficult to ground Ac-
% tions on a caſe of an uncertain nature, it's
“ branded with a publick Odium, and ſtands
„ among the things we refer to an All-ſee-
„e ing Juſtice. Yet this hinders not, but Sove-
reigns who have Rights incomprehenſtble to the
reſt of Men, may call a neighboring State to ac-
count for its Ingratitude, as appears by the War
of 1672. And this being the Caſe, how much
more reaſonable to revenge the Spaniards publick
Charge of Prevarication againſt his Majeſty, ſince


this is an Injury, againſt which the Laws provide


3 Remedy for private Partys?


SEC T. CCLY. Reaſons for not lying hold on
+. theſe favorable Diſpoſitions.


7 V talk at your eaſe, reply'd I to my merry
L Blade; you're not to anſwer in the ſight of
God, either for the Declaration of a War, or
the Miſerys which attend it. But when a Prince,
Ad with Picty and the Love of God, meditates


3 1
1 4 1
6—— 4


_ * —
** — —
3 — — *


——


I Odioſum fanẽ genus hominum officia exprobrantium, quæ
meminiſſe debet is in quem collata ſunt, non commemorare qui
eonrulit. Cicero in Lælio. f Hoc frequentiffimum crimen
nuſquam punitur, ubique improbatur. Neque abſolvimus il-
lud, ſed cum difficilis effer incertæ rei æſtimatio, ranthm odio
damnavinnys, & inter ea rekiquinus que ad yindices Deos mitti-


90


occaſian d by 4 Comet. 511
on the Precepts of his Religion, he ne'er has a

Thought whether *twere an eaſy matter to ſeize
his Neighbor's Dominions, or get this or that
Manifeſto drawn up, but whether. he can go on
ſach an Enterprize with a good Conſcience; and
concludes it's more his Intereſt to leave all People
in the quiet poſleſſion of their Right, than pro-
voke a God who will puniſh the greateſt Kings for
the abuſe of their Power, in a manner infinitely
more ſevere, * than they puniſh little Gentle-
men who tyrannize over their Vaſſals.

For this Reaſon, notwithſtanding all the favo-
rable Conjunctures which tempt his Majeſty to
undertake the Conqueſt of Europe, I ſhou'd not
bet ten to one that there will ſoon be a general
War, or that France ſha]l have all the Succeſs
which Fortune ſeems to promiſe. For beſides
what I juſt ſaid of the Piety of our Monarch, I
make no doubt but his excellent Senſe, and
inſight into Hiſtory, will inform him of the in-
ſtability of Fortune. What the Scythiars repre-
ſented to Alexander is very right; and had not
Death ſnatch'd away this Conqueror in the flower
of his Vouth, he might perhaps have bin in Circum-
ſtances to cry out, O Scythians! as Cræſus cry'd,
O Solon! Fortune, which has been compar'd to ſo
many things, may in my mind be rightly com-


——


—


*» (


* Vos quibus Rector maris atque terræ
Jus dedit magnum necis atque vitæ,
Ponite inflatos tumidoſque vultus.
Quidquid a vobis minor extimeſcit
Major hoe vobis Dominus minatur. 1
m egno graviore regnum eſt.
9 , e Thel. Att, 3. Sc. ult.
Mm 4 par'd


512 Miſcellaneous Reflection,

par'd to a ſmooth ſmiling Sea, which yet is brew-
ing | Miſchief and Tempeſts at bottom. Fool
who truſts it.


Mene ſalis placidi vultum, fluctuſq; quietos

Ionorare jubes ? Mene buic confidere monſtro?

e/AEntam credam quid enim fallacibus Auſtris,
Et cali toties deceptus fraude ſereni.


The King we know has not yet been trick'd by


Fortune. But fo many other great Princes have,


who ſoon or late ſaw a reverſe of their Glory,
that the ſureſt way is to venture nothing on fair
Appearances. For he who miſcarrys, not only
runs the hazard of being neither prais'd nor pi-
ty'd, but expoſes himſelf to the Laſhes of Con-
ſcience, to the Murmurs of his own People,
and the Inſults of Strangers. All Europe with
pleaſure beheld the ambitious Enterprizes of the


Houſe of Auſtria diſappointed (I hint at this the


oftner, that we might take warning by ſo freſh
an SLOPE, The Victorys of Guſtavus, the
Triumphs of the French, the Revolt of Catalonia,
the Lofs of Portugal, made all the World laugh,
and tell*em aloud, they richly deſerv'd it. All ſaw
the Growth of the Republick of Holland with
Pleaſure, which having given the firſt ſhock to
this formidable Power, weaken'd it day after
day, by its Conqueſt of ſeveral Towns, by ſeve-
ral naval Victorys, by its Commerce eſtabliſh'd in
all Parts of the World, by the unparallel'd bra-


very of the Princes which commanded its Armys,


_ 7


—


— — —
4 *


1 Ubi lſeryne navigia, ibi ſorbenrur. genere and


occaſiowd by a Comet. 512
and the conſummate Prudence of the States
General. And cou'd it be foreſeen that this Re-
publick ſhou'd one day be the greateſt Support of
tottering Spain, and ſhou'd make appear that it
had not enter'd into War by any Motives of
Ambition, but purely to preſerve its own Liber-
ty, anda Ballance between the Powers of Europe:
Cou'd this, I ſay, be foreſeen, I queſtion whether
*twou'd be ſo kindly taken (but People ne'er give
themſelves the trouble of ſo remote a Thought,
as where they whoſe preſent Proſperity is a Ter-
ror, may hereafter find ſhelter in their Diſgrace).
And we are ſeldom laviſh of our Applauſes to
thoſe who are equally ready to ſuſtain or humble

the ſame Power, according as it grows weaker or
more formidable. In a word, when People bring

Miſchiefs on themſelves, they are ne'er pity'd ;
but where unfortunate in a juſt Defenſive, there
they have a thouſand Sources of Conſolation.
Why ſhou'd not we think his Majeſty enters of-
ten into Reflections of this kind?

Why - ſhou'd not we ſuppoſe, he diſcovers by
the ſtrength of his own Judgment, that he ought
to be ſatisfy'd with the Glory he has acquir'd, and
not eaſily hazard it? As the World's made, it

always judges of a Hero's Actions by the laſt he
performs. If after gaining ſeveral Victorys, he
happens to loſe a Battel or two, they talk no more
of his Good, they remember. only his ill Fortune.
The true Reaſon why Ceſar, * the more he had ex-


—


——


* Non nifi tempore extremo ad dimicandum cunctatior factus
eſt, quo ſæpius viciſſet eo minus experiendos caſus opinans, ni-
hilque ſe tantum acquiſiturum viRoria, quantum auferre cala-
mnitas poſſet. Suet, in Ceſ. cap. 60, m_—_


perienc'd


514 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
perienc'd the Favors of Fortune, the leſs was he
inclin'd to fight ; judging with good Reaſon, that
a new Victory added to all his old, wou'd not do
him near ſo much ſervice, as the loſs of one
Battel wou'd do him prejudice. It's the huſi-
neſs of young Hero's, who have not yet eſtabliſh'd
a Reputation, and of your biſognoſs & honore, as
the Italians call em, to ſeek occaſions of ſignali-


Zing themſelves; it's their buſineſs to make em


Enemys right or wrong, to make a Parade of
their Forces: but when once arriv'd to a high Re-
putation, how right is it to ſtop there!

Why may'nt we believe, that his Majeſty with
all that good Senſe of his, and having ſuffi-
ciently diſcover'd what his Great Soul and mili-


tary Proweſs is capable of, deſigns to immortalize


himſelf by Methods wholly new, and in reality


infinitely more deſerving praiſe than Victorys and


Triumphs? Theſe new Methods, this Path to
folid Glory, is leaving Europe in repoſe, at a time
when he might. eaſily overrun it; this is making a
_ Conqueſt o'er himſelf 4 more glorious than that

of Empires, and ſetting a bright and tranſcendent
Example of Vertue which no Age affords. Now


from whom can we expect ſo rare an Example


with ſo much Juſtice, as from a King like ours,
whom God has diſtinguiſh'd by ſo many mira-
culous ways? For whom ſhow'd the Glory of
'fhewing the World the real Difference between a


6


—


+ Omni 200 triumpho depoſirus triumphus clarior fuit, adeo
wreta in tempore gloria interdum cumulatior redit. Liv. J. 2.
| Dec. 1. a |


: Magnum delata poteſtas


Majorem contempta probat Claud.


King


_ King


ces,
is el
Rigl
tian
light
of t
the

bett.
Chri
tern
ous.
Grea
tune
lieve
way
expe
yet 1
adva
tialit
it, |
Troy
make
State
Laws
whic
Mode
appr.
only
agree
Franc


Nime


Mode
Vico
it, be


occaſion'd by a Comet. 515
| King who adores the true God, and Infidel Prin-
ces, be reſerv*d for all this while, but for him who
is eldeſt Son of. the Church, cloth'd by hereditary
Right with the glorious Title of Moſt Chriſ-
tian? He ſhou'd be guided by Reaſon alone, en-
lighten'd by Faith; they govern'd by the Inſtin&
of their Paſſions. But alas! Chriſtian Princes, to
the ſcandal of Chriſtianity, ſeldom follow any
better Principle; and *tis long, very long ſince the
Chriſtian Religion has produc'd any excellent Pat-
terns: *twere time it produc'd one truly illuſtri-
ous. Nothing cou'd be more ſo, than Lewrs the
Great's renouncing all the Triumphs which For-
tune now preſents him. Why ſhou'd not we be-
lieve that the King deſigns to go to Glory by this
way? What Bleſlings, what Praiſes might he not
expect from his Neighbors, from thoſe who are
yet unborn, from lateſt Poſterity ; if taking no
advantage of the Weakneſs of Spain, nor the Par-
tiality of England, and the Factions which divide
it, nor the Irreſolutions of Germany, nor the
Troubles of Hungary, which the Turks will ſurely
make their uſe of; his Majeſty ſhou'd ſuffer the
States of Europe to live peaceably all under their own
Laws ! Thus all the dazling Thoughts and Turns
which our fineſt Wits have ſtudy'd to ſet forth the
Moderation of our invincible Monarch, might be
approv'd by the whole World: at preſent they are
only French Truths, which our Neighbors don't
agree in. We may pretend what we pleaſe in
France, that the Treatys of Aix la Chapelle and
Nimeguen, are the pure Effects of his Majeſty's
Moderation, who put a ſtop to the courſe of his
Vigorys when no body elſe cou'd ; they'l not allow

it, beyond the Alps, or beyond the Sea, or uf

von


516 Miſſgellaneous Reflections,

vond the Rhine, or beyond the Pyrenees. And yet
being the Object of Praiſe in theſe Foreign Parts,
is what ſhou'd principally be aim'd at; for be a
King's Actions what they will, he's always ſure
of Praiſes, during Life at leaſt, among his own
Vaſſals. The true Praiſes of a Prince, are thoſe
which his Enemys. are forc'd to publiſh; and
therefore Mr. Balzac writing to a great Wit of
Holland, and ſignifying his eſteem for Frederick
Henry Prince of Orange, thought he comprehend-
ed all in theſe few words: I wiſh him a Glory his
 -Enemys may be forc'd to allow, and which mayn't be
Conteſted him even in the Spaniſh Hiſtorys.


SEC r. CCLVI. A Reflection on what has been
obſerv'd of certain Prophecys in favour of
France. 1


' A to the old Traditions, or Prophecys, which
tis pretended promiſe the Conqueſt of the
World to one of our Kings, he muſt have a mean
opinion of Lewis XIV. who imagines him capableof
undertaking the leaſt Affair on ſucha Motive. The
King has too much good Senſe not to look on all
"theſe pretended Revelations as vain and viſionary ;
and is not ignorant that for one Prince who ſuc-
ceeded by building on ſuch Imaginations, ten have
been ingag'd in raſh and unfortunate Enterprizes.
I remember to have read in the Hiſtory * of the
Cruſades, that they paid dearly at the Siege of Je-
ruſalem tor giving the Aſſault, © upon the Advice


—


4
, —_ — you ——


* Hiſt, de Croiſades par le P. Maimbourg. L 5 ce of


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 517
« of a Hermit who liv'd with the Reputation of
« great Sanctity in a Cave of Mount Oliver, and
« promis'd Victory to the Chriſtians on the part
« of God, preciſely upon ſuch a Day, tho they
« aſſur'd him they had nothing in readineſs for
« the Enterprize. But they ſoon found, 4 P.
« Maimbourg, juſtly obſerves, that in all kind of
« Affairs, eſpecially thoſe of War, tis dan-
« gerous forſaking the Rules of Art and Pru-
« dence, blindly to follow the ways of Revela-
« tion, which are not much to be rely'd on,
« becauſe often falſe ; and tho poſſibly they
“ might be true, no one's oblig'd to believe
« *em without invincible Proof. Without this,
« we are always oblig'd to follow that Reaſon
« and common Senſe which God has givea us,
« next after his Divine Word, as the Rule of
« our Conduct. The ſhame of being guilty of
ſuch an Error, in preferring the Viſions of a
poor Hermit to the known Rules of War, made
Godfrey of Bulloigne wiſer for the future.

We need not go out of the Hiſtory of the Cru-
ſades for Inſtances of Prophecys, which have miſe-
rably deceiy*d thoſe who rely*d on em; but *twill
ſuffice to conſider what hapned to St. Bernard.
This great Man having receiv'dan Order from Pope
Eugenius III. to preach up the 2d Cruſade in 1145.
did not fail promiſing a thouſand happy Succeſſes
to the Princes who ſhou'd ingage in ſo holy an Ex-
pedition. The great Reputation of his Sanctity
making his Promiſes conſider'd as ſo many Divine
Inſpirations, was the occaſion of more Peoples
liſting for this Voyage to Jeruſalem than ever were
known to do before or after. Some will even
have it, that he conſirm'd his Promiſes by many

V


513 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


extraordinary Miracles. But * P. Maimbourg
leaves us at full liberty whether we'l believe %m


or no; and *tis likely, that Part's falſe, becauſe -


there ne er was a more . unfortunate Expedi-
tion than that which was undertaken upon the
mighty hopes given. by St. Bernard. The poor
Knights of the Cruſade cou'd not forbear com-
plaining + that he had run 'em by his falſe


Predictions. on a fatal Precipice. What Anſwer


did he make em? "Tis with great reluQance, Sir,
that I open my ſelf on this Subject; however J


venture for once. Inſtead of frankly confeſ.
ſing he had been firſt deceiv'd, he ſav'd him-


ſelf by the pitiful ſubterfuge of conditional Pro-
miſes; giving 'em to underſtand, that when he firſt
foretold the happy Succeſs of the Cruſade, twas
to be taken with this neceſſary Condition, that

the Soldiers did not provoke the good God by a
Eicentiouſneſs of manners. Tell me, Sir, is not
this mocking the World, to ſet up for a Prophet,
and foretel what ſhall never come to paſs, with-

out mentioninga ſyllable of what ſhall really hap-
pen? Either St. Bernard ſhowd ne&er have pre-
tended to foretel future Events, or he ſhou'd have
foretold the very Diſorders into which the Sol-


diers were like to fall, inſtead of promiſing ima-


inary Victorys which were ne'er to happen. M
— ren this, is principally in anf Bag to thoſe
who alledg the Treatiſe of Antichriſt inſerted in
St. Auſtin's Works, and remarkable for a magni-
ficent Prediction in favour of one of our Kings:
for if the Prophecys deliver'd by St. Bernard were


— -
gm "


Ni .* * = einne A 9 YE —_—_—


- * Hiſt. Craiſade, l. 3. + Ibid. I. 4.


no


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 519


ao. better than Illuſions fatal to the Chriſtian


Powers, what a folly. wou'd it be in us to flat-
ter our” ſelves with the Empire of the World on


the Word of Rabanus Maurus, or even that of St.


Auſtin himſelf? —

But, ſay they, the Turks themſelves have a
Prophecy, which threatens *em with the Sword of
France. Another Dream! *Tis true, ever ſince
the Tenth Century there has been a Prophecy cur-
rent among thoſe of the Biſhop Hippolitus, which
aſſures us, that it is not by the Hands of the
Greeks that the Infidels are to be deſtroy'd, but by
the Frevch. *Tis true likewiſe, we owe this Pro-
phecy to Luitprand the Wiſe and Learned Biſhop
of Cremona, in the Relation of his ſecond Embaſ-
ſy to Conſtantinople. Tis further very true, that
the Saracens were marvelouſly encourag'd by this
Prophecy in the Battel which they gain'd in Sicily
in 963. over the Troops of Nicephorus Emperor
of Conſtantinople. It's true in the laſt place, that
the R. P. Maimbourg *, on whoſe Credit I take
all, ſays, * There are undoubtedly many Predic-
« tions of this kind, and time alone can diſcover
« whether they be true; nor can this be, till the
* French, who united as they now are under one
Hof the greateſt Princes that ever reign'd, are
4 capable of executing this great Deſign, are not
* hinder'd by foreign Wars, and by unjuſt
* Leagues, which for their juſt defence divert


dem (when our Feſuit wrote theſe Lines) from fo - -


> glorious an Enterprize. I'm willing to allow


—_—


9


* Riſt, du Schiſme des Grecs, J. 3. -


FEY g
4
1


520 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


the truth of all this; yet I don't allow we ought thi

to take the Prophecy for true. tio

For, I. it's certain, the Inſidels mention'd in mo

this Prophecy, are the Saracens and not the Turks. it?

The Turks were not known to the Weſt in the cat

_ tenth Century, but *twas ſadly haraſs'd by the M
Saracens, and for this Reaſon ſome good Souls,

to comfort the Chriſtians of thoſe days, promis d F.

N *em that an Empire founded in the Weſt by a Ty
| King of France, ſhow'd deſtroy that Infidel Nation, ph
| or promis'd themſelves as much by the benefit of ph
| an overheated Imagination. Now as the Event Er
f has ſhewn the falſeneſs of this pretty Prophecy, tat
ſince it's certain the Empire of the Saracens was me
neither deſtroy'd by the French, nor the Emperors Cc

of the Weſt, but by the Turks and Tartars; in

who can imagine with any ſhadow of Reaſon, W

| that the Prediction ſhall be accompliſn'd in the I c
| deſtruction of the Ottomans? And were not he pr
1 an errant Fool, who ſhou'd declare War with the i 4
| Port on the ſtrength of this Promiſe? © Br
II. It is not very certain, that the Turks have Joc

| any Prophecy among them, which threatens their th
| Subverſion by the French: For were it really ſo, - Hi
FE how 1s't poſſible thoſe Greeks who told Mr. Span, 1 C4
* the Ottomans had a Prophecy * importing the O- th
x verthrow of their Empire by a Nation, Chry/c- of
enos, that is with fair Hair, ſhou'd be ignorant 15

of this other Prophecy ſo honorable to our Na- Se

* tion? This was a very favorable occaſion for WU +.
| mentioning it: So that Mr. Spon taking no no- im
tice on't, we have ground to think he heard no- 1 Ri

PO | 1 iii ü — t r


| # Voyage dulevant, Vol. 1, ps 270« de impteſſ de rm


—


SE SF Up wS


occaſion'd by a Comet, 521
thing of it in his Travels in Turty; a Preſump-
tion, this pretended Prophecy is current only a-
mong our own good People in France. Beſides,
it's evident, this fair Nation, ſo fatal to the Turk;
cannot be ours. Mr. Spon takes it to be the
Muſcovite Or Ruſſian + he ſhall have it. |

ut, ſay ſome to me, Tho you're too good a
Frenchman to wiſh our carrying the War as far as
Turky, on the ſtrength of ſome favourable Pro-
phecys; you'l at leaſt allow Dabricius a ſtanch Pro-
phet, in promiſing us mighty i.onquelts in the
Empire. I anſwer, that tho I mean not to imi-
tate our Poets and Orators, who from time im-
memorial have been urging our Princes to the
Conqueſt of Conſtantinople; yet I can't for bear wiſn-
ing that our Invincible Monarch wou'd in his own
Wiſdom think fit to undertake this mighty Work.
I only ſay, *twere nonſenſe to reckon upon the
pretended Traditions which promiſe us Succeſs +
And as for Dabricius, it's plain, that none but the
Enemys of France can believe, either that ſhe
looks on him as a Perſon divinely inſpir'd; or
that ſhe's capable of going on any Project to put


bis Prophecys in execution. For can Men be ſo


Catholick as the King's Privy Council, and believe


that a Proteſtant Miniſter had receiv'd the Gift


of Prophecy from God? Can Men have ſuch
a Zeal as the King's Council ſhews for extirpating


Sectarys which diſown the Pope, and yet prepare


tor fulfilling the Prophecys of Dabricius, which
import, as the World ſays, that the ſame
King of France who's to ruin the Houſe of Au-
ſtria, is to deſtroy the Pope too Root and Branch?
No one can harbor ſuch Thoughts as theſe with-

e dut


522 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
out making a judgment very injurious, not only to
the King's Inclinations, and to thoſe of his Mini-
ſtry, but to their Senſe of Religion alſo.

The Proteſtants themſelves are not ſo generally
ſatisfy'd that Dabricius was a Prophet. Nay,
many of em are perſuaded he was a mere Phana-
tick, who by too long poring upon ſome Com-


5 mentarys on the Prophecys of the Old Teſtament,


and thoſe of the Revelations, actually turn'd his
Brain: And having fill'd his Imagination with
Scripture Ideas, cou'd look on the Emperors of
Germany only as ſo many Pharaohs, Sennacheribs,
Nebuchadnezzars, and Servants of the Great
Whore, made drunk with the Wine of the Anger of
her Whoredom ; till he came at laſt to perſuade him-
ſelf, that God had appointed him to give ſeveral
Princes a ſpecial Command to. deſtroy theſe Per-
ſecutors. They who ſuffer'd under their Perſe-
cutions, and imagin'd that Divine Providence
wou'd ſoon or late revenge ſo. barbarous à Con-
duct, are the likelieſt to rely on the Viſions of Da-
bricins? Yet. theſe for the moſt part lay but lit-


tle ſtreſs on 'em, eſpecially ſince by ſad experience


they had found he was. miſtaken, and that he

often contradicted himſelf notoriouſly, and in a
manner not to be reconcil'd but by flying to va-

rious Gloſſes ; which make the Incredulous laugh
much more, than a frank confeſſion of the Man's
Miſtakes : for by Gloſſes of this kind, multiply'd
-as occaſions require, there's no falſe Prophet but
may be fairly brought off. A poor buſineſs, Sir,
this of Revelations for a Man to put his truſt in,
were they thoſe of St. Gertrude, St. Hildegarde,
or St. Bridget; when you very well know that
| | _— Authors


occaſion d by a Comet. 523


Authors perfectly Catholick *, and Religious to
boot, have boldly arraign'd the Prophecys of theſe
Saints, on the moſt convincing Exceptions.
'Twere a pretty thing indeed, to ſee France, under
ſo wiſe an Adminiſtration as'tis at preſent, em-
bark in a War with Germany on the Viſions of
Drabicius. Thus the favorable Diſpoſitions pre-
tended to be drawn from Prophecys, are far from
perſuading me, that we ſhall ſoon begin again
to conquer. 99 5 1


SEC T. CCLVII. Whether Europe has more
Reaſon to enter into a general Confederacy
nom than heretofore.


Eſides, Who has told us that Europe will al-
ways lie dozing, as ſhe do's at preſent? I
own, tho ſhe has her Fears of France, and fancys
ſhe ſpys ſomething, I don't know how, in her
Conduct, very much reſembling what we have
obſery'd of the Spaniards heretofore ; yet all lie
cloſe, no one will venture to ſtand the firſt Bruſh :
which puts me in mind of the Fable of the Rats
and the Cat. This Lethargy 1s the more ſurpri-
Zing, as they can't be ignorant that it's much
caſier for the King to execute his great and vaſt
Deſign of Univerſal Monarchy,than heretofore for
the Emperor, and King of Spain: all the Strength
and Forces of France being united under one
Head, who goes forth himſelf with his Armys;
is fortunate, brave, politick ; without a Power


„„


* *


Henricus de Haſſia Sibyllanus, Franc. Picus Mirandulanus
apud M. Delrio, Diſq. Magic, J. 4. c. 1. quaſt. 3. ſect. 4.


Nu 2 | | to


524 Miſcelaneous Reflections,


to awe him, ſo formidable as this Kingdom


to the Spaniards in the time of their good For-


tune. Theſe Advantages the Houſe of Auſtria
was ever deſtitute of, either in part or in whole.
When almoſt all its Forces were united in the
Perſon of Charles V. a Prince of great Courage
and extraordinary Capacity; yet his Dominions
lay at ſuch a diſtance, and ſo ſeparated, that they
cou'd not readily lend one another a helping-
hand: and beſides, France had then a Francis I.
brave as Steel, who alone cut out as much Work
for Charles as he cou'd well turn his Hand to.
On the other hand, Soliman, Emperor of the
Turks, was a terrible Neighbor to the Heredi-


. tary Countrys: And the Proteſtant Princes of


Germany, animated by that Tranſport of Zeal,
which is never wanting for a Religion, while pi-
ping-hot from the Anvil, were a curſed Thorn in
| Charles's Foot. The Caſe was much worſe after


the Retreat of this Emperor. His Eſtates were


diſmember'd; they who poſſeſs'd *em, liv'd a long
time in a kind of miſunderſtanding, which weak-


ned both Partys: The Diſtance between Vienna


and Madrid, wou'd not allow their concerting
Things with that diſpatch which is neceſſary for
great Enterprizes; and between Friends, the Suc-
ceſſors of Charles were nothing leſs than Hero's.
Yet. Europe was in a high Ferment, Europe


form'd Leagues; Europe in the end fell upon em
at ſuch a rate, twitting' em with their Pride and


Ambition, that they brought 'em down to a pretty
good Level. And at preſent, when ſhe looks


on the Danger as much greater, ſhe's content to


look on. All this I know, Sir; yet I'll lay no


Bets on our Conquelts. The People are like 2


Sea,


Sas kk. 4 — <<


occaſion d by a Comet. 525


Sea, which works terribly after the deepeſt
Calm. One Man is ſometimes enough to rouze
half the World, and & bring over Fortune to his
ſide.


SEC T. CCLVIII. Whether Leagues are
to be Fear d.


7 E RY well, ſays you; let em League on as
long as they pleaſe; Leagues are no ſuch Kull-
Cows : They are Bodys with a hundred thouſand
Arms, and which by having too many Heads, have
zune at all. You know the Apologue of the Turkiſh
Envoy, and the little account he made of Confede-
rate Troops, in compariſon of thoſe under one
abſolute Head. I own, Sir, it's an ineſtimable
Advantage to have an Army - commanded by a


ſingle Perſon; and 'tis a Circumſtance very fa-


vorable to our King's Deſigns, which I have not
yet taken notice of, That thoſe who oppoſe him,
are only Quota's of Troops commanded by dif-
ferent Perſons, with their ſeveral private Views,
and perhaps oppoſite Intereſts. It's well for us,
we had ſuch Armys to deal with in the laſt War;
for had the Allys kept a good Underitanding


among themſelves, we had ſurely been balkd,


notwithſtanding the King's good Conduct, and
the Bravery of his Troops. But 'twas the good
Fortune of France, that they cou'd never ſet their


—


* Tantum in uno viro fuit mentis, ut maximi imperii ſub-
verſi, & rurſum recepti Auctor eſſet; & unde ſtetiſſet ed ſe
victoria transferret, fieretque cum eo mira quzdam fortunæ
inclinatio. Juſtin. lib. 5. de Alcibiade.


Nn 3 | Hor ſes


6526 Miſcellaneous Reflections,

Horſes together. Their Councils of War were
ſo many pitch'd Battels. They were ſo many
Defiances, reciprocal Complaints, Jealouſys, Mag-
gots. Some wou'd much rather loſe a Battel, than
ſee it gain'd by a General they hated. Others,
to merit the continuance of their Penſions, gave


the worſt Advice they cou'd. We needed all


this, Sir, towards having that Succeſs which at-
tended us: For, as I have often already obſerv'd,
the Victorys one Party gains over t' other, can
never be of much Conſequence, unleſs there
be a great Diſproportion between their Forces.
Now what makes this Diſproportion, is not al-
ways that of greater Numbers, but greater Over-
ſights committed of one fide than t'other. This
made us an Overmatch for the Allys; the va-
ricty of their Intereſts and Sentiments, leading
'em into infinite Overſights, while the King ad-
miniſtring his own Affairs with a ſuperior Un-
derſtanding, committed none. Twice or thrice
were they guilty of that great and capital Error,
which Hannibals & reproach'd with, of not know-
ing how to make the moſt of a Victory. ©


——


—_
*


Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6.


occaſion'd by a C omet. 527


$SxcT. CCLIX. Owerſights of the Allies du-
225870 ring the laſt War.


N Effect, Mr. de Montecuculi in 1673. gain'd

ſuch an Advantage over Mr. de Turenne with-
out ſtriking a Stroke, that the Court of France
thought it ſelf very happy in coming off with the
Loſs of the Country of Cologn, and of moſt of
the Places which we held in Holland : ſo well they
knew it had been an eaſy matter to do us much
more miſchief. It happen'd luckily for our Affairs,
that the Germans, alittle over-haſty in going into
Winter-Quarters in their own Country, refus'd
to ſecond the Ardor and good Judgment of the
Prince of Orange, who had fo much contributed
to the Taking of Bonn. Two Years after, Mr. de
| Montecuculi having had the Glory of ſeeing Mr.
Turenne's Genius truckle to his, and of mauling
our Troops in their Retreat, cou'd not puſh his
Advantage, either becauſe Old Age had render'd
him unactive, or that ſome civiliz'd Perſons in
the Court of Vienna had us in their Thoughts.
However it be, he contented himſelf with re-
freſhing his Army on this ſide the Rhine, while
Mr. the Prince acted a Part very diſagreeable to
2 Genius ſo full of Fire, being forc'd to lie be-
hind Retrenchments, and with the Ruins of an
Army, behold the Imperialiſts walking about, and
taking their Pleafure in A!/ace; There was a
farther Overſight committed by thoſe who beat
Mr. de Crequi at Conſarorik ;, for inſtead of ad-
vancing on our Frontiers, while all was in Con-
ſternation, they amus'd themſelves the reſt of


Nun 4 the


628 Miſcellaneous Reftections,

the Campagn with the re-taking of a * Town
we cou'd very well ſpare em. The French made
no ſuch Blunders. So we are not to wonder if
the Affairs of the Allys went but ill; they were
baffled by their own unhappy Conduct, while the


ill Conduct of their Enemy made 'em not the


leaſt amends. Which yet generally happens in
moſt Military Operations, as Mr. de Ia Rochefou-
caut | juſtly obſerves upon our laſt Civil Wars:
Both Partys were at laſt convinc'd, that neither had
underſtood its true Intereſt. The Court, which Fortune
alone had ſupported, made a great many falſe Steps;
and twas evident in the Iſue, that each Cabal ſubſiſted
more by the Overſights of that which oppos'd it, than


its own good Condutt.


SzcT. CCLX. Conftderable Effecks of
54 ſome Leagues, |


KF ET for all this, Sir, don't imagine that

Leagues are always to be deſpis'd. I cou'd
entertain you a long time, did J relate all the
great Exploits they have perform'd. Who got
the famous Battel of Lepanto? A League form'd
againſt the Turk. The Sultan deſpiſes not Leagues,
ſo much as his Envoy wou'd make us believe,
with his Apologue of the Dragon with many
Heads, and many Tails. In the Heat of our
League in France, the Grand Signior offer'd his
Aſſiſtance to Harry IV. for this Reaſon princi-
Pally, That he bad a natural Averſion to the word


» —k


—


* Trevess In hu Memoirs,
baht oh LT ES a lively


League. And whence ſprang his Averſion ? From


as _ T % o& gyor_ 3:8


pud-". Sts » WS. c a. wS


occaſion d by 4 Comet. 529


a lively Idea of the old Armaments againſt him-


ſelf, which were call'd by this Name. This dif.
agreeable Idea rendred all Leagues and Confede-
racys odious to him, according to the Remark


of an * ingenious Author in a ſmall Treatiſe »
the Vſefulneſs of Hiſtory, which abounds with ex-


cellent Reflections. The League I ſpeak of, which
was enter' d into in this Kingdom for the Exclu-
ſion of a Hugonot King, did it not gain its Point?
Did it not make, not only Harry III. but even


Harry the Great buckle, who was one of the


higheſt-ſpirited Princes upon Earth? Was not
he forc'd to abjure his Religion? And were it
not for this, had not he been a wandring King
in his own Kingdom? Hadn't he been all his
life expos'd to the ſame Condition, in which he


repreſents himſelf in his Letter from before
Amiens to the Marquis de Roni? Þ I'll freely


tell you the Straits Tm reduc'd to: I'm ver


near the Enemy, and have ſcarce a Horſe to charge


on, nor whole Furniture to clap on his Back: N
Shirts are all in Rags; my Doublet out at the Elbows ;


my Pot ſcour'd and laid up, and for two Days paſt I
have din'd and ſup'd ſometimes with one Friend, and
ſometimes with another; My Purveyors proteſting they


o


don't know haw to keep my Table any longer, having

not rectiv'd a Penny of Mom theſe ſix Months.
Yet this League was a Chaos of a thouſand jar-

ring Paſſions, and Meſſrs de Guiſe themſelves not


perfectly united. Mr. de Thou || informs us, that


what moſt contributed to the Duke of Guiſe's


„.


* L' Abbe de St. Real. + Memoir de Roſni, Tom. 1. 345.


SD 4


| Hiſt, lib. 92,


Aſſaſſi-


_— RD —


- 8 * " — — 1
— — —x PIE een — —
- - —
- w . . — 0 N


530 Miſcellaneons Reflections,


Aſſaſſination, was the Duke of Maine his Brother's
betray ing his vaſt Deſigns to Dornano, and ling
bim free leave to acquaint Harry III. 0 en

Theſe two Brothers came to ſuch Baltemitys
about a Punk, that they fairly met in the Field.
But the Duke of Maine thinking better on't,
when he ſaw, himſelf on the point of killing his
Brother, or loſing his own Life, declin'd the Duel.
After the violent Death of the Duke and Cardi-
nal, one wou'd think the League ſhou'd have
dropt. Yet, the Duke of Maine, tho travers'd
by ſeveral great Men, who had by-Deſigns of their


own, {till kept. it, on foot; and twas Harry IV's


Lot to ſubmit. Which is the more remarkable,
becauſe this great King was incomparably more
active in his Nature than the Duke of Maine,
and more fortunate in his Pleaſures. For this
poor Duke, in the moſt preſſing Juncture of his


Affairs, ſuffering himſelf to be drawn * away. to


the Hotel de Carnavalet, © where four or five of
„ his Friends had a merry Meeting with' ſome
« Ladys of Pleaſure, hit ſo unluckily, that he
re was forc'd to keep his Chamber for ſeveral
£ Weeks after. .... Yet having only time to take


1


4“ palliative Remedys, the Infection work'd in-


ce wards, render'd him more unactive, more pen-
« five and melancholy, - and ſunk the 8 Spirit of
& the Party in his lingle perſon. 1

Beſides, was it not a League brought the Em-
peror and King of Spain to conſent to the Treaty
of Munſter, a Treaty ſo full of Mortification for
them? And had not France made Conceſſions in


-F Mezerai Abreg. Chron. ad An. > 2
favor


a 1 nn "Ty * 0
SLE 3214 Dee AA of F att ELIE DC — 2 * ka «
Ag o J v SI Et Re tn r NT . b
8 n 3 . i5 SELLS IE e Sr "Ur re b 5 8 8 2 N ö
i e ß . el I EE rt Ol,
* 83 5 * D IIS AE n 5 As es * N * * , I r N A ak nn * S * D Sa = 8 1


. Sn et Bo de ol het 8 9 Fr N * 0 9
JJ. ̊Uů d ]ðxy/ ͥ y ⁊ð hol (orgs ö
* n — W Fe WEIS 5 5 FEST Np 9 9 nnn ns de
8 e N . by 5 IS 8 . n * o 8 A ee *
* * on . C VVG „ 280
* 3 ane * rr HAAS DESI IL Se ern tn tend he OS


occaſion d by a Comet. 531
fyor of the Duke of Bavaria, had not they been
forc'd ſhamefully to annul the Tranſlation of the
Electorat, in prejudice of the King of Bohemia,
who was leagu'd againſt the Emperor? To offer
ſomething of more force, don't we know that
our invincible Monarch ipar'd no Expence to
diſſolve the laſt League, which ſhews he ſtood in
fear of it? © Aſſure your ſelf, Sir, the Peace con-
cluded at Nimeguen in 1678, came very ſeaſona-
bly; and League it as long as you pleaſe, I much
queſtion, whether the Campagns ot 1679 and


1680, might have been as ſucceſsful as the pre-


They who ſay the King gave Peace to Europe,
have more Reaſon o' their ſide than they are


aware; their meaning is, that his Majeſty, touch'd


with Compaſſion for his Enemys, who beg'd Peace,


was pleas'd to grant*em this favor at the expence
of mighty Victorys, which he might have thank'd


no body for. This is all they underſtand by
it, and here's the Ground of all their magni-
ficent Encomiums on the Conqueror's Modera-
tion. But there's one Reaſon more theſe Gentle-
men don't perceive, tho very obvious, which
obliges us to conſider the Peace of Nimeguen as
the King's peculiar Work; That of all the Pow-
ers engag'd in the War, there was hardly one
but France which deſir'd an End on't. The Houſe
of Auſtria broke off the Conferences of Cologne in


the moſt diſobliging manner imaginable, and


threw in a thouſand Difficultys and a thouſand
Delays to obſtru& thoſe of NMimeguen. While
France, which was generally believ'd to be weary
of the War, had Patience enough to overlook all
the little Incidents which were ſtarted day by 1 —

After


on to r 8 — — — — — -
IVES OY 2 — " A 2 5


532 Miſcellaneous Reflections,
After the Battel of St. Denys, where the Prince
of Orange ſo vigorouſly attack d our Army, and
with ſo conſiderable an Advantage, who wou'd
not have believ'd the Peace intirely broken?
Who'd have undertaken that we were a People
of fo much Moderation and cold Blood, as we
ſhew'd our ſelves on that occaſion ? The Allys ex-
pected nothing leſs at our hands. They flatter'd
themſelves with the hopes of keeping on the War,
as they ardently deſir'd; and yet have a pretence
of ſaying, that *twas France hinder'd the Conclu-
fion of the Peace. They were highly ſurpriz'd
to find, that the Affront which Mr. de Luxembourg
receiv'd, was not like to hinder the Treaty of
Nimeguen's taking full effect. a
Whence cou'd this proceed, Sir, but from the
King's great Deſire of diſſolving the Confederacy,
againſt which he had maintain'd the War for a
long time ? This laſt Bruſh, inſtead of diminiſh-
ing this Paſſion, fortify'd it mainly, becauſe it
made him more clearly comprehend the Impor-
tance of not letting ſo brave, ſo great a Captain
as the Prince of Orange lie on the Frontiers every
Seaſon 3 who tho but indifferently ſeconded by the
Allys, nay often travers'd by ſome of 'em, ſtill
acted for the Preſervation of the Netherlands, with
all the Intrepidity and good Conduct imaginable.
Conſider on the whole, whether we ought to de-
ſpiſe Leagues. Since his Majeſty has ſhewn a re-
ipe& for em; and ſince he forgets nothing to
prevent the forming any to his own prejudice,
and to promote ſuch as may be at his Deyotion,
they muſt needs be formidable.


8 EC T.


6,


occaſion d by æ Comet, 533


SECT. CCLXI. We onght not to reckon too
much on the preſent State of Affairs.


HAT therefore ought to raiſe and ſwell

our Hopes, is the Reſignation of Europe.

| call it Reſignation 3 becauſe the Patience ſhe
expreſſes, ſhews her intirely reſign'd to what it

| ſhall pleaſe God to ordain concerning her De-
ſtiny, without dreaming of new Leagues or Con-
federacys. Yet even this is not to be intirely

| rely'd on. Once more; there needs only one

| politick, active Spirit to make a hundred ſeveral

| Nations take up Arm.

| Who'd have imagin'd, while Europe trembl'd
| at the Name of the Houſe of Auſtria, and the


Councils of our Kings were filPd with its Penſio- 1 0
ners, that there ſnou'd be a young Student in 1
the Sorbon, who ſhou'd one day ſap this mighty i]


Power, and ſo bait it with Enemys on all ſides, 1
that at laſt it ſhou'd come reeling with its
Noſe to the ground? Yet this was really the
Caſe, as the great Cardinal R:chelieu has made
appear, one of the powerfulleſt Genius's of the
Vniverſe. And how know we, but at this very
Hour ſome young Lord, ſcarce yet out of the
| Duſt of a College, is deſtin'd to be a Scourge to
E France before twenty Years come about ?


PPP _


— LR


—
N
= . = L 3 = ” - 4
C my —— . : .
Ro — — — — ——
F ˙ ꝛ—— ²˙¹üꝛi˙ j ̃ —d(d — ˙— te ect — WW . 2 ——


Di prohibete minas, Dii talem avertite Caſum,
) 3 Et placidi fervat e pios. Virg. En. 3.


— — 3
8 n ©: . 7
n 5 2 *
— —
roy
93 2 a> *
2 r


Sex:


534 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


SCT. CCLXII. The Concluſion, of
the Work. :


E RE I ſtop, Sir, wondering at my ſelf,


when I caſt back my Eyes on the exceſſive
length of this Scroll; and much more when !
think of the ſtrange Medley which runs thro it.
For what have I not talk'd of? What ſtrange Set
of Thoughts have I not crouded together, taking
ſometimes what I had read in Books, ſometimes
what I had heard in Converſation, ſometimes
what my own {mall Stock furniſh'd. Vou'l ea-
fily perceive in the whole much the ſame Irregu-
larity, as is obſeryable in Citys; which being built
at different times, and repair'd ſometimes in one
place, ſometimes in another ; one ſees a little
Houſe pricking up by a great one, an old one by a
new. juſt thus, Sir, has this Miſcellany of various
Reflections been huddled together; I have often
turn'd back to make Additions and Amendments,
now in one place, now in another. You'd eaſily
gueſs ſo much by the firſt Work; but you'l find
it much plainer by examining this Copy, which!


muſt deſire you, Sir, to go by. I conſider'd *twou'd


be ſome Eaſe to you in the reading, ſhou'd |
divide it into ſhort Sections; and therefore
made all the haſte I cou'd with this Edition.
I have made ſeveral Additions, and might make
a great many more, but that I think it better
to wait for your learn'd Obſervations. I ſhan't be
ſurpriz'd if you accuſe me of having adyanc'd
ſeveral crude and undigeſted Notions ; for J cal
with the utmoſt Sincerity aſſure you, that when
1 firſt ſat down to write, I did not know N

| ou


ſhou'c
have!
ever!
courſ


the be


vow


3 Pn gp — . > 08 * o& *


occaſton d by a Comet, 535


hou'd ſay at the third Page; and that almoſt all 1
have ſaid occur*'d as I wrote to you, without my
ever having had aThought on't before in the whole
courſe of my Life. And tho I prepar'd you in


the beginning for ſome ſuch confus'd Miſcellany, I
vow 1 did not my ſelf believe I ſhou'd keep my


Word ſo ſtrictly. Perhaps you mayn't be diſ-
pleas'd to ſee what this Work may be reduc'd to
if one cut off the Digreſſions : caſt your Eye on
what follows, and you'l fee I have taken the pains
to make an Abridgment, out of pure love to
you. | |


Sz CT. CCLXII. An Abridement of the
whole Work.


N 13 bring the Diſpute into a narrow compaſs,


I ſay, if Comets were Preſages of human
Calamitys, this muſt be either as they are an effi-


| cient Cauſe of 'em, or as they are bare Signs only.


There's no denying this.
Now they are not Preſages, either as they are


efficient Cauſes, or as they are the Signs of Cala-


mitys. The Concluſion's obvious, if I prove both
Branches of this Propoſition. EE
The firſt Branch I prove by four Reaſons.


I. Becauſe maintaining, that Comets are the


efficient Cauſe of Wars, new Religions, Conſpi-
racys, and ſuch like Plagues of human Society
as depend on the free Will of Man, and the Con-
currence of a thouſand fortuitous Caſes, is not
only a Hereſy, but even the groſſeſt of all Abſur-

ditys, as Lhave ſufficiently made appear.
II. Becauſe there's no Argument priori, in the
Language of Philoſophers, proving, that 1
"ave


- 7
3 5
— — 4
* 3 KLE—————.ñ—ñ!k!Äññßͤ————ů—


536 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


have any Virtue of producing phyſically, either 3
Famine, or Mortality, or any thing of the like
Nair... . 1

III. That it's falſe, this Point may be proy'd
by any Arguments 4 poſteriori, that's to ſay, by
Arguments drawn from Experience. For all that
can be prov'd from Experience, amounts at moſt
but to this; That as oft as Comets have appear'd
in the Heavens, ſo often ſome great Calamitys have
enſu'd on Earth. Which is ſo far from proving
that Comets have been the Cauſe of theſe Cala-


mitys, that one may as well prove a Man's going


out of his Houſe in a Moraing is the Cauſe of ſuch
Multitudes paſling along the Streets that whole
day. In a word, it's wretched reaſoning to con-
clude from one thing's conſtantly following ano-
ther, that therefore it's the true Effect of that


other. The falling of a Stone which one has


jer kd into the Air, conſtantly and neceſſarily fol-
lows the Action of him who caſt it; and yet this
Action 1s not the efficient Cauſe of the Stone's
deſcending. But there's ſomething more ftill in
our caſe ; which is, that Experience proves not,
there have been more Calamitys after the Appea-
Trance of Comets than at other times: and to pre-
tend the contrary is pure illuſion, and pure miſ-
take in point of Fact. One need only conſult the
Annals of the World without prejudice, to be
convinc'd of what I ſay.


IV. Becauſe had Comets a virtue of cauſing
a Peſtilence, or Famine, as they are Cauſes which
act neceſſarily and without reſpe& of Perſons, they
muſt without diſtin&ion ravage all parts of the
Earth o'er which they move, or to which they are
viſible in making the Tour of the World, ht,


enge by 4 Comt., 537
js notoriouſly falſe. I it be ſaid, that they don't
every Where find the neceſſary Diſpoſitions for
E an Bſſett; I ſhall take leave to ſay;
they can for that very reaſon preſage nothing cer-


tain : for how know e upon ſeeing em, whether
of the Wotld ſhall then have the Diſpo-


any part | |
ſitioas which Comets require? One is not oblig*d


to believe they forbear ſhewing themſelves, till


the Canſes which concur with their Influences are
ready and rife in any part of the World. |
The other Branch of the Propoſition, to wit,
that Comets preſage not Calamitys; as Signs of
— 5 Calamitys, is plain from the following Rea-
1011S. 3 : | ;
I. Becauſe Comets are neither a natural Sign of
Calamitys, nor a Sign by Inſtitution. ot

For were they a natural Sign of Calamitys, it
follows they muſt either be a neceſſary Cauſe of
em, which we have ſhewn to be falſe; or at leaſt
that there muſt be a neceſſary Connex1on between
Comets and Calamitys : which is equally falſe; be-
cauſe Experience, the only Rule for juſtifying this
pretended Connexion againſt all the Reaſons
which oppoſe it, proves nothing leſs: Every
one's capable of ſatisfying himſelf in this Point,
and of ſeeing at the ſame time, how very wrong.
we are in boaſting of our Reaſon, when it's of ſo
little ſervice to us, that almoſt all the World's in-
gag d in a Perſuaſion void of every kind of Proof,
as well in Point of Fact as Reaſon.


» 412


That Comets are not Sigus of Calamitys by In-


| 2


ſtitation, is evident in It ſelf; God having no


Where rexeadl'd, as he has with regard to the Rains


bow, that he Wou'd give us Blazing-Stars in the


Heavens, is Watnifigs of his extraordinary Judg-
nents; 00 II. N


*
— . 7 i1— — W


8 * Op —_ ——
— . — — — 3 — I 1 Wn” — OISiaGs


538 Miſcellaneous Reflections,


II. Becauſe, were Comets the Sign of any Ca-


lamitys different from natural and inſtituted Signs,
*twere fit God ſhou'd imprint on 'em ſome pe-
culiar Characters, to diſcover what they im-
ported, no leſs diſtinctly than an expreſs Re-
velation; which might juſtify the judgment of


thoſe who maintain they are evil Preſages, and
render thoſe inexcuſable who believ'd it not.


Now this Almighty God has not done: On the


contrary, he has left 'em ſo deſtitute of all the
true Marks of a ſignificativye Prodigy, that one
might juſtly think he rather deſign'd to check
our natural Credulity. He has ſubjected em to the
Juriſdiction of the Sun, which diſpoſes of the ſitu-
ation of their long Tails, as it does of the ſmal-
leſt Cloud; and to that of the Fogs and foul Sky,
which deprive us of the fight of em for half the
time. He ſometimes gives em a Courſe which
leads into the Rays of the Sun, where they be-


come wholty inviſible: Sometimes gives em ſo


little Magnitude, or ſo high an Elevation, that they


are viſible to none except perhaps an Aſtronomer or


two, who wait whole Nights with their beſt Te-
leſcopes for a ſight of em. Then again he often
lets *em appear fairly, and allows us a conſiderable
time to view 'em, as if he'd render 'em familiar,
and permit us to ſtudy their Motions. But above
all, he gives em a Character of Univerſality,
which alone 13 ſufficient to deprive ; em of the Qua-
lity of Signs; for God having never had a Pur-
poſe of afflicting the whole Earth at the ſame
time, has ſurely never given us Signs of ſuch a
Purpoſe. Vet if Comets be proſaging Signs, . they
mutt be Signs of this nature, becauſe they threa-


ten all Nations alike. And hence, it's, d oi
= mY j . „ % by "os 4 7% S s AS, SARS? eg
n . :


occafiowd by'a Comtt. 539
Men make the leaſt uſe of their Reaſon, that theſe
are not menacing Signs, becauſe it's not likely all


who ſee Comets ſhou'd be afflicted, and becauſe


the'conſtant Courſe of the World has been, for
one Nation to be a gainer by the Spoils of ano-
ther: God, beſides this, never affecting to ſig-
nalize his judgments in the Vears which ſucceed
next after Comets, more than at other Seaſons;
and yet this is the Point, without which 'tis im-


poſſible Comets ſhou'd have the leaſt pretence to


denounce future Evils. A particular Nation might


very well happen to be more diſtreſs'dat ſuch a time


than ever before or after, as it hapned in France,
after the appearance of ſeveral Comets, under the
Reign of Harry III. and in the beginning of his
Succeſſor's Reign. But it do's not therefore fol-
low, that all Nations conſider'd together were
more afflicted at that time, unleſs in the Lo-
gick of ſome little Minds, who meaſure the Deſ-
tiny of all Human Affairs by that of the ſmal}
Community within their knowledg, and who cry
out, if a ſhower of Hail fall on their own poor
Village, that ſince the World was a World there
never was ſo ſad a Year, Seaſons ſo unfortu-
nate, ſo diſaſtrous.” Look at the condition of
Spain under the Comets which, they ſay, caus'd onr
Civil Wars: Vou'l find ſhe then added Portugal
and the Weſt-Indies to her other vaſt Monarchys :
That Fortune loaded her with Favors, and that


| her Ring was faid to govern the World with his


Pen. 11

III. Becauſe after all I have ſaid, were Comets
ſtill Signs, they muſt be Signs form'd miraculouſly
by God, and bee al Mankind to prepare
tor appeafing the Wrath of Heaven; that is, God
. 00 2 muſt


540 Ms "FRA Ralle,
muſt have given, and ſtill give Signs to occ
hundred miller new Acts of lleber, e
be offer'd without Impiety.

Having prov?d both Parts of. my Propoſition,
and ſhewn that Comets are by no means what
moſt People imagine; en Ale 5 Sir, that they
are Bodys as Ad aß Id, Which

by the Laws of Motion e God. go⸗-
verns the vaſt Machine of the Univer! are from
time to time determin 'd to Paſs within Our view,
and to refle& the Light of the dun upon us, mo-
dify'd i in ſuch a manner as to us perceive a
long train of its golden Lacks, wh wal ve re or
behind their Heads is uncertain; on whic ou may
conſult Aeſſicurs of BE Acac Emy 1 5 jences.
That for any thing Fron heir Paſſage Ou our
World is of no conſ and uet eb good. or bad,
any more than the Voyage of an Indiam into Europe.


With full liberty, however, for all that pleaſe, ac-


cording to the Inſtincts of their Picty, 10 mortify
at the hight of theſe Phenomena-

| You'l-find a ready Handle from this.Candjuſion,
for reconciling the Lights. of Philoſophy . with
thoſe of Conſcience. |

ſubmit the w mo Work to thoſe of your Un-
derſtandipg; a ho I undertake to anſwer all
the Objections y9u may make, I ſhall however al-


ways acknowledg you ay my gd and 4 Poſer: |
Och. 11. 1681.


1 am, Ge.


1855 | by oa of 1 N
The End 1 Refee
| „ a4 , 2. Kias *. - ©.
— 1, q Fo


(541)


4¹ App ed] to all the Univerſ ys


of urope, for 4 Deciſion *
bi * ah a ont.


.
— „


To the Rectors f all Chr yen an u.
per ſic)s.


8


mee
Beſcech you in the moſt humble manner,
That you't be pleas'd to convocare your
Academick Aſſemblys, in order to pro-
ndunce judgmem in a Difference, which has
made ſome noiſe in Holland for theſt tvyo or
three laſt Years.
This Difference is founded on a Book cons
cerning Comets, which I publiſh'd in the
Lear 1682. and on a Letter which appear'd
poi aſter, concerning an erroneous Con-
eience.


a
i
1
: \ ' 1
it: |
„
1
'
[ =
: : **
; [9.5
/ IM
iy 5 f |
! WI
i
4 E :
* 1
n \ 1
i 1
4 7
i i
i
| na
*
© 8
: : |
£ : .
ö
*
1
1
5
is s;
1 1
fy 1
1 ul
1 7
© |!
1
f F i"
1 1
fy
' 1
„
4 1
„ i
* H
55 +
1 175
1
1 .
9 i
3 .
i 1
1: i
3 |
f 4
$7 84
9 18 :
1 :
. L's
, .
| FE]
. of
7 *
T' [2
E}
N EI
: 1
[ ML
3 1 f
0 1
Eb;
1
;
4:
1
. 1
'%
oC *
15
s 117
: i
i}
* : 1
1
.
a fi
. 7
*
1
;
=
þ +
L
U.
7. |
5


ö
{
t
p
=
|
2
7
1
'
” ih


In my Treatiſe of Comes 1 unge, 5
That ene the neceſſity of a thing's


properly a Miracle before it can be a
Beige and conſſ ſering the infinite number


7 Preſages, which the Pagans accoumed
ſuthi, 4 Math | Chriſtians: fill obſerve;
Oo 3 conli-


542 An Appeal to all

conſidering alſo the Meanneſs of moſt
of them, their Obſcurity, their Uſelef-
neſs, their increaſing Superſtition and Ido.
latry : *Twere better aſcribe what we com-
monly call Preſages to the general Laws of
Nature which God has eſtabliſh'd, than to
thoſe particular Volitions in God which pro.
duce Miracles.


II. That conſidering the A verſion God ex-
preſſes againſt Idolatry, and his ſtrict Prohi-
bitions, under the Idea of a jealous God, a-
gainſt this Sin in particular; conſidering alſo
that before the Birth of IESuSs CHRIST
the whole Earth, except Paleſtine a very ſmall
ſpot of it, was given up to the Worſhip of Idols,
it can't be ſuppos d God ſhouꝰd miraculouſly
produce Comets to warn Men of impending


Evils, ſince this had been working Miracles


to give new Life to the abominable Worſhip
of Idols all tbe World over; the Pagans being
every where per ſuaded, that Comets were


menacing Signs, and continually redoubling


their Sacrifices and impious Ceremonys in ho-
nor of the falſe Gods, on the firſt Appearance
of theſe Stars. Manes e 08


III. That conſidering the many Abomina-
tions of the Pagan Idolatry, and that de-
clard Abhorrence of the Prophets againſt it,
102 ien


the Univer ſit ys. of Europe. 5 43


ſpeaking to us on the part of God; it is not
to be believ'd, that the preſerving this Ido»
latry leſt Atheiſm ſhowd abound, cou'd be
the propogd or adequate End or Deſign o of
God's working Miracles. . It


IV. That confidiiiig the natural Proccrefs
of Man to Superſtition, the Vigilance of the De-
vil, and the Intereſt of Prieſts and Magiſtrates
to maintain Idolatry; conſidering allo there
are ſundry uncommon Phenomena turniſh'd
by an ordinary Providence, in conſequence of
the general Laws of Nature; there never was
a neceflity of Miracles to prevent the extin-
guiſhing of Idolatry, and the general Preva-
lence c Atheiſm. : es)


1 That conſidering the Idea 1 Jealous,
and that of King, by which God was pleas'd
to manifeſt himialf tothe World ; the Crimes
and Blaſphemys in which conſiſted the Eſſence
of the Gentile Idolatrous Worſhip; the execra-
ble Vileneſs of the falſe Divinitys exalted to the
Throne in excluſion of the only true God;

we may reaſonably believe, that God was less
provok'd by thoſe who acknowledg'd no Di-
vinity at all, than by the Gentile World: As
a jealous Husband muſt be more ſenſibly

griev'd at a Wife that turns errand Proftirure,
Thi at one who obſtinately renounces all Con-
Korner? 00 4 verſation


——ꝛ— 2 — — »
9


$44 A Appeal ta al


verſation With Men; or as a King ſhau d be


more incens'd at Subjects who deco hi hita
transfer'd their Allegiance toa Stranger, than
if they intirely chang'd the form of Kingly
Government ; and at Neighbors who 221
With his mortal Enemy, more than at thoſe
who kept themſelves neuter.


VI. That conſidering the infinite difference


in point of moral and natural Perfection be:


tween the true God and the Pagan Idols, it
can't be ſaid that they who knew and honor'd
theſe Idols, either kaew ar honor'd the true
God; inſomuch that Pagans were no leſs void
of the Knowledg of God than Atheiſts, and
paſs'd their whole Life without rendring him


any Act of Honor no leſs than they. This the


Fecuaams cannot conteſt without ruiging
their. Cauſe againſt the Roman Catholicks in
the point of Creature Worſhi terminating,
as they maintain, purely = ſimply. in the
Creature, without any other relation-to God,
be the Intention of the Saints Votarys what
it will, than as it's difpleaſing to him 1 in the
higheſ} degree,


VII. That conſidering 4 horrible Cor-
riaption of Manners which-reiga'd among the


Pagans, and that Inlet to: all kind of Violence
and linpuriy which fn ene the, er


— SY 3: 'S » 66 tran 2 oo Vf oo oe


the Univerſitys of Europe. $48
Deity ſet open (they ſaid Jupiter gelt and
dethron'd his Father, marry'd his Siſter,
tabihd a world of young Women, ſtole
away Ganymede) conſideting alſo the Out-
tiges of the Heathens againſt their 2
vow'd Divinitys, and the Crimes they were
contirivally committing for and againſt em;
there's no reafort to think Mankind had been
more corrupt in a total State of Irreligion,
than in that of the Pagan Idolatry, |
III. That conſidering the Doctrine of
Original Sin, and that of the Neceſſity and In-
amilſibility of Grace, decided at the Synod of
Dort, every reform'd Proteſtant is oblig'd to
delieve, that all, except the predeſtin'd, whom
God regenerates and ſanckifys, are incapable
of acting out of a Principle of Love to God,
or reſiſting their Corruptions from any other
Principle than that of Self. love and human
Motives: So that if ſome Men are more. ver-
- tu6tis, than others, this proceeds either from
Natural Conſtitution, or Education, or from
a Love for certain kinds of Praiſe, or from a
fear of Reproach, &c. And if a ſervile fear
of Hell is ſufficient to procure an Obſervance
of the Externals of Religion, offering Vic-
tims, contributing to the charge of Worſhip ;
yet is it not eapable of converting the Heart
to the true God, by a ſiheece e
the inward Corruption, IX.


pun


IX. That this being the caſe, nothing hin-


ders but Men without a Religion may live up


to the Rules of Civility as well as Pagans;


fince the ſame Principles which mov'd the


Pagans may happily meet in them, Temper,


Education, . Love of Praiſe, and a Fear of


Reproach.


X. That conſidering the prodigious num.


bers of thoſe who live not according to their
Principles, who know God forbids Impurity
and Falſhood, and yet abandon themſelves to
the Luſts of the Fleſh, to Fraud and Slander;
conſidering alſo the Agreement obſervable
in a world of Chriſtians, between a hiſto-


Ihe Vniverſitys of Europe. 547
Truths, is ſufficient towards poſſeſſing ipſo
facto all that's requiſite to the Practice of
Goſpel-Morality. jo


XII. That conſidering the Ideas of Ho-
nour and Glory which prevail among Chriſ-
tians, and which yet they don't borrow from
the Goſpel ; conſidering alſo the Ideas of Ho-
nour and Glory, ſo powerful among the Pa-
2ans, which yet the Syſtem of their impure
Theology did not inſpire, a Man may enter -
_ tain ſuch Ideas independently of the Belief
of a God : he may, for example, apprehend,
that an Ingrate deſerves to be blam'd, that a
Child deſerves Praiſe for his reſpeQ to his Pa-
rents; as he apprehends, independent of all
Religion, that the Whole is greater than its
art. ”


XIII. That conſidering the modeſt and re-
_ gular Life of Epicurus, Pliny, and ſome o-
ther Atheiſts, of which Hiſtory makes men-
tion, it can't be ſaid that the Ignorance of a
Providence is a neceſſary cauſe of a Corrup-
tion of Manners ; unleſs we maintain ſuch an
Abſurdity as this, that a thing whereof there
wh ſeveral Examples is yet utterly impoſſi-
a 8 7


XIV,


wat Way ſbever bred, try
he hyes,, is neceflavily ſuak in all kind of
Vice; a Drunldird, Aduſterer, Inceſtuous.


o n
XIV. That conſidering theſe Exa mples,


the force of natural Temper, that of Edy-
cation, that of the Taſte of each particular


Country, tis abſurd: to nmintain, Thar an
Atheiſt, of whar Temper ſoever he is, ig


Coverous; 4 Robber, Traitor, an Aſſaſſin,
x Buclebiter, Falſe Witneſs, Parricide, Poiſo-


ner, an Enemy and Perſecutor of his own


Elaſtr and Blood: In a word, that he's ne-
coſſterily more inordinate had any Pagan, of
whatever” Conſtitution, whatever Country,
ot in whatever Way he has bin bred.


XV. That to diſcover the true difference


between the heinouſneſs of one Crime and
another, o muſt not have regard to human


avs, which: puniſh ſome, and: tolerate o-
thers hut to rhis ſingle Circumſtance, whe-
ther ſorbad by God : If ſo, it can't be com.


mittee without the Sinner's running into
all char: Iniquity which conſtitutes the Na-


rure: of gim That the Circumſtances


whiety arife-from: the State of tle Sinner,
from his Knowledg and Intentions, vary
the Turpitude according to the Degrees of
more and leſs ; yet that the Evil-ſpeaker and

: : VDaclean


in what Country


the Univerſizgs_ of Europe.
Unclean are 28 e e 4 nh


$49


as the Murd err.
XVI That the Wea o Order, ghee 41.


ga e vs, that the Moral Perieftions


7 Phyſical, . and char the mene one
loves. eu 99 he prefers it to Lie
G00, who 4s. loyereigaly, holy, ought ts
have (if it be proper.to mae ug of ale Bil-
crenges of more. and leſs with: relation to


God) 3 greater regard for bis Hohneſs than


for his Authority: and therefore they who


repreſent him * with Vice and Crimes,
as. the Pagans repreſented Jupiter wound
him 3 in a more ſenſible


with 1 7a jury
the N.


1 ene


XVII. That 8 being the h
a} all the natural Divine Perfections, 1


oY which in the Schools dilinguiſhes God


from all other Beings; "tis a leſs Eeror to ſup-
poſe with Epicuras, that God, perfectly bap-
py in himſelf, interferes not in the Govern»
ment of the World, than to imagine, as ſome
Pagaps have, that the Divinity needs being
nopriſh'd by Exhalations. — .


This, Gentlemen, is the ſubſtance of what


[ have taught. We have a —_— and
rofeſſor


rt, than ti y who


go era, Oo
Profeſſor | of Divinity at Rorterdam, who
maintains, That this Doctrine is impious,
and alledges it as a notorious proof of A.


| theiſm. Twere wronging your ſublime
Judgments, ſhou'd I defire you to get it ſo.


lemnly declar'd that he's miſtaken. in this
part of the Charge. There is not a Student
in your Claſſes who is not po ſparing
you this Trouble: And ſeeing the true
God is ſo interwoven in all my Doctrines,
that he reigns' in every part of em, he's


to be met With in the Principles, in the Con-
ſequences, in the Applications, in the Uſes,


in, cum, ſab; as the Lutherans expreſs them-


ſelves in another Caſe: What I therefore
deſire of you is, that you will give your


ſelves the trouble to examine, whether my
Doctrine may be ſo much as falſe: I for


my part believe it true in the utmoſt rigor,


philoſophically as well as theologically with
relation to a Calviniſt. Shou'd your Deci-
fions be againſt me, I'm ready to pay em
all the reſpect they deſerve: Be pleased then
to let me know, if I am in an Error, how


each of my Errors is to be qualifyd; for
there are Errors you know of various kinds,
the Indiſcreet, the Raſh, the Dangerous, the
Scandalous, and the Heretical.


, f 7 ;
N 8 - * F
. qo 1 3 4 ©. 4 185 ö $I
Ee” p « 5 F 4 * 0 + *
: ö 1 1 $. ; - * + *
0 4 K 0 FP
% (EL


Prit


$ v4 \4%4%þ +


din


4


*


r
it


2


5


1


4 * 598
ö | 2 2 N | L


th


4 £


N


I,


VI


— — —


, DCC.


—


*


*—


— wa. at


.


5


——


4
in


———


—


fited


|


— — = —
——z8 —Aẽ——ů—x —•—ũ—d <a>.


French, relating to 7 155


Life in the room of it, *T'is probable, had the


TH E fl in Account of Mr, Bay le's Life


Tine REP om beyond Sea to 4 Britiſh
Pier "tas unicated to me by 4 Gentleman
who "che Mortultty of Thing 4 ** of it ;


and there being an Appendix to the ſecond 2
lame of the Miſcellaneo e ering in the

written againſs
ich is on 1* vate Dopa |
e More) 1 rheaght IN


ablick more than by giving this


Mr. Ba le,
aal n
not oblige 2


Author 4 Def n 4 e #, he might have
ct om vr foſt 1 CY


NO GAR a
4 - * . \ Ys; JJ Tres


F 2

if V YOU 1 F * Mas, k. £. ge &% # : N de (7 ls"
abi bg | ; v9 4 9 Y — 114 1 hain pea
>. be EG — ä 22 2
= 6 50


— + A 4 4 AKUM ; FF FTYV 0 TEE ETSY * _


5 *
18 * *
-
— 7 ; F<, S
3 ' ; *
. & 8. 8 af


te lere,


. © 4
8 © _ 7


HE nager in . Wilen vet ex


of Mr. Beyle, carrys

' his'Elogy' beyond ay thing
the —Y Fanegyrifts can fay in bis
Favor; + 10 Wi no el Cor
a 10 f aud yotit Lordſhip inelin
_ uſt His Men
of His. Friends em to Have aban-
done re left flings of En.
wy Faure. It's true, my Lord;
Kind mote than might juſtly be ex-
pedted om a'Soul: gear, ſo *


635 18


2


| | 1 Concern for a


„ ata eden


N
1
4
oY
1
11
£
;
7
t
1
1
11
1
489
N :
at!
FF 1
. *
i-
1.
124
1
1
|
2.
y
4 *
1
1
1
1
1
4
e
: o
1
|
ö
*
* *
,4 o
1
& 1
Hel
bs
t,
[92
hs
;
' if
1
*
W's
bc +
1
$7
ſt ©
£
LE”
*
11-2
Lf


1
11
bw
11
il
9
|


— N —_
25 — - — —— —ͤ— 8 —


"Ml
_ble:manger,
procur d me the Hg


me. have long ſought for an occaſion


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
as yours. That kind Opinion with
which you had honor'd Mr. Bayle, was
founded on Motives too ſolid to be ever


ſhaken, You admir'd the Beauty of
his Wit, and the Juſtneſs of his Judg-


ment; but you were ſtill more charm'd


with His Modeſty, his Diſintereſtedneſs,


and Tategfity of Heart. Twas by this


part of him that he had the Happineſs
of pleaſing you, and (if I may pre-
ſume to ſay jo much) of engagingyour
Friendſhip.. Lou bad given Provts of
it to himſelf on ſeveral occaſions ;
and you continue to expreſs it farther,
by the Commands you have laid upon
me of ſending you an Account of his
Life. I ſhan't, my Lord, excuſe my
ſelf in any Difficultys which appear in
the, diſcharge of fußt a Task; I ſhall
Ae you .ratinn 16 2be oſt N.
, for your Goodneſs in pre
ſcribing it to me. IwWas Mr. Bay
Honor, of being known

eo your Lordſhip, and to him Im ob.


lig'd, for all the Fayors you have done.


bo


of teſtifying, my Acknowledgments to
your Lordſhip,and I cou d never hope for
therefore heſitate a moment in commu-

e RIG, I, Ore


me ;
CC % -
6 i , SEP Þ *


The Life of Mr. Bayle..


Bayle had inform'd me of his own Life,
during: a courſe of ſeveral years Ac-
quaintance, and what he has left con-
cerning himſelf in ſome Paſſages. of his


o ”
o


no great matter: The Lives of Philo-


Books, e it all amounts to


ſophers ſeldom abound with conſidera-
ble Events; their Writings and their Diſ-


putes are the only Battels and ſounding
Actions in the Hiſtory of theſe, Heroes.
| ſhall therefore chiefly aim at entertain-


ing your Lordſhip with ſome account


of the Works which Mr, Bale has pub-
liſh'd, and of the Diſputes he had bin


che fel, in, yet without ſertiog up ei
ther for a Judg or Apologiſt. If I ſome-


rimes chance to take his part, it ſhall 0n-
y be with relation to Facts, and wher c
t


e force of Truth won't ſuffer me to


1
8


be ſlent.


*
-


LL 8


Ain a ſmall Town of the County of
Foix, call'd Carlat, of which his Father
= was Miniſter. His Mother was of the
= Houſe of Dacaſſe, an antient Gentleman's
= Family, and which makes a very good
Figure in that Country. The Miniſters
1 : a.


5


Ma. Peter Boyle was born in 1648. 1648.


1
34
if
i
+ |
10
4
11
»
10
i
& | ©
13


6


| The Life of My 5 Bayle.
were much eſteem'd in France, is well


on account of the regularity of their


Manners, as becauſe they were intitled
to the ſame Privileges with the Gentry
in Civil Matters: Hence it was chat Per.
ſons of Quality thought it no Diſno-


nor to breed up their Children to the
Miniſtry. One may even affirm in 2
er


peral, that there was ſcarce a Miniff

in Frauce who was not of a good Pa-
mily : And this, my Lord, proceeded
from the Proteſtants having no Colleges
in which their Youth might be bred up


gratis; ſo that they were oblig'd to ſend


their Children to Academys generally
at 2 great diſtance, Which requir'd a
cooſiderable ' Expence. Upon this ac-
count we are not to wonder that the


Familys of their Province.
Mr.Bayle the Father gain'd the Eſteem
of every one by his Vertue and exem-


plary Piety : He was a Man free from


Miles ſometimes marry'd into the


Ambition, free from Pride, and of a


truly primitive Simplicity. He had


three Sons whom he carefully bred up
for the Miniftry : The Eideft came to
be his Farher's Colfegue in the Church
of Carlzt, and the Youngeſt died at Pa-
ris, being only a Propoſant or —
N * E


%%% ˙ꝛw;..... I EIT FS ] «² . ð OED PA r 4 Ok On AT CL I , EN INN, ES VS. P L * —_ — !
r 82 * N £2 EA CR Bo oe I ET CB et ar /c ay 9 ee = 3-28 N * r CAS : 3 . i 8
- Ros 2 5 2 2 Ys Mo 8 . „ 3 3 3 N 2 FO AT PSY o 3 SSF as REDS 5 25 0 .


The Life of, Mr. Bayle.
for. the Miniſtry. , Mr. Bee, who was
the ſecond, began his Studys under his

Father, who ioſtruQed him in the firſt
Rudiments of Literature, and brought
him to read ſome Greek and Latin Au-
thors: But the Dutys of his Function
not allowing him to imploy much time
in his Inſtruction, he was conſiderabl
retarded in his Studys, and made not ſo
8 eat a Proficiency as might be expected
from him. e TOTS
When he had arriv'd to the Age of 1666.
Eighteen, and his Father ſaw he had
made Progreſs enough in human Learn-
ing to attain a thorow perfection by
= himſelf, he enter'd him in the Aca-
* demy of Pay-laureys : He intended he
= ſhav'd finiſh his Studys in this place,
and afterwards embrace that kind of
Lie to which he bad from the begin-
ning deſign'd him. Mr. Bayle ſoon per-
ceiv'd. the difference, for a Man of Let-
ters, between a Home-Education and a
College : He was overjoy'd to find him-
ſelf in the Company of ſeveral learned
Men, who had a great deal of Merit: he
propos d em a thouſand Queſtions ; and
= they were ſo charm'd at his Aſſiduity in
all the Exerciſes of Religion, and fo ſtruck
with the n Genius, that
| 35


3


he had ever committed to it.


2 ——_ 184 tay 1 M. Bp: 1 1 *
TL ito of K N


they ſoon diſtingüift d- im amidſt the


becher young Scholars of nis Randi
It's true, his way of Lite was much leſs
diſſipated than theirs ; he often walk'd
abroad with - thoſe hog Humors nea-
Feſt uten his on: but inſtead of mak.


ing one in their 58 of Pleaſure, he


conſfagtly ſhut himſelf up in lis Study,
and with incredible Ardor read over the


beſt antient and modernBooks which fel
int his hands.  Platarch, and Montagne
were his Favorite Authors - and'con-


fy


cerning the latter, he usd to tell his
Friends in Mirth, that if all the Copys


of his Eſſazs were loſt" to the World,


he cou'd retrieve*em to a Tittle, ſo ol


ten had he read *em over. His Memo-


ry was Aird re happy, and pre.
ſented him at the inſtant with any thing
But Pay-laurens was too narrow à
Scene for ſo vaſt a Genius. How agree-
able ſoever this Town appear'd to him
at his firſt coming, he began in a ſhort
time to diſreliſh it. He had already
drain'd the Learned there of their beft


' Notions, and did not find Librarys well
enough furniſh'd to ſtay his infatiable
Appetite for reading. He reſolv'd to
quit the Place, and femove to ſome gres-


ter


bn, e


The Life of My. Bayle.


ter TDI but he was not a little di-


vided in makin


5 Choice. He wou d


very willingly have gone to one of the
famous forrigi Univerſitys; but the fear


of purting his | Father to a burdenſom
Expence,' made himſoon give over this


bouſe* was one of the fineſt, Towns of


Frauci that few Places in Europe aboun -
died more with learned Men or choicer -
= Librarys, that it was at no great diſ-


tance from the place of his Birth; and
what finally determin'd him, was its
having a College where a certain num-
ber of the Youth. of his County were
bred and maintain d on the Foundation,
and which for this reaſon was call'd the


College o Foix. ISPs


* Thither he removid after having paſt
about two years and a half at Pay- lau-
rens, and made four or five months Pro-

preſs in Philoſophy; and now purſu d

his Studys with incredible Application:


But what was extremely afflicting here-


in to his Family, was, after ſome time,
his changing his Religion. While he


ſtudy'd Philoſophy in the College of


Pay laurens, he was not ſo taken up with
the ordinary Exerciſes as not to find
time enough ta look into Treatiſes of


* 3


Contro-


Deſigtu At laſt he conſider'd that Thou


"4 Y 4
2

"

5


The Life N M.. Bayle.
Controverſy, nat with the Spirit that
People commonly do, te cunſirm them -
ſelves in preconcrivꝰd Opinions, but to
examine, according to the grit Prin.


ö ciple of Proteſta nts, whether | the Dac-


trine he had ſuckid in with the Breaſt
were True or no, which requires a
thorow knowledg of both ſides of the


Cauſe : For this reaſon he had the Curi-
ofity of ſeeing the Arguments of Roman
Catholicks in their :own Writings. He
met with Objections ſo plauſible againſt
the Doctrine which admits 90 Jiving
Judg upon Earth, to whoſ& Decifions
the Faithful are oblig d ro ſubmit in
all Diſputes about religious Matters;
that not able to anſwer em ſatisfatto-


rily to his own Reaſon, and leſs ſtill to


defend his Principles againft ſome ſub-
tle Controvertiſts with whom he had to
deal at Thoalouſe, 'hebegan to think bim-
ſelf a Schiſmatick, and out of the way
of Salvation, and oblig?d to reunite to
the main Stock, whereot he look'd on
the Proteftant Communions as fo many
lop'd Branches. Accordingly reconcu'd,
he continu d his Studys in the College
of the Jeſuits, as almoſt all do, of what


o the Roman Religion prevais: |
| But!


ble by cleaving to it.


ſome Fallaey in the


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


But the exceſſive Worſbip he faw paid


to Creatures, appearing to him ſuſpeQ,


f and Philoſophy informing him more ful-
jp of the :vpoffibiliey


of Tranſuhſtan-
tiation, he . chere muſt be


ions to which
he had ſubmitted; and taking a ſtrictet


1 Review' of the two Religions, he reco-


ver'd that Light which he had before
bin blind to, and ſtedfaſtly follow'd it,
without the leaſt regard to a thouſand
temporal Advantages of which he de-
ord himfelf, and a thouſand vexatious
Affairs Which appear'd to him inevita-


The Doctors of the College of Foix,
who ſoon diſcover'd-Mr. Bayle's fine Tas -
lents, were overjoy'd at thei Purchaſe
in him; and the Biſhop of Risux, in
whoſe Dioceſs the Town of Carla lay,
expreſt a particular Satisfaction at his
Change. The Library was always open


to him, and no means were neglected to


make ſure of him; when he form'd a


3 Reſolution of quitting the Place with the


very firſt
= grown inſu
3 additional Reaſons had further convinc'd


but he was not a little perpler d how


Opportunity, his ſtay bei
pportable, ' fince ſome late


him of the falſe ſtep he had made.


to


12


truſt his Deſign. Ti By


The: Life of Mr. Bayle!


to make an honorable Retreat; he
was deſtitute of the neceſſary Supplys
for undertaking a long Voyage, and


knew no body to whom he cou'd


tune for him, Mr. Ducaſſe de Pradals,


a Gentleman who was his Relation,
ha pned ahout this time to come to Thau-


louſe, and make him a Viſit, Mr. Ble
bleſod Heaven which feat him ſo truſty


a Perſon in ſuch. a Juncture; he-open'd


his Heart to him, and this generous


Friend preventing him with Offers of
every thing for his Occaſions, he retir'd


to Geneva, after having continu d about
@ Fear and a half at Thoulouſe. -


1670.


You!l eaſily. judg, that ſuch a ſtep as
this cou'd not but be very agreeable to


his Family. The Grief occaſion d in


it by his change of Religion, was re-
compens'd by an inexpreſſible Joy and


_ Conſolation. The College of Pay-
laurens, which was ſenſibly concern d


at his Lapſe, had no leſs a ſhare of Sa-
tisfaction. No ſooner was Mr. Bayle
arriv'd at Geneva, but he edify'd the


whole Academy there by the manner


in which he mourn'd his Fall, and


the Zeal he expreſt for the Reform'd


Religion. Mr. de Normandie, Syndic of
fp Geneva,


Sen


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
Geneva, took Mr. Baylt into his Fa-
mily, to inſtruct his Children. Mr. Baſ-
nagt, Who was then a Student at Gene ·
va, hapned to lodg in the ſame Houfe: |
He no ſooner knew Mr. Bay/e, but nge |
courted his Friendſhip; and Mr. Ble il
cou d not oblige himſelf more, than by
giving his intire Affections to a Perſon, (hi
whom he mightily eſteem d. and whoſe 1


13


Merit hegan alr eady to be known. at by
To Years after, the Count de Dhona. 16 72.
inquiring of Mr. Baſuage for a Preceptor

for his Childr en, he recommended Mr. .

Bale, who finding himſelf. in a manner
Perlected in his Studys, accepted the
Employment, and had the Direction of

the Studys of the Count de Dhona, Go-
vernor to the Prince Royal of Praſia; of

the Count his Brother, Major General
in the Troops of Halland; and of a third .


ce * **
%


Brother of the Family. He ſtay'd with
em for about two Years; but growing
weary, of the Country, he reſoly'd.
lor Paris, which he look d on as the
Center of Wit and Foliteneſs. Be-
ſides, he knew, the Arts and Scien-
ces flouriſh'd there more than in any
part of the World, by the Care the
Miniſtry took of inviting thither, at


ſeveral


\


=


14


1674.


&


1675.


—


The Life of W. Bayle.
ſeveral Profeſſions, - Conſtant Confe--
rences were held there on all forts of
Subjects, and Men of Letters had a free
and eaſy Acceſs. ©

| Accordingly he retwrn's to Guo
in 1674. and after he had ſeen all his
Friends, he departed thence with a
Relation of Mr. Baſnage, who ſtudy's
there, ancꝭ toelt him along with him to
Roan. Here he ſtaid about fix Months,
and afterwards proceeded to "Paris
The Satisfactions he met with in this
reat Town were much beyond what

e expected; fo that he cou not for-
beit thinking all the time he Bad paſt
in other” Places; juſt ſo much thrown


of the Morſe, tool him to be Governor
toa young Gentlemarrof his Family.

Mir. Baſurge was then at Sean, where
he fi his Studys i Divinity. Mr.
Bule” wrote to Him frequently, giving


arcbunes ofevery thing that came our at


Paris; relating ko the Sciences or Pblite
Leatnio and” Mr. Baſnage generally.
is Letters to Mr. 1 then
EI Froſeſſör in the ollege 6 of
on after 4 Philofophy” Fro
fellor's Chair filihg vacant,” Mi By:
1 his Eyes on Mr. Boyle to fill ſe,


The Efe of: Mr, Bayle!
Wo rer birt 10 Me! Ha who


aicheſſately
ly te .

at iv) unge o
ich, which Was + Secret to Al] in
D arts but Mr. Baſauge, "might
10 he diſebvet' d, and à Ffetence,
un d on the Eafct againſt telaps d
Fe a Kg. him into


* 601 Ep r be —
Binge told him the true
ring him of his Se-
Anm not to Hinder his
for the: Chair, Several ſtood
aces at the lame time, and ame

Son ö one of the Profeſſors
Ce da Rad a ſtrong Party
Mf. Bin ge had a great


ae 28 patticu-

115 y Gb
l 455 He word al
ien the Con eto ſoon as
Haga opp 7 hitnſelf.
1 Ar. ee 155 ſo
Force, and difcs:


prehenſion:


9868 Quitktieſs bf 15
100


16


has made ſo much noilgan
' 1ſhal here beging


7 2 em 9 5


The Life of: Mr: Bale


amd ſoextravrdinary à Penetration, that
rin „ Judg'd_


the mls Body al;ithe Acade
him ti he. Victor VE AN

the Number: 0 of
-; SIBEE: your Lo UP
ſire'a Character of.


HP 155


iſco)


as he then be


e. had'n ily Oy . Happy
Imagination 511 8 1 9 75 p
very 1s «thay le; A a i tut ulent
Proud, raſh, im politiye, anc


19700


00 *


abounding — T 95 85
him, N

extraord ian 1
cad ke
and giving himſe
of = World. Bur the.
ginat ion ſomerimescoph
ment, and the
ou ory: Ul


1 152


foun founded 27 #3 0
10 0


nim to 7155


6: 220 uf
5 "imac


.


5


an a0
off ih


Jerig. and of
erftanding, 151
Spas


e _— .


8


ö


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


of Grace, which look'd new, but was


in the main reconcilable to the Doc-


trine of Predeſtination, as underſtood
by all the Churches of France. Yet
Mr. Jurieu, jealous of every thing


which ſeem'd to eclipſe his Glory, en-
ter'd into a Cabal with ſome Miniſters


of Paris, who had no Kindneſs for


Mr. Pajon, and did all he cou'd to ruin
him. Mr. D' Haiſſeau, Miniſter of Sau-


mur, having publiſh'd a Treatiſe con-
cerning The Reunion of Chriſtians, tend-
ing to beget a Spirit of mutual Charity


and Toleration, Mr. Jurieu wrote an


Anſwer to it with a great deal of Gall
and Violence. Mr. D' Huiſſeaus Maxims
were far from reliſhing with his Palat.
The Spirit of Gentleneſs and Modera-
tion is the Bane of a proud and cholerick
Nature; and Toleration reducing Men
to akind of Equality, can't fail being the
Averſion of Perſons ſpiritually proud,
and who look down with Contempt
on the reſt of the World. Beſides,
how digeſt a Doctrine which pro-
ſtitutes the Favors of Heaven, and
bereaves of the ſweet Perſuaſion of be-
ing the Confidants of the ſecret things
of God, and the ſole Defenders of his
Side Rios aft, 1. An:


18


The Life of M. Bayle.


Cauſe? Not to be of theſe mens

ligion, is in fhort being of no Regin
at Accordingiy Mr. Furiea eX-
pref! le declares, Phir God had from that
time call him forth. fo fig ht with this
Moufter of Indi rent! or all Religions.
OY 0 14 cg eat df to
boaſt of his Undertaking 4gaioft Mr.
D. Huiſſeas ; the beſt Judges found his
Reafonings pitiful,. and the dear Work


was unfo dne condemn A in the Sy-


nod of Saintonge, as Ils u Hereti-
cal Pror ofitions.... This was his firſt
Tria gy he Skilt, and h he has taken care
1 to b ly it in bis after Performances.
The Vehepenee of üs Paſſions has of.
ten run, him into extravagant Notions,
and put, him upon” maintaining ſeveral
Proppfitions either falſe or contradicto-


ry; and the warmth of his Imagination


ſometimes reprefented things to him
uite otherwiſe than they were. Tcoy'd
give inconteſtable Wires: of this;


quity, which 1000 0 din to a A. Sk
to Paris, and which he wou'd not ſo
. * | eaſily


„ W .


be Life of My. Bayle.

eafily have got clear of, if he had not to
deal with Pe- ſons” of much more Pru-
dence and Moder ation than himſelf. Pl]

only take novice,” chat Mr D'Huiſſeaa
was no leſs his Friend than Mr. Pajon.
But *was his way with all that were
deareft to him: He pick'd ſome quar-
rel or other the moment he apprehended
em as his Rivals in Glory, or ſaw they
did not eſpouſe and applaud bim in e-


very thing. Then he fell foul of 'm,


and endeaver*d to blacken their Repu-
tation with a Charge of Heterodoxy,


Thus the Fondneſs of his Soul made


him treat his Boſom Friends. Theſe


Gentlemen, fays he himſelf, whom I then


attack'd with all my Might, were my Neigh-
bors and beſt Friends ; and never was there
the leaſt Mifunder ſtanding between us.
Every one may plainly fee to what
Hazards a Body expos'd himſelf by
making fo terrible a Friend as Mr. Jo
rieu; and no doubt if Mr. Bayle had
known the Man, he'd always have
ſhun'd his Converſation with as much
Care as he once ſeem'd to court it. But
the Uprightneſs and Simplicity of his
own Heart wow'd not ſuffer him to en-
tertain Suſpicions of this kind. Ever
ready to judg charitably, he did not
B 2 make


20


1679.


The Life of Mr. Bayle!


make it his buſineſs to ſift Mr. Jaries's
Conduct, nor thorowly to examine its
ſecret Motives. Tis true too, Mr. Ju.
rieu's lofty intractable Humor ſeem'd
incapable of withſtanding Mr. Bayle's


extreme Modeſty and Sweetneſs of


Temper. His Manners were ſo oþlig-


ing, his Conduct ſo regular, and his


Diſcourſes ſo diſcreet and moderate,


that Mr. Jurieu cou'd not forbear giv-


ing him his utmoſt Eſteem and good
Wiſhes. He liv'd, ſays he, ſeveral years


in the Academy of Sedan, without giving


the leaſt Offence, either in Word or Deea.
His bright Genius, and worthy Principles


ſo engag d my Affections, that I lovd him,


1 own, more intirely than I ever lou'd an
one beſides, You ſhall ſee, my Lord,
that Mr. Jurieu in proceſs of time
wou'd not have Mr. Bayle exempted


out of the number of thoſe beſt Friends


of his, whom he perſecuted unmerci-
fully. _

While he was taken up with the Bu-
ſineſs of his Place, a Miniſter of his
Acquaintance, in 1679. brought him
Mr. Poiret's Book, entitl'd, Copztationes
Nationales de Deo, Anima, & Malo; and
deſir'd him to communicate the Difficul-
tys which might occur to his thoughts


in


— — _—_ ke Md 2


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


in the reading. Mr. Buyle examin'd
this Work carefully, and ſent his Ob-
jections againſt it to his Friend, toge-


21


ther with a Letter of Thanks. The


Miniſter communicates *em to Mr. Poi-


ret, who wrote an Anſwer to 'em, and


ſent it him with a Letter, in which he


thanks him for having procur'd him an


Adverſary, ſo accurate, ſo judicious, fo


penetrating, and ſo Gentleman-like a
Writer. Theſe Objections, and the
Anſwer, are inſerted in a ſecond Edition
which Mr. Poiret gave of his Book at


Amſterdam, in 1685.


The next Year after, a Jeſuit of Caez
calbd P. de Valois, under the feign'd name
of Louis de la Ville, printed a Treatiſe


at Paris, entitl'd, The Sentiments of Mr.


Deſcartes concerning the Eſſence and
Propertys of Boay, repugnant to the Doc-
trine of the Church, and favoring the
Errors of Calvin in the point of the Eucha-
riſt. He dedicates it to the Clergy of
France, and exhorts the Biſhops ſpeedily


to apply a Remedy to the growing Evil


with which the Church was threaten'd
by the Carteſians: He conjures 'em, in
the Name of the whole Kingdom, to
pronounce Sentence of Condemnation
againſt Carteſianiſm; and to engage
B 3 em


1680.


The Life of M.. —
zem the more, by u Reaſon he knew


Was all- powerful over they minds, he
told 'em of an Order of Council, ba-
niſhing the Carteſtan Philbſophy


out of
the Univetſity of Par#, and aff a Lerter
under the Privy Seal, fletcing a Carte.


ſan Profeſſpr. "Flies Book alarm'd' the


hole Set; Mr. Regus 2 famous Carte.
ſtan, who held conſtaht Conferences at
Paris, was ſorc'd to break off, ard add


this Dif race to that of never Having


been able to obtain a Lidence for print-
ing a Body of Philoſophy, which had
lain by him of a long time. "Every one
dreaded being obſigd to ſignu fome
new Formulaty, or #6 de excommimunl
cated for Hereſy; r. 1 8

Mr. de la Ville, not content to over-
throw the Opinion of the new Philo-


ſophers touching the Nature of Body


by the Authority of Countils, ences-


vor'd to confute it by Arguments Trom -


Reaſon; and, to do him juſtice, he
lays the utmoſt that can be advaned
to prove Extenſion is not the Eſſence
of Matter. *Twas' on this Article
Mr. Bayle encounter'd him, hd aim-
ing at bringing his Pupils to maintsin
rational Theſes, took for his Subject
that Chapter of Mr. te Ia Ville's Book,
| | iN


The: Life of. Mr. Bayle.
in which he endeavots to prove by
natural Reaſbns, 'chati Extenſion is not


the EſRnee. of Matrer. And becauſe.


Mr. de Ia Nuila, totompaſs this end, does
little more tham ener vate, as much. as


poſſibly he can, rhe Reaſons by which


2 Clerſtlier Roh aut, and the
Author of the Seurch after Truth, have
maintaind that Extenſion is the Eſſence
of Matter; Mr. BH contents himſelf
with corroborating the Reaſons of theſe
Gemlemen,
It Ville*s Euoeptions and Subtletys, He


bends his greateſt ſtrength to prove,


that the Penetration! of the Parts of
Matter is impoſhble. '


Mt. Boyle had this Didertatiag | res.


printed in Ho#zna,. with ſome other
curious Pietes, of which I ſhall. take
notice in tliem proper place.
The Comet which; appear'd in the
month of December in the ſams year,
furniſh'd him an occaſion. of writing a
{ few Freatiſe. As People had an extra-
ordinary Opinion of his Knowledg and
| Jud oy he found binfelf-cominually
teaz d with Queſtions concerning it,
ptocediiig either from | Curidſity or
Fear. He did all he cou'd to ——
hole who were diſturb'd at this, pre-
17.10 B 4 tended


and deſtroying all Mr. de


23


24


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
tended evil Preſage, but gain'd very
little on *em by . Philoſophical ' Reaſon-
ings. Still they reply'd, that God ex-
pos'd theſe ſtrange Phenomena 0? pur-
poſe to give Sinners time to prevent
their impending Ruin by Repentance.
So he thought *rwou'd- be in vain to
reaſon any longer, unleſs he cou'd pro-


duce ſome Argument to ſhew that the


Divine Attributes permitted not the
deſtining Comets to ſuch an end. He
apply'd himſelf to meditate; upon it,
and quickly lit on this Theological Ar-
gument, That if Comets were Preſages of


Evil, God had work*d Miracles to confirm |


Idolatry. He did not remember he
had ever met with it in any Book,
or heard it in Converſation. This
made it appear to him perfectly new,
and gave him the firſt thought of wri-
ting a Letter on the Subject, to be in-


ſerted in the Mereure Galant. He en-


deavor'd not to exceed the bounds of
ſuch a Letter; but the Abundance of
Matter wou'd not permit his being ſhort
enough; and oblig' d him to take other
meaſures, and look on his Letter as a
Piece which muſt be publiſh'd apart.
He affected Brevity no longer; he en-
larg'd at his leiſure on every thing that
5 Bey]: 5 8 offer; d,


2


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
offer'd, {till keeping Mr. Yiſe in ſight.
He reſolv'd to ſend him his Letter, and
pray him to give it to his Printer, and
get either Mr. de 12 Reinie's Licence, if
that might ſerve, as it had for printing
ſeveral other Treatiſes on Comets; or
the Royal Privilege, if nothing leſs
wou'd do. He kept the Manuſcript in
his hands for ſome time, without know-
ing the Author's Name; and when one
call'd on him to inquire about it, he
anſwer'd, That he underſtood by a


| Perſon who had read it over, that
| Mr. de la Reine wou'd ne er anſwer for


25


the Conſequences of it; and that the


Approbation of Doctors muſt be had,
before they ſollicited a Royal Licence;
which was a tedious painful Under-
taking, for which. he had nor leiſure


enough. His Friend recover'd the


Manuſcript: And as the Suppreſſion
of the Academy of Sedan was the occa-
ſion of Mr. Bayle's removing to Holland,
he thought no more of printing his
Letter on Comets at Paris.

The King of France having reſolv'd
by little and little to extinguiſh the
Reformation in his Dominions, began
ſome time before to ſuppreſs the Aca-
demys belonging to the 3 b
A i at


1681.


26


diſſolv'd, than Mr. Juri


The. Life of Mr. Bayle.


That of Sedan had the fame fate with
the reſt:


out of buli.


Mr. Bayte being
place, and


heſs, reſotwd to quit the


make a trip to Paris; where he arviv'd


without knowing whether he {hou'd.go
on to ſturrer dam, where! he had ſome
hopes given him of an Eltabliſhment,
or go over to Expland, ot continbe in
France. Before he left Sedau, tile Count


de la Bourie, who was Governor, and


who had a very particular eſteem for
Mr. Behle, omitted nothing that might
engage him to turn Catholick, He let
him in a word underſtand, That 'twas


wholly in hi own power to Wake. is Fore


tune, and that "twas ful time for him to
think ont. | Mr. Bayle abſolutely rejected
the Pt6poſicion. He was ſoon aſter
calbd to — and procur'd a Set-
tlement for Mr. Jurien in the fame
Town, as you ſhall fee, my Lord, in
the Account Pm going to trafſcribe ;
and which may ſerve to give a juſter
Idea of the Spirit of this Miniſter.
The College of Sedan was no ſooner
in, much con-
cern'd at the lofs ot the beſt part of
his Fortune, began to look out for a
better Iacome than that of Miniſter,


whine Was: gti left him. His- ſirſt
TRENT


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 17
Thought was to acquaint the Viſitors of
the College of Groningen, that if they
had ſuch a place to give him as they
offer d hith formerly, he was ready to
accept it. But the Prayers and earneſt
Inſtances of Mademoiſelle Mary - d
Moulin his Aunt; a Perſon of great
worth, ſeconded by thoſe of ſeveral
other good People of Sedan, prevail'd
on him to promiſe he wou'd not for ſake
his Church, at a tie When it ſtood
in greater need of its Pa ſtors than ever.
But '#s his proud peeviſh' Temper had
| tender d him very ofdions to the Ro-
man Catholicks of Sedan, and” his af.
ſecting to diſtinguiſn himſelf by Starts
| bf Zeal; hich did the Reform'd a deal
pf prejudice, had provok'd ſome of the
Magiſtrates aghinſt him; he reſum'd
| the Deſign of getting away betimes :
and remembrins the Walloon Church
of Rotterdam had formetly defit'd him
JF for their Minifter, ' he turn'd his eyes
cht way. Mr. By, who had expee-
| tations in the ſame Town, by the Favor
of a Magiſtrate, procur'd him by one
| of his Friends, was overjoy'd at this
| Overtife ; and ſo earneſtly engag'd his
Friend in this Affair roo, that He pre-
| YPd on the lame Patron to iſſue a Vo-
os cation


28


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


cation to Mr. Jurieu. Mr. Bayle's Friend


was one Mr. Van Thelen, a young Gen-
tleman of Rotterdam, and a Relation to


Mr. Van Zygelen Burgomaſter of the ſame


Town. This young man had lodg'd with


Mr. Bayle at Sedan, improv'd himſelf con-
ſiderably in his Studys by his Conver-


ſation, and had entertain'd a thorow
Friendſhip for him; ſo that the very
day the Order for ſuppreſſing the Aca-
demy came to Sedan, he took a Reſolu-
tion of ſending it to Mr. Paets, his Re-
lation, one of the Counſellors of the
City of Rotterdam, a very learned and
conſiderable Perſon, and a Lover of
Men of Letters. He let him know by
the ſame Poſt that Mr. Bayle was out of
Buſineſs, ſaid a great many kind things
of him; and receiv'd an Anſwer exprel-
ſing a great Inclination to ſerve him.
Mr. Bayle wrote upon this occaſion a
Letter to this worthy Perſon ; who ſoon


aſter return'd him an Anſwer, That the
Town of Rotterdam had granted him 2
| Penſion, with a Licence to teach Philo-


ſophy therme.
Mr. Van Tpelen and Mr. Bayle had
left Sedan before the Arrival of this An-
ſwer, the latter to go to Paris, the other
to go ſtrait to Rotterdam, and ſollicit


Mr.


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Mr. Jurien's Affair in Perſon, which


Mr. Bayle had earneſtly recommended to
him. He ſpoke on't to his Relation in
ſo preſſing a manner (for Mr, Bayle had,
among other things, cleverly inſinuated,
that he muſt loſe no time for fear other
Employments ſhou'd offer for Mr. Ju-
rica) that this illuſtrious Magiſtrate
beſtir'd himſelf immediately to remove
all Obſtacles. There was none at all


1 regard to Mr. Bale; fo the Letter


wrote him by Mr. Paets ſignify'd, that
his Buſineſs was ſettled, and Mr. Ju-


rieu's in a fair way. Mr. Bayle then
being at Paris, Mr. Jurieu receiv'd


the Letter; but inſtead of ſending it
to Mr. Bayle, as 'twas all the reaſon
in the world he ſhou'd, he conten-
ted himſelf with taking notice to him
in general of the ſubſtance on't, nor e-


ver deliver'd it after. As Mr. Bayle was


a very eaſy Friend, who turn'd away
his Thoughts from every thing, which
it div'd into, might tempt him to judg
hardly of Perſons, he truly had ſome
ſuſpicion that this Letter was wrote in
Terms too obliging for him, and not


quite ſo obliging to the Perſon who kept


it in his hands; yet he did not d well on
it, not even in a Thought.


Whilſt


79


30 The Life of Mr. Bayle.
Whilſt Mr. Paets at Rotterdam was re-
moving all the ObRacles to Mr. Jurieus
Vocation, Mr. Bajle was inform'd he had
ingag' d himfelf to the Church of Roay;
ſo that he was mightily ſurpriz@ in his
Journy for Holland, to hear that Mr. J.
rieu was broke up from Sedan with ſome
precipitation, and making the heſt of his
way into Holland. He thought he cou'd
not be very far from Rotterdam, when
asking about him at Maeſtricht, they in.
form'd him be was actually there. Mr.
Baule made but a fhort ſtay at Afaeſtricht,
and upon his Arrival at Rotterdam, was
receiy'd in the moſt obliging manner
imaginable by the Family of Mr. Van
Toelen, very confiderable in this Town;
and by Mr. Paets, who had procur'd
him a Philofophy and Hiſtory Profeſlor's
Chair in the illuſtrious School, which
the wor fhipful Magiſtrates of Rotterdam
had juſt founded. Mr. Paets was but
newly return'd from his Embaſſy to
Spain: He was a Perſon of extraordi-
nary Merit, no leſs diftinguiſh'd by his
Acquaintance with all the moſt profound
Parts of Learning, than by his great
Ability in managing the Buſineſs of the
State, as your Lordſhip ſhalt fee more
particularly hereafrer, He was aged
in-law


The Life of Mr. Bayle!


in aw to Mr. Cornelius de Wit, and con -


| fider'das Head of the Party. which op-
pos d the Houſe of Orazge ; and therefore
it was not without ſome difficulty that he
was admitted again into the Magiſtracy
| of Rotiordam after his return from Spain.
This great Man was fo charm'd with
| the Beauty of Mr. Bs Wit, that he
enter id him into the number of his moſt
| intimate Friends; and to give him be-
fſorehand ſome particular mark of his
Eſteem, he was pleas'd, upon his bare
recommendation, to imploy all his cre-
dit to get Mr. Jurieu a Settlement in
| Rotterdam, inſomuch that he was foon
IF after made Profeſſor in Divinity there.

Some months after Mr, Bqle revis'd
bs Letter on Comets, and having made
; ſeveral Additions, he printed it under
che following Title: A Letter zo M. L.
A. D. C. 4 Doctor of Sorbon; in which
t © ſhewn, by ſeveral Reaſons draws from
» | Phibſophy and Divinity, That Comets
| ©

s

d


| are nat Preſages of Evil: with Reflec-
tions Moral and Political, ſeveral Hiftori-


; ſome reigning popular Errors. Mr. Bayle
baving wrote this Letter with a Deſign,
| 351 obferv'd before, of having it printed
at Pars, he was oblig'd to aſſume on
Fa Stile


| cal Obſervations, and a Conſutation of


31


31


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Stile of a Roman Catholick, and imi-
tate the Language and Elogys of Mr,
de Viſe on the publick Affairs. This
Conduct was abſolutely neceſſary for
any who wou'd appear in Print at Paris,
and he thought his imitating the Mer.
cure Galant in ſome of his Flights, wou'd


help to recommend it to a Licence, As


he had taken the utmoſt Precautions to
conceal his being the Author of this


Letter on Comets, which was printed in


Holland ſome months after his Arrival,
he made no Alterations in the Stile or
Language: This he thought wou'd ef-
fectually prevent Peoples imagining that


ttwas wrote by a Perſon who had abdi-


cated France for his Religion.

But notwithſtanding all his Precau-
tions, he was ſoon diſcover'd to be the
Author. Mr. Leers his Bookſeller ſhew'd


the Manuſcript to Mr. Paets, and told


him from whom he had it; and Mr.Paet-
believ*d he ſhou'd do Mr. Bayle a piece
of Service, by making it publick. On
the whole, tho Mr. Bayle's Deſign was
properly to undeceive the World, with
regard to the common Prejudices for


Preſage ; yet he had the Art of enliven-


ing his Matter by Digreſſions ſo eng.
ging, and by ſuch a variety of fine and


judicious


| jud!


rim!


oft


was


| whe
| Prat
Cut v


perc
at th


couꝰ
more
him
on C
came
the f
on't t
that
he nc
the v


ter'd
ſome


was t!


"75 0" "<<"


Publiſh'd his Hiſtory of Calviniſm,
C T7 his


The Life of Mr. Bayle:

judicious. Reflections, that from that
time he began to be look'd on as one
of the beſt Pens of Europe. This Work
was no leſs admir'd in France than elſe-
where, tho *twas eafily ſeen that the
Praiſes there were only from the Teeth


outwards, and that they cou'd not but


perceive in it ſeveral lively home Strokes
at the Roman Religion. Mr. Paets then


cou'd not make Mr. Bayle known to


more advantage, than by diſcovering
him to be the Author of the Letter up-
on Comets. Mr. Jurieu among others
came to know it by his means, either at
the firſt or ſecond hand ; and ſpeaking
on't to Mr. Bayle with a ſmall Reproach,
that others were let into the Secret and


he not, Mr. Bayle declar'd to him how


the whole matter came about, and en-
ter'd with him into an explication of


| | ſome Points in the Book. The Work


was then ſo much to Mr. Jurieu's mind,
that he advis'd his Friends to buy and
read it, recommending it as a very good


Piece; but withal, cou'd not forbear


harboring a ſecret reſentment, jealous, as

he ever was, of the Reputation of his

Friends. 2
Much about this time Mr. Maimboarg


9


34


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
This Author bad liv'd for above fifty
Years 1n a Society of Jeſuits, and with
a great deal of Diſtinction; but the Su-
periors oblig'd him now to march off,
to prevent any Umbrage from the Court
of Rome, Which was highly diſpleasd
at ſome of his Writings. This ſerv'd
but to raiſe his Reputation higher ;
for the King of Praxce, who at that
time ſtudy'd only how to mortify
the Pope, took him into his Royal Pro-
tection, and gave him a very conſidera-
ble Penſion. He had a deal of Wit,
and a boundleſs ſtock of fine Images for
giving a hundred pleaſing dextrous turns
to Affairs; his Stile, tho ſomewhat di.
fuſe, was ſprightly and ſhining, and here
and there one fell in with very beautiſul
flights of Eloquence. But tho he pre-
tended to the Character of a Hiſtorian,


he troubPd himſelf very little about the


faithful part. He even miſrepreſented
matters moſt an end, either to gratiſy
his own Paſſion, or to flatter the Court


from whence he deriv'd ſo many Favors.


Such being the Genius of Mr. Maim.
boarg, you can't think it ſtrange, my
Lord, that there ſhou'd be a general de-
mand for his Works. His Hiftory of
Calviniſm was read with ſo much the

more


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


more guſto, as it had been expected of
a good while, and as it turn'd beſides
on matters of the higheſt Importance.
The Deſign was to pronounce Judg-
ment on the Spirit and Conduct of the
| Reform'din France, ever ſince they had
ſeparated from the Church of Rome.
Mr. Maimbourg diſcharg'd all his Gall
on em, and employ'd the utmoſt Arti-
fices of his Pen, to draw upon em the
Contempt and Indignation of the Ca-
tholicks. Mr. Bay/e cou'd not bear the
Unfaithfulneſs which ran thro the whole
Relation, nor the hideous Picture
he had drawn of the Reformation ;
and in the Apprehenſion that it might in
ſome meaſure haſten the Ruin of the
KReform'd, he reſolv'd to oppoſe an
| Anſwer to it, which might fully vindi-
cate em from all his Calumnys. But
to compaſs his end, he did not think it
neceſſary to anſwer in Form, and en-
ter into a nice Diſcuſſion of Facts.
Twas enough, he thought, for ruining
Mr. Maimbourg's whole Scheme, to
| make ſome general Obſervations on his
Book, and to ſhew what kind of Judg-


JT ĩ WO I;


.. | ment we muſt paſs on things, if we
F ſuppoſe em ſuch as this Author re-
ic preſents. The little Certainty he


35


l
:
[4
:
:
£
-
:
:
1
1
:
.
' ?
: t+
3
: :
L :
1
17
3
2
i
I
yr
' T1
4
7 i
[1
*
ö
13
on
: +
;


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


had found' in Hiſtory, made him pitch
upon this Method as the ſureſt and pro-
pereſt for confounding his Adverſary.
He had obſerv'd, that all Partys miſ-
repreſent Facts in ſuch a manner, eſpe-
cially where Religion is concern 'd, that
tis an infinite trouble to ſift out the
Truth. Each ſide diſplays every thing
that's moſt for its advantage, and diſſem-
bles, or but faintly mentions whatever is
not in its favor; and how is poſſible
to ſeparate Tr uth from Fal ſhood under
ſo many fraudulent Diſguiſes? Such a
Diſcuſſion is ſo tedious, ſo painful, and
generally ſo inſignificant, that Mr. Boyle
had a great deal of Reaſon to avoid it.
His Anſwer came out in June 1682.
under the Title of 4 Generat Criticiſm
on P. Maimbourg's Hiſtory of Calviniſm.
You, my Lord, are too well acquainted
with Mr. Bayle's turn of Wit, not to
judg that this Piece muſt be the fartheſt
in the World from a ſour ſplenetick
Criticiſm. *Twas properly a kind of
roying, but filPd with good Senſe, and
fitter to embaraſs and deconcert his
Adverſary than the graveſt ſerious
Argument. Mr. Bayle*'s perfect Ac-
quaintance with all modern Wri-
tings had furniſh'd him with a
„ thouſand


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


thouſand Particulars of the Life and
Diſputes of Mr. Maimbourg, which o-
pen'd a large Field for the fineſt and
moſt pointed Raillery. Accordingly this
Work was ſo well receiv'd by the Pub-
lick, that the whole Edition was bought
up in four months. The Author was
enquir'd for with great Earneſtneſs; at
W People caſt their Eyes on one of the
beſt Pens of the Proteſtant Party in
France, No body ever dream'd of
ſearching for him in Holland, amidſt
the Dult of a College. Beſides, tho
Mr. Bayle did not induſtriouſly defign it,
he gave the Stile of this Criticiſm an
Air ſo different from that of the Let-
ter on Comets, that no one ſuſpected


the two Works were the Production


of one and the ſame Pen. A pure
Accident drew Mr. Bale from behind
the Curtain: for anſwering the Letter
of an Anonymous, which his Book-
{eller had ſent him, he forgot to de-
fire him not to deliver the Original
but a written Copy. This Anony-
mous, a Friend of Mr. Claude's the
Son, ask'd, as he ſhew'd him Mr.
Bayle's Anſwer, whether he knew the
Hand. Mr. Claude telling him whoſe it
. „ was,


x5 C0 2
—— —
— ran, onthe — 2 —


r. #47 * * 7
— — —
' —
— — —
*


— — one en
—_ ED — —
— —— —


——


|
|
|


—


— N =
— OT” *
— —— —
- - — —


— — EEO CL


2 — — —
— — * . ——
* — —— —


38


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


was, twas in vain for Mr, Bayle to make


a Myſtery any longer of his being the


Author of the Criticiſm. The ſecond
Edition of it was finiſh'd in November
following. Mr. Bayle enlarg'd it to


double the Bulk, yet keeping ſtrictly


within the Limits he had preſcrib'd him-


ſelf. I mean, he did not enter into a


Diſcuſſion of Facts, nor Reſearches of
Hiſtory, ſuch as might manifeſt the In-
nocence of the Reform'd, and the Un-


fairneſs of Mr. Maimbourg.


Mr. Jurieu alfo undertook to anſwer
Mr. Maimboarg, and accordingly com-
pos'd a Book, bulky enough indeed,
entitl'd, An Apology for the Reformers,
for the Reformation, and for the Reform d,
divided into four Parts, againſt a Libel
entitled, The Hiſtory of Calviniſm by Mr,
Maimbourg. Unfortunately the Pub-
lick did not give this Work ſo good a
Reception as it had given Mr. B's,
nor call'd for it with the ſame Eagerneſs.
Mr. Bayle's Critique had been admir d
by the beſt Judges, and in France the


very Catholicks cou'd not refuſe it their


Praiſes, : It's true, the Miniſters of State
were touch'd at it to the quick, yet this
hinder'd not their doing Juſtice to the
Author. But they were very far from


judging


deny
| ſpeak


judge
rien
Lor
Men
ces

whi
ſom
this
Crit


of (
MUCci


Bat!


Bay!
| had |
| has ©
great
| Mr,
| and
| all C
| Repe
Du!
the (
enra
petit
the
| their
for h
Prid.


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
judging ſo advantageouſly of Mr. Ju-
rieu's Apology. Give me leave, my
Lord, to relate in this place what Mr.
Menage ſaid of both in the Conferen-
ces he held at his own Houſe, and of


which his Friends have preſerv'd us


ſome Remains. I's 4 fine Piece, ſays
this learned Man, a fine Piece, this
Criticiſm on P. Maimbourg's Hiſtory
| of Calviniſm, and he himſelf cou'd not
| deny it his Eſteem. He has omn'd fo


much to me, tho he generally affected to


ſpeak of it as of a Book he had not read :
| Bating what relates to Religion, all Mr,
| Bayle ſays # ſprightly and rational, I
| had the Carioſity to read what Mr, Jurieu
has wrote on the ſame Subject: there's 4


great deal of difference between the Men;


Mr. Bayle's Book is that of a Gentleman
and a well-bred Man; Mr. Jurieu's is
all Cant and Impertinence. It's a paltry
Repetition of all that inſipid af which
Du Moulin and others have ſaid againſt
the Catholick Religion, Mr. Jurieu was
enrag'd at Mr. Bayle's ſtanding in com-
petition with him, and much more at
the different Judgments paſs'd upon


their Works. The Friendſhip he had


| for him was no longer proof againſt his
Pride; it began from that time forward
| C 4 to


39


40


The Life of My. Bayle.


to grow cold; and he has fully ſhewn


in the ſequel, how far the Reſentment


of an Author may be puſh'd when na-
turally ſplenetick, and intoxicated with
a high Opinion of himfelf, _
About this time Mr. Bayle gave a ſe-
cond Edition of his Letter on Comets:
But as he ever had an Averſion to long
Titles, he chang'd it to that of Miſcella-


vcous Reflections on occaſion of the Comet,


&c. This new Edition was much lar—
ger than the former, and Mr. Bayle di-


vided the Work into ſeveral ſhort Secti-
ons, to give his Reader the more Reſts,


and the Convenience of reſuming or
drawing Breath when he pleas'd. He


alſo gave himſelf the trouble of tranſla-


ting the Latin Paſſages into French, for
the Benefit of a great many honeſt Gen-
tlemen and People of good Senſe, who
deal not in the Originals.


Ihe Year following, that is, in 1684.
he publiſh'd A Collection of ſeveral cu-


rious Pieces, concerning the Principles of


Mr, Deſcartes. This Collection conſiſts
of ſix intire Pieces; the firſt is a kind ot


Concurdat between the Fathers of the
Oratory and the Jeſuits, in which thoſe


engage themſelves to certain Conditions


in teaching their Pupils, Which are


TS '


thought


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


though requiſite by theſe ; and among
other things they promiſe to renounce
the Carteſian Philoſophy, of which
they began to be the avow'd Patrons.
The ſecond Piece contains ſome Reflecti-
ons on this Condeſcenſion of the Fathers
of the Oratory. The third is an Exa-
mination of Mr. de Ia Ville's Book: this
Author pretended, that all the new
Philoſophers, whether Carteſians or Gaſ-


ſendiſts, ruin'd the Myſtery of Tran-


ſubſtantiation, by maintaining that
the Eſſence of Matter conſiſts in Exten-
ſion: And as his Book made a might

Noiſe in France, and did the Carteſians
much Miſchief, as I haye already ob-
ſervd; Mr. Bernier, a known Admirer
of Mr. Gaſſendi, began to be in pain,
and compos'd that Explication in which
he endeavors to reconcile the Princi-
ples of his Philoſophy with the Deci-
lions of the Church of Rome. The


| fourth is the Work of a Carte 7an, in


Anſwer to the ſame Mr. de Ja Vile,
and in favor of P. Malebranche. Not
but this great Philoſopher had himſelf
given an Anſwer to this Author, which


| was afterwards inſerted in his Search


ter Truth; but as Mr. de Ia Ville ſeem'd
Wore animated againſt him than againſt


1 _


42


ther inexplicable. It's likewiſe obſerv d


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


any other Carteſian, *twas thought fit
that one of the Party ſhou'd keep his
back hand. Theſe four Pieces are fol.
low'd by a Latin Diſſertation of Mr.
Bayle's, which I had the Honor of men-
tioning to your Lordſhip on another
Occaſion ; and by ſome Theſes of Phi-
loſophy by the ſame Hand, wherein is
maintain'd, among other things, that
neither Time, Place, nor Motion, have
yet bin defin'd, but in a manner altope-


there, that the Reflexion of Bodys pro.
ceeds from an Elaſtick Virtue in 'em,
ſince Motion is infinitely diviſible;
and by reaſon of this Diviſibility, no
Body in a ſtate of reſt, can hinder ano-
ther which is in motion, from moving
in a right Line; which Mr. Deſcartes it
{ſeems was not aware of. At the end of
this Collection are ſome Metaphyſical
Meditations, printed by a Diſciple of
P. Malebranche, in 1678. under the
borrow'd Name of William M ander.
There we find an Abſtract of the Car.
teſian Metaphyſicks, and every thing
that's valuable in De/cartes's Meditations,
Mr. Bayle even thinks, that the matter
is better digeſted here, brought into 4
narrower Compaſs, and-workt up to a

e 5 ertcr


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


| better conſiſtence than in the Writings
| of that celebrated Philoſopher, and car-
| ry'd ſome lengths further. That ſingle
| Meditation in which he examines what


| Liberty is, is a Theme in his Opinion,


on which the greateſt Divines might
| exerciſe their Talents. Inſtead of wrang-
ling, ſays he, on the Nature of Free-


| amuſing themſelves with the Proofs, they
| ought in the firſt place to prove there is
| ſuch a thing; the Queſtion may be of more
| Importance, and have a greater depth than
| they are aware.


About this time the Viſitors of the


Mr. Ble by his Reflections on Comets,
ocker him a Philoſophy Profeſſor's
[Chair with them. But tho this Poſt
„vas more beneficial, and indeed more
creditable than that of Roterdam, he
thank'd 'em for the Honor they did
him, but was loth to remove from his


5 Friends at Roterdam, hoping he ſhou'd
ae ert Mr. Baſuage there, whom he be-
oy Iiev*d the Perſecution wou'd ſoon waft


Paither, as it accordingly hapned.

The Deſign of informing the Publick

a kind of Journal, of the moſt curi-

us Occurrences in the Republick of
Letters,


wil, which they always ſuppoſe, without


College of Franeker, who had known


a 3 — IG — - 2 COR
— — c x7 FT 1 - » — — —— — —
— r 4 ne — ——— — a — — — 0
— — — — — — A , 5 £
> — 4


-
r
—


e


— —
_ - * — n — — —ẽ— yon — — 8 ͤ — ˙
8 — W „ 2 — : 8 — 0 — — — — — . RI Hy; Aut tg 2 —
” n a — Ow — gr — me = * — K n * — *
CRP — — 5 2 1 I R. C *
8 >


UE ik I
* x I — *
. —


44


well if not better furniſh'd with Book


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Letters, had been found fo inſtructive
and agreeable, that no ſooner had Mr.
Sallo, a Counſellor of the Parliament of
Paris, publiſh'd his firſt Eſſays of this
Project, in 1665. but ſeveral other Na.
tions expreſt their Satisfaction in it, ei-
ther by tranſlating the Journal des S..


pans, Which this ingenious Perſon had


-printed every Week, or by publiſhing
ſomething of the ſame kind.

This Emulation had ſenſibly increas'd
ever ſince that time, inſomuch as it ex.
tended it ſelf, not only from Nation to
Nation, but from one Science to ano.


ther. Mr. Bayle, who underſtood the


Uſefulneſs and Advantage of ſuch Jour:
nals beſt of any body, was mightily ſur-
priz'd, that Holland, which had always
ſignaliz' d it felf in the Improvement dl
the noble Arts, had not hitherto taken
part in the general Emulation. Hs
wonder increas'd the more when be
conſider'd, that this Country was 4


than any part of the World; thit
the People were naturally induſtrich
and inquiſitive; that their Voyages"
the Indies help'd *em to the Knowledg
of a thouſand Raritys and Things V


terly unknown to other Nations : 117


laſtl
Autl
reco1
| by tl
at ho
| temp


of the |
of ſey
com po.


Sheets
; Mort,

got 'en
think h.


ayupt


of all 0
Though
Lordſhi
Ribbon
Example
Was ſo


7


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Laſtly, that the Preſs was ſo open, that
Authors from all parts of Europe had
recourſe to Holland, when diſcourag'd
by the Difficulty of obtaining Licences
at home. All theſe Conſiderations had
tempted him more than once to write a


be ſoon gave over the Deſign when


Application which ſuch an Undertak-
ing requir d; and liv'd always in
| hopes, that ſome body elſe wou'd pre-
| ſent for the purpoſe, Accordingly the
| firſt Month of this Year there appear'd
2 kind of Journal, entitPd, the Mer.
cure Savant, Mr. de Blegm, Author
of the Journal or Hiſtory of Phyſick, and
of ſeveral Treatiſes of Chirurgery,
compos'd it at Paris, and ſent the
Sheets to Mr. Gaultier, a Phyſician of
Mort, Who liv'd at Amſterdam, and
got 'em printed there. One wou'd
think he undertook this Journal only to
Icry up his own Works, and damn thoſe
of all other Writers. Twas a happy


Lordſhip ſome Journaliſts of the blue
Ribbon, who have improv'd upon the
Example. However ſomething there
was ſo irregular in this new *

1 that


| he conſider'd the Time and infinite


Thought, and I cou'd name your


45


3
, that *twas dropt the very next Month


with the Month of March to give Us


This of all his Works was that which


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


after. No ſooner had Mr. Bayle ſeen


the Mercure Savant, but he felt his for. |
mer Paſſion kindle in him anew, and


with more Force than ever. The Plan


of this he obſery'd was defective, and


he was exceedingly ſhock'd at the viſible


Defign in it of running down illuſtrious


Men. Mr. Jurieu, who was privy to


Books. He flatter'd himſelf too with


the Hopes of inſerting in it now and


then ſome Memoirs againſt thoſe who
had the misfortune not to be 1n his good


Graces; and was beſides very deſirous I f


Mr. Bayle ſhou'd be ingag'd in a mat-


ter, which he was ſure wou'd prevent


is ever interfering with himſelf. |
wr" Bayle therefore having reſoly'd
to enter the Lifts as a Journaliſt, began
his Account of the Republick of Letters.


the Publick coveted moſt, and which


ajle's Thoughts in this point, and
wr rr a Got of the Mercure Savant |
comprehended the Advantages which |
might be made of ſucha Journal, urgd
him extremely to proſecute the Delign, |
hoping to have in him a truſty Pen for
forming the Panegyrick of all his own |


perhaps


perha
All w
Extra.
ing hi:
the Id
witho!
Choice
He w
Charad
thors,
tuting
that 11
Journal
afterwa
ticular,
moſt A.
tis'd of
cknow!
Was an
and of |
an't ſt
the Elog
of this
that all ti
copy 5 bu
hear him.
The <
n the H
af in a V


0blj gd te


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


perhaps was moſt univerſally reliſh'd.
All was ſprightly and animated in his
Extracts; he had the knack of diverſify-
ing his matter agreeably, and conveying
the Idea of a Book in a few words,
without tiring the Reader by an ill
Choice, or by tedious palPd Reflections.
He was diſcreet and reſerv'd in his
Characters, loth to diſcourage his Au-
thors, or to expoſe himſelf by proſti.
tuting his Praiſes. *T'was thought tho
that he prais'd too much in his firſt
Journals, and this oblig'd him to be
afterwards more reſerv'd in this par-
ticular, Very far from the Spirit of
moſt Authors, whenever he was adver-
tid of a Fault he took a Pleaſure in
:cknowledging it to the Publick, This
was an effect of his extreme Modeſty,
and of his ardent Love of Truth. I
| !han't ſtop here, my Lord, to colle&
the Elogysgiven Mr. Bayle on occaſion
of this Journal. I ſhall only obſerve,
that all the other Journaliſts endeavor to
copy, but none as we can ſee comes
near him. PT
The fecond Edition of his Criticiſin
in the Hiftory of Calviniſm being ſold
of ina very ſhort time, Mr. Bayle was
Olig'd to publiſh a third. As a
1ev'


— — —
— —— — — ͤ —— — ——— — — —— —⅜
— - - . - — = -
* X


48


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
liev'd this might be the laſt that
would ſell, he cou'd willingly have
brought it as near Perfection as poſſible;

but he durſt not, for fear of diſobliging
thoſe who had bought it twice before,
and becauſe People often murmur at


new Fditions, review'd,
and enlarg'd, which take off the Va-
lue of the former, and give Perſons
ſome regret that they laid out their
Mony in em. He took care then that


this Edition ſhou'd not much differ from


the Second, and publiſh'd an Advertiſe-
ment, that all who had the Second E-
dition might keep to it, and that the


Third ought not to give em any Temp-


tation. Yet he cou'd not forbear mak-
ing ſome Additions and Amendments,
which render'd it much preſerable to
the former.


got, my Lord, to tell you, that Mr. Ble
compos'd this Work by way of Letters)
but he chiefly apply*d himſelf to the po-
liſhing the Stile, by ſtriking out all


chiming · or ambiguous Expreſſions.


Mr. Bayle had ſtudy'd his own Lan-
guage to a nicety, and no one better


knew the difficulty of writing in it to


Perfection.


amended,


He made ſome change in
the Diſpoſition of the Letters (for I for-


io e ce.

who .

ſcarce 4
with 7

riods, C

6 ont inu,
avoid |
their N
Or der 0
Situatio
in all M
mg „ bec
over. abo
Ter min Al
Some


| kind of


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


Perfection. They who thorowly under-
ſtand our Language, ſays he, and who
have 4 nice Ear, own there's nothing
harder than writing juſtly in French, /o
45 to avoid all chiming Expreſſions, Con-
ſonances, and Phraſes, where the ſame word
may be refer d to ſeveral other Phraſes,
and admit of different Senſes, ſome 0
which may ſometimes be ridiculous, The
new French Grammarians, adds he, lay
down Rules which *tis impoſſible to follow,
and which deſerve to be lookt on as the
bane of Aathors, They have made the
French the difficulteſs of all Languages
to excel in; and therefore we find ſo few
who write by their Rales, We have
ſcarce an Author whoſe Proſe is not fill d
with Verſes, Cadences, diſagreeable Pe-
riods, Conſonances, chiming Sounds, and
continual Equivoques. They who wou'd
avoid Equivoques, are oblig'd to range
their Words according to the natural
Order of the Thoughts ; and in this
Situation, which is one and the ſame
in all Men, *tis impoſſible to avoid chim-
ing, becauſe the French Tongue does not
over. abound in Words, or in different
Terminations.

Some time after Mr. Bale publiſh'd a

kind of a Continuation of the Work,
EC = Which


50


to theſe matters. In his Advice to the
Reader, Mr. Bayle owns, that after he


Reflections, that theſe Judgments


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
which I have now ſpoke of, entit'd,
New Letters of the Author of the general
Criticiſm on P, Maimbourg's Hiſtory of
Calviniſm, firſt Part ; wherein, juſtifying
ſome Paſſages of the Criticiſm, which ſeem
chargeable with Contradiction, fallacious
Reaſonings, and other Defects of the
{ame kind, ſeveral curious Subjects are
occaſionally handled, which have a relation


had with much difficulty conſented to
the printing it, he was often tempted
to ſtop the Impreſſion, conſidering |
how rare a thing it is not to degene-
rate, when, after a Book has had
ſome. ſort. of Succeſs, one ventures to
give a Continuation. Pieces of this
kind, adds he, almoſt always import, That
the Author has not kept up to his Charac-
ter, that he had done well to have ſtop'd
where he was, that he ſhou'd have knows
his own Strength, and that he was wrong
to hazard his not anſwering the Opt-
nion the World had conceiu'd of him.
He afterwards ſhews by ſome juſt


may ſometimes be reaſonable; but
for the moſt part, if a Continus-
tion is not thought equal with the


The Life of Mr. Bayle,

firſt Work, 'tis not ſo much the Fault
of the Author as the Reader, But
as the Diſgrace is ſtill the ſame, he
concludes, that if one excepts a ſmall
Number of Writers, who have had
the good Fortune to prepoſſoſs the Pub-
lick, the reſt have reaſon to dread the


Compariſon between Work and Work,


if the farſt Part has not altogether dif-
pleas d. 305 1 af

* But, continues he, if ever any had
* cauſe to dread the Compariſon, ſurely


I have; becauſe Pm now deſtitute


* of a thouſand outward Circumſtan-
ces, Which in all likelihood produc'd
* the whole Succeſs of the General Cri-
* ticiſes, if it be true that it was not al.
together diſeſteem d. *Twas at firſt
* aſcrib'd to one of our moſt celebrated
* Fens ; and this Opinion ſpreading from


| © place to place, prepoſſeſt the World to


* ſuch a degree (for he is one of thoſe
* happily privileg'd Authors) that the
* Book was read with the moſt favora-
© ble Diſpoſitions ; which prevented ſe-
* veral Readers perceiving, that it was
© not a Production ſolid enough to come
* from ſuch a Hand. They who did
* perceive it, chang'd only to other as
© favorable Diſpoſitions, ariſing from
OY the


51


52


—


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


the Civility paid to an unknown Vir.
gin Author. The Pleaſure of gueſſing,
the Cuſtom of magnifying what we


are Strangers to, and a hundred other


Devices of the Imagination, amus d
the World, and made em ſpeak advan-
tageouſly of the Book. What ſhall 1
ſay of Mr. Maimbourg's Reputation,


which alone was ſufficient to excite


the Curioſity of the Publick for a Cri-
ticiſm on his Hiſtory of Calviniſm, eſpe-
cially at the time he wrote it? The


* Hiſtorys of this Jeſuit took mightily,


they were read in all Countrys; that
of Calviniſm nearly concern'd a con-
ſiderable Body in Europe: the Pro.


ceedings of the Pope againſt him had


drawn the Eyes of all thoſe upon him


more than ever, who were given to


reading; People expected with Impa-
tience what the Calviniſts wou'd ſay
to this new Writer of the Hiſtory
of their Religion; the whole Party
Wiſh'd paſſionately, that ſome body


you'd confute this Man; and their


* bly defended the Cauſe ; laſt of all,
Te con


Wiſhes for his ſucceeding in't dif


pos'd em powerfully to believe, and
to make others believe, ſo the Work


were tolerable, that he had admira-


con
tho
« had

Aft.


now
favoral
quent[!
Reade!
of the
and a I
mily :
Tempt
to ſtop!
© kno
* plaul
e 1ma
( 580%
do Epitf,
& ble L.
" enoug


| © Diſgr


« fort f
* Colled
* And v
study
* Men,
* lick, I
* Opinic
* not lie


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


« contraband Books had bin very rare,


« tho the Perſecution of the Hagonots
« had made a great noiſe.

After this Mr. Bay/e ſhews he was
now deſtitute of the help of all theſe
favorable Circumſtances, and conſe-
quently had reaſon to fear, that his
Readers might look on his Continuation
of the Criticiſm as a younger Brother,
and a Diſhonor to the Head of the Fa-
mily : and from hence proceeded the
Temptation, which he was often under
to ſtop it in the Impreſſion. © If you'd
© know, adds he, how I conquer'd fo
«* plauſible a Temptation, you muſt
« imagine a Man who, ſearching after
that bleſt Independence on which
Epictetus has given us ſuch admira-


ble Leſſons, has a Soul Philoſophical _


* enough to be eaſily comforted under


| © Diſgrace, and perhaps need no Com-


fort for the Diſadvantages this new
Collection of Letters may fall under.
And what, pray, ſhou'd we gain by


Study, if we continu'd, like other


Men, in a vile Servitude to the Pub-
lick, I mean in a Dependence on the
„Opinions of others? No, we muſt


* not lie down in this Slavery; yet


I»


33


— 2 — m a
— —A NCI. 007 - — 8 >
— — —Uä — — — .


Wo es? =


= og —— —


—
- — ——
rr Ss ene ——— ” a e —


.


——


.


— n —˙·m-
— II I
— IIS EO OE —


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
« *twere doing as much, to ſuppreſs
“ Books half printed, for fear the Rea-
& der ſhowd ſay this or that. We
% muſt e'en let 'em take their Por-
tune, and convince our ſelves by an
« Experiment, that we are free.
This Work contains two and twenty
Letters. In the firſt Mr. Bayle makes
ſome Reflections upon Authors not
bearing to be criticiz'd on: He relates
the Objections ſent to him againſt his
Critique Generale, and notes thoſe which
he intends to confute. The ſecond Let.
ter turns upon Authors contraditting
themſelves. The third contains ſeveral
Miſcellaneous matters. In the fourth
he treats of the Quality of Great Man,
and the ill Effects of Praiſe. In the fiſth
he applys to the famous Mr. Arnauli,
what was advanc'd in the former Let-
ter. In the ſixth he examines the Ex-
ample of Jesus CHRIST and his A-
poſtles, alledg'd to juſtify Authors who
Write in a violent Stile. The ſeventh
ſhews, that angry Authors don't go un-
puniſt'd, and aſſigns the reaſon of it.
Mr. Bazle ſpeaks in the eighth of ſome
Fdicts publiſh'd in France againſt ths
Reform'd. In the ninth he treats of the
Rights of an erroneous Conſcience, an


of


of Err.
juſtifys
had m
touchin
form'd
twelfth
had pul
the ne.
thirteer
lity of

tor em
the foui
of Biſh
In the ſ
cally, V
lock tha
of the
dren.

flection:
The ej,
ous Obi
ſpeaks e
he had {
of his

Principl
ter'd in
the twe
on the !
Mr. M.
Prince


;
q
Y


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
of Errors attended with Sincerity. He
juſtifys 1n the tenth ſome Remarks he


had made on a Letter of Mr. Peliſſon


touching the Converſions of the Re-


| form?d in France. In the eleventh and


twelfth he anſwers what Mr. Arzauld


had publiſh*d, to prove the Sincerity of


the new Converts. He ſpeaks in the
thirteenth of the Motives of the Nobi-
lity of France, as well for rejecting as
for embracing the Reformation. In
the fourteenth he ſpeaks of the Marriage
of Biſhops who chang'd their Religion.
Ia the ſixteenth he examines Philoſophi-
ally, why Men are leſs fond of Wed-


lock than Women, and what's the cauſe.


of the Love of Parents for their Chil-
dren. The ſeventeenth contains Re-
flections on the Uſefulneſs of Jealouſy.
The eighteenth has ſeveral Miſcellane-


ous Obſervations. In the nineteenth he


ſpeaks of a Paſſage of Brantome, which
he had ſtruck out of the Third Edition
of his Critique Generale, and of the
Principles of Morality which are ſcat-
ter d in Mr. Maimbourg's Hiſtorys. In
the twentieth he has ſome Reflections
on the Learning of Preachers, and on
Mr. Maimbourg's Omiſſion of the laſt


Prince of Conde, in the Elogy of bis


44 Anceſtors.


*


56


the ſtate of Prieſthood. And Mr. Bayle
in the twenty ſecond, anſwers an
Objection contain'd in the preceding


for a world of People, who ſeek, proper-


The Life of My. Bayle.
Anceſtors, The twenty firſt Letter is
written againſt the Author, by one Mr.
Criſante ; and here again the Marriage
of the firſt Reformers is ſpoke to, who
quitted the Cloyſter, or chang'd from


Letter.
Here, my Lord, is in general the
Subject of this Work ; for 'twere
troubleſom entring 1ato a detail of all
the Matters treated in it. You'l ea-
ſily judg, by what I have ſaid, that
Mr. Bayle does here ſometimes give a
full ſwing to his Imagination, and often
ſtudys only how to inſtruct his Reader
by amuſing him agreeably. This was
the end he propos d himſelf; and in this
Diſpoſition one muſt read ſeveral of his
new Letters, to paſs an equitable Judg-
ment on *em, and do the Author all the
Tuſtice he deſerves. Accordingly he fails
not to advertiſe the Publick, that his
Deſign was not to write like a grave
Doctor, or for Men of Learning, but


ly ſpeaking, only an innocent Amuſe-
ment, which may improve, but not fa-
tigue. Yet ſo few had taken him right,

COTE that


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 57
that he was forc'd to complain on't:
« It muſt be own'd, ſays he, in his
& Republique des Lettres for the Month
« of July, 1685. that moſt Readers
« are ſtrange Folks : One may take
the pains to advertiſe em of a thou-
“ fand things, recommend this or that
© to 'em in the moſt humble manner;
« they'l have their own way and their
humor nevertheleſs. There have bin
“ Novels written on the fruitleſs Pre-
* cautions of Mothers and Husbands ;
« Pm amaz'd no body has ſhew'd the
% Folly of the like Precautions in our
“Gentlemen Authors. I know one,
adds he, whoſe Work has not bin
e out of the Preſs above ſix Months,
e who had neglected nothing to ſecure
« himſelf from raſh Judgments: In
* his Preface he had given the moſt
* eflential Cautions ; and where he had
* any miſtruſt of his Reader, he had
« exprefly warn'd him, that his Senſe
* might be miſtaken, unleſs care were
© taken to examine what he ſaid alto-
* gether. He had even carry*d his Pre-
“ cautions ſo far, as to ſet down his
* real Opinion in Capital Letters, and
in ſome ſort to menace thoſe who


— — — — — — —


58


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


left inexcuſable ; yet all to no purpoſe,
«© He has ſince bin made ſenſible, that
c“ {ome even of the Tribe of Authors
& have gone into the nooſe, from which
« he had taken ſo much pains to pre-
« ſerve em. To return, Mr. Bayle de-
ſign'd in the beginning, to continue this
Firſt Part of his new Letters, by an
Addition of two Parts more, the firſt


of which was intended to fatisfy thoſe


who ſaid, he had in his Critique Gene-
rale too {lightly touch'd ſome things
which deſerv'd a greater Conſideration,
as the Conference at Poiſſi, the firſt tak-


ing up of Arms, the Verſion of the


Pſalms, &c. And the ſecond to explain
ſome Difficultys of Controverſy. Nay,
he had of a long time prepar'd the Mat-
ters for each of theſe Parts; but his o-


ther Occupations hinder'd his giving


em the finiſhing ſtroke. i
I ought not to forget, that he began


the ſecond Year of his Account of the
Republick of Letters, by a {mall change |


which put *em out of the number of
Anonymous Works; I mean, he added
to the Title of the Month of March,
1685. the following words,” By Mr.


3, Profeſſor in Philoſophy and | Hij-


2ry at Roterdam. This he did to ſhew,


that


lick.


that
of th
whic
Rote


there


receit
Enter
migh
theſe
the /
py L
apply
taking
means
yet th
em. i
teel Sj
Benefa
from

he fin
makin


Mr.
Upon tl
and as
tion w
that tir
the oc
his The
portanc


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


that the Author of this Journal was one


of the Profeſſors of that illaſtrious School,
which the worſhipful Magiſtrates of
Roterdam had the Generoſity to found
there in 168 1. and that if the Publick
received any Information, or uſeful
Entertainment by this Account, they
might know 'twas wholly owing to
theſe Gentlemen, ſince *twas to them
the Author was oblig'd for that hap-
py Leiſure which permitted him to
apply himſelf to ſo hard an Under-
taking. He wou'd alſo teſtify by this
means, tho he did not dedicate in form,


yet that he conſecrated it intirely to


'em. He who has any thing of a gen-
tee] Spirit, ſtudys how to return on his
Benefactors that Glory he derives
from 'em, and is never eaſy till
he finds out ſome way or other of
3 his Acknowledgments pub-
ck. |
Mr. Van Paets was then in England
upon the Buſineſs of the States General;
and as the Queſtion concerning Tolera-
tion was much agitated there about
that time, he wrote a Latin Letter on
the occaſion to Mr. Bayle, giving him
his Thoughts on a Subject of ſuch Im-
portance. This Letter was *
oon


59


60


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


ſoon after under this Title: H. V. P. ad
B— de nuperis Angliæ motibus Epiſtola,
in qua de diverſorum a publica Religion
circa divina ſentientium diſſeritur Tole-
rantia.

Mr. Van Paets began his Letter with
the Praiſes of the Prince, who was then
upon the Throne, for having never vi-
olated the Inſtincts of his own Con-
ſcience; and was in hopes, that as he
was not one of thoſe Kings, who rec-
kon the Reputation of not being as good
as their word, one of the leaſt Misfor-
tunes, but on the contrary, had all a-
long religiouſly kept his own, he wou'd
punQually obſerve the Aflurances he
had given his Proteſtant Subjects. Af-
ter this kind of Preamble he attacks
thoſe who maintain, that Kings ought
to allow only one Religion in their


Dominions, and the People ſuffer no |


King who is not of their Religion. He


maaintain'd, that theſe were moſt per-


nicious Maxims with regard to Sove-
reigns and to Subjects, and that they
cou'd only ſpring from a Corruption of
Heart. He afterwards endeavors to
confute the Reaſons which Politicians
and Prieſts alledg againſt a Toleration :


and after having ſhewa the Imperti-
nence


nenc
whic
he «
certa
befot
ter te
Socie


this!


and!
ſame
him i
tranſe


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


nence of the Doctrine of Infallibility,
which the Church of Rome arrogates,
he concludes with an Explication of
certain Points which he had advanc'd
before, and ſhews, twere an eaſy mat-
ter to unite all Proteſtant Sects into one


Society. Mr. Bayle gave an extract of
this ſmall Work as ſoon as it appear'd;


and Mr. Paets hapning to die about the
ſame time, he added a Character of


him in his Republick of Letters. I ſhall


tranſcribe it from him with ſo much
the more Pleaſure, as you have ſeem'd
willing, my Lord, to know this great
Man more particularly.
“This was not the firſt time, ſays
% Mr. Bayle, that the illuſtrious Mr.


« Paets, Author of the Letter which


% we have mention'd, had reaſon'd
« ſolidly on the point of Toleration.
There are ſome other Letters of his
© extant on this Subject, in the Col-
* lection of the Præſtantium ac erudi-
* torum virorum Epiſtole, printed firſt
« in Octavo, and afterwards in Folio, at
« Amſterdam, in 1684. Theſe are no-
die Monuments of his Eloquence, and
* of the Solidity of his Judgment. He
might eaſily have given the World
many others more conſiderable, h 25

| =


Om


*


c
0 0
46
0
66
E
Cc
40
ee
cc
cc
6
e
ec
&
4
.CC
Cc
cc
cc
(e
a
Cc
Cc
(
0
60
1
64
65


The Life of W. Bayle.


be the Ambition of being an Au-
thor; for he was a profound Divine,
a great Civilian, a great Stateſman,


and a great Philoſopher. He had a


very happy way of conceiving things,


and div'd to the bottom of em after


a ſurprizing manner. Never any


Man reaſon'd more ſolidly, or gave
a more majeſtick turn to Whatever


he had to deliver. But he was born
for greater Occupations than that of
an Author. His extraordinary Em-
baſſy into Spain, which he diſcharg'd


with ſo much Advantage to his
Country when under a Conſterna-
tion at the great Progreſſes of . France,


was an inſtance of his Capacity in


Affairs of State. What a loſs ist


that this great Man did not live
longer! He had ſcarce attain'd the
55th Year of his Age, when he
dy'd on the 8h of October, in the
Lear 168 5. no leſs valuable on ac-
count of his Intrepidity, his Probity,
his Generoſity, his inviolable Faith,
and all the other Qualitys which form
the Man of Honor, than for his great
Senſe and profound Erudition. This,
as a Journaliſt in the Republick of
Letters, adds Mr. Bayle, Em oblig'


Franc,


and ba


who,


of Ca
never
Bayle,
Hi or
know
Pens ©
new'd
Eſcape


his ret
| and ra
| on fine


of his
deſt C
him ſe


the Bi


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


& to ſay of him, What cou'd J leave
“ unſaid, did I ſpeak from my Senti-
ments of Gratitude, penetrated, as
« T am; by the Favors I have receiv'd
« from the illuſtrious Deceasdꝰ
This Year was a Year of Affliction
and Bitterneſs to Mr. Bayle, and never
was his Philoſophical Conſtancy brought
to ſo ſevere a trial, The Death of
Mr. Paers touch'd him ſenſibly, but


he was ſtill more agriey'd at the ge-


neral Oppreſſion of the Reform'd in
France, and - particularly at the cruel
and barbarous Treatment of his Brother,
Who, as I hinted before, was Miniſter
of Carlat. The Biſhop of Rieuæ had
never heard what was become of Mr.


Bale, till his Critique Generale on the


Hiſtory of Calviniſm had made him
known in France for one of the beſt
Pens of the Proteſtant Party. This re-
new'd the Grief of this Prelate at his
Eſcape from the College of Foix, and
his return to the Reform'd Religion;
and rais*d a Fury in him, which put him
on finding ſome Pretence to be reveng'd
of his Brother. The prudent and mo-
| deft Conduct of this Miniſter deliver'd
him ſeveral times from the Snares of


the. Aden, which ſerving only to en-
rage


1 x i
|
1
1
| |
14
|;
[


64


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
rage him the more, he at laſt reſoly'd
on his ruin. In the beginning of the


Year 1685. by a private underſtand.


ing with Mr. Louvois, who had long


' waited for an opportunity to be reveng'd


on the Author of the Critique Gene.
rale, he ſent a Troop of Archers to
his Houſe, who drag'd him out of his
Study, and carry'd him to Chateau
Trompete, where he was thruſt into the


diſmalleſt Dungeon in the place: they


tormented him a thouſand ways to make


him change his Religion; which, added


to a tender Conſtitution, did ſoon put


an end to his Life. Here he crown'd |


that Piety which was remarkable 1n the
whole courſe of his Life, by a bleſſed
Death, admir'd even by thoſe who
had us'd all their Endeavors to make
him die a Papiſt, and over whoſe ut-


moſt Crueltys he triumph'd gloriouſſy.


Mr. Bayle, who tenderly lov'd his


Brother, receivd the News of his Death


with exceeding Sorrow. But his Af.
fliction was never greater than when he
underſtood, they had at laſt repeald the
Edict of Nants, which Henry IV. had
granted to the Proteſtants of his King-
dom, as a Security for the free Exerciſe
of their Religion; and which Louis a


and L.
to ma
horror
aſter h
paſt, e
deſtroy
their h.
gion fre
cou'd a
Exile, I
thouſan
em to e
look*d c
Nor ws
the Fre
front to
and Eat
thoſe of
made u
and that
alintii
ſhort, n
more th
tings, the
the [nan
had eſta
and mal
This
him out
teſs of 1


14


— ——— IOC


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
and Louis the XIV. had ſolemnly ſworn
to maintain, He cou'd not without
horror reflect, how the Court of France,
after having, for above twenty Years
paſt, employ'd all kinds of Artifice to
deſtroy a People, whoſe only Crime was
their having different Notions in Reli-
gion from thoſe of the prevailing Sect,
cou'd at laſt make uſe of Dragoons;
Exile, Dungeons, Fire and Sword, and a
thouſand unheard of Crueltys, to force
' to embrace a Worſhip, which they
look'd on as ſuperſtitious and idolatrous.
Nor was he leſs provok'd to find, that
the French Authors ſhow'd have the
front-to publiſh, in the Face of Heaven
and Eatth, that no other Methods but
thoſe of Gentleneſs and Love had been
made uſe of towards the Reform'd,
ind that the extorted Converſions were
all intirely free and voluntary. In
ſhort, nothing cou'd poſſibly ſhock him
more than an infinite number of Wrj-


tings, the continual Burdenof which was


the [Immortal Glory that Louis the Great
had eſtabliſh'd, by rooting out Hereſy,
and making France intirely Catholick.

This Complication of Iniquity put
him out of all Patience; and in the ex-


tefs of his Grief and Indignation he
N 13631 14ili POT publifh'd


PF


—


— —— — —
MK Then rs Send na bn yer os T3 OE "I. — —


—


—ͤ—ñ——à—ů1ñ —— ̃ Et — 2


. ͤ ˙ w


66 be Lifedf Mf. Bay, |
| publiſt'da ſmall Book, entitPd, 4 Ch. Nie o
rafter of France intirely Catholick, under


- | with in
the Reign of Louis the Great, He might king;
juſtly have calld it a Philippick Oration ly with
here he paints out in the ſtrongeſt and promiſe
livelieſt Colors the Behavior and AGi- compos

ons of the Convertiſts of France; he byteria

thunders ſome affrighting Truths in Compel

their Ears, and is not ſparing of the molt conteſta

expreſſive Epithets to diſtinguiſh em. ee

Vet is it far from being a mere Decla- Auſlin's

| mation; the whole is ſuſtain'd by a 715

. ſtrain of the politeſt Wit, and the juſt. il he :

_ Fr eſt Reflections. As Mr. Bayle was tho- Rome he

rowly farisfy'd, that the Clergy oi,"

France were the principal Authors of Spirit of

all the Miſerys of the Reform'd, be I He reſo

ſuppos'd the Work to be written by a rery ſou

Refugee in England to a French Eccle. lution

ſiaſtick, and entitl'd ir, 4 Letter from | wh all.

London to Mr. Abbe de — 4 Canon of Monſter.

Notre-Dame of — He accompany d of the Ee

it with two other ſmall pieces, ſtill un. I g Iſhe

der borrow'd Characters: the firſt of Reproach

which is a Letter from the Canon to which re

Refugee at London, deſiring his Thoughts Crifien

-upon the former Letter which had bin dels. II

ſent him. The latter contains the Ne. ducd io

N ſugee's Anſwer to the Canon. 308 be had p
„ Anſwer is full of Civility, and Expre | Mi


ſion
*


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
ſions of Charity. Here the Author ſpeaks
in a milder Tone, and contents himſelf
with modeſtly offering his Advice, and
asking a few Queſtions, Vet is it not whol-
ly without its pointed Paſſages, Here he
promiſes a Philoſophical Commentary,
compos'd in Engliſh, by a learned Pref.
byterian, on theie words of the Parable,
Compel em to come iu; Which ſhou'd in-
conteſtably prove the neceſſity of a To-
kration, and utterly overthrow all St.
Auſtin's Arguments to the contrary,


In effect, Mr. Bayle plainly faw, that


all the Havock which the Church of
Rome had made in the World for ſo
many Ages paſt, proceeded ſrom its
Spirit of Conformity and Perſecution.
He reſolv'd therefore to begin at the

very ſource of the Evil; and in this Re-
ſolution he ſet hicaſelf heartily, and


Vith all his force, about vanquiſhing a


.


Monſter, which had cover'd the Face
of the Earth a thoufand times over with
Bloodſhed and Slaughter; the ſoreſt
Reproach of Human Nature, and that
which renders the precious Name of
Chriſtian deteſtable in the ſight of Infi-
dels. This, my Lord, was what in-
duc'd him to publiſh the V. ork, which
be had premis d in the ſmall Piece 1


E 2 men-


67


68


preceded by a Diſcourſe, in which it
fairly declar'd, that 'twas thought re
quiſite to draw the Convertiſts 0


fcultys which they ſhou'd not ewe


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
mention d. He gave it the following
Title, A Philoſophical Commentary oj
theſe words of JESUS CHRIST, Com.
pel *em to come in; in which it is prov's
by ſeveral demonſtrative Arguments, that
nothing is more abominablè than makin
Converts by Compulſion: with a Conf uta.
tion of all the Sophiſms of the Convertiſ.
in behalf of Violence, and of St. Auſtin"
Apology for Perſecation, Tranſlated from
the Engliſh of Mr. John Fox of Bruggy,
by M. J. F. Mr. Bayle feign'd it to be
a Tranſlation from the Exgliſb, as wel
becauſe the way of reaſoning in it re-
ſembl'd that Depth, and ſtrenuous Ab.
ſtraction, which diſtinguiſhes the Wri-
ters of England, as becauſe he would


not be ſuſpected for the Author of this
Work; and the better to conceal him.
ſelf, he diſguis'd his Stile, and made uſe


of ſeveral, either obſolete or new · coin d

„ nocd aroprony Fr
This Work is a Maſter-piece of ſound

Reaſoning ; it's divided into three parts


of their common place, and to lea
**m a new dance, by propoſing Dil


* hatt


have t
for. |
courſe


ever are
ration is
has al
practisꝰ
portunit
Poſition


which


other pi
ſays con
neous C
harſh to
reaſon ;

in draw
agree, t
Syſtem


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


have time enough to invent Evaſions
for, The Stile of this preliminary Diſ-
courſe does nearly reſemble that of
France intirely Catholick, and may very
juſtly,too bear the Title of a Philippick.
The, Definition given in it of a Conver-
tit, is almoſt as cruel as the Thing de-
fin'd; all the reſt is much in the fame
ſtrain; But the Commentary is of a
Stile more becoming a Philoſopher, and
keeps cloſer to the train of reaſoning.
The Deſign of the whole Work is to
ſhew, that Princes and Magiſtrates
ought never to diſturb any one on the


mere ſcore of Religion. Papiſts how-


ever are exempted, becauſe Non- Tole-
ration is a Doctrine which their Church


has always entertain'd, and always


practis'd whenever it has had Op-
portunity, Mr. Bayle makes out his


Poſition with a Force and Evidence,


which *twere hard to match in any
other piece of Controverſy, What he


ſays concerning the Rights of an erro-
neous Conſcience, will ſeem ſomewhat


harſh to thoſe who are not accuſtom'd to


reaſon; but they who are better skiPd
in drawing Conſequences, will readily


agree, there's no Medium between this
dyſtem and that of Perſecution. ©
— 2 .


69


tt
1
9
J
9
y
*
$45


0


70


-


|
|
|
l
|


The Life of | Mr. Bayle.


The firſt part of the Philoſophical Com-
mentary contains nine Proofs of the Fal.
ſity of that literal Senſe, which Perſecy.
tors give to theſe Words of the Parable,
Compel em to come in; and the ſecond
Contains a Confuration of eight Objec-
tions, which may be made in favor of


Conſttaint, or againſt that general To-


leration which Mr. Bale wou'd eſta.
bliſh. That your Lordſhip may the be:
ter conceive the Deſigu of the third
part, I muſt obſerye, that to juſtiſy th


Violences exercis'd on the Reform'd in


France, the Archbiſhop of Paris gt 4
{mall Book publiſh'd, cbtit bd, The Con.


formity of 10 Conduct of the Church of 90


France for bringing in the Proteſtaits,
with that of the Church of Africk for
| bringing an the Dowatiſis to the Catholict
Church. This Work contain'd two
Letters of St. Auſtin, one written
to Vincentius a Donatiſt Biſhop, who
had ſignifyd to this Father, how
much he was ſurpriz d to find, that hz
ving formerly bin of Opinion, that it
was not law ful to employ the Authority
of the Secular Arm againſt Heretick,
nor any other Means beſides the Word


of God and ſound Reaſon, he ſhou't


now maintain quite the contrary ; 1
| [ils


Letter
the ſat
Philo
ever a
the ot
Du
not, *
tions c
count
larly:
dend
to ber
bor ar
of an
doubte
his T
Philofe
meaſu
He w
of *
advert
Page,


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
the other addreſt to St. Auſtin by Boni.


face, who had conſulted him og the ſame


Subject. Mr. Bayle confutes both theſe

8 | 41:4 tos. SI |
Letters, and ſeveral Paſſages in others of
the ſame Tenor, in the third part of his
Philoſophical Commentary, which how-
ever appear'd not in ſome months after


* ”=
i #


the other two. Ir

During all this time Mr. Bayle faiPd
not, over and above the ordinary Func-
tions of his Charge, to continue his Ac-
count of the Ig corned of Letters regu-


71


1687.


arly : But he found himſelf over-bur-


den'd at laſt by an Undertaking, which,
to be rightly diſcharg'd, requires a La-
bor and Application above the ſtrength
of any one Man, Nor is it to be
doubted, that the ſtretch he had put
his Thoughts on in the compoſing his
Philoſophical Commentary, had in a great


meaſure contributed to exhauſt him.


He was not able to finiſh his Account


| of the Month of March 1687. and he


advertis'd on the back of the Title
Page, That 4 Humor fall n on his Eyes,
ind an intermitting Fever, had 6s bh
him to publiſh the Account of that
Month imperfe&t. In the mean time
his Fever, accompany'd with a violent
' $ 7.5 6 j SIM & 65554 19 7

Head-ach, increas'd upon him to that
I 111 4" N. SY 5-4 as «Lb ö

| / as


* *


E


;
|
|
|
|


* \
*
% of


x * . ny % &
TAS Sad | ' A f |
®'y #4 x ts : 14 1 1
pe Life of Mr. Bayle.
Ke t<.YJ.\ 8 #44 s


degree, that he was forc d to give over
that Work; and then he caſt his Eyes
on Mr. HBeaupal, Brother to Mr. Baſnage,


to continue it. Mr. Beauval undertook


it, and began with the Month, of Se


zember following; 9 et he did not think
it proper to publiſh this Continuation,
under Mr. Bayle's Title of The Account
of the Republich of Letters, but took
that of Ihe Hiſtory of the Works of the
Learved, <1 thought, fays he in hi
© Preface, that 'rwas beſt to treat the
“% Publick as we do Perſons afflicted tor


© the lols of a dear Friend, never bring
em to the Places which, recal the Re-


e membrance, anda
Tf the Object which

„ Feople, continues he, bad always in
* Toe. Account of. the Republic of Let.
ters, look'd for the illuſtrious Au-


wahen the Ideas of


capſes their Grief.


« thor, wha gave em birth : And the |


„ ſame Title meanly ſuſtain'd, had only
ſerv'd to redouble the publick AMic-
tion in the loſs of a Man inimitable.

VNotwirbltandiag all Mr. B99 Pre
cations to.conceal his being the Author
of. the Philoſphigal Commentary, ther
were thoſe; it ſeems who aſcrib'd it to
bim, per nor ſo guch to do him ap He-
nor fs to nd ay ogcafion of doing bum


2 Pre
weak
Sufſp:
publie
was
ſome
of th
bourg
berty
menta
plain
tors v
contin
ſite te
They
Voitar
Baudir
himſel
ly into


his, th


cou'd r
horren
neſs an
have ol
And he
much
ry'd to
As 50
that no


EP
4


We Life of Me. Bayle.

2 Prejudice with ſome Divines or ſome
weak People. To put a ſtop to theſe
Suſpicions, he advertis'd in the Re-
public of Letters for April 1687. which
was continu'd by other Hands, that
ſome Perſons ill affected to the Author
of the Cyitique Generale on Mr. Maim-
bourg, having given themſelves the li-


berty to aſcribe the Philoſophical Com-


mentary to him, he was oblig'd to com-
plain of ſo ill an Office, and to declare,
that he ſhou'd look on 'em as Perſecu-


tors with regard to him, who ſhou'd


continue to vent a Conjecture ſo oppo-
ſite to all the Rules of fair Criticiſm.
They may as well, adds he, aſcribe all


Voitare's Letters to'Balzac, ot thoſe of


Baudins to Blondel, Mr. Jurieu guidin,

himſelf by this ſy Maxim, gave round-
ly into the nooſe. © In a Spirit, ſuch as
his, the Principles of the Commentary
cou'd not but meet with an extreme Ab-
horrence: The very Names of Gentle-
neſs and Toleration were enough, as we
have obſerv'd, to make him ſtark mad.
And how muſt a Book, wrote with ſo
much Latitude, and an Argument car-
ry'd to ſuch a length, work upon him?


flat n |
4 Stile,


Th 1 os had made a diſcovery,
| thing Was more uneven than the


73


, — — 1 * 2
© % A
= — — ———  ——  — — — w To OOO cp — - —
—U—— .. —
o _ =


74


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Stile, he judg'd it cou'd not be Wrote
by a ſingle Author. He concluded
it muſt be the Work of a Cabal, and
4 Conſpiracy againſt the Truth. 'Thus


it was his Imagination, heated with the


Vapor Faw „ BB Choler, e


T he R. Kean. of * the two habeas in *
1 1


eg ; 15 The. 2 6 % 4 fo Dor:


out Sac times upon ache Violencs
exercis d on his own Flock, tomake em


changerheir Religion; who, knew what


infinlke Miſerys the Spirit of Per ſecu-
tion


The Life of Mr. Bayle,
tion had occaſion'd in France; and wha
in fine had himſelf bin oblig'd to live an
Exile, that he might enjoy the Liberty
of his Conſcience; it ſeem'd, I ſay, ve-
ry ſtrange, that ſuch a one ſhou'd after
this, turn Advocate for Non-Toleration
and Perſecution.  I-have known thoſe
who were puzzl'd, what Conſtruction
to put upon a Conduct fo very odd.
It proceeds, ſay they, from hence, that
the perſecuting Spirit is inſeparable from


the Eccleſiaſtical, and that he who ſays


Prieft, ſays Perſecutor. But is not this
turning a caſe perfectly ſingular into a
general Maxim; and beſides, is it not
well known, that there have always
bin Divines exemplary for their Gentle-
neſs and Moderation? They added,
that the Doctrine of Eccleſiaſticks, in
the point of Toleration, was purely re-
lative: that in reality they encounter
this Doctrine vigorouſly, when their
own Party is the weakeſt, and when
themſelves are in need of a Toleration;
but endea vor to make it take place with
all their might, as ſoon as Affairs come
to change in their favor, and that they
find themſelves happily ſettl'd in the
reigning Sect. But this Reaſon is too
general as well as the former, and _

ore


——ää— — — — — — — — an,»


tat... A. EE —— ——


» 2
. ” — 3 *
— . .AU . ³·˙ «m ̃AN;tö⅛ Avñ.èy m -w ͤ 1


76


The Life 'of Mr. Bayle:
fore concludes. no better. I dare ſay,


my Lord, you take this matter much
righter than theſe Men; and Pm much


miſtaken if your Judgment of it bert


thus. Nothing is ſo difficult as the re-
gulating the Motions of the Heart, as
getting rid of a reiguing Paſſion, Pride,


for example, Ambition, &'c. This, to


uſe the Scripture- Expreſſion, is cutting
off a right Hand, plucking out an Eye,


and making a Sacrifice to Vertue, which


coſts infinitely dearer than parting with
all the Goods of Fortune. We- muſt


not be ſurpriz'd then, that Mr. Jurieu,


after having done hamage to Religion,


at the expence of all the Conveniences


he enjoy id in France, has not wit hſtand.


ing bin unable to ſacrifice thoſe Paſſions
of his, which Conſtitution and Habi-
tude have, as it were, incorporated in-


to the very Subſtance of his Soul. Ac-
cordingly we fee a world of vicious
Men, who notwithſtanding, are migh-


ty zealous for their Religion, and who
would ſubmit to the laſt Extremity, ra.


ther than part with the outward Pro-


feſſion of it: And this, becauſe it's much
eaſier to be a thorow Orthodox, than to
regulate the Paſſions; and become a re-

ally Honeſt Man. Let's forbear then


ONC-


He Life of Mr. Bayle.


once more wondring, that Mr. Jaries
ſhou'd write in favor of a Doctrine,


which he ought to have had in abomi-


nation. It's enough, that the Man muſt
gratify the ſecret Inclination of his Soul.
Mr. Bayle's Indiſpoſition hinder'd not
his handling his Pen now and then. He
publiſh'd the third Part of the Philoſo.
hical Commentary, which contains a
Refutation of St. Auſtin's two Letters,
as I mention'd before; and printed a
Letter of five or ſix Pages before this
Volume, directed to his Bookſeller, in
which he ſignifys the Reaſons which
hinder'd his anſwering in Form to the
Treatiſe of the Rights of the two Sove-
reigns 3 to wit, That his Adverſary
had not rightly underſtood the ſtate
« of the Queſtion. This, ſays he, is
evident from the Opinions with which
he falſly charges me. He breaks his
« Heart to prove, that a Man often
+ ſins in acting by the light of his Con-
« ſcience, and 'tis fairly granted in more
places than one of the Commentary.
He charges me, continues he, with
* introducing an Indifference for all Re-
ligions; whereas there never was a
Doctrine more oppoſite to Indiffe-
* rence than that which maintains, we
ne ws « ought


77


78


The Life of M.. Bayle.


% gyght conſtantly to follow the Die-


« tates of our Conſcience.
I had almoſt forgot, my Lord, to take


notice to you of a (mall Diſpute which
paſt between Mr. Be and Mr. Ar.
nauld, on the following occaſion.


This
famous Docter, in his Theological and
Philoſophical Reflections on the vem Syſtem
concerning Nature and Grace, had with
all his might artack'd this Principle of
Father Malebr anche, That all Pleaſare ii
4 Good, and renders actually happy in th:
Enjoyment. Mr. Boyle, in giving an
Extract of Mr. Arnauld's Book, de-
clard for the Father on this Article:
Nothing, fays he, is more true, or more
innocent, than maintaining, that all
Pleaſure renders him happy who en-
joys, for the time he enjoys it; and that
notwithſtanding, we ought to refrain
thofe Pleaſures which unite us to Bodys.
But, ſay ſome, 1t ' Vertu? only, it's Grate,
it's the Love of God, or rather, it's God
himſelf, who is our Beatituae, True, 4
an Inſtrument or «efficient Cauſe, to ſpeat
with the Pluloſophers; but us a formil


. Cie e, itꝰs Pleaſure, it's the Emoyment only


which is our Felicity. Hereupon Mr. A/.


naulil took Mr. Buyle to task, in a Trea-


tiſe which he publiſh'd ſome months
| aſter,


after,
Autho
Letter
point
of his
certair
Mr. 5
Work
Aut hoi
Letters
ng wh,
of Sen;
Ce. |
and pr
Equive
Overru.


of Tre
moſt v


the nan


| {ure Ot
ſo, but
went ſc
Sine, tl
| lpiritua]
| ſider 129
are pure
| be call?
of their
merely”,
| Relatior


The Life of Mr. Bayle.

after, under the Title of Advice to the
Author of the Hiſtory of the Repablick of
Letters; in Which he puſh'd him from
point to point, according to the Rules
of his Method of diſputing, which was
certainly that of a very able Logictan.


Mr. Bayle reply'd off hand in a fmall


Work, entitPd, An Anſwer from the
Author of the Hiſtory of the Republick of
Letters, to the Advice given him concern-
ing what he had ſaid about the Pleaſures
of Senſe, in favor of P, Malebranche,
&c, He maintain'd his firſt Opinion,
and principally endeavor'd to clear the
Equivoques and Ambiguitys which had


overrun this matter, thro the Variety


ot Tropological Phraſes employ'd init ;
| moſt Writers having given to the Cauſe
| the name of the Effect, and calling Plea-
ſure or Pain, not that which is really
| ſo, but that which cauſes it. He even
| went ſo far as to confute thoſe who ima-
| gine, that the Pleaſures of Senſe are not
| ſpiritual: he maintains, that if we con-


| are purely Spiritual, and that they can't
| be call'd Corporeal, but in conſequence
| of their Relation to Bodys, which is


merely Arbitrary and Accidental; that


| Relation being founded in this, that 1 |
BY as


79


-
— - — — > ” - — Sis res *
—— ¶ · é——᷑̃ ͤœPßßß — — —·˙*⅛ni RS — -
*


RAE #6 14. 2 ov —— ß ̃ Nas Po Os 69, — ———


has eſtabliſh'd the Action of certain Ob-
jets on the Body of Man, as the occa-
ſional Cauſe of his Pleaſures. - Me. Ar.
nauld wou'd not have the laſt Blow, he
anſwer'd Mr. Bayle anew, in a, Woik
entitbd, 4 Diſſertation on the pretended
Felicity of the Pleaſures of Senſe, Jerving
for a Reply to Mr. Bayle's Anſwer, where.
in he wou'd juſtify what he had aawvanc's


on this Head, in his Account of the Re.


publick of Letters, for September 168,
in favor of P. Malebranche againſt Mr
Arnauld. This Diſſertation appearing
in the Extremity of Mr, Bœle's Indi:
poſition, he was not able to write an


Anſwer to it; and thinking it too late


when he recover'd, he juſt ſpoke a word
or two of it in another of his Works,
and no more.


1688. Mt. Bayle was ſcarce recover'd of his
Illneſs, when he put out a fourth Part


of his Philoſophical Commentary on theſt
Words of IEsus CHRIST, Compt
em to come in: In which, among oth
things, heutterly deſtroys the only ſhijt tha
his Adverſarys had left, by demionſtratin
that, Hereticks have. as good 4 Right t
perſecute as the, Orthodox. Here be 4
. treats of the Natare and Origin of Erro


In his Preface, he ſays (but tis probabl


*
1 * 4


2 blin
there
in fore
of the
ters of
Hſtem
cenſure
tion, a
erronec
he inte
three T2


contain
ally ſto
tors. J
[0 the 1
and to :
Author «
lens h:
Ihowd' it
his A Phot
ly in bet
preſently

niſh?d;:
preſs the

„ that h.
o anſwer

Wlutions |
Mofophic


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


a blind) that certain Reaſons, which he
there alledges, had induc'd him to reply
in form to the Book concerning the Rights
of the two Sovereigns, and to three Chap-
ters of a former piece, entitl'd, A true
Hſtem of the Church, in which the Author
cenſures his Doctrine concerning Tolera-
tion, and concerning the Rights of an
erroneous. Conſcience. He adds, that
he intended to divide this Work into
three Parts; the Firſt of which ſhou'd


ally: ſtopping the Mouths of Perſecu—
tors. The Second was to be an Anſwer
to the three Chapters of the Syſtem,
and to all the Objections, which the


reigns had propos d; and the Third
ſhowd' intirely ruin his whole Syfem,
JW Aphoriſms, and all he offers direct
y in behalf of his own Opinion. But
preſently adds, that tho the Work was
inſh?d; he had thought fit to ſup-
preſs the two laſt Parts, and publiſh
ly the firſt. The chief reaſon he gives
6, the he had conſider'd, twas eaſy
banſwer all the Difficultys ſtarted in
be Iyue Syſtem of the Church, from the
Wlutions he had already given in his
"loſophical Commentary. And to an-

F ſwer


contain ſome Supplements, for effecu-


Author of The Rihrs of 'the two So


82


ſwer the Book of the Rights of the to


pos'dagainſt a Toleration, in the Book


Mr. Jurieu was the Author of both


Judgment; and you ſhall ſe, my


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Sovereigns, *twas ſufficient to ſhew, that
the Author of the Commentary, and the
Author of the Trae Syſtem, were in-
tirely of the ſame Opinion. This he
makes out in five or fix Pages, and then
adds, that he is not the only Perſon
concern'd in this Diſpute ; that the Au-
thor of the True Syſtem is as deeply
engag'd; and in a word, is no leis
oblig'd to anſwer all the ObjeQions pro-


of Je Rights of the two Sovereigns,
than the Author of the Commentary him-
felt, Mr. Bay/e, who well knew that


theſe Works, thought the beſt way
wou'd be to get him into this Lock:
he was loth to exaſperate him too far,
by confuting his Arguments ſtep by
ſep, and according to the ſtrict Rules
of reaſoning. He thought it better to
fight him againſt himſelf, by ſhewing,
that he not only advanc'd in one Book
what he had deſtroy'd in another, but
even had the misfortune of contra-
dicting himſelf in one and the ſame
Work. The burry of his Imagins-
tion depriv'd him of Memory and


Lord,


The Life of Mr. Bayles.
Lord, more Inſtances of his declaiming
frequently againſt Opinions which he
| himſelf had advanc'd. I ſhan't now
ſtand to give the Contents of this fourth
Part of the Philoſophical Commentary,
You have ſeen by the Title, that it con-
tains ſeveral new Remarks, explaining
and confirming what he had offer'd in
the former Parts. |
| Belides, my Lord, tho Mr. Bale al-
ways mention'd this Work to your
Lordſhip as his own, yet he never
publickly own'd it. He always per-
ſiſted in that kind of Diſclaim which
he made upon its firſt Appearance: not
that he cou d run any risk in avowing it,
but that he had no mind to bring him-
ſelf under an Obligation of examining
all the paltry Objections which might
be ſtarted in a matter ſo very delicate,
and ſo capable of receiving an invidious
turn from malicious Wits. His Argu-
ments carry'd ſo much Conviction and
Evidence with em, that he did not be ·
lieve they cou 'd ever be ſolidly confuted.
Therefore he did not give himſglt the
leaſt trouble to defend em, when Mr.
Saurin, Miniſter of Utrecht, publiſh'd a
Work, in the year 1697. in which he
endeayor'd equally to confute the Philo-
| M2: —_—


83


vowing it openly, it cou'd not be cited


ceibe their Error. But perhaps they ſee Z


N 5 „ 4. ** - »
2 „ 4 4 3 4% Wu "I
* *


he Life of M. Bayle.


ſopbical Commentary, and the Treatiſe of


The Rights of the two Sovereigns, It's
pity Mr. Bqyle's Deſign of concealing W 7,
himſelf did not permit bis giving this 1 R.
Book that regularity of Turn, and all 1 hi.
thoſe Beautys which diſtinguiſh his other |M 75
Pieces. I often preſs'd him to givea ,
correcter Edition of it, but, he always
excus'd himſelf upon the infinite trou-
ble of caſting it over anew. The Value
your Lordſhip has for this Work mov'd
you alſo to defire he wou'd reviſe it;
and I don't doubt it had bin a pleaſure
to him to give you ſuch a Mark of his
Deference, if ſome unforeſeen Affairs
had not diverted his Thoughts. Yet
tho he difown*d this Philoſophical Com-
mentary in ſuch a way as I obſerv'd, tis
certain he never abſolutely deny'd he
was the Author of it; however not a-


againſt him without tranſgreſfing the
Rules of Equity. They who pretend
to find Paſſages in it which contradict
other parts of his Works, wou'd they

bur ewmine it cloſer, might eaſily per-


it plain enough, and ſtudy only how to
render their Adverſary odious,


=


De Life of Mr. Bayle.
A great many Gentlemen, who


expreſt their Concern for Mr. Bayle's
Indiſpoſition, were overjoy'd at his


Recovery. Moſt of the Learned ſent


him their Compliments; and Mr. da
Tot Ferrare, a Counſellor in the Par-
liament of Normandy, a Perſon of great


Merit, and a Maſter in the Lapidary


Stile, inſcrib'd the following Lines to
him. i


In Doctiſſimi Bx r 11 Sani-
tatem reſtitutam _
(probibet :


0 VA te mori vetat Gloria, egrotare
== Omnibus carus ac utilis,


Scriptores
Criticd face elucidaſti, Cenſorid nota emen-
Quæſitor urnam movens, (aafti,
Magnum in nomen ituros
MAternitati


 Pronub4 mana dicaſli -
Laboribus tuis alios abſumis,
Deliciis noſtris nuſquam abſumendus.
In hoc venerandus,
Quod neminem contempſiſti :


E 3 In


86


The Life of My. Bayle:


In hoc verendus,


Quod neminem formidaſti :


Dignu qui veritatis annos exaques, S it
Qui labantem ſuſtentas cognatam Veritati |
Libertatem. =
Non ad anius utilitatem Regions natw, 7
Ita exilium toleras, / th
Ut wiaearis optaſſe; 1


Ita cunctos eminus cominus reficis,

Vt vis credaris ullibi abeſſe.
Theatrum Eruditionis circumductile
ie Oy 75.
Subſellia que dicendo fatigare non potes,

Te ſilentem ferre, Te quieſcente quieſcere
Ne ſpera. | (poſſe,
Vale, vive, ſcribe.
Encania renovate Facundiæ
Fauſtis Litteratorum Acclamationibus
Celebrantur.


The ſmalleſt Productions of cele.
brated Men being reckon'd valuable,
and your Lordſhip having beſides com-
manded me to omit nothing that has
appear*d of Mr. Bayle's, I ſhall here ob-
ſerve, that he's the Author of the Pre-
tace to Furetiere's Dictionary. This Ab-
bot dying before his Work was quite
printed off, and having left no Preface
to it, the Bookſeller pray'd Mr. Bol

| | * [0


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
to write him one. It's a curious Piece,
and was known at firſt ſight to come
from ſome maſterly Hand, |


When your Lordſhip commanded.
me to ſend you a true Picture of Mr.


Jurieu, you did not, I ſuppoſe, mean,
that I ſhou'd trouble you with an ac-
count of all his Actions : I ſhall there-
fore only obſerve, that ſetting up for an
Inquiſitor, he attack'd I don't know
how many of the Reform'd Divines,
moſt of em Refugees in Holland, and im-
peach'd em in ſeveral Synods as Here-
ticks, or Favorers of Hereticks. Thoſe
who liv'd in other Countrys he de-
fam'd by Libels, or by private Letters
containing Accounts of em. For he
publiſh*d every thing that his Spys ei-
ther whiſper' d or wrote to him, and al-
ledg'd in Proof what was truſted to
| him in Confidance, or in the moſt pri-
vate Converſation, by thoſe who liv'd
with him on a foot of Friendſhip. In
ſhort, his Fury tranſported him to that
degree, as to fall foul on the Relations
or Friends :of thoſe whom he hated,
tho they never had given him the leaſt
Offence, nor ever ſet up for Men of
Letters. Where he wanted a Pretence
of charging 'em with Hereſy, he en-

F 4 dea vor'd


|
SY |


Fa Wnt ors


$8


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
deavor'd to bring 'em under Suſpicion
with the Governments which they
ſerv'd; and wrote to the Miniſters
of State, that they were Traitors or
Spys of France. I ſhan't ſtand, my
Lord, to trouble you with particular
Inſtances of theſe Practices. This


wou'd furniſh out a large Volume: I


ſhall only relate ſome Facts of a more
general Naturc, and which havea more


immediate dependence on the thred


of this Relation.
In 1684. Mr. Jurieu publiſh a 8a.

tyr, entitl'd, The Spirit of Mr, Arnauld;

in which, to revenge his private Piques,

be attacked the Reputation of ſeveral
great Men of the Court of Frante, and
thereby expos'd the Reform'd Chur.
ches to an eminent Danger, by diſcover-
ing, that he had Complices all over
the Kingdom, who furniſh'd him with
Memoirs, and pick'd up the very Bal-

lads to ſupply him. He ſeem'd to be
in no pain, leſt the reſenting of ſuch In-
ſults ſhou'd haſten the projected Ruin of
the Proteſtants; his only ſtudy was to
gratify his Revenge. The Court of
England was as little ſpar'd in this Satyr
as that of France. There were violent


Invectiv es in it againſt ſome Perſons of
Note


4
7 ö
7
1.
— 1
N. 87
. F
{i
923
LIND
DI
.
.
1
92
* 5 2
*
I
ru
Bax
AY
*
68"
6 &
TID 5
5
wg
358
be
5
0
7
8 b
Pp!
;


758.


N
5
5 *
cr
% vu
5
F
8
5;
"FP
N
53
.
2
n
IB
5
ar
DE
Fs
PF,
4Z
$36
3
A :
— * *
4
3%
5


73
bo”
nt
2
2
5
54
x
£2
*
* *
*
3
528
2
—v—
i
WS. *
A
« 4
0 4
|
d wy
5.
28
L
*
A 2
>
+ 3


N higheſt pitch of Glory, and build her Great-


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Note there, and particularly againſt the
Clergy of the Church of Exgland; fo
that the Libel no ſooner appear'd 1n
London, but the Copys were immedi-
ately ſeiz d, and the Bookſeller impri-
ſon d. There was ſuch a noiſe made


there about this Book, that Mr. Jurien


dreading it might come before the States
of Holland, wrote Letters to ſome Per-


ſons in London, in which he ſolemnly


proteſted, he was not the Author.
Two Vears after he ſet up for a Pro-
phet, and printed a Treatiſe concerning
the Accompliſhment of the Prophecys, or
the approaching Deliverance of the Charch,


which promis'd the Reſtoration of the


Refugees in 1689. and the Downfal of


Spiritual Babylon ſoon after: The Hour


1 at hand, ſays he, when the Nations


of the Earth ſhall drink of the Blood of


the Beaſt, and conſume her Carcaſe in the
Fire; when they ſhall ſtrip the great Whore


: of all her Garments, and lay Babylon in


Aſhes. The whole Kingdom of France
was to embrace the Reformation, and
become the principal Inſtrument of theſe
marvellous Things : He foretold, That
Providence had deſtin*d her to an exctedin

Elevation, that ſhe ſbou d arrive at the


neſs


89


U
1
: &
= .
0
{ np
4
1
1 4
=
+ B
=
* E
4 n
1
: 'Þ
1
1
[3
}
4
1
' _—
1
i ö
__
' Y
þ
4
1
11
\
'Þ
5
15
8
*
i 4
*
1
1


90


Erance without the Effuſion of Blood,


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


neſs on the Ruins of the Papal Empire; PD.


and laſt of all, that a thorow and total
Reformation ſhou'd be brought about in


This Book, ridiculous as it was, found
Credit with many of the Refugees, ſe.
duced by the Reputation and deciſive
Airs of Mr. Jurieu; nay, ſome of em
built ſo much upon it, that they ſtole
back into France, there ſedately to wait
the Accompliſhment of the Prophecy.
They carry'd a ſpice of his Apocalypti-
cal Spirit along with *em, and infus d it
into others of their Brethren, In fine,
theſe poor People filPd their Heads {0
with theſe Chimerasand fanatic Viſions,
that in 1688, a great multitude of al
Ages and Sexes got together in Dauphine,
and afterwards in the Vivarex, fancying
themſelves verily inſpir'd, and falling
into Trances and extraordinary Apgitz:
tions. Mr. Jurieu publiſh'd his Paſtors! i
Letters about this time, which were
commonly call'd, the Spiritual Garti,
in which he ſpoke of theſe new Pro-
phets, as of Per ſons ſent from Heaven,
and rank*d em with the Prophets of tht
Old Teftament. He treated all as Lt
bertines, and little better than Arheilts
who wou'd not allow the Prophets 0
1 | Dauphin,


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
Dauphinè, the ſinging of Pſalms there
by Angels, and the Shepherdeſs of
Cret, to be ſo many Realitys, and that
the Hand of God was in it; hearraign'd
em publickly,-and *twas upon this oc-
caſion, that Mr, Beauval had the mis-
fortune of loſing his Friendſhip, and
finding himſelf ſoon after expos'd in
one of his printed Libels. Some have


* *
1
718
[I
5
—.
7%
*
IF
«Th
I»


+
Sy
=
*
1
39
by
RES
7K 2
1
$M
4 Bb.
* 155 ;
ry
rr
280
We
-
it +4


the Prophecys, was only a Wileto pre-


bellion ; but I believe they wrong Mr.
Jurieu, who charge him with ſuch an
Impoſture : he verily, and in good ear-
neſt imagin'd, he had bin let into the
= profoundeſt Myſterys of the Revela-
tions. There was no cheat in this; not
but he had try'd his Skill in Politicks to
bring about a Revolution in France. He
had advanc'd in his Eſprit de Mr. Ar-
mauld, that the People are above their
Eings, and publiſh'd ſome Pamphlets
tending to make the Dauphin dethrone
his Father: but finding this had no ef-
fect, and paſſionately deſiring to have
bis Prophecys accomplifh'd, he chang'd
bis Battery, and of a ſudden began to


4 * 69

1

1 »

3 N
FN


IS
3 L-
Sa


Year 1689. come ſmoothly
F on,


ſuſpected, that the Accompliſhment of


pare the Reform'd of France for a Re-


be ſweet 55 Lewis XIV. When he
ta


91


92


| The Life of Mr. Bayle.


on, and no ſigns of a Reſtoration, he


_ caſt his longing Looks towards this


Prince, and wou'd fain try what was
to be done by wheedling. In the
Book I juſt mention'd, he had affirm'd
that the King of France, out of a Fond-
neſs for falſe Glory,was the direct Cauſe
of all the Miſerys of the Retorm'd ; and
acquitted P. de Ia Chaiſe himſelf, and the
Archbiſhop. of Paris: but in his Paſto-
ral Letters he chang'd Stile a little, and
left preſſing the Remnant of the Re-
form'd to quit the Kingdom; his Lan-
guage to the King of France was that
of Great Prince, who delighted not in
Blood, and whoſe natural Spirit was
that of Clemency. Nor did he refuſe
Mr. Louvois ſome few Grains of In-
cenſe. Then he exhorted the Reform'd


of France to read his Accompliſhment of


the Prophec)s without ceaſing, and never


hope for a Re- eſtabliſhment by the hand
of Man or of any earthly Power, but


from their oẽn Stedfaſtueſs, and from


the King's Goodneſs and Compaſſion.


His Letters to the Duke of Montauxier
in favor of his little Prophets of Dau-
phine, were filbd with his Majeſty's


Praites, whom he rank'd among the
Gods of the Earth; and with Proteſta -


„ tions


—
8
2 ——


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 93


tions of Zeal and dutiful Affection for
his Perſon. He fancy'd Lewis XIV. mov'd
by ſo much Zeal for his Glory, and ra-
viſh'd to find himſelf ſtil'd God of the
Earth, wou'd order the Duke to write
him ſome kind tbings in anſwer. But
Inſtead of Thanks he ſoon found his
_ Correſpondent only laught at him, and
deſpis'd him ſo far as to expoſe his Let-
ters, and make him the Jeſt of Mankind.
Upon this Mr. Jarieu began to change
Stile a ſecond time. The War having
open'd him a new Door of Hope, he
laid aſide his Spirit of Humiliation,
and preach'd up another ſort of Goſpel.
The Revolution in Exgland, and the
Confederacy of ſo many Powers againſt
France, chang'd the whole Plan of his
Prophetick Syſtem ; hencetorward *ewas
agreed, that the Reform'd Religion
ſhou'd triumph in that Kingdom by the
way of Conqueſt. Mr. Juriea return'd
to his Political Maxims, and exhorted
the Proteſtants. of France to take up
Arms for the defence of their Religion.
He even invented a new kind of Ponton
tor landing an Army on the Coaſts of
France, in ſpite of the Militia. He
flatter d himſelf already with the
Thoughts of preaching in the 3
: ame


.


8 — —-—-—— — — — —


As — Io — 8 — — < —


—
— — — —— — 8 E


— iem—_omcn_ns
8 rr


—
— —

8 — — >

— eel —— — —

"Iz roar.


22 p —
— * y 4x
—— —— — —
6 2 —
— —


—————
— —— —
2 — — "LF


—— 8
= —
— — - — * —
2— — n
—— —


——


—
—


94


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


dame of Paris, At the fame time he
raid bitterly againſt the King of
France, and againſt others in the high-
eſt Stations, not only in his Pamphlets,
but trom the Pulpit alſo. And I ought
not to forget that ſome Refugees in
Holland, infected by his Spirit, and a-
buſing the Liberty of the Preſs there,
tranſlated ſeveral Satyrical Pieces out of
Engliſb, and wrote others themſelves,
againſt the King of France, King James,
and ſome of the principal Perſons of

both Courts. 1
All the ſober part of the Refugees,
not inſenſible of the Prejudice this might
do 'em, equally diſapprov'd the Con-
duct of theſe Scriblers, and that of
their grand Mode! Mr. Jurieu. But this
Miniſter had rendred himſelf fo formi-
dable by his manner of treating Peo-
ple, that they durſt not complain of it
openly, how juſt ſoever their Grief
might be. Mr. Bayle, ever a Friend to
Moderation and Equity, ſuffer'd more
this way than any body elſe, becauſe
he was oblig'd to be often at Mr. Ja-
7:en's Houſe, where the Company was
much chang'd from what it had been
at Sedan all the Converfation at pre-
ſent. turning, either og Prophecy, or 5
| | ty!


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


tyr, which ſpar'd neither Friend nor
Foe. Nothing cou'd be more oppoſite
to Mr, Bayle's Nature, yet he drag'd
his Chain for a long time without hav-
ing the power to break it,

Matters were at this paſs, when in
the Month of April 1690. there appear'd
a Book intituled, Important Advice to
the Refugees concerning their approaching
return into France, being a Nem- Tear s
Gift to one of em in 1690. by Monſiear


date from Paris, and was wrote with
ſo much Heat and Vehemence, that the
Author himſelf call'd it a Sermon. In


that 1689. the Year of Accompliſh-
| ment, was expir'd, and yet none of thoſe
miraculous Revolutions come to pals
which they had promis'd themſelves.


| vorable Diſpoſitions, as they gave out,


| that all the ſober Party in the three E-
| ſtates of the Kingdom, wou'd be over-
| joy'd to ſee em. But he advis'd 'em
at the ſame time, to male a kind of Qua-


| Purge away the bad Air they had breath'd in
4 the Places of their Baniſoment, e
3 | ? — — —— S 4


the firſt place he rallys the Refugees,


He congratulated em on the King's fa-


| for their re-eſtabliſhment ; and {added,


1690.


C. L. A. A. P. D. P. This Work bore


rautain before they ſet foot in France, to


EE — —:)R Boy
8
r


* —
0 1 —— - 2 DDr — 4. — — Ha ——
n — - — —
| — — — — — —— —— - *
. eee ̃— ͤ—r˙— on ans ]⅛õ̃—— — ——————.—7§;ðr. CIOS 1 .
22. ˙ am — ry
n _— Wenn 0 > wn —
1 —
,


tn 8


— — — — ——


* —


|
1
Y
: | „
1


55


The Liſe of My. Bayle.


had infected em with two very dangerous
and very loathſom Diſtempers; one of mhich


was the Spirit of Satyr, the other the Re.


publican Spirit, tending to introduce a
State of Anarchy, the bane of human So.
ciety.. "Theſe were the two main Heads
of this Diſcourſe. © Then the Author


declaims vehemently againſt the 'Satyri-


cal Pieces I have hinted at, and ſpite-


fully alledges that they are charge-
able on the whole Body of the Refu-


gees, in regard they had not publickly


diſavow'd 'em. Has any of you, ſays
he, with or without a Commiſſion from your
Body, publiſh'd a Syllable to ſbem, that theſe
Libels are the Worb of ſome Perſons of no


Conſequence, whoſe Temerlty and Paſſun


give Offence to the Bull of the Refugees“
Nothing's omitted here, added he, 10
give weight to theſe Remarks, and to ma.
2y more of the ſame kind, with a deſiyn
of fixing an Imputation on the whole Bo-
dy, which properly and originally concerns


the Scriblers alone. Then he comes to


ſpeak of their Seditious Pamphlets; of
this kind he reckons all ſuch as maintain
that the Prince and People are recipto-
cally oblig'd, by Original Contract, to
the obſervation of certain'Dutys, in ſuch
a manner, that if the Prince happens
V5. e to


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


to violate his part, the Subjects are ab-
ſolv'd from theirs, and may transfer
their Allegiance to a new Sovereign,
whether the Body of the People unani-
mouſly declare the Throne vacant, or
only the major and more conſiderable
part of *em. And here the Author at-
tacks this Maxim with all his Might;


be carrys the Point of Abſolute Power
very high, and endeavors to ſhew the
many Inconveniences which muſt fol-


low from the oppoſite Notion ; imploy-
ing that ſort of Argument which 1n the


Schools is calPd Deductio ad Abſurdum,


He rakes up all the Objections the Pa-
piſts have ever made againſt the Prote-
ſtants on this Subject, and on their tak-
ing up Arms in the Cauſe of Religion;
and ſpares neither the Reform'd of
Trance, nor the Vaudois who had newly
re-entred their Country by Force of
Arms; nor the Presbyterians of Eng-
land whom he charges with beheading
Charles I. nor laſt of all the Clergy
of the Church of England, who after
declaring ſo highly in favor of the Pre-


rogative, had notwithſtanding made


the Prince of Orange King in prejudice
of their lawful Sovereign, or, which in
his Opinion came to the ſame thing,

. were


97


——_——


2 —


_ — —
">" — — ” —
— — 9

— 2 „„ͤ M..


—


— oi ee — — —
— — — — — —— — —— Fern * 4 * > 7
— —— — — — 8 8 | 5 _ |
- ä 26 gang ec er — 3 2 = — 3 — — " p x" . * - — *
— _ ne Ge — —— — —.— > — —— "> . — —— —
3 i Eos 3 — — =. : .
— — —— |


—


1 1
WH
3812
11
-Y J
|
.
1 *
N
* 8
5
12s
1
|
*
Wi


—


93


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


were willing to admit him, provided


he'd be content with the Title of Re-


gent. The Author concludes with ſe—


veral Remarks upon the laſt Campagn
(in 1689.) tending to exalt the Glory


of France, as well as that of the King.


There was a Preface to this Work,
the pretended Author of Which (ſup-
pos'd to live in London was as zealous
a Proteſtant, as that of the Book ap-
pear'd to be a violent Papiſt. He took
notice that one of his Friends had ſent


him this Piece, and ſets forth the


Reaſons which had determin'd him to
publiſh, and the manner in which he


deſign'd to confute it. Pm inform'd,
ſays he, and that from the Mouth of


Perſons lately come from France, and by
Letters from ſeveral parts of the Ring-


dom, that our Enemys make a handle of


ſome Pamphlets pabliſh'd in Holland, to
ſtir up the People againſt our Brethren
there, and to repreſent the Refugees a
Monſters of Calumn), Reproach, and A-
verſion to France: That the Monks
make Eætracts of ſome of our Writings,
and read em to the People from their Pul-
pits : That they deſcant upon *em with
ther Monkiſh Oratory, to produce in the
People, as much as in them lies, an im-


5 placable


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
placable Indignation againſt us, which
even reaches to the King's Cabinet, and
makes him reſolve on hazarding his Crown
and Kingdom. rather than reſtore the
Proteſtants. I conſider d then, adds he,
that tas fit I ſhowa let our Brethren
know, by publiſhing what was communica-
ted to me, upon what a foot they ſtand,
and what envenom'a Scanaals they lie un-
der; hoping that one or other of em might
be provok*d to lead the way by a word or
two in their vindication, 4s to theſe two
general Points only, our Satyrical Writ-


ings, 4s they call em in France, and our


Seditious, whilſt I at my leiſure take this
Advice. 0 pieces, and draw up a full and
particular Reply to it.


This Advice to the Refugees was prin-


ted privately at Amſterdam, and made
ſome noiſe upon its firſt coming out;
but was after wards in a manner forgot,
when in the beginning of the Lear 1691.
Mr. Jarieu of a ſudden took it in his
Head to let Mr. Baſuage know he look'd
upon Mr, Bayle as the Author of it, and
that he wow d ſoon make the Seven V-
nited Provinces too hot for him. Mr.
Bayle deſir d his Friend to acquaint Mr,
Jurieu, he wou'd willingly ſet this


| Matter right with him, and fatisfy him


G 2 in


99


— 0 rr ———— — 8
- = ho —
— —— — — 2 — — ** * e
1 —— Wt a. —— — — — — 4 en — 08 2
— — een 2 — — — I 22 — 8
r WT roy * —— wg = I CIO EST
. * 1


— ,-
IPG
— 2A


— : —
—— .
7 ES EEE am


_ rem — 3


—


Dr
— —


3


100


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


in all his Doubts ; but he never wou'd


give him a hearing. The ſecret ha-


tred he had bore Mr. Bayle of a long


time, was now turn'd into Fury; and
he thought this Advice to the Refugees


gave him the faireſt handle in the


World to be reveng'd. So he ſet him-
ſelf to write an Anſwer to the Advice,
in which firſt and foremoſt he query'd
upon the Author, and charaQteris'd him
in ſuch a manner, that any body cou'd
ſee he meant Mr. Bayle, tho he durſt


not name him. Then he enter'd into a


diſcuſſion of the Book it ſelf, but did
little more than enlarge and copy from
the Plan of a Reply which was sketch'd
out in the Preface ; vaunting however,


and ſtrutting as he went on, no leſs than


if it were a way expreſly open'd and
vouchſaſed to himſelf alone. In the
mean time he was terribly perplex'd to
think, what end Mr. Bayle cou'd propoſe
in writing this Book.

Upon a Suppoſition, that he was re-
ally the Author (which however was
founded, as he himſelf owns, only


upon Preſumptions) it was no hard
matter to ſee into his Deſign. The


truth is, he was ſenſibly concern'd to


find a World of Refugees feed them.


ſelyes


The Life of. Mr. Bayle.


ſelves with Chimeras and Apocalyptick


Viſions, which turn'd the whole Body


into Ridicule, and was by ſo much the


more to be dreaded, as the fame kind


of Folly had tormerly been very fatal
to the Proteſtants who fled out of the
Emperor's Dominions: Nothing hav-


ing done theſe a greater diſſervice than


the Conduct of their Drabitius and
Comenius (whom Mr. Jariea rank'd
with the antient Prophets) and a Book
wrote in a violent Spirit by the latter,
had like to have occaſion'd a general


| Maſſacre of the Proteſtants of Po-


land, during the Invaſion of Charles
Guſtavus King of Swede, One might
add, that Mr. Bayle having bin bred
up in ſome modern Notions of the Pro-
teſtants of France concerning the So-
vereign Power of Princes, it's no won-
der if he ſtrain'd this Point ſo high; con-
ſidering eſpecially that in France the Ring
pretends to be Abſolute, nor is it ſafe to
whiſper the contrary there: ſo that Re-
publican Pamphlets from Refugees, far
from having any good Effect, cou'd only
ſerve to render em Rill more odious, and
throw in an unſurmountable Obſtacle to
their Re-admiſſion. He remember'd too


from a ſad experience, how cruelly they


G6 3 were


q
— — — CS > ce ———9——7 — I
nar oe — er bz I. — — — — ———
2 — * . — ane — —
= . 2 . :


- 8 8 —
— =_ away L
£m — — — —
— 1 F 3 * B pg,
e — . —7—i 4 <a — =


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
were reveng'd of his Brother for the
Critique Generale on P. Maimbourg's
Hiſtory of Calviniſm; and there was
much more reaſon to ſear that they
wou'd make the ſew poor Proteſtants
who ſtaid behind in France, pay dearly
for the Satyrs which ſome of their Bre-
chren publifld againſt the Court in
foreign Countrys,
that the Papiſts, and particularly the
Miſhonarys, made a malicious uſe of
'em for blackning the Refugees, and ne-
ver left crying np the Grandeur of
France, he had rak'd up all the old and


new Ghjections of the moſt angry and


moſt 15 5 Papiſts; the Gloſſes cf


their Flatterers on the Operations of
rhe Campagn in 1689. the Scandals -


raisd upon the whole Body of Refu-
gees for the Faults of a few. Scriblers,
Fc. in order to open a Field for a full


and uſeful Remonſtrance, and for a


Repiy, which might at once confound
the Malice of their Perſecutors, the Va-
nity of the Flatterers; and reſcue the
Refugees ſrom the Ridiculous, on the
Article of their Prophets.


Conſiderations might be corroborated
by other Paſſages of his Book and Pre-
of the fame tenor with thoſe J

have


face,


"\ oft of all, finding


Al theſe


CC DTT —c_ TT


>
—


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
have already produc'd. Upon the
whole, it may be offer'd in Mr. Bayle's
Defence, that after having painted out
the Crueltys and Barbaritys of, the Pa-
piſts 1n the ſtrongeſt Colors, he might
be privileg*d to cenſure ſome few ſteps
in the Conduct of the Proteſtants, which
to him appear*d not according to Order.
And when the worſt is ſaid, he might
perhaps be tax'd of Indiſcretion, but
no ſuch odious Conſequences juſtly ſug-
geſted, TT |

This, my Lord, is the turn that any
one of a genteel Spirit had given the
Advice to the Refugees, cou'd he imagine
it Mr. Bayle' s- But Mr. Jurieu was in-


rather aggravate Faults, the better to
*. his own Ends: He induſtriouſly
rations, Not that I wou'd be under-
ſtood, my Lord, as tho he thorowly
perceived Mr. Bayle's drift in it (ill
ſuppoſing him the Author) but he
helliſhly diſſembled the ſenſe of his
Soul; for tho on other Occaſions he
had given ground to think him capa-
ble of ſuch an Impoſture, yet I wou'd
| G 4 wil-


:
| 104


The Life of My. Bayle.


| willingly endeavour to clear him in this.


The tranſport of his Paſſion undoubted.
ly hinder'd his reflecting: it repreſen-
ted all Objects ſuch as he deſir'd to find
**m ; and as his main Deſign was only
to blacken Mr. Bayle, he encounter'd


Crimes cf his in every Page, which yet
were hatch'd in his own Brain. Blinded


moreover by Self. love, he was far from
perceiving that the heavy Imputations


on the Refugees in general, were al.


moſt ſolely pointed at himſelf; and


that the main of the Advice concern'd
his own Prophetick Chimera's; his Sa-
tyrs againſt the Court of France; his


Libels for ſtirring up the People to


Rebellion, and the Dauphin to de-
throne his Father; his variations in the
Point of Sovereign Power, and all the
other Effects of his waſpiſh violent
Spirit.
the Seditious were, as your Lordſhip
has ſeen, the two principal Heads, of
the Sermon, and preciſely the two.
Points which the Author deſir'd might
be publickly diſavow'd. Mr. Jarieu
Libels were even cited to both, yet all
cou'd not open his Eyes: He had in-
deed a ſuſpicion that he was ſtruck at in
particular, but he paſs di ſlightly by this


The Satyrical Writings and


Conlide-


The Life of Me. Bayle:

Conſideration, which tended to extenu-
ate, or even to cancel Mr. Bayes pre-
tended Crimes, and deſtroy the Scheme
of that Fuuftg which 105 Was forging


to render him odious.
Upon the whole, he pretended, that


Trance run down, and being beſides
ſcandalized at = Revolution in Eng-
land, and the dethroning King James,
had cunningly wrote this Advice to the
Refugees, as an Apology for both theſe
princes; and the better to conceal his
real 8entiments, had aſſum'd the Charac-


ter of a Papiſt and profeſt Enemy to
the Reform'd; He back'd this Notion
with Slanders in ahundance, and pub-


liſh'd his Anſwer under the 8
Title: C onſiderations on 4 Libel againſt


Religion, againſſ t hie State, and 4 the


Revolutiouof England intitl d 13
Advice tothe Refugees, on their approaching
Return into. France. In the mean time
he did not believe, that any Motive of
lutereſt had inducd Mr. Bale to write
with ſo. much warmth 1 in favor of the
Royal Power and Prerogative. We muſt
do him this Juſtice, ſays he, that Intereſt
| (an hade no part in theſe Flights of Loh
| 4%); for. be cou'd have no Deſign. of in.


grati-


Mr. Bayle, not able to hear the King of


105


—


106


The Eiſe of Mr. Bayle.
gratiating by thjt Work with the Powers
whom it concern d, becauſe he had taken


all kind of Precautions to conceal himſelf.


Nor did he beſieve him quite ſo great
an Enemy to Proteſtants as he ſeem'd


in his Book. 'If muſt be own'd too, ſa Ys


he, that he is not that bitter Enemy to
the Proteſtant Religion he wowad appear
4% he. Thus the mere force of Truth


conſtrain'd him to acquit Mr. Bajle on


the ſcore of Religion and Integrity, at
the ſame time that he was uſing his ut-
moſt Endeavors to embroil him with
the Government. He fell into much


the fame kind of Contradiction with
regard to the Advice, Whenever he


had Mr. Bayle in his Eye, he pronounc'd
it a Maſterpiece, and repreſented it as
the moſt pernicious -Book that ever
was wrote againſt the Reform'd. But
this bigh Opinion vaniſh'd as ſoon as
the Author was out of his Mind. His
firſt Judgment upon it was regulated by
his Thoughts of Mr. Bayle, their reign-
ing Object. The Stile, he pretended, was
eaſy, flowing, lively; the Images natural,
the” Metaphors happy, the Ornaments well
choſen, and rightly plac'd: it carry d


ferret Charm, was full of fine Literature,


and the Eradition Skilfully diſþens'd wy
| the


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


he whole. All this pointed to Mr. Bayle's


Character. Then, he ſaid, this Book


comprehended in a_ ſmall V all that


ever had bin offer d with a Deſign of ef-
fectuallj blaſting the Proteſtants, and ex-


poſing the Reformation by the moſt hideous


View. For this was likewiſe conducive
to his end: But when he ſat down to


confute it, and frying over the Argu-


ment had forgot his firſt Draught,
'twas all of a ſudden az extravagant


Piece, without Principle, without Method,


without Reaſoning ; there were but two
miſerable Difficaltys to be clear'd in it;
the reſt was only Flouriſh, Invective, Im-


pertinence ; *twas a pretty Poſy of Polyan-


thea, an errand piece of Pedantry. This
Unevenneſs and Inconſiſtency in the
lame Book, is a plain Argument, that
Mr. Jurieu's Judgment proceeded in-
tirely from Pafſion, and that he'd rather
allow the Advice took in every thing


that was truly grating on the Reform' d,


than by under valuing it too much, leave
the leaſt doubt of Mr. Baz/e's being the
Author. Yet conſcious of the Weakneſs
of his Preſumptions, he till, with all
his Artifices, kept within ſome Bounds
of Moderation, Bur he did not long
continue in this uneaſy ſtate : an _
ion


107


— «
= 3 * — — LT de VT, —
14 152 * ome r oat ER . dos: om * 2
r - 1 ,_ K n D ==
Bs = 3 * K — —- Hoe, *. — — : 8
— —ͤ ———⁰b 1 . — «


IE ”
r
— ta


— \ — — — -
= — — - — rr — 1 p — E FIX — — — — — — S
= 97 "HER" IBS HIP — onhr hx apnea eps), --_. > gy _ — U— — — — 4 5 —

7 — IR I . ——


FP 2
4 8 a. » 4
2 £2 7 —— —_ —


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


ſion was ſoon preſented for giving full
vent to all his Rage. Give me leave,
| my Lord, to mention this Occaſion. |
| A certain Geneva Merchant, call'd
Goudet, wou'd needs undertake to re-
concile the Intereſts of all the Princes
who were then at War; and wrote
ſome Diſcourſes by way of Dialogue to
this purpoſe, containing the Project of
a Peace. Hts Propoſal was thus: The
Datch were to have the whole Eft In-
dia Trade made over to them, Treatys
of Commerce ſettłd with all their
Neighbors, ſuch as they themſelves
cou'd deſire; and France, in favor of
them, was to raſe ſome of its moſt
advanc'd Frontier Places, King Wil.
liam was to. be own'd as rightful King
of England, and King James ſent to the
Conqueſt of Jera/alem. The King of
France was to keep the Principality of
Orange, and give an Equivalent in the
County of Gez and the Territorys ad-
jacent, or elſe annex a part of the De-
pendencys of Cleves and Jaliers to the
County of Mears, which the Emperor
was to erect into a Dutchy, with the
Title of Naſſas, in honor of that Houle.
He ſettld the Intereſt of all the other
Potentates in Arms much: after the ſame
Ts manner,


108


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


manner, and then propos'd, that the
Chriſtian Princes ſhou'd enter into a
Confederacy for the Deſtruction of the


Turkiſh Empire. The Duke of Bawva-


ria was to be Emperor of Conſt antino-
ple; King James, as I ſaid before, was
to be King of Jeruſalem and Syria ; Ser-
via and Bulgaria were to fall to the Chil-
dren of the Duke of Lorain, and Bel-
grade was to be the Capital of their
new Dominions ; they were to have all
the Low Countrys beſides, except Mons,
which was to remain 1n the King of
France's Hands; this Prince was like-
wiſe to keep the Franche Comte, Lo-
rain, Luxembourg, and the new Con-
queſts in Flanders: Hanningen was to
be demoliſh'd, and Mont. Royal and Fort-
Louis ras'd. As to the Proteſtants of
France, they were to be reſtor'd to the
ſame Liberty of Conſcience in that


Kingdom as the Catholicks enjoy'd in


Holland, The Sieur Goudet was ſo fond
of this Project, that after having com-
municated it to his Acquaintance in
Geneva, he wou'd needs know the Opi-


nion of People in Holland upon it. Ac-


cordingly he deſir d Mr. Minutoli, a Mi-


niſter and Profeſſor of the Belles Lettres


at Geneva, to ſend the firſt ſix Dialogues
Py to


109


110


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


to his old Acquaintance Mr. Bayle, to be
communicated by him to ſeveral illuf-


trious Perſons in foreign Countrys,


Mr. Minutoli at his requeſt ſent him
the firſt Sheets in September 1690. with-
out letting Mr. Ble know the Author,
and among others nam'd my Lord Bi.
ſhop of Salisbury; the Baron de Groeben,
Governor to Prince Louis, the Elector of
Brandenburgs Brother; Mr. Van Beu-
ning; Mr. Hulft, Reſident of the States
General at Bruſſels; Mr. Fremond d Ab.
lancourt, and Mr. ae Bauval, as proper
Perſons to be: conſulted upon this rare
Project. Mr.Bayie, who was always an
obliging Friend, anſwer'd Mr. Minutoli,
that he wou'd with Pleaſure acquit
himſelf of his Commiſſion, but declar'd
his own Opinion, That the Author of this
Piece might aſſure himſelf, no Propoſal
of a general Peace wou'd be hearken'd to,
which aid not deprive the Ming of France
of all his Acquiſitions, and put it out
of his Power to give his Neighbors any
further Jealouſy. Healterwards commu-
nicated the Project to theſe Gentlemen:
{ome ſent it back unread, and others
wrote him word, that it was not only
meanly wrote, but belides ſtuft with
mere Viſions, and Ideas of a *
Om:


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 111


Commonwealth; or a Chriſtian Com-
monwealth, much after the Plan which
the Duke of Sully has left us. For Mr.
Bayle's part he never had read it, having
beſides an extreme Averſion to the read-
ing of any. Manuſcript Pieces, full Em-
ployment of his own; and the little
or no regard which others had ſhewn
pr it, intirely diverted him. However
be wrote Mr. Minutoli an Account of
the Reception it had met with. =
4s ill luck wou'd have it, Mr. Jarieu
vas not nam'd among the Perſons to be
conſulted, and Mr. Bayle durſt not {hew |
it him for fear he ſhou'd take the pre-
ſenting him a Project ſo very ſhort of
his own as a kind of Inſult, For Mr.
q Pole had underſtood by Mr. Minutoli's 1
„firſt Letter, that this did not make the is
/ © Reform'd the uppermoſt Religion in

France, as Mr. Jurieu peremptorily in-
ſiſted. Notwithſtanding theſe Diſcou-
ragements, the Sieur Goudet had his Pro-
| ject printed at Lauſanne, and the Book-
| ſellers of Holland ſoon got Copys of it.
hy this means it came to Mr. Jarieu's
Hands; and finding about the ſame
time, that Mr. Bayle had receiv'd a Ma-
| nulcript Copy of it ſome months before,
he publiſh'd a long Diſcourſe *
N ea


—— — 2 hd OT ac nc ” — — —
. a Fn — A 2&0 45k > * 7 > —
— — —
A — — — — — — — yy — — -
* os nn 2 4 2 - — 1 . ' you
—ůůͤ — — * — - - = - 5 2 — — reg pu oats > —— —
* 8 A. = * 2 & 1 7 . 30 — — 2 — == * n — — :
— a * 3% on . a — — nd — rt — — — — —_ 555g _— — 2 9 > 2 —
= — — =—— — _= > — = _ — bs So - - —
8 — — 1 ED: =, ED . - : - ; *
— * — — — - ares we - — K
® — a —— 2 a | > — — — — —
* — —


3 5
r 7 a — a+ Trot
TP

q ».S:


—— 2
©
Linn, len Ea int IS a HY
. % - T*Y
gs > gk SP — >. =”
— 213 —
b


— a >< Bn, — ——
—
=
2 Sy
— —
—
og


9


* *
1 1 2


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
head-of his Conſiderations on the Advice
ro the Refugees, intitled, Important Ad-
dice to the Publick, in which he pre-
tended there was a French Cabal, ex-
tended from the North to the South of
Europe, whoſe deſign was to embroil
Holland and England, to confound all
the Counſels of the Allies, and there-
by procure France the Univerſal Mo-
narchy, to the extirpation of the Pro-
teſtant Religion. 8

This rare diſcovery fully open'd his
Eyes to ſee the drift of the Advice to the
Refugees : He then frankly declar'd, that


What he had ſaid in the Confideratrons


touching the Author's Deſign, was only
the effort of a Mind groping in 4 dark-
ome Scene, It's trae, adds he, there
was ſomething of dimneſs in the caſe too;
and one can hardly comprehend, nom it's al
come out, how we ſhon'd miſs divining
the whole Myſtery at the very firſt thought.
They who are under any ee conti


nues he, cou'd not be more plauſibly juſtig d


by their Friends, than by asking cui bono!

And ] own, ſays he, this croſs Queſtion,

tho it did not, it's true, prevent my gut):

ſing at the Author of the Book, put me

however to 4 nonplus; when Providence

41 laſt, which won't ſuffer ſurh Myſterys of
| | Iniquit)


of the
Intere
and nc
her A
Court
Pens 1
Ehem.
grant
poſſeſſſ
Neigh|
tient L
this ene
breakit


probab


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 112
Iniquity to lie long undiſcover'd, had by


another anforeſeen Circumſtance enabled us
to ſound the bottom of it. Be it known
then, crys he, that this Advice is not
the Work of a ſingle Perſon, movd from
Principle to defead the Authority of
Kings, but the Fruits of a Cabal ex-
tending from North to South, whoſe
Center lies in Paris and in the Court of
France, | PEG |
Then he informs the World that
there's a French Party at Geneva com-
e pos'd of Perſons of all Ranks and Cha-
t raFers, and that this Cabal of the South
s | communicates with ſuch another in
Holland and the North. The Deſign
þ. Jof theſe Gentlemen is to promote the
1e Intereſt of France as much as poſſible;
o; and not being in a condition to procure
aher Auxiliary Troops or Alliances, the
Court of France makes uſe of their
ens to work upon the Spirits of her
Enemys, and incline their hearts to
grant her a Peace, and leave her in
poſſeſſion of all that ſhe has rob'd her
Neighbors of, and annex'd to her an-
tient Domains. The general means to
this end was by dividing the Allies, and
breaking that Confederacy which in all
probability muſt be fatal to France at
H long


4 rl _ * [
U n
= / __ n < 4 - — * _ * — — —— —— — Roam os — — ee. a9. won 2 —
— — — — — — — — eo een rey RE gy : COL I Sno EET IN pe—_— ERR nb ns We oper * — — ad — —


— — a © >
Au 3 SEEN I.
8 8 —


17 * =
—— —
2


— — — Son 4 nm —— — — —— —


— ＋rE: :
1
—


114


The Life of M. Bayle.
long run. And the means of bringing
this Diſunion about was, firſt, by alie-


nating the Minds of the Catholick


Confederates, by infinuating that the


War they were ingag'd in cou'd only


tend to the Ruin of the Church of
Rome; and by repreſenting Proteſtants
in general as declar'd Enemys of Sove-
reign Power, and conſequently. unqua-
lify'd for their Alliance. Now ſuch was
the drift of the important Advice to the Re-


fugees, which Mr. Jurieu was not able


to penetrate at firſt fight, Mr. Bayle,


Head of the Northern Cabal, had wrote
it with a deſign of breaking the Grand
Alliance, and working upon the Catho-
lick Powers to leave the Proteſtants in


the lurch. The next Artifice for di-


viding the Confederates, was by per-
ſuading 'em all in general, that *twas a
folly to keep on the War at ſo prodigious
an expence and ſo horrible an effuſion of
Blood, when the moſt they cou'd expect
from it at laſt was Peace (the Power ol
France being ſo much ſuperior to that
of. all Europe; beſides that they never
wou'd be able to reduce it, or wreſt out
of its hands what it was once poſle(s'd
of) and at the ſame time to ſuggeſt tothe
Proteſtant Powers in particular, that $

x1 We the


The Life of Mr. Bayle;
the Engliſh and Dutch, that they ſpent
haves to no purpoſe in this War,
ſince they might: find their Account
apart, and get out' of the Broil by as
advantageous a Peace now as ever
they ſhou'd, after a long and even ſuc-
ceſsful War; which tended: directly to
make their People murmur. Now this,
according to Mr. Jurien, was one view
of the Author of the Advice: to the
Refagees, eſpecially: in his Concluſion,
But as this was too important a Point
to be handled in ſo ſmall a Work, that
Party of the Cabal which manag, 'd in
the South, had'prepar'd another O' pur-
poſe ro urge this common Reaſon, or
ſecond Means of dividing: the Allies; -
and this was the - Dialogues upon 4
Projett of Peace, which I have-mention'd


already. Mr. Juries added, upon the
credit 51 4 Letter” which was wrote
do lim, chat the' Author of the Project


boaſted how his Work had been
revisd at Geneva by the Reſident of
France, and by one of the chief Syndics;
thatit was afterwards communicatetiey
the Kihg;-whs made ſome Alterations
in ie witthis owt Hand: and he pre-
tended; that aſter this it was ſent to


Mt, Bol Agent for the Cabal in Fol-
H 2 land,


116


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


land; in order to be printed there under
his Taſpettion.:: ot 05 eme

Here, my Lord, are all thoſe great
Lights which the Project of a Peace by
the Sieur Goudet, had afforded Mr. Ju-
ritu; and here's the ground of his endea-


voring to ruin Mr.:Bayle's Reputation,


whom he now branded as Impious,
Profane, a Man of no Honor nor Reli-
gion, aa Impoſtor, a Traitor and Ene-
my to the State; in a word, one that de-
ſerv'd to be deteſted, and puniſh'd cor-
porally. In the mean time all theſe Ac-


cuſations were founded, as he himſelf


own'd, not on any convincing Proof,
but bare Preſumptious which his Ha-
tred and Fury had ſuggeſted, and which
on this account he had reaſon enough
to call Violent. Twou'd have crown'd
all his Joys o this fide Heaven, had the
Magiſtrates but ſeconded his Fury, or
cowd he himſelf have had the conduc-
ting Mr. Bale to a Scaffold. If. it was
was not in my Pomer, ſays he, to do him
all the Miſchief he deſerv d, at leaſt I have
made him 4 Mark of pablick Hatred.
Wou'd any one believe, my Lord, if he


did not ſee it in his own words, that


the Heart of Man cou'd be capable of
ſo black, fo brutal a Malice as this?


That


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


That a grave Divine, who had given a
Perſon of Merit, for ſeveral Years toge-
ther, his Friendſhip and Eſtcem, and
had always met with ſutable Re-
turns, ſhou'd induſtriouſly break with
him, o' purpoſe to make himſelf the


Inſtrument of his Ruin, and of de-


livering him over to the Civil Power ?
This is a Baſeneſs ſo infamous, that Lan-
guage has not Terms to expreſs it.
The moſt unciviliz'd Pagans had ab-
hor'd ſuch ways. I ſhan'tdwell any lon-
ger upon an Object ſo hideous; and I
ask your Lordſhip's Pardon for ſaying
ſo much of him already. I ſhall only
ſay, that Mr. Jurieu imagining the At-

fair of the Project of Peace furniſh'd


Dirt enough to blacken Mr. Bayle, he


began to carry it ſomewhat milder to


the Advice to the Refugees. Far from


making it look'd on as a formidable
Piece, and pernicious to the Proteſtant
Intereſt, he repreſented it as a thing
which cou'd do *em no great harm, and
might happen to do em ſervice, The
Author believ d, ſays he, it wou'd do em
no more harm at long run, than a hundred
other Libels which have been written a-
gainſt em That this wou'd. be forgot
like the reſt ; and that in the mean time it

. H 3; ff


[| 1138 Tbe Life of Mr. Bayle.

It did France ſome ſervice, and the Prote.
14 ſtants too by chance; becauſe it might con-
| | tribute to the breaking the Confederacy,
and conſequently the reſtoring em all a
Peace, This Reflection was founded
upon the Author of the Project's propo-


geous to the Proteſtant Princes. But
Mr. Jarieu was averſe to their accept-
ing any, till they had made the Prote-
ſtant Religion the uppermoſt in Fraxce,
and accompliſh'd the reſt of his Prophe-
cys. This was the ſecret Motive which
warp'd him againſt a Peace. In fine, he
was ſo pleas'd at his diſcovery of this
Project of Peace, that he afterwards
ſpoke of the Advice to the Refugees as
a Trifle ; and cou'd not forbear raillying
Mr. Bayle upon the noiſe made by him,
as he pretended, ever ſince he had been
accus'd of being the Author of it. I
know thoſe, ſays he, who if accus'd of be-
ing the Authors of ſuch a Work as the


1 have already ſeen, my Lord, that he
I never repreſented this as a pernicious
Book, but when he had Mr. Bayle in
1 his Eye; and that he ſpoke of it quite
| otherwiſe when this Objeft of his In-


3


ſing Terms of Peace, not diſadvanta.


Advice to the Refugees, wou d only laugh
at it, and not be a jot concern d. You


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 119
dignation was remov'd. He ſpoke of
the Project of Peace much at the ſame
rate; when he was to make his uſe of
it againſt Mr. Bayle, *twas then the Con-
trivance of a powerful Cabal, and cor-
rected by the King of France's own
Hand: but when he look'd at it in a
confuting Spirit, all that was fo terri-
ble in his firſt Idea, vaniſh'd of a ſud-
dain. This Work, ſays he, 2 ff Fa
with Viſions, and none but a Viſ onar ) ts ; fit
to conf ute it.

As ſoon as this Book of Mr. Jarieu's
appear d, Mr. Boyle publiſh'd an An-
{wer to it, intitled, The Chimerical Ca-
bal, or an Anſwer to the Fabulous Ac-
count, and the Calumnys which Mr. Tu-
rieu has lately publiſh*d concerning à cer-
tain Project of Peace, and concerning a
Libel intitled, Important Advice to the
Refugees concerning their approaching Re-
| turn into France, in his Conſiderations of
this Libel, Here he lets the World
j know what part he had in this Project
of Peace, which was nothing more, as
I faid already, than undertaking, in
5 complaiſance to Mr. Minatoli, to com-
1
E


municate it to ſome Per ſons: of Note
who had been expreſly nam'd to him.
2 He li kewiſe confuted all the Falſhoods
H 4 and


— — — — * = 4
— — 2 Y A — — 2 -
I I nn ee es EE oa


Fry


120


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


and Calumnys in Mr. Jarieq's Narra-
tion. As to the Advice to the Refugees,
which made the ſecond Head in the
Accuſation, Mr, Bayle advertis'd, that
he was preparing an Anſwer to it, In
which he promis'd to expole Mr. To
rieu's groundleſs poor Conjectures and
Suſpicions, in ſuch a manner as he
hop'd wou'd fully fatisfy the World.
In the mean time he gave a kind of


Prelude ta this Anſwer ; in which,


after agreeing with Mr. Jurieu that


che Author was a Proteſtant, he un-
dertook to proye, by the ſtrongeſt
probable Reaſons, chat this Libel muſt
have been written in France. Accord-
ingly he ſcan'd all Mr. Jurieu's Rea.
ſonings and Preſumptions, and ſhew'd


that they concluded nothing abſolute-
Jy. As this was not one of thoſe


Diſputes which ſometimes ariſe bc-
tween Men of Letters upon Points of
Opinion, but ſuch as concern'd Lite or
Reputation, Mr. Bale thought bim
ſell. not oblig'd to ſpare his Accuſer.
He uncas'd him fo cleverly, that the
Man's Pride and Self-conceit were no
longer proof againſt the Storm. He
had immediate recourſe to the Wor—


igel the Pyrgoraſters of B. alot
an


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


and preſented *em a Petition ſo very ſin-
_ gular, that I can't forbear inſerting it
in termins, _ |

The Sieur Jurieu, who has had the Ho-
nor of defending the Cauſe of God for ſo
many Tears, and by ſo many Labors,
craves Juſtice from your Morſbips a-


gainſt a horrible Libel written by the


Sieur Bayle, in which the ſaid Bayle


treats him as a Fripon, a Villain, an
| Impoſtor, a Slanderer, a wicked Man;
| and in which he treats the Princes who
have ſhaken off the Toke of Popery, as
flagitious Men and Murderers, and ſays
| ſeveral ſcandalous things againſt the Re-
- WU formation. The Sieur Jurieu implores
be protecting of his Innocence, and that
d the ſaid Lib be prohibited, lacerated and
torn in pieces; the Author puniſb'd, as
behoves, for Injurys ſo atrocious ; and that
the ſaid Jurieu be permitted to juſtify him-
ſelf pablickly againſt thoſe grievous Accu-
ſations „ be pr omiſing to do this with Mode-
ſty and Chriſtian Moderation; and that
the ſaid Sieur Bayle be forbid to write
iy more Books againſt the ſaid Jurieu.
0 I don't believe there was ever any
c Wl thing ſeen more violent or more bur-
r- leſque than this very Petition. To de-
fre that an Accuſer impeaching on Ars
LICIES


122


Te Liſe of My. Bayle. |
ticles of High- Treaſon againft God and


Man, ſhou'd be permitted to write a-


gainſt the Accuſed, and he forbid to
anſwer in his own defence, is ſurely a
Caſe without a Precedent, A Gentle-


man who ſhou'd defire his Prince's
Leave to fight a Duel with his Enemy,


but bound to a Tree and with his Arms
pinion'd, wou'd make a much leſs ri.
diculous Requeſt than Mr. Jurieus
But his hardineſs in charging Mr. Bay
before theſe Magiſtrates, with having
in his Cabal Chimerique, treated the Prin.
ces who ſhook off the Yoke of Popery as


flagitious Perſons, and Murderers, and


with having ſaid ſeveral ſcandalous things
again(} the Reformation, was a Calumny
ſo black and ſo palpable, that this alone
was enough to blaft the Delator's Cre-
dit. The Worſhipful Burgomaſters of
Roterdam took a method much more
becoming their Wiſdom and Equity.


They wouꝰd not abſolutely ſilence theſe


two Profeſſors, but they found an Ex-
pedient which tended indirectly this
way, at leaſt with regard to Mr. J.
rien; Which was, forbidding either to
publiſh any thing on this Article til
examin'd by the Penſionary of the
City, and approv'd by the Burgo-

e maaſters.


maſte
well,
fary's
when
were
pitch?
promi
promi
did ni
which
Kidne
Int
Book
neva,
at the
the Sie
thing t
had 1
took th
yd
had gi
this Me
Note c
retion,
rates a
create a
Proteſts
rs, N
In whic
in't ay


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


maſters. Mr. Bayle, who knew very


well, that the Weakneſs of his Adver-


fary's Accuſations wou'd ſoon appear,
when his Invectives and foul Language
were ras'd, was glad that they had
pitch'd upon this Expedient, and freely


which were too hard upon a Man of his
* WW Kidney. ONS.

y In the mean time no ſooner was his
. Book againſt Mr. Bale arriv'd at Ge-
eva, but ſome were mightily diverted
4 Wat the Romance he had grafted upon
the Sieur Goadet's Project of Peace, a
ching they knew the Reſident of Frauce
1c WW had all along made a Jeft of. Others


e- took the matter in a ſerious way, and


oi Wcry'd out upon the malicious turn he
re had given to the Politick Dreams of
V. this Merchant. Several Perſons of good
lc I Note complain'd loydly of his. Indiſ.
. Weretion, as tending to ſet the Magiſ-
bis rates and People by the Ears, and to
rate a Jealouſy of em among all the
Proteſtants, and the Confederate Pow-
fs, Mr. Minutoli wrote him a Letter,
n which he tax'd him with this: I
int anſwer, ſays he, that our C *
an


promis'd to obey the Order: Mr. Jurieu
promis'd as much on his part, but he
did not long fit eaſy under Conditions


123


124


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


and others of Character among us, touch —
in 4 point which ſo nearly concerns their = jou
Honor and Conſcience, won't ſtudy ways " _
giving you the moſt mortifying Proofs of ing bi


their juſt Reſentment. But this I an broke


fare of, that I ſhou'd be wanting to all the - 5
Rules of Equity and Juſtice, if I did nu — |
clear Mr. Bay le, who purely by an Accident T: ve
that I am going to tell you, is beholtey Gab [
to me for what you are pleas'd to mil: th 8
ſuch a Crime in him. Then he gave him 0 A1


the whole Hiſtory of the Project of Peace, BY þ
which agreed to a tittle with Mr.Bay's iſ hs”
Account; and afterwards complain', s ereſl
that he, Mr. Jurieu, wou'd draw him wry
into the pretended Cabal, which ex * 108
tended from North to South. Wou's Eng? 7
Jou, lays he, in Conſcience take it well, thu 1 my
any one upon ſuch Preſumptions agaiiſ "pop 8
your ſelf, ſhowd, without more ado, pc. pg


claim you and your Friends in print, 4


"Ip,
fer of Men void of Honor, of Faith, ani Marie“


p l f |
Religion? He concluded with exhot 9. ny
ing him to make Mr. Baz/e Reparation having.


and ſpare him the trouble of publiſhing
this Letter in his Friend's Juſtification
Mr. Jurieu receiv'd other Letters fro
Geneva to the ſame purpoſe, in whic
his Friends intreated him not to reck0


Face, |
Printing
lad no
Ter he |


upon the Cabal, he had form'd to li n © Di


ſell


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


| ſelf, nor treat the Project of Peace as a
ſerious matter. 120 51.3
But all this hinder'd not his inveigh-


125


ing bitterly againſt Mr. Bay/e. He even


broke his Promiſe to the Burgomaſters


;
of  Roterdar, and publiſh'd ſeveral
' Þ {mall Pieces without their Participation


under the Title of ' Convictions, &c.
i Tis true, not daring! to ſpeak of the


Cabal any more, he confin'd himſelf to


ds Article, That Mr. Bay le had attempr-
"Wed to: print 4 Projett of Peace without the
"Wl Privity of the State, and contrary to its
x I eeſts and Intentions. Thus this dan-
m eerous Cabal, which extended from


North to South, and which deſign'd to
bring about a general Revolution in
„ Eeland and Holland, to fink the Con-
J ederacy, and leave France Miſtreſs of
inf Europe, was {hrunk at laſt to the print-
ing of a ſmall Pamphlet, which by Mr.
Juriew's, own confeſſion was full of Vi-
lions'and Chimeras. The whole mat-


feace, pray d Mr. Bayle to get him the
printing of it: Mr. Bayle told him he
had no Orders to get it printed, but if
ter he had, and the thing were left to
ts Diſpoſal, he ſhou'd have the Prefe-

TT rence.


ter was this: Mr. Jurieu's Bookſeller
baving ſome notice of this Project of


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


rence;. In the mean time the Author
got it printed at Lauſanne; and Mr.
Bayle having recommended this Book.
ſeller, who was 4 poor Refugee, to
Mr. Minutoli, he promis'd to ſend him
the Sheets as they were worked off
which yet was never done. Here's the
whole: Buſineſs of the printing, which


Mr. . Juriew miſrepreſented with all


his Art, and wou'd fain have under.
ſtood to be a Crime apainſt the State,
He likewiſe continwd! his Accufations
upon the Advice ta the Refugees, tho
they were growyn perfectly ridioulous,
ſince! his being undeceiv' dias to his pre-
tended: Cabal, founded on the Proſed
of Peace. For, as your Lordſhip has
already ſeen; this Project was the thing
that openꝰd his Eyes to ſee the true de-
ſign of the Advice, and diſcover all the
Poiſon in it. And now he was made to
underſtand, that the Project wasa mere
Chimera, and the Cabal a Viſion: did i
not follow very evidently; that all lis
frightful Account of the Auvice was
groundleſs, and the Danger chimerical?
But ſuch a Confeſſion had clear'd Mr.
Bil and this wus the leaſt of NI An.
rieuis Thoughts: So) he never” let
twitting him with this Auv ice to the Re.

"13 7 | | fugees,


fuges
as WI
of a

apiece
in wl
was e
with
ever:

him t.
increa
Sollici
forgot
Mr. E
they r
lence,

his Lil
ae
thougl
I
law th
Accuſa
miſh M
them o


The Life of Mr, Bayle.


fugess, and that with as much Bitterneſs
as when firſt he imagin'd it the Work


of a curſed Cabal, and inſeparably of


apiece with the Project. The manner
in which his Cabal had bin unhing'd,
was enough to cover moſt other Men
with Shame, and. ſtop their Mouths for
ever: But for his part, the Grief it gave
him to ſee it tumble, did only ſerve to
increaſe his Fury. He redoubPd his
Sollicitations with the Magiſtrates, and
forgot nothing to exaſperate em againſt
Mr. Bayle; but they {till anſwer'd, that
they muſt do Juſtice and hear his De-
tence, This diſtracted him; and all
his Libels were full of Lamentations up-
on the exceſs of their Clemency. He


thought the leaſt. they cou'd do was
blowing him out off Holland. When he


- -


127


aw the Magiſtrates made a mock of his


Accuſations,. he had recourſe to the Fle-


nib Miniſters, and endeavor'd to engage
them of his ſide; but. this too came to
nothing. At laſt he fell foul of his


| Miſcellaneous. Roflections on Comets, for-


merly ſo much admir'd by him, and


pretended this Book was a. Syſtem of
Libertiniſm and/Atheiſm. He likewiſe
attack d the Critique Generale on the
Hiſtory, of Calviniſm, and the Philoſo-


phical


—— — — — — —


128


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
phical Commentary, Which he now a-
{crib'd to Mr. Bayle, and not to a Club
of Refugee Miniſters. All the violent-


eſt things his Heart cou'd frame againſt |


theſe Works, and particularly the firſt,
he ſet forth in a Libel, intitPd, A ſhort


Review of the Maxims of Morality and
Principles of Religion, of the Author of |
the Miſcellaneous Reflections on Comets,
Kc. He diſtributed this Piece to the
Conſiſtory of Roterdam, and declaim'd


before em againſt Mr. Ble with ſuch


Violence, as to declare, he wou'd at


ſoon be reconcild to the Devil as to
him. Fine Words from a Divine! The
Conſiſtory reſolv*d to examine the Ac.
cuſations ſuggeſted in the Short Review,
and Mr. Bay/e ſignify'd, that he was


ready to make his Innocence appear: |


But Mr. Jurien did not think fit to


bring the matter to a hearing at that


time. , oY

Mr. Bayle had carry'd his Deference
for the Magiſtrates Order fo far as to
ſuppreſs the Anſwer at large, which he


had prepar'd to Mr. Jurieu, and was


reſolv'd to let him talk on by himſelf;
but when he ſaw this Miniſter wou'd
not give over railing in his Libels, and
that ſome of his Enemys made an Ad-

1 vantage


The Life of Mr. Bayle! © 129


vantage of his Silence, he thought he
was oblig'd to defend himſelf, Ac-
cordingly he wrote an Anſwer under
the Name of one of his Friends, en-
titl'd, The Chimera of the Roterdam Ca-
bal, demonſtrated from the pretended Con-
victions which the Sieur Jurieu has pab-
liſb'd againſt Mr. Bayle. This Work,
which was written with lefs warmth
than the Cabale Chimerique, was di-
vided into three parts. "The firſt was
a long Preface, containing a Detail of
Mr. Jurieu's Accuſations, and their
Conſequences ; deſign'd to let the Pub-
lick know the ſtate of the Queſtion,
and on which fide the Victory ſeem'd
to incline. The ſecond was a Confuta-
tion of all Mr. Jariea had advanc'd in
his Convictions, to juſtify his dream of
the Cabal concern'd in the Project of
Peace; and concluded with that Letter
of Mr. Minutoli's J have ſpoke of. And
ce in the third part he made ſome general
to Reflections upon the Factum, publiſh'd
e by Mr. Juriea, concerning the Advice
as W'o the Refugees; and ended by over-
rowing all his pretended Proofs.
Thus, my Lord, you fee the whole
train of this Diſpute, which made
o much noiſe in its time, and is not _ |
e I yet Wi


1

=
|

:


—— ge to — yo —
eons. — — re = IG a


o
1
——— — — — coy 2 — .
— — — — — — IIS —


130


I The Life of Mf. Bayle:


yet forgot, tho very few know the true


ſtate of it, As this is one of the points
of which you deſir'd the moſt particu-


lar Account, 1 cou'd not avoid Prolixity


and ſometimes Repetition. I ſhall be
much ſhorter in what concerns the true
Author of the Advice to the Refugees. |


Some diſcerning Perſons are of opi- |
nion, that Mr. Peliſſon is the, Author of
this Book, and that he ſent it to Mr.
Bayle, who publiſh'd it with a Preface,
ng the Plan of a folid Anſwer |
to it, as I have already obſerv'd, This |
was the Opinion of Mr. La Baſtide, |


containin


who dy'd at London, and had known


Mr. Peliſſon thorowly, having liv'd }
in ſtrict Friendſhip with him for above
thirty Years, He fancy'd he ſaw Mr.

Peliſſon's turn of Wit, his way of Rea |


ſoning, and ſome of his favorite Ex-


preſſions in this Advice to the Refugees : |


and even wrote a Diſſertation to juſtify


his Sentiments, which was never print
ed, being a Parallel between the Advict


and Mr. Peliſſon's, othet Works, He
ſupported his Opinion by this further
Circumſtance, That a ſecond Edition


of it was begun by Mr. Peleſſon's Book:


{eller at Paris, with the Royal Licence,


in October 1690. three months befors


& Mr


the 8
ſeller
the ff
the 4
in al
by th
Refug
more:
has a
Mr. J


liſſon V
thor of
born an
ſeveral
the Ref
which 7
chiefly b


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
Mr. Juriea thought of aſcribing it to
Mr. Bayle; but being interrupted for
ſome time, was afterwards finiſh'd by
his Widow in Jan. 1692. and publiſh'd
with a ſecond Royal Licence, the firſt


not having paſs'd thro all the requiſite


Forms. The laſt Licence aſcribes the
Interruption to this, that the Author af-
ſecting to conceal himſelf had made a
difficulty of having the firſt Licence,
which was granted in his own Name,
regiſter'd in the Books of the Com-
pany of Stationers at Paris; and to
the Sickneſs and Death of the Book-
ſeller. But one who was then upon
the ſpot, has declar'd his Opinion, that
the Suppreſſion of this Work was
in all probability occaſion'd wholly
by the Broils it had caus'd among the
Refugees, and the hopes of ſeeing *em
more and more inflam d; which indeed
has a great appearance of Probability.
Mr. La Baſtide believ d, that Mr. Pe-
liſon was ſhy of declaring himſelf Au-
thor of the Advice, not only as he was
born and bred a Proteſtant, and having
ſeveral Relations and Friends amon

the Refugees, was loth to own a Book
which tended to render em odious; but


chiefly becauſe having here and there let
Cans 12 fall


130


132 T he Life of Mr. Bayle.
fall Expreſſions ſomewhat too free and
too forcible againſt rhe way of treating
the Proteſtants in France, he had aſter-
wards underſtood, that theſe Paſſages
gave a diftaſt to ſome conliderable
Perſons, which oblig'd him to expunge
*em in the Paris Edition; tho it's
true at the ſame time, theſe Paſſages
don't all amount to one Page. It's need.
leſs adding, that the Preface to the firſt
was ſuppreſs'd in this ſecond Edition.
They gave in the room of it only a
{hort Advice to the Reader of two or |
three Periods. 1155
Ochers no leſs diſcerning than thoſe
we have bin ſpeaking of, think Mr.
Bayle the Author of the Preface to the
Advice, but that the Book was written
by Mr. Larroque (Son to the famous
Miniſter of Roan) who chang'd his
Religion ſoon after. He truſted the
Manuſcript in Mr. Bay/e's hands, who
got it printed, and gave it ſome few
"Touches of his own. What confirms
'em in this Opinion is, that Mr. La.
roque W3s Often heard to cite this Work
as his own Production. Theſe Gen-
tlemen think, that this is the whole
My ftery, and the true reaſon why Mr.

_ Bayle's V indications appear'd . 0
ur


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


durſt not freely give his Opinion either


of the Book or of the Author, who had


always bin his Friend. 9571

Laſt of all, there are a great many
who believe, that Mr. Bayle was the
Author of the Book as well as the Pre-
face, and ground their Opinion on the
ſprightly and agreeable manner of wri-


ting and reaſoning, which runs thro -


the whole, and which they think is


above the Capacity of either of the


other two Authors. But, beſide that
theſe Rules of Criticiſm are very uncer-
tain, and liable to Exceptions in the
preſent Caſe ; it's certain Mr. Peliſſon,
having written to a Perſon at Roterdam,
that the King offer'd Mr. Bay/e a Re-
ward, if he wou'd own to him he was
the Author, and even promis'd to keep
it a Secret, he proteſted he was not.
He aver'd the ſame to thoſe who were
deepeſt in his Confidance; ſo that it


muſt be ſtruck out of the Catalogue of


his Works: at leaſt this is a ſufficient


bar for nat alledging it in proof againſt


him. He had form'd the Deſign of


writing an Anſwer to it ; and tho the
matter was extremely delicate, there's


reaſon-to think he wou'd have executed


it, if Mr, Jurien had not made ſo much


13 noiſe,


133


134


1592.


I dare not affirm,
juſtify Mr.


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
noiſe. Be that as it will, had Mr. Bayl:
bin really Author of this Book, which
this wou'd not
arieu's T ranſports and Ex-
ceſſes. That black spre with Which
he turn'd Informer againſt his old
Friend, is a Note of Infamy which he
will never be able to cla off. I have
Thewn, my Lord, that on a Suppoſi
tion Mr. ayle was Author of this A4.


vide, it was capable of a favorable Con-
ſtruction”: - bur ſince he conſtantly


de-
ny'd it, common Juſtice won't allou
the citing of it with 4 deſign to blacken
his Memory; none but Jurieu's are ca-
pable of this. Beſides, the Advice had
this good effect, that i it a ſome of
the beſt Pens among the Refugees pub-
lickly to diſclaim thoſe Libels which
the Author: had made à handle of, and
to ſhew they were the Works of private
Perſons, without Coudtenance or Au-
thority. Ik alſo gave dem an Occaſion
of conſuting all the other Odjectiobs.

Mr. Bale finding Mr. Jurieu wou


not give over writing againſt his Books,


reſolv'd to make . Repriſals/” - But that
they who underſtood not the "French
Tongue might be the better able ta
make a Judgment of the'Genius of his

q Adyer-


partic
of Hea
larly tc
tians;
Syſten
in the


| Theſes


The, Life of Mr., Bayle.


Adverſary, he choſe to write in Latin.
There was indeed ſomething of Malice
in this choice; for Mr. Bale knew very
well, that Mr. Jarien was no great
Maſter of the Lalin Tongue, and that

e.,wou'd, be hard put to it to re-
ply. He tgok his Syfem of the Church
for the Subject of his Criticiſm. This
was tquching Mr. Jurieu in a tender


part; becauſe this Work had paſs'd for


Ole whic IMr. Nicole judg'd Worth an-


ſwering. - Mr. Bayle took the Name of


Carus Larebonics ; and fancying there
war ud Title the Ear was more us d to
than that, of, Janda Linguarum reſerata,
by Comenius, he intitl'd his Book, Ja-
mus Celorgu reſerata cunttis Religionibus,
4 celebri admodum viro, Domino Petro


Jarien, Ce. Here he made appear,
that Mr, Jarieu, as much an Enemy as


he was to Toleration, had notwith+


ſtanding, to diſtinguiſh himſelf by a


particular Syſtem, flung open the Gates
of Heaven to Jews, Pagans, and particu-


\ \} 4


larly to all the different Sects of Chriſ-


tians,z and thereby he intirely ruin'd his
Syſterg. ., Tho he cou'd write elegantly
in the Latin Tongue, as appears by the


f


tlie


135


736


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
the Stile and Method of the Sholaf.
tick Philoſophers, which gave a dif.
reliſh of his Book. Tis a pity, for he
handled his Subject with great addreſs,


and maintain'd throughout the whole


Work that force of Reaſoning which
was ſo natural to him: he gave his
Arguments ſuch a degree of Evidence,


that Mr. Jurieas never attempted to an-


ſwer em. 1
Some time after Mr. Bay/e publiſh'd a
Work intitled, The Project and Fragments
of a Critical Dictionary. The firſt Sheets
of it were printed above a Year be-
fore, and wou'd have been publiſh'd
ſoon after, if Mr. Jariea had not ſtruck
in to interrupt him in his Studys. The
Bookſeller preſſing him to go on with
that Deſign, he drew up in ſome haſt,
and on the firſt Matter that Chance
preſented, about Twenty Articles, to
givę a more juſt Idea of his Deſign. He
introduc'd 'em by a long Preface in-
{crib'd to Mr. Da Ronde then a Profeſ-
ſor in the Belles Lettres at Maſtricht, in
which he gave him an Account of the
Plan of this new Dictionary. The De-
ſign of it, ſays he, is to be a Collec-
tion of the Falſhoods in all other Dic-
tionarys, and a Supplement of what
e they


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
they had omitted. He propos'd, for
example, under the word SENECA,
to collect all the Falſhoods that had
been ever advanc'd concerning this Phi-
loſopher ; ſo that *twas only conſulting
this Article to make a right Judgment
upon every thing to be met with con-
cerning Seneca in any Author whatſo-


ever: if the Matter were falſe, twas


mark'd in the Collection; and if it was
not on a foot of Falſhood there, the
Reader might reckon upon it as true.
But beſides the perſonal Articles which
were to furniſh his Dictionary, he pro-
misꝰd to intermix ſuch as are real, that
is, ſuch as relate not to Perſons, or Pla-
ces, and 1 are not to be met
with in any Hiſtorical or Geographical
Dictionary; he gave two of theſe as


and the other on the Day. He even
c gave ground to hope that he ſhou'd not
n- MW confine himfelf within theſe Spaces,
how wide ſoever they may ſeem; but


in W that he wou'd make Excurſions on all


he forts of Authors as occaſion preſented.
He afterwards anſwer'd the Objections
againſt this Deſign, and ſhew?d that the
uſefulneſs of ſuch a Critical Collection
did hardly fall ſhort of that of any

1 other


137


a Specimen, one upon the Hippomanes,


1
KY
$4,
Lv,
4
1
790
1,
By
27:
4;
all
4.0
1M
11h *
1468
1
*
:
A
*
=]
-
m4
N
" .
4
.
f
1
|
0


— ———


*
ö —
:
*
N
:
.
＋


The Life of Mr. Bayle:

other Science, not excepting even. the
Mathematieks. And this gave him OC+
Londewn © Hiſtorical | Pyrrhoniſm., with


regard to infinite Fact, get 1s cortwn


there are 4 great many, others | which
anay be (prov 41:10 4 high degree of Cer.
tun). 106337) YH „„ ede. Ain 1
- He like wiſe ow d he Was not, inſenſt-
ble of the Difficultys of executing ſuch
A Deſign as it ougbt to be; but was fil
more ſenſible of his own inability for
the Undertaking: That for this Rea -
ſon he coofin'd himſelfitg the giving on-
ly the frſt Draughts of ſuch 2 Work,
to conſiſt of one Volume in Folio; and
ſhou d leave the care of continuing it to
Fenſons better“ quality?d; in caſe they
ſhow'dithiolhe Defig, improv d with
all requiſite Alteratiss, not unworthy
*heir Pens. Hut as lie foreſaw that | the
Sketch Which he proposd had extent
enough to coſt him a gr deal of trou-
ble; and belides Was Very, diſtruſtful ol
the, manner in which he intended 10
eary ir On, he had reſgly'd to. bazard
ſomeè Fragments of it beforeband, of
pur poſe 10, feel the Pulse of the Publick,
and profit by the Cenſures of the udir
Cious. This Preface Was oo by
Fay ome


The Liſe of Mr. Bayle-


ſome Articles of ſeveral kinds, ad
ing to the Plan he had lormd. mere
The Articles :exhibitgd: againſt Mr.
Bayle, on occaſion of his AMiiſceſlaneous
Reflections on Comets, &c. having not
been as yet debated in the Conſiſtor of
Roterdam; thro Mt; Torita's tardirie(s,
this Informer re ſolx'd atylaſhro moveigr


a Trial the following Tear. Mr. Baue


apply*d likewiſe to tde Canſiſtory, and
4 Reparation af the heavy Ca-
lumny s vvhich Mir. Jurite had publiſnid


that this Affair you'd now be brought
to anniſſue, when, Mr. Jarieu obta ind
an Appeal to the Synod which was to
meet ſoon after in A ia Age. Mr. Ju-
riedap therein Perſon; but ſpoke
not a ſyllable of this Proceſs, nor wou d
conſent that the Acts of the Conſiſtory
ſhowd helaid before em, tho the Con-
ſiſtary had expreſſy orderꝰd their Depu-


againſt him; and che had eme hopes


tys ſo tu da. " Tho oblig'd Mr. Baylæ ito


publiſn a Famphiet againſt his Adver-
ary;i.intirled; ' New. a, 0 the lat
Author of the little Bots.

For tO Years paſt Mr. Jas bad
ſtird / Hehven and Earth to exaſperate


18 . on: againſt Mr, Bayle,


with-


1693.


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
without the leaſt effect from all his in-


triguing. The Changes which King
William made in the Regency of Roter.


dam in 1692. had given him mighty
hopes of ſucceeding; but the new Ma-
giſtrates declar'd, as their Predeceſſors
had done before, that they wou'd do


Juſtice, and hear Mr. Bayle*s Defence |
if there were occaſion. This threw ,-


Mr. Jurieu into-ſuch'a Rage, that he
reſolv'd to hazard all rather than not
have his Revenge. The Lear 1693.


afforded him an opportunity Which he


wou' d not let ſlip, The
ſit heavy
triumph on all ſides. The great Efforts
ſhe had made to keep a Superiority over


ar began to


her Enemys, had drain'd her of Men


and Mony. If ſhe had been able to
bring about a Peace in this Conjuncture,
it muſt have been advantageous to her
Intereſts in all reſpects. She therefore
-aſpir'd after it wich an extraordinary
Ardor. In this diſpoſition, the better to
conceal her Steps towards obtaining it,
| ſhe dextrouſly ingap'd ſome of the Neu-
tral Powers to break it tothe Allies
letting 'em underſtand that ſhe Was in
clin'd to ſacrifice a part of her Coſ-
* if OS, quelis


on France, tho ſhe ſeem'd to |


quel
Pope
Ove!
Spais
Had
Pope
blanc
the.
ſitior
ſide,
ted P
'em
libert
ſhou?
cles r
fers v
great
enter
minar
ner,
carryi
Juries
ply'd
King
Affair


have (


ted M
He hai
cm tc
tiers |


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
queſts to reſtore Peace to Europe. The


Pope had the Year before made the firſt
Overtures to the Emperor, the King of


Spain, and the Duke of Savoy, France


141


had fo intirely refer'd her ſelf to the


Pope, that ſhe had given him a Carte
blanche to treat for her. But not one of
the Allies wou'd hearken to his Propo-
ſition. Finding her ſelf repuls'd on this
ſide, ſhe endeavour'd to draw the Uni-
ted Provinces to a Treaty, She offer'd
em a ſufficient Barrier, and an intire
liberty of Commerce, aſſuring *em they
ſhou'd have the ſettling of all the Arti-
cles relating to Trade. But theſe Of-
ters were rejected ; and ſome Perſons of


great Note moving that they might


enter into a Treaty on theſe Preli-
minarys, were ſilenc'd in ſuch a man-
ner, as put em out of a condition of
carrying on any Negotiation. Mr.
Jarieu obſerving theſe Diſpoſitions, ap-
ply'd himſelf ro ſome great Men of


King William's Court; and reviving the


Affair of the Project of Peace, which I
have ſaid ſo much of already, repreſen-
ted Mr. Bayle as an Emiſſary of France.
He had the leſs difficulty in perſuading
'em to what he wou'd, as theſe Cour-
tiers found their Account too well in

conti-


1 a W 8 — 2 7 G — 2 LE = — 2 7 lc 2 2 py — — — — —
* 8 r * 7 4 x == OE"; — —ũ— ͤ é — * 22 . — — — —— 7 — — = - —
= - — — LIT» <rres - EE ONS r — — — — re — ane SER, — — * 7% ans 2 —-— — — « — —
4 ; : * : Dr — — — + 2 * 8 6 <
* . — —— — bs 7 -
— —— — — 1 — — — —— — — = — — 2 _ =
3 r 3 maria wor = — Py — — — — 2 — — — - i _ — _ — . OS = —


—— — — —


142 The Liſe ef Mri\Bayle:


continuidg the War, to defire to ſee aa jour,

end of ie fo ſvoti.  Accordinply inflead 0
e Cy made Men

a Report of it to King William, and al. leſs

ſur'd bim there was a Cabal in Hold N

driving on 2 Peace; { that Mr. Bayle Was veal

one of the principal Members of it, and darit

had even the boldnefs to attempt print. wojc

ing a Project to this purpoſe drawn up confi

by the Court of France. They put YI the ;

him in mind that the Peace in 1678. had

been carry'd on by Writings of the

fame kind, diſpers'd in Amfterdam and

elſewhere ; and forgot not to give a

malicious Turn to the friendly Of-

fices done to Mr. Bayle by ſeveral

| Perſons of Piſtinction, who had no
| Affection for the Houſe of Orange.
This great Prince, who had not the


leiſure to examine into this Chimerical
8 Project, and who undoubtedly knew


x not that this Affair had paſs'd above
two Years before, was alarm'd at this
Notice. He order'd the Burgomaſters
of Roterdam immediately to, deprive
Mr. Bayle of his Profeſſor's Place and
his Penſion : and the Order was obey'd
without either citing or hearing him, a5
they had promis'd. Thus was Inno-
cence oppreſs'd by the Spite gs
"4 ou N


Jouſy of a half-craz'd Divite, and by


daring for a long time paſt to ſpeak a


whom the King bad treated with ex-


The Fifs of M.. Bayle.


the Injuſtice and Partiality of ſome great
Men, whoſe Merit ſhone with much
leſs Luſtre than their Fortunes

Mr. Jarie took care not to re-
veal this Myſtery of Iniquity. Not


word more of the Cabal of Geneva, he
confin'd himſelf, as we have ſeen, to
the Advice to the Refugees, and wow
inſinuate that this Book had been the
real Cauſe of Mr. Bayle's Piſgrace: As
if King William had ſo tender a regard
for the Refugees, as to 5 the out-
rage done em y the Author of the
Advice! But he was infinitely more
concern 'd at the Buſineſs of Feite; ant]
believ'd, upon the Report made him, |
that Mr. By le did teally ſollicit it on

the part of Traber and in concert with
ſome Per ſotis of the United Provinces,


treme Severity. Alas! Mr. Bayle ne-
ver had fuch a Thought and if he had,
never was there à Man leſs fitted for
carrying on a State Negotiation: All
who had any acquaintance with him,
muſt do him this juſtice; and you, my
Lord, knew him too well not to be
convine*d of it. Given up wholly to
reading,


444


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
reading, and engag'd in Metaphyſical


Speculations, he was utterly unacquain.


ted with the Myſterys of State. And
how is it poſſible he ſhou'd ſer up for
a Pacificator of Europe? He ſurvivd


this Diſgrace with a Philoſophical Con-


ſtancy, and even with too much indif-
ference, eſpecially with regard to his


Fortune. The heaping up Wealth was
the leaſt of his Cares, becauſe in rea-
lity he had no need of it. His Tem.
perance and Sobriety ſupply'd all, ſo

that poſſeſſing little he knew no lack.
Vet not that his Condition was Indi-
Bent, very far from it. He made no

uſtle to get into other Buſineſs ; he
found himſelf freer now, and more at |
his own diſpoſal, diſmiſs'd from the
irkſom drudgery of teaching and read
This bleſſed Indepen-


ing Lectures.
dence charm'd him ſo intirely, that he
wou'd not make uſe of a Privilege,


the Regency were willing to allow |


him, of teaching the Children of the
Counſellors of Roterdam in private,


who paſſionately defir'd he wou'd. His


Friends did all they cou'd to perſuade
him to it, repreſenting that this wou'd
be an authentick proof of his Innocency,
and of the Malice of his Enemys ; *

e


ception
though
this We
plicatio
Ser uple:
al the C
lalſe Th


1694. t
miſſione


klaminii


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


he always anſwer'd, he was oblig'd


to thoſe very Enemys for the Re-
poſe and Tranquillity they had pro-
cur'd him; nor was he much concern'd
at the raſh Judgments which might be
paſs'd upon him. This was not the
only Inſtance he had given of a Firm-

neſs of Mind truly Philoſophical.
Mr. Bohle wou'd not give himſelf
the trouble of contuting the Short Re-
view of his Reflections on Comets, &c.
for ſeveral reaſons; as, That Mr. Jurieu
had not appear'd to his Summons and
Challenges to make good the Charge a-
gainſt him: That after having remov'd
this Cauſe from the Conſiſtory to the
dynod, he had let four Sy nods paſs
without taking any notice of it: That
his Book on Comets contain'd a ſatiſ-
. © factory Anſwer to all the Delator's Ex-
e Y c*ptions: And that in fine he had
e, Thoughts of giving a new Edition of
x © fs Work, with ſeveral additional Ex-
je dlications and Solutions, for quieting the
e. NKruples of tender Minds, and ſilencing
is Will the Cavils of knaviſh Diſputants or
ge Wille Thinkers. But finding in February
d 64. that Mr. Jurieu had got Com-
y, Nniſioners nam'd in the Conſiſtory for
t Jaamining this Affair anew ; and fear-
K ing


5 N —, > 4 - — — 2 — i wow
IRE IS IE = 2 — TORE TIE — pad CODE — — : = :
: — Roe. — — — — eh, MW < > * — — — — 3 way 2 , — —
4 _ = - 2 OM. _ — — — — . — BEES... Doors - — — — — — —0——— = — ere"

© . * . — — 0 — - — — _ — 4 -
= — — — 7

— — — —— ꝗ 22 ——ñ̃ 3B —— —— —— I. — — = ä 2 : 2

nes, ger 2 — TI Tr rms en eh . — . —— v — — : -

- 25 2 —


146


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


ing it might be tranſacted in a ſumma-
ry way, without notice to make his
Defence, he judg'd it abſolutely neceſ-
ſary to draw up a kind of publick Fac-
tum, or ſtate of the Caſe, as a means of
Information for ſuch of the Judges as
wou'd make uſe of it, or to leave thoſe
without a Plea of Ignorance who wou'd
not. Accordingly he publiſh'd a Paper


intitled, Additions to the Miſcellaneous


oy ag on Comets, or an Anſwer to:
Libel, intitled, A Short Review, &c.


 defign'd for the Information of the Judges


who are to examine this Affair. Here he
expos'd the unfaithfulneſs of thoſe Ex-
tracts Mr. Jarieu had made in his Li.
bel: he intirely deſtroy'd all his Objec-
tions; ſhew'd in what manner the Ec-
cleſiaſtical Judges ought to guide them-


ſelves to come ata juſt knowledg of the
Difference; and addreſs'd a Petition to |


all the Univerſitys of Europe, praying
Judgment in thoſe Points of Doctrine
for which he was impeach'd by the
Accuſer. This Writing quaſh'd all the
Proceedings defign'd to be mov'd for
at that time, and put an end to this


Diſpute. a
The Count de Gaiſcard hearing that
Mr. Bale was out of all publick Em.


ployment,


Us


ploy
Into
your
a th
him |
the (
enjoy
But N
nor,
tions
Critic,
in the


rather
treated
never
kind of
ford
mentio
ng pra
him a 1
„the


it, allec


dioe the
lame,

that Mi
putting
or this 1


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


ployment, wou'd fain have got him
into France for the Education of the
young Count his Son. He offer'd him
a thouſand Crowns a Year, and aſſur'd
him he had taken ſuch meaſures with
the Court of France, that he might
enjoy a full Liberty of Conſcience,
But Mr. Bayle thank'd him for the Ho-
nor, and excus'd himſelf on the Obliga-
tions he was under of finiſhing his


*


147.


Critical Dictionam, which was already


in the Preſs.

Mr. Bayle's Friends, who knew he
wou'd never put his Name to any of
his Works, either out of Modeſty, or
rather a Philoſophical Indifference, in-
treated him to alter his Rule now ; but
never cou'd conquer his averſion to this
> lind of Vanity. Yet he was afterwards
to bored to comply, for Reaſons I ſhall
10 mention, Mr. Leers his Bookſeller hav-
ne ng pray'd the States of Holland to grant
he © bim a Licence for the Critical Dictiona-
he % the Undertakers of Moreri oppos'd
it, alledging this Work wou'd preju-
dice theirs, and was in ſubftance the


that Mr. Bayle had a Reluctance to the
putting his Name to it, they made uſe


ame. And as they were not ignorant


of this Incident to repreſent his Dicſio-
K 2 nary


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


nary as a Book without Warrant or Au-
thority, The States wou'd got refuſe
Mr. Leers a Licence, but 'twas on con-
dition that Mr. Bayle ſhou'd publickly
own he was the Author; ſo it was no
longer in his power to conceal him-
ſelf. 1 1

T muſt obſerve, that Mr. Bayl:'s
great Reputation gave People ſuch an
Opinion of this Undertaking, that be-
fore it was half work'd off, the Book.
ſeller perceiv*d he had not Copys enough
for thoſe who had beſpoke it. This
oblig*d him to work off a double Num-
ber of the remaining, and reprint as
many of the firſt. Sheets. I ſhall give


your Lordſhip another Inſtance,to ſhew niſi,
how high an Idea People conceiv'd of 4s *
this Dictionary. A Perſon of the firlt 11


Quality of Exgland, who had a great
deal of Wit and Merit, let a Friend of
Mr. Bayle's underſtand, that if this
Work were dedicated to him, he wou'd
make the Author a Preſent of a hun-
dred and fifty Guineas. This Friend
preſs'd him earneſtly to embrace
an Offer, no leſs honourable than ad-
vantageous to him: Several other ,

join'd in the Requeſt, but never cou'd Mare re
prevail on him. He generally pie. wholly wa


as YOU
only to
ionarys
ſmall;

mixture
agreeab
tous (
thought


tended,


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
tended, that having ſo often ridicuPd
Dedications, he wou'd never be guilty
of the ſame Fault himſelf. But this
was only a Colour ; the true ground of
his Refufal was this Lord's being then
in the Miniſtry ; and he cou'd not bring
himſelf to complement any one in a
| Poſt at the Court of a Prince, whom he
thought he had ſome reaſon to complain


of. Here's a further Inſtance of the


difintereſtedneſs.

He publiſh'd his Dictionary about the
end of 1696. after he had been 4 Years
upon it. Two Reaſons hinder'd his
finiſhing it ſooner ; the firſt was, his he-
ing oblig'd to make ſome change in
the Plan, to ſute himſelf to the Taft of
moſt Readers: for his origina! Deſign,
as your Lordſhip may remember, was
only to detect the Errors of former Dic-
nionarys, and other Authors great and
{mall ; hut having underſtood that a
mixture of Hiſtorical wowd be more
agreeable, and better receiv'd than a te-
dkous Collection of mere Errors, he
thought it neceſſary to alter his Scheme;
tho it render'd the greateſt part of the
Materials he had: brought together
wholly - uſeleſs. Accordingly. be di-

F K 3 .”. -yiged


ſteddineſs of his Soul, and of a perfect


— — 2


150


ſionar requir'd more time than ordint-


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
vided it into two parts : the Firſt con- T,
tain'd a ſuccinct Narration of Facts; TER
the Second, an ample Commentary, lian
containing the Proofs, Explications, ne- mig]
ceſſary Diſcuſſions, and Cenſure of the chan
principal Errors he had remark' d. This choic
new Deſig made him alter the Title to sche
that of an Hiſtorical and Critical Dittio. W ticlez
zary, The next thing which hinder d bur
his finiſhing this Work ſooner, was his I +
Curiouſneſs in avoiding all matters to be WF form.
met with in Moreri and other Dictiona. I of an
795, and moſt other matters which he I rials.
toreſaw wou'd be taken into thoſe FF kind
which learn'd Men were preparing in men
divers Parts of Europe. He even in- the 13
duſtriouſly declin'd whatever was to be form |
met with in ſome new Books, which I Mr. E
were or might be in every bodys hands, be me
fuch, for example, as Mr. du Pins that .
Bibliotheque f Eceleſiaftical Authors. he did
He wou'd not put his Readers to the I ſor iti


charge of buy ing the ſame thing twice I Article
over 3 tho by conſulting their Intereſt he I Ifeer


depriv'd himſelf of the greateſt Fund I of yr
of Matter that Hiſtory furniſhes, and I digere:
the faireft Harveſt, without any great WJ Works
trouble in the gathering. We may tion. ;
therefore eafily imagine, that this Dic-


ſys


— 4289 8 we


The Lift of Mr. Bayle:
ry, fince the Author had affected to
bring nothing into it which had been


handled or digeſted by others. We


might add a third Reaſon, from the
change he was oblig'd to make in the
choice of his Articles. By his firſt
Scheme he ſhou'd have taken in the Ar-
ticles Per ſonal and Real promiſcuouſſy;
but he was given to underſtand, that
'twere better he confin'd himfelf to the
former ; which likewiſe cut him out
of another great parcel of his Mate-
rials. However, that the Articles of this
kind which had appear'd in his Speci-
men might not be Joſt, he caft 'em at
the latter end of his Work into the
form of Diſſertations. But when I ſay
Mr. Bayle avoided repeating matters to
be met with in other Dictionarys, as
that of Moreri, &c. I don't mean that
he did not ſpeak of the ſame Perſons ;
for *tis certain there are a great many
Articles in his Dictionary to be found in


Moreri, but they ſcarce contain a Werd


of what Moreri ſays. Nor did this
difference in the Oeconomy of the two


Works lie only in the different Diſpoſi-


tion, in the Turn, in the Manner of ap-


plying or explaining; but in the Facts


and groſs Materials, which were wholly
ts K 4 diffe-


151


— — — _ — :
— I IT. — — Sr CITY — - : —
— —— — . ꝗ — *
— _—_— — — 2 = * — — — Page
= — — . - 8 =
N — I .


— —
— >
— —


—


B —. — . —— x — 2 —
bag — hy — — — — — — — ——


152


Author.


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
different. He even ſometimes refers to
Moreri, and contents himſelf with mo-
deſty glancing at the Overſights of this
In a word, this Dictionary
of Mr. Bayle's is not a heavy Work ſtuft
with Genealogys or bare Facts; but
paints out thoſe he ſpeaks of to the life,


. unfolds the Circumſtances of their Lives,


and the Motives of their Condug,
help'd out with Reflections which give
a juſter Idea, and enable us to paſs a
Judgment on ſurer grounds, and with
more certainty. He treats in it of mat-


ters of Religion, Morality and Philo.


ſophy, with much Erudition ; fo that
it's a Dictionary of an Order intirely
new and ſingular. In the Body of each


Article, he gives only a ſhort and con-


ciſe Account of the Perſon, but makes
amends in the Commentary, or Re-
marks which are caſt at the bottom.
They are an agreeable Miſcellany, and
ſuted to the taſte of all ſorts of. Rea-
ders. They contain things grave and
ſerious for thoſe whoſe aim is Inſtruc-
tion; and others humorous and ſprightly
for thoſe who wou'd only unbend and
divert themſelves. But what moſt di-
ſtinguiſhes this from all other Dictiona.
rys, is that Spirit of Impartiality and
371111


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Diſintereſtedneſs which runs thro the
whole. Mr. Bayle does the part of a
faithful and ſincere Hiſtorian, ' as to
what concerns Hereticks and falſe Reli-
gions; and not only cenſures, as occa-


ſion preſents, the Errors of Fact to their


Diſad vantage, but the falſe Reaſonings
alſo, and falſe Raillerys of Controver-


tiſts of what Denomination ſoever;


and ſhews we muſt not judg of Perſons


nemys. 8
In ſpeaking of the antient Philoſo-
phers, he endea vors to ſet their Opinions
in the cleareſt Light, and to ſhew the
ſtrong and the weak fide of em: And
ſometimes takes a Pleaſure in puſhing
their Arguments farther perhaps than
ever themſelves had done. As he had
obſerv'd, that in matters of Religion


7


five and violent, and that each Party is


em infallible, which has produc'd infi-
nite Miſchiefs in the World; he endea-
vors to work Men to a greater Mode-
tation in their Opinions, and more be-
coming the Weakneſs of the human
Underſtanding. Twas this put him
upon urging the Difficultys of the Mani-
F.. cheans


or Partys, by the Writings of their E-


the ignorant are always the moſt deci-


ſo fond of its own Tenets as to think


153


454


cheans on the Origin of Evil, and the
Permiſſion of Sin. His Deſign was to


with ſo many Difficultys, that *twere |


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


make thofe who pronounce with ſo much
Poſitiveneſs and Arrogance upon all
points of Religion, in ſome degree ſen-
ſible, that a ridiculous Sect can make
Objections, very hard to get over or
account for. He wou'd fain mortify
human Reaſon, or at leaſt check it in
its precipitate Judgments, and its adopt.
ing Opinions without a fair Examinati- |
on. 'The greateſt part of our Theolo-
giſts appear d to him̃ too deciſive, and he
was for having People ſpeak but doubt -
fully on things of a doubtful nature.
In this Diſpoſition he took an ill-natur'd |
Pleaſure in ſhocking their Afſurance,and |
ſhewing, that ſome Truths which pals
for evident, are obſcur'd and ſurrounded


more prudent in many Caſes to ſuſpend
their Deciſions. He alſo endeavor'd to
mfpire the ſame Temper with regard to
Hiſtorical matters. A thorow Expe-
rience had render?d him difficult on this
Head. He had diſcuſs'd ſo many Facts,
never calPd in queſtion by the Body of
theLearn'd, and which he had actually
diſcover'd to be falſe, that he was grown
ſuſpicious of all, and gave 3

= 1170:


The Life of Mr. Bayle:
Hiſtorians only conditionally, and till
he cou'd come at further Information.
In this Diſpoſition he inculcated to his
Readers the avoiding precipitate Judg-
ments, and not too lightly believing all
they meet with in Hiſtory,

This Work was receiv'd by the Pub-
lick with the ſame Eagerneſs as all his
other Productions; and the beſt Judges
did not think 1t at all below the Opinton
conceiv*d of it. Yet it was not poſſible
it ſhow'd pleaſe all the World. As ſoon
as it appear'd in France, the Bookſellers
of Paris, who had a deſign of reprint-
ing it, apply'd to the Chancellor for a
Licence; who order'd the Abbe Renau-
dot, Author of the Gazet, to examine
whether there was any thing in it againſt
the State, or the Romiſh Religion.
This Abbot made his Report, That the


E f

A very worſt things ſaid for fifty Tears pa
0 Mr 2 C elt 1 were 4 '
o bund in the ſeveral parts of this Diiti-
„aon: That the Catholic Authors were
und; that there were Elogys all along on


the Calviniſt Miniſters, aud whatever
chu d render the Reign of Louis the XIV.
odr0ns, with regard to the Revoration
the Edidt of Nants, and the Complaints
of the Refugees: Thus there was a viſible
Rt


55


156


Tie Life of Mr. Bayle.
Aﬀed ation in the whole, of raking up what-
ever was moſt blackning and injurious to
the Perſons of the late Kzngs of France.
This Judgment was pardonable in an
Abbot; and a Penſioner to the Court,
and one bred up in Principles of Su-
perſtition and Slavery. Had he kept
to thoſe two Points to which the Chan.


cellor's Order confin'd him, they might |}
have got him to paſs it; but he wou'd |
needs aſſume the Airs of a learned Man |
anda Critick, and be thought a rigid |
Caſuiſt. On the other hand, Mr. Ja-.
rien, who had bin criticiz'd in ſeveral
places of the Dictionary, gather'd up |
ſome Extracts from Letters, written ei-
ther by Bigots, or Enemys to his Adver-
ſary; and according to his old Cuſtom,
ſuppreſt the Authors Names, and join d
em to the Abbl's Judgment. But find-
ing all theſe Pieces together did not
blacken Mr. Bayle and his Dictionary as |
müch as he deſir'd, he added Remarks |
of his own, in which he pour'd out all
his Gall; and intitPd the whole, The |
Judgment of the Pablick, and of the Ab-


bc Renaudot in particular, on the Sieur


Bay le's Critical Dictionary. He got this
Libel diſtributed to the Synod then ſit-


ting at Delft, and cabal'd as much 8
FN a EY po 0


He re
derabl
of the
find
which
hurry,
culouſt
and E;


ters.


ciſms it


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


poſſible to obtain a Condemnation of
the Critical Dictionary: but the Synod
had no regard to his Sollicitations, nor
wou'd they ſo much as deliberate on the
matter. Fri Tec
The Conſiſtory of Roterdam ſignify-
ing to Mr. Bayle, that he had taken ſome-
what too great a liberty in his Article on
David, and other places of his Dicti-
onary, he promis'd to give em all poſ-
ſible Satisfaction. In the mean time he
publiſh'd a Paper, intitul'd, Reflections
on a Pamphlet ſtil d, The Judgment of the
Pablick, &c. in which he advertis'd,
that he was drawing upa Defence, which
in the Opinion of all unprejudic'd Rea-
ders ſhou'd demonſtrate the Untairneſs
of his Cenſors. This Apology was to
be printed at the beginning, or the end
of the ſecond Edition of his Dictionary.


He reſerv*d almoſt every thing conſi-


derable againſt the pretended Judgment
of the Pablick, to this Defence; and con-
fin'd himſelf to a few Obſervations,
which tho drawn up careleſly and in a
hurry, did yet ſerve to expoſe the ridi-
culouſneſs of Mr. Jurieu's Accuſations
and Extracts from his anonymous Let-
ters, What he ſaid to juſtity his Criti-
ciſms in the Dictionary on ſome of 25
5 Ju-


153


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Jarieu's Books, of which he had for-


merly ſpoke advantageouſly in his other
Writings,was very curious and judicious,
As to the Abbe Renaudot's Judgment,


he found it ſo full of Miſtakes, Fal.


ſhoods, and Impertinences, that hede-
clar?d, if ever he confuted it, it ſhou'd
not be till he was certify'd, that the
Author avow'd it for his, ſuch as it was
printed in Holland. This Abbe, who
had no deſign of making this Judgment


publick, and therefore had not bin over


exact in drawing it vp, dreaded Mr.


Bayle's returning to the Charge, not-


withſtanding his Declaration; and in


this fright apply'd to the late Mr. De
Mit, to whom he was known, and en-


treated him to oblige Mr. Bayle not to
write againſt him, promiſing never to
meddle with him more. Mr. Bohle was
glad of this occaſion of ſhewing his De-
ference for Mr. De Wit, who had ho-
nor'd him in a particular manner with
his Friendſhip; and freely conſented to
a perpetual Truce. This, my Lord,
is the reaſon of his taking no notice of
this difference in the ſecond Edition of
his Critical Dictionary. He even car-
ry'd the Civility ſo far, as not to inſert
in it his Reflctious on the *


he
this
with
der t
Mr.
lar E
Dict.
wou
fendi
But a
=
thou
fine :
ſo mu
In
dition
an Ac
the St
Catho
Religi
dition
larg'd
ſwers


bor the


his wr
having
other P
to the


having


but too


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
the Pablick, &c. how neceſſary ſoever


with citing *em, and referring his Rea-
der thither. I muſt here obſerve, that
Mr. St. Evremond, who had a particu-
lar Eſteem for Mr. Bayle, and read his
Dictionary with a world of Pleaſure,
wou'd give himſelf the trouble of de-
fending him againſt Mr. Renaudot.
But as he ſaw that this Abbé's writing
was only a mere Declamation, he


fine and delicate Irony of which he was
ſo much a Maſter. 8

In 1699. Mr. Bayle gave a third E-
dition of his Reflections on Comets, with
an Advertiſement of the Reaſons why
the Stile was all along that of a Roman
Catholick, whether the Subject was


0 I Religion or Politicks ; and why this E-


dition was not, as he had promis'd, en-
& WW heg'd with new Proofs, and new An-
ſwers to the Difficultys. He accounts


having it printed at Paris, and ſome
other Particulars mention'd before. As
to the ſecond Article, he ſays, that
having conſider'd this Book was already
but too like thoſe Rivers which _

| their


this might be. He contents himſelf


thought it beſt to anſwer him in that


br the firſt, by telling the occaſion of
his writing this Book; the deſign of


159


1699,


7
— —äWỹꝓ * -
a — —
— * _ T — aa — —


160


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


their Courſe by continual windings, he


cou'd inſert no more Digreſſions without


rendring it perplext in the reading; ſo |


that he reſer v'd his Additions for a new


Tome, which ſhou'd be printed as ſoon |
as he was a little further advanc'd in
his Critical Dictionary, on which he was |


now at work.


Much about this time Mr. le Clerc
publiſh'd a Work intitled, Parrhaſiana, |
or Miſcellaneous Reflections on Subjects of |
Criticiſm, Hiſtory, Morality, and Poli.
zicks. Here he endeavor'd to ſolve the |
Difficultys of the Manicheans, which |
Mr. Bayle had laid out in his Dictiona-
ry: and to overthrow all theſe, he


thought it ſufficient to make an Origeniſt


anſwer ; adding, That if a Man of this |
Form was able to put the Manicheans to |
ſilence, what might not be expected from |
thoſe who reaſon d infinitely better? But |


before he enters into the matter, he de-


clares, That in anſwering the Objections of


the Manicheans, he had no deſign of inſi-


nuating any thing to Mr. Bayle's preju-
dice; that he had not the leaſt ſuſpicion


of his being a favorer of their Opinions.
He added, That he was perſuaded he has
not taken the Philoſophical Liberty of
ſbewing, on many occaſions, what cou'd be


ſaid


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


ſaid for and againſt 'em without diſguiſe,


out of any other deſign, than juſt to ſtart
Game for thoſe whoſe Heads were turn d
for the Matters he treated, and not to fa-


fine, this was apiece of Juſtice Mr. Bayle


and cowd not be deny d him.
In October of the following Year, the
Princeſs Sophia of Hanover, and the
late Queen of Praſſia, then EleQtreſs of
Brandenburg, made a ſmall Tour in Hol-
land and Flanders, You, my Lord,


Princeſſes are no leſs diſtinguiſh'd by
the rare Talents of the Mind, than by
their Elevation and high Rank. Their


had 4 right to demand from his Readers,


can't be a ſtranger that theſe illuſtrious


vor thoſe whoſe Reaſons he urg d: That, in


s © Penetration and Inſight into the moſt


profound and abſtracted Sciences, has
J always entertain'd the wonder of thoſe
t who have had the happineſs to approach
em. Nor did they diſdain ſometimes
of to diſcourſe with Perſons of Wit and
- Learning. When their Highneſſes came
to Roterdam, they let Mr. Bayle, whoſe
on © Writings they had been wel] acquain-
5. ted with, know they ſhou'd be glad to
a4 ſee him; but it being ſome what late at
Fight, he excus'd himſelf. Some days
be iſter Mr. Baſuage hapning to go to the

i . | N Hague,


SS


162 The Life o Mr. Bayle.
Hague, where thele Priaceſſes Were, the
Count de Dhona, who knew they had an


eſteem for Mr, Bayle, deſir d hg wound


bring him thither. He brought him
ſoon after, and the Count preſented
him to their Highgeſſes, Who receiv'd
him iu a very obliging manner, and did


him the honour to diſcourſe With him


on matters of great importance. Mr.


Beſnoge was receiv d no leſs kindly ; and


their "Hiohneſſs deſir'd the Count of
Dhora: to take dem into his care, and
wou'd have em go with vm to Delft:


Me. Bavle, nat cut out for making


his court to the Great, ſouod means of


getting off of this Journy, apd tock


his leave at the Hague.
1702, The ſecond Edition of che Critical
Diftionary. Was publiſh'd in the begin-
Ding df 1702. in three Volumes in
Folk, enlang d to near double the bull.
Ar. en diſtinguiſd the Additions
Wich da much care, that they were vi.
ſible at firſt ſiaht. He ffruck out of
the Article of Dauid what had been diſ
reliſh'd-by the Couſiſtory of Roter dam,
and ſome Periods beſides which Were
thayght a litile too free. He carrected
ibe Brrots of the brſt. Edition, diſco


re either. by * ohſerv dd to]


5K 33 him


him
pre:
who
and!
thob
Man
of ſo
contr.
on th
He m
Uripez
Le Cle
a5 inc:
0bjeQ
other
nion,
to ol
We go
that of
Whethe
the Joc
cluded,
quieſce
reafonit
of the
long D
ſome P
he fir
cindali.


itheiſts


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


him by others.
preſs'd his Acknowledgments to thoſe
who had furniſh'd him with Memoirs,


and faiPd not to name 'em when he
thought it


proper. Never was any
Man farther than he from the humour
of ſome Authors, who can't bear being
contradifed, and who fly into a rage
on the ſeaſt attempt to undeceive 'em.
He made an Addition to the Article of


Urigen, ſhe wing, that the Anſwers Mr.


Le Clerc had furniſh'd his Origeniſt, were
5 incapable of ſatisfying the Manichean
0bjeQtions on the Origin of Evil as the
other Syſtems. *T was Mr. Bayle's Opi-
mon, that natural Light enables us not
to ſolve theſe Objections, whether
we go upon St. Auſtin's Syſtem, or
that of Molina and the Arminians; or
whether we have recourſe to that of


the Sociniuns: From whence he con-


daded, there Was no way but to ac-
quieſce in Revelation, and give over
reaſoning in this matter. At the end
of the whole Work, he inferred four
long Diſſertations to juſtify | or clear
ſome Points cenſur'd in his Dictionary.


be firſt concern'd. thoſe who were
andaliz?d at his ſaying, there had been


itheiſts and Epicureans' who excePd
L 2 | moſt


In this laſt caſe he ex-


65


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
moſt Idolaters in purity of Manners,
After having made ſeveral Reflection,
on this Subject, he refers, for more am-
ple ſatisfaction, to the Continuation of II - 435
his Miſcellaneous Reflections on Comets, *


which he had formerly promis'd. The ru
Second ſhews how we ought to under- 05 l
ſtand what he had advanc'd touching f 5 þ
the Objections of the Manicheans. He be f.
cloſes it with ſix Propoſitions, which 8


being a kind of Abſtract of it, I ſhall

here ſet down in his own words. (che
I. Thatit is a Property of the Go- alt
ſpel- Myſterys, to be incompaſs'd with 1


Pifficultys which natural Light can! their

| reſolve. 481 | "Ee $351 00 Pal |
2. That Unbelievers can't fairly draw
they te


any Advantage from this Aſſertion, That
the Maxims of Philoſophy afford no 80.
lations of the Difficultys they propok
againſt the Myſterysof the Goſpel.

3. That the Objections of the Man
cheans on the Origin of Evil, and upo
Predeſtinatian, ought not to be conſ
der'd in general as bearing againſt Pre
deſtination ;. but under this particula
Notion, as the Origin of Evil, the De
crees of God, &c. are ſome of ti
moſt inconceivable Myſterys of Chi de
ſtianity. e ls


4. Ti


The Life of Mr. Bayle.

4. That it ought to ſatisfy every good
Chriſtian, that his Faith is founded on
the Teſtimony of God's Word.

5. That the Manichean Syſtem, con-


and contrary to the Ideas of Order ;
that it is liable to be retorted, and not
able to remove the Difficultys,

| 6, That on the whole, no body can
be ſcandaliz'd at giving up the Point,


trines of the moſt Orthodox Divines
(the Calviniſts) as ſcandalous ; becauſe
1 all he has ſaid on this matter, was but the
wi natural and unavoidable Conſequence of
their Opinions; and that he did only ſet
forth in a more prolix manner what
"0 they teach in a more extenſive way.


1 to ſhew, that what he had ſaid of Pyr-
e 1honiſs cou'd be no way prejudicial to
* Religion; and the fourth confuted the


Exceptions taken at ſome obſcene Paſſa-

ges in his Dictionary. | |
The Year after Mr. Bay/e publiſh'd a
bock intitled, An Anſwer to ſome Queſ-
ons from a Country Gentleman. This was
ruly no more than a Collection of ſeve-
al ſcatter'd Facts, which cou'd not well
be brought into his Critical Dictionary,
RY l CE


ſider'd in it ſelf, is abſurd, indeſenſible,


The third Diſſertation was defign'd


165


but muſt be oblig' d to look on the Doc- =


1703.


166 The Life of Mr. Bayle.


but were nevertheleſs curious and in.
ſtructive. He ſigaify'd that the Deſigu
. «i 3 3l wo 7 1791 1 inn

of it was to be SE OTKOr a middle na.
ture, berwixt thoſe w ich ſerve. for the |
Hours of Study, and thoſe which ſerve
for Recreation. 10 this Thought he on.
ly touch'd ſlightly upoh ſome matters


*


bled a fort of Writing:


a Medly of Hiſtory,


bv


ceiv'd with the ſame applaufe as the reſt


of his Works; becaute che greatelt part
of his Readers did not take His Defign


right, or had not, a ſufficient fund of


.
*


to the beſt advantage.


Literature to turn What he furffch M em


1794, At laſt Mr. Bayle


which might have been treated with |
more depth; he turn'd' curſorily from
one Subjc& to another, on purpoſe to
create Variety; and when oblig'd to ox. |
plain ſome Points more at large, he didit
in ſuch a manner as each Chapter might
repreſent *em by ſeveral different Views, |
In the mean time he wou'd not under- |
take to define the Nature or Kind of
ſuch a Book; that he leſt torhediſeretion |
of his Reader. He ogly ſaid it reſem-|
21EA A fort OL Wiit jg Frequent e |
16% Century, under the, Title of %
Lectiones, or to this plirpoſe, *I'Was
of Hiſtory, . Criticiſm, polite |
Learning, Cc. but after all was not fe.


5 7 acquitted: Hichſel


oi


quitte
himſe!
nifm a


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


of his. ſo often repeated Promife of
giving a Defence of his Miſcellaneous
Reflections on Comets. He publiſh'd
two Volumes on this occaſion in 1704
under the Title of, M Continuation of
the Miſcellaneous Reflections written 10 4
Dottor. of the Sorbon, on occaſion of the
Comet which: appear d in December 1680,
or an Answer to the Diſſigultys propos d to
the Author by Mr. KN. In his Miſcella-
neous anions he had advanc'd among
other things, That Atheiſm was not worſe
than — Idolatry, and this was what
wholly determin'd him to write a De-
fence. But when once engag'd to take
up his Peu in juſtification of this Point,
he thought himſelf oblig'd to ſatisfy fe-
veral Difficultys ſtarted on other Paſſa-
ges in the Work; and at the ſame time
judg'd, that he ought to regulate the
Order of his pa by that. of the
Objections, Which were diſpos'd ac-
cording to the Chapters in his Book. He
obſerv d this method to the end of his


firſt Tome; but for fear of riſing to a


greater bulk than at firſt deſign'd, he
quitted it in the ſecond, and epa d
himſelf intirely to his Parallel of Paga-

niſm and Atheiſm. Let this ſecond Vo-


lume Was not ſufficient to take in; the


L 4 whole


16>


f
|
|


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
whole Diſpute ; ſo that he was oblig d


to adjourn ſeveral Objections left undiſ-
cuſs'd to a third Volume.


In this Work Mr. Bayle takes ſome }
exceptions at the Learned Dr. Cadworth,
who to account for the formation of |
Plants and Animals had ſupposd |
don't know what kind of Plaftick Na.
Fares, or immaterial Subſtances, which |
regularly form'd all theſe Beings, with |
out any Knowledg or Idea of their own |
He inſinuates, that they who |
admit this Hypotheſis, do unawares de. |
ſtroy the moſt ſenſible Argument for |
the "Exiſtence of a Deity, drawn from |
14 Contemplation of the Univerſe; and
give the Stratonic Philoſophers a handle
to elyde it by retorting the Argument:


Effects.


For when we urge the Exiſtence of a


God and Creator of all Things, from |


the Symmetry, Subordination, Beauty
and Order of the ſeveral parts of the
Vniverſe, we manifeſtly ſuppoſe, that
a Being which has no knowledg of what

it does, nor of the Plan it is to fill up,
nor of the End at which it ſhow'd drive,
can produce nothing regular. The

Stratoniſts, who pretend the World is

the Effect of a blind Cauſe, ate diſtreſsd
ke/ _ Argument; which yet loſes all

its


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 169
its force if once we ſuppoſe, there are
Beings which form the moſt regular.
and beautiful Parts of the Univerſe,
without the leaſt knowledg of what
they do. Mr. Le Clerc, who had gi-
ven an Extract of Dr. Cadworth's Intel.
lectual Syſtem in his Bibliotheque Choiſie,
and had honor d the Plaſtick Natures
with his own Suffrage, undertook their
defence too againſt Mr. Bayle in the
fifth Tome of this Journal. Mr. "i
Bayle anſwer'd him in The Hiftory of
the Works of the Learned for Aaguſt
Y 1704. and Mr. LeClerc reply'd in the
n ſixth Tome of his Bibliotheque Choiſie.
Mr. Bale wou'd not yield; he publiſh'd
le new Reflections on this Subject in the
t: Hiſtory of the Works of the Learned for
a December of the ſame Year ; which ob-
m lig'd Mr. Le Clerc to defend his Plaſtick
ty Y Natures with more Zeal than ever, and
beſtow 'em an Article in his 7th Tome
nat W of the Bibliotheque Choiſie. And here
hat MW he alſo reſum'd the Diſpute begun in his
vp, Parrhaſiana on the Doctrine of the Ma-
ve, W 7icheans, and defended his Origeniſt a-
The gainſt Mr. Bayles attacks in his Criti-
cal Dictionary. | 1
On another hand, Mr. Bernard, mak-
ing an Extract of the Continuation «
is the


170


The Life of Mr.\Bayle:
the Miſcellaneons Reflections, in his Ac-
count of the Republic of Letters, for


February and March 170 F. attack TM.


Bayle in his advancing: that the Proof


of the Exiſtence of a Deity from general |


Conſent was not ſolid; and on his Pa-


rallel of Atheiſm and Paganiſm : but
propos'd his ObjeQions with much de-.
cency, and deference for Mr. Bayle. 4.
Inn perſudlled, ſays heʒ that he ſincerely |
aims at Truth, and is beſides preparing a
Mhinds\Polame , Dm. fatitfy'd, without |
ing any need to conſult him, that be
won tue, it illi I propoſe ſome Diffical- |
%% 45:t hey occur to y Ihunghits; while I |
Rates; of: Gitlity, and write |
with n/bd.efteer. and reſpeii I profeſs for |


having.


bhſerwin


bf: Farth And Reaſob, ora
igion


has a fine Tincture of Divinity, and of


the Carteſian Philofophy. He Writes
with a deal of Fire, ahd in a Stile in- WY |


tirely form'd to gain the Applauſes of


the People. Fhen he does not indu-


ftrioufly: ſhun vocaſions of fignalizivg
2111 himſelt,


There appear'd about this
tima H Work intitled, The Conformity |
ence of Re.
arainſt the ptinripal Diſſiculys ſcat- |
ter In. Mr. Bayle's DidFrontry,. written
by Mr. Jaquelot. He's a Miniſter, and |


The Le of Mp. Bayle.


himſelf, and diſcovering his Metit. He
prefer the Honor of being Chaplain
to the k C ig of © Profſa; to the ky]
tage df Ainiſter to the Nobility

the Hagut; which g ave him an ofÞd

tutiity-of openly” beg t 25
iſt Sytem, to embrace that o "he: Ar.
mintang. BY _ giving this ge tt E 0:


85 en! Mr. e bert we
Lore, * es the len a -
duct: to write againſt Mr. Bi ile;


ir's f. A fi be gfe: e WAS 4 0
at MEE Bay Its 2 5 His 'Diſſer Aion
thi B. 4 Mb — 500 Olctibndr


with giving fe higher Eloþy Thal
that of a" f 110 — murm 80 La-
vily, and made inplaints in feve.
rat plac $ 155 WE He durſt got it
they-wete fbunded on wy Figs mad
uſe of the Epjetict e Ny Ve,
vs? vr %ery 510 clätige


flo He retet fed ihe word ne 75
ically 175 pA. Mr. 5 855 Fi
0 ne wh we Friend to both
teft to Hip he had us'd the word

üs turd f Stiification; and he had


St ar lone ah. mer, ExpitC


0 us'd tlie fame Epithet before in


elatlon to a, Bock, of which no. body


_ colr'd fulpeet def poke jronically, it being
. written


171


172


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


written by Mr, Baſzage. But no Pro-
teſtations cou'd appeaſe him: He re-
ſolv'd to revenge the. Inſult, and make
Mr. Ble ſuffer the puniſhment of his


 Temerity. But, tho by the Title of


his Book it ſeem'd to be wholly. delign'd


—


againſt, Mr. Baule, tis certain he was


4
+ %


concern d but in a very ſmall part, of it.
I be reſt was only a Repetition of what


Mr. Jaquelot had ſaid in 2 former Books.
What concern'd Mr, Boyle, might be
reduc d to theſe three Heads: Ihe Li-
berty of Indifference; the Origin of
Evil; and the Objections which Pyrrho-
niſm might beget upon ſome reveal d
Doctrines. I muſt take notice of one
much more conſiderable {lur..in this Ti.
tle. The words in defence of Religion
naturally led to a belief, that Mr. Bayle
had attack'd Religion; whereas he had


>


confin'd himſelf to the ſhewiog, that


the Philoſophical Objections againſt


what Theology teaches concerning the
Origin, and the Conſequences ;ot.;S1n,
are fo ſtrong, that. our. Reaſpn, is to0
weak to ſolve em; and that therefore
we ought to have the ſame regard to
the Myſtery of Predeſtination, as to all
the other Goſpel· Myſterys; believe on
the Authority of God, tho we can't

. Compre.


The Life of Mr. Bayle. 173
comprehend, nor reconcile em to the
Maxims of Philoſophy. I ought not
to forget, that Mr. Jaquelot, notwith-
ſtanding his Reſentment, declar'd, He
had no deſign of arraigning either the
Perſon or Heart of Mr. Bayle. I have
an eſteem for him, adds he, on account of
his Learning, Wit, Penetration, aud all
thoſe fine Talents which diſtinguiſh a Man
in the Republick of Letters. I ſay it
once again, continues he, I have no deſign
of ſcanning his Intention: That I leave
to the Judgment of God and his own
Conſcience, He declares theſe are Difh-
cultys which he propoſes, purely to provoke
others to find out 4 Solution of em.
You can't be ignorant, my Lord, that 1705.
ſeveral Perſons of good worth had of-
ten invited Mr. Bayle into England for
the ſake of his Converſation; but he al-
ways refus'd their Offers, tho advanta-
geous, and truly becoming the Perſons
who propos'd 'em. In 1705. the Earl
of Albemarle made him a Propoſal of
coming to live in his Family, till his
Son, my Lord Bum, ſhou'd be at a pro-
per Age to come under his care. He was
even pleas'd to write him a very oblig-
ing Letter on this Subject; but Mr. Bale
was too much in love with his Solitude
4


SY. qo bh


——=


— W


=.


—


Ra —


174 The Eiſe of Mr. Bayle.


7
to quit it. He e bis Lordſhip f 2%;
for his Goodneſß, pray'd him not for
ro: take it ill that did not accept the
of the Honour. For ſome time Pall h he I Mr.
Mad, been imploy' d in corrgcting, and IF into
maleing A e to his D > Divine ; to K

ry; gaht twas purely to unb end in the |
1 'vals of ; this painful Work, that he I full
rf ft undertook, his Anſwers to the Country ſwe
Gentleman's Que eſtions. But the ſeveral II q4et
485810 upon him gblig'd him to alter twee
the Scheme: the Anſwers to the Coun- Foin
275 Gentleman were no longer any more I ſore
72 Accellprys ; his Deſences became I the t


the princip ice of this Work. He this
— Iiſh'd deletes and thing Volumes bim
8 5 "em A at t e time. 1 th Je ſecond bis p


Tome he 0 me Reſſeck Sk on a and,
Tregriſe De, Ofigine Mali, written by f 0.
Dor. Ning Archbiſhop of Dablin, and II /9/0ph
Nies in HO, 1702, But as his %
Heligu was 99 y. to wake or e general |
Þ <yarions Halbe Principles of this
10Us | 0 that it
765 hard ter 1105 to ie the Book,
bs 1 8 himſelf Ned Won
FE tract for it, w er nard
bad. yen, "the (Pyblick Ky a 11
Aral of e 0. e l
Volume examig d the rcalo lon Mr. Fe Jr


C4 ar 115 a i


*% 1 2


„„ r e roo


—


cd rr Rh. So


.


nard had urg'd to ſupport his Argument


for the Exiſkence of à Deity, founded on


4.


the general Conſens af Mankind. Tho
Mr. Bernard's QbjeQtions were brought
into a few. Pages, Mr. Bayle thought fit


em, on purpoſe to ſet this Matter in a


#3234 #3


full light. In the third Tome he an-


{wer'd all that;gancern'd him in Mr. 05
quelot's Book:. And as the Diſpute be-
tween dem turn'd principally on the
Point of the Origin of Evil, he took


ſome pains in_cxplaining and ſettling


the true State of the Queſtion, to keep
this Miniſter from ſtarting, and make
bim undenſtand what was requiſite on
his part to prove the conformity of Faith
and Reaſon. 11 muſt be prov” "5 1a 5 he,
vot only that there are Principles of Phi-
lolophy favaarable ta our Faith, but that
alſo the particular Maxims objetied, a;


nat,quadrating with our Articles, are re:


ally agreeable to, em in a manner which

uch be diſtinttly concerv'd. , This Agree-

ment, adds he, requires not only that your

Hypotheſis, le accommodated: #9 0
0


„%%%%＋


, be not wictoriouſly. impagn d by ſome


other Maxim of Reaſc . N ow | i will
te wittariouſty inpugn'a, as long as you


111. 7 are
8 4 5


175


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


are fort d to defend your” ſelf by unintel.
ligible Diſtinctions, or by pleading the
profoundneſs of the Subject. Mr. Bayle
at the ſame time declar'd, his own Opi-
nion was exactly that of the Reform d,


and particularly of Mr. Jurieu, who in
a Work intitled, A Judgment of the ri.
gid and Latitudinarian Methods of ex-
plaining Providence and Grace, had given
it up, that no Hypotheſis is capable off


reſolving all the Difficultys which Rea-


of his Plaſtick Natures. ©
This Work rais'd a terrible Storm


and had even ſhut his Eyes to ſome
ſharp Touches from ſeveral of em, yet
he cou'd not eſcape their Reſentment
and Indighation. Mir. Bernard tool
occaſion in his Journal, to give a very
ſmart Criticiſm on the 2 Volumes of his
Anſwer to the Count. Gentleman's Queſ-
tions, yet aid not a ſyllable in defence of
the Authority of the general Conſent of
the People, but promis'd a Work ex-
Ne ä oreſl


preſl
yet ſe
not |
ſtand
in ſo f
ſhou'c
Origen
humb!
cility
cing tl


| ing At
fon may ſuggeſt on the Providence of -
God with regard to Sin and Evil. Mr.
Bayle alſo anſwer'd to what Mr. Le |
Clerc had offer'd in his Bibliotheque Choi. ¶ he n ih
fie, as well in defence of his Origeniſt, as


verſion
the G
| flatte


tnowled


J God in
about Mr. Bay/e. Tho he had treated 4% by
his Adverſarys with extreme Civility,


tation,
Diſpate,
mod d
Schools 0
# he tai
bretends
ts fit n
ned at ht
uculouſs 1
longer,

ton of


The Life of Mr. Bayle:


preſly on this Subject, which has not
yet ſeen the Light. Mr. Le Clere cou'd
not brook Mr. Bay/e's preſuming to
ſtand it out againſt him ſo long, and
in ſo ſturdy a manner. He expected he
ſhou'd ſolemnly own the weight of his
Origeniſt's Reaſons, and make him his
humble acknowledgments. His Indo-
cility ſhock'd him; and without min-
cing the matter, he accus'd him of favor-
ing Atheiſm, of endeavoring the ſub-
verſion of Religion, and of denying-
the Goodneſs and Holineſs of God.
| flatter'd my ſelf, lays he, that poſſibly
he might be brought to himſelf, and to ac-
tnowledg the Goodneſs and Holineſs. of
God in all his ways, after ſo fair 4 han-
Je given him for getting out of this
J wly buſineſs without involving his Repa-
Fiction, by owning himſelf ſatis)'d on the
Diſpute, and by thanking thoſe who had
remou'd hs Difficaltys, as # uſual in
Schools of Philoſophy and Divinity. But
# he takes a quite contrary courſe, and
pretends he has not been ſolidly anſwer'd ;
tus fit we let him ſee we are not fright«


licalouſneſs of em without dallying any
longer, Then he makes a Recapitula-
tion of the Diſpute he had hitberto

M maintain'd


ned at his Reaſonings, and ſhew the ri.


177


178 The Life of Mr. Bayle.


maintain'd in the Perſon of an Origeniſt;
and after having quitted this Character,
he endeavours to anſwer Mr. Bayle in
his own Name. As the greateſt Difh.
culty of the Manicheans concerns the
Eternity of Puniſhments, Mr. Le Clerc
rejected Origen's Opinion which denys trines
it, and contented himſelf with ſaying, ſmal
That the nature of the Puniſbments f his P
another Life is not clearly conceivꝰd by us, ¶ ner o
That we don't know but there may be diver; taken
kinds of acute Puniſhments at firſt, yet ¶ duct 1
varying according to the 'heinouſneſs of the him, t
Sins; nor whether God remitting the/: thro t
violent Inflictions afterwards, mayn't b At fir
content with abandoning thoſe who had ob. ¶ under
ftinately deſpis'd his Grace to the remorſe: I right, .
of their own Conſcience, which ſhall re. I on that
proach em with their Ingratitude, ani be, whe
diſquiet em much more by Reflections on um Exp
the loſs of that Felicity they ſhall ſee othen Nimes fa
enjoy. I/ God, ſays he, leave the condemm i Ino longer
in this ſtate (which however I don't deter. Ii
mine, for he is not oblig*d to execute huſh
Threats in the utmoſt-rigor) tis probull.
their condition may be ſupportable, aui
that they may have cauſe to confeſs ilt
Goodneſs of the Creator; ſince inſtead i
annihilating em, as their Diſobedience as
fſervd, he preſerves their _— anh
avis


The Liſe of Mr. Bayle. 179
leaves em in a ſtate not unſupportable.
Mr. Le Clerc deliver'd theſe Thoughts
with a great deal of Caution. He
look'd on em as Conjectures, and de-
clar d, He did not pretend to advance
em as undoubtedd Evangelical Doc.
trines, Nor was he leſs oftended at the
{mall regard Mr. Bayle had ſhewn for
his Plaſtith Natares, and his ſtiff man-

ner of reſiſting all the Lights he had

taken the pains to furniſh him. A Con-
duct ſo untoward, did eaſily perſuade
bim, that Mr. Bale attack'd Religion

„ thro the ſides of his Plaſtick Natures.

4. firſt, ſays he, I believwd his want of

underſtanding Dr. Cud worth's mind a-

right, might be the cauſe of his \judging

on that Hypotheſis as he did: But, adds
he, when I ſaw him unwilling to receive
any Explications upon it, after I had three
times ſucceſſively ſer him right, I cowd

10 longer doubt but the turn he had given

lis matter, was purely from a deſign of

uſtifying Atheiſts, Then he repeated a

art of What he had ſaid before on this fl

Wubjet, and continued to maintain 05

here was no room for a Retortion from

De Stratoniſts; ſince God was the

Huthor of choſe Plaſtick Natures, and

Dice they acted only by his Direction.

_ M 2 Mr.


180


of the.
Choiſie. ER ſaw Mr. Le Clerc attack'd |
him in Perſon, and did all he cou'd to


The Life of Mr. Bay le.
Mr. Bayle oppos d theſe new Attacks
of Mr. Le Clerc, in a Work intitled, A7


Anſwer for Mr. Bay le to Mr. Le Clerc,
upon occaſion of the 3d and 13th. Articles


gth Tome of his Bibliotheque


render him odious, he woufd ſpare him
no longer, and declar'd h was guilty of
raſh judging and calumny. "Bur becauſe


the Accuſations were ohiefly. grounded |
on the Conſequences drawn: from his |
Doctrine concerning the Origin of Evil


he gave a Summary of it under the


three following Propoſitions.


1. Natural Light and Revelation
clearly inform us there is but one Princi-
ple of all things, and that chis Princt-
ple is infinitely perfect.

2. The means of reconciling the mo.


ral and phyſical Evil of Man with the


Attributes of this one infinitely perfect
Principle of all things, ſurpaſſes our
Philoſophical Lights; ſo that the Objec.
tions of the Manuicheans leave Difiicul-
ty: behind, which human Reaſon. is not
able to ſatisfy. Hutt 260

1 Notwithſtanding this, we mul
ſtrenuouſly believe what the Light of
Nature and Revelation teach concern
mh; 4 ing


ing t.
God
ſion 4
lieve
carna

M
the L
ſtians
One c
Prope
ly tau
40 74
maint
in ot.
Mr. 1


cular!


hs IE 12% ou


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


ing the Unity and infinite Per ſection of
God; as by Faith, and by our Submiſ-
ſion to the Divine Authority, we be-
lieve the Myſterys of the Trinity, In-
carnation, &c.

Mr. Bale maintain'd, That this was
the Doctrine of almoſt all kind of Chri-
ſtians; and added, He was wer) fare no
one cou'd ever prove, that theſe three
Propoſitions were not what he had conſtant-
ly taught in his Works or if he had ſeem'd
to 1 otherwiſe in ome. places, he had
maintain d theſe three contrary Propoſitions


in others. He afterwards confuted all


Mr. Le Clere's Charge againſt him, parti-
cularly that by which he imputes to him
the maintaining that God was neither
good nor holy, from his having ſaid,

That Reaſon comprehends not how the


Goodneſs. and Holineſs of God are re-


concilable with Sin, and with the Miſe-
rys of Mankind. He compar'd this Opi-
nion with that of Mr. Le Clerc, and
ſhew?d, that were each of em to dit-
pute with a Manichean, he by his Prin-
ciple ſhou'd be able to ſtop his Mouth,
hi Mr. Le Clerc mult be quite
overwhelm'd with the weight of his


Objections, He likewiſe {hew'd, that
Fi Crime which this Divine had made


M 3 of


181


182


"The Life of Mr. Bayle.
of his affirming, That no Chriſtian Sy-
ſtem is capable of ſatisfying the Ob-
jections of the Manicheans, rebounded
upon himſelf; ſince to anſwer em he
had been oblig'd to quit all theſe Sy-
ſtems, - and to form one intirely new,
which after all was founded only on
bare Conjectures. He thought not fit to
ſay any thing farther concernimg the
Anſwer of Mr. Le Clerc under the
name of an Origeniſt; but only ſhew'd,


that what he had offer'd anew' on that
account, was a mere repetition of what
he had ſaid before; and that the Objec-


tions remain*d in their full force. In
fine, he offer'd to ſubmit this Diſpute
to the Deciſion of the Univerſitys of
Holland; and advis'd him to preſent Ex-
tracts of the Propoſitions condemn'd by
him in his Works; and to pray their


Judgment upon this Queſtion of Fact,


Mherher the Propoſitions tranſcrib d from
Mr. Bayle's Books are a ſufficient Proof
of the Charge Mr. Le Clerc has drawn up


againſt him? Mr. Le Clerc pretends they


are; Mr, Bayle aenys it, and further al.
teages, they contain nothing contrary to the
Confeſſions of the Reform d Churches of


France and Holland,


He


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


He charg'd Mr. Le Clerc with contra-
dicting himſelf on occaſion of the Pla-
ſtick Natures. For example, Mr. Le
Clerc had firſt \maintain'd, that theſe
Beings were only Inſtruments in the Hand
of God; That God regulated all their
Actions; That they were properly in-


ſirumental Cauſes produc d and apply d by.


the principal Cauſe And yet he pre-
tended that this Hypotheſis of Dr. Cad-
worth. differ'd from that of the Carte-
ans. But Mr. Bayle let him fee, that
in this ſenſe it Was tantamouat to the
Hypotheſis of theſe Philoſophers; for


tho they ſuppoſe God the immediate


Author of all the Effects of Nature, yet
they never deny'd that Bodys were
properly the Inſtruments God uſes for
the production of Plants and Animals,
And therefore he inſiſted, that theſe Na-
tures ought to be conſider'd as active
Principles executing the Plan of God,
the Author of their Virtue and Exi-
ſtence; yet without ſtandipg in need of
being continually urg'd on and directed
in ſuch a manner as Workmen are who
execute the Plan, ſuppoſe of an Ingi-
neer. Now he maintain'd, that accord-


ing to this Explication, which muſt


have been that of Dr. Cadworth himſelf,
92 . ſince


183


184


ſince Mr. Le Clerc ſaid,


The Ae of Mr. Bayle:


that this
Learned Man rejected Des Cartes's Hy-


potheſis, the Ness of the Strato-


niſts wou'd be juſt. Mr. Le Clerc find-


ing himſelf pinch'd by this Difficulty,
rectify'd his Hypothdlis and anſwer'd,
That he never meant, the Plaſtick Na-
tures were paſſive Inſtruments; which,
ſays he, was againſt Dr. Cadworth's Opi-
nion. He added, that they act under
the direction of God; That God guides


and conducts them Rill, tho we know


nothing of the manner how; That if
they act regularly of themſelves, till


they act under the direction of. God,
who interpoſes in what manner, and as


often as he pleaſes; That all the diffe-
rence between this, and the Operations


of brute Beaſts regularly performing ſe-
veral Actions when train d to em by Men,
tho they neither know what they do,
nor the reaſon why, is, that we know


nothing of the manner of God's inter.
poſing, whereas we know the manner
how Men intervene with regard to the


Actions of Brutes. Mr. Bayle reply'd,


that a Creature deſtitute of all know-
ledg, may, without doubt, by the di-
rection of God, perform many things
with as (he regularity as any intelli

| gent


The Life of Mr. Bayle: 185 iy

gent Being; That there was no difficulty ll
in comprehending this: but at the ſame 1
time *twas neceſſary this Direction Il
ſhow'd be perpetual and uninterrupted ; lil}
and conſequently *rwas neceſſary that 1
God | ſhou'd apply and direct the Pla- _
ſtick Natures by an undiſcontinued Act, —
from the time their Operation began .
till ſuch time as it was perfected:
Whence it neceſſarily; follow'd, that he
interven'd ſo, as that the Plaſtick Na-
ture Was only a paſſive Inſtrument in
his hands; and therefore that Dr. Cad-
worth cou d not avoid the Retortion, but
by ſuppoſing what the Carteſians ſup-
poſe. He added, that the Example of
Beaſts ſtrengthen d the Difficulty; be-
cauſe if we rightly conſider all the Ser-
vices they do us, we ſhall find that in
every Inſtance where their own
Knowledg ſerves em not as a Guide,
they muſt he urg'd on and directed as if
they were mere Machines. He al-
ledg'd the Authority of Mr. Leibnitæ,
who had allow'd the Retortion of the
Ky juſt, on a ſuppoſition that
the Plaſtick Natures were active Princi-
ples, and true efficient Cauſes, I don't
know what Dr. Cadworth might have
laid to this Diſpute had he been ur j
1 ut


186 The Lift of Mr. Bayle.


but to me it ſeems evident, that this
Learned Man look'd on the Plaſtick Na-
tures as Cauſes purely inſtrumental,
Mr. Wiſe in his Confutation of the Res-
ſors and Philoſophy of Atheiſm, which is
an improv'd Abridgment of Dr. Cad-
worth's Sy ſtem, ſuppoſes the ſame thing,
He aſſerts, that the Plaſtick Natures
are only inſtrumental Cauſes; and com-
pares em, as Dr. Cadworth does, to
paſſive Inſtruments, ſuch as a Saw, a
Baume, the Hands of Workmen, Cc.
Which ſhews that theſe. Gentlemens
Hypotheſis is much the ſame with that
of che Carteſians. Had Mr. Ble un-
derſtood Engliſb, and been able to read
their Works, he had made his advan-
tage of em. 14110
This Anſwer Terv'd only to licenſe
Mr. Le Clerc the more. He anſwer'd it
in the 10h Tome of his Bibliotheque
Choiſie, and complain'd in his turn of Doch.
the Author s manner of treating him. I the P]
He endeavor'd to make good his ſor- cefſliry
mer Charge, and examin'd the three non 3
Propoſitions to Which 115 Bayle had
reduc'd his Doctrine. iſted in found ;
maintaining, that tis thi buck of our 4
Reaſon to form juſt Ideas of the Good-


neſs and Holineſs of God ; and that to
admit


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


admit any others, is in the firſt place
denying theſe, and ig the next place


having none at all. In a word, he
maintain'd, that we ought to judg of


the Perfections of God by our natural


Lights; and that if we once ſuppoſe,
that what is unjuſt according to human
Ideas, is not fo according to the divine,
we muſt no longer pretend'to talk upon


the moral Attributes or Perfections of


God, ſince we know nothing of em;
and that this Diſt inction leads directly
to Irreligion and Atheiſm.
In anſwer to Mr. Bayle's Propoſal of
ſubmitting their Diſpute to the Judg-
ment of the Univerſitys of Holland, he
advis'd him to follicit their Approbation
of his Works; and if they declar'd they
found nothing in 'em contrary to their
own Opinion, he wou'd publickly ac-
knowledg his Error in denying that his


Doctrine was agreeable to theirs. As to


the Plaſtick Natures, he judg'd it unne-
ceſſary to ſay any more of em: I look
apon Mr. Bayle as too fully confuted, to
touch upon that Matter again: Ve has
found it impoſſible to ſhew, that this Opi-
nion gives Atheiſts a handle for retorting
one of our beſt Arguments againſt em.


This was his principal Deſign, and in this


he


187


188


Thi Like of Mr. Bayle.


he. has miſcarry'd. He- added, that he
did not believe Mr. Leibnitz wou d up-

on ſecond Thoughts find the Atheiſts
had any ground Tos retorting Dr. Cad-
worth's; Opinion; . becauſe they who
thorowly :examin'd it, eſpecially after
What he had ſaid, wou'd. lee quite the


The Pruitfulneſs of. Mr. Jaquelot $
Pen made him ſoon appear again upon


the Stage. He publiſh'd a Book intitld,


An Examination of Mr. Bay le's Theology,
as ſcatter d in his Critical Dictionary, in
his Reflections on Comets, and in his
Anſmers ro the C Ountry Gentleman: ; where.
in tlie Conformity of Faith and Reaſon
is defended Agaiuſt his Anſwers. *Twas


ceaſily ſeen by this Title, that Mr. Ja-


par would skirmiſh no longer, but


was refoly?d to come to a, general En-


gagement, and fight it out deſperately
without giving or taking Quarter. Ac-
cordingly he never fail'd levelling at his
Adverſing all the deadly: Strokes his Wit
cou'd deviſe. He accus'd.. him anew of
attacking. Religion, and. of pretending
to prove, that a Society of Atheilts
might ſubſiſt altogether as well as a So-


ciety of Chriſtians. He reply'd to what


Mr. Bayle had anſwer'd concerning the
Origin


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
Origin of Evil, the Permiſſion of Sin,


and the other Matters relating to theſe
Queſtions; and in Mr. Le Clerc's Judg-


ment aid enough to ſatisfy: Mr. Bay le,
had he bin willing to receive ſati faction.
Yet he did not carry the Argument quite
ſo far as Mr. Le Clerc, and he own'd
the Incomprehenſibility in part. He
perſiſted in charging Mr. Bayle with a
deſign of deſtroying the Liberty of
Man; and maintain'd what he had for-
merly advanc'd, that the Controverſy
about Liberty, which made ſuch a
Breach among Chriſtians, was only a
Diſpute about Words. It your Lord-
ſhip. wou'd be pleas'd to forgive my
quitting the Character of a Hiſtorian
or a moment, to take up that of a Phi-
loſopher, I ſhou'd not ſtick to ſay, that
Mr. Jaquelot had reaſon of his fide.
The Learned may: diſpute till they are
_ weary; ſtill in ſpite of their Contro-

verſys, they*l all have the ſame kind of
Free- will: and'twere really very ſtrange
they ſhou'd have a different kind of Li-
berty, or if you will, that one ſet of
Men ſhou'd be in reality free, and others


not, becauſe thoſe are bred up in the


| Arminian, and theſe in the Calviniſtical
School. What's very ſingular in the


Mat-


185


290


The Liſe of M.. Bayle.


matter is, that each Party appeals to his


own Experience; as if all Men were


not made the ſame way. Your Lord.
ſhip perhaps will ask, why Mr. J.
quelot after ſuch a Diſcovery ſhou'd ab-
jure the Calviniſtical Hypotheſis to em-
brace that of Arminius? But this in all
appearance proceeded from his fancying
that the Calviniſts were the Men who
kept all this ſtrife about Words: Theſe


will undoubtedly charge it upon the


Arminiaus, and pretend that theſe Gen-


tlemen, did they fairly reflect on what


paſſes within 'em, and expreſs them-
ſelves in a clear and diſtin manner,
wou' d eaſily perceive the Illuſion they
are under. Be that how it will, it can't
be deny'd but the Reſearch is very diffi-
cult, if we conſider that Men of

Parts, and of like Sentiments in other
matters, can't find an expedient for
coming to any Agreement in this. Nor
is any ching more uſual than to ſee em
miſtake other Mens Opinions upon
it; tho perhaps this proceeds not ſo
much from the Obſcurity of the Mat-


ter, as from the Caution which is us'd
on that Subject. They who have medi-


tated the deepeſt upon it, keep off in


great


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


looſe and general Expreſſions, or never
explain themſelves clearly ; the true rea-
ſon why Opinions areoftencharg'd upon
'em, which they are very far from en-
tertaining. This Method Mr. Bayle had
taken, and he was charg'd with de-
ſtroying Man's Free-will ; tho he kept
exactly to the Calviniſtical Hypotheſis.
Mr. Locke muſt have done the ſame, if
it be true, as I have heard ſome men
ſay, that Mr. Le Clerc cou'd not com-
prehend what his Opinion was in this
Point. At firſt he imagin'd him to be
an Arminian, and was afterwards ſur-
priz'd to find him talk like a Calviniſt.
But I have been aſſur d, there's neither
ambiguity nor inconſiſtency in any thing
he has ſaid on this Subject ; and that a
ſmall degree of attention, free from
prejudice, is ſufficient to make a Man
perceive that his Opinion is conform-
able to Mr. Bayle's Syſtem, and to that
of all the greateſt Philoſophers ; and that
he had ſet this Matter'in a much clearer

light than any one before him.
Mr. Jarieu made the laſt effort about
this time, to let the World know he was
ſtill alive, and that his Fire was not
quite ſpent. He publiſh'd a ſmall A-
nonymous Book, intitled, The Ne
| am


—


195


The Life | of Mr. Bayle.


convicted; and did not forget to repeat
moſt of what he had ever alledg'd againſt


Mr. Bayle, without taking any notice


of the Anſwers made him. He had for-
merly declar'd againſt Meſſieurs Jaque-
lot and Bernard with his uſual violence,


and accus'd dem of Heterodoxy before


the Synods : he had ikewife play'd Mr,
Le Clerc ſome ſcurvy pranks, and made
ſome rude attacks upon him not long
before: but when he ſaw how theſe
Gentlemen began to handle Mr. Bayle, he
ſtrain'd hard to ſpeak well of em. Tis
trve, he put 'em in mind of their old


Diſgraces, but he did it by a ſide Wind.


He introduc'd Mr. Bayle's Friends re-
jecting the Teftimony of theſe .three
Miniſters. Mr. Jaquelot, he makes em
ſay, had been piqu d at Mr. Bayle's not
ſpeaking of his Book of the Exiſtence of 4
Deity with eſteem enough. Beſides, he's
a Perſon ſomething more than ſuſpect, and


who in ſome differences he has had, has not


acquitted himſelf with Honor: © Mr. Ber-
nard has been admoniſbd by the Synoas ;
Mr. Le Clerc s a Pelagian, a Socinian,
convicted of Hereſy and Impiety. How-
ever, theſe Gentlemen reliſh'd his Com-
plements, much more than they reſented


dam Philoſopher accu#d, arraign'd, and


his


Juriea |
had ford
[Xth =
6iven th
Wit, the


Creaturi


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


his Raillerys : They ſeem'd to forget all
that was paſt, and cajol'd him in their
turn; which produc'd a very edifying
Scene. ; |

As Mr. Bayle had always maintain'd,
that his Doctrine concerning the weak-


neſs of Human Reaſon, &c. was ex-


actly that of the Reform'd Divines, and
particularly of Mr, Jarieu; this Mini-
ſter endeavor'd to find out a difference
between em, but declar'd at the fame
time, That the unlimited Power and So-
vereignty of God over the Creatures, is
that which ought to put Men to ſilence,


eſpecially with regard to whatever diſturbs


or wounds our Reaſon in the Methods of
Providence; and that this alone deſtroys all
the Difficultys of the Manicheans, Yet
this was the very thing Mr. Ble al-
ways contended for; he ſhew*d that
theſe Difficultys were not to be reſolv d
by Reaſon; and concluded, we ought
not to appeal to it in theſe matters, but


ſubmit .1atirely to Revelation. Mr.


Jurieu ſhew'd afterwards, that St. Paal
had foreſeen all theſe Objections in his
IXth Chapter to the Romans, and had
given the only ſolid Anſwer to 'em, to


wit, the Sovereigaty of God over his,


Creatures, and the Incomprehenſbility
S N 7


193


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
of his Conduct. He concluded from


that paſſage where the Apoſtle crys out,


O the Depth ! &c. that it's as plain as


noon day, that the deſign of theſe words is
to check the raſhneſs of thoſe falſe Learned,


who mond have us clear all the Difficaltys


by the Ligbts of human Reaſon, and by
their Philoſophical Maxims, or acknow-
ledg that Reaſon aud Divine Revelation
are incompatible ; as if what is above Rea-


fon, were always contrary to Reaſon. But


it muſt be own'd, adds he, that this pious


Exclamation of St. Paul ſhems the Error


of thoſe Divines who wou'd find a way of
reconciling Reaſon and Revelation by their
Pelagian Maxims, You fee, my Lord,
by theſe laſt words, what a Judgment
Mr. Jarieu made on the Syſtem of
Meſſieurs Jaquelot and Le Clerc. What
he ſaid of it a little before is ſtill ſtron-
ger: I wou d fain know, ſays he, why ſo
many conſiderable Divines are ſtartled at
this Doctrine, of the unlimited Power of
God, and his Sovereignty over the Crea-


Fares ; and chuſe rather to give us Elogys


on the Freedom of the Creature, and tht
Excellency of Liberty, This is very fine


but it's of no ſervice on this occaſion, and
beſides, it leads directiy to Pelagianiſm,


By ſhutting the door, as we imagine, again}


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


the Impiety of the Manicheans and Pyr.
rhoniſts, we open another, or rather leave
it open; for we can't, adds he, avoid
owning that God is Author of this Free-
will be has given to Man, and which be
is maſter of, ſo as to be able to prevent the
abuſe of it whenever he pleaſes, By this
Method therefore we ſhall never be able to


ſtop the Mouths of the Profane.


As ſoon as Mr. Jaquelot ſaw this Book
of Mr. Jariew's, he made an Addition
to his own, in which he animadverted
on what he had made Mr. Bayle's Friends
ſay of him. At the ſame time he attack'd


Mr. Jurieu's own Syſtem, and pretend-


ed it open'd a door for the terrible Con-


ſequences which the Manicheans drew


from it. I can't conceive, ſays he, how
a Divine, who ſeems to have rightly com-
prehended Mr. Bayle's Difficultys againſt
the Hypotheſes of thoſe, who take up wholly
with this Anſwer, That we muſt filence
our Reaſon, ſhou'd not perceive how it fol-
lows from thus Syſtem, that Human Reaſon
muſt be conſtrain'd by juſt and neceſſary
Conſequences to own, that God is the Cauſe
F Evil, and the Author of Sin. He
afterwards declares, this was what ob-
lig'd him to imbrace another Syftem ;


and adds, That they who won't renounce
N 2 thoſe


197


196 The Life of Mr. Bayle.


thoſe Hypotheſes on which Mr, Bayle has
founded his Difficultys, are indiſpenſably
oblig*d to ſhew the falſity of his Conſe-
quences and Objections, ſo as to ſatisfy the
Conſcience of à rational intelligent Perſon,
Elſe, ſays he, it's pure Perverſeneſs, and
a Principle of falſe Honor, to continue in
the profeſſion of Doftrines from whence
ſuch horrible Conſequences are deduc d.
Mr. Le Clerc, who was in Mr. Ja-
quelot's Sentiments here, join'd Suftrage
with him in the Extract of hs Conſiae-
rations on Mr. Bayle's Theology; and
took this occaſion of exhorting the Cal.
viniſts to renounce the Doctrine of Pre-
deſtination, and imbrace the Arminian
Expoſition of the IX Chap. to the Ro-
mans. Thoſe Reaſons of State, ſays he,
which formerly oblig'd ſome Perſons to
maintain the oppoſite Doctrine, being now |
ceas'd; tere full time to quit a Tenet
from which we ſee there are Conſequen-
ces to be drawn that are allow'd to be un-
anſwerable, This, adds he, were doing
the Reformation the greateſt Honor ima-
ginable, by ſhewing, that if it was capa-
ble of entertaining an Error, "twas as capa-
ble of forſaking it, EO
I thought my ſelf oblig'd, my Lord,
to relate all theſe Paſſages, toſhew 5
| thele


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


| theſe Gentlemen juſtify'd Mr. Bayle by
turns, fince they all allow'd his Diffi-


cultys unanſwerable. Mr. Jurieu own'd
this With regard to the Arminian Sy-
ſtem, and Meſſieurs Le Clerc and Jaquelor
with regard to the Calviniſtical. Why


then ſhou'd they unite in the odious


Charge againſt him? Were they not


all, and each of em, as culpable as he,


with regard to one another ?


In the Month of November of this


Year, Mr. Bayle publiſh'd a 4th Tome
of his Anſwer to the Country Gentle-
man's Queſtions, It had appeard in
the beginning of Summer, if the Book-


ſeller had not diſcontinu'd the Impreſ-


ſion, to finiſh ſome other Works. The
principal, and much the greateſt part of
this Volume, related to Mr. Bernard's
Cenſure on the 24 Tome of the Con-
tinuation of his Reflections on Comets.


Mr. Bayle gave a full Confutation of this


Cenſure; and where any Epiſodes


197


preſented, he never rejected em, if


they ſerv'd either to explain or to


prove the Points in queſtion : ſo that in
his manner of treating this Subject, in
it ſelf abſtruſe and dry enough, the
Reader was entertain'd with a mixture


of agreeable Reaſonings, Authoritys,
N 3 and


198 We Liſe of Mr. Bayle:


and Hiſtorical Reflections. Nay, he th
advertis'd, that no one ſhou'd deſpair, he
becauſe *twas an Anſwer ta Mr. Ber- to
nard, of meeting with things enter- Bi
raining in it; and that, the whole was ſta
as poſitive and as free from any perſonal
Differences, as if he never had Mr. Ber- tro
nard, or any other particular Perſon in flu
view. Thoſe little Diſcuſſions, ſays he, tor
which no way concern the Publick, but con. bly
fiſt baly in Complaints of Authors, and cee
their reproaches of one another, are ſeldom or
to be met with till a third or fourth Reply. mi
A firſt Anſwer, adds he, is incomparably ſon
freer from this Failing ; this i intirely die
exempt from it. He likewiſe ſignify d, abl
that he had intended to give ig this his
Volume a Confutation of Mr. Bernard's alu


ExtraQs of his ſecond and third Volume this
of the Auſmer to the Country-Gentlemas. to
He added, that this Confutation had mot


bin ready of a long time; that.itturn'd Mis
upon Matters no leſs various than im- He
portant; and that it was, in a word, wit!
ſuch as an Author might have ſome im- ſine
patience to ſee publiſh'd: yet that he deſi
was oblig'd to poſtpone it to a fifth quil
Volume, in conſideration of his Book- Onh
ſeller, who was concern'd in Intereſt to ſepa
finiſh: other Works which had bin 5 n
S | le 230


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
the Preſs for ſome Years paſt. Beſides,


he was buſy in drawing up an Anſwer


to Meſſieurs Le Clerc and Jaquelot's laſt


Pieces, without the leaſt regard to the


ſtare of his Healtf ..
For above a Year paſt he had bin
troubled. with a Cough, and à De-


fluxion on his Lungs, which had already


touch'd thoſe Parts, and began inſenſi-
bly to waſt him. The Diſtemper pro-
ceeded not either from his hard Labor
or Study, but was hereditary in his Fa-
mily; his Mother, Grandmother, and
ſome of his Uncles and Aunts having
died of it. So he look'd on it as incur-
able, and cou'd never be prevail'd on by
his Friends to take any Phyſick: He
always told 'em, the beſt Remedys for
this Diſtemper cou'd at moſt ſerve only
to ſpia out a languiſhing Life to a little
more length; which he look*d on as a
Misfortune rather than an Advantage.
He ſaw Death advancing upon him
without terror, and even without unea-
ſineſs t and without either dreading or
deſiring, he look'd at it with a-Tran-
quillity truly worthy of a Philoſopher.
Only Sadneſs and Melancholy, the in-
4{eparable Companions of Diſtempers of
this kind, had in a manger made him
14d ; N 4 roenounce


; 199


— F m =


Pun"


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
renounce all Society, and he beg
Friends not to take it ill.


'd his
For all this.
he world without | intermiſſion, He
had finiſh'd his laſt Anſwer to Meſſieurs
Le Clerc and Jaquelot, in the way of
Dialogue; the Partys to which were


Maxim and © Themipes.
cern'd: Mr. Le Clerc was already prin-
ted, and the beſt part of his Reply to


Mr. Jaquelor. He had anſwer'd all his


ObjeRtions, and afterwards: launchd


into ſome Reflections on certa in Paſſages
of this Miniſter's Book, Which were to
be tlie Concluſion of his Work. He
ſat to it for ſome part of the Night,
and deſign'd to reſume his Pen the nexc
Morning, when his Landlady hapned
to come into the Room. He talk'd to
her as uſual, and the next moment was


found dead in his Bed, without being


heard to ſetch the leaſt Sign. T Was the
28th of December 1706. When this great
Man finiſh'd his Courſe: He made his
old and faithful Friend Mr. Baſnage his
ſole Heir; a Perſon no leſs illuſtrious
ſor his Vertue and Merit, than for the


excellent Works with which he has


inrickid tbe Publick. I bave bin in-


jormid ha had deft Mademoi falle Ble


this! Nieco a Legacy of 1000 Florins;


What con-


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
but having heard that ſhe died the Octo-
ber before, he diſpos'd of this Sum in


favor of Mr. ae Bruquieres his Couſin by


the Mother's fide. and the neareſt Re-


201


lation he had. He bequeath'd all his


Books of Polite Learning and Profane
Hiſtory to Mr. Paets, Secretary to
the ' Admiralty of Amſterdam, who
moves with fo much Glory in the foot-
ſteps of his Father. By this he wou'd
expreſs his Gratitude for the Favors he
had receiv'd from this illuſtrious Pami-
ly, and particularly from Madame
Pazts, who had left him a Legacy of
two thouſand Florins in 1683, Theſe,
my Lord, are Particulars I have bin
aſſur'd are true. Tho if they be really
ſo, Mr. Bay/e muſt have made this Dif-
poſition by a Codicil or private Deed;
for I am ſatisfy'd from very good hands,
that Mr. Baſnage was left univerſal Heir


by his Will made in the preſence of a


Publick Notary.

You, my Lord, don't, I ſuppoſe,
expect I ſhou'd here attempt to draw a
Picture of Mr. Bayle. You knew him
too well to need any further Informati-
ons on this Head. I fhall therefore only
point at ſome of the principal Linea-
ments in his Character, which Pm per-

OY ſuaded


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


ſuaded your Lordſhip will readily. ac-
knowledg. He was truly a Philoſopher
in his manners, free from all haughtineſs
and ambition, never preferring himſelf
before others; ſober to frugality, and
even to inſenſibility. Indifferent to all


kinds of Pleaſure except thoſe of the


Mind, he ſeem'd to be above the reachof
the Paſſions. The Honeſty and Upright-
neſs of his Soul gain'd him the Eſteem
and Affections of all who knew him, He
was a faithful and obliging Friend, ſpa-
ring no pains nor trouble whenever
there was an opportunity of doing Ser-
vice, His Converſation was cheartul,
agreeable and inſtructive. His way of
writing render'd him the delight of men
of Wit. He was eſteem'd far and
near, but particularly in France, where
notwithſtanding the difference of Reli-
gion, his Death was ſenſibly regretted,
The illuſtrious Body, which with fo


much Glory imploy themſelves in the


Journal des Savans, have publickly ex-


preſt their ſorrow for Mr. Bayle, when


ſpeaking of his Death they declare, that


| the Near cou d not end with a more ſenfible


loſs to the Republick of Letters. He had
made conſiderable Common · place Books
in his Vouth; but from the time he
Fan + a ; began


4


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


began to write, he truſted to his Me-


mory, or rather imploy'd the Materials


as they preſented. But tho his Memory,


always happy and faithful, deliver'd him


3 propos whatever he had committed


to it, the minute he made the Demand;


yet he always took care to verify his
Citations to the greateſt nicety. He
examin'd Hiſtorical Facts with an Ex-


actneſs which border'd on Scrupuloſity,


and ſeem'd to be born for retrieving the
Faults which others had made, or the
Errors they had too lightly ſuffer'd to
paſs. Moſt Readers think themſelves
ſo little intereſted in Hiſtorical Rela-
tions, that they ſeldom or never will
be at the trouble of diſcuſſing em.
They take em for granted, and repeat


'em upon the Credit of him who has


examin'd 'em, or who vends 'em with


an aſſurance, Mr. Ble wou'd never


be impos'd on by the Authority of the


moſt celebrated Authors. He ſcan'd


203


thoſe Facts which have bin look'd on


as the moſt undoubted, and never was
diſcourag'd by the Difficultys which a-
riſe in diſcuſſing the minuteſt Circum-
ſtances. He had ſtock d himſelf with
the Books of all Partys, in order to the
diſcovery of the Truth, by OT

8 their


204


os The Life of Mr. Bayle.


their Relations, ever different, and very
often oppoſite. Never did any man
make a greater uſe of this kind of Writ-
ings: He rais'd 'em out of the Duſt
where they had lain buried for Apes
paſt, and made em ſubſervient to


the coming at the Truth of ſeveral


Fadts never conteſted before, and which


it was but juſt they ſhou'd. Equally
void of a Spirit of Intereſt and Paſſion,
he always pay'd homage to the Truth,
in whatever Party he met with it. He
every where applauded Vertue, and


gave no quarter to Vice. oe
His Penetration repreſented the deep-


eſt and moſt abſtruſe Matters to him


at the firſt ſight, and by all their diffe-
rent Views; unfolded all their Difficul-


tys, and diſcover'd their remoteſt Con-
ſequences.


Twas this rendred him ſo
cautious in his Judgments. He perceiv'd
things which others cou'd not ſpy ;


and finding no Solutions for the Objec-
tions he diſcover'd, he left the Matters


undetermin'd. This Reſerve brought


him under a charge of Pyrrhoniſm.


But if hereby be meant, that he wou'd
not allow Evidence to be the Character


of Truth, 'tis the moſt ill-grounded


Accuſation in nature. If it only _
that


that


peai


forn
his!
be d
is th
ſtan
as O
Diff
Cre.
ranc
cred
to tl
are 2
*Tis
Vert
OCcca
of o


Hun


ſame


nion:
are a
the!
are t
Reaſ
is ſuc
celv?
as a
grief
torn


The Life of Mr. Bayle,


that he doubted of things which ap-
pear'd doubtful, and in a word always

form'd his Judgments on the report of
his Ideas; this is the greateſt Honor can
be done him. 'This kind of Pyrrhoniſm
is the perfeCtion of the Human Under-


ſtanding. If he affirm'd not ſo often


as others, *twas becauſe he perceiv'd the


Difficultys better. Poſitiveneſs and


Credulity are the Daughters of Igno-
rance; and we ſee Men always leſs
credulous and leſs deciſive in proportion
to their attainments in Knowledg. They
are alſo more equitable and more modeſt.
*Tis with a deſign of inſpiring theſe
Vertues, that Mr. Bayle takes ſo many


occaſions of ſhewing the narrow Limits


of our Reaſon, and the little Extent of
Human Knowledg, He propos'd the
ſame deſign, when he ſhews that Opi-


nions accounted indubitable heretofore,


are attended with real Difficultys; and
others which have paſs'd for ridiculous,
are to be ſupported by very probable
Reaſons; But the nature of moſt Men
is ſuch, that they don't like being unde-
ceiv'd. They look on their Prejudices
as a part of themſelves; and 'tis with
grief and reluctance they ſee Opinions
torn from em, which they have won

| MS TY 9


LEY 5
75 *
1 x


187


206


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


of old, and which they conſider as fome
of their fineſt Feathers.


For this reaſon
Mr. Bayle had done well, not to have


carry'd his Talent of forming Diffi-
cultys and Doubts to ſuch a length.
While he endeavors to humble the Pride


of Reaſon, he does not manage the Pub-


lick enough. He has given a {wing to his
Imagination, and has often taken Li-
bertys, which may be properly calbd


Debauches of the Underſtanding.


He has proteſted more than once to


his intimate Friends, that he believ'd a


God, a Being infinitely Perfect; and
always ſpoke of the other Myſterys of
Religion juſt as the Reform'd do. His
Adverſarys, 'tis true, endeavor'd to


render him ſuſpected on this Head:
but he let 'em ſee, that he ſaid no more


ar bottom, than what the Divines of his
Communion conſtantally teach. This
they cou'd not diſown; and there-
fore were driven to this poor ſhift, that


there was this difference between him


and them; They talk'd ſeriouſly, and he


only in raillery and ridicule. But was


not this ſearching into his Heart, and


17 his Intentions? I muſt add,
that w


jatever free Thoughts might
have drop'd from him, were at firſt
only


only
in 8
one
com
enla!
by h
fend
drav
ples.
aſcri
he a
Poiſe
it ou


So tl


gero
'em;
and «
fence

H
aſſur
knov


the /


hapn
wipe
a mc
fine,

Cenſ
there
to fin


De Life of Mr. Bayle.
only curſorily glanc'd at, or elſe conſiſted
in Speculations ſo abſtracted, that not
one Reader of a hundred was capable of
comprehending em. If he afterwards


enlarg d upon em, he was forc'd to it


by his Enemys, who put him upon de-
fending himſelf. Farther ſtill, they have
drawn Conſequences from his Princi-
ples, which he conſtantly deny'd ; and
aſcrib*d pernicious Deſigns to him, which
he always diſown'd. If there be any
Poiſon in his Works, tis they have preſt
it out, *tis they have rendred it mortal.
So that Mr. Bayle's Reaſonings are dan-


gerous only in their Reflections upon


em; there all their Venom is extracted,
and one muſt have recourſe to his De-
fences for an Antidote.

He diſputed without heat, and never
aſſum'd a Magiſterial Air; nor was
known to make his Adverſarys feel


hapned now and then to give em a
wipe, *twas more in a pleaſant than in
a moroſe way. His Raillerys were
fine, his Reproaches moderate, and his
Cenſures gentle and good-natur'd. And
therefore People were the more {urpriz'd
to find him in his laſt Diſputes hy 5

rom


207


the Aſcendant he had over em. If he


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
from that Temper
which were ſo natural to him. But he
was ſomewhat ſour'd, and piqu'd at
his Enemys ſtriking rather at his Per-
fon than his Doctrines, and induſtriouſ-
ly endeavoring to draw the publick In-
dignation upon him. He believ'd they


deſign'd no leſs than his Ruin, and this


he thought gave him a right of repelling
Force by Force. The manner in which
ſome of 'em have treated him ſince his
Death, too plainly ſhews that their fal-


ling ſo violently upon him was not ſo


much out of Zeal for the Truth, as to
gratify their Spite. They are furiouſly
ſer againſt him ſtill, and take all occa-
 fions of expoſing him; as if they de-
fign'd their Reſentments ſhou'd never
die. But all their Invectives and at-
fected Scorn rebound only on them-
ſelves. Humanity is ſtartled at the cruel
Treatment; and whoever has the leaſt


ſpark of Honor, muſt needs be ſcanda-


lized to ſee em ſpurn the Dead, and give
a thouſand Stabs to one who is now no
more than a handful of Duſt. The
implacable Reſentments of Divines have
given riſe to the Proverb, Odium Theo-
logicum. Vet we were willing to be-
lic ve this was peculiar to ſome UT.
0


and Moderation


of a

Mr.

Popu

nent

Rule

But v

tion

vade

ſtretc
Jeſt c
comm
all th
them
teal
Chriſt
duct!
Heave
ſo ſhar
Ho!
tlemen
not to
haps t
But thi
that in
to hay
Diſcuf]
have
Languz
ſerve .
o far


The Life of Mrs Bayly.
of a lower Order, an wh


= =


Rule, and ai OE in a 1 50
But what will become of this Diſtinc-
tion now, when the higher ſort in-


vade the Birthright of the reſt, and


ſtretch it even farther than they ? The
Jeſt of it is, that theſe: very Men re-


commend Moderation and Charity in


all their Works; and if we'l believe
themſelves, are perſectly eaten up with
Zeal for the Houſe of God. Vet the


Chriſtian Religion never inſpir'd a Con-


duct like this, and tis diſhonoring, the
Heavenly Doctrine to make it a cloke 0


ſo ſhameful a Practice.


However, I don't pretend theſe Gens :
tlemen were oblig'd by Me. Bayles Death.
not to write againſt him at all; tho —


haps they had better have ict it alone;


But this is not the Point. 1 on ly, mean,
that in their laſt Anſwers they ought
to have confin'd themſelves to a, fair,
Diſcuſſion of his Ryalanings, and not
bave larded em with railing abulive


Language, which ac belt can only

ſerve to ſhew, - that they who, arg

ſo far med by their Reſegt⸗
0


ments,


— — —


3
— — —
5 F 8


. ⁵— PeP IRE Wren
A


Z —


— — Is my ee
ä 2 :


————__——__—v___—_—_
A
4 A 2 — 2 —


— — —


210 The Hife f Mr. Bayle.
ments, are next door to being beſide
Neither is the Queſtion here what
Mr. Bayle's Opinions were, but what
ſtrange ways have bin taken to confute
dem. * Inſtead of anſwering his Argu-
ments according to the Rules of right
Reaſoning, his Adverſarys run upon
perſonal Demurs againſt him, which
no hody is at all concern'd in. It Mr.


Bayle has had underhand Intentions and
dangerous Deſigns, this is a perſona
Charge againſt himſelf, and not the
Cauſe of the Publick, or of any of his
Friends. They who only ſearch aſter
Truth, will trouble themſelves very
little with examining, whether theſe
Imputations be juſt and well groun-
ded: this is not their buſineſs; they'l
Mill recur to the general Qgeſtion, and
look upon any thing elfe as wholly
foreign to the Matter. Beſides, theſe
Gentlemen cou'd not be ignorant that
almoſt all the Catholick, and the
greateſt part of the Proteſtant Divines, ¶ as err
openly maintain the ſame Doctrines I of: ſol
concerning Predeſtination, Free- will, Mr. B
. And why then ſhowd they fall ing his
upon Mr. Bayle alone, and take him hand,
fingly to task? Muſt not this hav Calvin
{IG „ prooeedei i 992


The Liſe of Mr. Bayle: |


proceeded purely from a fear of the


Magiſtrate, hindring their- attacking
directly the Calviniſt Divines? They
were over joy d at an occaſion of pelting
'em ſecurely, and by a ſide Wind, in
the Perſon of Mr. Bayle. This he ſaw,
and no doubt laugh'd in his ſleeve at
the profound ſilence of theſe Divines
on this occaſion. He well knew that
if they enter'd into the Diſpute, they
muſt adjudg him the Cauſe againſt
Meſheurs Le Clerc and Jaquelot. Your
Lordſhip has ſeen that Mr. Jarie« con-
demn'd both their Syſtems; Mr. La


of
211
——


Placette did the ſame, tho in a very mo-


which to him appear d not at all ſolid, nor
generally receid d: ſo that "twere to be
miſh'd (ome other Perſon wou'd enter the


Lifts, and examine the Manichean O06.


jettions, by comparing em, upon Principles
clearer and leſs conteſted, As much as to
ſay, he look'd on the Arminian Sy ſtem
as erroneous; and.conſequently incapable
of ſolving the Difficultys propos d by
Mr. Bayle; which was expreſly adjudg-
ing him the Victory. But on the other
hand, as Mr. La Placette follow'd the


Calviniſtical Hy potheſis, Mr. Le Clerc
950% 0 2 cou d


y | deſt manner. He declar'd, that theſe
Gentlemen had built upon Foundations,


111


The. Eiſe of Mr. Bayle.

cou'd not forbear expreſſing his Joy at
this Work's not appearing before Mr.
Bayle's Death; becauſe, ſays he, if he
had ſeen it, he wou'd have own'd him.
ſelf ready to ſubſeribe to it, without
changing Opinion; and pretended he
Was as Orthodox as Mr. La Placette.
By this Mr. Le Clerc wou'd inſinuate, he
ſaw no difference between Mr. Byle's
and Mr. La Placette's Principles.

To theſe two Teſtimonys of Mr.
Hayle's Victory over Mr. Le Clerc and
Mr. Jaquelot, T ſhall add a third, whoſe
Suffrage is ſo much the freer from Suſpi-
cion, as he does not in the leaſt ſpare
Mr. 'Bayle, in a Book lately publiſh'd by


him. Mr. Naade is the Man I mean:


He affirms Mr. N N was wor ſted b)
Mr. Bayle, that he was fairly run down,
and fared to contradict h emſelf ; and
proves it by diſcuſſing their Arguments
at large, and confronting the Writings
o' borh fides. Mr. Vaudè judg' d as little
favorably of Mr. Le Clerc, after he had
ſeen his laſt Anſwer to the Dialogue be-
rween Maximus and Themiftes, He
ſays, he ſhou'd be glad that all equitable
Per ſons, and all the ableſt Philoſophers
of Europe wor'd fairly compare this
Anſwer with his own Work; and he
perſuades


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
perſuades himfelf they muft own, he
replys at leaſt to the Objections of the
Manicheans, and that Mr. Le Clerc in no
wiſe does: For in fine, adds he, let any
ingenuous Perſon read in Mr. Bayle's


Dialogues, where they relate to Mr. Le


Clerc, all that is not merely perſonal, but
what airedtly concerns the Diſpute of the
Manicheans againſt  Arminianiſm, and


iftermaras read oder My. Le Cler.'s
Anſwer in the XIIth Tome of his Bib-


liotheque Choiſie; and T am perſuaded
he'l own, Mr. Le Clerc does not jo mach
as glance at Mr. Bayle's Objections, but
leaves all his wretched Arminianiſm in
the lurch, ſunk and overwhelm d with the
weight of the ſame Ovjettions : I /ay,
the very ſame terrible Objectiuns with
which he himſelf had always pretended to
craſb the Supralapfarians in the fit
place, and generally all the Reforma, as
if they alone had given ground to theſe
Ohjections, when no one is now. ſo blind
as not to ſee that "tis Chriſtianity in ge-
neral which opens the door to "em. In
the mean time Mr. Le Clerc does no more
than juſt endeavor to ſave himſeif "by
ſhuffling and talking backwaras and for-
wards, and even departing from the plain
and expreſs Doctrine of Scripture, with-

Ty: | 34 out


243


11
214


The Life f Ms. Bayle:
out giving Mr. Bay le one ſingle categorical


Anſwer, or offering a [Mable of any force


to ward off his ſtanning blows. He at-
terwards ſays, that Mr. Le Clerc is


forc'd to have recourſe to the Glory of
God as well as the Calviniſts:
does not follow their Method, nor can
have the ſame benefit hy it.


« it, ſays he, by unfairly diſſembling
ce that he is ſtruck and embaraſs'd with
ce the ſame Objections that we are;
4 and this with a deſign of keeping up
the Spirit of the Ignorant in his own
« Party, which he and his Brethren
have all along entertain'd in Opini-
“ ons very. wide of this Truth; but


© which were very falſe at the fame


« time, as Mr. Bayle has at leaſt given
Aus the pleaſure 17 making thoſe per-
4 ceive. very ſenſibly, who won't put
out their Eyes for fear they ſhou'd
« ſee it. But we, adds he, we do it


« by the Grace and Aſſiſtance of God,


< while we receive theſe Objections


< ſuch as they are, look 'em undaun-
4 tedly in the face, and overthrow em
at the ſame time.
Le Clerc reſents a new and lively Joy,
to think that the Treatiſe of the Sovereign
Perfeition of God was not publiſtod til


No. doubt Mr.


alter


Tho he
« He does


The Life of;


| - « | 31 168 >
after. his Agrerlarys Death. But *tis
time to reſume Mr.


Me, Bayle


* e Mr. Hess Character.
He had all along preſerv'd a tender
Love for his Country. Jealous to
Exceſs vt, qe Glory of his Nation,
he cou'd not with any Patience hear
it run dow; and he even had a Con-
tempt for thoſe who did not eſteem it
as highly as himſelf. This was a Fail-
ing which all his Friends cou'd never
correct We : I call ita Failing, be-
cauſe, ſo thorow a Philoſopher as he
ought to 1805 had larger Thoughts.
Nothing is more ordinary than to find
thoſe in all Countrys, and even ſuch as
are above the common Rank, who fan-


"5


cy their own the only Nation which has


engroſt all human Perfections. This
is pardonable in them, becauſe with all
their Wit and good Senſe they ſtedfaſt-
ly retain ſeveral vulgar Prejudices. But
People have not the ſame Indulgence for
a Philoſopher, who has taken a ſtrict
Survey of all his Opinions, and judges


of em without the leaſt reſpect of Per-


ſons. Mr. Bayle's affectionate way of
ſpeaking ſometimes of his Country, had
given his Enemys a handle for accuſing
him of being a Spy, and a Penſioner to
the Court of France: a Conſequ


ene o


4
}
i
4


K


r 7
— ——


216


knew Mr. Bale


"of Berlin, and:


The Life of Mr. \Bayle.


a Jo, rievous a Calumny,
that I'm, at a Tofs to conceive - how
one o po lateſt Antagoniſts cou'd in
this. point ſtrike in with Mr. Juries.
Faror arma miniſtrat. But all who
id him juſtice, and J
dare take the liberty of reckoning your
Lordſhip i in this number.


Your Lordſhip. deſir dito te


were Mr. Hayle's Fr iends 4 Oorreſpon-
dents in the {evera] parts of Europe. Thoſe
Tcan at pre ſent call to mind; beſides ſuch
25 I have alrcady nam'd, wetatheDuke
of Noailles in France, who. 'honors the
"Belles Lettres by his Love for Learned


: he Abbe Big aon, no leſs diſtinguiſh'd
by his great Parts, than by that gene-
1 PeoreQin he affords the Arts and
Sciences; 5711 e e the two P”;
1 Nel ;, Meflici 's Pinſon, Rainſan, de is

Aae, Marat, Longepierre ; Mr. Bayle
Protellor i in Philofophy at. Tholoaſe, who
Was, no way related to him tho of the
Ti c Name, cr. In German), Mr.


Eee, Miniſter of the French Church
Chaplain to the King of
Pruſſia, the r Mr. Leibnitz ;
Me fn Ar ch, lon, Thomaſius, Buddeus,
7 'V r. Magliabeechi, Library
Keeper


Men, and by bis Application to Study :


The Life of Mr. Bayle.


Keeper to the Great Duke of Tuſcany.


At Geneva, Mr. Pictet, Miniſter, and
Profeſſor in Divmity; Mr. Chouet, Syndic
of the Republick, &c. Vour Lordſhip
knows; he had the honor of being eſ-
teem'd by ſeveral Perſons of Quality in


Euglanu; but I don't think he held a


Correſpondence with any of the Learned
of that Kingdom. His Correſpondents
on that fide the Water were French, as
Mr. La Riviere, Miniſter of the French
Church at the Savoy; Mr. Le Vaſſor;
Mr. La Roque Boyer, Miniſter at Wind-
ſor; Meſſieurs Pajolas, Silveſire, Des
'Maizeaux, Coſte, cc. ,

As I endeavor to avoid Flattery. as
much as poſſible, and pay homage only


217


to Truth, I ſhan't go about to diſſemble


the hardeſt Article againſt Mr. Bayle, to
wit, That he had taken too great a liber-
ty in ſome parts of his Dictionary, and
talk?d ſomewhat too ſmuttily upon the
Affairs of Women. Tis certain, what
he ſays upon this Subject conſiſts for
the moſt part of Citations from grave
Authors, who had never bin the leſs
eſteem'd for having written a little too


this


licentiouſſy. Tis true too, that Mon-
tagne and ſeveral others had taken
infinitely a greater liberty. But all


x18


De Lite of MriBayle!


this does not acquit him with Perſons
who ſet up for rigid and refin'd Vertue ;
beſides, it ſhochs the Civility and Po-
ſiteneſs of our Age. Mer. Bœle did not
conſider, that he wrote in a Language
the chaſteſt in the World; and that if
the Authors he read had wrote at the
fame time he did, and in the fame Lan-
guage, they muſt have wrap'd up in
cleaner Expreſſions, or the World had
not born em. The truth is, the groſs
Obſcenitys he met with in their Wri-
tings made him conſider, as very inno-


cent Libertys, and Sallys of Wit, what


the World accounts much otherwiſe in
this Age: © We are told; that our own
Times are a great deal more corrupted
than thoſe of our Fatherb; and yet we
find they expreſs'd themſelves with leſs
Reſerve and Precaution than we. This
muſt have proceeded from the Heart's
being leſs corrupt in them: looſe, and
even ſmutty Expreſſions,” made but lit-
'tle Impreſſion ; their Imagination was
not defil'd, nor their Vertue endanger'd
by em. Now this Was preciſely Mr.


Bayle's Caſe. He did not find himſelf


ſhock'd by the looſe: Expreſſions he
'us'd'; he even believ?d 'em innocent,


becauſe they produced no Diſorder in
OLED 8 ö Tr | ;


himſelf


Hit


The Life of Mr. Bayle.
himſelf. In effect, his Life has bin al-
ways fo regular, that his bittereſt Ene-


mys cou'd never reproach him with any


thing on this head. His Manners fell
nat ſhort of thoſe of the beſt of Chriſti-
ans; and among ſuch as addict them-
ſelves to Philoſophy; very few are to
be found who: live ſo perfectly like Phi-
loſophers as he. All the Vertues which
render a Man truly valuable, were 0
be met with in him; his Integrity, his


*


Innocence, his Humility, his Tempe-


rance, his Equity, his Contempt of the
World, his Diſintereſtedneſs, were per-
fectly exemplary. Twas by this part
of him, as I have already obſerv'd, he
had the good Fortune of pleaſing your
Lordſhip, and meriting your Protection.


And this was the ere reaſon which
moy*d you to'defire an Account, of his
Life. I:ſhall. think my ſelf infinitely
happy, my Lord, if chis proves nat al-
t· | together unworthy your Notice; and if
s | you will de pleas'd to look upon it as
d ſome ſmall Mark of my Gratitude, and


FFF


um


—


lf
*
> $4.08 792, ln


humble Servant.


219


of that profound Reſpect with which !


4
8 0 tho ** 1
dead. 802 4 Menden pon pri
rene in
the
jut
B 50 00 I written 40 cer
bel
| LOSES Fra
9193 it 85 (17 I2r
© Iheloieow Reftetions 1 on 7 — ion of the
Comet which appear d in December, aga
1688. Mriiten to 4. Doctor of the Sorbon, K
in 12m0Oo. The firſt Edition. appear d in 7
1682, the ſecond i in 46835 the thirg 3 in 1999, dan
and the fourth in 1704. | tion.
A general Crititiſm e Hitoꝶ ef Cal- Ar.
vihiſm of P. Maimbourg, 2 vol. in l2mo. I
The firft and ſecoua Edition appear 4 in 1682, nibu
and the, third i #4. 1684. 1 Juri
New Letters of the. Authas. of. the 1 5 0 7
Generale on the* Hiſtory of Calviniſm, by tion,
P. Maimbourg. 2 > 900. 1685 A
The Hiſtory of "the pid bet uf Letters, in Book
12mo. from March bevy to — 1687. 5
Bon 7 17 0 f tion
An Anſ wer of * Luce of ue Hiſter) of Unit.
the, Republick of Letters to the Advic Fe 16 jo


a his havi 7 oke in favor of P. Malc-
22251 about 12 Pleaſures of Senſe, &c. 1
12mo. 1686. e

France intirely Cathotck undel the Reigy of 1702
Lewis the, Great, in 1 2mo. 1686. *
A Philoſopbical Commentary. on theſe W ords fiftor
of Ju5vs CuRisr, Compel 'em to 1 05
»


Books written by. Mr. Bayle. 221


in, Cc. 4 vol. in 12mo. The firſt and ſecond
printed in 1686, the third in 1687, the fourth
in 1688.

The Chimerical Cabal, or a Confutation of
the fabulous Account and Calumnys which Mr.
Jurieu has . publ. 85 4 concerning 4
certain Project of of Peace, and concerning a Li-
bel intitul d, Important NW na to the Re-
fugees, on their approaching Return into
France, in his Conſiderations on this Libel. In
12mo, two Editions in 1691.

A Letter concerning the little Books publiſh'd
againſt the Chimerical Cabal, in I2mo. half a
Ras, 1691.

The Chimericalneſs of the Cabal of Roter- |
dam demonſtrated from the pretended Convic- |
tions which Mr. Jurieu has publiſh'd againſt |
Mr. Bayle, in 12mo. 1691. |

Janua Cœlorum reſerata cunctis Religio- {

nibus a celebri admodum viro Domino Petro |
yore jeu, &c. in 4to. 1692.


The Project and Eſſay towards 4 Critical Dic-


TW


y tionary, in 80. 1692.
New Advice to the little Author of the lztle
4 Books, in 1 2mo. 1692.


An Addition to the Miſcellaneous Reflec= |
tions on Comets, or an Anſwer to a Libel | |


1 intitul d, = ſhort Review, Cc. in 12mo. |
{7 1694.

= A Hiſtavical and Critical Dittimary. The

c. firſt Edition in Folio, 2 vol. 1695; the ſe-


cond enlarg 4 to near half the Bulk, in 3 vol.


.. Lethoris concerning what paſe'd i in the Con- |
fo, ft wy of + the Wen Church W e |


on


222 Bite written by "Mr: Bayle:


Ky) 1 F ind oO 5 a) 1 -
of orcaſion of the Gr itical Dict 200afy, in 12 mo- of
r in.


Keſleckions on a Pamphlet inrituſ d, The the
Jos ment of the P able and particularly ſte


le Abbe Rendudot, upon the Critical Dic- !
tionar), &c. two Sheet, in Ato. 169. dor
A Continuation of the Miſcellaneous Reflec- ad
tions on Comets, or an Anſwer to the Difficultys, Fe
