The American Practice of Medicine, Vol. I
Wooster Beach
The American Practice of Medicine; Being a Treatise on the Character, Causes, Symptoms... and Treatment of the Diseases of Men, Women, and Children, on Vegetable or Botanical Principles, vol. I. New York: 1833.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/64210120RX1.nlm.nih.gov).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

AMERICAN PRACTICE OF MEDICINE ;

BEING

A TREATISE

ON THE

CHARACTER, CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, MORBID APPEARANCES,

AND

TREATMENT

OP THE

diseases of men, women, and children,

OF ALL CLIMATES,

ON

VEGETABLE OR BOTANICAL PRINCIPLES:

AS TAUGHT AT

€Tf)e a&eformeTi $SeTifcal ffiollefles In tjje ©nfteH States:

CONTAINING ALSO A

TREATISE ON MATERIA MEDICA AND PHARMACY,

on THE

WITH AN APPENDIX, ON THE CHOLERA, ETC.


ILLUSTRATED BV NUMEROUS PLATES AND CASES.

THE WHOLE PRECEDED BY

PRACTICAL RULES

FOR THE

PREVENTION OF DISEASE AND THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH.


BY W BEACH, M.D.

President of the Reformed Medical Society, mid Founder of the Reformed Medical Colleges of the
United States ; Licentiate of the Medical Society of the Stale of New York ; Member of the Medical
Society of the City and County of New York; Professor of Materia Medica, Pharmacy, Theory
and Practice of Physic and Surgery in the New- York Refoi.ned Medical College, and Principal
Physician and Surgeon of the United States Infirmary.


IN THREE VOLUMES VOL. 1.


NEW YORK

B E T T S & A N S T I C E ,

OPPOSITE ST. PAUL'S CHURCH ....
H DCCC XXXIII.


{U


l£33
k. /


Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1832, by
W. BEACH, M.D.

in the Clerk's office of the District Court of the United States for the Southern
District of New York.


New-York, Nov. 1832.
Doctor W. Beach,

Dear Sir,

I have great pleasure in stating the favorable opinion I
entertain of the merits of your work, and I hope that the pub-
lic will appreciate its value, and your talents.

I am confident that your system of practice will be read
with pleasure by many of the most distinguished physicians in
Europe, and that it will be found worthy of translation into
other languages.

I congratulate you, dear sir, in having produced such a
valuable stock of medical science, on a reformed or im-
proved plan.

I hope that the work may contribute something more to
your advantage than is generally the bare reward of learning
and literary labours ; and I feci a presage that your diligence,
judgment, and erudition, will be properly appreciated and re-
Warded by a discerning and enlightened community.
I am truly yours,

J. F. DANIEL LOBSTEIN, M. D.

Of the Medical Faculty of Paris; late Physician of the Military Hospital and Army of
France; Professor of Surgery and Midwifery; Member of'the Medical Societies
of Philadelphia, of the City and Countv of New-York, of Massachusetts, of Ma-
ryland, of Lexington, (Ky.). of New-Orleans, of Pittsburgh, (Pa.) and of many
othors of Europe. Author of several Works upon Medical and Literary subjects.


4 * Gulden Opinions?

'golden opinions.'

The Art of Medicine Is founded on experience. — Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal.

How egrcgiously do the greatest men err whenever they lose sight of facts, or substitute sallies
of wit or specious arguments in physic, for observation and experience. — Buchan.

If an opinion be erroneous it requires discussion, that its errors may be exposed. If it bo truei
it will gain adherents, in proportion as it is examined. — Dr. Cooper.

Let truth and falsehood grapple. Whoever knew truth put to the worse in a free and open en-
counter. — Milton.

If employment of the lancet were abolished altogether, it would perhaps save annually a greater
number of lives than in any one year the sword has ever destroyed. — Dr. Ring.

The man who wantonly wields the bloody knife, for tl.e sake of experience, or a vain display
of his adroitness, is a human savage, in- whose breast soft pity lwwer dwelt. — Dr. Cumming.

Abominable is the murdering quack, who, forever impatient to unsheathe his blood-thirsty lan-
cet, draws from a fever patient the irreparable balsam of life. — Dr. flunn.

I am neither for the ancients, nor for the moderns, but shall be of every age and nation. — Baglivi.

Let us study the character of diseases, and let us study the effects of the loss of blood Hall.

It sometimes requires no little boldness to abstain from the loss of blood. — Ibid.

We have not in any instance yielded our assent to authority, however high, when it has been
contradicted by our own experience — Dtwees.

It is owing to our ignorance that there is any necessity for instruments to cure disease Jtberncthy.

If the Reformed System be a good one, let it flourish and progress. If it be a bad one, let it be
frowned down by the just censure of an enlightened community. — Banner.

Both Surgery and Medicine can and will, in the present astonishing strides of human intellect,
be forced to pass a rigid scrutiny, and undergo a radical improvement. — Smead.

" Minerals exert a pernicious and baleful influence on the system ; they seldom or never cure,
but often destroy the patient. Their operation is altogether uncertain, depending entirely on the
state of the stomach, whether they act at all or prove injurious."

Among the numerous poisons which have been used for the cure or alleviation of diseases, there
arc few which possess more active and of course more dangerous powers, than Mercury. — Hamilton.

"Mercury, the Lancet, and the Knife, are now almost the only means made use of to cure dis-
ease, notwithstanding their deleterious effects are evidently fatal to multitudes."

The popular belief that every country produces simples suitable to cure all the prevailing local
diseases, is not void of truth; vegetable substances afford the mildest, most efficient, and most
congenial remedies to the human frame. The numerous cures that are daily performed by the use
of vegetable medicines, are sufficient evidence of their super-excellent virtues. — Prof. Rafincsque.

The Flora of North America is astonishingly rich in remedies. There is no doubt in my mind,
that in more diseases than is generally acknowledged, vegetable simples are the preferable reme-
dies. Who knows but in time, these native productions of the field and forest, will so enlarge and
confirm their dominion, as to supercede the employment of other medicines. — Prof. IVatcrhouse.

To yield to any authority would here be criminal. Facts must and will stand. — Dr. Underwood.

It would be highly advantageous to the public, and likewise to the best part of the Medical Pro-
fession, if the predispositions and oecasious of disease were made a portion of the education of
every gentleman.— Dr. Armstrong.

Every physician must rest on his own judgment, which appeals for its rectitude to nature and
and experience alone. — Gregory.

An obstinate adherence to an unsuccessful method of treating a disease, is self conceit — it gene-
rally proceeds from ignorance — it is a species of pride to which the lives of thousands have been
sacrificed. — Ibid.

I am here insensibly led to make an apology, for the instability of the theories and practice of
physic: And those physicians generally become the most eminent, who have the soonest emanci-
pated thelriselves from the tyranny of the schools of physic. — Late Author.

Our want of success is occasioned by the following causes; 1st, our ignorance of the disease;
2d, our ignorance of a suitable remedy ; 3d, w ant of efficacy in the remedy. — Ibid.

If truth doth any where manifest itself, seek not to smother it with glossing delusion ; acknowl-
edge, the greatness thereof, and esteem it thy best victory when the same doth prevail over
thee.— Hooker.

The whole nation is eroaning under the present practice of the Medical Profession, which fosters
disease more than cures it, ami debases or ruins our constitutions. — Morison.

Physicians have, been tinkering the constitution for about two thousand years, to eurc diseases,
and the result of all their discoveri- ; s that BrimstODO and Mercury are the only two specities.
Diseases remain what they ever wen

All men ought to be acquainted with the medical ait. I believe that knowledge of medicine is tho
sister and companion ef wisdom. — Hippocrates.

In early times skill in healing was esteemed a part of wisdom. I believe the practice of medi-
cine should be agreeable to reason. — Crlsus.

As health is the most precious of all things, and is the foundation of all happiness, the scienco of
protecting life and health is the noblest of all, and most worthy the attention of all mankind.

Hoffman

"Not only a reformation in medicine is necessary, but a revolution."


INTRODUCTION.


When- ire take into consideration the infinite number of medical
books already before the public, and the vast number which are daily
teeming from the press, it might seem to some almost superfluous to add
any more to the long catalogue. I certainly should not intrude myself,
or this production, upon the public, was it not imperiously called for.
The world groans under the weight of medical publications, and is lit-
erally surfeited with them. But what are they 1 ? Are they such treati-
ses, or such productions, as are calculated to cure diseases or amelior-
ate the sufferings of mankind. They certainly arc not, as we have
fully demonstrated in the following pages. We have shown that the
present practice of medicine, instead of exerting a salutary influence, is
pernicious and dangerous in the extreme. A few poisonous minerals
constitute almost the whole of the Materia Medica. In a word, the
human family daily fall victims to the present mode of treating the va-
rious diseases incident to the human body. Instead of resorting to na-
ture's garden for remedies, the chemical laboratory, or the bowels of
the earth, are explored, for articles which are unfriendly and poisonous
to the system* This is the case while medical agents, which the Au-
thor of Nature has bountifully scattered around us, are neglected or
been handed down to us by European authors, without reference to the
indigenous productions of our country, which experience has found to
remove disease without entailing any serious consequences.

It is true there are some works which have been written to substitute
an improved system of practice; but we know of none which will ena-
any of the various branches of medicine. Several authors speak of the
virtues of different plants and vegetable agents, but none are sufficient-
ly explicit or systematised to enable a person to practice judiciously,
without recourse to some of the deleterious medicines made use of by
common physicians; neither have they a correct knowledge of medical
botany, or the articles they treat of, and recommend. Besides, they
appear to be governed by no principles in the treatment of diseases;
or, if they have principles, they are at variance with the correct pa-
thology of disease, which renders their treatment very defective, su-
perficial, and often injurious, even more so than that pursued by com-
mon physicians. Some have receipts, but no principles; others again
have theories, but no remedies. Tims we perceive the labyrinthian diffi-
culties in which the medical world are involved. One system succeeds-
another so quick, that a writer has been constrained to say there is "no
uniformity in medical practice." This year a medicine is extolled as a
specific; the next it sinks into oblivion. This year one view is enter-
tained of disease, perhaps the next, one entirely opposite.


6 Introduction.

Dr. Samuel Jackson, a very respectable physician of Philadelphia,
df the old school, thus remarks: " It is a subject of well founded com-
plaint, that it has been a prevailing vice with medical writers, to in-
dulge in partial, encomiastic, and it is to be feared, sometimes fanciful
representations of the powers and efficacy of some favorite remedy or
mode of practice, to the introduction of which into medicine, they have
been instrumental, but have not been justified by subsequent experience.
Sanguine expectations have been, in this manner, too often injudicious-
ly excited, that have terminated in disappointment dark and bitter," as
the hopes they had nurtured were bright and pleasing. How many Of
the articles of the former materia medica* celebrated for their virtues;
are now known to be inert and useless! How many of our present
medicines have been invested with curative energies for formidable
diseases, in which a sober and matured experience has proved them to
be of none or of little avail! What different systems and modes of
treatment, founded on baseless theories, partial views, and limited ob-
servation, have enjoyed their short-lived reigns, extolled and defended
by misjudging partizans, but which now lie entombed in dusty and un-
disturbed tomes, and are brought into recollection only to display the
errors they embraced^ and the follies of their pretentions !"

For these reasons, many judicious spectators of the medical world,
have considered the science of medicine as resting upon no sure basis,
but chaos and uncertainty. But whatever discrepancy or difference of
opinion there may have been, or still is, among common physicians,
they all agree in rejecting the use of medical botany or vegetable agents,
and substituting for the cure of disease, mercury, the lancet, and the
knife.

This being the state of medicine in the present day, the reader will
at once perceive the propriety and necessity of a work calculated to ef-
fect a change, or introduce a reformation in the noble science of medi-
cine. To lay before the public, or the world,- a system of practice that
is both negatively and positively better than that now pursued. First,
negatively, that shall abolish the present pernicious treatment. Second,
to introduce a system that is infinitely superior— and the Author pro-
fesses to have accomplished these objects in the following pages. It is
no vain experiment, hypothesis, theory, or conjecture, but founded up-
on the immutable and eternal principles of truth, proved to be so, by a
Series of experiments, illustrations, and facts, deduced from extensive
practice, which challenge the severest scrutiny, and court the minutest
investigation from friends or enemies. We only ask a fair trial of the
treatment recommended, and this every honest man will acknowledge,
we are entitled to, before they decide upon the merits or demerits of
the work.

This work is the result of long experience and great research, and the
materials have been collected from a great variety of sources. Ancient
and modern authors have been referred to and analyzed, and every
thing valuable has been retained. I have availed myself of all the in-
formation worth preserving, contained in every botanical publication
which has issued from the press of this country or Europe ; but I must
confess that I have derived very little practical information from any of
thGm.


Introduction. 7

I have spared neither pains nor expense to acquire a knowledge of
the practice of the most noted botanical physicians, retaining from each
every thing which I have proved by experience to be useful. I have
not thought it beneath me to converse with Root and Indian Doctors,
and every one who has professed to possess any valuable remedy, or
any improved method of treating any disease. The hints and sugges-
tions of experienced nurses and female practitioners have not escaped my
notice. For, says a former President of the New- York College of Phy-
sicians and Surgeons, " there is not a maxim or remark of any experi-
enced female or nurse, which is not based upon sound pathological prin-
ciples." They are generally diligent observers of nature, and often
point out her indications in a. correct and masterly manner, which often
disappoints the physician and the friends of the patient. I have also
availed myself of every advantage arising from a regular course of study
in the University of the State of New- York. Besides, an extensive
practice for many years in the most populous city in the United States,
(New- York) with repeated consultations with the most distinguished
surgeons and physicians, has afforded me opportunities of witnessing
and treating every variety of disease, and trying every variety of practice.
I have also attended many thousand cases at the United States Infir-
mary, where constant application is made for medical aid, in physic,
surgery, and midwifery. During the last season, (a period of three
months) under the appointment of the New-York Board of Health, we
monitory or confirmed stages.*

The information which I have received from others, the opportuni-
ties of clinical practice, the improvements I have myself made, have
brought me into the possession of a system of practice which I have
found invaluable, and altogether superior to that pursued by physicians
of the old school. Schools have been founded to disseminate this prac-
tice, and are now in successful operation, the graduates of which are
giving us daily evidences of the unprecedented success of the practice.
One of our graduates writes as follows: " I have one objection to your
practice — it destroys disease too soon. It gives me no opportunity to

* By virtue of the power and authority in me vested, as Alderman and Warden
of Health of the Tenth Ward, I do hereby nominate, constitute, and appoint,
Wooster Beach, M. D. to visit and take charge of, and to give such medical ad-
vice and assistance, as may be required, to all poor persons, inhabitants of the
ward, who may be affected with the prevailing epidemic ; and also to call to his aid
such assistance from the medical faculty, as he may require and deem necesary and
expedient. JOHN PALMER, Alderman Tenth Ward.

July 17th, 1832,

After receiving the above appointment, the Corporation immediately issued and
posted up in every part of the Ward the following Bill:

Tenth Ward Medical Station. — All persons affected with Looseness, Pain in the
Bowels, or Cramp, are requested to apply immediately to Dr. W. Beach, No. 95
Eldridge-street, where they will receive advice and medicine, free of charge.
By order of the Board of Health.

THOMAS T. WOODRUFF, )
HENRY P. ROBERTSON, } Executive Committee.
WILLIAM MANDEVILLE. )
Feu-York, July 18, 1832.


8 Introduction.

make out a bill, I cannot keep my patients down for a long period, like
other physicians."

In prosecuting these inquiries and discoveries, our treatment has
been so much at variance with that of other physicians, that their op-
position has been very considerable. The illiberal and selfish portion
of them have incessantly calumniated and persecuted me. I have borne
all, however, with fortitude, from a conviction that I was engaged in a
righteous cause, the cause of truth and humanity. Their ignorance of
our practice and motives, offer some excuse or apology for this treat-
ment. Had they known us and our principles, we might have received,
at least, some countenance and courtesy, if not some commendation.
But I am pleased to say that more recently their hostility has ceased,
and they have manifested more respect.

In consequence of the opposition I have met from the faculty, I am
at a loss to know to whom I shall dedicate this work. If I prepare it
for the medical profession alone, however meritorious it may prove, I
might not receive their patronage. If I dedicate it to botanical physi-
cians, I may not receive sufficient encouragement from them to war-
rant the circulation of it. If I address it exclusively to the people at
large, they may not take sufficient interest in it. Therefore, upon ma-
ture consideration, I have concluded —

First, To adapt it to our Reformed Medical Colleges, as a textbook;
also to the Members of our Reformed Medical Society. This work is
particularly necessary and required for these institutions,

Second, To Physicians of the Old School.— Professor Rafinesque,
jn his introduction to his Medical Flora, or Medical Botany of the Uni-
ted States, thus observes; "Much has been done to teach and spread
correct medical knowledge. The establishment of medical schools,
chairs of materia medica, of medical and systematical botany, medical
and botanic gardens, infirmaries, hospitals, have largely contributed to
impart medical and botanical knowledge through the professional class.

This purpose has been aided by numerous publications of learned
physicians and botanists, medical works, pamphlets and journals, phar->
macopeias, dispensatories, inaugural theses, &c.

Notwithstanding all these means, it is a positive and deplorable fact,
that but fcio medical practitioners apply themselves to the study of bo-
tany, and therefore are deprived of the aid of comparative medical
botany.

" We have, however," says the author of the Manual of the Materia
Medica, " collected in this manual, all the knowledge the profession
could furnish us on that very interesting, and indeed too much neglected
subject, the properties and the medicinal application of our indigenous
productions. Although we possess many very valuable plants, still
comparatively few have as yet been introduced into regular practice,
and the reason may be, that they have not been made the subject of
extensive public experiments, and that those which have been made in
private practice, and an account of which has been published in peri-,
odical journals, have produced little impression on the minds of physi-
cians, and have already fallen into oblivion. Why this general indifier-.
ence for our native productions? Why not give them a fair trial?, and


Introduction. 9

if they prove valuable substitutes, why should we send to every quarter
of the globe for our remedies, while we are so well provided for at home?
Are we not rich in the vegetable kingdom? Our supposed poverty pro-
ceeds, we fear, more from our want of industry than from the real scar-
city of natural productions, possessing properties which entitle them to
our attention."

Third, Botanical Physicians. — By this class, we understand those
physicians are very numerous, and receive very considerable patronage
from the public. There are several grades, or classes of them, such as
are vulgarly called " root or Indian doctors, patent and steam doctors,
herbalists, empiricks," &c. Some of these have considerable informa-
tion, and are very judicious and successful in the treatment of many
diseases. " Even in large cities, and in the centre of medical light,"
says Rafinesque, " they are thriving, because they avail themselves of
the resources afforded by active plants, often neglected or unknown to
the regular practitioners."

Others again of the above class, are "illiterate, ignorant, deceitful,
reserved, and very conceited: they follow a secret or absurd mode of
practice, or deal in nostrums or patent remedies. All these classes need
instruction, and it ought to be afforded to them, that they may become
properly acquainted with those which they employ or may avail them-
selves of."

In relation to botanic physicians in general, the following remarks
of an author are very applicable:

" The author has long seen, and with regret, the want of something
like a general, systematic treatise upon the different branches apper-
taining to medicine, on a plan adapted to the peculiar profession of bo-
tanic physicians; and he has looked anxiously for some one, more com-
petent to the task, to undertake it. But as yet, no work of the nature
of the one proposed, even professedly, has appeared, that I am awaro
of. Many books, indeed, have been written upon botany ; but they
have chiefly been either a scientific classification of plants, unconnected
with their medicinal properties; or, mere fugitive treatises upon the
medical qualities and uses of particular plants, which, though very use-
ful as far as they go, were not intended by their authors as a general
guide for the practice of physic. Impelled, then, by the necessity of a
work, such as is proposed above, the author has attempted in the follow-
ing pages, to supply it: how far he has succeeded, others will deter-
mine. This, however, he can confidently assure the members of the
botanic profession, that in his hands the treatment of diseases recom-
mended has proved eminently successful; and it would be but a poor
compliment io his Botanic Brethren to suppose that in their hands it
would not be equally efficacious.

" It will not be denied, that the depressed and almost outlawed con-
dition under which Botanic Practitioners have laboured in modern times,
is in a great measure owing to the deficiency of a substantial, compre-
hensive and regular system of practice which should render them Inde-
pendent of any other sect, elevate them to a standard of respectability,
and remove all grounds for the imputations of ignorance and incompe-
Vol. I. 2


10 Introduction.

tency, which are now so lavishly heaped upon them by interested per-
sons. Until such a standard is established, societies formed, and the
Botanic Profession brought up to that standard, public confidence in
them, as a body, cannot be expected.

"And I would ask, what should hinder the accomplishment of so de-
sirable an object'? Are botanic medicines so intrinsically inefficient, or
so deservedly so unpopular, that they should forever be condemned to
insignificance"? None dare say it. Who has not, in the course of his
life, seen astonishing cures performed by the simple virtues of vegeta-
bles — even when administered by the humble man of "roots and herbs,"
when the whole force of minerals has failed ? Docs any one say that
vegetable medicines are less safe than minerals? — Alas ! the miserable
martyrs to the latter who daily meet our eyes, forbid it. Why then do
we grovel in the dust, when the Almighty has put in our possession such
ample materials for relieving the sufferings of our fellow beings'? — And
why are we permitted to render this service only with halters about our
the States by legislative restrictions, which, in many of them, amount
to absolute tyranny, as unconstitutional, as unjust? If there is a sha-
dow of a cause for such oppression, aside from the insidious misrepre-
sentations of interested persons, it is because Botanic Physicians are
not just to themselves. Let them unite — form societies — establish a
respectable and intelligent standard of admission, and the favour of the
public will soon break their fetters."

Fourth, The People generally. — " It is not less certain," says Pro-
fessor Rafmesque, " but still more deplorable, that beyond the imme-
diate sphere of medical knowledge, the majority of the people are yet
in prey to medical credulity, superstition, and delusion, in which they
are confirmed by the repeated failures of theorists, and the occasional
success of empirical rivals."

The improvements in medicine, since the revival of learning, (says
Buchan,) have by no means kept pace with those of the other arts. The
reason is obvious. Medicine has been studied by few, except those who
intended to live by it as a business. Such, either from a mistaken zeal
for the honour of medicine, or to raise their own importance, have en-
deavoured to disguise and conceal the art. Medical authors have gen-
erally written in a foreign language ; and those who are unequal to this
task, have even valued themselves upon couching, at least, their pre-
scriptions, in terms and characters unintelligible to the rest of mankind.

The study of law has likewise, in most civilized nations, been justly
deemed a necessary part of the education of a gentleman. Every gen-
tleman ought certainly to know at least the laws of his own country:
and, if he were also acquainted with those of others, it might be more
than barely an ornament to him.

The different branches of philosophy have also of late been very uni-
versally studied by all who pretended to a liberal education. The ad-
vantages of this are manifest. It frees the mind from prejudice and
superstition ; fits it for the investigation of truth ; induces habits of rea-
soning and judging properly ; opens an inexhaustible source of enter-
tainment ; paves the way to the improvement of arts and agriculture ;


Introduction. H

and qualifies men for acting with propriety in the most important sta-
tions of life.

Natural History has likewise become an object of general attention;
and it well deserves to be so. It leads to discoveries of the greatest
importance. Indeed agriculture, the most useful of all arts, is only a
branch of Natural History, and can never arrive at a high degree of
improvement where the study of that science is neglected.

Medicine, however, has not, as far as I know, in any country, been
reckoned a necessary part of the education of a gentleman. But surely
no sufficient reason can be assigned for this omission. No science lays
open a more extensive field of useful knowledge, or affords more ample
entertainment to an inquisitive mind. Anatomy, Botany, Chemistry,
and the Materia Medica, are all branches of Natural History, and are
fraught with such amusement and utility, that the man who entirely
neglects them has but a sorry claim either to taste or learning. If a
gentleman has a turn for observation, says an excellent and sensible
writer, surely the natural history of his own species is a more interes-
ting subject, and presents a more ample field for the exertion of genius,
than the natural history of spiders and cockle-shells.

We do not mean that every man should become a physician. This
would be an attempt as ridiculous as it is impossible. All we plead for
is, that men of sense and learning should be so far acquainted
with the general principles of medicine as to be in a condition to derive
from it some of those advantages with which it is fraught; and at the
same time to guard themselves against the destructive influence of Ig-
norance, Superstition, and Quackery.

As matters stand at present, it is easier to cheat a man out of his life
than of a shilling, and almost impossible to detect or punish the offender.
Notwithstanding this, people still shut their e) r es, and take every thing
upon trust that is administered by any pretender to medicine, without
daring to ask him a reason for any part of his conduct. Implicit faith,
everywhere else the object of ridicule, is still sacred here. Ma-
ny of the Faculty are no doubt worthy of all the confidence that can be
reposed in them; but as this can never be the character of every indi-
vidual in any profession, it would certainly be for the safety, as well
as the honour of mankind, to have some check upon the conduct of those
to whom they entrust so valuable a treasure as health.

The veil of mystery, which still hangs over Medicine, renders it not
only a conjectural, but even a suspicious art. This has been long ago
removed from the other sciences, which induces many to believe that
Medicine is a mere trick, and that it will not bear a fair and candid ex-
amination. Medicine, however, needs only to be better known, in or-
der to secure the general esteem of mankind. Its precepts are such as
every wise man would choose to observe, and it forbids nothing but
what is compatible with true happiness.

Disguising Medicine not only retards its improvement as a science,
but exposes the profession to ridicule, and is injurious to the true inter-
ests of society. An art, founded on observation, can never arrive at
any high degree of improvement, while it is confined to a few who make
a trade of it. The united observations of all the ingenious and sensible


12 Introduction.

part of mankind, would do more in a few years towards the improve-
ment of Medicine, than those of the Faculty alone in a great many.
Any man can tell when a medicine gives him ease as well as a physi-
cian; and if he only knows the name and dose of the medicine, and the
name of the disease, it is sufficient to perpetuate the fact. Yet the man
who adds one single fact to the stock of Medical observation, does more
real service to the art than he who writes a volume in support of some
favourite hypothesis.

Very few of the valuable discoveries in Medicine have been made by
physicians. They have in general either been the effect of chance or
of necessity, and have been usually opposed by the Faculty, till every
one else was convinced of their importance. An implicit faith in the
opinion of teachers, and attachment to systems and established forms,
and the dread of reflections, will always operate upon those who folloio
Medicine as a trade. Few improvements are to be expected from a man
who might ruin his character and family by even the smallest deviation
from an establishsd rule.

If men of letters, says the author of the performar.ee quoted above,
were to claim their right of inquiry into a matter that so nearly concerns
them, the good effects in medicine would soon appear. Such men
would have no separate interest from that of the art. They would de-
tect and expose assuming Ignorance under the mask of Gravity and Im-
portance, and would be the judges and patrons of modest merit. Not
having their understandings perverted in their youth by false theories,
unawed by authority, and unbiassed by interest, they would canvass
with freedom the most universally received principles in Medicine, and
expose the uncertainty of many of those doctrines, of which a physician
dares not so much as seem to doubt.

No argument, continues he, can be brought against laying open Med-
icine, which does not apply with equal, if not greater force, to religion;
yet experience has shown, that since the laity have asserted their right
of inquiry into these subjects, Theology, considered as a science, has
been improved, and the interests of real religion have been promoted.

Had other medical writers been as honest as this gentleman, the art
had been upon a very different footing this day. Most of them extol the
merit of those men who brought Philosophy out of the schools, and sub-
jected it to the rules of common sense. But they never consider that
Medicine, at present, is in nearly the same situation that Philosophy
was at that time, and that it might be as much improved by being treat-
ed in the same manner. Indeed, no science can either be rendered ra-
tional or useful, without being submitted to the common sense and reason
of mankind. The.*e alone stamp a value upon science ; and what will
not bear the test of these ought to be rejected.

I know it will be said, that diffusing medical knowledge among the
people might induce them to tamper with Medicine, and to trust to their
oio7i skill, instead of calling a physician. The reverse of this, howev-
er, is true. Persons who have most knowledge in these matters, are
commonly most ready both to ask and follow advice, 7vhcn it is necessary.
The ignorant are always most apt to tamper with Medicine, and have
the least confidence in physicians. Instances of this are daily to be met
with among the ignorant, who, while they absolutely refuse to tako a


Introduction. 13

greediness any thing that is recommended to them by their credulous
neighbours. Where men will act even without knowledge, it is cer-
tainly more rational to afford them all the light we can, than to leave
them entirely in the dark.

It may also be alleged, that laying Medicine more open to mankind,
would lessen their faith in it. This indeed would be the case with re-
gard to some ; but it would have a quite contrary effect upon others.
I know many people who have the utmost dread and horror of every
medicine which they know, and whose qualities they are in some mea-
sure acquainted with. Hence it is evident, that the dread arises from
the Doctor not from the drug. Nothing ever can or will inspire man-
kind with an absolute confidence in physicians, but an open, frank and
undisguised behaviour. Whilst the least shaddow of mystery remains
in the conduct of the Faculty, doubts, jealousies, and suspicions, will
arise in the minds of men.

No doubt cases will sometimes occur, where a prudent physician may
find it expedient to disguise a medicine. The whims and humours of
men must be regarded by those who mean to do them service'; but this
can never affect the general argument in favour of candour and open-
ness. A man might as well allege, because there are knaves and fools
in the world, that he ought to take every one he meets for such, and to
treat him accordingly. A sensible physician will always know where
disguise is necessary; but it ought never to appear on the face of his
general conduct.

The appearance of mystery in the conduct of physicians not only
renders their art suspicious, but lays the foundations of Quackery, which
is the disgrace of Medicine. No two characters can be more different
than that of the honest physician and the quack; yet they have gener-
ally been very very much confounded. The line between them is not
sufficiently apparent ; at least it is too fine for the general eye. Few
persons are able to distinguish sufficiently between the conduct of that
man who administers a secret medicine, and him who writes a prescrip-
tion in mystical characters and an unknown tongue. Thus the
canduct of the honest physician, which needs no disguise, gives a sanc-
tion to that of the villian, whose sole consequence depends upon secrecy.

No laws will ever be able to prevent quackery, while people believe
that the quack is as honest a man, and as well qualified as the physician.
A very small degree of medical knowledge, however, will be sufficient
to break this spell; and nothing else can effectually undeceive them. It
is the ignorance and credulity of the multitude, with regard to Medicine,
which renders them such an easy prey to every one who has the hardi-
ness to attack them on this quarter. Nor can the evil be remedied by
any other means but by making them wiser.

The most effectual way to destroy quackery in any art or science, is
to diffuse the knowledge of it among mankind. Did physicians write
their prescriptions in the common language of the country, and explain
their intentions to the patient, as far as he could understand them, it
would enable him to know when the medicine had the desired effect ;
would inspire hira with absolute confidence in the physician ; and


1 4 Introduction.

would make him dread and detest every man who pretended to cram a
a secret medicine down his throat.

Men in the different states of society, have very different views of
the same object. Some time ago it was the practice in some parts, for
every person to say his prayers in Latin, whether he knew any thing
of that language or not. This conduct, though sacred in the eyes of
our ancestors, appears ridiculous enough to us ; and doubtless some
parts of ours will seem as strange to posterity. Among these we may
reckon the present mode of medical prescription, which, we venture
to affirm, will some time hence appear to have been completely ridicu-
lous, and a very high burlesque upon the common sense of mankind.

But this practice is not only ridiculous, it is likewise dangerous. How-
ever capable physicians may be of writing Latin, I am certain apothe-
caries are not always in a condition to to read it, and that dangerous
mistakes, in consequence of this, often happen. But suppose the apot-
hecary ever so able to read the physician's prescription, he is generally
otherwise employed, and the business of making up presciiptions is left
entirely to the apprentice. By this means the greatest man, even
when he employs a first-rate physician, in reality trusts his life in the
hands of an idle boy or girl, who has not only the chance of being very
ignorant, but likewise giddy and careless. Mistakes will sometimes
happen in spite of the greatest care; but where human lives are con-
cerned, all possible methods ought certainly to be taken to prevent them.
For this reason, the prescriptions of physicians, instead of being couch-
ed in mystical characters and a dead language, ought, in my humble
opinion, to be conceived in the most plain and obvious terms imagina-
ble, and, indeed, every physician should be his own apothecary.

Diffusing medical knowledge among the people would not only tend
to improve the art, and to banish quakery, but likewise to render medi-
cine more universally useful, by extending its benefits to society. How-
ever long Medicine may have been known as a science, we will venture
to say, that many of its most important purposes to society have eitber
been overlooked, or very little attended to. The cure of diseases is
doubtless a matter of great importance ; but the preservation of health
is of still greater. Th's is the concern of every man, and surely what
relates to it ought to be rendered as plain and obvious to all as possible.
It is not to be supposed that men can he sufficiently upon their guard
against diseases, who are totally ignorant of their causes. Neither
can the Legislature, in whose power it is to do much more for preser-
ving the public health than can ever be done by the Faculty, exert that
power with propriety, and to the greatest advantage, without some de-
gree of medical knowledge.

Men of every occupation and condition in life might avail themselves
of a degree of medical knowledge ; as it would teach them to avoid
the dangers peculiar to their respective stations ; which is always easi-
er than to romove their effects. Medical knowledge, instead of being
a check upon the enjoyments of life, only teaches men how to make
the most of them. It has indeed been said, that to live medically is to
live miserably: but it might with equal propriety be said, that to live
rationally is to live miserably. If physicians obtrude their own ridicu-


Introduction, 15

lous whims upon mankind, or lay down rules inconsistent with reason
or common sense, no doubt they will be despised. But this is not the
fault of Medicine. It proposes no rules that I know, but such as are
perfectly consistent with the true enjoyment of life, and every way
conducive to the real happiness of mankind.

We are sorry indeed to observe, that JMcdicine has hitherto hardly
been considered as a popular science, but as a branch of knowledge
solely confined to a particular set of men, while all the rest have been
taught not only to neglect, but even to dread and despise it. It will
however appear, upon a more strict examination, that no science bet-
ter deserves their attention, or is more capable of being rendered gen-
erally useful.

People are told, that if they dip the least in medical knowledge, it
will render them fanciful, and make them believe they have every dis-
ease of which they read. This I am satisfied will seldom be the case with
sensible people ; and suppose it were, they must soon be undeceived.
A short time will show them their error, and a little more reading will
infallibly correct it. A single instance will show the absurdity of this
notion. A sensible lady, rather than read a medical performance,,
which would instruct her in the management of her children, generally
leaves them entirely to the care and conduct of the most ignorant, cred-
ulous, and superstitious part of the human species.

The benefits of Medicine, as trade, will ever be confined to those
who are able to pay for them; and of course, the far greater part of
mankind will be every where deprived of them. Physicians, like oth-
er people, must live by their employment, and the poor must either
want advice altogether, or take up with that which is worse than none.-
There are not, however anywhere wanting well-disposed people, of
better sense, who are willing to supply the defect of medical advice
to the poor, did not their fear of doing ill often suppress their inclina--
tion to do good. Such people are often deterred from the most noble
and praise-worthy actions, by the foolish alarms sounded in their ears
by a set of men, who, to raise their own importance, magnify the dif-
ficulties of doing good, find fault with what is truly commendable, and"
fleer at every attempt to relieve the sick which is not conducted by the
precise rules of Medicine. These gentlemen must, however, excuse
me for saying, that I have often known such well-disposed persons do
much good ; and that their practice, which is generally the result of
good sense and observation, assisted by a little medical reading, is fre-
quently more rational than that of the ignorant retainer to physic, who
despises both reason and observation, that he may go wrong by rule ;
and who, while he is dosing his patient with Medicines, often neglects-
other things of far greater importance.

Many things are necessary for the sick besides Medicine. Nor is (he
person who takes care to procure these for them, of less importance than
a physician. The poor oftener perish in diseases for want of proper
nursing than of Medicine. They are frequently in want of even the
necessaries of life, and still more so of what is proper for a sick-bed.
No one can imagine, wiio has not been a witness of these situations,
how much good a well-disposed person may do, by only taking care to


16 Introduction.

have such wants supplied. There certainly cannot be a more necessary,
a more noble, or a more godlike action, than to administer to the wants
of our fellow-creatures in distress. While virtue or religion are known
among mankind, this conduct will be approved ; and while heaven is
just, it must be rewarded ! v

Persons who do not choose to administer Medicine to the sick, may
nevertheless direct their regimen. An eminent medical author has
said, " That by diet alone all the intentions of Medicine may be an-
swered." No doubt a great many of them may; but there are other
things besides diet, which ought by no means to be neglected. Many
injurious and destructive prejudices, with regard to the treatment of the
sick, still prevail among the people, which persons of better sense and
learning alone can eradicate. To guard the poor against the influence
of these prejudices, and to instil into their minds some just ideas of the
importance of proper food, fresh air, cleanliness, and other pieces of
resfimen necessary in diseases, would be a work of great merit, and
productive of many happy consequences. A proper regimen, in most
diseases, is at least equal to Medicine, and in many of them it is great-
ly superior. [Buchan.]

The following observations by Dr. N. R. Smith, are applicable :

"It neither comports with the honour nor the interest of a liberal
and philosophic profession, to withhold from (hose of other avocations
a certain amount of correct information, relative to its principles and
precepts. Medicine is now so capable of asserting its dignity as a
science, that it is no longer necessary to shroud it in a veil of mystery,
and thus to win for it a superstitious faith, in place of rational confi-
dence. Mysticism can be employed as well by the ignorant as by the
scientific — indeed with more zeal and effect, for the former are often
the dupes of their own jugglery, or at least arc not restrained by con-
science. When, therefore, he who relies upon science for his means
of success, disingenuously mystifies the business of his art to gain the
confidence of the credulous, he is preparing the public mind to become
the dupe of empiricism. Men of science often complain that they are
ill requited for their intellectual toil, when empiricism is seen to win
from them the public confidence. They do not reflect, however, that
this is chiefly because medical men have first obscured their art, and
deluded the community into the belief that in it there is "some charm,
some conjuration, or some mighty magic." They are disappointed,
therefore, when they learn somewhat of the limited resources of our
art, and readily transfer their faith to those who are ignorant, or dis-
honest enough to keep up the delusion. Men are indignant when we
upon the part and uttering some technical incantation.

" To disenthral the public mind, medical men must cast off the whole
garb of the charlatan, nor suffer any thing to remain which shall con-
found medical philosophy with empiricism. The profession must seize
every opportunity to educate the community in the first principles of
medicine, and when this is accomplished, the medical scholar may,
in public opinion, safely rest his ripened claims to reputation, which
now is often wrested from him, when he will not resort to the degrading
tricks of the charlatan to maintain it.


Introduction. 17

Undoubtedly the ingenuous part of our profession suffer most severe-
ly, not from the itinerant nostrum-monger, but from the scientific em-
piric — that member of the profession who avails himself of that which
science reveals, but, in practice, associates it with the artifice of the
charlatan. Splendid instances of success achieved by such, can al-
ways be pointed out, and against them the honest part of the profession
can vindicate itself only by educating the community in the true charac-
ter of the science of medicine.

In addressing, therefore, the educated public, I conceive that I am
indirectly subserving the true interests of my profession, while my di-
rect object is the instruction of others. 1 consider, also, that it is an
urgent dictate of humanity to furnish the community with a certain
amount of knowledge, particularly in surgery, because at this time
they are singularly ignorant of its simplest principles — because infinite
mischief and suffering is created by its abuses 1 — and because the maladies
which demand the surgeon, are such ;is brook not a moment's delay.
Accidents often occur which prove immediately fatal, when the knowl-
edge of a single fact would enable any individual at least to arrest the
hand of death till more efficient aid could be procured."

ORDER AND ARRANGEMENT OF THE WORK.

In the arrangement of this work, I have divided it into parts, as fol-
lows : t

Part First — Contains the means of preventing disease and promot-
ing health and longevity.

Part Second — Contains the principles or theory of the American
Practice of Medicine.

Part Third — Contains an original or new system of Nosology, which
will be found very simple and concise; also, the description, causes,
symptoms, and morbid appearances of diseases, with the Old and Re-
formed Practice ; and occasionally cases, illustrating the efficacy of the
same.

Part Fourth — Contains our Reformed System of Surgery, with the
same arrangement as the above.

Part Fifth — Contains Operative Surgery.

Part Sixth — Contains Illustrations of our Practice.

Part Seventh — Contains Materia Medica, giving a description, his-
tory, and general properties of the articles used in our system of prac-
tice, with engravings or figures representing the various medicinal
plants, &c.

Part Eighth — Contains Pharmacy, or the compositions and use of
the various articles of the Materia Medica.

In the treatment of diseases, we are not so tenacious about the par-
ticular agents used, (minerals excepted) as we are for an adherence to
the theory or principles laid down; although much depends upon the
peculiar formula or medicines employed.

In concluding this preface, I will quote a few remarks from a late
production, entitled " Manual of the Materia Medica." The editors
observe :

" We like and admire the ingenuous maxim promulgated by the cele

Vol. T. 2»


18 Introduction.

brated Baglivi. ' I am,' said he, ' neither for the ancients, nor for the
moderns, but shall be of every age and nation.' This candid and phi-
losophical declaration shall also be our motto. We have observed in
our addition to this work, as much as it laid in our power, the golden
rule of Locke — ' Try all things, h old fast that which is good.'' For,
as the same author remarks, ' to prejudge other men's notions before
we have looked into them, is not to show their darkness, but to put out
our own eyes.' We cannot see without regret, therefore, the constant
opposition which every thing new encounters from some individuals who
can read the past only, but will not admit, or cannot understand the
improvements of the present. The history of medicine offers us but
too many examples of this system of opposition to every thing that is
not antique; and the difficulties which the justly celebrated Harvey,
Jenncr, Bichat, Gall, and Broussais, experienced in promulgating
their useful discoveries and doctrines, are remarkable instances of this
spirit so hostile to every suggestion of improvement or innovation.

"Locke, that great master of matter, mind, and human passions,
has faithfully, although quaintly recorded this feature of the character
of man, too much to the purpose not to be cited in this place.

" ' Truth,' says he, ' scarce ever yet carried it by vote any where at
its first appearance. New opinions are always suspected, and usually
opposed without any other reason, than because they are not common.
But truth, like gold, is not the less so for being newly brought out of
the mine. 'Tis trial and examination must give it price, and not any
antique fashion ; and though it be not current by public stamp, yet it
may, for all that, be as old as nature, and certainly not less genuine.

"At the present epoch, when the collision of opposite and conflict-
ing opinions is so great, it is very needful to refer from individual prac-
tice and experience to nature, unbiassed observation, general princi-
ples, and sound philosophical induction."

" Although there has been no lack of endeavour to render the work
as accurate, useful and satisfactory as possible, yet still it may be found
deficient in one or all of these particulars: errors no doubt there are,
sufficiently numerous to require the exercise of much charity, and an
equal share of candour to excuse; neither of which, however, is solici-
ted ; for they are only desirable or estimable, so far as they are the
spontaneous effusion of generous and enlightened minds."

" We expect that indulgence, which the zeal for doing weH, and the
desire of aiding the advancement of medical science, even when not at-
tained, always deserves. In conclusion, we shall say of our labour, (if
small things may be compared to great,) what the celebrated Johnson
said of his Dictionary: — ' In this work, when it shall be found that much
is omitted, let it not be forgotten that much likewise is performed; and
though no book was ever spared out of tenderness to the author, and the
world is little solicitous to know whence proceeded the faults of that
which it condemns; yet it may gratify curiosity to inform it, that this
work was written with little assistance of the learned, and without any
patronage of the great; not in the soft obscurities of retirement, or un-
der the shelter of academic bowers 1 but amid inconvenience and dis-
traction.' "


Introduction. 19

Friends may flatter, and enemies may defame, but the public at
large will do justice, because they are far removed from the sphere of
personal feeling. It is to this tribunal I appeal for a decision of the
merits or demerits of this work.


It was announced in the Prospectus that an abridgment of this work
would be issued, but we have considered it best to issue but one edition
at present, and defer the other for a short time; as soon aS it is called
for, it will be issued.

Some have intimated that they intend to infringe upon the copy-right
of this work, by publishing it in some form. None we presume will
hazard this undertaking, who will take the trouble to refer to the Uni-
ted States law on this subject.

Many of the Plants have been drawn from nature, and a number
from the excellent work of Professor Rafinesque, called the Medical
Flora. Others have been reduced from Barton, Bigalow, &c. The
foreign ones have been principally taken from the British Flora, and
Thornton'' s Family Herbal ', which were originally drawn from nature
by a celebrated artist.


PART FIRST.


MEANS OF PREVENTING DISEASE, AND PROMOTING HEALTH
AND LONGEVITY.


" It is better to prevent than to cure."

CHAPTER I.

TEMPERANCE, ABSTINENCE, MET, &C

As perfect health is the greatest earthly blessing we can enjoy, with-
out which all other blessings are of little consequence, I deem it of the
first importance to point out the means of promoting it ; by paying pro-
per attention to which, persons who arc born with, and enjoy a good
constitution, will attain a healthful and long life, and even those who
are delicate and tender, will arrive at an advanced age. These means
hold forth the doctrine that regularity and temperance in all things, are
highly conducive to health and happiness ; and on the contrary, that
irregularity and intemperance bring their votaries to an untimely grave.

When the various functions of the body, voluntary and involuntary
motions, are performed with ease, and suffer no interruption, the body
is said to be in health; in a contrary case it is diseased. Considering
the many dangers to which man is exposed, it is surprising that he should
remain in health so long; and our astonishment increases when we re-
flect how often he escapes the dangers prepared by his own hand. But
parental nature frequently repairs the injury in a manner unknown to
us. To set down supinely with a notion, that if the Majesty of Heaven
wills us to die, we certainly shall, in the use of means to prolong life;
and if He wills the contrary, we shall live, in the neglect of those
means, is a conduct, unscriptural and absurd. Disease may be consid-
ered the consequence of the moral or rather immoral conduct of man,

The powers of life may be compared to the oil in a lamp : in time
they will be exhausted ; they may be supported or diminished ; when
exhausted death invariably closes the drama. Death from mere old
age may be compared to the extinction of the lieht when the oil is all
consumed; and death from disease, to the blowing out of the lieht.

Vol. I. 3


20 Means of preventing disease.

when the oil is not all consumed, and might have burned longer. There
are laws in nature, by which man may arrive to maturity, to the sum-
mit of health and vigour; and there are laws, by which his powers of
life are lessened and finally exhausted. These are the " bounds which
he cannot pass.

In order to extend the common term of life, mankind must be per-
suaded to return to that primeval state of nature, from which, history
furnishes us almost incredible instances of longevity. The antideluvians
enjoyed an uninterrupted state of health; their manner of living and
vegetable diet was simple and not injurious. They had little need to
attend to their health, as the seeds of disease were little scattered in
such a state. We have deserted from the simple mode of fife, which
prevailed in the primitive ages. We have acquired our improved state
of mental culture, by sacrificing to it much of our bodily welfare. We
are less accustomed to consult what nature requires, with respect to
diet, mode of life, clothing, &c. than to follow fashions, customs, and
our own disordered inclinations.

The desire of long life is inherent in all human nature : and the pos-
sibility of prolonging it was never doubted by the orientals. The most
important circumstances which favour the attainment of long life, are

Temperance, Abstinence, and Diet.

w Temperance is a kind of regimen," says Dr. Thomas, " under
which every man may put himself without interruption to business, ex-
pense of money, or loss of time ; and may be practised by all ranks
and conditions, at any season, or in any place. If exercise assists in
throwing off superfluities from the body, temperance prevents them;
if exercise clears the vessels, temperance neither satiates nor overstrains
them ; if exercise promotes a free circulation of the blood, temperance
gives nature full play, and enables her to exert herself in all her force.
Cheerfulness of temper and vigour of body, are the usual results of tem-
perance ; on the contrary, depression of spirits, a shattered constitution,
disease, and often poverty, are the consequences of a continued course
of intemperance.

It is much easier to preserve health than to recover it when impaired,
and to prevent diseases than to cure them. Towards the first, the
means are generally in our own power, little else being required than
strict temperance in all things ; but towards the latter, the means are
uncertain and perplexed, and for the knowledge of them, the greatest
portion of mankind must apply to others, of whose skill and judgment
they are in a great measure ignorant.

The man who wishes to live long, be healthy, and die without sick-
ness either of body or mind, but by mere dissolution, or a long course
of years, must submit to live regularly, and be temperate in his habits;
since he cannot otherwise expect to enjoy the fruits of such a life, nor
be agreeable to himself or useful, in all probability, to his friends ;
neither can he relish the bounties of Divine Providence, nor acquit him-
self of his duties to God.

Some inconsiderate and sensual persons affirm, indeed, that a long


and promoting health and longevity. 5^1

life is no blessing, and that the state of a man who has passed his sev-
enty-fifth year, cannot really be called life, but death ; but we daily
see, in our public papers, instances recorded of persons having attained
the age of ninety or an hundred, enjoying most of their faculties; and
whoever will read the tract of Sir Thomas Barnard on the comforts of
old age, as also the life of Lewis Cornaro, the Venetian, will perceive
that this is a mistaken notion. At the age of one hundred years, he
was, by temperance in all his pursuits and indulgences, and particularly
in his diet, eapable of mounting his horse without any assistance, or ad-
vantage of situation, and could not only ascend a flight of stairs with
ease, but climb up a hill on foot, from bottom to top, with the greatest
ease ; moreover, he was gay, pleasant, and good humoured ; free from
perturbation of mind, and every disagreeable thought. He did not find
life burthensome, but, on the contrary, spent every hour, we are inform-
ed by him, with the greatest delight and pleasure; sometimes in con-
versing with men of his acquaintance, valuable for their good sense,
manners, and letters ; sometimes in reading the works of favourite au-
thors, and occasionally in writing.

He was extraordinary sober, and dieted himself with so much wisdom
and precaution, that finding his natural heat decaying by degrees in his
old age, he also diminished his diet by degrees, so far as to stint himself
to a very trifling meal indeed. By this means he preserved his health,
and was also vigourous to the age of an hundred years ; his mind did not
decay; he never required the assistance of spectacles; neither did he
lose his hearing; and that which is no less true than difficult to believe
is, that he preserved his voice so clear and harmonious, that at the end
of his life he sung with as much strength and delight as he did at the age
of twenty-five years.

" O, Temperance," says Sir William Temple, " thou physician of
the soul as well as the body, the best guardian of youth and support of
old age, the tutelar goddess of health, and universal medicine of life,
that clears the head and cleanses the blood, that eases the stomach and
purges the bowels, that strengthens the nerves, enlightens the eyes, and
comforts the heart; in a word, that secures and perfects digestion, and
thereby avoids the fumes and winds to which we owe the colic and
spleen, those crudities and sharp humours that feed the scurvy and gout,
and those slimy dregs and humours of which the gravel and stone are
formed within us ; diseases to which mankind are exposed rather by the
viciousness than frailty of our nature, and by which we often condemn
ourselves to greater torments and miseries of life, than perhaps have yet
been invented by anger and revenge, or afflicted by the greatest tyrants
upon the worst of men. And yet so little notion have the generality of
mankind of the virtue of temperance, that life with them is nearly one
continued scene of intemperance.

To what cause, so much as to intemperance, are owing faded youth
and premature old age, an enervated body, and an enfeebled mind, to-
gether with all that long train of diseases which the indulgence of appe-
tite and sense have introduced into the world. Health, cheerfulness,
and vigour, are well known to be the offspring of temperance. The
man of moderation culls the flowers of every allowable gratification


22 Means of preventing disease,

without dwelling upon it until the flavour be lost: he tastes the sweets
of every pleasure without pursuing it till the bitter dregs rise ; whereas
the man of the opposite character dips so deep as to stir up an impure
and noxious sediment, which lies at the bottom of the cup.

How quickly does the immoderate pursuit of carnal pleasures, or the
abuse of intoxicating liquors, ruin the best constitutions ! Indeed these
vices generally go hand in hand. Hence it is that we so often behold
the votaries of Bacchus and Venus, even before they have arrived at the
prime of life, worn out with diseases, and hastening with swift pace to
an untimely grave. Did men reflect on the painful diseases and prema-
ture deaths which are daily occasioned by intemperance, it would be
sufficient to make them shrink back with horror from the indulgence
even of their darling pleasures.

The innocent too often feel the direful effects of it. How many
wretched orphans are to be seen embracing dung-hills, whose parents,
regardless of the future, spent in riot and debauch what might have
served to bring up their offspring in a decent manner ! How often do
we behold the miserable mother, with her helpless infants, pining in
want, while the cruel father is indulging his insatiate appetites!

It is too true, that the major part of mankind are intemperate and
sensual, and they love to gratify their appetites and commit excess;
and seeing that they cannot avoid being greatly injured by their exces-
ses, they, by way of apologizing for their conduct, say that it is better
to live ten years less, and enjoy themselves, not properly considering
of what importance are ten years more of life, especially a healthy life,
and at a maturer age, when men become sensible of their progress in
knowledge and virtue, which they cannot obtain to any degree of per-
fection before this period.

A life of irregularity and intemperance has the certain effect to de-
stroy persons of the best constitution even in the prime of life; while,
on the other hand, one of regularity and temperance will frequently
preserve men for a length of time, who are of a very delicate or bad
constitution, and far gone in years. Whoever will read the life of Lew-
is Cornaro must be convinced of this. This Venetian had been addict-
ed to a life of intemperance up to his fortieth year, the consequence of
which was, that a heavy train of infirmities had invaded him, and made
great inroads on his constitution; and after having to no purpose tried
every means of relief that art and medicine admitted of, he at last, by
the advice of his physicians, entered on a life of the strictest temper-
ance, by which he regained his health, and lived to a very advanced
age. Daily observation has, indeed, fully convinced me that an elderly
man, even of a delicate constitution, who leads a regular and sober life,
has a better chance of a long one, than a young man of the best consti-
tution, who invariably leads a disorderly one.

That irregularities of diet, repletion, and unwholesome food, are the
origin of many diseases, cannot admit of a doubt ; and that the preser-
vation of health much depends on a proper regimen, is equally obvious.

When it is considered that many serious disorders are entirely occa-
sioned by an improper diet, and that in almost every complaint the due
direction of diet is perhaps of equal importance with the prescription of


and promoting health and longevity. 2-i

medicines, it is highly hlameable to neglect this powerful resource. To
delicate women and sickly persons, to pregnant women and those who
are nurses, and to young children, restrictions on diet are indispensably
necessary.

In every stage of human existence the functions of the stomach are
of high importance, and the same rules of diet which prove beneficial to
the invalid or weakly, will generally apply to the aged. The substan-
ces selected for the diet of old persons should be adapted to the state of
their teeth ; and solid viands, and those which are difficult of solution,
ought to be minced, or otherwise prepared to meet the defects of the
chewing instruments. • In addition to the gradual failure of the teeth,
the stomach* itself suffers a diminution of its powers to convert food into
chyle and bodily refreshments ; and hence it becomes needful to be more
particular about the diet in advanced life.

It has wisely been observed by Hippocrates (who has been called the
father of medicine), that if a man eats sparingly, and drinks little, he is
nearly certain of bringing no disease upon himself, and that a moderate
supply of food nourishes the body best. The quantity of food which
nature really requires for her support, is small, and he that lives tem-
perately, and eats and drinks moderately at each meal, stands fair to
enjoy sprightliness, vivacity, and freedom of spirits. Bodies that are
governed by temperance and regularity, are rarely hurt by melancholy,
or any other affection of the mind. To have a clear head, we must have
a clean stomach, for this is the grand reservoir in which the food is first
deposited, and from thence its nutritive power is distributed throughout
all parts of the body.

An error into which many people fall is that of eating too much at
once. If the stomach be filled with a greater quantity of food than it
can easily bear, or what is proper, its coats are stretched beyond then-
natural tone, and rendered incapable of performing its digestive powers;
the food being longer retained than by the laws of the circulation it ought
to be, and undergoing a disorderly fermentation, gives rise to crudities,
sour eructations, flatulence, listliness, headach, and stupor; for the
stomach having an intimate connection with the brain and nervous sys-
tem by sympathy, whenever one of them is disordered, the other sel-
dom fails of partaking in the calamity.

Who never fasts, no banquet e'er enjoys;
Who never toils or watches, never sleeps.

He that consults his health must check his appetite, and invariably
rise from table with the ability and disposition to eat and drink still more
than he has done. He should also diligently apply himself to discover
what kinds of food are best suited to him; for the proverb that what-
ever pleases the palate must agree with the stomach and nourish the
body, or that which is palatable must be wholesome and nourishing, is
founded in error. The best rule will be not to take any thing, but in
such quantity as the stomach can easily digest, and to make use of only
those things which from observation and experience the person has found
to agree with him. The quality, as well as quantity is, therefore, to be


24 Means of preventing disease,

taken into consideration. By repeated trials and experience any man
may acquire a perfect knowledge of his constitution, and ascertain not
only what food, but likewise the liquor, that agrees best with his stomach;
and in regulating his diet, he may place a safer reliance on his own
judgment than he can on the opinion of his medical attendant, be ho
ever so skilful.

An attention to diet and temperance in all other respects is not only
necessary for the preservation of health, but is likewise of great impor-
tance in the cure of diseases, and many of them indeed may be cured
by a suitable diet alone. Avoid, therefore, any excess at table, or the
partaking of a great variety of dishes ; for inteifperance not only ren-
ders the understanding cloudy and injures the constitution, Jrnt likewise
degrades the soul. Do not confine temperance, however, to merely eat-
ing and drinking, but let it be extended to the moderating every other
appetite, inclination, or passion.

Abstinence is the best cure for any excess which has been committed
in eating or drinking. In paying a strict attention to temperance, we
are to take care at the same time not to carry it so far as to border on
abstinence of an excessive nature ; for this is by no means conducive to
health, but the direct contrary, because a copious supply of fresh and
wholesome food is requisite for the support of the body, and is peculiar-
ly necessary for those who labour hard."

Dr. Cheyne imputes most of the chronical diseases, the infirmities of
old age and short lives, to repletion, or intemperance ; and that they
may be either prevented or cured by abstinence.

But if abstinence is not sufficient for the cure of diseases, yet it greatly
assists the operation of medicines, and is a preventive against a multi-
tude of dangerous disorders. Several writers relate extraordinary cures
performed by it, and many instances of its extending the term of human
life. It is, indeed, surprising to what a degree of age the primitive
Christians of the East, who retired from persecution into the deserts of
Arabia and Egypt, lived healthful, and cheerful, on a very little food.
Cassian assures us, that the common allowance for twenty-four hours,
was only twelve ounces of bread and mere water ; and adds, that on
this spare diet, Arsenius, tutor to the emperor Arcadius, lived an hun-
dred and twenty years, and many others to nearly the same age. A
man of the name of Laurence preserved his life to an hundred and forty
3 r ears, by temperance and labour. And Spotswood mentions one man
who attained the age of one hundred and seventy-five years, by means
of abstinence.

It appears from the registers of the society of Friends, that one half
of those born among them, live to the age of forty-seven years; where-
as, says Dr. Price, that of the general population of London, one half
live only 2 3-4 years. The number of Friends who live to the age of
seventy, compared with the general population of London, is as four
to one. This superior longevity is properly attributable to the tempe-
rate habits of the society generally ; and it may be added, that from
the same cause they enjoy a greater portion of health, and exemption
from the commonly allotted ills of life. A still greater benefit flowing
from the habitual temperance of this society, is, the almost total absence


PART FIRST.

MEANS OF PREVENTING DISEASE, AND PROMOTING
HEALTH AND LONGEVITY.


and promoting health and longevity. 25

of pauperism among them. Although they relieve the public from all
charge on account of their poor, it is believed that tbey are not subjec-
ted to any heavy burden thereby — their habits of temperance and eco-
nomy operating to keep nearly all above want.

Food which is simple, provided it be easy of digestion, and affords
a due quantity of nourishment, is far prelerable to that which is com-
pounded by the rules of art and cookery, and rendered more savoury
by an addition of aromatic spices. Eating a variety of high-seasoned
viands, and partaking of many dishes, is very unwholesome ; for the
stomach thereby becomes overloaded with an heterogeneous mass, ex-
ceedingly pernicious in its effects. Moreover we are induced to exceed
stomach labour? under all the direful effects of repletion. Food, plain-
ly roasted, broiled, or boiled, is all that is really necessary for people in
health ; and to eat moderately of one dish, is certainly most wholesome.
Simplicity of food requires no physical alteratives, and due exercise
with temperance, prove the best cathartics.

The new school of France seems to be well aware of this truth, and
have retired back to the simplicity of nature, to those days of primitive
manners, when the dietetic school spread its doctrines abroad for the
relief of man. If you ask the French professors what is the best mode
of curing disease? they will answer you, like the Greek orator, when
it was inquired what was the first essential in eloquence ? he answered
action; and what the second? action; and what the third? action: So
would the physicians of Paris, if it were inquired what was the first re-
quisite in curing disease, they would answer diet ; and the second'?
diet; and the third? diet!

Wonderful cures, says Dr. Mease, have been effected by simpli-
city of diet. The father of professor Cooper of South Carolina, was
cured, in London, of an asthma, to which he had been long subject,
by an exclusive diet of boiled carrots for two weeks, as recommended
by John Wesley, in his " Primitive Physic." During this time he
drank little water. He remained well for twelve years; but having re-
turned to his former generous living he was again attacked. — I have
heard of another cure by the same diet.

The disease called "broken wind," in horses, which is no more
than the asthma in the human species, is cured in England by an ex-
clusive diet of the same vegetable.

A lady in Philadelphia was cured of a most severe lheumatism by
a diet of milk solely; and Dr. Cheyne records, that Dr. Taylor, a con-
temporary with himself, was cured of epilepsy by the same diet. En-
glish Malady, p. 255. Our books of medicine record many other cures
effected by rigourous simplicity of diet.

In eating our food, due care should be taken to chew, or masticate
it sufficiently, previous to its being swallowed : this is a point deserving
of a very strict attention, and may be deemed the first process of diges-
tion; for without the solid parts of our food being well triturated in the
mouth, and at the same time incorporated with a due proportion of the
salivary secretion, it cannot be converted into good chyle, or healthy
nutriment.

Vol. I 4


2G Means of preventing disease,


CHAPTER H.

POOD AND DRINK.
" Man should content himself with the produce of the fields, gardens, and dairy.

Animal Food.

It appears very evident that man in his primeval state of simplicity,
never ate any animal food whatever. Previous to his transgression, he
was not permitted to kill any animals, or partake of any meat, as appears
by the command of his Maker, recorded in Genesis. Vegetables
alone seems to have been his only food. From this fact we may infer,
that vegetable, is more congenial to the system, than animal food. We
may infer this also from the effects which follow the long continued use
of meat. Sailors who use it on long voyages are subject to the scurvy,
which often proves fatal, when a recurrence to vegetables immediately
removes the disease. A vast number of other complaints are unques-
tionably produced by animal food. The evil consequences arising from
it are in part owing to the quantities of oil or grease it contains; by
reason of which, the digestion is disordered, the bile vitiated, the blood
corrupted, and cutaneous and other diseases mduced.

Injurious effects are very frequently immediately felt after eating
a meal of high seasoned meats ; such as oppression at the stomach, le-
thargy, and subsequently, if persisted in, dyspepsia, and other com-
plaints. Animal food then may in general be considered hurtful, and
requires a very strong and healthy stomach to digest it ; and it ought,
therefore, to be taken very sparingly, and not more than once a day.
Besides it is better taken cold than warm. When animal food and wine
have been received into the stomach, no sooner is the digestive process
begun, even before any portion is introduced into the circulating fluid,
than the action of the heart is increased, and the pulse is quickened;
but the same effect is not observed from vegetables.

Vegetable Food.

Vegetable food is much lighter, more easily digested, and much less
inclined to putrefy than animal food. Besides, from the natural stimu-
lus which it possesses, the bile is rendered more healthy, by which the
regular peristaltic motion of the bowels is kept up, and costiveness, the
source of so many evils, obviated. This is easily proved, for every one
knows that the use of certain fruits, such as tamarinds, peaches, prunes,
pears, plumbs, whortleberries, &c. besides other articles which will be
hereafter mentioned, keep the bowels in a constant soluble state.

To show still further the influence of vegetable food, in promoting a
healthy state of the system, we need only advert to the inhabitants of


and promoting health and longevity. »?

those countries who use it exclusively. For health and vigour of con-
stitution, they are noted. Observe, for instance, the Irish, who live upon
potatoes and buttermilk, how muscular and athletic they are, and how
their countenances glow with genuine health. They can endure more
hardships and more privaiions than other people, and yet subsist upon
this vegetable from infancy to old age. Our forefathers, the hardy sons
of New-England, enjoyed uninterrupted health, and lived to a good old
age by adhering to a simple diet, such as bean porridge, and hasty (In-
dian meal) puddings. But how have their descendants degenerated in
point of health, by a departure from these simple and wholesome rules. (
It must be acknowledged, that by their habits of luxury, they do not
live half as long as their ancestors. We shall not be very particular as
regards certain kinds of food, being well persuaded that whatever
agrees with a person or is easily digested, may be taken as a general
rule, due caution being observed with regard to the quantity; in other
words taking good care not to overload the stomach with any kind of
food whatever.

I shall make a few remarks upon the articles of diet most in use.

1st, Bread. Bread is said to be the staff of life, being used more
than any other kind of diet. The articles then, of which it is composed,
sere of the greatest consequence. I am satisfied that bread as now
made, and used, is one great cause of disease. The flour from which
it is made, is separated from the bran, the coarser part, designed
by nature to keep up a continued action, and stimulus to the bowels,
for the purpose of preventing costiveness, and a deranged state of the
stomach and intestines.

Another objection to' bread made in our large cities, is the quantity
of yeast added to the flour, which ferments it so much as to destroy the
sweetness, and often forms acidity.

Some, it is said, add alum, vitriol, and other deleterious substances,
which render it very unwholesome. This is another source of indiges-
tion and complaints of the liver. In grinding wheat, the coarser parts
should never be separated from the fine ; but both should be ground coarse
and mixed together, then made into bread in the ordinary manner. A
small quantity of indian may be added, and yeast to ferment it suffi-
ciently. This kind of bread, although it is not so white as that made of
s"uperfine flour, is more palatable, much lighter, more easily digested,
regulates the bowels, and 1 know not but I may with propriety add,
that with other precautions, it is a cure for the dyspepsia.

2d, Tea and Coffee. Tea and Coffee, drank too strong, are injuri-
ous, especially to invalids, dyspeptic and nervous people ; they pro-
duce debility, hysterics, and other evil consequences. In general, how-
over, the ill effects of these liquids proceed rather from the imprudent
use than from any bad qualities which they possess. Tea or Coffee
when green or new, is not so good as old. The black teas are prefer-
able to the green. Taken in moderate quantities neither too strong,
nor too weak, or hot, it will seldom do harm ; moreover, it should not
be drank upon an empty stomach; but if it be bad, which is often the
case, and too strong, or substituted in the room of solid food, it must
have many ill effects, by impairing the powers of the stomach, produ-


28 Means of preventing disease,

cing various nervous symptoms, palpitations of the heart, restlessness,
headache, a pale and sallow hue of the skin, and all the usual train of
morbid feelings which accompany dyspepsia.

3d, Cookery. The arts of cookery render many things unwhole-
some, which are not so in their own nature. By jumbling together a
number of different ingredients, in order to make a poignant sauce, or
rich soup, the composition proves almost a poison. All high season-
ing, pickles, &c. are only incentives to luxury, and never fail to injure
the stomach, they disorder it and impair the health of the system gene-
rally, by rendering the food too heating, and difficult of digestion, and
by inducing us to partake of too much food, or to eat hi the absence of
the natural appetite. " It were well for mankind, if cookery, as an art,
were entirely prohibited. Plain roasting or boiling is all that the sto-
mach requires. These alone are sufficient for people in health, and
the sick have still less need of a cook."

4th, Pastry. Pastry is generally unwholesome, and whatever is hard
of digestion. In a word, plain and wholesome food, simply cooked,
ought to be used. Ripe fruits of all kinds may be taken with safety ;
but crude and unripe fruits are very dangerous. They bring on acidity
and bowel complaints.

5th, Milk. Milk is the food destined by nature for the infant period,
and seems admirably adapted for the use of young children, as well as
adults, whose powers of digestion are enfeebled either by dissipation or
disease. In its pure state, however, it is apt to disagree with some per-
sons; in which case it will be advisable to dilute it with gruel or water.
Those who labour under pulmonary consumption and hectic fever, are
frequently confined to a milk diet, and in such cases, the milk of the goat
lias been much employed in preference to that of the cow, being of a
lighter nature. When that of the former is not to be obtained, that of
the latter may be rendered more easily digested, by allowing it to stand
for some time, and then skimming off the cream from it.

Simplicity in Diet.

'Nature delights in the most plain and simple food, and every animal,
except man, follows her dictates. Man alone riots at large, and ran-
sacks the whole creation in quest of luxuries, to his own destruction. An
elegant writer of the last age speaks thus of intemperance in diet : " For
my part, when I behold a fashionable table set out in all its magnificence,
I fancy that I see gouts and dropsies, fevers and lethargies, with other
innumerable distempers, lying in ambuscade among the dishes."

Water.

Good water is of the greatest importance to the animal economy. It
is the most simple of all liquids.

" Nothing like simple element dilutes

The food, and gives the chyle so soon to flow "

Water should be free from any mineral or vegetable ingredient. It
may be considered pure when it is perfectly clear without any disagree-


and promoting health and longevity . 2V

able smell or taste, soft, and easily unites with soap. The more pure
the water, the more healthy. When it is impregnated with foreign sub-
stances, ill effects follow the use of it. The water of marshes and stag-
nant ponds are not fit to drink, and the waters of many cities, particu-
larly the city of New- York, is very injurious. It is highly impregnated
with the carbonate of lime, as may be seen by the decomposition of
calcareous matter which is copiously deposited on the bottom and sides
of those vessels in which it has been boiled. By using such impure wa-
ter constantly for drink, and cooking, large quantities of earthy and de-
leterious substances are taken into the system, and occasion dyspepsia,
gravel, and other complaints. Rain and snow water, and that running
over gravel beds, is considered purest; but good spring water is better
than either. The noted " rain-water doctor" cured his patients by pre-
scribing the free use of this " universal menstruum." It should never be
drank too cold, especially when the body is heated, or in a profuse per-
spiration. The most dreadful consequences follow drinking cold water
in hot weather, while the pores are open or when in a copious perspiration.
Spasms, convulsions, and death, often follow quickly. If this should
happen, perspiration should be restored as soon as possible. Bleeding
should not be resorted to as is now the custom, but give a large tea
spoonful or two of camphorated spirit in a little gin or brandy, every
fifteen minutes until relief is afforded. The hands and face should be
washed or bathed before any cold water is drank, and then a small
quantity only taken at a time. Let it also be held in the mouth a few
minutes before it is drank. It is as equally dangerous to drink fresh
buttermilk when a person is overheated. A relation of the gentle-
man who prints this work, died in a few minutes after drinking it
freely. Many have lost their lives for want of these precautions.
Another caution is necessary for farmers and other persons residing fan
the country. When stooping down to drink from brooks on woody
mountains in this country, they will sometimes meet with small lizards
and insects concealed among the leaves in the water, which are some-
times inadvertently swallowed, and prove dangerous.

Simple water in general is sufficient for those who are in health, but
it may be rendered more palatable by the addition of molasses. The
addition of a table spoonful of good lemon syrup to half a pint of fresh
water, makes a very pleasant and wholesome drink. Good syrup
should be procured, as it is often adulterated by the juice of lemons
that are decayed. Common lemonade made by the fresh juice of lem-
ons or limes, and sweetened with loaf sugar, makes a cooling and
agreeable drink in hot weather.


3( I Means of preventing disease.

CHAPTER III.

FERMENTED LIQUOR.?.


Ardent Spirits.

Water, says Dr. Cheyne, is the only simple fluid fitted for diluting,
moistening, and cooling ; the only ends of drink, appointed by nature ;
and happy had it been for mankind if other mixed and artificial liquors
had never been invented. Water alone is sufficient, and effectual for all
the purposes of human wants in drink. Strong liquors were never de-
signed for common use: they were formerly kept as other medicines
weary, strengthen the weak, and raise the low-spirited: As natural
causes will always produce their effects, the effects of the common use
of wine and spirituous liquors, is to inflame the blood into gout, stone,
rheumatism, fevers, pleurisies, &c. and to dry up the juices, aud scorch
and shrivel the solids. Those whose appetite and digestion are good
and entire, never want strong liquors to supply them with spirits; such
spirits are too volatile and fugitive for any solid or useful purposes of life.

Spirituous liquors, inflame the blood, corrode the coats of the stom-
ach, impair digestion, destroy the appetite, and induce many diseases
of the most dreadful kind, such as gout, scirrhus of the liver or spleen,
dropsy, apoplexy, palsy, madness, and fevers of different kinds : they
also impair the judgment, destroy the memory, and produce intoxication.

Of all the ways in which spirituous liquors are used, that of drinking
them in the form of drams is the most injurious; and although, perhaps,
it may be a slower way of destroying life than by taking a dose of any
active poison, still in the end it will be attended with that direful effect.
The habit steals on imperceptibly with many, and under any depres-
sion of spirits, they have recourse to it ; but one dram begets a necessi-
ty for another, and at length the indulgence becomes unlimited, and the
vice uncontrolable. The constitution soon shews its effects ; the appe-
tite is destroyed, digestion impaired, lowness and dejection of the mind
with tremors of the nerves ensue, the face is blotched, and the nose red
and beset with bumps, nausea, vomitings, frequent eructations, flatulen-
cy, and great disorder in the biliary organs take place ; the liver becomes
enlarged, indurated, and tubercular, and at last dropsy manifests itself.
if the patient is not previously cut off by apoplexy or palsy.

It does not seem easy to determine which of the two, viz. opium or
spirituous liquors, by being improperly used, proves most detrimental
to the human constitution: unluckily, the victims who addict themselves
to either, are insnared by a habit which they find it impossible to relin-
quish; because the constitution, when habituated to a strong stimulus,


and promoting health and longevity. 31

becomes incapable of carrying on the functions of life without continual
excitement, which of itself brings on debility and premature decay.

The speedy effects which opium, or indeed any of its preparations,
is observed to have on those persons who take it habitually, are an ex-
hilaration of animal spirits ; and from a dosing and depressed state into
which they sink after passing the usual time of taking the dose, they be-
come alert and cheerful; but those who accustom themselves to this
drug are of a yellow complexion, look much older than they really are,
lose their appetite, and their bowels are invariably constipated. Those
who indulge in a free use of strong and spirituous liquors have but little
desire for food after a time, the liver becomes diseased (being either be-
set with tubercles, or indurated, scirrhous, or enlarged), the countenance
is tinged of a yellow hue, general debility ensues, and dropsy at last
destroys life. Palsy is often also the consequence of a continued course
of such intemperance.

Habits of drunkenness often take their rise from a connection with
some company or companion already addicted to the practice; which
affords an almost irresistible invitation to take a share in the indulgen-
ces which those about us are enjoying with so much apparent relish and
delight ; or from want of regular employment, which is sure to occasion
many superfluous and pernicious cravings, and frequently this among
the rest; or it may have originated from grief, or fatigue, either of which
strongly solicit that relief which inebriating liquors administer for the
present, and furnish a specious excuse for complying with the inclina-
tion. But the habit, when once adopted, is continued by different mo-
tives from those to which it owes its origin. Persons addicted to exces-
sive drinking suffer, in the intervals of sobriety, and near the return of
their accustomed indulgence, a faintness and oppression which it exceeds
the common patience of human nature to endure. This is usu^^ re-
lieved for a short time by a repetition of the same excess : and to this
relief, as to the removal of every long-continued pain, those who have
once experienced it are urged almost beyond the power of resistance.

Wine.

Wine, unmixed with Alcohol, used in moderation, may be con-
sidered a wholesome drink. In those countries where it is produced
in abundance, the people drink freely of it without injury, and are
proverbially temperate. In France, where there are such immense
quantities of wine, a drunkard is seldom or never to be found. It seems
to destroy that hankering after ardent spirits, which is so peculiar to
other countries where wine is not much made. The wine imported into
this country contains such a large quantity of alcohol, that it becomes
injurious. Hence the necessity and importance for Americans and
other^to plant vineyards. Some of our most sensible men give it as
their opinion, that if wine was as as freely used as in France, it would
eradicate the universal vice of intemperance.

Says a noted writer upon this subject: " Wine, when used in moder-
ation, proves generally grateful to the stomach ; it warms and stimulates
it to greater exertion; promotes, probably, a more speedy discharge of
its contents, and from its immediate action, imparts a transient sensa-


82 Means of preventing disease.

lion of warmth and comfort ; but when taken in an immoderate quantity,
it produces intoxication for the time, and its exhilarating effects having
subsided, it leaves the frame disordered, relaxed, and weak. Wine
may be considered as the best of cordials, where its good qualities are
not destroyed by too free and frequent a use. Most of the great drink-
ers of vinous and spirituous liquors, die of relaxation, debility, loss of
appetite, tubercles and scirrhosity of the liver, or dropsy. Good wine
taken in moderation, cannot be injurious."

" The usages of wine are great, both as a beverage and a medicine.
Several physicians recommend it as an excellent cordial, and particu-
larly serviceable in fevers. The moderate use of wine is of service to
the aged, the weak, and the relaxed, and to those who are exposed to
a warm and moist, or a corrupted air: Wine deserves to be ranked first
in the list of Antiscorbutic liquors. Considered as a medicine, it is a
valuable cordial in languors and debilities; grateful and reviving; par-
ticularly useful in the low stage of malignant or other fevers for rais-
ing the pulse, and resisting putrefaction."

Beer.

Malt liquors waste the powers of life, keep up a constant fever, ex-
haust the spirits, inflame the blood, cause headache and premature old
age, and drank frequently and to excess, expose the body to number-
less diseases. They particularly disagree with persons of a bilious
temperament, and those subject to flatulency, coughs, and inflammatory
affections. In cases, however, of great debility, where a stimulus is
required, they may be given with success, particularly in the form of
Porter. This article is very strengthening to females, debilitated in
nursing.

Spruce Beer.

This is a very cooling and pleasant beverage, which may be freely
drank. It must be made, not of the syrup of spruce which is now cus-
tomary, but with a decoction of the leaves, by which the flavour and
qualities are rendered altogether different, and much improved.

Medical or Root Beer.

The following Beer will not only be found a substitute for many com-
mon drinks, but a very pleasant and wholesome beverage. Besides, it
possesses alterative properties, attenuates viscid humours, and purines
the blood.

Take Sassafras root, (Rad. Sassafras) q. s.
" Burdock root, (Arctium Lappa) q. s.

" Wild Cherry tree bark, of the root, (Prinos Virginiana) q. s.
" Root of Black Alder, (Prinos Verticillatus) q. s. y

Make a strong decoction by boiling several hours, strain, sweeten well
with molasses or honey, then add when it is blood warm, sufficient yeast
to ferment it. In a short time, or as soon as it commences fermenta-
tion, it is fit for use. This may be freely taken as a diet drink. It is
very pleasant and excellent to prevent disease and keep the system in a
healthy state, and it is grateful and cooling in all kinds of fevers.


and promoting health and longevity. S?

Cider.

Cider made from ripe apples, properly fermented, and racked 01
purified, is, of all fermented liquors, the most innocent and the best.
But too little pains is taken with cider. It may be made by care and
proper management as fine flavored and as clear as wine.

Mead.

Mead made by adding honey to water and fermenting it, is Very
pleasant and wholesome.


CHAPTER IV,


Few are aware of the efl'ect of air in producing disease, or the pro-
motion of health. It is the principal medium by which animal life i,s
supported, and so necessary is it for this purpose, that life cannot exist
a moment without it, as will appear by placing an animal in the exhaust-
ed receiver of an air pump.

Impure Air.

Impure air is a very common cause of diseases. Where it is very
impure it proves fatal suddenly ; and where it is mixed with that which
is pure, the effect of it on the system soon becomes perceptible. Indeed •
it would appear that most disorders proceed from unwholesome air, or
an atmosphere highly charged with deleterious gases. The influenza,
which often occurs as an epidemic, is caused by it, seizing thousands of
persons and spreading over extensive districts. The Indian Cholera,
so highly pestilential, is communicated by an impure atmosphere. Al-
so, the intermittent, remittent, and yellow fevers. Cities, towns, and
villages, have been almost depopulated, by reason of unwholesome air
received into the circulation, through the medium of the lungs.

The deleterious nature of impure air is still more strikingly exempli-
fied, where carbonic acid gas, called " choke damp," or fixed air, has
accumulated in large quantities, as in wells, mines, beer vats, and in
such places as the Grotto Del Cani in Italy, where animal life becomes
immediately extinct. Dogs are tlirown into the latter place, and are
immediately killed by inhaling the gas with which it abounds; and the
great number of lives that are annually lost in wells and mines, is fa-
miliar to all ; from which we learn the great influence which impure air
has upon our health. Persons should never descend any of these pla-
ces, until they have previously let down a light to ascertain if combus-
tion can be supported. If the light is extinguished, I scarcely need add
that no one can subsist in them a moment. By thus letting down a light-
ed candle into any place that has been long closed, many valuable lives
might annually be saved. I may here also observe, that in case a per-

Vol. I. 5


84 Means of preventing disease.

son has been thus suffocated, another person may be let down with a
rope fastened to a tub; or a noose may be made of the rope, by which
he may be enabled to take hold of and rescue the patient, provided he
holds his breath during the time he is in the lower part of the well, that
he may not inhale the gas ; or a number of ordinary bags, or those
made of muslin, may, in a few minutes, be made, and placed over the
head and tied to the neck of the person ; these (bags) may be kept open
by attendants above, a sufficient time to admit the common atmospheric
air, which will enable him to respire and continue any length of time
where this gas exists.

Mr. Schrceder, member of the New- York Literary and Philosophical
Society, has communicated an account of an ingenious contrivance,
called a " safety pump," which extricates this kind of air from wells,
vats, &c. in a very few minutes. It has been successfully tried several
times in this city. A pump made of tin, in the ordinary manner, would
no doubt answer the same purpose.

When it has been discovered that this kind of air exists in any place,
in order to remove it, slacked lime must be plentifully introduced. The
carbonic acid gas unites with the lime, for which it has a great affinity,
and a carbonate is formed which renders the air pure.

Air of Crowded Assemblies.

When we reflect upon the quantity of atmospheric air which a single
person renders impure or unfit for inhalation, we shall readily see the
danger arising from the air of crowded assemblies. It is computed that
a man destroys the vital portion of a gallon of air per minute. To test
this, let an animal be confined in a jar of common air, perfectly closed;
in a short time the inhalation of it absorbs the oxygen, and leaves only
the nitrogen and a small proportion of carbonic acid gas, which, being
incapable of supporting combustion, soon takes the life of the animal.
In the same manner the health of people is impaired by being confined
in jails, prisons, or being in crowded assemblies, or sleeping in close
rooms, and where there are a number of others. Many have been suf-
focated in this manner. A most melancholy circumstance occurred in
the " black hole" of Calcutta. A vast number of prisoners were crowd-
ed so closely together, where there was little or no circulation of air,
that most of them died in a short time. It is owing to this, that close
stoves prove so injurious. They destroy the vital portion of the air,
so indispensable to health and life, while the remaining impure air is in-
haled, and the consequence is head-ache, languor, and other ill effects.
Those who are obliged to use small stoves, should place a vessel of wa-
ter upon them, which, in a great measure, affords a preventive.

Persons should be careful also to promote a free circulation of air in
their houses, by frequently opening their windows. I have been in the
habit of doing it at night, without receiving the least injury; but on the
contrary, I think, with much benefit. A noted physician was so im-
pressed with the importance of this subject, that he slept with his win-
dows open, during the whole year. In the winter, snow was often
found upon his bed. He considered pure air of vital importance to
health.


and promoting health and longevity. -35

" I would propose," says a writer, " that the casements of all public
rooms, and indeed of private houses, shall be so constructed, as that
lh«' upper division shall slide down, and that a certain portion of them,
according as the room is more or less crowded, be always kept open.
By thus promoting a free and constant circulation of air in every apart-
ment, whether occupied or not, the internal and external air become
nearly of an equal temperature ; the foul air which is generated in close
unoccupied chambers, and which adheres to the walls and furniture, will
be carried off before it is accumulated, and the usual practice of airing
rooms, by opening the windows, and warming them with fires, will be
less, if at all, necessary.

" The most neat and delicate person, after having passed the nigh
in his bed-chamber, does not, when he awakes, discover any offensive
smell in his room: but if he quits it for a few minutes, and returns to it,
after having been in the open air, and before fresh air has been admit-
ted, he will quickly discover an essential difference."

In crowded meetings, or assemblies, delicate persons often become
sick and faint, and in every place where the air becomes injured by re-
peated breathing, or by fires, candles, &c.

Air of Cities.

The air in cities is injured by being so often breathed, and stagnated
by narrow streets ; numerous and compact houses and apartments ; a
dense population; exhalations arising from putrid substances; filth;
smoke of factories; dirty streets; &c. The streets of our cities are
altogether too narrow, as well as too filthy. Those who come from the
country to the city, often become immediately affected by the polluted
and contaminated air.

Our cities should be built as Babylon and other ancient cities were.
The streets were wide; houses a distance apart; numerous gardens,
trees, plants, &c. It is a disgrace to our municipal authorities, that no
more attention is paid to the cleanliness of our streets and yards ; the
exhalations arising from which is not only unpleasant, but very un-
wholesome. Yards, privies, and every house^ should be often thor-
oughly cleansed and white- washed.

Burying within Meeting Houses, Cities, Sfc.

Another detestable practice is to bury within large cities, churches,
&c The air is rendeied extremely fceted, and unhealthy, by the de
cay of animal matter, which often may be experienced on entering such
places. This being inhaled by the lungs, must prove injurious, espe-
cially to weak and delicate persons. This practice should be strictly
forbidden. " In most eastern countries it was customary to bury the
dead at some distance from any town. As this practice obtained among
the Jews, the Greeks, and also the Romans, it is strange that we should
not have followed their example in a custom so truly laudable.

Air confined in Vessels.

It becomes necessary to use great caution in rendering air pure in
vessels, otherwise malignant diseases may prevail on board of them.


S6 Means of preventing disease,

Lime should be occasionally thrown into different parts of the hold, and
the scuttle left open to permit the stagnant air to escape ; but what is
stiff better, ventilation should be used in every vessel of any magni-
tude, which throws the pure air to the bottom and expels the foul.

Change of Air.

The effect of a change of air on the health is almost incredible, espe-
cially by removing from the city to the country; and the effect seems
still greater on. infants and children than adults, thousands of whom an-
nually die from the effects of impure air, Many who have been labour-
ing under the most serious and apparently incurable diseases, by remo-
ving from the city to the country, or from an inland residence to the
sea shore, have rapidly recovered. I might mention striking instances
of this fact. It is often equally as salutary to remove from one climate
to another of an opposite temperature. It is often the case that the
whole system undergoes a complete change, without the use of medi-
cine. Persons afflicted with pulmonary and nervous diseases, should
be careful to avoid the air of great towns or cities. Those who are una-
ble to leave the city for any length of time, should frequently take ex-.
eursions in the country, or on the water.

Trees and Plants.

Trees and plants are great purifiers of the atmosphere, and are con-
ducive to health. They emit oxygen gas, (the only vital portion of the
air) during the da}', while at night they imbibe, and decompose it, and
retain the carbonic acid gas or fixed air, the deleterious nature of which
has been pointed out. By this we see how much they contribute to life
and health. Let them therefore be nursed and cultivated, both for
health and ornaments.

Burning Charcoal.

The practice of burning charcoal to cook, or to heat rooms, has be-
come very common, and many have lost their lives by the gas produ-
ced by it. The newspapers have lately recorded many cases where
jars, or vessels of charcoal, have been placed in cabins or rooms, and
the persons sleeping in them, have been killed. This is a very danger-
ous practice and never ought to be repeated.

Pure Air in Disease.

A sensible writer on this subject thus observes: " If fresh air be-ne-
eessary for those in health, it is still more so for the sick, who often lose
their lives for want of it. The notion that sick people must be kept
very hot, is so common, that one can hardly enter the chamber where
a patient lies, without being ready to faint, by reason of the hot suffo-
cating smell. How this must affect the sick any one may judge. No
medicine is so beneficial to the sick as fresh air. It is the most reviving
of all cordials, if it be administered with prudence. We are not, how-
ever, to throw open doors and windows at random upon the sick. Fresh
air is to be let into the chamber gradually, and, if possible,, by opening
the windows of some other apartment.


and promoting health and longevity. 37

" The air of a sick person's chamber may be greatly freshened, and
the patient much revised, by sprinkling the floor, bed, &c. frequently
with vinegar, juice of lemon, or any other strong vegetable acid.

" In places where numbers of sick are crowded into the same house,
or, which is often the case, into the same apartment, the frequent ad-
mission of fresh air becomes absolutely necessary. Infirmaries, hospi-
tals, &cc. are often rendered so noxious, for want of proper ventilation,
that the sick run more hazard from them than from the disease. This
is particularly the case when putrid fevers, dysenteries, and other in-
fectious diseases prevail,"


CHAPTER V.

EXERCISE BY DR. THOMAS.

The labourer is apt to murmur that he is necessitated to earn bis
bread by the sweat of his brow, and, looking round on his superiors, he
repines at his condition and station, considering that as hard and afflict-
ing, which infinite wisdom has destined to be absolute, if not the only
method by which he can be put in possession of the chief of all earthly
blessings, — a sound body and a quiet mind ; for those whom poverty
obliges to labour for their daily bread, are not only the most healthy,
but, all things considered, generally the most happy of mankind.

Toil, and be strong. By toil the flaccid nerves

Crow firm, and gain a more compacted tone;

The greener juices are by toil subdu'd,

Mellow'd, and subtiliz'd; the vapid old

Expell'd, and all the rancour of the blood. — Armstrong.

The industrious labourer, who is under the necessity of earning his
daily sustenance by personal exertion, commonly enjoys good health ;
he eats his scanty meal with a good appetite, unassisted by provocatives,
which his active and athletic body, by proper exercise, is soon enabled
to digest; and at the return of evening he retires to undisturbed repose,
where sound and uninterrupted sleep recompenses for his toil. Health
makes his bed easy, and his wearied limbs, recruited by sound repose,
fit him for the labour of the ensuing day. As his wants are few, he is
nearly a stranger to care and solicitude ; and his progeny are partakers
with him in the same inheritance. On the other hand, the sluggard is
exposed to a variety of temptations; and that indolence and inactivity
are the source of much immorality, we may soon be convinced of by
casting our eyes round the world. They also lay the foundation of ma-
ny painful diseases, and at length the mind, as well as the body, dwin-
dles into a state of torpor.

Indolence impedes the organic functions, undermines the fountains
of health, and gradually but invariably leads to disease. Accordingly


38 Means of preventing disease,

we find that those persons who are obliged to labour for their livelihood
are generally strangers to the gout and some other disorders, which may
be considered as the offspring of good living and indolence. It is an
established law of nature, that moderate labour or due exercise is essen-
tial to the preservation of health; and although the energies of life may
be impaired by excessive labour, and premature old age, with its many
infirmities, be the consequence, yet the decree of the Deity that man
should earn his bread by the sweat of his brow, may be considered rath-
er as a blessing than a curse in our present state of existence.

Let us be ever so attentive to our regimen and other circumstances,
yet it is impossible to keep ourselves in a healthy state if unaccompanied
by due exercise : there is no substitute which we can appropriate for the
non-observance of this salutary branch of personal management. No-
thing so effectually prevents indigestion, and consequently strengthens
the solids, as exercise; but unless it be duly and properly persevered
in, and our bodies daily habituated to it, we cannot experience all that
benefit which accompanies its use. In the formation of our frames,
and from the nature of our constitution, it evidently appears to have
been the positive intention of Providence to create in us, for our well
being, an absolute necessity for exercise. Our love of motion is surely
a strong proof of its utility, and nature implants no disposition in vain.
It seems, moreover, to be a law throughout the whole animal creation,
that no creature, without exercise, should enjoy health, or be able to
find subsistence.

Were men to live in an habitual course of exercise and temperance,
there would be but little occasion for using medicines:- accordingly we
find that those are the most healthy who subsist by the chace ; and that
men lived longest when their lives were employed in hunting, and had
little food besides what they caught. It has been remarked that all those
who have attained a very advanced age have undergone great labour
and fatigue in their younger years ; such was the case with Parr and
Jenkins, the two oldest men on record.

By an attention to exercise, the tone and vigor of the body are very
much increased ; the nervous energy, and also circulation of the blood,
are materially accelerated; and this increased impetus of the blood
through the whole system produces an effectual determination to the
surface of the skin, and a free perspiration is the consequence. By the
same means, the body is disposed to sleep, the appetite is increased,
the tone of the stomach and other organs concerned in the process of
digestion preserved, and the blood is determined from the interior parts;
thereby preventing, as well as removing obstructions, and powerfully
obviating any tendency to overfulness in the system.

Moreover, by exercise, the spirits are enlivened, as well as the body
refreshed; and it is an undeniable truth that where it is neglected, the
strength and energy of the whole machine gradually fall to decay, and
a morbid irritability is induced, with a long train of those unpleasant
symptoms which usually accompany chronic weakness. The natural
powers of the stomach and intestines sustain particular injury, the ap-
petite is vitiated, and the bile and other fluids employed by nature in
the process of digestion, are very imperfecdy secreted, or perhaps con-


and promoting health and longevity. 39

siderably obstructed : the muscular fibres of the body become relaxed
and debilitated ; the whole animal economy is disordered ; and a train
of nervous and hypochondriacal symptoms, together with gout, apo-
plexy, palsy, glandular obstructions, and many other complaints inci-
dent to inactive, indolent, and sedentany persons, come on.

Nothing but regular and sufficient exercise in the open air can brace
and strengthen the muscles and nerves, or prevent the endless train of
diseases which proceed from a relaxed state of these organs. The ac-
tive and laborious are seldom the subjects of nervous diseases: these are
the portions of the sons of affluence and ease. Riches, indeed, supply-
many indulgences, but they are at the same time accompanied by many-
evils ; and thus are the good and bad things of this life pretty equally
balanced.

Those who wish to enjoy health should use exercise as regularly as
they take their food : they should walk a certain distance in the open
air every day, or ride on horseback ; and probably they may find it to
their advantage to employ some portion of the day besides in gardening,
or some agricultural pursuit. The studious, and men of letters more
particularly are required to attend to these points; for if study be united
with a want of exercise, it infallibly proves injurious to health, and ne-
ver fails to destroy the appetite and impair digestion; then costiveness,
flatulency, crudities, head-ache, apoplexy, and palsy, are the certain
consequences. Exertion of the mind and inaction of the body, when
carried to excess, are destructive of the most robust health. An alter-
nate mixture of daily and sufficient exercise, business and reading, ena-
bles us to allow rest by turns to the body and the mind ; and keeps the
faculties in due equilibrium, and in a state of progressive improvement.

To render exercise as beneficial as possible, it will be necessary that
it be not too violent, and that moderation both in eating and drinking
accompany it. Violent exercise, which either heats the body, fatigues
it, or exhausts the spirits and muscular strength, is sure to be hurtful.
Active exercise soon after eating a full meal, is likely also to be injuri-
ous: a state of quietude, therefore, for some time after dinner in parti-
cular, as being the principal meal with most persons, will be advisable,
but nevertheless we should not indulge in sleep soon after eating. This
custom some people practise, but it is an improper one, particularly for
those of a full habit.

Exercise certainly gives strength and energy to the body, but it should
not be carried too far, or be continued too long, as it may then be pro-
ductive of mischief instead of benefit. It should be gentle and moderate,
and when practicable, be taken in the open air. Another rule necessary
to be attended to for rendering exercise advantageous is, that due care
be taken that the body, when heated, be not suddenly exposed to cold,
either by subjecting it to currents of air, or fresh breezes, or by drinking
cold liquors of any kind. In war«n climates, exercise shoidd always be
taken in the cool of the day, particularly in the morning.

We may consider exercise of the body as of three kinds. First, that
of simple muscular motion, consisting in walking, or such employments
as call forth the exertion of the limbs, as fencing, dancing, gardening,
digging, hunting, shooting, cricket, playing ball, pitching quoits, and


40 Means of preventing disease^

the like. Secondly, that which is obtained by riding on horseback^
or in any kind of carriage; and thirdly, that which may be given to the
body by outward applications, such as frictions, either with the hand,
a flesh brush, or a piece of flannel.

Exercises of the first kind are highly beneficial when the bodily pow-
ers will admit of them, as the mind being occupied therein adds very
materially to the advantages resulting from them ; yet, on account of
their being more fatiguing and laborious, there are many instances
where they are scarcely admissible, in which case, riding must'be sub-
stituted in their stead. Of all the different species of exercise not taken
on foot, that of riding on horseback is certainly entitled to the prefer-
ence, if the person is capable of using it. In nervous affections of all
kinds, but more particularly the hypochondriac, as well as obstructions
in any of the internal organs, it is more likely to be beneficial than any
other, from the parts being universally shook by it, and such persons
ought to pass two or three hours every day on horseback when th©
weather is not wet.

Next to riding on horseback, a preference should be given to an open
carriage of some kind or other, as a person has the advantage of con-
tinually changing the air and breathing it pure, the importance of which
must be obvious, as well as beholding the diversity of scenery and
country.

It now and then happens, however, that the motion of either a horse
or carriage, be it ever so expertly hung, is too much for the delicate
frames of some invalids. In such cases, easy exercise may be obtained
by sailing in a small vessel or boat, at proper times of the day when the
weather is fine; but when not so, swinging in a cot or hammock may
be substituted.

A person who is prevented from taking exercise in the open air, by
inclemency of the weather, or other causes, should by no means remain
in a continued state of inactivity; he should engage in some employ-
ment, or active amusement within doors. Where the taste and inclina-
tion extend to any mechanical pursuit, such as that of turning, &c. it
ought to be indulged; but where they do not, what are called dumb
bells may be substituted for a considerable space of time each day ; or
the person may play at biliards, or any thing else, rather than take
no exercise at all.

In cities, the exercises which are most suitable to the habits of the
people and their opportunities, are, for men, the practice of walking,
playing ball, and the gymnastics which have lately been introduced
from Germany, and which were in the highest estimation among tho
Greeks in former days, and to which, in a great measure is to be at-
tributed their fine healthy and efficient forms which have come down to
us in their statues.

The third species of exercise whiob has been mentioned, is that of
frictions, and where the circulation is languid, and the motion of th©
other fluids sluggish, or there is an inability of muscular motion from
any paralytic affection, these may be employed with much advantage,
and in the latter instance, still more so, if conjoined either with electri-
city or galvanism. Frictions may be made either with a piece of flan-


and promoting health and longevity. 41

nel, the flesh-brush, or simply with the hand ; and the best time for
employing them, seems to be in the morning, at the time of rising from
bed ; for then the superfluous matter which is prepared for perspiration,
is more readily brought to the surface of the body. In the application
of this species of exercise, if we commence the friction from the extre-
mities upwards to the body, we shall thereby accelerate the circulation,
and propel the blood into the finer branches of the minute vessels.

In every stage and state of life, exercise is necessary for our welfare
and health, and it is equally as requisite for those of the female sex as
for the male part of the creation. By food our bodies may be nourish-
ed ; but if not assisted by due exercise to carry on the digestion of it
with advantage, and help in throwing off the superfluous humours by
perspiration, we must, unavoidably feel all the inconveniences of reple-
tion and fullness in the blood vessels, whilst at the same time the body
will be afflicted with many painful diseases.

Indolence, moreover, not only occasions diseases, and renders men
useless to society, but promotes all manner of vice. Indolence, when
indulged, gains ground, and at length becomes agreeable ; hence, ma-
ny who were fond of exercise in the early part of life, become some-
what averse from it when more advanced in years. This is the case
with most gouty and hypochondriacal people, which, in a great measure,
renders their diseases more untractable, if not incurable. Idleness may
well be said to be the root of many evils; and I think we may safely
alledge, that, on the contrary, a life of activity and industry is not only
the greatest prompter as well as preservative of health at all periods of
our mortal existence, but likewise one of the best guardians of virtue.

No piece of indolence hurts the health more than the modern custom
of lying a-bed too long in the morning. This is the general practice in
great towns. The inhabitants of cities seldom rise before eight or nine
o'clock ; but the morning is undoubtedly the best time for exercise,
while the stomach is empty, and the body refreshed with sleep. Be-
sides, the morning air braces and strengthens the nerves, and, in some
measure, answers the purpose of a cold bath. Let any one who has
been accustomed to lie a-bed till eight or nine o'clock, rise by six or
seven, spend a couple of hours in walking, riding, or any active diver-
sion without doors, and he will find his spirits cheerful and serene
through the day, his appetite keen, and his body braced and strength-
ened. Custom soon renders early rising agreeable, and nothing contri-
butes more to the preservation of health.

The age of sixty may in general be looked upon as the commence-
ment of senility, and about this period of life it commonly happens that
some signs of bodily infirmity begin to appear. To the constitutions of
such persons moderate quietude is most suitable, since the springs of life
in them are rather weakened than invigorated by excessive or severe
action.


Vol. I.


42 Means of preventing disease .


CHAPTER VI.

CLOTHING.

Those who wish to pay a due regard to their health, must attend to
their clothing. It should he adapted to the climate, the season of the
year, age, &c.

Climate.

The principal object of clothing, is to preserve a right temperature
of the body. Hence persons in very cold, require much more clothing
than those in warm, climates. Custom or habit, however, has a great
influence. The natives of this country live throughout the most rigour-
ous winters, almost without any clothing, while we apparently experi-
ence more suffering with a very great quantity of clothing.

Age.

Youth, in consequence of the rapid circulation of the blood, require
less clothing than middle and old age.

Season.

The dress should be adapted to the season of the year, as every one
knows that winter requires much more clothing, than summer. But the
greatest caution is necessary to make the change very gradually.
Woolen garments should be put on early in the fall, and worn late in
the spring. This is the more necessary, by reason of the sudden and
great changes of our climate. One day the thermometer rises to an
hundred ; the next it sinks to forty ; which racks the constitution, and
proves very destructive to health. These vicissitudes must be guarded
against by proper clothing, which should never be very thin, even in
midsummer.

Fashion and Figure.

More consequence is now attached to figure and form, than to health
and convenience. Persons must dress fashionable, no matter how ri-
diculous or dangerous it may prove. Hence fashion and shape are con-
tinually changing, without regard to health, climate, or comfort. In
order to reduce the body to a. fine shape, the stomach and bowels are
squeezed into as narrow a compass as possible. By this reprehensible
practice, indigestion, fainting, coughs, consumption, and other com-
plaints, are produced.

Tight Lacing, Bandaging, fyc.

Garters, when drawn too tight, not only prevent the free motion and
use of the parts about which they are bound, but likewise obstruct the
circulation of the blood, which prevents the equal nourishment and


and promoting health and longevity. 43

growth of these parts, and occasions various diseases. Tight bandages
about the neck, as stocks, cravats, necklaces, <fcc. are extremely dan-
gerous. They obstruct the blood in its course from the brain, by which
means head-aches, vertigoes, apoplexies, and other fatal diseases, are
often occasioned.

Quantity of Clothing.

A judicious physician in speaking upon this subject, has the following
excellent remarks: " Robust persons are able to endure cold better than
the delicate, consequently may clothe lighter; but the precise quantity
of apparel which may be necessary for any person cannot be determin-
ed by reasoning. It must be entirely a matter of experience, and every
person is the best judge for him or herself what quantity Of clothes is
necessary to keep him or her sufficiently warm and comfortable. The
state so nearly approaching to absolute nudity, in which fashionable fe-
males now make their appearance in public, is not only highly indecent,
but must be very destructive of their health and personal comfort.

" Whilst treating on clothing, I would recommend it to every person
to be careful in observing that their linen is properly dried previous to
its being put on. This precaution will be particularly necessary in the
winter months, as washerwomen are then obliged to dry chiefly by the
heat of a fire, and tins is apt to be very imperfectly done. Many lives
are annually sacrificed by persons putting on damp linen, as well as by
sleeping in sheets not properly dried.

" Another observation which I think it necessary to make on the pre-
sent subject is, that due care should be taken to change tie stockings
and other clothing as speedily as possible after their becoming wet by
any exposure to inclement weather, rain, snow, &c. Many persons
are so imprudent as to neglect this very necessary change, and to suffer
their clothes, after such an exposure, to dry on them, assisted, proba-
bly by going near a fire for some time; but such a practice is always
attended with risk, and not unfrequently gives rise either to rheumatism,
fever, pleurisy, cough, consumption, or some other disease of a danger-
ous, or even fatal nature.".

Kind of Dress.

I shall say but little upon the kind of clothing which ought to be worn,
but leave this part of the subject to the good sense of the reader, to
determine. I would merely add, that such articles must be used as will
render the temperature of the body as uniform as possible, by keeping
up a due degree of perspiration. Nothing contributes more to this than
flannel.

" A very ingenious philosopher, (Sir Benjamin Thompson) by a va-
riety of experiments on the relative power of absorbing moisture from
the atmosphere, in different substances; as wool, fur, hair, silk, cotton
wool, and linen; has found, contrary to what was supposed wou'd be the
result, that woolen cloth absorbed most of these substances, and linen
the least; and hence this gentleman justly infers the vast advantage of
a flannel waistcoat next the skin; and, from personal experience, and
accurate analogy, he concludes that it would prevent a multitude of dis-


44 Means of preventing disease.,

oases; and as it promotes evaporation, instead of being too hot for sum-
mer, he found no inconvenience from it in the hottest weather, as it is
well known that evaporation produces positive cold; hence probably it
is that the East Indians find cotton shirts and shifts to be more comfort-
able than linen."

Females of a delicate constitution really require some under clothing
in addition to what is usually worn; and I would therefore recommend
them drawers or sliders of flannel. Some persons, particularly inva-
lids, may wear flannel throughout the year.

I think it is much better to wear flannel over the shirt, than next to
the skin. It is certainly more pleasant, and besides, it seems to main-
tain a more uniform, and equal heat of the body. I have proved this
by many years experience, and I have just learned that the late Pro-
fessor Smith of New Haven, advanced the same opinion. A flannel
waistcoat early in the fall, and as the weather grows colder, flannel
drawers, should be worn ; and they should be discontinued in the same
order of time. By this course, the transition from one extreme to the
other is not so great. It is better to wear cotton next to the skin, than
linen, as the latter when moistened with perspiration from great heat or
exercise, gives a sense of dullness as the body cools; whereas cotton,
by its absorbing properties, prevents any such effects.

Flannel, by all means, should be taken off at night, otherwise the
skin becomes too much accustomed to its stimulus, and its beneficial ef-
fects in some degree, lost. Not only so, if flannel is worn at night, the
system becomes more susceptible of cold after rising from the bed, and
exposure to the atmosphere. Flannel should be worn during the day,
to defend the system from a sudden contact of cold, which it does admi-
rably, by absorbing perspirable matter, thereby preventing too sudden
evaporation, and in this manner, a uniform temperature is maintained.

Imprudent persons have lost their lives by taking off their flannel too
early in the spring, merely because a day or two of warm weather com-
menced, which rendered it a little unpleasant. If it is not worn con-
stantly, it should be at least continued till the beginning of summer,
and again put on by the first of September, , in this latitude at least.

In the sultry days of summer, every precaution should be taken that
the body be not suddenly exposed to cold when overheated by exercise,
by throwing off a portion of our clothing, as is very customary with
many.

It is lamentable to see the great departure there is now from the for-
mer modes of dress, as well as in other respects. Our ancestors were
in the practice of dressing very warm, and comfortable; stout cloaks,
thick shoes, &,c. and they in consequence were healthy. In these days
it is the reverse. By the present mode or fashion in dress, thousands of
females are injured if not killed.

In concluding this chapter, I will quote the remarks of Buchan on
this subject. " Nothing," says he, " can be more ridiculous, than for
any one to make himself a slave to fine clothes. Such a one, and many
such there are, would rather remain as fixed as a statue from morning
till night, than discompose a single hair, or alter the position of a pin.
Were we to recommend any particular pattern for dress, it would be


and promoting health and longevity. *5

thai which is worn by the people called quakers. They are always f
Beat, clean, and often elegant, without anything superfluous. What
ethers lay out upon tawdry laces, ruffles, and ribands, they bestow upon
superior cleanliness. Finery is only the affectation of dress, and very
often covers a great deal of dirt."

The remark* of the celebrated Cobbett on dress, occurs to me, and
although not immediately connected with the preservation of health, af-
fords a useful lesson. " Let your dress be as cheap as may be without
shabbiness; attend more to the colour of your shirt, than to the gloss
or texture of your coat; be always clean as your situation will, without
inconvenience, permit; but never, no, not for one moment believe,
that any human being with sense in his skull, will love or respect you
on account of your fine or costly clothes."


CHAPTER VIT.


CLEANLINESS.


Those who wish to preserve their health, must attend strictly to
cleanliness. Few things are of more importance to society, and should
be attended to every where among all classes. By reference to Deu-
teronomy, chapter 22, 12th and 13th verses, it will be seen that the
Jews, during their mcampments in the wilderness, received particular
instructions with respect to it, and these instructions ought to be obeyed
by every one. It appears that the whole system of laws delivered to
that people, has a tendency to promote cleanliness.

In the most eastern countries, cleanliness makes a great part of their
religion. Mahometan, as well as the Jewish religion, enjoins various
bathings, washings, and purifications.

Although these might be designed to represent inward purity, yet at
the same time, they are calculated for the preservation of health. It
is rightly said, that the want of cleanliness is a fault which admits of no
excuse, for where water can be had for nothing, it is in the power of
every one to be clean.

The continual discharge from our bodies by perspiration, renders
frequent change of apparel necessary. Changing apparel greatly pro-
motes the secretion from the skin, so necessary for health. When that
matter which ought to be carried off" by perspiration, is either retained
in the body or re-absorbed from dirty clothes, it must occasion diseases.

Diseases occasioned by the want of Cleanliness.

Many com plaints are caused by want of cleanliness. Fevers, dysen-
teries, and diseases of the skin, often arise from filth, and they may
be mitigated, or cured, by a strict regard to cleanliness.


46 Means of preventing disease,

Filthy Persons and Apartments.

It is well known that the itch and vermin attack those whose apart-
ments and persons are filthy, by which they become a common nuis-
ance. Some of the habitations of the lower classes of persons, parti-
cularly of our cities, are so dirty that the most disagreeable and fceted
affluvia is emitted from them. If such persons are too indolent to re-
move the filth about them, ought not magistrates to interfere, and cause
it to be done 1

Filthy Cities and Streets.

Some cities are almost proverbial for their filthiness, and I know of
none more so than the city of New- York, notwithstanding the great
sums that are paid for the purpose of keeping it clean. While the most
popular streets are kept clean, there is such a stench arising from others,
that a person in passing them, is often obliged to suspend the functions
of his lungs, or in other words, obliged to " hold his breath." What
effect such deleterious gases must have upon the health, I leave the rea-
der to judge.

The same filthiness exists around our markets, docks, &c. If our
Corporation have not ingenuity enough to keep our streets and docks
clean, I will mention a method which is infallible, and it is that practised
in some of the great cities of Europe ; a method which renders the streets
so perfectly clean, that every traveller is forcibly impressed with it;
and it is this. Let there be a sufficient number of scavengers, or men,
to only a small portion of a street, and let the overseer, or superintend-
ant see that every particle of filth and dirt which is there accumulated,
is not only scraped, and swept into a pile, but likewise removed, and
if this every other day is not sufficient to keep it clean, it is done daily.
By this means, every street in the city is perfectly sweet and clean. It
is true, the expense may be a trifle more, but what is this compared to
the health of our citizens.

A writer has the following judicious remarks upon this subject.

" In many great towns the streets are little better than dung-hills, be-
ing frequently covered with ashes, dung, and nastiness of every kind.
Even slaughter-houses are often to be seen in the very centre of great
cities. The putrid blood, excrements, &c. with which these places are
generally covered, cannot fail to taint the air, and render it unwhole-
some. How easily might this be prevented by active magistrates, who
have it always in their power to make proper laws relative to things of
this nature, and to enforce the observance of them "?

Whatever pretentions people may make to learning, politeness, or
civilization, we will venture to affirm, that while they neglect cleanliness,
they are in a state of barbarity.

In ancient Rome the greatest men did not think cleanliness an object
unworthy of their attention. Pliny says, the Cloaca, or common
sewers for the conveyance of filth and nastiness from the city, were the
greatest of all the public works; and bestows higher encomiums upon
Tarquinius, Agrippa, and others who made and improved them, than
those who achieved the greatest conquests.

How truly great does the Emperor Trajan appear when giving direc-


and promoting health and longevity. 47

lions to Pliny his proconsul, concerning the making of a common sewer
for the health and convenience of a conquered city !

As it is impossible to be thoroughly clean without a sufficient quantity
of water, we would earnestly recommend it to the magistrates of great
towns to be particularly attentive to this article. Most great towns and
cities are so situated as to be easily supplied with water ; and those per-
sons who will not make a proper use of it after it is brought to their hand,
certainly deserve to be severely punished. The streets of great towns,
where water can be had, ought to be washed every day. This is the
only effectual method of keeping them thoroughly clean; and, upon
trial, we are persuaded it will be found the cheapest."

Some of the most dreadful diseases incident to human nature might,
in my opinion, be entirely eradicated by cleanliness.

Personal Cleanliness.

Personal cleanliness, says a writer, is chiefly effected by a frequent
change of dress, but is much increased by ablutions of different parts of
the body daily with water. Of these the head, face, and mouth, as
wefl as the hands and feet, claim our particular attention. From neg-
lecting to keep the mouth, teeth, tongue, and throat properly cleaned,
the breath is apt to acquire a disagreeable taint. The teeth ought,
therefore, to be cleansed after every meal, as the refuse of the food na-
turally settles about them, and in consequence of heat, rapidly becomes
putrid, and in this state, proves injurious to them as well as the gums.
Every morning the tongue should he cleansed, and the throat be well
gargled, and washed out with water.

The teeth are apt to become incrusted with tartar, which in time
yere much injures the enamel with which they are coated externally:
it should not, therefore, be suffered to collect, but be removed from
time to time. They should be washed every morning with a small
piece of sponge, or very soft brush dipped in cold water, joining occa-
sionally the powder of fresh prepared charcoal. If any of the teeth have
a tendency to caries or rottenness, or the gums are spungy and bleed,
the mouth may be washed with the tincture of myrrh.

Attention to the feet is also very necessary, particularly in warm
weather, and with those who from a peculiarity of constitution have
them very moist. The perspiration proceeding from them in hot wea-
ther, and after much walking, emits a very disagreeable smell: they
ought, therefore, to be frequently washed, but no means for stopping
the discharge should be resorted to, as by drying it up, serious diseases
might be induced. Great cleanliness by daily ablutions of the feet,
and the change of stockings, are not only the most convenient, but the
most salutary means of preventing all unpleasantries."

The most rigid cleanliness must also be observed during sickness.
The clothes of the person must be freqnently changed, every thing of-
fensive removed, and the apartment must be kept perfectly clean.

Mechanics, and those who are under the necessity of working where
there is constant dirt and filth, ought to wash themselves, and change
their clothing as often as possible. They should frequently bathe both
in the summer and winter season.


4i> Means of preventing disease,

I shall here quote the remarks of Mr. Jefferson, to show the great be-
nefit derived from frequently bathing the feet, as well as to show the
great advantage derived from an observance of the preceding rules and
maxims on health.

"I have lived temperately, eating little animal food, and that not as
an aliment so much as a condiment for the vegetables, which constitute
my principal diet. 1 double, however, the doctor's glass and half of
wine, and even treble it with a friend ; but halve its effects by drinking
Weak wines only. The ardent wines 1 cannot drink, nor do I use ar-
dent spirits in any form. Malt liquors and cider are my table drinks,
and my breakfast is of tea and coffee. 1 have been blest with organs
of digestion which accept and concoct, without ever murmuring, what-
ever the palate chooses to consign to them ; and I have not yet lost a
tooth by age. I was a hard student until I entered on the business of
life, the duties of which leave no idle time to those disposed to fulfil
them; and now, retired, and at the age of seventy-six, I am again a
hard student. Indeed, my fondness for reading and study revolts me
from the drudgery of letter writing; and a stiff wrist, the consequence
of an early dislocation, makes writing both slow and painful. I am not
so regular in my sleep as the doctor says he was, devoting to it from five
to eight hours, according as my company, or the book I am reading in-
terests me ; and T never go to bed without an hour or half hour's previ-
ous reading of something moral whereon to ruminate in the intervals of
sleep. But whether I retire to bed early or late, I rise with the sun.
I use spectacles at night, but not necessarily in the day, unless in read-
ing small print. My hearing is distinct in particular conversation, but
confused when several voices cross each other, which unfits me for the
society of the table. I have been more fortunate than my friend in the
article of health: so free from catarrhs, that I have not had one, (in
the breast, I mean,) on an average of eight or ten years through life.
water every morning, for sixty years past. A fever of more than twenty-
four hours, I have not had above two or three times in my life. A pe-
riodical head-ache has afflicted me occasionally, once, perhaps, in six or
eight boms, for two or three weeks at a time, which seems now to have
left me; — and, except on a late occasion of indisposition, I enjoyed
good health — too feeble, indeed, to walk much, but riding without fa-
tigue, six or eight miles a day, and sometimes thirty or forty."


<>nd promoting health and longevity. 49


CHAPTER VIII.

SLEEP, EARLY RISING, &C.

■• > or the purpose," says Dr. Thomas, "of recruiting the waste daily
produced in the human body, and enabling it to perform every function
properly, nature has wisely and beneficially determined that an ade-
quate renovation should succeed this exhaustion, by alternate periods of
sleep and watching.

An insufficient quantity of sleep exhausts the spirits and produces
head-ache, anxiety of mind, and moroseness of temper ; moreover it
debilitates the nervous system. On the contrary, too great an indul-
gence in sleep is also injurious, as the muscular motions are thereby
debilitated, the nerves and other fibres become relaxed or torpid, and
a state of indolent stupidity supervenes, which is not thrown off the
whole day ; added to which, that sprightliness of life and vivacity are
wanting, which are usually the consequences of early rising. It is evi-
dent, therefore, that sleep requires some regulation as well as our diet.
A habit of retiring soon to rest, and of rising early, appears to be very
favourable to the developement of the powers and the preservation of
health. Those who lie half of the day in bed, become effeminate
and enervated, and they soon lose that activity, which, properly direc-
ted, can alone confer value on life.

It would appear that six hours sleep every night is sufficient for any
adult person during the summer, who is in health, and in winter about
seven, or at the most eight. Those who indulge for nine or ten hours
in bed, are commonly wakeful or restless during the fore part of the
night ; and when they ought to rise, sink to rest and slumber on till noon,
by which imprudent conduct, even the strongest constitution will event-
ually be injured.

Nothing, however, more certainly destroys the constitution than that
of sitting up a great part of the night, and lying in bed the pleasantest
and most healthy part of the day, as is too much the custom with those
who lead a fashionable life, thereby converting night into day, and day
into night. This plan of proceeding is sure to injure the health of its
votaries, and to shorten the natural period of life, and it will under-
mine the strongest constitution, even if accompanied with habits of
regularity in other respects ; but how much more destructive must its
effects be, when conjoined with intoxication, gambling, sensuality, and
other midnight excesses. Persons of athletic bodies may probably
bear up for a time under late hours and intemperance, but the delicate
and weakly must unavoidably fall very soon martyrs to such indiscre-
tions.

It is, indeed, melancholy to observe among the votaries of fashion
and dissipation, the ill effects produced on their constitutions by their
midnight revels. Let any person view their pallid countenances where

Vol. I. 7


50 Means of preventing disease,

rouge is not resorted to, as well as their ghastly forms, and they will
be well satisfied that inverting the established order of things, by turn-
ing night into day, soon robs the blooming cheek of its roses and lilies,
brings on early decay in process of time, and destroys the most vigo-
rous frame.

A due proportion of sleep, taken at proper hours, is absolutely ne-
cessary for the welfare of our bodies, which during this period receive
a considerable degree of nourishment and renovation : if, however, it
be too short, interrupted, or taken at unseasonable hours, debility en-
sues, and the vital powers, sustaining a deprivation of adequate supply
of nourishment, are exposed to injury. A person from this cause will
be likely to feel a great degree of languor and weariness when he rises,
instead of proper refreshment. It must be evident to every person that
a considerable portion of human happiness is founded on the alternate
vicissitudes of motion and rest : those, therefore, who neglect the latter,
will rarely be gratified by the relish resulting from the former.

We should avoid sleeping in those apartments where we live during
the day, and for a bed-chamber make choice of a spacious room expo-
sed to the sun, and that can have the windows opened in the day-time
for the admission of pure air and the dispersion of vapours collected
during the night. To secure ourselves from the effects of a vitiated at-
mosphere, we ought also to take care that the beds are well shaken up
every morning; and that these, as well as the bed-clothes, are freely
exposed for a due length of time to the air.

Children may always be allowed to take as much sleep as they please,
but it is a very different case with adults of a youthful age. Quietude
and repose best, however, become the constitutions of those who are
far advanced in years, since the springs of life in them are rather weak-
ened than invigorated by excessive action and want of sufficient sleep.

The best way of making sleep refreshing, is to take proper exercise
through the day : to avoid strong infusions of tea or coffee in the even-
ing ; to make a very light supper at least an hour or two before retiring
to rest, where such a meal is indispensably necessary ; to go early to
bed; to lie down with a mind as serene and cheerful as possible, pla-
cing the body in the position which is most congenial to the feelings and
habits of the individual ; and to rise betimes in the morning ; for it has
been observed that the most of those who have attained a great age,
have generally been early risers. It must however be understood, that
although early rising and activity are conducive to health, they should
nevertheless be regulated by the state of bodily strength, the season
of the year, and the habitual exertions of the mind.

Too much exercise will prevent sleep as well as too little. We very
seldom hear, however, of the active and laborious complaining of rest-
less nights : it is the indolent and slothful who are generally incom-
moded with these complaints. The labourer enjoys more real luxury
in sound sleep and plain food than he who fares sumptuously and reposes
on downy pillows, where due exercise is wanting.

Light suppers are also necessary to sound sleep ; and many there arc
who experience uneasy and restless nights, if they commit the least ex-
cess at that meal, and when they do fall asleep, the load and oppression


and promoting health and longevity. 5 1

on their stomach occcasion frightful dreams, the night mare, broken
and disturbed rest. Some people cannot sleep, however, unless they
have taken solid food at night, and this perhaps merely from habit or
custom ; but in such cases the very lightest should be chosen, and only
a very moderate quantity be eaten, taking care at the same time that
an hour or two shall always elapse prior to getting into bed. Indeed, it
would always be advisable after eating such a supper to take a little
gentle exercise before the person retires to rest.

Those who follow intellectual pursuits with immoderate ardour, ex-
haust their powers, and speedily are visited by premature old age, —
Shun, therefore, close meditation and intense study by nights.

Anxiety of mind, and intense thinking, are almost certain to pre-
vent sound sleep ; and therefore we should endeavour to preserve tran-
quillity of mind, and banish anxious thoughts as much as possible, when
we retire to rest, calling in the aid of philosophy to bear with due for-
titude and resignation those ills which we cannot prevent.

He that goes to bed early at night will in general be desirous of ris-
ing betimes in the morning : moreover, he that accustoms himself to
an early hour for retiring to rest, can rarely join in Bacchanalian re-
vels, nor in the fashionable dissipations of high life : his sleep is not
disturbed by the effects of unseasonable luxury ; his slumbers are
sound and refreshing; and he rises with cheerfulness and fresh acqui-
red vigour to breathe the morning air, and commence the duties of the
day."


52 Means of preventing disease,


CHAPTER IX.

OCCUPATIONS.

It is well known that certain kinds of business materially injure the
health. Every kind which requires confinement and little motion ex-
erts a baneful influence on the system, such as shoe-makers, tailors,
mantua-makers, &c.

Many are injured by the air of some occupations being impregnated
with certain deleterious matters ; type-founders, printers, stone-cutters,
millers, chemists, forgers, glass-blowers, miners, and other artists,
painters, gilders, manufacturers of white and red lead, &c. The per-
sons last mentioned, should take frequently a dose of olive oil, or cas-
tor oil to prevent the painter's cholic.

Sedentary and studious persons are very liable to have their health
impaired by continuing too long in one position, or for the want of pro-
per exercise.

Watch-makers, in consequence of their sedentary habits, are liable
to a peculiar species of disease, to which many of them fall victims.
Its commencement is indicated by deficient appetite and eructations of
wind from the stomach. There is also sallowness of complexion, and
a muddy yellow appearance of the eyes. In the progress of the dis-
ease great quantities of black coagulated blood is discharged by stool,
and occasionally by vomit. On dissection, the whole intestinal canal
is found replete with blood either fluid or black and coagulated. The
liver and the spleen appear soft, and as it were rotten.

In its more early stages, this disease admits of being ehecked by ac-
tive purgatives, exercise, and country air.

Dr. Buchan gives the following judicious advice to persons of this
description, and those who lead a sedentary life.

" Instead of multiplying rules for preserving the health of the seden-
tary, we shall recommend them to the following general plan, viz
That every person who follows a sedentary employment should cultivate
a piece of ground with his own hands. This he might dig, plant, sow,
and weed at leisure hours, so as to make it both an exercise and amuse-
ment, while it produced many of the necessaries of life. After work-
ing an hour in a garden, a man will return with more keenness to his
employment within doors, than if he had been all the while idle."

Cultivating the ground is every way conducive to health. It not
only gives exercise to every part of the body, but the very smell of the
earth and fresh herbs revives and cheers the spirits, whilst the perpetu-
al prospect of something coming to maturity delights and entertains the
mind. We are so formed as to be always pleased with somewhat in
perspective, however distant or however trivial ; hence the happiness
that most men feel in planting, sowing, building, &c. These seem to
have been the chief employments of the more early ages; and, when


and promoting health and longevity. 53

kings and conquerors cultivated the ground, there is reason to believe
that they knew as well wherein true happiness consisted as we do."

It may seem romantic to recommend gardening to manufacturers
in great towns ; but observation proves that the plan is very practica-
ble. This practice has many salutary effects. It not only induces these
people to take exercise without doors, but also to eat many greens,
roots, &c. of their own growth, which they would never think of pur-
chasing.

Mechanics are too much inclined to crowd into great towns. The
situation may have some advantages ; but it has likewise many disad-
vantages. All mechanics who live in the country have it in their pow-
er to cultivate a piece of ground; which, indeed, most of them do.
This not only gives them exercise, but enables them to live more com-
fortably. So far at least as my observation extends, mechanics who
live in the country are far more happy than those in great towns, they
enjoy better health, and live in greater affluence.

In a word, exercise without doors, in one shape or another, is absolutely
necessary to health. Those who neglect it, though they may for a while
drag out life, can hardly be said to enjoy it. Weak and effeminate,
they languish for a few years, and soon drop into an untimely grave.

Intense study is so destructive to health, that few instances can be
produced of studious persons who are strong and healthy. Hard study
always implies a sedentary life; and when intense thinking is joined
to the want of exercise, the consequences must be injurious. We have
frequently known even a few months of close application to study, ruin
an excellent constitution, by inducing a train of nervous complaints
which could never be removed. Man is evidently not formed for con-
tinual thought more than for perpetual action, and would be as soon
worn out by the one as by the other.

So great is the power of the mind over the body, that, by its influ-
ence, the whole vital motions may be accelerated or retarded to almost
any degree. Thus, cheerfulness and mirth quicken the circulation, and
promote all the secretions; whereas sadness and profound thought nev-
er fail to retard them. Hence it would appear, that even a degree of
thoughtlessness is necessary to health. Indeed the perpetual thinker sel-
dom enjoys either health or spirits; while the person who can hardly
be said to think at all, generally enjoys both.

Perpetual thinkers, as they are called, seldom think long. In a
few years they generally become quite stupid, and exhibit a melan-
choly proof how readily the greatest blessings may be abused. Think-
ing, like every thing else, when carried to extreme, becomes a vice;
nor can any thing afford a greater proof of wisdom, than for a man fre-
quently and seasonably to unbend his mind. This may generally be
done by mixing in cheerful company, active diversions, and a change
of scenery."

I would recommend to merchants, clerks, and all classes of citizens,
who are very much confined, to rise very early, and as often as possible
to walk or ride into the country.


54 Means of preventing disease.


CHAPTER X.

TRANSITIONS FROM HEAT TO COLD.

Most of our diseases arise from a sudden transition from heat to
cold. The sudden application of cold to the body in a state of perspira-
tion, cannot but be fraught with danger. The pores become closed,
perspirable matter retained, which proves a source of irritation to the
system, and soon terminates in a departure from health. And this
is generally brought about by a sudden transition from a high to a low
degree of temperature. The system is capable of undergoing an in-
tense degree of cold, when it is gradually brought under the influence
of it ; but when it is suddenly applied, such a shock is given to the body
that it rarely escapes without receiving injury ; from which we may in-
fer the great necessity of care and caution against sudden transitions
from heat to cold. A sensible writer has the following remarks upon
this subject : —

By cold air, the human body is considerably contracted and ren-
dered more compact ; which is very obvious by observing that the same
clothing which in summer sits tight will in the winter be too large. In
proportion, therefore, as the external heat is diminished, it would ap-
pear nature intended that the internal heat should be increased there-
by. In winter the blood is much disposed to inflammation ; and be-
coming, in some measure, obstructed in its passage through the lungs,
produces coughs, pleurisy, inflammation of the organs of respiration,
rheumatism, and inflammatory sore throat. By paying attention, how-
ever, to a proper degree of clothing, and taking particular care that a
due proportion of exercise be not neglected, cold may be rendered less
hurtful to the body, and the risk of incurring these dangerous com-
plaints in a great measure be obviated.

The effects of extreme cold are, however, sometimes destructive
to the human frame, as in northern countries persons have been known
to drop down suddenly, and be deprived of life without any previous
symptoms of disease. The loss of various parts of the body in per-
sons of the most healthy constitution, by the effect of extreme cold, is
Avell known. The toes, fingers, lips, and nose, are frequently so far
exposed to its effects, as to induce a mortification in these parts.

There is no change throughout nature more pernicious either to an-
imal or vegetable bodies than from extreme heat to intense cold, or from
freezing to sudden thawing, and the opposite of these. Hence, it has
been observed, that irritating coughs are never so prevalent as when
there are sudden alterations of the weather, and when the air, after
having been very cold, suddenly becomes warm and damp, and after
that assumes a considerable degree of coldness again. These transitions
occasion a smaller quantity of matter to be thrown off by perspiration,
and the lodgment of a greater proportion of fluids upon the internal


and promoting health and longevity. oo

parts, which become loaded and obstructed ; hence catarrhs, diarrhsea.
and many other diseases.

When any ordinary change of external temperature is made grad-
ually, such is the constitution of the healthy human frame that it bears
it with impunity; but when it happens more rapidly, danger arises, pro-
portioned to the suddenness of the event.

The most dangerous, however, of all, are those rapid and violent
fluctuations which arise from the artificial modes of influencing temper-
ature by the close rooms and fires of refined life, as also by the cloth-
ing. There are many thoughtless persons who will rush out into the
freezing air from a room heated to the temperature of India, or after
having been warmly clad throughout the day, will go out into the cold
damp air of night in the flimsy dress of a ball-room, with their bosoms
uncovered, and their necks and shoulders perfectly bare ; for such is the
prevailing fashion among women nearly of all ages. They are never
more dressed, according to their ideas, than when thus equipped for some
place of amusement, although, in fact, they very nearly approach a state
of nudity. It is by such imprudences, and the changes of temperature to
which they become liable, that so many thousands are annually cut off
by one disease or another, but particularly by pulmonary consumption.

But we are now so accustomed, to hear of colds, coughs, consump-
tions, rheumatism, and a long train of other diseases of a similar nature,
that we have nearly been brought to consider them as the necessary at-
tendants of our situations, the unavoidable scourges of our climate and
land, the existence of which we may deplore, but against which it is al-
most useless to employ any precaution. It is a positive fact, however,
that most of our winter maladies derive their origin from sudden and
considerable vicissitudes of temperature, and may, perhaps, be avoid-
ed by paying due attention to the following rule : viz. To keep the tem-
perature of the atmosphere which surrounds us as uniform as possible,
and when a change is unavoidable, to make it gradually, and not sud-
denly. A due attention should, therefore, be paid to our clothing, and
management in other respects, on quitting our houses, or coming out of
any crowded place of public resort in cold weather. Persons of a deli-
cate constitution will find it much to their advantage to pay attention to
the changing of their clothes according to the vicissitudes of the sea-
son, or even, indeed, to those of the same day, proportioning not on-
ly the quality, but quantity thereto.

As our bodies are readily acted upon by every sudden change of
weather, as from heat to cold, and the reverse of this, every precau-
tion should be taken, for the purpose of preventing any sudden check
to perspiration ; and it should be a fixed rule, to avoid all rapid trans-
itions from one extreme to another, and never to remove from a room
which is highly heated, to a cold air, or fresh breeze, while the body
remains warm, or till the necessary change by additional clothing has
been previously made. If, at any time, the body should be greatly
heated during the warm weather, it will be sure to suffer by going into
a cellar, ice-house, or cold bath, or even by sitting on cold stones, or
groand thttl Is damp. Severe colds, pulmonary consumption, rheuma-
tism, and many other maladies of a severe nature, have been brought


ob Means of preventing disease,

on by such imprudence, and even speedy death has been the conse-
quence of such a transgression."

Wet Clothes.

Another writer treating on obstructed perspiration, has the following
pertinent remarks: " Wet clothes not only by their coldness obstruct
the perspiration, but their moisture, by being absorbed, or taken up
into the body, greatly increases the danger. The most robust constitu-
tion is not proof against the danger arising from wet clothes; they daily
occasion fevers, rheumatisms, and other fatal disorders, even in the
young and healthy.

It is impossible for people who go frequently abroad, to avoid some-
times being wet. But the danger might generally be lessened, if not
wholly prevented, by changing their clothes soon ; when this cannot be
done, they should keep in motion till they be dry. So far are many
from taking this precaution, that they often sit or lie down in the fields
with their clothes wet, and frequently sleep even whole nights in this
condition. The frequent instances which we have of the fatal effects of
this conduct, ought certainly to deter all from being guilty of it.

Wet Feet

Wet feet often occasion fatal diseases. The colic, inflammations
of the breast and of the bowels, cholera morbus, <fcc. are often occa-
sioned by wet feet. Habit will, no doubt, render this less dangerous;
but it ought as far ?s possible to be avoided. The delicate, and those
who are not accustomed to have their clothes or feet wet, should be pe-
culiarly careful in this respect.

Night Air.

The perspiration is often obstructed by night air; even in summer
this ought to be avoided. The dews which fall plentifully after the hot-
test day, make the night more dangerous than when the weather is cool.
Hence in warm countries, the evening dews are more hurtful than where
the climate is more temperate.

It is very agreeable after a warm day to be abroad in a cool evening ;
but this is a pleasure to be avoided by all who value their health. The
effects of evening dews are gradual, indeed, and almost imperceptible;
but they are not the less to be dreaded: we would therefore advise
travellers, labourers, and all who are much heated by day, carefully to
avoid them. When the perspiration has been great, these become dan-
gerous in proportion. By not attending to this, in flat marshy coun-
tries, where the exhalations and dews are copious, labourers are often
seized with intermitting fevers, quinseys, and other dangerous diseases.

Damp Beds.

Beds become damp, either from their not being used, standing in
damp houses, or in rooms without fire, or from the linen not being dry
when laid on the bed. Nothing is more to be dreaded by travellers
than damp beds, which are very common in all places where fuel is
scarce. When a traveller, cold and wet, arrives at an inn, he may.


and promoting health and longevity. 57

by means of a good fire, warm diluting liquor, and a dry bed, have
the perspiration restored ; but if he be put into a cold room, and laid in a
damp bed, it will be more obstructed, and the worst consequences will
ensue. Travellers should avoid inns which are noted for damp beds,
as they would a house infected with the plague, as no man, however ro-
bust, is proof against the danger arising from them.

But inns are not the only places where damp beds are to be met with.
Beds kept in private families for the reception of strangers are often
equally dangerous. All kinds of linen and bedding, when not frequent-
ly used, become damp. How then is it possible that beds which are
not slept in above two or three times a-year, should be safe? Nothing
is more common than to hear people complain of having caught cold by
changing their bed. The reason is obvious: were they careful never
to sleep in a bed but what was frequently used, they would seldom find
any ill consequences from a change.

That baneful custom, said to be practised in many inns, of damping
sheets, and pressing them, in order to save washing, and afterwards
laying them on the beds, ought, when discovered, to be punished with
the utmost severity. It is really a species of murder, and will often
prove as fatal as poison or gun-shot. Indeed no linen, especially if it
has been washed in winter, ought to be used till it has been exposed
for some time to the fire ; nor is this operation less necessary for linen
washed in summer, provided it has lain for any length of time. This
caution is the more needful, as gentlemen are often exceedingly atten-
tive to what they eat or drink at an inn, yet pay no regard to # a circum-
stance of much more importance. Muslin, is much more healthy than
linen, sheets.*

Damp Houses.

Damp houses frequently produce the like ill consequences: for this
reason those who build should be careful to choose a dry situation. A
house which stands on a damp marshy soil or deep clay, will never be
thoroughly dry. All houses, unless where the ground is exceedingly
dry, should have the first floor a little raised. Servants and others,
who are obliged to live in cellars and sunk stories, seldom continue long
in health."

" If a person suspect that his bed is damp, the simple precaution of taking off
the sheets and lying in the blankets, with all, or most of his clothes on, will prevent
all the danger. I have practised this for many years, and never have been hurt by
damp beds, though no constitution, without care, is proof against their baneful
influence.


Vol. I.


38 Means of preventing disease,

CHAPTER XI.

EVACUATIONS OR EXCRETIONS.

The state of our health is materially influenced by the excretions or
evacuations of the body. Nature has provided certain outlets for the
ourpose of carrying off morbific and extraneous matter, which, if re-
tained too long, injures our health.

The Bowels.

It is scarcely necessary to say that costiveness is the cause of many
complaints. When the excrements are too long retained in the bowels,
they contaminate the fluids, and seldom fail to prove injurious. The
bowels, therefore, should be kept regular. We cannot precisely deter-
mine how often they should be moved in a given length of time, as this
depends upon the constitution, habit, state of the health, and other
causes. As a general rule, however, once in twenty-four hours is suf-
ficient, and two days at farthest; but there are instances, where per-
sons are so imprudent as to suffer their bowels to become so constipa-
ted, that nothing is discharged in one or two weeks. This is a very
dangerous practice. Some persons, from a torpid state of the stomach
and intestines, want of exercise, &c. are habitually costive, causing
flatulence, swelling of the abdomen, loss of appetite, head-ache, debil-
ity, and sometimes convulsions. To such, I would recommend such a
course of treatment, diet, and exercise, as will restore a regular action
of the bowels. Most persons continually take physic for this state of
the system, which injures the tone of the stomach and intestines, and
after a while, rather aggravates, than removes the cause.

Remedy for Habitual Costiveness.

A mild purgative may first be administered to remove the accumula-
tion of feculent matter, and it may be occasionally repeated, until cos-
tiveness can be removed by other means.

After the operation of the physic, recourse must be had to proper
diet. Nothing of a binding or heating nature, must be taken; but, on
the contrary, that kind which possesses loosening properties, such as
fruit of various kinds, raisins, prunes, figs, dried peaches, apples,
whortleberries, &c. and particularly the coarse bread spoken of in a
prec ding chapter.

Those who are habitually costive, will find great benefit by taking a
tumbler of cider before breakfast in the morning. I have seldom or
never known it fail to act moderately upon the bowels, and to obviate
costiveness. But there is another method which 1 have practised with
great success, which is, when the bowels become constipated, or cos-
tive, to use friction with the hand over the stomach and whole belly.
Let the parts be daily rubbed for ten or fifteen minutes. This has had
an admirable effect, and regulated the bowels when all other means
have failed.


ana promoting health and longevity. 59

The Liver.

The state and quality of the bile must be attended to, in order to
preserve health. The bile, in a vitiated state, or when not duly secre-
ted, will sometimes become obstructed in the liver and gall bladder,
and become a source of dyspepsia, constipation, and nervous com-
plaints, jaundice, &c. When tins is the case, or when a person is pos-
sessed of a bilious habit, it should be corrected principally by diet. All
hi({h seasoned food and meats, should be avoided, and vegetables sub-
stituted. Exercise should by no means be neglected, and one meal of
victuals, daily omitted. One or two soda powders may be daily taken,
and other aperient, or laxative medicines, if a course of regimen should
not prove effectual.

Kidneys.

The kidneys perform an important office, which, if suspended, or im-
perfectly performed, will affect the health, by inducing inflammation of
the kidneys, dropsies, &c. When there is a disposition to pass the
urine more frequently than usual, and when there is but a small quantity
voided at a time, it is a sure evidence that there is some derangement in
the animal economy. Persons, in such a case, should immediately re-
sort to the use of such medicines as stimulate the kidneys, and cause
them to secrete a larger quantity of mine, or in other words, to perform
their office. An infusion of parsley, of whortleberries, marsh mallows,
and other dilutent drinks, should be freely taken. Should there be,
however, too great a quantity of urine voided, it will constitute a dis-
ease termed Diabetes, which requires an opposite course of treatment.
If this should be the case, as little drink as possible should be taken,
and those of a tonic and astringent nature, such as a decoction of the
bark of the wild cherry tree, and beth root.

Some, who are styled urine doctors, pretend to know and cure dis-
eases by the inspection of the urine alone. But this is impossible. So
many things tend to change the quality and quantity of urine, as to ren-
der it altogether an uncertain criterion, with respect to health or disease.

A writer on this subject has the following excellent remarks: " It has
long been an observation among physicians, that the appearances of the
urine are very uncertain, and very little to be depended on. No one
will be surprised at this, who considers how many ways it may be af-
fected, and, consequently, have its appearance altered. The passions,
the state of the atmosphere, the quantity and quality of the food, the
exercise, the clothing, the state of the other evacuations, and number-
less other causes, are sufficient to induce a change either in the quantity
or appearance of the urine. Any one who attends to this will be as-
tonished at the impudence of those daring quacks, who pretend to find
urine. These impostors, however, are very common in some parts,
and, by the amazing credulity of the populace, many of them amass
considerable fortunes. Of all the medical prejudices which prevail in
this country, that in favour of urine doctors is the strongest. The com-
mon people have still an unlimited faith in their skill, although it has


tiO Means of preventing disease,

been demonstrated that no one of them is able to distinguish the urine
of a horse, or any other animal; from that of a man."

The Skin.

Perspiration constitutes the greatest of all the discharges from the
body. Sanctorius, an Italian physician, was the first that directed the
attention of the faculty to the cutaneous and pulmonary transpiration,
which he proved to exceed the other secretions considerably in weight;
and he maintained that this function must have a considerable influence
on the system, and was deserving of great consideration in the treat-
ment of diseases. From this we may learn what effects must follow its
obstruction. No doubt more complaints arise from retained perspirable
matter, than from any other cause. It therefore becomes of vast impor-
tance to keep up a regular and constant perspiration ; for want of a due
attention to which, thousands of lives are annually sacrificed.

" Whatever gives a sudden check to perspiration," says Thomas,
" may be productive of very injurious consequences, and these should
be carefully guarded against, as many persons annually fall a sacrifice
to not paying proper attention to the various causes from which perspi-
ration may become obstructed ; one of the most common of which is,
taking, or catching cold, as it is more usually called.

By sudden transitions from heat to cold, either from changeableness
of the weather, the state of the atmosphere, going immediately from a
hot room into the cold air, or throwing off some part of the clothing
when heated by exercise, the perspiration is very apt to be obstructed ;
and colds, coughs, and inflammation of the lungs are the usual effects of
such conduct. Drinking freely of cold water, or any other small li-
quor, when the body is heated, is not only injudicious, but fraught with
many ill consequences. Damp houses and damp beds, or linen ; expo-
sure to night air, especially in hot countries ; not changing clothes quick-
ly after their getting wet ; and continuing to wear stockings, shoes, or
boots, which are saturated with water, exposing the feet thereby to cold,
are all likely to be attended with injurious consequences, by occasioning
obstructed perspiration. The same will happen by throwing open a
window when the room is hot and sitting in or near it, so as to be ex*
posed to a current of air.

Some are so imprudent, or fool hardy, as to bathe themselves in cold
water when considerably heated by walking, dancing, or the like exer-
cises ; and by such conduct have been soon attacked with some dreadful
disease or other. In some instances death has been the consequence."

I shall here give rules to pursue, when perspiration has been obstruct-
ed from any cause. If the clothes have been wet, they should be im-
mediately taken off, and dry ones substituted. The feet must be im-
mediately bathed in warm water, and a glass of gin sling, or toddy, ta-
ken as hot as possible. After which, an infusion or tea of some medici-
nal plant may be taken, such as sage, mint, catnip, pennyroyal, hyssop,
&c. This course will restore perspiration, and prevent dangerous if
not fatal diseases. This is much better than to send for a common phy-
sician, to be bled, blistered, and mercurialized !


and promoting health and longevity. 6*


CHAPTER XII.

THE ABBRNETHIAN CODE OF HEALTH AND LONGEVITY.

In the preceding chapters I have treated on most of the subjects con-
nected with the prevention of disease, and the preservation of health.
But there are some things, in relation to which, it will be satisfactory
to the invalid, to be more explicit. I allude to the digestive functions
which exercise such a great controul over the system, that it becomes
necessary, in order more fully to develope the true Hygeian principle to
enlarge upon. Few are aware of the influence which the stomach and
intestines exert in the prevention of disease, and preservation of health.
Such ample justice has been done to this subject by the celebrated Dr..
John Abernethy, that I shall make no apology for inserting the sub-
stance of his remarks.

Symptoms of Faulty Digestion.

The process of digestion then, or the preparation of what we eat and
drink, is the great function of the stomach, but this process becomes
often impaired or in fault, and the symptoms of imperfect or faulty di-
gestion first appear in that organ or part of the body which is naturally
weakest ; hence, often the distance of it from the original seat of the
disease ; and hence, also, the complication of symptoms which mark
this primary foundation and source of aliment.

One of the first marks of vitiated digestion is lowness of spirits, or a
peculiar languor and lassitude that sickens at exertion, and shows any
thing but what are in common language termed good spirits ; this is fol-
lowed by want of rest or disordered sleep, and the person awakes in
the morning with a sense of weariness and fatigue, instead of being re-
freshed; deficiency, or loss of appetite, then ensues, and Nature no
longer employs her protecting monitor, in the sensation of hunger, when
the organ is thus out of order, or in a torpid state.

To these primary, or leading symptoms, are added a dry, hot skin,
occasioning, by the retention of saline matter in the blood, an offensive
breath; the tongue also is foul, and in the morning appears covered
with a crust, conveying to the person's own sense a bad and disagreea-
ble taste; with these symptoms are joined, also, a heavy, dull counten-
ance, a sallow look, and sympathetic pain in the head.

Symptoms of a Faulty State of the Bowels.

When the bowels partake of this faulty state, they are marked by an
irregular action of the canal; if examined, also, the excrementitious
matter voided will be found changed in quality, which, in a healthy
state, should be neither too solid nor too liquid in consistence, and in
colour be like that of rhubarb made into a paste ; but in derangement
of the digestive process, this matter varies in colour from perfectly


62 Means of preventing disease,

white to black; the former proclaiming a deficiency of bile, and the
latter a fault in the liver and large intestines. In this state, there pre-
vails flatulence, irructation and extrication of gaseous matter, which is
never known in health : and hence arise various uneasy s}'mptoms in
the stomach and alimentary tube. Indeed in the continued identical
structure from the gullet to the rectum, the state of one part is apt to
effect that of another, so indigestion occasions flatulence, spasms, and
pains in the intestines, and vice versa, the state of the intestines eiiccts
the stomach.

Causes of Indigestion.

The causes of of imperfect digestion are, all the refinements of civili-
zation, and whatever draws us from a life of nature, or a condition of
simplicity in diet and all its attendant auxiliaries. Of these may be
enumerated :

First, All stimulants, as spirits, wines, and the too free use of pur-
gative medicines.

Secondly, All liquids in excess, especially when taken warm, for
they weaken the tone of the organ, and dilute the gastric juice, lessen-
ing its solvent powers; this is the case with tea, punch, and other dilu-
tions; but —

Thirdly, If this is the case with excess of liquids, that of solids is no
less pernicious, for gluttony over-distending the stomach, prevents a
full secretion of bile.

Thus the pleasures of the table, whenever enjoyed beyond modera-
tion, are purchased at the expense of health. Even the quality of what
we take requires equal attention to avoid injury or doing wrong, as well
as the quantity, and the more food is deprived of the nourishing princi-
ple, the more unfit is it for the purposes of aliment. Hence various
experiments have been made on the digestibility of the different sub-
stances we eat ; but whatever the state of digestibility of such substan-
ces, it should be laid down as a maxim, that no food should be submit-
ted to the powers of the stomach without due mastication ; for the want
of proper and minute divisibility will render all food, whatever its na-
ture, less digestible than it otherwise would be.

This process of mastication properly conducted should reduce the ali-
ment into a soft mass, and mix it intimately with an albuminous fluid,
derived from the passages already stated it pervades ; but when all this
is done, in order to show the mutual sympathy that influences the sys-
tem, digestion is often interrupted by disorders of ditferent parts, or
affections of the mind.

This process of digestion, at the time it takes place, seems to be the
centre of Auction ; nature here concentrates her powers for this great
and primary object — the formation of nourishment, and suspends, as it
were, for a time, her attention to other parts, till this is prepared ; thus
as a proof of her attention, and of the general influence which seems to
take place in the completion of this process.

The fever of digestion is consciously felt in a slight sense of cold
shivering, with a quicker and more contracted pulse, and as the process
advances, the skin or spasm of the surface relaxes, and the insensible


and promoting health and longevity. 63

perspiration augments, like the febrile paroxysm that marks the efforts
of nature aroused by the influence of disease. Of this daily progress of
symptoms, after meals, persons of weak and irritable habits are parti-
cularly sensible.*

Deductions on the Importance of the Primary Organs, particularly the

Stomach.

After this detail, the primary organs are to be looked to in the pro-
per exercise of their functions, as the foundation and leading apparatus
of the whole, for continuing the welfare of the machine, and especially
the stomach.

1. As we have seen, in no case can life exist without this organ;

2. All matters for the support of life must pass through it;

3. It possesses a universal sympathy with every part, for the aid and
help of the whole. *

We have only to state the case of the celebrated Venetian nobleman
Carnaro, to show what the proper regulations of these functions will do,
in the attainment of longevity.

Carnaro, till he arrived at the age of forty-five, had led a most dis-
sipated life ; finding the powers of his constitution to be rapidly declining,
he consulted two of the most eminent physicians in Italy, who attribu-
ted his complaints of indigestion, general lassitude, and occasional gout,
to his mode of living, and told him he must make his choice, either of
temperance or death. Regarding long life as the greatest blessing mor
tals can enjoy, and greatly dreading death, he adopted the former; he
commenced a vigorous war against his passions, and, after some efforts,
gained a complete victory. Virtue then triumphed, and crowned him
with the blessing of Heaven and the esteem of his friends. He selected
his articles of diet, and made a wholesome repast of one dish, and ab-
stained from all savoury sauces and spirituous liquors ; he took only a
sufficient quantity to satisfy nature, and so great an advocate did he
become for temperance, that he was satisfied that what he left at a meal
did him more good than what he consumed. He took care not to ex-
pose himself to sudden vicissitudes of the atmosphere ; he abstained from
violent exercise and late hours, and selected places for his residence the
air of which was salubrious. Thus his constitution and intellects were,
by the adoption of this well-regulated plan, fully preserved.

Though Carnaro is a strong instance of the happy effects of a well re-
gulated plan, there are others who, without any of these rigid regula-
tions, deserve more implicit imitation. The Cardinal de Senlis, un-
der a less restricted plan, lived a hundred years — an equal age to Car-
naro; and his maxim had been, in the previous years of his life, to live
with the caution of an old man when young, so that, when old in years,
he was still, in constitution, a youth.


* But the effects of food, as of every thing else, being relative to the state of the
stomach, what is light to one is heavy to another; and a cordial in some states oc-
casions vomiting. A heavy meal oppresses the stomach, and depresses its power
over tlie other parts of the system, often inducing alarming symptoms, which are
frequently relieved hy a puke, or by spirits or aromatics, increasing the power of

'.\\f <ii \m-t,-\\


the stomach.


64 Means of preventing disease,

The celebrated John Wesley is another instance, who, with a natu-
ral weak and infirm habit, was able to undergo much bodily and mental
exertion, for a long life, and to possess the mens sana in corpore sano,
solely by adhering to certain rules he had laid down.

In more modern times, Sir John Sinclair recovered his health by a
similar plan, though without any of those rigid regulations which mark
the plan of Carnaro. Sir J6hn observes — " though naturally possessed
of a sound constitution, untainted by any hereditary disease, yet, about
the year 1797, he fell into a weak and enervated state ; found himself
unequal to manage his private concerns, of prosecuting useful inquiries,
or of applying his mind to political pursuits, with his former zeal and
energy: he saw, also, many of his contemporaries die at an early peri-
od, before their constitutions had, apparently, suffered much decay.
By reflecting on these circumstances, and a number of others, with
which the subject is connected, he came to the conclusion that more
die from their ownfaidts than from actual disease : and that life might,
accordingly, be prolonged, and health enjoyed with satisfaction, by a
proper and regulated conduct with each individual, in regard to the
various circumstances connected with the continuance or support of life ;
accordingly, by laying down a proper plan of proceeding for himself,
he not only recovered his own health, but was enabled, by his advice
toothers, to render them an equal benefit. These circumstances led
him to publish his excellent work, entitled "A Code of Longevity" —
the substance of which will be found in these pages — where he brings
forward, as a leading professional example of his precepts, the immor-
talized Galen, who, by a certain plan, strictly adhered to, reached the
age of one hundred and forty years.

These cases then offer abundant proof how a proper and restricted
mode of proceeding, in diet and regimen, even in a weak constitution,
will ensure a healthy longevity. It is at the same time not to be dispu-
ted, that nature alone has often done that for the individual which the
above system is so well calculated to effect, without any of the restric-
tions now insisted on ; but even in these cases of what may be termed
natural longevity, it has never happened but where the primary parts of
the machine, the stomach and bowels, have originally been, in their
fabric, the strongest parts of the body. These remarkable instances
have chiefly occurred in cold climates, and amongst the lower orders of
society ; and some curious examples of it that occur in Medical History
are as follows.

Remarkable Instances of Longevity.

Isabel Walker, a Scotch woman, died at one hundred and twelve,
without much severity of regimen; but she was distinguished by a pla-
cidity of temper, and possessed that happy medium state of habit, neith-
er lean nor corpulent, favourable to long life.

Peter Garden, a Scotchman, died aged one hundred and thirty-one;
his stature was tall, and his employment agriculture, which he contin-
ued to his death, with a wonderful appearance of freshness and youth.

John Taylor, a Scotch miner, lived to one hundred and thirty-two:
his teeth continued sound to the last.


and promoting health and longevity. 65

Gylloul Macrain, a native of the island of Toura, in the Hebrides,
died, after keeping one hundred Christmas masses.

Catharine, Countess of Desmond, in Ireland, who died in the reign
of James the First, was one hundred and forty; and thrice in the course-
of her life she renewed her teeth.

Brian Monagher, a native of Ireland, walked twenty miles to vote,
at a contested election, in Queen's County, he being then one hundred
and fourteen years old. The law required that forty-shilling freehold-
ers should renew the registering of their qualification every seven years ;
and so little idea had this farmer of death, that, in giving a plumper to
Sir Henry Parnell, he intimated his intention, of registering as a 501.
freeholder the next time, which answers for life !

Thomas Parr, a native of Shropshire, was buried in the Abbey of
Westminster, at the age of one hundred and fifty-two.

Lawrence, a native of the Shetland Islands, married at the age of
one hundred, and died at one hundred and forty.

Kentigern, or St. Mungo, Bishop of Glasgow, lived to the age of
one hundred and eighty-five, as certified on -his monument.

Henry Jenkins, of Northallerton, Yorkshire, lived to the age of one
hundred and sixty-nine, being first a labourer, and afterwards a fisherman.

Sarah Rouen, one hundred and sixty four, and John Rouen, her
husband, one hundred and seventy-two, were married one hundred and
forty-seven years, both natives of the Directory of Carsoueber.

Petratsch Zorten, a native of Hungary, and a cow-herd, lived to one
hundred and eighty-five.

The greater proportion of these persons were natives of Scotland;
though it is known that the most numerous instances of longevity are to
be met with in Norway and Russia; out of 6229 persons in Norway,
sixty-three had lived to a hundred; and out of 726,273 in Russia, two
hundred and sixteen attained one hundred years, two hundred and
twenty above it, and four one hundred and thirty. In the list of lon-
gevity, enumerated above, all these persons were of a low situation of
life, except the Countess of Desmond; and the diet of all of them seems
to have been moderate, and in some instances abstemious. Parr's
maxims of health were, to keep your head cool by temperance, your
feet warm by exercise ; to rise early and go soon to bed ; and if you
are not inclined to get fat, to keep your eyes open and your mouth shut,
or, be moderate in your sleep and diet.

The diet of Jenkins is said to have been coarse and sour ; and in the
north of England, distinguished for long-lived people, it is much the
same, consisting of salted meat and sour-leavened bread.

Zorten's diet consisted entirely of milk and cakes, with a glass of
brandy; and, being of the Greek church, he was, to the last, a strict
observer of all their fasts.

The following instance of longevity is mentioned in the St. Peters-
burgh Gazette. There is living near Polosk, on the frontiers of Lithu-
ania, a man named Demetrius Crabowski, who is one hundred and
sixty-eight years old. He has always led the humble but tranquil life
of a shepherd, assisted by his two sons, the eldest of whom is one hun-
dred and twenty, and the youngest ninety-seven years old.
Vol. I. Q


66 Means of preventing disease,

The following is an epitaph on Margaret Scott's tomb stone in Scot-
land.

Stop, passenger, until my life you read,
The living may get knowledge from the dead !
Five times five years I lived a virgin's life,
Ten times five years I was a virtuous wife,
Ten times five years I lived a widow chaste.
Now wearied of this mortal life I rest.
Between my cradle and my grave have been
Eight mighty kings of Scotland, and a queen
Four times five years the commonwealth I saw.
Ten times the subjects rose against the law.
Twice did I see old Prelacy pulled down,
And twice the cloak was humbled by the gown
An end of Stuart's race I saw — nay more,
My native country sold for English ore.
Such desolations in my time have been,
I have an end of all perfection seen.

Comparative Statement of Longevity.

To these facts, we may add, in comparing the different classes of
society with respect to longevity, that the profession of the gardener is
the most healthy; next to it husbandmen are also healthy, but from
their great exertions and exposure to every weather, they are soon
worn out, and generally old men before fifty. Manufacturers are neith-
er healthy nor long-lived. Miners, who are much below ground, are
generally healthy, and often long-lived. Soldiers, unless cut off by tho
casualties of war, are long-lived, as well as sailors, who are generally
healthy; and this is proved by the records both of Chelsea and Green-
wich Hospitals. Persons engaged in commerce, if not too speculative,
and their minds racked with anxiety, are generally long-lived. The
voluptuous, both in town and country, are commonly cut off in their
prime. Dancing-masters are long-lived, from their constant exercises;
singers, on the contrary, are short-lived. The learned professions, at
the farthest, seldom exceed the age of eighty. In addition to these
truths rt may be observed, in respect to the sexes, that women are
generally longer lived than men ; and mothers than single women.

On this solid foundation, then — the healthy action of the stomach and
bowels — is the present Code of Longevity built, which no speculative
reasoning can overturn, and which every practical fact tends to confirm
and enforce. The means of carrying it into effect are simple and clear,
neither wrapt in mystery nor needing disguise to recommend them;
and along with the regulation of these primary functions, they require
only the auxiliaries of diet and exercise, under such control, as to ren-
der the plan successful.

Method oj Counteracting Indigestion, or of Preserving a Healthy

State.

All the preceding symptoms of indigestion proclaim weakness in the
primary part or the stomach, and the consequence of this weakness here
is, that the sympathetic organs, or the liver and intestines, unavoidably
partake of the same state. Wherever weakness occurs, in any organ or
part, its functions become retarded; hence accumulation follows, and


and promoting health and longevity. W

congestions are formed, that clog the wheels of the machine. The first
and leading point then is, to remove this disposition to disease; and for
this purpose the bowels must first be unloaded of their contents, and the
energy of the liver, next excited, to perform actively its peculiar se-
cretion: when this is once effected, being the fundamental indication,
then the second, or relief of the organ itself, comes to be the remaining
object in view, which consists in restoring to the stomach its energy, or
healthy tone; and these two indications must go hand in hand, in order
to give and continue effectual relief.

Use of Aperients.

In performing the first indication, much attention is to be paid both
to the means and to the frequency ; to the means has been given the
appellation of Chylo-poetic Aperient, the operation of which is intend-
ed to be gentle; not too stimulant or drastic. To its frequency, its use
should not be repeated oftener than once or twice a week; acting then,
as the gentle assistant, not the violent outrager of nature in her efforts.
Perhaps, from no cause;, do diseases of the gut or rectum so frequently
arise, as from the rash and imprudent use of purgatives. With many,
this has become such an established habit, that a motion is never procu-
red without the intervention of art. Thus an exciting cause of disease
is constantly applied. Nay, since popular medicine gave such a rage
for drastics, under the name of Antibilious Pills, now so numerous and
so unscientifically compounded, from that time diseases of the rectum
seem chiefly to have taken their origin, for they are at least four-fold
within these thirty years. Nature intended that this part should be kept
in a certain degree distended by its contents, and where these are thrown
off too frequently, and that by a strong action producing irritation, this
natural distention not only is not allowed to take place, but from the
irritation an unnatural contraction of the fibres of the gut is induced ;
which, by the frequent repetition of such irritation, gradually thicken
and harden, so as to occasion disease by this thickening and contracting
of the cavity in whole or in part. Once in twenty-four hours is suffi-
cient for the purposes of health, and thus contraction will be prevented
on the one hand, and irritation on the other. The rectum is to be con-*
sidered as the natural ivater-closct. of the system, which does not require
to be too often or unnecessarily emptied ; and if proper regard is paid
to this idea, we shall not hear so often of strictures of the rectum, or the
use of bougies for their removal. The best bougie is the contents of
the part.

Use of the Alterative Digester.

The second indication is performed by what is termed the Alterative
Digester, or such means as invigorate; for the weakness of the stomach
is oftener caused by loss of tone in its muscular fibres, than from any
other source. Its secretion is not so readily affected as its moving pow-
ers; and as digestion is connected with more circumstances than the
mere application of the gastric juice; so in the means employed to act
on the organ, these circumstances are all to be taken into account, both
in the prescription and its use; for the same caution, as regards acting
on its contents, is not so necessary here as in the intestines,


6& Means of preventing disease,

Such are the principles of the Abernethian System, thus shortly ex-
plained; and whatever form of medicine is adopted to execute these
views, it can only act properly, by answering the two objects pointed
out. To this system Mr. Abernethy was led by his observations on the
hospital practice. He saw there that local disease, or affection of a
part, induced a general derangement of the body and interruption of
health ; and in the same manner he saw that a general derangement as
completely influenced this state of local disease. Reflecting on these
things, he was led to believe, that if the primary organs of digestion and
expulsion are kept in a healthy condition, the health of the whole ma-
chine must be regulated by them, and follow their healthy condition, as
links of the same chain. The plan of medicine to do this is clearly sim-
ple, and can never fail of success, when assisted at the same time by a
proper attention to diet and exercise.

In confirmation of the first, or the powerful effect of diet, the case
of Carnaro and other celebrated instances have been stated ; and in ad-
dition to these, we shall here insert Mr. Abernethy's Rules on the sub-
ject, which he strongly and constantly recommend^ to the perusal of
every patient that consults him, as taken from the celebrated seventy-
third page of his work.


THE ABERNETHIAN CREED.

" The method of treatment," he observes, " which I have adopted is
simple, and founded on the opinions I have formed of the nature of the
disease, and on physiological views of the functions of the affected or-
gans. Believing the disordered parts to be in a state of weakness and
of irritability, my object has been, to diminish the former and allay the
latter. Believing also that the secretions into the stomach and bowels,
upon the healthy state of which the due performance of their functions
depends, were, in consequence of such disorder, either deficient in
quantity or depraved in quality, I have endeavoured to excite, by means
of medicine, a more copious and healthy secretion.

In conformity to these views of the subject, the patients have been
recommended to be particularly attentive to their diet. The food
should be nutritious, and easy of digestion : strong, plain broths, ani-
mal food of loose texture, milk, eggs, and farinaceous vegetables, are
the articles which appear most advisable. But, as custom and inclina-
tion have so great an effect in regulating the action of the stomach, I
have contented myself with recommending patients not to eat any thing
which it was probable that they could not digest. It seems reasonable
to suppose, that if the food be properly digested, it will not irritate the
intestinal canal; but that if digestion fails, the animal and vegetable
matters will undergo chemical changes in their passage through the long
tract of intestines, and thereby maintain a state of irritation in those or-
gans. I have urged patients not to oppress the powers of the stomach
by too great a quantity of food, nor to take a second meal until time has
been allowed for the digestion of the first, and for the recovery of the
powers of the stomach. Whilst I have thus advised patients to eat
moderately and not too frequendy, I have also cautioned them not to
let the stomach become irritable by too long abstinence.


and promoting health and Longevity. t>y

The quantity of food should of course, be proportionate to the pow-
ers of the stomach. If it receives more than it can digest, no nourish-
ment is obtained from the superfluous quantity, and the undigested ali-
ment not only acts injuriously in the bowels, but in the blood, and in
the urine, as has been mentioned. There is also another view of the
subject. Moderation in diet not only insures the complete digestion of
the aliment, but it prevents the blood vessels from being over-loaded
and kept in a state of action exhausting to their strength. When also
important organs may be in a state of nervous irritation and disorder of
functions, if there be a plethoric state of the blood-vessels at the same
time, those vascular actions are likely to ensue, which may produce an
alteration of their structure, and irremediable disease.

The function of digestion will not, however, go on well, even where
these circumstances have been attended to, if the stomach be deprived
of a stimulus to which it has long been accustomed. Uneasy sensations
will be experienced, denoting, if I may so express it, a discontented
state of this organ, and a want of the expected stimulus. It is on this
account injurious wholly to restrain those patients from the use of wine
who have been in the habit of taking it. A moderate quantity of such a
stimulus may be allowed after dinner, to prevent uneasy sensations, and
to promote digestion; but strong fermented liquors must be injurious
at any other period. It is wrong to stimulate the stomach when it has
no task to perform.

Even our food must be considered as exerting a medicinal influence
in disorders of the stomach, when that organ is irritable. A vegetable
diet and abstinence from fermented liquors may tend to tranquillize it.
On the contrary, when it is weak as well as irritable, that aliment which
is most readily digested is to be preferred, and cordials are sometimes
beneficial. The effects of food and medicine can never be considered
as resulting from their operation on the stomach solely, but from their
conjoint influence upon the nervous system in general. Irritability of
the stomach may arise from that of the brain, and unstimulating diet
may tend to tranquillize the latter organ, and thereby alleviate the dis-
order of the former. On the contrary, a more generous diet may, bj"
exciting the nervous system, produce that degree of energy in its action,
which invigorates the stomach, and tranquillizes its disorder. It may
further be observed in some cases, that the kind of medicines or diet
which is serciceable to the stomach, may aggravate the nervous disor-
der ; and, on the contrary, that those means which seem to tranquillize
nervous irritation tend to diminish the powers of the stomach.

A regular diurnal evacuation of the bowels is particularly necessary,
since the detention of the faeces must prove irritating to these organs.
Purging medicines sometimes relieve unpleasant sensations; but they
do not in general produce even this effect ; and all active purges seem
to increase the disorder. It is natural to suppose, that strong stimuli
will aggravate the unhealthy condition of weak and irritable parts.

It is difficult, in many cases, to regulate the actions of the bowels,
either by diet or medicine. They are costive for a time, and then fits
of purging come on. The former state must be obviated, in order to
prevent the latter. Medicines which excite a healthy action of the


70 Means of preventing disease,

bowels in one person, are either inert or too active in another. Doses
which would have no effect in a state of health, become purgative in
this disorder — a circumstance which shows that the bowels are irritable.
There are some rare instances of the contrary, in which it is exceed-
ingly difficult to excite the actions and secretions of these viscera. The
object which I had in view, in all cases, is to excite the peristaltic ac-
tion of the bowels, without irritating them, so as to induce them to pour
forth and evacuate their own fluids. The administration of purgative
medicines, in very small doses, at regular intervals is in many cases the
best mode of effecting this purpose.

At the same time I have not been inattentive to the error in the bili-
ary secretion, which exists in the greater number of these cases. The
relief, which arises from the increase or correction of the biliary secre-
tion, in the majority of these cases, shows how much the liver is con-
cerned in causing or aggravating the symptoms in these diseases.

I have generally explained to the patients the objects which I had in
view, in correcting disorders of the digestive organs, by saying that
there are three things which I consider as right and necessary to the cure
of disorder. First, That the stomach should thoroughly digest all the
food that is put into it. The patient, perceiving the necessity of ob-
taining this end, becomes attentive to his diet, and observes the effect
which the quantity and quality of his food and medicines have upon his
feelings, and the apparent powers of his stomach. Secondly, That the
residue of the food should be daily discharged from the bowels: here
too, the patient, apprised of the design, notes what kind and dose of
purgative medicine best effect the intention; and whether it answers
better if taken at once or at intervals. Thirdly, That the secretion of
bile should be right, both with respect to quantity and quality.

Whenever circumstances would permit, I have recommended the
patients to take as much exercise as they could, short of producing fa-
tigue; to live much in the open air; and, if possible, not to suffer their
minds to be agitated with anxiety, or fatigued by exertion. The ad-
vantages of exercise in nervous disorders, upon which those of the di-
gestive organs so greatly depend, appear to me very striking. It were
to be wished that we had some index to denote the strength and irrita-
bility of the nervous system, serving as the pulse does with regard to
the sanguiferous organs. Perhaps the strength, agility, and indefatiga-
bility of the muscles may b^ regarded as the surest evidence of energy,
of nervous power, and bodily vigour. If this were granted, however,
it would follow, that many persons possessing great nervous power,
have nevertheless great nervous irritability. Many people who are ex-
tremely irritable and hypochondriacal, and are constantly obliged to
take medicines to regulate their bowels whilst they lead an inactive life,
no longer suffer from nervous irritation, or require aperient medicines,
when they use exercise to a degree that would be excessive in ordinary
constitutions. The inference which I draw from cases of this descrip-
tion is, that nervous tranquillity is restored in consequence of the super-
fluous energy being exhausted by its proper channels — the muscles.
When, on the contrary, the nervous system is weak and irritable, ex-
ercise seems equally beneficial ; but caution is here requisite as to the


and promoting health and longevity. 71

degree in which it should be taken. A weak and irritable patient may
not be able to walk more than half a mile without nearly fainting with
fatigue on the first day of the experiment; but by persevering in the ef-
fort, he will be able to undergo considerable muscular exertion without
weariness. Does not this imply a considerable increase of bodily
strength, and is not the acquisition of strength the chief desideratum in
the cure of many disorders? The nervous irritability also, when de-
pendent on weakness alone, will proportionately diminish with its cause.
In the latter case the nervous energy seems to be augmented in conse-
quence of our increasing the demand for it. I am induced to make
these observations from a belief that exercise is not employed as a med-
ical agent to the extent that its efficacy seems to deserve. Attention to
diet, air, exercise, and mental tranquillity, are more decidedly benefi-
cial than medicines. Surgeons in London meet with frequent and con-
vincing instances of the efficacy of pure air. Patients under the irrita-
tion of a local disease, who scarcely eat or sleep in town, recover their
appetite, digestion, and sleep, so suddenly on their removal into the
country, as to leave no room for doubting, that the change of air has
produced this beneficial alteration in their health."

Such, then, are the dictates of Mr. Abernethy, to which he refers his
patients; and, without entering into the strange colloquial drama that
on such occasions ensues, we shall state that his peculiarities, though
not always pleasant, will, like an unpalatable drug, though received
with distaste at first, from the truths they convey, gain their full influ-
ence on the mind of every invalid in the end.

Thus, in conclusion, the Abernethian Code of Health and Longevity
may be in its principles comprised in a nut-shell ; and consists, as has
been mentioned, in three grand points —

1. The due Regulation of the Stomach and Bowels, by the use of
mild Aperient Medicine.

2. Moderation in Diet to co-operate with this, and rather in quantity
than in respect to quality.

3. Exercise proportioned to the Constitution and circumstances of
the Individual, taken chiefly in the open air.

This is the true system for Health and Longevity; and death will
never take place where a proper attention to this system is observed,
but by a gradual decay, or by unforeseen casualties, which no precau-
tion can guard against. Thus, on the plan laid down, " every one man
be justly said to have his Health in his oum keeping.' 1 ''


72 Means of preventing disease ,


CHAPTER XIII.

PERNICIOUS CUSTOMS, TOBACCO, MINERALS, &C

I shall now notice some of the most pernicious customs which are
prevalent, and which materially injure the constitution.

Tobacco.-

Among all the pernicious customs, the use of ardent spirits ex-
cepted, I know of none more nauseous, unpleasant, and perhaps
I may add, injurious to health, than the use of tobacco, in various
forms. I cannot conceive how it is that a plant so poisonous, sick-
ening, and disgusting, has been brought into such universal use.
It must be, no doubt, like the use of opium, imputed to its narcotic
effects. As this is an important subject, I shall occupy a few pages
in pointing out its deleterious influence on the system, extracted
from a Dissertation on the Use and Abuse of Tobacco, by Adam
Clarke, LL. D.

In 1798, seventy ships, laden with tobacco, came into the port of
London, whose cargo amounted to forty millions of pounds weight!
When such an amazing consumption of this article, in only two king-
doms, is considered, it will not appear surprising that a plant which was
formerly only a wild production of North or South America, should
have been so extensively cultivated ; seeing not only the inhabitants of
Great Britain and France, but of Europe in general, have acquired
the extravagant habit of using such prodigious quantities of it, either
in the form of powder, as a sternutatory ; by the pipe, in the way of
fumigation; or in twist as a masticatory. And this habit, strange to
tell, notwithstanding its shocking indelicacy and nastiness, continues to
enslave, in the most disgraceful manner, the higher, lower, and mid-
dle ranks of life. The Church and the State have enjoined to sancti-
fy and legalize the use of it, from the time of the Grand Prior, on
the one part, and Queen Catherine de Medicis, on the other, to the
present day.

Dr. Maynwaring in his Treatise on the Scurvy, has written largely
against the use of this herb. He assserts in the most positive manner
that it is a grand procuring cause of scorbutic complaints, and that the
scurvy has abounded much more in these nations since the introduction
of tobacco than it had ever done before.

On this subject old Mr. Salmon, a man in practical medicine wise
beyond his day, speaks as follows: — "The powder of the leaf is used
as a sternutatory to cleanse the head and brain, and may be profitable,
being used physically; but the ordinary and constant use of it for snush,
is of very evil consequences, and induces apoplexies. For drawing a-
way the tbin matter by itself, through the continual use thereof, the
thick is left behind, where increasing, and being too thick to pass through


and promoting health and longevity. 73

the Os Ethmoidcs or siove-like bone, the cavity at length is filled there-
with, where obstructing the animal spirits near their centre, an apo-
plexy is infallibly induced: and I am confident more people have died
of apoplexies in one year, since the use of this snush, than have died
of that disease in an hundred before the use thereof; and most, if not
all, who I have observed to die of late of that disease, were such as
were extreme and constant snush-takers."

The great virtues of a pipe, taken in the morning fasting, are, (says-
Mr. Jones,) extolled by many ; "because," say they, "it pumps up a
quantity of cold phlegm from the stomach." Not to insist, that noth-
ing can be taken out of the stomach but by vomiting ; let it be obser-
ved, that the substance which is forcibly hawked up by many who have
acquired this most disgustful habit, is the mucus secreted by the tonsils
to lubricate and defend the CEsophagus ; together with the saliva which
is secreted. And this mucus and saliva are not less requisite in tlieir
respective places, than the blood itself; as they are not oidy absolutely
necessary for the defence of the parts already mentioned, but also for
the important purpose of digestion: which, if not properly promoted,
and carried on, the body cannot long continue in a healthy state. Ev-
ery medical man knows well, that the saliva, (which is so copiously
drained off by the infamous quid, and the scandalous pipe,) is the
first and greatest agent which nature employs in digesting the food. —
See Tisset on Palsey, fyc. p. 123.

But is the elegant snuff-box as dangerous as the pipe and the quid?
Let us hear evidence. " The least evil," says Mr. De Bomare, " which
you can expect it to produce, is to dry up the brain, emaciate the bo-
dy, enfeeble the memory, and destroy, if not entirely, yet in a largo
measure, the delicate sense of smelling."

" Common snuff," says a sensible medical practitioner, (whose opin-
ion on the subject lies now before me,) " in habitual snuff-takers, has
been found to penetrate into the sinuses communicating with the nose,
and into the antrum where it has formed horrid abscesses : it is often
carried down into the stomach, and by the use of it, the skin is tinged
of a pale brown colour." — This is sufficiently evident in all snuff-takers.
The most delicate females have their complexion entirely ruined by it.
Strange ! that the snuff-box should be deemed too great a sacrifice for
that, for which most people are ready to sacrifice every thing beside ! —
Many cases have been observed where the appetite has been almost
destroyed, and a consumption brought on, by the immoderate use of
this powder.

I heartily wish the Corporation of Surgeons, and other anatomists,
would procure as many bodies of habitual smokers and snuff-takers as
possible, that being dissected, we might know how far that ever-to-be-
dreaded evil prevails, which J. Borrhi in a letter to Bartholine, says,
happened to the brain of an immoderate smoker, which on dissection
was found dried and shrivelled up by his excessive use of the pipe ! See
Chambers' Cyclopaedia, Dr. Rees's Edition, article Tobacco.

In one of the German literary Journals several cases are mentioned
of vertigo, blindness, and paralysis, occasioned by the immoderate
use of this herb.

Vol. 1. 10


74 3Ieans of 2>r eventing disease,

The use of it as an emetic, for which some have pleaded, is ex-
tremely dangerous, as it has often occasioned almost intolerable cardial-
<ric anxieties, violent vomitings, and stupidity.

Mr. Bomare informs us, that it has been employed as a remedy in
lethargic swoonings : and the patient has been restored to sensibility,
only to be racked by a more dreadful disorder. Convulsions, accom-
panied with vomitings, cold sweats, and a feeble and intermitting pulse,
with other dreadful symptoms, have been the consequence of its uses
in the above cases. If it be so dangerous, when employed as a rem-
edy, what evil may not be expected from it when used constantly, im-
moderately, and without any corrective 1 ?

Under the article Torpor Pancreatis, Dr. Darwin observes, "I
saw what I conjectured to be a tumour of the Pancreas, with indiges-
tion, and which terminated in the death of the patient. He had been
for many years a great consumer of tobacco, insomuch that he chew-
ed that noxious drug all the morning, and smoked it all the after-
noon. As the secretion from the Pancreas resembles saliva in its
general appearance, and probably in its office of assisting digestion, by
preventing the fermentation of the aliment, there is a reason to sus-
pect that a sympathy may exist between the salivary and pancreatic
glands ; and that the perpetual stimilus of the former by tobacco, might
in process of time injure the latter." Zoonomia, vol. 2. p. 80, 4toed.

" The unwise custom of chewing and smoking tobacco for many
hours in the day, not only injures the salivary glands, producing dry-
ness in the mouth when this drug is not used, but I suspect that it also
produces schirrhus of the Pancreas. The use of tobacco in this im-
moderate degree injures the power of digestion, by occasioning the pa-
tient to spit out that saliva which he ought to swallow ; and hence pro-
duces that flatulency which the vulgar unfortunately take it to prevent."

That it is unfriendly to animal life may be variously proved. A
poultice of it laid to the pit of the stomach, proves dreadfully emetic
in a short time. The following case I think awful, and insert it here
as a warning to those whom it may concern. A physician of my ac-
quaintance was sent for to see a girl of about seven years of age, griev-
ously tormented with spasms in her stomach, and incessant vomitings.
Various means were used to relieve her, but without success ; nor could
the cause of the complaint be found out for a considerable time; (the
child, till her sudden seizure with the vomitings, had been in perfect
health.) At last the smell arising from the breath and head of the child
led to a detection of the cause. The girl had what is termed by some a
sore or broken-out head, (scabies:) to cure and cleanse it, her mother
had that day made an ointment of butter and snuff, and applied it to
the place. This was found to be the sole cause of those violent retch-
ings, which had nearly put a period to the child's life !

A person of my acquaintance, who had been an immoderate snufl-
taker for upwards of forty years, was frequently afflicted with a sudden
suppression of breatMng, occasioned from a paralytic state of the mus-
cles which serve for respiration ; these affections grew more and more
alarming, and seriously threatened her life. The only relief she got in
such cases was from a cup of cold water poured down her throat. This


and promoting health and longevity, 75

became so necessary to her, that she could never venture to attend
even a place of public worship without having a small vessel of water
with her, and a friend at hand to administer it! At last she left off
snuff; the muscles re-acquired their proper tone, and in a short time
after she was entirely cured of a disorder occasioned solely by her at-
tachment to the snuff-box, and to which she had nearly fallen a martyr !

The poisonous nature of the oil of this plant has been observed by
several, and particularly by Fontana, in the following experiments, who
ranks tliis herb with the vegetable poisons. 1. — " 1 made," says he,
"a small incision in a pigeon's leg, and applied to it the oil of tobac-
co. In two minutes it lost the use of its foot. 2. — I repeated this ex-
periment on another pigeon, and the event was exactly the same. 3.
— I made a small wound in the pectoral muscles of a pigeon, and ap-
plied the oil to it ; in three minutes the animal could no longer support it-
self on its left foot. 4. — This experiment repeated on another pigeon
ended the same way. 5. — I introduced into the pectoral muscles of a
pigeon a small bit of wood covered with this oil ; the pigeon in a few
seconds fell insensible. 6. — Two other pigeons to whose muscles I ap-
plied this oil, vomited several times all that they had eaten. 7. — Two
others with empty stomachs, treated as above, made all possible ef-
forts to vomit." Fontana observes, that vomiting was the most con-
stant effect of this oil. — Various other experiments prove, that an ap-
plication of this herb, in almost any form will produce this effect. Che-
mists observe, that tobacco leaves, distilled in a retort without addition,
yield an acrid empyreumatic poisonous oil. Koempfer also ranks it
with the strong vegetable poisons.

Nor need we wonder at the above, when it is known that a single
drop of the chemical oil of tobacco, being put on the tongue of a cat,
produced violent convulsions, and killed her in the space of one minute.
A thread dipped in the same oil, and drawn through a wound made by
a needle in an animal, killed it in the space of seven minutes. Indeed
the strong caustic oil and acrid salt which are contained in it, must pro-
duce evil effects beyond calculation.

These facts which are well authenticated, may suffice ; and taken
into connexion with that word which says, " Thou shalt do NO mur-
der,'''' should deter every person who wishes well to his body and his
soul, from the (at least immoderate) use of this herb.

That it is sinful to use it as most do, I have no doubt ; if destroying
the constitution, and vilely squandering away the time and money
which God has given for other purposes, may be termed sinful.

Many persons 1 have known, who were scarcely able to procure the
necessaries of life, and yet by sacrificing: health and decency, have
made a shift to procure the daily quantum suffcit of tobacco. I have
observed some whole families, and very poor ones too, who have used
tobacco in all possible ways, and some of them for more than halt a
century. Now supposing the whole family, consisting of four, five,
or six, to have used bu' Is. 6d. worth in a week,* then, in the mere arti-

* To say nothing of the power of money to increase its value almost beyond
credibility bj Compound Ijtterest, in which case the above weekly consumption
would amount in fifty years to upwards of £800 .sterling, and in 54 years to up-
wards of jCionn


7"(j Means of preventing do.

cle of tobacco, nearly 200?. sterling is totally and irrevocably lost, in
the course of fifty years ! Were all the expenses attending this busi-
ness enumerated, probably five times the sum in several cases would
not be too large an estimate; especially if strong drink, its general
concomitant, neglect of business, and appropriate utensils, be taken
into the account.* Can any who profess to call themselves Christians
vindicate their conduct in this respect ?

A pious clergyman lately told me, that he had a number of very
poor families in his parish immoderately attached to the use of tobac-
co. He plainly saw that a large proportion of their daily earnings
was destroyed in this way. He warned them in private, and preached
in public against it, but few of them had resolution enough to lay it aside.

The expense of one very poor family in snufF and tobacco he calcu-
lated, and found it to amount to nearly one third part of their yearly
earnings.

But the loss of time in this shameful work is a serious evil : I have
known some who, (strange to tell !) have smoked three or four hours
in the day, by their own confession ; and others who have spent six
hours in the same employment! How can such persons answer for
in this way. Whatever good effects may be attributed even to a mod-
erate use of it, can be produced by medicines of a more cleanly and
less dangerous nature. As to snuff, all its good effects, says Mr. De
Bomare, may be much better procured by powder of betony, sage, or
marjoram. If it be taken as a sternutative, or medicine to cause sneez-
ing, it should be taken very seldom, or it will lose its effect ; and if it
should not, who, for the sake of redeeming his head from some occa-
sional trifling inconvenience, would consent to have his body thrown in-
to continual convulsions!

"But it has done me good." Perhaps it has ; so has an emetic: but
will you infer thence, that the constant use of it is necessary ? If you
do, be consistent with yourself, and the very next time you need an
emetic, be sure to repeat it every hour as long as you live.

I grant that a person who is brought under the dominion of the pipe
or the snuff-box, may feel great uneasiness in attempting to leave it off,
and get some medical man, through a false pity ', or for money, to pre-
principle or without skill.

An eminent Physician, with whose acquaintance and friendship I am
honoured, gave me lately the following account. — " When I was in
L , in the year 1789, a certain religious people, at one of their an-
nual meetings, made a rule, or rather revived one, which had been long
before made and established among them by their venerable Founder,

* My estimate here may be deemed by some rather exorbitant, but how little is
it in comparison of that of our noble King; James ! " Now, how you are by thi*
custom disabled in your goods, let the gentry of this land bear witness, some of' them
bestowing three, some four hundred pounds a year, upon this precious s Hnk." —
Counterblast, p. 10. 1672.


and promoting health and longevity. 77

but had been iu a great measure lost sight of, viz. That no minister lit
Physician. This rule showed at once both their prudence and good
sense. Towards the conclusion of the meeting, having offered my as-
sistance to as many as stood in need of medical help, several of them
consulted me on the subject of taking tobacco in one form or other;
and with very little variation their mode was as follows: — " Doctor, I
am troubled very frequently with such a complaint, (naming it.) I
take tobacco, and have found great benefit from the use of it. — I am
sure were I to give it up, I should be very ill indeed ; and I am certain,
that you are too wise and too skilful a man to desire me to discontinue
a practice which has been so beneficial to me." After such an address,
what could I say 1 It was spoken with serious concern, and was prop-
erly argumentum ad hominem : I knew well they were sincere, but I
knew also they were deceived; however, to the major part of them I
ventured to speak thus : — " Gentlemen, you certainly do me honour iu
the confidence you repose in my skill ; but you have brought me into a
dilemma, from which I cannot easily extricate myself; as I find I must
either say as you say on the subject, or else renounce all pretensions to
wisdom and medical skill. However, I cannot in conscience and hon-
many of you immense hurt."

But the religious people mentioned above, are not the only persons
who have published edicts against this destructive practice. Amurath
the IV. Emperor of the Turks, the Tzar of Muscovy, and Sha Abas
king of Persia, apprehensive of the evils which were likely to be occa-
sioned in the constitutions and properties of their subjects, forbade the
use of tobacco in their dominions, on pain of death : — only the pen-
alty in case of snuff-taking was, to have the nose cut off. It is well
known that James I. king of England,, wrote a treatise expressly a-
gainst smoking, &c. called "A Counterblast to Tobacco."

Simon Paulli, physician to the king of Denmark, has also written
a Treatise on the danger of using this herb; and observes, (which I
quote for the sake of those who retain any sentiment of delicacy on this
subject,) " That the merchants frequently lay it in bog-houses, to the
end, that, becoming impregnated with the volatile salt of the excre-
ments, it may be rendered brisker, stronger, and more foetid."*

In 1689, the Corporation of Apothecaries of the city of Clermont,
probably supposing that great good might be done, to themselves or oth-
ers, by uniting this plant to the Materia Medica, applied to the Court of
Exercise for permission to cultivate tobacco in their gardens for medi-
cal purposes under the name Nicotia. But the Court, whether actua-
ted by motives of humanity or commerce, fortunately passed an Arret,

* A dealer in this article once acknowledged to me, that he sprinkled his rolls and
leaf frequently with stale urine to keep them moist, and to preserve the flavour!
A friend of mine whose curiosity led him to see tobacco-spinning, observed that
the boys who opened out the dry plants, had a vessel of urine by them, with which
they moistened the haves, to prepare them for the spinner! Do the tohacco-chew-
ersknow this, and yet continue in this most abominable and disgraceful practice I
Can any person think of the above impune, with a quid in his mouth 1


78 Means of preventing disease.

bearing date, June 28, 1689, " Forbidding the apothecaries of Clermont,
or of any other place to sow any tobacco in their grounds under the name
Nicotia or any other, on pain of confiscation, and a fine of 1000 livres."
What a singular mercy was this ! Had the use of it become common
in medicine, how many thousands must have been its victims ere this
time!

The impiety manifested by several in the use of this herb, merits the
most cutting reproof. When many of the tobacco consumers get into
trouble, or under any cross or affliction, instead of looking to God for
support, the pipe, the snuff-box, or the twist is applied to, with quad-
ruple earnestness ; so that four times, (I might say in some cases ten
times,) the usual quantity is consumed on such occasions. What a
comfort is this weed in time of sorrow ! — What a support in time of
trouble ! In a word, what a God.

Again, the interruption occasioned in places of public worship by
the use of the snuff-box, is a matter of serious concern to all those who
are not guilty. When the most solemn and important matters relative
to God and man, eternal glory and eternal ruin, form the subject of a
preacher's discourse, whose very soul is in his work ; it is no unusual
thing to see the snuff-box taken out, and officiously handed about to half
a dozen of persons on the same seat. — Would there not be as much pro-
priety in bringing forth and distributing some of the common necessa-
ries of life? — "But we do not go to the house of God to take our vic-
tuals." — Neither should you to take physic.

Never did Pope Urban the VIII. act more like an Apostolic man,
than when he made a Bull to excommunicate all those who took tobac-
co in the churches.

To the great scandal of religious people, the abominable customs of
snuff-taking and chewing have made their way into many congregations,
and are likely to be productive of immense evil. Churches and cha-
pels are most scandalously abused by the tobacco-chewers who frequent
them : and kneeling before the Supreme Being, which is so becoming
and necessary when sinners approach their Maker in prayer, is render-
ed impracticable, because of the large quantity of tobacco saliva, which
is ejected in all directions.

The Indians of South America make extensive offerings of this herb
to their gods, and think it the most acceptable present they can make
them, in order to ensure their protection. Was it from them that these
Christians have learned to introduce it into places of public worship? —
Surely they do not use the snuff-box and the quid as a part of a religi-
ous ceremony. — Some indeed have been so candid as to acknowledge
that, " though they did not use it as such, yet they took it as a help to
their devotion:"* O earth! earth! earth! — "I cannot," says one,
«

* I know one case only, in which the use of snuff seems to be innocent. A
very pious woman of my acquaintance is obliged, (as she thinks so) to have recourse
to it sometimes, for a kind of lethargic affection of her head, by which she is often
afflicted: but let it be observed, she takes it merely as a medicine, and uses only
one half-penny worth in a month. All such persons I cordially exempt from every
censure.

N. B. Since, the above person has totally left off the use of this powder, and
has not suffered the slightest inconvenience in consequence of the sacrifice she
bad made.


and promoting health and longevity. 79

'•hear to any advantage without it; it quickens my attention, and then
I profit most by the sermon." I am inclined to think there is some
truth in this : and such persons exactly resemble those who have habitu-
ated themselves to frequent doses of opium ; who, from the well known
effect of too free a use of this drug, are in a continual torpor, except
for a short time after each dose. Thus they are obliged to have con-
stant recourse to a stimulant, which in proportion to its use increases
the disease.

I cannot help adding, that I have heard just the same sort of reason
given for taking a dram before divine service; " I am in a better spirit
for hearing, have a more tender heart, and abetter recollection of what
I have heard, when I take a little brandy or gin before hand."

Such persons as these are utterly unfit to appear in the house of God ;
and sufficiently prove that they are wholly destitute of the spirit of pi-
ety, and of a sense of their spiritual wants, when they stand in need of
such excitements to help their devotion. He can have no pity for the
wretched, who does not lift up his soul in prayer to God in behalf of
such miserable people.

But are not many led into this practice of smoking by their pastors ?
I am sorry to have it to say, that this idle disgraceful custom prevails
much at present among ministers of most denominations. Can such
persons preach against needless self-indulgence, destruction of time, or
waste of money? These men greatly injure their own usefulness ; they
smoke away their ministerial importance in the families where they oc-
casionally visit: the very children and maid-servants pass their jokes on
the piping parson ; and should they unluckily succeed in bringing over
the uninfected to their vile custom, the evil is doubled. I have known
serious misunderstandings produced in certain families where the exam-
ple of the Idle Parson has influenced a husband or wife, against the
consent of the other, to adopt the use of the pipe or snuff-box.

Should all other arguments fail to produce a reformation in the con-
duct of tobacco-consumers, there is one which is addressed to good-
breeding and benevolence, which for the sake of politeness and human-
ity should prevail. Consider how disagreeable your custom is to those
who do not follow it. An atmosphere of tobacco effluvia surrounds you
whithersoever you go. Every article about you smells of it; your a-
partments, your clothes, and even your very breath. Nor is there a
smell in nature more disagreeable than that of stale tobacco, arising in
warm exhalations from the human body, rendered still more offensive
by passing through the pores, and becoming strongly impregnated with
that noxious matter which was before insensibly perspired.

Consider what pain your friends may be put to in standing near you,
in order to consult you on some important business, or to be improved
by your conversation. Will you oblige them to pay so heavy a tax for
the benefit of your advice, when it would have been more honourable
to yourself, and comfortable to them, to have had the gratification in a
less expensive way. I cannot help saying, that I have often suffered a
very painful nausea from the cause above assigned, and — on which I
will dilate no farther.

To those who are not yet incorporated with the fashionable company of


80 Means of preventing disease,

tobacco consumers, I would say, " Never enter.'''' To those who are
entered, I would say, "Desist." First; For the sake of your health,
which must be materially injured, if not destroyed by it. Secondly;
For the sake of your property, which, if you are a poor man, must be
considerably impaired by it. But supposing you can afford this extra
expense; consider, how acceptable the pence, (to go no farther) which
you spend in this idle unnecessary employment, would be to many, who
are often destitute of bread ; and to whom one penny would sometimes
be as an angel of God. Thirdly ; For the sake of your time, a large
portion of which is irreparably lost, particularly in smoking. Have
you any time to dispose of — to murder? Is there no need of prayer —
reading — study? Fourthly; For the sake of your friends, who can-
not fail to be pained in your company, for the reasons before assigned.
Fifthly; For the sake of your voice, which a continuance in snuff-ta-
king will infallibly ruin, as the nasal passages are almost entirely oblit-
erated by it. Sixthly; For the sake of your memory, that it may be
vigorous and retentive; and for the sake of your judgment, that it may
be clear and correct to the end. Lastly ; For the sake of )'our soul —
Do you not think that God will visit you for your loss of time, waste of
money, and needless self-indulgence? Have you not seen that the use
of tobacco leads to drunkenness! Do you not know that habitual
smokers have the drinking vessel often at hand, and frequently apply
to it? Nor is it any wonder, for the great quantity of necessary mois-
ture which is drawn off from the mouth, &c. by these means, must be
supplied some other way. You tremble at the thought : well you may,
for you are in great danger ; may God look upon, and save you before
it be too late.

It is with pain of heart that I am obliged to say, I have known seve-
ral who through their immoderate attachment to the pipe, have become
mere sots. There are others who are walking unconcernedly in the
same dangerous road — I tremble for them. Should this fall into their
hands, may they receive it as a warning from God !

" But I take (says one) only a little now and then in complaisance to
others." Then you will soon be as great a slave to it as others are.
When it is offered to you in this way, think of the conduct of Omiah,
a native of Otaheite, who was brought to London by captain Furneaux:
when a certain lord presented him his golden snuff-box, and invited him
to take some; the innocent savage, having gained little acquaintance
with European refinement, bluntly replied: "I thank you, my lord,
my nose is not hungry."

You say, " I am so long accustomed to it, I cannot leave it off."
Alas ! alas ! your case is truly deplorable, you are shorn of your strength,
and power is now lacking to bring the expostulations of conscience to
good effect. However, try: see what God will do for you. I knew a
Xvoman in the east of this kingdom, who had taken snuff, and immode-
rately too, for the space of fifty years. With a person who frequently
visited at her house, and who was as fully attached to the snuff-box as
herself, she agreed to leave it off; and that the first who took any should
forfeit a dozen of wine to the other. In a short time she got uneasy, by
and by miserable, and lastly ran quite distracted. She was then obli-


and promoting health and longevity. 81

ged to resume it. Not long after, hearing the preaching of the people
called Methodists, she was deeply convinced of sin, and converted to
God. To give it up, she was terribly afraid, remembering what she
had suffered before on that account. However, she thought, Then, I
did it in my own strength : Now, I will do it in the strength of God.
She did so ; threw away her snu(f-box, and abstained from it ever after,
and never suffered the slightest inconvenience in consequence.

A very intelligent physician hast just now favoured me with the fol-
lowing, which is nearly a similar case, — " A gentleman who was in the
habit of taking snuff very freely, was frequently affected with stomach
complaints and difficulty of breathing, attended with great prostration
of strength, depression of spirits, and other nervous symptoms. He
was besides often afflicted with a teasing tickling cough, and inability to
utter his words, which to him was a circumstance peculiarly distressing,
as he was a public speaker. Several tonic and stomachic medicines
were tried, but to very little purpose : at length he was advised to aban-
don his Snuff-box; — he did so, and the happiest effects were speedily
produced. The free use of his speech, appetite, and easy respiration,
were restored; and all his other symptoms soon disappeared."

A near relation of my own had been a slave to it for nearly fonty
years. I strongly advised her to leave it off; but she had received the
common absurd opinion that she should lose her health, if not her life,
in the attempt. I endeavoured to shew her that her fears were ground-
less, and urged the former advice: — she thought me undutiful, if not
cruel. I then desisted. In a short time she began to reflect more se-
riously on the business, and resolved in the strength of God to give it
up: — she did so; and her health, which had been in a very shattered
state, began soon to improve ; in a short time she was restored to a state
of entire convalescence, and now enjoys a state of mental and corporeal
vigour unusual to persons of such an advanced age. She is now about
seventy, and for the six last years in which she has abandoned this de-
structive practice, has steadily witnessed to the pipe and snuff-box
slaves, the mercy of God which has rescued her " from the body of this
death." Many similar cases of reformation among tobacco-consumers
I could adduce, did the nature of the Pamphlet require it.

To conclude. I am sorry that in writing on this vile subject, I have
been obliged to use some words, the places of which I should have been
glad to have supplied with others of more agreeable sound, and more
easy to be understood; but as these were the only appropriate terms I
could find, my readers will accept this as a sufficient apology for my
using them ; and those who understand the subject, will at once per-
ceive, that I could not have easily found terms less offensive and less
difficult.

Some of the most disagreeable things relative to the practice, against
which I have been writing, are still behind the curtain; and designedly
detained there; — and it is there alone where I wish every persevering
smoker to seek for a certain vessel named the sp-tt-ng dish, which, to
the abuse of all good-breeding, is frequently introduced into public com-
pany. May they and their implements, while engaged in this abomina-
ble work, be ever kept out of sight.

Vol. I. 11


82 Means of preventing disease,

King James finishes his piece on the same subject, as follows: "A
custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to the brain,
dangerous to the lungs, and in the black slinking fume thereof, nearest
resembling the horrible Stygian smoke of the pit that is bottomless/'

Bleeding.

An opinion prevails that it is necessary to bleed occasionally to pre-
vent disease, or preserve health. This is a pernicious custom also, and
ought to be deprecated by all who place any value upon their lives.
No person has a drop of blood to lose. This practice, which brings on
many diseases, may afford present relief, but the consequences ate very
injurious. It occasions debility, dropsy, nervous diseases, &c.

Salts.

Many suppose that it is necessary frequently to take salts to preserve
their health. This custom is also pernicious. A viscid, thin, or cold
state of the blood, follows the frequent use of the neutral salts. Nor
are frequent purges of any kind conducive to health. The motto on a
certain tomb stone should be remembered by every person, particularly
invalids. " I was well; I took physic and died."

Minerals.

Those who wish to preserve their health, must avoid the use of all
minerals internally. They never were designed by the Author of Na-
ture for medicine. They injure the coats of the stomach and intestines,
and instead of removing, create diseases. Mercury, which is so uni-
versally in use, is the worst of all. Vegetables should be used in pre-
ference, being safer, and more congenial to the system.


and promoting health and longevity. $%


CHAPTER XIV.

BATHS.

Baths of various descriptions are now so generally resorted to, for
pleasure or the cure of disease, that it becomes very imp ortant to con-
sider their effect upon the human system in a medical point of view.
They arc attended either with considerable advantage or injury to all
who use them. Many have been cured, others have been injured by
baths, and all which must be attributed to their indiscriminate use, the
disease, or the circumstances under which they have been used. We
shall now mention the different kinds, and different complaints in which
they prove beneficial, or injurious. They may be distinguished into
the

Cold,

Warm,

Hot,

Vapour,

Sulphur,

Shower,

The Cold Bath.

The cold bath consists of water, either fresh or salt, in its natural
degree of heat, or it may be made colder by art. The temperature of
it, in general, varies from thirty-two to sixty-five degrees of Fahren-
heat's thermometer. Sea-water, or the water of ponds and of rivers,
are very similar in their effects; but sea-water is preferable, from the
stimulating effects of the salt with which it is impregnated.

In treating of the cold bath, we wish it expressly understood, that the
temperature of the water suitable for bathing in general, must be simi-
lar to that of our bays and rivers in the summer months. A sensation
of comfort, and some degree of warmth must be experienced a few mo-
ments after immersion. A sensation of dullness, on the contrary is
an evidence that the temperature of the water is too cold.

Cold bathing may be used in the following complaints: Fevers,
chronic rheumatism, hysterics, hypocondriac and paralytic affections,
rickets, scrofulous complaints, general debility, obstructed perspiration,
languor and weakness of circulation^ accompanied with profuse sweat-
ing and fatigue on very moderate exercise. It is useful in that slow,
irregular fever to which many persons, particularly those who lead a
sedentary life, are subject. Such persons have constantly a pulse ra-
ther quicker than natural, hot hands, restless nights, impaired appetite,
dejection of spirits, &c. It is very useful to such.

The cold bath is injurious to all classes where reaction does not fol-
low its use. If no perspiration or warmth follows, but chills, great de-
pression, laneruor, head-ache. &c. it is an evidence that it ought not to be


84 Means of preventing disease,

used. It sometimes produces the apoplexy in plethoric habits. It should
not be used in obstructed menses, in coughs, ruptures, or when any in-
ternal organ is diseased. If the temperature of the body is below the
natural standard, or where there is a profuse perspiration, cold bathing
should be avoided as injurious. Persons constitutionally weak, and who
have but little energy of circulation, are rather injured than benefitted
be the cold bath.

We believe that there are few, if any cases, in which the sudden ap-
plication of cold water to the system, (except in some particular diseases)
proves beneficial. On the contrary, the sudden shock given to the sys-
tem, often brings on disease. Therefore, a very cold bath should bo
seldom used. The water for ordinary bathing for persons in health, as
well as in disease, should be of such a temperature, as causes an agree-
able sensation while bathing. When this agreeable sensation is not felt,
but rather there is a sense of coldness, the person should leave the wa-
ter immediately, wipe himself dry, then walk or exercise briskly until
warmth of the system is restored.

For the want of proper precautions in bathing, many have lost their
lives.

Bishop Heber of Calcutta, on a mission from England to that coun-
try, died in the bath in consequence of not attending to the above pre-
cautions. It is said that Marcellus was so prostrated by the cold-bath,
that he died soon after.

Topical Bathing.

The application of cold water, in cases of local inflammation, proves
highly efficacious. It may be freely and safely used in inflammation of
the brain, dropsy of the head, and in some grades of fever, particular-
ly typhus.

A variety of chronic catarrh, which displays itself in a troublesome
flow of mucus from the nostrils and often continues for months, is cured
by immersion of the head in cold water, or by the application of this
fluid to the part, by means of a spout or tube. The following case
from an old writer little known, ( Vander Heyden) will show the utility
of this practice.

" Bathing of the head in cold water cures also inveterate pains of
that part, and the continual catarrhs and defluxions from thence. For
it is certain, that if the head be put in cold water, as far as the middle
bone of the hinder part of the head, and to the end of the nose before,
so that there be left just so much of the nose out of the water, as that
the party may have freedom of breathing only, and that this be done so
long, as while a man may be saying the Lord's Prayer, the pain of the
head, though it hath boen of long continuance, will hereby be removed,
and the defluxions stopped, as hath often been proved by experience.
And I have been much confirmed in this opinion of mine by an experi-
ment of it made upon a certain English Knight, named Sir Toby Ma-
thews, a man no less eminent for wisdom, than fit for public trust. This
gentleman having been troubled twenty years together with an intolera-
ble pain on one side of his head, and also with a continual and violent
defluxion of the head, distilling through his palate and nose in so great


and promoting health and longevity. &o

a quantity, that he could never go without a wet handkerchief in his
pocket ; he was so happily cured of both these maladies in the sixtieth
year of his age, by thus bathing his head in cold water, as that till the
seventieth year of the same which he hath now passed, he hath never
had the least touch of eitber during the said space of time; and being
now better in health than ever he was in his life before, to prevent his
falling into the like infirmities again, he useth the said immersion of his
head in cold water all the year long, and even in the depth of winter;
also, he saith that he received this profitable advice from a certain Eng-
lish nobleman, who having himself been a long time much tormented,
with the same disease, had by this means cured both himself, and very
many others who were alike affected, and restored them to perfect
health to the great admiration of all men."

It is stated that several wens have been cured by bathing them fre-
quently in salt water.

Dr. Garret Lawrence, a member of the society of Shakers, New Le-
banon, New- York, a very intelligent physician and an excellent bota-
nist, informs me, that the sight of eyes which have been weak and dim
by age, or any cause, are essentially benefitted or cured, by holding tho
face under clear water every day, and suffering it to come in contact
with them by winking a few times. It is reasonable to suppose that
this practice is calculated to give them tone and energy.

Dipping or bathing the crown of the head every morning, in a basin
of cold water, is an excellent remedy for painfulncss of the head, me-
lancholy and nervous disorders.

Warm or Tepid Bath.

The temperature of the warm bath, should be about ninety-five of
Fahrenheit's thermometer. This kind of bath is much better calculated
for bathing in general, in most seasons of the year, than either the cold
or the hot bath.

" We are not allowed" says Dr. John Bell of Philadelphia, " to doubt of
the tranquillizing and soothing, in fine, of the sedative operation of warm
bathing. There seems to be, however, this difference between the cold
and the warm bath, that while the former depresses at once, and pow-
erfully, the circulating and nervous systems, benumbing and rendering
them torpid even unto death, or preparing for a violent and irregular re-
action — tingling and glow, the latter is just in that relation with the ner-
vous system to convey a sensation, soothing by its mildness and active
by its diffusiveness, and with the capillary system to invite blood into
the smaller vessels of the extremities, which were of a temperature less
than the water, and thus produce an equal yet moderate fullness and ac-
tion of these vessels; an effect still further insured by the softened and
diminished resistance of the external tegument, or cuticle."

"To those who are past the meridian of life," says Darwin, "and
have dry skins, and begin to be emaciated, the warm bath, for half an
hour twice a week, I believe to be eminently serviceable in retarding
the advances of age." Acting on this principle, this learned physician
relates that when Dr. Franklin was in England, he recommended the
latter to use a warm bath twice a week, a practice which he afterwards
continued till near his death.


riG Means of preventing disease,

" So early as the time of Homer, an opinion seems to have prevail-
ed of the utility of warm bathing in advanced life. When Ulysses, af-
ter his return to Ithaca, found his lather Laertes reduced to great weak-
ness, he advised him to use warm bathing, and to encourage him, told
him lie had seen one whose case was exactly similar to his, worn down
and emaciated with age, who, by the use of warm baths, very quickly
recovered his appetite and rest. He likewise adds, that its efficacy
in such cases was well known, and that it was a common custom among
old men." Odyss. XXIV.

" It has been supposed till very lately that one constant effect of the
warm bath is to relax and debilitate the body ; but numerous experi-
ments seem to prove that this opinion was founded in error, and that,
on the contrary, persons debilitated by disease, have felt stronger on the
days when they used the warm bath, and were soon restored to their
former strength. If in any cases relaxation and debility follow the use
of the warm bath, it is to be attributed to the heat of the bath having
been too great for the constitution of the patient, or the immersion hav-
ing been continued too long. The stimulant effects of the warm bath
are very inconsiderable, and it is found useful in allaying irritation, di-
minishing morbid frequency of the pulse, relaxing and purifying the skin,
and in inducing sleep and repose. The warm bath will be attended with
advantage in those cases of fever where the heat is preternaturally great,
but where, from some affection of the lungs, or other unfavourable symp-
tom, cold bathing is inadmissible; in the paroxysms of hectic fever; in seve-
ral eruptive diseases attended with increased heat and dryness of the skin;
in atonic gout and rheumatism, accompanied with stiffness and swelling of
the joints; in chlorosis ; in slight cases of palsy; in scrofulous swellings;
in some spasmodic and convulsive affections, where the cold bath might
prove too violent ; in all those affections of the bowels that seem to de-
pend on an irregular or diminished action of any part of the alimenta-
ry canal ; and in cases of debility attended with nervous irritation. In
cases of predisposition to phthisis, it shares the frequency of the pulse,
and tends to retard, at least, if it does not wholly prevent, the pulmonary
affection. The time of continuing in the warm bath should be varied
according to the temperature of the water and the feelings of the patient.
In a bath of ninety-six, a person may remain fifteen, twenty, and thirty
minutes."

Hot Bath.

By the hot bath we understand a greater degree of heat than
the warm bath. The water should be made as hot as the person
can bear. In this state, it possesses the most powerful relaxing proper-
ties, and should only be used in cases of emergency, in very painful and
dangerous diseases, where an immediate relaxation becomes necessary,
such as fits, suppression of urine, gravel, strictures, complaints of the
kidneys, cramp, hypocondria, bilious cholic, &c. The most sudden
and salutary effects are experienced from the hot bath, in these and si-
milar complaints.

Topical Applications.
Hot or warm water applied to any painful parts, is attended with the


and promoting health and longevity. &?

happiest effects. It removes the tension of the skin, diminishes irrita-
bility, and is often very useful.

Neither the hot nor the warm bath should be used, where there is a
great determination of blood to the head, or where there is much plethora.

Fourcroy relates the case of an individual, who, being immersed in a
bath of the immoderate heat of 66 degrees of Reaumur (180 degrees of
Fahrenheat), fell down apoplectic an hour after. And a writer acquaints
us with the history of a patient who was seized with paralysis from hav-
ing used a bath excessively hot. Peter Frank mentions the develop-
ment of an iniiammatory fever followed by the appearance of fourteen
abscesses, after the application of such a bath. Venel saw at Balaruc, a
sick person sink into a state of fatal debility by remaining too long in a
hot bath ; and the same author tell us, that, at Cauterets, a Spaniard
died of hemorrhage from the same cause. Similar inconveniences and
alarming effects are also noticed by Currie.

" By a hot bath," says Bell, " we are to understand that in which the
water is of a heat exceeding 98 degrees of Fahrenheit. It is decidedly
stimulating, and, in its often violent and marked effects on the human
body, contrasts strongly with the more pleasurable impressions produced
by the warm bath. This contrast must convince us of the impropriety
of including the two under a common head, and of confounding their dif-
ferent powers. The hot bath, by imparting to the system an excessive
dose of heat, strongly excites the circulation, and proves a nervous ir-
ritant."

The Vapour Bath.

The vapour or steam bath, is a contrivance by which steam, either
simple, or medicated, is brought by pipes from a vessel of boiling wa-
ter, and admitted to the body, placed in a small box or chamber. The
room is heated to a temperature considerably above that of the atmos-
phere, and the naked body (sometimes including the head,) is suffered
to remain in this heated air until perspiration takes place. Aromatic
herbs are thrown into the boiler, which renders the bath more pleasant
and more stimulating in its effects. It may be made by placing the per-
son in a common chair, with his outside clothes removed, and a blanket
thrown around it so as to exclude the external air. Under the chair a
suitable tube or vessel must be placed, and a decoction of the herbs
thrown into it. The steam, or vapour arising from this, surrounds the
body, and after fifteen or twenty minutes, a free perspiration takes place.
If the steam is insufficient to cause this perspiration, a brick or stone,
previously heated, may be thrown into it; some substitute burning alco-
hol, or spirits, to produce the steam. A bath made in a manner still
more simple, and which answers well for all domestic purposes, may b©
made in the following manner. Let the herbs, say pennyroyal, hoar-
hound, catnip, tansy, and wormwood; a double handful of each, be all
boiled in a pail full of water, and the whole thrown into a tub of a suit-
able size; then, one or two narrow pieces of board, placed across the
tub, and partially covered with a piece of flannel, or cloth of any kind.
The person will sit over this in the manner as directed above, until he
perspires freely. A heated brick, or stone, may be also necessary in
this case. Care must be taken that there are sufficient openings by the


88 Means of preventing disease, <*

side of the strips of board, or the covering of them to admit the steam,
to the body; bathing the feet at the same time, and drinking freely of
an infusion, or tea of catnip, will greatly aid the process of sweating.

The steam or vapour bath used in this manner, is very valuable in
many diseases. It is useful in the commencement of all diseases, where
it is necessary to promote perspiration, and where the patient is not con-
fined to his bed. In fevers, rheumatism, colds, inflammation of the
lungs, and other painful affections.

The vapour or steam bath may be applied in every case with advan-
tage, which is attended with a torpid state of the vessels of the surface,
and extremities of the body.

" Dr. D. T. Coxe of this city," says Dr. Bell, " has published a short
paper on the efficacy of the vapour bath,* which he superintended at
the time, in various diseases. In most of them the vapour was inhaled
as well as applied to the surface of the body. The diseases enumerated,
greatly relieved, or entirely cured, were chronic disease of the liver,
rheumatism, ulceration of the fauces, pimples and other blemishes on
the skin, enlarged spleen, with tendency to dropsy, dyspepsia, inflam-
mation of the kidneys, hemicrania, influenza and erysipelas. In refer-
ence to the dyspeptic patients who used the bath, he informs us that it
removed the costiveness of the bowels, and generally improved their
complexion ; perspiration was with difficulty brought on. We are told
that ' here the benefit terminated. Indeed in one case the inhalation of
so much warm vapour seemed to excite too much phlogosis in the stom-
ach, as the patient was worse after taking several baths, and attributed to
them this effect.' The erysipelas, says Dr. C, was one of the diseases
which yielded readily and kindly to the influence of the vapour badi.

It was remarked that the peculiar odour of some of the articles,
through which the steam was made to pass before its being applied to
the body of the patient, was perceived in the urine.

The temperature of the bath is not regularly mentioned by Dr. Coxe.
In one case, a person suffering under cutaneous eruption, accompanied
with a torpor of the liver, it was at first about 104 degrees, in which the
sweating was profuse. Each time the temperature was augmented, until
it reached to between 115 and 120 degrees. This case serves to illus-
trate a fact mentioned by all writers on this subject, viz. the impunity
with which a person who has been exposed to the elevated temperature
of a vapour bath can subsequently bear cold. The person in question
' was in the habit of taking several tumblers full of cold water while in
the bath ; and neither in this case nor in any other in which this usage
was followed, did any bad consequences result.'

In the apparatus used by Dr. D. T. Coxe, after the plan obtained from
Mr. Whitlaw, and the invention of which was claimed by the latter,
c the vapour, generated in a boiler, escaped through a bent tube, fur-
nished with a stop cock, into a small basin or receiver in the lower part
of a box. The top of this receiver, into which herbs or other articles
were placed, as well as the upper covering of the box was perforated,
and allowed the free ascent of the medicated vapour into the upper or


* North American Medical and Surgical Journal. Vol. IV. p. 20—27.


and promoting health and Longevity. 8f

curtained part of the contrivance where the bather sat, and either in-
haled the vapour, or had it merely applied to the surface of the skin, ac-
cording to the situation of his head, whether within or exterior to the
inclosure. 1 "

Sulphur Bath.

The sulphur and other medicated baths have been highly extolled for
the cure of various complaints, but I have spent much time and money in
testing their efficacy, and never could perceive that they possessed any
advantages over the vapour bath.

Shower Bath.

This is a species of cold bath, an invention by which water falls from
a height through numerous holes, or apertures, on the head and body.
It may be conveniently made by boring numerous small holes through
a tub or half barrel, which must be fastened a few feet above the head
of a person. Another tub of a sufficient size to contain two pails of
water, must be suspended over the other, and made to turn upon an
axis. A rope or cord must be so fastened to this that it can be inverted
or turned downwards at pleasure. The person taking the shower bath,
must place himself underneath uncovered, and having filled the tub with
water, he will suddenly pull upon the cord, when almost instantaneously
the contents of the upper tub or bath will fall into the lower one con-
taining the holes, and the water will thus be conveyed in numerous and
copious streams upon the head and body.

The apparatus should be inclosed, as well as the body, in a box or
frame a few feet square, or a sufficient size to enable the person to stand
or turn round with convenience. A few boards or plank inclosed in a
small frame is sufficient for the purpose.

This bath may be used in all diseases of the head, epilepsy, nervous
complaints, head-ache, melancholy, hypocondriasis, obstruction of the
menses, and such complaints as arise therefrom, delirium, general de-
bility, &c.

Dr. Graham of this city, who has become very celebrated on account
of his lectures on temperance and diet, recommends, I am told, the
shower bath for numerous complaints.


Vol. I t V>


00 Means of preventing disease-


CHAPTER XV.

MINERAL OR MEDICINAL WATERS.

Several Springs are found in the United States, holding in solution
certain mineral, saline, or medicinal agents, which have become very
popular, from their real or supposed efficacy in curing diseases. The
term mineral water seems not very appropriate, for such are found ex-
ceedingly dangerous to drink. Some are impregnated with copper,
and other deleterious substances, and are dreaded by man and beast.
But those which hold in solution earthy substances, principally, or even
a small portion of iron, exert some sensible effect on the animal econo-
my. Hence it is not irrelevant to notice them. Thost that are most
frequented by invalids throughout the United States, are the following:

Ballston, N. Y. New Lebanon, N.Y.

Saratoga, N.Y. Schooley's Mountains, N.J.

Bedford, Pa. Orange, N.J.

Yellow, near Philadelphia. Stafford, Conn.

Do. Ohio. Suffield, Conn.

Dft. Virginia. Pittsburgh, Pa.

The effects of these waters vary according to their component part?.
Their medicinal effects, if any they have, depend not upon the mineral
agents, as many suppose, if we except the tonic properties of iron, to
which metal we will not object; but to other ingredients, such as salt or
muriate of soda, lime, and magnesia, or the dilutent properties of the
water itself. These, no doubt, sometimes benefit by their purgative or
diuretic properties. But most of the benefit derived from these springs,
is owing to a change of air, diet, exercise, &c. A celebrated physi-
cian, in treating upon the various mineral waters which abound in En-
gland, has the following excellent remarks :

" It is scarcely possible to read without a smile the numberless books,
essays, and pamphlets, which have been written on this subject. It
seems to be the favourite region for the exercise of fiction and fancy.
The traditionary tales of ancient miracles, said to be wrought by holy
wells and consecrated springs, do not much surpass in extravagance the
fraud, ignorance, and credulity. In printed Guides, as they are called,
or Pocket Companions, to any of those fountains of health, it may be
excusable to amuse us with a little romance; but we are sorry to find
the same spirit pervading many medical treatises which should be distin-
guished by the most sacred regard for truth, and a just contempt of
puerile embellishments.

Some allowance indeed should be made for the influence of local pre-
judices, and for the strong bias of interest and ambition on the mind of
a professional man, who. residing near one of those springs, has, per-


and promoting health and longevity. 91

haps, no other means of acquiring popularity and reputation, hut hy an
encomium on its virtues, and a description, quite in the poetical style,
of the beauties of the surrounding scenery. The latter is, indeed, a
harmless puff; it seldom deceives any body ; but is viewed in the same
light as an auctioneer's advertisement of an estate, where frightful chasms
ry laid out by the finger of Nature, and a gallows as a hanging-wood.
There is another particular, in which those highly-coloured landscapes
that form the introductory part of almost every treatise on a medicinal
spring, may defeat the proposed end, and that is, by exciting a reason-
able suspicion that those waters are chiefly indebted for the high repu-
tation of their efficacy to local circumstances, to the pleasant walks and
rides, or the delightful prospects round them.

A display of all the attractions of the favourite spot is commonly fol-
lowed by very minute details of chemical analysis, which are just of as
little use to the generality of readers as the description of the scenery.
A knowledge of the contents of any mineral water by no means implies
a knowledge of its medical properties. These are to be learned by re-
peated experiments. Were it not for the evidence of facts, the late dis-
coveries in chemistry, as far as they respect the analysis of mineral
waters, would only tend to lessen their credit, by showing the little dif-
ference between them and any common water of the same purity and
temperature. For instance, if we confined ourselves to mere specula-
tion on the subject, how could we suppose that a quarter of a grain of
the oxj'd of iron suspended by a little fixed air in a whole quart of wa-
ter, the largest quantity usually taken in the course of a day, could pro-
duce any remarkable or peculiar effects? The same thing might be
said of the most celebrated springs; and many physicians of great pro-
fessional eminence, arguing from this principle, have not hesitated to
assert, that the cures performed by those springs were not owing to the
ingredients with which they were impregnated, but to the simple ele-
mentary part, or what may be called pure water. It would not be easy
therefore to determine, whether chemical analysis has furnished more
arguments in favour of, or against, the boasted superiority of mineral
waters.

Dr. Falconer, the author of one of the very few books relative to this
subject, that contain something more than the gratification of idle curi-
osity, candidly confesses, that " chemical analysis, as far as it has been
hitherto prosecuted, seems to give us a very imperfect view of the me-
thods by which these effects (?'. c. the medicinal effects of the waters)
have been produced ; and this circumstance has induced several persons
to deny the truth of the facts altogether, or to represent them as highly
exaggerated, and that such advantages (if any) as might be in truth re-
ceived, were owing to collateral circumstances of uncertain and inde-
terminate efficacy, as change of air, diet, manner of life, and the like.'*

It is not therefore to the landscape-painter, or to the chemist, that
we musl look for any useful information on those points, but to the mo-
dest and judicious practitioner, who, like the author now quoted, watch-
es with care, and reports with fidelity, the bad as well as the good ef-


92 Means oj preventing disease,

as of their sueeess, in various disorders. I am sorry to add, that the
fund of such truly valuable materials is as yet very scanty, and that I
must confine myself to general remarks on the most frequented of our
medical springs, so as to direct invalids to the fountain, from the use of
which they may form some reasonable hopes of relief. As more parti-
cular instructions will often be necessary when they get to the spot, I
feel it my duty to caution them against choosing for their medical guide
any man, however high his reputation may be, who has distinguished
himself as the loudest or most eloquent trumpeter in the indiscriminate
praise of the waters near which he resides.

The like caution may prove still more serviceable to such of our
countrymen as resort to foreign springs for medicinal purposes. A po-
pular advocate for the use of any remedy is seldom to be relied on as a
good physician ; and we have always strong reason to suspect the skill
or the integrity of a man, who speaks in a tone of confidence of the

Classification of Mineral Waters.

Mineral waters are usually classed according to their sensible quali-
ties, as perceived by the touch, sight, taste, and smell, or according to
some well-known ingredient, which may predominate in this or that
particular spring. The most obvious division is into cold and hot foun-
tains; but both these, being too comprehensive, are again subdivided into
chalybeate, saline, sulphureous, and calcareous, from their being im-
pregnated with iron, salts, sulphur, or lime. There are many still
minuter distinctions, where two or more of those ingredients may be
found united in the same spring, or combined with different sorts of air,
which must have a very powerful effect in the internal use of the waters.

The first class of mineral waters, which I shall notice, are those call-
ed chalybeatcs, from a Greek word that signifies iron, the taste of which
is very perceptible in them when fresh from the spring, though they lose
it on being exposed for some time to the atmosphere. The reason is, that
the small quantity of iron which they contain, being kept in solution by
fixed air, when this evaporates, the iron sinks to the bottom, forming
the fine ochre that lines the channel or water-course. As iron abounds
in almost every part of the earth, it is no wonder that so many springs
should be impregnated with it, in a greater or less degree, according to
the quantity of fixed air they contain, by which the iron is held in a state
of solution. Some of those waters have, in conjunction witli the iron
and fixed air, a pretty strong mixture of purgative salt, and are very
different from the others in their effects as well as their taste. In order
to distinguish each by a specific name, the former may be called simple
chalybeatcs, and the latter saline or purging chalybeatcs. They may
be very properly chosen as examples or illustrations of the various medi-
cinal effects of this numerous class of waters."'

Ballston and Saratoga Springs.

None are more resorted to, or more indiscriminately used by the in-
valid, than these waters. Upon analysis, a bottle containing twenty-
five ounces of the Ballston water, contains the following ingredients :


and promoting health and longevity. M

1. Carbonic acid, three times its volume.

2. Muriate of soda, 31 grains.

3. Super saturated carbonate oflime, 22 grain?.

4. Muriate of magnesia, 12^ grains.

5. Muriate of lime, 5 grains.

6. Carbonate of iron, 4 grains.

It appears by this, that the Ballston waters contain a larger propor-
tion of fixed air, and a greater quantity of iron, than any other mineral
water which has ever been discovered. It will be seen also that they
contain a great portion of lime. Many who have drank them state that
they have received great benefit ; others say they have been much injured.

I shall first speak of cases in which they are not beneficial. First, in
those complaints, which are attended with an increased excitement of
the whole system, or with local inflammation, they are manifestly pre-
judicial. We infer this from the qualities of the water alone. It is also
confirmed by experience and observation. They are injurious in preg-
nancy. A woman some years ago lost her life by the imprudent use of
them. They are injurious in diseases of the mesentery and of the lungs.
A person afflicted by the consumption, was evidently hastened to the
grave by the frequent use of these waters. In cold, phlegmatic, bilious
habits, they must be hurtful : also, in chronic diarhoca and dysentery.

Diseases in which they are beneficial. — From the lime and salt, mag-
nesia, &c. which they contain, and their operation upon the urinary or-
gans, they may be useful in the dropsy, gravel, and other affections of
the kidneys and bladder.

General Debility. — Being strong chalybeates, they possess some to-
nic powers; hence they are useful in dyspepsia, hypochondriasis, and
hysteria. They are also serviceable in painful and suppressed menses ;
likewise in that species of consumption arising therefrom ; also the rick-
ets and scrofulous affections, &c.

The following are the remarks of Dr. Dyckman upon the use of theso
waters: " The doses must be regulated by the constitution of the pa-
tient, the state of the stomach, the nature and stage of the disease, and
the effects produced. In large quantities, as from a pint to a quart,
they usually operate gently as a cathartic; but in small doses their ac-
tion is confined more particularly to the kidneys and the skin. In gen-
eral, they should be drank till they produce a slight evacuation from the
bowels. Care however should be taken never to distend the stomach so
as to occasion inconvenience. If from one to two or three pints daily,
produce no sensible effect, the quantity of fluid will be apt to prove more
injurious as a load, than useful as a medicine.

In most instances, perhaps, it will be advisable to begin with small
quantities, and repeat them often. When taken to an improper extent
particularly if they do not produce some effect as a purgative and diur-
etic, they not unfrequently occasion much distress and disturbance of
the whole system, being followed by anxiety, head-ache or vertigo,
perturbation, pains in the stomach and bowels, or spasms. They
should not be employed when the stomach and bowels are overloaded
or just before or after meals. When intended to act as an aperient, the


94 Means of preventing disease,

proper time for administering them is in the morning before breakfast.
Their operation will be facilitated by the exercise of walking or riding.
Taken after a meal, they are less apt to affect the bowels, than they are
the kidneys and skin.

Saratoga and Ballston springs are situated about twenty-five miles
from the Hudson river, and run parallel with it, being about a day's
journey from Albany. The country around them is rather elevated ;
the atmosphere is by many degrees cooler than in the neighbourhood of
the cities of the United States, generally ; the nights are always cool and
comfortable ; the air is extremely clear, and, upon the whole, the situ-
ation and the surrounding country are healthy and pleasant. All the
fountains in this great valley, which lie pretty much in the form of a
crescent, as far as they have been examined, appear, with few excep-
tions or variations, to possess the same qualities, differing only in the
proportion of the substances common to all, and which are as follows:
carbonic acid gas, muriate of soda, carbonate of soda, carbonate of
lime, carbonate of magnesia, a trace of iron and iodine.

It would be almost impossible to give a minute detail of all the foun-
tains in this immediate neighbourhood, the names of the principal of
which, however, are the Congress Spring, Lowe's Well, the Flat-rock
Spring, the High-rock Spring, Spa, Sulphur Spring, the Hamilton, the
Columbian, the President, &c As the properties of these springs are
nearly alike, we shall therefore only dwell on those which are considered
most interesting. The water in each of these fountains arises from a
bed of sand, intermixed with stiff blue clay, and overlaying calcareous
and schistose rock. The water of these fountains is perfectly clear and
transparent; as it issues from its source, it sparkles briskly, but in some
more than others, which is produced by the escape of the carbonic acid
gas ; the same occurs when poured from one vessel to another. Its taste
is saline with a slight degree of bitterness, and its effects on the econo-
my purgative or aperient. See Professor Silliman's Letter in the
Northern Traveller, page 137.

Lowe's Well, Ballston. — The temperature of the water of this
fountain is uniformly 52 degrees of Fahrenheit. The specific gravity
is to that of distilled water, as 1008 to 1000, the temperature of both
being 60 degrees. A glass of this water, just taken from the well, has
a saline and pungent taste, with an evident chalybeate property. It is
so very pungent as to affect the palate, and produce, at first, a slight
giddiness and exhilaration of spirits. This water is also used for bathing.

According to Dr. Meade's analysis of this fountain, one quart of its
water may be stated to contain the following substances: Muriate of
soda, gr. 43; carbonate of lime, 13A; carbonate of magnesia, 1\; mu-
riate of lime, 4\; muriate of magnesia, 2%; oxyde of iron, 1; carbonic
acid gas, 601 cubic inches ; nitrogen, 2\.

Ballston Spa is situated about seven miles in a south-west direction
from the springs at Saratoga. The water is very clear and sparkling, and
when drunk betrays its chalybeate and gaseous properties to the taste.
Dr. Steel remarks, that from the repeated application of the several rea-
gents to the waters of this fountain, they appear to contain no properties
to distinguish them from the waters of Saratoga. Its temperature is 50


and promoting health and longevity. 95

degrees, and one gallon, or 232 cubic inches, on a careful analysis, yield-
ed the following result: Muriate of soda, 159; carbonate of soda, 9;
earbonate of lime, 75.5 ; carbonate of magnesia, 2.5 ; carbonate of iron,
7; carbonic acid gas, 210 cubic inches.

Schooltifs Mountain. — Schooley's Mountain is a part of the granitic
chain, extending in a north-east and south-west direction nearly across
the state of New Jersey. Its height is more than six hundred feet from
its base, and not more than eleven hundred feet above the level of the
ocean. This elevation is sufficient to influence the temperature of these
springs. The temperature of the water of the copious springs near the
top of the mountain is only 50 degrees, while that of the deepest and
coolest wells in New York is 54 degrees of Fahrenheit. These mineral
springs are situated between two beautiful wooded mountains, and issue
from a fissure of the perpendicular side of a rock, and the quantity of water
gushing from this fissure may be estimated at six hogsheads per day.

According to Dr. W. J. M'Neven, this water contains extractive,
0.92; muriate of soda, 0.43; muriate of lime, 2.40; muriate of mag-
nesia, 0.50; carbonate of lime, 7.99, sulphate of lime, 0.65; carbo-
nate of magnesia, 0.40; silex, 0.80; carbonated oxyde of iron, 2.00;
loss, 0.41.

This water has been found advantageous in calculous concretions, and
when the urine is blackened by it, is always held as a favourable symp-
tom of its operating beneficially. The quantity generally drank is from
ten to twenty half pint tumblers a day. One of the great advantages
of this water is, that the carbonic acid it holds is altogether in a state of
lence or spasm in the weakest stomach, while it acts as a tonic like other
chalybeates.

Pittsburgh Chalybeate Mineral Spring. — This spring is situated four
miles south-west of the city of Pittsburgh. When the water remains
undisturbed for a few hours, it is covered with a white pellicle ; its taste
is lively and rather pungent, with a peculiar ferruginous flavour, and it
exhales an odour of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. Its temperature is very
generally uniform, and is of 54 degrees of Fahrenheit. The specific gra-
vity of the water differs little from the purest water, and is as 1002 to 1000.

According to Dr. Meade's analysis, it contains muriate of soda, 2;
muriate of magnesia, $; oxyde of iron, 1 ; sulphate of lime, -i; carbo-
nic acid gas in one quart of water, 18 cubic inches.

Dr. M. thinks this water even superior, in a medicinal point of view,
to the water of the Schooley's Mountain spring, which has long sustained
a high character for its chalybeate properties.

Yellow Spring.— This spring is situated in Green county, (Ohio,)
sixty-four miles from Cincinnati. This is a copious vein, which bursts
from a fissure in the silicious lime-stone rock ; the water is transparent,
and emits no air bubbles. Its temperature is of 52 degrees. Its taste
is that of a slight chalybeate. From the examinations made, it seems
to contain some oxyde of iron and carbonate of lime, dissolved by the
agency of carbonic acid gas, and slightly charged with saline particles.
Its sensible effects on the human body seem to be inconsiderable • it has
however, been used with advantage in cases of chronic debility, in which
'.nalybeates are indicated


96


"ftlcans of preventing disease,


New Mineral Spring at Albany. — This spring was discovered in the
summer of 1826, in a very singular manner. Messrs. Boyd and M'Cul-
loch, anxious to procure water for their brewery, were induced to bore
for it in the lower part of the city ; when they had proceeded to the
depth of 480 feet, instead of obtaining fresh water, the fluid which as-
cended had a peculiar saline taste, and a sparkling appearance. Its tem-
perature is uniformly from 51 to 52 degrees of Fahrenheit's specific
gravity as 1010 to 1000. This water is purely saline, somewhat pun-
gent, rather agreeable. If left to stand for a little while, the water,
which at first was transparent, becomes perfectly opaque, having, how-
ever, formed previously a pellicle on its surface, which falls to the bot-
tom, and then loses its agreeable and acidulous taste, becoming perfectly
vapid, and tastes like a solution of marine salt in water.

According to Dr. Meade's analysis, it contains the following articles,
but, in order the better to understand its properties, we shall give also
Dr. M.'s analysis of the Congress Spring, and of the Public Well at
Ballston. The following are the contents of each in one pint of water.


Congress Spring

Muriate of soda,
Carbonate of lime,
Magnesia, - -

Muriate of lime,
Muriate of magnesia,
Oxyde of iron, - -


Grs.

514
13|

■ *k

■ n

24
- i


Total, 781


Carbonic acid gas,
cubic inches,


33


Public Well, Ballston.
Grs.
Muriate of soda,
Carbonate of lime,
Carb. of magnesia,
Muriate of lime, - -
Muriate of magnesia,
Oxyde of iron,


21

4|

5|

If

- 1

■ 4


Total, 34J


Carbonic acid gas,
cubic inches,


Albany Water.

Muriate of soda,
Carbonate of soda,
Carbonate of lime,
Carb. of Magnesia,
Carbonate of iron,
Muriate of lime,


Grs.

59

5

- 4

U
1


Total, 71


Carbonic acid gas,
304 cubic inches, - 26


Bedford Mineral Springs, Pennsylvania. — Bedford is a village situ-
ated on the great western turnpike from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh, a
few miles east of the chief elevation of the Alleghany mountains. The
springs, the chalybeate excepted, are located about two miles south of
Bedford, in Shover's valley, which is watered by a creek bearing the
same name.

The principal springs are Anderson's, Fletcher's, the Lime-stone spring,
the Sweet springs, the Sulphur spring, and the Chalybeate spring.
These springs are distant from Philadelphia 195 miles, and from Balti-
more, or Washington city, 130 miles.

Anderson's. — The waters of this spring issue, in a very copious stream,
from a fissure in a lime-stone rock. The water is clear, lively, and spark-
ling. Its temperature was of 58 degrees of Fahrenheit, whilst the ther-
mometer stood at 70 degrees. Its specific gravity is 1029. It has a
peculiar saline taste, resembling a weak solution of Epsom salt in water,
and impregnated with carbonic acid. This w r ater is inodorous. On ex-
posure in an open vessel it becomes vapid.

According to Dr. W. Church, a quart of this water yielded the follow-
ing substances: —

Sulphate of magnesia, 20 grs.; sulphate of lime, 3%; muriate of soda,
24; muriate of lime, I; carbonate of iron, 11; carbonate of lime, 2;
loss . •$ ; carbonic acid gas. 18* cubic inches.


ajid promoting health and longevity. 9f

Fletcher' 's. — This fountain furnishes also a very abundant supply of
water. Its temperature was 55 degrees of Fahrenheit, while the ther-
mometer stood at 70 degrees. Dr. Church's experiments on this water
come nearly to the same results as with the preceding. He remarks,
however, that it contains rather more iron and common salt, and less
magnesia. All the other remarks made about Anderson's spring are
equally applicable to this spring.

These waters are exhibited in a great many affections, but particularly
in chronic diseases, as are almost all the fountains of this description
Saline Springs, Big Bone Licks — Are fountains, several in number,
situated in the state of Kentucky, near the banks of the Ohio, twenty-
two miles south-west of Cincinnati. Previous to the discovery of the
saline springs on the great Kenhawa, which afford a great quantity of
salt, the water of these springs was also employed in the manufacture of
salt. It holds in solution, besides common salt, muriate of lime, sul-
phate of soda, or magnesia, and a few other salts of less activity, but
no iron. These springs yield a great quantity of sulphuretted hydrogen
gas, which continually escapes in bubbles; and soem also to contain
some gallic acid, from their effects on tho sulphate of copper and iron.
The temperature is 57 degrees. The taste and smell are sulphurous,
and offensive to new comers, but this effect is transient, and soon after
a taste of common salt predominates. They have no action on the cir-
culation, hut their effects on the alimentary system, kidneys, and skin,
are very great. They frequently produce in a tew days a violent itch-
ing, followed by an eruption of pimples or pustules, which are some-
times accompanied with large boils. These waters can never be service-
able to debilitated persons ; but may be useful, and at times peculiarly
adapted to torpor, or obstruction produced by acute disease in the lungs,
or, in a word, in any of the viscera, which is of short standing, and has
not exhausted the patient. From a pint to a gallon may be taken daily;
the quantity drunk at first ought to be, however, very small.

An author speaking of the effects of Chalybeate mineral waters,
thus remarks : " It gives a gentle stimulus to the relaxed nerves, and con-
tributes to restore their proper tone. It affords great relief in many
complaints of the stomach, in flatulencies, bilious vomitings, irregular
or imperfect digestion, and other consequences of either debility or in-
temperance. It promotes the circulation of the blood, and the various
secretions; but more particularly that of urine: and this latter circum-
stance is one of the best proofs of its agreeing with the habit of the pa-
tient. In short, its natural tendency in the cases to which its stimulant
and tonic powers are adapted, is to raise the spirits, and increase the
general vigour of all the functions.

These waters are considered serviceable in what may be called the
sexual disorders of females, arising from a great weakness or derange-
ment of the uterine system; such as an immoderate flow of the menses,
green sickness, fluor albus, and other similar indispositions, which are
not only relaxing and painful in themselves, but are often the cause of
abortion, or of sterility. If the profuse flow of the menses should be
accompanied, as it often is, by feverish symptoms, by pain in the back,
and local irritation, the stimulus of the waters mi«ht then prove injuri-
Vot. I. 13 J


y8 Means of preventing disease,

ous. Indeed, they are improper in all inflammatory cases, except the
feverish irritation which attends the green sickness, and which is more
frequently abated than increased by the use of chalybeates.

In all obstructions of the urinary passages, and other complaints of
that region, those waters are found of singular efficacy ; for though, as
before observed, they in some degree promote every secretion, yet their
chief and most regular determination is to the kidneys ; and experience
has fully proved tlie good effects of their gently stimulant and diuretic
properties.

We may proceed still farther in our recommendation of these waters,
disorders as- arise from slow beginnings, and are attended with great
laxity and weakness of the\solids, but without much organic disease. It
is necessary to attend to this material exception ; because a general
weakness may be often brought on by morbid affections of the mesen-
tery, of the lungs, or of some other important organ, to the cure or re-
lief of which they would be very inadequate. Even in complaints
where they have commonly proved efficacious, cases must often occur
that require the exercise of the nicest judgment and discrimination.

As some persons may be too soon prejudiced against the use of cha-
tybeates by any unpleasant or unexpected sensations at first, it is pro-
per to inform them, that giddiness and sometimes a heaviness of the
head, nausea, vomiting, a slight pain about the heart, and a sense of
fulness over the whole body, though by no means uncommon symptoms
en beginning a course of these waters, will disappear after a little use.
It is only when they stubbornly continue, that they should be regarded
as a proof that the waters are not suited to the nature of the complaint
or to the patient's constitution. The nausea or sickness being often oc-
casioned by the coldness of the fresh-drawn water, acting on an empty
or a very weak and irritable stomach, it is advisable, in the first instance,
not to drink the waters fasting, till the stomach becomes gradually re-
conciled to them; and, in case of extreme irritability, it is a common
and judicious practice to immerse in hot water a bottle filled with the
chalybeate, and well corked, that the dullness may be diminished, with
as little evaporation of the fixed air as possible.

This account of the primary and immediate effects of the water used
internally will enable any patient to judge, from his own feelings, whe-
ther it agrees with his constitution or not. If it excites, on being first
taken, a pleasing glow in the stomach, followed by an increase of spi-
rits, and of appetite, particularly for breakfast, and, above all, a rapid
determination to the kidnios, there is the greatest probability of its prov-
ing serviceable. But if it occasions head-ache, thirst, and dryness of the
tongue; — If it sits heavy on the stomach, or produces sickness, and does
not pass off by urine or perspiration; — it may be fairly concluded, that
its continuance would do injury, unless these symptoms can be removed.
If we come next to consider the external application of those waters,
we shall find, in the first place, that they unite all the medicinal ad-
vantages of warm baths, from about a hundred and six degrees of heat
to any inferior degree that may be desired. The extent also of the
baths, which affords room to niove about in (hem freely, and the per-


and promoting health and longevity. "^

nianonce and uniformity of their warmth, are not unimportant recom-
mendations. But Dr. Falconer is of opinion, that the waters possess
sonic further powers or specific qualities superior to those of common
water of the same temperature. He thinks that their action on the ner-
vous system is more stimulating than a common warm bath; — that they
raise the pulse and heat of the body to a higher degree, yet are much
less apt to produce a violent perspiration ; — that they remarkably increase
the urinary discharge; — and that, so far from causing any relaxation or
weakness, the bathers are observed to be in general more alert and vigor-
ous, and to have a better appetiteon the days of bathingthan in the interval.

good effects of the waters, arc the green sickness, particularly before
any considerable affection of the stomach takes place, or any feverish
symptoms appear; visceral obstructions, when the consequences of in-
l.'iinittent fever, or of long residence in hot climates, if the disorder in
these cases has not advanced too far; the palsy, from a great variety
of causes ; the gout, in that stage of the complaint, when the inflam-
matory symptoms, if any have preceded, have in a good measure aba-
ted, and a degree of weakness and want of tone in the system begins to
take place; the chronic rheumatism, and the acute also, provided the
feverish disposition be previously allayed by proper evacuations; white
swellings on the knee; hip cases; weakness of the organs of digestion;
the colic, accompanied with hysteric symptoms, or produced by the
poison of lead; the jaundice, when arising from simple obstruction
of the biliary ducts; hypochondriac and hysterical complaints; St.
Vitus's Dance; spasmodic affections of the womb and painful menstru-
ation; and, lastly, in many cutaneous, but more especially leprous
eruptions.

I have confined myself here to a bare outline, which may be suffi-
cient for the general direction of valetudinarians, who must avail them-
selves of more particular advice at the fountain-head. Almost every
case will require a peculiar mode of treatment ; and great caution will
he found necessary to prevent fatal mistakes. I cannot too often repeat
that the more powerful any remedy is, the more liable it is to abuse;
and though the efficacy of the waters has been established in some
of the most stubborn and afflicting disorders, yet their misapplication
has also been often attended with very serious consequences.

No less regard should be paid to the proper use of the bath. A short
stay of five or six minutes is most advisable at first; and if this trial
produces no symptoms that are disagreeable, but on the contrary, seems
to improve the health, spirits and strength, a longer stay may be grad-
ually indulged, till it comes to half an hour, but never to cause lassi-
tude, faintness, or disgust.

Acidulous, or Gaseous Mineral Waters.
These waters are limpid and colourless ; they have an acidulous and
fresh taste, a sharp, hut very weak smell. They redden the tincture of
litmus and form with lime water a flaky precipitate. To the presence of
carbonic acid, they arc indebted for most of their properties. They
vet v often contain five or six times their volume of that gas ; thus when


100 Means oj preventing di><

they arc agitated or heated, a great number of bubbles escape. Salts are
also found in them, such as carbonates, hydro-chlorates and sulphates
of lime, of soda, and of magnesia, but in too small quantities to ren-
der them purgative ; a certain number of these salts, insoluble in water
are kept in solution in them by carbonic acid; indeed, by the disen-
gagement of this gas, these waters lose their transparency, and a whit-
ish precipitate is formed, more or less abundant, of carbonate of lime
or of magnesia.

The springs of gaseous mineral waters are either cold or thermal.
The former are cooling, quench thirst, excite slightly the organs of
digestion, increase in a remarkable manner the secretion of urine ; but
they react promptly on the brain. In fact, their use often causes gid-
diness, a slight inebriation, and even head-ache, agitation, syncope,
&c. The thermal waters are more stimulating. It appears therefore,
that these mineral waters act on the digestive canal like temperants ; but
the influence they exercise on the nervous system, is evidently of a
stimulating nature.

The cold gaseous waters are exhibited with success in small quantities
as cooling drinks, in cases of slight inflammation of the digestive or-
gans ; in larger doses, they succeeded in a great number of chronic
diseases, and especially in those proceeding from weakness of the
stomach. They are employed in nervous affections, hypochondriasis,
chlorosis, amenorrhcea, calculous affections, chronic catarrhs, obstruc-
tions of the liver, &c. The thermal waters of this class, are very
useful, especially as baths, in diseases of the skin, rheumatic and arth-
ritic affections, white swellings, and other diseases of this nature.

The principal springs of acidulous or gaseous mineral waters in this
country, are the following:

Thermal Waters. Lebanon Spring. — This is a spot beautified both
by nature and art, twenty-six miles east from Albany, and about two
miles east from the village of New Lebanon, which is itself situated in
a little valley, surrounded by fine hills and on the side of one of these
hills, is the fountain, from which issues the clear and warm water, which
although possessed of no strong mineral properties, has nevertheless
given to this place its celebrity. The waters of this spring are abun-
dant, and much esteemed for bathing, always keeping the temperature
of 72 deg. Fahr. It resembles very much the Buxton water in England,
although less warm. The waters of Bristol, England, are another in-
stance of tepid waters being almost entirely without mineral properties.
The present fountain scarcely possesses any medicinal virtues, as may
be seen by its contents below and as stated in Dr. Meade's analysis.

Two quarts' of the water contain muriate of lime, gr. 1 ; muriate of
soda, If; sulphate of lime, 1|; carbonate of lime, f ; nitrogen gas, 13
cubic inches ; atmospheric air, 8.

Bedford Lime-stone Spring. — The water of this fountain, which is-
sues from the fissures in a lime-stone rock, is a pure lime-stone water.
Its temperature, 51 deg. Fahr. the thermometer being at 70 deg. There
is also a swert spring, the water of which is as pure as distilled water,
with the exception of the carbonic acid it contains, and which may be ea-
sily expelled from the water by boiling it. See Bedford mineral springs.


and promoting health and longeviii/. 101

Sulphurous Mineral Waters.

The mineral waters belonging to this class, and called sulphurous,
hepatic, dfc. are very remarkable for their foetid smell, similar to that
of rotten eggs, and by their bitter, brackish, and very unpleasant taste.
In general they are limpid and unctuous. The springs which furnish
them are mostly warm; there are, however, many cold ones. The
chemical composition of these waters varies considerably, but they all
contain some hydro-sulphuric acid, in a free state, or combined with
an alkali. The other substances found in them are sulphates, hydro-
chlorates, and carbonates of soda, magnesia, lime, and even occasion-
ally, free carbonic acid, and a peculiar vegeto-animal matter.

The sulphurous mineral waters act upon the whole economy as ex-
citants. They promote appetite, render the circulation more active,
and produce an abundant perspiration, or a considerable discharge of
urine. Indeed, their continued employment produces even a febrile
motion, which may last for several days.

These waters are employed either internally or externally in a great
number of cases. In herpetic eruptions and in many other cutaneous
affections, they may act advantageously. They are likewise used with
success in chronic catarrhs, when it is necessary to stimulate in a gentle
and continued manner, the mucous membrane of the bronchia 3 and of
the pulmonary cells. They are also highly and justly recommended for
their efficacy in the treatment of scrofulous affections, and in engorge-
ments of the lymphatic glands. Finally, they are administered in
chronic rheumatism, gout, &c.

The principal sulphurous waters in this country, are the follow-
ing:—

Sulphur Spring, near Saratoga. — Directly up the Kayadarossaras
Creek, and near its banks, and two or three miles from Ellis's Spring,
is situated a strong-scented sulphur spring, so much so as to enable us
to smell its emanation at some distance from it. The water is clear,
and is only slightly agitated by the escape of gas. Its taste is unpleas-
ant, partially resembling bilge water. Its temperature is 50 deg. Fahr.
This water has been used in various cutaneous diseases, both internal-
ly and externally.

Dr. Steel, on analysis, has obtained from a gallon of water of this
spring, the following substances : muriate of soda, grs. 23.6; carbon-
ate of soda, 1.4; carbonate of lime, 33.1; carbonate of iron, 1.9;
carbonic acid gas, 43.5 cubic inches; sulphuretted hydrogen gas, 11
uhic inches.

Sulphur Spring, Ballston. — Within a few feet of Lowe's Spring is
situated this sulphurous fountain, which announces its character or prop-
erties to the smell and taste. Its temperature is 52 deg. This water,
like the preceding, is used for bathing, but is sometimes drank, and is
supposed to be highly efficacious in cutaneous affections.

According to Dr. Steel's analysis, a gallon of water yields the fol-
lowing substances: muriate of soda, grs. 64; carbonate of soda, 6; car-
bonate of lime, 30; carhonate of iron, 4; carbonic acid gas, 144 co-
nic inches ; sulphuretted hydrogen gas, 7.


LOil Means of preventing disease.

Bedford Sulphur Spring. — This water, as well as sulphurous foun-
tains generally, exhales a very strong odour of sulphuretted hydrogen
gas. Its temperature is 56 deg. Fain - . Dr. Church, by chemical ex-
periments, has ascertained it to contain carbonic acid, sulphuretted hy-
drogen gas, small quantities of lime, magnesia, and mutriate of soda.
It contains no iron. See Bedford Mineral Springs.

An injurious prejudice prevails in this country, (says a writer) that all
diseases must be cured by medicines taken into the stomach, and that the
more violently these medicines operate, they are the more likely to have
the desired eifect. This opinion has proved fatal to thousands, and will, in
all probability, destroy many more, before it can be wholly eradicated.
Purging is often useful in acute diseases, and in chronical cases may pave
the way for the operation of other medicines: but it will seldom per-
form a euro ; and, by exhausting the strength of the patient, will often
leave him in a worse condition than it found him. That this is frequent-
ly the case with regard to the more active mineral waters, every per-
son conversant in these matters will readily allow.

Strong stimulants applied to the stomach and bowels for a length of
time must tend to weaken and destroy their energy ; and what stimu-
lants are more active than salt and sulphur, especially when these sub-
stances are intimately combined, and carried through the system by the
penetrating medium of water 1 Those bowels must be strong indeed
which can withstand the daily operation of such active principles for
months together, and not be injured. This, however, is the plan too
generally pursued by those who drink purging mineral waters, and
whose circumstances permit them to continue long enough at these pla-
ces of fashionable resort.

Many people imagine that every thing depends on the quantity of wa-
ter taken, and that the more they drink, they will the sooner get well.
This is an egregious error ; for, while the unhappy patient thinks he is
by this means eradicating his disorder, he is often, in fact, undermin-
ing the powers of life, and ruining his constitution. Indeed, nothing
can do this so effectually as weakening the powers of digestion by the
improper application of strong stimulants. The very essence of health
depends on the digestive organs performing their due functions, and
the most tedious maladies are all connected with indigestion.

Drinking the water in too great quantity not only injures the bow-
els, and occasions indigestion, but generally defeats the intention for
which it is taken. The diseases, for the cure of which mineral waters
are chiefly celebrated, are mostly of the chronic kind; and it is well
known that such diseases can only be cured by the slow operation of
alteratives, or such medicines as act by inducing a gradual change in
the habit. This requires length of time, and can never be effected
by medicines which run off by stool, and operate chiefly on the first
passages.

Those who wish for the cure of any obstinate malady from the waters
of the sulphurous or saline class, ought to take them in such a manner
as hardly to produce any effect whatever on the bowels. With this
view, a half-pint glass may be drank at bed-time, and the same quan-
tity an hour before breakfast, dinner, and supper. The dose, how-


and promoting health and longevity. 103

ever, must vary according to circumstances. Even the quantity men-
tioned above will purge some persons while others will drink twice as
much without being in the least moved by it. Its operation on the bow-
els is the only standard for using the water as an alterative. No more
ought to be taken than barely to move the body ; nor is it always neces-
sary to carry it even this length, provided the water goes off by the
other emunctories, and does not occasion a dullness or flatulency in
the stomach or bowels. When the water is intended to purge, in cases
where the nature of the patient's complaint requires a strong determi-
nation to the bowels, it may be necessary to drink a pint or two before
breakfast.

I would not only caution patients who drink those waters over-night,
to avoid hearty suppers, but also against eating heavy meals at anytime.
The stimulus of water, impregnated with sulphur and salts, seems to
create a false appetite. I have seen a delicate person, after drinking
the waters of a morning, eat a breakfast sufficient to have served two
ploughmen, devour a plentiful dinner of flesh and fish, and, to crown
all, cat such a supper as might have satisfied a hungry porter. All this
indeed, the stomach seemed to crave; but this craving had better re-
main not quite satisfied, than that the stomach should be loaded with
what exceeds its powers. To starve patients was never my plan; but'
I am clearly of opinion, that, in the use of all the strongly purging
mineral waters, a light and rather diluting diet is the most proper ; and
that no person, during such a course, ought to eat to the full extent of
what his appetite craves.

Exercise is not less conducive to the salutary end in view than tem-
perance. It promotes the operation of the waters, and carries them
through the system. It may be tiken in any manner that is most agree-
able to the patient ; but he ought never to carry it to excess. I scarce-
ly need repeat a remark often made in other parts of this work, that tho
best kinds of exercise arc those connected with amusement. Every
thing that tends to exhilarate the spirits, not only increases the efficacy
of the waters, but acts as a medicine. All those who repair to the
fountains of health ought therefore to leave every care behind, and to
make; themselves as cheerful and happy as possible. From this conduct,
assisted by the free and wholesome air of those fashionable places of
resort, and also the regular and early hours which are usually kept, the
patient often receives more benefit than from using the waters.

I have met with many instances of the most mischievous effects pro-
duced by drinking the waters in cases where they were absolutely im-
proper, and adverse to the nature of the disease. When people hear
of a wonderful cure having been performed by some mineral water,
they immediately conclude that it will cure every thing, and according-
ly swallow it down, when they might as well take poison. Before pa-
tients begin to drink the more active kinds of mineral waters, they
ought to be well informed of the propriety of the course, and 'should
never persist in using them, when they are found to aggravate the dis-
order.

On the other hand, [ often witnessed the happy issue of experiments
made with judgment and caution, when the greatest benefit was deri-


104


Means of preventing disease,


ved from the proper use of the waters in various eruptions on the skin,
of the most distressing nature ; in rheumatism complicated with scor-
butic complaints ; in obstructions of the glandular and lymphatic system;
and in diseases of the first passages, accompanied with, or proceeding
from, inactivity of the stomach and bowels, acidity, indigestion, viti-
ated bile, worms, putrid sores, the piles, and jaundice. They answer
two very important purposes ; first, when taken in small quantities,
acting as an alterative, and inducing, by their mild operation, a grad-
ual change in the habit; and, secondly, when employed in larger do-
ses where purging is indicated, fulfilling that intention in the most desi-
rable manner, without irritating the nerves, or weakening the patient so
much as other purgatives. After a little use, almost every body can
drink them without any great disgust, though they are at first no less
nauseous to the taste, than offensive to the smell."

I shall only add, that the external use of sulphurous waters are
deemed a very powerful auxiliary in many of the disorders for which
they are resorted to, particularly those of the cutaneous class.

Mineral Waters in Europe.

Various parts of Great Britain and France, are likewise distinguished
for mineral or medicinal waters ; the properties of which are very simi-
lar to the above. Among these are the following : —


Aix, in Provence,

Barege,

Bath

Bristol,

Buxton,

Borset,

Cheltenham,

Carlsbad,

Epsom,


Harrowgate,
Hartfell,
Holywell,
Leamington,
Malvern,
Matlock,
Moffat,

Passy, near Paris,
Rouen, &c.


Pyrin ont,
Scarborough,
Spa,
Sedlitz,
Sea-water,
Seltzer,
Tunbridge,
Vechy, and others
of less note.


The remarks on the mineral waters of the United States, are appli-
cable to those in France, England, and other parts of Europe.


and promoting health and longevity. 105


CHAPTER XVI.

JuLECTRICITV.

The application of electricity having been recommended for the cure of
so many diseases, it becomes proper to make a few remarks upon its na-
ture and effects. Ever since the discoveries made by Doctor Franklin,
it has been resorted to by medical men and others, for the alleviation
and cure of disease ; and in the present day, many consider it as a spe-
cific or universal panacea, that contains the power of ridding the system
of every complaint that ' flesh is heir to.' I know of no disease for which
its advocates have not strongly recommended it; but I have very satis-
factory evidence that most of the cures said to have been wrought by its
agency, must, like many other reputed remedies, be owing more to
dame nature, than any specific or medicinal effects which they possess.

I have had ample opportunities, since I commenced the practice of
medicine, of testing its efficacy. I have kept a machine and superin-
tended its administration, and after abandoning it for want of success,
1 have recommended my patients to several persons in this city, two of
Avhoni are professed electricians; and I am now constrained to state
that I am very much disappointed in its operation and effects, having
seen very few cures performed in the multiplicity of cases in which* it
has been applied ; but some diseases have been aggravated by it.

In palsy, it is said to have been beneficial, and probably has in some
cases relieved or cured it, particularly when it has been partial, or confined
to a particular part of the system. But in other cases, I have evidence
that it has proved injurious. It may be serviceable in rheumatism, and
some other chronic complaints. It has been highly extolled in inflam-
matory diseases, but there is no evidence that it proves beneficial in any
of them. It has also been highly spoken of in cancers and schirrhous
tumours of the female breast; but I have tried it in these complaints, and
have never derived any advantage from it. Some good, no doubt, is
sometimes derived from the effect it has upon the imagination. I wish,
however, not to dissuade any one from trying it as an experiment in
those diseases in which it is highly recommended, a„nd particularly where
other means are found unavailing.


Vol. I. 14


106 Means of preventing disease ,


CHAPTER XVII.

NOSTRUMS AND PATENT MEDICINE**

We deem it necessary to make a few remarks on the numerous nos-
trums or quack medicines offered for sale. The public are as much,
or more duped by taking these preparations, as from those minerals or
poisons administered undisguisedly. It is astonishing to witness the
facility with which many suffer themselves to be imposed upon, by
the pompous advertisements of some panacea, catholicon, pill, syrup,
or universal remedy, which they purchase at a high rate from some pre-
tender to a great secret or nostrum. The most foolish and palpable
preparation is purchased and taken with avidity, provided it is kept a
secret and highly extolled or puffed.

Our papers are filled with numerous nostrums, highly recommended
for the cure of all diseases. " Whoever advertises any medicine," says
Tissot, " as an universal remedy for all diseases, is an absolute impos-
tor; such a remedy being impossible, and contradictory in our present
state of knowledge. I freely appeal to every sensible man, who will
reflect a little on the different causes and symptoms of disease, whether
this is not the case."

, Did people know the ingredients of the nostrums which they purchase,
they would lose all confidence in them. Secresy, in the minds of the
ignorant and vulgar, stamps a great value on every medical preparation.
Cheats and impostors know this, and thus take the advantage of such
persons to palm upon them their spurious trash.

Some allowance, it is true, must be made, when we reflect upon the
want of a correct system of medical practice. Many persons, finding
no benefit from learned, fly to ignorant, quacks, for relief. Unhappily
as it were, they are burnt by standing between two fires. When a man
advertises that he can cure all diseases, or when he publishes a certain
cure for all complaints, look out for an impostor. No matter how many
certificates are appended or exhibited. So, whenever we see a person
professing to set or reduce bones, when there is neither dislocation nor
fracture, then beware of a shameless interloper and an empyric.
Look out also for those who arrogantly profess to have an infallible cure
for cancer and some other complaints in all stages; they will generally
be found deceivers. The basis of their applications is usually arsenic,
■mercury, or some other poisonous article.

Most of the lozenges and worm preparations contain mercury; also
many other remedies highly extolled, contain the same deleterious ar-
ticle.

Many of the syrups and panaceas denominated vegetable, contain
corrosive sublimate.

Many of those persons who profess to cure disease by vegetable reme-
dies, make use of mercury almost exclusively, in some form or other.


and promoting health and longevity. 107

I here give the advertisement of a doctor, who is repeatedly resorted to
in tlie city of New- York by a certain class of invalids, by way of speci-
men for puffing some of these nostrums:

" Salus Populi Suprema Lex. Dr. H , having been legally

bred to the medical profession, confines his attention to a particular dis-
ease, which engages his most profound attention. His experience is
very great; his success astonishing. Strangers may find some difficulty

in making a choice. Dr. H looks down with conscious pride upon

all competition; his real respectability, skill, and integrity, challenge
the severest scrutiny. A plurality of offices are provided," &c.

This only is given as a specimen, but the newspapers are full of them.

The following receipt is recommended by a doctor:

" For gout, rheumatism, cramps, contractions of the sinews, &c. —
Take a young fat dog, kill him, scald and strip off his hair. Then,
from a small incision, take out the contents of his belly, and put in the
eavity two handsful of nettles, two ounces of brimstone, a dozen of eggs
and four ounces of turpentine, well mixed together. Then sew up his
belly, and roast him before a fire, and save the oil. This is to be ap-
plied to the parts affected, warm, and rubbed in by the fire.

Or, the dog being prepared in the same manner, fill his belly with a
pint of red pepper, a pint of fish worms, the bark of sassafras roots,
and three or four green frogs ; roast him in the same manner, and save
the drippings. This is a valuable ointment for rheumatisms, contrac-
tions of the tendons, nervous affections, burns, &c.

That these preparations, although singular, are valuable, no one need
doubt."

Sometime since a German came to this city and proposed to cure all
diseases by inspection of the urine. The old women, girls, as well as men,
who imagined they were sick, sent a specimen of the precious liquid for
After pocketing a good fee, he ordered each one, no matter what
die disease, to be copiously and repeatedly bled. The consequence
was, that their complaints were exasperated and several destroyed. I
might easily fill a volume on this subject; but a few hints to the wise is
sufficient.

1 will make, however, a few more remarks on nostrums or quack
medicines. First, of Swaim's Panacea:

A man by the name of Swaim came to this city some years ago, af-
flicted with a disease, it is said, and became in possession of some
medical preparation which cured him. He then commenced making
experiments upon it by giving it to various persons; put it up into por-
ter bottles; denominated it a "panacea" or universal medicine, and
ihen began to vend it. He very cunningly and artfully procured the
recommendations of several noted physicians of Philadelphia and New-
York. These men, more, no doubt, for the novelty of the thing, or for
the sake of having their names appear in the newspapers, highly puffed
his nostrum, which gave great notoriety and attached much importance
to it. People of all classes purchased the article with great avidity, for
almost all complaints, for it promises to cure almost every thing. The
physicians, who recommended it, thus put a knife into the hands of


108 AJcans of />/■< renting dis<

their enemies to cut their own throats. They afterwards regretted that
thev had given their signatures, and stated that they had been dec eived
in the nostrum ; that, while it had benefitted some, it had injured others;
that it contained mercury, and had salivated many.

When Swaim ascertained that mercury had been detected in the
medicine, and was accused of it, he no longer added it. He then went
before a justice of the peace or a commissioner, and swore that his pa*
nacea did not contain one particle of mercury, which, no doubt, was
the case from the time he took the oath. But let the reader carefully
observe the sagacity of the man. Mercury must be given, or the pana-
cea will not have the desired effect. He therefore takes good care, in
the directions accompanying each buttle of the panacea, to tell the pa-
tient to take mercurial or " blue pills." From this we see, that the
whole properties of this medicine depends upon sarsaparilla, the only
active vegetable agent, and mercury. I have tried the medicine again
and again, but have never seen the least beneficial effect from it, though
in some cases it has no doubt been useful.

There is the most incontestible evidence that is has salivated numer-
ous individuals. Among the number, Dr. Hooker, of New-Haven,
states that he has known profuse salivation follow the use of it. This
panacea is no doubt similar to that which is called the French Rob.
Since Swaim has come out, numerous others have appeared of a similar
character.

Dr. Mallison has the following remarks on Nostrums and Patent Medi-
cines : — " One of the greates evils to which our country is exposed, and
one also which has not been felt the least, is the use of nostrums and
patent medicines ; the number of which, that are offered for sale at
the present day, are almost innumerable: each of which is said to be
a specific for nearly, or quite, all of the diseases to which a human be-
ing is subject. Now it is high time the public should open their eyes
and resist those gross impositions which have been the cause of many
premature and untimely deaths. The honest and unsuspecting suffer-
ers, who are labouring under afflicting diseases, feeling anxious for re-
lief, and being induced by the high recommendations attached to these
drugs, and likewise being ignorant of their composition, vainly trust
in them for relief, till many times their complaints advance beyond
the reach of the most efficacious and judiciously applied remedy.
This has come under my immediate observation more times than one.
I am well aware, however, that certificates are sometimes obtained
purporting cures to have taken place while the person was using some
of those nostrums ; but I am fully inclined to believe that most of such
cures were accomplished by the powers of nature or the vis conserva-
trix overcoming the effects of the disease, and I think that many times
it had to overcome the effects of the remedy also. For it is an absolute
fact, of which any person ma}* satisfy themselves, if they will take the
trouble only to inquire of those persons who have been in the habit of
using those articles, that nine times out of ten they have either been of
no use or actually injurious. And if certificates should be obtained
from all who have used these medicines according to the real effect the}-
Jiave producer), it is certain that not more than one out of ten would be


and promoting licalth and longevity. 109

in support of tlicm. Did the public know the composition of these nos-
trums, which they certainly ought before they hazard the application of
them, they would certainly detest the most of them as odious and bane-
ful. The nostrum called ' Panacea,' contains for its base, corrosive
sublimate, upon which all its virtues and activity depends. This is
a fact which has heen demonstrated by myself and others. Corrosive
sublimate is a preparation of mercury, of which if one grain should be
taken into the stomach, it would undoubtedly produce death in a short
time, if not immediately counteracted. I know of a case of scrofula,
in this county, where the panacea has been given and relied on for a
cure until the young lady has become a spectacle to behold, and in
.-ill probability will remain a miserable and distressed object during the
remainder of her life, in consequence of this deleterious mercurial ef-
fect, which is now one of the greatest scourges to our land. The
Welch Medicamentum, of which it is said, "if a person uses he will
never need or require the healing art," is nothing more nor less than a
compound tincture of aloes, diluted and mixed with a few aromatics,
more to disguise it than to sooth its operation. The active articles in
this preparation, are fit for little else than medicine for horses, on
which they operate, it is said, very well. A celebrated remedy re-
commended and sold for a preventive and cure for fever and ague.
contains a quantity of arsenic. The virtues of Anderson's Cough
Drops depends on the opium which they contain. A preparation sold
for the cure of dyspepsia, and which lias gained considerable celebrity,
is wholly dependent on prussic acid for its active agency. Now, prus-
sic acid is a substance which, if one drop should be applied to the
tongue, in its concentrated state, would produce death as quick as an
electric shock. I have known this article, also, to be taken until the
society of the person, which was once pleasant and delightful, was ren-
dered tedious and disagreeable even to his nearest friend, in conse-
quence of the nervous and hypochondriacal affection it produced. —
AVhat a curse is this! — How loaded with guilt must be the author of such
a calamity! It calls for a voice as loud as the thundering of the heav-
ens to speak against it. I have been waiting for an elder practitioner of
medicine to take up the pen against these life destroying agents, until
the scenes of human misery which were presented before my eyes, for-
bid my waiting any longer. Where i^ the man who knows these state-
ments to be correct, and who has the least spark of a philanthropic spi-
rit, can sit and hold his peace, and see humanity and innocence thus
tortured. I write the above through a feeling sense of duty, knowing
that the high recommendations which most of these nostrums have re-
ceived, to be base fabrications, and knowing the danger which a per-
son is exposed who uses an article of medicine that he knows not the
nature of, and having seen from time to time the injurious effect of these
articles, I now candidly say to the public, ' Be particular, as you value
your lives and health, to avoid all nostrums and patent medicines, of
which you know not the nature nor composition.' And the practicing
physician who uses or recommends to his patients these articles, only
indirectly acknowledges that he lias no confidence in his own prepara-
tions of medicine, and his ignorance of the healing apt."


.110 Means of preventing disease,


CHAPTER XVIIi.

THE PASSIONS.

Such is the connection between the body and the mind, that one
cannot be affected without a correspondent or sympathetic affection of
the other. But how this union of matter and mind exists, this material,
and immaterial connection, is a subject of profound astonishment, which
must ever remain a mystery to the greatest philosopher, or metaphysi-
cian. The most we know, is, that the nerves are the connecting
medium between the soul and the bod}\ Hence certain passions, or
mental affections, have great influence over the system, and likewise
whatever affects the body, must in like manner, affect the mind. It
therefore becomes necessary to study the nature, causes and symptoms
of mental derangement; but in this place, the passions, more especially,
form the subject of inquiry. Those passions which are the most sub-
ject to derangement, or to an unreasonable and morbid excess, are love,
grief, fear, and anger. To these we might add, joy, envy, malice, and
hatred.

Love.

This passion may, with propriety, be divided into two species, or
kinds: One, is a supreme attachment to the Creator; the other, to the
creature.

1. Love to the Creator. — This constitutes the most noble, the most
sublime, and the most heavenly of all the passions that actuate the hu-
man breast. That being whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain,
is emphatically pronounced, Love. From which we may infer that this
is the most holy, and blissful attribute of Deity, and the only true source
of happiness to men and angels.

The exercise of this passion, constitutes a Heaven, while its opposite
passion, anger, constitutes Hell, and the sufferings of the damned. There
i3 therefore no passion which exercises such a healthful, and important
influence as pure, celestial love'' It is a fact, which has been con-
firmed by thousands, that the most inveterate and dangerous diseases,
such as baffled the skill of physicians, have been removed by the influ-
ence of that love which has followed the pardon of sin. While Anger
on the other hand, has brought on fatal and incurable diseases. There
is therefore the highest incentive for us both, in a temporal and spiritu-
al point of view, to be brought under the influence of this love.

2. Love of the Creature, or Carnal Love. — The love of the Crea-
tor, just spoken of, begets a correspondent love to all mankind ; not a
carnal or selfish love, but a pure, disinterested affection, emanating
from a divine influence, and so far as it is exercised, is noble, prais-
worthy, and highly beneficial to society. But there is another kind of
love which admits of two species, and both of which are very different
in their effects.


and •promoting health and longevity.


Ill


1. Selfish Love.— This consists in a supreme regard to ourselves,
and tliose only through whom we derive some personal henefit. I his
originates from low and sordid principles, and is one great cause ot
the misery in the world.

2. Carnal Love.— I now come to speak of that kind of love to
which authors who write upon this passion, invariably allude. They
make no distinction between the several kinds of this passion, but treat
of it as emanating frdm one source. Whereas it appears evident to me,
that the most clear distinction should be observed. There appears to
be as much difference between disinterested, and carnal love, as there
i*s between any two diverse, or opposite passions. A person becomes
attached to a female which he considers love, and in the commence-
ment, it may be disinterested love. But the next sensation is a carnal
passion, which is associated with lust. When this is the case, it cer-
tainly, in my opinion, ceases to be genuine love ; but how far this latter
passion is consistent with the highest and best principle of love, or whe-
ther it is permitted in divine wisdom expressly to procreate the human
species, I shall not attempt to decide. But 1 have seen so much mise-
ry result through mistaken notions of this passion, by reason of substi-
tuting carnal for disinterested love, that I wish to draw a clear distinction be-
tween the two kinds. It is a question in the minds of many, how far the
fall of man from his primeval state of simplicity, has deranged this pas-
sion, and introduced selfish and carnal love. But it does appear that
Deity, on account of the first transgression, permits the present state
of things, for wise purposes; however much it may differ from his ori-
ginal design.

There is one thing, however, to which I wish to call the attention of
the reader, and which points out and seems to show an irreconcileable
difference between the two kinds of love, viz. disinterested and sensual.
I allude to the testimony and experience of some of the best men, who
have lived in any age of the world. They state, that the two, proceed
from sources entirely opposite; that when spiritual and disinterested
love pervades the soul, carnal love is entirely overpowered, destroyed,
and vice versa.

It may not be improper here to state, while writing upon the passion
of love, according to the common acceptation of the term, that its in-
fluence, and effect upon the mind, is in every case, very insidious and
gradual; that the subject of it, from a state of indifference, slowly, and
imperceptibly, is brought under its influence, until it becomes fairly
seated in the mind; when this is the case, it may be ranked among
the strongest passions, and when it is disappointed in its object, it be-
comes a disease, and a subject of medical attendance. Every person
should be well conversant with this fact, who is desirous of " avoiding
entangling affections." The passion of love is produced on the prin-
ciple of association, which begets assimilation or attachment, from
which every one may learn the prevention, if not the remedy. There
is one remarkable fact respecting this passion, which I shall here men-
tion, and it is that love creates the most irresistible and powerful im-
pressioo between the ages of twelve and sixteen; a truth which shows
the necessity of pointing out proper remedies.


1 1*£ Means of preventing disease,

Symptoms. — The symptoms of love when it creates disease, arc
well known. Melancholy ; love of solitude ; sighing ; wakefulness, &c.
It sometimes has a great influence upon the system, such as dyspepsia;
hysterica ; hypocondriasis ; fever and mental derangement, the latter of
which, has sometimes ended in suicide; while the others have occa-
sionally terminated fatally.

It is remarkable that those who have been cured of any of the dis-
eases from love, particularly by medicines, recover without possessing
any affections for the persons whom they formerly loved. It is stated
that this was the case with one of the princes of Conde. He said that
his physicians had drawn oft' all his love for his mistress, by their reme-
dies.

Treatment. Avoid the Company of the Object. — When a euro
is desired for love, an opposite course must be taken from that which
caused it. Association first begat assimilation as stated above : it now
becomes necessary in order to cure it, to pursue an opposite course, and
keep from the company of the object beloved. By seeing the person
often, it only adds fuel to the fire. A voyage, or journey should bo
undertaken, for absence has been justly styled " the tomb of love."

Medicine. — If the passion has become so seated, as to create any
should be adapted to particular symptoms. The stomach must bo
cleansed, the bowels regulated, and a restorative course of treatment
pursued.

Divide the Affections. — Let the person labouring under this pas-
sion, and who wishes to be cured of it, mix in cheerful company, and
let him or her select from the multitude, another object, whose attrac-
tions shall engage the attention ; by this means, the affections become di-
vided between the two objects, and the passions become weakened or
entirely destroyed. Ovid speaks of this, and compares it to a river or
stream which has dried up after it has become divided.

Recreation and Rural Scenery. — Recreation and rural scenery,
Will contribute very much to the destruction of this passion. Let the
person travel, and behold the beauties of nature. Let the flower gar-
den be cultivated. Let cheerful and amusing books of a moral tendency
be perused.

Indignation. — I wish to suggest or recommend nothing inconsistent
with morality or religion, or any thing calculated to excite any of the
passions. But in a medical point of view, I trust I shall be excused,
if I recommend one passion less violent, more transient, and less inju-
rious in its effects, for the purpose of removing another. I therefore
Would recommend the indulgence of a suitable degree of spirit and in-
dignation against the object loved, sufficient, at least to remove the inor~
dinate degree of the passion, not however, to the exclusion of friendship
tind benevolence.

In accordance with this, I would advise the person labouring under
this passion, to indulge the opposite passion, viz. hatred or indignation.
Let his or her ill treatment, deformities, and defects be constantly
brought to mind, and in this way, victory may be obtained. Many have
been perfectly cured by this ^lone,


and promoting health and longevity. H3

Let the person under the influence of this passion, exercise for-
titude and resolution. Let him spurn the thought of heing injured by
becoming a dupe to this puerile, slavish and transient passion, which sub-
sides as soon as the object is possessed, and which is often followed by
indifference and even disgust, wraugling, quarrelling, care, burden, per-
plexity, to which " single blessedness" is a stranger, to say nothing of
the grief and sorrow entailed by a numerous, and perhaps wicked off-
spring. Think of the troubles from which you will be exempted, by
living in a single state, and enjoying the company of your friends, with-
out your affections being so divided as to render their company irk-
some.

Morality and Religion. — Let morality and religion, be another in-
centive to you, to banish this passion for the creature, and to place your
affections upon your Creator. Think how much better you can serve
Him, divested of the cares of a family. Think of the fact that is so
much complained of by Christians, that as soon as they get married,
their cares and affections are such, that they appear to lose all love for
their Creator.

Let Hope in the Lover be Extinguished. — A celebrated writer
has the following pertinent remarks upon this passion : "As hope and
love are born together, so they can only die together." Uncommon
pains therefore should be taken, in curing love, to extinguish every spark
of hope in a lover. This advice is given with singular good sense and
humanity, by Dr. Gregory, in his legacy to his daughters, upon the.
subject of courtship and marriage.

Grief,

Few, if any, of the passions are more severe, or more injurious, thaw,
grief. Fear and anger, though more violent, are of shorter duration.
Grief consumes slowly, and undermines the constitution, and is much
more permanent in its effects than most any of the passions ; and where*
it is very deeply seated, sometimes proves fatal.

Symptoms. — The symptoms of grief are languid circulation; con-
traction of the heart; slow, weak, and unequal pulse; paleness; fretful-
ness ; loss of sleep and appetite ; flatulence and dyspepsia. In females,
it is sometimes accompanied with suppressed menstruation ; indeed all
the functions of the body become impaired by the indulgence of this
passion, and such is the effect on the mind, that the subject of it cannot
enjoy health.

A very sudden and powerful attack of grief, causes hysteric and apo-
plectic fits, and sometimes it ends in loss of memory, marks of prema-
ture old age, melancholy, and insanity.

Dissections of those who have died of grief, discover congestion in, and
inflammation of the heart, with a rupture of its auricles and ventricles.

Grief produces contraction of the womb, miscarriage, &c. it destroys
the circulation of the foetus; produces a relaxation of the muscles of
the spincter, and of the bladder.

There is another peculiar symptom of grief, not generally noticed,
which is that of profound sleep; a mother who has just lost a child, of-
ten sleeps profoundly. The keeper of Newgate in London states, that.

Voi,. T. 15


114- i\fcd)is of preventing disease.

criminals sleep soundly the night before their execution. The son ot'
general Custine in Paris, slept nine hours the night before he was led to
the guillotine. The disciples of our Saviour slept during his agony in
the garden, in consequence of " sorrow having filled their hearts."

Treatment. Anodynes. — When grief seizes a person suddenly
and powerfully, very much shocking the system, an opium pill may be
administered. Should paroxysms or urgent symptoms occur, it may be
repeated.

Purgatives. — Should grief so prey upon the system, as to create
great excitement, a purgative may be administered. While it lessens
the excitement, it will also obviate costiveness, a very attendant symp-
tom upon this passion.

Silence. — Conversing much with persons labouring under this passion,
often exasperates it. Silence is better than much conversation.

" There is science," says a writer, as well as, sympathy, in this si-
lence, for in this way, grief most rapidly passes from the bosom of tbo
sufferer into that of his friend.

Solitude. — Grief is generally increased by solitude. When a person
is afflicted with grief, he feels much more distressed when he is alone,
no doubt by dwelling on the cause of it. Solitude should, therefore, by
all means be avoided.

Friends. — A person seized with grief, almost invariably flies to his or
her nearest friend, to unbosom and unload the mind of its sorrows. Such
a friend, if he is one indeed, receives a portion of the sufferings, which
immediately lessens the affliction. Therefore the company of friends
should be resorted to.

Religion. — The greatest consolation, is no doubt derived from reli-
gion. The sufferer should remember well, that afflictions arise not from
the dust, that every event is permitted by Divine Providence, and under
his superintendence, and that his afflictions or bereavements has been
wisely dispensed, even for his or her individual benefit, however heart-
rending the present trial may be. We should recollect that the Creator
deals out afflictions, and trials to the children of men, with the same
scrupulous exactness, as the apothecary or physician deals out his medi-
cines.

Change of Scenery. — The mind in distress, may be much relieved
by a change of scenery. Let there be a constant succession of new
ideas, and new objects to divert the attention. Travelling, sailing, the
study of any art or science, reading or writing on interesting subjects,
&,c. will sooner assuage grief, than many other amusements. When
the mind has nothing else to think about, but its misfortunes and calami-
ties, it is sure to indulge in grief. Some business, therefore, should be
rigidly followed.

Pei sons suffering under any misfortune, should carefully abstain from
the use of ardent liquors, as they are apt to fly to it for relief, and thus
become intemperate.

In communicating sad tidings, it never should be done all at once,
but gradually, that the mind may be prepared for it.


and promoting health and longMity. H«*

A in

This passion cxevts a most violent and powerful effect on the system.
When it ascends to rage and fury, or when it is protracted into malice
;ind revenge, it becomes a sin and proves very destructive to health.

Symptoms, — A paroxysm of anger produces a determination of blood
to the brain; fufciess of the blood vessels of the face; redness of the.
: foaming at the mouth; volubility or total suppression of speech;
agitation o( the fists; stamping of the feet; and uncommon bodily
strength. It sometimes causes hysteria, hemorrhage, and mania. It
affects the sanguiferous and nervous system, produces vomiting, and
often breaks a blood vessel, or brings on apoplexy. It causes a return
of epilepsy; bleeding at the nose; affects the secretions of the liver;
induces colic, diarrhoea, faintings, and convulsions.

Treatment — The remedies for anger, when it becomes a disease,
may be divided into two classes. Fifst, Such as are proper during its
paroxysms. Second, Such as are proper, during their intervals, to
prevent a recurrence,

1. During a paroxysm. — Let a person labouring under this passion,
drink a tumbler of cold water. It gives time for the rage to subside,
and also gives time for reflection. Cold water thrown over the whole
body, has cured a paroxysm of anger. It never fails to part two con-
tending fowls, or dogs.

Resolution. — Let the whole powers of the mind be concentrated
instantaneously to form a resolution not to indulge in the passion of an-
ger. This is the most powerful of every other means to suppress it.

Absence from the exciting cause. — As soon as a person is attacked
with a paroxysm of anger, let him immediately absent himself from the
exciting cause of it, except there is a strong probability of a reconcili-
ation by seeing the person who has occasioned it. When this is the
case, be resolved to meet tho person with as much calmness as possible,
and let the subject be conversed upon. In such cases the difficulty is
often settled, and a greater friendship follows.

2. Means of preventing a recurrence of Anger. — Those who are very
passionate, should avoid all stimulating drinks and liquids, as nothing
tends more to inflame the passion of anger, than these. It is owing to
litis that even friends, when they assemble together and drink ardent
spirits, often begin to wrangle, quarrel, or fight. Dr. Arbuthnot states
that a milk and vegetable diet has cured a very angry disposition.

Silence. — Whenever a person becomes very angry, let him be silent,
and do, nor say nothing to fan the flame of anger.

Science or Education. — These have a great tendency to eradicate
from the breast the baneful passion of anger. They teach the mind
lliat there is true wisdom and philosophy, in abstaining from the indul-
gence of such an unholy and pernicious practice.

Opinion of others. — Those that are subject to fits of anger, should
recollect in their calmer moments of reflection, that when they exhibit
a paroxysm of anger, they render themselves as ridiculous as a drunk*
en man.

" ll will be useful for persons subject to the criminal degrees of th'fi


1X6 <Fi das fff preventing rZ/v

passion," says Dr. Rush, " to reflect, that it is not onty contrary to re-
ligion and morals, but to liberal manners. The term gentleman im-
plies a command of this passion above all others."

Religion. — There is nothing so powerful to allay the tumults of this
mighty passion, as religion. It is this alone that seems fully capable of
eradicating it from the human breast. It is remarkable that real Chris-
tians have been incapable of showing the least ange# under the most
aggravating circumstances. Therefore, whoever labours under this be-
setting sin, should pray earnestly to God for its removal.

Medicine. — When anger causes bilious and hepatic diseases, appro-
priate medicines must be administered, which will be hereafter men-
tioned.

Fear.

Fear, which was no doubt implanted by the Creator for a wise pur-
pose, exerts a great influence over the animal economy. Fear and anx-
iety, by depressing the spirits, not only dispose us to diseases, but have
a tendency to aggravate them, or even render them fatal.

Symptoms. — The effects of fear, when it acts suddenly upon the sys-
tem, are tremors, quick pulse and respiration, globus hystericus, a dis-
charge of urine, diarrhoea, and sometimes an involuntary discharge of
the faeces, fever, convulsions, fainting, madness, and death. Dr. Bram-
billa relates the case of a soldier, in whom fear produced not only a fe-
ver, but a mortification from a blister on the leg, which destroyed his
life. Besides these general effects of fear, it acts in a peculiar manner
upon the hair of the head. First, in causing it to stand perpendicular.
verting it suddenly to a gray, or white colour; and Third, .in causing it
to come out by the roots, and to fall off the head. Of this Dr. Huch
states that he knew an instance of a gentleman who was in Lisbon, at
the time of the great earthquake in 1755.

Other effects of fear have been lately noticed. The earthquake which
took place on the shores of the Mississippi, in December, 1811, pro-
duced silence or great talkativeness, and moping stillness or constant
motion in different people.

Treatment. — Although fear appears to be in a considerable degree
constitutional, yet it may be moderated, or measurably overcome by
habit, the exercise of reason, philosophy, and religion.

Those very subject to this passion, should endeavour to exercise for-
titude of mind. They should reflect that they have no just grounds or
reason to fear any thing which can happen unto them, provided they
are in the line of their duty, and act conscientiously. That nothing
will be permitted to overtake them, but such as is for their benefit. In
a word, they should endeavour to exercise perfect resignation, ever
bearing in mind the following lines of the poet:

" Through all the downward tracts of time
God's watchful eye surveys;
O. who, so wise to choose our lot.
Or regulate our wayB.


and promoting health and longevity, ' l '

I cannot doubt his bounteous love,

Unmeasurably kind;
To his unerring, gracious will,

Be every wish resigned.

Good when he gives, supremely good,

Nor less when he denies;
Even suff'ririgs from his sov'reign hand,

Are blessings in disguise.

Here happiness cannot be found,

The honey 's mixed with gall,
'Midst changing scenes and dying friends,

Be thou my all in all.

Fear of Thunder and Lightning.— Dr. Rush has the following judi-
cious remarks upon the prevention of fear in thunder storms:
" The remedies for it are,

1. Living in a house defended hy a lightning rod.

2. Sitting in the middle of a room, and remote from the doors and
windows of a house, not defended by a lightning rod.

3. A citizen of Philadelphia, who was under the influence of this fear,
obviated it in a degree by closing the doors and windows of a room, and
sitting with a lighted candle in it. By this means he avoided the sight
of the lightning, and the anticipation of the noise of the thunder which
usually follows it.

4. A lady of respectable character, formerly of this city, usually
fainted with terror during the time of a thunder-gust, and discovered,
by a livid countenance, and cold and clammy sweats, the signs of ap-
proaching death. She was apparently kept alive, by pouring into her
stomach three or four wine glasses of Jamaica spirits: it was remarka-
ble she never was intoxicated by it, and that it was disagreeable to her
at all other times.

5. I crossed the Atlantic Ocean with a lady, in whom an acute head-
ache was always induced by thunder. It left her as soon as the thunder
ceased. Her only remedies for it, were quietness and silence. It is
probable a large dose of laudanum, taken upon the appearance of a
thunder-gust, would have prevented this head-ache, as well as obviated
the terror mentioned in the two preceding cases, more effectually than
a close room artificially lighted, or a large quantity of ardent spirits.

2. The fear which is excited by darkness may easily be overcome
by a proper mode of education in early life. It consists in compelling
children to go to bed without a candle, or without permitting company
to remain with them until they fall asleep.

3. The fear of ghosts should be prevented or subdued in early life,
by teaching children the absurdity and falsehood of all the stories that
are fabricated by nurses upon that subject.

4. The fear from speaking in public was always obviated by Dr. John
k Hunter, by taking a dose of laudanum before he met his class every

day.

5. The fear from sailing, riding, and from certain animals and in-
sects, may all be cured by resolution. It should be counteracted in
early life. The existence of it always shows a defective education.
Peter the Great, of Moscovy, was born with a dread of water. He


118 Means of preventing disease,

cured it, by throwing himself headlong into a boat when obliged to cross
a river. The horror he felt in doing this often induced syncope. He
finally conquered his dread of water, so as to cross seas in pursuit of
the great objects which characterized his life and reign.

In cases of sudden fear from any cause, holding the breath, coughing,
or hawking, often give immediate relief. They impart tone to the
bra in, by promoting a determination of blood to it, and thus infuse vi-
gor into the mind.

To obviate fear from all its causes, great advantages will arise from
creating counter motives in the mind. The fear of death in a battle is
overcome by the powerful sense of glory, or shame. The fear of the
pain of an operation, such as drawing a tooth in a child, is overcome
by the expectation of receiving afterwards a piece of money, and the
prospect of all the pleasures it will procure.

Great advantages may likewise be derived for the cure of fear, by a
proper application of the principle of association. A horse will seldom
be moved by the firing of a gun, or the beating of a drum, if he hear
them for the first time while he is eating; nor will he start, or retire
from a wheel-barrow, or a millstone, or any other object of that kind,
after being Once or twice fed upon them. The same law of association
may be applied in a variety of instances to the human mind, as well to
the prevention, as cure of fear.

OfJoy.

''This emotion," says Dr. Rush, " is attended sometimes with pain
in the region of the heart, a change in the voice, tears, syncope, and
death. Mr. Bruce mentions another symptom of excessive joy, and that
is thirst, which he felt in a high degree, when he reached the long
sought for head of the Nile. He gratified it, he tells us, by drinking
the health of his sovereign, George the Third, and of his mistress, by
a draught from the fountain of that celebrated river.

Joy is most intense, when it has been preceded by fear. The Indian
Chief, Logan, has designated this form of joy in his eloquent speech,
preserved by Mr. Jefferson, in his Notes upon Virginia, when he de-
clares that "he knew not the joy of fear."

There /are many instances upon record, of death being induced by a
sudden paroxysm of joy. The son of the famous Leibnitz died from
this cause, upon his opening an old chest, and unexpectedly finding in
it a large quantity of gold. Joy, from the successful issue of political
schemes or wishes, has often produced the same effect. Pope Leo the
Tenth died of joy, in consequence of hearing of a great calamity that
had befallen the French nation. Several persons died from the same
cause, Mr. Hume tells us, upon witnessing the restoration of Charles
the Second to the British throne ; and it is well known the door-keeper
of Congress died of an apoplexy, from joy, upon hearing the news of tho
capture of lord Cornwallis and his army, during the American revolu-
tionary war.

During a paroxysm of joy, if it be attended with danger to life, a new
emotion or passion should be excited, particularly terror, anger, fear,
or grief. Perhaps the effusion of cold water might have that effect.


and promoting health and longevity. -119

The stimulus of artificial pain should likewise be tried. It should be oi a
nature calculated to produce the most prompt effects.

The morbid state of joy should be prevented, by imparting the news
which we expect will create it, in a gradual manner, and with the alloy
of some unpleasant circumstances,

Connected with joy, but produced by different causes, is laughter.
It is a convulsive disease, and sometimes induces a rupture of a blood-
vessel, in the lungs, spleen, or brain. 1 have seen an instance of
haemoptysis induced by it, which had a fatal issue. Two sudden deaths
are upon record from it, the one of Chrysippus, an ancient Greek phi-
losopher, the other of a pope. It was induced in the latter, while he
was confined to his bed with a light indisposition, by seeing a tamo
monkey put on a part of his pontifical robes. Excessive laughter, when
not attended with these fatal effects, is often followed with a pain in the
left side, hiccup, and low spirits.

The remedies for a paroxysm of laughter should be fear, terror, or
any other counter impression. Pinching the body, or the affusion of
cold water over it, is calculated to produce the same good effects. Lau-
danum seldom fails of relieving the pain, hiccup, and low spirits, which
sometimes follow it."

Of the Morbid Effects of Envy, Malice, and Hatred.

BY DR. RUSH.

"As envy is commonly the parent of malice and hatred, I shall make
a few remarks upon it, and afterwards mention the combined effects of
them all upon the body.

Of this vice it may be truly asserted, that it is deep seated, and al-
ways painful; hence it has been said, by an inspired writer, to resemble
" rottenness in the bones;" and by lord Bacon, " to know no holidays."
It is likewise a monopolizing vice. Alexander envied his successful ge-
nerals, and Garrick was hostile to all the popular players of his day. It
is moreover a parricidal vice, for it not only emits its poison against its
friends, but against the persons, who, by the favours it has conferred
upon those who cherish it, have become in one respect the authors of
their being ; and, lastly, it possesses a polypus life. No kindness, gen-
tleness, or generosity, can destroy it. On the contrary, it derives fresh
strength from every act which it experienced of any of them. It like-
wise survives and often forgives the resentment it sometimes occasions,
but without ceasing to hate the talents, virtues, or personal endowments,
by which it was originally excited. Nor is it satiated by the apparent
extinction of them in death. This is obvious, from its so frequently
opening the sanctuary of the grave, and robbing the possessors of those
qualities of the slender remains it had left them of posthumous fame.

However devoid this vice and its offspring may be of remissions, they
now and then appear in the form of paroxysms, which discover them-
selves in tremors, paleness, and a suffusion of the face with red blood.
The face in this case performs the vicarious office which has lately been
levers, and in a long train of nervous diseases. Persons affected with
th»?in seldom acknowledge their true cause. A single instance only of


120 Means of preventing disease,

this candour is mentioned by Dr. Tissot. He tells us he was once con-
sulted by a gentleman, who told him all his complaints were brought on
by his intense and habitual hatred of an enemy. Many of the chronic
diseases of high life, and professional men, I have no doubt, are induced
by the same cause.

I once thought that medicine had not a single remedy in all its stores,
that could subdue, or even palliate the diseases induced by the baneful
be found only in religion ; but I have since recollected one, and heard of
another physical remedy, that will at least palliate them. The first is,
frequent convivial society between persons who are hostile to each<other.
It never fails to soften resentments, and sometimes to produce reconci-
liation, and friendship. The reader will be surprised, when I add, that
the second physical remedy was suggested by a madman in the Penn-
sylvania Hospital. In conversing with him, he produced a large collec-
tion of papers, which he said contained his Journal. " Here (said he) I
write down every thing that passes in my mind, and particularly malice
and revenge. In recording the latter, I feel my mind emptied of some-
thing disagreeable to it, just as a vomit empties the stomach of bile.
When I look at what I have written a day or two afterwards, I feel asham-
ed and disgusted with it, and wish to throw it into the fire." I have no
doubt of the utility of this remedy for envy, malice, and hatred, from its
salutary effects in a similar case. A gentleman in this city informed me,
that after writing an attack for the press upon a person who had offended
him, he was so struck with its malignity, upon reading it, that he instant-
ly destroyed it. The French nobility sometimes cover the walls and
ceiling of a room in their houses with looking glasses. The room, thus
furnished, is called a boudoir. Did ill-natured people imitate the prac-
tice of the madman and the gentleman 1 have mentioned, by putting
their envious, malicious, and revengeful thoughts upon paper, it would
form a mirror, that would serve the same purpose of pointing out, and
remedying, the evil dispositions of the mind, that the boudoirs in France
serves, in discovering and remedying the defects in the attitudes and
dress of the body.

To persons who are not ashamed, nor disgusted, with the first sight of
their malevolent effusions upon paper, the same advice may be given,
that Dr. Franklin gave to a gentleman, who read part of a humorous sa-
tire which he had written upon the person and character of a respecta-
ble citizen of Philadelphia. After he had finished reading it, he asked
the Doctor what he thought of his publishing it. " Keep it by you,"
said the Doctor, " for one year, and then ask me that question." The
gentleman felt the force of this answer, and went immediately to the
printer, who had composed the first page of it, took it from him, and con-
signed the whole manuscript to oblivion.

I shall conclude the history of the passions, by remarking, that their
symptoms, and force, are varied by a difference in predisposition, age,
rank in society, profession, moral and religious habits, duration, and by
their acting singly, or in combination with each other.

There is now and then a torpor of the passions, the reverse of the


and promoting health and longevity. 321

exeited, they are devoid of all sensibility and irritability. Persons who
are thus affected love and fear nothing. They are strangers to grief and
anger; they envy and hate nobody; and they are alike insensible to
mental pleasure and pain. I was once consulted by a citizen of Phila-
delphia, who was remarkable for his strong affection for his wife and
children when his mind was in a sound state, who was occasionally af-
flicted with this apathy, and when under its influence lost his affection
for thorn all, so entirely, that he said he could see them butchered before
his eyes without feeling any distress, or even an inclination to rise from
his chair to protect them.

This paralytic state of all the passions continues during life in some
people: a physician of great eminence, who died some years ago in Eng-
land, declared, upon his death bed, that he had never known what it was
to love man, woman, or child. But we sometimes meet with this disor-
der in a partial state. Thus there are men who have never loved, others
who have never feared, others who have never shed a tear, and others
in whom injuries have never excited an emotion of anger. In such
persons, the mind is in a mutilated state; for man, without all his pas-
sions, is an imperfect being, both as to his duties and happiness.

The remedies for this torpid state of the passions, whether general or
partial, should be suited to the state of the system. Purgatives will be
proper, if the blood-vessels are oppressed. In a contrary state of the
system, powerful stimulants, particularly pain, labour, and the cold bath,
are indicated."

In conclusion, I have to observe that the due regulation of the pas-
sions, contributes much to health and longevity. The animating pas-
sions, such as joy, hope, love, &c. when kept within proper bounds,
gently excite the nervous influence, promote an equable circulation, and
are highly conducive to health; while the depressing affections, such as
fear, grief, and despair, produce the contrary effect, and lay the foun-
dation of the most formidable diseases-


\ ol. I. 16


122 Means of preventing disease.


CHAPTER XVIII.

RULES FOR THE PREVENTION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES, AND CONTAGION.

It is no doubt the case, that very many infectious or contagious dis-
eases, may be averted or completely destroyed by adopting proper
means for this purpose.

Separation or Removal.

When any person is attacked with a disease which is contagious or
supposed to be contagious, he should be immediately removed to a
place established expressly for that purpose, or if convenient, or
desirable, let him be taken to a separate and remote part of the house,
distant from the rest of the family, into a clear and well ventilated room.
The upper portion of the house is preferable. First, Because it is drier;
and Second, Because it permits the contagious effluvia arising from the
body of a patient, more readily to pass off, as the current of air ii ; re
rarified is naturally upwards.

Separate Apartment for the Sick.

In all boarding houses, and where a great number of persons are
crowded together, there ought to be a separate room for those that are
sick. Where there is not a suitable place, one should be provided in
the vicinity or neighbourhood.

Intercourse with the Sick.

There should be as little intercourse with the person affected with any
contagious disease, as possible. No one should be allowed to visit him,
except the nurse, or immediate relatives, and those should be careful
to keep at a proper distance from the bed ; that his breath, and the
vapour arising from his body may not be inhaled. — A handkerchief wet
in vinegar, may be held occasionally to the nose while in the room.
Those who are obliged to continue in the room, should, as much as
possible, avoid fatigue, be very temperate, and occasionally take it
dose of physic.

Let them eat plenty of raw onions, and let them be applied to the
feet of the sick person, and other parts of the body.

It is generally admitted that fear operates as a predisposing cause in
the production of infectious diseases. It therefore becomes necessary
to command as much fortitude and resolution as possible, as well as to
inspire confidence in the mind of the patient.

Ventilation.

The greatest attention should be paid to a free, and constant circu-
lation of air in the apartment or apartments. Tho upper part of the


u nd promoting health and longevity. 123

window or the door should he left open — hut a current of air direct up-
on the person, should be avoided. If the weather should be very windy,
let muslin or gauze be hung before the window. Nothing is more im-
portant than pure air.

Cleanliness.

(Jreat attention should also be paid to cleanliness. The clothes of
the sick, must be often changed, and the room kept perfectly clean.
Haygarth lays down the following rules to prevent the spread of infec-
tious diseases :

1. " The chamber in which the patient lies, must be kept clean and
freely ventilated. No bed curtains must be allowed to be drawn around
the patient."

2. " Dirty cloths, utensils, &c. should be often changed, and imme-
diately immersed in cold water ; and washed clean when taken out."

3. " The discharges from the patient must be instantly removed; and
the floor around the patient should be rubbed clean once a day with a
wet cloth."

4. " Avoid the current of the patient's breath, as well as the effluvia
which ascends from his body, and from the evacuations."

5. " Visitors ought not to go into the patient's chamber with an empty
stomach ; and in doubtful circumstances, on coming out, they should
blow from the nose and spit from the mouth any contagious poison
which may adhere to these passages."

Fumigations.

In order to remove any offensive or disagreeable effluvia, and to
destroy the power of contagion engendered, fumigations may be used.
The following:— Take a suitable quantity of common oil, put it into an
earthen vessel of any kind, and add sufficient sulphuric acid, or oil of
vitriol, to moisten it. A purifying gas will be disengaged and diffused
through the room. This is sufficient for small apartments; but for hos-
pitals, the vessel may be placed over a moderate degree of heat. Clothes
j nay be submitted to this gas, and other places that are foul and sus-
pected of contagion.

Another excellent method to purify rooms where there is contagion
js to pour vinegar on a heated shovel, or peal. This should be fre-
quently done, and particularly when any thing passes the bowels of the
^ick person. Green plants may also be kept in the apartment, and the '
iumes ot bitter herbs, bruised or boiled, are also excellent preventives
I lie hands, face, and body, should be occasionally bathed with vine-
gar, and the temperature of the body should not be too great, as it tends
to putrefaction. Whatever diet is given, should be of an antiseptic
nature, nutritious, and altogether vegetable.

Siceet Oil a Preventive.

For the prevention of the plague, it has been recommended to

bathe the body with sweet oil, as it has been ascertained that anion*

a million ,,l ...habitants carried off by the plague in Egypt, not a

nngle oil-man, or those who worked in oil stores, were ever infected


124 Means oj preventing disease,

with the disease ; their clothes and bodies were besmeared with oil.
I therefore recommend any one exposed to any contagious disease,
to dip their flannels in sweet oil, wring them out, and constantly wear
them in this state, thus saturated with the oil ; also take an ounce of
the oil once or twice a week, and observe universal temperance.

Fever Institutions.

These are of great consequence, and ought to be established near
every large town and city, being the most likely to prevent the spread-
ing of contagious diseases, under proper regulations, with proper medi-
cal attendance and nursing.

Rigid Quarantine.

It becomes necessary for our municipal authorities, to pay no regard
to the disputed points of contagion and non-contagion ; but to maintain
a rigid quarantine upon all vessels coming from those parts, where con-
tagious diseases are from time to time prevalent.

Secret of Destroying Contagion.

The great secret of destroying contagion, and preventing its increase,
is unquestionably to dilute the infected air, or atmosphere, by ventila-
tion, cleanliness, fumigation, separation of the sick, or those suspected.
There is every reason to believe that this will not onfy prevent the
spread of contagion, but entirely destroy the powers of it.

Chloride of Lime.

In conclusion, I have to state that the chloride of lime possesses very
antiseptic, disinfecting, and purifying properties, which render it higlily
important in the preservation of health, and prevention of contagion,
by decomposing putrid effluvia of every kind, and preventing the gene-
ration of epidemic diseases, or arresting their progress when they al-
ready exist! It destroys the poisonous exhalations from privies, sewers,
docks or ponds, left bare at low water; also of vaults, cellars, store-
houses, hospitals, prisons, market-houses, gutters, &c. It is valuable
for purifying the air of wells, mines, slaughter-houses, drains, tables,
the holds of vessels, and the rooms of the sick. It prevents the fetid
smell from dead bodies previous to burial, and such as are disinterred
for judicial investigation; also the fetid effluvia from dirty clothes.

Chloride of lime immediately destroys the offensive smell from any
source.

Method of using it. — The method of using it is very simple. A lit-
tle of it may be placed in a saucepan, and kept in any place where there
is contagion, or any disagreeable effluvia whatever; or, the apartments
may be sprinkled with the article. The fetid smell which arises from
the excrements of the sick, or any other exhalation, is immediately de-
stroyed by sprinkling a small quantity in the room. As a means of re-
moving the sources of disease in cities and villages, chloride of limn de-
mands the attention of the guardians of the public health.


and promoting health and longevity. 125


CHAPTER XX,

I shall conclude the different Chapters on Health and Longevity,
hy introducing one or two anecdotes:

A very aged man was called into court as an evidence. The judge
being struck with the advanced age of the witness, asked him how he
had lived to be such an old man — he replied in the following language :

" Wine and women I always refused.
Late hours I never used.
I kept my head and feet from cold,
And that is the reason I am so old."


BOERHAAVE.


This celebrated physician and scholar ordered in his will that all his
books and manuscripts should be burnt, one large volume with silver
clasps excepted. The physical people flocked to Leyden, entreating
his oxocutors to destroy his* will. The effects were sold. A German
count, convinced that the great gilt book contained the whole arcanum
of physic, bought it for ten thousand guilders. It was all blank but the
first page, on which was written, " Keep the head cool, the feet
warm, and the body open, and then bid defiance to the physician."


PART SECOND.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE AMERICAN PRACTICE OF
MEDICINE, AND INDICATIONS OF CURE.


There must be first principles in medicine, as well as in philosophy, which
are invariable and incontestible, and which, like the stars of the firmament
In guiding the mariner, will conduct the physician, with assured aim, through
the different stages of disease.


PART SECOND.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE AMERICAN PRACTICE OF
MEDICINE, AND INDICATIONS OF CURE


" PRINCIPLES NOT RECIPES."


CHAPTER I.

NATURE, CAUSES, AND TREATMENT OF DISEASES IN GENERAL.


SECTION I

The pathology or doctrine of diseases in general, has heen a subject
of controversy in all ages of the world. A thousand different causes
have been assigned for disease, and as many different modes of cure.
Nor is the question at this day settled, or any better understood. We
shall not here take up time, or discuss this subject to refute either the
ancient, or modern doctrines maintained, any farther than we conceive
they interfere with correct medical practice.

Theory and speculation are harmless, while they do not lead to any
pernicious course of treatment. But when they lead to erroneous prac-
tice, it becomes necessary to refute them.

We shall now inquire into the pathology of disease, and lay down
such principles as will lead to a judicious mode of treatment. In prose-
cuting this inquiry, no elaborate researches are deemed necessary. We
have only to follow the simple path of truth, or in other words, to fol-
low the voice of reason and nature.

The Excretions the only outlets of Disease.

The Author of our existence, has wisely established certain laws in
the animal economy, to guard and protect it against the inroads of dis-
ease, and when formed, to remove it. By these laws we understand
an inherent power of the system to throw off any, and every thing which
is foreign, or injurious. Let us now inquire in what manner this is per-
formed. A little attention to the system, shows us that there are cer-
tain outlets, or excretions to the system, designed especially to carry
off every thing retained which is incompatible with health. When these
excretions perform their offices, a person mav be said to be well; but

Vol. T 17


130 General Principles of the American Practice

when they cease to act, or act imperfectly, morbific matter is retained,
and derangement follows.

I shall here briefly treat upon these several excretions, show their
offices, and the consequences arising from their obstruction.

1. The Skin.

The whole body is covered, and lined with this membrane, through
which there are innumerable pores or openings destined to carry off
every thing which is not salutary, or compatible with a healthy state of
the system. The fluid which thus passes oft', is distinguished into sen-
sible and insensible perspiration. By looking at any part of the body in
the summer season, with a microscope, vapour or steam may be
seen to rise like a fountain, which, coming in contact with the atmos-
phere, becomes condensed, and falls down in the form of drops which
we term sweat or perspiration. When this is kept up, and continued,
the blood is pure, being separated in this manner from every im-
purity. But when this perspiration becomes checked by cold, the hu-
mours engendered in the system, are retained, carried into the circula-
tion, settle upon some organ, that is most predisposed to disease, and
become a source of irritation. Every day's observation, convinces us
that the moment the pores become in any degree closed, a universal de-
rangement succeeds. A sensation is felt in that part where such re-
tained perspirable matter is thrown, as if a needle, or some foreign sub-
stance was pierciug it. This, may be said to be the proximate cause of
irritation.

It may be translated to the lungs, brain, kidneys, and other organs,
causing inflammation, and pain ; or it may remain in the blood, and
cause fever. This fact is demonstrated by the phenomena of eruptive
disease, small-pox, measles, &c. The infection or contagion is taken
into the blood through the medium of the lungs, and as soon as it becomes
sufficiently impregnated with the specific humour or virus, nature is arou-
sed, and makes a powerful effort or struggle to expel it from the system.
As soon as she accomplishes this object, the poison in these eruptive
complaints is thrown copiously to the surface, and appears in the form
of vesicles or eruptions, and when they are thus expelled, the fever im-
mediately subsides, but will reappear if from debility, or other causes,
the poison or humours are absorbed. It is the case also in hectic fever
as almost every one knows. Matter from the lungs or an ulcer is taken
into the circulation, and causes irritation and febrile excitement, and it is
also proved from the termination of fever by sweat or perspiration, and
also by fever sores. These facts reduce it to a mathematical precision,
and renders the subject so simple and plain, that it is really a matter of
profound astonishment that any one the least acquainted with fever,
should be ignorant of its nature, cause and cure, as well as that of other
diseases.

No doubt a preternatural accumulation of blood to such parts, may
serve as an auxiliary source of irritation; but from various experiments
it may be shown, that an accumulation of blood, alone, to any particu-
lar organ, is not sufficient to account for all the phenomena of disease ;
but this subject will be further illustrated in the next chapter. It is also


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 131

well known that fever*, inflammation and a variety of other complaints,
immediately follow a check of perspiration.

Sanctorius proved that two-thirds of the fluids taken into the system
are discharged by the skin, which shows the danger that must arise when
such fluids are retained. Every person, the least acquainted with phy-
siology must perceive that a departure from health must follow their ob-
struction.

2. The Bowels or Intestines.

The bowels or intestines are also designed by nature to carry oft
much that is noxious or injurious to the system, and which does not serve-
(he purposes of health, or nutrition. Hence the diseases that arise from
their long constipation. It cannot otherwise be, but that such a great
quantity of extraneous and feculent matter lodged in the body, must dis-
order it. The effluvia arising from the operation of physic, is an evi-
dence of the deleterious nature of retained alvine discharges.

Nature therefore expels disease very frequently by the intestines.

3. The Kidneys.

From the blood is secreted the urine through the medium of the kid-
neys, and which is another excretion designed to rid the system of some-
thing extraneous, foreign or morbific. When this excretion is checked,
or if it does not duly perform its office, certain noxious matters are re-
tained, and are mixed with the circulating fluid, and prove another source of
morbid derangement, such as dropsy, inflammation of the kidneys, and
how many other complaints, it is difficult to decide. That diseases are
carried off by a copious discharge of urine, every physician knows.
The effects which arise from the suppression of urine, points out tho
purpose for which it is designed.

4. The Stomach.

The stomach is another organ by which nature expels morbific
agents. When violence has been done by overloading it, or when
any thing poisonous or dangerous has been received, or when any con-
taminated fluid is poured into it, or when it becomes unhealthy or dis-
eased from any cause whatever, the peristaltic or regular motion of it,
is inverted, vomiting commences, and its contents are discharged, its
tone restored, and health follows. Thus we see that this organ is de-
signed to eliminate deleterious agents, and constitutes therefore an im-
portant excretion.

5. The Lungs.

The lungs are another organ which serve the purpose of secreting
from the blood offensive agents. They not only throw off carbonic
acid gas, but likewise mucus, and when they become diseased more espe-
cially, they cast off pus, which, if retained, would cause suffocation.
Heine we see in pulmonary diseases, an effort of nature, to effect a
cure, through the medium of this organ.

Inasmuch then, as health depends upon each and all of these perfor-
ming their respective offices, if follows that when anyone becomes tor-


VS'J, General Principles of the American Practice

pid, or ceases to perform its duties, that morbid excitement is the conse-
quence; and this shows in a most striking light, the proximate cause of
most diseases, at least; being nothing more or less than the retention in
the system of morbific perspirable matter, producing irritation, morbid
action and a deviation from health. These humours are no doubt taken
into the system through the medium of the air, food, or drink.

Although the symptoms of complaints in general, are very different,
yet this is not owing to the exciting cause; this being similar; but to
the peculiar structure or the tissue of the organ which is the seat of the
disease.

I have just seen a French work which corroborates these views. The
author says, " if this fluid (meaning perspirable matter,) should be stopt,
or considerably lessened, and thereby be transferred to any inward part,
it must occasion some dangerous complaint. In fact, this is one of the
mott frequent causes of disease."


SECTION II.

OF THE EFFORTS OF NATURE TO REMOVE DISEASES.

Many authors, particularly the ancients, wrote much on the powers
of nature to remove diseases. It was usually called vis mediatrix na-
turai, or a certain principle inherent in the system, to expel from it every
thing injurious, foreign or extraneous. Some have denied that such an
effort exists, while others admit it, and term it reaction, which may bo
considered an appropriate term. That it does exist, must be evident,
to every person the least acquainted with the animal economy. A wri-
ter in England, by the name of Townsend, in his guide to health, has
the following remarks upon this subject:

" Tiie efforts of nature to relieve herself have, in all ages, exercised
the attention of speculative minds. It is not my intention here to in-
troduce the Archaus of Van Helmont to the student; but I shall state
some facts, which will give him an idea of those efforts, which nature
can exert for warding off approaching evil, for removing whatever dis-
turbs her economy or functions, and for repairing any injury the system
has received.

When cantharides, spread on a plaister, are applied to the surface of
the body, they first excite a genial warmth with inflammation of the skin.
A sense of burning follows, and nature distressed goes instantly to work,
separates the cuticle to form a bag, interposes serum between the nerves
and the offensive matter, then prepares another cuticle, that when the
former with the adhering substance shall fall off, the nervous papilla;
may be again provided with a covering.

If a grain of sand falls into the eve, tears flow in great abundance
to float it off, that it may not mechanically injure that delicate and most
irritable organ.

The same reasoning will apply to the operation of emetics and ca-
thartics ; for not only is the peristaltic motion, either greatly quickened


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 138

or inverted, according to the urgency of the distress, but both the mu-
cous glands, and the exhalant arteries, pour forth their fluids in abun-
dance, to wash away the matter that chemically, or even mechanically,
offends.

When a thorn is lodged in some irritable part, the first suggestion of
the mind is by the fingers, or by the assistance of the nails, to extract
that thorn. But it is perhaps beyond our reach.

The design of nature, in the consequent inflammation, is to produce
suppuration, and thereby to remove the thorn.

Should this effort be effectual, she next proceeds to the granulation of
new flesh. The arteries and the veins, the lymphatics and the nerves,
extend themselves, unite, and renew their communication, and, without
the assistance of a surgeon, nature effects a cure.

Supposing her efforts to float off the offending matter, whatever it
may be, should be insufficient after the suppuration is complete, she
then proceeds to surround it with a wall ; a hard and insensible callus is
produced; or, in the language of surgery, a fistula is formed, and here,
as I apprehend, her efforts cease.

In case of pleuritic inflammation, nature pours forth coagulating
lymph, and, without the physician's aid, forms a new membrane, sup-
plied, like the renovated flesh already mentioned, with arteries, veins,
lymphatics, nerves, and thereby preserves the substance of the lungs
lion) injury.

Van Swieten makes mention of cases in which calculi in the gall blad-
der, being too large for the common duct, had, after producing inflam-
mation, adhesion, and suppuration, found their way by fistulous ulcers to
the external surface of the body, and thus effected their escape.
Comment. § 950.

Among the most astonishing efforts of nature to relieve herself, arc
those exerted in some cases of extra uterine conception. For when a
child has been lodged within the cavity of the abdomen, from which it
cannot be extracted in the usual way; nature, by inflammation, usually
forms adhesion, and in process of time an abscess, so as to eject the
foetus, either through the teguments of the abdomen, or by the rectum;
and this frequently without considerable injury to the mother's health.

Yet more astonishing are her resources in cases of necrosis. For
supposing some portion of a bone (for example of the tibia) to be de-
prived of animation, this she envelops with new bone, united at each
extremity with the fibres of the living bone. Here it proves a stimulus,
and calls forth renewed efforts of the vital principle. Inflammation is
produced; suppuration follows; fistulous openings are formed in the new
bones, and the dead portions, if not extracted by the surgeon, are dis-
solved by the pus and floated off.

Thus, nature in almost innumerable cases, even without assistance, is
able to effect a cure.

I have already mentioned, in cases of inflammation, the efforts to
relieve herself by resolution and by suppuration; but when the vital
energy in a part has been totally exhausted, and sphacelus ensues, she
has still one expedient left, and this frequently effects a cure. Fresh
■m flam motion is excited, and makes a separation between the living and


134 General Principles of the American Practice

the dead. The part deprived of animation is cast off by sloughing ; a
kindly suppuration follows ; and granulation with a new cuticle com-
pletes the cure.' ,

We see from these remarks, as well as by what passes in the system
daily, that the author of nature has wisely provided a principle which is
calculated to remove disease. It is very observable in fevers. No sooner
is noxious, or morbific matter retained in the system, than there is an
increased action of the heart and arteries to eliminate the exciting cause
by the skin, or it may pass off by other outlets established for that pur-
pose. With what propriety, then, can this provision of nature be de-
nied, as it is by some. A noted professor in Philadelphia or Baltimore,
ridicules this power in the constitution; he says to his class, " kick na-
ture out of the doors." It was this man, or a brother professor, who
exclaimed to his class, " give me mercury in one hand, and the lancet
m the other, and I am prepared to cope with disease in every shape and
form." I have not time to stop here, and to comment upon such pal-
pable and dangerous doctrine. I have only to say, let the medical his-
torian record this sentiment maintained in the highest medical universi-
ties in America, in the nineteenth century. I am pleased, however, to
observe, that all physicians do not coincide with such views.

Disease, then, according to what has been stated, may be considered
rather a healthy effort of nature than otherwise, or a restorative process
to bring about a healthy action.


SECTION HI.

GENERAL INDICATIONS OP CURE.

If then the cause of disease consists in the retention of morbific
agents, and a recession of blood from the surface ; if it be caused by
morbid excitement, as we have already shown; if a deviation from a
healthy standard is owing to the inactive state of the excretions, does
not the plainest dictates of reason, common sense, and experience,
show the necessity of restoring those secretions'? Is there, or can there
be, any other indications of cure, if they are the only channels which
nature makes use of to restore the system to health 1 and we confess we
know no other. There is an effort of nature to restore these suppressed
evacuations. The whole art of physic, then, consists in aiding her salu-
tary efforts. Then what else is there to accomplish, but to give such
medicines as remove the obstruction and restore the secretions'? This
is shown by the crisis or termination of diseases in general. They sub-
side when perspiration takes place upon the skin, by diarrhoea, by
vomiting or urine, or expectoration by the lungs. With what proprie-
ty then, we ask, do physicians of the old school give mercury or bleed 1 ?
Do they fulfil any indications of nature? Nature cures no disease by
salivation, nor does she seldom or ever cure anv by bleeding. Hence
we may safely say that they are injurious. They produce disease, sui
generis, of a specific character. Bleeding lessens or destroys the heal-


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 13?

thy effort established by nature, and thereby counteracts her intentions
and exasperates the complaint. An objector to this doctrine may say
that nature relieves herself occasionally by bleeding at the nose, he-
morrhoidal vessels. &c. which must be admitted ; yet it is very rarely the
case. But can it be proved that it is a healthy action, established for
the same purpose as the common excretions? We think it is very evi-
dent that this is not the case. It appears rather to be the effect of dis-
ease, unequal circulation in the system, and therefore instead of pro-
moting this as we should do if it was a natural excretion, we find it
good practice to check it by promoting perspiration, and thereby equa-
lizing the circulation. But to be a little more particular; is any disease
terminated, or scarcely any, by a discharge of blood from the system?
Do they not almost invariably subside, by vomiting, purging, sweating,
and urine? And do not physicians form a favourable or unfavourable
opinion of a disease by these symptoms. Then if health is restored in
• his manner, is it philosophy, is it reason, is it common sense, is it
acting in the capacity of a servant of nature, to institute a mode of treat-
ment, which she seldom or never takes to accomplish this object. Be-
sides, admitting that bleeding occasionally does occur and relieve, it
will not prove the propriety of general blood-letting, as this cannot re-
move the cause, even if it should have the least beneficial effect.

That hemorrhage sometimes occurs and affords relief, only shows the
wise provision of nature in cases of ignorance on the part of the physi-
cian. When he is unable to administer such medicines as will remove
a malady by the proper and ordinary passages of the system, certain
blood vessels become prcternaturally full, and are either distended, or
ruptured, by which bleeding follows, succeeded sometimes by relief.
Had proper means been used, no such effect would have taken place.
This provision of nature is like that established to return the blood after
amputation. Certain lateral blood vessels, called anastomosing branch-
es, become distended, which returns the blood, and which never con-
veyed it thus before. A remarkable fact established especially for ac-
cident and ignorance.

Bleeding sometimes takes place from the gums, nose, &c. in scurvy,
and in yellow fever; but shall we infer, then, that this is a healthy ef-
fort of nature. It is well known to be the reverse. It is in the last
stages that these characteristic symptoms prevail. Dr. Rush, I know,
endeavoured to maintain that nature, in such cases, struggled to cast
ofi* the fever in this manner ; and he, therefore, supposing it to be in
accordance to her dictates, bled his patients nearly to death. Doctor
Ross, a physician from the West Indies, extensively acquainted with
(lie yellow fever, proved conclusively, that hemorrhage or bleedings
of this kind, proceeded from debility and relaxation of the blood ves-
sels. That it was no law of nature to cure the fever, but the effect of
the disease. Then we ask where is the authority, in imitation of na-
ture, to cure diseases by blood-letting, or salivation?


136 General Principles of the American Practice,


SECTION IV.

THE PHYSICIAN CAN ONLY BE THE SERVANT, OR HANDMAID OP NATURE,
IN THE CURE OF DISEASE.

In reality we can cure nothing. We can only remove the offending
cause, while nature performs the cure, and therefore lay it down as a
fundamental maxim in medicine, that all the physician can do is to
act as a servant, or handmaid to nature.

The author of the Medical Sketches thus remarks in relation to this
subject: — " The ancients," says he, " not only observed the effects of
that instinct, by which brutes are directed to certain plants for relief
when they are unwell, and then applied them to the complaints of men,
but they also attended with diligence to the manner in which nature,
when left entirely to herself, relieved or threw off diseases. They per-
ceived that certain disorders were carried off by spontaneous vomitings,
others by looseness, and others by augmented perspiration ; and having
thus learned how diseases were cured by nature, whenever her powers
seemed too weak and tardy, then, and then only, they ventured to
assist her by art.

Here it is worthy of observation, that although that sensation or in-
stinct, by which some animals are prompted to select particular veget-
ables for the removal of disorders, is not given in so strong or particu-
lar a degree to man ; yet nature often directs him also, though in a
more general way, to the best method of relieving his complaints. In
fevers, the patient generally has a desire for cooling, light, acescent
drinks, and dislikes those which are of a heavier and more heating na-
ture : He covets juicy ripe fruits of various kinds, and nauseates ani-
mal food ; — a free stream of air, and a spacious cool bed-chamber, are
equally salutary and agreeable to him ; while confined air, and a small
heated room, are pernicious and oppressive. In those instances, what
the sick person shews an aversion to, has a tendency to promote the
disease ; and what he relishes, has an effect in abating its violence. —
Other instances of the same kind might be enumerated ; I will confine
myself to one, which I have frequently had occasion to observe.

Towards the end of very bad putrid fevers, when the patient, ex-
hausted by the violence and length of the disease, lay constantly on his
back, had continual startings in the tendons of the wrists ; his lips and
teeth being covered with a black crust; his tongue trembling, and with
difficulty held out ; the pulse weak and quick; in this deplorable condi-
tion, when the patient seemed insensible to every thing else, he rejected,
with every mark of aversion that was in his power, medicines of every
kind ; but upon his lips and tongue being moistened with wine, he suck-
ed it in greedily, and was soon cured."

This doctrine is further exemplified by the writings of Dr. Hillary,
who states in his secret of curing diseases, by adopting a better system,
" that by accurately observing all the motions, endeavours, and indica-
tions of nature, to carry off and cure diseases; and by observing by
what critical evacuations she does at last cast off the morbid matter


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 137

which caused them, and so restores health ; we may, by the same method
of reasoning, know both the methods and the means we should use to as-
sist nature in producing those salutary effects ; if we avoid all hypothet-
ical reasoning, and by thus observing, following and assisting nature,
agreeably to her indications, our practice will always be more satisfac-
tory and successful.

" For the human body is so wisely and wonderfully formed, that
whenever any noxious matter is got into it that would be injurious or
destructive, we may observe, that it always so irritates, stimulates and
offends nature, that she always exerts her power, or the vis vita, to
throw it off. And she acts with great regularity, order, and uniformi-
ty, in her endeavours to expel the offending matter out of the body;
and by carrying off the disease, restore health and preserve life.

"And thus, by observing, investigating, and truly knowing, the dis-
eases and their causes, and justly reasoning therefrom, we shall know
when to assist nature according to her indications; and in this is con-
tained the chief part of medical knowledge, and the true scientific
principles of the medical art. And when we shall thus have learned of
nature, by observing her laws and indications, we may reasonably
hope to render the theory and practice of physic beneficial to mankind"


Vot. I. IS


138 General Principles of the American Practice


CHAPTER II.

ON THE AGENCY OF HEAT AND COLD IN THE PRODUCTION AND
REMOVAL OF DISEASE.


SECTION L

The influence that cold possesses in the production of disease, must
be evident to every person of the least discernment. Medical writers
have imputed the causes of diseases in general to the vicissitudes of the
atmosphere ; but the immediate effect of cold upon the system seems to
have been but little understood, or very imperfect views of it enter-
tained. Nor has the agency of heat in the cure of disease been well
understood, or duly appreciated. It is somewhat remarkable that both
heat and cold are the cause of most diseases, while they at the same
time are (the former more particularly) so eminently subservient to their
removal. It would appear that a certain temperature of the body is
necessary to maintain a healthy state of the system. Persons, however,
will bear a great degree of heat or cold, if applied to the system gradu-
ally ; but on the contrary, if suddenly applied, the most serious effects
follow. Great heat, however, can be much better borne, than a great
degree of cold, and it is on this account that cold plays such an impor-
tant part in the production of morbid excitement. Some parts of the
system is much more susceptible of cold than others. The minute blood
vessels of the surface, coming in contact with the atmosphere, are more
susceptible of its impression than the internal organs. Cold, long and
suddenly applied, brings on a torpid or inactive state of the capillary
vessels, by which the pores are closed, morbific matter retained, and
a deviation from health follows. The blood becomes obstructed in these
vessels of the skin, consequently it is withdrawn from the general circu-
lation, and the balance of it is lost, impaired, or rendered unequal.
The consequence of all this, is, that the blood recedes, or is driven
back from the surface to some of the internal organs of the system ; the
heart and arteries become distended with an unusual quantity ; increas-
ed action or more powerful contractions follow to return the blood back
to the surface, and to overcome the constriction of the capillary vessels,
which greatly increases the circulation.

When we reflect upon the vast quantity of blood contained in the
small vessels of the skin, we must be sensible of the effect it must pro-
duce upon the system, when so much is stagnated or obstructed, or is
driven back and forced upon the vital organs. The great blood vessels
become preternaturally full, the various functions impaired, and inflam-
mation and congestion follow. Whatever organ or part of the system is
the most predisposed to disease, will feel the effect of this change. It


of Mcdmnc, and Indications of tun 139

may be translated to the brain, and create inflammation of the lungs,
causing pneumonia; or it may affect the liver, stomach, or bowels.
The irritation, occasioned thereby, proceeds from two causes. First,
An illusion of blood to the part. Second, Morbific matter retained in.
the circulation.

The intimate connexion between the skin, the stomach, the heart
and arteries, intestines, and other organs, readily accounts for the ef-
fect of cold suddenly or long applied to the surface. Sometimes even
very slight impressions, thus applied, cause the great quantities of blood
in the minute vessels of the skin to recede, and to be thrown internally
upon some portion of the viscera. Reaction then takes place. The
heart propels the blood with redoubled energy back again to the ex-
tremities or the surface, by which the organ aflected is relieved of its
oppression. It appears, therefore, evident, that there is a flux and re-
flux of blood constantly passing from the heart or centre to the surface
of the body. Thus there is a regular balance or equilibrium maintained
in the circulation, which constitutes, as it were, a standard of health.

When this balance of circulation is lost in the system; when the
blood becomes unequal, or is driven from one part of the body to anoth-
er, from the influence of cold or any other cause, morbid excitement or
a deviation from healthy action, is the consequence. I have observed
this fact for many years in the course of my practice. It has been aK
most invariably the case, if one part of the system has suffered from
disease, particularly inflammation, the opposite part of the system has
been unusually cold. For instance, when there has been inflamma-
tion or pain of the head or upper portion of the body, there has been a
coldness of the extremities. I therefore always first, in the treatment
of such complaints, direct my attention to the part thus primarily affect-
ed. My great object is to recall or restore the circulation, as soon as
possible, by bathing the feet, and by giving such medicines as promote
a determination to the surface; and this practice is always attended
with the happiest effect. As soon as the cutaneous circulation takes
place, the disease is relieved. It is very clear that the blood thus re-
cedes from the surface, in fevers, and a great variety of other com-
plaints. After the body has been exposed to cold, suddenly or long
applied, we see that the circulation ceases or is lessened in the capillary
vessels, by the chills, sense of coldness, paleness of the skin, with a
husky or dry state of it; and the great heat and commotion that rages
throughout the system, arises, no doubt, from an engorgement in the
heart and arteries, with the irritation from the morbific matter retained
in the circulation. It requires, therefore, but a small share of common
sense or discernment, to learn the indications of cure; which are, not
to abstract any portion of blood from the system, which decreases the
power of overcoming the disease in proportion to the quantity taken by
inducing debility, but to recall the blood to the surface by the applica-
tion of heat, steam, or sudorific medicines, or in other words, to equa-
lize the circulation.

Cold, it will be seen, therefore, causes a torpor and inactivity of the
exhalents, and the system generally; while heat has an effect diametri-
cally opposite, bv stimulating these vessels to perform their proper


140 General Principles of the American Practice

functions; the effect of which is the restoration of warmth, vitality, and
circulation. These phenomena are exemplified in the repulsion of erup-
tive diseases; upon the application of cold, the eruptions disappear, and
are translated to some other organ, in gout, it will attack the brain,
stomach, or intestines. The erysipelas or St. Anthony's fire, is some-
times characterised by the same symptoms; also the measles, small-
pox, &c. The remedy, therefore, must be obvious. Bleeding, which
is resorted to by many, will take or endanger the life of the patient, by
averting the power of reaction which is so essential to recovery, while
the application of heat to equalize the circulation, will prove a sove-
reign remedy. Bathing the feet and surface with warm applications
and medicines to promote perspiration, will return the eruption to the
surface, or will carry them oft' through their proper channels, or emunc-
tories. By this means, the morbid excitement preying upon the vascu-
lar system or internal organs will be relieved.

We may therefore see, from the effect of heat and cold upon the sys-
tem, how greatly they are concerned in the production of disease, and
the restoration of health. A due regulation of both are of vital impor-
tance to the animal economy. If either is suffered to prevail to too
great a degree, life becomes extinct.

It has been shown that heat and cold, especially the latter, is a fruit-
ful source of disease ; that they are (the latter more especially) the most
common cause of all complaints; and admitting these premises, the im-
portance of heat for their removal must be duly appreciated in a medical
point of view, as well as the importance of cold where heat predomi-
nates.

Heat, properly applied to the system, will bring about symptoms the
reverse of that occasioned by the exciting cause of the complaint. When
the blood recedes from the surface, settles upon some organ, and by its
accumulation, together with the irritation arising from retained perspi-
rable matter, the substitution and application of heat, and other stimu-
lating medicines, will cause a revulsion whereby the congestion, irrita-
tion, &c. will be removed by unloading these internal organs, and cau-
sing the blood to re-circulate in the vessels of the surface.

When disease proceeds from too much heat of the body, or when fe-
ver arises to expel from the system morbific matter, and to equalize the
circulation, it often becomes necessary to moderate it by lessening ar-
terial excitement. In such cases, tepid or cold water will have a salu-
tary effect, by abstracting a portion of heat from the body by the evapo-
ration that follows, together with the stimulus given to the exhalent ves-
sels of the surface.


SECTION II.

DISEASES IN WHICH HEAT AND COLD IS BENEFICIAL.

It may not be improper to mention some forms of disease, in which
heat and cold will prove eminently beneficial.


-/ Medicine, and Indications of Cun. W

1. Febrile Diseases.

Fevers, as we have shown elsewhere, proceed from a check of per-
spiration, cold commonly proving the exciting cause. It must be evi-
dent, therefore, that the first duty of the practitioner is to remove the
injury which it has caused to the system. The skin has become torpid,
its pores dosed, by which the vascular system particularly is disordered
as a consequence. Heat must, therefore, be applied both internally
and externally, to remove this morbid state of the skin, by restoring
perspiration.

The blood is sometimes driven so suddenly and so forcibly from the
surface and extremities to the internal organs, that the powers of na-
ture are suspended, (occasionally cut off,) and a state of asphyxia or
swooning follows. It is on this account tl at not even a particle of
blood can be drawn in such cases. The office of the heart and arteries
which is to send or propel the blood to every part of the body, partial-
ly or wholly ceases, on account of the prostrating and overwhelming in-
fluence of intense cold, giving them such a shock, that reaction cannot
take place, or takes place very feebly. This was remarkably exempli-
fied in the cold plague which raged in the southern and western states
some years ago. Persons were seized with it in the manner just men-
tioned, and Dr. Anthony Hunn, of Kentucky, states that every other
means proved useless hut the hot hath, which recalled (he blood from
the centre to the surface. As soon as the heart and arteries became un-
loaded, they immediately began to play and perform their offices, when
reaction and heat, consequently relief immediately took place.

The following case, related by Dr. Hunn, is very applicable. " Mr.
N. Rochester Esq. came from, what is termed, the wilderness, for me-
dicines for his father-in-law, Mr. Johnston, who was dangerously ill with
the ' cold plague.' He had ridden day and night, and swam several
streams, in rainy and cold weather. When he was getitng the medi-
cines, I predicted that he would undoubtedly, also be taken with it, if
he returned. I advised him to get a negro from his brother in Danville,
to send him on full speed to his father-in-law, while he remained for a
day or two to recruit and refresh himself. He pleaded the absolute
necessity of speedily returning personally. He started, but on the short
road from town to his brother's mansion, he was suddenly taken with a
terrible shaking and inexpressible torments, which drew him from his
horse. He was carried to his brother's mansion; and Iwas immediate-
ly sent for. In a state of suffocation, with a clay cold feel of hands and
face, and red suffused eyes, he exclaimed, that ' his insides were tearing
to pieces,' with a constant, raging desire to urinate, he could not void a
drop. The hot hath was quickly prepared, and the patient put into it.
In less than half a minute, he said: I feel easier and can void urine.
The Mood in his face, and warmth, and the pulse, (which was before
hardly to he felt) gradually returned, and a warm sweat dropped from
his forehead. When he was taken out of the bath, he was completely
relieved: for the recovery was in such cases, as sudden as the symptoms
fc«re dangerous and alarming. A gentle, warm sweat was kept up for
twenty-four hours, when he again started for the wilderness. On his


142 General Principles of the American Practice

road to his father-in-law's, he was again taken, but immediately using
the hot bath, was enabled to reach the place of his destination, and re-
mained well. Mr. Johnston, though despaired of, also quickly recovered
by the same means.

In its highest grade, this sickness wanted nothing to cure it speedily,
but the hot bath, with such medicine as kept the patient in a constant,
warm perspiration, not amounting to an actual, profuse sweat: for this
might cause indirect debility."

It is stated that a disease raged several years ago in the New-England
states called typhoid pneumonia, attended with similar symptoms. Tho
skin and extremities were remarkably cold and torpid, with chills, &c.
Nervous energy evidently much diminished. Nothing was found of so
much utility in this complaint as heat or perspiration. The common
people I infer from the statement, treated it the most successfully, by
using the vapour bath. It is said that its application arrested it at once.
How different is the effect of heat and perspiration in these and similar
diseases from the practice of abstracting blood; which debilitates the
system, protracts the complaint, and endangers the life of the patient,
or at best, if he recovers, injures his health; while the course here re-
commended, returns the vital fluid to its proper channel, thereby remov-
ing congestions and inflammations, restoring strength and warmth, equa-
lizing the vascular and nervous influence, and removing the shock, and
mischief occasioned by the cold.

Dr. Gallup who wrote on the disease above mentioned, thus remarks:
" As the causes of the disease act upon the nerves, and show their morbid
influence on the surface of the body, by coldness in the first stage, want of
perspiration, &c. the natural indication is to restore warmth and activity
to the surface as quickly as possible. I have succeeded in this often
times by the use of the warm bath. It is one of the most powerful agents
we can employ, while, at the same time, it is safe and agreeable. No-
thing is more common than for patients to express it as a great luxury.
If it does not immediately bring on sweating, it invites the circulation
1o the surface, relieves external chills, and internal pain, and prepares
the system for the remedies which are soon to follow. Where the bath
cannot be obtained for immersion, rolling the patient several thicknesses
in blankets, dipped in warm water, serves as a substitute.

Perhaps no remedy is better agreed on as being generally useful in
this disease, than sweating, or, in other words, the application of exter-
nal heat. If it is not always useful, it is in some solitary cases, where
there is an abundant heat from reaction having taken place in vigorous
habits. At the onset of the disease, however, this remedy may be said
to be always useful. External warmth is of vast importance in keeping
up the ccntri-fugal action of the system. If the action is allowed to re-
cede to the centre, by neglect of external warmth, after sweating lias
been used with advantage, the patient is apt to be exercised with sink-
ing distress, and will be in danger, if heat be not immediately applied.

Dr. Armstrong, speaking of typhus, observes, '"the warm bath is a
safe and efficacious remedy, and, with the means above mentioned,
has considerable effect in equalizing the circulation.' Again, in speak-
ing of prostration, he remarks: " This depression of the animal heat,


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 143

however, occasionally come on in the collapse of typhus, without any
apparent cause ; an instance of which I have witnessed in a medica
gentleman, who I befieve would have died if external and interaal
warmth had not been promptly and perseveringly employed. When
the pulse still remains oppressed, and the tide of the circulation does
not return to the surface, some wine with warm water should be occa-
sionally exhibited, and the patient speedily immersed in a bath, strong-
ly impregnated with salt, and at least about the temperature of 100 deg.
He should remain in the bath till his skin becomes warm, and on being
removed, it should be well rubbed all over with hot flannels; and he
ought then to be laid in an aired bed with bottles of warm water at his
feet. This plan together with tepid wine and water occasionally, will
often promote a flow of blood towards the skin, and considerably relieve
the viscera from congestion."

The following remarks on cholera, from a late number of the Medi-
cal and Chirurgical Journal, further corroborates these principles:

" In the history of disease in this country, we recollect but one that
appears to bear any analogy, either in its general mode of attack, its
great fatality, or the means most clearly indicated in its treatment, to
the present cholera of Europe. The disease to which we refer, is the
spotted fever, which prevailed in the state of Maine, in the year 1814.
Its symptoms were more various than those of the cholera, and its fatal
issue was not quite so speedy. But the attack consisted in the main,
in the sudden departure of blood from the surface, and an appalling
prostration of the powers of life. Having been an eye-witness to this
epidemic, it has been recalled to our mind by every history we have
read of the symptoms of cholera. We have seen persons in the fulness
of health, suddenly fall under its blow, apparently lifeless, and the sud-
den and obstinate 1 coldness of the surface, in all cases, gained for the
disease the popular name of the cold plague. In no disease have we
seen so marked effects, from different modes of treatment. Purgatives
and venesection were generally followed by fatal results ; where calomel
was given, the unhappy sufferer often died whilst under its operation ;
and in spite of most forms of treatment, from the first, most heating
and stimulating remedies internally and externally, with an unsparing
hand, exerted an entire control over the disease. This practice was
pursued with marked and almost uniform success by Dr. Page of Hallo-
well, by that man of Ross, whose benevolence will never be forgotten
by the hundreds of his townsmen, to whom it has ever been liberally.
extended. In the small town of Wiscasset, containing about two thou-
sand inhabitants, two or three (equal to sixty a day in Boston) were d} r -
tng daily of this epidemic, until Dr. Page was persuaded to visit the
place; and after the day he entered the town and introduced the mode
of treatment, that had been so successful at home, not an individual
dii (I of this disease.''''

I have extracted the following remarks from a communication by Dr.
North, upon a malignant fever, lately prevalent in New London, Con-
necticut, and which still further corroborates the doctrine of disease
here advocated :
" As counter illustration in regard to malignant asthenia, the reader


144 (xeneral Principles of the American Practice

js informed, that the first thirteen patients at Winchester, Litchfield
county, were treated about twenty years ago upon the then fashionable,
cooling, depleting plan of treating fevers; and I have the very best
authority for saying that all of these patients died. And their constitu-
tional organization was good, for they were young persons. Tben tho
sweating and stimulating plan was introduced by the memorable Dr.
Samuel Woodward, in imitation of Mrs. Hurlburt's process. After this,
the success was as great there as here, having reference to the north
part of Litchfield county, and some other places. There was much
oral testimony against depletion and in favour of sweating, long before
any thing was printed on the subject. This accidental discovery, or re-
vival of an ancient practice, in regard to malignant fevers, or malig-
nant asthenia, I regard as being now fully established by our experience
in New London, if it was not a long time ago. I have witnessed the
malignant asthenia in both counties, i. e. in Litchfield and in New Lon-
don county.

The non-professional reader will not want to be troubled much with
an account of symptoms or details in regard to medicines. Professional
readers have already my views in regard to particular symptoms and
with respect to particular treatment, in cases of spotted fever, published
in New- York, twenty-one years ago.

Non-professional readers may imagine, that information in regard
to depletion and sweating, is annually taught in our medical schools.
Such is not the fact.

The diseased action of the vital elements of our organization in the
spotted fever and in malignant cholera are alike in one happy respect,
viz. no permanent organic mischief is usually left to torment us, as seg-
ulae to those two forms of malignant asthenia. Such is not the case with
contagious epidemics, such as small-pox, measles, scarletina, &c.

This is the first time that spotted fever has manifested itself on the
sea coast ; although sporadic cases have oftener occurred than many are
willing to allow.

I have been often asked, why I did not instruct every one to cure the
spotted fever. The reason is, that it is more difficult to teach some
how to treat the spotted fever, than it is to cure the disease. The in-
dolent propensities and want of inquisitive talents, prevents even highly
respectable medical gentlemen from giving their attention to the sub-
ject at all, unless the pestilence breaks out in their own vicinity.

Those physicians abroad, who may be fond of marvellous mysticism,
if there be any such, may not like the simple swearing and stimulating
treatment pursued in New-London. It is hoped, however, that our can-
did public, will be thankful that so few deaths have happened ; and for
the expense and trouble which has been saved, by the non-contagious
doctrine which has been orally taught. The facts in review will show
a great difference between knowledge and the want of it in regard to
the wise, economical and safe management of epidemics.

Time has not been found for making post mortem examinations.
This is less to be regretted, because our epidemic is a functional mala-
dy ; and its correct treatment must be learned from personal experience
and the testimony of experienced witnesses, in regard to it. There j?


of Medicine, and Indications oj (J art 14*

BOW much sueh testimony before the American public, and it should be
promulgated in Europe.

The malignant cholera is probably a more dangerous form of malig-
nant asthenia, than spotted fever. And yet I must believe, that self-
esteem and other propensities prevent the poor in Europe from apply-
ing to cholera hospitals, as soon as is needful for the cure of many pa-
tients. If the plan in use among a few medical men in this country was
adopted, mortality would probably be lessened in the eastern world.
The plan alluded to is to teach the ignorant to take a sweat in a warm
bed, the instant they begin to feel unwell, and not wait for the tardy
arrival of a physician. I may be mistaken in regard to cholera, not
having seen the disease.

I hope the promulgation of the above facts may do more good among
the sick than many medical speculations. These last may however give
notoriety to authors, and manifest the greatest ingenuity of human
brains. Broussa-ism, Homoopathic-isra, and slight monomania of ma-
uy kinds may be useful, by amusing a grave profession, yet not very
much benefit the sick."

2. Rheumatism.

In rheumatism, also, similar effects take place. It is in general
caused by the sudden transition from heat to cold, bringing about the
symptoms before mentioned, and the same treatment is here called for.

Sometimes the force of the disease is concentrated upon some parti-
cular part of the body, the head, lungs, liver, or the joints. When
this happens, the act of producing warmth of the surface, and restoring
perspiration, affords immediate relief, and often cures the disease in
its incipient or forming stage. It is exceedingly important in fulfilling
the indications here laid down, (in inflammatory rheumatism particu-
larly, as well as febrile diseases) that while we administer stimulating
sudorifics, or sweating medicines internally, we apply heat exter-
nally to the whole surface of the body, in order to remove the stricture,
or tension of the cutaneous vessels. If this precaution is not attended
to, stimulating medicines will often increase, or exasperate the disease.
The reciprocal influence between the stomach and surface, is such,
that attention must be directed to both at the same moment or time, if
we wish to equalize the excitement. Such is the sympathy 01 intimate
connection between the stomach and the skin, that it seems impossible
for one to suffer, or be affected, without the other likewise suffers.

3. The Lungs.

The lungs are very liable to receive morbid impressions from the in-
fluence of cold suddenly applied to the body. After a person has been
very much heated, and immediately after exposed to a current of air;
or if he has been long exposed to the sedative and debilitating influence
of cold, the pores become closed, recrementitious or morbific matter
is retained in the system, and the blood in an accumulated quantity is
tin-own upon the mucous membrane, or the parenchyma of the lungs.
Irritation and inflammation takes place, which, if not arrested, is fol-
lowed by suppuration. Now under these circumstances, perspiration

Voi- T 19


i4t> General Principles of the American Practice

must be immediately resorted to, to counteract the deleterious effect of
this morbific agent, viz. cold. The blood also in this case, as in the
other, recedes from the surface and is thrown upon the lungs, causing
engorgement and irritation; therefore it must be immediately recalled
by these means. It is here that we have it in our power to arrest that
terrific monster, (phthisis pulmonalis, or consumption) which daily slays
its thousands, by instituting this course of treatment which will terminate
the disease by resolution, or without suppuration. Bleeding, so far
from accomplishing this desirable end, will inevitably bring on dangerous
or fatal prostration, and in all probability carry the patient to an un-
timely grave.* ,

4. Dysentery.

The dysentery is a disease in which the application of warmth to the
surface, and diaphoretic medicines, are very serviceable. It has been
thought by some, particularly the ancient physicians, to be a fever
translated to the intestines, and from the effect of perspiration in the
complaint, we are led to believe, that it arises from a retention of hu-
mours or acrid and morbific matter which is translated to these parts.
As soon as the patient begins to perspire freely, he experiences relief.
The same good effects arise in bowel complaints generally. Spotted fe-
ver, cholera morbus, cholic, diarrhoea, &c. Dr. Mosely in his work on
diseases of warm climates, strenuously insists upon the propriety of su-
dorifics in bowel complaints. External heat in the form of fomentations,
are invariably attended with an admirable effect in bowel complaints of
every description. They divert the fluids from the intestines to the skin,
and by their stimulating and relaxing properties, prove very serviceable.
The surface and extremities in these diseases are pale and cold, from
which we see that the balance of the circulation in the system is lost.
The recession of blood in connection with those foreign agents which is
not eliminated by the skin, operates as an undue, and as a disease-creat-
ing stimulus in the intestines.


* A person, speaking of the diseases of poultry, makes the following remarks,
which shew that the agency of heat and cold upon animals is similar to its effects
upon the human system.

1. In these animals, cold exercises a constant, and determinate action on the
lungs.

2. The effect of this action is the more rapid and more severe, the younger the
animal is.

3. When cold does not cause acute and speedily fatal termination of the lungs,
it produces a chronic inflammation, which is pulmonary consumption itself.

4. Heat always prevents the attack of pulmonary consumption; when the lat-
ter has taken place, heat suspends its progress, and even sometimes arrests it en-
tirely, and effects a complete cure.

5. Pulmonary consumption is never, in any stage, contagious: fowls' affected
with that disease, were not only all day long with the healthy, but at night roosted
in the same places, without communicating their disease to them.

6. The action of too long confined air exposes these animals to abscesses of the
cornea, and inflammation of too ball of the eye. These abscesses and inflamma-
lions are also caused in a still more cruel manner, by cold, especially when accom-
panied with moisture. This fact explains the manner in which diseases are gene-
rated in men. as well as animals.


u) Medic uu . and Indications of Van. M3

5. Pleurisy.
In pleurisy T have been called when the patient appeared to be dy-
ing from the cause last mentioned. The irritation upon the pleura was
so great, that a sensation was created as if needles were piercing it, the
breath nearly gone. In this case, when the disease threatened immedi-
ate destruction of life, and when scarcely a physician could be found ei-
ther in Europe or America, who would not have copiously drawn the vital
fluid, and that repeatedly for days no doubt, I have pursued the course
above recommended, viz. recalled the vitiated blood to the surface by
producing free perspiration, and I have had the pleasure of witnessing
sudden abatement of the pain, succeeded by a recovery of the patients
in a few days.

G. Apoplexy.
In apoplexy, this course is attended with much better effects than ge-
neral blood letting. I cannot think in this disease there is too great a
quantity of blood which calls for an abstraction of it, but the disorder
arises from unequal circulation. The blood recedes from the surface
and extremities, and is accumulated or effused upon the brain. The
remedy then is, to equalize the circulation. I have never failed to ar-
rest the disease by such treatment, particularly in the commencement.

7. Fits.

In fits, tins practice is equally efficacious. I never knew it fail of afford-
ing relief. 1 was called sometime ago to a man who had been subject to
convulsions for years, and he had sometimes several in the course of the
day. One of our most popular physicians in this city repeatedly bled him,
without affording any, except momentary, relief. The treatment was
now reversed, bleeding was entirely dispensed with, and means made
use of to divert the fluid from the brain to the surface and extremities.
Nothing at all was done for him except on every accession of the fit, to
immerse his feet in warm water to which ley had been added, sufficient
to render it somewhat sharp or biting to the tongue. This treatment
alone in a short period affected a cure. I think I gave him little or no
medicine.

8. Syncope or Fainting.

in asphyxia and fainting of every kind, the immersion of the feet
hi Mann water, will restore the patient.

9. Hysterics, (Hysteria.)

In hysteria (hysterics,) the same benefit will be experienced. The
extremities here are cold, the surf ace pale, attended usually with chills,
all which is accounted for on the same principles. Physicians generally
are in the habit of bleeding in this complaint, notwithstanding it is a dis-
ease of debility, but this practice renders the disease worse. The treat-
ment should be the same as before recommended. The feet and surface
must be bathed with warm water and weak lev. and other means recom-


148 General Principles of the American Practtu

mended to cause perspiration. If fits come on, the feet should be im-
mersed in warm ley water.

10. Intermittent Fever,

In the intermittent fever, or fever and ague in the cold stage, stimu-
lating medicines given internally, and heat applied externally, will be
found highly beneficial. The application of sudorific or sweating me-
dicines, just before a paroxysm or fit comes on, will often cure or dimi-
nish the violence and continuance of it. The duration of the hot stage
is always in proportion to the cold; hence those medicines which lessen
or moderate the cold, necessarily shorten or lessen the hot stage. The
patient should therefore be well covered in bed, hot bricks or bottles of
water may be applied to the sides and feet, warm drinks freely taken
until perspiration succeeds.

In some cases of intermittent, so powerful is the influence of cold
upon the system, that little or no reaction takes place. Nothing but heat
in this case will save the life of the patient.

11. Head-ache, (Cephalalgia.)

In head-ache, the same course will be found useful by diverling the
fluids from the head and extremities; the pain arising from different
causes will cease. That head-ache arising from difficult or suppressed
menstruation, by bathing the feet in warm water and using a hip or warm
bath, will often be removed without any other medicine.

12. Dropsy of the Head.

The dropsy of the head is also very much relieved by this process,
by bathing the feet and surface, and cold or tepid applications to the
head. It powerfully assists in allaying the inflammatory action.

13. Inflammation.

In phlegmonous and erysepelatous inflammation, perspiration, aided
by warm and relaxing poultices, are attended with excellent effects.

14. White Swellings, and other Painful Diseases.

In white swellings and other painful diseases, the application of heat in
the form of steaming, is attended with the happiest effects, and indeed
is often a complete and sovereign remedy. Cases have been relieved
and cured by it, which has baffled the skill of our most noted physicians.
This principle properly applied, will mitigate the acute symptoms of
white swellings, and similar complaints in fifteen or twenty minutes, and
by its repeated application, will wholly remove the horrid sufferings of
tho patient.

15. Opthalmia, or Inflammation of the Eyes.

It is difficult to make a practitioner, unacquainted with the fact, be-
lieve what salutary effects follow the means here recommended in cases
of opthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes. I have cured blindness of
one or two years standing, when the disease has depended on sub-acute


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 14 l J

inflammation. I have merely ordered the feet to he bathed every night,
or every other night, for a great length of time, and this treatment has
recalled the blood from the head to the feet and surface, which, of course,
lessens the pain and inflammation of the head.

A lady whose child I had formerly cured of sore eyes, has just step-
ped into my office, in company with a neighbour, whose daughter is now
afflicted with the same complaint. In prescribing for it, she soon asked,
" shall not her feet be bathed?" " This," added she, "contributed as
much towards curing my child, as the medicine." When her head was
in pain, and her eyes much inflamed, bathing her feet gave immediato
relief. This will not appear strange to the physiologist, or the physi-
cian, who understands the pathology of diseases in general. He will at
once see the cause, and the indications of cure.

We might here go on, and enumerate a great variety of other com-
plaints, in which the same treatment will be found exceedingly benefi-
cial. But sufficient has been written to show its importance and utility,
as well as to give an idea of all other cases in which it my be advanta-
geously applied.

This principle or method of treatment is very extensive. We know not
how many diseases may be treated in the same manner. By substituting
agents diametrically opposite to those which cause the disease, the cure
is effected. For example, a complaint caused by acidity in the stomach,
is cured by an alkali. In inflammation, or heat of any part, cold or re-
frigerant applications afford relief, and vice versa. Scurvy, which is
caused by a long course of animal food, is cured by substituting vege-
table food. Persons who are brought near the grave by this complaint,
are immediately restored to health by pursuing this treatment ; all which
demonstrates tbe truth of the latin maxim:

" Contraria contrariis medentuiv"

The translation of which may be thus rendered : Diseases are cured
by means or agents diametrically opposite to the causes which produced
them.

The great object should be in every complaint, first to ascertain if
the circulation is uniformly and equally carried on through the system ;
and if this is not the case as will be found in most diseases, the means
recommended with others that will be hereafter mentioned, must be re-
sorted to, and persisted in until warmth and perspiration is restored.
Copious and long continued perspiration except in the most urgent cases,
should be avoided as injurious and dangerous. Many have hern lite-
rallv sweat to death, by too great and too long continued heat; more
particularly by the steaming process now so much in fashion by those-
called, " Patent Doctors."

Dr. Thompson, who has procured a patent to treat diseases principal-
ly by steaming and puking, states in his theory of medicine, that heat
is life , and cold is death, and under this impression that this vital prin-
ciple, (heat) cures almost every disease, steaming or sweating is carried
to such a degree, that many have lost their lives by it. The abuses
of it must be carefully guarded against.

It must he continually kept in mind, that in advanced stages of some


150 General Principles of the American Practice

diseases, for instance typhus fever, when there is great prostration of
strength, the heart and arteries having become exhausted by their inef-
fectual struggle to return the blood and morbific humours to the sur-
face, to overcome the constriction of the skin, very stimulating sudorific
medicines internally should not be given. In this case, the most heat-
ing or stimulating agents designed to promote perspiration, will only in-
crease the disease. When called under such circumstances, the blood
must be invited from the centre to the surface, by repeatedly bathing
the whole surface with tepid or cold applications, according to the tem-
perature of the body.


SECTION in

MEANS OP PROMOTING WARMTH AND PERSPIRATION.

I have already hinted at some of the means to promote warmth and
perspiration ; but it may be proper to dwell somewhat more upon them in
this place. In general, perspiration may be promoted by taking warm
diluent drinks, and nothing is better than a strong infusion of catnip, freely
drank; also bathing the feet in warm water, or weak ley. The surface
in most cases may also be bathed with the same, as warm as possible,
while the patient is in bed. The clothesmay be raised with one hand,
and a piece of flannel dipped in warm ley applied with the other hand
to the surface. When one side of the body has been thoroughly bathed
from the neck to the feet, then the sick person must be turned on the
other side and bathed in the same manner. The liquid should be kept
hot or warm by the bed side, and additional clothing sometimes becomes
necessary to aid the process. Bottles of hot water may likewise be
placed to the sides and feet. These means will answer in many cases,
but it often becomes necessary to apply more powerful means to accom-
plish this object. The pores of the skin are frequently so closed, or
constricted, that a greater degree of heat is necessary to open them.
For this purpose there is nothing more simple and effectual than the
Vapour Bath, mentioned under the head of baths, page 87. Certain
other medicines to answer these indications will be mentioned, while
treating of different diseases.


SECTION IV.

THE REMEDIATE INFLUENCE OP COLD.

1 will now speak of cold applications. This is a class of very great
importance, one which has been too long in disrepute, and too little used
in our attempts to alleviate human sufferings. Cold applications are re-
quired in high feverish heat, in all bruises, sprains and inflammations, in
violent head-aches, sore eyes, wasp stings. &c. &c.


oj Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 151

Now let us look at the reason for applying cold. It is in all cases to
prevent too much inflammation. It is one law of our nature as before
shown, that an unusual quantity of blood immediately rushes to any
part inflamed. As proof, think how quick the eyelids will swell when
struck, or the arm swell when stung by a wasp. Now this swelling is
in part owing to the flesh being crowded too full with blood. Again: it
is another law of our nature that less blood goes to any part that is cold,
and more to any part that is warm. As proof, in winter we come into
the house with hands, face, ears, &c. white with cold; but we find the
gqod woman sitting by the fire red with heat.

By this course of reasoning, then, we see why cold is applied; and
may also learn all the cases in which it is required, viz. in all cases
where we wish to prevent inflammation and swelling, or where swelling
has taken place and we wish to remove it. And may learn likewise
how effectually this may be done, by remembering that if we remain
out in a cold evening long enough, that is, apply cold enough to the ear
to freeze it, we have driven every particle of blood from it, and it is as
white as a lily. In all common cases, much less cold than that will an-
swer our purposes. The effect will always be the same, differing only
in degree. Cold will always keep the blood from rushing to the part;
that is, will prevent inflammation and swelling, and that is what we are
called upon to do. Having proved then that cold applications are ne-
cessary and useful, the next question will be, how will this application
be made? What article shall be used 1

I will say that there are many articles, and many ways of accomplish-
ing this object; but the cheapest, the most convenient, the neatest and
altogether the best mode of applying cold, is by means of cold water.
Cold is applied then in cases of inflammation of various kinds. Of the
brain, the application of cold water is attended with benefit. In cer-
tain cases of typhus fever, ablution and the effusion of it has often been
attended with benefit. Also in other febrile diseases, where the heat is
;jbovc the natural temperature of the body, except in eruptive diseases
in which it should not be used. In hemorrhages cold water is sometimes
used with advantage. In weak and inflamed eyes it imparts tone and
a healthy action to them. In contusions and sprains the application of
cold water is sometimes useful, and occasionally it has been found of
benefit in the form of the cold and shower bath, but heat or warmth in
most diseases is far preferable.

Cold seems almost invariably when long and suddenly applied to be
repulsive to nature. After its application, particularly where the system
is feeble, it is necessary that reaction or an effort of the system be insti-
tuted to counteract its effects. Therefore when applied as above or last
mentioned, It must be considered as an enemy. Throughout the whole
course of my practice, 1 have found that heat exerts a much more
salutary influence both in health and disease, and is therefore the most
congenial to the system.


152 General Principles of the American Practice


SECTION V.

ADDITIONAL REMARKS.

Although I have laid great emphasis upon the necessity and impor-
tance of promoting warmth and perspiration in diseases, I wish it not to
be understood that it is insisted upon or recommended to the exclusion
of other appropriate means, or that other remedies be in any wise neg-
lected. I have dwelt more largely upon this subject, because physi-
cians generally have not paid that attention to it which it deserves, and
because they, like Dr. Sangrado, have substituted bleeding for perspi-
ration, believing no doubt that no other means are sufficient to reduce
it. Again, I have not in this treatise insisted so strenuously upon at-
tention to the other excretions, because there is not so great a disparity
in our views, as there is on the subject of the capillary system.

We all agree upon the propriety of fulfilling most of the indications
for the cure of disease, but the wide, the radical, the irreconcilable dif-
ference, consists in the various means made use of, to fulfil those indi-
cations of cure.


<>t Medicine-, and. Indications of Cure. 153


CHAPTER III.

.MERCURY, AND OTHER MINERALS.


SECTION I

On the Pernicious Effects of Mercury, by James Hamilton, M. D.
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and Professor of Mid-
wifery in the University of Edinburgh.

Among the numerous poisons which have been used for the cure or
alleviation of diseases, there are few which possess more active, and
of course more dangerous powers than mercury. Even the simplest and
mildest forms of that mineral exert a most extensive influence over the
human frame, and many of its chemical preparations are so deleterious,
that in the smallest doses they speedily destroy life.

The late Dr. Parr, in his Medical Dictionary, (Vol. I. page 177,)
thus expatiates on the virtues and uses of that mineral. " As a medi-
cine, there is scarcely an indication that mercury cannot supply. There
is no more certain and active emetic than the mercurius vitriolatus; a
more powerful laxative than the calomel; a more effectual and steady
diaphoretic and stimulant than the mercurius muriatus; a more certain
emmenagogue than calomel; a more effective errhine than the turpeth
mineral; a more infallible sialagogue than either of its preparations."

casion calomel, or the blue pill. Thus, calomel is now almost the uni-
versal opening medicine recommended for infants and children, and ■
course of the blue pill (which is one of the mildest preparations of mer-
cury) is advised, without any discrimination, for the cure of trifling ir-
regularities of digestion in grown persons.

Dr. Falconar of Bath (in a paper inserted in the first volume of the
Transactions of the Medical Society of London, dated May, 1809,)
has in strong language reprobated this practice, and has pointed out
many of the dangerous effects of the indiscriminate use of mercury.
His warning voice, however, has not been listened to ; for the employ-
ment of mercurial medicines has, for several years, become more and
more extensive.

But when the effects of mercury upon the human body are accurate-
ly investigated and duly considered, it cannot fail to appear, that infi-
nite injury must accrue from its use.

It is the object of the author, in the following pages, to illustrate
those propositions ; and in doing so, he readily avails himself of the

Vol- ! 20


154 General Principles of the American Practice

recorded facts and observations of those respectable members of the pro-
fession, to whom proper deference is due.

In detailing the changes produced upon the system by preparations
of mercury, it is necessary to premise the well known fact, that there
are some individuals on whom such medicines, though continued for a
considerable length of time, have little or no perceptible influence, un-
less the activity of their form, or the magnitude of their dose, be cal-
culated to excite immediate effects. For example, whatever the con-
stitution of the person may be, a very few grains of the muriate of
mercury given in substance, prove rapidly fatal, and large doses of the
submuriate are quickly followed by vomiting and purging. On the other
hand, instances of constitutions which are unsusceptible of the influ-
ence of the ordinary doses and preparations of mercury, are very few
in comparison with those which are affected by the smallest quantity of
that mineral.

Preparations of mercury, exhibited cither internally or externally
for any length of time, increase in general the action of the heart and
arteries, and produce salivation, followed by emaciation and debility,
with an extremely irritable state of the whole system.

These effects of mercury are expressly mentioned, or virtually ad-
mitted, by every author, ancient and modern, who has directed its use;
and it must appear very extraordinary, that their full influence should
have been misunderstood, or at least not sufficiently regarded.

The first effect enumerated, is an increased action of the heart and
arteries, that is, a more than usually rapid circulation of the blood
through every part of the body. This also occurs in feverish and in-
flammatory disorders, and in all is accompanied with an augmentation
of the animal heat. But in feverish disorders there is neither any ap-
parent change upon the sensible qualities of the blood, nor any unusu-
al flow of the ordinary secretions ; while in inflammatory affections the
sensible qualities of the blood are materially altered, and either some
of the secretions are furnished in greater abundance, or topical conges-
tions, that is, obstructions in the vessels of particular parts, take place.

Accelerated circulation of the blood, in consequence of the use of
mercury, is attended with the most obvious of the circumstances which
arise from inflammation. Blood drawn from the arm of the most del-
icate and debilitated individual, subjected to a course of mercurial
medicines, exhibits the same buffy crust with blood drawn from a per-
son labouring under pleurisy, and the secretions from the skin or from
the kidneys are greatly increased.

In inflammatory complaints, topical congestions occur more frequent-
ly than increase of secretions, while the reverse of this happens where
the inordinate action of the heart and arteries is occasioned by the use
of mercury.

There is another remarkable difference. In inflammatory diseases,
the muscular strength, in many instances, continues unimpaired till to-
wards the termination of the complaint. Thus, eveiy practitioner
knows that individuals labouring under pleurisy have walked several
miles within a few hours of death. But from the time that the influence
of mercury becomes evident, the general strength declines rapidly.


B) Medicine, and Indications of Cm l- r >-"«

It appears, therefore, tliat the increased action of the heart and ar-
teries excited by mercurial medicines, produces not only the same in-
jurious changes upon the body with those arising from inflammation,
but also certain effects peculiar to itself. This important fact has been
incidentally noticed by numerous authors, although the natural infer-
ence to be deduced from it has been very much overlooked. Dr. Car-
michael expressly says, "mercury induces a specific fever, different
from all others, and attended with an increase of the various secre-
tions."

Reasoning upon the subject, it might be concluded, that if there be
an inordinate action of the heart and arteries, attended with an altered
state of the blood and with debility, while the increased secretions ac-
companying this inordinate action have no tendency to allay it, thp
health must be rapidly undermined; and if there be ulcerations in any
part of the body, they must as certainly degenerate into malignant
sores, as blistered surfaces or scarifications mortify in cases where the
living powers are much exhausted.

Experience has proved the reality of such conclusions, but prejudice
and inaccurate observation led many practitioners of deserved reputa-
tion to attribute those effects of mercury to other causes, till Mr. Ma-
thias published his valuable remarks on what he terms the mercurial
disease. Thus, before Mr. Mathias's publication, the injurious effects
of mercury in some syphilitic cases were attributed to the original vi-
rus operating on scrofulous, or cancerous, or scorbutic constitutions, ov
to some complication or anomaly which was inexplicable.

Mr. Mathias has unequivocally shown, that certain dangerous chan-
ges upon ulcerations originally syphilitic, and certain derangements of
health, occur whenever mercury has been administered in too acrid a
form, or in too large a quantity ; and his remarks are confirmed by the
experience of every practitioner who has, with extensive opportunities
of observation, been attentive to the phenomena. He imagines that
the action of the mercury in such cases is of a specific or peculiar na-
ture; it more probably, however, is merely in an inordinate or exces-
sive degree, and in no other respect different from what it is in every
case. It is a well known f.ict, that exposure to cold, bodily fatigue,
and irregularities of diet, particularly indulgence in intoxicating liquors,
have aggravated the severity and malignancy of syphilitic ulcerations,
whether primary or secondary. But as all those different causes con-
cur only in one respect, viz. in exciting inflammation, it is evident that
mercury, when it affects the system, must be productive of equally in-
jurious changes upon the ulcerations in question and upon the general
health, because it probably induces a more violent degree of inflamma-
tion, than exposure to cold or irregularities of diet.

Upon the same principle may be explained the fact noticed by all
practical writers, that scrofulous sores, and scirrhous tumours, and can-
cerous affections, in certain stages of their progress, are much aggra-
vated by preparations of mercury.

Dr. Blackall has shown, that, from the same cause, thickening of
various membranes, particularly the pericardium and pleura costalis.
has ensued, — 'and it is more than probable, that the aching pains which


lot) Gcicral Principles of the American Pmctm

so often follow courses of mercury are owing to partial adhesion, and
thickening of the cellular membrane in contact with the fascia and ex-
tremities of the muscles. From Dr. Blackall's cases, too, there is
reason to believe, that the inflammatory diathesis induced by mercury
may continue for a considerable time after the mercury has been laid
aside, and without any manifest signs. When individuals in this state
are subjected to accidental exposure to cold, or indulge in irregularity
of living, a violent and anomalous indisposition takes place, which is
apt to terminate fatally, or to occasion a broken state of health.

Secondly, — Salivation, or an excessive and unusual flow of saliva,
in general follows the increased action of the heart and arteries, and is
preceded by a certain metallic taste in the mouth, and is attended with
a peculiar odour of the breath, different from what is ever perceived
in any natural disease.

When an increase of any of the ordinary secretions takes place du-
ring the course of inflammatory affections, the local complaints may be
relieved. But the excessive flow of saliva, in consequence of mercury.
is accompanied with more or less local inflammation of all the parts
within the mouth. In some cases, beside the ordinary ulceration of
the gums, and loosening and final separation of the teeth, the tongue,
moveable palate, &c. swell and ulcerate to a frightful degree.

Thirdly, — Emaciation so commonly follows a course of mercury,
that several eminent physicians, about the beginning of last century,
imagined that mercury had a natural tendency to destroy the fatty par-
ticles. The celebrated Van Swieten (§ 147) says, "All the pinguid
humours are dissolved by the action of mercury, all the viscid are at-
tenuated, and discharged out of the body, through various outlets, to-
gether with the virus adhering to them ; therefore, when the patient's
body is totally emaciated, &c."

This emaciation has generally been supposed to proceed, parti}'
from the diminished appetite for food, and chiefly from the increased
secretions and excretions ; but as the observations of Dr. Blackall have
proved that the serum of the blood passes off with the urine, it is more
than probable that the excessive rapidity of the emaciation is occasion-
ed by that circumstance.

Fourthly, — Debility, with an irritable state of the whole system,
accompanies the emaciation, and of course occurs in various degrees
in different individuals. The late Mr. Benjamin Bell, whose practical
knowledge was so pre-eminent, comprehends in one short paragraph,
(page 188, of the second volume of his valuable Treatise on the Lues
Venerea,) an emphatic list of those effects of mercury. He remarks,
that besides the usual symptoms of fever, " mercury is apt to excite
restlessness, anxiety, general debility, and a very distressful irritable
state of the whole system.

The consequences of this effect upon the nerves are different upon
different subjects. In some, temporary delirium takes place — in oth-
ers, palsy or epilepsy supervene, and in many the memory and judg-
ment are more or less permanently impaired. Instances, too, have
occurred, where sudden death has supervened, apparently in conse-
quence of a very trifling exertion or agitation. Mr. Pearson has well


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 137

" is characterised by great depression of strength, a sense of anxiety
about the precordia, irregular action of the heart, frequent sighing,
trembling, partial or universal, a small, quick, and sometimes inter-
mitting pulse, occasional vomiting, a pale contracted countenance, a
sense of coldness ; but the tongue is seldom furred, nor are the vital or
natural functions much disordered."

It may be alleged, that these are extreme cases, and it must be ad-
mitted, that in many instances, those very violent effects do not follow.
Delicate individuals, however, particularly those who have been ac-
customed to a sedentary life, and, therefore, in an especial degree, fe-
males, generally experience, after a course of mercury, various modi-
fications of disordered feelings, communicating the idea of imaginary
diseases, which unfit them for the duties of life, and render existence a
burden.

Among the anomalous complaints arising from this cause, may be
enumerated, impaired or capricious appetite for food, with all the or-
dinary symptoms of indigestion, particularly retchings in the morning,
and flatulency — disturbed sleep, with frightful dreams — impaired or
depraved vision — frequent aches and pains in different parts of the bo-
dy — occasionally such sudden failure of strength, as if just dying, and
at other times violent palpitations at the heart, accompanied with diffi-
culty of breathing. Along with all these complaints, there is such a
wretchedness of look, with such a propensity to brood over their miser-
able feelings, that it is extremely difficult to persuade the relations or
the attendants of the patient that there is no serious indisposition. In-
deed medical practitioners, who are not accustomed to weigh with ma-
ture deliberation all the complications of symptoms, are generally de-
ceived in such cases, and involuntarily add to the alarm both of the
unhappy sufferer and of the attendants.

**I might cite all writers on the Materia Medica," Dr. Falconar,
in the paper alluded to, (page 110) says, "for authorities that the long
continued and frequent use of mercury is not free from danger ; that
among other ill effects, it tends to produce tremors and paralysis, and
not unfrequently incurable mania. I have myself seen repeatedly, from
this cause, a kind of approximation to these maladies, that embittered
life to such a degree, with a shocking depression of spirits, and other
nervous agitations with which it was accompanied, as to make it more
than commonly probable, that many of the suicides, which disgrace
our country, were occasioned by the intolerable feelings that result from
such a state of the nervous system." To the truth of these remarks
every unprejudiced physician who has been in extensive practice must
bear testimony.

Such are the ordinary and well known effects of mercury when giv-
en in sufficient quantity to act upon the human body, — but in many ca-
ses other deviations from health ensue.

Of these, the most common are excessive diarrhoea, accompanied
often with discharges of blood from the bowels. This is so apt to occur
in some individuals, even though the mercury be administered by being
rubbed upon the surface, that every writer upon "Lues Venerea" has


I. r >:> (icneral Principles of the American Practia

mentioned this effect as one of the great obstacles to the cure of the
disease.

The random experiments of speculative physicians upon patients
labouring under scrofulous affections have proved, that in some cases
ulcerations of the soft parts, and caries of the bones, originally arising
from ill conditioned states of the system, are much accelerated in their
progress by mercurial medicine. Of this many melancholy examples
might be cited. A boy about eleven years old had a sore on one cheek,
with an affection of the jaw, which were attributed to the mismanage-
ment of a dentist in extracting a carious tooth. A physician was con-
sulted, (after the patient had suffered for some months,) who immediately
ations in the throat appeared, the nose sunk, and one of the eyes was
nearly destroyed, while the general health became so seriously injured,
that death followed in a few months. Can it be for a moment doubt-
ed, that all those morbid changes proceeded from the inflammatory ac-
tion of the mercury.

Mental derangement, with eventual fatuity, has sometimes followed a
course of mercury ; and the probable reason why it does not do so more
frequently, is, that the irritable state of mind which usually precedes
actual derangement, commonly alarms the attendants, and leads to ac-
live precautionary measures.

Another consequence of the use of mercury is a very violent affec-
tion of the skin originally hinted at by Mr. Benjamin Bell — and more lately
and Mr. Pearson of London. It has been styled hydrargyra by Dr.
Alley, erythema mercuriale by Dr. Spens, and aczema mercuriale by
Mr. Pearson.

This eruption is usually preceded by heat and itching of the skin, a
frequent pulse, and a white tongue. Most commonly it begins on the
inside of the thighs, or about the flextures of the arms; and Mr. Pearson
asserts, that it generally attacks the anterior parts of the body before
the posterior. The parts affected are first of a faint red colour, and
gradually the shade becomes deeper. The eruption proceeds by slow
degrees over the whole surface, accompanied with an evident tumefaction
of the skin, with great tenderness and heat, and most troublesome itchings.

Examined by a magnifying glass, the eruption appears distinctly ve-
sicular, though the vesicles are so minute that they cannot be distinguish-
ed by the naked eye. These minute vesicles contain at first a pellucid
fluid, and are each surrounded by a circular redness. From the great
itching they are soon and inevitably ruptured, and discharge a thin acrid
fluid, which irritates and excoriates the surface, and aggravates greatly
the patient's sufferings. In this way the disease proceeds from one part
to another, till the whole person becomes affected.

When the vesicles are first ruptured, the fluid which exudes, though
thin, stiffens the linen, but after a few days (he discharge becomes thick,
and emits a most offensive smell. As the different parts of the body
are affected in succession, the exudation is thin in one part, and thick
and adhesive in another. In a day or (wo the adhesive discharge ceases.
the cuticle loosens, assuming first a pale brown colour, and then turning;


t>j Medicine, and Indications of ( 159

nearly black, when it separates in large (lakes, leaving a faint redness
on the exposed surface. Sometimes this disquamation is succeeded by
u second or third, in the form of white scales, like farinaceous powder.
In some cases the hair and even the nails have also separated along with
the epidermis.

The duration of the disease varies from a fortnight to eight or ten
hydrargyria mitis, simplex febrilis, and maligna ; and out of forty-three
cases, which he witnessed within ten years, eight patients died. For a
more particular account of this loathsome and distressing affection, the
reader is referred to Dr. Spens' Observations, already quoted, Dr. Al-
ley on Hydrargyria, Mr. Pearson, second edition page 166, and Dr.
Bateman, page 254.

These morbid effects of mercury do not seem to depend entirely
upon the quantity or mode of preparation of that medicine which may
be administered to the individual, for while it is an established fact, that
the mildest preparations employed externally, if exhibited in too large
doses, or continued for too jjreat a length of time, are followed by some
of the bad effects above enumerated, it is also notorious, that very small
quantities of mercury have suddenly proved equally injurious. Thus,
in a lady (whom the author attended some years ago along with his in-
telligent friend Dr. Farquharson) who had had such small doses of the
blue pill, combined with opium, for three nights successively, that the
whole quantity amounted to no more than five grains of the mass, sali-
vation began on the fifth day, and notwithstanding every attention, the
tongue and gums became swelled to an enormous degree, bleeding ulcers
of the mouth and fauces took place, and such excessive irritability
and debility followed, that for nearly a whole month her life was in the
utmost jeopardy. Every practitioner must have met with similar cases.

Another common consequence of a very small dose of mercury, is an
excessive bowel complaint. In many individuals a permanent irritabi-
lity of the stomach and intestinal canal has followed the accidental ex-
hibition of a few grains of calomel.

Various other anomalous affections have been known to succeed the
use of mercury. Thus, Dr. Falconar mentions, (Memoirs of the Medi-
cal Society of London Vol. III. page 381,) that he once saw a dropsy of
the breast produced by the use of a mercurial remedy for a redness in the
face, which it effectually removed, but instantly produced a dropsy of the
chest, terminating in death. Dr. Blackall has recorded similar cases.

In his observations on tin 1 hydrargyria, page 40, Dr. Alley asserts,
that he had seen " that eruption appear over the entire body of a boy
about seven years old, for whom but three grains of calomel had been

Many other instances of violent effects from a small dose of mercury
might be cited. Besides, the following seems to prove, that mercury
may remain inert for a considerable time in the habit, and afterwards,
by some inexplicable circumstance, may become active.

A lady, the mother of four children, in the twenty-eighth year of her
age, had a bad miscarria»e at the end of the fourth month. When the
author was called, she was very much reduced from the loss of blood,


160 General Principles of the American Practice

and required the ordinary palliative remedies. Three days after the
first visit she complained of a bad taste in her mouth, with soreness of
her gums, and on the following day salivation took place. On inquiring
into the circumstances of her previous history, it was learned, that four
years before she had had for a fortnight a course of the blue pill, which
had only slightly touched the gums, and it was solemnly asserted, that
she had never again taken any preparation of mercury, and had been
in general in good health.

The salivation was therefore at first attributed to some accidental
cause, but when it was found to be proceeding with great violence, the
medicines which the lady had been taking for the palliation of the com-
plaints produced by the abortion, were carefully analyzed, from a sus-
picion that some mercurial preparation might have been mixed with them,
but it turned out that they contained no mercury. The most anxious
and unremitting attention, and the careful exhibition of all the ordinary
remedies which have been employed in similar cases, proved unavailing.
The salivation, with the usual consequences of excessive emaciation,
debility, and irritability, continued for above twelve months. Occasion-
ally for a day or two it was checked, but alarming vomiting, with threat-
ening sinking of the living powers, supervened.

It is universally acknowledged, that although the morbid effects of
mercury may be induced very suddenly, and by very small quantities of
the medicine, in certain constitutions, there are no marks by which such
peculiarities of habit can be distinguished, and there is no method of
arresting their progress.


SECTION II.

THE PERNICIOUS EFFECTS OF MERCURY, IN VARIOUS DISEASES.

In slight cases of indigestion, popular prejudices may perhaps have
led practitioners to attribute the most usual symptoms of indigestion to
a retention of bile, and to suppose that nothing else than calomel or the
blue pill can afford them relief.

Hazardous as it always must be for any individual to oppose popular
prejudice, it is incumbent on practitioners, in every instance of serious
indisposition, to act according to their own deliberate judgment respect-
ing the nature of the case, and not in compliance with the caprice of
the patient. Physicians ought absolutely to refuse sanctioning the use of
mercury.

Those who are subject to occasional fits of dyspepsia, particularly
those who have resided in hot climates, are accustomed to appeal to
their own personal experience, as directly evincing the great utility of
calomel in such complaints. But if those persons could attend impar-
tially to the effects of that medicine, they would find, that its immediate
operation is severe, and that it is followed for some time by uncomfort-
able feelings, and by an unusual susceptibility of derangement of the
stomach and bowels. Perhaps, indeed, these very effects of calomel


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 1(*1

furnish in the majority of cases an antidote to the poison, for they com-
pel the sufferers to adopt restrictions in diet, and other necessary pre-
cautions, which the immediate relief that would ensue from the opera-
tion of safer medicines might make them suppose to be useless.

Sometimes, it is true, a single dose of calomel seems to remove in a
few hours the oppressive feelings produced by indigestion, and this hap-
pens from the sudden discharge of the acrid contents of the stomach and
duodenum. But a repetition of the same medicine, instead of being
equally serviceable, generally aggravates the sufferings, inducing alarm-
ing fits of palpitation, or of faintings, or of such unaccountable feelings
us lead to the dread of immediate death.

The author can truly affirm, that in several cases to which he has been
called, where patients had been under a course of mercury for stomach
lent degree than he ever witnessed from the same medicine given in
other diseases. Nor is it wonderful that this should happen, since it is
well known that one of the most common disorders occasioned by the
use of mercury is indigestion.

When symptoms resembling those of dyspepsia arise from organic
disease of the stomach, or through sympathy, from tubercles in tho
lungs, or altered texture of any other part than the liver, it may bo
much questioned whether any beneficial effects were ever produced by
mercury. In almost all the instances of this kind which have fallen
under the author's notice, the original affection was hurried on. Scirr-
hosity of the pylorus has been always considered to be quite incurable ;
and tubercles of the lungs, and affections of the mesenteric glands,
which seem by sympathy to produce dyspepsia, are as little under tho
control of medicine.

The chemical preparations most generally in use as a purgative in
this country is the calomel. " It has," as Mr. Carlisle has remarked,
" a direct purgative power, as a metalic salt; and it operates power-
fully on the large intestines. — It disorders the digestive powers of the
stomach; and, in debilitated persons, the frequent employment of it sinks
the strength, and provokes hemorrhoids."

It may be alleged, that in every complaint of infancy and childhood,
calomel, within these few years, has been had recourse to, not only by
practitioners, but by parents and nurses; a practice which must have
long ago been exploded, if bad effects had ensued.

Although a dose of calomel may seem merely to affect the stomach
or bowels, it may by its influence upon some latent disorder, such as
tubercles in the lungs, or slight enlargements of the mesenteric or other
internal glands, give activity to a disease, the source of which might
otherwise have been removed by the natural powers of the constitution.
The author has for several years been impressed with the conviction of
this important truth.

That there are many individuals who have often with impunity taken
calomel as a purgative, is not to be denied; but it is equally true, that
extremely irritability of the stomach and bowels, ulcerations of the
mouth with caries of the teeth, dropsy, epilepsy, and various other mo-
difications of disease, have followed the use of that preparation. In se-

Vol. T 21


162 General Principles of the American Praetii

Vera] cases the author has decidedly ascertained, that ulcerations oi' the
villous coat of the intestines in infants and young children, have been
induced by the frequent repetition of doses of that medicine.

Had these injurious effects of calomel upon delicate constitutions
been hid from the rest of the profession, and known only to the author,
some apology might be offered for the pertinacity with which that medicine
ly asserted, that no medical man of competent knowledge and observation
could administer calomel as a purgative, in a hundred instances, without
being convinced of its injurious tendency. Of this innumerable proofs
could be cited, but it is sufficient to appeal to the testimony of professor
Carlisle and of Dr. Blackall.

Mr, Carlisle has expressed himself very strongly on this subject.
" That grave men should violently persist in large doses of calomel, and
order these doses to be daily reiterated in chronic and debilitated cases,
is passing strange. Men, starting into the exercise of the medical pro-
fession, from a cloistered study of books, and from abstract speculations;
men wholly unaware of the fallibility of medical evidence, and unversed
in the doubtful effects of medicines, may be themselves deluded, and
delude others for a time ; but when experience has proved their errors,
it would be magnanimous, and 3 r et no more than just, to renounce both
the opinion and the practice."

Dr. Blackall's remarks being very specific, afford a still more satis-
factory proof of the validity of the author's opinions. " It appears to
me," he says, " that no accidents proper to the disease can account for
all those fatal conversions to the head, which of late years have so fre-
quently taken place in the fevers of children; and I have on some oc-
casions been disposed to attribute them to excessive and repeated doses
of calomel, which cither not moving the bowels, as was expected, have
given evidence of being absorbed, or, on the other hand, have purged
too violently, and been succeeded by diarrhoea without bile, and a pros-
tration of strength, from which the little patient has never risen. Its less
severe effects are sometimes of no slight importance; a slow and im-
perfect recovery, a languid feverish habit, and a disposition to scro-
fula.

" It need not surprise us, that, in children, this disposition, particularly
if so excited, should often be formed on the part most liable to every
impression, and most actively developing itself, the brain; since, even
in adults, mercury is inimical to the nervous system. Parents have
something to regret, who are so perpetually giving calomel to their chil-
dren, without any distinction or care, as a common domestic remedy.
And it is difficult to conceive on what view of the subject even practi-
tioners proceed, who indulge in its use with less scruple than ever, with
less caution as to management, whilst they are observing and lamenting
the daily increasing ravages of hereditary scrofulous disorders. It can
hardly be in the present day from want of calomel, that such a taint is
propagated."

Small doses of calomel may seem useful in bowel complaints, when
in reality the amendment i? to be attributed to the regulation of diet,


»J Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 163

and to the opiates which are commonly recommended at the same
time.*

The author can confidently declare, that he has seen a numher of in-
fants, and very young children, destroyed, as he positively apprehends,
by the indiscriminate use of calomel lor complaints of the bowels.

In dropsies there is either increased activity of the exhalcnts, or some
altered condition of the circulating mass, which renders it acrimonious
or stimulating when exhaled, it is perfectly obvious, that all medicines
capable of aggravating such causes ought to be most carefully avoided.
And since it is clearly established, that preparations of mercury have a
direct tendency both to increase the action of the arterial system, and
to alter the constituent parts of the blood, they must be regarded as
most especially inadmissible.

The author has never met in consultation with any practitioner of
discernment and experience, who has not admitted the fact, both that
mercury and squills frequently fail to give relief in cases of general drop-
sy; and also, that in many instances their exhibition has been succeeded
by a rapid and mortal aggravation of the symptoms; If any reliance
can be placed on the validity of the observations in the preceding pages,
the reasons for these failures may be easily comprehended.

Were any further illustrations required, the author could state several
distressing cases to which he has been called, even since the publication
of Dr. YVells' and Dr. Blackall's valuable hints. The patients alluded
to, while under a course of mercury and squills, had been unexpected-
ly seized with alarming breathlessness, or violent pain in the side, or
sudden delirium, with a sharp pulse, for which they had been very pro-
perly otherwise treated, while the mercurial medicines had been discon-
tinued. But although a rapid amendment had followed this change of
treatment, the use of the mercury had been resumed whenever the alarm
had fairly subsided and a hopeless recurrence of all the bad symptoms-
had ensued.

Although the consideration maybe humiliating, it is too instructive to
be passed over, tiiat the very reason urged by practitioners of deserved
eminence for the employment of mercury in hydrocephalus, are not un-
frequently in direct contradiction to their own explanation of the nature
of the disease. A late writer on this subject, of high reputation, for ex-
ample, attributes hydrocephalus acutus to increased action of the arte-
ries, with at the same time vcinous congestations within the cranium, and
recommends mercury for the purpose of substituting a new action. But
the most ample proofs, it is presumed, have been brought forward in
the preceding pages, to show, that mercury increases the arterial action,
that it alters the nature of the circulating mass, and that it impairs the
energy of the nervous system, and therefore its operation must tend di-
rectly to aggravate those alleged causes.

On this subject the author can express his sentiments with more than
usual confidence, having from his earliest years had innumerable oppor-
tunities of attending to the effects of mercury in this disease. In no


* Tin's i< tlic case in all di«^n«' 1 «


164 General Principles of tlie American Practice

instance under his observation has that medicine ever proved successful,
and lie fully agrees with Dr. Blackall in opinion, that on many occasions
the injudicious use of that mineral has actually occasioned the disease.
To his certain knowledge, affections of the stomach and bowels have
on the presumption, that the patient already laboured under that dis-
ease.

Upon what principle mercury has been so universally employed in all
cases of enlarged ovarium, notwithstanding the variety of age, consti-
tution, and state of general health of the individuals affected with it, no
satisfactory explanation has hitherto been given.

Analogical reasoning is little in favour of the practice. Hydatids have
never been cured by mercury, even when situated in parts of the body
where that mineral could exert a ready influence. As to accumulations
within the proper coat of the ovary, they are too isolated and unconnected
with the absorbent system, to be affected by medicines capable of in-
creasing the actions of the lymphatics.

Far less can experience be pleaded in justification of this practice,
for the author speaks within bounds, when he avers, that he has known
mercury employed in some hundred cases of diseased ovarium, without
its having proved useful in a single instance. A few apparent excep-
tions have been reported to him by old pupils; but from the uniform
result of all the cases which have been under his own notice, he is in-
duced to believe, that in those alleged exceptions, the disease had not
been the enlargement of the ovary.

But while mercury can be of no utility whatever, it may, and cer-
tainly often has produced irreparable injury, not only upon the general
constitution, but also in all cases where indurations of portions of the
ovary are complicated with serious collections. Instances of this kind
every now and then occur, and cannot be distinguished till their progress
towards cancerous ulceration be so far advanced as to become manifest.
A most impartial attention to many of those cases has convinced the au-
thor, that indurations, which might have remained for years without in-
convenience to the patient, have been forced into morbid activity by a
course of mercury.

In some parts, calomel has been employed for many years, as the
city, by medical men who had practised in the West-Indies, before the
author could be persuaded to sanction its use. He was informed that
the method of exhibiting it, was to give to a child of three or four years
old, five grains evening and morning, and that it cured the disease with-
out producing any sensible operation. Such an account held out no in-
ducement for trying so hazardous a remedy, more especially since he
knew that the practice, under the direction of the late Dr. Wright, and
some other physicians, who had resided in hot climates, proved so un-
successful, that on more than one occasion, two children in the same fa-
mily, treated according to this plan, died within a few days of each
other.

About sixteen years ago, however, in consequence partly of the ur-
gent representations of an old pupil, (the late Dr. J. Anderson.) and


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 165

chiefly because the ordinary remedies frequently proved uncertain, he
was induced to give calomel a fair trial ; and he can solemnly assert, that
according to all that he has seen, no relief whatever has been afforded by
that medicine, unless copious dark green coloured stools, like boiled
spinnage have been discharged, and that it requires large and repeated
doses of the medicine to produce that effect. For example, to a child of
seven years old, one hundred and thirty-three grains were given within
sixty hours.

In reasoning upon this subject, it is extremely difficult to explain, hi
the first place, the safety with which a hundred and thirty-three grains
of calomel could be given in this climate, within sixty hours, to a patient
of seven years of age.

It has been shown, that the action of mercury tends, by exciting in-
flammation and effusion, to produce thickening of various membranes,
particularly of the pleura — and several instances of that kind are re-
corded by Dr. Blackall, where the fact was proved by the appearances
on dissection. This effect of mercury has been long remarked by the
author, and it suggested to him, many years ago, a practical inference
of some importance.

Many practitioners imagine that mercury is a specific in the venereal
disease. But this is not the case. Indeed it is very questionable whe-
ther it has any other than a deleterious effect in this disorder.

This remark is exemplified in the experiments lately made in England
by the head surgeon to the army. It is stated, that about two thousand
patients were cured without mercury, simply by abstinence and rest, or
rather by the natural efforts of the constitution; whereas, no more were
cured by mercury. Thus it is evident, that that mineral exerts no in-
fluence in the removal of syphilis, and that physicians impute to art, or
rather to a dangerous medicine, what is due to nature.

When we reflect that in fevers mercury is given with little scruple,
we are led to remark, that " within the last thirty years either a sudden
revolution in the laws of the human machine had taken place, or that
medical men had ceased to reason on the operations of medicine."

Every practitioner who has paid the least attention to the effect of
mercury in fevers, must be convinced of its immediate and subsequent
injurious effects. No further proof need be adduced than is found in the
preceding pages; it is shown, that it produces an augmentation of fe-
verish and inflammatory symptoms; that from the time that the influence
of mercury becomes evident, the general strength declines rapidly, a
dangerous emaciation, debility, with an irritable state of the whole sys-
tem, also paralysis, epilepsy, loss of senses, and many other distressing
and dangerous complaints.

Who then in the possession of his reason would think of exhibiting
mercury in fevers. But, strange as it may appear, it is universally ad-
ministered, and constitutes the chief medicine in the materia medica.
We hope, however, that those who see its pernicious and fatal effects
portrayed in this work, will in future flee from it as from the lace of tho
most poisonous serpent. It would require years to give an account of
the number of deaths it has occasioned;


1 o6 General Principles of the American Practice

SECTION III.

ON THE MERCURIAL DISEASE, BY DR. A. MATH1AS.

The mercurial disease will be found to attack the bones, the perios-
teum, the tendons, the tendinous fascia, and in the joints, the cartilages
and the ligaments, by the extension of the specific diseased action, and
not merely by the spreading of a mercurial ulcer in the neighbourhood ;
for indeed it very seldom happens that the mercurial disease discovers
itself in them in a state of ulceration.

If what I have now observed be true, the extent of the mercurial
disease is rather greater than that of the venereal. When any of these
parts take on the mercurial disease, the irritation must always be con-
sidered as a general and not as a local affection ; except the complaint
commenced there locally in a venereal ulceration. The irritation will
commonly discover itself by pain, by tumour, and by inflammation,
and very often without there having been any one previous symptom of
the lues venerea. It is however by these symptoms commencing du-
ring a course of mercury, and resisting all the efforts made b}' that
medicine to cure them, that we are led to believe that they entirely de-
pend on the mercurial specific irritation.

The appearance of the mercurial disease in these parts so much re-
sembles the venereal disease, that we must always take into consider-
ation the quantity, the quality, and the effects of the mercury which
was previously given, to enable us to form a right judgment of these
cases. The symptoms, however, are not so absolutely alike in both
diseases that there are no shades of difference : the symptoms, for in-
stance, whether of pain, of tumour, or of sore, possess the moveable
fluctuating disposition which I have so often mentioned, when speak-
ing of this disease in the groin and in the throat.

The mercurial disease in the bones mostly extends no further than
in producing a pain in them. This occurs many times strictly in those
parts which are commonly affected by the venereal virus, and these pains
will come on principally at night ; but in many cases the disease will
extend to the joints of both extremities and even to the smaller joints.
The hip joint has sometimes been the seat of this disease, a circum-
ard in his work on the venereal disease.

The bones of the head are often the seat of the mercurial irritation,
and the patient is subject to violent head-aches. These pains, in ma-
ny cases are as troublesome during the day as in the night, but they
shift very frequently from one part to another, last for a week or two,
disappear, and then return again. The patients sometimes supposed
them to be a rheumatic affection.

The mercurial irritation occasionally proceeds to such an extent in
the bones as to produce an affection of them resembling the disease
called the mollities ossium, in which the bones are liable to fracture ou
every trifling accident. Mr. John Howard makes mention of this af-
fection, and he concludes that there is then an absorption in part of the


of Medicine, and Indications of Curt . 167

earthy matter of the hones; a circumstance not unlikely to take place-
when the mercurial irritation is very violent in these [tarts. The teeth
will often drop out from the destruction of the gums, and an absorp-
tion takes place of their aleolar processes from this same cause. The
venereal virus, most certainly, at times also renders the bones very
friable, but it generally first makes them carious. This is not the case
with mercury, when it produces the kind of disease which I have just
observed.

Few bones in the body are exempt from the possibility of a vene-
real infection, and, as far as my observations have reached, I may as-
sert that the mercurial irritation is equally as extensive in its effects.

When the bones and cartilages of the nose are affected by the ven-
ereal virus, the complaint is then called a venereal ozcena; and, from
the spongy and delicate structure of these bones, the mischief done b) r
ft is often sudden and irreparable. The mercurial ozcena is likewise a
complaint not unfrequent. I have seen some cases of it, and have ob-
served that its effects arc as mischievous and as sudden as those of the
venereal ozcena. I have known the mercurial ozcena to commence in
a case of the mercurial ulcerated throat, when there had not been the-
least appearance of a venereal ulcer in the part.

Perhaps in no instance is it of more importance, than in this state
of the disease, to distinguish accurately and speedily, when the case is
doubtful, on what specific irritation it depends. I have seen the bones
of the palate, the scheidcrian membrane, the cartilages and bones of
the nose, all confounded in one diseased mass. I have also seen sev-
eral cases of the mercurial disease from hot climates, in which the
complaint has first commenced in the nose, and, after having produ-
ced considerable destruction there, the ulcerative process has crept up
on each side of the superior maxillary bones, through the cheeks, in an
irregular angular direction, till at last the miserable patients have found
in their deaths the only remedy for their unhappy sufferings. Some of
these cases have been accounted incurable instances of the lues vene-
rea; and others have been called the lues venerea terminating in can-
cer; when, from their whole history, I had little doubt of their having
been first venereal, and then finally and truly mercurial. In many of
them I had opportunities of observing the moveable disposition of the
ulceration, which is so characteristic of the mercurial affection.

Mercury appears to destroy the energy of the nervous system, produ-
cing weakness, tremors, palseys, fatuity, epilepsy, and mania, the
most dreadful of all its bad consequences ; and indeed no part of the
body is exempt from its deleterious effects. The patient becomes hec-
tical, has a small quick pulse, and there is often a tendency to a colli-
quation on the skin and bowels, and a wasting atrophy of the flesh ;
his countenance is pale and wan, his nights bad, his appetite impaired,
his strength much reduced, and he complains of general irritability,
with head-ache and flying pains in his bones, especially on the approach
of had weather, of rain, of frost, or of north-easterly winds.


168 General Principles of the American Practice

SECTION IV.

CALOMEL OR MERCURY....BY DR. ANTHONY HUNN, OP KENTUCKY.

This is the aera of calomel. The present medical practice might well
dispense with every other drug beside it. I own the calomel practice
is both cheap and easy to the physician; for the whole extent of both
theory and practice is, give calomel. If that will not help, give more
calomel, and if that again proves abortive, double, treble the doses of
calomel. If the patient recovers,- " calomel has cured him :" if he dies,
" nothing on earth could have saved him." The reader will conclude,
that medical schools and academies, with the head-aching studies of
anatomy, physiology, botany, pharmacology, chymistry, have been
laid prostrate by this giant, calomel. Half a day's, nay, in a genius,
half an hour's study will initiate any lady or gentleman in all the myste-
ries Of the jEsculapian art, and the " aurea praxis" might swell the
account of a modern Galenus to one dollar at the expense of twelve and
a half cents. This is certainly for the doctor a " consummation devout-
ly to be wished." But there is a heavy draw-back on our joy, which
the fable of the "boys and the frogs," so ingeniously pourtrays: '■'■what
is joy to you, is death to us," said the expiring frogs. I expect to
show to my impartial reader, that the present calomel practice in fevers,
is a calamity in its ravages co-extensive with the empire of civilization,
and that war, with all its ghastly concomitants, must hail calomel their
master.

The proper effects of mercury on the human frame, are First, Fever,
as I have before defined it. Second, It is the cause of a peculiar action
on the lymphatic vessels. Third, It chymically decomposes the fluids,
and peculiarly the lymph. This is, in my opinion, the true cause of
the fetid breath in salivation. Fourth, In constitutions prone to that
effect, or under circumstances favouring it, or when too long used, it
produces mortifying ulcers of a specific kind, which hitherto have prov-
ed absolutely incurable. Its accidental effects are, First, Salivation,
which may also be produced by other drugs and sometimes appear spon-
taneously, and which is not at all necessary to effect a cure. Second,
In a state of great visceral irritability, or when given in large doses, it
proves a sickening and powerful purgative, with a singular sympathetic
affection of the liver, which viscus is thereby thrown into a morbid con-
vulsive action, creating bile, exorbitant in quantity and poisonous in
quality; when in a healthy state the bilious secretion is mild, moderate
in quantity, and salutary.

Now, it appears to be a law in animaliation, that two distinct fever
causes cannot operate at the 'same time on the system. Thus, for in-
stance, if the infection of the measles lodge in the body, when a patient
is inoculated for the small pox, the latter will lay inactive, till the first
has run through its course. This law, I apprehend, has first introduced
mercury into the fever practice, and it is a fact, if the proper mercurial
action can be produced, the fever produced by a miasma will speedily
cease. But my reader will please to observe. First, That in all fever


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. Ib9

cases it is extremely precarious and doubtful to produce this proper
mercurial action, and there are many cases, in which it cannot be in-
duced at all. Besides that, when induced, it is unmanageable. Se-
cond, If the bowels are very irritable and weak or in peculiar habits, it
will operate as a purge and throw the liver into bile, creating convul-
sions, like a blister-plaster on the very liver. It will attract more or
less of the febrile impetus upon that vital viscus, producing a dangerous
inequality, which is called " bilious fever." Third, After a vast quan-
tity of mercury has been introduced into the system, which for want of
(sufficient excitability, has lain dormant; if now, by a sudden increase
of that excitability or from other unknown causes, it evinces its pre-
sence by salivation, this will be of course, enormous and distressing.
The teeth, valuable instruments of our most substantial enjoyments,
become loose and rot, perhaps fall out: or, worse still, the upper and
lower jaw bones exfoliate and rot out sometimes, as I have witnessed in
the form of horse shoes: parts of the tongue and palate are frequently
lost, and the poor object of commiseration lingers out a doleful exis-
tence, during life. A tremendous description this, indeed; yet this
happens when mercury performs a cure. In our summer and fall fever,
the pestilential bilious symptoms occasioned or aggravated by it, carry
the patient speedily off in inexpressible torments, and spread the multi-
plied miasma among the mourning family, the unwary bystanders and
mourners !

Is there any of my readers who would not by this time pray, " deliv-
er us from calomel?" Yes, my fellow citizens, you can be, the world
will be delivered from it! Only drive away prejudice, that black thun-
der-cloud, which ever hovers over truth ; think for yourselves, free as
republicans ever should think; consult your precious healths and lives.
Every free man should, at least to a certain degree, be his own lawyer,
his own preacher, his own physician. My method of cure in fever is
entirely without mercury and its doleful effects. Were I even not more
successful than those gentlemen of the medical profession, who trust so
much to the virtues of calomel, still the gain would be immense; but
from facts, enumerated fairly by myself and others, I have nothing te
fear from an impartial comparison.


SECTION \ .

The Statement of Dr. Richard Reese, of London, member of the Roy-
al College of Surgeons, author of the " Dictionary of Popular
Medicine,'''* " Chemical Guide,'''' corresponding member of the So-
ciety of Practical Medicine of Paris, fyc. fyc. fyc.

The charter of the 'Royal College of Physicians' is found to con-
tain a singular license, which is, a permission to any one and every
one to practice the healing art by the use of herbs only. Now we really
do consider this as ample a permission as any man would require, for
poor must be the resources of that physician's mind, and very narrow
his knowledge of medical botany, who could not from the vegetable

Vol. T. 22


170


General Principles of the American Practice


kingdom alone cure most of the diseases of the human frame : even the
specific of mercury, if we were driven to the necessity of a substitute,
might probably be rivalled in some of these productions of nature. We
know not whether we have most reason to hail the discovery of mercury
as a blessing, or regard it as a curse, since the diseases it entails are
as numerous as those which it cures. Our best informed dentists de-
clare, that they can clearly witness the progress of the use of mercury,
in the increasing diseases and decay of the teeth. There are serious
objections also to other articles of the metallic world; antimony, iron,
and arsenic, are dangerous remedies in the hands of the ignorant, and
mankind, perhaps, in the aggregate, would be benefitted by their ex-
pulsion from medical practice."


SECTION VI.

PLATE, SHEWING THE EFFECTS OF MERCURY OR CALOMEL UPON

THE SYSTEM.

The above figure represents the appearance and state of Mr. William
W -, 47 Oak-street, of this city, in consequence of submitting to


of Medicine, and liulicafions oj Cure. 17 i

the treatment pursued and recommended, by physicians and authors of
the day. He had felt occasionally a little pain in his side, and requested
became enormously swelled, and sore, and soon protruded out of his
mouth, as appears in the figure. It cracked or burst open in four pla-
ces, from which, as well as from his mouth, issued matter, blood, and
water. The doctors, in consultation, concluded to operate upon his
tongue, by making incisions or opening it. This, however, was ob-
jected to; his jaws were also enormously swelled, and for ten days he
ate nothing. One hundred and fifty-six leeches were applied to his
tongue, and four quarts of blood were extracted from it.

His tongue was thus protruded for the space of two weeks, or more,
during which time he was obliged to make his wishes known by writing.
His recovery was considered very doubtful. He, however, employed
another class of physicians, who by pursuing an opposite mode of prac-
tice, (vegetable instead of mineral) soon counteracted the effects of the
poison, by the application of poultices, &c. and the man is now well,
and ready to attest to the truth of this statement. This is by no means
an uncommon case. It occurs often, and even worse consequences,
sooner or later follow the use of mercury and other poisonous metals,

I am now attending a woman nearly destroyed by taking mercury for
the prevailing influenza. Her whole sjstem has been excessively swol-
len, almost unable to swallow; her tongue, gums, throat, and jaws,
swollen and sore; her breath so fetid that it was almost impossible to
stay in the room; flesh almost wasted away; countenance sunk, pale,
and ghastly; excessive debility; water running from the mouth; appe-
tite gone; and from the putrid state of the fluids, every appearance of
mortification and death. When the physician was first told of the mis.-
chief he had done, he made no apology for the treatment, but immedi-
ately began to converse upon another subject. The son of this woman
again called his attention to his mother, but he was inexorable. Alas !
he had followed the books of the day, and this was sufficient to excuse
his conscience ! This man was not one of the lowest grade of common
physicians, by which some of the faculty might excuse the matter, but a
no less personage than one of the physicians of the New-York Hospital.


SECTION VII.
MINERALS GENERALLY.

In concluding this Chapter, I will merely hint at the dangerous ef-
fects of most of the other minerals used for medicine, which I extract
from an article I wrote some time ago, in reply to an attack made up-
on our practice by a physician of this city.

Mercury.

The principal mineral now used internally to " heal all the ills
to which our flesh is heir," is mercury. It is called the Sanson of


172 General Principles of the American Practice

the Materia Medica, and so it appears to be ; for if Samson slayed
his thousands, this mineral poison has slayed its tens of thousands. It
is a matter of profound astonishment to me, that any article, productive
of such deleterious effects, should be so highly extolled by the faculty,
and be so universally used. It seems that modern not botanical physi-
cians, are the genuine descendants of that celebrated empiric, Para-
celsus, who first discovered and made use of it. For many centuries
previous, Galen taught and practiced the vegetable system of medicine for
whieh we now contend. Many authors of distinguished reputation, have
raised their warning voice against the use and abuse of mercury, while
others equally celebrated have proved by experiments on thousands,
that it is a very dangerous article ; yet it is still administered for nearly
every complaint.

Muriate of Mercury.

Muriate of mercury, says a writer, is one of the most violent poi-
sons with which we are acquainted.

Zinc.

Zinc is the next mineral extolled by the writer as a suitable article
for medicine. The following definition may be given of it: Zinc is a
metal which exerts a powerful and very dangerous effect upon the sys-
tem, especially if an over dose is taken.

Antimony.

Antimony, says Hooper, is a medicine of the greatest power of any
known substance ; a quantity too minute to be sensible in the most deli-
cate balance, is capable of producing violent effects, if taken dissolved,
or in a soluble state.

Arsenic.

It is stated by the same writer, that arsenic is one of the most sud-
den and violent poisons we are acquainted with. When the quantity is
so small as not to prove fatal, tremors, paralysis and lingering hectics
succeed. We are on the combined testimony of many medical practi-
tioners, conspicuous for their professional zeal and integrity, irresistibly
induced to declare our opinion, at least, against the internal use of this
active and dangerous medicine.

Iodine.

It is stated in Hooper's Medical Lexicon, that iodine whenever it is
administered, an over dose must be avoided, as it acts with extreme
and dangerous effects on the constitution.

Metals Generally.

The attention of the reader is particularly direeted to the following
testimony of the same author:

flC^ " All the metallic preparations are uncertain, as it depends en-
tirely on the state of the stomach, whether they have no action at all,
or operate with dangerous violence."


Mi r/idne, and Indications of Cure. 173


CHAPTER IV.


BLOOD-LETTING.


If the employment of the Lancet was abolished altogether, it would perhaps
save annually a greater number of lives than in any one year the sword has ever
destroyed. im. reid.


SECTION I.

Among the various means made use of to restore the sick to health,
there is none so irrational and absurd as blood-letting. It is, at present,
considered almost as a universal remedy, and resorted to for the cure
of the slightest indisposition; and, although daily slaying its thousands,
it still continues to be the main pillar of the profession. Indeed, were
bleeding and mercury to be altogether prohibited, many physicians
would find themselves in a sad dilemma ; for their hands would be com-
pletely tied.

We are unable to determine precisely the commencement of this per-
nicious custom, but we find it to be very ancient; having been, it ap-
pears, commensurate with the declension of the healing art in the ear-
liest ages of the world. It was not however carried to such an extent,
till after the discovery of the circulation of the blood by Harvey. It
was at this period that the whole faculty began their mad career, in
committing the most wanton violation of the laws of nature. Those who
were so unfortunate as to fall victims to disease, were doomed to suffer
the most extravagant effusion of blood, and the poor sufferers were soon
hurried to an untimely grave, secundum artem; even the guillotine of
France scarcely surpassed this systematic murdering. But in process
of time practitioners began to witness the mischief they were commit-
ting, which, in some measure, damped their ardour in these bloody-
scenes. This check induced one physician to remark, that the propor-
tionate disuse of the lancet was one of the greatest improvements in
modern medicine. We find, however, that blood-letting has been prac-
tised for many centuries almost with the same infatuation; and, lament-
able for mankind, in the present day, it is regarded as the most pow-
erful weapon to subdue disease. There are few maladies in which it is
not recommended. In pleurisy, and all inflammatory complaints, an
astonishing quantity of blood is drawn from the system. It is very com-
mon to take from five to seven pounds in twenty-four hours. One of
the professors in the medical college of this city stated that he had fre-
quently bled his patients to the amount of two hundred ounces in three
davs. Another professor declared that he had taken three hundred oun-
ces in the short space of three days, and for proof of this fact, appealed


174 General Principles of the American Practn ,

to one of his students. The effect of this practice I shall leave for peo-
ple of common sense to determine. How much is it to be regretted that
such an awful scourge of humanity should exist ! A little examination
into the consequences of blood-letting, will prove that so far from its
being beneficial, it is productive of the most serious and fatal effects.

Nature has endowed the animal frame with the power of preparing,
from proper aliment, a certain quantity of blood. This vital fluid, sub-
servient to nutrition, is, by the amazing structure of the heart and blood
vessels, circulated through the different parts of the system. A certain
natural balance between what is taken in, and what passes off by the
several outlets of the body, is, in a state of health, regularly preserved.
When this balance, so essential to life, is, contrary to the laws of the
animal constitution, interrupted, either a deviation from a sound state
is immediately perceived, or health, from that moment, is rendered
precarious. Blood-letting tends artificially to destroy that natural bal-
ance in the constitution. Nature, deprived of a quantity of the circu-
lating fluid, being fitted with means for repairing the loss she has sus-
tained, begins immediately to repair it. The secretions and excretions
in general are diminished; the appetite is increased; and, for a short
time, the process of nutrition is unusually quick.

Thus, by the wisdom of Providence, nature soon restores to the
constitution what art bad taken from it.* The consequences, therefore,
of having been once bled are rarely considerable. This single opera-
tion, however, is an imprudent violation of nature, and of common
sense.

But too often the practice has not rested here. For various are the
incidents which favour the repetition of blood-letting. The patient, if
addicted to an easy, indolent, luxurious way of life, may find himself,
after the evacuation, sensible of some present ease. The system, be-
ing before too full of blood, or rather the balance being lost, enjoys a
short respite from its usual oppression. Or, after the bleeding, though
it was improper, and tended rather to increase the disease, yet the hope
of relief, or a change of weather, the benefit of exercise and country
air, or some other alteration in an accustomed manner of living, may,
by palliating or removing the complaint, prejudice the patient in favour
of the lancet. The disorder, it may be, was of such a kind as really
to admit of alleviation from the use of bleeding ; but, nevertheless, the
remedy unhappily proves of worse effect to the constitution than the
disease itself would have done, though entirely left to nature. Great
numbers of people who have been relieved by bleeding, are apt to bo
partial to the means of their own recovery, and to become strenuous ad-
vocates for its use, even in cases by no means similar to their own.

These, and a variety of other accidental causes, often persuade to
repetitions of blood-letting. The consequences now become more se-
rious. The constitution, though it did not suffer materially from ono


rf It very frequently happens, however, that' in many habits, the loss of even
small quantities of blood, induces such a debility as to prevent a reaction of the
system, whereby the blood becomes thin and watery, dropsical and other diseases
follow, and very commonly death itself.


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 175

bleeding, yet far from being able to undergo with impunity repeated
operations of a similar kind, turns against itself those powers which
were given for its preservation, and co-operates with the imprudent uso
of the lancet in promoting the accomplishment of its own destruction.
For now the constitution not only repairs the losses of blood it sustains,
but, if the common intervals of time be interposed, makes more blood
than is naturally required for the purposes of health and life, it may bo
able to bear such repeated evacuations.

Thus the habit of blood-letting is established. But, in fact, habitual
blood-letting augments the very evil it was intended to remove. For
sanguine evacuations necessitating the constitution to make more blood
than is requisite, produces too great fulness of the system. The bal-
ance between what is taken into the body, and what passes off by its se-
veral outlets, is no longer maintained. As the disposition to plethora
exists, plethora itself, if the person continue to live in his accustomed
manner, will undoubtedly prevail, except at that time when the consti-
tution has just received the unnatural assistance of the lancet. The
habit of letting blood increases and becomes stronger by repetition. In
this state, the constitution, in spite of human art, will at times labour
under various degrees of plethora, till the vessels arrive at that point of
fulness, which again creates the necessity of bleeding. Though some
constitutions are so robust, or so peculiarly framed by nature, as to
bear such treatment without any evident had consequences, yet this is
but the privilege of few. Many will severely suffer, though they them-
selves may often be the first to extol in the highest terms of praise that
very remedy which has proved so pernicious to their own constitutions.
They have been bled till stated bleedings become necessary, not only
for the support of health, but even for the preservation of their lives.
They have injudiciously created to themselves the necessity of bleeding,
;ind are even happy to find that it relieves complaints, which it at first
tended to conduce, and afterward to confirm.

The effects of plethora are many and dangerous. A slight degree of
it often produces strange commotions in weak and irritable habits. No
person who depends for the preservation of his health on an artificial
discharge of blood, can ever be pronounced out of danger. Before the
usual means of relief be employed, the sanguine fulness at one time or
another may have proceeded to a morbid, or even to a fatal length.
The anticipation of the stated bleedings may with the greatest inconve-
nience lessen, but it can never remove the danger. An increase of fat-
unnatural heat, torpor, inactivity, and a sense of lassitude are
common effects of plethora. The whole vascular system is unnaturally
put upon the stretch, and along with it, the nervous and muscular fibres.
Thus by slow degrees, the tone of the body, in consequence of so con-
siderable an over-distension, is in danger of being destroyed. The
constitution itself, in proportion to its native vigour, is rendered liable,
exclusive of every other cause of disease, to break many years sooner
than it might otherwise have done in the common course of nature, if
nature's laws had not been wantonly violated, or presumptuously des-
pised. Hence old age sets in at an earlier season, and becomes afflicted
with heavier infirmities. Frequently the appetite fails, the powers of


176 General Principles of the American Practice

digestion and nutrition are impaired, the body shrinks, the mind be-
comes dejected, the stomach and bowels are disordered, sleep is inter-
rupted and unrefreshing, and in short, the whole constitution funda-
mentally shaken and debilitated.

These are the flow and the frequent consequences of bleeding. Others
in fact occur, which, though on the whole they are perhaps less destruc-
tive, are however more painful, and better distinguished.

Too great a fulness of blood predisposes the constitution to a world
of disorders. Inflammatory fever, and external inflammation, the phren-
sy, the pleurisy and the quinsy, rheumatism, haemorrhage, &c. are fre-
quently the disorders of a sanguine habit, depending greatly on the ple-
thoric state. Physicians likewise are perfectly agreed, that too great a
quantity of blood, increasing irritability, has a strong tendency to ex-
cite, in habits where the predisposition to such disorders exists, convul-
sions, St. Vitus' dance, epilepsy, and hysteric fits; complaints which
otherwise might never have made their appearance. We may further
add, pains of the head, vertigo, night-mare, often the forerunners of apo-
plexy and palsy, which are justly ranked among the unhappy effects of
plethora. Habitual blood-letting tends indeed particularly to bring on
apoplectic and paralytic complaints. The morbid habit, acquiring
strength by repetition, produces its fullest and most trying effects in ad-
vanced age, when venous plethora occurs ; and when the veins of the
head, in old people, are particularly subject to rupture, and the conse-
quent effusion of blood, far the most frequent and fatal cause of apo-
plexy.

Thus much, by way of example, to showthe injurious effects of bleeding.
It has been proved, that habitual artificial discharges of blood, instead
of diminishing, tend to produce plethora ; the pernicious consequences
of which, on the human constitution, have been briefly enumerated.

Some may object to this reasoning, that, in many instances of habi-
tual blood-letting, the effects here mentioned have not followed; and that,
where they have other causes more powerful, have principally produced
them. We answer, that such argument is inconclusive in itself, and fo-
reign to the present subject. Not uncommonly the slighter effects of
blood-letting are inaccurately overlooked, or ignorantly neglected. But,
where that is not the case, it may be observed, that particular causes of
disease, when not alone completely efficient, are often applied without in-
ducing any morbid effect. Hard would be the fate of mankind, were every
species of contagion to infect every person to which it might be applied.
To argue, that habitual bleedings are no cause of apoplexy, because apo-
plexy is not constantly induced, is just as rational as to deny the very power
of a pestilential contagion, because it has been applied to thousands
without exciting the pestilential fever. To produce a disease, two par-
ticulars in general are requisite; first, the predisposition of the body;
secondly, the application of the exciting cause. Without the predispo-
sition we are often exposed with impunity to otherwise very active causes
of disease; and, without the application of the cause, the predisposition
may continue with us through life without inconvenience. With regard
to the latter part of the objection, that other cases, more powerful, act-
ing in conjunction with habitual blood-letting, may probably have produ-


oj Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 177

ced the effects which have heen enumerated, it is evidently foreign to the
purpose, i We grant that full living, and the neglect of exercise, may very
powerfully assist in exciting the consequences of plethora. It is believed too ,
that there are men who would rather submit to be bled even once a month,
with the privilege, in the mean time, of indulging their vitiated appetite at
large, and of enjoying the pleasures of ease, than by living a temperate
active life, possess the most perfect state of health, the free gift of heaven,
independent of the assistance of art. Yet the argument, just advanced,
appears still decisive, that habitual blood-letting often produces a san-
guine fulness of the vascular system, liable to be followed with perni-
cious effects, and is therefore, absurd, and highly detrimental to
health.

The following are the observations of the surgeon of the western re-
giment of Kentish militia, England, on the effects of blood-letting. They
plainly prove the inutility and absurdity of bleeding for the " cure of
any disease with which we are acquainted." His language ought to be
written in letters of gold. He remarks,

I have been upwards of six years surgeon of the western regiment of
Kentish militia, during which time our number of sick has never been
inconsiderable ; whereby much opportunity of practice has been afforded
me. I have been in the habit of keeping a journal of the different cases
as they occurred, wherein I carefully noted every symptom of which tho
patient complained, the various remedies exhibited, the time when, and
with what view given. I also marked every change that took place in
the course of a disease, and the effect of the medicine made use of; and
lastly, my own opinion of the method of cure which I adopted. In the
course of my practice, I have endeavoured, on every occasion, to de-
termine the justness of preconceived theories by experience, and on every
subject to think for myself, uninfluenced by the tenets of schools, or the
opinions of others. The prevalence of any mode of practice is cer-
tainly not a clear proof of its beins; useful, nor is it a sufficient recom-
mendation that it may be practised with safety. If it is not evidently
beneficial it ought to be laid aside. In this light, I consider the custom
of bleeding, as a means of cure, in febrile and other diseases, which I
have no hesitation in asserting, is not necessary in any complaint with
which we are acquainted. If we grant that any deviation from the
healthy state denotes debility, either general or partial, surely what-
ever has a tendency to debilitate further, it is reasonable to suppose,
ought to be carefully avoided. It certainly cannot be denied that in
cveiy disease wherein bleeding has been used, complete recovery has
been protracted, owing to the debility thereby occasioned. We are di-
rected to use blood-letting to lessen irritability, to take off the phlogistic
diathesis, to deplenish the blood vessels, and to prevent inflammation. I
know by experience that these indications can be fulfilled much better
with less danger by other means. Though the ill effects of the loss of
blood, unless excessive, are seldom perceivable in youth, and yet they
rarely fail of being felt before the age of forty-five. People who have
been often bled when young, about this period of life, begin to be af-
flicted with chronic pains. They recover very slowly from fits of ill-
ness, and are very liable to febrile paroxysms, and a variety of other

Vol. I. 23


178 General Principles of the American Practice

disorders. I have rarely been deceived in my conjectures respecting
patients of this description, when I have met with them. The cases
mentioned by Dr. Denman, shows that it does not prevent inflammation
or abortion ; nor is it proved that by taking away blood we lessen the
diameter of the blood vessels, as we find that six ounces from a large
orifice has a greater effect than twenty from a small one.


SECTION II-

DR. VAUGHAN's CASE OP DEATH OCCASIONED BY BLEEDING. PROM THE

LONDON MEDICAL AND PHYSICAL JOURNAL.

JMr. Charles Green, saddler, in North Fleet-street, a man about thir-
ty-five years old, athletic and convivial, was bled on Sunday in the arm.
The wound in the vein was very large, and the discharge of blood from
it was profuse, quick, and difficult to be stopped. When stopped, how-
ever, the arm was kept quiet, and no pain was felt in it all the next day,
nor indeed till Tuesday evening. At this time a pain was felt at the
wound, particularly below, extending from it as high as the middle of
the arm. The pain increasing, Mr. Green soon began to experience
some pain in the head, and some confusion of thought, which, together
with extreme anxiety, restlessness, shortness of breath, and frequent ri-
gours, made him declare to his wife his apprehension that his having
been bled would presently cost him his life. A surgeon was sent for on
Wednesday. On Friday, by twelve o'clock, when I saw Mr. Green
again, the tumour of his arm had totally subsided, and there were evi-
dent marks of inflammation from the bend of the arm to the axilla. But
alas! though Mr. Jones had, in my absence, applied sinapisms to the feet
with a view to relieve the head, yet the disease which had a regular time
of appearing and ending, went on with such celerity and increase, that
Mr. Green died this very day (Friday) in less than three hours after I
left him.

Dr. John Pulhfs Observations on the Effects of Bleeding, in relation
to the above case.

There are evil symptoms following the use of the lancet not depend-
ing on the action of any morbid poison; not resting on the unscientific
conduct of the operation; but owing their appearance to a peculiarity
(call it irritability if you please) of constitution. Sometimes an abscess
forms in a cellular membrane around the puncture from the lancet, which
commonly approaches to the size of a walnut; and, if the habit be very
bad, the inflammation will extend far around, and a considerable slough-
ing of the parts may be the consequence; insomuch as to render the re-
moval of the limb a matter of necessity. And even after amputation,
the stump will, in all probability, assume the like disposition to slough.
In either case the symptoms of irritation may be great enough to destroy
life. When the vein is disposed to inflammation, much pain is felt af-
ter bleeding, and shortly aronnd the punctured part appears a redness


of Mediant , and Indications of Cure. 179

and swelling, which soon extends along the arm both ahove and below
the elbow. The arm feels knotty, and pain is given on the touch. The
inflammation and swelling sometimes extend to the breast. The accom-
panying symptoms of irritation are always great; sometimes producing
delirium, and even the death of the patient. It is said that horses after
bleeding are not unfrequently attacked with this affection of the brain.
On dissection pus has been found in the vein, and even in the heart. It
has been imagined that the inflammation has been induced by the exter-
nal orifice not being effectually closed. But this idea is by no means correct


SECTION ID

BLEEDING IN PLEURISY. FROM THE MEDICAL REFORMER.

I am perfectly satisfied that thef e is no necessity of bleeding scarcely
in any case. A few days ago I was called to a patient labouring under
a violent attack of the pleurisy. Almost every practitioner, however
averse to blood-letting in general, recommends it in this disease. As
soon as I examined the person, he requested me to bleed him, and give
a dose of mercury and rhubarb, as a certain physician always was in the
custom of doing in this complaint. I intimated to him that nothing was
more common than for physicians to disagree, and hoped that he would
abide by my directions. I, in the first place, ordered a decoction, which
produced a most copious perspiration. This was about four o'clock, P.M.
Early the next morning a vegetable purgative was administered. I called
to see him on the same day about twelve o'clock, when I found the in-
flammation and cough had subsided; the pain in his side, which was very
acute, entirely gone, and all the symptoms of the disorder, which was
violent in the extreme, (insomuch that his friends despaired of his life)
abated. I asked him how he felt? He answered, I am well. In the
morning he was not able to articulate a single sentence. Had this person
been treated according to the present system of depletion, and had his
constitution been vigorous enough to have resisted the force of his dis-
order, together with the dangerous treatment, he must, in all probabili-
ty, have been confined to his bed for the space of three months ; instead
of which, in four days he was able to attend to his ordinary business.
Did physicians know the number of people killed by bleeding, I am
persuaded they would abolish such an irrational practice. It always
endangers the life of a person, and never fails to aggravate his disorder;
and if so fortunate as to recover, he experiences a train of evil conse-
quences through life.

The blood is properly called the vital fluid, and the life of a person
is said to be in the blood. We know that just in proportion to the loss
of this substance is our vigour and strength taken from us. When
taken from the system by accident, or the lancet, it is succeeded by
great prostration of strength, and a derangement of all the func-
tions of the body. These effects are invariably, in a greater or
less degree, consequent on bleeding. Is it not then reasonable to


180 General Principled of the American Practice

suppose, that what will debilitate the strongest constitution in a state of
health, will be attended with the most serious evils, when applied to a
person labouring under any malady 1 Is it not like throwing spirits on
a fire to extinguish it? But, says one, we must deplete the system, emp-
ty the blood vessels, and take away the strength to arrest the disorder.
In other words, we must make the patient worse, before we can make
him better.

This argument shows how ignorant medical men are of the animal
eeonomy, and the indications, and cure of diseases. No system could
be invented, better calculated to counteract the healthy efforts of nature.
Bleeding is immediately resorted to in all inflammatory complaints. Did
practitioners know the nature and design of inflammation, their treat-
ment would be different. In fever, it is produced by an increased ac-
tion of the heart and arteries to expel acrid and noxious humours, and
should be promoted until the irritating matter is dislodged from the sys-
tem. This should be effected in general by inducing a copious perspi-
ration; to produce which, a preternatural degree of heat or inflamma-
tion must be excited by internal remedies. Fever is nothing more nor
less than a wholesome and salutary effort of nature to throw off some
morbific matter, and therefore every means to lessen this indication
proves injurious. Bleeding, in consequence of the debility it produces,
prevents such indication from being fulfilled.

I have now a London periodical publication before me, in which the
editor laments, that we have no better means to subdue inflammation
than by bleeding. He remarks,

" Our most valued remedies against inflammation are but ill adapted
for curing that state of disease. They do not act directly on the dis-
eased part; the action is only indirect; therefore it is imperfect.

Bleeding, the best of them, is in this predicament. The direct ac-
tion of bleeding is only to lessen the quantity of blood. Now, suppose,
as often happens, that a person is apparently well to day, and he is taken
ill with an inflammation of the lungs to-morrow ; in such a case, it will
perhaps be necessary to take away several pounds of blood from the
patient, and yet, the quantity of blood in his body must have been
much the same just before the attack when the person was in good
health, as it was afterward when the disease had commenced. The
bleeding therefore cannot be employed to lessen the quantity of blood-
Some other reason must exist.

The truth is, that lessening the quantity of blood is the best mode
we know of, to control that ebullition of the circulation which forms the
important feature of the inflammatory state. But, it is evident that
this action of bleeding on the disease is only an indirect action; and it
is moreover true, that it is positively injurious to the constitution to take
away so large a quantity of the vital fluid as the blood is very pro-
perly called."

I was called a few days ago, to see a lady who had been bled within
a few months seventeen times, for some inconsiderable complaint. —
The last blood drawn was as transparent and limpid as water. She was
so far exhausted as to be unable to walk; she was reduced to a state of
misery. Her pulse languid ; her countenance ghastly ; her extremities


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 181

swollen; and evident symptoms of approaching dissolution. I might
cite scores of cases, in which people have either lost their health or
lives in the same manner. In pneumonia, or inflammation of the lungs,
blood-letting is practised without reason or mercy. Again and again
the patient is bled, till his strength is completely exhausted, when a
free perspiration and other means would afford immediate relief without
destroying the constitutional stamina.

Dr. Sandwich, an English surgeon, has written a treatise recommen-
ding in the highest terms, the most copious depletions. He informs us,
that in every species of inflammation it is necessary " to bleed in quick
succession ;" and that unless we speedily repeat our bleedings, we of-
ten actually increase the violence of the disease, and convert what was
mere congestion into positive inflammation. He indeed, lays down
the following position, as a practical maxim ; " whenever an inflamma-
tion is not cured by the first bleeding, the operation should be repeated
every two, four, or six hours, until it is."

Dr. S. presents a case in point, viz. of pneumonia, in which thirty
ounces of blood were first taken. This was at twelve o'clock on the
28th of March. At eight o'clock thirty leeches were applied to the
affected side. At six the next day, twenty ounces more of blood were
taken; in the evening, sixty small leeches were applied to the side.
On the third day, at six, the pulse being 110, twenty ounces of blood
were taken, and a physician was sent for. »The relief obtained by
the bleeding was not at this time decisive. The blood still showed no
size; nevertheless I was certain," says Dr. S. "the disease was pneu-
monia," and anxiously pressed another bleeding, which was overruled.
Another physician was accordingly sent for; but, in consequence of a
difference of opinion between the two, the patient was not again bled
till the afternoon of the 2d of April, " when twenty-two ounces of
blood were abstracted, with decided relief and syncope." After this
there was a suspension of active measures, until the 6th, when inflam-
mation, evidently to Dr. S. and one of the attending physicians, still
existing in the pericardium, the patient was again "bled, usque ad de-
fiffiiium, (fifty ounces,) and was in a state verging on syncope for sev-
eral hours." Early in the morning on the 7th, twelve ounces more
were abstracted ; and during the three following days the system was
in a state of torpor. On the 11th, in the evening there was a relapse.
In the morning (4 o'clock, A. M.) twelve leeches were applied, and
sixteen ounces of blood taken from the arm. Our author's next date is
20th ; but he speaks of this as of a day immediately succeeding the
11th; for he says, "a comfortable night was the result of these mea-
sures, (the measures of the 11th,) but the next morning we found it
necessary to abstract sixteen ounces more blood." On the 22d, thirty
ounces more were taken. On the 25th, twenty-four good leeches were
applied to the side. At eight o'clock on this day " the patient was al-
most exanimate, the face corpse-like, and the pulse vermicular and past
numeration." The debility the whole of the next day was extreme.
On the following morning the memory was gone, and the mind imbecile.*

' W«s eve* ; ' bullock more- completely bled to death 1


18*5 General Principles oj' the American Practice

Dr. Reid, in the Medical and Physical Journal, reports as follows:- —
The reporter of Finsbury Dispensary has, this last month, been im-
pressed more deeply than ever with the fatal folly of bleeding. A per-
son who, at a very advanced period of life, was sinking under the com-
bined operation of age and intemperance was advised, on account of a
difficulty of breathing, arising from general debility and a mutilation
of the pulmonary organs, to experience frequent and extravagant evac-
uations from the arm ; which of course, in a very short time, put a pe-
riod to his terrestrial existence.

If the employment of the lancet was abolished altogether, it would
perhaps, save annually a greater number of lives, than in one year, the
sword has ever destroyed. Medical men are sometimes apt to consi-
der themselves, and are generally regarded by others, as insignificant
and inefficient unless they are doing something; that is, either perform-
ing some painful operation, or administering some powerful remedy.
Whereas the fact is, that in no inconsiderable proportion of cases tho
best thing that can be done is to let the patient alone.

An inflammatory fever, or a habit indicating excess of general ex-
citement, in this enervated age very rarely occurs ; and local inflam-
mation, such as acute rheumatism, gout, or quinzy, will seldom, with
impunity, admit the opening of a vein. In the last disease, the writer
has had more especial reason to entertain this opinion, in which he is
confirmed by the authority of a man, celebrated as a philosopher, al-
though not a member of the medical profession. " Ah, these accursed
physicians ! they will certainly kill her with their blood-lettings. I
have been myself extremely subject to the quinzy, and have invariably
found that bleeding increased its violence ; when, on the other hand, I
contented myself with using a gargle, and putting my feet in warm wa-
ter, generally found myself well the following day-"

How absurd, to take away any part of that fluid which conduces most
essentially and immediately to the vigour and support of the constitu-
tion.

Dr. Wbyth relates a case which proved fatal in consequence of bleed-
ing. A delicate or nervous girl, having chilled herself at the return of
a critical period, was next morning at four o'clock, seized with stupor,
and difficulty of speaking or movinjr. She was soon after bled and
blistered. At eight o'clock she could neither speak nor swallow, had
a hiccough, and was pale and cold, though her pulse and breathing
were natural. Besides taking medicines, she was now bled again, and
a third time in the afternoon, and died at ten o'clock ; eighteen hours
after her seizure. No one can doubt for a moment but that this lady
was killed by her physician.

The reporter was called up last evening suddenly, to a patient la-
bouring under inflammation of the stomach. An evacuation of blood,
which exaggerates that complaint by inducing debility, was abandoned.
I administered a purgative, in the form of an emana, which afforded
relief not lomr after it was civen. Two persons were this day slain in
this neighbourhood by the lancet, and if was expected that another
would soon share the same fate. Well, indeed, might this philosopher
exclaim. "Ah, these accursed physicians!"


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 183

If one single man can do so much mischief with this instrument, the
lancet, what mischief is done throughout the world by thousands of
others ! ,

Dr. James Mann, who was Hospital Surgeon to the army of the
United States, in the years 1812, 1813, and 1814, relates the following
case: — He says " a man at Rochester was bled eight ounces, and with-
in twenty-four hours took one hundred grains of mercury, one hun-
dred grains of jalap, two ounces of castor-oil, and four ounces of salts.
He adds, " this man died suffocated while walking his room."


SECTION IV.

REMARKS ON BLEEDING, BY DK. ROSS.

Rush says, in his Account of the Yellow-Fever of 1793, page 275,
" As a proof that I did not draw one ounce of blood too much, it will only
be necessary to add, that haemorrhages frequently occurred after a third,
a fourth, and, in one instance, after a sixth bleeding had been used."
To this statement a Scotch physician, who was travelling through the
United States, and who happened to be then at Philadelphia, made the
following reply, by which the reader will be fully convinced, that the
spontaneous haemorrhage, in place of being prevented, is produced, by
copious bleeding, and that Rush's proof of the efficacy of his remedy,
is, on the contrary, a proof of its mortal effects.

In the list of misfortunes brought upon the city of Philadelphia by
the prevailing epidemic, must be included the degradation of its med-
ical character. Previous to the appearance of this formidable disease,
the physicians of Philadelphia were esteemed the most eminent on the
continent of America; they have since sunk from that state of exalta-
tion to a condition bordering on contempt, in consequence of the rash
practice and absurd publications of some of their body, and the inju-
dicious silence of others. I do not mean to say, that every silly paper
should have received a regular answer : arguments evidently contemp-
tible refute themselves. But it sometimes happens, that arguments suf-
ficiently specious to impose upon readers of sound understanding, who
are unacquainted with the nature of the anmal economy, are brought
forward for the purpose of supporting a very dangerous practice. In
such a case, it is the duty of professional men, who are better informed,
to expose the fallacy of such reasoning, that the dangerous tendency of
the doctrines attempted to be established by it may be distinctly per-
ceived.

Those observations are meant to apply particularly to an argument
which has been triumphantly employed by the phlebotomists, both in
writing and conversation, and very ostentatiously displayed by Dr.
Caldwell, in his treatise, dated the 10th of October.

It is confidently asserted, that the spontaneous haemorrhages, which
frequently occur in malignant fevers, are solely occasioned by the omis-
sion of copious blood-letting; and as these excessive haemorrhages ap-


184 General Principles of the American JPractu <

pear in many cases to be the immediate cause of the death of the pu-
tient, we are told this fatal termination would have been prevented, if
blood had been freely drawn at any preceding period of the disease.

This reasoning is so specious, that, in the minds of all those readers
who are unacquainted with the anatomy and pathology of the human
body, it must be decisive.

To detect the fallacy of this reasoning, it will be necessary to examine
critically the facts upon which it is founded, and then to make a few
observations upon the conclusions that have been drawn by the phlebo-
tomist, from those facts, in support of a practice replete with danger.

If those who employ this reasoning, mean that, provided the vessels
be completely drained of their blood, there will be no risk of spontane-
ous haemorrhage, we admit the trutfa of the observation. For conjurors
tell us, where nothing is, nothing can come out ; and it hardly requires
a man to be a conjurer to give us that information. But, if they mean
to say, such a quantity of blood as may be drawn without producing a
dangerous degree of debility in the patient, being taken away in the early
part of the disease, or at any time preceding the spontaneous haemorr-
hage, will prevent that haemorrhage from taking place, it follows, that
it is caused by the vascular system being overloaded, insomuch that the
increased action of the vessels bursts a passage for the superabundant
blood, and nature does too late, what ought to have been earlier per-
formed by the doctor. Hence it follows, that spontaneous haemorrhages,
in malignant diseases, must be most likely to occur when the vessels are
fullest, and the vascular action most violent.

But is this really the case? Does spontaneous haemorrhage most fre-
quently occur at the commencement of malignant diseases, when the
vessels are fullest, and the action most violent; or at their close, when
the vessels are comparatively empty, and the vigor of the system ex-
hausted?

Let us inquire what happens in a very formidable disease, the causus
of Hippocrates, better known at Philadelphia by a much-dreaded name,
the yellow fever of the West Indies. This complain commences with
a febrile state of excessive ardour and violence, which continues gen-
erally from sixty to eighty hours, when the symptoms of violent action
rather suddenly ceases, and extreme debility marks the remainder of
the disease.

I will ask Dr. Caldwell, and those who think as he does, whether,
agreeably to their system, spontaneous haemorrhages ought not more
frequently to occur at the commencement, during the ardent state of
this disease, when the vessels are fullest, than during the quiescent
state, when the vigour of the system is exhausted, and the mere ab-
straction of food, and waste by natural evacuations (supposing artifi-
cial ones to have been refrained from) must have reduced the vessels
to a state of comparative emptiness? As men of candour, they must
answer in the affirmative.

I will then ask whether spontaneous haemorrhage really happens of-
tener in the commencement than the close of the yellow- fever? As
men of veracity, they must answer in the negative ; nay, as men so-
licitous for the detection of error and the establishment of truth, they


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 185

will go farther in their answer than is required by my question. They
will admit, that, in every case of yellow-fever, they have seen, heard,
or read of, in which this symptom has occurred, it has never appeared
but in the last stage, or quiescent state. We must, therefore, cease to
look for its explanation in the superabundance of blood, and fix our at-
tention upon what appears to be its proximate cause, the extreme de-
bility prevails at the time of its occurrence.

That excessive weakness alone is sufficient to account for spontane-
ous haemorrhage,* will be completely proved by observing the frequen-
cy of its occurrence in a disease of pure debility, where there is no fe-
brile action, and where, from the situation of those subject to the dis-
order, at and preceding the commencement of it, there can be no rea-
son to suspect fulness of the vascular system. — I allude to the sea scur-
vey. This complaint afflicts not only seamen in long voyages, who
are obliged to subsist on aliment, the nutritive quality of which has
been diminished by time and the mode of preservation, but it also ag-
gravates the miseries of winter to the poorer inhabitants of northern
climates.

Among the symptoms of this shocking disease, none are so formida-
ble as spontaneous haemorrhages : they are apt to occur upon the slight-
est motion; sometimes the bleeding is external, sometimes internal, and
frequently fatal. So slowly does death advance, from any other cause,
in this disease, that should the wretched patient be so fortunate to es-
cape haemorrhage, he may linger out a miserable existence, till the con-
clusion of his voyage, or the approach of summer enables him to pro-
cure sustenance more nutritious ; and the danger of spontaneous hae-
morrhage is removed by his returning strength, though accompanied
by increased fulness of the blood vessels.

The blood does not escape, in these diseases, in consequence of vio-
lent action in the moving powers, or from any distention of the vas-
cular system by the quantity contained, but from inability in the ex-
treme vessels to resist the slightest impulse.

As I have shown the cause of the symptom, on which the strong ar-
gument of the phlebotomists is founded, to have been misunderstood,
it can hardly be necessary to say the conclusion they have drawn musf
be erroneous. Dr. Caldwell says, " in the occurrence of this spontane-
ous haemorrhage, nature undoubtedly gives an obvious hint which all
physicians should have discernment and sagacity sufficient to improve.
She would seem to tell them in the language of facts, that, if they ei-
thor through ignorance or inattention, neglect the evacuation of blood-
letting entirely, or use the lancet in a manner not sufficiently bold, she
must and will, by means of this discharge, make a final effort for the
safety of the patient herself; it is, however, to be greatly lamented
that she makes this effort in vain." Adopting the idea of Dr. Caldwell,
that nature is the physician's kind directress, her hint may be explained
more consistently with facts, by saying she intends, by her conduct,

What folly, then to induce a greater degree of debility in this, and other dis-
orders, by bleedj

Vol. I. 24


ISO General Principles of the American Practice

to caution the physician against bleeding in this disease, particularly at
a late period, by showing that it is always pejudicial, often fatal.


SECTION V.

OS THE MORBID EFFECTS OF THE LOSS OF BLOOD.

Dr. Marshall Hall, an English physician, has written a treatise
onthe "morbid and curative effects of loss of blood," in which he de-
monstrates the pernicious effects of blood-letting in a variety of diseases.
He states in his introductory remarks, that the subject has been by no
means understood until very recently. He has given many facts " to
afford, he states, not only an additional, but an unbiassed testimony to
the truth of the general principles laid down." In further discussing
this subject, I shall refer to this work, and make such extracts from it,
as are calculated to corroborate my views*

" The question of the morbid effects of loss of blood appears to me,"
says the author, " not to have sufficiently engaged the attention either
of the physiologist or of the practical physician; yet to both tiny offer
objects of inquiry of great interest and importance.

To the physiologist the phenomena of syncope, of reaction, and of
sinking, present innumerable objects for his consideration, of the very
deepest interest. The influence of syncope on the functions of the
brain, of the heart, of the capillary vessels, of the lungs, of the stom-
ach, &c. ; the phenomena of reaction, excessive or defective; but es-
pecially the phenomena and influence of the sinking state, or state of
failure and decline of the vital powers, in their relation both to the ner-
vous, the circulating, and the organic systems, severally present ob-
jects for our investigation, in a physiological point of view, at once of
much novelty and of the highest utility.

To the physician the symptoms of reaction, so similar to those of
some inflammatory affections of the head and of the heart, and the phe-
nomena of the sinking state, so similar to those of some other affections
of the head, and to those of some morbid affections within the chest and
abdomen, present subjects for his observation of the utmost moment in
actual practice. The diagnosis of these cases is most important; the
prognosis and the treatment alike depend upon it.

The morbid effects of loss of blood may be divided into the immedi-
ate and into the more remote. Besides syncope, from its slightest to its
fatal form, the former include delirium, convulsions, and coma. The
latter comprise the states of excessive reaction, of defective reaction,
of the gradual failure of the vital powers, and of more rapid or sudden
sinking or dissolution. The former, the different forms of syncope at
least, are comparatively well known. The latter appear to me not to
have received the degree of attention due to them. No author has de-
blood, under the various circumstances of repetition, or continued flow,
in which it may occur. And yet when we reflect how constantly blood-


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 187

letting is employed as a remedy, and how frequently haemorrhage oc-
curs as a disease, it must evidently be of great moment to trace the
symptoms and effects of a diminished quantity of blood upon the differ-
ent functions of the human body.

This inquiry possesses a still higher interest in a practical point of
view; for, as I shall immediately explain, some of the more obvious
and striking effects of loss of blood, or those of reaction, arc such as to
suggest the idea of increased power and energy of the system, and of
increased action in some of its organs, and to lead to an erroneous and
dangerous employment or repetition of tho lancet, when a directly op-
posite mode of treatment is required; while the state of actual but pro-
tracted sinking frequently resembles a state of oppression of the brain,
or of congestion of the lungs, so accurately, as to prompt the unwary
practitioner to a still more suddenly fatal use of the lancet.

There is another point of view in which the effects of loss of blood
become interesting in the practice of physic. I have already stated that
the symptoms of reaction from loss of blood, accurately resemble those
of power in the system, and of morbidly increased action of the ence-
phalon, and that from these causes the case is very apt to be mistaken,
and mistreated by the further abstraction of blood. The result of this
treatment is in itself again apt further to mislead us; for all the previous
symptoms are promptly and completely relieved ; and this relief, in its
turn, again suggests the renewed use of the lancet. In this manner the
last blood-letting may prove suddenly and unexpectedly fatal.

The next point for our consideration is the influence of the age, the
strength, and the varied constitution of the patient, in modifying the
effects of loss of blood. On these greatly depends the tendency to de-
fective or to excessive reaction, and to the state of sinking. So that
the effects do not correspond with the measure, or even a comparative
measure, of loss of blood, in different subjects. Sometimes there is no
reaction. At other times the reaction is excessive and even violent.
In a third instance we may be surprised by the sudden accession of a
sinking state, or even of the symptoms of immediate dissolution. I
think the whole of these varied and even opposite phenomena admits of
a ready explanation. In general it may be said that reaction is princi-
pally observed in connection with strength of system; in infancy and in
old age reaction is slight; exhaustion from loss of blood is then most apt
to shew itself in the form of failure or sinking of the vital powers.

But a question still more interesting even than this, is that of the in-
fluence of different diseases in inducing iuthe system, resistance or sus-
ceptibility in regard to the effects of loss of blood.

The next point for our consideration in the inquiry into the morbid
effects of loss of blood, is that of the organic changes induced during
the state of sinking. These are chiefly observed in the brain, in the
cavities of the serous membranes, in the bronchia, in the lungs, and hi
the track of the alimentary canal, under the forms of effusion, dropsy, &c.

We must consider, in the last place, the proper mode of treating the
effects of loss of blood, both constitutional and local.

The effects of loss of blood then require to be traced successively in
their relation both to the central and to the ultimate parts both of the


IS* General Principles of the American Practia

nervous and vascular systems. They involve questions of the deepest
interest in regard to the physiology, pathology, and treatment.' 1


SECTION VI.
ON THE IMMEDIATE EFFECTS OF LOSS OF BLOOD.

1. Syncope or Fainting.

The most common effects of the loss of blood, is syncope or fainting,
which appears to arise from the usual stimulus of blood of the brain be-
ing withdrawn, or a deficiency of nervous fluid or excitement. This
very fact is sufficient to show that abstracting any portion of the vital
fluid from the system, instead of acting as a remedial agent, does vio-
lence to nature, by deranging the animal economy. Every physician
who might be called to a person suffering under the ordinary effects of
from disease. A small quantity of blood abstracted, sometimes produ-
ces the most alarming and dangerous consequences ; but fainting is the
most usual effect that follows the use of the lancet. In ordinary syn-
cope from bleeding, the patient first experiences dizziness ; then a loss
of sensation; respiration is affected, being suspended until the painful
sensation produced rouses the patient to draw deep and repeated sighs ;
the heart and pulse beats slow and weak; the face and general surface
become pale, cool, and bedewed with perspiration; nausea or sickness
at the stomach, &c. On recovery, there is sometimes momentary de-
lirium.

In great haemorrhage, or excessive discharges of blood, these symp-
toms assume a more frightful aspect; the countenance becomes more
and more pale and sunk. Every symptom shows or denotes an impaired
state of the energies of the brain. The breathing becomes stentorious, and
at length affected by terrible gasping; pulse feeble, or imperceptible;
heat of the body departs; the extremities become colder and colder,
notwithstanding the application of external warmth; at length the
strength fails, and the patient sinks, gasps, and expires.

2. Convulsions.

The next most common effect of bleeding after fainting, is convulsion.
It occurs particularly in children, and in cases of the slow and exces-
sive loss of blood. In this case, also, the brain seems to be the prima-
ry seat of the injury, arising from exhaustion of its customary stimulus,
the blood. It is a matter of surprise that physiologists have never no-
ticed the connection or correspondent relation between the nervous and
the vascular system. Health cannot be preserved unless a regular and
uniform balance is maintained. It is in consequence of this balance
being lost, that the abstraction of blood is attended with such pernicious
effects. Dr. Hall relates the two following cases of convulsions:

1. " A physician, aged thirty-four, became affected with inflammation
of the larynx. He was bled freely on two successive mornings at his


o) Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 184J

own instance. In the afternoon of the second day, the disease being
unsubdued, he was bled a third time, placed in a rather inclined posi-
tion upon a sofa. The blood was allowed to flow until thirty-four oun-
ces were taken. He then suddenly fell upon the floor violently convul-
sed ; and he remained for some time afterwards in such a state of syn-
cope as to render his recovery very doubtful; being carried to bed,
however, and cordials being administered, he slowly recovered.

2. A similar case is given by Mr. Travers. This gentleman observes,
' Some patients cannot bear the loss of blood : it gives rise to prostra-
tion, attended with convulsions, in which the circulation fails so alarm-
ingly as to require watching for several hours and the repeated admin-
istration of stimulants to restore it. A very intelligent surgeon in the
neighbourhood of London, in bleeding a clergyman to the extent of
twenty ounces, was compelled to remain with him during the whole of
that day ; and notwithstanding frequent recourse to brandy, continued
long apprehensive for the patient's life. He represented the convul-
sions, which returned in paroxysms, as resembling the puerperal in
their severest form.' "

A writer states, "that the loss of blood in operations, though insuf-
ficient to create alarm for the patient's safety on that score, obviously
predisposes to the convulsions which sometimes prove fatal, especially
to children. I have known an infant die of convulsions on the day af-
ter the removal of a small mark upon the head."

Puerperal convulsions often arise from loss of blood. One of the
common causes of fits in children also arises in consequence of the loss
of blood. By the experiments of Dr. Kelly upon dogs and sheep, fits
or convulsions were found to be a frequent consequence of exhaustion
arising from the loss of blood.

3. Delirium.

Delirium occurs as an immediate, and mania as a remote effect of the
loss of blood.

The following case illustrates this fact. A young man, aged thirty,
had lost much blood from the arm and by leeches; and under the ope-
ration of an active purgative, fell into complete syncope or fainting. He
was found perfectly colourless and senseless, and affected with rattling
in breathing. He made a convulsive effort to expectorate, and the blood
rushed into his cheeks. He then began to recover, opened his eyes, and
complained of deafness; chills followed; fever; constant delirium; numb-
ness of the feet and legs, &.c. He finally, however, recovered.

A person fell and hurt his back. For four days in succession he was
bled, followed by faintness, sickness and retching, with much affection
of the head; paleness; sighing; hurrying alarm of mind; extraordinary
noise and visions, with delirium, which finally destroyed the patient.

Convulsion and delirium combined. Mrs. miscarried on the

third month of pregnancy. There was much hemorrhage; she turn-
ed pale, and nearly fainted ; became affected with convulsion and de-
lirium.

Delirium sometimes occurs in certain habits from the loss of oven a
small quantity of blood.


190 General Principles of the American Practia

4. Coma or Lethargy.

A comatoze state is often followed by blood-letting, which is so near-
ly allied to apoplexy, that it is difficult to discriminate between the two
diseases. It appears very often in infants and children.

Mr. C. Bell observes, " when a man who has cut his throat is brought
into the hospital, he is in a state very much resembling that which some
sible, he is cold, pale, taciturn, and very often, although such men are
desirous of living, they sink within twenty-four hours. This appears
at first to proceed from a strong impression on the mind; that is, I be-
lieve, the consequence of loss of blood, and the shock thus given to their
powers of life."

5. Of Sudden Death from the loss of Blood.

Sometimes the loss of blood suddenly proves fatal. One of our most
distinguished citizens, it is stated, lost his life the other day, by a single
bleeding.

A case of this kind is mentioned in the lancet. A person received a
slight injury, for which he was first bled eighteen ounces, and at noon
twenty ounces more were taken. Next day the pulse was ninety, full,
and rather jerking. Eighteen ounces more were taken, and at night the
same quantity. Next day he was ordered to be bled eighteen ounces
more. In two hours afterwards, another physician was called in con-
sultation; when twenty ounces of blood more were drawn, making in
all one hundred and twelve ounces, in this short space of time. After
the last bleeding, the pulse became a mere flutter, and the man only
survived a few hours. On a post mortem examination, the vessels about
the heart were quite empty ; the brain very pale ; almost colourless ; the
liver was also of a very light colour.

I shall here give in illustration, the observations on the medical treat-
ment of general Washington's last illness, by John Reid, M. D., physi-
cian to the Finsbury English Dispensary, and professor of the theory and
practice of physic.

In reading the official report of the death of general Washington, as
stated in the newspapers, &c. I should imagine there were few medi-
cal persons who did not feel astonishment at the extraordinary manner
in which that great man was treated by his physicians, during his last
and fatal indisposition.

Some time in the night of the 13th of December, it is said, the
general was seized by a disease called the cynanche trachealis, (croup).

During the same night he sent for a bleeder, who took from him twelve
or fourteen ounces of blood.

Next morning a physician was sent for, who arrived at Mount Ver-
non, at eleven o'clock ; when, imagining danger in the case, he advised
the calling of two consulting physicians.

In the interval, however, he thought proper to employ, in spite of
the twelve ounces that had already been expended, two copious bleed-
ings. Now when we consider that these are called copious, and the
other is not noticed as such, and all indifference with which a future,


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 191

most copious bleeding is afterward mentioned, we may presume that
each of these was twenty-five or twenty ounces at least.

After this, " two moderate doses of calomel were administered." I
know not exactly, what an American moderate dose of calomel may be,
but if it is as fair to presume, it be in proportion to the bleedings, we
may conclude that it was at least very considerable.

Upon the arrival of the first consulting physician, it was agreed that
as there were no signs of accumulation in the bronchial vessels of the
lungs they should try another bleeding.

Now, this appears to be perfectly inexplicable. As there were, at
present, no signs of accumulation in the bronchial vessels of the lungs,
they were driven to another bleeding. Hence it will be seen, that this
last bleeding was to produce an accumulation in the bronchial vessels of
the lungs. There was great difficulty of breathing, great inflammation ;
but as there was as yet no accumulation in the lungs, they were deter-
mined to induce that also, and as a likely means of inducing it, had re-
course to the most extravagant effusion of blood. This is not an unfair
interpretation of their words; but it could not have been their real mean-
ing: their real meaning, it is impossible to discover. In addition to all
their previous venesections, thirty-two ounces are now drawn ! The me-
dical reader will not be surprised to find that this was unattended by any
apparent alleviation of the disease.

In the next place, vapours of vinegar and water are frequently inhaled.
Two doses of calomel were already given, but this is not deemed suffi-
cient, ten grains of calomel are added ; nor is even this sufficient. Re-
peated doses of emetic tartar, amounting in all to five or six grains are
now administered. It is said, the powers of life now seemed to yield, to
the force of the disorder. To many, it may appear that the yielding of
the vital principle, in these circumstances, was not altogether owing to
the force of the disorder.

The patient, lying in this feeble and nearly exhausted state, is to be
still farther tormented. Blisters were next applied to his extremities,
together with a cataplasm of bran and vinegar to his throat.

It is observed that speaking, which was painful from the beginning,
now became scarcely practicable. When we reflect upon the extreme
weakness, to which the patient must, by this time, have been reduced,
and that he had both a blister and cataplasm of bran and vinegar to his
throat, can we wonder that speaking would be scarcely practicable !
respiration grew more and more contracted and imperfect, until after
eleven o'clock on Saturday night, when he expired without a struggle.

Think of a man being, within the brief space of little more than twelve
hours, deprived of eighty or ninety ounces of blood; afterward swallow-
ing two moderate American doses of calomel, which were accompanied
by an injection; then five grains of calomel and five or six grains of
emetic tartar; vapours of vinegar and water frequently inhaled; blis-
ters applied to his extremities; a cataplasm of bran and vinegar applied
to his throat, upon which a blister had already been fixed ; is it surpris-
ing that when thus treated, the afflicted general, after various ineffectual
struggles for utterance, at length articulated a desire that he might be al-
lowed to dio without interruption !


192 General Principles of the American Practice

To have resisted the fatal operation of such herculean remedies, one
would imagine, that this venerable old man ought, at least to have re-
tained the vigour of his earliest youth. \

6. Of Exhaustion with Excessive Reaction.

Exhaustion from blood-letting may assume several different charac-
ters. It may be attended with excessive or defective reaction, or with
actual sinking of the vital powers, causing delirium or lethargy. When
there has been great loss of blood, or repeated blood-lettings, the pulse x
instead of being slow and feeble, acquires a morbid frequency j a throb-
bing beat, and in some cases, there is excessive reaction.

It is from this kind of pulse, that physicians are so frequently deceiv-
ed. They bleed and bleed because the pulse is tense and full, when
in reality this very fulness is occasioned by the bleeding ; thousands are
bled to death in consequence of these erroneous views.

The reaction that follows bleeding, is sometimes followed by symp-
toms still more severe. The brain becomes very much affected; great
intolerance of light and sound ; pain in the head and delirium ; the ac-
tion of the heart and arteries are morbidly increased ; great palpitation ;
throbbings of the carotid arteries ; the patient is greatly alarmed, and
impressed with the feeling of approaching dissolution ; fainting ; the
pulse will sometimes rise from 100 to 130, with a bounding of the arte-
ry; respiration is frequent and hurried, attended with panting and s.gh-
ing; restlessness; heat of the skin; sudden dissolution has sometimes
occurred upon the slightest exertion.

"I was about," says a physician, "to bleed in such a case, but for-
tunately" observes he, " for my patient and for myself, the repugnance
of the patient to general bleeding, prevented me from using the lancet,
and so saved her life."

Dr. Cooke relates a case which corroborates the doctrine here main-
tained. He says, " After uterine haemorrhage, and also after copious
depletion on account of pulmonary and other inflammations, I have fre-
quently observed the symptoms of cerebral congestion: and which has
generally appeared to arise from the excitement occasioned by some
mental effort, though occasionally it has arisen without an evident cause.
Whilst the other parts of the body appear comparatively bloodless, the
vessels of the head throb violently ; there is severe pain ; confusion of
intellect, semetimes to such a degree as to threaten delirium ; the pulse
at the wrist is usually small and vibrating, and the countenance distres-
sed. When I first observed these symptoms I was led to abstract blood,
from an apprehension of phrenitis : but I did harm ; for if the urgency
of symptoms was diminished, the susceptibility to a recurrence was in-
creased, and restoration to health was protracted. The liability to this
form of cerebral plethora has appeared to me to be proportionate to the
preceding haemorrhage, and the consequent debility. If in this condi-
tion an intrusive visitor be admitted to converse, though but for a short
time, with the patient — or if the patient attempt to read, or in any other
way to employ the mental faculties beyond what is perfectly easy — or
if the mind be agitated, this state of the head will almost inevitably be
induced. It may. however, be brought on bv all those causes which


of Medicine, and Indications of din . 193

tend to destroy the equilibrium of circulation ; and none are more likely
in this condition of the patient, than noise in the room, deficiency oi
sleep, improper food, a constipated state of the bowels, or a morbid
state of the secretions into them. This susceptibility to local conges-
tion after excessive loss of blood, depends upon the want of that due
balance which, in a state of health, subsists between the nervous and
vascular systems.

A lady aged twenty-five had been frequently bled, on account of sy mp-
i.oms in the head, which had followed an injury. Considerable relief had
followed each bleeding, but the symptoms had soon returned so as to lead
to a repetition of the bleeding at short intervals, and this had been go-
ing on for several months. When I saw her she was stretched upon a
couch, her face of the most death-like paleness, or rather of the paleness
of a stucco figure, her pulse very rapid and as small as a thread, her
general weakness extreme. The mass of blood appeared to be redu-
ced to the lowest point that was compatible with life, but she still com-
plained of frequent head-ache, violent throbbing in the head, confusion
and giddiness. It was evident that evacuation could be carried no far-
ther, and in consultation with a very intelligent medical man who had
the charge of her, it was agreed as a last experiment, to make a trial
of the opposite system, nourishing diet and tonics. In a fortnight she
was restored to very tolerable health.

It would, perhaps, be difficult to offer any observations on the na-
ture and cause of excessive reaction: but it is plain that the state of
sinking involves a greatly impaired state of the functions of all the vi-
tal organs, and especially of the brain, from defective stimulus. The
tendency to dozing, the snoring and stertor, the imperfect respiration,
the impaired action of the sphincters, the defective action of the lungs,
and the accumulating of the secretions of the bronchia, the feeble and
hurried heat of the heart and pulse, the disordered state of the secre-
tions of the stomach and bowels, and flatulence, all denote an im-
paired condition of the nervous energy. The state of sinking may,
indeed, in certain points of view, be compared with the state of the
functions in apoplexy: and to the effects observed on abstracting the in-
fluence of the brain and spinal cord, or by dividing the eighth pair of
nerves, or by destroying the lower portion of the cord.

" Where bleeding has been carried to a great extent, symptoms fre-
quently occur which in reality arise from the loss of blood, but which
a superficial observer will be led to attribute to the injury itself, and
concerning which indeed it is sometimes difficult, even for the most
experienced surgeon, to pronounce in the first instance to which of
these two causes they are to be referred. Repeated copious blood-let-
ting is of itself adequate to produce a hardness of the pulse, which
we shall in vain endeavour to subdue, by persevering in the same sys-
tem of treatment. In many individuals it will produce head-ache and
confusion of mind, not very different from what the injury itself had
previously occasioned. These things may be observed especially in
i oung females who are disposed to hysteria, and whom I have often
known to suffer from a continued aggravation of such symptoms as I
covering immediately on the use of the lancet bcine: laid aside, and on

Vol J 2- r »


194 General Principles of the American Practice

their being allowed to take solid nourishment, with occasional doses of
carbonate of ammonia. Dr. Marshall Hall has published in the thir-
teenth volume of the Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, some excellent
practical observations on the effects of copious blood-letting, many of
which are applicable to the cases mentioned above."*

7. Of Sinking, or more Sudden Dissolution.

If the loss of blood be repeated still further, not only syncope, but
a state of sinking is induced; the effects of reaction are of course in
this case, permanently relieved, whilst a different series of phenomena,
sinking may either be spontaneous, or it may be the effect of a last
blood-letting, the state of syncope scarcely ceasing, no reaction follow-
ing, but the total though gradual failure of the vital powers.

When the last bleeding has been considerable, it has, in some cases,
been followed by the most dreadful gaspings and other convulsive mo-
tions, and death. It should be observed that between the most gradu-
al sinking and the most sudden dissolution, as the effects of blood-let-
ting, there is every intermediate shade, with the phenomena of which
it is of the utmost importance to be acquainted. These varied phe-
nomena may, I think, be collected from the observations which have
been made in this and the preceding sections. They are further illus-
trated by the following cases which exemplify the fatal effects of loss
of blood, as supervening more and less gradually upon the use of the
lancet.

Mrs. , aged thirty, had been effected with what appeared to be a

slight attack of influenza; she was seized with chills, and soon after-
wards the pains of labour came on and issued in delivery in about fif-
teen hours, at 9 o'clock, A. M. this was followed by much fever, the
countenance being flushed, the pulse frequent, and the breathing diffi-
cult with incessant cough; these symptoms increased towards evening
and in the night, and about forty ounces of blood were drawn from the
arm at two blood-lettings, and the next morning twelve leeches were
applied to the chest, with great relief. In the evening a blister was
applied. — The night was passed more comfortably ; she dosed a little
and was cheerful, and continued relieved in the morning. As a pre-
ventive against a relapse, however, three teacupsful of blood were
taken. The patient became faint during the flow of the blood, sank
from that time, and never again rallied ; she became extremely feeble,
and could scarcely articulate, and from being cheerful the day before,
was now impressed with the conviction of approaching dissolution, and
expressed herself as unable to recover from the last blood-letting. Du-
ring this day, Saturday, and during the two succeeding days there was
a state of extreme exhaustion, — and still a sense of load at the chest,
and pain of the side.

On the succeeding Tuesday the countenance was observed some-
times to flush to a deep scarlet, and then to become quite pallid, and a
profuse perspiration frequently ran down the face ; the pulse was ex-

' >Terlico-Cl)irurgical Transaction"*. Vol. xiv. pp. 381, 382.


af Medicine, and Indications of CW. 193

tremely frequent, and the pain severe on coughing ; there was no de-
'just like death.' During the four following days there was little obvi-
ous change; distressing faintings usually came on about two or three,
o'clock, P. M. On the Sunday, she became drowsy, and evidently
more sinking; this state continued to increase, and she died in the eve-
ning of the following day.

The last blood-letting, in the case just given, was obviously though
rather gradually fatal. In the present case, the fatal event supervened
immediately on the use of the lancet. Mrs. was of pale and sal-
low complexion and weakly constitution. Six days before her confine-
ment of her first child, she was awoke in the night by severe pain of the
head confined to one spot. This pain continued several hours, when

Mrs. applied to her medical man : she was completely relieved

by losing sixteen ounces of blood, followed by purgative medicine, and
she continued well. Mrs. 's labour occurred on the 1st of Septem-
ber, 1817, and was rather tedious, but natural, and she had no complaint
until the second day, when she experienced a second attack of pain in
the head, but less violent than the previous one. She was seen six hours
after this attack; she then complained of pain and beating of the head,
about the anterior part of the right parietal bone ; the skin was hot, and
the pulse frequent and strong. Sixteen ounces of blood were taken from
the arm, leeches were ordered to be applied to the temples, and an enema

was again visited, and it was deemed necessary to abstract more

blood: — six or eight ounces were therefore taken; faintishness was in-
duced, and the symptoms were abated.

On the succeeding morning, September 4th, the symptoms still re-
mained the same ; the surface was hot ; the bowels had been purged and
the evacuations were natural. The saline mixture was ordered. At
noon the symptoms remaining as before the purgative medicine was re-
peated and a blister was applied. In the evening, the evacuation of
the bowels was satisfactory, and the pain of the head was not severe,
but there was much beating and a rushing noise ; and there was restless-
ness, and a teasing, irritative cough. A draught with thirty drops of
the tinctura opii was administered.

On the morning of September 5th, Mrs. expressed herself as

being much better from having enjoyed comfortable sleep. The surface
was still hot, and the head still affected as before. In the evening, there
was a degree of tenderness in the region of the uterus. She dreaded,
the idea of being bled, from the faintishness she had before experienced
from it, and said it would certainly kill her. On the morning of the 6th,
the pain in the region of the uterus was relieved, the head was affected
as before, the window was kept open for want of air. In the evening

Mrs. complained of being faint and low. A mixture with camphor


On the 7th, the irritative cough again occurred; the pulse was fre-
quent, from one hundred and twenty to one hundred and thirty; and
the other symptoms remained unabated. A physician was consulted.
Sixteen ounces of blood were directed to lie taken from the arm: a


196 General Principles of the American Practice

grain of calomel was given every three hours, and the effervescing me-
dicine was ordered.

On the morning of the 8th, Mrs. appeared to be relieved in

every respect ; the heat of the surface, and the pain of the head were
diminished ; the blood presented the buffy coat. It was thought proper,
however, to abstract more blood. Four teacups full were taken; the
most dreadful fainting followed, with gasping, open mouth, a convulsive
action of the diaphragm, and in an hour or two death closed the scene.

The following case forwarded to me by a medical friend is not, I
think, unworthy of an insertion.

" A gentleman nearly seventy years of age, the subject of frequent
gouty paroxysms, whose constitution was broken down, and who was of
a pallid complexion, was suddenly seized with severe pain in the side,
hot skin, quick full pulse, and difficulty in breathing. A physician was
consulted, who recommended the abstraction of six ounces of blood.
The arm was tied up accordingly, the patient being in bed; before two
ounces were taken away his pulse sunk, and heavy perspiration came
on, with faintness. The patient was placed horizontally in bed, and it
was some length of time before his medical attendant deemed it prudent
to leave the house.

The blood taken away, manifested the usual character of inflamma-
tion, but the pain in the side was not removed. On the following morn-
ing he was again visited by his physician, who finding that the pain and
other symptoms detailed were not relieved, directed the bleeding to be
repeated to six ounces; this was again attempted, but before one ounce;
escaped, he became so alarmingly faint, that he fell back in the bed, the
circulation being suspended for a length of time, and his dissolution ex-
pected to take place. Stimuli of every description which could at the
moment be brought forward, were resorted to; after a considerable lapse
of time, the heart's action was feebly renewed, but its power was never
again restored; and the pain in his side was not relieved. From this
lime he progressively sank, and in a short time expired."

Dr. Rush, who was such a strenuous advocate for blood-letting, never
discovered his error, it appears, until he was afflicted with his last dis-
ease. He requested his attending physician to bleed him repeatedly,
and when he refused, it is stated that he introduced the lancet into his
arm, and extracted so much of the vital fluid, that he sunk under it. It
appears now for the first time he saw the delusion in which he had been
shrouded, all his life time.

Dr. Dewees mentions the case of a person who was so repeatedly
bled in a fever, that it induced such a state of debility and sinking, that
every stimulant administered availed nothing. He sunk and expired
like thousands of others, a victim to the lancet.

A middle aged man, who, for several years, had been an asthmatic,
applied to a medical man for advice. Symptoms, hoarseness and diffi-
culty of breathing, with frequent, bounding pulse. The physician
cordingly, about twenty ounces of blood were taken from his arm in a
sitting posture, the pulse continuing full and strong, when suddenly, said
lie. " I feel verv faint; do lav me down." He was now laid upon the


oj Medicine, and Indications of Cure. i\i7

iloor iu a horizontal position; cold water was sprinkled on his face, and
volatiles applied to his nostrils, when reaction took place; but complain-
ing of considerable debility, he was advised to lay an hour or two to re-
cruit; after which, he felt relieved, and walked a short distance to his
lodgings, but within ten days he expired.

I once bled a young lady in the arm for a suppression of the menses.
I had not taken more than half an ounce of blood, before she fainted,
and continued so long in a state of frightful syncope, that I was really
apprehensive that reaction never would take place. However, by sprink-
ling a few drops of cold water on her face, by the application of vola-
tiles to the nostrils, and the administration of hot brandy sling internally,
she recovered.

Another young lady in New-Haven, says the author of the above
cases, fainted immediately on the introduction of the lancet into her
arm.

A lady in this city was bled for a sick, or periodical head-ache. It
produced such a sinking and prostration, that it proved fatal in three
hours.

Each successive blood-letting, is of course attended with increased
risk. There is considerable danger where the reaction is strong; still
greater when it is feeble. A large blood-letting in such cases may bo
followed by sudden death. There is greater danger when fainting has
been several times induced, and when there is the least tendency to
1 want air. 1


SECTION VII.
EFFECTS OV THE LOSS OF BLOOD ON THE INTERNAL OR(.

It appears evident that debility arising from loss of blood, may lead
to effusion in the ventricles of the brain, and that such a state of ex-
haustion is no security against an attack of the apoplexy. Dr. Denman
relates a case, which shows conclusively that this is the fact. A patient
of his had suffered several years by hemorrhage from the uterus. After
passing a day without any unusual complaint, she went to bed in good
spirits, but was found next morning in a state of insensibility, &c. She
remained in this state about twenty-four hours, and died. Leave way
also given to inspect the body, which she often expressed a wish might
be done. About four ounces of blood were found in the ventricles of the
brain, containing serum or water. This extravasation was clearly the
immediate cause of her death, little as it might have been expected, on
account of the daily profuse discharge to which she had for so manv vears
been subject.

Dr. Hey in treating upon child bed iewv, relates a case which shows
that a loss of hlood causes congestion of the brain. She had been bled
several times, which did not reduce the pulse. After a few days she
died in a state of great anxiety and restlessness. The seat of the dis-
ease, appeared to be in the bead, evidently showing that there was
'ongestion and extravasation of the brain.


198 General Principles of the American Practice

Dr. S weedy relates another case which corroborates this fact. A la-
dy had lost much blood during the first months of pregnancy, which
caused palsy and delirium.

Dr. Hammond relates a case in point. A lady in confinement lost
about three pints of blood which produced faintness, head-ache, &c.
She was bled to twenty-four ounces, which also produced syncope, but
the head was not relieved. The bleeding was repeated, and carried
even to fainting. She lost twenty ounces, which produced convulsions.
She was much exhausted, the countenance was blenched to an ivory
whiteness. She revived and became more comfortable for a few days.
She was then attacked with extreme depression, the right arm and leg
paralyzed; speech much altered, and swallowing difficult; countenance
deathly, and the pulse feeble and scarcely perceptible ; all which shows
the injury done to the brain by the loss of its customary stimulus, by
which we see that the blood is the primum mobile or main spring, both
to the corporeal and mental organization; or in other words, is the
support of body and mind.

Dr. Travers mentions a case of inflammation of the lungs, in which a
stroke of palsy which destroyed the patient, took place in the very act
of bleeding. Permanent blindness also sometimes immediately occurs
from bleeding. Thousands of cases might be mentioned of a similar
nature.

The Lungs.

Physicians are not aware of the effect of the loss of blood upon the
lungs. It has the effect of subtracting the nervous energy almost the
same as if the eighth pair of nerves were divided.

Let a person apply his ear to a patient who has been freely bled for
inflammation of the lungs. He will find that their office and powers
become so far weakened and diminished, as to labour at every inspira-
tion. A peculiar rattle can be heard with or without the immediate ap-
plication of the ear.

The bronchial vessels first become clogged or loaded with mucus ; the
lungs become oedematous, and are no longer capable of decomposing
the air, and receiving the oxygen, or vital portion of it, so essential to
life. Ever since I commenced my practice, I have witnessed this fact,
the knowledge of which, has induced me to withhold the lancet in every
case of this kind, no matter how severe the attack, and I know not that
I have ever lost a single case in all my practice where I have been call-
ed within a reasonable time. Nothwithstanding this, some of my oppo-
nents have pronounced me presumptuous for not bleeding.

No one, however, can form an idea of the superiority bf our prac-
tice over that usually pursued by physicians, unless tested by actual
experience; the patient recovers in half the time, without that consti-
tutional injury which invariably arises from repeated blood-lettings.

It has been found that the lungs of those who have died of hemorr-
hage have been effected by swelling, effusions of lymph, adhesions, &c.

I have not room to enter fully into the effect of the loss of blood up-
on different parts of the system. Every one knows the tendency to effu-
sion into the cellular membrane. One half of the cases of dropsy, arises,
in my opinion, from the usp. of the lancot.


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure' 199

Typhus Fever.

A judicious practitioner informs me, that after bleeding, in most
diseases for a number of years, he abandoned it altogether, in conse-
quence of the inquiry that resulted from it. It often induced ty-
phoid symptoms.

Contusions, Injuries, $pc.

Many surgeons state that, as popular as bleeding is, it destroys the
restorative principle, or so far prevents the healing process, that the
patient cannot recover. One of the surgeons in the New-York Hos-
pital, now disclaims much against the lancet in injuries. — " Sometimes,"
he says, "you cannot obtain a particle of blood after a fall, and it is a
fortunate circumstance that you cannot, as life is saved by omitting it."
For hundreds of years it has been fashionably to bleed frecls after eve-
ry accident; but now, a new fashion is in vogue, viz. to wait an hour or
two before you bleed, or until reaction takes place. What the next
fashion in relation to this practice may be, time alone must decide; but
I sincerely hope that my maxim will be adopted, which is, after testing
its effects thoroughly upon the human system; seldom or never bleed.

I shall only give a few more hints on the effects of the loss of blood.
Dr. Hall states that there is a remarkable similarity between the ef-
fects of the loss of blood, and the state of bloodlessness in chlorosis or
obstruction of the menses. Both have a tendency to induce dropsy, ex-
travasation, and lastly of ending in a state of great prostration, or even
of sudden death. From which it is evident that the capillary and the
general circulation is similar in both complaints. The blood appears al-
most entirely to desert the surface, and to terminate in serum or water.


SECTION VIII.
MORBID EFFECTS OF BLEEDING IN INFANCY.

If physicians were aware of the morbid effects of bleeding in iu-
i'ancy, they would have recourse to it less frequently. The bare idea
of tying up the arms of infants, and abstracting a portion of the vital
fluid, has ever seemed to me not only unnatural but appalling. Be-
sides the immediate injurious effect which arises from loss of blood in
infancy, these are the best reasons to believe that very many complaints
are occasioned by it.

Dr. Hall, to whom we are indebted for much very interesting infor-
mation on this subject, states that of the whole number of fatal cases of dis-
ease in infancy, a great proportion occur from this inappropriate or un-
due application of exhausting remedies.

"This observation," says lie, "may have a salutary effect in checking
the ardour of many young practitioners, who are apt to think that if
they have only bled, and purged, and given calomel enough, they have
done their duty : when, in fact, in subduing a former, they have exci-


SMK) General Principles of the American Practice

ted a new disease, which they have not understood, and which has led
to the fatal result.

This question, and that of the effects oi exhaustion in infants and chil-
dren open a new field for investigation. Almost all our works on infantile
diseases are silent on the subject; and yet without an accurate knowl-
edge of it, I regard it as totally impossible that we should be prepared
to watch and treat the morbid affections of this young and tender age.
The subject must be taken up and investigated anew. All the affec-
tions which may arise from exhaustion, must be accurately observed,
distinguished from similar affections arising from other causes, and
traced back to their origin, and forward in relation to their remedies.
In this manner some hydrencephaloid, convulsive, and even croupy
affections will be viewed in a new aspect ; and we shall be preserved
from some painful dilemmas into which we should assuredly fall without,
this knowledge of the effects of exhaustion."

Bleeding, in dropsy of the head, and other complaints of children,
infallibly plunges the little patient into imminent, if not irretrievable
danger.

There is a complaint peculiar to infants which very nearly resem-
bles the dropsy of the head, and from which it is customary to bleed;
but which, like the latter disease, instead of being benefitted by any
kind of depletion, is only aggravated. An opposite course of treatment
is required, viz. stimulants.

Dr. Tweedy, Hall, Hemery, Gooch, and Abercrombie, have all
hinted at this disease.

The following case is given by Dr. Hall :

I was called a short time ago, to see a little girl, aged two years and
three quarters, who had laboured under an attack of influenza. The
affection of the chest had been severe and protracted, and sixteen leech-
es had been applied, besides the administration of other depletory mea-
sures, before it had subsided.

The symptoms of the affection of the chest were, however, subdued
at last; but the little patient was left extremely exhausted, and in this
state a new train of symptoms supervened, not less alarming, and
more puzzling, than the first. The child fell into a dozing state, and
lay with its eye-lids but half closed ; it moaned when any attempt was
made to rouse it; the eyes were unfixed on any external object, the
pupils were dilated, yet partially contractile on the influx of light; the
pulse was 140.

On withdrawing into an adjoining room, the medical gentleman whom
I had the pleasure of meeting, observed, "dropsy in the head has now
supervened, and we must administer calomel." I replied that 1 took
a different view of the case, — that it resembled hydrencephalus indeed,
but arose from exhaustion, and that brandy, not calomel, could alone
save the little patient's life. I referred to the history of the case for
sufficient sources of exhaustion; and to facts for the actual occurrence
of such cases in practice.

We administered brandy, directing thirty drops to be given every
two hours, with barley-water in the intervals, and a quarter of a pint
of milk twice in the twenty-four hours. The bowels were relieved by
magnesia and the warm water injection.


9J Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 2Ui

This plan of treatment lowered the number of the pulse, and grad-
ually diminished the severity of the other symptoms, and the patient
eventually recovered. Another case is related where a few leeches
were applied for inflammation of the head, and which, instead of af-
fording relief, brought on congestion, lethargy, &c. and which proved
fatal.

bleeding and blistering, if not calomel; the father asked him if he
said the father, 'apply to a physician who can.' He sent for Dr.
Downing, who treated him on the principle laid down in this work, and
it soon recovered.

"A little patient," says a writer, "was reduced to copious and re-
peated bleeding for croup. There supervened a state of irritability of
temper, so that, when greatly exhausted, it made great efforts t©
scratch, bite, and beat its attendants. This state of agitation continu-
ed until the powers of life were gradually»exhausted."

I might go on and speak of the effects of the loss of blood in inflam-
mation, and every other disease ; but the limits of this work will not
permit, and I must leave it for others hereafter further to enlarge upon,
and to illustrate.


SECTION IX
TREATMENT OP THE EFFECTS OF LOiSS OF BLOOD.

It is not my design in this place to treat much upon the curative ef«
fects of the loss of blood. This part of the subject is reserved for ano-
ther section of this work. I will, however, speak of the curative effects
in general.

1. Posture.
When fainting occurs, which is so common in bleeding, the patient
should be laid upon the floor, bed, or in a recumbent position, which
more readily admits a return of blood to the head and brain.

2. Stimulants.

Administer spirits or brandy, or which is better, ten drops of the
spirits of hartshorn in a little spirits of lavender.

3. Application of Water.
A small quantity of water may be dashed in the faee.

4. VolatUes.

Camphorated spirits, or hartshorn, may be applied to the nostrils
and face. If reaction does not take place soon, the feet and surface
may bo bathed in warm water.

5. All tight bandages should be removed.

Vol. J 26


202^ General Principles of the American Practice

6. Air.

Few persons should be permitted where the patient lays. The doors
or windows should be opened, that there may be a free current of air.

7. When the patient is recovered from fainting, a restorative course
of treatment must be instituted. Wine or wine bitters may be given,
and a very nutritious diet recommended.

8. Anodynes.

Where there is great irritability of the nervous system, exhaustion,
annes has an excellent effect.

9. Sinapisms.

Mustard plasters may be applied to the feet and to the nape of the

neck.

10. Laxatives.

The bowels must be kept. regular by aperient or laxative medicines.
11. Quiet or Repose.

In most diseases arising from loss of blood, the person is very sus-
ceptible of noise, and to disturbance of any kind. Quietude and rest
therefore should be strictly enjoined.


SECTION X.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

In concluding this Chapter on the morbid and dangerous effects of
blood-letting, I anticipate the remarks of an objector or enquirer,
"Do you then reject bleeding in every disease?" In answer to which
I have to observe, that ever since I commenced the practice of medi-
cine, I have witnessed the effects of bleeding in different diseases. The
practice has been so popular, and recommended by such high authority,
and been adhered to by physicians for such a great length of time, that
I concluded to follow it until I satisfactorily ascertained the effect of it
upon the system. At one time, I even took a bleeder with me in my
visits to my patients, and in some degree followed the footsteps of Dr.
Sangrado, and bled almost every one of them. I soon found that I in-
jured, instead of benefitted them, and although I discontinued the prac-
tice of bleeding so constantly, and so indiscriminately, yet I have for
years occasionally resorted to it, till more recently I have laid aside my
lancet, and it is now rusting in its scabbard. It is true my students some-
times bleed patients who insist upon its being done, but this is not in
conformity with my practice. I can fulfil every indication for which
bleeding is practiced, by the substitution of other means more rational,
natural, and congenial with the system; and therefore, after a most
extensive observation and practice at the bedside of the patient, I must
as an honest man, whatever may be the opinion or practice of others,
adopt the following maxim —

SELDOM OR NEVER BLEED.


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 203


CHAPTER IV.

THE KNIFE, OR ABUSES IN SURGERV,


What a sarcastic, what a damning catalogue of great operations, performed
within these Inst few years, might a diligent cynic compile for the gratification
of the world. johnsox.


SECTION I.

OF SURGICAL OPERATIONS IN GENERAL.

The limits of this work will not permit a full investigation of this
part of the subject, or that which relates to abuses in surgery. I shall,
however, give an abstract or outline of our views.

Within some years past, it has become very fashionable to attempt
to cure a great variety of diseases by the knife, or by manual opera-
tions, but with what propriety or rationality, I have never yet been
able to determine. I cannot reconcile the propriety of it with any
indications of nature, or with physiology, anatomy, observation, or
experience. It is true, perhaps, although I have seldom, or never
seen an instance, that some diseases may be removed by a surgical op-
eration. But this affords no reason why they should be so generally
resorted to, for it is well known that diseases for which such operations
are performed, are otherwise removed either by nature, or by other
means. When we reflect for a moment upon the structure and organs of
different parts of the system, we shall see why so little benefit, and so
much injury results from operative surgery. Wherever any disease is
seated, for which cutting is recommended, we shall see that there is,
in general, such an intimate connection between it, and the surround-
ing healthy parts, that the knife cannot separate between them. It is
owing to this, that those diseases for which an operation has been per-
formed, so frequently reappears after they have been apparently ex-
tirpated.

The morbid and healthy vessels and fluids are so interwoven and con-
nected together, and so freely inosculate with each other, that opera-
tions oftener exasperate than cure. This is exemplified in tumours of
various kinds ; the scrofula, white-swelling, cancer, fistula, Sec.

Operations are acknowledged hy all to be the opprobrium of surgery,
and rather a disgrace, than credit to the operator. It ought to be the

primary object of every practitioner, to prevent the use of the knife.

But in this day, it is certainly not the case. Some of our noted sur-
geons express the most joyful sensations whenever they can obtain a
subject for carving. Jt appears to be their delight to dissect and cut


•204 (jicueral Principles of the American, Prae&ict

human flesh; and there might be some excuse for it, were sucli opera-
tions indispensably necessary ; but when it is a fact, (which has been
demonstrated in scores and hundreds of cases,) that there is seldom if
ever any necessity for them, we confess that we feel horror-struck and
indignant, that mankind must continue to be tortured, mangled, and quar-
tered, for those very diseases which have been so frequently cured by
the most safe and mild means.

Dr. Johnson, editor of the Medico-Chirurgical Review, and physi-
cian extraordinary to the King of Great Britain, has the following pithy
remarks on this subject: — "If operations, bloody, cruel operations, are
looked on with admiration, it can only be by those who regard
plague, pestilence and famine as beneficial also. No! operations are
our opprobrium, our disgrace, not our proper and legitimate boast; the
mere operator is little better than a human butcher by rule. There is
too great a taste for the knife at present; — shame to those who en-
courage it ; — woe to those who practise it, unnecessary operations bring
discredit on surgery; unsuccessful ones, even when perfectly justifiable,
inspire doubt and repugnance to it in the public mind. Patients who sec
or hear of their relatives or friends submitting to barbarous and fright-
ful maimings, only that they might live for a month, or a week, feel
no great relish for the knife, when its use might bring safety and a cure.
What a sarcastic, what a damning catalogue of great operations, per-
formed within these last few years, might a diligent cynic compile for
the gratification of the world ! But we have done, and we trust that
these observations may not be without their effect."

In Dr. Gibson on bony tumours, page 136, 7, is the following to the
same import:

" Whoever attends an European Infirmary, will be struck with the
diversity and multiplicity of operations, performed upon the most trivial
occasions. Will it be credited when I say that the illustrious founder
of American surgery, during a practice both hospital and private, of
thirty years, and more extended than that of any other individual of our
country, has hardly ever had occasion to resort to amputation 1 It may
be asked what became of his patients? I answer, they have been cured
by general and local means. Doctor, said a surgeon of Pennsylvania
hospital, to a distinguished practitioner of a neighbouring city, what
would be done in your town with such a leg? We should cut it off, was
his reply. We can cure it here without, rejoined the other. " In a
certain London hospital," says Dr. Gregory, " a patient was under the
eare of the physicians, on account of a very bad leg, which baffled their
skill, and appeared to them almost hopeless ; they therefore requested a
consultation of the surgeons, to examine the leg and to decide what
should be done with it. The surgeons accordingly met, examined it,
consulted about it, and resolved nemine co/itradicente, that the leg could
not be saved, and ought to be cut off. They cut it off without delay.
But, strange' to tell, the physicians, at their next visit, on examining the
patient, found to their great astonishment, the supposed hopeless leg, as
fast to his body as ever it had been.

The puzzle was soon explained. It happened that the man had two
1e£s, both of them very bad; one the physicians thought they could save,


Medicine, and Indications of Cm I . 205

the other they despaired of. There being but right and wrong, it was
not very marvellous that the consultation took the wrong. Both physi-
cians and surgeons 1 believe, were a little disconcerted at that quid pro
quo; and as it was thought rather a strong measure to cut off both of
the man's legs, they exerted themselves to the utmost and saved the leg
which should have been cut off: so that after all the poor man was but
one leg out of pocket.

As I was not an eye witness of this edifying transaction, it is proper
to give some notion of the genealogy of the story, which is very short
and simple. I have it from a reverend clergyman, who had it from one
of the physicians concerned, and who is now one of the most eminent
of his profession in London. I know both the clergyman and the phy-
sician intimately ; I know them both to be men of veracity and men of
sense; and I have no doubt that the facts were just as I have stated
them.

These remarks may appear, perhaps, irrelative, but I am satisfied
of their importance, and shall be gratified if they tend to check the dis-
position, so prevalent among surgeons, to use the knife; or contribute
in a single instance to alleviate pain, or remove diseases by milder or
more appropriate means."

The following cases are related by a physician of this city. It shows
still further, the fondness of surgeons to perform even unnecessary ope-
rations.

" Yesterday, in passingdown Delancy-street, my attention was arrested
by a number of persons collected together in consequence of an acci-
dent which had just occurred to a lad by the name of William Thomp-
son, about twelve years of age. After he had been conveyed to the
residence of his mother, No. 91 Delancy-street, I took the liberty of
calling and making some enquiry respecting the nature of the accident.
I there found some half dozen of physicians or medical students, who
in a very superficial manner were examining the wound of the boy. It
was pronounced a compound fracture of the lower, and a simple frac-
ture of the upper arm. The ends of both bones were seen protruding
through a large wound; although the blood circulated freely below it,
and the motion of the hand was not lost. The injury had been done, I
was informed, by the machinery, in a manufactory for cutting glass. All
the physicians or students present immediately decided, with the excep-
tion of one, the oldest and most experienced, that the arm must be am-
putated. This physician stated that the wound though extensive might
be cured. At any rate, he thought an attempt ought to be made to ef-
fect it; that there would be no more danger in making a trial than would
result from amputation, and he quoted for authority sir Astley Cooper,
and spoke of the danger of an operation so soon after the injury. He
concluded by asserting that he had cured a wound equally as serious and
unfavourable. Although the opinion of this physician was respectfully
solicited by the principal surgeon, the enmity of the others was so much
excited at the opposition he made to the proceedings, that they tried
every means, in the most clandestine and disgraceful manner, to rid
themselves of his presence. The proposition to heal the wound was
not listened to. The physicians besran to make preparation to remove


2UG General Principles of the American Practice

the arm, by displaying before the eyes of the unfortunate lad, numerous
surgical instruments !! ! The scene resembled a number of butchers
eager to shed the blood of a poor animal.

The boy strenuously and perseveringly objected to the operation ; and
called some around him to prevent it being done. His cries, entreaties
and agonies were truly heart-rending, and convulsed his whole frame.
He was firmly held by them, however, till the arm was cut off, not be-
low the elbow, where it ought to have been, as I was forcibly impressed
if at all, but above.

My object in this communication is to express my conviction, (and 1
judge from common sense and common observation) that this ami could
have been saved as intimated by the physician above alluded to. I have
seen a wound apparently as bad, if not worse, cured by him, after it had
been decided that amputation must be immediately performed. I have
no doubt that many limbs are taken off, which if left to nature and ju-
dicious treatment might be preserved.

A few years ago a person was expelled from the New- York alms-
house, because he would not consent to have his leg amputated. He
succeeded after three days of great toil and distress in reaching the city,
and in a few months recovered the use of his legs, and can now walk
perfectly well. Ought not these " stubborn facts," outweigh any and
every theory leading to an opposite practice, however plausible, or
founded on authority however high? If there is an improved system of
practice, and I have the fullest evidence of the fact, by which we may
be cured of our diseases without the loss of our limbs, or without being
" quartered and mangled," ought it not to be investigated and patronized
by every humane and philanthropic person, however opposed they may
be by the illiberal, the interested, the envious, or the prejudiced?

These cases are too painful to be contemplated with ordinary patience
by any humane reader. The anxiety which we have ourselves witnessed
in some jujtine practitioners of surgery, to flourish the scalpel about the
limbs of a maimed patient, for the sole sake of showing off their profes-
sional adroitness, has on more than one occasion induced feelings of ex-
quisite and unmentionable anguish.

There are thousands of juvenile slaughterers, secundum artem, who
are always longing for chances to display their callous philosophy and
cunning agility, in slashing off a bruised arm or sawing away a shattered
leg, without condescending to wait for any of the efforts of nature.

An instance is within our own recollection, somewhat analogous. The
circumstances occurred in Massachusetts, four or five years since, and
can be proved by the testimony of hundreds. A little girl, about four
years of age, while riding in a gig with her parents, fell out of the ve-
hicle and the wheel immediately passed over one leg and one arm of the
child, crushing horribly the bone of the thigh and that of the upper arm.
A council of surgeons resolved that the wound was past all remedy,
other than immediate amputation, and while preparing for the operation,
a noted bone-setter, named Sweet, illiterate, coarse, better acquainted
with nature than art, saw the patient and remonstrated with effect against
the proposed mutilation. The surgeons of course abandoned the sufferer


oj Medicine, and Indications 0} Curt. 803

to her late, and retired, pronouncing however sentence of death upon
her. The bone-smith, who pretended to be nothing more than one ol
nature's journeymen, bandaged the crushed limbs, without even using
the wooden splints or frames, considered so essential by all scientific
chirurgeons. Thus nature was left to work itself out of its own predi-
cament ; and by dint of careful, simple, and gentle treatment on the part
of her attendants, the little patient in a few weeks was restored to her
overjoyed parents, whole and sound, and is at this day one of the most
sprightly children of her age, enjoying the free use and original shape of
all her limbs. We are by no means inclined to disparage the noble sci-
ence of surgery, we view it as even the most honourable of professions ;
but we would deprecate that precipitate zeal in imprudent practitioners,
which in its earnestness to make exhibitions of skill, lose sight of the
grand truth, that art is but nature's auxiliary. In young persons, espe-
cially, the utmost caution and hesitancy ought to be observed. Such is
the practice with all experienced surgeons, before applying the cruel in-
struments, whereby misery and deformity are forever entailed upon the
unfortunate sufferer.

The count La Sallee, in one of his papers addressed to the academy
des arts at Paris, thus expresses himself, in relation to the practice of
surgery among the Indians. The paper is dated, August 10, 1565.

" In my travels through the wilds of America, I visited most of the In-
dian tribes, which populate the regions of the west. I commenced my
pilgrimage at the mouth of the St. Lawrence, and ended it at the passes
of the Mississippi. A nobler race of beings I never witnessed ; and I
was surprised when I found that though unacquainted with any of the
sciences, they were masters of the art of surgery. During my travels I
found a number of the aborigines, who had been wounded and mangled
in the wars, but I never found one who was in the least deformed, by the
fracture of bones, and the numerous accidents to which Indian warfare is
liable, not a single amputation. I had noticed in most of the hospitals
of Europe, that but few of the inmates, who had been confined came out,
without being lame and deformed ; and when I recollected this, I ex-
pressed my astonishment to the chiefs of the tribes that the invalids per-
fectly recovered the use of their limbs, and did not bear any of the
marks of previous disaster. To my observations one of the chiefs re-
plied, " you have men to mend limbs, who are taught hymen to do so;
we obtain our knowledge from the Great Spirit. We are perfect for our
knowledge comes from the clouds; yours comes from man only." I con-
less that I was thunderstruck with the reply; but I could not but admit
the justice, accuracy, and pungency of the remark.

The celebrated missionary John Zimmerman, as early as the year
1620, made a voyage to Patagonia, under the auspices of the Moravian
church, and in one of his letters to the Synod, took an elaborate view of
that people, and from the which, we make the following extract.

" I was not more surprised than delighted to find among this people,
men who were practically and theoretically acquainted with surgery,
though they were unacquainted with the terms and phrases which are
employed by civilized nations. I enquired of them how they became
acquainted with the art, their reply was our God forms not his mortals


iiiiH General Principles of the American Practice

without intelligence, and he has wisely ordained that we should all pos-
sess the capacity of supplying our wants. He that formed us, endowed
us with the necessary knowledge to enable us to heal our wounds, and
restore our fractured bones."

Were I disposed, I could proceed and relate hundreds if not thousands
of the most inhuman, barbarous, bloody, and fatal operations both in
Europe and America; and that too for those very diseases which nature
often cures, without any assistance from art. It may be that occasion-
ally an operation removes a disease. But if so, this is blazoned to the
world, and brings great fame to the operator, when perhaps the scores
of cases which he has butchered out of the world, are kept silent. In-
deed I have sometimes thought the more patients a surgeon kills by for-
midable operations, the more popular he becomes. I never would ob-
ject to any operation, were I convinced that there was no other alterna-
tive ; but when I see persons cut and mangled and destroyed for com-
plaints which I have so frequently cured, if I did not raise my warning
voice against such practice, and express my indignation, I should be des-
titute of the least spark of humanity and philanthropy.


SECTION IJ.

OF OPERATIONS IN PARTICULAR.

1. Amputation.

It is customary to amputate a limb when mortification takes place,
but it is directed not to remove it, until a line of demarcation is formed
between the mortified or dead, and the living or sound flesh; assigning
as a reason, that if it is done, the stump will slough, or that the disease
will return.

Now I ask in the name of reason, common sense, and philosophy,
where is the propriety or necessity for amputating a limb for mortifica-
tion, or any other disease, when it has been stopped or arrested. In this
case according to the very directions given, or principles laid down, the
limb will if left to nature alone be saved.

The extract already quoted from Gibson, proves that a surgeon who
understands the healing art, may practice, perhaps all his life time with-
out cutting off a single limb. How then can surgeons in this day recon-
cile their cutting and carving system with their consciences, or with
correct principles of the science of medicine.

It is a very common circumstance for persons to apply to us for the
treatment of some disease for which amputation or an operation has
been proposed, and I now do not recollect a solitary case in which we
have not been successful, where our prescriptions have been followed;
and a great share of the abuse and calumny which has been heaped
upon the author of this work, has arisen in consequence of having cured
those very diseases for which operations have been proposed, and re-
commended as absolutely necessary. I must however, here state, that it


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 209

is alleged that some improvements have taken place within a few years
past, in operative surgery. A medical gentleman informs me, that not
one half the limbs are now amputated that were some years ago.

2. Compound Fractures and Dislocations.

It has been very customary to amputate for compound fractures and
dislocations, but this is seldom, if ever necessary. The worst cases of
which I have any account may be cured; and indeed, amputations now
are not so frequently performed for these accidents, as they were some
yean ago.

Sir Ashley Cooper proves conclusively that these accidents can be
cured without amputation. Why then do other surgeons, in this day,
remove a limb for compound fractures or dislocations?

But I humbly trust that a new aera in medical science will soon dawn
upon the world.

3. White Swelling.

It is customary to amputate for white swellings. This is truly a cruel,
unnecessary and shocking practice. How must the hearts of parents
bleed to see the limb or limbs of their beloved children amputated or
cut off for a disease, that can be as infallibly cured, may I not add, as
water will extinguish fire.

4. Operations for Cancer*

It is recommended by authors and lecturers both in Europe and Ame-
rica, to use the knife for cancers in the female breast, and other parts of
the body. But how this practice has so long prevailed, in face of
all the facts on record, I cannot divine. I cannot account for it in any
other way, except on the same principle that error always prevails. I
know by a life's time experience, that the method of extirpating can-
cers with the knife, is not attended with success; but on the contrary, I
have found that it aggravates the complaint. I have been often called
to treat the disease in all stages, both before, and after excision, and
therefore, 1 consider myself a competent judge, and now have to state that
this operation is uncertain, ineffectual, and generally renders the com-
plaint worse, and therefore ought to be abandoned, and other means
substituted.

Among all the operations performed for cancer of the female breast,
I have never known a solitary cure performed. Dr. Alexander Munro
of Edinburgh states, that he has been present at the extirpation of
sixty-two cancers of the female breast, and not two of the individuals
remained free of the disease a year afterwards. Is there then any en-
couragement, or any authority for continuing this barbarous practice?

The method that we pursue in the treatment of this disease, is alto-
gether better.

Attempts to cut a cancer, may be compared to the act of cutting down
a tree and leaving the roots to sprout. It grows with renewed vigour.

5. Fistula.

A horrid operation is now recommended, and performed by surgeons
Vol. I. 27


210 General Principles of the American Practice

for the cure of this most obstinate and unpleasant disease ; but the suc-
cess of it is very little better than that for cancer. It seldom or never
effects a cure. I have had them apply to me, after they had been ope-
rated upon a number of times, after they had been cut and mangled,
and after the disease had been thus exasperated; and have entirely
cured it, without any surgical operation.

The operation consists in passing a bistoury or knife up the sinus or
opening, and then cutting it entirely open; after which, lint is applied
without any other applications. Now it requires but a small share of
common sense to perceive that the act of making one common opening
with the intestinum rectum, is not sufficient to cure ihe disease. It dues
not eradicate the callus, which constitutes the very essence of it. The
method we adopt, is to excite a preternatural discharge, which produ-
ces this effect, and thus removes the complaint.

I have not yet seen a single case, no matter of how long standing, or
how inveterate or deep seated, provided the general health has not been
too much impaired, but I have been enabled to cure, and that too, where
our most popular surgeons have failed. In proof of this, I can refer any
person to numerous cases in every part of the city ; and to facts of this
kind, we depend for the success and merit of our work and system of
practice.

6. Hernia or Rupture.

When a hernia or rupture becomes apparently irreducible or stran-
gulated, after a few attempts to reduce it, and without waiting long
enough to know if it can be reduced, an incision is made down to and
through the stricture, and the contents of the sac retuwied. It is possi-
ble that there may be cases in which this operation may be necessary;
but I have never yet found any such. I have reduced the worst case,
I have ever seen ; and when we reflect that this operation often proves
fatal, ought we not to substitute a course of treatment which will ob-
viate the necessity of it.

7. Aneurism.

There are few diseases more painful or dangerous than an aneurism,
or a partially ruptured blood vessel, producing a pulsating tumour, and
there are few if any, in which the knife proves more dangerous or fatal.
Tying the artery above the tumour, may, when it is on the extremities,
effect a cure, but when some great artery is the seat of the disease, an
operation almost invariably proves fatal. I have successfully treated an
aneurism of the femoral artery, when the patient was told that without an
operation she must inevitably die, and I am confident that if such an ope-
ration had been performed, the patient could not have survived it.
This operation proves fatal from various causes; first, from irritation;
second, from inflammation; third, from mortification, and consequently
hemorrhage. Out of very numerous operations which I have seen de-
tailed by authors, or which has come under my own observation, (and
which I might here insert if I had room,) nearly all proves fatal or ex-
ceedingly injurious.

I am of the opinion from my experience in the treatment of this com-


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 211

plaint, that many more would recover if left entirely to nature, than by
a surgical operation.

8. Trephining.

There has been much dispute and controversy among surgeons re-
specting the propriety of trephining for injuries of the head. Some
highly extol, while others deprecate it. The surgeon of the hotel Dieu
of Paris, has stated that almost everyone who was admitted into the hos-
pital for injuries of the head, and who was trephined, died in conse-
quence, no doubt, in a great measure, of the operation. Even sir Ash-
ley Cooper, the oldest and most popular surgeon of London, and who
cannot be accused of departing much from common established surgical
practice, recommends the operation of trephining to be very rarely per-
formed. He uses in cases of depression with fracture, simply an ele-
vator to raise the hones. He relates a case in his lectures, where some
surgeons expressed astonishment that he refused to trephine, and yet
the patient did well.

A surgeon told me the other day, that he insisted upon trephining a
child who had received an injury of the head, but as the mother refused,
it was omitted, and the child rapidly recovered. An operation very
probably would have killed it. Mr. Abernethy mentions many such cases.

The act of boring one hole in the head to cure another, seems to be
very irrational, and absurd. I have had patients who have received al*
most every kind of injury of the head, and I have found no difficulty in
curing them without the operation of trephining; a single case excepted,
and which was hopeless from the commencement. I had one case of
fracture with depression of such a character, that I even doubted whe-
ther he would recover with or without an operation; he was thrown into
convulsions, lethargy, &c. from a wound made in the right parietal bone,
by a stone. Means were taken to reduce the inflammation, the irritation
was allayed by anodynes, and the man recovered without bleeding, or
trephining. A depression still remains in the skull an eighth of an inch
deep. Cases are on record almost without number, where recover}* has
taken place in a similar manner.

9. Lithotomy or Operation for the Stone.

When we reflect upon the number that die from this operation, being
about one in five, and the liability to a relapse, even if there was no
other means of removing it, it would remain a question, whether a per-
son suffering with the complaint, had better submit to the danger and
excruciating pain of the knife, or take palliatives, and trust the dis-
ease to nature.

But it is sometimes cured by medicine, and when it cannot be, it may
be cured by the new process adopted in Europe of perforating and de-
itroying the stone in the bladder, without any cutting whatever.

It would be interesting to relate the vast number of fatal cases which
have resulted from the operation of lithotomy. An acquaintance of
mine was operated upon for the stone, but when an incision was made
into the bladder, none was found. A sureeon a short time ago, stated that
a child was afflicted with a stone in the bladder, and he proposed to cut


212 General Principles of the American Practice

for it. Some diuretic medicine was given by the father secretly, and
the child soon recovered.

10, Operation for the Cataract.

I have never yet seen a single case of cataract cured by an opera-
tion, but I have seen many eyes injured, if not ruined by it. Some
state that soon after the operation, they received some benefit, but the
disease soon returned, and was even worse than ever. One writer states
that he ruined a hat full of eyes, before he could operate with any kind
of success. He ought to have said that he had ruined a hat full of eyes,
and after all could not cure a single case by the operation.

A person informed me the other day that he had submitted to an ope-
ration for a cataract, and it not only made the eye worse, but caused in-
flammation in the eye that was sound, and which endangered the sight
of it.


SECTION III.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

I cannot here further enlarge upon the use and abuse of the knife,
but will close the chapter with the remarks of the late professor God-
man on this subject, with some that I made a few years since in reply
to an attack made upon our practice, by a physician in this city, in the
American Lancet.

Are there not gross abuses of the knife in the practice of surgery, and
is it not productive of more injury than good?

It is now generally admitted by the most judicious physicians and sur-
geons, that too many operations are performed, that many have recover-
ed of maladies for which the knife was said to be the only remedy. Again,
it is universally known and admitted, that many die of capital opera-
tions, or are mutilated or crippled for life, who if left entirely to nature
might have lived comfortably for years. This has occurred in amputa-
tions, lithotomy, aneurisms, cancers, tumours, fistulas, injuries of the
head, white swellings, hernia, cataract, and other diseases. Numerous
facts can be adduced to substantiate this assertion. I do not say there
are no cases in which an operation is necessary; but in a vast majority
I know by observation and experience, they can be dispensed with. That
celebrated surgeon, Mr. Abernethy of London, positively declares every
time he commences his lectures, that " it is owing to our ignorance that
instruments or operations are necessary in any case."

Remarks of the late Professor Godman on the Knife.

The following judicious discrimination, is from the pen of the late
professor Godman, and does honour to his head and heart.

" The difference between a surgeon and a mere operator, may be es-
estimated by contrasting them. The surgeon inquires into the causes,
and removes the consequences of constitutional and local disease; the


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 213

operator inquires into the willingness of his patient to submit, and re-
sorts to the knife. The surgeon relies on the restoration of the healthy
actions, by regimen and medicine; the operator relies on himself, and
cuts off' the diseased part. The surgeon reflecting on the comfort and
feelings of his patient, uniformly endeavouring to save him from pain
and deformity: the operator considers his own immediate advantage,
and the notoriety he may acquire, regardless of other considerations.
The surgeon reluctantly decides on the employment of instruments; the
operator delays no longer than to give the knife a keen edge. The
surgeon is governed by the principles of the science; the operator most
generally by the principle of interest ; one is distinguished by the num-
ber he has saved from mutilation, and restored to usefulness ; the other
by the number of cripples he has successfully made."

" The surgeon is an honour to his profession, and a benefactor of man-
kind ; the mere operator renders the profession odious, and is one of the
greatest curses to which mankind among their manifold miseries, are
exposed."

I anticipate the same objection here in relation to the knife, that I
did in the preceding chapter on the use and abuse of the lancet " Do
you then reject all operations'?" In reply to which I would state, that
I have seen the effects of various operations performed in the New-York
hospital, as well as in private practice. I have carefully noticed the
result under different circumstances, and for different diseases, and after
the most mature reflection and deliberation upon the subject, as an ho-
nest man, I am under the necessity of adopting the following maxim —

SELDOM OR NEVER OPERATE.


214 General Principles of the American Practice


CHAPTER V.


OBSERVATIONS OF DIFFERENT INDIVIDUALS ON THE PRESENT PRACTICE
OF MEDICINE.


SECTION I.

1. Remarks of Dr. John J. Steele, on Mercury, the Lancet, and the
Knife, being a part of an address delivered at the New- York Re-
formed Medical College.

"Though there be some who shut their eyes against light, and debar
truth from their reception, yet thanks be to Heaven, the mass of the good
and the truly wise, have ever been ready to receive both, when fairly
and honestly presented.

In the following lecture, truth, honesty and benevolence shall influence
the speaker. He shall only exhibit his own views* founded upon expe-
rience, matters of fact, and common observation. He too, let it be re-
collected, was early disciplined into the old school of medicine, and for
many years used calomel, the lancet, and the knife, without compunc-
tion or reserve.

Every man who thinks, or reflects for a moment, upon the frail na-
ture of man — the diseases which afflict him, and the system of practice
pursued by modern physicians, must come to the conclusion, that die in-
ordinate use of mercury, and other mineral poisons, the abuse of the lan-
cet and the irrational use of instruments in surgery and midwifery, are
fruitful sources of disease and death to thousands. This is an evident
fact at first sight. But follow up the subject — call to mind the nume-
rous instances that have occurred in your neighbourhood, of persons
who have been poisoned by mercury, killed by bleeding, or butchered
into eternity by the knife in surgery, and the forceps in midwifery, and
then say honestly, what you think of the present system of practice.

An inquisitive people must discover that the old system is both defec-
tive and dangerous. What disease can its disciples cure? Examine,
of mercury, antimony, lead, bleeding, &c. all of which are disease-cre-
ating remedies, and all of which act in direct opposition to the laws of
our animal nature. Is then such a course of conduct, in relation to one
of the most important objects of human life, to be sanctioned by popu-
lar opinion? The people certainly are awaking out of sleep on this all
important subject. The light of reform is spreading far and wide, and
a still small voice begins to be heard from one ewl of our country to the
other — Physicians, you are in error — Your indiscriminate use of mer-


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 215

cury, the lancet, and the knife, are adding to, rather than alleviating
the sum of human misery! Reform! Reform the abuses of the healing
art, and endeavour to become a blessing to the human family. This
voice of enlightened public opinion begins to wax louder and louder, and
if unheeded by medical men, sentence will soon be passed upon them
from the bar of public opinion.

Every one who has given the subject of medicine the least attention
has discovered that, first, the common mode of practice is unequal in
contending against disease; — 2d. That it is the most easy and profita-
ble to the physician who pursues it; — and thirdly, that it is dangerous to
the sick. It is unequal, because upon a close examination, you find that
it rarely if ever cures a deep-seated or malignant disease, and that most
of those who do recover, recover from constitutional vigour. It is pro-
fitable, because a lancet and a pound of calomel will not cost two dol-
lars, and the neat profits independent of visits will exceed one hundred,
and moreover, how easy for a medical dandy to carry his lance in one
vest pocket, and his calomel in the other. But it is dangerous. Every
man upon a moment's reflection must admit the high importance of the
blood in the animal economy ; and the reasonableness of the supposition,
that no more blood is formed in our system than is necessary, and that
upon the proper quantity of blood depends the measure of health we en-
joy. Now if it were possible for man to generate too much blood, or
that in certain states of diseased excitement, the removal of disease de-
pended upon a diminution of the volume of blood, would not the God
of nature have provided such an outlef ? — none however exists from the
blood, for all natural disease-removing processes, are carried on through
the medium of the stomach, the bowels, the kidneys, and the skin. Be-
sides bleeding in every case both of health and disease, in proportion to
the amount taken, destroys the balance of circulation, and robs the sys-
tem of its most valuable treasure and support; this balance must be re-
stored, and this treasure replaced before a healthful action can be com-
plete in the system.

Again, the old practice is dangerous, because its remedial agents aro
unnatural mineral poisons. The bad effect of calomel or mercury upon
the system is not sufficiently known, or admitted. It exerts a most pow-
erful influence upon the liver and other glands; it is one of the most fruit-
ful causes of liver complaints, consumptions, kings-evil, dropsies, dys-
pepsies, &c. that exist in the present day. Its use is now general as a
woi m medicine, and it is the champion of modern physicians in the cure
of every disease. To prove this, we need only quote the words of a learn-
ed professor in one of the old schools, when lecturing to a class of up-
wards of one hundred students. " Give me," says he, "calomel in the
one hand, and die lancet in the other, and I am prepared to cepe with
disease in every shape that it may attack the human family." What a
world of ignorance is contained in such a declaration! And oh!
whai an amount of moral turpitude and crime is contained in such a
precept, when delivered, and enforced under such circumstances!!

I know full well the effects of mercury upon the human system, for
I have tried it in every shape, and for almost every disease, and have
uniformly found it attended with risk, and if pushed to a salivation,


216 General Principles of the American Practice

absolute consequences of a dangerous character either open or hidden,
were produced. This fact is no secret to the physicians who adminis-
ter it, for they admit amongst themselves and in their writings, that
mercury does produce disease of the most disagreeable and dangerous
character. Why tiien persist in the use of it? Hut if they will persist in
the lace of all the evidence they have, and in defiance of all moral obli-
gations imposed by the sixth commandment, surely the people cannot be
so infatuated as deliberately to swallow down the seeds of certain disease
and death. Nay, the mass of them will halt and consider.

The knife is another source of immense mischief to the human
family. Every day brings us tidings of some unfortunate man or wo-
man being ushered into eternity through the means of a surgical opera-
tion. I could name twenty cases which have occurred within a year,
when the persons were in a common degree of health, at the time the
operations for different purposes were commenced, and all of whom
died in less than a week after undergoing such operations. How me-
lancholy would the reflection be, if from an absolute necessity, phy-
sicians were compelled to operate in this manner, and when the fact
was known that such operations were generally followed by death. But
what diiferent feelings inspire us, when we reflect that most of those
operations are undertaken and performed, without any necessity, and
only to exhibit to tiie world the manual surgical tact, of a vapouring,
iron-hearted M. D. That in nine cases out of ten, when operations
are performed, and death ensues, the patient might have been cured,
or sensibly benefitted, we have not the shadow of a doubt. For as pro-
fessor Abernethy says, " It is owing to our ignorance that the knife is
used in any case."

Is it asked what will we substitute for mercury and the knife? — we
answer that for mineral poisons, we substitute the vegetables that grow
in Nature's Garden. We have tried them and we find them abundant-
ly successful. Moreover we find them of such variety in strength, and
medicinal qualities, as to answer every indication disease presents, and
to accomplish all, and much more than the conjoined use of calomel
and the lancet. Diseases which have been given up by mineral prac-
titioners, have been cured by vegetable prescriptions both here and
elsewhere. A! vast number of cases denominated surgical, in which
deadly operations have been recommended, have been completely cur-
ed by the Reformed Practice. Indeed in no department of God's
vast scheme of goodness to man, is that goodness so strikingly exhibit-
ed as in the arrangements of medicinal plants to restore health and re-
move obstinate diseases. All that is required of us is to know the med-
icinal quantity of each plant, and the disease it is designed to cure, then
when we are sick, we may put forth our hand and take it as the boon of
Heaven.

It becomes our duty to investigate the quality of each plant from the
forest tree down to the humble ivy. And in the performance of this
duty, I trust we have the prayers of the philanthropist, and the patron-
age of every good man. It is a work of vast importance to the hu-
man family. And if we have found substitutes for minerals, the lancet,
and the knife , surely the world will not withhold from us that respect


of Medicine, and Indications of Cure. 217

or patronage which so great a discovery demands. Some physicians of
the old school will jeer and mock, and lie, and slander, hut their efforts
to put down our system, or the Reformed Medical . Society of the Uni-
ted States will be in vain. The mass of the people are on our side,
they are our defence, our judges, and rewardeis. Besides the object of
our pursuit is, above all others, calculated to cheer us in our researches,
and comfort us in our privations; having no less object in view than
the redemption of the rising generation, from the evils of mineral poi-
son and blood-letting, and our army, navy, and other unfortunate fellow-
heings, from the horrors of the scalpel and amputating knife. Let us
go on then and do our duty, fearless of all that the enemy can do.


SECTION II.

REMARKS OF DR. ANTHONY HUNN OF KENTUCKY, ON THE SUBJECT OF
REFORM IN MEDICINE.

" I have laid before the public, only a few of the many existing facts,
which press themselves upon the mind of an observing thinker, and must
inevitably lead him to the conclusion, that the present medical practice
is so far from bein^ beneficial, as even to create a serious doubt, whether
it be not in the whole, detrimental and injurious to mankind. This is
Owing to the want of truth in all our system, of medical science. A sys-
tem should consist of just, logical deductions drawn from familiar, known
indubitable and undoubted facts. Instead of this, all our systems are
either false conclusions from mere imaginary whims, begged principles,
or mere suppositions; or even false conclusions, from erroneous princi-
ples. Ml systemisers pretend to build upon facts; but their facts are
pressed and whipped into their service. The doctor first spins his sys-
tem out of the cobweb of his fancy, and afterwards squeezes some facts
into forms resembling proofs of it, and, very honestly shuts his eyes*
against all such facts as are at variance with his beloved air castle. He
creates distinctions, when in nature all is whole, and forges classifica-
tions, when in nature all swims together. Thus Bcerhave, Cullcn, Brown,
Darwin, Staehl — are all blind leaders of the blind, and the young phy-
sician, who thinks he has in his notes and books a remedy for every dis-
ease, when he comes to the sick bed, finds all a chaos; no rule will ap-
ply; he looks in vain for the vaunted effects of his cure-all nostrums,
either forsakes in disgust a practice, which may lead him to manslaugh-
ter, or from experience chalks himself out some dictionary: This is good
for that; or diat is good foi this; and becomes a quack. For practice
without system is the very definition of quackery. Another, and not
less efficient cause of the falsity of our medical systems is the prejudiced
respect, for ancient and modern celebrated names. The most important
data presented to us by modern improvements in physiology and ana-
tomy, (th'" marrow of the medical science) are bartered away for the
dicta of lliopocrates, Galen, Bcerhave, Cullen, and Rush; and thus
the lancet, or calomel, or cold bath, or opium, or gait of tartar; all in

Vol. I. 28


218 General Principles of the American Practice

their turn, become panaceas, (cure-alls) with the accession of every new,
popular profession, and

" For the king's offence the people die."

I offer to the public a new system of medical science, which I have formed
conscientiously clear of all those impediments, and which is confirmed
in its salutary effects, by the experience of a life time's practice.

But 1 anticipate a question, which has been put to Moses, to Socrates,
to Gallileo, to Columbus, to every man, that has presented the face of a
reformer, and which green-eyed envy never yet has failed to accompa-
ny with the sneer of detraction: " Who are you, that you dare to pre-
sume to know more than weV Free from that cowardly, bastard mo-
desty, which trembles to own its competency before the scorn of male-
volence, 1 frankly answer as a freeman, that from my sixth year I was
dedicated to the sciences by a father rich enough to give three sons be-
sides me, a full chance of the highest scientific education that Europe
affords. At a riper age I studied for five years, (not for half a year,
" off and on") in the celebrated academy of Jena in Saxony, succes-
sively theology, law, and medicine. The last as my predilection, I chose
for the employment of my life. I graduated as doctor of medicine and
surgery (as my diplomas show) in two universities on the continent, Jena
and Erfurt, profited afterwards by visiting the universities of Erlang %
Gottingcn, Keel, enjoyed the lectures of Reich, Stark, and of the most
eminent physician of the present age, Hoffland. Then I embraced the
opportunity of the assistance of my mother's relations in France, to at-
tend the surgical operations in the hotel de dieu in Paris, practised af-
terwards three years in Amsterdam, and embarked for America, where
I have had for thirty years the amplest of opportunity to effect a refor-
mation in the science of medicine, and of studying the power of nature
on the sick bed. Being acquainted with ancient and modern languages,
I have read till twelve every night, every author of note, and made ex-
tracts, and now I am near sixty years of age, and am the very man who
offers his services to the sovereign people of America."


SECTION III.

OPINION OP THOMAS JEFFERSON ON THE STATE OP MEDICINE.

I have given the views of some physicians on the present practice of
medicine. I will now subjoin those of Mr. Jefferson, who did not belong
to the profession, but who by the bye possessed an extraordinary mind,
and who was fully competent to judge correctly upon this subject.

" We know from what we see and feel, that the animal body is in its
organs and functions subject to derangement, inducing pain and tending
to its destruction. In this disordered state, we observe nature provid-
ing for the re-establishment of order, by exciting some salutary evacu-
ation of the morbific matter, or by some other operation which escapes
our imperfect senses and researches. She brings on a crisis by stools,


of Medicine, and Indications of Care. 211/

vomiting, sweat, urine, expectoration, &c. which for the most part ends
in the restoration of healthy action. Experience has taught us also,
that there are certain substances, by which, applied to the living body,
internally or externally, we can at will produce the same evacuations,
and thus do, in a short time, what nature would do but slowly, and do
effectually, what perhaps she would not have strength to accomplish.
Where, then, we have seen a disease characterized by specific signs or
phenomena, and relieved by a certain natural evacuation or process,
whenever that disease occurs under the same appearances, we may rea-
sonably count on producing a solution of it, by the use of such substances
as we have found, by experience, produce the same evacuation or move-
ment. Thus fulness of the stomach we can relieve by emetics; dis-
eases of the bowels, by purgatives, &c. &c. Here then the judicious,
the moral, the humane physician, should stop ***** jjirt
the adventurous physician goes on, and substitutes presumption for know-
ledge. From the scanty field of what is known, he launches into the
boundless regions of what is unknown. He establishes for his guide
some fanciful theory, of corpuscular attraction of chemical agency, of
mechanical powers, of stimuli, of irritability accumulated or exhausted,
of depletion by the lancet, and repletion by mercury or some other in-
genious dream whicb lets him into all nature's secrets at short hand. On
the principle which he thus assumes, he forms his table of nosology, ar-
rays his diseases into families, and extends his curative treatment, (says
he) by analogy, to all he has thus arbitrarily marshalled together.

I have lived myself to see the disciples of Hoffman, Boerhave, Staehl,
Cullen, Brown, succeed one another, like the shifting figures of the
magic lantern, and their fancies like the dresses of the annual doll-ba-
bies from Paris, becoming, from their novelty, the vogue of the day,
and yielding to the next novelty their ephemeral favours. The patient,
treated on the fashionable theory, sometimes gets well in spite of the
medicine.

The medicine, therefore, restored him, and the young doctor receives
new courage to proceed in his bold experiments on the lives of his fel-
low creatures.

I believe we may safely affirm that the inexperienced and presumptu-
ous band of medical tyros let loose upon the world, destroys more human
life in one year, than all the Robbinhoods, Cartouches, and Macheaths
do in a century.

It is in this part of medicine I wish to see a reform ; an abandonment
of hypothesis for sober facts. The first degree of value set on clinical
observation and the lowest on visionary theories. I would wish the youne
practitioner, especially, to have deeply impressed on his mind the real
limits of his art. *****

The only sure foundations of medicine are an intimate knowledge of
the human body, and observation of the effects of medicinal substances
on that. The anatomical and clenical schools, therefore, are those in
Which the young physician should be formed. If he enters with inno-
cence, that of the theory of medicine, it is scarcely possible that he
should come out untainted with error. His mind must be strong indeed,
if rising above juvenile credulity, he can mantain a wise infidelitv


!$20 (xrntral Principles of the American Practice, Sfc.

against the authority of his instructors, and the bewitching delusion of
their theories. ********* I hope and believe, tha\ it is
from this side of the Atlantic, that Europe, which has taught us so many
other things, will be led into sound principles in this branch of science,
the most important of all others, being that to which we commit the care
of health and life.— Letter to Dr. Wister, Vol. IV. page 91.


CONCLUDING REMARKS.

After dictating the preceding chapters on the principles laid down in
this work, I observed to my amanuensis, who, by the bye, is a grad-
uate of the old school, and whose medical sentiments are in union with
mine, that the principles here maintained, are so plain and clear, and
yet so simple, that every person must see their consistency, and the
truth of them. Does it not, I added, appear exceedingly plain and
clear to you? He replied in the affirmative, as he had many times be-
fore, in expressing his opinions of them, often asserting that they
would stand the minutest investigation; that it was impossible to over-
throw or subvert them ; yet at the same time there would be some phy-
sicians, who, in face of all the light and truth exhibited, would cavil,
reject, and oppose. If they admit that these principles are correct,
added he, they will bleed to equalize the circulation, and give mercury
as indications of cure. In reply to this, I observed, that for such,
there was no remedy. If there is not a principle of honesty, upright-
ness, and integrity sufficient to receive the truth, it would be as fool-
ish to attempt to convince them, as to cause vegetation to grow upon a
rock, or to give medicine to a dead man, to raise him to life.


PART THIRD.


PHYSICAL DISEASES.


PART THIRD.


PHYSICAL DISEASES


CHAPTER I.


NOSOLOGY, OR A SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT AND CLASSIFICATION
OF DISEASES.

There have been several systems or treatises on Nosology, or the
classification of diseases; one, by Dr. Cullen, and which has been, per-
haps, the most popular of any, and next to it, that of Sauvages ; one
also by Hosack, Good, and other writers; but all have been found so
prolix, arbitrarily arranged, and exceptionable, that many have re-
jected them almost with disgust, and pay no regard to any order or ar-
rangement whatever. It does certainly forcibly strike the mind of an
observer, that arranging diseases into classes, orders, genera, and spe-
cies, as we do plants, is unnatural and injudicious, and I view every
system of Nosology that I have hitherto seen, very much in the same
light. I have not, however, been willing on this account, to discard a
systematic arrangement of diseases in every respect, in consequence of
the defects of writers upon this subject; but I have given such an ar-
rangement or classification of diseases as does, in my humble opinion,
supersede that of all others, by reason of its simplicity, and the easy,
natural, and systematic arrangement laid down.

By this Nosology, it will be seen that any person of ordinary capa-
city who has perused it once, will be able in a moment, to refer any
disease to its proper class, order, and species. No part of it is unna-
tural, arbitrary, or forced; but diseases are classed as they naturally
occur, and the mind is left free to rest upon some one specific disease,
in reference to the organ or part affected.


224


Nosology, or a Systematic Arrangement


PHYSICAL DISEASES.


CLASS I.


FEBRILE DISEASES.


Order 1.


Intermittent Fever, Fever and Ague


, Febris Intermittens.


2.


Remittent do. 2 Species,


Febris Remittens.


], Simple,


Simplex.


2. Bilious,


Biliosa.


3.


Inflammatory,


Febris Ardens.


4.


Simple Continued or Long Fever,


Synochus.


5.


Tvphus, 4 Species,


Typhus.


1. Mild,


Mitior.


2. Putrid or Malignant,


Gravior.


3. Yellow,


Icterodes.


4. Spotted,


Petechialis.


G.


Scarlet, 3 Species,


Scarlatina.


1. Mild,


Mitts.


2. Affecting the Throat,


Anginosa.


3. Malignant,


Maligna.


7.


Miliary,


Febris Miliaris.


8.


Puerperal or Child Bed,


F'ebris Puerperalis.


9.


Hectic,


Febris Hectica.


CLASS II.


INFLAMMATORY DISEASES.


Order 1.


Inflammation of the Brain,


Phrenitis.


2.


Inflammation of the Ear,


Otitis.


3.

4.
5.
6.


Mumps,

Quinsy or Inflammat'y Sore Throat,
Putrid or Malignant do.
Croup, Hives, or Rattles,


Cynanche Parotidea.
Cynanche Tonsillaris
Cynanche Maligna.
Cynanche Trachealis.


7.
8.
9.


Inflammation of the Pharynx,
Do. of the Larynx,
Do. of the Bronchia,


Cynanche Pharyngea
Cynanche Laryngea.
Bronchitis.


10.
11.
12.
13.


Hooping Cough,
Influenza,
Cold or Cough,
Asthma,


Pertussis.

Tussis Epidemicus.

Tussis.

Asthma.


14.


Inflammation of the Lungs,


Pneumonia.


15.


Consumption,


Phthisis Ptdmonalis


and Classification of Diseases.


225


16. Pleurisy,

17. Inflammation of the Pericardium,
of the Diaphragm,


18.

19.
30.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.


Do.

Do.

Do.

Do.

Do.

Do.

Do.
Rheumatism,
Gout,


Pleuritis.
Pericarditis.
Paraphrenesis, sive \
Diaphragmatitti. S

(iastritis.
Hepatitis.
Splenitis.


of the Stomach,
of the Liver,
of the Spleen,
of the Intestines or Bowels, Enteritis.
of the Kidneys, Nephritis.

of the Uterus or Womb, Hysteritis.

Rheumatismus.

Podagra^ or Arthritis.


CLASS III.


ERUPTIVE DISEASES.


Order 1.


Small Pox, 2 Species,


Variola.


1. Distinct,


Interpuncta.


2. Confluent,


Conjluens.


2.


Cow Pox,


Vaccina.


3.


Chicken Pox,


Varicella.


4.


Measles,


Rubeola.


5.


Nettle or Scarlet Rash.


Urticaria.


6.


Itch,

CLASS IV.

DROPSICAL DISEASES.


Psora.


Order 1.


Dropsy of the Head, 2 Species,


Hydrocephalus.


1. Internal.


Internus.


2. External.


Externus.


2.


Dropsy of the Abdomen or Belly,


Ascites


3.


Do. of the Chest,


Hydrothorax.


4.


Do. oftheOvaria,


Ascites Ovarii.


5.


Do. of the Cellular Membrane,


Anasarca.


6.


Do. of the Scrotum,


Hydrocele.


CLASS V.

CEREBRAL DISEASES.

Order 1. Insanity or Mental Derangement,
2 Species, 1. Idiopathic,

2. Symptomatic,
2. Nymphomania, or Furor Uterinus.
Voi I 29


Mania.

Idiopathica.

Symptomatica.


226


Nosology, or a Systematic Arrangement


Order 3. Melancholy,


Melancholia.


4. Epilepsy or Falling Sickness,


Epilepsia*


5. Apoplexy, 2 Species,


Apoplexia.


1. Sanguineous.


Sanguinea.


2. Serous.


Serosa.


6. Catalepsy,


Catalepsia.


7. Lethargy,


Coma.


8. Fainting or Swooning,


Syncope.


9. Giddiness,


Vertigo.


CLASS VI.


NERVOUS DISEASES.


Order 1. Hysterics,


Hysteria.


2. Hypocondria,


Hypocondriasis.


3. Palsy,


Paralysis.


4. St. Vitus' Dance,


Chorea Sancti Viti,


CLASS VII.


GASTRIC DISEASES.


Order 1. Cholera Morbus, 2 Species,


Cholera Morbus.


1. Bilious,


Biliosa.


2. Spasmodic, or


J Spasmodica site
) Maligna.


Malignant,


2. Water Brash,


Pyrosis.


3. Indigestion,


Dyspepsia.


4. Convulsions,


Spasmi.


5. Cramp,


Tetanus.


6. Heartburn,


Cardialgia.


7. Canker,


Apthae.


8. Vomiting,


JEmcsis.


9. Hiccup,


Singultus.


CLASS VIII.


INTESTINAL OR BOWEL DISEASES.


Order 1. Dysentery, 2 Species, Dysentcria.

1. Acute, Acuta.

2. Chronic, Chronica.
2. Bowel, Summer Complaint, or Relax, Diarrhoea,


and Classification of Diseases.


227


Order 3. Colic, 4 Species,

1. Flatulent,

2. Bilious,
8. Painter's,
4. Hysteric,

4. Costiveness or Constipation,


Colica.

Flatulenta.

Biliosa.

Pictonum.

Hysterica.

Constipatie.


CLASS IX.


PROFLUENT DISEASES.

Order 1. Vomiting of Blood,

2. Spitting of Blood,

3. Bleeding from the Nose,

4. Involuntary Discharge of Urine,

5. Whites or Fluor Albus,

6. Immoderate Flow of Blood from )

the Womb, S

7. Abortion,

8. Cessation of the Menses.

9. Incontinence of Urine,

10. Bloody Urine,

11. Onanism, or Artificial Discharge of )

Semen, S


Hccmatamesis.

Haemoptysis.

Epistaxis.

Diabetes.

Leucorrhoza.

Menorrhagia.

Abortio.

Eneuresis.
Haimaturia.


CLASS X.


REFLUENT DISEASES.


Order 1. Menses, Retention of


2.


Do. Suppression of

Do. Painful Affections of


4.


Do. Angina Pectoris.


5.


Night Mare,
Palpitation of the Heart,


7.

s.


Urine, Suppression of
Jaundice,


Chlorosis,

Amenorrhcea.

Dysmcnorrhoea.

Incubus.
Palpitatio.
Ischuria.
Icterus.


CLASS XL

CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES.


Order 1. Scurvy,

2. Urine, Heat of


Scorbutus.
Ardor Urines.


?28


Xosology, <y< .


Order 3. Emaciation,

4. General Debility.

5. Mercurial Disease and Salivation.

6. Yaws,

7. Rickets,


Marasmus


Frambcesia.
Rachitis.


CLASS XII.

-LOCAL DISEASES.

Order 1, Lumbago.

2. Worms, 4 Species, Vermes.

1. Pin, Ascarides.

2. Long Round, Lumbricoides.

3. Hair, Trichuris,

4. Tape, Taenia.

3. Teething, or Dentition, Dentitio.

4. Poisons,

5. Head-ache, 2 Species, Cephalalgia.

1. Idiophatic, Idiophatica.

2. Symptomatic. Symptomatica.


Physical Diseases. **"


CHAPTER II.

PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

SECTION I.
DEFINITION OF HEALTH AND DISEASE.

Health.

When all the functions of the system are duly performed, a person
may be said to be in health.

Disease.

Any alteration from this state, or when any part ceases to perform
its office, or function, disease is the consequence.

Disease a Unit.

Is it irrational, or unphilosopiiical, to consider disease a unit? All its
innumerable forms, or symptoms, being derived from one cause acting
upon different organs or tissues of the body.

Disease, Primary or Symptomatic.

Disease is either primary (idiopathic,) or symptomatic. Primary
when it does not depend upon any other. Symptomatic, when it does
depend on some other complaint; for instance, when the head aches
by reason of a disordered state of the stomach.

Disease is Acute or Chronic.

Acute when the attack is very severe, attended with violent symp-
tons, terminates in a few days and is dangerous. — Chronic, when it is
slow in its progress, little or no inflammation, and is not attended with
immediate danger.

Peculiarity of Constitution, (Idiosyncrasy.)

A peculiarity of Constitution, in which a person is affected by cer-
tain agents, which, if applied to a hundred other persons, would pro-
duce- no effect: thus some people cannot see a finger bleed without
fainting; and thus violent inflammation is induced on the skin of some
persons, by substances that are perfectly innocent to others.

State of the Mind.

Fear, anxiety, and a fretful temper, occasion and aggravate diseases.
In vain do we apply medicines to the body for diseases which proceed
from the mind. When that is affected, the best medicine is to soothe


230 Physical Diseases.

the passions, to divert the mind from anxious thought, and to keep the
patient as easy and cheerful as possible.

Age.

Here it must be observed, that the doses of medicine mentioned in
this work, (with some exceptions pointed out in their place,) are those
adapted for an adult ; but as in the two extremes of life, childhood and
old-age, the body is weaker, and in early youth more susceptible of
all the impressions, these quantities cannot be administered with safe-
exercised.

Sex.

Although some women possess as much bodily strength and vigour of
constitution as the majority of men; yet the greater delicacy and sen-
sibility of the female frame, at every period of life, requires not on-
ly caution in apportioning the doses of active medicine, which should
be less than those ordered for men of the same age; but the medicines
themselves should be such, as are likely to fulfil the indications without
much violence. The state of the uterine system likewise must not be
overlooked in prescribing for a female. Thus the employment of aloetic
and drastic purgatives, bark and astringents should be suspended during
the period of pregnancy;

Temperaments.

It is undoubtedly true that persons of different temperaments or ori-
ginal confirmations of body are differently affected by the operations of
medicines. Stimulants more readily affect those of a sanguine than
those of a phlegmatic temperament, and therefore smaller doses are
required. In the phlegmatic, also, the bowels are generally torpid,
and require both a description of purgatives and such doses as would
endanger an irritable and delicate constitution.

Habit.

Habits have considerable influence in modifying the operation of
medicines. Persons addicted to the use of spirits, narcotics, and other
stimulants, are less easily excited, "both by medicinal stimulants and
narcotics. Persons in the daily habit of taking purgatives, must take
a different article to produce much effect upon the bowels. In the em-
ployment of medicines, which require to be long-continued, the bene-
ficial effect is soon lost, if the doses be not increased.

Of the Form and Composition of Prescriptions.

In every prescription simplicity should be kept in view, and when
ferred. The nauseous taste, however, and other qualities of some
medicines, require the addition of others to modify their taste or
compound form, yet the practice of accumulating a great variety of in-
gredients in one prescription should be avoided.


Physical Diseases. 231

Medicines exhibited in a fluid form operate sooner, and with more
certainty than in the solid state; but in choosing the vehicle or solvent,
the taste of the patient ought not to be overlooked. Syrups do this
tolerably well. Medicines which when given alone produce griping,
require the addition of aromatics to correct that quality, and when
they operate with violence, mucilages or opiates are necessary to mod-
erate their action. In prescribing purgatives it is also necessary to
consider the particular part of the alimentary canal, on which they
immediately act. Thus, rhubarb acts chiefly on the upper part of tho
bowels, aloes on the lower, and jalap and senna on the whole intes-
tines.

Another reason for ordering medicines in a compound form, is the
necessity of producing two or more effects at one time. Thus the same
dose may be required in a case of colic, for example, to allay pain
and to open the bowels, or in fever to determine to the skin, to allay
irritation and to produce sleep. But in combining medicines, care must
be taken not to bring together incompatibles, or substances that de-
compose each other, or chemically combine, and consequently alter the
nature of the mixture, or render it inert, unless the resulting compound
1 lies are incompatible, unless the neutral salt be the remedy required.

Doses.

It should be remembered that when we speak of a tea-spoonful being
a dose, one of an ordinary size is meant, which is a fluid drachm.

When a table-spoonful is mentioned, one also of an ordinary size is
meant, and which is half an ounce.

Pills.

When the weight of pills is not mentioned, those of an ordinary
size are meant; they contain usually three grains.

I prefer this method, because it is much more convenient than to
weigh medicine every time it is necessary to administer it, and it is
sufficiently accurate for all ordinary medicines. When greater accura-
cy is required, the weight and measure will be mentioned.

Prescriptions.
Every prescription or direction for the administration of medicine,
very plain and explicit. The quantity to be given, and the time when
it should be given, ought to be particularly mentioned, and these direc-
tions ought to be left with the nurse only. Many valuable lives have
been lost for the want of these precautions.


232 Physical Diseases.

CLASS L
CHAPTER I.

FEBRILE DISEASES'.


Character.

This class of diseases is characterised by an increase of heat, an ac-
celerated pulse, a foul tongue, and an impaired state of several func-
tions of the body.


SECTION I.

FEVERS IN GENERAL.

" In tracing the progress of fever in its direful and disastrous
course," says Robertson, " we are compelled to regard a remedy, at
once safe and powerful to still its raging, as one of the most signal ben-
efits which the Deity has conferred on man. When we cast our eye
over the map of human misery, and mark the monuments of the de-
stroyer — the scenes of battle and devastation, spread out over all the
nations of the world, where he has marched with death and fever in-
his power, and to baffle his malignity ; we may exclaim with the poet :

" For thou, ten thousand, thousand years,
Hast seen the gush of human tears,
Which shall no longer flow."

The tears that have bedewed the earth, were we to calculate their
sum, poured out for the dead that have fallen by this one disease called
fever, they would form an ocean that might swim the living! Were the
cold and ghastly forms of the victims that have sunk into the silence of
everlasting sleep, by this one disease, since the history of the son of the
Shunamite to the present time, collected into one monument, they would
form a mountain that would astonish heaven, and terrify the earth ! What
heart has not bled over a beloved friend 1 ? over children dearer than their
own soul? over the wife or husband of their youth? And how many
have seen all their earthly comforts wither under the sweeping siroc of
this pervading and desolating storm ? Yes ! from the first thrill of the
agitated nerve, the stinging pain, the hot and heaving breast, to "the
pestilence that walketh in darkness, and the destruction that wasteth
openly at noon day ;" the human race, smitten in all its members, con-
sumed in every limb, has sunk to the house of silence, in multitudes in-


Physical Diseases. ^33

numerable, under the single pressure of this destructive power. Look
at the east and west, the silent cities, the untrodden streets, the dismal,
dark array of travellers on the path of death — and ask, who hath done
all this? what enemy hath been here? Echo, from her thousand caves,
would ring out her response, fever! fever! fever! This is the disease
which, to break, to bailie, to conquer, or subdue, the learned Colleges
of Physicians have tried all their efforts, and spent their skill in vain. It
must run its course, is the common sentiment; if one mode of treatment
fails, we must try another, and another, and another, till the exhausted
imagination, the worn out sources of the materia medica, and the dy-
ing patient, arrest the hand of the experimenter, (and, I might have
said, tormentor,) or nature triumphs equally over medicine and disease.

" The practice of medicine is, perhaps, the only instance in which a
man can profit by his blunders and mistakes. The very medicines which
aggravate and protract the malady, bind a laurel on the Professor's
brow; when, at last, the sick is saved by the living powers of nature
struggling against death and the physician. He receives all the credit
of a miraculous cure ; he is lauded to the skies, for delivering the sick
from a detail of the most deadly symptoms of misery, into which he
himself had plunged them; and out of which they never would have
arisen, but by the recuberating efforts of that living power, which, at
once, triumphed over poison, and disease, and death."

The causes which have conspired to cover with uncertainty the treat-
ment of fever, and to arm the members of the faculty often against
each other, are numerous and important. A brief detail would unfold
the many causes of error, and the fatal consequences which often re-
sult from the established practice.

Doctor Eberle, who has lately written a treatise on the Theory and
Practice of Medicine, thus remarks: " When indeed it is considered
that the destroying angel has made his most desolating visitations under
the form of febrile epidemics; and that in the long list of human mala-
dies fever occurs in perhaps nine cases out of ten, the paramount im-
portance of this subject is strongly forced upon our convictions."

"If we except," says Van Swieten, "those who perish by a violent
death, and such as are extinguished by mere old age, and which are in-
deed few, almost all the rest die either of fever, or of diseases accom-
panied with fever. We read in Pliny with what fear and trembling the
Romans endeavoured to have this universal disease — fever, appeased by
their supplications in the temple of Fanum. And hence perhaps it is
that fevers are called diseases by Hesiod, and that Horace calls all dis-
eases simply fevers when they rushed out of the box of Pandora."

Dr. Donaldson who published a new Theory and Practice of Fevers,
remarks as follows :

" From a retrospective glance at the history of our science, we are
forced to acknowledge that there is perhaps no subject which is more
eminently calculated to humble the pride of human reason than this one.
For, in relation to this subject especially, pathology has been in a con-
tinued state of revolution and instability. The human mind has been
engaged with this subject for near three thousand years. Theories have
risen and sunk again in a continued and rapid series of succession ; each.

Vol. I. 30


234 Physical Diseases.

has had its hour "to strut upon the stage," and its votaries to yield it
faith; but the stream of time has hitherto overturned all these unsub-
stantial, though often highly wrought fabrics."

Dr. Cole, of Worcester, suggested the idea, that the proximate cause
or nature of fever, depends on a laxity or debility of the brain and ori-
gin of the nerves. Bozelli and Cole were the only persons, who prior
to the celebrated Hoifman, considered the nervous system to be the seat
of the proximate cause of fever. These doctrines of the preternatural
acrimony of the nervous fluid of Bozelli, of Italy, of nervous laxity or
debility of Cole, and spasm and atony of Hoffman, were imbibed by
the celebrated Dr. Cullen, of Scotland, and have been implicitly be-
lieved by almost all physicians of modern Europe with very little al-
terations, in the manner of explaining them.

Dr. W. Cullen, of Edinburgh, adopted the doctrine of spasm and
atony of the extreme arteries, and laboured hard to explain the proxi-
mate cause or nature of fever as consisting of this universal spasm, pro-
duced by the remote causes of the disease, or rather the vis medicatrix
natural; which suppositions of the nature of fever, says Dr. Jackson,
are mere subterfuges, and mysterious ways of acknowledging the gross-
est ignorance of the subject, and adds, that the proximate cause of fe-
ver is a certain peculiar state of the body, on which the disease, or the
subsequent parts of the disease, necessarily depend. It is, in short, the
first essential action of the febrile cause; but this action is so intricate,
and difficult to be discovered, that physicians have sought for it in vain,
for more than two thousand years. The ancients were satisfied with the
ideas of preternatural heat, excited in the heart, and communicated to
the rest of the body by means of the blood, animal spirits, or nervous
influence; and the moderns have adopted the no less erroneous doctrine
of a spasmodic affection of the moving fibres, and weakened action of
the nervous system.

Dr. Benjamin Rush, of Philadelphia, implicitly imbibed the doctrines
of Brown and Darwin, in opposition to those of Cullen. He boldly as-
serts, that the essence of fever consists in an irregular action, or an ab-
sence of the natural order of motion, produced or invited by predispos-
ing debility ; that every fever consists of increased excitement, and is
seated in the blood vessels; and that all the local affections, called pleu-
risy, angina, phrenzy, inflammation of the liver, dropsy of the head,
consumption of the lungs, inflammations of the liver, stomach, intes-
tines, kidneys, and all other external and internal parts, are the mere
symptoms only of an original and primary disease of the sanguiferous
system, excepting in some local affections of the viscera produc-
ed by injuries, which bring the whole sanguiferous system into sym-
pathy. The irregular action of the arteries, constituting fever,
consisted, according to his theory in a spasm, convulsion, heat,
itching, and in suffocated excitement, which five constituents of preter-
natural action of the blood vessels, are imaginary creatures or beings of
a visionary brain, drawn from the celebrated and hypothetical systems
of Cullen, Brown, and Darwin. He further adds, that there is only one
exciting cause, and that is excitement; so he makes all fevers to consist
of an excess of excitement, which raises the powers of circulation to


Physical Diseases. 23o

a degree incompatible with the enjoyment of health, inducing mor-
bid actions, motions, sensations and operations, in the animal economy.

Thus we might trace the opinions of physicians in the different periods
of time, and in different nations,' respecting the real nature of lever, we
might show the relative ignorance of all men on this great subject, and
fully evince their defects in the knowledge of the nature and cure of
diseases, in all preceding ages, by the testimonies of their own writings;
whereby the whole science has been overwhelmed with floods of errors
and erroneous systems from the time of Hippocrates down to the pre-
sent age of learning and erudition; we might easily show, that the whole
art of medicine has been distracted by disputations and revolutions of
its theories, and that it continues still to fluctuate on the ocean of visions
and uncertainties, and theoretical hypotheses, of its cultivators, who have
either wished to exalt their names by the introduction of new systems
and doctrines, or have laboured hard to acquire riches by some egregious
impositions on mankind; and that very few have desired to advance the
science and art of medicine, in order to confer the most gratuitous and
lasting benefits on their fellow creatures. But time would tail us to speak
of the various systems of medicine, and review their numerous treatises,
and I shall, therefore, open to view the doctrines of the schools of medi-
cine of the present times, and shall then proceed to explain the doctrine
of the nature of fever, which I have discovered.

" I was educated," says Dr. Donaldson, " in the Gregorian doctrines of
the Edinburgh school of medicine; I was taught the theory of medi-
cine as delivered in his Conspectus, and was exercised in the Cullenian
discipline, divested of all his hypothetical errors of spasm and atony of
the extremities of arteries. I learned all the branches of the medical
science under the distinguished and erudite professors of the most cel-
ebrated university and school of medicine in the world. I always em-
braced plausible truths, and rejected visible errors, in theory and prac-
tice; I admitted doubtful hypotheses to have no place in my mind, to
influence my future practice. Even during my discipleship, I thought
for myself, and digested their instructions with an unfettered and inde-
pendent judgment and reasoning, and I had no sooner completed my
studies of the theoretical and practical science of medicine, and
other branches of learning, in the college of Edinburgh, than I re-
paired to the schools of London, so famous for anatomy and physi-
ology.

" Having finished my intended course in the metropolis of the British
empire, I launched into practice, under the auspices of a real imita-
tor of the Edinburgh school, and a follower of Clarke, Blane, Lind,
Thomas, &c. and soon had ample opportunities of witnessing the great
insufficiencies of the medical practice of the present day, in the hands
of the most skilful administrators and practitioners. In this situation I
soon had occasions to dissent from the doctrines of the schools, but
years elapsed before I could bring myself to deviate from the practice
which they, and the most esteemed authors, taught in their instructions
and works. 1 hesitated in the old road until T should discover a new
way by experience and observation, to keep me from stumbling on the
dark mountains of doubts and errors. I consulted all the most celebra-


236 Physical Diseases.

ted writings Of ancient and modern physicians ; I searched for light in
vain, to direct my steps.

" During my travels in the East-Indies, in the years 1810, '11, '14,
'15, and '16, I had many opportunities of trying every method of cu-
ring diseases of all descriptions, and of provin? the virtues and efficacies
of all remedies commonly employed by practitioners, as well as ol ma-
king all necessary alterations in former modes of treatment, and in the
choice of remedies. Fevers, fluxes, inflammations, affections of the
spleen and liver, apoplexies, palsies, spasms, &c. were the great dis-
eases that first attracted my attention, being under my own care and
treatment in those warm regions, and I was extremely mortified to find
all my remedies ineffectual to reduce inflammation, or subdue many
of those diseases, by the common method of treatment; and my pride
was humbled at the repeated disappointments I encountered, in being
baffled to cure them with the common remedies, carried to the same
extent, and administered with the same diligence, as recommended in
books, or by professors of medicine ; I administered purges, barks, and
wine, with the utmost rigour, in all cases of inter and remittent fevers;
I exhibited saline purges, opiates, mercurials, sudorifics, and nutrients,
in cases of dysentery, and found them all ineffectual to arrest the pro-
gressof fevers, or to cure the affections of dysentery, in many severe cases.
I could not produce an immediate crisis in fevers, nor remove the ago-
nies of fluxes ; they still continued to return, or to torture my patients,
in defiance of all the remedies that have been recommended by Drs.
Blane, Lind, Clarke, Chisholm, Cullen, Thomas, Philip, Hoffman,
Bcerhaave, Brown, Ferriar, Fordyce, Currie, Darwin, Jackson,
Wright, Fowler, Trotter, Haygarth, Heberden, Lieutaud, Hux-
ham, Russell, Macgregor, Falconer, Desgenettes, Milne, Dewar,
Bisset, Warren, Pringle, Buchan, Churchhill, Friend, Mead, &c.
who are supposed to have delivered the sentiments of the medical schools
in their days. Neither were the remedies employed by the most noted
of the ancients, as Hippocrates, Celsus, Galenus, Asclepiades, Them-
iston, Erasistratus, Diodes, Praxagoras, Aristoteles, Herophilus,
Heraclites, Apollonius, Sextius Niger, Julius Bassus, Oribasius,
Alexander, iEtius, Paulus, Palladius, Acmarius, Rhrasis, Avicenna,
Avenzoar, Averhoes, Alsaharavius, Constantinus, Hermes, Al
Tamini, Abul Pharagius, Ali Ebno, L'Abbas, Al Malice, Hoam-
ti, &c. among Egyptians, Grecians, Asiatics, Chinese, Africans,
&c. (see our history of medicine,) more successful in curing febrile
distempers. Having read and studied the medicine of the ancients and
moderns, I was able to choose those remedies, proposed in their wri-
tings, best calculated to cure disorders of the human frame, in all cli-
mates of the earth, and employ them to the greatest advantage ; but
without the knowledge of the real nature of fevers and fluxes, I still
laboured in the dark, and could not effect, in all cases, by the use of
such remedies, a solution of the disease under my care, with any de-
gree of certainty of success in the commencement; I was unacquaint-
ed with the principle on which those remedies acted to bring them to a
favourable crisis; I longed for that day when my knowledge of the na-
ture of the diseases, and of the virtues of the remedies employed to


Physical Diseases. 237

cure them, would enable me to cure the severest of them at pleasure, and
to liberate my fellow-creatures from the iron grasp of mortal affections,
and I began to lament the universal ignorance ol the professors of medi-
cine, respecting the nature of diseases.

" From that day till the present, I never have used the remedies com-
doctrines of the schools in the treatment of febrile diseases; I deter-
mined that no other patient of mine should ever become a victim to the
common old treatment pointed out by professors of medicine, and au-
thors of medical books. In tlie full belief of the doctrine which expe-
rience had taught me, I soon had the pleasure of seeing almost all my
patients recover from fevers, in the space of two, three, four, or five
days, whereas, according to the old method of treatment followed by
my contemporaries, patients laboured a month, six weeks, two or three
months, under a violent fever and its fatal dregs, and either died or
were restored by the mere efforts of nature, or languished under the
irremediable consequences of such disease, during the remainder of
their lives, in misery and infirmity.

"Thus it may be perceived, by the foregoing collection of facts,
how I came to possess a new doctrine and theory of fevers, and to in-
stitute a new method of treatment on the foundation of a sure and cer-
tain principle of practice, deduced from this doctrine, in the use and
application of remedies, more rational and successful than appears in
any system of medicine ever exhibited in ancient or modern times, as
far as I know, by the annals of medicine; and I now come forward to
open the discovery for the general benefit of mankind. In doing this
I shall be under the absolute necessity of exposing and rejecting all for-
mer opinions respecting the proximate causes or nature of diseases; I
shall have to combat the errors of the learned and ignorant, both in the
theory and practice of medicine, I shall be forced to reject all the erro-
neous doctrines of the schools in which 1 was educated ; I shall have
to defend my sentiments against all the invidious malignities and con-
tumelies of mine enemies, on the basis of infallible principles deduced
from, and depending on the truths and facts which I have discovered in
the nature of these diseases, by experience, observation, reflecting and
reasoning, so absolutely necessary to be known before we can succeed
in practice. Many self-confident and ignorant pretenders to the science
and art of medicine, are inclined to suppose that no errors exist, in the
present theories of the enlightened schools of Europe and America, to
combat, in the treatment of diseases.

" In fact, no physician whose works I have read, no professor of med-
icine whom I have heard speak on the nature of diseases, has ever dis-
covered, or even hinted at the nature and cure of fevers; all have de-
livered theories, which amount to open acknowledgments of their ig-
norance of it; or have candidly professed the universal ignorance of
all physicians in the world, of the former and present times, respecting
the nature of these diseases.

"I observed the plan of cure followed by the East-Indians in fevers.
I saw the practitioners cure the most vehement cases of intermittent
fevers in the space of a single day, with such a mathematical precision


238 Physical Diseases.

and certainty, as I never beheld in any region of the earth ; by pur-
ging, vomiting, and sweating, fyc.* I perceived that they also cured
Without knowing the nature of disease, or the principles of their prac-
tice ; and was led to believe all diseases curable, if we could only dis-
cover the remedies against them, and would apply these remedies in
due time and to sufficient extent, to effect these possible ends. Their
method of treatment consisted in the administration of a medicine that
effectually purged and vomited their patients, who were obliged at the
same time to use the steam bath, and to drink abundantly of warm teas
until copious or profuse sweat was produced, and the fever was me-
chanically reduced, leaving; nothing to be done by feeble nature, as the
ancient and modern practitioners of Europe were accustomed to do
many ages prior to the days of Bottallus and Sydenham.

" Having acquired a knowledge of these things relative to the nature
of febrile diseases, I was induced to abandon the common plan of
treatment, and to institute a new method of curing them with the use
of new remedies; but in the course of my investigations, I learned
from the annals of medical history, that there could be no advantage in
deserting the old path, until I had found a new one, well paved with
the solid rocks of experience, observation, and induction, in which I
would meet no impediments to my course of rational practice. On the
consideration of this circumstance, I rather concluded to conform my
practice, in some degree and measure, to the doctrine of the schools,
until I should sufficiently attest and establish my new doctrines and
principles, by lon^ and reiterated experience and observations, which
I deemed necessary to sanction any change in the generally approved
practice, and to ratify the truths of my doctrines and maxims by the suc-
cess of the remedies which 1 proposed to myself to employ in their
cure."


DESCRIPTION, OR DEFINITION OF FEVER.

Fever is an increased action of the heart and arteries, to expel from
the system irritating or morbific matter. It is salutary in its nature,
being the means used to throw off something that offends or oppresses
her. It is often fatal, but this is rather to be attributed to the fault of
the constitution, than the disease itself, or rather to the want of pro-
per remedies.

When a person is suddenly attacked by shiverings or rigours, follow-
ed by a hot skin, a quick pulse, and a feeling of languor and lassitude,
he is said to have an attack of fever. With such symptoms are usual-

* The East-Indians practice medicine with success; their skill is exemplified in
their manner of treating the diseases here mentioned; instead of rendering the pa-
tient worse by the lancet, mercury, &c. they cure a fever in the space of two days
with a "mathematical precision, by vomiting, sweating, and purging, the most ra-
tional, and powerful method that could be adopted." They reject bleeding as the
most absurd treatment imaginable; and make use of vegetable productions. A
gentleman well conversant with the Chinese, stated not long since, that in travel-
ting through the largest cities in India, not a single individual could be seen with
the loss of a limb; their treatment prevents the necessity of amputation.


Physical Diseases. 239

ly present also a loss of appetite, thirst, restlessness, and diminish-
ed secretion. These constitute the leading symptoms of lever, the
characteristic features by which its presence may always he detected.
Every function of the body indeed is more or less disturbed.


CAUSES.

As much controversy and speculation as there is respecting the pa-
thology or nature of fever, we think there is no complaint that is more
simple or easily understood, as regards causes, symptoms, and treat-
ment.

It would be too tedious further to enumerate the various theories that
have been maintained, respecting the origin and nature of this class of
diseases. We shall therefore omit this, and enter into a practical dis-
quisition of the subject.

I shall now speak of the remote, intermediate, and proximate cause
of fever.

We may consider fever a unit; that the various phenomena of the
complaint, depend not upon any specific difference in the many types
of fever, but consist, rather, in the various exciting causes, habit, tem-
perament, &c.

Remote Causes.

In general, every cause capable of producing a departure from a
healthy standard, predisposes the system to fever.

1st. High atmospheric temperature may be mentioned as a cause.

2d. Cold. — As a cause of fever, cold plays a very important part.
It diminishes the action of the capillary vessels, giving a pale, shrunk-
en and dry state of the skin. It also diminishes the sensibility of the
system.

The most prolific and fruitful source of disease is cold, united with
moisture. When the atmosphere is cold and dry, it seldom causes any
complaint; but in damp, wet, and very cold weather, the system be-
comes more susceptible of morbid impressions. Much, however, de-
pends upon the state of the body when exposed to cold. If it be very
gradually applied, it can be borne with impunity. But if it be applied
suddenly, and especially when there is great perspiration, fever or in-
flammation succeeds.

All sudden transitions from heat to cold, or cold to heat, are sources
of fever. The capillary system ceases to perform its office, or performs
it imperfectly, the consequence of which is, that vitiated blood recedes
from the surface, and is accumula'ed in too great a quantity upon the
heart, and large arteries, which causes in them an unnatural or preter-
natural effort to return it to its original channels, or into the vessels of
the skin, to relax or overcome its constriction, and thereby expel the
irritating, morbific, or perspirable matter.

3d, Heat. — Heat may also be reckoned as a remote or predisposing
cause to fever. Dr. James Johnson, in speaking of the effect of heat upon


240 Physical Diseases.

the system, thus remarks : " Solar heat produces only the predisposition,
while terrestrial exhalations and cold, call into action the principal dis-
eases of hot climates.

The mode in which solar heat contributes to the production of dis-
ease, appears to be either by augmenting the general irritability of the
system, or more generally, by exciting inordinate functional action of
the skin and the liver, and thereby rendering them more susceptible of
the paralyzing impression of cold.

Between the skin and the liver there exists a close and powerful sym-
pathy, in consequence of which, whatever excites the functions of the
former, produces perhaps an equal increase of the functions of the lat-
ter organ.

Heat also operates as a cause of fever, by extricating or evolving
certain deleterious gases or agents.


INFECTION.

Deleterious Effluvia.

By this term we understand a class of febrile agents floating in the
air, and which is taken into the circulation through the medium of the
lungs. It may be divided into three kinds:

1. Effluvia arising from the decomposition of vegetable agents.

2. An effluvia produced by a person in a state of disease.

3. Etfluvia from putrid animal substances.

1. Marsh or Vegetable Effluvia.

The effluvia arising from the decomposition of vegetable matter, aid-
ed by a suitable degree of heat, and perhaps moisture, mixes with the
atmosphere and contaminates it. This is taken into the system, and if
not thrown off by some of the excretory ducts, proves an exciting cause
of fever. " This morbific agent," says a writer, " was not unknown
to the ancient Greek physicians. They personified this aeriform poi-
son under the emblem of a many-headed monster, whose pestiferous
influence was so severely exercised over the luxuriant fields of Argolis,
that it was made one of the labours of the potent son of Alcmenus to rid
the country of this dreaded source of pestilence. Hercules, accordingly
drained the extensive Lernean marshes, and thus dried up this abun-
dant source of pestiferous emanations."

It is a fact worthy of remark, that persons residing in very elevated
situations, are less liable to become affected from the influence of
marsh effluvia, than those who reside in low situations in the neighbor-
hood of marshes. This has been repeatedly demonstrated. But how
far this noxious air may be diffused sufficient to produce fever, is doubt-
ful. Bancroft thinks it rarely extends beyond a quarter of a mile, and
mentions several facts to prove this assertion. The effluvia arising
from marshes, seems to be emitted much more at night than in the day
time ; hence there is much greater danger of contracting fevers during


Physical Diseases. 243

that period. Delisle says, that the most dangerous period in the twen-
ty-four hours of the day, is, that which accompanies the setting, and
that which immediately precedes the rising of the sun; and the least
critical time, is, when the sun is at the highest point above the horizon.

It prevails extensively on fresh water rivers and streams, but it seems
to be very much counteracted by salt water.

Marsh effluvia produces fever quite different in its general character
from that produced by animal or other poisonous effluvia. It generates
various grades of bilious fevers, intermittent and remittent. It also
produces a bilious state of the system, enlargement of the liver, spleen,
jaundice, &c. An author remarks that "the indigenous inhabitants of
marshy districts, in warm climates, present an aspect of suffering and
wretchedness from this cause, which is well calculated to draw forth the
commiseration of those who are more fortunately located. Continually
exposed to the deleterious influence of these baneful exhalations, man.
in such situations, exhibits a state of feebleness and early decrepitude
strongly indicative of a broken down constitution, and deep and irre-
mediable chronic disease." Custom or habit renders the influence of
this effluvia less injurious to the system, and less susceptible of its im-
pression. Hence persons from a northern climate on their arrival to a
southern one, much more readily experience the effects of it, than the
natives. To such it is more serious and fatal. There are also varieties
of this effluvia depending on various causes. Doctor Johnson expresses
the same sentiment. He states that the fever of Batavia differs from
the fever of Walcheren. The fever of Antigua from the fever of the
Ganges, and all these differ materially from the plague of the Levant.

The influence of this poisonous gas on the human system, depends on
the state of the body, on temperament, predisposition, and many other
things. Thus, of a number of persons exposed to this effluvia, some
may have the intermittent, others the remittent, and some the malig-
nant bilious fever. The most simple form arising from it, is the inter-
mittent. As it increases, it produces a higher and more violent grade
of fever. It may extend from the simple fever and ague, to the malig-
nant and fatal plague. Of the time which intervenes between the re-
ception of the effluvia and the first appearance of it on the body, is va-
rious and uncertain. Of an equal number of persons exposed at the
same time, one may have it immediately as it were, another in a few
days, and another in several weeks, while some will remain free from
it altogether. Notwithstanding these great diversities, the essential na-
ture of this effluvia is every where the same.

It is an established fact, that marsh and other effluvia, passing over
bays or rivers of water, are absorbed and annihilated.

Daily experience still confirms, that it is in the neighbourhood of
marshes, and all such places where vegetable and animal putrefaction
takes place to any extent, that pestilential and other diseases of various
grades and violence prevail. Epidemics, attended with carbuncles and
buboes, which are denominated, in conjunction with ordinary symptoms
of what is called jail and hospital fever, the characteristics of the plague,
down to the mildest intermittents, have appeared, and raged with ex-

Vol. I. 31


242 Physical Diseases.

traordinary violence, occasioned by the exhalations from puti'ii'ying
animal and vegetable substances.

The numerous testimonies of the most judicious writers, shew, that
there are few climates where instances have not occurred of malignant
epidemic and endemic diseases from these sources. Bengal, on both
sides of the Ganges, and Egypt, annually overflowed by the Nile, ex-
perience an unhealthy and pesUlcniial atmosphere, immediately after
the exhalations from the putrifying collections of vegetable and animal
matter begin to arise, which diffusing themselves in the air, bring on
diseases of various grades of malignancy, according to the greater or
less contaminated state of the atmosphere, and other concomitant cir-
cumstances. Of Grand Cairo, Dr. Mead observes — " It is situated in
a sandy plain, at the foot of a mountain, which, by keeping off the
winds that would refresh the air, makes the heat very stifling. Through
the midst of it passes a canal, which is filled with water during the over-
flowing of the Nile, and after the river is decreased, it gradually dries
up. Into this canal the people throw all kinds of filth, carrion, &c. so
that the stench arising from it, and the mud together, is insufferable.
In this situation of things, the plague every year constantly preys upon
the inhabitants, and is only stopped when the Nile, by overflowing,
washes away the load of filth." Of Bengal thus — " During the rain,
this rich and fertile country is covered by the Ganges, and converted
as it were into a large pool of water. In the month of October, when
the stagnated water begins to be exhaled by the heat of the sun, the air
is then greatly polluted by the vapours from the slime and mud left by
the Ganges, and by the corruption of dead fish and other animals. Dis-
eases then rage — fevers of the remitting and intermitting kind. If the
season be very sickly, some are seized with a malignant fever, of which
they soon die. The body is covered with blotches of a livid colour,
and the corpse, in a few hours, turns quite livid and corrupted. At
this time fluxes prevail." He further observes, that the island of Bom-
bay has been rendered much more healthy than it formerly was, by a
wall, built to prevent the encroachments of the sea, where it formed a
salt marsh ; and by an order, that none of the natives should manure
their cocoa-trees with putrid fish. He also observes of Bencoolen, in
the island of Sumatra, that it is the most unhealthy of all the East India
settlements; but that by building their fort on a dry, elevated place,
about three miles from the town, it became sufficiently healthy. Bata-
via, the capital of the Dutch East India dominions, (Dr. Lynd) is an-
nually subject to a fatal and consuming sickness: " It has been remark-
ed, that the sickness rages with the greatest violence when the rains
have abated, and the sun has evaporated the water in the ditches, so
that the mud begins to appear. The stench from the mud is intolera-
ble." Mr. Ives, in his journal of a journey from India to Europe by
land, observes, that Gambroon, in Persia, is very unhealthful, and
that various authors, as well as the present English factory, " impute
its unhealthiness, during the summer months, to the noxious effluvia
with which the air is contaminated from the great quantities of blubber-
fish left by the sea upon the shore, and which very soon become highly
offensive." The same writer observes of Bassorah, that fifteen years


Physical Diseases. 243

before his visit to this place, the banks of the river Euphrates having
been demolished by the Arabs, to revenge an injury done them by the
Turks, its environs were inundated. "The stagnating water in the ad-
jacent country, and the great quantity of dead and corrupted fish at that
time lying upon the shore, polluted the whole atmosphere, and produ-
ced a putrid and most mortal fever, of which between twelve and four-
teen thousand of the inhabitants perished; and at the same time, not
above two or three of the Europeans who were settled there escaped."
It is further observed of this place, (Tytler's Treatise) by a gentleman
residing there in 1780, " that the canal that runs through a great part of
the city being filled with the bodies of animals, and all kinds of putrid
matters; and, at low tides, all these substances exposed to the sun,
made the air in the town scarce supportable; and, being totally desti-
tute of police, the streets were in many places covered with human or-
dure, the bodies of dead dogs and cats, &c. which emitted a stench
more disagreeable and putrid than any thing he ever experienced."
" In all spots, (Dr. Lynd) in the East Indies, situated near large swamps,
or the muddy banks of rivers, or the foul shores of the seas, the vapours
exhaling from putrid stagnated water, produces mortal diseases." He
more particularly mentions, that the yellow fever often rages at Green-
wich Hospital, in Jamaica, which, he observes, was built near a marsh,
and could not proceed from any source of infection in the hospital. He
every where attributes the yellow fever to the vapours arising from pu-
trifying vegetable and animal substances. Dr. Clark, in his " Obser-
vations on the diseases of long voyages to hot countries," mentions a
contagious malignant fever, which prevailed at Prince Island, in 1771,
produced from the exhalations of putrifying vegetable substances.

The plague, which caused so great terror and mortality in London,
1625 and 163G, according to the account given of it by Mr. Woodal,
surgeon to St. Bartholomew's hospital, and surveyor-general to the East
India company, who was present the two years it prevailed there, was
evidently generated in that city, from causes similar to those already re-
lated. He says — "The terrestrial causes (after mentioning it as a
punishment inflicted on mankind for their sins) are, by common consent
of most writers, as followeth ; venomous, stinking vapours, arising from
standing ponds or pools, ditches, lakes, dunghills, sinks, channels, vaults,
or the like ; as also, unclean slaughter-houses of beasts, dead carcasses
of men, as in time of war, and of stinking fish, fowl, or any thing that
hath contained life, and is putrid; as also, more particularly in great ci-
ties, as London, the unclean keeping of houses, lanes, alleys, and streets:
from those recited, and the like infectious venomous vapours, by warmth
of the sun exhaled, are apt and able to infect the living bodies of men,
and thereby to produce the plague, as experience too much showeth."

" According to Dr. St. John, the aeriform fluid, which is exhaled from
animal bodies in a state of putrefaction, acts at certain times more pow-
erfully than at others, and is indeed in one stage of the process infinite-
ly more noxious than any other elastic fluid yet discovered. Dr. St.
John informs, that he knew a gentleman, who, by slightly touching the
intestines of a human body, beginning to liberate this corrosive gas, was
affected with a violent inflammation, which in a very short time extend-


iJ44 Physical Diseases.

ed up almost the entire length of his arms, producing an extensive ulcer
of the most foul and frightful appearance, which continued for several
months, and reduced him to a miserable state of emaciation. He men-
tions, also, a celebrated professor, who was attacked with a violent in-
flammation of the nose and fauces, from which he with difficulty reco-
vered, by stooping for an instant over a body, which was beginning to
give forth this deleterious fluid. Hence he infers, that the tame tros,
f carbonic acid,) modified or mixed, or united with other.'., may be the
occasion of the plague, which has so often threatened to annihilate the
human species.

In the war of 1775, in Germany, a destructive fever prevailed, attributed
then to an infection of the air by the putrid effluvia from the vast num-
bers killed in battle, and also to a calm in the atmosphere for a long time.

" Pringle, Jackson, Hume, Mosely, M'Lane, and a number of otiier
medical writers, ancient and modern, might be cited, in proof that ef-
fluvia, from animal and vegetable putrefaction, may give rise to, and are
the common causes of, malignant and pestilential diseases. But there
is no occasion for consulting books, knowing the opinion of any, or go-
ing abroad for confirmation of what has been advanced respecting the
origin of malignant diseases. Our own observations, and the evidence
of our senses, are quite sufficient to convince, I must not say all, that
they do not arise from any other cause, so far as any material agent is
concerned. Dr. Reynolds, (Webster's Collection, page 197) states a
case of fever in a young woman, evidently excited by the effluvia of a
putrid carcass, lying on the borders of a marshy piece of ground, where
she was obliged frequently to pass and repass. She was at first affected
with violent pains in the head, and sickness at her stomach. On the
second day she was bled; but her fever increased, and she became de-
lirious: a number of blisters, surrounded by inflammation, appeared upon
her feet and hands, fingers and toes; she died on the fourth day. Dr.
Bayley, in his treatise on the epidemic of New- York, in 1795, states a
case of fever produced from the exhalations of vegetables in a state of
putrefaction. The cause was detected from an unusual and offensive
smell, which proceeded from the cellar. Two persons went down to ex-
amine, and found, in one corner of a small tight room, a quantity of
June cabbages, on which the sun had shone about three hours in a day ;
they were rotten, and had fallen down in a lump of putrefaction. On
being stirred, there immediately issued forth such an intolerable stench,
as obliged those in the cellar to quit it instantly. Vomiting came on,
which lasted nearly an hour. Three persons in the family were taken
with all the leading symptoms of the yellow fever.

There can be no doubt but stagnated water is a very common cause
of fever, under any circumstances. It is related in Goldsmith's Ani-
mated Nature, that a vessel became becalmed in the ocean, near the
Cape of Good Hope. When the water had been perfectly still for some
time, its surface was covered with a green slime, and numerous snakes
and other animals were seen in different directions. The consequence
of this corrupted state of the water, was, that a number of the crew be-
came sick of a fever and soon died. As soon as they were favoured
with a breeze, no more were attacked, and recovery of the sick succeed-


Physical Diseases. 24o

cd. This fact shows that a deleterious gas or effluvia proceeded from
the water and generated the disease.

2. Human Effluvia.
By this term we understand such a secretion from the body of a per-
son labouring under disease, as is capable of producing another of a
similar nature, aided also by filth, heat, and other causes. It occurs
in crowded apartments, jails, hospitals, ships, &c. and other places not
duly ventilated. Dr. Smith of N. w-York observes, that this effluvia is
especially generated in the apartments of the sick, particularly of those
who are labouring under a typhus state oi fiver. Dr. Ehorle of Phila-
delphia says: " 1 would restrict this term io those morbific effluvia which
are generated by decomposition of the animal secretions, whether form-
ed in a state of health or disease, and to the ordinary exhalations from
the body, when accumulated in such a manner as to deteriorate the at-
mosphere of confined rooms, if these be really capable in themselves,
and without decomposition, of exciting fevers." This effluvia is the
source of typhus and some other continued fevers. Dr. Smith supposes
that a mixture, or the combined agency of human or animal and vege-
table effluvia, may produce fevers of a novel or anomalous character.
" Let us suppose," says he, " the circumstances in which typhus origi-
nates to occur in summer, such as the crowding of individuals into small
apartments, badly ventilated, and rendered offensive by personal and
domestic filth. These causes would obviously produce typhus in its
ordinary form. But suppose there exist at the same time those exhala-
tions which occasion plague and yellow fever, or intermittent and remit-
tent fevers. Under such circumstances, we should not expect to see
any one of those diseases fully and distinctly formed, but a disease of a
novel or modified character." There exists no doubt in my mind, of
the correctness of Dr. Smith's observation, that the late Banker-street
fever in New-York, as well as the peculiar fever which prevailed among
the blacks in this city a few years ago, were engendered by the united
inlluence of these two miasmal poisons. I once had a striking illustra-
tion of the anomalous and fatal character which the united action of
marsh and animal effluvia are apt to impart to fever. During the fall
of 1814, while attending in the capacity of regimental surgeon in the
encampment at Baltimore, ten men affected with mild remitting fever,
were lodged in a room of confined dimensions, and as the weather was
cold, the room was kept pretty waim by fire, and the doors and win-
dows as little opened as was admissible. The adjoining room was ex-
ceedingly crowded witli invalids, and but little attention was paid to
cleanliness and ventilation. In a short time several cases of fatal ty-
phus occurred in this room. Soon after this, the patients who were af-
fected with intermitting fever in the next room, manifested new and
more alarming symptoms; blood began to ooze from their gums; ex-
treme tenderness of the epigastrium occurred; the intellect was but lit-
tle disturbed; the eyes were dull, watery, and staring; the temperature
Of the skin and the pulse nearly natural; the animal powers so little
prostrated, thai one of the men died a few minutes after he had been
sitting up with his back leaned against the wall of the room. Thev


"2-Hi Physical Diseases.

were all immediately removed to the Baltimore Hospital, and all except
one died in a few days. There can be no doubt, that this peculiar
modification of febrile disease was the result of the impressions of idio-
miasmata (engendered in the house) made on systems already under
the morbific influence of koino-miasmata, or marsh and animal effluvia.'"

Under this head may be enumerated the effluvia or contagion, arising
from persons labouring under small-pox, measles, scarlet fever, &c.

There is an instance recorded in the New-England Medical Journal,
from Dr. J. A. Allen, in the state of Vermont, of three persons having
died in one house of typhus gravior or malignant typhus. The weather
being unusually warm, the corpses of the two last suddenly run into the
putrefactive process, and not being deposited in coffins sufficiently close,
the effluvia evolved was very offensive to the people who attended the
funeral ceremonies. Nearly all who were exposed to those septic gases
had an attack of the disease ; and from the sick it was communicated to
their attendants through the season, and thus it became epidemical. The
interim of time from exposure to an attack, was from ten to twenty-one
days. The spasmodic cholera maybe communicated in the same manner.

3. Animal Effluvia.

Putrid animal matter is another cause of fever. Magendie found that
on exposing different animals to the exhalations arising from putrid ani-
mal matter, diseases were produced in them, similar to those produced
by pestilential effluvia. It is therefore very probable that such putrid
agents floating in the atmosphere, constitute the deleterious principle
of putrid animal effluvia, and that the different kinds, or modifications
of disease produced by it, depend upon the state of the system, pecu-
liarity of constitution, the quality of noxious effluvia, and the substan-
ces from which it is derived.

It has been from this source that many pestilential fevers have origi-
nated in different parts of Europe, particularly after battles. The gas
or effluvia arising from the decomposition of dead bodies after a battle,
when they have been suffered to lay above ground, has caused fevers of
the most fatal character.

It appears very evident, that contagious diseases, fevers particularly,
are communicated to the system through the medium of the lungs, and
not the stomach, as some suppose. The small-pox cannot be commu-
nicated by conveying the poison or virus into the stomach, as has been
proved; but on exposing animals to the effluvia arising from putrid sub-
stances, they became diseased and died. After this poison has been
taken into the circulation, it acts as a foreign, or extraneous agent to
the internal surface of the heart and arteries, and there is immediately
commotion or effort to dislodge it by the skin or the other excretions,
and if they perform their offices, well; if the perspiration be not ob-
structed, or if it be free, such agents or poisonous effluvia will be car-
ried off without much shock or injury to the system. But on the con-
trary, if it be predisposed to the disease by any means whatever, fever
becomes established to effect what the powers of nature are unable to
accomplish. It is under such circumstances that her salutary efforts
must be aided.


Physical Diseases. -4/

The reason why the stomach is generally so much affected m febrile
diseases, is in consequence of the lungs and their appendages being
lined with a continuation of the mucus tissue of the prima vice, or first
passages, and therefore being more accessible to the deleterious air or
effluvia inhaled or inspired.

Had Broussais reflected upon this fact, his doctrine of fever probably
would have been different.

It is stated that forests, a high wall or fence, mountains,, hills, &c.
are sufficient to prevent the spread of these deleterious gases. Delisle
relates many facts to corroborate this statement. A convent situated
on Mount Argental, near the village of St. Stephens, was for a long
time remarkable for its salubrity, until the trees, with which it was
surrounded, were cut down. It then became very sickly.

These deleterious gases are carried to a considerable distance, and
communicate fevers. It is stated by Lancisci, that thirty Roman no-
blemen were sailing near the mouth of the Tiber, when suddenly the
wind shifted, and blew over the putrid marshes. Twenty-nine out of
the thirty were seized with the intermittent fever. The pestilential ef-
fluvia from the swamps of Benin, produced great ravages.

Thunder storms and showers have a powerful tendency to clear the
air of pestilential effluvia. After sultry, humid weather, intermittent
and other fevers often become prevalent, and they remit after showers
or storms.

According to the experiments of Professor Julia, of Lyons, it would
appear that: —

1. The deleterious influence of these effluvia, depends on particles
of putrid animal or vegetable matter dissolved and suspended in aqueous
vapour.

2. The air of marshes does not differ from atmospheric air in any of
the principles which chemical analysis can detect.

3. None of the gases, disengaged from bodies in a state of putrefac-
tion, exhibit themselves in a sensible quantity.

4. The disorders caused by marsh effluvia, are not, in any degree,
dependent on the predominance of azote.

Among the various remote causes of fever, we may enumerate, great
exertions or fatigue, certain passions of the mind suddenly excited, such
as fear, grief, and anxiety, unwholesome air, extreme degrees of heat
and cold as before illustrated, absorption of pus or matter, indigestible
food, suppression of the usual evacuations, external or internal injuries,
excessive evacuations, onanism, &c.

Intermediate Causes.

Among the various intermediate causes of fever, may be ranked, a
morbid state of the stomach, arising either from vitiated bile, worms, or
other sources of irritation. This morbid condition of the stomach, how-
ever, sometimes arises from the deleterious state of the atmosphere. A
late French author, Broussais, maintains that the source of all diseases
originates in the stomach and first passages, or the mucous membrane
of the alimentary canal. This he terms, gastro enteritis. In accord-


S>4S Physical Diseases.

mildest and simplest medicines, leeches over the region of the stomach,
glysters, &c.

Bat tlie principal and almost only intermediate cause of fever, is ob-
struction in the capillary vessels; cold, suddenly applied or long con-
tinued, acts as a sedative, closes the pores, and thus becomes a pow-
erf.il intermediate cause of fever. A viscid state of the blood or other
fluids, may m part cause this obstruction.

Nature* in such circumstances, appears to be retreating before some
powerful invader; but when the sedative powers are violent and sud-
denly applied, she makes strong efforts to relieve herself, and the gates
of this tumultuous city are barred, whilst she is assembling all her for-
ces to expel the enemy; for, during the paroxysm of fever, the pores
are strongly closed, whilst the vital energy is evidently concentrated and
collected in the heart, which propels the blood with renewed vigour
through the arterial system in its whole extent.

It is not found easy to explain how debility produces this spasmo-
dic contraction, but it is imputed to the vis medicatrix natures, or the
law in the animal economy above mentioned, by which motions are ex-
cited to obviate the effects of any thing noxious to the constitution; and
that the spasm exists, appears from the suppression of all excretions,
and the shrinking of the external parts, during the cold stage. This
proves an indirect stimulus to the sanguiferous system, by throwing the
blood, mixed with acrid perspirable matter, back with violence upon
the heart and large arteries, and exciting them to stronger and more
frequent contractions; which increased action of the heart and arteries
continues till it restores the diminished energy of the brain, extends this
energy to the extreme vessels, overcomes the spasm, restores their ac-
tion, on which sweat breaks forth, the other excretories are also relax-
ed, and the fever abates.

Proximate Cause.

The proximate or immediate cause of fever, is a retention of acrid,
stimulating, or morbific matter or humours, which, instead of being
carried off by the outlets or excretions of the system, enter the circula-
tion, and stimulate the heart and arteries to an undue and increased
action, to overcome the obstruction of the capillary vessels, and to ex-
pel such morbific matter.* The seat of fever then is in the blood ves-
sels or the vascular system. It is well known that most fevers follow a
sudden check of perspiration. Hence it is evident that the exciting
cause must be in the blood, and arise from an excess of stimulus, or a
morbid excitement applied to the heart and arteries, or the sanguiferous
system. This fact is demonstrated by the phenomena of eruptive dis-
ease, small-pox, measles, &c. This infection or contagion is taken in-
to the blood through the medium of the lungs, and as soon as it becomes
sufficiently impregnated with the specific humour or virus, a preternatu-
ral action of the blood vessels immediately takes place. Nature is arous-
ed, and makes a powerful effort or struggle to expel the poison from the
system. As soon as she accomplishes this object, the exciting cause or

■ Dr. Mitchill supposed this agent to be carbonic acid gas, mixed with oxygen.


Physical Diseases. 249

agent in these eruptive complaints is thrown copiously to the surface,
and appears in the form of vesicles or eruptions, and when they are
thus expelled, the fever immediately subsides, but will reappear, if
from debility or other causes, the poison or humour are absorbed. It
is the case also in hectic fever, as almost every one knows ; matter from
the lungs or an ulcer is taken into the circulation, and causes fever. It
is also proved from the termination of fever by sweat, and also by fever
sores. These facts reduce it to a mathematical demonstration, and
render the subject so simple and plain, that it is really a matter of pro-
found astonishment that any one the least acquainted with fever, should
be ignorant of their nature, cause, and cure.

" The veinous system," says Bichat, " may be regarded as a genera}
Teservoir, into which are poured all the materials which are to be thrown
out of the body, and all those which are to enter it. In this last respect,
this system of vessels performs an essential part in the production and
support of diseases. The deleterious substances may be introduced in-
to the blood-vessels with the chyle, and produce ravages in the system
in circulating with the fluids. There can be no doubt, moreover, that
besides the principles which convert the veinous into arterial blood,
there often passes through the lungs into the circulation deleterious mias-
mata, which produce diseases, as my experiments on asphyxia have
proved. The intestines, the lungs, and the skin, are the three avenues
through which the morbific agents may gain admission into the circu-
lation."

If I mistake not, Eberle maintains similar, if not the same views,
He observes on the subject of fever: " Besides the source of direct
vascular irritation already mentioned, there is another one perhaps still
more common and extensive in its influence — namely, retained excre-
mentitious elements, in consequence of accidental glandular torpor or
inactivity. ' If one organ is impeded in its office of ridding the econo-
my of certain noxious materials, and not vicariously supplied by any
other, such materials must therefore accumulate in the blood, and be-
come; a source of irritation throughout the system ; but more especially
to the organ whose function it is to eliminate them. Thus, if from cer-
tain causes, the elements entering into the composition of bile abound in
the system, a source of disorder or of irritation is present in the blood.
This irritating cause must act upon those parts which are sensible to its
impressions, and to which it is incessantly and immediately applied.
Derangement of the whole vascular system becomes the consequence of
such irritation offered to the nerves, ramified upon the heart and blood-
vessels, but more especially in the organ destined to combine and to
secrete, under new forms, the materials now so abundantly presented
to it.' Thus too, if the cutaneous exhalation be arrested in consequence
of the sudden influence of cold, a large portion of the recrementitious
perspirable matter will be retained in the circulation. If this be not re-
moved out of the system by the vicarious functions of some other organ,
the whole mass of the blood will become surcharged with substances
which the welfare of the economy requires to be cast off, and which
must necessarily impart a morbific, or irritating quality to the blood.
This circumstance, therefore, with the internal congestions which usuallv

Vol. T. 32


250 Physical Diseases.

attend torpor of the cutaneous oxhalents, becomes a direct source of irrita-
tion to the heart and arteries, and consequently of febrile excitement."

With all the evidence which we possess, therefore, that the blood fre-
quently becomes charged with substances of an irritating or deleterious
character, there can surely exist no reasonable doubt that fever must
sometimes be the result of a direct and primary irritation of the heart
and arteries; for it will, most assuredly, not be denied tiiat agents which
are capable of causing morbid impressions on the nerves of the skin,
the alimentary canal, or of any other organ, will be equally capable of
producing irritation in the heart and arteries, when they are brought in
immediate contact with their internal surface."

These morbific agents may likewise act upon some organ, cause in-
flammation, and thereby produce symptomatic fever.

The acid sweats, (says a writer) thrown out from the poisoned mass
of blood, by means of the small exhalent arteries, in malignant and pesti-
lential diseases forming the matter of infection, and adhering to the bed
clothes and linen, which, by its corrosive qualities, it destroys and rots;
and, if exerted in any considerable quantity, so commonly relieves the
patient, (inasmuch as the volume of poison, contained in the arterial sys-
tem is thereby lessened,) shows that the blood, in certain diseases, con-
tains something of a noxious nature. The appearances also, which blood,
drawn in pestilential fevers, puts on, corresponds with that in which sep-
tic gas had been artificially injected. Blood, thus infected with this
poison, taken up by the absorbent vessels, will continue to stimulate the
heart and arteries, wearing out their excitability, and, consequently, bring
on death, if the constitution be incapable of becoming habituated to its
stimulus, or a part, or whole, of the stimulus be not subducted. If it be
present in any great quantity, it may cause a sudden extinction of the
vital principle, as is observed sometimes to happen in highly pestilential
diseases.

In a word we may sum up the causes of fever as follows :

1. Remote Causes.

1. Cold.

2. Heat.

3. Marsh or vegetable effluvia.

4. Human effluvia.

5. Animal effluvia, to which may be added great exertion and fa-
tigue, the passions, injuries, &c. But cold, or a check of perspiration, no
doubt, produces three fourths of febrile diseases.

2. Intermediate Causes.

1. Morbid state of the stomach from worms, bile, &.c,

2. Obstruction in the capillary vessels.

3. Proximate Cause.

Extraneous morbific or deleterious agents, generated in or out of the
body, mixed with the blood, and acting as incitants or stimulants upon
the internal surface of the heart and arteries, propelling the blood with
increased force or velocity, in order to expel these morbific agents by
the skin or other outlets or excretions of the system.


Physical Diseo ~ -:U


SYMPTOMS

1. Chills and Heat.

The first characteristic symptom of fever, is rigor, or chills, succeed-
ed by a preternatural degree oi" heat. Sometimes the chill is very se-
vere, at other times very light; but fever is almost invariably ushered
in by this symptom. The patient complains of great coldness; he
shakes and trembles; the skin becomes pale, rough, and shrunken, and
sometimes there is a sensation as if cold water was running down the
back. After a while, the dullness subsides, and flushings and heat
prevail, with a return of the colour of the skin. The eyes and face be-
come red, and the patient now complains of heat. This may be said
to constitute the " hot stage" of fever. The continuance of the cold
stage is very uncertain. Sometimes it lasts an hour; at other times, it
continues several days, with alternate flushings of heat.

I have never seen any satisfactory or reasonable cause assigned for
the chill or cold stage of fever. But it appears to me very obvious and
self-evident. When the blood, by cold, or any thing else, is obstruct-
ed in the blood vessels of the surface, it must recede, be thrown back,
and accumulate upon the heart and great blood vessels. Cold, then, as
a matter of course, must predominate. The blood or circulation, the
cause and seat of animal heat, being cut off, or carried on-very par-
tially in the vessels of the skin, there is then experienced a cold sensa-
tion, which we call chills or rigors. As soon as an unnatural or a pre-
ternatural stimulus of the blood is felt by the heart and arteries, on ac-
count of such obstruction, a powerful reaction takes place to overcome
it, tho heart beats more violent, the pulse is accelerated, and the blood
is thrown back into the capillary system, so forcibly as to cause an un-
natural or too great a degree of heat, which we term fever. Thus we
see that a battle, as it were, occurs between these two contending par-
ties or agents, cold on the one hand, termed chills, and heat on the
other, termed fever. If the former (cold) prevails, the disease proves
fatal; if the latter, (heat) recovery or health is the result; that is, if it
so far prevails, as to overcome the obstruction, or remove the cause of
the disease. In other language, there is a struggle between the vital
powers and the febrific agent.

2. Increase of the Pulse.

Another invariable symp'.om, is an increase in the frequency of the
pulse. It usually becomes more frequent, fuller, and harder; showing
clearly the increased action of the heart and arteries, which, however,
is modified or altered by various incidental circumstances; by some of
the passions; by diet, air, medicine, &c.

3. Debility.

Another invariable symptom attendant on fever is debility. There
is a sense of languor, lassitude, and fatigue, which is generallv increas-
ed by anv exertion.


252 Physical Diseases.

4. Pain.

There is pain experienced in different parts of the body ; in the head,
neck, and along the course of the spine and in the extremities; in the
muscles and joints; a sense of soreness of the flesh or bones, and great
depression and heaviness is complained of; a general trembling; want
of sleep, or it is disturbed and unrefreshing ; there is a peevish or fret-
ful temper, and difficult respiration.

5, The Secretions.

All the secretions and excretions of the body, are deranged on or be-
fore the accession of fevers. By looking at the tongue, the back part
of it in particular, a very unhealthy and morbid appearance will be dis-
covered. It appears coated with a foul substance, and this serves as
an index to point out the accumulation of bilious matter, or a disordered
state of the stomach. There is usually loss of appetite, nausea, and
vomiting. The mouth is dry and clammy ; the skin is dry and parched
from diminished perspiration; the urine is scanty and high coloured,
and there is generally constipation of the bowels, and the evacuations
from them are generally dark and fetid. In a word, all the functions
of the body are impaired.

6. These are the leading characteristic symptoms of fever, but from
various causes and circumstances, there is an infinite number of varia-
tions and modifications; but such are the the most prominent features
of this class of diseases.

7. Fever is Primary or Symptomatic.

There should be a distinction made and kept in view between pri-
mary and symptomatic fever. First, Primary, when it does not arise
from any other complaint. Second, When it does arise from somo
complaint, as injuries, wounds, &c.

8. Restoration of the Secretions.

It is exceedingly important in a practical point of view, ever to bear
in mind the method invariably adopted by nature to cure a fever, which
is the restoration of the secretions, and in most cases it is by sweat or
perspiration. Without this knowledge, there will be error in practice.
But when a practitioner is well apprised of this fact^he will at once
know what indications to fulfil; in other words, what course of treat-
ment to institute.


COMMON TREATMENT.

The principal and almost only Remedies (if such they may be called)
resorted to by physicians in this day, are Mercury, Salts, Bleeding,
and Blistering. \ shall not consume time to descant on the improprie-
ty and injurious effects of such practice. This has been, and will be
further exemplified in other parts of this work. It is sufficient here to
observe, that instead of such treatment proving beneficial, by aiding


Physical Diseases. 253

nature to overcome the disease, it counteracts her salutary efforts, and
either destroys the patient, endangers his life, or protracts his complaint;
and should his constitution be sufficiently vigourous to withstand the
combined influence of these "Herculean remedies," or, in other words,
should the patient recover in spite of them and the violence of the dis-
ease, the subsequent effects injure or ruin his health.

The practice is certainly absurd and irrational, and I ask, is it not
preposterous in the extreme, and can it be supported by arguments,
reason, experience, or facts'?

When a person is attacked with a fever, the whole sanguiferous sys-
tem is stimulated or aroused to throw off or cast out the enemy, and sho
invariably points, as we before stated, to certain doors, outlets, or ex-
cretions of the system as the only natural and proper passages, through
which such enemy must be driven from the system; and it is the pro-
vince of the physician to aid her in this wise and well established effort,
and intention; but when such means are made use of, instead of ren-
dering her the necessary assistance, her powers and energies are en-
tirely crushed, weakened, or diminished. First, by bleeding. Second,
by administering a poisonous mineral, mercury, and thereby corrupting
the fluids and inducing another dangerous disease, perhaps, worse than
the first.

I am satisfied that mercury and bleeding in febrile, as well as other
diseases, brings on a contaminated state of the blood, and dangerous, if
not fatal debility.


REFORMED PRACTICE.

General Indications of Cure.

Restore the suppressed evacuations, or the secretions and excretions.
This will remove the offending, or irritating cause, and when this is re-
moved the effect, or in other words the fever, must necessarily cease.
In fulfilling this one indication, consists the whole secret of curing fe-
brile diseases.

Particular Indications of Cure.

1. Moderate the violence of arterial excitement.

2. Obviate local inflammation and congestion.

3. Support the powers of the system.

4. Relieve urgent symptoms.

The necessity of fulfilling all these indications must be borne in mind
by the practitioner. In every modification of fever, it becomes his duty
to render himself an assistant of nature.

What she endeavours in the commencement of the disease to accom-
plish, is, to evacuate the deleterious agents by the proper passages.
The whole business of art, therefore, is to assist her in these two efforts
of secretion and excretion of the morbific matter. The manner of ef-
fecting this, in every particular species of fever, is given under their
respective heads; but as we are treating of fever in general, it may be
proper to give the general principles of treating them as fevers, without
entering into the various subdivisions or modifications.


i£54 Physical Diseases.

The remedies which are to be given to assist the secretion and pre-
paration of the morbid and diseased matter, are sudorific, diluting drinks
and medicines, such as produce a determination to the surface, evacu-
ate and give a healthy tone to the stomach and bowels, kidneys, &c.

There are few preparations which have a greater tendency to dimin-
ish heat; to attenuate viscid humours; remove obstructions; promote
perspiration ; increase the quantity of urine, than drinking freely of
water, or any other weak diluting liquor, of which it is the basis. The
necessity of such drinks or liquors, is plainly indicated by the dry tongue,
parched skin, and the burning heat, as well as by the extreme thirst of
the patient.

Many refrigerant or cooling liquids, suitable to be drank in a fever,
may be prepared from fruits; as from tamarine jelly (made similar to
currant, or any other jelly;) lemons, oranges, apples, &c. Also infu-
sions or teas of balm, sajre, catnip and other medicinal plants, are ex-
ceedingly valuable, both on account of the dilutent properties of the
water, and the cooling effects of the plants themselves.

Buttermilk moderately acid, and diluted with water, has also been
found very useful.

Secretions and Excretions.

1 have already stated, that the great secret of curing fever, is the re-
storation of the secretions and excretions; the violence of the disease,
is just in proportion to their torpor or obstruction, and as soon as they
are restored, and perform their offices, the whole catalogue of symptoms
attendant on fever, at once vanish, like fire before the watery element.

When they are restored to their healthy action, how quick does con-
valescence take place. The gastric, the alvine, the urinary and perspi-
ratory discharges and functions become natural ; the heat of the system
equalised; the pulse falls to its natural standard, and with this decline
of the febrile commotion, there is a correspondent, healthy action in
every organ ; the appetite is improved, and strength and health is re-
established.

The Stomach.

When we reflect upon the extensive influence of the stomach over
the system, and particularly the skin, we shall be able more readily to
appreciate the utility of emetics in febrile diseases. It is by reason of
this intimate relation and connection between the stomach and every part
of the system, that the administration of an emetic, proves so very ef-
fectual. It not only cleanses the stomach of any bilious, feculent, irri-
tating, or any morbific matter ; but it proves eminently beneficial by the
general relaxation which follows it, approaching sometimes almost to
fainting, and which extends to the skin, and produces perspiration.
They may, as a general rule, be given where there is much nausea, and
where there is no peculiarity of constitution to forbid. They are very
serviceable in bilious, intermitting, and remitting fevers.

An emetic given in the commencement of a fever, will sometimes re-
move it, at once. Event when the stomach has been thoroughly clean-
sed, the exhibition of an emetic, may be advantageously given in con-


Physical Diseases. ~J^>

sequence of the shock and stimulating effect given to the stomach,
liver, and neighbouring organs. Intermittent fever has sometimes been
cured by a single emetic.

In some diseases there appears to be such a morbid accumulation;,
that other medicines will not act upon the living fibre, and therefore this
class of medicines, becomes important as a preparatory step in the
treatment of fever. In typhus, and other modifications of fever, eme-
tics may be beneficially administered.

" In the typhoid and typhus pneumonica," says Potter, " that occa-
sioned such lamentable mortality, of late years, throughout the United
States, emetics, judiciously employed, were more beneficial, than any
other remedy. It was indeed a novel spectacle to those who were ac-
customed to unsheath the lancet in almost every thoracic affection, te
behold a pneumonic fever, perhaps an haemoptoe, removed by the in-
cantation of a single emetic."

" Emetics," says Dr. Chapman, "exhibited early in fevers, (bilious
particularly) operating well, will frequently check an attack, and in the
more advanced stages, judiciously repeated, we shall find by it the pulse
reduced, pain in the head relieved, sickness of the stomach appeased,
temperature of the surface lowered, with perspiration, which restores
quietness, and hastens a critical solution.

This precept is strongly applicable to the bilious fevers of our own
climate, and especially as they occur in the southern states, where they
prove exceedingly intractable under any other mode of treatment."

Sydenham has the following judicious remarks on the efficacy of
emetics: — "When I have happened," says he, "sometimes carefully
to examine the matter thrown up by vomit, and found it neither consi-
derable in bulk, nor of any remarkable bad quality, I have been surpri-
sed how it should happen that the patient should be so much relieved
thereby; for as soon as the operation is over, the several symptoms,
viz. the nausea, anxiety, restlessness, deep sighing, blackness of the
tongue, &c. usually abated and went off, so as to leave the remainder of
the disease tolerable." Wallace, commenting on this passage, thus
observes: — " Sydenham was not aware of the sympathetic affections
which take place in the constitution, nor knew that an extremely small
portion of morbid matter could produce effects so sudden and surprising
from a local action, so as to derange the whole system."

The Bowels.

The intimate relation which exists between the whole of the alimen-
tary tube or canal, the skin, and other parts of the animal economy,
points out the necessity of promoting in them a healthy action.

Purgatives, therefore, have a decided good effect in fever. The
preternatural excitement of the blood-vessels is sensibly diminished by
the exhibition of purgatives. This effect takes place by removing the
feculent matter which they contain, and by stimulating the exhalenr.
vessels of the mucus membrane of the intestines, causing them to pour
out copious effusions from the blood, or circulating mass. Their im-
portance must be seen in a striking view, when the length of the intes-
tines is considered, which is about thirty feet,, and also their office.


256 Physical Diseases.

There is an immense number of vessels, opening into them through
their whole extent, and from which there is poured out a vast quantity
of feculent matter; and when there is a preternatural stimulus given to the
intestines by purgatives, there is a sympathetic affection of the whole
system; the circulation becomes more equal, the pulse is lowered,
pain in the head, and other parts diminished, or removed, and there is
a sensible improvement. Dr. Dewies has the following excellent re-
marks on the utility of purgatives in febrile diseases: —

"In fevers of almost every description, purging is not only useful,
but in many, is indispensable. There exists constantly a want of equi-
librium in the circulatory system whenever the body is attacked with
fever, and the determination for the most part, is, to the brain, the
liver, the spleen, or to the lungs ; and few remedies are found so effec-
tual in restoring this want of balance, as well chosen, and properly adapt-
ed aperients. Besides the determinations just mentioned, fecal mat-
ter in the bowels, is constantly accumulating which it is of much con-
sequence to remove. Occasionally there will be a redundancy of bile; at
other times a deficiency ; and we are obliged sometimes to remove the
one, or to solicit the other, and both of these ends are answered by the
proper choice, and exhibition of cathartics.

"Purges, besides cleansing the bowels of offensive matter, cause to be
discharged into the bowels a considerable quantity of the fluids natural
to these parts, and thus serve the double purpose of removing their fe-
cal contents, as well as evacuating from the general system. For ef-
fecting these purposes, however, some cathartics are much more valu-
able than others, consequently there is a choice. We shall not enter
here more fully than we have into a detail of them. Designing in the
treatment of each disease, as they may be necessary to point out those
that are proper. The management of cathartics must be regulated,
first, by the state of the system in general, and of the bowels in parti-
ular; they are indicated when the system maintains its general vigour,
and where the bowels are still loaded, or not sufficiently cleansed — the
pulse will direct in the one instance, and the appearance of the evac-
uations in the other.

" There is a popular prejudice against purging, that we should be
glad to remove, viz. that they are " very weakening.' Purging, like eve-
ry other evacuation may be carried too far ; and then with strict pro-
priety it may be said to be " very weakening ;" but this is only the abuse
or mal-administration of a remedy. In many instances of fever, the
patient is so far from being weakened by being purged, that he is abso-
lutely strengthened by it. This has been repeatedly exemplified in yel-
low fever. We have known patients faint, when labouring under this
disease, upon being merely put in an upright position ; yet after a free
purging, and other evacuations, they have been able to get out of bed,
and walk the floor. Now were these remedies directly weakening, the
contrary of this should have happened. And again it is frequently said,
when these medicines are about to be administered, that they cannot be
necessary, for there is nothing inside of the patient to bring away ; and
as a proof of this, they will declare " the patient has eaten nothing for a
number of days."


Physical Diseases. 2S*

" This popular language and feeling must be disregarded, if we do
not mean to injure the patient, especially where attention has been paid
to the quantity and nature of the discharges; and where we are con-
vinced, that much remains to he removed. For we have frequently
seen after the purging process has been continued for a considerable
time, and where the friends of the patient were convinced there was
"nothing inside," large, hard, and fetid evacuations have succeeded
those "water stools," and the patient has been almost immediately re-
stored to health."

We could say much upon this important subject, but our limits will
not permit.

Attention should be paid to the time when they are to be administered — ■
they should not be given, (unless it would be the loss of precious time to
procrastinate,) so as to interfere with the night's rest of the patient ; no*
should they be used, so that they shall interfere with the " sweating pe-
riod of fever."

Great care is necessa'ry to guard the patient against the injurious ef-
fects of cold, while under the operation of physic. If he is able to
rise from his bed, a cloak or blanket should be thrown around him.

Repetition of Purgatives.

Purgatives may be repeated daily, and in the morning before any
nourishment is taken, in those fevers which ordinarily run their course
in a short time; such as inflammatory and yellow fever. In those of
longer duration, such as typhus and other continued fevers, they may
be given every other morning, or once in three days may be sufficient,
(according to the state of the disease, and other circumstances,) provi-
ded no particular symptoms, or state of the system contra-indicate. —
Moderate doses of physic in general are sufficient, except in the onset
or commencement of a fever, when a brisk purgative may be adminis-
tered.

The Pores, or Capillary System.

It appears that febrile diseases, in their very nature and essence,
consist in a derangement of the skin or capillary system j and that no
means will subdue a fever, until these functions are restored. We must
be convinced of the necessity of this, from the extensive surface of
the skin; its connection with the stomach and sanguiferous system, and
its important office in casting off superfluous and noxious matter. It is
calculated that two-thirds of what is taken into the system, is evapora-
ted by sensible or insensible perspiration. Hence it will be seen what
mischief will arise from a retention of this perspirable matter, and
what benefit will also follow by restoring this secretion. Another great
benefit to be derived from perspiration, is the evaporation that con-
stantly takes place on the surface, which keeps the skin cool and soft.

Diaphoretic or sudorific medicine, then, reduces general excitement
and is one excellent method of depleting the system. Evacuations from
the skin, invariably lessen the for(tf of the heart and arteries, by taking
from the circulation every agent which is useless or injurious, and by
relaxing the constriction of the surface, they remove congestions bv a

Vol. I. 33


258 Physical Diseases.

determination of blood to the extreme vesels ; and in a word, lay the
axe, as it were, at the root of the disease.

No sooner does perspiration break out in a febrile patient, than there
is a mitigation of all the symptoms; the dry, pale, and husky state of
the skin is removed ; the balance in the circulation is restored, and
very often a violent attack of fever is cut short as soon as free sweat-
ing takes place. The object then should be immediately to restore
perspiration, and continue it throughout the course of the fever; not
violent sweating, but moderate perspiration, or a gentle moisture of the
skin. It is by this moisture, or the dry and parched state of the skin,,
that we form a favourable or unfavourable opinion of the fever. If
natural perspiration cannot be promoted, we predict danger. On the
contrary, if it can be promoted and kept up, we predict a favourable
issue. Indeed on this depends the basis of our prognosis.

Sudorific or sweating medicine must therefore be given, but not too
freely, especially after a few first days from the accession, or the at-
tack. If those medicines, which are very stimulating, will not fulfil
this indication, or will not answer the purpose, then others must be
given; such as will have the desired effect without increasing the heat of
the body, as Virginia snake-root, sage, lemon-balm, catnip, amaran-
thus, &c.

The following refrigerant or cooling drink I have administered with
excellent effect:

Take the juice of a lemon.

Cream of tartar, supertartrate of potash, one teaspoonful.

Add a pint of water.

Then sweeten with loaf sugar.
Whenever the patient is thirsty, let it be freely drank.

I recently cured a violent continued fever by giving this drink alone,
and bathing the surface with weak ley water about three times a-day.
The effect was almost immediate, and the fever removed in a very
short time. The nature of the preparation, although simple, will con-
vince the reader that it possesses very cooling or anti-febrile properties.
It promotes the discharge of urine, is laxative, antiseptic, and refri-
gerant.

The Kidneys.

When the kidneys cease to perform their offices, or do it imperfect-
ly, the urine is scanty, or is much diminished. This fluid is retained
carried into the circulation, and must prove a source of irritation;
and hence the necessity of restoring the secretion of them.

Diuretic medicines, therefore, or such as promote a discharge of
urine must be administered, and it will be found that as the urine be-
gins to flow freely, there is diminished arterial excitement. It is the
case, that fevers and other inflammatory diseases are brought to a fa-
vourable termination by a spontaneous discharge of this fluid.

An infusion of spearmint possesses a remarkable diuretic property,
and it may be drank freely. It not only acts upon the kidneys, but
likewise upon the skin, and often allays nausea and irritability of the
stomach.


Physical Diseases. 25.9

The Lungs.

The lungs is an organ to which strict attention must he paid. It is
the prbnum mobile, or main spring of the system; its office heing to
supply it with the vital principle. If this is withheld, or if they ahsorh
impure air, the fever is exasperated. It is therefore necessary to place
the patient in a large, well ventilated room.

The method of suppressing fevers by this means, was practised by
the ancients: they exposed their patients to cold air, and gave them
cold water to drink. Fresh air is very salutary to a person in a fever,
it removes his anxiety, cools the blood, revives the spirits, and is in
every view beneficial. There ought, therefore, to be a constant stream
of fresh air in his chamber, so as to keep it moderately cool. Air that
has been repeatedly breathed, when the blood is inflamed, or the hu-
mours are in a putrid state, becomes unfit for respiration, and acquires
a noxious quality.

The lungs also become affected by sympathy, and where -this is the
case, irritation and cough succeed. Under such circumstances, expec-
torants must be given.

Local Treatment.

Attention must be paid to particular symptoms, such as soreness of
the throat, pain in the head or other parts, from congestion or an unu-
sual quantity of blood thrown upon some other organ; for sickness at
the stomach, &c.

The Surface.

A tenacious, viscid, perspirable matter, is deposited upon the surface
of the body in febrile diseases, which dries upon it, and becomes an
additional mean of keeping the pores closed or obstructed. The usual
moisture being gone, as before mentioned, a preternatural degree of
heat is generated, which creates great distress and protracts the fever.
This state of the system, obviously points out the propriety and neces-
sity of bathing the surface very liequently. It removes every thing
which obstructs perspiration externally, by relaxing the cutaneous ves-
sels, and the evaporation which follows, diminishes the temperature of
the body surprisingly. Nothing is better for this purpose than warm
water to which ley has been added.

" According to Sir John Chardin, the celebrated traveller, the Per-
sian physicians, devoted followers of the Galenical school, had frequent
recourse to bathing in febrile diseases. His own case is a remarkable ex-
ample of their practice in particular. He had with him a French sur-
geon who gave him every assistance in Ins power during the violent re-
mittent ferer wrilh which Sir John was attacked ; but on arriving at Laar
they com hided to send for the governor's physician. The latter on his
arrival stated ihe nature of the disease (the fever of Bender), and, con-
trary to the gloomy prognostics of Sir John and his professional friend,
promised a speedy cure. Chardin called out, "I am dying of heat.'"
" I know it," said he, " but you shall soon be cooled."

" ' As in the extreme heat of my fever,' says Chardin, ' I thought no*


260 Physical Diseases.

thing could be so delicious as drinking snow-water, I sent to beg a little
snow of the eovernor, who sent me some about eleven o'clock; and as
I then had the most raging thirst, I drank with more pleasure and avid-
ity than I had ever done in my life. My apothecary was always near
me. It was he who administered the liquid to me. He filled a large vase
with barley-water and willow-water, put a large lump of snow into it,
and, when it was half melted, gave me the vessel, and desired me to
drink my fill. The pleasure I had in drinking was the greater, because
the liquid was very agreeable to the taste, and 1 took it by the physi-
cian's desire. I was lying on the ground floor of the house, in a cool
room, my bed stretched on the ground. Every hour the floor was wa-
tered, so that it might be said to have been quite covered with water. But
nothing could allay the heat of my malignant fever, which seemed to be
irritated rather than abated by so many cooling remedies. My apothe-
cary then ordered my bed to be taken up, saying it heated me; and he
spread a thin mat in its place, upon which he made me lie down in my
shirt, without any other coverings, and then made two men come
and fan me. But this was of no avail, the heat continued as oppressive
■as ever. The apothecary, who paid me the most constant attention,
then procured two buckets of cold water, and having placed me on a
chair, on which I was supported by two men, poured the water over
my body little by little, from the haunches downwards, and then
taking a large bottle of rose-water, bathed, in the same manner, my
head, face, arms, and breast. I blessed, in my heart, the Persian
practice of medicine, which treated sick persons so voluptuously!
Bu our French surgeon, who was always by me, could not contain bis
indignation. ' The man is killing you, sir,' said he to me in a compas-
sionate tone. ' What ! bathe you with cold water in the heat of a ma-
lignant fever, with a pint of emulsion, two pints of decoction, and a
pound of confection in your belly, with I do not know how many draughts
of snow-water. Depend upon it,' added he, ' that instead of being very
soon without fever, as he has promised you, your death will be the end
of the business.' — ' 1 do not know what will happen,' answered I,
' but at any rate I do not feel as if I were about to die, as you suppose.'
Indeed at that moment I felt the heat within me diminish, and my sen-
ses return ; upon which my apothecary, having felt my pulse, said,
4 your fever is abating.' Tt went off" from that time so quickly, that by
one o'clock in the afternoon I was quite free from it, even in the opin-
ion of the French surgeon. He was quite astonished, and I was transpor-
ted with joy. After having offered up my devotions to God, as to the
first cause of my recovery, I said to the apothecary, that to complete
my happiness I must see my physician. He will return, said he, by the
time the medicines have operated. I took them, as I have said, at
nine in the morning, and T had only since that time experienced a kind
of heaviness, which swelled me up very much without griping me, so
that I imagined they would have no effect upon me, and that their ef-
ficacy was exhausted in my continued sweating. But in a quarter of
an hour afterwards a looseness seized me, and lasted two whole hours,
without any pain or uneasiness In the evening the physician came to
see me, and I received him as a prophet, or as Esculapius himself.


Physical Diseases. 261

He had learned from the apotherary how I had spent the day, and he
ordered me a mess of rice boiled in water, with cinnamon and the bark
of dried pomegranate pounded together. 1 had taken no nourishment
whatever for five days.

" ' On the 28th, when I awoke, I was a little feverish, on which ac-
count the physician, when he came to see me, ordered me an emulsion
of the cold seeds (melon, cucumber, poinds, and pompions), and a
dose of the confection, as the day before, recommending that I should
eat raw cucumbers. These remedies were tiven to me at nine o'clock
in the morning, and I did nothing all day but drink, most deliciously,
willow-water, and barle) -water, cooled with snow, eating raw cucum-
bers, water-melons and pears. Verjuice, in considerable quantity,
was put into the mess which I took at noon and in the evening, to give
it an agreeable taste, and it most wonderfully lessened my thirst.

'"The next morning, the physicisn having found me still rather fe-
verish, ordered me medicines similar to those I had taken on the 27th.
These purged me during the whole day with so much violence, that I
had nearly sunk several times under the effects. The night was still
worse than the day, as I passed it in pain, with a violence increase of
fever. My physician found me in that state, and, as usual, filled me
with consolation; for, after having felt my pulse attentively, he told
me that Ik; was goin<_> to give me some draughts that would carry oil' what
fever remained, and deliver me from it entirely. This certainly took
place, but I do not know bow he accomplished it. I only know that
about nine o'clock in the morning I took two pints of emulsion, wiih a
lanre dose of confection, as on the preceding days, and half an hour
afterwards a julep; after which I fell asleep, and when I awoke in the
afternoon, my head was clear, I was without fever, perfectly tranquil,
and, as I thought, entirely restored to health.

'" I was so much transported with joy, that I could not find utterance
to my feelings, relying on the word of my physician, whom I thought
an oracle, that the fever would return no more.

'" On the morning of the 31st he confirmed his opinion, and ordered
me to live ten days together on chicken and rice, without any thing else;
at the end of which time he said I might live as usual. I asked him how
many days it would be before I could pursue my journey? He told me
that two more days of repose would be sufficient, and that I might then
set out on hoist -hack. He once more ordered me a great dose of emul-
sions and cordials, as before.

" 'On the first of June he came to see me for the last time, saying
tha I was not any longer in need of his visits ; that he had ordered the
apothecary to brine me the materials often emulsions, and to teach my
servant how to prepare them.

" On the third of June, Sir John Chardin proceeded on his journey,
and experienced no relapse; and on the 17th he reached Chiraz, in a
convalescent state and still weak, but otherwise so well that he left off
his medicines."

Dr. Currie, very properlv supposes that the fever under which Sir
John Chardin suffered, was the bilious remittent fever. The cold, it is
to be observed, was applied in this case during the height of the paroxysm


202 Physical Diseases.

when the heat and thirst were the most urgent. "The laxative medi-
cines wera no doubt of service in carrying off the morbid contents of the
alimentary canal; but they seem to have been carried to excess on the
29th May, and to this circumstance the return of fever may be imputed.
The bitter medicine was no doubt a decoction or infusion of some vege-
table, in its qualities resembling tlie bark ; and the cooling confec-
tion was certainly the celebrated mirthridate, a combination of opi-
um and aromatics, well known over the eastern as well as the western
world."

In Abyssinia, according to Bruce, the practice of using cold water,
externally as well as by drink, is very general in the violent fevers of
that country. Remembering, however, the high heat of that region
throughout the year, we must be aware that the temperature of the wa-
ter is proportionably elevated, probably equal to 76 or even 80 degrees
of Fahrenheit. Savary tells us thai the Egyptians pursue nearly a
similar practice in their fevers.

"In the revolutions of our science," says a writer, "the practice al-
luded to, seems to have been rejected, or lost sight of, for many cen-
turies. Nearly a hundred years ago, however, an attempt was made
to revive it by a writer who entertained such extravagant nol ions of its
efficacy in the inflammatory fevers, that he denominated cold water
febrifugum magnum, or the great febrifuge. Yet the remedy in no one
of its applications gained much ground, antecedently to the appearance
of the celebrated work of Currie, since which time its utility has been
fully confirmed by the concurrent experience of many of the most dis-
guished practitioners in various sections of the world.

" This mode of treating disease has not been generally adopted in the
United States, certainly not to the same extent as in Britain, and her
colonial dependencies in the East and West Indies, which may, in part,
be owing to our attachment to the lancet, and other directly depleting
remedies, operating, to a certain degree, in a similar way. Cold ab-
lutions are sparingly used in our autumnal fevers, to allay heat of the
skin, and ice is habitually applied in the inflammatory attacks of the head.
But in the European hospitals, nothing is more common than to see pa-
tients, in the early stage of typhus fever, placed under a shower bath, or to
have water dashed upon them. Nearly the same course was pursued in
scarlatina, and in the whole of the complaints, in short, where a heated
surface exists. The effect, most commonly, was a free perspiration, fol-
lowed, as is usual, by highly beneficial tendencies. Yet in the exanthe-
mata, the practice, to such extent, can hardly be justified from the dan-
ger of repelling the eruption. Cases of death are reported from it, and
I have seen it, in several instances, productive of mischief."

Bathing with cold water, in many stages and types of fever, is a very
excellent remedy, yet I have proved that in most cases, tepid or warm
water is preferable. It is not followed by the sedative and debilitating
effect that cold water sometimes is.

Again, bathing the surface is by far much better and much more
convenient, than throwing or dashing it upon the patient. It is almost
if not quite impossible, to raise a very sick and exhausted person from
his bed. and support him long enough to apply water in this manner.


Physical Diseases. 263

But by applying it in the way I have recommended, the patient is very
little disturbed, and it can be repeated as he lays in bed, and that as
often as it ma) be necessary.

I recollect attending a girl many years ago of typhus fever, where I
ordered the nurse in connection with other means, to bathe the surface
at night thoroughly with rain water mixed with ley.* 1 called in the
morning, and tbund that the skin was very dry, parched and shrunken,
heat great. 1 expressed my disappointment, and asked her it she had
followed my directions. She replied that she bad : (a falsehood by the
bye,) L could not, however, account for the symptoms, for 1 had nev-
er in all my practice, been deceived in regard to the happy effect of
this process. I, however, directed the same medicine to be given
thro igh the day, and the surface to be bathed at night, as before direc-
ted. In the morning, I again called, and found my patient just as I
anticipated the day previous, in a tine perspiration; skin cool; arterial
excitement, and of course, the heat diminished, and all the symptoms
manifestly better.

The woman or nurse then had the candour to acknowledge the decep-
tion she had used. She said that she had not, as she before stated to
me, bathed the surface the first night, as I directed it, from a supposi-
tion that it was too simple to do any good, but that the preceding night,
she had strictly followed my directions, and had applied the liquid free-
ly over the whole surface of the body ; and the consequence was, as
before intimated, a remarkable change for the better. Thus we see
from this circumstance, first, the folly and criminality of refusing to
administer medicine, because it is apparently simple, and secondly, the
reprehensible conduct of those nurses who pretend to be wiser than the
physician,!

* It is very necessary that ley should be added; first, Because the nature of the
perspirable matter is such, being very greasy or oily, and being so tenacious and
viscid, that it appears almost to cement or close the pores; or at any rate, it ad-
heres so closely to the surface, that simple water will not effectually remove it
Ley, by its cleansing, and purifying properties, completely removes it. Secondly,
It not only cleanses, but appears to soften the skin, and invites perspiration by its
stimulating or relaxing nature. I have applied various liquids, such as spirits, vine-
gar, &c. But the skin is not left in the same state. Even pearl-ash water will not
leave the skin so soft and moist. Besides it seems more caustic and heating in its
effects. Ley should be used which has been well leached, as it appears to acquire
new, or different properties by the oxygen which it imbibes from the atmosphere.

Not only so, I am inclined to think, that the momentum of blood is diminished,
by the sympathetic effect produced by stimulating the cuticular vessels of the sur'-
face. It certainly must effect the internal organs of the system directly, or indi-
rectly, from the fact, that if one function is deranged or healthy, there is a corres-
pondent effect in others.

t The following circumstance in relation to this subject, will show how easily
any improvement can be introduced when it is sanctioned, or supposed to be sanc-
tioned by high authority. One of the graduates of our school on his way home
to West New-Jersey, was taken ill of a fever in Philadelphia. He gave directions
that the whole surface should be repeatedly bathed, which was attended with the
most salutary effect. Those who attended him, however, were not aware that he
was a student of our school, and the treatment, therefore, was taken up by a physi-
cian near the city, who, by some means, had heard of the effects of it; and supno*.


264 Physical Diseases,

The Feet.

Every one knows that fevers are occasioned by the application of
cold to the feet, which drives the blood from the extremities, and throws
it upon some organ, or retains such agents as ought to be eliminated,
in consequence of which fever takes place. Now it must be evident
that there is no better method of preventing the consequences, than by
recalling the blood to the feet and surface, thereby preventing and re-
moving fever, than by bathing the feet in warm water, to which a small
quantity of ley has been added.

I am persuaded that the act of bathing the feet immediately after ex-
posure to wet or cold, in nine cases out of ten will prevent an attack of
fever, aided by drinking freely of warm catnip tea, then covering warm in
bed.

Medicine.

All violent medicines are to be avoided in fevers, such as antimony,
mercury, or any other mineral whatever; also blood-letting. Nature
attempts to do her office placidly, and quietly in these cases, and such
medicines violently disturb her motions, and often bring on mischief,
which she, if left entirely to herself, would wholly avoid.

Rest and Quietude.

Lassitude, or heaviness, is generally the consequence of a recent fe-
ver ; and this symptom evinces the propriety of keeping the patient ea-
sy, and, if possible, in bed: lying in bed relaxes the spasms, abates
the violence of the circulation, and gives nature an opportunity of ex-
erting her whole force to overcome the disease. The bed alone would
often remove a fever in its early stage.

The patient, says Dr. Fordvce, is to be confined to his bed, where
unnecessary exertion is avoided, and the heat is equable over the whole
body. The bed-chamber is to be large, and heated when necessary by
fuel, burning in an open fire-place ; or cooled by sprinkling the floor with
infusions, vinegar, or distilled waters of some of the aromatic herbs.

It is of the utmost importance that the patient lay upon a straw bed
or mattress, as a feather bed increases the fever.

The Mind.

If the patient's spirits, in a fever, are low and depressed, he should
not only be supported with cordials, but every method should be taken
to cheer and comfort his mind, by conversing on subjects that are plea-
sant and agreeable, and cautiously avoiding every syllable that may
create uneasiness. Every thing indeed that disturbs the imagination
promotes the disease. In fevers every person ought to be kept perfect-
ly quiet, and not be permitted to hear or see any thing which might dis-
compose the mind.

ing that it was sanctioned by the medical faculty of Philadelphia, commenced the
same process of bathing the surface with decided benefit, in every case of fever un-
der his care. Now had he known the source whence it originated, he probably
would have rejected it because not sanctioned by different, or orthodox authority.


Physical Diseases. 265

Drinks.

We have already hinted at the propriety of taking freely of dilutent
drinks; and this should by no means be neglected. Such kinds may be
given, as are pleasant and agreeable to the person, and such as are cal-
culated to keep up a moisture of the surface.

Cold or cool water may be taken at proper intervals, and in proper
quantities when the heat of the body is uniformly above the natural
standard, or when there is no chill or sensation of coldness. There
has ever been a very popular prejudice against the use of cold water in
fevers, and which ought to be put down. There are few articles in the
whole Materia Medica, which exert such an immediate and salutary
effect in fevers, as cold water; but too great a quantity should not be
taken into the stomach at a time, as it sometimes overloads it, and
causes mischief. There are thousands of instances on record, where
nature has pointed out the cure by creating in the mind of the febrile
patient, an irresistible desire for draughts of cold water, and when
drank, it has been followed by the happiest effects ; by a remission of
all the symptoms. Celsus directs large draughts of the coldest water in
ardent fevers, and dwells with emphasis, on the highly beneficial con-
sequences of it. " The patient," says he, "falls into a sound sleep, the
heat remits, and a free perspiration ensues, though he had previously
suffered much from thirst, heat, and restlessness."

Vegetable acids are discarded by some, as injurious, but without
foundation. They moderate thirst, allay heat, and are very grateful
and pleasant to the patient. Nothing of the kind is better than lemon-
ade, which may be freely taken after the skin has become properly re-
laxed, or perspiration takes place. Buttermilk mixed with water is a
very nourishing and cooling drink.

General St. Clair, who was once a physician, was wont to cure the
scarlet fever, by causing the patient to drink, several times each day,
of buttermilk, moderately acid, and as much of buttermilk- whey, as the
patient could take. This rarely, if ever, failed of a cure.

Regimen.

The dictates of Nature must be followed as regards food, or regimen
in fevers; though the patient has the greatest inclination for drink, yet
lie seldom has any appetite for solid food, hence the absurdity of urging
him to take victuals; much solid food in fever is very injurious. It ap-
oppresses the stomach, and instead of nourishing the patient, serves only
to increase the disease. The food that is taken, must be vegetable,
very light, and easy of digestion. It should consist chiefly of panado,
thin gruel, roasted apples, &c.

Ripe fruit of every kind is excellent, such as apples, oranges,
grapes, &c.

Cravings.

Particular attention should be paid to the cravings of a patient. They
are often the calls of nature, and point out the remedy.

They are not to be indulged in every thing that their capricious ap-
Vol. I. 34


266 Physical Diseases.

petitos may desire, but when any particular article is eagerly desired, it
may be given, although it may seem not altogether proper.

Convalescence.

Few are aware of the danger of a relapse in fevers. The lives of
thousands have been lost for the want of proper care on recovering from
a fever. The stomach and body is extremely weak, and hence will not
bear much food, or exercise, and in which convalescent persons are very
liable to indulge.

Nursing.

In vain will the best medicine be given without a proper nurse or per-
son to administer it, and to attend faithfully to every duty of her office
or business. It is very seldom that we find a good nurse, as profitable
and as important as the profession is.

Some are ignorant, some careless and inattentive.

I know not but that I may say, that more depends upon a good nurse
than upon the physician. It is the duty of the nurse to punctually ad-
cept they know it is poison) and not to cheat the physician by throwing
it into the fire, and then give their own nostrums or some others, and
when interrogated respecting it, dissemble and lie by affirming that it
has been given. This practice is very reprehensible, no matter what
kind of practitioner attends the patient. Let the physician be discharged,
or follow his prescriptions.

It is the duty of the nurse to pay strict attention, also, to the wants
of the sick, to the medicines, drink, diet, &c. that they be given in right
quantities, and in a right time; that the clothes of the patient and his
bed, be often changed, and kept clean. Also, that every thing offensive,
be immediately removed. Let the room be kept well ventilated, clean,
and quieU

It is not her duty to dictate and pretend to know more than the per-
together, and recommend new doctors, patent medicines, nostrums, &c.
or to make use of any language, calculated to excite distrust, unneces-
sary alarm or fear of the patient or friends. Great mischief is often
done by such a course of conduct, and all classes of physicians suffer
much by it. Nurses who are guilty of such deportment, ought to be at
once discharged.*

, * Would it not be a good plan for a number of respectable middle aged females,
to associate themselves together, and receive lectures or instructions from an expe-
rienced physician or nurse, and after having become well qualified by theory and
practice, to receive a certificate or recommendation from the society?

This would inspire confidence in the public, or in the minds of the sick, and such
nurses would command much more respect, and better wages.


Order l.j Intermittent Fever. - iu


CHAPTER I.

INTERMITTENT FEVER, OR FEVER AND AGUE
(Ftbris Intermittens.)

DESCRIPTION.

The title of Intermittent, is applied to that kind of fever which con-
sists of a succession of paroxysms, between each of which, there is a
distinct and perfect intermission from febrile symptoms.

Different names have been applied to this fever, according to the
distance of time observed between the periods of its return.

1. When it comes on within the space of every twenty-four hours, it
is called a quotidian.

2. When it returns every other day, or there is a space of forty-eight
hours between its attacks, it is called a tertian.

3. When it attends on the first and fourth day, with an interval of
seventy-two hours, it is named a quartan. That under the tertian type
is most apt to prevail in the spring, and is indeed the most frequent form
of the disease. The quartan is the most obstinate and dangerous, being
chiefly prevalent in autumn. The quotidian is more likely than the
others to assume the continued type.

Of the quotidian, tertian, and quartan intermittents, there are seve-
ral varieties and forms; as the double tertian, having a paroxysm every
day, with the alternate paroxysms similar to one another. The double
tertian, with two paroxysms on one day, and another on the next. The
double quartan, with two paroxysms on the first day, none on the se-
cond and third, and two again on the fourth day. The double quartan,
with a paroxysm on the first day, another on the second, but none on
the third. The triple quartan, with three paroxysms every fourth day.
The triple quartan, with a paroxysm every day, every fourth paroxysm
being similar. When these fevers arise in the spring of the year, they
are called vernal; and when in autumn, they are known by the name
of autumnal. Intermittents often prove obstinate, and are of long du-
ration in warm climates; and they not unfrequently resist the common
mode of treatment, so as to become very distressing to the patient, and
often give rise to other chronic complaints, but more particularly ana-
sarcous or dropsical swellings, and an enlargement of the liver, or spleen.

CAUSES.

It seems to be pretty generally acknowledged, that marsh miasma, or
the effluvia arising from stagnated water, or marshy ground, when acted
upon by heat, are the most frequent exciting causes of this fever. In
marshes, the putrefaction of vegetable and animal matter is always go-
ing forward, it is to be presumed; and hence it has been generally con-
jectured, that vegetable or animal putrefaction imparted a peculiar
quality to the watery particles of the effluvia arising from thence. We


268 Febrile Diseases.


[Class T.


are not yet acquainted with all the circumstances which are requisite to
render marsh miasma or effluvia productive of intermittents. According
to observation, it has been ascertained, that marsh miasma, when much
diluted with aqueous exhalation, as in summers where an unusual quan-
tity of rain has fallen, are nearly inert; but when arising from stagnant
waters of a concentrated foulness, in consequence of great drought and
heat in the latter end of summer, and the early part of autumn, they act
with great violence and malignity.

In admitting the powers of marsh effluvia to produce intermittents,
we ought not, at the same time, to look on them as their universal
cause, since it is found that persons residing constantly in the most
healthy part of cities, and far remote from marshes, are sometimes at-
tacked by them.

The testimony of writers proves, that febrile miasma or effluvia, may
be wafted by currents of air to a distance far exceeding what has been
supposed, or admitted upon this subject.

This disease may also be occasioned by debility, however induced,
by a poor watery diet, damp houses, evening dews, lying upon the
damp ground, watching, fatigue, depressing passions of the mind, &c.

AVhen the inhabitants of a high country remove to a low one, they
are generally seized with intermittent fevers, and to such the disease is
most apt to prove fatal. In a word, whatever relaxes the solids, dimin-
ishes the perspiration, or obstructs the circulation in the capillary or
small vessels, disposes the body to agues.

One peculiarity of this fever is, its great susceptibility of a renewal
from very slight causes, as from the prevalence of an easterly wind, or
from the repetition of the original exciting cause. It would appear
likewise, that a predisposition is left in the habit, which favours the re-
currence of the complaint. In this circumstance, intermittents differ
from most other fevers, as it is well known that after a continued fever
has once occurred, and been completely removed, the person so affect-
ed is by no means so liable to a fresh attack of the disorder, as one in
whom it had never taken place. Sometimes intermittents degenerate
into continued fevers.

SYMPTOMS.

This disease may be divided into three stages, viz.

1. The cold stage.

2. The hot stage.

3. The sweating stage.

Cold Stage. — An intermitting fever generally begins with pain of the
head and loins, weariness of the limbs, coldness of the extremities,
stretching, yawning, with sometimes great sickness and vomiting; to
which succeed shivering and violent shaking.

Hot Stage. — After a longer or shorter continuance of shivering, the
heat of the body gradually returns; irregularly at first, and by transient
flushes, soon, however, succeeded by a steady, dry, and burning heat,
considerably augmenting above the natural standard. The skin, which
before was pale and constricted, becomes qow swollen, tense, and red;


Order I.] Intermittent Fever. -69

and is remarkably sensible to tbo toucb. The sensibility, diminished
in the cold stages, is now preternaturally acute; pains attack the head,
and flying pains are felt over various parts of the body. The pulse is
quick, strong, and hard; the tongue white, the thirst is great, and the
urine is high coloured.

Sweating Stage. — A moisture is at length observed to break out up-
on the face and neck, which soon becomes universal and uniform. The
heat falls to its ordinary standard; the pulse diminishes in frequency,
and becomes full and free; the urine deposits a sediment; the bowels
are no longer confined; respiration is free and full; all the functions
are restored to their natural order; when, after a specific interval, the
paroxysm returns, and performs the same successional evolutions.

PROGNOSIS.

When the paroxysms are of short duration, regular in their recur-
rence, and leave the intervals quite free, we may expect a speedy re-
covery ; but when they are long, violent, and attended with much anx-
iety and delirium, the symptoms are less favourable. Other unfavour-
able symptoms are, great prostration of strength, vertigo, fetid excre-
tions, the presence of dysentery, cholera morbus, enlargements of the
liver and spleen, inducing dropsy or jaundice, and convulsions occur-
ring during the paroxysm preceded by coma. Relapses are very com-
mon to this fever, at the distance even of five or six months, or even a
year; and autumnal intermittents are more difficult to remove than
vernal ones. Much, however, depends upon the treatment.

DISSECTION.

Dissections of those who have died of an intermittent, show a morbid
state of many of the viscera of the thorax and abdomen ; but the liver,
and organs concerned in the formation of bile, as likewise the spleen and
mesentery, are those which are usually most affected.


COMMON TREATMENT. |

Bleeding in the cold and hot stage is by some recommended ; mercurv,
salts, antimony, arsenic, sulphate of quinine, nitre, zinc, «fcc.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The indications of cure in the treatment of
intermittents, are, first, to put as speedy a stop as possible to the fit,
when it has taken place ; and, secondly, during the intermission to pre-
vent its return, at the usual or any after period, both by exciting a new
action in the system, by administering certain remedies at the commence-
ment or immediately before the accession of the cold fit, thereby de-
stroying the morbid action induced by the cause of the disease, and by
invigorating the body.


270 Febrile Diseases. ( i ass J .]

It will be necessary, in treating intermittent fever, first, to cleanse the
stomach and bowels. A purgative, often, will be sufficient, but the soon-
est and the most effectual method of curing the complaint, is to adminis-
ter first an emetic. The liver and stomach, are in a very morbid con-
dition, viscid phlegm and bile being discharged by vomiting. For this
purpose give the

Common Emetic*

When it begins to produce sickness, the patient ought to drink free-
ly of an infusion of boneset, (eupatorium perfoliatum.)

Emetics not only cleanse the stomach, but increase perspiration, and
all the other secretions, which render them of such importance, that they
often cure without any other medicine.

Should any peculiar temperament, debility or state of the system,
render it injudicious to administer an emetic, it must be dispensed with,
and a moderate purgative given:

Take Mandrake, or May-apple root, (podophyllum peltatum,) pulverized.
Cream of Tartar, (super, tart, potasscc,) equal parts.

Of this powder give an ordinary sized teaspoonful. Let this be put into
a teacup or tumbler, and a small lump of loaf sugar added. Add a gill of
boiling water, or it may be given in any syrup. Let the whole be taken
at a dose. This will cleanse the stomach and bowels, and prepare the
system for tonics.

the accession of the cold stage, it will be desirable to diminish its force,
and to lessen its duration; for on this circumstance, will depend, the
continuance, or duration of the other stages of the complaint. If suit-
able means are used to cut it short, the hot and sweating stages will be
proportionably short, and often the disease entirely cured. To this
end, let stimulating and warm teas be freely taken, such as Virginia snake
root, infusion or tea of boneset and peppermint, which are calculated to
answer this purpose. The person may be covered with warm clothing,
heated bricks may be placed to the feet, and every means used to pro-
mote perspiration.

Hot Stage. — As soon as the cold stage is terminated this treatment
must be reversed. The bed clothes must be removed, and instead of
giving warm infusions, cold drinks may be given. Lemonade is very
grateful, and particularly cold water, both of which may be freely taken.
This course will allay the febrile excitement.

Sweating Stage. — During this stage, warm and cold drinks must be
withheld, and those that are tepid, given ; wine-whey, buttermilk, &c.
may be taken.

Intermission. — During the intermission of the fever, such medicines
must be taken, as will prevent a recurrence of the paroxysm.


* I have already stated in the preliminary remarks, that every formula, or pre-
scription, the component parts of which are not mentioned, will be found under the
head of Pharmacy.


Order I.] Intermittent Fever. -71

As soon as the fever leaves the patient, give the following Pills.

Take the extract of the best Peruvian bark, form into pills of ordi-
nary size, (three grains each) let two or three of these be taken as
the stomach will bear, every three hours, or if the paroxysm occurs daily,
every two hours, until the accession of another chill, when they must be
omitted, and the means recommended above, recommenced, and given
again when the fever, succeeding the chills, has subsided.

Many practitioners rely almost wholly on the salts of bark, (sulphate
of quinine) but there are objections to the general use of this article.
Some has been found to contain arsenic, and the use of it has been
followed by swelling of the face, spleen, liver, &c. When all other
means have failed, I have found the following preparation almost, if not
quite, infallible:

Take Jesuits', or Peruvian bark, (cinchona,) one ounce.
Flowers of sulphur, (Jlores sulphuris,) two drams.
Wild cherry-tree bark, (prunus Virginiana,) half an ounce.
Cinnamon.
Cloves.

Nutmegs, of each one dram.
Maderia, or sweet wine, three pints.
Pulverize the ingredients, and add them to the wine. It is fit for use in an hour.

The patient will take of this tincture, from half a wine glass to a wine
glass full every two or three hours during the intermission. This
treatment cures in a very short time, usually in one or two days.

Vomiting. — Sometimes in intermitteot fever, there is great irritabili-
ty of the stomach; vomiting ensues, and prevents the operation of those
medicines that are necessary to effect a cure, or to remove it. When
this is the case, dissolve one dram of sal aeratus, (Bicarbonas Potassa;)
in eight ounces of distilled peppermint water, or as a substitute in the
same quantity of a tea or infusion of peppermint. Of this, give an or-
dinary sized table spoonful sweetened with loaf sugar, every half hour,
or as often as vomiting occurs. Should this preparation fail to check
the vomiting, (which is seldom the c$se) then add to every table spoonful
of it, five drops of laudanum, tincture of opium.

Should the above medicines, from debility, or any cause be rejected,
the following may be taken.

Take pure salts of bark, (sulphats quinina,) twenty-four grains.
Divide into twelve powders.

Let one be taken in currant jelly or any other vehicle, every two
hours, while the person is free from fever. It is scarcely necessary to
state, that these bracing or tonic preparations are to be discontinued
upon an accession of the chill.

This course of treatment must be repeated, until the complaint is re-
moved.

The intermittent fever sometimes attacks infants and children. When
this is the case, the quinine can be administered more easily than any
other preparation, particularly in the following liquid form, which de-
prives it of its bitter ta'sti


272 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

Take sulphate of quinine, sixteen grains.

Lemon juice, twenty drops.

Loaf sugar, a suitable quantity.

Water, two ounces. Mix. .
The dose is a tea-spoonful every two hours, for a child between two and five years
of age.

It is sometimes the case, that the chill is almost wholly or entirely
removed, but some fever and much debility remain. When such symp-
toms occur, an emetic must be given every two or three days. This
will give tone and energy to the stomach, and restore the patient to
health. When the chills and fever subside, give a purgative.

Various other medicines have been highly extolled for the cure of in-
termittent fever, but we have tried most of them with little or no suc-
cess. Such as cobweb, coffee, opium, spiders, spirits, the juice of gourds,
&c. &c.

These nostrums should be carefully guarded against.

A lady in South Carolina, was recommended to take the latter arti-
cle, namely, the juice of the gourd, which soon proved fatal.

REGIMEN.

In the intermission, or between the paroxysms, the patient must
be supported by nutritious diet, such as is easy of digestion. Ve-
getable food is preferable. He may take infusions of bitter herbs, such
as boneset, snake-root, chamomile or wormwood. The patient may
also take exercise as much as his strength will permit. Nothing tends
more to protract the intermittent fever, than indulgence in idleness.
Small quantities of mustard and cayenne pepper, may be taken as con-
diments with food.

Hundreds of cases might be mentioned of the efficacy of the forego-
ing treatment, many of which had been treated by various physicians
without any benefit.

Some pretend to cure the fever and ague by charms, and amulets, or
a supernatural power.

A woman of this city of undoubted veracity, related to me the fol-
lowing circumstance:

She states that she had been afflicted with the intermitting fever for a
great length of time ; it had reduced her very much, was very obstinate,
and had become very serious. She had received the best medical aid
in vain. Having heard much of a man in the city, who professed to cure
the complaint by some means without medicine, she applied to him.
He asked her if she had faith to believe that the Lord Jesus Christ could
cure her. She replied in the affirmative. He then told her that she
Avould only have one chill more, and thatjwould be very light; apparent-
ly using some invocation, and muttering over some unintelligible lan-
guage. His statement proved true — the next chill was very trivial, and
she never afterwards had a single attack.

This will probably be imputed to the influence of the mind upon the
body, and perhaps it is so ; but while we admit the effect of the imagi-
nation, we must not impute the interposition of a merciful Being to hu-
man agency, or other frivolous causes, or agents


Order I.] Intermittent Fever, 273

PREVENTION.

A change of air is the surest prevention, but it is not always conve-
nient for a person to change his residence. To such, the following ad-
vice is very judicious".

" The inhabitants of our southern states, and of the low swampy
situations on the Delaware river, &c. are peculiarly liable to the attacks
of intermitting fevers ; but those affected with it, who resort to the salu-
brious air of New-England, experience a speedy cure, and that frequent-
ly without the aid of medicine. To prevent the attacks of agues, or their
recurrence when once cured, care should be taken to avoid the influ-
ence of the hot sun, and the damp air of morning and evening; a flannel
shirt should be constantly worn next the skin, and regularly changed once
a week."

The following preparation will be found a valuable preventive :

Take white-wood bark, (liriodendron tulipeftra,) half an ounce.

Dog-wood bark, (cornus Florida,) half an ounce.
Bruise, and add one pint of boiling water; let it stand two hours, then add one
pint of best gin.

Of this, let from half to a wine glass full be taken night and morning on ,
an empty stomach.

If fires are kept burning in the sitting rooms, mornings and evenings,
during the damp seasons, they will be found useful by depriving the air
of its unhealthy moisture, and keeping the walls dry. " By this prac-
tice," says Dr. Mease, " I have known the health of a family in the
swamps of Delaware, preserved during a whole summer, while the neigh-
bours were all aiflicted by agues." Dr. Rush recommended that fires
should not only be kept in the house during the sickly months, but that
large fires be made every evening, of brush, near the house, between it
and die spots from whence the exhalations are derived. This practice,
he observed, should be continued till the appearance of two or three
frosts ; for frosts, as well as heavy rains in the autumnal months, never
fail to put a stop to the progress of intermittents.


Vol. I. 35


274 Febrile, Diseases. [Class I.


CHAPTER II.

REMITTENT FEVER. (Febris Remittcns.)

DESCRIPTION.

By a remittent fever is to be understood that modification of fever
which abates, but does not go entirely off before a fresh attack ensues ;
or, in other words, where one paroxysm succeeds another so quickly,
that the patient is never without some degree of fever.

CAUSES.

Remittent fever is principally induced, as well as the intermittent, by
exhalations from marshy ground, or from stagnant water, impregna-
ted with the decaying remains of animal and vegetable substances, and
is most apt to arise when calm, close and sultry weather quickly succeed
heavy rains, or great inundations. In warm climates, particularly as
we approach the tropics, where great heat and moisture rapidly succeed
each other, the remittent is a very prevalent type of fever, and often
appears under a highly aggravated and violent form, prevailing epidem-
ically. It is likewise often met with in low marshy situations, abound-
ing with wood and water, from which miasma, or effluvia, are conse-
quently evolved ; and it most generally attacks those of a relaxed habit,
those who undergo great fatigue, and those who breathe an impure air,
and make use of a poor and unwholesome diet. Although this fe-
ver is produced originally by marsh miasma, and in its simple state, is
consequently not of an infectious nature ; still, under bad management,
such as crowding too many sick together, and neglecting proper clean-
liness, and a free ventilation, there cannot be a doubt that it may in its
course, engender a matter capable of occasioning a highly contagious
fever.

SYMPTOMS.

An attack of a common remittent fever is very similar to that of an
intermittent. Preceding the attack, the person usually feels heavy and
languid, anxiety, sighing, yawning, and alternate fits of heat and cold. —
In the commencement he experiences pain in the head and back, heat
of the whole system, thirst, difficulty of breathing, and great dejection
of spirits. The pain of the back and legs is very similar to the inflam-
matory rheumatism. The eyes and skin assume a yellow tinge, there
is pain and a sense of fulness about the region of the stomach, nausea,
and sometimes vomiting of mucous or bilious matter. The urine is
scanty and of a yellowish colour, the skin is usually very dry and hot ;


Order II. J Remittent Fever. 275

after these symptoms continue for a short time, a gentle perspiration
takes place, and the fever abates, or goes off imperfectly, but not so as
to leave the patient free from some fever. This remission continues, per-
haps not more than an hour or two. The fever then commences again
as severe as before, and perhaps worse; and after a short period, again
abates and eives place to another remission. In this manner with ac-
cessions and remissions it proceeds at last to a crisis, or is changed into
a fever of a different type. In warm climates the remissions often oc-
cur so early as the second day; but in cold ones it frequently docs not take
place, until from the fourth, the sixth, or eighth day.

Sometimes the attack of fever is much more violent in all its symp-
toms, severe delirium arises, and soon carries off the patient, or the
remission is scarcely observable, and is succeeded by another paroxysm,
on which all the symptoms are much aggravated. The heat of the sys-
tem is much increased, countenance flush, thirst very great, tongue coat-
ed with a dark brown fur, breathing laborious, and the pulse quick,
throbbing, and tremulous. Some time after, another short but imper-
fect remission occurs, but the fever returns with greater violence, and
finally destroys the patient.

The symptoms attending the remittent fever are very apt to vary ac-
cording to the situation and constitution of the patient ; likewise the sea-
son of the year, and other circumstances. In warm climates the remit-
tent fever often becomes very aggravated and dangerous. It assumes a
putrid character from its commencement. Such fever attacks the pa-
tient very suddenly, and with great violence ; the chills are slight, but
the heat soon becomes very intense, thirst is excessive, head-ache vio-
lent, pain in various parts of the system very excruciating, sickness of
the stomach, with great fulness and oppression, and respiration impeded or
difficult. A considerable remission will take place in twenty-four hours,
when another paroxysm will commence more violent than the first : the
eyes become very yellow, red and watery, incessant vomiting or retching ;
after a while another remission takes place, and thus the paroxysms con-
tinue to recur until a crisis follows.

There is great prostration of strength, and in an advanced and aggra-
vated stage of the disease, very malignant appearances are manifest. All
the symptoms are very similar to the remittent fever of temperate lati-
tudes, only they are more exasperated and malignant in their character.

The liver, stomach, and first passages are in a very morbid condition,
particularly in warm climates.

Towards the close of the remittent fever, very copious and dark col-
oured bilious matter is discharged from the bowels, which often termi-
nates the complaint. No age or sex is exempt from this fever, but the
inhabitants of warm climates are less liable to its attack, than strangers
or those from colder regions. Doctor Cartwright gives an account of an
epidemic remittent fever which prevailed in the county of Monroe,
(Mississippi) in the fall of 1822, which strikingly illustrates some varie-
ties of this fever.

" The disease," he says, " was generally ushered in by a distinct
chill, which was speedily followed by intense heat, thirst, and head-ache,
and very severe pains in the loins. The anxiety and difficulty of breath-


27b Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

ing, the deadly sickness, sense of weight, heaviness, and pain in the
stomach, increased as the fever approached its acme, until the suffer-
ing became intolerable. The exacerbations generally occurred in the
evening, and a considerable remission, amounting in some cases to a
perfect intermission, took place on the ensuing morning. On the even-
ing of the second day a sudden and unexpected paroxysm, more violent
than the first one, came on, which was attended with a mosr horrid
sensation of pain and oppression of the stomach, accompanied with
deadly sickness and continued vomiting, but with the ejection of very lit r
tie fluid of any kind. The bowels during the first and second parox-
ysms were always in a state of obstinate constipation. About noon of
the third day the third paroxysm generally came on. During this par-
oxysm the skin usually felt rather cooler than natural, and the pulse was
commonly remarkably slow. By placing the hand on the abdomen, a
pulsation was felt equal to that which the heart produces in the thoiax,
and synchronous with the pulsations of that organ." During the first
two paroxysms the tongue was but little furred ; but in the third it assu-
med a much worse appearance, having a dark red line running from its
extremity over its dorsum, which soon changed to a black colour. The
skin began to acquire a yellow colour during the third paroxysm. The
paroxys-ms continued to recur until the fifth, seventh, or ninth day,
when either death took place, or " enormous dark-coloured evacuations
from the bowels occurred, and the patient commenced to convalesce."

That the reader may have an opportunity of witnessing the symptoms
of the remittent fever, as it occurs in various sections of the United
States, and under different circumstances, we subjoin a letter from Dr.
Norcum, Edenton, (N. C.)

" The annual remitting fever of Edenton, and the country in its vicinity,
usually begins with the month of August, and I have remarked that
the most malignant cases always occur in this month, or during the hot
weather of September. As the autumn advances, and the heat decreases,
fevers of every grade seem disposed to assume more and more the char-
acter of intermittents, which generally conclude the sickness of the sear
son. The remitting fever with us, as far as I have been able to ascer-
tain, is most fatal in seasons tending to dryness, and accompanied with
unusual heat. In its character and symptoms it is as various as the cir-
cumstances of the climate and season under which it exists. Sometimes
persons are seized violently without any previous indisposition, with a
chill, or mixed sensations of heat and chilliness, that last for an hour or
two, and are succeeded by a severe fever, with pains in the head and
back, a full, hard, quick, and bounding pulse, great thirst, a hot and dry
skin, hurried respiration, with redness or a muddy suffusion of the eyes,
and a disposition to delirium. The stomach, in this form of the fever,
does not seem to be affected with much sickness or nausea ; yet vomit-
ing is a frequent occurrence, and it is with difficulty that a patient can
retain the least particle of food whatever. A sense of heat or burning
is generally complained of, which is very distressing, and occasions every
thing to be thrown up that is swallowed if it contains stimulus, or be in
any way substantial. The exacerbations of the fever are oftenest quo-
tidian, returning generally in the afternoon, and the intervals short, with


Order II.] Remittent Fever. 277

an imperfect remission, without sweating, or any considerable abatement
of pain.

BILIOUS REMITTENT FEVER.

Another form of remitting fever, which is the true bilious remittent
of our climate, (continues Dr. Norcum,) comes on with a distinct ciiilly
fit, of greater or less duration, and is succeeded by the ordinary symp-
toms of fever, with a frequent, full, and soft pulse, such as may al-
most always be felt in the paroxysm of an intermittent. It is not ac-
companied with much acute pain, but great aching and restlessness,
nausea or vomiting, with ejections of bile, or matter exhibiting a bilious
appearance. The type of this fever is generally that of a double ter-
tain, having a"n exacerbation one day in the afternoon, the next, in the
evening. Its remissions are more distinct than those of the inflamma-
tory remittent. It is rarely fatal, and when it is, seldom terminates in
less than from ten to sixteen or seventeen days. Towards its close it
sometimes puts on the garb of typhus, and does not end in death, or a
recovery, in less than from twenty to thirty days. The fever last de-
number of persons at a time, and is the least mortal of any of our con-
tinued fevers. Neither the inflammatory nor the bilious remittent, is
very fatal; the former, however, is much the more so, in the propor-
tion I should suppose of at least three to one. It either ends fatally in
from four to eight or nine days, or favourably somewhere between the
eighth and ihirteenth, but is not unfrequently protracted to a later peri-
od: the fatal issue generally occurs early in the disease.

The tongue in the bilious remittent is commonly furred and yellow;
the skin likewise exhibits a yellow hue, which increases as the fever
progresses: whereas in the inflammatory remittent, the tongue exhibits
the common febrile fur in most cases without yellowness, and the skin
is hardly ever discoloured until about the close of the complaint. In
two or three instances I have known the surface of the body to turn
yellow soon after death, from the inflammatory remittent, when not the
smallest discolouration had been observed before. The vomiting in
one of these fevers, or forms of fever, (which you please,) is different
from that which attends the other: In the first it occurs with little nau-
sea, or sickness ; is seldom attended with bilious discharges ; affords
scarce any relief, and is always increased by bark and stimulants. In
the last it is preceded by great nausea, attended with large discharges
of bile, which gives the patient relief."

Discharges of blood rarely occur in either of these fevers; in one or
two cases, I have seen blood discharged from the gums.

" I am not quite certain that I have ever seen the black vomit in any
of our endemic fevers ; but a vomiting of black matter of various de-
scriptions is no unfrequent occurrence. In 1799, when we had a true
yellow fever in Edenton, I saw the genuine black vomit in several
cases: but I do not believe I have ever seen exactly the same thing
since: though I confess I have seen perhaps half a dozen cases in which
my suspicions have been strongly excited. Hemorrhages from the nose


278 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

and gums are occasionally met with in protracted cases ending fatally;
and I remember one case of a malignant nature, in which a bleeding
from the mouth took place, that ended in death in three or four days.
Glandular swellings, so far as my observation has extended, have not
been among the characteristics of any of our fevers. In most of the
fatal cases of inflammatory remitting fever which have fallen under my
notice, the heat of the skin has continued intense until a short time be-
fore dissolution, and the patient has expired in a paroxysm or exacer-
bation of fever. The bilious remittent, when about to prove mortal in
a majority of instances, puts on the garb of typhus, and terminates with
the symptoms common in the last stage of that disease.

I have thus given an account of two forms of fever, as they appear in
the tract of country to which my practice has been confined ; and all the
continued remitting, or what are usually denominated bilious fevers, in-
cident to our climate, seem to me to be only modifications, or variations
of these two original and distinct diseases. Neither the inflammatory
nor the bilious remittent always attack and progress precisely as in the
history I have sketched. They both vary in their modes of attack, in
duration, in violence, in the remissions and exacerbations that attend
them, and in many of their less essential symptoms. Nevertheless, I
feel persuaded that, from the description I have given, the peculiar
and distinguishing character of each will be sufficiently manifest."

Doctor Thacher, in speaking of the bilious remitting fever of this cli-
mate, thus observes: — " When a continual remitting or intermitting fe-
ver is accompanied with a frequent and copious evacuation of bile,
either by vomit or stool, the fever is denominated bilious. A fever of
this character frequently exists in the United States, and from the sea-
son in which it is most prevalent, it has been termed autumnal fever.
According to Dr. Rush, it prevailed in Philadelphia in the autumn of
1780. It came on with rigour, giddiness in the head, and faintness.
The fever was accompanied with acute pains in the head, eye-balls,
back, and limbs, sometimes affecting the neck and arms and unusual
soreness of the flesh resembling rheumatism. So exquisitely severe
were the pains and soreness in every part of the body, that the patient
could not lie in bed, and from these circumstances the disorder obtained
the name of the Break-bone fever.* A nausea, and sometimes a vomit-
ing, attended ; the pulse was quick and full, but seldom hard. The
tongue and skin were generally moist, and the former was tinctured of
a yellowish colour. Remissions, or at least, exacerbations were ob-
served, morning and evening. A rash often appeared on the third and
fouith day, which proved favourable. When the fever did not terminate
before the fourteenth or twentieth day, it assumed in its progress the
usual symptoms of the typhus."

PROGNOSIS.
A remittent fever is always attended with some hazard, particularly

*A strong; decoction of boneset, Eupatorium Perfoliatum, proved a sovereign
remedy in this fever. It must be drank warm at night, and cold through the day.
and must be taken freelv.


Order II. i Remittent Fiver . ~ /L>

in warm climates, in which it usually goes through its course in the
space of five or six days ; but in cold ones, its crisis is not usually ef-
fected until the twelfth or fourteenth. The shorter and more obscure
the remissions are, the greater will be the danger; and each succeeding
paroxysm is attended with more risk than the former. On the contrary,
the milder the attack, and the nearer the fever approaches to an inter-
mittent, the fairer will be the prospect of a recovery.

DISSECTION.

The usual appearances on dissection are, congestions of blood in the
liver and spleen, inflammations in the alimentary tube, a distended
state of the venous vessels of the brain, and serous effusion into the cavi-
ties of that organ.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, mercury, antimony, salts, blisters, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE

Indications of Cure.

1. Moderate the violence of arterial action, if too great.

2. Remove the tension and obstruction in the capillary vessels of the
skin.

3. Cleanse the stomach and first passages, and restore a healthy ac-
tion of the same.

4. Restore the secretions and excretions.

5. Support the strength of the system.

In order to cure this fever, we must endeavour to bring it to a regu-
lar intermission. To effect which give,

1. Emetics. — There has been much controversy among physicians
respecting the propriety of administering emetics in remittent fevers.
Some have stated that they are beneficial, others injurious. Antimony,
no doubt, has generally been given, which, from its violent effects up-
on the system, has proved hurtful. But vegetable emetics, in the first
stages of the fever, particularly, proves very serviceable. It often dis-
arms fever of the greatest part of its violence and malignity, and redu-
ces it, comparatively, to a simple type, requiring afterwards very mild
means to effect a cure. Numerous cases might be cited to prove that
suitable emetics, have arrested the disease; not only in its forming
stage, but after it has become fairly established, the

Common Emetic,
may be given as directed, and occasionally repeated according to the
violence or duration of the disease.

Purgatives. — It will be necessary after the operation of the emetic,
and when the sickness at the stomach has fully subsided, to administer
a vegetable purgative. If the bowels are very costive, it may be given
very soon after the operation ; otherwise a period of six hours may


280 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

previously intervene. The following formula will be found very ef-
fectual :

Take pulverized jalap, (conrol. jalapa,) one part.

Pulv. Alexandria senna, (senna AUxahit.) two parts.

Cream of Tartar, (superlartras potassce,) one part. Mix.

Of this powder give a teaspoonful to an adult every three hours till
it purges; the first dose is usually sufficient.

Put the powder into a teacup, add a small lump of loaf sugar, and a
gill of boiling water. When cool, or nearly cool, let the whole be taken
on an empty stomach. During the operation of it, indian meal gruel
may be taken. This purgative may be repeated every other day, or
every third day without reference to the state of the bowels, according
to symptoms and circumstances. The benefit is derived, not so much
from evacuating the contents of the stomach and bowels, as by expell-
ing the morbid agents from the system, and by exciting a healthy action
of the liver, stomach, and intestines.

Sudorifics. — It is exceedingly important in this as well as all other
fevers, to attend particularly to the skin. This circumstance is lamenta-
bly neglected by physicians. Some pay little or no attention to it, but
like Dr. Sangrado, substitute bleeding. It is impossible to treat fever
successfully, or to act as a servant of nature, without restoring the
obstruction which invariably exists in the capillary vessels. It ap-
pears to be the first great effort of the system to fulfil this indication.
Such medicines then must be given, as will have the effect of producing
perspiration. The feet must be frequently bathed in warm rain water,
to which a suitable quantity of ley has been added; the patient may
then take the following sudorific drops:

Take Virginia snake-root, (serpenlaria Virginiana,)
Saffron, (crocus satitus,)
Ipecac, (callicoc. ipecacuanha,) pulverized,
Gum camphor, (gummi camphora,)
Opium, (papaver somnifcrum) of each one dram.
Best gin, 8 oz. Mix.

After this has stood a sufficient length of time to extract the strength
of the articles, a teaspoonful may be given in a tumbler full of an infu-
sion of catnip, sweetened or not, as may be preferred; to be repeated
every two hours until perspiration takes place. The infusion of catnip
must be taken frequently and freely, to aid the operation of the medi-
cine. These drops may be occasionally repeated to continue perspira-
tion. One or two doses generally is sufficient to cause sweating ; and
when it has taken place, they must be omitted, and given occasionally
to continue a moisture of the skin.

They possess anodyne, as well as diaphoretic properties. Hence they
are useful in allaying the nervous irritation attendant on this type of fe-
ver. They may be repeated daily, in the same manner, if the fever
does not subside, or the skin is very dry and parched, particularly in
the first stages. It is sometimes the case, that in the middle and last
stages of the fever, these drops prove too stimulating; the patient can-
not bear them, or any thing of a similar nature. It then becomes ne-


Order II.] Remittent Fever. 281

cessary to substitute, in their place, such medicines as keep up a deter-
mination to the surface, without increasing the heat of the body. Un-
der such circumstances, the following infusion may be given:

Take amaranthus or crawley root, (pterospcra andromedea) pulv. 1 table spoonful.
Add a pint of boiling water.

This infusion may be freely drank; it, keeps the skin moist, without
proving too stimulating. Give also an infusion of boneset cold through
the day, and warm at night.

Bathing the surface. — Those who are unacquainted with the effects
of bathing the surface, cannot appreciate its value, and it therefore
must by no means be neglected.

Rain or spring water, may be used for this purpose, to which suffi-
cient ley has been added as to render it mucilaginous, or slightly caus-
tic to the tongue. When the heat is very great, this may be applied
over the whole surface. In general it is best to apply it tepid, or mod-
erately warm, but in some cases, it proves more serviceable to apply
it quite cold. The manner of using it should be as follows: Place
the vessel containing the liquid, by the side of the patient's bed, then
let an assistant, or the nurse raise the clothes from the body, with one
hand, and with a piece of flannel or muslin, dipt in the liquid, thoroughly
rub first one side of the surface, from the neck to the feet, with the other.
The patient must then be turned upon the opposite side, and bathed in the
same manner. This process is invariably attended with a salutary ef-
fect. It may be repeated every two or three hours, or as often as the
heat of the system becomes very considerable, until a remission or par-
tial remission takes place. This process removes the slim}', viscid, and
perspirable matter, which is thrown upon the surface, and which assists
in obstructing the pores of the skin. It removes the tension and spasm
of the capillaries, by its relaxing properties. It likewise diminishes the
preternatural heat, by the evaporation which takes place. A writer
speaking of cold effusion, thus remarks:

" The cold effusion has been found productive of the most decided
good effects in remittent fevers. This should be employed at the height
of the paroxysm, when the sensations of heat are violent, the head-
ache severe, and the skin dry. The effects to be observed from the
cold effusion, are an alleviation of the violent symptoms, a tendency to
quiet sleep is soon induced, the skin becomes moist, and a distinct re-
mission follows."

Diluents. — Various drinks may be given possessing diluent, and dia-
phoretic properties, such as infusions of balm, mint, and catnip; but
few articles in the whole materia medica are of more essential benefit
than cold water. The parched lips, dry mouth, intolerable thirst, and
the great heat of the system, all call loudly for the the use of this uni-
versal diluent liquid. It may be taken freely at all times, except when
chills are present. Should it however produce any uneasinesss, or ful-
ness of the stomach, it must be taken in smaller quantities, and repeat-
ed oftener. There are an infinite number of cases on record, where
the free use of water internally and externally have cured fevers in
their forming and even advanced stages.

Vol. I. " 36


282 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

Lemonade may also be freely drank as a change, except when stim-
ulating medicines are given to produce perspiration. In such cases it
ought not to be taken except very warm.

Anodynes. — when the patient is very restless, and unable to sleep,
ten grains of the

Diaphoretic Powders

may be taken in currant jelly, or any other suitable vehicle. They are
less stimulating than the drops before mentioned, and to fulfil this in-
dication, answer sometimes a better purpose. They should generally
be given at night. These powders not only have the effect of procu-
ring sleep, but likewise cause a moisture of the surface.

Tonics. — I have often given tonics in fevers when there was some lit-
tle remission, but have seen little or no benefit from them. There is
one article, however, that may be given with benefit, which combine
tonic and diaphoretic properties:

Take Virginia snake-root, (Serp. Virginiana,)

Add boiling water. To be given occasionally through the day.

An infusion of boneset, may also be given.

Having spoken of the general treatment of remittent fever, I shall
now speak of particular symptoms.

Head-ache. — There is usualby great pain in the head, to relieve which
the feet must be frequently bathed in warm water, and the following
plaster or sinapism applied to them :

Take Indian-meal.

Mustard, equal parts.
Add vinegar sufficient to form a plaster, or paste.

If the pain and heat of the head be great, apply the following lo-
tion:

Take spirits,

Vinegar,

Rain-water, equal parts.
To a pint of which, add ateaspoonful of salt.

Let this be repeatedly applied to the head, nearly cold. It is neces-
sary to apply a cap, or handkerchief over the head, to prevent «. too
speedy evaporation.

Sickness at the stomach. — This symptom is very common, and ex-
tremely distressing. To allay which, give an infusion of spearmint,
(mentha sativa.) Sometimes the peppermint given in the same man-
ner proves even more serviceable. The same articles bruised and mix-
ed with a small quantity of vinegar, and applied over the pit or region
of the stomach, has proved very effectual.

Should not this allay the vomiting, the following mixture may be
given :

Fresh lemon-juice, a table-spoonful.

Sal aeratus, (bi-carbonaspota)sce,) half of an ordinary teaspoonful.

Put the lemon-juice into a wine-glass, and fill it with water, then add the sal
aeratus made fine ; to be immediately taken when added, or in a state of effervescence
(foaming.) This may be repeated as often as the sickness returns.


Order II. j Remittent Fever. -83

Or what is still better, is the

Salts of lemon-juice, (acidumcicrilum,) half a teaspoonful, or 30 grains.
Sal aeratus, (bi-carbonas polassa,) an equal quantity.

Each article must be separately pulverized, and put in separate tum-
blers, containing a gill of water, each, and when dissolved must be ta-
ken in a state of effervescence ; the contents of one tumbler must bo
poured into the other, and immediately drank. The common soda pow-
ders, taken according to the directions printed upon them, will answer
very well, if the above articles cannot be procured. If one or two doses
of the above effervescing draught should fail to check the vomiting, then
add to every succeeding dose ten drops of laudanum. The following
plaster may be applied over the region of the stomach :

Take Cloves, pulverized,

Ginger,

Alspice,

Cinnamon,

Mustard, each one table-spoonful, and

One nutmeg, grated.
Mix and moisten with vinegar, and apply warm to the stomach.

Local pains and congestions. — When any particular part or organ is
very much affected, fomentation of bitter herbs must be applied. —
Should these not remove the irritation, a mustard-plaster may be appli-
ed; a considerable portion of indian-meal to be added to prevent the
flesh from becoming excoriated.

Canker. — If there are apthous spots in the mouth, or if the throat is
sore, let it be gargled with a decoction made of sage and hyssop, sweet-
ened with honey, to which a little powdered borax has been added.

Debility or Prostration. — Should there be great prostration of
strength, the pulse low, and there is a necessity for rousing nature,
wine-whey may be given, pure wine or wine-sling, or a small quantity
of porter. Should either, however, increase the fever, it must bo
omitted.

Cough. — Should there be a cough, demulcent and mucilaginous medi-
cines must be given, a decoction of hoarhound sweetened with honey,
and such as are mentioned under this head.

Mustard Plasters. — Many apply blisters in this and almost every
kind of fever, but I think that they should be seldom if ever applied.
They are very tormenting, often produce great excitement, and some-
times mortify. I have occasionally applied them, when pain in the
head or any particular part has been very great; but more recently, I
have used the mustard-plaster in preference. I think it much better in
every respect.

Dr. Anthony Hunn, of Kentucky, a very aged and learned physi-
cian, has written a treatise against the common method of treatment in
uses only a blister on the right side, over the region of the liver. The
benefit, he says, depends upon the stimulus it gives to this organ. He
deprecates the use of the lancet and mercury, after having practiced
about half a century upon the common, or ordinary plan.


284 Febrile Diseases. Class 1.]

Relapses. — It is of the utmost importance that the patient, as soon
as a state of convalescence takes place, should use every precaution to
prevent a relapse. His diet should be very spare and principally vege-
table, and he should use moderate exercise.

REGIMEN.

The regimen musi be adapted to the prevailing symptoms. When
there are any signs of inflammation, the diet must be slender, and
the drink weak and diluting. But when nervous or putrid symp-
toms prevail, it will be necessary to support the patient with food and
liquors of a more generous nature, such as are recommended in the
preceding fever. We must, however, be very cautious in the use of
stimulating articles, as this fever is frequently changed into a con-
tinued, by a hot regimen, and improper medicines.

Whatever the symptoms are, the patient ought to be kept cool, quiet,
and clean. His apartment, if possible, should be large, and frequently
ventilated by letting in fresh air at the doors and windows. It ought
likewise to be sprinkled with vinegar, juice of lemon, or the like. His
linen, bed clothes, &c. should be frequently changed, and all his ex-
crements immediately removed. Though these things have been re-
commended before, we think it necessary to repeat them here, as they
are of more importance to the sick than practitioners are apt to imagine.

" The patient's shirt, bed-clothes, and bedding" says Doctor Lind,
"ought freqently to be changed, and exposed to the air, and all his ex-
crements immediately removed ; tbe bed-chamber should be well ven-
tilated, and frequently sprinkled with vinegar ; in short, every atten-
tion should be paid to the patient. I can affirm, that a physician who
puts these in practice will much oftener succeed, than one who is even
more skilful, but has not an opportunity of using these means."

When the above treatment has been strictly followed, I have never
known it fail of curing this type of fever. I have been called to treat
it in its various stages, and have uniformly found the same result from
the practice.

I have never found it necessary in any case to give a particle of mer-
cury, or any other mineral, or to bleed a single patient.


Order III.] Inflammatory Fever. ~^ ,J

CHAPTER III.

INFLAMMATORY FEVER. (Synocha.)

DESCRIPTION.
This type of fever is characterized by great inflammation, intense
heat, frequent, strong and hard pulse, flushed countenance, redness of
the face, &c. It may be readily distinguished from typhus, by its be-
ing attended with symptoms much more inflammatory. It makes its at-
tacks at all seasons of the year, but is most prevalent in the spring.
Persons of all ages and habits are subject to it, but more especially
those in the vigor of life, with strong elastic fibres and plethoric con-
stitution. It is a species of fever almost peculiar to cold and temperate
climates, being rarely met with in warm ones.

CAUSES.

Remote cause. — This fever may be produced by a variety of causes,
but cold is the most common, and it is sometimes likewise occasioned by
heat : also by intemperance in eating and drinking, stimulating kinds of
food and liquid, and whatever else causes plethora ; but sudden transi-
tions from heat to cold is the most frequent cause of inflammatory fever.
Exposing the body in a state of perspiration to cold will bring it on:
lying on damp ground, drinking cold liquor when a person is very hot,
repelled eruptions, suppressed evacuations, &c.

Proximate cause. — The proximate cause of this disease is seated in
the sanguiferous or vascular system, in the heart, arteries, and capillar}'
vessels. Cold checks perspiration, by which irritating, perspirable mat-
ter is taken into the circulation, and stimulates the blood vessels to an
undue and increased action.

By reference to Eberle's practice, I perceive that he maintains
a similar opinion of the proximate cause of inflammatory fever.
He thus observes : " a large proportion of the recrementitious ele-
ments of perspirable matter must remain mingled with the blood, (un-
less speedily removed by the vicarious action of some other emunc-
tory,) and necessarily impart to this fluid qualities which are not
natural to it. Most assuredly the retention of materials which have be-
come useless to the system, and for whose constant elimination nature
has provided so extensive a series of emunctories as the cutaneous ex-
halents, cannot be long tolerated by the animal economy with entire
impunity. The blood is the natural stimulant of the sanguiferous ves-
sels, and we must believe that its stimulating qualities are naturally in
due and harmonious relation with the sensibility and irritability of its
appropriate vessels. When, therefore, in consequence of suppressed
perspiration, this fluid becomes surcharged with the elements of" recre-
mentitious perspirable matter, its natural relations with the heart, ar-
teries, and capillaries will be destroyed, and irritation more or less in-
tense must almost necessarily ensue."


286 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.


SYMPTOMS.

The attack of inflammatory fever is generally very sudden ; com-
mencing with distinct rigors or chills — the patient complains of debility,
which is succeeded by dizziness and pain in the head, back, and more
or less over the whole body. These symptoms are soon succeeded by
redness or flushing of the face; the eyes assume a red and an unnatural
appearance, and are intolerant to light. There is great throbbing of the
carotid and temporal arteries, great restlessness, heat which is intense
and biting, thirst, difficult respiration and sickness at the stomach. The
pulse is very full, hard, and quick, compressed with difficulty. If the
attack is very severe, or if the fever is not arrested in the beginning,
stupor and delirium will intervene, particularly in the latter stages. The
mouth, throat, tongue and lips are very dry, and gradually become dark,
the tongue of a scarlet color at the sides and furred with white in the
centre. Occasionally there is an haemorrhage, or bleeding from the
nose ; there is sometimes yellowness of the skin and it is very dry and
parched, swelling of the abdomen, the urine is scanty, red, or high
colored, and there is usually constipation of the bowels. These symp-
toms undergo slight remissions, and exacerbations — the first occurs in
the morning and the latter in the evening.

This fever generally goes through its course in one or two weeks, and
often terminates critically, by perspiration, by diarrhoea, occasionally
a slight haemorrhage from the nose, or a deposition of much sediment
in the urine. The crisis is generally preceded by some change in the
pulse. Sometimes it runs into typhus, particularly after mal-practice,
or bad management, such as copious blood-letting, mercury, &c.

PROGNOSIS.

The termination of this disease depends almost wholly upon the
treatment. If the fever runs high, or continues many days without
any abatement of the symptoms, the event may be doubtful, and is still
more dangerous if there is picking at the bed-clothes, starting of the
tendons, and involuntary discharges by stool and urine, with hiccups.

On the other hand, if the heat diminishes, and the other symptoms
subside ; if there is a free and natural perspiration; if the urine increas-
es and deposits much sediment, and the pulse becomes more slow and
soft ; if a relax, or diarrhoea ensue, we may with propriety predict a
recovery.

DISSECTION.

When dissecting those who have died of inflammatory fever, an ef-
fusion has been found within the brain, and occasionally some of the
other viscera are affected.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding copiously from a large orifice till there be fainting or symp-
toms of fainting ; next salts, mercury, antimony, and blisters.


Order III.] Inflammatory Fever.


REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — From the character of inflammatory fever, it
is obvious that our first attempt should be to diminish inflammation,
and thereby prevent the mischief that may arise from it.

Remedies. — To fulfil this indication, it is necessary to deplete the
system, not by blood-letting, which will often bring on typhus, and
other serious consequences, but by promoting all the secretions and ex-
cretions of the system. This is the only proper method to reduce in-
flammation of any kind. The course pursued by physicians of the
day, protracts the complaint, injures the constitution, or endangers the
life.

Bleeding, so strenuously insisted upon, suddenly or subsequently
" prostrates the system into a state of collapse or debility, out of which
the most potent stimulants will be hardly sufficient to raise the pa-
tient."

Lieutaud, Physician to Louis XV. in his synopsis of medicine, thus
remarks on blood-letting in inflammatory fever:

" Repeated bleedings," as the illustrious Vansweiten remarks, " are
apt to bring on more vehement symptoms, or convulsions themselves,
as has happened in my own observation, even before the flow of blood
was stopped. It is therefore best to avoid them, notwithstanding what
some practitioners adduce to the contrary, who are used to accommo-
date themselves to the whims of the byestanders, and are never deter-
red by the unhappy event of things, so long as they can keep the con-
fidence of the sick. Here by the bye we may note, that they shame-
fully mistake, who persuade themselves, that by blood-letting, they an-
swer the end of spontaneous and critical flows of blood, because it has
been observed an hundred times, that in every disease, a certain crit-
ical haemorrhage is of more service than frequent blood-letting : besides
that a haemorrhage in this species of fever is for the most part danger-
ous."

"I remember," saysEberle, (a strenuous advocate for blood-letting,)
"with pain, the unfortunate lot of an amiable and intelligent friend. —
He was a man of a healthy constitution, and fond of indulging in the
pleasures of the table. He was seized with simple synochal fever from
cold. His physician bled moderately; the fever went on unchecked;
be bled again and again daily ; after the seventh bleeding there was still
too much quickness and tension in the pulse ; the lancet was inserted
the eighth time, and the patient almost immediately sunk into a state
of collapse. Stimulants, both external and internal, the most diffusive
and potent were now diligently applied, but all in vain; he lived but a
few hours longer.

"In Italy," says the same writer, "the most violent inflammatory
fevers are treated, and according to the published reports, with success,
by lar^e, and frequent doses of antimony, without any direct depletion
whatever." — By this statement alone, it is evident that this fever can
be treated successfully without any bleeding, and even by a very in-
ferior remedy.

I shall now lay down the course of treatment to be pursued in this


288 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

variety of fever ; and the first medicine to be given, whether there be
costiveness or not is

A Purgative.

Take pulverized jalap, ( Rad. Jalapa,) pulverized.
Alexandria senna, (sen. JIUxand.)
Cream of Tartar, (supertart. potassm,) equal parts. Mix. '

Of this powder, give a common teaspoonful, (about one dram,) in
molasses, currant jelly, tea, or any other convenient vehicle every two
hours, until free purging is produced. Any warm tea will aid the oper-
ation of it. This will lessen the heat, lower the pulse, remove the
pain of the head, and other parts. After the effect of this has fully
subsided, let

Sudorifics

be administered. The sudorific or sweating-drops may be given every
two hours in a tumbler of catnip tea, until the patient perspires freely.
In the next place, let the whole

Surface

be well bathed with tepid alkaline wash, (weak ley,) and let it be re-
peated three or four times within twenty-four hours, or as often as the
skin becomes dry and parched. The very first bathing usually removes
that biting heat, usually attendant on this fever. It diminishes pain and
arterial excitement, and by its stimulating effect on the capillary ves-
sels, promotes perspiration, and in short, has a salutary effect on the
whole system.

Further, to equalize the circulation, let the feet be well bathed in
the above mixture of ley and water; after which, let a sinapism or a
poultice be applied to the soles of them, made of indian-meal and mustard,
mixed with vinegar. Should there be great pain in the head, let it be
bathed in equal parts of spirits, rain-water, and vinegar, to which must
be added a small quantity of salt. It will be necessary also to give
diluent drinks or infusions. An infusion of catnip is excellent. Also
an infusion of elder flowers — cream of tartar water may be occasion-
ally drank. It is refrigerant or cooling, laxative, and acts upon the
urinary organs. A writer on this fever has the following remarks:

" Almost every person in a fever complains of great thirst, and calls
out for drink, especially of a cooling nature. This at once points out
the use of water, and other cooling liquors. What is so likely to abate
the heat, attenuate the humours, remove spasms and obstructions, pro-
mote perspiration, increase the quantity of urine, and, in short, pro-
duce every salutary effect in an ardent or inflammatory fever, as
drinking plentifully of water, thin gruel, or any other weak liquor, of
which water is the basis? The necessity of diluting liquors is pointed
out by the dry tongue, the parched skin, and the burning heat, as well
as the unquenchable thirst of the patient.

In inflammatory fevers, where the thirst is great, the following forms
a grateful and cooling beverage :


Order III.] Inflammatory Fever. 1>89

Take Cream of Tartar, (superlart.pot.) half an ounce.

White sugar, q. s.

Hot water, three pints.
Haifa pint or more may be drank as occasion requires.

There is usually great restlessness and wakefulness, and it is there-
fore necessary to give an anodyne, combined with a diaphoretic med-
icine. To fulfil this indication, nothing is better than the

Diaphoretic Powders.

They procure refreshing sleep, and at the same time, promote perspi-
ration. Ten grains may be given every night in any suitable vehi-
cle. These medicines must be repeated until the fever terminates, or
subsides.

If it is very violent, a purgative may be administered every day,
and at farthest, every other day. Sufficient of the sudorific drops
must also be administered to keep up a gentle perspiration. Should
they prove too stimulating, the diaphoretic powders must be given
morning and night, as a substitute.

After this course has been pursued two or three days from the acces-
sion of the fever, should the pulse continue tense and fuli, give the

Tinct. of Fox Glove, (Digitalis.)

Fifteen drops may be taken three times a-day, in a tumbler of an infu-
sion or tea made of balm, (melissa officinalis.) This plant, given in
the form of tincture or infusion, possesses the power of reducing vascu-
lar action and lessening general excitement. It diminishes the irrita-
bility of the system, increases the action of the absorbents, and also the
discharge of urine.

Ferrier considers digitalis a substitute for the lancet in all diseases.
"It is well known," says he, "that bleeding is very inadequate to the
purpose of lessening the velocity of the circulation, unless it be carried
to a dangerous excess. The fox-glove furnishes us with the means of
regulating the pulse to our wish, and of supporting a given state of ve-
locity as long as we judge it proper."

REGIMEN.

The patient's diet must be very little and very light. Nutritious
liquids should be given, such as indian-meal gruel, panado, toasted
bread water. Ripe fruits may be given, roasted apples, currant jelly,
&c. but nothing of a heating or stimulating nature should be allowed
except there should be great prostration in the latter stages of the com-
plaint. Wine-sling and wine-whey may then be given. Fresh air must
always be admitted to the patient, using due precaution that a current of
air be not permitted to reach the patient. It must be broken by curtains
or window blinds.

The patient must not be loaded with bed clothes under pretence of
sweating him, or preventing him from taking cold ; such a practice in-
creases the fever, debilitates the patient, and retards, instead of pro-
moting perspiration. The patient may be allowed, if the stren°ih will

Vol. I. 37 5


290 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

permit, to sit up in bed, or if not able, let bis head and shoulders be
elevated by means of a chair.

Cleanliness must be regarded. The chamber may be sprinkled with
vinegar. The patient's mouth should be often washed with a little wine
and water, or equal parts of vinegar and water sweetened with honey.
The forehead, temples, and hands may be frequently bathed in vinegar.
This is very refreshing and grateful to the patient.

All noise and disturbance should be avoided, and the patient kept as
quiet and still as possible. A dozen women should not be suffered to be
in the chamber, talking and whispering; it disturbs the mind by creat-
ing fears and suspicions. Let there be few attendants in the room.
Should there be a great desire for any particular kind of drink or food,
it may be given.

Convalescence. — There is great danger of relapse when the patient
becomes convalescent; the appetite becomes keen, and the patient is
very apt to indulge it, by overloading the stomach ; the digestive organs
being weak, a relapse is brought on which very often proves fatal ; little
should be ate at a time, and that ought to be very light and nutritious.
If the appetite should not return, an infusion or tea of chamomile or
Virginia snake root may be drank occasionally through the day.

Fresh air, gentle exercise, and the moderate use of good wine will
greatly contribute to the recovery of convalescents.

The depletion or evacuation induced by this treatment, will be found
quite sufficient. It will generally cure the fever in a few days without
any of those injurious effects consequent on the common practice.


Order IV.] Simple Continued Fever. 291


CHAPTER IV.
SIMPLE CONTINUED FEVER. (Synoehus.)

DESCRIPTION.

This fever was formerly known and distinguished by the name of
" Long Fever." A combination of inflammatory or synochal, and ty-
phoid or putrid symptoms, constitute simple continued fever. An in-
flammatory type preponderates in the commencement, and nervous or
typhoid, in the latter stages.

CAUSES.

Cold is the most frequent cause of this as well as other types of fever.
It may also be occasioned by a morbid condition of the biliary organs,
stomach and alimentary canal.

Whatever has a tendecy to debilitate the system, may act as a predis-
posing cause of continued fever.

Hence we find it arises from great exercise or fatigue, violent exer-
tions, intemperance and certain kinds of diet, as well as too great in-
dulgence in sensual pleasures. It may likewise be produced by the sup-
pression of some customary evacuation, certain passions, &c.

But the most prolific cause, is the application of cold to the system,
producing a check of perspiration. It would appear that much depends
upon the peculiar nature or circumstances of the cold itself, as well as
the person to whom it is applied, the degree or intensity of cold, the
continuance of it, manner of its application, its being accompanied with
moisture, also, a sudden transition from heat to cold. It may be occa-
sioned likewise by breathing vitiated or contaminated effluvia, directly
or indirectly from the body of a person labouring under the disease.

The peculiar gas, or excretions proceeding from a diseased person,
floats in the air, and being inspired or inhaled, is capable of generating
this kind of fever. It is well known that human effluvia, or the efflu-
via arising from the human body, if concentrated, and is not permitted
to mix with the air, and thus become diluted from want of cleanliness
and free ventilation, is sufficient to create a fever of great malignity,
and when taken into the system, actually creates a specific disease. This
is unquestionably the case in typhus. Emanations from animal and ve-
getable substances, in a state of decomposition or putrefaction, may also
cause this fever. Marshy or that kind of soil, the bottom of which is
clayey, and which retains for a great length of time, an unusual quantity
of water, being acted upon by heat, emits or sends forth noxious effluvia,
which proves a prolific source of fever of various types and grades.

SYMPTOMS.

The first symptom of this fever, is a considerable degree of debility,
inactivity, heaviness, yawning and stretching, a sensation of cold is nosv


'-"J^ Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

felt in the back, and over the whole system, which increases till a regu-
lar chill over the whole body succeeds. There is nausea or vomiting,
little or no taste in the mouth, oppressed and frequent respiration, pulse
increased, and there is some confusion of intellect. After a short time,
the cold stage which is characterized by these symptoms, decreases, or
becomes less violent, and is alternated with ilushings, and finally sub-
sides, and is succeeded by a preternatural decree of heat, diffused over
the whole system; there is redness of the face; there is a dull, heavy,
or throbbing pain in the head ; oppression at the chest, and sickness at
the stomach ; the skin is dry, hot and parched, with some degree of co-
lour, or redness ; the pulse is full and frequent, beating perhaps an hun-
dred strokes in a minute; the patient complains of great restlessness; is
fretful and manifests some confusion of mind. The tongue, which is
at first white, gradually loses this colour, and as the disease advances, it
becomes dry, and dark. The urine is usually scanty and high coloured;
sometimes pale; there is likewise great thirst and costiveness. If the
attack is very severe, there is a great determination of blood to the head,
which causes delirium. In this and other kinds of continued fevers,
there is usually an increase of all the symptoms towards evening.

These symptoms'generally go on about a week without any particu-
lar change, except very slight remissions and exacerbations, which take
place in the morning and at night. As the disease advances, however,
it becomes more seated, unfavourable and dangerous in its character.
The inflammatory symptoms in a considerable degree subside, and ty-
phoid symptoms manifest themselves, or great prostration, attended with
delirium, lethargy, furred, dark tongue, fetid breath, sordes about the
teeth, hurried respiration, starting of the tendons, picking at the bed
clothes, &c. The pulse grows weaker and smaller, and the fever proves
fatal in two or three weeks.

The typhus stage often commences as early as the fourth or fifth day,
and sometimes sooner.

This is the ordinary course of the disease, except when it declines
under a favourable crisis, which is usually in about a week.

There is a modification of all these symptoms; sometimes the at-
tack is light, and the fever soon subsides ; at other times it is very se-
vere.

The simple continued fever, terminates invariably by a regular crisis,
by vomiting, purging or sweating, or by the morbific or febrile matter
falling on some organs which excites inflammation, and abscess, or proves
fatal. •

PROGNOSIS.

Great anxiety, loss of strength, intense heat, stupor, delirium, irre-
gularity in the pulse, twitchings in the fingers and hands, picking at the
bed-clothes, startings of the tendons, hiccups, involuntary evacuations
by urine and stool, and such symptoms, point out the certain approach
of death. On the contrary, when the senses remain clear and distinct,
the febrile heat abates, the skin is soft and moist, the pulse becomes mo-
derate and is regular, and the urine deposits flaky crystals, or becomes
turbid on cooling, we may then expect a speedy and happy termination
of the disease.


Order IV.] Simple Continued Fever. ~93

DISSECTION.

The appearances of those who die of this fever, are an effusion within
the cranium, with some little derangement of the other viscera.

COMMON TREATMENT.
Bleeding in the commencement. Dr. Eherle recommends taking twen-
ty ounces of blood at a time! Salts, mercury, antimony. Armstrong
says that mercury must be given to salivate.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. Lessen arterial excitement.

2. Restore the secretions and excretions.

3. Equalize the circulation.

4. Remove local congestions.

5. Expel from the system the sources of irritation.

All these indications will be best fulfilled by the means recommended
under the head of remittent and inflammatory fevers, particularly the
former. In the commencement and first stage, particularly if there be
nausea,

Administer an Emetic.

It exerts not only a powerful and salutary influence upon the stomach,
and neighbouring organs, but likewise upon the whole system, the skin
and other excretory organs, and sometimes brings about a revulsion.
After the operation of the emetic, give

The Common Purgative.

These two classes of medicine are indicated from the morbid condi-
tion of the stomach, and alimentary canal. The purgative must be oc-
casionally repeated through the course of the disease, either daily, every
other day, or once in three days at farthest.

The Surface and Feet

must be frequently bathed with tepid ley water. The repeated ab-
lution of this liquid, is admirably calculated as before stated, to arrest
the febrile course, to moderate excessive heat, and to restore a healthy
action of the skin. As often as the skin becomes dry and parched, the
surface must be well bathed. It is necessary also to give diaphoretic
medicines, in order to keep up a moisture, or a constant determination
to the surface. For this purpose, give the

Diaphoretic Powders,

particularly at night. They will lessen pain and restlessness, procure
sleep, and diminish arterial excitement ; ten grains may be given at
night in syrup or currant jelly, to be accompanied with the free use of
an infusion of catnip.

It will be necessary as in other types of fever to administer

Diluent Drinks,


294 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

such as infusions or teas of balm, spearmint, and Virginia snahe-root.
If the patient is not in great perspiration, cold water, cream of tartar
water, and lemonade, may be freely drank.

Acidulated drinks are very refrigerant and refreshing.

Tamarind water may be taken, the juice of oranges and ripe fruits.

Attention must be paid to local congestion, or pains in any particular
parts of the system; for such symptoms,

Let Fopientations be Applied.

Hops, tanzif, and wormwood, may be simmered in equal parts of wa-
ter and vinegar, enclosed in flannel, and applied to the abdomen, or
any other part where there is pain or congestion. Let them be applied
very warm, and often changed : for the pain in the head, apply a mus-
tard poultice to the nape of the neck, and to the soles of the feet.

The only method to obviate the subsequent stage of prostration and
typhus, is to subdue the inflammatory symptoms in the commencement,
which is most easily affected by the treatment here laid down.

The practice pursued of bleeding or reducing the system, to accom-
plish this, is exceedingly dangerous. It has a manifest tendency, so far
to weaken the tone of the system, that there is not sufficient strength
left, to combat the succeeding stage, which is invariably one of great de-
bility. Thousands are annually swept off for want of this precaution.

It is of the greatest importance in the latter stages of this complaint, when
the system becomes exhausted to keep up the strength of it, by nourish-
ing liquids and diet. Wine may be given pure, or mixed with water, if
the stomach will bear it. If it is attended with any putrid symptoms, a
wine glass of good yeast may be given four or five times through the day
in any manner that can be most conveniently taken.

Should the stomach become irritable and reject purgatives, injections
or glysters may be given, composed of

A decoction of Boneset or Thoroughwort, one pint,

Milk, half a pint,

Molasses, one gill,

Sweet oil, half a wine glass. Mix.

Should a cough be present, such medicine must be given as is calcu-
lated to allay it.

An infusion of Hoarhound, (marrubium vulgare,) and

Slippery elm bark, (ulmus fulra,) may be drank freely.

Should a vomiting attend the fever, the soda powders may be given.

Lieutaud, first physician to Louis XV., in his Synopsis of Universal
Practice, has the following remarks upon this fever:

"Within these limits they are not restrained, whose dull minds have
but a smack of the elements of medical science ; while they terrify the
credulous bystanders, by muttering about the danger of the disorder; and
therefore draw blood with a liberal hand, and administer medicines of
all kinds, even the more powerful; by which indeed some of their pa-
tients are tired out, while others, by the powers of the natural economy
alone, overcome the disorder and the untimely remedy. Nor do these


Order V.] Typhus or Nervous Fever. '^95

quacks suffer themselves to be disturbed by the unexpected termination
py event to their own wonderful method of cure."

REGIMEN.

Nothing heating or stimulating should be taken in the first stages of
this complaint. The diet should consist of panado, indian-meal gruel,
barley and toast water, rice water, stewed apples, prunes or gooseber-
ries, and in the latter stages, light boiled rice, raw egg and wine where
there is great debility, oysters or oyster soup.


CHAPTER V.
TYPHUS OR NERVOUS FEVER

CHARACTER.

The word typhus is derived from a Greek word, which signifies stu-
por; this being the characteristic symptom of the disease. It is also
called nervous fever, in consequence of the nervous system being very
much affected. There are three species of this fever: One is called
typhus mitior, being the mildest, and the attack more gradual. The
second species is named typhus gravior, in consequence of its being
more violent in its attack, more malignant, and discovering in its cha-
racter more putrescency. It is also called putrid fever. The third, ty-
phus icterodes, or yellow, in consequence of bile and yellowishness.


SECTION I


SLOW, NERVOUS, OR TYPHUS F E VER, (Typhus Milior.)
DESCRIPTION

The slow or nervous fever, is distinguished from other kinds of fe-
ver by its effects on the nervous system. It is a peculiar form of fever
which may be spread by contagion, characterized by a torpid state of
the sensorium, or great lethargy, with great prostration of muscular
power, and more or less delirium. It principally attacks those of a
weekly constitution ; and is generated in jails, hospitals, prison ships,
and ill ventilated apartments of the poor, and in damp, dirty cellars,
cities and large towns. In a number of persons exposed to the contagion
of typhus, some, although rarely, are attacked on the third or fourth
day: others on the thirteenth, and some not under three months. But
the most common period of an attack after an exposure, is from the
end of the first week to the middle of the third.


296 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

CAUSES.

Typhus fever may be produced by whatever depresses the spirits, or
impoverishes the blood, by certain passions, watching, intense study,
the use of poor diet, or unripe fruits of any description. It may like-
wise be produced by bleeding, mercury, and other minerals; by moist,
close, or impure air. Hence it is more prevalent in wet weather, and
proves most fatal to those who live in small filthy houses, narrow and
dirty streets, hospitals, jails, and manufacturing, or large towns. It
generally attacks those who have been frequently bled, and have taken
mercury, and those who lead an irregular and licentious life, or whose
constitutions have been broken from any cause whatever. It is occa-
sioned from sudden transition from heat to cold ; getting the feet or
clothes wet ; lying upon the damp ground ; great fatigue, or bodily ex-
ercise. These are all predisposing causes, but the most frequent of all
is infection, or contagion communicated through the medium of an im-
pure or heated air, by concentrated noxious effluvia, arising from the
body of a person labouring under the disease,* and although it may not
be contagious in the commencement, or under proper regulations, yet
it may become so from the want of ventilation, treatment, &c. Other
fevers, as before intimated, sometimes degenerate into t3 7 phus. This
fever occurs sometimes in warm climates, but more generally in those
that are cold and temperate, often in cold, wet autumns.

SYMPTOMS.

Typhus fever usually commences with a great degree of mildness in
all its symptoms. It is usually preceded by slight indisposition for sev-
eral days, succeeded by rigours or chills, debility, sighing, and oppres-
sion in breathing, with nausea and loss of appetite ; with a certain un-
pleasant, uneasy sensation in the pit of the stomach. The countenance
is pale and dejected; the eyes are dull and heavy, and there is often
tremor of the extremities, sense of weariness both mental and corpore-
al. Towards evening there is some increase of these symptoms. In the
course of a few days, as the disease progresses, there is oppression in
the chest, pain in the head, giddiness, confusion of intellect, and great
depression of nervous energy. There is sometimes a sinking or
fainting, particularly when the patient attempts to sit up; the tongue
is dry, at first white, and afterwards coated with a dark brown fur;

* Dr. Haggarth, who devoted considerable attention to the consideration of the
contagious nature of typhus fever, and the manner in which it is propagated, has
deduced therefrom a variety of important facts, of very great importance for the
prevention of misery, and the preservation of human life; whence he concludes that
it may be easily and certainly prevented by ventilation; (in large, airy, and clean
rooms,) or by separation (into our hospitals, or into an adjoining room of the same
house, where practicable ;) or especially by cleanliness, which entirely destroys the
poison, wherever it can be completely accomplished.

Wedekind states that during the campaign of the French against Russia, the ty-
phoid contagion, which was generated in the hospitals and houses crowded with
prisoners, and which was communicated to the inhabitants along the road by which
the soldiers returned, afterwards spread gradually from the road-side to the ad-
jacent districts, until the disease became widely prevalent.


Order V.J Typhus or Nervous fever . 297

also the teeth are incrusted with the same, yet the patient seldom com-
plains of thirst. There is a small, low, frequent, and irregular pulse ;
a cold, unnatural, and clammy perspiration breaks out upon the backs
of the hands, while the inside of them is hot; the skin is dry and con-
stricted, and all the excretions diminishes ; the bowels are usually cos-
tive ; intellects grow more confused ; the patient becomes fretful, rest-
less, and watchful ; the countenance more anxious and dejected ; urine
scanty and high colored, or is pale and watery ; sometimes there are
catarrhal symptoms, with a short, dry cough ; there is pain in the back,
loins, and extremities, with a sense of soreness over the whole body ;
sleep disturbed and unrefreshing ; the cerebral functions become more
and more disordered ; there is more or less deafness ; delirium increas-
es ; indeed body and mind seem as it were almost paralized. The
patient has a great aversion to exercise, as well as to conversation. —
This stage of excitement generally continues about a week, when it
terminates in a stage of prostration, or great debility. The inflamma-
tory symptoms subside, and a great weakness and sinking ensues. The
body emaciates rapidly, and if the disease is suffered to progress, it dai-
ly assumes more formidable and unfavourable symptoms; there is
fluttering; a very weak and intermitting pulse, with startings of the
tendons, hiccups, 6lq. There is also in violent cases some eruptions on
the surface, a peculiar hollow sound of the voice, and a swelling and
tenderness of the abdomen or bowels. The later stages of fever
is also attended with diarrhoea, the discharges being very fetid, watery,
and acrid. There is generally, also, so much lethargy that it is with
difficulty that the patient can be aroused.

There is one very prominent symptom in this complaint, at which I
believe I have not hinted, which is a very unequal circulation. It is
common for the temperature of one part of the body to be about natural,
while another part is unnatural, if below the temperature of health. —
Again, it is very remarkable that in the middle and latter stages of the
complaint, also the whole force of the disease, is, as it were, withdrawn
from every other part except the nervous system.

This fever frequently continues for some weeks, and terminates in
such a state of prostration as to prove fatal, or it degenerates into a
malignant type ; but when it terminates favourably, it generally subsides
about the fourteenth or fifteenth day, by diarrhoea, or by perspiration dif-
fused over the whole body. It often, however, continues thirty or for-
ty days, and finally subsides without any evident crisis.

PROGNOSIS:

Favourable Symptoms. — About the seventh, fourteenth, or twenty- first
day, the tongue peeling and becoming moist, showing a conical point and
vigour of motion when put out, and quickly retracted, moist skin, gen-
tle diarrhoea, respiration free, pulse becoming slow and full, deafness,
sores about the mouth and nose, tumours behind the ears, and a dis-
charge from the same, miliary eruptions unattended by profuse sweats.

Unfavourable. — Profuse evacuations by sweating or purging, much
watchfulness, sinking of the pulse, great incoherency of ideas, mutter-
ings, picking at the bed-clothes, considerable dilatation of the pupils of

Vol. T. ' 38


298 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

the eyes, involuntary discharges by urine and stool, starting of the ten-
dons, and hiccups, point out the near approach of death.

DISSECTION.

The usual appearances on dissection are, a softness and flaccidity
in the solids, a dissolved state of the fluids, particularly of the blood,
collections of sanious matter in the different cavities; turgescence and
inflammation of the thoracie, and abdominal viscera, and in the inte-
i ior parts of the brain, increased vascularity and collections of a serous
fluid. In some cases, however, accompanied by great intellectual de-
rangement from the beginning, the minutest dissection, after death, has
not been able to detect the least vestige of cerebral disease.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, the administration of mercury, antimony, salts,
nitre, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. Diminish arterial excitement by stimula-
ting the excretory organs to a healthy action.

2. Equalize the circulation.

3. Remove local congestions.

4. Support the strength of the patient, or the powers of the system.
Emetics. — If called in the incipient stage of this fever, or a few days

after the attack, a gentle emetic may be given, particularly if there is
nausea, oppression and sickness.

Take Ipecacuan, (callicoc- ipecac.)

Emetic plant, (lobelia inflat.) equal parts, pulv. Mix.

Of this give a teaspoonful, (one dram) in about a gill of boneset or
thorougkwort tea. Should it not operate in half an hour, the same
quantity may be repeated, and an infusion of the boneset (Eupatorium
Perfoliatum) may be freely drank, to aid its operation. Should not the
complaint yield to this, and such other medicine as will be mentioned,
this emetic may be repeated, once in three days, any time before the
stage of prostration commences. One or two doses in the commence-
ment is sufficient, and where there is any peculiar temperament to con-
tra-indicate the use of emetics, and in the middle and latter stages of
the fever, they may be entirely dispensed with. The early exhibition
of an emetic, is generally attended with a very salutary effect, often ar-
resting the fever in its commencement ; but when the fever has existed
for some time, they should not be given, particularly when the system is
much debilitated. Emetics, judiciously given, not only cleanse the sto-
mach of its acrid and morbid contents, but the impression which they
give to the skin, the other excretions, and the whole system, is attended
with a very excellent effect. They promote perspiration, and thereby
prevent congestion, expel irritating agents from the circulating mass, give
tone and energy to the stomach, liver, and the connecting viscera, and
ia many cases their early use breaks up the disease before it becomes
fairly seated or established.


Order V.] Typhus or Nervous Fever. 2$9

As valuable, however, as they are, it is not always necessary to admi-
nister them, in order to remove the disease.

Purgatives. — Gentle cathartics are exceedingly valuable throughout
the whole course of typhus fever.

" The full operation of aperients," says Armstrong, " sometimes re-
duces the morbid heat of the skin, and the morbid force of the pulse in
the stage, almost as effectually as the effusion of cold water, &c."

In typhus, the brain, and the system generally, is thrown into a very
morbid condition, by an accumulation of acrid, and vitiated bile, and
matter collected in the stomach and first passages, in consequence of an
inactive or torpid state of the liver.

Delirium, great heat and prostration of strength takes place from this
cause. The sympathy that exists between these organs is truly surpris-
ing: if one is healthy, so is the other: if one is in a morbid condition,
those that sympathize with it, are diseased also. Hence the very great
importance of exciting a healthy state of the stomach, liver, and whole
alimentary canal.

Purgatives are admirably calculated to fulfil this indication. They
cleanse and stimulate at the same time, and although a patient is very
weak, he will gain strength under the administration of repeated pur-
gatives. They may be given every other day, twice or thrice a week
in protracted cases.

Persons in a very low or distressed state of typhus fever, will very
soon assume a healthy appearance after the administration of a purga-
tive. The following will be found very effectual and very suitable ;

Take tincture of Jalap, an ordinary sized table spoonful.

It may be taken in mint tea every three hours, until it operates. In some
conditions of the stomach, it operates both as an emetic and purgative,
evacuating large quantities of offensive matter, which almost invari-
ably improves the condition of tlie patient.

Dr. Hamilton makes the following excellent remarks on the use of pur-
gative medicines, in typhus fever :

"More extended experience confirmed these conjectures; and I was
gradually encouraged to give purgative medicines during the course of
typhus, from the commencement to the termination of the disease. I
have directed a strict attention to this practice for a longtime, and I am
now thoroughly persuaded that the full and regular evacuation of the
bowels relieves the oppression of the stomach, clears the loaded and
parched tongue, and mitigates the thirst, restlessness, and heat of the sur-
face, and that thus the later and more formidable impression on the ner-
vous system is prevented, recovery more certainly and speedily pro-
moted, and the danger of relapsing into the fever much diminished.

I am disposed to refer the superior utility of purgative medicines in ty-
phus (ever, to the circumstance of their operating tliroughout the whole
extent of the intestinal canal; to their acting upon an organ, the healthy
functions of which are essential to recovery, in a manner that is conso-
nant to the course of nature, by propelling its contents from above down-
wards; and to their moving and completely evacuating, the feculent
matter which, in this case, becomes feculent, and irritating constjpa-


30U Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

tion, together with the change which fever appears to produce in the
fluids secreted into the intestines, seems to be the cause of this altera-
tion in the state of the faeces. The necessity of expelling this noxious
mass is therefore apparent; and if my opinion be correct, the operation
of a clyster, the stimulus of which is confined to the rectum, must be
altogether inadequate to procure the full evacuation which the circum-
stances of the case require. Accordingly, it is now some years since I
have relinquished almost entirely the use of emetics and clysters in fe-
ver; I trust to a purgative medicine to ensure a regular alvine evacua-
tion, although the daily exhibition of a purgative is not always required.
By this mode of treatment, I avoid the harassing distress which the op-
eration of an emetic occasions, as well as the trouble and fatigue which
accompanies the exhibition of clysters. In most instances of fever, this
practice by purgatives, is conducted with ease, and a tolerable degree
of certainty. The observation and experience of individuals may be
necessary, on some occasions, for directing measures where it is not
easy to lay down precise rules. The effect of purgative medicines may
not be foreseen in every instance, or be altogether immediately under
command; at any rate, however, the subsequent doses of purgatives,
and the frequency of their repetition, will be regulated by the effect of
preceding ones.

It is of importance to consult in all respects the ease and comfort of
patients in fever. The exhibition of purgatives, therefore, should be
so timed, that their effects may be expected during the day, when pro-
per assistance can be best procured for the sick.

My experience, in the treatment of typhus, enables me to draw the
following conclusions :

1st. Purgative medicines are given with safety in typhus, to evacu-
ate the contents of the bowels.

2d. Under this limitation, they may, and ought to be exhibited at
any period, from the commencement to the termination of the fever.

3d. The early exhibition of purgatives relieves the first symptoms,
prevents the accession of more formidable ones, and thus cuts short the
disease.

4th. In the advanced period of typhus gravior, symptoms that indi-
cated the greatest danger, were relieved by the evacuation of the bow-
els, and the patients in this instance recovered.

5th. Reconvalescence from typhus is greatly promoted and confirm-
ed, by a preservation of a regidar state of the body. The same
means secure against the danger of a relapse.'"

disease, none stand higher than sudorifics, or medicines which produce
perspiration. They are calculated to relieve the stupor and pain, they
expel the morbific matter from the system, allay heat and procure rest.
The sweating drops may be given as directed under the head of bilious
remittent ; these may be given particularly in the first stage of the dis-
ease, in doses of a teaspoonful in a small quantity of catnip tea, suffi-
cient to produce a moderate degree of perspiration. Too much sweat-
ing must not be promoted or encouraged, as debility is apt to follow.
A moisture of the skin must be produced, at least, throughout the


Order V.] Typhus or Nervous Fever. 301

whole course of the disease until a crisis takes place ; give an infusion of
halm and catnip. Should the sweating drops prove too stimulating they
must be omitted, and such diaphoretics as have the desired effect, with-
out increasing the heat of the body. For this purpose give an infusion
or tea of the amaranthus, or crawley root. The medicinal herbs just
mentioned have this tendency. Sometimes the capillary vessels are so
much constricted, and especially in the middle and latter stages of the dis-
ease, especially where they have been neglected, that it is very difficult to
promote perspiration ; but where the surface has been properly and
timely attended to, with other suitable medicines, this is seldom the case.
Refrigerants, or cooling Medicines. — After the disease has become
fairly established, and assumes an obstinate character, I have known
every prescription of a heating or stimulating nature to aggravate the
complaint. In this case, it becomes necessary to reverse the treatment.
Refrigerant and cooling remedies must be used. The following purga-
tive will be found best.

Take Alexandria senna,

Manna, of each one ounce.
Add boiling water, and simmer to half a pint. Strain, add a teaspoonful of cream
of tartar, sweeten with sugar or molasses.

Give one half, and if it does not operate in three hours, give the re-
mainder. This purgative may be occasionally repeated.

Diluents. — Cold water may be drank from time to time, if the pa-
tient complains of great thirst. Also lemonade, cream of tartar,
whey, and soda powders. Likewise beer made of various roots may
be freely drank; such as spice-wood, sassafras, burdock, and black alder.
Let them all be boiled down strong, sweetened with honey or molasses,
and when blood warm, a sufficient quantity of yeast added. This will
prove a grateful and cooling beverage, and it may be drank freely.

Anodynes. — If the patient is unable to sleep, complains of pain or
distress, ten grains of the diaphoretic powders may be given at bed
time in any suitable vehicle. This produces sleep, moisture of the
skin without causing any excitement, and is a most invaluable medicine
in typhus. These powders may be repeated daily.

Cold affusion. — Among the various means made use of to arrest the
progress of this disease, few are more valuable than the cold affusion.
Such confidence had Dr. Currie, of Liverpool, in this application in
fevers, " that," he says, " for the cure of our most common febrile dis-
eases, it is no longer necessary to ransack the elabaratory of the chem-
ist, or to traverse the mountains of Peru ; that, used in the three first
days of fever, the cold affusion very generally stops the disease. The
same happy effects sometimes follow its use on the fourth, or even
fifth day, but seldom later. Even in the subsequent stages, where the
heat continues preternaturally great, and the skin dry, it is of great and
manifest advantage, almost immediately relieving the most distressing
symptoms, particularly restlessness and delirium, and conducting the
disease to a safe and speedier issue."

If the heat is not much above the natural temperature, as is some-
times the case in typhus, tepid or moderately warm applications may be


'302 Febrile Diseases.


[Class I.


applied to the body, the whole surface may be bathed with it three or
four times a day, or as often as the fever increases; this answers all the
purposes in general of dashing buckets of water upon the patient.
Should the heat be below the natural standard, let the parts occasionally
be bathed with cayenne pepper and spirits. It is of the utmost impor-
tance to bathe the feet in warm rain water or ley, once a-day. Great
attention must be paid to cleanliness, the patient's hands, face, and
breast, should often be washed with warm water, his hair should be
combed, and his bed and body linen frequently shifted, his mouth and
fauces are to be washed and gargled with lemon juice and sugar; lem-
onade, tea, or toast and water should be given very frequently; all ex-
crementitious matters should be immediately removed, and the apart-
ment should be well ventilated.

SINKING STAGES OF TYPHUS.
We have hitherto been speaking of the first stage of typhus, before
collapse or great prostration or sinking takes place. It is well known
that debility is a characteristic symptom of this fever, and hence it is ne-
cessary to use the utmost precaution to support the strength of the sys-
tem. To effect which we must give, first,

Tonics or Stimulants.

Even though the pulse be somewhat irregular, weak, or quick, it will
not contra-indicate or deter us from the use of corroborating or strength-
ening medicines, especially where prostration of strength is very great,
and the person sinking. If the skin be dry and there is great debility,
the best Madeira wine may be given, diluted with twice its quantity of
water, sweetened and given warm. This acts not only as a tonic, but
likewise as a diaphoretic, promoting perspiration. A wine glass full
may be occasionally given through the day.

Good Porter may be given.

The infusion of serpentaria Virginiana and boneset may be given
with advantage. If these medicines improve the state of the patient,
let them be continued and the doses increased as the stomach will bear,
until there is a crisis or a remission. Should they increase the symptoms,
they must be given in smaller quantities or discontinued altogether.

Sometimes ripe fruits, (says a writer) particularly strawberries and
wine, are the only nourishment he will take ; which circumstance of it-
self forms a presumption, that they are the properest for him. At other
times, when he refuses panado, sago, rice, when prepared without wine,
he will take them in considerable quantity mixed with wine and sugar;
and when he takes such nourishment with any degree of relish, thev sel-
dom fail of being beneficial. They enable him to bear the open air and
a free ventilation for a longer time, which always tends to hasten his re-
covery.

When that prostration of strength, so often mentioned, has taken
place, and is followed by stupor, low delirium, twitching of the tendons,
and other symptoms ; however proper we may think the bark would be,
and however eager we are to eive it, this is no longer in our power. In


Order V.] Typhus or Nervous Fever. 303

this state the patient generally rejects it in all its forms, or will only
take it in such small quantity as can be of no service. Yet the case is not
entirely hopeless; for even in this situation, if the lips are moistened
with a little warm wine, sweetened with sugar, he will shew a relish for
it, and when given in spoonfuls, will suck it into his mouth, with signs
of satisfaction, after rejecting every medicine with disgust, and refusing
every other kind of nourishment whatever.

In one particular case of this nature, which I well remember, after
a certain quantity of wine (perhaps near a pint) had been given in the
space of an hour, I perceived the patient's pulse acquire strength, and
become slower, while the insensibility seemed to wear gradually away;
but the relations taking an alarm at this quantity of wine, notwithstand-
ing those flattering appearances, withheld it, and offered the patient
some other drink, which in their opinion was more suitable to his
case. Notwithstanding his again and again rejecting every thing
they offered, it was not till after they plainly perceived the pulse
begin to sink, and the delirium to return, that they could be prevailed
on to give more wine, which, upon my returning to visit the patient, I
persuaded them to do, and with the same success as before.

1 have known instances also, where the physician not being convin-
ced that the filling of the pulse and removal of delirium was owing to the
wine, has set aside the use of it in the same manner, till the return of
the bad symptoms obliged him to resume it, not without remorse for hav-
ing made an experiment which had like to have proved fatal to the patient.

It is generally necessary, in such cases, to begin by giving the wine
warm with sugar, to induce the patient to take three or four spoonfuls;
but afterwards he takes it freely cold, and without sugar.

The reader might be astonished were I to mention the quantity of
wine I have known some patients take in this fever, and in some cases
of the confluent small-pox, where the weakness, insensibility and other
symptoms, were the same, and where the recovery of the patient was
evidently owing to that cordial alone. The proper rule is to give the
wine till the pulse fills, the delirium abates, and a greater degree of
warmth returns to the extremities. — Upon the smallest appearance of
the stupor coming back, the pulse quickening and sinking, for they all
go together, the wine must be resumed.

Attentively observing this rule, I have often known patients, who in
health were not fond of wine, and who would have been intoxicated
with a single bottle, drink in the space of twenty-four hours two bottles
of claret without any other effect but that of strengthening the pulse,
abating the delirium, removing the tremor, and creating a moderate
warmth on the skin. In others I have known a much greater quantity
necessary to produce" the same effect; but by giving that greater quanti-
ty, the same effect was produced. As I am told that this part of my
work (and perhaps many others) will be exposed to censure, I refrain
from mentioning the exact quantity of wine which I have known some
particular patients take, with the best effects, in this fever — it is suffi-
cient to say, that it ought to be given in such quantity as the patient
will willingly take, till the effects above mentioned are produced, and
then stop ; but on the first appearance of the pulse becoming weaker,


304 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

or any other symptoms returning, more wine must be given, persever-
ing in that quantity which is found by attentive observation sufficient to
keep up the pulse, and ward off the other bad symptoms.

When that quantity has been continued for several days, it may be
gradually diminished ; a little bread soaked in the wine, or some other
simple nourishment, may be offered. After the patient is able to take
panado mixed with wine, or bread soaked in it, with any degree of rel-
ish, the appetite sometimes becomes very keen, and he is even willing
to take more panado, rice, or sago mixed with wine, than is proper for
him.

This return of appetite is undoubtedly one of the strongest indications
of returning health ; but it must be indulged with caution ; the patient
must be allowed to eat but little at a time, even of this kind of nourish-
ment, and to return very gradually to his usual food.

Soon after the fever is entirely removed, and long before the patient
has recovered his strength, he will, by proper management, be entirely
weaned from the wine, or his allowance may be reduced to two or three
glasses in a day, if the physician should think that quantity more pro-
per than none. Indeed, the third part of what formerly had proved a
salutary cordial and a restorative, would, in this state of convalescence,
occasion a dangerous intoxication. So great a difference is there in the
effect of this cordial upon the constitution, in this state of extreme weak-
ness, when all the natural functions seem loaded and clogged by disease,
from what it has in perfect health, or when the fever being just remo-
ved, the animal functions gradually resume their former course.

Claret is the wine I have generally recommended, when the cir-
cumstances of the patient could afford it. I have seen the same good
effects, however, from the use of Port, Maderia, and other wines ; and
when no kind of wine is to be had, brandy or rum diluted with water
or milk, and sweetened with sugar, must be substituted in its place. In
diluted have nearly the same effect with wine, and are even more rel-
ished by a certain class of patients.

Where wine cannot be procured, equally beneficial effects have been
produced by drinking sound porter or ale with a lemon or orange sliced
into it, and rendered agreeable to the palate of the patient by the addi-
tion of moist sugar. This beverage may be drunk occasionally, will be
found to support strength as effectually as wine, and is in general much
relished by the sick ; with the addition of one dram of muriatic acid to
each quart of the liquor, it forms a remedy to which the cure of most of
the low fevers of this country may with safety be confided.

Rubefacients. — I have very little confidence in blisters, although some
highly extol them. Applied in the first stages of the disease, they have
a tendency to increase it, and there is also danger from mortification.
A mustard plaster is not attended with these unpleasant effects.

If there is a great determination of blood to the head, one may be
applied to the nape of the neck, and kept on long enough to excite red-
ness of the skin. It may then be removed, and placed on the right side
over the region of the liver, and continued until the same effect is pro-
duced.


Order V.] Typhus or Nervous Fever. 305

If the head is in great pain, cold water, spirits, and vinegar, to which
has been added a little common salt, may be applied to it.

When we reflect upon this stage of prostration, is it not a matter of
profound astonishment that many of the physicians of this day, should
practice blood-letting, even when the patient is on the borders of the
grave from debility. I ask the candid, sensible reader, whether there
is any sense, judgment, or philosophy in such treatment?

As before mentioned, it is very common in typhus for the tempera-
ture of one part of the body to be natural, while in another, there is an
unnatural degree of heat. This arises from a recession of blood from
the surface to the internal organs, or to an unequal circulation of the
blood. To obviate this, fomentations and frictions must be applied.
Hops boiled in vinegar may be applied. Also, the following:

Cayenne Pepper, (capsicum annuum) a teaspoonful.
Spirits of any kind, half a pint.
Simmer a few minutes, and apply to the parts with a piece of flannel.

These applications have a tendency to recall the blood from the in-
ternal parts to the surface, and to equalize the circulation.

If great weakness continues, and the system cannot be aroused by
the stimulants already mentioned, the following powder may be given:

Cayenne Pepper, (capsicum annuum) 10 grains.
Mint water or tea, one gill.
Sweeten with sugar or lemon syrup.

Give the whole at a dose and repeat three times a day.

This is one of the most permanent and and pure stimulants that can
be administered, and has this peculiar effect upon the system, that while
it stimulates, it does not increase the fever.

Should a diarrhoea come on, and the general symptoms indicate a
favourable crisis, it must not be checked ; but on the contrary, should
the patient continue to grow worse under it, it must be checked or mod-
erated. For this purpose give the following mixture :

Take best Turkey rhubarb, 10 grains.
Sal Gratis, 5 grains. Mix.

And add the same to one gill of an infusion or tea of peppermint, and
let the whole be taken, to be repeated every three hours, until the di-
arrhoea is checked.

Tonics. — Many arc in the habit of giving Peruvian bark in typhus
fever, but I have no evidence of its ever proving beneficial. While
the exciting cause of the disease remains, it seems to possess no power
of removing, but rather increases it. Should, however, a complete re-
mission take place, centaury, or bonesct and chamomile tea may be drank.

Should any symptoms of putrescency appear, the following mixture
may be given :

Good yeast, a wine-glass.

Olive oil, one table spoonful. Mix, and sweeten with molasses.

Let the whole be taken at a dose, and repeated two or three times a
day.
Vol. I.


306 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

Fresh Air. — In this, as well as every other type of fever, fresh air
must be admitted into the apartment of the patient, and the most rigid
attention to cleanliness must be observed. A s soon as any thing passes
the bowels, it must be immediately removed, and the casements of the
windows or the doors left so far open as to admit a current of air.

REGIMEN.

The patient must be kept cool and quiet in body and mind, and as
much encouragement held out as the nature of the fever will admit. —
After the stage of excitement is over, a nourishing and geneious diet
may be allowed, such as panado and gruel mixed with wine. Chicken
soup may be given, particularly in the middle and latter stages of typhus,
but it must be freed from oil. Wine whey may also be given as a com-
mon drink, and as before intimated, occasionally a glass of good Ma-
deria wine may be given, and if there is no fever, with great weakness,
wine bitters.


The following cases were communicated by Dr. Wolcott :

Case I. — A farmer aged twenty-two, of a thin spare habit, but con-
stitution naturally good, applied to me for advice sometime in the month
of July last. He had laboured hard, and I found on critical investigation
that he had been addicted to the solitary vice of onanism. He told me
that during the space of two years, he had experienced a total want of
virile energy.

Symptoms. — Pulse somewhat accelerated, bounding a little on ex-
acerbations of fever, but yielding readily to pressure ; tongue coated
with a yellowish fur; want of appetite, with languor and slight aberra-
tion of mind. As his disorder advanced, he became stupid ; pupil of
the eye dilated ; brown tongue ; dark brownish matter adhering close-
ly to the teeth near the gums, and the pulse, when the fever was go-
ing off, promptly indicated a sinking state of the system.

Treatment. — Iu the commencement, an emetic of ipecac followed
by a brisk purgative of jalap was administered. From the great de-
bility which he experienced in the first stage of his complaint, and
being well persuaded that he would go through a course of fever of un-
certain duration, and having read of a case of slow fever, followed by
the death of the patient, in consequence of onanism, recorded in one of
our periodicals by a celebrated practitioner of this (Connecticut) state,
I considered my patient's case a very critical one, and therefore com-
municated to the friends of the sick, my wish to have consultation. Dr.
Fitch of North Guilford was then called in, to whom I mentioned the
particulars of the case, and we accordingly agreed upon the plan of
treatment. As the exacerbations of fever were of short duration, and
as his system exhibited a constant disposition to sink, we directed the
attendants to feel the pulse in his wrist, and whenever they should find
it weak and feeble, to raise it by gentle stimulants. This was the guide.
bonate of ammonia triturated with four table spoonsful of pure honey,
of which a teaspoonful was given every three hours, and an infusion of
Virginia snake-root, three drams to the pint of boiling water, a ta-


Order V.] Typhus or Nervous Fever. 307

ble spoonful every three hours, half an hour after the exhibition of the
common and previous to the febrile accession. To obviate subsultus,
(starting of the tendons,) and quiet the low muttering delirium, we gave
a teaspoonful of strong Valerian tea once in four hours, but this, after
taking three or four times, he refused. To avoid putrescency, check
the fever, and give tone to the system, he took elixir of vitriol, seven
drops in a table spoonful of cold water, every fourth hour, fever on or
off. When febrile exacerbations ran high, cream of tartar, a tea-
spoonful dissolved in a pint of hot water, was directed to be drank
freely. This solution acts as a mild diuretic and refrigerant, and some-
times slowly opens the bowels. We gave him liberty to drink freely of
cold water, vinegar and water, lemonada, mountain mint or balm tea,
as he might select. One daily evacuation from the bowels was solicit-
ed, but diarrhoea was dreaded from the beginning, and consequently
whenever the patient had more than one or two stools within the space
of twenty-four hours, a quarter of a grain of opium was ordered once
in six hours to check or restrain them. To counteract the stupour, a
blister was applied alternately to the arm and leg of opposite sides, and
kept on just long enough to excite a little redness, or inflammation.

The exacerbations of fever being now very short, and when off, the
pulse suddenly sinking, wine, that best of stimulants in typhus, was
next resorted to. A table spoonful of the best Port or Maderia, dilu-
ted in twice its quantity of cold water, was ordered to be administered,
and repeated according to circumstances.

When he became tired of wine, we gave him old St. Croix Rum,
one teaspoonful to two of cold water, sweetened with loaf sugar, and
repeated as occasion required, to raise the pulse.

One evening I was present when the pulse sank to an alarming de-
gree. The patient could not speak, and when I offered him wine, he
turned his head away in disgust, and seemed determined to take nothing
more. I now felt deeply concerned, as I was convinced that dissolu-
tion would speedily follow, unless some powerful stimulant could be
conveyed into the system. Said I, applying my mouth close to his

ear, " you will certainly die, and that immediately too, unless

you take this medicine." He then opened his mouth, and I gave him
half a gill of strong camphorated spirit, which immediately roused hinij
and from that moment he began to recover.

His diet consisted of milk-porridge ; equal parts of wheat flour and
ground rice boiled in milk, custards, chicken broth, soft-boiled eggs,
fowls, broiled ham, &c.

Under this treatment he rapidly convalesced, and when I saw him a
short time since, he told me that his virile energies were restored : he
enjoyed excellent health and spirits, and was much more fleshy than
before his indisposition.

Case II. — Some years since, a lady aged twenty-four, was seized
by a continued fever. I cannot give all the particulars of the case, as
I was then but a child, but I well recollect that the heat of the patient's
body was steadily above natural ; skin hot, dry, and red ; tongue rough
and parched, and thirst very great, the patient almost continually calling-
out for cold water.


308 Febrile Diseases. [Class T.

Dr. Joseph Foot, of North Haven, Connecticut, the attending phy-
sician, recommended affusing the body of the patient with cold water
at the height of the exacerbation. He also expressed his opinion that
should the fever continue to run high after the application of the water,
it might be necessary to repeat it. Accordingly about nine in the even-
ing, the patient, divested of all her clothing, was placed in a large tub,
and one or two buckets full of cold water dashed upon her head. The
patient was very much refreshed by this process, which disengaged such
an evaporation from the skin, that the body smoked like stones or bricks
dashed with cold water.

After this, the pulse rose, the temperature of the body increased,
flushes of heat appeared on the face, which continuing, the friends of
the patient, contrary to precise directions from the physicians, again
applied the cold water in the same manner as before. This procedure
struck in the fever and distressed the patient exceedingly.

At this critical juncture, the physician happily arrived, and advised
me to go immediately into New Haven, (a distance of seven miles,) and
procure some of the best Maderia wine, and a box of soda powders.
This I accomplished in a very short time, and obtained the articles.
Wine was immediately administered ; and repeated agreeable to pre-
scription, which brought the heat to the surface of the body, and to cool
the system, . and calm the irritation in the stomach, one or two of the
soda powders was given according to directions. By this treatment the
fever was arrested, and no further unfavourable symptoms occurred ex-
cept slight flushes of heat, which appeared occasionally on the cheeks,
but their duration was very short. The patient recovered.

I must not omit to mention that in the above case the cold affusion
was employed in the incipient stage of the fever; and here I beg leave
before I close, to suggest a hint both to physicians and the friends of the
sick, viz. that affusing the body of a patient with cold water should nev-
er be employed except in the presence of the medical attendant, or a
person well acquainted with the nature and effects of the cold affu-
sion.


SECTION II.

PUTRID OR MALIGNANT FEVER. (Typhus Gravior )

DESCRIPTION.

Malignant or putrid fever takes its name from the putrescent and ma-
lignant character with which it is attended, especially in the latter sta-
ges of it. It is by some called the pestilential fever of Europe, and
seems nearly allied to the plague. It may be distinguished from the
mild species of typhus, by the great violence of the attack, and from
the inflammatory fever, by the smallness of the pulse, the sudden and
great debility in its commencement ; the brown or black tongue ; the
foul matter about the teeth; the intense heat of the skin; and in the
advanced stages, purple spots, which appear in various parts of the bo-
dy ; fetid stools, &c.


Order V.] Putrid or Malignant I < 309

CAUSES.

The malignant fever is occasioned by impure air, from many per-
sons being crowded together into small, dirty, and unventilated apart-
ments or houses; from putrid animal and vegetable effluvia, &c.

Like common typhus, it is prevalent in jails, camps, and hospitals,
particularly where they are much crowded, filthy, and the air confined.
Long periods of rainy or wet weather, it is thought, likewise occasion
putrid fever. It often succeeds great inundations in low and marshy
countries, particularly where these are preceded and followed by a hot
and sultry season. It may likewise arise from eating too much animal
food without the use of vegetable, or eating meat that is on the verge
of putrefaction. Hence those from the calamities of war ; those who
are confined on ship-board, and are obliged to live upon unwholesome,
tainted animal food, are very liable to an attack of putrid fever.

It may also arise from stagnant water, also the effluvia arising from
the decomposition of animal matter, dead bodies, &c. Hence it has
often prevailed where persons have been suffered to remain above
ground, unburied.

Want of cleanliness is a common cause of malignant fever, and
it prevails where the inhabitants are crowded together, the apartments
filthy, and a very little circulation of air. This fever is unquestionably
contagious.

• SYMPTOMS.

An attack of this disease is characterized by debility, great depression
of spirits, and of muscular power. There is sense of soreness, pain in
the head, back, and extremities, attended with chills ; the eyes appear
full, heavy, yellowish, and somewhat inflamed ; there is a great beating
of the temporal arteries, the tongue is dry and parched, breathing labo-
rious and interrupted with deep sigh?, the breath is hot and offensive,
urine pale, an intense heat of the skin which is dry and constricted,
great constipation of the bowels, the pulse is quick, small, and hard,
fluttering and irregular ; there is often great heat, oppression, and pain
at the pit of the stomach, and as the disease advances, the pulse increa-
ses in frequency (beating often from 100 to 130 in a minute): there is
apparently vast debility; great heat and dryness of the skin; oppression
at the breast, with anxiety, sighing, and moaning; the thirst is greatly
increased; the tongue, mouth, lips, and teeth, are covered over with a
brown or black tenacious fur; the speech is inarticulate, and scarcely in-
telligible; the patient mutters much, and delirium arises. The fever
continuing to increase still more in violence, symptoms of putrefaction
show themselves; the breath becomes highly offensive; the urine depos-
its a black and fetid sediment; the stools are dark, disagreeable, and
pass off insensibly ; haemorrhages issue from the gums, nostrils, mouth,
and other parts of the body; livid spots, or petechia?, appear on its sur-
face; the pulse intermits and sinks; the extremities grow cold ; hiccups
ensue ; and death at last closes the tragic scene.

When this fever does not terminate fatally, it generally begins, in cold
climates, to diminish about the commencement of the third week, and


310 Febrile Diseases. Class I.]

goes off gradually towards the end of the fourth, without any very evi-
dent crisis ; but in warm climates it seldom continues above a week or
ten days, if so long.

PROGNOSIS.

Our opinion, as to the event, is to be formed by the degree of
violence in the symptoms, particularly after the appearance of pe-
techia?, although, in some instances, recoveries have been effected
under the most unpromising appearances. An abatement of febrile heat
and thirst, the tongue becoming moist and clean, a gentle moisture dif-
fused equally over the whole surface of the body, loose stools, turbid
urine, the pulse being stronger, but less frequent, a free secretion of
saliva, tumour and suppuration of the parotid, axillary, or inguinal
glands, a scabby eruption about the mouth, and the delirium and stupor
abating, or going off, may be regarded in a favourable light. On the
contrary, great muscular debility, very laborious respiration, difficulty
of deglutition, stupidity, and listlessness of the eyes, perpetual writhing
of the body, petechia? of a livid colour, with dark, offensive, and invol-
untary discharges by urine and stool, fetid and cadaverous sweats, hae-
morrhages, subsultus tendinum, and hiccups, denote the almost certain
dissolution of the patient.

The duration of putrid fever is very uncertain; it sometimes runs its
course in a week, at other times it continues several weeks.

Favourable Symptoms. — Rising of the pulse, return of sleep and rea-
son, the spots being of a florid colour, natural perspiration, moist and
clean tongue, eruptions about the mouth.

Unfavourable Symptoms. — Partial clammy sweats; weaker and ir-
regular or tremulous pulse; dry, black, or choppy tongue; swelling of
the abdomen, involuntary discharge by urine and stool, starting of the
tendons, picking at the bed clothes, high delirium, constant vomitings,
coldness of the feet and hands, trembling of the tongue, laboured res-
piration, difficulty of swallowing, all denote a fatal termination of the
disease.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Among the various means recommended, is bleeding, mercury and
blistering.

When during the German war, the French were shut up in Prague
by the Austrians, they suffered by a putrid fever, for which their phy-
sicians bled them freely. The consequence was such as we may readi-
ly imagine, for they lost from eighty to one hundred every day.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The great indication of cure in putrid fever, is to arrest it as
speedily as possible, in order to prevent the fluids from running into a
state of putrefaction.

An emetic may be administered, as directed in the preceding type of
fever, and if it prove beneficial, it may be repeated in a day or two
afterwards.


Order V.] Putrid or Malignant Fever. 311

Give the following purgative :

Take pulverized Jalap,
do. Senna,

Cream of Tartar, equal parts.

A teaspoonful may be taken in syrup, molasses, or any convenient
vehicle, every two hours, until the bowels are thoroughly evacu-
ated ; to be repeated daily, or every other day, according to circum-
stances.

Give a teaspoonful of the sudorific or sweating drops in a tumbler of
catnip tea, to be repeated every two hours until perspiration takes place.
These drops must be used often enough to keep the skin moist, and two
or three times a day is sufficient for this purpose. Let an infusion or
tea of the same plant be freely taken at the same time. No means that
can be made use of, will cut short the fever so quick as free perspira-
tion.

Let acidulated drinks also be given. Lemonade is a valuable med-
icine in putrid fever. It is antiseptic, or has a great tendency to
prevent putrefaction.

Dr. Thomas who had much experience in this kind of fever, has the
folowing remarks on the use of acids :

"Whatever is given to the patient for drink ought to be cold, and
gently acidulated with the juice of oranges or lemons. The mineral
acids likewise are, beyond all doubt, better remedies in this and other
malignant diseases, than we have been accustomed to regard them;
and from having employed them, but more particularly the muriatic, for
several years with very great success in typhus gravior, I can vouch for
their efficacy. My usual plan of proceeding is as follows :-^-Having re-
lieved the stomach by a gentle emetic where nausea prevails, cleared
the bowels of their feculent contents, and subjected the patient to cold
affusion, when the circumstances already noticed have admitted of it, I
with five drops of laudanum ; and as a vehicle I employ about an ounce
and a half of an infusion of cascarilla, columbo, or orange peel. This
draught I direct to be repeated every four hours, gradually increasing
the quantity of the acid in each to eighteen or twenty drops, or more.

The surface.— -In order to aid ihe process of sweating, and conse-
quently to abate the febrile symptoms, let the whole surface be thorough-
ly and repeatedly bathed with tepid ley-water. The happy and per-
manent effects of this practice, the astonishing power that it possesses
to arrest and destroy fevers of every grade, can only be known by those
who have experienced it. It seems almost capable at once of snatch-
ing the victim from the grave. It lowers the pulse ; diminishes arterial
excitement; removes pain, tension, and congestion; equalizes the cir-
culation ; quenches thirst ; procures rest and sleep, and in short is one
of the greatest anti-febrile remedies which we possess.

The feet also must be bathed once or twice a day, and mustard poul-
tices applied, and to the nape of the neck if there be great pain in the
head. By reference to Thomas, I see that he highly extols, with oth-
ers, cold affusions in putrid and malignant fever, which I shall here sub-


312 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

join. At the same time, as far as my experience goes, I have found
that tepid applications are preferable to cold, in all febrile diseases.

Dr. Thomas thus remarks :

"These steps being pursued, and the nature of the disease clearly as-
certained, I would advise the ablution of the patient with cold water, or
rather a general affusion, provided the heat of the body is steadily a-
bove the temperature of health. The good effects of this mode of prac-
tice I have often experienced.

The late Dr. Currie, of Liverpool, reports, that this fever having
made its appearance in a regiment quartered in that town, he had the
men drawn up and examined, seventeen of whom were found with symp-
toms of it upon them: these he subjected to the cold affusion once, or
sometimes twice a day. In fifteen of this number the contagion was
extinguished, and in the remaining two, the fever went through its course.
The healthy part of the regiment bathed in the sea daily, and by these
means he effectually destroyed the contagion. He also relates, that of thir-
ty-two who went through the disease, by its being too confirmed to be
removed at the time of his first seeing them, only two died ; and with
these the cold affusion was not had recourse to.

This gentleman's report, with the authorities of other practitioners
of eminence, clearly prove the application of cold water by affusion on
the first attack of the complaint to be, under certain restrictions, an ef-
ficacious remedy for stopping its progress, as likewise that of other low
contagious fevers.

Dr. Currie found that the most advantageous time for using the cold
affusion is when the exacerbation is at its height, or immediately after
it is begun, which is generally from six to nine in the evening; but he
observes it may be used with safety at any time of the day, when there
is no great sense of chilliness present; when the heat of the surface is
steadily above that which is natural ; and when there is no general or
profuse perspiration.

The same remedy has likewise been successfully employed by him,
and many others, in the more advanced stage of the fever, so as sel-
dom to fail of procuring a safe termination. He relates a case of a
soldier who was in the ninth day of the disease when he first saw him :
his pulse was 100, and feeble ; his heat was 104; his thirst very great; his
tongue foul and black ; his mind much confused, and at times he was deli-
rious ; and petechia? were dispersed over his whole body. The mode
of treatment was as follows : his strength was directed to be supported
by administering a bottle of wine a day, with an equal quantity of gruel ;
every night he took an opiate draught, and his body was kept open by
laxative clysters, and when these failed, by physic. A bucket full of
salt water was directed to be thrown over him immediately, which was
to be repeated according to circumstances.

The effect was, that in a few minutes after the affusion, the heat les-
sened to 98 ; the pulse moderated to 96 ; and his mind became more
calm and collected. Two hours afterwards he had relapsed nearly into
his former state, but the night was passed with greater tranquility. The
whole of this practice was continued with nearly the same result, until
the twelfth day of the disease, the afiusion having been performed in


Order V.] Putrid or Malignant Fever. 313

the evening, and occasiojjcdly at noon. The fever continued its usual
period; but on the twelfth day, the heat having sunk to its natural stand-
ard, the cold affusion was thenceforth omitted, and instead of it, the
body was sponged all over once or twice a day with vinegar.

In' those cases where the fever had been of eleven, twelve, or thir-
teen days' standing, and the heat of the body was inconsiderable, he
thought it prudent to make the degree of cold very moderate, and in
some instances he substituted tepid ablution, or sponged the body over
with vinegar by itself or diluted with water.

Some communications to Dr. Currie from Mr. Marshall, surgeon of
the Cheshire regiment, bear further testimony to the good effects of this
remedy in typhus fever. In sixty cases out of sixty-four, in which it
was employed at an early period, the disease was arrested by having re-
course to it three or four times; and in the other four which were ad-
vanced in their progress, although the disease was not stopped from
goin? through its natural course, still all the patients recovered. Mr.
Marshall mentions, that from the time he began the cold affusion, he
used little or no wine, no opium, nor indeed scarcely any other remedy
in any one case in which the cold affusion was employed ; which report
is of itself sufficient to establish its decided superiority over every
other mode of treatment.

It is, however, in the early stages of low contagious fevers that we
can employ it with most advantage. It lias, indeed, been used by ma-
ny practitioners, in some instances, so late as the twelfth, or even the
fourteenth day, with safety and success ; but it can only be employed
at this advanced period, in the instances in which the heat keeps up stea-
dily above the natural standard, and the respiration continues free. In
such cases it has been observed to appease agitation and restlessness, dis-
sipate delirium, and, as it were, snatch the patient from impending dis-
solution. When the remedy is to be had recourse to, every arrange-
ment should be made for the affusion before the patient is moved at all;
and fatigue as well as disquiet should be avoided as much as possible.
In those cases where the delicacy of the system, or the apprehensions
of the patient, or of the by-standers, may prevent cold affusion from
being employed, we may substitute tepid affusion for the more powerful
remedy, or we may recommend either ablution or aspersion.

A memorable instance of the good effects of cold affusion came under
my immediate knowledge some years ago, whilst I practised in the
West Indies. A piofessional gentleman of my acquaintance, residing
in the island of Nevis, was attacked with this fever, and it proceeded
with such violence, that in a few days petechias appeared on different
parts of his body, and a haemorrhage of blood issued from his nostrils,
mouth, and other places. Under these unfavourable circumstances he
was freely exposed to the open air, and one or two buckets of cold water
were thrown over him ; he was then wiped perfectly dry, and replaced
in his bed; which plan of proceeding was repeated twice and sometimes
thrice a day. By means of this application, the administration of an
opiate at night, and a liberal allowance of wine, his life was preserved,
to the great but pleasing astonishment of all his friends.

I have been much in the habit of recommending cold affusion, or

Vol. I. 40


314 Febrile Diseases. [Class i.

ablution, in most cases of typhus fever, and 'with very beneficial effects.
The same practice has been adopted in the London House of Recovery,
and apparently with the most decided success. Obvious, however, as
are the advantages to be derived from the remedy in question, still there
nre many practitioners who look on it as an innovation, and are there-
fore averse to it.

In the early stage of typhus, the superior efficacy of affusion over ab-
lution, is unquestionable; its operation extends beyond the mere ab-
straction of heat from the surface : it acts powerfully on the nervous
system. Besides its effectually removing the uneasy sensation of heat
in the beginning of febrile diseases, and thus indirectly recruiting the an-
imal powers, it induces sleep. We well know that when any disagree-
able sensation is removed, sleep soon follows, and it happens so in this
instance. After the fourth or fifth day of fever, the influence of both
affusion and ablution is greatly diminished, and not sufficient to inter-
rupt the morbid actions ; at a still more advanced stage the heat is re-
moved nearly in the same degree by washing the surface of the body
with a wetted sponge, or cloths dipped in water, as by pouring cold
water on the naked body ; and the patient is relieved nearly the same
by one mode of treatment as by the other. Thus much for the compar-
ative merits of affusion and ablution.

In the advanced stages of typhus gravior, as well as of typhus mitior,
whore either the affusion of water of a low temperature, the immer-
sion of the patient, or even the sprinkling his body with cold water,
might in the least endanger our arresting the movements of life, we
should always take the precaution of giving a glass of warm wine, or
some other powerful cordial, immediately after employing the remedy.

Antiseptics. — When symptoms of putrescency occur, let good yeast
be given freely. Brewers' yeast is preferable, if it can be procured.
A wine glass may be given every three hours through the day, and once,
during that period, let an ounce of olive or sweet oil be added to a wine
glass of the yeast, sweetened and drank. Besides the laxative effects
of the oil, it possesses great antiseptic properties. A clergyman and
practitioner in England records the good effects as follows. It would
appear to possess almost specific properties.

Whatever may be the mode of action of yest in typhus, the fact ap-
pears to be indisputable, that fixed air takes off that extreme debility of
the stomach so conspicuously marked in disorders of this nature; and
in proportion as that subsides, the pulse rises, becomes slower and full-
er, the burning heat on the skin disappears, and a truce is gained for
the reception of nutritive supplies.

" Seventeen years past, I went," says a benevolent individual, " to
reside at Brampton, near Chesterfield. I had not been there many
months before a putrid fever broke out among us: finding a great num-
ber of the people too poor to afford relief to themselves, I undertook,
them. I early attended a boy fourteen years of age, attacked with the
fever, the symptoms unequivocally putrid; I gave bark, wine, and
such other remedies as my books directed, but found them of no avail;
his disorder grew every day worse, and I was hourly in expectation of


Order V.] Putrid or Malignant Ft 315

his dissolution. Being under the necessity of taking a journey, hefore
I set off, I visited him, and I thought for the last time, and prepared
his parents for the event of his death. While conversing on this dis-
tressing subject, I observed in die corner of the room a tub of wort
working; the sight brought to my recollection an experiment I had some-
where met with, of a piece of putrid meat being made sweet by being
suspended over a tub of wort in the act of fermentation. The idea
rushed into my mind that the yeast might correct the putrid nature of
this disease, and I instantly gave him two large spoonsful, and told the
mother if she found her son better, to repeat the dose every tliree hours.
On my return, after a few days, I anxiously inquired after the boy,
and was informed he was recovered. I went immediately to the house.
when the boy opened the door and looked surprisingly well.

Second Cure of a Putrid Fever.

" After I left Brampton, I lived in Leicestershire. My parishioners
being opulent, I dropped the medical character entirely, even with my
own family. One of my domestics falling ill, a fever ensued, which in
its progress became putrid. Having great reliance, and deservedly, on
the apothecary's judgment, the man was left solely to his care; till
finding every effort baffled, he told me he considered it a lost case, and
that in his opinion the man could not survive twenty-four hours. 1 then
determined to try the yeast; his pulse, though feeble, began to get more
composed and full; in thirty-two minutes from his taking it he was able
to get up from his bed, and walk in his room. At the expiration of the
second hour, I gave him a basin of sago, with a good quantity of wine,
lemon, and ginger. He ate it with an appetite; in another hour I re-
peated the yeast; an hour after which I gave the bark; the next hour
he had food; the next hour had another dose of yeast, and then went
to bed; it was nine o'clock; he told me he had a good night, and was
recovered. However, I repeated the medicine, and he was able to go
about his business as usual."

Third Cure of a Putrid Disorder by Yeast.

" About a year after this, I was riding past a detached farm house,
at the outskirts of the town. I observed a farmer's daughter at the door
apparently in great affliction. On inquiring the cause, she told mc her
father was dying. 1 dismounted, and went into the house to see him,
and found him in the last stage of a putrid disorder; his tongue was
black, his pulse scarcely perceptible, and he lay stretched out like a
corpse, in a state of dropsy insensibility. I then immediately procured
some yeast, which I diluted with water, and poured down his throat,
but left him with but litde hope of his recovery. I returned in about
two hours and found him sensible and able to converse. I then gave
him a dose of bark; he afterwards, at a proper interval, took refresh-
ment ; l staid with him ' ii he repeated the yeast, and then left him, with
directions how to proceed. 1 called upon him the next morning at nine
o'clock ; I found him apparently well and walking in his garden. He
was an old man upwards of seventy.

I have since given the yeast to above fifty persons labouring under
putrid fevers; and what is singular, I have not lost one patient."


31G Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

Mustard Plasters. — Blisters must be carefully avoided in putrid fe-
vers. There is such a tendency to putrescency in the fluids that morti-
fication is very likely to follow their application. If the pain of the
head be great, and delirium present, a mustard plaster, as before inti-
mated, may be applied for a short time to the nape of the neck.

Bathing the head and feet. — Great attention must be paid to the act
of bathing the feet and head. Nothing has a greater tendency to miti-
gate pain than this practice. Cold water and vinegar may be applied to
the head. It abstracts the heat from it, and equalizes the circulation.

Remission. — When there, is evident remission, the following prescrip-
tion may be given :

Take Peruvian bark, (Cinchona officinalis,) one ounce.

Virginia snake-root, (Serp. Virgiiiiana.) half an ounce.
Maderia wine, one quart.

From half to a wine-glass full may be taken every two hours during
the intermission.

Gargles. — The mouth must be frequently cleansed with vinegar and
water, or wine and water sweetened with honey.

Pain and Restlessness. — If there is much pain, distress, restlessness,
and want of sleep, give ten grains of diaphoretic powders, particularly
at night. They are anodyne, diaphoretic, refrigerant, antiseptic, and
diuretic. Their operation must always be aided by an infusion or tea
of balm or catnip.

REGIMEN.

In this type of fever, the practitioner should endeavour, as far as
practicable, to counteract the tendency of the fluids to putrescency. —
To keep up the strength of the patient, and to aid the salutary efforts of
nature in expelling the cause of the complaint, by promoting perspiration,
and the other evacuations.

Pure Air. — As impure air occasions the disease, pure air will have a
tendency to remove it. Hence there must be a current of air admitted
in the room, but not suffered to come in contact with the patient's body.
The propriety of this will be obvious, Avhen we reflect upon the putrid
exhalations of the breath by perspiration, bowels, &c.

Vinegar should be frequently burnt in the patient's room, particular-
ly after the bowels have been evacuated. The hands, body, and face
of the patient may occasionally be bathed with vinegar. Bitter and aro-
matic herbs may be kept continually in the room. If it is in the win-
ter season, let these herbs be boiled with vinegar and water, and let the
vapour from them be diffused through the room. This is not only very
refreshing to the patient, but it likewise prevents the spread of the con-
tagion among attendants, or others. As little noise as possible should
be permitted, and the patient must be kept cool and quiet.

The diet should be vegetable and nutritious; such as panado, Indian
or oat-meal gruel, mixed with wine, and acidulated with the juice of
orange, or currant jelly. Ripe fruits of every kind may be taken.
Tamarind, cream of tartar water, lemonade, &c. may be occasion-
ally taken as a change.

Cold water may also be drank with safety and advantage.


Order \ Putrid or Malignant Fever. 81"

PREVENTION.

Having pointed out the mode of treatment to be adopted when the
disease actually takes place, it seems proper likewise to mention the pre-
cautions it may be necessary to pursue, in order to prevent its contagion
from being communicated to others.

Dr. Thomas has the following remarks on the prevention of this fever:

" When the disease arises, the sick ought to be removed to a clean
and well-aired room in the most remote part of the house, and as much
separated from the rest of the family as possible ; his bed-linen should
be changed frequently ; his body be kept clean ; whatever comes from
him, either by stool or urine, be immediately removed and emptied ;
and his chamber be well ventilated by allowing a free admission of fresh
air into it ; it may likewise be sprinkled frequently with warm vinegar,
in which some of the aromatic herbs have been infused. No fire should
be kept in the room. In summer the patient should be covered only
with a sheet, and in winter with a single blanket above the sheet. The
good effects which arise from removing patients in this fever from con-
taminated air, are particularly remarkable among the poor ; for a great
many of them will recover when brought to an hospital or ward of recov-
ery, although they take little or nothing medicinal ; whilst those who re-
main at their own houses and have the best medicines and attendance, will
sink rapidly. None but the necessary attendants should have any com-
munication with the sick; and these, to guard against contagion, should
avoid sitting down on the patient's bed ; and they must likewise care-
fully avoid inhaling the vapour arising immediately from his body. When
near him, they may keep a sponge or handkerchief, moistened in
camphorated spirit or vinegar, to the nose and mouth.

" In every species of typhus, direct and immediate exhalations from
the sick, provided there is a sufficient approximation or actual con-
tact of another, are indisputably equal, in some cases, to the infecting
such person, even when the most minute attention shall have been paid
to cleanliness and ventilation.

"In hospitals, camps, and on board of ships, where a number are un-
avoidably crowded together, so as to render it impossible to cut off the
communication between the healthy and the diseased, the simple means
before recited will not prove sufficiently powerful for destroying the
contagion, and therefore others must be adopted. In all such instances,
besides well fumigating the apartments, clothes, beds, bedding, and ham-
mocks of the sick, as hereafter advised, changing them frequently for
fresh ones, paying the strictest attention to cleanliness in every respect,
well ventilating every place where they ate lodged by a constant and
free admission of fresh air, — we should oblige those in health, as well as
those tainted by the contagion, to undergo daily ablution with cold wa-
ter.

"Nitric acid has been used by the late Dr. Carmkhael Smyth, as a
fumigation, with great success in this fever. In the year 1780, the dis-
ease broke out among the Spanish prisoners confined in Winchester Cas-
tle ; he embraced the opportunity of giving the remedy a fair trial, and
obtaining the most decisive evidence of its happy power in preventing


318 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

the spreading or farther communication of the infection. He found he
could use it without risk or inconvenience to respiration, and therefore
thought it the most proper antidote to he applied, where persons are un-
avoidably obliged to be present.

" The Doctor's mode of obtaining nitric acid gas, is by decomposing
nitre by means of heated sulphuric acid, which may be done as follows:
Put half an ounce of this acid into a crucible, glass, china cup or saucer,
and warm this over a lamp, or in heated sand, adding to it, from time
to time, some nitre : these vessels he directs to be placed at 20 or 30
feet distance from each other, according to the height of the ceiling and
the virulence of the contagion. In hospitals and prisons, he advises the
lamps or vessels containing heated sand to be placed on the floor ; but
on board of ships, he recommends to hang them to the beams by waxed
silk cords.

" From the well-known efficacy of the sulphuric acid in destroying
contagion, he advises it to be employed as a fumigation for clothes and
furniture, <fcc. ; but for purifying empty prisons, hospital wards, and
ships, he gives preference to the nitric, its vapour being more volatile
and penetrating, and not leaving the disagreeable smell which the sul-
phuric does, and thinking it at the same time equally efficacious."

In concluding this section on typhus, I shall quote the remarks of Dr.
Thachei : " It remains," says he, " to caution the inexperienced phy-
sician against an error in practice, of which he may not be aware. It
is that of doing too much, and expecting more from our art than can be
realized. Typhus is a subject not so easy of control as some may ima-
gine; it will in general run its course, and it is even doubtful, whether
in the aggregate, more lives are saved by what is termed bold, vigour-
ous, efficient practice, than by the most simple mode of treatment, and
more reliance placed on the efforts of nature, carefully regarding her
dictates, and judiciously fulfilling her indications."


PLAGUE. (Peslis.) < "

DESCRIPTION.

l he Plague is a very malignant fever, of a putrid anu contagious
nature, characterized by extreme debility, buboes, carbuncles, red or
purple spots upon the skin, haemorrhages, diarrhoea, &c. The infec-
tion of this disease is of a specific nature, producing febrile symptoms,
and affecting the nervous and glandular system.

The Plague is, in strict nosological language, a continued fever close-
ly allied to typhus, and therefore demanding notice more particularly
in this place. In its symptoms and progress, we shall trace an obvious
resemblance to those of typhus.

The historical details connected with this very singular disease are
highly interesting. The ancients do not appear to have been acquainted
with it, but it must be confessed that its origin and early history are in-
volved in much obscurity. For many centuries past it has been endemic
on the shores of the Mediterranean ; and though it has occasionally


Order V.J Plague. 319

shown itself in other latitudes, as at Moscow in 1771, and in England
in 1665, yet in that situation only is it all times to be met with. Grand
Cairo may be considered as the great nidus of the contagion of plague,
and from this point, at particular seasons, it spreads with a malignity
scarcely Jo be estimated.

The plague is by most writers considered as the consequence of pes-
tilential contagion, which is propagated from one person to another by
association, or by coming near infected materials.

Some, however, have doubted whether the disease is really conta-
gious or not, whilst a few have asserted positively that it is not so : an
absurd doctrine truly, which, if acted upon by Legislatures, would
be likely to be attended with the most injurious consequences. The fact
that it is evidently contagious is fully established in Sir James M'Gre-
gor's opinion ; but the laws of its transmission are not more accurately
known than the specific nature of the contagion. Dead bodies, we are
told, did not seem to convey it; the heated animal body, and still more
with a febrile moisture on the skin, appeared to transmit it most readily.
Among the most obvious causes which contribute to induce the plague,
besides contagion, may be enumerated the following, viz. corrupt or
damat'ctl grain, putrid fish or other animal substances, noxious exhala-
tions arising from stagnant waters or slimy mud, a residence in confined
situations where the current of air is obstructed, and the want of due
cleanliness.

The disease attacks persons of all ages and both sexes indiscriminate-
ly: but women, young people, and infants at the breast, have been ob-
served in general to resist infection more than robust men. Those who
were exposed to vicissitudes of heat and cold, such as bakers, cooks, and
smiths, were noticed, during the campaign in Egypt, to be more par-
ticularly attacked with it.

In all epidemic plagues, terror and anxiety, filth and defective nu-
triment, fatigue and hurry, anger and intemperance of every descrip-
tion, have acted as predisposing and accelerating causes of the distem-
per.

The plague is known to be most prevalent in Egypt soon after the
inundation of the Nile, or rather its recession ; for a quantity of slimy
mud being deposited on the banks of the river and other places it has
overflowed, occasions humid mephitic exhalations to arise, and which
are supposed to produce the disease. From Sir Robert Wilson's account
of the diseases of Egypt, there is great reasons to suppose that a humid
state of the atmosphere is favourable to the production of the plague ;
for the English and Turkish armies which marched to Cairo escaped
contagion, notwithstanding almost every village was infected ; while the
troops that remained stationary on the moist shore of Aboukir were se-
verely affected, and lost many men. A dry atmosphere appeared to
him not only to be a preventive of the plague in some degree, but
likewise to act as a remedy; for we are told that several men confined
with this disorder in the hospital at Jaffa, escaped into the Desert, and
endeavoured to reach the army ; but finding the attempt impracticable
they returned in three days perfectly recovered.

The general resemblance which plague bears to those malignant


330 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

forms of typhus fever, which are occasionally witnessed in cold countries,
must be abundantly obvious. The great distinction between them lies
in the occurrence of buboes ; in other words, in the tendency which
plague has to affect the lymphatic system. This line of distinction how-
ever is so broad, that plague is to be viewed as a continued feyer, allied
indeed to typhus, but differing from it in the important circumstances
of having its origin in specific contagion. That the plague is a highly
contagious disease cannot for a moment be made a matter of dispute ;
but some physicians have maintained, that it is not a fever sui generis,
generated by a specific contagion, but only an aggravated form of ty-
phus; in support of which opinion it has been argued, that cases of ty-
phus complicated with buboes have sometimes been observed in this
country. This idea, however, is entertained only by a few, and the
doctrine of a specific contagion in plague is that which is now general-
ly received. Its laws have been investigated with some accuracy, and
the following seem to be the most important of those which have hither-
to been ascertained.

1. The latent period of the contagion of plague, or that between
communication with an affected individual, and the appearance of symp-
toms, varies in different cases. It is scarcely ever less than three
days, and it seldom exceeds six. Instances indeed are recorded of the
disease not appearing until the tenth day, but these cases are rare.

2. The contagion spreads to a very small distance only from the body
of the patient. The consequence of which is, that the disease is seldom,
if ever, communicated except by actual contact.

3. The dead body does not communicate the disease so readily as
the living. This appears to be well understood in Turkey ; but that the
contagion is sometimes received from the dead body, cannot, I appre-
hend, be doubted.

4. The contagion of plague is readily imparted to fomites, in which
it may lurk for a very long time, more particularly if secluded from the
air.

5. Re-infection is occasionally observed, but, upon the whole, is not
common. The individuals throughout Turkey, who are employed a-
bout the persons of plague patients, have, with very few exceptions, un-
dergone the disease. Sufficient instances, however, are met with of
persons taking the disease a second time, and even dying of the second
attack, to make all who have previously had it, cautious in their inter-
course with the affected.

6. Plague, like the small-pox, may be taken by inoculation. The
experiment has been tried in several instances, but in none has it suc-
ceeded in mitigating the disorder. Dr. Whyte in 1801, and Mr. Van
Rosenfeldt in 1817, paid with their lives the forfeit of their temerity.
The former died on the fourth, the latter on the second day of the dis-
ease.

Plague I have stated to be epidemic in Egypt ; and both at Cairo and
Constantinople cases of the disease are almost always to be met with.
In other words, they occur sporadically in those places. While the
English army was in Egypt in 1801, cases of plague were continually
occurring ; but the judicious regulations then adopted, coupled with the


Order V.] Plague. 321

state of the air, prevented the disease from spreading, and the troops
suffered but very little. At Malta, however, in 1813, and in the Ionian
Islands during the years 1815-16, the plague raged epidemically; and
from early times it has been observed, that at certain seasons the plague
disseminates itself with extraordinary malignity. To this nothing can
give any effectual check but the enforcement of severe measures by the
strong arm of military power. At Marseilles in 1720, at Messina in
1743, at Grand Cairo in 1759, and on various other occasions, when
the plague was suffered to advance without any such control, the ravages
which it committed were of incalculable magnitude. The establishment
of a cordon around the whole of the affected district, the rigid seclusion
of families, the immediate removal of all suspected cases into quaran-
tine, and of all decided cases to the lazaret, are the preventive mea-
sures of most obvious importance. By these, promptly and vigorously
exerted, the extension of the plague in the Ionian Islands has been sev-
eral times, in the course of the last five or six years, prevented: and it is
now no longer questionable, that it might in the same manner be effec-
tually checked in every part of the Turkish Empire.

SYMPTOMS.

A feeling of great languor and lassitude ushers in the attack of plague,-
which for the most part happens towards evening. There is always a
cold stage, though it is seldom of long duration. Heat of skin, head-
ache, and giddiness succeed. The pain of the head is referred to the
temples and eye-brows. The eyes appear heavy, dull, and muddy.
The expression of countenance changes in a remarkable manner. Some-
times there is a wild and furious look ; sometimes a look claiming com-
miseration, with a sunk eye and contracted feature. The most striking
of all the early symptoms of plague is the staggering, and the sudden
extreme prostration of strength. A strong tendency to void the urine is
generally noticed. The stomach is very irritable, and rejects almost
every thing presented to it. The tongue is white and moist. The bow-
els are sometimes torpid, and at other times loose, the evacuations be-
ing always highly offensive. The speech falters. The pulse is at first
small, hard, and quick ; but after the appearance of buboes it often be-
comes fuller and softer. It is sometimes intermittent. In point of fre-
quency, its average may be stated at 100. The heat of the skin is seldom
very intense. The head is occasionly perfectly clear and collected. At
other times, stupor occurs immediately after the formation of the hot fit.
Some cases of the disease are ushered in by a violent fit of mania. The
greatest indifference with regard to recovery prevails, which is always
reckoned a most unfavourable symptom.

After one, two, or at farthest three days, pains in the groins and
axillae announce the formation of buboes. These pains are often highly
acute, and unless speedily followed by the swelling of the gland, the
patient dies delirious. In women the axillae, in men the groins are
chiefly affected. Carbuncles appear at the same time, but indifferently
on all parts of the body. Petechia? and vibices are much more frequent
than carbuncles, which it appears do not occur above once in twenty

Vol. I. 41 y


322 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

cases. The fatal termination is sometimes preceded by violent haemorr-
hages from the mouth, nose, or intestines.*

The duration of the disease is very various. A few cases are on re-
cord, where the patient died within a few hours from the invasion. To
many it proves fatal during the first paroxysm or peiiod, which includes
the time from the evening of the attack to the close of the following
night. The third and fifth days are, however, upon the whole, those
of the greatest danger. The former is the usual period of the appear-
ance of bubo; the latter, of the abatement of the febrile symptoms. If
the patient survives the fifth day, and the bubo is fully formed, he may
be considered as nearly out of danger. The convalescence indeed is
always very tedious, from the extreme debility which the disease leaves ;
and the patient's life is not unfrequently again put into imminent hazard
from the occurrence of gangrene in the extremities.

Such is the train of symptoms which characterize this disease. Some
idea of the extent of the mortality which it occasions may be formed
from the fact, that out of 700 persons attacked by it in the district of
Leftimo in Corfu, 1815, seventy only were saved, and 630 died. It is
curious, however, to observe, that occasionally this very formidable
disease assumes a totally different character. The mild form of plague
is not peculiar to any families, or classes of persons, or districts, or pe-
riods of the epidemic. It is more commonly met with towards its de-
cline, but it is observed occasionally even from the very first. Buboes
form in this variety of the disease about the usual period, generally with
a good deal of inflammation, and go on to suppuration. Carbuncles
and petechia?, however, are never observed to attend it. It is marked
by the same set of febrile symptoms as characterize the malignant
form of the disease, but they are all milder in degree. It terminates oc-
casionally by a critical discharge, but does not appear to require, or to
be at all affected by common medical treatment. A few cases have
been recorded of plague appearing in the form of buboes, without any
constitutional affection.

A circumstance of some importance, as tending to point out the ana-
logy between the plague and other forms of continued fever, has been
taken notice of by Sir James M'Gregor, in his Medical Sketches of the
Expedition from India to Egypt; — I mean the effect of season, ventila-
tion, and peculiarities of soil, in modifying the character of the symp-
toms. The cases of plague which occurred in the cold months of the
year were marked by an inflammatory state of the system. Those which
were sent in from crowded hospitals were attended from the very first with
low or malignant symptoms. Those which occurred when the army was
encamped near the marshes of El-Hammed, showed a kind of remittent
or intermittent type.

DISSECTION.
Dissections of the bodies of those who have died of the plague have

* This detail of the symptoms of Plague is abstracted, by permission of Sir J.
M'Gregor, from the official reports of the epidemic of 1816, transmitted to the Ar-
my Medical Board by the officers in charge of the Plague Hospitals in the Ionian
Wand*


Order V.] Plague. 323

discovered the omentum, stomach, and intestines gangrenous in some
places ; the liver in a state of congestion and considerably enlarged, the
gall bladder filled with black fetid bile, and the pericardium with a
bloody fluid. Proofs of inflammation and gangrene have also been found
in the brain and its investing membranes, in the lungs, and kidneys.
In many instances the glandular system has been found in a very
diseased state, and the blood black and loose in its texture, similar to
what occurs in putrid fever.

COMMON TREATMENT

Bleeding, mercury, antimony, salts, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

From the nature, history, and symptoms of this disease, the indica-
tions to fulfil will appear very obvious. The impropriety of bleeding,
where there is such excessive debility, must be apparent. It is stated
that " Dr. Whyte, one of the physicians to the forces in Egypt, used
the lancet very freely, but that every one of his patients died."

The treatment evidently called for in the plague, is nearly pointed
out under the preceding type of fever, (typhus gravior) which it very
nearly resembles.

from the large quantities of fetid, bilious matter, secreted by the liver,
and thrown into the stomach and first passages, it appears clear that
vegetable purgatives are indispensably necessary. So far from induc-
ing, they will remove debility, by evacuating the morbid and feculent
matter attendant on the complaint.

Emetics have been found by those most experienced in the plague,
to be very valuable. They therefore should be given as early as possi-
ble, and occasionally repeated, according to the severity and symptoms
of the disease. 1 am confident that no emetic, from its extensively
stimulating effects, will answer a better purpose than the lobelia infiata.

Sudorifics are the principal class of medicines to be relied upon, to
expel from the system the peculiar virus or poison, which is the imme-
diate cause of the disorder. The patient, therefore, should be put into
a state of perspiration as speedily as possible, by the usual means, to
be continued till a crisis or remission succeeds. A writer states, " it
has been observed that a gentle diaphoresis or sweating sometimes
proves critical and carries off the disease."

Antiseptics must be administered, if symptoms of putrescency appear.
The same as recommended under the head of malignant fever. If there
be great prostration, good wine may be drank. Infusions of medicinal
plants, such as balm, catnip, snake-root, mint, maybe freely taken-
also, lemonade, cream of tartar, whey, and other diluent, acidulated
drinks.

Ablutions, or bathing the whole body very often with the alkaline
wash, (ley water) will be found one of the most powerful and salutary
remedies. It usually requires not more than fifteen minutes measurably
to remove the most violent heat of the skin, and lower the pulse to its
natural standard. The feet must also be immersed mornin? and ni"ht
in the same liquid


324 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

Savary, in his Letters on Egypt, mentions an anecdote which is con-
sidered by Dr. Falconer as much to his purpose. The captain of a ship,
whose sailors had contracted the plague at Constantinople, caught it
himself by attending on them : he felt, as he expressed himself, exces-
sive heat, wLich made his blood boil; the disease seized his head, and
he perceived (as he thought) that he had only a few moments to live.
The little remaining reason he had, taught him to attempt an experi-
ment: he laid himself down quite naked on the deck: the heavy dews
that fell, penetrated, according to his sensations, to his very bones.
In a few hours he could breathe better; his agitated blood became calm,
and bathing the morning after in the sea, he was perfectly cured.

This case brings to my recollection another, of a French soldier, and
reported by Dr. Desgenettes, who being afflicted with the plague, threw
himself into the Nile, under a high degree of delirium, and on being
taken out of the water after a short lapse of time, soon recovered from
the disease, seemingly in consequence of his immersion. A similar case
is brought forward of the good effects derivable from the sudden appli-
cation of cold water by Sir Brooke Faulkner, in his Observations on the
Plague.

Water applied to the surface too cold, when the excitement of the
blood vessels runs high, or when it is reduced very low, increases reac-
tion in the first stage, arid prevents it in the latter. In the intermediate
stages of the disease it is useful. Water which has stood awhile in the
air, allays thirst much more than when it is very cold. This has been
confirmed by the experience of persons who work in the open air in hot
weather, as well as by patients in fever.

Mustard Plasters may be applied to the nape of the neck and to the
bottom of the feet, for pain in the head or delirium.

For sickness at the stomach, local pains and congestion, make use of
the same treatment as recommended under the head of other types of
fever.

Anodynes, combined with Diaphoretics, may be given to procure
sleep and produce perspiration. Nothing will equal the Diaphoretic
Powders, which may be given two or three times a day.

PREVENTION.

Remove the sick into clean, airy, and well ventilated apartments.
Let there be as little communication with them as possible. Oblige
ships, persons, and all kinds of merchandize coming from places infect-
ed with the plague, to undergo a rigid quarantine. Let every species
of filth be removed from houses, and let them be often fumigated.
Avoid fatigue, sudden transitions from heat to cold, and observe unu-
sual temperance in eating and drinking.

In Dr. Duncan's Annals of Medicine for 1797, is inserted an article
relating to the cure and prevention of the plague by frictions of the
whole surface of the body with olive-oil, and communicated, as we are
given to understand, by George Baldwin, Esq., at that period his Bri-
tannic Majesty's agent and consul-general in Egypt.

It is mentioned, that there is no instance of a person rubbing a pa-
tient having taken the infection ; but, by way of precaution, is is ad -


Order V.] Plague. 325

vised to anoint himself all over with oil, and to avoid receiving the breath
of the infected person into his mouth and nostrils. The prevention to
be used in all circumstances, is that of carefully anointing the body, and
living upon light and easily digestible food.

A striking observation made by Mr. Baldwin is, that among upwards
of a million of inhabitants carried off by the plague in Upper and Lower
Egypt, during the space of four years, he could not learn that a single
oil-man, or dealer in oil, had suffered.

Mr. Jackson, in his Reflections on the Commerce of the Mediterra-
nean, likewise informs us, that in the kingdom of Tunis, where the
plague frequently rages in the most frightful manner, destroying some thou-
sands of the inhabitants, there was never known an instance of any of the
coolies, or porters, who work in the oil-stores, being in the least aflect-
by this disorder, their bodies being always well smeared with the oil, as
well as their clothes being imbued with it.

It has been considered as pretty certain that in the generality of in-
stances the contagion of the plague enters the body through the medium
of the cutaneous lymphatics, and thence produces the disorder of the
lymphatic glands. This idea is illustrated by the probability that the
external use of oily frictions lessens the susceptibility to infection ; and
Sir James M'Gregor mentions a fact which much favours the opinion,
by observing, that the men who were employed in applying oily fric-
tion to the camels for some epidemy afiectine them, escaped the plague.

The evidence produced in behalf of the plan communicated by Mr.
Baldwin, seems more satisfactory as to the preventive powers of the
application, than as to its sanative properties after the disease has once
taken place. It seems, however, right to notice, that Dr. Assalini, who
was a medical officer in the French army which invaded Egypt, makes
favourable mention of oily frictions in his Observations on the Plague,
as being generally followed by copious sweating, and to this he thinks
their beneficial operation is to be attributed. We are also told by Mr.
Jackson, that he recommended the remedy to several Jews and Mus-
sulmen during the time that the plague was depopulating West Barba-
ry, in 1799 and 1800; and no instance of its failure, when duly perse-
vered in, even after infection had manifested itself, had come to his
knowledge.


■i2(> Febrile Diseases. [Class T.

SECTION III.

YELLOW FEVER. (Typhus Icterodcs.)

DESCRIPTION.

The yellow fever is a disease which very much resembles in its char-
acter, the highest grades of the bilious remittent fever. It is more vi-
olent in its attack, and all the symptoms are more aggravated, and there
is a greater tendency to putrescency, together with some other distin-
guishing characteristics.

CAUSES.

Predisposing Causes. — There are many predisposing causes of this
complaint, among which may be reckoned, intemperance of every
kind. Almost all the first victims of yellow fever, are almost all ad-
dicted to the use of ardent spirits, and such are the most liable to fall
victims to it. The constitutions of such are more susceptible of the
disease, more violent, and more malignant. Another predisposing
cause is great fatigue, exposure to damp, wet weather, getting the feet
and clothes wet, a check of perspiration, overloading the stomach,
and every thing which causes a deviation from health.

Immediate or Intermediate Causes. — A contagious and poisonous gas
or gases must be considered the immediate cause of this kind of fever.

"Pestilence or contagion has always been the peculiar curse of popu-
lous cities. Of about two hundred general plagues, recorded in history,"
says Webster, "a few only have been so violent as to spread over
countries into villages and farm houses ; almost all have been limited to
large towns, evidently demonstrating, that they would never have af-
fected mankind, without the influence of impure air, generated in those
places. This is a truth, as unquestionable as it is important; and on a
conviction of this, hangs the safety of men from that dreadful calami-
ty. Had Mead, and other eminent physicians, taken the same pains
to lead makind into truth, as into error, we should long ago have intro-
duced improvements into the arrangement and structure of our cities,
which would have secured our citizens from nine-tenths of the infectious
diseases, by which they have been alarmed and distressed."

"Multitudes and multitudes of lives are annually sacrificed, in all
cities, to the avarice of the original proprietors of lots. The little nar-
row, dirty houses, kitchens and yards, surrounded with high fences, ex-
cluding air and vegetation; all that can dissipate or absorb the noxious
exhalations; all that ran purify the atmosphere, and refresh the exhaus-
ted frame of a human being, panting beneath a sultry sun — every thing
in our cities is contrived to waste the powers of life, and shorten its du-
ration."

" Remove the sick, cleanse the houses and clothes, do whatever hu-
man art and labour is competent to effect, all will not avail; cases spring
up in every quarter, and the disease takes its course. — Then, die we
must ; for I contend, that if to prevent an epidemic disease is thus im-


Order V.] Yellow Fever. 327

possible, there never could be a single instance of recovery from the
disease, during the continuance of the pestilential state of the atmos-
phere. All medical aid would be totally useless, and labour lost ; for
a disease never can be cured, that cannot be prevented. I must still
be of opinion, that if cities could be rendered more commodious, by a
dilferent arrangement of streets and buildings ; if the means of putri-
faction and cleanliness, both of person and in domestic economy, could
be particularly, generally, and universally embraced, and strictly ob-
served, it would interpose an effectual barrier to almost every species
of disease. Longevity would be much more frequent, and man, now
like the grass which the windpasseth over, and is gone, would then fall,
like a shock of corn fully ripe, in all the fragrance of wisdom, and ma-
turity of age; every movement in the journey of life being prompted
by desire of good, and marked with usefulness, he would only die to live."

In order fully and effectually to secure the inhabitants of any city
from pestilential diseases, it is necessary that every lot upon which a
house is built should contain one acre of ground, that there be a yard
in front and rear, dry cellar, numerous windows, rooms often white-
washed, plenty of goed water, baths, &c. This will be a sure and
sovereign antidote to every kind of infection.

"Physicians," says Brower, "who have written on the subject of
fevers and epidemical diseases, observe, that they, almost without ex-
ception, commence with the poorer class of citizens, who are too fre-
quently as negligent of cleanliness and neatness of person, as they are
regardless of the quantity and quality of the food and drink they con-
sume.

It was not unfrequent, during the yellow fever in Boston, on the firs*
visitation to a patient of the above description, to find him enveloped
in a rotten feather bed, little less pleasant to the olfactories, than a
lump of putrefaction; or rolled up in blankets, quilts and rags, which
would not have been more disagreeable, if they had been used in the
lowest offices of a foundling hospital.

Frequent bathings, in the warmer seasons, when the blood is in a
calm state of circulation, is very salutary, and greatly contributes to the
continuance of health. When the body has been a considerable time
in full perspiration, the volatile particles of the perspired matter es-
cape, and leave an incrusted matter upon the surface of the body, which
often frets and corrodes the extremities of the exhalcnt vessels, and
thus lay the foundation for disease. This is remedied by frequently
laving the body in water of moderate temperature. It also agreeably
refreshes and invigorates the system, and preserves and enlivens the ac-
tions of the lymphatic vessels, upon which the purity of the blood, and
the perfect health of the body, very much depend. This practice
should become frequent as it was among the ancients, and is now with
the inhabitants of the southern and middle latitudes.

To me it seems most probable, that the proximate cause of all fe-
vers affecting the system, generally, is deranged motion, or total want
of action in the lymphatic system, consisting of exhalents and ab-
sorbents. When these vessels are in healthy motion, all deleterious
matters, floating in the common mass of the circulating medium, are


328 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

eliminated and perspired. But, let this process be checked, and the
skin becomes hot and inflamed ; the whole body soon feels all the dis-
tress of a fever paroxysm.

Volney, in his Travels in Egypt and Syria, Chap. xvii. informs, that
" at Cairo, it is observed the water-carriers, continually wet with the
fresh water they carry in skins upon their backs, are never subject to
the plague." This fact, says Mr. Webster, if accurately stated, is
worth an empire.

The most safe, easy, pleasant, and beneficial mode of using water,
is, to bathe or wash the body in a private apartment at home. This
may be done several ways, either in a large vessel, immersing the whole
body at once ; or, what is less troublesome, with a single pail or bowl
of water, in a bed chamber. The washing may be done with the
hand, or a sponge, in a few moments, as the person rises in the morn-
ing, or retires at night.

Origin. — There has been great dispute among physicians respecting
the origin of yellow fever. Some contend that it may be generated in
this country ; others that it is imported. Some again contend that it is
communicated from one subject to another; others believe the contrary.
Hence it has been the theme of fruitful discussion, and controversy.
From all the facts that we can gather we are led to believe,

1. That it may be imported from the West Indies, and other warm
climates into the United States.

2. That it may arise spontaneously among us from local causes,
filth, &c.

It has been satisfactorily ascertained that the infectious effluvia may
be generated, or retained in the holds of ships during their continuance
in the sea-ports of hot climates. When such vessels arrive at our
wharves, the effluvia from them may produce the fever, under favora-
ble circumstances. When the effluvia is introduced, the fever engen-
dered by it, will only attack those who visit the infected vessel or the
cargoes, and will disappear entirely when it is removed. The cases
which have occurred in Philadelphia, Perth Amboy, and New- York,
have been distinctly traced to vessels which have just arrived from the
West Indies. This fact is put beyond all controversy, by numerous
examples, one of which is very striking; and I shall here mention it.
The ship Ten Brothers arrived at Boston on the first of August, 1819.
Many persons went on board of her when the cargo was discharging,
most of whom received the infection. Twelve of these persons living in
different parts of the city were attacked with yellow fever; nearly all
of whom died. It is remarkable, however, that they did not commu-
nicate the fever to any who visited or attended them.

Another circumstance proves that this disease may not only be taken
in a warm climate on board of a vessel, but may continue in her for a
great length of time, and may be communicated to those within its in-
fluence, without any concurring circumstances, except a vitiated state
of the atmosphere, heat, &e. This is proved by a United States ves-
sel, some years ago, which had caught the infection in a warm climate,
and after they had been out to sea for some length of time, it was com-
municated to the crew, among whom there was great mortality.


Order V.} Yellow Fever. 329

It is a subject of great dispute whether the yellow fever is ever gene-
rated in any of the sea port towns of the United States ; and this seems to
be a subject involved in some doubt and uncertainty. It is probable that
the noxious or deleterious effluvia exhaled from masses of public filth,
containing putrescent matter generated under a high range of tempera-
ture, may cause yellow lever.

" It has fallen to my lot," says Hardie, " to see as much of the yellow
fever, as any other individual in the United States, as I was constantly
employed by the New- York Board of Health in one capacity or another,
from the year 1798, till the year 1814, when I resigned. It will now be
the third time, that I have published a book respecting this disease, and
as a matter of course, I have endeavoured, as well as I could, to in-
vestigate the cause of its origin. After much reflection upon the sub-
ject, I have, at last, come to this conclusion, that it may be, and has
been imported, and that it also may be, and has originated from local
causes. In some of those years, in which we have been afflicted with
pestilence, I have found no difficulty in tracing it to some vessel or ves-
sels, which had arrived here from a foreign port; and in others after the
most strict inquiry, I could not possibly devise any cause for it, except
that it was owing to the filth and dirt of various kinds, which had been
allowed to accumulate in our cellars, yards, privies, &c."

At any rate we know that our climate generates high grades of bil-
ious remittent fevers, which often very much resembles yellow fever, and
which by some is identified with it. But there is a manifest difference be-
tween the two diseases in the history, causes, symptoms, and treatment
of the two complaints. Dr. Peixotto has nicely discriminated between
these two diseases ; the most prominent distinction I shall here notice.

" A careful analysis," says he, " will expose the error in almost every
instance.

The yellow fever most usually runs its course in a short time, say
from three to five, or to seven days.

The bilious fever generally continues from nine to twenty-one days.

The stomach is always and essentially affected in the yellow fever, as
is evinced by the burning heat about the praecordia, the pain at the pit
of the stomach, the vomiting of matter not bilious, but evidently a se-
cretion from the stomach itself, or whether a secretion or not, proceed-
ing from this organ alone.

In bilious fever the stomach may indeed be affected, but it is in a
milder degree, and this organ cannot be considered the seat and throne
of the disease.

The pulse and temperature, in yellow fever, are frequently natural;
in bilious fever, they are never so. The appearance of the eyes is very
different in the two diseases, as is that of the suffused skin.

The muscular system always suffers under great debility as bilious
fever advances, while the arterial system is more and more excited. In
yellow fever, on the contrary, the muscular strength is frequently retain-
ed to the very hour and moment of death.

The appearances on dissection differ also very materially in the two
diseases. To sum up all the points of difference will scarcely be ex-

Vol. I. 42


330 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

pectcd of us in this place. It is enough to mention the different condi-
tions in which the stomach is found, after death, in the two diseases."

The treatment required in the two diseases differs essentially. Nor
does the real hlack vomit occur in the bilious remittent.

Is Yellow Fever Contagious. — It is equally evident that the yellow
fever is not contagious, except under peculiar circumstances. It is
highly infectious within a certain distance of an infected ship or place.
In other words, as far as the atmosphere is sufficiently contaminated with
the deleterious effluvia, it may be communicated to those who inhale it.
This was clearly proved when it last occurred in this city in 1822. A
certain part was inclosed, called the " infected district." Those who
went within it caught the fever, while those who remain outside, were
free from it. But it is equally as clear and as well established, that the
fever was seldom If ever communicated to those who visited or nursed
such as were sick with it. As soon as they were removed into the
country ; or even a short distance from the infected part, they never
communicated it to a single individual. Those who are the strongest
advocates for contagion, seem to admit that it cannot be communicated
from one person to another, except the air becomes very much vitiated
or impure where the patient lays. Hence it is a great consolation to
know under what circumstances the yellow fever is generated and pro-
duced. While on the one hand, we entertain no groundless fear of
taking the complaint; on the other, it becomes our city authorities to
maintain a rigid quarantine.

"If the breath, perspiration, and other excretions of a person, in a
yellow fever, be confined in a small close room, they may produce a
similar disease, especially when they act upon a body previously de-
bilitated by grief or fatigue. But they are generally inoffensive, where
the sick are accommodated in open, well ventilated situations. Out of
upwards of one thousand persons, who have carried this disease into the
country from our cities, there are not more than three or four instances
to be met with, of its having been propagated by contagion. In the
city hospital of Philadelphia, there was no instance of this disease being
contagious, in 1793, 1797 and 1798. Clothes, impregnated with the
effluvia of a person who had died of the yellow fever, might produce a
similar disease, but it would be only in consequence of those effluvia
partaking of the nature of putrid matters, derived from any other animal
source. The same thing may be said of the effluvia emitted from a
putrefying dead body."

" Some of the laws of the contagion of yellow fever," says Gregory,
"appear to be ascertained with tolerable accuracy. Its latent period
varies from two to eight days. Ten days is, I believe, the longest pe-
riod recorded of yellow fever appearing, after exposure to the contagion,
and removal to a freely ventilated atmosphere. The contagion of yel-
low fever has a peculiar range of atmospheric temperature, but on a high-
er scale than that of the plague. It has never been known, but in those
countries and at those seasons when tropical heats, that is, of eighty de-
grees Fahrenheit's, or upwards, prevail. It never fails to disappear as
the winter approaches. It is certainly a singular circumstance in the
history of the yellow fever, that it has never prevailed to any remarkable


Order V.J Yellow Fever. 333

extent at a distance from the sea, and that its principal ravages have
been on the shores of the Atlantic Ocean.

The last circumstance which it is of importance to notice in the "histo-
ry of the yellow fever and the laws of its contagion, is the question
whether it can be taken a second time. The answer is a very short one.
Although a few well attested instances to the contrary have been record-
ed, still a most extensive experience has satisfactorily proved, that the
immunity from second attacks is nearly complete, and that it forms one
of the most striking characteristics of this remarkable disease."

Mortality of the Disease. — Yellow fever has hitherto been very
prevalent in many of our Atlantic cities ; in the West Indies, and some
other parts. It has ever been very formidable and very fatal, and which
may be imputed in a great measure to the want of proper medical treat-
ment. New- York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, Savannah and
New Orleans, have suffered terribly by this horrid malady, and it has
been still more destructive in some of the West India islands. In Ha-
vana it is stated that in the month of June (1816, I think,) it swept off,
in the course of three weeks, thirteen hundred persons.

Proiimate Cause. — It is self evident that the proximate cause of this
type of fever is a specific poison received from the atmosphere through
the medium of the lungs, and which enters the circulation, is thrown
upon the liver, and in an attempt or effort to expel it from the system
through the medium of this organ and the stomach, vomiting and gastric
irritation ensues. The poison also being mixed with the blood is carried
to the heart and becomes a foreign irritating and morbific agent, which
stimulates it and the blood vessels to a most powerful action to throw it
off by the skin and the other excretions.

SYMPTOMS.

The yellow fever usually attacks with lassitude and weariness ; chilly
fits; listlessness of every thing around; faintness; giddiness; flushing
of the face; redness of the eyes; pains in the eye-balls and lower part
of the forehead, as likewise in the back; debility and sighing; thirst
and a tendency to lethargy ; the urine is high coloured, small in quan-
tity, and turbid; the perspiration is irregular, interrupted, and greatly
diminished; the saliva is viscid; the tongue is covered over with a dark
fur; the bile, which is scalding and acrid, is secreted in unusual quanti-
ties, and is thrown into the stomach, from which it is again speedily
ejected, and the skin is intensely hot, dry, and hard. The disease con-
tinuing to advance, the eyes become of a deep yellow: the face and
breast are tinged with the same hue; an incessant retching and vomiting
of frothy bile ensues; great costiveness prevails, which is attended with
a permanent dilatation of the pupils of the eyes.

There is hardly ever an evident remission until the fever has entirely
gone through its first stage, which is generally in thirty-six or forty-eight
hours; when there is often such an abatement of the symptoms, as to in-
duce the patient to think himself tolerably well; but an early recurrence
of the symptoms in an aggravated form, accompanied with extreme de-
bility, soon convinces him of the contrar}'. In the last stage of the dis-
ease, the greatest debility prevails, and symptoms of universal putre-


332 Febrile Diseases. [Class T.

faction arise; large patches of livid spots are to be observed on different
parts; the tongue becomes dry and black; the teetli are incrusted with
a dark fur; the breath is highly offensive; the whole body exhibits a
livid yellow in many cases, but not in all; haemorrhages break forth
from the mouth, ears, and nostrils ; dark and fetid stools are discharged ;
hiccups; the pulse sinks, and death follows very quickly. These are
the usual symptoms, but there is considerable variation.

A physician who witnessed this disease as it occurred in Baltimore,

" The yellow fever as it appeared here, tended naturally to death.
A fatal case, therefore, will portray more strikingly its form. ' The
eye of the physician entering the chamber of the sick, would be arrest-
ed by a countenance of distress ; the countenance of one weeping with
the anguish of a broken heart. He would behold a face suffused with
blood ; an eye red, watery, half closed and sad : the parts immediately
around it swoln : its silent glance spoke sensibly to the soul, and seemed
to demand its pity. He would find the tongue moist, and white or clean.
His hand would feel the skin excessively dry, and parched with heat:
a pulse hobbling or intermitting, slow or frequent, full or small, but al-
ways tense. He would behold the patient tortured with excruciating
pains, rendered less supportable by constant exertion to vomit, till di-
lirium mingled with his groans a frantic laugh or song.'

'At certain periods, the heat of the skin would abate for a short time,
but every other symptom would continue with unremitting violence.'

' But at length the skin would become cool ; the pulse lose its tension
and frequency, and every pain cease. The fiery redness of the eye
would disappear, and assume the yellow livery of bile. A yellowness
would appear about the neck, and gradually extend itself over the whole
body. A vomiting of a black fluid would occur, resembling the grounds
of coffee. The patient would be sensible of immense and oppressive
weakness. As these symptoms increased, the lips would appear cede-
matous, and the tongue swoln. The skin would be cold, and impart on
pressure a sensation like that of a dead person. The pulse would con-
tinue preternaturally slow, and generally acquire fulness as death ap-
proached. A hiccup would at length occur, the pulse rapidly seemed
to pause after every pulsation, as though it were to beat no more.
The blood bursts from different parts of the body ; the action of the arte-
ries is no longer felt; the heart gradually ceases exertion, while deli-
rium and convulsions announce the victory of death.'

" Those who were exposed to the contagion, would be affected with
head-ache, a heat and sense of fulness or oppression in the stomach, want
of appetite, a disagreeable taste, and costiveness, a burning of the hands
and feet at night; restlessness or drowsiness ; heat of the skin, alternate-
ly with profuse sweats, frequently of a yellow colour. These symptoms
were not always succeeded by disease, yet they proved the precursors
of the fever.

" These premonitory symptoms did not precede every case of fever.
It would often seize upon its victims with sudden violence, while occu-
pied in the various employments of life, or engaged in the pursuits of
business or pleasure. A shaking or chill would usher in the disease in


Order V.] Yellow Fever. 333

some, and from its degree of intensity we might suspect the violence of
the ensuing case.

Indies and in this city :

" I shall avail myself of a description of the disease which I drew up
after my return from the West Indies, where I had enjoyed repeated
opportunities in 1818-21-22, of witnessing it in its most severe forms.
In the latter year I studied its character as developed in the epidemic
of Hector-street, and was struck with the striking features of identity
displayed with the tropical fever in all its more aggravated cases.

"The disease generally invades the patient with the ordinary symp-
toms of fever; slight rigors, seldom amounting to a chill; pain in the
head and loins; uneasy sensation about the stomach, and a general
sense of weariness. Sometimes the symptoms are altogether wanting,
and pyrexia seizes. the patient suddenly: at other times they continue
for several hours, and then are succeeded by increased arterial action,
quick, full, and chorded pulse ; great, and even pungent heat of skin ;
increase of the pain of the head, more particularly across the eye-balls ;
soreness and pains of the loins, stretching forward to the umbilicus, or
shooting down the thighs and settling in the calves of the leg, in which
the patient likewise complains frequently of a sense of weakness. The
countenance has a sad and characteristic appearance; the eyes are in-
flamed and watery ; the tongue L* slightly covered with a whitish mucus,
and is most frequently moist. The skin is sometimes of a dingy hue,
mostly not altered in its appearance, and frequently it is covered with a
slight moisture. The stomach is very uneasy, experiencing a sense of
vacuity, sometimes of hunger, and is generally painful on pressure from
without ; in some cases it retches even at this early period, and if vom-
iting be superadded, the prognostic is fearfully certain. The bowels are
costive, and respond with difficulty to the action of purgatives. The urine
is scanty, and what is voided is reddish and clear. The mind in general
is serene, but fearful of the event.

The symptoms continue increasing for forty-eight or sixty hours, when
relief seems approaching in a temporary alleviation of the more violent
symptoms. The febrile heat and pain yield and frequently go off alto-
gether. But when the stomach has once been disordered, there is no
sensation of its sufferings. This second stage has not inaptly been term-
ed, by Mosely, Metaptosis ; it is the token that reaction is exhausted,
and the system is undergoing a rapid change, from a state of excite-
ment to one of collapse and passive suffering. The third or last stage
accordingly developes itself sooner or later in the sunk and irritable pulse,
though in some cases it is little changed, the low temperature of the bo-
dy, constant sighing, burning sensation in the oesophagus, occasional
delirium, the approaching Coldness of the extremities, and yellowish
suffusion appearing first about the angles of the mouth, and on blistered
surfaces, particularly in moments when the patient either from vomiting
or any other exertion is exhausted, and then diffusing itself over the neck
breast, and whole body. The patient complains now of increasing un-
easiness about his stomach, and is urgent for cold drink, which is no
sooner taken that it is rejected and accompanied with increasing quan-


334 Febrile Diseases. Class I.]

tides of black menbranaceous flocculi swimming in the fluid, and of a
slate coloured sediment at the bottom. He is frequently free from all
disturbance, and inclines to doze, but he no sooner falls into a slumber,
than the perturbation of his stomach becomes perceptible, and vomiting
is brought on. He now lies on his back, with his knees drawn up in
the bed, and is iniolerant of any covering about his head: he occasion-
ally sighs, and tosses his hands to and fro; is anxious for something hard
upon which to press, and frequently leaves his bed with insane violence,
and grasps the floor or the bed and seems to experience relief from in-
dulgence. Hiccough, increase of black vomiting, dark and fetid stools,
haemorrhage, and perhaps a convulsive fit ends his acute sufferings.

Such is a general outline of the train of phenomena characterizing
this disease, whose mortal progress it is the severe duty of a humane
physician to watch with scarce a hope of any other reward to his la-
bours and anxiety, except an addition to his melancholy experience."

All cases are not, however, thus distinctly marked.

DISSECTION.

Dissection of the bodies of those who have died with the yellow fever
have shown the coats of the oesophagus corroded ; the stomach and in-
testines loaded with a black fetid matter, or both to be often much in-
flated, inflamed, and sphacelated; the liver, in many cases, to be shrunk
to less than half its natural size, very flaccid, and of a colour approach-
ing to buff; and the gall-bladder to be flaccid and greyish, having but
little bile contained in it. In some instances the lungs have been found
inflamed; and the bladder has been observed to be much thickened, and
to contain a considerable quantity of urine. In those cases where there
has been a discharge by vomiting of a black coagulated matter resem-
bling the grounds of coffee, the gall-bladder and biliary ducts have been
found distended with the like substance. Where an affection of the
head has formed a prominent feature of the disorder, the integuments of
the brain have been observed more or less inflamed, the vessels of the
dura and pia mater to be very turgid with blood, and occasionally there
has been extravasation. Sometimes the volume of the brain has been
found increased, and the substance of it more firm than usual.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, mercury, salts, and blisters.

That the reader may have an opportunity of seeing to what extremi-
ty blood letting is recommended by physicians, in this fever, I will give
the remarks of Eberle, taken from his practice, page 106.

" Dr. Robertson, in his account of the yellow fever of New-Orleans,
states, that during the first 12 hours, he frequently drew from 50 to 60
ounces of blood;* and Dr. Belcher bled to the extent of from 50 to 80
ounces in the first stage with much advantage.t In a disease so impe-
tuous in its attack, and so apt to develop local inflammations, much, and

* Johnson on Tropical Climates, vol. ii.

t Edinburgh Med. and Surg. Journal, 1825. /


Order V.] Yellow Fever. 33S

often every things depends on an early and powerful antiphlogistic im-
pression on the system. Wi-cre the reaction of the heart and arteries
is vigorous, the blood should be suffered to flow until fainting approach-
es, " for it is not only by unloading the vessels, but by the shock also
which it gives to the system, that blood-letting proves so serviceable in
inflammatory fevers." Dr. Anthony Musgrave, states, as soon as the
febrile reaction was developed, after the invasion of the disease, he de-
rived the greatest benefit from the immediate and rapid abstraction of
blood, to an extent limited less by the quantity than by its decided ef-
fect upon the action of the heart and arteries.* Dr. Rush, as is well
known, was a zealous advocate for blood-letting in the disease. " I paid
no regard," he says, "to the dissolved state of the blood, when it ap-
peared on the first or second day of the disorder, but repeated the
bleedings afterwards in every case when the pulse continued to indicate
it." "In a disease like this," says Dr. Robertson, " where the danger is
frequently imminent in twelve hours, it is often surprising to see how much
its apparent character may be altered by active depletion." A host of
other able practitioners might be cited in behalf of the usefulness of
this practice. In those instances of the disease, however, where the
nervous system appears to be in a manner overwhelmed by the remote
cause of the fever ; when the patient exhibits an air of confusion or in-
toxication, with great agitation, " and a dash of wildness gleaming at
intervals over his agonized features:" when he complains of little or no
head-ache, but is impatient and irritable, yet oppressed : and after the
first days, sinks down with a careless expression of resignation — in such
cases blood-letting is wholly inadmissible. Here we must rely chiefly
on the prompt and liberal administration of calomel with a view to its
salivant operation."

A more speedy way of destroying the patient could not be invented,
except he were killed outright, than bleeding and the use of mercury.
The first brings on dangerous, if not fatal sinking; the second, mercury,
brings on a putrid state of the fluids much sooner than would take place,
if the disease were left entirely to the efforts of nature. There are
some West India physicians, however, who pursue a more judicious,
and successful course of treatment. They use only mild laxatives, acid-
ulated drinks, glysters, and externally cold applications. This is cer-
tainly an improvement on the old method.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The great object to be accomplished in the
treatment of this kind of fever, is to use the most prompt and ener-
getic means, to expel the poison from the system.

1. The arterial excitement must be moderated, if excessive.

2. Excite a healthy action of the stomach and liver, which is al-
ways in a very morbid condition.

3. Remove local congestions.

4. Correct the putrescent state of the fluids.

5. Support the strength of the patient ; to accomplish which attend
to the following particulars: '

• Treatise on the Yellow Fever of Antigua.


■S3(y Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

First — The Stomach. — The stomach in this complaint is in a very
irritable and morbid state, in consequence of a secretion of acrid, viti-
ated bile from the liver. Probably an acid of a peculiar nature is
generated. It therefore becomes necessary to use the most prompt and
energetic means to bring about a healthy state of these organs. Emet-
extreme irratibility which exists; and that too very justly, except an op-
previous to which, a vegetable emetic may be given with safety and
advantage. It will have a tendency to mitigate the violence of the dis-
ease, and act favourably upon the liver. When, however, retching
and vomiting takes place, an Emetic ought not to be given.

Second — The Bowels. — It is indispensably necessary in any stage
of this fever to administer brisk purgatives. The same kind may be
given as directed in the preceding disease, viz. The common or anti-
bilious physic. When the stomach is overloaded with bilious matter,
it often acts as a mild emetic, then as a cathartic, evacuating the sto-
mach and first passages, thoroughly, and exerting a healthy action up-
on the liver, and the whole alimentary canal. These purgatives re-
lieve the head, lessen the fever, and in every respect, improve the
condition of the patient.

Where the stomach is very irritable, and excessive vomiting prevails,
such medicine must be given as is calculated to allay it. The following
preparation may be given:

Take Rhubarb, (rheum palmalum,) powdered, twenty grains.
Sal aeratus, (bicarbonas potasses, ) twenty grains.
Peppermint plant, (menth-piperit.) a teaspoonful, pulv
Add a gill of boiling water.
Laudanum, (tinct opii.) fifteen drops.
Brandy, a table-spoonful. Mix.

Sweeten with loaf sugar. One table-spoonful of the above may be
faken at a dose, and repeated every half hour until it ceases. This
will be found an admirable remedy for removing nausea and vomi-
ting which prevails in this fever.

One writer states that in some instances, the vomiting has been
known to cease, upon the application of a large poultice of mustard
flour to the stomach and feet, which ought not to occasion inflammation
of the skin.

The benefit of rubefacients has been mentioned by others.

Dr. Chapman, of Philadelphia, states that in yellow fever, they may
be early resorted to. " Taught by dissections, as well as by the lead-
ing phenomena or symptoms, that the stomach is the seat of this pes-
tilence, inducing a malignant gastritis, (inflammation of the stomach,)
a prompt application of a large blister over the region of the stomach
is obviously indicated and all experience confirms its utility."

A mustard plaster will be found far preferable to blisters.* It will

* "I had a case of black-vomiting in my own family, on Long-Island, this sea-
son (1799.) A young girl, ray niece, three days after leaving the city, in the
month of September, was found to labour under the usual symptoms of the pesti-


Order V.J yellow Fever. • &*7

be necessary to give a purgative every day, and if the attack is very
violent, twice a day, particularly in the first stage of the disease. I
have been called where delirium was present from an accumulation of
bilious matter in the system inducing fever, in which the administration
of a brisk cathartic, has restored the patient to a sane state of mind,
diminished the fever, and apparently cut short the disease at once, or
within twenty-four or forty-eight hours. The quantities of offensive or
bilious matter discharged has been truly surprising. In one instance
the health officer had previously been giving only, an infusion or the
tincture of snake-root, as a tonic.

After pursuing these means, should vomiting and retching still Con-
tinue, give the following:

Take Epsom salts, (sulphas magnesia,) eight ounces
Warm water, eight ounces.
Muriatic acid, one dram.

After the salts have been added to the water, add the acid. Of this
give a large table spoonful every hour in a gill of cold water, until it
acts upon the bowels. After every dose, give a small teacup full of
warm tea of any kind. One or two doses usually purges. This prepa-
ration was prepared and used by a celebrated physician of Dublin, (Ire-
land,) as a substitute for mercury. From its excellent effects in many
cases, it was kept a great secret and is now extensively sold and used in

lence. Apprehensive of the threatened state of the stomach, I evacuated the ali-
mentary canal as soon as possible, by cathartics, and ordered the bowels to be kepi
open by clysters. Toward the close of the second day of the malady, she vomit-
ed up dark-coloured matter in the usual manner, and I believed the time of her
death was very near. As I had never known any remedies, whether acid, or neu-
tral, nor of any other quality, do good in that dangerous condition of the stomach,
but had always found every thing taken in of the medicinal kind to do harm, by in-
creasing the irritation and disposition to vomit, I determined, in this case, to leave
the stomach as much to itself as I could. I therefore withheld all medicines, and
forbade the administration of food, until the patient should ask for it, and gratified
her to the full, by allowing the draughts of cool water she called for. The surface of
the body was bathed trequently with cool salt-water and soap-suds alternately. The
black-vomiting ceased toward the end of the third day; and after an abstinence of
eight days from all kind of food, she asked for a roasted potatoe. During those
eight days, she drank no drink but cool water; and, what is very remarkable, at
the end of that time possessed more strength than she did on the third day from the
attack. She recovered, and has been very well ever since. I am quite satisfied,
from the ill-success of giving medicine to stop black-vomiting, that the best way i^
to let the stomach remain as much at rest as possible, and not be tormented and
thrown into convulsions by foreign matters taken down. In order to make this
mode of management successful, the alimentary canal ought to be cleared effectu-
ally, in the early part of the disease; and the large intestines should be plied with
injections. A physician, who stayed in New- York the whole of this season, in-
formed me he had, in addition to a total cessation of remedies by the mouth, giv-
en injections from time to time with large quantities of laudanum, in some cases as
much as half an ounce at a time. While this thebaic tincture acted upon the large
intestines, the vomiting stopped, and the stomach was easy. If, when its effects
was past, the vomiting returned, the injection with the laudanum was repeated,
and continued as long as the symptoms required. The event of this mode of man-
agement, he says, was the recovery of a greater proportion of the sick, than by
any other practice;— and I think it very likely to be true."

MS. letter from Dr. MiteMH
Vol. 1 43


338 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

different parts of the United States, for many diseases. I have occasionally
used it with great success, particularly where the stomach has rejected
every other medicine. I have never known it to fail to check vomiting
under any circumstances, when all other means have failed. The ori-
ginal recipe contained nitric acid, but I have substituted the muriatic,
which I think is better. This mixture may be occasionally repeated.
It possesses antiseptic and refrigerant, or cooling properties.

The Skin. — It is inconceivably important to attend to the skin.
The dry, hot, and parched state of the skin points out the necessity of
promoting perspiration. An infusion of boneset, drank very freely, has
an admirable effect by promoting sweating. A quart may be drank in
the shortest space of time. This infusion appears to act upon all the
excretions, and we have some well authenticated cases of its having per-
formed a perfect cure in yellow fever, without any other medicine, ex-
cept the addition of a little brandy. Should this alone fail of producing
perspiration, a teaspoonful of

The Sudorific or Sweating Drops

may be taken, till free perspiration is produced. When the stomach
becomes no longer able to bear it, or should they cause too much sick-
ness, cold water, except when there is great perspiration, and cream
of tartar water may be taken; also, lemonade, infusions of mint, cat-
nip, balm, Sfc.

The Surface. — The whole surface of the body, as early as possible,
must be thoroughly bathed with weak ley, every two hours through the
day and night, if the patient does not sleep, or as often as the fever in-
creases. This will have a remarkable effect in allaying the febrile ex-
citement. The transition from pain to relief, by this application, is
truly surprising, not only in this, but all febrile diseases.

The Feet. — It is equally as important to bathe the feet, morning and
night. This equalizes the circulation, and thereby prevents a determi-
nation of blood to the head, and local congestions. If the patient can-
not rise from his bed, it may be done in a recumbent position.

The Abdomen. — Oftentimes the abdomen is tender, and becomes
swollen from the irritation of the intestines. When this is the case, ap-
ply warm fomentations to it. Hops and wormwood boiled in vinegar
and inclosed in a flannel bag, must be applied to it.

The Head. — If there is great determination to the head, delirium,
&c. a towel may be dipped in a mixture of spirits, vinegar, and water,
to which has been added a little salt.

Anodynes. — Anodynes may be given if the patient is very restless
and unable to sleep. Fifteen grains of

The Diaphoretic Powders

must be given night and morning, and repeated every two hours, if the
pain is not removed or sleep procured. The ordinary effects of opium
is prevented by this peculiar compound. It induces sleep without in-
creasing the fever; but its diaphoretic properties lessen it.

Antiseptics. — In a great tendency to putrescency, yeast may be freely
giVen, as much as the stomach will bear. It mav be mixed with a little


Order V.] Yellow Fever. > 381

milk and molasses. If there is great prostration and sinking, wine may
be drank mixed with water, and given warm.

Cold Affusion. — Should the fever prove refractory under this treat-
ment, or should it not readily yield, the cold affusion must be used.
The whole body must be repeatedly and thoroughly bathed with cold
water until the fever abates.

Give internally, if there remains any irritability of the stomach, and
great thirst, the following liquid :

Take Sal iEratus, (bi-carbonaspolassa,) a teaspoonful, (1 dram.)

Mint water, 8 oz. Mix.
Give a table spoonful every three hours through the day.

This alkaline liquid will allay the irritability of the stomach, correct
the putrid state of the fluids, and act favourably on the skin, and is ad-
mirably calculated to neutralize the acidity and poison in the stomach
and intestines.

Cream of Tartar whey is a very valuable drink, and which may be
occasionally taken.

Boneset is also a very valuable remedy in yellow fever. A Mr. Gil-
bert Fowler of this city was attacked with this fever in the year 1805,
and the only medicine that he took was the following:

A strong decoction of Boneset, two quarts.
French Brandy, half a pint.

The whole to be taken as soon as possible, and as warm. This from
its action upon all the excretions^ stomach, skin, &c. soon arrested
the disease, and he recovered.

Mr. David Whitehead of this city, in the year 1794, while the yel-
low fever raged here, was attacked with the disease, and having been
told of the salutary effects of the boneset, he commenced taking a
strong decoction of it, with the addition of Virginia snake-root. In
fifteen or twenty minutes, he drank two quarts of the tea, and such was
the effect upon the system that it cut short the fever at once.

Thus it seems that simple plants are very effectual in removing even
the most formidable diseases ; but in these days of popularity, error and
prejudice, they are despised, rejected, and trampled under foot. This
very plant just mentioned was likewise found of singular efficacy in a
remittent or intermittent fever which prevailed during the American war
among the soldiers. The physician of the regiment, or the nurse, I
know not which, went into the meadow, and collected a large quantity
of the thoroughwort or boneset, and put it into a large iron kettle, boil-
ed it until it became a strong decoction, and then administered it to all
that were sick with the fever. The consequence was that the whole of
the sick recovered rapidly, and in the most surprising manner. It also
had an astonishing effect in the remittent fever, which prevailed in anoth-
er section of the country.

There are numerous other authorities, to prove the superiority of the
vegetable, over the mineral practice.

Dr. Hosack states in a letter to the Mayor of New- York, on the yel-
low fever, that however humbling it is to the pride of medical science.


340 I < toile. Diseases. [Class I.

a certain quaker of this city cured more patients by giving catnip tea and
castor oil, than the rest of the faculty!!*

Cold Water. — The patient may also in this disease take cold water.
It is not only very refreshing, but diminishes the fever, and is a valua-
ble auxiliary in curing the disease. I know a man in this city who was
in the most hopeless condition with yellow fever, and who was forbid by
his physician to taste any cold water, procure it in a clandestine manner
and drank it very freely, which caused perspiration and removed the
fever in a very short space of time, without any other medicine. Na-
ture in such cases seems to point out the cure.

In concluding this section on the treatment of yellow fever, I will
partly recapitulate.

First. — Negatively. — Be careful not to administer a particle of mer-
cury. It is almost as dangerous as the disease itself. Abstain from
bleeding. It will hasten the disease by the debility which it induces.

Second. — Positively. — The treatment in this disease must be very
prompt and energetic. The whole secret of curing it, depends upon
the means made use of, to open all the excretions, and that as soon as
possible before the stage of collapse or prostration ensues ; and all this
is effected in a similar manner as it is in other types of fever, with this
difference, that the treatment must be more active.

There are three principal things to be relied upon in arresting this dis-
ease.

1. Cathartics. — I find none so good in this as well as in most febrile
diseases, as that which I have before recommended, viz.

Jalap, pulv. one part.

Senna, do. two parts.

Cream of Tartar, one part. Mix.

A large teaspoonful to be given every two hours until free purging
takes place ; to be repeated once or twice a day, in the commencement.

2. Sudorific, or Sweating Medicine. — The sudorific, or sweating
drops must be administered, a large teaspoonful at a dose, every hour,
till free and copious perspiration ensues ; to be given in half a pint of
catnip tea, and to be kept up during the fever. After which let an in-
fusion oiboneset be drank warm. Should these drops at any time prove
too stimulating, substitute the diaphoretic powders.

A very skilful French physician who practised many years ago in
Philadelphia, was in the habit of saying, that as soon as he got his pa-
tients (afflicted with this fever,) into a free perspiration, he pronounced
them out of danger.

* Allow me to add this truth, however humiliating it may be to the pride of sci-
ence, and I mention it in confirmation of the good effects of this comparatively mild
treatment, that, in the yellow fever of 1798, under the direction of Richardson
Underhill, a member of the Society of Friends, who like another Howard, volun-
teered his services to the poor, on that memorable occasion, a greater proportion
of persons ill of that disease, were cured by means of Ca* ! oi O y, than

by those more active prescriptions employed by many of the physicians of our
city. With the hope, that these suggestions may be useful, lam, Dear Sir, &c.

DAVID HOSACK.

THE HON. CADWALLADER D. COLDEN.


Order \ Yellow Fever. 341

Since writing the preceding, I have been favoured with a small trea-
tise upon the nature and cause of yellow fever, in which my views are
further confirmed. The writer thus remarks:

" On the subject of remedy, permit me to state, from undoubted in-
formation, that, in most parts of the West Indies, there are now regu-
lar bred nurses, who take with them their large bathing tubs, and first
immerge their patients in a warm bath ; rubbing them with cloths, squeez-
ing over them warmed lime and lemon juice, and causing them to drink
plentifully of lemonade and other diluting drinks. If a perspiration
succeed, they clap their hands in signs of safety. They also administer
emetics and gentle purges if necessary. This " sudorific' 1 '' practice sel-
dom fails of cure, if the golden moment be not lost, and if applied im-
mediately on the first attack of cold chills, and before the mucus begins
to form in the stomach, and external fever sets in, which is about the
second or third day. As this said mucus or phlegm accumulates, through
the body into the stomach, after a check of the perspiration, the fever,
as a conteracting effect, increases in its struggle to relieve the patient.

These West Indians have no terrors of contagion; they neither speak
of, nor heed its importation, or exportation; they know its true cause,
and call yellow fever the highest grade of indigenous bilious fevers
amongst them. They have already, in most of the Islands, rendered
its effect mild and manageable to a great extent, among themselves, and
may, by this simple practice, " within reach of every body,'''' ultimately
neutralize its consequences, perhaps to its final melioration.

That I may be fully understood, I beg leave to explain my own
simple view of this said check of the perspiration, now so little regarded.

Our bodies are externally covered with a kind of net-work, called
skin ; consisting of innumerable pores, which expand with heat, and
contract with cold. In perfect health these nerves emit a constant in-
sensible fluid or steam, and when the body is agitated, appears in a visible
sweat. Through these pores, by far the greater portion of our food is
discharged. When sudden cold seizes on a healthy body, these nerves
experience shivering, and chills, which draw them shut, and the fluids
cease to be discharged through them externally. This I apprehend to
be a check of the perspiration, and may be more or less general over
the whole body. Its effect, also, is the precise manner in which yel-
low fever begins, viz. with chills. It is then, kind nature instantly com-
mences the work of relief through a reaction of internal heat, or fever.
To effect this, the blood is set in rapid motion through the body ; and
the pulse, from its natural beat of about seventy-five, is made to strike
more than one hundred times in a minute. This heat or fever, in the
order of nature, reacts, with all its power on the external cold ' infec-
tion," and a perspiration is thereby frequently forced, on bodies in pre-
vious good health, by the mere rapid motion of the blood, without any
other aid than this increase of nature's fever heat. If the warm drinks,
and bathing practice, as above stated, be instantly applied, on the'
first attack of cold, nature receives a powerful auxiliary (in her own way,
through an external and internal heat,) towards an increased motion of
the blood ; and if a profuse sweat be the consequence, nine times out
of ten, the pores open and assume their functions, and the patient is re-
lieved in a few days. If an attack of cold, in this season of the year be


342 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

a relapse, on bodies previously unwell, and the efforts to produce perspi-
ration fail, the heat, or fever, puts on an alarming external appearance,
on or about the second or third day ; and continues to act with a pro-
portionate, though natural and necessary vigor, towards a restoration.
In these extremities we are most inclined to tamper with the patient, who
ought not to be otherwise acted upon, until the paroxysm of fever shall
abate. To practice on this fever as a cause, in my view of it, is death ;
to treat it as a friend, is life !

A fever pervades animated nature, and almost instantly follows dis-
eases of every kind. It is then, an effect, not a cause ; a remedy, not
a disease, and ought to be promoted as a friend to destroy an enemy,
when itself will disappear! It is nature's restorative. The medi-
cal practitioner is rarely called until the second stage of diseases, — he
finds the patient in high fever; " pestilential yellow fever" is declared!
In 1793-95 and 98, — (and as the young practitioner had been taught to
practice,) in went the lancet, down went the calomel and jalap, all to
kill the fever, treating it as a cause. — The fever is lessened, and the pa-
tient lapses in a stupor. — Again, the fever (deemed to be the dire enemy)
rouses the patient for life, into action ; — other " copious bleedings were
then had, and purges repeated" to the entire emptiness of the body of
its blood, and the bowels of their sustenance ! The fever is broken.
The patient becomes cool and easy ; is not emaciated, conceits himself
well, walks erect, at flighty intervals, though in a general stupor,
through want of fever, and dies apparently cool and without


FEVER


The great danger, in all diseases, is the application of too much art,
interrupting the efforts of nature.*

If the " sudorific" practice shall prevail, it is confidently believed,
that our fall fevers will be rendered mild, as they are daily becoming
in the West Indies, from a true knowledge of their causes and manage-
ment. Nature will then be studied, by our physicians, in her health,
and her diseases, on the broad basis of her elements, in every climate,
and especially in our own. Disputations about non-entities will then
be heard of no more, at least among the real students of nature, and
particularly those of the Medical Faculty."

3. The Surface. — The whole surface from the neck to the feet must
be drenched, and effectually rubbed and bathed with strong leached ley
water, used sometimes tepid and sometimes cold, as it may most di-
minish febrile excitement.

These and the auxiliary means recommended in the preceding chap-
ter, will be found a very superior and sovereign remedy for the yellow
fever, called in any reasonable time.

JREGIMEN.

Diet in this fever is almost out of the question, as patients seldom can
eat any thing ; but should the patient desire it, he may take a little pa-

* This is declared of George Washington, the Father of his Country ; who is be-
lieved to have sunk into premature death by this practice of bleeding so repeatedly
performed on him. It is believed that thousands have since fallen by like practice ;
and millions may yet fall from a misapplication, and disregard of the only true
means of relief, through a multiplicity of frivolous and false hypothesis.


Order V.J Yellow Ft 348

nado, indian-meal gruel, or barley water. A very grateful and nour-
ishing drink is made by toasting bread very brown, and soaking it in wa-
ter and then drinking it. It is good for the nausea ; is cooling and
nourishing. For a change, lemonade, currant jelly ', tamarind and ap-
ple water may be drank. Buttermilk, moderately acid, and mixed
with water, is very refrigerant. Vegetable acids of all kinds, is very
agreeable to the^patient, and is very antiseptic.

Cool Air. — Cool air is as necessary to the patient as medicine. The
room must be kept clean and well ventilated by opening the windows,
removing the bed curtains, and placing the bed, when practicable, in
the middle of the room. Vinegar and water applied to the head, on
a cloth or napkin, lessens the pain and heat of it, and thus affords great
relief by rendering the intellects clearer, and lessening delirium. Wash-
ing the face, hands, and feet often, with the same liquid, will prove
equally serviceable and refreshing.

Quietude. — Company, noise, and conversation must be avoided. As
much encouragement must be held out to the patient as the symptoms
will warrant ; but never, no never, deceive or flatter him by creating
false hopes of recovery. Any physician who is guilty of this, is answer-
able to his Conscience, and to the Bar of God.


A young man, whose veracity can be relied upon, states that during
his residence in New-Orleans, he with two others was seized with the
yellow fever, and his case was pronounced hopeless- He had an irre-
sistible desire for cold water, which was denied him; one night, in the
absence of his nurse he reached a basin of soap-suds, and such was his
intolerable thirst, 'that he greedily drank it. The consequence was a
free perspiration, a remission of the symptoms, convalescence, and re-
covery; while the other two, affected with the same fever, died. May
we not draw a practical inference from this fact:

1. That nature often in this manner points out the cure, and wc
ought therefore to be always careful to watch, and follow her dictates.

2. We may also learn from this fact, as well as numerous others, the
anti-febrile properties of water.

3. We may also infer that the soap which was mixed with the water
might have contributed to the cure, and therefore may contain great
medicinal properties.


MORAL REFLECTION'S.

"What striking instances of the transitory nature of life, does such a
disease afford ! We see men exulting in the bloom of youth and prime of
health and strength, in three or four days numbered with the dead. Our
gayest companions, our most amiable friends, in less than a week, are
laid in the dust. When we have been daily witnessing these scenes
around us, who can avoid reflecting, that his turn may be next ; yet the
mind, when habituated to the most afflictive and extraordinary events,
becomes hardened and views them with indifference. Disease and
death, the most dreadful accidents which can affect the human frame,
when made familiar to the sight, cease to inspire dread and are ranked
with the most common occurrences.'"


-94fi Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

SECTION IV.
SPOTTED FEVER. (Typhus Petechialis.)

DESCRIPTION.

" Perhaps there is no disease," says Hand, " which so soon makes the
tongue to falter, the knees to totter, locks up the senses, alienates the
mind, and with unconquerable weakness saps the very basis of our life,
as spotted fever. It is not confined to any season, and it has not been
observed to choose any peculiar aspect or atmosphere, but visiting in
turn the bleak ridge, and the banks of the clear stream.

This very formidable disease made its first appearance in our country
in the town of Medfield, Massachusetts, in the year 1806. Subsequent-
ly to that period, it has occasionally been recognized as an epidemic in
various parts of the New England states, in the state of New- York, and
on the borders of Canada. In 1810 it prevailed with mortal rage in
Worcester, Massachusetts, and in the autumn of 1812 and winter of
1813, the same or distinct epidemic visited the army of the United States,
stationed at Greenbush, and at various other situations, where its destroy-
ing power has scarcely been exceeded by military slaughter. It was
prevalent also, in Connecticut and Vermont, and a considerable num-
ber of fatal cases occurred likewise in Boston, both among the inhabi-
tants and the soldiers quartered in that metropolis. It has usually oc-
curred during the cold weather of winter and spring, and its continuance
has been protracted in some seasons to May and June, chiefly in the in-
terior of the country.

CAUSES.

We have never heard any cause assigned for this fever ; but it would
appear that it arises from a peculiar morbid state of the atmosphere,
engendering some specific virus, or poison different from any other.
The paleness of the surface which sometimes attends the disease,
and the partial or total want of reaction, show that the blood is forcibly
and powerfully driven from the surface to the internal organs. The con-
gestion, or accumulation of blood is sometimes so great, that the heart
and arteries are incapable of exerting the least power to counteract the
cause of the disease. Hence they sink immediately under its withering
influence. Dissections demonstrate a morbid state of the heart and
lungs with their contiguous membranes.

SYMPTOMS.

Though the leading features of this enemy are always the same, yet his
dress is endlessly varied.

To enumerate symptoms : — Some patients are seized with violent
pains in the stomach, head, joints, limbs; and frequently the pain is con-
fined to a single point ; often to a single toe or finger. Some have a
violent ague and shaking, and yet are not not sensible of cold ; and
some have no heat. Some were taken suddenly, totally blind, or im-


Order V.] Spotted Fever. 345

penetrably deaf; others were not affected at all in those organs. A
palsy of a member was not unfrequent, and a strange numbness was
felt in the nose and face of some, which led them to be rubbing their face,
and that for hours. Some had raving or furious delirium, others a play-
ful or hysteric alienation of mind, while others were more shrewd than be-
fore. Some were conscious of their sinking, yet seemed not to mind it.
Some fell into a snoring lethargic sleep, from which nothing would rouse
them. Some were so painfully sensible as to complain of the slightest
touch or motion, while others felt not the pricks of needles, nor yet the
contact of living coals.

Dr. Miner, of Middletown, (Conn.) said in some cases the stomach
was perfectly torpid like a a leather bag ; the most powerful stimulants
conveyed into it, did no good ; while in others, there was dreadful gas-
tric (stomach) irritability, immediately ejecting every thing swallowed.
The pulse was commonly feeble, frequent, irregular and often interrupt-
ed. In some cases it seemed inflated, yet would disappear upon the
slightest pressure. Sometimes when the pulse was gone in the wrist,
the arteries of the neck would be seen beating with seemingly impatient
and fretful motion.

Bleedings were frequent from different parts of the body, and often
fatal. Purple spots appeared in some, from oozing of blood from the re-
laxed vessels of the true skin, yet without sufficient force to penetrate or
elevate the scarf skin, and spreading to various sizes, from a point, to that
of a shilling ; and assuming different hues from scarlet to black. In this
disease, however, there are often no spots nor fever at all, and the pa-
tient is in many cases dead before fever could form.

From the onset, a clay-like coldness came over the whole system,
and all efforts to restore genial warmth were frequently unavailing.
The tongue was in some cases clear and moist, in others dry, in others
bloodless; in the progress of the disease it commonly turns brown or
black. The swallowing was often difficult from canker in the throat,
or from palsy of the parts. Nausea and vomiting commonly harrassed
the patient from first to last; yet the contents of the stomach were not at
all vitiated. The bowels seldom suffered at all. A horrid sensation of
cold was felt in the stomach as if ice was melting there ; this symptom,
as well as that of puking, was greatly aggravated by drinking cold water
on any weak beverage. Patients who inquired for water could not dis-
tinguish it from brandy.

Dr. Wolcott states the case of a medical gentleman, a relative of his,
who was suddenly seized with strong, fixed pain in his shoulder. The
patient undertook to open a vein in his arm, but the blood was so stag-
nated that it would not flow. The patient and his friends became alarm-
ed, and sent for a council of physicians, who arrived in time to investi-
gate his case. The pain in the shoulder still increasing, became terri-
bly severe, and he screamed aloud. ' Gentlemen,' said the patient to the
physicians 'what do you think of my case? I request you to speak
without reserve, and name, if you can, my disorder. Do not hesitate
to tell me whether you think I can or cannot survive. I beseech you
do not deceive me. I wish to know the worst.' 'Doctor,' said the
physicians, ' we would not give vou unseasonable alarm, but as you have

Vol. T 44


346 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

requested us to express our opinion, we, as in duty bound, must tell you
that we think your disease very nearly resembles (if it is not identified
with) the spatted lever, and that your case is desperate.'

' Give me opium,' said the patient, ' the pain is intolerable, T cannot
bear it.' Opium, in substance, was, accordingly, immediately adminis-
tered, of which he took In a short time, a piece, as large as a butternut,
but without any alleviation of the pain. At length he swooned away,
and sunk into the arms of death, in sixteen hours from the first attack.
During the whole of the tragic scene, the pain was constantly fixed in the
shoulder. His body was not opened, but the shoulder, after death, ex-
hibited a gangrenous (black and blue) appearance.

The invasion of the disease is generally sudden and violent. The pa-
tient is seized in the midst of his usual labor, and oftentimes is struckdown
suddenly almost as by a stroke of lightning.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, sulphate of copper, turpeth mineral, calomel and jalap,
squills, antimony, arsenic, blisters on the head and other parts.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The indications of cure in this disease, are, First,
to recall the blood from the internal parts to the surface of the body,
by promoting perspiration. Second, to remove urgent symptoms. Third,
to sustain the sinking powers of life.

The whole history and symptoms of spotted fever show the absolute
necessity of administering such medicines as will cause a copious perspi-
ration.

The means recommended under the other types of fever may be used
in this, but given oftener and in greater doses; in conjunction with which
the vapour or hot bath may be used. Dr. Miner, who had considerable
experience in this disease, says, that not only a warm, but a hot bath
should be used. An infusion of the boneset or thoroughwort is highly re-
commended. A small quantity of brandy may be added, and taken as
warm and as often as possible.

Purgatives should be daily given, and when the patient is in great dis-
tress, twenty grains of

The Diaphoretic Powders,

may be repeated every two hours. In clay-like coldness of the surface,
let it be thoroughly bathed with capsicum (cayenne pepper) and brandy
in suitable proportions, simmered and applied as warm as the patient
can bear it. A teaspoonful of the pepper may be given internally in
a tumbler of mint tea every hour or two until warmth of the system is
restored or reaction takes place. The feet must be frequently bathed,
in warm or hot water. When the head is much affected, tepid water may
be applied to the temples and forehead. Sinapisms may also be applied
to the feet. If there is pain and oppression at the chest, warm applica-
tions may be applied to it. Infusions of snake-root, chamomile, catnip,
balm, &c. may likewise be given. Should the violence of the disease
be directed to the bowels, fomentations of hops and vinegar may be ap-


Order V.J Spotted Fever. 347

plied. Give also injections. If there is much retching and vomiting,
give small quantities of brandy and essence of peppermint, mixed. If
this should not stop the retching, let the mixture be given as recom-
mended for vomiting under yellow fever.

If great sinking comes on in the course of the disease, give a wine
glass of yeast every two hours, also wine or porter.

Dr. Hand says: — " Under this view of the subject, we see what " must
and the symptoms pointing with iron index, to the only means which can
save the patient from sinking, viz. cordial stimulating medicine and
?iourishing diet. The pressure of the disease, and the remaining strength,
must determine the kind and quantity of means ; and the range is be-
tween going into a warm bed, with drinking pennyroyal, horsemint,
spearmint, or peppermint tea, and hot bath, with brandy, laudanum,
ether, &,c.

Begin the treatment by putting the patient into a warm bath, apply
flannels wrung out of hot water, or bladders of hot water to the sides and
feet of the patient. If the disease be more than slight, give to drink hot
wine whey, milk punch, or warm wine and water. If obstinate nausea
or puking attend, give hot brandy, a spoonful at a time, with only wa-
ter enough to keep it from strangling; put a capsicum and a mustard
plaster over the stomach. If lethargic symptoms come on, apply the
same on the nape of the neck, and increase all the stimulants.

If the warmth and moisture return, and the pulse is raised, there is
hope ; yet the patient must be kept up, and the disease kept at bay, by
anodynes, in full portions every two or three hours, essence of peppermint,
spearmint, &c.

Dr. Anthony Hunn, of Kentucky, who had considerable experience in
this complaint, cured every case by plunging his patients immediately
into a hot bath.

The whole indication of cure in this disease is to bring on reaction, to
recall the poison which is mixed with the blood and thrown to the centre,
which can only be done by inducing a copious perspiration in the most
prompt and energetic manner.

If I mistake not, where sweating was produced in this complaint, re-
covery invariably followed, while bleeding, mercur}', &c. only aggra-
vated it.

The sweating or sudorific drops, then, given freely, and bathing
the surface repeatedly, with capsicum or cayenne pepper, with spirits or
brandy simmered a tew minutes together, and applied over the whole
surface as hot and as often as possible, together with bathing the feet,
the hot bath and an infusion of peppermint given as warm as can be
drank, constitute the principal remedies in this type of fever.


348 Febrile Distd [Class I.

CHAPTER VI.

SCARLET FEVER. (Scarlatina.)

DESCRIPTION.

The scarlet fever is so denominated from the scarlet colour, and erup-
tions which appear on the body. It occurs at all seasons of the year,
but generally in the fall, or beginning of winter. It often seizes whole
families, but children and young persons are more subject to it. It is di-
vided into three principal kinds. Simple scarlatina, when the throat is
not affected; scarlatina anginosa, when the throat is affected; when ac-
companied with symptoms of putrescency and malignancy, it is called
scarlatina maligna. The two latter kinds are generally blended togeth-
er. There has been a dispute whether the scarlet fever, and malignant
sore throat are the same diseases, or only a variety of the same. ' It is
now pretty generally admitted,' says a writer, 'that the scarlet fever in
all its forms, as welj as putrid sore throat (cynanche maligna) is pro-
duced by the same specific contagion.'

CAUSES.

Scarlet fever arises from a specific contagious effluvia.

This disease is seldom, if ever taken the second time. There are
some instances on record of the fact, that in this type of fever as in
many others, some individuals are rendered unsusceptible of its contagion.

Gregory states that there is abundant evidence that fever attended
with scarlet eruption, and possessing all the other characters of this dis-
ease, does occasionally arise from exposure to cold. The cause or
contagion of scarlet fever will remain in one place for several years;
a few individuals becoming from time to time affected with it.

"This disease," says Thatcher, "has long been considered as high-
ly contagious, spreading epidemically through villages and districts,
with an alarming degree of mortality. In the years 1735 and '36 it
prevailed extensively throughout our country in its most malignant form,
and it was estimated that in Massachusetts about one thousand persons
became its victims.* It is recorded that in 1741, '46, and '60, the
disease, termed anginosa maligna, or the putrid and ulcerated sore
throat, prevailed and extended through the colonies with mortal rage,
in opposition to the united endeavours of the faculty. It swept all be-

* Dr. William Douglas, a respectable physician of Boston at that day, publish-
ed a valuable practical essay on the anginosa ntcuscvlosa, which prevailed in New-
England in 1735 and '36, in which he detailed the characteristics of the disease,
and the method of treatment. He says, "most of those who died of the physician,
died by immoderate evacuations." It has been related by tradition, that the physi-
cians of that day, or of some other period, adopted the plan of bleeding from the
vein under the tongue, and although in almost all instances it proved fatal, the prac-
tice was persisted in longer than could have been deemed warrantable


Order VI.] " Scarlet Fever. 349

fore it, and some villages were almost depopulated. It appeared again
in 1784, and spread through the New-England States; at subsequent
periods it has been recognized either as an epidemic, or as sporadic ca-
ses, without assuming in a high degree characteristic contagious powers.
Scarlatina, in all its forms, is produced by the same specific contagion;
and frequently the symptoms are so blended in the first onset, that the
particular species can scarcely be designated. It may be communicated
by the contaminated atmosphere, and by simple contact of the patient,
either in the heat of summer or cold of winter; but it most frequently
occurs in autumn, and becomes a very prevalent epidemic, often con-
tinuing through the summer months. It frequently attacks young peo-
ple in the most sequestered situation, where communication with the sick
had been impossible, appearing in some families and passing others con-
tiguously situated. It produces its operation on the system about the
fourth or fifth day after exposure to the contagion, and it not unfre-
quently happens that persons exposed escape the disease, as in other
contagions, although in general persons are not susceptible of a second
attack, some instances to the - contrary have undoubtedly occurred.
Children and persons of weak lax habit are most commonly the sub-
jects of this disease. In its mildest form it is known as the simple scar-
let fever, receiving its name from the singular colour which pervades
the skin, resembling the shell of a boiled lobster, or appearing as if
diffused with red wine."

SYMPTOMS.

The scarlet fever commences with a chill and shivering, like other
kinds of fever, with nausea and often vomiting, great sickness succeed-
ed by heat, thirst, and headache ; sometimes in a very mild degree,
at others more violent. The pulse is accelerated, the breathing is
frequent or interrupted, the eyes red, and eye-lids swollen. In two
or three days the flesh begins to swell, a pricking sensation is ex-
perienced, and an eruption appears on the body in the form of a red
stain or blotch, or rather of a fiery redness. It usually appears first upon
the face, breast, and arms, then over the whole body, of a uniform red
colour. In about three days a gentle perspiration takes place ; the effer-
vescence or eruptions disappear; the cuticle peels off, and there re-
mains a kind of branny scales dispersed over the whole body, which
sometimes reappears two or three times.

The scarlet fever may be distinguished from the measles, by the
eruptions of the former (scarlatina) being more of a fiery redness, and
diffused over the whole body, and not as in measles in distinct spots,
nor is it accompanied with any cough, a weeping or watering of the eyes,
and the efflorescence of the measles does not appear, till about two
days later than scarlet fever. Where the disease appears in the
simplest form there is little required from art; a simple course of treat-
ment soon removes it.

SCARLATINA ANGINOSA, (Effecting the Throat.)
Scarlatina anginosa, in several instances, approaches very near to
the malignant form. The patient is seized not only with a coldness and


:JoU Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

shivering, but likewise with great languor, debility, and sickness, suc-
ceeded by heat, nausea, vomiting of bilious matter, soreness of the
throat, inflammation, and ulceration in the tonsils, &c. a frequent and
laborious breathing, and a quick and small depressed pulse. When
the efflorescence appears, which is usually on the third day, it brings
no relief; on the contrary, the symptoms are much aggravated, and
fresh ones arise.

In the progress of the disease, one universal redness, unattended,
however, by any pustular eruption, pervades the face, body, and limbs,
which parts appear somewhat swollen. The eyes and nostrils partake
likewise more or less of the redness, and, in proportion as the former
have an inflamed appearance, so does the tendency to delirium prevail.

On the first attack, the fauces are often much inflamed ; but this is
usually soon succeeded by grayish sloughs, which give the parts a speck-
led appearance, and render the breath more or less fetid. The patient
is often cut off in a few days: and even if he recovered, it will be by
slow degrees ; dropsical swellings, or tumours of the parotid, and oth-
er glands, slowly suppurating, being very apt to follow.

"The patient," says an author, "complains of a stiffness in the neck,
with acute pain in the back of the head. The throat is sore and in-
flamed, exhibiting a shining redness of a deeper colour than in com-
mon inflammatory sore throat, and interspersed with pale or ash colour-
ed spots. In many cases the affection of the throat is among the first
symptoms, a dark red line extending along the velum pendulum palati,
and lower part of the uvula. The breath is highly offensive, the tongue
is covered with a yellow mucus or thick brown fur, and the inside of
the lips is beset with vesicles containing an acrid matter, which excori- '
ates the corners of the mouth and other parts. In the progress of the
disease, the inside of the -nose becomes red and inflamed, and a thin
acrid matter issues from the nostrils which corrodes the skin wherever
applied."

SCARLATINA MALIGNA, (Malignant Specks. )

"This," says Dr. Thatcher, "is the cynanche maligna of Cullen,
the ulcerated or putrid sore throat of Huxham and other authors. This
form of the disease has several symptoms in common with scarlatina an-
ginosa. It comes on with rigors, dejection of spirits, pain in the head
and back, giddiness, vomiting, and much general oppression. The
eruption comes out in blotches, or small points scattered over the body
and extremities of a dark purplish or livid hue. The fever is intense
and progresses with rapidity, but manifesting an exacerbation in the
evening and slight remission in the morning. The pulse is small, in-
distinct and irregular. There is a very great determination of blood to
the brain, producing redness of the eyes, intolerance of light, throb-
bing, pain of the head, and delirium or coma. The whole neck some-
times swells and assumes a dark red colour. It sometimes happens that
cynanche maligna appears without any affection or efflorescence of the
skin, as scarlatina in some cases presents itself without any ulceration
of the throat. As the sloughs about the fauces spread, they generally


Order VI.] Scarlet Fever. 351

become of a darker colour, the whole internal fauces are at length cov-
ered with thick sloughs, which when they fall off, discover ulcers very
deeply seated, and the parts appear quite black, and the sloughs often
extend throughout the whole of the alimentary canal. The eruption
sometimes suddenly recedes, an alarming train of symptoms ensue, as
also when the eruption suddenly assumes a very pale and livid appear-
ance. The symptoms called putrid and malignant are now conspicuous,
a dissolved state of the blood is indicated by inky petechias, oozings of
black gore from the nostrils, gangrenous appearances of the throat,
spots upon the skin, and haemorrhages from various parts of the body.
Cynanche maligna generally arrives at its height about the fifth or sixth
day, but in some fatal cases the scene closes as early as on the third day.
The inflammation, as in cynanche tonsillaris, on some occasions affects
the eustachian tube, producing ulceration in the internal ear, and often
extending to the parotid maxillary and other glands of the fauces, which
become swelled and painful. The malignant or putrid sore throat may
be distinguished from the inflammatory, by the looseness and vomiting;
the puffy and dark coloured redness attending the swelling, and by the
fetid ulcers of the throat, covered with white or ash coloured sloughs.
It may also be distinguished by the slight delirium appearing early in
the disease; and by the sudden weakness with which the patient was
seized.

PROGNOSIS.

When scarlatina is to terminate in health, the fiery redness abates
gradually, and is succeeded by a brown colour, the skin becomes rough,
and peels off in small scales, the tumefaction subsides, and health is grad-
ually restored. On the contrary, when it is to terminate fatally, the fe-
brile symptoms run very high from the first of its attack, the skin is in-
tensely hot and dry, the pulse is very frequent but small, great thirst
prevails, the breath is very fetid, the efflorescence makes its appear-
ance on the second day, or sooner, and about the third or fourth is prob-
ably interspersed with large livid spots ; and a high degree of delirium
ensuing, or haemorrhages breaking out, the patient is cut off about the
sixth or eighth day. In some cases a severe purging arises, which never
fails to prove fatal. Some, again, where the symptoms do not run so
high, instead of recovering, as is usual, about the time the skin begins
to regain its natural colour, become dropsical, fall into a kind of linger-
ing way, and are carried off in the course of a few weeks.

Scarlatina, in its inflammatory form, is not usually attended with dan-
ger, although a considerable degree of delirium sometimes prevails for
a day or two ; but when it partakes much of the malignant character,
or degenerates into typhus putrida, which it is apt to do, it often proves
fatal.

DISSECTION.

On dissection of those who die of this disease, the fauces are in-
named, suppurated, and gangrenous ; and the trachea and larynx are
likewise in a state of inflammation, and lined with a viscid fetid matter.
Tn many instances the inflammatory affection extends to the lungrs them-


352 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

selves. Large swellings of the lymphatic glands about the neck, occa-
sioned by an absorption of the acrid matter poured out in the fauces, are
now and then to be found. The same morbid appearances which are to
be met with in putrid fever, present themselves in other parts of the body.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Mercury, bleeding, antimony, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — From the appearance of the eruptions on the
skin, soon after the commencement of the disease, it is very evident
that this fever is produced by some morbific matter, taken into the cir-
culation through the medium of the lungs, and that the increased action
in the system, is a healthy effort of nature to throw off such humours
or morbific matter. It is therefore our duty to aid nature in her salu-
tary efforts. If unable to expel the irritating cause from the system, she
must be assisted by sudorifics, or sweating medicine. If her struggles
are too great, by which too much inflammation is produced, she must
then be restrained or moderated.

Empties. — Emetics will be found very useful in the commencement
be administered. None will have a better effect than pulverized ipecac
and lobelia given in suitable doses, according to the age of the patient.
It is not always necessary, however, to give them; but if there is soreness
of the throat, and an accumulation of mucus impeding respiration, a mild
emetic will have a beneficial effect. When given in the forming stage
of the disease, or at a very early period, they abate the febrile symp-
toms, and render the subsequent effects of the fever less violent, and
in some cases cure the disease, or render it extremely light. Wither-
ing recommends them throughout the whole course of the fever. But
the best effects arise from their use in the early stages of it. One great
effect derived from emetics in febrile diseases, is the sympathetic action
they exert upon the capillary system. The connection which exists be-
tween the stomach and skin is so great that if a healthy action is exer-
ted upon one, the other experiences a correspondent good effect. They
appear to overcome that tension and stricture which exists in the pores
of the skin, by their stimulating effects upon the cutaneous exhalents.

Purgatives. — Purgatives in this fever, as well as others, are highly
useful. Hamilton on purgative medicines speaks of their utility in scar-
let fever in the highest terms. They moderate arterial action, relieve
the pain in the head, and prevent delirium, and remove the morbid
state of the liver, stomach, and whole alimentary canal. It must be
borne in mind, however, that there is a great difference in purgatives ;
some pass through the stomach and bowels without carrying away or re-
moving any feculent matter, or altering the condition of the mucous
membrane. In general, castor-oil and salts may be mentioned among
this class of purgatives. No kind will be found so useful as the

Common Purgative.

A. teaspoonful of this powder to be put in a teacup, or tumbler, with a lump


Order VI.] Scarlet Fever, 353

of sugar sufficient to sweeten, then add a gill of boiling water or mint
tea. An adult will take the whole of it when cool; but it must be recol-
lected that children among whom scarlatina more generally prevails,
must take a dose proportioned to their age. This thoroughly cleanses
the stomach and bowels, and invariably benefits the patient. It may
be repeated every other morning, or at farthest every third morning.

"1 think," says an old and experienced physician, "the opinion gains
ground, that purgatives are useful in scarlatina. Many years ago, when
the prejudices against them were more prevalent than they are at this
time, 1 ventured to employ them.. My doing so was, indeed, a neces-
sary consequence of the benefit I had experienced from purgative medi-
cines in typhus. I had learned, that the symptoms of debility which
take place in typhus fever, so far from being increased, were obviously
relieved by the evacuation of the bowels. 1 was, therefore, under little
apprehensions from them in scarlatina ; and I have never, in a long
course of experience, witnessed sinking and fainting, as mentioned by
some authors, and so much dreaded by them ; neither have I observed
revulsion from the surface of the body, and consequent premature fa-
ding, or, in common language, striking in of the efflorescence, from the
exhibition of purgatives. Accordingly, in treating scarlatina, I have
confided much in the use of purgative medicines ; and no variety of the
disease, as appearing in dilferent epidemics, or in the course of the
same epidemic, has hitherto prevented me from following out this prac-
tice to the extent which I have found necessary.

I have observed the pungent heat of surface, violent head-ache, tumes-
cence of features, flushing of countenance, and full and quick pulse,
the earliest symptoms in some epidemics of scarlatina, and which may
have suggested and warranted the practice of blood-letting to be quickly
subdued by one or two brisk purgatives. Full purging is not required
in the subsequent periods of the disease, in which the sole object is to
remedy the impaired action of the intestines; to secure the complete
and regular expulsion of their contents ; and thus to prevent the accu-
mulation of faeces, which never fails to aggravate the symptoms, and to
prove the source of farther suffering to the patient.

It is generally, I believe, admitted, that purgative medicines are use-
ful in removing dropsical swellings, the consequence of scarlatina, and
are given with this view towards the decline of the disease, when the
weakness of the patient is often very great. I conceive that purgatives
also afford a mean of preventing this swelling, and other derangements
of health; and for this reason I give purgatives during the fever, when
the strength is not altogether broke down, and for some time after con-
valescence has commenced.

In scarlatina, as in typhus, we should keep in view the procuring the
effect of purgatives during the day, and the avoiding, in this manner,
the disturbance of the sick in the night-time. It is of moment to exam-
ine the faeces, to ascertain their state and their quantity, circumstances
necessary to determine the subsequent dose of the purgative, and the
frequency of its exhibition,

The use of purgative medicines in scarlatina does not supersede the
other sources of relief and comfort, which have been found proper in

Vol. I. 45


354 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

the treatment of the disease, and which our patients, or their friends and
attendants, may expect, and which the habits of practitioners may sug-
gest. Upon a dispassionate review, however, of the whole of the pre-
sent inquiry, I feel myself at liberty to say, that, under the regulated ex-
hibition of purgative medicines, conjoined with personal cleanliness, and
access to pure air, I have not found the necessity of employing other
remedies to be great, and certainly not so urgent as I at one time thought
it to be."

Sudorifics. — Since the mischief exists in the capillary vessels, or the
skin, the exhalents not performing their offices, such medicines must be
given, as will open the pores and cause perspiration. In this state of
the system, there are two difficulties: First, obstructed perspiration,
by which the poison is retained in the system, and, second, the want
of perspirable matter, by which the process of evapouration is carri-
ed on, keeping the skin moist and cool. Hence it is necessary to give
sudorifics to promote the excretions of the skin.

In the first stages of scarlet fever, the feet must be bathed, and an
infusion or tea of saffron freely given. Also a teaspoonful of the sudo-
rific or sweating drops, added to a tumbler of catnip tea, to be re-
peated every two hours until moderate perspiration follows. The same
dose may afterwards be given in the same manner, three or four times
through the day, to keep up a determination to the surface, except the
temperature of the body is too great to admit of this stimulating diapho-
retic medicine, which is very seldom the case, especially if every other
excretion of the body has been duly attended to. Should this be the
case, however, we must rely on those medicines which produce perspi-
ration without increasing the heat of the body, such as an infusion of
catnip, amaranthus, &c. which may be drank warm, and drank freely
through the day. An infusion or tea made of lemon balm, or sage,
may likewise be given as a change.

Bathing the Surface. — Cold affusions have been highly extolled by
some authors, as well as cold drinks. I grant that cold water may often
be applied to the surface with impunity, and often with benefit even in
the different forms of scarlet fever; but injury may arise from its indis-
criminate use. The subsequent effects arising from the repeated and sud-
den applications of cold to the body, under a great state of excitement,
especially in an eruptive disease like scarlatina, may prevent the ap-
pearance of the eruption, and cause a recession of them after they
have appeared, and thus prove fatal. Bathing the surface with warm
rain-water, to which has been added a little ley, is far preferable. No
dangerous reaction takes place from the use of tepid, as from cold wat-
er; nor will any danger result from it whatever, as it is a most valu-
able mxiliary, and the use of it cannot be too strongly recommended.
We may say with Bateman, when speaking of the application of cold
water: "We are possessed of no physical agent, as far as my experi-
ence has taught me, by which the functions of the animal economy are
controlled with so much certainty, safety, and promptitude, as by the
application of cold water to the skin, under the augmented heat of
scarlatina and of some other fevers. This expedient combines in' it-
self all the medicinal properties which are indicated in this state of dis-


Order VI.] Scarlet Fever. 355

ease, and which we should scarcely expect it to possess, for it is not
only the most effectual febrifuge, the * febrifugum magnum,' as a rev-
erend author (Dr. Hancoke) long ago called it, but it is in fact the only
sudorific or anodyne which will not disappoint the expectation of the
practitioner under these circumstances. 1 have had the satisfaction, in
numerous instances, of witnessing the immediate improvement of the
symptoms, and the rapid change in the countenance of the patient, pro-
duced by washing the skin. Invariably in the course of a few minutes
the pulse has been diminished in frequency, the thirst abated, the
tongue has become moist, a general free perspiration has broken forth,
the skin has become soft and cool, and the eyes have brightened; and
these indications of relief have been speedily followed by a calm and
refreshing sleep."

It may be applied as often as the fever increases; but should be omit-
ted if there is any chill, or if the skin is not above the natural tempera-
ture. It may then, however, be applied very warm.

When the throat is sore and the swallowing difficult, which often oc-
curs in the scarlet fever, it must be bathed with the following linament
or oil :

Take Spirits of Turpentine
Oil of Sassafras,
Olive or Sweet Oil,
Spirits of Hartshorn,
Gum Camphor. Equal parts. Mix.

Apply warm, after which bind a flannel around the neck. The throat
may be gargled, if it can be conveniently done, with the following :

Take Sage,

Hyssop. Equal parts.

Make a strong tea or decoction, sweeten with honey, add a small
piece of borax, and gargle often.

Mustard Plasters made weak, may be applied to the feet.

Anodynes. — I have always seen the happiest effects from anodynes,
combined with diaphoretics.

Diaphoretic Powders. — Our diaphoretic powders are attended with
very excellent effects. They tranquilize the system, mitigate pain, pro-
cure sleep, lessen the fever by causing perspiration, and will have the
desired effect in every, and any state or stage of the complaint, particu-
larly after the evacuants recommended have been made.

When there is some inflammation of the brain present, Eberle, among
other means, recommends bleeding ; but there is much more danger to
be apprehended from bleeding, than there is from the inflammation,
even without any means made use of to lessen it. There is great de-
bility present in this as well as other kinds of fever, and therefore com-
mon sense shows, that whatever tends to augment this debility or pros-
tration, must tend also to hasten its fatal termination. Bleeding in this,
as well as other fevers, almost inevitably precipitates the patient into
fatal prostration. I know of nothing more unnatural or absurd, than to
plunge a lancet into the arm of the little sufferer, under pretence of re-
ducing the inflammation or fever.


;iob Febrih Diseases. [Class I.

When there are symptoms of inflammation of the brain present, bath-
ing the feet and applying tepid water or cooling lotions to the head, such
as a mixture of water, vinegar, and brandy, with frequently bathing the
feet and applying sinapisms, will do more to allay it, than drawing any
quantity of blood from the system. If no other means would subdue it,
leeches or cupping might be resorted to ; but I have never found either
necessary in all my practice.

Some apply blisters under such circumstances; but I object to them.
Blisters sometimes are as mischievous as bleeding; they cause a general
or preternatural excitement of the system, and the parts to which they
are applied often mortify.

MALIGNANT SCARLET FEVER.

I have hitherto dwelt on the severe and ordinary form or type of
scarlet fever, and the treatment given is, in general, sufficient for the
other species; but when it assumes a more formidable and malignant
character, some variation is called for.

Should the attack of Scarlatina be very violent, it is liable to run
into a malignant type. It is, therefore, necessary to use the most ener-
getic means to arrest the fever in its incipient stage. For in proportion
as the disease is controlled and checked in its commencement, will its
subsequent course become more manageable, and be attended with less
violence and danger. When it is judiciously treated in the beginning,
the patient is safely and speedily conveyed through it, without that ex-
haustion and prostration, which results from the lamentable and danger-
ous prostrating practice of orthodox physicians, or physicians of the old
school. Should, however, the patient become very feeble and debili-
tated, a restorative or stimulating course of treatment must be pursued.
Wine whey may be given. Infusions of Virginia snake-root and cham-
omile flowers. It may be repeated two or three times a day. An infu-
sion of boneset may likewise be given.

Expectorants or Emetics. — When the throat becomes very much af-
fected, emetics are very valuable.

"Emetics," says Armstrong, "are the best gargles, where the throat
is much obstructed from an accumulation of tenacious mucus;
their operation effectually dislodges that morbid secretion for a time;
often greatly relieves the respiration ; improves the appearance of the
ulcers; and they may be repeated where no abdominal inflammation
exists, at any time, during the continuance of the fever, whenever the
respiration or swallowing becomes much impeded by an acumulation of
phlegm." Expectorants are in general to be preferred.

Dr. Thomas, in treating of this species of scarlet fever, thus re-
marks: — " At the commencement of cynanche maligna it has been found
of service to give a gentle emetic : wherefore a few grains of ipecacu-
anha may be taken. It will not fail to bring off a considerable quantity
of acrid matter, which, by getting into the bowels, might induce a diarr-
hoea ; an affection to be avoided by every possible means, as always
adding to debility, and endangering the life of the patient. During the
first four-and-twenty hours, an emetic will in some cases cut short the


Order VI.] Scarlet Fever. 357

progress of the disease, and in all it will be likely to break the force of
it. At an advanced stage of the disorder, if we still wish or think it
proper to evacuate the contents of the stomach, it may be done by an
infusion of chamomile flowers, in preference to ipecacuanha.

The grand objects to be kept in view in this malignant disease, should
be, to check or counteract the septic tendency which prevails; to wash
off from time to time the acrid matter from the fauces, and to obviate
debility. Should any particular symptoms arise during its progress which
may tend to aggravate the disease, such as diarrhoea, haemorrhage, &c,
they ought to be immediately attended to."

" In the year 1785, at which period I was in the West Indies, this
disease prevailed in the island of Saint Christopher's, as a universal epi-
demic among children; and a vast number of them fell martyrs to it,
in spite of the utmost endeavours of the profession to save them; when
at last the most happy effects were derived from the use of the remedy,
the basis of which was Cayenne pepper.

Take two table spoonsful of Red or Cayenne Pepper.

A teaspoonful of Salt.
Add half a pint of boiling water.
In fifteen minutes after add half a pint of Vinegar.
Let it stand an hour, then strain through a fine cloth.
Give two table spoonsfuls every half hour.

The speedy and good effect produced by the use of this medicine in
every case in which it was tried, evidently points out the utility of giv-
ing warm aromatics, which will bring on a timely separation of the
sloughs, as well as other antiseptics, to correct the tendency in the parts
to gangrene.

Since the period above mentioned, many practitioners in the United
Kingdom have become vouchers for the very beneficial effects which
were derived in various instances of cynanche maligna from this medi-
cine. My own experience induces me to speak well of it also."

Yeast may be freely given, if the putrid symptoms continue, and the
throat may likewise be occasionally gargled with it. It must be mixed
with milk, and a little honey added. If suppression of urine occurs, give
a strong tea or infusion of spearmint, and apply hops, and vinegar, sim-
mered together, over the region of the bladder.

Mortification. — The face and inside of the mouth often mortifiy in
scarlet fever, particularly after the use of mercury. When this is the
case, apply a yeast poultice over the part; and let the mouth be gargled
with it : or apply it to the parts in the best manner possible.

Dropsy. — The dropsy sometimes follows the scarlet fever ; generally,
in consequence of mal-practice. It occurs after bleeding or mercury.
When this is the case, the following prescription may be given:

Take Elder Bark, (Sambucus Nigra.) 1 oz.

Lisbon Wine, 1 quart. Simmer an hour.

Give a wine glass full, four or five times a day. Let parsley tea also
be freely drank.


• ioS febrile Diseases. [Class I.

' REGIMEN.

"Through the whole course of the disease" says Thomas, "the pa-
tient is to be supported with a sufficient quantity of liquid vegetable nu-
triment, such as gruel, barley-water, and preparations of tapioca, In-
dian arrow-root, rice, sago, and panado ; and his ordinary drink may
consist of wine-whey, or Port wine negus acidulated with orange-juice,
or some other acid.

The quantity of wine allowed must be in proportion to the age of the
sick, the violence of the febrile symptoms, the degree of debility that
exists, or the tendency that there is to putrescency.

The chamber should be kept sufficiently ventilated, and of proper
temperature, so as not to be too hot, nor at the same time to be so cool
as to give any check to the perspiration or efflorescence ; and it may be
sprinkled several times a day with warm vinegar in which rosemary or
some other aromatic herb has been infused. The greatest cleanliness
is moreover to be observed in removing, as soon as possible, whatever
is voided by stool ; the patient's linen, as also that of his bed, ought
frequently to be changed, and the mouth and throat be repeatedly wash-
ed and kept clean.

The putrid sore throat being highly contagious, especially among
children, it will be prudent, on the first appearance of the disease, to
separate the sick from the rest of the family : and in order to destroy
the contagion, and render the attendants less susceptible of being infect-
ed, it may be advisable to fumigate with the nitric or muriatic acid gases,
as advised under the head of Malignant Fever.

The capsicum medicine before mentioned has not only been used in
the cure of cynanche maligna, but it haf likewise been advised for the
prevention of it. By giving the attendants of the sick, and others who
may unavoidably be exposed to infection, a teaspoonful or two every
three hours, using it at the same time as a gargle, the preventive effect
of the remedy is said to have proved certain. It seems to act by pro-
ducing and keeping up a regular excitement in the tonsils, uvula, and
fauces, and thereby enabling them to resist the sedative effect of the poi-
son which is inhaled.

PREVENTION.

"Scarlatina," continues the same writer, "being of a very contagious
nature, and never failing to excite the greatest consternation and anxie-
ty when it breaks out in schools and families, it seems right to notice
the means which have been recommended, under such circumstances,
for checking its progress, and attempting its total extinction.

So long ago as 1779, Dr. Haygarth preserved 37 boys from the scarlet
fever in a boarding-school at Chester, by confining a patient ill of it to a
violent degree, in a separate room of the same house, and by attention
to pprfect cleanliness. In a boarding-school at Bath, in 1805, two
young ladies had a scarlet fever and a malignant ulcerated sore throat,
one of them dangerously. The governess visited the patients, and as-
sisted to syringe their throats frequently in the day. After washing her
hands, and with other strict attention to perfect cleanliness, so as care-


Order VI.J Scarlet Fever. 359

fully to avoid conveying any contagious dirt out of the sick chamber,
but without changing her garments, she went among sixty-five of her
scholars in the adjoining rooms of the house to hear their lessons and
examine their work: not one of these young ladies was infected with
the fever, as Dr. Haygarth was informed by the physician who attended
these patients. The testimony of such numerous facts proves, beyond
all controversy, that contagious miasms, in his opinion, do not adhere
to clothes so as to infect others closely exposed to them. Hence typhus,
scarlatina, &c. are always caught either by miasms issuing from the pa-
tient, or by miasms issuing from the contagious poison in a solid or li-
quid form discharged from the patient ; but not by miasms adhering to
clothes, &c. It completely confirms the fourth law of contagion men-
tioned under the head of Typhus, which is of very great importance,
being highly conducive to the simplicity, facility, and certainty of the
rules of prevention. If, in future, a patient ill of either typhus or the
scarlet fever, be permitted to infect the family, where there is a room
in the house for the separation of the sick, it will be justly imputed to
the want of knowledge or the want of care in the attendants.

All masters and mistresses of boarding-schools ought for their own
sake, as well as for the interest of the children committed to their care,
to be provided with one or more separate apartments, in proportion to
the size of the establishment, for the reception of invalids. These should
be so contrived that the communication between the rooms appropriated
for the sick and the rest of the house may be speedily and completely
cut off at any time. If the establishment be too small to admit of such
appendages under the same roof, a proper lodging should be reserved
in the neighbourhood, to be always in readiness, whenever the occasion
might require to resort to it.

As soon as the fever manifests itself in one subject, the person so af-
fected should be separated without delay from all the rest. The next
essential step to be taken is to subdue unnecessary alarm and consterna-
tion ; in the performance of which duty the parent or guardian must co-
operate fully with the instructor. Where the scholars are numerous,
and the extent and disposition of the premises admit of it, the best plan
is not to disperse the school ; for by dismissing the children, those in
whom the infection is latent, and to be afterwards produced, thereby
convey it to their respective families, and so promote the further pro-
pagation of the disease, to the great injury of the junior branches in
particular, who are more susceptible of the contagion than adults. Hav-
ing ascertained and cut off the source of infection ; having separated
the originally tainted as soon as they begin to sicken, and while they yet
remain incapable of imparting disease ; having disposed of them in pro-
per apartments, and strictly enforced the rules of prevention ; the evil
may be crushed in its infancy. The extent and magnitude of the mis-
chief will thus be accurately measured, and totally obviated.

But if the accommodations of the establishment be too limited for the
complete execution of this scheme, or parents be unwilling to commit
their offspring to any other than their own inspection in the time of illness.
it is a sacred duty imposed on them not to admit even a suspected child,
much less a diseased one, into family intercourse with themselves, their


360 - Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

other children, or their servants. A separate apartment, where cir-
cumstances allow of such a convenience, ought to be in readiness, or in
a state to be made ready, for accidental sickness ; and this should be
at the top of the house, or upper story, as the current of heated air is
naturally upwards, and the atmosphere loaded with contagious steams
emanating from the body, will, if the patient be in a lower apartment,
diffuse themselves over the whole house, whereas, if he be placed above,
they will have a ready vent. Here a strict quarantine should be per-
formed, whether the subject be suspected or convalescent, the period of
which may be regulated, partly by what is already known on the sub-
ject, and finally determined by future observation and the results of ag-
gregated facts. If the child be really infected, immediate separation,
with a suitable regimen, should be adopted.

To annihilate the powers of contagion, we may employ fumigations
with manganese, salt, and sulphuric acid, or we may have recourse to
those of the muriatic or nitric acid.

In regard to prevention, it is obvious that an improvement of the diet
in such as live low, moderate exercise in the open air, bathing, and in
short every mode of strengthening the constitution, with great attention
to cleanliness and ventilation, must have a tendency to ward off the dis-
ease. Those who are in attendance ought as much as possible to avoid
inhaling the breath of the sick, as it is clear that scarlatina, as well as
some other diseases, is taken in this manner."


ADDITIONAL REMARKS.

Since Scarlet Fever in some of its forms is so extensively prevalent,
and often so very fatal, a judicious course of treatment is imperii
ously called for, and I know that such treatment is recommended above.
It has been so repeatedly tested, that it no longer remains a subject of
doubt; but is established on sure, safe, and unerring principles, and
to be known needs but to be tried. The practice of bleeding and giv-
ing mercury, in this and other diseases, will no longer exist, when peo-
ple learn the difference between the two kinds of treatment.


Order VII.] Miliary Fec< 361


CHAPTER VII.
MILIARY FEVER. (Ftbris Miliaris.)

DESCRIPTION.

In this fever, nature seems to be endeavouring to drive out the
morbific matter to the surface of the body, by increasing her secre-
tory and excretory motions.

It derives its name from the small pustules or bladders which appear
on the skin, resembling in shape and size the seeds of millet. These
pustules or pimples a * either red or white, and sometimes both are
mixed together ; sometimes they are distinct, and sometimes in clus-
ters.

Sometimes this is a primary disease, but more frequently symptom-
atic of some other malady; as the small-pox, measles, inflammation,
putrid or nervous fever, &c. In all which cases it is generally the ef-
fect of too stimulating a regimen or medicines.

CAUSES.

This fever is sometimes occasioned by violent passions and emotions
of the mind; by great evacuations, a weak watery diet, rainy seasons;
by the immoderate use of cold, crude, and unripe fruits, impure water,
and unwholesome provisions. It may also be occasioned by the sup-
presssion of any customary evacuations, as issues, setons, ulcers, the
bleeding piles, or the menstrual flux.

It attacks both sexes, all ages and constitutions, but more frequently
people of weakly and delicate constitutions. This disease in child-bed
women is often occasioned by great costiveness during pregnancy, and
very frequently by their excessive use of green trash, and other im-
proper things, in which pregnant women are too apt to indulge ; but
indolence and inactivity are the most general causes.

SYMPTOMS.

This fever, when it is a primary disease, generally commences with
a violent cold stage, succeeded by great heat, anxiety, and sighing;
the heat soon increases, and produces a profuse sweat, preceded by a
sense of pricking in the skin; and it has a peculiar, strong, disagree-
able smell. The period of eruption is indeterminate ; it seldom attacks
the face, but appears first on the neck and breast, and thence spreads
all over the body. The patient is restless, and sometimes delirious ; the
tongue appears white, and the hands shake, with often a burning heat
in the palms; and in child-bed women the milk generally ceases, and
also the other discharges. After the patient has experienced an itching
or pricking pain under the skin, innumerable small pustules of a red or
white colour be^in to appear. These symptoms then generally abato.

Vol. I. 46


362 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

the pulse becomes fuller and softer, the skin moist, and the sweat as
the disease advances, has a more fetid smell : the oppression on the
breast and spirits usually subsides, and the customary evacuations reg-
ularly return. Though the eruption apears at no fixed period, nor is of
any regular certain duration, the pustules generally begin to dry and
fall off about the sixth or seventh day from the eruption, occasioning a
very troublesome itching in the skin.

The pustules usually come out on the third or fourth day, when the
eruption is critical, but when symptomatica!, they may appear at any
time of the disease. When the pustules appear and disappear by turns,
there is always danger; but when they disappear suddenly, and do
not appear again, the danger is very great.

In child-bed women the pustules are commonly at first filled with
clear water, afterwards they become yellowish. Sometimes those of a
red colour are interspersed. When these only appear, the disease is
named a rash.

If a diarrhoea comes on in the progress or decline of the disease, and
is suddenly checked, it may occasion an apoplexy. In child-bed wo-
men a diarrhoea is a very dangerous symptom ; and the change of the
colour of the urine from a yellow to a pale colour is alarming; drowsi-
ness is a favourable symptom. Free breathing, moderate sweat, without
much debility or depression, are favourable symptoms, and on the con-
trary dangerous.

The type of this fever is generally of the typhoid kind, on account
of the excessive discharges by the skin. When of a typhus nature it
is generally white; on the contrary if of the synocha, red; this is owing
to the difference of impetus of the blood.

TREATMENT.

If the stomach is oppressed, and if there be nausea, &c. give a mild
emetic, and then treat it on the same principle as other fever, particu-
larly Scarlatina. We must not increase the sweat too much for fear of
debility.

Moderate doses of physic must be occasionally given, and such li-
quids and infusions drank, as cause a moisture of the skin. For this
purpose give Saffron and Snake-root tea. The feet must be daily im-
mersed in ley-water, and the body must be frequently bathed with the
same, and applied warm. There is danger oftentimes in this, as well
as in many other diseases, of doing too much. A particular attention
only is required to all the secretions and excretions. Here, as we have
before stated, consists the " grand secret," of curing febrile, as well as
most other complaints.

REGIMEN.

In all eruptive fevers, of whatever kind, the chief point is to prevent
the sudden disappearing of the pustules, and to promote their matura-
tion and expulsion. For this purpose, the patient must be kept in such
a temperature as neither to expel the eruption too fast, nor to cause it
to retreat prematurely. The diet and drink ought therefore to be in a
moderate degree nourishing and cordial : but neither strong nor heating.


Order VIII.] Puerperal Fever. 363

The patient's chamber ought neither to be kept too hot nor cold; and
he should not be too much covered with clothes. Above all, the mind
is to be kept easy and cheerful. Nothing so certainly causes an erup-
tion to recede as fear, or the apprehension of danger.

The food must be weak chicken broth, with bread, panado, indian-
meal gruel, &c to a gill of which may be added a spoonful or two of
wine, as the patient's strength requires, with a few grains of salt, and
a little sugar. Good apples, roasted or boiled, with other ripe fruits
of an opening cooling nature, may be eaten.

The drink may be suited to the state of the patient's strength and
spirits. If these be pretty good, the drink ought to be weak: as cat-
nip and balm tea.

When the patient's spirits are low, and the eruption does not rise suf-
ficiently, his drink must be a little more generous ; as wine whey shar-
pened with the juice of orange or lemon, and made stronger or weaker
as circumstances may require.

Sometimes the miliary fever approaches towards a putrid nature, in
which case the patient's strength must be supported with generous cor-
dials, joined with acids; and if the degree of putrescence be great, the
Peruvian bark and yeast must be administered. If the head be much
affected, the body must be kept open by injections, or clysters.


CHAPTER VIII.
PUERPERAL FEVER. (Febris Puerperalis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is a disease peculiar to women after delivery, particularly in
lying-in hospitals, and is supposed to occasion the death of nearly one
half who die in child bed. Three fourths of those who have been at-
tacked, have fallen victims to it. It commences, in general, three or
four days, sometimes a week, after delivery; and it appears to occur
oftentimes as an epidemic.

CAUSES.

Various reasons have been assigned as the cause of puerperal fever ;
but none very satisfactory seems as yet to have been given. A check
of perspiration from cold, combined with a moist and unhealthy state of
the atmosphere, probably gives rise to it. Morbific matter is retained,
enters the circulation, and is thrown upon some of the viscera of the
abdomen, exciting inflammation and other symptoms of the complaint;
or it may cause the complaint, by mixing with the circulating mass.

The late Dr. Young, professor of midwifery at Edinburgh, was of
opinion, that the puerperal fever, strictly so called, is in every instance,
the consequence of contagion; but he contends, that the contagious
matter of this disease is capable only of producing its effects, in conse-
quence of a peculiar predisposition given by delivery and its consequen-
ces. In support of this doctrine he remarks, in a paper read in the


364 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

Philosophical Society of that city, that for many years the disease was
altogether unknown in the lying-in ward of the Royal Infirmary at
Edinburgh; but that after it was once introduced into die hospital, al-
most every woman was, in a short time after delivery, attacked with it ;
although prior to delivery, she may have lain even for weeks together,
not only in the same ward with the infected, but even in the very next
bed. He further remarks, that it was only eradicated from the hospital
in consequence of the wards being entirely emptied, thoroughly venti-
lated, and new painted. After these processes, puerperal females in
the hospital remained as free from the disease as formerly.

With respect to the infectious nature of this fever, a great contrariety
of sentiment has indeed existed : the probability is in favour of its being
so; but it is nearly impossible to form a decided opinion on the subject.
Doubtless it will be the safest practice to consider it as infectious, and
to cut off all intercourse of pregnant and parturient women with those
who labour under it.

It is certain that puerperal fever has a strong tendency to the typhoid
type in an advanced stage, although at its commencement, or during the
first twenty-four or thirty-six hours, it is usually attended with inflam-
matory symptoms, and even with topical inflammation in the abdominal
viscera, but more particularly the peritonaeum, or membrane which
envelopes them,

SYMPTOMS.

Puerperal fever commences with rigor or chills which is succeeded by
great heat, and frequently ends in perspiration; but its characteristic
symptom, by which it is always accompanied, is pain in the region of
the uterus, which, although generally attended with remarkable aggra-
vations, resembling after pains, has no complete intermission as they
always have. It is increased by motion, attended by extreme soreness
and tenderness to the touch, and accompanied by a pulse so rapid as to
rise to 140 to 160 in a few hours after the attack.

The pulse especially during epidemic constitutions, although full and
strong, and but moderately quick, at the very commencement of the
disease, in a few hours becomes very rapid, running up to 160 strokes
in a minute, and is then proportionally small, at the same time the pa-
tient's strength rapidly fails, and her countenance expresses great pain
and anxiety, her head is frequently affected with pain, giddiness, and
with a ringing in her ears. The secretion of milk is generally suppres-
sed, the breast becomes suddenly flaccid ; the bowels in the commence-
ment are generally costive, but a diarrhoea is soon apt to come on. The
belly swells to a great extent, and the tenderness is spread over the
whole abdomen, compelling the patient to lie immoveable in one posture,
with her extremities drawn up, and generally on her back ; although
such is the extreme tenderness, that she cannot bear the weight of the
bed clothes. The tongue soon becomes foul, the stomach is oppressed
with nausea, and the teeth collect a brown sordes, the breath offensive,
purple or red spots appear, and extreme debility comes on sooner in
this, than in any fever which begins with such decided symptoms of
inflammation, and makes a sudden and total change of its nature, into
that of a putrid and malignant fever.


Order VIII.] Puerperal Fever. <;o">

This complaint frequently attacks within 48 hours, generally within
five days after delivery, and in general, the earlier the attack, the more
violent are its symptoms. It runs through its course in a very short pe-
riod of time, ending in death in a very few days : indeed a great and
sudden mortality, particularly in some epidemic constitutions, has prov-
ed the most distinguishing, as well as the most terrible characteristic of
the disease. In some epidemics, very few indeed ; in others, it is said,
none have recovered : some patients have died within eighteen hours,
and most of the fatal cases have ended within three or four days : but
when it has ended in recovery, the symptoms have often been protract-
ed to six or eight days, with occasional but irregular intermissions and
exacerbations; and it has been remarked, that after very considerable
remissions, indeed after such complete intermissions as to afford the most
sanguine hopes of recovery, the attack has been renewed with increased
danger.

Such in general is the course of the puerperal fever; the symptoms of
which, however, may be often varied, according to the constitution of
the patient, the degree of the disease, and its earlier or later invasion
after delivery.

i PROGNOSIS.

The reappearance of the lochia, and a gradual subsidence of the ab-
dominal tension and soreness after copious stools, the pulse at the same
time becoming slower, with a moist skin, may be regarded in a very fa-
vourable light. On the contrary, an agitated countenance, with a hur-
ried unconnected manner of speaking, constant sighing, attended with a
tossing about of the arms, pain and oppression at the chest, visual de-
ceptions, imaginary strange sounds and voices, muttering and stupor,
are to be considered as unfavourable symptoms. An extensive swelling
of the belly, so as to sound on striking it with the fingers, sudden cessa-
tion of pain, irregularity of the pulse, coldness in the extremities, clam-
my moisture diffused over the whole body, frequent dark-coloured and
fetid evacuations by stool and an indifference to all external objects, de-
note certain and speedy death.

DISSECTION.
The morbid appearances observed on dissection are usually confined
to the abdomen. The first thing that often presents itself is a collection
of whey-like fluid in the cavity of the abdomen, which is sometimes so
considerable in quantity as to amount to several quarts ; and it has a pe-
culiarity of smell different from any other fluid to be met with in the
human body, either in health or disease. Where it is large in quan-
tity, the surfaces of the different viscera and of the peritonaeum will
usually be found covered with a crust formed of a solid part of this mat-
ter, resembling coagulated lymph. If there be any insterstices between
the intestines or the other viscera, they are frequently filled with large
masses of the same, adapted exactly to the shape and size of such inster-
stices. In a few cases, a deposit of a caseous and serous nature has
been discovered likewise in the head, breast, and external cellular mem-
brane, as has before been observed. In most instances there is found
a slight degree of inflammation in some part of the cavity ; but it is not


366 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

confined invariably to any particular place ; as the uterus, ovaria, peri-
tonaeum, omentum, intestines, and bladder, have all in their turn been
observed in a state of inflammation. In many cases of dissection, a con-
siderable quantity of purulent matter has been found in the cavity
of the abdomen.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding profusely and repeatedly, mercury, blisters, opium, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

It requires no discernment to see the pernicious effect of the above
practice. Some bleed five or six times in succession, which soon sinks
the patient into the arms of death. Mercury is also given at the same
time, which hastens dissolution.

Indications of Cure. — The principal indication in the cure of this
disease, is to subdue the inflammatory symptoms; to effect which,
sweating and purging are the two Herculean remedies to be relied on.

confidence in their utility. The sweating drops must be given in
doses of a teaspoonful in a tumbler of catnip tea every two hours until
free perspiration is produced. Physicians in general place their great-
est reliance on copious bleeding. We place our greatest reliance on
copious perspiration. It must be continued until the inflammatory symp-
toms subside. Bathing the surface and feet greatly promotes it.

Purgatives are exceedingly important in reducing this fever. The
same may be given as recommended in the preceding fevers, and re-
peated at least once a day. If vomiting supervenes, give the saline
purgative :

Take Epsom salts, eight ounces.

Hot or boiling water, eight ounces.
Add Muriatic Acid, one dram.

Give a table spoonful in a tumbler of mint tea every hour till it acts
upon the bowels. This stops the vomiting, allays the heat and in ev-
ery respect acts favourably.

" To alleviate the soreness and distension of the abdomen, we may
recommend the application of fomentations both inwardly and extern-
ally: inwardly, by injecting every four or six hours, and administering
emollient clysters from time to time ; and externally, by applying flan-
nel cloths wrung out in a warm decoction of equal parts of chamomile
flowers and bruised poppy-heads, with an addition of about one-third
of rectified spirit, over the whole region of the abdomen ; and these
ought to be renewed as often as they become cold, taking due care that
they are not so wet as to run about the bed and incommode the patient."

After suitable evacuations Diaphoretic Powders may be given, par-
ticularly at bed-time. The dose must depend on the severity of the
pain, and the age and constitution of the patient. It may be repeated
every two hours until there is a mitigation of the symptoms, and a
moisture of the skin.

Should putrid or malignant symptoms commence, yeast must be giv-
en, as much as the stomach will bear. Wine and porter, may likewise


Order VIII.] Puerperal Fever. 367

occasionally be given. An infusion of chamomile flowers cold, may
also be taken to keep up the strength of the patient, nourishing diet, &c.
Dr. Guinot recommends ten or twelve grains of the Carbonate of Pot-
ash to be given in any proper vehicle three times a day, not only in
puerperal fever, but in all diseases connected with the secretion of
milk. This treatment he recommends under the idea that the disease
is occasioned by a predominance of acid. Other practitioners likewise
speak of its good effects.

REGIMEN.

A very light, cooling diet should be used in the commencement of
the disease, and in the latter stages of it, a more nutritious diet recom-
mended; indian-meal gruel, panado, toast, and bread water, barley-
water, rice-water, &c.

PRECAUTION.

" It would appear," says an experienced physician, "that the effluvia
of a patient under puerperal fever is an animal poison sui generis, ca-
pable of acting on pregnant females, their situation giving the predis-
position necessary for the operation of its influence. The usual mode
of communicating the infection in private practice is by being deliver-
ed by some accoucher who has lately been attending a woman labouring
under puerperal fever, or her being visited by female friends who have
been where it prevailed. It therefore behoves every practitioner when
he meets with the disease to observe every possible precaution in chang-
ing his clothes, and by careful ablution of his hands to guard against
conveying infection to other parturient women: moreover, all pregnant
women should be excluded from the house ; nor should the nurse or oth-
er persons about the sick be permitted to go abroad and visit women in
a stage of pregnancy.

"To prevent the disease from occurring, it will be proper to keep the
patient's mind both before, during the time of labour, and afterwards,
as free from every kind of uneasiness as possible, as anxiety might great-
ly predispose to an attack of it. She should likewise carefully avoid
any exposure to the infection of fever before delivery, as well as to the
occasional causes of it afterwards. Every woman lately delivered
ought cautiously to guard against cold; but in doing this, her room
should at the same time be kept of a proper temperature by allowing a
sufficient ventilation.

" It being a well-known fact that puerperal fever has been chiefly con-
fined to close apartments and small hospitals, and that since the lying-
in chambers have been made more airy and commodious, and the hos-
pitals larger, the disease seldom prevails epidemically, or becomes gen-
eral. Due attention should be paid to a free ventilation ; for it is by no
means improbable that a cool air in a lying-in chamber will frequently
prevent, and its opposite be likely to induce, the phenomena of puer-
peral fever.

" The patient should observe the strictest cleanliness both as to herself
and the bedding. On the coming of the milk, her breasts ought to be
drawn repeatedly throughout the course of the day, by some person ac-


368 Febrile Diseases. [Class I.

customed to the business, or by applying the child; her body should be
kept perfectly open after she is delivered, as well as before her confine-
ment, by some mild purgative medicine, and she should abstain from
all food of a heating or irritating nature.

" An upright posture will be most proper, in order to discharge more
readily any putrescent matter that may be in the uterus.

" When the disease prevails as an epidemic among puerperal women,
or occurs in a lying-in hospital, all communication ought immediately to
be cut off between those who are affected, and such as have lately lain
in, or expect shortly to do so ; and in order to root out the disease and
stifle contagion, we should have recourse to fumigations, as advised un-
der the head of Malignant Fever, and afterwards to painting, white-
washing, and a free ventilation.


CHAPTER. IX.

HECTIC FEVER. (Febris Hectiea.)


DESCRIPTION.

Hectic fever is generally characterized by a frequent, weak pulse ;
flushing in the face, the hands or the feet; night sweats or diarrhoea. A
wound or local injury upon a healthy person produces a fever that may
properly be termed symptomatic or sympathetic.

CAUSES.

The cause of hectic fever is almost always some local disease. This
form of fever appears to be a feeble and hopeless struggle of the system
about to be overpowered without any apparent tendency to remove the
disease. It arises from long continued irritation of any severe local dis-
ese upon the constitution whether accompanied with suppuration or not.
It arises from the absorption of pus or matter from tubercles on the
lungs, diseased hip joints, white swelling, curvature of the spine, scrof-
ula, abscesses, ulcers, &c.

SYMPTOMS.

Hectic fever arises at different periods after the commencement of
any serious local disease. This may be owing to some peculiarity of
constitution, or the particular structure or functions of the part diseased.
The more weak and feeble the patient naturally is, and the more se-
vere and incurable the local disease, the sooner do the hectic symptoms
generally begin, and the more rapid is their progress.

Sometimes the first accessions of this fever are almost imperceptible ; a
very slight degree of emaciation; a pulse a little quicker than ordinary,
with a trivial increase of heat, particularly after meals, being the
only early symptoms. As the fever becomes more established, the symp-
toms generally run as follows : a frequent small pulse quickens towards


Order IX.] Hectic Fever. 369

evening, but is always ten or twenty strokes in a minute faster than in
health; moist skin ; pale copious urine, with sediment; a good deal ol
debility; the tongue seldom so much furred as in most other fevers, its
edges being of a bright red colour, and the papillae swollen and prominent;
times an ejection of all food from the stomach, a great readiness to be
thrown intosweats; profuse nocturnal perspirations; frequently a consti-
tutional purging; repeated chills and flushes of heat; derangement of
the nervous system; loss of sleep; indigestion; heartburn; flatulence.
When however the biliary system is undisturbed, the digestive powers
ure little impaired, and the appetite remaining good to the last. In an
advanced stage, the hair falls off, and the nails become bent.

Hectic fever is more or less remittent, but never wholly intermittent.
It is observed that the frequency of the pulse is generally from 100 to
140 in a minute, seldom falling below 100, even in the time of a remis-
sion, and in some cases never being under 120 : while in other consti-
tutions, the pulse of health may be so slow, that 90 strokes in a minute
would be enough to indicate an exacerbation.

The principal exacerbations generally occur about five in the after-
noon: and if we are to credit Galen, Vogel and Wilso, who differ from
Cullen on this point, an increase of the febrile symptoms always follows
a full meal at any time of the day. The exacerbations, which are most-
ly preceded by chills, are marked by a sensation of burning heat in the
palms of the hands, which become red and mottled, and frequently in
the colour of which, in persons of a florid and delicate complexion, has
also, during the remission, a more abrupt termination than in health.
It has not been ascertained by the themometer, whether the temperature
of the blood is actually reduced during the chills which usually precede
an exacerbation. Whatever may be the form of exacerbation in the
day time they are generally succeeded towards the end of the night by
copious sweats. When diarrhoea supervenes in the latter stages of the
disease, the sweat generally disappears. The reddish sediment of uric
acid in the urine is generally observable after the sweats, and absent
during the hot fit, when the secretion is usually pale and limpid.

Mr. Hunter divides hectic fever into two kinds; viz. one which arises
from the absolute incurability of the local complaint; another, which
depends upon a disease that is curable if the patient's c.onstitution had
sufficient powers.

TREATMENT.

In the cure of hectic fever, attention must first be directed to the ex-
citing cause of the disease before it can be removed. If it arise from
the absorption of matter in consequence of an ulcer, how can it be
cured while the primary affection exists. As soon as the disease is re-
lieved or cured, which produces the febrile disturbance, the fever will
cease. But when the local disease cannot be cured, which causes it, it
must of course be mitigated, which in almost every instance can be ef-
fected. Under such circumstances, the hectic fever must be treated on
eeneral principles. The bowels must be regulated by laxative medi-
~ Vol. I. 47


370 Febrile Diseases. [Class L

cines, and upon every accession of the fever, the surface must be bath-
ed with tepid ley water.

Attention must be paid to the debility which almost invariably exists.
And it must be borne in mind that this debility arises in consequence of the
night sweats which attend this form of fever, caused by a relaxation of
the capillary vessels. They may be checked in almost every instance
py administering

15 or 20 Drops of Elixir of VitrioL

in a gill of water or tea of any kind once or twice a day. At night is
the most suitable time to give them. During the day, give an infusion
or tea of the Crawley, or Amaranthus root to be taken cool. This drink
may be changed, and an infusion of the Virginia snake-root may be ta-
ken. It acts both as a diaphoretic and tonic.

Every thing of a stimulating nature should be avoided, but a nutri-
tious diet may be taken.


CHAPTER X.

INFANTILE REMITTENT FEVER.:

DESCRIPTION.
This fever is peculiar to children, from the age of one, to five or six.
It comes on very gradual, manifesting itself by irregularity, which is
sometimes by costiveness, and at other times by relaxations of the
bowels.

CAUSES.

This fever is evidently symptomatic of disordered digestion. It de*-
pends perhaps partly upon absorption of the putrid contents of the in-
testines.

SYMPTOMS.

On its coming on, the child becomes fretful, his lips are dry, his hands
hot, his breath short, the head painful, and his pulse quick, being often
120 in a minute: he is unwilling to stir or speak, vhe sleep is disturbed
by startings, and the food rejected; sometimes very little is discharged
from the intestines ; and at others too much, the stools being often mu-
cous or slimy; some children are delirious, or lost and stupid; many for
a time are speechless. In the course of the day there are several slight
accessions of fever, during which the child is usually drowsy ; in the in-
tervals of these paroxysms he appears tolerably well, though at times
more peevish than usual.

These symptoms probably manifest themselves, more or less, for
eight or ten days, when all at once a more violent paroxysm of fever
will arise, preceded by a shivering fit and by vomiting. The pulse rises
to 140 in a miniute; the cheeks are flushed, the drowsiness is much in-
creased, and the child keeps picking almost incessantly at the skin of
the Tips and Hose, and of the angles of the eyes.


Order X] unfile Remittent Feecr. £71,

This species of fever is- mild at its commencement, slow in its pro-
gress, and very uncertain in its event. In some respects it resembles
dropsy in the head, and I apprehend is sometimes mistaken for it; but
in the latter there arc occasional screamings, with much tossing of the
hands above the head, intolerance of light, with more or less of squint-
ing; whereas in the remittent fever of infants, none of these appearan-
ces are to be met with. In this fever the desire for food is destroyed,
and the little patient will take neither aliment nor medicine. In hydro-
cephalus, on the contrary, he will usually take whatever is offered to
him without reluctance. The faeces are remarkably changed from their
natural appearances in the remittent fever, being sometimes black, and
smelling like putrid mud; and at others they are curdled, with shreds of
coagulable lymph floating in a dark-greenish-coloured fluid. In acute
hydrocephalus we meet with nothing very similar to these motions.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The indications of cure in this disease are, to clear the stomach by a
gentle emetic, and the bowels by purgatives, to moderate or remove
the febrile symptoms, and then, if necessary, to restore the lost energy
by tonics,

A dose of senna and manna may be administered to the child twice
or thrice a week. The surface may be bathed with tepid water occa-
sionally, also the feet. If there is pain, apply linen cloths wetted in
vinegar and water on the head. Keep up a determination to the sur-
face by giving diaphoretic medicines. Thirty or forty drops of the
sudorific or siceating drops may be given morning and night in catnip
tea. A tea made of elder flowers, balm, <fcc, may be occasionally drank
throughout the day. When the fever is nearly subsided, and there is
great debility, give tonics, such as an infusion of equal parts ofcolumbo,
gentian, and chamomile: give a little occasionally. It there is acidity
in the stomach, give the following:
Take Rhubarb, 20 grains.

Sal jflratus, 20 grains.
Add 8 ounces of Mint tea.

A table spoonful may be given to a child two years old, three or four
times a day, sweetened with common sugar,

REGIMEN.

\ milk and vegetable diet must be observed.

PREVENTION OF FEVERS.
In concluding this class of diseases, I shall give the receipt for pre-
paring the disinfecting gas, as follows;

Take Nitre, pulverized, 6 drams,
Oil of Vitriol, G drains.

Mix them in a tea-cup by adding to the nitre, one dram at a time of the
oil; the cup to he placed during the operation, on a hot or heated brick,
shovel, hearth, or any other heated substance. The mixture to be
stirred with a tobacco-pipe, or piece of iron.


u'Z Inflammatory DtiMtsts. * ss I]

CLASS II.
INFLAMMATORY DISEASES.

CHARACTER.

This class of diseases is characterized by heat, pain, redness, and
swelling. Inflammation is either general or local; general when the
system is extensively affected, local when confined to some particular
part or organ. It is also acute or chronic; acute when the attack is se-
vere, and the symptoms violent; chronic when the inflammatory action
has, in a considerable degree subsided, and the disease become less
painful, and less violent in its character, and protracted. There arc
several varieties of inflammation occasioned by difference of cause,
function, or texture of the part affected.

All the viscera are subject to inflammation. The various phenomena
or symptoms exhibited in this class of diseases, is owing more to the
peculiar structure of the part inflamed, than to the exciting cause.


CHAPTER T.
INFLAMMATION OF THE BRAIN, (Phrenitis.)

DESCRIPTION.

Plirenitis is an inflammation of the membranes, or brain itself. When
if occurs independent of any other disease, it is termed idiophatic, or
primary. It is called symptomatic when it is produced by some other
disease, as fevers, eruptions, &c,

CAUSES.

Proximate Cause. — Whatever causes a determination of blood to
the head, produces an inflammation of the brain, or membranes. Hence
we find that in this complaint, the blood recedes from the extremities,
thereby producing coldness, and flows in an unusual quantity to the
head, in consequence of which there is heat, inflammation, &c.

Remote Causes. — The remote causes are fits of passion ; intense ap-
plication of the mind; great exercise; external violence of any kind;
fractures or injuries of the head, intemperance, exposure to great heat
of the sun, suppressed evacuations, &c. Sypmtomic phrenitis is pro-
duced by the repulsion of febrile and cutaneous diseases.

SYMPTOMS.

Inflammation of the brain exhibits the following symptoms: It usual-
ly commences with inflammatory fever, flushed countenance, redness of


Order I.] Jnf animation of the Brain. 373

the eyes, intolerance of light and sound, head-ache, watchfulness, and
delirium. The patient experiences a fulness of the head, which is usu-
ally attended with a throbbing of the temporal arteries. The patient
becomes restless, his sleep is disturbed, or wholly forsakes him. There
is a peculiar disposition in the patient to injure, or destroy himself,
which he often accomplishes if he obtains a proper instrument. It is
often preceded by great pain in the stomach, which, no doubt is pro-
duced by sympathy of the brain. Sometimes fierce delirium does not
commence within several days after the attack. The pain is sometimes
in other parts of the head. The hearing is acute, sometimes the re-
verse. There is usually preternatural heat, while the extremities, par-
ticularly the feet, are cold, showing evidently a determination of blood
to the head. The patient talks incoherently, and delirium gradually
increases, till he arrives at a state of complete frenzy. The complaint
sometimes, though rarely, intermits. Respiration is generally deep and
slow, and now and then difficult; seldom hurried or frequent. The
patient imagines that some persons or evil spirits are constantly pursuing
him to take his life, from whom he starts with horror, and no argument
or assertion can induce him to believe the contrary. Sometimes there
is a discharge of mucus from the nose; occasionally blood. It is usu-
ally attended with a tremor of the joints, grinding of the teeth, twitch-
ing of the muscles of the face, which is often florid, then suddenly turn-
ing pale, with a general derangement of the internal functions, and
whole system. The length or duration of this disease is very uncertain,
as it may prove fatal in a week, at other times it continues for months.

PROGNOSIS;

This disease must always be regarded as very dangerous ; but may
be removed by judicious treatment. A person to survive the common
routine of practice in this complaint, must certainly possess a very ro*
"bust constitution.

COMMON PRACTICE.

1. The common practice in this disease, is to bleed repeatedly and
copiously from the arm, jugular veins, and temporal arteries.

2. Shave the head, and blister.

3. Mercurial purges, salts, antimony, &c.

This constitutes the principal treatment of physicians, and there are
strong objections to this practice. As regards bleeding, even fifteen
ounces, from some habits, will destroy life ; whereas it is recommended
to the amount of two or three hundred ounces in a short space of time.
The debility arising from the copious depletion recommended, proves
much more injurious than all the benefit derived from it; indeed, I have
seldom or never seen any present or permanent relief from general blood*
letting. Blisters to the head, instead of allaying the inflammation, has a
tendency to increase it. Mercurial purges are also improper.

Dr. L. M. Peixotto has the following remarks on this subject: "It is
recommended in many of our most popular elementary treatises on the
practice of physic and therapeutics, that, in diseases attended by a
great determination to the brain, blisters should be applied to the head.


374 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class U,

It has always appeared to me that this practice is directly at variance
with the object aimed at, and inconsistent with the other measures sim-
ultaneously recommended, as ice, cold water, leeches, &c. applied to
the same part. One of the strongest advocates for blisters in phrenitis
and typhus admits that in mania they are hurtful while they are draw-
ing, and they are therefore best applied to distant parts. (Elements of
Therapeutics.) Now the same fact obtains in inflammation of the brain,
and every argument drawn from analogy contra-indicates their applica-
tion so near to the seat of the disease. Dr. John Clarke, in his admi-
rable treatise on diseases of children, deprecates their application to the
scalp in phrenitis."

REFORMED PRACTICE,

Indications of Cure. — The indication of cure in Phrenitis, is to di-
vert the blood from the brain, by restoring the circulation in the extrem-
ities ; in other words, by equalizing the circulation.

Treatment. — Bathe the feet in tepid water to which has been ad-
ded a little pearlash or ley. Let this be repeated at least twice in twen-
ty-four hours.

Give Purgatives. — Administer a purgative every morning, or ev-
ery other morning, that kind which acts with peculiar force upon the
stomach and first passages. Nothing will be found better than our com-,
mon physic; to be given as before directed. If the inflammation is
very great, apply cups to the temples and nape of the neck. It will be
necessary also to keep up a determination to the surface by giving a
dose of our fever or sweating drops.

Rubefacients. — Should not this treatment mitigate the symptoms after
a few days, apply a mustard plaster between the shoulders. It also may
be applied to the feet at night. When there is great pain of the head,
or delirium, apply to it a fomentation of hops simmered in vinegar, in^
closed in flannel or muslin ; to be occasionally repeated.

Anodynes. — Should there be great pain, restlessness, or want of sleep,
give ten grains of the Diaphoretic Powders in an infusion or tea of cat-
nip, to be repeated every night.

A continuance of this course will generally subdue the inflammation in
a short time. Cupping will be found altogether superior to general
blood-letting. It removes the turgid vessels of the brain, and by its
counter-irritating effects produces immediate relief. But even this op-
eration is seldom if ever necessary.

REGIMEN.

The patient must be kept from all noise, and a strict adherence to a
light, cooling diet. Nothing of a stimulating nature must be given, eith-
er in food or drink.


Order IL] Inflammation of the Ear. 375


CHAPTER II.
INFLAMMATION OF THE EAR, (Otitis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is an inflammation of the membranes well furnished with nerves,
which are spread upon the internal surface of the ear.

CAUSES.

An inflammation of the ear is usually brought on by exposing the ear
to a partial current of air. It may arise from cutting the hair of the
head very short, particularly in the winter.

SYMPTOMS.

When the car is inflamed, the pain is very acute, attended with more
or less fever, and sometimes delirium. Swelling and redness is often
perceived externally, attended with throbbing ; suppuration occasionally
takes place, when a copious discharge of matter follows. This dis-
charge will sometimes continue for years.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, and purging is generally resorted to, if the pain
be severe.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

If the pain be very severe,

Take hops, (humulus Lupulus.) a suitable quantity.
Vinegar and water, equal parts.

Simmer the above till the strength is extracted; inclose them in lin-
nen or flannel, and apply warm over the ear. Repeat the same until
the pain subsides.

Let the feet be bathed in warm water.

Should the above means not remove the pain,

Take oil of sassafras, (oleum lauri sassafras,) half an ounce.
Olive or sweet oil, (oleum oliv arum,) one ounce.
Camphor, (gummi camphora,) one dram. Mix.

Warm this liniment, and pour a small quantity on a pledget of cot-
ton, and bind over the ear. Provided the pain still continues, drop it
in the ear. A cathartic may be given, and warm infusions given to
promote a gentle perspiration.

Laudanum,

Juice of roasted onions, equal parts.


376 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class tt.

This treatment will almost invariably remove the pain and inflam-
mation of the ear. This complaint more generally attacks children,
but adults are subject to it. It sometimes becomes somewhat chronic in
its character, and is very protracted. When this is the case, if the means
plaster behind the ear, and to the bottom of the feet, particularly at
night.

PREVENTION.

Great care is necessary in screening the head from any cold or current
of air. The head should be covered, particularly at night, and a pled-
get of cotton or wool applied in the ear.


CHAPTER III.

MUMPS, (Cynanche Parotidea.)

DESCRIPTION.

Mumps is a swelling of the glands about the throat, and often occurs
as an epidemic. Children of both sexes are more liable to it than adults,
It more generally occurs in the spring, than at other periods.

CAUSES.

Contagion.

SYMPTOMS.

One or both of the parotid glands of the neck, become large, hard,
and often painful, and sometimes become so large as to impede res-
piration, and cause a difficulty of deglutition, or swallowing. The
swelling is often translated to the testicle and becomes dangerous, in-
creasing for three or four days, then subsides, and wholly disappears.
There is usually some fever attending the complaint; other parts are
sometimes affected from sympathy. Suppuration rarely, but sometimes
takes place. The contents of the tumour being discharged into the la-
rynx, and producing suffocation; but this is rarely the case, as the dis-
ease usually puts on a mild aspect. The great danger arises from the
patient's taking cold.

COMMON TREATMENT.

In some cases mercurial ointment is recommended, LHstcrs and
bleeding.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The patient should be directed to keep warm in bed, and perspira-
tion promoted, by drinking freely of diluting liquors, such as an infusion
of balm tea. If there is costiveness, give a gentle purgative, and


Order I V -j Qi'tnsy, or Inflammatory Sore Throat* 3/7

bathe the feet. Cover the swelling with a pledget of cotton, and should
it be very painful or troublesome, it may be bathed with the following
liniment:

Castile soap, scraped, one dram.

Sassafras oil, (ol. sassafras.) half an ounce.

Sweet oil, (ol.oliv,) one ounce.

Camphor, (gum camph.) three drams. Mix, and apply warm three times a
day.
In case of a recession, (by which this complaint is thrown to the testicle
or other parts,) a free perspiration must be promoted by giving one tea-
spoonful of the red or sweating drops every hour, diluted with tea and
sweetened. Should suppuration take place, a poultice must be applied,
made by adding Indian-meal to beer until it is formed into the consis-
tence of a poultice. The above treatment has invariably been found
successful.


CHAPTER IV.

QUINSY OR INFLAMMATORY SORE THROAT,

(Cynancht Tonsillaris.)

DESCRIPTION.
When the tonsils, commonly called the almonds of the ear, or the
mucus membrane lining the throat, become inflamed, it is termed quin-
sy, or inflammatory sore throat. It generally affects the young and
sanguine, and it occurs more especially in the spring and autumn.

CAUSES.

The most common causes of this disease are a sudden cooling of the
body, and especially of the throat, in consequence of drinking cold wa-
ter when the system is in a state of perspiration; wet clothes; wet feet;
damp beds; moist air; drunkenness; acrid or irritating food, &c.

An inflammation of the throat is often occasioned by omitting some
part of the covering usually worn about the neck. Singing, speaking
loud and long, or whatever strains the throat, may also cause an in-
flammation of that organ. It may also proceed from pins, bones, or
other sharp substances sticking in the throat; by sitting near an open
window, or in a room newly plastered or white- washed. This disease
is sometimes epidemic and infectious.

SYMPTOMS.

An inflammatory sore throat discovers itself by a difficulty of swal-
lowing and breathing, accompanied by a redness and tumour in one or
both tonsils; dryness of the throat; foulness of the tongue ; lancinating
pains in the parts affected; hoarseness of the voice; a frequent but dif-
ficult excretion of mucus, and some small decree of fever. As the dis-
ease advances, thediflicultvof swallowing and breath ins: becomes jrrcal-

VoJ. 1.


378 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

«r; the speech is very indistinct; the dryness of the throat and the
thirst increase ; the tongue swells and is epcrusted with a dark fur, and
the pulse is full, hard, and frequent, beating from 100 to 140 in a min-
ute. In a few cases, small white sloughy spots are to be observed on
the tonsils, and in very violent ones there is complete deafness. When
the symptoms are considerable, the whole face partakes of it, the eyes
are inflamed, and the cheeks florid and swelled ; respiration is perform-
ed with difficulty, and the patient is obliged to be supported in nearly
an erect posture to prevent suffocation. Even delirium and lethargy
supervene. The inflammation sometimes proceeds to such a height, as
to produce a stop to respiration. Sometimes both tonsils are very much
inflamed and swelled, so that it becomes exceedingly difficult to give
any kind of nourishment. It sometimes terminates in suppuration, and
in some cases subsides without it; terminating by what is called resolu-
tion. When suppuration takes place, the parts affected become more
pale, and less painful; a sense of pulsation is felt, and very slight chills.
The matter is often discharged into the oesophagus or throat, and passes
into the stomach, when immediate relief follows.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, mercury, and jalap; occasionally neutral salts and anti-
mony. This constitutes the principal treatment in this as well as most
other diseases. For authority, see Eberle's and Dewees' late system of
practice, and other standard works.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Curt. — The first object in the treatment of this dis-
ease, is to remove urgent symptoms; the next to subdue or moderate
the inflammation. It is truly astonishing that any person, professing a
knowledge of the science of medicine, should make use of the common
practice to cure this complaint, especially when it is well known that this
very treatment occasioned the death of General Washington, as well
as thousands of others.

In the incipient stage of quinsy, it is necessary to administer

An Emetic.

None answers better than that which we use in complaints generally.
This often affords immediate relief, and removes the disease in a very
short time. Should the attack, however, be very severe, and the dis-
ease continue, the patient will steam the throat with the following pre-
paration :

Take Wormwood, ( Absyntheum Vulgare.)
Hops, (Humulus Lupulus.)
Catnip. Equal parts.

Make a strong decoction by boiling one or two hours in equal parts of
rain water and vinegar. Put these into a large pitcher, or any conve-
nient vessel, over which place a funnel; then let the patient inhale the
steam arising from this for fifteen or twenty minutes each time, to be re-
peated every two hours until the urgent symptoms are removed. The


Order IV.] Quinsy, or Inflammatory Sort Throat. 379

herbs to be bound on the neck. This generally affords immediate relief,
by relaxing the tension of the parts inflamed. The breathing soon be-
comes easy, and the pain and swallowing much less. The above arti-
cles may be put into a common tea-pot, and the steam inhaled from the
spout.

The following liniment, or oil, must now be applied to the throat:

Take Sassafras Oil, (Oleum Lavri Sassafras.)

Olive Oil, (Oleum Olivarum.)

Spirits of Hartshorn, (Aqua Ammonce.) Of each half an ouuce,
Add two drams of Gum Camphor, (Gummi Camphora.) Mix.

Warm this preparation, and bathe the throat as long as the patient can
bear; after which put a piece of flannel around it. This must be re-
peated occasionally through the day.

It will be necessary also to gargle the throat with the following pre-
parations :

Take Sage (Saliva Officinalis.)
Hyssop, (Hysophus do.)

Make a strong decoction ; to every pint add half an ounce of borax.
Let the throat be frequently gargled with it.

When the acute inflammatory symptoms have subsided, a gargle more

Take Sumach Berries.

Golden Seal ; one half the quantity of the Berries.

Make a strong decoction ; to which add a small quantity of pulverized
alum. In the same proportion as the preceding gargle, to be used fre-
quently through the day.

A gargle made of weak ley has been found remarkably efficacious
where other means have proved useless, particularly where persons
have been subject to the quinsy, and when it assumes a chronic char-
acter.

Purgatives must be given repeatedly, as they have a great ten-
dency to allay the febrile excitement : the feet must be bathed in warm
rain water, to which has been added ashes or a quantity of ley, and
perspiration promoted by the vapour bath or warm drinks, &c. If there
is preat swelling of the throat apply a poultice made of slippery elm bark
and ley.

Should the disease increase, and exhibit symptoms of suppuration,
so as to threaten suffocation, the tongue must be pressed down with the
finger or handle of a spoon, and the swelling punctured with a common
lancet which has been nearly covered with two pieces of pine properly
secured, so that a small portion of the instrument is left exposed. This
precaution is necessary to prevent wounding any important blood ves-
sels in or near the tonsils. This operation is seldom cr never necessary
if the disease has been properly treated.

REGIMEN.

All food and drinks of a stimulating nature, must be avoided. Warm
diluent drinks. Notliinsr cold must be ?iven.


Inflammatory Diseases, [Class 1 1,

PREVENTION.

Great care must be taken to prevent a check of perspiration. The
throat should never be uncovered or exposed to the cold air. A piece of
flannel should be worn about the neck. The practice of bathing the
feet in weak ley water should by no means be neglected. If persons
would be careful to keep themselves warm, wear flannel, especially
about the throat, use a spare diet, the disease would seldom become
very aggravated. It is particularly necessary to guard against drinking
cold water when the body has been heated.

The celebrated Col. Aaron Burr of this city, a great enemy to the
common practice, had been subject to frequent attacks of the quinsy,
for most of his life, from the age of sixteen years and upwards. He had
twice tried the orthodox physician without benefit. He submitted to a
similar course of treatment, and it effected a cure.


CHAPTER V.
PUTRID SORE THROAT, (Cynanche Maligna.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease generally affects the glands of the throat, while the com-
mon quinsy affects the mucous membrane. In the putrid sore throat,
there are also spects and ulcers in the fauces, together with great debil-
ity of the system. In the inflammatory sore throat, there is always great
difficulty of swallowing, whereas in the other these symptoms are not
present.

CAUSES.

The cause of this disease is specific contagion ; it is often communica
ted by infection ; when it is not, it most generally arises from cold, in
habits predisposed to the disease. Whatever tends to produce putrid
or malignant fevers, may occasion the putrid ulcerous sore throat ; as
neglect of cleanliness, unwholesome air, damaged provisions, &c.

SYMPTOMS.

Some consider this disease the same as scarlatina maligna, but al-
though very similar, there appears in some respect a marked difference.
The symptoms of this complaint are chills, fever, stiffness of the neck,
soreness and inflammation of the throat. Ash coloured spots appear
upon the inflamed parts which produce deep ulcerations. The breath-
ing and speaking are attended with a peculiar noise and hoarseness. It
is ushered in with sickness, vomiting, looseness, and great anxiety. The
pulse in general small, quick and fluttering. The countenance is often
full and bloated, sometimes pale and sunk, and the breath is intolerably
offensive. The ulcers become livid or black, and sometimes gancrcne


Order VI.] Croup. :{sl

to a considerable degree takes place. Putrid symptoms now appear,
under which the patient sometimes sinks in a few days. At the close
of the disease, haemorrhages from the mouth, nose, and other parts take
place.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Mercury, bleeding, blistering, antimony and salts.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indication of Cure. — The indication of cure will be to counteract a
putrid tendency and to keep up the strength of the patient. Bleeding

In the first stage of the disease, a mild emetic may be administered,
after which mild cathartics may occasionally be given. If there is great
soreness and inflammation of the throat, let the patient inhale, the
steam of the decoction mentioned in the treatment of the common quin-
sy. The liniment there mentioned may also be applied to the throat.

When putrid ulcers appear in the throat, let it be gargled with a
mixture of yeast and milk. It will be necessary also to administer anti-
septic medicines; a wine glass of good yeast may be taken through the
day. If the pulse is very weak, and the patient sinks, the system
must be supported by stimulating medicines and liquids. Porter and
wine may occasionally be given.

Dr. Thomas speaks in the highest terms of the efficacy of the follow-
ing formula, which from the component parts is unquestionably very
valuable.

Two table spoonsful of Cayenne Pepper.
Salt, a teaspoonful, in
Half a pint of boiling water, and add
The same quantity of warm Vinegar.

Let it stand for about an hour, and strain the liquor through a fine
cloth. Dose two table spoonsful every half hour. A plaster may be
applied to the throat made by melting equal parts of common Brown
Soap and Rosin to be spread on a thin leather or linen.


CHAPTER VI.

CROUP. (Cynanche Trachealis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is an acute inflammation of the mucous membrane of the trachea,
or wind-pipe, characterized by fever, cough and hoarseness, difficulty
of breathing, with a considerable degree of spasmodic affection.

CAUSES.

The usual causes of croup, are cold, exposure to a damp atmosphere,


382 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

and whatever checks perspiration. It prevails chiefly in winter and
spring.

SYMPTOMS.

The symptoms of this complaint are difficulty of breathing, and a pe-
culiar whistling noise. It is attended with a couch, which generally in-
creases until it becomes very troublesome. It occurs in paroxysms,
which agitate the whole frame, great thirst, restlessness, and expecto-
ration of mucus, which is raised with a great deal of difficulty. The
head is thrown back in great agony, as if attempting to escape suffoca-
tion. The cough is generally dry; but if any thing is spit up, it has
either a purulent appearance, or seems to consist of films resembling
portions of a membrane. Where great nausea and frequent retchings
prevail, coagulated matter of the same nature is brought up. There is
an uneasy sense of heat over the whole body, a continual inclination to
change from place to place, and frequency of the pulse. Very often
the symptoms suffer considerable, and sudden remissions and exacerba-
tions take place.

In an advanced stage of the disease, respiration becomes more stri-
dulus, and is performed with still greater difficulty and some degree of
spasmodic affection being repeated at longer periods, and with greater
exertions, until at last it ceases entirely.

The disease has in a few instances terminated fatally within twenty-
four hours ; but more generally,, when it proves fatal, it runs on to the
fourth or fifth day. In this disease great quantities of lymph are poured
out into the trachea or wind-pipe, and bronchial tubes, larynx, &c.
which produce the suffocation, and many other symptoms attending it.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding^blistering, mercury, and antimony. It is no cause of won-
der that so many die of this disease, under such pernicious treatment.
The poor little victims of this complaint, are tortured by excoriating;
blisters, bleeding from the arm, with copious portions of mercury ! !

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — Prompt means should be taken to lessen in-
creased action of the mucous membrane of the trachea, larynx, and
bronchia?. To accomplish these means, it will be necessary to bathe
the feet in weak ley. Give the following tincture:

Tincture of Eye Bright, or Emetic Plant, (Lobelia Inflata.)

Do. of Blood Root, (Sanguinaria Lonadtnsis.) Equal parts. Mix.

To a child of one year old, give a common sized teaspoonful every half
hour until gentle vomiting takes place. This acts with peculiar force
upon the trachea, separating or removing the effusion of lymph collected
there, by which the breathing becomes easy, and all the symptoms more
favorable. This must be repeated occasionally, or as often as there are
any returns of the severe symptoms or paroxysms.

A Purgative may be given a short time after the operation of the
emetic, which may bo repeated every day, until the symptoms abate.


Order VI.J Croup, 383

Expectorants. — Should there be great difficulty of expectoration, the
following syrup may be given :

Take Beneca Root, (Polygela Seneka.)
Squills. Of each half a pound.
Water, eight pounds.
Boil it slowly till the water is half consumed.
Strain off the liquor and add sU-ained Honey, four pounds.
Then boil to six pounds, or the consistence of a syrup.
To every pound of this syrup, add one quarter of a pound of Tincture of Lobelia/

An ordinary sized teaspoonful may be given to a child one year old,
as often as a paroxysm of coughing occurs, particularly if the mucus is
discharged with difficulty. This acts as an expectorant, diaphoretic,
and laxative.

If the cough proves very troublesome, give occasionally a teaspoon- 1
ful of the syrup of garlic. Should not this preparation diminish it in a
reasonable time, administer the Pulmonary Balsam, according to the di-
rections given. If there is much febrile excitement, let the surface be
occasionally bathed, and mustard plasters applied to the feet and be-
tween the shoulders.

Case 1. — A child of Mr. , aged about nine months, was severe-
ly attacked with the croup. The symptoms were fever, cough, wheez-
ing* and difficulty of respiration, great distress and restlessness, spas-
modic affection. All the ordinary means had been used without effect.
The treatment recommended above was pursued, which soon arrested
all the symptoms, and in a few flays the child was well.

Case 2. — I was called to a child aged about two years, residing in
Essex-street, which was apparently dying with the croup. There was
such an accumulation of mucus in the trachea and bronchia?, that breath-
ing was almost entirely stopped, with all the most violent symptoms of
croup. The treatment of the attending physicians had been of no ser-
vice; indeed, it seemed past recovery. I first gave a dose of the tinc-
ture of lobelia, which, in fifteen or twenty minutes, produced nausea
and gentle vomiting. A large quantity of tough, viscid mucus was dis-
charged, which mitigated the symptoms. The breathing became ea->
sier, the spasms and cough subsided, and the child soon recovered.
The relief afforded in.this case, was a subject of astonishment to every
one acquainted with the case. The treatment, in other respects, was
the same as mentioned above. Hundreds of other cases of a similar
nature might be mentioned.


384 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.


CHAPTER VII.

1 N F L A M M A T 1 N F THE PHARYNX, f Cynancht Pliaryngea.)

DESCRIPTION.

This differs from quinsy only in the seat of the inflammation. It is
of the same nature, is produced by the same causes, and requires a
similar treatment.


CHAPTER VIII.
INFLAMMATION OF THE LARYNX, ( Cynancht Laryngea.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is a disease of the mucous membrane investing the epiglottis
and margin of the glottis serumis effused under it. It is of a local na-
ture, very acute, and of short duration. It is very similar to the croup,
and has often been confounded with it.

CAUSES.

The usual causes are exposure to cold, which excites an inflammation
of the membrane investing the larynx.

SYMPTOMS.

It comes on with chilliness, succeeded by heat and fever, which are
soon followed with a hoarseness and indistinctness of voice, laborious
respiration and pain, or, as it were, a stricture in the throat threatening
suffocation ; the pulse is quick and feeble ; the eyes are suffused with
blood, and somewhat protruding; the countenance has a livid or swol-
len appearance; the tongue is furred; the tonsils, uvula, and pharynx,
presenting a dark red appearance on inspection, and any attempt to
swallow is succeeded by excruciating pain and difficulty. If the symp-
toms are not properly attended to, and subdued by an immediate adop-
tion of active and proper means, the patient is destroyed by suffocation.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, and antimony.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — Subdue the local inflammation as quick as pos-
sible. If the subject be an adult, let him inhale the steam of the de-
coction recommended under the head of quinsy. Administer an emetic ;
(tincture of lobelia) afterwards give a purgative, and in other respects,
pursue the same treatment as in quinsy.


Order IX.] Inflammation of the Bronchia. 385


CHAPTER VII.

INFLAMMATION OF THE BRONCHIAL TUBES, (Bronchtis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is an inflammation of the mucous membrane of the bronchia
or bronchial tubes. It is either chronic or acute. The acute stage very
much resembles pneumonia, or inflammation of the lungs. As this dis-
ease is sometimes difficult to discriminate, we shall give a short de-
scription of the structure of the parts: — From tlie larynx the canal Li tins
to take the name of trachea, and extends from thence as far down as the
fourth or fifth vertebra? of the back, where it divides into two branches,
which are the right and left bronchial tubes. Each of these broncl ia
ramifies through the substance of that lobe of the lungs, to which it is
distributed by an infinite number of branches, which are formed of car-
tilages separated from each other like those of the trachea, by an inter-
vening membranous and ligamentary substance. Eactl of these cartilages
is of an annular figure ; and as they become gradually less and less in
their diameter, the lower ones are in some measure received into those
above them, when the lungs, after being inflated, gradually collapse by
the air being pushed out from them in expiration. As the branches of
the bronchia become more minute, their cartilages become more and
more annular and membranous, till at length they become perfectly
membranous, and ramify through the lungs.

CAUSES.

The same as inflammation of the lungs.

SYMPTOMS.

It is frequent in cold and variable climates. In its simplest forms it
constitutes those protracted, catarrhal affections, which are so common
during winter in old persons, especially in those who are predisposed to
colds and coughs. The acute bronchitis generally commences, like a
common cold or catarrh, with lassitude, chillings, slight cough, oppres-
sion, and tightness of the chest, with some fever. As the disease in-
creases, these symptoms increase, great anxiety of the countenance,
respiration more laborious, attended with a wheezing or ratling sound,
as if the air were forced through a narrow aperture, clogged with a
viscid fluid. It is generally attended with hoarseness, respiration is
more difficult in the recumbent than in the erect position. At first the
cough is dry, but afterwards a copious secretion of viscid, transparent
mucus, resembling the white of eggs, soon occurs, and with it consider-
able abatement of the violence of the cough ensues. But when the in-
flammation is about terminating, without suppuration, the malter ex-

Voh I. 40


386 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II

perforated loses its transparency, and becomes mixed with yellowish,
white or greenish masses, which are scanty at first, but continue to in-
crease more and more, until at last they compose the whole of the
expectoration. A severe pain in the forehead, which is aggravated by
coughing. When ihe secretion of mucus into the bronchia is very
copious, and respiration is much obstructed, considerable drowsiness
occurs. The tongue is white, and covered with transparent mucus; the
skin is dry, and its temperature generally, but very little above the
natural standard. The hlood is commonly buffy, and sometimes
cupped. Infants are especially liable to this affection. In them the
disease manifests itself by a short, quick, oppressed, and wheezing
respiration; uneasiness by being placed in the recumbent position;
slight cough, somewhat hoarse at first, but humid and rattling as the dis-
ease advances ; a uniformly pale and anxious countenance ; pulse
frequent and tense ; skin above the natural temperature on the trunk,
but the hands and feet are cool, or about the regular temperature.
The respiration varies greatly ; occasionally it becomes easy and free,
and then suddenly becomes alarmingly oppressed, threatening instant
suffocation. The progress of the disease is usually rapid. If it is not
arrested, the breathing becomes more and more oppressed ; " the child
falls into a comatose state, a slightly livid tinge makes its appearance on
the lips, from which the pallid cheeks are not entirely free. But even
at this late period, gleams of hope sometimes burst upon us. For a
short time the difficulty of respiration may seem to subside, and the
child to be better. But these hopes are seldom realized ; for even the
next exacerbation may terminate in suffocation." The disease some-
times terminates fatally as early as the third day, though more com-
monly its course is protracted to the fifth or sixth day. Acute bronchitis
is always attended with great debility. In some instances it is compli-
cated with a disease of the liver. Cases of this kind, besides these
symptoms, are attended with pain, tenderness, and fulness of the right
side, oppression, nausea, bitler taste, vertigo, head-ache, with dark
coloured and fetid discharges from the bowels.

This complaint is very similar to the croup or hives, and it is often very
difficult to discriminate between them.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, blistering, antimony, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

In the acute bronchitis, Emetics and Sudorifics are the only anchors
of hope. The following mixture may be given : —

1. Tincture of Emetic Plant, (Lobelia Inflata.)

2. Tincture of Blood-Root, (Sanguinaria Canadensis.)

Equal parss. Mix.

For an infant, or a child of one year old, give an ordinary sized tea-
spoon full every half hour, till vomiting is produced. This may be
repeated as often as there is an accummulation of mucus in the bronchiaJ


Order IX.] Inflammation of the Bronchia. 367

vessels, with difficulty of expectoration, respiration, &c. Twenty-five
drops of the Sweating, or Sudorific Drops, may afterwards be given
in tea of any kind, every hour, until a moisture or perspiration is pro-
duced. The surface must be frequently bathed with warm water, to
which ley has been added. The feet must also be frequently bathed,
and Sinapisms applied.

Purgatives to be administered, to keep the bowels gently open. —
To relieve the cough, give a strong decoction of Hoar hound, sweetened
with honey.

CHRONIC INFLAMMATION OF THE BRONCHIA.

Tins is often the result of acute bronchitis. It is characterised by a
troublesome cough, attended with a copious expectoration of viscid,
purulent, or a whitish frothy matter; uneasy and somewhat oppressed
respiration, accompanied at times with wheezing; more or less weight
and uneasiness at the pit of the stomach ; loss of appetite; a slightly
furred tongue ; irregular action of the bowels ; a quick and irritated
pulse, particularly towards evening; and deep red and scanty urine.
The coughing usually occurs in fits of considerable violence, being
almost always most severe in the morning on rising from bed, or on
passing from warm to a cold air. Sudden atmospheric vicissitudes,
also, seldom fail to increase the violence and frequency of the spells of
coughing; and the same effect is usually produced by the inhalation of
various vapours, fine dust, and occasionally by the act of swallowing
food. Sometimes slight transient pains are felt in the chest ; but more
frequently no painful sensations whatever are experienced, except im-
mediately after a fit of coughing, when a general aching pain is left for
a few moments in the breast.

DIAGNOSIS.

The following diagnostic circumstances between chronic bronchitis,
in the early period of its course, and tubercular phthisis or consumption,
will in general enable us to distinguish these two affections from each
other. In chronic bronchitis, the face is generally pallid, and the lips of
a bluish hue. In tubercular consumption the lips are red, and the
checks more constantly flushed. " In the beginning of chronic inflam-
mation of the bronchia, the hands and feet are often cold, and the tem-
perature of the surface altogether more variable than in tubercular con-
sumption." More or less inflammation and soreness usually occurs in
the upper portion of the pharynx, during the early period of chronic
bronchitis, which is very rarely the case in tubercular phthisis. In the
former affection the expectoration is free almost from the commence-
ment, and continues to be blended with a large portion of trarsparent
viscid mucous to the end of the disease. In tubercular consumption,
on the other hand, the cough is for a long time short and dry.

DISSECTION.

The bronchial cells are usually found engorged with purulent matter
mixed with a bloody serous fluid, and a portion of frothy mucus


388 Inflammatory Diseases. [CJaa If.

CAUSES.

Chronic inflammation of the mucous membrane of the bronchia may
occur as the sequel of acute bronchitis. It most commonly, however,
arises from neglected catarrh. It is the consequence sometimes of
measles, of hepatic diseases, and of protracted disorders primarily
located in the digestive organs. It may proceed directly from the
vicissitudes of heat and cold, and from the inhalation of irritating
vapours or particles of matter floating in the atmosphere. It occasion-
ally occurs in consequence of hooping cough, particularly from taking
cold while under the influence of this affection.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, blistering, and calomel.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

In the chronic form of this complaint, emetics may likewise be given
as directed in the acute species, but repeated only at longer intervals.
They unload the viscid secretions with which the bronchial cells be-
come gorged. The same decoction may likewise be given as recom-
mended undei that head.

From the sympathetic relation which exists between the skin and lin-
in< membrane of the bronchial tubes, it is necessary to keep up a regu-
lai action of the cutaneous vessels, for in the proportion as we increase
the activity of these emunctories, so we lessen the influx of fluids to the
lungs. Flannel and proper clothing should be worn to prevent the effects
of cold and sudden atmospheric changes. When the cough is very trou-
blesome two teaspoons full of the syrup of white poppy may be given to
allay irritation. Groat attention must be paid to the extremities that an
equal circulation may be produced, by which the disease will be mitiga-
ted. A stimulating, or strengthening plaster may be worn upon the chest.


CHAPTER X.

HOOPING COUGH, (Pertussis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is a disease known by a convulsive, strangulating cough, with
hooping, returning by fits that are usually terminated by vomiting. Chil-
dren are most commonly the subjects of this disease, and it seems to
depend on a specific contagion, which affects them but once in their life.
The disease being once produced, the fits of coughing are often re-
peated without any evident causes ; but, in many cases, the contagion
may be considered as only giving the predisposition, and the frequency
of the fits may depend upon various exciting causes, such as violent
exercise, a full meal, the having taken food of difficult digestion, and
irritation of the lungs by dust, smoke, or disagreeable odours. Emo-
tions of the mind may likewise prove an exciting cause.


Order X.] Hooping Cough. 3&9

CAUSES.

It is evidently produced by contagion. Its proximate or immediate
eause seems to be a viscid matter or phlegm lodged about the bronchia,
trachea, and fauces, which sticks so close as to be expectorated with
the greatest difficulty. Some have supposed it to be a morbid irritabil-
ity of the stomach, with increased action of its mucous glands ; but
the affection of the stomach which takes place in the disease, is clearly
only of a secondary nature, so that this opinion must be erroneous.

SYMPTOMS.

The hooping-cough usually comes on with a difficulty of breathing,
some degree of thirst, a quick pulse, and other slight febrile symptoms,
which are succeeded by a hoarseness, cough, and difficulty of expecto-
ration. These symptoms continue perhaps for a fortnight or more, at
the end of which time the disease puts on its peculiar and characteristic
form, and is now evident, as the cough becomes convulsive, and is at-
tended with a sound, which has been called a hoop.

When the sonorous inspiration has happened, the coughing is again
renewed, and continues in the same manner as before, till either a quan-
tity of mucus is thrown up from the lungs, or the contents of the stomach
are evacuated by vomiting. The fit is then terminated, and the patient
remains free from any other for some time, and shortly afterward re-
turns to the amusements he was employed in before the fit, expresses a
desire for food, and when it is given to him, takes it greedily. In those
cases, however, where the attack has been severe, he often seems much
fatigued, makes quick inspirations, and falls into a faint.

On the first coming on of the disease, there is little or no expectoration;
or if any, it consists only of thin mucus ; and as long as this is the case,
the fits of coughing are frequent, and of considerable duration ; but on
the expectoration becoming free and copious, the fits of coughing are
less frequent, as well as of shorter duration.

By the violence of coughing, the free transmission of blood through
the lungs is somewhat interrupted, as likewise the free return of the blood
from the head, which produces that turgescence and suffusion of the face
which commonly attend the attack, and in some instances brings on a
haemorrhage either from the nose 01 ears.

The disease having arrived at its height, usually continues for some
weeks longer, and at length goes off gradually. In some cases it is, how-
ever, protracted for several months, or even a year, and sometimes ter-
minates in other complaints.

PROGNOSIS.

Although the hooping-cough often proves tedious, and is liable to re-
turn with violence on any fresh exposure to cold, when not entirely re-
moved, it nevertheless is seldom fatal, except to very young children
who are always likely to suffer more from it than those of a more ad-
vanced age. The danger seems indeed always to be in proportion to
the youth of the person, and the degree of fever, and difficulty of
breathing, which accompany the disease, as likewise the state of debili-
ty which prevails.


S9U Inflammatory Diseases. [Clare It.

It has been known in some instances to terminate in apoplexy and
suffocation. If the fits are put an end to by vomiting, it may be re-
garded as a favourable symptom, as may likewise the taking place of
a moderate and free expectoration, or the ensuing of a slight haemorr-
hage from the nose or ears.

DISSECTION.

Directions of those who die of the hooping-cough, usually show the
consequence of the organs of respiration being affected, and particular-
ly those parts which are the seat of catarrh. When the disease has been
long protracted, it is apt to degenerate into pulmonary consumption,
asthma, or visceral obstructions, in which last case the glands of the
mesentery are found in a hard and enlarged state.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Squills, antimony, bleeding, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Emetics. — It is generally reckoned a favourable symptom when a fit
of coughing makes the patient vomit. This cleanses the stomach, and
greatly relieves the cough. It will therefore be proper to promote this
discharge, by giving a Lobelia Emetic.

Emetics not only cleanse the stomach, which in this disease is gene-
rally loaded with viscid phlegm, but they likewise promote perspira-
tion and the other secretions, and ought therefore to be repeated according
to the obstinacy of the disease. They should not however be strong;
gentle vomits frequently repeated are both less dangerous and more be-
neficial than strong ones.

For this purpose a teaspoonfull of the Tincture of Lobelia, may be
given to a child a year old, in any kind of tea sweetened, every half
hour till it operates as a gentle emetic. It may be repeated when-
ever a fit of coughing occurs, and there is a sense of suffocation, or if
there is great debility, or the attack is not very severe, a sufficient quan-
tity may be given to loosen the mucus or phlegm, and to cause the
child to breathe freely.

The following syrup may be given :

Elecampane root and honey, 4 oz. of the root to half a pint of honey.

Bake it in a well glazed earthen pot in an oven heated. If the root
be green it needs no water, if dry add half a pint of water. A tea
spoonful of the syrup to be given occasionally, or three times a day.

Opiates are sometimes necessary to allay the violence of the cough.
For this purpose, a little of the syrup of poppies, according to the age
of the patient, may be taken in a cup of hyssop or pennyroyal tea, and
repeated occasionally.

Laxatives. — The bowels must be kept freely open by gentle laxatives.
A good medicine for this purpose, is the cold pressed Castor Oil, mixed
with a little milk sweetened. A tea spoonful or two may be given to a
child one year old two or three times a day, as there is occasion.
For those that are older,the dose must be increased,and repeated till it ha,s


Order XI.] Influenza. 391

the desired effect. Those who cannot be in this manner induced to
take the castor oil, may have it mixed with a little syrup or currant jelly
to disguise the taste. Most children are fond of syrups and jellies, and
seldom refuse a disagreeable medicine when miNed with them.

The Feet must be bathed in warm ley water every night, and draughts
or sinapisms applied.

REGIMEN.

Whatever injures the digestion, obstructs the perspiration, or relaxes
the solids, disposes to this disease; consequently its cure must depend
upon cleansing and strengthening the stomach, bracing the solids, and at
the same time promoting perspiration, and the difierent secretions.

The diet must be light and of easy digestion ; for children, good bread
made into pap or pudding, chicken-broth, with other light spoon-meats,
are proper ; but those who are farther advanced may be allowed gruel,
and if the fever be not high, a little boiled chicken. The drink may be
hyssop, or pennyroyal tea, sweetened with honey or sugar-candy, small
wine-whey, or, if the patient be weak, he may sometimes be allowed a
little wine.

One of the most effectual remedies in the hooping-cough is change of
air. This often removes the malady, ev on when the change seems to be
from a purer to a less wholesome air. This may in some measure de-
pend on the patient's being removed from the place where the infection
prevails. Most of the diseases of children are infectious; nor is it at
all uncommon to find the complaint prevailing in one town or village,
when another at a very small distance is quite free from it. The feet
should be frequently bathed in lukewarm water, and a sweating or
strengthening plaster kept sconstantly between the shoulders.


CHAPTER XL

CATARRH OR INFLUENZA, (Tussis Epidemicus.)


DESCRIPTION.


This is an epidemical disease which occasionally prevails, and some-
times affects nine-tenths of the inhabitants of Europe and America. —
It is an increased secretion of mucus from the membranes of the nose,
fauces and bronchia with fever, and attended with sneezing, cough, thirst,
lassitude and want of appetite.

CAUSES.

A species of catarrh, to which the name of Influenza has been applied,
sometimes makes its appearance ; and considering the manner in which
the epidemic infection of this disease occasionally spreads, even over


392 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

whole countries, in the space of a very short time, it is evident that it is
conveyed by a current of the atmosphere, and deiives its origin from
some casual source capable of impregnating the air which we breathe
with the specific po;son of the malady.

Catarrh and Influenza are not accompanied with danger, when ap-
pearing under a mild form, and properly attended to at an early period;
but when connected with highly inflammatory symptoms, and these are
not counteracted at the commencement by appropriate means, or there
is a predisposition in the constitution to consumption, or a tendency to
asthma, unfavourable consequences may result therefrom.

SYMPTOMS.

It commences by sneezing, coughing, hawking, chills succeded by
heat, hoarseness, soreness and rawness of the throat, lungs and stomach.
There is an expectoration of mucus, pain of the head, chest, back, shoul-
ders, and forehead. The eyes are red, and there is great weakness and
debility. The cough is often attended with great difficulty of expecto-
ration.

As before intimated it seldom proves fatal, but in some epidemics the
attack has been so universal as to occasion great mortality. Towards
the close of the year eighteen hundred and thirty-one, and commence-
ment of eighteen hundred and thirty-two, it prevailed throughout the
United States, and proved very mortal upon those principally, who
were aged, or were subject to some other complaint. It swept off many
of our most distinguished inhabitants.

TREATMENT.

In general the vapour bath alone, will soon remove it. It may be
repeated every other day ; at the same time the feet must be bathed ; and
warm teas drank, made of Boneset or Hoarhound, until perspiration is
promoted.

A teaspoonful of the tincture of Lobelia, may be taken every morn-
ing ; and if the cough prove troublesome, a tea spoonful of the syrup of
IVhite Poppy, may be given. A purgative also may be occasionally
taken.

REGIMEN.

The diet should be light, and taken in moderate quantities; liquids are
preferable. This treatment will be found very effectual in the catarrh
and influenza.


Order in.] Colds and Coughs. 393


CHAPTER XII.
COLDS AND COUGHS, (Tussit.)

DESCRIPTION.

The inhabitants of every climate are liable to take cold when tin-
seasons are variable, and there are sudden and considerable changes iu
the surrounding atmosphere. Those are chiefly the subjects of it who
are of a delicate constitution; whose employments expose them to quick
transitions from Great boat to a verj reduced temperature, and who have
a morbid susceptibility to the impression of cold, and are disposed to
coughs. v

Mosl persons affect to despise colds, and as long as they can crawl
about, sc;irn to be confnv ! lr, what they call a common cold. Hence it
is that colds dcsir \ such. numbers of mankind. Like an enemy de^
they gather strength from delay, till at length they become invincible.

CAUSES.

The application of cold to the body, giving a check to perspiration,
is the geueral cause of these complaints.

SYMPTOMS.

A cold is usually accompanied with a weight and pain in the head,
oppression at the chest, and some difficulty of breathing, a sense of ful-
ness and stopping of the nose, watery inflamed eyes, soreness of the
throat, cough, pains about the chest, cold shiverings succeeded by tran-
sient flushes of heat, rheumatic pains in the neck and other parts of tho
body, in increased see rction o<" mucous from the nose, throat, and lungs,
^sequence pi a slight inflai imatiqn of the mucous membrane of these
parts, and in many instances with some decree of fever.

Common Cough. — A cough is generally the effect of a cold, which has
either been imp perly treated, or entirely neglected. When it proves
obstinate, there is always ason to fear the consequences, as this shows a
weak state of the lungs, and is often die forerunner of consumption.

TREATMENT.

1. Bathe the feel in blood warm water.

2. 1 I th as directed under that head.

3. Give or take an infusion, or tea of common koarhound and bone
set, sweetened with honey.

4. ■ se of physic

5. If the cough is troublesome, particularly at night, give a tea-spoon-
fid of paregoric, or syrup of poppies.

Vol. I. 50


394 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

Should the cough return after using the above means, an emetic may
be taken, and afterwards the following mixture :

Take Oil of Anise, half a drachm,

Oil of Almonds, half a drachm,
Balsam of Fir, half a drachm,
Tincture balsam of Polu, half a drachm,
Wine, half an ounce. Mix.

Twenty drops 3 or 4 times a day to be given in a little mucilage or
tea. This treatment will be found very effectual for colds or coughs ;
and which, if properly applied, will prevent the consumption.

Also, a mixture of honey, vinegar, and butter melted, and a tea-spoon-
ful taken often.

The following syrup is very valuable for every kind of cough :

One ounce Elecampane Root,

One ounce Comfrey Root,

One ounce Spignard Root,

One ounce Hoarhound, the herb.

Half ounce AVild Cherry Tree Bark,

To be simmered in three pints of water down to one pint, then strained,
to which add one pound of brown sugar; strain again, and add half a
pint of old Jamaica rum. Take half a wine glass, morning, noon, and
particularly at night, on retiring to rest. This has cured many appar-
ently in the consumption.

REGIMEN.

When a person finds himself much indisposed from any exposure to
cold, he ought immediately to put himself on a light, spare diet, abstain-
ing from the usual quantity of animal food at least, and from all fer-
mented and spirituous liquors, together with every thing that is likely to
heat and inflame the body. The best food for him will be gruel, weak
broths, bread puddings, roasted apples, and the like ; and the most ap-
propriate drink will be barley water. The patient in particular should
avoid eating any supper except gruel, with a little bread. It will like-
wise be advisable that he be confined to the house, and not expose him-
self to the external atmosphere ; he should also be warmly clothed.

Previous to his going to bed, he had better put his feet into warm wa-
ter and ley for ten or twelve minutes, and after having them well wiped,
he should take freely of hoarhound, and as a change, boneset tea very
warm at bed time, and cold through the day ; and covering himself in bed
with sufficient clothes, so as to excite a proper perspiration throughout
the night. The next morning he ought to continue in bed longer than
usual.

PREVENTION.
Persons liable to coughs from any little exposure to cold, should wear
flannel next to the skin, but particularly over the chest ; they should
adapt their clothing to the vicissitudes of the weather, and they should
be cautious how they expose themselves too quickly to the external air
when heated by exercise or crowded rooms.


Order XIII.] Asthma. 395


CHAPTER XIII.
ASTH M A, (Asthma.)

DESCRIPTION.

Asthma is an affection of the lungs, or the bronchial vessels, general-
ly of a spasmodic nature, that occurs in paroxysms which take place
usually at night. It is characterized by frequent, difficult, and short res-
piration, wheezing, stricture of the chest, and a cough, al! which symp-
toms are aggravated when in a recumbent position. It more generally
attacks those of a full, or plethoric habit.

When there is a great discharge of mucus from the lungs it is termed
humid ; but when it is attended by little or no expectoration, it is termed
the dry, or Spasmodic Asthma. It more generally attacks men than
women.

CAUSES.

Asthma, but more particularly the spasmodic, is brought on by almost
every thing which increases the action of the heart ; and which stimu-
lates and fills the vessels of the mucous membrane. Thus it is produc-
ed by intense heat, by lightness of air, by severe exercise, by strong
mental emotions, by full meals, by stimulating drinks, by exposure to
cold and atmospherical influence, and by certain effluvia, as those of hay,
whether new or old, of sealing wax, and other burning substances.

Congestions of blood, or of serous humours in the lungs, noxious va-
pours arising from a decomposition of lead or arsenic, impure and smo-
ky air, cold and foggy atmosphere, sudden changes of temperature, scro-
fulous, rheumatic, gouty, and scorbutic acrimony; dyspepsia, or irrita-
tion in some of the abdominal viscera, but particularly iu the stomach :
irritation of the bronchial system by aerial acrimony, or other causes,
suppression of long-accustomed evacuations, frequent catarrhal attacks,
gout, general debility, water in the chest, aneurisms, polypi, or concre-
tions of grumous blood in the large vessels, and the like, are the causes
from which this formidable disease may arise in different individuals.
In some instances it proceeds from an hereditary predisposition, and in • ^.
others from mal-conformation of the chest.

Asthma having once taken place, its fits are apt to return periodically,
and more especially when excited by certain causes, such as by a sudden
change from cold to warm weather, or from a heavier to a lighter atmos-
phere; by severe exercise of any kind which quickens the circulation of
the blood ; by an increased bulk of the stomach, either from too full a
meal or from a collection of air in it ; by exposure to cold, obstructing the
perspiration, and thereby favouring an accumulation of blood in the lungs ;
by violent passions of the mind; by disagreeable odours ; and by irrita-
tions of smoke, dust, and other subtle particles floating in the. air.


396 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class H.

The bronchial vessels seem very much concerned in the production of
this disease. It is the large quantity of mucus secreted and collected in
them, which appears to be the proximate caiiM suffocation, and

difficulty of breathing which attends the complaint, bv preventing tho
free admission of air into the lungs.

SYMPTOMS.

There is often some degree of warning given of the approach of an
asthmatic paroxysm, not by pulmonary symptoms, but by those of indi-
gestion, heartburn, fiatus,itching of the skin, pain over the eyes and sleepi-
ness. The attack most commonly occurs at night and the patient is per-
haps awaked out of his- sleep by it. To those who experience or wit-
ness a paroxysm of asthma for the first time, it appears one of the most
formidable diseases to which man is liable. The patient is oppressed by
a tightness across the breast, Which so impedes respirati »n, as to threaten
the immediate extinction of life. He starts up inio an eiect posture, and
flies to the window for air. For a considerable time his breathing is per-
formed by gasps, slowly and with a wheezing noise ; speaking is difficult
and even painful to him ; there is often present also a propensity to cough-
ing.

In this state of urgent distress the patient continues till the approach
of morning, when a remission commonly takes place. Howevei sudden-
ly the fit began, it always goes off slowly. By degrees the breathing be-
comes less laborious, and coughing and speaking are performed with
greater ease. In the generality of cases a copious expectoration of mu-
cus at length takes place, and with it the paroxysm ceases, and the pa-
tient falls asleep. During the fit the pulse usually continues of the natu-
ral standard, the surface of the body is pale, the muscles appear shrunk,
and there is a considerable flow of limpid urine. In a few cases expec-
toration is very scanty.

During the next day, the asthmatic experiences some remaining <-. n nse
of stricture across tho breast, and any exertion of the body increases his
uneasiness. At night the urgent difficulty of breathing return*;, and in
this manner he is harassed for three or f >ur successive days; after which,
the symptoms gradually yielding, he enjoys his usual rest without further
disturbance. This terminates the paroxysm of asthma.

When it has once taken place, the disease is apt to recur periodically,
and when the asthmatic disposition is very strong, to be brought on at al.
times by some of the circumstances enumerated. A degree of difficulty
of breathing, particularly on ascending a hill or flight of steps, is never
Avanting during the intervals, and respiration is always attended more or
less with wheezing ; that is, with a morbid accumulation of mucus in the
bronchial tubes, Persons subject to asthma acquire a peculiar expres-
sion of countenance easily recognized when once observed.

COMMON Tltr.ATMI NT.

Bleeding, blistering, tartar emetic, digitalis, Prussic acid, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

During a paroxysm, or fit of the asthma, the patient must be placed in


Order XIII.] Asthma. -&~

an erect position, and his feet immediately immersed in warm ley water,
and sinapisms applied, with a view to equalize the circulation, or to di
vert the blood or humours from the lungs and bronchial vessels. An in-
fusion of catnip or pennyroyal may he given at the saint- time to excite
gentle perspiration, which course will soon afford relief. Should the
paroxysm, ho fever, be very severe, attended with a sense of suffocation,
&r. administer immediately in a cup of warm tea, an ordinary sized ta-
loonful of the Tincture of Lobelia, to be repeated every half hour
if the first portion does not afford relief.

This medicine exerts tiie most astonishing effects in this complaint.
It is no sooner introduced into the stomach, than the tension and spasm
is removed, by dislodging collections of mucus in the bronchial vessels,
and thereby giving free admissions of air into the lungs; and it is inva-
riably attended with a -alnt ar >;■ -ct. I have been called when patients
have been pronounced past recovery, when they have been thought to
be dying, and upon the exhibition of this plant, an immediate amend-
ment has raken place. I recollect one rase where a young woman ap-
peared to be nearly gone with the disease, after having been attended
by another physician, who had administeted antimony without any bene-
fit. I gave only an infusion of the plant as it was gathered, not having
been pulverized. I commenced widi table-spoonful doses ; the, first af-
forded relief, and after repeating it a few times, the paroxysm subsided,
and she soon recovered. The other physician afterwards called in, and
upon being shown the simple article 1 made use of, he rred out with in-
dignation, " O ! it is nothing but the Indian tobacco," a name given it by
some.

Another case now or irs to me, where two or three physicians had
been attending was nearly suffocated with the asthma, croup,

or similar disease, and he was pronounced hopeless. They called fre-
quently, and asked " if he was poi yet dead." [n this condition I was
called 'o visit him, hut so n- i lis n I (fid he appeal to be, that 1 thought
it entirely useless to pies'- m ; but as an experiment, I directed

some of the tincture oj lobelia to be given, which was done after my de-
parture, but having no hopes of his recovery, I did not acain call to see
him, supposing thai he could not survive but a few hours. Six
months after this, a person who was acquainted with the family, asked
I told him I had not, but I supposed that he was dead. He informed me
that he was alive and well ; that the medicine that I left, was given, and
that it almost immediately caused him to breathe easier, mitigated the
symptoms, and in a short time cured him.

II in 'reds of -ases might be meniioned of a similar nature.

The virtues of lobelia are unquestionably very o.vraordinary in many
complaints, hit in none more so than asthma, croup, &c; much discre-
tion an I judgment, however, is necessary in the administration of it

II i- sp inded the paroxysm, the next step will be to effect a rad-

ical - ure ; and this is seldom d ne, for the reason that asthmatic patients
generally discontinue 'ho medicines when they become comfortable. But
when the patient wishes a cure effected, he must persevere in the use of


•398 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

proper means. It will be necessary for him to repeat the dose of the
tincture, or powder of lobelia, once or twice a week, in doses sufficient
to excite general vomiting.

He must also, occasionally, take a. purgative.

During the intermissions, and when the patient is afflicted only with
cough, difficulty of breathing, &c. the following medicine may be taken:

Take Liverwort, (Hepatica Triloba,) a quarter of a pound.

Solomon's Seal, (Conv. Multiflora,) a quarter of a pound.
Skunk Cabbage, (Iclerodes Foetida,) a quarter of a pound.
AVater Hoarhound, (Lycopus Virginiana ) a quarter of a pound.
Blood root, ( Sanguinaria Canadersis,) two ounces.

Bruise and add a sufficient quantity of water. Boil until the strength
is extracted, strain and continue to boil until there is four quarts of the
liquid, strain and add 5 lbs. of honey and half a pint of brandy. Let it
settle, and it is fit for use. Of this let a wine glass be taken three or four
times a day.

During the time that this is taken, give an infusion of Hoarhound
warm at night, and cold through the day.

It will be necessary to keep a determination to the surface, by giving
diaphoretic medicines.

A strengthening plaster may be worn upon the breast and between the
shoulders, to divert the humours from the lungs.

When there is difficulty of breathing, from an accumulation of mucus,
give expectorants.

The following is good :

Take half an ounce of Blood root,
lialf an ounce of Lobelia,
half an ounce of Pleurisy Root,

Bruise all, and add one quart of Metheglin, or Wine.

A table-spoonful or two may be given, occasionally.

As occasion requires, the stimulating, or capsicum pill is attended with
much benefit in asthma ; 2 or 3 at a time may be administered, morning,
noon, and night.

A lady of this city, who has been for many years afflicted with the
asthma, (apparently spasmodic) and bad tried almost every kind of
medicine, could find no relief from any except the following: —

Take Ether,

Tincture of Castor,

Tincture of Opium, (laudanum)

Equal parts. Mix.

A tea-spoonful to be taken whenever the symptoms are urgent.
REGIMEN.

The patient by all means should breathe a pure air. He should avoid
smoke, dust, &c. He should lay upon a straw mattress with his head
elevated. A spare diet to be used, chiefly vegetables, milk, &c.


Order XIV.] Inflammation of the Lungs. 399


CHAPTER. XIV.

I INF LAMM ATI ON OF THE LU N G S, (Pneumonia.)

DESCRIPTION.

When the mucous membrane lining the lungs, or the substance of
the lungs are inflamed, it is termed pneumonia, or an inflammation of
the lungs. When any part of the contents of the thorax is inflamed, it
is termed by some pneumonia; by some pcripneumony. This disease
attacks all classes, and is extremely prevalent. Children are very lia-
ble to it.

CAUSES.

The most general cause of this disease is the application of cold to the
body, which gives a check to the perspiration, and determines a great
flow of blood to the lungs. It attacks principally those of a robust
constitution and plethoric habit, and occurs most frequently in the winter
season and spring of the year : but it may arise in either of the other
seasons, when there are sudden vicissitudes from heat to cold.

Other causes, such as violent exertions in singing, speaking, or play-
ing on wind instruments, by producing an increased action of the
lungs, have been known to occasion inflammation of this organ. Those
who have laboured under a former attack of this complaint, are much
predisposed to returns of it.

SYMPTOMS.

Inflammation of the lungs comes on with an obtuse pain in the chest
or side, great difficulty of breathing, (particularly in a recumbent
position, or when lying on the side affected,) together with a cough,
dryness of the skin, heat, anxiety, and thirst. At the first com-
mencement of the disease the pulse is usually full, strong, hard, and
frequent, but in a more advanced stage it is commonly weak, soft, and
often irregular. In the beginning, the cough is frequently dry and with-
out expectoration ; but in some cases it is moist, even from the first,
and the matter spit up is various both in colour and in consistence, and
is often streaked with blood.

If relief is not afforded in time, and the inflammation proceeds with
such violence as to endanger suffocation, the vessels of the neck will
become turgid and swelled; the face will alter to a purple colour; an
effusion of blood will take place into the cellular substance of the lungs,
so as to impede the circulation through that organ, and the patient will
50011 be deprived of life.

If these violent symptoms do not arise, and the proper means of
subduing the inflammation have either been neglected, or have proved


4U9 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

ineffectual, although adopted at an early period of the disease, a
suppuration may ensue, which event is to be known by frequent slight
shiverings, and an abatement of the pain and sense of fullness in the
part, and by the patient being able to lie on the side which was affected,
without experiencing areat uneasiness.

When pneumonia proves fatal, it is generally by an effusion of blood
taking place in the cellular texture of the lungs, so as to occasion
suffocation, which usually happens between the third and seventh days;
but it may likewise prove fatal, by terminating either in suppuration or
gangrene.

When it goes off by resolution, some very evident evacuation always
attends it ; such as a greai flow of urine, with a copious sediment,
diarrhoea, a sweat diffused over the whole body, or a haemorrhage
from the nose; but the evacuation which most frequently terminates
the complaint, and which does it with the greatest effect, is a free
and copious expectoration of -hick white or yellow matter, slightly
streaked with blood; and by this the disease is carried off generally in
the course of ten or twelve days.

PROGNOSIS.

Our opinion as to the event is to be drawn from the symptoms which are
present. A high degree of fever, attt 'led with delirium, great
difficulty of breathing, acute pain, and dry c. sgh, denote great danger ;
on the contrary, an abatement of the febrile symptoms, and oi the
difficulty of breathing, and pain, taking place on the coming on of a
free expectoration, or the happening of any other critical evacuation,
promises fair for the recovery of the patient. A termination of the
nflamination in suppuration is always to be considered as dangerous.

DISSECTION.

On dissection, the lungs usually appear inflamed ; and there is often
found an extravasation, either of blood, or of coagulable lymph, in
their cellular substance. The same appearances likewise present them-
selves in the cavity of the thorax, and within the pericardium. The
pleuri, connected with the lungs, is also in an inflated state, having its
surface every where crowded with red vessels. Besides these, abscesses
■quently found in the substance of the lungs, as likewise tubercles
and adhesions to the ribs are formed. A quantity of purulent matter is
often discovered :,!so in the bronchia. In the < od of this disease

we oiay hope, by acl ires, to br resolution;

but when it is mi must look for adis :.a>^e by expec-

toration, as the means of restoring he art to a healthy state.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Repealed -.>ud copious bleeding even to fainting, (ad deliquium ani-

bm'J mercur , alts, antimony, blistering, nitre, &,c. Dr. H*****

i a person in pneumonia, to the amount of ( wo

hundred ounces in two or three days. If an aged physician of the


Order XIV.] Inflammation of the Lungs. 401

old school, has pronounced Dr. R*** a " woful quack," in consequence
of his sanguinary practice ; with how much greater propriety might we
pronounce this Dr. Sangrado a woful quack for such mal-practice. We
should suppose that a man in his sober senses, with any pretensions to
medical knowledge, could not be guilty of such consummate ignorance.
Some might suppose that such practice would prove fatal by producing
the consumption ; but there is no fear of this, as it cuts short Vie life of
the person too soon to induce this complaint.

REFORMED PRACTICE. J

Indications of Cure. — The most prompt means should be used to re-
duce the inflammation, and remove tho disease by resolution, or by pro-
venting suppuration.

In consequence of the vicissitudes of our atmosphere, this disease (In-
flammation of the lungs) is the greatest scourge of this country. It proves
more fatal than the yellow fever, or any other epidemic, if not immedi-
ately, by its subsequent effects upon tho system.

It is the practice universally among physicians to bleed in this, as well
as other inflammatory diseases ; but I have invariably succeeded in treat-
ing the worst species of the complaint, without ever having drawn one drop
of the vital fluid ; notwithstanding, it is asserted by authors, that the most
dangerous consequences result from the neglect of bleeding. I know by
experience that the disease is cured much sooner, and without endangering
the life or health of the patient. The lives of thousands have been destroy-
ed by the use of the lancet in this as well as other diseases.

Lieutaud, a celebrated Doctor and Physician to Louis XV. depre-
cates the practice of free bleeding in this disease. He says " that bleed-
ing must be confined within certain limits, lest the strength necessary to
promote expectoration, or any other effort of nature, should fail from too
great depletion of the vessels. Every one knows that bleeding, even the
smallest, are fatal in some epidemic constitutions. To this we may add,,
that by common consent, bleeding hinders suppuration, which nature usu-
ally points to about the third or fourth day of the disease.

It is not to be denied, that many, not of inferior note, have followed a
contrary method; who have, for instance, in every obvious inflammation;
of the breast, ordered bleeding ten or fifteen times, or even more. The
young and athletic may bear this astonishing loss of blood, with success;
but I have seen many afterwards relapse into phthisis or dropsy, after over-,
coming the inflammatory disease ; to say nothing of many whose strength
had been prostrated by this immoderate depletion of the vessels : where-.
by they became unequal to the promoting of expectoration, and were
carried off by suffocation or gangrene."

In this, as well as other diseases, it will be necessary in the incipient or
first stage of inflammation of the lungs, to produce free and copious per-
spiration, by administering Sudorific Medicines; and a very excellent
method to answer this purpose, is to steam the patient over bitter herbs
as mentioned in other parts of this work,or by making use of the vapour
bath. This may be resorted to if the strength of the patient will cnablo
him to sit up ; otherwise the sudorific, or sweating drops may be given
in tho usual manner, until the patient perspires freely for several hours

Vol. I. 51


408 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class 11.

and this must be continued moderately until the inflammation has subsi-
ded. This singlo operation will divert the blood from the lungs and pre-
vent congestion, lessen the febrile excitement by equalizing the circula-
tion, remove the pain, and favor expectoration. When the patient has
recovered from the operation of free perspiration, a purgative may be
given, and occasionally repeated during the disease. When the arterial
action has diminished, mild emetics may be administered. They gener-
ally produce immediate relief from the oppression of the chest, cause a
determination to the skin as well as a free expectoration. They expel
the viscid mucus which fills the air cells of the lungs, restore respiration,
and thereby increase the strength of the system. These may be repeat-
ed as often as the circumstances of the case justify. The lobelia inflata
is the best medicine that can be administered.

It will be found very serviceable to inhale the steam of bitter herbs.
The tension of the lungs is thus removed, and mucus expectorated with
more freedom, and these may be repeated frequently through the day.
When the arterial excitement has diminished, should the cough
prove troublesome, one or two tea-spoonfuls of the syrup of poppy, or
paregoric may be given. If these should not allay the cough sufficient-
ly, give ten grains of diaphoretic powders at bed time, until rest or 6leep
is procured ; To be repeated every night if necessary.

Expectorants. — If there is much accumulation of mucus, oppression
at the chest, cough, &c. difficulty of breathing and expectoration, give
the following preparation t

. Tincture of Blood root, ( Sanguinaria Carnaensis.)
Lobelia, (Lobelia Inflata.)
Skunk Cabbage, (Ictodes Fatida.)
Of each equal parts. Mix.

Give a tea-spoonful in a gill of infusion of hoarhound occasionally, or
as often as the lungs become clogged with mucus.

This preparation has the effect of lessening all the symptoms of the
complaint. It acts as an expectorant, diaphoretic, &c.

Mustard Plasters. — When the inflammation is very acute, and the
symptoms violent, a Mustard Plaster may be applied on the chest, till
the skin becomes reddened, and when the inflammation has in some de-
gree subsided, should the cough continue, use the Vegetable Syrup as
recommended under the head of consumption. An infusion of Hoar-
hound and Boneset may be used through the day, sweetened with ho-
ney.

The patient may drink an infusion of Flaxseed, Bran, and Slippery
Elm. These by their demulcent properties will be found singularly
beneficial.

It will bo particularly necessary in the acute stage of this disease to
avoid the uso of pectorals, syrup, and such medicines as possess bracing
or tonic properties, except in conjunction with depletic means.

The inflammation must bo in some degreo first subsided, before these
can be administered with a good effect.

The Feet must be daily immersed in warm ley water, 15 or 20 min-


Order XIV.] Inflammation of the Lungs. 403

utcs at a time, and when removed wiped dry and sinapisms applied at
night.

Should tho pulse continue full, tense, and hard, after the pa-
tient has submited to this treatment, or should not the inflammation gra-
dually subside, then give the Tincture of Fox Glove (Digitalis). 15 or
20 drops may be given morning, noon, evening, and bed time, in any
kind of tea.

This plant increases tho discharge of urine and thereby lessens inflam-
mation. It lessens tho circulation through the lungs, by diminishing tho
action of the heart and arteries, and is thus attended with a very favor-
able effect.

I am of opinion, says a practical Physician, that tho digitalis may in
all cases of activo inflammation bo most advantageously employed, and
that much of the pabulum vitge can by its aid be preserved. I have had
lately under my care a man, who from a violent cold was seized with
pneumonia, he was old, greatly enervated and had typhoid symptoms
combined with it, and ho without any inconvenience took in 24 hours,
six grains of this powerful sedative, on tho third day j which reduced his
pulse to 75, and cured the inflammation.

A purgative must be administered every day or two according to the
obstinacy or violence of tho disease. It has a powerful tendency
to lessen inflammation.

Pectorals. — Should tho cough continue obstinate, or should it remain
troublesomo after the other symptoms have subsided, give the Pulmona-
ry Syrup, or Balsam.

REGIMEN.

The diet should bo diluting, light, cooling, and nutritious. No kind
is more anti-phlogistic, or cooling, while at tho same time it is nourish-
ing, than Indian-meal gruel. It is food, drink, and medicine in this dis-
ease, and in almost every other.

This course of treatment has proved an effectual and sovereign reme-
dy in the worst form and stage of Pneumonia, or Inflammation of the
Lungs, when tho course now pursued by physicians sends the patient into
the grave in a few days, or throws him into the consumption. None can
realise the difference in the two kinds of practice except thoy witness it.


PNEUMONIA TYPHOIDE8.

DESCRIPTION.

Tins disease is termed, by some, peripneumonia notha, pneumonia
typhoides, bilious pneumonia, and malignant pleurisy. In the southern
states, it is vulgarly called " cold plague, or cold skin fever," in conse-
quenco of tho remarkable coldness of the surface and extremities, and
its great mortality in some places and seasons. It is termed, bilious in-
flammation of the lungs, in consequence of the liver being affected in
the disease. In the eastern states it is called " pneumonia typhoides,"


404 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class IL

inconsequence of its being a mixed disease, — in other words, the true
peripneumony, or inflammation of the lungs, degenerating into typhus.
Huxham gives a very accurate description of this disease, as fol-
lows : — " Though the load of the breast is very great, breathing difficult,
the cough very importunate, and sometimes violent ; yet the fever and
and heat are small, many times scarcely perceptible, the pulse either
quick, weak, and small, or sluggish and oppressed, never hard and tense.
So that, as this distemper hath very different and quite contrary symp-
toms to those of a truo peripneumony in several respects, it is reasona-
able to suppose it arises from very different causes, and requires a very
different method of cure. And, in fact, we see, that bastard peri-
pneumony commonly seize the old and phlegmatic, the weak and lax,
the fat and unwieldy, and are most rife in wet, foggy weather, and win-
ter seasons ; whereas the true Inflammatory Peripneumony generally
attacks the robust, vigorous, and active, and is most frequent in cold,
dry weather, during north-east winds. These two diseases then seem
to differ almost as much as ardent and slow nervous fever. A perpetu-
al laborious wheezing, great anxiety, constant oppression of the chest,
cold extremities, &c. are marks of immediate danger. When this disease
comes upon a place, it is, with all the frequency and destruction of an
epidemic disease, and unexpected deaths are terrible. The pulse is
weak ; the cough slight ; the difficulty of breathing more anxious than
painful ; the face sunk in the features, and flushed, or rather of a livid
colour, except when it is cadaverous, pale, and yellow. The suffoca-
tion is sudden ; the lungs have, as Morgagni expresses it, a liver like,
solid consistence : they have no longer the cellular appearance of
lungs, for their bronchiee are crammed with blood 5 their common cellu-
lar texture is also full of extended blood ; they are dense, solid, and
very heavy and black; the pulse small, feeble, and trembling. The
disease has, in general, commenced with acute pain in the side or
breast, stricture across the thorax, and difficulty of breathing ; short,
distressing cough, sometimes attended with a mucous expectoration,
tinged with blood ; numbness in the muscles, excruciating pains in the
limbs and about the region of the heart, chills and great prostration of
strength, together with palpitation, irregularity, depression, and anni-
hilation of the pulse, syncope, and cold sweats ; but in a few cases the
pulse was very rapid, and not depressed. In some instances the pa-
tient was seized with a violent pain in the head, soon became delirious,
and died in a few hours. — (See Spotted, or Petechial Fever.)

CAUSES.

Supposod to be epidemic, or produced by the various vicissitudes of
climate. It prevails in the cold weather of winter and spring. Resem-
bles very much, in its character, the spotted fever, by the violence and
suddenness of its attack, the variety of its forms, sudden and great pros-
tration of strength, its rapid progress, and fatal termination. The peri-
of Bastard Peripneumony, which, he says, arises every year towards
the beginning, but more frequently towards the close of winter. It
chiefly attacks such as are of a gross habit of body and middle-aged


Order XIV.] Pneumonia Typhoide3. 405

persons, but oftener those who are more advanced in years, and " too
much addicted to spirituous liquors, especially brandy."

TREATMENT.

Cold is often the most predominant symptom on the first attack of
this disease. Hence, it will be necessary to excite perspiration as soon
as possible ; and the warm bath has been found remarkably efficacious.
Prompt means should also be used, to keep up a perspiration. An
Kinetic may also be administered, and repeated as the mucus accu-
mulates in the lungs. This treatment will restore a general warmth
and excitement to the surface and extremities, by recalling the blood
from the internal to the external parts. If the symptoms continue
violent, a Mustard Plaster may be applied upon tho chest, as well as
the breast or side ; and mild Cathartics occasionally administered. If
there is great pain, restlessness, and distress, ten grains of Diaphoretic
Powders may be given every two hours, till relief is afforded. But they
are best given at night, to allay irritation, promote perspiration, &c.
It will be of the most essential service to support the strength of the
patient, which has a constant tendency to sink. For this purpose two
or three pills of Capsicum may be given three or four times a day ;
also Wine Sangaree or Sling, Porter, &c. There is often a great ten-
dency to putrescency in this disease, which must be counteracted by
giving freely of yeast.

There are two opposite conditions of the body to contend with in
this disease, — local inflammation on the one hand, and typhoid symp-
toms on the other. Nothing will be of more importance in the treat-
ment of this complaint than the administration of diaphoretic remedies.
By these, we counteract a vitiated state of the fluids, at the same time
diminish, if not totally remove the local irritation of the lungs, or other
organs involved in the disease. An infusion of Snake-root may be
given through the day ; also Bonesct and Hoarhound.

A physician states, that the following formula has proved efficacious
as a mild diaphoretic in this disease : —

Take Salt of Hartshorn ( Carbonas Ammoniac,)
Camphor (Gam Camphora,)

Equal parts. Divide into doses of eight grains each. Give one every
two, three, or four hours, according to symptoms. If there is great
pain, restlessness, or delirium, combine ten drops of laudanum with each
powder, until quietude is procured.

In one case of this disease, the above prescription had a very salutary
effect, and the patient soon recovered.

It should be borne in mind, that the loss of even a few ounces of blood
in this disease, is attended with fatal consequences.* If the pulse con-
tinues too frequent, give fifteen drops of the Tincture of Digitalis
three times a day. The feet should be daily bathed in tepid ley water,

Dr. Drake of Peekskill, N. Y. informs me that this disease was very prevalent
in Unit section of the country, a few years since, and proved very mortal. Bleed-
ing was found exceedingly injurious. He states that a Dr. White bled twelve per-
sons labouring under this complaint, and eleven of them died.


406 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

and Mustard Sinapisms applied. If this disease, in its incipient or
acute stage, was judiciously treated, in all probability, it would seldom or
never run into the typhoid state. It is the mal-practice of physicians
which cause the true pneumonia to degenerate into the real typhoid state.


CHAPTER XV.

CONSUMPTION, (Phthisis Pulmonalis.)

DESCRIPTION.

Pulmonary Consumption (Phthisis Pulmonalis,) is characterized by
emaciation, debility, cough, hectic fever, and purulent expectoration.
Some authors enumerate thirty different species of this complaint, but
this distinction seems unnecessary for practical purposes.

CAUSES.
Tho causes which produce this afflicting and extensive malady, are
very numerous. The following are the most general :

Hereditary disposition, particular formation of the body, obvious by a
long neck, prominent shoulders, and narrow chest ; scrofulous diathesis,
or state of the system indicated by a fine clear skin, fair hair, delicate ro-
sy complexion, large veins, thick upper lip, a weak voice, and great sen-
sibility ; certain diseases, such as syphilis, scrofula, the small pox, and
measles; particular employments, exposing artificers to dust, such as
needle pointers, stone cutters, millers, &c. or to the fumes of metals or
minerals under a confined and unwholesome air ; violent passions, exer-
tions, or affections of the mind, as grief, disappointment, anxiety or close
application to study, without using proper exercise ; frequent and exces-
sive debaucheries, late watching, and drinking freely of strong liquors ;
great evacuations, as diarrhoea, diabetes, excessive venery, fluor albus,
immoderate discharge of the menstrual flux, and the continuing to suckle
too long under a debilitated state ; and, lastly, the application of cold,
cither by too sudden a change of apparel, keeping on wet clothes, lying
in damp beds, or exposing the body too suddenly to cool air, when heat-
ed by exercise ; in short, by any thing that gives a considerable check
to the perspiration. The more immediate or occasional causes of phthi-
sis are, haemoptysis, or bleeding of the lungs, pneumonic inflammation
proceeding to suppuration, catarrh, asthma, and tubercles, the last of
which is by far the most general.

In the fifth volume of Memoirs of the Medical Society, we are inform-
ed by Dr. Johnson, that persons employed in the pointing of needles, by
dry grinding them, arc quickly affected by pulmonary complaints, such
as cough, and purulent and bloody expectoration ; and that they scarce-
ly ever attain the age of 40 years.

Wc arc also told by Dr. Willan, in his reports, that hair dressers, ba-
kers, masons, bricklayers, labourers, laboratory men, coal heavers, and


Order XV.] Consumption. **"

chimney sweepers, arc very liable to obstinate pulmonic diseases ; as are
likewise in an equal degree, the dressers of flax and feathers, and work-
men in the warehouses of leather sellers. Many persons thus engaged
struggle with a hard tormenting cough until it terminates in consumption ;
whereas, by a timely removal into pure air, and having recourse to a
Suitable regimen, they might soon have been restored to health.

Dr. E. Smith, of Boston, has the following remarks on the causes and
prevalence of this disease :

There is no disease (says he) more alarming to people in our country
than that which is emphatically called " the Consumption." It is
considered more common than in former years, and this doubtless is
true. There are at least four reasons for this.

1. The people are more numerous than they wero fifty years ago,
about four to one, and allowing peoplo died in the same proportion,
this would make four to ono. It is however certain that consumptive
cases have increased beyond tho increase of the people.

2. A second cause of consumption is the great difference in the man-
ner of living and dress, as it respects people now, and fifty years ago ;
particularly in females.

Half a century ago, peoplo lived on common, simple, healthy food
and drink, and were healthy. Wo sometimes find an old person who
tells us of living upon bean porridgo, and other food equally simple.
In those days the dress of men and women was plain, and suited to the
climate where they lived, and to tho different seasons of the year. At
this time how different ! Tho fashions of the nobility in warm climates
arc brought to this country, and females of all classes endeavour to
imitate them, until a consumption follows, and death ends the short race
of them.

In addition to a thin dress, their clothes are tight, the natural shape is
crowded upon, and it is sometimes hard for them to stoop or breathe
easy. A violent cold is taken, a bad cough follows, symptoms of con-
sumption arc feared and mentioned, and at last it is seated, and the
poor fashionable daughter or wife is taken away by what is called the
quick consumption.

3. A third cause of consumption is tlie great change in the climate
within twenty years. Within that time, we have cold summers, which
were against the health of young people. At first young people, and
others far advanced in years, were taken off with the spotted fever.
They did not hold heat enough to withstand the cold of winter ; their
blood chilled, and they died by thousands. Many who lived through,
and arc now grown up, are troubled with cold hands and feet, foul
stomachs, cholic, head-ache, jaundice, pain in the limbs, indigestion,
or consumptive symptoms. I do not think there ever was a time when
so many young people were troubled with these complaints as at the pre-
sent.

4. A fourth cause of consumption, is tho manner in which people arc
employed, and the manner of treating them when sick.

The employment of thousands, particularly young people, is now
different from what it was forty years ago. Multitudes work in factories,
and arc employed where there is but little exercise, they are obliged to
continue long in a stooping posture. Others arc employed in braiding


406 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

straw, or working over the steam of brimstone. In the straw business
there are two things injurious to females, one is sitting so much, the
other and most pernicious, is continually putting their fingers in cold
water. This in many, cools the blood through the whole system, and
they either become partially blind, dropsical, or consumptive.

The manner of treating people supposed consumptive, is in my
opinion the cause of more deaths by consumption than any thing else.
People* will send for the doctor when they have a bad cough, pain in tho
side, foul stomach, or no appetite. They are directed to put on a
blister; have an issue or seaton, be bled, take salts, calomel and
jalap, take a tarter emetic puke, diet themselves or go through a
course of salivation, or tako mercury till their tongues are swelled out
of their mouths, their lips are black, their teeth loose, and they
almost dead with hunger. If all this does not cure, the last direction is
to go into the country for your health. I do not believe there is a well
man on earth who could go through all this treatment without being
confined to his bed. After going through this process the person is
commonly declared in a consumption, past all cure, and thus they die.

I believe " the consumption'''' may as certainly be cured as any other
complaint, if rightly attended to in season.

SYMPTOMS.

The incipient symptoms usually vary with the cause of the disease ;
but when it arises from tubercles, it is usually thus marked: it begins
with a short dry cough, that at length becomes habitual, but from which,
nothing is spit up for some time, except a frothy mucus. The breathing
is at the same time somewhat impeded, and upon the least bodily mo-
tion is much hurried: a sense of straitness, with oppression at the chest,
is experienced : the body becomes gradually leaner, and great languor
with indolence, dejection of spirits, and loss of appetite, prevail. In
this state the patient frequently continues a considerable length of time,
during which he is, however, more readily affected than usual by slight
colds, and upon one or other of these occasions the cough becomes
more troublesome and severe, particularly by night, and it is at length
attended with an expectoration, which towards morning is more free
and eopious. By degree the matter which is expectorated becomes more
viscid and opaque, and now assumes a greenish colour and purulent ap-
pearance, being on many occasions streaked with blood. In some
cases, a more severe degree of haemoptysis or bleeding at the lungs
attends, and the patient spits up a considerable quantity of florid,
frothy blood. The breathing at length becomes more difficult, and
the emaciation and weakness increasing. With these, the person begins
to be sensible of pain in some part of the thorax, which, however, is
usually felt at first imder the sternum, particularly on coughing. At a
more advanced period of tho disease, a pain is sometimes felt on one
side, and at times prevails in so high a degree, as to prevent the person
from lying easily on that side ; but it more frequently happens, that it
is felt only on making a full inspiration, or coughing. Even whero no
pain is felt, it often happens that those who labour under consumption
cannot lie easily on one or other of their sides, without a fit of cough-
ing being excited, or the difficulty of breathing being much increased,


Order XV.] Consumption. 409

At the first commencement of the disease, the pulse is often natural, or
perhaps is soft, small, and a little quicker than usual; hut when the
symptoms which have been enumerated have subsisted for any length
of time, it then becomes full, hard, and frequent. At the same time
the face flushes, particularly after eating; the palms of the hand, and
soles of the feet, are affected with burning heat; the respiration is
difficult and laborious; evening exacerbations become obvious, and, by
degrees, the fever assumes the hectic form. This species of fever is
evidently of the remittent kind, and has exacerbations twice every
day. The first occurs usually about noon, and a slight remission en-
sues about five in the afternoon. This last is, however, soon succeed-
ed by another exacerbation, which increases gradually until after mid-
night; but, about two o'clock in the morning, a remission takes place,
and this becomes more apparent as the morning advances. During the
exacerbations the patient is very sensible to any coolness of the air,
and often complains of a sense of cold when his skin is, at the same
time, preternaturally warm. Of these exacerbations, that of the eve-
ning is by far the most considerable. From the first appearance of the
hectic symptoms, the urine is high coloured, and deposites a copious
branny red sediment. The appetite, however, is not greatly impaired,
the tongue appears clean, the mouth is usually moist, and the thirst is
inconsiderable. As the disease advances, the mouth and fauces put
on rather an inflamed appearance, and are beset with apthce, or canker,
and the red vessels of the tunica adnata become of a pearly white.
cheek; but at other times the face is pale, and the countenance some-
what dejected. At the commencement of hectic fever, the belly is
usually costive ; but in the more advanced stages of it a diarhcea often
comes on, and this continues to recur frequently during the remainder
of the disease ; colliquative sweats likewise break out, and these alter-
nate with each other, and induce vast debility. In the last stage of the
disease the emaciation is so great, that the patient has the appearance
of a walking skeleton; his countenance is altered, his cheeks arc promi-
nent, his eyes look hollow and languid, his hair falls off, his nails are of a
livid colour, and much incurvated, and his feet are affected withcede-
raatous, or dropsical swellings. To the end of the disease the senses
remain entire, and the mind is confident and full of hope. It is, indeed
a peculiar symptom attendant on phthisis, that those who labour under
it are seldom apprehensive or aware of danger ; and it is no uncommon
occurrence to meet with persons laoouringundcr its most advanced stage,
flattering themselves with a speedy recovery, and forming distant pro-
jects tinder that vain hope. Some days before death the extremities
become cold. In some cases a delirium precedes that event, and con-
tinues until life is extinguished.

PROGNOSIS;

Pulmonary consumption is in every case to be considered as attended
with much danger; but it is more so when it proceeds from tubercles,
than when it arises in consequence either of haemoptysis, or pneumonic
suppuration. In the last instance, the risk will be greater where the ab-
scess breaks inwardly, and gives rise to empyema, than when its con-

Vol. I. 52


410 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

tents arc discharged by the mouth. Even cases of this nature
have, however, been known to terminate in immediate death. The
impending danger is generally to be judged of, however, by the hectic
symptoms; but more particularly by the lector of the expectoration, the
degree of emaciation and debility, the colliquative sweats, and the
diarrhoea. The disease has, in many cases, been found to be consid-
erably retarded in its progress by pregnancy ; and in a few has been
alleviated by an attack of mania, or mental derangement.

DISSECTION.

The morbid appearance most frequently to be met with, on the dissection
of those who die of phthisis, is the existence of tubercles in the cellular
substance of the lungs. These are small tumours which have the appear-
ance of indurated glands, are of different sizes, and are often found
in clusters. Their firmness is usually in proportion to their size, and
when laid open in this state they are of a white colour, and of a con-
sistence nearly approaching to cartilage. Although indolent at first,
they at length become inflamed, and lastly from little abscesses or
vomicae, which breaking, and pouring their contents into the bronchia,
give rise to a purulent expectoration, and thus lay the foundation of
phthisis. Such tubercles or vomicae, are most usually situated at the
upper and back part of the lungs; but in some instances they occupy
the outer part, and then adhesion to the pleura are often formed.

When the disease is partially, only about a fourth of the upper and
posterior part of the lungs is usually found diseased; but, in some
cases, life has been protracted till not one-twentieth part of them ap-
peared, on dissection, fit for performing their function. A singular
observation, confirmed by the morbid collections of anatomists, is,
that the left lobe is much oftener affected than the right.

DIAGNOSIS.

As an expectoration of mucus from the lungs may possibly be mis-
taken for purulent matter, and may thereby give us reason to suspect
that the patient labours under a confirmed phthisis, it may not be
amiss to point out a sure criterion, by which we shall always be able to
distinguish the one from the other. The medical world are indebted to
the late Mr. Charles Darwin for the discovery, who has directed the
experiment to be made in the following manner:

Let the expectorated matter be dissolved in vitriolic acid, and in
caustic lixivium, and add pure water to both solutions. If there is a
fair precipitation in each, it is a certain sign of the presence of pus;
but if there is not a precipitate in either, it is certainly mucus. This,
however, is not always a sure criterion.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, mercury, antimony, squills, and laudanum. Is-
sues, seatons, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of cure. — The indications are,
1. To moderate inflammatory action.


Order XV.] Consumption. 411

2. To support the strength, and promote the healing of ulcers in the
lungs.

3. To palliate urgent spmptoms.

It undoubtedly is the case, that thousands die of this disease in conse-
quence of the mal-practice of physicians. It has become proverbial,
that as soon as patients are placed under their charge, they begin rapid-
ly to decline. Indeed, this cannot otherwise be, as the medicine they
give produces the most debilitating effects, and undermines the constitu-
tion much faster than the disease itself. From the structure of the lungs
it is unquestionably a difficult disease to cure ; the constant motion of
them, prevents the healing or restorative process ; notwithstanding which,
pulmonary consumption may be cured as well as other diseases, by judi-
cious or skilful treatment, especially in the first stages of the disease.

Almost numberless medicines are recommended in this complaint, few
of which have much claim upon our attention. The following treatment
we have found very generally successful, especially in the incipient stages
of the disease, and when it has failed to cure, has uniformly mitigated
the complaint and rendered the patient more comfortable, and thus pro-
longed his life, which is one great ohject of medicine.

Vegetable Emetics. — There is no class of medicines so highly benefi-
cial in this disease as certain kinds of emetics. Mineral agents, such as
antimony and vitriol, arc dangerous to administer, but vegetable, oper-
ate very different. In consequence of their action upon the thoracic
viscera by sympathy, they are very valuable in consumption, acting
with peculiar force and effect upon the lungs, removing the tough, viscid
mucus from the air cells, and by producing absorption, by their tonic and
corroborant effects, bring about a healthy state of these organs. No pre-
paration will be found to answer a better purpose than the following :

Take Emetic Plant, (Lobelia Injlala,) 1 part.

Blood root, (Sanguinaria Canadensis.) 1 part. Pulverized.

From half a tea-spoonful to a tea-spoonful of this powder may be given
in tea of any kind, every other morning fasting, if the strength of the pa-
tient will permit ; if there be great debility, it should be administered only
once or twice a week. It may be given in an infusion of Eupatorium or
Boncset tea, and should not this be sufficient to produce nausea and slight
vomiting, a small additional quantity may be taken at each dose. This
produces very considerable sickness, which is an objection with many to
its use ; but it must be remembered that its salutary effects depend in a
great degree upon this very nauseating effect. Without exception Lobelia
is the most diffusible, penetrating, and permanent stimulus with which
we are acquainted. Its action upon the] great sympathetic nerve is so
immediate, that it is felt in every part of the system.

This preparation seems to exert a specific effect upon the stomach,
luntrs, and all the surrounding viscera.

Emetics should be repeated according to the strength of the patient,
and continuance; of the symptoms. No fear need be apprehended from
the shortness of breath and apparent debility that follows these emetics.


412 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

Some patients can better take the following liquid form of the medi-
cine :

Take Tincture of Lobelia Inflala, one part.

Blood root, (Sauguinaria Canadensis,) one part. Mix.

Two tea-spoonfuls is a dose, to be taken in any kind of tea.

Sudorifics and Diaphoretics. — In the commmencement of consump-
tion it is necessary to promote perspiration. For this purpose, give an
infusion of the Seneca Snake root, (Poly gala Seneca.) If this should
not be sufficient to produce perspiration, give a tea-spoonful of the sweat-
ing, or Sudorific Drops. This determination to the skin must be kept
up during the continuanco of the disease ; but it must be very moderate,
merely a moisture of the surface.

Pectorals and Expectorants. — Whenever the lungs become loaded
with purulent matter, or mucus, give the following medicine :

Take Pleurisy Root, (Aschpias Tuberosa,) 1 oz.

Blood root, (Sanguinaria Canadensis,) 1 oz.

Emetic Plant, (Lobelia Inflata,) £ oz.
Bruise all. Add Malaga or Port wine, 1 pint.

Give one or two tea-spoonfuls every time there is an accumulation
in the lungs.

Tonics, corroborants, fyc. — Give the following syrup :

Take Spikenard root, (Asalia Racemosa) tlie root,

Hoarhound, (Marrubium Vnlgare,) the plant,

Elecampane root, (Inula Helcnium.)

Comfrey root, (Symphytum Oficium,)
Of each two ounces.

Boil all in rain water till the strength is extracted, then evaporate to
two quarts, strain and add two pounds of sugar and two pounds of honey.
Boil again to two quarts, add one gill of spirits. Give a wine glass morn-
ing, noon, evening, and bed time. This must be continued daily.

This syrup will be found to possess extraordinary virtues in pulmona-
ry consumption. It lessens the cough, removes the pain of the breast,
and gives strength and energy to the system generally, and has cured
many persons who have had every symptom of genuine consumption.
Should this fail of removing the complaint, let the following syrup be
given :
Take Liverwort, (Hcpalica Triloba,) 1 oz.

Solomon's Seal, ( COnvalaria Polygonal urn,) 2 oz.

Skunk Cabbage, ( Symplocarpus Fwlida,) 2 oz.

Blood root, (Sanguin. Canad.) half oz.

Bugle Weed, or Water Hoarhound, 2 oz.

Add a suitable quantity of rain or soft water and extract the strength
by boiling. Let it be reduced to two quarts, then add two lbs. of sugar.
Dose, a wine glass three times a day, fasting. This will be found very
serviceable, particularly when there is bleeding at the lungs.

An infusion or tea made of the White Pine Bark may be given with
the above syrup.

Anodynes. — If the cough be very troublesome, and the rest of the pa-


Order XV.] Consumption. 413

tient is very much disturbed in conseque i .tho patient may take

the following mixture:

Take Balsam of Tolu, (Bnhamum Tolulanum,) half oz.
Balsam of Fir, ( Abies Bulsamif era,) \\vl\{ oz.
Best Opium, half a drachm.

Digest in half a pint of alcohol for a few days. Give one tea-spoon-
ful of the above mixture in any convenient vehicle.

For the hectic fever, give a tea or infusion of the Amaranthus. This
diminishes arterial excitement without increasing the heat of tho system.
It is also serviceable in night sweats. Should it not answer this purpose,
15 or 20 drops of Elixir of Vitriol, may be taken at bed time in a wine
glass of water.

Should the pulse continue too frequent and full, let 15 drops of the
Tincture of Digitalis be taken in any kind of tea three times a day
until the inflammatory symptoms subside.

Diluent and Tonic drinks. — An infusion of Ho at 'hound and Bonesct
combined, and sweetened with honey may be drank through the day,
and especially while taking the syrups.

inhalation. — Among the various means employed in the cure of con-
sumption, inhalations are very conspicuous. A Dr. Middlcton, of Phil-
adelphia, invented a machine to communicate certain powders directly
to the rungs — such as gum myrhh, cicuta, See. As soon as I heard of
this invention, I procured his machine and tried it in several cases,and 1
found no difficulty in conveying the powders into the cellular substance
of the lungs, but it did not prove a remedy. Benefit was derived, the ex-
pectoration was changed in quantity and quality, and the principle of it
has ever appeared excellent, but the failure apparently has consisted in
the want of administering proper medicinal articles or agents. Was this
machine to be used in conjunction with the treatment mentioned above,
would it not prove a certain remedy for this Hydra, which annually
sweeps its tens of thousands from the earth. I have thought of institut-
ing further experiments in this disease, and conveying to the lungs pow-
ders of certain medicinal plants, or agents, of the most healing and sa-
native properties.

It is well known to every physician that no remedies can be commu-
nicated directly to the lungs in any other manner than by inhalation
through the trachea and bronchial vessels directly to them. All the be-
nefit of other medicine must be derived by sympathy.

The following inhalation has been much praised :

Take Extract of Cicuta, half a drachm.

Digest for several days in an ounce of sulphuric ether.

Of this, one, two, or three tea-spoonfuls are put into a wine glass held
up to the mouth, and inspired till the whole is consumed.

The bowels must be regulated by mild laxatives.

Let a strengthening plaster be applied on the breast and between the
shoulders. They are useful from their counter-irritating and diaphoretic
effects.

Oysters, beef steaks, and in short whatever sits easy, or agrees with
the stomach may be used.


414 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

A change of Climate, or air. — This has sometimes performed won-
ders. Persons have gone from a Northern to a Southern climate, where
bilious diseases prevail, and have been perfectly cured when they have
been even in the last stages of the consumption. East Florida, New Or-
leans, and the West Indies, the South of France and Italy possess such
peculiar temperature as to suspend or cure the disease ; the soothing ef-
fect of the air has the power of healing the lungs in a most remarkable
manner, and I have the fullest evidence of the benefit arising from this
change of climate.

One man, nearly gone with the disease, was recommended to go to a
place where he would be likely to take the Bilious Fever. He did so, and
became much reduced with it, and the consequence was that he was
soon cured of the consumption.

A patient of mine, who had been near her end with this disease, em-
barked on board of a ship bound to Brazil, took up her residence there,
and in a few weeks after her arrival, (she afterwards informed me,)
was free of her cough, and apparently well. It appears that heat or
bile is an antidote to pulmonary diseases, from its opposite properties or
effects.

I have sometimes thought that the vicissitudes of our northern climate
produced or generated an acid of a very irritating nature, which is ac-
companied by a check of perspiration, and which is counteracted or neu-
tralized by this influence of a southern climate acting specifically upon the
liver, causing it to pour out an unusual quantity of bile, which by its sym-
pathetic action upon the lungs,removes the disease in some measure ; for
we are aware that one organ cannot be sensibly diseased, without the other
participates with it ; or the benefit may be entirely owing to the genial
warmth, heat, and uniform temperature of the climate.

Many have been cured by remaining a long time at sea, and constant-
ly breathing a pure air. Would not a three years voyage to the South
Seas or Pacific Ocean, remove this complaint?

The following remarks from an English author on this disease, are
worth perusing :

Pulmonary consumption is a disease almost peculiar to a certain
zone of northern latitude. A little farther to the north, or to the south,
the ravages of these complaints are camparatively trifling. The only
natural cause to which this can with propriety be attributed, is the
fluctuation of our atmospheric temperature between the confines of heat
and cold. The increased frequency of pulmonic complaints, which
has accompanied the mere general diffusion of wealth, and consequent
habits of luxurious living in this country, affords, I think, sufficient
proof that tender and indulgent treatment is not the best means of
obviating them. What are the classes of mankind most susceptible of,
and most injured by the impressions of heat and cold? Precisely those
who are least exposed to their influence. Sedentary artificers, who
necessarily pass their days in close and heated chambers, are swept off
in unaccountable numbers by pulmonary consumption ; while sailors,
ploughmen, butchers, and all persons whose occupations leads them to
be much in the open air, enjoy a comparative immunity from the attack
of this disease. Among the native inhabitants of America, Doctor
Rush informs us, that pulmonary consumption is unknown ; but in pro-


Order XV.] Consumption. 415

portion as they adopt the arts and manners of civilized life, do they be-
come liable to the fatal influence of this complaint.

When a wealthy parent sees a delicate child shiver at the freshness
of the breeze, a natural tenderness leads him to avert this unpleasant
feeling by the means he can most readily command, close apartments
and warm clothing. But he thus augments that very delicacy of consti-
tution he should endeavour to counteract. The variations of atmospheric
temperature are most sensibly felt by those who are cased in the
thickest clothing ; as plants reared in the hot-house are least able to
bear the blasts of winter. Contrast the leaden-coloured visage, and
the chilblain toes and fingers of the puny schoolboy, shivering and
crawling along the street in a winter's day, with the appearance of the
country lad of equal years employed all day in following the plough,
the surface of his body, in place of being chilled by the cold, is roused
to a state of increased vascular action, his countenance glows with the
genuine hue of health, and his whole frame bespeaks elasticity and
vigour. Surely from this example we might be taught the most effectual
method of averting delicacy of constitution, being careful to modify
the means according to the object we have to operate upon. Let the
child whose wealth can command, and whose future existence is of
sufficient importance to justify such attention, reside in a part of the
country where the soil is chalk or limestone, and the air pure. Let
him be abroad all day, and during every kind of weather, provided he
is employed in active exercise ; let him be guarded against suddenly
approaching, or sitting much over the fire, even in winter. Let the
habit of retiring early to bed, and leaving it early in the morning, be
strictly enforced. Let him wear no more clothes than are requisite to
guard against cold, and plunge into the sea, or a river, for a moment,
daily, during the three warmest months of summer. The phthisical
habit is, in general, attended by a precocity of intellect, which it is of
more importance to check than to encourage. In such instances the
improvement of the mind should be considered as a secondary object,
and may well be postponed till a certain share of robustness of consti-
tution has been ensured. This kind of corporeal education is obviously
incompatible with the usual discipline of schools, whether private or
public, and can only be advisable where the importance of the object
justifies the various sacrifices that must be made in order to attain it.

I very recently had occasion to see the success of this plan completely
exemplified. Every possible attention was paid to the health of a
delicate child by its anxious parents. He lived in spacious apartments
in an open and airy part of London ; was carried abroad several times
every day when it did not rain ; and the diet was regulated with every
attention to propriety. Notwithstanding all this care the flesh of this
child was flabby, he was averse to exorcise, the belly became promi-
nent, and the glands on each side of the neck were very considerably
enlarged. In this state the child was removed the beginning of last
summer to a dry and healthy situation in the neighbourhood of the sea.
There it ran about and bathed along with other children of a similar age!
No particular attention was paid to dress or diet. In the course of a
few months the tumid abdomen subsided, the swellings of the neck
disappeared, the flesh became firm, and this child, whose life had been


416 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

despaired of, and was sent from home as on a forlorn hope, returned
vigorous, active, and healthy.

But precautions against this insidious disease are rarely had recourse
to at so early a period of life. The buoyant spirits and active propen-
sities of its destined victims rarely excite suspicion either in themselves
or their friends of the approaching mischief. As the age of puberty
approaches, other indications of the propensity to phthisis are developed.
The narrow and elongated form of the chest becomes more apparent,
and is chiefly indicated by the prominence of the shoulders, which stand
out from it on each side somewhat like wings. A broad deep chest,
the transverse section of which approaches the circle, affords the best
criterion of a healthy and vigorous conformation of the body, not only
in man but in all kinds of quadrupeds, which are subservient to his
wants. For the support of life it is necessary that nearly one half of
the blood should circulate through the lungs in the same time that the
remainder passes through the rest of the body. But if the lungs are
prevented from expanding to their proper magnitude in consequence of
being confined within the limits of a narrow thorax, their proper blood-
vessels must be proportionally diminished in number as well as in dimen-
sions, and on any sudden push of blood, their coats, already over-
distended, must be prone to rupture. At this period of life, too, there
is evidently an effort of the constitution endeavouring to expand every
part to a state of full perfection. This is evinced by frequent discharges
of blood from the nose. The vessels of that part readily heal, but an
accident of the same kind taking place in the lungs, not unfrequently
lays the foundation of consumption.

This temporary fulness of blood should be counteracted, by strictly
adhering to a diet of the farinacea and ripe fruits. Animal food and
fomented liquors ought to be rigidly prohibited. Even milk often proves
too nutritious. Exercise should be regular but gentle. Sudden and
violent exertions are extremely hazardous. Riding on horseback is
preferable to any other kind of exercise. Such efforts of the voice as
are required in singing or playing on any wind-instrument of music,
frequently produce discharges of blood from the lungs ; but the practice
of reading or reciting for some time together in a moderate tone of
voice, tends to strengthen these organs, and to diminish the danger of
pulmonary hemorrhage from any sudden exertion.

During the circulation of the blood through the lungs, a principle
necessary to the support of life is absorbed from the air ; and various
matters, the longer continuance of which in the body would be noxious,
are also discharged in the form of vapour or gas. That there is,
besides, no inconsiderable quantity of aqueous fluid secreted and dis-
charged from the lungs, every person must be convinced, who has at-
tended to the deposition of watery particles that takes place from the
breath in a frosty day. Of the whole quantity of perspirable matter
discharged from the surface of the body in any given portion of time,
that exhaled from the surface of the lungs may be estimated as amount-
ing to the one-third. The skin and the lungs being both secreting sur-
faces, must also be considered as organs mutually compensating or
balancing each other. If the skin be suddenly chillod,a larger share of
perspirable matter will endeavour to escape by the lungs, as being an


Order XV.] Consumption. 41 '

internal, and therefore a warmer surface. Tt is~not surprising that this
effort should in a delicate organ be productive of derangement and
disease, and accordingly we daily hear people dating their first attack of
pulmonary complaints from sitting in a cool place after having been
over-heated; from being thoroughly soaked with rain, or from cold-
bathing in an improper state of the system.

The purpose of these observations is to enforce the propriety of
maintaining cutaneous perspirations, and endeavouring to render the
surface of the body less susceptible of atmospheric variations. In persons
of a phthisical habit the skin is in general either dry and scabrous, or
clammy, both of which conditions betoken deficient perspiration. The
most effectual means of removing this morbid state of the body is the
sedulous use of cutaneous friction, with warm rain water and ley
applied daily. Why a practice, on which the ancient physicians placed
so much dependence not only for the cure of many diseases, but in a
pre-eminent manner for the preservation of health, should have in
modern times fallen so completely into neglect, it is not perhaps easy to
account ; although at present nothing seems to be considered as medi-
cine except what is taken into the stomach ; as if the due regulation of
air and exercise did not furnish means of recovery, at least as efficacious
as drugs.

From regularly persevering for some length of time in this practice I
have observed a very obvious alteration produced in the texture of the
skin. It appears to acquire thickness, and to become mellow and
pliable, a condition very different from that of persons disposed to
consumption, whose skin is commonly thin and harsh. The muscles
also seem to derive firmness from this practice. It will also be found
daily to remove no small quantity of furfuraceous matter, which, whether
inspissated perspiration adhering to the surface, or particles of decay-
ing cuticle, is certainly better away. This practice also removes every
kind of roughness and asperity from the surface of the skin, which
becomes beautifully smooth and polished, so that even as a cosmetic,
having no tendency to impair health, bathing may be advantageously
employed. After exposure to wet to strip and bathe the feet and surface
of the body till it glows, is unquestionably the best means to prevent
taking cold.

I do not presume so strenuously to recommend friction of the skin
as a means of supporting the healthy action of the external surface of
the body, and of promoting cutaneous perspiration, without having
witnessed remarkable change for the better produced in the constitu-
tion by adopting and persevering in this practice. Indeed I am dispo-
sed to attribute much of the benefit derived from exercise on horse-
back, as well as the good effects of sea voyage towards a mild climate,
to the increase of perspiration produced by these modes of gestation.

Every person suspicious of predisposition to pulmonary consumption
ought at all times, but especially in cold weather, to wear a quantity of
woollen clothing sufficient to obviate any approach to the perception of
chilliness; independently however of the actual presence of obstinate
hoarseness or cough, I am disposed to think that the requisite quantity
of flannel is more advantageously worn over the usual shirt, than in
immediate contact with the skin.
Vol. I. 53


418 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

The possibility of communicating the disease by contagion is a point
that has been much agitated. As a measure of precaution, the delicate
ought to decide this question for themselves in the affirmative. Ex-
halation from the lungs is the mode by which infectious diseases are
most generally propagated; and from analogy we might infer that air
impregnated with the effluvia of these organs in a state of ulceration,
would have a tendency to excite diseased action of a similar kind if
received into the lungs of a person previously disposed to this com-
plaint. I have seen more than one instance of a husband who appear-
ed to have no previous disposition to consumption, being affected with
a distressing cough, which continued to harass him for months while his
wife was lingering under that disease. On one melancholy occasion I
witnessed the successive deaths of three young ladies, two of whom,
in my opinion, decidedly caught the disease in consequence of their
sedulous attention, during the progress of the indisposition, to her who
was first affected, who evidently was of a phthisical habit, which was
not apparent in either of the others.

as characterising this disease renders its existence no longer equivocal,
the person so affected ought without delay to migrate towards a warmer
climate. Should circumstances render this expedient impracticable,
the next best plan a phthisical person can adopt is to remove into a low
and rather damp situation wheie bilious diseases prevail. The fatal
event of pulmonary consumption is uniformly accelerated by residing
in an elevated region. There are even instances on record of phthisis
making its appearance in families, previously unaffected by it, on
changing their places of residence from a level to a hilly country.
While on the contrary the inhabitants of extensive districts in low
places enjoy a complete immunity from this disease. In Holland, pul-
monary consumption is a disease of comparatively rare occurrence.
The same situations that predispose to ague are unfavourable to the
attack of phthisis, as if these tioo states of consumption were incom-
patible with each other. The physicians of ancient Rome were accus-
tomed to send their consumptive patients to the low and marshy land
of Egypt. Cicero, the celebrated orator, who, in his youth, was threat-
ened with consumption, as the hollow temples and sharp features of his
remaining busts abundantly testify, travelled into Egypt for the re-
covery of his health. In this country the choice of situation is not
sufficiently attended to.

In the incipient stages of phthisis pulmonalis a vomit taken in a
morning, fasting, I have known occasionally to be of use. Keeping
up a copious discharge from the surface of the chest by the savin oint-
ment subsequent to the applications of a strengthening-plaster, sometimes
appears to arrest the progress of the disease. — [Buchan.]

1 shall conclude this chapter by relating the following circumstance
which I recollect reading many years since and which may prove inter-
esting and useful."

A lady retired to the country to die, being in the last stage of con-
sumption. One morning while sitting at her chamber window she ob-
served a dog almost wasted to a skeleton, enter the garden very early,
into a bed of Chamomile and licked the dew from the flower of the


Order XV.] Csnsumptlon. H9

plant. After a number of days, she noticed an improvement in the ap-
pearance of tlit? consumptive animal. This induced her, as the last al-
ternative, to imitate his example, and every morning in the same man-
ner to sip the dew from the same bed. The effect of which was an
abatement of all her symptoms, followed by a perfect cure of her com-
plaint.

This story may at least inspire confidence enough to induce us to
drink freely of this excellent plant, if not literally to imitate the consump-
tive dog and lady.

Dr. Hopkins, one of the graduates of our school informs me, that dur-
ing his residence in South or North Carolina, a lady was nearly reduced
to a skeleton by the consumption. She was abandoned by the physician
as incurable and found no remedy from any source whatever.

In this situation, some person advised her to take the following prepa-
ration :

Take Polypody. *

Liverwort, (Ikpatica Triloba.)

A decoction to betaken freely through the day.

She took this medicine, and immediately began to grow better, and
after continuing it some time, it effected a radical cure, and she is now
well.

Never having used this combination, I am unable to speak of its ef-
fects in this complaint. Nor can 1 say positively that we are acquainted with
the Polypody which she used, and I therefore cannot give the botanical or
scientific name of it ; but I am well persuaded that the plant alluded to, is
the Polypodium Vulgar e, called by some fern root, rock brake, brake
root, female fern. I hope, however, before this work is closed, to ob-
tain correct information respecting this article, as the physician alluded
to, has promised to write to the lady who was cured, and if so, sucli
information will be found under the head of Polypodium. (Con-
tained in the Materia Mcdica connected with ibis work.)

Since writing the above, a physician informs me that a person in the
state of Connecticut was cured of a deep seated cough, attended with
haemoptysis, or bleeding at the lungs, by taking a syrup of the Polypo-
dy and Black Cohusfi.

The following receipt has been sent to me by Dr. T. Seely for inser-
tion in this work. He states that he has been remarkably successful in
treating consumption by the use of it.

Take Water, G oz.
Olive Oil, 2 oz.
Paregoric, 2 drachms,

Spirits of Ammonia (Hart shorn J 1 drachm,
Sugar, 2 oz. Mix.

Take a table-spoonful every two hours.

This medicine, says Dr. Seely, after proper evacuations and the
fluids corrected, will generally produce a vomica or abscess on the lungs,
which will discharge the most fetid matter that can be conceived ; at


420 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class 1 1 .

which time a gargle of yeast and water must be used to cleanse the mouth
and throat.

The following recipe is taken from a small Medical Treatise entitled
"Dr. John Williams's Last Legacy to the World," and which may be
taken with safety and advantage.

Take a table-spoonful of common Tar,

3 spoonfuls of Honey,

3 Yolks of Hens' Eggs,

Half a pint of Wine.
Mix together in a dish with a knife or spoon, then bottle for use.

Dose, a tea-spoonful morning, noon, and night before eating. Drink
barley tea for constant use.

Since the above I have received a communication from Dr. Lobstein,
on the properties and uses of a-plant called the Water Fennel, or fine
leaved Water Hemlock, in consumption, an account of which may be
seen, by reference to this article under the head of Materia Medico.


CHAPTER XVI.

PLEURISY, (Phuritis.)
DESCRIPTION.
Pleurisy'is an inflammation of the pleura, which lines the internal
coat of the thorax, and covers its viscera. When it is seated in this
membrane, which lines the inside of the breast, it is called a true or in-
ternal pleurisy; but when it chiefly occupies the external parts, and
principally affects the muscles within the ribs, it is called the'spurious or
bastard pleurisy. The pleurisy is most predominant in the spring sea-
son, and prevails among labouring people, especially such as are much
exposed, and are of a sanguine constitution.

CAUSES.

Its causes are cold applied to the skin; sudden and great distention
of the pleura in drawing breath; drinking cold liquors after being heated
by violent exercise ; cold, northerly winds ; sleeping without doors, on
the damp ground; wet clothes; plunging the body into cold water, or
exposing it to the cold air, in a state of perspiration. Generally speak-
ing, whatever obstructs perspiration may occasion the pleurisy. It may
also be produced by drinking strong liquors; stopping issues, ulcers,
sweating of the feet or hands, cr other usual evacuations; the sudden
striking in of the small-pox, measles, or any eruption. It may also be
brought on by violent exercise, as running, leaping, wrestling, lifting
heavy burthens, blows on the breast, &c.

SYMPTOMS.

This, like most other forms of fever, begins with chilliness and shiv-
ering, which arc followed by heat, thirst, and inquietude, and the other
common symptoms of fever. After a few hours the patient is seized
with a violent pricking pain in one of his sides, commonly about the


Order XVI.] Pkurisif. 421

short ribs, which sometimes extends itself towards the back bone, some-
times towards the shoulder bone, and towards the fore part of the breast,
and this is attended with frequent coughing.

The matter which the patient spits up is at first small in quantity, and
thin, and mixed with particles of blood; but as the disease advances, it
is more plentiful and more concocted, but not without a mixture ot
blood. The pulse is remarkably strong, and seems to vibrate like the
tense string of a musical instrument, and the blood drawn from a vein,
as soon as it is cold, looks like melted suet. Sometimes there is little
or no spitting in this disease, and hence pleurisies are distinguished into
moist and dry.

PROGNOSIS.

An idea of the termination of the disease may be drawn from the
severity of the symptoms. If the fever and inflammation have run high,
and the pain should cease suddenly, with change of countenance and a
sinking of the pulse, great danger may be apprehended ; but if the
heat and other febrile symptoms abate gradually, respiration is per-
formed with greater ease and less pain, and a free and copious expecto-
ration ensues, we may predict a favourable result. Empyema, or a col-
lection of pus in the cavity of the thorax, is occasionally one of the ter-
minations of plouritis.

DISSECTION.

The appearances on dissection arc an inflamed state of the pleura
connected with the lungs, having its surface crowded with red vessels,
and a layer of coagulable lymph lying upon it : adhesions also of the
substance of the lungs to the pleura. Besides these, the lungs them-
selves, are often found in an inflamed state, with an extravasation either
of blood or coagulated lymph in their substance. Tubercles and ab-
scesses are likewise frequently met with.

COMMON PRACTICE.

1 . Copious and repeating bleeding, even to fainting.

2. Blisters, nauseating doses of antimony, mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

I formerly bled in the commencement of this disease, but more re-
cently I have almost, or entirely dispensed with it, and substituted
treatment which I have found far less injurious, and much more effectual.

As soon as I am called to a patient laboring under an acute attack of
the pleurisy, I administer two tea-spoonfuls, of the Sudorific drops,
in half a pint of the infusion of Catnip, and repeat the same in half an
hour, if the first dose does not relieve the severe pain in the side. The
feet arc to be bathed in tepid water and lev. In conjunction with these
means, it will be necessary to apply the following fomentation to the side:

Cayenne or Red Pepper (Epncum Annuum.)
Alcohol or best Brandy, one pint.

Simmer a few minutes together, then dip flannels in the same, and ap-
ply to the side. When cool, repeat the same. Should this not relievo
the pain in one or two hours, apply the following fomentation :


422 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

Take Tanzy, ( Tanacetum Vulgarc.)

Wormwood, ( Absy thium Vulgare.)
Iloarhound, (Marrubium Vulgar e.)
Catnip, (Nepeta Cataria Vulgare.)
Boil all down together in a suitable quantity of water, and enclose the
same in flannel, and apply to the side as warm as can be borne. This
application mitigates the pain, relaxes the vessels, and prevents con-
gestion. If there is much cough and difficulty of expectoration, give the
following infusion:

Pleurisy root, (Asclepias Tuberosa.) half oz.
Bruise, add one pint of boiling water. Let this be drank freely through
the day. This infusion acts as an expectorant and diaphoretic, and will
be found altogether better than antimony. The drops recommended
with the other auxiliaries, produces in a short space of time, a copious
perspiration, and often cuts short the disease in a few hours, or at most
in a few days, and without debilitating or injuring the system, or pro-
tracting the disease, as bleeding invariably does. Should the pain in
the side, after the above treatment, continue, which very seldom is the
case, apply a Mustard Plaster over the seat of it.

After submitting to this course of treatment, should not the inflam-
mation be subdued, or nearly so, fifteen or twenty drops of the Tinc-
ture of Digitalis may be given every three or four hours, in a tumbler
of Pleurisy Root tea. If the patient is not free of pain at night or should
be very restless, give ten grains of the Diaphoretic Powders.

Purgatives must also be given every day or two.

REGIMEN.

The diet ought to be cool, slender, and diluting. The patient must
avoid all food that is hard of digestion, and every thing of a heating
or stimulating nature. This drink may be panado, gruel, &c.


Case 1. — Mr. A residing in Christie-street of this city, was sup-
posed to be dying with pleurisy ; catching for breath, and unable to ar-
ticulate, so severe was the complaint. Cough excessive, and no ex-
pectoration. The sudorific drops were administered in a strong infusion
of catnip, fomentations to his side, feet bathed, &c. The effect was in
a very short time to produce a copious perspiration, which removed the
acute symptoms almost immediately. In a kxv days he was well, and
attending to his business.

Case. 2. — A lady in Essex-street was taken in a similar manner. The
pain was so acute in the side, that it was with the utmost difficulty that
she could breathe ; constant inclination to cough ; great fever, pulse tense,
quick and hard ; her distress was so very great, that I though it best to
bleed her, as it appeared that she could not live but a few minutes. I as-
ked Dr. Downing, the physician who accompanied me (a real Brumoni-
an) for his lancet. He objected to the bleeding, and immediately re-
plied, "administer the sweating drops." I hesitated, fearing that I should
jeopardise the life of the patient, but finally concluded to try the
powers of vegetable medicine alone. I accordingly administered it to-
gether with a large quantity of an infusion of catnip, with the other


Order XVII.] Inflammation of the Heart. 423

medicines recommended, and relief was afforded in a few minutes.
She rapidly recovered, and in a few days was about her business as
strong as ever. Had this patient been bled, as is now practised by phy-
sicians, in all probability it would have killed her, or she would have
suffered under the influence of debility for a long time. A small vo-
lume might be filled with similar cases.

We now ask, if the worst cases of pleurisy can be cured without
bleeding, cannot every disease incident to the human body?*


CHAPTER XVII.

INFLAMMATION OFTHE HE A R T, (Pericarditis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is an inflammation of that membranous bag which surrounds
the heart, the use of which is to secrete and contain the vapour of the
pericardium, which lubricates the heart, and thus preserves it from
concreting with the pericardium.

SYMPTOMS.

Pain in the region of the heart, suffocating weight, violent palpita-
tion, motion of the heart, breathing by starts, dyspnea, or difficulty of
breathing, increased by motion or exercise. Pressure also aggravates
the symptoms. Pulse frequent and bounding; the countenance has a
peculiar pale and haggard appearance-.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The treatment of this complaint is very similar to other inflammatory
diseases. The sudorific drops may be given until perspiration is pro-
duced, and repeated occasionally to keep up a determination to the
surface.

If the pain and symptoms are very acute, apply a mustard plaster
over the region of the heart. The following pill may be given every
four hours through the day:

Foxglove, (digitalis purpurea.) Pulverize, and form into a pill of two grains.

Should there be much distress, want of sleep, &c. give the diaphor-
etic powders ; and give also freely an infusion of catnip, and let the
feet be frequently bathed.

* It is intended, should there be room, to occupy a small portion of this work
for the purpose of giving illustrations of our practice; very few therefore will be
given elsewhere.


424 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class 11.

CHRONIC INFLAMMATION OF THE HEART.

DESCRIPTION.

The same symptoms as in the acute, but with less violence, and more
protracted. It may arise from enlargement of the heart, or sub-acute
inflammation of that organ.

TREATMENT.

Give the digitalis pill occasionally through the day. A strengthen-
ing plaster may be laid over the region of the heart, and the bowels be
regulated by laxatives.

REGIMEN.

Great care is necessary in these complaints. No stimulating food, or
liquor should be taken. Avoid violent exercise of every kind; great
fatigue, and whatever has a tendency to debilitate the system. The
food should be light, and in no respect stimulating.


CHAPTER XVIII.

INFLAMMATION OF THE DIAPHRAM. (Paraphrenias. j

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is produced by an inflammation of the diaphram
that divides the thorax from the abdomen, usually called the Midriff.

CAUSES.

fhc same as Pleurisy.

SYMPTOMS.

There is very violent pain which is deep seated under the short ribs,
striking through to the back; breathing quick, small, and difficult; fre-
quent sickness and hiccup; the pulse is small, hard, frequent and irre-
gular. It is nearly connected with pleurisy.

TREATMENT.
The same as Pleurisy.


Order XIX.] Inflammation of the Stomach. 425


CHAPTER XIX.

INFLAMMATION OF THE STOMACH. (Gastritis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is an inflammmation of the coat or coats of the stomach, cnar-
acterized by fever, great anxiety, heat, pain over the region of the
organ, increased when any thing is taken into the stomach, hiccup,
pulse small, hard, and great debility.

CAUSE?.

Inflammation of the stomach is produced by acrid substances taken
into the stomach, such as arsenic, antimony, mercury, &c. Likewise
by food of an improper kind; drinking cold liquor when the body is
heated. It may be brought on by inflammation of some of the neighbour-
ing parts attacking the stomach.

SYMPTOMS.

Burning heand, pain and swelling, particularly after any liquor has
been swallowed ; hiccup, cold extremities, hard, quick and tense p
pain which is produced by pressure. There is also great thirst ; \
any thing is ate or drank, it produces great difficulty of breathing and
swallowing — sometimes syncope and fits will ensue. There is rest-
lessness, with continual tossing of the body, and great prostration of
strength.

PROGNOSIS.

The event of this disease is seldom favourable, especially under com-
mon treatment, as the patient is usually taken off by the violence of the
inflammation, or else it terminates in suppuration, ulceration, or mor-
tification.

If the symptoms are very mild, and proper remedies have been em-
ployed, it may terminate favourably by resolution in one or two weeks,
or it may become chronic in its character.

DISSECTION.

Fatal cases of this disease show on dissection a considerable redness
of the inner coat of the stomach, having a layer of coagulable lymph
lining its surface. They likewise show a partial thickening of the sub-
stance of the organ, at the inflamed part, the inflammation seldom ex-
tending over the whole of it. Where ulceration has taken place, the
ulcers sometimes are found to penetrate through all its coats, and some-
times only through one or two of them.

Vol. I. 54


426 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

COMMON TREATMENT.
Repeated bleedings, blisterings, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The Indications of Cure will be to allay the irritability of the stom-
ach, by lessening the inflammation.

In this disease, it will be necessary to give cooling and mucilaginous
drinks, and none will be found better tban the mucilage of slippery-elm
bark. Apply warm fomentations to the stomach, and remove them as
they grow cool. An ounce of sweet oil must be given every day, and if
the vomiting is very troublesome, a soda powder may be taken as
often as it occurs. Should this not mitigate the symptoms, the Dia-
phoretic Powders must be given, ten grains at a dose, as often as the
pain becomes violent. The feet must be often bathed, and should the
disease continue obstinate, apply a Mustard Plaster over the region of
the stomach, and afterwards between the shoulders.

Vomiting. — Should vomiting continue, give the following:

Bicarbonate of Potash, 1 dram.
Mint Water, 8 ounces. Mix.

Give a tea-spoonful or iwo, occasionally, or as often as the vomiting occurs.
All acrimonious, heating, and irritating food and drink are carefully
to be avoided. The weakness of the patient may deceive the bystand-
ers, and induce them to give him wines, spirits, or other cordials ; but
these never fail to increase the disease, and often occasion sudden death.
The inclination to vomit too, may often impose on the attendants, and
make them think a vomit necessary ; but that too is very fatal and serious.
The food must be light, thin, cool, and easy of digestion; it must be
given in small quantities, and should neither be quite cold, nor too hot.
Thin indian meal gruel has a charming effect in this complaint ; light
toasted bread dissolved in boiling water, or very weak chicken broth
are very proper. The drink should be clear whey, barley water, in
which toasted bread has been boiled, or decoctions of mucilaginous
vegetables, as Marsh Mallows, Bene Plant, and Slippery Elm.


Order XX.] Inflammation of the Liver. 427


CHAPTER XX.

INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER. (Hepatitis.)

DESCRIPTION.

By this disease, we understand an inflammation either in the mem-
branes or substance of the liver, characterized by febrile excitement,
with tension and pain of the right hypochondrium, or side often pun-
gent, like that of pleurisy, but more frequently dull, or obtuse, a pain
at the top of the shoulder blade and clavicle, and in the right side ; dif-
ficulty of breathing, dry cough, vomiting, and hiccup. Yellowness of
the eyes sometimes appeal - . This disease is either chronic or acute.

CAUSES.

The causes are all those producing inflammation, schirrhous tumours
in the liver; injuries from external violence; biliary ducts; hot cli-
mate; obstructing tho hepatic ducts; any thing that suddenly cools
the liver after it has been much heated ; drinking largely of wines and
spirituous liquors; eating hot, spicy aliment; violent exercise; exposure
of the heated body to the cold air, <fcc.

Those who have exposed themselves to the destructive habit of drink-
ing to excess, are particularly liable to diseases of the liver. Tuber-
cles, schirrhous hardness, and chronic inflammations, are the change
which, in general, are produced in this organ, by this pernicious prac-
tice.

SYMPTOMS.

The acute species of hepatitis comes on with a pain in the right hy-
pochondrium, or side, extending up to the clavicle and shoulder; which
is much increased by pressing upon the part, and Js accompanied with
a cough, oppression of breathing, and difficulty of lying on the left side;
together with nausea and sickness, and often with a vomiting of bilious
matter. The urine is of a deep saffron colour, and small in quantity;
there is loss of appetite, great thirst, and costiveness, with a strong,
hard, and frequent pulse; and when the disease has continued for some
days, the skin and eyes become tinged of a deep yellow. When the
inflammation is in the cellular structure or substance of the liver, it is
called by some hepatitis parenchymatoso, and when the gall-bladder
which is attached to this organ, is the seat of the inflammation, it has
been called hepatitis cystica.

The chronic species is usually accompanied with a morbid com-
plexion, loss of appetite and flesh, costiveness, indigestion, flatulency,
pains in the stomach, a yellow tinge of the skin and eyes, clay-colour-
ed stools, high-coloured urine, depositing a red sediment and ropy mu-


428 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

cus; an obtuse pain in the region of the liver, extending to the shoul-
der, and not unfrequently with a considerable degree of asthma.

The symptoms are, however, often so mild and insignificant as to
pass almost unnoticed; as large abscesses have been found in the liver
upon dissection, which in the person's lifetime had created little or no
inconvenience, and which we may presume to have been occasioned
by some previous inflammation.

Hepatitis, like other inflammations, may end in resolution, suppur-
ation, gangrene, or scirrhous; but its termination in gangrene is a rare
occurrence.

PROGNOSIS.

The disease is seldom attended with fatal consequences of an imme-
diate nature, and is often carried off by haemorrhage from the nose, or
haemorrhoidal vessels, and likewise by sweating, by a diarrhoea, or by
an evacuation of urine, depositing a copious sediment. In a few in-
stances, it has been observed to cease on the appearance of erysipelas,
in some external part.

When suppuration takes place, as it generally does, before this forms
an adhesion with some neighbouring part, the pus is usually discharged
by the different outlets with which this part is connected, as by cough-
ing, vomiting, purging, or by an abscess breaking outwardly ; but, in
some instances, the pus has been discharged into the cavity of the ab-
domen, where no such adhesion had been formed.

DISSECTION.

On dissection, the liver is often found much enlarged, and hard to
the touch ; its colour is more of a deep purple than what is natural, and
iis membranes are more or less affected by inflammation. Dissections
likewise show that adhesions to the neighbouring parts often take place,
and large abscesses, containing a considerable quantity of pus, are of-
ten found in its substance.

COMMON PRACTICE.
Bleeding, mercury, and blistering.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — As in all other inflammatory diseases, the first
object will be to lessen the determination of blood to the part inflamed, by
equalizing the circulation; to effect which, it will be necessary to produce
a free perspiration. The feet must be bathed in warm water and ley,
and a tea-spoonful of the Sudorific Drops, in half a pint of an infu-
sion of Catnip must be given every hour until the pain ceases or
perspiration is produced or promoted. The patient must drink freely
of Balm or Pennyroyal tea. Let fomentations be applied warm to the
side, or over the region of the liver. Should they not take off the ten-
sion, and afford relief, apply Cayenne Pepper and brandy simmer-
ed a few minutes together. These may be applied as often, and as
warm as the stomach can bear. A purgative must be given daily while


Order XX.] Inflammation of the Liver. 429

the acute symptoms continue. In this disease vomiting is a very atten-
dant symptom, to allay which give the following mixture:

One dram of Suprrcarbonate of Potash.
Peppermint water, 8 ounces. Mix.

Give a table-spoonful as often as the vomiting returns. This will al-
lay the irritability of the stomach. Should not these applications miti-
gate the symptoms, apply the following plaster to the side.

Take Mustard.

Red Cayenne Pepper, equal parts.

Indian meal, a table-spoonful.

Vinegar sufficient to form a plaster, or poultice of suitable consistence.

Apply warm to the side, and continue it as long as the patient can
bear. I have occasionally applied a blister in this disease, but I find that
Mustard Plasters do much better. Blisters should be dispensed with, their
effect always proving very troublesome and not unfrequently serious.
If the pain continue severe and prevent sleep, ten grains of the Diapho-
retic Poivders may be given in currant jelly, roasted apple, or any
other convenient vehicle, every two hours until relief is afforded.

If the stomach continue to exhibit a morbid state, which is sometimes
the case from sympathy, great relief will be found by giving a mild
emetic of the tincture of lobelia every other morning or evening. This
will stimulate the liver to healthy action when other means fail, and should
the disease be so obstinate as to resist the above treatment, which with
me has been invariably successful, cupping may be resorted to. One
application of which is far better than many bleedings from the arm.

Regimen. — The same regimen is to be observed in this as in other
inflammatory disorders. All heating articles are to be carefully avoided,
and cool diluting liquors, as whey, barley water, &c. drank freely. The
food must be light and thin, and the body, as well as the mind, kept ea-
sy and quiet.


CHRONIC INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER.

DESCRIPTION.

Sometimes inflammation of the liver becomes.chronic in its character
as before mentioned, arising from long continued intermittents, and other
causes. The symptoms are a dull pain in the right side, and top of the
shoulder, the stomach sometimes disordered, yellow tinge of the skin,
and often a swelling over the region of the liver.

TREATMENT.

Tincture of lobelia may be given two or three times a week, and our
Common Purgatives administered as often. Deobstruent medicines
must likewise be given, as the following :

Eitract of Dandelion Root, three grains.


430 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

Form a pill, and give two or three at a dose every day. Apply our
common strengthening plaster to the side, and let it remain for several
weeks. If the disease prove obstinate, give a portion of mandrake,
twice a week.

Some are in the habit of applying mercurial ointment over the region
of the liver. Commodore Lewis's wife, of Perth Amboy, N. J. com-
municated the following circumstance to me. Her husband was sta-
tioned in the Isle of Wight, during which she resided with him. The
intendant of the island, afflicted with a liver complaint, was given over
by five physicians as incurable. He had become unable to move in bed
with an enormous swelling of the liver, emaciation, &c. He was prevailed
upon to apply to a physician who was reputed to be very skilful, but
who was much despised by the other physicians. He came, and commen-
ced rubbing an ointment over the region of the liver ; and from that very
hour he began rapidly to recover, and in a short time became entirely
well. Such confidence had Mrs. Lewis in this medicine that she pur-
chased a jar of it, and soon after this, she set sail in a transport ship for
America. During her passage she was attacked with the same com-
plaint, chronic inflammation of the liver. She requested the lady who
accompanied her, Mrs. W. to bathe her side every day, the effect of
which was to diminish the pain, and mitigate all the symptoms, and it soon
cured her. After relating this circumstance she handed me a small
quantity of the same ointment, which, she stated, she had kept in her
possession 25 years. I took it, and employed Mr. Chilton, of this city,
to analyse the preparation, and to inform me particularly whether it con-
tained any mercury, as I supposed this was the basis of it. He informed
me that it contained not a particle, although I am induced to believe that it
did contain that mineral, from the fact, that the lady who bathed the
side of the patient, was slightly salivated, while it had no such effect
upon the subject of the disease. As great an enemy as I am to mercu-
ry, I am willing to admit that it may sometimes exert a beneficial effect
upon the liver used in this manner ; but at the same time it is no longer a
question, whether it does not produce more mischief than benefit.


Order XXI.] Inflammation of the Liver. 431

CHAPTER XXI.

INFLAMMATION OF THE SPLEEN. (Splenitis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease very much resembles inflammation of the liver, but the
pain is in the left side.

SYMPTOxMS.

It is characterized by fever, tension, heat, tumour, and pain in
the left hypochondrium or side, increased by pressure. This disease
comes on with a remarkable shivering, succeeded by a most intense heat
and very great thirst ; a pain and tumour are perceived in the left hypo-
chondrium, and the paroxysms for the most part assume a quartan form ;
when the patients expose themselves for a little to the free air, their ex-
tremities immediately grow very cold. If a haemorrhage happens, the
blood flows out of the left nostril. The other symptoms are the same
with those of the hepatitis, or inflammation of the liver. Like the liv-
er, the spleen is also subject to a clironic inflammation, which often hap-
pens after agues, and is called the "ague cake," though that name is al-
so frequently given to a schirrous tumour of the liver succeeding inter-
mittents.

CAUSES.

The causes of this disease are the same with those of other inflamma-
tory disorders ; but those which determine the inflammation to that par-
ticular part more than another, are very much unknown more than
cold. It attacks persons of a very plethoric and sanguine habit of
body rather than others.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, mercury, and blistering.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

subdue the inflammation.

1. Give a purgative every day, or every other day, according to the
strength of the system, and severity of the disease.

2. Give sudorific medicines to produce perspiration.

3. Apply Cayenne pepper, (capsicum annuum,) mixed and simmer-
ed with spirits to the part.

4. Should this not relieve tho pain, and mitigate the symptoms, a
mustard plastor may be applied to the side, or over the region of the
spleen.


432 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.


CHRONIC INFLAMMATION OF THE SPLEEN.

Tho spleen sometimes becomes enlarged, and suppurates. This
may be known by the soft or schirrhous feeling. In either case it
is seldom attended with danger. Should symptoms of suppuration
appear, a poultice may be applied to the part, and thus be promo-
ted. Should the spleen become soft and pulpy, and partly destroyed,
as is sometimes the case, a plaster may be applied to the side, composed
of equal parts of rosin and common soap, melted together, and spread
on a piece of thin leather to the side, and purgatives and emetics occa-
sionally used, together with electricity.


CHAPTER XXII.

INFLAMMATION OFjHE INTESTINES. {Enteritis.)

DESCRIPTION.

An inflammation of the mucous membrane lining the intestines. This
disease is characterized by fever, fixed pain in the abdomen, costiveness,
and vomiting.

CAUSES.

An inflammation of the intestines is occasioned by long continued
costiveness or hardened feculent matter lodged in some part of the tube;
by the strangulation of a protruded portion of the gut in a rupture, by
preceding colic, eating unripe fruits or great quantity of nuts, and by
schirrous tumours of the intestines, or strictures; but the most fre-
quent causes is exposure to cold, particularly when applied to the lower
extremities or belly itself, and occasionally by cold drink swallowed
when the body is much heated by exercise.

SYMPTOMS.

This dangerous and painful disease is characterized by acute pain
in the bowels, which is much increased upon pressure, and shoots round
the navel in a twisting manner ; there is obstinate costiveness, tension
of the belly, and a vomiting generally bilious, or dark and fetid ; the
urine is high coloured, the pulse quick, hard, and contracted, with
some degree of febrile heat, thirst, and great depression or loss of
strength. The patient is constantly belching up wind, and, in protrac-
ted cases, he even discharges excrement by the mouth, the motion of
the intestines becoming invertedfrom their being no passage downwards.

DISCRIMINATION.

The only disease which can be mistaken for this, is colic; but an
inflammation of the intestines is accompanied with fever, the other
not ; the pain moreover is considerably increased by pressure with the


Order XXII.] Inflammation of the Intestines. 433

hand on the belly, whereas in colic it is thereby somewhat relieved.
The chief symptom indeed which distinguishes inflammation of the
intestines from a colic is the extreme tenderness of the belly to the touch
in the former disease, which, coupled with a quick small pulse and
other appearances usually attending on an inflammation of the intestines,
cannot fail to point out with great certainty the nature of the malady.
There is also in inflammation of the intestines or bowels, considera-
ble swelling.

PROGNOSIS.

The following symptoms denote a favourable termination, viz.* the
pulse losing its frequency and becoming natural ; the pain changing its
seat, and not being confined to a particular part , the belly becoming
less tender to the touch and less painful ; stools taking place ; the urine
depositing a sediment ; and a warm equable sweat diffused over the
body. The symptoms which have already been enumerated as indicative
of a mortification having taken place, point out approaching dissolution.

If by the adoption of proper means at an early period we are able to
subdue the inflammation, and copious evacuations by stool ensue, then
there will be a gradual diminution of all the symptoms, and in due time
health will be restored ; but when there is a sudden cessation of pain
and anxiety, and the patient becomes calm and collected, the counte-
nance assumes a livid and cadaverous hue, and the pulse intermits,
hiccups and startings of the tendons takes place, the face and hands are
bedewed with clammy sweats, and the extremities become cold, we may
be assured that a mortification has taken place.

; DISSECTION.

Dissection of this disease show, that the inflammation pervades the
intestinal tube to a very considerable extent; that adhesions of the dis-
eased portion to contiguous parts are formed ; and that, in some cases,
the intestines are in a gangrenous state, or that ulcerations have formed.
They likewise show, that, besides obstinate obstructions, introsuscep-
tion, constrictions, and twistings, are often to be met with ; and that,
in most cases, the peritonaeum is more or less affected, and is perceived,
at times to be covered with a layer of coagulable lymph.

COMMON TREATMENT.
Bleeding copious and repeated, blistering, laudanum, mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Stimulating purgatives should be avoided in this disease, as (Iicy arc
calculated to exasperate it. The most antiphlogistic or cooling treatment
and regimen must be followed. The feet should be frequently bathed
An ounce of cold pressed castor oil may be given every two hours, until
it acts upon the bowels, and afterwards administered as occasion requires,
in strong ley water, and warm fomentations applied to the abdomen.

Should not this operate as a laxative or purgative, administer the
following injection.

Vol. I. 55


4S4 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

" Take one pint of the infusion of Slippery Elm Dark, ( Ulmus Fulva.)
One pint of milk,

Olive or sweet oil, (Oleum Olivarum,) 1 gill,
Molasses, half a pint,
Bi-Carbonate of Potash, rdrachm,
Laudanum, half an ounce. Mix.

Administer this injection blood-warm, with a French syringe, to be
repeated according to the urgency of the symptoms. If the pain is se-
vere, it may be given every two hours.

To allay the irritation of the stomach, and vomiting, which not un-
frequently attend this disease, as well as to mitigate urgent symptoms,
ten grains of the Anodyne or Diaphoretic Powders, may be given every
two hours till relief is afforded, and a dose also given every night.

Bleeding and blistering is much resorted to in inflammation of the
intestines; yet I have never known any benefit derived from it. But
on the contrary much injury.

Should not this treatment arrest the complaint in a short time, the
following fomentation may be applied :

Take Tanzy, Wormwood, Hoarhound, and Hops,

Boil all in vinegar and water, then enclose them in flannel or muslin;
apply to the abdomen, and change them often.

Should vomiting be a predominant symptom, the following prepara-
tion may be given.

Infusion of Spearmint, (Mentha Saliva) 8 ounces,
Sal ^Eratus, [Bicarbonate of Potash] 1 drachm.

Give a table-spoonful every hour.

The inflammation sometimes is so great that the passage of the bow-
els seems closed so that nothing will pass them. Should this be the case,
tient may be put into a warm bath, and occasionally repeated. Should
the swelling, inflammation, or pain, continue after the above treatment, let
a Mustard Plaster be applied to the bowels, and kept on till the skin
is reddened.

A repetition of the same means must be continued until the patient is
cured.

REGIMEN.

The regimen in this disease should by no means be stimulating, but
the reverse. The most cooling, demulcent and diluting, such as Slip-
pery Elm, Flax Seed, Barley water, clear Whey, &c.


INFLAMMATION OF THE PERITONAEUM.

This membrane envelops and surrounds all the different organs which
are sealed in the abdomen, or cavity of the belly; it defends them from
injury by any motion or concussion, and their whole mass is prevented
through its means from being misplaced by their own weight.

The disease is accompanied by symptoms pretty similar to the same
affection of the intestines just pointed out; it arises from the same causes
and must be treated in a similar manner.


Order XXIII.] Inflammation $f the Kidneys.


CHAPTER XXIII.

INFLAMMATION OF THE KIDNEYS, (Nephritit.)
DESCRIPTION.

Inflammation of the kidneys is known by fever, pain in the region of
the kidneys, and shooting along the course of the ureter ; drawing up
of the testicles; numbness of the thigh; vomiting; urine high-coloured,
and frequently discharged ; costiveness, and colic pains. Nephritis is
symptomatic of calculus, gout, &c.

CAUSES.

The causes which give rise to nephritis are external contusions, strains
of the back, acrids conveyed to the kidneys in the course of the circula-
tion, violent and severe exercise, either in riding or walking, calculous
concretions lodged in the kidneys or ureters, and exposure to cold. In
some habits there is an evident predisposition to this complaint, particu-
larly the gouty, and in these there are often translations of the matter to
the kidneys, which very much imitate nephritis.

SYMPTOMS.

This disorder is characterized by an acute, pungent, or more fre-
quently an obtuse or dull pain in the region of the kidneys, shooting
along the course of the ureters, or ducts which convey the urine from
them into the bladder; pain also in the small of the back, together with
a fever, and frequent discharge of urine which is small in quantity, red
and high coloured, yet in the highest degree of the disease, watery and
limpid ; the thigh feels benumbed, and there is a pain in the groin and
testicle of the same side, together with a retraction. There are, more-
over, continual eructations with bilious vomitings, debility, <&c.

This disease sometimes assumes a chronic form, known by heat, pain,
&c. over the loins.

DIAGNOSIS.

This inflammation may be distinguished from the colic by the pain
being seated very far back, and by the difficulty of passing urine, which
constantly attends it; and it may be distinguished from rheumatism, as
the pain is but little influenced or increased by motion.

Nephritis is to be distinguished from a calculus in the kidney or ure-
ter, by the symptoms of fever accompanying, or immediately following
the attack of pain, and these continuing without any remarkable inter-
mission; whereas, in a calculus of the kidneys or ureter, they do not
occur until a considerable time after violent pain has been felt. In the
latter case, too, a numbness of the thigh, and a retraction of the testi-
cle on the affected side, usually takes place.

DISSECTION.

Dissections of nephritis show the usual effects of inflammation on the
kidney; and they likewise often discover the formation of abscesses,
which have destroyed its whole substance. In a few instances, the kid-
ney has been found in a scirrhous state.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, calomel, antimony, opium.


436 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

REFORMED PRACTICE.
The first object to accomplish is to relax the system, by producing
perspiration. If the pain be violent, apply over the seat of the disease
the following fomentation of bitter herbs :
Take Hops,

"Wormwood, equal parts.
Simmer in vinegar and water, apply warm and renew often.
The following formula may be given to diminish the inflammation of
the kidneys, to promote the urinary discharge, &c.

Take Spirits of Nitre, (Spirilus Nitri Dulcis) 1 ounce.

m Balsam of Copaiva, (Copaifera Officinalis) half ounce,
Spirits of Turpentine, (Spts. Terebenth) 1 ounce.
Oil of Sweet Almonds, (01. Amyg.) 1 ounce,
Gum Camphor, 1 dram. Mix.

Give a tea-spoonful three or four times through the day, in one or
two tea-spoonfuls of the mucilage of Gum Arabic. At the same time
give through the day the following decoction :

Take Marsh Mallows,

Queen of the Meadow, equal parts.

Make a strong decoction, drink freely and warm. This promotes the
discharge of urine, and allays irritation.

It will be necessary if the patient be of a costive habit, to give
a purgative every day or two, according to the violence of the dis-
ease. Sometimes spasms arise from irritation of gravel passing the
ureters. When this is the case, an Opium Pill containing two or three
grains may be administered every two hours until relief is afforded,
and the patient may be put into a warm bath. This usually affords great
and sudden relief,

When the disease is chronic, and there is pain in the small of the
back, &c. let the part affected be bathed with the fol-low :

Red Pepper or Cayenne, (Capsicum,) 1 ounce.
Alcohol, 1 pint.

Bathe the parts two or three times a day, and use the drops mentioned
above. In the course of a few days, or when the inflammation has
measurably subsided, apply a strengthening plaster to the back.

Vomiting. — Should the disease be attended with vomiting, which is
often the case, give Sal JEratus. One tea-spoonful may be dissolved in
half a pint of cold water, a table-spoonful given as often as vomiting takes
place. At the same time give an infusion or tea of Peppermint.

REGIMEN.

Every thing of a heating or stimulating nature is to be avoided. The
food must be thin and light ; as panado, Indian gruel, broths, with mild
vegetables, mint tea drank freely. Emollient and thin liquors must be
plentifully drunk; as clear whey, or balm-tea sweetened with honey,
decoctions of marsh-mallow roots, with barley, &c. The patient, not-
withstanding the vomiting, must constantly keep sipping small quanti-
ties of these or other diluting liquors. Nothing so safely and certainly
abates the inflammation, and expels the obstructing cause, as copious


Order XXIV.] Inflammation of the Womb. 437

dilution. The patient must be kept easy, quiet, and free from cold, as
long as any symptoms of inflammation remain.
Let the feet be often bathed.


CHAPTER XXIV.
INFLAMMATION .OF THE WOMB. (Hysterilu.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is characterized by fever, heat, tension, tumour, pain in
the region of the womb and vomiting.

CAUSES.

Besides the common causes productive of inflammation, this disease
sometimes takes place after delivery, particularly where the labour has
been long protracted, instruments have been used, or the lochial discharge
which ought to have taken place has been suddenly stopped by an ex-
posure to cold.

SYMPTOMS.

It is accompanied by pains in the lower region of the belly, which
are greatly aggravated upon pressure with the hand, as also by tension
or tightness of the surrounding parts, considerable depression of strength,
a change of countenance, increased heat of the whole body, great thirst,
nausea, and vomiting. The pulse is weak, but hard and frequent ; the
bowels confined, the urine high-coloured and scanty, the secretion of
milk somewhat interrupted, and the lochial discharge much diminished
if not wholly suppressed.

Inflammation of the womb is always attended with danger, particu-
larly if the symptoms run high, and proper means to arrest its progress
are not promptly adopted ; for in such cases it is apt to terminate either
in suppuration, scirrhosity, or a mortification.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, blistering, &c.

REFORMED TREATMENT.

Perspiration ought to be promoted as soon as possible. An infusion of
catnip should be drank freely with a tea-spoonful of the sweating, or
sudorific drops. The abdomen should be freely fomented as in other
inflammatory diseases.

When there is great irritation, an Anodyne may be administered ;
ten grains of the Diaphoretic Powders.

A Cathartic may be occasionally given.


438 Inflammatory Diseases, [Class II.


INFLAMMATION OF THE BLADDER. (Cittitu.)

DESCRIPTION.
This disease is characterized by pain in the region of the bladder,
attended with fever, and hard pulse, frequent, painful discharge of urine,
with suppression and general tenesmus.

CAUSES.

It is occasioned by an improper use of acid medicines, such as can-
tharides; by inflammation extending along the urethra or urinary chan-
nel; by permanent or spasmodic stricture; by local irritation, from the
lodgment of a stone ; by hardened foeces, or a diseased state of the
prostrate gland; and by mechanical injury, as well as by all the usual
causes of inflammation.

SYMPTOMS.

Where this disease exists, an acute burning pain and some degree of
tension at the bottom of the belly, with a constant desire to make water,
a difficulty in voiding it, or total stoppage, a frequent inclination to go
to stool, much uneasiness and heat, a general febrile disposition, a fre-
quent and hard pulse ; sickness and vomiting not unfrequently attend.

TREATMENT.

We must employ similar means in this disease, as in the inflammation
of the kidneys. The Hip or Warm Bath may be employed morning
and evening.

The Diuretic drops must be given, also Mint and Barley tea.

Fomentations of bitter herbs must also be applied over the region of the
bladder.

The patient should abstain from every thing that is of a hot, acrid,
and stimulating quality ; and should live entirely upon small broths,
gruels, and mild vegetables.

Purgatives must also be administered.


Order XXV.] Rheumatism. 439


CHAPTER XXV.

RHEUMATISM, (Rluumaiismus.)

DESCRIPTION.

The rheumatism is a very painful disease which affects the muscles
and joints in different parts of the body, and, in many cases, so
nearly resembles the gout as to be distinguished from it with difficulty.
It makes its attacks in all seasons of the year when the atmosphere is
moist and variable, but is more frequently met with in the autumn and
spring. It is sometimes accompanied with fever, and sometimes there
is none. In the former instance, it is known under the name of acute
rheumatism : in the latter, it is called chronic rheumatism.

CAUSES.

Obstructed perspiration, occasioned either by laying in damp linen
or damp unventilated rooms, wearing wet clothes, or being exposed to
cold air, after having been much heated by exercise, or other ways,
may be considered the chief and most frequent causes of the rheuma-
tism.

The gout is the disorder which most nearly resembles the rheumatism,
but in the latter, it is principally the large joints which are affected ;
moreover, the pain frequently shifts its seat, and follows the course of
the muscles in its transition to other parts. Besides, it is in general
preceded by flatulency and indigestion, as is the case in gout; and it
occurs at any period of life, whereas gout is usually confined to adults.

PROGNOSIS.

The deposite of a reddish sediment in the urine, or its becoming
cloudy, with a general but gentle moisture on the skin, are to be re-
garded as very favourable appearances in acute rheumatism ; but the
inflammation assuming a dark red colour, followed by vesications, as
in bad cases of erysipelas ; the urine being pale, the febrile symptoms
very high with delirium, or translations of the inflammation to the head,
thest, heart, diaphragm, stomach, or other organs contained in the
cavity of the belly, and producing the symptoms of the primary deseases
of these parts, are to be considered as very dangerous.

SYMPTOMS.

The acute rheumatism generally commences with weariness and
shivering, succeeded by heat, thirst, restlessness, anxiety, a hard
full, and quick pulse, and all the usual symptoms of inflammatory
fever. After a short lapse of time, acute pain is felt by the patient in
one or more of the large joints of the body, and these are followed by a
tension and swelling of the parts so affected. The pain is transito-


440 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

ry, and generally, shift from one joint to another, leaving the part
it occupied, red, swollen, and very tender to the touch. The tongue
is white, the bowels are obstinantely costive in general, the urine is
high coloured, the pulse full and hard; the blood, when drawn from a
vein, exhibits a thick buffy coloured coat on its surface, as in pleurisy;
and sometimes there is a profuse sweating, unattended however by any
relief. When the patient is in bed, the pains are usually much increas-
ed, and he cannot bear the least motion without their being highly ag-
gravated.

The chronic form of rheumatism may either be a consequence of the
termination of the acute, or it may be independent of it. In the first
cases, the parts which are affected with inflammation, are left rigid,
weak, and, in some instances, puffed up, and the pain not being move-
able, is now confined to particular parts ; sometimes, however, it shifts
from one joint to another, but without being accompanied by any in-
flammation or fever. In the ltater cases, where it has risen from an
exposure to cold and sudden vicissitudes of the weather, pain seizes
the head, shoulders, knees, loins, wrists, and other parts ; and these
often continue for a considerable length of time, and then go off, leaving
the seat they occupied in a state of debility.

Very alarming and fatal symptoms sometimes follows the recession of
Rheumatism. It passes to the heart, diaphragm, stomach, bowels, and
every part of the body. When it is translated to the heart, the patient
is seized with acute pain and great anxiety over that region, palpitation,
partial fainting, pale, distressed countenance. When it is translated to
the brain it is attended with heaviness, with acute pain in the head, in-
tolerance of light and sight, wild and anxious expression of countenance,
occasional delirium, &c. When the stomach is affected by a recession
of this disease, pain, nausea, and vomiting. Sometimes the bladder is
affected with rheumatism producing a retention of urine and pain over
the seat of that organ. Sometimes it is translated to the lungs and pleura
which becomes affected, producing an inflammation of those parts.
Sometimes it passes to the uterus, or womb, &c.

Dr. Cox, of England, states that the numerous cases of organic dis-
ease of the heart and pericardium which he met with at Guy's Hyspital
were referable to, or connected with Rheumatism. All of which symp-
toms unquestionably arises from a retention of morbid humours in the
system.

DIAGNOSIS.

The Ancients considered Gout and Rheumatism the same ; but it is
very evident that there is a great difference between the two diseases.
The characteristic difference between Gout and Rheumatism is, that the
former attacks the small joints, while the latter attacks the system gener-
ally. Besides, the Rheumatism is generally produced by sudden changes
of the atmosphere, while the Gout is produced by the want of exercise,
the use of wine, rich, high seasoned and stimulating articles of diet.

PROGNOSIS.

The acute rheumatism is not frequently accompanied with much dan-
ger ; but, in a few instances, the patient has been destroyed by general


Order XXV.] Rheumatism. 441

inflammation, and now and then by a recession of the morbid matter to
some vital part, such as the head and lungs. Acute rheumatism, altho'
accompanied with a considerable degree of inflammation in particular
parts, has seldom been known to terminate in suppuration; butaseroug
or gelatinous effusion takes place.

DISSECTION.

Rheumatism seldom proving fatal, very few opportunities have offer-
ed for dissections of the disease. In the few which have occurred, the
same appearances have been observed as in inflammatory fever; effusion
within the cranium, and now and then affections of some of the viscera;

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, blistering, mercury, antimony and opium;

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The first and great object in acute rheumatism
is to lessen the inflammatory action and lower the fever;

A late author, Dr. Eberle, writes : The very profuse sanguineous
evacuations so frequently resorted to in this complaint, so far from prov-
ing beneficial, lead often to very disastrous consequences ; for experi-
ence has fully established the fact, that metastasis of the local affection
to an internal organ is particularly favored by thus draining the system
of its blood, and impairing the Vital energies.

"We have long been convinced," says Dr* Johnson, "from attentive
observation; that the system of detracting large quantities of blood id
cases of acute rheumatism, is productive of more frequent metastasis, or 1
a translation of the disease from the extremities to internal organs, than
a more moderate treatment. If we do quell the external inflammation*
a retrocession to some weakened organ is but too apt to take place. Of
this we have seen several instances." The records of medicine furnish
us with many examples illustrative of the correctness of this observation;
The case reported by Dr. Kemper is a striking instance of this kind;
This was a strongly marked instance of inflammatory rheumatism ; the
fever was violent, and the "joints of her limbs, from the elbows and
knees downwards, were affected with swelling, redness, and most acute
pain." In five days nearly eleven pints of blood were abstracted from
the patient. Metastasis of the disease soon took place, first to the lungs
and then to the head; At last the rheumatic affection returned to the
extremities and relieved the internal organs.* Dr. Armstrong, also,
has related a case of this kind. The inordinate use of the lancet, by
debilitating, is, moreover, apt to prolong the disease in a sub-acute, or
chronic state, and to strengthen the predisposition to a recurrence of the
affection. " In no Avay," says Scudamore,' " is a degeneracy into chro-
nic symptoms so certainly induced, as by that injudicious employment
of general bleeding which enfeebles the constitution, and still leaves the


* Philadelphia Journal of Medical and Physical Sciences, No. 12.

t London Medical and Physical Journal, No. 269.

56


442 Inflammatory Distant. [Class II.

rheumatic disposition in great force. Nor does the articular disease it-
self yield to the use of general bleeding in the manner which we might ex-
pect."*

Is it not remarkable that such a great change should take place
in the minds of physicians as regards jhe treatment of this disease]
They have ever considered it of the greatest importance to bleed copi-
ously and repeatedly, and this is agreeably to their pathological views of
acute rheumatism, being characterized by so much inflammation. Are
they not as liable to be mistaken in their views and treatment of other
diseases 1

Purgatives. — In this complaint it will be necessary,

1st. To give purgatives. Two or three operations are far more
beneficial than several bleedings. The common Vegetable Purgative
may be given, and repeated two or three times a week.

2d. Sudorifics. — It will be of the highest importance to administer
Sudorifics, and to promote free perspiration. For this purpose the vapour
bath may be used, if the patient be able to sit up, otherwise a tea-spoonful
of the Sudorific Drops may be given every two hours till perspiration
takes place, and afterwards to be given occasionally to keep up a mois-
ture of the skin, to be aided by drinking freely of an infusion of Catnip.

Gentle and uniform perspiration is always serviceable.

Emetics. — Some persons speak highly of emetics ; I cannot speakof
their effects from experience, never having used them in this complaint.

Anodynes. — If the pain prevents sleep, ten grains of Diaphoretic
Powders may be given at bedtime in syrup or molasses.

Oils or Liniments. — The following liniment may be used :

Take Oil of Hemlock, 1 oz.

Alcohol, 1 quart. Mix.

Let this be occasionally applied blood warm to the parts most pain-
ful and swelled.

If the inflammation be very acute, and the heat and swelling consid-
erable, bathe the body with the following wash :

Take Spirits, half a pint,
Vinegar, half a pint,
Rain-water, half a pint,
Salt, half an ounce. Mix.

Let it be applied tepid to the surface of the body, with a piece of flannel,
three or four times in the course of the day. This wash often affords
great relief, by lessening the heat, pain, and swelling.

Should there be much swelling and pain in the joints after the above
application, they may be bathed with the following mixture :

Take Oil of Turpentine, (01. Terebinth,) 1 oz.
Camphor, half an oz.
Alcohol, 1 pint. Mix.

Bathe the parts blood warm occasionally, or when there is much pain.


A Trtatise on the Nature and Cure of Rheumatism, London, 1827, page 70.


Order XXV.] Rheumatitm. 443

The patient may drink through the day the following infusion :

Take White Pine leaves or buds, 1 oz.
Hemlock leaves, 1 oz.
Boiling water, 1 quart.

A wine glass to be taken at a dose, and as often as the stomach can
bear.

When there is great tension, swelling, and pain of the joints, the fol-
lowing poultice will be found excellent :

Simmer together a short time, Bran and Vinegar, until a poultice of
proper consistence is formed, and apply tepid. I have known this simple
mixture afford relief when all other applications have proved useless.

This treatment will be found very effectual in curing inflammatory
rheumatism ; although the disease under the best treatment will be some-
times protracted , at other times it is cured very soon. By the common
treatment, it often degenerates into the chronic rheumatism, oris attend-
ed with other very serious consequences.

REGIMEN.

Cool and diluting diet, consisting chiefly of vegetable substances,
milk, &c. will be the most proper. Nothing heating should be prescrib-
ed in food or drink. Buttermilk may be drank freely ; also, barley
water and gruel.


CHRONIC RHEUMATISM.

DESCRIPTION.

The chronic rheumatism differs from the acute in its not being attend-
ed with fever or much inflammation, and the pain being usually con-
fined to some particular part of the body, as the shoulders, arms or
loins; but it is apt to occupy those joints which are surrounded by many
muscles, and particularly such muscles as are employed in the most
constant and vigorous exertions. When it affects those of the loins, it
is called lumbago ; when seated in the hip joint, it is known by the name
of sciatica.

CAUSES.

The causes of rheumatism are frequently the same as those of an
inflammatory fever, viz. an obstructed prespiration, the immoderate
use of strong liquors, sudden changes of the weather, and all quick
transitions from heat to cold, are very apt to occasion the rheumatism.
The most extraordinary case of a rheumatism that I ever saw, says a
writer, where almost every joint of the body was distorted, was a man
who used to work one part of the day by the fire, and the other
part of it in the water. Very obstinate rheumatisms have likewise been
brought on by persons not accustomed to it, allowing their feet to con-
tinue long wet. The same effects are often produced by wet clothes,
damp beds, sitting or lying on the damp ground, travelling in the
night, &c.


444 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

The rheumatism may likewise be occasioned by excessive evacuations,
or the stoppage of customary discharges. It is often the effects of
chronic diseases, which vitiate the humours ; as the scurvy, the lues
venerea, obstinate autumnal agues, &c.

The rheumatism prevails in cold, damp, marshy countries. It is the
most common among those who are ill-clothed, live in low damp houses,
and eat coarse and unwholesome food, which contains but little nour-
ishment, and is not easily digested.

SYMPTOMS.

The symptoms of chronic rheumatism, says Scudamore, are much less
uniform and definite than those which characterize the acute form of the
disease. Chronic is often the consequence of acute rheumatism ; but
it occurs also, frequently, as a direct consequence of exposure to cold
and damp air, more especially when the system is under the influence
of mercury. The affected parts are commonly neither swollen nor
red ; nor is there often any manifest fever connected with the chronic
variety of the disease ; although quickness, tension, and contraction of
the pulse are in some instances present in the evening and during the
night. The pain often wanders from one part to another, fixing itself
by turns, in the head, shoulders, knees, wrists, fingers, hips, loins, &c. —
more especially in those cases which approach the subacute character.
Some individuals are hardly ever entirely free from pain ; others are
affected with it only occasionally, on the occurrence of damp and cold
weather. In some instances, the pain is seated in the joints: mothers,
in the muscles and parts situated between the joints. After remaining
at rest for a while the patient feels stiffness and pain on attempting to
move the affected limb; but on using exercise, until the body becomes
Warm, both the pain and stiffness are apt to disappear. Those who
are subject to this form of the disease generally feel a dull aching pain
in one or more joints on the approach of stormy and rainy weather.
Severe and inveterate cases of chronic rheumatism are apt to give rise
to organic disease of the tendons, bursae mucosae, with wasting and
hardening of the muscular structure about the affected parts. The joints
stiff. A jelly-like effusion into the cavity of the affected joints occurs
pccasionally.

PROGNOSIS.

No danger is attendant on chronic rheumatism ; but a person having
been opce attacked with it, is ever afterward more or less liable to
returns of it: and an incurable anchylosis is sometimes formed, in con-
sequence of very frequent relapses.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Sulphate of lime, stramonium, guaicum, &c. In some instances mer-
cury and arsenic is recommended.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The object in this disease will be
1st. To stimulate the cutaneous vessels to a healthy action, and thus
restore perspiration.


Order XXV.] Itheumatism. 445

2d. To attenuate the thick viscid or sizy state of the blood which in-
variably attends this complaint.

Internal Remedies. — The following syrup may be given :

Take Lignumvitae shavings, (Ligni. Guaic.) 1 lb.
Sarsaparilla, (Smilax Sarsaparilla,) 1 lb.
Sassafras Bark, (Cort. Sassafras,) quarter of a pound,
Burdock Seeds, (Sew. Arct. Lapp.) quarter of a pound.

Boil the whole till the strength is extracted, then evaporate to four quarts.
Add sufficient sugar to prevent fermentation. A vrine-glass may be
taken or given three or four times a day. This will have a decided
good effect in this disease.

The following infusion may likewise be taken in conjunction with the
above syrup.

Take White Pine Bark, (Cort Pinus Sylvestris,)
Burdock Seeds, (Sem. Arct. Lappa,)
Prickly Ash Bark, (Zanthoxi Ion Fraxineum,)
Virginia Snake root, ( Serpentaria: Virginiana.)

Equal parts.

Make a strong infusion, and drink freely through the day.
After using the above prescription, should the complaint still prove
obstinate, the following liquid may be administered.

Take Extract of Poke-berry, (Phytolacca Decandria,) half an ounce,
White Pine Turpentine, (Terebinth,) half an ounce.

Add one quart of Malaga wine. Half a wine-glass may be given
three times a day, and the dose gradually increased to a wine-glass.
External remedies. — Bathe the parts with the following tincture :

Take Cayenne Pepper, (Capsicum Annuum,) 1 oz.
Alcohol, 1 quart. Mix.

To be applied warm with a piece of flannel. The parts may also be
bathed with the following :

Take Oil of Sassafras, (01. Sassafras,) 1 oz.

Oil of Hemlock, (Abies Canadensis,) 1 oz.

Oil of Red Cedar, (Pinus Cedra Rubra,) 1 oz.

Oil of Spearmint, (Menth. Saliva,) 1 oz.

Turpentine, (01. Terebinth,) 1 oz.

Olive Oil, (01. Oliv.) 1 oz.

Camphor, (Camphora,) 1 oz. Mix.

Bathe the parts two or three times a day warm,

The common strengthening plaster may be applied to the parts most
affected after the use of the above articles, or when the disease is par-
tially subsided.

The Vapour Bath may be occasionally used in this complaint. In
consequence of the free perspiration it produces it will be found very
serviceable.


446 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

REGIMEN.

A heating or stimulating diet may be used in this disease.

Cayenne pepper and mustard may be taken with food. Also, arti-
cles containing ginger.

Flannel should be worn during the day, and taken off at night. The
greatest precaution should be observed to prevent a check of perspira-
tion from the vicissitudes of the weather, or other causes.


MERCURIAL RHEUMATISM.

This disease is somewhat similar to the chronic, but more painful and
more difficult to remove. It proceeds from the use of the universal pa-
nacea now given called mercury. At every change of the weather the
person feels most intolerable pains ; indeed his system is a complete
thermometer by which he is enabled always to designate the variation
of the weather. The treatment in this disease is similar to the chronic
rheumatism. Sulphur and cream of tartar may be given internally, and
a plaster composed of sulphur and Venice turpentine applied to the
joints and renewed often. The syrup mentioned in the preceding dis-
ease may also be freely taken to eradicate the mercury from the sys-
tem. The Vapour Bath will also be found useful.

The following is taken from " Dr. John Williams's last legacy to the
world," and recommended in this disease.

Take Princes pine-tops,
Horse-radish roots,
Elecampane roots,
Prickly-Ash bark,
Bitter-sweet bark off of the root,
Wild-cherry bark,
Mustard Seed. A small handful of each. Make a decoction and drink.

One gill of tar water into one pint of brandy, or the same proportion.
Drink a small glass before eating, three times a day.


The following remedy has been forwarded by a very respectable and
judicious physician for insertion in this work.

" For Sciatic, or Sciatica, Arteria. — Make a beer of the following
articles :

Spruce, Sage, Sarsaparilla, Hackmetac, or by another name, Ta-
marac, garden Rhubarb, Elder roots, the bark of Burdock roots, Even
roots, or by some called Even's root, Rheumety or Wintergrecn, such
as bears the red aromatic berries, grows low, and keeps green through-
out the winter, Water- Cresses. *

Syrup. — Spikenard, Comfrey, White Solomon's Seal, Johnswort,
Sweet Egrimony, Prince's Feather, or what is called " love lies a bleed-
* n g»" (grows in the garden,) Swamp Brake roots, (a plenty,) one pound


Order XXV.] Rheumatism. 447

of Raisins, two ounces of Saffron. Put all into an earthen pot, adding
a course of sugar between each course of roots and herbs ; cover the
pot or jar with a rye dough or paste, put it in a hot oven, and when it is
sufficiently digested, wring out the liquor, add one tliird rum or brandy.
The beer is for common drink. The syrup is to be taken a wine-glass
full two or three times a day.

Tamcrac is a large tree, grows in some swamps and is evergreen.

A young woman, a relation of mine, when in her childhood, was more
than ordinary sprightly, active, and healthy. At about the close of her
youthful days she was afflicted with sciatic pains. Her parents
were wealthy, and spared no cost or pains for her relief. They lived
in Windham county, Conn. Her father employed the most renowned
of the faculty from Hartford, New Haven, Rhode Island, and Boston ;
and after spending much money and suffering much grief for his beloved
daughter, and her physicians had pronounced her case incurable, all
hopes of her recovery were given up. At this time one of her legs was
so much contracted, that her heel pressed so hard against the muscle
glutaeus major, that it gave her pain, and thus was she a cripple unable
to help herself.

At length as Providence was pleased to restore her, he caused a poor
indigent old man to pass that way, who called at her father's house to
ask alms, who was taken in, and hospitably fed and clothed. The poor
man saw her situation, pitied her case and kindly offered to pour in the
oil and wine and healing balm as above, and in about two years after I
saw her at a ball, and she danced as spiritedly as any lady in the circle
and was well and sprightly. Some time after, (agreeably to her own
language,) thinking of her late and present health and comfort, and what
she had suffered, she felt conscientious of her duty towards her benefac-
tor and Creator for her recovery,and besought the Lord in humble prayer
and supplication to heal her soul, which prayer she felt conscious had
been heard and answered ; and thereby healed both body and soul.

I obtained from her the above receipts, and when I lived in Louisiana
my book of recipes was pilfered from me. I wrote to this lady (about
2000 miles) who forwarded me a second set and wrote me the following:
Her letter is this moment before me.

" According to your request I send you receipts for the beer and sy-
rup which was so beneficial to me. Would to God I could find a reme-
dy as effectual now, as 1 am in my advancing age, out of health. I wish
to promulgate it as a donation to suffering humanity."

" In all instances of sciatica, during my practice, I found this medicine
a sovereign specific ; and I well know that the generality of mankind
afflicted with sciatica, call it the rheumatism, and that the quack unac-
quainted with the system, is ignorant of the case, sports with his unwary
patient, gulls from him his money, and lastly what is worse, robs him of
his life."— Dr. Seely.


448 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.


CHAPTER XXVL

GOUT. (Arthritis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is usually divided into the regular and irregular. When
the inflammation occupies the joints to a due degree, and after a cer-
tain duration gradually disappears, leaving the health unimpaired, it is
termed regular gout. Of the irregular gout there are three species, viz. :

1st, The Atonic. When there is not sufficient energy in the sys-
tem to produce a proper degree of inflammation in the extremities, in
consequence of which the general health is considerably affected ; the
stomach performs the office of digestion imperfectly, and the patient is
troubled with flatulency, loss of appetite, eructations, violent pains of a
spasmodic nature, and frequently with nausea, accompanied not usual-
ly with dejection of spirits and other hypochondrical symptoms.

2. The retrocedent. In this, the inflammation having occupied a
joint, ceases suddenly, and is translated to some internal part, such as
the head, lungs, heart, or stomach.

3. The misplaced, or where gout, instead of producing the inflama-
tory affection of the joint at all, seizes some internal parts, producing
inflammation there, and giving rise to some symptoms which attend
inflammations of those parts from other causes.

CAUSES.

The attacks of gout are generally in the winter or spring, and are
rarely met with before the adult age, or middle period of life. Persons
of a full and robust habit are most subject to this disease, particularly
those who live luxuriously, and lead an indolent inactive life ; whereas
those who are employed in constant bodily labour, and who live upon
a vegetable diet principally, are seldom afflicted with it. Women are
much less the subjects of it than men: no sex, age, or even youth, are,
however, exempt from it; but in the latter cases, it can only be ascri-
bed to that predisposition or constitutional bias which is entailed by the
parents of the child. An hereditary predisposition therefore* as also
too free an indulgence in the use of animal food, fermented liquors,
and venery, leading a sedentary and studious life, anxiety of mind,
evcessive evacuations, fatigue, the application of cold to the extremi-
ties, sprains, the ceasing of usual labours or accustomed exercise, indo-
lence, and intemperance, are to be considered as the chief causes which
are productive of gout.

The disease may, in general, be readily distinguished from rheuma-
tism, by the pains attacking the smaller joints, instead of the large ones,
as in the latter; by its not being accompanied or even preceded at its
eommencement with symptoms of inflammatory fever; and by the pre-
vious affection of the stomach with flatulency, eructations, and pain.


Order XXVI.] Gout. 449

Tho fit is generally shorter in proportion to the violence of the
febrile symptoms and the length of the intermission : its returns may he
rendered milder when acquired, than when it proceeds from an heredi-
tary bias, and the disease admits more readily of alleviation in youth-
ful persons than in those that have attained an advanced period of life.

SYMPTOMS.

An attack of regular gout sometimes comes on suddenly, and without
any previous warning ; but most usually it is preceded by a belching of
wind, flatulency in the stomach and bowels, nausea, weariness, dejection
of spirits, pains in the limbs, with a sensation as if cold water or wind
were passing down the thigh ; great lassitude and fatigue are felt after
the slightest exercise, the bowels are costive, and the urine is of a pale
colour.

The paroxysm most frequently comes on about two o'clock in the
morning with excruciating pain either in the joint of the great toe, the
heel, calf of the leg, or perhaps the whole of the foot ; and this becom-
ing more violent by degrees, is accompanied with shiverings, succeeded
by heat and other febrile symptoms. The pain having attained its height
towards the following evening, ceases gradually, a gentle moisture breaks
out Upon the skin, and the patient being greatly relieved from his tor-
ment, falls asleep, but upon awakening he finds the parts, before pain-
ful, now much inflamed and swollen. During several succeeding even-
ings there is a return of both pain and fever, and these continue with
more or less violence during the night, and towards the break of day
they subside and go off.

A fit of the gout consists of several such paroxysms as have been de-
toms after a day or two, still the pain and fever return every night, going
off again the following morning. According to the disposition of the
body to the disease, the strength of the patient, and season of the year,
■will be the duration of a fit of the gout; but it usually continues at first
for two or three weeks, and then goes off either by perspiration, an in-
creased flow of urine, or some other evacuation ; the cuticle or scarf-
skin of the parts which have been affected, peeling off in branny scales,
and some slight lameness and tenderness remaining for a considerable
time.

In the atonic gout, if the head be affected, there is great pain there,
with perhaps giddiness, and not unfrequently apoplectic and paralytic
affections arc the consequence. If the lungs, it produces an affection
similar to asthma. If the heart, faintings, palpitations, and an intermit-
tent pulse. If it is seated in the stomach, there is great pain, nausea,
vomiting, flatulency, and eructations, dejection of mind, languor, want
of energy, and apprehension of danger; and these are frequently ac-
companied with cramps in several parts of the trunk of the body and
upper extremities. Sometimes there is obstinate costiveness ; some-
times a purging.

In the retrocedent gout, if the disease is translated to the stomach,
there is great anxiety, violent pain and vomiting, with a peculiar sense
oi cold over the region of this organ. If to the heart, there are faint ; n<rs

Vol. I. 57


450 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

and palpitations. If to the lungs, asthma. If to the head, apoplexy and
palsy.

In misplaced gout, instead of there being an inflammatory affection of
the joints, the disease attacks some internal part, produces inflammation
there, and then we meet with the symptoms specified as accompanying
such an affection from an exposure to cold, or other causes.

Attacks of gout usually become more severe during each returning fit,
both as to the degree of pain as well as the number of parts which are
affected. Probably it only seizes one foot at first, but afterwards both
feet are affected by every paroxysm, the one after the other ; and as the
disease advances, it not only affects both feet at once, but after having
ceased in the foot which was secondly attacked, again returns to the first,
and perhaps a second time into the other. Sometimes it shifts its seat
from the feet into the other joints of the upper and lower extremities;
and in severe cases there is scarcely a joint of the body that does not in
its turn feel its effects. Although two joints may be affected at the same
time, yet it generally happens that the attack is only severe in one, pass-
ing successively from one to another, so that the sufferings of the patient
are frequently prolonged to a considerable length of time.

At first a gouty attack occurs probably only once in two or three years;
it then comes on every year, till at length it becomes very frequent, and
is not only of longer duration, but much severer each succeeding fit.
After repeated attacks, the joints lose their flexibility and strength, and
become so stiff as essentially to interfere with their performing their ac-
customed motions. On the joints of the fingers, little hard swellings or
small nodes arise, chalky concretions are formed, and both the kidneys
and bladder occasionally become affected with small stones of a similar
nature.

PROGNOSIS.

We are to consider an unimpaired constitution, with the tongue becom-
ing moist and clean, the urine depositing a sediment, the appetite return-
ing, and the local inflammation gradually subsiding, and not shewing a
disposition to a quick transference from one part to another, or if it be fu-
gitive, not fixing severely on new parts, as favourable occurrences.
Whereas, on the contrary, an impaired constitution, or the disease sud-
denly receding from the extremities and attacking an important organ, as
the brain, heart, stomach, «fcc. arc to be viewed in an unfavourable and
dangerous light. Where the system is greatly weakened from frequent
and long continued fits of the gout, the patient is apt to be attacked with
cither palsy, asthma, or dropsy in some form or other, but more particu-
larly an extravasation of fluid in the chest.

TREATMENT.

Various medicines have been recommended for the cure of the gout,
among the rest a preparation has been highly extolled called the Eau
Mcdichialc cVJIusson.

This much celebrated composition was discovered about fifty-five
years ago by M. Husson,a French officer, and has been so highly famed
for its almost infallible powers in the cure of gout, as to command the
enormous price of from one to two crowns a dose ; and it still retains
its high reputation in England, and in various pans of the European con-


Order XXVI.] Gout. 451

tinent. This remedy is considered as producing a specific effect in re-
moving the paroxysms of gout, as often, and almost as soon as they oc-
cur ; scarcely an instance, it is said, of its failure having yet been known
in practice. Numerous attempts have been made to discover the com-
position, or to devise a substitute for Eau Medicinalc.

" Mr. James Moor, surgeon, London, has succeeded in compounding
a medicine, closely resembling the original medicine in smell, taste, and
dose, in its evacuant powers, and finally in its property of relieving the
gout so far as it has been tried. This medicine, whose identity with the
specific is thus presumed on, is composed of three parts of the wine of
white hellebore, and one of wine of opium. The above wine of white
hellebore is prepared by infusing for ten days eight ounces of the sliced
root of that plant in two pints and a half of white wine. The dose of
the compound is from one to two drachms."

The root of our own species of swamp hellebore has been found equal-
ly efficacious as the imported root.

This composition, says Dr. Thatcher, since its promulgation, has been
considerably employed in practice, and with the success anticipated by
its sanguine advocates. In gout and rheumatism it has obtained a repu-
tation in some degree proportioned to the original preparation of M.
Husson. The dose above specified, however, is too large, as it is apt
to irritate and induce nausea and vomiting. It is found more conveni-
ent to limit the dose to sixty or eighty drops, or increase as the stomach
of the patient can bear ; smaller doses twice in a day have on some oc-
casions proved advantageous.

Cold Water. — Cold water has also been highly recommended in
gout. The following remarks are taken from the Edinburgh Medical
and Surgical Journal.

" As a compiler, however, the abilities of Dr. Barthez are highly re-
spectable. Every where are evinced marks of great research and sound
judgment. Let us take as an example, and as connected with Dr. King-
lake's practice, what he has said of the use of cold water in gout. The
use of cold water as a drink, he represents as of acknowledged efficacy
in allaying the violent pains of a fit of gout, as well as in moderating the
thirst and heat, which are sometimes insupportable. Rondelet seems
to have been the first to consider this treatment as of specific utility in
this disease. Vander Heyde says, that there is no remedy more pow-
erful in preventing an attack, or curing it after it has commenced. Al-
though our author thinks this eulogium exaggerated, he has himself often
experienced the best effects from this remedy, and is of opinion that
Vogel has with justice recommended it. However, there are limitations
to the use of cold water as a drink in this disease, which havo not been
sufficiently determined. When the thirst and fever are strong, he thinks
it may suddenly check the salutary efforts of nature ; which has induced
Miis;rravc to say, too eenorally, that it is always rash and dangerous.

Hippocrates says, that cold water freely poured upon gouty swellings
of the joints, allays the pain, by producing a moderate degree of numb-
ness.

Galen has confirmed this opinion; but, from the principles of this
practice not having been determined, it has been too generally condemn-


452 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

ed by some, as De Gorter, and recommended by otbcrs, as Coccbi.
Our author, therefore, endeavors to supply this defect; but we think
without success. The following facts are more important : Loubet, in
a paroxysm of gout, having his feet affected with erysipelas, was induced
by the agony he suffered, to immerse his feet and legs in cold water,
until it became temperate. After having dried them, he went to bed
and slept soundly. On awaking, he continued to perspire profusely for
more than fifteen hours, when he found himself relieved ; and next day
walked without any pain. Pechlin relates, that he knew a gouty man,
who got rid of his pains by rubbing his feet with snow, and afterwards
walked on the snow. Musgrave has also observed, that the immersion of
the feet in cold water, although very often pernicious in a fit of gout, in
several individuals had the effect of speedily removing it.

As a preventive of gout, the external application of cold water has
been long recommended. The waters of the Cydnus, which are re-
markably cold, are celebrated in Strabo for their good effects in gout and
ligamentous swellings of domestic animals. Pliny also quotes a letter
of Cassius of Parma to Mark Anthony, on the use of the waters of the
Cydnus in gout. Antonius Musa cured Augustus of extreme emaciation,
the consequence of gout, by cold bathing and cold drink. Stoll advises
the body to be spunged every morning with cold water ; Grant says,
that walking in cold water is the most useful of all exercises ; and Wil-
liams recommends immersion for about half a minute in cold water, suc-
ceeded by friction and exercise, for the radical cure of gout. " Upon
the whole," says our author, " it is impossible to deny the good effects
which immersion for a short time in cold water, succeeded by moderate
exercise, has in exciting the powers of the constitution in many individu-
als subject to gout; provided," ho cautiously adds, " this immersion be
employed in favourable circumstances, and combined with an appropri-
ate strengthening diet."

But in one particular, says an author, Dr. Good is rather singular in
his practice ; it is in the use of cold water externally applied. He speaks
from a trial of several years upon his own person, and is anxious that
others should participate in what has proved so decisive a comfort to
himself. In the heighth of a paroxysm of pain he stripped off the flan-
nel and boldly plunged his foot into cold water for four or five times in
succession. The application was peculiarly refreshing ; the fiery heat
and pain, and all the inflammatory symptoms diminished instantly ; he
repeated the cold bathing two hours afterwards, and continued to do so
through the whole of the day ; the complaint gradually diminishing upon
every repetition, and in twenty-four hours the fit completely disappear-
ed, and he was capable of resuming his accustomed exercise of walking.
For five or six years afterwards in his annual attacks, he always had
immediate recourse to cold immersion or affusion.

Heat, or hot water, has also been very much praised.

Dr. Steinherm, of Edinburgh, has adopted a method for the cure of
gout which is extremely simple ; it being nothing more or less than hold-
ing the affected part over hot or boiling water. The Doctor states this
process was attended with the most sudden and salutary effect in his own
person.


Order XXVI.] Gout. 453

The application of the vapour bath, or the steaming mentioned above
will have all the benefits of the hot water, with the stimulating proper-
ties of the herbs.

In case the toe, foot, hand, or any other part is much swelled or pain-
ful, apply a poultice made by simmering Bran and Vinegar together till
a poultice of suitable consistence is formed. Apply tepid."'

Should this fail to give relief, take equal parts of Sicuta and Stramo-
nium leaves, simmer in good vinegar until soft, then add a sufficient quan-
tity of Slippery Elm Bark pulverized, to form a poultice. Apply blood
warm, renew before it becomes dry.

This will be found an excellent application when other appropriate
means have been used.

The following means have been advised in the forming stage of the
disease, in order to moderate or prevent the paroxysm. Emetics, (Chal-
mers ;) active cathartics, (Musgravc ;) vegetable bitters, iron, and high-
seasoned food, (Grant;) Dover's powder of antimonial wine with opi-
um, (Fothergill ;) large doses of musk or castor, (Williams;) gratiola,
Wolff;) bleeding from the foot, (Gilbert;) the application of very cold
water to the feet, (Giannini ;) the internal use of iced-water, (Barthez ;)

&.C.

The following liniment may be applied to the swelling :

Take Spirits of Turpentine, 1 oz.
(■'urn Camphor, 1 oz.

Alcohol, 1 quart. Mix.

Apply warm.

Should the pain, swelling, and heat be great, the foot or part affected
may be steamed over bitter herbs. This generally affords the most sud-
den and permanent relief.

[f the foregoing treatment does not cure the complaint, the Botanical
])rof>s may be given, two tea-spoonfuls four times a day in a tumbler of
V richly Ash tea, made cither of the bark or berries.

Potdtices. — If the parts arc very painful, let a poultice be applied
made by simmering together Elm Bark and Vinegar.

A portion of physic should be occasionally taken and a course of al-
terative medicine as directed under the head of Rheumatism.

REGIMEN.

In the fit, if the patient be young and strong, his diet ought to be thin
and cooling, and his drink of a diluting nature ; but where the constitu-
tion is weak, and the patient has been accustomed to live high, this is
not a proper time to retrench. In this case he must keep nearly to his
usual diet, and should take frequently a glass of wine. Wine-whey is a
very proper drink in this case, as it promotes the perspiration without
greatly heating the patient. It is well known, that the whole habit may
be so altered by a proper regimen, as quite to eradicate this disease ;
and those only who have sufficient resolution to persist in such a course
have reason to expect a cure.

The course which we would recommend fo.r preventing the gout, is as
follows : — In the first place, universal temperance. In the next place,


454 Inflammatory Diseases. [Class II.

sufficient exercise. By this we do not mean sauntering about in an in-
dolent manner, but labour, sweat, and toil. These only can render the
humours wholesome, and keep them so. Going early to bed, and rising
betimes, are also of great importance. It is likewise proper to avoid
night studies, and intense thinking. The supper should be light and
taken early. The use of milk, gradually increased, till it becomes the
principal part of diet, is particularly recommended. All strong liquors,
especially generous wines and sour punch, are to be avoided.


Class III.— Order I.] Small-Pox. 455


CLASS III.


ERUPTIVE DISEASES.


CHARACTER.

Most of this class of diseases is characterized by fever, nausea or
vomiting, and at a particular time, numerous and small eruptions appear
on the skin or surface of the body. Most also of the diseases of this
class are contagious, and attack a person only once in life.

All the symptoms exhibited show conclusively that the pathology of
fever as advocated in this work, is strictly correct. While the conta-
gious matter is in the circulation, all the phenomena of fever is observed ;
but as soon as the eruptions, the excitive cause, are thrown to
the surface, it subsides, and re-appears wben such humors or eruptions
are absorbed, showing in the plainest possible manner the nature and
cause of Fever.


CHAPTER I.
SMALL-POX, (Variola.)

DESCRIPTION.

Small-pox is a disease of a very contagious nature, marked by a fe-
ver which is usually inflammatory, but now and then is of a typhoid na-
ture, attended with vomiting, and upon pressure of the epigastrium,
with pain ; succeeded after a few days by an eruption of red pimples
on different parts of the body, which in the course of time suppurate,
and scab, which at length fall off, leaving frequently behind them little
pits In the skin, and, in severe cases, scars.

" It is not known," says Eberle, " at what period the small-pox made
its first appearance. In the writings of the Greek and Roman physi-
cians, we find nothing which could lead us to believe that they had any
particular knowledge of this devastating malady, although we can scarce-
ly doubt that its origin was of a much earlier date. The Arabian phy-
sicians were the first who gave a distinct description of this disease; and


456 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

it is to the small work of Rhazes, who lived about the beginning of the
tenth century, that we must look for an account of its early history. It
may be collected from the writings of Rhazes and others, that small-pox
was probably at first brought from Ethiopia into Arabia, and that it was
thence conveyed into the Levant, Spain, and Sicily by the Saracens
during their hostile irruptions into these countries. In the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, it gained vast ground during the wars waged by the
Christian potentates against the infidel Saracens for the recovery of the
holy land. From that time forwards, its desolating visitations were fre-
quently renewed in every part of Europe, and there is perhaps no single
disease, with which the Almighty has thought it good to afflict mankind,
which has carried off so many victims to the grave as the present one."
It has been estimated, that before the introduction of vaccination,
450,000 individuals died annually of small-pox in Europe.

CAUSES.

Both the distinct and confluent small-pox are produced either by
breathing air impregnated with the effluvia arising from the bodies of
those who labour under the disease, Of by the introduction of a small
quantity of variolous matter into the habit by inoculation ; and it is pro-
bable that the variety of the small-pox is not owing to any difference in
the contagion, but depends on- the state of the person to whom it is ap-
plied, or on certain circumstances concurring with the application
of it.

Many physicians are of opinion, that the variolous contagion is limited
to a narrow sphere, and that it seldom, if ever, is conveyed by the wind
to a distance, as some have imagined it capable of being. Dr. Haygarth,
in his " Sketch of a Plan to exterminate the casual Small-pox, 1 ' informs
us, that certain facts appear to exhibit negative proofs that the open air
is not contaminated to a great distance from the patient ; not to one
thousand five hundred feet, nor probably to one hundredth part of the
space. He mentions, that very few cases have been adduced by those
who have corresponded with him on the subject, in which clothes expos-
ed to variolous miasma have been even suspected of conveying infec-
tion, and that several have given a negative testimony against this mode
of communication. He further notices, that innumerable, instances are
to be produced where medical men, after exposing themselves to the mi-
asms of an infectious chamber, in a very short time nearly approach per-
sons liable to the distemper, who are yet not infected by the interview;
and that inoculators are daily in this situation without communicating
the casual small-pox. The period during which infection remains latent
in the body, he observes, is determined by the testimony of many to be,
in the inoculated small-pox, from the fifth day to the sixteenth, seven-
teenth, and even the twenty- third ; in the casual or natural small-pox, a
little but not much longer than the common period in inoculation.

A variety of opinions have been entertained respecting the effect of
the variolous infection on the foetus in utero ; a sufficient number of in-
stances, however, have been recorded, to ascertain that the disease may
be communicated from the mother to the child. In some cases (he body
of the child at its birth has been covered with pustules, and the nature of


Order I.J Small-Pot. 457

the disease has been most satisfactorily ascertained by inoculating witfi
matter taken from these pustules. In other cases there has been no ap-
pearance of the disease at the time of the birth, but an eruption and other
symptoms of the malady have appeared so early, as to ascertain that
the infection must have been received previously to the removal of the
child from the uterus.

SYMPTOMS.

Of this disease there are two species, the distinct, ahd confluent.
In the distinct small-pox, the disease begins with an inflammatory fever.
It generally comes on with some symptoms of a cold stage, and com-
monly with a considerable languor and drowsiness. A hot stage is soon
formed, and becomes more considerable on the second and third day.
During this course, children are liable to frequent startings from their
slumbers; and adults, if they are kept in bed, are disposed to much
sweating. On the third day, children are sometimes affected with one
or two epileptic fits. Towards the end of tho third day the eruption
commonly appears, and gradually increases during the fourth; appear-
ing first on the face, and successively on the inferior parts, so as to be
completed over the whole body on the fifth day. From the third day,
the fever abates, and by the fifth it entirely ceases.

The eruption appears at first in small red spots, hardly prominent*
but by degrees rising into pimples. There are generally but few on
the face ; but even when more numerous they are separate and distinct
from orte another. On the fifth or sixth day a small vesicle, or bladder,
containing an almost colourless fluid, appears on the top of each pim-
ple : for two days these vesicles increase in breadth only, and there is a
small pit in their middle, so that they are not raised into spheroidical or
globular pustules or eruptions, till the eighth day. These pustules, from
their first formation, continue to be surrounded with a circular inflamed
margin, which, when they are numerous, diffuses some inflammation
over the neighbouring skin, so as to give somewhat of a damask-rosc
colour to the spaces between the pustules.

As the pustules increase in size, the face swells considerably, if they
arc numerous on it; and the eye-lids particularly are so much swelled*
that the eyes are entirely shut. As the disease proceeds, the matter in
the pustules becomes by degrees, first more opaque or cloudy, then
white, and at length assumes a yellowish colour. On the eleventh day
the swelling of the face is abated, and the pustules seem quite full. On
the top of each a darker spot appears ; and at this place the pustule, on
the eleventh day or soon after, is spontaneously broken* and a portion
of the matter oozes out, in consequence of which the pustule is shrivel-
led, and subsides; while the matter oozing out dries, and forms a crust
upon its surface. Sometimes only a little of the matter issues out, and
what remains in the pustules becomes thick and even hard. After some
days, both the crusts and the hardened pustules fall off, leaving the
skin which they covered of a brownish red colour; nor doth it resume
its natural colour till many days after. In some cases, where the mat-
ter of the pustules has been more liquid, the crusts formed hy it are la-
tcr in falling off.

Vol. I. 58


458 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

On the legs and hands the matter is frequently absorbed; so that at
the height of the disease, these pustules appear empty. On the tenth
and eleventh days, as the swelling of the face subsides, a swelling arises
in the hands and feet; but which again subsides as the pustules come to
maturity. When the pustules are numerous on the face upon the sixth
or seventh day, some uneasiness in the throat, with a hoarseness in the
voice, comes on, and a thin liquid is poured out from the mouth. These
symptoms increase with the swelling of the face; and the liquids of the
mouth and throat becoming thicker, are with difficulty thrown out; and
there is, at the same time, some difficulty in swallowing, so that liquids
taken in to be swallowed are frequently rejected or thrown out by the
nose. But 4 all these affections are abated as the swelling of the face
subsides.

The more exactly the disease retains the form of the distinct kind, it
is the safer; and the more completely the disease takes the form of the
confluent kind, it is the more dangerous. It is only when the distinct
kind shows a great number of pustules on the face, or otherwise, by fe-
ver or putrcscency, approaching to the circumstances of the confluent,
that the distinct kind is attended with any danger.

There is not much danger in the mild distinct small-pox, except when
the patient is extremely loaded, especially about the head and throat.
This disease sometimes lays the foundation of consumption, and obsti-
nate opthalmy, or inflammation of the eyes, and frequently, by remov-
ing complaints that existed before, it improves the health and consti-
tution.

Confluent Species. — In the confluent small-pox all the symptoms
above mentioned are much more severe. The eruptive fever particu-
larly is more violent, the pulse is more frequent and more contracted.
The coma, or drowsiness, is more considerable, and there is frequently
a delirium. Vomiting also generally attends, especially at the beginning
of the disease. In very young infants, epileptic fits are sometimes fre-
quent on the first days of the disease, and sometimes prove fatal before
any eruption appears ; or they usher in a very confluent and putrid small
pox. The eruption appears more early on the third day, and sometimes
in clusters like the measles.

When the eruption is completed, the pimples are always more nume-
rous upon the face, and at the same time smaller and less prominent.
Upon the eruption the fever suffers some remission, but never goes off
entirely ; and after the fifth or sixth day it increases again, and contin-
ues to be considerable throughout the remainder of the disease. The
vesicles formed on the top of the pimples appear sooner; and, while
they increase in breadth, they do not retain a circular, but are every
way of an irregular figure. Many of them run into one another, inso-
much that very often the face is covered with one vesicle rather than'
with a number of pustules or eruptions.

The vesicles, as far as they are any way separated, do not arise to a
spheroidal or globular form, but remain flat, and sometimes the whole of
the face is of an even surface. When the pustules are in any degree
separated, they are not bounded by an inflamed margin, but the part of
the skin that is free from pustules is generally pale and flaccid. The


Order I.] , Small-Pox. 459

liquor in the pustules changes from a clear to an opaque or cloudy ap-
pearance, and becomes whitish and brownish, but never acquires the
yellow colour, and thick consistence which appears in the distinct small-
pox. The swelling of the face, which only sometimes attends the dis-
tinct, always attends the confluent kind: It also comes on more early,
and arises to a greater height, but abates considerably on the tenth or
eleventh day. At this time the pustules or vesicles break and shrivel;
pouring out, at the same time, a liquor, which is formed into brown or
black crusts, which do not fall off for a long time after. Those of the
face, in falling off, leave the skin subject to a desquamation or scaling,
which generally produces pittings.

On the other parts of the body, the pustules of the confluent small-
pox are more distinct than on the face ; but never acquire the same ma-
turity and consistence of pus, or matter, as in the distinct kind. The sa-
livation, which only sometimes attends the distinct small-pox, very con-
stantly attends the confluent. In infants a diarrhoea comes frequently
instead of a salivation.

In this kind of small-pox, there is often a very considerable putre-
scency of the fluids, as appears from petechia?, serous, or watery vesi-
cles, under which the skin shows a disposition to gangrene, or mortifi-
cation, and form bloody urine, or other haemorrhages; all which symp-
toms frequently attend this disease. In the confluent small pox also,
the fever, which had only suffered a remission from the eruption to the
maturation, at or immediately after this period, is frequently renewed
again with considerable violence. This is what has been called the se-
condary fever, and is of various duration and event.

In the confluent kind the danger is always very considerable : and
the more violent and permanent the fever is, the greater the danger;
and especially in proportion to the increase of the symptoms of putre-
scency. When the putrid disposition is very great, the disease some-
times proves fatal before the eighth day ; but, in most cases, death hap-
pens on the eleventh, and sometimes not till the fourteenth or seven-
teenth day. Though the small-pox may not prove immediately fatal,
the more violent kinds are often followed by a morbid state of the body,
sometimes of very dangerous event.

Dr. Buchan is of opinion, that, " the pustules, as soon 'as they come
to maturity, should be opened.i' But Dr. Sims, in his observations on
epidemical diseases, says, " allow me to remark on the practice of those,
who recommend the pustules in the face to be opened, when at the
height, that the contained matter being thereby evacuated, the face may
not retain any disagreeable marks. In a favourable distinct pock, this
caution seems superfluous, there being little danger of its leaving any
deep impression; and in the confluent malignant kind, when I have seen
it practised, it has always given such intolerable smart, as must wound
any person not deprived of humanity itself."

PROGNOSIS:

The distinct small-pox is not attended with danger, except when the
eruptive fever is very violent, or when it attacks pregnant women, or
approaches nearly in its nature to that of the confluent ; but this last if


46Q Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

always accompanied with considerable risk, the degree of which is ever
in proportion to the violence and permanence of the fever, the number
of pustules on the face, and the disposition to putresency which prevails.

When there is a great tendency this way, the disease usually proves
fatal between the eighth and eleventh day ; but in some cases death is
protracted till the fourteenth or sixteenth. The confluent small-pox, al-
though it may not prove immediately mortal, is very apt to induce vari-
pus morbid affections.

Both kinds of small-pox leave behind them a predisposition to inflam-
matory complaints, particularly to opthalmia and pneumonia ; and they
not unfrequently excite scrofula into action, which might otherwise have
lain dormant in the system.

The regular swelling of the hands and feet, upon that of the face sub-
siding, and its continuance for the due time, may be regarded in a favour-
able light. Violent eruptive fever, delirium, stupor, severe vomiting,
dyspnoea, sudden disappearance of the eruption, subsidence of the swel-
ling of the face or extremities, suppression of saliva, or depression of the
pustules, followed by much prostration of strength, pallor of the skin,
great anxiety, syncope, or convulsions, are appearances which denote
the greatest danger. The disease in its progress assuming a malignant
character and typhoid type, and the pustules becoming livid, or being
interspersed with petechioe, portend a fatal termination.

DISSECTION.

The dissections which have been made of confluent small-pox, have
never discovered any pustules internally on the viscera. From them it
also appears that various pustules never attack the cavities of the body,
except those to which the air has free access, as the nose, mouth, trachea,
the larger branches of the bronchia, and the outermost part of the mea-
tus auditorius. In cases of prolapsus ani, they likewise frequently at-
tack that part of the gut which is exposed to the air. They have usual-
ly shown the same morbid appearances inwardly, as are met with in pu-
trid fever, where the disease has been of the malignant kind. Where
the febrile symptoms have run high, and the head has been much affect-
ed with coma or delirium, the vessels of the brain appear, on removing
the cranium and dura mater, more turgid, and filled with a darker co-
loured blood than usual, and a greater quantity of serous fluid is found,
particularly towards the base of the brain. Under similar circumstances
the lungs have often a darker appearance, and their moisture is more
copious than usual. When no inflammatory affection has supervened,
they are most usually sound.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, mercury, salts, antimony, nitre, blisters, pounded ice to the
head, lunar caustic to the eruptions, &c.

' REFORMED PRACTICE.
Indications of Cure. — The object of the physician in this disease,
as in every other ought to be, to aid the salutary efforts of nature in
#Hminating or expelling the morbific or variolous poison, is,


Order I. J Small-Pox. 461

1. If the powers of nature are insufficient to expel it, such medicine
must be given as will produce this effect.

2. If on the other hand, there is too great an excitement in the sys-
tem, or too much fever, it must be moderated.

3. Counteract a tendency to putrescency.

When called in the commencement of small-pox, it will be found
necessary to treat it in a considerable degree on general principles, hav-
ing in view at the same time, particular symptoms, such as vomiting.
For such is the similarity between eruptive and febrile diseases, that
it is sometimes difficult to discriminate between them, and if the diag-
nostic symptoms are ever so well marked, a very similar course of
treatment is called for in both complaints. Should vomiting be predo-
minant, such medicine must be given as will allay the irritability of the
stomach; and the best for this, will be the bi-carbonate of potash, or
sal ceratus, given as has previously been directed, to be accompanied
with an infusion or tea of spearmint. When this is allayed, administer
a. purgative. After the stomach and -bowels have been cleansed, atten-
tion must be directed to the skin. Such medicine must be given as will
produce gentle, not profuse perspiration. This must be kept up mo-,
derately throughout the whole course of the disease.

The following infusion may be given :

Take of Saffron,

Catnip. Equal parts.

Make a tea and give it warm. This will soon produce a moisture of
the skin, and assist nature to expel the eruptions.

It will be indispensably necessary to immerse the feet in warm ley*
water, to be repeated once or twice daily.

The surface must be entirely bathed with the same liquid, and re~-
peated as often.

Should the reaction or febrile excitement be too great, it must be
moderated by attention to all the secretions, and excretions. Purga-
tives and sudorifics are the principal class of medicines to fulfil this in-
dication. Should the heat be great, let the body be bathed with warm
water, notwithstanding the eruptions. Attention must be paid to par-
ticular symptoms, such as pains in the head, delirium, sore throat, &c.
For pain in the head, in addition to bathing the feet which alone
is often sufficient to remove it, let a mustard poultice or plaster be ap-
plied to the bottom of the feet. The head may likewise be bathed with
equal parts of rain water, spirits and vinegar, and applied tepid.

For soreness of the throat, and accumulation of mucus and phleghra
in the bronchial vessels, give one or two tea-spoonfuls of the tincture
of lobelia, to be repeated occasionally. The throat may also be garg-
led with a decoction of equal parts of sage and hyssop, sweetened with
honey, and a little borax added.

When there is a great tendency to putrescency in the fluids, give a
wine glass of yeast three or four times a day.

Sometimes there is a sinking or great prostration of strength. When.
this is the case, wine-whey may be given, and buttermilk moderately
acid.


462 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

During the complaint there is great restlessness, or pain, want of
sleep, &c. For such symptoms, as well as to keep up a determina-
tion to the surface, without increasing the heat of the body, give ten
grains of tho Diaphoretic Powders, and particularly at bed time; at
the same time a weak infusion of the Virginia Snake Hoot may be given.

In consequence of debility, it is sometimes the case, that the vesicles
or eruptions, are flabby or not well filled, showing evidently that the va-
riolous matter is retained in the system. Under such circumstances, a
more stimulating course of treatment must be pursued.

A tea-spoonful of the sweating drops must be given in a half pint of
Catnip Tea, and after giving this, should not the pox become fuller,
and more healthy, give milk punch, to be continued until an improve-
ment is perceptible.

When the eruptions suddenly subside, or as it is familiarly expressed,
strike in, or in other words, when there is a recession of them, before
they have arrived at maturity, the danger is very great. Should such
symptoms occur, the same treatment, as last mentioned, must be prompt-
ly and rigidly pursued ; in addition to which, a tea made of equal parts
of Saffron and Snake Root, may be freely given.

The most dangerous period of the small-pox, is when a secondary fever
appears, which generally commences when the disease begins to blacken
or turn. Most of those who fall victims to the small-pox, are carried off
by this fever, and all, it appears to me, for the want of proper treatment.

Nature often attempts at the turn of the small-pox to relieve the patient
by diarrhoea, and did physicians take this hint, they would know what
from the absorption of the variolous matter, and that there would belittle
or none, were nature properly aided in her attempts to carry off the com-
plaint. Therefore her kind endeavours must be promoted. When the
eruptions are thrown to the surface, and the disease begins to turn, the
patient must be finely purged; whereas, previous to this period a ca-
thartic, occasionally administered, is sufficient.

Our common physic is the best preparation that can be given to all
classes.

Sometimes infants are affected with convulsions before the eruptions
appear.

There is no occasion for alarm in this case. All that is necessary to
be done, is to bathe the feet in warm water, and give warm diluent
drinks, such as Balm, Mint, or Catnip Tea, &c.

This treatment is designed for both the distinct and confluent species.
The only difference in the treatment is, that in the latter, a more active
course of treatment is called for.

REGIMEN.

During the eruptive fever, the patient must be kept cool and easy,
and weak diluting liquors given, such as 31int, Balm, and Catnip Tea,
and if the patient is very thirsty, and the eruption well out, give also
lemonade, currant jelly, and toast water.

His nourishment should be barley water, Indian meal gruel, butter-
milk and water, roasted apples, ripe fruit, and particularly mush or


Order I.] Small-Pox. 46 3

hasty pudding. There should be a current of air in the roorn^ hut should
not be suffered to come in direct contact with the patient. The tempe-
rature of the room should be uniform, neither too hot, nor too cold,
Great attention should be paid to cleanliness. As soon as any thing
passes the bowels, it should be immediately removed, and vinegar
thrown upon a heated brick or other substances. The linen and clothes
should be often changed, and all noise and confusion, as far as possible,
pi evented.

Various means have been recommended to prevent the pitting which
attends the small-pox; such as opening the pustules, and the appli-
cation of lunar caustic; but it is very questionable whether any benefit
arises from this practice or any other of a similar nature.

Nothing is better to diminish the inflammation and pitting of the face,
as well as to mitigate the inflammation of the eyes, than a poultice
made of the superfine flour of the Slippery Elm. The eruptions, if
very large and full of matter, attended with great irritation, may be
punctured, the fluid let out, and sprinkled with the dry flour of Slippery
Elm.

The above treatment, I have found invariably successful in small-
pox ; never having lost a single case where I have been called in any
reasonable time. It carries the patient safely and shortly, through the
worst species of the disease, while the course pursued by physicians
generally, such as bleeding, mercury, and cold applications, is attended
with the most distressing or fatal effects.

I have extracted most of the following remarks on the treatment of
this disease, from several English writers.

When the first symptoms of the small-pox appear, people are alarm-
ed, and generally have recourse to medicine, to the great danger of the
life of the patient; and if convulsions appear, the alarm is still greater,
as if they announced a primary disease ; instead of being a symptom,
and not an unfavourable one, of the approaching eruption ; as the fits
usually go off before the actual appearance of the small-pox. Slight
convulsions are supposed a favourable symptom, as it has been observed
they prognosticate the distinct sorts, and never precede the confluent.

During the eruptive fever, the patient should be kept cool and easy,
and allowed to drink freely of some weak diluting liquors ; as barley-
water, balm-tea, clear whey, gruels, &c. Instead of being wholly con-
fined to his bed, he should sit up as much as he is able, and have his feet
and legs often bathed in hike-warm water.

To confine the patient too soon to his bed at this period, and supply
him with abundance of warm cordials, or other heating medicines, is
doubtless very pernicious. Whatever heats and inilamcs the blood in-
creases the fever, and prematurely forces the pustules ; which not only
increases the number of pustules, but also tends to make them run into
one another ; such as have been pushed out with too great violence,
generally falling in before they come to maturity.

A filthy custom prevails among the inferior classes of people, of allow-
ing children in the small-pox to wear the same linen during the whole
period of that loathsome disease. This is perhaps done to prevent their


464 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

catchu.g cold, but it is attended by many ill consequences : the linen,
by the moisture which it absorbs, becomes hard, and frets the tender
skin. It also occasions an offensive smell, which is pernicious to the
patient, as well as to those about him.

Suffering several children, who have the small-pox, to lie in the same
bed, has many ill consequences ; they should never be even in the same
chamber, as the perspiration, the heat, the smell, &c. all tend to augment
the fever, and heighten the distress.

The food, in the small-pox, should be very light, and of a cooling na-
ture, as panado, or bread boiled with milk and water, apples roasted, or
boiled with milk, or the like. The drink may be a mixture of equal
quantities of milk and water, clear sweet whey, barley-water, thin gruel,
&c. Buttermilk is of an opening and cleansing nature, and therefore
a very proper drink after the pox are full. Mush, or hasty pudding, and
molasses or milk.

Little more is necessary, during the primary fever, than to keep the
patient quiet, encouraging him to drink diluting liquors, and bathe his
feet frequently in warm water* This is the safest course that can be taken
With infants, but for adults of a strong constitution and plethoric habit, a full
pulse, a dry skin, and other symptoms of inflammation depletion is neces-
sary; but when these symptoms are not urgent, it may be safer to let it
alone. If the body is bound, emollient clysters should be thrown in.

If a great nausea or inclination to vomit comes on, weak Chamomile or
Mint Tea, or warm water should be drank, in order to cleanse the sto-
mach. At the commencement of a fever, nature generally attempts a
a discharge, either upwards or downwards, which, when gently promot-
ed, greatly abates the violence of the disease. After the pustules have
made their appearance, the suppuration must be promoted by diluting
drink, and light food, and, if nature seems to flag, by generous cordials;
good wine made into a negus, with about an equal quantity of water, and
sharpened with orange-juice, currant-jelly, &c. is extremely proper.
Wine-whey, sharpened as above, is equally salutary in this case ; but if
the patient should be overheated by any of these things, the eruption
would be retarded instead of being promoted.

When the rising of the small pox is prevented, as it often is, by the
Violence of the fever, a stimulating regimen should strictly be observed.
When excessive restlessness prevents the rising and filling of the small-
pox, gentle anodynes are necessary ; but they ought always to be ad-
ministered sparingly; a tea-spoonful of the syrup of poppies may be
given to an infant every five or six hours, till it has produced the effect
desired. A table-spoonful to an adult will be about enough.

When the mouth is foul, and the tongue dry and chapped, it should
be often washed, and the throat gargled with water and honey, acidulat-
ed with vinegar or currant-jelly. Pernicious consequences ensue from
costiveness. Hence the use of purgative medicines ; but not a particle
of mercury should be given.

When purple, black, or livid spots appear among the small-pox, yeast
must be immediately administered in as large doses as the patient's sto-
mach can bear. Also, yeast and castor oil mixed and sweetened with
molasses. If for a child, two drams of the bark in powder may be


Order L] Small-Pox. 4(J$

mixed in three ounces of common water, one ounce of simple cinna-
mon-water, and two ounces of the syrup of orange or lemon, and a ta-
ble-spoonful administered every hour. An adult may take at least three
or four spoonfuls' every hour, in the same form. As this is an important
medicine in these cases, it must be administered a6 frequently as the
stomach can bear it. Many happy effects are produced by the use of
this medicine ; it frequently occasions the petetia? or purple spots to dis-
appear, and the small-pox, which had before a very threatening aspect,
to rise and fill with healthy matter.

In this case also the patient's drink should be generous, as wine shar-
pened with the lemon-juice, vinegar, currant-jelly, &c; Apples, roasted
or boiled, preserved cherries, plums, and other acid fruits should be his
principal food.

In the lymphatic or chrystaline small-pox, where the matter is thin$
and not duly prepared, the bark and acids are also necessary. The
Peruvian Bark seems to possess a singular power of assisting nature, in
preparing matter; and consequently must be very beneficial in this, and
other diseases, where the crisis depends on a suppuration. It often hap-
pens that, where the small-pox were flat, containing in them transparent
matter, and where they had at first the appearance of running into one
another, that the Peruvian Bark, sharpened as above, changes the colour
and consistence of the matter, and produces the most happy effects.

When the eruptions suddenly subside, or as it is familiarly expressed,
strike in, before they have arrived at maturity, the danger is very great.
In this case gentle sweating medicines must be administered. A mixture
of Hoarhound and Saffron Tea, and the patient's spirits supported with
cordials. Sharp cataplasms, or poultices applied to the feet and hands,
tend to promote the swelling of these parts, and draw the humours to-
wards the extremities.

Nature often attempts, at the turn of the small-pox, to relieve the pa-
tient by a lax state of the body. When this happens to be the case, her
kind endeavours should be promoted, and the patient should, at the same
time, be supported by food and drink of a nourishing and cordial nature.

If, when the secondary fever approaches, the pulse is very quick, hard,
and strong, the heat intense, and the breathing laborious, with other
symptoms of an inflammation of the breast, the patient must be sweated
and purged. If, in the secondary fever, the patient be faint, the pus-
tules become suddenly pale, and there be great coldness of the extremi-
ties, sinapisms to the feet must be applied, and the patient must be sup-
ported with generous cordials. In such cases wine, and milk punch have
been given with great success.

It is generally found necessary, after the cirre of the small-pox, to
purge tin; patient; hut if, during the course of the disease, the body has
been kept open, or if buttermilk, and other opening drinks have been
taken freely after the height of the small-pox, purging becomes less ne-
cessary, though it should not wholly be omitted.

For infants, or very young children, an infusion of senna and prunes,
with a little rhubarb, and sweetened with coarse sugar, may be given in
small quantities till it operates. A child of the age of five or six years

Vol. f. 59


466 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

may take eight or ten grains of fine rhubarb in powder over night. This
may be wrought off with water-gruel, and repeated three or four times,
allowing five or six days to intervene between each dose. For older chil-
dren, and adults, the dose should be increased in proportion to the age and
constitution.

Parents often deceive themselves, with a confidence that their chil-
dren are exempt from danger of infection, because they have been in
the same room, or even in the same bed, with those who have had the
small-pox upon them. But lest too great a reliance should be placed on
this circumstance, and should prevent the adoption of necessary mea-
sures, it should be generally known that children, in early infancy, are
not so liable to receive this disease as is commonly imagined ; and that a
child, who has been exposed to the influence of this disease without re-
ceiving it, or who has even been inoculated without effect, may in a lit-
tle time become highly susceptible of infection.


INOCULATION.

The small pox, says Townsend, so destructive to preceding genera*
tions, is now, under proper management, no more to be dreaded than
fire on the hearth.

For this change we are indebted to inoculation, introduced at the
commencement of the present century by Pylarini, an eminent prac-
titioner of Italy, who being then resident at Constantinople, sent to the
Royal Society the first account both of the operation and its effects on
the inhabitants of that metropolis.

By his relation it appears, that to them originally the practice had been
derived from Greece, where it was found not in the hands of physicians,
but of the peasants.

And by a subsequent account, transmitted to the same society by
Timoni, A. D. 1713, it is evident, that the Circassians and Georgians
had been long in the habit of performing this kind office for their female
children, in order to preserve their beauty. Their principal intention
was, however, to increase their value, when, at the age of maturity,
they were to be sold to the Turkish officers.

A. D. 1717, the son of Wortley Montague, then at Constantinople,
was inoculated, and lady Mary, on her return to England, introduced
the practice, where it was first tried on the malefactors then in Newgate
under sentence of death.

In consequence of the propitious issue of that essay, it was adopted
by the royal family.

Dr. Jurin, physician to the court, having observed, so early as the
year 1722, that, instead of one in five, the usual proportion lost by the
natural small-pox, not more than one in ninety failed under inoculation;


Order II.] Cow-Pox; or, Vaccine Disease. 467

he communicated the information to the public, gave a description of his
practice, and firmly established it.

When the matter of small-pox is inserted under the skin, a pimple
appears on the third day, followed by swelling in the axilla. The pim-
ple then becomes surrounded by a jagged areola, in which small vesi-
cations are observable. On the seventh or at farthest the eighth day
from the insertion of the virus, rigours occur, and in forty-eight hours
afterwards the eruption appears. In a large majority of cases, the erup-
tion proves to be of the mild and distinct sort ; and in very many in-
stances the number of pustules over the whole body does not exceed one
hundred. The further progress of the disorder diners in no respect

Nothing has ever been suggested, calculated to throw the smallest
light on the curious fact, that the mode of reception into the system
should thus influenco the quantity of eruption. To so great a degree
does this take place, that the mortality by inoculated small-pox, with-
out any restriction as to age or strength of constitution, does not exceed
one in five hundred. We select for the period of inoculation that sea-
son of the year, and that time of life, when inflammatory tendencies
are least to be expected. It is sufficiently ascertained that beyond a
few doses of a cooling aperient, no preparatory course of medicine ig
requisite. A spare vegetable diet, cool air, and subacid drinks, will
contribute to render the disease mild and safe. Improper management
may of course increase the quantity of eruption, and with it the dan-
ger of the patient. Some attention, therefore, ought always to be paid
to the treatment of inoculated small-pox; but the principles already laid
down are equally applicable in the present case, and will be sufficient
without further detail for the guidance of the practitioner.


CHAPTER II.
COW-POX; OR, VACCINE DISEASE. {Vaccina.)

It is about twenty-five or thirty years since a treatise on this disease
from the pen of Dr. Jenner was laid before the public, making it known
therein, it had been discovered that those who had been infected by it, were,
in general, secured ever afterwards from the infection of the small-pox;
that it was a very mild disease in comparison with the latter, never hav-
ing been found to prove fatal; and, moreover, that from its not being
infectious but by inoculation alone, it might be introduced into a family
without extending to others.

In many of the dairy countries, it had long ago indeed been observed,
that cows were subject to an eruption on their tits and udders, which
occasionally was communicated to the fingers and other parts of the
hands, of those who milked them, giving rise to a few ulcerations, ac-
companied by some degree of fever; and it had been noticed that those


468 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

who had thus gone through the vaccine disease were not afterwards
ever attacked by the small-pox, either naturally or by inoculation. This
knowledge had, however, never been improved, or acted upon, until
Dr. Jenncr's publication; and it is to him that mankind are indebted for
{he promulgation of this valuable discovery.

The pustules on their first appearance, when the infection is received
from the cow, somewhat resemble small vesications occasioned by a
burn; these superficial suppurations assume a circular form, their edges
being more elevated than the centre, and are of a blueish colour ; tu-
mours, in consequence of tho absorption of the morbid poison, appear
in the arm-pits, with some affection of the system, such as slight shiver-
ings, lassitude, a quick pulse, sickness at the stomach, vomiting, and
occasionally delirium. These symptoms, however, generally go off in
a few days, leaving the ulcers in a state unfriendly to healing.

It is now well ascertained, however, that the vaccine virus is render-
ed much milder by passing through different persons, than when receiv-
ed immediately from the cow; and so gentle is the disease when it arises
from inoculation, that the aid of medicine is seldom, if ever, necessa-
ry, either prior to the appearence of the pustules, or during their con-
tinuance or suppurative stage; but as soon as the eschar on the arm
where the vaccine matter was introduced, begins to become dry, and
the few pustules which had shown themselves to disappear, it may be
advisable to give one or two doses of some gentle purgative, suffering
three or four days to intervene between each dose.

The following circumstances are deserving of attention in inoculating
for the cow-pox, and substituting this mild and safe disease for that dan-
gerous and pestilential one, the small-pox.

1. That the matter with which we inoculate, be not taken later in
the disease than the ninth day.

2. That the fluid be perfectly transparent, as it is not to be depended
upon when it is in any degree become opaque.

3. That the matter taken should be allowed to dry gradually and tho-
roughly before it is laid by for use, when not employed immediately,
or in its fluid state.

4. That the punctures with the besmeared lancet be done as superfi-
cially as possible, and only one be made in the same arm.

Here it may not be improper to remark, that the inoculation for this
disease will not be likely to succeed well if there be any herpetic erup-
tion on the skin. On the third or fourth day after inoculation, the wound
will appear a little prominent round its edges and red, which will keep
increasing to about the ninth or tenth day, when the constitution will
show some symptoms of being affected, such as a slight degree of febrile
heat, and probably a little enlargement of the glands in the pit of the
inoculated arm.

Should any excess of inflammation happen to arise in the inoculated
part, immediate attention should be paid to it.

Tt will be of the highest importance after vaccine inoculation, to as-
certain fully that the vesicle in the arm has not acted locally, but that
it has effected the desired change in the constitution. With this view,
it may be advisable to re^vaccinate at some after period, to test the se-


Order II.] Cow-Poz; or, Vaccine Disease. 469

curity from any exposure hereafter to variolous infection. If parents
will not be satisfied with this test, matter taken from a small-pox pustule
may then be substituted instead of the vaccine. In one instance out of
ten thousand, perhaps, small-pox may take place after the constitution
has been satisfactorily acted upon by vaccine inoculation, and even
when this has happened, the disease has usually been very mild in-
deed.

Some persons have been known to have the small-pox a second time,
and this irregularity may perhaps account for a few of the cases of small-
pox which have occurred after vaccine inoculation. The majority of
such cases may, however, justly be attributed to imperfect or improper
vaccine matter having been employed for the inoculation, and which had
not the power of securing the person so inoculated from the contagion
of the small-pox. This spurious sort of vaccine matter is wholly ineffi-
cacious.

We have only to take a comparative view of the effects of the in-
oculated cow-pox, the natural small-pox, and the inoculated small-pox
to be fully satisfied of the decided preference to which the former is
entitled.

The inoculated cow-pox, uniformly, is a mild and inoffensive disease;
it is neither loathsome nor attended with any danger; in general, it forms
no eruption, except a pustule or two on the inoculated part; requires
neither confinement, loss of time, nor expense, as few or no medicines
are necessary; it occasions no subsequent disfiguration; induces no su-
pervenient disease ; and lastly, is not contagious, and may therefore be
introduced into any family, without its extending to others.

It is well known that the natural small-pox is frequently a painful,
loathsome, and fatal disease ; and that from a computation, one person
in six falls a martyr to it. It is of a highly contagious nature, and spreads
rapidly; the eruptions are painful, numerous, and disgusting in their
appearance, and leave behind deep scars, or pits, especially in the face;
it requires some weeks confinement, loss of time, and more or less ex-
pense, as medical treatment and attendance are requisite both during
the continuance of the disease and afterwards ; and when it ceases, it is
apt to induce inflammation of the eyes, deafness, diseases of the skin,
glands, and joints, and to bring into action scrofula, which is dormant
in the constitution.

The inoculated small-pox is generally mild, but in some instances is
attended with all the violence, disgusting appearances, and danger of
the natural. Of those who are inoculated, it has been computed that
one out of three hundred is destroyed, and that one in forty has the dis-
ease in a dangerous form. Eruptions more or less numerous are scat-
tered over the body, and the disease requires preparation by diet and
medicine before the appearance of the eruptions, as well as confinement,
loss of time and expense during its different stages. It is, moreover,
as contagious as the natural small-pox, and where it proves severe, is
apt to leave deep pits or scars behind it, as well as to call into action
other diseases, particularly scrofula. Besides these disadvantages, it
cannot be practised with safety in early infancy, or old age, oor during


47-0 Eruptive Disease*. [Class III.

a state of pregnancy ; whereas, vaccine inoculation Is subject to no such
restrictions and inconveniences. — [ Thomas.]

In many instances, as has been already stated, vaccination protects
the system completely against infection from small-pox contagion. In
other cases, the system is either only partially freed from its aptitude to
variolous infection, or this susceptibility, though for a time entirely sub-
dued by the vaccine influence, gradually returns and regains a greater
or less degree of intensity. The disease which results from the action
of small-pox contagion on a system thus partially deprived of its vario-
lous susceptibility, and which has of late years been so common, devi-
ates more or less conspicuously from regular small-pox, and is, in a
great measure, divested of the dangerous character of the latter affec-
tion.


CHAPTER III.

OF THE CHICKEN AND SWINE- POX.

DESCRIPTION.

These diseases are the same* and differ only in name.,
SYMPTOMS.

The eruptions make their appearance, in many instances, without any
previous illness ; in others, they are preceded by a slight degree of chilli-
ness, lassitude, cough, interrupted sleep, wandering pains, loss of appe-
tite, and a febrile disposition for three or four days. Most of the erup-
tions are of the common size of those of the small-pox, but they are
not numerous or confluent. On the first day they are red, and much
resemble, in their appearance, the small-pox. On tRe second day, the
red pimples have become small vesicles, containing a colourless fluid,
but sometimes a yellowish liquor. On the third, the pustules arrive at
full maturity, and in some instances so much resemble the small-pox as
to be distinguished with difficulty. When the little bladder is broken by
accident or rubbing, as sometimes happens on the first or second day,
there forms a thin scab, and the swelling of the other part abates without
its ever being converted into proper matter, as it is in the small-pox.
The few which escape being burst, have the little drop of fluid contained
in the vesicle at the top of them, turn yellow and thick, and it dries into
a scab. On the fifth day of the eruption, the pustules are almost dried
and covered with a slight crust, but no cicatrix, or mark, is left behind
when tins falls of.

DIAGNOSIS.

The only disease for which the one under consideration can be mis*
taken, is the small-pox of the mildest and most distinct kind ; but the


Order IV.] Measles. 471

former may readily be distinguished from the latter, by tlie 6mall de-
gree of fever, by the eruption being generally first visible in the back,
and each vesicle being filled with a limpid fluid on the second or third
day, and crusts covering the pocks on the fifth day, at which time those
of the small-pox are not at the height of their suppuration.

It is proper to remark here, that the pocks are occasionally so large,
and come to such maturity, as to be mistaken for the small-pox ; and
inoculators have been so unwary as to take matter from them, whereby
some have been supposed to have taken the true small-pox a second
time, and others have fallen a sacrifice to the disease, under the fatal
idea of their being secure.

The chicken-pox is perfectly free from danger, unless the eruption
be of the confluent kind, a rare occurrence indeed, when it is to be ap-
preciated from the degree of violence in the accompanying fever.

TREATMENT AND REGIMEN.

The complaint is usually of so trivial a nature, as seldom to require
the aid of medicine; but should the febrile symptoms run high previous
to the appearance of the eruption, or after it has shown itself, it may
be advisable to give the patient some cooling medicine from time to
time ; drinking plentifully of cool diluting liquors, and keeping the
bowels open, if necessary, by some gentle aperient medicine.

After the disappearance of the eruption, one or two doses of any
mild purgative had better bo administered with an interval of three or
four days between each.


CHAPTER IV.

MEASLES, (Rubeola.)
DESCRIPTION.

The measles are known by the appearance of small eruptions, some-
what resembling flea» bites, over the face and body, but particularly
about the neck and breast, not tending to suppuration. Many of these
spots'soon run into each other, and form red streaks or suffusions, lar-
ger or smaller, which give the skin an inflammatory appearance, and
produce a perceptible swelling of the face ; each spot is raised a little
above the surface, especially in the face, where they are manifest to
the touch ; in the limbs and trunk they form only a roughness.

The disease is highly infectious ; often prevails epidemically, how-
ever, and the constitution that has been once under its influence is sel-
dom liable to a second attack. It only happens when the person has at
first had a very mild or spurious species of measles.


472 Eruptive Diseases. [ Class III.

CAUSES.

The measles are produced by a specific infection, or contagious mat-
ter received into the constitution, if this is predisposed to favour tho
progress of such matter, and produce febrile effects in the habit; for if
such a predisposition be wanting at the time that this disease, or any
other of a similar nature, is epidemical, the effects peculiar to infectious
or contagious matter cannot be preduced. Children are more liable to
the measles than grown people, and the winter is the season of the year
when the disease is most apt to be prevalent.

The symptoms which characterize measles and distinguish it from
other eruptive disorders, are the dry cough and hoarseness, the heaviness
of the head and drowsiness, the appearances of the eyes, which are red,
swelled, itchy, very sensible to light, and frequently beset with tears,
together with frequent sneezing, and an acrid thin discharge from the
nostrils.

SYMPTOMS.

The measles may prevail at all seasons of the year as an epidemic,
but the middle of winter is the time they are usually the most prevalent ;
and they attack persons of all ages, but children are most liable to them.
They prove most unfavourable to such as are of a plethoric or scofulous
habit. Like the small-pox, they never affect persons but once in their life ;
their contagion appears to be of a specific nature. The eruption is usual-
ly preceded by a general uneasiness, chilliness, and shivering, pain
in the head, in grown persons ; but in children a heaviness and sore-
ness in the throat ; sickness and vomiting, with other affections, suoh
as happen in most fevers ; but the chief characteristic symptoms are, a
heaviness about the eyes, with swelling, inflammation, and a defluxion
of sharp tears, and great acuteness of sensation, so that they cannot bear
the light without pain, together with a discharge of such serous humour
from the nostrils, which produce sneezing. The heat and other febrile
symptoms, increase very rapidly ; to which succeeds a frequent and
dry cough, a stuffing, great oppression, and oftentimes retching to vom-
it, with violent pains in the loins, and sometimes a looseness ; at other
times there is great sweating, the tongue foul and white, the thirst very
great, and, in general, the fever runs much higher than in the milder
sort of the regular small-pox. The eruptions appear about the fourth or
fifth day, and sometimes about the end of the third. On the third or
fourth day from their first appearance, the rednass diminishes, the spots,
or very small papulae, dry up, the cuticle peels off, and is replaced by
a new one. The symptoms do not go off on the eruption, as in the small-
pox, except the vomiting ; the cough and headache continue, with the
weakness and defluxion on the eyes, and a considerable degree of fever.
On the ninth or eleventh day, no trace of redness is to be found, but the
skin assumes its wonted appearance ; yet, without there have been some
considerable evacuations either by the skin, or by vomiting, the patient
will hardly recover strength, but the cough will continue, the fever re-
turn with new violence, and bring on great distress and danger.

In the more alarming cases, spasms of the limbs, lethargy, delirium,
or what more frequently happens, twitching of the tendons, supervene.


Order IV.] Measles. 473

This last symptom so frequently attends the eruptive fever of measles,
that by some practitioners it is regarded as one of its diagnostics.

In measles, as in other febrile diseases, the symptoms generally suf-
fer some remission towards the morning, returning however towards the
evening with increased severity.

The measles, when violent, are not usually attended with a putrid
tendency; but it sometimes happens, that such a disposition prevails
both in the course of the disease and at its termination. In such cases,
livid or black spots are to be observed interspersed among the eruptions,
and these last become livid; or assume almost a black colour. Haemorr-
hages break out from different parts of the body, the pulse becomes
frequent, feeble, and perhaps irregular, universal debility ensues, and
the patient is destroyed.

PROGNOSIS.

We are to regard in a favourable light the febrile and other symptoms
being mild ; a gentle moisture diffused equally over the whole body ori
the coming out of the eruptions ; early and free expectoration, and open
bowels: On the contrary, the fever increasing after the appearance of
the eruptions, great pain in the head and eyes; anxious respiration, no
expectoration before the fourth day, an inflammatory affection of the
lungs; a small but rapid pulse, delirium, the sudden disappearance of
the eruptions, or these becoming of a livid hue, violent purging, great
loss of strength, purple spots on different parts of the body, with other
marks of putrescency; are very unfavourable symptoms : indeed, the
latter clearly point out that a fatal termination is near at hand:

A disposition to consumption, attended by hectic fever and an obsti-
nate inflammation of the eyes, are not unfrequently observed after meas-J
les have gone offj and ought therefore to be carefully guarded against.

DISSECTION.

The morbid appearance to be observed oh dissection of those who die
of measles arc pretty much confined to the lungs and intestines ; the
former of which always show strong marks of inflammation, and some-
times a tendency to mortification. Where the patient dies under the
eruption, the trachea and largei branches of the bronchia, as in the small-
pox, are often covered with it, which may account for the increase of
the cough after the disappearance of the eruption.

DISCRIMINATION.

Scarlatina sometimes resembles the measles so exactly as not io be
easily distinguishable;

The redness of the scarlet fever is more equally diffused than in the
measles, and is not in distinct spots with the natural colour of the skin
interpose d ; yet in a few it has been observed so. In the measles the
eruption rises more above the skin, and occasions a manifest roughness
to the touch, which is hardly observable in the scarlet fever, except
very little roughness sometimes in the arms. Tn the scarlet fever there
is seldom a severe cough ; the eyes do not water much, and the evelids

Vol. I: 60


474 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

are not red and swollen ; all which rarely fail to attend the measles.
The time of the eruptions is likewise different, for it appears in the scar-
let fever both in the face and arms on the second day ; but in the meas-
les it begins only about the third day to be visible on the chin and breast,
and does not come to the arms and hands till the fourth or fifth day.

COIV1MON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, antimony, calomel, laudanum, nitre, muriate
of ammonia, or squills, ice water, and other cold applications.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. It is our duty in this disease, as well ai
small-pox, to assist nature in expelling the eruption, if her efforts be
too feeble, and when they are too violent, they must be moderated by
suitable evacuations.

2. The attention must be directed to urgent and particular symptoms,
such as cough, restlessness, difficulty of breathing, &c.

The greatest danger in the treatment of measles, as well as in most
other diseases, consists in doing too much by improper and untimely
interference, and thus taking the business out of the hands of nature,
and trusting it to the danger and uncertainty of art. The measles be-
ing usually attended with great inflammation, it is often the first business
of- the physician to moderate it ; to effect which, the same means must
be pursued as recommended under the head of small-pox. The first
step to be taken will be to immerse the feet in warm ley water, and
bathe the surface with the same, once or twice a day, according to the
urgency of the symptoms, until the eruptions appear. This will re-
lieve the head and facilitate the appearance of the eruptions.

The following infusion should be given as early as possible :

Take Saffron, 2 parts.

Virginia Snake-root, 1 part.

Make a tea, sweeten with loaf sugar, and give warm ; to be repeated,
and as much drank as the stomach will bear.

This infusion, with the means recommended above, will lessen the
distressing and urgent symptoms attendant on the forming stage, by di-
minishing excessive inflammation, as well as to aid the expulsion of the
eruptions.

If from debility, cold, or any other cause, the eruptions should
only partially appear ; or after their appearance, should there be a re-
cession of them, in addition to these means, give Sudorific Drops,
warm milk punch, &c. And should not this be sufficient, use the
warm bath.

When they have made their appearance on the surface, and as-
sume a healthy appearance, very little medicine is necessary.
In this complaint, the eyes are generally very much affected. When
this is the case, they may be washed with the mucilage of slippery elm
bark and borax water.

There are also pneumonic or pulmonary symptoms in measles, which
prove very distressing to the patient. When there is difficulty of res-
piration, from the accumulation of mucus, give a dose of the Tincture


Order IV.] Measles. 475

of Lobelia, sufficient to dislodge it, to be repeated on the return of the
symptoms — in addition to which give the following:

Pleurisy Root, (Ascle.pias Tuberosa.)
Hoarhound, ( Murrub. Vulgar,) equal parts.

Add sufficient boiling water to make a strong infusion. Sweeten with
honey. Let this be freely given.

Should the pain of the head be very great, with delirium or convul-
sions, continue to bathe the feel often, and apply to them the Mustard
Paste.

There is usually considerable febrile excitement, restlessness, and
pain. For these symptoms, as well as to keep up a continual mois-
ture of the skin, give a dose, (according to the age of the person,) of
the Diaphoretic Powders, every night, at bed-time.

Should nausea or vomiting prevail, let Mint tea and Bi-Carbonate
of Potash be given.

It is of the greatest consequence in measles to attend to"the bowels. In
the first stages of this disease, a purgative should be given, and re-
peated according to the violence of the disease, and inflammation. If
the excitement is. very great, a moderate dose of physic may be given
every day, but in general, every two or three days will be sufficient, till
the eruptions have fully appeared, when it may be necessary to repeat
them oftener in order to prevent any morbific matter, which may have
been retained in the system, from being thrown upon some organ, and
thus causing subsequent diseases, such as Chronic Opthalmia, Dropsy,
Consumption, &c. The following purgative, under these circumstan-
ces, may be given:

Take Senna,
Manna,
Cream of Tartar.

Of the two first articles, take two drams of each; add half a pint of boil-
ing water; simmer until the strength is extracted; then add a tea-
spoonful of cream of tartar. Sweeten. For a child of two years old
give a table-spoonful every two hours until it acts upon the bowels.
This purgative ma*y be occasionally repeated.

Should any disease remain after the measles havo disappeared, let
it be treated the same as arising from other causes. If great debility of the
system should take place, denoting a tendency to putrescency, give
yeast mixed with a little sweet oil and molasses three or four times a
day. Give also wine sling or sangoree, warm, with plenty of nut-
meg grated into it.

Should there be diarrhoea or looseness, treat it as laid down under
the head of that complaint.

REGIMEN.

Panado, gruel, ripe fruits,, currant jelly, &c. may be taken. The
patient may drink barley, toast water, buttermilk whey, <fec. The
room should be well ventilated, clean, and of a moderate temperature,


476 Eruptive Diseases. [Class III.

and the clothes should be often changed. Patients recovering from the
measles should be careful about their diet. Their food for some time
ought to be light, and in small quantities, their drink cooling, and rath-
er of an opening nature.

This treatment will carry the patient safe through the disease, while
the opposite course, bleeding, mercury, &c. will cause such debility
or putrescency in the fluids, as to protract the complaint, harrass and
distress the patient, if not prove fatal.


Class IV.— Order I.] Dropsy in the Head. 477


CLASS IV.


DROPSICAL DISEASES.


CHARACTER.

In this class of diseases there is a preternatural, or morhid collec-o
tion, consisting of a serous fluid in the cellular membrane in the visce-.
the functions of life. This accumulation receives different names, ac-
cording to the particular parts in which it is lodged. When it is deposi-
ted in the cranium or brain, it is called Hydrocephalus. When it is.
deposited in the chest, it is called Hydrothorax. When in the cavity of
the abdomen, it is denominated Ascites. When in the scrotum, Hy-
drocele. When in the ovarium, Ascites Ovarii. When in the uter-.
us, Hydrometra. When it is diffused through the cellular membrane,.
it is called Anasarca. Each of which diseases will be separately con-
sidered.

Diminished absorption, and increased effusion, or both united, may
be considered as the proximate cause of the different species of Dropsy^


CHAPTER I.

DROPSY IN THE HEAD OR BRAIN. (Hydrocephalus.)

DESCRIPTION.

By Dropsy of the Head, we understand a collection of water, either
between the membranes of the brain, or in the ventricles. It is divi-
ded into two species, internal and external. Internal when the fluid
is collected within the ventricles of the brain; external, when it is collect-,
ed between the membranes of the brain. In this latter case, it is usually
of a chronic nature, and water has been known to increase to a enor-
mous quantity, swelling the head to a prodigious size; widely separa-
ting the bones of the head, and sometimes causing an absorption of
the brain.

Pain in the head, particularly across ihe brow, stupor, dilatation of
the pupils, nausea, vomiting, preternatural slowness of the pulse, and


478 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

convulsions, aro the pathognomonic symptoms of this disease, which
have been laid down by the generality of writers.

Hydrocephalus is almost peculiar to children, being rarely known to
extend beyond the age of twelve or fourteen; and it seems more fre-
quently to arise in those of a scrofulous and rickety habit than in oth-
ers. It is an affection which lias been observed to pervade families, af-
fecting all or the greater part of the children at a certain period of their
life ; which seems to show that in many cases, it depends more on the
general habit, than on any local affection or accidental cause. .

CAUSES.
The disease has generally been supposed to arise in consequence
either of injuries done to the brain itself, by blows, falls, &c. from
scirrhous tumours or excrescences within the skull, from original laxity
or weakness in the brain, or from general debility and an impoveiished
state of the blood.

With respect to its proximate cause, very opposite opinions are still
entertained by medical writers, which, in conjunction with the equivo-
cal nature of its symptoms, prove a source of considerable embarrass-
ment to the young practitioner. Some believe it to be inflammatory,
and bleed largely.

Dr. Withering observes, that in a great many cases, if not in all,
congestion, or slight inflammation, are the precursors to the aqueous
accumulation.

Dr. Rush thinks that, instead of its being considered an idiophatic
dropsy, it should be considered only as an effect of a primary inflam-
mation or congestion-of blood in the brain. It appears, says he, that
the disease, in its first stage,, is the effect of causes which produce a less
degree of that inflammation which constitutes phrenitis or inflamma-
tion, and that its second stage is a less degree of that effusion which
produces serous apoplexy in adults. The former partakes of the na-
ture of the chronic inflammation of Dr. Cullen, and the asthenic inflam-
mation of Dr. Brown. — There are others, again, who view the subject
in a very different light. Dr. Darwin supposes inactivity, or torpor of
the absorbent vesse's of the brain, to be the cause of hydrocephalus
internus ; but he confesses, in another part of his work, that the tor-
por of the absorbent vessels may often exist as a secondary effect.

Dr. Whytt, who has published an ingenious treatise on the disease,
observes the immediate cause of every kind of dropsy is the same ; viz.
such a state of the parts "as makes the cxhalent arteries throw out a
greater quantity of fluids than the absorbents can take up. From what
he afterwards mentions, he evidently considers this state as consisting
in debility.

As many cases are accompaniod with an increased or inflammatory
action of the vessels of the brain, and others again are observed to
prevail along with general anasarca, it seems rational to allow, that hy-
drocephalus is, in some instances, the consequence of congestion or
slight inflammation of the brain, or general debility.

A morbid state of the stomach and bowels, has been supposed by
some to be a predisposing cause, hut of all the causes which contribute
to the production of this disease, cold plays the most conspicuous part.


Order I.] Dropsy of the Head or Praia. , 4Xl

SYMPTOMS.
Hydrocephalus may, for the purpose of instruction, be considered
as exhibiting four stages or sets of symptoms; but the distinction must
be viewed as a very arbitrary one ; and it should be thoroughly under-
stood, that, in many cases, the symptoms of different stages will be
found blended together, or one or more of them altogether wanting.

1. The symptoms which characterize the first, or premonitory stage
of hydrocephalus, are those of common infantile fever, such as often
accompany the state of den.-'ion or teething, or a foul stomach, or a
disordered state of the bowels, more especially when complicated with
tin presence of worms. The pulse is quick, the skin hot, the pulse
disturbed, the tongue white; there is some degree of nausea and vom-
iting, with thirst, restlessness, and loss of appetite. The child droops.
The fauces being very dry, he picks the nose so as often to make it
bleed. The body wastes, and the skin is flabby. The symptoms have
irregular exacerbations and remissions ; so that this state of disease is
generally known by the name of infantile remittent j ever. An exacer-
bation or remission of the symptoms usually takes place towards evening.

2. The second set of symptoms are those which mole unequivocally
direct attention to the head as the seat of disease. They are, head-
ache, sometimes diffused, sometimes referred to a particular spot; im-
patience of light and noise; a flushed countenance j preternatural red-
ness of the eyes; contracted pupil; tossing the arms to the head, and
occasional screaming or shrieking without any obvious cause. With
these are joined the common symptoms of infantile fever, and they de-
note acute inflammatory action of the vessels of the brain.

3. The train of symptoms which characterize a third stage of the
disease are of a different kind. The pulse, before quick, becomes slow,
intermitting, or irregular. The pupils are permanently dilated, and
cease to contract on the approach of light. There is squinting. In-
stead of being restless, and tossing about his arms, the child falls into a
state of stupor, and is insensible to things and persons around hinu
The screaming fits occur more frequently, and there is an almost con-
stant moaning. The child will often vomit on being brought into the
erect posture. Any sudden exertion brings on a fit of convulsion, in
which the child dies. These symptoms are supposed to mark that wa-
ter is now poured out by the vessels of the brain.

4. If the child survives this stage, it is occasionally found that after
a time the pulse acain rises, so as to beat 150 or more in a minute, and
is withal small and feeble. The child lies perfectly insensible, and
takes nourishment from actual inability to swallow. The stools and
urine pass involuntarily. The face is pale; the tongue dry and brown*
convulsions or partial paralysis occur; occasionally one side becomes per-
fectly paralytic. Severe pustular opthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes is
sometimes witnessed. The immediate approach of death is often precc-'
ded bv gangrenous spots, appearing particularly about the neck, hips, or
tips of the i

The first stage is sometimes wanting, the attack being sudden, and
perhaps the first evidence of the disease a strong convulsion fit. In


480 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

man)' instances the pulse never becomes slow. In a still larger pro-
portion of cases the disease never exhibits that remarkable change
from the slow to the rapid pulse, which characterizes the fourth stage.
Occasionally there is neither permanent contraction nor dilatation of
the pupil) but throughout the lohule course of the disease an irregulari-
ty in the contractions of the iris may he noticed. The pupil of the eye
dilates on the approach of the candle, and contracts as it recedes. In
a few cases I have seen children continue sensible to the last moment.
Other, and even more singular varieties in the symptoms will be found
recorded in the Writings of authors. It is certainly worthy of remark,
considering the universality of delirium as a symptom of inflammation
of the brain in the adult, that aberration of intellect can scarcely be
said to occur in this, or indeed in any of the diseases of early life.

The duration of hydrocephalus is liable to almost as much variation
as the symptoms which characterize it. It has been known to proVe
fatal in a week; Some cases run on even as far as two months, but
these are comparatively rare. The average duration of the complaint
may be stated to be three weeks. — [Gregory. J

The extremities are cold, showing a determination to the head, or
an unequal circulation, and in some cases there is costiveness in the
commencement of the complaint. There is in others, particularly
when the attack is very violent, free purging. There is also, generally,
great heat or inflammation of the head, and this may be the principal
cause of the disease.


CHRONIC FORM OF THE DISEASE.

It remains to notice the chronic form of Hydrocephalus; or
that which is accompanied by enlargement of the skull. Sometimes
this disease is congenital, but more usually it begins during the first
month. In consequence of the bones of the cranium giving away, the usual
symytoms of compression do not come on. The size which the head attains
in this disease is often enormous; On dissection, the brain appears flat-
tened out, but it will be found to weigh about as much as a healthy
brain would have done at the same age. In the progress of the disease
the functions of the body generally are very little, often not at all im-
paired till a snort tiaie before death. It is almost incredible how little
the powers of the mind are affected by this disorder. Dr. Monro states,
that in no instance seen by him could it be said that the intellect was
deranged. In one remarkable case, of twenty-six years duration, in
which the head measured forty-four inches in circumference, the patient
displayed a very affectionate disposition towards his parents, entered
into the amusements of his brothers and sisters, and enjoyed a tolera-
bly retentive memory. Attempts have been made to afford relief to
this apparently hopeless state of disease by tapping, and a case sue 1 -
cessful for a time, is recorded in the Medico-Chirurgical Transactions
(vol. ix, pajrc 355.) More recent observations have showr, that the
risk from this operation is great, and that it is not generally to be re com-


Order I.J Dropsy of the Head or Drain. 481

mended. Bandaging of the head has been tried, but without material
benefit. The complaint does not necessarily prove fatal at an early
age, a few cases being on record of its continuance to an advanced
period of life.

"The disorder," says Thomas, "manifests itself with inactivity of
body, languor, loss of appetite, sickness at the stomach, vomiting, hot
dry skin, flushing of the face, a parched tongue, and other febrile
symptoms, which are succeeded by pains over the eyes, great sensibil-
ity to light, and a suffused redness of the eyes. The pain in the head
comes on at intervals, is exceedingly acute at times, and Occasions the
sufferer to shriek out, while at the same time the forehead is compres-
sed with the hand, there is extreme restlessness, a flushed countenance,
disturbed sleep, and costiveness.

" After a time, the pupils of the eyes become dilated, and squinting
takes place ; the pain in the head is much increased, particularly to 1
wards evening ; but at length this diminishes, and drowsiness succeeds
a constant state of watching. The pulse also, which before was in-
creased in quickness, is now preternaturally slow and often intermitting,
the pupils become niore dilated, and do not contract on being exposed
to the light, and double vision, or a complete loss of sight, with lethar-
gic stupor, succeed.

" This second stage of the disease having existed for a time (its dura-
tion being shorter or longer,) the pulse again returns to a febrile state,
and becomes so extremely small arid quick as to be numbered with dif-
ficulty, the eyes are now inflamed and red, there is great difficulty of
breathing with snorting, the evacuations are involuntary, and at length
the patient is carried off by a strong convulsive fit.

"The symptoms, therefore, which strongly characterize a collection of
water iii or on the brain, and distinguish it from other diseases, are
the excruciating pain in the head, and intolerance of light, followed by
squinting, dilated pupils, and profound stupor, as likewise by vomiting.
At first the pulse is preternaturally quick, but afterwards it becomes
slow arid irregular.

" We are to look upon this disease as ever attended with very great
danger; but particularly so when there is constant stupor with loss of
sight ; weak intermitting pulse, difficult respiration, involuntary evac-
uations, apoplectic snorting, or the head much enlarged."

DISCRIMINATION.

I

It is to be distinguished from apoplexy by its being attended with fever,
and from simple typhus by the paroxysm being very irregular, with
perfect intermissions, many times in a day. Whatever difficulties there
may be in the early stage, particularly in infants, there is no disease
more easily distinguished in the advanced stages than hydrocephalus;
indeed, says a writer, how can we mistake when we see a child rolling
its head on the pillow, or perhaps sawing the air with one hand, while
the opposite side is palsied; with a hectic on the cheek, his eyelids half
concealing the pupil, and the eyes deprived of their vivacity by the fil-
my covering of the cornea; the complete dilatation of orie or both pupils,
and the suffusion of the adnata; drawing a long sich; frequently grind-

Vol. I. 61


482 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

ing his teeth ; quite incoherent, or in a Btate of complete insensibility;
with a burning fever on the skin, or sweat forced from every pore : and
all these symptoms alternating with, and at last finished by a palpitating
breathing and violent convulsions 1

DISSECTION.

An accumulation of water in the ventricles of the brain, is one of the
most common appearances to be observed on dissection. In different
cases this is accumulated in greater or less quantities. It sometimes
amounts only to a few ounces, and occasionally to some pints. When
the quantity of water is considerable, the fornix is raised at its anterior
extremity, in consequence of its accumulation, and an immediate open-
ing of communication is thereby formed between the lateral ventricles.
The water is of a purer colour and more limpid than what is found in
the dropsy of the thorax, or abdomen. It appears, however, to be ge-
nerally of the same nature with the water that is accumulated in these
Cavities. In some instances, the water in hydrocephalus contains a very
small proportion of coagulable matter, and in others it is entirely free
from it.

When the water is accumulated to a very large quantity in the ventri*
cles, the substance of the brain appears to be a sort of pulpy bag, con-
taining a fluid. The skull, upon such occasions, is very much enlarged
in its size, and altered in its shape ; and it appears exceedingly large in
proportion to the face*

COMMON PRACTICE.
Bleeding repeatedly from the arm or jugular veins, mercury, blisters,

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. The indication of cure in this disease, is to
lessen the inflammatory action, by equalizing the circulation, and thus
preventing a serous effusion*

2. When water has been collected to evacuate it through the medi-
um of the absorbents, by stimulating them to a healthy action.

From the nature of this complaint it is evident that it becomes more
difficult to remove than most others. But by prompt and suitable mea-
sures, it may often be successfully treated.

When the disease is marked by inflammation, the first steps to be
taken are, to use such means as are calculated to subdue it. General
bleeding is resorted to by physicians generally; but with what proprie-
ty* I am unable to determine.

It may produce, or exasperate, but can never cure the disease.

The usual effect of blood-letting, viz. that of debility or prostration,
is sensibly experienced in hydrocephalus, and that, too, without at all
lessening arterial action.

To reduce the inflammation, our reliance must be placed upon more
appropriate means, and such, in general, must be resorted to, as have
been laid down under the head of other inflammatory complaints, in
order to divert the blood from' the head, and recall it to the extremities
and the surface. Let the feet and legs be immersed in warm ley water,


Order I.] Dropsy of the Head or Brain. 483

and well rubbed with flannel or muslin. Let the surface be batlied with
the same ; both of which processes must be often repeated, or accord-
ing to the urgency of the symptoms.

Great reliance in the treatment of this disease must be placed upon
purgatives ; and such as act equally, through the whole alimentary ca-
nal. Our common purgative combined with cream of tartar, answers
well for this purpose. About equal parts of the two articles may be
combined, and given in any suitable vehicle.

It is difficult to lay down any precise rule for the repetition of purga-«
tives, as this depends upon the violence of the disease, constitution, &-c;
but as a general rule in severe attacks they may be given daily, and in
protracted cases every two or three days. In most cases, immediate
amendment follow their administration, either when there is infiamma-*.
tion, or serous effusion.

It is indispensably necessary in this as in most other diseases, to pay
strict attention to the capillary system. Such medicines must be given,
and such means taken as are calculated to promote perspiration. In
addition to bathing the feet and surface mentioned above, sudorific me-
dicines must be given. For this purpose give the sudorific or sweating
drops in doses according to the age of the child, to be accompanied with
the free use of the infusion of Spearmint, (Mentha Sativa) the same
tea, or infusion, to be given when the child is thirsty. This plant has a
threefold effect upon the system ; First, it allays the irritability of the
stomach; Second, it promotes gentle perspiration; Third, it promotes
a preternatural discharge of urine.

Should the sweatingdrops prove too stimulating, and thus increase the
febrile excitement, substitute the Diaphoretic Powders; two or three
grains may be given to a child two years old three or four times through
the course of the day, and particularly given at night to allay irritation,
procure rest, promote perspiration, &c.

Should all these means fail of producing perspiration, which, from the
dry and constricted state of the skin, may occasionally be the case, leS
the child be held in the arms of its mother or nurse, and a blanket
thrown around it, and let both be placed over a tub, containing a strong
decoction of bitter herbs, The steam must be permitted gradually to
come in contact with the body of the child ; after which, let it be wrap-
ped in a blanket, and placed in a bed or cradle. If benefit is experi-
enced from this process, let it be repeated.

In almost every case of hydrocephalus, there is great heat or inflam-
mation of the head, and therefore it is necessary to apply refrigerant
or cooling lotions, or applications to it. Equal parts of spirits, rain
water and vinegar, to which, a little salt has been added may be often
applied to the head, tepid, 1 have applied it cold and sometimes warm,
and when I have ascertained which has afforded the most relief, I have
continued it of the same temperature.

Should this only partially relieve, or should it lose its efficacy, after
frequent application, let it be omitted, and let hops simmered with vine-
gar be applied to the whole head. Great benefit is invariably experi-
enced by these applications. The child after great restlessness and pain,
will generally fall asleep after having applied them,


484 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

In some cases where the disease has been of an unusual obstinate
character, resisting the ordinary remedies of this nature, I have applied
with decided benefit, a poultice of Slippe?y Elm Bark over the whole
head, to be removed before it becomes dry.

Care must be taken in making these applications, that there be not
too speedy an evaporation. The head must be covered with a cap or
handkerchief.

I have administered, and as far as I have been able to ascertain with
great advantage, the Tincture of Foxglove or Digitalis. Five or six
drops, (according to age) of the tincture may be given in a little parsley
tea, morning, noon, evening, and bed time; other internal medicines to
be suspended during the da)', while these drops are administered. Pur-
gatives, however, may be given in the morning, if necessary, and the
diaphoretic powders at night.

Mustard plasters must be kept to the feet, sufficiently strong to ex-
cite a little redness, after which, let them be applied between the shoul-
ders, and thus changed alternately.

Cupping has been highly spoken of by some, in this disease. A
physician of this city, became very celebrated, some years ago, for the
cure of dropsy of the head, and his principal reliance was upon this
operation. I have occasionally tried it in the worst or most desperate
cases, but I am not clear in my mind, how far it is beneficial. In one
case which was given up as incurable, and one of the worst I ever saw,
as a last alternative, I ordered the child to be cupped. It appeared to
mitigate all the pain, the child fell asleep, and soon recovered. It might
be resorted to, should all other means fail. The cups should be placed
upon the temples and nape of the neck.

REGIMEN.

It is very necessary that the room should be kept quiet, and some-
what darkened. For nourishment, give arrow-root tea, milk, panado,

&LC.

When nourishment cannot be taken by the mouth, it may be given by
the way of injection. By this treatment we have cured many cases of
this disease which appeared beyond the control of medicine.


Order II.] Dropsy of the Abdomen or Belly. 485


CHAPTER II.

DROPSY OF THE ABDOMEN OR BELLY. (Ascites.)

DESCRIPTION.

By this species of dropsy we understand a collection of water in the
cavity of the abdomen. The water is generally collected in the sac of
the peritonaeum or general cavity of the abdomen. Sometimes it is found
without the peritonaeum, and between this and the abdominal viscera.
Sometimes the water is contained in sacs, and connected with some of
the viscera. It is then called encysted dropsy.

CAUSES.

A preternatural collection of serous fluid, whether in the cel-
lular membrane, or in the cavities of the body, is caused by absorption
falling short of exhalation in these cells and cavities; and this effect may
be produced either by increased effusion from the exhalant arteries, or
from diminished action of the absorbents. But as in dropsy the lym-
phatics and thoracic duct are much enlarged ; it is clear that absorption
is increased, although not in proportion to the exhalation, and that there-
fore the cause of dropsy is in the exhalants.

Increased effusion from the exhalants may arise.

1. From their relaxation, which may be occasioned by fevers, whether
typhus or protracted intermittents ; by continued grief; by excessive
evacuations of any kind ; by the several species of intemperance ; by
indolence and inactivity ; or by drinking only stagnant or cold water ;
when heated.

2. From superabundance of serum in the blood, which may be occa-
sioned by all the ahovementioned causes ; by a penurious diet ; by pro-
fuse haemorrhage and repeated venesection; by weakened powers of
digestion, defective chylification, and diminished energy of the lacteals ;
by interruption of the watery excretions, whether of urine, or of per-
spiration; by jaundice. It might be thought, that the superabundant
serum would more readily pass hy the kidnies, as aqueous fluids do in
healthy subjects, than by the exhalant arteries: but when the stimulus
of well oxygenated blood is wanting, as we see in pale, languid, and hy-
dropic habits; the kidnies become torpid, their vital action ceases, and
the quantity of urine is diminished. This we have seen exemplified in
the beautiful experiments of Hales, who produced an artificial dropsy
in dogs, by pouring abundance of warm water into their arteries through
a tube of such a height, that the pressure of the column equalled the
force of the heart, yet none of the warm water passed through the
kidnies.


486 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

3. From continued pressure on the veins, as in pregnancy, obstinate
flatulence, and schirrous tumours, increasing the determination of blood
to the exhalant arteries, in which cases dropsy is merely symptomatic,
for when the obstruction is removed the dropsy ceases.

4. From the stimulus of inflammation. A blow on the testicles pro-
duces inflammation, of which the consequence may be dropsy of the
head. A child's brain inflames, and secretion ensues. Pleurisy fre-
quently terminates in hydrothorax, and peritoneal inflammation in asci-
tes, or dropsy of the belly. It is in this way that cold water drank ac-
cording to this theory, when heated by exercise, produces dropsy.
Cruikshank often took away fifty or sixty pints of water from a patient,
which had collected in the abdomen, in the few days the peritoneal in-
flammation lasted, during the usual species of puerperal fever. He very
properly remarks, that when the arteries of the part have once got a
habit of increasing their secretions, they commonly go on for a long time,
or the lymphatics may be so altered by the inflammation, as not to ab-
sorb in proportion to the discharge by the exhalants.

Among the remote causes of ascites, may be reckoned bleeding,
mercury, and repeated eruptions, suppressed discharges, scarlatina,
measles, inflammation of the peritonaeum, &c.

The proximate cause therefore of dropsy is not as Sydenham con-
ceives, the serous fluid itself as collected in the cells, but diminished
tone in the system, as more accurately stated by Dr. Cullen.

SYMPTOxMS.

This variety of dropsy is often preceded by loss of appetite, sluggish-.
ness, dryness of the skin, oppression at the chest, cough, diminution of
the natural discharge of urine, and costiveness. Shortly after the ap-
pearance of these symptoms, a protuberance is perceived in the abdo-
men, which extends gradually, and keeps on increasing, until the whole
belly becomes at length uniformly swelled and tense. The distension
and sense of weight, although considerable, vary somewhat according to
the posture of the body, the weight being felt the most on that side on
which the patient lies, while, at the same time, the distention becomes
somewhat less on the opposite side. In general, the practitioner may be
sensible of the fluctuation of the water, by applying his left hand on one.
side of the abdomen, and then passing on the other side with his right.
In some cases, it will be obvious to the ear. As the collection of water
becomes more considerable, the difficulty of breathing is much increased,
the countenance exhibits a pale and bloated appearance, an immoderate
thirst, the skin is dry and parched, and the urine is very scanty, thick,
high coloured, and deposits a latcritious sediment. With respect to the
pulse, it is variable, being sometimes considerably quickened, and, at
other times, slower than natural. The principal difficulty, which pre-
vails in ascites, is the being able to distinguish, with certainty, when the
water is in the cavity of the abdomen, or when it is in the different states
of encysted dropsy. To form a just judgment, we should attend to the
following circumstances : — When the preceding symptoms gave suspicion
of a general hydropic diathesis, or state of the system, when, at the same
time, some degree of dropsy appears in other parts of the body; and


Order II.] Dropsy of the Abdomen or Belly. 487

when, from its first appearance, the swelling has been equally diffused
over the whole belly, we may generally presume that the water is in the
cavity of the abdomen. But when an ascites has not been preceded by
any remarkable cachectic state of the system, and when, at its beginning,
the tumour and tension had appeared in one part of the belly more than
another, there is reason to suspect an encysted dropsy. Even when the
tension and tumour of the belly have become general, yet, if the system
or the body in general appear to be little affected ; if the patient's strength
be little impaired; if the appetite continue pretty entire, and the natural
sleep be little interrupted : if the menses in females continue to flow as
usual: if there be yet no anasarca or general dropsical affection, or,
though it may have already taken place, if it be still confined to the
lower extremities, and there be no paleness or sallow colour in the
countenance ; if there be no fever, nor so much thirst and scarcity of
urine as occur in a more general affection: then according as more of
these different circumstances take place, there will be the stronger grounds
for supposing the ascites to be of the encysted kind. The encysted form
of the disease is more difficult to cure, though its progress to a fatal
termination is generally very slow; and the peritonaeal dropsy is
mostly very obstinate, depending usually on organic disease in the liver,
or other abdominal viscera, or organs.

Ascites is not necessarily connected with a collection of water in any
other part of the body, but is not unfrequently combined with anasarca
or hydrothorax. It commences with a tumefaction of the abdomen,
which gradually increases until it is uniformly distended, and there is a
distinct fluctuation perceivable by applying one hand to the belly, and
striking the opposite side with the other; the urine is diminished in
quantity, and of a deep colour ; there is a great thirst, and more or less
fever ; thejfacc is generally pale and bloated, and the breathing is diffi-
cult when the water is accumulated in a large quantity, pressing against
the diaphragm. When the disease arises in consequence of morbid af-
fections of the liver, or any other internal viscera; the general system is
frequently not much affected, but the event is always precarious. In
the ascites, the water is on some occasions confined in different cysts or
in one of the ovaria, in which case the fluctuation is more obscure, and
in the early stage of ovarian dropsy, the tumour is situated towards one
side of the abdomen, and is less smooth and uniform than in genuine as-
cites; When, too, the water is very viscid, or when confined in hyda-
tidsi the fluctuation will be less distinctly perceived. It is often ex-
tremely difficult to distinguish between a dropsy of the belly and a state
of pregnancy. When deception is intended, the most skilful physician,
with all his care and attention, is liable to sutler imposition, and on cer-
tain occasions the character both of the physician and his patient may
essentially depend on a correct decision. " Dreadful to relate !" says
Dr. Parr, " the trocar has more than once within our own observation,
happily not by our direction, been plunged into a pregnant uterus." Dr.
Good relates the following singular incident. " If dropsy occur at a pe-
riod of life when the catamenia are on the point of naturally taking their
leave, and where the patient has been married for many years without
ever having been impregnated, it is not always easy from the collateral


488 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

signs to distinguish between the two. A lady under these circumstances,
was a few years ago attended for several months by three or four of the
most celebrated physicians of this metropolis; one of whom was a prac-
titioner in midwifery, and concurred with the rest in affirming that her
disease was an encysted tumour of the abdomen. She was in conse-
quence put under a very active series of different evacuants ; a fresh
plan being had recourse to as soon as a preceding had failed ; and was
successively purged, blistered, salivated, treated with powerful diuretics,
and the warm bath, but equally to no purpose: for the swelling still in-
creased and became firmer; the face and general form were emaciated,
the breathing was laborious, the discharge of urine small, and the appe-
tite intractable ; till at length these threatening symptoms were followed
by a succession of sudden and excruciating pains, that by the domestics,
who were not prepared for their appearance, were supposed to be the
forerunners of a speedy dissolution, but which fortunately terminated
before the arrival of a single medical attendant, in giving birth to an
infant, that, like its mother, had wonderfully withstood the whole of the
preceding medical warfare, without injury."

In forming our conclusion in all suspicious cases, we must attend with
scrupulous exactness to the first appearances, the progress, the form and
state of the tumour, with the appearance of the breasts and other cir-
cumstances. "If the menses continue regular ; if the breasts appear
flat or shrivelled, with a contracted and light coloured areola ; and if the
swelling fluctuate to a tap of the fingers, there can be no doubt of its be-
ing a case of dropsy : but if on the contrary, the breasts appear plump
and globular, with a broad and deep coloured areola ; if we can learn,
which, in cases where pregnancy is wished to be concealed, we often
cannot do, that the catamenia or menses have for some time been ob-
structed ; and if the swelling appear uniformly hard and solid ; and more
especially if it be seated chiefly just above the pubes, or provided it be
err, there can belittle or no doubt in most instances, of the existence of
pregnancy. The most difficult of all cases is that in which dropsy and
pregnancy take place simultaneously. It is a most distressing combina-
tion for the patient; and can only be treated with palliatives till the time of
child-birth." There is also considerable difficulty in ascertaining with cer-
tainty, whether the water is contained in the cavity of the abdomen, or
whether it is an encysted dropsy. The young physician will often be
embarrassed in forming his judgment ; but if the swelling from the begin-
ning is equally diffused over the whole belly, the probability is strong in
favour of the water being contained in the cavity of the abdomen. But if
at its commencement the tumour and tension appear in one part of the
belly more than another, we have much reason to suspect an encysted
dropsy. — [ Thatcher.]

PROGNOSIS.

The urine being little diminished, or becoming more copious; the swel-
ling of the abdomen subsiding; the skin ceasing to be dry; the strength ori-
ginally little impaired, and the respiration becoming free, may be regarded
in a favourable light ; on the contrary, intense local pain, great emacia-


Order II.] Dropsy of the Abdomen or Belly, 489

tion, sympathetic fever, the disorder having been induced by a diseased
state of the liver, or other abdominal viscera, are to be looked upon as
very unfavourable circumstances. Dropsy of the encysted kind gen-
erally terminates, sooner or later, in the destruction of the patient.

DISSECTION.

The usual appearances to be observed in dissections of those who
have died of ascites, are as follows : — We observe a large quantity of
fluid effused in the cavity of the abdomen, which for the most part is
seroUs, but it now and then presents material differences both in colour
and consistence, and wc frequently notice flakes of coagulable lymph
floating in it. In some cases, the water, instead of being collected in
the general cavity of the abdomen in one large body, is lodged in dis-
tinct small cysts forming what are called hydatids: Besides the accu-
mulation of water in the abdomen, we often find the liver swelled;
hard; tuberculated, or gorged with blood, the spleen, pancreas, and
mesenteric glands considerably enlarged, the stomach occasionally
schirrhous, and the peritonaeum, either generally or in patches, in-
flamed, thickened, studded with white elevated points, and sometimes
in a state approaching very nearly to gangrene. Polypi are not un-
frequently observed in the large blood vessels, as also ossifications in
various parts of the organs.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, mercury, blistering, tapping, &c.
REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. Evacuate the water.

2. Prevent the re-accumulation, by restoring the tone of the system.'

To answer the first indication, give the same purgative as directed
under the head of Ilydrothorax, or Dropsy in theChest. As a change,
equal parts of our common purgative and cream of tartar may be giv-
en in the same manner. This purgative evacuates the water very co-
piously, lessening the tension and swelling of the abdomen. Let it bo
repeated twice a week, or as occasion requires.

The next preparation to be given will be the following :

Take Queen of the meadow, (Spina Ulmaria.) 1 oz.
Milk-weed, (Asclepias Syriaca,) 2 oz.
Juniper Berries, (Dace. Junip.) 2 oz.
Horse Radish Root, (Raph. Rusticanus.) 1 oz.
White Mustard Seed, ( Sinapis Alba.) half an oz.
Prickly Ash Bark, (Zanthox Fraxin.) 2 oz.

Bruise all these articles separately, then mix. Of the powder take a
large table-spoonful, add a point of boiling water. When cool, give
as much and as often as the stomach will bear. This will stimulate the
kidneys, and promote a free discharge of urine, and thus aid in evacu-
ating the watery fluid. This medicine should be continued daily.

• The same oil may be rubbed upon the abdomen or belly, as re-
commended under the head of Ilydrothorax. After the continuance
Vol. 1. 62


490 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

of this treatment, should it only partially remove the complaint, give
tho Hydragogue Tincture, made as follows :

Take Elder Bark, {Cortex Sambucus,) 1 lb. if green, if dry half a pound.
Add one gallon of White or Lisbon Wine.

Simmer an hour. Strain and bottle. Dose, a wine-glass three times
a day. This is a very valuable diuretic, and I have found it very suc-
cessful hi the treatment of this disease. It has cured many cases with-
out the aid of any other medicine. While the patient is taking this
tincture, let him drink freely of a decoction made of the roots of the
vaccinum, commonly called whortlebeiry. Let the root be dry and
properly cleaned, cut fine, and bruised. Then add sufficient boiling
water to make a strong decoction. This may be taken freely through
the day.

Should, from any cause whatever, the disease still remain intractable,
after the above treatment, then administer in a little syrup, or tea
sweetened, the Evphobia Ipecacuanha, fifteen or twenty grains may
be given at a dose, which sometimes vomits, and almost invariably
purges, producing copious watery passages, and acting in a peculiarly
favourable manner in all dropsical diseases.

After the exhibition of this medicine, the patient must be placed over
a tub of bitter herbs, as directed under the head of vapour bath, and
continued fifteen or twenty minutes, or until perspiration is produced.
Let him be removed to the bed, and if sweating takes place only par-
tially, let a tea-spoonful of the sudorific, or sweating drops be given
in a tumbler of catnip tea ; and sometimes it becomes necessary to ap-
ply two or three heated bricks to the sides, and legs. They should be
covered with muslin that has been wet in vinegar, to create more- heat
or vapour."

This process or operation must be repeated about twice a week, be-
ing as often as the Euphobia is administered, or once a week
will answer in protracted cases. The abdomen should be supported by
proper bandages.

When the water is partially evacuated, or nearly so, a re-accumula-
tion of it must be prevented by giving two or three capsicum pills mor-
ning, noon, and night.

The wine bitters, also, should be given as a tonic, to keep up the
strength of the patient, create an appetite, &.C.

The spirits of spearmint and the decoction of the queen of the mea-
dow, aided by whortleberries and gin, cured Mrs. , of a dropsy.

It is the practice to tap the patient, and draw off the water when the
accumulation has become very great, but the operation is attended with
only temporary benefit, and indeed the fluid appears to collect much faster
after it has been drawn off, than before, which precludes all hope of
recovery.

In one case, when I was called too late to cure the disease, the
person having an organic complaint of the uterus, and had the water
often drawn off, I repeated the operation and took from her five gallons
of serous fluid.


Order III. J Dropsy of the Chest. 491

REGIMEN.

Stimulating diet is required in every species of dropsy. Mustard,
horse-radish, red pepper, &c. maybe freely taken with food. It usu-
ally requires only a part of the remedies h$re recommended, to remove
the dropsy in almost every stage of it, and should the treatment fail, it
will probably depend upon an organic affection of some of the viscera,
implicated in the complaint.

The following formula has been given to me as a remedy for the dropsy,
but I am not prepared to speak of its effect, never having tried it; but
from the component parts, or the ingredients of which it is composed, I
think that it may prove very beneficial :

Take Mustard, half an ounce.
Juniper Berries, 1 oz.
Milk-Weed Root, 1 oz.
Horse Radish Root, 1 oz.
Black Alder Bark, 1 oz.
Mandrake Root, 1 oz.
Dwarf Elder Root, or bark, 1 oz.
Bitter Sweet Bark, from the root, 1 oz.

Pound or bruise all, and add one gallon of hard cider. One wine-glass
to be taken three or four times a day on an empty stomach.


CHAPTER IV.

DROPSY OF THE C II E S T, (Hydrolhorax.)

DESCRIPTION.
By this disease, we understand a collection of water in the pericardium,
or in the cavities of the thorax. Sometimes it is diffused in the cellular
texture of the lungs without being deposited in the cavity of the thorax.
Occasionally the water is inveloped in small cysts of a membranous na-
ture, known by the name of hydatids, which apparently float in the cav-
ity, but generally they are connected with, and attached to particular
parts of the internal surface of the pleura, a membrane lining the chest.

CAUSES.

The causes which give rise to the disease, are pretty much the same
with those which are productive of the other species of dropsy. In some
cases, it exists without any other king of dropsical affection being pres-
ent ; but it prevails very often as a part of more universal dropsy.

Bleeding and mercury may be reckoned among the most common cau-
ses of this complaint by the debility and effusion they occasion. Also
inflammation of the lungs, liver, or any other neighbouring viscera
Most liquors, ardent spirits, and whatever tends to produce debility or
serous effusion may cause it.


4p2? Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

SYMPTOMS.

Hydrothorax or dropsy of the chest often comes on with a sense of
uneasiness at the lower end of the sternum or breast hone, accompanied
by a difficulty of breathing, which is much increasd by any exertion or
motion, and which is always most considerable during night, when the
body is in a horizontal posture. With these symptoms there is a cough
that is at first dry, but which, after a time, is attended with an expecto-
ration of thin mucus. There is likewise a paleness of the complexion,
and an anasarcous swelling of the feet and legs, together with a consid-
erable degree of thirst and a diminished flow of urine; occasionally the
face swells and pits upon pressure, especially in the morning ; and these
signs of disease are accompanied by debility and loss of flesh. Under
these appearances we have just ground to suspect that there is a collec-
gradually increase, but their progress is slow, and a considerable time
elapses before the disorder is fully formed.

The difficulty of breathing at length becomes excessive. The pa-
tient can seldon remain in a recumbent posture for any time, and the
head and upper part of the trunk must be supported almost erect. The
sleep is frequently interrupted on a sudden by alarming dreams, out of
which the patient quickly starts up in bed, with a sense of impending
suffocation. Convulsive efforts of the muscles subservient to respiration,
resembling an attack of spasmodic asthma, with violent palpitations of
the heart, generally accompany the paroxysms, which are also fre-
quently excited by the most trifling voluntary motion, or by a fit of
coughing.

When afflicted with these distressing symptoms, the patient is under
the necessity of continuing erect, with his mouth open, and he be-
trays the utmost anxiety for fresh air. His face and extremities are cold:
the pulse, with little exception, is feeble, irregular, and intermits in a
degree seldom experienced in other disorders, and a pain or sensation of
numbness frequently extends itself from the heart towards the insertion
of the deltoid muscle of one or both arms. Excepting a livid hue of the
lips and cheeks, the countenance is pale, and indicates a peculiar anxie-
ty and ghastliness of appearance, and, together with the upper parts of
the body, is usually covered with a profuse clammy sweat. Drowsi-
ness, coma, or delirium, occasioned by the difficult transmission of the
blood through the lungs and want of sleep, frequently attend the latter
periods of hydrothorax, and from the same cause the expectoration is
sometimes bloody. Now and then a sensation of water floating about
can be distinctly perceived by the patient, or any sudden change of pos-
ture.

Dr. Maclean, who wrote a treatise on Hydrothorax, thus accurately
gives the symptoms of this disease.

The respiration is more or less affected in every case. " It is some-
times quick, hurried, anxious, and irregular ; while at others it is slow
and laborious : at times it is performed with a peculiar wheezing noise,
as if the air were passing and repassing with difficulty through a narrow
straitened, or as one of my patients expressed herself, through a metal


Order III.] Dropsy of the Chest. 493

tube." In hydro-thorax, the patient cannot lie down for half a minute
in the worst cases and most advanced periods.

But although in some instances the patient be able to lie down without
inconvenience, he is often suddenly roused soon after going to sleep by
a most distressing sense of suffocation, oppression, and extreme anxiety
about the chest, attended with palpitation; and if able to walk, he pro-
bably runs to a window for fresh air, and makes several laborious inspi-
rations before he recovers his ordinary breathing. Under these most
distressing paroxysms, the face is generally livid, and even black, and,
together with the neck and chest, is covered with profuse sweats, appear-
ing in large drops, which arc generally followed by a remission of these
symptoms, but not that complete intermission which succeeds the asth-
matic paroxysm. The intellectual functions are, under these circum-
stances, much disturbed, the patient talking incoherently, and labour-
ing under temporary delirium, which subsides with the paroxysm. As
the disorder advances, he is thus immediately attacked on attempting to
lie down ; so that at length ho is obliged to seek repose in a chair or bed,
supported by pillows, in a sitting posture, sometimes with the chest in-
clined forward : even in this situation, as the quantity of water increa-
ses, he is suddenly awakened by similar sensations, and, dreading the
repetition of this alarming symptom, he has no natural refreshing sleep,
though he be overcome by constant drowsiness and stupor."

There is commonly greater difficulty of lying on one side than on the
other, this depends on the site, diffusion and quantity of the water; if
confined entirely to one side, the patient can only lie on this.

The countenance is much changed in hydrothorax; the lips, nose,
eye-lids, and those parts of the face arc usually florid, become livid ;
while the rest of the face is pale and sallow, and the whole exhibits an
expression of extreme anxiety and suffering.

The urine is commonly scanty and high-coloured, and deposits, on
cooling, a copious deep pink, or yellowish branny sediment. In a few
instances the urine is of a dark dusky brown hue, without sediment,
but with an oily film on its surface, Cases occur in which the urine
does not deviate from the natural state till toward the advanced stage.
In idiophatic or primary hydrothorax, the disorder sometimes makes
considerable progress before the determination to the kidneys is sensibly
diminished, or before the quality of the urine is altered.

Palpitation of the heart, irregularity and intermission of the pulse,
may be regarded as among the most frequent attendants on hydrothor-
ax. But these symptoms arc much varied in different cases; — and we
know that, in some instances, they arc not present.

The palpitation of the heart and inequality of the pulse, may either
precede, immediately attend, or succeed the watery effusion ; and it is of
consequence to ascertain the time of their appearance : if they precede
the symptoms of serous accumulation, especially in old age, or after
acute inflammation of the chest, it may be inferred they arise from one
or other of the organic affections of, or near the heart, but if they com-
mence about the same time with, or soon succeed, these symptoms, it
may reasonably ho concluded they are owing to the pressure of the wa-
ter on the surface of the heart and lungs.


494 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

At some period or other of the disease, the extremities hecomc more
or less oedematous. —

" The anasarcas limhs of genuine hydrothorax are colder, and more
livid, than those of common anasarca; and this will he found proportion-
ed to the degree of interruption of respiration.

Being suddenly roused from sleep by a sense of suffocation, is so fre-
quent a symptom as to have been deemed diagnostic. — " This symptom,
like every other, individually considered, affords no positive evidence
of the presence of water; but when united with the other leading ones
mentioned, however obscurely marked these may be, it ought to re-
move every doubt as to the nature of the disease."

Besides these more essential to the disease, there are other symptoms
of frequent occurrence, as cough, dry, or humid expectoration of blood,
and pains in different parts of the chest. With regard to external tu-
mor, and fluctuation of water, he remarks, that a tumor, elevation,
or inequality of some parts of the chest may sometimes be observed ;
or if the body be exposed to view, one side appears larger than the other.
This swelling is more frequent, and sometimes very considerable, about
the epigastrium, than any other part. In some cases, it is oc-
casioned solely by the descent, or protrusion of the diaphragm, occa-
sioned by the water ; in otbers by the liver being thrust downwards and
forwards from its natural seat, either in a sound, but more generally in
a diseased state, by the same cause. The fluctuation is regarded, as
merely a symptom of the imagination. — " But though it cannot be either
heard, or felt against the fingers by the usual test used in dropsy, yet
the patient sometimes observes that he has the sensation as if water
were contained in the dies', passing from one side to the other in turn-
ing, or as if the heart were moving in a fluid."

The natural functions are variously disordered in the progress of hy-
drothorax ; the appetite and digestion are sometimes impaired ; the
tongue foul and furred ; and the bowel ■> are various, but generally bound.
The pressure of the water on the oesophagus has sometimes occasioned
a distressing difficulty of swallowing.

Stupor and drowsiness are not uncommon attendants. In a few in-
stances delirium, and even mania has been observed. The blood is dark,
the crassementum is loose and soft, the proportion of serum is large,
and the inflammatory huff is rarely if ever to be seen upon it.

Every part of the body shews, in a striking manner, the effect of this
morbid change of the solids and fluids. Not only those parts the most
distant, but the nearest to the heart, feel the influence of a. languid and
irregular circulation of dark venous blood. The whole surface is cold
and chilly, except under the circumstances mentioned above, when
profuse sweats break out on the upper parts of the body ; the natural
perspiration is diminished, and sweat is with difficulty excited by sudo-
rific medicines.

The progress of hydrothorax to a fatal termination, is, it is remark-
ed —

" Regular and uniform, when art has not interposed her salutary aid;
and this has been too generally the case under medical treatment, in so
much that it is numbered among the incurable diseases by most medical


Order III.] Dropsy of the Chest. 495

writers. In consequence of the increased pressure of the accumulated
fluid on the heart and lungs, the patient may be said to be suffocated ;
or he dies apoplectic, from the pressure of dark venous blood on the brain,
not unfrequently accompanied with serous effusion, either on its surface
or in its ventricles; so that death in this disease is sometimes analogous
to that from drowning or hanging. The fatal event is generally sudden,
and sometimes unexpected, probably when they appear to be a momen-
tary interval of repose, frequently during, or after a meal, or any sud-
den bodily exertion."

The precise seat of the fluid in hydrothorax, it is not always easy to
determine, and more especially, it has been found difficult to ascertain
those symptoms which are peculiarly indicative of dropsy of the pericar-
dium or the investing membrane of the heart.

DISCRIMINATION.

It is sometimes somewhat difficult to distinguish this complaint from
some others nearly allied, or somewhat similar, such as lingina pectoris,
asthma, organic affections of the heart, aneurisms and diseases of the
liver, but by a close attention to the symptoms which have been pointed
out, we shall be able to distinguish between them with great accu-
racy.

When the following diagnostic symptoms are present, there can be
no doubt of the real nature of the complaint.

1. In dropsy of the chest, there is a tightness and sense of fulness
across, or in, the chest.

2. A pain at the bottom of the sternum or breast bone.

3. Palpitation of the heart.

4. Difficulty of laying in a recumbent position with a sense of suffoca-
tion in such a situation.

5. A diminution of urine, and which is of the colour of brown beer
or brandy.

PROGNOSIS.

Unfavourable Symptoms. — 1. Palpitations of the heart, steady and
constant, appearing early, not subsiding on rest, or on the evacuation
of the water, together with a pulse in every way corresponding.

2. Dyspnoea, or orthopnoea, continuing, with more or less violence,
under similar circumstances, and threatening suffocation on attempting
to lie down, or on any sudden motion.

3. Severe pains of the chest, especially about the seat of the heart,
or in the direction of the large arterial trunks, and continuing with lit-
tle or no intermission.

4. The disease suddenly supervening to pneumonia, or other acute
inflammatory affections of the chest, particularly if these have been
neglected in the beginning, or if immoderate bleedings or drastic pur-
gaiives have In-on used in their advanced stages.

5. The disease coming on in constitutions previously exhausted by
intemperance, especially by a constant career of tippling or dram-
drinking; by the long continued operation of the depressing passions;


49G Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

in very advanced periods of life ; or from extreme bodily weakness or
exhaustion in any age.

6. Schirrhous enlargements, or irregular knotty indurations of the
liver, with confirmed jaundice.

7. Distortion or malformation of the chest.

Favourable Symptoms. — When the disease commences its attacks
under circumstances the reverse of those mentioned ; when there is no
reason to apprehend the presence of visceral affection of any magni^
tude: and when all the unpleasant symptoms gradually recede as the
medicines begin to act upon the kidneys, we may venture to hold forth
sanguine hopes of a happy issue, provided the treatment be directed
by skill and judgment, and pursued with unremitting attention for a
due length of time.

DISSECTION.

Dissections of this disease show that, in some cases, the water is
either collected in one side of the thorax, or that there are hydatides
formed in some particular part of it; but they more frequently disco-
ver water in both sides of the chest, accompanied by a collection in the
cellular texture and principal cavities of the body. The fluid is usualy
ly of a yellowish colour; possesses properties similar to serum, and,
with respect to its quantity, varies very much, being from a few ounces
to several quarts. According to the quantity, so are the lungs com-
pressed by it; and, where it is very considerable, they are usually
found much reduced in size. When universal anasarca has preceded
the collection in the chest, it is no uncommon occurrence to find seme
bf the abdominal viscera in a scirrhous state.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, mercury, blistering, salt-petre, squills, cantharides, iron,
blue vitriol, &c.

Some of these remedies, (if such they may be called,) induce drop-

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. Evacuate the water.

2*. Prevent its return by exciting a healthy action of the absorbents.

It will be proper to commence the treatment of the hydrothorax^ by
administering the following cathartic :

Take the Mandrake or May-apple, (Pod. Pellatum,)
Cream Tartar, (Sjip. Tart. Potass.)
Peppermint Plant, (Menlh. Pip.) of each, equal parts.

Of this powder, give a large tea-spoonful every four hours until it
purges. It ma} r be given by pouring a little boiling water upon the
powder, and sweetening it with loaf sugar, or it may be taken in mo-
lasses, or common syrup ; and mint tea may be freely drank after taking
it. This purgative is remarkably well calculated to evacuate the wa-
ter in this, and other species of dropsy. It acts as a diuretic and as a
hydragogue, and immediately improves the condition of the patient by
the copious evacuations of water which follows its exhibition.


Order III.] Dropsy of the Chest. 497

I have sometimes substituted the jalap root for the mandrake, which
answers an excellent purpose; but from the remarkable success I
have more recently had, by using the former, I am inclined to
give it the preference. One of these cathartics is by no means sufficient.
They must be continued until the disease is removed, and given ac-
cording to the strength, constitution, &c. As a general rule, one or
two in the course of a week, is sufficient. After the operation of this
medicine, and the stomach has become quieted, administer the follow-
ing:

Take Spearmint, (mentha sativa.) pulv. 2 oz.

Foxglove, (digitalis purpurea.) pulv. 2 drams.

Divide into twelve powders. Add fourteen ordinary sized table-spoon-
fuls ('seven ounces) of boiling water, to one powder, which contains
ten grains of the foxglove. Of this infusion, take a table-spoonful
every hour through the day, or two table-spoonfuls every two hours.
Should it produce any nausea, or giddiness of the head, half the quan-
tity only should be taken. It must be recollected that one powder must
be taken in this form each and every day. I have sometimes employ-
ed the tincture of digitalis in place of the above, and it has been follow-
ed with a good effect. This infusion has a very powerful and sover-
eign effect in hydrothorax, or dropsy of the chest. A very short space
of time elapses before there is a sensible improvement. It promotes
reabsorption of the serous fluid, and causes a free discharge of urine.
It is powerfully aided by the free use of the following tea, all of which
articles are strongly diuretic :

Take Spearmint,
Parsley,
Elder Flowers,.
Dandelion Roots and Tops, a handful of each.

Put them into a tea pot, and add sufficient boiling water to make a
strong infusion. This to be- taken freely through the day. The pa-
tient must be rubbed or anoinlcd upon the chest and abdomen, morn-
ing and evening, with warm sweet oil, to which a i'cw grains of cap-
sicum, or calyenfle popper has been added, sufficient to heat or stimu-
late the skin. When the water has been evacuated, which will be
known by a subsidence of the symptoms, give morning, noon, and
night three of the stimulating, or capsicum pills. They act as a
tonic, and in some degree as a diuretic. If the water should diminish
very slowly, their use may be commenced earlier, as they will aid this
evacuation.

Without great care, using preventives, &c. the disease is liable to
return after convalescence. It will therefore be necessary to continue
in the use of the medicine sometime after the patient is apparently well.
Give also as a tonic, and to prevent a re-accumulation of water, the
wine bitters. Haifa wine-glass may be taken three or four times a day
on an empty stomach.

Should not this treatment cure, (and I know not that I now remember
a single failure,) emetics must be given every third day, to be accompa-

Vol. I. 63


498 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

nied with the use of the vapour hath, purgatives, and the hydragoguo
tincture.

Dr. Stark, a German physician of Pennsylvania, became very cele-
brated for the cure of the dropsy in the chest ; and patients repaired
to him from a distance of an hundred miles. When he left that part, he
states that a practitioner offered the sum of one hundred dollars for the
method of treating it. On his arrival to this city he called upon
me for patronage, and although I gave him the use of my office to
assist him into practice, he was unwilling to impart to me his treatment.
After a year or two, however, I prevailed upon him to dispose of it;
and which I have found, in conjunction with my own remedies, a
sovereign cure. I subjoin his treatment, and the reader will see where-
in it differs from my own :

" 1, Take Digitalis, the plant, two drams, divide in twelve pow-
ders, ten grains each, after this add fourteen table-spoonfuls of boiling
hot water. Take one table-spoonful every hour, or two every two hours.

2. Calomel, one grain every morning and evening.

3. Bathe the breast and abdomen every night and morning with red
precipitate ointment.

4. Take sweet or olive oil, warm it and anoint the whole body in
the morning and evening.

5. Drink an infusion or tea of parsley."

REGIMEN.

The diet should be light and nutritious. Pepper sauce may be freely
taken with food, mustard, horse-radish, and cayenne pepper, all which
possess medicinal properties in this disease.


CHAPTER IV.

DROPSY OF THE OVARIA. (Ascites Ovarii.)
DESCRIPTION.

This species of dropsy begins without much pain, or constitutional
disturbance. It is not usually discovered until it is much enlarged, and
then appears on one side. It is known by its being moveable when the
patient is in a recumbent position, and by passing the finger up the va-
gina, the tumour may be felt which distinguishes it from dropsy of the
abdomen ; but it seldom is the case that the tumour rises above the pel-
vis, until anasarca appears, and prevents the tumour from being dis-
covered. The fluctuation is not very perceptible; the disease being
generally occasioned by the fluid, which is in white small bladders of
various sizes called hydatids.

Until the tumour has acquired a considerable size, the patient's health
suffers no very visible diminution ; it then induces pain and numbness


Order IV.] Dropsy of the Ovaria. 499

in the thigh corresponding with the side in which the swelling Is situat-
ed, and by degrees the body becomes wasted, the appetite bad, and the
strength greatly impaired.

The progress of the disease varies in different cases. Tn some, dan-
gerous symptoms have ensued soon after the disorder became apparent,
whilst others have laboured under it for a year or two previous to its
destroying the patient. Nothing can be more uncertain than the pro-
gress and termination of the complaint ; for experience has proved, that
under the most apparently desperate circumstances the health has been
in some measure restored, or life protracted for a considerable time,
while on the other hand, where no urgent symptoms have been mani-
fest, a sudden aggravation of the disease has occurred, and a rapid ad-
vance to a fatal termination has taken place.

Nothing satisfactorily can be offered respecting the causes of a dropsy
of the ovarium, as women of every condition and age are found to be
afflicted with it.

Dropsy of the ovarium is to be distinguished from ascites by attend-
ing to the symptoms which have been already enumerated under the
head of the latter. Great caution will be requisite in not mistaking
pregnancy for this complaint, as fatal consequences might ensue there-
from. Fortunately the two are readily distinguished from each other.

The quantity of water in ovarial dropsy is commonly from thirty to
thirty-five pints, and some cases have occurred where it has been nearly
a hundred.

TREATMENT.

Some are in the habit of tapping or drawing off the water in this dis-
ease ; but this is attended with little or no benefit, and cannot be consi-
dered good practice. The only reliance must be upon the treatment
laid down in other species of dropsy, particularly ascites.


DROPSY OF THE WOMB. (Hydrops Vleri.)

It is sometimes the case that there is a collection of water or hy-
datids in the womb. A tumour appears over the hypogastric region,
which gradually increases, and somewhat resembles the figure of the
uterus. It yields upon pressure, and there is a sense of fluctuation.
There is not much, if any diminution of urine. It is distinguished from
the dropsy of the abdomen, by its being confined to the region of the uterus.

This disease is soon followed by general dropsy, a slow fever, and
emaciation.

TREATMENT.

The same as ascites.


500 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.


CHAPTER V.

CELLULAR DROPSY. (Anasarca.)

DESCRIPTION.

By anasarca, is to be understood a collection of water in the cellu-
lar membrane, which is extensively diffused throughout the body, and
which is moistened by a fluid thrown out by the arterial exhalents. In
various ways, the quantity of this fluid may be increased, constituting
the disease, called anasarca, or cellular dropsy.

SYMPTOMS.

Anasarca, or dropsy of the cellular membrane, usually commences
in the lower extremities, and first shows itself with a swelling of the feet
and ankles towards evening, which by degrees ascends, and successive-
ly occupies the thighs and trunk of the body. The swelling is soft and
inelastic, retaining for a time the pressure of the finger; the colour of
the skin is paler than usual, and, in the more advanced stages of the dis-
order, now and then exhibits more or less of a livid hue. When the
effusion has become very general, the cellular membrane of the lungs
partakes of the affection, the breathing becomes difficult, and is accom-
panied by frequent coughing and the expectoration of a watery fluid.
The urine is scanty in quantity, very high coloured, and generally depo*
sits a reddish or pinky sediment, although in a few instances it is of a pale
whey colour. These symptoms are accompanied by insatiable thirst,
dryness of the skin and costiveness, the countenance becomes sallow,
and there is sluggishness and inactivity, together with a slow fever. When
the cellular membrane of the legs and ankles is greatly distended, the
water is apt to ooze through the pores of the skin, or raise it up in small
blisters. The pulse is usually small and feeble. — [Gregory.]

CAUSES.

Pathologists in all ages have occupied themselves in enumerating the
several causes from which anasarca may originate. Without following
them into details, it maybe useful to point out those which are most fre-
quently observed to operate.

1. Local anasarca, sometimes arises from pressure accidentally made
on veins, as by the gravid uterus, swelled glands in the groins or armpits,
or a tight garter. The same result occasionally follows, even in heal-
thy states of the system, from a too long continuance in the erect pos-
ture.

2. General dropsy arises from a variety of causes which concur in
producing a debilitated state of the whole body, and more particularly
perhaps of the venous system. Hence it is that anasarca succeeds severe


Order V.] Cellular Dropsy. 501

haemorrhages (natural or artificial,) fevers, and fluxes; and that It oc-
curs so frequently in the latter stages of diabetes, pulmonary consump-
tion, and amenorrhoea, or obstructed menses. Under such circumstances
the dropsical symptoms commence slowly, and as it were imperceptibly.
There are instances, however, in which the disease comes on suddenly;
and the cause of this acute form of anasarca is various.

Exposure to cold and damp has frequently been followed by dropsical
swellings. I have known them to commence within forty-eight hours
from the application of the exciting cause. In this variety of the dis-
ease the pulse will commonly be found full and strong, with perhaps some
degree of hardness. There will be present at the same time symptoms
denoting an affection of the thoracic organs; tightness across the chest,
with cough and dyspnoea, aggravated by exertion and the recumbent
posture, and producing head-ache.

General anasarca arises, in the next place, from excess in the use of
spirituous liquors. When the attack is sudden, this dropsy is of the arte-
nying hydroptic effusion from cold.

Another cause of anasarca is disturbance in the uterine func-
tions.

The only other circumstance requiring attention in anasarca, is its
connection with some of the febrile eruptions. It has long been known,
that dropsy, particularly in the form of anasarca, occasionally follows
scarlet fever. The same phenomenon is sometimes observed as a sequel
of measles, small-pox, and erysipelas. It has been conjectured, that
the dropsical tendency is here dependent on a morbid condition of the
cutaneous exhalants, the consequence of the eruption; and there are
sufficient grounds for this notion. The accompanying symptoms occa-
sionally point out some obscure affection of the heart and lungs existing
at the same time. Under all circumstances the practitioner will do right
to view this form of disease as of constitutional origin, and to be more
solicitous about the state of the system than of the skin.

From the remark now offered it will appear, that the pathology of
anasarca is closely connected with that of hydrothorax. In many cases
these forms of dropsical effusion coexist, and the remedies are the same
for both. Notwithstanding all the causes which are assigned for dropsy,
it is somewhat doubtful whether this one has been yet discovered.

Is it not probable that the first cause of every species of dropsy exist
in the kidnies, in consequence of their ceasing to perform their office,
or failing to secrete the urine.

When this is the case, it is retained or reabsorbed and taken into the
circulating mass. The exhalents then pours it out in greater quantities
than the absorbents can take up, consequently, serous or watery effusion,
and a collection follow which we term dropsy.

All know that a diminution of urine is the characteristic symptom of
dropsy, and that diuretics or medicines which stimulate the kidneys
to a healthy action, or cause them to secrete or separate the urine from
the blood, immediately relieves or cures the disease. Does not this
phenomena then explain the cause or nature of this complaint ?


502 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

In those who have died of anasarca, the whole of the cellular mem-
brane has been distended with a fluid, mostly of a serous character.
Various organic diseases have occurred ; and the blood is said to be al-
tered in consistence, according to the degree of the disease. In general
a cure can be more readily effected when it arises from topical or gene-
ral debility, than when occasioned by visceral obstruction ; and in re-
cent cases, than in those of long continuance. The skin becoming
somewhat moist, with a diminution of thirst, and increased flow of urine,
are very favourable. In some few cases the disease goes off by a spon-
taneous crisis by vomiting, purging, &c

COMMON PRACTICE.

Mercury, bleeding, blistering, antimony, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The first object will be, as in every kind of dropsy, to evacuate
the water, and afterwards to prevent a re-accumulation of it.

To effect which, a very similar course must be pursued, as recom-
mended under the head of ascites, or dropsy of the abdomen.

If the swelling is confined to the legs, let them be steamed every
night over a large tub containing a strong and hot decoction of bitter
herbs, comprised of tanzy, wormwood, hoarhound, hops, and catnip.
The legs should be held over this fomentation hot, or warm as possible,
and if they do not perspire, let a heated brick or stone be put into the
decoction. A blanket should be thrown over the legs to prevent the es-
cape of the steam. If the swelling extends to the abdomen, the pa-
tient may sit over the vapour or steam, with a blanket around him,
that a general perspiration may be excited. This process is to be re-
peated two or three times a week, or according to circumstances. It
is always necessary to aid the process by giving some diaphoretic rn-
fusions or tea, as sage, hysop, mint, or catnip.

The following cathartic may be given about twice a week :

Take Jalap Root, pulverized,
Cream of Tartar,
Spearmint, pulverized, equal parts by weight. Mir.

Of this compound give a tea-spoonful every three hours until it acts
freely upon the bowels. After this let the hydragogue tincture be giv-
en, to be accompanied with the use of the fellowing infusion or tea :

Take Indian Hemp,
Milk-Weed,
Dandelion Roots, equal parts.

Make an infusion and drink through the day.

When every other means have failed in curing the dropsy, I have
succeeded by giving repeated emetics. They appear to give a new im-
pulse or tone to the whole system by the shock they occasion, or by the
sympathetic effect they exert, particularly on the skin and absorbent sys-
tem. I have found the common emetic powders to be an excellent pre-


Order VI.] Dropsy of the Scrotum. 503

paration ; and it may be given two or three times a week. I recently cu-
red a very difficult and complicated case of dropsy, resulting from the
use of mercury, (given to cure the intermittent fever,) by administer-
ing an emetic twice a week, and sweating the patient as often by the
vopour bath, as before mentioned. When there is great swelling in
any part, fomentations of bitter herbs afford great relief. Should the
disease prove obstinate, give fifteen or twenty drops of the tincture
°f foxglove four times a day in a tumbler of spearmint tea.

The following preparation may be taken the same as the tincture,
and at the same time :

Take common Whortle-berries, dried and bruised, 4 oz.

Add sufficient boiling water to cover them. Let it stand two hours, then
add a quart of fourth-proof Holland gin. Of this give from half to a
wine-glass morning, noon, and evening. I have seldom known this
preparation, though simple, fail of evacuating large quantities of wa-
ter, and producing a very salutary and permanent benefit in this and
other kinds of dropsy. Give also in place of the common physic, fif-
teen or twenty grains of the pulverized root of the euphorbia ippecacu-
anha. In all other respects the anasarca must be treated the same as
laid down under the head of ascites.


CHAPTER VI.
DROPSY OF THE SCROTUM. (Hydrocele.)

I shall here only write a few words upon this disease, but shall treat
it more fully under the head of surgery. I shall merely state that it
consists in an effusion of serum or water in the coats of the testicle.
There is a tumour formed which slowly increases and appears transpa-
rent, or light and elastic. Sometimes a fluctuation of water can be dis-
covered. Great care is necessary to discriminate between this, and
hernia or rupture. In the last complaint, the tumour recedes in a re-
cumbent position, but not so in the latter.

TREATMENT.

Tapping the tumour and drawing off the water, is the usual course
so, it is desirable to cure the complaint without an operation, particular-
ly in infants and children, and this may be done by using the same re-
medies recommended in other kinds of dropsy ; particularly anasarca.

It will be necessary, also, to use fomentations of bitter herbs to the
scrotum, and to administer two or three times a week purgatives and


504 Dropsical Diseases. [Class IV.

diuretics. I have succeeded admirably in every case, by pursuing this
method.


TYMPAN ITES.

The symptoms are elastic distension of the abdomen, not readily
yielding to pressure, and sounding like a drum, with costiveness and
emaciation, but no fluctuation.

In the beginning we observe flatulence, or difficulty of breathing,
that is, hollow rumbling of the bowels. Thirst and loss of appetite, pain
in the loins, and dispneea with frequency of pulse, succeed, and atrophy
brings up the rear.

The persons most liable to this disease are chiefly those of a relaxed
and irritable habit, such as have been debilitated by profuse evacuations,
by intermittents, or by typhus fever; patients who have recently suffered
by spasmodic and inflammatory affections of the bowels, and particular-
ly women after child-birth.

It is occasioned sometimes by ascites and morbid affections of the
liver ; at other times by biliary or renal calculi ; frequently by worms;
and in one most curious case, reported by Van Swieten, it arose from
haemorrhagic effort after suppression of the catamenia, and of the hae-
morrhoidal flux. /

It may likewise be induced by poisons, when they occasion flatulence
and spasmodic constriction in the bowels.

From what has been said, we cannot be at a loss for the proximate
cause of this disease. There is evidently a preternatural distension of
the intestines by air, producing loss of tone in the muscular fibres of the
part distended, and, from what has been suggested on the process of di-
gestion, it must appear, that the extrication of this air, or gas, in the sto-
mach or the bowels, is to be attributed to some defect either in quantity
or quality of the several fluids, the saliva, pancreatic juice, and bile,
which are mixed with our aliment to assist in the reduction of it into
chyle, and to restrain the progress of fermentation in the faeces, whilst
they are passing the intestines. But this alone cannot be the proximate
cause of tympanites ; for with this must be united spasmodic stricture
in some part of the intestines, which prevents the escape of wind, and
this spasmodic stricture must be occasioned by some irritation in the
system.

This view of the proximate cause is confirmed by anatomical obser-
vations, particularly by those of Platerus, Littre, and De Haen. These
celebrated physiologists discovered the colon distended to the size of a
man's thigh, and the stomach with small intestines three times their usual
bulk. These distensions were observed in different parts of the alimen-
tary canal, sometimes in the stomach, at other times in portions either of
the large or of the small intestines forming constricted cells, and some-
times in all of them together. With air, they discovered likewise an
amazing quantity of hardened faeces. We cannot therefore entertain a
doubt as to the nature of this disease. Heister, in his extensive practice


Order VI.] Tympanites. 503

during the space of six and forty years, never found air as the cause of
tympanites in the cavity of the abdomen, till Ruysch showed him one
case in which that cause was evident.

TREATMENT.

Agreeable to this idea of the proximate cause, the indications of cure
must be:

1. To relieve the spasm;

2. To restore the tone of the intestines.

3. To evacuate the water when it exists.

It will be necessary in treating this disease, occasionally to adminis-
ter a purgative ; but we must depend more, for a cure, upon repeated
stimulating injections. The following I have found very excellent:

A strong decoction of the seeds of Angelica, 1 pint,
Milk, 1 pint,
Molasses, 1 gill,
Olive Oil, 1 gill,
Salt, 1 tea-spoonful.

Introduce as much of the liquid, each time, as possible, to be repeated
daily, or twice a day, according to the symptoms.

This discharges large quantities of wind, and soon relieves the pa
tient.

I have also found in this complaint, the hydragoguc tincture^ contri-
bute essentially to the cure.

I have also given with excellent effect; the tvhorih-berries and gin\
as mentioned under some of the preceding species of dropsy.

It appears that flatulence alone, is not the sole cause of tympanites.
It often depends on watery effusions or collections, and when they ar©
of the encysted kind, the disease is very difficult to cure.

I lately attendedja lady in this city, whose case appeared to be almost
hopeless, having been of long standing, and reduced her exceedingly;
But I cured her by the above treatment.

Great cafe is necessary to distinguish between tympanites, and other
forms of dropsy, particularly by those physicians who perform the un-
necessary and useless operation of tapping;

When I fust commenced the practice of medicine in this city, I was
called in company with three other physicians, to a female, said to have
the dropsy. After they all examined her, and considered fhe disease
ascites, or dropsy of the abdomen, my opinion was asked. With much
reluctance, I gave it, as it was directly in opposition to the other elderly
and experienced physicians. They decided that the woman had the
ascites, and must be tapped. I, on the contrary, pronounced it the
tympanites.


Vol. I. 64


506 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.


CLASS V.


CEREBRAL DISEASES.


CHARACTER.
Wb understand by this class, cerebral diseases, those which proceed
from a deranged, or impaired state of the functions of the brain.


CHAPTER I.

INSANITY OR MENTAL DERANGEMENT. (Mania.)

DESCRIPTION.

Insanity or mania may be termed a false perception of things display-
ed most generally in the opinion formed by the patient of his nearest
friends, or things in general ; in a want of due connection of the train
of thoughts marked by an incoherence or raving ; and in a resistance
of the passions to the command of the will, accompanied, for the most
part, with a violence of action and furious resentment at restraint. The
incapacity of distinguishing the diseased functions of the mind, and the
irritability of our actions, in the opinion of Dr. Spurzheim, constitute
insanity.

Some writers contend that insanity is a disease wholly of the mind,
and not of the body ; whereas others suppose that mania in general de-
pends on a physical origin, or arises from disorganization,- or morbid
action of some part of the body, derangement of the intellectual facul-
ties being only the effect ; which supposition is somewhat supported by
the appearances frequently to be observed in the head on dissection. But
every species of madness, whether it has originated in the mind or the
body, becomes the same by continuance. In madness, both the mind
and the body must ultimately be diseased ; for a disease of the mind
soon produces one in the body.

CAUSES.

Proximate Cause — Dr. Rush states, after refilling the idea, that ma-
nia is occasioned by a morbid condition of the brain, stomach, spleen,
liver, &c. that the cause of madness is seated primarily in the blood-ves-
sels of the brain, and that it depends upon the same kind of morbid and
irregular actions that constitutes other arterial diseases ; but such is the
connection between body and mind, and such are the operations of
moral and physical causes upon it, that the proximate or immediate
cause of insanity, is very difficult to explain. All we know is that cer-
tain impressions made upon the mind, or sensorium, are sufficient to
destroy or suspend that principle or faculty which enables a person to
perceive and judge and act rationally and consistently.


Order I.] Insanity or Mental Derangement. 507

It 9eeras to take place somewhat similar to the manner in which a
musical instrument is thrown out of tune. Sufficient force exerted up-
on it, is enough to effect this purpose, and thus with the mind. Cer-
tain agents or impressions seem capable of unhinging the sentient facul-
ty, or throwing it into such disorder that it becomes incapable of direc-
ting the Judgment or performing its functions.

Dr. Rush says, I infer madness that exists in the mind from the remedies
which most speedily and certainly cure it; being exactly the same as
those which cure fevers, or disease in the blood-vessels, or in other parts
of the body.

Remote and Exciting Causes. — Among the various causes of mental
derangement, we may enumerate certain local diseases, such as enlarge-
ment of the bones, tumours and dropsy of the brain. Certain diseases
of the brain also, such as palsy, epilepsy, apoplexy, head-ache, &c.
gout, dropsy, consumption, pregnancy, and febrile diseases, profuse
evacuations from bleeding, mercury, or other causes. Perhaps the
most fertile of all causes of insanity, is the use of ardent spirits, Inor-
dinate sexual desires is another cause of insanity,

A very common practice among young men, called onanism, is anolh*
er cause of the disease. Also great pain, great labour or exercise, very
hot or cold weather, narcotic substances taken into the stomach,
may produce it ; worms, foreign matters retained in irritable parts of the
body also, translations of morbid humours to the brain, hysterics, cuta->
neons eruptions, measles, inordinate ambition, intense study, and the
passions, such as joy, terror, love, fear, grief, shame : also from de-
famation, calumny, ridicule, loss of property and beauty, and domes*
tic quarrels.

It is said that extravagant joy produced insanity in many of the sue*
ccssful speculators in the South Sea expedition in England.

Charles the VI. became deranged from a paroxysm of anger. Reli-
gious enthusiam, or mistaken notions of religion, is another cause. But
perhaps one of the most common causes of insanity is the struggle be-
tween conscience, or a sense of duty on the one hand, and naturalpro-
pensities on the other.

I have no doubt in my mind, if people would adhero strictly to the
principles of true religion, they never would be afflicted with insanity.

Eberle, in enumerating the causes of insanity or mental derangement,
has made some very interesting quotations, which I here subjoin.

" The predisposition to insanity, is, in many instances, very evidently
dependent on an hereditary peculiarity of organisation. . Dr. Rush men-
toins several very striking examples of this kind. Esquirol asserts, that
according to his own observations, one half of the cases of insanity among
the wealthy, and at least one-sixth of those which occur among the poor,
depend on an hereditary predisposition ; and according to a tabular
statement given by Dr. Casper, it appears that in the different hospitals
at Paris, the proportion of cases depending on an hereditary predispo-
sition, is to the whole number as about 1 to 4 1 ,. Esquirol states that he
has met with an instance of seven sisters and brothers out of one family
having been affected with insanity; and Ilaslam mentions ten families
in each of which several cases of mental derangement occurred. Dr.
Rush observes, that the following, among other peculiarities attend thi#


§08 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

disease, where the predisposition to it is hereditary ; 1, weaker exci-
ting causes develope this disease than where the predisposition to it has
been acquired ; 2, it is apt to come on about the same period of life at
which it appeared in the patient's ancestors ; 3, children horn previous,
are less apt to become insane, than such as are born after the occurrence
pf mania in their parents , 2, in some instances of families in which
madness has existed, the disease passes by the understanding in their
posterity and appears in great strength and eccentricity of memory and
pf the passions, or in great perversion of their moral faculties."

The liability to mental derangement is greatest between the twentieth
and fortieth years of age ; and according to the observations of Esquirol,
still more particularly between the ages of twenty-five and thirty. The
following tabular summary in relation to this point, drawn up by Dr.
Casper, from the observations of Pinel, Esquirol, Haslam, and others,
shows that from the thirtieth to the fortieth year of age, the occurrence of
insanity is decidedly more common than during any other equal period of
life. During childhood, or before the age of puberty, mania occurs very
rarely. Instances are nevertheless mentioned, in which insanity appear-
ed at a very early period of life. Dr. Rush saw two cases in children only
two years old ; in one instance it appeared during the seventh, and in
another during the eleventh year of age. Haslam also relates an instance
which occurred in a girl only four years old ; in another instance the dis-
ease came on in the seventh, and in a third one about the tenth year of age.

Old age, also, is almost equally unfavourable to the occurrence of ma-
nia. Dr. Rush states that he has met with but four instances in which the
disease came on after the sixtieth year of age. It has moreover been ob-
served, that maniacs rarely live to a very protracted age. Dr. Casper,
however, mentions a very remarkable exception to this general fact. A
coloured woman, he says, who had laboured under mental derangement
for upwards of eighty years, was brought into the Hospital Salpetriere in
a state of raving insanity, at the very advanced age of one hundred and
seventeen years.

In relation to the relative frequency of insanity in the two sexes, it is
pretty generally admitted that it is more common in females than in males.
Haslam gives a statement from which it appears, that during a period of
forty-six years, there were four thousand eight hundred and thirty-two
female, and only four thousand and forty-two male lunatics admitted into
the Bethlehem Hospital in London. It appears, however, from the in-
quiries of Dr. Casper, that the proportion of female over male lunatics, is
much greater in France than in England.

It is worthy of notice that the predisposition to mental derangement is
very generally connected with black or dark brown hair and a dark com-
plexion. Esquirol states that out of two hundred and twenty-seven fe-
males affected with mania, one hundred and fifty-two had dark, thirty-
nine fair, and thirty-six gray hair. Dr. Rush informs us, that of nearly
seventy patients in the Pennsylvania Hospital, who were examined with
a reference to this fact, in the year 1810, " all except one had dark-co-
loured hair." In some regions mental diseases are manifestly endemic.
This is the case with the cretins in manyof the gorges of the mountainous
districts of Europe: and it would appear that this disease is found only
where the soil is calcareous.


Order I.J


Insanity ox Mental Derangement.


509


The exciting causes of mental dorangement are usually divided Into the
moral and physical; or into those which affect the animal organization
thro' the medium of the mind, and those which act directly upon the body.

From the following table it would appear that grief, distress, want,
and disappointed love, are decidedly the most common exciting causes
of insanity.


Physical Causes.


Hereditary,
Pregnancy,
Epilepsy, -

Suppressed Menstruation,
Puerperal State,
Old Age, -


Coupdu soleil, -

Injuries of the Head, -

Congenital,

Fever, - ' . ,

Apoplexy, .

Malformation of the Skull,

Fire and other injurious Substances,

Syphilis, ....

Imprudent use of Mercury,

Onanism, .....

Intoxication, -

Worms, .....

Suppressed Cutaneous Diseases,

Suppressed Haemorrhoids,


Moral Causes.


Crief,

Unfortunate Love,
Fanaticism, -
Fright, ....
Jealousy, -

Anger, ....

Distress and Want,
Mortified Pride, -
Disappointed Ambition, -
Intense and Protracted Study,
Misanthropy, - - - -
Vives Revolutions d'esprit,
Political Causes,


Salpetriere,

in the years

1811-12.


5- ft
• S v


105


150


11


4


11


2


55


19


52


21


60


4


12


4


14


4


13


12


60


10


8


1


14


18


24


4


105


31


46


25


8


1


38


8


18


14


16


77


14


1


16


12


13


2


14


31


oo W


118

36

69

157

9
27


21

106


99
37
55


116

78
49

58


It is indeed very obvious that those sects which are most accustomed
to call up all the human passions, in order to assist the propagation of
their doctrines, must be most exposed to the inconveniences which re-
sult from the too violent operation of those passions.

SYMPTOMS.

The most common form of insanity is the intermitting, or that in
which the paroxysms of the disease are divided by lucid intervals. The
accession of the paroxysms is far from being regular, but most usually
they begin soon after the summer solstice, continue with more or


510 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

less violence during the heat of summer, and terminate towards the de-
cline of autumn. Mania comes on at different periods of life ; but in
the greater number of cases it makes its first attack between thirty and
forty years of age, probably because people at this period are more lia-
ble to be acted upon by the remote causes of the disease, or that a
greater number of such causes arc then applied. At this age people
are generally established in their different occupations; are probably
married, and have families ; their habits are strongly formed, and the
interruptions of them are consequently attended with greater anxiety
and regret. Under these circumstances they feel the misfortunes of
life more exquisitely.

Sometimes mania, however, instead of being only temporary, or
occurring in paroxysms, which go off and return again at certain pe-
riods, continues during the whole of the person's life without any in-
termission, and the patient sinks at last under the violence of the con
fiict, without any abatement of the symptoms ; or a state of perfect
idiotism ensues.

Although insanity usually breaks out suddenly, the manners of the
patient becoming preternaturally impetuous, his conversation hurried,
his mind full of projects, which he pursues with restless activity, there
are instances where insanity makes its approach gradually : a certain
whimsicality of disposition, and waywardness or singularity of char-,
acter, are observed for some time, perhaps for years, before the indi-
vidual is set down by his friends as a maniac ; and this is particularly
the case in hereditary derangement.

In no two patients is the disease ushered in, or continued, with pre-
cisely the same appearances ; for the different propensities and habits
of differents patients lead of necessity to a difference of idea and of ex>»
pression in each. The precursory symptoms of a maniacle paroxysm
are, however, very frequent, as follows r — The patient complains of a
sense of tightness at the region of the stomach, want of appetite, cos-,
tiveness, and a sensation of heat in the bowels. He is subject to a
ences a degree of fear that sometimes amounts to terror, and feels
either little disposition or absolute incapacity to sleep. Soon after these
appearances, incoherence and incongruity of idea are betrayed in bis
outward conduct, by unusual gestures, and by extraordinary changes
in the expression and movements of his countenance. He generally
holds his head erect, and fixes his eyes and attention upon the heavens.
He speaks with a deep hollow voice, walks with a quick and precipi-
tate step, then stops suddenly, as if arrested by the most interesting
and profound contemplations. Some maniacs are remarkable for good
humour and mirth, which they express by fits of loud and immoderate
laughter. There are others again whose taciturnity is perpetual ; who
express their afflictions by tears, or who sink, without a tear, under
the distresssing influence of solitary anxiety. This happens in melan-
cholia, to which there are usually added, fondness for solitude, timidity,
fickleness of temper, great watchfulness, flatulence in the stomach and
bowels, costiveness, and a small weak pulse. Furious madness is mark- ♦
ed by severe pains in the head, redness of the face, noise in the ears,


Order I.] Insanity or Mental Derangement. 511

wildness of the countenance, rolling and glistening of the eyes, grinding
of the teeth, loud roarings, violent exertions of strength, absurd incoherent
discourse, unaccountable malice to certain persons, particularly to the
nearest relatives and friends, a dislike to such places and scenes as form-
erly afforded particular pleasure, a diminution of the irritability of the
body with respect to the morbid effects of cold, hunger, and watching,
together with a full quick pulse.

Insane persons are said to be usually worse in the morning ; but per-
haps this is not so generally the case as has been supposed. In many
instances, at the commencement of the disease, they are more violent
in the evening, and sometimes so the greater part of the night. It is, in-
deed, well known that the majority of patients of this description have
their symptoms aggravated by being placed in a recumbent position.
They seem of themselves to avoid the horizontal posture as much as
possible when they are in a raving state, and when so confined as that
they cannot be erect, will support themselves on the breech.

Of the organs of sense which become affected with those labouring un-
der insanity, the ear has been observed particularly to suffer : few lu-
natics become blind, but numbers were noticed by Mr. Haslain to be
deaf; and those who arc not actually deaf, were troubled with difficulty
of hearing.

Mania is to be distinguished from phrenitis by the absence of pyrexia
and head-ache ; and from delirium, by the state of the pulse, and not be-
ing conscious of external objects when roused, and even then the person
soon relapses into a state of inattention ; whereas in mania he is fre- 4
quently sensible, and is often planning the means of preventing or re-
venging supposed injuries. A modern writer thinks that insanity is dis-
tinguished from delirium by the derangement of the intellectual faculties
not being connected with bodily disorder, and that it is this circumstance
which constitutes the distinction between the two maladies.

An intermittent fever supervening on madness of long standing has
been known in some instances to have proved a cure for the disease ;
the senses have returned when the fever terminated. When madness
has arisen in consequence of some other disorder, and when its attacks
are slight, and do not return very frequently, a radical cure may possi-
bly be effected; but when it takes place in consequence of an heredita-
ry disposition, or is attended with great melancholy, and a fixed atten-
tion to one particular object, be it love or religion, we should not en-
tertain much hope. — [7 honias.]

This variety of mental disorder, partial insanity, (dementia.) " con-
sists not in false perception, like the worst grades of madness, but of an
association of unrelated perceptions, or ideas, from the inability of the
mind to perform the operations of judgment and reason. The judg-
ments arc generally excited by sensible objects ; but ideas, collected to-
gether without order, frequently constitute a paroxysm of the disease.
it is always accompanied with great volubility of speech, or with bodily
gestures, performed with a kind of convulsive rapidity* We rarely meet
with this disease in hospitals; but there is scarcely a city, a village, or
a country place, that does not furnish one or more instances of it. Per-
sons who are afllicted with it arc good-tempered and quarrelsome, mali-
cious and kind, generous and miserly, all in the course of the same day."


512 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.


PROGNOSIS*

Insanity, if tlicre be proper medical treatment, and suitable manage-
ment, may be cured as well as otber diseases. Wben the paroxysms
become less frequent, the mind more quiet, the secretions restored, we
may predict a recovery. Symptoms the reverse of this, are unfavour-
able.

In the Retreat at York, England, out of sixty-six patients cured of
insanity, twenty-seven were affected during the first year, thirteen in
the second, three in the third, one in the fourth, five in the fifth, three
in the seventh, two in the ninth, one in the thirteenth, and one in the
fifteenth, (Casper.) Finel observes, that after three years' ineffectual
treatment, the chance of cure in insanity will be about as one to
thirty.

DISSECTION.

The morbid appearance most generally to be observed, is an unheal-
thy state of the brain. There is a determination of blood to the mem-
branes, as well as the substance of the brain itself.

COMMON TREATMENT.

The medical treatment generally pursued in mania, is the same as
that in other diseases* It consists principally, in bleeding, blistering,
and mercury.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. The cure of mental, as well as bodily dis-
eases, is to be effected, first, by reducing the system by suitable evacu-
ations. 2. To create revulsive actions, and finally remove subsequent
debility, or feeble morbid actions, by tonics* and stimulating remedies.
3. By the influence of proper moral treatment.

1. Moral and General Treatment It will be necessary in the first
place, when the disease is seated, to remove the patient to aplace where
he will be prevented from injuring himself or others. If he is taken to
an insane hospital, it must be one that is properly conducted, not one
which is calculated to exasperate the complaint, by the treatment and
regulations established there.

2. Much depends upon the conduct of the physician. The practice
of some* is harsh, censorious and tyrannical towards lunatics* This
conduct is very reprehensible* as it prevents the recovery of the pa-
tient. His language should be that of kindness and respect ; seldom or
never contradicting, or in any respect calculated to wound the feelings.
In a word, the law of kindness should be upon his tongue. Acts of
justice, and a strict regard to truth are calculated to secure the respect
and obedience of deranged patients. Every thing necessary for their
comfort, should be provided for them, and every promise made should
be strictly and punctually performed.

" As an inducement," says Dr. Rush, "to treat mad people in the
manner that has been recommended, I shall only add, that in those
cases in which the memory has' been greatly impaired, they seldom for-


Order V.J Insanity or Mental Derangement. 513

get three things after their recovery, viz., acts of cruelty, acts of indig-
nity, and acts of kindness.

1 have known instances in which the two former have been recollected
by them with painful, and the last, with pleasant associations for many
years. In gratitude for kindness and favours shown to them, they ex-
ceed all other classes of patients after their recovery. A physician once
asked a young woman of the society of Friends, whom he had assisted
in curing in the Pennsylvania hospital, if she had forgiven him for com-
pelling her to submit to the remedies that had been employed for that
purpose : " Forgive thee !" said she, " I love the very ground thou
walkest on."

Should not persuasion and kindness be sufficient to produce obedi-
ence, it will be necessary to use coercion ; but it must be consistent
with the greatest kindness. No harsh or severe measures must be taken.
Moderation and decision of character must be the watchword.

The means generally made use of to confine those lunatics who are
unmanageable, is the straight-jacket: but this has been condemned,
particularly by Haslam, who employs instead of it, a belt from eight
to ten inches wide. This is passed round the lower part of the body,
and fastened on the back by strong buckles. On each side, leather bags
are fastened, into which, the hands of the patient are thrust, and secured
by proper bandages. By this, the pressure usually occasioned by the
straight-jacket is avoided, and it is preferred, or borne with less re-
straint. It is said that in Dubuison's private institution, an armed chair
is used as a mode of coercion. It consists of an armed chair, with a
high back, and foot-board : the arms, legs, feet, and body, are fasten-
ed to this chair by strong and broad straps furnished with buckles.

This is an excellent contrivance to secure deranged patients in parox-
ysms of the complaint. Some have recommended total darkness in
such cases ; but the expediency of this measure is very doubtful.

"In the furious stale, insane patients," says Dr. Rush, "should never
be contradicted, however absurd their opinions and assertions may be,
nor should we deny their requests by our answers, when it is improper
to grant them. In the second grade of the disease, we should divert
them from the subjects upon which they are deranged, and introduce, as
it were accidentally, subjects of another and of an agreeable nature.
When they are upon the recovery, we may oppose their opinions and
incoherent tales, by reasoning, contradiction, and even ridicule."

Sometimes threatening the patient with some kinds of punishment,
will tend to tranquillize them ; but kindness and soothing treatment,
will be found the most sovereign remedy.

Amusements. — -Various kinds of amusements have a tendency to be-
nefit insane persons. Such as are pleasing must be recommended.
Reading. interesting books must be recommended, also, writing, copy-
ing, &c.

" Committing entertaining passages of prose and verse to memorv,"
says Dr. Rush, " and copying manuscripts, Iiave-4)cen found useful in
relieving hypochondriasis They divert and translate attention and ac-
tion from the understanding to a sound part of the mind. Reading
aloud has nearly the same effect.

Vol. I. 65


514 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

Dr. Burton recommends, in the highest terms, the reading of the
bible to hypochondriac patients. He compares it to an apothecary's,
shop, in which is contained remedies for every disease of the body. I
have frequently observed the languor and depression of mind which oc-
cur in the evening of life, to be much relieved hy the variety of inci-
dents, and the sublime and comfortable passages, that are contained in
that only true history of the origin, nature, duties, and future destiny of
man. A captain Woodward, of Boston, who lately suffered all the
hardships of shipwreck on an inhospitable island in the East-Indies,
found great comfort in revolving the history of Joseph and his bretliren
in his mind. A captain Inglefield revived his spirits, and those of his
crew, in a similar situation, by telling them pleasant stories.

Music has a tendency to tranquillize the mind, and may be prac-
tised. Mr. ******** has left the following testimony in its favour.
" Next to theology, I give the highest place to music, for thereby all
anger is forgotten; the devil, also melancholy, and many tribulations and
evil thoughts arc driven away." For the same reason that tragedies af-
ford more relief than comedies, plaintive tunes are more useful than
such as are of a sprightly nature. I attended a citizen of Philadelphia,
occasionally, in paroxysms of this disease, who informed me that he was
cured of one of them by hearing the old hundred psalm tune sung in a
country church. His disease, he said, instantly went off in a stream of
tears. Dr. Cardan always felt a suspension of the anguish of his mind
from the same cause; and Mr. Cowper tells his friend, Mr. Hayley, in
one of his letters, that he was " relieved as soon as his troubles gushed
from his eyes." The tears in these cases acted by indirectly depleting
from the brain.

Interesting Scenery. — Perhaps nothing contributes more to the reco-
very of insane patients, than interesting scenery. Therefore an insti-
tution for this unfortunate class of our fellow beings, should be located in
the most delightful, pleasant, and romantic section of the country, and
especially by the side of the ocean, lake, or large beautiful river, or
sheet of water. In a word, he should be placed in the midst of all the
beauties of landscape combined, pleasant grounds and walks, groves,
and flower gardens. A house should be placed in the midst of this sce-
nery, having all the appearance of a private residence, and without any
thing to create an idea in the mind respecting a hospital or public insti-
tution, and the internal affairs of which should correspond with the exter-
nal. The rooms should be large and convenient, with suitable furniture,
and should be superintended by the most humane, kind, discreet, and
judicious persons, and every means should be made use by them to im-
press upon the minds of the deranged inmates, ihat they are in the midst
of a private house, and domestic circle, among those who take the great-
est interest in their welfare and health, or those who are their best friends.
How different such a situation from some of the hospitals, where the in-
sane are now obliged to resort. They are more calculated to render
people " crazy," than cure them of it.

It has been the practice to force them into narrow, cold, and dismal
cells, put on the straight-jacket, or confine them to the floor by large
iron chains, in addition to which, they have been obliged to submit to


Order I.] Insanity or Mental Derangement. 515

corporeal punishment, abuses, &c. and treated more like brutes than
human beings.

Nothing will supply the place of the scenery, and kind treatment
above spoken of. An opposite course will produce gloominess and des-
pondency, and is calculated to aggravate, rather than cure insanity.
How enlivening, how well calculated to cheer the desponding spirit,
would he a situation with such advantages, especially when connected
with proper nursing, diet, exercise, amusements, kind treatment, cheer-
ful friends, with the administration of suitable medicine. A water pros-
pect is inconceivably important, and should by no means he omitted in
a site or situation of this kind. It has the most salutary, cheering, and
permanently good effects. Sailing and fishing is also good employ-
ment.

Those who are insane, should be kept apart as much as possible, lest
one contract an additional degree of insanity from another.

Employment. — Every insane person should be employed about some-
thing. It is calculated to concentrate the mind upon one object, and
dispel gloomy sensations. Females may he engaged in various kinds of
domestic concerns, while males should attend to gardening, farming, or
mechanical occupations.

Exercise. — This in part will be sufficient for exercise, where patients
can be prevailed upon to practise itc but where they are unable to fol-
low any kind of employment, they must be often compelled to walk or
ride out.

This, by restoring the secretions, and giving tone to the system,
strengthens the nerves, diverts the mind, and thus has a tendency to re-
move the complaint.

Travelling. — Travelling is often attended with a happy effect. A
change of air benefits the patient, as well as the constant change of
scenery. Many persons have been entirely cured by it.

Medicine. — It is not necessary in general to give much medicine in
mania; but tliat which is suitable may be given with advantage. Even
supposing that the first cause of the disease exists in the mind, such is
its influence upon the bod}', that it is thrown into disorder or derange-
ment. There is usually a morbid condition of the stomach, liver, and
alimentary canal. Hence purgatives should be occasionally admin-
istered ; and where there is habitual costiveness a laxative pill
should be given at night. The body should be frequently bathed with
ley water, to divert the blood from the centre to the surface, and thus
equalize the circulation ; the feet must also be repeatedly bathed with
the same, and sinapisms applied to them. When there is considerable
febrile excitement, or a determination of blood to the brain, a mus-
tard plaster may be placed between the shoulders, and the diaphoretic
powders given at bed time.

In a paroxysm, and when there is wakefulness, and the patient un-
able to sleep, administer a dose of the hyoscramvs, or henbane, from
half a dram to a dram may be given at a dose. The saturated tincture
of A ops is also an excellent. medicine to allay irritation and procure
sleep. When the nerves are very irritable, and there is great debility,
with little or no fever, tonics may be given, and none will be found
better than the restorative cordial.


516 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

Bathing. — The patient must use the tepid bath occasionally, and
particularly the shoicer bath. They divert the blood from the head
and give tone and energy to the brain. In conclusion, I will add a
short account of a private institution established in England some years
asro, by Dr. Willis. It is worthy of imitation: i

" Dr. Willis lived at Greatford, in Lincolnshire, and he there had
one of the largest private establishments in the kingdom for the recep-
tion of lunatics. His house was pleasantly situated, with grounds and
plantations neady laid out around it, where his patients could enjoy
salutary exercise, and have interesting natural objects continually be-
fore their eyes. Some of those entrusted to his care were distributed
in the neighbouring villages, with proper attendants to wait upon them
and overlook their conduct. An asylum in the country is much more
adapted 'to heal the wounded spirit,' and to correct the morbid trains
of thought, than a crowded hospital hi the midst of a large town.—
The calm retreat, the multitude of agreeable objects, the kind and
benign aspect of the physician, his constant saiperintendance, the se-
lect society of strangers in similar circumstances, the fear of being put
to shame, must all have a favourable effect in promoting the cure."

" From what can be gathered from the few sources of information
to which we have access, the patients at Greatford were treated like
human beings; they were managed like children, and not shut up or
chained down like wild beasts. Moral means were principally trusted
to, yet physical ones were never neglected. The patients were taught
to fear and to love their physician ; they were admitted to breakfast,
and dine with him; and in the company of others, as long as they be-
haved well, and could restrain their feelings ; whenever any one trans-
gressed the rules of good behaviour, the strait- waistcoat was employed
as the badge of disgrace. No chains or bandages were ever made use
of, and the strait-waistcoat only in cases of extreme necessity. One
of the principal means he employed was to have the attendants or keep-
ers always appear as servants to the lunatics, appointed to wait upon
them and to supply all their wants ; but the servants were under the
controul, and received instruction from their master, the physician,
which they dared not, on any account, disobey, and they could not
allow any orders to be infringed against without permission. Besides
relieving the attendants from a disagreeable situation, this served to
give the patients a very high idea of the power of their physician, of
whom they never can be brought to think too highly : they ought to feel
that their fate rests in his hands, and that no person in the world is of
greater consequence than he who has the management of their health."

" Of physical remedies, emetics were most preferred by Dr. Willis.
Opium, he thought, did harm, and when narcotics were required, he
employed hyosciamus. Blisters on the neck he found hurtful. When
the strength of the body wanted to be increased, he gave the Peruvian
bark, and he used this in large quantities. Digitalis was considered
serviceable in some cases. Dr. Joseph Frank learnt thus much in con-
versation with Dr. John Willis, and ono. other fact, which is of some
importance, viz, that Dr. Willis had never observed any thing peculiar
in the formation of the skull among his patients. 1 '


Order II.] Nymphomania, or Furor Uterinus. 517

" Various objections are raised against sending a madman to a place
of confinement, even among the highest and lowest classes of society.
A principal one is the fear of severe and cruel treatment, and the haz-
ard of making the disorder permanent ; but these apprehensions are
groundless; for there must be some grievous defect in the mode of cor-
recting the disordered mind, if correct sentiments and rational and or-
derly behaviour, are not inculcated by the habit of self-denial, and
strong efforts of the will. Let the appeal be fairly made, by visiting a
maniac at his own house, or at a large establishment appropriated for the
reception of such persons. Patients, in general, not only more order-
ly, but more rational and tractable than those in a private house, where
the continual fluctuations of temper and apprehension among friends,
lead alternately to improper indulgence or undue severity. Such treat-
ment will both confirm the morbid associations, and enervate the nat-
ural character, just as sullenness and ill-humour are the natural conse-
quences of irregularity and inattention in the early part of life. If
great advantages are derived from lunatic hospitals, (imperfect as they
have hitherto been, and little as their managers in general understand
the art of forming the characters of their patients,) how beneficial may
they become under the direction of a benevolent physician, who, in-
stead of confining his efforts merely to make the noisy quiet, and the
sullen to eat and speak, labours with redoubled attention to rectify the
disorders of the several powers of the mind, to excite its healthy ac-
tion, and by the fine, yet simple contrivance of making a society or
school of their own, exhibits the interesting sight of the melan-
cholic gaining health and spirits, and the maniac restored to take his
station again in the extensive society of the world 1 Such seems to
have been the plan of the late Dr. Willis, and the number of those
who have recovered under his care, will best testify how well he re-
duced such a plan to practice.

REGIMEN.

A light and nutritious diet should be given. Such medicines as cre-
ate wind should be avoided. The room should be kept quiet, and no
instruments left through which suicide can be committed.


CHAPTER II.
NYMPHOMANIA, OR FUROR UTERINUS.

DESCRIPTION.

By this disease we understand an inordinate desire in females for
coition, sometimes amounting even to insanity or mania.

SYMPTOMS.

cribe it :


518 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V*

"Furor Uteriaas or Satyriasis, as every one knows, is an insatiable
desire of coition, in which both virgins and women who have entered
the camp of Venus, rush intemperately to the embraces of men, which
being denied, they suffer frequent pollutions, as well waking as sleep-
ing, or sport in imaginary gratification. That species of salacity dif-
fers much from furor utcrinus, which depends on the amazing size of
the clitoris, (which when excited by lust, or affected with stiffness,
seems to resemble the male organ; whence those lascivious women cal-
led tribades, endeavour to force others of the same sex with whom
they are in love, and not without abominable pleasure, are able to per-
form an addle species of the office of a man. To return to our sub-
ject: furor uterinus is not always manifested by obscene discourse and
indelicate actions, since many who are not free from shame and bash-
fulness, endeavour to conceal this most vile situation, and conscious of
its turpitude, try to repress this abominable lust. Women of a sangui-
neus temperament are thought prone to satyriasis, virgins who are ripe
for husbands, or women living in gratification of their lusts, and in
luxury ; widows, or those who are married to frigid old men ; never-
theless this affection spares not other ages, since there are examples of
some women about the sixtieth or seventieth year of their age, seized
with this most filthy disease. Mention is also made of a little girl throe
years of age, afflicted with this hereditary affection. Obscene books,
conversations or thoughts promote this disease ; very nutritious and
acrid food, and especially the frequent use of mastupration ; (a prac-
tice similar to onanism.) Satyriasis is rarely dangerous, and yet often
suffers such great exacerbations, that women who cannot be gratified
with venery are seized with fury ; they solicit all whom they meet to
venereal embraces, and attack those that refuse with fists and nails;
perpetually handling their privates with their wanton fingers, until they
become maniac, and are forced to be confined with chains lest they do
violence to themselves or the hy-standers. The dead bodies exhibit
the uterus inflamed, the cletoris much enlarged, the tubes and ovaries
variously diseased, namely, inflamed, suppurated, having fatty excre-
cences, hydatids, schirri, &,c, The kidnics are also found of stupen-
dous magnitude, <fcc.

TREATMENT.

1. Let purgatives be administered to reduce the system.

2. Let refrigerant applications be applied to the organs of generation,
and over the pubis.

3. Occasionally let anodynes be given.

4. Let the patient be restricted to a low diet.

5. Let the patient avoid the company of men.


Order III.] Melancholy. 519


CHAPTER III.
MELANCHOLY. (Melancholia.)

DESCRIPTION.

Melancholy, is a low kind of delirium, with a fever; usually atten-
ded with fear, heaviness, and sorrow, without any apparent occasion.
Or, as some define it, a disease which consists in the perturbation or
injury of the imagination, which prevents it from forming a regular and
determinate idea of things, as at other times ; so that its due operations
are interrupted, and often second ideas, having no connection with the
first, crowd in, and are succeeded by actions no way analogous or similar
to the first idea, and therefore appearing irrational.

This malady has essential differences, on account of the causes from
which it is produced. In some people, it seems wholly to depend upon
a false judgment of tilings in the mind; and in this case it is usually
habitual and incurable. In others, it arises from injuries of the body ;
and in these it always is observed to bear a proportion to the injury or
debility of the parts. This peculiar species is called hypochondriac
melancholy ; and finally, in others, it seems of a mixed nature ; as
when it has taken its origin from disease in the body, but is afterwards
so increased by mental disorders, that even after the total removal of
the corporeal ones, it still remains in all its force upon the mind. This
is a too common and a very unhappy case.

CAUSES.

It may proceed from an hereditary disposition, melancholic temper-
anient, depressing passions or affections of the mind, great and affecting
disappointments, suppressed evacuations, intemperance, and injuries
of the cranium. Sometimes it is occasioned by a sedentary life, and sol-
itude ; and by acute fevers, or other diseases. It is sometimes the ef-
fect of excessive venery ; and is frequently produced by gloomy and fa-
natical notions of religion.

SYMPTOMS.

* In this disease,' says Dr. Temple, ' the patient shuns society, and courts
solitude, is fearful and low spirited, and these symptoms are frequently
observed for some time before an actual derangement is perceived. He
indulges a certain train of thoughts upon one subject, and generally fixes
upon that which was the cause of his misfortune, if it has been brought
on by any sudden and violent affection of the mind. The face is gener-
ally pale, the urine is small in quantity and watery, the patient is gen-
erally costive, and the stomach affected with flatus or wind ; and in some
cases, so miserable are the feelings that the unfortunate wretch seeks
every opportunity of putting an end to them, by terminating his exis-
tence.'


520 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

To these symptoms, the following may be added ; the patient is fret-
ful, fickle, capricious and inquisitive ; solicitous about trifles, and al-
ternately niggardly and prodigal : he has a distaste and dislike to every
thing, even before it comes in sight, and frequently weeps for imagina-
ry causes, or for no cause at all. Many people, in this case, seem al-
ways to want room ; they are for opening all the windows they can, and
for running out into the streets or fields, thinking themselves every where
imprisoned ; others leave their houses, and dread being taken up for
capital offences, though never guilty of any: and in others these symp-
toms of the mind are evidently joined with those of the body, such as
palpitations of the heart, deep sighs, and painful breathing.

This disease is varied an infinite number of ways, according to the
temperament and ideas of the person affected with it. It is a species
of madness and only differs from a downright mania in degree.

If it arises from suppressed evacuations, or any bodily disorder, there
are greater hopes of a cure than when it proceeds from the mind. In
these cases a looseness, haemorrhage, or eruption sometimes carries off
the complaint. When it is hereditary, a cure is scarcely to be expect-
ed.

If the patient begins to enjoy sound refreshing sleep ; if the mind can
be easily diverted from its accustomed train of reflections, and becomes
capable of lively impressions, a recovery may be hoped for.

There is a lower species of melancholy, called low-spirits, to which
persons of weak nerves are more or less subject. Generous diet, the
cold bath, exercise, and amusements, are the most likely means to re-
move this complaint. It is much increased by solitude, and indulging
gloomy ideas, but may often be ^relieved by cheerful company and
proper amusements.

TREATMENT.

In the treatment of melancholy, attention must be directed to the mind
as well as the body. The patient should be amused with a varietyof scen-
ery : should take plenty of exercise in the open air; such as riding,
walking, gardening farming, &c. He should peruse interesting books, and
converse with cheerful friends, and above all should be located in pleas-
ant scenery where he can enjoy a water prospect; a country air, and
country diet: he should use the shower bath often, after which the whole
body should be rubbed with flannel. He should occasionally take a mild
Emetic, gentle Laxatives, and Restorative bitters.

The diet should be principally vegetable, but not those which pro-
duce flatulence. He may use milk if it agrees with him, and eat fruit,
after it has been cooked.


Order IV.] Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. 52l


CHAPTER IV. >

EPILEPSY OR FALLING SICKNESS. (Epilepsia.)

DESCRIPTION.
Epilepsy, called also falling sickness, is a sudden privation of sense,
accompanied with unusual motions and violent convulsions of the whole
system. It occurs in paroxysms, which* after a period, leaves the pa-
tient nearly in his former state, but generally it is succeeded by lan-
guor, debility, stupor, and drowsiness. It occurs more frequently
among 'young children than grown. It occurs also periodically, and
oftener in the night than in the day-time; It is frequently an heredi-
tary disease, attacking several in the same family.

DISCRIMINATION.
The only disease with which epilepsy can be confounded, is hysteria*
and from this it may readily be distinguished, by the foaming at the
mouth, gnashing of the teeth, blackness of the countenance, <fcc. to-
gether with the speedy termination of the fit in sleep, and the absence
of the usual symptoms of hysteria, such as the globus hystericus, pal-
pitations of the heart, involuntary laughing or weeping, and other

CAUSES.

The causes which give rise to epilepsy are blows, wounds, fractures,
and other injuries done to the head by external violence, together with
plethora of the vessels of the head, of water in the brain, tumours, con-
cretions, polypi, and a deformity in the shape of the bones in any inte-
rior part of the skull. Epilepsy has also been known to arise from an
affection of the spinal marrow ; and it is to inflammation in that part,
of a more chronic form, that those shaking palsies, which are attended
with pain, have been imputed. Violent affections of the nervous system,
sudden frights, fits of passion, great emotions of the mind, frequent in-
toxications, acute pains in any part, worms in the stomach or intestines,
teething, the suppression of some long-acCustomed evacuation, too
great emptiness or repletion, and poisons received into the body, are
causes which likewise produce epilepsy. Sometimes it is hereditary,
and at others it depends on a predisposition arising from a mobility of
the sensoriura, which is occasioned either by plethora or a state of de-
bility.

Derangement of the stomach and bowels, is a very frequent cause of
this complaint.

We are told by Dr. Parry, that whatever may be the primary cause
of epilepsy, it usually depends immediately on excessive impetus of
blood in the vessels of the brain.

Vol. I. 66


522 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

" Epilepsy," says Gregory, " is in some instances dependent upon a
primary morbid condition of the brain, and totally independent of dis-
turbed function of the abdominal viscera. Like the preceding variety,
cerebral epilepsy is of two kinds ; the one connected with functional,
the other with structural disease of the brain and nervous system.

The obscurity which attaches to the functions of the brain and nerves,
makes it impossible to speak with any precision on that difficult point in
the pathology or nature of epilepsy ; but a variety of arguments might
be adduced to show, that there exists primary functional disturbance of
the brain, leading to the epileptic paroxysm. The hereditary predis-
position to the disease ; the absence of all appearances after death, ex-
cepting such as are common to other forms of chronic disease of the brain;
and the recurrence of the fits at irregular periods, and particularly at
night are strong confirmations of this doctrine. To these we may add
the peculiar character of many of the exciting causes of the fit, violent
mental emotions, irritation, and the operation of certain poisons, both
of the narcotic and morbid kind. Arsenic and the muriate of barytes
have been strongly suspected of inducing epilepsy. In children a com-
mon effect of the poison of small-pox is an epileptic paroxysm.

It is impossible to overlook the fact, that in a very large proportion
of the cases of cerebral or idiophatic epilepsy, and in many of those
which are manifestly connected with disturbed function of the bowels
and uterus, there is preternatural fulness in some parts of the vascular
system of the brain. This is an important feature in the pathology of
epilepsy.

The grounds on which we establish the connection of epilepsy with a
state of congestion or over-distention of the cerebral blood-vessels, may
be thus brielly enumerated. Epilepsy occurs in persons of full habit of
body, and indolent mode of life ; the fit is frequently preceded by head-
ache, flushings of the face, and throbbing of the carotid and temporal
arteries ; it is brought on, in many cases, by great muscular exertion,
as in parturition, by stooping, intoxication, heated rooms, and above
all by violent fits of coughing, such as occur in severe hooping cough.
The hysteric form of the disease is only one of those many consequen-
ces of obstructed menstruation of which the prevailing character is ir-
regular determination of blood.

While I thus express myself on the subject of epilepsy, as connected
with iurgescence of vessels, I am not insensible to the fact, that pa-
roxysms of compulsion are occasionally connected with a state of cere-
bral circulation, directly the reverse ; as when we see them following
large bleedings at the arm, double amputations, or excessive purging.
Dr. Cullen, indeed, appears to have overstrained his favourite theory of
epilepsy from collapse, but it must not be on that account excluded from
our reasonings.

The last point which requires consideration previous to entering on
the subject of treatment, is the connection of epilepsy with chronic dis-
organizations of some one of the structures within the cranium. Those
which authors have most usually noticed as producing epilepsy, are
spicula of bone detached by some injury from the internal table of
the skull ; ossifications of the falx ; tumours of various kinds, at-


Order IV.] Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. 523

tached cither to the hones, membranes, or substance of the bratn ; and
lastly, foreign bodies lodged there. Numerous cases are to bo
found on record, of epilepsy from these and similar causes ; but instead
of pressing them on the notice of the reader, I would rather wish him
to understand how rare they are in comparison of those which are sim-
ply the result of morbid action, in many of which we may reasonably
hope, by judicious measures and steady perseverance, to produce an al-
leviation, and even, in a few, the permanent cure of the disease.

SYMPTOMS.

The epileptic fit for the most part occurs suddenly. The patient falls
to the ground ; and the disease has hence received the appropriate
name of the falling sickness. When the complaint is fully established,
it is usual for the patient to experience certain warnings of the approach
of a fit, which though lasting only a few seconds, enable him to make
some preparations for it. The most frequent of these warning symptoms
arc head-ache, giddiness, dimness of sight, or flashes of light passing be-
fore the eyes, ringing in the eats, and coldness of the extremities. Some
persons are apprised of the approach of the fit by the appearance of
particular spectres ; but the most common of all epileptic warnings is that
singular sensation of tremor, or coldness, or numbness, which has been
called the aura epileptica. It begins at the extremity of a limb and
gradually ascends to the head, when the paroxysm of lethargy and con-
vulsion ensues.

During the fit the convulsive agitations of the body are violent. The
eyes are fixed and reverted and the pupils permanently contracted ; the
teeth gnash against each other ; the tongue is thrust forward, and often
severely bitten, and there is foaming at the mouth; the breathing is ir-
regular and laborious, and the pulse for the most part small and con-
tracted. Complete insensibility prevails. The fit varies in duration,
from a few minutes to a quarter or even half an hour. In some cases it
has lasted even longer. On its cessation the patient remains for some
time motionless, insensible, and apparently in a profound sleep. From
this he recovers by degrees, but without any recollection of the circum-
stances of the fit. It leaves him weak and exhausted, and for the rest
of the day he generally complains of a degree of stupor and sense of op-
pression in the head. In many cases this has amounted to actual mania,
continuing for two or three days.

The periods of recurrence of the fits are too various to admit of being
stated with any degree of accuracy. When the disease first develops
itself, the intervals are long, perhaps two or three months. As it be-
comes more firmly rooted in the system, the fits recur with a corres-
ponding frequency, until at length the patient hardly passes a day with-
out one. It is important, however, to bear in mind, that genuine epi-
lepsy never occurs oftGner than this ; and therefore, when a person has
more than one fit in the day, we may reasonably conclude that the dis-
ease is of an hysterical nature.

Epileptic fits occur at all hours ; but much more commonly during
the night than in the day; sometimes on first going to sleep; but more
usually, as far as my own observations extend, on waking in the morn*


5g4 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

ing. It is reasonable to conclude that there is some peculiarity in the
state of the brain during sleep, which is highly favourable to the devel-
ppement of the epileptic paroxysm.

It has been noticed by authors, that some degree of consciousness
is occasionally preserved in the genuine epileptic paroxysm ; but such
an occurrence is very rare, and seldom permanent, proving only a pre-
lude to the total abolition of sense. In a few cases the recovery from
the fit has been as sudden as the seizure ; nor are the succeeding head-
ache and stupor observed invariably.

Such are the more common modifications of the epileptic paroxysm.
In whichever way the disease manifests itself, it goes on to produce
other and more serious injury to the constitution. In the first place,
the mental faculties become gradually and permanently more and more
impaired ; the memory fails, and a state of mind closely verging on idio-
tism is at length brought on. In almost all epileptics a vacant expres-
sion of countenance is observable, which once seen cannot easily be for-
gotten.

Epilepsy, when once thoroughly rooted into the habit, will generally
be found to bring on, sooner or later, some other form of cerebral disease
— hydrocephalus, mania, apoplexy, or palsy, The complication of
epilepsy with mania is at once the most frequent and the most formidar
ble. Of one of these, in most instances, the epileptic patient dies ; but
it is not to be overlooked, that epilepsy sometimes terminates, in the
third place, fatally and suddenly, without inducing any secondary affec-
tion. This, though seldom witnessed among adults, is not uncommon
in the epilepsy of children ; and assuredly it cannot be a matter of sur-
prise ; it can only lead us to reflect, how wonderful must be the struc-
ture of that delicate system, which can resist, in ordinary cases, the
repeated attacks of so dreadful a disease, and how little pathology can
assist us in unravelling such a mystery.

Epilepsy is generally considered as equally frequent in both sexes,
It is considerably more prevalent among/emales than males ; and the
fact, if correct, may be attributed partly to the greater mobility of habit
in the female sex, and partly to the peculiar character of the exciting
causes of the disease. These constitute, in fact, the most interesting
points in the pathology of epilepsy, I may begin by noticing the con-,
nection of epilepsy with a deranged state of the natural functions, con-
stituting the epilepsia occasionalis of Dr. Cullen ; and then proceed to
show how it depends, in other cases, upon some primary morbid con-
dition of the brain. This latter variety of the disease Dr. Cullen has
designated by the title of epilepsia cerebralis.

The symptomatic or occasional epilepsy is of two kinds ; — the en-
teric, or that which is connected with disturbance of function in some
portion of the alimentary canal ; and the hysterick, or that which has its
origin in disturbed functions of the uterus. Speaking generally, we may
say, that the first is peculiar to children under the age of fourteen ; and
the second to women between the ages of fourteen and twenty.

The first source of that irritation in the alimentary tract which leads
to epilepsy, is painful dentition. It is a fruitful cause of the diseases of
children, and of none more commonly than of epileptic fits. The se-


Order IV.] Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. 525

cond is ascidity in the stomach, its distention by wind, or the mere de-
tention in it of crude and undigested aliment. In infants of high natur-
al irritability of frame, these disordered conditions of the stomach fre-
quently lead to paroxysms of convulsion ; and in many cases they recur,
and otherwise exhibit all the characters of perfect epilepsy.

At a somewhat more advanced period of life, there is no kind of ir-
ritation which so commonly proves the scource of epileptic fits, as the
presence of worms in the intestinal canal ; but almost any disorder of
the bowels will, in certain habits and states of body, bring on a tenden-
cy to convulsion. The phenomena of cholera morbus will at once sug-
gest themselves as an illustration of this pathological principle. The
prognosis, in all the forms of enteric epilepsy, is naturally more favoura-
ble than in any other variety of the disease ; because the source of ir-
ritation is both more obvious, and more under our control.

The hysteric epilepsy is an equally frequent and much less managea-
ble kind of disorder. It prevails extensively among the most delicate of
the sex, at the most interesting period of their lives, often resisting the
most active and judicious treatment, and degenerating into that perma-
nent and almost incurable form of cerebral epilepsy which we are next
to notice. Hysteric epilepsy commonly affects females about the com-
mencement of the catamenial epoch, or shortly afterwards, when the
flow is scanty and difficult. Occasionally it takes place at a later pe-
riod of life, in accidental obstructions of the menses. It chiefly prevails
among those of sanguine temperament, with full development and vigo-
rous action of the circulating system, and a delicate irritable constitu-
tion. There is nothing peculiar in the character of the fits of hysteric
epilepsy, except that their recurrence frequenly corresponds with the
regular catemenial periods. [Gregory.]

PROGNOSIS.
When the disease arises from an hereditary disposition, or comes
on after the age of puberty, or where the fits recur frequently, and
are of long duration, it will be very difficult to effect a cure ; but when
its attacks are at an early age, and occasioned by worms, or any acci-
dental cause, it may in general be removed with ease. In some cases,
it has been entirely carried off by the occurrence of a fever, or by the
appearance of a cutaneous eruption. It has been known to terminate
in apoplexy, and in some instances to produce a loss of the powers of
the mind, and to bring on idiotism.

DISSECTION.
The appearances usually to be observed on dissection, are serous
and sanguinous effusion, a turgid tense state of the vessels of the brain
without any effusion, a dilatation of some particular part of the brain,
excrescences, polypi, and hydatids, adhering to it, and obstructing
its functions, and likewise ulcerations.

COMMON PRACTICE.
Bleeding, arsenic, mercury, lunar caustic or nitrate of silver, ox
ide and sulphate of zinc, sulphate of copper, ammonicated copper,
sulphate of iron, ammonicated iron, &c.


526 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

During the epileptic paroxysm in general, little or nothing Is to he
done, except using precautions, that the patient may not injure him-
self; and it. will be prudent to remove any thing which may compress
the veins of the neck, to obviate congestion in the head.

Indications of Cure. — 1. To remove all sources of irritation.

2. To moderate the afflux of blood upon tbc brain.

3. To alter that morbid condition of the nervous system, on which
convulsion depends ; and to strengthen the body.

To one or other of these principles may be traced the good effects of
all the medicines and plans of treatment which prove efficacious in the
cure of epilepsy. They are far from being incompatible with each oth-
er. On the contrary, it is often necessary to combine them all in the
management of an individual case.

In the epilepsies of infants and children, much may be done by
scarification of the gums; by the administration of an emetic ; by oc-
casional smart doses of purgative medicines ; by the more liberal use
of mild aperients and tonics ; and by strict attention to diet and regi-
men. Where the concomitant symptoms afford evidence of the pre-
sence of worms, anthelmintics are of course to be exhibited.

When the irritation is seated in the uterine system, as manifested by
the concurrent symptoms, (scanty and laborious menstruation, and the
peculiar periods at which the fits recur,) our measures must in part be
directed to restore the natural determination to the uterus. Recourse
may be had to the warm hip bath, stimulating injections, relaxing medi-
cines, diaphoretics, and the different kinds of enwienagogucs.

The second principle in the treatment of epilepsy is the obviating
general plethora, and the taking off that peculiar determination of blood
to the vessels of the head, which is one of the most important features
in the pathology of the disease. Such a principle is equally applica-
ble to the sympathetic as to tiie primary, or cerebral varieties of epi-
lepsy. AVhere the disease is still recent ; where it occurs to adults and
young persons of robust habit ; and more especially where, in the in-
tervals of the fits, the patient complains of head-ache, giddiness,, stu-
por, or any other mark of permanent fulness in the blood-vessels of
the brain, Purgatives and sudorifics must be given. It may even be
necessary to repeat it, before the tendency to accumulation of blood
about the head can be thoroughly subdued.

Keeping the same important object in view, the practitioner will aid
the effects of medicine by directing a mild and unirritating diet, early
hours of rising and going to bed, regular exercise, abstinence from all
fomented liquors, and cold washing of the head and neck. Under
particular circumstances, he will substitute cupping between the shoul-
ders, mustard plasters to the nape of the neck, and the steady use of
purgative medicines.

The physician will attempt to alter that peculiar condition of the
brain and nervous system with which the state of convulsion is associ-
ated. Experience has shown, that medicines of the narcotic kind pos-
sess a considerable power over it. Many of them have accordingly
been employed in epilepsy, and with advantage ; more particularly


Order IV.] Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. 527

camphor, opium, hyoscyamus, and stramonium. Further ; there are
the strongest grounds for believing, that the morbid irritability of the
brain and nerves, on which spasm depends, is often connected with
general constitutional weakness. Hence it is, that many of the most
powerful of the anti-spasmodic medicines are in fact tonic.

Medicine. — Having detailed the general indications, and principles
of cure, I shall now speak of the administration of particular kinds of
medicine.

1st. Emetics. -^-The stomach being either primarily or secondarily
affected in this disease, it will be necessary to administer a stimulating
emetic — either the pulverized Lobelia plant, or the seeds may be given,
and repeated once or twice a week according to circumstances. From
the extensive influence of this plant on the system, it is better adapted
to diseases of this kind than any other kind of emetic. It stimulates the
stomach, liver, pancreas, brain, and whole nervous system, and usu-
ally brings on more or less perspiration.

2d* Moderate purgatives should also be occasionally given to cleanse
the first passage, and intestines. Afterwards laxatives, or aperient
medicines may be taken, sufficient to keep the bowels regular.

3d. Antispasmodics must be given. The following 1 have found pre-
ferable to any other.

Take seeds of Stramonium, (Datura Stramonium.) pulv. 1 Drachm.

Spirits, 4 Ounces.

Digest until the strength is extracted. Of this tincture, let 20 or 30
drops he taken three times a day in a little tea or any suitable vehicle*
The dose may be increased until there is a slight degree of dizziness,
when the dose should be continued the same.

Tonics. — I have found by experience, that the Epilepsy is a disease
of general debility or weakness. Indeed it seems to be the proximate
cause of the complaint, and I have therefore always found the most be-
nefit from such mediciues as have given the most tone and energy to
the system.

The following formula combines anti-spasmodic and tonic properties :

Take Garden Paeony (Pozonia Officinalis) 1 oz.
Peruvian Bark (Cinclion Officinal) 1 oz.

Virginia Snake Root (Serpent. Virginian.) 1-2 oz.
Wild Valerian, or Ladies' Slipper 1 oz.

Extract all the strength of these by repeated boilings, then strain and
simmer to one quart, add a pound of loaf sugar, and half a pint of Ma-
deira Wine. Of this, the patient may take from half a wine glass to a
wine glass three or four times a day fasting.

Shower Bath. — The patient should use the shower bath three or four
times a week, after which, the body should be thoroughly rubbed with
flannel. Should the above means fail to cure the disease, the Restora-
tive Cordial and the Wine Bitters may.be alternately used.

REGIMEN.

It is necessary to diet in Epilepsy ; and it should be light and nu-


528 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

tritious. Ardent spirits should be avoided, all fatigue, and every thing
calculated to excite the passions.

j) r> ##*##*# #^ f Connecticut, was cured of this disease by
pursuing a rigid course of diet. He avoided all fat and greasy substan-
ces, and observed Franklin's rules to rise from table with a desire for
more food.

Epileptic patients ought to breathe a free and pure air. Exercise is
likewise of great use, but the patient must be careful to avoid all ex-
tremes of heat and cold ; all dangerous situations, as standing or work-
ing upon houses, precipices, or near deep waters, rivers, &c. lest a fit
should happen to come at the time, and they be precipitated to the
ground.


CHAPTER V.
APOPLEXY, (Apoplexia.)

DESCRIPTION.

Apoplexy is a sudden privation in some degree of all the senses and
motions of the body, except those of the heart and lungs, attended by
stupefaction and sometimes snoring. The disease is usually divided
into two species, the sanguinous and serous '. the first is caused by the
blood distending the vessels and thereby compressing the brain, or by
an extravasation of blood in consequence of the rupture of a vessel ;
the second arises from a collection or effusion of a serous fluid in the
cavities of the brain.

Apoplexy makes its attack chiefly at an advanced period of life ; and
most usually on those who are of a corpulent habit, with a short neck,
and large head ; and who lead an inactive life, make use of full
diet, &c.

CAUSES.

The predisposition to apoplexy has attracted much attention from
medical authors, and many contradictory opinions have been brought
forward concerning it.

1. The tendency to apoplexy is given, in the first place, by ccrtaia
conformations of body. The apoplectic make has been remarked, in-
deed, in all ages. A large head, a short thick neck, a florid complex-
ion, broad shoulders, short stature, with a tendency to corpulency, are
the prominent features of the apoplectic figure. Nevertheless, apo-
plexy is sometimes met with in spare subjects with pale countenance.
Peculiarity in the formation of body being often hereditary, a tendency
to the disease may naturally be expected to prevail in particular fami-
lies ; but independent of this, there may exist a constitutional tenden-
cy to disease of the head, the knowledge of which will materially as-


Order V.] Apoplexy. 529

•ist in forming a right judgment on the origin and probable tendency of
particular symptoms.

2. The predisposition to apoplexy is connected, in the second place,
with a certain period of life. Hippocrates said, that apoplexies were
chiefly generated between the fortieth and s xtiethyear; and Cullen
further remarks, that as life advances, the tendency to this disease in-
creases. There is no doubt that in early life it is rarely met with ; but
it is far from being uncommon between the twentieth and thirtieth year.
By many pathologists it has been held, that the greater liability to the
disease at an advanced period of life, is owing to an ossified or other-
wise diseased state of the coats of the cerebal arteries ; which is sta-
ted to be then of frequent occurrence. It is supposed to give increased
facility to extravasation within the brain, just as the same morbid struc-
ture in other parts is imagined to lead to aneurism. There is proba-
bly, some foundation for this opinion, though it may have been pushed
too far by certain of its supporters. While we are ready to acknowl-
edge, then, that the rupture of a blood-vessel within the brain may
sometimes be connected with a diseased state of the coats of the arter-
ies, we must not, on the other hand, forget, that, in probably a larger
proportion of cases, it is merely the result of a morbid action of vessels,
analogous to that which takes place in haemoptysis.

3. A predisposition to apoplexy is further given by such habits of life
as tend to produce plethora generally, to drive the blood in more than
ordinary quantity upon the vessels of the brain, or to prevent its free
return to the heart. Hence it is, that full living, habitual intoxication,
sedentary pursuits, too great indulgence in sleep, intense and long-
continued thought, have always been accused of leading to apoplexy.

The principal exciting causes of apoplexy, are the distension of tho
stomach by a full meal, the immoderate use of wine or spirits, strain-
ing to evacuate a costive stool, violent exercise, very long or loud
speaking, severe fits of coughing, tumours on the neck, stooping, tho
recumbent posture, and, lastly, violent passions of the mind. It is
a singular circumstance, that both heat and cold, when in an extreme
degree, may occasion apoplexy. The coup de soleil of hot climates
has been considered, on good authority, to be of the nature of apo-
plexy. The improper use of the warm bath has, under my own obser-
vation, brought on complete and fatal apoplexy. On the other hand,
excessive cold produces a torpor and sleepiness, apparently of the com-
atose kind. This was strikingly exemplified in the celebrated adventure
of Dr. Solander and Sir Joseph Banks on the mountains near the Straits
of Magellan. The disposition to sleep is almost irresistible ; but, in
the emphatic language of Dr. Solander, whoever indulges it, " wakes
no more."

It belongs to this place to remark, that an apoplectic attack is not
uncommon in the progress of other diseases. It occasionally occurs in
fevers, small-pox, rheumatism, gout, and hooping-cough; and it is a
still more frequent consequence of organic diseases of the heart, more
particularly of such as are attended with a bounding pulse, and in their
course become complicated with dropsy.

Bleeding andmercurv are two greyt causes of apoplexy.

Vol. I. 67


530 Cerebral l>isc<acs. [Class V.

SYMPTOMS.

It \i very seldom that this dreadful visitation is experienced without
the occurrence of symptoms to warn the patients of its probable ap-
proach. There are a lew instances, indeed, of any kind of severe dis-
ease occurring without some premonitory symptoms ; but they are not
often so unequivocal as those which indicate the apoplectic tendency.
With a view to practice, such symptoms are of infinitely more impor-
tance than those of the fit itself; and they accordingly require the most
serious attention from the physician. For the sake of perspicuity, they
may be arranged according as they affect the head generally, the exter-
nal senses, the internal senses, or the organs of voluntary motion.

To the first class belong pain of the head (generally a dull pain, with
a sense of weight, but occasionally a more acute pain, accompanied
with the feeling of tho head being bound round by a cord or wire; —
giddiness, particularly on stooping, or any attempt to turn the head
quickly round ; throbbing of the temporal arteries. To the second class
belong transient deafness, ringing in the ears, epistaxis, obscurity or ir-
regularity of vision, transient blindness. — To the third, stupor, drow-
siness, incoherent talking, a state resembling intoxication, disturbed
sleep, failure of the memory, loss of temper. — To the fourth, twisting
of the mouth, falling of the eyelid, numbness and weakness of a finger,
dragging of the leg, stammering. After experiencing, for a longer or
shorter time, one or more of these warnings, the patient falls into tho
ways in which this takes place.

1. In the most usual form of apoplectic seizure, the patient falls down
suddenly, deprived of sense and motion, and lies like a person in a deep
sleep. He neither hears nor sees > nor feels. Unconscious of every
thing around him, he is alike insensible to the exertions of his medical
attendants, and the anxieties of his friends. The suddenness of the at-
tack is that feature of the disorder which most immediately impresses
itself upon the notice of observers ; and being so very general, the dis-
ease has from this circumstance in all ages received its name.

2. The second form of apoplectic seizure commences by a sudden at-
tack of violent pain of the head, accompanied with paleness of the face,
sickness at stomach, vomiting, and transient loss of recollection. The
patient, in some instances, falls down in a state resembling syncope, but
recovers in a few minutes, and is able to walk. After a few hours, how-
ever, the head-ache continuing, he becomes oppressed, and gradually
sinks into perfect coma or lethargy.

3. The third form of apoplectic seizure begins with a sudden attack of
palsy of one side, with loss of speech, which after the lapse of some hours
passes gradually into apoplexy.

In which ever way the apoplectic fit commences, there are certain
appearances presented during its continuance, which merit attention.
The pulse, at first, is commonly small and irregular ; but as the system
recovers from the shock, tho pulse becomes full and strong, and is gen-
erally slower than natural. Respiration is much embarrassed, being al-
ways slow, and occasionally irregular. In all the severer degrees of the


Order V.] Apoplexy. &H

diseaso, this laborious breathing is accompanied by stertor ; and a fre-
quent appearance is that of foam, or frothy saliva, excreted from tho
mouth, and blown away from the lips with considerable force. Tliis
latter symptom has always been looked upon as indicative of the great-
est danger.

The skin is commonly warm, and bathed in a copious perspiration.
In the worst cases of the disease, a cold clammy sweat has been obser-
ved. The face is generally pale ; the cornea dull and glassy ; and tho
pupils permanently dilated. The teeth are closely clenched; and tho
power of swallowing, though seldom wholly lost, is for the most part so
much impeded, as to oppose the most serious obstacles to the adminis-
tration of remedies. The bowels arc torpid, as is usual in all cases
of cerebral oppression, and they resist the action even of power Ad
cathartics. If blood is drawn from tho arm, the coagulum is commonly
firm ; and Sir Gilbert Blanc states that it is in most instances huffy.

The duration of the apoplectic fit varies from two or three hours to
as many days. Thirty hours may be called the average duration. [Gre-
gory.']

Sanguineous apoplexy is sometimes preceded by giddiness, dimness of
sight, drowsiness, loss of memory, or faltering of the tongue in speak-
ing ; but it more usually happens; that without much previous indisposi-
tion the person falls down suddenly, the face is red, and appears puffed
up, the veins of the head, particularly of the eyes, temples, and neck,
seem turgid, the head feels hot, the eyelids arc half open and rigid, tho
eyes are prominent and fixed, the breathing is difficult and stertorous,
and for the most part the pulse is strong, regular, and generally less
frequent than what is natural. In a few instances, a grinding of tho
teeth, with slight convulsive motions, are observable. When the dis-
ease continues for any length of time, the pulse becomes languid, weak,
and slow, and the breathing is shortened, until at length it ceases alto-
gether.

In serious apoplexy the attack is more gradual in general, the faco
is pale and humid, the veirrs are depressed, the pulse is small, weak,
irregular, and intermitting, respiration is impeded and stertorous, and
the extremities arc cold and flaccid. Sometimes these appearances are
preceded by vertigo, torpor, and an impediment in the speech, together
with a failure of memory.

Although tho whole body is aflccted with the loss of sense and motion
in apoplexy, it takes place nevertheless very often more on one side
than the other, which is called a hemiplegia, and in this case the side
least aflccted with palsy is somewhat convulsed.

In some few instances of apoplexy the patient lies for several days in-
sensible and motionless, and yet gradually recovers the use of his under-
standing, and his muscular strength ; but for the most part he is per-
manently deprived of the command of one side of his body, or he re-
gains it imperfectly after a time ; his mind sustains a shock which is
never recovered from ; his sensations and perceptions becoming less ac-
curate, aird his memory and powers of combining being much weakened,
&r at least his faculty of expression ; for even while his memory and


532 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

imagination are unimpaired, he is not always able to find appropriate
words to express the notion which is excited in his mind. [ Thomas.]

PROGNOSIS.

Where there is extravasation, the patient's recovery will be slow and
difficult; for the power of absorption cannot be equal to its being im-
mediately taken up. When the person's recovery is immediate, it is a
presumptive evidence that there has bean neither extravasation, effusion,
nor exudation, but that the compre-sion arose from a repletion in the
vessels of the brain. The sanguineous apoplexy is more dangerous than
the serous.

DISSECTION.

Dissections of those who have died of sanguineous apoplexy offer am-
ple proof of the arterial as well as the venous system being in a remark-
able state of repletion. When the scalp is divided, there is sometimes
a considerable flow of blood from the occipital and frontal veins; in-
deed, during the dissection the venous blood flows from all parts of the
head. The dura mater is sometimes thickened and bound to the cra-
nium by strong adhesions ; sometimes the tunica arachnoides loses its
transparency, is opaque, and much thickened. The pia mater is often
remarkably vascular ; the veins are turgid with dark blood, and in par-
ticular parts of this membrane there appears high arterial action ; the
whole surface sometimes acquires a bright vermilion tint. Between the
pia mater and tunica arachnoides there is often to be observed a serous
effusion which in some bodies is colourless ; in others, torpid, bloody,
or even mixed with streaks of coagulable lymph. With respect to the
substance of the brain, it is frequently found unusually firm, and when
cut into, the numerous points of blood show that the divided vessels are
enlarged. A considerable quantity of serous fluid is often found in the
ventricles, and these are much enlarged. For the most part, extrava-
sated blood is met with in the cranium, sometimes between the mem-
branes, and sometimes in the substance of the brain, and sometimes in
the ventricles. Dissections have confirmed the observation, that the
blood is generally but not invariably found extravasated in the hemis-
phere opposite to the side of the body which was paralyzed.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding copiously and profusely, mercury, tarter emetic, sulphate
ofzink, blisters, issues, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The object to be accomplished in this com-
plaint will be during the paroxysm, first, to suspend it, by recalling the
blood from the brain to the surface and extremities ; second, to pre-
vent a determination of blood to that organ.

When called to a person, labouring under a fit of apoplexy, prompt
and energetic measures must be put in execution. The patient should
be immediately removed to a pleasant, airy, and cool place, and placed


Order V.J Apoplexy . 535

in a recumbent position to favor a return of blood from the brain. All
compression should be removed from the neck, and all tight bandages,
or legatures.

The feet and legs must be immediately immersed in very warm
ley water. This simple process is attended with the most extraordina-
ry effects in all cerebral affections, as well as numerous other diseases.
The reasons of which will appear obvious to all who have perused the
principles of this practice detailed in the first part of this work. I have
never known it fail to exert a salutary and decided good effect. They
should be continued in the water for fifteen or twenty minutes, and
friction then applied to them. The whole surface should also be bathed
with a mild tincture of Capsicum, and applied very warm. If the pa-
tient is unable to take medicine, a large injection, or clyster should be
immediately administered, made as follows:

Take infusion of Lobelia, half a pint.
Milk, a pint.
Sweet or Olive, Oil a gill.
Molasses, one gill.

Fine Salt, a tea-spoonful. Mix, and introduce the whole with a French
Syringe.

This will serve nearly all the purposes of a purgative, with the ad-
ditional advantage of a quicker operation. From the large quantities of
feculent matter which it discharges from the bowels, and from its ac-
tion upon the brain through the medium of the stomach, it is product-
ive of great benefit. The patient should be covered warm, in order to
excite perspiration. Hot bricks covered with cloths wet with vinegar
may be applied to the extremities, to assist in recalling the blood back
to its original channels.

In all the cases that I have ever attended of apoplexy I have invaria-
bly found that the cause of the disease consisted in an unequal circula-
tion of the blood. It recedes from the extremities, and is effused upon
the brain. Hence when you ask a patient who has the premonitory or
incipient symptoms of apoplexy, if the feet are not cold, they will an-
swer in the affirmative ; from which circumstance the indication of cure
may be clearly inferred.

A mustard plaster should also be immediately applied between the
shoulders.

As soon as the patient can swallow, let a brisk purgative be adminis-
tered. This class of medicines is very important in apoplexy.

Sometimes it is in part occasioned by an over-distention of the sto-
mach, and a morbid state of the alimentary canal, and evacuations
of this kind are indispensably necessary, not only to unload the stomach
and bowels, but likewise to remove the turgescence or congestion of the
brain by the sympathetic action exerted on this organ through the me-
dium of the stomach.

These are the means to be pursued during an attack of the complaint,
and they will be found altogether more effectual than the sanguinary
practice now pursued, viz: "to abstract a vast quantity of blood, from
six to eight pounds," to use the language of a standard author.

It seems astonishing that physicians persist in pursuing a practice


&>4 Cerebral Diseases. JClass V.

which has been conclusively ghown, by writers, to bring on apoplexy,
or congestions of the brain. Occasionally an author may be found who
has experienced the mischievous effects of bleeding, and among the
number, I think, is Professor Recamier, who has several times obser-
ved loss of blood in such cases " aggravate the cerebral congestion." I
have not the least evidence that blood-letting has the smallest power to
diminish the violence or duration of an apoplectic paroxysm, but on
the contrary, I have every reason to believe that it so far weakens the
powers of reaction, as greatly to retard the cure, or prove fatal to the
patient.

I attended an elderly person who was subject to the apoplexy, and
who upon any attack, or symptoms of it, sent for his physician, who
always bled him, till after a while it appeared almost necessary that he
should be bled to save his life. I remonstrated with the man, and told
him the consequence of such a procedure. He, however, paid no at-
tention to my remarks, but continued to submit to the treatment of his
family physician, till in a short time tho complaint proved fatal, as I
predicted.

1 attended a patient about the same age, and the same complaint,
pursued the treatment here recommended, and he recovered, and now
enjoys good health. When the patient has recovered from an attack of
apoplexy, and sometimes it continues a week or two in a greater or
less degree, the next object will be to prevent a return of it ; to ef-
fect which, it will be necessary to continue the use of purgatives about
once a week. Also emetics must be given where there is nothing to
contra-indicate their use. They also should be repeated as often as
the purgatives. They have a very beneficial effect by diverting the
blood from the head, and throwing it into the capillary system, and
they have also a tendency to keep up perspiration. Moderate sweating
should be now and then encouraged by the use of the vapour bath,
which likewise has a tendency to prevent a return of the complaint, by
expelling such humours or extraneous agents as corrupt, or as causes a
thick and sizy state of it; in other words, it has a tendency, with the
other means recommended, to purify the blood. For the same purpose
the patient may take alternative infusions and drinks, such as the seeds
or roots of Burdock, Elder flowers, Sarsaparilla, ifyc.

It will be necessary to continue tho practice of bathing the feet al
least three or four times a week. The head may likewise be bathed
with a weak tincture of capsicum, particularly when there is any pain.
These measures must be continued until there are no more symptoms of
the disease remaining.

I have occasionally been in the habit of applying cups to the temples
and the nape of the neck, when the patient has complained of a fulness
and dizziness of the head, and I have found benefit derived from it,
but I have never resorted to cupping, even during an attack of the com-
plaint, and very seldom in any stage of it, having succeeded by the other
means already mentioned. Cut in a very severe parox3'sm it may be jus-
tifiable to resort to it. An anodyne may be given when the patient
complains of much restlessness and pain. Ten grains of the diaphoretic
powders will serve the double purpose of procuring sleep, and promo-
ting perspiration.


Order VI.] Catalepsy. 535

REGIMEN.

Much depends upon diet in this complaint. It is often brought on by
high living, inducing plethora, and therefore may be prevented or cured
by an opposite course of living. All high seasoned victuals, roasted
meat, &c. must not be used ; neither wine, fermented liquors, ardent
spirits, &c. He must be confined to a cooling, spare, vegetable diet,
with regular exercise in the open air, the use of the tepid bath likewise ;
great fatigue or exertion must be avoided, also intense application to stu-
dy. He must be careful not to stoop, or continue in a bending posture.
He must avoid sudden transitions from heat to cold, and in all things ob-
serve universal temperance.


CHAPTER VI.

CATALEPSY, ( Catalepsia. )


DESCRIPTION.

Catalepsy consists in the temporary suspension of voluntary mo-
tion, and consciousness and volition. The exact position of the body re-
maining the same as it was when the attack came on. It generally lasts
a short time,when it subsides, leaving the person in the same condition as
formerly, without any disease or recollection of any thing that has passed.

CAUSES.

Catalepsy may arise from various causes — from passions, intense ap-
plication of mind to any study or pursuit, suppressed customary evac-
uations, worms, morbid state of the stomach and alimentary canal, ple-
thora, &.c. A person died of the catalepsy in this city, and was exami-
ned by Dr. Kissam, who stated that one of the valves of the heart had
become callous or undurated.

SYMPTOMS.

The disease generally commences suddenly, without any premon-
itory symptoms, but more generally the attack is sudden, and commen-
ces without any warning ; but when there is any warning given of its ap-
proach, it is known by swimming in the head, or head-ache, lassitude,
pain in the breast, sense of heaviness, tremor of the hands and legs,
flatulence, yawning, &x. When an attack commences, it is very sud-
den, and the patient remains in the same position like a statue, without
being able to move a single finger. The eyes remain immovably fixed,
either open or closed. If a limb is changed, it still remains fixed in the
same position until the paroxysm subsides. All the senses are entirely
suspended, and the patient remembers nothing that has occurred, and
it is stated if the paroxysm comes on while ho is conversing, or in the
performance of any other continuous act, he will resume the thread of


536 Cerebral Diseases, [Class V.

the conversation, or even finish the half-pronounced word, or continue
his acts as soon as the paroxysm is over, as if no interrruption had ta-
ken place. It is stated that cases have occurred where patients during
a paroxysm have continued their employment, such as walking without
any consciousness of it. A case is mentioned by Galen, in which the
patient, (one of his fellow students,) lay motionless, like a dog, with
his eyes open, but he heard and remembered what occurred during the
paroxysm. Sometimes respiration is feeble, and the surface is cold.

The continuance of a fit of catalepsy varies from a few minutes to
several days. The patient, when it leaves him, sighs deeply. Sometimes
the paroxysm comes on three or four times a day, and only lasts a few
minutes. Hoffman mentions the case of a woman in which upwards of
one hundred paroxysms occured during a period of forty days.

Catalepsy is sometimes complicated with other diseases, such as epi-
lepsy, hysteria, &c.

This disease seems to be similar, or nearly allied to what is called a
trance, and eztacy. It either will go off spontaneously, or may be re-
moved by medicines, and proper diet.

TREATMENT.

During a paroxysm of the catalepsy, friction should be applied to the
surface and extremities, and particularly around the region of the
heart. Afterwards the disease must be treated on general principles;
all the secretions and excretions regulated. The stomach, bowels, and
skin should be kept in a healthful tone. Antispasmodics and restora-
tives administered, with suitable diet and exercise.


CHAPTER VII.
LETHARGY, (Coma.)

DESCRIPTION.

LETHAttGY is generally a symptomatic disease, arising from apo-
plectic symptoms, or a morbid state of the stomach or some other com-
plaint. It may arise also from the use of opium, or other narcotic sub-
stances.

TREATMENT.

Sometimes drowsiness or lethargy proves very troublesome, the per-
son falling asleep very often, and very contrary to their wishes. When
this is the case, the best remedy, and one that is very effectual, is the
administration of an emetic, to be repeated occasionally; and also im-
mersing the feet in warm water.

The bowels must be kept regular. A light vegetable diet should al-
so be used.


Order VIII.] Fainting or Swooning. 537


CHAPTER VIII.
FAINTING OR SWOONING. (Syncope.)

DESCRIPTION.

Fainting consists in a decreased action, and sometimes total cessa-
tion of the pulse and respiration. It is sometimes preceded by anxiety
about the praecordia, or heart ; a sense of fullness ascending from the
stomach towards the head ; vertigo, or confusion of ideas ; dimness of
sight, and coldness of the extremities. Attacks of syncope or fainting
are frequently attended with, or end in vomiting, and sometimes in
convulsions, or in an epileptic fit.

CAUSES.

Fainting is most frequently occasioned by profuse evacuations, es-
pecially of blood ; but it may happen also from violent passions of the
mind, from surfeits, excessive pain, violent exercise, disgusting sights,
drinking freely of warm or strong liquors, exposure to great heat, in-
tense application to study, certain odours or smells, &c.

People of delicate constitutions are very subject to it from slight cau-
ses; and sometimes it will arise from affections of the heart and large
Vessels, not easy to be understood. Fainting is also a symptom of ma-
ny disorders, especially of that fatal one called a polypus of the heart,
of the plague, profuse bleeding or flooding, and many putrid diseases.

A disposition to this disease may take place wherever debility exists ;
but when it frequently recurs, without any obvious cause, a morbid
state of the heart or brain themselves is to be suspected.

SYMPTOMS.

A syncope begins with a remarkable anxiety about the heart; after
which follows a sudden extinction, as it were, not only of the animal
powers and actions, but also of the vital powers, so that the patients
are deprived of pulse, sense, and motion, all at once.

In these cases the patient does not entirely lose his senses, but turns
cold and pale ; and the pulse continues to beat, though weakly ; the
heart also seems to tremble ratber than beat, and the respiration, or
breathing, is just perceptible. But in the true syncope, not the small-
est sign of life can be perceived; the face bath a death-like paleness, the
extremities are cold, the eyes shut, or at least troubled; the mouth
sometimes shut, and sometimes gaping wide open; the limbs flaccid,'
or limber, and the strength quite gone ; as soon as they begin to recov-
er, they fetch deep and heavy sigbs.

TREATMENT.

In order to revive the patients, they ought to be laid in an horizon-
tal posture, in any airv place ; the legs, thighs, and arms, are to' be
Vol. I. 68


538 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

rubbed with hot flannels; very strong vinegar, or salt of hartshorn, may
be held to the nostrils, and the following mixture given:

Take Spirits of Harlshorn, (Aq. Ammonia.) 10 drops.

Compound Spirits of Lavendar, (Spts. Lavend.) 1 tea-spoonful. Mix.

Dilute with water, and give the whole. If circumstances permit, let
the feet be immersed in warm water, and the breast, and pit of the
stomach rubbed with the tincture of capsicum.

If the patient does not soon revive, let a little hot spirits or brandy
sling be administered. Persons subject to fainting should avoid all
crowded assemblies, or places where the air is confined. They should
avoid every thing calculated to excite the mind or the passions, as well
as too much labor, or fatigue. All tight bandages, neck-cloths, corsets,
&c. must be immediately removed.


CHAPTER IX.

GIDDINESS. (Vertigo.)


DESCRIPTION.

Vertigo or dizziness is generally symptomatic of some other corn-
plaint, such as dyspepsia, hypochondria, or it may be a premonitory
symptom of apoplexy, or over-determination of blood to the head.

SYMPTOMS.

The patient is suddenly seized with a sense of swimming in the head.
Every tiling appears to him to turn around. He staggers, and is in
danger of falling down. His complaint is attended with very little dan-
ger where it arises from hysterics, or any nervous disorder. But when
it arises from plethora, or an unnatural quantity of blood in the head,
there is danger of apoplexy.

TREATMENT.

It will be necessary first to ascertain the cause of the complaint.
If it is symptomatic of some other disorder, that must first be re-
moved in order to cure it ; but if it be a primary affection, or if it be
apparently seated in the head or stomach, a purgative should be occa-
sionally used, and the feet bathed. If this should not remove it, ad-
minister an emetic.


Order X.] Delirium. 539


CHAPTER X.

DELIRIUM TREMENS. (Mania Potu.)

DESCRIPTION.

Tins is a disease which in this day very often occurs among those who
are addicted to the excessive use of ardent spirits, and such as indulge
in the use of opium and other narcotic substances. It is characterized
by most of the ordinary signs of insanity. This disease is called by
some, the brain fever of drunkards.

CAUSES.

It is difficult to state with certainty what the proximate cause of tins
complaint may be. Dr. Coates, who wrote a treatise on it, says that
" (he disease is the result, not of the application, but of the sudden in-
termission of the use of these aiticles." But it appears to me to arise
from excessive stimulus of the stomach and brain, in which organs the
complaint is seated.

SYMPTOMS. <

It commences with nausea, vomiting, or belching of wind, and some-
times after a sudden disuse, it is said, of stimuli, and in subjects ad-
dicted to the use of spirits to excess, without becoming habitually
drunk. The complaint seems to come on gradually, and it is several
days before it arrives to its greatest degree of violence. Thore is great
wakefulness, walking to and fro, or raving, and the patient seems to
be in the greatest agitation, and distress of mind. He is very apt to
imagine that there is evil spirits continually before him, or haunting
him. I was called to one case of this kind where the person insisted
that there were devils before him, which he could see upon the carpet.
This disease, says Teatcher, "is always attended by febrile symptoms,
and it is one of its peculiarities that the mind is continually haunted
with the idea that they are infested by snakes and insects. I have fre-
quently seen patients,' says he, ' weary in attempting to catch snakes,
which they imagined were curling about them under their clothes. The
countenance assumes a peculiar appearance, expressive of anxiety,
alarm and suspicion. The patient becomes irritable, talkative, and often
cries out for assistance. He becomes boisterous and raving, being
continually tormented with the idea that some one is about to rob or
destroy him. The system is usually more or less disordered during the
complaint. There is costiveness, loathing of food, &c.

Delirium tremens usually runs its course in four or five days, and of-
ten terminates in a fit of epilepsy ; at other times where it is properly
treated, the patient recovers.


540 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.

TREATMENT.

The first object of the practitioner in this complaint, will be, to al-
lay the paroxysm, and to calm and support the nervous system, and
afterwards, by a proper course of treatment, to prevent a return of the
complaint.

Should there be a determination of blood to the head, which may be
known by a redness of the countenance, a fullness and beating of the
carotid arteries, heart, &c. the first object will be. to equalize the cir-
culation by recalling the blood to the surface, and extremities. Tbis
may be effected by bathing the feet and legs in a tub of warm ley water,
and applying mustard plasters to the feet, and nape of the neck.

At the same time a a brisk cathartic must be administered. After
its operation, give a pill made of the solid opium, about the size of a
pea, which contains three grains, to be repeated every two hours until
rest is procured. This will break the paroxysm and procure sleep.
Afterwards the patient must be treated according to the symptoms ex-
hibited. Emetics will be found very useful, particularly the lobelia,
and which may be given in the same kind of spirits that the patient has
been in the habit of taking.


CHAPTER XI.
PRIAPISM OR SATYRIASIS.

DESCRIPTION.

This disease affects men, the same as the Furor Uterinus affects
women.

SYMPTOMS.

I shall here also quote the remarks of Lieutaud on this complaint.

"What is to be understood by Priapism or Satyriasis, no man of let-
ters is ignorant. This lustful itching of the genitals often exercises such
tyranny, that it hurries the patients, deaf to all persuasions and threat-
ening, even to madness. This most disgraceful disease affects both
sexes, changing only its name, and is in a small degree mitigated, only
by the emission of semen. But the patients are inflamed with so great
a desire of venery, that even after repeated copulation they are not at
all satiated. Satyriasis mostly invades the young, the duration of which
at this age, is not very long; but it sometimes comes on with such vio-
lence as to occasion death. Nor does it spare more advanced age, in
which ins thought not to be dangerous, but far more obstinate. De-
baucheries are obnoxious to it; those excited by the rage of love- those
who are intoxicated by very facetious or lustful conversation with their
paramours : those who are very fond of reading lascivious books ; or who
use canthandes in order to excite lascivious venery; and lastly, high


Order XII.] Drunkenness and Intemperance. 541

livers, or those who indulge in wine or rich dainties. This lustful
priapism is also promoted by cancerous ulcers of the bladder, great size
of the kidneys, double spermatic vessels, and other organic faults, which
dissection exhibits."

TREATMENT.

The same as in Furor Uterinus.

Those who are seized with this shameful disorder ought to avoid,
worse than a snako, brothels, lustful thoughts, obscene books, lascivi-
ous conversation, and in short all sports of the mind, which may stir up,
or aggravate the disease.


CHAPTER XII.
DRUNKENNESS AND INTEMPERANCE.

I have already touched upon this subject, but so prevalent have these
crimes and diseases become, that I deem it necessary to make a few
further remarks. I shall make a few extracts from the writings of Dr.
Rush upon the effects of ardent spirits, after which I shall point out a
remedy :

By ardent spirits, I mean those liquors only which are obtained by
distillation from fermented substances of any kind. To their effects up-
on the bodies and minds of men, the following enquiry shall be exclu-
sively confined. Fermented liquors contain so little spirit, and that so
intimately combined with other matters, that they can seldom be drunk-
en in sufficient quantities to produce intoxication, and its subsequent
effects, without exciting a disrelish to their taste, or pain, from their
distending the stomach. They are, moreover, when taken in a mod-
erate quantity, generally innocent, and often have a friendly influence
upon health and life.

The effects of ardent spirits divide themselves into such as are of a
prompt, and such as are of a chronic nature. The former discover
themselves in drunkenness; and the latter, in a numerous train of dis-
eases and vices of the body and mind.

I shall begin by briefly describing their prompt, or immediate effects
in a fit of drunkenness.

This odious disease (for by that name it should be called) appears
with more or less of the following symptoms, and most commonly in
the order in which I shall enumerate them :

1. Unusual garrulity.

2. Unusual silence.

3. Captiousness, and a disposition to quarrel.

4. Uncommon good humour, and an insipid simpering, or laugh.

5. Profane swearing, and cursing.

6. A disclosure of their own, or other people's secrets.


542 Cerebral Diseases. [Class V,

7 A rude disposition to tell those persons in company, whom they
know, their faults.

8. Certain immodest actions. I am sorry to say, this sign of the
first stage of drunkenness, sometimes appears in women, who, when
sober, are uniformly remarkable for chaste and decent manners.

9. A clipping of words.

10. Fighting; a black eye, or a swelled nose, often mark this grade
of drunkenness.

11. Certain extravagant acts, which indicate a temporary fit of mad-
ness.

It belongs to the history of drunkenness to remark, that its parox-
ysms occur, like the paroxysms of many diseases, at certain periods,
and after longer or shorter intervals. They often begin with annual,
and gradually increase in their frequency, until they appear in quarter-
ly, monthly, weekly, and quotidian or daily, periods. Finally, they
afford scarcely any marks of remission, either during the day or the
night.

It is further remarkable, that drunkenness resembles certain heredi-
tary, family, and contagious diseases. I have once known it to de-
scend from a father, to four out of five of his children. I have seen
three, and once four, brothers, who were born of sober ancestors, af-
fected by it, and I have heard of its spreading through a whole family
composed of members not originally related to each other. These
facts are important, and should not be overlooked by parents, in deci-
ding upon the matrimonial connexions of their children.

Let us next attend to the chronic effects of ardent spirits upon the
body and mind. In the body, they dispose to every form of acute dis-
ease ; they moreover excite fevers in persons predisposed to them, from
other causes. This has been remarked in all the yellow fevers which
have visited the cities of the United States. Hard drinkers seldom es-
cape, and rarely recover from them. The following diseases are the
usual consequences of the habitual use of ardent spirits, viz :

1. A decay of appetite, sickness at stomach, and a puking of bile,
or a discharge of a frothy and viscid phlegm, by hawking, in the morn-
ing.

2. Obstructions of the liver.

2. Jaundice, and dropsy of the belly and limbs, and finally of every
cavity in the body.

4. Hoarseness, and a husky cough, which often terminate in con-
sumption, and sometimes in an acute and fatal disease of the lungs.

5. Diabetes, that is, a frequent and weakening discharge of pale,
or sweetish urine.

6. Redness, and eruptions on different parts of the body. They
generally begin on the nose, and after gradually extending all over the
face, sometimes descend to the limbs, in the form of leprosy. They
have been called 'Rum-buds,' when they appear in the face. In per-
sons who have occasionally survived these effects of ardent spirits on
the skin, the face, after a while, becomes bloated, and its redness is
succeeded by a death-like paleness.

7. A fetid breath, composed of every thing that is offensive in putrid
animal matter.


Order XIL] Drunkenness and Intemperance. 543

8. Frequent and disgusting belchings. Dr. Haller relates the case of
a notorious drunkard having been suddenly destroyed, in consequence
of the vapour discharged from his stomach by belching, accidentally
taking fire by coming in contact with the flame of a candle.

9. Epilepsy.

10. Gout, in all its various forms of swelled limbs, colic, palsy and
apoplexy.

Lastly 11. Madness. The late Dr. Waters, while he acted as house
pupil and apothecary of the Pennsylvania Hospital, assured me, that
in one third of the patients confined by this terrible disease, it had been
induced by ardent spirits.

Most of the diseases which have been enumerated, are of a mortal
nature. They are more certainly induced, and terminate more spee-
dily in death, when spirits are taken in such quantities, and at such
times, as to produce frequent intoxication ; but it may serve to remove
an error with which some intemperate people console themselves, to re-
mark, that ardent spirits often bring on fatal diseases, without produ-
cing drunkenness. I have known many persons destroyed by them,
who were never completely intoxicated during the whole course of their
iives. The solitary instances of longevity which are now and then met
with in hard drinkers, no more disprove the deadly effects of ardent spi-
rits, than the solitary instances of recoveries from apparent death by
drowning, prove that there is no danger to life from a human body ly-
ing an hour or two under water.

Not less destructive are the effects of ardent spirits upon the human
mind. They impair the memory, debilitate the understanding, and
pervert the moral faculties. It was probably from observing these ef-
fects of intemperance in drinking, upon the mind, that a law was for-
merly passed in Spain, which excluded drunkards from being witnesses
in a court of justice. But the demoralizing effects of distilled spirits, do
not stop here. They produce not only falsehood, but fraud, theft, un-
cleanliness, and murder. Like the demoniac mentioned in the New-Tes-
tament, their name is ' legion,' for they convey into the soul a host of vi-
ces and crimes.

A more affecting spectacle cannot be exhibited, than a person into
whom this infernal spirit, generated by habits of intemperance, has en-
tered. It is more or less affecting, according to the station the person
fills in a family, or in society, who is possessed by it* Is he a husband'?
How deep the anguish which rends the bosom of his wife! Is she a
wife ? Who can measure the shame and aversion which she excites in
her husband? Is he the father, or is she the mother, of a family of
children ? See their averted looks from their parent, and their blush-
ing looks at each other! Is he a magistrate? or has he been chosen to
fill a high and respectable station in the councils of his country? What
humiliating fears of corruption in the administration of the laws, and the
subversion of public order and happiness, appear in the countenances
of all who see him! Is he a minister of the gospel? — Here language
fails me. — If angels weep — it is at such a sight.

In pointing out the evils produced by ardent spirits, let us not pass
by their effects upon the estates of the persons who are addicted to


544


Cerebral Diseases. [Class V.


them. Are they inhabitants of cities ?— Behold ! their houses stripped
gradually of their furniture, and pawned, or sold by a constable, to pay
tavern debts. See! their names upon record in the dockets of every
court, and whole pages of newspapers filled with advertisements of their
estates for public sale. Are they inhabitants of country places? Be-
hold their houses with shattered windows, — their barns with leaky
roofs, — their gardens overrun with weeds, — their fields with broken
fences, their hogs without yokes, their sheep without wool, — their cat-
tle and horses without fat, — and their children filthy and half clad, with-
out manners, principles and morals. This picture of agricultural
wretchedness is seldom of long duration. The farms and property thus
neglected, and depreciated, are seized and sold for the benefit of a
group of creditors. The children that were born with the prospect of
inheriting them, are bound out to service in the neighbourhood ; while
their parents, the unworthy authors of their misfortunes, ramble into
new and distant settlements, alternately fed on their way by the hand
of charity, or a little casual labour.

Thus we see poverty and misery, crimes and infamy, diseases and
death, are all the natural and usual consequences of the intemperate use
of ardent spirits.

I have classed death among the consequences of hard drinking. But
it is not death from the immediate hand of the Diety, nor from any of
the instruments of it which were created by him. It is death from sui-
cide. Yes — thou poor degraded creature, who art daily lifting the
poisoned bowl to thy lips — cease' to avoid the unhallowed ground in
Which the self-murderer is interred, and wonder no longer that the sun
should shine, and the rain fall, and the grass look green upon his grave.
Thou art perpetrating gradually, by the use of ardent spirits, what he
has effected suddenly, by opium — or a halter; Considering how many
circumstances from surprise, or derangement, may palliate his guilt, or
that, (unlike yours) it was not preceded and accompanied by any other
crime, it is probable his condemnation will be less than yours at the day
of judgment.

I shall now take notice of the occasions and circumstances which are
supposed to render the use of ardent spirits necessary, and endeavour
to shew that the arguments in favour of their use in such cases are found-
ed in error, and that in each of them, ardent spirits, instead of afford-
ing strength of the body, increase the evils they are intended to re-
lieve.

1. They are said to be necessary in very cold weather. This is far
from being true ; for the temporary warmth they produce, is always
succeeded by a greater disposition in the body to be affected by cold.
Warm dresses, a plentiful meal just before exposure to the cold, and
eating occasionally a little gingerbread, or any other cordial food, is a
much more durable method of preserving the heat of the body in cold
weather.

2. They are said to be necessary in very warm weather. Expe-
rience proves that they increase, instead of lessening the effects of heat
upon the body, and thereby dispose to diseases of all kinds. Even in
the warm climate of the West-Indies, Dr. Bell asserts this to be true.


Order Xil.] Drunkenness and Inttmperancei 545

" Rum (says this author) whether used habitually, moderately, or in
excessive quantities in the West-Indies, always diminishes the strength
of the body, and renders men more susceptible of disease, and unfit
for any service in which vigour 01 activity is required." As well might
we throw oil into a house, the roof of which was on fire, in order to
prevent the tlames from extending to its inside, as pour ardent spirits
into the stomach, to lessen the effects of a hot sun upon the skim

3. Nor do ardent spirits lessen the effects of hard labour upon the bo-
dy. Look at the horse ; with every muscle of his body swelled from
morning till night in the plough, or a team, does he make signs for a
draught of toddy, or a glass of spirits to enable him to cleave the
ground, or to climb a hill "? — No — he requires nothing but cool water
and substantial food. There is no nourishment in ardent spirits. The
strength they produce in labour is of a transient nature, and is always
followed by a sense of weakness and fatigue.

But are there no conditions of the human body in which ardent spirits
may be given? I answer— there are. 1st. When the body has been
suddenly exhausted of its strength, and a disposition to faintness has
been induced. Here a few spoonfuls, or a glass full of spirits, with or
without water, may be administered with safety and advantage. In this
case we comply strictly with the advice of Solomon, who restricts the
use of " strong drink" only " to him who is ready to perish." — 2dly.
When the body has been exposed for a long time to wet weather, more
especially, if it be combined with cold. Here a moderate quantity of
spirits is not only safe, but highly proper to obviate debility, and to pre-
vent a fever.

" Valetudinarians, especially those who are afflicted with diseases of
the stomach and bowels, are very apt to seek relief from ardent spirits*
Let such people be cautious how they make use of this dangerous reme-
dy. I have known many men and women, of excellent characters and
principles, who have been betrayed by occasional doses of gin and
brandy, into a love of those liquors, and have afterwards fallen sacrifices
to their fatal effects. The different preparations of opium are much
more safe and efficacious than distilled cordials of any kind, in ilatulent
or spasmodic affections of the stomach and bowels* So great is the
danger of contracting a love for distilled liquors by accustoming the
stomach to their stimulus, that as few medicines as possible should be
given in spirituous vehicles, in chronic diseases. A physician of great
eminence, and uncommon worth, who died towards the close of the last
century, in London, in taking leave of a young physician of this city,
who had finished his studies under his patronage, impressed this caution
with peculiar force upon him, and lamented at the same time, in pa-
thetic terms, that he had innocently made many sets by prescribing
brandy and water in stomach complaints. It is difficult to tell how ma-
ny persons have been destroyed by those physicians who have adopted
Dr. Brown's indiscriminate practice in the use of stimulating remedies;
the most popular of which is ardent spirits ; but it is well known, seve-
ral of them have died of intemperance in this city, since the year 1790.

" No man ever became suddenly a drunkard. It is by gradually ac-
customing the taste and stomach to ardent spirit*, in the forms of grog,

Vol. 7. <i9


o4(i Cerebral Disease*. Iw» V.

and toddy, that men have been led to love them iu their destructive
mixtures and in their simple state. Under the impression of this truth,
were it possible for me to speak, with a voice so loud as to be heard
from the river St. Croix, to the remotest shores of the Mississippi, which
bound the territory of the United States, I would say, Friends and Fel-
low Citizens ! avoid the habitual use of those two seducing liquors, whe-
ther they he made with brandy, rum, gin, Jamaica spirits, whiskey, or
what is called cherry bounce. It is true, some men, by limiting the
strength of those drinks, by measuring the spirit and water, have drun-
ken them for many years, and even during a long life, without acquiring
habits of intemperance or intoxication ; but many more have been in-
sensibly led, by drinking weak toddy, and grog, first at their meals, to
take them for their constant drink, in the intervals of their meals ; after-
wards, to take them, of an increased strength, before breakfast in the
morning, and finally to destroy themselves by drinking undiluted spirits,
during every hour of the day and night. I am not singular in this re-
mark. ' The consequences of drinking run) and water, or grog as it is
called, (says Dr. Mosely) is, that habit increases the desire of more spi-
rit, and decreases its effects ; and there are very few grog-drinkers, who
long survive the practice of debauching with it, without acquiring the
odious nuisance of a dram-drinker's breath, and downright stupidity and
impotence."

" Where are all the Indian tribes, whose numbers and arms formerly
spread terror among their civilized neighbours'? I answer in the words
of the famous Mingo Chief, ' the blood of many of them flows not in the
veins of any human creature.' They have perished, not by pestilence
or war, but by a greater foe to human life than either of them : Ardent
Spirits. The loss of four thousand American citizens, by the yellow
fever, in a single year, awakened general sympathy and terror, and
called forth all the strength and ingenuity of laws, to prevent its recur-
rence. Why is not the same zeal manifested in protecting our citizens
from the more general and consuming ravages of distilled spirits?—
Should the customs of civilized life preserve our nation from extinction,
and even from an increase of morality, by those liquors, they cannot
prevent our country being governed by men, chosen by intemperate and
corrupted voters. From such legislators, the republic would soon be in
danger. To avert this evil : let good men, of every class, unite and be-
siege the general and state governments, with petitions to limit the num-
ber of taverns ; to impose heavy duties upon ardent spirits ; to inflict a
mark of disgrace, or a temporary abridgment of some civil right, upon
every man, convicted of drunkenness; and finally, to secure the proper-
ty of habitual drunkards, for the benefit of their families, by placing
it in the hands of trustees, appointed for that purpose, by a court ot
justice.

TREATMENT.

of drunkenness and intemperance. Dr. Chambers of this city, had a
celebrated nostrum, which seemed to suspend the disease for a while,
bur finally returned asrain.


Order XII.] Drunkenness and Intemperance o47

First, Moral Restraint. — In order to remove this habit, the nearest
friend of the intemperate, should pourtray in the most lively and glow-
ing colours, the disgusting, loathsome, and low crime of drunkenness.
Let him state to him, explicitly, and positively, that he is forever ruined
in soul and body, and will in a very short time, be guilty of the crime of
suicide, and bu rotting in the grave, if he does not break off from the
habit at once. Tell him that his friends and the public, will hold his
name and his memory in contempt and ridicule, and that he will onhy
be a by- word, and laughing stock to a gazing multitude.

Tell him that he must break off now, or it will soon be forever too
late ; he will have no power ; that the disease will every day gain ground
upon him, and after a very short time, he will have no moral energy to
reform.

The advice to him must be, " now or never."

I lately conversed in this way to a confirmed drunkard, and the con-
sequence was a reformation.

Many hundred drunkards have been cured of their desire for ardent
spirits, by a practical belief in the doctrines of the christian religion.
Examples of the divine efficacy of Christianity for this purpose, have
lately occurred in many parts of the United States.

A sudden sense of the guilt contracted by drunkenness, and of its
punishment in a future world, it once cured a gentleman in Philadel
phia, who, in a fit of drunkenness, attempted to murder a wife whom he
loved. Upon being told of it when he was sober, he was so struck with
the enormity of the crime he had nearly committed, that he never tasted
spirituous liquors afterwards.

A sudden sense of shame. — Of the efficacy of this deep-seated prin-
ciple in the human bosom, in curing drunkenness, I shaU relate three
remarkable instances.

A farmer in England, who had been many years in the practice of
coming home intoxicated, from a market town, one day observed appear-
ances of rain, while he was in market. His hay was cut, and ready to
be housed. To save it, he returned in haste to his farm, before he had
taken his customary dose of grog. Upon coming into his house, one ef
his children, a boy of six years old, ran to his mother, and cried out,
" Oh? mother, father is come home, and he is not drunk." The father,
who heard this exclamation, was so severely rebuked by it, that he sud-
denly became a sober man.

A noted drunkard was once followed by a favourite goat, to a tavern,
into which he was invited by his master, and drenched with some of his
liquor. The poor animal staggered home with his master, a good deal
intoxicated. The next day he followed him to his accustomed tavern.
When the goat came to the door, he paused: his master made signs to
him to follow him into the house. The goat stood still. An attempt
was made to thrust him into the tavern. He resisted, as if struck with
the recollection of what he suffered from being intoxicated the night
before. His master was so much affected by a sense of shame, in ob-
serving the conduct of his goat to be so much more rational than his own,
that he censed from that time to drink spirituous liquors.


Cerebral Diseases. [Class V

A gentleman in one of the southern states, who had nearly destroy-
ed himself by strong drink, was remarkable for exhibiting the grossest
marks of folly in his fits of intoxication. One evening, sitting in his
parlour, he heard an uncommon noise in his kitchen. He went to (he
door, and peeped through the key-hole, from whence he saw one of his
negroes diverting his fellow servants, by mimicking his master's gestures
and conversation when he was drunk. The sight overwhelmed him
with shame and distress, and instantly became the means of his refor-
mation,

An advantage would probably arise from frequent representations
being made to drunkards, not only of the certainty, but of the sudden-
ness of death, from habits of intemperance. I have heard of two per-
sons being cured of the love of ardent spirits, by seeing death suddenly
induced by fits of intoxication ; in the one case, in a stranger, and in
the other, in an intimate friend.

It has been said, that the disuse of spirits should be gradual; but my
observations authorize me to say, that persons who have been addicted
to them, should abstain from them suddenly and entirely. ' Taste not,
tains spirits in the house of a man, who wishes to be cured of habits of
intemperance. To obviate, for a while, the debility which arises from
the sudden abstraction of the stimulus of spirits, laudanum, or bitters
infused in water, should be taken, and perhaps a larger quantity of beer
or wine, than is consistent with the strict rules of temperate living. By
the temporary use of these substitutes for spirits, I have never known
the transition to sober habits to be attended with any bad effects, but of-
ten with permanent health of body, and peace of mind.

The association of the idea of ardent spirits, with a painful or disa-
greeable impression upon some part of the body, has sometimes cured
the love of strong drink. I once tempted a negro man, who was habi-
tually fond of ardent spirits, to drink some rum, (which I placed in his
way) and in which I had put a few grains of tartar emetic. The tartar
sickened and puked him to such a degree, that he supposed himself to b©
poisoned. I was much gratified by observing he could not bear the sight
nor smell of spirits for two years afterwards.

I have heard of a man who was cured of the love of spirits, by work-
ing off a puke, by large draughts of brandy and water ; and 1 know a
gentleman, who, in consequence of being affected with a rheumatism,
immediately after drinking some toddy, when overcome with fatigue and
exposure to the rain, has ever since loathed that liquor, only because it
was accidentally associated in his memory with the recollection of tha
pain he suffered from his disease. — [Rush.]

A tea-spoonful of the tincture of tobacco may be put into the liquor,
which the drunkard is in the habit of taking. If this quantity is not
sufficient to cause vomiting, let the dose be greater. Let also a mild
emetic of lobelia be given every week in the kind of liquor that the per^
son is most in the habit of taking.

It will not only have a beneficial effect upon the stomach and brain,
but it will likewise create art aversion or disgust to the kind of spirits
forrnefly marie ipga ■


Order XII.] Drunkenness and Intemperance. 549

Tonics should likewise be used, and Dome is better than the wine
bitters.

In order to effect a radical cure of delirium tremour, as well as drun-
kenness, and the irresistible craving after ardent spirits, which is now
the great curse and calamity of the world, which has called down the
judgments of heaven upon us as a nation, and which has been strikingly
manifested in the appearance of the Cholera, it will be necessary
totally to forbid the use of any kind of ardent, or distilled liquors, and
substitute in their place, good wine, and which may be freely drank.
By the use of wine, that hankering after liquor is destroyed, as well as
its corrosive effects upon the stomach, and upon the system generally.

There is nothing, except moral and religious restraint, that will prove
such a sovereign antidote and remedy to drunkenness and intemperance,
as the use of good wine, or wine which has not been adulterated by the
addition of alcohol or brandy. Hence it is of the greatest importance in
a national point of view, that it should be freely introduced into the
country, and sold very low, by removing all duties upon it, while such
duties are imposed upon distilled spirits, as will amount to a prohibition.
Native vineyards should also be planted by every farmer.

The most powerful, and the most effectual of all means, then, (reli-
gion excepted,) entirely to prevent and destroy the hankering thirst for
strong drink, is abstinence from every species of distilled liquors, and
the substitution of good wine. It is a remedy which the most confirmed
drunkard, as well as every other person, will always most cheerfully
submit to take, and as this class of persons are usually very poor, ought
not they to be provided with it free of cost, by individuals or public au-
thorities.

It has been recommended to establish institutions, expressly to confine
and treat drunkards, and this no doubt will be very useful, but the means
laid down above, will be found above all others, the most effectual.


55Q \firous Diseases. i Class VT.


CLASS VL


NERVOUS DISEASES,


CHARACTER.

This class of disease is confined, or apparently confined to the ner-
vous system.

Irregular, or preternatural motions of the muscles or muscular fibres,
arc characteristic of this class of diseases.


CHAPTER I.

H Y S TE R 1 C S. (Hytltria. )

DESCRIPTION.

Hysteria or Hysterics is characterized by a grumbling noise in the
bowels, followed by a ball ascending to the throat attended with a sense
of suffocation, stupor insensibility, convuisions, laughing and crying
without visible cause, sleep interrupted by sighing and groaning, attend-
ed with flatulence.

Hoffman calls the hysteric affection a cohort of diseases.

Sydenham compares it for the infinite variety of its forms to Pro-
teus, and for the mutability of its appearances to a chameleon. It is
attended with more or less delirium.

CAUSES.

This disorder may be produced by various causes. It usually arises
from certain passions operating upon a feeble constitution.

The persons most liable to this disease are females, from the time of
puberty to the age of thirty-five, unmarried women, and young wid-
ows, chiefly those of the sanguine temperament ; of a relaxed habit ; of
great sensibility ; and of an irritable fibre ; more especially after pro*
fuse evacuations, whether sanguine or serous ; the indolent, and those
who are exhausted by either long protracted fevers or habits of intem-
perance ; and such also in whom the uterine hsemorrahage is unseasona-
bly stopped, or habitually obstructed.

Can we therefore hesitate to assign as the predisponent cause, debility
with morbid irritabilitv?


OWwL] kysicrl 551

SYMPTOMS.

The disease attacks in paroxysm or fits. These are sometimes pre-
ceded by dejection of* spirits, anxiety of mind, effusion of tears, difficul-
ty of breathing, sickness at the stomach, and palpitations at the heart ;
but it more usually happens that a pain is felt on the left side, about the
flexure of the colon, with a sense of distention, advancing upwards till
it gets into the stomach ; and removing from thence into the throat, it
occasions by its pressure a sensation as if a ball was lodged there, which
by authors has been called globus hystericus. The disease having ar*
rived at this height, the patient appears to be threatened with suffoca-
tion, becomes faint, and is affected with stupor and insensibility ; while
at the same time the trunk of the body is turned to and fro, the limbs
are variously agitated, wild and irregular actions take place in the al-
ternate fits of laughter, crying, and screaming; incoherent expressions
are uttered, a temporary delirium prevails, and a frothy saliva is dis-
charged fron the mouth. The spasms at length abating, a quantity of
wind is evacuated upwards, with frequent sighing and sobbing, and ths
woman recovers the exercise of sense and motion without any recollec-
tion of what has taken place during the fit; feeling, however, a wvcre
pain in the head, and a soreness over the whole body.

In some cases there is little or no convulsive movement, and the per--
son lies for some time seemingly in a state of profound sleep, without
either sense or motion.

Hiccup is a symptom which likewise attends in seme instances on the
hysteric disease ; and now and then it happens that a fit of hysteria con-
sists of this alone. In some cases of this nature it has been known to
continue for two or three days ; during which it frequently seems as if
it would suffocate the patient, and proceeds gradually weakening her,
till it either goes oft*, or eke occasions death by suffocation : but this
last is extremely rare. Besides hiccup, other slight spasmodic affec-
tions sometime wholly form a fit of hysteria, which perhaps continue
for a day or two, and then either go oft' themselves, or are removed by
the aid of medicine.

In some cases the patient is attacked with violent pains in the back,
which extend from the spine to the sternum, and at length become fixed
upon the region of the stomach, being evidently of a spasmodic nature,
and often prevailing in so high a degree as to cause clammy sweats, a
pale cadaverous look, coldness of the extremities, and a pulse hardly
perceptible. — [ Thomas.]

DISCRIMINAHO.V.

Hysteria differs from the hypochondriac affection in the following
particulars. It attacks more generally the sanguine and plethoric ;
comes on soon after the age of puberty, makes its attacks suddenly and
violently, and deprives the patient of sensation and voluntary motion.
It is accompanied with a sensation of a ball rising in the throat with a
sonse of suffocation, and is attended usually with a spasmodic affection.

The reverse happens in hypochondriasis. It attacks the melancholy ;
seldom ocenrg till after the age of thirty-five : in a tedious disease and


.">J2 j$ r ervous l>iseascs. [Class VI.

more difficult to remove. Another difference may be pointed out be-
tween the two diseases, which is, that hysteria is much relieved by advan-
cing in age, whereas hypochondriasis usually becomes aggravated.

The two diseases have often been confounded together ; but from du-
ly considering the foregoing circumstance, it appears that a proper line
of distinction should be drawn between them.

The hysteric passion likewise differs from syncope, as in this there is
an entire cessation of the pulse, a contracted face, and a ghastly coun-
tenance ; whereas in the uterine disorder there is often sometime of a
colour, and the face is more expanded ; there is likewise a pulse, though
languid ; and this state may continue two or three days, which never
happens in syncope.

It also differs from apoplexy, in which the abolition of sense and vol-
untary motion is attended with a sort of snoring, great difficulty of breath-
ing, and a quick pulse ; which do not take place in hysteric cases.

It differs from epilepsy, in that this is supposed to arise in consequence
of a distention of the vessels of the brain ; whereas in hysteria, the
spasmodic and convulsive motions arise from a turgescence of blood in
the uterus, or in other parts of the genital system. Hysteria may be
distinguished from epilepsy by the glubus hystericus, by the great flow
of limpid urine, by the sudden transitions from laughing to crying, and
by the fear of death preceding and succeeding to the paroxysm.

However dreadful and alarming an hysteric fit may appear, still it is
seldom accompanied with danger ; and the disease never terminates fa-
tally, unless it changes into epilepsy or mania, or the patient is in a
very weak reduced state.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, copiously and repeatedly, sulphate of zink, mercury, an-
timony, &c. Is it not passing strange, that the very practice should be
recommended and pursued by physicians which more often proves an
exciting cause of the disease than any thing else. Every one knows
that the nervous and the feeble are the subjects to this complaint. With
what propriety then, can blood-letting be practised, when it so invaria-
bly aggravates the characteristic symptoms of it. I have seen delicate
people nearly bled to death, when every successive paroxysm was in-
duced by the very practice.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

In the cure of hysteria two indications are to be attended to.

The first is to allay the spasmodic symptoms which constitute the fit",
and

The second, to lessen the excitability of the nervous system, and
strengthen the whole frame during the intermissions of the paroxysms.

During a fit the patient's dress should be loosened, so that the circula-
tion and respiration may be as little as possible embarrassed ; cold water
should be sprinkled or rather dashed over the face, the body laid in a re-
cumbent position, with the head elevated, and a current of air admitted
into the apartment. The attendants may be employed in rubbing the


Order I.J Hysterics. 553

ieniples, abdomen and extremities. Five or six persons are often in the
habit of clenching the patient during a hysteric fit, and confining them
to the bed, or in a certain position ; but this practice should be avoided;

It is best to use only force sufficient to keep the patient from injuring
herself, or her attendants. When she suddenly raises and springs!
from the bed, allow as much latitude, liberty and motion to the body
and limbs as possible.

If the patient discovers a disposition to roll upon the floor, to use the
language of the late professor Smith of New-Haven^ "let her roll."

When called to treat the disease during the paroxysm, the first object
will be to suspend or shorten it. To this end, such measures must be
adopted as have a tendency to divert the blood from the centre of the
circulating system towards the extremities ; in other words to equalize
the circulation, and nervous excitement. That there is such unequal
circulation, is very evident from the coldness of the extremities, the feet,
the hands and the surface, while there is a morbid or altered condition
of the head or brain. It will therefore be of the first and greatest con-
sequence to immerse the feet and legs in very warm tcater. It is alto-
as are calculated to restore the balance of the circulation; and the ner-
vous influence.

Having attended to the first step in the treatment of hysteria; it will
be necessary in the next place, to administer an antispasmodic, or such
medicine as will aid in cutting short the paroxysm. I have found the
following medicine preferable to any other, where there were no symp-
toms to contra-indicate the use of an emetic. I allude to the tincture
of lobelia. A table-spoonful may be taken, diluted with a little tea or
water between the fits, provided diere be an intermission as there usual-
ly is in most cases. It acts as a nervine, having a powerful tendency to
allay the irritability of the nervous system! It removes the rising in the
throat, sense of suffocation, and the phlegm or mucus collected upon the
stomach, while at the same time, it throws the blood to the surface and
extremities, and makes such an impression upon the brain, and nervous
system, that the paroxysm is often cut short by a single dose, even under
the influence of spasms. Where the teeth are tighty clenched, a small
quantity of this tincture introduced into the mouth, and between the
teeth, will relax the muscles, and cause the patient to open her mouth
and enable her to swallow. Should it be, however, from any causes
impracticable, to administer medicine internally, administer the follow-
ing injection or clyster :

Take a strong infusion of Catnip, 1 pint.
Milk, half a pint.
Sweet or Olive Oil, 1 gill.
P^olasses, 1 gill.

Laudanum, a small tea-spoonful.
Fine Salt, do. do. Mix.

Let the whole be, if possible, introduced at a time, blood warm, witH
a French syrinuc.

This alone rarely fails to moderate the symptoms very speedily, aftd
to induce a complete intermission of the spasmodic action.

Vol: I. TO


554 Nervous Diseases. [Class VI.

It will be necessary also to apply fomentations to the abdomen. The
following may be used :

Take Hops, Wormwood, and Tanzy, equal parts.

Boil an hour or two in vinegar and water, and apply (o the abdomen ;
to beoften renewed, or as often as it grows cold. This course will soon
bring about an intermission of the hysteric fit. I have seldom known
a failure where it has been properly attended to.

Should it fail, however, from any cause whatever, give to the pa-
tient a pill of opium containing about three grains, or about the size of
a pea. This is infallible under all circumstances, and in all cases. I
the influence of hysteric fits for a whole day, and in an hour or two, the
patient was free from pain, and convalescent. I have now spoken of
the treatment of hysteria during a paroxysm, and having suspended it,
our next object will be to prevent a recurrence, which the patient is very
liable to; and this must be effected by restoring the tone of the system.

We may commence by giving a moderate cathartic. This will
cleanse the stomach and bowels and prepare the way for medicine.
After the operation of it, an aperient pill must be taken to regulate the
bowels which, in this complaint, are habitually constipated. For this
purpose, I give a mild preparation denominated the anti-dyspeptic pill.
It acts mildly upon the bowels without leaving them costive, neither
does it induce any nausea or griping. Two or three should be taken at
bed time, in a little currant jelly or roasted apple, to be continued until
the bowels become regular. This is very necessary, as the complaint
is often induced by an inactive or torpid state of them, causing fetid
gases, and feculent matter to accumulate in the intestines.

During the da} r , the patient thould take from half a wine glass, to a
wine glass of the restorative cordial or bitters. This preparation inva-
riably improves the condition of the patient. It creates an appetite,
gives tone and energy to the nervous system, and prevents a recurrence
of the hysteric paroxysm. The following infusion may be taken with
this preparation.

Take Wild Valerian, or Ladies' Slipper,
Skunk Cabbage. Equal parts.

Add sufficient boiling water to make an infusion, to be taken cold
through the day, and particularly with a view to allay that extreme ir-
ritability of the nervous system which causes wakefulness or want of
sleep, and which, indeed, is one of the characteristic symptoms of the
complaint. This infusion is nervine and anti-spasmodic.

Where we wish to effect a radical cure, a mild emetic may be given
once a week. Our common emetic poiodcrs answer the best purpose of
any preparation with which I am acquainted. It is only necessary to
excite gentle vomiting, which contributes much towards the cure by
imparting tone and energy to the stomach and nerves.

Where the hysteria assumes a lingering or chronic character, mild
emetics are very valuable. Dr. Dean of Harrisburg, speaks of their
efficacy in the following language. He says, " in some cases where the


° r <ler I.] Hysterics. 555

patients had laboured under this disease for ten years, and during that
time had, by the advice and direction of respectable physicians, exhaus-
ted, with at most but temporary benefit, the whole class of remedies
vomits, either entirely removed the complaint, or so far interrupted the
habits of the diseased action in the stomach, that antispasmodic and to-
nic medicines would, in general, complete the cure."

Dr. Tidd was very much in the habit of administering the following
preparation, which he called, " hysteric pill"

Take Gum Assnfa:tida, four parts.

Salts of Hartshorn, two parts.
Gum Opium, one part.

Dissolve the gum assafadita over a slow fire, then combine it with the
opium, which should be soft, after add the salts of hartshorn made fine.
Let the whole be well incorporated together, and rolled into pills of about
two grains each. One or two of these to be given at a dose, particularly
when there are any cramps or hysteric symptoms.

The above treatment with me has been uniformly and invariably suc-
cessful. I have been called to the patient when she has been nearly
destroyed by the lancet, a succession of paroxysms occasioned by it,
irritable, delirious, extremely feeble, countenance almost as white as
marble, and by discontinuing such practice, and substituting the course
here recommended, a remission of all the hysteric and nervous symp-
toms have followed with convalescence and recovery.

The following is the preparation so highly extolled and recommended
by sir Ashley Cooper :

Take Salts of Hartshorn, (Carb. Ammonia,) half dram.

Mint Water, (Aqua Mentha Viride,) one and an half ounce.

Com. tint Cardaman, (Corny. Tine. Cardaman,) half an ounce. Mix r

Two table-spoonfuls three times per day,

REGIMEN.

There is no disorder that requires more care and attention as regards
diet, soothing or kind treatment, &c.

Nothing harsh, or censorious must be said to the patient, or any thing
calculated to arouse the passions or emotions of the mind. She should
be kept as quiet and composed as possible.

No sad intelligence suddenly imparted, if at all. The mind to be
kept as free as possible from every kind of anxiety.

She must avoid great fatigue or labour. Nursing of infants who are
too old, and in short, every cause of debility. She must exercise often
in the country, or open air. She must never overload the stomach but
use a nutritious diet, and such as easily digests.

Some years ago, I was called to a young lady of this city, recently
from England, or Canada, labouring under this complaint, which had
been brought on by adversity ,and she had become reduced from a degree
of affluence to great poverty, and being ashamed to make known her
situation, she submitted to great privation. She was finally assisted by


550 Nervous Diseases. [Class VI.

a religious society, but a sense of her former and present situation,
produced great nervous debility, hysterics, with more or less delirium.'
A physician of this city had greatly aggravated her symptoms by his
treatment. He bled her, until her countenance became like marble,
her strength gone, confined to the bed with great irritability of the ner-
vous system, &c. Besides the family with whom she resided, did not
treat her kindly; all these circumstances rendered her truly miserable.
I now reversed the treatment, and received her into my family, endea-
voured to treat her with tenderness, in addition to proper medical treat-
ment. The change was surprising, all her unfavourable symptoms
vanished; her appetite returned ; her flesh, and her reason; strength
and spirits ; in short, she entirely recovered, and has remained well, at
least ten years.


CHAPTER II.
HYPOCHONDRIA, (Hypochondriasis.)

DESCRIPTION.

By the, term Hypochondria is to be understood, a disordered or dis-
eased state of the mind, arising generally from debility of the nervous
system, connected usually with dyspeptic symptoms. It is denominated
by some, spleen, vapours, low spirits, &c. In this complaint, the pa-
tient's mind is harassed with great anxiety, principally from the antici-
pation of imaginary evils, or from the slightest grounds, and however
erroneous, such imaginary troubles may be, there is always the most
obstinate belief and persuasion of them. It is the lowest grade of men-
tal derangement.

CAUSES.

This disease seems to depend upon a loss, of tone, or energy in the
nervous system, induced by various causes, such as close and intense
study, long and serious attention to abstruse subjects, the constant re-
membrance of some material loss or disappointment which has occurred,
great anxiety of mind, leading an inactive, indolent, or sedentary life,'
immoderate venery, or a use of crude, flatulent, or unwholesome food,
being guilty of great irregularity and intemperance, and by long-contin-
ued evacuations.

The affections of the abdominal viscera with which this disease is
usually complicated, have been often treated of as standing in the rela-
tion of causes, while, in reality, they should be arranged among its oc-
casional symptoms. That such is really the case, is clearly proved by a
consideration of the exciting causes of the disease, which operate upon
the system through the medium of the brain. These are the depressing


Order II.] Hypochondria. 557

passions, fear, grief, and despondency, habits of indolence quickly suc-
ceeding to a life of industry and employment, long-continued and ex-
cessive exertions of the intellectual faculties. The sympathetic derange-
ments consequent on hypochondriasis, are not, however, confined to the
abdominal viscera; for nothing is more common than to meet, in such
cases, with palpitations of the heart, difficulty of respiration, and chro-
nic cough.

Hypochondriasis and other nervous complaints are, through the me-
dium of sympathy, scarcely less infectious (it is probable,) than febrile
diseases ; and even persons naturally of a cheerful temper, by being long
domesticated with those of a melancholy desponding cast, have been
known to become decidedly and often deplorably dejected

SYMPTOMS.

This disease is attended with inactivity, a want of resolution with res-
pect to all undertakings, lowness and dejection of spirits, great despond-
ency, and apprehension of evil upon the slightest grounds, and a dread
of danger from any unusual feeling even of a trifling kind, together with,
flatulency in the stomach and bowels, acid eructations, costiveness, a
copious discharge of pale urine, spasmodic pains in the head and other
parts of the body, giddiness, dimness of sight, and palpitations. In,
short, it is attended with such a long train of symptoms, that it would
fill many pages to enumerate them all, as there is no function or part
of the body that does not suffer in its turn by its tyranny ; the misera-
ble patient indulges wild imaginations, and fancies that he labours un-?
der almost every disease ; and with respect to these feelings and appre-
hensions, he entertains the most obstinate belief, being highly displeased
if any attempt is made to reason with him on the absurdity of his per-
suasions.

Dr. Rush has given an admirable description of this disease in the fol-
lowing language :

The symptoms of this form of derangement as they appear in the body
are, dyspepsia; costiveness or diarrhoea, with elimy stools; flatulency
of urine.

The characteristic symptom of this form of derangement, as it ap-
pears in the mind, is distress, the causes of which are numerous, and o£
a personal nature. I shall enumerate some of them, as they have ap-
peared in different people. They relate to the patient's body. He
erroneously believes himself to be afflicted with various diseases, parti-
cularly with consumption, cancer, stone, and above all, with impotence,
and the venereal disease. Sometimes he supposes himself to be poison-
ed, or that his constitution had been ruined by mercury, or that the seeds
of the hydrophobia are floating in his system.

He believes that he has a living animal in his body. A sea captain,
formerly of this city, believed for many years that he had a wolf in his
liver. Many persons have fancied they were gradually dying, from ani-
mals of other kinds preying upon different part of their bodies. He
imagines himself to be converted into an animal of another species, such
as a goose, a cock, a dog, a cat, a hare, a cow, and the like. In this


558 Nervous Diseases. [Class VI.

case he adopts the noises and gestures of the animals into which he sup-
poses himself to be transformed.

He believes he inherits, by transmigration, the soul of some fellow crea-
ture, but much oftcner of a brute animal. There was a madman in the
Pennsylvania Hospital, who believed that he was once a calf, and who
mentions the name of the butcher that killed him, and the stall in the
Philadelphia market on which his flesh was sold previously to his ani-
mating his present body.

He believes he has no soul. The late Dr. Percival communicated to
me, many years ago, an account of a dissenting minister in England, who
believed that God had annihilated his soul as a punishment for his hav-
ing killed a highwayman, by grasping him by the throat, who attempted
to rob him. His mind was correct upon all other subjects.

He believes he is transformed into a plant. In the Memoirs of the
Count de Maurepas, we are told this error took possession of the mind of
one of the princes of Bourbon to such a degree, that he often went and
stood in his garden, where he insisted upon being watered in common
with all the plants around him.

The patient afflicted with this disease sometimes fancies he is transr
formed into glass.

Galen and Avicon make mention of people who have fancied them-
selves earthen pots, and therefore have carefully avoided being touched^
for fear they should be broken.

Dr. Fcrriar records the case of a young lady, who fancied herself ac-
companied by her own apparition, and who, therefore, may be justly said
to have been, beside herself.

Bartholinus, Lcmnius, and others, speak of a man, who was persuaded
that his nose was grown to that prodigious length and greatness, that it
was a great hindrance. The physician cured him by holding concealed a
long stuffed thing like a sausage to his nose, and taking hold of the in-
valid's nose, scratched that with an instrument, dexterously pretending
he had whipped off the excrescence.

He believes, that by«discharging the contents of his bladder, he shall
drown the world.

He believes himself to be dead.

It is worthy of notice, in all these cases of erroneous judgment, the
patients reason correctly, that is, draw just inferences from their er-i
rors. Thus the prince of Bourbon, when he supposed himself to be a
plant, reasoned justly when he insisted upon being watered. In like
manner, the hypochondriac who supposes himself to be dead, reasons
with the same correctness when he stretches his body and hmbs upon a
bed or a board, and assumes the stillness and silence of the shroud.

It is remarkable further, that all the erroneous opinions, persons af-
fected with this form of derangement entertain of themselves, are of a
degrading nature.

But again. The distress of a hypochondriac is derived from er-
rors respecting his outward circumstances as they relate to his pro-
perty.

The conduct of his friends, relations, or a mistress.


Order II.] Hypochondria. 559

His birth place, and society of his family, when absent from them.
The state of his country. His spiritual state.

The mind, in its distress from all the above causes, is in a reverse
state from that which was just now mentioned, in drawing erroneous,
or disproportionate conclusions from just premises. Thus the hypo-
chondriac who possesses an income which he admits to be equal to all
the exigencies of his family, reasons unjustly when he anticipates end-
ing his days in a poor-house. In like manner the deranged penitent
judges correctly when he believes that he has offended his Maker, but
he reasons incorrectly when he supposes he has excluded him from his
mercy.

In the hypochondriasis from all the causes that have been mentioned,
the patients are for a while peevish and sometimes irascible. The light-
est noises, such as the grating of a door upon its hinges, or its being
opened and shut suddenly, produce in them anger or tenor. They quar-
rel with their friends and relations. They change their physicians and
remedies, and sometimes they discover the instability of their tempers
by settling and unsettling themselves half a dozen times in different
parts of their native country, or different foreign countries, in the
course of a few years, leaving each of them with complaints of their
climate, provisions, and the manners of their inhabitants.

The hypochondriasis, or tristimania, like most other diseases, has
paroxysms, and remissions or intermissions, all of which are influenced
by many circumstances, particularly by company, wine, exercise, and,
above all, the weather.

A pleasant season, a fine day, and even the morning sun, often sus-
pend the disease. Mr. Cowper, who knew all its symptoms by sad ex-
perience, bears witness to the truth of this remark, in one of his let-*
ters to Mr. Haley. " I rise," says he, " cheerless and distressed, and
brighten as the sun goes on." Its paroxysms are sometimes denomi-
nated " low spirits." They continue from a day, a week, a month, a
season, to a year, and sometimes longer. The intervals differ in being
accompanied with preternatural high spirits. In being attended with re->
missions only ; and, with intermissions, or, in other words, with correct-
ness and equanimity of mind.

The extremes of low and high spirits which occur in the same per-
son, at different times, are happily illustrated by the following case. A
physician in one of the cities of Italy was once consulted by a gentleman
who was much distressed with a paroxysm of this intermitting state of
hypochondriasm. He advised him to seek relief in convivial company,
and recommended to him in particular to find out a gentleman of the
name of Cardini, who kept all the tables in the city, to which he was
occasionally invited, in a roar of laughter. "Alas! Sir," said the pa-
tient, with a heavy sigh, " 1 am that Cardini." Many such characters •
alternately marked by high and low spirits, arc to be found in all the
cities in the world.

But there are sometimes flashes of apparent cheerfulness, and even of
mirth, in the intervals of this disease, which are accompanied will) latent)
depression of mind. This appears to have been the case in Mr. Cow-
per: hence, in one of his letters to Mr. Haley, he says, "I am cheerful-


56CJ Nervous Diseases. [Class VI.

upon paper, but the most distressed of all creatures." It was probab-
ly in one of these opposite states of mind that he wrote his humorous 4
ballad of John Gilpin.

In the history of hypochondriasis as far as it has been given, there
is a combination of some of the symptoms of hysteria, from the nervous
system being partially or alternately in a strictum or laxum, or in oth-
er words, in an inirritable or irritable state, and from the blood-vessels
being alternately in a diseased and sound state.

DISCRIMINATION.

It is necessary to discriminate between this complaint and other ner-
vous affections, particularly hysteria. The latter complaint is attended
with spasms or paroxysms; sense of rising and fullness of the throat,
alternative fits of laughing and crying, and which affects women more
than men while in hypochondriasis, these symptoms are not present.
Besides it is generally atttended with costiveness or diarrhoea, and con-
tinued distress or anxiety of mind, and which are transient affections
Only in hysteria.

Men of a melancholic temperament, whose minds are capable of
great attention; and whose passions are not easily moved, are at an ad-
vanced period of life, most apt to be attacked with hypochondri-
asis, and when it has once taken place; it goes on increasing as life ad-
vances, being usually most troublesome in the fall and winter seasons.

PROGNOSIS.

As to the prognostic, the disease, if recent, is rather to be regarded
its troublesome than dangerous ; but if long continued, it is apt to pro-
duce schirrhi of the viscera, cachexy, dropsy, incurable melancholy,
br madness:

DISSECTION.

Ori dissections of hypochondriacal persons, some of the abdominal
viscera, (particularly the liver and spleen,) are usually found consider-
ably enlarged. In some few instances, effusion, and a turgescence in
{he vessels, have been observed in the brain.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, iron," mercury, blistering, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — 1. Restore the nervous energy;

2. Mitigate or remove the exciting causes of the complaint.

3. Give tone to the stomach and alimentary canal, and promote the
secretions.

The complaints of hypochondriacs should be treated as of real
existence, and from whatever cause they may arise, it is our duty to
employ art to remove it. Nor should we ruffle an irritable mind by lev-
ity, or expose a morbid sensibility to insult and reproach.

Compassion, and not raillery, is to be bestowed on the hypochon-
driac,' as the firm persuasion which he entertains will not allow his feel-


Order II.] Hypochondria. 561

ings to be treated as imaginary, nor his apprehension of danger to be
considered as groundless, however the physician may be of opinion that
it is the case in both respects. To gain his confidence, it will be ne-
cessary to attend to his complaints, as if they were real.

The remedies for this form of derangement divide themselves into
two classes.

I. Such as are intended to act directly upon the body ; and,

II. Such as are intended to act indirectly upon the body, through
the medium of the mind.

Before we proceed to administer the remedies that are indicated un-
der our first head, it will be proper carefully to review the history of
all the remote arid exciting causes of this disease, and, when possible,
to remove them.

As regards medicine, we iriay commence by administering to the pa-
tient a mild emetic. A dram of the radix ippecacuanha, pul-
verized, may be giveri, and its operation aided by the Common cham-
momile, or which is as good, or preferable, wild chammomile, or May-
weed, (anthemis cotula,) and it may be repeated, if the disease is obsti-
nate, every week. The day after the exhibition of the emetic a portion
of our common physic may be given. These medicines will cleanse the
stomach and bowels, and impart new action and tone to them, whidi is
indispensably necessary in the cure of this complaint.
. It will be proper, in treating the disease, afterwards, to give mild
laxatives to regulate the bowels ; and for this purpose, there is nothing
better than the anti-dyspeptic pill to be occasionally given at bed time.

It corrects a morbid state of the stomach and intestines, and very
gently excites a natural or peristaltic action or motion, and thus gives
tone and energy to the nervous system.

The next class of medicines to be given, will be corroborants, or to-
nics. Such as the Restorative Cordial t or Wine Hitters.

The patient may take from a table-spoonful to half a wine glas?, mor-
ning, noon, and night, to be accompanied with an infusion of the wild va-
lerian. The body should be frequently bathed, as well as the feet, and
for pain in the head or other parts, fomentations and a Mustard Plas-
ter should be applied to the seat of irritation, except it be in the head
when the Rubefacient should be applied between the shoulders.

When the patient is] troubled with flatulence or any spasmodic affec-
tions of the head or stomach arising from it, or when there is great de-
pression of mind, the following mixture may be given.

Take Spirits of Camphor, 20 drops.
Spirits of Hartshorn, 10 drops'.
Compound spirits of Lavender, a tea-spoonful. Mix.

Let the whole of this be taken in half' a tumbler at Fennel Seed tea.

This mixture will remove flatulence, nervous irritation, and exhili-
ratc the spirits. It may be repeated when there is an occurrence of
similar symptoms.

When the disease proves very obstinate, not readily yielding to this
course, pure opium will be found a most invaluable remedy. It will some-
times act like a charm when all other means fail. Cowper, who was very

Vol. I. 71


562 Nervous Diseases* [Class VL

subject to this complaint, states that a preparation of it saved him from
being devoured by melancholy. It calms the irritability of the ner-
vous system by raising the tossed. or depressed powers of the brain.
The patient may commence by taking a half grain pill once or twice a
day, according to the symptoms of the complaint. Should costiveness
arise from the use of it, the aperient pills must be taken to obviate it.

To aid the cure, or as an auxiliary, good old Wine must occasion*
ally be taken, but such must be selected as will not cause acidity of the
stomach, and in general the sweet wines are best, such as Malmsay,
Muscat, and Malaga. If they disagree with the stomach, they must be
omitted.

The tepid and the shower bath may be used with advantage, as well
as sea bathing.

Opium, however,- for obvious reasons should be the last remedy re-
sorted to.

A remarkable cure was effected by the use of opium, in the case of
Mr. Hezekiah Reynolds of Wiallingford, Connecticut. He had been a
miserable hypochondriac for three years. He had applied to a number
of physicians without ever having received any benefit. In this condi-
grain to a grain daily, which was gradually increased. This medicine
had the desired effect, and restored him to health. Speaking of the
cure, he exclaimed, " this is the medicine (opium) which has reached
my disease."

When the mind is so diseased, that the patient imagines he has a liv-
ing animal in his body, or something of the kind, he must be indulged
in this belief, and apparent, or deceptive means, taken to destroy it, or
to remove whatever cause of this nature may exist.

Great attention must be given to the mind. The person afflicted
with this disease, should be recommended to read the bible, particularly
the New-Testament. He should be recommended to seek relief in
obedience to the precepts of religion, or if they have no relish for this,
recommend the perusal of interesting histories ar.d narratives. Travel*-
ling has a powerful influence upon the mind of hypochondriacs ; the
change of scenery, constant succession of new objects, together with the
restoration of the excretions ; the natural circulation of the blood ; all
tend to remove the morbid or diseased state of the imagination.

Gardening and agriculture have a great tendency to remove this
complaint. While it engages the mind, and calls it from objects of
gloom, it invigorates and strengthens the bodily powers. It seldom fails
to create a keen appetite which indicates a healthful state of the stom-
ach, and consequenly the tone of the nervous system is improved.

If possible, the patient should reside where the scenery is pleasant
and cheering, and near the water is always perferable, as it affords en-
livening sensations to the mind, while it ailbrds opportunities for agreea-
ble amusements, pleasant walks, sailing, fishing, &c.

A writer on this subject has the following remarks: — "The patient's
attention is to be engaged and diverted to other subjects than his own
feelings ; he is to be directed to vary the scene frequently by going from
one place to another ; to associate as much as possible with agreeable


Order II.] Hypochondria. 563

cheerful company ; to engage in such pursuits as will afford him moder-
ate exercise in the open air, which gardening, and riding on horseback,
are particularly calculated to do ; and by all means to avoid absolute
idleness ; but in doing tins, all applications to former studies, especially
professional ones, is to be forbid : entertaining books will, however, be
serviceable, as assisting to divert the mind from itself. Gardening is a
pursuit highly proper for hypochondriacs, as it will keep the mind alert
and the body in exercise : such as live in the country should therefore
engage in it. In cities or large towns where this healthy recreation
cannot be enjoyed, no better substitute can be employed than that of fit-
ting up an apartment as a work-shop. Working in a cool and free at-
mosphere would prove a deliverance from that chilliness which for above
half of our year so miserably persecutes the tender, and it might act
equally as a charm on the ruffled spirits.

When the hypochondriasis proceeds from the influence of any one
passion, exciting an opposite one will sometimes remove it, or when it
proceeds from attachment to an object, changing it to some other will
remove it, as in disappointed love.

A striking case occurred in Connecticut, where the affections of a young
man were placed upon a coquette who deceived him. He became af-
fected with the hypochondriac disease which rendered him very unhap-
py and miserable. He opened his mind to a friend who advised him to
place his affections upon some other female which he did. He travelled
south, was taken ill, and became attached to the person who nursed
him during his sickness, and afterwards married her, the effect of which
was an entire change in his mind. His complaint left him, and he has
remained perfectly well ever since.

REGIMEN.

The regimen in the Hypochondriac disease, should be such as is ea-
sily digested. Such vegetables must be avoided as create flatulence. —
Meals should be taken regular, and regular hours should be kept. Fa-
tigue and excessive labour should be avoided, and every thing calculated
to excite the passions or depress the mind.

Red Pepper or Capsicum, Mustard, and salt may be freely used.
They act as stimulants and tonics. Strong coffee and tea must be
avoided, as well as ardent spirits.


564 Nervous Diseases. [Class VL


CHAPTER III.

PALSY. (Paralysis.)
DESCRIPTION.

Palsy is a disease principally affecting the nervous system, charac-
terized by a loss or diminution of motion or feeling, or of both, in one
pr more parts of the body. When one entire side of the body, from the
head downwards, is affected, it is distinguished among professional men
by the name of hemiplegia. If one half of the body, taken transverse-
ly, by the seat of the disease, it is named paraplegia; and when confined
to a particular limb, or set of muscles, it is called a paralysis.

CAUSES.

It may arise in consequence of an attack of apoplexy. It may like-
wise be occasioned by any thing that prevents the flow of the nervous
power from the brain into the organs of motion; hence tumours, over-
distcntion, and effusion, often give rise to it. It may also be occasioned
by translations of morbid matter to the head, by a suppression of usual
evacuations, and by the pressure made on the nerves by uxations, frac-
tures, wounds, or other external injuries. The long continued applica-
tion of sedatives will likewise produce palsy, as we find those, whose
occupations subject them to the constant handling of white lead, and
those who are much exposed to the poisonous fumes of metals or miner-
als, are very apt to be attacked with it. Whatever tends to relax and
enervate the system, may likewise prove an occasional cause of this dis-
ease.

SYMPTOMS.

Palsy usually comes on with a sudden and immediate loss of the mo-
tion and sensibility of the parts; but, in a few instances, it is preceded
by a numbness, coldness, and paleness, and sometimes by slight convul-
sive twitches. When the head is much affected, the eye and mouth are
drawn on one side, the memory and judgment are much impaired, and
the speech is indistinct and incoherent. If the disease affects the extre-
mities, and has been of long duration, it not only produces a loss of mo-
tion and sensibility, but likewise a considerable flaccidity and wasting,
away in the muscles of the parts affected.


HEMIPLEGIA, OR, PALSY OF ONE SIDE.

The most perfect form of cerebral palsy is Hemiplegia; in which
ihe affection extends over the whole of one side of the body, from the


Order III.] Paraplegia, or, Palsy of the Lower Extremities. 565

head to the foot. Sometimes it takes the form of paraplegia, or palsy
of the lower extremities; and, in some rarer instances, the affection is
confined to the loss of function in a particular nerve.

Hemiplegia, to which form of the disease the term Palsy is in common
language appropriated, has generally been considered as a minor degree
of apoplexy. The attack of it is sometimes unexpected, but more com-
monly it is preceded for several days, or even weeks, by one or more
such as giddiness, drowsiness, numbness, dimness of sight, failure of the
powers of mind, forgetfulness, transient delirium, or indistinctness of ar-
ticulation. For the most part, the paralytic seizure is sudden; but oc-
casionally the approaches of the disease are made more slowly; a fin-
ger, a hand, or an arm, the muscles of the tongue, of the mouth, or of
the eyelids, being first affected, and the paralytic state gradually extend-
ing to distant parts. It is a common observation, that hemiplegia is, in
most instances, preceded by a genuine fit of apoplexy ; but this opinion
will hardly be borne out by facts; and it is rendered improbable by a
comparison of the frequency of palsy, with the rarity and acknowledged
fatality of apoplexy. It is true, that the patient, on occasion of the pa-
ralytic, stroke, is often observed to labour under more or less of tempo-
rary lethargy, but the apoplectic paroxysm is hardly ever complete. It
will be found in practice, that palsy is much more commonly the precur-
sor, than the consequence of apoplexy.

It has often been remarked, as a very singular circumstance, that in
hemiplegia, as well as in other varieties of palsy, the power of sensation
should remain perfect, while that of voluntary motion is wholly lost.


PARAPLEGIA, OR, PALSY OF THE LOWER EXTREMITIES.

Paraplegia, or palsy of the lower half of the body, though far less
frequent than hemiplegia, ranks next in importance to it. The loss of
nervous power is here entirely confined to the pelvis and lower ex-
tremities.

"This affection," says Gregory, "sometimes arises from local causes in-
juring the spinal marrow; but it is. as a disease depending upon some mor-
bid state of the cerebral system, that I am now to consider it. Dr. Baillie
is, I believe, the first who fully established the important pathological
principle which I am now to illustrate, and to his paper I am indebted for
the following outline of this variety of palsy."

Cerebral paraplegia occurs chiefly in the middle or more advanced
periods of life, and is more frequent in men than women. The ap-
proach of the disease is never sudden ; at first there is only a sense of
numbness, with a stiffness or awkwardness of motion in the lower limbs;
but by degrees the patient is unable to walk without support. As the
disease advances, the urine passes off, at first in a feeble stream, at
length involuntarily. The bowels are costive, but from loss of power
over the sphincters, the motions frequently pass unrestrained by the will.
Patients in this complaint may live for a long time ; but at the end of


56Q Nervous Diseases. Class VI.

some years they usually die with their constitutions entirely exhausted.
In a few instances recovery takes place.

The connection of these symptoms with disease of the brain has been
in some cases proved by dissection; and in others it has been rendered
almost equally certain by the general symptoms of cerebral disease pre-
sent at the same time. Dr. Baillie has seen paraplegia accompanied by
giddiness, drowsiness, impaired vision, paralytic dropping of an eyelid,
defect of the memory, loss of mental energy, and lastly, numbness and
weakness of one or both of the upper extremities. These circumstan-
ces afford strong evidence that the cause of the disease exists within the
cavity of the skull, and that it consists in some mode of pressure upon
the brain. — [Gregory.]


PARTIAL, OR, LOCAL PALSY,

There are a variety of cases in which the loss of nervous power is
confined to a particular organ, or muscle, or set of muscles ; and yet from
the manner in which the affection begins, from the symptoms which at-
tend it, and the course which it afterwards runs, it is obvious that the
source of the mischief must be sought for in the great centre of the ner-
vous system. Innumerable degrees of paralytic affection may be ob-
served in practice, from the torpor and weakness of a single finger, up
to complete apoplexy, in which sense and motion perish throughout the
whole body. To enumerate these different partial palsies would be \\xv-.
necessary; it is sufficient to say, that among the most frequent will be
found amaurosis, or palsy of the optic nerve, palsy of the muscles of one
side of the face, palsy affecting only the muscles of deglutition, or the
neck of the bladder, and palsy of an arm, a hand or a finger. It is wholly
beyond our power to comprehend how it happens that a cause, operat-
ing upon the brain generally, should produce effects so partial and at
such a distance from the actual seat of disease.


SHAKING PALSY.

A few lines may be devoted to the consideration of that nervous ak
fection which has been called shaking palsy, the paralysis agitans of
some nosologists. In this disease the muscles of one or both the superior
extremities are in a state of continual tremor. By degrees the trembling
extends to one or both legs, and the patient walks with increasing diffi-
culty. The body is bent forward. Articulation is indistinct, mastica-s
tion troublesome, and at length the saliva-dribbles from the mouth. As
the muscular weakness increases, the agitation of the body becomes more
and more vehement, continuing even during sleep. Delirium, drowsi-
ness, and other marks of exhaustion, precede the fatal event. The com-,
plaint often lasts for many years, without impairing in any degree the


Order III. J Shaking Palsy. 507

mental faculties. Such a condition of nervous disorder is peculiar to
persons advanced in life. Nothing is known regarding its remote causes.
It is conceived to depend on some morbid state of the medulla oblongata
and upper portions of the spinal marrow.

PROGNOSIS.

When palsy attacks any vital part, such as the brain, heart, or lungs,
it soon terminates fatally. When it arises as a consequence of apoplexy,
it generally proves very difficult to cure. Paralytic affections of the
lower extremities ensuing from any injury done to the spinal marrow, by
blows and other accidents, usually prove incurable. Palsy, although a
dangerous disease in every instance, particularly at an advanced period
of life, is often removed by proper treatment.

DISSECTION.

The morbid appearances to be observed on dissections in palsy are
pretty similar to those which arc to be met with in apoplexy; hence,-
collections of blood, and of serous fluids, are often found effused on the
brain, but more frequently the latter; and in some instances the sub-
stance of this organ seems to have suffered an alteration. In palsy, as-
well as in apoplexy, the collection of cxtravasated fluid, is generally on
the opposite side of the brain to that which is affected.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Among other means used, are bleeding, mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

In case the disease should attack the patient suddenly and violently/
the same course must be pursued as in apoplexy.

Spasmodic symptoms are very common in this complaint. The per-"
son is seized with a violent twitching of the muscles of the face, gene-'
rally those on one side of it, which occasions very great distress. For'
this symptom, and to allay the spasm and pain, I have formed the follow-'
irtg mixture effectual.

Take Ether, (JEther Sul])huriciis,) one part,
Laudanum, (Tinct. Opii.) one part,
Spirits of Camphor, (Tinct. Campkorcc,) one part. Mix.

Of this mixture give a tea-spoonful in a tumbler of hop tea, or any
other kind as a substitute, every half hour, until the spasms sub-
side.

During the intermission, the patient must take such medicines as are
calculated to promote and equalize the circulation, and purify the blood.-
For this purpose, the following stimulating liquid should be applied ex-
ternally, and taken internally.

Take Capsicum, half ounce.

White Mustard, pulverized, half ounce,

Alcohol, or fourth proof Brandy, one quart. Mix.

After the strength is extracted, the patient may take a small tea-spoon-
Ail of this in a tumbler of any kind of tea, two or three times a day.


568 Nervous Diseases. [Class VI.

The parts affected must be as often bathed with flannel. Let poultices,
or plasters composed of equal parts of Pepper, Mustard, and In-
dian Meal, moistened with vinegar, be applied to the feet, between the
shoulders, and on the parts affected.

Purgatives in palsy will be found very useful. One may be given
two or three times a week, or as occasion requires. They rarely fail
of proving beneficial to the patient.

" Purging," says Dr. Dewccs, " should be pretty constantly main-
tained, especially in recent cases, to break in upon, and to prevent the
habit of determination to the head, and this is of more consequence than
might at first be imagined ; for it is in the commencement of such at-
tacks that such accumulations are most to be feared : and we very ef-
fectually overcome this disposition from fixing on the brain, by diverting
the flow of blood from it, and throwing it upon the intestines from whence
it can be more easily discharged by cathartics, than from the brain,
when the determination sets that way."

It is sometimes the case, however, that the lower portion of the sys-
tem is in such a torpid, or paralytic state, that no purgatives will act
upon the bowels. When this symptom is present, stimulating injections
or clysters must be administered.

The following is excellent.

Take Red or Cayenne Pepper, one tea-spoonful,
Lobelia, two tea-spoonfuls.

Add a pint of boiling water. After standing a sufficient length of time
to extract the strength, sweeten with molasses, add half a pint of milk,
and a gill of sweet oil. Let it be given warm, and as much of it as the
patient can bear. This will excite action in the bowels, and promote
evacuations.

I have seen patients where the faeces have been so hardened that in-
struments were required to remove them. In such cases nothing is
more valuable than injections of this kind.

it is very necessary in this complaint to use frictions. The parts
must be rubbed for twenty or thirty minutes, two or three times a da} r .
Where the feet or any other part swells, let them be frequently steam-
ed over bitter herbs. This I have found very useful. When the dis-
ease is seated in any particular part, more than another, I have found
stimulating plasters very useful. None is better than our common
strengthening plaster, more particularly in consequence of the capsi-
cum and camphor it contains.

If the patient does not grow better under the above treatment, give
the alterative syrup. This medicine acts as an alterative, and seems
to improve that morbid or viscid state of the blood, which is probably
one of the exciting causes of the complaint. During the use of it, let the
parts be bathed with the following liniment, or oil:

Take Oil of Turpentine,
Oil of Hemlock,
Oil of Sassafras,
Oil of Spearmint,
Olive Oil,
Oil of Wormwood,
Oil of Camphor. Equal parts. Bathe three or four times a dav.


Order I V.J St. Vitus 1 Dance. 569

For wakefulness, pain, inquietude, <fcc. an anodyne may be given
at bed-time. The saturated tincture of hops, ma_\ likewise be given,
particularly where preparations of opium disagree w ilh the person. The
tincture of hyosiarnus is also very ^(jod.

Electricity has been highly extolled for the cure of palsy, and in
some cases, it appears to have been successful, in others, injurious. I
bave seen both effects arise from its application. The most benefit
which I have seen from it, has been where the disease was con-
fined to particular parts. Recourse may be had to it, if other means
fail ; or it may be tried in conjunction with other means. Few, or
no shocks, however, should be given, and should it prove the least in-
jurious, it ought to be immediately discontinued. Nervines are some-
times useful in palsy, and none is better than the trihl valerian, or
ladies 1 slipper. It may be given in the form of extract or decoction.

REGIMEN.

In the palsy which arises in persons of a full habit, the diet should
be light and spare ; but when the disease proceeds from relaxation or
debility, which is generally the case, or makes its attack at an advan-
ced period of life, it ought to b% invigorating and warm, being season-
ed with spicy and aromatic vegetables, as mustard, horse-radish, &c.
The drink may be some generous wine, brandy and water, or mustard
whey.

Exercise is of great importance in palsy ; if the patient is capable
of walking he should take his exercise daily; but if deprived of the
use of his legs, he ought then to be carried abroad in a carriage of
some kind, and none can be more appropriate than chairs upon wheels,
on account of the facility of placing the patient in them, and their be-
ing drawn about by an attendant. Flannel should always ho worn next
the skin, and cold, moist, or damp air be avoided. In the winter para-
lytic persons should remove to a warmer climate, if circumstances will
admit of it.


CHAPTER IV.

S T. VITUS' DANCE. (Choera Sancti Vili.)

DESCRIPTION.

This singular disease is characterized by a twitching and convulsive
action of certain muscles, usually confined to one side of the system,
and it affects principally, the arm and leg. It is said that it received
its name in Qermany in consequence of persons who suspected them-
selves to be afllicted with this curious convulsion, performing an annu-
al pilgrimage to the chapel of St. Vitus near Ulm, to which women
labouring under certain nervous affections were in the habit of resorting
every spring, where they danced violently and unremittingly from morn-

Vol. I. 72


57()' t>0H6 Disease ». [Class VI.

ing to night until they sunk down, completely exhausted, into a swoon,
or a kind of ecstacy, by which exercise they fancied themselves cured
for one year. Some writers place its origin at a much earlier date, de-
ducing it from the very remarkable dancing mania which prevailed
throughout Germany in 1374, and which, as it was thought to be the
malicious doings of Satan, was generally treated by exorcism ; and it
is said that the monks of the convent of Korbey wore particularly for*
tunatc in casting out the fiend under the holy influence of their patron,
St. Veit.

Some divide this complaint into two species, viz. primary and symp-
tomatic. It is chiefly incident to young persons of both sexes, but
particularly those of a weak constitution, or whose health and vigour
have been impaired by confinement, or by the use of scanty and improper
nourishment ; and makes its attacks between the age of ten and fifteen,
Occurring but seldom after that of puberty.

By some physicians it has been considered rather as a paralytic af-
fection than as a convulsive disorder, and has been thought to arise
from a relaxation of the muscles, which being unable to perform their
functions in moving the limbs, shake them irregularly by jerks.

•
CAUSES.

This disease may arise from various causes ; from morbid condition
of the stomach, as teething, worms, acidity in the bowels, offensive
smells, violent affections of the mind, as anger, fear, &c.

It may arise also from debility, from extreme irratibility of the ner-
vous system, and sometimes it arises, it is said, from sympathy, check
of perspiration, poisons, &c.

SYMPTO i

The fits are sometimes preceded by a coldness of the feet and limbs,
or a kind of tingling sensation that ascends like cold air up the spine ;
and there is a flatulent pain in the left hypochondrium, with obstinate
costiveness. At other times the accession begins with yawning, stretch-
ing, anxiety about the heart, palpitations, nausea, difficulty of swal-
lowing, noise in the ears, giddiness, and pains in the head and teeth;
and then come on the convulsive motions.

These discover themselves at first by a kind of lameness or instabil-
ity of one of the legs, which the person draws after him in an odd and
ridiculous manner, as if it was paralytic ; nor can he hold the arm of
the same side still for a moment ; for if he lays it on his breast, or any
other part of his body, it is forced quickly from thence by an involun-
tary convulsive motion. If ho is desirous of drinking, he uses many
singular gesticulations before ho can carry the cup to his head, and it is
forced in various directions, till at length he gets it to his mouth, when
he pours the liquor down his throat with great haste, as if he meant to
afford amusement to the by-standers. Sometimes various attempts at
running and leaping take place, and at others the head and trunk of
fbo body are affected with convulsive motions. The eye loses its his*


Order 1\ £L Vitus' Dunce, .371

ire and intelligence, and the countenance is pale and expressive of va-
cancy ; deglution is occasionally performed with difficulty, and articu-
lation is often impeded, and sometimes completely suspended. In the
advanced periods of the disease, flaccidity and wasting of the muscular
flesh take place, the consequence of constant irritation, of abated ap-
petite, and impaired digesiion.

In many instances the mind is afflicted with some degree of faturity,
and often shows the same causeless emotions, such as weeping and
laughing, which occur in hysteria.

When the disease arises in children, it usually ceases again before
the age of puberty, and in adults is often carried off by a change from
the former mode of life. Unless it passes into some other disease, such
as epilepsy, or its attacks are very violent, it is rarely attended with
danger.

Sydenham gives the following description of this complaint:

" It is," says he, " a kind of convulsion which principally attacks
children of both sexes, from ten to fourteen years of age. It first shows
itself by a lameness or rather unsteadiness of one of the legs, which
the patient draws after him like an idiot, and afterwards affects the hand
on the same side, which being brought to the breast, or any other part,
can by no means be held in the same posture for a moment, but is dis-
torted or snatched away by a kind of convulsion into a different posture
or place, notwithstanding all possible efforts to the contrary. If a glass
of liquor be placed in the hand to drink, before the patient can get it
into his mouth, he uses a thousand odd gestures ; for not being able to
carry it into a straight line thereto, because his hand is drawn different
ways by the convulsions ; as soon as it has reached his lips, he throws
it suddenly into his mouth, and drinks it very hastily, as if he only
meant to divert the spectators."

Another writer gives the following description of this complaint :

" Its approaches are commonly slow. An awkward dragging of the
leg, twitches of the muscles of the face, and unsteadiness of Hie fin-
gers, precede the more general convulsive motions which characterize
the confirmed state of the disease."

" The contortions and gesticulations of the patient render him a sin-
gular but painful object of observation. All the muscles of voluntary
motion are at different times and in different instances aftected. Those
of the face, neck, and extremities, more particularly suffer. The
hands and arms are in constant motion. He can grasp no object, even
with the strongest exertions of his will ; he walks unsteadily ; but with
all this, there is no symptom of pain or uneasiness. The expression
of countenance, though grotesque, is, in the early stage of the disease,
that of good humour and contentment."

" The convulsive agitations vary in violence, and are subject to oc-
casional exacerbations. During sleep (unless in very bad cases) they
cease altogether. As the complaint advances, articulation becomes im-
peded, and is very often completely suspended. Deglution also is oc-
casionally performed with difficulty. The eye loses its lustre and in-
telligence. The face is thin and pale, and expressive of a languor and
vacancy, which in severe and protracted cases approaches nearly to


572 Nervous Diseases. [Class VI.

fatuity. The mind, indeed, partakes, in some instances, of the bodily
disorder, and the menial faculties retrogade to those of infancy."

" With these evidences of disturbance of the cerebral functions, are
usually united very unequivocal marks of a derani/ed condition of the
stomach and bowels. A variable and often ravenous appetite, a swell-
ing and hardness, or sometimes flabbiness of the abdomen, with con-
stipation, accompany in a large proportion of cases the onset of the
disease. In its advanced periods we may observe impaired digestion,
a very offensive state of the alvine evacuations, and flaccidity and
wasting of the muscles throughout the body."

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, flowers of zinc, lunar caustic, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The indications in this complaint are : — 1. To remove the exciting
causes.

2. To remove the constipated state of the bowels and regulate their
functions.

3. To strengthen the general system.

JFirst, If upon inquiry, the stomach is found deranged, administer
half a dram of rad. ippecacuan/ta, pulverized, to be accompanied
with a tea of common May-weed, wild or common chamomile. This
will evacuate the stomach, and impart new tone to it, as well as the
nervous system. The day after this emetic has been exhibited a mod-
crate purgative may be given, to be repeated weekly. From the sym-
pathetic effect of this class of medicines, they are very valuable in
choera.

After having thus cleared the stomach and bowels, and created in
them a more healthy action, the following corroborative or restorative
preparation should be given :

Take Columbo Root, puly.
Spikenard do.
Gentian do.

Comfrey do.

Chamomile Flowers, of each a dram.

Bruise, and cover with boiling water, then add one quart of sweet
wine. Of this, let the patient take from half to a wine-glass, morning,
noon, and evening, before eating. During the day, an infusion of the
wild valerian may likewise be taken. Mild and laxative pills to be
taken at night, and in sufficient number to regulate the bowels. Two
or three every day or two, is usually sufficient. The anti-dyspeptic
jrill answers a very valuable purpose. It imparts tone and energy to
the system, while it carries off all feculent matter from the intestines.
The feet should he occasionally bathed, and the surface of the body,
if the skin is usually dry.

The following infusion used with the other means recommended,
(and probably used alone) is a specific in this disease. I know not of
a simile case in whir!) it Iras failed lo effect a cure:


Order IV.] St. Vitus' Dance. 573

Take Scullcap, (Scutellaria Lateriflora,) 1 oz.
Boiling Water, 1 quari.

Strain, and sweeten with loaf sugar. Let the patient drink of this
freely through the day, and to be constantly drank alternately with the
tea of valerian, before mentioned. I have found this treatment in-
variably successful. One case occurred in a woman fifty years of age,
who had had the complaint a length of time, had been treated by seven or
eight physicians without benefit, and after submitting to the use of the
above remedies, (emetics excepted,) she recovered.

The scullcap appears to have specific effects in this, and most other
nervous complaints.

REGIMEN.

A diet that is nutritious and easy of digestion must be used, and ew
ery thing calculated to excite mental affections.


574 Hastric Disease*. [Class V1T.


CLASS VIL


GASTRIC D I S E A 8 E 9,


CH4RACTER.

Gastric diseases include such as are more especially or apparently
located in the stomach, or have their origin in this organ.


CHAPTER I.

CHOLERA MORBUS. (Cholera Morbus.)

DESCRIPTION.

Cholera morbus is a disease of the stomach and alimentary canal,
.characterized by vomiting and purging, with severe griping, pain,
cramps in the stomach, abdomen, and extremities. It is very prevar
lent in this climate, particularly during hot weather, and much more so
in the East and West Indies.

CAUSES..

Various have been the causes assigned for the production of this dis-
ease. Most writers, however, (particularly the ancients) agree, that
it depends primarily upon an undue, increased, or vitiated secretion of
bile irritating the stomach and bowels. Cullensays that the disease der
pends upon increased secretion of bile and its copious effusion into the
alimentary canal, and as in this way, it irritates and excites the motions
above mentioned, he infers, that the bile is thus effused in a larger
quantity, and is at the same time of a more acrid quality than usual.

Darwin says, that not only the stomach, but also the duodenum and
ilium, as low as the valve of the colon, have their motions inverted ;
and great quantities of bile are thus poured into the stomach, while at
the same time, some branches of the lacteals become retrograde, and
disgorge their contents into the upper part of the alimentary canal, and
other branches of them disgorge their contents into the lower parts of it,
beneath the valve of the colon. A vomiting and purging commence to-
gether, called cholera, as it is supposed to have its origin from an in-
creased secretion of bile. But I suppose, (says he,) that it more fre-
quently arises from putrid food or poisonous drugs.


Order l.j Cholera Morbus. 575

It would appear, however, that neither the quantity or quality of the
bile, is wholly the cause of the complaint, for in many instances, there
appears to be a deficiency of the bilious secretion; the cause must be
accounted for in some other way, and it appears to me, very evident,
that the immediate exciting cause of the cholera morbus, is, the action
and stimulus of an acid secreted in the liver, or formed in the stomach
and alimentary canal, and which produces an irritation of the mucus
membrane of these parts, the same as many kinds of poison, and
which cause the phenomena of the complaint ; and this probably is the
nitric or septic acid. Dr. Vought, and, (I believe) Dr. Mitchill enter-
tained similar views. I have read an author which speaks of the same
effects following the use of certain kinds of fish, said to feed on copper
banks, and which causes vomiting, purging, cramps, &c. all which
show conclusively that the cholera morbus is occasioned by some kind of
poison. It is well known that corrosive sublimate, and other agent*
have very similar effects on the system, as are exhibited in this complaint,
This poison is no doubt received into the circulation through the medi-
um of the atmosphere, and not being eliminated by the ordinary excre-
tory organs, especially the skin, is thrown back from the surface to the
liver, which becomes deranged and engorged with an accumulated
quantity of blood, combined with a morbid fluid, or acid, which proves
the exciting cause of the complaint.

There are very many predisposing causes, such as indigestible and
irritating kinds of food and drink. Crude or unripe fruit, and all arti-
cles that contain much acid or such liquids as soon run into a state of
fermentation ; but causes of this kind rarely produce the disease, unless
the system is predisposed to it by a debilitated state of the digestive or-
gans, or by a general relaxation and exhaustion from the influence of
great heat.

SYMPTOMS.

The cholera morbus generally comes on very suddenly. It usually
commences with nausea and pain in the stomach, followed by severe
griping and distress in the abdomen.

These symptoms are immediately succeeded by vomiting and pur-
ging ; which continues generally in paroxysms until great prostration
follows. In the intervals, between the periods of vomiting, there is
great sickness and distress at the stomach. The stools are at first
thin and watery, and generally tinged with bile. After the disease has
continued for a short time, the evacuations are very bilious. As the
disease advances, the vomiting, retching, purging, and pain are severe
and incessant. The peculiar feature of the complaint is a spasmodic
affection of the abdominal muscles, and extremities. The person is
drawn up on every attack, or in every paroxysm, often causing him to
scream aloud with dreadful agony. The thirst is usually very great,
but almost every liquid taken into the stomach is immediately ejected,
As the disease progresses, the pulse becomes small, feeble, and inter-
mitting, there is coldness of the extremities, countenance pallid and
expressive of great distress, a cold sweat breaks out, and great prostra-
tion fol In «■•«:.


57t> Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

Cholera morbus is a very common and a very dangerous disease, of-
ten proving fatal in twenty-four hours, and the malignant type of it in
a few hours.

DISCRIMINATION.
Cholera morbus is to be distinguished from diarrhoea and dysentery,
by the matter which is discharged by stool being pure bile, unmixed
with blood or mucus, and with scarcely any admixture of faeces. It
may be distinguished from colica pictonum, or painter's colic, by the
evacuations : for in the latter, although there is sometimes a consider-
able quantity of bilious matter thrown off by vomiting, yet the bowels
remain obstinately costive.

PROGNOSIS.

Our opinion must ever be unfavourable, when the evacuations up-
wards and downwards are accompanied by great prostration of strength,
much distension of the abdomen, intermitting pulse, cold clammy
sweats, a short hurried respiration, constant hiccup, spasms of the
extremities, or convulsions : but a gradual diminution of the symptoms,
especially the vomiting, succeded by sleep, or a gentle moisture on the
skin, maybe regarded in a favourable light.

DISSECTION.

The appearances generally to be observed on dissection, where chol-
era terminates fatally, are an accumulation of bile in the stomach and
intestines, particularly in the duodenum; relaxation and distension of the
biliary ducts and choledochus ; and a removal of many of the viscera from
proper places, occasioned probably by the violence of straining in
vomiting.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, calomel, blisters, &.c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

" We will suppose," says Vought, " the cause of this vomiting, with all
the other alarming symptoms, to be an acid existing in the stomach and
intestines, which, by its stimulating effect, produces all this mischief, and
which, notwithstanding it is thrown out of the alimentary canal by vom-
its and purges, may still continue to collect there in various ways. The
first thing to be done, is to use all means possible to allay the vomiting
and irritation of the stomach ; for which purpose, many have been in the
habit of giving large and repeated doses of calomel, and also emetics ;
which practice is at this day approved of by many of the medical profes-
sion. I will only add what I have experienced in the result of this prac-
tice ; that is, that calomel or any other laxative was immediately thrown
out of the stomach by vomiting, and that it increased the distress, instead
of lessening it. And when emetics were added, they usually operated
with violence, produced a sudden and unavoidable prostration of strength,
and notwithstanding all efforts to the contrary, the patients sunk under all
the horrors of their disease."


°rder I.J Cholera Morbus. 577

The principal indication of cure in this complaint, ts, to neutralise or
destroy the acid, vitiated, or acrid bile ; in other words, the exciting cause
some purgatives; but I have no evidence of the utility of either, and I con-
sider them very injurious. They both seem calculated to aggravate the
disease, by continuing or increasing the vomiting and purging; although
it is possible that a new action might be excited by the use of one or both,
and in this way prove beneficial.

The following treatment I think I may say with propriety, I have found
an infallible remedy for the cholera morbus, even in the last stages of
it. to

When first called to a patient labouring under the complaint, my
first object is to allay the irritability of the stomach, not by giving any
medicine calculated to re*- in ilie morbid secretions, or to lock them up
in the system, but to ^eutraiize, or render inert and harmless, the dele-
terious agent or agei is, which is the immediate cause of it; and the fol-
lowing formula fulfils this indication admirably.

Take best Turkey Rhubarb, either bruised or pulverized, half a dram.
Jhcurbonate of Potash, half a dram.
Peppermint Plant, half a dram.

Grind together in a mortar, and put the powder into a teacup : add suffi-
cient loaf sugar to sweeten, then add half a pint of boiling water, and
when nearly cold, two table-spoonfuls of best brandy. Of this give two
table-spoonfuls every half hour, or as often as the paroxysms or periods
of vomiting and purging take place. In very severe cases I have oc-
casionally added to every dose, fifteen or twenty drops of laudanum.
This must be repeated until the urgent symptoms are diminished.
The effect of this medicine is truly surprising. So sudden and powerful
is it, that I have often been delighted at its salutary effects.

^ It is seldom the patient will vomit up more than one dose of the medi-
cine; but it rests upon the stomach, calms the irritation, checks the nau-
sea and vomiting, passes gently through the alimentary canal, changing
their contents or faeces from the most morbid and fetid, to the most heal-
thy state. While mercury, which is now given in such cases, only ag-
gravates, this preparation acts like a charm, and I was about to say,
might be compared to the act of extinguishing fire by pouring water
upon it.

Besides the administration of this mixture, in case the disease is so
severe as to render it imprudent to wait the short time that is necessary
for the operation of it, an opium pill may be given. I have seldom, how-
ever, found this necessary.

External applications must also be used, and the following:

Take Red or Cayenne Pepper, one table-spoonful.
Spirits, one pint.

Simmer a few minutes, then dip flannels in, and let it be applied warm
to the stomach and abdomen, and also to the extremities, particularly if
there are cramps.

Vol. I. 78


578 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

As a change, 1 have also applied fomentations of bitter herbs over
the parts with decided benefit.

Hops simmered in vinegar, are excellent.

These applications remove the tension and spasms so peculiar to this
complaint. Sometimes a greater portion of the disease seems concen-
trated in the intestines, or the umbilical region, occasioning very great
distress, and it becomes necessary to administer injections. Should this
be the case, or should there be such an assemblage of symptoms as re-
quire the application of several remedical agents to subdue them, the
following injection must be given.

Take Mucilage of Slippery Elm Bark, one pint.
Sweet Milk, half a pint.
Molasses, half a pint.
Olive Oil, one gill.

Bi-Carbonate of Potash, a tea-spoonful.
Laudanum, half an ounce. Mix.

Introduce as much as possible of it. It has a very soothing'effect upon
the bowels, and generally in ten or fifteen minutes relieves the pain.

Hot bricks may be applied to the feet, and they should be bathed in
warm ley water.

The patient should take freely of mint tea, slippery elm, and other
mucilaginous drinks. Bread toasted very brown or black, and boiling
water poured upon it, makes a very grateful and medicinal drink.

Indian, or oat meal gruel, also, has a very excellent effect upon the
bowels in this disease. It acts as a soothing or emolient poultice to the
stomach and intestines, while at the same time it affords nourishment.

I repeat that the above practice, is uniformly successful in cholera mor-
bus, and where it has been promptly tried, it has never, to my knowl-
edge, failed in a single instance.

I have been called upon when life was nearly extinct, where the patient
has been drawn nearly double with the pain or spasms, and when the or-
dinary course of treatment, such as mercury, salts, senna and manna, &c.
had only rendered the complaint worse, and by pursuing the treatment
laid down, they have been immediately relieved, and in a few hours,
cured.

person had been vomiting and purging three days, and had been attend-
ed by a physician without benefit. He had become almost senseless,
excessive prostration, and the evacuations passed off involuntarily. I
administered the mixture first mentioned, combined with a small quan-
tity of cinnamon and cloves. In a few hours, the disease was arrested,
and h covered.

common and the reformed practice, in this as well as other diseases, and
to be known, needs but to be tried.

The treatment is founded upon a belief that the cause of the disease
is an acid, and that the remedy is an alkali, and hence the bi-carbo-
nate of potash is given, and considered the antidote.

In concluding this chapter on cholera morbus, I shall relate a case


Order I.J Cholera Morbus. 579

detailed by the late Dr. Vought, whose views and treatment for cholera
morbus were in unison with our own.

The following was a case which came under my observation, of cho-
lera morbus, treated by giving calomel and emetics, in the fall of 1821.
He was a man about fifty years of age, who had always been in the ha-
bit of leading an active life, and of late years was supposed to have used
more spirituous liquors than were beneficial to his health. He was a
man of a small size, light complexion, light hair, and large blue eyes.
He was first taken, about the middle of the day, with a pain in the head
and bowels. For present relief, he drank a small glass of brandy and
water. About three o'clock, a vomiting commenced, which consisted of
the food which he had taken that day for his breakfast and dinner. At
five o'clock, a vomiting and purging of matter tinctured with bile, at«
tended with great distress, were the prevailing symptoms, which continu-
ed (at least every hour) through the night. At sunrise he first sent for
a physician, who immediately gave him a large dose of calomel, which
was rejected as soon as he took it. Another dose was then given, some
of which he retained in his stomach. I called, for the first time, to see
him, about nine o'clock that morning, and found his physician at his bed-
side, in the act of giving him some more mercury. I felt his pulse, which
I found to be quick and small, consisting of about one hundred and ten
beats in a minute. He was almost constantly vomiting, or retching to
vomit. The fluids discharged by vomiting were enormous in quantity ;
sometimes sour, and green, like infusion of green tea, at other times thin
and watery, consisting only of the drinks he had taken. His eyes were
sunk in their sockets, and appeared fixed and glassy. His mouth was
dry and parched, his tongue white and faltering, and his voice low and
hoarse. He seemed listless and stupid, and was under the impression
that he must still evacuate a load of noxious matter, which, he said, caus-
ed in his abdomen a disagreeable and uneasy sense of fulness, although
he had already been puking and purging for the space of twenty hours.
His skin was pale and clammy, his extremities were cold, and large
drops of cold sweat appeared on many parts of his body; he was also
attended with frequent spasms and tremors.

I asked his physician what had been given. His reply was, that he
had taken large doses of calomel. I mentioned the propriety of giving
him the sub. carbonate of potash, and the acid of lemon, in a state of
effervescence, for the purpose of checking the vomiting, and opiates,
for the purpose of allaying the irritation of the stomach. My opinion
was in a manner treated with contempt, and the reply was, that he
would soon settle the patient's stomach, by giving him an emetic. I
expressed my disapprobation of the course of treatment resolved to be
used, and observed that persons in his situation would evacuate bilious
matter till they died, or till they no longer had strength to raise it, if
means were not used for their relief; and when they could no longer
vomit, it would be out of the power of medicine to save them. I called
again to see the patient in the evening of the same day, by a particular
request of some of his friends,) and found his symptoms increased, his
pulse one hundred and thirty, his strength much exhausted, his skin shrun-
ken, pale and discoloured, in spots of a blueish or livid hue. His vomit-


580 Gastric Diseases. [ Class VII,

ing of bilious matter was not so immense, but his retching to vomit was
continued, with scarce an interval of more than one minute, while I
remained at his bed-side. I inquired if he had taken an emetic, and
was informed that he had not yet taken it, but was going to take it that
evening. I then made another reply, and said it would in my opinion
go hard with him, if he took an emetic, as I supposed it impossible for
him to undergo its operation. The alkaline medicine was not given
in any shape whatever. The doctor, as I understood, returned in the
evening and administered an emetic, which operated three or four times,
by vomiting a little bilious matter, and powerfully per ano, or other-
wise, produced an involuntary discharge by stool ; and after which, in
defiance of all the brandy, wine, bark, and opium that was given him,
he expired the same night, at three o'clock, in the most horrid and ex-
cruciating distress, it being only about thirty-six hours from the time of
his first confinement.


CHOLERA OF INFANTS J OR, SUMMER, OR BOWEL COMPLAINTS

(Cholera Infantum.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is the cholera of infants, which in some respects resem-
bles that of adults; but differs from it in many respects. It is known
usually by the name of the summer or bowel complaint, and it is
very prevalent among children during the summer season, many very
mortal.

CAUSES.

Dr. Rush says, that from its occurring nearly in the same season with
cholera in adults, and remitting fevers, he considers it produced by the
same cause, and a modification of the same disease ; and consequently,
many of the same remedies are necessary in performing a cure.

There appears to be three principal causes which produce this com-
plaint:

1. A great degree of heat.

2. The impure air of crowded cities.

3. Dentition, or teething.

One writer says that it is a mere variety of the bilious fever of our
climate; the force of which is turned inward, upon the intestines.

This disease is very seldom met with in the country where the air is
salubrious; but in cities it produces annually a most frightful mortality
It may be caused by a check of perspiration, causing the blood to retreat
from the surface, to the internal parts, and deranging the liver, and
mucous membrane of the intestines.

SYMPTOMS.
This complaint is usually characterized by fever ; and commences in
a gradual manner with more or less diarrhoea, and after a short time, it


Order I.] Cholera Morbus. 581

is attended with nausea, retelling and vomiting. The evacuations are
very offensive, apparently not very bilious, and consisting of a slimy,
whitish, frothy, or nearly of a colourless, watery fluid. If the disease
progresses a short time, the child begins rapidly to waste. There is, a
coldness in the extremities, the skin is shrivelled and dry, and there is a
preternatural de»ree of heat in the head and bowels. The face is very
pale, the eyes dull and sunk, the pulse is weak, irregular, and frequent.
There is lethargy or drowsiness, and the child sleeps with his eyes part-
ly open. There is considerable tossing or motion of the head when
awake, and if no remedy is administered, the child rapidly sinks into a
state of great prostration, and insensibility, and which proves fatal.

This complaint is very liable to assume a chronic form, and become
very much protracted ; when this is the case, an almost incredible de-
gree of emaciation follows. The child becomes almost a living skele-
ton. Canker appears on the tongue and cheeks, the face and other
parts bloat, and the discharges become extremely acrid, excoriating
and fetid.

The continuance of this disease is very various, depending upon ma-
ny causes, such as air, diet, nursing, medical treatment, &.c. It may
prove fatal in a (c\v hours, or it may last many months.

Where the disease has continued for a length of time, there is ulcer-
ation of the living membrane of the stomach and bowels, showing con-
clusively that the disease is caused by the action of an acid or poison-
ous fluid, acting upon these parts.

Dr. Vought has the following description of this complaint :
Cholera Infantum is a vomiting and purging of children, and pro-
duced by the same cause as vomiting and purging of adults. The fre-
quency and danger of this disease, (says Rush) is always found in pro-
portion to the heat of the weather. It affects children from the first or
second week after their birth, till they are two years old. It some-
times begins with a diarrhoea, and worms are frequently discharged.
There is also fever, which is of the remitting kind. Children draw up
their feet, and are never easy in one posture. The disease affects the
head, and in some instances, delirium and mania are produced. Fre-
quently a swelling occurs in the abdomen, in the face and in the limbs.
A thirst attends every stage of this disease. The eyes are languid and
hollow, and children sleep with them half closed. Sometimes the
vomiting continues without purging; but generally the purging continues
without vomiting, through the whole course of the disease. The stools
are mostly large and fetid. A cool day frequently abates its violent
symptoms, but in extreme warm weather, it frequently ends in death,
in the space of a few days ; and sometimes it carries off children with-
in forty eight hours from the fust attack. When it is of long continu-
ance, and the approach of death is gradual, an emaciation of the body
takes place, livid spots appear, the bones come through the skin, and
convulsions, a hippocratic countenance, hiccup, &c. with many other
distressing symptoms, precede the fatal termination of this disease.

COMMON TREATMENT.
The treatment for this complaint pursued by physicians generally,


582 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

is very similar to the common cholera morbus. Mercury is the principal
medicine made use of.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

first object is to allay it, and this may be done by the exhibition of the
neutralizing mixture or cordial, the first preparation mentioned under
the head of common cholera morbus.

It must be given according to the age of the child, and the urgency
of the symptoms.

One or two tea-spoonfuls may be given to a child a year old, and
repeated every half hour. This preparation is not only necessary in
the stage of nausea and vomiting, but in any and every stage of the
complaint. It acts mildly, but effectually upon the stomach and whole
alimentary canal, neutralizing acidity, while it evauates the fetid and
morbid accumulation, and brings on a healthy action, and thus improves
the condition of the patient speedily, and in an eminent manner.

After repeated trials of every other kind of purgatives, I find this al-
together superior to every other. It has a three fold effect ; it cor-
rects acidity, cleanses the stomach and bowels, while it restores
the tone of them by its astringent qualities. It should be continued
until the passages become healthy, wbich is usually the case, as soon
as it acts moderately upon the bowels, or as a laxative.

In protracted cases of the disease, it may be given four or five times
through the course of the day.

In this complaint, injections or clysters arc exceedingly valuable.
They have a soothing and emolient effect upon the intestines; allaying
pain and inflammation in a very remarkable manner. One may be ad-
ministered whenever the child is very fretful and distressed.

The following :

Take an infusion or Mucilage of Slippery-Elm, half a pint.
Milk, half a pint.
Molasses, one gill.
Sweet or Olive Oil, a wine glass.
Common Salt, half a tea-spoonful.

Mix and introduce with a suitable sized syringe.

There is usually, as before observed, considerable heat, and swelling
of the abdomen. For this symptom let the following fomentation be
applied :

Take Hops.

Wormwood.

Tansy.

Catnip, ahandfull of each.

Simmer or boil a short time, in equal parts of vinegar and water. In-
close in flannel and apply warm to the bowels, to be occasionally re-
peated.

Particular attention must be paid to the state of the skin. If the disease
is caused by morbid humours retained in the system and thrown up-
on the intestines, how necessary is it that they should be thrown off
through the proper excretory ducts.


Order I.] Cholera Morbus. 583

Therefore such means and medicines must be used as will divert the
vitiated fluids from the centre to the surface. The feet and body must
be often effectually bathed and rubbed with weak ley water applied te-
pid. It will prove very cooling and refreshing, and lessen the violence
of the disease. In order to promote gentle perspiration, as well as to
allay irritation or pain, medicine should be given that has this twofold
effect, which is the Diaphoretic Powders. They are particularly ser-
viceable when the child is wakeful, restless and in pain. For a child a
year old, give two grains in a little tea, and if the desired effect is not
produced in three hours, to be repeated.

Mucilaginous and cooling drinks are very useful in this complaint.

The bene plant makes an excellent mucilaginous drink. A i'ew leaves
dipped in a tumbler of cold water immediately forms a clear tasteless,
cooling, and soothing mucilage, which has cured hundreds of cases without
any other preparation. The bene plant is annual, and very easily raised
by sowing a few seeds in the garden or in the spring, and it should be kept
in every family.

When the disease assumes a chronic form, and proves very obstinate,
additional means may be necessary to remove it. In such a stage of
the complaint, after proper evacuations, give the following infusion.

Take Sumach Berries.

Leaves of Red Raspberry, equal parts,

Add sufficient boiling water to make a weak infusion. Sweeten with
loaf sugar, and give a small quantity occasionally through the day.

At the time that this infusion is taken, give the child the following
syrup.

Take the bark of the root of the Blackberry, (Rubus Villosus.) 1-4 of a pound.

Let it be properly cleaned, and cut in small pieces. Add a sufficient
quantity of water, and boil till the strength is extracted and until there
is one pint of the decoction. Then strain and add one pound of loaf
sugar, boil again a few minutes to form a syrup. When cold, add one
gill of brandy. Of this syrup give a small table-spoonful two or three
times a day.

This treatment has, in my hands, invariably cured the worst stages of
this disease. My practice has been very extensive in it, and I can
scarcely recollect a single case of failure.

REGIMEN.

Arrow-root tea or jelly may be given, and mucilaginous drinks and
liquid. Chicken soup, panado, gruel, &c. But the best diet for chil-
dren aflicted with bowel complaints is thickened milk, to which a little
cinnamon has been added.

The child must be kept clean, clothes often changed, and if possible
removed to a pure atmosphere.


584 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII;

SICK STOMACH. (Cholera Americana.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is rather a novel disease, and seems peculiar to Ohio, or somo
of the western states. It seems to be a complaint in which morbid bile
preponderates, characterized by heat, burning and sickness at the stom-
ach, with retching and vomiting.

CAUSES.

It is difficult to say precisely what the cause of this disease is ; some
of the inhabitants of those places where it prevails suppose, that it arises
from an unknown vegetable poison; but it is more probable that it arises
from a peculiar staie of the atmosphere, creating a morbid state of the
liver, causing it to secrete a morbid, acrid or acid bile, or a peculiar
acid, which acts as a poison or foreign substance.

SYMPTOMS.

The symptoms of this novel complaint, are, disagreeable, sickening
sensations at the stomach, and general debility and lassitude, succeeded
by great loathing, nausea and vomiting, or distressed retching to vomit.

The vomiting returns every hour; die patient complains of great dis-
tress and a burning sensation at the stomach. Hiccup and hot belch-
ings are often troublesome. The tongue is slightly furred, and the breath
is very offensive, and has a peculiar and very disagreeable smell. In
more malignant cases, the patient falls into a stupor, the eyes are pro-
truded, and pupils dilated, with other symptoms of inflammation of the
brain ; with an occasional vomiting of black matter which generally des-
troys the patient in a few days. The materials generally thrown out of
the stomach, consist of liquids that have been swallowed, which are hot,
acrid, or sour when ejected.

- TREATMENT.
To allay the irritability of the stomach, give the following.'

Bi-carbonate of Potash, one dram.
Mint Water, 8 ounces. Mix.

A table- spoonful every hour may be taken.

When the stomach is calmed or quoted, ihcneutralizingmixture or cor-
dial may be given until it acts a; fwrgative;. After which, let it be
administered two or three times throfeglV ^eicourakof the day. Should
this fail a correct the morbid stan/of the stofha^ch,; fct the common pur-
gative be administered, and occasionally repeated^. Wthe intermediate
time, the ivine bitters may be taken. Should the^ disease not yield to
this treatment, it will be necessary to exhibit emetics occasionally, until
a healthy state of the stomach is produced. The common emetic pow-
ders may be given, and where circumstances justify, or there is nothing
to contra-indicate it, the treatment may be first commenced by a gentle
emetic.


Order II. J Water Brash. 585


CHAPTER II.
WATER BRASH. (Pyntk.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is known by a burning pain in the stomach, attended
with copious eructations generally of a watery and insipid fluid.


CAUSES.

Whatever deranges the functions of the stomach, or the surrounding
viscera, may give rise to the water brash, as indigestion, acidity, &c.

SYMPTOMS.

The application of cold to the lower extremities, and distressing
emotions of the mind, are enumerated among its occasional causes.

The fits of pyrosis usually come on in the morning and 'forenoon, when
the stomach is empty; and the first symptom which the patient per-
ceives is a pain at the pit of the stomach, with a sense of constriction,
as if it was drawn towards the back, and this is usually much increased
by an erect posture. The pain, after proving severe, and continuing
for some time, is followed by eructations and the discharge of a consid-
erable quantity of a thin watery fluid, sometimes of an acid taste, but of-
ten quite insipid. In some instances however, it is very ropy, and of an
appearance somewhat similar to the white of an egg.

On a frequent repetition of the eructations and discharge, the fit at
length goes off*.

This disease rarely proves fatal, but is often tedious and troublesome
to remove, being apt to recur occasionally a long time after it has once
taken place.

TREATMENT.

The patient will commence with the following liquid :

Take Elixir Salulis, or Compound Tincture of Senna, 8 oz.
Tincture of the BtU'aiB of'fohi/half an ounce. Mix.

Of this, the P at j^8pj§^ffflfcv' e spoonful every morning fasting. It
creates a healthy aKp^Mipjttoinach, and thus soon mitigates the symp-
toms of the complaint. It is carminative, stimulating, laxative and to-
nic, in its effects,' and therefore well calculated for the removal of the
disease.

I recollect one case, where the person had applied to various' physi-
cians for a most obstinate case of water brash, and could find no reme-
dy till he took the above preparation, which operated like a charm,
soon effecting a cure.

V©] ] 74


586 Gastric Diseases.. [Class VII.

REGIMEN.

Great attention must be paid to regimen; nothing greasy, or acid,
must be taken, but such articles as are easy of digestion. Red pepper,
mustard, and salt, may be taken with food.


CHAPTER III.

INDIGESTION. (Dyspepsia.)

DESCRIPTION.

Dyspepsia is a derangement of the digestive functions, occasioning
an interruption in the organs or vicera concerned in the process of di-
gestion; the immediate cause of which, appears to be a diminished or
increased quantity, or vitiated quality of the gastric juice, or the secre-
tion of bile.

Says Gregory, indigestion is certainly the most frequent of all dis-
eases. It is met with in every country, in every class of society, in
every season of the year. Devoid of the danger which attends other
diseases, it is nevertheless equally distressing to the patient, poisoning
all the scources of his enjoyment, and leading, in many instances, to the
miseries of confirmed hypochondriasis. Long as it has been made the
subject of inquiry by medical authors, it remains involved in much ob-
scurity. The pathology of the disease is little understood; the method of its
treatment is still imperfectly known ; and the most remarkable diver-
sities of opinion are entertained regarding the extent to which it influen-
ces the production of other disorders."

CAUSES.

1. Proximate Cause. — The proximate cause may depend in the first
place, upon a morbid state of the glands subservient to digestion. The
saliva may be deficient, — the gastric juice may be either deficient, or
secreted in too large quantity, er vitiated in quality, whereby the coats
of the stomach become enveloped with a thick tenacious mucus. Lastly,
the bile may get into the stomach, and there interfere with the first steps
in the digestive process.

2. Dyspepsia may arise from a morbid condition of the nerves of the
stomach,— or from general torpor, or defect of the whole nervous sys-
tem.

3. Dyspepsia may in some cases be owing to such morbid states of
the muscular coat of the stomach as cause the food to be detained too
long there, or which hurry it too soon into the bowels.

4. Dyspeptic symptoms, lastly, may originate, independent of all dis-
ease, in the stomach, from the functions of the duodenum being imper-
fectly performed-. Morbid accumulation in the duodenum is justly


Ordei [II, Indigestion. 587

reckoned the immediate cause of that pain high up in the hack which
sometimes accompanies it, but it is often observed independent of the
more common dyspeptic symptoms.

2. Remote or Intermediate Cause. — Primary affections.

1. Dyspepsia from occasional overloading of the stomach.

2. from habitual overfeeding.

3. from habitual indulgence in spirituous liquors

4. from want of air and exercise.

5. 1 from excessive or long-continued evacuations.

6. from cold.

7. from anxiety of mind.

1. The first and most simple cause of dyspepsia is the occasional
overloading of the stomach; or the taken in of some indigestible sub-
stance, which, even in small quantity, offends the nerves of the stomach,
such as tainted meat ; or, lastly, an accidental debauch of wine. This
form of dyspepsia is commonly attended with a sense of oppression at
the stomach, nausea, and that peculiar species of head-ache called tbe
megrim. It is carefully to be distinguished from every other, because
it demands a particular mode of treatment.

2. The second cause of dyspepsia is habitual full living, particularly
the too frequent indulgence in animal food. This is one of the most
common sources of dyspepsia in the upper classes of society, and is easily
distinguished from all others by its occurring along with gout.

3. The third is the abuse of spirituous liquors. This is the prolific
source of dyspepsia in the lower ranks of life, in comparison with which
all the other causes of the disease are of little importance. Dyspepsia
from this cause is often a very severe, and always an obstinate complaint.
It is attended in most cases with a very acute pain in the region of the
stomach (gastrodynia,) and tenderness of the epigastrium. It may be
distinguished also by the trembling hand which never fails to accompa-
ny it. This and the preceding form of dyspepsia may so far be con-
sidered as connected, as the remedy for the disease is in both cases ob-
vious ; and as any plan of treatment, which does not make the removal
of the exciting cause an indispensable condition, will be either ineffec-
tual, or serve only in the end to aggravate the evil.

4. The fourth cause of indigestion is the want of air and exercise.
Torpor and inactivity of the body naturally extend their influence to
internal organs, and the stomach is the first to suffer. Hence it is that
dyspepsia is the frequent concomitant of a sedentary profession, and
that it prevails not only among the luxurious and dissolute, but amongst
the most industrious and sober classes of the community. Distention
of the stomach by wind, particularly rftcr meals, eructations, and a tor-
pid state of the bowels, usually prevail, and constitute the urgent symp-
toms in this form of the complaint.

5. Another cause of primary dyspepsia may be found in excessive
evacuations, such as flooding, and large bleedings at the arm; or in more
moderate evacuations, if long continued, as for instance, leucorrhcea, or
protracted suckling. The practice of keeping strong children at the
breast for a year and a half or two years is very common in the lower
orders in this country, and leads, particularly in weak habits, to some.


^88 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

of the most distressing forms of dyspepsia which are ever witnessed.
The peculiar characters of this variety of dyspepsia are a sense of sink-
ing at the pit of the stomach, giddiness, dimness of sight, a feeling of
different objects dancing before the eyes, and a small, often impercepti-
ble, pulse.

6. In the next place, dyspepsia may be traced in very many cases to
the influence of cold and moisture. The general effect of cold, when
long continued, is to depress the nervous power, and this is often mani-
fested in the temporary loss of the functions of the stomach. Hence it
happens that dyspeptic aliments arc so frequently met with when the
cold weather first sets in. This kind of dyspepsia may usually be dis-
tinguished by the thirst, the restlessness, the white tongue, and other
marks of general though slight febrile disturbance which attend it. The
symptom that most attracts the notice of the patient, and for which
he specially solicits the aid of the physician, is loss of appetite,
(anorexia )

7. The last source of primary dyspepsia which requires notice, is
mental emotion, particularly the depressing passions, fear, grief, but
above all anxiety. This, though very common, can only so far become
a practical consideration, as it may lead to the propriety of recommend-
ing, in some cases, change of air, of scene, and of habits, as essential to
recovery.

The various sympathies of the stomach have frequently been describ-
ed, and every one is sensible of the intimate connection of dyspepsia
with local disease in other parts. In many of these instances the affec-
tion of the stomach has been viewed as the primary complaint, upon the
principle that such states of local disease are best combated by remedies
which apparently act on the stomach. It has been well observed, how-
ever, that when a disordered state of the digestive organs, and local dis-
ease in a remote part, are concomitant, they maybe but effects of some
distant and unknown irritation, perhaps proceeding from the nervous
system.

1. Dyspepsia symptomatic of habitual constipation.

2. of chronic disease of the liver.

3. of chronic disease of the spleen.

4. of functional disturbance of the uterus,

5. of obscure disease of the kidney.

G. of chronic affection of the bronchia.

7. of chronic cutaneous diseases.

1. Dyspepsia is in many instances accompanied by a costive state of
the bowels, to which, when present, the patient himself is generally dis-
posed to refer all his symptoms. The student, however, will remember,
that the functions of the stomach and great intestines are very different,
and that disturbances in them are by no means necessarily associated.
Costiveness frequently exists without indigestion, and dyspepsia without
constipated bowels. The contrary indeed sometimes happens; but
whenever habitual costiveness is the direct cause of dyspeptic symptoms,
the circumstance will generally be made manifest by the hardness or ful-
ness of the abdomen, and by those inquiries into the present and previous
state of the pvnemtions which the practitioner will in no instanro fail to


Order III.] Indigestion. 589

make. 2. In many cases dyspepsia will be found dependent upon chro-
nic diseases of the liver, and more than is frequently imagined. When
a defective or vitiated state of the bile, that is to say, functional disturb-
ance of the liver, exists; still more, when structural disease of that organ
is present, accurate investigation will commonly lead to the detection of
some of those symptoms formerly enumerated as characteristic of hepa-
tic affections. 3. There can be little doubt, that dyspepsia, is in cer-
tain instances, symptomatic of an affection of the spleen. It would be
contrary to all analogy to suppose that this organ is not subject to some
primary forms of disease; but very little appears to be known concern-
agines to consist in a congestive state of the vessels of the spleen. It is
probable, that an acquaintance with the physiology of the spleen might
enable us to separate and refer to their true source some other cases now
classed under the general head of dyspepsia. The peculiar symptoms of
splenic dyspepsia, as far as I have been able to trace them, are fulness
and sense of weight in the region of the spleen (without corresponding
flatulence,) a sallow countenance, loaded tongue, and occasional haemorr-
hages. It chiefly occurs in young women, particularly in female servants
who have over exerted themselves, and is very obstinate and difficult of
cure. 4. Dyspepsia is a frequent concomitant of disturbance in the ute-
rine functions. It is a leading symptom in chlorosis and hysteria, and is
well known as one of the earliest evidences of pregnancy. This form of
the disease is easily distinguished from all others by the habit of body in
which it occurs. Vomiting of the food half an hour after it has been taken
(marking the great degree of irritability prevailing in (he stomach,) will
generally be found characteristic of uterine dyspepsia. 5. Indigestion is
a well-marked symptom in diseases affecting the kidney, the local evi-
dences of which are often very obscure. Hence it is that the original
complaint is sometimes overlooked ; but the error is fortunately of no
material importance. 6. The functions of the stomach are frequently im-
paired in chronic affections of the bronchia, and this complication of a
disease is very formidable, particularly in old people. 7. A remarkable
connection has long been observed between dyspepsia and several varie-
ties of chronic cutaneous diseases.

Such are the most important distinctions among the several kinds of
dyspeptic complaints.

SYMPTOMS.

The symptoms of dyspepsia are extremely diversified. They may
be divided into such as are referable to the stomach itself, or to its sym-
pathies with other parts of the body, especially the intestines, kidneys
heart and lungs, brain, and nervous system. Among the first may be
enumerated, nausea, pain in the epigastrium or hypochondria, called
gastrodynia, heart-burn or cardialgia, a sense of fulness, distension, or
weight in the stomach, a feeling as if a ball were lodged in the oesopha-
gus or throat; acid or fetid eructations, pyrosis, or the vomiting of a
a clear liquor, sometimes of an acid quality and often in vast quantity'
a sensation of sinking or fluttering at the pit of the stomach, and lastly
loss of appetite. To the second head of dyspeptic symptoms may be


590 Gastric Diseases. < llass VIZ

referred, among many others, costiveness, or an irregular state of the
bowels, with a morbid appearance of the evacuations, pain over the
region of the stomach, of the back, together with turbid urine, a disa-
greeable taste in the mouth, especially on first waking, tooth-ache, pal-
pitation, pulsation in the epigastrium, irregularity of the pulse, a short
dry cough, and occasional difficulty of breathing, giddiness, and head-
ache, sometimes referred to the fore, but more commonly to the back
part of the head ; languor, lassitude, and great depression of spirits,
with fear of death, or of impending evil, in one word, hypochondriasis.
These last evidences of affection of the nervous system indicate a very
aggravated state of the disease.

The tongue is generally referred to as affording evidence of the state
of the stomach ; but it will often be found that the tongue is perfectly
clean when the stomach is much disordered.

" The symptoms of indigestion," says Dr. Eberle, " differ considera-
bly, according to the stage of the complaint, or the degree and extent
of the irritation. In the commencement the appetite is variable, gener-
ally weak, and often entirely destroyed ; the patient is troubled with
flatulency, distention, acid eructations, and colic pains ; the mind is, at
times, depressed and languid ; the tongue covered with a white fur; the
bowels usually constipated ; the whole system languid, particularly dur-
ing the process of digestion; and there is almost a constant uneasy feel-
ing in the epigastrium. Sometimes the appetite is morbidly craving,
but if the patient indulges freely in taking food, he becomes much op-
pressed, and generally suffers severe pains some hours after eating. Af-
ter the disease has continued for some time, or it is aggravated by some
unusual irritating cause applied to the stomach, the pulse becomes tense
and quick ; the epigastrium tender to the touch ; the mind irritable,
discontented, and gloomy. The colic pains are more frequent and severe
some time after taking food; the bowels irregular, being sometimes
constipated ; at others affected with diarrhoea, during which portions of
food are occasionally passed off" in an imperfectly digested state ; the
stools varying in colour, consistence, and character. The body now
begins to waste, the strength fails, the epigastric distress severe and
constant, the countenance assumes a haggard and sallow aspect, the pa-
tient complains of more or less difficulty of lying on the left side, the skin
becomes dry and shrivelled, and there is usually a morbid sensibility to
low temperature.

From the extensive sympathies which subsist between the stomach and
every other part of the living body, dyspeptics are frequently much
harassed by painful and other distressing affections in parts situated re-
motely from the stomach. Among these sympathetic affections of indi-
gestion, hcad-achc is the most common and annoying."

PROGNOSIS.

Dyspepsia never proves fatal, unless when, by a very long continu-
ance, it produces great general debility and weakness; and so passes
into some other disease, such as drops} ; but it is at all times very dif-
ficult to remove, but more particularly so in warm climates.


Order III.] Indigestion. 591

DISSECTION

The morbid appearances to be observed on dissections of this disease^
are principally confined to that part of the stomach which is called the
pylorus ; which is often found either in a contracted, scirrhous, or ulce-
rated state. In every instance, the stomach is perceived to be consider-
ably distended with air.


COMMON TREATMENT.


Mercury, &<-.


REFORMED PRACTICE.

The object to be kept in view in the treatment of dyspepsia,
are:

li To obviate the several exciting causes of it.

2. To expel from the stomach the several offending agents.

3. To obviate costiveness.

4. To improve the tone, or energy of the stomach, and
Lastly, to remove urgent or distressing symptoms.

With a view of fulfilling the first indication, the patient must abstain
from every exciting cause, which he is conscious has given rise to the
disease, whether in eating or drinking, or in any other irregularity.

The second indication, viz. for removing from the stomach all offen-
sive or morbid agents, an emetic may be given.

Take Rad. Ipecac, pulv.

Lobelia Inflata, pulv. Equal parts. Mix.

Of this a tea-spoonful may be taken in a tumbler of bonesct tea, and if it
does not produce gentle vomiting in half an hour, let it be repeated. The
same tea, or infusion, may be freely taken during the operation.

The day after the emetic has been given, our common purgative may
be administered. But in obstinate cases the compound powder of man-
drake is much preferable. A moderate dose of either will be sufficient.
It will be necessary to repeat each of these classes of medicines once a
week, especially where the disease has been of long standing, and in-
veterate. There is in this complaint, such a tenacious viscid fluid, or
state of the stomach, that every means to remove the complaint is apt to
prove ineffectual, until there is a new or a healthy action excited. No
medicine appears to act upon the living fibre of the stomach, until its
actions have been very much stimulated or inverted.

Emetics, particularly prove beneficial in dyspepsia, first, by evacuat-
ing morbid or offending materials, and second, by imparting new tone or
energy to it; third, by its action upon the skin, by eliminating morbid or
vitiated humours, and fourth, by the healthy shock it gives to the neigh-
bouring viscera, and the whole system.

Where there is great aversion to the lobelia, ipecac may be substitut-
ed ; but it is not so effectual, being less stimulating. Even where dys-
pepsia is complicated with organic or chronic affections of the liver,
which is very often the case, and where mercury is supposed to be ne-
cessary to remove them, this kind of emetic, and particularly when
accompanied by mandrake, affords a substitute for this mineral.


^J2 Gastric Diseases. [Class Vl'f.

Where the liver has been much affected, I have found their exhibi-
tion very successful. The next great indication to fulfil in the treat-
ment of dyspepsia, is, to regulate the bowels. It appears that the liver
in this disease fkom debility, obstruction, or torpor from some cause,
ceases to perform its office, or performs it very imperfectly; in conse-
quence of which there is not a sufficient quantity, or a proper quality of
bile secreted to keep up a regular or peristaltic motion of the intestines;
the effect of which, is an inactive or costive state of them ; and therefore,
such medicines as stimulate the liver to perform its office, are obviously
indicated.

In addition to the emetics recommended, the patient must endeavour
to regulate the bowels if possible, by a course of diet, and there is no
article so effectual as the coarse or brown bread which is now in many
places very much used. The bran, in which consists the physical pro-
perties of the wheat, is retained in making thisbr-ad, which affords a
more natural stimulus to the liver and alimentary canal, than any medi-
cine which can be given. The wheat should be ground coarse, but
should not be bolted, and in all respects be made as ordinary bread.

Some prefer buiscuit made of the same. 1 do not remember a single
case, however costive the bowels may have been, where this bread has
failed to regulate them, as well as to improve the state of the stomach.

The fourth indication is to improve the tone of the stomach.

The means already recommended are calculated to fulfil this object,
but other medicines may be necessary ; and I have found that the an-
ti-dyspeptic pills are well calculated for this purpose. They first gen-
tly stimulate the stomach, while at the same time they cleanse and im-
part tone and energy to it, without causing that debility which so often
follows the use of other preparations. They also serve to obviate cos-
tiveness, and they have cured many cases of dyspepsia without the aid
of any other medicines.

Another most valuable medicine for indigestion, and which is like-
wise calculated to fulfil several of the above indications, is the follow-
ing preparation :

Take Golden Seal, pulv. 1 dram.
White Wood Bark, 2 drams.
Bitter Root, or Indian Hemp, pulv. 1 dram.
Capsicum or Cayenne Pepper, half a dram.
Sweet or Malaga Wine, 1 quart.

Add the articles pulverized or bruised, to the wine, and let it digest a
few days, and it is fit for use. The patient may take from a quarter to
half a wine-glass three or four times a day, on an empty stomach.

This creates an appetite, and strengthens the system generally. The
few individuals in possession of this formula, annually sell hundreds of
dollars worth, at two dollars per bottle, for the cure of dyspepsia, and
there are many well authenticated cases in which it has proved a sove-
reign remedy.

I have occasionally had a case where our ordinary course of treatment
has proved unsuccessful ; I have then given the following with success :

Take Epsom Salts, 8 ounces.
Boiling Water, 8 ounces.
When cool arid Muriatic A^id, half an oimcr


Order III.] Indigestion. 593

Of this give a table-spoonful every morning in a tumbler of cold water.
During the day the patient must drink a strong infusion of boneset, and
every night he may take a large tea-spoonful of charcoal in a little tea
or molasses, if the stomach will bear it.

AVith us, this treatment has been very successful. A thousand other
articles have been recommended, and many have I tried, but I have
found little benefit resulting from them.

A Mr. Halsted of this city; a short time ago, became very popular
for treating the dyspepsia, but his practice has now fallen into disre-
pute. It consisted principally in suddenly thumping or striking upon
the abdomen, and kneading it with the hand with a view to remove
their torpid state. Several persons informed me that they received
great benefit from the process ; that it almost always had the effect
of regulating the bowels ; and being very simple* and easily put in
practice, it may be tried with safety and with a prospect of some ad-
vantage*

REGIMEN.

There is no disease in which a rigid attention to diet, is of more ab-
solute importance fthan in dyspepsia. Indeed the disease may be en-
tirely cured by such a course of regimen. The patient must eat noth-
ing but that digests easily and this he must ascertain by his own experi-
ence* He must always get up from the table ivith an appetite some-
what sharp, and whatever he finds creates flatulence, or gives any un-
easiness, must be carefully laid aside. In general, fresh and high sea-
soned victuals, as well as greasy articles, must be avoided.

The patient may eat meats when cold, such as beef, lamb, and chick-
ens, to be eaten in small quantities, and salt, mustard, and red pepper
alternately, and freely used. Coffee and chocolate should not be drank,
but a weak infusion of black tea may be used.

" In every form of dyspepsia," says Gregory, " attention to diet is
indispensable, and the patient must have regard, not to its quality on-
ly, but to its quantity. In a weakened state of the stomach it must
have little given it to do. The body is strengthened* not in proportion
to the quantity of food taken in, but to that which is thoroughly diges-
ted. Differences in the habits of life will of course lead to important
differences in the kind and quantity of diet which should be permitted
to a dyspeptic patient ; but the following may be regarded as rules of
very general application. It should consist in a due mixture of ani-
mal and vegetable food, but the former should be eaten only once a
day. It should be thoroughly masticated. Great varieties of food at
any one time should be prohibited, as leading to an indulgence of the
appetite beyond the wants of the system. Articles of difficult digestion
should be carefully avoided ; such as all kinds of smoked, hard, dried,
salted, and long-kept meat; all those dishes where too much nutritious
matter is collected in a small space ; eggs, for instance, potted meats,
strong soups, and preparations of suet, fat, and butter; lastly, all raw
vegetables whatever, with the exception of ripe fruits. Regularity in
the hours of meals should be rigorously enjoined, and the patient di*
rected to abstain from food at all other times."

Vol. I. 75


594 Gastric Diseases. [Class VIL

" Of the necessity of regular exercise to the due performance of
the functions of the stomach, every one must be fully sensible. Walk-
ing is of all exercises the best. It is that which nature intends for us,
and can never be compensated by what are called the passsive exercises
of the luxurious. Pure air is eminently conducive to healthy digestion."

in dyspepsia a change of air, such as a voyage to sea, or a resi-
dence near the salt water, has been of great service. I know a man
who was so far reduced with dyspepsia that he was carried on his bed
from this city to the town of West-Chester, about fourteen miles dis-
tant, on the banks of the East-River, and after remaining there a
while, entirely recovered his health.

"It has been remarked," says Thatcher, " that cold and wet feet
are frequently the cause of complaints of the stomach and bowels ; these
therefore should be guarded against with the greatest care. It will be
of great utility about half an hour before eating, and again soon after,
to have recourse to brisk friction with a flesh brush or coarse cloth, over
the region of the stomach and abdomen, and the same operation should
be practised every night and morning over the whole body and extrem-
ities while itl bed. The operation of friction remarkably contributes
to the health of sedentary persons; it invigorates and excites the natu-
ral warmth, promotes insensible perspiration and cutaneous absorption,
increases the action of the stomach, and consequently its power of di-
gestion. In short, friction is so highly conclusive to the recovery of the
patient, that it cannot be too strongly inculcated. But no less impor-
tant to the restoration of the dyspeptic patient, is exercise on horse-
back and change of place and amusing scenes, remembering that riding
should be performed on an empty stomach, and the most proper hour
is in the morning before breakfast.

BILIOUS AFFECTIONS.

Many persons, particularly in the Southern states, and West Indies,,
are great sufferers from a redundancy of bile, destroying the diges-
tive organs. Such persons ought to depend upon prevention more than
cure. They should make use of such diet as will prevent the ac-
cumulation of bile, pepper sauce, mustard, stewed fruits of various
kinds, sound or " hard cider." They should exercise much, and
avoid all kinds of greasy and fresh meat, or sweet articles. Pastry or
rancid butter is very improper, and especially coffee and chocolate, both
of which increase these affections. Costiveness should also be avoided.
When a person is labouring under a bilious complaint, let him take a
gentle emetic, or as a substitute, a portion of mandrake. After which,
one "or two of the bilious pills occasionally. Let him also take the
lohie bitters, and a tea made of the bark or berries of the black alder..


Order IV.] Convulsions or Fits. 595


CHAPTER IV.
CONVULSIONS OR FITS. (Spasmi.)

DESCRIPTION.

The term convulsion is usually applied to all kinds of spasmodic af-
fections, such as hysteria, epilepsy, &c. In treating of the complaint,
I have in view fits or convulsions which often occur in children, and
sometimes in adults, and which assume no specific character, when
they proceed from the eruption in small-pox being retained or sudden-
ly receding, or from teething, pregnancy, &c.

CAUSES.

Fits in children and others usually proceed from some acrid matter
in the stomach and intestines, such as various kinds of poison, or from
flatulence, teething, worms, recession of some rash, or the recession of
some eruptive disease, such as scarlatina, small-pox, sudden emotions
of the mind, as fear, anger, &c.

SYMPTOMS. -i

Previous to an attack of convulsions in men or children, there is of-
ten great debility, with an unnatural appearance of the eyes and coun-
tenance. At other times, there is a sudden accession of the complaint.
The patient is suddenly seized with a spasmodic affection of the face,
body, and whole extremities, trembles and shakes violently, and sud-
denly falls down, and remains senseless a longer or a shorter period,
with involuntary twitchings of the muscles or tendons, the teeth clench-
ed, and a discharge of saliva from the mouth; pupils of the eyes con-
tracted, &c.

TREATMENT.

Where the attack is sudden and violent, put the patient in a warm
bath ; but as considerable time elapses before this can be prepared, the
feet must be immersed in warm water, and the region of the stomach
bathed with capsicum and spirits simmered a few minutes together. If
there is time, an injection or clyster may be given. It is difficult to in-
troduce any medicine during the paroxysm, but after it is over, means
must be used to prevent a recurrence of them. If the disease appears
to exist from acrid or foul matter in the stomach, give an emetic, and
afterwards a dose of senna and manna.

If it appears to proceed from worms, give such medicines as will
expel them ; and the same purgative will answer with the addition of a
little pink root.

Should fits arise from a recession of rash, or from the invasion of
some eruptive disease, excite perspiration to aid their re-appearance.


596 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

When they arise without any apparent cause, and occur at different
intervals, they must be treated by giving emetics and tonics ; and in
other respects treated the same as epilepsy. When other means fail,
give the tincture of stramonium.


CHAPTER V.
CRAMP IN THE STOMACH. (Tetanus.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is a very violent and most painful disease, generally attacking
persons very suddenly, and is very dangerous. Weaklv and nervous
persons are the most subject to it, Jt may arise from acrid matter, or
from a check of perspiration.

TREATMENT.

Frictions should be immediately made upon, or over the region of
the stomach, and continued until a preternatural degree of heat is pro-
duced, and the pain begins to subside. 1 have found this by experience
in my own person. 1 was once suddenly seized in the night, while in
the country, where little aid or medicine could be procured. It occur-
red to me that friction would afford relief, and I therefore requested a
person sleeping in the adjoining room, to rub my stomach and breast as
hard as possible, which he did, and as soon as the friction occasioned
heat, the pain began immediately to subside. — (See principles of our
practice, Vol. I.)

Should this, however, prove ineffectual, half a tea-spoonful of red
pepper may be given in half a tumbler of water or tea. At the same
time, let mint or peppermint tea be given, or as a substitute, any com-
mon herb tea. Let the feet also be bathed in warm water, and
red pepper in spirits be applied hot over the region of the breast.
Should this fail to afford relief, apply a heated brick covered with
muslin, and steeped in vinegar to the breast as hot as can be borne.
This, also, has removed a severe cramp or pain in the breast when
other means have failed. The person attacked may take also a tea-spoon-
ful of equal parts of laudanum, essence of peppermint, and spirits of cam-
phor.

An excellent remedy also for cramp in the breast is to take ten drops
of the essential oil of hemlock, in a little tea, sweetened, and at the
same time to apply hops simmered in vinegar on the stomach or chest.


0r der VI.] Heart-Burn. 597


CHAPTER VI.

HEART-BURN. ( Cardialgia.)
DESCRtPTION.


jase is an uneasy sensation about the part called the pit of
i ; it is attended with great anxiety, difficulty of breathing,


This disease
the stomach ,

want of strength, inquietude, retching to vomit, coldness and tremb-
ling of the extremities. Those whose stomachs abound with acid, or
with bilious disorders, are the most subject to this complaint.

CAUSES.

The causes are various, as wind, acid, and other acrimonious hu-
mours in the stomach ; or from debility of the stomach, or a loss of its
mucus. It may proceed from worms; from a spicy and pungent aliment ;
or from a transition of rheumatism or gouty humours to the stomach ;
or an ulcer in any part of it. It may be occasioned b} r fat aliment, es-
pecially if cold liquors are drank too soon after eating it. If it proceeds
from bilious matter, it is attended with bitter and naureous eructa-
tions or belchiqg, as well as by a yellow or greenish discharge by
vomiting ; collections of blood about the region of the stomach from a
plethora, or from spasms.

Dr. Hunter is of opinion that this disorder is generally caused by
fumes arising from acrid humours, rather than from the humours them-
selves : his reason is, because if the patient puts himself into a posture
to prevent the fumes arising to the part affected, immediate relief is gen-
erally found. A spasm in the orifices of the stomach, by which the va-
pours are impeded in their passage from this viscus, and by the heat of
the part rarifying, produce a distension, anxiety, &c. particularly after
meals. Stones in the gall ducts, or in the ureters, by sympathy pro-
duce this disease in the stomach.

More or less of these symptoms are the attendants of the heart-burn,
which approaches generally with yawning and listlessness, and at its
height the extremities are cold. It does not quit the patient till heat re-
turns into the feet, and it often totally vanishes with a copious perspi-
ration.

The heart-burn must be distinguished from that oppression and un-
easiness in the stomach, which is only the effect of overcharging it with
food, the colic, and a swooning.

TREATMENT.

Where the complaint appears to proceed from acidity or sourness of the
stomach, with belching, heat, pain, &c. the carbonate of magnesia is
a good medicine. From a tea-spoonful to a table-spoonful may be oc-


598 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

casionally taken in a tumbler of mint tea. Should this fail to remove
the disease, a mild emetic may be given, succeeded by a purgative. If
it proceeds from wind, give a tea-spoonful of the compound spirits of
lavender.

The food should be such as is very easy of digestion.


CHAPTER VII.
CANKER, THRUSH, OR SORE MOUTH, (Aplha.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is a disease to which children more particularly are subject.

It appears in small white ulcers upon the tongue, gums, and around
the mouth and palate, resembling small particles of curdled milk. When
the disease is mild, it is confined to these parts: but when it is violent
and of long standing, it is apt to extend through the whole course of the
alimentary canal, from the mouth down to the anus ; and so to excite
severe purgings, flatulencies, and other disagreeable symptoms. The
disease when recent and confined to the mouth, may in general be easi-
ly removed ; but when of long standing, and extending down to the sto-
mach and intestines, with proper treatment it very often proves fatal.

The thrush sometimes occurs as a chronic disease, both in warm cli-
mates and in those northern countries where the cold is combined with a
considerable degree of moisture, or where the soil is of a very marshy
nature. It may, in some cases, be considered as an idiopathic or pri-
mary affection ; but it is more usually symptomatic

CAUSES.

Retention of acrid humours, turned inwards upon the moulh, stomach
and intestines.

SYMPTOMS.

It shows itself at first, by an uneasy sensation, or burning heat in the
stomach, which comes on by slow degrees, and increases gradually in
violence. After some time, small pimples, of about the size of a pin's
head, show themselves on the tip and edges of the tongue ; and these,
at length, spread over the whole inside of the mouth, and occasion such
a tsnderness and rawness, that the patient cannot take any food of a
solid nature ; neither can he receive any vinous or spirituous liquor into
his mouth, without great pungency and pain being excited: little febrile
heat attends, but there is a dry skin, pale countenance, small pulse, and
cold extremities. These symptoms will probably continue for some
weeks, the general health being sometimes better and sometimes worse,
and then the patient will be attacked with acrid eructations, or severe
purgings, which greatly exhaust his strength, and produce considerable
emaciation of the whole body. After a little time, these symptoms cease,


Order VII.] Canker^ Thrush, or Sore Mouth. 599

and he again enjoys better health ; but, sooner or later, the acrid mat-
ter shows itself once more in the mouth, with greater virulence than be-
fore, and makes frequent translations to the stomach and intestines, and
so from these to the mouth again, until, at last, the patient is reduced to
a perfect skeleton. Elderly people, and persons with a shattered con-
stitution, are most liable to its attacks.

A writer thus remarks: " Infants are subject to an inflammatory af-
fection of the mucous membrane of the alimentary canal, generally
classed as a species of diarrhoea, but known also hy the name of aphtha,
or the thrush, from a symptom which attends it in one of its stages. It
chiefly occurs between the fourth and eighth month, and among such
as are fed wholly or partially upon spoon-meat. There is reason to be-
lieve, that it is always connected with an improper diet. It is character-
ized by vomiting, fetid eructations, and pain, apparently referred to
the epigastrium; tormina, diarrhoea, and some degree cf tenderness of the
belly on pressure. The stools are green, and slimy, or tinged with
blood. Frequently they are ejected with great force. As soon as any
food is taken into the stomach, the child has a motion, giving the ap-
pearance as if it passed immediately through the bowels. As the dis-
ease advances, the tongue becomes red ; the mouth is covered with
aphthae, and the verjre of the anus appears inflamed. The brain also
becomes infected. The child is frequently drowsy, before the aphthae
appear. This symptom is vulgarly called sleeping for the thrush. Co-
ma is occasionally observed to come on towards the termination of the
complaint. The infant rapidly emaciates.

COMMON TREATMENT.
Mercury, or calomel, as usual.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

When the disease is seated, it may sometimes be necessary to give a
gentle emetic, but in general, purgatives are sufficient. The ncutrali*
zing mixture or cordial, may be taken until it acts upon, the bowels, to 1
be occasionally repeated. Let the mouth be washed with the following
gargle :

Take Sage.
Hysop.
Sumach Berries. Equal parts.

Make a strong decoction sweetened with honey, and to half a pint of
it, add half a tea-spoonful of pulverized borax. Let the mouth be often-
washed with it. The child should take for nourishment, indian meal
gruel, milk, &c.

A tea made of the red raspberry leaves is also good for this com-
plaint.


600 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.'


CHAPTER VIII.

VOMITING. (Emesis.)

It is sometimes the case that persons are taken with vomiting with-
out any apparent cause, and when it does not proceed from other com-
plaints, or in other words, is, not a symptomatic disease.

The stomach from various causes becomes irritable, and every thing
taken into it is ejected.

When this is the case, where it does not apparently proceed from
some particular disease, our attention must be directed exclusively to
the symptom of vomiting. A solution of carbonate of potash should
be frequently given. A dram may be added to eight ounces of mint
water, and a table-spoonful given as often as retching, nausea, or vomit-
ing occurs.

Should not this check it, give equal parts of essence of peppermint,
laudanum, and spirits of camphor, twenty drops of each in spearmint
tea.

An infusion of peppermint may be occasionally drank.

The common soda powders are often sufficient to put a stop to ordi-
nary vomiting.

If the complaint is very violent, apply a mustard paste over the re-
gion of the stomach.

The following plaster has also been found very effectual in allaying
the irritability of the stomach. Take equal parts of cloves, natmegs, al-
spice and ginger. Pulverize and add sufficient Indian meal and vine-
gar to form a plaster, to be applied to the pit of the stomach.

Bathing the feet has also an excellent effect.

When all other means fail, the exhibition of an opium pill has stopped
the vomiting. I have also succeeded by withholding all kinds of li-
quids and drinks, and by giving injections, to which half an ounce of
laudanum has been added. Cases, however, seldom occur, in which,
these last remedies are called for.

A physician relates to me, the following case : He had administered
antimony, which had a very unfavourable effect. It operated with great
violence, and very much prostrated the patient. The retching and
vomiting continued incessantly, till the patient appeared to be in a very
dangerous situation, being almost speechless and pulseless.

He first administered sling, (brandy, water, and sugar) to check the
vomiting; but it was immediately rejected. He then gave equal parts
of peppermint and laudanum, which was retained upon the stomach,
and checked the vomiting. He afterwards administered spirits, which
raised the pulse, and the woman soon recovered.

The physician who communicated the above account, states that such
was the operation of the medicine, (antimony) that he has never dared
to give another dose since.


Order IX, X.] Iliccvp. Sea Sickness. 601


CHAPTER IX.

HICCUP. (Singultus.)

DESCRIPTION.

Tins hiccup is a spasmodic or convulsive affection of the stomach and
midriff, arising from any cause that irritates their nervous fibres.

It may proceed from excess in eating or drinking; from an injury of
the stomach; poisons; wind; inflammations or scirrhous tumours of
thd stomach,- intestines, bladder, midriff, or the rest of the viscera. Ill
gangrenes, acute and malignant fevers, a hiccup is often the forerunner
of death.

When the hiccup proceeds from the use of aliment that is flatulent or
hard of digestion, wine, or any spirituous liquor will generally re-
move it. If poison be the cause, plenty of oil and milk must be drank.
AVhcn it proceeds from an inflammation of the stomach, &c. it is very
dangerous. In this case the cooling regimen ought to be strictly ob-
served. His stomach should be fomented with hops and wormwood
simmered in vinegar.

If the hiccup does not cease, give ten or fifteen drops of laudanum, to
be occasionally repeated.

It sometimes proceeds from flatulence or wind. When this is th3
case, give fennel seed tea and the carminative drops.


CHAPTER X.

Sea sickness,
description.

Sea sickness is a nausea or tendency to vomit, which varies, in res-
pect of duration, in different persons upon their first going to sea. With
Some it continues only for a day or two ; while with others it remains
throughout the voyage.

CAUSES.

Sea-sickness appears to depend on the peculiar excitement of the brain,-
Occasioned by the swinging or rocking motion of a vessel at sea;

SYMPTOMS.

The symptoms of sea sickness are so familiar,' that they appear tore-
quire little or no description. It is a very distressing complaint, and in
some habits peculiarly so; sometimes even proving fatal. It is attend-
ed with a dizziness of the head, great distress in the stomach, nausea
with vomiting, and purging of bilious matter, resembling very much in
its character, cholera morbus. It is likewise attended with great pro£
tration.

Vol h 76


602 Gastric Diseases. [Class VII.

TREATMENT.

As soon as a person begins to feel sick at sea, let him place himself
in the open air on the deck, and in a recumbent position. This con-
tributes much to allay the symptoms ; but if it cannot be practised by
reason of the weather, or other causes, let him lay in a birth, midships,
or in the middle of the vessel with his head towards the prow or forepart
of the vessel. I have practised this myself with very great benefit. The
reason for recommending a birth midships, is in consequence of their
being less motion of the vessel. Should the sickness continue severe,
take a solution of the Sal ccratus or bicarbonate of Potash, in propor-
tion of a tea-spoonful to half a pint of water. A small table-spoonful
may be taken whenever there is retching or vomiting.

Should this fall to allay it,

Take Essence of Peppermint, 20 drops.
Laudanum, 20 drops. Mix.

Take at a dose, and to be occasionally repeated.
When the vomiting first commences, a weak infusion of chamomile
tea may be taken.


Class VIII. Order!.] Dysentery. 603


CLASS VUI.


INTESTINAL OR BOWEL DISEASES.


CHARACTER.

This class of disease is characterized by more or less pain in the ab-
domen, nausea, vomiting and prostration of strength, with more or less
fever, and with either costiveness or copious evacuations.


CHAPTER I.
DYSENTERY. (Dyttntcria.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is an affection or inflammation of the alimentary canal, charac-
terized usually by nausea, pain, fever, tenesmus, with fetid or bloody
evacuations. It is attended with more or less fever and is sometimes
contagious.

In ickat manner Dysenteries are infectious. — Dysenteries are some-
times infectious; but whether infectious or not, depends upon circum-
stances. When a person, labouring under a malignant case of dysente-
ry, is kept in a pestilential atmosphere, as is frequently the case, in de-
partments which are neglected during the confinement of the sick; when
the room is not frequently and sufficiently ventilated; when the sheets
are not frequently changed; when the filthy and fetid stools are not
immediately removed from the sick department; and when strict atten-
tion to cleanliness is not observed by the nurses, as is frequently the case
in jails, seiges, camps, and in many other places ; under these circum-
stances, dysentery may be infectious. But when every attention is paid
to cleanliness, and when all putrid substances are removed from the
habitation of the sick, I am disposed to believe that the disease is not
capable of being communicated from one person to another.

It is to this day a subject of great dispute, and warm contests are en-
tered into, by different parties, respecting the doctrine of contagion in
those diseases caused by pestilential fluids. It is a subject that 1 do not
wish to enter into.

Dysentery, arising sporadically, cndetnically , and epidemically. —
When a dysentery arises from the putrefaction of the contents of the


604 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII,

alimentary canal, It is the cause of a sporadic affection. Where a few
scattering cases of dysentery are only found to exist, and when their
causes are produced in the body or neighbourhood of the patient only,
they are then said to arise sporadically. When particular places and
countries are visited by dysentery more than others, and its causes are
generated in local situations, such as a pond of stagnant water, or large
marsh, or body of vegetable or animal matter, undergoing the process
of decomposition, as the case may be, the state of the atmosphere being
impregnated more or less, according to the proportion of decomposition
which takes place; when the dysentery arises in this way, it is said to
arise endemically. When it appears at certain times, and attacks ma-
ny persons, through large tracts and countries, and its cause taken into
the constitution from a pestilential atmosphere, which every country
may be more or less subject to, according to circumstances; where dys-
entery arises in this manner, it is said to arise epidemically.

CAUSES.

Whatever has a tendency to obstruct perspiration may give rise to
this complaint. Morbid humours are retained in the circulation, and
<^re mixed with the blood, and thrown upon the intestines, causing irri-
tation, inflammation, and all the phenomena of the disease. Unwhole-
some diet, night air, damp beds, wet clothes, &c. It sometimes ap-
f)ears to be caused by contagion, becoming epidemic in jails, camps,
lospitals, ships, <fec. Sudden change of weather, with humid or moist
air, may act as a predisposing cause of the disease.
Townsend, speaking of the remote cause of dysentery, thus observes:
The occasional causes may be,

1. Putrid acrimony generated in the system.

During the protracted boat of summer, the determination, as alrea-
dy stated in the observations on heat and cold, is to the external surface:
but when cold and damp succeed to heat, and when the vital energy is
much diminished, the determination is reversed, the perspiration is di-
minished, the urine is increased, and the secretions of bile and mu-
cus in the intestines are not only increased in quantity, but rendered
more acrid, and by stagnation become putrescent. Hence arise, dysen-
teries with putrid fevers, and the weakest are the first to suffer.

2. Putrid infection.

This, although apparently received into the lungs, seems to exert its
first action on the mucous glands of the intestines, as appears by loss of
appetite, sickness, nausea, vomiting.

In these ideas I am confirmed by revolving in my mind, what is rela-
ted by Sir John Pringle in his treatise on the diseases of the army.

The observations, to which I refer, were made in Zealand, and in
Brabant, where the country is low and damp, and the springs are near
to the surface of the earth ; where the nocturnal fogs are thick and fetid,
and where an autumnal sun exhales putrescent vapours.

In these circumstances, and in these situations, the army under his
care was frequently attacked by putrid diseases in a variety of forms ;
more especially when hot days were followed by cold and foggy nights.

These at first appeared as tertains and double tertains, with foulness


Order L] Dysentery. 605

of the tongue, bitterness In the mouth, nausea, and the desire of acids,
putrid vomiting, and sense of oppression about the stomach.

Such were the symptoms in the camp on the first approach of this
disease. But lie soon had an occasion to observe a connection between
these intermittents and the dysentery, because they who were first seized
with dysentery, usually escaped the fever, if a plentiful evacuation fol-
lowed ; or if any of the soldiers were attacked by both diseases, it was
alternately, so that when the flux began the fever ceased, and when the
former stopped the other instantly returned.

liven in the camp it appeared to be contagious, but in the hospitals
it took the form of a putrid malignant fever; insomuch that thoir bed-
ding conveyed infection, and whenever the hospitals were crowded, a
great mortality ensued.

He had an occasion to remark, when the disorder came on with the
most alarming symptoms, when the men were suddenly seized with
headache, pain in their back, heat and thirst, delirium, bilious vomitings
and bilious stools, tenesmus and pain in the region of the colon; the
fever remitted on the evacuation of the first passages of the alimentary
canal: yet without artificial evacuations nature made no cures, unless
when a cholera supervened.

As to the nature of the contagion, Sir John Pringle had occasion to
observe, that it arose frequently from dead bodies left unburied in the
field of battle ; in one instance from the rotting of a whale ; often from
putrid carcasses of cattle, and from the effluvia of marshes in the au-
tumn, and not unfrequently from foul ulcers, as well as from crowded
jails and hospitals.,

Prozimate Cause. — It would appear that the immediately exciting
cause of the dysentery, is a peculiar acid, the same as in the cholera
morbus, which is secreted by the liver and which corrodes and irritates
the mucous membrane of the intestines. This appears to be the opinion
of the late Dr. Vought He remarks as follows':

" That which I conceive to be the true and sole cause of this diseased
state of the large intestines, has for many years Ibeen discussed by
the most eminent physicians of the present age. It has been demon-
strated bv the most convincing arguments, and illustrated in such a
manner, and by such examples, as to remove all possibility of doubt
in the. mind of every man of common sense. It is the only true cause ca-
pable of exciting the dysentery. But it has been, and is, and will
be overlooked and undervalued, through the ignorance or neglect
of many who pretend to be followers and practitioners of the science of
medicine in the United States. To shew the falsity of the arguments,
and overthrow the elaborate doctrines of those who have pretended that
the putridity of the bile was the cause of bilious complaints, (so termed,)
such as intermitting and remitting fevers, dysenteries, diarrhoeas, cho-
lera-moi-bus, &c. much might be said. The valuable discovery of the
cause of those diseases, can never assume a higher rank than it is justly
entitled to. We say that nitrogen, so combined with oxygen, (the prin-
ciple of acidity,) as to form an acid in the alimentary canal, is the only
true cause producing dysentery. Pringle declares, that an acid exists
in the faeces, which he called the feculent acid. He united nitrous acid


606 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

with the faeces to allay the fetor, but, to his surprise, it greatly increased
it. I have tried the experiment myself, and found it to have the same
effect. This acid was called, by Pringle and others, the mineral acid ;
but it has since been found to be of animal and vegetable origin, pro-
duced by putrefaction. Let it be implanted in the minds, not only of
medical men, but also of all parents and nurses, and all who may please
to read this treatise, that the increased fetor of the stools of patients,
labouring under this disease, is a strong proof that nitrous acid is the
cause of this disease. It is found that the food made use of by the hu-
man species, contains the basis of this acid, in a large proportion; and
animal diet is much more used than vegetable, among that class of com-,
munity which suffer most from this disease."

A writer speaking of the proximate cause of dysentery says thus. "The
disease appears to be a spasmodic constriction of the colon induced by
local irritation,

By this constriction the fasces are retained, and by the action of the
absorbents they become hardened, and therefore increase both the irri-
tation and spasm.

In consequence of this the mucous glands of the intestines are excited,
either by the immediate action of the hardened faeces, or by consent to
supply the mucus, which is hurried on by the quickened peristaltic mo.
tion of the intestines, and appears in frequent stools.

The same irritation, communicated by sympathy to the heart, quick-
ens the pulse, but in the extreme arteries of the part affected produces
either effusion of blood or inflammation. This again increases irrita-
bility, and consequently spasm.

The stimulus applied to any part of the intestines being propagated
to the rectum, produces the tenesmus, that is, a most urgent and inces-
sant desire to evacuate the feces.

That the theory of Dr. Cullen is well founded will appear from hence,
that when the hardened scybala are evacuated, the disease is speedily
relieved.

Should it be suffered to continue, the villous coat will separate, and
be discharged, mixed with pus or putrid sanies, because the acrid mat-
ter acts like cantharides, when it brings on inflammation, and separates
the cutacle, or continuing to act when the vital energy is much dimin-.
ished, induces sphacelus. All this agrees with observations after death,
for the intestines have been discovered, not only in all the various stages
of inflammation, of suppuration and of gangrene, but with their diame-
ters contracted, and their coats much thickened,"

SYMPTOMS.

An attack of dysentery is sometimes preceded by loss of appetite*
costiveness, flatulency, sickness at the stomach, and a slight vomiting,
and comes on with chills, succeeded by heat in the skin, and frequency
of the pulse. These symptoms are in general the forerunners of the
griping and increased evacuations which afterward occur.

When the inflammation begins to occupy the lower part of the intes-t
tinal tube, the stools become more frequent, and less abundant ; and,
in passing through the inflamed parts, they occasion great pain, so that


Order I.] Dysentery: C07

every evacuation is preceded by a severe griping, as also a rumbling
noise.

Tbe evacuations vary both in colour and consistence, being sometimes
composed of frothy mucus, streaked with blood, and at other times of
an acrid watery humour, like the washings of meat, and with a very
fetid smelh Sometimes pure blood is voided; now and then lumps of
coagulated mucus, resembling bits of cheese, are to be observed in the
evacuations, and in some instances a quantity of purulent matter is
passed.

Sometimes what is voided consists merely of a mucous matter, with-
out any appearance of blood, exhibiting that disease which is known by
the name of dysenteria alba, or morbus mucosus.

While the stools consist of these various matters, and are voided
frequently, it is seldom that we can perceive any natural faeces among
them, and when we do, they appear in small hard balls, called scybala,
which being passed, the patient is sure to experience some temporary
relief from the griping and tenesmus.

It frequently happens, from the violent efforts which are made to dis-
charge the irritating matters, that a portion of the gut is forced beyond
the verge of the anus, which, in the progress of the disease, proves a
troublesome and distressing symptom ; as does likewise the tenesmus,
there being a constant inclination to go to stool, without the ability of
voiding any thing, except perhaps a little mucus.

More or less fever usually attends with the symptoms which have been
terminate fatally ; and is either of an inflammatory or putrid tendency.-
In other cases, the febrile state wholly disappears after a time, while
the'proper dysenteric symptoms probably will be of long continuance ,-
Hence the distinction into acute and chronic dysentery.

PROGNOSIS.

When this disease is properly treated, it yields very readily and is
soon cured, but under the common treatment it is very dangerous, and
Very often fatal.

DISSECTION.

Upon opening the bodies of those who die of dysentery, the internal
coat of the intestines (but more particularly of the colon and rectum)
appears to be affected with inflammation and its consequences, such as
ulceration, gangrene, and contractions. The peritoneum, and other
coverings of the abdomen, seem likewise, in many instances, to be af-
fected by inflammation.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding even to the extent of sixty or seventy ounces, until fainting
is produced, has been practised. — Mercury, opium, and blistering. Su-
gar of lead, nitrous acid, tobacco, leeches, balsam of copaiva, nitric
acid, aqua fortis, salts, &c. &c.

" Fatal indeed," says Vought, " may this disease be called, as it
would occupy almost the whole of this volume to enumerate the places


6Q8 intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VITI;

visited, and number of deaths occasioned by this disease, in the last ten
years, in the United States of America : and it may well be said, that
the pages of military history weep less for the slain in battle, than those
who have fallen victims to this calamity. It has been so malignant in
some places as to baffle the skill of the medical profession irt general}
and lias, in some instances, proved more malignant on account of the
attending physicians not being fully acquainted with the cause and dif-
ficulties of the disease, and with the proper remedies to remove this
cause and allay those difficulties.

Francis Bowes Savre, M. D.* a gentleman of high standing in his
profession, marks the very prominent symptoms which indicate the
true cause of this disease. He says, great debility of the stomach, weak
pulse* coldness of the extremities, difficult micturition, distressing
tenesmus, a thin discharge, resembling the washings of meat, appearing
very corrosive, excoriating the parts, and occasioning violent and al-
most continual tenesmus, were its symptoms. He says, the strength
seemed withered, as if by a stroke of lightning, marking the highly
septic (nitric) nature of the disease. But what were the doctor's reme-
dies to counteract the septic (or nitric) cause and nature of the disease 1
He 'says he gave emetics, which he found to destroy the tone of the
stomach, and laxatives, which hastened the progress of the disease,- by
increasing the patient's debility. He gave calomel, glauber salts, cas-
tor oil, sulphuret of antimony, &c. which, with the utmost pain he is
obliged to say (although supported by the authority of the greatest and
most candid writers in medicine) produced little or no advantage. — Ho
tried the use of stimulating injections of opium, &c. but all to no desi-
red effect His patients generally fell victims to their disease; Al-
though the doctor appears to notice the existence of an acid in the bow-
els, it does not appear that he used an alkali, in any shape, to neu-
tralize this acid.

The above practice is noticed, as mentioned by the doctor himself,
for the purpose of showing how malignant a state the disease sometimes
appears to assume ; and how difficult it has been to adopt a proper and
successful treatment in this disease. I will now briefly point Out the
practice of many physicians in the United States, which has come un-
under my observation, without any reference to individuals. I have
made it my particular business to gain all the information in my
power, on the subject of bowel complaints, since the year 1814, at
which time a hospital of U. S. soldiers was put under my charge, on
the west shore of the Cayuga Lake, most of whom were dangerously
afflicted with these complaints ; and at which time T became fully con-
vinced of my former errors in the treatment of those complaints. — In
travelling through many parts of the United Stales for some time, I
have not failed to make all inquiries respecting the places, and the
malignancy of those diseases, and particularly the method of treatment
made use of by the atttending physicians.

The symptoms from which physicians generally make up their minds

* See Observations on Dysentery, as occurred in Bordentown, N. J-^Philad.
Med. Museum, p. 391,


Order I.] Dysentery. 609

to call a disease dysentery, are acute tormina, tenesmus, acrid dis-
charges of blood, &c. sometimes accompanied with scybala by s-tool,
and fever.

They first employ blood-letting, as authors have told them it was an
invaluable remedy in the first stages of dysentery, to mitigate and take
oil the fever, even should the pulse he found low and quick, indicating
a well-marked typhus. — Secondly, Emetics are used, they say, to
cleanse the stomach and discharge the bile; for which purpose they
use antimony, ipecacuanha, 6cc— Thirdly, Purgatives are highly re-
commended, and freely used, by physicians. They accordingly give
calomel and jalap, castor oil, Glauber's salts, &c. — Fourthly, Sudo-
rifics, with a view to excite perspiration. A variety of medicines are
recommended, as James' powder, Dover's powder, antimonial wine,
&c. and calomel is also said to be used with the happiest effect, espe-
cially when it had affected the salivary glands. — Fifthly, Blisters. If the
pain in the bowels continues obstinate, notwithstanding the several reme-
dies before mentioned, recourse must be had to blisters, which are said
by some to act as a charm in removing distressed and harassing symp-
toms; and, indeed, it appears to me, that after the patient has under-
gone all the operation of the before-mentioned remedies, it becomes
highly necessary that something should act as a charm to relieve the sys-
tem. — Sixthly, Astringents. Some use astringents in the first stage of
the disease, and endeavour to check the discharge immediately, and
cure the patient in one or two days. But the consequence generally
proves to be an increase of more dangerous symptoms, and sometimes
a change to a still more malignant disease.

After using all these depleting and irritating remedies, the physician
finds his patient exhausted, with a preternatural constriction of the co-
lon, occasioning those spasmodic efforts which are felt in severe gri-
pings, which Cullen calls the proximate cause of the disease ; weak
and feeble pulse ; coldness of the extremities ; sunken countenance;
brown or black tongue ; great debility of stomach, with nausea and
vomiting , and giving themselves up a prey to the most abject despon-
dency. They then begin to think it neces ;ary to endeavour to stop the
discharge by stool with astringents, such as kirto, logwood, zinc, &c.
and give opium and tonics to prevent the patient from running down ;
and if the patient complains of acidity of the stomach, magnesia or
prepaied chalk is the loading prescription.

The whole routine of remedies here enumerated, which would ap-
pear to man}' well calculated to have the desired effect, will have been
administered not only without the least benefit to the patient, but on
the contrary, to his great injury; forbad his system not been mangled
in the early stages of his disease, his constitution might possibly have
effected his recovery. But the strength of his constitution is now in a
manner worn out, and the last resort of the physician, if it has not al-
ready by accident occurred, Is to try the eilect of mercury, which is
given, combined with opium, in small doses, to produce salivation;
which, in many cases, it fails to accomplish ; and in other cases, when
salivation is effected, and especially in cases of children under the age of
six years, the unfortunate patieut sinks under its operation, and death
closes the scene.

V«k I. 77


610 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

REFORMED PRACTICE - .

Indications of Cure. — 1. Correct the acrimonious state of the fluid's,
(the exciting causes of the complaint,) and cleanse the alimentary canal.

2. Remove urgent symptoms by allaying the irritation and spasms.

3. Sheathe the irritated portions of the intestines by oleaginous anJ
mucilaginous substances.

In the cure of the ordinary forms or types of dysentery, such medi-
cine must first be given, as will have both the effect of cleansing the
stomach and bowels, acting as an astringent and restoring the tone of
them; but active cathartics should never be employed, as ample experi-
ence has proved their inexpediences. To fulfil these indications, there
is no article so valuable as the genuine Turkey rhubarb. Compared to
this, all other medicines, (the bi-carbonate of potash excepted,) sink into
insignificence. It has a specific effect which no other known agent pos-
sesses, and it seems as though the Author of Nature had designed it es-
pecially for this, and similar diseases.

It is really a subject of astonishment to me, that physicians with this
root before them, should neglect to use it, and substitute poisonous
minerals in its place.

I seldom or never exhibit this article alone, but combine it in such a
manner as divests it of its nauseous taste, while at the same time, its
action and operation is rendered more effectual.

The following is the formula or preparation I first administer in eve-
ry stage of dysentery :

Take best Turkey Rhubarb Root, bruised.

Sal jEratus, or Bi-carbonate of Potash, pulverized.

Peppermint Plant, pulverized.

Cinnamon, pulverized, of each two scruples. Mix.

And rub altogether in a mortar, — add half a pint of boiling water, and
sufficient loaf sugar to sweeten ; and when cool, add two table-spoon-
fuls of best French brandy.

Of this preparation, give a table-spoonful every hour, until the pas-
sages are changed in their appearance and consistence.

The alkali neutralizes the acidity of the stomach, while the rhubarb
by quickening the peristaltic motion of the intestines, carries it to the
seat of the disease, and remove the morbid collections in them, and
restores their tone. The peppermint, also, lessens the irritation, while
the loaf sugar and brandy are valuable auxiliaries. It should be repeat-
ed according to the urgency of symptoms, puration of the disease, and
other circumstances; but generally after it has once acted upon the bow-
els, a table-spoonful given three times a day is sufficient, or it may be
given at proper intervals.

This medicine in a short time entirely changes the complexion of the
disease. It relieves the spasms, and tenesmus; corrects and lessens the
fetid discharges, and in short, brings about a healthy action throughout
the whole extent of the intestines.

Other means, however, are sometimes necessary to remove the dis-
ease.

After this preparation has acted upon the bowels, there may still be


Order I.] Dysentery. 611

inflammation and irritation in the colon, which requires other means to
subdue them, and the most powerful, are, injections or clysters.
Give the following :

Take Mucilage of Slippery-Elm Bark, one pint.
Milk, one pint.
Olive Oil, one gill
Molasses, half pint.
Common Salt, Fine, one tea-spoonful. Mix,

And let it be introduced warm with a large French syringe, to be re-
peated as often as the patient complains of much pain.

If the spasms, or pain be very great, a tea-spoonful of laudanum may
be added to the injection.

Usually in ten or fifteen minutes after one of these injections are giv-
en, there is a mitigation of the urgent symptoms. It sheathes the irri-
tated portion of the intestines, and thereby lessens the inflammation of
them. It relieves griping and tenesmus like a charm. I have some-
times known the disease so centred upon the lower portion of the bow-
els, that I have had to depend almost exclusively upon injections for a
cure.

I now recollect one case where all medicine proved useless, and upon
the use of the above injection, the patient immediately recovered.

It is necessary, also, in almost every stage of the complaint, to keep
up gentle perspiration, or moisture of the skin. As the disease is some-
times occasioned by translations of morbific matter to the intestines,
means must be used to throw them off by the excretion of the skin. For
this purpose, diluent and sudorific drinks may be given, and when the
bowels have been well cleansed, eight or ten grains of Diaphoretic Pow-
ders may be given, particularly at bed time ; while they serve to pro-
duce perspiration, they relieve pain, and procure sleep.

If there is much febrile excitement; if the skin be dry and husky,
attended with thirst, the surface must be often bathed with tepid ley
water, and also the feet.

As soon as the cutaneous vessels have become thus stimulated, a por-
tion of the morbific agents are translated from the mucus membrane of
the intestines, and expelled through this medium.

Mosely states that " intermittents are not cured with more certainty
by the Peruvian bark, than dysentery by sudorifics."

Copious perspiration however, is not called for in the complaint. A
general and uniform moisture of the skin, is all that is required.

When the pain is located more especially in one particular part, or
where there is very great distress accompanying the disease, fomentations
will be found a valuable auxiliary.

The following may be applied :

Take Hops.
Tansy.
Hoarhound.
Catnup. A handful of each.

Boil in vinegar and water, inclose in a flannel bag, and apply to
the abdomen or belly — to be often renewed. They divert the humour*


612 Intestinal or Boicel Diseases. [Class VIII,

from the intestines to the surface, and assist to remove pain, spasm,
tension, <fcc.

, Mucilaginous drinks are beneficial in dysentery, such as an infusion of
slippery-elm bark, bene plant, marsh mallows, &c. They may be giv-?.
en alternately as the stomach of the patient wi.ll hear.

But the slippery-elm is decidedly the best article. It possesses very
soothing and anti-phlogistic properties.- A tea-spoonful of the superfine
flour of the bark may be stirred into a tumbler of cold water, and the
whole or part given as the patient is able to take it. Three or four teat
spoonfuls may be given through the course of the day.

Should the putrid symptoms appear, a wine glass of yeast may be
given occasionally through the day, and about a gili of it added to every
injection.

Many are in the habit of giving castor oil in dysentery, and in some
cases it may prove serviceable, but 1 prefer the sweet or olive oil. It
seems to sheathe the intestines, and defend them from acrimonious hu-*
m.ours better than any oily substance with which I am acquainted.

After the operation of the first kind mentioned in the treatment of
this disease, a table-spoonful of fresh olive oil may be given in a little
milk, or taken without the addition of any other article every morning.
It usually acts as an aperient or laxative.

Some are in the habit of administering emetics in dysentery, but I
have never found them necessary. Cases might occur, however, in
which they would be necessary, particularly where the stomach and
liver was in a very deranged or morbid condition.

In some very obstinate cases of dysentery, where the patient did;
not improve as fast as I had desired, I have found the following prepar-,
ation to have an excellent effect :,

Take Epsom Salts, 8 o traces.

Arid Boiling Water, half a pint.

When cool, add Muriatic Acid, half an ounce.

Of this give a table-spoonful every two hours until it acts upon the
bowels, to be given in half a tumbler of cold water. After every dose*
the patient must drink freely of some warm herb tea, such as catnip
or pennyroyal:

With me this treatment has been attended with unprecedented suc-
cess, never having lost a case of dysentery in all my practice. The
remedies are prompt, energetic, and sovereign.

In protracted and unusually obstinate cases, a syrup made of the
blackberry root must be used. It has effected a cure when all other
means have proved unavailing.

Dr. V ought, late of this city, wrote a very valuable treatise upon
dysentery, in which he endeavours to show that it proceeds from an
acid, and that the only rational mode of curing it, is by an alkali. He
thus observes :

" And I venture to go one step farther, and say, that this alkaline
principle must he conveyed, either by nature or art, to the intestinal
canal, there to meet with this deleterious mater, and form a neutral and
inolfensive substance, and thus relieve the system from the malignant


Older I.] Dysentery. 613

effect of this matter, or the disease must inevitably end in death ; which
1 am sorry to say, has proved the fate of most of those unfortunate
victims of this disease, who have been treated in an opposite course,
and upon a different principle from those which are here laid down. I
must c ert, and I hope it may never be forgotten by all

who wish to be instrumental in saving the lives of their fellow-creatures,
that in every true case of dysentery, notwithstanding all other pre*
scriptions they may think necessary to allay certain symptoms that may
occur, a constant and correct course of alkaline medicines, with the
addition of mild cathartics, from the very first commencement of the
disease, till the stools become natural, and the patient is free from fe-
ver, will greatly add to their success in accomplishing a cure. Thus
far, by a careful attention to the efforts of nature, and by rendering her
such assistance as she has required, we shall find our patient convalcs^
cent, and free from fever, with a gentle diaphoresis, and stools in a
manner natural, without pain, but perhaps a little inclined to diarrhoea.
We then with propriety begin the use of tonics and astringents, which
must at first bo used in small doses, and be increased as the strength of
the patient increases, according to his situation."

REGIMEN.

" Nothing," says an experienced physician, " is of more importance
in this disease than cleanliness. It contributes greatly to the recovery
of the patient, and no less to the safety of such as attend him. In all
contagious diseases the danger is increased, and the infection spread,
by the neglect of cleanliness, but in no one more than in this. Every
thing about the patient should be frequently changed. The excrements
should never be suffered to continue in his chamber, but removed inw
mediately, and buried under ground. A constant stream of fresh air
should be admitted into tiio chamber, and it ought frequently to be
sprinkled with vinegar, juice of lemon, or some other strong acids.

The patient must not be discouraged, but his spirits kept up in hopes
of a cure. Nothing tends more to render any putrid disease mortal
than the fears and apprehensions of the sick. All diseases of this na^
ture have a tendency to sink and depress the spirits, and when that is
Increased by fears and alarms from those whom the patient believes to
be persons of skill, it cannot fail to have the worst effect.

A flannel wa'itcoat worn next the skin has often a very good effect
in the dysentery. This promotes the perspiration, without overheating
the body. Great caution, however, is necessary in leaving it off. 1
have often known a dysentery brought on by imprudently throwing ofF
a flannel waistcoat before the season was sufficiently warm. For what
ever purpose this piece of dress is worn, it should never be left off but
in a warm season.

In this disease the greatest attention must be paid to the patient's di-
et ; flesh, fish, and every thing that has a tendency to turn putrid or
rancid on the stomach, must be abstained from. Apples boiled in milk,
water-pap, and plain light pudding, with broth made of the gelatinous
parts of animals, may constitute the principal part of the patient's
food. Gelatinous broth or soup not only answers the purpose of food,


614 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

but likewise a medicine. I have often known dysenteries, which were
not of a putrid nature, cured by it, after pompous medicines had
proved ineffectual."

But of all the kinds of diet in dysentery, the following is best r —
Take a table-spoonful of wheat flour; add a little cold water to moisten
it; then add a pint of boiling milk; boil for fifteen or twenty minutes.
Remove from the fire ; sprinkle in a small quantity of fine cinnamon;
sweeten with loaf sugar ; let it be taken in moderate quantities through
the day.

" I lately saw a young man," says a physician, " who had been
seized with a dysentery. Many things had been tried there for his re-
lief, but to no purpose. At length, tired out with disappointments from
medicine, and reduced to skin and bone, he came over to Britain, rath-
er with a view to die among his relations, than with any hope of a
cure. After taking sundry medicines here with no better success than
abroad, I advised him to leave off the use of drugs, and to trust entire-
ly to a diet of milk and fruits, with gentle exercise. Strawberries was
the only fruit he could procure at that season. These he ate with milk
twice and sometimes thrice a day. The consequence was, that in a
short time his stools were reduced from upwards of twenty in a day, to
three or four ; and he was soon cured."


CHRONIC DYSENTERY.

It is sometimes the case that the acute runs into a chronic form, aris-
ing from ineffectual struggles in the system to excite a healthy action;
or it may take place from errors in diet, check of perspiration, &c.

The pulse in this form of dysentery is generally somewhat accelerat-
ed; the patient is very feeble; the appetite is impaired; the bowels
deranged ; unnatural evacuations, with tenesmus, or " pressing down."
The countenance is pale, or assumes a yellowish tinge ; the skin is dry
and husky, and the face sometimes bloats; the patient becomes emacia-
ted, and the discharges are very frequent and felid, and sometimes
general dropsy supervenes. Dissections show that the mucous mem-
brane is the seat of the disease. It becomes thickened, rough, ulcerat-
ed, and covered with pustules, and sometimes it is gangrenous.

TREATMENT.

The treatment in this disease is somewhat similar to that recommend-
ed under the acute form of dysentery.

The preparation of rhubarb and potash, first mentioned, may be giv-
en daily ; a table-spoonful three or four times in the course of twenty-
four hours. At the same time the following may be given :

Take Bayberry Bark, 1 ounce.

Wild Cherry Tree Bark, 1 ounce.
Black Birch Bark, 1 ounce.
Bitter Almonds, 1 ounce.

Add a suitable quantity of water, and boil until all the strength if ex-


Order II.] Diarrhoea, or Looseness. 615

tracted, and let there be one quart of the liquid. Sweeten with loaf
sugar, and add a gill of brandy. From half a wine-glass to a wine-glass
may be taken three or four times a day on an empty stomach.

The patient may drink an infusion, made by pouring a suitable quan-
tity of boiling water upon equal parts of sumach berries and red rasp-
berry leaves.

Should the above treatment not prove effectual, the blackberry syrup
must be taken, and occasionally an emetic administered.

The diet should consist principally of thickened milk, and chicken
or animal broths.

A physician desires me to state that he cured an obstinate bowel
disease by the following formula:

Take Extract of Logwood, 1 dram.
Chalk Mixture, 4 ounces.
Tincture of Catechu, 2 drams.
Essence of Peppermint, 2 drams. Mix.

Of this he gave a table-spoonful every hour. The pain in the bowels
being very great, he added forty drops of laudanum to a table-spoonful
of the mixture, with directions to administer in the course of an hour
twenty drops more, if the pain should not cease. Under this treatment
she soon recovered.


CHAPTER II.

DIARRHEA, OR LOOSENESS.

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is characterized by frequent discharges from the bowels,
with a pressing down, or disposition to evacuate their contents. It is
attended with more or less griping, but generally without much fever.
It is divided into different species : the crapulous, in which the faeces
are more liquid than natural, and voided in greater quantity; bilious,
wherein the faeces are yellow, and voided too copiously : mucous, in
which either from things too acrid taken into the stomach, or from cold,
particularly applied to the feet, a copious evacuation of mucus is occa-
sioned: cceliac, wherein a milky humour like chyle is voided: lienteric,
when our food quickly passes, without being much altered: hepatirr-
hozal, when a serocruentous fluid is ejected per anum, without pain.

CAUSES.

Whatever increases the action or peristaltic motion of the intestines,
may produce this disease; such as improper food, irritating substances,
or it may be occasioned by bile of an acrid or vitiated quality.

It may also be occasioned by a suppression of perspiration, worms,
crude and unripe fruits, acids, &c. In some habits there is a variety
of agents which will bring on this complaint; but probably the most


616 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

common of all, is retained, perspiration, and vitiated agents or humours,
which, not being expelled by the skin, are thrown upon the liver and
the mucous membrane, causing a vitiated or unhealthy secretion of bile
and mucous.

SYMPTOMS.

In diarrhoea, each discharge is usually preceded by a murmuring noise
and flatulence in the intestines, together with a sense of weight and un-
easiness in the lower part of the belly; which cease on the discharge
taking place, but arc again renewed before the one which is to succeed
ensues. The appearance of the stools is various; Sometimes they are
thinner than natural, from the admixture of a larger quantity of fluid
poured out by the exhalcnts of the intestines than common. Sometimes
they are slimy, and sometimes they are green, when first discharged;
sometimes they are evacuated of a yellow colour, but become green on
exposure to the air; and now and then they are of a dark, brown colour,
and very fetid. As the disease advances the stomach becomes affected,
and sickness, nausea, and vomiting occasionally prevail; the counte-
nance turns pale, and the skin is dry and rigid, if it continues for any
length of time, universal emaciation, dropsy of the lower extremities, and
relaxation of every part ensue, together with a great loss of strength.

PROGNOSIS.

In forming our prognostic in this disease, we are to be determined by
the particular cause from which it arises, whether symptomatic of anoth-
er disorder, and whether of a ciitical nature; as likewise by the degree
of debility present in the system, and the length of time it has contin-
ued. Where it attacks pregnant women, it is generally to be consider-
ed as attended with danger.

DISSECTION.

Dissections of diarrhoea which have terminated fatally, have shown,
that where it prevailed as a primary disease, ulceration of some portion
of the intestines is #ie morbid change most usually met with; in which
cases the inner membrane is often abraded for a considerable extent,
and its muscular coat laid hare. They have likewise shown that the
Follicular glands are the most frequent seat of such ulcerations, and that
they now and then become cancerous, and assume the same appearance)
as scirrllus and cancer in other parts*

COMMON TREATMENT.

Mercury, opium, &c;

REFORMED PRACTICE.

In the treatment of diarrhoea it will be necessary to attend to the fol-
lowing indications:

First, To obviate or remove the morbid cause.

Secondly, To restore the impaired tone of the parts.

Vomits not only cleanse the stomach, but promote all the secretions;
and therefore when diarrhoea has arisen from excess or repletion, or


Order II.] Chronic Diarrhoea. 617

from crude and acrid matter in the stomach, the first indication may be
answered by giving a gentle emetic in the evening, and an aperient the
succeeding morning.

If it has proceeded from obstructed perspiration, in consequence of
exposure to cold, we must then endeavour to restore this by diapho-
retic medicine.

It is very seldom necessary to resort to an emetic to cure any species
of diarrhoea, except it has assumed a chronic form, and become ex-
tremely obstinate.

Rhubarb, combined with an alkali, and aromatics, usually puts a
stop to the complaint in a few hours. The preparation mentioned un-
der the head of dysentery, may be given every hour, until the passages
are changed in their appearance, and afterwards given at longer inter-
vals. In ninety-nine cases in a hundred, this preparation almost
immediately cures ordinary forms of diarrhoea. When an exception,
however, occurs, the patient may take the following decoction:

Take Sumach Berries.
Bayberry Bark.
Wild Cherry Tree Bark. Equal parts. A small quantity of each.

Bruise, and add sufficient boiling water to make a strong infusion.
Sweeten with loaf sugar, and let half a tumbler be drank occasionally
through the da}'. An injection may be given every clay, particularly if
there is any pain or griping. At bedtime, give a portion of the Dia-
phoretic Powders; but it must be borne in mind that no anodynes or
astringents must be given, until the stomach and bowels have been
properly cleansed, or until the acrimonious state of the fluids have been
corrected.

The author of Medical Admonitions says, " One caution is however
necessary against the too prompt and indiscriminate employment of
purgative medicines, in the outset of the disease. Believing it never to
originate but in the irritation occasioned by some matter, which they
suppose cannot be too rapidly removed, those who suffer from the dis-
ease, generally, have immediate recourse to some active purgative, to
expedite the salutary process which they suppose nature to have institu-
ted. But it will frequently happen, that so far from accelerating the
cure of this malady, such medicines will, by their additional irritation
prove highly pernicious."

The patient must take for his diet, milk boiled and mixed with a lit-
tle wheat flour.


CHRONIC DIARRHtEA.

Simple diarrhoea sometimes becomes chronic in its character, often
continuing for a length of time, very obstinate. There is a preternatm
ral discharge from the bowels which is kept up at intervals for a treat
length of time, and which proves very obstinate. When this is the case
and when the common diarrhoea does not yield to the usual course of
treatment, but assumes this protracted type, it must be treated the
same as chronic dysentery. Recourse must be had to mild emetics,
and mild laxatives, and our common purgative in such cases, is verv

Voh I. 78 '


618 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

serviceable. After the exibition, the neutralizing mixture, or the pre-
paration of rhubarb before mentioned, may be given in doses of a table
spoonful three or four times a day. At the same time, the syrup of
blackberry root must be given.

fc The diet must consist principally of thickened milk, to which a little
powdered cinnamon lias been added.

It arises from a deranged or morbid state of the liver, which secretes
such an acrid or poisonous fluid, as seriously affects or diseases the mu-
cous membrane of tbe intestines, causing inflammation, ulcerations, or
contractions. The object should be first, to abate the local inflamma-
tion ; second, to change the nature of the secretions of the stomach and
bowels, and to allay the irritations of the intestines ; third, to diminish
the frequency of the discharges with aperients combined with astringents:
fourth, to restore lost strength.

In treating the complaint, regard must always be had to the skin,
as well as any other secretion'and excretion.


CHAPTER III.
COLIC. (Colica.)

DESCRIPTION.

Colic is characterized by great pain in the bowels seated principally
in the umbilical region, and extending to the stomach, accompanied
with nausea, retching, vomiting, and often a spasmodic contraction of
the muscles of the abdomen. Several species are enumerated.

1. Flatulent Colic, when there is costiveness, griping in the bowels,
a rumbling noise, distention of the stomach, pain severe, with an incli-
nation to vomit, &c.

2. Hysteric Colic, when there is nausea and sickness at the stomach,
severe spasms, costiveness, and dejection of spirits, &.c.

3. Bilious Colic, when there is a bitter taste in the mouth, thirst,
febrile heat, and a vomiting of bilious matter and costiveness.

4. Painter's Colic, occasioned by the absorption of lead.

This disease it called colic, from its being more directly seated in the
intestines called the colon, than any other. It is called by a variety of
names, on account of its symptoms, such as, colica biliosa, from excess
of bile in the bowels; colica calculosa, from stony substances in the in-
testines; colica febriosa, or colic with fever; colica flatulenta, colic
from wind; colica miscnterica, from diseased misentery; colica ner-
vosa, nervous colic ; colica pituitosa, or spasmodic colic, &c.

CAUSES.

The disease is produced by various causes, such as crude and aces-
sant food, wind, a redundance of acrid bile, long- continued costiveness,
hardened feces, certain metalic poisons, derangement of the priraae


Order III.] Flatulent Colic. 619

vise, metastasis of gout or rheumatism, hysteria, the application of cold
and moisture, worms in the intestinal tuhe and from swallowing poison-
ous substances as lead, the different species has been variously denom-
inated, according to the cause which has given rise to it, but in all of
them the proximate cause seems to be the same, viz. a spasmodic con-
striction of some part of the intestines.

In all cases there is evidently an irritating substance in the alimenta-
ry canal, which produces a spasmodic contraction of the abdominal
muscles, and sometimes violent inflammation, coldness of the extremi-
ties, distension of the stomach by a collection of wind, vomiting, obsti-
nate costiveness, and sometimes an evacuation of faeces by the mouth,
(a very disagreeable and distressing symptom) called the aliac passion.
The pain changes its situation, and is not confined particularly to one
spot.


FLATULENT COLIC.

This disease is termed flatulent colic in consequence of indigestion
and flatulence being the most predominant symptoms.

A weak or debilitated state of the digestive organs, induces this spe-
cies of colic. In persons of this description, certain articles of food will
produce the disease, such as unripe fruit, crude vegetables, &c.

Flatulent colic generally commences by a sense of fulness.and uneasi-
ness at the pit of the stomach, attended usually with pain, nausea, retch-
ing and vomiting, which continues to increase until the patient becomes .
very distressed. After a while these symptoms subside or partially sub- *
side, and there are short intervals, the pain occuring in paroxysms,
upon an accession of which, the patient is extremely uneasy, and can
scarcely lay a moment in one position. He rolls upon the bed, and if
his strength permit, gets upon the floor, where he still continues to change
his posture, moving to and fro, with his body bent forward, and with
his hands pressing upon the abdomen. The pain flies from one part of
the bowels to another, and is much lessened when there is a discharge
of wind either upwards or downwards. There is costiveness with con-
siderable febrile excitement, with pain, soreness, griping of the bowels,
a rumbling noise, extcntion of the stomach, an inclination to throw up,
and coldness of the extremities.

The presence of wind enables us to distinguish this form of colic from
the others.

TREATMENT.

Flatulent colic is cured with very little difficulty. The principal ob-
ject is to expel the wind, and to remove the constipation of the bowels.
To effect which, I usually give a purgative combined with aromatic^
The following formula generally affords immediate relief.

Take Cinnamon.
Cloves.
Nutmegs.
Ginger.
Gum Aloes, Of each, equal parts. Pulverised.


620 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII,

Add a large table spoonful of this compound to half a pint of Hol-r
land gin. After it has stood a short time, give a table-spoonful until it
acts upon the bowels, or until relief is procured.

At the same time the patient should take freely of peppermint tea.
Brisk friction should also be made upon the stomach and bowels, which
often occasions a free discharge of wind. The belly also may be bathed
with capsicum and spirits. If the colic has proceeded from over eating
or loading the stomach, half a dram of Ipecac may be given, and the
operation of it aided by drinking a weak infusion of chamomile.

or who is in acuta distress, it is desirable to afford immediate relief, or
before the above medicine has time to mitigate the symptoms. When
this is the case, give an opium pill, containing two or three grains, to
be repeated in an hour if the pain does not subside.

As soon as the patient becomes relieved, give an ounce of cold pres-
sed castor oil, and if it does not act as a purgative in the course of an
hour or two, let its operation be aided by a clyster or injection. This,
treatment soon puts an end to the complaint.


BILIOUS COLJC.


DESCRIPTION.


This species of colic seems to depend upon a super-abundant, or
morbid secretion of bile, and remotely upon noxious or deleterious ef-
fluvia of the atmosphere. It occurs more generally in the fall after
sultry and wet weather. The cause seems to be very nearly connected
with that of bilious remitting and intermitting fever.


CAUSES.


Dr. Gregory states that bilious colic is closely allied to bilious diarrhoea
and cholera occurring along with them, and apparently differing from
them only in some unessential features. It would appear that bilious
colic is occasioned oftener by a deficiency of biliary secretion, than
a redundancy of it. This may be inferred from the want of the cus-
tomary stimulus of bile imparted to the intestines, giving risa to the
most obstinate costiveness, and there is no doubt but that the quantity of
the bile also is very acrid, or vitiated, and which causes such a morbid
and irritable state of the stomach.

The intermediate cause of the complaint seems to be a derangement
in the capillary vessels, which do not eliminate the ordinary morbific
agents, and which mixes with the blood, is carried to the inward parts,
and there is an effort of the system to expel them through the medium
of the liver, stomach, and intestines. Acrid bile pent up in the intes-
tines, becomes literally a poison to the system, and is the occasion of
many very anomalous symptoms.

SYMPTOMS.
The bilious colic generally seizes the patient about the beginning of


Order III.] Bilious Colic. 621

summer, with a vomiting of a yellow greenish cast ; a bitter taste in
navel ; sometimes with most excrutiating pain all over the abdomen ;
then shifting from place to place ; little or no discbarge of urine ; a pul-
sation in the abdomen, with a sense of cold about it: frequently it is
attended with a hoarseness, which continues during the whole stage of
the disease, with thirst, fever, and costiveness ; and sometimes termi-
nates in the iliac passion.

" Bilious colic," says a writer, "is ushered in with head-ache, loath-
ing of food, a bitter taste in the mouth, and very often bilious vomiting;
but the urgent symptoms are distention and griping pains of the bow-
els, urgent pain of the loins, and obstinate costiveness, or at most te-
nesmus, the motions being very scanty and partly slimy. The con-
tinuance of such an irritation for a short time usually leads to fever ;
and bilious colic is therefore frequently complicated with the more gen-
eral affection, bilious fever. In this particular variety of fever, there
is often considerable head-ache, for the most part referred to the fore-
head. The tongue is loaded, the fur upon it being often yellow, and
in streaks. There is besides, much thirst, a short dry cough, restless-
ness, and exceeding languor and lassitude, the pulse being seldom much
accelerated, or the heat of skin very apparent. In irritable habits, hys-
terical symptoms frequently show themselves."

" In this state of the disease, if a discharge of feculent bilious matter
can be obtained, the symptoms generally yield ; but it is sometimes diffi-
cult to procure evacuations of this character, on account of the irritability
of the stomach. Where bilious stools are not brought away, it is com-
mon to find chocolate-coloured motions passed, often in vast quantity,
reducing the patient to a state of great weakness. If by the fortunate
combination of medicines, or by the efforts of nature, the irritating
cause is removed, the tongue becomes clean, appetite returns, and the
patient recovers strength."

DISCRIMINATION,
The colic is to be distinguished from inflammation of the bowels by
the spasmodic contraction of the abdominal muscles, by the absence or
trifling degree of fever, by the state of the pulse, which is frequent
but full, and by the diminution of the pain upon the pressure of the
abdomen : whereas in enteritis, there are no spasms, but a considerable
degree of fever, the pulse is quick and small, and the abdomen ex-
tremely tender to the touch,"

PROGNOSIS.

When the pain remits, or shifts its situation, not being obstinately
confined to one place, and when the patient experiences considerable
ease after a discharge either of wind or feces, and stools are obtained,
we may have reason to expect a favourable termination to the disease ;
but the sudden cessation of pain, with the costiveness remaining ob-
stinate, cold sweats breaking out, a weak tremulous pulse, frequent
syncope, and the ensuing of hiccup, denote supervening inflammation
terminating in a gangrene.


622 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

DISSECTION.

Wlien the disease proves mortal, the usual appearances to be obser-
ved on dissection are, inflammation on the surface of the intestines,
distension and irregular contraction of some particular part of the tube,
or a passing of one portion of it within another to a considerable ex-
tent, the part received within the other being in a contracted state, or
probably gangrenous.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, mercury, antimony, blistering, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The indications of cure in this disease are,

1. To allay the irritability of the stomach.

2. To evacuate the bowels of their acrid contents.

3. To remove spasms, irritation or urgent symptoms.

4. To excite a healthy secretion of the liver.

The most distressing symptoms of the complaint are nausea, retching,
and vomiting ; and therefore the first attention of the physician seems
naturally directed to the stomach ; indeed, very little can be done by
way of medicines, until this irritable state of the stomach is allayed.
this object. Let the following be administered ;

TakeBi-carbonate of Potash, 1 dram.

Distilled Peppermint Water, eight ounces.
Laudanum, a tea^-spoonful, Mix.

Of this give a small table-spoonful every half hour, or as often as vomi-
ting occurs, and when it is allayed, give the purgative combined with
aromatics, as directed under the head of flatulent colic'

Should not this act upon the bowels, or should it not afford relief in
a few hours, or in a reasonable time, let it be followed up by the ad-
ministration of a double portion of our Common purgative, or anti-bil-
ious physic. The liver and stomach are sometimes in such a very tor-
pid state, that even these active cathartics are insufficient to evacuate
the contents of the inestines. When this happens, clysters or injections
become the anchor of hope, or the only alternative. Those which are
properly prepared, and of the right materials, exert a most powerful,
sovereign, and salutary effect in this disease.

They remove the spasms and griping pains, stimulate the intestines,
by which their contents are discharged, as well as allay the nausea and
vomiting.

The common injection may first be given, such as is mentioned un-
der the head of ' Dysentery.' This, in general, is sufficient — but some-
times, those more stimulating are necessary. In such a case, let the
following be given :

Take Lobelia Inflata, a tea-spoonful.

Capsicum, do.

Slippery Elm Bark, do.
Add a quart of Boiling Water. Mix.


Order III.] Painters Colic. 623

After standing a short time, strain, and add half a pint of sweet milk,
half a pint of molasses, a gill of sweet oil, and half an ounce of
laudanum. Introduce as much of this injection as the patient can bear,
to be repeated every hour or two, until evacuations are procured or
relief obtained.

The next step in order will be the use of fomentations to the stom-
ach and bowels. Hops, catnip, wormwood, and tanzy may be boiled
with vinegar and water, and inclosed in flannel or muslin, and applied
over the whole abdomen, as warm as the patient can bear ; to be of-
ten renewed.

When the patient has submitted to this treatment, should the disease
still continue unsubdued, or should there be much pain, administer a
pill made of the pure Turkey opium, the size of a pea, which contains
three grains. If the first does not have the desired effect in two hours,
repeat it, or let another be given.

It is sometimes the case, that the disease assumes such a very vio-
lent character, that it becomes necessary, at the very onset, to give
an anodyne, and it will sometimes be followed by an excellent effect.
It will put a stop to the vomiting, allay the irritation of the intestines
by its anti-spasmodic and relaxing properties, and prepare the way for
purgatives.

Again, I have seen the system in such a state, under the influence of
bilious cholic, that nothing could be made to pass the bowels, until per-
spiration was promoted. It therefore will be necessary to give sudo-
rific medicines. Catnip and peppermint tea should be freely drank,
the feet bathed in warm ley water, and bricks heated and covered in
cloths, wet in vinegar, applied to the legs and sides of the body.
Where the disease is very violent and severe in its character, in con-
junction with the means recommended, it may be necessary to use the
warm bath.

After the bowels have been freed, and the symptoms mitigated, oc-
casional purgatives or injections may be necessary to prevent a relapse.

Occasionally a case has occurred where the following proparation
has apparently answered better than any other :

Take Epsom Salts, ei^ht ounces.

Muriatic Acid, half an ounce.
Boiling- Water, eight ounces. Mix.

Dose, a table-spoonful every hour, in half a tumbler of water, till if
acts as a laxative.


PAINTER'S COLIC (Pidonum.)

DESCRIPTION.

Tins species of colic differs from the other in some respects, more"
particularly as regards its severity or violence, and the paralytic symp-
toms attending it. It is characterized by very obstinate costiveness,
with a vomiting of acrid bile, severe pains about the region of the na-


524 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [Class VIII.

vel, and shooting from thence to each side, with great violence ; strong
spasms in the intestines, and muscles of the ahdomen.

CAUSES.

It is occasioned by long-continued costiveness; by an accumulation
of acrid bile; by cold applied either to the extremities or to the belly
itself; by a free use of unripe fruits; by great irregularity in the mode
of living; by acrid food or drink, such as sour wines or cider; and by
the inhalation of vapours arising from a decomposition of lead, or fre-
quently handling some of its chemical preparations; hence painters and
glaziers are frequently attacked by it. From tlie disease occurring fre-
quently in Devonshire, (England) and other cider counties, it has gen-
erally been supposed to arise from an impregnation of lead received
into the stomach; and it seems now to be perfectly understood that the
malic acid of the apple takes up in solution a portion of the lead of the
vats employed in manufacturing the cider, which soon acts on the stom-
ach of those who drink this liquor abundantly, and produces the disease
in question.

SYMPTOMS.

The painter's colic comes on gradually with a pain at the pit of the
stomach, extending downwards to the intestines, particularly round the
navel, accompanied by eructations, slight sickness at the stomach, thirst,
anxiety, obstinate costiveness, a frequent but ineffectual desire to evacu-
ate the contents of the bowels, and a quick contracted pulse, but seldom
exceeding one hundred in a minute. After a short time the pains in-
crease considerably in violence, the whole region of the belly is highly
painful to the touch, the muscles of the abdomen are contracted into
hard irregular knots or lumps; the intestines themselves exhibit symp-
toms of violent spasm, insomuch that a clyster can hardly he injected
from the powerful contraction of the sphincter ani ; and there is con-
stant restlessness, with a frequent vomiting oi' an acrid or porraceous
matter, but more particularly after taking either food or medicine.

Upon a further increase of the symptoms, or their not being quickly
alleviated, the spasms become more frequent as well as violent, the
costiveness proves invincible, and an inflammation of the intestines en*
sues, which soon destroys the patient by terminating in gangrene. In
an advanced state of the disease it is no uncommon occurrence for dy-
suria to take place in a Very high degree.

DISCRIMINATION.

Due attention will be necessary in distinguishing accurately between
enteritis or inflammation of the. bowels and painter's colic. The symp-
toms which characterize the latter, and distinguish it from the former,
are these: the pain at first is rather more in the pit of the stomach; it
afterwards fixes itself at the navel, and thence darts in all directions
over the abdominal viscera, accompanied by such a retraction of the
abdominal muscles, as to oblige the patient to lean forward, as the only
posture in which he feels at all easy, whilst at the same time the circu-
lation does not appear to be affected. In enteritis the abdomen is tu-


Order II.] Painter's Colic. 625

mid, hard, and painful, but the pain seems concentrated, and does not
diverge as in those spasmodic twitchings or dartings observed in colica
pictonum: moreover the pulse is quick, although usually small. In coli-
ca pictonum, besides the rigidity and retraction of the muscles, the belly
seems pressed down towards the spine with a force proportional to the
degree of spasm. In inflammation of the bowels there is little or no
spasm; but in the other disease, there is soon perceived a disposition to
paralysis in the extremities, and often a contraction of the joints, which
never take place in enteritis or inflammation of thebowcls.

The palsied and dropping hand, and slightly contracted finders, un-
accompanied by spasm in the upper extremities, or by any affection of
the lower, supervene with remarkable uniformity in the colic to which
painters and glaziers are liable from constantly handling white lead.

Colica pictonum is always attended with some degree of danger, but
which is ever in proportion to the violence of the symptoms and the du-
ration of the disease.

TREATMENT.

The treatment in this species of colic is nearly the same as in the bil-
ious The means in general, however, require, if practicable, 1o be
more prompt and energetic. I usually commence the treatment of the
painter's colic —

1. By giving medicine to allay the vomiting, the same as in bilious
colic.

2. Administer cathartics, and dislodge the irritating and acrid agents
from the intestines.

3. Remove the spasms, irritation, <fcc. by injections, anodynes, and
sudorifics.

After the vomiting has in some degree ceased, or before, if the alka-
line medicine does not allay it, give fifty of the black droj>s, and repeat
every hour until the pain subsides; then give a double portion of the
anti-bilious physic, every two hours, until the bowels are evacuated, to
be aided by injections and fomentations, as in bilious colic.

I have found the warm bath of very great service in the painter's
colic. It should be made hot, and the patient should be kept in as long
as possible. I remember one case where the patient was, for a length
of time, senseless, from the violence of the pain, and where the hot bath
with other means soon restored him to health. Indeed, the treatment laid
down, is invariably successful in every species of colic, never yet having
lost a single case ; while those, labouring under this disease, who have
submitted to the common practice, have been bled, mercurialized, bits-.
tered, and destroyed.

Dr. Luckey, formerly of Elizabethtown, has published the result of
a very large experience, with opium and castor oil, in the present dis-
ease. Foiled by the ordinary modes of practice, he resorted to the use
of powerful doses of opium, followed by castor oil, and always with the
happiest effects. " I began," says he, " by administering large doses
of opium, and generally gave ten grains at a dose, every hour, until two
scruples were taken. I was exceedingly rejoiced to find that the symp-
toms now began to yield, and a few common doses of oleum ricini, or

Vol I. 79


625 Intestinal or Bowel Diseases. [C lass VIII.

the infusion of senna, would produco the desired effect. Of forty cases
which occurred in my practice, none, except one, proved fatal after the
adoption of this practice."

The prevalence of this disease arose from the country people in the
vicinity of Elizabethtown, putting up their apple-butter, during the fall
of 1814, in earthen vessels badly glazed, got from a neighbouring pot-
tery. The acid of the apple-butter acting upon and dissolving the gla-
zure of the crocks, (composed of red-lead) converted into acetate of
lead, which, being received into the system, with the apple-butter,
gave rise to this disease.


CHAPTER III.

COSTIVENESS. (Conslipaiio.)

A certain state of the bowels may be either constitutional or symp-
tomatic; generally the latter. There is a retention of the excrements,
attended with hardness and dryness of the evacuations, which are often
difficult, and sometimes painful.

Sedentary persons are peculiarly liable to this complaint, especially
those of a sanguineous or choleric temperament; or who are subject to
hypochondriac affections, the gout, acute fevers, or a diseased state of
the liver and spleen.

Costiveness is frequently occasioned by negleeting the usual times of
going to stool, and checking the natural tendency to those salutary ex-
cretions; by an extrordinary heat of the body, and copious sweats; by
receiving into the stomach a larger proportion of solid food than is pro-
per for the quantity of fluids swallowed; by a free use of opium, and by
taking food that is dry, heating, and difficult of digestion. Drinking
freely and frequently of Port wine may likewise occasion costiveness.

With the defect of stools there sometimes exist nausea, want of appe-
tite, flatulency, pains in the head, and a degree of febrile heat.

TREATMENT.

This disease is to be obviated by an attention to diet ; by observing
certain regular periods for soliciting motions; and where these fail, by
having recourse to laxatives.

The diet of such as are of a costive habit ought to consist much of
vegetables and ripe fruits, and their ordinary drink of malt liquors.

With respect to the second object to be attended to, a habit of regu-
larity should be endeavoured to be established by the person's going at a
certain hour or hours each day, and making proper efforts at each period
for promoting an evacuation. If a natural inclination arises at any
time, this ought likewise to be encouraged.

The laxatives most proper for obviating costiveness are those which
afford the least irritation, but which will at the same time procure one
or two motions daily.


Order III.] Cosiiveness. 627

The anti-dyspeptic pills should be given daily, in the commencementi
and afterwards occasionally ; but it is necessary to obtain a regular state
of the bowels, by exercise, food, &c.

The use of every purgative medicine creates a necessity for its repe-
tition, and by this repetition the bowels lose their energy, their delicate!
nerves become torpid to the stimulus of the food and drink, and the se- 4
cretions formed from them. A natural discharge of the contents of the
bowels ought therefore to be solicited by those of a costive habit, in pre-
ference to the habitual use of any kind of purgative whatever.

The brown bread is exceedingly valuable to obviate costiveness; also,
stewed apples, peaches, and alLkinds of ripe fruits are excellent I
find that most cases of costiveness arise from want of exercise, and no*
thing will supply the place of it; it should be punctually practised, and
brisk frictions should be made upon the abdomen, and it should be daily
" kneaded."

Wheat bread should be avoided ; also, all astringent articles! spi-
ces, &c.


g2g Projlucnt Diseases, [Class IX ,


CLASS IX.


PROFLUENT DISEASES


CHARACTER.

By this class of diseases is to be understood such as are characterized
by a preternatural discharge of blood, or some fluid from the system
produced in most cases, by muscular debility, or relaxation of the mus-
cular fibre.


CHAPTER L

VOMITING OF BLOOD. (Hcematamaeis.)

DESCRIPTION.

Bv this disease we understand a discharge of blood by the mouth,-
generally in a considerable quantity, attended with retching and vomi-
ting, and without its being characterized by those symptoms attendant
on haemoptysis or bleeding at the lungs.

CAUSES.

This disease may arise from wounds, blows, bruises, or any thing
which causes too great a flow of blood to this organ, from a suppression
of the menses, or the bleeding piles, or it may be symptomatic of some
other diseases. It more generally however arises from debility, iroin S
relaxation of certain blood vessels, &c.

SYMPTOMS.

A vomiting of blood is readily to be distinguished from a dischargo'
from the lungs, by its being usually preceded by sense of weight, pain,>
or anxiety in the region of the stomach; by its being unaccompanied by
any cough; by the bbol bain^ discharged in a very considerable quan-
tity; by its being of a dirk colour, and somewhat guraous; and by its
being mixed with the other contents of the stomach.

COMMON TREATMENT.
Bleeding, blistering, mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.
If the disease arises from a suppression of the menses, let means be
taken to restore them by appropriate remedies ; and in all cases, it will


Order II.] Spitting of Blood. 629

be necessary to divert the blood from the seat of the complaint to its
original channels. The feet must be bathed, and perspiration promoted,
or restored.

I have found purgatives very useful. They may be given about once
a week, or according to the urgency of the symptoms. This will re-
move the oppression and load at the stomach, and sense of fulness which
accompanies the complaint, and by its revulsive effects, will heal the
diseased blood vessels.

If called to suppress a copious bleeding from the mouth, it will be ne-
cessary to administer astringents. A little common salt will often sup-
press the discharge, or a little alum whey. If these fail, give a decoc-
tion of beth root and the black cohusln After the haemorrhage is stop-
ped, strengthening medicine* must be given ; and the restorative cor-
dial and wine bitters are very valuable. The anti-dyspeptic pill should
be given to keep the bowels in a soluble state, and even though the bow-
els be soluble, a purgative must be occasionally administered.

The patient should exercise moderately, and should never fatigue or
strain himself in arty way; He should avoid sudden transitions from heat
to cold, and he will find it serviceable to wear a strengthening plaster,
to the pit of the stomach.

His diet should be light, but nutritious. The patient ma}' drink ti
cold decoction of the bugle weed or water hoarhound (Lycopus Virgin-
icus) for his constant drink. It is tonic and astringent.


CHAPTER II.

SPITTING OF BLOOD. (Hemoptysis.)
DESCRIPTION.

This disease is characterized by coughing up florid or frothy blood,:
preceded usually by heat, or pain in the chest, irritation in the wind
pipe, and a saltish taste in the mouih.

It is readily to be distinguished from hsematemesis, or vomiting of
blood as in this last, the blood h usually thrown out in considerable
quantities; and is, moreover, of a darker colour, more gumous, and
mixed with the other contents of the stomach; whereas blood proceed-
ing from the lungs is usually in small quantity, of a florid colour, and
mixed with a little frothy mucous only.

CAUSES.

A spitttng of blood arises most usually between the ages of sixteen
and twenty-five, and may be occasioned by any violent exertion either
in running, jumping, wrestling, singing loud, or blowing wind-instru-
ments; as likewise by wounds, plethora, weak vessels, hectic fever,
coughs, irregular living, excessive drinking, or a suppression of some
accustomed discharge, such as the menstrual or hemorrhoidal. It may


630 Projlucnt Diseases. [Class IX.

likewise be occasioned by breathing air which is loo much rarified to be
able properly to expand the lungs.

Persons in whom there is a faulty proportion, either in the vessels of
the lungs, or in the capacity of the chest, being distinguished by a nar-
row thorax and prominent shoulders, or who are of a delicate make and
sanguine temperament, seem much predisposed to this haemorrhage ;
but in these, the complaint is often brought on by the concurrence of
various occasional and exciting causes before mentioned.

A spitting of blood is not, however, always to be considered as a
primary disease. It is only a symptom, and in some disorders, such as
pleurisies, peripneumonies, and many fevers, often arises, and is the
presage of a favourable termination.

It is said that the disease has been produced by pricking or wounding
the auditory nerve.

SYMPTOMS.

Sometimes it is preceded, as has already been observed, by a sense
of weight and oppression at the chest, a dry tickling cough, and some
slight difficulty of breathing. Sometimes it is ushered in with shiverings,
coldness at the extremities, pains in the back and loins, flatulency* cos-
tiveness, and lassitude. The blood which is spit up is generally thin, and
of a florid red colour ; but sometimes it is thick, and of a dark or black-
ish cast; nothing, however, can be referred fron this circumstance,
but that the blood has lain a longer or shorter time in the breast, be-
fore it was discharged.

An haemoptoe is not attended with danger, where no symptoms of
phthisis pulmonalis or consumption have preceded or accompanied the
haemorrhage, or where it leaves behind no cough, dyspnoea, or other
affection of the lungs; nor is it dangerous in a strong healthy person, of
a sound constitution ; but when it attacks persons of a weak lax fibre,
and delicate habit, it may be difficult to remove it.

It seldom takes place to such a degree as to prove fatal at once ; but
when it does, the effusion is from some large ^essel. The danger,
therefore, will be in proportion as the discharge of b]ood comes from a
large vessel, or a small one.

When the disease proves fatal, in consequence of the rupture of some
large vessels, there is found, on dissection, a considerable quantity of
clotted blood in the lungs, and there is usually more or less of an in-
flammatory appearance at the ruptured part. Where the disease ter-
minates in pulmonary consumption, the same morbid appearances

COMMON TREATMENT.
Bleeding, blistering, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

For the bleeding, the same treatment pursued as pointed out under the
preceding disease: in addition to which, a strong decoction of the bugle
iceed must be taken freely, and cold as soon as the haemorrhage has sub-


Order III.] Bleeding at the Nose. 631

sided, in order to prevent a recurrence of it, the vegetable syrup should
be taken, and the ordinary course pursued to equalize the circulation.

The tincture of digitalis, has, in many cases, proved serviceable.
Fifteen or twenty drops may be taken three or four times a day. This
complaint is often a forerunner of the consumption, or connected with
it, and it will therefore be necessary to take such medicines as are
recommended under that head, provided the above does not cure.

I lately attended a case of this kind, where the patient bled two or
three gallons, and yet he recovered.

Indian Method of Curing Spitting of Blood.
[Communicated in a letter to the late Dr. Mease,]
The following case is a very extraordinary one ; but I know the gen-
tleman to be a man of veracity, and had this account from his own
mouth. He was of a thin, hectic constitution, and laboured under a
troublesome pulmonary cough for some years ; at last he was taken
with an haemoptoe, for which he had the best advice he could get in
Maryland, but he grew rather worse under the care of two physicians-
who attended him for several months ; and at last he was prevailed up-
on to put himself under the care of a negro fellow, who is the Ward of
Maryland ; for he has the reputation of performing some extraordinary
cures, though nature has the chief claim to them ; but indeed this was
not the case here. — In short, he advised the gentleman to go into a
warm bath twice a dav, and sit up to his chin in it, for two or three
minutes at a time, and as soon as he came out to dash cold water seve-
ral times on his breast, and to wear flannel next his skin. This meth-
od soon relieved the gentleman ; and when I left Maryland, which was
about seven or eight years after the cure, he remained free from his
haemoptoe, eased very much of his cough, and went through a good
deal of exercise.


CHAPTER III.
BLEEDING AT THE NOSE, (Epistaxis.)

DESCRIPTION.

In the nose there is a considerable net-work of blood-vessels expand-
ed on the internal surface of the nostrils, and covered only with a thin
tegument : hence, upon any determination of a greater quantity of blood
than ordinary to the vessels of the head, those of the nose are easily
ruptured. In general the blood flows only from one nostril ; but in
some cases it is discharged from both, then showing a more considera-
ble disease.

Persons of a sanguine and plethoric habit, and not yet advanced to
manhood, are very liable to be attacked with this complaint; females
being much less subject to it than males, particularly after menstrua-


652 Profluent Diseases. [Class IX.

tion has commenced. Peculiar weakness in the vessels of the part,
and the decline of life, may also he considered as predisposing causes.
Great heat, violent exertion, external violence, particular postures of
the body, and every tiling that determines the blood to the head, are
to be looked upon as its exciting causes.

Bleeding at the nose comas on at times without any previous warn-
ings; but at others, it is preceded by a pain and heaviness of the head,
vertigo, Hushing in the face, heat and itching in the nostrils, a throb-
bing of the temporal arteries, and a quickness of the pulse. In some
instances, a coldness of the feet, and shivering of the whole body, to-
gether with costiveness, are observed to precede an attack of this hae-
morrhage.

TREATMENT.

In general, bleeding at the nose soon ceases ; but this is not always
the case. It sometimes proves very serious. When a person has bled
from the nose some length of time, it is necessary to take proper means
to check it. And in most cases, it may easily be done, by diverting
the blood from the head, and throwing it back to the extremities and
surface, and this must he effected by the usual means to equalize the
circulation. The feet must be immediately immersed in a tub of warm
ley water, and hysop or pennyroyal tea must be taken to produce per-
spiration.

This will generally stop it in every case. If this fail, let a little cold
water be applied to the nape of the neck, the head, and the face. At
the same time a little of the pulverized bayberry bark may be introdu-
ced up the nostrils by means of a probe to which a little piece of linen is
fastened. If this fail, let a piece of lint rolled into a little ball, and dip-
ped in alum water, be introduced into the nostril as far up as possible. Af-
ter this, a coagulum will form, and it will be stopped.

Some time ago, I was called to a case where the person had hied from
the nose, several days, and become exceedingly reduced ; and all the
means he had used, afforded him no relief. I pursued only the means
recommended, to equalize the circulation, and it soon cured him. As
soon as his chill was removed by perspiration, the bleeding stopped.

A few years ago, I was walking along Chatham-street, in this city,
when my attention was arrested by a person who was bleeding freely at
the nose. I stepped up to him, and rendered him such aid as was then
in my power, not having any suitable medicine with me. I applied
cold water to his neck and head without any effect. While the man
was bleeding, a person rushed through the mob who stood gazing at
the man, and with one of his fingers thrust up a powder into his nos-
trils. In a few minutes it entirely checked the bleeding. The person
afterwards disclosed the remedy to a friend of his, or one of the by-
standers who communicated it to me. It consisted in nothing more or
less than dried or smoked beef finely grated, and which makes a
very handsome brown powder. This medicine, which he kept as a
nostrum, he stated had cost him $500, and he afterwards expressed a
regret when he heard that it had been communicated to a physician.
Upon enquiry, I found the person to be a no less personage than th«


Order IV.] Involuntary Discharge of Urini. 633

honourable High Constable Hays, who afterwards was very communi-
cative with me upon the subject.

I have since tried the same medicine with success. The y owde
must be introduced as far dp the nostril as possible. The property o
this article depends probably upon the salt which it contains, and the
mechanical agency produced, may likewise exert a beneficial effec.


CHAPTER IV.
INVOLUNTARY DISCHARGE OF URINE. (Liabctis.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease is characterized by large quantities of urine, and ofteri
an involuntary discharge of the same: It is accompanied with great
debility, costiveness, fever, voracious appetite, emaciation; a large
proportion of saccharine arid other matter which is generally voided in
a quantity fair exceeding that of the aliment, or fluid taken into thd
system:

CAUSES.

Sometimes it arises from the use of spirituous liquors ; from debility j;
from cold ; from diuretic medicines ; poor diet ; depressing passions J
an impoverished state of the blood, &c. It is thought to be occasioned
by a perverted or diseased action of the kidneys.

Diabetes makes its approaches veiy irisiduouslv. The first symptoms"
usually complained of are lassitude 1 , weakness, a disposition to sweat-
ing on slight exertions, and head-ache. Sometimes a diseased state of
the urine advances to a considerable extent, and subsists for some time,'
without being accompanied by any strongly-marked constitutional dis-
turbance, and occasionally even without attracting the notice of the
patient: The most striking symptom of the disease is ah increase in the
quantity of the urine. This varies very much in' different cases, and
is for the most part a good index of the violence of the disease. The
largest quantity which I have seen recorded as having been passed in
twenty-four hours, is thirty-six pints ; and it is not uncommon to find
from twenty to thirty pints discharged daily for weeks,- or even months
together. The average quantity may perhaps be stated at twelve or
fifteen pints; and rt is - a remarkable fact, that in many instances
it exceeds the Whole amount of solid and fluid. The secretion of
so much urine is almost necessarily attended with a frequent desire to
pass it. The patient is generally compelled to rise three or four times
in the niglrt for this purpose. [Thomas.]

The urine of diabetes is of a pale straw colour. Its smell is com-
monly faint and peculiar, sometimes like sweet whey or milk. Its taste
is, with few exceptions, decidedly saccharine, or sweet, in a 'greater
or less degree. Even if this should not be perceptible in the first instance*

Vol. I. 80


634 Projluent Diseases. [Class IX.

it may often be detected when the urine is concentrated by evapora-
tion. In many cases the saccharine quality of the urine is occasional-
ly suspended ; and this happens both spontaneously, and from the in-
fluence of medicine. Of the fact, that sugar is secreted by the kid-
ney in this disease, no doubt can be entertained. It is confirmed by
the repeated experiments of chemists in all countries. The quantity of
sugar formed is in most instances directly proportioned to the degree of
diuresis. If a patient passes twelve pints of urine in a day, of the
specific gravity 1035, he voids in that time above sixteen ounces and
a half of solid matter. The quantity, however, is in many cases much
greater than this.

Other important symptoms occur in diabetes besides those now spe-
cified. The appetite is usually much greater than in health ; though
digestion is seldom if ever perfect. There is uneasiness therefore in
the stomach after meals, with flatulence, acid eructations, and irregu-
lar bowels. Thirst is a never-failing source of complaint, and often
attracts the notice of the patient before he is sensible of the true nature
of his case. The skin is dry, and has a peculiarly rough and parched
feel, from the total want of perspiration. The gums are often swelled,
tender, and red ; sometimes ulcerated. The breath has a sub-acid
odour. The tongue is white and foul in the centre, with bright red edg-
es. The mouth is dry and parched, and the taste depraved. The
patient will generally be found to complain of some pain or sense of
weakness in the loins. Phymosis and excoriations on the penis are fre-
quently noticed. Besides these, there occur in almost all cases symptoms
indicating general weakness or exhaustion, such as swelled legs, emacia-
tion, coldness of the feet, d} r spncea on the slightest exertion, a sense of
weight at the epigastrium, with tendency to syncope, general languor,
lassitude, and depression of spirits. Early in the disease the pulse is
seldom affected; but in its progress hectic fever supervenes, and the
pulse becomes frequent, feeble, and irritable.

The duration of diabetes is very variable. An instance is recorded
where it ran its course, and proved fatal, in five weeks. On the other
hand, it has been known to last for several years, and ultimately to
wear out the constitution.

TREATMENT.

The common treatment in this disorder, is so various and opposite,
that it is impossible to state in what it consists, except it be said in a
word, that it is strictly empirical.

The indication of cure will be to adopt such a course of treatment, as
will restore the tone of the system, which must be effected by restora-
tive medicines. If there is nothing to contra-indicate, give a mild emetic
of the pulverized ipecacuanha root, and after this has operated, let at-
tention be paid to every secretion and excretion of the system. The
bowels should be kept regular, the skin moist, and the feet warm.

Let the patient take the following decoction:

Take Beth Boot.

Black Cohosh.

Crane's Bill. Equal Parts.


Order V.] Whites, or Fluor Albus. 635

Pulverize, and to a table-spoonful of the powder, add a pint of boiling
water, and let it be drank cool or cold through the day. It may be
changed, after drinking it a few days, for the use of an infusion of cha-
momile. During the same time, let the following tonic preparation be
taken :

Take Spikenard.

Solomon's Seal. Equal parts.

Bruise or pulverize. To an ounce of this, add a quart of Port wine,
and let the patient take from half a wine-glass to a wine-glass, three or
four times a day, before eating.

A mild laxative pill should be taken to keep the bowels regular; and
for the febrile symptoms and irritation, let eight grains of the Diapho-
retic Powders be taken at bedtime, and at the same time, let the sur-
face be bathed over with tepid ley water.

If, after using the above means, the disease is not removed, or the
patient does not grow better, give three capsicum pills in the morning,
and three at night, to be accompanied with the use of the restorative
cordial. A strengthening plaster to be applied to the small of the back.

Should the disease still prove obstinate, the wine bitters may be ta-
ken; the emetic occasionally repeated, and perspiration promoted, with
the use occcsionally of a purgative, consisting of the pulverized man-
dralce and cream of tartar.

The tepid bath, during the treatment, should be used every other
day. All these means are calculated to excite a healthy action of the
system, and remove the disease by imparting tone and energy.

REGIMEN.

Diet has great influence sometimes in curing this disease. Doctor
Willoughby L. Lay, of Branford, Connecticut, cured a very difficult
case of diabetes, which had resisted every other mode of treatment, by
means of diet, which consisted simply of broiled beef-steak, well cooked
and thoroughly chewed or masticated, without bread or vegetables of
any kind, and this was taken three times a day in small quantities, and
very little drink. One or more physicians had previously tried in vain
to cure the disease.


CHAPTER V.

WHITES, OR FLUOR ALBUS. (Leucorrhcea.)


DESCRIPTION.


We understand by this disease, an increased secretion or discharge
of mucus from the vagina, which consists of a thin, white, or yellow
matter, and is attended with some degree of fcetor and pain in rnakin«
water, accompanied also with pain in the back and loins, with consid-
erable debility. It is stated that in some cases the discharge .is so acrid


63fl Profiwtnt Diseases. [Class IX.

as to pi-oduce symptoms on those who are connected with the woman,
somewhat similar to the venereal disease, causing excoriations ahout
the penis, and a discharge from the urethra.

CAUSES.

Debility is one great cause of this complaint, and this may be occa-
sioned by immoderate coition, injury done to the parts by difficult and
tedious labours, frequent miscarriages, immoderate flowing of the men-
ses, excessive evacuations, and a sedentary life. Delicate women are
very subject to this disease.

DISCRIMINATION.

It is very important for the practitioner to discriminate between this
disease and gonorrhoea, as much mischief and injury is often occasion-
ed by inability to discriminate between the two complaints. There is
often such a similarity between them that without considerable discern-
ment one may be mistaken for the other, and in consequence of which,
the health and reputation of the patient will be in jeopardy, as well as
the character of the physician. Gonorrhoea commences a shoii time af-
ter copulation with an impure woman, and it is attended with a burning
sensation, pain and scalding in making water, with more or less symp-
toms of inflammation, while in fluor albus these symptoms are seldom,
if at all present.

Again, fluor albus partakes more of a chronic character, which con-
tinues a length of time without much change, and the discharge is more
like jelly, or whiter than in gonorrhoea, although this symptom often
varies. Sometimes it often has the symptom of pus or matter, and
there is considerable weakness of the whole system, and particularly pain
in the back and loins.

SYMPTOMS.

The disease shows itself by an irregular discharge from the uterus
and vagina, of a fluid, which in different woman varies much in colour,
being of a white, green, yellow, or brown hue. In the beginning it is,
however, most usual'y white and pellucid, and in the progress of the
Complaint acquires the various discolorations, and different degrees of
acrimony; from whence proceeds a slight smarting in making water.
Besides the discharge, the patient is frequently afflicted with severe and
constant pains in the back and loins, loss of strength, failure of appe-
tite, pain in the stomach, dejection of spirits, paleness of the counte-
nance, chilliness, and 1 mguor.

The sleep is disturbed by fearful dreams, and affords but little refresh-
ment. The woman becomes pale and emaciated, her eyes are dull,
and a flushing of the face is alternated by a ghastly paleness. In pro-
cess of time the feet and ankles swell, palpitations and a difficulty of
respiration are experienced; the mind is dejected, apprehensive, and
occasionally affected with melancholy. Very frequently the functions
of generation are greatly injured, and sterility is often the consequence
ulwreof. Hysteria also, in a greater or less degree, is generally a con-


Order V.) White$, or Fluor Alius. 037

comitant of leucorrhcea: the urine is turbid, and the menstruar'dis-
charge is sometimes scanty, and even suppressed: at others, it is too
copious, irregular, or attended with much pain.

The disease is seldom removed but by artificial means; and where
these are long deferred, it proceeds to waste the constitution with accu-
mulating mischief. Every symptom becomes highly aggravated, the
eyelids and face swell, are bloated and disfigured, the body is wasted
and debilitated; and hectic fever, with its doleful train, and dropsy in
every form, supervene, and terminate a miserable existence. In some
pases prolapsus uteri, and ulcerations, are to be met with.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, mercury, antimony, oil of vitriol, alum, sulphate of zinc,
copperas, tincture of cantharides, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

The chief object of the physician should be, in treating the disease,
to import tone and energy to tbe system. This course, will, in most
cases, be attended with success. If the stomach is in a disordered
state, a mild emetic may be given, but in general, it is sufficient to com-
mence with the exhibition of a moderate purgative ; after which give
\he following drops :

Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, two parts.
Balsam Copaiva, one part.
Sweet Spirits of Nitre, two parts.
Spirits of Turpentine, one part. Mix.

Of this let the patient take half a tea-spoonful or half a dram in a
wine glass of milk, or any kind of tea, three times a day, before eat-
ing, to be taken on an empty stomach.

While the patient is using this, or a short time after, according to the
severity of the disease, the following tonic preparation may be given :

Take Columho Root.
Gentian Root.
Chamomile Flowers.
Fennel Seed.

Bruise the whole, and to an ounce of the powder, add a quart of port
wine. From half a wine glass, to a wine glass may be taken three or
four times a day. This preparation gives strength to the system, and
generally soon diminishes the complaint. While the patient is using
these preparations, an adhesive or strengthening plaster should be put
upon the back.

If the patient is very restless, and complains of much pain, give ten
grains of capsicum, combined or raixed with six grains of the diaphoretic
powders, to be taken at bedtime.

Should the disease continue after the exhibition of these medicines,
Jet the following decoction be injected up the vagina :

Take White Oak Bark,

Sumach Berries, or Bark,
Bark of Witch Hazel,
Hemlock Bark.


(333 Profiuent Diseases. [Class IX.

Bruise or pulverize, and make a strong concentrated decoction, and to
every pint, add one dram of pulverized alum. Let it be injected with
a female syringe, morning and night; and if this injection, with the
preceding remedies does not effect a cure, the patient may take the

following :

Take BetfrRoot,
Spikenard,
Solomon's Seal.

Bruise, and to every ounce, add a pint of sweet wine. Dose, a wine-
glass. A strong infusion or tea of the same preparation may be taken.
I have cured this disease, when other means have failed, by giving
only the alterative syrup, and which may be used, provided it remains
very obstinate. Strong tea and coffee must be avoided. Exercise
must be taken and the bowels kept regular.


CHAPTER VI.

IMMODERATE FLOW OF THE MENSES. (Menorrhagia.)

DESCRIPTION.

There is sometimes an immoderate flow of blood from the womb.
When the menses return more frequently than is natural, when they
continue longer, or are more abundant, it is termed Menorrhagia.
The disease is accompanied with bearing, or pressing down, and pains
in the back and abdomen.

CAUSES.

Whatever produces too great a determination of blood to the womb,
may give rise to the disease, such as too much exercise, strains, inju-
ries, violent passions of the mind, check of perspiration, abortion,
difficult or tedious labours, and debility arising from any cause, such as
drinking freely of warm, enervating drinks, tea and coffee, want of
exercise, &c.

SYMPTOMS. ■

An immoderate flow of the menses arising from plethora is of-
ten preceded by head-ache, giddiness, or dyspnoea, or shortness
of breath, and is afterwards attended with pains in the back and loins,
some degree of thirst, universal heat, and a frequent, strong, hard
pulse ; but where it arises in consequence of a laxity of the organ, or
of general debility, and such attacks are frequently repeated, the symp-
toms which attend are, paleness of visage, chilliness, laxity and
flabbiness in the muscular fibres, unusual fatigue in exercise, a hurried
respiration on the slightest effort, pains in the back on remaining any
length of time in an erect posture, and coldness of the extremities, to-


Order VI.] Immoderate Flow of the Menses. 639

getlier with loss of appetite, indigestion, and a long train of nervous
complaints.

If the disease has induced much debility by frequent and severe at-
tacks, it is no uncommon occurrence for the feet to be affected with
cedematous or dropsical swellings, particularly towards the evening,
and for a paleness to take place.

In forming our prognostic in this disease, we must he directed by
the nature of the cause which has given rise to it. If occasioned by
a plethora, or a general fulness of the system, we need apprehend no
danger, as a temporary debility will be the only inconvenience the wo-
man will experience ; but where it is produced by a laxity of the ves-
sels of the organ, and is profuse, long-continued, and of frequent oc-
currence, there will always be a risk of its inducing much general de-
bility, and other symptoms. Leucorrhcea is a common consequence
of it. Where it arises from an organic affection of the part, which is
sometimes the case after the age of forty-five, it is usually deemed in-
curable.

When menorrhagia proves fatal in consequence of a scirrhus of the
uterus, this organ is observed on dissection to be much increased in
size, and its substance to be thick and hard ; and when cut into, shows
a firm structure intersected with membranous septa. The internal sur-
face is at the same time usually ulcerated, and beset with ragged pro-
cesses, and from these ulcerated parts the haemorrhage proceeds.

If polypi are the organic affection, these on dissection are general-
ly to be found adhering to some part near the neck of the womb, and
they are surrounded with varicose vessels, which throw out the blood
in considerable quantity when a rupture of any of them happens to
take place.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, blistering, mercury, zinc, turpentine, eantharides, su-*
gar of lead.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

When called to a female who is labouring under the active stage of
this disease, or when there is excessive discharge from the womb, ac-
tive means must be taken to suppress it. The feet must be immedi-
ately immersed in warm water, and if there is great pain in the abdo-
men, a fomentation of hops and wormwood must be applied, and the
following powder given internally :

Take Diaphoretic Powders, 10 grains.

Capsicum, or Cayenne Pepper, 10 grains. Mix.

If the pain and haemorrhage is considerable, give the whole. Other--
wise, give one half, and in an hour, give the other. At the same time
give a strong decoction of the black cohush and bcth root. Apply
cloths wet with vinegar, spirits, and rain water, to the abdomen, and
over the vagina. If this does not check the discharge in a short time,.
let the patient take alum whey.


640 Profluent Diseases. [Class t%i

When the urgent symptoms have been removed, means must be ta-
ken to prevent a recurrence of the haemorrhage, to effect which, give a
course of tonics. A decoction of the spikenard, Solomon's seal, and
beth root, to be taken through the day,- and the patient must take the
restorative cordial, morning, noon* evening,- arid bedtime.-

Where there is a considerable discharge from the vagina; appearing
suddenly or at various periods, and which resists, in any degree, these
remedies^ the patient may inject once or twice a day, the decoction
mentioned under the head of fluor albus or whites;

It is necessary to distinguish between an approaching miscarriage and:
a common flooding, which may be readily done by inquiring whether
or not the haemorrhage has proceeded from any evident cause, and
whether it flows gently or is accompanied with unusual pains. The for-
mer usually arises from some fright* surprise, or accident, and does not
flow gently and regularly, but bursts out of a sudden, and again stops
all at once,- arid also is attended with severe pains in the back and the
bottom of the belly; whereas the latter is marked with no such occur-
rence* The further a woman is advanced in pregnancy,- the greater
will be the danger if floodings take place, as the mouths of the vessels
are much enlarged during the last stage of pregnancy, and of course a
quantity will be discharged in a short time.

The treatment must differ according to the particular causes of the
disease, and according to the different states of constitution under which
it occurs. The haemorrhage is more frequently of the active kind, and
requires the refrigerant plan to be strictly enforced, especially obviating
the accumulation of heat in every way,- giving cold acidulated drink,
and using told local applications; the patient must remain quiet in the
horizontal posture; the diet be of the lightest and least stimulant des-
cription ; and the bowels kept freely open by cooling laxatives. Where
the discharge is rather of a passive character, tonic and astringent
medicines ought to.be given r rest and the horizontal position are equal-
ly necessary, costiveness must be obviated, and cold astringent appln
cations may be materially useful, or the escape of the blood may be
prevented mechanically. A nourishing diet, with gentle exercise "in a
carriage, and the prudent use of the cold bath, may contribute to re*
store the patient, when the discharge has subsided.

Cold applications must riot be continued too long, lest injurious ef-
fects follow their application.

I lately cured a case of this kind, which baffled all former attempts
to remove it, by the treatment here laid down. The patient had be-
come exceedingly reduced by the loss of several gallons of blood in the
course of a few months. There was great debility, paleness, emaci-
ation, <fcc. The medicine restored her to perfect healtlf in a short
space of time.

A physician desires me to insert the following case of uterine' hae-
morrhage, which occurred in his practice :

York, whose strength was prostrated by reason of uterine haemorrhage,
(flooding from the womb,) the consequence of abortion or miscarriage.
On my arrival, I found that the haemorrhage had ceased, but the pulse


Order VI.] Immoderate Flow of the Menses, 641

was small and weak ; there was considerable coldness of the extremi-
ties, nausea, with immediate vomiting of food or medicine taken into
the stomach; and the bowels were too much relaxed. I therefore con-
cluded that there was only one alternative, viz. to cleanse the first pas-
sages, so as to permit nourishment and stimulants to remain in the stom-
ach without ejection, or else to suffer nature to take its course. You
will readily perceive that there was great risk in either case ; for, in
the first place, by withholding medicine, and relying on the simple ef-
forts of nature, the patient would have gradually sunk under the dis-
ease, arid in the second place, the administration of an emetic might
induce such prostration as to extinguish Vitality at once.

" What was then to be done 1

" Why, the stomach must be tranquillized ; and how, thought I, can
this be accomplished without first cleansing the same of its irritating and
ipecac, in powder of thirty grains ; the half of which was directed to
be administered in a little cold water, and in case the first did not act,
to give the remainder; the operation of which was to be assisted by
copious draughts of art infusion of May-weed, or wild chamomile. I
then retired a short distance, stating where I might be found, should
there be any real; or supposed danger; but in about forty minutes I
Was sent for in great haste, as the by-standers and friends of the patient
apprehended she was dying. In a few minutes I arrived, found her un-
able to articulate, except in a very low whisper ; the pulse was very
small, weak, and somewhat frequent, requiring to be felt, firm pres-
sure upon the artery, with coldness of the extremities ; a clammy sweat
appeared on the face and forehead, and she seemed not far from the
borders of the grave.

1 now inquired of the attendants whether the vomiting had ceased,
and was answered in the affirmative.

"I think;" said she, " that my stay will be very short, unless some-
thing crtn be quickly done." These were her words.

" Do not be alarmed," said I, (God helping) we can soon restore
you."

" I am not alarmed," she replied, " I am willing to live or die, as
God sees fit, for I have hope in my death."

"Then," said I, "you are safe."

I now endeavoured to allay the fears, and quiet the apprehensions of
the by-standers and attendants.

Now, (thought I) although she is greatly prostrated, there is a good
foundation laid for the reception and retention of stimulants and food,
so obviously and imperiously demanded.

I then sent for a pint of old fourth proof French Brandy, which was
immediately procured, and gave her half a gill of it diluted with a little
cold Water sweetened with loaf sugar, once in about five minutes,
watching the rising of the pulse, and repeating the dose as circumstan-
ces indicated.

Iri less than 15 minutes, I had the satisfaction of seeing a visible a-
mendment; she spoke loud, expressed her gratitude, and continued
to drink the sling (although at longer intervals) until she took the whole

Vol. I. 81


C42 Projluent Diseases, [Class IX.

pint of brandy in the space of an hour. Nutritious soups, broth, jel-
lies, and custards were now directed to be given as the stomach would
bear, and within four days she was up and about the house."


CHAPTER VII.
ABORTION. (Abortio.)

DESCRIPTION.

Miscarriage, or the expulsion of the fcetus from the uterus, before the
seventh month, is called abortion, after which, premature labour. It most
commonly occurs between the eighth and eleventh weeks of pregnancy,
but may happen at a later period. In early gestation, the ovum sometimes
comes off entire; sometimes the fcetus is first expelled, and the placen-
ta afterwards. It is preceded by floodings, pains in the back, loins f
and lower part of the abdomen, evacuation of the water, shiverings,
palpitation of the heart, nausea, anxiety, syncope, subsiding of the
breasts and belly, pain in the inside of the thighs, opening and moisture
of the os tincae. The principal causes of miscarriage are blows or falls ;
great exertion or fatigue ; sudden frights and other violent emotions of
the mind; a diet too sparing or too nutritious; the abuse of spirituous
liquors; other diseases, particularly fevers, and haemorrhages; likewise
excessive bleeding, profuse diarrhoea or colic, particularly from accumu-
lated faeces; immoderate venery, Asc. The spontaneous vomiting so
common in pregnancy, rarely occasions this accident: but when in-
duced and kept up by drastic medicine?, it may be very likely to have
that effect. Abortion often happens without any obvious cause, from
some defect in the uterus, or in the foetus itself, which we cannot satis-
factorily explain. Hence it will take place repeatedly in the same fe-
male at a particular period of pregnancy ; perhaps in some measure
from the influence of habit.

TREATMENT.

A very similar course of treatment must be pursued in abortion, as
recommended in the preceding disease, menorrhagia.

The treatment of abortion must vary considerably according to the
constitution of the patient, and the cause giving rise to it.

Clear the bowels by some cathartic, directing the patient to re-
main quiet in a recumbent position, kept as cool as possible, with
a low diet, and the cooling regimen in other respects. Should there be
much flooding, cloths wetted with cold water ought to bo applied to the
region of the uterus, or even introduced into the vagina, to obstruct
the escape of the blood mechanically. Where violent forcing pains at-
tend, opium should be given by the mouth, or in the form of glyster,
after premising proper evacuations. Should these means not avail to
check the discharge or the forcing pains r and particularly if the water


Order VIII.] Cessation of the Menses % G43

be evacuated, there can be no expectation of preventing the miscar-
riage : and where there is reason for believing the foetus dead, from the
breasts having previously subsided, the morning sickness gone off, the
motion stopped, &c. it will be proper rather to encourage it by manual
assistance.

If on the other hand females of a delicate and irritable habit, rather
deficient in blood, be subject to abortion, or where this accident is
threatened by profuse evacuations and other debilitating causes, it may
be more probably prevented by a diet nutritious, yet easy of digestion,
with tonic medicines, and the use of the tepid bath, attending at the
same time to the state of the bowels, giving anodynes if pain attend,
and carefully avoiding the several exciting causes.

When a female has suffered several abortions, it becomes almost
impossible to prevent a repetition at the same period of gestation in a
subsequent pregnancy. Nothing, however, will be so successful in pre-
venting a recurrence of a similar misfortune, as in allowing the uterine
vessels to recover their tone; for which purpose tonics must be given.


CHAPTER VIII.
CESSATION OF THE MENSES. (Commonly called the "Turn of Lift.")

DESCRIPTION.

That period of life at which the menses cease to flow is likewise very
critical to the sex. The stoppage of any customary evacuation, how-
ever small, is sufficient to disorder the whole frame, and often to des-
troy life itself. Hence it is, that so many women either fall into chro-
nic disorders, or die about this time. Such of them, however, as sur-
vive it, without contracting any chronic disease, often become more
healthy than they were before, and enjoy strength and vigour to a very
great age.

If the menses cease suddenly, which is seldom the case, in women of
a full habit, they ought to abate their usual quantity of food, especially
of the more nourishing kind. They ought likewise to take sufficient ex-
ercise, and to keep the body open.

Should any scirrhous or cancerous affection of the uterus take place
on a stoppage of the menstrual flux, as sometimes happens, all that can
be done in such cases is to have recourse to such remedies pointed out
in the diseases wherein these medicines are indicated.


644 Projhunt Diseases. [ClaM IX.


CHAPTER IX.
INCONTINENCE OF URINE. (Eneurtsis,)

DESCRIPTION.

It is pretty generally known that some children, and occasionally
adults, are subject to an involuntary discharge of urine, particularly at
night.

It arises from a debility of the urinary organs, occasioned by drink-
ing great quantities of tea, coffee or ardent spirits, or by strains, or
whatever relaxes the parts. It may likewise be occasioned by irritating
substances contained in the bladder.

TREATMENT.

The treatment of this disease will consist in restoring the tone of the
parts by the exhibition of tonics and astringents. The patient shouW
be directed to drink a decoction made of the following articles.

Take Wild Cherry Tree Bark.
Hemlock Bark.
Bay berry Bark.' Bruise or Pulverize.

Add a sufficient quantity of water to make a strong tea or decoction.
While the patient is taking this decoction, let him take fifteen or twenty
drops of the balsam of copaiva in a tumbler of beth root tea three times
a day.

His diet should consist of boiled milk, and wheat flour, with a little
nutmeg and cinnamon sprinkled in it.

He should avoid the use of tea and coffee, and take as little as possi-
ble of any kind of liquids.

This complaint in children, is often the result of habit, or careless-
ness, in not being made to avoid the urine, immediately before going to
bed. As this disease, is often occasioned by a check of perspiration,
this secretion should always be restored. Tepid bathing is beneficial,
as well as laxatives. An adhesive, or strengthening plaster should also
be applied to the small of the back and sacrum.

Some are in the habit of giving tincture of cantharides in this com-
plaint, and formerly I administered it in a few cases, and in one case,
it effected a cure.


Order X.] Voiding Blood by Urine. 645


CHAPTER X.
VOIDING BLOOD BY URINE. (Hematuria.)

DESCRIPTION.

This is rarely, if ever, a primary disease, but is commonly a symp-
tomatic complaint, arising from some external injury by biows, bruises,
or a fall; by some violent exertion, as lifting a heavy weight, jumping,
or hard riding, or from a small stone lodged either in the kidney, or the
duct for conveying the urine from thence to the hladdcr, and which, hy
its irregularity, or size, wounds or lacerates the surface of the part in
which it is lodged, or through which it has passed.

If the blood proceeds immediately from the bladder, in consequence
of a stone contained in it, it is generally accompanied by a sense of
heat and pain at the bottom of the belly, and occasionally, much diffi-
culty in making water. When a discharge of blood proceeds from the
kidney or urinary ducts, and is occasioned by a rough stone descending
from thence to the bladder, it is accompanied by an acute pain and
sense of weight in the back, and a difficulty in voiding urine.

The deposit of clotted blood at the bottom of the- chamber-pot in this
complainr, and its staining linen of a red colour, will enable us to dis-
tinguish it from the high coloured urine attendant on many diseases.
The voiding of bloody urine denotes danger, but it is particularly so
when mixed with purulent matter, as it then points out that there is ul-
ceration in some part of the urinary passages. Nor is the daDger less
when it has been produced by wounds or bruises of the kidneys. When
it takes place in the course of any malignant disease, it shows a putrid
state of the blood, and is often to be considered as a fatal symptom.

TREATMENT.

The treatment of this complaint likewise consists in giving stimulating
diuretics and astr ngents.

The urinary decoction may be taken, according to directions given
under the head of that preparation; likewise the balsam copaiva, as di-
rected in the preceding disease.

I lately attended one case of this kind, which I cured by a strong
decoction of peach tree leaves.


646 Profluent Diseases. [Class IX.

CHAPTER XI.

ONANISM, SELF POLLUTION, he.

DESCRIPTION.

By this disease is to be understood an excessive discharge of the se-
minal fluid, either naturally or artificially. It is a very common prac-
tice among men and women, more particularly youth. It gives rise to
a variety of symptoms, which are often unsuspected or overlooked by
the physician, and by the friends of the patient.

The semen being the most vital fluid of the system, it is easily seen
what the consequence must be when it is thrown off in an undue or ex-
cessive degree; and it is somewhat doubtful, whether a discharge of it
in any manner, does not more or less injure the health or lessen the
growth of persons. When it is retained in eunuchs and animals, they
grow to a larger size, and obtain greater vigour and strength.

SYMPTOMS.

This disease produces febrile complaints, mania or mental derange-
ment, dyspepsia or indigestion, hectic fever, and general debility. The
more one indulges the practice, the greater the propensity for it. It
causes a long train of complaints, tremors of the limbs, head-ache, rest-
less nights, gleets or discharges from the urethra, pains of the system
in different parts, the memory, judgment, and reason becomes impair-
eJ; discharge of semen, particularly at the thought or sight of women;
pain in the breast and loins, cough and consumption, weakness in the
back and genitels, sometimes fits of apoplexy, hypochondria and hys-
teria, and great despondency of mind.

TREATMENT.

1. The patient must abandon the practice immediately.

2. Neither see nor think of women more than is possible.

3. If there is nocturnal emissions of semen, let the patient take a
few grains of the diaphoretic powders at bedtime.

4. Give the diuretic drops through the day.

5. Apply the tincture of capsicum to the back, loins, and parts of
generation.

6. Let the wine bitters be taken.

7. Tepid bathing in salt water.

8. A cooling but nutritious diet, fresh raw eggs, oysters, milk, &c.

9. Reside in the country.

For further particulars on this- important disease, consult a work by
Tissot, lately translated from the French.


Class X«-Order I.] Retention of the Menses. C it


CLASS X


REFLUENT DISEASES.


CHARACTER.

^ Tins class of diseases is diiectly the reverse of the preceding class,

viz. profluent diseases. When any fluid is obstructed, or is returned

back into the circulation, it constitutes a disease which comes under

this head.


CHAPTER I.
RETENTION OF THE MENSES. (Chlorosis,)

DESCRIPTION.

It is well known that females from the age of twelve to sixteen, (o#
according to the climate,) begin to menstruate, and which constitutes a
critical period in their lives, as health depends very much upon thisdis*
charge. It is liable fiom various causes to become obstructed at the
period when it ought to appear, and when this takes place, it is atten-
ded with very painful or serious effects ; and if nature is not assisted,
the health is impaired, or the constitution undermined, inducing con*
sumption, or some other complaint.

CAUSES.

The remote cause of this complaint, is most frequently suppressed
perspiration, and it may arise in part, by an inactive and sedentary
life, and such habits as are peculiar to the higher classes of society,
particularly in cities and towns.

The proximate cause of it seems to be a want of power in the sys-
tem, arising from inability to propel the blood into the uterine vessels-
with sufficient force to open their extremities, and to allow a discharge
of blood from them.

SYMPTOMS.

Heaviness, listlessness to motion, fatigue on the least exercise, pal-'
pitations at the heart, pains in the back, loins, and hips, flatulency,
and acidities in the stomach and bowels, costiveness, a pretematHral


(548 Refluent Diseases. [Class X;

appetite for chalk, lime, and various other absorbents, together with
many dyspeptic symptoms, usually attend on chlorosis.

As it advances in its progress the face becomes pale, and afterwards
assumes a yellowish hue, even verging upon green, from whence it has
been called green-sickness ; the lips loso their rosy colour ; the eyes
arc encircled with a livid areola ; the whole body has an unhealthy ap-
pearance, with every indication of a want of power and energy in the
constitution ; the feet are affected with ccdematous swellings ; the
breathing is much hurried by any vigorous exertion of the body ; the
pulse is quick, but small ; and the person is apt to be affected with a
cough, and with many of the symptoms of hysteria. Sometimes a
great quantity of pale urine is discharged in the morning, and not un-
frequently hectic fever attends.

In cases of a more chronic character, " there is a continued though
variable state of sallowness, of yellowness, or icterode hue, of dark-
ness, or of a wan, squalid, or sordid paleness of complexion, or a
ring of darkness surrounding the eyes, and extending a little perhaps
towards the temples and cheeks, and sometimes encircling the mouth,
without tumidity, as well as without the palidness of the lips, al-
ready mentioned."

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding, mercury, iron, salts, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

As this disease proceeds from debility, it is evident that the greaf
object to be fulfilled, will be to give tone and energy to the system, and
if this debility has arisen from a sedentary life, the patient must begin
immediately to execrcise in the open air, and if practicable, to change
her residence. 1 once had a case so very violent and protracted, that
the patient often had fits resembling the apoplexy. I gave her medi-
cine, and during the time she was taking it, she went to the sea-shore,
bathed, took herb tea, and after a few weeks or months was entirely
restored to health. The change of air, bathing, &c, appeared to con-
tribute as much to the cure as the other means made use of. The
tepid or warm bath should be used in preference to the cold.

The first medicine given, may be the pulverized mandrake root, com-
bined with a little cream, of tartar^ and where the stomach is very irri-
table, our common purgative will be found very good. This, as well
as other medicines, should be taken upon an empty stomach, and af-
ter it has been given, peppermint tea should be freely drank. After
the exhibition of this purgative, which may be occasionally repeated,
gum aloes may be taken, combined in such a manner as will prevent
the piles. This medicine from its action upon the uterus through the
medium of the rectum, is very useful in retention of the menses;
and its benefit is much increased by combining it with other articles.
Hence we have used it in the form oi* the anti-di/spcptic pill which an
swers the purpose very well. It is mild, gently laxative, and tonic-
Two or three of these may be taken at bedtime, or as many as are
sufficient to keep the bowels in a soluble state. During the use of these


Order II.] Suppression of the Menses. 649

pills, let the patient take the restorative cordial, as directed under that
head. Emenagogues, or " forcing medicines" should not be used to
bring on the menses, except there be a struggle or effort of nature to
effect it, and this will be known by the periodical pains and pressing
down about the hips and loins. When this happens, let the feet be
bathed, and perspiration promoted by drinking freely of diluent teas,
such as pennyroyal, motherwort, and garden thyme. Should consider-
able pains attend the complaint, eight or ten grains of the diaphoretic
powders may be given, and fomentations of bitter herbs applied over
the region of the womb.

The patient should be very careful not to expose herself to the vi-
cissitudes of the weather ; the feet or clothes should not be suffered to
become wet ; warm clothing should be worn, and particularly flannel.
Chalybeates waters, such as Ballston and Saratoga, have been taken
with success in this complaint.

The diet should be light, nutritious, and easy of digestion.


CHAPTER II.

SUPPRESSION OF THE MENSES. (Amenorrhea.)

DESCRIPTION.

By this disease we understand a partial or total obstruction of the
nienses in women from other causes than pregnancy and old age. The
menses should be regular as to quantity and quality ; and that this dis-
charge should observe the monthly period, is essential to health. When
it is obstructed, nature makes her efforts to obtain for it some other out-
let. When these efforts of nature fail, the consequence may be fever
pulmonic diseases, spasmodic affections, hysteria, epilepsy, mania',
apoplexy, chlorosis, according to the general habit and disposition of
the patient.

Any interruption occurring after the menstrual flux has once been
established in its regular course, except when occasioned by conception,
is always to be considered as a case of suppression.

A constriction of the extremities of the vessels of the uterus arising
from accidental circumstances, such as cold, anxiety of mind, fear in-
activity of body, the frequent use of acids and other sedatives, &c.- is
the cause which evidently produces a suppression of the menses. In
some few cases it appears as a symptom of other diseases, and particu-
larly of general debility in the system. Herein there is a want of the
necessary propelling force or due action of the vessels.

When the menstrual flux has been suppressed for any considerable
length of time, it not unfrequently happens that the blood which should
have passed off by the uterus, being determined more copiously and
forcibly to other parts, gives rise to haemorrhages ; hence it is frequent-
ly poured put from the nose, stomach, lungs, and other parts, in suefr

Vol. I. 82


650 Refluent Diseases. [Class X<

cases. At first, however, febrile or inflammatory symptoms appear,
the pulse is hard and frequent, the skin hot, and there is a severe pain
in the head, back, and loins. Besides being subject to these occurren-
ces, the patient is likewise much troubled with costiveness, colic pains,
and dyspeptic and hysteric symptoms.

Our prognostic in this disease is to be directed by the cause which
has given rise to it, the length of time it has continued, and the state-
of the person's health in other respects. When menstruation is sud-
denly suppressed, in consequence of cold, it may easily be restored
by pursuing proper means; but where the suppression has been of long
standing, and leucorrhcea attends, we ought always to consider such
circumstances as less favourable, though not incurable.

COMMON PRACTICE.

Bleeding repeatedly, antimony, mercury, &c

REFORMED PRACTICE.

It will be necessary in the treatment of this disease, to remove ur-
gent symptoms if they are present. If the patient be in severe pain^
give ten grains of the diaphoretic powders, and at the same time, let
a strong infusion of garden thyme and pennyroyal be freely given. At
the same time, let the feet be immersed in warm ley water, and rub-
bed well with flannel. If relief be not obtained in the course of an
hour, or in a very short time, a strong decoction of bitter herbs should
be thrown into a proper vessel, and the patient steamed fifteen or twen-
ty minutes, as long as she is able to bear, or until perspiration is pro-
duced. And immediately after, let her be put in bed, covered warm,
and the herbs be inclosed in flannel or muslin, and applied to the low-
er part of the abdomen or belly. This process will almost immediate-
ly relieve the urgent symptoms. After this, our next object will be,
to regulate the menstrual discharge, by a proper course of strengthen-
ing medicine, and that recommended under the head of chlorosis, or a
retention of the menses, may be taken with advantage. Inasmuch as
this complaint, like the preceding, proceeds from debility, it is evident
that this debility must be removed in order to effect a cure; and there-
fore that medicine and treatment which strengthens and invigorates the
system, will invariably benefit the patient. The skin, stomach, and
intestines, all seem concerned in the production of this disease, and
hence our attention should be directed to a restoration of their proper
offices. The stomach and bowels should be cleansed, and stimulated to
a healthy action. Perspiration must be promoted, and in short every
secretion and excretion of the system.

If the stomach is in a morbid condition, let an emetic occasionally
be given, after which a dose of mandrake ; both of which may be re-
peated as occasion requires. The patient may then take the following
tonic bitters :

Take Prickly Ash Bark, 2 ounces.

Wild Cherry Tree Bark, 2 ounces.
Seneca Snake Root, 1 ounce.


Girder II. ] Suppression of the Menses. 061

Tanzy, 1 ounce.

Gum Soctorine Aloes, half an ounce.

Devil's Bet, 2 ounces.

Pulverize, and to every two ounces of the powder add half a pint of
boiling water, and one quart of Holland gin. Half a wine-glass may
be taken three or four times a day. This may be continued while ic
agrees with the patient, or as long as benefit is derived.

About once a month, there will generally be felt, more or less symp-
toms preceding a catamenial discharge. Considerable pain will be felt
through the lower part of the abdomen, hips, and loins, showing that
there is a strong effort or struggle of nature to return the menses. Our
principal object when this occurs should be to aid her salutary eflorts,
as directed in the preceding complaint ; the patient should sit over the
steam of bitter herbs for ten or fifteen minutes, retaining the steam by
means of a blanket, to concentrate it upon the lower part of the body. At
the same time, the feet should be bathed, and tanzy tea freely drank.
The abdomen should also be fomented, as before directed. It will not
be necessary, however, to use these means except there is an obvious
indication to return the menses.

It must be recollected, that when the patient labours under some oth-
er disease, there is such debility, that there is not superfluous blood suf-
ficient to keep up the menstrual discharge; and in this case, our atten-
tion must be directed to the primary affection without any regard to
such symptoms ; and it is also very necessary to bear in mind, the fact,
that the menses are often suppressed from pregnancy, and the physici-
clan will be applied to return them with a view to procure abortion. No
man possessed of any principle, will ever be guilty of prescribing med-
cine in such a case with a view to return them. Such conduct
would be very criminal, and an indictable offence. Great rewards or
remuneration, are in such cases held out to the practitioner, but as he
values his reputation, character, and conscience, let him never yield
to the temptation.

By a proper attention, he can always discriminate between a sup-
pression of the menses and pregnancy; and the principal diagnostic
symptom is, that in the former complaint, there is a pain, or an affec-
tion of the head, attended with dizziness.

Lieutaud makes the following remarks upon this subject:

"Those who are desirous to cure this disease, ought strictly to enquire
whether there be any suspicion of pregnancy ; since numberless pseu-
do-virgins, or wanton little prostitutes are met with, who are impreg-
nated, and by every art endeavour to conceal their very scandalous situ-
ation; under the semblance of curing this pretended disease, they de-
sire to be bled in the saphcenn, in hope of future abortion; so that even
the most guarded are daily deceived."

If the precedingjreatment does not cure the disease, which will seldom
if ever be found the case, if persevered in, the patient may take 15 or
20 grains of the Euphor Ipecacuanha about twice a Aveek in a little
molasses, and a tea made of the green ozicr, may likewise be drank
through the day. This will he found an excellent medicine.

I lately attended a case of Amenorrhcea, which had existed for two


6

•^552 Refluent Diseases. [Class X.

years, and the abdomen had gradually acquired an enormous magni-
tude, much larger than a female in the last month of pregnancy, and
after having tried all my ordinary remedies to return the menses I suc-
ceeded whh the following treatment. I first gave a tea or infusion of
the Digitalis or Foxglove, as directed under the head of Hydrothorax.
In the next place, a. purgative was ordered once or twice a week. Dur-
ing the same time the patient was ordered to drink freely of parsley tea,
and the whole abdomen was rubbed twice a day with sweet oil, and as
often with white precipitate ointment.

From the very time that the patient commenced this treatment, the
belly began to subside ; in a short time, the courses returned,
she soon entirely recovered her health, and she has been well for many
years. Having exhausted my skill in trying all ordinary remedies, I re-
sorted to this last treatment, as an experiment, or as the last alterna-
tive, and never was a medicine more strikingly successful. The cure
was a matter of astonishment to all who witnessed it. The abdomen
was perfectly tense and hard, and appeared almost in a state of schirr-
hus. Of the modus operandi of the medicine, I must leave the reader
to judge.

Some physicians have been very much in the habit of using the
"Golden Tincture" made by adding spirits to Black Hclliborc and
logwood, till a saturated tincture was formed, and then giving one or
two tea-spoonfuls three or four times a day.

A person informed me some years ago that a physician on Long-
Island cured his wife of obstructed menses which had placed her life in
the greatest jeopardy, and which other physicians could not remove.
The following formula was used :

Take Tincture of Gum Myrrh.

do. Castor, equal parts.

Give a tea-spoonful three or four times a day.

Since writing the preceding remarks upon this complaint, I ad-*
ministered a dose of Mandrake for a bilious complaint to a young
woman who had been afilicted with partial or deficient menses for ma-
ny years, and which not only removed the symptoms for which it was
given, but likewise returned the menses.

Since writing the above also, a gentleman has come a distance of
forty miles to obtain relief for his daughter, who has been labouring un-
der a spasmodic affection from suppressed or obstructed menses. Two
physicians have attended her, and pursued the usual course of bleeding,
&c. the effect of which has been (as I predicted,) an aggravation of the
complaints The bleeding soon induced greater spasms and finally con-
vulsions. I explained to him the nature of the disease, gave him my
opinion that it proceeded not from repletion or excess of blood as his
physician stated, but from an unequal circulation or an undue quantity
thrown upon the brain. He then stated that her feet and le^s were as
cold as a dead person's, showing evidently a recession of blood from
these parts to the head. After stating my views and treatment of the
disease, he appeared forcibly struck with the difference between my
views and other physicians, exclaiming, " How you Doctors do differ.'*


Order III.] Painful and Imperfect Menstruation. 653

Dr. Tidd, with whom I studied, was in the habit of giving a prepar-
ation which has been attended with great success, and which I have
formerly been in the practice of giving. He procured it from some per-
son in the section of the country where he resided, who obtained great
celebrity for removing this disease. Tt is made as follows :

Take Gum Myrrli, 4 ounces.

Flowers of Sulphur, 4 ounces.
Steel Filings, 4 ounces.
Loaf Sugar, 4 ounces.

Pulverize, and simmer all in a quart of wine, until the mass becomes
nearly dry ; after which remove from the fire, and when dry, pulver-
ize. Of this, let the patient take half a tea-spoonful two or three times
a day. Some prefer taking the same quantity in the form of pills.

Under the treatment here laid down, I know not that I recollect a
single instance of failure.

The following case occurred within my knowledge : — A young lady
had laboured under almost a total suppression of the menses all her life,
or for many years. She had tried almost every kind of medicine with-
out receiving the least benefit, and her case appeared utterly hopeless.
She was advised to apply to a woman who was very noted for curing
this disease only. She called upon her, stated her symptoms, re-
ceived a box of pills and took them according to her directions. The
effect of which was, the natural return of the catamenial discharge, and
perfect restoration to health. The father presented me with a few of
the pills, which I found to be composed of about four parts of whit©
turpentine gum, and one part of sulphate of iron, (green vitriol,) for-
merly called sal mortis. Two or three pills of the same, to be taker*
at a dose, three or four times a day.


CHAPTER III.

PAINFUL AND IMPERFECT MENSTRUATION. (Dysmenorrhea.}.

DESCRIPTION.

Besides the two deviations from the usual course of nature already
mentioned, there sometimes occurs a third, viz. where menstruation,
although not wholly suppressed, is nevertheless somewhat difficult, and
accompanied with severe pains in the hack, loins, and bottom of the
belly.

This disease is owing to a weak action of the vessels of the uterus,
or spasm of its extreme vessels, and is to be obviated by tonics, warm
bathing, both topical and general, together with the use of anodynes,
which should be employed as soon as the symptoms that denote its ap-
proach are apparent.

This complaint is a common, and generally an extremely harassing
affection. It may occur at every period during the menstruation stage


654 Refluent Diseases. [Class X.

of life ; but it appears to be most common between the twentieth and
thirtieth years of age, and in subjects of an irritable and sanguineous
temperament. In many instances severe pains are experienced in the
back, loins, and lower part of the abdomen, for five or six hours pre-
vious to the appearance of the menstruous evacuation. _ This, however,
soon ceases, and an immediate aggravation of the torturing pain follows.
Sometimes the catamenia begin to flow moderately with little or no pre-
vious pains; but in an hour or two they become suddenly arrested, at
the same time that violent pains come on in the hips, hypogastrium,
loins, back, and thighs, with a distressing sensation of forcing or bear-
ing down in the pelvis. Occasionally a very slight menstrual discbarge
continues uninterruptedly for three or four days, accompanied through-
out with extremely severe pains in the pelvis and lower portion of the
abdomen; and in some rare instances, the catamenial evacuation, al-
though attended with great suffering, is sufficiently copious and pro-
longs in its course, and may even exceed the regular duration and
quantity of an ordinary healthy menstruation.

COMMON TREATMENT.

Mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Since it is well known that a derangement in the uterine functions
must generally proceed from a check of perspiration, astringing the
minute ends of the uterine vessels, or in some manner derajig-ing their
functions, causing debility, <fcc. it will appear clear that our first atten-
tion must be directed to the skiru Cold appears to be the cause of the
disease, and heat seems to remove it. Therefore when these periods
of distress occur, let the patient sit over a strong decoction of bitter
herbs, such as tansy, hoarhound, wormwood, catnip and hops, while a
blanket is thrown round the waist of the patient to confine the steam to
the lower parts. After the patient has been thus steamed, and the feet
bathed, let the person be put into a bed warmly covered and diluent
drinks given, such as tansy, thyme, peniryroyal, &c. At the same
time, let fomentations of the same herbs inclosed in a flannel bag be
applied to the abdomen as before directed.

This Will produce perspiration and afford immediate relief; and when
these distressing symptoms are removed, and the patient becomes com-
fortable, a course of treatment must be adopted to prevent a recurrence
of these symptoms or to produce a natural flow of the catamenial dis-
charge ; and similar to that recommended under the two preceding
complaints. A tea made of the bark of green ozier may be drank freely.

A writer on this subject thus remarks, "this case of painful menstru-
ation deserves particular attention, because it impairs the health of pa-
tients by its present effects, and ^scems to render them less prolific in
future. Dr. Fothargill has offered relief to several by the following pro-
cess: let the patient have by her a few pills, consisting of opium,
gr. i. each, made soft with a little of any kind of conserve. She is to
take one of these pills the moment she finds the pain attending this dis-
charge coming on. A pill may be taken every hour till the pain goes


Order IV-] Angina Pectoris. 055

off; and more than two of these pills will seldom be required; but it
must be taken in such a quantity as to mitigate the pain. Let the pa-
tient keep either in or upon tlie bed, at least in a recumbent posture^
drinking moderately of any diluting liquor, as the herb teas, weak whey,
or thin broth. When the time is past, a course of chalybeate bitters,
in small doses, may be continued, till within a few days of the return;
and the belly should be kept open with some proper laxative. This ex-
cruciating pain seems to be spasmodic and to proceed from the extreme
irritability of the uterine system."

_ The diaphoretic powders will be found very useful. Diet and exer-
cise are important.


CHAPTER IV.
ANGINA PECTORIS.

DESCRIPTION.

An acute constrictory pain at the lower end of the sternum, inclining
rather to the left side, and extending up in the left arm, accompanied
with great anxiety. Violent palpitations of the heart, laborious breath-
ings, and a sense of suffocation, are the characteristic symptoms of
this disease. It Is found to attack men much more frequently than wo-
men, particularly those who have short necks, who are inclinable td
corpulency, and who at the same time, lead an inactive and sedentary
life. Although it is sometimes met within persons under the age of twen-
ty, still it more freqnently occurs in those who are between forty and
fifty-

CAUSES.

It mostly depends upon an ossification of the coronary arteries, and-
then we can never expect to effect a radical cure.

SY3IPTOMS.

In slight cases, and in the first stage of the disorder, the fit comes on
by going up hill, up stairs, or by walking at a quick pace after a hearty
meal ; but as the disease advances, or becomes more violent, the par-
oxysms are apt to be excited by certain passions of the mind; by slow'
walking, by riding on horseback, or in a carriage; or by sneezing,
coughing, speaking, or straining at stool. In some cases, they attack
the patient from two to four in the morning, or whilst sitting or stand-
ing, without any previous exertion or obvious cause. On a sudden, he
is seized with an acute pain in the breast, or rather at the extremity of
the sternum, or breast bone, inclining to the left side, and extending'
up into the arm, as far as the insertion of the deltoid muscle, accompa-
nied by a sense of suffocation, great anxiety, and an idea that its con-
tinuance or increase would certainly be fatal. In the first stage of the


(556 Refluent Diseases. [Class X.

disease, the uneasy sensation at the end of the sternum, with the other
unpleasant symptoms, which seem to threaten a suspension of life by a
perseverance in exertion, usually go off upon the person's standing still,
or turning from the wind; but, in a more advanced stage, they do not
so readily recede, and the paroxysms are much more violent. During
the fit, the pulse sinks, in a greater or less degree, and becomes irregu-
lar ; the face and extremities are pale, and bathed in a cold sweat, and,
for a while, the patient is perhaps deprived of the powers of sense and
voluntary motiort. The disease having recurred more or less frequently
during the space of some years, a violent attack at last puts a sudden
period to his existence. Angina pectoris is attended with a considera-
ble degree of danger ; and it usually happens that the person is carried
off suddenly.

TREATMENT.

During the paroxysms, considerable relief is to be obtained from fo-
mentations, and administering powerful antispasmodics, such as the fol-
lowing mixture : laudanum, tincture of castor, ether. A tea-spoonful of
this mixture taken occasionally, or when a paroxysm occurs. Tinc-
ture of henbane may also be tried.

The application of a mustard plaster to the breast is likewise attend-
ed sometimes with a good effect. As the painful sensation at the ex-
tremity of the sternum often admits of a temporary relief, from an evac-
uation of wind by the mouth, it may be proper to give frequent doses
of carminatives, such as peppermint, carraway, or cinnamon water.
Where these fail in the desired effect, a few drops of ol. aniseed, on a
little sugar, may be substituted.

With a view of preventing the recurrence of the disorder, the pa-
tient should carefully guard against passion, or other emotions of the
mind : he should use a light, generousjdiet, avoiding every thing of a heat-
ing nature ; and he should take care never to overload the stomach, or to
use any kind of exercise immediately after eating. Besides these pre-
cautions, he should endeavour to counteract obesity, which has been
considered as a predisposing cause ; and this is to be effected most
safely by a vegetable diet, moderate exercise at proper times, early
rising, and keeping the body perfectly open. It has been observed that
angina pectoris is a disease always attended with considerable danger,
and, in most instances, has proved fatal under every mode of treatment.
" We are given, however, to understand, by Dr. Macbride, that of late,
several cases of it have been treated with great success, and the disease
radically removed, by inserting a large issue on each thigh."

Purgatives must be given, and perspiration promoted.


Order V:] Nightmare. 657


CHAPTER V.

NIGHTMARE. (Incubus.)

SYMPTOMS.

This unpleasant and distressing affection always attacks the person dur-
ingsleep, and if this is profound, the first approach of the fiend is usual-
ly in the shape of a disagreeable and frightful dream. He perhaps suppo-
ses himself in great danger, or pursued by an enemy whom he finds it
imposible to avoid. He frequently feels as if his limbs were confined
and deprived of motion. After a time the uneasiness of the patient
rapidly increases, he feels oppressed with a sense of weight on the chest,
impressing him with the idea of some living being that is seated thereon,
inspiring terror, impeding respiration, and paralyzing all the voluntary
muscles. The sensation is highly distressing and painful, he becomes
every instant more awake and conscious of his situation, he makes vio-
lent efforts to move his arms with the view of throwing off the recum-
bent weight, but all to no purpose; he moans sadly, his heart is some-
times affected with palpitations* but generally moves with additional
velocity, the difficulty of breathing goes on increasing, the eyes are
half open, and the countenance puts on a ghastly appearance.

If the person is left undisturbed, he generally lies in this state for
two or three minutes, when all at once he recovers the powers of voli-
tion, upon which he cither changes his position instantly, so as to awake
himself thoroughly; or lie jumps out of bed in a violent fright. When
this is not done, the paroxysm or fit is very apt to return immediately
or very soon, as there is an irresistible propensity to sleep, which, if
yielded to, is very likely to be productive of another attack.

When the disease is fully established, some confusion of ideas, sing-
ing in the ears, spectral visions before the eyes will frequently remain
for a time after being roused; and there will also be an unpleasant
taste in the mouth, weight at the stomach, palpitations of the heart, and
an accelerated pulse.

CAUSES.

The disease is most frequent among persons of a nervous tempera-
ment, and those who are studious or lead an inactive life. It seems
principally to arise from indigestion, being usually accompanied with
flatulency in the stomach and bowels, acid eructations, and costiveness.
Nothing is more likely to produce an attack of the nightmare than go-,
ing to bed soon after having eaten a hearty supper, and particularly of
food of an indigestible or flatulent nature. It never takes place but
when the person is lying on his back. Great anxiety, abstruse think-
ing, or any thing that oppresses the mind, may be considered also as
exciting causes of this disease.

The nightmare has generally been looked upon as a trifling com-
plaint, unattended with danger; but it is by no means improbable that

Vol. I. 83


658 Refluent Diseases. [Class X.

some of those persons who have been found dead in their beds, have
been destroyed by it. Those who are subject to attacks of this disease
should therefore have some person to sleep near them, that they may
be immediately awoke on their moaning or making a noise during the
fit, as the uneasiness goes off as soon as the patient is roused.

TREATMENT.

Persons subject to the nightmare should abstain from all kinds of
food which is either difficult of digestion or apt to prove flatulent, par-
ticularly for supper; they should take regular and sufficient exercise
throughout the day, court cheerful society, and avoid gloomy contem-
plations and intense stud}', with late hours.

On recovering from an attack of the nightmare, or being roused
therefrom by an attendant, it may be advisable, if the patient seems dis-
tressed by flatulency or uneasiness at the stomach, to give him a draught
consisting of an ounce of peppermint water, three drams of the com-
pound tincture of cardamoms, and ten grains of the carbonate of potash,
repeating it as the occasion may seem to require. If these medicines
are not at hand, a table-spoonful of brandy or any other cordial may be
substituted.

Persons who are young, and full of blood, if troubled with the night-
mare, ought to take a purge frequently, use a spare diet, and exercise
in the open air. The carbonate of potash, mixed with ale or porter,
form an agreeable beverage for those liable to dyspeptic symptoms and
incubus.


CHAPTER VI.
PALPITATION OF THE HEART. (Palpitatio.)

DESCRIPTION.

Palpitation op the Heart, is sufficiently manifest, since it may
be perceived by the touch, sight, and hearing; but the essential is hard
to distinguish from the symptomatic ; nor does the genuine cause of pal-
pitation appear. Nevertheless it is reasonable to believe that it con-
sists in the spasmodic contraction of this viscus, by which the sides of
the ventricles struggle in the vain effort to expel the blood. That palpi-
tation is allied to convulsion appears from this, and by its vehemence
not only the voice and respiration are injured, but even the ribs are
removed from their situation, or broken. The pulse, as the disease
advances, is contracted, unequal and intermittent, vertigo comes on,
with dimness of vision. The sick complain of flatulency, and of a cer-
tain twitching in the affected parts, &c. Sometimes Palpitation of the
Heart or convulsive asthma is associated with dropsy of the breast,
leucophlegmasige, &c. Tremor of the Heart is of another kind, which
the unskilful rashly take for Palpitation ; although it is principally dis-


Order VII.] Jaundice. 659

tinguished from it by weak pulse, loss of strength, faintings, cold sweats,
and other forerunners of death.

" Palpitation of the Heart takes its rise from plethora, or from a
suppression of accustomed discharges of blood, from repulsion of cus-
tomary eruptions, and closing of long continued ulcers, great joy, an-
ger, fear, terror, solicitude, and other violent emotions of the mind, to
say nothing of some odours, of imoderate exercise, <fcc. which may al-
so occasion it. The cachectic, hypochondriac, scorbutic, and gouty
are subject to it, as also* hysterical and chlorotic persons. Lastly, it of-
ten invades valetudinarians, gluttons, and idlers, &c.

41 Palpitation of the Heart proceeding from an accidental and slight
cause, is void of danger, nor is the symptomatic thought always danger-
ous, so long as it is not the consequence of an incurable disease ; lastly,
there is some hope of health if it be caused by a general injury of the
nerves. But it turns out otherwise if it be produced by an organic de-
fect of the heart, which may be suspected when it recurs frequently, or
continually afflicts the sick. By what kind of fault this prime organ of
the circulation of the blood is affected, wc can only conjecture, nor
are physicians worth a straw, even when the nature of the disease is
best known, since this organic defect admits of no cure." [Lieutaud.]

TREATMENT.

This disease being often symptomatic of some other complaint, such
as indigestion, it will be necessary to give such medicines as will re-
move the primary affection. The patient may take the elixer salutis,
or compound tincture of senna, about half an ounce, every day or
two, and also fifteen or twenty drops of the tincture of digitalis morn-
ing and night. Through the day he may also take an infusion or tea of
the common cuckolds, which has proved exceedingly valuable in this
disease. A plaster may be worn over the region of the stomach and
heart. All violent emotions of the mind must be avoided ; severe la-
bour, exercise, &.c. Also all heating or stimulating liquids or food.


CHAPTER VII.
JAUNDICE, (icterus.)

DESCRIPTION.

Jaundice is derived from the French, jaunisse, yellowness, ofjaune,
yellow, in medicine, a disease consisting in a suffusion of the bile, and
a rejection thereof to the surface of the body, whereby the whole exte-
rior habit is discoloured. Dr. Maclurg is of opinion, that the bile re-
turns into the circulation in this disorder, by the course of the lympha-
tics. There is also a species of this disease called the black jaundice.

CAUSES.
The immediate cause of the jaundice is an obstruction of the bile in
its passage into the duodenum. The remote or occasional causes are,.


OgO Refluent Diseases. [Class X.

the bites of poisonous animals, as the viper, mad dog, &c. a coarse and
bad diet ; obstruction or repression of the necessary discharges. It is
also brought on by a suppression of intermittent fevers, particularly of
quartans, by astringents, and by violent passions of the mind, as grief,
anger, <fcc. Violent vomits or purges will sometimes also bring on this
disease, as will a sudden draught of cold water when the body is very
hot. It is also a symptom in several kinds of fever, and pregnant women
are very subject to it.

SYMPTOMS.

The jaundice first shows itself by a listlessness, and want of appetite;
the patient becomes dull, oppressed, and generally costive. These
symptoms have continued but a very short time, when a yellow colour
begins to diffuse itself over the white of the eyes, and nails of the fin-
gers ; the urine becomes high-coloured, with the yellowish sediment ;
the stools are whitish or grey. The patient's skin is dry, and he generr
ally feels a kind of itching or prickling pain over the whole body.

Sometimes the patient has a continual propensity to. sleep, but in
others there is too great watchfulness ; and sometimes the pain is so
great, that though the patient be sleepy he cannot compose himself to
rest. The pain comes by fits; and all women who have had the
jaundice agree, that they are more violent than labour pains. As the
disease advances, the yellow colour becomes more and more deep ; and
even the internal membranes of the viscera, the bones, and the brain
itself becomes tinged, as hath been shown from dissections, where the
bones have been found tinged sometimes for years after the jaundice has
been cured.

In like manner all the secretions are affected with the yellow colour
of the bile, which in this case is diffused thoughout the whole mass of
fluids. The saliva, or spittle, becomes yellow and bitter : the urine
excessively high coloured, in such a manner as to appear almost black;
the blood itself is sometimes said to appear of a yellow colour when
drawn from a vein ; yet Dr. Heberden says, that he never saw the
milk altered in its colour, even in cases of very deep jaundice. In pro-
cess of time, the blood begins to acquire a tendency to dissolution and
putrefaction, which is known by the patient's colour changing from a
deep yellow to a black or dark yellow. Haemorrhages ensue from va-
rious parts of the body, and the patients frequently die of an apoplexy;
though in some the disease degenerates into an incurable dropsy; and
there have not been wanting instances of some who have died of the
dropsy after the jaundice itself had been totally removed.

If the patient be young, and the disease complicated with no other
malady, it is seldom dangerous; but if, in old people, it continues long,
returns frequently, or is complicated with others, it generally proves
fatal either in itself, or in its consequences.

COMMON TREATMENT.
Mercury, Antimony, Salts, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.
If the stomach is much disordered, which is usually the case, we
may commence the treatment of this disease by giving a mild portion


Order VII.] Jaundice. 66*

of the emetic powders, and after the operation and the stomach has be-
come settled, give a portion of the pulverised mandrake root, com-
bined with a little of the cream of tartar and cloves to prevent griping ;
and the repetition of these must depend upon the obstinacy of the com-,
plaint :

After these have been given, the patient should commence the use of
the following preparation :

Take Yellow Root, or Golden Seal, 1 dram.
Bitter Root, 2 drams.
White Poplar Bark, 2 drams.
Capsicum, 1 dram.

Cover with boiling water, then add a pint of Holland gin. Of this let
the patient take from half a wine glass, to a wine glass, morning, noon
and night.

During the same time the following decoction may be taken :

Take the root of Dandelion,
Bark of Bayberry.
Bark of Bayberry Root.

Pound or bruise, make a decoction and drink freely.

Every night the patient may take two or three of" the anti-dyspeptic
pills, or sufficient to act as a laxative.

The tincture or infusion of blood root is also a valuable auxiliary in
the cure of this complaint. The diet should be vegetables^ light and
nutritious. A raw egg may be taken every morning.


662 Constitutional Diseaset [Class XI.


CLASS XI.


CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES.


CHARACTER.

By this class we understand those diseases which are not confined to
any particular organ, but more or less affect the whole system.


CHAPTER I.

SCURVY. (Scorbutus.)

DESCRIPTION.

This disease prevails chiefly in cold northern countries,fespecfalIy
In low damp situations, near large marshes, or great quantities of stag-
nating water. Sedentary people, of a dull melancholy disposition are
most subject to it. It proves often fatal to sailors on long voyages, par-
ticularly in ships that are not properly ventilated, have many people
onboard, or where cleanliness is neglected.

It is not necessary to mention the different species into whicii-lhis
disease has been divided, as they differ from one another chiefly in
degree. What is called the land scurvy, however, is seldom attended
with those highly putrid symptoms which appear in patients who have
been long at sea, and which, we presume, are rather owing to confined
air, want of exercise, and the unwholesome food eaten by sailoirs on
\ong voyages, than to any specific difference in the disease.

CAUSES.

The scurvy is occasioned by cold moist air ; by the long use of salt-
ed or smoke-dried provisions, or any kind of food that is hard of di-
gestion, and affords little nourishment. It may also proceed from the
suppression of customary evacuations, as the menses, the hemorrhoidal
flux, &c. It is sometimes owing to an hereditary taint, in which case
a very small cause will excite the latent disorder. Grief, fear, and oth-<
er depressing passions, have a great tendency both to excite and aggra-
vate this disease. The same observation holds with regard to neglect
of cleanliness, bad clothing, the want of proper exercise, confined air,
unwholesome food, or any disease which greatly weakens the body, or
vitiates the humours.


Order I.] Scurvy. 663

SYMPTOMS.

This disease may be known by unusual weariness* heaviness, and
difficulty of breathing, especially after motion; rottenness of the gums,
which are apt to bleed on the slightest touch ; a disagreeable breath ;
frequent bleeding at the nose ; crackling of the joints; difficulty of
walking ; sometimes a swelling, and sometimes a falling away of the
legs, on which there are livid, yellow, or violet-coloured spots ; the
face is generally of a pale or leaden colour. As the disease advances,
other symptoms come on ; as decay of the teeth, haemorrhages, or dis-
charges of blood from different parts of the body, foul obstinate ulcers,
pains in various parts, especially about the breast, dry scaly eruptions
all over the body, «fcc. At last a wasting or hectic fever comes on,
and the miserable patient is often carried of by a dysentery, a diarrhoea
a dropsy, the palsy, fainting fits, or a mortification of some of the
bowels.

TREATMENT.

We know no way of curing this disease but by pursuing a plan di-
rectly opposite to that which brings it on. It proceeds from a vitia-
ted state of the humours, occasioned by errors in diet, air, or exercise;
and this cannot be removed but by a proper attention to these important
articles.

If the patient has been obliged to breathe a cold, damp, or confined
air, he should be removed, as soon as possible, to a dry, open, and
moderately warm one. If there is reason to believe that the disease
proceeds from a sedentary life, or depressing passions, as grief, fear, &c<
the patient must take daily as much exercise in the open air as he can
bear, and his mind should be diverted by cheerful company and other
amusements.

When the scurvy has been brought on by a long use of salted pro-
visions, the proper medicine is a diet consisting chiefly of fresh vegeta-
bles ; as oranges, apples, lemons, limes, tamarinds, water-cresses*
scurvy-grass, <fcc. The use of these, with milk, pot-herbs, fresh bread-
and fresh beer or cider, will seldom fail to remove the scurvy of this
kind, if taken before it is too far advanced; but to have this effect, they
must be persisted in for a considerable time. When fresh vegetables
cannot be obtained, pickled or preserved ones may be used ; and where
these are wanting, recourse must be had to vegetable acids. All the
patient's food and drink should, in this case, be sharpened with cream
of tartar, vinegar, or the muriatic acid.

These things, however, will more certainly prevent than cure the
scurvy, for which reason sea-faring people, especially in long voyages,
ought to lay in plenty of them. Cabbages, onions, goose-berries, and
many other vegetables, may be kept a long time by pickling, prcser*
ring, fyc. and when these fail, the acids recommended above, which
will keep for any length of time, may be used. We have reason to be-
lieve, if ships were well ventilated, had got store of fruits, greens, ci-
der, &c. laid in, and if proper regard were paid to cleanliness and
warmth, that sailors would be the most healthy people in the world, and


664 Constitutional Diseases. [Class XL

would seldom 6uffer either from the scurvy or putrid fevers, which are
so fatal to that useful class of men : but it is too much the temper of
such people to despise all precaution; they will not think of any ca-
lamity till it overtakes them, when it is too late to ward off the blow.'

In the course of the disease particular symptoms may arise, requi-
ring a separate consideration. Pains of the belly are to be relieved by
emollients and opiates; oppression at the chest and impeded respiration
by mustard plasters; contractions of the hams and calves of the legs;
by fomenting the part and by the application of emolient poultices and
frictions ; spOriginess of the gums, and looseness of the teeth, by wash-
ing the mouth frequently with anti-septic and astringent gargles ; and
foul ulcers are to be cleansed and healed by washing them with soap
and water, or tha tincture of myrrh, and then dressing them with some
kind of ointment, or poultice. In bad cases of ulceration the yeast
poultice will be serviceable.

" Every body knows," says a writer, " how much easier it is to pre-
vent than to cure any disease ; but this is particularly true with respect
to the scurvy. I have therefore recommended the most assured means
of preserving our seamen from its formidable attacks. Vegetable and
mineral acids are certainly the best correctives of the acrimony occasion-
ed by the long use of salted provisions. These are one of the chief
causes of the scurvy not only at sea, but on land also, where salted
and smoke-dried meats are a favourite and very customary article of
food. It appears that the scurvy is almost unknown to the natives
of Canada, though they live entirely on animal food, but not salted;
while the use of the latter never fails to produce the scurvy.
Would it riot then be worth while to make various experiments for pre-
serving meat at sea without salt 1 Surely the resourses of human in-
vention are not exhausted. The absorbent and anti-putrescent proper-
ties of sugar are well known ; but it might be deemed too expensive a
seasoning. I must leave trials of this sort to persons of more leisure.
It is enough for me to suggest the hint. I wish it may lead to a dis-
covery of so much importance."

Since the above was written, this art has been discovered and prac-
tised.

" I have often seen," says a writer, " very extraordinary effects in
the land scurvy from a milk diet. This preparation of nature is a
mixture of animal and vegetable properties, which of all other is the
most fit for restoring a decayed constitution, and removing that par-
ticular acrimony of the humours, which seems to constitute the very
essence of the scurvy, and many other diseases. But people despise
this wholesome and nourishing food, because it is cheap, and devour
with greediness flesh and fermented liquors, while milk is only deemed
fit for their hogs.

" Tho most proper drink in the scurvy is whey or buttermilk. When
these cannot be had, sound sider or spruce beer may be used. Wort
has likewise been found to be a proper drink in the scurvy, and may
be used at sea, as malt will keep during the longest voyage. A decoc-
tion of the tops of the spruce-fir is likewise proper. It may be drank
in the quantity of a pint twice a day. Tar-water may be used for the


Order II.] Heat of Urine. $65

same purpose, or decoctions of any of the mild mucilaginous vegeta-
bles ; as sarsaparilla, marsh mallow roots, &c. Infusions of the bit-
ter plants, as tanzy, centaury, fyc. are likewise beneficial.

•' A slight degree of scurvy may be carried off by frequently sucking
a little of the juice of a bitter orange or a lemon. When the disease af-
fects the gums only, this practice, if continued for some time, will
generally carry it off. We would, however, recommend the bitter or-
ange as greatly preferable to lemon ; it seems to be as good a medicine,
and is not near so hurtful to the stomach. Perhaps our own sorrel may
be little inferior to either of them.

All kinds of salad are good in the scurvy, and ought to be eaten very
plentifully, as spinage, lettuce, parsley, celery, radish, dande-
lion, &c. It is amazing to see how soon fresh vegetables in the spring
cure the brute animals of any scab or foulness which is upon their skins.
It is reasonable to suppose that their effects would be as great upon the
human species, were they used in poper quantity for a sufficient length
of time.

I have sometimes seen good effects 1n scorbutic complaints of very
long standing, from the use of a decoction of the roots of dock. It is
usually made by boiling a pound of the fresh root in six pints of water,
till about one-third of it be consumed. The dose is from half a pint to
a pint of the decoction every day. But in all the cases where 1 have
seen it prove beneficial, it was made much stronger, and drank in lar-
ger quantities. [Buchan.]


CHAPTER II.
HEAT OF URINE. (Ardor Urina.)

DESCRIPTION.

From vraious causes, persons are afflicted with heat and scalding of
the urine. It often proceeds from venereal, but may arise from vari-
ous other causes ; from inflammation of the kidneys, uterus, gravel, &c.

TREATMENT.

Cooling and mucilaginous drinks must be taken for this complaint,
Half a tea-spoonful of the diuretic drops may be taken in half a pint
of spearmint tea ; also the mucilage of slippery elm bark should be
taken.

A cooling and spare diet should be used, and all heating kinds of food
or liquids avoided.

Buttermilk is an excellent article of diet.

This course will soon remove the complaint.


Vol I. 84


666


Constitutional Diseases. [Class XI.


CHAPTER III.

EMACIATION OR WASTING OF THE BODY. (Marasmus.)

DESCRIPTION.

Sometimes the system begins to waste and decline without any evi-
dent cause, which constitutes a species of marasmus or consumption,
and it is often difficult to trace the disease to any particular organ ; the
flesh wastes away, the strength declines, and the whose system is de-
ranged.

TREATMENT.

Our object should be to ascertain the seat of the disease if possible,
as it may lurk in some part of the system which it is quite difficult to
detect ; and therefore our inquiries should be very minute. When we
can discover any specific disease which gives rise to the complaint, ap-
tect the cause, then it must be treated on general principles. All
the secretions and excretions must be regulated, the stomach, intestines
and skin must be attended to, and brought into a healthy state.


CHAPTER IV.
GENERAL DEBILITY.

DESCRIPTION.

Persons are many times afflicted with universal languor, debility or
great weakness without being able to trace it to any particular cause.
They complain of a sense of sinking, particularly after a little exercise
or fatigue. The appetite is generally good, and there is seldom any
pain ; nor is any particular organ seemingly deranged.

TREATMENT.

1. The stomach and bowels must be cleansed, the skin must be kept
moist, and any particular symptoms attended to. I have found the use
of the restorative cordial, invariably to benefit or cure this anomalous
complaint. From half a wine glass to a wine glass may be taken three
or four times a day. The bowels must be kept regular.


Order V.] Mercurial Disease and Salivation. G67


CHAPTER V.

MERCURIAL DISEASE AN D K S A LI V AT 10 If.

DESCRIPTION.

The symptoms of this disease are too well known to need descrip-
tion, but they are detailed in the first part of this work under the head
of the injurious effects of mercury. The general use of this min-
eral, has rendered this the most prevalent and destructive disease. —
Scarcely an individual can be found among us, who has not, or does
not suffer from the effects of this dreadful poison, and it is one of the
most remarkable circumstances on record, that an article so evidently
deleterious, which entails such a vast variety of complaints, should be
given as medicine, when it possesses not the least power to remove dis-
ease whatever, any further than is produced by a its purgative effects.

It is true, all patients are not killed who take it, but it so retards the
efforts of nature to remove this poison, and the disease together, from
the system, that she often struggles " like a cart beneath the sheathes,"
to] effect it, and very frequently if the constitution is not sufficiently
strong, it kills the patient almost immediately, or at some subsequent
period ; or if it does not have this effect, it renders him a cripple or
miserable for life, and perhaps it would be much better for him, if the
physician had immediately put a period to his existence by a dose of ar-
senic or prussic acid ; for, in this case, the constant state of torture, mis
ery and wretchedness which attends tbe exhibition of this mineral, would
be avoided. It penetrates into every avenue of the system, destroying,
the flesh and bones, fluids and mental powers. The person who takes it
is liable to have his teeth drop into his porridge, his tongue inflamed or
ulcerated, and perhaps protruding from his mouth, his flesh wasted
away, saliva and blood flowing copiously from his mouth and gums, or
perhaps the whole jaw bone in a state of rottenness or exfoliation: the
patient is unable to chew or swallow ; such a stench arises from his
breath that his friends or attendants can scarcely approach his bed side
—-he is scarcely able to articulate a word — his stomach and bowels de-
ranged — flesh and strength gone — he is racked and tossed with excru-
ciating pains, unable to sleep or perhaps deliriou;, and the poor pa-
tient is now doomed to sink to an untimely grave, a victim of quackery,
empiricism or charlatanism ; and should the unfortunate person recover
from the immediate effects of such worse than barbarous treatment, he
is doomed to drag out a miserable existence; and all from the use of a
deadly poison administered under the garb of medicine. A preparation
or agent which I never yet could learn was ever capable of curing a sin-
gle disease any further than arises from its action, as a purgative.

TREATMENT.

I was about to recommend the same treatment as for ordinary poisons,
but this would not do, because it is much worse than most kinds, for


668 Constitutional Diseases. [Cass XL

they can be immediately dislodged from the stomach by an emetic ; but
this subtle poison insinuates itself into every part of the system, and
diseases the fluids so extensively, that its effects cannot always be so
easily removed.

1. When the practitioner is called to the patient, if he is still using
mercury in any form, he must order it to be immediately discontinued.
patient can swallow let him take cream of tartar and flowers of sulphur
once or or twice a day. This will check the salivation, and counteract
the effects of the poison. The greatest suffering is experienced in con-
sequence of taking cold after the use of it. When this happens, let per-
spiration be promoted. When the mercurial rheumatism is produced,
and the joints stiff, let the alterative syrup be freely taken, and an infu-
sion of burdock seed is also very gcod. A little sulphur may be mixed
with Venice turpentine spread upon linen, and laid upon the parts affect-
ed, and subsequently let a strengthening plaster be applied— but it is
exceedingly difficult to remove the consequences attending such lamenta-
ble mal-practice.


CHAPTER VI.

YAWS. (Frambatsia.)

DESCRIPTION.

Yxws is a disease peculiar to the negroes in the West India islands,
said to be imported from Africa. It is propagated by contagion. It
occasionally attacks white people, but they are not so liable to it as the
blacks. Like the small pox, it only affects the person once during
life.

SYMPTOMS.

The yaws are sometimes preceded by pains in the limbs which some-
what resemble those of rheumatism, and are particularly severe round
the joints; these pains are attended with languor and debility, and
frequently continue for many days without any further appearance of
disease. After a time these precursory symptoms are succeeded by a
degree of fever, sometimes attended with rigors, although in other in-
stances the fever is slight and scarcely noticed.

For the most part the patient complains of headache, loss of appe-
tite, and pains in the back and loins, which are rather increased to-
wards evening. When these symptoms have continued for a few days,
they are followed by an eruption of pustules more or less numerous,
which appear in various parts of the body, but especially upon the
forehead, face, neck, arm-pits, groins, pudenda, and round the anus.
The eruption of these pustules is not completed over the whole body
at one time, neither do they show themselves in any regular succes-
sion on the different parts ; but while one crop is falling off, a fresh


Order VI.] Yaws. 669

one is making its appearance in another place. Every new eruption of
pustulos is usually preceded by a slight febrile paroxysm. On the first
appearance of the pustules or pimples, they are not larger than a pin's
head, but gradually increase until they attain the size of a sixpence, or
even a shilling. The pustules are filled with an opaque whitish fluid,
and when they burst, a thick viscid matter is discharged, which forms
a foul and dense crust or scab upon the surface. From the larger kind
of pustules there frequently arise red fungous excrescenses of various
magnitudes, from the size of a pea to that of a large mulberry: which
fruit owing to their rough granulated surfaces, they somewhat resemble.
These fungi, though they rise considerably above the surface of the skin,
have but a small degree of sensibility ; they never suppurate kindly,
but discharge a sordid glutinous fluid, which forms an ugly scab round
the edges of the excrescence, and covers the upper part of it, when
much elevated, with a white slough. When these eruptions appear up-
on any part of the body covered with hair, the colour of the latter is
gradually changed from black to white. In general the number and
size of the pustules are proportioned to the degree of eruptive fever. When
the febrile symptoms are slight, there are few pustules ; but they are
mostly of a larger size when the complaint is more violent and ex-
tensive.

The duration of the yaws is very uncertain, but is generally supposed
to depend a good deal on the habit of body at the time of receiving the
infection.

In some cases they arrive at their full size and maturity in the space
of four or five weeks ; but in others they have taken two or three
months.

When no more pustules are thrown out, and when those already upon
the skin no longer increase in size, the disease is supposed to have
reached its height. About this time it happens on some part of the
body or other, that one of the pustules becomes much larger than the
rest, equalling the size of a half-dollar ; it assumes the appearance of
an ulcer, and instead of being elevated above the skin like the others,
it is somewhat depressed ; the surface is foul and sloughy, and pours out
an ill-conditioned ichor, which spreads very much by corroding the
surrounding sound skin : this is what is called the master or mother
yaw. If proper attention be not paid to keep the surface of the ulcer
clean, the matter becomes very acrid, and when near a bone some-
times affects it with caries.

When the excrescenses appear upon the soles of the feet they are
prevented from rising by the insistence of the thick hard epidermis,
and give so much pain that the person affected is unable to walk. The
fungi thus situated are called by the negroes in the West Indies, tubba,
or crab yaws. They are sometimes so large as to cover a great part of
the sole of the foot ; at other times they are not larger than a shilling ;
like corns, they are frequently affected by different states of the at-
mosphere, but more particularly by rainy weather.

Where a judicious mode of treatment has been adopted, the yaws,
although a very loathsome complaint, seldom proves either difficult or
tedious of cure, and even in the worst of cases is never attended with


070 Constitutional Diseases. [Class XL

immediate danger : bat where the eruptions have been repelled into the
system by wrong applications, or mercury has been resorted to, the
cure is often greatly protracted, and in some cases rendered uncertain.
Where the disease has been suffered to pursue its course without any
assistance, foul ulcers of a considerable extent are apt to be formed,
which induce great debility, and often occasion a caries of the bones.
Thomas.]

COMMON TREATMENT.
Bleeding, blistering, mercury, &c.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Having clearly ascertained the disorder to be the yaws, the negro
ought to be sent immediately to some very private part of the estate,
where he can have no possible communication with such as never had
it. This precaution is by no means sufficiently attended to, as those
who labour under the disease are too frequently suffered to associate and
mix in friendly intercourse with other negroes, by which means it is
propagated from one to another, instead of being eradicated.

During the eruptive stage of the disease we are to assist the efforts of
nature in determining the noxious matter to the surface of the body by
giving some mild diaphoretic, which may be Washed down with about
half a pint of the decoction of sarsaparilla. With these reme-
dies the patient should make use of a warm bath about twice a week,
confining himself at the same time to a vegetable diet. He ought to be
comfortably and warmly lodged, and his system bo invigorated by ta-
king daily exercise proportioned to his strength.

In the second stage of the disease where the eruptions begin to dry
off, it will be advisable to employ purgatives so as to produce an altera-
tive effect. The alterative syrup may be used at the same time. Both
are to be continued until the scabs become perfectly dry and fall off;
at which period they are to be omitted, and then a gentle purgative
should be given.

It has already been observed, that there usually remains one large
eruption after all the rest have died away ; and this, by degenerating in-
to a foul ulcer, discharges an ichorous matter. The best application
for its cure is the white ointment, and a suitable wash.

From the thickness of the cuticle in the feet, when the yaws appear
there, the discharge is apt to be confined. When they break they are
difficult to heal, often ulcerating the whole sole, and thereby rendering
the person incapable of walking. A poultice of the elm bark is the best
application in such cases.

Hard swellings of a very painful nature which do not suppurate,
sometimes appear likewise in the soles of the feet as a consequence of
the yaws, and occasion lameness. To remove them the patient should
bathe his feet in warm water until the swellings become somewhat soft ;
they then should be touched by the caustic potash, which produces an
eschar and sore, that is readily healed by dressing it with a' 'yeast poultice.


Order I.-Cktss XIL] Lumbago. — Worms. 671


CLASS XII.


LOCAL DISEASES.


CHARACTER.
By this class, we understand such diseases as are located more es-
pecially in some particular part of the body, but not affecting appa-
rently any particular organ.


CHAPTER 1.
LUMBAGO.

DESCRIPTION.

This Disease is a species of rheumatism which is more particularly
concentrated in the small of the back, or the lower part of the spine.
It causes great weakness or pain, and difficulty of stooping and often
of walking.

TREATMENT.

The treatment of Lumbago is the same as that recommended for
common rheumatism. The part may be bathed with the tincture of
capsicum or Cayenne pepper, and if this does not relieve, the oil of
sassafras; after which, let a strengthening plaster be applied.


CHAPTER II.

WORMS. (Vermes.)

DESCRIPTION.

These are chiefly of three kinds, viz. the tamia, or tape-worm ; the
teres, or round and long worm ; and the ascarides, or round and short
worm. There are many other kinds of worms found inihe human body ;
but as they proceed, in a great measure, from similar causes, have
nearly the same symptoms, and require almost the same method of treat-
ment as these already mentioned, we shall not spend time in enumera-
ting them.


672 Local Diseases. [Class XII.

Tho tape-worm is white, very long, and full of joints. It is gener-
ally bred either in the stomach or small intestines. The round and
long worm is likewise bred in the small guts, and sometimes in the stom-
ach. The round and short worms commonly lodge in the rectum, and
occasion a disagreeable itching about the seat.

The long round worms occasion squearaishness, vomiting, a disagree-
able breath, gripes, looseness, swelling of the belly, swoonings, loath-
ing of food, and at other times a voracious appetite, a dry cough, con-
vulsions, epileptic fits, and sometimes a privation of speech. These
worms have been known to perforate the intestines, and get into the ca-
vity of the belly. The effects of the tape-worm are nearly the same
with those of the long and round, but rather more violent.

Andry says, the following symptoms particularly attend the solium,
which is a species of tape-worm, viz. swoonings, privation of speech,
and a voracious appetite. The round worms called ascarides, besides
<m itching of the anus, cause swoonings, and tenesmus, or an inclina-
tion to go to stool.

CAUSES.

Worms may proceed from various causes ; but they are seldom found
except in weak and relaxed stomachs, where the digestion is bad. Se-
dentary persons are more liable to them than the active and laborious.
Those who eat great quantities of unripe fruit, or who live much on raw
herbs and roots, are generally subject to worms. There seems to be
an hereditary disposition in some persons to this disease.

SYMPTOMS.

The common symptoms of worms are, paleness of the countenance,
and, at other times, an universal flushing of the face; itching of the
nose (this, however, is doubtful, as children pick their noses in all dis-
eases;) starting, and grinding of the teeth in sleep; swelling of the up-
perjlip; the appetite sometimes bad, at other times quite voracious;
looseness ; a sour or stinking breath; a hard swelled belly; great thirst;
the urine frothy, and sometimes of a whitish colour; griping, or colic
pains; an involuntary discharge of saliva, especially when asleep;
frequent pains of the side, with a dry cough, and unequal pulse ; pal-
pitations of the heart ; swoonings, drowsiness, cold sweats, palsy, epi-
leptic fits, with many other unaccountable nervous symptoms, which
were formerly attributed to witchcraft, or the influence of evil spirits.
Small bodies in the excrements resembling melon or cucumber seeds-
are symptoms of the tape-worm.

Says Buchan, — I lately saw some very surprising effects of worms in
a girl about five years of age, who used to lie for whole hours as if
dead. She at last expired, and upon opening her body, a number of
the teres, or long round worms, were found in her intestines, which
were considerably inflamed; and what anatomists call an intus-suscep-
tio, or the involving of one part of the gut within another, had taken
place in no less than four different parts of the intestinal canal.


Order II.] Worm. 673

TREATMENT.

Calomel is now principally used for the removal of worms : but this
medicine, as has been frequently shown, is very dangerous to adminis-
ter. Calomel or mercury is t'no basis or principal ingredient of most of
the highly reputed nostrums for worms, such as worm lozenges, ver-
mifuges, &c. The following preparation will be found very effectual
in expelling different kinds of worms from the system.

Take Carolina Pink Root. (Spigelia Maylandka.)
Alexandria Senna. (Cassia Senna.)
Manna. (Fraxinus Omus.) of each, half an ounce,

Bruise all, and add to the powder, one quart of boiling water. Let it
stand a short time, in order to extract the strength of the articles —
sweeten with molasses, and add a small quantity of milk.

For a child five years old, give a gill three or four times a day on an
empty stomach, and if this does not purge, increase the dose until the
effect is produced.

Worms sometimes ascend into the throats of children and choak them.
This symptom may readily be removed by giving a little salts and wa-
ter, and repeating it occasionally will often expel them, and always is a
preventive.

This will be found a very valuable remedy for different kinds of
worms, and even should none exist, it will cleanse the stomach and bow-
els, and prove very beneficial. I have tried various articles for worms,
but find that this exceeds every other preparation.

When small worms infect the rectum, a weak infusion of tobacco
used as an injection, will dislodge them, and the above medicine should
likewise be given.

This treatment may also be used for the taenia, or tape- worm, but
I cannot recommend it as a certain remedy, nor do I know any treat-
ment that is always capable of removing this species of worms. I have
given thirty or forty different agents, but none of which, have proved
entirely effectual.

A person informs me that a small quantity of indigo cured one case in
Kentucky. The male fern has also been highly extolled for it, but I
cannot speak with any certainty of its effects.

One case was cured in one of the New-England states by a very cu-
rious process, and which, perhaps, is an infallible remedy, but which
to many, might be a very unpleasant one. The patient was suffered to
get extremely hungry, after which, he was suspended over a boiling
vessel of food with his mouth open in order that the worm might inhale
the steam arising from it. This had the desired effect. The animal
rushed from the stomach to the mouth to satisfy the cravings of hunger,
and his head was dipt with a pair of scissors, and thus removed.

A young woman atPeekskill,New-York,was attended for dyspepsia.
After her decease, worms were discharged from her mouth.


Vol. I. 85


674 Local Diseases. [Class XII.


CHAPTER V.
H E A D-A CHE. (Cephalalgia.)

DESCRIPTION.

Head-ache is of two kinds, primary or symptomatic. It often arises
from a morbid state of the stomach in consequence of an effusion of
bilious matter. When this happens, is is termed sick head-ache. It
often also arises from a determination of blood to the head, as well as
many other causes.

TREATMENT,

In treating the head-ache we must first ascertain the cause of it. If
it proceeds from the stomach, our attention must be directed to this or-
gan, and it must be cleansed by a gentle emetic, or as a substitute, a
purgative, and which must be occasionally repeated.

The feet must be often bathed in warm water to equalize the circula-
tion, particularly when it arises from a determination of blood to the
head as in incipient apoplexy.

When it proceeds from irritability of the nervous system, let nervines
and anodynes be given, such as the valerian, diaphoretic powders, &c.
Equal parts of blood root and bayberry pulverized may be used as a
snuff.

If the pain at any time be very severe, let mustard plasters be applied
between the shoulders and the bottom of the feet. Diet is very neces-
sary in this disorder. It should be vegetable, cooling and light, and
such as easily digests, Stewed fruit is very useful, as it tends to regulate
the bowels which is very necessary.

Bathing the crown of the head every morning in cold water has
proved a sovereign remedy for head-ache. Captain Snow informs me
that he laboured under this complaint for a length of time, and sever-
West-Indies — he applied to an elderly Scotch physician who objected to
bleeding, and pronounced it ignorance, and recommended him to bathe
his head every morning in cold water, which he did, and has continued
for many years, and it has effected a perfect cure; and that no doubt by
equalizing the circulation, and the sympathetic and healthy effect pro-
duced upon the stomach, upon which, he states, it always has a sen-
sible effect.


INDEX TO VOL. I.


A.


Apoplexy,
Ammenorrhcea,

Asthma, - - 395

Abstinence, - - - 19

Ardent Spirits, 30

Air, - - - - 33

Air of Crowded Assemblies, - 34

Air of Cities, - - 35

Air, Change of, - 36

Air, pure in Disease, - 36

Age, --.- 42-2:!0

Aperients, use of, - 67

Abernethian Code of Health and

Longevity, ... 61

Abernethian Creed, - 68

Alterative Digester, use of, 67

Abuses in Surgery, - - 203

Acute Rheumatism, - - 439

Affection, Hypochondriac, - 556
After pains of lying-in women,

(see Appendix.)


[Bathing, topical, - 86

147-528 do. Sea, - - 83

649 Burying within Churches and Cities, 35


Ague and Fever,

Anasarca,

Angina Pectoris,

Apthae,

Ardor Urina:, «•

Arthritis,
Ascanu^.,

Ascites, -

do. Ovarii,

Artificial discharge of Semen.

Animal Food,

Air confined in Vessels, -

Amputation, -

Abortion,


267
5(id
655

598
665
448
672
4S5

498

646

26

35

208

642


do.


- (see Appendix.)


Bladder, Inflammation of,

Bleeding from t he Nose,
do. from the Penis,
do. from (he Stomach, -
do. from the Lungs,
do. from the Uterus,
do. from the Bladder,

Blood, Spitting of, -
do. Vomiting of,

Bloody Urine,

Brain, Inflammation of,

Bronchitis, ...
do. Chronic,

Beer, ....

Bandaging and Tight Lacing,

Bowels, faulty stale of,

Brtths,

Blood-lettiug, effects of,

Bleeding in Pleurisy.


438
631
645

628

629

638

645

629

628

645

372

385

387

32

42

61

83


Burning Charcoal, effects of,
Bilious Affections,


36
594


Catalepsy ... 635

Chicken Pox, - - 470

Chlorosis, ... 647

Chorea, ... 569

Cholera Infantum, - - 580

Cholera, Spasmodic or Indian,

(see Appendix


Cholera Morbus, -
Colic,

do. Flatulent, -

do. Bilious,

do. Painter's, and Hysteric,
Constipation,
Cow Pox,
Croup,

Cystitis, acute, -
Costiveness, - - -

Cynancliea Trachialis, -
do. Laryngea,
do. Tonsilari- - , -
do. Maligna,

Colds and Coughs,
Consumption, - t

Constitution, Peculiarity of.
Cider, . . .

Clothing, ...

Climate, - - .

Cleanliness, -
Clothes, wet
Cold Bath, -
Cardialgia,

Carditis, ...
Catarrh, -
Cephalalgia, -
Chronic Rheumatism,
Conception,
Confluent Small Pox,
Contagion, means of preventing,
Continued Fever,
Convulsions, - - . 505

do. in children, (see Appendix..)

do. Hysterical, do.

do. in Pregnant Women, do.

Cramp, . - - 596

Causes of Indigestion, - - 62

Cramp in the Stomach, - 596


574

618

619

620

623

626

467

381

438

626

381

384

S77

380

393

406

229

33

42

42

45

- -.- - 56

83

- 597
423

«■ 391
674

- 443
(see Appendix-)

458
122
291


Canker,


D.


82-88-186 Dance, St. Vitus',
179 iDebil .ty,


698


560
666


676


Index.


Dentition, - (see Appendix,)

Diabetes, - - - 638

Diarrhoea, - - r 616

do. chronic, - - 017

Diaphragmafis, - 424

Digestion, difficult or impaired, 586
Diseases of Women and Children,

(see Appendix,)
do. Pregnancy, do.

Distinct Small Pox, - - 455

Dropsy in the belly, - 485


Brain, - 148-477

Cellular Membrane, 500


Chest.
Ovaria,
Scrotum,
Uterus,


do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
Dysentery,
Dysmenorrhea, -
Dyspepsia, ...
Delirium, -

do. Tremens, -

Dysenteria,

do. Chronic, -

Drunkenness and intemperance,
Diet, -

Dress, kind of, -
Damp beds,

do. Houses, -
Digestion, symptoms of faulty,

do. cause of,
Diseases in which Heat and Cold are

Beneficial, - - - 140

Disease a Unit, - - 219

do. Primary or Symptomatic, 429

do. Acute or Chronic. 429

do. ueneral indications in the

Cure of, - - . 134


491

- 498
503

- 499
146-603

- 653
526

- 506
539

- 603
614
541

19
43
56
57
61
62


E.
Ear, inflammation of,
Enuresis,
Enteritis,
Epilepsy,
Epistnxis,


375

644
432
521
631


Emaciation, or wasting of the body, 6G&
Falling of the Fundament in children,

(spe Appendix.)
E\or<Mions (lie only outlets of disease 129
Falling of the Ulcrus, (see Appendix,)
False pains in pregnant women, do.
Fainting, .... 147-537
Febrile Diseases. - - 141-232
Fevers in General, - - 232

Fever, definition of, (in general,) 258
do. Causes of

Treatment of,

Intermittent,

Remittent, ...

Bilious Remittent,

Yellow, -

Simple Continued,

Inflammatory,

Typhus,

Putrid or Malignant,

Scarlet, -

Synochus, -

Spotted,

Miliary, ...

Infantile Remittent,

Hectic, -

Puerperal, ...


Eruptions, cutaneous, in children,

(see Appendix.)
Erysipelas, (sec Surgery, Vol. II.

Excoriations in Infants, (see Appcndis.)
Eyes, inflammation of, (see Vol. 11.)
Exercise, .... 37

Early Rising ... - 49

Evacuations, ... - 58

Excretions of the Bowels, Liver, and

Skin, - - - 5859

Epitapth on Margaret Scott's Tomb

Stone, .... 66

Electricity, .... ]05

Efforts of nature to remove disease, 132

Effluvia, deleterous, - - 240

do. Marsh, - - - 240

do. Human, ... 245

do. Animal, ... 246


do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.

do.
Food,

Fermented Liquors,
Fashion and Figure,
Filthy Cities and Streets,
Feet," wet, - - - "TT

Flatulency in jot—, <- see Appendix.)

Fiuo. AllulS, ..-- 63o

Female Diseases, (see Appendix.)
Floodings in Pregnant Women, do.
FIu>;, Bloody, or Dysentery, 603

Fundament," falling of, (see Vol. II.)
do. in children, (see Appendix.)
Furor Uterinus, - 517

Filthy persons and apartments, 46

Fits, 147


239
253
267
274
277
326
291
285
295
308
348
291
342
361
370
368
363
26
30
42
46


686
425
538
550
448
647
666
(see Appendix.)


G.

Gastralgia,

Gastritis,

Giddiness or Vertigo,

Globus Hystericus,

Gout,

Green Sickness,

General Debility,

Gripes in Infants,

H

Hematuria, ... 645

Ha-matamesis, - - 628

Haemoptisis, ... 629

Head-ache, - - - 674-148

in pregnant women, (see Appendix.)
Heartburn, ... 597

in pregnant women, (sec Appendix.)
Hectic Fever, - - 368

Hemaplegia, ... 664


Indtt.


677


Lungs from, -


629


Nose,


- 631


Bladder,


645


Stomach, -


• 628


Uterus,


638


-


427


Hemorrhage, . 1 628

do (see Piles.)

do

do.

do

do

do
Hepatitis,

Hernia, (see Surgery vol. II.) •
Herpes, do

Hydrocele, do.

Hydrocephalus - - 148-477

Hydrophobia, (see Surgery vol. II.)
Hydrothorax, - 491

Hypochondriasis » - 556

Hysteria, - - 147-550

Hives. - - - 381

Hemorrhoids, (see Surgery vol. II.)
Hot Bath, -.- 86

Heat and Cold, Agency of in the produc-
tion and removal of disease 138
Health and disease, definition of, 229
Habit, - - .230

Hiccup, .... 601
Heat of Urine, • - 665


Innoculation, - 466

Icterus, ... 659

Illeus, (see colic.)

Indigestion, ...

» a . *»rms. *

Inflammation ot tne d._;_

do Ear,

do Eye,

do Stomach, -

do Peritonaeum,

do Liver,

do Spleen, -

do Diaphragm,

do Kidneys,

do Bladder,

do Womb, -

do Pleura,

do Lungs, •

do Heart,

do Larynx,

do Pharynx,

do Tonsils,

do Intestines, •

Impure Air, ...
Influenza, ...

Insanity,

Ischuria, (see Surgery vol. 2 ) -
I'ch, (see Surgery vol. 2 ) -
Incontinance of Urine, -
Incubus or Nightmare,
Infants, diseases of, (see Appendix.)
Infantile Remittent fever, - °<u

Infection, to prevent or remove, J^
Inflammatory Fever, j4g-267

Intefmhtent,


586
671
372

975

148
425
434
427
431
424
435

- 438
437

420-147
399
423
384
384
377
432
33
391
506


644
657


] Inflammatory Sore Throat, -
Intestines, Inflammation of,
Inflammation,

do Bronchial tubes,


Jaundice,


37T
43a
148
385


659


King's Evil, (see Surgery vol. 2.)

Kidneys, Inflammation of, • 435

Kine Pox, . . . 467

Kind of dress, - - - 4S


Lethargy, , . 436

Leucorrhoea , - * 635

Liver, Inflammation of, . 427

do. Chronic, ... 439
Lochia immoderate discharge of, (see

Apendix.) ...
Lochia, suppression of,'(see Appendix.)
Longings of pregnant women, (see Ap.)
Looseness of the bowelsordiarrhooea 615
Looseness in Infants, (see Appendix,)
Lungs, Inflammation of, - - 399

Lungs, Bleeding- from, - 629

Lacing Tight, - - 42

Longevity, Remarkable instances of, 64

do Comparative state of, 66

Lumbago, ... 671


Melanchelv,
Mania a Potu,
Measles. .


M


Menorrhagia,

Mental Derangement,

Mania. ...

Miliary Fever, ...

Malignant,

Mumps, ,

Medical Beer,

Mead, - - -

Method to Counteract indigestion,

Mineral or Medicinal waters,

Morbid effects of malice, envy and

hatred, - - lid

Morbid effects of the loss of blood, 186
Mercury, Pernicious ef. of, 160-168-153
Mercurial Disease, - - 166

Minerals, effects on the system, 171-82
Madness, - - . 506

Madness, Canine, (<ce vol. 2.) -
Meconium, retention of, (see Appendix,)


519
539
471
033
506
506
361
308
376
32
33
65
90


Menses, Immoderate flow of,
Menses, ^relention of,
Menses, suppression of, •

do Difficult and Painful, .

do Cessation of,
Miscarriage, (see Appendix.)


638
647
649
653
643


678


Index


Means of Preventing disease and promo-
ting Longevity, - - 19

Means of Promoting warmth and per-
spiration, - - 150

Mercury, Permicious effects^of, by

Dr.,Hunn, . 168

Morbid effects of the loss of blood, 186
do in Infancy, - 199

N

Nausea and Vomiting, . - 574

Nausea in Pregnant woman, (see App.)
Nephritis, - . 435

Nervous or Typhus Fever, - 295

Nettle Rash, - - 157

Nightmare. ... 657

Nipples, excoriation of, (see Appendix.)
Nymphomania, - - 517

Night air, - - 56

Nostrums and patent Medicines, 106
Nature, cause and treatment of dis-
ease in General, - - 129
Nosology, or Systematic Arrange^

ment of diseases, - 223

O

Opthalmia, (see Surgery vol. 2.)
Otitis, - - - 375

Ovaria, Dropsy of, - - 498

Onanism, - - - 646

Occupations, ... 52

Operations in Surgery, - - 208

Observations of different individuals up-
on the present practice of Med. 214
do of J. J. Steel, - 214

do of Dr. Anthony Hunn, 217
Uo ofXh<,u.a»jciiersoi), 218


Pneumonia, - 399

do Typhoides, - - 403

Piles, (see Surgery vol. 2 )

in Pregnant Women, (see Append.)
Pains after, in lying Woman, (see App.)

do False, (see Appendix.)
Palpitation, ■ 658

Palsy, ... 564

Plague, - - - 33B

Paralysis. - - 564

Peritonitis, - - - 434

Peripneumony Notha, - 403

Phrenitis, - - - 372

Phthisis Pulmonalis, - 406

Pleurisy, - - - 147-420

Pleurilis, - - - 420

Puerperial convulsions, (see Appendix.)

do Fever, - - 363

Pertussis, - 388

Primary Organs, importance of, 63

Prescriptions, form &. composition of, 230
Pernicious Customs, - - 72


Preliminary Remarks, • . £281

Passions, Nature and effect of, 110

Principles of the American Practice of

Medicine and general indications of

Cure, - - - 129

Physicians, servants to nature only, 136
Plate showing the effects of Mercury 170
Puliy's observations on the effects of

Bleeding, - - - 178

Prescriptions, - - 231

Putrid Sore Throat, - - 380

Priapism, ... 54Q

Poisons, (see Surgery vol. II.) -
Pox, Chicken, "- - 470

do Cow, ... 46jr

do Small, ... 455

Pregnancy, diseases attendant on, (see

Appendix. J
Pulmonary Consumption, - 406

Purging or Diarrhoea, - - 615

do and Vomiting, . 574

Putrid Fever, ... 303
Pyrosis, - . . 595

Personal Cleanliness, - - 47


Q

Quinsey, - - - 377

Quantity of Clothing, - . 43

R.

Rheumatism, acute, - - 439

do. Chronic, - - 442

do. Mercuric'. " ™*

Rubeola, .... 471

Root Beer. .... 32

Remedy for Habitual Costiveness, 58

do. the prevention of infection, 122

Remarks on Bleeding by Dr. Ross, 183

do. Amputation, - - 208

do. on Compound Fractures, 209

do. Cataract, - - - 212

do. Dislocations, - - 209

do. Stone, - - - 211

do. White Swellings, - 209

do. Trephining, - - 211

do. Cancer, ... 209*

do Fistula, - - - 209

do. Hernia or Rupture, - 210

do. Aneurism, - - 210

Remittent Fever, - - - 274

Rickets, (sec Surgery.)

Rachitis, do.

Restlessness in Pregnant Women,

(see Appendix.)
Retention of the Menses, - 647

do. Urine, (see Surgery, Vol. II.)
Remarks of Dr. Godman on the

Knife, .... 212
Remediate Influence of Cold, 150

Remarks of Dr. Anthony Hunn upon

the subject of Medical Reform, 217


Indei.


679


348

569

662

566

455

446

431

425

431

584

230

28

32

42

49

89

89


3.
Scarlet Fever,
St. Vitus' Dance,
Scurvy, ...

Shaking Palsy,
Small Pox, -

Sciatica, ...

Splenitis, ...
Stomach, Inflammation of, -
Spleen, do
Sick Stomach,
Sex, -

Simplicity in Diet,
Spruce Beer,
Season, -

Sleep,

Sulphur Bath,
Shower Bath,
Statement of Dr. Rees on the use

of Minerals, - - 169

Surgical Operations in General, 203
Summer Complaint, - 580

Scrophula, (see Surgery.)

Spitting of Blood, - - 629

Sore Throat, Inflammatory, 377

do. Putrid or Malignant, 380

Stomach, Cramp or Spasms in, 596
Syncope, - - - 147-537

Synocha, , - 285

Synochus, ... 291

Salts, ... 82

Sea Sickness, - - 601

X.

Taenia, or Tape-Worm, - ors

Teething. (see Appendix.)

Teres, - - - 672

Thrush, - - . 598

Tinea Capitis, (see Surgery.)

Tooth Ache, do.

Typhus Fever, - . 295


Tympanites, - - 604

Temperance, - - 19

Trees and Plants, - - 36

Transitions from Heat to Cold, 54

Tobacco, Pernicious effects of, 72

Tepid Bath, 85

Topical Applications, • 86

Treatment of the effects of the loss

of Blood, - - 201

Temperaments, - - 230

Tongue Tied, (see Appendix.)

Tight Lacing and Bandaging, 42


Variola^


-


455


Vaccina,


-


467


Varicella,


.


470


Vitus', St. Dance of,


.


569


Vapour Bath,


-


87


Vaughan's case of Death by Bleed-
ing, - - - 178
Vegetable Food, - - 26
Vomiting, - . . 600
do. of Blood, - 628

W.

Whooping Cough, - - 388

Water, ... 28

Wine, ... 31

Wet Clothes, 56

Warm Bath, 85

Wet Feet, ... 56
White Swelling and other painful

Diseases, - - 148

Water Brash, - - 585

Worms, - . . 671


Yaws,


668
