The American Practice of Medicine, Vol. III
Wooster Beach
The American Practice of Medicine; Being a Treatise on the Character, Causes, Symptoms... and Treatment of the Diseases of Men, Women, and Children, on Vegetable or Botanical Principles, vol. III. New York: 1833.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/64210120RX3.nlm.nih.gov).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ROSA.


COMMON ROSE.


FRONTISPIECE


Vol hi


AMERICAN PRACTICE OF MEDICINE;

BEING

A TREATISE

ON THE

CHARACTER, CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, MORBID APPEARANCES,

AND

TREATMENT

OF THE

DISEASES OF MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN,

OF ALL CLIMATES,
ON

VEGETABLE OR BOTANICAL PRINCIPLES:

AS TAUGHT AT

C&e HeformeU jf^etofcal Colleges In ttje ZEnlteti States :

CONTAINING ALSO A

TREATISE ON MATERIA MEDICA AND PHARMACY,

OR THE

WITH AN APPENDIX, ON THE CHOLERA, ETC.

ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS PLATES AND CASES.

THE WHOLE PRECEDED BY

PRACTICAL RULES

FOR THE

PREVENTION OF DISEASE AND THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH.


BY W. BEACH, M.D.

* » •

President of the Reformed Medical Society, ami Founder of the Reformed Medical Colleges of the
United States ; Licentiate ol the Medical Society of the State of New York ; Member of the Medical
Society of the City and County of New York ; Professor of Materia Medica, Pharmacy, Theory
and Practice of Physic and Surgery in the New- York Reformed Medical Collt 5 , and Principal
Physician and Surgeon of the United States Infirmary.


IN THREE VOLUMES VOL. Ill,


NEW YORK:
BETTS & ANSTICE,


OPPOSITE ST. PAUL'S CHURCH.
MDCCC XXXIII


6 36

1833
v, 3


(y^Hy vu> M^IL


Entered according to the Act of Qocgress, in the year 1^3.', by
W. BEACH, M.D.

in the Clerk's office of the District Court of i he l aited States for the Southern
District of Now York.


PART VII.


MATERIA MEDICA.


PART VII.


MATERIA ME DIC A.


SECTION I.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


By the term Materia Medica, we understand that part of medical
science which treats of the nature, corn position, and relation of the
Various substances which are employed in the prevention, cure, and
mitigation of diseases : also the effects of chose substances on the hu-
man body. It embraces Botany, Chemistry, and Natural History.

Order or Arrangement.

It is generally customary, in treating on this branch of medi-
cine, to divide the various remedies, or agents, into classes. But
as every plant possesses several or many properties, and cannot be
classed into any definite medical order, but belong to several at the
same time ; the alphabetical arrangement is adopted in preference.

The following is the order which are adhered to in this work. 1st.
Articles are treated of which are purely vegetable, such as medicinal
plants, roots, bark, &c. 2nd. Minerals, certain salts, &c.

Season of Collecting Vegetable Medicines.

1st. Roots. — Roots must be collected in the spring, before the sap
begins to rise, or in the fall after the top is dead.

2nd. Barks. — Barks may be stripped from the tree or shrub any
time when the sap prevents it from adhering to the wood. The exte-
rior portion must be shaved off; the bark then cut thin, and dried in
the shade.

3rd. Medicinal Plants. — Medicinal plants should be collected
while in blossom, and also dried in the shade; their virtues^ however,
are not essentially diminished any time .before frost appears.


4 Materia Medica.

4th. Flowers and Seeds.— Flowers and seeds should be collected
when they are fully lipe, and likewise dried in the shade. All veget-
ables after having been dried should be kept from the air, and preserved
air tight, or in a dry place. In this way they may be preserved for
many years, without losing any of their medicinal properties. The me-
thod adopted by the society of Shakers, is admirably adapted to pre-
serve them. They press roots, plants, &c, after having been properly
dried, by means of a screw, into cakes, which are very handsome, and
their flavour and virtues remain unimpaired.

On the Preparation or Composition of Articles.

It is scarcely possible to administer remedies in the same state as
furnished by nature ; their form, volume, hardness, their state of
impurity, &c. prevents it. It is consequently necessary to submit
them to certain preparations, either in order to change their state, or
develope and render more sensible their virtues, or finally to impart to
them some new properties by combining these articles with others.

It is by means of comminution, extraction, solution, mixture,
tincture, and combination, that these objects are attained.


ECTION 1L

OF THE PROXIMATE PRINCIPLES OF VEGETABLES.

The ultimate analysis of the vegetable substances belonging to the
Materia Medica is seldom of utility, since we can scarcely ever discover
any relation between the composition and the medicinal powers of the
substance analysed. The application of chemistry, therefore, to the
vegetable substances belonging to the Materia Medica, is, in a great
measure, confined to the discrimination of their vegetable proximate
principles.

These principles are numerous and of very different kinds. They
are not all to be met with in every vegetable, or in every period of
vegetation ; some exist only in certain plants, and that only in their
state of vigor or maturity ; at other times, they are to be found only in
particular organs ; others are diffused through the whole substance of
the vegetable ; and mixed more or less intimately with all its parts ■
and some are nearly peculiar to certain vegetables, while others are
common to almost every plant. Those only need here be pointed out
which are connected with medicinal properties.

These principles are the products of vegetation from a common juice
or sap, which circulates freely through every part of the vegetable
system, being supplied by absorption from the soil, and, perhaps from
the atmosphere. It varies in its qualities, particularly according to the
season, and the progress of the plant to maturity ; frequently too, it
has an intermixture of the proper juices ; it always contains the usual
elements of vegetable matter, with generally saline substances, having
principally lime for their base.


Materia Mtdka. 5

Gum. — The first transition of the sap appears to be into mucilage,
or gum, one of the proximate principles contained in'greatest abun-
dance in vegetables. Gum is the name given to the principle when it
is obtained in a concrete state ; Mucilage is the name given to it as
expressed in a liquid state, or extracted by maceration in water.
This principle is found in all young plants, in a greater or less quantity;
and is often so abundant in the plant as to be discharged by sponta-
neous exudation. It abounds also in their roots, stalks, and leaves,
and especially in their seeds ; it is an inodorous, insipid, and glutinous
substance, soluble in water in every proportion, and forming with it a
thick viscid solution, which, by evaporation, affords a tenacious mass,
that when dried again is soluble, and very brittle. Exposed to heat,
it is neither fusible nor volatile. It is not inflammable ; for although,
when heated in contact with atmospheric air, it combines with oxygen ;
it emits no flame. Gum is usually obtained either by spontaneous
exudation, or by incisions made in the trunks and branches of trees.
It is more or less pure as it is obtained from different plants. Its exist-
ence in vegetables is detected by boiling gently the vegetable sub-
stance with water ; the water dissolves the gum, and if much of
that principle be present, the solution is glutinous. It may be allowed
to remain till the impurities have subsided ; if it then be allowed to
evaporate to the consistence of thin syrup, the addition of three parts of
alcohol will separate the whole of the gum in flakes.

Pure gum is not an active substance, considered with respect to its
effect on the living system. In medicine it is only used for its lubricat-
ing quality ; and so little activity does it exert, that it has often been
taken for a considerable time as an article of food. In pharmacy, it is
used as a medium to combine balsams, resins, and oils with water.
Though pure gurn is inactive, yet the virtues of many vegetables
depend on a gummy or mucilaginous matter.

Fecula, is a principle approaching in several of its characters to
gum. Like it, it is soluble in hot water, and forms a viscid glutinous
solution ; but it is at once distinguished by being perfectly insoluble
in cold water. It exists principally in the tuberoze roots and grami-
neous seeds. It is extracted by beating the dried root or seed with a
large quantity of water : the liquid soon becomes milky from the
diffusion of a white powder through it. On being poured from the
remaining vegetable matter, and allowed to remain at rest, this powder
is deposited, and when washed and dried is the Fecula of the plant.
It is generally mild and insipid, of a white colour, with a peculiar kind
of brilliancy, and is soft to the touch. Starch is the fecula of wheat,
aiuHis the most abundant part of that grain. Fecula is insoluble in
alcohol ; it is highly nutritive, and is usually contained in those plants
which serve as food. It is sometimes employed in its pure state in
medicine, on account of its nutritive quality and from being easy of
digestion ; Sago and Sallop are substances of this kind.

Gluten. — This principle is usually associated with fecula, and is
obtained in the process in which the fecula is separated. It then
appears as a viscous, elastic, and fibious-like substance, which, from
its resemblance to the animal product, named Gluten, has been deno-
minated Vegetable Gluten. It is obtained from the flour of wheat in


6 Materia Medica.

greatest abundance ; the flour is made into a paste with water, which
being compressed by the hand, while a stream of water falls upon it ;
the fecula is carried off in the state of powder : the mucilaginous and
saccharine parts of the grain are dissolved by the water, and there
remains a tenacious ductile mass forming the gluten. It has scarcely
any taste, is of a greyish culour, and when dried is semi-transparent.
It is insoluble in water ; and is dissolved in very small quantities by
alcohol. It contains a larger proportion, of nitrogen than any vegetable
product docs, and it is supposed to render those vegetables in which
it is present highly nutritive.

Saccharine Matter. — This exists in many vegetable substances,
especially in their fruits and roots, but often intimately united with
their mucilaginous and extractive matter. When freed from these its
taste is sweet, without any peculiar flavour ; it is soluble in water and
in alcohol. By the action of nitric acid, it is converted into oxalic acid.

Oil is a common proximate principle of vegetable matter ; it is of
two kinds, expressed or fat oil, and distilled, volatile or essential oil.
These have the common qualities of unctuosity and inflammability ;
but they also possess peculiar properties by which they are distin-
guished as species.

The expressed, fat, or fixed oils, r are thick and unctuous, insipid and
inodorous. They congeal on exposure to cold, are lighter than water,
and insoluble in that liquid ; they are likewise insoluble in alcohol,
except in minute quantity ; and they combine with the alkalies, forming
soap. They are not volatalized at the temperature of 212 deg. : some
require to be raised 600 deg. to make them boil, and the condensed oil
is changed in its properties. These oils are contained in the seeds and
fruit of vegetables, at the period of their maturity. Thej? are extracted
by expression or decoction with water; they are frequently impreg-
nated with part of the extractive, mucilaginous, or resinous parts,
which the seed or fruits contain ; from which they derive colour, and,
in many cases a peculiar taste and odour, and even, perhaps, certain
medicinal powers. They are mild and emollient, and are used princi-
pally for their qualities. They are rendered mixable with water by
the medium of gum or sugar, or by the addition of a small quantity of
an alkali.

Volatile, or essential oils, have characteristic properties different from
those of expressed oils. They arc volatile at a low temperature, and
are entirely and quickly converted into a vapour at the heat of boiling-
water without being decomposed ; they are soluble in a small propor-
tion in water, and hence the taste and flavour which water receives
from many vegetables by distillation. In alcohol they are completely
soluble ; they are generally odoriferous, pungent, and even acrid ■ they
are more highly inflammable than die fixed oils.

Resin.— This principle is in some measure connected with essential
oil, and in plants, is often united with u, as well as with other princi-
ples. Some vegetables, however, exude juices which concrete into i>
matter entirely resinous, and it is from these that the characters
the substances be^nging to this genus are tal m. The distinguishing
properties of a resin, are its existing in a solid state, being insoluble in
water, but soluble in alcohol, ether, and oil ; the solution in ether or


Materia Medico. 7

alcohol, is decomposed by water : resins are in general odorous and
sapid, though neither of these qualities is essential to a pure resin ; they
are inflammable, and burn with much smoke ; at a temperature nearly
that of boiling water they melt ; but they cannot be volatilized without
being decomposed.

The existence of a resin in a vegetable is discovered by infusing it
in alcohol : this dissolves it if any is present, and it can then be
precipitated from the solution by the addition of water.

Balsams are resinous juices with an intermixture generally of
essential oil, and containing always a portion of the acid named Ben-
zoic acid. They are usually thick and tenacious, becoming b}^ age
concrete. They are odorous and pungent, principally from the essen-
tial oil the}' contain.

A principle of considerable importance in the phamaceutic rela-
tions, which is supposed to constitute the acting matter of many
vegetables, is what has been named, extract or extraction matter.
Its leading character is, that it is soluble equally in pure water and
in alcohol. By this property it is distinguished both from gum and
resin, the one being insoluble in water, the other in alcohol. This
principle is supposed to be the base of what are named extracts of
plants, preparations formed by boiling vegetables in water, and eva-
porating the clear liquid to a thick consistence.

Tannin. — The important medicinal property of astringency, ap-
pears to be dependent, in vegetable substances, on a peculiar principle
called Tannin. This principle exists in all the powerful vegetable
astringents. It is extracted by maceration with water, and is de-
tected in the infusion by a peculiar test, that of the animal principle
denominated gelatine. If a solution of gelatine is adapted to the in-
fusion, it become turbid, and a precipitate is thrown down, composed
of the tannin and gelatine in combination.

Vegetable Acids. — The acid formed in the juice and other parts of
plants, is not always the same. Not less than seven acids, different
from each other, are of vegetable original, viz: Gallic. Oxalic, Malic,
Citric, Tartaric, Benzoic, and Acetic.

Camphor. — Is a proximate principle found in some vegetables,
similar in many of its properties to essential oil. It is a solid sub-
stance, of a white colour, semi-transparent, having a strong peculiar
smell, and a penetrating taste. It is very sparingly soluble in
water, but is abundantly soluble in alcohol, from these solutions it is
precipitated by water.

Wax. — Though wax is a substance formed by the bee, yet it is
always a produce of vegetation. It is yielded by the leaves and
fruit, and it is sometimes intimately mixed with resin, gum, or extrac-
tive matter of plants. It is insoluble in water, and is soluble in
very small quantity, by the aid of heat in alcohol: it combines with
the fixed oils and melts at a moderate heat in oil.

Albumen — This principle has been supposed to exist in vegetables,
and has been called albumen, from its resemblance to the animal
principle of that name. It is soluble in cold water; its solution


8 Materia Medica.

being coagulated also by heat. Like gluten it is liable to putrefac
tion, and furnishes a large quantity of ammonia by distillation.
This principle has, however, been regarded, and perhaps justly, as a
variety of gluten. A few more competent parts might he named,
but it is deemed unnecessary.

SECTION III.

TERMS OF CLASSIFICATION.

In the arrangement of subjects in this work, the alphabetical order
has been adopted, as the most convenient for reference, rather than
the pharmaceutical division of simples from compounds, or the more
common arrangement by classes, adopted in various works on the
Materia Medica. The alphabetical order enables'us to concentrate
in one view, all that is said on a medicine and its principal pre-
parations.

It may be expected, however, that a treatise on Materia Medica
should contain some explanation of the mode in which medicines are
most commonly arranged ; and it is necessary to give definitions, at
least of such general terms as continually occur among writers on
medical science. Various terms have been introduced into medicine,
as indicative both of general and particular kinds of operation, either
in health or disease ; and those medicines which produce similar
operations, have. been placed in the same classes or orders. The fol-
lowing are the classes, and the definitions generally given :

Narcotics

Are substances which diminish the actions and powers of the sys-
tem, without occasioning any sensible evacuation. They have the
effect of producing sleep.

Antispasmodics

Are medicines which have the power of allaying irritation and
spasms.

Tonics

Are those articles which increase the tone of the animal fibre, by
which strength is given to the system.

Astringents

Are articles which have the power of binding or contracting the
fibres of the body.

Emetics

Are medicines which excite vomiting, independent of any effect
arising from the mere quantity of matter introduced into the stomach.

Purgatives or Cathartics.

Medicines which increase the peristaltic motion of the intestines
and thereby produce a preternatural discharge.


Materia Medica. 9

Emmenagogues

Are those medicines which are capable of promoting the menstrual
'discharge.

Diuretics

Are those medicines which increase the urinary discharge.
Diaphoretics

Are those medicines which increase the natural exhalation by the
skin, or promote moderate perspiration.

Sudorifics
Are those medicines which produce copious exhalations, or sweat-
ing.

Expectorants

Are those medicines which increase the discharge of mucus from
the lungs.

Sialgogues

Are those medicines which excite a preternatural flow of saliva.

Errhines

Are those medicines which increase the secretion from the nose and
head, and excite sneezing.

Epispastics, or Blisters
Are those substances which, when applied to the surface of the
body, produce a serous or puriform discharge, by exciting a previous
state of inflammation.

Rubefacients.
Substances, which, when applied to the skin, stimulate, redden, or
inflames it.

Refrigerants,

Medicines which allay the heat of the body or of the blood.

Antacids,
Remedies which obviate aciditv in the stomach.

Lithontriptics,
Medicines which are supposed to have the power of dissolving
■urinary concretions in the bladder.

Escharotics, or Caustics,
Substances which corrode or dissolve the animal solids.
Anthelmintics,

Medicines which have the effect of expelling worms from the intes-
tines.

Demulcents,
Medicines which obviate and prevent the action of stimulating and

B*


10 Materia Mcdiea.

acrid substances, by involving them in a mild and viscid matter, which
prevents their action on the body.

Diluents,
Those medicines which increase the fluidity of the blood.

Emollients,
Substances which soothe and relax the living fibre.

Alteratives.

This term is applied to substances which are found to promote a
change in the system favourable to recovery from disease, but not
with certainty referable to any other class.


SECTION IV.

CLASSIFICATION OF ARTICLES.


The various articles composing the Materia Medica may be classed,
or divided as follows :


ist. »


ledicin


al Plants.


2nd.


<(


Roots.


3rd.


ii


Flowers.


4th.


it


Seeds.


6th.


ii


Extracts.


6th.


ii


Barks.


7th.


u


Gums.


8th.


ii


Oils and Balsams.


Sin.


ii


Salts.


10th.


ii


Minerals.


11th.


it


Earthy Substances


GLOSSARY

OP

BOTANICAL TERMS

USED IN THIS WORK.


Abortive. Defective. Not arriving to perfection.

Abrupt. Terminating suddenly, so as to appear as if a part was cut or

bitten off. A pinnate leaf is abrupt when it does not terminate with

an odd leaf.
Acuminate. When any part terminates suddenly in a point which is

inclined to one side.
Acute. Terminating in a sharp point.
Adnate. Adhering or growing together.

Aggregated. Crowded together in one receptacle without united an-
thers, as in compound flowers.
Alternate. On opposite sides of the stem, and at different distances from

its base: this relation repeated at nearly regular intervals.
Ament. A simple peduncle bearing numerous chaffy scales, which

serve as calyces. The chesnut is an example.
Angimpermia. The seeds inclosed in a capsule. The name of the

second order of the thirteenth class.
Angular. Having angles.

Annual. Springing up, perfecting fruit, and dying the same year.
Anther. The top part or knob of the stamen which contains the pollen.
Apex. The point end opposite the place of insertion.
Approximate. Growing near each other.
Arboreous. Tree-like.
Asceniing. Rising gradually between a horizontal and perpendicular

direction.
Axon. A short slender process proceeding from the top or back of

glumes.
Awnless. Devoid of awns.
Axil. The hollow or angle formed by the meeting of the^petiole with

the stem, or a branch with the main stem.
Axillary. Growing from the axils.


12 Glosi

B

Barren. Producing no ripe seed.

Base. The part nearest the point of attachment.

Beaked. Terminated by a process resembling a bird's ha*.

Beard. Parallel hairs.

Bell-form. Swelling out at the base in the form of a bell.

Biennial. Springing up from the seed, one year comes to perfection,
bears seed, and dies the next.

Bifad. Divided into two parts.

Bract. A floral leaf. A thin leaf-like appendage to some flowers, lying
under or interspersed in the flowers ; it is generally different in co-
lour and shape from the true leaves of the plant,

Branchlet. A twig.

Bulb. Fleshy and roundish, as the onion.


Caducus. Any part of a plant which falls off earlier than is usual for

similar parts in most of plants.
Calyx. The external covering of the flower surrounding the corol ; it

is mostly green.
Campanulaie. See bell form-
Capitate. Growing in heads.
Capsule. That kind of pericarp which opens by valves, and when ripe

becomes dry : not including siliques, nor legumes.
Caulescent. Having a stalk or stem besides the peduncle or scape.
Cauline. Belonging to the stem.
Cell. The cavity of a pericarp or anther.
Chaffy. Having or bearing chaff.

Ciliate. Edged with parallel hairs resembling eye-lashes.
Class. The highest division in natural history. Classes are divided

into orders, orders into genera, genera into species. Linnaeus divided

plants into twenty four classes, but since his day botanists have

reduced them to twenty-one.
Clasping. A sessile leaf with the two lobes partly surrounding the

stem.
Claw. The lower and narrow parts of a petal, by which it is attached

to the receptacle or calyx. This can exist only in polypelalous

carols.
Climbing. Ascending by means of tendrils or rootlets. It differs from

twining.
Coloured. Any colour except green ; as, in botanical language, °reen

is no colour.
Common. That part which serves to include or sustain several parts

similar among themselves.
Compound Flowers. "When several florets are comprised within one

receptacle, each having united anthers.
Compound Leaves. When several lcafcts grow en one petiole.
Compressed. Flattened.
Conglomerate. Consisting of a number of small heads.


Glossary. IS

Conical. In the shape of a cone.

Connate. Opposite leaves with their bases growing together, so as to
appear but one leaf; as the Eupatorium Perfoliatum,

Connivant. Bending towards each other. Converging.

Cordate. Heart-shaped, with the lobes at the base.

Coriaceous. Leathery.

Corol. The inner delicate covering of the flower, which generally con-
stitutes its principal ornament.

Corymb. The general appearance is like an umbiliferous flower, from
which it differs by having its peduncles springing up at different
distances down the main stem ; as the Yarrow.

Creeping. Running along in a horizontal direction, sending off rootlets.

Crenate. Scolloped on the margin : the notches point neither to the
apex nor base.

Crenulate. Finely crenate.

Crested. Having an appendage similar to a cock's comb in shape.

Crowned. Having hairs, feathers, or some other appendage on the top
of the seeds ; as the dandelion, (Leontadon).

Cruciform. Having four petals disposed in the form of a cross.

Criptogamia. The name of the twenty-first class. This includes those
plants whose stamens are not manifest even by the aid of the mi-
croscope.

Cuculate. When the edges meet in the lower part and expand above,
so as to form a hood or sheath.

Cuneate. Wedge-form.

Cylindrical. Shaped similar to a cylinder.

Cyme. The general appearance is like an umbiliferous flower, with
which it agrees by having the stalks springing from a common cen-
tre ; but disagrees in having those stalks irregularly subdivided. —
The Elder is an example.

D

Decandria. Ten males. Ten stamened. The name of the tenth class,
which includes all perfect flowers with ten distinct stamens. It is
also the name of the tenth order, in those classes in which the cha-
racters of the first twelve classes are taken for orders.

Deciduous. Falling off in the usual season ; for similar parts to full off.
Not perennial.

Declined. Curved downwards.

Decompound. Doubly-compound.

Decurrent. When two edges of a leaf proceed down the stem below the
points of insertion, and become projecting wings, it is termed decur-
rent.

Dentate. Having projections of its own substance, which are neither
6erratures nor denatures.

Denticulate. Having very small teeth.

Diadhe'.phia. Two brotherhoods. The name of the sixteenth class,
which includes those flowers that have their stamens united by their
filaments into one or two sets, and have papilionaceous corols.

Diandria. Two males. Two stamened. The name of the second


14 Glossary.

class, which comprises all those plants whose flowers are perfect ,
having two.stamens not growing in the pistil. It is also the name
of the second order in those classes in which the characters of the
first twelve classes are taken for orders.
Oickotomous. Forked in pairs.

Didynarnia. Two overpowering others. The name of the thirteenth
class ; it includes all those plants, which have perfect flowers, with
four stamens, two longer than the. other two, and the corols labiate.

Didynamous. Approaching to the class Didynarnia.

Digynia. Two females. Having two pistils. The name of the second
order of such of the first twelve classes, known by the flower having
two pistils.

Dicecia. Occupying two houses. The name of the twentieth class ;
the plants belonging to this class have imperfect flowers, the male
and female flowers grow on different plants of the same species.

Disk. The whole surface of a leaf, or the top of a compound flower,
in opposition to margin or periphery.

Diverging. Branches proceeding from the stem, so as to form nearly
right angles with it.

Doubly-pinnale. The general petiole with a second range, bearing pin-
nate leafets arranged on each side of them.

Doubly-ternate. When the petiole is ternate, and each one has three
leaves.

Doubly-toothed. Having the teeth dentate.

Drupaceous. Bearing drupes.

Drupe. That kind of a pericarp which is a thick, fleshy or cartilagin-
ous coat, covering a nut or stone.

E

Egret. The down remaining on the top of the seed.

Eliptic. In the form ofanelipse.

Emarginate. Notched at the termination of the midrib.

Enneandria. Nine males. Nine stamened. The name of the ninth
class. It includes all those plants whose flowers are perfect with
nine stamens in each. The number of stamens are very variable
in many of the plants belonging to this class.

Ensiform. In the shape of a sword.

Entire. Continued without interruption. Undivided.

Erect. Upright, not drooping.

Exsert. Standing or protruding out.


Fascicle. It differs very little from the corymb, except the flower stalks
are much shorter : the Sweetwilliam is an example.

Female. See Pistillate.

Ferruginous. The color of iron rust.

Fertile-fioxoer. Pistillate. Bearing seed.

Filament. That part of the stamen which extends from its insertion to
the anther, supporting the latter. When this part is wanting, the
anthers are sessile.


Glossary. ' 15

Filices. The first order of the twenty-first class ; it includes all ferns.
The plants belonging to this order bear ther fruit on the leaves.

Filiform. Thread-like.

Fleshy. Thick and pulpy.

Flexuous. Bending.

Floral. Relating or belonging to a flower.

Floret. A little flower. One of the number which constitutes a com-
pound flower, whether it be large or small.

Foliaceous. Having abundance of leaves.

Folhcle. A pericarp with une valve which opens longitudinally, as the
asclepias.

Funnel-Form. In the form of a funnel.

G

Genus — Includes a number of plants which agree with each other in
the structure of the flowers and fruit. Genera are divided into
species.

Germ. The part of the pistil which, after the reception of the pollen,
soon enlarges, and contains the rudiment of a young plant or more.
The whole substance finally becomes the pericarp and seed.

Gibbous. Swelled out. When one or both sides are swelled out.

Glabrous. Sleek, having no pubscence.

Gland. A roundish appendage, which serves for secretion and trans-
piration.

Glaucous. Covered with a greenish mealing, which is easily rubbed off.

Globose. Spherical.

Glume. Chaffy scales which surround and inclose the stamens and
pistils of the flowers and grasses.

Gymnospermia. The name of the first order of the thirteenth class ; it
includes those plants which have naked seeds.

Gynandria. Stamen and pistil united. The name of the eighteenth
class ; it comprises all those plants which have their stamens insert-
ed on the pistil, separate from the base of the corol.

H

Halbert-shaped. A leaf, having acute processes proceeding from each
margin at the base, as the sorrel leaf.

Head. Flowers heaped together in a roundish form, having either very
short or no peduncles, as the clover.

Hemispherical. Semi-globular.

Herbaceous. Not woody. Perishing annually.

Hermaphrodite. A perfect flower.

Hexandria. Six males. Six stamened. The name of the sixth class ;
it includes all those plants which have perfect flowers, with six sta-
mens, neither situated on the pistil, united by their filaments into
one or two sets, nor have four stamens always longer than the other
two. it is also the name of the sixth order of those classes which
ta.<e the chi.racwr of the first twelve classes for orders.

Hfriute. Covered with suffhairs.


16 Glossary.

Hoary. Having a whitish colour, arising from being ^ovored with

mealy scales.
Horizontal. Parallel to the horizon, as the Blood-root, (Sangulnaria.)
Horn. An elongated process from the base, or near it, of the calyx,

corol or nectary ; the Larkspur is an example.

I— J

Jagged. Irregularly divided, cut or torn.

Iconsandria. The name of the eleventh class ; which includes all plants

bearing perfect flowers, with the number of stamens exceeding ten,

and inserted on the calyx, as the apple, pear, rose, &c.
Imbricate. Leaves, scales, &c, lying over each other, as the shingles

of a house.
Incurved. Bent inwards.
Inferior. When a calyx, or a corol, comes out below the germ, it is

inferior.
Inflated. Appearing as if blown up with air.
Interrupted. When a spike has leaves or small flowers interposed at

different intervals.
Involucrum. See Involucre.
Involucre. A kind of leafy calyx, coming out some distance below the

flower, and never enclosing it like a spathe.

K

Kidney-form. Hollowed out at the base with roundish lobes at the ends.


Labiate. Having lips.

Lamina. The upper broad part of a petal of a polypetalous corol.

Lanceolate. Lance-form. When the length greatly exceeds the breadth,

with a gentle taper from the base to the apex.
Leaflet. One of the constituent leaves of a compound leaf.
Lezume. A pod, wiihout a partition running lengthways, and having

the seeds attached to one edge only.
Ligulate. That kind of flower which consists of a strap-like petal

which is tubular at the base onty.
Linear. Maintaining the same breadth throughout the whole length.
Lipped. Having lips.

Lobe. A division which is parted off by a rounded or curved incision.
Longitudinally. Lengthways.

M.

Male. Staminate.

Margin. The circumference, or border.

Midrib. The middle rib of a leaf, running from the peticle to the apex

Monadelphia. One brotherhood. The name of the fifteenth class ; it

comprises all plants having perfect flowers, with their stamen*


Glos 17

i
■united by their filaments into one set, and their flowers not papilion-
aceous.

Monandria One male. Having one stamen. The name of the first
class ; it includes all those plants which have perfect flowers, with
one stamen each, not situated on the pistil. It is also the name of
the first order in those classes, which take the character of the first
twelve classes for orders.

Monoecia. Occupying; one house. The name of the nineteenth class ;
it includes those plants which have imperfect flowers : but the sta-
mens and pistils grow on the same plant in different flowers.

Monogijnia. One female. One styled. The name of the first order in
the first thirteen classes ; it includes all plants belonging- to those
classes whose flowers have one style.

JWonopetalous. Having only one petal

Mucronale. Having a rounded end, terminated by a prickle, which re-
sembles the continuation of the midrib.
Muricate. Covered, or armed with prickles.

N

Nectary. That part of the flower which secretes honey.

Nerves. Rib-like fibres, running from the base of the leaf towards the

apex.
Nectariferous. Bearing nectaries. Producing honey.
Nodding. Whatever is applied to droops, or hangs down.

O

Obcordate. Cordate, with the point attached to the petiole : as in the
common sorrel.

Oblong. Having the length about double the breadth, and the side
nearly parallel.

Obovate. Ovate, with the base smallest.

Obsolete. When teeth, serratures, &c., are nearly obscure, and appear
as if worn out.

Obtuse. Having the apex rounded. Blunt.

Oclandria. Eight males. Eight stamened. The name of the eigh"
class ; it includes all those plants which have perfect flowers, with
eight stamens to each, not growing on the pistil ; nor imited into
one or two sets by their filaments. It is also the name of the eighth
order in those classes, in which the characters of the first twelve
classes are taken for orders.

Orbicular. Nearly circular.

Order. The division of a class.

Oval. The length exceeding the breadth, having the heads equal, and
rounded similar, and the sides curved the whole length.

Ovate. Egg-shaped, with the base largest.


Palmate. Deeply divided, and spreading, so as to resemble a hand
with the fingers spread. e*


Glossary.

Panicled. In panicles.

Panicle. When the peduncles along the main peduncle of a racenvs

are divided, and the flowers hang loose, it is named a panicle : Oats

are an example.
Papilionaceous. Butterfly -form. Resembling a butterfly in shape : as

the peaflower.
Pedate. With narrow divisions, which run down almost to the stem,

and resemble the hand, with spread fingers, or a bird's foot ; from

the latter it derives its name.

eel. A foot stalk. A partial peduncle.
Pedicelled. Having a pedicel.
Pedunckd. Having a peduncle.

icle. A flower stalk, which does not spring up naked from the

root.
Peiunculous. Partaking of the character of a peduncle.
Peltate. Having the petiole, or style, attached to the underside of the

leaf, or stigma, instead of the margin.
Pentagynia. Five males. Five styled. The name of the fifth order of

the first twelve classes ; it includes all plants belonging to these

orders which have five pistils.
Petandria. Five males. Fi e stamened. The name of the fifth class,

which comprises all perfect flowers that have five stamens not grow-
ing on the pistil.
Perennial. Continuing longer than two years.
Perfect floxoer. Hermaphrodite. Having both pistils and stamens.
Perfoliate. Perforating a leaf.

Pericarp. Any kind of a seed vessel, or substance containing seed.
Permanent. Any part of a plant, which hangs on longer than is usual

for similar parts in most of plants.
Persistant. Any part of a plant, which remains longer than is usual

imilar parts in most of plants. Directly opposite to Caducous.
Petal. A coloured leaf of a coiol.
Petalled. Having petals.
Petiole. The foot stalk of a leaf.
Petiotcd. Having petioles.
Peliolate. Having a petiole.
Pinnate. Having distinct leaflets arranged along the opposite sides of

a simple petiole.
Pinnatifid. This differs from pinnate, by segments of leaves, instead of

leaflets; arranged along the midrib.
Pistil. The female genital organ of plants ; it' is situated in the centre

of a perfect flower. It consists of the germ" style, and stigma ■ but

the style is frequently wanting : then the stigma is sessile.
Pistillate. Having pistils, without stamens.

Plaited. Folded somewhat similar to a fan when nearly full spread
Pollen. A yellow mealy substance, contained within the cells of the

anthers.
Polyandria. Many males. Many 1 stamened. The name of the twelfth

class. Comprising all those plants whose flowers are perfect having

more than ten stamens placed in the receptacle. Also the name of

the twelfth order in those classes in which the character of the first


GioSi 19

Iwelve classes are taken for orders. And those plants which are

very variable in regard to the number of their stamens.
Polygamia JEqualis. The first order of the seventeenth class. The

florets of the disk and of the ray are all perfect.
Polygamia Superf.ua. The second order of the seventeenth class. The

florets of the disk are perfect, those of the ray, pistillate.
Polygamous. Inclining to the class Polygamia. This class, however,

is Abolished.
Polygynia. The name of the thirteenth order. It includes those plants

belonging to the first twelve classes, whose styles or sessile stigmas,

exceed ten.
Polypelalous. Having more than one petal.
Pome. A pulpy pericarp, without valves, containing the capsule,: as

the apple, pear, and quince.
Pubescent. Hairy. Having hair or down.
Punctate. Dotted.

a

Quadrangular. Having four corners or angles.
Quinate. Having five leaflets on one petiole.

R

Raceme. That manner of flowering, wherein the florets are arranged
on pedicels along the side of a general peduncle : as in currants.

Radiating. Spreading out from around the margin.

Radical. Proceeding directly from the root.

Ray. The outer margin of a compound flower.

Receptacle. The end of the peduncle, in which is inserted the other
parts of the flower.

Refexed. Bent back, so as nearly or quite to touch the stem or pe-
duncle.

Rcniform. Kidney-shaped.

Repand. When bordered by teeth separated by small segments of cir-
cles. Waved.

Repent. Creeping.

Refuse. See Emorginate.

Reversed. Bent back towards the base.

Revolute. Rolled back. Applied to a leaf when the opposite margins
are rolled back till the rolls meet at the midrib.

Rugose. Wrinkled.

Runcinate. Pinnatifid, with the divisions pointing backwards

S

Saggitate. Shaped like an arrow head ; differing from Cordate, by
having its lobes acute.

Salver-form. A monopetalous corol, having a flat spreading limb pro-
ceeding from the top of the tube.

Scabrous. Covered with elevations, which are not percepitble to the
eye, but are harsh to the touch.


20 Glossary.

Scape. A peduncle, springing' immediately from the root, and devoid of

leaves.
Segment. The parts into which a leaf, corol, petal, &c., is divided or

cut.
Serrate. Having the margin notched, appearing as if cut, and pointing

towards the apex.
Serrulate. When a serrate leaf has its teeth serrate again ; it is also

applied to leaves with extremely small serratures.
Sessile. When a leaf or a flower, &c. is destitute of a petioie or pedun-
cle, &c, it is sessile.
Sc'accus. Resembling a bristle in proportion and size.
Silicic A Silique, whose length and breadth are nearly equal.
Siliculosa. The name of the first order of the fourteenth class ; it

includes those plants which have a silicle, whose length is never

double its breadth.
Silique. That kind of a pod which has a longitudinal partition, to

which the seeds are attached alternately at each edge.
Simple. Undivided.
Sinuate. Having the margin hollowed out by rounded incisions : as

the oak leaf.
Solitary. Standing alone.
Spadix. An elongated receptacle, proceeding generally from a spatbe

or sheath. In the Arum Triphyllum it emerges from the spathe ;

but in the Acorus Calamus the spadix is destitute of a sheath.
Spathe. The kind of calyx which first incloses the flower, but after it

expands it is left at a distance below it.
Species. The lowest division in the vegetable kingdom.
Spike. Having florets arranged along the sides of a general peduncle

or receptacle, with either very short or no peduncles.
Spiked. In spikes.

A thorn.
Stamen. The male genital organ of plants ; in perfect flowers it is

situated next to the pistil. It generally consists of a filament and

an anther ; the latter contains the pollen.
Stamina te. Having stamens without pistils.
Staminifcrous. See Staminate.
Stigma. The top of the pistil.

ar. Having connection with, or formed of stipule.
Stipule. A leaeflt or scale, near or at the point of insertion of the petiole.
Striate. Marked or grooved with small lines.
Strobile. An anient, with woody scales: as the fruit of the pine.
Style, The part of the pistil between the germ and the stiirma.
Sub-cordate. Somewhat heart-shaped.
Sub-dentate. Somewhat toothed.
Sub- globular. Somewhat roundish.
Sub-radical. Somewhat radical.
Sub-serrulate. Somewhat serrulate.
Sub-sessile. Nearly sessile.
Subulate. Linear at the base, and becoming sharp and more or 1

curved to one side at the point.
Succulent. Juicy ; also applied to pulpy leaves.


Glossary. 21

Superior. When a calyx or a corol comes out from the upper part of
the germ, it is superior.

Syngenesia. Anthers growing up together in an united tubular set.
The name of the seventeenth class, which comprises all those plants
whose flowers are compound, having the anthers (which are five in
number in each floret,) adnate, so as to form a tube.


Terminal. Proceeding from or occupying the extremity of a branch or

twig, &c.
Ternate. In threes.
Tetr adynamia. Four stamens in superiority over the other two. The

name of the fourteenth class, which comprises all plants whose

flowers uniformly have six stamens with four longer than the other

two, and cruciform corals.
Tetrandria. Four males. Four stamened. The name of the fourth

class, which comprises all perfect flowers which have four stamens

distinct, and not two long and two short ones.
Throats. The internal part of a ringent corol, where the tubular part

begins to open into lips.
Tomentose. Covered with down matted together.
Toothed. See Dentate.

Tooth-serrate. Partaking of the nature of a serrate and dentate leaf.
Triandria. Three males. Three stamened. The name of the third

class. It includes all those plants which have perfect flowers, with

three stamens each, not growing on the pistil,
Triangular. In the form of a triangle. Three cornered.
Trichotomous. Three-forked.
Tricuspidate. Three-pointed, each point ending in a bristle or prickle,

or a straight simple point.
Trijied. Divided into three parts.
Trigynia. Three styled. The name of the third order in the first twelve

classes ; it includes all the plants belonging to those orders which

have three pistils.
Truncate. The end appearing as if cut off : as the end of the Tulip-
tree.
Tuberous. Roots, which are thick and fleshy, but not of a regular

globular form : as the potato.
Tubulous. The corol of a compound flower which forms a tube, not a

hgulate floret.
Twining. Ascending by winding around : as the Heamulus Lupulus,

(Hop).


Umbel. That manner of flowering, in which the flowering stems
diverge from one common centre, like three braces of an umbrella ;
if these stems be again subdivided, a partial umbelis formed

Umbdiferov.s. Bearing umbels.


22 Glossary.

Unarmed. Having neither thorns nor prickles.
Undulate. Waved.


Veined. Having ribs or tendinous fibres, variously branched.
Ventricose. Inflated. Bellied out.
Vexillum. The upper petal of a papilionaceous flower.
Villose. Covered with soft whitish hairs.

W

Wheel-shaped. Wheel-form. A monopetalous corol, with a spreading

border, and having an extremely short tube.
Whorl. Leaves or flowers disposed in a circular manner around a

stem.
Whorled. Surrounding the stem at intervals.


No. I.
A.SCLEPIAS TUBEROSA.


VLFXRISY ROOT.


No 1. ■

ASCLEPIAS TUBEROSA. The Root.

English Name — Orange Swallow-Wort.

Vulgar Names — Pleurisy Root, Butterfly-Weed, Flux-Root,
Wind-Root, White-root, Silk-weed, Canada-Root, &c.

Botanical Character. ;

Class V.— PETANDRIA.
Order II.— DIG YNI A.

Ge««s— Asclepias— Follicles 2 : Corol, 1 petalled, inferior : reflect-
ed : nectaries 5, ovate, concave ; each putting out a little horn.

Species,— Tub kkos a — Leaves alternate, oblong, lanceolate, sessile ;
umbels forming a terminal corymb ; stem erect, hairy, spreading at
the top of flowers ; a bright orange colour.

Description.
Root perennial, large fleshy while of variable form, fulsiform, crook-
ed or branched ; many stems, either erect, ascending, or procumbent ;
round, hairy, green, or red. Leaves scattered, sessile, or on short foot
stocks ; very hairy, pale beneath, entire or undulate, oblong or lanceo-
late, or nearly linear, obtuse or acute ; the flowers are received by long
slender pods, containing the seed, to which is attached a kind of silk ;
flowers erect, and of a bright orange colour.

History.
This plant is easily known by its bright orange-coloured flowers
b ossoming in July and August ; it is a very ornamental plant'
although inodorous. All the Asclepias are milky, but this is less
than the others. They all produce a fine glossy and silky down
which has been used for beds, hats, cloth, and paper.

Locality.
It is found throughout the United States, but it grows more abun-
dantly m the Southern States ; it prefers open situations, poor and
gravelly soils, along gravelly streams, and on hills ; but is rarely to
l)e met with in rich and loamy soils.

Quality.
The root when dry, is brittle, and easily to be reduced to powder ■
it is somewhat bitter, but not unpleasant j it contains a bitter extract-
ive and fecula, both soluble in boiling water. When fresh, the root,
as well as the whole plant, is rather unpleasant, sub-acrid, and nau-


24 Materia Medica and Medical Botany.

Medical Propertiesi

Subtonie, Diaphoretic, Expectorant, Diuretic or Astringent, Laxative
Carminative, Antispasmodic, $c.
It is a valuable popular remedy, and a mild sudorific, acting safely,
without producing any stimulating effect upon the body. Its action
is specifically upon the lungs, to assist suppressed expectoration, and
to relieve the difficult breathing of patients labouring under Pleurisy.
It appears, likewise, to exert a sort of mild tonic effect, as well as sti-
mulant power over the excretories. It relieves difficulty of breathing
and pains in the chest. It sometimes acts as a mild cathartic, suitable
to the complaints of children. In low stages of Typhus and other
febrile diseases, it has been known to excite perspiration when other
sudorifics have failed

' Dr. Bigelow, in support of the remediate properties of this article,
says, " I am satisfied of its utility as an expectorant medicine, and
have seen no inconsiderable benefit arise from its use as a palliative
in phthisis pulmonalis (consumption)." Dr. Ebeiie, of Philadelphia, in
his Therapeutics, speaks very favorably of this article ; " Having wit-
nessed its good effects," says he, " in pneumonia, or inflammation of the
lungs, and phthisis pulmonalis, (consumption) and injone case of acute
the tone of the stomach and digestive powers. It has been given in
Asthma, Syphilis, and for Worms.

Dr. Burgon, of Bucks' county, Pennsylvania, speaks highly of it
in the fever, diarrhcea, and other distressing symptoms accompanying
dentition ; he recommends the following mode of administering it : —
" Boil two drachms of the root, in a pint of fresh milk, down to three
gills ; an ounce of this is to be given two or three times in twenty-four
hours. It very seldom fails to produce copious perspiration, and at the
same time proves gently laxative."

The same Physician recommends it also in the. cholera infantum, or
the summer complaint, and marasmus. It is also very servicable in
flatulent colics.

Employment.

The doses are from twenty to thirty grains of the powder of the root
three times a day, qr about a gill of the strong decoction may be taken
as often. A vinous and aqueous infusion are sometimes recommended ;
it enters into the Diaphoretic Decoction of our Pharmacy and used
principally for Pleurisy ; also into Smith's Colic Powders. I have
given a strong tea, or infusion, in Chronic Dysentery, with success.


No. 2.
ANTIIEMIS NQBIL1S.


CAMOMILE.


Medical Botany. *»

No. 2.
CAMOMILE. The Flowers.

Latin Name — Anthemis Nobilis.
English Name — Camomile.

Botanical Character.

Class XV1L— SYNGENESIA.

Order II— POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.

Genus— Anthemis— Receptacle chaffy ; florets of the disk herma-
phrodite, of the margin female ; all fertile ; seeds generally crowned
with a slight border ; calyx hemispherical ; florets of the ray more
than five, oblong.

Species — Nobilis — Leaves doubly- pinnate ; leaflets 3-parted ; linear
subulate, a little downy.

Description.

This plant rises near a foot in height. Stem slender, trailing, hairy,
of a pale green. Flowers compound, in the centre yellow, in the ray
white, standing singly, terminal. Flowers in the ray usually eighteen,
strap-shaped, ending in three sharp teeth.

Locality.

Camomile is a perennial plant, indigenous in the south of England,
but cultivated in our gardens for medicinal purposes.

History.

Camomile flowers in July and August. The flowers have a strong,
not ungrateful, aromatic smell, and a very bitter nauseous taste. Their
active constituents are bitter extractive, and essential oil. To the
retic effects ; to the former their influence in promoting digestion.

Properties.

Camomile flowers are antispamodic, carminative, tonic, &c. They
enter into one of our pectoral preparations ; also into our restorative
cordial. The flowers are useful in phthisis pulmonalis, in hysteria, in
spasmodic and flatulent colics, in the vomiting of puerperal women, in
gout, in intermittents and in typhus fevers. No bitter is more common
in the derangement of the stomach and digestive organs. We are
told by Dr. Cullen, that Dr. Pitcairn was of the opinion that their
powers in intermittents were equal to those of the Peruvian bark. Hoff-
man seems to have thought them very effectual, and at the same time
a safer remedy. The infusion is used to assist the action of emetics.

Camomile flowers boiled down with milk, and applied to Mrs.
H.'s neck, cured her of a painful glandular swelling, proceeding
from cold.

Employment.

These flowers may be given in infusion, or tea, which may be drank
warm, to promote the action of emetics. It may be taken in wine, in
cases of debility, and in the form of tea in pulmonary complaints, and,
boiled in vinegar, may be used as a fomentation in painful glandular
swellings. They give out their virtues both to water and spirit.

Vol. III. D


26 Materia Medica

No. 3.

WILD CAMOMILE.

Latin Name — Anthemis Cotula.
English Name — Wild Camomile.
Vulgar Names — Mayweed, Dogs-fennel, Dilly, Dilwee0,

FlELDWEED, &C.

Botanical Character.

Genus — Anthemis — Flowers compound, radiate. Perianthe he-
mispherical, imbricate ; rays above five, female ; phoranthe conical,
chafFy ; seeds naked.

Species — Cotula annual, pubescent, stem angular, furrowed, braced ;
leaves bipinnatifid, sessile, carinate ; pirrules, linear, acute. Pe-
duncles grooved, naked, thicker above ; chaff bristly ; seeds obovate,
4-sided, furrowed.

Description.

Root annual, crooked, fibrous ; stem and leaves covered with short
oppressed woolly hairs ; stem from one to two feet high, erect and
very much branched, irregular, angular and striated ; branches corym-
bose ; leaves alternate, sessile, flat doubly pinnatifid, or almost pin-
nate ; carinate beneath, in the middle ; pinnules flat unequal, linear,
acute, entire or trifid ; flowers many, forming a terminal corymb,
each on a naked peduncle, erect, grooved and thicker upwards. The
central florets of the disk are numerous and of a bright yellow ; those
of the rays are linguiform, from seven to twelve, and white. Seeds
brown, obovate, 4-sided, grooved and tuberculated.

History.
It blossoms from June to November, affording a profusion of flowers
in succession, of the size of camomile, but never double. The whole
plant has a strong smell, but not fetid.

Locality.
Our plant is indigenous, and not naturalized, as mentioned by some
botanists. It is spread all over the United States, from Maine to
Louisiana, but confined almost everywhere to open fields. It is
never found in woods, but delights in the sun, road sides, stony
places, old fields, &c.

Qualities.
Graveolent, bitter and nauseous. The smell of the plant resides in
a volatile oil, of a strong graveolent aroma, and diffused throuohout
the whole plant, but more concentrated in the flowers. This "oil is
bitter, and communicates a bitterish acrid taste to the whole plant
Medical Properties.
The properties of this article are similar to the common camomile
but weaker, and less pleasant to the taste. It may be substituted f '
it with safety. As a tonic, it may be used in all cases where tonics


No. l.

ALOE SPICATA.


ALOE.


Medical Botany. 27

are indicated. It is sudorific, stimulant, anodyne, emetic, &c. The
external use in fomentations is proper, in white swellings, rheumatism,
hysteric fits, suffocations, piles, pains and contusions. It acts always
as a sudorific, promoting copious swea ing, and is very beneficial to
assist the action of emetics. In large doses it is emetic, but in small
ones it is diaphoretic and gently tonic. It is highly prized by country
people, to promote perspiration in many incipient complaints.

Employment.
A tumblerful of the infusion may be given three or four times a
day ; and, to promote perspiration, it may be freely drank, and warm.


No. 4.

ALOE — Inspissated Juice of the Leaves.

Latin Name — Aloe Spicata.
English Name — Aloe.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYN1A.

Genus — Aloe — Corolla erect, inferior, 6-cleft, with an expanded
mouth, and a nectariferous base ; calyx : filaments inserted on the
receptacle.

Species — Spicata — Caulescent ; leaves flat, ensiform, toothed ;
flowers spiked, campanulate, horizontal. Cape, the best aloes ia
prepared from this species.

Description.

Root fibrous ; stem or scape two or three feet high, covered with
sharp scales ; leaves thick, succulent, from eight to ten inches long,
of a green glaucous colour, crowded at the base of the stem ; flowers
red, in an elongated spike, hanging, tubular ; calix cylindrical ; six
stamina adherent to the base of the calix ; stile terminate with a
trilobed stigma.

Locality.

The aloes is a perennial plant, of which there are many varieties,
which grow in the south of Europe, Asia, Africa and America. But
Thunberg says, and the Dublin College agree with him, that the finest
aloes are prepared from the Aloe Spicatas the second species of
Willdenow, which grows at the Cape of Good Hope.
Qualities of the Inspissated Juice.

In the chemical composition of this article, there appears to be some
obscurity : M. Braconnot (Ann. Chim. t. lxviii.) conceives it to be a
substance, sui generis, which he terms " bitter resin," while others
regard it as composed of resin, gum and extractive, the proportions of
which are supposed to vary in the different species ; but that their
peculiar virtues reside in the extractive part.


28 Materia Medica.

Medical Properties.
There are three kinds of aloes in commerce, viz. the socotorine, the
hepatic, and the cabaline or horse aloes : this last is used only for
horses. The first is the kind generally made use of by physicians.
It is a warm stimulating purgative, operating with peculiar force upon
the large intestines, and particularly upon the rectum, and by empty-
ing the uterus, often producing piles, if given alone. It should never
be administered to pregnant women, or persons subject to the haemor-
rhoides, nor to women who are menstruating ; neither in leucorrhcea,
or when there is any discharge from the womb. It is good in habitual
costiveness, and in obstruction of the menses. It warms the habit,
and quickens the circulation. Given in small doses, of from one to
two grains, it acts as a tonic upon the alimentary canal, promotes
digestion, and assists the regular peristaltic action of the intestines. It
has proved effectual in expelling small worms in children. Aloes has
been employed externally in the weakness of the eyes, as well as in
opacities of the cornea. It enters into one of our formulas for dyspep-
sia; "the Anti-Dyspeptic Pills." It is the basis of many noted nos-
trums.

Employment.
It is given in substance, in tincture, or in combination with other
articles. In substance, it is given in doses of from five to fifteen
grains. The best form of administering it, is in that of pill, combined
with other articles.


No. 5.

ARCHANGEL— The Root, Stem and Seed.

Latin Name — Angelica, Archangelica.
English Name — Garden Archangel.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRU.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus— Angelica— Flowers tubulous, all fertile ; umbels globular ■
corols uniform ; petals incurved ; styles reflected ; seeds solid round!
ish, 3-winged.

Species— Archangelica— Leaves pinnate; the terminal leaflet-
3-lobed.

Description.
Stem cylindrical, large, branched, striate and hollow ; leaves very
large, bi or tnpinnate ; flowers white, in large and numerous umbels -
involucrum composed of several leaflets ; the partial involucrum o'f
about eight foholes j petals slightly curved ; two divergent stvles •
fruit ovoidal, membranous on the edges, with five longitudinal and
sahant parallel lines ; root large, fleshy, fusiform, gray and wrinkled


No. 6.
ACTEA RAUEMOSA.


BLACK P.NAKE-ROOT.


Medtial Botany.

History.
This plant flowers in June and July, and the seeds are ripe in
August.

Locality.
This is a biennial plant, and indigenous to the southern parts of
France, but is cultivated in our gardens.

Qualities.
Every part of this plant has a warm and bitter taste, and a very
pleasant smell. The whole plant, and the root and seeds more espe-
cially, contain an essential oil, resin, and an extractive matter.

Medical Properties.
Angelica possesses very powerful, stimulant and conservative pro-
perties, which may be administered with advantage in all diseases in
which an excitant may be required. It is administered with advan-
tage in disorders arising from flatulence, and debility of the stomach
and digestive organs. It is recommended in nervous headach pains,
in tremors of the limbs, chlorosis, hysteria, &c. It has been exhibited
in the last stage of chronic catarrhs of the lungs with success, in order
to facilitate expectoration, and to restore the tonejtojthe mucous mem-
brane. We use it in the form of infusion or tea, for flatulence or
wind ; and for clysters or injections in that species of dropsy, called
Tympanites. It may be given also for pain in the breast.


No. 6.

BLACK SNARE-ROOT.

Latin Name — Actea Racemosa.
English Name — Black Snake -Root.

Vulgar Names — SauAW-RooT, Rich-weed, Rattle-weed, Rattle
Snake-root, Black Cohash.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Act,ea — (Synom. Macrotys) calyx, about 4-leaved ; be.
coming coloured before expanding, caducous ; corol, many minute
petals, very caducous or wanting ; stigma sessile ; berry 1 -celled ; seeds
flat, placed in a row.

Species — Racemosa — Leaves decompound, 7-leaflets, oblong-ovate,
gash toothed ; racemes very long ; capsules ovate ; fruit dry.

Description.

Root perennial, blackish, thick, with long fibres ; stem simple,
straight, and rises from three to six feet in height, smooth, angular fur-
rowed, and often crooked ; leaves few, and alternate, tri-pinnate ;
flowers in a long terminal raceme, from one to three feet long, r r »»n


30 Materia Medica.

with one or two short ones at its base. This raceme is cylindrical,
white, always bent or crooked at first : the flowers are scattered, often
germinate or fasciculate on short peduncles. Capsule blackish and
dry ; seed many and flat.

History.
The American species has an extensive range, and was used by all
the Indians. It blossoms in June and July ; its seeds are ripe in
August. The whole plant, and even the flowers, are possessed of
medicinal properties.

Locality.
Found all over the United States, from Maine to Florida, Louisiana
and Missouri, Canada and Texas ; common in open woods, rich
grounds, and on the sides of hills ; not so common in rocky mountains
and sunny glades ; very scarce in moist and swampy soils.

Qualities.
The root and plant have rather an unpleasant smell, and a disagree-
able nauseous taste. Schoepf considers it as nearly poisonous, and
to be used with caution ; yet powerful and heroic. According to
Dr. G. W. Mears' analysis, it contains tannin, extractive matter, a
bitter principle, gallic acid, resin, gum and starch.

Medical Properties, i

Astringent, diuretic, alterative and emmenagogue, &c. It is an article
much used by the Indians in rheumatism, and to accelerate parturition,
whence it bears the name of Squaw-root. When exhibited in large
doses, it produces great prostration, and excites nausea, vomiting,
vertigo, anxiety, and pains in the extremities, &c. It is astrin-
gent, and therefore is pronounced an excellent remedy in bowel com-
plaints, and especially those of children. A strong decoction mixed
with slippery-elm bark, makes a good poultice for every kind of in-
flammation. A decoction is also used for the purpose of arresting
haemorihage or bleeding. A syrup made of the root is good for
coughs. It also makes an excellent gargle for the quinsy.

Dose.

Tincture, from twenty to thirty drops, several times a day. As an
astringent, give a strong tea or infusion. As a gargle, any quantity.


7.
ARCTIUM LAPPA.


J'.rilDOCK.


Medical Bolany. 31

No. 7.

BURDOCK. The Root and Seed.

Latin Name — Arctium Lappa.
English Name — Burdock.

Botanical Character.

Class XVII.— SYNGENESIA.
Order I.— POLYGAMIA .EQUALIS.

Genus — Arctium — Receptacle chaffy ; calyx globular ; the scales
ending in an incurved hook ; seeds crowned with chaffy bristles ;
flowers in heads.

Species. — Lappa — Cauline leaves, condate, peticled, denticulate ;
calyx smooth ; flowers pale blue.

Description.

This plant rises three feet in height. Stem large, and purplish ;
branches alternate. Leaves also alternate, heart-shaped, veiny ;
above, of a dark-green ; beneath, whitish ; lower leaves large, stand-
ing upon long foot-stalks, grooved like the stem ; flowers numerous,
purplish, generally ending in pairs ; seeds triangular ; root long,
fibrous, fusiform, brownish externally, yellowish internally.

History.

This plant flowers in July and August, and is well known by the
burs or heads, which stick to the clothes ; the seeds ripen in Septem-
ber.

Locality.
This plant is indigenous to Europe, and naturalized in America.
It grows abundantly in damp places, and along the sides of roads and
around old buildings.

Qualities.

This substance, of which no accurate analysis has yet been made,
seems to contain sulphur in a free state, some oxalate of lime, starch,
and some extractive principles, soluble in water.
Medical Properties.

It is used as an alterative. The seeds or the root occasionally enter
into the alterative syrup of our pharmacopoeia. It is administered in
the form of a decoction, in salt-rheum, herpes, ulcers and rheumatism,
and in all diseases of the skin. Thqrnton recommends the use of
this article in dropsy, where more active articles cannot be used,
" having known it to succeed in two dropsical cases, where other
powerful medicines had been ineffectually used."

The leaves, applied to the feet and forehead, are useful in febrile
diseases.

Employment.
The root or seeds may be given in the form of a decoction or infu-
sion, which is made by boiling two ounces of the fresh root in three
pints of water to two; which, when intended as a diuretic, should be
drank in the course of two days. The root enters into a medical
beer, which is good to purify the blood.


32 Materia Medica.

No. 8.

ASARABACCA.

Latin Name^— Asarum Canadense.
English Name — Broadleaf Asarabacca.

Vulgar Names — Wild Ginger, Indian Ginger, Canada Snake-
root, Heart Snake-root, Colts-foot.

Botanical Character.

Class XVIII.— GYNANDRIA.
Order X.— DECANDRIA.

Genus — Asarum — Calyx 3-cleft, superior, somewhat bell-form :
corol ; anthers proceeding from the middle of the filiaments ; capsule
coraceous, 6-celled, crowned with the calyx ; stigma, 6-cleft.

Species — Canadense — Leaves 2, broad kidney-form ; calyx woolly,
3-parted ; divisions reflexed.

Description.

Roots perennial, long, creeping, fleshy, cylindrical, jointed, with
scattered fibres, brown outside, white inside. The leaves resemble
the foot of a horse, or colt, from which it derives its name. Flowers
solitary between the two leaves, on a curved foot stalk, downy, purple,
darker inside ; capsule round, 6-sided, crowned, and with many
small seeds.

History.

This is an humble stemless plant ; the flowers are nearly concealed
in the ground. There are many varieties of this plant, with large and
small leaves, rounded, spotted, and unspotted ; the flowers vary also
in colour, from greenish-purple to dark-purple. They blossom in
May and June.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to Europe ; but is found from Canada to
Carolina, and Missouri, in shady woods and in clay soils ; more abun-
dant in hills, valleys, and moist soils.

Qualities.

The whole plant, but more particularly the root, has a warm aro-
matic bitterish taste, resembling that of ginger. The smell is spicy
and strong. The chemical composition of this article consists in a
volatile oil, possessing the smell of the plant, likewise a red and bitter
resin, both soluble in alcohol, besides much fecula and mucilage.
Medical Properties.

Aromatic, stimulant, diaphoretic, subtonic, errhine, and pectoral.
It has been used with success in intermittent fevers. The pulverized
leaves make an excellent errhine, and enter into Henry's celebrated
cephalic snuff. It is excellent for colds, coughs and pulmonary dis-
eases generally.

Employment.

The dose of this must be small, as it is apt to excite vomitino It
may be given in the form of syrup or infusion, in all deep Seated
coughs.


No. 8.
ASARUM CANADENSE.


BROADLEAF ASARABACCA.


Medical Botany. 33

No. 9.

DEADLY NIGHTSHADE. The whole Plant

Latin Name — Atropa Belladonna.
English Name — Deadly Nightshade.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Atropa — Corol monopetalous, campanulate ; stamina dis-
tant, incurved ; berry superior, globular, 2-celled.

Species — Belladonna — Stem herbaceous ; leaves ovate, entire ;
berries black.

Description.

Root very thick, whitish, sending forth strong purple coloured stalks
of from three to four feet in height; leaves oval, acute, large, of a
deep green colour; flowers large, of a tarnished red, solitary and
hanging, bell-shaped, furrowed, the border of which is cut into five
segments.

History.

This is a perennial plant, and flowers from June to August. Its
fruit is ripe in September, when it is black.

Locality.
It is found growing in stony and shady places, along old walls and
fences, and among old ruins.

Qualities.
It is possessed of a disagreeable smell, and nauseous and acrid
taste. According to Brande, it contains a bi-malate of atropia, gum,
starch, resin, chlorophile, lignin, a "matter analogous to osmazome,
Borne salts, &c. Water and alcohol take up its active principles.
Medical Properties.
This article, taken in large doses, acts like a narcotic, acrid poison,
and causes death quickly. In small doses it irritates the stomach, and
produces heaviness of the head, vertigo, dilatation of the pupils of the
eyes, irregularity of the pulse, &c. This plant, notwithstanding its
poisonous quality, is used with great benefit externally, in the cure of
cancers, and in discussing indolent tumours and schirrhosities in the
breasts of females. It enters into the discutient ointment of our phar-
macopoeia. But we generally substitute for it the solanum nigrum,
which seems possessed of similar properties.

Employment.
The leaves and roots, either green or dry, may be simmered in soft
water, until the strength is extracted ; then the slippery-elm bark
may be stirred in till a poultice is formed. It may be applied to boils,
and all hard painful glandular swellings.


Vol. III. E


34 Materia Medica.

No. 10.
FENJNEL. The Seed.

Latin Name — Anethum Foeniculum.
English Name — Sweet Fennel.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRI^
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Anethum — Seeds ovate, somewhat compressed, striate ;
calyx entire ; corol, 5-petalled ; superior petals involute, entire.

Species — Foeniculum — Fruit ovate, cauline ; leaves numerous.
Description.

This is a perennial plant, rising four feet in height; stem ramose,
smooth ; leaves, vaginant at their base ; flowers on terminal umbels of
a pale yellow, without involucrum or involucellum ; three petals,
revolute ; stamina spreading longer than the corolla; fruit elongated,
flattened on the edges.

History.

This plant flowers in June and July ; fruit ripe in September.

Locality.
This plant is a native of Spain and Portugal, and is perfectly natu-
ralized to this country ; grows principally in gardens.

Qualities.
The seeds are of a pale -green colour, of a strong aromatic and
agreeable smell, of a sweetish and slightly acrid taste. The root is
long, of the size of the finger, and almost inodorous. Fennel seeds
contain a green essential oil, and a fixed, inodorous and tasteless
oil. Water, and especially alcohol, take up their active principles.
Medical Properties.
Fennel seeds are endowed with energetic properties as a stimu-
lant, which appears to consist in the essential oil which they contain.
They are principally employed in flatulencies, difficult digestion, such
as dyspepsia ; in colic of children. They are useful in pain and weak-
ness of the breast.

Employment.
Of the infusion, or tea, give freely through the day.


Medical Botany. 35


No. 11.

GARLIC. The Root.

Latin Name — Allium Sativum.

English Name — Common cultivated Garlic.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I. -MONOGYNIA.

Genus— Allium— Corol, inferior, 6-petailed, spreading ; divisions
ovate ; spathe bifid ; many flowered ; umbel crowned ; stigma simple.

Species— Sativum— Cauline leaves flat ; leaves linear ; bulb-bear-
ing ; bulb compound ; stamina? tricuspidate.

Description.

This plant rises a foot or more in height. The leaves from the root
are numerous ; on the stem few, long, flat, grass-like. Flowers arise
between the small bulbs, which terminate the stem in a cluster. The
flower is white and commonly abortive. The calyx is a spatha com-
mon to all the florets and bulbs. The corolla consists of six oblong
petals. The capsule is short, broad, 3-celled and 3-valved, and
contains roundish seeds.

History.

Garlic is a perennial bulbous-rooted plant.
Locality.

Garlic grows wild in Sicily, but is cultivated in our gardens for culi-
nary use.

Medical Qualities.

The root consists of five or six small bulbs, enclosed in one com-
mon envelope of a thin whitish colour. Its strong, disagreeable taste
and odour are sufficiently known. It contains a very heavy acrid and
yellow volatile oil, albumen, sulphur, a saccharine matter and fecula.
Its property depends upon the above acrid and volatile oil.
Medical Properties.

A poultice of it is a good resolvent in indolent tumours. It is of
service in colds and coughs, united with honey, as an expectorant.
As a counter-irritant, it is useful to cause revulsion ; or in the form
of draughts, to equalize the circulation. In asthma, both pituant and
spasmodic, and in flatulencies, and in hysterical diseases, it has in
general a good effect. It is useful, applied externally, in fevers ; ap-
plied to the feet, it is useful in all inflammatory diseases.

Employment.

To prepare the syrup, garlic bulb, sliced, one pound ; boiling
water, two pounds ; double refined sugar, four pounds ; macerate the
garlic in the water in a close vessel, for twelve hours, and add the
sugar to the strained liquor. In inflammation of the lungs, give a
tablespoonful occasionally. For children, it is very useful in colds
and oppression of the chest.


36 Materia Medica,

No. 12.
GINGER. The Root.

Latin Name — Amomum Zingiber.
English Name — Ginger.

Botanical Character.

Class I.— MONONDRU.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus. — Amomum — Calyx 3-cleft, unequal, cylindrical ; corol
3-parted, unequal, expanding ; nectary 2-lipped, nearly erect.

Species. — Zingiber — Scape naked; spikes ovate; scales ovate;
leaves lanceolate, alternate, with a ciliate margin at the tip ; corol
yellowish-green, with a slender tube.

Description.
This plant has two kinds of stalks ; one of which bears only the
leaves, (which resemble those of reeds, common to India, and closely
wound round each other at the base,) and rises to a foot or two in
height ; the other kind bears the flowers, and does not rise beyond
ten or twelve inches in height, terminating at the top by a kind of ear
of very beautiful colours, formed of membranous scales ; amongst
which, the flowers proceed, which are composed of five irregular pe-
tals, which have somewhat the appearance of being lipped, and are
succeeded by a capsule, containing a great number of seeds. Root
tubercular, of the size of the finger, flat, knotty, and palmated-like,
hard, compact, covered with a grayish epidermis, white or yellowish
internally.

History.
Ginger flowers in September, and is of two kinds, the black
and white. The black is thick and knotty; internally of an orange
colour, and externally of a yellow colour. The white is less thick
and knotty ; internally, of a reddish-yellow colour, and externally, of
a whitish-gray or yellow.

Locality.

Ginger is a perennial plant, a native of the East Indies, but is now
cultivated in the West Indies, and much like potatoes.

Qualities.

The root is possessed of an acrid and warm taste, and a very strong
smell. Ginger, according to the analysis of Morin, contains a resin
soluble in ether ; a sub-resin insoluble in that menstruum ; a volatile
oil of a greenish-blue colour ; a matter containing nitrogen; another
matter similar to osmazome ; some acetic acid, acetate ofpotassa
gum, ligneous fibre, and salts. Water, alcohol, and ether, dissolve a
part of its active principles.

Medical Properties.
Ginger is a warm, stimulating aromatic, useful in cold, flatulent co
lies, in laxity, and debility of the intestines, and in some forms of


No. 12.
AMOMUM ZINGIBER.


GINGER.


Medical Botany. 37

dyspepsia, proceeding from atonic gout. It promotes the circulation,
and relieves pain, particularly in the stomach. It is serviceable in
the form of tea, in an habitual coldness of the system.

Employment.
In flatulence, languid circulation, and a check of perspiration, a
strong tea may be taken freely. It is also used in the form of syrup.


No. 13.

MYRRH. Tree.

Latin Name — Amyris Kataf.

English Name — Myrrh.

Description.

A botanical specimen of the tree which affords this gum resin has
not yet been obtained ; but from the account of Bruce, who says it
very much resembles the acacia vera of Linnasus, there can be little
doubt in referring it to that genus, especially as it corresponds with
the description of the tree given by Diosorides.

Good myrrh is of a turbid black-red colour, solid and heavy, of a
peculiar smell, and bitter taste.

Locality.

The tree that affords the myrrh, which is obtained by incision,
grows on the eastern coast of Arabia Felix, and in that part of Abys.
sinia which is situated near the Red sea, and is called by Bruce
Troglodyte.

Qualities.
Myrrh is composed, according to Pelletier. of resin and essential
oil 84 ; gum 68. It is more soluble in boiling water than in alcohol,
and, rubbed with one fifth of camphor, it becomes perfectly miscible
with water.

Properties.

Myrrh is used internally as a stimulant, antiseptic, and emmena-
gogue ; externally as a detergent wash in foul ulcers, and particularly
as an injection in sinous ulcers.

Dr. Cullen remarks, that it heated the stomach, produced sweat,
and agreed with the balsams in affecting the urinary passages. It has
lately come more into use as a tonic in hectical cases, and is said to
prove less heating than most other medicines of that class. '

A writer says, that the " tincture of myrrh is recommended inter-
nally for warming the habit, attenuating viscid juices, strengthening
the solids, opening obstructions, particularly those of the uterine
vessels, and resisting putrefactions. The dose is from fifteen to forty
drops, or more. It may, perhaps, be given in these cases with ad-
vantage, though it is more commonly used externally, as a stimulant
and antiseptic application, for clearing foul ulcers, and promoting the
exfoliation of carious bones."


38 Materia Medica.

The tincture is used also as a wash, when diluted, for scorbutic
relaxation of the gums. It enters into the emmenagogue or black
powder of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.

Of the powder, ten grains to one drachm. The tincture is made as
follows :

1. Myrrh, powdered fine, three ounces.

2. Alcohol, twenty ounces.

3. Water, ten ounces.

Let them stand together seven days, and then strain it through
brown paper.


No. 14.

INDIAN TURNIP. The Root.

Latin Name — Ahum Triphyllum.
English Name — Three-leaved Arum.

Vulgar Names — Indian Turnip, Dragon Root, Dragon Turnip,
Pepper Turnip.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONGECIA.
Order XIL— POLYANDRIA.

Genus — Arum — Spathe cuculate 1-leafed ; spadix cylindrical,
naked above, bearing the stamina in the middle, and the pristillate
flowers beneath. Berry mostly 1 -seeded.

Species — Triphyelum — Leaves ternate ; leaflets ovate, accumi-
nate ; lamina lanceolate, accumulate, as long as the spadix.

Description.

This plant arises from one to two feet in height ; roots perennial,
round, flattened, tuberous, with many white fibres around the base ;
skin dark, wrinkled and loose ; leaves oval, three on each plant, pale
beneath, with regular parallel nerves. The germs, when ripe, be-
come berries of a very bright scarlet colour.

History.

This plant blossoms with us from May to July, and in the summer
bears its bright scarlet berries. By long boiling, the seeds and roots
may be rendered eatable. They were eaten by the Indians of this
country by roasting and boiling.

Locality..
It grows all over North America, in woods and low moist soils.
All soils and regions appear suited to this plant ; but rich and shady
grounds appear to suit it better.

Qualities.
The whole plant, and the root in particular, is possessed of a violent
acrid, pungent and even caustic taste, but it does not irritate the skin.


No. 14.
ARUM TRIPHYLLUM.


LNDIAN TURNIP.


»l


Medical Botany. 39

The active principle of this plant is a peculiar substance, aroine,
highly volatile, having no affinity to water, alcohol, oils or acids ; be-
coming an inflammable gas by heat and distillation. The roots yield
one fourth their weight of a pure starchy matter.
Medical Properties.

Indian turnip, when fresh, makes a powerful, strong, stimulating,
acrid remedy. It makes an excellent poultice in scrofulous swell-
ings, and, when dried and pulverized, it is a good remedy in coughs,
pains in the breast, and, given in teaspoonful doses, it is a valuable
remedy in colic. It is said to be very efficacious in cases of low ty-
phus fever. I have found it to answer in cases of scrofula, as one of
the best poultices in use. Dr. Chapman, of Philadelphia, in speaking
of this article, says : "my experience with it is not extensive, though
I have seen enough of its use to be convinced that it is among the
most active of our expectorants, and so far may be serviceable in old
catarrhs and other pituitous cases." The dried root, boiled in milk,
is the manner in which he recommends it. An ointment made of the
fresh root and lard, is useful, says a writer, in tinea capitis, (scald
head.)

Employment.

The powder, mixed in molasses or milk, and given in teaspoonful
doses three or four times a day. For scrofulous swellings, bruise the
green root and leaves, and apply. If the root be dry, bruise it, and
add water, and boil till soft ; then stir in slippery-elm bark, until a
poultice of a proper consistence is formed.


No. 15.

AMERICAN IPECACUANHA. The Root.

Latin Name — Apocynum Cannabinum.
English Name — American Ipecacuanha.
Vulgar Names — Indian Hemp, Indian Physic.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Apocynum — Calix very small, 5-cleft ; corol campanulate ;
anthers converging, saggitate ; nectareous filaments 5, alternating
with the stamina ; stigma thick, subsessile.

Species— Cannabinum — Stem erect, branching, herbaceous ; leaves
oblong-oval, hoary beneath ; cymes lateral, terminal, longer than the
leaves.

Description.
Stems of this plant, from one to several, about two feet in height,
branched above, round, and of a reddish colour ; leaves numerous,
and ovate, hanging on footstalks ; flowers terminal, forming a loose


40 Materia Medir.a.

panicle, whitish, similar to buckwheat, which terminate in seed pods
resembling cucumbers, containing seeds ; root composed of nume-
rous long, brown and 3lender branches, radiating from a thick tuber.

Locality.
This is a perennial plant, indigenous to the United States ; grows
in meadows and in low, moist woods.

Qualities.
The root of this plant consists of a bark and ligneous part. The
active property appears to be confined altogether to the bark. Its
taste is bitter and nauseous, and its smell nearly resembles that of
ipecacuanha. According to Dr. Bigelow, it contains a bitter, ex-
tractive matter, a resin, &c. ; and Dr. Staples has ascertained that
this root does not contain emetic.

Medical Properties.

This plant is emetic, cathartic, tonic and diuretic. It has been
given with success in dropsy. Dr. Eberle, in his Therapeutics, (vol.
i. p. 77.) says ; " From my own experience with this plant, which
has not been inconsiderable, I am led to regard it as very little infe-
rior to the officinal ipecacuanha as an emetic. Like this latter arti-
cle, it is a safe and efficacious vomit." In small doses, it acts as a
tonic, given in quantity of from three to four grains at a time in this
manner. Dr. Eberle considers it to be useful in dyspepsia, as having
been benefited by the use of it while suffering with that disorder
himself.

Employment.

Of the powder, as an emetic, in the dose of about thirty grains.
As a tonic, from two to four grains.

We use it principally as a tonic, in indigestion, in combination with
other articles. It is one of the ingredients which comprises the wine
bitters, which is very valuable in dyspepsia.


No. 16.
MALE FERN. The Root.

Latin Name — Aspidium Filix Mas.
English Name — Male Shield Fern.

Botanical Character.

Class XXL— CRYPTOGAMIA.
Order I.— FILICES.

Genus — Aspiditjm — Fructification in roundish, scattered dots, not
marginal ; involucre umbilicate, opening nearly all around.

Species — Filix Mas — Doubly pinnate ; subdivisions oblong, ob-
tuse, serrate at the top ; stalk scaly ; fructifications remform.


Nd. 1G.
ASPIDHJM FILIX MAS.


MALE SHIELD FERN,


Medical Botany. 4l


Description.

Root horizontal ; has a great many appendages placed close to .each
other in a vertical direction, while a number of small fibres s r.ke
downwards ; leaves large, oval, pinnate ; pinnulae close to each other
very long and pinnatifid ; petioles short, of a deep brown colour, and
furnished with scales ; fruit kidney form and rounded.

Locality.

This plant is perrenial, and grows in great abundance in every
part of Great Britain, where the ground is not cultivated. It is found
also growing on the mountains and among rocks, in New-Jersey.

Qualities.

This root is nearly inodorous, its taste slightly bitter, sweetish, sub-
astringent and mucilaginous. According to M. Morin's analysis, this
root contains a volatile oil, a fatty matter, some uncrystallizable
sugar, gallic acid, tannin, starch, &c. According to the experiment of
Mr. Peschier, an apothecary of Geneva, the anthelmintic properties
of this article reside in a peculiar fatty matter.
Medical Properties.

The male fern appears to have an indifferent action on the animal
economy, but appears to be highly deleterious to intestinal worms,
and particularly to the tape-worm. This article constitutes the basis
of the celebrated specific of Madam Nomer for the tape-worm.

This secret was thought of such importance by some of the prin-
cipal physicians at Paris, who were deputed to make a complete trial
of its efficacy, that it was purchased by the French king, and af-
terward published by his order. The method of cure is the follow-
ing : — After the patient has been prepared by an emollient clyster,
and a supper of panada, with butter arid salt, he is directed to take in
the morning, while in bed, a dose of two or three drachms of the
powdered root of the male fern. The powder must be washed down
with a draught of water, and, two hours after, a strong cathartic,
composed of jallap and scammony, is to be given, proportioned to
the strength of the patient. If this does not operate in due time, it
is to be followed by a dose of purging salts ; and if the worm be not
expelled in a few hours, this process is to be repeated at proper inter-
vals. Of the success of this, or a similar mode of treatment, in cases
of taenia, there can be no doubt, as many proofs in this country afford
sufficient testimony ; but whether the fern root, or the strong cathartic,
is the principal agent in the destruction of the worm, may admit of a
question ; and the latter opinion, Dr. Woodville believes, is the more
generally adopted by physicians. It appears, however, from some
experiments made in Germany, that the taenia has, in several in-
stances, been expelled by the repeated exhibition of the root, without
the assistance of any purgative.

Employment.

Of the powdered root, from two to three drachms. Two hours after
its administration, a purgative must be given, in order to procure the
expulsion of the worms.

Vol. III. F


42 Materia Medica.

No. 17.

MARSHMALLOWS— Root, Leaves and Flowers.

Latin Name — Althaea Officinalis.
English Name — Marshmallow.

Botanical Character.

Class XV.— MONODELPHIA.
Order XIIL— POLYANDRIA.

Genus — Althaea — Calyx double ; the outermost 6 9-cleft ; cap-
sules numerous ; 1-seeded, disposed in a flat ring.

Species — Officinalis — Leaves downy, oblong-ovate ; obsoletely,
3-lobed, serrate.

Description.

This plant rises from three to four feet in height. Leaves heart-
shaped, downy, smooth ; flowers of a rose-white colour, large, con-
sisting of five petals, heart-shaped inversely, in panicles at the top
of the stem ; calyx double ; the exterior, 9-divided ; the interior,
5-divided ; ovary free, rounded ; style simple ; monospermous ; cap-
sules united in a circle at t the base of the style. Root fusiform, fleshy,
of the size of the finger.

History.
This is a perennial plant, flowering in June and July.

Locality.
Marshmallows is a plant indigenous to Europe, and grows plentifully
throughout the United States, growing along the banks of rivers and
marshy places.

Qualities.
The marshmallows, such as is found in commerce, is stripped of its
epidermis, fleshy, of the size of the finger, of a white colour, ino-
dorous, and of a viscous taste. All parts of this plant, and the roots
especially, contain a large quantity of gum and fecula. Boiling water
takes up its principles.

Medical Properties.
Emollient and demulcent : good in diseases attended with irritation
and pain, especially of the urinary organs ; and in dysentery it is used
with great advantage. They relax the passages in nephritic com-
plaints, in which last case a decoction is the best preparation. Two
or three ounces of the fresh roots may be boiled in a sufficient quan-
tity of water to a quart, to which one ounce of gum Arabic may be
added. The following is given where it is required that large quan-
tities should be used. An ounce of the dried roots to be boiled in
water, enough to leave two or three pints to be poured off for use : if
more of the root be used, the liquor will be disagreeably slimy. If
sweetened, by adding a little more of the root of liquorice, it will be
palatable. Very useful in canker of the mouth, as fomentations and
injections.


17.
ALTHiEA OFFICINALIS.


Hj


MARSlliUALLOYV.


No. 18.
AMYGDAUIS COMMUNIS.


COMMON ALMOND


Medical Botany. 43

Employment.
Decoction, as above. Marshmallow troches: mallow, two parts;
orris-root, one part ; sugar, thirty-six parts ; gum Arabic, sufficient to
form into troches. Made into an ointment, it proves very serviceable
in herpatic affections. It is good to allay itching and burning from
any cause ; and in all disorders of the urinary organs it is serviceable ;
also in bowel complaints.


No. 18.

ALMOND.


Latin Name — Amygdalus Communis.
English Name — Common Almond.

Botanical Character.

Class XL— ICOSANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Amygdalus — Calyx inferior, 5-cleft ; corol 5-petalled ;
drupe with a nut perforated with pores.

Species — Communis — Lower teeth of the leaves glandular ; flowers
in pairs, sessile.

Description.

The almond tree rises twelve, or more, feet in height ; flowers of a
pale pink colour, which are placed in pairs upon its branches ; the
flowers appear before the leaves ; the leaves are elliptic, narrow, point-
ed at the end, minutely sawed, standing upon short foot-stalks.

History.
This tree flowers early in the spring, before the leaves have put
forth ; and it nearly resembles the peach tree.

Locality.
This tree originally came from Syria and Barbary ; but is now
much cultivated in the south of Europe.

Qualities.

The almond is a flattish kernel, of a white colour, and of a soft,
sweet taste, or a disagreeable bitter one. The oil, which is the prin-
cipal part used in medicine, is of a greenish-white colour, of a smell
analogous to that of sweet almonds. This oil turns rancid with the
greatest facility. Its composition does not differ from that of the fixed
oils in general.

Bitter almonds yield a large quantity of oil, perfectly similar to that
obtained from sweet almonds, but the matter remaining after the ex-
pression of the oil, is more powerfully bitter than the almond in its
entire state. Great part of the bitter matter dissolves by the assistance
of heat, both in water and rectified spirit ; and a part arises also with
both menstrua in distillation. Bitter almonds have been long known
to be poisonous to various brute animals ; and some authors have


44 Materia Medica.

alleged that they are also deleterious to the human species ; but the
facts recorded upon this point appear to want further proof. However,
as the noxious quality seems to reside in that matter which gives it
the bitterness and flavour, it is very probable, that when this is sepa-
rated by distillation, and taken in a sufficiently concentrated state, it
may prove a poison to man, as is the case with the common laurel, to
which it appears extremely analogous.

Medical Properties.

The oil of almond is serviceable in tickling coughs, hoarseness, &c.
It acts likewise upon the urinary organs, in the scalding of urine ; and
in the diseases of the kidneys, especially when combined with other
remedies, it is peculiarly serviceable. Externally, it is applied against
tension and rigidity of particular parts. The milky solutions of al-
monds in watery liquors, usually called emulsions, possess, in a certain
degree, the emollient qualities of the oil, and have this advantage over
pure oil, that they may be given in acute or inflammatory disorders,
without danger of the ill effects which the oil might sometimes produce
by turning rancid.

Employment.

It enters into one of our preparations for pulmonary diseases, deno-
minated " cough drops," and which we find very useful. Also into
one called "diuretic drops," for diseases of the kidneys, urinary
organs, &c.


No. 19.

PARSLEY.

Latin Name — Apium Petroselincm.
English Name — Rock Parsley.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Apium — Flowers flosculus ; all fertile petals inflected uni-
form ; involucre 1 -leafed ; seeds minute, striate.

Species — Petroselinum — Leaflets of the stem linear ; involucels
minute.

Description.

Parsley is a biennial plant ; it rises two feet in height. The radical
leaves are without foot-stalks, compound, pinnated in threes. The
leaflets are smooth, reined, divided into three lobes, and notched at
the margin ; flowers small, of a yellow colour, placed on terminal
umbels.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to the south of Europe ; but is likewise
naturalized to our climate, and is generally cultivated for culinary
uses. y


Medical Botany. 45

Qualities.
This plant has an aromatic and agreeable smell, and a faint taste.
The seeds are of a warmer and more aromatic taste than the plant.

Properties.
It is a very good diuretic, and there are cases on record, in which
it has entirely cured the dropsy.

Employment.
It is given in tea or decoction, by infusing one ounce of the root in
a quart of water, and drank freely.


No. 20.

STAR GRASS.

Latin Name — Aletris Farinosa.
English Name — Mealy Starwort.

Vulgar Names — Star-grass, Blazing-star, Bitter-grass, Uni-
corn-root, Ague-root, Ague-grass, Star-root, Devils-bit.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I.— MONGYNIA.

Genus — Aletris — Corol funnel-form, wrinkled superior, some-
what 6-cleft ; the stamens inserted on the base of the segments ; cap-
sule 3-celled ; cells many-seeded.

Species — Farinosa — Stemless ; leaves lanceolate ; flowers alter-
nate, farinaceous.

Description.

Root perennial, small, black outside, brown inside, ramose, crooked.
Radical leaves from six to twelve, spreading on the ground like a
star, but all unequal in size, sessile, lanceolate, very smooth, with
many longitudinal veins ; they are of a pale green ; stem from one to
two feet in height, very simple and upright ; flowers white, forming
a long, slender, scattered spike ; shape oblong, spreading into six
acute segments, like a star at the top ; the outside has a mealy rugose
appearance.

History.

A true natural genus, peculiar to North America, and containing
two species very similar to each other. It blossoms in June and July.

Locality.
This plant has a wide range, from New-England to Georgia, and
west to Kentucky and Missouri. It is more abundant in the south, and
always confined to dry and poor soils, in sunny glades and fields.

Quality.
The roots of this plant contain an intense bitter emulsive resin,
soluble in alcohol, somewhat similar to aloes, but less cathartic. This
bitter principle is also partly soluble in water. They contain extrac-
tive, but very little or no tannin, or gallic acid.


46 Materia Medico.

Properties.
This root is intensely bitter, like quassia and aloes. It is tonic,
stomachic and narcotic. Rafinesque says, that it must be taken in
small doses, not over twelve grains at once, as it will nauseate, produce
giddiness, or narcotic effects, if taken in large doses. In pains of the
breast and flatulencies, it is an excellent remedy : in repeated small
doses it invigorates the appetite. The infusion, or decoction, is still
better, and may be used as a substitute for quassia. Rafinesque says,
that bitters prepared from this article are too powerful ; and he re-
commends a mild cordial as the best spiritous preparation of this
article. Doses, three small wineglasses each day.

Employment.
In the form of infusion, or in tincture. The tincture may be made
by adding an ounce of the root to a pint of proof spirits, of which a
tablespoonful may be given three times a day 5 before eating.


No. 21.

SPIKENARD.

Latin Name — A r alia Racemosa.
English Name — Common Spikenard.

Botanical Description.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order V.— PENTAGYNIA.

Genus — Aralia — Umbellets with an involucre ; calyx 5-toothed,
superior ; corol 5-petalled ; berry 5-seeded.

Species — Racemosa — Stem herbaceous, smooth ; leaves decom.
pound, branched, alternate ; peduncles axillary, branched, umbellat-
ed ; umbils terminal, round.

Description.
This plant rises four or five feet in height ; leaves are many, small,
ovate, on long foot-stalks; main stalk of the size of the thumb, joint-
ed, purplish ; flowers inconspicuous, very small, of a bluish colour,
producing berries very much resembling those of elder, of a sweet,
pleasant, aromatic taste.

History.
It blossoms in July and August ; its berries are ripe in September
and October.

Locality.
Spikenard is found from New-England to Carolina and Indiana
but it is more common in the north than in the south ; grows in deep
woods and good soils. It is generally cultivated in gardens.

Qualities.
The root of this plant has a balsamic, fragrant, and warm aromatic
sweetish taste.


No. 21.
ARALIA RACEMOSA.


COMMON SPIKENARD.


No. 22.
ASCLEFIAS SYRIACA.


No. 23.
ARISTOLOCHIA SERPENT ARIA.


COMMON SILK WEED. VIRGINIA SNAKE-ROOT.


Medical Botany. 47

Properties.

The root of this plant is healing, pectoral, stimulant, cordial and dia-
phoretic.

This plant is much used by the Indians. The roots, bruised, chew-
ed, or pulverized, were used by them in all kinds of sores and ulcers.
In colds and coughs, the roots and berries may be used in syrups,
cordials and decoctions. Henry speaks very highly of the supe-
riority of this medicine in gout of the stomach. The manner in which
the fresh berries, and let it stand by the fire for a week, then pour a
pint of rain water on them. Dose, a wineglassful, three times a day.
This article enters the " restorative cordial 1 ' of our pharmacopoeia,
also the pulmonary balsam.

Dose and mode of administering.
It may be given in infusion, decoction, or syrup.


No. 22.

SILK WEED. The Root.

Latin Name — Asclepias Sykiaca.
English Name — Common Silk Weed.
Vulgar Name — Milk Weed.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.

Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus— Asclepias— Follicles 2 ; corol 1-petalled, inferior reflect-
ed ; nectaries 5, ovate, concave, each putting out a little horn.

Species— Syriaca— Stem simple ; leaves opposite, ova], downy be.
neath ; umbels nodding.

Description.

This plant has a square stalk, rising three feet high ; leaves oval
smooth and mdky ; flowers yellow, which terminate in pods resem'
blmg cucumbers, filled with a silky down ; seeds resembling some
what the seeds of parsnip. The root is white, and of the size of the
finger, about a foot in length.

Locality.

It grows plentifully throughout the United States, along the sidea
of roads and in sandy grounds.

Properties.

The root of this plant is a powerful diuretic ; it is said to be emmena-
gogue, and has been found beneficial in catarrhal, cachectic scrofu
lous and rheumatic disorders. Boil eight ounces of the root' in six
quarts of rain water to three ; strain it for use. For the dropsy, take
a gill of this decoction foirf times a day, increasing the dose according
to the effect. Those who are troubled with a suppression of urine
may take a teacupful of this decoction four times a day, sweetened


48 Materia Medica.

Dose and mode of administering.
Given in form of the above decoction, or in powder, of from twenty
to forty grains, three or four times a day. We use it generally in
combination with several other articles, for different species of dropsy.
(See Pharmacy.)


No. 23.

VIRGINIA SNAKE-ROOT.

Latin Name — Aristolochia Seepentaria.
English Name — Snake-root, Birthwort.
Vulgar Names — Virginia Snake-root, Snake-weed, Snagreh.

Botanical Character.

Class XVIII. -GYNANDRIA.
Order VI.— tlEXANDRIA.

Genus — Aristolochia — Calyx 0; corol 1-petalled, tubular, tongue-
shaped ; stigmata 6 ; capsule inferior, 6-celled.

Species — Serpentaria — Leaves oblong cordate, acuminate, flat ;
stem weak, flexuous ; peduncles radical.

Description.

Root perennial, knotty and gibbose, brown and very fibrous ; fibres
long, small, yellow, when fresh. Stems round, slender, weak, joint-
ed, bearing from three to seven leaves, and from one to three flowers;
leaves alternate and petiolate ; base heart-shaped, end sharp, surface
smooth, of a pale green. Flowers nearly radical and solitary, on
foot-stalks curved, jointed, coloured, with some small scales ; germ
inferior, perigone, reddish, or purplish ; tube crooked, limb bilabiate ;
upper lip notched, lower entire, both short and lobular; 6-sessile; an-
thers oblong, obtuse, attached to the sides of a large round sessile
stigma; capsule oboval, with six angles, six cells and many minute
seeds.

History.

The Virginia snake-root of commerce is collected from half a do-
zen species or varieties. All of those plants blossom but seldom, or
once in their lives, in May or June.

Locality.
Found in shady woods, from New-England to Florida and Missouri ;
but most abundant in the Alleghany and Cumberland mountains ;
scarce in alluvial and limestone regions.

Qualities.

f The root has an agreeable, penetrating, aromatic smell, somewhat
similar to valerian; and a warm, bitterish, pungent taste.

It contains, according to Mr. Chevallier's analysis, an essential oil,
to which it is indebted for its odour ; a bitter yellow matter, soluble in
water and alcohol, a resinous matter, some gum, albumen, starch,


No. 24
BERBERIS VULGARIS.


P.AUEKRRY.


Medical Botany. 49

some salts of potassa and lime, a small quantity of iron and silica.
Its active principles are soluble in water and alcohol.

Properties.

Diaphoretic, tonic, anodyne, antispasmodic, cordial, antiseptic and a
powerful stimulant to the whole system. It was first introduced in the
Materia Medica as a remedy against snake bites, from which it de-
rives its name, and was used by the Indians for that purpose.

The Virginia snake-root possesses very powerful and lasting stimu-
lant virtues ; but, besides this general action, it must be observed that
it acts also on the skin by stimulating this membrane and increasing
perspiration. It is useful in the treatment of typhoid fevers of armies
and prisons, and it has undoubtedly produced very good effects in
many cases. It is now less frequently employed, although it may be
administered with success generally, in all the cases in which it be-
comes necessary to promote perspiration.

Dr. Chapman, in speaking of the virtues of this article, says, " To
remittent fever, serpentaria seems still better adapted, having, in
many cases, an indisputable superiority over the bark, inasmuch as it
rarely is offensive to the stomach, and may be given in those obscure
states of the disease, where the remission is not readily discernible.
In that disorder called bilious pleurisy, it has been highly useful. In
bilious complaints it checks vomiting and tranquillizes the stomach."
It enters into the sudorific drops.

Doses and mode of administering.

Of the powder, from ten to twenty grains, and gradually to half a
drachm. Infusion, four drachms to one pound of water, of which one
or two ounces may be given every four hours.


No. 24.
BARBERRY. Bush.

Latin Name — Berberis Vulgaris.
English Name — Barberry.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Berberis — Corol 6-petalled, with two glands at the base
of each ; calyx 6-leaved ; style ; berry superior, 2-seeded.

Species — Vulgaris — Racemes simple, pendulent ; leaves obovate,
the serratures ending in soft bristles ; branches puncate ; spines mostly
in threes ; berries red, acid.

Description.

This shrub rises from four to eight feet in height, with branches
long and bending, having many small thorns, often three together.
The leaves are ©rowded and unequal in each fascicle, oh short leaf

Vol. III. G


50 Materia Medica.

stalks, smooth and glossy, oboval, obtuse, with small remote teeth.
The flowers are on slender and lax racemes, either nodding or pen-
dulous ; yellow on long pedicels, and rather small. Berries hang in
loose bunches ; they are oblong and red.

History.

This shrub blossoms in April and May. The berries ripen in June,
but they are sometimes abortive. The stamina of the flowers are
irritable, and bend with elasticity toward the pistil when touched.

Locality.

It is found from Canada to Virginia, in mountains, hills, among
rocks, &c. ; common in New-England in rocky fields ; rare in the
West, and in rich soils.

Qualities.

The whole shrub, even the root, is acid. In the berries, this acid
becomes very pleasant, and is probably the tartaric acid, but mixed
with some astringency. The bark is yellow and bitter.

Properties.

Antiseptic, acid, subastringent, refrigerant, &c. Added to good
hard cider, it is good in jaundice. The berries contain a very acid
and red juice, which forms a pleasant and useful drink in fluxes and
malignant fevers, for abating heat, quenching thirst, raising the
strength, and preventing putrefaction. Prosper Alpinus says, that
being attacked with a putrid fever, accompanied with a bilious diar-
rhoea, he attributes his recovery entirely to eating the fruit of the
barberry. Simon Pauli gives a similar account of the use of the
berries. J. Bauhin recommends the same remedy in dysentery.

Dose and mode of administering.
Made into syrup, infusion or decoction. We add to it hard cider,
and give it in jaundice.


No. 25.

BLACK BIRCH.

Latin Name — Betuea Le.nta.
English Name — Common Black Birch.

Botanical Character.

Genus — Betula — Staminate ; flowers corol 4-parted ; calyx scale
of the ament 1-leafed ; 3-cleft; 3-flowered ; stamens ten or twelve.
Petiolate flowers, calyx scales of the ament 1-leafed, generally
3-cleft ; 2 or 3-flowered ; styles 2 seeds, 1-winged.

iSpecies— Lenta— Leaves cordate, ovate, sharply serrate acu-
minate ; petioles and nerves hairy beneath Urge trees.

Description.

This tree rises from twenty to forty feet in height, sending out many


No. 2G.
BAPTISTA TINCTORIA.


YELLOW OR WILD INDIGO.


Medical Botany. 51

branches at the top ; leaves ovate, the edges notched, upper surface
smooth, the under ribhed, and pale coloured.

Locality.
Grows in woods that are low and swampy. Found all over the
United States.

Properties.
It is tonic and astringent, and enters into one of our preparations
for bowel complaints, and is the only case in which we use it.


No. 26.

WILD INDIGO.

Latin Name — Baptisia Tinctoria.
English Name — Indigo Broom.

Vulgar Names — Wild Indigo, Indigo Weed, Horsefl Weed,
Yellow Broom, Clover, Broom, Rattle Bush, Yellow Indigo.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DEfcANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Baptisia — (Podalyria Lin.) — Calyx 4 or 5-parted, some-
what labiate ; coral papilionaceous, petals nearly equal in length ;
vexillum laterly-reflected; stamina deciduous; legume ventricose
many-seeded.

Species — Tinctoria — Very glabrous and branching ; leaves ter-
nate, subsessile ; leaflets, cuneate-obovate, round-obtuse, stipules ob-
solete oblong-acute, much shorter than the petioles ; racemes termi-
nal ; flowers yellow ; the plant becomes black in drying.

Description.

Root perennial ; large, woody, irregular, blackish outside, yellow
ish inside ; stems two or three feet high, round and smooth, yellow,
ish green, with black dots, very much ramified ; branches thin, and
with small leaves. These leaves are alternate, and with three folioles
nearly sessile, obovate, smooth, of a bluish green. Flowers bright
yellow, in loose spikes at the end of branches; pea-like stamina, en-
closed, deciduous. Pistil single and stipitate. succeeded by a swelled
oblong pod of a bluish-black colour, with a row of small rattling seeds.

History.
This plant has the appearance of a small shrub or broom. It
blossoms in July and August. The whole plant, (even the flowers,)
often become black in the fall, or in a herbarium. It dyes a kind of
blue like indigo, but it is inferior. The young shoots of this plant are
eaten, an New-England, like those of poke, and, like this latter article,
they are of a drastic nature.


52 Materia Medica.

Locality.

Found all over the United States, from Maine to Louisiana and Illi-
nois, in woods and on hills. It prefers dry and poor soils ; is unknown
in rich loamy soils, and seldom met in alluvions.

Qualities.

The whole of this plant, but in particular the root, is nauseous, sub.
acrid, sub-astringent, but inodorous. It is active and dangerous in
its recent state, if taken internally ; but it loses much of its activity if
dried or boiled. The active principles of this article are but little
known. It contains tannin, indigo and an acid.

Properties.

Astringent, antiseptic, purgative, emetic and stimulant. This plant,
in the form of poultice, is very efficacious in inflammatory affections,
bordering upon gangrene. The corticle part of the bark is that which
we use. It is good in syphilitic ulcers ; also for almost every sore,
such as malignant ulcerous sore mouth and throat, mercurial sore
mouth, sore nipples, chronic sore eyes, &c. It may be used exter-
nally, in strong decoction as a wash, or in fomentation, poultice or
ointment, with lard or cream.

It has been used, it is stated, with some considerable success, in
scarlatina anginosa, (scarlet sore throat,) and in typhus fever. It
forms the basis of our yellow salve, which is very useful in various
kinds of ulcers.

Dose and mode of administering.
It has been given in the form of a decoction, internally, at the dose of
half an ounce of a decoction, made with twenty times its weight of
water. Used also as above.


No. 27.

COPAIBA.


Latin JSame — Copaifera Officinalis.
English Name — Officinal Copaiba.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Copaifera — Calyx ; corol 4-petalIed ; legume ovate ;
seed 1, involved in a pulpy coat.

Species — Officinalis — A tree with primate leaves ; racime, com-
pound, terminal, (South American balsam of copaiba is the resinous

juice.)

Description.
A large bushy tree, with alternate leaves, composed of from five
to eight folioles, shining, and almost sessile; flowers white, in ra-


No. 27.

COPAIFERA OFFICINALIS.


OFFICINAL COPAIBA.


Medical Botany

raoseand axillary clusters ; calyx 4-parted ; no corolla ; stamina dis-
tinct, ipreadiog; fruit 2-valved, containing one or two seeds.

Locality.

This tree is a native of the Spanish West Indies, and of some
parts of South America. It grows to a large s.ze, and the resinous
juice is obtained by making incisions in the trunk of the tree.

Qualities.

The balsam is a liquid of an oily consistence, transparent, of a
yellowish-white colour, of a strong and disagreeable smell, of an acrid
and bitter taste, and of a specific gravity of 0.950.

Balsam copaiba, according to E. Durand's analysis, contains an
essential oil, forming about one half of its weight; a resin ; a small
quantity of acetic acid ; a fatty matter ; traces of muriate of lime,
and of a sweet substance. It dissolves in twenty-five times its weight
of alcohol, at thirty-five degrees of Baume's areometer, leaving be-
hind the insoluble fatty matter, which precipitates in the form
of semi-fluid, transparent, and yellowish globules, not soluble in any
additional quantity of the same menstruum ; but the whole of the
copaiba dissolves in ether, absolute alcohol, and essential oils. Co-
paiba, when perfectly pure, and mixed with one seventeenth of pure
calcined magnesia, acquires a degree of solidity sufficient to allow it
to be formed into pills, (Revue Medicale.) This preparation requires
six or eight hours to inspissate, and in time it becomes still more solid.

Properties.

The balsam has been much used as a cooling diuretic and astrin-
gent ; but the manner in which it has been used, renders it less effi-
cacious than it might be. It enters into one of our preparations, the
diuretic drops, and we have used it in this manner with particular
benefit. When absorbed, it is principally on the mucous membrane
it seems to act, and especially upon the genito-urinary organs, in the
same way as turpentines. It is employed with success in chronic ca-
tarrhs, in coughs with great expectoration, and certain affections of
the lungs unattended with inflammation. It proves successful in ob-
stinate leucorrhcea, &c. It is in order to reduce the discharges that
balsam copaiba is principally used. It was commonly administered
when the inflammatory symptoms had been abated : but Drs. Delpech
and Ribes have of late exhibited it on the outset of the disease, how-
ever great the inflammation might be ; and they affirm having ob-
tained the greatest advantages from its early employment. Dr. Vel-
peau, in order to obviate the inconveniences of this remedy when
taken in large doses, has proposed to administer it in clysters, and
numerous successful experiments leave no doubt whatever of the effi-
cacy of this method.

Dose and mode of administering.

Merely as a stimulant, from ten to twelve drops, two or three times
a day, on sugar or in tea.

Pills of solidified copaiba. — Copaiba, one ounce; pure calcined mag-
nesia, half a drachm; mix carefully and permit the mass to become so-
lid ; for 4-grains pills, two of which contain 15 drops of the liquid bal-
sam. Dose from 1 to 3, three or four times a day.


64 Materia Mcclica.

No. 28.

CAYENNE PEPPER.

Latin Name — Capsicum Annuum.

English Name — Jamaica Pepper, Red Pepper.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Capsicum — Corol monopetalous, wheel-shaped ; berry
juiceless, 2-celled, inflated ; anthers connivent ; calyx angular.

Species — Anncum — Stem herbaceous, smooth, crooked, branched ;
leaves elliptical, pointed; sequents of the corol plaited; pod conical,
varying in shape and size ; peduncles solitary.

Description.

Stem herbaceous and ramose ; leaves lanceolate, entire, shining,
supported by a long petiole ; flowers white, small, axillary ; fruit an
elongated capsule, of a conic shape, shining, of a lively red, with two
or three cells, containing reniform and yellowish seeds.

History.

This plant is a native of South America, and is raised in the West
Indies. It will likewise ripen its fruit in the United States.

Qualities.
Cayenne pepper contains a peculiar substance, discovered^ by
Forchhamrner, and called capsicin by Dr. C. Conwell ; a red colour-
ing matter, a small quantity of a matter containing niirogen, a muci-
lage and some salts, especially nitrate of potassa. Dr. C. obtains,
bv means of ether, a liquid of a fine reddish-yellow colour, which he
calls ethereal oil of capsicum, and which is eminently endowed with
all the stimulant and acrid properties of the Cayenne pepper.

Properties.
i Capsicum is one of the purest and strongest stimulants with which
we are acquainted ; also carminative, tonic and diuretic. It is good to
remedy flatulency, arising from eating vegetable food, and likewise
to warm the stomach. It la used in rheumatism and in coldness of
the system. In cynanche maligna, (malignant sore throat,) capsicum
is much used, both as a gargle and as an internal remedy. Mr. Stu-
art speaks very highly of its powers in this disease. He orders "two
tablespoon fuls oi'li le small red pepper, or three of the common Cay-
enne pepper, and two teaspoonfuls oi* line salt, to be beat into paste, on
which half a pint of | ter is to be poured, and strained off

when cold ; an equal quantity of very sharp vinegar beino- added to
this infusion. A tablespoontul, every hour, is a proper dose for an
adult." -Mr. Stephens gave it to four hundred patients labouring under
this disease, " and it seemed," says he, " to save some whose state
had been thought desperate."


No. 28.
CAPSICUM ANNWJM.


CAYENNE PEPPER.


No. 29.
CONIUM MACULATUM.


COMMON HEMLOCK.


Medical Botany. 55

Oil of capsicum possesses a most intolerable warmth and acrimony
of taste, and concentrates all the stimulant properties of the pods.
When applied to the skin of the hand, its action is immediately felt,
and produces no redness. It is of a brilliant reddish-yellow colour,
has a peculiar odorific aromatic taste, and cannot be distilled without
undergoing decomposition. It is obtained by digesting, for two weeks,
capsicum pods in sulphuric ether, filtering the ethereal tincture, and
leaving it to a spontaneous evaporation. As the ether falls, drops of
crystals of capsicin, assuming curious dendroid forms, will be seen
studded around the inside of the vessel ; and after all the ether is dis-
sipated, the warm aromatic or concentrated oil of capsicum will be
found at the bottom.

This ethereal oil is very useful in rheumatism. In dyspeptic states
of the stomach, capsicum appears to be peculiarly adapted. Dr.
Chapman thinks this article well suited to " dyspepsia as it prevails
with drunkards, or is occasioned by the atonic gout." The tincture
is remarkably efficacious, used externally, in all painful affections, in
rheumatism, sprains, " soreness of the flesh," &c.
Dose and mode of administering.

Dose of the powder from six to twelve grains, in the form of pills ;
tincture of capsicum, {Cayenne pepper,) one ounce ; diluted alcohol,
two pounds. Externally, tincture of capsicum, half an ounce ; Cay-
enne pepper, one drachm ; diluted alcohol, one pound ; useful as a
rubefacient in palsy, pleurisy, rheumatism, &c.


No. 29.

CICUTA


Latin Name — Co.nium Maculatum.
English Name — Hemlock.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Conjum — Flowers tubulous, all fertile ; petals cordate,
equal ; partial involucres halved ; generally 3-leafed ; seeds ovate,
gibbous, 5-ribbed each side ; the ribs curled before maturity.

Species — Maculatum — Seeds unarmed, striate ; stem branched,
shining, spotted.

Description.
This root is biennial, tapering, forked, eight inches long, and of the
size of the finger. The stalks are six or seven feet in height, round,
shining, branched near the top, and striated near the bottom, and
covered with a bluish exudation, appearing like a fine powder. The
lower leaves are tripinnated, of a shining green colour, standing upon
long striated conoave foot-stalks, which proceed from the joints of the


56 Materia Medico.

stem ; the upper and smaller ones are bipinnated, and placed at the
divisions of the branches ; the flowers are in umbels, are both univer-
sal and partial, and composed of several striated radia. The universal
involucrum consists of five or seven leaves ; these are lanceolate,
whitish, and the margin bent downwards.

History.

The conium of the Greeks, and the cicuta of the Romans, was
a poisonous plant, the juice of which was used to produce death in
Ceos and Athens. Socrates and Phocion, two virtuous, eminent and
innocent Athenians, were condemned to drink it, and their death has
rendered famous that poisonous potion. The powers of this plant
depend upon the places in which it grows, the time when collected,
and the preparations of it. This plant blossoms in summer, from
June to August.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to Europe, but now naturalized in New-
England, New-York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio, &c. Mostly
found in old fields, near roads and fences, on the banks of rivers, &c.

Qualities.

The smell of the fresh plant, when rubbed with the fingers, is un-
pleasant, and not dissimilar to that of the urine of the cat ; its taste is
acrid and nauseous.

According to Mr. Brande, this plant contains a peculiar alkaloid
substance, which he calls Coniin, a very odorous oil, albumen, resin,
a colouring matter, and some salts. Ether and alcohol take up its
active principles, whilst water dissolves but a small part.

Coniin.

According to Mr. Brande, this substance is obtained by digesting
the leaves and stem of the fresh plant, well bruised, for several days,
in alcohol ; filter the solution, and evaporate to dryness ; treat the
alcoholic extract with water, and add to the aqueous solution obtained,
either magnesia, alumina, or the oxide of lead ; evaporate this solu-
tion to dryness, and treat the dry residue with a mixture of alcohol
and ether. This menstruum takes up coniin, which, by a new
evaporation to dryness, is left in a pure state.

Half a grain of coniin is sufficient to kill a rabbit. The symptoms
induced by it are analogous to those produced by strychnia. After
death, the vessels of the head, the right auricle of the heart, the
superior vena cava, and the jugular, are very much gorged with blood,
while the abdominal vessels appear to be completely empty.

Properties.

This is a powerful acrid narcotic and resolvent. It is not dangerous
in very small doses often repeated, and gradually increased. It is
also anodyne, sedative and antispasmodic, useful to allay pain in acute
diseases. In scrofulous tumours it is a useful article. We, however,
seldom use it as an internal remedy. It enters into our discutient
ointment. It is spoken very highly of by Drs. Fisher, Jackson and
Bigelow, in the treatment of jaundice : their mode of administering it
is to commence with small doses> and increase them gradually, until
the effects of them are felt in the head and stomach. " This incon-


Medical Botany. 57

venience," says Dr. Bigelow, "is temporary, and will be preferred by
most patients, to the evil of a mercurial ptyalism, (salivation.)" The
yellowness of the skin and eyes, in favourable cases, begins to disap-
pear at an early period, frequently by the second day. As a poultice
in inflammation and abscess in the breasts of women, it is a valuable
article ; and in all cases where resolvent poultices may be required.
Dose and mode of administering.
Internally, of the powdered leaves, two grains to one scruple, in
pills. Externally, fomentation, hemlock one ounce, boiling water two
pounds and a half. Plaster, hemlock, wax and resin, each two parts ;
olive oil one part. This is a valuable plaster to discuss some indolent
tumours.


No. .30.

COLOCYNTH.

Latin Name — Cucumis Colocynthis.
English Name — Bitter Cucumber.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONCECIA.
Order III.— TRIANDRIA.

Genus — Cucumis — Calyx 5-toothed ; corol 5-parted. Male fila-
ments 3 ; antherae cohering. Female style 3. cleft; pome succulent ;
seeds ovate, acute, compressed.

Species — Colocyntiiis — Leaves in many divisions ; fruit globular,
smooth ; stems rough.

Description.
B. C. Stem fleshy, coS'ered with rough hair, scandent and cirrhose ;
leaves reniform, 5-lobed ; the nerves covered with stiff hair ; flowers
monoicous, solitary, of an orange yellow ; fruit globular, yellow, of
the size of an orange, furnished with a thin and rough peel, containing
a white pulp ; seeds, oval, flattened, white and very numerous.

Locality.
An annual plant, native of the Levant, and cultivated in gardens.

Qualities.
Colocynth, such as is found in commerce, is in white, round, spongy,
dry and light masses, in the pulp of which are placed the seeds. Its
taste is nauseous and extremely bitter, without scarcely any smell.

According to Mr. Vauquelin, this substance contains a resinoid
matter, more soluble in alcohol than in water, which he calls colocyn-
tin, and which is the active principle ; another resin, insoluble and
not bitter ; a fatty oil, some gum, an extractive matter and salts.
Water, alcohol and ether dissolve easily its active principles.

Properties.
Colocynth is one of the most powerful and violent cathartics. When
given alone, it is apt to occasion severe griping; and if it be given in
Vol. III. H


58 Materia Medica.

large doses, it occasions vomiting, tenesmus and other marks of highly
intestinal irritation. It appears to act with most energy upon the mu-
cous coat of the lower intestines. Orfila says, that in the animals
which he destroyed with this article, he uniformly found the rectum in
a state of high inflammation and gangrene. As a hydrogogue it is
occasionally given by some practitioners. It has likewise been used
in coma and apoplexy ; and in those cases it depends upon the revul-
sion which it occasions from the head to the intestinal canal. And, to
use the words of Dr. Eberle, " there can be no doubt, that a remedy
which produces such prompt and decided impressions on the bowels,
and which, therefore, procures such copious watery evacuations as
the present one, is well calculated to prove beneficial in affections of
this kind." We make no use of it, except as an article that enters
into the "dyspeptic pills.''

Dose and mode of administering.
The colocynth, in substance, is given in doses of from five to ten
grains.. Compound extract of colocynth is composed of colocynth, six
drachms ; socotorine aloes, one ounce and a half; scammony, half
an ounce ; cardamum, one drachm ; diluted alcohol, one pint. Dose
of this from ten to fifteen grains.


No. 31.

CELADINE.

Latin Name — Chelidonifm M ajtjs.
English Name — Great Celandine.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Chelidonium — Calyx 2-leaved ; petals 4 ; silique superior,
2-valved, 1-celled, linear; seeds numerous, crested.

Species — Majus — Leaves alternate, pinnate, lobed ; umbils axillary,
peduncled ; seeds black, with a white crest.

Description.
This plant rises two or three feet in height, has many tender, round,
green, watery stalks, with large joints, very brittle and transparent ;
leaves large, serrated, and very tender ; and the flowers, consisting of
four leaves, yellow, after which come long pods, which, when pressed
by the fingers, fly into pieces instantly.

Locality.
This plant grows in meadows, and by the sides of running brooks,
and low marshy places ; found throughout the United States.

Properties.
The properties of this plant are acrid, stimulant, anti-herpetic, de-
tergent, diuretic and discutient. The juice rubbed on warts removes


No. 31.
C11EL1DONIUM MAJVS.


GREAT CELANDINE.


Medical Botany. 59

them ; cures ring-worms and cleanses old ulcers. This herb, boiled
in white wine vinegar and added to aromatics, and drank, is considered
by some excellent in jaundice, and to remove visceral obstructions,
especially of the liver. We, however, make use of it only for the piles,
salt-rheum, or tetter, in the form of tincture and ointment.
Mode of using.
An ointment of the roots is made by boiling them in hog's lard, and
is useful in the piles. The tincture may be made by digesting one
ounce of the plant in one pint of spirits.


No. 32.

SPURRED RYE.

Latin Name — Sbcale Cornutum.

English Name — Spurred Rye, Horned Rye, Ergot.

Botanical Character.

Class III.— TRIANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Secale — Calyx opposite, 2-valved, 2-flowered ; glumes

subulate, shorter than the florets ; corol, with the lower valve, long

awned.

W Species — Cornuttjm — Glumes with a rugged fringe ; corol smooth ;

bristles scabrous ciliate.

Description and Qualities.
The spurred rye (secale cornutum) is a fungiform excrescence,

which takes place under peculiar circumstances, between the valves
of the glume of several cereales, and especially of rye. Ergot (as it
is called) is elongated, recurved, cylindrical, swollen in the middle,
and generally marked on one of its sides with a longitudinal furrow.
It is likewise brittle, hard, horny, and of a slight violet colour exter-
nally ; whitish with a shade of violet internally ; of an acrid and rather
pungent taste. The spurred rye, according to Vauqueline, contains
a deep yellow colouring matter, soluble in alcohol ; a free acid, which
seems to be phosphoric acid ; some free ammonia ; a very putrefiable
matter containing nitrogen. Water and alcohol take up the active
principles of this article.

Properties.
The spurred rye, as an aliment, is attended with serious conse-
quences : such as violent convulsions, acute and burning pains in the
extremities, gangrene of those parts, and even death. The name of
ergotism is given to all of these phenomena.


80 Materia Medica.


JBERNICIOUS EFFECTS OF VITIATED KYE.

When ground down with the flour, or used in distillation, it proves
a mortal poison ; and, at times, has proved a pestilential scourge of
Europe ; it has been equally fatal to America, and is supposed to
have been the chief cause of the plague in London. In 1811 and
1812, a great number of lives were lost, from the spurred rye being
used as food, and liquor distilled from the rye. The great mortality
in this country was chiefly confined to New-York and Vermont. Up-
wards of twenty thousand victims fell a sacrifice to the ravages pro-
duced by that dreadful poison. Meeting after meeting, of the faculty,
took place, to endeavour to discover the cause ; and after the most
mature deliberation, it was discovered by one party, that it was a poi-
and affecting certain persons, more particularly those that were in the
habit of drinking gin ; the best apology for their ignorance of the true
cause, the ergot or spurred rye. What made their report the more
ridiculous, was, that there was at that time, a fine, clear, black, hard
frost, and the healthiest weather that could be imagined. Many of
the members were sceptical, and could not believe the report ; they
thought that, owing to the fine weather, it was impossible for the con-
tagion to exist in the air: others were of the same opinion with the
doctors. One of the non-contagionists wrote, and requested me to
go to Albany, where the disorder was then raging, and wished me to
endeavour to discover the cause of the afflicting calamity. On my
journey from New- York to Albany, where the legislature of the state
was sitting, I stopped at a place called Kinderhook, and being cold,
contrary to my usual practice, I drank a glass of gin. I had not
drank it many minutes before it affected me as if I had taken some-
thing boiling hot into my stomach. Although I immediately took an
emetic, which produced the most active effects, the poison had taken
so firm a hold of my constitution, that my throat and rectum were ex-
tremely painful. I had a cold perspiration towards the morning, with
a pain in my bones and head, whereas I was in perfect health before
I drank the gin. I accused the tavern-keeper of putting poison in
the gin ; a gentleman of the town, who heard me, and had observed
t'hat the habitual gin drinkers in the place had died, seconded me in
my charge. The landlord declared he was innocent, and referred us
to the distillery. Upon our applying, the distiller was much alarmed
at our charge of his putting poison into the gin ; and added, it would
be his ruin if the report got abroad, in consequence of the great mor-
tality. He took a voluntary oath that he put nothing but the pure
grain into his gin, and invited us to see the grain, in the still-house
16ft. We found it, on inspection, badly cleaned, and probably one
tenth of it spurred rye, or rye vitiated by being infested with the cla-
rus or ergot. I was quite astonished when I saw it, particularly as it
in various parts of Europe ; producing, what is called by Dr. Mason
Good, in his history of medicine, mildew mortification ; in America it
was vulgarly called the dry rot. On dissection, I htive observed that


Medical Botany. €1

the windpipe and rectum were so completely parched by the action
of the air, stimulating or attracting the effects of the poison to the
parts, that, when pressed, they would give way, and appear like black
snuff. I lost no time in repairing to Albany. On my arrival, the in-
habitants were in mourning, on account of the loss of their relatives
and friends, some of whom had risen in health in the morning, had
eaten a hearty breakfast, and at noon were in eternity ! Such were
doctors of New-York to the air of Albany being charged with the
damps of death. The members of the assembly of the state had, at
the time, under their consideration, a resolution to enable them to re-
move the state legislature from Albany ; it was expected the resolution
would be carried the same night, to the great and irreparable injury
of the inhabitants. To the friend, who was waiting for me at the ho-
tel, I communicated the glad tidings, of having discovered the cause
of the disorder. He immediately ran to the assembly-room, and ob-
tained the members' consent to adjourn the question until the follow-
ing morning. The tavern, where I was, was soon crowded by the
members and citizens, all anxious to know the cause. It was no
sooner communicated, with a detail of my own sufferings, than the
members searched the book-shops and libraries, and found to their
great satisfaction, that the ergot was capable of committing ravages
upon mankind that I had represented to them. One of the sceptical
of the faculty, on being requested to analyze the article, and report
on the subject, took a few of his acquaintances some distance into the
country, to dine at his father's farm ; where an opportunity offered to
prove whether the ergot was injurious or not, for a large quantity of it,
that had been separated from the rye, was given to the pigs ; and
from its fatal effects, (as it caused their death the next day,) the fa-
ther became a convert to the opinion. A number of rats, cats and
dogs, also, fell a sacrifice to its effects, before the sceptical were con-
vinced. — (Whitlaw on the Causes of Inflammation, fyc.)

In small doses, this article appears to act in a peculiar manner upon
the uterus, (womb,) the parenchyma of which, it seems to excite in a
powerful manner. It is administered in difficult labours, consequently
when there is too great debility of the uterus, and in hemorrhage, so
often fatal, produced by inactivity of this organ. This substance must
not be administered, so long as there are natural pains present, if
they be sufficient to expel the child. It is likewise indispensable that
the oslincoi, (mouth of the womb,) be sufficiently dilated, or easily di-
latable, before we attempt the exhibition of the ergot. Dr. W. P. De-
wees, who is a warm advocate for the use of this substance, when
timely and properly exhibited, says, in the American Journal of Me-
dical Sciences, No. II.,

" As regards myself, I have the most firm reliance upon the powers
of the ergot, and the character of its action is so distinctly marked,
that a very little observation will enable us to detect it." Again',
" When ergot has been administered with success, we find the uterine
effort not only more quickly repeated, and more powerfully exerted,
but these efforts are accompanied with less suffering than the same
apparent exertions of this organ, when not urged bv this dru<»/'


62 Materia Medica.

We likewise extract from the same Journal, Dr. Dewees' cardi-
nal rules, laid down for the more successful employment of the ergot.

" 1st. It should never be given before the membranes are ruptured,
the os uteri dilated, and the external parts disposed to yield.

" 2d. It must not be used so long as the natural pains are efficient,
and competent to the end.

" 3d. But should they flag, from any cause, it may be given; provid-
ed the labour be a natural labour, according to our acceptation of the
term, • natural labour ;' that is, when the head, (if well situated,) the
breech, the feet, or the knees, present. For, independently of any
accident which may complicate the labour, it is sometimes desirable,
for the safety of the child, to hapten it when the natural powers are in-
competent to this end.

"4th. And if the labourbe accompanied by any such accident aa
flooding, convulsions, syncope, &c, it may sometimes be employed to
great advantage, provided rules 1 and 2 are not violated.

" 5th. It may be used, very often with much advantage, in every kind
of premature labour ; and at full time, when the placenta is not thrown
off, and the uterus is found in a state of atony.

" 6th. Where flooding takes place after the rupture of the mem-
branes ; the os uteri well dilated ; the pains feeble, but the child well
situated.

" 7th. Where the head of the child has been left in the uterus by
being separated from its body.

" 8th. Where the uterus is painfully distended by coagula."

Dr. D. is decidedly against the use of this article in alarming ute-
rine haemorrhage before delivery. " I have," he says, " in so many
words, declared that reasoning is against the use of the ergot in the
unavoidable haemorrhage ; I will now endeavour to show this to be
the case." He had, however, previously remarked, " that in the un.
avoidable haemorrhage an advantage may be derived from the exhi.
bition of the ergot, by hastening the labour, though it may for a short
time increase the discharge. But, in order that this reasoning may
have any value, as a practical precept, the cases in which this advan-
tage could be derived, should be well defined," &c.
Dose and mode of administering.

Of the powder, from ten to thirty grains, suspended in four ounces
of a proper menstruum ; decoction, or infusion, from thirty to forty
grains, in one pint of hot water. A tablespoonful of this may be given
once every 15 minutes.


Medical Botany. 63


No. 33.

HORSE-RADISH.

Latin Name — Cochlbaria Armoracia.
English Name— Common Horse-Radish.

Botanical Character.

Class XIV.— TETRADYNAMIA.
Order I.-SILICULOSA.

Genus— Cochxearia— Silicle thick, rugose, many-seeded, with
gibbous obtuse valves ; partitions nearly parallel to the valves.

Species — Armoracia — Radical leaves lanceolate, crenate ; cauhne
leaves gashed.

Description.

Stem ramose, two or three feet in height ; smooth leaves proceed-
ing from the root, very large, elliptical, petiolate ; those growing on
the stalk smaller, narrower, lanceolate ; flowers white, small, in long
spikes at the extremity of the branches; calix, four concave divi-
sions; petals spreading; fruitsmall; ovoid pods,crowned by a persistent
stigma, and composed of two cells, containing five or six seeds ;
roots cylindrical, one or two feet long, of the size of the arm.

History.
A perennial plant, indigenous to France, and growing by the sides
of brooks, and cultivated in gardens ; flowers in June. It rarely
perfects its seeds in Great Britain.

Qualities.
The horse-radish contains a very acrid, volatile principle, of an oily
character, which seems to contain sulphur ; fecula and albumen are
likewise found in it. Its active principles are soluble in water, wine
and alcohol.

Properties.
Stimulant, rubefacient, diuretic, anti-scorbutic. Applied to the
skin it produces rubefaction, pain and all the symptoms of inflamma-
tion ; and as a rubefacient may be used externally instead of mustard.
We use it only as a diuretic, united with other articles, in dropsy; It
is very wholesome, used as a condiment, with food.
Dose and mode of administering.
Infusion, from half to one ounce of the root infused in two pints of
water, a wineglassful thrice a day.


64 Materia Medica.

No. 34.

GOLDEN THREAD.

Lalin Name — Coptis Trifolia.
English Name — Common Gold Thread.
Vulgar Names — Gold Thread, Mouth Root.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRTA.
Order XIII.— POLYGYiNIA.

Genus — Coptis — Petals 5 or more, caducous, necotaries small, 5
or 6, cowled ; capsules 5 — S ; stipulate, diverging, oblpng, 1-celled,
many-seeded.

Species — Trifolia — Leaves ternatc, on long petioles, subradical ;
leaflets dentate, rounded, crenate ; scape 1-flowered ; flowers white ;
root long, creeping, beautiful yellow.

Description.

Roots perennial, creeping, filiform,of a bright yellow,with many small
fibres ; condex or base of the scapes and radical leaves covered with
imbricate scales, ovate, acumate and yellowish ; leaves evergreen, on
long, slender petioles, proceeding from the condex, with ternate fo-
ioles ; sessile rounded or obovatc ; base, acute margin, with unequal acu-
minate crenatures and lobes ; surface smooth, firm and veined ; flow-
ers about half an inch wide, with white corolliform calyx of five, six
or seven folioles ; oblong, obtuse, concave petals ; as many shorter ;
obovate, hollow, yellow at the top ; pistils from five to eight ; styles
short and curved ; stigmas acute ; capsules, like the pistils, naked, the
calix having fallen off; umbellate.

History.

This plant flowers early in the spring of the cold regions, or in
May. The roots are the only parts used ; they are of a fine golden
colour, whence they derive their name. They ought to be collected
in the summer, and are easily dried, but not easily pulverized.

Locality.

Found from Canada to Greenland and Iceland on the east, and to
Siberia on the west. The most southern limits are New-England,
New-York and the shores of Lake Erie. It is commonly found in
mossy swamps and bogs of evergreen woods ; but also on the rocks
of the White Mountains, Labradore, Newfoundland, &c.

Qualities.

A pure, intense bitter, without smell or astringcncy, consisting of ex-
tractive matter, and a bitter principle, soluble in water and alcohol;
the tincture is yellow.

Properties.

Tonic and stomachic, promoting digestion, and strengthening the
viscera ; useful in dyspepsia, debility, convalescence from fevers ; a


No. 35.
CALLICOCCA IPECACUANHA.


AMERICAN IPECACUANHA.


Medical Botany. 65

good substitute for quassia. It is much used as a gargle, in ulceration
of the mouth.

Dose.
Ten or twenty grains of the powder may be given three times a
day. A tincture made with an ounce of the roots in a pound of alco.
hoi diluted, of which a teaspoonful may be given three times a day.


No. 35.

IPECACUANHA. The Boot

Latin Name — Callicocca Ipecacuanha.
English Name — Ipecacuanha.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Callicocca — Calyx 5-cleft ; coral funnel shape, 5-parted ;
fruit black, egg-shape, containing two small white nuts.

Species — Ipecacuanha — Stem erect ; simple leaves, opposite, en-
tire, oval ; flowers small, united into a head, surrounded by a large
involucrum ; root horizontal, repent.

Description.

Root or stump subterranean, horizontal, repent ; stem straight, one
or two feet high, simple ; leaves six or eight at the top of the stem,
opposite, entire and oval ; flowers white, very small, united in a ca-
pitulum looking apparently as the continuation of the stem, surrounded
with a large involucrum ; calyx 5-toothed ; corolla infundibuliform,
5-divided ; five stamina ; fruit ovoid, black, and containing two small
whitish nuts.

Locality.

Ipecacuanha is indigenous to South America.

Qualities.

The root of ipecacuanha, such as is found in the shops, is from
three to four inches long, compact, brittle, irregularly twisted ; of the
size of a goose-quill ; annulated with considerable circular depres-
sions at short intervals ; of a brown colour, sometimes gray or red.
dish ; of a weak, but disagreeable smell ; of a bitter, acrid and nau-
seous taste. These roots are composed of a cortical part, the frac
ture of which is brown and resinous, and of a fibrous medilullium, of
a yellowish colour, less sapid and odorous.

According to Pelletier, this root is composed of emetia, 16 ; fatty
matter, ]. 2; resinous substance,, 1.2 ; gam and salts, 2.4 ; starch,
53 ; matter containing nitrogen, 2.4 ; lignin, 12.5 ; and traces of
gallic acid. Warm water, alcohol, and ether, take up its aetive prin-
cjples.
Voi. III. I


66 Materia Mcdica.


Properties.

Ipecacuanha is emetic, stimulant, tonic and diaphoretic. When ad-
ministered in proper doses, it acts upon the mucous membrane of the
stomach, which is more or less violently irritated by it, producing
vomiting. In haemorrhage, (bleeding,) ipecacuanha is sometimes an
important article. Dr. Chapman, in his Therapeutics, (vol. i. p. 162.)
says : " Many physicians of respectability bear testimony to its good
effects in haemoptysis, (bleeding from the lungs,) though it is in ute-
rine haemorrhage that it displays its best powers. In these cases,"
says he, " I really think it is quite equal to the saccharum saturni,
(sugar of lead,) and sometimes superior. The common mode of ad-
ministering it in haemorrhage," says the same writer, " is to combine
one or two grains of it with half a grain of opium, or less, to be re-
peated at stated intervals." In dyspepsia, this article has been used
with seeming good success. Daubenton, in his tract upon this sub.
ject, recommends it in such small doses as not to excite nausea, and
thereby acting as an alterative, changing the state of the stomach
imperceptibly, till it finally restores this organ to its natural tone and
action. We are informed by Dr. James, of Albany, that a pill of one
or two grains, taken after dining, will generally obviate the oppression
of the stomach felt after dining.

We extract the following article from the London Medical and
Physical Journal.

To the Editors of the London Medical and Physical Journal.

Gentlemen, — You possibly may remember, that in my small pub-
lication of August, 1801, on diseases of the army, &c, I have men-
in dysentery, at Columbe, in the island of Ceylon, in the'year 1797,
when I was surgeon of his majesty's 19th regiment of foot.

It affords me much pleasure to state, that during my residence in
France, for upwards of these last nine years, I have had many oppor.
tunities of observing the good effects of ipecacuanha decoctions, not
only in dysentery, but also in internal piles, and in flatulent distension
of the bowels, from whatever cause they may have arisen.

While at Verdun, in France, I likewise received a very satisfactory
account concerning the effects of the same medicine from Mr. Con-
nin, surgeon of the navy, who was made prisoner of war in the Medi-
terranean. He asserted to me, that during last war, while on the
same station, he lost many men of dysentery ; but that, during the
present war, although he had the charge of a considerable number of
sick labouring under dysentery, yet he did not lose one patient. This
astonishing difference of success he attributes chiefly to ipecacuanha
injections.

Since my return to London, I also have obtained veiy satisfactory
additional information on the same subject from my friend, Mr. Archi-
bald Barklimore, surgeon, High-street, Bloomsbury.

In a letter from our mutual friend, Mr. Baird, surgeon in the Hon.


Medical Botany. 67

East India Company's service, to Mr. Barklimore, dated Tigris, off
the Cape of Good Hope, 18th May, 1810, the following passage is
contained : " With regard to professional news, little has occurred in
our ship to afford opportunity for observation. I cannot help men-
tioning, however, (because it gives me much pleasure,) that a case
has lately occurred, in which the valuable remedy that our friend
Clark communicated to us has been very successful in curing dysen-
tery. One of the ship's company, who had been afflicted with dysen-
tery for several weeks, and who had been much reduced by mercury,
(which seemed to be the cause of the disease,) was snatched from the
jaws of death by the ipecacuanha given in clysters. Mr. Graham,
surgeon of the ship, consulted me when he had lost all hopes of his
patient's recovery. At this time his evacuations were generally
slimy, mixed with blood, and he sometimes passed liquid stools of the
colour of coffee. I recommended the ipecacuanha, and, though my
hopes of its being beneficial were by no means sanguine, I was de-
lighted to find that the poor man was soon relieved by it. I expect to
do much good with it in India."

Another letter to Mr. Barklimore from Mr. Baird, dated Port Louis,
Isle of France, 5th Dec. 1810, contains the following observations :
"I was attached to the 22d regiment, and embanked with Col. Kelso,
in the Illustrious, 74, with a detachment of 175 mm . We had a long
passage, and were sickly. Dysentery made dreadful ravages amongst
the ship's company. Nearly seventy men died of it in nine weeks.
I was very fortunate in only losing three, and two of these were old
bad cases. I used Clark's remedy freely with much advantage."

In a third letter from Mr. Baird to Mr. Barklimore, dated Port
Louis, Mauritius, 10th Nov. 1811, the subsequent remarks are made :
" I have mentioned to you before how successful I had found Clark's
mode of treating dysentery. I have daily opportunities of confirming
it. Most of my fellow labourers have been in a situation to judge of
its effects, and have all, I believe, adopted it. I did not fail on these
occasions to do him the justice of quoting him as the teacher of the
practice. A few days ago I went into a bookseller's shop here, and,
in rummaging over a parcel of medical books, his little work pre-
sented itself to my agreeable surprise. I was not long of buying it,
you may be sure. I have derived the greatest plt?asure from a perusal
of it, and shall certainly consider myself indebted to him for much
valuable practical information."

Hence, it would seem that the use of decoctions of ipecacuanha in
dysentery will soon become general. It would therefore be highly
gratifying to me, and probably very beneficial to mankind, if your
quaint the world at large, through the medium of your valuable Medi-
cal Journal, with the effects produced by it under their directions.

I here think proper to mention, for the information of those who
have not seen my publication of 1811, that the form of decoction
which I found most successful in adults, was about three drachms of
ipecacuanha boiled in a quart of water down to a pint, strained, and
given all at once as a lavement. In cases of internal piles, for reasons


68 Materia Medica.

that must appear obvious to every one, it is in most instances unne-
cessary to administer more than half a pint of the medicine at a time.
I have the honour to be, gentlemen,
With the utmost respect,

Your most obedient servant,
THO. CLARK, M. D.

No. 17, Denmark-street, Soho, June 17, 1812.

Employment.
As an emetic,' about thirty grains of the powder may be exhibited
in a suitable vehicle. There is a vinous tincture, the dose of which
for an adult is an ounce. Ipecacuanha is useful in every case in
which an emetic is required.


No. 36.

JALAP. The Root.

Latin Name — Convolvulus Jalapa.
• English Name — American Jalap.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Convolvulus — Corol monopetalous, funnel-form, plaited ;
calyx 5-parted ; stigmata 2 ; capsule 2 or 3-celled ; cells 2. seeded,
covered by a lid.

Species — Jalapa — Stem triangular, twining ; leaves ovate, sub-
cordate, obtuse, obscurely repand, villous beneath ; peduncles 1-flow-
ered ; seeds downy.

Description.

This plant has thick, fleshy, radish-like roots, full of a milky juice ;
stalks numerous, twining for support, and rising to about ten or twelve
feet ; the leaves vary, being heart-shaped, angular, oblong or pointed,
smooth, and stand alternately upon long foot-stalks ; the flowers are
usually two, bell-shaped, plicate, of a reddish coleur on the outside,
and of a dark purple within. The calyx is composed of five small
oval leaves. Each flower terminates in a wrinkled, roundish, pentago-
nal, umbilical fruit, about the size of a peppercorn, including a
white kernel.

Locality.

Jalap is a plant indigenous to Mexico and Vera Cruz, and brought
to us from thence. I have had this plant growing in my garden, but
our climate is rather too cold to cultivate it.

Qualities.

It is brought to us in transverse slices or pyriform shape. These
are compact, solid, and heavy, rugous and blackish externally, and
of a grayish colour internally. When powdered, it has a peculiar
and somewhat nauseous odour, and a slight acrid, sweetish taste. It


No. 3G.
CONVOLVULUS JALAPA.


AMERICAN JALAP.


Medical Botany, 69

contains a large portion of resin, upon which its cathartic property
appears to depend. It contains likewise a gum, which, although
almost wholly destitute of laxative properties, is active as a diuretic,
and some extractive matter, with fecula and salts.

Properties.
The root of this plant is a brisk cathartic, acting in a remarkably
efficacious manner, without griping upon the whole alimentary canal.
It enters into the anti-bilious physic of our pharmacopoeia ; also the com-
pound tincture of senna. It possesses great anti-bilious and detergent
properties. Jalap and cream of tartar have long been used by some
in combination, in dropsical cases. Twenty-five grains of jalap,
united with from forty to sixty grains of cream of tartar, forms a
powerful cathartic and hydragogue. Chapman says, that ten grains
of jalap, combined with one drachm of cream of tartar, form an ex-
cellent preparation where long continued purging is necessary, as in
dropsy, &c.

Employment.
The pulverized root, in the dose of thirty grains, acts as a safe and
efficacious cathartic. This is one of the most valuable roots pro-
duced in America.


No. 37.

ORANGE. The Fruit.

Latin Name — Citrus Aurantium.
English Name — Orange Tree.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Citrtjs — Calyx 5-cleft ; petals 5, oblong ; anthers 20 ; the
filaments united into various bodies ; berry 9-celled.

Species — Aurantium — Petioles winged ; leaves elliptic, pointed ;
stem arboreous.

Description.
The leaves are nearly elliptical, smooth entire, of a shining green
colour, and the foot-stalk is winged, that is, it has the appearance of a
small leaf; the flowers appear during the whole of summer, and some
branches are in full bloom whilst others are just going off, and on the
others appear the young or full grown oranges. The calyx is salver,
shaped, and cut into five small teeth ; the petals are five, oblong,
white, fleshy, and beset with small glands.

Locality.
An evergreen tree, native both of the East and West Indies, and
cultivated on a large scale in the south of France, and in almost all
warm latitudes.


70 Materia Medica.


Qualities.

This substance is in flat fragments, of a deep yellow colour, wrink-
led, and resembling shagreen on one side, owing to the presence of a
number of small glands, which, in the fresh state, contain a large
quantity of essential oil, of a bitter aromatic taste, and a very agreea-
ble odour.

It contains a good deal of essential oil, and a very bitter matter.
Water and alcohol dissolve its active principles.

Properties.

Orange peel acts as a stimulant and tonic, on account of its essen-
tial oil, and of its bitterness. It is most commonly used as a carmina-
tive and stomachic, united with other stimulants and tonics.

Employment.

Of the powdered peel, from one scruple to one drachm. Infusion,
from two drachms to half an ounce to a quart of boiling water.


No. 38.

LEMON. The Fruit.

Latin Name — Citrus Medica.
English Name — Lemon Tree.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Citrus — Calyx 5-cleft ; petals 5, oblong ; anthers 20 ; the
filaments united into various bodies ; berry 9-celled.

Species — Medica — Petioles linear ; leaves ovate, pointed.
Description.

Trunk straight, slender ; leaves oval, acuminate, dentate, of a
yellowish-green, supported by an unwinged peduncle ; flowers nume-
rous, of a violet-red colour externally, otherwise similar to those of the
orange-tree ; fruit ovoid, and terminated by a conical apex. _;

Qualities.

a considerable quantity of juice of an acid and agreeable taste, and
of a very pleasant odour.

C. P. According to Mr. Proust, lemon juice contains citric acid,
1.77 ; bitter principle, gum, and malic acid, 0.72 ; and water, 97.51.

Properties.
. In small doses, lemon juice stimulates the stomach, and facilitates
digestion. Diluted with water, it is employed with great success as a
refrigerant in inflammatory diseases. Dr. Broussais has remarked,
that it was, of all the acidulous substances, that which suited best the
stomach, when this organ was labouring under an acute phlogosis.


No 39.

CINCHONA OFFICINALIS.


PERUVIAN RANK


Medical Botany. 71

It is also very useful in stopping certain irritations of the stomach in
which there is a constant vomiting. Its administration is recommended
in jaundice, scurvy, and generally in all kinds of febrile diseases in
which the thirst is great and the animal heat very much increased.

Employment.
It is given in lemonade : the juice of one lemon, water one pint,
loaf-sugar sufficient quantity. The citric acid obtained by evaporating
the juice of the lemon, is used as the best preparation, to combine with
sal airatus to make the effervescing mixture or draught. It is seldom,
however, obtained pure.


No. 39.

PERUVIAN BARK.

Latin Name — Cinchona Officinalis.
English Name — Peruvian Bark.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Cinchona — Corol funnel-form, 5-cleft ; capsule inferior,
2-celled, bipartile ; the valves parallel to the partitions, opening in-
wardly.

Species — Officinalis — Leaves ovate, lanceolate, petiolate, gla-
brous ; capsules oblong, panicle terminal ; trichotomous.

Description.

The tree which produces the bark varies in size. Woodville de-
its leaves are oblong, three inches in length, and about an inch and a
half in breadth. The flowers stand in clusters at the end of the
branches, and are composed of single tubular petal, whose border is
divided into five segments. These are succeeded by capsules of an
olive shape, which, when ripe, split open lengthwise, showing two cells
divided by a membrane ; each contains a number of small flatted seeds,
surrounded with a membranous edge.

History.

There are commonly enumerated three varieties of Peruvian bark,
viz :

1. The common, the yellow of some authors.

2. The yellow, the orange of some authors.

3. The red.

1 Cortex cinchona cordifolia. — The plant which affords this species
is the Cinchona cordifolia, of Zea ; the Cinchona officinalis, of Lin-
naeus ; the Cinchona macrocarpa, of Wildenow. Heart-leaved cincho-
na. The bark of this tree is called yellow hark, because it approaches
more to that colour than either of the others does. It is in flat pieces,
not convoluted like the pale, nor dark-coloured like the red ; exter-


72 Materia Medica.

nally smooth, internally of a light cinnamon colour, friable and fibrous;
has no peculiar odour different from the others, but a taste incompa-
ably more bitter, with some degree of astringency.

2. Cortex cinchona lancifolia. — This species is obtained from the
Cinchona lancifolia, of Zea. Lance-leaved cinchona. This is the
quilled bark, which comes in small quilled twigs, breaking close and
smooth, friable between the teeth, covered with a rough coat of a
brownish colour, internally smooth, and of a light brown ; its taste is
bitter, and slightly astringent ; flavour slightly aromatic, with some
degree of mustiness.

8. Cortex cinchona oblongifolia. — This kind is procured from Cin-
choria oblongifolia of Zea. Oblong-leaved cinchona. This is the red
bark : it is in large thick pieces, externally covered with a brown
rugged coat, internally more smooth and compact, but fibrous, and of a
dark red colour ; taste and smell similar to that of the cinchona land-
fola cortex, but the taste rather stronger.

Geoffroy states that the use of this bark was first learned from the
following circumstance : — Some cinchona trees being thrown by the
winds into a pool of water, lay there till the water became so bitter,
that every body refused to drink it. However, one of the neighbouring
inhabitants, being seized with a violent paroxysm of fever, and finding
no other water to quench his thirst, was forced to drink of this, by which
he was perfectly cured. He afterward related the circumstance to
others, and prevailed upon some of his friends, who were ill of fevers,
to make use of the same remedy, with whom it proved equally suc-
cessful. The use of this excellent remedy, however, was very little
known till about the year 1638, when, a signal cure having been per-
formed by it on the Spanish viceroy's lady, the Countess del Cinchon,
at Lima, it came into general use, and hence it was distinguished by
appellation of cortex cinchona, and pulvis comitissa, or the Countess's
powder. On the recovery of the Countess, she distributed a large
quantity of the bark to the Jesuits, in whose hands it acquired still
greater reputation, and by them it was first introduced into Europe,
and thence called cortex, or pulvis jesuiticus, pulvis patrum ; and also
Cardinal del Lugo's powder, because that charitable prelate bought a
large quantity of it at a great expense for the use of the religious poor
at Rome.

Qualities.
From the general analysis of bark, it appears to consist, besides the
woody matter which composes the greater part of it, of gum, resin,
gallic acid, of very small portions of tannin and essential oil, and of
several salts, having principally lime for'their basis. Seguin also sup-
posed the existence of gelatin in it, but without sufficient proof. Cold
water infused on pale bark for some hours, acquires a bitter taste, with
some share of its odour ; when assisted by a moderate heat, the water
takes up more of the active matter ; by decoction, a fluid, deep colour,
ed, of a bitter styptic taste, is obtained, which, when cold, deposites a
precipitate of resinous matter and gallic acid. By long decoction, the
virtues of the bark are nearly destroyed, owing to the oxygenation of
its active matter. Magnesia enables water to dissolve a larger portion
of the principles of bark, as does lime, though in an inferior degree.


Medical Botany. 73

Alcohol is the most powerful solvent of its active matter. Brandy,
and other spirits, and wines, afford also strong solutions, in proportion
to the quantity of alcohol they contain. A saturated solution of am-
monia is also a powerful solvent ; vinegar is less so even than water.
By distillation, water is slightly impregnated with the flavour of bark ;
it is doubtful whether any essential oil can be obtained.

Properties.
Given in small doses, the Peruvian bark acts locally and simply on
the stomach and intestinal canal ; it increases the vitality of this ap-
paratus, stimulates the digestive functions, and renders the assimila-
tion of the alimentary substances more rapid and perfect ; but this
tonic action is almost exclusively limited to the tissues with which the
bark comes in contact ; whilst, under the influence of larger doses,
we perceive the manifestation of a series of general phenomena,
which leaves no doubt that this action is extended to the whole
economy. In fact, after the administration of a common dose of bark,
under any shape whatever, the mouth becomes dry ; the stomach
experiences a sensation of heat, which extends very soon to the whole
abdomen ; the circulation is quicker, the pulse becomes more active
and full ; the general heat, and cutaneous perspiration, are increased ;
finally, a sensation of vigour more or less appreciable and permanent
is experienced, which characterizes the tonic preparation. Should the
dose of bark be too strong, or its use too long continued, or, finally,
the digestive canal, or any other organ be in a state of inflammation,
all the phenomena we have just mentioned become more intense, and
all the symptoms of inflammation are aggravated. Uneasiness and a
dry heat are felt at the epigastric region ; nausea, flatulence, vomiting
or alvine evacuations take place ; a violent thirst and an acrid and
burning heat are experienced ; the pulse is hard and frequent ; the
temporal arteries beat violently ; all these symptoms are followed by
a violent headach, bleeding at the nose, an extreme agitation, dryness
of the skin, and even, in some cases, by delirium, sleeplessness, irregu-
lar motions, and all the signs of an irritation in the brain.

Intermittent fever is the disease, for the cure of which bark was
introduced into practice, and there is still no remedy which equals it
in power. It is given as early as possible, after clearing the stomach
and bowels, in the dose of from one scruple to a drachm every second
or third hour, during the interval of the paroxysm ; but it becomes by
far more efficacious by uniting it with other ingredients.

We must always avoid giving this remedy during the fever ; for,
under this circumstance, instead of lessening its intensity, it would
increase and render it more obstinate. However, in remittent fevers,
when the fits are separated by very short intervals, the bark may be
exhibited towards the end of the exacerbation, and the dose should
be then administered all at once, in order that it may act before the
return of the next paroxysm.

In some forms of continued fever which are connected with debility,
as in typhus, cynanche maligna, confluent small-pox, &c, it is re-
garded as one of the most valuable remedies. It may be prejudicial,
however, in those diseases where the brain or its membranes are
inflamed, or where there is much irritation, marked by subsultus ten-
Vol. III. K


74 Materia Medica.

dinum, and convulsive motions of the extremities; and in pure typhu*
it appears to be less useful in the beginning of the disease than in the
convalescent stage.

Employment.
Internally, the powder as a tonic, from ten grains to half an ounce.
As a febrifuge, from one scruple to a drachm, every second or third
hour, in wine. The extract is a good form to administer it. It is the
basis of our vegetable wine bitters, which we have found a specific in
all species of the intermittent fever.


No. 40.

DOGWOOD. The Bark.

Latin Name — Corntjs Florida.

English Name — Large-flowered Cornel.

Botanical Character.

Class IV.— TETRANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Cornus — Calyx deciduous, 4-toothed, often with a 4-leaf-
ed involucre ; coral 4-petalled, superior ; drupe with a 2-celled nut.

Species — Florida — Leaves opposite, ovate, acuminate ; involucres
large ; leaflets obcordate ; fruit ovate.

Description.

The dogwood tree is of slow growth, and possesses a very com-
pact wood, covered with a rough, broken bark. The branches are
smooth, covered with a reddish bark, marked with rings at the place
of the former leaves. The leaves, which are small at the flowering
time, are opposite, petioled, oval, acute, entire, nearly smooth, paler
beneath, and marked, as in others of the genus, with strong parallel
veins. The flowers are small, grow in heads or sessile umbels, upon
peduncles an inch or more in length. At the base of each bunch is
the large spreading involucrum. constituting the chief beauty of this
tree when in bloom. This involucrum is composed of four white
nerved, obovate leaves, having their point turned abruptly down or
up, so as to give them an obcordate appearance. This point has fre-
quently a reddish tinge. Calyx superior, somewhat bell-shaped, end-
ing in four obtuse, spreading teeth. Petals 4, oblong obtuse, re-
flexed, stamens 4, erect ; the anthers oblong, with the filaments
inserted in their middle ; style erect, shorter than the stamens, with an
obtuse stigma. The fruit is an oval drupe, of a glossy scarlet colour,
containing a nucleus with two cells and two seeds.

History.

This tree is one of the chief ornaments of our forests. It
is rather below the middle stature, not usually reaching the


Medical Botany, 75

height of more than twenty or thirty feet. It is, however, among
the most conspicuous trees in our forests. In the months of April,
May and June, according to its latitude, it is then covered with a pro-
fusion of its large and elegant flowers.

Locality.

This tree is found throughout the United States, but more plentifully
in the middle states. In the Carolinas, Georgia, and the Floridas, it
is confined principally to the borders of swamps. It is not very com-
mon in the most fertile parts of the western states, being found where
the soil is of secondary quality.

Qualities.

The bark of the root, stem, and branches, taste very much like the
cinchona ; it is bitter, astringent, and slightly aromatic. Its astrin-
gency is, however, stronger than that of the Peruvian bark.

Besides tannin, colouring matter, gum extractive, &c, this bark
contains an alkaline proximate principle, discovered by Mr. G. W.
Carpenter, of Philadelphia, and called by him cornine, and afterwards
cornia.

Medical Properties.

Tonic, astringent, &c. The bark of the root, of stem, and smaller
branches, is employed. That of the root is deemed most efficacious.
Drs. Edwards and Vavasseur, in their Manual of Materia Medica,
speak of this bark in the following terms : — This bark, which has been
ably investigated by Dr. Walker, of Virginia, is, without doubt, one
of our most valuable native articles. As a substitute for cinchona,
which it resembles very much, both in its physical and chemical, as
well as therapeutical properties, much has been written in commend,
ing it as a succedaneum. It seems, however, to be more particularly
related to the cinchona oblongifolia ; but the cornus florida differs from
it, in its being rather more astringent. It is extensively employed by
country practitioners in intermittent fevers, and the report they give
of it is very favourable and satisfactory. Dr. Gregg, of Bristol, ob-
serves, that he exhibited it for nearly twenty-three years, during
which time he found it always sufficient to cure successfully intermit-
tent fevers, and uniformly beneficial as a tonic in cases of debility.

Employment.

This bark is used in powder, or infusion of the powder, from one
scruple to half an ounce. Infusion one ounce of the bark to a pint of
boiling water.


76 Materia Medica.

No. 41.

ROSE- WILLOW. The Bark.

Latin Name — Cornus Sericea.

English Name — Round-leaved Dogwood.

Vulgar Names — Green Osier, Red Rod, Red Willow.

Botanical Character.

Class 1 V.— TETRANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Cornus — Calyx deciduous, 4-toothed, often with a 4-leaved
involucre ; corol 4-petalled, superior ; drupe with a 2-celled nut.

Species — Sericea — Branches spreading ; leaves ovate, acuminate,
silky ferruginous beneath ; cymes naked, flat ; berries blue.

Description.

This tree is about the size of a small apple tree, and covered with
a greenish coloured bark, and very red within ; the flowers resemble
a bunch of roses, from whence it derives its name.

Locality.

It grows near brooks, along the banks of rivers, and on upland mea-
dows ; it is known throughout the United States by the name of red-
rose willow, which distinguishes it from the black willow, or the puss
willow, which grows in swamps, and along the sides of moist mea-
dows.

Medical Properties. ,

It is a powerful astringent and tonic, preferred by some to the Peru-
vian bark or Columbo, and is much employed in the Northern States,
in substance or otherwise, in diarrhoea and dyspepsia ; but it is too
heating in fevers. In vomiting, this is an excellent remedy, given in
form of an infusion, in the vomiting particularly arising from preg-
nancy and diseased uterus. This is a valuable article.

Employment.

This is given mostly in the form of infusion, made as common in-
fusions.


No. n.

CORNUS BER1CEA


Medical Botany. 77


No. 42.

SCAMMONY.

Latin Name — Convolvulus Sg ammonia.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I. -MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Convolvulus — Corol monopetalous, funnel-form, plaited ;
calyx 5-parted ; stigmata 2 ; capsule 2 or 3-celled ; cells 2-seeded ;
covered by a lid.

Species — Scammonia — Leaves sagittate, truncate behind ; pedun-
cles round, 2 or 3-flowered ; flowers yellow.

Description.

The root is thick and large, like bryony, black on the surface and
white within, and it is full of an acrid, milky juice ; from this arises
the stalk, weak and trailing, three or four feet high, and beset with tri-
angular leaves, like those of the common field bindweed. The flow-
ers grow from the axilla of these, are large, bell-shaped and whitish,
with purplish or yellowish tinge. The seed vessel is of a pointed
form, and the seeds themselves angular and blackish.

Locality.

This is a climbing, perennial plant, which grows in Syria, Mysia,
and Cappadocia.

Qualities.

This substance is found in commerce in masses of moderate size,
of a deep gray colour, and friable ; its fracture is dull and opaque ;
its odour is strong and peculiar ; its taste bitter, acrid.

According to Messrs. Bouillon Lagrange, and Vogel, it is composed
of resin, 60 ; gum, 3 ; extractive, 2 ; impurities, 35. It is soluble in
alcohol. Triturated with water, it forms a sort of emulsion of a dirty
greenish-yellow colour, in which one fourth of the resin appears to
be dissolved.

Medical Properties.

Scammony is an efficacious and strong purgative. Some practi-
tioners condemn it, as unsafe. Where the intestines are loaded with
an excessive burthen of mucus, the scammony is apt to pass through
without exerting itself; but where there is a deficiency of the natural
mucus, this article is apt to irritate and inflame the intestines.

Employment.

The common dose of scammony is from three to twelve grains.


78 Materia Medica.

No. 43.

SENNA. The Leaves.

Latin Name — Cassia Senna.
English Name — Alexandria Senna.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Cassia — Calyx 5-leaved; corol 5-petalled, unequal; 3
upper anthers barren ; 3 lower ones beaked ; legume flat.

Species — Senna — Leaflets 4 to 6 pair, sub-ovate ; petioles without
glands ; stipules spreading ; pods oval, oblong, bent upwards.

Description.

The stalk rises from two to four feet, resembling a shrub, and send-
ing out hollow woody stems ; leaves in alternate order, and com-
pound, composed of several pairs of oval, pointed and nerved pinnae,
of yellowish-green colour ; flowers yellow, forming a spike consisting
of five petals ; the pod is covered and short, bivalved with several
cordiform seeds, contained in separate cells.

Qualities.

Senna, according to Messrs. Lassaigne and Feneulle, contains a
peculiar substance, called cathartin, some chlorophyllin, a fatty oil, a
small quantity of volatile oil, a yellow colouring principle, albumen,
and salts of lime and potassa. Water and alcohol dissolve its active
properties.

Cathartin seems to be the active principle of senna; it is neither
acid nor alkaline, and does not crystallize ; it is slightly deliquescent,
of a reddish-yellow colour, of a peculiar odour, and of a bitter and
nauseous taste. It dissolves in water and alcohol, but not in ether.
Heated, it is decomposed rapidly. It has not, as yet, been intro-
duced into practice.

Medical Properties.
This is a very useful cathartic, operating effectually and mildly. It
is necessary to combine this article with other ingredients, to prevent
its griping effects. This article, enters the anti-bilious physic of our
pharmacopoeia, and into the worm, or vermifuge powders.

Employment.
It is often administered, principally, in the form of infusion. Infu-
sion of senna. — Take of senna-leaves, an ounce and a half; ginger-
root, sliced, a drachm; boiling water, a pint. Macerate for an hour,
in a covered vessel, and strain the liquor.


43.

CASSIA SENNA.


ALEXANDRIA SENNA.


No. 44.
CONVALLARIA MULTIFLORA.


.SOLOMON'S SEAL


Medical Botany. 79

No. 44.

SOLOMON'S SEAL. The RooU

Latin Name — Convallaria Multiflora.
English Name — Solomon's Seal.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Convallaria — Corol 6-cleft; calyx 0; stigma '3 -sided ;
berry superior, 3-celled.

Species — Multiflora — Leaves alternate, clasping the stem, ob-
long, oval ; stem round, bending ; peduncles axillary, loose, many
flowered ; corols funnel form ; greenish-white.

Description.
This plant rises six or seven inches high ; leaves lanceolate, and of
a dark-green colour ; flowers in umbels, and hang on the sides of the
stalks, producing red berries.

Locality.
It grows on the sides of meadows, high banks and mountains, in
every part of the United States.

Medical Properties.
The roots are astringent, incrassant and corroborant. The muci-
lage of the roots is good when applied to inflammations and piles. The
roots are useful in all cases oijluor albus, (whites,) and in immoderate
flowing of the menses, arising from female weakness. It enters into
the restorative cordial of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.
Externally, as a poultice ; internally, , as above directed.


80 Materia Medica.

No. 45.

SAFFRON.

Latin Name — Crocus Sativus.
English Name — Garden Saffron.

Botanical Character.

Class III.— TRIANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Crocus — Corol 6-parted, regular, with very long tube ;
stigmata convolute, jagged.

Species — Sativus — Stigma exserted, 3-parted ; segments linear.
Description.

The root is a small bulb, standing upon a larger, with a multitude
of fibres growing from the base. Four or five leaves arise from the
root, of a dark-green, narrow and grassy, about five inches long;
from the same root arises a stalk, four inches high, sustaining a single
flower, resembling crocus. It has three stamina, with yellow anthers,
and a centre ; a long pistilum, which, at the top, divides into three
cristated, fleshy, capillaments, of an orange colour, which is the part
used in practice.

Locality.

This plant is a native of the Levant, and cultivated in Europe and
in this country.

Qualities.

This substance is in long filaments, slightly rolled, flexible, elastic,
of a very deep orange-red colour, of a sharp and bitter taste, and of a
strong peculiar odour. It dyes saliva of a golden yellow.

Saffron contains an orange-red colouring matter, a very odorous
volatile oil, acrid and caustic, a concrete fixed oil, gum, albumen, and
salts. The substance which Bouillon Lagrange, and Vogel, have de-
nominated polychroite, is but a compound of colouring matter and vo-
latile oil. Water, alcohol, vinegar, &c. dissolve its active principles.
Medical Properties.

In small doses, saffron is employed as a diaphoretic, soon causing
perspiration ; in large doses, it acts upon the whole animal eco-
nomy in the same way as stimulus. It extends its action considerably
to the uterus. It is useful to allay the lumbar pains which accompany
menstruation in some females. It is useful also in chlorosis, hyste-
ria, &c. It may be employed likewise as a stomachic and antispas-
modic. It enters into the sudorific drops of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.

In powder, twelve grains. Infusion, half to one drachm, in two
pounds of boiling water; very valuable in all eruptive diseases, mea-
sles, small-pox, &c.


No.
CROCUS SAT1VUS.


.FFROX.


CYPRIPEDIUM PUBESCENS.


YELLOW LADIES' SUITER


Medical Botany. 81

No. 46.

LADIES' SLIPPER.

Latin Name — Cypripedium, Pubescens.
English Name — Yellow Ladies' Slipper. ^

Vulgar Names — Moccasin Flower, Yellow Umbel, Nervm-Root,
&c.

Botanical Character.

Class XVIII.— GYNANDRIA.
Order II.— DIANDRIA.

Genus — Cypripedium — Nectary 2-lipped, the lower large, in-
flated.

Species — Pubescens — Root fibrous ; stem leafy ; petals 4, lanceo-
late, pointed ; upper lip elliptic, channelled ; flowers yellow.

Description.

Grows from one to two feet high, and sometimes has leaves all the
way up ; the flower is in the form of a purse or round bag, with a small
entrance near where it joins the stalk, and is something like a mocca-
sin, or slipper ; the roots are fibrous and thickly matted together.

Locality.

It is common in the hills and swamps of New-York, and is found
throughout the United States.

Qualities.

The roots have a pungent, mucilaginous taste, and a peculiar smell,
somewhat nauseous.

Me dical Properties.

Ladies' slipper root is a sedative, nervine, and antispasmodic, and a
substitute for valerian in all cases. They produce beneficial effects
in all nervous diseases and hysterical affections, by allaying pain,
quieting the nerves, and promoting sleep. It is also used in nervous
headach, epilepsy, tremors, nervous fevers, &c. It is preferable to
opium in most cases, having no baneful nor narcotic effects. The dose
is a teaspoonful of the powder, diluted in sugar water, or any other
convenient form. It may also be used in decoction, or formed into an
extract. As with valerian, the nervine power is increased by combi-
nation with mild tonics.


Vol. in.


82 Materia Medico.

No. 47.

CAMPHOR. The Gum.

Latin Name — Laurus Camphora.
English Name — Camphor Tree.

Botanical Character.

Class IX.— ENNEANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Laurus — Calyx ; corol 6 -parted, resembling a calyx 5
nectary 3-glands surrounding the germ, and each ending in 2-bristles ;
inner filaments supporting 2-glands each; berry 1-seeded.

Species — Camphora — Leaves triply-nerved, lance-ovate, whitish
beneath ; flowers on long peduncles.

Description.

A proximate principle, contained in a great number of plants ; but
obtained principally from the dryobalanops camphora, Colebroke, a
large tree, native of the forests on the north-western coast of Sumatra ;
and from the laurus camphora, Lin., a tree growing in China and
Japan.

Dryobalanops. Trunk large, often six or seven feet in diameter ;
leaves opposite below, and alternate above, ellipticnl, obtusely acumi-
nate, or rather beaked, parallel. veined, entire, supported on short
petioles, with subulate, caducous stipules in pairs ; calyx, 1 -leafed,
permanent, enlarged into a gibbous cup, with 5 ligulate, long, scariose
wings ; corolla, 5-parted ; fruit, a persistent capsule, superior, ovate,
woody, fibrous, longitudinally furrowed, 1 -celled, and 3-valved, with
a solitary seed, possessing a strong terebinthinate fragrance.

Laurus camphora. Trunk straight, tolerably high ; leaves alter-
nate, oval, shining on the superior surface, glaucous on the inferior
one ; flowers in corymbs, supported on long peduncles ; fruit, similar
to that of the cinnamon tree, but smaller.

Locality.

The dryobalanops camphora is a native of the north-west coast of
Sumatra, while the laurus camphora is a native of China and Japan.

Quality.

Camphor is solid, white, transparent, very volatile, brittle ; com-
monly in the form of round pieces, convex on one side, slightly con-
cave on the other, of a crystalline texture, and shining fracture, not
easily pulverized, tenacious between the teeth, of a strong smell, sui
generis, of an acrid taste, followed by a sensation of cold. Its specific
gravity is 0.988.

C. P. It is composed of carbon, 74.38 ; hydrogen, 10.67 ; andoxygen,
14.61 ; it inflames easily, and burns with a good deal of smoke without
leaving any residue. Heated, it melts at 175° Centig. (347 Q Fahr.,^


LAI R1 ; ' A UPH


CAMIMIOK 'J I


No. 48.
DAUCUS CAROTA.


WILD CARROT,


Medical Botany. 83

boils at 204 13 Centig. (400° Fahr.,) and is easily reduced to vapours,
even at the common temperature. Alcohol dissolves three fourths of
its weight ; it is very soluble in ether, in fixed and volatile oils ; but
water dissolves only a small quantity, and precipitates it from its alco-
holic solutions. Treated with nitric acid, it gives camphoric acid,
and with sulphuric acid, it changes, partly, into artificial tannin.
Medical Properties.
Camphor is stimulant, sudorific, and antispasmodic. Exhibited in
small doses, it increases excitement ; but if pushed too far, it induces
delirium, vertigo, convulsions, and death. In low typhoid fevers, this
article appears to exert its greatest benefit. Combined with opium
and ipecacuanha, it is a very valuable remedy in low typhus and
putrid fevers. " Its power of allaying," says Dr. Eberle, " the de-
lirium and other nervous symptoms of typhus is, I think, more decisive
than that of any other remedy we possess." It has likewise been
given in epilepsy with success. Cullen adduces considerable evidence
in its favour, in this disease, when combined with other remedies.
Dr. Gooch considers camphor, given in union with hyoscyamus, the
best sudorific with which we are now acquainted. His method of
administering it, is to give ten grains of each at bedtime, after the use
of the tepid bath. Camphor enters into the sudorific drops, and
several plasters.

Employment.
Given in the form of powder, emulsion, or solution. By triturating
it with a few drops of alcohol it is easily pulverized.

The dose of camphor is from two grains to one scruple.


No. 48.

WILD CARROT. The Seeds and Roots.

Latin Name — Daucus Carota.
English Name — Wild Carrot.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Daucus — Involucres pinnatifid ; flowers somewhat radia-
ting ; florets of the ceatre abortive ; fruit muricate.

Species — Carota — Seeds bristly ; petioles nerved beneath, divi-
sions of the leaflets linear acute.

Description.
The common garden carrot needs no description, being so well
similar to the garden carrot, except the leaves and stalks are some-
what whiter and rougher. The flowers are situated upon the top of
the stalks, forming an umbel, with the edges of the umbel rising higher


84 Materia Medica.

than the middle, gives it the form of a bird's nest. The roots are
small, long, and hard.

History.
This plant is indigenous, and flowers in July and August ; seeds
ripe in September.

Locality.
This plant (the wild) grows in many places of the United States,
and is found by the sides of old fields and uncultivated grounds.

Qualities.
The wild carrot is slender, acrid, and of a strong aromatic smell.

Medical Properties.

This plant is diuretic, acting particularly upon the urinary organs.
Given in strong decoction, it is very useful in gravelly complaints, and
in the passage of the stone from the kidneys and bladder ; in the bu-
boes, arising from the venereal, it is very useful in causing suppura-
tion. It is likewise used in carcinomatous ulcers, and in cases of
fissures in the nipples of nurses.

Employment.

The seeds are carminative, and are very useful in flatulent disorders.
The roots and seeds are the parts principally used. A strong tea, or
decoction, of the seeds, to be freely drank as directed above, and in
the form of poultice.


No. 49.
FOX-GLOVE. The Leaves.

Latin Name — Digitalis Purpurea.
English Name — Fox- glove.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNA MIA.
Order II.— ANGIOSPERMIA.

Genus — Digitalis — Calyx 5-parted ; corol campanulate, ventri-
cose 5-cleft ; capsule ovate, 2-celled, many seeded ; stigma declined.

Species — Purpurea — Divisions of the calyx ovate, acute ; corol
obtuse, with the upper lip very entire, leaves lance-ovate, pubscent.

Description.

Stem herbaceous, simple, straight, hairy, from two to three feet
high ; radical leaves very large, oval, whitish, hairy on both sides ;
flowers of a deep purple, hanging in a terminal and unilateral spike ;
calyx persistent, with five deep divisions ; corolla irregular, campanu-
late, spotted internally with black dots ; fruit, an ovoid, acuminate and
bivalve capsule.

History.

This plant seldom flowers before July, and the seeds are ripe in
August.


No. 49.
DIGITALIS PURPUREA.


L ' M Mat-


FOX- GLOVE.


Medical Botany. 85

Locality.

This plant grows on dry sandy ground, for the most part, on the
high as well as the low places. This is a biennial plant, indigenous
to Europe, but flourishes well in America.

Qualities.

The leaves of this plant have a slight virose smell, and an acrid
and unpleasant taste.

According to the analysis of Messrs. Destouches and Bidault de
Villiers, digitalis contains an aqueous brown extract, an alcoholic
extract, an oily green matter, salts, oxide of iron, &c. Mr. Leroyer,
of Geneva, has discovered in it a peculiar substance, which he con-
siders as the active principle of this plant, and which he calls digita-
lin ; but, according to Mr. Dulong, this substance is not of an alkaline
nature, but is simply a compound of several other substances, all
soluble in ether.

Digitalin, such as Mr. Leroyer obtained it, is brown, of the con-
sistence] of pitch, extremely deliquescent, slightly alkaline, of an
intense bitterness, and almost uncrystallizable. This substance,
whatever its nature may be, possesses in the highest degree the virtues
of digitalis, as has been proved by the experiments Dr. Prevost made
upon several species of animals. It has not as yet been used in the
practice of Medicine.

Medical Properties.

Sedative and diuretic, diminishing the activity of the pulse, and the
general irritability of the system, and increasing the action of the ab-
sorbents and the discharge of urine. In inflammation this article is
valuable, to reduce the activity of the pulse, and thereby lessening
the inflammation. In hydrothorax or dropsy in the chest, this medi-
cine is very useful. It is useful in pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs,
and in the dropsy, and in all inflammatory affections.

Remarks of Dr. Newman, of Berlin, on the use of the digitalis in
pulmonary diseases : — He states, that it is useless in tubercles, or
where the lungs are in a state of ulceration. But it almost always
cures chronic catarrh, which results from irritation of the mucous
membrane of the bronchia, chronic bronchitis, or mucous consumption.
Digitalis will be of no service if it does not diminish the pulse after
using a {ew days. The leaves should be green, although dry, without
any appearance of brown spots.

Preparation. — Infuse two ounces of the plant in six ounces of boiling
water. The patient to take a tablespoonful of this infusion every two
hours, until it produces nausea, dryness of the throat, sparkling of the
eye, and irregularity of the pulse. This article enters one of the
preparations of our pharmacopoeia for hydrothorax.

Employment.

Of the powdered leaves, from two to three grains gradually increas-
ed. Infusion, fox-glove, one drachm ; boiling water, half pint; infuse
four hours, then strain. It lowers the pulse much more effectually
than bleeding, without producing that dangerous debility which fol-
lows this operation.


86 Materia Medica.

>

No. 50.
THORN APPLE. The Leaves and Seeds.

Latin Name — Datura Stramonium.

English Name — Common Thorn Apple.

Vulgar Names — Jamestown-weed, Jimson, Stink-weed, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Datura — Corol monopetalous, funnel-form, plaited ; calyx
tubular, angular, deciduous, with a permanent orbicular base ; cap-
sule, superior, 2-celled, 4-valved, each cell partly divided, many
seeded.

Species — Stramonium — Pericarps spinous, erect ovate ; leaves
glabrous, ovate, sinuate-angular.

Description.
Root, annual, white, crooked ; stem erect, from one to eight feet in
height, branched by forks, or dichotome, cylindrical, often hollow,
smooth or pubescent ; leaves alternate at the forks, petiolate, oval or
oval-oblong ; base decurrent, end acute, margin almost angular by
large unequal acute teeth. Flowers, axillary, solitary, on short pe-
duncles, erect or sometimes nodding, large, white, or bluish. Calyx
monophylle, tubular, with five angles, and teeth deciduous, but leaving
a rim at the base. Corolla twice as long, monopetalous ; base tubular,
subangular limb with five angle plaits and teeth ; the last are acumi-
nate ; stamina five ; filaments coherent with the persistent rim of the
calyx, oval, hairy, one style ; filiform as long as the stamina; one stig-
ma. Fruit, a large fleshy capsule, ovate, thorny, with four valves
opening at the top inside, with four cells, many black seeds filling the
cells, and attached to a central recepticle in each cell.

History.
This plant blossoms from May to September in the southern states,
and from July to October in the northern, bearing blossoms when the
seeds of the first flowers are ripe. It is killed by the frost with us ;
but in warmer climates it becomes a semi-biennial plant.

Locality.
This is one of the wandering plants common to all parts of the
world, and spreading with the utmost facility. It is probably a native
of Persia and India ; but has spread through Europe, Africa,|and
America. It was once thought to be a native of North America, but
it has spread in it only since its colonization by the whites, and is
called by the Indians " white people's plant." It is most commonly
met with in old fields, along roads, and old houses, &c. ; never in
woods and mountains.


No. 50.
DATURA STRAMONIUM.


COMMON THORN APPLE.


Medical Botany. 87


Qualities.

Its smell is virose and nauseous, and its taste acrid and bitter.

Promnitz found the green plant to contain, gummous extractive
matter, 0.58 ; extractive, 0.6 ; fecula, 0.64 ; albumen, 0.15 ; resin,
0.12; salts, 0.23 ; lignous fibres, 3.15. Mr. Brande, in his analysis
of the seeds, discovered an alkaloid proximate principle, combined
with malic acid, which he named daturia. Water and alcohol take
up, by ebullition, the proximate principles of this plant.

Daturia, which, according to Messrs. KirchofT and Engelbart, seems
to be the active principle of stramonium, is white, pulverulent, almost
insoluble in cold water and alcohol, but soluble in the latter menstruum
when boiling, and capable of combining with acids and forming solu-
ble salts. It has not as yet been used in medicine.
Medical Properties.

A strong poison, acting upon the animal economy in a powerful
manner, resembling the action of belladonna. It has been given in
the form of extract and powder in epilepsy, mania, and other nervous
disorders. I have given it in other diseases, both internally and ex-
ternally, with success. Dr. Ives, of New-Haven, says that he has
seen beneficial effects arise from the use of this article in epilepsy ;
but as far as my experience goes, it is designed more for an external
than an internal medicine ; and the best form of using it is in an oint-
ment made by simmering the fresh bruised leaves with lard. It pos-
sesses discutient, antiphlogistic properties, and is particularly service-
able in burns and piles. The best way of preparing the extract, is as
follows : — Select any quantity of the most perfect leaves in the time
of flowering, and boil them in water ; during three or four hours
strain the decoction and evaporate with a gentle heat until it has ac-
quired the consistence of syrup ; place this in a warm oven in a glazed
or earthen vessel until it becomes fit for use. This extract possesses
uniform strength and power. From half to one grain is a dose of thia
extract. All parts of this plant appear to be poisonous. Some sol-
diers in the revolutionary war died by eating this plant for greens,
through mistake.

Employment.
Internally, from one grain to twenty of the leaves or seeds, may
be given gradually ; externally, as above directed, in form of an oint-
ment. I have used a tincture, made from the seeds, with success, in
epilepsy. Twenty or thirty drops may be given three or four times
a day.


88 Materia Mediea.

No. 51.

BONESET. The Leaves and Flowers.

Latin Name — Eupatorium Perfoliatum.

English Name — Boneset.

Vulgar Names — Thorough-wort, Boneset Jcepy,e Teazel, Fe-
ver-wort, Sweating Plant, Thorough-stem, Cross-wort, Indian
Sage, Ague weed, Thorough-wax, Vegetable Antimony.

Botanical Character.

Class XVII.— SYNGENESIA.
Order I.— POLYGAMIA jEQUALIS.

Genus — Eupatorium — Receptacle naked ; down simple or rough ;
calyx imbricate, cylindrical ; style longer than the corol, cloven half
way down.

Species — Perfoliatum — Leaves connate-perfoliate, oblong, ser-
rate, rugose, downy beneath ; stem villose ; flowers white.

Description.

Root perennial, horizontal, crooked, with scanty fibres, and sending
up many stems, which are upright, simple at the base, branched above
in a trichotome form, forming a depressed corymb, from two to five
feet high, round, covered with flexuous hairs ; the whole plant has a
grayish green colour, and even the flowers are of a dull white.
Leaves opposite, decussate, connate at the base, or united to each
other there, where broadest, and gradually tapering to a sharp point ;
from three to eight inches long, narrow, oblong, rough above, woolly
beneath ; margin serrulate ; upper leaves often sessile, not united ;
inflorescence in a dense depressed terminal corymb, formed by
smaller fastigate corymbs ; peduncles hairy, as well as the perianthe
or common calyx, each enclosing from twelve to fifteen florets ; scales
lanceolate, acute ; florets tubulose, white ; five black anthers united
into a tube ; seeds black, oblong.

History.
r A very striking plant, easily recognised among all others, even
when not in bloom, by its connate leaves perforated by the stem.
This plant blossoms from August to October.

Locality.

Common in meadows and swamps near streams. Found growing
throughout the United States, from Maine to Florida, from Ohio to
Louisiana.

Qualities.

The whole plant is exceedingly bitter, and possesses but little smell.
According to Dr. Andrew Anderson, this plant contains a free acid, a
small quantity of tannin, a bitter extractive matter, a gummy matter,
resin, nitrogen, lime, probably in the state of acetate, gallic acid, a
resiniform matter, soluble in water and alcohol, containing a bitter
principle.


No. 51.

EUPATORIUM PERFOLIATUM.


BONESET.


No. 52.
EUGENIA CARYOPnYLATTA.


CLOVES.


Medical Botany. 89

Mr. J. Scattcrgood has obtained from this plant, a salifiable base,
which forms, with sulphuric acid, tasteless, prismatic crystals, and
which he calls Eupatoria.

Medical Properties.

Emetic, cathartic, sudorific, tonic, &c. This plant possesses very
active remedial properties, according to the dose in which it is admi-
nistered. It has been given in intermittent fever with complete suc-
cess, either in infusion, decoction, or powder. Dr. Anderson states,
that this article was used in nearly every case of intermittents that
occurred in the alms-house in 1812, instead of the Peruvian bark,
and it proved uniformly successful. Drs. Bard and Hosack speak very
highly of this plant as a diaphoretic in the cure of yellow fever. The
dried pulverized leaves of this plant, united with aromatics, is a very
good tonic in dyspepsia. A warm infusion of this plant, drank pre-
vious to taking an emetic, assists its operation, and causes the patient
to vomit with more ease.

Employment.

The leaves of this plant may be given in powder, infusion, or cold
decoction, according to the indications required. Of the leaves, as a
tonic, from ten to twelve grains may be given ; as an emetic, or to
assist the action of other emetics, the warm infusion must be taken.
The cold infusion or decoction likewise may be taken as a tonic.


No. 52.

CLOVES.


Latin Name — Eugenia Cahtophylatta.
English Name — Cloves.

Botanical Character.

Class XL— ICOSANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Eugenia — Calyx 4-cleft, superior ; corol 4-petalled ; berry
l-celledjjmany-seeded.

Species—- Cakyophylatta — Leaves very entire, oblong, rather
acute ; panicles axillary and terminal ; peduncles trichotomous ;
calyx repand ; fruit elliptic.

Description.

Leaves opposite, oboval, smooth, persistent ; flowers of a pink co-
lour, forming a terminal trichotomous corymb ; calyx elongate, infun-
dibuliform, with four teeth ; four petals ; ovary unilocular, monosper-
mous ; fruit, a dry ovoid drupe.

History.

This is a beautiful tali tree, a native of the Malucca islands.
Cloves are the flower buds, which are gathered in October and No-
vember, before they are open, and dried in the sun.

Vol. III. M


90 Materia Medic a,


Qualities.

Cloves have the form of a small nail with a round head ; they are
of a light brown colour, of an acrid and sharp taste, of a strong and
agreeable aromatic smell.

Cloves contain, according to TromsdorfT, a large proportion of essen-
tial oil, heavier than water, and excessively acrid, some tannin and
gum. Mr. Lolibert has discovered in it a peculiar resinous matter,
crystallizable, white, satin-like, rough to the touch, inodorous and in-
sipid, which he has called caryophyllin.

Medical Properties.

Cloves are among the most stimulating of the aromatics. They
are employed principally as adjuvants to other medicines, particularly
in combination with bitters, or with the vegetable cathartics. The
essential oil is used with the same intention, and as a local application
to severe toothach. We sometimes make use of the pulverized cloves
as an aromatic in our "bilious physic," and the essential oil enters
into our " dyspeptic pill." Cloves also enter into some other of our
preparations, particularly for some forms of bowel complaints.

Employment.

In the form of powder or infusion. Of the powder from six to eight
grains. Infusion, cloves one drachm, boiling water half a pint. Dose
from one ounce to two, twice or thrice a day. Of the oil, from two
to four drops triturated with sugar.


No. 53.
ASAFCETIDA. The Gum.

Latin Name — Feeula Asafq;tida.
English Name — Asafostida.

Botanical Character.

Class V.-PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Ferula — Flowers tubulous, all fertile ; petals cordate ;
seeds oval, flat, compressed, with three raised lines on both sides.

Species — Asafostida — Leaflets alternately sinuate, obtuse.
Description.

Root similar to that of the parsnip, black externally, white inter-
nally, lactescent, fetid; stem naked, cylindrical, five or six feet high ;
leaves all radical, triternate, of a light-green, supported by a pedun-
cle six to eight inches long, of the size of the finger; flowers of a
pale-yellow colour, in umbels of from twelve to twenty rays ; involu-
crum caducous ; involucellum polyphyllous ; flowers elliptical, com-
pressed, of a reddish-brown colour.


Medical Botany. 91

Locality.

A perennial plant, indigenous to Persia. It has been raised in the
botanical garden in Edinburgh.

Qualities.

This substance is in agglutinated masses, more or less voluminous,
of a brown or fallow colour, intermixed with white or violet points;
becoming easily soft with a gentle heat; of a penetrating smell, and
remarkable for its fetidity ; of an acrid, bitter, and sharp taste.

According to Mr. Pelletier, it is composed of resin, 66 ; volatile
oil, 3.60; gum, 19.44; bassorin, 11.66; super-malate of lime, 0.30.
It is soluble in alcohol, ether, vinegar, the yolk of eggs, and partly
only in water ; triturated with this menstruum, it forms a sort of per-
manent emulsion ; with ^th of camphor, it produces a plastic mass,
and is easily reduced to powder with carbonate of ammonia, without
undergoing any alteration in its nature.

Medical Properties.

The gum of this plant is very useful in hysterics and other nervous
disorders. It is very efficacious in spasmodic asthma, in which disease
it should be given in large doses, of from ten to fifteen grains of the
gum for a dose, made into pills, repeated three or four times a day.
This dose may be safely increased until the desired effect is produced.
This article being laxative, it is likewise very suitable in diseases of
the stomach and bowels, particularly in hypochondriasis, as costive-
ncss is apt to be very troublesome in this disease. Richter, in speak-
ing upon this article, thinks it to be entitled, almost as a specific, to
correct the morbid condition of the stomach which generates acidity,
if combined with the gall of an ox, equal parts of each. It enters the
hysteric pills of our pharmacopoeia.

Doctor Wolcott states that he cured a case of spasmodic asthma, of
other practitioners, by administering the asafoetida, in the form of a
pill or bolus, 10 grains, three times a day ; also the following expec-
torant :

Squills in powder, 30 grains ;

Gum ammoniac 1£ drachms;

Extract of hemlock, (cicuta,) 30 grains ;
Made into 30 pills ; of which the patient took one or two every six
hours, until a slight giddiness was felt. He also smoked stramonium
leaves and tobacco.

Employment.

In powder, the asafoetida may be given in from ten grains to half
an ounce.


92 Materia Medioa.

No. 54.

GAMBOGE. Hie Gum.

Latin Name — Garcinia Gambogia.
English Name — Gamboge.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Garcinia — Calyx 4-cleft, inferior ; corol 4-petalled ; ber-
ry globular, 8-seeded ; crowned with the stigma.

Species — Gambogia — Leaves opposite, elliptic, acute, deep-green ;
flowers solitary, terminal, nearly sessile.

Description.
Trunk of a middle height ; leaves opposite, oval, shining, tough, of
a deep-green colour ; male flowers, in distinct bunches ; the herma-
phrodite axillary ; calyx four-divided ; corolla four petals, about thir-
ty stamina ; fruit, a globular, whitish, or pink berry, containing seve-
ral elongate and triangular seeds.

Locality.
The tree that furnishes the gamboge is of middling size, and grows
wild in the kingdom of Siam and in Ceylon, and in the peninsula of
Cambodia. The gum is obtained, by making incisions in the bark of
the tree, from which the juice exudes and concretes.

Qualities.
Gamboge is found in commerce in cylindrical masses, of various
sizes, of a yellowish-brown externally, of a reddish-yellow colour in-
ternally, friable, with a shining fracture, of a slight taste at first, then
acrid and inodorous.

It seems to be composed of 20 of gum and 80 of resin. It is very
soluble in water, alcohol, and ether, which it colours yellow, and also
in volatile oils, and in a strong solution of ammonia and potassa, to
which it imparts an orange-red colour. Heated, it melts, and burns
at a higher temperature with a white flame, leaving a light and spon-
gy coal.

Medical Properties.
Gamboge evacuates powerfully both upwards and downwards ; and
is condemned by some authors, as acting too powerfully ; apt to excite
too great discharges, and to produce inflammation of the stomach and
bowels. Like all other drastic purgatives, gamboge has been em-
ployed, with success, in dropsies. In small doses it acts as a mild
laxative. Gamboge enters as one of the articles in the anti-dyspeptic
pill of our pharmacopoeia. The celebrated hydragogue and diaphoretic
preparation of Farrier, consists of gamboge, half a grain; ipecacuanha,
half a grain ; paregoric, one teaspoonful. This he considers as a dose.

Employment.
Dose, of the powdered gum, from two to three grains.


No.
GENT1ANA LUTEA.


GENTIAN


Medical Botany. 03

No. 55.

GENTIAN. The Root.

Latin Name — Gentiana Lutea.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Gentiana — Corol monopetalous, tubular at the base,
without nectariferous pores ; capsule 2-valved, 1-celled, many seed-
ed ; stigmas subsessile.

Species — Lutea — Corols mostly 5-cleft, sometimes 4, wheel -shaped,
whorled ; the whorls somewhat cymed ; calyx spothaceous ; root long,
cylindrical. When the corol is but 4-cleft, there are but 4 stamens.

Description.

Root perpendicular, branched ; stem erect, two or three feet high ;
leaves amplexicaule, oval, of a light-green, five or seven nerved ;
flowers yellow, spicate ; corolla regular, rosaceous ; stamens alter-
nate with the lobes of the corolla ; anthers erect ; two stigmas ; no
styles, ovary and capsule fusiform, unilocular ; fruit flat, and mem-
branous on the edges.

Locality.

Gentian is a perennial plant, indigenous to Europe, growing upon
the Alps, Appenines, Pyrenees, and other mountains, in the temperate
parts of Europe. It blossoms in May.

Qualities.

According to Henry and Caventou, it contains a peculiar bitter
principle, which they have called gentianin, an oleo-resinous matter,
very similar to bird-lime, a greenish oil, uncrystallizable sugar, some
gum, a yellow colouring matter, and, finally, some lignin. Water, al-
cohol, and ether, dissolve the active parts of this root.

The gentian root is elongated, of the size of the finger, wrinkled,
twisted, brown externally, of a lively yellow, and spongy texture inter-
nally, of a slightly nauseous smell, of a very bitter taste, but devoid of
astringency.

Medical Properties.

Gentian is a powerful and very useful tonic. In dyspepsia this ar-
ticle has obtained much celebrity, and not without foundation. It en-
ters into almost all of the nostrums that are vended, at present, for
the cure of this disease. It is administered with good effect, in some
cases of gout, and jaundice, caused by debility of the biliary organs, in
chlorosis, hysteria, &c. It is given in conjunction with other tonics
and astringents, which appear to increase its value. The extract of
gentian enters the anti-dyspeptic pills of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.

Compound infusion of gentian ; gentian root, half an ounce; orange
peel, one drachm ; coriander, half a drachm ; diluted alcohol, four
ounces; water, one pound. Of the powder, as a dose, from one scru-
ple to half a drachm.


94 Materia Medica.

No. 56.

GUAIACUM . The Gum and Raspings.

Latin Name — Guaiacum Officinale.
English Name — Guaiacum.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Guaiacum — Calyx 5-cleft, with the two outer divisions
least; corol 5-petalled; petal inserted into the calyx, equal : capsule
fleshy, angular, 3 or 5-celled.

Species — Officinale — Leaflets 2 or 8 pairs, elliptic, sessile, ob-
tuse ; flowers lateral, blue.

Description.

Trunk elevated ; leaves opposite, pari-pinnate, composed of two
or three pairs of sessile and oval folioles about one inch long ; flow-
ers blue, eight or' ten in the axilla of the leaves ; calyx, five deep divi-
sions ; corolla stellate, 5-petals ; ten stamina ; ovary pedicellate, sur-
mounted by a simple style ; fruit, a capsule, commonly flattened, cor-
diform, with two, and sometimes five cells.

Locality.

This tree is a native of the West Indies.

Qualities.

Guaiacum Wood. This wood is found in commerce in large irre-
gular pieces or logs, the exterior of which is frequently furnished with
a thick, grayish, and resinous bark. The part properly called wood is
very compact, hard, heavier than water, and of a greenish-brown,
whilst the alburnum, or inner bark, is of a light yellow colour, and of
a much softer nature. The taste of guaiacum is very acrid and slightly
bitter, and it has hardly any smell. For medical uses, this wood is re-
duced to a coarse powder by means of a rasp. This powder, yellow
at first, becomes green by exposure to light, and provokes sneezing,
although it is almost inodorous.

Resin of Guaiacum. — A peculiar juice, exuding from the bark of the
principle, sui generis, which he calls guaiacin.

This substance is in irregular masses, brittle, with a shining frac-
ture, of a greenish-brown colour, of an agreeable smell, similar to that
of benzoin ; its taste is weak at first, then acrid, and producing a con-
siderable irritation of the throat. Its specific gravity is 1.2289. Re-
duced to powder it is grayish at first, but it soon becomes green
wherever it is in contact with the air and light.

C. P. The resin of guaiacum, according to Brande, contains 798 of
pure resin, and 202 of bark. Water dissolves only 9 per cent. ; whilst
alcohol takes up about 95 of that substance. The alcoholic solution is


GUAIACUM OFFICINALE


VCTM


Medical Botany. 95

of a deep brown colour, which soon changes to blue or green, by the
action of nitric acid or starch. It is very soluble in alkalies and in
their carbonates.

Medical Properties.

Both the wood and resin of guaiacum possess diaphoretic and altera-
tive properties. They appear to produce a more special influence upon
the skin by their stimulant action, causing an increase of secretion
from this membrane. In consequence of this manner of action, it is
employed in gout, chronic rheumatism, and affections of the skin in old
and very obstinate venereal ulcers, scrofulous affections, &c. ; in rheu-
matism, particularly that arising from the use of mercury ; in gout,
&c. In purulent ophthalmia, we use it in conjunction with other re-
medies. Dr. Chapman, of Philadelphia, in his Therapeutics, speaks
very favourably of this article in diseases of the eyes. The raspings
of guaiacum enter into the alterative syrup of our pharmacopoeia.
The gum enters into the botanical drops. It is well calculated to re-
move the mercurial disease.

Employment.

The gum may be given from ten grains to one scruple, in pills, or
suspended in emulsion, by means of the yolk of eggs. Tincture of
guaiacum ; guaiacum resin, one pound ; alcohol, two pounds and a half.
Dose from one drachm to two.


No. 57.

CRANESBILL. The Root.

Latin Name — Geranium Maculatum.
English Name — Spotted Cranesbill.
Vulgar Names — Crowfoot, Alum-root, Tormentil, Storkbill,

Botanical Character.

Class XV.— MONADELPHIA.
Order X.— DECANDRIA.

Genus — Geranium — Calyx 5-leaved, equal ; corol 5-petalled ; pe-
tals equal ; stamens 10, the 5 alternate ones longer, with nectariferous
glands at the base ; receptacles beaked, separating into 5 1-seeded
capsules, each tipped with a long simple awn.

Species — Maculatum — Stem erect, dichotomous ; leaves hairy,
opposite, 3 to 5-parted, gashed, the upper ones sessile ; peduncles
2-flowered ; petals obovate ; flowers large, purple.

Description.

Root perennial, horizontal, oblong, thick, rough, knobby, brownish,

spotted with greenish-white inside, very brittle when d»y, with few

short fibres ; stem erect, round, with few dichotome branches, and

leaves covered, as well as the petioles with hairs, and from one to two


96 Materia Medica.

feet high ; several radical leaves on long petioles ; the leaves on the
stem are opposite ; floral leaves nearly sessile ; flowers germinate on
biflore peduncles arising from the forks, erect, round, swelled at the
base, with linear bracts similar to the stipules ; calyx formed by five
deep segments, oval, lanceolate, hairy outside ; five equal petals ;
fruit, a capsule divided into five cocas, or 1-seed capsule.

History.

This is a very pretty plant, blossoming in the spring, from May to
July. The best time for collecting this plant is in the fall.

Qualities.

Root thick, rough, knobby, of a dark brown colour externally, of a
pale flesh colour internally ; taste astringent, without being bitter and
inodorous. According to the following analysis of Dr. E. Staples,
this plant contains gallic acid, tannin, mucilage, starch, red colouring
matter, and probably a crystallizable vegetable substance.

Medical Properties. — The Root.
Boiled in milk, this proves a very efficacious medicine in cholera
infantum. The decoction of this root is very useful in apthous sore
throat and mouth. It is considered by the Indians to be very useful
in syphilis. The infusion of the root has been used successfully a»
an injection in gleets and gonorrhoea. The pulverized roots, when ap-
plied to the bleeding orifice of wounds, will restrain the haemorrhage.
The infusion, according to Dr. Thatcher, will suppress the bleeding
at the lungs in a prompt manner.

Employment.
Dose of the powdered root, from fifteen to twenty-five grains.
Decoction, from one ounce to one ounce and a half, boiled in half a
pint of water. One or two tablespoonfuls may be given at once.


No. 58.

LIQUORICE. The Hoot.

Latin Name — Glycyrrhiza Glabra.
English Name — Sweet Liquorice.

Botanical Character.

Class XVI.— DIADELPHIA.
Order X.— DECANDRIA.

Genus— Glycyrrhiza — Calyx 2-lipped ; the upper lip 3-parted,
lower undivided ; legume ovate, compressed.

Species — Glabra — Legumes glabrous ; flowers racemed, violet ;
stipules none ; leaflets ovate, somewhat retuse.

Description.

Stem straight, glabrous, from three to four feet high ; leaves impa-


GLYCYRRHIZA GLABRA.


SWEET LICIUORICE.


Medical Botany. 97

ripinnatc, with thirteen oval folioles, covered with a viscous substance ;
flowers violet, in axillary spikes ; calyx tubular, bilabiate, unequally
5-toothed ; carena formed of two distinct petals ; 10 diadelphous sta-
mina ; fruit, a flattened pod containing from three to six seeds.

Locality.
Liquorice is a perennial plant, and indigenous to the south of Eu-
rope. It is likewise cultivated in England for medical use.

Qualities.

The liquorice root is long, cylindrical, of the size of the finger,
brownish externally, yellow internally, of a sweet taste, slightly acrid,
and of a faint smell.

It contains, according to Mr. Robiquet, a peculiar saccharine sub-
stance, which cannot be fermented, called glycyrrhizin ; a matter ana-
logous to asparagin, but crystallizable ; starch, albumen, a resinous
oil, thick and acrid ; some phosphate and malate of lime and magne-
sia ; finally, some lignous fibres. Cold water dissolves its sugary and
demulcent principles ; but it does not take up the acrid oil, which dis-
solves only in warm water.

Medical Properties.

The root of this plant is at present used principally to alleviate
coughs, pneumonia, (inflammation of the lungs,) and in consumption.
Dr. Chapman, in his Therapeutics, says, " I know not, indeed, any
article possessing in a higher degree the quality of calming pulmo-
nary irritation, than liquorice. The late Dr. James Malone, of Lon-
don, gives the following recipe for a cold :

Take a large teaspoonful of linseed, with two pennyworth of stick
liquorice, and a quarter of a pound of sun raisins. Put them into two
quarts of soft water, till it be reduced to one ; then add to it a quarter
of a pound of brown sugar candy, pounded, a tablespoonful of white
wine vinegar, or lemon juice.

Note. — The vinegar is best to be added only to that quantity you
are going immediately to take ; for if it be put into the whole, it is
liable, in a little time, to grow flat.

Drink half a pint at going to bed, and take a little when the cough
is troublesome.

This recipe generally cures the worst of colds, in two or three days ;
and, if taken in time, may be said to be almost an infallible remedy.
It is a sovereign balsamic cordial for the lungs, without the opening
qualities, which endanger fresh colds, on going out. It has been
known to cure colds, that have almost been settled into consumptions,
in less than three weeks.

Employment.

From twelve grains to one drachm of the powdered root may be
given. Cold infusion, from two to three drachms of the root to two
pints of boiling water. Dose of the extract, from half an ounce te
an ounce.

Dr. Sawyer, of Cleveland, Ohio, a graduate of our school, statea

Vol. III. N


98 Materia Medica.

that the following preparation cured him of a very deep-seated cough,
bordering on consumption.

Take liquorice root,
Lung-wort,

Iceland moss, equal parts ;
Make a strong decoction ; sweeten with rock candy ; and take as
much as the stomach will bear.


No. 59-

HELLEBORE. The Root.

Latin Name — Helleborus Niger.
English Name — Black Hellebore.

Botanical Character.

Class XIL— POLYANDRIA.
Order XIIL— POLYGYNIA.

Genus — Helleborus — Calyx ; petals 5 or more ; persistent ;
nectaries numerous, tubular, 2-lipped ; capsules compressed, nearly
erect ; many-seeded.

Species — Niger — Scape 1 or 2-flowered, nearly naked ; leaves
pedate.

Description.

Stem subterraneous, horizontal, articulate ; leaves apparently radi-
cal, petiolate, 7 or 8-lobed, tough, dentate, and oboval ; flowers one
or two on a scape, from two to sixinches high, of a pink colour, very
large, nodding, with two bractes ; calyx regular, persistent, 5-parted ;
corolla 10 or 12 ; petals hollow and cornet-like ; fruit, from 3 to 6
capsules.

History.

About Christmas, if the weather be temperate, this plant flowers.
The flowers appear upon foot-stalks ; flowers consisting of five large
round white petals, each of which are purple, sometimes, on the edges.

Locality.

This is a perennial plant, growing in the mountains of Vasges,
Dauphine, and Provence.

Qualities.

This root is of the length and size of the little finger, gray, or red-
dish internally, blackish externally, marked with circular rings, not
distant from each other, and furnished with numerous radical fibres ;
its taste, which at first is acrid and bitter, seems to benumb the tongue ;
its odour is nauseous.

It contains, according to Messrs. Feneulle and Capron, a fatty oil
slightly acrid, a resinous matter, an odorous volatile acid, a bitter


No. 50.
HELLEUORUS NIGER.


BLACK HELLEBORE.


No. GO.
HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.


r


GOLDJEN SEAL


Medical Botany. 99

principle, wax, &c. Water, and alcohol especially, take up its active
principles, which are mostly lost by a long ebullition.

Medical Properties

The root of this plant is a cathartic, and as such was much used by
Galen and Hippocrates, and their successors, who esteemed it as a
most valuable cathartic. It has likewise obtained the name of melam-
podium. It is recorded that Melampus, a Greek physician, who first
discovered this plant, acquired immense wealth and renown by re-
storing to reason the daughters of an eastern monarch, who by some
unknown cause had all of them been deprived of it. The hellebore
is the only article which he employed. It is most probable that its
powers in this affection of the mind is owing altogether to its griping
effects, and to the active and violent evacuations which it occasions
from the bowels. It is well known that very active cathartics will
sometimes entirely subdue the fiercest forms of mania, and that they
will also arouse the sensibility of the system in the lowest stages of
melancholy. It is said that the more griping the purgative, the greater
its effects will be in those cases.

We have occasionally employed it in obstructed menses.

Employment.

Dose of the powdered root from ten grains to a scruple ; of the in-
fusion two drachms to one pound of boiling water, one ounce of which
is given every four hours.

For obstructed menses take equal parts of the tincture of hellebore
and tincture of logwood, of which let one or two teaspoonfuls be taken
three or four times a day.


No. 60.

GOLDEN SEAL. The Root.

Latin Name — Hydrastis Canadensis.
English Name — Yellow Pucoon.

Vulgar Names — Yellow-root,Groitnd Raspberry,Yellow Paint,
Golden Seal, Orange-root, Indian Plant, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order XIII.— POLYGYRIA.

Genus — Hydrastis — Calyx ; corol 3-petalled, petals ovate ; berry
composed of 1-seeded granulations.

Species — Canadensis — Stem 1, 2-leaved, the lower ones petioled
emarginate at the base ; the upper clasping, palmate, serrate, gaslied •
peduncle solitary, terminal, 1 .flowered ; flower yellow ; fruit red, sue
culent.

Description.

The root is crooked, knobby, wrinkled, with many long fibres, and


100 Materia Medica.

of a bright yellow colour ; stem a foot high, or less, simple, straight,
round, naked top, with two unequal alternate leaves ; first leaf petio-
late, cordate, palmate, 5 or 7-lobed ; lobes oval, unequal, acute, with ir-
regular, sharp, seiratuse, 5-branched nerves ; the upper or second leaf
similar, but sessile, and commonly trilobe ; flowers, single, terminal,
on a peduncle shorter than the upper leaf; 3 petals, or petaloid leaves,
flesh or rose-coloured, oval, obtuse, equal ; berry red and oval.

Locality.

From Canada and Maine to Carolina and Tennessee, in rich shady
woods, on the banks of rivers, sides of hills, and deep valleys.

Qualities.

The root is only used when fresh ; is juicy, but when dried loses
about two thirds of its weight. The taste is exceedingly bitter, rather
pungent, and nauseous. The smell strong and virose. It contains
amarine, extractive, several salts, and a peculiar principle, hydras-
tine of a yellow colour.

Properties.

It is an estimable tonic, and at the same time laxative, which makes
it very appropriate in dyspeptic disorders ; also ophthalmic, detergent,
and stimulant. The plant is much used in the western states for dis-
eases of the eyes, and for this purpose it must be cautiously used.
The juice or infusion is used as a wash, in sore or inflamed eyes.
It is considered a specific by the Indians for that disorder ; they also
employ it for sore legs, and many external complaints, as a topical
tonic. Internally, it is used as a bitter tonic, in infusion or tincture,
in disorders of the stomach, bile, and liver. A half ounce of the
dried pulverized roots is sufficient to infuse in a quart of spirits.

This root appears to be highly narcotic, and is said to enter into
many of the compounded remedies for cancer. Some Indians employ
it as a diuretic, stimulant, and escharotic, using the powder for blis-
tering, and the infusion for the dropsy.

Golden seal bitters forms one of the best correctives of bile and
bilious habits that can be given. It is likewise very beneficial as a
gargle, in sore mouth, &c.

Employment.

It may be given in powder or infusion, internally. Externally in
powder as an escharotic. Of the powder, from ten to twelve grains.

It enters into the "wine bitters."


Medical Botany. 101

No. 61.

HYSSOP. The Leaves and Flowers.

Latin Name — Hyssopus Officinalis.
English Name — Garden Hyssop.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Hyssopus — Calyx 5-parted, divisions nearly equal ; corol
with the lower lip 3-parted ; the middle segment mostly crenate ; sta-
mens straight, distant.

Species — Officinalis — Flowers in whorls, racemes pointing one
way ; middle division of the corol 2-lobed, very entire ; leaves linear,
lanceolate.

Description.

The stem of this plant rises about a foot in height ; ramous ; leaves
sessile, narrow, acute ; flowers blue or pink colour, united in the axilla
of the superior leaves.

Locality.

This plant grows in the south of France, and America.

Qualities.
Hyssop has an agreeable and aromatic odour, and a warm, pungent,
and slightly bitter taste. It contains a yellow essential oil, some bitter
principles, and sulphur. The remedial principles are soluble in wa-
ter and alcohol.

Medical Properties.
This substance is slightly stimulant, and is possessed of expectorant
properties, which make it very beneficial in colds, coughs, and pulmo-
nary catarrhs, and in phthisis and other affections of the lungs. As a
gargle in sore mouth, this is very useful. Culpepper recommends its
being boiled with figs as a gargle in quinsy and sore mouth.

Employment.
Infusion, a handful of the hyssop infused in two quarts of boiling
water, and drank according to the thirst.


102 Materia Medica.

No. 62.

HOPS. The Fruit.

Latin Name — Httmttltts Lttptthjs.
English Name — Garden Hops.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.
Order V.— PENTANDRIA.

Genus — Humumjs— Staminate flowers ; calyx 5-leaved ; corol ;
antherae with 2 pores at the top ; pistillate flowers ; calyx an oblique,
entire scale ; corol ; styles 2 ; seed single coated, the head strobile-
form.

Species — Ltjptjltts— Stem twining, rough ; leaves pefiolate, 3-5-
lobed, acute, sharply sernate, rough ; staminate flowers panicled.

Description.

The hop vine is an ornamental plant, climbing to a great height ;
root perennial ; stems annual, twining around the poles set for them,
angular, covered with rough minute prickles ; leaves opposite, on long
winding petioles ; the smaller ones heart-shaped ; the longer ones 3
or 5-lobed ; serrate, veiny, serrated, and extremely rough ; flowering
branches rough, axillary ; flowers numerous, and of a greenish co-
lour ; stamens short, the anthers oblong, and bursting by two termi-
nal pores.

Locality.

The hop is a perennial plant, indigenous to Europe, springing up
spontaneously along hedges*; likewise cultivated on a large scale in
several districts of the north of France, in Flanders, in England, and
in the United States.

Qualities.

The fruit of the hop is composed of foliaceous and persisting scales,
and covered with small hair, charged with a kind of dust called lupu-
lin. It is of a green yellow colour, possesses an aromatic and bitter
taste. Independently of lupulin, hops contain, according to Messrs.
Payen and Chevallier, a volatile oil, a fatty matter, wax, some acetate
of ammonia, malate of lime, tannin, gallic acid, a small quantity of
osmazome. Boiling water, alcohol, and ether, dissolve the active
principles of this plant.

Lupulin. — According to Messrs. Payen and Chevallier's analysis,
this substance is composed of resin, 105; bitter matter, 25 ; essential
oil, 41 ; gum, and a small quantity of fatty matter and osmazome,
some acetate of ammonia, silica, sulphur, oxide of iron, and salts,
with base of potassa and lime. It is soluble in water, alcohol, and
ether.
It is obtained by rubbing the cones of the hops on a sieve ; the


&2.
HUMULUS LUPULUS.


GARDEN HOPS.


No. G3.
HAMAMELIS VIRUIMCA.


•


Medical Botany. 103

lupulin passes through, and is received on a piece of paper. It is
purified by immersing it in water.

This article possesses the same properties as the hops, but in a much
greater degree. In too great doses it produces a sensation of heat in
the epigastric region, and throughout all the abdomen ; pains in the
abdomen, costiveness, nausea, vomiting, &c.
Medical Properties.

It is anodyne, and in many cases may be used instead of laudanum.
In the form of tincture I have given it with success in inflammation of
the bowels. A strong infusion or decoction of the hops is very useful
in some forms of dyspepsia attended with nervous irritation and loss of
tone in the stomach and bowels ; it acts in this case as a tonic and
sedative. Dr. Chapman says, that he has employed the hop success,
fully in advanced stages of typhoid fevers, where nervous tremors and
subsultus tendinum (twitching of the tendons) existed. I have like-
wise used it with success in the after pains of women ; thereby
allaying the spasmodic uneasiness of the uterus. The same gentleman
above spoken of says, " It is well adapted to drunkards, and I have
found it a useful auxiliary in the treatment of mania a potu."

A bag filled with warm hops, and placed under the head, is a popu-
lar remedy to quiet nervous irritation and procure sleep. In fomen-
tations it is exceedingly valuable.

Employment.
The hop may be administered in tincture, decoction, infusion, or
pills made of the extract. As a tonic, the infusion (of which a wine-
glassful maybe taken) is the best. Of the extract, half a teaspoonful,
to be repeated and increased as the case may require.


No. 63.

WITCH HAZEL. The Bark.

Latin Name — Hamamelis Virginica.

English Name — Winter Witch Hazel.

Vulgar Namts — Witch Hazel, Snapping Hazelnut, Winter-

BLOOM, PlSTACLUE-NUT, &C.

Botanical Character.

Class IV.— TETRANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Hamamelis — Involucre 3-leaved ; proper calyx 4-leaved,
corol 4-petalled ; petals long, linear ; filament short, broad ; anthers
adnate ; nut 2-celled, 2-horned.

Species — Virginica — Leaves alternate, obovate, acute, obliquely
cordate, margin uneven.


104 Materia Medica.


Description.

This shrub rises from six to ten feet in height, with irregular
branches, flexuous and knotty ; bark, smooth, gray, with brown dots';
leaves rather large, smooth, alternate, petiolate, obovate ; margin with
unequal faint teeth, commonly obtuse ; nerves prominent ; flowers on
short pedicles, clustered three to five together, in several places along
the branches ; calyx small, but enlarged with the fruit, with three
or four scales at the base ; divided into four thick, oval, pubescent
segments. Petals yellow, much longer, linear, obtuse, often undulate,
or revolute ; stamen four, opposed to petals, shorter than the calyx ;
pistal oval, central, short style, two obtuse stigmas ; fruit a nut-like
capsule similar to a hazel nut.

History.

This shrub blossoms in winter, when no other tree is in bloom.
The blossoms remain from October till February. The fruit remains
on throughout the whole year till the next fall, and then explodes
with a noise, scattering the seeds around.

Locality.

Found from New-England to Carolina and Ohio, commonly on
hills and mountains, near stony banks of streams ; rare in plains,
&c.

Qualities.

The bark and leaves are somewhat bitter, very astringent, leaving
a sweetish pungent taste, which remains some time.

Medical Properties.

Sedative, tonic, astringent, discutient, &c. This shrub is valued
very highly by the Indians, and is by them much used. They apply
the bark, which is sedative and discutient, to painful tumours and ex-
ternal inflammation. A cataplasm of the inner bark is found to be
very efficacious in removing painful inflammation of the eyes. An
infusion made of the leaves is a very useful astringent in haematame-
sis, (bleeding at the stomach,) amenorrhcea, bowel complaints, and
menstrual effusions. The bark likewise affords an excellent topical
application in piles, (hsemorrhois,) &c, falling of the bowel and
womb.

Employment.

This article may be given internally in the form of infusion ; exter-
nally as a poultice in foul ulcers, &c.; and in the form of a strong
decoction as an injection into the vagina, for prolapsus, or falling
down of the womb ; and as a wash for falling of the intestine.


No. 64.
HEPATICA TRILOBA.


COMMON LIVERWORT.


Medical Botany. 105

No. $4.

LIVERWORT. The Leaves, Stems, and Root.

Latin Name — Hepatica Triloba.

English Name — Common Liverwort.

Vulgar Names — Liverweed, Trefoil, Noble Liverwort.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order XIII.— POLYGYNIA.

Genus — Hepatica — Calyx 3-leaved ; corol 6 to 9-petalled, petals
oblong, seeds naked.

Species — Triloba — Leaves radical, 3-lobed ; lobes entire ; petioles
and scape hairy ; scape 1 -flowered; flowers blue.

Description.
Root perennial, fibrose ; fibres long, fasciculate, brown ; leaves all
radical, on long hairy petioles, somewhat leathery and partly persis-
tent in winter ; base cordate, divided into three equal entire lobes,
rounded, obtuse, or acute, purplish above, glauceous and purplish
beneath ; flowers terminal, drooping at first, spreading when unfolded ;
involucre resembling a calyx, very hairy; hairs gray and long; seg-
ment very deep, oval, entire, obtuse ; anthers elliptic and of a pale
yellow ; pistils and seeds oval, acute.

History.
This is a vernal plant : the leaves stand the winter, and early in the
spring the flowers come out, sometimes while the snow is yet falling.
They last from March till May.

Locality.
This plant is a native of the northern parts of Europe, Asia, and
America ; growing on this last continent from Labradore to Virginia
and the Pacific Ocean ; found in woods, hills, and mountains, through-
out the United States.

Qualities.

This plant has no smell, and not much taste ; not bitter, but a little
astringent and mucilaginous. It contains tannin, mucilage, extrac-
tive, &c.

Medical Properties.

Subtonic, subastringent, deobstruent, pectoral, demulcent. It may-
be used in fevers, liver complaints, indigestion, hypochondria, &c.
It is useful for hemoptysis (bleeding at the lungs) and coughs. It
has been used with benefit in those diseases as well as complaints
arising from dyspeptic and hypochondriac affections.

Employment.
It may be given in the form of infusion, either warm or cold, and
drank ad libitum. It enters into the vegetable syrup.
Vol. III. O


106 Materia Medica.

No. 65.

LOGWOOD. The Wood.

Latin Name — ELematoxylum Campechianum.
English Name — Campeachy Logwood.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Hjematoxylon — Calyx 5-parted ; corol 5-petaIIed ; cap-
sules lanceolate, 1-celled, 2-valved ; valves boat-shaped.

Species — Campechianum — Leaves abruptly pinnate ; leaflets ob-
cordate ; branches crooked, spinous ; flowers racemed.

Description.

Too well known to need a description.

Locality.

The logwood tree grows at Campeachy, in America, in the islands
of Santa Cruz and Jamaica.

Qualities.

According to the analysis of Chevreul, it contains a volatile oil,
tannin, a crystalline colouring matter, soluble in boiling water ; called
hematin, salts of lime, and potassa.

Medical Properties.

This wood is principally used in medicine as an astringent in the
latter stages of dysentery, in diarrhoea, and mucous discharges. We,
however, seldom use it, except in combination with other articles, in
amenonhoza. Dr. Wolcot has used the following formula with success,
in dysentery. Extract of logwood one drachm, chalk mixture four
ounces, tincture of catechu two drachms, essence of peppermint two
drachms ; mix. Dose of this from one to two tablespoonfuls every
four hours or oftener, according to circumstances. Laudanum was
also administered, to allay the griping distressing pains.

Employment.

Decoction, half an ounce of the wood boiled in two pints of water
down to one eighth. Extract, from one drachm to two.


Medical Botany. 107

No. 66.

BUTTERNUT. The Bark and unripe Fruit.

Latin Name — Jublans Cinerea.

English Name — White Walnut and Butternut.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONCECIA.
Order XII.— POLYANDRIA.

Genus — Juglans — Staminate flowers ; corol 6-parted ; calyx
1-leafed, scote form, mostly 5-parted ; filaments twelve to thirty-six.
Pistiolate flowers ; corol 4-parted ; calyx 4-cleft, superior ; styles
1, 2 ; nut rugose, furrows irregular.

Species — Cineeea — Leaflets numerous, brancholate, serrate ; base
rounded, soft, pubescent beneath ; petioles villous ; nut oblong, ovate,
roughly sculptured, edible ; tree large.

Description.
. Too well known to need a description.

Locality.
These trees are very common in the United States. Found grow-
ing in valleys and on mountains.

Medical Properties.

During the American revolution, when medicines were scarce, this
article was brought into use by the physicians of the hospitals, and
was esteemed by them an excellent substitute for the ordinary ca-
thartics. The extract made from the inner bark of these trees is
alone employed. When given alone, in doses of from fifteen to thirty
grains, it operates as an active cathartic, without " occasioning heat
and irritation." It is thought to be very applicable in indigestion, as
an aperient in habitual costiveness, as it is not so apt to leave the
bowels in a costive state as other cathartics do. The extract should
be made from the bark in the months of May or June.

Employment.

It is given in the form of an extract, in doses of from fifteen to
thirty grains.


108 Materia Medica.

No. 67.

JUNIPER. The Fruit.

Latin Name — Juniperus Communis.
English Name — Common Junipeb.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.

Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus-— Juniperus — Staminate flowers ; calyx, the scales of an
ament ; corol ; stigmata 3 ; pistillate flowers ; calyx, the scales of
an anient, fewer, becoming fleshy, uniting into a 3-seeded berry.

Species — Communis — Leaves in threes, spreading, spinous ; mu-
cronate, longer than the berries.

Description.
This shrub rises four feet in height ; leaves numerous, long, sharp-
pointed, of a deep green, standing three together without foot-stalks ;
stem straight, ramose ; leaves verticillate, ternate, pungently acute ;
flowers dioicous, in axillary aments ; male flowers ; scales in the form
of a nail, bearing on their internal surface ; globular and sessile an-
thers ; female flowers ; involucrum, fleshy, globular, 3-parted ; fruit,
globular berries of the size of a pea, and containing two or three
small nuciform triangular seeds.

History.
The berries of this shrub, which is the only part used, are ripe in
August. It flowers in June.

Locality.
This shrub is indigenous to Europe, but naturalized in this country,
and grows in abundance in the state of New-York, on the banks of
rivers, &c.

Qualities.
The juniper berries are blackish, pulpy, of the size of a pea, of a
strong and agreeable smell, of a bitter, warm, and turpentine taste.
They are composed, according to Tromsdorff, of volatile oil, 1 ; wax,
4 ; resin, 10 ; sugar, 33.8 ; gum, 7 ; lignous fibres and water, 48 ;
besides several salts. Water and alcohol dissolve their active
principles.

Medical Properties.
The berries and essential oil are possessed of a powerful diuretic
quality, exercising a very decided stimulating action on the general
economy, but more especially upon the kidneys, increasing the secre-
tion of those organs. They are principally exhibited in dropsy.
The oil is carminative, and may be given in flatulencies.

Employment.
The berries may be given in the form of infusion, and the oil
may likewise be given. Eight or ten drops is a dose.


No. 67.
JUN1PERUS COMMUNIS.


COMMON JUNIPER.


No. 68.
INULA HELENIUM.


ELECAMPANE.


Medical Botany. 1<W

No. 68.

ELECAMPANE. The Boot.

Latin Name — Inula Helenium.
English Name — Elecampane.

Botanical Character.

Class XVII.— SYGENESIA.

Order II.— POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.

Genus — Inula — Receptacle naked ; egret simple ; calyx imbricate ;
antherse ending in two bristles at the base ; ray florets ligulate, nu-
merous, yellow.

Species — Helenium — Leaves clasping, ovate, rugose, downy be-
neath ; scales of the calyx ovate.

Description.

Stem cylindrical, from four to six feet high, branched towards
summit, covered with a whitish down ; radical leaves oval, acute, lo-
mentose underneath, irregularly dentate and petiolate ; the caulinary
small, sessile, and almost round ; flowers yellow, at the extremity of
the branches ; the florets of the circumference are female ; involucre
formed of imbricate leaflets ; seeds elongate, cylindrical, surmounted
by a silky and sessile pappus.

Locality.

This is a perennial plant, indigenous to Europe, but is very common
in this country, growing in low meadows, by the road side, and in
stony pastures. It flowers in July or August.

Qualities.

The elecampane root is large, tuberous, elongated, brown external-
ly, white internally, of an aromatic smell, of a very bitter taste at
first, and afterwards sharp and camphorated.

It contains 30.7 of a very peculiar principle, discovered by Rose,
and called Inulin by Thomson ; white, pulverulent, soluble in boiling
water, from which it precipitates on cooling, and finally, which is con-
sidered as starch ; 0.3 of a concrete volative oil, very analogous to
camphor ; 0.6 of wax ; 1.7 of acrid resin ; 36.7 of a bitter extractive
matter ; 4.5 of gum, and finally some lignous parts, albumen, and
salts, with a base of potassa, lime, and magnesia. Water and alcohol
dissolve all its active principles.

Medical Properties.

This plant is possessed of pretty energetic tonic properties. It
acts likewise as an excitant, owing to the camphorated oil which it
contains. It is an excellent article, in combination with others, in
colds and coughs, in pulmonary irritation, in phthisis pulmonalis,
(consumption,) and in some forms of indigestion, when it proceeds
from a debility of the digestive organs. It enters into the pulmonary
balsam of our pharmacopoeia. .


110 Materia Medica.


Employment.
It may be given in powder, decoction, or infusion. Dose of the
powder, from half to one ounce ; decoction or infusion, from half an
ounce to one ounce, in one quart of water.


No. 69.

CEDAR. The Leaves and Berries.

Latin Name — Juniiverus Virginiana.
English Name — Red Cedar.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECTA.

Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus — Juniperus — Staminate flowers ; calyx, the scales of an
ament ; corol ; stigmata 3 ; pistillate flowers ; calyx, scales of an
ament, fewer, becoming fleshy, uniting into a 3-seeded berry.

Species — Virginiana — Leaves in threes, joined at the base ; the
younger ones imbricate, older ones spreading.

Description.

Trunk from thirty to forty feet high, very branchy ; leaves nume-
rous, small, scaly, and mucronate, ternate, and joined at the base, the
younger imbricate, the older loose ; flowers very small, both sexes
frequently found on the same tree, and in other instances located on
two different trees ; fruit, small blue berries, 1 or 2-seeded ; seeds
nuciform.

Locality.

This tree is indigenous to America, growing in great abundance in
the southern states, but found all over the United States.

Qualities.

The leaves of this tree have a strong, unpleasant smell, and acrid,
hot, bitterish taste. Distilled with water, they give out an essen-
tial oil.

Medical Properties.

Internally, the leaves of the red cedar have been found to produce
nearly the same effects as the savin. They have been useful in rheu-
matism, as a general stimulant and diaphoretic. They have been used
likewise as an emmenagogue. The oil which is procured from the ce-
dar by distillation, is very useful in rheumatic affections, by bathing
the affected parts with it. It may also be combined with the oil of
spearmint, which is very beneficial in gravel, diseases of the kidneys,
scalding of the urine in gonorrhoea, &c.

Employment.

The leaves pulverized may be given in doses of from ten to twelve
grains, or an infusion of the leaves may be given. Externally, the
essential oil.


Medical Botany. Ill

No. 70.

SAVIN. The Leaves.

Latin Name — Junipertjs Sabina.
English Name — Savin Tree.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.

Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus — Juniperus — Staminate flowers ; calyx, the scales of an
ament ; corol ; stigmata 3 ; pistillate flowers ; calyx, the scales of
an ament, fewer, becoming fleshy, uniting into a 3-seeded berry.

Species — Sabina — Leaves opposite, erect, decurrent ; the opposi-
tions closed.

Description.

Stem from ten to fifteen feet high ; leaves very small, squamiform,
opposite, imbricate upon the stem ; flowers dioicous, in aments ; fruit,
pisiform and blackish berries, containing two small stones.

Locality.

This is an evergreen shrub, a native of Siberia, Tartary, the south-
ern parts of Europe, and of North America. It grows plentifully in
New-Jersey.

Qualities.

The leaves and tops of this plant have a moderately strong smell
of the disagreeable kind, and a hot, bitterish, acrid taste. They give
out great part of their active matter to watery liquors, and the whole
to rectified spirit. Distilled with water, they yield a large quantity
of essential oil. Decoctions of the leaves, freed from the volatile
principle by inspissation to the consistence of an extract, retain a
considerable share of their pungency and warmth along with their
bitterness, and have some degree of smell, but not resembling that of
the plant itself. On inspissating the spiritous tincture, there remains
an extract consisting of two distinct substances, of which one is yel-
low, unctuous, or oily, bitterish, and very pungent ; the other black,
resinous, less pungent, and sub-astringent.

Medical Properties.
Savin is a powerful and active medicine, and has been long re-
puted the most efficacious in the materia medica, for producing a de-
termination to the uterus, and thereby proving emmenagogue ; it
heats and stimulates the whole system very considerably, and is said
to promote the fluid secretions. The power which this plant pos-
sesses (observes Dr. Woodville) in opening uterine obstructions, is
considered to be so great, that we are told it has been frequently em-
ployed, and with too much success, for purposes the most infamous
and unnatural. It seems probable, however, that its effects in this
way have been somewhat overrated, as it is found, very frequently,


112 Materia Medica.

to fail as an emmenagogue, though this, in some measure, may be as.
cribed to the smallness of the dose in which it has been usually pre-
acrid and heating substance, and I have been often, on account of
these qualities, prevented from employing it in the quantity necessary
to render it emmenagogue. I must own, however, that it shows a more
powerful determination to the uterus than any other plant I have em-
ployed ; but I have been frequently disappointed in this ; and its heat-
ing qualities always require a great deal of caution.'' Dr. Home ap-
pears to have had very great success with this medicine, for in five
cases of amenorrhoea, which occurred at the Royal Infirmary at Edin-
burgh, four were cured by the sabina, which he gave in powder, from
a scruple to a drachm twice a day.

Dr. Chapman speaks in very high terms of the savin in chronic
rheumatism, "where "there exists a coldness of the surface, and espe-
cially of the lower extremities, which are dry, or covered with a clam-
my sweat ; and connected with this state there is also a swelling and
rigidity of the joints, amounting sometimes even to the loss of mo-
tion, accompanied with pains very acute, and aggravated by changes
of the weather." He states that the pulse, previous to the adminis-
tration of this medicine, which was " small, weak, and accelerated,
becomes full, active, and comparatively slow, upon administering this
article; and" that "its wide spreading influence is peculiarly felt
throughout the whole animal economy, especially the organs of se-
cretion, viz. of perspiration, urinary, catamenial, and perhaps the
seminal." Dr. Eberle's experience with this article likewise concurs
with that of the above named gentlemen.

Employment.

It is given in substance in the dose of from one to two scruples, three
times a day. A decoction made by boiling one ounce of the leaves
in a pint of water, down to half a pint, with the addition of two ounces
of syrup. Dose, a wineglassful every two hours.

Savin Cerate. — Take of fresh leaves of savin, bruised, a pound ;
yellow wax, half a pound ; prepared lard, two pounds. Having melt-
ed together the wax and lard, boil therein the savin leaves, and
strain through a linen cloth. This article is of late introduction for
the purpose of keeping up a discharge from blistered surfaces. It
extensive use, because it does not produce the inconveniences that
follow the constant application of the common blistering cerate. A
thick white layer forms daily upon the part, which requires to be re-
moved, that the cerate may be applied immediately to the surface
from which the discharge is to be made.


71.
► PES FCETIDA.


r. Ad-:


Medical Botany. 115

%

No. 71.

SKUNK CABBAGE. The Balls and Hoots.

Latin Name — Ictodes F<etida.
English Name — Swamp Cabbage.

Botanical Character.

Class IV.— TETRANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Ictodes — General calyx a spathe ; spathe ventricose, ovate
acuminate ; spadix sub-globular, covered with perfect flowers ; petals
; calyx deeply 4-parted, permanent ; segments cucullate, becdfaing
thick and fleshy ; style 4-sided ; stigma minute ; seeds immersed in
the spongy receptacle.

Species — Foitida — Stemless ; leaves radical ; cordate ovate, very
large ; spathe purple, spotted, cucullate ; plant very fetid.

Description.
Spathe ventricose, ovate, acuminate ; spadix roundish, covered with
hermaphrodite flowers ; calyx deeply 4-parted, persistent ; segments
cucullate, truncate, becoming thick and spongy ; petals none ; style
pyramidal, 4-sided ; seeds solitary, immersed in the spongy recepta-
cle ; leaves very large, smooth, and green, strongly veined and en-
tire, preceded by conspicuous sheating stipules.

History.
Its flowers are among the first that appear in the spring, after the
rigours of winter have passed, appearing from February <to April, ac-
cording to its latitude.

Locality.
This is a perennial, native plant, growing in boggy woods and
swamps, and other moist places, throughout the United States.

Qualities.
Root verticillately fibrous, truncate ; fibres whitish, coloured with
brownish-red rings. Every part of the plant, even the seeds, is im-
bued with a peculiar fetid smell, resembling that of asafcetida, or the
odour thrown off by the skunk or pole cat, whence its name.

It seems to contain a volatile acrid principle, readily dissipated by
heat ; a resinous substance, and a gummy or mucous principle. The
seeds contain a considerable quantity of fixed oil.

Medical Properties.

The root of this plant is possessed of anti-spasmodic properties,
similar to asafcetida and other fetid gums. It is very useful in spas-
modic asthma, and is very highly recommended by the Rev. Dr.*
Cutler, in this disease. Dr. Eberle likewise speaks very favourably
of this article in the same disease. " Dr. Thatcher, on the authority
of a correspondent," says Dr. Eberle, states, " that two teaspoonfuls

Vol. III. P


114 Materia Medica.

of the pulverized root of this vegetable, gave very prompt and effectual
relief in a case of hysteria, after the ordinary remedies for such cases
had been used without benefit." This root, pulverized, and given in cold,
phlegmatic habits of the body, attended with chronic cough, will pro-
duce the most decided benefits. In the tus&is senalis, or cough of old
people, it may be administered with benefit, relieving the cough and
difficulty of breathing.

fr It constitutes one of the ingredients of our vegetable syrup, used
for bleeding at the lungs, coughs, asthma, dec.

Employment.
This article may be given in substance, of from ten to forty grains,
in pills, mixed with syrup. A tincture or syrup may likewise be form-
ed from the root or seeds.


No. 72.


BUGLE. The Plant.

Latin Name — Lycopus Vikginicus.
English Name — Sweet Bugle.

Vulgar Names — Bugle-weed, Water Bogle, Bugle-wort, Wa-
ter HoBEHOUND, &C

Botanical Character.

Class II— DIANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Lycopus — Calyx tubular, 5-toothed ; corol 4-cleft, nearly
equal ; superior division broader and emarginate ; stamens distant ;
seeds 4, naked, retuse.

Species — Virginicus — Leaves lanceolate, serrate, narrow, and en-
tire at the base ; calyx very short, spineless ; stem quadrangular.

Description.

Root perennial, creeping, and fibrous ; stem erect, commonly sim-
ple, somewhat rough, with four furrows and four obtuse angles ; leaves
opposite, sessile, acuminate, or attenuated and entire at both ends,
remote, serrate in the middle, broad, lanceolate, somewhat rough, co-
vered with glandular dots beneath ; flowers sessile, in small axillary
whorls, very small ; two sublate bracts under each flower ; calyx with
four ovate-lanceolate and acute segments ; corolla white, tubular, with
four small round lobes ; two stamina, hardly exert, filiform ; style
erect ; four seeds, longer than the calyx, obovate, compressed.

History.

This plant blossoms in the summer, in July and August ; seeds ripen
in September.


No. 72.

LYCOPUS VIRGINICUS.


COMMON BUGLE-WEED.


Medical Bo! any. 115

Locality.
This plant is found growing near water, ditches, creeks, swamps, &c.

Qualities.
This plant affords an essential oil ; also a little tannin. To this oil
this plant probably owes its active properties.

Medical Properties.
Sedative, subtonic, subastringent. It is very useful in coughs, and
in hemoptisis, (bleeding of the lungs,) and in incipient phthisis. " The
first inquirers respecting its properties, were Drs. Pendleton and
Rodgers, of the city of New-York, and who have published a number
of cases of incipient phthisis and hemoptisis cured by this article."
Those properties have been confirmed by Drs. Smith, Ives, Lawrence,
Rafinesqe, and myself. In its action it somewhat resembles that of
the digitalis, lowering the pulse, and lessening its frequency ; allays
irritation, cough, and equalizes the circulation ; and is considered by
Rafinesque, " as one of the mildest and best narcotics in existence."
It enters into the vegetable syrup of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.
It may be given in infusion or decoction.


No. 73.

POPLAR. The Bark of the Trunk and Roots.

Latin Name — Liriodendron TtrLiriFERA.

English Name — White Poplar.

Vulgar Names — White-wood, Wild Poplar, White Poplar, dec.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order XIII.— POLYGYNIA.

Genus — Liriodendron — Calyx 3-leaved ; petals 6 ; seeds ending
in a lanceolate scale, and imbricate into a strobile.

Species — Tulipifera — Leaves 3-lobed, truncate at the end ; a
large tree.

Description.

This beautiful and noble tree rises sometimes to the height of 140
feet ; its trunk is straight, and its branches regularly disposed ; leaves
large, 3-lobed, with the central lobe truncated ; flowers large, solitary,
terminal, subcampanulate, variegated with yellow, orange, and lake-
green colours ; stamina about 86, disposed in a simple series ; pistils
numerous ; germs disposed in the form of a cone ; fruit conical, com-
posed of numerous thin and imbricated scales.


116 Materia Medica.

History.
This tree flowers about the middle of May.

Locality.

This is a tree indigenous to America, and is found growing through-
out the United States, on mountains and in low forests.

Qualities.

Very bitter, slightly aromatic, and astringent. According to Dr.
Rogers' analysis, this bark contains gum, resin, muriatic acid, iron,
calcareous salt, mucus, fecula, &c.

Medical Properties.

The bark of the tree and root is possessed of valuable tonic proper-
ties, and by some is considered equal to Peruvian bark. It is like-
wise stimulant ; but its virtues appear to consist altogether in its tonic
powers. " It occasionally acts as a diuretic, and it most generally
produces very conspicuous diaphoretic effects when largely given."
The bark of the root is more tonic but less stimulant than that of the
trunk. Dr. J. T. Young, in a letter to Gov. Clayton, of Delaware,
intermittent fever, and can declare from experience, that it is equally
efficacious with the Peruvian bark, if properly administered." The
same gentleman says he has used it in hysteria, with the greatest
benefit. " There is not," says he, " in all the materia medica, a
more certain, speedy and effectual remedy in hysteria, than the pop-
lar bark, combined with a small quantity of laudanum." In dyspeptic
states of the stomach and bowels, this is a valuable remedy, owing to
its tonic and stimulant powers. In phthisis pulmonalis, accompanied
with hectic fever, nocturnal sweats, and diarrhoea, it will frequently
abate these troublesome and alarming symptoms, if administered in
union with laudanum.

Employment.

The dose of this bark is from half to two drachms in powder ; the
infusion from half to one ounce, in a pint of boiling water. It enters
into the wine bitters.


No. 73.
LTRIODENDRON TULIPIFERA.


WHITE POPLAR.


Medical Botany. 11 T

No. 74.

COHOSH.

Latin Name — Leontice Thalictroides.
English Name — Blue Cohosh.

Vulgar Names — Blue Berky, Pappoose-root, Squaw-root, Blue
Ginseng, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Leontice — Calyx inferior, 3 to 6-leaved, deciduous ; corol
6-petalled, petals opposite the leaves ; nectary 6-leaved, spreading,
placed on the claws of the petals ; anthers adnate to the filaments,
opening longitudinally ; fruit 1-seeded.

Species — Thalictroides — Stem ; leaf simply ternate ; floral one
doubly ternate ; stem ending in 3 leaves each ; petiole being trifid,
and supporting 9 leaflets ; the two lateral ones sessile, and 2-lobed ;
middle one petioled, and 3-lobed ; raceme simple ; berries dark blue.

Description.

It grows from two to four feet high. The root yellow inside, brown
outside, hard, irregular, knobby, branched, with many fibres. Stem
upright, straight, smooth, dividing at top into three branches, each of
which has three leaves, and in the centre of which comes out the
flower stem ; leaves smooth, lobed, somewhat in shape like the hand.
The flowers are of a yellowish green, producing a stone berry, of a
dark blue colour, something like sour grapes.

Locality.

It is perennial, growing all over the United States ; and is generally
found in low, moist, rich grounds, near running streams, in swamps,
and on islands that have been overflowed with water.
Medical Properties.

This plant is very efficacious in the cure of rheumatism and amenor-
rhea. This plant appears to be well suited to the complaints of fe-
males, and is much used by the Indian women to expedite parturition.
For rheumatism, Henry recommends two ounces of this root, and one
ounce of blood-root, (sanguinaris canadensis,) bruised and infused in
three pints of spirits. Of this a wineglassful three times a day may
be taken. This preparation will also promote the menstrual discharge.

Employment.

Given in the forms of infusion and decoction.


118 Materia Mtdiea.

No. 75.

CINNAMON. The inner Bark.

Latin Name — Latjrus Cinnamomum.
English Name — Cinnamon Tree.

Botanical Character.

Class IX.— ENNEANDRIA.
Orderl.-MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Laurus — Calyx ; corol 6-petalled, resembling a calyx ;
nectary 3 glands, surrounding the germ, and each ending in two bris-
tles ; inner filaments supporting two glands each ; berry 1-seeded.

Species — Cinnamomum — Leaves 3-nerved, ovate, oblong ; the
nerves disappearing towards the tip ; flowers panicled ; bark smooth.

Description.

Trunk twenty-five to thirty feet high ; bark grayish outside, red
inside ; leaves irregularly opposite, acute, tough, smooth, green on
one side, and glaucous on the other ; flowers yellowish, in a loose
and axillary panicle ; calyx pubescent, with six divisions ; male
flowers, nine stamina, forming several rows ; female flowers ovoid,
terminated by a thick style ; stigma capitulate ; fruit ovoid, resembling
an acorn.

Locality.

This tree was formally cultivated in the island of Ceylon, and was
guarded by the Dutch with unremitting jealousy, that they might mo-
nopolize the whole commerce of its production. They, however, at
length failed in their attempts, and the cinnamon is now cultivated in
other parts of the East Indies, and is likewise produced in the West
India islands.

Qualities.

Cinnamon contains, according to Vauquelin, a very acrid and strong
volatile oil, of a yellow colour, and heavier than water ; a great
deal of tannin ; a colouring matter containing nitrogen, an acid, a
mucilage, and some fecula. In the Ceylon and Cayenne cinnamon,
these proximate principles are found in very nearly the same propor-
tions ; but the Chinese contains a more considerable quantity of es-
sential oil. Water and alcohol take up the active principles of cinna-
mon.

Medical Properties.

Cinnamon is a very elegant and grateful aromatic to the taste and
stomach ; more so than any others of this class of remedies. It is,
like others of this class, stimulating, warming to the stomach, carmi-
native, and tonic. It is principally used as an adjunct to other reme-
dies, to disguise their smell and taste. It occasionally enters into the


No. 76.
LEONTODON TARAXACUM.


COMMON DANDELION.

No. na

SOLANUM NIGRUM.


GARDEN NIGHTSHADE.


Medical Botany. H9

" neutralizing physic" of our pharmacopoeia, and also in the com-
pound spirits of lavender. It is also useful in bowel complaints.

Employment.
Given in powder of from twelve grains to one scruple.


No. 76.

DANDELION. The Leaves and Roots.

Latin Name — Leontodon Taraxacum.
English Name — Common Dandelion.

Botanical Character.

Class XVII.— SYNGENESIA.
Order I.— POLYGAMIA jEQUALIS.

Genus — Leontodon — Receptacle naked ; florets ligulate ; calyx
double, imbricate ; down simple, pedicelled.

Species — Taraxacum — Outer calyx reflexed ; scape 1-flowered ;
leaves runcinate, glabrous, with toothed lobes.

Description.

This is a perennial plant, the leaves all radical, smooth, oblong,
and acute, cut up on the sides in a runcinate form, sometimes almost
pinnatifid ; the divisions acute, toothed, unequal, like the teeth of a
saw ; sinuses, acute, only one large nid rib ; stems erect, naked, from
six to eighteen inches high, cylindrical, hollow, smooth, milky when
broken, bearing only one blossom ; florets yellow, numerous, unequal,
triangular ; seeds black.

History.

This is a well known plant, common to Europe, Asia, and America.
It blossoms from April to October. It derives its name from dent de
lion, an old French name, meaning a lion's tooth.

Locality.
It is found in pastures, fields, and along road sides.

Qualities.

Root fusiform, covered with a blackish epidermis ; it contains an
abundance of milky juice, inodorous, of a bitter, sweetish, and slightly
acid taste. The leaves are also slightly lactescent, and of a pleasant
bitterness.

This plant contains a good deal of extractive, a green resin, some
fecula, a saccharine substance, some nitrate of potassa, and lime, and
acetate of lime, &c.

Medical Properties.
f Deobstruent, diuretic, hepatic, sub-tonic, aperient. It has been
much used in liver complaints, dropsy, jaundice, hypochondria, and
obstructions. Dr. Rush had much confidence in this article, and gave
it frequently in hepatic affections. Zimmerman, Bergins, and parti-
cularly Pcmbcrton, have highly spoken of the deobstruent propertie*


120 Materia Medica.

of the dandelion. Dr. Wilson Phillip, in his valuable treatise on in-
digestion, speaks in the highest terms of this article, in disorders of
the liver, arising from dyspepsia. He considers it to be much more
suitable to those disorders than mercury in any shape.

It is said that liver grown cattle have been cured, by feeding upon it.

Good in complaints of the urinary organs, dropsy, &c.
Employment.

Given in the form of infusion, one ounce of the roots and leaves, in-
fused in a pint of boiling water.


No. 77.

LOBELIA. The Seeds, Leaves, and Capsules.

Latin Name — Lobelia Inflata.
English Name — Common Lobelia.

Vulgar Names — Indian Tobacco, Emetic-weed, Wild Tobacco,
Puke-weed, Asthma-weed, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRU.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Lobelia— Corol irregular, 5-cleft, slit longitudinally on its
upper side ; anthers united into a tube ; stigma capitate ; capsule in-
ferior, 2 or 3-celled.

Species — Inflata — Stem erect, branching, hirsute ; leaves ovate,
serrate ; racemes leafy ; capsule inflated ; many-seeded.

Description.

Biennial plant, one or two feet in height ; stem erect, ramose, flex-
uose, subangular, hirsute ; leaves alternate, oval, or oblong, acute,
sessile, or semi-amplexicaule, serrate, or toothed, pubescent ; ra-
cemes of flowers, terminal, erect, foliose ; flowers remote, each nearly
sessile and axillary to a smaller bract, somewhat similar to the leaves,
but smaller, the upper ones smallest ; lower flowers pedunculated ;
ovary swelled, oval, globose; calyx with five unequal sublate divisions';
corolla small, blue ; capsule crowned by the calyx, swelled, striated,
2-celled, full of very small seedp.

History.

This plant blossoms from June to November. The flowers are very
small, but singular ; when broken, a milky, acrid juice is emitted. It
is biennial, throwing out, the first year, only a few radical roundish
leaves.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to America, and found growing all over
the United States, in fields, woods, dec.


No. 77.
LOBELIA I NFL AT A.


COMMON LOBELIA.


Medical Botany. 121

Qualities. *
Roots fibrous, yellowish-white, acrid, nauseous ; leaves and cap*
sules very acrid ; taste resembling tobacco, and when chewed pro-
duces a copious flow of saliva, sickness at the stom"ch, and giddiness.

Medical Properties.
Lobelia is a very valuable plant, containing many active medicinal
properties. It is stated that it was first used by the aborigines of this
country as an emetic ; but we are indebted more especially to Dr.
Sarnuel Thompson, for bringing it into use. It constitutes the basis
of his practice for diseases generally ; but this indiscriminate use of
the plant is, we think, very objectionable. It is, like every other ar-
ticle, good and proper when used in its place ; in oth'er words, it is
designed only to fulfil certain indications, which the practitioner
should bear in mind.

It is emetic, and peculiarly stimulating, and from its action upon
the great sympathetic nerve, its effect is peculiarly felt throughout the
whole system. It exerts a peculiar action upon the trachea and bron-
chial vessels, almost instantaneously expelling from them any collec-
tions of mucus that may have been collected in them. Ijence it is
exceedingly valuable in asthma, croup, hooping-cough, and in pulmo-
nary diseases generally.

From its extensive influence over the animal economy, particularly
the stomach and liver, it is found very effectual in exciting healthy
action in many chronic diseases, such as dyspepsia, chronic affections
of the liver, &c. It is also an excellent emetic, where poisonous sub-
stances have been taken into the stomach ; but there is no disease in
which it displays such a remarkable effect as in asthma. In parox-
ysms of the complaint, where the patient is nearly suffocated, it will
give relief instantaneously. It is equally valuable in the pneumonia of
infants. It affords immediate relief where the child seems to be suf-
focated by mucus or phlegm. It is also very valuable as an expecto-
rant in consumption. In some of those complaints I have been called
when the case appeared hopeless ; and the exhibition of this article
has produced the happiest effects. When large doses have been
given, it caused much debility, shortness of breath, with some degree
of stupor or lethargy, and usually proves somewhat laxative. It ap-
pears to be in some small degree narcotic ; but the charge brought
against it by some physicians is totally false. I have used it for
many years in various diseases, both of men, women, and children, and
in which I have never seen a single unpleasant symptom arise from
its administration. Of late, I learn that many physicians in Europe
have used it with success in asthma. It enters into the emetic pow-
ders, expectorant tincture, dec. of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.

The leaves, seeds, and inflated capsules, may be given in the form
of powders, and tincture. The dose, of the powder, about a drachm,
or a small teaspoonful. Of the tincture, the dose is about half an
ounce, or a tablespoonful.

Says Dr. E. Smith, of Boston, " It is now about fourteen years since
my first acquaintance with this herb, as an emetic, in my family ; and

Vol. III. Q


122 Materia Medica.

towards six years since, I took it to relieve in sickness, and nearly five
years since I administered it to others. Though one of the most
useful herbs on earth with others, it is not so alone, as it does not pos-
sess all needful to restore health to the sick man. It is very quick in
its operations, but if some other medicine is not added to assist, it
soon exhausts itself, and is done.

" Not far from thirteen years ago, my eldest daughter was very
feeble, supposed to be in a consumption. I applied to the most skilful
doctor in Portsmouth, (as was supposed ;) he attended her awhile ; she
failed continually with all his directions. A young man, somewhat
acquainted with this emetic, and the manner of using it, proposed to
administer it to her ; this he did, three times in one week. In a few
weeks she recovered, and afterwards enjoyed good health.

" Five years ago, I was violently seized, in Boston, with the bilious
cholic, and found no relief. I went to Portsmouth, and was attended
with this emetic and other things in harmony with it, and with twice
being attended, was entirely cured, and have not had a return of the
complaint to this day. Soon after this, I began to administer it to
others ,• which practice I have continued till now, with a success un-
known in the administration of any other medicine.

" I have found it, with other medicines, an infallible cure in all
cases, excepting such as are beyond all cure. I have given it to all
ages, from two days old to men of eighty-two, with safety and success.
I have given it to females in all cases peculiar to them, and have
never known it to fail, in curable cases. There are two cases, where
it will not operate ; one is, when the person is dying ; here it will not
act, of course it will not cause death to any one. The other case is,
when all disease is removed. It will not make a well man sick.
When a man is so sick as to be past cure, this emetic will relieve him,
and cause him to live longer, and easier than without, excepting in
mortification."

" It is said by some, that if it does not operate, it is immediate
death. This is not true, neither can it be proved so by any one."
The foregoing encomiums are passed upon this plant, by Dr. E. Smith.


>


Medical Botany. 123

No. 78.

SASSAFRAS. Roots, Twigs, and Bark.

Latin Name — Laurus Sassafras.
English Name — Common Sassafras.

Botanical Character.

Class IX.— ENNEANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Laurtjs — Calyx ; corol 6-petalled, resembling a calyx ;
nectary 3-glands, surrounding the germ, and each ending in 2-bristles ;
inner filaments supporting 2-glands each ; berry 1-seeded.

Species — Sassafras — Leaves entire and lobed on the same tree ;
downy beneath.

Description.
Trunk, from thirty to forty feet in height ; leaves alternate, cadu-
cous, of various shapes, green on the upper surface, whitish on the
under surface ; flowers forked, yellowish, in small panicles ; male
flowers calyx ; pubescent, 6-parted; 9 stamina, 3 of which are barren ;
anthers quadrilateral, 4-celled ; pistil barren; female flowers five,
barren stamina ; stigma globular ; ovary ovoid ; fruit a pisiform drupe.

Locality.
This tree is a native of North America, and found growing plenti-
fully throughout the United States, in forests and along the borders
of swamps.

Qualities.
This root is found in commerce in pieces of the size of the arm ;
the lignous part is light, porous, composed of concentric layers, of a
yellowish colour, of a strong and aromatic smell, of a sweetish taste
at first, then warm and slightly acrid. The bark is thick, rugose, of
a spongy nature, of a red-brown colour, and furnished with a resinous
and yellowish epidermis. Its smell and taste are much stronger than
those of the wood.

This substance contains an essential oil, heavier than water, very
volatile, of a pale-yellow colour, becoming red by the action of light.
"Water and alcohol principally take up its active principles.
Medical Properties.
This article is stimulating and attenuating, very good in rheumatic
complaints and in eruptive diseases. The bark of the young branches
and the pith contain a considerable quantity of mucdage. If the pith
be infused in a glass of water a considerable quantity of mucilage is
extracted, which renders this infusion very useful in acute inflammation
of the eyes, and in catarrhs, and dysentery. Alibert frequently ad-
ministered sassafras, at the hospital of St. Louis, in rheumatic com-
plaints, and it appeared always to him to produce a manifest action on
the cutaneous vessels. He mentions likewise two cases of gout, in


124 Materia Medica.

which sassafras was employed with complete success. Dr. Eberle
says, "I have known the long continued use of an infusion of this
article effectually cure a case of inveterate rheumatism. It enters
into the alterative syrup of our pharmacopoeia. The pith of sassafras
put into rose-water makes the laurus eye-water, which is very valuable
for ophthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes.

Employment.
Infusion, infuse from one ounce to two ounces of the bark of the
root in a quart of boiling wjater. Drink according to circumstances.


No. 79.

WHITE LILY. The Root.

Latin Name — Lilium Cabjdidum.
English Name — Common White Lily.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order L— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Lilitjm — Corol 6-petalled, companulate, with a longitudinal
nectariferous groove from the middle to the base ; capsules with the
valves connected by cencelled hairs.

Species — Candidum — Leaves lanceolate, scattered, tapering to the
base ; corols, companulate, glabrous within, white.

Description.

Root bulbous ; stem upright, rising about three feet ; leaves, nume-
rous, smooth, without foot-stalks ; flowers, large, white, terminating,
the stem in clusters upon short peduncles. The corolla is bell-shaped,
composed of 6 petals of a beautiful white colour ; capsule oblong,
divided into three cells, containing many flattish seeds of a semicir-
cular shape.

Locality.

This plant is a native of the Levant, but is cultivated in our gardens
for its beauty.

Medical Properties.

It is mucilaginous, which makes it very useful as a poultice in in-
flammatory swellings. It likewise, when simmered with lard, forms
a good ointment for tetters, &c. It enters into the tetter ointment of
our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.
Externally, in poultice and ointment.


Medical Botany. 125

No. 80.

LAVENDER. The Leaves and Stems.

Latin Name — Lavandula Spica.

English Name — Broad-leaved Lavender.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOPERMIA.

Genus — Lavandula — Calyx ovate, subdentate, supported by a
bract ; corol reversed ; stamens within the tube.

Species — Spica — Leaves sessile, lance-linear ; margin revolute ;
spikes terminal, intercepted, naked ; flowers blue ; shrub branched.

Description.

Stem woody, ramose, whitish ; leaves lanceolate, pointed, entire,
glaucous ; flowers bluish, verticillate, sessile, disposed in terminal
spikes.

Locality.

A perennial plant, native of the south of France ; flowering from
May to September.

Qualities.

Its smell is aromatic and pleasant, and its taste bitter and warm.
It contains a large proportion of essential oil, of a straw colour, which
furnishes 0.25 of camphor. Water and alcohol take up its active
principles.

Medical Properties.

Although lavender possesses very energetic stimulant properties, it
is, nevertheless, very little used now, except as a perfume. It may,
however, be administered with advantage in flatulence, fainting, and
nervous affections. It is carminative, pectoral, nervine, and anti-
spasmodic.

Employment.

Powder, from one scruple to half a drachm. In the form of infu-
sion or tea. It constitutes the principal ingredient in the compound
spirits of lavender.


126 Materia Medica.

No. 81.

BAYBERRY. The Bark of the Root.

Latin Name — Myrica Cerifera.
English Name — Wax Myrtle.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.
Order IV.— TETRANDRIA.

Genus — Myrica — Staminate flowers ; ament long ; calyx a concave
scale of the anient ; corol ; stamens 4 to 6; anthers 4-valved ; pistil-
late flowers ; calyx like the staminate ; corol ; styles 2 ; berry
1. seeded.

Species — Cerifera — Leaves wedge-lanceolate, acute, with distant
serratures at the apex ; fruit small, globose, covered with a whitish
wax in a mealy state ; stem arboreous ; shrub.

Description.

Stem ramose, furnished with a grayish bark, from six to twelve feet
high ; branches cylindrical, covered with a brown or slightly reddish
epidermis ; leaves alternate, oblong, lanceolate, pointed at top, and
scattered with resinous atoms ; aments loose ; axillary short ; calyci-
nal scales acute, not shining ; fruit, a globular berry, furnished exter-
nally with an unctuous white powder, and containing a large quantity
of wax.

Locality.

A native shrub of the United States, found particularly in the states
of Connecticut, New-Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Virginia, the
Carolinas, and Louisiana.

Qualities.

According to Dr. Dana's analysis, the berries of the myrica ceri-
fera contain wax, 32.00 ; resino-extractive, 5.00 ; black powder,
15.00 ; kernels, 47 ; loss, 0.50.

.Medical Properties.

This article is narcotic, astringent, emetic, &c. The bark of the
root is found to be a sovereign remedy in scrofula, applied in the form
of poultice, by bruising the bark, and simmering it in rain water;
then applying the poultice to the ulcers, and injecting a strong decoction
into the sinuses. It is likewise very good in jaundice, especially that
called " black jaundice." In dysentery, I have given an infusion of
this bark with success. Dr. Fahnestock has used the pulverized con-
crete oil in dysentery of a typhoid kind, which prevailed at Harris-
burg, (Pennsylvania,) and it was attended with much success. His
mode of administering it is by rubbing down to a powder a drachm or
two of the concrete oil, or the wax, and by uniting the oil of cinna-
mon to the powder, using gentle evacuants before administering it.

I consider this shrub to be one of the most valuable productions of


No 78.
LAURUS SASSAFRAS.


COMMON SASSAFRAS.


Medical Botany. 127

this or any other country. It enters in the composition of the anti-
dysenteric cordial of our pharmacopoeia.

We use it principally in the form of poultice, as a remedy in the
scrofula, or king's evil ; and also combined with blood-root, as a ster-
nutatory, or snuff, for the polypus.

Employment.

It may be given in powder, infusion, or decoction.

The poultice for scrofulous ulcers is made by simmering the bark
of the root, bruised or pulverized, in rain or spring water, until soft;
and then stirring in Indian meal, or, which is better, slippery. elm bark,
until a poultice of a proper consistence is formed.

Bayberry tallow, or wax, is the basis of one of our plasters for
scrofulous ulcers.


No. 82.

COLOMBO. The Root.

Latin Name — Menispermum Palmatum.
English Name — Colombo.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.
Order XII.— POLYANDRIA.

Genus — Menispermum — Petals 4 exterior, 8 interior ; male sta-
mina 16 ; female stamina 8 ; barren ; berries 2, 1-seeded.

Species — Palmatum — Stem simple, hirsute ; leaves orbicular with
five distant and palmated lobes.

Description.

Stem climbing, simple, furnished with long hair ; leaves orbicular,
5-nerved, and five distant and palmated lobes ; male flowers, support-
ed by simple or ramose peduncles, longer than the leaves ; calyx
6-parted ; corolla six fleshy petals ; six stamens longer than the pe-
tals ; female flowers unknown.

Locality.

This is a native growth of Africa, Madagascar, and the East Indies.

Qualities.

This root is thick, fibrous, and composed of fusiform ramifications.
It is found in commerce in sections of about one inch and a half di-
ameter, or in pieces two or three inches long, covered with a thick
and yellowish bark, easily detached, and offering a rugose epidermis
of a brown or olive colour. The parenchyma is of a spongy texture
of a greenish-yellow colour, presenting several concentric zones:
its taste is bitter, and its smell unpleasant.

Colombo contains, according to Mr. Planche, starch, 33 ; gum, 9 ;
a principle containing nitrogen, 6 ; a yellow bitter matter, 13 ; a little


128 Materia Medica.

volatile oil ; some salts of lime and potassa ; some oxide of iron,
silica, and lignin.

Medical Properties.

This article is possessed of a bitter quality, without any astringency
or acrimony ; but if it is given in too large doses, it is apt to nauseate.
When given in proper doses, it acts as a tonic, giving strength to the
stomach and intestinal canal, without stimulating ; and on that account
it is very useful in hectic fever. In dyspeptic complaints, it exerts its
greatest benefits, and is one of the best tonics which we can employ
in those cases. Dr. Eberle administered this article, in union with
ipecacuanha, with "marked advantage," in dyspepsia. He gives ten
or twelve grains of Colombo with two of ipecacuanha. Colombo en-
ters into the restorative cordial of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.

Colombo may be administered in the forms of powder and infusion.
Dose of the powder, from twelve to fifteen grains ; infusion, from one
to two drachms, infused in a pint of boiling water.


No. 83.

GUM ARABIC. The Gum.

Latin Name — Mimosa Nilotica.
English Name — Gum Akabic.

Botanical Character.

Order X.— DECANDRIA.

Genus — Mimosa — Polygamous ; calyx tubular, 5-toothed ; corol
5-petalled ; stamina? 5 or more, exert ; style 1 ; stigma truncate ; le-
gume 1-celled, 2-valved.

Species — Nilotica — Spines stipular, spreading ; leaves doubly pin-
nate, outer partial leaves separated by a gland ; spikes globular, pe-
duncled ; flowers yellow.

Description.

Trunk from thirty to forty feet high, ramose ; leaves bi-pinnate,
composed of ten pinnidm, supporting each about twenty pairs of small
and oval folioles ; flowers yellow, small, united in a capitulum, in the
axilla of the leaves ; stamina very numerous, monadelphous, two of
them much longer than the calyx ; fruit, a long and narrow pod, offer-
ing from seven to eight strangulations, each containing one seed.

Locality.

The tree that furnishes the gum arabic, grows principally along the
Nile, in Egypt, and in the sandy deserts of Africa, and Arabia Petraca.

Qualities.

Gum arabic is found in commerce, in dry and semi-transparent
pieces of various sizes, rugose, and slightly cracked on the surface ;


No. 84.
MARRUBIUM VULGARE.


COMMON HOARHOUND.


RAVBF.RRY.


Medical Botany. 129

friable, irregularly round, colourless, or yellowish ; inodorous, of a
sweet and viscous taste. It is composed, according to Messrs. Gay
Lussac, and Thenard, of carbon, 42.23 ; oxygen and hydrogen, in
suitable proportions to form 57 of water. It contains, besides, a
small quantity of saline substances ; otherwise, its chemical proper-
ties do not differ from those of gums in general.
Medical Properties.

The gum of this tree is highly nutritious. During the whole time
of the harvest, of the journey, and of the fair, the Moors of the desert
live almost entirely upon it. It has likewise been ascertained that
six ounces of this gum is sufficient to support a person during the
space of twenty-four hours. It possesses the power of being a mulci-
laginous demulcent, which makes it very valuable in hoarseness,
dysentery, strangury, hooping-cough, &c. In gonorrhoea it is an
excellent article. It is very useful as a vehicle for other medicines.

Employment.

Given in doses of the pulverized gum, of from half to one drachm.
Solution, gum Arabic, from half to one ounce, in two pounds or two
pints of boiling water, used as common drink.


No. 84.

HOARHOUND. The Leaves and Stents.

Latin Name — Marrubium Vulgare.
English Name — Common Hoarhound.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DID YN A MIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Marrubium — Calyx salver-form, rigid ; 10 striate ; the
upper lip of the corol cloven, linear straight.

Species — Vulgare — Leaves roundish, ovate, toothed, rugose,
veined ; calyx 10-toothed, with setaceous hooked teeth.

Description.

This plant is perennial, arising about a foot in height, leaves deeply
serrated, veined, wrinkled and hoary, in pairs, standing upon long
thick foot, and broad foot-stalks ; flowers white ; calyx cut into ten
segments.

Locality.

This is a native plant of Europe, but flourishes well with us ; and
is found growing along fences and road sides.

Qualities.

Hoarhound has an aromatic and musk-like odour, and an acrid,
warm, and bitter taste.

It contains a volatile oil, a bitter principle, and some gallic acid.
Water and alcohol dissolve its active principles.

Vol. III. R


130 Materia Medica.

Medical Properties.

It is a very energetic stimulant, diaphoretic, pectoral, and tonic, and
is a very excellent remedy in colds, coughs, and all pulmonary affec-
tions. It is very good in consumption and pneumonia ; it acts as an
emmenagogue and antispasmodic. Given in very large doses it
sometimes acts as a laxative. It enters into the pulmonary balsam of
our pharmacopoeia ; and which constitutes an exceedingly valuable
preparation in all pulmonary diseases.

Employment.

It is most generally given in the form of syrup and infusion, or tea.
It is used also in the form of syrup, for colds and coughs.


No. 85.

PEPPERMINT.^ The Leaves and Ste?ns.

Latin Name — Mentha Piperita.
English Name — Peppermint.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Mentha— Calyx 5-cleft ; corol nearly equal, 4-parted,
the broadest segment notched; stamens erect, distant.

Species — Piperita — Spikes obtuse, interupted below ; leaves pe.
tiolate, subovate, nearly glabrous ; stem glabrous.

Description.

Stem erect, one or two feet high, ramose ; leaves oval, dentate on
the periphery ; flowers violet, in short and very close spikes at the
top of the branches.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to Europe, but is cultivated in our eardeng
for medical use.

Qualities.

The odour of this plant is agreeable and penetrating ; its taste is
pungent, slightly bitter, followed by a sensation of cold in the mouth.

It contains an abundance of yellowish essential oil, containing cam-
phor, a little resin, and extractive. Its active principles are soluble
in water and alcohol.

Medical Properties.

This plant possesses decided stimulant, sudorific, antispasmodic, pun-
gent, and anti-emetic properties, which principally arise from the es.
sential oil which resides in this plant. It is accordingly administered
in affections which require the use of stimulating articles. It may
be administered with advantage in nervous affections of the stomach :
such as flatulence, colics, dyspepsia, spasmodic vomiting, cardialgia,
ll may likewise be administered with some success in ame-
norrhcea, chlorosis, hysteria, and other nervous diseases. It is also


No. 85.
MENTHA PIPERITA.


PEPPERMINT.


No. 86.
NEPETA CATARIA.


CATNIP.


Medical Botany. 131

very useful as an adjunct to other medicines, particularly cathar-
tics, to facilitate their action, and to conceal their odour or unpleasant
taste. It enters into the neutralizing and antibilious physic of our
pharmacopoeia. It is excellent to allay vomiting ; it is very useful in
bowel complaints, cholera morbus, &c.

Employment.
It may be given in powder, infusion, or the essential oil, essence,
or powder. From one scruple to half a drachm may be given at a
dose. Infusion, an ounce to a quart of boiling water ; and should be
taken freely.


No. 86.

CATNIP. The Leaves and Flowers.

Latin Name — Nepeta Cataria.
English Name — Common Catnip.
Vulgar Names — Catnip, Catmint, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Nepeta — Corol with the middle segment of the corol cre-
nate, the orifice with a reflected margin ; stamina approximate.

Species — Cataria — Flowers in whorled spikes ; whorls slightly pe-
dicelled ; leaves petioled, cordate ; tooth serrate ; plant hoary, pu-
bescent.

Description.

This plant rises from two to three feet in height ; stalk quadrilateral,
ramous ; leaves roundish, dentate, pubescent ; flowers in a whorled
spike, whitish.

Locality.

This is a perennial plant, indigenous to this country, and is found
growing throughout the United States, along the sides of roads and
old buildings.

Medical Properties.

It is diaphoretic, carminative, diluent, refrigerant. It is useful in
aH kinds of fevers, producing perspiration without increasing the heat
of the body. Although this plant is very simple, and is by some des-
pised, yet it is a very valuable article.. In colds, a tea made of it is
much used in domestic practice, and not without effect, as it most
generally induces a profuse perspiration, which throws off the cold,
and restores the patient to his ordinary health. Very efficacious in
all kinds of fevers.

Employment.

It is given in infusion, by infusing a small quantity in a quart of
boiling water. Externally as a poultice in painful swellings. Ex-
cellent also in fomentations.


132 Materia Medica.

No. 87.

SPEARMINT. The Leaves, Branches, 8?c.

Latin Name — Mentha Viridis.
English Name — Spearmint.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Mentha — Calyx 5-cleft ; corol nearly equal, 4-parted ;
the broadest segment notched ; stamens erect, distant.

Species — Viridis — Spikes interrupted ; leaves sessile, lanceolate,
acute, naked; bracts setaceous, and with the teeth of the calyx some-
what hairy ; leaves glabrous ; flowers purple.

Description.
This 'plant arises two or three feet in height ; stem quadrangular,
straight, with small branches, leaves opposite, on short peduncles,
oval, serrated ; flowers on a short terminal spike.

Locality.
It is a perennial plant, found growing along brooks and rivulets.

Qualities.
It has a warm, stimulating, aromatic taste, which is owing to the
essential oil which it contains.

Medical Properties.
Febrifuge, diuretic, antispasmodic, and antiemetic. This plant is
excellent to allay nausea, and sickness at the stomach. It is also an
excellent remedy in gravel, suppression of urine, &c. The oil is
also valuable in pains, and rheumatic affections.

Employment.
Infusion, made by bruising a handful, in a quart of boiling water.
It constitutes the principal article in the spirits of mint, which is made
by bruising the green plant, and adding sufficient fourth. proof Hoi-
land gin to make a saturated tincture, which makes a preparation
remarkably efficacious in suppression of urine, gravelly affections,
&c. I discovered this many years ago, more by accident than de-
sign. The dose of this preparation is a wineglassful, drank as often
as the stomach will bear. Cotton, wet with the above liquid, or tinc-
ture, and applied to the piles, affords immediate relief.


J\ T o.
MENTHA VIRID1S.


*%


SPEARMINT.


Medical Botany. 133

No. 88.

TOBACCO.

Latin Name — Nicotiana Tabactjm.
English Name — Common Tobacco.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Nicotiana — Corol funnel-form, with a plaited border ;
stamina inclined ; capsule 2-valved, 2-celled.

Species — Tabacum — Leaves lanceovate, sessile, decurrent ; flowers
acute.

Description.

Stem straight, ramose and viscous, from two to three feet high ;
leaves alternate, pubescent, very large, oval, and sessile ; flowers in
panicles at the extremity of the branches, large ; calyx urceolate ;
corolla, infundibulitbrm, regular, five stamina ; ovary ovoid, with two
polyspcrmous cells ; fruit an ovoid and bivalve capsule.

Locality.

This plant is a native of America, but is cultivated in Europe. It
flourishes best in the southern states.

Qualities.

The tobacco leaves, in their green state, have a virose smell, and
an acrid and aromatic taste. Such as they are found in commerce,
they are dry, and have experienced a beginning of fermentation,
which, to a certain degree, changes their nature ; their colour is then
more or less brown, their odour aromatic and penetrating, and their
taste acrid.

According to Vauquelin, the juice obtained from the fresh leaves
contains a red animal matter, soluble in water and alcohol ; a peculiar
acrid principle, soluble in water and alcohol, volatile, colourless, and
apparently the active principle ; a green resin, albumen, lignous
fibres, acetic acid, and some salts. The tobacco of commerce, con-
tains besides, some carbonate of ammonia. Water and alcohol take
up easily its active principles.

Medical Properties.
The properties of this plant are well known. Its influencing powers
are every where felt. The Arab cultivates it in the burning sands of
his barren desert, and its influence is so well experienced by him, that
he will perform tedious and lengthy journeys through the scorching
sands to procure it. The Laplander places his life in jeopardy,
amidst the drifting snows of his country, to obtain it. The Indian,
that roams the " forest wild" alone, finds in this article a companion.
The sailor and soldier, too, to whom the thundering cannon and depri-


134 Materia Medica.

ration of every other luxury is nothing, if he can procure this grateful
morsel. Even the polished citizen, although surrounded with all the
pleasures and comforts of civilized and elegant society, will not dis-
pense with his favourite cigar. This article is emetic, narcotic, &c.
It is good in ulcers, and in wounds. Sternutatory, making an excel-
lent snuff for catarrh, and affections of the head. It has been used
by some physicians as an emetic, but it is not a fit article for this
purpose.

Jewett, who some years since was cast away in Nootka Sound, on
the northwest coast of America, applied a leaf of tobacco, steeped
in spirits, to a severe wound of the skull which he had received in an en-
counter with the Indians, and the application was attended with suc-
cess. All but one or two of the crew were massacred by the savages.
The wound was received upon the head by a tomahawk, which caused
a considerable depression of the skull. Upon his return to this coun-
try, he showed me the scar of the wound he had received, and he
stated that he used nothing else but the tobacco to effect a cure.
A weak infusion, as an injection, removes worms which sometimes
infest the rectum. Hosack recommended one good remedy, when I
attended his lectures, viz. that tobacco be used only externally.
He stated that this plant was made for the any.s, but not for the mouth*

Employment.
Externally, as a wash in foul ulcers ; and in snuff, taken in catarrh.


No. 89.

THYME.


Latin Name — Origanum Majorana.
English Name — Garden Thyme.

Botanical Character.

Class XIII.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Origanum — Calyxes collected into a quadrangular cone,
with intervening bracts ; the upper lip of the corol erect, flat, emar-
ginate ; under lip 3-parted, divisions nearly equal.

Species — Majorana — Spikes roundish,temate, compact, peduncled ;
leaves petiolate, elliptic, obtuse, somewhat glabrous.

Description.
This is a well known garden plant, so familiar as to need no de-
scription.

Medical Properties.
Both the plant and the oil are possessed of medicinal properties.


Medical Botany. 13&

Employment.
A tea of the plant, drank warm, is very valuable in painful or diffi-
cult menstruation. The oil is useful externally, in rheumatic and
other painful affections.


No. 90.

OLIVE. The Oil.


Latin Name->—Oi,KA Europ^ea.
English Name — Olive Tree.

Botanical Character.

Class II.— DIANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Olea — Corol 4-cleft, the segments somewhat ovate ; drupe
1-celled, 1-seeded.

Species — Europjea — Leaves lanceolate, very entire ; racemes ax-
illary, close ; tree evergreen.

Description.
This is an evergreen, with oblong, narrow, willow-like leaves, and
monopetalous, whitish flowers, cut into four sections or segments, fol-
lowed by a cluster of oval, black fruit, containing, under a fleshy pulp,
a hard, rough stone.

Locality.
This tree is a native of the south of Europe, and north of Africa.
It is cultivated in France, Spain, and Italy, for the sake of its fruit
and oil.

Qualities.
Olives, when fresh, have an acrid, bitter, and extremely unpleasant
taste. The oil is viscous, of greenish-yellow colour, becoming solid
a few degrees above the freezing point, of an agreeable taste and
smell, and of the specific gravity of 0.9153. Its composition is the
same as that of the other oils ; it is not desicative, and does not be-
come rancid as easily as that of sweet almond.

Medical Properties.

Emollient, purgative, antiseptic, vulnery, refrigerant, &c. This oil,
taken internally, operates as a gentle laxative, and is useful in inflam-
mation of the bowels and stomach ; also in dysentery. It is often
used to mitigate the action of acrid substances, taken in the stomach.
It is used externally in frictions, in gargles, and in clysters ; but its
principal employment is in the composition of ointments and plasters.
It has been thought to be a specific for the bite of poisonous serpents.

In the Philosophical Transactions, (vol. xxxiv. p. 310.,) are related
the experiments of one William Oliver, who suffered his arm to be


136 Materia Medica.

bitten by a viper, and waited until the most violent symptoms ensued,
which were soon removed by applying the warm oil of olives to the
affected parts. This oil is found to be very serviceable in dropsies,
especially in ascites. The oil, in those cases, seems to soften the
skin, and lessen the inflammation, which is produced by distension.
The leaves of the olive possess a very bitter and harsh taste, and
contain tannin and gallic acid. They are frequently used in the
south of France, in intermittent fevers. They have been used at the
Hospital de la Charite, and not without benefit. They may be ad-
ministered in powder or decoction.

Employment.
The dose of the oil, as a cathartic, is one ounce. Externally, it is
rubbed on the parts, or formed into plasters or ointments.


No. 91.

ALDER. The Bark and Leaves.

Latin Name — Prinos Verticillatus.
English Name — Black Alder.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Prinos — Consists of shrubs, a part of which are deciduous,
and a part evergreen ; bearing small, lateral, or axillary flowers. Its
character is formed by a 6-cleft calyx ; a monopetalous subrotate,
6-cleft corolla ; and a 6-seeded berry.

Species — Verticillatus — Leaves deciduous, oval, serrate, acumi-
nate, slightly pubescent beneath ; flowers axillary, aggregate.

Description.
The black alder is irregular in its growth, but most commonly forms
bunches six or eight feet in height. The leaves are alternate, or scat-
tered, on short petioles, oval, acute at the base, sharply serrate,
acuminate, with some hairiness, particularly on the veins underneath.
The flowers are small, white, growing in little tufts, or imperfect um-
bels, which are nearly sessile in the axils of the leaves ; calyx small ;
6-cleft, persistent ; corolla monapetalous, spreading, without a tube ;
the border divided into six outer segments. The stamens are erect,
with oblong anthers ; in the barren flowers they are equal in length
to the corolla ; in the fertile ones, shorter. The germ in the fertile
flowers is large, green, roundish, with a short neck, or style, termi-
nating in an obtuse stigma. These are followed by irregular bunches
of bright scarlet berries, which are roundish, supported by the per-
sistent calyx, and crowned with the stigma ; 6-celled, containing six
long seeds, convex outwardly, and sharp-edged within. The berries


91.
PRINOS VERTICILLATUS.


BLACK ALDER


No. 90.
OLEA EUROr/EA.


OIJVE TREE,


Medical Botany. 137

are bitter, and unpleasant to the taste, with a little sweetness and
some acrimony.

Qualities.

The bark of the black alder is moderately bitter, but inferior in this
respect to some other shrubs. It is not very astringent.
Medical Properties.

Alterative, subastringent, corroborant, anti-herpetic, &c. It has
been much used by some in intermittents. Barton thinks that, on
some occasions, it is better than the Peruvian bark. It is recommend,
ed in cases of great debility, accompanied with fever. Barton says,
that in incipient gangrene, it is unquestionably a medicine of great
efficacy. To be given internally, and applied externally as a wash.

Dr. Thatcher recommends a decoction, or infusion of the bark,
taken internally, in doses of a teacupful, and employed also as a wash,
for the cure of cutaneous eruptions, particularly the herpetic kind.

A tea or decoction of the bark, sweetened, has been highly extolled
for the removal of worms in the stomach of children.

The bark, or the root of black alder, is found excellent to purify
the blood ; to be combined with other articles, and made into beer, or
diet drink.

The berries, infused in brandy, are said to be very efficacious in
some pulmonary affections.

Matthew Noyes, a clergyman, in Northford, Connecticut, it is said,
was cured of an affection of the lungs, which had rendered him unable
to preach. He took a wineglassful of the above preparation, three or
four times a- day.


No. 92.

ANISEED. The Seed.

Latin Name — PiiMpinella Anisum.
English Name — Garden Aniseed.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — Pimpinella — Flowers tubulous, all fertile ; petals cordate,
incurved ; seeds striate, ovate, oblong ; stigma subglobular.

Species — Anisum — Radical leaves, trifid, and cut ; stem striate ;
cauline leaves, in narrow pinnate segments.

Description.

Stem herbaceous, ramose, one foot high ; radical leaves petiolate,
round and dentate ; the cauline leaves gashed into narrow and linear
segments ; flowers white, without involucrum or involuccllum ; petals
equal, cordiform ; stamina longer than the petals ; anthers round,
globular ; fruit ovoid, slightly pubescent.

Vol. III. S


138 Materia Medica.

Locality.
An annual plant ; native of the Levant ; cultivated both in Europe
and America.

Qualities.
Seeds greenish, ovoid, lunated, striate longitudinally ; of a warm,
aromatic, and sweet taste ; of an agreeable smell.

Their shell contains a white essential oil, congealing at 10° Centig.
(50° Fahr.) and the almond yields an inodorous fixed oil. Its active
principles are soluble in water, and principally in alcohol.
Medical Properties.
The properties of this plant are somewhat similar to those of fennel.
The seeds are carminative and pectoral. They are useful in dyspep-
sia, and flatulent affections incident to children. The oil of aniseed
enters into the cough-drops of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.
The seeds may be given, but the oil dropped on sugar is preferable.
For flatulence, an infusion of the seeds may be given.


No. 03.

CANADA BALSAM. The Resinous Juice.

Latin Name — Pinus Balsamea.
English Name — Canada Fir Balsam.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.-MONOECIA.
Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus — Pinus — Male. — Calyx a peltate scale of the ament : corol
; anthers sessile, growing to the scales.

Female. — Calyxa 2-flowered, scale of the cone ; corol 0; pistil 1 ;
two nuts under each scale ; winged.

Species — Balsamea — Leaves solitary, flat, glaucous beneath ;
cones cylindrical, erect, with short bracts ; bracts mucronate, sub-
serrulate.

Description.

Trunk elevated, ramose at top, covered with a smooth, and in some
species with rough bark ; leaves linear, more or less elongate, point-
ed, persistent, of a more or less deep green ; flowers monoicous, male
flowers in scaly aments ; two anthers fixed to the scales ; female
flowers amentaceous as well as the male, two on each scale ; fruit, a
pyramidal cone, of variable size, composed of imbricated and thick
scales, containing almonds of a turpentine taste.

Locality.

This tree is found growing plentifully in Canada, and in some parts
of the United States.


No. 94.
PTEROSrORA ANDROMEDA.


DRAGON'S? CLAW.


Medical Botany. 139

Qualities.
This balsam is composed of resin and essential oil. It is entirely
soluble in alcohol, and partially in water.

Medical Properties.

When given internally, this balsam is stimulating, gently laxative ;

applied internally, it is emollient and cooling. It is efficacious when

applied to sore nipples, and is esteemed very much by some in cuts,


Employment.
The dose is from twenty to thirty drops.


No. 94.

DRAGON'S CLAW. The Root.

Latin Name — Pterospora Andromeda.

Vulgar Names — Dragon's Claw, Fever-root, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Pterospora — Corol monopetalous ; margin 5-toothed, re-
flexed, enclosing the stamens ; anthers 2-celled, 2-bristled, peltate ;
filaments flat ; style short ; capsule 5.celled, 5-valved ; calyx 5-part-
ed ; seeds minute, and very numerous, each furnished with a terminal
wing.

Species — Andromeda — Scape purple, tall, bearing a many-flowered
raceme, of reddish-white flowers ; flowers lateral and terminal,
nodding ; stem simple, scaly ; leafless.

Description.
This plant rises six or seven inches in height ; the leaves grow in
a cluster from the top of the root ; blossoms yellow ; small black root,
about the size of cloves, very tender resembling the claws of a hen.

Locality.
It is found in the Genesee country, and in the mountains around
Albany.

Medical Properties.
This plant is useful in different kinds of fevers, particularly typhus.
It keeps up a moisture of the skin, without producing any excitement.

Employment.
To a teaspoonful of the root, add about half a pint of boiling water.
It may be drank freely.


140 Materia Medica.

No. 95.

WHITE, AND YELLOW, OR PITCH PINE.

Latin Names — Pinus, Strobus, and Palttstus.
English Names — White Pine ; also, Pitch and Yellow, or
Southern Pine.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONOECIA.
Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus — Pinus — Staminate flowers ; corol ; calyx, a peltate scale
of the ament ; anthers sessile, growing to the scales ; pistillate
flowers; calyx, a 2-lcaved scale of the cone; corol ; pistil 1,
2-winged ; nuts under each scale.

Species — Strobus — Leaves in fives, slender ; cones cylindrical,
smooth, longer than the leaves ; anthers with a double subulate, mi-
nute, crest ; cones pendulous.

Locality.

Found principally in the northern states.
Medical Properties.

Both the white and yellow pitch, or southern pine, are stimulant,
laxative, diuretic, pectoral, vermifuge, discutient, antiherpetic, deter-
gent, balsamic, vulnerary, &c. This, together with the white pine, is
one of the most valuable productions to be found. The bark and gum
are very useful in rheumatism, and consumption. It likewise acts as
an emmenagogue, increasing the flow of the menses. It is also bene-
ficial in diseases of the kidneys. Externally, it is much used in
the form of plasters, for ulcers, &c. In short, it appears to act upon
all the secretions and excretions of the body.

Employment.

Internally, infusion of the pitch, white, and other pines, drank, or
pills made of the gum ; externally, plasters, spread on cloth or leather,
for lumbago, rheumatism, and local pains. The gum itself, spread on
leather, makes an excellent strengthening plaster. Digested in wine,
it is an excellent remedy in rheumatic affections, and obstructed
menses. The oil of tar is excellent in pain in the breast. Ten drops,
three or four times a day, arc a dose ; to be given in milk.


No. 95.
P1NUS PALUSTR1S OK AUSTRALIS.


YELLOW, OR PITCH PINE


Medical Botany. 141

No. 96.

WILD CHERRY. The Bark.

Latin Name — Prunus Virginiana.
English Name — Wild Cherry-tree.

Botanical Character.

Class XL— ICOSANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus —Prunus — Calyx inferior, 5-cleft ; corol 5-petalled ; drupe,
with a stone, with slightly prominent seams.

Species — Virginiana — Flowers in erect racemes ; petals roundish ;
leaves doubly toothed, oblong, acuminate, smooth ; petioles with about
4 glands.

Description.
Trunk from twenty-five to thirty feet high ; leaves deciduous, oval,
pointed, and dentate, of a fine shining green colour, furnished at their
base with two small reddish glands ; flowers white, in erect racemes,
from six to eight inches long ; calyx inferior, 5-cleft ; 5 petals ; style
terminal ; fruit, a black drupe, containing a nut with a prominent
suture.

Locality.
This tree is indigenous to the United States, in many parts of which
it is found in abundance. Found growing in our forests.

Qualities.

It has a bitter astringent taste, slightly aromatic, and similar to that
of the peach kernels.

Dr. Conwell, in his dissertation on vegetable chemistry, mentions
that he has obtained from this bark a new crystalline principle, which
he calls cerasia.

Medical Properties.

The bark, when taken into the system, produces some increase in
the action of the heart and arteries, and is apt, in some persons, to
produce some drowsiness. When continued for a length of time in
small doses, it increases the tone of the stomach, and invigorates the
whole system ; but if taken in very large doses, it produces the con-
trary effects.

Dr. Eberle says, that "he has several times reduced his pulse from
seventy-five to fifty strokes in a minute, by copious draughts of the
cold infusion taken several times during the day, and continued for
twelve or fourteen days." He further adds, " this effect has not, I
believe, been noticed before, but from much experience with it, I am
strongly inclined to believe that we may control the action of the heart
and arteries, (circulation,) to a considerable extent, by the use of this
substance."


142 Materia[Medica.

This bark has been particularly recommended in intermittent fe-
vers, phthisis, hectic fever, and in some instances with decided benefit.
Its effects are pretty obvious, and we may easily perceive how this
bark may produce this beneficial medication in cases of this nature.
The infusion of wild cherry bark contains, as we have said, prussic
acid, together with a bitter and an astringent principle, dissolved in a
considerable quantity of water ; and to the combination of these reme-
them in consumption, and catarrhal affections.

" This is a very good article (says a writer) in dyspepsia, given in
small doses ; but if given in too large doses, it is apt to weaken rather
than invigorate those organs." It is useful as a corroborant in fever
and ague. It enters into the wine bitters, given in intermittent fever.
It is excellent in many forms of dysentery, and, combined with other
articles, makes a good beer for the blood.

Employment.

In the form of infusion ; as a tonic, should be given cold ; the pow-
dered bark, in the dose of from half a drachm to two, may be given.


No. 97.

HEMLOCK. The Bark, Leaves, and Oil.

Latin Name — Pinus Canadensis.
English Name — Common Hemlock.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONOECIA.
Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus — Pinus— Staminate flowers ; corol ; calyx a peltate scale
of the ament ; anthers sessile, growing to the scales ; pistillate flow-
ers ; calyx a 2-leaved scale of the cone ; corol ; pistil 1 ; 2-winged
nuts or seeds under each scale.

Species — Canadensis — Leaves flat, denticulate, leaning two ways ;
strobiles ovate, terminal, acute ; scales round ; strobiles scarcely
longer than the leaves.

Description.

This is a large tree, growing throughout the northern states, and is
so well known as to need no description. The bark is used for tan-
ning leather.

Qualities.

The bark contains tannin, gallic acid, &c, and is very astringent.
Medical Properties.

A decoction of the bark makes an excellent astringent wash for
falling of the bowels and womb. A tea or infusion made of the leaves,
an Indian doctor informs me, is excellent to produce perspiration in
incipient rheumatism. The oil is very valuable in painful rheumatic


No. OS.
PODOPHYLLUM PELTATUM.


MAY AITLE.


Medical Botany. 143

affections, externally ; and internally, is very good in pain of the
breast ; also for quinsy, bathed on the throat. The gum makes an
excellent plaster for lumbago, sciatica, and rheumatism. Dr. Thomp-
son says, that a tea made of the bark is excellent to remove canker.

Employment.
It is said that a fomentation of the hemlock is very useful when ap-
plied to swelled testicles, arising from the mumps, when translated to
these parts.


No. 98.

MANDRAKE. The Root.

Latin Name — Podophyllum Peltatum.

Vulgar Names — May Apple, Indian Apple, Mandrake, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA. .

Genus — Podophyllum — Calyx 3-leaved ; petals 6 to 9; berry 1 -cell-
ed, many-seeded, crowned with the stigma.

i. Species — Peltatum — Leaves palmate, peltate ; sinus obtuse ; seg-
ments cuniform, bilobe, and toothed at the end.

Description.

The May apple has a jointed, running root, about half the size of
the finger ; the stem is about a foot high, and is enveloped at its base
by the sheaths which covered it when in bud ; it is smooth, round, and
erect, dividing at the top into two round petioles, from three to six inches
long ; each petiole supports a large peltate, palmate leaf, smooth above,
slightly pubescent beneath, divided into seven lobes, which are wedge-
shaped, toothed at the extremity ; in the fork of the stem is a solitary
flower, on a round, nodding peduncle, one or two inches long ; ca-
lyx 3 ; oval, obtuse, concaved leaves ; petals from 6 to 9, obo-
vate, obtuse, concave, smooth, white ; stamens shorter than the petals,
curving upward ; anthers oblong, twice as long as their filaments ;
germ oval, compressed, obscurely angular ; stigma nearly sessile,
convex ; fruit large, ovate, and yellowish, which is l-celled, many-
seeded, and crowned with the stigma; flowers from March till May.

Locality.

The May apple inhabits in this country from New-England to Geor-
gia, but is found in the interior of the country the most.

Qualities.

The dried root of the May apple is fragile, and easily reduced to
powder. It has a peculiar mid rather unpleasant taste, but not much
acrimony. When chewed for some time, it manifests a strong, bitter


144 Materia Medica.

taste. It appears, according to Bigelow, to contain a resin, a bitter*

extractive matter, fecula, and a slight proportion of gummy substance.

Medical Properties.

Purgative, deobstruent, anti-bilious, anthelmintic, hydrogogue, anti-
dyspeptic.

The properties of this article are that of a sure and active cathartic,
equal, if not superior, in some diseases, to that of jalap. " We have,"
says Professor Bigelow, " hardly any native plant which answers bet-
ter the common purposes of jalap, aloes, and rhubarb, and which is
more mild and safe in its operation."

We have found this root very valuable in many inveterate chro-
nic diseases, such as venereal, scrofulous, bilious, dyspeptic, or chro-
nic, affections of the liver, dropsy, &c.

The following is an excellent form to administer it :
Compound Powder of Mandrake.
Pulv. mandrake root,
Pulv. spearmint,
Cream tartar,
Equal parts ; mix ; dose, a teaspoonful in molasses or tea.

The mandrake is often considerably nauseating, and sometimes vo-
mits, and, upon the whole, is not so pleasant as some other purgatives;
but, as far as my experience goes, it has a peculiar effect upon all the
secretions and excretions, stimulating them to a healthy action, and
often answers the purpose both of an emetic and cathartic. It is ex-
cellent in chronic affections of the liver, indigestion, &c. I have in-
variably given this preparation with success in a variety of complaints.
It is a powerful medicine, and requires caution in the administration
of it.

"The root of this plant," says Miles, "is peculiarly calculated for
a cathartic, extending its influence through every part of the system ;
touching every gland, when given in small doses, and repeated every
two or three hours. It is particularly serviceable in all dropsical cases
and intermittents, or in any other disease where a general action is
wanting. It is often successfully employed as a vermifuge, in tea-
spoonful doses, and repeated." "I will remark," says he, "in re-
gard to this medicine, also, that small doses excite a general action,
and stimulate the glands to a discharge of their respective offices ;
while large doses evacuate, and exhaust the system."

We likewise have pleasure in stating the opinion of our worthy
friend, and able practitioner, Dr. J. F. D. Lobstein, upon this article.
He says it is of the greatest service in incontinence of urine ; in
which disease, he says, he has never known it to fail in procuring
immediate relief.

Employment.

Internally, the pulverized root may be given in the dose of a small
teaspoonful, or from twenty to thirty grains, combined with aro-
matics.


No. 99.
PA PAVER SOMNIFERUM.


GARDEN POPPY.


Medical Botany. 145

No. 99.

POPPY. The Capsules, Flowers, and Gum.

Latin Name — Pap aver Somniferum.
English Name — Garden Poppy.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Papaver — Calyx 2-leaved ; corol 4-petalled ; stigma ra-
diate ; capsule superior, discharging its seeds by numerous pores un-
der the permanent stigma.

Species — Somnifercm — Calyx and capsules glabrous ; leaves clasp-
ing the stem, cut, glaucous.

Description.

Stem cylindrical, smooth, from three to four feet high ; leaves ses-
sile, elongate, semi-amplexicaule, glaucous, irregularly cut on the
borders ; flowers solitary, terminal, red, or white, very large ; corolla
4 petals, about 100 stamina; stigma orbicular, stellate; fruit, a
round capsule, crowned by the persistent stigma, and containing
numerous white or gray seeds, very small and reniform.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to Asia, and is cultivated now, both in Eu-
rope and America.

Qualities of Opium.

Opium, such as it is brought from the Levant, is in flattened, circu-
lar masses, reddish externally, of a blackish-brown internally, hard,
with a shining and compact fracture, of a bitter, acrid, and nauseous
taste, of a peculiar virose smell, and of a specific gravity of 1.336.
Worked with the fingers, this substance becomes soft, tenacious, and
resembles pitch.

Opium is partly soluble in water, alcohol, ether, vinegar, lemon-
juice, &c. Rubbed in warm water, five twelfths are dissolved, six
twelfths are suspended, and one twelfth remains insoluble. Heated in
the air, it inflames and burns rapidly. It is composed of an alkaline
principle, discovered by Sertuerner, and called morphia, which, ac-
cording to Robinet's experiments, is combined with a peculiar acid he
designates by the name of codeic ; of another peculiar acid, called
meconic acid, which, in opium, seems to be combined with soda ; of a
crystallizable principle, discovered by Derosne, and named narcotin ;
finally, of extractive matter, mucilage, fecula, resin, fixed oil, a gluti-
nous matter similar to caoutchouc, a vegeto-animal substance, vege-
table fibres, and sand.

Qualities of Morphia.

This substance is white, in prismatic rectangular needles, inodo-

Vol. III. T


146 Materia Medica.

rous, almost tasteless on account of its insolubility, but very bitter
when it is dissolved. It is unalterable in the air.

According to Pelletier and Dumas, it is composed of carbon, 72.02;
nitrogen, 5.53 ; hydrogen, 7.01 ; and oxygen, 14.84. It is almost
insoluble in water ; it dissolves slightly in this menstruum when boil-
ing, and completely in alcohol, and in ether especially. Gently heat-
ed, morphia melts, and forms on cooling in a radiated mass ; at a high
temperature, it is decomposed. It possesses alkaline properties, turns
green the syrup of violets, combines with diluted acids, and forms
neutral salts. Mixed with nitric acid, it acquires a lively red colour,
and the salts of iron in the maximum of oxidation, strike a fine blue
colour with it.

Medical Properties.

The action of opium appears to be directly, or indirectly, upon the
nervous system. When administered in small doses, it diminishes
sensibility, and causes a tranquillity in the system, which is followed
by sleep. It is very useful in diarrhoea and vomiting, to calm the irri-
tation of the stomach and intestines. Taken when going to bed, it
produces an equable glow throughout the system, produces sleep,
calms pulmonary irritation, and most generally produces a moisture of
the surface. In typhus fever, which is attended with local inflamma-
tion, opium, united with camphor and ipecacuanha, is attended, most
generally, with very good success. In some acute inflammatory af-
fections, after the symptoms of inflammation have subsided, and there
still appears to be general irritation, produced by the disturbance of
the nervous system, opium may be administered with benefit, to calm
the nervous irritability which exists. But this plant is exceedingly
abused. It is given by physicians too frequently and too indiscrimi-
disease, by which the exciting cause of the complaint is locked in the
system, instead of its being expelled.

It should be seldom used, merely as an anodyne ; but when com-
bined with other ingredients, with a view to act upon the secretions, it
may be given in very many diseases, with signal benefit.

Employment.

Opium may be given in doses of from one to three grains. Lauda-
num, from 30 to 100 drops. A medium dose, for an adult, is 40 or
50 drops. A syrup, made of the capsules, is excellent for children,
as the water takes up less of the narcotic principle than spirits. About
a teaspoonful of it is a dose for a child of two years old. The product
of this plant enters into the sudorific drops, diaphoretic po"wders, &c.


.No. 100.
I'LANTAGO MAJOR.


LARGE PLANTAIN.


Medical Botany. 147

No. 100.

PLANTAIN. The Root and Leaves.

Latin Name — Plantago Major.
English Name — Large Plantain.

Botanical Character.

Class IV.— TETRANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Plantago — Calyx 4-cleft ; corol 4-cleft, with a reflected
border ; stamens very long ; capsule superior, 2-celled, opening
transversely.

Species — Major — Leaves ovate, nearly glabrous, shorter than the
petiole ; scape round ; spike with imbricate flowers ; seeds numerous.

Description.
This plant has a fibrous root, sending out long oval leaves, irregu-
larly dentated, of a pale-green colour ; the under surface is nerved ;
there arc generally from five to nine leaves. The flower-stem grows
from six inches to a foot in height, crowned with a spike of clustered
flowers, which are very small.

Locality.
This plant is indigenous to this country, and is found growing plen-
tifully in meadows, pastures, by road-sides, and in gardens.
Medical Properties.
This plant is possessed of refrigerant, vulnerary, antiseptic, antiher-
petic, detergent, and subastringent properties. It is held in high repute,
by some, in the cure of bites from poisonous serpents, and insects.

It was recorded in a Virginia paper, that a gentleman was bitten
above the knee, by a spider. A few minutes after, he perceived a pain
shooting upwards from the spot, which soon reached his heart. A
quantity of plantain was immediately gathered and bruised, and the
juice squeezed out and swallowed, which stopped the progress of the
poison, so that a cure of the bite was obtained immediately.

Culpepper considers this to'„be the best plant in nature. He says,
that if the juice of it be purified, and drank for several days, it will
prevent all " torments and excoriations" of the bowels. Dioscorides
thought it to be of service in tertian agues. The leaves, simmered in
spirits, or fresh butter, makes an excellent ointment /or erysipelas,
tetter, or salt-rheum. It is also remarkably efficacious in poisons of
all kinds.

A negro, at the south, obtained his freedom, by disclosing a nos-
trum for the bite of snakes ; the basis of which was the plantain. It
consisted in giving the expressed juice of plantain, and hoarhound,
equal parts. A tablespoonful, to be repeated as often as the stomach
would bear, and the same to be applied to the wound.

A writer states, that a toad, in fighting with a spider, as often as it
was bit, retired a few steps, ate of the plantain, and then renewed the
attack. The person deprived him of the plant, and it soon died.


148 Materia Medica.

No. 101.

POKE. The Hoot, Leaves, and Berries.

Latin Name — Phytolacca Decandria.

English Name — Poke.

Vulgar Names — Poke, Skoke, Garget, Coakum.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order VT.— DECAGYNIA.

Genus — Phytolacca — Calyx ; corol 5-petalled, resembling a ca-
lyx ; berry superior, 10-celled, 10-seeded.

Species — Decandria — Leaves ovate, acute at each end ; flowers
racemed ; berries flattened at the ends.

Description.
Stem from five to seven feet high, thick, round, branched, and gla-
brous ; leaves ovate, narrow at both ends, acute, veined on the under
side, and smooth on both ; flowers in long racemes, often opposite to
the leaves ; perianthe 5-leaved, divisions concave and ovate, folding
inwards ; stamina short, from seven to twenty, with double anthers ;
styles from five to ten; fruit, a superior 10-celled, 10-seeded berry.

Locality.
This is a plant indigenous to America ; but is now naturalized in
Europe. It is found growing in all parts of the United States, along
the way-sides, in woods, and fields, &c.

Medical Properties.

Drs. Bigelow, Fisher, Hayward, Shultz, and others, have tested the
medical properties of this plant, and have proved, in their experiments,
that it is a valuable remedy.

" As an emetic," says a writer, " it seems hardly inferior to ipeca-
cuanha ; ten grains of the powder will seldom remain on the stomach,
and twenty or thirty grains will always produce a powerful emesis,
and sometimes catharsis. It operates with ease, and rarely occa-
sions nausea, pain, or cramp ; it is rather slow in its effects, but con-
tinues to operate for a longer period of time than is usual with eme-
tics, though it is readily checked with opium."

We, however, do not use it for an emetic.

The inspissated juice of the berries is of great service in rheuma-
tism, and externally in ulcers. It has been considered by some prac-

oners to be of service in the venereal, &c.

We occasionally employ it in the cure of fistula ; also as a discu-
tient in hard, glandular tumours, and it frequently proves very effica-
cious.

A graduate of our school has used the ointment successfully in


No. 101.
PHYTOLACCA DF^CANDKIA.


•


I'OKF..


No, 102.
POLYGALA S»NECA.


SENECA SNAKE-ROOT.


Medical Botany. 149

bronchocele. The juice has removed a bony tumour from an
animal, by rubbing it with it.

Employment.
We use it in the form of extract, and the inspissated juice of the
berries ; also in the form of ointment.


No. 102.

SENECA SNAKE-ROOT. The Root.

Latin Name — Polygala Senega.
English Name — Seneca Snake-root.
Vulgar Name — Rattle-snake Root.

Botanical Character.

Class XVI.— DIADELPHIA.
Order VIII.— OCTANDRIA.

Genus — Polygala — Calyx 5-leaved, two of them larger, wing-
shaped, and coloured ; corol irregular ; legume obcordate, 2-celled,
2-valved.

Species — Senega — Stem erect, herbaceous, quite simple, leafy ;
leaves alternate, lanceolate, acute ; spikes terminal, filiform ; flowers
beardless, alternate, white.

Description.

Stem herbaceous, from eight to ten inches high ; leaves sessile,
oval, of a light green colour ; flowers small, in terminal spikes ; calyx
five deep and irregular divisions ; corolla irregular, five petals ; fruit,
a compressed and bivalve capsule, with two monospermous cells, con-
taining black elongated seeds, terminated in a point.

Locality.

This is a perennial plant, indigenous to America. It is found grow-
ing in nearly all the states in the Union, but more particularly in
Pennsylvania and Virginia.

Qualities.

Root of a variable size, from that of a quill to the size of the little
finger, contorted, ramose, having on one side a sort of longitudinal
membranous margin. Its bark is grayish, resinous, and covering a
whitish and lignous meditullium. Its odour is weak and nauseous ; its
taste sweet at first, afterwards acrid and bitter ; provokes coughing and
salivation.

According to Mr. Gehlen, this root contains senegin, 6.15; resin,
7.5; sweet extractive matter, 26.85; gum and albumen, 9.5 ; lignous
fibres, &c. 50. According to Dr. Giacomo Folchi, it is composed of
a thick oil, partly volatile ; free gallic acid ; an acrid matter ; a yellow
colouring matter ; a little wax ; a gummy extract ; a matter contain-


150 Materia Medica.

ing nitrogen, similar to gluten ; woody fibres, sub-carbonate, sulphate,
and muriate of potassa ; carbonate, sulphate, and a little phosphate of
lime ; carbonate of magnesia, iron, and silex.

Mr. Peschier, an eminent pharmaceutist of Geneva, asserts, that
he obtained from the polygala senega three new substances, which he
calls pulygalina, polygalic acid, and isolisin. The two first sub-
stances form in the root a polygalate of polygalina. Water and al-
cohol take up the remedial principles of this root.

Senegin seems to be the active principle of polygala. It is solid,
brown, translucid, of an unpleasant taste ; when it is reduced to pow-
der, its smell provokes sneezing. It is insoluble in water and ether,
but easily soluble in alcohol. It has not, as yet, been introduced into
practice.

Medical Properties.

This article is possessed of very energetic, stimulant properties.
If the dose of the root be large, it is apt to induce vomiting, together
with alvine evacuations. This article has been highly recommended
in cynanche trachialis, (croup,) but I have never seen any very great
benefit arise from the use of this medicine in that disease. I have
sometimes witnessed its good effects as a hydragogue, in dropsical
complaints.

Dr. Chapman, of Philadelphia, speaks in the highest terms of this
root, as an emmenagogue, but considers it to be of the greatest ser-
vice where the decidua exists. On the other hand, Dr. Eberle affirms,
that he has used this substance repeatedly, and most generally with-
out success. He adds, that " Dr. Chapman has expressed an opinion
much too favourable of its efficacy as an emmenagogue." In the lat-
ter stages of pneumonia, this article is of service as an expectorant.

Employment.

Dose of the pulverized root, from ten grains to half a drachm.
Decoction : take one ounce of the root bruised, and simmer it in a
close vessel, with a pint of boiling water, until the quantity is reduced
to one third.


No. 103.
P^ONIA OFFICINALIS.


)NY.


Medical Botany. 151

No. 103.

PEONY. The Root.

Latin Name — P.eonia Officinalis.
English Name — Garden Peony.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLYANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

Genus — P^eonia — Calyx 5-leaved ; corol 5-petalled, increased to a
great number by culture ; styles ; capsules podlike, many-seeded.

Species — Officinalis — Leaves decompound, naked ; leaflets lobed,
broad, lanceolate ; capsules nearly erect, downy.

Description.

The peony rises to the height of two or three feet ; stalks large,
green, and branching ; leaves tolerably large, toothed, and red-co-
loured ; flowers terminal, standing on the top of the main stalks ; pe-
tals red, cordiform ; in the centre there are three seed-vessels, con-
taining round black seeds when ripe ; roots many, thick, long, spread-
ing, and running deep in the ground.

Locality.
The peony is cultivated in our gardens, as an ornamental flower.
It is found growing in gardens throughout the United States.

Qualities.
The roots and seeds of the peony have, when fresh, a faint, unpleasant
smell, somewhat of the narcotic kind, and a mucilaginous subacrid
taste, with a slight degree of bitterness and astringency. In drying,
they lose their smell and part of their taste. Extracts made from them
by water, are almost insipid, as well as inodorous ; but extracts made
by rectified spirits, are manifestly bitterish, and considerably astrin-
gent. The flowers have rather more smell than any of the other
parts of the plant, and a rough, sweetish taste, which they impart, to-
gether with their colour, both to water and spirit.

Medical Properties.
The roots, flowers, and seeds of the peony have been esteemed in the
character of an anodyne and corroborant, but more especially the
roots ; which, since the days of Galen, have been very commonly
employed as a remedy for the epilepsy. For this purpose, it was usual
to cut the root into thin slices, which were to be attached to a string,
and suspended about the neck as an amulet ; if this failed of success,
the patient was to have recourse to the internal use of this root, which
Willis directs to be given in the form of a powder, and in the quantity
of a drachm, two or three times a day, by which, as we are informed,
both infants and adults were cured of this disease. Culpepper thinks


152 Materia Medica .

the seeds valuablo in incubus attendant upon hydrophobic persons, ta-
ken in the morning, and at bed time. We use it only in the antispas.
modic syrup, for epilepsy.

Employment.
Dose of the pulverized root or seeds, from thirty to forty grains.


No. 104-

WHITE OAK. The Bark.

Latin Name — Quercus Alba. v
English Name — White Oak.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONOECIA.
Order VI.— HEXANDRIA.

Genus — Qfercus — Staminate flowers ; calyx campanulate lobed ;
corol ; stamina 5 to 10 ; pistillate flowers ; calyx campanulate ;
very entire, rough ; corol ; style 1 ; stigmata 3 ; nut superior.

Species — Alba — Leaves annual, pinnatifid ; the sinuses narrowed ;
segments oblong, without points.

Description.

This tree rises fifty or sixty feet in height, sending off numerous
large branches ; leaves lacerated, ribbed, having long foot-stalks ;
fruit conical, surrounded at the base by a rough shell.

Locality.

Found growing in the forests throughout the United States abun-
dantly.

Qualities.

Most, and perhaps all, the species of oak, have a high degree of
astringency, depending upon tannin, which they possess in great quan-
ties, and on account of which they are extensively used in the pre-
paration of leather. \ ,ie white oak is one of the American species,
which is most esteemed for this property. The bark of the young
branches is probably more astringent than that of the trunk, on ac-
count of the mass of dead cortical layers, which constitutes a part of
the thickness of the latter.

Medical Properties.

Oak-bark has been given, in some instances, as a substitute for cin-
chona, to which, however, it is' greatly inferior. Its chief use is an
external astringent and antiseptic. A strong decoction is employed
with advantage, as a gargle in cynanche, and as a lotion in gangre-
nous ulcers, and offensive discharges of different kinds.

The powder of this bark has, it is said, by inhaling, cured phthisis


No. 101.
tiUERCUS ALBA


WHITE OAK.


Medical Botany. 153

puhnonalis. It is used by us in procedentia, (or falling down of the
uterus,) and prolapsus ani, in leucorrhcea, and all other diseases in
which astringents are required. It enters into the " astringent de-
coction" of our pharmacopoeia. The extract is used for hernia, or
rupture, and ulcers. It forms an excellent wash, or injection.

Employment.
It is the basis of the astringent decoction. It enters into Ferris'
cancer -plaster, for cancers and inveterate ulcers.


No. 105.

BLACKBERRY. The Root and Berries.

Latin Name — Rubus Villosus.
English Name — Common Blackberry.

Botanical Character.

Class XI.— ICOSANDRIA.
Order XIII.— POLYGYRIA.

Genus — Rubus — Calyx 5-cleft ; corol 5-petalled ; berry superior,
composed of several single-seeded granulations.

Species — Villosus — Leaflets in threes or fives, ovate, acuminate,
sharply serrate, villous on both sides ; stems and petioles prickly ;
racemes naked ; petals lanceolate ; flowers white.

Description.

The blackberry is too well known to need a description.

Locality.
This plant is found growing abundantly throughout the United
States, and is indigenous to this country. Found growing along
swamps and fences.

Qualities.
The root of this plant is contorted, of the size of a quill, black ex-
ternally, and lighter colour internally. They are possessed of astrin-
gent qualities.

Medical Properties.

The bark of the root, formed into a syrup, is exceedingly valuable
in chronic diarrhoea, and dysentery, cholera infantum, or summer com-
plaint. It often proves a sovereign remedy, when all other remedies
fail.

Dr. Chapman, in speaking upon the use of the blackberry, says :
" Of the vegetable astringents, I have reason to believe that they (the
black and dew berries) are among the most active and efficacious."
In cholera infantum, says he, " to check the inordinate evacuations
which attend the protracted stages of this disease, no remedy has
ever done so much in my practice." In diarrhoea, proceeding from
any cause, this article may be administered with great advantage, as

Vol. III. U


154 Materia Medica.

it will check the discharge, and give tone to the alimentary canal. It
is a medicine much used by the Indians in dysentery ; and it is said,
that, in the Oneida tribe, five hundred were attacked with this disease
in one season, and, by the use of the blackberry-root, all recovered,
whilst their neighbours, the whites, fell before the disease ; no doubt,
in consequence of taking mercury, or some of the common agents
made use of.

Employment.
The root may be given in powder, infusion, decoction, or syrup.
Dose of the powder, from one to two drachms ; decoction, one ounce
syrup.


No. 106.

CASTOR BEAN. The Oil.


Latin Name — Ricinus Communis.
English Name — Castor Bean.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— MONOECIA.
Order XV.— MONADELPHIA.

Genus — Ricinus — Staminate flowers ; calyx 5-parted ; corol ;
filaments numerous, filiform ; pistiliferous flowers ; calyx 5-parted ;
corol ; styles 3, cloven ; capsule 3-celled, 3-valved ; seed solitary.

Species — Communis — Leaves peltate, somewhat palmate ; fruit
prickly.

Description.

Stem straight, ramose, fistulous, glaucous and reddish ; leaves al-
ternate, peltate, palmate, with seven or nine lobes ; flowers monoicous,
united in extra-axillary and pyramidal clusters ; male flowers, calyx,
with five caducous divisions ; ovary free, globular, 3-sided, and 3-celled \
one very short style ; three stigmas ; fruit, a capsule, with three
prominent sides, covered with prickles, and containing each one seed.

Locality.

This plant is a native of the East Indies, and Africa. In those
countries, it is said to be perennial ; but in our country, and in Eu-
rope, where it flourishes well, it is an annual plant.

Qualities.

The seeds of the ricinus are oval, flattened on one side, convex and
round on the other, of a variable size, generally of the size of a
French bean ; smooth, shining, of a gray colour, with brown spots on
their surface, with a fleshy and white appendix on the umbilicus ;
white inside ; of a sweet taste at first, and afterwards acrid. The


No. 106.
U1CINUH COMMUNIS.


»R BEAN


Medical Botany. 155

oil obtained from it is of a yellowish-white, thick, viscous, and inodo-
rous. It congeals only several degrees below the freezing point, and
its specific gravity is greater than that of the other fixed oils.

From the recent experiments of Messrs. Lecanu and Bussy, castor
oil submitted to distillation, has furnished a solid, spongy, and yellow.
ish residue, amounting to nearly two thirds the quantity of the oil
employed in the experiment, a very odorous volatile oil, which crys-
tallizes on cooling, and two new acids, which they call ricinic, and
the active properties of the oil under consideration. Besides, it dif-
fers from the other fixed oils in this particular, that it is completely
soluble in absolute alcohol and ether. Finally, it becomes easily
rancid, and then acquires a very acrid taste.
Medical Properties.

The castor oil is a very mild cathartic, unloading the bowels of their
contents, without occasioning any gastro-intestinal irritation, which
renders it very useful in bowel complaints, by its oleaginous particles
lubricating the inflamed mucous surface of the intestines. But where
we wish to make a decided impression upon the system, or to unload
the bowels of impacted mucus, we should not administer the oil, as
it will pass the bowels without removing any mucus, bilious matter,
or without making much impression upon the system. In piles, this
medicine is useful, depending upon its mild laxative properties. If
this oil become rancid, its mild properties are converted into those of
an irritating quality, and produce effects resembling those medicines
of a drastic nature. When it is rancid, it should never be adminis-
tered in any form or disease. It is also serviceable in cholics, and in
strangulated hernia. It is excellent in inflammation of the stomach
and bowels, and in all diseases where an unirritating, emollient pur-
gative is required.

Employmetit.
The dose of this oil, is from half an ounce to one ounce, poured on
peppermint water, or in boiled milk, which disguises it in a manner.


156 Materia Medica.

No. 107.

YELLOW DOCK. The Root

Latin Name — Rumex Crispus.
English Name — Yellow Dock.
Vulgar Name — Garden Patience.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order III.— TRIG YiN I A.

Genus — Rumex — Calyx 3-leaved ; corol 3-petalled ; petals conni-
vent ; seed 1, superior, 3-sided, naked ; stigma many cleft.

Species — Crispus — Valves of the calyx ovate, entire, all marked
with a grain-like appendage on the back ; leaves lanceolate, undu-
late, acute.

Description.

Stem herbaceous, branched at top, four or five feet high, cylindrical
and channelled ; leaves elongate, sagittate, supported by long petioles;
flowers greenish, in panicles at the top of the branches ; calyx turbi-
nate, with six divisions ; six stamens inserted in the calyx ; three stig-
mas ; fruit triangular.

Locality.

Plant perennial, indigenous to Europe, and naturalized in America.
Grows abundantly in damp places, in gardens, &c; flowering in the
summer.

Qualities.

Root long, fibrous, fusiform, brownish externally, yellowish inter-
nally, almost inodorous, and of an acrid and bitter taste. The leaves
possess a sub-acid taste.

This substance, of which no accurate analysis has as yet been
made, seems to contain sulphur in a free state, some oxalate of lime,
starch, and some extractive principles soluble in water.
Medical Properties.

This plant is slightly tonic, narcotic, and detergent. The decoction
of this root drank, is considered very useful in the cure of cancers.
A poultice of these roots applied to indolent swellings, is very useful
to discuss them. An ointment is also good to discuss indolent glan-
dular tumours. Thatcher says, it will effectually cure the itch. A
syrup made of the root, is excellent to eradicate scrofulous and other
taints of the system.

Employment.

A decoction of the roots made and drank. Also ten grains of the
pulverized root may be given as a dose.


No 107.
RUMEX CRISPUS.


YELLOW DOCK.


No. 108.
RHEUM PALMATUM.


unur.Aur.


Medical Botany. 15?


No. 108.

RHUBARB. The Hoot.

Latin Name — Rheum Palmatum.
English Name — Rhubarb.

Botanical Character.

Class IX.— ENNEANDRIA.
Order III.— TRIGYNIA.

Genus — Rheum — Calyx 0; corol 6-cleft, permanent; seed 1, tri-
angular.

Species — Palmatum — Leaves palmate, acute, roughish, with the
cavity at the base dilated ; petioles obsoletely grooved above and
rounded at the edge ; berries dull-red.

Description.

Stem simple, straight, cylindrical, from two to four feet high, ramose
at top ; leaves very large, petiolate, the limb divided in seven acute
lobes, irregularly cut on the sides ; flowers small, yellowish, very
numerous, in an elongate panicle at the top of the stem ; calyx 5 or
6-divided ; 9-stamina ; 5-simple stigmas, almost sessile ; fruit, a cap-
sule with 3 prominent angles.

Locality.

A perennial plant, native of China and Tartary ; cultivated in
various parts of Europe, especially in Fiance ; and it is likewise
produced in America.

Qualities.

We find in commerce three principal species of rhubarb, viz : The
Russian rhubarb, the most valued of the three, is in pieces somewhat
flattened, irregular, sometimes angular ; smooth, with a hole' in the
middle, of a yellow colour externally ; irregularly marked internally,
with red and white veins ; of a compact fracture ; of a strong peculiar
odour ; of a bitter and astringent taste ; gritty under the teeth ; dying
the saliva of a saffron-yellow colour ; its powder is of a pure yellow.

The Chinese rhubarb is in round pieces, larger than those of the
preceding, not so smooth, nor so well prepared ; generally with small
holes, of a dirty-yellow colour, and covered over with a yellowish
powder. Their texture is compact, of a dull-red colour, and marked
internally with white veins ; of a dull and rough fracture ; gritty under
the teeth ; having a taste and a smell similar to the preceding.

The rhubarb cultivated in France, and of late in England, is less
esteemed than the others, and is not furnished by the rheum palmatum
alone, but also by the 11. undulatum and compactum.. It is cultivated
on a large scale at Rheumpole, in the department of Morbihan. This
species is in pieces resembling very much the exotic rhubarbs in
appearance and shape, but they are easily distinguished from them by
their exterior, which is slightly red, and possessing a sweeter smell,
being very slightly bitter, mucilaginous, and sweet, and principally for
their not being gritty under the teeth.


158 Materia Medica.

The Russian and Chinese rhubarbs are very similar in their com-
position ; they contain a peculiar principle, to which they are indebted
for their smell, taste, and colour, which has been called rhabarbarin ;
a small quantity of fixed sweet oil, some super-malate of lime, gum,
starch, oxalate of lime in the proportion of one third of its weight,
some lignin, and salts of -lime and potassa. The French rhubarb dif-
fers from the others, inasmuch as it contains only one tenth of oxalate
of lime, a larger proportion of starch, and a more considerable quan-
tity of colouring principle, of a reddish hue. Alcohol dissolves 2.7 in
10 parts of rhubarb, ether 1.5, and boiling water, almost one half. It
is necessary to remark that this root loses part of its purgative proper-
ties by ebullition in water, and becomes more bitter and astringent.
Medical Properties.
The root of this plant is a valuable and singular cathartic, differing
from all others of the materia medica. It operates first, by evacuating
the intestinal canal, and then gently astringingor restoring the tone of it.
Upon these singular properties combined, (purgative and astringent,)
depend its utility in dysentery and diarrhoea. In cholera its medicinal
properties are heightened by the addition of an alkali. And in other
diseases depending upon a lax state of the muscular fibres of the in-
testines, together with the existence of an acrid state of the fluids,
this preparation is exceedingly useful. Its operation in those disordered
states of the bowels is by neutralizing the acid, by evacuating the
contents of the bowels, and then by gently astringing the relaxed
fibres. I have often been astonished that this valuable plant should
be neglected by physicians, particularly in bowel complaints, and
mercury substituted, when this mineral invariably injures, while the
rhubarb proves a sovereign remedy.

Employment.
The dose of the pulverized root is from thirty to forty grains as a
cathartic, or it may be given in the form of syrup or cordial, which
renders it a very pleasant medicine. It forms the base of our neu-
tralizing cordial and mixture.


No. 10!).
RHUS TYl'IIINUM.


COMMON SUMACH.


Medical Botany. 15'J

No. 109.
SUMACH. Bark of the Roots, and Berries.

Latin Name — Rhus Typhinum.
English Name — Common Sumach.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order III.— TRYGYNIA.

Genus — Rhus — Calyx 5-parted, inferior ; corol 5-petalled ; berry
1-seeded.

Species — Typhinum — Branches and petioles very villose ; leaves
pinnate ; leaflets lanceolate, pointed, sharply serrate ; berries red, in
close tufts at the end of the branches.

Description.
There are two kinds of the common upland sumach, one known as
the narrow-leaved sumach, the other as the Pennsylvania sumach.
The latter is smooth, and rises to the height of ten or fifteen feet ; the
leaves are feathered, sawed, lanced, naked on both sides, and change
to a beautiful red in autumn ; the seeds are in large bunches, ar-
ranged like the flowers, are red, and covered with a white powder,
of an agreeable acid taste.

Locality.
It grows throughout the United States, in barren fields, by the sides
of fences, generally in gravelly soils.

Medical Properties.

The two species above mentioned are considerably astringent.
An infusion of the berries, sweetened with honey, is sometimes used
as a gargle in sore throats, and for cleansing the mouth in putrid
fevers.

The bark of the root is considered a very great antiseptic ; in form
of poultices for old ulcers, it is hardly equalled by any ; in decoction,
good for cutaneous eruptions and scrofula. It is said to be efficacious
in the venereal, combined with the bark of slippery elm and white
pine, in decoction, and taken freely.

Employment.

Sumach bark is used in the form of decoction, for prolapsus ani,
falling of the bowel, also of the womb. A decoction of the berries
makes an excellent gargle for the quinsy, and putrid sore-throat.


160 Materia Medlca.

No. 110.
BITTERSWEET. The Bark of the Hoot.

Latin Name — Solanum Dulcamara.
English Name — Bittersweet.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Solanum — Corol monopetalous, wheel-form ; anthers slight-
ly adhering, opening by two pores at the top ; berry superior, 2-celled.

Species — Dulcamara — Stem unarmed, woody, climbing, flexuous ;
upper leaves halbert-shaped ; lower ones cordate; clusters cymed ;
berries scarlet.

Description.

Stems sarmentose, lignous at their base, herbaceous in the rest of
their length, several feet long ; leaves alternate, tri-lobed ; flowers
violet, pedunculate, and in clusters ; calyx persistent, very small ;
corolla with narrow lobes, marked at their base with two small green
dots ; stamina partly united in a cone ; fruit, an ovoid, red berry.

Locality.

This is an under shrub, indigenous to Europe, and is now naturalized
in this country. It flowers in June and July.

Qualities.

The woody part, cut in small pieces and split in two, is only em-
ployed. This plant possesses a strong and virous smell, which be-
comes weaker on dessication, and a bitter taste, leaving after it a
sweetish taste.

Bittersweet contains an alkaloid substance, discovered by Desfosses,
and called by him solania, combined with a peculiar acid, discovered
and denominated solanic acid, by Peschier ; and several salts with
base of lime and potassa. Water dissolves its active principles.
Medical Properties.

Dulcamara, when given internally, produces irritation in the diges-
tive canal, and when absorbed, it appears to act principally upon the
cutaneous vessels. It does, in fact, cause a perspiration, and a prick-
ing and itching sensation of the skin. It acts likewise upon the ner-
vous system, as its employment is sometimes followed by some slight
convulsions, and a degree of heaviness in the head. It is very bene-
ficial when administered internally, in combination with yellow dock,
in scrofulous and scirrhous diseases. It is also beneficial in liver com-
plaints, and in all cutaneous diseases, and in ill-conditioned ulcers.

Employment.

Dose of the powder, from half to one drachm. Decoction and in-
fusion, from half to one ounce to a quart of water.

Used externally, an ointment must be made of the bark.


No. 110.
SOLANUM DULCAMARA


BITTERSWEET.


No. 111.
SANGU1NARIA CANADENSIS.


BLOOD ROOT.


Medical Botany. 161

No. 111.

BLOOD-ROOT. The Root.

Latin Name — Sanguinaria Canadensis.
English Name — Blood-Root.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— POLY ANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Sanguinaria — Calyx deciduous, 2-leaved ; corol 8-pe-
talled ; stigma sessile ; silique ovate, 1-celled, 2-valved, acute at each
end.

Species — Canadensis — Scape simple, 1-flowered ; leaves lobed ;
flower white ; root tuberous, reddish, horizontal.

Description.

Scape uniflore, proceeding from one end of the root, rising perpen-
dicularly to the height of six to eight inches ; 1 solitary leaf, radical,
reniform, and lobed, attaining its full growth only after the blossoming
of the plant ; calyx 2-leaved, deciduous ; petals 8 ; stigma sessile,
2-grooved ; capsule superior, oblong, 1-celled, 2-valved; apex atte-
nuated ; receptacles 2, filiform, marginal ; seeds small, round, and
black.

Locality.

This is an indigenous plant of this country, found growing in low
grounds, among rocks, in meadows, or in woods near meadows.

Qualities.

Root tuberous, of the size of the finger, two or three inches long,
with a curvature at each end ; several roots connected together by nu-
merous fasciculate fibres, originating from the main body ; brown
externally; when cut, a juice of a reddish-orange colour is abun-
dantly discharged through numerous pores. The dried root is wrin-
kled, having considerably diminished in size ; its fracture is resi-
nous, and of a deep red colour. Its taste is bitter, acrid, and pun-
gent, leaving an impression in the fauces for some time after it has
been chewed.

According to Dr. Fitzgerald Bird's analysis, it appears to contain
cinchona, extractive matter, a gum resin, a resin and gallic acid in a
state of combination. The colouring principle of this root resides
chiefly in its resinous parts, the alcoholic solution being always more
than twice as highly coloured as the aqueous. Dr. Dana, of New-
York, obtained from it a peculiar alkaline substance, which has been
called sanguinara.

Medical Properties.

This root is emetic, cathartic, sudorific, and emmenagogue ; deter-
gent, expectorant, &c. " The medicinal properties of the sanguina-
ria," says Eberle, " have been variously represented, and its powers

Vol. III. W


162 Materia Medica.

do not appear to be, as yet, well understood. Dr. Bigelow considers
this root as an acrid narcotic. Dr. Bird says, that its medicinal pro-
pertjes are in every respect similar to those which characterize the cin-
chona officinalis, (or Peruvian bark,) and the late Dr. Barton valued it
chiefly for its emetic and expectorant powers. Its properties are cer-
tainly very peculiar, being capable of producing tonic, narcotic, sti-
mulant, or emetic effects, according to the dose and form in which it
is administered. Taken in a large dose, it produces nausea, heat in
the stomach, faintness, and often vertigo and indistinct vision, and
finally vomiting. These effects are produced by doses of from eight to
twenty grains ; in smaller doses, its effects on the pulse are analogous
to those of digitalis. I have noticed this effect in several instances.
Given in such doses as are not sufficient to produce nausea, it acts as
a stimulant tonic. Applied in the form of powder to fungous flesh, it
evinces pretty active escharotic properties.

" From the concurrent testimony of a number of eminent practition-
ers, the sanguinaria appears to be entitled to very considerable atten-
tion as an article of the materia medica. Professor Francis, of New-
York, in a very interesting paper on the medical properties of this
plant, states, that he had used it 'with essential benefit in a long pro-
tracted and distressing affection of the chest. The patient had la-
boured under repeated attacks of pneumonia, and notwithstanding a
very active treatment, had suffered by haemorrhage from the lungs.
The consequences were, much constitutional debility, and habitual
returns of spasmodic dyspnoea, similar to those of hooping-cough. The
tincture of the sanguinaria, to the amount of twenty drops, three times
a day, has obviated the most formidable symptoms, and given strength
and vigour to the constitution.' Dr. Ives, of New-Haven, also speaks
very favourably of its remedial powers in diseases of the lungs and
liver. ' In plethoric constitutions,' he observes, ' when respiration is
very difficult, the cheeks and hands become livid, the pulse full, soft,
vibrating, and easily compressed ; the blood. root has done more to
obviate the symptoms and remove the disease, than any remedy he has
used.' It should be given in large doses in cases of this kind, and
repeated until it produces vomiting. He also recommends it as highly
useful in influenza, hooping-cough, and croup. In this latter disease,
it must be given so as to produce vomiting.

" Dr. Francis, in the paper which I have already quoted, states, that
he has used this remedy with advantage in a formidable case of acute
rheumatism occurring in a gouty habit, the patient having been pre-
viously prepared by cathartics and sudorifics. The patient took thirty
drops of the saturated alcoholic solution three times a day. Dr.
Macbride, of Charleston, S. C, in a letter to Dr. Bigelow, states,
thathe has found it useful in hydrothorax, 'given in doses of
sixty drops, three times a day, and increased until nausea followed
each dose.' I have administered the saturated tincture in doses of
about twenty drops a day, with unequivocal benefit, in an asthmatic af-
fection. In this instance, the pulse became reduced about ten strokes
in a minute. In another case of weakness of the breast, and copious
mucous expectoration, it produced a similar diminution of the action


Medical Botany. 163

of the pulse ; but its good effects were not so conspicuous as in the
former instance.

" As an external remedy, the powdered root has been found very be-
neflcial iu ill-conditioned ulcers with callous edges, and an ichorous
discharge. Professor Smith, of Hanover, New-Hampshire, states,
that he has cured several polypi of the soft kind, by using it as a
snuff.

"Dr. Tully, who has written a very long communication on sangui-
naria canadensis, thinks that, besides acting as an emetic, this root
decidedly possesses deobstruent properties, without producing emesis
or catharsis."

This root is efficacious in bleeding of the lungs, croup, scarlet fe-
ver, jaundice, &c. We also use it in the form of snuff, for the cure
of polypus, and likewise in combination with other articles in pulmo-
nary diseases. We use it alsp in the form of extract, and the pow-
dered root as an escharolic, in foul ulcers.

Dr. Woodruff, a botanical physician, of Orange county, in this state,
informs me, that he has recently had considerable practice in the
malignant scarlatina, which has prevailed as an epidemic in that
section of the country, and that he has treated the disease with re-
markable success, by the administration of mild vegetable emetics,
purgatives, and sudorifics. But the most signal benefit, he states, was
derived from the blood-root used in the following manner :

For Malignant Scarlet Fever.

Blood-root, (sanguinaria canadensis,) pulverized, from 20 to 30
grains, or a teaspoonful, in half a pint of boiling water. Strain off
the infusion, and sweeten with honey. Dose, a teaspoonful, for a child
of from two to four years of age. Repeat every hour through the
day, if the child can bear it. If the surface gets broken, and becomes
ulcerated, wash the parts with the same infusion.

Dr. W. states, that the virtue of this root is too little understood.
He uses it in bilious, herpetic, and pulmonary affections, as an expec-
torant, deobstruent, tonic, and antiseptic, creating a healthy action in
the biliary organs and stomach.

Dr. Wolcott states, that " the sanguinaria, two drachms of the root
put to half a pint of boiling water, is highly beneficial in pneumonia,
attended with expectoration of mucus, streaked with blood. It should
be given after the action of a gentle emetic and mild laxative.

" Dose of the above infusion, a teaspoonful every two hours through-
out the day."

Employment.

Dose of the powdered root, as an emetic, from ten to fifteen grains,
&c. Given also in the form of syrup, infusion, tincture, and extract.


164 Materia Medicd.

No. 112.

PINK. The Leaves, Stems, and Roots,

Latin Name — Spigelia Marilandica.
English Name — Carolina Pink.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Spigelia — Corol monopetalous, funnel-form ; capsuld
double, 2-celled, many-seeded ; stigma simple.

Species — Marilandica — Stem quadrangular, erect ; leaves sessile,
ovate, lanceolate, acuminate, entire ; flowers large, spiked, swelling
in the middle, deep red.

Description.
Stems numerous, from one to two feet high, 4-sided, smooth, and of
a purplish colour ; leaves few, sessile, opposite, ovate, and acuminate ;
flowers on a unilateral spike, leaning towards one side, and composed
of from four to twelve flowers ; calyx 5-parted ; corolla funnel-shape,
contracted at top, with five acute segments, of a beautiful carmine
colour externally, except towards the base, where it is blended with
white, of an orange colour inside ; anthers convergent ; capsule didy-
mous, 2-celled, 4-valved, containing many seeds.

Locality.
This is a perennial herbaceous plant, indigenous to this country.
Found growing in the southern states, from Maryland to Florida.

Qualities.

Root consisting of a great number of slender and blackish fibres,
forming together a large bunch. They are sent from the south in
bundles of twenty to twenty-five inches long, together with the stems,
furnished with their leaves. Their taste is bland, and somewhat
nauseous.

It contains a large quantity of mucilage, but it does not appear to
Contain resin.

Medical Properties.

This article is well known to possess surprising anthelmintic, or
vermifuge properties, which act particularly upon the kind of worm
called lumbrici, by destroying them. In this country, this medicine
has superseded the use of almost all other worm medicines. In its
recent state it is supposed to be more certain in its operation than
when it becomes old. It is, however, a powerful medicine when given
in large doses, producing all the effects of narcotic substances.

Dr. H. Thompson found it to produce acceleration of the pulse,
flushed face, drowsiness, and a sensation of stiffness of the eyelids.

Dr. Eberle mentions a case where a strong decoction of the root,
administered to a child of six years old, occasioned a complete mental


Medical Botany. 165

derangement, of the same nature as that which is sometimes produced
by the seeds of stramonium. These symptoms went off in the course
of twenty-four hours, and left him quite as well as he had been before
he took the pink-root.

Dr. Chapman supposes that the virtues of this medicine, as an an-
thelmintic, depend upon its narcotic properties. It likewise possesses
cathartic properties, in a slight degree. This medicine may be given
in powder or decoction. Of the powder, the dose for a child is from
five to ten grains, and of the decoction, half an ounce, or more, to be
repeated occasionally. Whenever this article is given as a vermi-
fuge, some brisk cathartic should be added, as senna, &c. In doing
so, we increase the powers of the remedy, and prevent any unpleasant
nervous symptoms.

Employment.

Dose of the powder, as above ; decoction, from half to one ounce,
in a pint of water, given by wineglassfuls every two or three hours ;
but it is generally combined with senna leaves, in order to procure
the expulsion of worms as soon as they have been destroyed or
weakened by the vermifuge. The following form is remarkably effi-
cacious. Take equal parts of pink-root and leaves, senna and man-
na ; make a strong tea or infusion ; sweeten. To a child, four or five
years old, give a gill, three or four times a day, until it acts upon the
bowels. For particulars, see Pharmacy.


No. 113.


COMFREY. The Boot.

Latin Name — Svmhhitum Officinale.
English Name — Comfrey.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Symphytum — Corol, with a tubular swelling border ; the
throat closed with subulate rays ; calyx 5-parted.

Species — Officinale — Leaves ovate, lanceolate, decurrent, rugose.
Description.

Stem herbaceous ; leaves oval, lanceolate, acute ; flowers white, or
of a rose colour, in spikes at the extremity of the branches ; corolla
tubular, furnished with five lanceolate and acute processes.

Locality.
This plant is indigenous to Europe, but naturalized in this country,
growing in gardens and meadows. Flowers in May and June.

Qualities.
The root of this plant, formerly frequently used, is large, elongated,


166 Materia Medica.

blackish on the outside, white inside ; at first of an insipid and mucila-
ginous taste, but becoming afterwards slightly astringent. It contains
a good deal of mucilage, and seems to contain also a little gallic
acid ; but in such small quantity that it cannot have any influence
on its mode of action.

Medical Properties.

The roots of this plant are demulcent, pectoral, and astringent ;
very useful in diarrhoeas, dysentery, and in haemoptisis ; likewise as a
demulcent, in pulmonary irritations, arising from colds, coughs, &c.
In phthisis pulmonalis, (consumption,) it is a valuable remedy. We
make extensive use of it, in combination with other ingredients, and
principally in the form of syrup.

Employment.

Decoction, from half to one ounce, in one quart of water. It enters
into the pulmonary balsam, and restorative cordial, and is very useful
in leucorrhcea, (whites,) debility, &c.


No. 114.


DWARF ELDER. The Flowers, Berries, and
inner Bark.

Latin Name — Sambucus Ebulus.
English Name — Dwarf Elder.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order III.— TRIGYNIA.

Genus — Sambucus — Corol 5-cleft ; calyx 5-parted, superior ; berry
3-seeded.

Species — Ebulus — Cymes 3-parted ; stipules folioceous ; stem
herbaceous. .

Description.

It rises six feet in height, is herbaceous and erect ; leaves opposite,
pinnate, composed of four or five pairs, with an odd one at the ex-
tremity ; pinae lanceolate, unequal, and serrated ; flowers in terminal
corimbi ; calyx cut into five teeth ; corolla monopetalous, wheel-
shaped, cut into five large segments ; fruit, a round, black, single-
celled berry, containing three irregular shaped seeds.

Locality.
This is a perennial plant, growing abundantly throughout the United
States. Found along fences, and road sides. Flowers in July and
August, and its berries are ripened in September.


No. 112.
•P1GELIA MAR1LANDICA.


CAROLINA PINK,


No 113.
SYMPHTTUM OFFICINALE


COMFREY.


Medical Botany. 167

Medical Properties.
A decoction of this bark has been found beneficial in dropsy.
The extract of the inner bark of elder is very good in piles and dropsy.
The juice of the inner bark, taken in the dose of a gill, vomits and
purges powerfully.

Employment.
In the form of decoction, extract, &c.


No. 115.

MUSTARD. The Seeds.

Latin Name — Sinapis Alba.
English Name — White Mustard.

Botanical Character.

Class XIV.— TETRADYNAMIA.
Order II.— SILIQUOSA.

Genus — Sinapis — Calyx spreading ; claws of the corol straight ;
glands between the shorter stamens and the pistil, and between the
longer stamens and the calyx ; silique beaked ; partition longer than
the valves.

Species — Alba — Siliques bristly, swollen at the seeds, shorter than
the 2-edged beak ; leaves pinnatifid.

Description.

Stem herbaceous, cylindric, two or three feet high ; leaves lyrate,
large, sessile, smooth ; flowers yellow, small, disposed in spikes ; ca-
lyx spreading, petals straight ; fruit, a slender tetragonal silique.

Qualities.

Mustard seed is spheroidal, externally of a brownish-red ; internally
of a lively yellow colour, of a sharp and slightly bitter taste ; inodo-
rous when not comminuted ; it acquires a strong and very penetrating
smell, when it is bruised in water ; and gives rise to a peculiar vola-
tile principle, which powerfully irritates the eyes.

According to Thibierge, it contains, 1st, a fixed oil of a greenish-
yellow colour, soluble in alcohol ; 2d, a volatile oil of a slight yellow,
heavy, of an acrid and sharp taste, soluble in water, and containing
sulphur ; 3d, vegetable albumen ; 4th, mucilage ; 5th, sulphur ; 6th,
nitrogen; and 7th, calcareous salts. The active principle of mustard
seems to reside in the volatile oil. The fixed oil contains, according
to Garot and Henry, jr., a fat substance, analogous to cholesterine ;
a red colouring matter, and a crystallizablc acid, which they have
called sulpho-sinapic.

Medical Properties.
Mustard seeds arc stimulant and rubefacient. Bruised, and mixed


'68 Materia Medtca.

with Indian meal and vinegar, to form a paste, or plaster, and, spread
on cloth, is excellent to relieve inflammation, both superficial and
deep-seated ; and I have found it much preferable to the cantharides,
or Spanish flies. The mustard cataplasm, or poultice, is also used to
arouse the system in apoplectic and comatose affections, and in the
last stages of low typhus fever. As a preventive to the return of
convulsions in children and adults, this cataplasm should never be
omitted. It is a remedy which may be used to attract and fix gout
on the extremities, and likewise in bringing out eruptive diseases,
that have left the surface. In those cases they should be applied to
the extremities. In the latter stages of typhus fevers, the application
of the mustard cataplasm is often succeeded by an erysipelatous in-
flammation. In the treatment of cholera, both spasmodic and com-
mon, large mustard poultices applied to the abdomen, very much as-
sist in overcoming those diseases. They possess a stimulating pro-
perty, and are therefore beneficial in intermittents, attended with a
cold habit. In dyspepsia, and in obstinate costiveness, they are use-
ful, by stimulating the intestines. Indeed, mustard is an excellent
auxiliary in producing revulsion, or in equalizing the circulation.

In case of accidents by poisons, a teaspoonful of mustard-flour,
promptly administered, is a very valuable remed}', expelling it from
the stomach before a practitioner can be called.

Employment.

Dose of the seeds, in dyspepsia and costiveness, a teaspoonful three
or four times a day ; cataplasm as above. It is an excellent condi-
ment with food, in dyspeptic cases. The black mustard is equally as
beneficial as the white.


No. 116.

GARDEN NIGHTSHADE. The whole Plant.

Latin Name — Solanum Nigrum.
English Name — Garden Nightshade.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Orderl.-MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Solanum — Corol monopetalous, wheel-form; anthers slight-
ly adhering, opening by 2 pores at the top ; berry superior, 2. celled.

Species — Nigrum — Stem unarmed, herbaceous ; branches angled,
dentate ; leaves ovate, angular, toothed, and waved ; racemes nodding;
berries black.

Description.
Stalk upright, cylindrical, green, and hollow ; it rises "from one to
two feet high ; ramous leaves, green, ovate, dentated edges, serrate ;


No. 114.
SAMBUCUS EBULU8.


DWARF ELDER.


No. 115.
SINAPIS ALBA.


WHITE MUSTARD.


Medical Botany. 169

flowers white, standing upon the tops of the stalk ; petals 5-pointed ;
stamens 5, yellow, and set together ; fruit, a berry, black, of the size
of a pea, containing whitish, rounded, flattened seed.

Locality.

An annual plant, native of Europe, and naturalized in this country ;
found growing along old walls, fences, and in gardens.

Qualities.

The root is white, a little woody, when in the state of maturity. It
contains, like the bitter-sweet, solania united with malic acid.

Solania. — An alkaloid proximate principle, discovered by Mr. Des-
fosses in the bitter-sweet, and several other plants of the genus sola*
num. Since, Mr. Peschier has ascertained, that this substance was
in combination with a peculiar acid, which he has called solanic acid.

Solania is pulverulent, white, opaque, pearl-like, inodorous, of a
nauseous and bitter taste.

It is unalterable in the air, insoluble in cold water, soluble in 8000
of this mentruum when boiling, and in a very small quantity in alco-
hol. Its alkaline properties are very weak ; it restores to their blue
colour the solutions of litmus reddened by an acid. It combines ea-
sily with an acid, and forms with them perfectly neutral and uncrys-
tallizable salts. Heated, it decomposes without melting or evaporat-
ing.

According to Mr. Magendie's experiments, solania produces at
first violent vomiting, then somnolency, and drowsiness ; which proves
that it acts on the encephalon. It has not as yet been employed as a
remedy. It might, perhaps, be administered in the state of an ace.
tate, in the same cases in which bitter-sweet is indicated, in the dose
of one eighth to one fourth of a grain in pills.
Medical Properties.
Narcotic and discutient. We use it only in the discutient ointment
of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.
See discutient ointment.


Vol. III.


170 Materia Medic a.

No. 117.

SARSAPARILLA. The Root.

Latin Name — Smilax Saesaparilla.
English Name — Sarsaparilla.

Botanical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.
Order VI.— HEXANDRIA.

Genus — Smilax — Staminate flowers ; calyx 6-leaved, inferior ; co-
rol ; anthers adhering to the filaments ; pistillate flowers ; calyx
6-leaved, inferior, corol ; styles minute, 3 ; berry 3-celled ; 1 to
3-seeded.

Species — Sarsaparilla — Prickly ; leaves unarmed, lance-ovate,
retuse, with a point sub-5-nerved.

Description.

Stem articulate, branchy, furnished with recurved thorns ; leaves
alternate, tough, cordiform, furnished with 2 tendrils at their base ;
flowers greenish, dioicous, in small simple umbels upon a common pe-
dicle ; calyx 6-divided ; male flowers, 6 stamina ; female flowers, one
ovary with 3 monospermous cells ; 3 stigmas ; fruit, a round berry of
a reddish colour, containing 3 seeds.

Qualities.

Root fibrous, several feet long, of the size of a quill ; bark wrinkled,
gray, reddish externally, white internally, and of a pink colour, inodo-
rous, mucilaginous, bitter.

According to Pallota, this root contains some parillin, fecula, muci-
lage, and albumen. Boiling water and alcohol take up its active
principles.

Parillin. — A peculiar proximate principle, discovered by Pallota.
It is white, pulverulent, and heavier than distilled water.

Locality.

This plant is indigenous to South America, growing spontaneously
in Peru, Mexico, and all over South America, and in the Spanish
West Indies.

Medical Properties.

This root was first introduced into Europe by the Spaniards, about
the year 1563, with the character of being a specific in venereal com-
plaints, particularly lues venerea, a disease which had made iti ap-
pearance in that country a little before that period ; but, upon its being
administered alone, it was found incompetent to cure this disease. It
has since that time caused much speculation in the medical world.
This root, however, is mucl: used at present, united with sudorifics in
chronic rheumatism, in syphilis, and diseases of the skin. It enters
as one of the component parts of Swaim's Panacea, which is said to


No. 117.
SMI LAX SARSAPAR1LLA.


SARSAPARILLA.


Medical Botany. 171

have wrought so many wonderful cures ; and in almost all of the pana-
ceas and catholicons of the day it enters as an ingredient. We make
much use of this article in our practice, as an alterative, &c. It
enters into the alterative syrup of our pharmacopoeia, which is very
beneficial in many complaints.

Employment.
Dose of the powdered root, from half to one drachm. Decoction,
from two to four ounc*es to a quart of water.


No. 118.

SAGE.


Latin Name — Salvia Officinalis.
English Name — Garden Sage.

Botanical Character.

Class II.— DIANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Salvia — Corol irregular ; filaments transversely affixed to
a pedicel ; seeds 4, naked.

Species — Officinalis — Leaves lanceolate ovate, crenulate ; whorls
few-flowered ; calyxes mueronate.

Description.
Too well known to need a description.

Medical Properties.
One author has such a high opinion of this plant, that he thus ob-
serves : " Why dies the man whose garden sage affords ?" It is a
sudorific, producing perspiration ; and is a popular remedy for colds,
coughs, fevers, &c. We use it principally as a gargle in aphthae and
quinsy.


172 Materia Medica.

No. 119.

BALSAM OF TOLU. The Balsam.

Latin Name — Toltjifera BalsAmum.
English Name — Balsam of Tolu.

Botanical Character.

Class X.— DECANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Toluifera — Calyx companulate, 5-toothed ; corol 5.pe.
tailed, the lowest very large and ob-cordate ; styles 0.

Species — Balsamum — Tree branched ; leaves alternate, elliptic,
entire, pointed ; racemes lateral ; fruit a round berry.

Description.
This tree grows to a great height ; the leaves are oval or ovate,
and stand upon short foot-stalks. The fruit is a round berry.

Locality.
This tree grows in Spanish America. The balsam flows from
incisions made in the bark during the hot seasons.

Qualities.
This substance is solid, of a coft and glutinous consistence, or dry
and friable, according to its age ; of a fallow or brown yellow colour ;
of a granulated or crystalline texture ; smell resembles that of lemons ;
taste warm and sweetish. Volatile oil, resin, and benzoic acjd.
Medical Properties.
This is the mildest of all balsams. It is useful in coughs, as an
expectorant, and in pyrosis it is likewise beneficial. It enters into
the composition of the cough drops of our pharmacopoeia.

Employment.
Given in the form of syrup or tincture ; the former made by boiling
with sugar to a proper consistence ; the other by dissolving in spirits ;
from forty to fifty drops of either is the dose.


No. 119.
TOLUIFERA BALSAMUM.


BALSAM OF TOLU.


No. 120.
TANACETUM VULGARE.


No. 124.
LIATRIS.


TANSY.


DEVIL'S BIT.


V


No. 121.
EUPHORBIA IPECACUANHA.


SPURGE IPECACUANHA


Medical Botany. 178


No. 120.
TANSY. The Leaves.

Latin Name — Tanacetum Vulgare.
English Name — Tansy.

Botanical Character.

Class XVII.— SYNGENESIA.

Order II.— POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.

Genus— Tanacetum— Florets of the ray obsolete, or 3-cleft, some-
times wanting ; receptacle naked ; seeds crowned with a slight mar-
gin ; calyx imbricate, hemispherical ; scales acuminate.

Species— Vulgare — Leaves doubly pinnatifid, deeply serrate.
Description.

This plant rises three feet in height ; flowers yellow and small,
resembling a flat hemisphere; florets of the disc bisexual, of the ray
female.

Locality.
Native of Europe, growing in moist pastures, borders of cornfields;
flowers in July and August.

Medical Properties.
When fresh, sudorific, emmenagogue, vermifuge, carminative, de-
obstruent, tonic, and stomachic. Very useful as a tea in fevers, agues,
cachexy, hysterics, dropsy, &c.

Employment.
Given in the form of tea.


No. 121.

EUPHORBIA IPECACUANHA.

Latin Name — Euphorbia Ipecacuanha.
English Name — American Ipecacuanha.
Vulgar Names — American Ipecac, Spurge, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class XL— DODECANDRIA.
Order III.— TRIGYNIA.

Genus — Euphorbia — Calyciform involucrum with 4 or 5 seg-
ments like petals ; and the same number of interior segments like
nectaries; stamens 12 or more ; filaments articulated, fertile; flower
solitary, stipulate, naked ; styles three, bifid ; capsule 3-seeded.

Species — Ipecacuanhe — Procumbent with opposite, obovate,oblong
or linear leaves ; peduncles axillary, one flowered, elongated.


L 74 Materia Medica.


Description.
This is a low, tufted plant. Root irregular and fleshy, very large
in proportion to the plant it bears, running deep in the ground. The
stems arise from one root, numerous, erect, or procumbent, forming
large bunches on the ground ; they are smooth, regularly dichatomous,
and jointed at the forks. Leaves inserted at the joints, opposite, ses-
sile, smooth, having most frequently an oblong shape ; differing
however from circular to linear ; their size and colour are likewise
variable ; flowers solitary, on long peduncles, from the forks of the
stem ; calyx spreading, divided into five obtuse segments. Stamens
numerous, in five parcels, appearing at different times, two or three
together, with double anthers. The fertile flowers have large, round-
ish, drooping, pedicelled germ, crowned with six revolute stigmas ;
capsule 3-celled.

Locality.
This plant is a native of America, growing in shady woods, bogs,
and sandy soils, in the middle and southern states.

Qualities.
The dried root is of a grayish colour outside, and white within. It
is light and brittle, and has about the hardness of cork ; taste sweetish,
and not very unpleasant. Dr. Bigelow, from his experiments on this
root, supposes it to be possessed of caoutchouc, resin, mucus, and
probably fecula.

Medical Properties.

Emetic, cathartic, and tonic. This article is possessed of very valu-
able medicinal properties. As an emetic, it has nearly superseded
the officinal ipecac; and it has been thought by some physicians to
be very little inferior to that article.

It seems to possess a tonic power, and has, accordingly, been
thought very beneficial in intermittent fever. Dr. Eberle says, that
he found it particularly serviceable as a sudorific in dysenteric affec-
tions ; and that, from what he had observed of its effects in other cases,
it appears to him that the opinion entertained by the late Dr. Barton,
of its possessing tonic properties, is not without foundation.

Euphorbia possesses very powerful properties. It is an excellent
hydragogue, evacuating the water when all other agents prove abor-
tive or useless. A physician lately consulted me in a case of obsti-
nate dropsy, which had resisted every means made use of to remove
it. I advised him to give fifteen grains of the euphorbia ipecacuanha,
which he did two or three times throughout the week ; and the effect
of it was a complete evacuation of all the water, followed by a perma-
nent cure. It also has a tendency to promote the menstrual evacua-
tion. A person informed me that it is an infallible cure for the bilious
colic. It first produces nausea or vomiting, then purges freely. Dr.
medicine, with great success, in a great variety of diseases.

Employment.
The powdered root may be given in doses of from twelve to fifteen
grains, in molasses or tea.


No. 122.
ULMUS FULVA.


SLIPPERY ELM.


Materia Medica. 175

No. 122.

SLIPPERY ELM. The Bark.

Latin Name — Ulmus Fulva.
English Name — Slippery Elm.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order II.— DIGYNIA.

G yus — Ulmus — Calyx, campanulate, deciduous, 5-cleft ; corol
wan ng ; seed 1, enclosed in a winged receptacle.

Syecies — Fulva — Leaves ovate, oblong, acuminate, nearly equal
at the base, unequally serrate, pubescent ; buds tomentose ; flowers
conglomerate, sessile, ciliate.

Description.

Stem seldom above thirty feet high, trunk slender dividing in nu-
merous branches, furnished with a rough and light-coloured bark ;
leaves oval-oblong, acuminate, serrate, pubescent on both sides, al-
most equal at the base ; buds tomentose, of a tawny colour ; flowers
red, sessile, succeeded by membranous seed-vessels of a compressed
and oval shape, containing one oval seed.

Locality.

A native tree of North America.

Qualities.
The inner bark is fulvous, rather brittle, and very mucilaginous.
It contains fecula, ulmine, and gum.

Medical Properties.

Demulcent, diuretic, pectoral, deobstruent, emollient, and refrigerant.
Useful in all urinary and bowel complaints, strangury, sore-throat,
catarrh, pneumonia, pleurisy, or inflammation of the lungs, and sto-
mach and bowels, scurvy, scorbutic affections, herpes, inveterate
eruptions, &c. As an external application, in the form of poultice, it
is an admirable remedy, far exceeding any other known production
in the world, for ulcers, tumours, swellings, gun-shot wounds, chil-
blains, burns, cutaneous diseases, erysipelas, felons, old, obstinate
ulcers, scabs ; sore mouth, or thrush, used as a wash.

It quickly and powerfully allays inflammation, promotes resolution,
also suppuration, and heals speedily. The tea is much used by the
Indian women, to procure easy labour, and is drank for two or three
months previous to their being confined in childbed. We make exten-
sive use of the flour of the bark, in the form of poultice, for every va-
riety of inflammation, wounds, ulcers, &c.

In point of utility it is of far more value, than its weight of gold.
Employment.

Internally as a tea. externally as a poultice.


176 Materia Medica.

No. 123.

RASPBERRY. The Leaves.

Latin Name — Rubus Strigosus.
English Name — Red Raspberry.

Botanical CJiaracler.

Class XI.-ICOSANDRIA.
Order XIIL— POLYGNIA.

Genus — Rtjbtjs — Calyx 6-cleft ; corol 5-petalled ; berry superior,
composed of several single-seeded granulations.

Species — Strigosus — Unarmed, rigidly trispid ; leaflets 3, or pin-
nate, quinnate ; base oval, acuminate, white-downy beneath, terminal
one frequently sub-cordate.

Description.

The stem of this plant is defended with spines, and rmes three or
four feet in height. The leaves are rough, veined, serrated, downy
beneath, composed of three or five oval pinnae.

Locality.

Native of Britain, and cultivated in our gardens ; found in woods and
among rocks ; flowers in May and June ; fruit ripe in August.
Medical Properties.

" The leaves of this plant are astringent, and therefore good in diar-
rhoea and dysentery. The leaves, dried, and made into a strong tea,
are good to remove canker from the mouth, throat, stomach, bowels,
and other parts of the body. In the dysentery it is very useful. In
the first stages of that disease, I have frequently relieved people by
giving them a strong tea made of the leaves.

When a poultice to remove canker, or what is called proud flesh,
is needed, this tea is good to make it with. In such a case, or for a
burn, make a strong tea of the leaves, and thicken it with pounded
crackers, or white bread, and apply it, renewing it as often as is need-
ed, till the canker is removed.

Children who have sore mouths, ought to wash with it often. If
they are troubled with canker or humours in the skin, the sores should
be washed with this tea. If they have canker in the throat, stomach,
or bowels, or are troubled with a relax, the tea, drank frequently,
will generally remove the complaint. It may be sweetened, with a
little milk added, when needed to make it more palatable." — (Smith.)

Employment.

The leaves given in decoction.


No. 123.
RUBUS STR1GOSUS.


RED RASPBERRY.


No. 125.
IRIS VERSICOLOR.


Medical Botany. 177

No. 124.

DEVIL'S BIT. Liatris.

Description.
Root tuberous, acrid, and bitterish, pungent, spicy, smelling like
turpentine or juniper, holding a peculiar balsamic resin, but no oil ;
properties, partly soluble in a watery decoction, wholly in alcohol.
A powerful diuretic, acting mildly; may be used ad libitum; also dis-
cutient, tonic, diaphoretic, and deobstruent. Useful in dropsy, sore-
throat, scrofula, gravel, pains in the breast, after pains in women, and
bite of snakes.

Employment.
It is used both externally and internally. It may be administered
in the form of powder, tea, or syrup.


No. 125.

BLUE FLAG. The Moot


Latin Name — Iris Versicolor.
English Name — Blub Flag.

Botanical Character.

Class III.— TRIANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Iris — Corolla parted into 6 segments, or petals, of which
3 are reflexed, and 3 are erect ; stigmas resemble petals.

Species — Versicolor — Leaves ensiform ; stem acute on one side ;
capsules oblong, 3-sided, with acute angles.

Description.

Root fleshy, horizontal, sending down a multitude of fibres ; stem
two or three feet high, round on one side, acute on the other ; leaves
sword-shaped ; peduncles of various length, flattened on the inside ;
germ 3, covered with flat sides, and obtuse angles ; outer petals of
the flower spatulate, beardless, the border purple, the claw variegated
with green, yellow, and white, and veined with purple ; inner petals
erect, paler than the outer ; style short, concealed ; stigmas 3, petal-
form, purple or violet, resting on the outer petals ; stamens concealed
under the stigmas, with oblong, linear anthers ; capsule 3-celled,
3-valvcd ; seeds numerous, flat.

Vol. III. Y


178 Materia Medica.


Locality.
Found throughout the United States, in the borders of swamps, and
in wet meadows ; flowering in June.

Qualities.
The root has a nauseous taste, and, when held in the mouth, imparts
a powerful sense of heat and acrimony to the fauces. " The most
active constituent," says Bigelow, " appears to be a resin, which pre-
cipitates in the form of a white powder, when water is added to the
alcoholic solution."

Medical Properties.

Cathartic, stimulant, diuretic, antivenereal. The root of this plant,
when dried and recent, is a very certain and active cathartic. It is
apt to occasion nausea, with prostration of strength sometimes. From
the stimulating properties of this root, it is capable of exciting many
of the secretions, as likewise the excretions. We are informed by
Dr. Bigelow, that Dr. Macbride, of Carolina, found great benefits re-
sulting from the use of this article, in combination with eryngium
yuccifolium, in dropsy. " In consequence of hi3 recommendation,"
says Dr. Bigelow, " I administered the tincture of the iris, in small
doses, to several persons affected with anasarca and hydrothorax.
It was evidently of service to a majority of those who took it, for a
certain time."

Dr. Woodruff informs me, that this root is very valuable in several
diseases. Given in doses of six or eight grains, night and morning, it
proves gently laxative, and eradicates the most inveterate taint of the
system. It is excellent in venereal and herpetic affections, fluor
albus, &c. It forms the basis of Smith's antimercurial syrup, which
is given and recommended for syphilitic, and many other complaints.
We copy the following from Dr. Elisha Smith's Botanic Physician :

" This root possesses great medicinal power ; and from a long expe-
rience of its use, I am convinced that it is equally as efficacious as
mercury, in all the diseases in which, in the commons-practice, it is
supposed mercury is indicated. It serves as an alterative, and siala-
gogue, in small continued doses ; as a powerful drastic purge, a stimu-
lant, a vermifuge, a diuretic, errhine, &c. It is a complete substitute
for that mineral, for any of its purposes ; and, being a vegetable, I
consider it far preferable, because, after having its operation and ef-
fect, it passes off and leaves the system free ; whereas mercury fastens
upon the bones and solids, and remains, like a corroding and eating
canker, rendering vast numbers feeble and debilitated for life. Such
is the difference between these two articles of medicine ; and it would
be a happy event for mankind if physicians would, for once, devest
themselves of their blind prejudices in favour of the mineral, and con-
sent, at least, to make a trial of this vegetable substitute. Their hu-
manity should be a sufficient inducement for this. The plea that the
vegetable kingdom contains no equivalent to mercury, is no longer
tenable ; then why should not physicians discard the use of it at once,
when it is universally acknowledged, and felt, that in the aggregate i
has proved a curse, a destroyer to the human race. The disuse of it


Medical Botany. 179

it is true, would lessen the employment of the medical profession ; but
the satisfaction they must feci at the proportionate decrease of suf-
fering among their fellow beings, will, no doubt, richly compensate
them for their pecuniary sacrifice."

Employment.
Given in powder, as a cathartic, the dose is about twenty grains.


No. 126.

NUTMEG. The Fruit

Latin Name — Mykistica Mosciiata.
English Name — Nutmeg Tkee.

Botanical Character.

Genus — Myristica — Male flower ; calyx 3-cleft ; corolla none ;
anthers adhering about the upper part of the filament ; female flower ;
calyx 3-cleft ; corolla none ; style short ; stigma bifid ; capsule
drupaceous.

Species — Mosciiata — Leaves lanceolate ; fruit smooth.

Description.
This tree grows to the height of thirty-feet ; leaves elliptical,
pointed, undulated, nerved, alternate, on long foot-stalks, above of a
bright green, beneath paler ; flowers small ; fruit round, or oval ; a
drupe, splitting into two valves, which discovers the mace, which has
a reticulated appearance, and divides into three portions, which closely
invest a slender shell, containing the seed, or nutmeg.

Locality.
The tree which furnishes this elegant spice, is a native of the Ma-
lucca islands. It is not cultivated in any of them but Banda, from
which we have been supplied with mace and nutmeg.

Qualities.
Nutmegs are oval, or round, flat at both ends, furrowed on the out-
side, of a yellowish colour inside, variegated with brown, undulating
lines ; solid, hard, unctuous to the feel ; balsamic smell, and agreea-
ble aromatic taste. By distillation, they yield an essential oil, of a
whitish yellow colour, lighter than water, and possessing the aromatic
taste and smell of the nutmeg in an eminent degree.

Medical Properties.
Nutmegs are carminative, stimulant, and stomachic. It is useful to
relieve nausea, or vomiting, or to check diarrhoea. It is also em-
ployed to conceal the taste and flavour of unpleasant medicines, and


180 Materia Medica.

to obviate the nausea which they might excite. The oil of nutmegs
is a powerful carminative and stomachic, given in doses of a few
drops.

Employment.
Given in the form of powder, from ten to fifteen grains.


No. 127.

VIRGINIA SPEEDWELL. {Veronica Virginica.)

The following account of this plant has been communicated to me
by Mr. Prince, the venerable proprietor of the Linnsean Botanic Gar-
den, at Flushing, L. I.

He states, that a relative of his was so far reduced with the dropsy,
that she was abandoned by her physician as incurable. In this condi-
tion, her friends concluded to apply to some " root," or " Indian
doctor," in hopes that something might yet be done. After arriving
at the house, it was found so small that she was unable to remain
there, as was intended, and therefore some medicine was given her,
and she returned home. The directions for taking it were, to add a
suitable quantity of water to three handfuls of the herb or plant, and
boil down to half a pint ; then drink the whole. The physician as-
sured her that it would effect a cure ; and, according to his assertion,
it had the effect. In a few weeks it carried off" the water, and it never
again returned. The husband then went and procured the green
plant, and raised it in his garden ; and Mr. Prince informs me that he
cultivated it in his garden at Flushing. He found considerable diffi-
culty in dissecting it ; but such confidence had he in its properties,
that he persevered until he discovered the genuine botanical name of
it, which is the Veronica, or Virginia Speedwell.

Mr. Prince further informs me, that he communicated this informa-
tion to several physicians, but so prejudiced were they to the use of
any thing different from the established practice, that all refused to
administer it, except a Dr. Ogden, who used it with the greatest suc-
cess. Mr. Prince further states, that it is equally efficacious in puri-
fying the blood, for the leprosy, &c, in which, to his knowledge, it
was given with success.

On one occasion, intelligence came to a domestic of his, that she
must go immediately home, as her father, Mr. Combs, was nearly gone
with the leprosy. He was in the most deplorable state. He went
into his garden, and procured some of the speedwell, and requested
her to use it internally, and wash the ulcers with Castile soap and wa-
ter. After this, he heard no more of the ease for some months, when
a person called and asked him for some of the plant which cured Mr.
Combs of his leprosy. He said that some one had it much worse
than the other man, who was cured. He had none, but took par-
ticular pains to procure it. It was given according to the directions,
and effected a permanent cure.


No. 127. No - l3a

VERONICA VIRGIN1CA. ZANTHOXYLUM FHAXINEUM.


VIRGINIA SPEEDWELL. PRICKLY ASH.


No. 128.
rilELLANDUIUM AQUATICUM.


WATER FENNEL


No. 126.
MYRISTICA MOSCIIATA,


NUTMEG.


Medical Botany. 181

No. 128.

WATER FENNEL. Phellandrium Aquaticum.

In mucous consumption ; genuine pulmonary consumption ; in humeral
asthma ; in chronic ulcers of the legs ; in chronic catarrh ; and in cases
of hamoptisis.

By J. F. Daniel Lobstein, M.D.

Gentlemen, Members of the Associate Medical Society of Botanic
Physicians and Surgeons of New-York,

I take the liberty to communicate to you several observations of dif-
ferent diseases, in which I was very successful, by employing the
seeds of semen phellandrium. I do not pretend to be the first physi-
cian who has introduced this remedy into practice, but I have em-
ployed it in several cases, and under a union with other medicines,
in which it was never employed before.

I take the liberty to present to you, gentlemen, Members of the As-
sociate Medical Society of Botanic Physicians and Surgeons of New-
York, a half-pound of the seeds of the phellandrium, so that if differ-
ent members of the society would make a trial with that, they can do
it ; and if your results should be as successful as my results, it would
be very flattering to me.

The phellandrium aquaticum is a biennial umbelliferous plant, indi-
genous to Germany and other parts of Europe, growing in ditches and
in low marshy situations. The seeds are of a yellowish-green colour,
elliptical, slightly curved, flat on one side, and gibbous on the other;
they are streaked, and terminate in small 5-toothed heads. They
have an aromatic odour, resembling angelica, and a strong, spicy, and
acrid taste. This active property appears to reside partly in an ethe-
real oil, which they contain in considerable abundance, and perhaps
in part, also, in more fixed elementary principles. This plant is some-
times confounded with other umbelliferous plants, growing in swampy
places, particularly with the slum laiifolium, and angustifolium, and
cicuta virosa. The seeds of the sium angustifolium are more oval,
pointed above, and terminated with a small style. The seeds of the
sium latifolium, are smaller, more curved, stronger, and more regularly
ribbed. The seeds of the cicuta virosa are roundish, gibbous, com-
passed, greenish, and crowned with a small calyx.

The seeds of this plant are a mild narcotic stimulant, occasioning,
when given in large doses, vertigo, intoxication, and dull pains in the
head. The action of this remedy appears to be particularly directed
upon the pulmonary organs ; it promotes expectoration, lessens
cough, and improves the morbid secretions of the bronchia. Huf eland
speaks in very high terms of the effects of this remedy in phthisis


182 Materia Medica.

'pituitosa, or mucous consumption, in which he gave it in doses of 20
grains, three times a day. It is also much commended for its power
in phthisis, by John, Stern, and Nebel.* Burdock, in his excellent
work on the materia medica, speaking of the medicinal powers of this
article, says, " so long as the substance of the lungs has as yet not
suffered any material disorganization from ulceration, or in what has
been called phthisis pituitosa, the phellandrium aquaticum is one of
our most valuable remedies." This medicine is also highly recom-
mended in chronic bronchitis ; in weakness of the lungs ; and in
chronic catarrhal affections, arising from pneumonia ; as well as in
phthisis, depending on suppressed cutaneous eruptions, or rheumatic
affections of the breast. It has been also employed with much bene-
fit in humoral asthma, and in chronic ulcers of the legs. Some phy-
sicians advise it to be given in union with the extract of cicuta ; but in
my own practice, I have found it to answer best when exhibited in
combination with pulv. gum arabic and saccharum lactis. Having
stated, in a general way, the diseases in which this article has been
found particularly useful, I will 'now relate the facts which have oc-
curred in my own practice, in relation to its remedial powers.

I have employed this remedy in four cases of mucous consumption,
in two of humoral asthma ; in one of chronic ulcers of the legs ; in three
of phthisis ulcerosa, or genuine pulmonary consumption ; in three of
chronic catarrh, and in two cases of haemoptisis.

Case 1. The first case of mucous consumption in which I prescrib-
ed this remedy, .occurred in Strasburg, in France. The patient was
a middle-aged woman ; she had taken various remedies for her com-
exceedingly reduced. Her cough was, at times, very violent, attend-
ed, occasionally, with a copious and tenacious expectoration. She
was much emaciated, and affected with symptoms of dyspepsia ; a
slight paroxysm of fever supervened ev£ry afternoon, and the night-
sweats were sometimes very profuse. On being first called to her, I
ordered such remedies as I thought calculated to mitigate the cough,
from which she derived temporary benefit. After having continued
for a few weeks, with the use of the ordinary demulcents and expec-
union with saccharum lactis and gum arabic, in the dose often grains
of the former, and twenty of each of the other two articles, three times
a day. After having used this medicine about fourteen days, she was
evidently better ; the fever had almost entirely disappeared, and the
cough was much less violent, and accompanied by a much easier and
better expectoration. Under the continued use of the medicine, she
gradually recovered more and more strength ; her appetite became
good, and in about six weeks she was so well as not to require any
further attendance.

Case 2. This, also, was a case of mucous consumption, in a young
woman of Strasburg. She contracted her disease from an imprudent
exposure to a cold atmosphere, immediately after having over-heated
horself by dancing. She was at first affected by a dry cough, which

* JNebel de phellandro aquatica ejusque in phthisis puruleata virtutibus.


Medical Botany. 183

she neglected, until, becoming weak, and troubled with night-sweats,
with increased coughing, she requested my attendance. I, at first,
sugar, by which the cough and expectoration were considerably im-
proved. The expectoration, however, soon became exceedingly co-
the semen phellandrium, and had the satisfaction of seeing my patient
gradually recover under its use.

riety of pulmonary disease, and with the happiest effects.

Case 3. The first case of phthisis pulmonalis ulcerosa, in which I
employed this article, was in a woman, at Strasburg. She had been
labouring under the disease for several years, and had undergone va-
rious treatments for her disease. She was about thirty-two years of
age, and mother of three children. I found her very emaciated, with
frequent and troublesome cough, attended with a copious purulent ex-
pectoration ; she had regular exacerbations of fever; a small, tense,
and frequent pulse, and experienced debilitating night-sweats.
Scarcely any hopes of recovery were entertained by her friends, or
indeed by myself.

use of the phellandrium aquaticum, and in the course of about four
months she was almost entirely restored to her original health.
When I left Strasburg, in 1818, four years had already elapsed, du-
ring which she was tree from her disease.

Two similar cases, I treated with the same success ; two gentlemen
in Philadelphia.

Case 4. This was also a case of phthisis pulmonalis, exhibiting the
most unequivocal symptoms of the disease. The expectoration was
purulent, the night-sweats exhausting, the cough very troublesome,
and debility and emaciation were rapidly progressing. She gradually
and completely recovered under the employment of the semen phel-
landrium. I treated another consumptive patient, a weaver, whose
disease yielded effectually to the powers of this remedy.

Case 5. This was a case of humoral asthma, in a widow, about six-
ty-four years old. She had suffered much from the frequent attacks
of the disease, and had consulted many eminent physicians. After
prescribing various remedies, without any particular advantage, I de-
termined to give her the semen phellandrium. She soon found herself
relieved by this remedy, and was finally entirely freed from her com-
plaint by its use.

Case G. This case of asthma occurred in a young woman, at Read-
ing, Pennsylvania. She had already suffered much from the disease,
and undergone various treatments for its removal, without any advan-
tage. In this case the semen phellandrium was signally serviceable.
She was speedily and effectually cured by it.

Of the efficacy of this remedy in chronic catarrh, I have had re-
peated evidence. I treated a woman under this affection, who had
been a very great while affected with the disease. She was com-
pletely cured by this remedy, although I had previously given her a
great variety of medicines, without the least benefit. I attended


184 Materia Medica.

another patient suffering from this disease, in whom the usefulness of
this medicine was unequivocally demonstrated.

I have also used the semen phellandrium, with very good effects,
in chronic and ill-conditioned ulcers of the lower extremities ; and in
several cases of spitting of blood, I have known it to produce very
salutary effects.

From my own experience with this remedy, therefore, I am per-
suaded that it is capable of very important remedial applications, and
deserving of much more general notice than it seems hitherto to have
received, out of Germany.

In phthisis ulcerosa and pituitosa, I have given the semen phellan.
drium, as follows :

Take pulvis seminis phellandrii aquatici, gr. v. ;
Saccharum lactis,
Pulv. gum arabici ad gr. x ;
Dent. tal. dos. no. xxiv. ; three powders a day.

N. B. Each powder will contain gr. v. of pulv. sem. phellandr.
aquat. ; and each powder gr. x. of sacchar. lactis, and gr. x. of pulv.
gum arabic.


No. 129.
BITTER ROOT. The Root, Flowers, and Leaves.

Latin Name — Apocynum Androseamifolium.

English Name — Bitter Root.

Vulgar Names — Dogsbane, Fly-trap, Honey Bloom, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class XVIII.— GYNANDRIA.
Order V.— PENTANDRIA.

Genus — Afocyntjm — Calyx 5-cleft ; corolla bell-shaped, 5-cletl ;
five corpuscles surrounding the germ ; five anthers alternating with
them, connivent, and adhering, by the middle, to the stegyne or
cover of the pistils, which are 2, small and concealed ; succeeded by
two follicles, with numerous downy seeds.

Species — Androseamifolium — Smooth, stem erect, dicnotome ;
leaves petiolate, opposite, entire, acute ; cymes nodding, lateral, and
terminal, beyond the leaves ; follicles linear.

Description.

Stem erect, herbaceous, from three to five feet high, cylindrical,
smooth, often rose-coloured, forked several times; leaves opposite,
petiolate, pale beneath, acute, entire, two or three inches long, with a
large nerve ; flowers corymbose, or paniculate, axillary or terminal ;
calyx short, 5-cleft ; corolla white, tinged with red ; anthers connivent,
sagittate ; style obsolete ; stigma thick, acute ; fruit, a pair of folli-
cles, long and linear ; seeds numerous, comose.


Medical Botany. *85

Locality.

A perennial American plant ; found from Canada to Carolina. It
grows in woods, hills, dry, or sandy soils, along fences, and over old
fields. Blossoms from June to July.

Qualities.

The whole plant is lactescent ; the root is intensely bitter and nau-
seous.

It is considered as containing a bitter extractive principle, soluble
in water and alcohol, a colouring principle, soluble in water only, a
very large quantity of caoutchouc, and a volatile oil.

Medical Properties.

This plant is tonic, alterative, and emetic. It is a very active plant,
highly valued by our southern Indians. The root is the most power-
ful part, and is much employed by our country physicians instead of
ipecacuanha. Thirty grains of the recently powdered root evacuate
the stomach as effectually as two thirds of this quantity of ipecacuanha,
by which name it is known in various parts of the eastern states. Its
power is diminished by keeping, and destroyed by age. Professor
Bigelow remarks, that we have very few indigenous vegetables which
exceed this apocynum in bitterness, and thinks the sensible and che-
mical properties of the root promise a good effect, when given in small
doses, as a tonic medicine.

In small doses it is a tonic, useful in dyspepsia and fevers. The
Choctaw and Chickasaw nations of Indians employ it in syphilis, and
consider it a specific ; they use the fresh root, chewed, swallowing
the juice only.

Employment.

In the form of powder, of the root, the dose is from 20 to 30 grains,
for an emetic ; for a tonic, from six to eight.


No. ISO.
PRICKLY ASH. The Bark, and Berries.

Latin Name — Zanthoxylum Fraxineum.

English Name — Prickly Ash.

Vulgar Names — Toothache-bark, Toothache-tree.

Boiflnical Character.

Class XX.— DIOECIA.
Order V.— PENTANDRIA.

Genus — Zanthoxylum — Calyx 5-parted ; corol ; female flowers,
pistils 5 ; capsules 5, 1-seeded.

Species — Fraxineum — Prickly; leaves pinnate ; leaflets lance-oval,
sub-entire, sessile ; umbels axillary.

Description.

Stem straight, furnished with numerous prickles, from ten to fifteen

Vol. III. Z


186 Materia Medica.

feet high ; leaves pinnate ; folioles oval-lanceolate, sessile, serrulate,
and almost entire ; common petiole unarmed ; umbels axillary ; flow-
ers, perianthe, 5-parted ; stamina, three, five, and six ; pistils three to
five, containing each one seed. When rubbed with the fingers, they
impart an odour similar to that of lemon oil.

Locality.

This is a tall shrub, indigenous to the southern states ; and found
plentifully in the middle states, in meadows, and low, moist ground.

Qualities.

Bark thin, gray externally, yellowish-white internally ; taste pun-
gent, aromatic, and exciting a copious discharge of saliva.

Dr. Staples has obtained from this bark a crystalline substance
analogous to piperin, united with an oil possessing all the aroma, acrid-
ity, and warmth of the bark.

Medical Properties.

This bark possesses very energetic stimulant and diaphoretic pro-
perties, analogous to those of mezereon bark. It is a popular medi-
cine, often exhibited in practice, as a remedy in chronic rheumatism.
It is said that, by an internal and protracted use, it has, in several in-
stances, produced salivation. We also make use of the bark, or ber-
ries, in chronic rheumatism.

It is recommended in malignant ulcers, both as an internal and ex-
ternal remedy, and several cases, in testimony of its efficacy in this
respect, are related in the Medical and Physical Journal, and in the
Transactions of the London Medical Society.

Employment.

The powder is given in doses of ten, twenty, and even thirty grains.
Decoction, (one ounce of bark to a quart of water, boiled down one
third,) taken in doses of two or three ounces, every two or three
hours. The tincture of the bark and capsules, is a popular drink in
chronic rheumatism.


No. 131.
UEDEOMA PULEGIOIDES.


AMERICAN PENNYROYAL.


Medical Botany. 187

\o. 181.

PENNYROYAL. The Plant.

Latin Name — Hedeoma Pulegioides.
English Name — American Pennyroyal.

Vulgar Names — Pennyroyal, Thick-weed, Stinking-Balm,
Squaw-Mint.

Botanical Character.

Class II.— DIANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Hedeoma — Calyx bilabiate, 10-striated ; base gibbous,
upper lip trifid, lower with 2-sublate teeth, and ciliated bristles ; co-
rolla bilabiate, upper lip nearly entire, lower trilobed, middle lobe ob-
cordate ; two fertile stamina, as long as the corolla ; two sterile, and
short ; 1-style, 4 seeds.

Species — Pulkgioides — Annual leaves, sub-petiolate, oblong, acute,
sub-serrate, a little rough ; flowers axillary, verticillate, by six, on
short pedicels, with two small bracteoles.

Description.
Root annual, small, yellowish, branched ; stem upright, about one
foot high, with slender, erect branches ; leaves opposite, small, ob-
long, lanceolate, or sub-oval ; flowers all along the branches, in axil-
lary whorls of six ; calyx, as above, pubescent; corolla very small ;
stamina and style filiform ; anthers oblong ; stigma, lateral, acute ;
fruit, four small oblong seeds.

Locality.
Found all over the United States, and in Canada, in dry woods,
plains, &c.

Qualities.
The smell is strong, and hardly aromatic, but pleasant ; taste, pun-
gent, and warm. The medical principle resides in an essential oil,
possessing the same smell and taste as the herb.

Medical Properties.
Carminative, stimulant, diaphoretic, emmenagogue, &c. It is a po-
pular remedy in the country for suppressed menses ; an infusion, or
tea, given freely, assists nature to restore this evacuation, particularly
where it has arisen from a sudden check of perspiration.

Employment.
A strong tea, made of the plant, should be taken warm, freely, and
frequently.


188 Materia Medic a-


No. 132.


ELDER. The Flowers, heaves, Bark, fyc.

Latin Name — Sambucus Niger.
English Name — Common Eldek.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order III.— TRIGYNIA.

Genus — Sambucus — Calyx 5-parted ; corolla 5-cleft ; berry
?-seeded.

Species — Niger — Cyme 5-parted ; leaves pinnate ; stem arboreous.
Description.

It sometimes rises to the height of a small tree; it is much branched
toward the top ; the young shoots are full of pith, the old ones have
none ; leaves pinnated, consisting of two or three pairs of pinac, with
an odd one at the end ; flowers white, growing in an umbelliferous
manner; fruit, around, blackish berry, containing three seeds.

Locality.
This shrub is found growing all over the United States, in hedges,
&c. Flowers in June ; fruit ripens in September.

Qualities.

The berries contain malic acid, and have a sweetish, not unplea-
sant, taste ; but if eaten in too great a quantity, will produce nausea.
Medical Properties.

Every part of this plant possesses considerable medical properties.
It is laxative, diuretic, alterative, anti-herpetic, refrigerant, vulnerary,
deobstruent, &c. The bark is useful in dropsy. The flowers are
excellent to purify the blood ; from the leaves is made an excellent
ointment, very useful in, eruptions of the skin, and they also form an
excellent poultice for inflammations. A syrup, made of the berries, is
highly esteemed by many, in bowel complaints.

A tea made of the flowers, is very good to remove the herpetic af-
fections of children, and to obviate costiveness.

Employment.
We make a very extensive use of the elder. The flowers enter
into the alterative syrup, and the bark, simmered with wine, forms
the hydragogue tincture, which is given in dropsical complaints.


No. 132.
8AMBUCU3 NIGER.


MON ELDER,


No. 133.
ROSA.


COMMON ROSE.


Medical Botany 189

' No. 133.

ROSE. The Flowers.

Latin Name — Rosa Gallica.
English Name — Red Rose.

Botanical Character.

Class XII.— ICOSANDRIA.
Order V.— POLYGYNIA.

Genus — Rosa — Petals 5 ; calyx unceolate, 5-cleft, fleshy, narrow
at the neck ; seeds many, hispid, affixed to the interior sides of the
calyx.

Species — Gallica — Germs ovate, hispid ; stems and petioles his-
pid-acuclate.

Description.

Stems straight, ramose, furnished with numerous reddish prickles ;
leaves alternate, petiolate, composed of from 3 to 7 oval and sessile
folioles; flowers, of a fine crimson-red; calyx urccolate, persistent,
globular ; fruit contained in the tube of the calyx.

Locality.

Native of the south of Europe, but now very common in our gar-
dens. Flowers in June and July.

Qualities.

Petals of a deep red colour, of a faint smell, but pleasant; of a bit-
ter and styptic taste.

According to Cartier, they contain tannin, gallic acid, a colouring
matter, an essential oil, a fatty matter, albumen, some soluble salts
with base of potassa, insoluble salts with base of lime, some silica,
and oxide of iron. Water, alcohol, and vinegar, dissolve their active
principles.

Medical Properties.

Astringent, tonic, &c. Exhibited with advantage in passive hae-
morrhage, mucous discharges, colliquative diarrhoea, and other simi-
lar affections. We use occasionally this article externally, in the form
of an eye-water, by adding rose-water to the pith of sassafras, which
constitutes a mucilaginous liquid, and is very serviceable in ophthal-
mia, or inflammation of the eyes.

Employment.

Infusion, by adding two pinches of the petals to a pint of boiling
water. Syrup of roses is made by adding one part of roses to nine of
boiling water, and ten of sugar.


190 Materia Medica.

No. 134.

HENBANE. The whole Plant.

Latin Name — Hyoscyamus Niger.
English Name — Black Henbane.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Hyoscyamus — Corolla funnel-shaped, obtuse ; stamina in-
clined ; capsule operculate, belocular.

Species — Niger — Leaves embracing the stem, waving; flowers
sessile.

Description.

This plant rises from one to two feet ; the leaves are large, cut into
irregular lobes, or pointed segments, of a glaucous colour, undulated,
woolly, and embrace the stem ; flowers are funnel-shaped, the tube
short, the border expanded, and cut into five obtuse segments ; the
colour is dingy yellow, with bright purple streaks, which is the livery
of poisonous herbs, purple with yellow being the characteristic ; the
calyx is also divided into five short-pointed downy segments.

Locality.
This is an annual plant, native of Europe, but grows plentifully with
us, along road-sides and among rubbish. Flowers in July.

Qualities.

The colour of this plant, when fresh, is of a dull green ; its odour
is fetid and nauseous, and ils taste sweetish, and afterwards slightly
acrid.

Henbane contains resin, mucilage, extractive, malic acid, and some
salts. Mr. Brande, in his analysis of the seeds, has discovered an
alkaloid proximate principle, combined with malic acid, which has
been called hysociama, and is considered to be the active principle of
this plant.

Hyosciama is white, crystallizes in long prisms, unalterable at a
high temperature, insoluble in water, and forming soluble salts with
sulphuric and nitric acids. It has not as yet been employed in prac-
tice, but ought to be carefully studied, says a writer, as deserving a
very particular attention.

Medicate 'roper -ties.
This article is very poisonous, and often proves fatal to many, when
taken by mistake. The symptoms produced by an over-dose of this
medicine, are great thirst, giddiness of the head, dimness of sight, ra-
vings, convulsions, risus sardonicus, coma, &c. The antidotes to
counteract this medicine, consist in first giving a teaspoonful of the
flour of mustard, to produce vomiting ; if this does not succeed, ad-


No. 134.
HYOSCYAMUS NIGER.


BLACK HENBANE.


No. 135.
FRAXINUS ORNUS.


FLOWERING ASir.


Medical Botany. 191

minister largo quantities of diluent drinks, with a small quantity of
vinegar and water, and follow this up by giving a dose of sweet oil.

This plant is a powerful narcotic, and in general better for ex-
ternal than internal use. Applied externally, in the form of poultice
and fomentation, it is useful in all cases of painful and obstinate in-
flammations, such as fistulas, boils, and swellings of the breast.

Given in the form of tincture, it will sometimes allay irritation where
opium cannot be administered.

It may be given in tic douloureux, tetanus, and other painful ner-
vous affections ; also in epilepsy, &c.

Employment.
In very severe pains, a small teaspoon ful of the tincture may be
given. Externally, a poultice may be made of the leaves, by simmer-
ing them in water, and then adding the slippery-elm bark. The ex-
tract, in doses of from one to two grains, gradually increasing ; of the
leaves, the same as the extract.


No. 135.


FLOWERING ASH. The Concrete Juice of the
Tree — (Manna.)

Latin Name — Fraxinus Orntjs.
English Name — Flowering Ash.

Botanical Character.

Class XXIII.— POLYGAMIA.
Order II.— DIOECIA.

Genus — Fraxinus — Bisexual flower ; calyx none, or 4-parted ; co-
rolla none, or 4-petalled ; stamina 2 ; pistil 1 ; lanceolate.

Species — Ornus — Leaves ovate-oblong, serrated, pctioled ; corolla
4-parted.

Description.

Trunk about twenty-five feet high ; leaves imparipinnate, composed
of 7 or 9 folioles ; flowers white, in ramose panicles at the extremity
of the branches ; calyx very small, 4-divided ; corolla, 4 linear divi-
sions ; fruit, a narrow and elongated capsule, terminated by a plain
and obtuse wedge.

Locality.

Native of the south of Europe, particularly of Sicil) and Calabria.

Qualities.

Three different kinds of manna are found in commerce, viz. : the
manna in tear, or flake manna, manna lacrymata, which is in round,
solid, and light pieces, of a white colour, of a saccharine, and having


192 Materia Medica.

scarcely any nauseous taste ; the manna in sorts, manna communis,
is in masses, formed of yellowish flakes, united together by a brownish
juice, of a less saccharine taste than the former, but insipid and nau-
seous ; the fat manna, manna inferior, is in soft, viscous masses, of a
brown colour, of a disagreeable taste, and mixed with a great many
impurities.

According to Thenard, this substance is composed of a peculiar
principle, which he has called mannite, and which is found to ex-
ist in manna in variable proportions ; of crystallizable sugar, of an
uncrystallizable mucous matter having a nauseous taste, and to which
manna appears to be indebted for its purgative properties.

Mannite is white, crystallized in silky flakes, composed of small
semi-transparent needles, of a saccharine taste, soluble in water and
alcohol, principally when warm, and incapable of producing the vinous
fermentation, and, consequently, of furnishing alcohol.
Medical Properties.

Manna is a very mild purgative ; it appears even that, when it is
recently collected, it has no action on the intestinal canal ; since, in the
country where it is gathered, it is employed for the same purposes as
sugar. By the alterations produced by age, it acquires its laxative
properties. Indeed, the older it is, the more powerful are its effects.

According to Mr. Vassal, mannite produces no purgative effect,
which renders the flake manna generally preferable.

Employment.

Dose, one drachm to three ounces, in milk. This enters in the com-
position of our worm powders.


No. 136.

BALM.


Latin Name — Melissa Officinalis.
English Name — Common Balm.

Botanical Character.

Class XIV.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Melissa — Calyx angular, scarose, with the upper hp as-
cending, bifid.

Species — Officinalis — Racemes axillary, verticillate ; pedicles
simple.

Description.

This plant rises two feet high ; leaves egg-shaped, spreading, rough,
ribbed, veined, deeply serrated, of a bright green colour, placed upon
long petioles ; flowers, white, ringent, proceeding from the alae of the
wings.


No. 136. No. 138

MELISSA OFFICINALIS. VERBABCUM TIIAPSUS.


COMMON BALM


COMMON MULLEN.


194 Materia Medica.

being united with liverwort, is said to have permanently cured a lady
in South Carolina of the consumption in its last stage. A strong de-
coction of this plant, when given to children, will purge, and expel
also worms. This root has also been used, in combination with pur-
gatives, to expel the tsenia or tape worm ; and it is said with success.

Employment.
Given in the form of syrup or decoction.


No. 138.

MULLEN. The Leaves and Blossoms.

Latin Name — Verbascum Thapsus.
English Name — Common Mullen.

Botanical Character.

Class V.— PENTANDRIA.
Order I.— MONOGYNIA.

Genus — Verbascum — Corolla rotate, somewhat unequal ; capsule
3-celled, 2-valved.

Species — Thapsus — Leaves decurrent, on each side, tomentose ;
stem simple.

Description.

This stem rises two or three feet in height ; leaves large, without
foot-stalks, at the base decurrent, oblong, pointed, indented at the
margin, and covered on both sides with a fine down or hair ; flowers
yellow, and clothe the extremity of the stalk, and are produced in
succession, from the bottom to the top. Calyx cut into five acute seg-
ments, and covered with down ; corolla also divided into five seg-
ments, which are blunt and somewhat unequal.

Locality.

This plant is a native of Great Britain, and grows plentifully with
us, along the road-sides and in old fields.

Qualities.
The leaves of this plant possess a bitterish subastringent taste, and a
mucilaginous quality. The flowers contain saccharine, chlorophylle,
yellow resin, volatile oil, malic and phosphoric acid.

Medical Properties.

The blossoms of this plant are anodyne, antispasmodic, pectoral,
&c. They make a very pleasant tea, which is useful in coughs, hae-
moptysis, haemorrhage, &c. The leaves are very useful in dysentery,
and in piles. A decoction of the leaves may be drank in dysentery ;
and in piles, they make a valuable fomentation to discuss the tumours.

In the form of a poultice, the leaves and pith of the stalk arc useful
in white swellings.

Employment.

As above directed.


No. 139.
SCUTELLARIA LATERIFLORA.


OFFICINAL SCULLCAr


Medical Botany. 195

No. 139.

SCULLCAP.

Latin Name — Scutellaria Lateriflora.

English Name — Officinal Scullcap.

Vulgar Names — Mad-weed, Hood-wort, Blve Pimpornell.

Botanical Character.

Class XIV.— DIDYNAMIA.
Order I.— GYMNOSPERMIA.

Genus — Scutellaria — Calyx bilabiate, persistent, upper lip with
a lid covering the seeds ; corolla bilabiate ; upper lip concave, entire ;
lower trilobe ; stamens cliclynamous ; seeds 4, in the closed calyx.

Species — Lateriflora — Branched and smooth ; leaves petiolate
and thin, ovate dentate, the lower ones subcordate ; racemes axillary,
leafy.

Description.

Root perennial, fibrous, yellow ; stem erect, from one to three feet
high, branched, diffuse, smooth, quadrangular ; branches opposite ;
leaves on long petioles, thin, nearly membranous, opposite, subcor-
date on the stem, ovate on the branches, dentate, acute, somewhat
rugose ; flowers pale blue, on long lateral axillary racemes, bracteated
by bracts, ovate, acute, entire, subsessile ; each flower axillary to one
bract,and pedunculated ; bracts distichal; flower unilateral ; calyx scu-
tellate ; 'Seed oval, verrucose.

; Locality.

This plant is found all over the United States, in meadows, woods,
near water, &c. ; blossoming in the summer.

Qualities.

This plant has very little smell, and the taste is a passive bitterish.
The juice of the plant is a little coloured with red.
Medical Properties.

Tonic, nervine, and antispasmodic. It is remarkably effica-
cious in chorea, or St. Vitus' dance ; with the infusion I have cured
a great number of cases of this disease. It has of late become quite
famous as a cure for the bite of mad dogs. Its property as a medicine
in this case was first discovered by Dr. Vanderesveer, towards 1772.
He used it with the utmost success, and is said to have, till 1815, at
which period he died, preserved 400 persons and 1000 cattle from be-
coming affected with the disease, after they were bitten by rabid ani-
mals. It is likewise stated that his son prevented, relieved, or cured,
40 persons in three years, in the states of New- York and New- Jersey,
by the use of this article. It is also very useful in convulsions, teta-
nus,, and tremours.

Rafinesque says, " that the dried plant gave one fourth of soluble


196 Materia Medica.

water, and a very active extract. The substances found in it by-
Cadet, were, 1. A yellow-green oil, fixed, and soluble in ether ; 2.
A bitter principle, soluble in water, alcohol, and ether ; 3. Chloro-
phylle ; 4. A peculiar volatile matter, smelling and tasting like the
principle of antiscorbutic plants ; 5. An essential oil ; 6. Albumen ;
7. A sweet mucous substance; 7. A peculiar astringent principle;
9. Legnine. When burnt, the ashes afford the chlorure of soda, and
even other salts." " It is therefore preposterous," says he, " to deem
such a plant inert." "The facts already known, prove that it is to-
nic, astringent, antispasmodic, and antihydrophobic."

Employment.
Given in the form of infusion, to be drank freely through the day.


No. 140.

BETH-ROOT. The whole Plant.

Latin Name — Trillium Latifolium.
English Name — Broad-leaf Bf.th-root.

Vulgar Names — Beth-root, Rattlesnake-root, Wake Robin,
Cough-root, Indian Balm, Ground Lily, &c.

Botanical Character.

Class VI.— HEXANDRIA.
Order III.— TRIG YNIA.

Genus — Trillium — Perigone double, marcescent, each 8-parted,
exterior calciform, interior corolliform ; 6 stamina inserted at the
base of the segments, nearly equal ; anthers linear; pistils oval ; 3
linear stigmas ; style seldom ; berry 3-celled, polysperm.

Species — Latifolium — Leaves subsessile, very broad, dilate wider
than long, subromboidal, undulate, both ends shortly acuminate ; ma-
ny-nerved, and reticulate ; calyx and petals subequal, oval, acuminate,
reflexed, revolute ; stamens shorter thart the pistils.

Description.

Root perennial ; stem terete, smooth, erect, with 3 verticillate
leaves, and 1 terminal flower.

Locality.

This plant is a native of North America.

Qualities.

The roots are oblong, or terete, tuberous, brown outside, white in-
side, from one to five inches long, with a few branching fibres ; they
have a faint smell, resembling cedar, and an aromatic taste, like co-
paiba.

Medical Properties.

The root of this plant is astringent, pectoral, tonic, antiseptic, alter-


No. 140. No. 141.

TRILLIUM LATIFOLIUM. ARTEMISIA ABSINTIIIUM.


BETH-ROOT.


WORMWOOD.


Medical Botany. 19'

ative, &c. The root is employed internally, in hematuria, or bleed-
ing from the kidneys, bladder, or urethra ; in uterine haemorrhage, im-
moderate menstrual evacuations, spitting of blood, hectic fever, asth-
ma, cough, &c. ; in doses of a teaspoonful of the powdered root, or in
infusion. In fluor albus of females, I have employed an infusion of
this root with much success. ' : Externally, this root is very useful in
the form of a poultice, in tumours, indolent and putrid ulcers, carbun-
cles, and mortifications, by itself, or, what is still better, in combination
with blood-root," says Rafinesque. As a tonic, this article, in combi-
nation with blood-root, is said to be, by the same writer, " a certain
cure for inflamed carbuncles and ulcers, after a purge has been ad-
ministered." It is also said, that this root restrains gangrene. In
female complaints, this is a good astringent, given in menorrhagia, lu-
corrhcea, and, after parturition, to astringe the uterine organs.

Employment.
The powdered root may be given in teaspoonful doses. Externally,
in the form of poultice. The infusion is made by adding a pint of
boiling water to a tablespoonful of the powder ; drink freely.


No. 141.

WORMWOOD. The whole Plant.

Latin Name — -Artemisia Absinthium.
English Name — Common Wormwood.

Botanical Character.

Class XIX.— SYNGENESIA.

Order I. -POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.

Genus — Artemisia — Receptacle naked ; seeds crowned with a
slight margin ; calyx imbricated, hemispherical ; florets of the ray
obsolete, or 3-cleft, sometimes wanting.

Species — Absinthium — Leaves compound, multifid ; flowers sub-
globular, pendent ; receptacle villous.

Description.

Stem herbaceous, covered with a whitish down ; leaves tripinnati-
fid, whitish on both sides; flowers flosculous, small, yellowish, form-
ing a long and pyramidal panicle ; the florets of the centre herma-
phrodite, fertile, 5-dentate ; those of the circumference, female, bi-
dentate, without pappus.

Locality.

This is a perennial plant, native of Europe, but raised in our gar-
dens ; it is found growing in stony and uncultivated places in Europe
and America. Flowers in July and August.


198 Materia Medica.

Qualities.

This plant has a strong and aromatic smell, and a very bitter and
aromatic taste.

According to Mr. Braconnot, it & composed of a very bitter matter,
containing nitrogen, soluble in cold water, but very little so in alco-
hol, 18 ; a matter containing nitrogen, and almost insipid, 8 ; a resini-
form substance, extremely bitter, soluble in alcohol and boiling water,
from which it precipitates on cooling, 1.4; a green volatile oil, 0.9;
chlorophyllin, 3 ; albumen, 7.5 ; fecula, 1 ; salts of potassa, 7.5 ;
lignous fibre and water, 552. Cold water and alcohol dissolve its
active principles.

Medical Properties.

Wormwood is possessed of very valuable stimulant and tonic pro-
perties. If administered in too large doses, it is apt to create heat in
the epigastric region, thirst, and all the other symptoms of irritation of
the stomach. When given in moderate doses, it promotes appetite
and digestion, quickens the circulation, and imparts to the whole sys-
tem a strengthening influence. It is given in all cases requiring the
administration of tonics; in dyspepsia, and other atonic states of the
intestinal canal, in certain cases of amenorrhoea, chronic leucorrhoea,
and in obstinate diarrhoea, depending upon debility of the membranes
of the intestines. It is often administered in intermittent fevers with
complete success. It is likewise given as an anthelmintic. The herb
is very useful in fomentations for bruises, and inflammations in gene-
ral. The oil enters into the green, or rheumatic oil, which is a
valuable application in rheumatism.

Employment.

Dose, of the powder, from one scruple to one drachm; infusion,
from half to one ounce, one pint of cold water. Externally, as a fo-
mentation.


Medical Botany. 199

The following articles are occasionally used, and highly extolled
by many, but not all yet fuily introduced into our materia medica.

American Columbo — (Trasera Verticellata.) — Root bitter and nau-
seous ; vomits and purges ; tonic given in weakness of the stomach,
attended with costiveness.

Mother-wort — (Leonurus Cardica.) — Is nervine, antispasmodic,
and emmenagogue ; useful in hysteria, and to promote the menses.
Given in the form of tea.

Laurel — (Kalmia Lalifolia.) — The powdered leaves are employed
successfully in tinea capitis, and in certain forms of fever.

Lung-wort. — Found growing on maple trees; is good in coughs and
defluxions of the lungs.

Maiden Hair. — This plant is mucilaginous and subastringent ;
good in coughs, asthma, pleurisy, jaundice, &c.

Water Melon. — The fruit is a good diuretic, and very cooling in
hot bilious constitutions. The seeds, infused in Holland gin, make an
excellent medicine in dropsy and suppression of urine.

Nettle, Stinking. — A powerful styptic.

Jerusalem Oak — (Cheiiapodium Anthelminticum.) — It is emmena-
gogue, deobstruent, and anthelmintic ; the oil is much used as a ver-
mifuge.

Wild Marjoram — (Origanum Vulgare.) — Fragrant, pungent, acrid,
bitterish, stomachic, corroborant, detergent, stimulant, menagogue,
diaphoretic ; useful in tea, for cough, asthma, chlorosis, cedema.
The distilled oil has all the properties ; it is acrid and caustic, burns
the skin, relieves toothache, &c.

Broomrai'e — (Orobanche Americana.) — Astringent, antiseptic, and
antidyphilitic ; considered in the West as a specific for gonorrhoea and
syphilis ; useful in obstinate ulcers, apthose and herpetic sores,
diarrhoea, and dysentery.

Partridge Berrv — (Gaidtheria Procumbens.) — Mild diuretic and
emmenagogue ; used in New-England to cure dropsy; given in tea.
Berries mild, astringent. A popular remedy for diarrhoea in the
North, and for disury in Carolina. Said to facilitate parturition.

Red Mulberry — (Morus Rubra.) — Fruit refrigerant and corrobo-
rant ; useful in sore-throat, angina, putrid fevers ; syrup Aiefly used.
Bark is said to expel the tenia Fruit contains tartaric acid.

Beech Drops — (Septamnium Virginianum.) Called also cancer
root. Root and stem astringent, bitterish, nauseous, useful in cancers;


200 Materia Medica.

base of Martin's powder; (with white arsenic, sulphur,and ranunculus;)
a painful remedy for curing cancers by application, but injurious in
scrofula and scrofulous cancers.

St. John's-wort — (Hypericum Perforatum. ) — Is vulnerary, pectoral,
pellant, nervine ; blossoms chiefly used ; although yellow, they dye oils
red ; infused in bear's oil, sweet oil, &c. they make a fine balsamic
ointment for wounds, sores, swellings, ulcers, tumours, rough skins,
&c. The tea of the leaves gives relief in diseases of the breast and
lungs. Used by empirics in diarrhoea, menorrhoea, hysterics, hypo-
chondria, mania, low spirits. A syrup made with sage is a specific
for coughs. Dose, a tablespoonful for a child twelve months old ; half
if six months old. An ointment composed of this article, with bitter-
sweet, elder bark, and stramonium, is said to be a specific in hard
indolent tumours of the breast.

Corsican Worm-weed — (Fucus Helminthochorotos.) — This plant
grows on the coast of the Mediterranean, and especially of the island
of Corsica. This plant (the whole of which may be used) is pos-
sessed of very powerful vermifuge properties, which act very pow-
erfully upon the intestinal worms. It is principally administered to
children, for the expulsion of the lumbricoid worms. The dose of the
powder is from ten grains to two drachms, mixed with honey, &c.

Cowhage — (Dolichos Pruriens.) — The operation of this article
seems to be merely mechanical. It has been found particularly use-
ful in expelling the round worm, lumbricus teres ; the spicula? irritating
and aiding its expulsion, by wounding it, without affecting the intes-
tines. It is prepared by dipping the pods in syrup or molasses, and
then, with a knife, scraping off the hairs along with the syrup, until it
forms a mixture of the thickness of honey, which is given in doses of
a teaspoonful to a tablespoonful in the morning, then followed by a
brisk cathartic. However, it is advised before exhibiting it, to pre-
pare the patient by a gentle purgative, as its efficacy is generally
much increased by this practice, probably by exposing the worms more
to the action of this substance.


Water Hemlock — (Cicuta Maculata.) — This plant acts in the
same manner as the narcotic poisons. It has been used of late by
several practitioners, as a substitute for the conium maculatum. Its
effects were very analogous to those of the true hemlock, but rather
more powerful. A primary symptom which attended a larger dose,
was nausea and vomiting.


Strong-scented Lettuce — (Lactuca Virosa.) — This plant acts upon
the nervous system in a manner similar to the hyosciamus and the
other solaneae ; this is the reason why it may be substituted in many
cases for opium. In sufficiently lar£e doses, it produces nausea, a!-
vine evacuations, and often, especially in cases of oedema or dropsy,
a remarkable increase in the secretion of urine. It has been exhi-
bited with success in ascites, engorgements of the abdominal viscera,


Medical Bolany. 201

jaundice, &c, and as a substitute for opium, in nervous cases. Ex-
tract, the dose from two grains to one scruple.

Vervine — ( Verbena Haslata.) — The roots of this plant, when boiled
down to a strong decoction, and that decoction drank, are very bene-
ficial as a tonic in intermittents and scrofula ; they open obstructions
of the viscera, promote the menses, and are good in gravelly com-
plaints, coughs, wheezing, and expel worms. They should be pre-
pared in strong decoction, and drunk daily.

Yarrow — {Millefolium.) — This plant possesses considerable medi-
cal property, as a detergent, purifies the blood, opens the pores, re-
moves obstructions, &c. It stops the spitting of blood, and cures the
bleeding piles. It is also very beneficial in dysentery. It may be
given in the form of decoction, sweetened with honey.

Winter Green — (Gautiera Repens.) — Winter green is stimulant,
anodyne, astringent, emmenagogue, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, milky,
and cordial ; and a popular remedy in many parts of the country. It
is generally used as a tea ; but the essence and oil possess eminently
all the properties, and are kept in the shops. The tea is used as a
palliative in asthma, to restore strength, promote menstruation, also
in cases of debility, in the secondary stage of diarrhoea, and to pro-
mote the secretion of milk in the breast ; it is a very agreeable and
refreshing beverage. The oil relieves the toothache, or allays the
pain wf carious teeth. The Indians make great use of this plant as a
stimulant, restorative cordial, &c. It is injurious in fever. The oil is
used as a disguise to many of the popular panaceas.


Iceland Moss — (Lichen Jcelandicus.) — The Iceland moss, on ac-
count of its bitterness, acts as a tonic ; the great quantity of fecula which
it contains renders it also very nourishing. Deprived of its bitter
principle, by repeated washings, or rather by macerating it in a weak
alkaline lie, as Berzelius recommends, it is used as an aliment by the
inhabitants of Iceland, and of some other parts of the north of Eu-
rope. It then acts as gum arabic and other mucilaginous substances ;
and it is very frequently administered in pulmonary catarrhs, in di-
arrhoea, and other affections requiring the exhibition of remedies of
this kind. When the bitter principle is not separated from it, it suc-
ceeds in chronic diseases of the lungs, in obstinate and inflammatory
diarrhoea, dyspepsia, and generally in all cases where it is necessary
to stimulate, in a slight degree, the digestive organs, and to promote,
at the same time, the strength of the patient, by tolerably abundant
alimentation, without fatiguing the stomach.

Ice Plant — (Cryslullinum.) — The root of this plant has by some
been thought almost an infallible remedy for fits in children. The
juice, diluted in cold w.iter, is useful in sore eyes. The roots should
be pulverized, and kept in bottles. Children troubled with fits may
take from half to one teaspoonful of the powder, in a cup of peony,
root tea, Ate.

Vol. III. 2B


202 Materia Medica.

Ground Ivy — (Glechoma Hederacea.) — The leaves of this plan(,
made in a decoction, are a good purifier of the blood, a pectoral, &c.
This decoction is good in consumption, obstructions, laxity, and
debility of the viscera ; for cleansing and healing ulcers in the lungs,
kidneys, and other internal parts ; and is likewise a good remedy in
jaundice, and asthmatic coughs.

Golden Rod — (Solidago Virgaurea.) — The flowers are aperient
and corroborant, and the leaves are gently astringent. The flowers
have been found beneficial in removing obstructions of the urinary
organs, in gravelly complaints, ulcerations of the bladder ; is good in
vitiation of the humours, and in the first stages of dropsies. The
leaves are good in debility, and laxity of the viscera or bowels, and all
disorders proceeding from that cause. They may be taken in infu.
sion, or decoction.

Golden Thread — (Coptis Trifolia.) — It is a pure, intense bitter,
without smell or astringency ; is tonic, stomachic, promoting diges-
tion ; useful in dyspepsia, debility after fevers, and whenever a pure
bitter is required. A tincture made with an ounce of the roots, in a
pound of diluted alcohol, is recommended in doses of a teaspoonful
thrice a day ; or ten or twenty grains of the powder ; both agree
with the stomach.


Five Finger — (Polentilla Reptans.) — The root is a gentle astrin-
gent, and has been found by experience to be very beneficial in fe-
vers, and particularly when there is great debility, lassitude, and night
sweats, which last it seldom fails to check ; it also helps the appetite.
It is taken in decoction, or it may be boiled with milk. It is service-
able in allaying fluxes, immoderate flow of the menses, &c.


Feverfew — {Matricaria Vulgaris.) — Leaves and flowers. — Both the
wild and garden feverfew have the same virtues. They are warm,
aperient* carminative, bitter, and strengthen the stomach, expel wind,
promote the menses, destroy worms, and are beneficial in hysterical
complaints and lowness of spirits. For a decoction, pour two quarts
of boiling water on two handfuls of the leaves, of which a teacupful
may be taken three or four times a day, in order to promote the
menses ; the same may be taken in colds and fevers. In hysterical
complaints, a teaspoonful of the compound spirit of lavender may be
added to the above decoction.


Cleavers — (Gallium Aparine.) — We copy the following from Dr.
Smith's Botanic Physician :

" Cleavers is one of the most valuable diuretics that our country
produces. I have found it an excellent and speedy medicine in all
suppressions of the urine and gravelly complaints, and is a powerful
discutient.

" It has also been found beneficial in the cure of the scurvy, and
spitting of blood. The expressed juice of this plant, mixed with oat-
meal to the consistence of a poultice, and applied cold over an indo-


Medical Botany. 203

lent tumour, three times n day, keeping the bowels open in the mean
time by castor oil, and taking a tablespoonful of the juice every morn-
ing, will often disperse it in a few days.

"Infusions of this herb should always be made in cold water, heat
destroying its virtues. Three or four ounces of the dried herb to a
quartof water, is sufficient; this should be drank for common daily drink.
It is an admirable remedy in gravelly disorders, often curing them
entirely, alone. It seems to possess a solvent power over the stone,
or gravel, crumbling it into a sandy substance, so that it is discharged
without difficulty. When urinary obstructions proceed from a collec
tion of cold, slimy, or muddy substance in the kidneys or bladder,
this effectually clears it out, in all cases. In inflammatory affections
of the kidneys or bladder, the cleavers infusion is peculiarly applica-
ble, from its cooling as well as diuretic quality. It gives great relief
in the scalding of the clap.

"The cold nature of cleavers, however, renders its employment in
dropsies, and other diseases of cold and debility, improper."

Centaury — (Centaurium Minor.) — Leaves and flowers. — Centaury
is justly esteemed one of the most efficacious bitters indigenous to
the United States, and is a good substitute for the English gentian,
which it resembles in taste. It is a good stomachic, emmenagogue,
febrifuge, and vermifuge.

Two ounces of the leaves and flowers of centaury, and one ounce
of orange-peel, may be infused in two quarts of brandy for two weeks.
One tablespoonful of this tincture taken before breakfast and dinner,
will create an appetite ; and children having worms, may take two
teaspoonfuls or more, every morning, which will effectually destroy
them. In the cure, and to prevent intermittent fevers, a wineglassful,
with twenty drops of elixir vitriol in it, is recommended twice a day, on
an empty stomach. In fevers, a tea made of two ounces of the
flowery tops of centaury, and a handful of balm, in two quarts of rain
water, may be drank five or six times a day. In order to restore
the menses, pour two quarts of water on two ounces of tops, and steep
for half an hour; then strain, and add a pint of rum. Dose, a tea-
cupful four times a day, together with fomentations, &c.

Caraway — (Carum Carui.) — The seeds. — This plant is cultivated in
our gardens, both for medicinal and culinary purposes. On account of
their aromatic smell, and warm, pungent taste, the seeds of caraway
may be classed among the finest stomachics and carminatives of our
climate. To persons afflicted with flatulency, and liable to colics, if
administered in proper quantities, they generally afford considerable
relief, and may sometimes be used with advantage in agues. They
give an agreeable flavour to more powerful tonics and stimulants,
and may therefore be combined with them advantageously.

Striped Blood-wort — (Laphathum Sanguineum Rubrum.) — The
properties of this plant are, antiseptic, voluntary, astringent, and pec-
toral. A decoction of it drank will immediately stop immoderate
flowing of the menses, and other haemorrhages. The powder of


- 04 Materia Medica*

blood-wort, mixed with an equal quantity of blood-root, and a little
alum, and used as a snuff for polypus in the nose, frequently destroys
it in the course of a week. The decoction of this root, made into a
syrup, has been found very beneficial in consumptions, accompanied
with spitting of blood. The juice of the green leaves of blood-wort,
boneset, and rattlesnake plantain, equal parts, and a gill drank at a
dose, is said to be an infallible cure for the bite of a rattlesnake, or
any other poisonous reptile. The bruised leaves should also be ap-
plied to the wound, and changed often.

Whortleberry — (Vaccinium.) — This plant is vulgarly called
"huckleberry," and is familiar to most persons. The fruit is much
used and esteemed.

The berries contain very considerable medicinal properties. They
are, with the root, strongly diuretic, and they seldom fail of relieving
or curing gravelly and dropsical affections. They may be bruised,
put in gin, and drank as the stomach will bear.


Horsemint — (Mornardus Punclana.) — This species of mint is aro-
matic, stimulant, sudorific, and diuretic. A strong decoction or tea of
it affords immediate relief in suppression of urine from the gravel.
The oil, applied externally, is excellent to remove painful affections.


Minerals, Acids, Salts, Sfc. 205


MINERALS, MINERAL ACIDS, SALTS, ANI-
MAL AND EARTHY SUBSTANCES, &c.

Oil of Vitriol, SuLrnuRic Acid — (Acidum SulpJiuricum.)

Description and History.

This acid is liquid, colourless or brownish, inodorous, and of a very
acid taste. It exists in nature in great abundance, combined with
certain salifiable bases, such as lime, alumen, soda, &c. It may be
prepared by burning, in a leaden chamber, a mixture of eight parts of
sulphur with one of nitre. The floor, being covered with water, ab-
sorbs the gas, and diluted sulphuric acid is the result.

General Properties and Employment.
It is extremely caustic, destroying the clothes, as well as the texture
of the body, wherever it is applied. It is the principal article in the
elixir of vitriol, and much in use as a remedy in night sweats in con-
sumption. It is used by some as an astringent to check the flow of
blood in haemoptysis and other kinds of bleeding. It is never ad-
ministered in a concentrated state.


Sulphuric Ether — (JEther Sulphur icus.)

Description.

Sulphuric ether is a colourless, limpid liquid, extremely volatile, of
a strong peculiar smell. It is formed from sulphuric acid and alcohol.
Properties and Employment.

It is a good antispasmodic and stimulant. It3 dose is from twenty
to thirty drops, given in some kind of tea. It is exhibited with ad-
vantage in most of the nervous affections, such as a spasmodic vomit-
ing, nervous colics, hysteria, and asthma. It is also useful in typhoid
fevers, in calming the convulsive motions, hiccough, dec. Externally
it is used as a refrigerant.


Lime — (Calx.)
This article is so familiar to all, that it needs no description.

Properties and Employment.
Lime water is prepared by pouring hot water upon unslaked lime,
is antiacid and antiseptic. By adding a small portion of the muriate
of mercury, it forms the yellow wash.


206 Materia Medica.

Copperas, Green Vitriol, Sulphate of Iron — (Sulphas Ferri.)

Description and History.
Copperas is a salt composed of iron and sulphuric acid. It is found
native, and also combined with other substances.

Medical Properties.
We use it only as an external application. By|Submitting copperas
to the action of a red heat, a red powder is formed, which acts as a
very powerful astringent. It is applied in cases of haemorrhage, piles,
&c. It is also serviceable, combined with lard, in cutaneous erup.
tions.


Sal Ammoniac, Muriate of Ammonia — (Murias Ammoniac.)

Description and History. '^

This article is found in nature, principally in the vicinity of volca-
noes. Mount -(Etna furnishes it in considerable quantities. It comes
to us in masses, concave on one side, and convex on the other, or in
conical pieces, crystalline, white, inodorous, of a bitter and acrid
taste. It is compressible and difficult to pulverize.

Medical Properties.

This is a cooling application for inflammation, and especially for
erysipelas and inflammatory rheumatism.

Muriate of ammonia, in combination with a decoction of wormwood,
makes an excellent application for inflammations, the result of sprains
or contusions. It should be applied warm. In inflammation of the
brain, a wash made of sal ammoniac, vinegar, and water, is very useful
in relieving the heat of the head.


Muriate of Mercury, Corrosive Sublimate — {Murias Hydrargyri,
Hydrargyri Oxymurias.)

Description and History.
This compound is found in the shops in the form of circular pieces,
white, semitransparent on the edges ; convex, smooth, and shining on
one side ; extremely acrid, caustic, and metallic taste. It is prepared
by mixing in a close vessel four parts of common salt, one part of per-
oxide of manganese, and five parts of sulphate of mercury. This
mixture is submitted to heat, and the muriate of mercury volatilizes
and condenses on the superior sides of the vase.

Medical Properties.
We use it only as a caustic, and as an external application. With
borax or lime water it also forms the yellow wash.


Minerals, Acids, Salts, fyc. 207

Spanih Flies, Cantharides — (Meloe Vesicaioria.)
Description and History.

These are insects very common in "Spain, Italy, and France, where
they are found in large families on the fraxinus, lilac, viburnum, &c.
They have a body from six to ten lines long ; they are of a shining,
golden, green appearance; they have a strong, penetrating, unplea-
sant, and peculiar odour ; their taste extremely acrid ; their powder
is of a brownish gray, intermixed with shining particles, of a metallic
green odour.

Medical Properties.

Applied externally, the action of Spanish flies is confined principally
to the skin ; however, their active principles may be absorbed, and
cause strangury, haematuria, priapism, &c. Taken internally, they
act as the most energetic, acrid poisons ; and seem to have a deter-
mination to the urinary organs, which they stimulate violently. How-
ever, they are often used by many as a stimulating diuretic, in the
treatment of incontinence of urine, gleet, impotence, &c. We, how-
ever, seldom use them either internally or externally.


Saltpetre, Nitrate of Potash — (Nitras Potassa.)
Description and History.
This salt is found in large quantities in nature, principally in the
East Indies, in Spain, in the kingdom of Naples, and in old walls, on
the surface of which it effloresces. It is also extracted, by chemical
process, from the earth ; found under old houses, barns, &c. It is
white, transparent, unalterable in the air, inodorous, of a cool and
sharp taste, followed by a slightly bitter after taste.
Medical Properties.
This article is refrigerant and diuretic ; it enters into the urinary
decoction.


Red Oxide of Lead — Red Lead — (Plumbi Oxidum Rubrum.)

Description and History.
Red lead is found in the form of a powder, of a very bright orange
red colour, insipid, inodorous, and of a specific gravity of 8.95. It
is composed of lead and oxygen ; formed by submitting common lead
to a great degree of heat, in a large oven prepared for that purpose,
which produces a scum upon the surface. This forms an oxide of
lead. The white lead is prepared by submitting common lead to the
action of acetic acid.

Medical Properties.
The properties of red and white lead depend not upon the lead it-
self, but upon the oxygen with which they are combined. These
preparations form the basis of some plasters which, by reason of the
large quantity of oxygen they contain, are very serviceable.


208 Materia Medica.

Sugar op Lead, Saccharum Saturni, Super Acetate of Lead —

(Plumbi Super acetas.)

Description and History.

In common, it is found in masses, composed of slender prismatic
crystals, aggregated, of a yellowish colour, slightly efflorescent. It
has a very sweet and styptic taste, is abundantly soluble in water, but
scarcely forms a transparent solution even with distilled water, owing
to a slight decomposition.

Medical Properties.

As an external application, sugar of lead is often employed to obtain
its astringent effect. A solution of it, of the strength of three grains
to an ounce of water, is used as an injection in gonorrhoea, and, pro-
ducing no irritation, is not liable to be attended with the injurious
consequences which sometimes arise from preparations more active.
A solution rather weaker, is used as a collyrium, or eye-water, in
ophthalmia, and is applied even in a state of active inflammation. A
stronger solution is a common application in superficial inflammation.


Caustic Potass^e — (Potassoz Fusa, Lapis Causticus.)
Description and History.

This article is found in a state of round sticks, like the nitrate of
silver, of a grayish white, sometimes reddish, with a smell like
slaking lime, and a corrosive action on the mouth ; exposed to the
air, it attacks quickly the carbonic acid, and moisture of the atmos-
phere, and is thus converted into a very deliquescent subcar-
bonate.

Medical Properties.

Caustic potash is a powerful escharotic. It quickly decomposes the
parts with which it is put in contact. It is principally used to remove
tumours, and to form issues ; which are most conveniently made by
placing on the skin a piece of linen, spread with adhesive plaster,
and perforated with a hole of the size of the proposed issue. The
caustic, being held in a paper, is then applied to all the skin which is
left bare by the perforation. This skin immediately becomes moist,
and turns a dark colour, a burning sensation taking place in the part.
If the caustic be good, the vitality of the skin will be destroyed in ten
or fifteen minutes. It may then be washed with vinegar, to neutralize
what caustic remains. Theyest poultice must now be used. The dead
skin commonly sloughs off in about a week or two. Caustic potash
differs from all other caustics, in exciting no pain or inflammation,
except when first applied, and then only for a few moments.


Cream of Tartar, Crystals of Tartar, Supertartrate of
Potash — (Potasscc Super tartras.)

Description and History.
This salt exists in small, irregular crystals, generally run together
in small masses, white, semitransparent, and gritr ; icid taste.


Minerals, Acids, Salts, Sfc. 209

The casks in which some kinds of wine are kept, become gradually
incrusted with a hard, saline substance, tinged with the colouring
matter of the wine, which has long been known by the former name
of tartar. When this saline substance is purified by solution, filtra-
tion, and crystallization, it constitutes the common cream of tartar.

Medical Properties.
Cream of tartar is refrigerant, laxative, and diuretic. Small doses,
in solution, form a cooling drink in febrile diseases, and excite the
urinary secretion ; large doses, in substance, occasion copious watery
discharges from the bowels ; hence, it is very useful in dropsical
cases, whether it operates by the kidneys or alimentary canal. When
added to the resinous purgatives, it renders them better suited to in-
flammatory cases, as in the compound powder of jalap and mandrake.
Combined with sulphur, it is a popular internal remedy in various dis-
eases of the skin. Its dose, when its laxative effects are required, is
from two to six drachms. Combined with sulphur, it is excellent in
the piles.


Sal jERatus — (Potassm Bicarbonas — Bicarbonate of Potash.)

Description and History.

This is a white alkaline salt, prepared by exposing pearl ash in

wooden boxes, perforated with holes, to the carbonic acid of a distiller's

or brewer's fermdhted vat, for several months, until the alkali is nearly

or quite neutralized.

Medical Properties.
Sal osratus is a very valuable remedy. Its comparatively agreeable
taste renders it one of the most pleasant and efficacious alkaline
remedies, both as an antiacid, diuretic, or antilithic. It is preferable
to the carbonate as an ingredient in the effervescing draught, and
requires a quarter less of lemon juice for its saturation. It enlers
into our neutralizing cordial, or mixture, which we find so remark illy
successful in every species of bowel.complaints.


Castile Soap — (Sapo Venetiensis.)
Description and History.
Castile soap is made from olive oil and soda ; its marble appear-
ance being given by the sulphate and red oxide of iron which are
mixed in al different stages of the process by which it is made. Good
soap should have little odour, and a disagreeable alkaline taste. With
water it forms an opake milky solution ; and with alcohol a nearly
transparent one.

Medical Properties.
Applied externally, it is detergent and cleansing. In pharmacy it
is used for the formation of pills. It enters into our antidyspeptic
pills.

Vol. III. 2 C


210 Materia Medica.


Borax, Sub-borate of Soda— (Sodai Sub-boras.)

Description and History.

It is found in large quantities in several lakes of Thibet and China,
and in some of the mines of Peru. ^Lt is purified by melting it over
the fire, then dissolving it while in powder, and permitting it to crys-
tallize. It is white, semitransparent, and of a styptic and urinous
taste.

Medical Properties.

It is used only externally as an astringent and gargle, in aphthae,
excessive salivation, attended with ulcerations of the tongue, and of
the internal surface -of the cheeks. It is remarkably antiphlogistic,
or cooling, in its nature, and very readily allays heat and irritation.
A solution of it forms the cooling wash, which is useful in ophthalmia
and other inflammations.


Sulphate of Quinine — (Sulphas Quinicc.)

Description and History.
This is a neutral, saline substance, resulting from the action of
sulphuric acid upon quinia. It is found in commerce in very minute
needles, of a pearly white, flexible, resembling fibrous and silky
asbestos, united ia radiated flakes, and of an excessively bitter taste.
It is obtained, by repeatedly boiling the yellow Peruvian bark in water,
acidulated with sulphuric acid.

Medical Properties.
The sulphate of quinine possesses the tonic, and principally the
.ebrifuge properties of the bark from which it is obtained, and is ex-
hibited inlhe same cases. Where, from irritability of the stomach,
the bark cannot be retained, the sulphate of quinine may be usefully
employed. Much of this article is adulterated ; some of it mixed
with arsenic, and serious effects have followed its use.


Flowers of Sulphur, Sublimit Sulphur — (Sulphur Sublimatum.)

Description and History.

This is a preparation of sulphur, obtained by subliming common
brimstone, in a large cast iron vessel communicating with a chamber,
which is used as a receiver. For medicinal use, it is then washed,
in order to remove a .small quantity of sulphuric acid, which is formed
during the operation. It is insoluble in alcohol and in water, but it
dissolves in fatty and essential oils. It combines with almost all the
simple metal!:'; substances, rs. and forms, with them, sulphu-

rets.

I Properties.

Administered internally, in large doses, sulphur acts as a purgative ;
but taken in less quantity it increases animal heat, and acceleration of
the pulse ; it promotes the secretion of the bronchia, of the skin, and
kidneys ; in a word, n acts as a stimulant. Its exhibition for a length
of time is capable of producing very serious consequences: sue' 1 ns


Minerals, Acids, Salts, fyc. 211

haemorrhage, agitation, fever, &c. It is administered internally, and
applied externally in the treatment of piles, itch, and some other
cutaneous diseases. It enters into our preparation for the intermittent
fever.


Salts of Hartshorn, (Sal Cor:vu Cervi, Sub-carbonate or

Amsioivia.) — (Ammonia Carbonas.)

Description.

Sub-carbonate of ammonia is an elegant salt, prepared in the fol-
lowing manner: take of the muriate of ammonia, (murias ammonias,)
one pound ; of prepared chalk, dried, a pound and a half; reduce them
separately to a powder, and sublime in a heat moderately raised, till
the retort becomes red. In this preparation a double decomposition
takes place, the carbonic acid of the chalk uniting with the ammoniac,
and forming sub-carbonate of ammonia, which is volatilized, while
muriate of lime remains in the vessel.

JStedical Properties.
It is nervine and stimulating; of importance as a gentle stimulus
in the advanced stages of typhus fever. The stimulus raised by car-
bonate of ammonia more resembles healthy action than any other
article generally made use of. The following is an excellent pre-
scription :

Take carbonate of ammonia, three scruples, (9hj.)
Gum Arabic and loaf sugar, two drachms, (311.)
Mint water, distilled, eight ounces, (3viii.) mix:

Take a tablespoonful, or two, every hour, according to circumstances.
bonate in the form of bolus, as follows :

Carbonate of ammonia, finely pulverized, fifty grains ;
Pure honey, four tablespoonfuls ; mix :
Thoroughly beat up together, until some effervescence takes place.
Dose, a teaspoonful once in three or four hours, or oftener, according
to circumstances. This prescription I have proved to be very superior
in low excitement. Not long before his death, the late Dr. Khun,
says a writer, who was one of the most sagacious and discriminating
practitioners of this country, told me with some emphasis, that, after
an experience of nearly half a century, if he was called upon to say,
with what remedy he had done the most good, he should, without
hesitation, name the carbonate of ammonia, aided by wine-whey.


White Vitriol — (Sulphate of Zinc.)
White vitriol is found in water, but in an impure state, and in small
quantities. It is made by the application of diluted sulphuric acid
upon zinc ; then suffering the solution to crystallize.
Medical Properties.
It is used as an cscharotic, in the form of powder, or combined with
other articles. Added to water, it makes a cooling wash, and is em-
ployed in inflammation of the eyes, and occasionally in the form of
injection.


212 Materia Medica.


Native Sulphur — (Sulphur Vivvm.)

This article is common sulphur as found in its native state. It is
a dark brown powder, without much resembling sulphur, as regards
appearance, or smell.

Properties.

I have found sulphur vivum to be a specific for the itch. It soon
cures it, without producing any disagreeable symptoms, or smell,
or without the necessity of even changing the clothes.

It should be pulverized, and mixed with fresh butter, or hog's lard ;
and .the part affected bathed, or rubbed with it, as often as there is any
itching. This powder appears to be the basis of some of those itch
ointments, which are said to cure the disease in a few hours.

This ointment is also useful in salt rheum, herpetic affections, &c.


PART VIII.


PHARMACY AND DISPENSATORY.


PART VIII.

PHARMACY AND DISPENSATORY.


Phakmacy may be defined that branch of medical science which
teaches the art of preparing and combining remedies for the treatment
of diseases.

It is the object and province of materia medica, to provide or furnish
articles or ingredients for the prevention and cure of diseases, and to
treat of their properties and virtues. But it is the province of phar-
macy to show how these articles are prepared and compounded for
administration. It is the design of therapeutics to show the modus
operandi, or their effects on the human body, and their application to
the cure of diseases. At any rate, this is the order which I propose
to pursue, although it may differ from some writers.

We wish every one to be deeply impressed with this sacred maxim
in physic, that the virtue of a medicine consists wholly in the skill
of its application ; and that the best and most salutary medicine, if
injudiciously administered, may prove injurious.


Table of Doses.

As a general rule, the following table of doses will be quite suffi-
cient ; but much must always be left to the judgment of the pre-
case : —
A person from fourteen to twenty years of age, may take two thirds of

a dose intended for an adult.
From nine to fourteen, one half.
From six to nine, one third.
From four to six, one fourth.
From two to four, one sixth.
From one to two, one tenth.
Below one year, a twelfth.

A woman, generally, should take a little less than a man.

Apothecaries'' Weight.

A pound contains twelve ounces.
An ounce — eight drachms.
A drachm — three scruples.
A scruple — twenty grains.


216 Pharmacy and Dispensatory,

Measure for Liquids.

A pint contains sixteen ounces.

An ounce — eight drachms.

A tablespoonful is about half an ounce.

A teaspoonful is one fourth of a tablespoonful.

Sixty drops make one teaspoonful.

The following are the characters used to express the given quanti-
ties of different articles or substances : —

ife pound.

3 .... - ounce.

3 drachm.

9 scruple.

gr grain.

Some substances are administered in their natural state ; others pre-
viously undergo various preparations.

Every article used in medicine should be collected in the right sea-
son, and be free as possible from impurities.

The articles of the materia medica, in their raw or natural state,
are generally unfit for medicinal use, and their remedial powers are
often increased by combining two or more of them together ; hence
the necessity of preparation and composition, by which we are en-
abled to form many powerful, as well as elegant, prescriptions.

The medicinal properties of vegetable substances frequently reside in
peculiar proximate principles, which, from their relation to certain
solvents, can be separated from each other ; and thus, in many cases,
the principle on which the medicinal activity of the substance depends,
can be obtained in a pure, and, if necessary, in a concentrated state.
Resins, for example, are dissolved by alcohol ; gums by water ; ex-
tractive matter by either of these liquids, or by a mixture of both ;
and by this separation important advantages may be obtained : the
medicine is rendered more certain in its operation ; it is more easily
preserved, or more conveniently administered. On this are founded
the various pharmaceutic preparations of infusions, decoctions, tinc-
tures, medicated wines, and extracts ; forms under which medicines
are often employed in preference to their natural state.

Some preliminary operations are frequently had recourse to, of a
mechanical nature, to diminish the cohesion of bodies, or enlarge
their surface ; such as pulverization, trituration, levigation, granula-
tion, &c.

Pulverization is the term employed when solid bodies are reduced
to powder by beating.

Trituration, that where the same effect is produced by continued
rubbing.

Levigation denotes the operation when the powder is triturated to
a great degree of fineness, the trituration being facilitated by the in-
terposition of a fluid, in which the solid is not soluble. As by any of
these operations the powder must consist of particles of unequal size,


Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


217


the finer are separated from the courser by sifting or washing. Sift-
ing is passing the powder over a sieve, the interstices of which are
so minute as to allow only the finer particles to pass. Washing is an
operation performed on substances which are not soluble in water.
The powder is diffused through a quantity of that fluid, and the mix-
ture is allowed to remain at rest. The coarser particles quickly sub-
side, and the finer remain suspended. The fluid is then decanted
off, the powder is allowed to subside, and it is then dried.


Our different medicinal preparations are arranged under the fol-
lowing heads : —


1. Balsams.


1G.


Powders.


2. Bitters.


17.


Poultices.


3. Cordials.


18.


Liquids.


4. Caustics.


19.


Salves.


5. Drops.


20.


Syrups.


6. Extracts.


21.


Ointments.


7. Eye Waters.


22.


Sinapisms.


8. Gargles.


23.


Tinctures.


9. Fomentations.


24.


Spirits.


10. Injections.


25.


Decoctions.


11. Liniments.


26.


Washes.


12. Mucilages.


27.


Infusions.


13. Oils.


28.


Troches, or Suppositories


14. Pills.


29.


Mixtures.


15. Plasters.


30.


Essences,


Vol. III.


2D


213 Phannacy and Dispensatory.


CHAPTER I.

BALSAMS.


By balsams, is generally understood the concrete, or inspissated
juice of vegetables : such as balsam of fir, copaiba, &c. But we
make use of the term here to designate certain artificial preparations,
which, as regard qualities, or consistence, resemble balsams.


Pulmonary Balsam.

Take of Spikenard root, (nardus Americanus,) - - l^lfe

Hoarhound tops, (marrubium vulgare,) - do

Elecampane root, {inula helenium,) - do

Comfrey root, (Symphytum officinale,) - do

Add a suitable quantity of water.

Boil, and pour off the infusion repeatedly, until the strength is all
extracted ; then strain, and reduce the whole of the liquid down to
about 12 porter bottles ; then add of white sugar 12 pounds, and good
honey 6 pounds ; clarify it with the whites of eggs. Let it stand 24
hours, in order that it may settle ; add 1 quart of spirits, and finally
bottle it for use.

Dose. — A wineglassful, three or four times a day.
Use. — This preparation is highly useful in the treatment of pulmo-
nary affections, and coughs of long standing. It is admirably calculated
to relieve that constricted state of the lungs which is often met with
in phthisis pulmonalis, (consumption,) and to assist expectoration. It
does not appear to increase the circulation, and is, therefore, a safe
remedy in any stage of consumption.


Balsam of Honey.

Take of Balsam tolu, (balsamum tolutanum,) - - 23

Balsam of fir, (balsamum canadense,) - - do

Opium, (papaver somniferum,) - - 23

Dissolve all these in one quart of alcohol.
Dose. — A teasponnful, occasionally.
Use. — This preparation is also useful in pulmonary diseases.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 219


CHAPTER II.

BITTERS.


By this class of medicines is understood certain liquids, as wine,
or spirits, impregnated with those vegetables which contain the greatest
quantity of the bitter principle : such as gentian, centaury, aloes, &c.
They are used to impart tone to the stomach.


WINE BITTERS.

Take of Golden seal, (Hydrastis canadensis,) - - 13

White wood bark, (liriodendron tulipifera,) - 13
Bitter nut, (apocynum androseamifolium,) - 13

Cayenne pepper, (capsicum annuum,) - . 13

Bruise all, and add two quarts of wine.
Dose. — From a tablespoonful to a wineglassful, three times a day.
Use. — This forms a useful tonic, and pleasant bitter. It is ad.
ministered in dyspepsia and other complaints, where tonics are indi.
cated.


Compound Bitters.
Take of Tamarach bark, (pinus pendula,) - . 6ft

Prickly-ash bark, (zanthoxylum Jrax,) - . 4ft

Wild-cherry bark, (prunus virginiana,) . 3ft

Seneca snake-root, (polygala senega,) - - 3ft

Tansy, (tanacetum vulgare,) - - - 1ft

Socotorine aloes, (aloe socotorina,) . . £ft

Let these articles be pulverized and mixed; then take of the mixture
one quarter of a pound, add three pints of boiling water, two quarts of
Holland gin, and one pint of molasses. Let it stand a week.
Dose. — Haifa wineglassful morning, noon, and evening.
Use. — This forms an excellent tonic for dyspepsia, obstruction of
the menses, and other diseases, where tonics are required.


220 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

CHAPTER III.

CORDIALS.

Bv this class of medicines we understand those vegetables contain,
ing the virtues of various vegetables, prepared similar to common
cordials, mostly with a view to render pleasant their exhibition. After
a decoction of the articles which compose the cordial are sufficiently
concentrated, sugar and spirits are added, to render it agreeable to the
taste.

Restorative Cordial.
Take of Comfrey root, {Symphytum officinale,) - - 13

Solomon's seal, (convolaria polygonatum,) - - 13

Spikenard root, (nardus Americanus,) - - 13
Colombo root, (cocculus palmatus,) ^3

Gentian root, (ge?itiana lutea,) . • - - £3
Chamomile flowers, (flores anthemis,) • - £3
Bruise altogether, cover with boiling water, and then add two quarts
of wine or metheglin.

Dose. — Half a wineglassful three or four times a day.
Use. — This is a very useful tonic, in all cases of debility. It is
pectoral and corroborant, particularly that peculiar to females. It is
valuable in fluor albus and incipient consumption. Seldom or never
given without benefit.

Neutralizing Cordial, or Mixture.
Take of green peppermint, (mentha piperita,) • ■ 2fe
Simmer it in one gallon of water ; and take of

Turkey rhubarb, (rheum palmatum,) - - |lfe
Simmer in one gallon of water till the strength is all extracted ; then
strain ; add these two liquids together, and add four ounces of sal
aeratus, and seven pounds of loaf sugar ; then boil it a few minutes,
and add half a pint of brandy.

Dose. — For a child a year old, two teaspoonfuls every two hours.

Use. — This is an invaluable remedy in cholera morbus, dysentery,
and diarrhcea. It is administered in every stage of these diseases with
the best effects. It is antiacid, antidysenteric, <kc.

Antidyscnteric Cordial.
Tane of Birch bark (betula lenta,) - - - 21fe

Bayberry bark, (myrica cerifera,) - - l|lfe

Cherry tree bark, (primus Virginiana,) - - life

Bitter almonds, - - - -life

Water, ..... 2 galls.

Boil to one gallon and a half, to which add half a gallon of good
brandy, and loaf sugar sufficient to made it palatable.
Dose. — A. wineglassful three or four times a day.
Use. — This forms an excellent tonic and astringent, for dysenteries
and diarrhoeas of long standing.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 221


CHAPTER IV.

CAUSTICS OR ESCUAROTICS.

Caustics and escharotics are those substances, which, when applied
to fungus flesh or the skin, disorganize the same. Their operation,
however, differs very much, according to the agents employed ; some
acting very mildly, others very severely. They are derived both from
the mineral and vegetable kingdom. The latter are always to be
preferred, when they answer the indication required.

Mineral Caustic.
Take of Borax, (borate of soda,) - - £3

Muriate of mercury, - - £3

Vermillion, ..... 20grs.
Rub in a glass mortar to an impalpable powder ; and bottle it in glass
bottles.

Use. — This forms a very useful caustic in syphilitic ulcers, fistulas,
and, in fact, in every species of ulcers where an active caustic is
needed.

Mild Mineral Caustic.
Take of Calomel, - - - - - 13

Vermillion, - - - - 19

Rub it, and preserve it in glass vessels.

Use. — It is useful in the treatment of chancres and buboes, in a
state of ulceration. It soon produces a healthy action in them, with-
out giving any pain.

Vegetable Caustic.

Make a strong ley of hickory or oak ashes; put it into an iron kettle
and evaporate till dry ; pulverize, and preserve it in closed vessels.

Use. — This caustic is highly useful in the treatment of fistulas ; also
in indolent ulcers of every character. It removes fungous flesh, with-
out exciting any inflammation, and acts but little except on spongy or
soft flesh. It is useful in cancers, and in every case where a caustic
is required.

Extract of Blood- Root.
This article, applied on lint to some species of ulcers, proves very
beneficial.


White Vitriol.
White vitriol, pulverized, makes an exellent caustic, particularly to
remove fungous, or " proud flesh." A few grains to be occasion-
ally applied.


222 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


CHAPTER V.


Drops include medicines which, from their strength or active pro-
perties, require to be given in very minute doses ; the dose being
usually graduated by the number to be administered.

Great care or caution is necessary in giving this class of medicine,
as mistakes are more liable to be made, than in some other forms.

Phials, containing drops, should always be kept corked, that the
strength may not be increased by evaporation, or the virtues of them
lost.


Diuretic Drops.

Take of Sweet spirits of nitre, (sp. atheris nitrosi,) - 23

Balsam of copaiba, (balsami copaiba,) - - 13
Oil of almonds, (oleum amy gdalia,) - - 23

Spirits of turpentine, (oleum terebinthinai,) - 13

Mix these together, and add one scruple of camphor.
Dose. — A small teaspoonful, given in mucilage of gum arabic, three
or four times a day.

Use. — The drops are successfully administered incases of scalding
of urine, whether arising from syphilitic or other complaints. In in-
flammation of the kidneys, they give prompt relief.


Black Drop.
The black drop was originally prepared, upwards of one hundred
years ago, by Edward Toustall, a practitioner, of the Society of
Friends, in England ; the receipt passed into the hands of a relative,
and was finally published.
Take of Opium, (papaver somniferum,) - - - ilfe

Vinegar, (acefi,) ...... 3 pints

Nutmeg, (myristicJuB nux,) - . . . 113
Saffron, (croci officinalis,) - - - - ^3

Boil a while, and then add a quarter of a pound of loaf sugar, and
two tablespoonfuls ofyest; set the whole in a warm place, for four
or five weeks ; decant and bottle for use.
Dose. — From 15 to 50 drops.

Use — This, perhaps, is the best form in which opium can be admi-
nistered, as an anodyne. It is given in all cases when an anodyne
is indicated.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 223


Cough Drops. .

Take Oil of anise, (oleum aneseum,) - ^3

Oil of almonds, (oleum amygdalia,)
Balsam of fir, (balsami Canadensi,)
Tine, of balsam tolu, (balsami tolutanam,)
Wine ......

Mix.

Dose. — Fifteen or twenty drops, three or four times a day.
Use. — These drops should be given in a little mucilage or tea. They
assist expectoration in tickling coughs, and afford great relief.


}3

£3
£3

^3


Tar Drops. '
Take of best oil of tar, (oleum pix liquida.)

Dose. — Give from four to ten drops, jn a little milk, three or four
times a day.

Use. — Good for pain in the breast.


Whitwiih , s Drops.
Take of Camphor, (laurus camphora,) - - - - 13
Oil of origanum, (oleum origani,) ... 63
Spirits of turpentine, (oleum terebin.,) - . ^3

Alcohol, 1 pint.

Alkanet root, - - - - - - - 23

Mix ; and let it stand one week.

Dose. — Administered internally, 25 drops, mixed in wine or sweet-
ened water.

Use. — This preparation is useful as a stimulant; may be applied ex-
ternally in chronic rheumatism, and other painful affections.


Carminative Drops.

Take Angelica, - - 43

Wild valerian ....... 23

Calamus, ....... J-3

Anise, dill, and fennel seed, (each) - - - 13
Catnip, blows or leaves, and mother-wort, each a large handful ;
Pleurisy root, ....... 43

Infuse the whole in two quarts of brandy, or good common spirits ;
and digest in a moderate heat for twenty. four hours ; then press out
and strain the liquid, and add to it half a pound of loaf sugar. When
settled, bottle it for use.

Dose. — For children, from 10 to 60 drops, according to the age ;
for adults, from one to four teaspoonfuls, in a cup of warm tea. It
may be repeated once in four or six hours.

Use. — It eases pain, creates a moderate perspiration, and produces
refreshing sleep ; is good for restless children, removes flatulency,
and wind colic : and is useful in hysteric and nervous affections, fe-
male debility, Arc.


224 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Toothache Drops.

Take of Oil of sassafras - - - ^3

Oil of cloves, - - - - ^3

Mix ; dip a piece of lint, or cotton, in the drops, and put on the tooth.


CHAPTER VI.

DECOCTIONS.

Decoctions are certain preparations of medicines, and drinks, made
by boiling substances in water for a considerable time. Where we
wish to administer the virtues of any plant in a small volume in the
form of drink, decoctions are very useful. Some ingredients, how-
ever, lose a part of their efficacy by long boiling, and are given best
in some other form.

Vegetables designed for decoction, should be cut into slices, or
bruised into a coarse powder, that their strength may be more easily
extracted.


23
23
23
23
23
23


Diuretic Decoction.

Take of Queen of the meadow, (spirce ulmaria,) -
Milk weed, (aselepias syriaca,)
Juniper berries, (juniperus com.) -
Dwarf elder, (sambucus ebulus,)
Spearmint, (mentha sativcB,) -
Wild carrot seed, (daucus syl.,)
Put all into a mortar, and bruise. Make a strong decoction.
Dose. — Half a pint, to be taken often through the day.
Use. — This decoction is very useful in gravel, dropsy, &c. It is
strongly diuretic.

Rheumatic Decoction.

Take of Virginia snake-root, (serp. Virginiana,) - - 13

White pine bark, (pinus strobus,) 23

Burdock seed, (arctium lappa,) - - - 23

Prickly ash bark, (santhox fraxin.,) - - 23

Pulverize all together, and add half a gallon of water; boil to three

pints.

Dose. — Half a pint, two or three times a day.

Use. — This forms an excellent decoction in chronic rheumatism.


V Unary Decoction.

Take of Marshmallows, (althaea officinalis,) ... 33
Queen of the meadow, (spirm ulmaria,) • - 33


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 225

Add four quarts of water, and boil it to one ; then add two ounces
of gum arabic, and half an ounce of pulverized nitre.

Dose. — A teacupful four or five times a day.

Use. — This is an excellent remedy in nephritis, or inflammation of
the kidneys. It is also useful in the treatment, of inflammation of the
bladder ; in hematuria, or bloody urine, and other urinary diseases.
It is a demulcent diuretic.


Diaphoretic Decoction.

Take of pleurisy root, (asclepias tuberosa,) - - 23

Boil it a few minutes in a quart of water ; strain.

Dose. — A teacupful.

Use. — This decoction is highly useful in the treatment of pleurisy,
and other forms of pneumonia, or inflammation of the lungs.


Decoction of Cohush.

Take of Black cohush, (macrotis racemosa,) . . 23

Water, 2qts.

Boil to three pints.

Dose. — One gill.

Use. — Useful in uterine haemorrhage, coughs, and rheumatism.


For the Gravel.

Take of the root of Jacob's ladder, - - - - 2 3

Make into a decoction ; to be taken as a common drink. Said to
be infallible for the gravel.


Vol. 111. 2 E


226 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

CHAPTER VII.

EXTRACTS.

Extracts are the products of vegetables, produced by boiling or
evaporation to a proper consistence. There are two kinds : spiritous
and watery. In the former, spirits are used to extract the strength of
the article of which the extract is made ; in the latter, water is made
use of. In preparing them, it is necessary often to add fresh water, if
water be used, until all the strength is extracted ; then strain, and
slowly evaporate until the liquid is brought to the consistence of thin
molasses ; after which, let it be placed in earthen jars, and tightly
covered with a bladder or skin, to prevent moulding.

This is an excellent form to administer many kinds of medicinal
plants, as the quantity to be given is very small.


Extract of Blood-root.

Take of blood-root, any quantity.

Boil in water till the strength is obtained ; then strain, and boil to a
proper consistence.

Use. — This extract forms a useful and mild caustic. It is applied to
some species of indolent ulcers, with excellent effect ; also to fistulas.


Extract of Gentian.

Prepared in the same manner as the above.

Use. — This article is tonic, but seldom administered alone. It en-
ters into the antidyspeptic pill.


Extract of Jalap

Is prepared in the same manner, and it makes an excellent anti-
bilious pill.

Dose. — From two to four grains.

Dr. Bone's Extract of Poke.

Take of Expressed juice of poke, j gal.

Gunpowder, ...... l gill.

Lard, a p j a t.

Simmer to the consistence of honey or molasses.
Use. — This forms a very efficacious extract or plaster, for scrofulous,
cancerous, and all indurated tumours. It may be rubbed upon the
parts affected, or a plaster of it applied.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 227


CHAPTER VIII.

COLLYRIUMS, OR EYE-WATERS.

Eye-waters, or collyriums, are prepared either from mineral or ve-
getable substances, and which are usually added to spirits or water, and
applied to the eyes in the form of wash. They should first be applied
very weak, and the strength gradually increased.


Stimulating Eye-water.

Take of White vitriol, (sulphas zinci,) - • - 2 3

Sugar of lead, (superacetas plumbi,) - - £3

Gum myrrh, (gummi myrrha,) - - - 13

Hot water, 2 qts.

Let it stand two weeks, and filter.

Use. — This forms an excellent remedy in chronic inflammation of
the eyes. Sometimes it will be found more efficacious if applied
warm. When first used, let it be a little diluted. It should be ap-
plied three or four times a day.


Spirilous Eye-water.

Take of Fourth-proof brandy, 7 pint.

Rain water, - 2 P' nt -

Camphor, --•••-- a o
Mix.

Use. This eye-water is used in chronic ophthalmia, or inflamma-
tion of the eyes.

Mucilaginous, or Laurus Eye-water.

Take of pith of sassafras, (laurus sas.) - - - 13

Add it to a suitable quantity of rose water, which makes an excel-
lent mucilaginous and cooling wash.

Use.— It will be found beneficial in the treatment of ophthalmia, or
inflammation of the eyes, during the acute stages.

Dr. Lobstein's Eye-water.

Take of White vitriol, * 3

Common table salt, fine, - - - - 3 3

Common water, ^ •

Boil the water for a quarter of an hour ; then put the two salts in a
new earthen pot, and pour the boiling water over it ; let it simmer for
fifteen minutes ; let it get cold, and stiain it through filtering paper.
U se . — For inflammations of the eye.


228 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

Mineral Eye-water.

Take Muriate of mercury, - ±3

Jamaica spirits, ...... ± pint.

Mix ; and dissolve.

Use. — This-eye water is used for the purpose of removing films
from the eyes. It should be applied with caution, as it is liable to pro.
duce too much inflammation, if used too freely. It may be applied
with a camel's-hair pencil.


CHAPTER IX.

FOMENTATIONS.


Fomentations are usually composed of several kinds of bitter herbs,
and are very useful to relieve pain and inflammation, by taking off
tension and spasm ; or to brace and restore the tone and vigour of
those parts to which they are applied.

The first of these intentions may generally be answered by warm
fomentations ; and, the second, by those that are cold. They should
often be renewed. This class of medicine is very valuable in a great
many complaints.


Hop Fomentations.

Take two handfuls of hops, and one gill of vinegar. Heat the vine-
gar, and pour it on the hops till they are moist.

In cases of sore-throat, "hoarseness, or soreness of the breast, se-
vere pain in the abdomen, colic, dysentery, &c, this fomentation
will give ease and allay irritation. It may be applied at bed. time,
and kept on all night, or any time in the day, if necessary. But it is
usually best to apply warm, and often renew.


Common Fomentation.

Take Hops, (humulus lupulus,) - - - - - 33
Tansy, (tanacetum vulgare,) - - - - 33

Wormwood, (artemesia vulgare,) ... 33

Hoarhound, (marrubium vulgare,) 33

Catnip, (nepeta catatia,) .... 33

Or a handful of each.

Make of these articles a strong decoction, by boiling in equal
parts of vinegar and water.

Use. — This will be found very efficacious in relieving pain, and re-
ducing inflammation, resulting from contusions, sprains, dislocations,
and other causes.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 229

It may also be usefully employed in inflammation of the bowels, of
the stomach ; in short, in almost every species of inflammation, it will
be found very useful.


Stimulating Fomentation.

Take Red pepper, (capsicum annuum,) - - - 23

Bruised mustard seed, 23

Alcohol, or spirits, ...... 2 quarts

Simmer a few minutes.

Use. — This is used as an external application, in paralysis, or palsy.


Poppy Fomentation.

Take of white poppy heads, (papavares capsula,) or the flowers,
a suitable quantity ; add equal quantities of vinegar and water; simmer
a few minutes.

Use. — Thi3 is an excellent anodyne fomentation, used in painful
affections.


Ophthalmic Fomentation.

Take of white poppy heads ; simmer them in water.
Use. — In severe acute ophthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes, this
fomentation is sometimes used with good effect.


Mint Fomentation.

Take of fresh spearmint, (mentha sativa,) a proper quantity ; let it
be bruised, and add spirits, and simmer.

Use. — In cases of great irritability of the stomach, attended with
frequent vomiting, this fomentation, applied to the pit of it, will often
relieve when other means fail.


230 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


CHAPTER X.

GARGLES.

Gargles, in many complaints, are very useful, particularly in the
aphthae, quinsy, fevers, &c. By this class of medicines we under,
stand certain infusions, decoctions, or liquids, suitable or designed for
washing the mouth and throat, which, by their stimulating or deter-
gent properties, become efficacious.

Adults can generally gargle their mouth or throat with little dim-
culty ; but infants and children require an assistant to apply them,
which is best done by tying a little piece of linen to a probe or stick,
dipping it in the liquid, and often applying it. They should never be
made very stimulating, except in severe cases.


Stimulating Gargle.


i


Take of sumac berries and goldenseal, a sufficient quantity ; make
a strong decoction, strain, and add one drachm of pulverized alum to
every pint of the decoction.

Use. — This gargle is used frequently in ulcerated sore-throat of
long standing.


Astringent Gargle.

Take of cohush, (macrotis racemosa,) a proper quantity, and make
a strong decoction.

Use. — This gargle is used in quinsy.


Antiphlogistic Gargle.

Take of Sage, (salvia officinalis,) - . . 13

Hyssop, (hyssopus officinalis,) - . 13

Pour on one quart of boiling water, let it stand'half an hour, then
strain ; and add one drachm of fine borax, (sub-boras soda.)

Use. — This gargle is usefully employed in aphthae, and in quinsy,
or sore-throat, particularly where there is acute inflammation.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 231


CHAPTER XI.

INFUSIONS.

Infusions, or, as they are usually called, teas, is a very common and
good method of administering the virtues of various medicinal agents.
It prohahly is the most natural, if not ancient method of preparing
medicine. A two-fold benefit is derived from infusions: 1st, the
medicinal properties of the article made use of; 2dly, the heat and
diluent properties of the water.

An excellent method to make teas, or infusions, is to put the plant
or root into a teapot, and pour on boiling water, and let it stand a
short time by the side of the fire. In this way the infusion is readily
made very clear.


Infusion of Digitalis, or Foxglove.

Take of Foxglove, (digitalis purpurea,) dried, - . 13

Boiling water, ...... i pint.

Infuse the foxglove, for four hours, in a covered vessel ; strain.

Use. — This is the form under which digitalis was administered by
Dr. Withering, who introduced it in the treatment of dropsy.

Infusion of Linseed.

Take of Flaxseed, (jini asitalissimi,) in meal, - 13

Boiling water, ...... 2 pints.

Macerate for four hours, near the fire, in a vessel lightly closed ; and
strain.

Use. — This forms a demulcent, which is often used with advantage
in gonorrhoea, dysuria, and sometimes in catarrh, or cough.


Infusion of Boneset.

Take of Boneset, (eupatorium perfoliatum,) - - 13

Boiling water, - - - - 1 pint.

Infuse two hours in a covered vessel, and strain.

Use. — It is useful in colds, fevers, coughs, &c. To be drank freely.

Balm Tea.

Take of Balm leaves, - - - .13

Sugar, ..-- - 1 spoonful.

Boiling water, .... 1 pint.

Lemon juice, - - - - 13

Infuse fifteen minutes, closely covered, and strain.
This is a good drink, when cold, for a fever.


232 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Infusion of Elder.

Take of White elder flowers, - 13

Hot water - - | pint.

Honey, ... - 1 tablespoonful.

Use. — This will prove a gentle purgative for young children.
Dose. — One tablespoonful — every half hour, till it operates.

Take of Elder berries, dried, - - .2 tablespoonfuls.

Hot water, ... 2 gills.

Molasses or sugar, - - .1 tablespoonful.

This will operate similar to the above, in the same doses. It is
useful in cases of erysipelas, if drank freely for some time.

Elecampane Tea.

Take of the root of elecampane, cut fine, - 13

Boiling water, ] pint.

Honey, .... 2 tablespoonfuls.

Infuse twenty minutes, and strain.

Use. — This tea is somewhat glutinous, and of an aromatic bitter.
It is used as a stomachic and pectoral, in cases of coughs and asthmas,
catarrhs, &c.

Dose. — One teacupful every two hours, for adults.


Sweet Fennel-seed Tea.

Take of the seeds of sweet fennel, pounded, 13

Boiling water, - - - 1 pint.

Sugar, .... l tablespoonful.

Infuse for twenty-five minutes, closely covered, and strain.

Use. — This tea has an agreeable flavour, and a moderately pun-

gent and aromatic taste. It is a carminative, resolvent, and diuretic.

It has been used to much advantage in cases of colics, malignant

fevers, headachs, indigestion, &c.


Sweet Flag -root Tea.

Take of Sweet flag-root, dried and powdered, 23

Hot water, . - 1 pint.

Honey, 1 tablespoonful.

Infuse for twenty-five minutes, and strain.

Use. — This tea is said to be an antiseptic, and has been used to

prevent contagion. A little alkali will add much to its medicinal

virtues. It is useful in colic, pain in the breast, and flatulence.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 233


Hyssop Tea.
Take of Hyssop, . . . .13

Hot water, .... 1 pint.
Honey, .... 1 tablespoonful.
Infuse for thirty minutes, closely covered.

Use. — This tea has an aromatic and pungent taste, and is particularly
recommended in cases of asthma and other disorders of the breast and
lungs. It is used to promote expectoration.

Dose. — The dosejmay be, for adults, one teacupful, as often as occa-
sion may require ; children in proportion.


Catnip Tea,

Take of Catnip leaves and flowers, - . 13

Boiling water, .... 1 pint.

Loaf sugar, - - - - £3

Milk, 1 tablespoonful.

Infuse twenty five minutes, and strain.

Use. — This is an excellent tea for infants. It removes irritation and
griping pains, which frequently occur with small children.

Dose. — The dose for a child, one year old, may be one tablespoon-
ful, when occasion may require. A little gin is sometimes added.


Spearmint Tea.

Take of Spearmint, - - - - J 3

Hot water, - - - - 1 pint.

Infuse fifteen minutes, and strain.

Use. — This tea is said to be one of the most powerful vermifuges
in the vegetable kingdom. It is also a warm stomachic, useful in re-
lieving nausea and retching to vomit. Those who have children that
are subject to an excess of worms in the alimentary canal, will find
the importance of the use of this tea, with other anthelmintic medi-
cines. It is also strongly diuretic, and diminishes fever and inflam-
mation, by promoting a discharge of urine.

Dose. — The dose may be one tablespoonful every two hours, for a
child about one year old.


Tansy Tea.

Take of Tansy leaves, ... 1 handful,

Hot water, . . - - 1 pint,

Sugar, ... - 1 tablespoonful.

Infuse for twenty five minutes, and strain.

Use. — This is a warm deobstruent bitter; useful for children, to
destroy worms in the bowels. It may be used similar to spearmint
tea. It promotes the menses.

V01. III. 2 F


234 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

Pennyroyal Tea.

Take of Pennyroyal leaves, dried, - 1 handful,

Hot water, . 1 pint.

Infuse for twenty-five minutes in a covered vessel.

Use. — This is a warm, pungent, aromatic, tea, similar to mint, more
acrid, and less agreeable. It is an aperient, and used in hysteric
cases. Also in suppression of the menses.

Dose. — One teacupful for an adult.

Sassafras Tea.

Take of the Bark of the sassafras root, pounded, or

scraped fine, - - - - 1 3

Hot water, - 1 pint.

Infuse for thirty minutes, and strain.

Use. — This is a warm aperient and corroborant. It is frequently
employed with good success for purifying the blood, rheumatism, &c.

Sassafras oil is a sudorific and diuretic remedy. It is stimulating
and heating, consequently should be given in small doses.

Dose. — The tea as above prepared may be taken in doses of from
one to three tablespoonfuls, every two or three hours, with a little
sugar, to make it more agreeable.

Infusion of Virginia Snake Foot.
Take of Virginia snake root, (serpent. Virgin.,) - 13

Boiling water, - - - . 1 pint.

Infuse for two hours in a covered vessel, and strain.

Use. — This forms an excellent tonic for convalescent patients. It
is also very useful in febrile diseases, particularly when there is little
or no remission.


Infusion of Slippery Elm.
Take of Slippery elm, sliced, (ulmas fulva,) - - 13

Boiling water, .... 1 quart.

Infuse for an hour in a covered vessel, and strain.

Use. — It is useful in gastro-enteritis, inflammation of the intestines,
dysentery, diarrhoea, bowel complaint, inflammation of the eyes,
stomach, and other organs. It may be drank freely.

Anthelmintic Infusion, or Worm Powder.
Take of Carolina pink, (spigelia Marylan.,) |3

Senna, (Alexandria senna,) . . . . 13
Manna, (fraxinus ornus,) - - . . .13
Add to these one quart of boiling water ; let it stand six hours ; strain,
and add 21b of loaf sugar, or honey, and a little milk.

Dose. — A small teacupful, three or four times a day, for a child
six years old.

Use. — It is an excellent medicine to expel worms.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 2^3£

Compound Infusion of Senna.
Take of Senna, . . . . - £3

Manna, . - . . 13

Cream of tartar, . - |3

Fennel seed, bruised, ... lteaspoonful.
Add one pint of boiling water to the senna and manna, and simmer to
half a pint ; strain ; add the cream of tartar, and sweeten.
Dose. — A wineglassful every hour, till it purges.
Use. — A cleansing and cooling purgative ; useful in fevers and in.
flammatory diseases.


CHAPTER XII.

INJECTIONS, OH CLYSTERS.

Injections, or clysters, are certain liquids, thrown into the rec-
tum by mechanical means. Their operation or effect depends upon
the ingredients used. Some are emollient, others are stimulant,
anodyne, purgative, antispasmodic, dec. Those generally used by
practitioners, are composed of starch; and so inefficiently are they
used, or directed to be used, that little or no benefit is derived from
them.

A bladder and pipe is generally employed to administer injections ;
but the liquid cannot be effectually introduced by this instrument. A
large syringe should always be used for adults, and a small one for
infants and children. This enables the practitioner, or nurse, one of
whom should always perform this simple, but valuable operation, to
throw up the injection to such an extent, or distance, as will be ex-
ceedingly efficacious. To prove effectual, a large quantity should
always be given. Few are aware of the great benefit and efficacy of
injections or clysters. They often prove a sovereign remedy for
diseases which nothing else will relieve. Hence, every family should
possess a syringe, and a knowledge of its use.

Sometimes the stomach is in such a state, that medicine cannot be
given to act upon the bowels. In this case, the syringe is very useful,
also in strangulated or incarcerated hernia, or rupture ; in bilious
colic, dysentery, cholera morbus, and bowel complaints generally.


236 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Common Injection.

Take of Sweet milk, .... 1 pint,

Mucilage of slippery elm, - . 1 pint,

Olive oil, .... 1 gill,

Molasses, l pint,

Sal seratus, - - - . 13 Mix.

Use. — This forms an injection of much value ; and may be used
in almost every case where one is indicated. It is often used with
admirable effects in dysentery and diarrhoea. Sometimes, when there
is great pain in the lower intestines, it will do better if a drachm of
laudanum is added to each injection, and it will not fail of relieving the
griping pain occasioned by the disease. It should be used with a large
sized French syringe.


Soapsuds Injection.

Take of soapsuds, strong, a sufficient quantity. Inject it about blood
warm.

Use. — This is an injection which may always be conveniently pro-
cured. It is mild, and may be administered when a more stimulating
injection would be hurtful. It is very useful in habitual costiveness,
when purgatives are ineffectual.

Stimulating Injection.

Take of Lobelia, (lobelia inflata,) - - . . 13
Inner bark of large hemlock, (pinus Canadensis,) \Z
Red pepper, (capsicum annuum,) - - - 13
Make a tea, or infusion, sweeten, and introduce half a pint to a pint.
Use. — This injection is occasionally used in very obstinate cases of
costiyeness, bilious and painters' colic ; strangulated or incarcerated
hernia.


Tobacco Injection.

Take of Tobacco, (nicolianatabacum,) - . . 13

Tepid water, ...... j pmt>

Infuse for twenty or thirty minutes.

Use. — This injection is sometimes used in the treatment of incar-
cerated hernia, with a view to its relaxing properties. It should be
employed with caution, as it has sometimes produced alarming symp-
toms. It is also used to destroy worms from the rectum.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 237


CHAPTER XIII.

LINIMENTS.

Liniments are preparations' 1 employed in frictions or embroca-
tions on the skin. They are usually composed of oily, spiritous, and
gummy, or saponaceous substances ; as some of the essential oils, al-
cohol, soap, camphor, &c. They are used externally for rheumatism,
quinsy, and other painful affections. The benefit is derived from
their counter-irritant effects.


Common Liniment.


Take of Castile soap,


Oil of sassafras, (oleum z. sassa.)
Camphor, (laurus camphora,)
Spirits of hartshorn,
Alcohol,

Use. — This forms an excellent liniment, in diseases of the throat
and tonsils.


13


13
13
13
13 Mix.


Opium and Camphor Liniment.

Take of Opium, powdered, - - . .13

Gum camphor, ditto - . . .13

Castile soap, scraped fine, . . - 13

Alcohol, - - - . -13

Rub them all together in a mortar, till the camphor, soap, and

opium is dissolved, and they all form a liniment.

Use. — This is a preparation used externally, as a stimulant and ru-
befacient. It is an efficacious remedy for inflammatory sore throats,
and stiff necks. It should be applied with a flannel, and rubbed in
every two hours. In some cases it is necessary to dry it in by apply-
ing, over the flannel cloth, a hot iron or brick.


Rheumatic Liniment.

Take of Alcohol, - - - . j gallon.

Spanish soap, cut fine, - . J-jfe

Sassafras oil, - - - - ^3

Spearmint oil, - - . - 13

Oil origanum, - . - - j3

Oil amber, - . - . £3

Put all into a jug ; keep warm for five or six days, frequently

shaking it till dissolved.

Use. — This liniment is excellent for rheumatism, sprains, and other

painful affections. The parls affected should be often bathed with it.


238 Pharmacy and Dispensatory*


CHAPTER XIV.

LIQUIDS.

Liquids include such medicines as are made from various men-
struums, or solvents, such as spirits, wine, water, &c. They are
usually compound preparations.

Rheumatic Liquid.

Take of White turpentine, (terrebin. alb. ) - * 43

Inspissated juice of poke-berries, - • 43

Malaga wine, or metheglin, - 3 gal.

Let these articles be mixed, and stand one week ; then filter, and
bottle.

Dose. — Half a wineglassful, two or three times a day.

Use.—' This is an excellent preparation for chronic rheumatism.


Anti-pyrosis Liquid.

Take of Elixir salutis, (comp. tinct. senna,) - - £ft

Tine, of balsam tolu, ... 13 Mix.

Dose. — A tablespoonful every morning or evening.

Use. — This liquid will be found efficacious in removing the trouble-
some symptoms of water-brash, or pyrosis. It may be taken, mixed
in water, every night, at the time of going to bed.


Mint, or Spirits of Mint, Liquid.

Take of spearmint, (menthce sativa,) green, bruised, add a suffi-
cient quantity to saturate a quart of alcohol.

Use. — This preparation of mint will be found exceedingly useful
in the treatment of strangury, and retention of urine, arising from
strictures in the urethra, and diseases of the prostate gland. It has
proved successful when other means failed.

Dose. — The dose must be regulated according to the patient's ha-
bits. Some will require half, others a gill, at a time, and repeated
every thirty minutes. The patient should take it till it produces re-
lief. This liquid has also been used with the best effects, in the treat-
ment of haemorrhoids, particularly in a state of inflammation; to be
applied on a little cotton. In cases where the green mint cannot be
procured, the dried may be used, though, perhaps, it is not so good.
This liquid may also be used, both externally and internally, in cases
of severe vomiting.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 239


Stimulating Liquid.

Take of Red pepper, {capsicum annuum,) - .23

Common spirits, or alcohol, - - - 2 quarts.

Let it stand a few days, or, if wanted immediately, simmer a few
minutes.

Use. — This liquid is used externally, in rheumatism, paralysis,
" soreness of the flesh;" ague in the face and breast, pain of the
breast ; and indeed of any, and every, other organ. It is exceedingly
valuable, seldom or never disappointing the practitioner in relieving
pain.


Tincture of Ipecacuanha, or Wine of Ipecacuanha.

Take of the Root of ipecacuanha, in powder, - 13

White wine, .... 163

Macerate for seven days, and filtrate.

Use. — This makes a valuable emetic for children.

Dose. — The dose is one ounce for adults ; children, two years of
age, one teaspoonful every ten or fifteen minutes, till it pukes them.


CHAPTER XV.

MUCILAGES.


Mucilages are soft, bland substances, made by dissolving differ,
ent kinds of gum, or the roots, leaves, or other parts, which abound
with mucilage. Mucilaginous drinks are useful in diseases of the
bowels, urinary organs, &c. Also to cover any acrid matter, so as to
prevent its irritating the parts over which it passes.


Mucilage of Gum Arabic.

Take of Gum Arabic, (gummi Arabici,) 43

Boiling water, - . - - 83

Rub the gum with the water gradually, until it forms a mucilage ;
then strain.

Use. — Mucilage of gum Arabic is used in pharmacy, to suspend in
water substances insoluble in that liquid, to diffuse oils in water, and
for "similar purposes. It is sometimes employed in the formation of
pills. It is very useful in heat and scalding of the water.

Dose. — Half a wineglassful, three or four times a day.


240 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Mucilage of Slippery. Elm.

Take of Slippery-elm bark, (ulmas fulva,) - - 13

Boiling water, - - - - 1 quart.

Let it stand an hour. It is employed in gastro-enteritis, or inflam-
mation of the stomach, and other diseases. It is useful in bowel com-
plaints generally.


CHAPTER XVI.


Oils are of various kinds, and used either singly or combined. They
are used, generally, when applied externally, for rheumatism and
other painful affections.


Rheumatic Oil.

Take of Oil of wormwood, (oleum arlemesia vul.,) - 13

Oil of sassafras, (oleum laUrus sassafras,) - 13
Oil of cedar, (oleum juniperus virgin.,) - - 13
Oil of hemlock, - - - - - - 13

Oil of turpentine, (oleum terrebin.,) - - 13

Oil of olives, (oleum olivarium,) - - - 13
Camphor, (laurus camphora,) - • - 13

Mix all together.

Use. — This oil is exceedingly efficacious in relieving pain in chro-
nic rheumatism. It is also a good remedy in sprains, contusions, and
in painful affections of almost every description. It may be applied
warm to the affected parts three or four times a day. The parts to be
well rubbed with it.


Oil of Red Pepper — (Oleum Capsicum.)

This oil may be obtained by adding the pepper, pulverized, to ether,
and let it evaporate. The oil only remains.

Use. — This oil is very efficacious in white swellings, lumbago, sci-
atica, rickets, ague in the face and breast, quinsy, pain in the side
and breast, pleurisy, and for painful affections generally. It is pow-
erful, and should be applied very sparingly. The essence of it is
excellent for pain and cramp in the breast and stomach.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 241


CHAPTER XVII.


OINTMENTS.


Ointments are a class of medicines which contain the properties of
certain vegetables, designed for external use. Their consistence is
softer than that of salves or plasters, but the heat of the body is suffi-
cient to melt them. Lard and butter, or oil and wax, are principally
used to make them.

According to the direction given in common dispensatories, the
properties of vegetables are not communicated to either of these sub-
stances, (through the medium of water alone,) particularly if they arc
dry ; but by simmering them in spirits, the desired union is obtained.


Stramonium Ointment.

Take of stramonium leaves, (dantura stramonium,) a proper quan-
tity, while green ; bruise them to a pulp, and put them into an earthern
vessel ; then cover with spirits and lard ; then simmer the leaves until
they become crisped; strain, and add of Venice turpentine, half a
pound to every ten pounds of the ointment.

Use. — This forms an excellent application for scalds, burns, and cu-
taneous eruptions, attended with inflammation. It may be applied
occasionally, with the finger, or with a piece of linen.


Venice Turpentine Ointment,

Take of Venice turpentine, (ter. Veneta,) jlfe

Lard, - - - - - - - life

Simmer until they are united.

Use. — This ointment is used in the treatment of tinea capitas, (scald
head.) After the parts have been washed with soap and water, let
this ointment be applied three limes a day.


White Ointment.

Take of Lard, - - - - - 61fe

Venice turpentine, (ter. Veneta,) - - ^Ife

Melt ; and, when nearly cold, add two drachms of corrosive subli-
mate, and two ounces of fine borax. Stir ; and mix till cold.

Use. — This ointment has cured numerous persons of cutaneous dis-
eases, piles, &c. But a vegetable preparation should always be sub
stituted, when practicable.


Vol. Ill 2G


242 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Green Ointment.

Take of Tansy, (tanacetum vulgare ;)

Wormwood, (artemesia absynthium ,•)

Hoarhound, (marrubiam vulgare ;)

Catnip, (nepeta cataria ,•)

Hops, (humulus lupulus ;)
Of each an equal quantity. Bruise them, and put them into a kettle,
cover over with spirits and lard, and let it stand two weeks ; then sim-
mer awhile, and strain. Add one pound of common turpentine to
every ten pounds of the ointment.

Use. — This ointment is very cooling, resolvent, relaxing, and emol-
lient. It is very useful in sprains, contusions, swellings, dislocations,
contracted sinews, &c.


Yellow Ointment.

Take of White ointment, - - - life

Flour of sulphur, - - - 43

Mix together, cold.

Use. — This ointment is used in the treatment of the haemorrhoids,
or piles, and is also useful in the tetter, or salt rheum, (herpes.)


Discutient Ointment.

Take of Bark of the root of bitter-sweet, (solanum dulcamara,) 23
Stramonium leaves, (datura stramonium,) - 23

Cicuta leaves, (sicuta,) . . . 23

Deadly nightshade, (solanum nigrum,) . 23

Yellow dock-root, (rumex crispus,) - - 23

Lard, ..... lfe

Bruise, and simmer the roots and leaves in spirits ; then add the
lard, and simmer till the ingredients are crisped.

Use. — This ointment is exceedingly valuable in discussing scrofu-
lous, indolent, and glandular tumours and swellings.

It should be rubbed on the parts, about 30 minutes each time that
it is applied ; after which, let a piece of cotton be applied, and secured
by a proper bandage.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


243


Vegetable, or Tetter Ointment.

Take of White turpentine, (terebinthina,) - - jlfe

Fresh butter, *ft

Olive oil, (oleum olivarium,) . - 13

Beeswax, - - - - .23

Indian turnip, {arum triphylum,) - - 13

Leaves of white lily, - - - 13

Common plantain leaves, - - 1 3
Bruise the leaves and roots, and simmer them in an earthen vessel,

over a slow fire, and closely covered ; strain, and, when nearly cold,

add two drachms of yellow ochre.

Use. — This ointment has cured many inveterate cases of tetter,

(salt rheum,) and herpetic affections.


Judkin's Specific Ointment.

Take of Boiled linseed oil, ... 1 gallon

Red lead, ..... 216

Gray oxide of mercury, - - l'teaspoonful

Mutton tallow, - - - 13

Resin, .... - 23

Buds of balm of Gilead, - - 1 handful

Oil of turpentine, - - - 23
Put the oil into an iron kettle, and raise it to a boiling heat ; then

put in the lead by small quantities ; add the oil of turpentine and

gray oxide ; take it from the fire, and add the suet, resin, and buds

of balm of Gilead.

Use. — This ointment has been celebrated as a cure in chronic

rheumatism. We have never used it.


Itch Ointment.

Take of Sulphur vivum, fine, - - - 13

Venice turpentine, - - - - 13

Lard ..... ^Ife

Melt the lard and turpentine ; then add the sulphur, and stir till it is
cold. Let it be applied two or three times a day.

Use. — It soon cures the complaint, without the necessity of chang-
ing the clothes.


Celandine Ointment.

Take the herb or plant, bruise, and cover with any kind of spirits ;
simmer awhile ; then add fresh butter ; and let it remain over the fire
until the leaves are crisped. Strain.

U S e.— This ointment is useful in the piles, and cutaneous eruptions.


244 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Ophthalmic Ointment, or Eye-Salve, called also Eye-Balsam,


Take of Fresh butter,

White wax, - - -

Red precipitate,

Prepared tutty,

Camphor, dissolved in olive oil,
Mix, for ointment. — Communicated by Dr. Lobstein.


33

13
13


For the Salt-Rheum.

Take of narrow dock-roots, scabious, and swamp-sassafras, equal
parts ; boil down, strong ; add life of lard. Simmer down to an oint-
ment. Rub the parts affected, three or four times a day.


Marshmallow Ointment.

Take marshmallow tops and roots ; add spirits ; bruise and simmer ;
then cover the plant with fresh butter ; simmer till the strength is ex-
tracted.

Use. — This forms a very cooling ointment ; and is efficacious in all
kinds of eruptions, attended with inflammation, such as erysipelas,
(St. Anthony's fire,) sore nipples, cutaneous affections, particularly in
children, in the face, and around the ears.


PJiarmacy and Dispensatory. 245


CHAPTER XVIII.

PLASTERS.

Plasters, like ointments, have generally for their base an oily or
fatty substance ; but they are more solid and tough, and they adhere
to the parts without melting.

Some are composed of wax, resin, and oils ; others are the product
of a chemical combination, betwixt oleaginous substances and the
metallic oxides with which they are combined. Some are spread
upon leather, others upon linen.


Ferris^ Black Plaster.

Take of white oak bark a proper quantity ; bruise ; add urine sufficient
to cover it. Let it stand two or three days, and then boil it, till it
becomes of the consistence of honey ; add to every 51b, lib of honey
and lib of strained turpentine gum. Add 23 of white vitriol, pul-
verized, to every ounce, when it is intended to act as an escharotic.

Use. — This forms a very valuable plaster for cancers, ulcers, or
white swelling in a state of ulceration, and for the removal of spongy
or fungous flesh. It excites but little pain or inflammation. It should
be spread on linen, or a soft piece of leather.


Cicuta Plaster.

Take of common turpentine ; strain it after melting ; and, when
nearly cold, add of pulverized cicuta leaves a sufficient quantity to
form a plaster.

Use. — It is useful in glandular swellings of the breast, and other
parts.


Strengthening Plaster.
Take of hemlock gum ; dissolve and strain it.

Use. — This forms an excellent strengthening and stimulating plaster.
It is employed in chronic rheumatism, weakness in the back, &c.


246


Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Tobacco Plaster.

Take of Tobacco, (nicotiana tdbacum,) - - - lib

Urine, - • - - - 1 gal.

Boil down one half; strain it, and add sufficient pitch. Boil to the
consistence of a plaster.

Use. — This plaster is said to have cured the rheumatism. We have
never used it.


Blistering Plaster.
Take of Mutton suet,

Beeswax,

White resin,
Of each an equal part. Melt these articles together, and add one
proportion of Spanish flies, pulverized.


Astringent Plaster.

Take of white oak bark, (quercus alba, ) a sufficient quantity ; macerate
it in cold water one day ; then put it into a boiler, and evaporate till
an extract is obtained.

Use. — It is useful in hernia, or rupture. To be spread on a soft
piece of leather, and applied over the rupture ; after which a truss
must be worn.


Adhesive and Strengthening Plaster.
Take of White resin, ...... 3ft

Beeswax, - 43

Burgundy pitch, ...... 43

Mutton tallow, 43

Melt these together, and then add

Sweet oil, £3

Camphor, £3

West India rum, ...... 1 gill.

Sassafras oil, - - - - . . |3

When the latter articles have been incorporated with the former, let
the whole be poured into a vessel of water, and work it in the hands
till cold. In some seasons, and climates, a little more resin, or a little
more sweet oil, is required to make it of the right consistence.

Use. — This is used as a sticking plaster ; and is used also in rheu-
matism. It is likewise useful in cuts, ulcers, &c. This makes an
elegant plaster.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 247

Common Strengthening Plaster, called " Sear Cloth Plaster."

Take of Resin, (usually termed rosin,) ... life

Beeswax, - - - - - - - 43

Capsicum, - - - - ... 43

Spirits, 1 quart.

Simmer the pepper (enclosed in a linen bag) in the spirits, and strain.
Melt the other articles together, and add the tincture ; and simmer
till the spirits is nearly all evaporated. Take it from the fire, and,
when nearly cold, add 23 of fine camphor, and 33 of oil of sassa-
fras.

Use. — This is used whenever a strengthening plaster is wanted. It
seldom or never fails to afford relief.


Bone's Sear Cloth Plaster.

Take of common turpentine, melt and strain it ; then add a small
quantity of resin, mutton tallow, and vinegar. Melt again, and pour
it into a pail of water. Form it into rolls, or plasters.

Use. — To be used as the preceding.


CHAPTER XIX.

POULTICES.

Poultices, or cataplasms, are external applications, of a soft or
pulpy consistence, and somewhat tenacious. They are of various
kinds : some are designed for discutients, others to produce suppura-
tion ; some are refrigerant or cooling, while others are stimulating •
others again are emollient. In general, poultices are best applied
warm or tepid, and they should not be suffered to get dry before they
are renewed.

Linseed Poultice.

Take of Linseed, powdered, - - - 43

Hot water, . - - - - i pint.

Gradually sprinkle the powder into the water, and stir them together
with a spoon.

Use. — This is a good and convenient emollient poultice, for many
cases. It is preferable to the bread and milk poultice, so much in
use ; it is not so liable to become brittle and hard when dry. It is
very useful in carbuncle, obstinate inflammation, &c.


248 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Carrot Poultice.

Take of Boiled carrots, bruised, - - - Ife

Flour, 13

Butter, 13

Mix them with as much hot water as to form a pulp.

Use. — This will be found a valuable application to ulcerated sores

and swellings, scrofulous sores of an irritable kind, and many other

inveterate ulcers.


Mustard Cataplasm.

Take of Mustard, in powder, 43

Soft bread, or Indian meal, - - - - 63
Vinegar, of the best quality, as much as is sufficient to mix, and make
into a cataplasm.

Use. — This is found to be a good application to the soles of the feet,
in cases of rheumatism, gout, inflammatory diseases, fevers, &c.


Common Poultice.

Take of slippery-elm bark, (ulmas fulva,) a sufficient quantity, pul-
verized ; stir it in hot, or warm, milk and water, to the consistence of
a poultice.

Use. — This poultice exceeds every other in point of efficacy. It is
of almost universal application ; and removes inflammation sooner
than any other. Compared to this, every other poultice dwindles into
insignificance.


Alkaline Poultice.

Take of ley, rather weak, warm it, and stir in of slippery-elm bark
sufficient to form a poultice.

Use. — This poultice is useful in inflammation of the breast, and
other parts, in felons, white swellings, lockjaw, wounds, fistulas, &c.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 249

Yest Poultice.

Take of Milk, blood warm, 1 pint-

Yest, - - 1 gill-
Stir in fine slippery-elm bark, to form a poultice.

Use. — This is a good antiseptic and refrigerant poultice. Applied to

gangrenous ulcers, it is more efficacious than any other. It sooner
arrests mortification, used with proper auxiliaries. It is also very
serviceable in other species of inflammation.

Cat-tail Poultice.

Simmer the root of the cat-tail in milk ; stir in slippery-elm bark,
to form a poultice.

Use. — I have used this poultice, with good effect, in inflamed tes-
ticles.


Indian Turnip Poultice.

Take of the tops and roots of Indian turnip, (arum triphyllum ;) if
green ; if dry, the root only, simmer in water, and add slippery-elm
bark, sufficient to form into a poultice.

Use. — This poultice is used in the treatment of king's evil, or scro-
fula, with the best effect. I think it altogether superior to every
other poultice, in scrofula, in a state of swelling and inflammation.

Potato Poultice.

Boil the common potato ; mash or bruise soft ; and then stir in
the slippery-elm bark.

Use. — This poultice has been used with success in ophthalmia, of
an acute character, when other means have failed.


Cicuta Poultice.

Take the plant, green or dry, and boil in milk and water, until it is
very soft ; add a very small quantity of the slippery-elm bark, suffi-
cient to make it adhere ; apply it blood warm.

Use. — It is excellent to produce suppuration, especially in those
swellings where the glands are indurated, inflamed breasts, testicles,
cancers, &c.

Ferris' Poultice.

Scrape the common carrot, add to it a decoction of spignard root,
and stir in Indian-meal.

Use. The late Dr. Ferris was in the habit of using this poultice

in cases of inflammation, bordering on gangrene, or mortification.

Astringent Poultice.
Take the root of black willow bark, (called pussy willow,) pulve-
rized, a sufficient quantity ; form it into a poultice, by the addition of

Use. This is the common poultice of the celebrated Dr. Bone, of

New-Jersey, who has acquired great celebrity for the successful
treatment of inflammation and ulcers.

Vol. III. 2 H


250 \ Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

CHAPTER XX.

PILLS.

Pills are certain small, round substances, composed of vegetables
and are designed to operate in a small dose ; the disagreeable taste,
or smell of which, renders it necessary that they should be concealed
from the palate.

In general, they do not operate as soon as medicine in other forms.
Pills is a good form to administer some kinds of medicine, as some
can take it, made in this manner, better than any other.


Antidyspeptic Pills.

Take of Socotorine aloes, (aloe socotorina,) - 43

Castile soap, (sapo venetensis,) - - 23

Colocynth, (cucumis colocynthis,) - 23

Gamboge, (stalagmitis gambogioides,) - - 23

Extract of gentian, (gentiana lutea,) • 43

Oil of cloves, (oleum caryophilata,) - .23

Mix; and form into pills of the size of a pea.
Dose. — One or two, morning and evening, according as they ope-
rate.

Use. — This is a very valuable pill ; while it cleanses the stomach,
it restores the tone, without creating debility.


Nervous, or Hysteric Pill.

Take of Asafcetida, (fecula asafoztida,) - - 13

Opium, (papaver somniferum,) - - 13

Carbon, of ammonia, . - • 13

Dissolve the same over a fire ; mix ; and form into pills, of the size
of a pea.

Dose. — One or two.

Use. — It is useful in hysterics, and all nervous cases.


Opium Pill.

Take of Turkey opium, (papaver somniferum,) cut out the soft part,
and form it into pills, of the size of a pea, (3 grains,) and rub them in
a little flour.

Dose. — One every hour, or two, if necessary.

Use. — This is the best form to give opium, in very urgent and
acute cases. In vomiting, from any cause, attended with spasm, it
affords prompt relief. It is useful in colic, &c.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 251

Cicuta Pill.

Take of Cicuta leaves, (pulv. cicuta virosa;) add sufficient turpen-
tine to form into pills.

Dose. — One or two^may be given for a dose.

Use. — 'This pill aids in discussing hard glandular tumours.

Hydragogue Pill.

Take of Jalap, (conv. jalapa,) pulv. - - - 19

Scammony, (con. scammonia,) - - IB

Gamboge, (stalagmitis garnbogioides,) - 19

Add mucilage of gum Arabic, enough to form into pills. Make 16
pills.

Dose. — One every hour.

Use. — This pill has cured the dropsy of the chest, and may be
given when other means fail.


Red, or Stimulating Pill.

Take of Cayenne pepper, (capsicum annuum •) add sufficient of mo-
lasses and flour to form into pills.

Use. — Useful in dropsy of the chest, asthma, flatulence, indiges-
tion, pain, &c.

Dose. — Give three, three times a day/


Bilious and Laxative Pill.

Take of Extract of jalap, - - . 13

Castile soap, - - - - 13

Oil of peppermint, - - - - 13

Scrape and rub the soap fine ; warm the extract ; and then unite
them, and incorporate ; add the peppermint oil, and form into pills.
Sometimes a little flour is necessary.
Dose. — Two or three is a dose.
Use. — Useful in costiveness, and bilious affections, headach, &c.


252 Pharmacy und Dispensatory.


CHAPTER XXI.


POWDEES


Are the most simple and natural form in which medicine can be
given, as their virtues are not impaired by passing through any parti,
cular process ; but when it is necessary to administer a large quantity
of any article, they cannot be conveniently taken in this form. They
are either simple or compound. All powders should be kept in a glass
vessel, closely stopped, and from the light, otherwise their virtues may
be impaired.

Powders may be administered in molasses, honey, syrup, tea, or
any suitable veicle.


Snuff Powder.

Take of High laurel, - - . . lOife

Sassafras, . . . - life

Blood root, - - - - 13

Pulverized ; mix well.

Use. — Good for catarrh, obstructions of the head, &c.


Antibilious Powder, Common Purgative, or Physic.

Take of Jalap, (conv. jalapa,) 116

Alexandria senna, ..... 21fe

Peppermint plant, ..... life

Let these articles be separately pulverized ; then mix them together,
and pass through a fine sieve.

Dose. — A teaspoonful, (about a drachm.) It should be put into a
teacup, with a lump of loaf sugar, and a gill of boiling water added;
and given to the patient when cool, fasting, or on an empty stomach.
Use. — This forms the best general purgative that is now known.
It combines power with mildness of action, and acts throughout the
whole alimentary canal, cleansing it, and producing a healthy action.
It may be given to every age and sex ; it removes offensive accumu-
lations in the bowels, without bringing on subsequent constipation.
It stimulates every contiguous organ to a healthy state. It is useful
in all diseases where physic is required. In bilious and febrile
diseases it is invaluable.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 253


Emetic Powder, or Compound Powder of Ipecacuanha.

Take of Ipecacuanha, (calicocca ipecacuanha,) - 43

Lobelia, (lobelia inflata,) ... 43

Cayenne pepper, (capsicum,) - - 23

Pulverize separately.

Dose. — A teaspoonful, given every thirty minutes, till it operates.
It should be given in warm boneset, or camomile flower tea.

Use. — This emetic, perhaps, is unsurpassed by any other, for effi-
cacy of action. It is administered in all those cases where an emetic
is indicated ; and from its extensive effects upon the system, is very
efficacious in breaking up morbid associations, or exciting a healthy
action of the system. It is useful in febrile and other diseases, &c.
Excellent in the chronic affections of the liver, stomach, and intestines.


Bone's Emetic and Cathartic Powder.

Take of Euporbia ipecacuanha, (spurge,) - 12 grs.

To be given in molasses.

Use. — This is excellent in dropsy, obstruction of the menses,
jaundice, and liver complaint. This medicine is much given by Dr.
Bone.


Emmenagogue, Black, of Tonic Powder.

Take of Flour, of sulphur, .... 43

Gum myrrh, (gumma myrrha,) - - 43

Steel filings, fine, .... 43

Loaf sugar, .... 43

Add to these articles a quart of wine, and simmer till nearly dry ;

remove from the fire, and, when cold, pulverize, and bottle for use.

Dose. — Half a teaspoonful, three times a day, to be taken in mo-
lasses ; or the same quantity maybe taken in the form of pills.

Use. — This forms an excellent preparation for the treatment of
amenorrhcea, or obstructed menses, when that complaint is an idio-
pathic, or primary disease.

That it may not be said that I ever administer a single mineral;
more recently I have omitted the steel filings.


254 Pharmacy and Dispensatory*


Diaphoretic Powder.

Take of Gum opium, . . . . . . ^3

Camphor, ..-...„ 23
Pulv. ipecacuanha, - - . . . 13
Cream of tartar, . - . . - . 13
Pulverize all separately ; then mix. It is best to use pulverized
opium.

Dose. — Ten grains, as often as may be necessary.
Use. — This forms a valuable anodyne, diaphoretic, and sudorific.
It is beneficially administered in fever, diarrhoea, dysentery, and
cholera morbus ; and in all cases where an anodyne, combined with
a sudorific, is required. In these diseases, it should be administered
in small doses. It is also applicable to many other diseases, such as
rheumatism, gout, &c. It promotes perspiration, without increasing
the heat of the body. It produces a constant moisture of the skin for
a great length of time, while it allays irritation.


Eupatorium Powder,

Take of boneset, (eupatorium perfoliata ;) pulverize it very fine.
&; Dose. — From a teaspoonful to a tablespoonful, three or four times a
day; to be taken fasting ; mixed in half a pint of hoarhound tea, and
sweetened.

Use. — These powders have been used with considerable success,
in the treatment of dyspepsia, intermittent fever, and pulmonary
diseases.


Smith's Cough Powder.
Take of Elecampane root, (inula helen.)
Liquorice root, (glicyrrhiza g.)
Blood. root, (sanguinaria can.)
Crane's-bill, (geranium mac.) -
Indian turnip, (arum tri.)
Pulverize fine.

Dose. — Haifa teaspoonful, three times a day.
Use. — Good expectorant, pectoral, and tonic.


23
23
23
23
23


Smith's Colic Powder.

Take of Pleurisy root, (asclepias tuberosa,) - - 13

Cayenne pepper, (capsicum an.) - - - 13
Pulverize, and mix in half a pint of water.

Dose. — One tablespoonful every twenty minutes, till it operates, or
relieves.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 255


Fever Powder.

Take of dragon'9 claw, (pterospera andromeda,) pulverized.

Dose. — A teaspoonful, infused in a proper quantity of water, morn-
ing and evening.

Use. — These powders have been much celebrated in the treatment
of fevers, and particularly of that species called hectic fever. They
act as a mild, but efficient sudorific, without increasing the force of
the circulation. They may be safely administered in almost every
stage of fever.


Cephalic Powder.

Take of Blood-root, (sang, canadensis,) - - - 13
Bark of the root of bayberry, - - - 13

Calomel has sometimes been added, in polypus. Mix.
Use. — Useful in catarrh, headach, polypus, &c.

Red, or Styptic Powders.

Take of copperas, (sidphas ferri,) .... 63
Submit it to a red heat, in a flame of fire ; a decomposition is effected,
and a red substance is formed. This, pulverized, forms a powder,
containing highly styptic and astringent properties.

Use. — It is used in the treatment of haemorrhoids, (piles,) and in
stopping haemorrhage, or bleeding. It may be mixed with a little
melted tallow, and introduced up the rectum, for the bleeding piles.


83
13
13
13
13
13


HulVs Bilious Physic.

Take of socotorine aloes, (aloe soco.) -

Gum myrrh, (gummi myrrha,)

Cinnamon, (laurus cin.)

Cloves, (eugenia caryoph.)

Ginger, (ammonium zingiber,) •

Saffron, (crocus officinalis,)
Pulverize fine, and mix.

Dose. — A teaspoonful every hour, till it operates.
Use. — This preparation has been celebrated as a remedy in the
treatment of bilious colic.

Henry's Cephalic Snuff.

Take the roots of daisies, yarrow, and white hellebore, colts' foot
leaves, and bayberry bark, of each one ounce, finely pulverized, and
sifted through gauze ; mix the powders well together, in a mortar,
and drop in it one drachm of the essence of bergamot ; after which
put it in a bottle, close corked, for use.

Dose. — A small pinch of this snuff may be taken at bed. time, as a
cure for vertigo, " megrims," obstructions, from catarrh, &c. ; and I
have found it effectual in relieving the headach.


256 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

Compound Powder of Mandrake.

Take of Pulverized mandrake.
Pulverized spearmint.
Cream of tartar ; equal parts. Mix.

Dose. — A teaspoonful, in tea or syrup.

Use. — Useful in diseases of the liver, dyspepsia, obstructed menses,
dropsy, in venereal diseases, and in every taint of the system.

I have this moment been to visit a young lady, whose menses had
been obsiructed for many months, attended with dizziness, and pain in
the head, enormous swelling of the abdomen, &c, and where the ex-
hibition of the above medicine, a mandrake alone, every other morn-
ing, with two or three pills of gum turpentine, restored them, and re-
moved the symptoms.


CHAPTER XXII.

SALVES.

Salves are medicines of proper consistence, for spreading on linen,
or muslin, designed for external use, for burns, ulcers, &c. They are
formed, by uniting wax, resin, or oil, with some remedial agent,
either vegetable or some of the metallic oxydes, such as red lead. They
require to be made of a little harder consistence for summer than
winter; and which may be done by adding or diminishing the quantity
of oil.

Salves designed for ulcers should be renewed about twice a day.


Black Plaster, or Healing Salve.
Take of Olive oil, {oleum olivarium,) - - 3 quarts

Common resin, - - - 33

Beeswax, - - - - .33

Melt these articles together, and raise the oil almost to boiling heat;
then add, gradually, of pul. red lead 2ife, if it be in the winter; if in
the summer, 2jfe. In a short time after the lead is taken up by the
oil, and the mixture becomes brown, or a shining black, remove from
the fire ; and, when nearly cold, add of pulv. camphor, half an ounce.

It should remain on the fire until it forms a proper consistence for
spreading, and which may be known by dipping a spatula or knife
into it from time to time, and suffering it to cool.

Use. — We have found this elegant salve superior to every other,
where applications of this kind are required. It has an excellent
effect in every kind of ulcer, in burns, in venereal, scrofulous, and
fistulous, and all other ulcers.

It should be spread thin, on a piece of a linen, and renewed once
or twice a day.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 257


Green Salve.


Take of Turpentine, (terebinthincB,) . - - jlfe

Bayberry tallow, (m< corifera,) - - jfe

Dissolve together, and form into a salve ; add sweet oil, if neces-
sary.

Use. — This salve is designed for scrofulous ulcers.


Yellow Salve.

4

Take one bushel of the roots of the baptisia tinctoria, or indigo
weed, boil till the strength is out, then strain, boil, and skim ; add
lOlfe of fresh butter, 3ffe of beeswax, and l^fe of mutton tallow ; then
boil the water out, and strain till clear.

Use. — This salve is used by Dr. Bone, for all kinds of ulcers. It
is cleansing, detergent, discutient, &c.


Vol. III. 2 1


258 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


CHAPTER XXIII.


Syrups are liquids containing the properties of certain vegetables
in a very concentrated state ; they are prepared by boiling the ingre-
dients until their strength is extracted, and much of the watery portion
evaporated ; then adding sufficient quantity of clarified sugar to pre-
vent fermentation.

Syrup is an excellent form to administer many kinds of medicines.
They should always be kept in a cool place.

In consequence of the oleaginous and other peculiar properties of
most, or all, vegetables, water is not sufficient to extract their virtues,
and it is necessary to use spirits. The two menstruums combined
answer this purpose admirably ; after the alcohol has extracted the
component parts of the plants or roots, it is evaporated by boiling ;
when no danger need be apprehended from its stimulating effects.


Alterative Syrup.

Take of Sarsaparilla, (smilax sarsaparilla,) - - 61fe

Guaiacum shavings, (guaiacnm offi.) - - 31k

Sassafras-root bark, (laurus sassafras,) - 21k

Elder flowers, (sam. niger,) - - - 21k

Add one gallon of cheap spirits and one gallon of water.

Boil, and pom off the liquid; then add water repeatedly, and boil
till the strength is obtained. Strain, and reduce to 16 porter bottles ;
then add thirty pounds of clarified sugar. Let it stand twenty-four
hours to settle ; pour off, and bottle for use.

Dose. — A wineglassful three or four times a day.

The sugar may be clarified, by adding to it half its weight of water,
then a few eggs, and boiling till no more scum arises.

Use. — This syrup, the alterative, we use in a great variety of cases.
In syphilitic, or venereal diseases, in rheumatism, chronic inflamma-
tion of the liver, we could not dispense with it. We also use it in the
ti'eatment of scrofula, which presents itself in so many shapes. In
some of the cutaneous diseases, we find it very effectual ; in every
species of ulcer, it is also valuable. White-swelling, necrosis, rickets,
salt-rheum, or herpes ; and, in short, we have found it very useful in
every taint of the system, from whatever cause it may arise. I have
used Swaim's, and many other boasted nostrums, but I find this pre-
ferable to all of them. It appears to act upon all the secretions and
excretions. A tea of burdock-seed may be taken with it.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 259

Vegetable Syrup.
Take of Liverwort, (hepatica triloba,) - - life

Solomon's seal, (conv. multijlora,) - - lib

Skunk cabbage, (ictodes fatida,) ' - life

Blood-root, (sanguinaria can.) • - ?lfe

Water hoarhound, (lycopus virgin.) - - life

Add a sufficient quantity of water.

Boil, and pour off the water, till the strength is obtained. Strain,
and boil to 20 porter bottles ; add 20 pounds of strained honey ; re-
move from the fire, and add one pint of brandy ; let it settle, and bot-
tle for use.

Dose. — A wineglassful, three or four times a day.
Use. — This preparation is used in every variety of pulmonary dis-
ease, and particularly, however, in hsemopytsis, (bleeding at the
lungs,) and asthmatic affections.

I procured this formula from Dr. Lawrence, an excellent botanist,
and chief physician and surgeon to the society of " shaking quakers,"
at New Lebanon, New-York.


Scrofulous Syrup.

Take of Yellow dock-root, (rumex crispus,) - - 2ife

Bark of bittersweet-root, (solan, dulca.) - 21fe

Bruise, and boil till the strength is obtained ; then strain, and boil
to 12 porter bottles ; add sugar sufficient to prevent fermentation.

Dose. — A wineglassful, three times a day.

Use. — This syrup is useful in scrofula and herpetic affections.


Syrup of Ginger.

Take of Ginger root, (amomum zingiber,) ... 43
Boiling water, - - - - - - 83

Sugar sufficient to make a syrup.
This is a stimulating, aromatic syrup, and contains all the properties

of the ginger. It is combined with other agents, and used principally

in the cholera.


White Poppy Syrup.

Take of the capsules of white poppy, (papaver somniferum,) infuse
them in warm water, for twelve hours ; then boil and strain ; add suffi-
cient sugar to preserve it.

This forms a good anodyne, particularly for infants and children.

Prepared in this manner, there appears to be less of the narcotic
property of the herb, than when prepared with spirits.

Dose.— The same doae is therefore required.

jj se , — It relieves coughs and pain, similar to paregoric, and it pos-
sesses about the same strength.


260 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Antispasmodic Syrup.

Take of Peony-root, (paionia officinalis,) - - - life
Peruvian bark, (cinchona off.) - - - ^Ife

Virginia snake-root, (serp. virgin.) • - £lfe

Extract the strength by boiling ; boil to four porter bottles ; strain,
and add 61fe of white sugar.

Dose. — A wineglassful, three or four times a day.
Use. — This is a valuable tonic syrup, in epilepsy ; for which only
we use it.


Black Berry Syrup.

Take 21fe of the bark of the root, well cleansed, or washed. Add a
suitable quantity of water ; then boil two hours. Pour off the liquid ;
then add more water ; and thus continue to boil and pour off, until
all the strength is extracted; then strain, and add all the boilings
together. Simmer to two quarts ; strain; then add 41fe of loaf sugar,
and when cool add half a pint of best French brandy.

Dose. — A tablespoonful, three times a day, fasting. If it does not
arrest the disease after taking it a few days, gradually increase the
dose, as the stomach can bear it.

Use. — This is a very valuable syrup in bowel complaints, particu-
larly the chronic form. It will effect a cure when every other means
fail. It appears to possess specific virtues, different from every
other vegetable.

A rob, or jelly, is made of the fruit, which is useful to mix with
water, and drink.


Hoarhound Syrup.

Take of the leaves of hoarhound, dried, 23; infuse them for twenty-
four hours, in half a pint of boiling hot water, and as much spirits;
strain, and add iife of honey, and one teaspoonful of the essence of
lemon.

Dose. — For an adult, one or two tablespoonfuls every two hours.

Use. — This is recommended for hoarseness, asthma, complaints of
the breast, lungs, &c. It promotes the fluid secretions in general,
and if used very freely will loosen the abdomen.

thrown into a salivation by the use of mercurials, when every other
method that had before, for one year, been used, failed, or rather in-
creased the disease. After using the hoarhound, the patient got well
in a short time. It is said to have been a favourite medicine with the
ancients, for removing obstructions of the viscera. The negroes use
it for curing vegetable poisons, &c.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 261


Syrup for the Dysentery,
(Which, it is said, has never failed in thirty years.)

Rhubarb and wild cherry bark, a handful ; four tablespoonsfuls of
sugar ; simmer a while.

Dose. — Give a tablespoonful, every fifteen minutes, until the pain
ceases. Make it fresh every day, and add a little brandy.

Use. — The above is taken from a work, called the " Indian Physi-
cian ;" and is pronounced infallible in dysentery.


Expectorant Syrup.
(From the same.)
A handful of St. John's-wort ; one of sage. Make a syrup.
Dose. — For a child six months old, a teaspoonful ; for one of six
years old, give a tablespoonful every fifteen minutes.


Cough Syrup.

Take of Iceland moss, - 23

Four poppy heads,

One tablespoonful of barley, (whole.)
Put in three pints of water, and boil down to two ; strain. Then dis-
solve life brown rock candy.

Dose. — A. tablespoonful, whenever the cough is troublesome.
Use. — Useful in tickling coughs.


262 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


CHAPTER XXIV.

SPIRITS.

Spirits are similar to tinctures ; they are usually compounded of
several ingredients. The principal menstruum is alcohol, either pure
or diluted ; sometimes spirits, or vinegar, alone, are used to prepare
this class of medicines.


Compound Spirits of Lavender, (called Lavender Compound.)

Take of Flowers of lavender, (lavendula spica,) • - 23

Nutmeg, (nux moschatta,) - - . - 23

Mace, (myristicha moschatta,) - - - 23

Cloves, (eugenia caryo.) .... 23

Cinnamon, (laurus cin.) - - - - 23

Pulverize, and add a quart of spirits.
Dose. — One or two teaspoonfuls may be taken often, in a little water,

or tea.

Use. — This pleatant, aromatic preparation, is useful in debility,

fainting, hysterics, and all nervous affections ; pain in the breast,

flatulence, &c.


opirits of Mindererus.

Take of good vinegar, saturate it with the carbonate of potash.

Dose. — A tablespoonful, four or five times a day, diluted with a
little water.

Use. — This is given in fevers, as a refrigerant ; particularly those
of a typhoid type. I add the sal aeratus, or bicarbonate of potash,
instead of the ammonia.


Spirits of Camphor.

Take of Gum camphor," 13

Alcohol, 1 pint. Mix.

Dose. — From half to a teajspoonful may be taken in a little water,
sweetened.

Use. — This preparation contains all the virtues of camphor : it is
useful in flatulence, pain, or sickness of the stomach, colic, cramp,
&c. Combined with equal parts of spirits of lavender, and essence
of peppermint, it becomes more efficacious. I found much benefit
from it myself, during the cholera.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 263


CHAPTER XXV.

SINAriSMS, OR DRAUGHTS.


Sinapisms, and other stimulating draughts, are employed with the
same intention as the common blister, to produce counter irritation ;
and they often give relief very speedily, in internal pains and inflam-
mation. Mustard poultices, or plasters, act much more quickly than
blisters, and they are free from the inconvenience and distress which
arise from them. They should be applied sufficiently strong to pro-
duce a little pain, or to redden the skin ; after which they may be
removed, and applied near the same place. They are excellent to
relieve pain and inflammation of the head, in febrile and other dis-
eases ; are very useful to equalize the circulation in very many
complaints. Recently I have substituted mustard plasters for blisters.


Mustard Sinapisms.

Take of Mustard, (sinapis nigra, or alba,)

Rye, indian, or oatmeal,
Equal parts. Form it into a proper consistence, by the addition of
vinegar.

Use. — This plaster answers all the purposes of a blister, without its
being attended with any of the distressing effects which generally
result from its application. They should be made sufficiently strong
to redden, but not to break the skin. They may be very often chang-
ed from place to place, with a good effect. They are very valuable,
applied to the feet, to cause revulsion, or to equalise the circulation ;
hence, it is useful in fevers, inflammation, &c.


Garlic and Onion Sinapism.

Bruise raw onions, and apply.

Use. — Useful in the same diseases as the preceding, in pneumonia,
or inflammation of the lungs, die.


264 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

\

CHAPTER XXVI.

TINCTURES.

Tinctures are certain active ingredients, principally vegetable
substances, which are imparted to alcohol, spirits, or wine. Tinctures
are excellent for administering a great variety of medicinal agents ;
but, in some cases, there may be an objection to them, in consequence
of the spirits which they contain. Substances yield their virtues more
readily to spirits, by the addition of heat.


Hydragogue Tincture.

Take of Bark of sweet elder, (sambucus nigra,) - - 116
Good wine, - - - - - - - 1 gal.

Let it simmer an hour ; strain and bottle.

Dose. — A wineglassful, three or four times a day.

Use. — This tincture is usefully administered in dropsical affections,
particularly in abdominal dropsy, or ascites. It has cured many
without any other ingredient.


Botanical Tincture.

Take of Gum guaiacum, (guaiacum officinalis,) - - 13
Nitre, (nitras potassa,) - - - - - 13

Camphor, ....... 23

Balsam Tolu, (balsami tolu,) 23

Spirits, - 2 quarts. Mix.

Dose. — Two teaspoonfuls, three or four times a day, to be taken in
a tumbler of prickly ash tea.

Use. — This formula I obtained from Dr. Budd, a celebrated phy-
sician, in New-Jersey. He procured it from another physician, in
Charleston, S. C. It is highly extolled in rheumatism, and any
external, painful, chronic affections. I have used it but little ; but the
Doctor informs me, that he is so partial to it, that he usually prepares
five gallons at a time.


Tincture of Lobelia Inftata.

Take of Pulv. lobelia, (lobelia inflata,) - - - 23

Spirits, - 2 quarts

Let it stand two or three days, and filter.

Dose. — From a teaspoonful to a tablespoonful, as often as necessary.

Use.— This tincture is an excellent remedy, in the treatment of
asthma, croup, and pulmonary affections. It is also given in tetanus
and poisons.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 285


Anodyne Tincture.

Saturate alcohol, with the pollen of hops.
Dose. — From one to two teaspoonfuls, in milk.
Use. — Useful in after pains, and in cases where opium cannot be
taken.


Tincture of Balsam Tolu.

Take of Balsam tolu, (balsami tolutanum,) • • - 13

Alcohol, - - - - ' ■ - - " l P int -
Let it stand one week, and filter.

Use. — This is combined with the compound tincture of senna, {elixir
salutes,) for the water-brash.


Tincture of Castor.

Take of Castor, (castoreum,) - - - - - 23

Spirits, 1 quart

Let it digest one week.

Use. — Useful in nervous diseases, and in suppressed menses.


Tincture of Gum Myrrh.

Take of Pulv. gum myrrh, (gum myrrha,) - - - 13

Alcohol, 1 pint.

Dose. — One or two teaspoonfuls is a dose ; to be given three or four
times a day, in motherwort tea.

Use. — This and the preceding tincture are combined in equal parts,
and given in obstructed menses. It one case it cured, when all other
means failed.


Tincture of Cantharides.

Take of Pulv. Spanish flies, (meloe ves.) - - - 13

Proof spirits, - 1 pint.

Let it stand one week, and strain.

Dose. — Twenty-five drops ; for a child two years old, ten drops is
a dose, in any kind of tea.


Vol. III. 2 K


266 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Elixir Salutis, or Compound Tincture of Senna.

Take of Alexandria senna, 23

Jalap, (conv. jalapa,) - - - • - 13
Fennel seeds, - - - - - - \'&

Spirits, 2 quarts

Let it stand one week, and then strain.
Dose. — One. ounce.
Use. — A mild, but effectual purgative.


Laudanum, or Tincture of Opium.
Take of Opium, (papaver somniferum,) 23

Proof spirits, ...... 1 quart.

Let it stand a week.

Dose. — From 30 to 100 drops.
Use. — Given as an anodyne.


Compound Tincture of Camphor, or Paregoric.

Take of Opium, (papaver somniferum,) - - - 13

Flowers of benzoin, (fores benzoes,) - - 13

Camphor, (laurus camp.) - • - - 29

Anise, (piminella anisum,) - - - - 13

Proof spirits, 1 quart.

Dose. — A teaspoonful for a child a year old.
Use. — Given to allay irritation, or pain, for flatulence, or wind, in
coughs, &c. This preparation should be sparingly used.


Gout and Rheumatism Tincture.

Take of White hellebore, (helebore alba,) - - • 33
Opium, (papaver som.) - - - - - 13

Lisbon wine, - - - - - - 83

Let it digest till the strength is extracted.

Dose. — Give from twenty-five to eighty drops.

Use. — This preparation is similar to the celebrated composition,
discovered about fifty years ago, by M . Husson, a French officer, and
has been so highly famed for its almost infallible power in the cure
of gout. It was sold for one or two crowns a dose.

Meadow saflron, made into tea, may bo drank at the same time.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 267


Tincture of Stramonium.

Take of Pulv. seeds of stramonium, (dau. stra.,) - - 23

Proof spirits, ----- 1 quart.

Let it stand one week.

Dose. — Twenty.five drops twice a day. In cases of fits, it may be
increased until the pupil of the eye becomes somewhat dilated, or
until it causes a little pain or dizziness in the head.

Use. — It is useful in epilepsy, neuralgia, palpitation of the heart, &c.


Expectorant Tincture.

Take of Blood-root, (sang, canad.,) - - - - 13
Lobelia, (lobelia injlata,) - - - - - 13
Pleurisy root, (asclepias tubcrosa,) - - 23

Wine, or metheglin, ..... 3 pints.
Let it stand one week.

Dose. — A tablespoonful twice a day, or as often as may be neces-
sary.

Use. — It is useful in inflammation of the lungs, in pleurisy, in hoop-
ing-cough, in consumption, &c, and when there is any difficulty of
expectoration.

Tincture of Skunk Cabbage.

Take of The root of skunk cabbage, - - - - 33

Spirits, ... .... l quart.

Let it stand one week.

Dose. — From a teaspoonful to a tablespoonful, in asthma and hys-
terics.


Golden Tincture.

Take of Logwood, rasped, (ham. cam.,) 43

Black hellebore, (helleborus nig.,) 43

Spirits, or wine, ..... - 3 pints.
Let it stand one week, and filter.

Dose. — From a tablespoonful to a half wineglassful three times a
day.

Use. — Useful in a retension of the menses.


Tincture of Cohush.
Take of Black cohush, the root, (macro, race.,) - - 33

Proof spirits, or wine, 1 quart.

Let it stand a few days.

Dose. — Half a wineglassful three or four times a day.
Use.— Useful in obstinate coughs, rheumatism, and impurity of the
blood.


268 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


Tincture of Foxglove.

Take of Foxglove, (digitalis purpurea,) - - - 13

Proof spirits, ------- 1 pint.

Digest one week, and strain.

Dose. — From 15 to 20 drops, to be given three or four times a day,
in parsley tea.

Use. — Excellent in inflammatory diseases. It lessens the pulse,
by diminishing arterial excitement, and thereby prevents the neces-
sity of blood-letting. It is attended with an excellent effect in pneu-
monia, or inflammation of the lungs. It is also very valuable in hy-
drothorax, or dropsy of the chest.

Sudorific Tincture, or Sudorific Drops.

Take of Ipecac, (cal. ipecacuanha,) 23

Saffron, (crocus officinalis,) •- - - - 23
. Camphor, (laurus camphora,) - - - - 23
Virginia snake-root, (serp. virg.,) 23

Opium, (papaver somniferum,) - - - - 23
Holland gin, or Jamaica spirits, ... 3 qrts.
Let it stand two weeks, and filter.

Dose. — One teaspoonful, given in a tumbler of catnip tea, every
hour, till it produces perspiration.

Use. — This medicine is probably unsurpassed in fulfilling the indi-
cations for which it is given, which is generally to produce free per-
spiration. One or two doses, aided by warm infusions, and bathing
the feet, causes a copious perspiration. Hence, it is useful in a va-
riety of diseases. In fever, inflammation, &c, I know of no medicine
so certain in its operation.


Wine Tincture.

Take of Peruvian bark, (cinchona offi..,) - - - 23

Wild cherry-tree bark, (prunus virg.,) - - 13

Cinnamon, - - - - - - - 13

, Cloves, - - - - - - - - 13

Nutmegs, - - - - - -, 13

Sulphur, - - - - - - - 13

Wine, 2 qrts.

Let it stand a while.

Dose. — A wineglassful every two or three hours.
Use. — This mixture we have found almost an infallible cure for in-
termittent;, fever, or fever and ague. It iemoves it when al! other
means fail.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. '^69


CHAPTER XXVII.

ESSENCES.


Essences are- made by adding alcohol to the essential oils, in pro-
portion of one ounce of oil to sixteen ounces of alcohol. They are
useful externally, to relieve pain, and used with advantage internally,
for many complaints.


Essence of Peppermint.

Take of Oil of peppermint, - - - - - 13

Alcohol, 1 pint. Mix.

Dose. — A teaspoonful.

Use. — Useful in pain of the breast, cramp, sickness of the sto-
mach, &c.


Essence of Hemlock.

Made in the same manner.

Dose. — Twenty-five or thirty drops, on sugar, or in tea.
Use. — Useful in rheumatism, and other affections ; also for sprains,
&c.


Essence of Sassafras.

Made in the same manner.

Use. — It is useful in gout and rheumatism, pain in the breast, lum-
bago, sciatica, contusions, &c.


The other essences are made in the same manner, and their virtues
are the same as the oils from which they are made.


270 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

TROCHES, OR SUPPOSITORIES.

These are solid remedies, of the conical form, intended to be in-
troduced into the rectum, and to remain there for a certain length of
time, to act as stimulants and discutients.


Troches.
Take of Aloes, pulverized, - - ±3

Gum myrrh, pulverized, -
Castile soap, shavings,
Sugar lead,
Oxide of copper,
Vegetable caustic, -
Pulverize, and add two quarts molasses ; put the whole in an iron
vessel; and simmer until, upon trial, the mass becomes sufficiently hard
to form into small troches, about the size convenient for introduction
per anus.

One or two introduced up the rectum daily, is excellent for the piles.


is


CHAPTER XXIX.

WASHES, OR LOTIONS.

Washes, or lotions, are certain liquids, in which are suspended
medicinal agents, and designed principally for external use.


Ophthalmic, or Cooling Wash.
Take of Borax, (sub-boras soda,) pulv. - - - 13

Rain, or spring water, ..... 1 quart.
Let it stand twelve hours.

Use. — This forms a very cooling and useful wash, for all kinds of
inflammation, particularly the eyes ; also, sore and inflamed nipples,
canker, or sore mouth, and throat. It may be applied freely, and
often.


Refrigerant, or Cooling Lotion, or Wash.
Take of Sugar of lead, (acetate of lead,) ■ - 13

Rain water, £ pint. Mix.

Use. — This wash is cooling, or refrigerant, and serviceable in in-
flammation, particularly erysipelatous.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 271


Yellow Wash.


Take of Borax water, ------ 1 P mt -

Muriate of mercury, ----- 13. Mix.

Use. — This wash has been occasionally used as a mild and cleans-
ing caustic, in the treatment of venereal and indolent ulcers.


Saline Wash.

Take of Fine salt, - - - - - - - 13

Spirits, ------- £ pint.

Vinegar, - 2 P mt -

Rain water, - j pint.

Or equal parts. Mix.

Use. — This makes a good refrigerant, or cooling wash, for many
kinds of inflammations. We are in the habit of prescribing it, particu-
larly in inflammation of the brain, dropsy of the head, &c. Some-
times it is applied tepid, at other times cool ; but seldom cold, except
in very urgent cases.


Astringent Wash.

Take of Dried bark of large hemlock.

Upland sumac-root bark,

Witch-hazel barkyt

White-oak bark ;
Equal parts. Make a strong decoction.

Use, — This is useful to inject in fluor albus, to wash the parts in
prolapsus ani, and utero, or falling of the bowel and womb.


272 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


CHAPTER XXX.

MIXTUBES.

Mixtures are a combinations of medicines in a liquid form, or when
substances are diffused through liquids by means of mucilage, or
syrup.

White Liquid, or Saline Physic.

Take of Epsom salts, 2fe

Hot water, - 2fe

Nitrous acid, - - - - - - 23 Mix.

Dose. — A tablespoonful in a gill of water, until it purges ; a tumbler
of tea, to be taken after each dose.

Use. — The above is similar to a formula, invented by Dr. Johnson,
of Dublin, as a substitute for mercury ; and given to Lorenzo Dow,
and since called, " Dow's Family Physic." In some cases it is useful
in indigestion, liver complaint, fever, dysentery, bilious colic, &c.

It must never be given, except it be well diluted.


Anticholeric and Antispasmodic Mixture.

Take of Camphor mixture, (spirits of camphor,) - - 43

Essence of peppermint, 43

Tincture capsicum, - - . . . 13

Syrup of ginger, |3Mix.

Dose. — One tablespoonful, every quarter, half, or one and two
hours, according to the urgency of the symptoms.

Use. — This mixture is useful in the malignant, or spasmodic cho-
lera, cramp of the stomach, fits, &c.


Nervous Mixture.

Take of Mixture, or liquid, carbonate of ammonia, - £3

Mint water, distilled, 1£3

Compound tincture cardamon, ... |3Mix.

Dose. — Two tablespoonfuls, three times a day.
Use. — Useful in fainting, hysterics, debility, and all nervous cases,


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 273


Neutralizing Mixture, Neutralizing Cordial, or Physic.

Take of Rhubarb, pulv 23

Sal teratus, pulv., ------ 29

Peppermint plant, pulv., ... - 29

Add half a pint of boiling water ; sweeten with loaf sugar, and add a
tablespoonful of brandv.

Dose. — One or two tablespoonfuls, every quarter, half, or one or two
hours, according to symptoms.

Use. — This is one of the most valuable preparations known, for
cholera morbus, cholera infantum, or summer complaint of children,
diarrhoea, dysentery, &c. Its operation and action appear to be a
specific, or almost infallible. It is very similar, in its effects, to the
neutralizing cordial ; (see cordial ;) the form only differs.


CHAPTER XXXI.

TnE following formulas were handed to me by Dr. Lobstein, for in-
sertion in this work, and which I have not had time to translate.

1. Hooping-cough.

Take of mosch. opt., 6 gr.

Sacchar. alb., - - - - - - 19

Pulv. gum arab., - - - - - - 13

Add Aq. foenicul, - - - - - - - 13

Syr. althaea, 33 Mix.

Dose. — A teaspoonful every two hours.


2. For the same.

Take of Pulv. liquir., - - 13

Pulv. rad. belladona, 19 Mix.

Divide into 96 equal parts, that each powder contain a quarter
of a grain of belladona.

Dose. One powder in the morning, and one in the evening, for

children under one year ; three powders for children under two years ;
four powders for children between three and four years ; six powders
for children from four to six years old.


Vol. III. 2 L


374 Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


3. The same.

My friend, the celebrated Professor Loebenstein Loebel, late Pr°"
fessor of Medicine at Jena, has recommended the following powder :
Take of Pulv. rad. valerian, . . . . . 3 gr.

Extract pulsatillse nigricant, . . . . ? g r «

Sacchar. alb., . . . . . . 6 gr.

• M. f. pulv. disp. tal. dos. vi.

Dose. — Three powders a day, for children from eight to twelve
years old.

I have employed these powders the same in two cases, with great
success ; after seven or eight days, by continuing these powders, the
symptoms of the disease have disappeared.


4. Incontinentia Urines.
May-apple root, pulverized.


5. Diarrhoza Urines.

Take of Lact. sulph., 23

Aq. foenicul, ....... 33

Aq. cinnamon, . . . . . . 13

Syr. papav. alb., j3Mix.

Dose.-*— A teaspoonful every hour.


6. Epilepsia — Fits.

Take of Essentia valerian, . . . . . . 13

Essentia castor, . . . . . . 13

Eight days, three times a day, a teaspoonful ; eight days, twice a
day, a teaspoonful ; and after, continuing one teaspoonful a day.


7. Gravel.

Take of Pulv. fol. uvae ursi, ..... 23

Sapo medicinal, . . . . . . 23

Syr. capillor, q. s.
F. pill, No. 72.

Every day, two, three, to four, half an hour before dinner.
When, after a few days, the patient should find his stomach fatigued,
he shall take the following pills :


Pharmacy and Dispensatory. 2T5


8.

Take of Pulv. fol. uvae ursi, 13

Extract, rhei, 13

Sapo medicinal, . . . . . . 13

Syr. capillor, q. s.
F. pill, No. 24.
To be taken like the first pills.


9. Fever and Ague.

Take of Pulv. rad. gentian, 23

Pulv. conchae praeparat., . . . . 13

01. fcenicul, 2 gutt.

M. f. pulv.


10. Hooping-cough, and Nervous Catarrh.

Take of Sacchar. alb., 13

Pulv. rad. belladon., . . . . . 3 gr.
M. f. pulv. divid. in xjj. part. aeq.
One powder a day.

11. Rheumatismus.
Vinum colchicum.


12. Powder to re-establish the Milk.

TakeofFabar. tostae cacao, ^3

Pulv. sem. anisi, ...... ^3

Pulv. sem. fcenicul, |3

M. f. pulv.

5 — 6 teaspoonfuls a day.


13. Piles.

Take of Sal. amar., 63

Pulv. nitr. potass., 23

Flor. sulph., ...••••

Pulv. stipitaedulcamar., 23

M. f. pulv. divide in xjj. part. aeq.

3 powders a day.


276


Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


14. Impotentia.

Take of Limatur. martis, 13

Pulv. cinnamon, . . . . . • 23

Ol. cinnamon, ...... 10 gutt.

Extract gentian, . . . . . • £3

F. pil. gr. ij.

Consperg. pulv. cinnamon.

8 pills three times a day, and the following mixture for frictions on
the scrotum :


15.


Take of 01. anthos., .
Ol. juniper. .
01. lavendul. .
Alcohol vini, .
Liq. ammon. caustic,
Aq. rosar. ,


16. Cardialgia.


Take of Pulv. quassia?,
Pulv. rhei,
Magnes. calcinat.,
M. f. pulv. tal. dos. xij.
8 powders a day.


15 gutt.
15 gutt.
15 gutt.

13

23

33


x 9

2 "7

^9

2 ^

19


17. Rheumatismus.

Take of Gum guaiac, 13

Gum camphor, ...... ^3

Spir. of wine, . . . . . . 13

Laudanum, . . . . . . . 19

Mix these together; let them macerate for 12 hours, and give
from 30 to 50 drops three times a day, in a tablespoonful of mo-
lasses.


18. For a Cough, and Pain in the Breast.

Take of Gum guaiac, .

Gum camphor,

Castile soap, .

Laudanum,

Spir. of wine,

Bals. peruv., .
Mix all together.
15 drops three times a day, on a piece of white sugar.


13
19

12 gr.
20 gutt.

13
12 gutt.


Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


277


19. Asthma,


TakeofPulv. cicut

Flor. sulph., .

Extr. liquir., .
M. f. pulv.
A teaspoonful three times a day.


13
53
63


20. Hemoptysis.

Take of Conserv. rosar. rubr.,

Pulv. nitr. potass., . .
M. f. electuar.
A teaspoonful every two hours.


21. For the Stomach — Dyspepsia

Take of Flaved. eort. aurant. siccor.,
Flaved. cort. citri siccor.,
Cinnamom acut., .
Nucis moschataB,
Cardamom minor.,
Caryophill. aromat.,
Sacchc.r. alb.,
M. f. pulv.


43
£3


23
23
23
13
13

a ^
13


22. Atrophia.

Take of Tinctur. cort. aurant., 13

Terra ponderos. salit., . . . . . 13

35 to 40 drops, twice a day ; and frictions on the belly, with linim.
volatile.


23. Quinsy.


13
13


Take of Spirit, minderer.,

Essentia pimpinell. alb., .....
M.
12 drops, on a piece of white sugar, three or four times a day.


278


Pharmacy and Dispensatory.


24. Pleuritis.


Take of Sal. ammon. depur.,


13


Succ. liquirit. ....


13


Solv. in aq. fontan.,


43


Add Vin. antimon., ....


13


Oxymel scillitic, ....


• J3


A tablespoonful every hour.


25. Hamorrhagia Uteri.

When alum, china, and other remedies are employed without suc-
cess, you may employ the following mixture :

Take of Extract, lign. campech., .....
Saless. tartar., .....

Syr. rub. idaci, .....
M.
A tablespoonful every hour.


26. Anasarca, and Dropsy in the Chest.

Take of Pulv. digit, purpur., ....

Pulv. scillae maritim., ....

Pulv. nitr. potass., .....
Divide in xjj. part. aeq.
3 to 4 powders a day.


23
13
63


10 gr.
29
13


27. Chronic Diarrhoea.


TakeofLapid. cancror.,

Pulv. rad. columbo,
Pulv. op. puriss.,

M. f. pulv.

A teaspoonful every two hours.


23

5 to 8 gr.


£to23
Hto23


28. Gout.

Take of Extr. gentian rubr., ....

Vitriol alb. . - - . .

F. pil. 2 gr.

Obduc. fol. argent.

Early in the morning, two ; in the afternoon, three ; and in the even-
ing, three pills.

In a few days after taking these pills, you will observe a great sedi-
ment in the urine ; in a few days after, let the patient take three
pills in the morning, four in the afternoon, and four in the evening.


Pharmacy and Dirpentatory.


279


29. Hypochondria.


Take of Extr. taraxaci,
Extr. cichorei,
Extr. quassise,
Solv. in aq. chamom.,
Aq. foenicul.,

Add Fell, tauri exsiccat.,
Tart, solub., -
Syr. cinnamom,
M.


13
13
13
33
33
£3
$3
13


A tablespoonful early in the morning, in the afternoon, and in the
evening.


30. Fluor Albus.
A decoction of hazelnuts.


INDEX TO VOLUME III.


Antispasmodics, .


. 8


Balsam of tolu, •


Astringents, . . . .


. 8


Bitter-root,


Antacids, .


. 9


Balm, common, . . • ■


Anthelmintics,


9


Beth-root,


Alteratives


. 10


Broomrake,. . . • •


Asclepias, tnberosa,


. 23


Beech-drops, ....


Anthemis nobilis, .


. 25


BoraX, .....


Archangel, .


. 28


Bicarbonate of potass,


Angelica,


. 28


Bicarbcnas polassse,


Arctium lappa,


. 31


Asarabacca, .


. 32


Classes of medicines, .


Asaruni, Canadense,


. 32


Cathartics, .


Atropa belladonna,


. 33


Caustics, .


Anetlium fceniculum,


. 34


Classification of articles,


Allium sativum, .


. 35


Camomile, .


Amomum zingiber,


. 36


Coils-foot,


Arum tryphillum, .


. 38


Copaiba, .


American ipecac.


. 39


Copaifera officinalis, .


Apocynum cannabinum,


. 39


Cayenne pepper.


Aspidium fitix mas,


. 40


Capsicum annuum,


Althffi officinalis,


. 42


Cicuta, . . . . .


Almond,


. 43


Conium maculatuin, .


Amygdalus communis,


. 43


Colocynlh, . . . .


Apium petroselinum,


. 44


Celandine, .


Aletris farinosa, .


. 45


Chelidonium magus, .


Aralia racemosa, .


. 46


Coptis trifolia, .


Asclepias syriaca,


. 47


Callicoca ipecacuanha,


Aristolochia scrpentaria,


. 48


Convolvulus jalapa, .


Asafcstida, .


. 90


Cinchona officinalis,


Alder, black,


. 136


Cornus florida, . . . .


Aniseed,


. 137


sericea, .


Artemisia absinthium, .


. 197


Convolaria multiflora,


American Colombo,


. 199


Crocus sativus, .


Acidum sulphuricum, .


. 205


Cypripediuin pubesccns,


./Ether sulphuricus,


. 205


Camphor, .
Cloves, .


Blisters,


. 9


Cranesbill,


Botanical terms, .


. 11


Cedar,


Black snake-root,


. 29


Cohush, blue, .


Black cohush,


. 29


Cinnamon, .


Burdock,


. 31


Colombo, .


Barberry,


. 49


Catnip,


Berberis vulgaris, .


. 49


Canada balsam,


Black birch, .


. 50


Castor bean, . . . .


Betula lenta,


. 50


Comfrey,


Babtisia tinctoria,


. 51


Chenapodium anlhclminticum, .


Boncset,


. 88


Corsican worm-weed,


Butternut,


. 107


Cowhage,


Bugle, ....
Bayberry,
Blackberry, .


. 114
. 126
. 153


Cicuta maculala,
Crystallinum, .
Cleavers,


Bittersweet,


. 160


Centaury, ......


Blood-root, .


. 164


Centaunum minor,


iv


INDEX.


Page


Page


Caraway, ....


203


Glechoma hederacea,


. 202


Carum carui,


. 203


Golden rod,


. 202


Caustic, potassas,


208


Gallium aparine,


. 202


Causticus lapis, .


208


Green vitriol, ,


. 206


Cream of tartar,


. 208


Calx, ....


. 205


Hemlock, .


. 55


Cantharides,


. 207


Horse radish,


. 63


Copperas, ....


206


Hellebore, .


. 98


Castile soap,


209


Helleborus niger,


. 98


Hydrastis canadensis,


. 99


Diuretics, ....


9


Hyssop, . . .


. 101


Diaphoretics,


9


Hyssopus officinalis, .


. 101


Demulcents,


9


Hops,


. 102


Diluents, ....


10


Humulus lupulus,


. 102


Deadly nightshade,


. 33


Hamamelis virginica,


. 103


Dogwood, ....


74


Hepatica triloba,


. 105


Daucus carota, .


83


Hoarhound,


. 129


Digitalis purpurea,


84


Hemlock,


. 142


Datura stramonium, .


86


Hedeoma pulegioides, .


. 187


Dwarf elder,


166


Henbane, . . . .


. 190


Devil's bit, ....


177


Hyoscyamus niger,


. 190


Dolichos pruriens, . .


200


Hypericum perforatum,


. 200


Horse-mint,


. 204


Emetics, ....


8


Emmenagogues,


9


Introductory remarks,


3


Expectorants, .


9


Indian turnip,


. 38


Errhines, ,


9


hemp,


. 39


EpispasLics,


9


physic,


. 39


Escharotics, .


9


Ipecacuanha,


. 65


Emollients, .


10


Inula hclenium, .


. 109


Ergot, ....


59


Ictodes fcetida,


. 113


Eupatorium perforatum,


88


Indian tobacco, .


. 120


Elecampane, .


109


Iceland moss,


. 201


Euphorbia ipecacuanha,


173


Ice plant,


. 201


Elm, slippery, .


175


Elder, common, .


188


Jalap, ....


. 68


Juglans cinerea, .


. 107


Flux-root, ....


23


Juniper, ,


. 108


Fennel, ....


34


Juniperus communis, .


. 108


Foxglove, ....


84


virginiana, .


. 110


Flowering ash, .


191


sabina,


. Ill


Fraxinus ornus, .


191


Jerusalem oak, .


. 199


Fucus helminthochorotos, .


200


Five-finger,


202


Kalmia latifolia,


. 199


Feverfew,


202


Lithontriptics,


9


Glossary, ....


11


Lemon,


. 70


Garlic, ....


35


Ladies' slipper, .


81


Ginger, ....


36


Laurus camphora,


. 82


Golden thread, .


64


Liquorice,


. 96


Green ozier,


76


Liverwort, .


. 105


Gamboge, ....


92


Logwood, .


. 106


Gentian, ....


93


Lycopus virginicus,


. 114


Gentianalutea, .


93


Liriodendron tulipifera,


. 115


Guaiacum,


94


Lobelia,


. 120


Geranium maculatum,


95


Laurus sassafras,


. 123


Golden seal,


99


Lilium candidum,


. 124


Gum Arabic,


128


Lavender, .


. 125


Garden nightshade,


168


Lavendula spica,


. 125


Gaulthera procumbens,


199


Liatris, .


. 177


repent,


201


Leonurus cardica,


. 199


Ground ivy, .


202


Laurel, .


. 199


INDEX.


Lungwort,

Lichen Icelandicus,

Lime,

Lead, red, '


Pago
199
201


Podophyllum peltatum,
Poppy, white,


Page
143
145


205
207


Papavcr somniferum, .
Plantain, .


145

147


Myrrh,


37


Plontago major, . . . .
Poke


147
148


Male fern, . . . '.
Marshmallows, .
Milkweed, »
Myrica cerifera, .
Marrubium vulgare,


40

42
47


Phytolacca decandria,

Polygalla senega,

Peony, ....


148
149
151


126


Pceonia officinalis,


151


129


Pink, ....


164


Mentha piperita, ' ."


130


Phellandrium aquaticum, .


161


viridis, .
Mandrake, . , ]
May apple,
Mustard,


132
143


Prickley ash,
Pennyroyal,


185
187


. 143


Polypod, common,


193


167


Polypodium vulgare, .


. 193


Myristica moschata, .


179


Partridge-berry, .


199


Melissa officinalis,


192


Palentilla reptans,


202


Mullen, ....


194


Potassae supertartras,


208


Mother-wort,


199


bicarbonas,


209


Maiden hair,


199


Plumbi superacetas,


. 208


Melon, water,


199


oxidum rubrum,


207


Morus rubra,


199


Potasses nitras, . . .


. 207


Millefolium,


201


Matricaria vulgaris, .


202


Quercus alba,


. 152


Monardus punctana, .


204


Muriate of mercury, .


206


Rubefacients,


9


Murias hydrargyri,


206


Refrigerants,


9


Melee vesicatoria,


207


Rattlesnake-root,


. 29


Murias ammonias,


. 206


Red pepper,


. 54


Rose willow,


. 76


Narcotics, ....


8


Rattlesnake-root,


. 149


Nepela cataria, .


. 131


Rubus villosus, . . .


153


Nicotiana tabacum,


. 133


Ricinis communis,


154


Nutmeg, ....


. 179


Rumex crispus,


. 156


Nitrate of potash,


. 207


Rhubarb, ....


. 157


Nitras potass®, .


. 207


Rheum palmatum,


. 157


Native sulphur, . ,


. 212


Rhus typhinum,


. 159


Raspberry, ....


. 176


Order or arrangement,


3


Rose, red, ....


. 189


Orange, ....


. 69


Rosa gallica,


189


Origanum majorana, .


. 134


Red mulberry,


199


Olive, '


135


Origanum vulgare,


199


Season for collecting vegetablt


Orobanche Americana,


199


medicines,


3


Sudorifics, ....


9


Preparation, or comp. of articles,


4


Silagogues,


9


Proximate principles of vegetable


s, 4


Squaw-root, .


29


Purgatives,


8


Star grass,


45


Pleurisy, root, .


23


Spikenard, ....


46


Parsley, ....


44


Silk-weed, ....


47


Peruvian bark, .


71


Spurred rye,


59


Poplar, white, ,


115


Secale cornutum,


59


Pappoose-root, .


117


Scammony,


77


Peppermint, .


130


Senna, ....


78


Prinos, verticillatus, .


136


Solomon's seal,


79


Pimpinella anisum,


137


Saffron, ....


80


Pinus balsamea,


138


Savin, ....


111


Pine, . . .


140


Skunk cabbage,


113


Pinus pallustris, .


140


Sassafras, ....


123


Prunus virgintana,


141 ;


Spearmint, .


132


Pinus canadensis,


142 I


Seneca snake-root,


149


Sumach,

Solanum dulcamara, .
Sanguinaria canadensis,
Spigelia marilandica,
Symphytum officinale,
Sambucus ebulus,
Sinapis alba,
Solanum nigrum,
Sarsaparilla,
Sage, .
Spurge,
Slippery-elm,
Speedwell, Virginia,
Sambucus niger,
Scullcap,

Scutellaria lateriflora,
Stinking nettle, .
Septamnium viginianum
St. John's-wort, .
Strong-scented lettuce
Solidago virgaurea,
Striped blood-wort,
Sulphuric acid, .
Sulphuric Esther,
Saltpetre, .
Sal ammoniac, .
Spanish flies,
Sugar of lead,
Supertartrate of potash
Sal mratus,
Soap, Castile,
Sub-borate of soda,
Sulphate of quinine,
Sulphur, flour of,
Sulphur sublimatum,
Salts of hartshorn,
Sub-carbonate of ammonia
Sulphate of zinc,
Sulphur vivum, .
Sapo venetiensis,
Sulphas ferri,
Sulphas quinise, .


Tage

159

160

161

164

165

166

167

168

170

, 171

173

. 175

180

. 188

. 195

. 195

. 199

. 199

. 200

. 200

. 202

. 203

. 205

. 205

. 207

. 206

. 207

. 208

. 208

. 209

. 209

. 210

. 210

. 210

. 210

. 211

. 211

. 211

. 212

. 209

. 206

. 210


Tonics,

Thorn apple,

Tobacco,

Thyme,

Tansy,

Tanacetum vulgaro,

Trillium latifolium,

Trasera verticellata,

Unicorn-root,
Ulmus fulva,


Page
8
86
133
134
173
173
196
199

45
175


Vegetable medicines, season for

collecting, .... 3
Vegetables, proximate principles of, 4
Virginia snake-root, ... 48
speedwell, . . .180
Veronica virginica, . . . 180
Verbascum thapsus, . . . 194

Vervine, 201

Verbena hastata, . . .201

Vaccinum, .... 204

Wild camomile, .... 26

ginger, .... 32

indigo, .... 51

carrot, .... 83

Witch hazel, . . . .103

White lily 124

Wild cherry, . . • .141
White oak, .... 152

Water fennel, .... 181
Wormwood, .... 197
Wild marjoram, . . . 199

Water hemlock, . • .200

Winter green, .... 201
Whortleberry, . . .204

White vitriol, . . . -211

Yellow dock, . . . .156
Yarrow, 201


PHARMACY.


Table of doses, .
Apothecaries' weight,
Measure of liquids,

Balsams, .
Pulmonary balsams,
Balsam of honey,

Bitters, .
Compound bitters,
Wine bitters,

Cordials,
Restorative cordial,
Neutralizing cordial,


Page


Page


215


Antidysenteric cordials,


. 220


215


Caustics, or escharotics,


. 221


216


Mineral caustic,


. 221


218


Mild mineral caustic, .


. 221


218


Vegetable caustic,


' . 221


218


Extract of blood-root,


. 221


219


White vitriol,


. 221


219


Drops,


. 222


219


Diuretic drops, .


. 222


220


Black drop,


. 222


220


Cough drops,


. 223


220


Tar drops.


. 223


Vll


Whitwith's drops,
Carminative drops,
Toothache drops,

Decoctions,
Diuretic decoction,
Rheumatic decoction, -j
Urinary decoction,
Diaphoretic decoction,
Decoction of cohush, .

Extracts,
Extract of blood-root,
gentian,
jalap, .
puke, .
Collyrium., or eye-waters,
•Stimulating eye-water,
Spiritous eye-water, .
Mucilaginous eye-water,
Lobstcin's eye-water, .
Mineral eye-water,

Fomentations, .
Hop fomentation,
Common do.
Stimulating do. .
Poppy do. .
Ophthalmic do. .

Gargles, .
Stimulating gargle,
Astringent gargle,
Antiphlogistic garglo,

Infusions,
Infusion of fox-glove,
linseed,
boneset, .
balm,
elder,

elecampane,
fennel,
flag-root,
hyssop,
catnip,
spearmint,
tansy,
pennyroyal,
sassafras,
Virginia snake-root,
slippery-elm,
Anthelmintic infusion,
Compound infusion of senna,

Injections, or clysters,
Common injection,
Soap-suds injection, •
Tobacco injection,
Stimulating injection,

Liniments,
Common liniment,
Opium and camphor liniment,
Rheumatic liniment, .

Liquids,
Rheumatic liquid,
Antipyrosis liquid,
Mint liquid, or spirits of mint.


Page

223

223

224

224

221

224

224

225

225

226

226

226

226

226

227

227

227

227

227

228

228

228

228

228

228

229

230

230

230

230

231

231

231

231

231

232

232

232

232

233

233

233

233

234

234

234

234

234

233

233

236

236

236

236

237

237

237

237

238

238

238

838


Stimulating liquid,


. 239


Mucilages,


. 239


Mucilage of gum arabic,


. 239


elm-bark,


. 240


Oils, ....


. 240


Rheumatic oil,


. 240


Oil of red pepper,


. 210


Ointments,


. 241


Stramonium ointment,


. 241


Venice turpentine ointment,


. 241


White ointment,


. 241


Green ointment,


. 242


Yellow ointment,


. 242


Discutient ointment, .


. 242


Vegetable, or tetter ointmen


, . 243


Judkin's specific ointment,


. 243


Itch ointment, .


. 243


Celandine ointment, .


. 243


Ophthalmic ointment,


. 244


Marshmallow ointment,


. 244


Plasters,


. 245


Ferris' black plaster, .


. 245


Cicuta plaster,


. 245


Strengthening plaster,


. 245


Tobacco plaster,


. 246


Blistering plaster,


. 246


Astringent plaster,


. 246


Adhesive & strengthening plaster, 246


Common strengthening plaster, 247


Bone's searcloth plaster,


. 247


Poultices,


. 247


Linseed poultice,


. 247


Carrot poultice,


. 248


Mustard poultice,


. 248


Common poultice,


. 248


Alkaline poultice,


. 248


Yest poultice,


. 249


Cat-tail poultice,


. 249


Indian turnip poultice,


. 249


Potato poultice, .


. 249


Cicuta poultice, .


• 249


Ferris' poultice, .


. 249


Astringent poultice, .


. 249


Pills,


. 250


Antidyspeptic pill,


. 250


Nervous, or hysteric pill,


. 250


Opium pill,


. 250


Cicuta pill,


. 251


Hydragogue pill,


. 251


Red, or stimulating pill,


. 251


Bilious pill,


. 251


Ponders,


. 252


Snuff powder,


. 252


Antibilious powder,


. 252


Emetic powder, .


. 253


Emmenagogue, black, or


tonic


powder, .


. 253


Diaphoretic powder,


. 254


Eupatorium powder.


. 254


Smith's rough powder,


. 254


colic powder,


. 251


Fever powder,


. 255


♦


Cephalic powder, .
Red, or styptic powder,
Hull's bilious physic, .
Henry's cephalic snuff,
Compound powder of mandrake,

Salves, .
Black salve, or plaster,

Green salve

Yellow salve, ....

Syrups,

Alterative syrup,
Vegetable syrup,
Scrofulous syrup, . .

Syrup of ginger,

white poppy,
Antispasmodic syrup,
Blackberry syrup,
Hoarhound syrup,
Syrup for the dysentery,
Expectorant syrup,
Cough syrup

Spirits, . ....

Compound spirits of lavender,
Spirits of mindererus,
camphor,

Sinapisms, ....
Mustard sinapism,
Garlic and onion sinapism, .

Tinctures, ....
Hydragogue tincture,
Botanical tincture,
Tincture of lobelia,
Anodyne tincture,
Tincture of balsam tolu,
castor,
gum myrrh,
cantharides,
Compound tincture of senna,
camphor,

opium, (laudanum,)
Gout and rheumatic tincture,
Tincture of stramonium,
Expectorant tincture,
Tincture of skunk cabbage,
Golden tincture,
Tincture of cohush, .
foxglove, .
Sudorific tincture drops,
Wine tincture, ....


INDEX.


Page


Page


255


Essences, . . . .


269


255


Essence of peppermint,


269


255


hemlock,


269


255


sassafras, .


269


256


Troches, or suppositories,


270


256


Pile troches, .


270


256


Washes,


270


257


Ophthalmic wash,


270


257


Cooling, or refrigerant wash,


270


258


Yellow wash, .


271


258


Saline wash, .


271


259


Astringent wash,


271


259


Mixtures, . . . .


272


259


White liquid, or saline physic,


272


259


Anticholeric mixture,


272


260


Nervous mixture,


272


260


Neutralizing mixture,


273


260


Formulas, by Dr. Lobstein,


273


261


1st, For the hooping-cough,


273


261


Ditto, do.


273


261


Dr. Loebel's ditto, . .


274


262


For incontinence of urine, .


274


265


diarrhoea urinae, .


274


262


epilepsia, or fits, .


274


262


gravel, ....


274


263


ditto, .


275


263


fever and ague, .


275


263


nervous cough, .


275


264


rheumatism,


275


264


powder to re-establish milk,


275


264


piles,


275


264


impotentia, .


276


265


ditto, .


276


265


cardialgia, . . . .


276


265


rheumatismus,


276


265


eough, and pain in the breasl


, 276


265


asthma, . . . .


277


266


haemoptysis,


277


266


dyspepsia, .


277


266


atrophia, .


277


266


quinsy, . . . .


278


267


pleuritis, .


278


267


haemorrhagia uteri,


278


267


anasarca and hydrothorax,


278


267


chronic diarrhoea,


278


267


gout,


278


268


hypochondria,


279


268


fluor albus, .


279


268


ERRATA.

I notice some typographical errors in this Work, but none very important ; I
deem it unnecessary, however, to point them out, and shall, therefore, leave it
to the good sense of the Reader to correct them.


N«w York : Printed for the Author, by S. Marks & Son, and Mitchell & Co.


ADVERTISEMENTS.

NEW-YORK
REFORMED MEDICAL COLLEGE,

ELDRIDGE-STP.EET.


CIRCULAR.

The happy effects of the botanical system of practice, more especially of late,
employed in the cure of diseases, are such as entitle it to a high rank among mo-
dern improvements. The opinion long entertained in its favour by many of the
judicious, a thorough experience has now demonstrated to be well founded; and
with the number and variety of its salutary achievements, its reputation ia in-
creasing.

It must be evident to every discerning mind, that the present prevailing practice
of medicine, which rejects this botanical aid, in at variance with our nature and
our happiness.

MERCURY, the LANCET, and the KNIFE, are chiefly relied upon by physi-
cians and surgeons of the present day, for the removal of almost all the diseases in-
cident to the human body, notwithstanding the effects of these deleterious agents
are evidently fatal to multitudes. Deeply impressed with these facts, and with a
view of reforming the science and practice of medicine, an individual in this city,
in the year 1827, procured a lot of ground, and erected a handsome and convenient
edifice for an Institution, denominated the United States Infirmary, expressly for
employing a reformed system of practice in the treatment of diseases : the reme-
dial sources being chiefly derived from the productions of our own country. The
course of treatment adopted by this Institution, was principally the result of nearly
forty years' experience of a distinguished medical reformer; which course, we are
happy to state, has been crowned with success, and proved to a demonstration that,
without mercury, that boasted champion of the materia medica, or other poison-
ous drugs, diseases generally may be cured by those more safe and salutary means
which the God of nature has so liberally scattered around us.

Animated by tho past success, and with the hope of benefiting future generations,
an irrepressible desire has been felt, that measures commensurate with the import-
ance of the object should be taken to promulgate this valuable system of practice,
and thereby improve and reform the noble and important science of medicine.

After reflecting for years on tho most prudent and successful method of effecting
so desirable an object, it has been deemed expedient to establish a Medical School,
with competent teachers, where students may receive board and education, until
they are fully qualified to practice in the various branches of the healing art, upon ,
the reformed system. We are now happy to announce, that a building for such
an Institution has been erected, and opened for the reception of students, who can
commence at any period.

Tho building is large and commodious, situated in Eldridgc-street, between Grand
and Broome streets, adjoining the present United States Infirmary. It is in a
healthy and retired part of the city, and has been completed at a great expense.

2M


2 Advertisements.

The following branches are taught by lectures, recitations, examinations, and
suitable toxt books : —

1. Anatomy.

2. Surgery.

3. Theory and Practice of Physic.

4. Midwifery, and Diseases of Women and Children.

5. Materia Medica, and Practical Botany.

6. Chemistry and Pharmacy.
The benefits to be derived by an attendance at this Institution will, we trust, be

duly appreciated by those who wish to acquire a correct knowledge of the healing
art. Here the student will be taught all the modern practice which is deemed ne-
cessary, in addition to the botanical ; and in consequence of his residing in the
institution, and pursuing a systematic course of studies, combining each of those
departments, he may acquire a knowledge of both in a short space of time, and at
a very small expense, in comparison to that of other medical institutions.

There being an Infirmary connected with the Academy, the students will have
the benefit of clinical practice, by which the experimental part of medicine will be
acquired with the theory.

There will be no specified time to complete a course of study; but whenever a
student is qualified to pass an examination, he will receive a diploma.

REQUISITIONS.

The qualifications for admission into the School will be, 1. A certificate of good
moral character ; 2. A good English education.

TERMS.

1. The price of qualifying a person for practice, is $200. One half payable in
advance, or at the time of entering the School ; and the other half at the expiration
or close of his studies, or before a diploma is granted. A deduction of $25 will be
made to those who pay the whole sum in advance.

2. Board (being an extra charge) is $2.50 per week, payable weekly or quar-
terly.

3. Each student must supply himself with books, bed, and bedding.
A liberal allowance will be made to those in indigent circumstances.

tCP We have the pleasure to announce that our School is now fast filling up, and
is in successful operation ; and that there is an opening in every section of the
United States for those educated in its principles and practice.

*** Those wishing further information, by addressing a letter, post paid, to the
present state of the above Institution.

W. BEACH.


New-York Medical Institution,
April, 1830.


MANUAL LABOUR SCHOOL OF MEDICINE.


From the success which has attended the Manual Labour Schools recently es-
tablished to teaeh the ordinary branches of education, we have thought that it
might further the cause of medical reform, to establish one or more Colleges ex-
pressly to educate indigent young men in the various branches of medicine, free
of charge; the expenses to be defrayed by labour, in horticulture, agriculture, &c.

It has been shown that three hours employment each day only is sufficient to de-
fray expenses of board and tuition, while sufficient time is afforded to acquire more
information than is obtained in thu same length of time at other Institutions.

Communications on this subject will be received from such as feel an interest
in the subjeet.


OHIO REFORMED MEDICAL COLLEGE.


The public are respectfully informed, that an Institution is established, and in
Successful operation, in the city of New-York, denominated " The Reformed Medi-
cal College," under the jurisdiction of the Reformed Medical Society of the United
Stales; that this Institution has arisen, from its own intrinsic merits, notwithstand-
ing the opposition of illiberal and interested physicians, to an eminence which has
exceeded the most Banguine expectations of its friends.

Animated by the flourishing state of this College, and feeling an ardent desire
still further to disseminate the valuable system of practice therein taught, a second
School of the same character was established in December, 1830, in the town of
Worthington, denominated " The Ohio Reformed Medical College." This College
was chartered by the state as a literary Institution ; and subsequently, the board
of trustees adopted the above as the medical branch of their Institution, where all
the various branches of the healing art are taught on the reformed system. A
number of young gentlemen have here commenced their studies, and numerous
others have applied for admission. At this time there are about 40 students. Its
locality presents the greatest advantages to facilitate researches in medical botany ;
the surrounding country abounding with a great variety of medical plants and
vegetable productions.

It is situated near the centre of the state, on the Whetstone river, nine miles
north of Columbus, on the northern turnpike, and is one of the most healthy and
delightful villages in the western country. The ground attached to the College
contains every variety of soil for a botanical gaiden. The necessity for an Insti-
tution of this kind, under the direction of competent professors, must be evident to
all who have reflected on the subject of medical reform. Here a system of prac-
tice is taught, altogether superior to that taught in other Schools, or pursued by
other physicians; the remedial agents being derived from the vegetable kingdom.

The efficacy of this practice has been proved, for more than half a century, com-
bining the improvements of the most distinguished reformers of the present or any
other age. Its superiority has been so repeatedly demonstrated, as to satisfy the
most wavering and sceptical. It has been tested in every variety and form of dis-
ease ; and its salutary effects witnessed where the mercurial or mineral treatment
has been pursued without any beneficial effect, but to the great injury of the con-
stitution.

The benefits to be derived by an attendance at this Institution will, we trust, be truly
appreciated by those who wish to acquire a correct knowledge of the healing art.
Here the student will be taught all the modern practice which is deemed necessary,
in addition to tho botanical; and in consequence of his residing near the Institu-
tion, and pursuing a systematic course of studies, combining each of the depart--
ments of medicine, he may acquire a knowledge of both in a short space of time,
and at a very trifling expense, in comparison to that of other Medical Institutions.

The regular fall and winter course of lectures in this Institution will commence
on the first Monday in October, and continue six months, or longer; during which
time a full course of lectures on all the different departments of medical science
will be delivered, with daily examinations, &c. 1st. On Anatomy and Physiology ;
2d» Materia Medica and Pharmacy ; 3d. Theory and Practice of Physieand Sur-
gery; 4th. Midwifery; 5th. Chemistry; 6th. Theoretical and Practical Botany;
7th. Medical Jurisprudence, Szc. Szc. The spring and summer course will be more
particularly appropriated to Botany, Materia Medica, Comparative Anatomy, and
Clinical Practice, &c.

There being an Infirmary connected with the College, the students will have the
benefit of clinical practice, by which the practical part of medicine will be acquired
with the theory.

Every student, on graduating in Worthington College, will become a member of
the Reformed Medical Society of the United States, from which he will rrc?ivc a
diploma, and reports of all the improvements of its different members, and be en-
titled to all its constitutional privileges and benefits.


4 Advertisements.

There will be no specified time lo complete a course of studies; but whenever
a student is qualified to pass an examination, he will receive a diploma.

REQUISITIONS.

The qualifications requisite for admission into the School will be, 1st. A certifi-
cate of good moral character; 2d. A good English education.

TERMS.

The price for qualifying a person to practice and access to all the advantages of
the Institution, will be $150 in advance, or $50 in advance, and $125 at the close
of his studies. Every advantage given and a liberal allowance made for those in
indigent circumstances. Boarding may be had at $1 per week, and books at the
western city prices. The price of a diploma will be $10. Those wishing further
information, will please address a letter (post paid) to Col. G. H. Griswold, or to
the undersigned, and it shall receive prompt attention.

THOMAS V. MORROW, President.


PROSPECTUS

OF A NEW PUBLICATION,
ENTITLED, THE

SYSTEM OF MEDICAL AND SURGICAL PRACTICE,

As pursued at the United Stales Infirmary, and taught in the Reformed Medical Col-
leges in New-York, and TForihington, Ohio.

BY W. BEACH, M.D.,

Founder of ihe Reformed Medical Colleges, and President of the Reformed

Medical Society of the United States.


From a conviction and knowledge that the present practico of medicine exerts
a baneful and pernicious eflect upon the health and lives of mankind, Colleges
and Infirmaries have been founded, and are in successful operation, expressly to
introduce an improved system, or to accomplish a reformation in the science of me-
dicine.

As an evidence of the success and prosperity of these Schools, we would remark,
that we have now graduates in almost every state in the Union, who from time to
time transmit to us statements of their unprecedented success in the cure of dis-
eases. One of our physicians from the state of Ohio writes as follows : " We have
had during this fall three hundred and twenty-five cases of various diseases, and
we have lost but three out of all that number. Disinterested persons state that our
.success is unparalleled in history." All of which proves to a demonstration that,
without mercury, that boasted champion of the materia medica, or other poisonous
drugs, diseases generally may be cured by those safe and salutary means which the
God of nature has so liberally scattered around us.

The system of practice taught is altogether superior to that taught in other Me-
dical Schools, or pursued by other physicians ; the remedial agents being principally
derived from the vegetable kingdom. Its efficacy has been proved for more than
half a century, combining the improvements of the most distinguished medical re-
farmers of this or any other age. It has been tested in every variety or form of
disease, and its salutary effects witnessed where the mercurial or mineral treatment
had been pursued without the least effect, except great injury to the constitution.
Its superiority has been so repeatedly demonstrated, as to satisfy the most waver-


Advertisements. &

ing and sceptical ; and it is chiefly owing to this success, that we are indebted for
the elevated character and reputation of our Reformed Medical Colleges.

Animated by such encouragement, and feeling an ardent desire still further to
promulgate this valuable system, wo have concluded, in compliance with our ori-
ginal design, with the repeated requests of physicians, and others, to publish a work
on the practice of physic and surgery upon the reformed or botanical system; in
which shall be disclosed the principles and practice of medicine, as taught and
pursued at our Infirmaries and Colleges.

Hitherto, our constitution has bound every member under a heavy penalty, as
well as in a moral point of view, not to divulge, reveal, or make known, any part
of the formula of our practice, without the general approbation of the Society.
This was deemed advisable, to prevent any injury which might arise from a pre-
mature or improper publication of it. We wished also still further to te6t and
prove it, before it was laid before the world. This bond has since been rescinded
by a unanimous vote of our members, and the founder of the Schools appointed
and authorized to publish the present work.

They have been induced to issue it earlier than was at first contemplated, on ac-
count of the impositions already practised upon the community.

Patent medicines have been vended under the pretence that they are the same as
those published at our Institutions.

A volume of considerable size, published in this city, has been sold at a great
price, in consequence of its having been stated that the author wa6 president of
our Society; when, in reality, he had never been a member. Another small pub-
lication (apparently printed at Boston, but unquestionably in New- York) has ap-
peared, said to have been written by " professors and members of our Colleges," a
refutation of which accompanies this prospectus.

Others, at a distance, have likewise proposed to publish our practice. These
considerations, together with the difficulty our students labour under for want of
proper text books, calculated to elevate the character of our Schools ; the great
necessity which exists of disseminating a judicious, scientific, and superior method
of treating diseases ; to prevent interested and disqualified persons from further
imposing upon the unsuspecting portion of the community, have induced the So-
ciety to publish the practice.

CONDITIONS.

1. The work is in three large octavo volumes, with plates, for the sum of five
dollars per volume.

2. It will be executed in a superior style, as regards type, paper, binding, &c.

3. The most convenient mode by which persons in the interior can receive tho
work, is by ascertaining from their local bookseller the address of the house he deals
with in New-York ; on transmitting which to the author, the books can be depo-
sited with him to be forwarded.

4. Booksellers, editors, and post-masters, (except those who sell a spurious pub-
lication,) are hereby appointed agents for this work; and are authorized to receive
subscriptions, for which they will be allowed ten per cent, on all moneys remit-
ted ; they paying the expense of any further advertisements. Those who procure
gratis.

5. To prevent imposition, besides securing the copyright, the hand-writing of
the author will be annexed to both works. Should any person again attempt to
publish, abridge, or palm any part of this work, or any other purporting to be the
same, a copy of this work will be given to any person who will furnish us with the
name and address of such person.

6. Every travelling agent duly aulliorized to receive subscriptions, must have a
writing from the author certifying the same.

7. All orders for this work, with directions where they shall be sent, to be ad-
dressed, post paid, to the author, Eldridge-street, New-York.

New-York Reformed Medical College, 1833.


Advertisements.


That the reader may form some idea of the estimation in which our practice u
held by those who are best acquainted with it, I will here insert a communication
which I have just received from a graduate of the Ohio Medical Reformed College,
a branch of the one established in this cily; and it affords me much pleasure to
state, that the writer speaks the same language as all others who understand it.

Dayton, Ohio, Jan. 1th, 1833.
Dr. W. Beach,

Sir — Having enlisted myself under the banners of the groat and good cause of
medical reform, of which you have the honour of being the founder and indefati-
gable supporter, and feeling a deep and ardent solicitude for the welfare and rapid
advancement of our invaluable system of medical practice, I at this time have taken
the liberty of addressing a few lines to you, in which I wish to tender you my un-
feigned thanks, and an acknowledgment of the obligation which I atn under for
the possession of a knowledge of your mode of treating diseases.

I am aware of the numerous and apparently insurmountable obstacles which op-
posed your endeavours to introduce to the world a mode of practice, the general
adoption of which would avert so large an amount of human suffering, and so
much enhance the sum of human happiness. Your undertaking was great ; your
opposition almost unlimited ; your courage undaunted ; your resolution unshaken ;
and, happy for the world, your enterprise successful.

I have nothad the pleasure to receive your verbal instruction, having acquired a
knowledge of the reformed system at the Worthington, Ohio, Medical College.
The incalculable benefits which must necessarily be experienced by generations yet
unborn, from the reformed or botanical system of medicine, cannot but inspire am-
bition in the minds of all those engaged in the highly laudable cause. It is with
much pleasure that I view the prosperous and flourishing state of medical reform
in this section of the Union. Many of our most respectable aDd intelligent citizens
are thoroughly convinced of the danger and impropriety of the common and fash-
ionable mode of practice, and have decidedly declared themselves friends and sup-
porters of the reformed system. The uniform success which attends our practice,
dispels prejudice and opposition, as the sun drives away the mists of the morning.
All, all seems brightening in the prospects of our cause.

I am in partnership in practice with Dr. David Jordon, a graduate of your School
in New- York, and we are gaining ground very fast in this place. The slanders
and puny efforts of our opponents have but an inverse influence in retarding our
advancement. I think we could find sale for several sets of your Medical and Sur-
gical work, if we had them. We shall be happy to do all in our power to extend
the system of practice; and should you be so disposed, we should be glad to re-
ceive an agency in the sale of the publication.

It would give mc much satisfaction to have a statement of the general outlines
of your practice in the cholera. We know not how soon we shall be visited by
this fatal pestilence; several cases have already occurred in this place, but at pre-
sent we have none.

The institution at Worthington is in a very flourishing condition.

D. L. TERRY, M.D.


MEDICINE.


thereby be frustrated in fulfilling our indications: and it is a notorious fact, that
it is a common practice among apothecaries and druggists, to prepare and vend
either spurious or adulterated articles, or 6uch as have been kept so long on hand
that their virtues are either lost, or greatly impaired. Mnny kinds have hoen bought


Advertisements.

al auction, which have been damaged, and, after passing through some change, are
sold by them as genuine articles. . ,

Almost every kind of medicine that has obtained any notoriety, is now imitated
or counterfeited. I have seen large quantities of labels for certain preparations
copied and printed literally as they are issued in Europe. For instance, an imita-
tion of the Harlem Oil is prepared throughout the United States, apparently with
the original covering or bills ; so that it becomes extremely difficult to procure this
article, or any othert pure or unadulterated. This is a fact that no person, we be-
lieve, will pretend to deny ; and I will here record one instance among many which
might be mentioned, extracted from the New-York Farmer and Horticultural Re.
pository, vol. v. p. 261. The writer, in giving an account of his tour from New-
York to Philadelphia, thus remarks : " Proceeding," says he, " down the Raritan
river, about a mile and a half below New-Brunswick, I came to a grist mill, where
they were grinding roots; what they were then grinding was mixed with Indian
meal, and they told me they ground it as they had orders to do, sometimes with the
Indian meal, and sometimes without it ; and that they kept one run of stones going
infthis business as much as one fourth of the time ! 1"

/n consequence of such fraud, and the difficulty that many might have who are
disposed to use the remedies pointed out in this work, I propose to prepare and vend
every description of medicine recommended or required, in the best possible man-
ner, either in their raw or crude state, or prepared for use, as may be wanted ; and
to be superintended personally, or prepared under my immediate inspection, the
prices of which will be as moderate as they can be purchased at any other place.

In doing this, I can confidently look for the same success to attend the practice
as experienced at our Institution.

Medicines will, therefore, be prepared and sent, either raw or manufactured, to
any part of the United States or Europe.

Both the Latin and the English name will be attached to each article, with cop-
perplate engravings ; and they will be pressed by means of a screw into such small
compasses or cakes, that they can be easily transported, with little expense, and
their virtues will remain unimpaired for years.


DISPENSARIES OR INFIRMARIES FOR THE
INDIGENT.


It is in contemplation to establish in all the principal cities throughout the United
States, Medical Dispensaries or Infirmaries on the reformed system, for the be-
nefit of the poor.

The object of these Institutions will be to give advice, medicine, and attendance
gratuitously to all such as are unable to pay for the services of a physician; that
this class may avail themselves of the advantages of a vegetable or improved
system of medical and surgical practice. It is also designed to connect with it a
Vaccine Institution ; to procure for the use of the public an apparatus for re-
suscitating drowned persons ; a stomach pump, for the removal of poisons from
the stomach; a complete apparatus for fractured limbs, &c. Sec. It is also contem-
plated, if the directors meet with sufficient success, to make provision for the gra-
tuitous attendance on poor married lying-in women, at their own houses, under the
management of qualif.'od females and physicians.

The plan is submitted to tlio public. It is proposed to create 300 shares, at five
dollars a share, for the purposo of raising a fund for the building of a house, and
the purchase of a lot ; each share subject to an annual assessment of fifty cents, for
the purchase of medicine for the dispensary. The trustees to hold the property in
trust for the stockholders.


Advertisements.


REFORMED MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS.


Should the citizens or inhabitants of any part wish to establish Medical Schools,
Infirmaries, or Hospitals, upon the principles laid down ; and should they desire
any further aid, graduates of our Schools will be sent to superintend them, or to
render such assistance as may be deemed expedient.


Should I meet with sufficient encouragement, I propose to publish :

1st. A brief but comprehensive system of Anatomy and Physiology, illustrated
by numerous plates.

2d. Another edition of this work, with corrections, revisions, additions, &c, and
further illustrated by additional plates, and probably of a larger size.

3d. A System of Midwifery, containing about 100 plates, making in all four
octavo volumes, executed in a superior style, as regards type, paper, binding, &c.

4th. A cheap edition of the present work, or an abridgment, that all classes
may avail themselves of it.


DRAWINGS OF PLANTS.


I will forward a complete set of this work, in extra binding, to the person who
shall send me, by post or otherwise, the best drawing from nature of any plant en-
graved in this work, or any other medical herb.

I should also be gratified to receive drawings of this kind of any and all plants
growing in the vicinity of those who may receive this publication.

A discretionary premium will be given for the most natural representation, aa
well as for any valuable remedy, when it shall have been fully tested.

In order to make every possible improvement and discovery in the science of me-
dicine, I hope that in whatever country or part this work may find its way, that it
will fall into the hands of those who will communicate to the author all the im-
provements in their possession on the subject of medicine ; on medical botany, si-
tuation or locality, soil, temperature of the climate, diseases, mode of treatment,
habits of the people peculiar to the place.


HERBARIUMS, PLANTS, SEEDS, &c.


I intend to prepare, or have it done under my supervision, Herbariums, con-
taining all the Plants we use in our practice, and others, and sent to any person
who may order them.

Also, Med-cal Plants, Roots, Seeds, &c, for Botanical Gardans.
